^ 

UBRAWYOfPRIWCEP* 

NOV  -6 
THEOLOGICAL  SEMINARyI 


i 


i 


i 


i4  h€  i^ 


« 


J 


AC03IPLJETE 

C©j\CORI>ANCE 


HOLY    SCRIPTURES 


OLD  AND  NEW  TESTAMENT. 


A  COMPLETE 

€ON€ORDA 


;*     FEB  27  1911      * 


HOLY    SCRIPTURES 

09  THE 

OLD  AND  NEW  TESTAMENT: 


OR,  A 


DICTIONARY   AND   ALPHABETICAL,   INDEX    TO   THE    BIBLE: 

VERT    USEFUL   TO   ALL  CHRISTIANS   WHO   SERIOUSLY   READ  AND  STUDY   THE   INSPIRED  WRITINGS 

IN    TWO    PARTS: 


com-AiNiNe, 


(.  The  Appbllativk  or  Common  Words  in  io  full  and  arge  a  Man- 
ner, that  any  Verse  may  be  readily  found  by  looking  for  any 
material  Word  in  it  In  this  Part,  the  various  Significations  of 
the  principal  Words  are  given ;  by  which  the  true  Meaning  of 
many  Pasgages  of  Scripture  is  Bhown:  An  Account  of  several 


Jeteish  Customs  and  Ceremonies  is  also  added,  which  may  serve  to 
illustrate  many  Parts  of  Scripture. 
II.  The  Propbr  Names  in  the  Scriptures.    To  this  Part  is  prefixed  a 
Table,  containing  the  Significations  of  the  Words  in  the  Origin* 
Languages  from  wluch  they  are  derived. 


TO  WHICH  IS  ADDED, 


^  Concordance  to  tije  JSoolts  taiwa  i^pocrajpt^f. 

THE  WHOLE  DIGESTED  IN  AN  EASY  AND  REGULAR  METHOD:  WHICH,  TOGETHER  WITH  THE  VARI0U3 

SIGNIFICATIONS  AND  OTHER  IMPROVEMENTS  NOW  ADDED,  RENDERS  IT  MORE  USEFUL  THAN 

ANY  BOOK  OF  THE  KIND  HITHERTO  PUBLISHED. 


BY  ALEXANDER  CRUDEN,  AK.  A. 

FROM  THE  TENTH  LONDON  EDITION, 
CAREFULLY  REVISED  AND  CORRECTED  BY  THE  HOLY  SCRIPTURES. 

TO    WHICH    19    ADDED, 

AN  ORIGINAL  LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 


Search  the  Scripluris ;  fur  in  them  ye  think  ye  have  eternal  life,  mid  they  arc  they  which  testify  of  me.— John  v.  39. 

Thou  hast  known  the  Holy  Scriptures,  which  are  able  to  make  thee  rcise  unto  salvation,  through  faith  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus. 

All  Sciiptvre  is  given  by  inspiration  of  God,  {fc. — 2  Tim.  iii.  15 — 17. 


PHILADELPHIA : 
THOMAS    WARDLE 

1846. 


NO.  9  GEOBGE  STTtETT. 
PRINTED   BY   KING   AND   EAIKD, 


MEMOIR 


OP 


MR.  ALEXANDER  ORUDEN. 


nnilE  facilities  afforded  by  the  following  Work,  to 
•*-  the  minister  of  the  Gospel,  the  Biblical  student 
and  the  more  private  Christian,  when  searching  the 
Scriptures,  whether  for  the  instruction  of  others,  or 
their  own  individual  benefit,  have  embalmed  the  name 
of  Cruden  in  their  grateful  affections;  and  cannot  fail 
to  attach  a  more  than  ordinary  interest  to  the  events  of 
his  life,  so  large  a  portion  of  which  was  laboriously  em- 
ployed for  their  benefit. 

Mr.  Alexander  Cruden  was  born  at  Aberdeen  on 
the  31st  of  May,  1701.  His  father,  Mr.  William 
Cruden,  was  a  merchant  of  some  eminence ;  and  pos- 
sessed the  esteem  and  confidence  of  his  feUow-citizens 
sufficiently  to  procure  his  election  as  one  of  their 
Baillies,  or  chief  magistrates.  In  both  pubUc  and  pri- 
vate life  his  integrity  and  uprightness  were  exemplary ; 
and  the  terms  of  veneration  in  which  his  son  Alexan- 
der was  accustomed  to  speak  of  him,  were  doubtless 
dictated  by  truth  no  less  than  by  strong  fihal  affection. 

Few  particulars  of  Mr.  Cruden's  early  years  have 
been,  preserved.  The  acknowledged  piety  of  his 
parents,  and  the  commendable  attention  paid  in  Scot- 
land to  the  religious  instruction  of  youth,  doubtless  con 
ferred  on  him  great  moral  advantages;  and  led  him 
even  from  childhood,  to  revere  the  sacred  volume.  It 
is  more  than  probable  that  the  habits  thus  early  formed 
had  considerable  influence  on  his  subsequent  life  and 
studies. 

A  higher  motive  than  mere  secular  advantage  led 
him  to  make  choice  of  the  Christian  ministry,  as  the 
business  of  his  future  life.  He  had  previously  received 
a  good  elementary  education  in  the  grammar  school  of 
his  native  city ;  and,  as  an  introduction  to  the  clerical 
profession,  and  in  order  to  secure  the  advantages  of  that 
respectable  seat  of  learning,  he  entered  himself  a  stu- 
dent of  Mareschal  College,  and  diligently  attended  the 
lectures  of  the  several  professors.  Here  he  made  con- 
siderable proficiency  in  the  learned  languages,  and  in 
general  literature ;  the  degree  of  Master  of  Arts  was 
conferred  upon  him;  and  he  was  on  the  point  of  being 
proposed  as  a  Hcentiate,  when  circumstances,  which  are 
in  a  great  measure  enveloped  in  mystery,  caused  a  total 
change  in  his  destination.  Though  posterity  is  left  in 
ignorance  of  the  precise  nature  of  these  circumstances, 
there  is  abundant  evidence  that  the  purity  of  his  moral 
character  remained  unsullied,  and  that  his  love  for  theo- 


logical studies  had  experienced  no  abatement.  Possi- 
bly some  symptoms  of  that  aberration  of  mind  which 
more  strongly  discovered  itself  at  a  subsequent  period 
of  his  life,  rendered  the  abandonment  of  a  profession  so 
replete  with  mental  anxiety  and  labour,  when  its  duties 
are  properly  performed,  highly  prudential,  if  not  essen- 
tially necessary. 

As  the  malady  from  which  he  so  severely  suffered 
was  not  hereditary,  it  has  been  referred  to  various 
causes.  Some  have  attributed  it  to  the  bite  of  a  mad 
dog;  but  the  peculiar  symptoms  of  hydrophobia  fur- 
nish no  confirmation  of  such  an  opinion.  Others,  with 
more  consistency,  ascribe  it  to  a  disappointment  in  love, 
which  he  experienced  about  this  period ;  but  it  is  doubt- 
ful whether  this  operated  as  a  cause  or  a  consequence. 
If  the  rejection  of  his  addresses,  in  terms,  as  would  ap- 
pear, not  the  most  gentle,  did  not  originally  excite  the 
malady,  the  effect  produced  by  the  disappointment,  on 
a  mind  pre-disposed  to  insanity,  caused  him  frequently 
to  use  such  unseasonable  and  sometimes  outrageous  at- 
tempts to  obtain  an  interview  with  the  object  of  his 
affections,  as  to  oblige  his  friends  to  send  him  to  a  place 
of  confinement.*  On  his  release  from  confinement,  he 
resolved  to  leave  the  scene  of  his  early  and  bitter  sor- 
rows. In  the  year  1722  he  arrived  in  London;  and 
was  employed  at  Ware,  in  Hertfordshire,  as  classical 
tutor  to  some  young  persons.  Several  following  years 
were  spent  in  the  Isle  of  Man,  in  similar  occupations. 
In  1732  he  finally  settled  in  London,  and  engaged  as 
corrector  of  the  press;  blending  with  this  occupation 
the  trade  of  a  bookseller,  which  he  carried  on  in  a  shop 
under  the  Royal  Exchange.  Here  his  literary  attain- 
ments, indefatigable  industry,  and  strict  integrity,  pro- 
cured for  him  the  esteem,  not  only  of  those  who  availed 
themselves  of  his  professional  labours,  but  of  several 
persons  eminent  for  their  wealth  and  influence.  To  the 
strong  recommendations  of  the  Lord  Mayor,  and  several 
of  the  Aldermen,  and  other  distinguished  Citizens  of 
London,  who  were  well  known  to  Sir  Robert  Wal- 
pole,  then  Prime  Minister,  he  was  indebted  for  the  ap- 
pointment of  Bookseller  to  the  Queen,  vacant  by  the 
■death  of  Mr.  Matthews  ;  but,  though  eventually  suc- 
cessful, his  patience  was  severely  tried  by  the  tardy 
measures  of  the  Minister. 

About  a  year  or  two  before  he  received  this  distinc- 
tion, he  determined  to  begin  that  great  work  upon  which 


*  The  young  lady  above  referred  to  was  the  daughter  of  a  clergyman  of  Aberdeen.  Shortly  after  Mr.  Cruden  was  placed  under  restraint, 
It  was  discovered  that  a  criminal  intercourse  had  subsisted  between  her  and  her  own  brother,  by  whom  she  was  actually  pregnant.  About 
ten  or  eleven  years  afterwards,  Mr.  Cruden  then  resident  in  London,  was  taken  by  Mr.  Chalmers,  a  Printer  of  Aberdeen,  to  tlie  house  of  a 
merchant  near  the  Royal  Exchange,  who  was  deemed  likely  to  assist  him  in  his  business.  The  door  was  opened  by  the  unworthy  object 
of  Mr.  Cruden's  tenderest  regards ;  who,  upon  '.eaving  Aberdeen,  had,  unknown  to  Mr.  Cruden,  or  his  friend,  there  found  a  refuge  far  from 
the  scene  of  her  guilt  and  ruin.  JNlr.  Cruden  started  back  ;  with  the  utmost  intensity  of  feeling  he  grasped  the  hand  of  Mr.  Chalmers,  and 
exclaimed,  "  Ah  !  she  has  still  her  fine  black  eyes!"  No  inducement  could  prevail  on  him  to  have  any  communication  with  the  owner  of  tiie 
bouse,  who  was  a  younger  brother  of  the  lady.  As  to  the  wretched  woman  herself,  he  never  mentioned  her  name  but  wilii  the  bitterest  gtuef, 
drid  most  tender  compassion. 

5 


MEMOIR  OF  MR.  ALEXANDER  CRUDEN. 


he  had  long  deliberated,  A  Complete  Concordance  of 
the  Holy  Scriptures  of  the  Old  and  J^ew  Testaments. 
If  the  merit  of  labour  alone  be  given  to  this  work  of 
Mr.  Cruden,  it  must  be  acknowledged  that  it  required 
labour  the  most  intense,  and  perseverance  which  knew 
no  interval.  He  was  well  qualified  for  such  an  under- 
taking ;  for  habits  of  industry  were  familiar  to  him ;  and 
his  conviction  of  the  high  utihty  of  such  a  work  led  him 
both  to  form  and  to  execute  the  plan  previously  to  his 
receiving  any  encouragement  from  the  public.  The 
first  edition  was  published  in  1737 ;  the  preface  to  which 
explains  his  plan,  and  tlie  motives  which  led  to  its  publi- 
cation. He  had  the  honour  of  presenting  a  copy  of  the 
work  to  Queen  Caroline,  consort  of  George  II.  a 
short  time  prior  to  its  publication;  when  her  Majesty 
"smiled  upon  the  Author,  and  assured  him,  she  was 
highly  obhged  to  him."  A  dedication  to  his  Royal 
Patroness,  couched  in  most  eulogistic  terms,  was  pre- 
fixed ;  and  tlie  Author's  expectations  of  receiving  some 
solid  proof  of  royal  munificence  were  very  sanguine. 
The  uncertain  nature  of  all  earthly  dependencies  was, 
however,  strikingly  manifested  by  the  sudden  death 
of  the  Queen,  only  sixteen  days  after  the  presentation 
of  the  work  ;*  and  "  her  declared  intention  of  remem- 
bering the  Author  never  took  place." 

As  Mr.  Cruden  had  undertaken  the  work  on  his  own 
responsibility,  the  expenses  necessarily  attendant  on  its 
publication  had  nearly  exhausted  his  hmited  resources; 
and  the  time  it  occupied  had  possibly  diverted  his  atten- 
tion from  the  duties  of  his  shop.  His  embarrassments 
obliged  him  to  dispose  of  his  stock  in  trade,  and  to 
abandon  Jus  shop ;  and  his  disappointed  hopes  depressed 
his  mind,  which  had  possibly  suffered  from  the  intensity 
of  application  to  which  it  had  been  subjected  while  pre- 
paring the  work.  His  malady  returning  with  increased 
violence,  his  friends  deemed  his  confinement  necessary, 
and  he  was  sent  to  a  private  asylum  for  lunatics,  at 
Bethnal  Green ;  from  which  he,  however,  contrived  to 
escape,  though  he  was  chained  to  the  bedstead  on 
which  he  lay.  In  March,  1739,  Mr.  Cruden  published 
a  journal  of  his  sufferings  while  confined  at  Bethnal 
Green,  entitled:  The  London  Citizen  exceedingly  in- 
jured ;  giving  an  account  of  his  severe  and  long  cam- 
paign at  Bethnal  Green,  for  nine  weeks  and  six  days  ; 
the  Citizen  being  sent  there  in  March,  1738,  by  Robert 
Wightman,  a  notoriously  conceited,  whimsical  man; 
where  lie  was  chained,  handcuffed,  strait-tvaistcoated,  and 
imprisoned ;  with  a  history  of  }Vight7nan's  Blind  Bench; 
a  sort  of  Court  that  met  at  Wightman' s  room,  and  unac- 
countably proceeded  to  pass  decrees  in  relation  to  the 
London  Citizen,  S^c.  ^c.  Not  content  with  bringing 
the  parties  by  whom  he  supposed  liimself  aggrieved  to 
the  bar  of  public  opinion,  he  instituted  legal  proceedings 
against  Wightman,  the  proprietor  of  the  asylum,  and 
Dr.  Monro,  the  Physician.  Mr.  Cruden  pleaded  his 
,own  cause,  and  furnished  sufficient  proof  of  the  deranged 
state  of  his  intellect.  A  verdict  was,  of  course,  found 
for  the  defendants.  When  the  verdict  was  returned, 
Mr.  Crudkn  betrayed  no  agitation;  but  on  Jiearing  it 
said,"  I  trust  in  God."  The  Judge  replied:  "  I  wish 
you  had  trusted  more  in  God,  and  had  not  come  hither." 
The  trials,  with  remarks,  were  subsequently  pubhshed 
by  Mr.  Cruden,  with  a  dedication  to  King  George  II 

Tiie  former  employers  of  Mr.  Cruden  did  not  deem 
him  disquulifiod  for  resuming  his  labours  as  corrector  of 
the  press.  After  his  release,  he  was  employed  for  a 
considerable  number  of  years,  in  those  services  which 
Printers  and  Publishers  constantly  need  from  men  of 


education  and  learning.  Under  his  inspection  several 
editions  of  the  Greek  and  Roman  Classics  were  pub 
lishedwith  great  accuracy.  His  maimers  were  invaria 
bly  simple  and  inoffensive;  he  was  always  to  be  trusted, 
and  performed  his  engagements  with  the  strictest  fidelity. 
Fifteen  years  had  passed  away  in  this  laborious  and 
usefiil  employment,  without  any  alarming  indications  of 
mental  incapacity  ;  when  his  relatives,  induced  by  rea- 
sons which  charity  would  hope  justified  them  in  having 
recourse  to  such  extreme  measures,  placed  him  a  third 
time  in  confinement,  wliich  was  but  of  short  duration 
being  from  the  12th  to  the  29th  of  September,  1753. 
No  proof  was  ever  adduced  of  a  mischievous  propensity ; 
his  madness  was  sui  generis:  we  find  nothing  like  it  in 
the  annals  of  medicine ;  nor  can  it  be  accounted  for  on 
any  known  principles  of  physiology.  It  is  more  than 
probable  that  the  restraint  to  which  he  was  subjected, 
and  the  discipline  employed  by  those  under  whose  care 
he  was  placed,  irritated  his  mind,  and  increased  his 
melancholy  disorder. 

Upon  his  liberation,  he  afforded  some  rather  ludicrous 
proofs  of  the  light  in  which  he  regarded  those  who  had 
procured  his  recent  confinement.  As  his  sister,  Mrs. 
Wild,  being  his  nearest  relative,  had  sanctioned  that 
proceeding,  he  required  from  her  a  reparation  of  the 
injury.  In  a  letter,  addressed  to  a  friend  of  Mrs.  Wild, 
hp  makes  what  he  calls  "  proposals  of  reconciliation ;" 
and  begs  her  good  oflices  to  induce  Mrs.  Wild  to  ac- 
cede to  them.  These  proposals  were,  that  Mrs.  Wild 
would  "  voluntarily  submit  to  confinement  in  the  prison 
of  Newgate  for  forty-eight  hours,  and  pay  to  Mr.  Cru- 
den the  sum  of  ten  pounds."  On  its  being  intimated 
that  a  confinement  in  Newgate  might  prove  prejudicial 
to  her  health,  as  the  jail  distemper  was  then  prevalent  in 
that  prison,  Mr.  Cruden  offered  to  commute  the  impri- 
sonment in  Newgate  for  one  of  twice  forty-eight  hours 
in  the  Tower,  and  a  sum  of  fifteen  pounds.  These 
"  reconcDing  proposals"  were,  however,  not  agreed  to 
by  Mrs.  Wild,  though  her  guardian,  and  other  friends 
were  urged  to  employ  their  persuasions.  Mr.  Cruden 
was  much  surprised  at  the  failure  of  these  overtures ; 
and  observed,  "  It  is  a  little  comical,  that  there  should 
be  so  much  trouble  in  getting  this  woman  confined  for 
forty-eight  hours,  who  by  a  word  of  her  mouth  confined 
the  Corrector  for  seventeen  days."  At  length,  despair- 
ing of  a  pacific  termination  of  the  business,  he  brought 
an  action  against  his  sister,  and  three  other  persons, 
which  was  tried  in  Westminster  Hall,  February  20 
1754.  The  damages  were  laid  at  ten  thousand  pounds, 
and  a  verdict  was  returned  for  the  defendants.  At  the 
the  commencement  of  the  following  term,  Mr.  Cruden 
moved  the  Court  in  person  for  a  new  trial,  which  was 
refused.  He  then  published  his  case,  entitled.  The  Ad- 
ventures of  Alexander  the  Corrector;  three  parts  of 
which  successively  appeared.  It  is  not  easy  to  convey 
an  idea  of  the  contents  of  these  publications.  They  are 
evidently  the  production  of  a  mind  in  which  reason  tot- 
tered, if  she  were  not  entirely  dethroned.  Various, 
whimsical,  serious,  and  jocose,  they  form  a  fair  speci- 
men of  the  publications  which  he,  from  time  to  time, 
presented  to  the  public  relative  to  himself. 

His  insanity  now  discovered  itself  in  a  variety  of 
whimsical,  and  occasionally  extravagant  actions;  the 
narration  of  which,  though  it  might  gratify  curiosity, 
would  answer  no  valuable  purpose ;  only  a  few  instances 
shall  be  adduced.  Fully  persuaded  that  he  was  in- 
tended by  Divine  Providence  to  accomplish  a  great 
national  benefit,  he  Assumed  the  title  of,  "  Alexandkb 


•  The  work  was  presented  Nov.  4, 1731,  and  Her  Majesty  died  oa  the  Slst  of  the  same  month. 
6 


MEMOIR  OF  MR.  ALEXANDER  CRUDEN. 


THE  Corrector  ;"  and  gave  out  that  he  was  commis- 
sioned by  Heaven  to  reform  the  manners  of  the  age; 
particularly  to  restore  the  due  observance  of  the  sabbath. 
To  convince  the  public  of  the  validity  of  his  claims  to 
the  high  prerogatives  he  exercised,  he  printed  and  cir- 
culated detached  sentences  from  the  sermons  and 
writings  of  eminent  ministers  and  others;  all  anony- 
mous, or  with  the  initials  only  of  the  authors'  names. 
The  substance  of  these  predictions  was,  "  That  Mr. 
Cruden  was  to  be  a  second  Josjtph,  to  be  a  great  man 
at  Court,  and  to  perform  grea  jiings  for  the  spiritual 
Israel  in  Egypt."  Furnished  with  these  credentials,  he 
went  to  Oxford,  and  other  places,  and  exhorted  the  peo- 
ple whom  he  found  in  the  public  walks  on  the  sabbath, 
to  go  home,  an4  keep  the  sabbath-day  holy  ;  generally 
enforcing  his  admonition  with  denunciations  of  eternal 
wrath  in  case  of  non-compliance. 

Mr.  Cruden's  mind  seems  to  have  cherished  with  no 
ordinary  enthusiasm  the  scheme  of  reformation  we  have 
described;  and  that  his  power  might  be  co-extensive 
with  his  aims,  he  urged  the  necessity  of  a  formal  recog- 
nition of  his  authority  by  the  King  in  Council ;  and  even, 
should  it  be  found  necessary,  that  an  Act  of  the  Legis- 
lature should  constitute  him  "  Corrector  of  the  People." 
To  obtain  these,  the  aid  of  persons  high  in  office  was 
solicited ;  and  the  influence  of  the  ladies  of  London  was 
diligently  sought.  lie  drew  up  a  testimonial  of  his 
integrity,  and  zeal  for  the  public  good ;  and  obtained  the 
signatures  of  the  Lady  Mayoress,  and  some  other  fe- 
males of  rank ;  who  appear  to  have  considered  his  am- 
bition of  so  harmless  a  character,  that  it  was  better  to 
indulge  him  by  a  seeming  acquiescence  with  his  preten- 
sions, than  to  irritate  his  malady  by  unnecessary  oppo- 
sition. 

About  the  same  time  he  made  a  formal  application  to 
His  Majesty  for  the  honour  of  Knighthood  ;  to  which 
distinction  he  aspired,  not  from  fondness  for  the  title, 
but  from  a  persuasion  that  it  would  introduce  him  to 
greater  usefulness :  "  for  thinking  men,"  he  observed, 
"  ought  to  seek  after  titles  rather  to  please  others  than 
themselves."  The  account  he  gave  of  his  attendances  at 
Court  on  this  business,  and  of  his  interviev/s  with  the 
Lords  in  Waiting,  the  Secretaries  of  State,  and  other 
persons  of  rank,  is  highly  amusing.  His  eccentricities 
seem  to  have  become  familiar  with  the  attendants ;  and 
his  acknowledged  reputation  for  uprightness  and  worth 
appears  to  have  preserved  him  from  the  treatment  gene- 
rally met  with  by  impertinent  intruders.  He  complains, 
however,  that  iiis  applications  were  not  attended  to ;  but 
exempts  Earl  Paulett  from  the  censures  which  he  ap 
plies  to  others.  That  nobleman,  he  says,"  spoke  civilly 
to  hi™ ;  for,  being  goutish  in  his  feet,  he  could  not  run 
away  from  the  Corrector,  as  others  were  apt  to  do." 

Wearied  by  his  unsuccessful  solicitations  for  court 
distinction,  he  next  aspired  to  parliamentary  honours. 
At  the  general  election  in  1754,  he  offered  himself  as  a 
candidate  for  representing  the  City  of  London  in  par- 
liament! The  endeavours  of  his  friends  to  dissuade 
him  from  this  wild  enterprise  were  ineffectual.  To  the 
suggestion  of  some,  that  he  was  too  late  in  his  applica- 
tion, he  replied,  "  that  he  was  not  to  look  backward,  but 
forward."  He  obtained  an  interview  with  one  of  the 
Bishops,  who  treated  him  with  humane  attention;  com- 
mended his  Concordance  ;  but  intimated  his  opinion 
that  he  was  not  likely  to  obtain  his  election,  unless  Provi- 
dence specially  appeared  for  him.  "  This,"  says  Cruden, 
in  his  account  of  the  interview,  "  the  Corrector  readily 
acknowledged."  Indeed,  he  appears  confidently  to 
have  anticipated  some  extraordinary  interposition  in  his 
favour ;  and  even  hoped  that  the  other  candidates,  in 


consideration  of  the  uncommon  motives  by  which  he  was 
actuated  in  applying  for  the  honour,  would  decline  all 
opposition.  To  the  London  ministers  he  sent  circular 
letters ;  stating,  that  if  Christian  directions  were  given 
to  the  people  by  their  reverend  pastors,  it  might  cause 
the  Electors  to  act  with  caution  and  conscience ; — and 
that  wicked  men  are  not  fit  to  be  chosen  senators,  and 
intrusted  with  the  religion  and  liberties  of  the  nation. 
His  various  addresses  to  the  Livery,  through  the  me- 
dium of  the  public  press,  were  equally  singular  in  style 
and  sentiment.  The  following  is  a  fair  specimen  of 
both: 

"  To  the  worthy  Livery  of  the  City  of  London." 


"  London,  April  30,  1754. 

"  Gentlemen : 

"  Your  votes  and  interest  are  humbly  re- 
quested for  Alexander  Cruden,  the  Corrector, 
Citizen  and  Stationer,  and  author  of  the  New  Concor- 
dance to  the  Bible,  a  work  in  much  esteem,  to  be  one 
of  the  Representatives  in  Parliament  for  the  City. 

"  It  is  thought  that  God  in  his  providence  signally 
favours  the  Corrector.  And  in  order  to  fulfil  the 
prophecies  concerning  him,  he  earnestly  requests,  that 
the  Sheriffs,  Candidates,  and  Liverymen,  may  seriously, 
as  in  the  sight  of  God,  consider  the  Appendix  to  Alex- 
ander the  Corrector's  Adventures,  and  his  letters  and 
advertisements  published  for  some  days  past ;  which  it  is 
hoped  will  have  a  good  effect  on  the  candidates  them- 
selves, and  all  persons  concerned  for  the  honour  of  God, 
and  of  true  religion. 

"  If  there  is  just  ground  to  think  that  God  will  be 
pleased  to  make  the  Corrector  an  mstrument  to  reform 
the  nation,  and  particularly  to  promote  the  reformation, 
the  peace,  and  the  prosperity  of  this  great  city,  and  to  / 
bring  them  into  a  more  religious  temper  and  conduct, 
no  good  man,  in  such  an  extraordinary  case,  will  deny 
him  his  vote.  And  the  Corrector's  election  is  believed 
to  be  the  means  of  paving  the  way  to  his  being  a  Joseph, 
and  an  useful,  prosperous  man. 

"  The  Corrector's  earnest  prayers  are  put  up  from 
time  to  time  for  your  happiness  in  this  world,  and  the 
world  to  come,  through  Jesus  Christ. 

"  I  am,  very  respectfully, 
"  Gentlemen, 
"  Your  most  obedient  and  affectionate 
Humble  servant, 
"  Alexander  Cruden." 

It  is  needless  to  say,  that  Mr.  Cruden  was  not  more 
successful  at  the  hustings  than  at  Court.  But  he  bore 
thi3  new  disappointment  with  the  most  entire  resigna- 
tion; consoling  himself  with  the  reflection,  "  that  he  had 
the  hearts  of  the  people,  though  their  hands  had  been 
promised  away."  The  Corrector,  he  adds,  "  was  very 
cheerful  and  contented  ;  and  not  at  all  affected  at  the 
loss  of  his  election.  God's  time  is  the  best  time." 
Shortly  afler  the  election,  Mr.  Cruden  published  a 
statement  of  the  motives  which  induced  him  to  aspire  to 
the  dignity  and  duties  of  a  senator ;  interspersed  with 
some  shrewd  observations  on  the  injurious  influence  of 
faction  on  the  morals  and  happiness  of  a  people. 

While  Mr.  Cruden  was  aspiring  to  the  honours  of 
Knighthood,  and  a  seat  in  Parliament,  he  appears  to 
have  been  brought  under  the  powerful  influence  of  love ; 
and  with  an  ardour  suited  to  the  importance  of  the  pur- 
suit, besought  the  hand  of  Mrs.  Elizabeth  Abney,  the 
daughter  of  Sir  Thomas  Abney,  who  filled  the  ofiice  of 
Lord  Mayor  of  London  towards  the  close  of  the  reign 
of  William  III.     The  object  of  his  affection  le  de- 

7 


MEMOIR  OF  MR.  ALEXANDER  CRUDEN. 


Bcribed  by  him  in  his  Love  Adventures,  as  "  a  woman 
of  good  understanding,  of  good  principles,  and  of  amia- 
ble temper,  with  a  liberal  education,  and  acceptable 
person."  Whether  these  valuable  qualities  would  have 
been  sufficient  to  captivate  his  heart,  unaccompanied  by, 
wliat  he  terms,  "  the  greatest  revenues  of  any  lady  of 
the  puritanical  denomination,"  which  he  also  states  her 
to  have  possessed,  i:>  doubtful.  That  his  ruling  passion, 
even  in  this  affair,  was  the  desire  of  promoting  the  pub- 
lic good,  may  be  easily  conceived.  He  supposed  tiiat 
the  large  fortune,  which  was  at  the  lady's  own  disposal, 
would  put  him  in  possession  of  the  influence  essential  to 
the  success  of  his  benevolent  schemes.  As  Mrs.  Abney 
peremptorily  refused  to  see  him,  he  urged  his  suit  for 
months,  by  letters,  memorials,  and  remonstrances  innu- 
merable, of  which  he  published  some  laughable  speci- 
mens. As  milder  measures  had  failed  of  producing  a 
favourable  termination,  he  at  length  sent  to  her  a  ])aper 
of  great  length,  formally  signed  and  sealed,  which  he 
styled  a  Declaration  of  War.  In  this  he  rehearsed  his 
grievances;  stated  the  means  he  had  hitherto  adopted 
to  reduce  Mrs.  Abney  to  a  compliance  with  his  rea- 
sonable requests ;  and  that  he  was  now  reduced  to  the 
necessity  of  employing  other  measures.  Being  an  ex 
traordinary  man,  he  would  thenceforth  carry  on  the 
war  in  an  extraordinary  manner,  "  by  shooting  off  great 
numbers  of  bullets  from  his  camp;  namely,  by  earnest 
prayer  to  heaven,  day  and  night,  that  her  mind  may  be 
enlightened,  and  her  heart  softened."  He  also  had  re- 
course to  another  stratagem,  which,  though  highly 
ludicrous,  could  not,  from  its  public  nature,  have  been 
altogether  pleasant,  to  the  lady  herself.  In  1754,  Mrs. 
Abney,  being  in  the  west  of  England,  her  eccentric 
lover  evinced  his  affectionate  concern  for  her  welfare,  by 
causing  "  praying  bills"  to  be  delivered  every  sabbath  at 
several  places  of  wortfhip,  requesting  the  prayers  of  the 
minister  and  congregation  for  the  preservation  of  lier- 
self  and  attendants.  And  on  her  return  he  sent  similar 
bills,  desiring  that  thanksgivings  might  be  addressed  to 
Almighty  God  for  her  safe  arrival.  In  an  epistle  he 
subsequently  addressed  to  her,  he  urges  these  exertions 
in  her  behalf  as  a  powerful  argument  in  his  favour,  and 
a  proof  that  he  was  "  more  thoughtful  about  her  than 
all  her  friends." 

Notwithstanding  these  multifarious  and  persevering 
attempts  to  produce  a  favourable  impression  on  her 
heart,  Mrs.  Abney  remained  obdurate;  and  even  his 
letters,  he  states,  "  were  quickly  tossed  back."  It  is 
even  said,  that  the  discipline  of  the  blanket  was  at  length 
tried  by  the  servants,  to  cure  his  troublesome  attempts 
to  obtain  a  personal  interview.  Justice  however  com- 
pels us  to  state,  that  Mr.  Cruden  makes  no  allusion  in 
his  Adventures  to  any  such  occurrence. 

At  the  close  of  tiie  year  1754,  Mr.  Cruden  was  en- 
gaged by  Mr.  Woodfam.,  senior,  as  corrector  of  the 
press  to  the  Public  Advertiser,  a  popular  daily  journal, 
in  which  tlie  well  known  Letters  of  Junius  first  appear- 
ed. The  close  application  required  by  the  regular 
routine  of  business  at  Mr.  Wooufall's  office,  doubtless 
did  much  towards  diverting  him  from  his  quixotic  love 
enterprise.  Prej)arationy  for  a  new  edition  of  his  Con- 
cordance bfjcnmo  shortly  after  necessary;  and  the 
requisite  corrections  and  additions  furnished  him  with 
ample  employment.  The  busiufss  of  tlie  printing-ofhce 
was  rarely  over  before  one  o'clock  in  the  morning.  Mr. 
Cruden  selflom  allott(;d  more  than  four  or  five  hours  to 
rest;  and  before  six  in  the  morning  might  be  found  turn- 
in»  over  the  loaves  of  his  Bible,  and  adding  to,  amend- 
ing, and  improving  his  Concordance  with  mostscrupu- 
ious  attention.     At  this  he  laboured  till  the  evening, 


when  he  repaired  to  the  printing-office.  These  habits 
were  well  calculated  to  counieract  the  mental  disease 
under  which  he  had  so  long  laboured ;  and  the  reader 
will  learn  with  benevolent  satisfaction,  that  his  mind 
was  restored  to  a  degree  of  calm  regularity  to  which  he 
had  been  long  a  stranger.  From  1753,  to  the  close  of 
his  life,  he  was  mercifully  preserved,  in  a  very  considera- 
ble degree,  from  those  distressing  visitations  which  had 
painfully  characterised  the  earlier  periods  of  his  history. 

In  1 762,  a  circumstance  occurred  in  Mr.  Cruden's 
history,  which,  while  it  iKustrates  tiie  charity  of  his  dis- 
position, will  tend  to  shew  that  the  eccentric  enthusiast 
in  benevolence  is  sometimes  neitlier  a  ridiculous  nor  a 
useless  being.  One  Richard  Potter  was  tried  and 
capitally  convicted  at  the  Old  Bailey,  of  forging,  or 
rather  uttering  with  a  guilty  knowledge  of  its  being  a 
forgery,  a  seaman's  will,  a  crime  very  rarely  pardoned. 
Mr.  Cruden  was  in  court  during  the  trial ;  and  was  so 
fully  convinced  that  Potter  was  a  poor  iUiterate  crea- 
ture, the  tool  of  another,  and  ignorant  of  the  nature  of 
the  crime  he  committed,  that  he  determined  to  exert 
himself  to  obtain  for  him  the  royal  clemency.  He 
visited  him  after  his  trial ;  prayed  with  him,  exhorted 
him,  taught  him  the  principles  of  religion,  and,  under 
the  divine  blessing,  produced  in  him  a  due  sense  of  the 
wickedness  of  his  past  life;  and  directed  his  inquiring 
mind  to  him  "  whose  blood  cleanseth  from  all  sin." 
With  the  activity  of  enlightened  zeal  he  represented 
the  case  of  this  poor  man  to  the  Earl  of  Halifax,  then 
principal  Secretary  of  State;  and  the  result  of  his  un- 
wearied applications  was  successful.  The  original 
sentence  was  commuted  for  transportation;  and  Mr. 
Cruden  tasted  "  the  god-like  luxury"  of  delivering  a 
fellow-creature  from  the  jaws  of  death,  and  of  instru- 
mentally  saving  his  soul  from  "  the  death  that  never 
dies."  Mr.  Cruden  accompanied  his  apphcation  to  the 
Earl  of  Halifax  in  tlie  behalf  of  the  above  unfortunate 
man  with  a  copy  of  the  second  edition  of  his  Concor- 
dance, to  which  was  prefixed  an  elegant  Latm  dedica- 
tion to  his  Lordship. 

The  success  which  had  attended  his  benevolent  exer- 
tions to  instruct  and  reform  Richard  Potter,  induced 
Mr.  Cruden  to  continue  his  visits  to  Newgate,  in  the 
hope  that  among  the  numerous  prisoners  some  might, 
possibly,  derive  benefit  from  his  labours.  He  visited 
them  every  day;  furnished  them  with  copies  of  the  New 
Testament,  Catechisms,  &-c.;  catechised  them  himself; 
and  bestowed  small  pecuniary  rewards  on  the  most 
attentive.  His  efforts  were,  however,  productive  of 
little  apparent  good  in  a  place  where,  from  wsint  of 
proper  attention  to  the  classification  of  the  prisoners, 
the  vicious  of  every  age,  and  of  every  degree  m  vice, 
were  permitted  to  associate  indiscriminately,  and  to 
harden  each  other.  The  books  distributed  among 
them  by  Mr.  Cruden  were  sold,  and  the  money  spent 
in  spirituous  liquors.  At  length,  discouraged  by  the 
unpropitious  effects  of  liis  well-meant  efiorts.  he  discon- 
tinued ids  visits. 

Though  disappointed,  Mr.  Cri'den's  zeal  for  the  pre- 
sent and  future  welfare  of  his  fellow-creatures  suffered 
no  abatement.  The  ardour  of  his  niiud  sometimes  car- 
ried him  beyond  the  boundaries  of  prudence ;  and  he 
often  appeared  obtrusive,  when  he  only  meant  to  be 
kind.  When  successful  in  rescuing  any  poor  creature 
from  the  barbarity  of  ignorance,  or  the  o\yen  practice  of 
wickedness,  his  joy  knew  no  bounds.  Another  instance 
of  his  success  is  upon  record,  and  well  authenticated. 
Returning  on  a  Sunday  evening  from  a  place  of  worship, 
Mr.  Cruden  observed  a  man  whose  countenance  was 
expressive  of  the  deepest  melancholy,  if  not  of  absolute 


MEMOIRS  OF  MR.  ALEXANDER  CRUDEN. 


despair.  To  behold  misery  in  any  of  its  diversified 
forms,  and  to  attempt  its  removal,  or  mitigation,  were 
necessarily  connected  in  Mr.  Cruden's  philanthropic 
mind.  He  immediately  accosted  this  man;  and  drew  from 
him  a  confession,  that  the  privations  to  which  himself 
and  family  were  reduced  from  his  extreme  poverty,  with 
other  causes,  had  induced  him  to  determine  on  commit- 
ting the  desperate  act  of  suicide.  Mr.  Cruden  expos- 
tulated with  him;  unfolded  the  wickedness  of  his  inten- 
tion ;  and  administered  such  seasonable  instruction  and 
consolation,  with  present  pecuniary  assistance,  and  a 
promise  of  future  support,  that  the  poor  man  became 
cheerful,  resigned,  and  hopeful. 

The  following  instance,  though  not  so  generally 
known,  is  inserted  on  the  testimony  of  a  gentleman 
whose  character  for  veracity  is  a  sufficient  security  for  its 
truth.  Mr.  Cruden  was  one  evening  accosted  by  one 
of  those  daughters  of  infamy,  who  nightly  prowl  through 
the  streets  of  the  metropolis ;  and  who  laid  hold  of  his 
arm,  with  the  familiarity  of  her  wretched  profession. 
He  made  no  reply,  but  allowed  her  to  walk  with  him, 
till  he  arrived  at  his  own  door,  when  he  told  her  he  must 
leave  her  ;  but  could  not  do  so,  without  expressing  his 
sorrow  at  finding  her  engaged  in  so  sinful  and  ruinous 
a  course ;  and  earnestly  exhorted  her  to  abandon  it. 
The  poor  girl  told  him'  with  tears,  she  had  no  alterna- 
tive ;  that  she  would  willingly  quit  her  present  mode  of 
life,  but  knew  not  where  to  go.  Mr.  Cruden  observed, 
it  was  too  late  that  night,  to  enter  into  the  particulars 
of  her  situation  ;  but  if  she  continued  in  the  same  mind 
the  next  day,  she  might  call  at  his  house,  and  he  would 
befi-iend  her.  She  came  accordingly ;  and  expressed 
her  w'dlingness  to  engage  in  any  situation,  however  me- 
nial and  laborious,  rather  than  continue  her  pursuits  of 
infamy.  Mr.  Cruden  told  her,  that  he  knew  of  no  situ- 
ation suitable  for  her ;  but  offered  her  an  asylum  in  his 
house,  as  an  assistant  to  his  servant,  till  a  situation  could 
be  procured  for  her.  She  gratefully  accepted  his  propo 
sal;  and  immediately  entered  upon  the  duties  of  her 
new  office.  She  continued  in  Mr.  Cruden's  service 
.  till  his  death ;  and  conducted  herself  with  such  modesty 
Vaud  propriety,  as  proved  that  her  reformation  was  com- 
plete, and  her  penitence  genuine.  Such  actions  shed  on 
the  memory  of  Mr.  Cruden  a  glory  more  pure  and  last 
ing  than  that  obtained  by  the  conqueror  of  nations.  His 
record  is  on  high ;  and  though  his  eccentricities  occa 
sionally  obscured  the  benevolent  motives  by  which  he 
was  influenced,  the  great  Searcher  of  Hearts  will,  in  the 
day  of  his  coming,  reward  him  openly. 

Loyalty  was  a  prominent  feature  in  Mr.  Cruden's 
character.  He  was  of  opinion  that  a  bad  man  cannot 
make  a  good  patriot,  fn  the  political  struggle  between 
Mr.  Wilkes  and  the  administration  of  the  country, 
which  threw  the  whole  nation  into  a  violent  ferment,  Mr. 
Cruden  took  a  decided  part  against  that  political  dema- 
gogue, whose  name  he  could  never  endure  to  hear  men- 
tioned. He  wrote  a  small  pamphlet  against  him  ;  and 
also  testified  his  aversion  to  him  in  a  way  peculiar  to 
himself,  by  effacing  "  No.  45,"  wherever  he  found  it 
chalked  on  doors  or  window-shutters.  His  instrument 
was  a  large  piece  of  spunge,  which  he  carried  in  his 
pocket,  partly  for  this  purpose,  and  partly  for  the  purpose 
of  destroying  those  inscriptions  offensive  to  decency  and 
good  morals,  which  so  frequently  disgrace  the  walls  of 
the  metropolis.  This  employment  occasionally  made  his 
walks  very  tedious. 

Neither  time  nor  circumstances  can  wholly  dissolve, 

though  they  may  suspend,  those  powerful  attachments 

to  the  place  of  his  birth,  and  the  scenes  of  his  childhood 

id  youth,  which  have  a  place  in  the  breast  of  every 

B 


man  of  sensibility.  When  Mr.  Cruden  was  enabled  to 
detach  himself  from  those  laborious  occupations  which 
had  engrossed  so  large  a  portion  of  his  life,  he  yielded 
to  the  force  of  these  feelings;  and  in  the  year  1769, 
visited  Aberdeen,  his  native  city.  Here  he  also  en- 
deavoured to  serve  the  cause  of  religion  and  public  mo- 
rals. He  applied  for,  and  obtained  permission  to  deliver 
a  lecture  in  one  of  the  PubUc  Halls  of  that  city,  on  his 
favourite  topic,  the  necessity  of  a  reformation  of  man- 
ners. He  pnnted  the  Fourth  Commandment  in  the  form 
of  a  hand-bill,  and  distributed  several  thousands  among 
his  fellow-citizens,  especially  on  the  Lord's  day.  His 
pockets  were  always  well  stored  with  catechisms  and 
other  religious  tracts,  on  which  he  expended  considera- 
ble sums;  and  these  he  bestowed  freely  on  young  persons, 
and  others  who  promised  to  read  them.  Mr.  Chalm- 
ers records  with  a  grateful  feeling,  which  does  credit 
to  his  head  and  his  heart,  his  recollection  of  the  tender 
regard  and  winning  manners  by  which  he  endeavoured 
to  allure  children  to  read  their  Bibles,  Catechisms,  &c. 
By  the  inhabitants  at  large  he  was  received  with  con- 
siderable respect ;  and  the  occasional  singularities  of  his 
conduct  were  readily  excused  in  consideration  of  the  gen- 
eral excellence  of  his  character.  Mr.  Cruden  measured 
the  qualifications  and  conduct  of  ministers  of  the  gospel, 
by  no  ordinary  standard ;  and  wherever  he  discovered 
any  marked  inconsistency  between  the  office  and  the  man, 
he  never  faded  to  express  his  disapprobation  by  some 
word  or  action  too  unequivocal  to  be  misunderstood. 
On  one  occasion,  during  this  visit,  he  happened  to  meet 
with  a  young  clergyman,  whose  spruce  and  conceited 
manners  excited  his  disgust.  With  great  solemnity  he 
presented  him  with  a  child's  catechism,  well  known  in 
Scotland,  entitled.  The  Mother's  Catechism,  dedicated  to 
the  Young  and  Ignorant, 

Mr.  Cruden  continued  at  Aberdeen  about  twelve 
months ;  and  then  returned  to  London,  where  he  closed 
his  days,  and  was  called  to  rest  from  his  labours.  He 
died  at  his  lodgings  in  Camden  Street,  Ishngton,  No- 
vember 1st.,  1770.  The  circumstances  attending  his 
dissolution  were  sufficiently  remarkable  to  warrant  a 
particular  insertion  in  a  Memoir  of  his  life.  His  health 
had  undergone  no  visible  change.  He  had,  indeed,  com- 
plained for  some  days  of  a  slight  asthmatic  affection, 
but  the  evening  before  his  decease  he  retired  to  rest,  as 
usual.  In  the  morning  the  maid  rang  the  bell,  to  sum- 
mon him  to  breakfast.  Receiving  no  answer,  she  went 
into  his  bed-room,  but  he  was  not  there.  She  then  en- 
tered his  closet ;  where  she  found  him  kneeling  against  a 
chair,  his  hands  supported  by  its  back ;  but  he  was  quite 
dead !  As  he  never  married,  he  bequeathed  his  moderate 
savings  to  his  relations ;  except  a  certain  sum  to  his  na- 
tive city,  to  be  employed  in  the  purchase  of  religious 
books,  for  the  use  of  the  poor  ;  and  he  founded  an  exhibi- 
tion of  five  pounds  per  annum,  to  assist  in  educating  a  stu- 
dent at  Mareschal  College.  This  exhibition  was  to  be  ob- 
tained on  certaintermsmentionedinhiswdi,  one  of  which 
was  a  perfect  acquaintance  with  Vincent's  Catechism. 

Mr.  Cruden's  religious  sentiments  were  decidedly 
Calvinistic,  as  the  definitions  of  various  terms  in  his 
Concordance  sufficiently  testify.  But  he  was  no  bigot; 
and  often  censured  with  much  severity  the  principles  and 
practices  of  narrow-minded  men.  He  was  evidently 
warmly  attached  to  that  cause  in  which  all  true  Chris- 
tians, of  whatever  denomination,  must  agree;  the  cause 
of  practical  religion.  His  zeal  for  the  reformation  of 
manners  among  all  ranks  of  men,  could  proceed  only 
from  a  mind  deeply  affected  with  the  evil  of  sin ;  and 
though  his  exertions  in  promoting  the  cause  of  righteous- 
ness were  marked  with  a  certain  degree  of  eccentricity 

9 


MEMOIRS  OF  MR.  ALEXANDER  CRUDEN. 


arising  from  occasional  mental  infirmity,  yet  they  entitle 
him  to  tbe  warmest  approbation  of  all  who  wish  well  to 
the  best  interests  of  mankind.  His  Concordance  is  a 
.asting  monument  of  his  supreme  regard  for  the  Sacred 
Writings.  None  but  a  person  who  possessed  the 
highest  esteem  and  veneration  for  the  scriptures,  would 
have  undergone  the  immense  toil  which  tliis  work  must 
have  cost  him. 

A  conscientious  regard  for  the  public  institutions  of 
religion,  and  an  habitual  respect  to  the  duties  of  private 
devotion,  showed  the  genuineness  of  Mr.  Cruden's  piety 
towards  God.  Nor  did  he  attempt  to  separate  commu- 
nion with  God,  from  communion  with  the  church  of 
God ;  but  having  first  given  himself  to  the  Lord,  he 
made  an  open  and  decided  profession  of  serious  godliness, 
by  closely  uniting  himself  with  the  Independent  Church, 
wliich  assembled  in  Great  St.  Helen's,  under  the  care 
of  Dr.  GuYSE,  whom  he  termed  his  "  faithful  and  be- 
loved pastor."  About  1762,  when  age  and  infirmities 
obliged  Dr.  Guyse  to  resign  the  pastoral  office,  Mr. 
Cruden  was  induced  to  attend  the  ministry  of  Dr.  Con- 
DER,  in  Moorfields ;  and,  subsequently,  that  of  Mr. 
Cruicksiiank,  in  Swallow  Street.  He,  however,  never 
wholly  separated  from  the  church  at  great  St.  Helen's, 
but  attended  the  first  Sunday  in  every  month,  when  the 
Lord's  Supper  was  administered. 

In  private  life  Mr.  Cruden  was  courteous  and  affable; 
prone  to  give  his  opinions,  and  firm  in  his  religious  views 
To  the  poor  he  was  as  liberal  of  his  money  as  of  his  ad- 
vice; he  seldom,  indeed,  separated  the  one  from  the 
other.  His  concern  for  them  must  have  been  sincere, 
for  interest  he  could  have  none;  and  his  generosity 
must  have  been  pure,  for  he  often  gave  more  than  he  re- 
tained for  his  own  use.  To  such  young  men  as  were 
recommended  to  his  notice,  especially  from  his  native 
city,  he  behaved  with  the  kindness  of  an  affectionate  and 
judicious  friend  ;  affording  them  pecuniary  aid,  when 
needed;  and  invariably  cautioning  them  against  the 
temptations  which  assail  youth  in  the  great  metropolis. 

Though  Mr.  Cruden  may  not  obtain  a  niche  in  the 
temple  of  genius,  his  name  will  stand  high  on  the  records 
of  utility.  Besides  the  works  already  referred  to,  he 
wrote  an  Account  of  the  History  and  Excellency  of  the 


Holy  Scriptures,  prefixed  to  a  Compendium  of  the  Holy 
Bible.  He  also  published  the  History  of  Richard  Pot- 
ter,  the  poor  man  who  was  rescued  from  an  igno- 
minious death  by  his  exertions.  A  Scripture  Dictionary 
was  compiled  by  him,  and  published  in  two  octavo  vo- 
lumes at  Aberdeen  shortly  after  his  decease.  He  also 
compiled  the  very  elaborate  verbal  index  which  be- 
longs to  Bishop  Newton's  edition  of  Milton's  Works; 
an  undertaking  inferior  only  to  that  of  his  Concordance, 
and  which  he  undertook  at  the  request  of  Auditor  Ben- 
son. But  his  great  work  was  his  Concordance,  to  the 
revision  and  improvement  of  which  he  devoted  all  his 
leisure  in  the  later  periods  of  his  life  ;  a  second  edition 
was  published  in  17G1,  dedicated  to  his  late  Majesty 
George  the  Third,  who  had  newly  succeeded  to  the 
throne ;  and  who  during  his  reign,  the  longest  in  the 
annals  of  the  British  Empire,  fully  maintained  the  truly 
honourable  character  ascribed  to  him  in  that  dedication, 
of"  having  manifested  a  high  regard  for  religion,  and  an 
earnest  concern  for  promoting  it  among  his  subjects." 
This  edition  was  well  received,  and  a  Third  was  required, 
which  appeared  in  1769,  with  the  Author's  last  correc- 
tions. These  two  editions  reimbursed  Mr.  Cruden  for 
the  losses  he  sustained  by  the  first.  For  his  second 
edition  he  received  five  hundred  pounds  ;  and  when  the 
third  was  published,  the  Booksellers  made  him  a  further 
present  of  three  liundred  pounds,  besides  twenty  copies 
of  the  work  on  fine  paper.  These  sums,  with  the  pro- 
duct of  some  other  literary  labours,  placed  liim  in  easy 
and  comfortable  circumstances  during  the  last  years  of 
his  life ;  and  enabled  him  to  indulge  the  benevolence  of 
his  heart,  in  relieving  the  necessities  of  others. 

Sucli  are  the  brief  Memoirs  we  have  been  able,  after 
considerable  research,  to  collect  of  Alexander  Cru- 
den ;  to  whom  the  religious  world  lies  under  very  great 
obligations :  "  whose  character,"  to  use  the  words  of 
Mr.  Chalmers,  "  notwithstanding  his  mental  infirmities, 
we  cannot  but  venerate  ;  whom  neither  infirmity  nor 
neglect  could  debase  ;  who  sought  consolation  where 
only  it  could  be  found ;  whose  sorrows  served  to  instruct 
him  in  the  distresses  of  others ;  and  who  employed  his 
prosperity  to  relieve  those  who,  in  every  sense,  were  ready 
to  perish." 


TO  THE  KING. 


SIRE, 

THIS  CONCORDANCE  was  begun  with  a  design  to  promote  the  study  and  knowledge  of  the  holy  Scrip- 
tures, and  the  method  taken  therein  is  deemed  by  competent  judges  to  be  the  best  towards  a  complete  Con- 
cordance that  hath  hitherto  appeared  in  our  language.  It  is  acknowledged  to  be  an  useful  book  to  private  Chris- 
tians who  search  the  Scriptures,  and  to  be  very  necessary  for  all  the  Preachers  of  the  Gospel :  Therefore  to 
whom  can  this  new  Edition  be  more  properly  oftered  than  to  your  Majesty,  now  in  the  beginning  of  your  reign, 
having  already  manifested  a  great  regard  to  religion,  and  an  earnest  concern  for  promoting  it  among  your  sub- 
jects? ... 

All  other  books  are  of  little  or  no  importance  in  comparison  of  the  holy  Scriptures,  which  are  a  revelation 
from  God,  and  are  given  as  the  only  rule  of  faith  and  practice.  If  the  kings  of  Israel  were  required  not  only 
"  to  read  tlie  law  of  Moses  all  the  days  of  their  life,  but  also  to  write  out  a  copy  of  it  with  their  own  hand,  that 
they  might  learn  to  fear  the  Lord  their  God,  and  keep  all  the  words  of  his  law ;"  it  may  be  reasonably  expected 
that  Christian  Princes  should  make  the  glorious  Gospel  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  their  daily 
study,  that  it  may  become  their  constant  guide  and  rule  for  the  government  of  their  people,  as  well  as  for  their 
own  salvation. 

It  hath  been  often  observed,  that  the  most  effectual  way  to  a  general  external  reformation  is  "  to  make  Reli- 
gion a  step  to  preferment,  and  Irrehgion  a  bar  to  it;"  because  example  has  a  more  powerful  influence  over  the 
mmds  of  men  than  precept,  or  even  than  punishment.  The  early  declarations  and  strong  resolutions  your  Majesty 
was  pleased  to  make  at  your  coming  to  the  throne,  "  That  you  would  encourage  those  who  are  religious,  and  dis- 
courage those  that  are  otherwise,"  rejoiced  the  hearts  of  all  who  earnestly  desire  the  revival  of  vital  and  prac- 
tical religion,  and  to  see  your  Majesty's  subjects  a  holy  and  happy  people. 

True  piety  has  been  in  all  ages  accounted  the  truest  honour ;  for  Religion  diffuses  the  greatest  glory  around 
a  human  character,  and  sweetens  and  embalms  the  memory  of  Princes.  A  pious  Prince,  who  hath  shewn  a 
hearty  concern  for  the  eternal  happiness  of  his  people,  as  well  as  for  their  present  protection,  will  be  re- 
membered with  great  esteem  and  honour:  for  the  Scripture  says,  that  "the  memory  of  the  just  is  blessed."  When 
they  are  spoken  of,  it  is  with  praise  and  commendation  by  all  good  men.  All  other  accomplishments,  without 
true  grace  and  real  religion,  cannot  make  the  children  of  men  happy,  who  must  all  die  and  rise  again, "  and  ap- 
pear before  the  judgment  seat  of  Christ, to  receive  according  to  what  they  "have  done  in  the  body,  whether 
good  or  had." 

The,  memory  of  Hezekiah,  the  religious  King  of  Judah,  is  precious :  he  hath  been  celebrated  in  all  ages  of  the 
Church  for  his  pious  zeal  in  the  reformation  of  his  people  at  the  beginning  of  his  reign;  for  "God  honours  those 
that  honour  him,  and  they  who  despise  him  shall  be  hghtly  esteemed."  It  is  said  of  that  pious  King,  that  "  he 
trusted  in  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  so  that  after  him  there  was  none  like  him  among  all  the  Kings  of  Judah,  nor 
any  that  were  before  him:  for  he  clave  to  the  Lord,  and  departed  not  from  following  him,  but  kept  his  com- 
mandments, which  the  Lord  commanded  Moses."  Hezekiah,  Uke  your  Majesty,  began  his  reign  in  his  youth, 
yet  his  zeal  for  the  worship  of  God,  and  for  promoting  Religion  among  his  subjects,  carried  him  through  the 
great  difficulties  of  reforming  a  people,  who  had  so  much  degenerated  into  gross  idolatry.  May  the  great  God 
be  the  guide  of  your  Ufe,  and  direct  and  prosper  you,  that  it  may  be  said  by  the  present  and  future  ages,  that  King 
George  the  Third  hath  been  an  Hezekiah  to  our  British  Israel. 

I  DOUBT  not  but  your  Majesty  wiU  pardon  my  forbearing  to  enter  upon  your  valuable  personal  accomplish- 
ments :  I  shall  only  add  that,  when  it  pleased  God,  the  sovereign  Lord  of  hfe  and  death,  to  deprive  us  of  the 
blessing  of  your  Royal  Grandfather  King  George  the  Second,  the  Protector  of  our  Religion  and  Liberties  for 
many  years,  it  was  esteemed  a  national  blessing  that  God  had  favoured  Great  Britain  with  a  Prince  born  and 
educated  among  us,  who  makes  the  liappiness  of  his  people  the  rule  of  his  government;  and  without  Religion 
there  can  be  no  real  happiness  for  Prince  or  People., 

When  your  Majesty  came  to  the  throne,  the  loyal  and  affectionate  addresses  from  your  subjects  in  all  parts  of 
the  British  dominions,  shewed  their  great  hopes  and  strong  expectations  of  being  happy  under  your  Majesty's 
government.  We  of  th«  British  nation  have  reason  thankfully  to  remember  the  appearances  of  Divme  Provi- 
dence in  tlie  preservation  of  our  Religion  and  Liberties,  particularly  in  settling  and  establishing  the  Protestant 
Succession,  and  in  disappointing  from  time  to  time  all  the  contrivances  and  attempts  of  its  enemies,  whether 
secret  or  open;  and  in  your  Majesty's  coming  to  the  throne  with  the  hearts  of  all  your  subjects  united  to  you  as 
the  heart  of  one  man. 

May  it  please  God  to  bestow  his  choicest  gifts  upon  your  Majesty,  upon  your  Royal  Mother  the  Princess 
Dowager  of  Wales,  and  all  the  Royal  Family,  and  upon  your  numerous  and  powerful  People.  May  you  be  blessed, 
and  made  a  real  blessing,  and  may  your  reign  be  long  and  prosperous;  and  after  you  have  been  enabled  to  serve 
God  faithfully  here  upon  earth,  may  you  reign  forever  with  him  in  heaven  through  Jesus  Christ.  This  is  the 
sincere  and  earnest  prayer  of  him  who  is,  with  great  humility  and  profound  respect, 

May  tt  please  your  Majesty, 

Your  Majesty's  most  dutiful. 

And  most  obedient  subject  and  servant, 

London,  June  11, 1761.  Alexander  Chuden. 

n 


TO  THE  QUEEN. 


THIS  CONCORDANCE,  the  work  of  several  years,  was  begun  with  a  design  to  promote  thestudy  of  the 
holy  Scriptures;  and,  in  pursuance  tliereof,  is  now  published  with  many  improvements  beyond  any  book  of  this 
kind  in  the  English  language. 

Long  before  this  Work  was  ready  for  the  press,  I  designed  humbly  to  offer  it  to  your  Majesty,  and  to  beg 
leave  to  publish  it  under  your  royal  protection.  Your  Majesty's  illustrious  qualities  and  example  in  the  great 
scenes  of  your  valuable  life,  encourage  me  humbly  to  beg  your  countenance  to  a  well-meant  attempt  for  pro- 
moting the  knowledge  of  our  holy  Religion. 

The  beauty  of  your  person,  and  the  fine  accomplishments  of  your  mind,  were  so  celebrated  in  your  father's 
court,  that  there  was  no  Prince  in  the  Empire,  who  had  room  for  such  an  alliance,  that  was  not  ambitious  of 
gaining  a  Princess  of  such  noble  virtues  into  his  family,  either  as  a  Daughter,  or  as  a  Consort. 

And  though  the  heir  to  all  the  dominions  of  the  house  of  Austria  was  desirous  of  your  alliance,  yet  you  gener- 
ously declined  the  prospect  of  a  Crown  that  was  inconsistent  with  the  enjoyment  of  your  Religion.  The  great 
Disposer  of  all  things,  however,  kept  in  store  a  reward  for  such  exalted  virtue,  and  by  the  secret  methods  of  hia 
wisdom  hath  brouglit  your  Majesty  to  a  Crown,  as  famous  for  defending  and  supporting  the  Protestant  Religion, 
as  it  is  conspicuous  for  its  glory  and  splendor;  which  is  such  a  return  of  Divine  Providence  as  is  to  be  admired 
with  great  thankfulness,  though  without  the  least  surprise,  since  He  whose  kirigdom  ruleih  over  all  hath  declared, 
that  such  as  honour  Him,  He  will  honour. 

It  was  the  fame  of  this  heroic  constancy  that  determined  his  Majesty  to  desire  in  marriage  a  Princess  who  was 
now  more  celebrated  for  her  Christian  magnanimity,  than  for  the  beauty  of  her  person,  which  had  been  so  univer- 
sally admired.  We  of  the  British  nation  have  reason  to  rejoice  that  such  a  proposal  was  made  and  accepted, 
and  that  your  Majesty,  with  regard  to  these  two  successive  treaties,  shewed  as  much  prudence  in  your  compli- 
ance with  the  one,  as  piety  in  your  refusal  of  the  other.  You  no  sooner  arrived  at  Hanover  than  you  improved 
the  lustre  of  that  court,  which  was  before  reckoned  among  the  politest  in  Europe,  and  increased  the  happiness 
of  a  people,  who  were  before  looked  upon  as  the  happiest  in  the  Empire.  And  you  immediately  became  the  dar- 
ling of  the  Princess  Sophia,  a  Princess,  justly  acknowledged  to  be  one  of  the  most  accomplished  women  of  the  age 
in  which  she  lived,  who  was  much  pleased  with  the  conversation  of  one,  in  whom  she  saw  so  lively  an  image 
of  her  own  youth. 

We  daily  discover  those  admirable  qualities  for  which  your  Majesty  was  famed  in  other  countries,  and 
rejoice  to  see  them  exerted  in  our  Island,  where  we  ourselves  are  made  happy  by  their  influence.  We  behold 
the  throne  of  these  kingdoms  surrounded  by  your  Majesty's  royal  and  numerous  Progeny,  and  hear  with  pleasure 
of  the  great  care  your  Majesty  takes  to  instil  early  into  their  minds  the  principles  of  Religion,  Virtue  and  Honour. 

Your  Majesty  is  possessed  of  all  those  talents  which  make  conversation  either  delightful  or  improving.  Your 
fine  taste  in  the  elegant  arts,  and  skill  in  several  modern  languages,  is  such,  that  your  discourse  is  not  confined 
to  the  ordinary  subjects  of  conversation,  but  is  adapted,  witli  an  uncommon  grace,  to  every  occasion,  and  enter- 
tains the  politest  persons  of  different  nations.  That  agreeable  turn  which  appears  in  your  sentiments  upon  the 
most  ordinary  affairs  of  life,  which  is  so  suitable  to  the  delicacy  of  your  sex,  the  politeness  of  your  education,  and 
the  splendor  of  your  quality,  is  observed  by  every  one  that  has  the"  honour  to  approach  you. 

But  the  great  regard  your  Majesty  lias  shewn  to  Religion,  which  diffuses  the  greatest  glory  around  a  human 
character,  encourages  me  to  hope  that  tliis  Work  will  meet  with  your  favourable  acceptance.  May  it, 
therefore,  please  your  Majesty  to  take  into  your  royal  protection  this  Concordance,  the  design  of  which  is  to 
render  the  study  of  the  Scriptures  more  easy.  Whatever  may  be  wanting  either  in  the  Work  or  Author,  is 
abundantly  supphed  by  the  dignity  of  the  subject ;  which  consideration  cliieily  encouraged  me  to  presume  to  offer 
it  to  your  Majesty,  whom  God  hath  exalted  to  the  most  eminent  station,  and  blessed  with  extraordinary  endow- 
ments of  mind,  and  with  a  benevolent  and  beneficent  disposition:  To  whom  then  can  I  more  properly  offer  this 
Work  than  to  your  Majesty,  who  is  celebrated  both  for  your  inclination  and  capacity  to  do  good? 

May  the  great  Con  continue  to  multiply  ids  blessings  upon  the  King,  your  Majesty,  and  every  branch  of  your 
Royal  Family :  May  your  life  be  long  continued  to  serve  God  faithfully  on  earth,  and  may  you  reign  for  ever  with 
Him  in  heaven,  through  Jesus  CHRrsr  our  Lord.     Amen. 

These  are  the  sincere  prayers  of  him  who  is,  with  the  most  profound  respect, 

May  it  please  your  J\Iajesty, 
Your  Majesty's 

J\Iosl  dutiful,  and 

JUost  obedient  servant, 
London,  October,  1737  Alexander  Cruden. 


12 


PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION. 


A  CONCORDANCE  is  a  Dictionary,  or  an  Index  to  the  BIBLE,  wherein  all  the  words  used  through  the 
inspired  writings  are  ranged  alphabetically,  and  the  various  places  where  they  occur  are  referred  to,  to  assist  ua 
in  finding  out  passages,  and  comparing  the  several  significations  of  the  same  word.  A  work  of  this  kind,  which 
tends  so  much  to  render  the  study  of  the  holy  Scriptures  more  easy  to  all  Christians,  must  be  acknowledged  to 
be  very  useful;  for  if  a  good  index  to  any  other  book  is  to  be  valued,  much  more  ought  one  to  the  Bible,  which 
is  a  revelation  from  God,  given  as  the  only  rule  of  our  faith  and  practice,  and  to  discover  to  us  the  way  to  eternal 
life  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

I  DO  not  here  propose  to  treat  of  the  incomparable  excellencies  of  that  divine  book,  which  is  above  all  com- 
mendation, and  will  be  in  the  highest  esteem  by  all  the  true  members  of  the  church  of  God,  whose  faith,  hope, 
and  comfort  are  built  upon  these  divine  Oracles. 

What  I  shall  further  do  in  this  Preface,  shall  be  to  present  the  Reader  with  a  short  historical  account  of  Con- 
coRDANCEs,  wMch  will  tend  to  display  their  great  usefulness;  and  then  acquaint  him  with  the  method  I  have 
followed  in  this. 

Hugo  de  S.  Charo,  a  preaching  Friar  of  the  Dominican  order,  who  was  afterwards  a  Cardinal,  was  the  first 
who  compiled  a  Concordance  to  the  holy  Scriptures:  he  died  in  the  year  1262.  He  had  studied  the  Bible  very 
closely,  and  for  carrying  on  this  great  and  laborious  work  the  more  successfully,  we  are  told  he  employed  five 
hundred  Monks  of  his  order  to  assist  him.  He  framed  an  Index  of  all  the  declinable  words,  and  referred  to  the 
places  where  they  were  to  be  found. 

This  Latin  Concordance  has  been  frequently  printed  with  improvements ;  and  since  that  time  works  of  this 
sort  have  been  brought  to  much  greater  perfection  than  formerly.  At  first  it  was  thought  sufficient  to  specify 
the  chapter  wherein  the  word  occurred,  with  these  letters  a,  b,  c,  d,  as  marks  to  point  out  the  beginning,  the 
middle,  or  the  end  of  the  chapter.  But  after  Robert  Stephens,  in  the  year  1545,  had  divided  the  chapters  of  the 
Bible  into  verses,  the  verses  likewise  began  to  be  numbered,  and  the  letters  in  the  editions  of  the  Concordances 
to  be  suppressed.  And  in  1555  this  eminent  Printer  published  his  fine  Concordance,  wherein  the  chapters 
and  verses  are  exactly  distinguished. 

It  could  not  be  thought  that  when  so  useful  a  work  as  Cardinal  Hugo's  came  to  be  known,  men,  who  carefully 
studied  the  Scriptures,  would  be  satisfied  that  such  assistance  should  be  confined  only  to  those  who  understood 
Z,afm ;  Accordingly,  several  have  been  published  in  various  languages,  particularly  Rabbi  Mordecai  JVathan, 
otherwise  called  Isaac  JVathan,  composed  a  Hebrew  Concordance  in  imitation  of  Cardinal  Hugo's.  He  began 
it  in  the  year  1438,  and  completed  it  in  1448,  being  no  less  than  ten  years  in  finishing  it;  and  besides,  as  he 
himself  says,  he  was  obliged  to  employ  a  great  many  writers  in  this  work.  After  printing  was  invented,  it  was 
printed  several  times :  first  at  Venice  by  Daniel  Bomberg  in  the  year  1523,  under  the  title  of  Meir  J^ctib,  that  is 
to  say.  Which  giveth  light  in  the  way ;  at  Basil  by  Frobenius  in  1581,  and  at  Rome  in  1621.  This  was  the 
foundation  of  that  noble  work  published  by  John  Buxtorf,  the  son,  being  assisted  by  his  father's  papers,  at  Basil 
in  1632. 

As  to  the  Greek  text  of  the  New  Testament,  a  Concordance  was  published  by  Henry  Stephens  at  Geneva  in 
1599,  and  republished  in  1624:  But  a  more  accurate  one  was  compiled  by  Erasmus  Sch77iidius,  and  pubhshed 
at  Wittemberg  in  1638,  which  was  republished  more  correctly  at  Leipsic  in  1716,  and  is  reckoned  a  very  complete 
performance.  * 

A  Greek  Concordance  to  the  Septuagint  Version  of  the  Old  Testament,  must  be  owned  to  be  very  usefiil  to 
such  as  are  for  comparing  the  expressions  used  in  it  with  those  of  the  JVeio  Testament,  and  to  those  who  read  the 
Fathers.  Conrad  Kircher  of  Augsbourg  is  celebrated  for  his  Greek  Concordance  of  the  Old  Testament,  printed 
at  Franc/art  in  1602.  This  author  has  inserted  the  Hebrew  words  in  an  alphabetical  order,  and  placed  under 
them  the  Greek  words  to  which  they  answer.  But  since  that  time,  an  excellent  Concordance  to  the  Old  Testa- 
ment has  been  published  at  Amsterdam  in  1718,  by  the  aged  and  worthy  Minister  of  Groningen,  M.  Abraham 
Trommius,  who  instead  of  following  the  Hebrew  alphabet  with  Kircher,  has  chosen  rather  to  observe  the  order 
of  the  Greek  alphabet- 

There  have  been  Concordances  likewise  published  in  various  modern  languages;  in  French  by  M.  Gravelin; 
in  High-dutch  and  Low-dutch  by  several ;  the  most  complete  one  in  Low-dutch  is  that  begun  by  M.  Martinitz, 
and  finished  by  M.  Trommius  before-mentioned.  In  English  we  have  had  many.  The  first  was  published  by 
Mr.  Marbeck  in  1550,  which  is  dedicated  to  the  pious  King  Edivard  VI.  but  this  referred  only  to  chapters,  not 
verses:  Then  Mr.  Cotton  published  a  pretty  large  Concordance,  which  has  been  often  printed:  Afterwards  Mr. 
J^ewman  published  one  more  complete ;  and  lastly,  we  have  had  one  published  under  the  title  of  the  Cambridge 
Concordance.  There  have  been  several  abstracts  or  small  Concordances  published :  First  by  Mr.  Downame, 
the  next  by  Mr.  Vavasor  Powell,  then  by  Mr.  John  Jackson,  and  afterwards  by  Mr.  Samuel  Clarke.  As  also 
other  works  of  this  nature  have  been  written  by  way  of  a  Dictionary  or  Concordance,  but  in  a  different  method, 
as  Mr.  Wilson's  Christian  Dictionary,  Mr.  Knight's  Axiomatical  Concordance,  Mr.  Bernard's  Thesaurus  Biblicus, 
and  Mr.  Wicken's  Concordance.  &c. 

•  13 


PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION. 

Thus  it  appears  that  we  have  liad  Concordances  to  the  Bible  some  centuries  ago ;  and  the  world  has  been  so 
sensible  of  their  usefulness,  that  many  of  them  have  been  composed  and  pubhshed  in  different  languages :  But  as 
there  are  several  in  our  language,  it  may  be  inquired.  What  occasioned  my  undertaking  this  great  and  laborious 
work,  or  what  advantage  it  has  above  any  other  hitherto  published? 

When  I  first  began  this  work,  I  designed  to  compose  an  useful  Concordance  in  Octavo;  but  after  I  had  printed 
several  specimens,  I  found  it  necessary  to  alter  my  scheme,  and  to  compile  one  to  be  printed  in  this  large 
volume,  in  order  to  make  those  improvements  which  now  render  it  preferable  to  any  other. 

The  method  is  easy  and  regular,  and  each  text  of  Scripture  is  generally  contained  in  one  line,  whereby 
the  reader  may  readily  find  the  place  he  wants,  if  he  remembers  any  material  word.  When  there  are  two  or  more 
texts  of  Scripture  that  are  parallel,  I  have  generally  mentioned  the  first  that  occurs  in  ordc^r  in  the  Bible,  and 
have  directly  added  the  parallel  texts.  It  is  printed  with  a  good  letter,  though  pretty  small,  which  was 
necessary  in  order  to  bring  it  into  this  volume,  and  make  it  contain,  multum  in parvo,  much  in  a  little  compass; 
and  great  care  has  been  taken  that  the  figures  referring  to  the  chapters  and  verses  of  the  Bible  be  exact  and 
correct.     When  a  text  is  marked  with  a  f ,  it  denotes  a«marginal  reading. 

This  Concordance  is  divided  into  three  Alphabets. 

This  first  Alphabet  contains  the  appellative  or  common  words,  which  is  the  principal  part.  It  is  very  full  and 
large,  and  any  text  may  be  found  by  looking  for  any  material  word,  whether  it  be  substantive,  adjective, 
verb,  &c. 

In  this  part,  I  have  given  the  various  Significations  of  the  principal  words,  which,  T  hope,  will  be  esteemed 
an  useful  improvement,  there  not  being  any  thing  of  this  kind  in  the  other  large  Concordances:  By  this  improve- 
ment the  Reader  will  have  many  texts  explained,  and  difficulties  removed ;  and  the  meaning  of  the  Scripture 
may  be  here  known  by  that  which  is  accounted  the  best  rule  of  interpreting  Scripture,  namely,  btj  coinparing  one 
Scripture  with  another.  There  is  so  large  a  collection  of  the  various  Significations  of  many  words  in  Scripture, 
as  may,  perhaps,  be  not  only  useful  to  private  Christians,  but  also  to  those  who  preach  the  Gospel ;  for  hereby 
many  important  things  may  be  observed  at  one  view,  without  the  trouble  of  turning  over  several  volumes ;  and 
occasion  is  sometimes  taken  to  give  an  account  of  the  Jewish  customs  and  ceremonies,  by  which  the  Reader 
is  led  into  the  meaning  of  many  passages  of  Scripture,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  words,  Elder,  Ephod,  Syna- 
gogue, &c. 

The  second  Alphabet  contains  the  Proper  Jfames  in  the  holy  Scriptures,  which  the  Reader  will  receive  with 
approycments,  as  in  Abraham,  David,  &c.  The  texts  referred  to  where  those  names  are  mentioned,  give  a  short 
historical  account  of  the  remarkable  things  recorded  in  Scripture  concerning  them.  To  this  part  is  prefixed  a 
Table,  containing  the  Significations  of  the  words  in  the  original  languages  from  which  they  are  derived. 

The  third  and  last  Alphabet  is  a  Concordance  for  those  books  that  are  called  Apocryphal,  which  is  only 
added  that  this  work  might  not  be  deficient  in  any  thing  that  is  treated  of  in  any  other  Concordance ;  those  books 
not  being  of  divine  Inspiration,  nor  any  part  of  the  Canon  of  Scripture,  and  therefore  are  of  no  authority  in  the 
church  of  God. 

I  CONCLUDE  this  Preface,  with  praymg  that  God,  who  hath  graciously  enabled  me  to  bring  this  large  Work  to 
a  conclusion,  would  render  it  useful  to  those  who  seriously  and  carefully  search  the  Scrijitures ;  and  grant  that 
the  sacred  writings,  which  are  so  important  and  highly  worthy  of  esteem,  may  meet  with  all  that  affection  and 
regard  which  they  deserve.  May  those  who  profess  to  believe  the  Scriptures  to  be  a  Revelation  from  God, 
apply  themselves  to  the  reading  and  study  of  them;  and  may  they  by  the  holy  Spirit  of  God,  who  indited  the 
Scriptures,  be  made  wise  to  salvation  through  faith  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus.     Amen. 

London,  October,  1737.  A.  C. 


PREFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION. 


AS  to  what  respects  this  new  Edition,  notwithstanding  the  great  pains  taken  in  the  Mrst,  there  was  room 
for  improvements.  The  filUng  up  of  the  hnes  to  make  the  text  fuller  could  not  so  well  he  done  in  the  manuscript 
copy  as  in  the  printed.  This  renders  the  sentences  more  complete  m  many  thousands  of  places :  moreover  the 
texts  are  more  distinct  in  many  places  by  the  leading  words  being  distinguished  in  Italic  characters.  Some  texts 
are  added,  and  some  improvements  are  made  in  the  Signijications  of  words,  and  an  historical  account  is  given  of 
some  eminent  persons  under  their  Proper  J^ames;  and  other  things  that  need  not  be  particularly  mentioned. 

The  labours  of  many  persons  to  compile  Concordances  to  the  Bible,  and  their  acceptance  from  time  to  time 
by  the  public,  shew  their  great  usefulness :  It  may  be  reckoned  a  good  sign  that  religion  is  revived  in  some  con- 
siderable degree  in  the  present  age,  by  the  great  demand  for  Concordances  and  religious  books.  The  First 
Edition  of  several  thousands  in  number  has  been  long  sold  off,  which  shews  this  book's  favourable  reception  from 
the  public ;  and  a  demand  has  been  long  made  for  a  new  Edition.  There  are  few  books  more  necessary  to  those 
who  study  their  Bibles  than  a  Concordance,  whether  private  Christians,  or  Ministers  of  the  Gospel  who  make 
the  Scripture  the  S'tandard  of  their  preaching.  I  was  told  by  an  eminent  Minister,  that  the  Bible  and  this  Con- 
cordance taught  him  to  preach :  This  Dictionary  may  be  a  help,  but  the  Spirit  Of  God  is  the  best  Teacher,  who 
alone  can  powerfully  and  effectually  teach  and  impress  the  heart  with  the  truths  revealed  in  the  Scriptures,  and 
make  those  who  read  and  study  the  sacred  writings  wise  to  salvation. 

My  great  aim  and  design  in  this  Work  is,  that  it  may  be  the  means  of  propagating  among  my  countrymen,  and 
through  all  the  British  dominions,  the  knowledge  of  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  of  ourselves,  as 
the  same  is  revealed  in  the  Scriptures ;  for  whose  good  I  heartily  wish  that  it  were  more  complete  than  it  is :  For 
though  it  be  called  in  the  title-page,  A  Complete  Concordance,  poor  sinful  man  can  do  nothing  absolutely  perfect 
and  complete,  and  therefore  the  word  complete  is  only  to  be  taken  in  a  comparative  sense :  yet  competent  judges 
are  of  opinion  that  the  method  here  taken  is  the  best  which  has  appeared  in  our  language  towards  a  complete 
Concordance. 

It  is  hoped  that  the  above-mentioned  improvements  in  this  new  Edition  will  serve  to  recommend  the  Work 
more  and  more  to  the  favour  of  the  pubhc.  May  it  please  God,  by  the  powerful  operations  of  his  Spirit,  to  make  it 
useful  for  the  spiritual  benefit  of  those  who  dihgently  and  carefully  use  it. 

London,  June  11,  1761.  A.  C. 


THE  First  and  Second  Editions  of  this  Concordance  having  been  well  received  by  the  public,  seems  to  shew 
the  great  usefubiess  of  such  a  Dictionary  to  the  Bible;  for  itmaybejustlysaid,  that,  if  Christians  were  convinced 
that  Concordances  tended  so  much  as  they  really  do  to  promote  the  study  and  knowledge  of  the  holy  Scriptures, 
they  would  be  more  desirous  of  having  one :  And  some  Ministers  have  expressed  so  great  an  esteem  for  this  Con- 
cordance,thB.t  they  have  said,  "  If  they  could  not  have  another  copy,  they  would  not  part  with  it  for  many  pounds." 
This  third  Edition  now  appears,  with  some  improvements,  which  it  is  hoped  will  engage  the  continuance  of  the 
public  approbation  this  work  has  already  been  favoured  with.  May  it  please  God  to  make  it  more  and  more 
useful,  and  a  blessing  to  the  Church  of  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     Amen. 

IiONDON,  March  24,  1769.  ^^  C. 


16 


PREFACE  TO  THE  OCTAVO  EDITION, 


NEXT  to  the  Sacred  Writings,  no  volume  better  deserves  a  place  in  the  library  of  the  Christian,  than  Cru- 
den's  Concordance  to  the  Hor.y  Scriptures.  On  the  principle  now  generally  recognized  by  Christians 
of  all  denominations,  tliat  Scripture  is  the  best  interpreter  of  Scripture,  a  more  accurate  knowledge  of  the  con- 
tents of  the  Bible  may  be  attained  by  means  of  a  correct  and  copious  Concordance,  than  by  any  other  means. 
As  a  common  dictionary  is  referred  to,  for  the  signification  of  words  in  ordinary  use,  so,  by  comparing  together 
the  different  passages  of  Scripture  in  which  any  word  occurs,  as  arranged  in  a  Concordance,  the  Scripture  ac- 
ceptation of  the  term  wiU  be  discovered;  and  the  inquirer  freed  from  the  drudgery  of  consulting  Commentaries, 
and  antiquated  systems  of  divinity,  in  which  every  passage  is  generally  explained  in  conrormity  with  the 
creed  of  the  Author,  rather  than  according  to  "  the  analogy  of  faith." 

The  learned  Bishop  Horsley  has  recorded  his  opinion  on  this  subject.  He  says,  "  It  should  be  a  rule  with 
every  one  who  would  read  the  Holy  Scriptures  with  advantage  and  improvenfent,  to  compare  every  text  which 
may  seem  important  for  the  doctrine  it  may  contain,  or  remarkable  for  the  turn  of  the  expression,  with  the  parallel 
passages  in  other  parts  of  Holy  Writ ;  that  is,  with  the  passages  in  which  the  subject  matter  is  the  same,  the 
sense  equivalent,  or  the  turn  of  tlie  expression  similar." — It  is  incredible  to  any  one,  who  lias  not  in  some  degree 
made  the  experiment,  what  a  proficiency 'may  be  made  in  that  knowledge  that  maketh  wise  unto  salvation,  by 
studying  the  Scriptures  in  this  manner,  without  anv  other  commentary  or  exposition,  than  what  the 
different  parts  of  the  Sacred  Volume  mutually  furnish  for  each  other.  I  will  not  scruple  to 
assert,  tliat  the  most  illiterate  Christian,  if  he  can  but  read  his  English  Bible,  and  will  take  the  pains  to  read  it  in 
tliis  manner,  will  not  only  attain  all  that  practical  knowledge  that  is  necessary  to  his  salvation :  but,  by  God's 
blessing,  he  will  become  learned  in  every  thing  relating  to  his  religion,  in  such  a  degree,  that  he  will  not  be  liable 
to  be  misled,  eitJier  by  the  refined  arguments  or  the  false  assertions  of  those  who  endeavour  to  engraft  their  own 
opinions  upon  the  Oracles  of  God.  He  may  safely  be  ignorant  of  all  philosophy,  except  what  is  to  be  learned 
from  the  Sacred  Books;  which,  indeed,  contain  the  highest  philosophy  adapted  to  the  lowest  comprehensions. — 
He  may  safely  remain  ignorant  of  all  history,  except  so  much  of  the  first  ages  of  the  Jewish  and  of  the  Christian 
Church  as  is  to  be  gathered  from  the  Canonical  Books  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments.  Let  him  study  these  in 
the  manner  I  recommend,  and  let  him  never  cease  to  pray  for  the  illumination  of  that  Spirit  by  which  these  books 
were  dictated,  and  the  whole  compass  of  abstruse  philosophy,  and  recondite  history,  shall  furnish  no  argument 
with  which  the  perverse  will  of  man  shall  be  able  to  shake  this  learned  Christian's  faith.  The  Bible,  thus  studied, 
will  indeed  prove  to  be,  what  we  Protestants  esteem  it — "  a  certain  and  sufficient  rule  of  faith  and  practice;  a 
helmet  of  salvation,  which  alone  may  quench  the  fiery  darts  of  the  wicked."* 

The  Rev.  T.  H.  Horne,  in  his  Introduction  to  the  Critical  Study  of  the  Scriptui'cs,\  (a  work  which  for 
extent  of  research,  and  felicity  of  arrangement,  is  unequalled  in  the  department  of  literature  to  which  it  belongs,) 
observes :  "  The  comparison  of  parallel  passages  is  a  most  important  help  for  interpreting  such  parts  of  Scripture 
as  may  appear  to  us  obscure  or  uncertain;  for,  on  almost  every  subject,  tliere  will  be  found  a  multitude  of  phrases, 
that,  when  diligently  collated,  will  afford  mutual  illustration  and  support  to  each  other;  the  truth  which  is  more 
obscurely  intimated  in  one  place  being  expressed  with  greater  precision  in  others.  Thus,  a  part  of  the  attributes, 
or  circumstances,  relating  to  both  persons  and  things,  is  stated  in  one  text,  and  part  in  another;  so  that  it  is  only 
by  searching  out  several  passages,  and  connecting  them  together,  that  we  can  obtain  a  just  apprehension  of  them." 

If  these  remarks  be  just,  (and  the  authorities  from  which  they  proceed  place  them  above  all  reasonable  objection,) 
then  the  value  of  such  a  work  as  "  Cruden's  Concordance  to  the  Holy  Scriptures,"  affording  such  facility 
to  the  study  of  the  Sacred  Volume,  will  be  readily  admitted.  The  pecuhar  claims  of  the  present  edition  remain  to 
be  noticed. 

The  first  and  most  important  point  to  be  regarded  in  such  a  work,  is  the  general  correctness  of  the  various 
referencfi  to  Scripture  Texts.  To  secure  this,  the  utmost  pains  have  been  employed;  every  passage  has  been 
carefuliy  »;oriipared  with  the  last  edition  published  under  the  eye  of  the  Author,  in  1769,  and  collated  with 
subsequent  editions;  and  whore  any  difference  appeared,  the  passage  was  traced  out,  and  corrected  from  the 
Scripturea.  This  extraordinary  care  will,  it  is  contid(;ntly  hoped,  obtain  for  this  Edition  the  high  recommendation 
of  being  the  most  correct  edition  of  Cruden's  Concordance  ever  published. 

The  Octavo  form  in  which  the  Concordance  now  appears,  so  much  more  portable  than  a  ponderous  Quarto, 
enables  the  publishers  to  offer  it  at  a  considerably  reduced  price ;  while  the  clearness  and  beauty  of  its  type  render 
it  a  specimen  of  that  high  degree  of  excellence  tiie  art  of  Stereotype  Printing  has  attained  in  tiiis  country. 

A  Memoir  of  Mr.  Cruden,  on  an  extended  scale,  containing  some  scarce  and  interesting  particulars  of  his 
life,  and  several  characteristic  and  authentic  Anecdotes,  has  been  compiled  by  the  Editor,  with  great  care  ex- 
pressly for  this  edition. 

SAJVUEL  BLACKBURJT. 

Old  Street  Road,  London,  October,  1823. 

•  Nine  Sermona,  pp.  221-228.  t  VoL  II.  p.  552. 

16 


A  COMPLETE 

CONCORDANCE 


TO    THE 


HOLV   SCRIFTURES: 


^  Bittionavst  antr  ^Ipf)atjctical  Jrirtcp  to  t!je  J3it)Ic. 


A'ole. — The  Table  of  Proper  Names,  and  the  Concordance  thereof,  with  the  Concordance  to  the  Apocrytha,  ar» 

placed  separately,  at  the  End,  in  Alphabetical  Order. 


ABASE. 
JOB  40. 11  behold  everyone  proud,  and  a.  him 

ha.  31.  4.  as  the  lion  will  not  a.  himself 
Ezek.  21.  26.  and  a.  him  that  is  high 
Dan.  4.  37.  that  walk  in  pride,  is  able  to  a. 

ABASED. 
Isa.  32.  t  19.  and  the  city  shall  be  utterly  a. 
Mat.  23.  12.  and  whosoever  shall  exalt  himself 
shall  be  a.  ||  Luke  14.  11.  ||  18.  14. 
Phil.  4. 12. 1  know  how  to  be  a.  and  how  to  abound 

ABASING. 
S  Cor.  11.  7.  have  I  committed  an  offence  in  a. 
AB.\TED.  [myself 

Oen.  8.  3.  after  150  days  the  waters  were  a.  8. 11. 
Lev.  27.  18.  it  shall  be  a.  from  thy  estimation 
Deut.  34.  7.  nor  was  Moses'  natural  force  a. 
Judff.  8.  3.  then  their  anger  was  a.  toward  him 

ABBA. 
Mark  14.36.n.Father,all  things  are  possible  to  thee 
Bom.  8.  15.  the  Spirit,  whereby  we  cry,  a.  Father 
Oal.  4.  6.  sent  Spirit  into  vour  hearts  crying  a. 
ABHOR.  [Father 

Signifies  [1]   To  loalli  or  detest,  Deut.  32.  19. 
Job  42.  6.     [2]    To  despise  or  neglect,  Psal. 
22.  24.     Amos  6.  8.     [3]  To  reject  or  cast  off, 
Psal.  89.  38. 
Lev.  26.  11.  and  my  soul  shall  not  a.  you 
15.  or  if  your  soul  a.  myjudgments 
30.  I  w  111  destroy,  and  my  soul  shall  a.  you 
44.  noi  will  I  a.  them,  to  destroy  them  utterly 
Deut.  7.  26.  thou  shalt  utterly  a.  it,  a  cursed  thing 
23.  7.  shalt  not  a.  an  Edomite,  not  a.  an  Egyptian 
I  Sam.  27.  12.  he  hath  made  his  people  to  a.  him 
Job  9.  31.  and  ray  own  clothes  shall  a.  me 
30.  10.  they  a.  me,  they  flee  far  from  me 
42.  6.  I  a.  myself,  and  repent  in  dust  and  ashes 
Psal.  5.  6.  the  Lord  will  a.  the  bloody  man 
119. 163.  I  hate  and  a.  lying,  but  love  thy  law 
Prov.  24.  24.  liira  people  curse,  nations  shall  a.  him 
Jer.  14.  2).  do  not  a.  us  for  thy  name's  sake 
Amos  5. 10.  they  a.  him  that  speaketh  uprightly 
6.  8. 1  a.  the  excellency  of  Jacob,  hate  his  palaces 
Mic.  3.  9.  hear,  ye  that  a.  judgment,  and  pervert 
Rom.  12. 9.  a.  that  which  is  evil,  cleave  to  good 

ABHORRED.    * 
F.zod.  5.  21.  you  have  made  our  savour  to  be  a. 
Lev.  20.23.  they  committed, and  therefore  In.  them 
26.  43. "they  despised,  their  soul  a.  my  statutes 
Deut.  32. 19.  when  the  Lord  saw  it,  he  a.  them 
1  Sam.  2.  17.  for  men  a.  the  offering  of  the  Lord 
9  Sam.  16.  21.  shall  hear,  thou  art  a.  of  thy  father 
1  Kinss  11.  2.5.  Hadad  a.  Israel,  and  reigned  over 
Job  19.  19.  all  my  inward  friends  a.  me 
Psal.  22. 24.  nor  a.  the  affliction  of  the  afflicted 
Psal.  78.  59.  he  was  wroth,  and  greatly  a.  Israel 
89.38.butthou  hast  cast  off  and  u.hast  been  wroth 

106.  40.  insomuch  that  he  a.  his  own  inheritance 
Prov.  22. 14.  who  iii  a.  of  the  Lord  shall  fall  therein 
Lam.  2.  7.  the  Lord  hath  a.  his  sanctuary 
Ezek.  16.  25.  thou  hast  made  thy  beauty  to  be  a. 
Z^ch.  11.8.  loathed  them,  and  their  soul  also  a.  me 

ABHORREST. 
Isa.  7.  16.  the  land  that  thou  a.  shall  be  forsaken 
Rom.  2.  22.  thou  that  a.  idols,  doat  thou  commit 

ABHORRETH. 
Job  33.  20.  so  that  his  life  a.  bread,  and  his  soul 
Psal.  10.3.  blpsseth  the  covetoufl,whom  the  Lord  a. 
36.4. he  deviselh  mischief  on  his  bed,  he  a.  not  evil 

107.  18.  their  soul  a.  all  manner  of  meat 

ha.  49.  7.  to  him  whom  the  nation  a.  to  a  sen'ant 


ABI 

ABHORRING. 

Isa.  66.  24.  and  they  shall  be  an  a.  to  all  flesh 

ABIDE 

Signifies,  [1]  To  stay  or  tarry,  Gen.  22.  5.     [2] 
To  dwell  or  live  in  a  place.  Gen.  29.  19.  Psal. 
15.    1.     [3]    To  bear  or  endure,    Jer.    10.    10. 
Joel  2.  11.     [4]  To  be,  Gen.  44.  33.     [5]   To 
continue,   Eccl.  8.  15.    John  14.  16.     [6]   To 
wait  for,  Acts  20.  23.     [7]  To  rest,  Prov.  19. 
23.     [8j    To  live,  Phil.  1.  24.     [9]   To  stand 
firm,  Psal.  119.  90.  125.  1.     [10]    To  rule  o 
govern,  Psal.  61.  7. 
(ien.  19.  2.  but  we  will  a.  in  the  street  all  night 
22.  5.  a.  you  here  witli  the  ass,  and  I  and  the  lad 
24.  55.  let  the  damsel  a.  with  us  a  few  days 

29.  19.  it  is  better  I  give  her  to  thee,  a.  with  me 
44.  33.  let  thy  servant  a.  instead  of  the  lad 

Exod.  16.  29.  a.  ye  every  man  in  his  place 
Lev.  8. 35.  therefore  a.  at  the  dooi  of  the  tabernacle 
19.13.  the  wages  of  him  hired  shall  not  a.  with  thee 
jYum.  35.  2.5.  shall  a.  to  the  death  of  the  higli-priest 
Rut/t  2.  8.  but  a.  here  fast  by  my  maidens 

1  Sam.  1.22.  appear  before  the  Lord,  and  a.  forever 
5.  7.  the  ark  of  G.id  of  Israel  shall  not  a.  with  us 
22.  23.  a.  thou  with  me,  fear  not,  for  lie  that  seeks 

30.  21.  whom  they  had  made  to  a.  at  brook  Besor 

2  Sam.  16.  18.  his  will  I  be,  and  with  him  will  I  a 
Job  24. 13.  they  rebel,  nor  a.  in  the  paths  of  the  light 

38.  40.  and  a.  in  the  covert  to  lie  in  wait 

39.  9.  will  the  unicorn  be  willing  to  a.  by  thy  crib 
Psal.  15. 1.  Lord,  who  shull  a.  in  thy  tabernacle? 

61.  4. 1  will  a.  in  thy  tabernacle  for  ever 
7.  he  shall  a.  before  God  for  ever 

91.  1.  shall  a.  under  the  shadow  of  the  Almighty 
Prop.  7. 11.  she  is  loud,  her  feet  a.  not  in  her  house 

19.  23.  and  he  that  hath  it  shall  a.  satisfied 
Eccl.  8.  15.  tor  that  shall  a.  with  him  of  his  labour 
.ler.  10. 10.  nations  not  able  to  a.  his  indignation 
Jer.  42. 10.  if  ye  a.  in  this  land  I  will  build  you 

49. 18.  no  man  shall  a.  there,  33.  |  50.  40. 
Hos.  3.  3.  thou  shalt  a.  for  me  many  days 

11.  6.  and  the  sword  shall  a.  on  his  cities 
.Tocl  2.  11.  the  day  is  terrible,  who  can  a.  it  7 
Mic.  5.  4.  they  shall  a.  for  now  shall  he  be  great 
JVaA.  1.  6.  who  can  a.  in  the  fierceness  of  his  anger? 
Jtlal.  3.  2.  but  who  may  a.  the  day  of  his  coming? 
Mat.  10.  11.  there  a.  Mark  0.  10.  LukeO.  4. 
lAike  19.  5.  for  to-day  I  must  a.  at  thy  house 

24.  29.  a.  with  us,  for  it  is  toward  evening 
.To/in  12.  40.  believes  on  me,  should  not  a.  in  dark- 

14. 16.  give  another  comforter  that  he  may  a. 

15.  4.  a.  in  me  and  I  in  you,  except  ye  a.  in  me, 7. 
6.  if  a  man  a.  not  in  me,  he  is  cast  forth 

10.  ye  shall  a.  in  my  love,  and  a.  in  his  love 
JlclB  15.  34.  it  pleased  Silas  to  a.  there  still 

16.  1.5.  come  into  my  house  and  a.  there 
20.23.  saying,  that  bonds  and  afflictions  a.  me 
27.  31.  except  these  a.  in  ship,  ye  cannot  be  saved 

1  Cor.  3.  14.  if  any  man's  work  a.  he  shall  receive 
7.  8.  it  is  good  for  them  if  they  a.  even  as  I 
20.  let  every  man  a.  in  the  same  calling 
40.  she  is  happier  if  she  bo  a.  after  my  judgment 

Phil.  1.24.  to  a.  in  the  flesh  is  more  needful  for  you 
25.  I  know  that  I  shall  a.  with  you  all 

1  7'jm.  1.  3. 1  besought  thee  to  a.  at  Ephesus 
UoAn2.24.1et  that  a.  in  you  which  ye  have  heard 

27.  ye  shall  a.  in  him  ||  28.  children  a.  in  him 
ABIDETH. 

2  SaT-".  16.3.  Ziba  said,  behold  he  a.  at  Jerusalem 
Ptal.  49.  12.  roan  beitig  in  honour  a.  not,  he  it 


ABL 

Psa/..55. 19.  God  shall  hear,  even  he  that  a.  of  old 
119.  90.  thou  hast  established  the  earth,  and  it  a. 
125. 1.  shall  be  as  mount  Zion,  which  a.  for  ever 
Prov.  15.  31.  heareth  reproof,  a.  among  the  wise 
Eccl.  1.  4.  another  Cometh,  but  the  earth  a.  forever 
./er.  21.  9.  he  that  a.  in  this  city  shall  die  by  sword 
.lo/in  3.  36.  but  the  wrath  of  God  a.  on  him 

8.  3.5.  the  servant  a.  not,  but  the  son  a.  for  ever 

12.  24.  except  a  corn  of  wheat  die,  it  a.  alone 
34.  we  have  heard  that  Christ  a.  for  ever 

15.  5.  he  that  a.  in  me  bringeth  forth  much  fruit 

1  Cor.  13.  13.  now  a.  faith,  hope,  charity 

2  Tim.  2.  13.  if  we  believe  not,  yet  he  a.  faithful 
Hib.  7.3.  Melehisedt'C  a.  a  priest  coHtinually 

1  Pet.  1. 23.  by  the  word  of  God  which  a.  for  ever 
1  Jokn  2.  6.  he  that  saith  he  a  in  him  ought  to  walk 
10.  he  that  loveth  his  brother  a.  in  the  light 
14.  ye  are  strong,  and  the  word  of  God  a.  in  you 
17.  but  he  that  doth  the  will  of  God  a.  for  over 
27.  the  anointing  a.  in  you  and  teachelh  you 
3.  6.  whosoever  o.  in  him  sinneth  not 
1  ./oAn  3. 14.  that  loveth  not  his  brother  a.  in  death 

24.  and  hereby  we  know  that  he  a.  in  us 
'J  Jokn  9.whosoa.not  in  the  doctrine  of  Christ  hath 
not  God,  he  tliat  a.  hath  the  Father  and  tiie  Son 
ABIDING. 
Jfrnn.  24.  2.  Balaam  saw  Israel  a.  in  his  tenia 
1  .S'am.2li.  19.  from  a.  in  the  inheritance  of  the  Lord 
1  C/iron.  29.  15.  days  as  a  shadow,  there  is  none  a.  ' 
Luke  2.  8.  there  were  shujiherds  a.  in  the  field 
./oAnS.  38.  and  ye  have  not  his  word  a.  in  you 
1  Jokn'i.  15.no  munlercr  hath  eternal  life  a. in  him 

ABJECTS. 
Psal.  35.  15.  the  a.  gatherer!  together  against  me 

ABILITY. 
Ijcv.  27.  8.  to  his  a.  that  vowed,  priest  shall  value 
Eira  2.  09.  they  gave  after  their  a.  to  the  wurk 
-VfA.  5.  8.  we  alter  our  a.  redeemed  our  brethren 
Daji.  1.  4.  as  had  a.  to  stand  in  the  king  s  palace 
Mat.  25. 15.  he  gave  to  each  according  to  liis  a. 
Acts  11.  29.  according  to  his  a.  determined  to  send 
1  Pet.  4.  11.  let  him  do  it  as  of  the  a.  God  giveth 

ABLE. 

Exod.  IP.  21.  provide  out  of  all  the  people  a.  men 

Lev.  14.22.  two  pigeons,  such  as  he  is  a.  to  get,  31. 

J^um.  1.  3.  all  that  are  a.  to  go  to  war,  20,22,  24, 

26,  28,  30,  32, 34,  36,  cH,  40,  42, 45.  |  2(>.  2. 

13.  30.  go  up,  for  we  are  well  a.  to  overcome  it 
Deut.  16. 17.  every  man  shall  give  as  he  is  a. 
Josh.  23.9.no  man  hath  been  a.  to  stand  before  you 
1  .VflHi.6.20.who  is  (i.to  stand  before  this  holy  God! 

1  Kings  3. 9.  who  is  a.  to  judge  so  great  a  peoplt? 

2  Cliron.  2.  6.  but  who  is  a.  to  build  liim  a  house! 
20.  P.  so  that  none  is  a.  to  withstand  thee 

2,->.  9.  the  Lord  is  a.  to  give  thee  much  more 
.Job  41. 10.  who  then  is  a.  to  stand  before  me? 
Prov.'Xl.  4.  but  who  is  a.  to  stand  before  envy? 
/^zfA.  46. 11.  the  otlering  shall  he  as  ho  is  a.  to  give 
Dan.  3. 17.  our  God  whom  we  serve  is  a.  to  deliver 

6.  20.  thy  God  is  a.  to  deliver  thoc  from  the  lions 

Mat.  3.  9.  God  is  a.  of  these  stones  to  raise  up 

children  to  Abraham,  y.Kie  3  8 

9.  28.  believe  ye  that  I  am  a.  to  do  this? 

10.  28.  fear  him  a.  to  destroy  soul  and  body  in  hell 
19.  12.  he  that  is  a.  to  receive  it,  let  him  receive 
20.22.  are  ye  a.  to  drink  of  the  cuji  I  shall  drink  of? 
22.  46.  no  man  was  a.  to  answer  him  a  word 

Marki.  33.  spake  he,  as  they  were  a.  to  hear  it 
.John  10.  29.  no  man  is  a.  to  pluck  them  out  iif  my 
Acts  15.  10.  a  yoke  cur  fathers  nor  we  a.  to  uoar 


ABO 

JlctsVi.  32.  word  of  his  grace,  a.  to  build  yon 
ii.  5.  which  among  you  arert.  go  down  with  mel 

Rom.  4.  21.  he  had  promised,  he  was  a.  to  perform 
11.  iJ3.  for  God  16  a.  to  gratftliem  in  again 

14.  4.  for  God  is  a.  to  make  him  stand 

15.  14.  ye  are  a.  bIko  to  admonish  one  another 
1  Cor.  3.  2.  ye  were  not  a.  nor  yet  now  are  ye  a. 

10.  IXnot  suffer  to  be  tempted  above  that  ye  area. 
S  Cor.  3.  G.  who  hath  made  us  a.  ministers  of  new  t. 

9.8. God  isa.to  make  all  grace  abound  towards  you 
F.ph.'i.  20.  to  him  that  is  a.  to  do  abundantly  above 
PhiL  3.  21.  he  is  a.  to  subdue  all  things  to  himself 
S  Tim.  1. 12.  he  is  a.  to  keep  that  I  have  committed 
3.  7.  never  o.  to  coino  to  the  knowledge  of  truth 
15.  holy  scriptures  a.  to  make  wise  to  salvation 
.Heft .2.18.  he  is  a.  to  succour  them  tliat  are  tempted 
5. 7.  to  him  that  was  a.  to  save  him  from  death 
7.25.  he  is  a.  to  save  to  the  uttermost  all  that  come 
11.19.  accounting  that  God  was  a.  to  raise  him  up 
Javi.  1.21.  the  word  which  is  o.  to  save  your  souls 
3. 2.  is  a.  also  to  bridle  the  whole  bo<iy 
4.1:it.t>iQre  »  one  lawpver  a.to  save  and  to  destroy 
JudeMi  to  him  tliat  is  a.  to  keep  you  from  falling 
Rev.  5.  3.  no  man  was  a.  to  open  the  book  nor  look 

13.  4.  who  is  a.  to  make  war  with  the  beast? 
15.  8.  no  man  was  a.  to  enter  into  the  temple 

Be  ABLE. 
Lev.  25.  2i>.  and  himself  be  a.  to  redeem  it 
Deut.'.'ii.  there  shall  no  man  be  a.  to  stand,  11. 2-5. 
Josh.  1.  5.  not  any  man  be  a.  to  stand  before  thee 
14. 12.  if  the  Lord  be  with  me  J  shall  be  a.  to  drive 
1  Sam.  17.  9.  if  he  be  a.  to  fight  with  me  and  kill  me 
lCAron.2i).14.that  we  should  be  a.  to  otfer  w  illingly 
SC/fon. 32.14.  that  your  God  should  be  a.  to  deliver 
Jsa.  47.  12.  if  so  be  tliou  shall  be  a.  to  prolit 
Ezek.  33.  12.  nor  shall  the  righteous  be  a.  to  live 
Luke  14.  31.  whether  he  be  a.  with  10,000  to  meet 
Rom.  8.  39.  be  a.  to  separate  us  from  love  of  God 

1  Cor.  10.  13.  lliat  yo  may  be  a.  to  bear  it 

Eph.  3. 18.  may  be  a.  to  comprehend  with  all  saints 

6. 11.  that  ye  may  be  a.  to  stand  against  the  devil 

IG.  faith,  wherewith  ye  shall  be  a.  to  quench 

8  Tim.  2.  2.  who  shall  be  a.  to  teach  others  also 

Tit.  1.  9.  may  be  a.  by  sound  doctrine  to  exhort 

S  Pet.  1.  15.  that  ye  may  be  a.  after  my  decease 

/Jco.C.17.  wrath  is  come, and  who  shallA«  a.to  stand 

J^'ot  be  ABLE. 

2  Kings  18.29.  not  be  a.  to  deliver  you,  Isa.  36. 14. 
Psal.  3G.  12.  cast  down,  and  shall  not  be  a.  to  rise 
F.ccl.  S.  17.  yet  shall  he  not  be  a.  to  find  it 

/ea.  47.  U.  Uiou  slialt  7tot  be  a.  to  put  it  off 
Jer.  11.  11.  not  be  a.  to  escape||49. 10.  nofbe  a.  to 

hide 
Eiek.  7.  19.  gold  shall  not  be  a.  to  deliver  them 
Luke  13.  24.  seek,  not  be  a.  \\  21.  15.  not  be  a.  to 

gainsay 

J\rot  ABLE. 
Lev.  5.  7.  and  if  he  be  not  a.  to  bring  a  Iamb 
JVum.]3.31.wc  be  not  a.to  go  up  against  the  people 

14.  1(5.  because  'he  Lord  was  not  a.  iJevt.  9.  28. 
S  Chriin.  20.  .37.  ships  were  tiot  a.  to  go  to  Tarshish 
Ezra  10.  i:i.  we  are  not  a.  to  stand  without 
J^T'h.  4.  10.  so  that  we  are  not  a.  to  build  the  wall 
Psal.  18.  :13.  wounded  that  they  were  not  a.  to  rise 

21.  )  1.  device  which  they  are  not  a.  to  perform 
40. 12.  hold  on  ir.c,  so  that  I  atn  not  a.  to  look  up 

Jlmos  7. 10.  the  land  iR?iot  a.  to  bear  all  his  words 
Luke  12.  2f>.'if  ye  be  nut  a.  todo  the  thing  isleast 

14.  20.  laid  fouiidalion,  and  is  not  a.  to  finish 
^o/i«  21.  G.  they  wire  not  a.  to  draw  it  for  the  fishes 
Jlr.ts  C.IO.und  ihcv  were  wot  a.to  resist  the  wisdom 

'  ABOARD. 
Jlcta  21.  2.  a  shipsailiiig,  wo  went  a.  and  set  forth 

ABODI".,  Substantive. 
2  Kinn^K  19.  27.  but  I  know  thy  a.    /»a.37.28. 
h'.ira  9.  t  8.  lo  give  us  a  sure  a.  in  his  holy  place 
Johii  l4.2'}.wo  will  romc  and  makeour  a.  with  him 

ABOni:,  Vrrh. 
f7rn.20.14..Iacob  a.  with  him  the  space  ofn  month 
49.  21.  but  his  bow  a.  in  strength,  and  the  arms 
F.zod.  24.  Ifi.  the  glory  of  the  Lord  a.  tm  Sinai 
A'um  9.  17.  whi^e  rloiid  a.  Israel  pilclwMl,  18, 2L 
20,  Ihcy  a.  in  their  leiils,  and  journeyed,  22 

11.  35.  the  peoiilo  journeyed,  and  a.  at  lla/.oroth 
20.  1.  the  people  n.  in  Kailcsh,  -Ut'le.  H.  17. 
2'-!.  8.  the  princifl  ofM.ab  a.  willi  Balaam 

Jleut.  1.  40.  so  ye  a.  in  Kndc;sh  many  days 
3.29.  we  a.  in  the  valley||9.  9.  I  a.  in  the  mount 

Jo«A.5.8.lhey  a.  in  their  placos  till  they  were  whole 
P.  9.  thoy  a.  between  Bethel  and  .Ai,  but  Joshua 

Jwlff.a.  17.  Oilead  a.  beyond  Jordan,  Asher  con- 
tinued on  the  sea-shore,  and  a.  in  his  brcachc-ii 

19.  4.  the  Levito  a.  with  him  three  days 

20.  47.  and  a.  in  the  rock  RImmoii  four  months 
1  Sam.  1.2.3.  the  woman  n.  and  gave  her  son  suck 

7.  2.  while  the  nrk  n.  in  Kirjath-jcarim,  time  long 
13.  10.  Saul  and  Jonalhnn  a.  in  Gibenh 

22.  fi.  Piul  n.  II  2.3.  14.  Daviil  a.  25.  ]  211.  3. 

2:1. 18.  Davi.l  a.  in  wood  iJtSam.  1. 1.  a.  at  Ziklng 
iSam.  11  12.  Uriah  a.  in  Jerusalem  tliat  day 


ABO 

2  Sam,  15.  8.  servant  vowed  while  I  a.  at  Gcshur 

1  Kings  17. 19.  he  carried  him  to  a  loft  where  he  a. 
Jer.  38.  28.  Jeremiah  a.  in  the  court  of  the  prison 
Jllat.  17.22.  and  while  they  a.  in  Galilee,  Jesus  said 
J^uke  1.  5ti.  Mary  a-  with  her  about  tliree  raontlis 

8  27  nor  a.  m  acy  bouse  but  ;d  the  iomos 
John  1.  32.  I  saw  tne  Spirit,  and  ii  a.  upon  Him 
39.  they  came  and  a.  with  him  lliat  day 

7.  9.  when  he  said  these  words  he  a.  in  Galilee 

8.  44.  he  was  a  murderer,  and  a.  not  in  the  truth 
ll.G.hea.  two  daysstUl  in  the  place  where  he  was 

Jicts  1.13.an  upper  room  where  a.l'eter  and  James 
14.  3.  long  time  a.  they  speaking  boldly  in  the 
18.  3.  Paul  a,  with  them  and  wrought 
21.  7.  we  came  and  a.  with  the  brethren  one  day 
8.  weentered  the  house  of  Philip  and  a.  with  him 
Oal.  1.  18.  I  went  and  a.  with  Peter  fifteen  days 

ABODE  there,  or  there  ABODE. 
Deut.  1.  46.  according  to  the  days  that  ye  a.  there 
.Josh.  2.  22.  came  to  mountain,  and  a.  there  3  days 
Judg.  21. 2.  the  people  a.  there  till  even  before  God 
Ezra  8. 15.  and  there  a.  we  in  tents  three  days 

32.  we  came  lo  Jerusalem  and  a.  tAcrc  three  days 
John  4.  40.  and  Jesus  a.  there  two  days 

10.  40.  wliere  John  at  first  baptized,  and  there  a. 
Jlcts  12.  19.  Herod  went  to  Cesarca,  and  there  a. 

14.  28.  there  they  a.  long  time  with  the  disciples 

17.  14.  Silas  and  Timolheus  a.  there  still 

ABODEST. 
Judg.  5.  16.  why  a.  thou  among  the  sheepfolds? 

ABOLISH 
Signifies  [1]  To  do  away,  or  make  void,  2  Cor.  3. 
13.     Eph.  2. 15.    [2]  To  destroy,  Isa.  2.  18.    2 
Tim.  1.  10. 
Isa.  2. 18.  and  the  idols  he  shall  utterly  a. 

ABOLISHED. 
Isa.  51.  6.  and  my  righteousness  shall  not  be  a. 
Ezek.  G.  6.  and  your  works  may  be  a. 

2  Cor.  3. 13.  not  look  to  the  end  of  that  which  is  a. 
Eph.  2.  15.  having  a.  in  his  flesh  the  enmity 

2  Tim.  1.  10.  Jesus  Christ,  who  hath  a.  death 

ABOMINABLE. 
Lev.  7.  21.  that  shall  touch  any  a.  unclean  thing 

11.  43.  ye  shall  not  make  yourselves  a.  with  any 

18.  30.  commit  not  any  ofthese  a.  customs 

19.  7.  if  it  be  eaten  on  the  third  day,  it  is  a. 

20.  25.  ye  shall  not  make  your  souls  a.  by  beast 
Deut.  14.  3.  thou  shalt  not  eat  any  a.  thing 

1  CAron.  21. 6.  for  the  king's  word  was  a.  to  Joal) 
2CAron.ld.8.Asa  put  away  tlioa.  idols  from  Judah 
Job  15.  16.  how  much  more  a.  and  filthy  is  man 
Psal.  14.  1.  are  corrupt,  they  have  done  a.  works 
53. 1.  corrupt  are  they,  and  have  done  a.  iniquity 
Isa.  14.  19.  thou  art  cast  out  like  an  a.  branch 
G5.  4.  and  broth  of  a.  things  is  in  their  vessels 
Jer.  16.  18.  filled  with  carcases  of  their  a.  things 
44. 4.  O,  do  not  this  a.  thing  that  I  hate 
Ezek.  4.  14.  nor  came  a.  flesh  into  my  mouth 
8.  10. 1  saw  and  behold  a.  beasts  and  idols 
IG.  52.  thy  sins  committed  more  a.  than  they 
Jt/ic  6.  10.  and  the  scant  measure  that  is  a. 
JVah.  3.  6.  and  I  will  cast  a.  filth  on  thee 
Til.  1.  16.  but  in  works  deny  him,  biMng  a. 
1  Fct.  4.  3.  when  we  walked  in  a.  idolatries 
liev.  21.  8.  fearful,  and  unbelieving,  and  the  a. 

ABOMINABLY. 
1  ICings^l.  26.  Ahab  did  very  a.  in  following  idols 

ABOMINATION 
Signifies,  [1]  ^  tAin^  hateful  and  detestable.  Gen 
43.  32.     Piov.  2:i.  27.     [2]  Sin  in  general,  Isa. 
GG.  3.      Ezek.  16.  .50.      [3]  .?n  h/o/,  2  Kings 
2:1.  13.      Isa.  44.   19.      [4]    The  Roman  army 
that  destroyed  the  temple  and.Iewish  polity, MaI. 
24.  1.5.     [5]  Evil  doctrines  and jt radices,  Rev. 
17.  4. 
Gen^  43.  32.  for  that  is  an  a.  to  the  Egyptians 
4li.  34.  every  shrpherd  is  an  a.  to  the  Egyptians 
/Cxo(/.8.2G.for  we  shall  sacrifice  the  a.of  Egyptians 
Lev.  7.  18.  it  shall  bo  an  a.  11.  41,  42. 

11.  10.  they  shall  be  an  a.  to  you,  12,  20,  23. 
18.  22.  ns  with  womankind  it  is  a.  20.  13. 

JJeut.  7.  25.  it  is  n.  to  the  Lord  thy  God,  17.  1. 
2G.  nor  shall  thou  bring  an  a.  into  thy  house 

12.  31.  every  a.  they  have  done  to  their  gods 

13.  14.  that  such  a.  is  wrnvight  among  you,  17.4. 
IK.  12.  all  that  do  ihe.iic  things  are  an  a.  22.  5. 
2.3.  18.  both  these  are  an  a.  to  the  Lord  thy  God 

21.  4.  for  that  is  an  a.  before  the  Lord 

2."i.  IG.  all  that  do  unrighteously  are  an  a.  to  God 
27.  1.5.  cursed  be  the  man  that  makeili  a.  to  the 
1  ■'<am.  13.  4.  Israel  was  had  in  a.  with  Philistinea 

1  Kings  11.  5.  Milcom  the  o.  of  Ammoni'ea 
7.  an  high  place  for  Cliemosh  the  a.  of  Moab 

2  Kings  2:1.  13.  Ashtoreth  the  a.  of  the  '/idonians 
I'siil.  88.  8.  Ihou  hast  made  me  an  a.  lo  them 
I'ror.  3.  32.  the  froward  in  an  a.  to  llie  Lord 

G.  16.  yea  seven  things  aro  an  a.  to  him 
H.  7.  K|i(ak  truth,  wickedness  is  an  a.  lo  my  lips 
11.  1.  a  false  balance  is  an  a.  to  the  Loril 
20.  thoy  of  u  froward  heart  aie  an  a.  to  the  Lord 


ABO 

Prov.  12.  22.  Ij-ing  lips  are  a.  to  the  LoriJ 

13.  19.  it  is  an  a.  to  fools  to  depart  from  evil 

15.  8.  the  sacrifice  of  the  wicked  is  an  a.  21.  27 
9.  the  way  of  the  wicked  is  an  a.  to  the  Lord 
26  thoughts  of  llie  wicked  are  nn  a  to  the  Lori 

16.  5  every  one  wnai  is  prouo  jn  ned/i  .s  an  a. 
12.  it  is  an  a.  to  kings  to  commit  wickednesa 

17.  15.  they  both  are  an  a.  to  the  Lord 

20.  10.  both  of  thom  are  alike  a.  to  tlio  Lord 
23.divers  weighlsarean  a.  to  the  Lord 

2-1.  9.  and  the  scorner  is  an  a.  to  men 
Prov.  28.  9.  even  his  prayer  shall  be  a. 
29.  27.  an  unjust  man  is  an  a.  to  the  just,  ana 
he  that  is  upright  in  the  way,  is  a.  to  the  wicke* 
Isa.  1.  13.  incense  is  an  a.  to  me,  the  new-moon» 
41.  24.  an  a.  is  he  that  choosoth  you 
44.  19.  shall  I  make  the  residue  thereof  an  a.7 
66.  17.  eating  swine's  flesh,  and  the  a.  and  mou8« 
Jer.  2.  7.  ye  entered,  ye  made  my  heritage  an  a. 

6.  15.  ashamed  when  they  committed  a.  8. 12. 

32.  35.  that  they  should  do  this  a.to  cause  Judab 
Ezek.  16.  50.  they  were  haughty  and  committed  a 

18.  12.  lifled  up  his  eyes  lo  idols  and  committed  a 

22.  11.  committed  a.  with  his  neighbour's  wife 

33.  26.  ye  stand  on  your  sword  and  ye  work  a. 
Dan.  1 1. 31.  shall  place  the  a.  that  maketh  desolate 

12.  11.  and  the  a.  that  niakcth  desolate  set  up 
Mai.  2.  11.  and  a.  is  committed  in  Israel  and  Jerus. 
JSIat.  24.  15.  ye  see  a.  of  desolation,  .Mark  13.  14. 
Luke  16.  15.  esteemed  among  men  is  a.  wiih  God 
Hcv.  21.  27.  shall  in  no  wise  enter  that  workcth  a. 

ABOMINATIONS. 
Detit.  18.  9.  not  learn  to  do  after  the  a.  of  nations 

32.  16.  with  a.  provoked  they  him  to  anger 

1  Kings  14.  24.  did  according  to  all  a.  of  nations 

2  Kings  16.  3.  thro'  fire  according  to  a.  2  Chr.  28. 3. 

21.  2.  Manasseh  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 
after  the  a.  of  the  heathen,  2  CA7on.  33.  2. 

23.  24.  a.  spied  did  Josiah  put  away,  2CAr.  34.  .33. 
2  CTiron.  36. 8.  acts  of  Jehoiakim  and  his  a.  he  did 

14.  people  transgressed  after  all  a.  of  the  heathen 
Prov.  26.  2.5.  for  there  are  seven  a.  in  his  heart 
Jfr.  44.  22.  the  Lord  could  not  bear  for  the  a. 
Ezek.  6.  11.  alas  for  all  the  evil  a.of  house  of  Israel 

8.  G.  seest  thou  the  great  a.  of  Israel,  but  turn  theo 
yet  again,  and  thou  shall  see  greater  a.  13,  15. 

9.  behold  the  wicked  a.  that  they  do  here 
17.  is  it  a  light  tiling  to  commit  a.  herel 

9.  4.  that  sigh  and  cry  for  all  the  a.  that  be  done 
11.  18.  take  away  all  the  a.  thereof  from  thence 

14.  G.  turn  away  your  faces  from  all  your  a. 

16.  2.  son  of  man,  cause  Jerusalem  to  know  her  a. 
18.24.  when  the  righteous  doth  according  to  all  a. 
20.  4.  cause  them  to  know  the  a.  of  their  fathers 

7.  cast  ye  away  every  man  the  a.  of  his  eyes 

8.  they  did  not  cast  away  the  a.  of  their  eyes 

22.  2.  yea  thou  shalt  shew  her  all  her  a. 

36.  31.  and  shall  loathe  yourselves  for  all  your  a 
44.  G.  O  Israel,  let  it  suflice  you  of  all  your  a. 

7.  they  have  broken  my  covenant  for  all  your  a 
Dan.  9.  27.  and  for  the  overspreading  of  a. 
'/.ech.  9.  7.  will  take  his  a.  from  between  his  tectlt 
Rev.  17.  4.  a  golden  cup  in  her  hand  full  of  a. 
5.  th(!  mother  of  harlols  and  a.  of  the  earth 
Their  ABOMINATIONS. 
Deut.  20. 18.  loach  you  not  to  do  after  all  fAfir  a 
29. 17.  and  ye  have  seen  their  a.  and  their  idols 
Ezra  9.  1.  the  people  doing  iicconling  to  tAi'i'r  a. 

11.  with  their  a.  which  have  filletl  the  land 
Isa.  G6.  3.  and  their  soul  delighteth  in  th»ir  a. 
Jer.l.'.V).  have  set  tAcir  a.  in  the  house  called  !'2.34 
Ezek.  G.  9.  for  the  evils  committed  in  all  tAr ir  a. 

7.  20.  but  they  made  the  images  of  their  a. 

11.  21.  whose  heart  walketh  after  thiir  a. 

12.  16.  thatihey  may  declare  all  their  a. 
IG.  47.  yet  hast  Ihou  not  done  after  tA't'r  a. 
20.  30.  and  commit  ye  whoredom  aller  tAitr  a. 
2.3.  36,  yea,  declare  lo  them  <A(  ir  a. 

33.  29.  the  land  desolate  because  of  all  tAn'r  a. 

43.  8.  ihey  have  defiled  my  holy  name  by  tAn'r  a. 

44.  13.  they  shall  bear  their  shame  and  their  a. 
lius.  9.  10.  their  a.  were  according  as  tliey  loved 

These  ABOMINATIONS. 

/ycn.  18.  26.  yo  shall  not  commit  any  ofthese  a. 
27.  all  tAr.«e  a.  have  the  men  of  the  land  dune 
29.  whosoever  shall  commit  nnyof  these  a. 

/>fut. 18.12. because  ofthese  n.lheLord  hath  driven 

2  Kings  21.  11   Manassidi  hath  done  these  a. 

Ezra  9.  14.  join  in  allinity  wiOi  people  of  these  a. 

JcT.  7.  10.  we  are  delivered  to  do  all  tAr*e  a. 

/■.':fft.I8.I3.he  hath  done  all  tAmc/j.shnll  surely  die 
Thine  or  thy  ABOMINATIONS. 

,Ier.  4.  1.  if  thou  will  putawaylAinr  a.  out  ofsighl 

13.  27.  I  have  seen  lAinc  a.  on  the  hills 

F.iek.  5.  9.  do  what  I  havo  not,  because  of  thine  a. 
II.  Ihou  hasl  defiled  my  sanctuary  with  thy  a. 
7.  3.  I  will  recompense  on  Ihce  all  thine  a.  4,  8,  SL 
IG.  22.  all  (Aine  a.  thou  hast  not  rememberod 
3G  with  all  the  idols  of  tAine  a.  and  by  the  blood 
43.  not  commit  this  lowdncvs  above  all  tAine  a 


ABO 

£i«!t.  16.  51.hast  multiplied  (Ainna.  more  than   1 

58.  thou  hast  borne  thine  a.  saith  the  Lord 

ABOVE 

Signifies,  [1]  ^loft,  high,  Gen.  fi.  16.  Prov.8.23. 
[•Z\  The  dignity  or  excellenct/  of  a  person  or 
thing,  I'sal.  113.  4.  Mat.  10. 'J4.  [;1J  Beyond, 
2  Cor.  1.  8.  [4]  More  than,  Gen.  3. 14.  |  48.  ii. 
[S]  Upwards,  E.\od.  30.  14.  Lev.  27.  7.  [ti]  Jl 
higher  state  or  rank.  Num.  Ifi.  3.  [7]  Chief 
in  authority  and  power,  Deut.  iM.  13.  [H]  //cn- 
vcn,  or  the  highest  place,  Job  3.  4.  Rom.  10.  (i. 
[U]  Heavenly  and  spiritual,  Gal.  4.  26.  [10] 
Things  that  relate  to  heaven,  Gal.  4.  26.  Col. 
3.1.     [11]  Ood,  Jam.  1.  17. 

Gen.  1.  7.  I'rom  the  waters  a.  the  firmament 
ao.  and  fowl  that  may  fly  a.  the  earth 
3.  14.  the  teri)ent  cursed  a.  all  cattle,  a.  beast 

6.  Hi.  in  a  cubit  shalt  thou  finisli  tlio  ark  a. 

7.  17.  and  the  arii  was  lifted  up  a.  the  earth 
48.  22.  given  iheo  one  portion  a.  thy  brethren 

49.26.  prevailed  a.  the  blessings  of  my  progenitors 
Kxod.'ij  22. 1  will  commune  fi  ovn  a.the  mercy-seat 

28.  27.  a.  the  curious  girdle  of  the  ephod,  28. 

30.14.  are  numbered  from  twenty  years  old  and  a. 
Lev   11-  21.  which  have  legs  a.  their  feet  to  leaji 

27.7.  and  if  it  be  from  si.vty  ytars  old  and  a. 
A'um.  16.3.  lift  up  yourselves  a.  the  congregation 
Deut.  17.  20.  heart  be  not  lifted  up  a.  his  brethren 

25.  3.  lest  if  he  should  beat  him  a.  these 

28.  13.  thou  shalt  be  a.  only,  and  not  be  beneath 
30.'>.  do  thee  good  and  multiply  thee  a.  thy  fathers 
Josh.  3.  13.  the  waters  that  come  down  from  a.  10. 
Judg.5Sl4.  blessed  shall  she  bea.women  in  the  tent 
2  Sam.  22.  17.  he  sent  from  a.  Psal.  18.  16. 

1  Kings  8.  7.  cherubims  covered  ark  a.  2  Chr.  5. 8. 

2  Kings  25. 28.  a.  the  throne  of  kings,  Jer.  52.  32. 
1  Chron.  5.  2.  for  Judah  prevailed  a.  bis  brethren 

23.27.  for  tlie  Levites  were  numbered  from  twenty 

years  old  and  a.   Kiod.  30.  14. 

27.  C.  Benaiah  was  mighty  and  a.  the  thirty 
JVVA.  7.  2.  Ilananiah  feared  God  a.  many 

12.  37.  they  went  up  a.  the  house  of  David 
Job  3.  4.  let  not  God  regard  it  from  a. 
18.  16.  and  a.  shall  his  branch  be  cut  oK 

28.  18.  for  the  price  of  wisdom  is  a.  rubies 

31.  2.  for  what  portion  of  God  is  there  from  a.? 

28.  for  I  should  have  denied  the  God  that  is  a. 

Psal.  10.  5.  thy  judgments  are  a.  out  of  his  sight 

18.  48.  thou  liftest  me  a.  those  that  rise  up 
27.  6.  now  shall  my  head  be  lifted  up  a.  enemies 
45.  7.  the  oil  of  gladi-.ess  a.  thy  felluvvs,  Heli.  1.  9. 
78.  23.  though  he  commanded  the  clouds  from  a. 
119.  127.  I  love  thy  commandments  a.  gold 

136.  6.  that  stretched  out  the  earth  a.  the  waters 

137.  6.  if  I  prefer  not  Jerusalem  a.  my  chief  joy 
144. 7.  send  thine  hand  from  a.  rid  me,  deliver  me 
148.  13.  his  glory  is  a.  the  earth  and  heaven 

Prov.  8.  28.  when  he  established  the  clouds  a. 

15.  24.  the  way  of  life  is  a.  to  the  wise 

31.  10.  for  her  price  is  far  a.  rubies 
Ecct.  3.  1 9.  a  man  hath  no  pre-eminence  a.  a  beast 
Isa.  2.  2.  mountain  shall  be  e.xalted  a.  the  hills 

6. 2.  a.  it  stood  the  seraphims,  each  had  six  wings 

7.  11.  ask  it  either  in  the  depth  or  in  the  height  a. 
Jer.l5.S.  their  widows  increased  a.sand  of  the  seas 
Jjom.  1. 13.  from  a.  hath  he  sent  fire  into  my  boner. 
Ezek.  1.  26.  as  appearance  of  a  man  a.  U]ion  it 

10. 19.  the  glory  of  God  was  over  them  a.  1 1 .  22. 

29.  15.  nor  exalt  itself  any  more  a.  the  nations 
Dan.  6.  3.  Daniel  was  preferred  a.  the  presidents 

11.  36.  the  king  inagnify  himself  a.  every  god 
Amos  2.  9   yet  I  destroyed  his  fruit  from  a. 
JV*<//i.3. 16. hast  multiplied  thy  merchants  a. the  stars 
J\lai.  10.  24.  disciple  not  a.  his  master,  Luke  6.  40. 
John  3.  t  3.  except  a  man  be  born  froBi  a.  7. 

6.  1.3.  baskets  which  remained  over  and  a. 

8.  2.3.  I  am  from  a.  ye  are  of  this  world 

19.  11.  except  it  were  given  him  from  a. 
Jict.1  4.  22  for  the  man  was  a.  forty  years  old 

26.  13.  I  saw  a  light  a.  the  brightness  of  the  sun 
Rom.  10.  6.  that  is  to  bring  Christ  down  from  a. 

14.  5.  one  inan  esteemeth  one  day  a.  another 

1  Cor.  4.6.  not  to  think  of  men  a.  what  is  written 

10.  1.3.  yon  to  be  tempted  a.  that  ye  are  able 
1.5.  6.  he  Wiis  seen  of  a.  500  brethren  at  once 

2  Cor.  1 . 8.  were  pressed  out  of  measure  a.  strength 

11.  23.  I  am  more,  in  stripes  a.  measure 

12.2.  a.  fourteen  years  ago,  whether  in  body  or  out 
6.  lest  any  man  should  think  of  me  a.  that 
(inl.  4.  26.  but  Jerusalem  which  is  a.  is  free 
Phil.  2.  9.  and  given  him  a  name  a.  every  name 
Col.  3.  1.  seek  those  things  which  are  a. 

2.  set  your  afTeclion  on  things  a.  not  on  earth 
Philem.  16.  not  now  as  a  seivant,  but  a.  a  servant 
Heb.  10.  8.  a.  when  he  said,  sacrifice  and  oflTering 
Jam.  1.  17.  every  good  and  perfect  gift  is  from  a. 
3.  15.  this  wisdom  descendeth  not, from  a. 

ABOVE  all. 
flen.  3.  14.  the  serpent  is  cursed  a.  all  entile 
JVvzn.  12.  3.  Moses  was  very  meok  a.  all  tho  men 


ABO 

Deut.  7.  14.  thou  shalt  he  blessed  a.  all  people 
1 0. 1 5.  he  chose  you  a.  ai/ people,  as  it  is  this  day 
14.2.  chosen  theea.a// the  nation^s,26. 19.  |28.1. 

1 /rin^-,?  14. 9.  donee  Vila.  oW  that  were  before  thee 
22.  provoked  a.  all  that  their  fathers  had  done 
16.  30.  Ahab  did  evil  a.  all  that  were  before  him 

2A'inirs'21.11.done  wickedly  a. a// theAmoritos  did 

1  Chron.  29.  3.  over  and  a.  all  I  have  prepared 
li.  and  thou  art  exalted  as  head  a.  all 

2  Chron.  11.21.  be  loved  Maachah  a.  all  his  wives 
JVeh.  8.  5.  for  Ezra  was  a.  all  the  peojilo 

Ksth.  2.  17.  king  loved  Esther  a.  all  the  women 
Psal.  97.  9.  thou  Lord  art  high  a.  all  tho  earth 

99.  2.  he  is  high  a.  all  peojile,  113.  4. 

138.  2.  magnified  thy  word  a.  all  thy  name 
Prov.  4. 1 23.  keep  thy  heart  a.  all  keei)ing 
Eccl.  2.  7.  a.  all  that  were  in  Jerusalem  belbre  me 
./er.  17.  9.  the  heart  is  deceitful  a.  all  things 
thek.  16.  43.  not  commit  this  lewdness  a.  all 

31.  5.  his  height  was  exalted  a.  all  the  trees 
Dan.  11.  37.  for  he  shall  magnify  himself  a.  all 
Luke  3.  20.  Herod  added  yet  this  a.  all 

13.  2.  these  sinners  a.  all  the  Galileans,  4. 
■John  3.  31.  he  that  cometli  from  heaven  is  a.  all 
Epii.  1.  21.  far  a.  all  principality  and  jxiwer 

3.  20.  a.  all  that  we  ask  ||  4.6.  one  God  a.,  all 
6.16.  a.  all  taking  the  shield  of  faith  to  ijuench 

Col.  3. 14.  a.  all  these  things  put  on  charity 

2  Thess.  2.  4.  exalteth  a.  all  that  is  called  God 
Jam.  5.  12.  a.  all  things,  my  brethren,  swear  not 

1  Pet.  4.  8.  a.  all  things  have  fervent  charity 

3  John  2.  I  wish  a.  all  things  that  thou  prosper 
Above  all  Gods  ;  see  Gods.     Above  heaven ; 

see  Heaven.  Stood  Above  ;  see  Stood. 
Above  him,  me,  them  ;  see  him,  me,  them. 
ABOUND. 
Pro?).28.20.  the  faithful  man  shall  a.  with  blessings 
Isa.  2.  t  6.  they  a.  with  the  children  of  strangers 
Mat.  24.  12.  becau.se  iniquity  shall  a.  love  ol'  many 
/i«m.5.20.lhe  law  entered  that  the  offence  might  a. 
6. 1.  shall  we  continue  in  sin,  that  grace  inay  a.? 
15.  13.  that  ye  may  a.  in  hope  througli  the  power 

2  Cor.  1.  5.  as  sufl'urings  a.  so  consolation  abounds 

8.  7.  as  ye  a.  in  every  thing,  see  that  ye  a. 

9.  8.  God  is  able  to  make  all  grace  a.  to  you 
Phil.  1.  9.  I  pray  that  your  love  may  a.  more 

4.  12.  I  know  how  to  a.  both  to  a.  and  suffer 

17.  but  I  desire  fruit  that  may  a.  to  your  account 

18.  but  I  have  all  and  a.  I  am  full 

1  Thess.  3.  12.  Lord  make  you  to  a.  in  love  one 

4.  1.  so  ye  would  a.  more  and  more 

2  Pet.  1.  8.  for  if  these  things  be  in  vou  and  a. 

ABOUNDED,  ETII,  ING. 
Prov.  8.  24.  when  no  lountains  a.  with  Water 
29.  22.  and  a  furious  man  a.  in  transgression 
Rom.  3.  7.  for  if  the  truth  of  God  hath  more  a. 

5.  15.  grace  by  Jesus  Christ  hath  a.  to  many 
20.  but  where  sin  a.  grace  did  much  more  a. 

1  Cor.  15.  58.  always  a.  in  the  work  of  the  Lord 

2  Cor.^.'i.  deep  poverty  a.  to  the  riches  of  liberality 
Eph.  1.8.  wherein  he  hath  a.  toward  us  in  wisdom 
Ciil.  2.  7.  a.  therein  with  thanksgiving 

2  Thess.  1.  3.  the  charity  toward  each  other  a. 

ABOUT. 
Gen.  38.  24.  a.  three  months  after  was  told  Judah 

41.  25.  God  shewed  I'haraoh  what  he  is  a.  to  do 

42.  24.  he  turned  himself  a.  from  them  and  wept 
46.  34.  thy  servants'  trade  hath  been  a.  cattle 

Exod.  11.  4.  a.  midnight  will  T  go  out  into  Egypt 
13.  18.  God  led  the  people  a.  through  the  way 

19.  2.3.  set  bounds  a.  the  ntount,  and  sanctify  it 

32.  28.  there  fell  that  day  a.  3000  men 

Lev.  6.  5.  all  that  a.  which  he  hath  sworn  falsely 
Jfam.  16.  24.  from  a.  the  tabernacle  of  Korah 
Deut.  32.  10.  he  led  him  a.  and  instructed  him 
.fosh.  10.  13.  sun  hasted  not  to  go  down  a.  a  day 
Juds.  17.  2.  the  silver  a.  which  thou  cursi'dst 
Ruth  2.  17.  and  it  was  a.  an  cphah  of  barley 

1  .Sam.  L  20.  whim  the  time  was  come  a.  Hannah 
5.  8.  let  the  ark  of  God  be  carried  a.  to  Gaih 

9.  26.  it  came  to  pass,  a.  the  spring  of  the  day 

21.  5.  women  liave  been  kept  from  us  a. three  d;iys 

2  Sam.  14.  20.  to  fetch  a.  this  form  of  speech 

1  Kings  2.15.  the  kingdom  is  turned  a.  and  become 

22.  36.  a.  going  down  of  the  sun,  2  Chron.  18.  34. 

2  Kings  4.  16.  a.  this  season  according  to  the  time 
2  Chron.  2.  9.  the  house  which  I  am  a.  to  build 
Ezra  10.  15.  were  employed  a.  this  matter 

.fob  20.  23.  when  he  is  a.  to  fill  his  belly 
Prov.  3.  3.  bind  them  a.  thy  neck,  6.  21. 

20.  19.  he  that  goeth  a.  as  a  tale-bearer 

Cant.  7.  2.  like  a  heap  of  wheat  set  a.  with  lilies 
■fsn.  5  t2.  built  a  tower,  and  made  a  wall  a.  it 
.'JO.  11.  that  coinpnss  yourselves  a.  with  sparks 
.Trr.  2.3(i.  whygaddest  thou  a.  so  much  to  change 
31.  22.  how  long  wilt  thou  go  a.  O  thou 
41.  14.  all  the  people  ca.'st  a.  and  returned 
//o.i.  7.2.  now  their  own  doings  have  beset  them  a. 
Mat.  20.  3.  he  went  out  a.  the  third  hour 
Mark  2.  2.  no,  not  so  much  as  a.  tho  dow 


ABU 

Mark  12.  l.set  H  hedge  a.  it,  and  digged  a  place 
Luke  2.  49.  I  must  be  a.  my  Father's  businesa 

3.  23.  Jesus  began  to  be  a.  thirty  years  of  age 

12.  35.  let  your  loins  be  girded  a.  and  light* 
John  3.  25.  there  arose  a  cjuestion  a.  purifying 

7.  19.  why  go  ye  a.  to  kill  me  1 
Jicts  4.  4.  the  immber  of  the  men  was  a.  5000 

18.  14.  and  when  Paul  was  a.  to  open  his  moutn 

27.  30.  as  they  were  a.  to  flee  out  of  the  ship 
Rom.  4.  19.  when  he  was  a.  100  years  old 

10. 3. going  a.  to  establish  their  own  righteousnesi 

1  Cor.  9.  5.  have  we  not  power  to  lead  a.  a  sister 

2  C'or.4.10.  always  bearing  a.  in  the  body  the  dying 
Eph.  6. 14.  having  your  loins  girt  a.  with  truth 

1  Tim.  5.  13.  wandering  a.  from  house  to  house 
Heb.  8.  5.  when  he  was  a.  to  make  the  tabernacle 
Rev.  8.  1.  silence  a.  the  space  of  half  an  hour 

10.  4.  I  was  a.  to  write,  and  I  heard  a  voice 

See     Go.NE,     HIM,    ME,     THEE,     THEM,     ROUNP, 
STOOD,  THIS,  TIME,  WENT. 

ABROAD. 
Exod.  12.46.  shalt  not  carry  ought  of  the  flesh  a. 
y^«i. 13.12.  and  if  aleprosy  break  out  a.  in  the  skin 
18.  9.  whether  she  be  born  at  home  or  a. 
Deut.  23. 10.  then  shall  he  go  a.  out  of  the  camp 

13.  when  thou  wilt  ease  thyself  a.  shalt  dig 
.ludg.  12.  9.  took  daughters  from  a.  for  liis  sons 

2  Kings  4. 3.go, borrow  thee  vessels  a. of  neighbour* 
2  Chron.  29.  16.  Levites  took  it  to  carry  it  out  a 

31.  5.  as  soon  as  the  commandment  cnme  a. 
Esth.  1. 17.  this  deed  of  the  (|Ueen  shall  como  a. 
Job  15.  23.  he  wandereth  a.  for  bread,  saying 
Psal.  41.  6.  when  he  goeth  a.  he  telleth  it 
Prov.  5.  16.  let  thy  fountains  be  dispersed  a. 
/i'a.  44.  24.  that  spreadetb  a.  the  earth  by  myself 
Jer.  6.  11.  I  will  pour  it  out  on  the  children  a. 
I^am.  1.  20.  a.  the  sword  bereaveth,  at  borne  death 
Mark  1.  45.  he  began  to  blaze  a.  the  matter 

4.  22.  nor  kept  secret,  but  that  it  should  come  o. 
Luke  1.  65.  these  sayings  Avere  noised  a.  through- 
out all  the  hill-country  of  Juaea 

2. 17.  made  known  a.  the  saying  about  this  child 
.Hcts  2.  6.  when  this  was  noised  a.  the  multitude 
Rom.  5. 5.  the  love  of  God  is  shed  a.  in  our  hearts 

16.  19.  for  your  obedience  is  come  a.  to  all  men 
See  Cast,  spkead,  stand,  scatter,  went. 

ABSENCE. 
Lvke  22.  6.  to  betray  him  in  a.  of  the  multitude 
Phil.  2. 12.  but  now  much  more  in  my  a.  workout 

ABSENT. 
Gen.  31.  49.  when  we  are  a.  one  from  another 

1  Cor.  5.  3.  for  I  verdy  as  a.  in  body,  hut  present  in 

2  Cor.  5.  6.  at  home  in  body  are  a.  from  the  Lord 

8.  willing  rather  to  be  a.  from  the  body,  present 

9.  whether  present  or  a.  we  may  be  accejited 
10.  1.  but  being  o.  am  bold  toward  you 

11.  as  we  are  by  letters  when  we  are  a.  such  will 

13.  2.  and  being  a.  now  I  write  to  them,  10. 
Phil.  1.  27.  whether  I  come,  or  else  he  a. 

Col.  2.  5.  for  tho'  I  he  a.  in  the  flesh,  yet  am  I  with 

ABSTAIN. 
Acts  15.  20.  that  they  a.  from  pollutions  of  idols 

29.  that  ye  a.  from  meats  offered  to  idids 
IThess.  4.  3.  that  ye  should  a.  from  fornication 

5.  22.  a.  from  all  appearance  of  evil 

1  Tim.  4.  3.  commanding  lo  n.  from  meats 

1  Pet.  2. 11.  a.  from  fleshlv  lusts  which  war  against 

ABSTINENCE. 
Acts  27. 21.  after  long  a.  Paul  stood  forth  in  midst 

ABUNDANCE. 
Deut.  28.  47.  thou  servtdst  not  God  for  tho  a.  of  all 
33.  19.  they  shall  fuck  of  the  a.  of  the  seas 
1  Sam.  1.  16.  out  of  the  a.  of  my  complaint 

1  Kings  10.  10.  came  no  more  such  a.  of  .apices 
27.  as  the  sycamore-trees  for  a.  2  Chron.  1.  15. 

18.  41.  for  there  is  a  sound  of  a.  of  rain 

2  Chron.  9.  9.  she  gave  the  king,  of  spices  great  a. 
.fob  22.  11.  and  a.  of  waters  cover  thee,  38.  34. 
Psal.  72.  7.  :.i  his  day  shall  be  a.  of  peace 
Ece!.  5.  10.  nor  he  that  lovcth  a.  with  increase 

12.  Ihe  a.  of  the  rich  will  not  suffer  him  to  sleep 
[sa.  7.  22.  for  a.  of  milk  he  shall  cat  butter 

15.  7.  therefore  the  a.  they  have  gotten 
47.  9.  for  the  great  a.  of  Ihy  enchantments 
60.  .5.  the  a.  of  the  sea  shall  be  converted  to  thee 
66.  11.  be  delighted  with  the  a.  of  her  glory 

Jer.  33.  6.  1  will  reveal  to  them  a.  of  pence 

Ezek.Ki.49.  n.  of  idleness  was  in  her  and  daughters 
26.  10.  by  reason  of  the  a.  of  his  hor.«es 

Zech.  14.  14.  gold,  silver,  and  apparel  in  great  a. 

Mat.  12.  34.  out  of  the  a.  of  the  heart,  /-h/.v6.  45. 
13.  12.  and  he  shall  have  more  a.  25.  29. 

Mark  12.  44.  they  cast  in  of  their  a.  Luke  21.  4. 

Rom.  5. 17.  more  they  which  receive  a.  of  grace 

2  Cor.  8. 2.  the  a.  of  their  joy  abounded  lo  the  riches 

14.  your  a.  a  supply,  their  a.  a  supply  for  want 
12.7.  be  exalted  through  the  a.  of  the  revelations 

fln).  18.  3.  waxed  rich  thro'  the  a.of  her  dclicacici 

In  ABUNPANCE. 
2  5am.  12.  30.  David  brought  spoil  of  tho  city  in  a 


ACC 

1  Rings  1.  19.  Adonijali  hath  slain  oxen  in  a.  ». 

1  Chrun.  22.  3.  David  prepared  brass  in  a.  14. 
4.  also  codar-trecs  in  a.  marble  in  a.  21).  2. 
15.  there  are  workmen  with  thee  in  a.  liewers 

5J9.  21.  they  otTered  sacrifices  in  a.  for  all  lsr.-»cl 
«  Chriin.  2.  9.  even  to  prepare  me  timber  in  a. 
4.  IS.  Solomon  made  all  these  vessels  tn  great  a. 
i.  1.  Uiiecn  of  Sheba  brought  gold  in  a. 
II.  2:!.  Rehohoam  gave  his  sons  victuals  in  a. 

14.  15.  Asa  carried  away  sheeji  and  camels  in  a. 

15.  i).  for  thi'y  fell  to  Asa  out  of  Israel  tn  a. 
17.5.  all  Judah  brought  [ircscnis  to  Jehoshaphat, 

and  he  had  riches  and  honour  in  a.  18.  1. 

V?.  2.  Ahib  killed  !;hoep  for  Jehoshaphat  in  a. 

to.  25.  Jehosliajihat  found  spoil  in  a. 

H.  11.  thus  Ihiy  gathered  money  ifi  a. 

Ti.  35.  and  also  the  burnt-otVerings  were  in  a. 

31. .').  children  of  Israel  brought  in  a.  first-fruits 

32.  5.  (lezekiah  made  darts  and  shields  in  a. 
29.  he  provided  him  cities  and  possessions  in  a. 
ffch.^.  25.  they  took  vineyards  and  fruit-trees  in  a 
Esth.  1.  7.  they  gave  them  royal  wine  in  a. 
fob  30.  31.  he  givctli  meat  in  a. 
Psal.  37.  11.  delight  themselves  in  a.  of  peace 

52.  7.  but  trusted  in  the  a.  of  his  riches 

105.  30.  the  land  brought  forth  frogs  in  a. 
Luke  12. 15.  man's  life  consistelh  not  in  the  a. 

2  Cor.  8.  20.  that  no  man  blame  us  in  this  a. 

ABUNDANT. 
Fzod.  34.  n.  Lord  Uod  a.  in  goodness  and  truth 
Proc.  12.t2f).  the  righteous  more  a.  than  neighbour 
/sa.  50.  12.  shall  be  as  this  day,  and  much  more  a 
Tcr.  51.  13.  O  thou  Habylon,  a.  in  treasures 
1  Cor.  12.  23.  on  these  we  bestow  more  a.  honour 
24.  having  given  more  a.  honour  to  that  part 

3  Cor.  4.  15.  that  the  a.  grace  might  redound 

7.  15.  his  inward  affection  is  more  a.  toward  you 
9.  12.  for  the  administration  is  o.  by  many 
1 1. 23.  in  labours  more  a.  in  stripes  above  measure 

Phil.  1.  2.'i.  that  your  rejoicing  may  be  more  a. 
1  T/7n.l.l4.  the  grace  ofour  Lord  was  exceeding  a. 
1  Pet.1.3.  according  to  his  a.  mercy  hatb  begotten 

ABUNDANTLY. 
Gen.  1.  20.  let  tlie  waters  bring  forth  a.  21. 

8.  17.  that  they  may  breed  a.  in  the  earth 

9.  7.  multiply,  bring  forth  a.  in  the  earth 
Ezod.  1.7.  the  children  of  Israel  increased  a. 

8.  3.  the  river  shall  bring  forth  frogs  a. 
^am.20.1 1  .Moses  smote  and  tlie  water  came  out  a. 

1  Chron.  12.  40.  brought  oil,  oxen,  and  ehcep  a. 
22.  5.  so  David  prei)ared  a.  before  his  death 

8.  thou  hast  shed  blood  a.  and  made  great  wars 

2  Chron.  31.  .5.  tithe  of  all  things  brought  they  in  a. 
Job  12.  G.  into  whose  hand  God  bringeth  a. 

36. 2S.  the  clouds  drop,  and  distil  upon  man  a. 
Psal.  3fi.  8.  they  shall  be  u.  satisfied  with  fatness 

65.  10.  thou  waterest  the  ridges  thereof  a. 

132.  15.  I  will  a.  bless  her  provision 

145.  7.  shall  a.  utter  the  memory  of  thy  goodness 
Cant.  5.  I.  O  friends  drink,  yea  drink  a.  O  beloved 
Jua.  15.  3.  every  mic  shall  howl,  weeping  a. 

35.2.  it  shall  blossom  a.  and  rejoice  with  joy 

43. +  21.  nor  hast  thou  a.  moistened  with  the  fat 

55.  7.  and  to  our  (!od,for  he  will  a.  pardon 
John  10.  10.  that  they  might  have  life  more  a.    ' 

1  Cor.  1.5.  10.  I  laboured  more  a.  than  they  all 

2  Cor.l.l2.conversalion,  and  more  a.to  yon-wards 
2.  4.  might  know  the  love  I  have  more  a.  to  you 
10. 1.5.  shall  be  enlarged  according  to  our  rule  a. 
12.  15.  though  the  more  a.  I  love  you,  the  less 

F.ph.  3.  20.  to  him  that  is  able  to  do  exceeding  a. 
1  TAM».2.17.endeavoured  more  a.  to  see  your  face 
Tit.  3.  B.  which  he  shed  on  us  a.  thro'  Jesus  Christ 
ffeb.  6.  17.  fJod  willing  more  a.  to  shew  to  the  heirs 
SfeM.ll.for  soan  nnlrancc  he  ministered  to  you  a. 

ABiisr,,  r.n. 

J,fv.  19.120.  wholielh  with  a  bond-maid  a.  by  any 
Juilg.  19.  25.  and  a.  her  all  the  night  till  morning 
1  Ham.  31.4.  h'st  uncircumcised  a.  me,  1  Chr.  10.  4. 
I  Cor.  9.  18.  Uial  I  a.  not  my  power  in  the  gospel 

ABirSKRS,  ING. 
1  Cor.  fi.  9.  nor  a.  of  themselves  with  mankind 
7.  31.  and  they  that  use  I  his  world  as  not  a.  it 

ACCr.PT 
Signifies,  [1]  Tu  rrerinr  favourabli/,  Mai.  1. 10,  13. 
2('or.  11.4.    [i]r»lalce]ilra.iurcin,  V./j-k.  20. 
40.     [31  To/.TA'-ir'-,  <;cn.4.  7.   Job42.  9.     [4] 
To   respect  partially,  Job  13.    10.    |    >2.  21. 
Tr.  18.  5.    [5]  Tube  rririirdnl or  valueil, 2 Ciir. 
8.12.  [0]  To  br  bilovrd  or  hi/rhly  esteemrd,\Aikf 
4.  24.  [7]  To  he  received  into  grace  and  favour, 
Acts  10.  3.5.  Eph.  1.  0. 
f)en.2i.  20.  perndvenliire  he  will  a.  of  mo 
F.zod.22.  11.  and  the  owner  shall  a.  thereof 
Lev.  2(i.  41.  and  they  a.  of  the  punialimenl,  43. 
Dent.  33.  11.  bless  and  a.  the  work  of  his  hand* 

1  Sam.  20.19.  let  him  a.  an  offering 

2  .Sam.  24. 2:1  Arnunah  said,  ihe  L.  ihy  Cod  a.  thee 
Job  13.  8.  will  yea.  his  person?  will  ye  contend 

10.  WiUtoprovf,  if  ye  do  secretly  a.  perioiui 


ACC 

Job  32.  21.  let  me  not  o,  any  man's  person 

42.  8.  Job  shall  jiray  for  you,  for  him  will  I  a. 
Psal.  2(1.  3.  and  a.  thy  burnt  sacrifice 

82.  2. 1  nd  a.  the  persons  of  tlie  wicked 
119.  118.  a.  I  beseech  thee  the  frec-will-ofrerings 
Pruv.  0.  t  35.  not  a.  the  face  of  any  ransom 

18.  5.  not  good  to  a.  the  person  of  the  wicked 
Jcr.  14.  10.  therefore  the  Lord  doth  not  a.  them 

12.  when  offer,  I  will  not  a.  them,  .imos  5.  22. 
Kzek.  20.  40.  there  will  I  a.  them,  and  require 

41.  I  will  a.  you  with  your  sweet  savour 

43.  27.  and  I  will  a.  you,  saith  the  Lord 
jMul.  1.  8.  will  he  be  jjleased,  or  a.  thy  person? 

10.  nor  will  I  a.  an  offering  at  your  hand 

13.  should  la.  this  of  your  hands? 
Acts  24.  3.  we  a.  it  always,  and  in  all  places 

ACCEPTABLE. 
Leo.  22.  20.  for  it  shall  not  be  a.  for  you 
Deut.  33.  24.  let  Asher  be  a.  to  his  brethren 
Psal.  19.  14.  let  the  meditation  of  my  heart  be  a. 
09.  13.  my  prayer  is  to  thee,  O  Lord,  in  an  a.  time 
I'rov.  10.  32.  lips  of  the  righteous  know  what  is  a. 

21.  3.  to  do  justice  and  judgment  is  more  a. 
F.ccl.  12.  10.  the  preacher  sought  out  a.  words 
Isa.  49.  8.  in  an  a.  time  have  I  heard  thee 

.58.  5.  wilt  thou  call  this  an  a.  day  to  the  Lord? 

01.  2.  to  proclaim  the  a.  year  of  the  Lord 
Jer.  C.  20.  your  burnt-oftijrings  are  not  a. 
Dan.  4. 5J7.  O  king,  let  my  counsel  be  a.  to  thee 
I.uke  4.  19.  to  preach  the  a.  year  of  the  Lord 
Horn.  12. 1.  bodies  a  living  sacrifice,  holy,  a.  to  God 

2.  what  is  that  good  and  a.  will  of  God 
14.  18.  is  a.  to  God  and  approved  of  men 
1.5.  16.  oflering  up  of  the  Gentiles  might  be  a. 

F.ph.  5.  10.  proving  what  is  a.  unto  the  l^ord 
I'Uil.  4.  18.  a  sacrifice  a.  well  pleasing  to  God 
1  Tim.  2.  3.  for  this  is  a.  in  the  sight  of  God 

5.  4.  for  that  is  good  and  a.  before  God 
1  Pet.  2.  5.  sacrifices  a.  to  God  by  Jesns  Christ 
20.  if  ye  take  it  patiently,  this  is  a.  with  God 
ACCEPTABLY. 
Hcb.  12.  28.  whereby  we  may  serve  God  a. 

ACCJiPTANC% 
Isa.  60.  7.  they  shall  come  up  wit"a.  on  mine  altar 

ACCEPTATION. 
1  Tim.  1.  15.  this  is  a  saving  worthy  of  all  a.  4.  9. 

ACCEPTED. 
Gen.  4.  7.  if  thou  dost  well,  shalt  Ihou  not  bo  a. 

19.  21.  see,  I  have  a.  thee  concerning  this 
F.xod.  28.  38.  that  they  may  be  a.  before  the  Lord 
Leo.  1.  4.  the  offering  shall  bo  a.  for  him,  22.  27. 

7.  18.  it  shall  not  be  a.  19.  7.  |  22.  23,  25. 

10.  19.  should  it  have  been  a.  in  sight  of  the  Lord 

22.  21.  an  offering  shall  be  perfect,  to  bo  a. 

23.  11.  he  shall  wave  the  sheaf  to  be  a. 

1  Ham.  18.  5.  he  was  a.  in  the  sight  of  all  the  people 
25.  35.  David  said,  see  I  have  a.  thy  person 

2  Kinirs  .5.  t  1.  Naaman  was  a.  with  bin  master 
F.sth.  Id.  3.  a.  of  the  multitude  of  his  brethren 
Ju'i  22.  t  8.  the  a.  for  countenance  dwelt  in  it 

42.  9.  the  Lord  also  a.  Job 

Isa.  .56.  7.  their  sacrifice  shall  be  a.  on  mine  altar 
.Ji-r.  37.  20.  let  my  supplication  be  a.  before  thee 

42. 2.  let  our  supplication  be  a.  before  thee 
Mai.  2.  t  9.  but  yo  have  a.  faces  in  the  law 
Luke  I.  t  2"^.  hail  thou  that  art  graciou.sly  a. 

4.  24.  no  prophet  is  a.  in  his  own  country 
Acts  10.  35.  he  that  worketh  righteousness  is  a. 
Rom.  1.5.  31.  my  service  may  be  a.  of  the  saints 
2  Cor.  5.  9.  labour,  absent  or  present,  we  may  bo  a. 
6.  2.  heard  thee  in  a  time  a.  now  is  the  a.  time 
8.  12.  it  is  a.  according  to  that  a  man  hath 
17.  for  indeed  he  a.  the  exhortation 

11.  4.  or  another  gospel  which  ye  have  not  a. 
F.ph.  1.  6.  he  hath  made  us  a.  in  the  beloved 

ACCEPTEST. 
Au^e  20.  21.  neither  a.  ihou  the  person  of  any 

ACCEPT  ETII. 
.Tob  34.  19.  to  him  that  a.  not  persons  of  princes 
F.rcl.  9.  7.  eat  with  joy,  for  God  iio«'  a.  thy  works 
llos.  8.  13.  they  sacrifice,  hut  the  Lord  a.  them  not 
Gal.  2.  0.  God  a.  no  man's  person 

AcCEPTlNO.     See  Dklivkr\nck. 
ACCESS. 
Rnm.  5.  2.  by  whom  also  we  have  a.  by  faith 
F.ph.  '2.  18.  thro"  him  we  both  have  a.  to  the  Father 

3.  12.  in  whom  we  have  boldness  and  a.  by  faith 
AccoMi'ANY.     See  Salvation. 

ACCOMPANIED. 
.Iris  10.  23.  certain  bnlhren  from  Joppa  a.  him 
11.  12.  moreover  these  six  brethren  a.  mo 

20.  4.  Sopnter  of  BiToa  a.  Haul  into  .Asia 
38.  and  they  a.  him  to  Ihe  ship 

ACCOMPANYINO.       Sre  AkK  of  God. 
ACCOMPLISH 
Sitrnifios,    [1]      To    perform,    finish,    or  fulfil, 
Jir.    44.    2.5.,    Dan.    9.    2.     Luke   2.  0.     Acts 
21.  5.  [2]   To  yield  or  rondrsrrnd  tn,  1  Kings 5. 
9.  [31  Obtained  or  broueht  to  pa.i^Piov.r.ll^ 
Lev.  22.  21.  ollerelh  o  sacrifice  to  a.  his  vow 


ACC 

1  Kings  5.  9.  shall  a  my  desire  in  giving  food 
/ob  14.6.  till  he  shall  a.  as  a  hireling,  hiji  day 
Psal.  64.  0.  they  a.  a  diligent  search 

Isa.  55.  1 1.  but  it  shall  a.  that  which  I  please 
Jer.  44.  25.  ye  will  surely  a.  your  vows 
Kick.  6.  12.  thus  will  1  a.  my  fury  upon  them 
7.  8.  now  will  1  a.  mine  anger  ujion  thee 
13.  15.  thus  will  I  a.  my  wiatli  upon  the  wall 
20.8.  1  will  |)our  out  my  fury  to  a.  my  anger,  21. 
Dan.  9.  2.  that  he  would  a.  seventy  years 
I^uke  9.  31.  whii'h  he  should  a.  at  Jerusalem 
ACCOMPLISHED. 

2  Chron.  30.  22.  the  word  by  Jeremiah  might  be  a. 
F.sth.2.  12. daysof  i)urification  were  a.  y^uA<;2. 22. 
Job  15.  32.  it  shall  be  a.  betiire  his  time 

Prov.  13.  19.  the  desire  a.  is  sweet  to  the  soul 

Isa.  40.  2.  cry  unto  her,  that  her  warfare  is  a. 

.Icr.  25.  12.  when  seventy  years  are  a..29.  10. 

34.  for  the  days  of  your  dispersions  are  a. 

39.  16.  my  words  shall  be  a.  before  lliee 
Lam.  4.  11.  the  Lord  hath  a.  his  fury 

22.  the  punishment  of  thine  iniquity  is  a. 
Fzek.  4.  6.  when  hast  a.  them,  lie  on  ihy  right  sidf 

5.  13.  thus  shall  mine  anger  be  a. 
I  Jan.  11.  36.  shall  |iroEpcr,till  the  indignation  be  a. 

12.  7.  a.  to  scatter  the  power  of  the  holy  people 
Luke  1.  2.3.  ihc  daysof  his  ministration  were  a. 

2.  6.  the  days  were  a.  that  she  should  be  delivered 
21.  when  eight  dayfe  were  a.  for  circumcising 

12.  50.  and  liow  am  I  straitened  till  it  be  a. 

18.  31.  concerning  the  Hon  of  man,  shall  be  a. 

22.  .37.  that  is  written,  must  yet  be  a.  in  me 
John  19.  28.  knowing  that  all  things  were  now  a. 
Acts  21.  5.  when  we  had  a.  those  days, we  departed 

1  Pet.  5.  9.  same  aflliclions  are  a.  in  your  brelhrcc 

AccoMPUsniNG.     .Sec  Servicb. 

ACCOMPLISH.MENT. 

./}ct5  21. 26.  to  signify  the  a.  of  days  of  purificatio* 

ACCORD. 
I^er.  25.  5.  groweth  of  its  own  a.  shall  not  reap 
.losh.  9.  2.  to  fight  with  Israel  with  one  a. 
Acts  1. 14.  these  all  continued  with  one  a.  in  prayei 
2.  I.  they  were  all  with  one  a.  in  one  place 
40.  they  continuing  daily  with  one  a.  in  tempi* 
4. 24.  they  lifted  up  their  voice  to  God  with  one  a. 
5.  12.  were  all  with  one  a.  in  Solomon's  jiorch 

7.  57.  and  ran  upon  Stephen  with  one  a. 

8.  0.  peoi)le  with  one  a.  gave  heed  to  these  thingi 
12.  10.  Ihc  gate  opened  to  them  of  his  own  a. 

20.  but  I  hey  came  with  one  a.  to  him 
15.  25.  being  a.ssombled  with  one  a.  to  send 

18.  12.  the  Jews  with  one  a.  made  insurrection 

19.  29.  they  rushed  with  one  a.  into  the  theatre 

2  Cor.  8. 17.  but  being  more  forward  of  liis  own  A. 
Phil.  2.  2.  being  of  one  a.  of  one  mind 

ACCORDING. 
Gen.  27.  19.  I  have  done  a.  as  thou  badest  rae 

41.  .54.  dearth  began  to  come  a.  as  Joseph  said 
F.jod.  12.  2.5.  the  Lord  will  give  a.  as  he  promised 
JVum.  14.  17.  bo  great,  a.  as  thou  ha.st  spoken 
Deut.  10.  9.  his  inheritance  a.  as  God  promised 

10.  10.  a.  as  the  Lord  Ihy  God  halli  blessed  thee 

1  Kings  3.  6.  a.  as  he  walked  before  thee  in  truth 

.fob  34.  11.  and  cause  every  iimn  to  find  a.  to  his 

ways,./cr.  17.  10.  |  21.  14.  |  .32.  19. 

42.  9.  went  and  did  a.  as  the  Lord  commanded 
Psal.  7.8.  judge  me,  O  (;od,a.tomy  liglileousneet 

17.  I  will  praisi'  Ihe  Lord  u.  to  his  righteousness 
2.5.  7.  a.  to  thy  mercy  remember  thou  me,  51.  1.  | 
iOO.  4.5.  1  109.26.  I  119.  124. 
28.  4.  give  them  a.  to  Iheir  deeds,  and  a.  lo  the 
33.  22.  let  mercy  be  on  us  a.  us  wehope  in  thco 
.35.  24.  judge  me,  O  God,  a.  to  lliy  righteousnes* 
48.  10.  a.  lo  thy  name,  so  is  thy  praise 

02.  12.  for  thou  renderest  to  every  man  a.  to  hit 

work, /Vui:.  24.  12,29 
79.  11.  a.  to  the  greatness  of  Ihy  power 
90.  11.  a.  to  thy  fear,  so  is  ihy  wrath 
103.  10.  nor  rewarded  us  a.  lo  our  iniquities 
119.  25.  a.  to  Uiy  word,  28,  41,  58,  6.5,  70,  107, 
llfi,  154,  169,  170. 
1.59.  quicken  me  a.  to  thy  kindness,  Isa.  ti3.  7 
1.50.  2.  praise  him  a.  to  his  excellent  greatness 
fsa.  8.  20.  if  they  speak  not  a.  lo  this  word 

9.  3.  Ihoyjov  a.  to  Ihc  joy  in  harvest 

03.  7.  a.  lo  iill  Ihat  Ihe  Lord  has  bestowed  on  us 
.fir.  .50.  29.  reCoinpeiiso  her  a.  to  her  work 
Dan.  II.  3.  lliat  shall  rule  and  do  a.  lo  his  will 
l/ii.i.  3.  I.  n.  1(1  the  lovo  of  Ihe  Lord  toward  Israel 

12.  2.  Ihe  Lord  «ill  punish  Jacob  a.  to  his  WRVi 
.1/if.7.15.  a.  to  the  days  of  thy  coining  oul  of  Egypt 
.Mot.  9.  29.  a.  lo  your  faith  be  it  unio  you 

10.  27.  he  will  reward  everv  man  a.  lo  his  worki, 

Horn.  2.  0.     2  Tim'.  4.  1 1,     llev.  2.  23. 
I.uke  12.  47.  nor  did  o.  to  his  will,  shall  Ih-  beaten 
.hhn  7.  24.  jiidgo  not  t.  to  the  appearance 
.'lets  4.  35.  made  to  every  man  a.  as  he  hiid  need 
Hum.  1.  3.  rnadeoflho  seed  of  David  a.  lolho  flo«h 
8.  2'^.  who  are  the  called  a.  lo  his  purpose 
12.  0.  gill*  differing  a.  to  the  grace  given  to  ui 


^ 


ACC 

Rom.  15.  5.  to  be  like  minded  a.  to  Christ  Jesua 

1  Cor.  15. 3.  Cliiist  died  a.  to  the  scriptures,  4. 

2  C</r.9.7.6very  man  a.  as  he  purposeth  in  his  heart 
11   la  whose  end  sliall  be  a.  to  tiicir  works 

Gal  I.  4.  who  gave  himself  a.  to  the  will  of  God 
3.  2!>.  Abraham's  seed,  and  heirs  a.  to  the  promise 

Eph.  1.  4.  a.  as  lie  halh  chosen  us  in  him,  before 
5.  a.  to  good  pleasure  1|7.  a.  to  riches  of  his  grace 
11.  being  predestinated  a.  to  the  purpose  of  him 

3.  20.  a.  to  the  power  that  worketh  in  us 
Phil.  3.  21.  a.  to  the  working  whereby  he  is  able 

4. 19.  God  shall  supply  our  need  a.  to  his  riches 
2  Tim.  1.  9.  who  hath  called  us  not  a.  to  our  works 

y^t.  3.5.  but  a.  to  his  mercy  be  saved  us  by  washin^^ 
Hcb.  8.  9.  not  a.  to  the  covenant  that  I  made  with 

1  Pet.  1.  3.  a.  to  his  mercy  hath  begotten  us  again 

4.  6.  but  live  a.  to  God  in  the  Spirit 

2  Pet.  1.3.  a.  as  his  divine  power  hath  given  us 
3.  13.  we  a.  to  his  promise  look  for  new  heavens 

Rev.  20. 12.  dead  were  judged  a.  to  their  works,  13. 
22.  12.  I  come  to  give  a.  as  his  work  shall  be 
According  to  all.     See  All. 
ACCORDING  to  that. 
Gen.  27.  8.  obey  my  voice  a.  to  that  I  command 
.Tudg.  11'.  36.  do  to  me  a.  to  that  which  proceeded 
2  Kings  14.  6.  slew  not  a.  to  that  wliich  is  written 
2  Chron.  35.  2f).  a.  to  that  which  was  written 
EzraG.  VS.  Tatnai  did  a.  to  £Aat  Darius  had  sent 
Rom.4.18.  a.  tofAat  which  wasspoken,  thy  seed  be 
2  Cor.  5.  10.  a.  to  that  he  hath  done,  good  or  bad 
8.12.a.to  that  a  man  liath,not  a.tn  thathe  hath  not 
Accordingly.     Sre  Repav. 
ACCOUNT. 
F.iod.  12.  4.  shall  make  your  a.  for  the  lamb 
2  Kings  12.  4.  of  every  one  that  passeth  the  a. 

1  Chron.  27.  24.  nor  was  the  number  put  in  the  a. 

2  Chron.^G.  11.  according  to  the  number  of  their  a. 
Job  33.  13.  for  he  giveth  not  a.  of  his  matters 
Psal.  144.  3.  or  the  son  of  man  that  thou  makest  a. 
Eccl.  7. 27.  counting  one  by  one  to  find  out  the  a. 
Dan.  6.  2.  that  the  jirinces  might  give  a.  to  them 
Mat.  12.  36.  give  a.  thereof  in  theday  of  judgment 

13.  23.  which  would  take  a.  of  liis  servants 
I.vke  16.  2.  give  an  a.  of  thy  stewardship 
jicts  19.  40.  whereby  we  may  give  an  a.  of  this 
Rom.  9.  t  28.  he  will  finish  the  a. 

14.  12.  every  one  shall  give  a.  of  himself  to  God 
Phil.  4.  17.  desire  fi  nit  that  may  abound  to  your  a. 
Philcm.  18.  if  he  oweth  thee,  ])ut  that  on  mine  a. 
Hr.b.  13.  17.  they  watch  as  they  that  must  give  a. 
1  Pet,  4.  5.  who  shall  give  a.  to  him  that  judgeth 

ACCOUNT,  ED. 
Devt.  2.  11.  which  also  were  a.  giants 
20.  that  also  was  a.  a  land  of  giants 
1  Kings  1. 21.  I  and  Solomon  shall  be  a.  offenders 

10.  21.  silver  was  nothing  a.  of,  2  Chron.  9.  20. 
Psal.  20.  30.  be  a.  to  the  Lord  for  a  generation 
Isn.  2.  22.  for  wherein  is  he  to  be  a.  of? 
Mark  10.  42.  which  are  a.  to  rule  over  Gentiles 
J^vkcW.  35.  be  a.  worthy  to  obtain  that  world 

22.  24.  which  of  them  should  be  a.  the  greatest 
Horn.  S.  36.  we  are  a.  as  sheep  for  the  slaughter 
J  Cor.  4.  1.  let  a  man  so  a.  of  us  as  ministers 
Go.1. 3.  6.  it  was  a.  to  him  for  righteousness 
SS  Pet.  3. 15.  a.  that  the  long-suffering  of  the  Lord 

ACCOUNTING. 
Ueb.  11.  19.  a.  that  God  was  able  to  raise  him  up 

ACCURSED 
Siffnifies,  [1]  Dfvnted  to  destruction,  Josh.  6. 17. 
[2]  Separated  from  the  church,     Rom.   9.  3. 
[3]   Cursed  eternallij  from  God,  1  Cor.  16.  22. 
Gal.  1.  8,  9. 
/)«?«.  21 .  23.  he  that  is  hanged,  is  a.  of  God 
Josh.  6.  17.  the  city  shall  bo  a.,  it  and  all  therein 

18.  any  wise  keep  from  the  a.  thing 
7.  1.  trespass  in  the  a.  thing;  Achan  took  of  a. 

11.  for  they  have  even  taken  of  the  a.  thing 

12.  turned  their  backs,  because  they  were  a. 

except  ye  destroy  the  a.  from  among  you 

13.  there  is  an  a.  thing  in  the  midst  of  thee 

15.  he  that  is  taken  with  the  a.  thing 
22.  20.  did  not  .\chan  commit  trespass  in  a.  thinj 

1  Sam.  3.  t  13.  his  sons  made  themselves  a. 
)  Chron.  2.  7.  who  transgressed  in  the  thing  a. 
Isa.  65.  20.  the  sinner  a  100  years  old  shall  be  a 
Rom.  9.  3.  for  I  conid  wish  myself  a.  from  Christ 
1  Cur.  12.  3.  no  man  by  the  Spirit,  caileth  Jesus  a. 
Gal.  1.8.  preach  any  other  gos|)el,  lethimbe  a.  9. 

ACCUSATION. 
Kzra  4.  fi.  wrote  they  to  him  an  a.  against  Jiidah 
Mat.  27.  37.  set  over  his  head  his  a.  Mark  15.  26. 
jAike  fi.  7.  that  they  might  find  an  a.  against  him 
19.  8.  if  I  have  taken  any  thing  by  fake  a 
John  18.  29.  whata.bringyc  against  this  man'? 
.^cts  25.  18.  they  brought  no  a.  as  I  supposed 

1  Tim.  .5.  19.  against  an  elder  receive  not  an  a. 

2  Pet.  2.  11.  bring  not  a  railing  a.  against  them 
Jude9.  Michael  durst  not  bring  a  railing  a. 

ACCUSE. 
Prov.  30. 10.  a.  not  a  servant  to  his  master 


ACR 

Jlfot.  12.  10.  that  they  might  o.  him,  Mark  3.  2- 
L,uke  11.  54. 
Luke  3.  14.  nor  a.  any  falsely,  and  be  content 
23.  2.  and  they  began  to  a.  him,  saying 

14.  touching  those  tilings  whereof  ye  a.  him 
John  5.  45.  that  I  will  a.  you  to  the  Father 
8.  6.  that  they  might  have  to  a.  him 
.^cts  24.  2.  Tertullus  began  to  a.  him,  saying 
8.  take  knowledge  of  all  things  whereof  we  a 
13.  nor  can  they  prove  things  whereof  tlicy  a.  me 
25.  5.  let  them  go  down  with  me,  and  a.  tliis  man 
11.  if  tliere  bo  none  of  those  whereof  these  a.  me 
28.  19.  not  that  I  had  aught  to  a.  my  nation  of 
1  Pet.  3.  16.  falsely  a.  your  good  conversation 

ACCUSED. 
Dan.  3.  8.  Chaldeans  came  near,  and  a.  the  Jews 

6.  24.  they  brought  them  which  had  a.  Daniel 
Mat.  27. 12.  when  he  was  a.  he  answered  nothing 
Mark  15.3. priests  a.  him  many  things,  Lukei3.10 
Luke  16.  1.  was  a.  that  he  had  wasted  his  goods 
.^cts  22.  30.  the  certainty  wherefore  he  was  a. 

23. 28.  have  known  the  cause  whereof  they  a.  him 
29.  perceived  to  be  a.  of  questions  of  their  lav.; 

25.  16.  before  he  which  is  a.  have  the  accusers 

26.  2.  answer,  touching  things  whereof  I  am  a. 
7.  for  which  hope's  sake  I  am  a.  of  the  Jews 

Tit.  1. 6.  faithful  children,  not  a.  of  riot,  or  unruly 
Rev.  12. 10.  accuser,  who  a.  them  before  our  God 
Accuser.     See  cast  down. 
ACCUSERS. 
John  8.  10.  woman,  where  are  those  thine  a.  ? 
.^cts  23.  30. 1  gave  commandment  to  his  a.  also 
35.  I  will  hear  thee  when  thine  a.  are  come 

24.  8.  commanding  his  a.  to  come  to  thee  ' 

25.  16.  before  he  have  the  a.  face  to  face 
18.  against  whom,  when  the  a.  stood  up 

2  Tim.  3.  3.  without  natural  affection,  false  a. 
Tit.  2.  3.  not  false  a.  not  gi\en  to  much  wine 

ACCUSETH,  ING. 
John  5.  45.  there  is  one  that  a.  you,  even  Moses 
Ro7n.  2.  15.  their  thoughts  a.  or  excusing 
Accustomed;  sec  Do  EviL.    Aceldama; 
sec  Field. 
ACKNOWLEDGE 
Signifies,  [1]  To  own  or  confess,  Gen.  38.  26.  Psal. 
32.  5.     [2]  To  observe,  or  take  notice  of,  Prov. 
3.  6.  Isa.  33. 13.  [3]  To  esteem  and  respect,  Isa. 
61.  9.  1  Cor.  16.  18.  [4]  To  approve  of,  2  Cor. 
1.  13.  Philem.  6.  [.5]  7'o  worship  or  make  pro- 
fession of,  Dan.  11.  39. 
Dent.  1.  t  17.  ye  shall  not  a.  faces  in  judgment 
21.  17.  he  shall  a.  the  son  of  the  hated 
33.  9.  nor  did  he  a.  his  brethren  nor  children 
Psal.  32.5.1  a.  my  sin  ||  51. 3.  I  a.  my  tran.sgression 
Prov.  3.  6.  in  all  thy  ways  a.  him,  he  shall  direct 
Isa.  33.  13.  ye  that  are  near,  a.  my  might 
61.  9.  all  that  see  them,  shall  a.  them 
63.  IG.  thou  art  our  father,  tho'  Israel  a.  us  not 
Jer.X  la  only  a.  thine  iniquity  that  thou  hast 
14.  20.  we  a.  O  Lord,  our  wickedness 
24.  5.  so  will  I  a.  them  that  are  carried  away 
Dan.  11.  30.  with  a  strange  god  whom  he  shall  a. 
Hos.  5.  15. 1  will  go,  till  they  a.  their  offence 

1  Cor.  14.  37.  let  him  a.  the  things  that  I  write 
16.  18.  therefore  a.  ye  them  that  are  such 

2  Cor.  1.  13.  what  you  a.  and  I  trust  shall  a. 
ACKNOWLEDGED. 

Geii.  38.  28.  Judah  a.  them,  and  said  she  hath  been 
2  Cor.  1.  14.  also  you  have  a.  ns  in  part 
ACKNOWLEDGETH. 

1  John'i.  23.  he  that  a.  the  Son  hath  the  Father 
ACKNOWLEDGING. 

2  Tim.  2.  25.  repentance  to  the  a.  of  the  truth 
Tit.  1. 1.  to  the  a.  the  truth  which  is  after  godliness 
Philem.  6.  by  the  a.  every  ?ood  thing  in  Christ 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT. 
Col.  2.  2.  to  the  a.  of  the  mystery  of  God 

ACQUAINT,  ED,  ING. 
.Tab  22.  21.  a.  thyself  with  him  and  be  at  peace 
Psal.  139.  3.  thou  art  a.  with  all  my  ways 
Eccl.  2.  3.  yet  a.  my  heart  with  wisdom 
Isa.  53.  3.  a  man  of  sorrows,  and  a.  witli  grief 

ACQUAINTANCE. 
2  Kings  12.5.  lot  priests  take  it,  every  man  of  his  a. 

7.  therefore  receive  no  more  money  of  your  a. 
.Toh  19.  13.  mine  a.  are  estranged  from  me 

42.  11.  thin  came  all  that  had  been  of  his  a. 
Psal.  31. 11. 1  was  a  reproach  and  a  fear  to  mine  a. 
55.  13.  it  was  thou,  mine  equal,  and  mine  a. 
88.  8.  thou  hast  put  away  mine  a.  far  from  me 

18.  lover  put  from  me,  and  my  a.  into  darkness 
J.vkc  2.  44.  they  sought  him  among  their  a. 
2.3.  49.  nil  his  a.  stood  afar  off,  beholding  things 
Acts  24. 23.  he  should  forbid  none  of  hie  a.  to  come 

ACQUIT. 
Job  10. 14.  thou  wilt  not  a.  me  from  mine  iniquity 
JV*aA.  1.  3.  the  Lord  will  not  at  all  a.  the  wicked 

ACRE,  S. 
1  Sam.  14.  14,  20.  men  wiihin  half  an  a.  of  land 
lea.  5.  10.  ten  a.  of  vineyard  ghall  yield  one  bath 


ADJ 

ACT. 

/«a.  38. 21.  and  bring  (o  pass  his  a.  his  strange  a 
59.  6.  and  the  a.  of  violence  is  in  their  hands 
John  8.  4.  was  taken  in  aduhery,  in  tlie  very  a. 

ACTS. 
Dcut.  11.  3.  and  his  a.  which  he  did  in  Egypt 

7.  your  eyes  have  seen  the  great  a.  of  the  Lord 
Judg.  5. 11.  rehearse  the  righteous  a.  of  the  Lord 

1  Sam.  12. 7.  reason  of  all  righteous  a.  of  the  Lord 

2  Sam.  23.  20.  and  Benaiah  ihe  son  of  Jehoiada, 
who  had  done  many  a.  1  Chron.  11.  22. 

1  Kings  10.  6.  it  was  a  true  report  I  heard  of  thy  a. 
11.  41.  the  a.  ofSolomon,  are  they  not  written  ia 

the  book  of  the  a.  of  Solomon  ?  2  Chron.  9. 5. 

2  Kings  10.  34.  the  a.  of  Jehu,  and  all  that  he  did 
23.  19.  according  to  all  tJie  a.  he  hod  done 

28.  the  a.  of  Josiah  and  all  that  he  did  are  written 

1  Chron.  29.  29.  the  a.  of  David,  first  and  last 

2  Chron.  16.  11.  behold  the  a.  of  Asa,  first  and  last 
20.  34.  the  a.  of  Jehoshajjhat,  first  and  last 
32.  32.  the  a.  of  Hezekiah,  2  Kings  20.  20. 

Esth.  10.  2.  all  the  a.  of  his  i)ower  and  might 
Psal.  103.  7.  his  a.  to  the  children  of  Israel 

106.  2.  who  can  utter  the  mighty  a.  of  the  Lord  ? 

14.5.  4.  and  shall  declare  thy  mighty  a.  6,  12. 

150.  2.  praise  him  for  his  mighty  a.  praise  him 
ACTIONS. 

1  Sam.  2.  3.  and  by  the  Lord  a.  are  weighed 
ACTIVITY. 

Gen.  47.  6.  if  knowest  any  man  of  a.  among  them 

ADAMANT. 
Ezek.  3.  9.  as  an  a.  have  I  made  thy  forehead 
Zech.  7. 12.  they  made  their  hearts  as  an  a.  Btono 

ADD 
Signifies,  [1]  To  join,  orput  to,  Dcut.  4.  2.  ActsS 
41.  2  Pet.  1.  5.    [2]  To  increase,  Prov.  16.  23 
[3]   To  give,  or  bestow.  Gen.  30. 24.  Mat.  6. 33. 
[4]    To  make  wise  by  instruction,   Gal.  2.  6. 
[5]   To  uHer,  Deut.  5.  22. 
Gen.  30.  24.  the  Lord  shall  a.  to  me  another  son 
Lev.  5.  16.  he  shall  a.  a  fifth  part  thereto,  6.  5.  I 
27. 13,  15,  19,  27,  31.  ^'■um.  5.  7. 
J^iim.  35.  6.  to  cities  of  refuge  a.  forty-two  cities 
Deut.  4.  2.  ye  shall  not  a.  to  the  word,  12.  32. 
19.  9.  thou  shalt  a.  three  cities  more  of  refuge 

29.  19.  to  a.  drunkenness  to  thirst 

2  Sam.  24.  3.  the  Lord  thy  God  a.  to  the  peoplo 
1  Kings  12. 11.  and  now  Rehoboam  said,  I  will  a. 

to  your  yoke,  14.  2  Chron.  10.  14. 
2Kings  20.  6.  I  a.  to  thy  days  15  years,  Isa.  38.  5. 

1  Chron.  22.  14.  and  thou  mayest  a.  thereto 

2  Chron.  28.  13.  ye  intend  to  a.  more  to  our  sins 
Psal.  69.  27.  a.  iniquity  to  their  iniquity 
Prov.  3.  2.  long  life  and  peace  shall  tliey  a.  to  thee 

30.  6.a.  thou  not  to  his  words,  lest  he  reprove  thee 
Isa.  29. 1.  a.  ye  year  to  year,  let  them  kill  sacrifices 

30.  1.  that  they  may  a.  sin  to  sin 
.V««.6.27.  can  a.one  cubit  to  his  stature, Z?(Acl2.25. 
Phil.  1.  16.  supposing  to  a.  affliction  to  my  bonds 
2  Pet.  1.  5.  beside  this  a.  to  your  faith  virtue 
Rev.  22.  18.  if  any  a.  God  shall  a.  to  liim  rlagues 

ADDED. 
Deut.  5.  22.  with  a  great  voice,  and  he  a.  no  more 
1  Sam.  12.  19.  we  have  a.  to  all  our  sins  this  evil 
Jcr.  36.  32.  there  were  a.  besides  many  like  words 
4.5.  3.  the  Lord  hath  a.  grief  to  my  sorrow 
Dan.  4.  36.  and  excellenf  majesty  was  a.  to  me 
.Mat.  6.  33.  all  these  shall  be  a.  to  you,  Luke  12.31. 
Liike  3. 20.  Herod  a.  yet  this  above  all,  he  shut  up 
19. 11.  as  they  heard,  he  a.  and  spake  a  parable 
.9cts  2.  41.  the  same  day  there  were  a.  3000  souls 

47.  and  the  Lord  a.  to  the  church  daily  such 
5.  14.  believers  were  the  more  a.  to  the  Lord 
11.  24.  and  much  people  was  a.  to  the  Lord 
Gal.i.G.  seemed  to  be  somewhat,  a.  nothing  to  mo 
3.  19.  the  law  was  a.  because  of  transgressions 

ADDETH,   ING. 
Job  34.  .37.  for  he  a.  rebellion  to  his  sin 
Prov.  10.  22.  and  he  a.  no  sorrow  with  it 
16.  23.  the  heart  of  the  wise  a.  learning  tohislipt 
Gal.  3.  15.  no  man  disannullelh  or  a.  thereto 

ADDER. 
Grn.  49.  17.  Dan  shall  be  an  a.  in  the  path 
Psal.  58.4.  they  are  like  the  deaf  a.  that  stoppeth 
91. 13.  thou  shalt  tread  on  the  lion  and  a. 
140.  3.  a.  poison  is  under  their  lips 
Prov.  23.  32.  wine  at  last  stingeth  like  an  a. 

ADDICTED. 
1  Cor.16.15.  a.  themselves  to  the  ministry  of  saints 

ADDITION,  S. 

1  Kings  7.  29.  certain  a.  were  made  of  thin  work 

30.  undersetters  molten  at  the  side  of  every  a. 

36.  he  graved  chernbims,  and  a.  round  about 

ADJURE 

Signifies,  [1]  To  bind  under  the  penalty  of  a  fear 

fvl  curse.  Josh.  fi.  26.  [2]  To  charge  earnestly 

by  word  or  oath,  1  Kings  22.  16.  Mat.  26.  63. 


1  Kings  22.  16.  the  king  said,  how  many  times 
shall  I  a.  thee  to  tell  me  nothing,  2  Chron.  18. 15 
Mat.  20.  63.  I  a.  thee  by  Uie  living  God 


ADV 

Mark  5.  7.  I  «.  tlice  by  God,  tliou  tormeiil  me  not 
^cl3  19.13.  suving,  wu  a.  you  by  Jc^iua,  wlium  Puul 

ADiVliBU. 
Josh.  6.  '2G.  Josliuu  a.  thuiii  ul  that  time 
1  Sam.  14.  ~i.  fur  Saul  had  u.  thcjmojile 
ADMLNISTKATION,  S. 

1  Cor.  12.  5.  there  utu  ditVereiices  of  a. 

2  Ci<r.  y.  12.  lor  the  a.  ol'  ihis  service  Bupplietlj 

ADMLMSTKKKU. 
2  Cor.  8. 19.  a.  by  us  to  the  glory  of  the  same  Lord 
2U.  ill  tliib  abundance  which  is  a.  by  us 
ADMIKATIOX. 
.fade  IG.  having  men's  ptrsuns  in  a. 
Jieu.  17.  ti.  I  saw  her,  I  wondered  with  great  a. 

ADMIKEU. 
2  Tiua.  I.  10.  to  be  a.  in  all  llu-ni  that  believe 

AU.MOMrill,  KU. 
F.ccl.  4. 13.  a  foolish  king  who  will  no  more  be  a. 
12.  12.  and  further  by  these,  my  son,  be  u. 
Jtr.  42.  ly.  know  certainly  thai  I  have  o.  you 
JlcU  27.  y.  tlie  fust  was  now  jiast,  Fuul  a.  them 
Horn.  15.  14.  ye  are  able  also  to  a.  one  another 
CmI.  3.  10.  o.  one  another  in  jisalms  and  hymns 

1  7'Am.  a.  12.  Uiat  are  over  you  in  Lord,  and  a.  you 

2  This.  3. 15.  not  an  enemy,  but  a.  him  as  a  brother 
lleb.  a.  5.  as  Moses  was  u.  of  God,  when  he  was 

AUMOMTION. 
1  Cor.  10. 11.  they  are  written  fi.r  our  a. 
Kplt.  b.  4.  bring  them  up  in  the  a.  of  the  Lord 
'J'lt-  3.  lU.  after  the  first  and  second  a.  reject 

ADO. 
Mark  5.39.  he  sailh,  why  make  ye  this  a.  and  weep 

AUOFTION 
Is  an  action  ichercby  a  man  takes  apersoniiilo  hit 
family,  in  order  to  make  him  part  of  it,  aclnww- 
Udges  him  for  his  son,  and  receives  him  into  the 
number,  and  gioes  him  a  right  to  the  privileges 
vf  his  children.  I'haraok's  daughter  adopted 
young  Moses,  and  .Mordccui  Kslhcr,  i;.\ud.2. 10. 
Ksth.  'J.  7, 15.  He  are  not  uajuninted  hoic  far 
thepriciUgcs  of  adoption  extended;  hut  it  may 
be  presumed  that  thiy  icerc  much  the  same  with 
those  mentioned  in  theUomun  laics:  The  adopt- 
ed children  shared  in  the  estate  with  the  natural 
children ;  they  assumed  the  name  of  the  person 
who  adopted  thent,and  became  suhjecl  to  his  pa- 
ternal power  who  received  them  into  his  faintly. 
Jlnd  (Jud  doth  adopt  his  children,  ichen  he  gra- 
ciously admits  strangers  and  enciiii<s,iis  all  the 
fallen  race  of.ldam  are  by  natare,into  Ihestate 
and  relation  of  children  thro'  .lesus  Christ;  he 
becoming  their  Father  in  him,  according  to  the 
great  orumise  of  the  new  covenant,  Eph.2. 11, 
12,13.1  John  3. 1.  Gal.  4.5.  Eph.  1.5.  Jer.  31. 33. 
SCor.G.  10,18.  The  adopted  are  true  believers  in 
•  'hrist;  they  relying  vpon  his  blood  and  surety- 
righteousness  fur  pardon  and  reconciliation 
with  Ood;  for  to  as  many  as'  received  him,  to 
them  gave  he  power  to  become  the  sous  of  God, 
even  to  them  that  believe  on  his  name.  I'hey  are 
regenerated  hj  the  Spirit,and  ure  justified  Ireely 
by  grace,  through  the  redemption  that  is  in  Jesus 
(Jhiist,  and  arebrought  thro'  the  Spirit's  opera- 
tion to  anaffectiu^iute  obediential  franicof  spirit 
towards  God  as  their  reconciled  Father,  .loliii 
1.  12,13.  Rom.  3. 24, 2.5.  Zech.  12.  10.  l.s:i.U3.  \i<. 
Gal.  4.  5,  t>.  Tit.  3.  5,fi.  1  John  2.  29.  Many  and 
great  are  the  privileges  of  (iod's  adopted  chil- 
dren; some  of  which  are,  his  fatherly  prot'clion 
from  temporal  and  spiritual  evils,  and  his  pro- 
vision uf  all  nrrdful  things  both  for  soul  and 
body;  hisfuthrrly  correction  of  them;  audience 
and  return  tn  their  prayers;  and  a  sure  title  to 
the  heavenly  inheritance:  for,  if  children,  then 
heiri,  heirs  of  God,  and  joint-heira  with  Christ, 
Horn.  H.  17.  Vsal.  34. 10.  ami  121.  7.  }lcb.  12.  (i. 
1  John  5.  14, 1.5.  'J'rur  brlirrers  are  said  to  be 
put  into  this  stale,  []]  Jly  election,  Eph.  1.  5. 
[2]  Jly  manifestation  and  luisurancc,  Kom.  8. 
15.  Oal.  4.  5, 0.  [3]  Uy  perfect  redemption  and 
glory,  at  Ike  general  rcaarrcrtion,  Kom.H.  23. 
Rom.  H.  1.5.  but  ye  have  received  the  t^piril  of  a. 

2.'!.  waiting  for  the  a.  the  redemption  of  our  body 
D.  4.  to  whom  pertaineth  the  a.  and  the  glory 
fial.  4.  5.  that  we  might  receive  the  u.  of  xons 
y.ph.  1.  5.  pri'ili'stinnti'H  iih  to  the  a.  of  children 

AUOR.N,  El),  ETH,  ING. 
ha.  01. 10.  a»  a  bride  a.  hcrnelf  with  her  jewels 
Jer.  31.  4.  thou  Bhnlt  be  ngain  a.  with  tiibrc^tx 
J.vke  21.  5.  the  tomplo  \\n»  a.  with  goodly  Htoiies 
1  7*1111.  2.  9.  that  wnmeii  a.  in  modrnt  appiiri.l 
TV*.  2.  10.  a.  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Haviour 
1  Vet.  3.  3.  whoso  a.  lot  it  not  ho  that  outward  a. 

a.  women  who  trusted  in  (Jod  a.  Ihomnelvra 
Hev.  21.  2.  prepared  us  a  hride  a.  for  her  huKbaiid 

ADVA.NCEI). 
ISam.  12.0.  it  in  tlie  Lord  (hat  a.  Mimed  and  Aaron 
F.sth.  3.  1.  Almmiorus  a.  Ilnnmn  the  Agngitc 
S.  II.  Hainan  told  Ihein  how  he  Imd  a.  him 
ID.  3.  the  greatiievs  whereto  the  kuij  a.  Mordecai 


ADV 

ADVANTA«E,  ED,  ETU. 
Jui35.  3.  thou  saidst,  what  a.  will  it  be  to  thco 
J.uke  9. 25.  what  is  a  man  a.  if  he  gain  the  world 
Horn.  3.  1.  what  a.  tJien  hath  the  Jew,  or  what 

1  Cor.  15.  32.  what  a.  it  me  if  the  dead  rise  not  ? 

2  Cor.  2. 11.  lest  Satan  should  get  an  a.  of  us 
Jude  IC. men's  persons  in  admiration,  because  of  a. 

ADVEATURE,  ED. 
Deul.  28.  56.  not  a.  to  set  the  sole  of  her  foot 
Judg.  9. 17.  my  father  sought  and  a.  his  life  far 
Acts  19.  31.  Uiut  he  would  not  a.  into  the  llivatrc 

ADVERSARY. 
F.iod.  23.  22. 1  will  he  an  a.  to  thine  adversaries 
j\'um.  22.  22.  tlie  angel  stood  for  an  a.  against 

lialaam 
t  32.  behold,  I  went  out  to  be  an  a.  to  tlieo 
1  Sam.  1.  0.  and  her  a.  also  provoked  iier  sore 
29.  4.  lest  in  the  battle  he  be  an  a.  to  us 
1  Kings  5. 4.  there  is  neither  a.  nor  evil  occurrcnt 
11.  14.  the  Lord  stirred  up  an  a.  to  Solomon,  2;i. 
25.  was  an  a.  to  Israel  all  the  days  of  Solomon 
Esth.  7. 6.  the  a.  and  enemy  is  tliis  wicked  Hamun 
Job  1.  t  G.  and  the  a.  came  also  among  them 
31.  ;io.  and  that  my  a.  had  written  a  book 
Psal.  74.  10.  how  long  shall  the  a.  rejiroach? 
109.  t  G.  let  an  u.  slaml  at  his  right  hand 
Isa.  50.  8.  who  is  mine  a.  let  him  come  near  to  me 
y>a»i.  1.  10.  the  a.  hath  spread  out  his  hand 

2.  4.  he  stood  with  his  right  hand  as  an  a. 
4. 12.  that  the  a.  should  have  entered  the  gates 

~1mos  3. 11.  an  a.  shall  be  round  about  the  land 
Zech.  3. 1 1.  shewed  me  an  a.  standing  to  be  his  a. 
Mat.  5.  25.  agree  with  thine  a.  quickly,  lest  at  any 
time  the  a.  deliver  thee  to  tlic  judge 
Au/fc  12.  58.  when  thou  goest  whh  thine  a. 
18.  3.  a  widow,  saying,  avenge  me  of  mine  a. 
1  7V»j.  5.  14.  give  no  occasion  to  the  a.  to  speak 
I  Pet.  5.  8.  your  a.  the  devil  as  a  roaring  lion 

ADVERSARIES. 
Dcut.  32.27.  lest  their  a.  should  behave  strangely 

43.  he  will  render  vengeance  to  his  a. 
.Josh.  5. 13.  art  thou  for  us,  or  for  our  a.? 

1  Sam.  2.  10.  the  a.  of  the  Lord  shall  be  broken 

2  .Sam.  19.  22.  that  ye  should  this  day  be  a.  to  me 
Ezra  4. 1.  when  a.  of  Judah  and  Benjamin  heard 
.VV/i.  4.  11.  our  a.  said,  tlicy  shall  not  know 
Psal.  38.  20.  that  render  evil  for  good,  are  my  a. 

1)9.  19.  mine  a.  are  all  before  thee 
71. 13.  be  confounded  that  are  a.  to  my  soul 
HI.  14.  have  turned  my  hand  against  their  o. 
89.  42.  thou  ha.st  set  uji  the  right  hand  of  his  a. 
109.  4.  for  my  love  they  are  my  a.  but  I  ])ruyer 
20.  let  this  be  the  reward  of  my  a.  from  Lord 
29.  let  my  a.  he  clothed  with  shame 
Isa.  1.  24.  sailh  the  Lord,  I  will  ease  mc  of  my  n. 
9.  11.  the  Lord  shall  set  iip  the  a.  of  Rcziii 
11.  13.  and  the  a.  of  Judah  shall  be  cut  oft" 
59.  18.  lie  will  rejiay  fury  to  his  a. 

03.  18.  our  a.  have  trodden  down  thy  Sanctuary 
()4.  2.  to  make  thy  name  known  to  thine  a. 

.Icr.  30.  10.  all  thine  a.  shall  go  into  captivity 
40.  10.  that  he  may  avenge  liiin  of  his  a, 
50.  7.  and  their  a.  said,  we  otfeiid  not 

J^am.  1.5.  her  a.  are  the  chief,  her  enemies  prosper 
7.  the  a.  saw  her,  and  did  mock  her  sabbaths 
17.  that  his  a.  should  be  round  about  him 
2.  17.  he  hath  set  up  the  horn  of  Uiine  a. 

.Mie.  5.  9.  thy  hand  shall  be  liflcd  up  upon  thy  a. 

.Yah.  1.  2.  the  Lord  will  take  vengeance  on  his  a. 

I.uke  13.  17.  all  his  o.  were  ashamed 
21.  15.  all  your  a.  shall  nut  bo  able  to  gainsay 

1  Cor.lii.\).  a  door  is  opened,  and  there  are  many  d 

Phil.  1.  2-*.  and  in  nothing  terrified  by  your  a. 

Jlcb.  10.27.  indignation  which  shall  devour  the  a. 
ADVERSITY,  lES. 

1  Sam.  10.  19.  who  himself  saved  you  out  of  all  a. 

2  .Sum.  4.  9.  who  redeemed  my  soul  out  of  nil  a. 
2  Chron.  15.  ti.  for  God  did  vex  I  hem  with  all  a. 
/'avi/.IO.O.  hcMuid  in  his  heart,!  shall  never  be  in  a. 

31.  7.  thou  hast  known  my  soul  in  a. 

35.  1.5.  but  ill  my  a.  they  njoicod 

94.  13.  mnyesl  give  him  rest  from  the  days  of  a 
Prov.  17.  17.  anil  a  brother  is  horn  for  a. 

24. 10.  if  thou  faint  in  day  of  a.  thy  strength  small 
F.ccl.  7.  14.  but  in  the  day  of  a.  contiider 
Isa.  30.20.  tho'  the  Lord  give  you  iho  bread  of  a. 
JJcb.  13.  3.  remember  them  w  liieh  sutler  a. 

ADVERTISE. 
.Vnm.  24. 14.  I'll  a.  thoe,  what  this  people  shall  do 
liuth  4.  4.  I  thought  to  a.  thee,  saying,  buy  it 

ADVICE. 
Judg.  19.  30.  take  a.  and  speak  your  minds 

20.  7.  eive  here  your  a.  and  counsel 

1  .SVim.  2.'>.  .33.  blessed  be  thy  n.  and  blessed  be  thou 

2  .Sam.  19.43.  that  our  a.  should  not  be  first  had 
2  CAr.  10.  9.  what  a.  give  ye,  that  we  may  aiiswi^r 

14.  niiHweied  them  after  the  a.  of  young  men 
2,'>.  17.  king  Amaziah  look  a.  and  sent  to  Joash 
I'rnv.  20.  18.  and  with  good  a.  make  war. 
2  Cor  8.  10.  and  herein  1  givu  my  a. 


AFA 

ADVISE,  ED. 

2  5am.24.13.a.and  see  what  answer,  \Chron2\.\i. 
1  Kings  12.G.  how  do  ye  a.  that  I  may  answer  peo- 
Prov.  13. 10.  but  with  the  well  a.  is  wisdom  [plo 
Acts  27. 12.  the  more  part  a.  to  depart  thence  alio 

ADVISEMENT. 
1  Chron.  12.  19.  iJie  lords  upon  a.  sent  him  away 

ADULTERER,  S. 
I,ev.  20.  10.  the  a.  shall  suiely  be  |iut  to  death 
Job  24.  15.  the  eye  of  the  a.  waitelh  for  twilight 
Psal.  50.  18.  thou  hasl  been  partaker  vith  a. 
Jsa.  57.  3.  draw  near  ye  seed  of  a.  and  the  whoro 
/(-r.9.2.for  they  be  all  a.  an  assembly  of  treachcrotu 
23.  10.  for  the  land  is  full  of  a.  for  swearing 
llos.  7.  4.  they  are  all  a.  as  an  oven  heated 
Mai.  3.  5.  I  will  be  a  swift  witness  against  the  a. 
Luke  18.  11.  I  am  not  as  others,  extortioners,  a. 

1  Cor.  G.9.  be  not  deceived,  neitiicr  a.  shall  inherit 
Jieb.  13.  4.  whoremongers  and  a.  God  will  judge 
Jam.  4.  4.  ye  a.  know  ye  not  that  the  friendship 

ADULTERESS,  ES. 
Lev.  20.  10.  the  a.  shall  surely  be  put  to  death 
Prov.  6.  26.  the  a.  will  hunt  for  the  precious  life 
Ezck.  23.  45.  righteous  men  shall  judge  them  as  a. 
Hos.  3.  1.  go  yet,  love  a  woman,  yet  an  a. 
Jiom.  7.  3.  so  that  she  is  no  a.  tho'  she  bo  married 

ADULTEROUS. 
Prov.  30.  20.  such  is  the  way  of  an  a.  woman 
Mat.  12.  39.  an  a.  generation  soeketh  a  sign,  16.  4. 
Mark  8.  38.  whoso  shall  be  ashamed  in  tliia  a. 

ADULTERY,  lES. 
Is  twofold,    [1]  jVa<uraZ,  Mat.  5.  28.    Mark  10. 
11.    [21  Spiritual,  which  is  idolatry s  IcT.  X  9. 
Ezek.  23.  37. 
Ezod.  20. 14.  thou  shall  not  commit  a.  J)evt.  5.18. 
Mat.  5.  27.  I  19.  18.  Rovi.  13.  9. 
/.CD.  20.  10.  the  man  that  committetli  a.  even  he 
that  committeih  a.  shall  surely  be  put  to  death 
Pro(i.G.32.whoso  conimitsa.lacketh  understanding 
Jer.  3.  8.  when  backsliding  Israel  committed  a. 
9.  committed  a.  with  stones  and  with  titocks 
5.  7.  when  I  fed  them,  then  they  committed  a. 
7.  9.  will  ye  steal,  murder,  and  commit  a.  ? 
13.  27.  I  have  seen  thine  a.  and  neighinga 
23.  14.  they  commit  a.  and  walk  in  lies 

29.  23.  because  they  have  committed  a. 
Ezek.  16.  32.  but  as  a  wife  that  committeth  a, 

23.  37.  with  their  idols  have  llicy  committed  a. 

43.  then  said  I  to  her  that  was  old  in  a. 
Nos.  2.  2.  put  away  her  a.  between  her  breoxta 
4.2.  by  lying  and  committing  a.  they  break  out 

13.  and  your  spouses  shall  commit  a. 

14.  I'll  not  punish  them  when  they  commit  a. 
Mat.  5.  28.  hath  committed  a.  in  his  heart 

32.  w  hosoever  shall  marry  her  that  is  divorced 
committeih  a.  19.  9.  Luke  10.  18. 
1.5.  19.  oul  of  tho  heart  proceed  a.  Mark  7.  21. 
Mark  10.  11.  whosoever  shall  put  away  his  wife 
and  marry  another,  committeih  a.  /.uke  16.18. 
19.  do  not  coiiiniit  a.  Luke  18.  20.  .!avi.  2. 11. 
.John  8. 3.  brought  unto  him  a  woman  taken  in  a. 4. 
Kom.  2.  22.  sayest,  a  man  should  not  commit  a. 
(ial.  5.  19.  the  works  of  the  flesh  are  manifest,  a. 

2  Pit.  2. 14.  having  eyes  full  of  a.  not  cease  from  sin 
ticv.  2.  22.  I  will  cast  them  that  commit  a.  with 

ADVOCATE. 

1  .Tohn  2. 1.  we  have  an  a.  with  the  Father,  Jesui 

Christ  the  tiglitooua 
A  FAR  joined  with  (JFF 
Signilies,    [1]    The  distance  between  place  and 
place.  Gen.  37.  18.    [2]  To  estrange  one's  self 
from  another,  Psnl.  3t<.  11.    [3]    7'«  be  absent, 
Psal.  10.  1.    [4]  'I'o  be  strangers,  or  not  of  the 
visible  church,  Eph.  2.  13,  17. 
fi'en.  22.  4.  Abraham  saw  llie  place  a.  off  ^ 

.37.  18.  when  his  brethren  saw  ^iseph  a.  off 
F.iod.  24.  I.  come  up,  and  worMiip  ye  o.  off 
.t).  7.  pilch  the  tahernacio  a.  off  from  llio  camp 
A'lini.  9.  10.  be  unclean,  or  he  in  a  journey  a.  off 

2  Kings  4.  25.  when  the  man  of  God  saw  her  a.  off 
Ezra  .').  13.  shouted,  and  the  noise  was  heard  a.  off 
JVeh.  12.  43.  the  joy  of  Jerusalem  was  heard  a.  off 
.fob  36.  3.  I  w  ill  li'tcli  my  knowledge  from  a. 

25.  a  man  may  we  it,  a  man  may  Udiold  it  a.  off 
39.29.  seeks  her  prey,  and  her  eyes  behold  a.  off 

Psnl.  I>5.  ,5.  and  of  th'Mii  that  arc  a.  o^on  the  sea 
1.38.  G.  hut  the  proud  he  knoweth  a.  off 
139.  2.  thou  uiitlerslandesl  my  thoughts  a.  off 

Prov.  31.  14.  she  bringelh  her  food  from  a. 

Isa.  23.  7.  her  own  feet  shall  carrv  her  a.  off 
00.  19.  those  that  escape  to  the  i.*les  a.  off 

Jer.  23.2;i.iim  I  a  God  at  han(l,and  not  u  God  a.offl 

30.  10.  I  will  save  thee  from  a.  46.  27. 

31.  t  3.  the  Lord  appeared  from  a.  unto  me 
10.  and  declare  it  in  tho  isles  a.  off 

49.  30.  Ilee,  gel  you  a.  off,  dwell  deep 
51.  50.  go  away,  remember  the  Lord  a.  off 
Mie.  4.  3.  ho  shall  rebuke  siroi.g  nations  a.  off 
Mat.  2G.  58.  but  Peter  followed  him  a.  off,  and 
went  in,  Mark  14.  54.  Luku  22.  54 


AFF 

Mat.  27.  55.  womeii  beholding  a.  off,  Mark  15. 40. 
Mark  5.  l>.  but  when  he  saw  Jesus  a.  off,  lie  ran 

11.  13.  and  seeing  a  fig-tree  a.  off  with  leaves 
i.uke  1<J.'2;{.  lift  up  his  ey('9,and  seelliAbrahama.ojf 
Jiccs  -2.  39.  the  promise  is  to  all  that  are  a.  off 
JEpA.  2.  17.  and  came  and  preached  peace  to  you 
which  were  a.  off,  and  to  them  that  were  nigh 
Heb  11.  13.  having  seen  the  promises  a.  off 
!i  Pet.  1.  9.  is  blind,  and  caimot  see  a.  off 
See  Far,  Stand,  Stood. 
AFFAIRS. 
IChron.  20.32.  pertaining  to  (;od,and  a.  of  the  king 
Pial.  112.  5.  he  will  guide  his  a.  with  discretion 
Dav.  2.  49.he  setShadrach  over  a.  ofthe  province 

3.  12.  .Tews  whom  thou  set  over  a.  ofthe  province 
Eph.  6.  21.  but  that  ye  also  may  know  my  a. 

22.  I  have  sent,  that  ye  might  know  our  a. 
PAH.  1.  27.  or  be  absent,  I  may  hear  of  your  a. 

2  Tim.  2.  4.  entanglcth  liimself  with  the  a.  of  life 

AFFKCT,  KD,  ETH. 
J^am.  3,  51.  mine  eye  a.  my  heart,  because  of  all 
^c^*-  14.  2.  their  minds  evil  a.  against  the  brethren 
Gal.  •!.  17.  zealously  a.  you,  that  ye  might  a.  them 

18.  it  is  good  to  be  zealously  a.  in  a  good  thing 

AFFECTIOiV. 

1  Chrov.  29. 3.  have  set  my  a.  to  the  house  of  God 
Horn,  1.  31.  without  natural  a.  2  Tim.  3.  3. 

2  Cor.  7.  15.  his  inward  a.  is  more  abundant  to  you 
Co/.  3.  2.  set  your  a.  on  things  above,  noton  things 

5.  mortify  therefore  fornication,  inordinate  a. 

AFFECTIONS. 
/Jom.l.26.forthis  causeGodgave  them  up  to  vile  a. 
Gal.  5.  24.  have  crucified  the  flesh  with  the  a. 

AFFECTION  AT  EL  Y. 
1  Thess.  2. 8.  so  being  a.  desirous  of  you,  willing 

AFFECTIONED. 
Rom.  12.  10.  be  kindly  a.  one  to  another 

AFFINITY. 
1  Kings  3.  1.  Solomon  made  a.  with  Pharaoh 
IChron.  iS.  1.  Jelioshaphat  joined  in  a.  with  Aliab 
Ezra  9.  14.  should  we  join  in  a.  with  the  people 

AFFIRM 
Signifies,  [1]  To  mai/itain  the  truth  of  a  thing. 
Acts  25.  IJ.  Tit.  3.  8.  [2]  To  teach,  1  Tim.  1.  7. 
Horn.  3. 8.  and  as  some  a.  that  we  say,  let  us  do  evil 

1  Tim.  1.  7.  what  they  say,  nor  whereof  they  a. 
jTit.  3. 8.  these  things  I  will  thatthou  a.  constantly 

AFFIRMED. 
Luke  22.  59.  about  an  hour  after  another  a. 
Acts  12. 15.  3ut  Rlioda  constantly  «.  that  it  was^o 
25.  19.  and  of  Jesus,  whom  Paul  a.  to  be  alive 

AFFLICT. 
Oen.  15.  13.  and  they  shall  a.  them  400  years 
31.  50.  if  thou  shalt  a.  my  daughters,  or  take 
F.foil.  1.  11.  set  over  them  task-masters  to  a.  them 

22.  22.  ye  f  ball  not  a.  any  widow  or  fatherless 

23.  if  thou  a.  them  in  any  wise,  and  they  cry 

23.  t  22.  I  .vill  a.  them  that  a.  thee 

Lee.  16.  29.  ye  shall  a.  your  souls,  31.  |  23.  27, 
32.     JV«M.  29.  7 
./VuTO.  24.  24.  ships  from  Chittim  shall  a.  Ashur 
30.  13.  and  every  binding  oath  to  a.  the  soul 
Judg.  16.  5.  that  we  bind  him  to  a.  him 

6.  wherewith  thou  mightest  be  bound  to  a.  tlice 

19.  she  began  to  a.  him,  and  bis  strength  went 

2  Sam.  7.  10.  nor  children  of  wickedness  a.  them 
.'  Kings  1 1.  39.  I  will  for  this  a.  the  seed  of  Uavid 
ZChron.  6.20.  turn  when  thou  dost  a.  I  Kings  S.35. 
Ezra  8.  21.  that  we  might  a.  ourselves  before  God 
Job  37.  23.  toucliiiig  the  AIniigluy,  he  will  not  a. 
Psal.  44.2.  how  thou  didst  a.  the  peojile  and  cast 

55.  19.  God  shall  hear  and  a-  them,  even  he 
By.  22.  nor  the  son  of  wickedness  a.  hira 
!)4.  5.  O  Lord,  they  a.  thine  heritage 
^   143.  12.  and  destroy  all  them  that  a.  my  soul 
Isa.  9.  1.  afterward  did  more  grievously  a.  her 
.51.  2;{.  put  it  into  the  hand  of  thum  that  a.  thee 
.58.  5.  a  day  for  a  man  to  a.  his  soul  ■? 
64.  12.  O  Lord,  wilt  thou  a.  ua  very  sore  ? 
Jcr.  31.  2f<.  as  I  watched  to  destroy  and  to  a. 
J.am.  3.  33.  for  the  Lord  doth  not  a.  willingly 
Amos  .5.  12.  they  a.  the  just,  they  take  a  bribe 
6.  14.  they  shall  a.  you  from  Hemath 
•VttA.  1.  W.  have  afflicted,  I  will  a.  tliee  no  more 
Zeph.  3.  19.  behold,  1  will  undo  all  that  o.  theo 

AFFLICTED. 
Ezod.  1.  12.  the  more  fliey  a.  the  more  they  grew 
/,CT).  23.  29.  the  soul  that  shall  not  be  a.  that  day 
JVi/m.  11.  11.  wherefore  hast  thou  a.  thy  ••ervant? 
Dcut.  20.  6.  the  Egyptians  a.  us  and  laid  on  ua 
Ruth  I.  21.  and  the  Almighty  hath  a.  me 
2  Sam.  22.28.  and  the  a.  people  thou  wilt  save 
I  Kings  2.  26.  a.  in  all  wherein  my  father  was  a. 
ZKings  17.  20.  the  Lord  rejected  Israel  and  a.  them 
Job  6.  14.  to  him  that  is  a.  pity  should  be  shewed 
30.  "■!.  he  hath  loosed  my  cord,  and  a.  me 
34.  28.  and  he  heareth  the  cry  of  the  a. 
Psal.  9.  t  12.  he  forgetteth  not  the  a. 
n  '  12.  arise,  O  Lord,  forget  not  the  a, 
18.  27.  for  tiiou  will  save  the  a.  people 


AFF 

Psal.  22.  24.  nor  abhorred  the  affliction  ofthe  a. 
25. 16.  have  mercy  on  me, tor  I  am  desolate  and  a. 
82.  3.  do  justice  to  the  a.  and  needy 
88.  7.  thou  bast  a  me  with  all  thy  waves 

15. 1  am  a.  and  ready  to  die  from  my  youth 
90.  15.  according  to  days  wheicin  tnou  hast  «,.  us 
107.  17.  fools,  because  of  their  iniquities,  are  a. 
116.  10.  1  was  greatly  a.||ll'.).  07.  before  I  was  a. 
119.  71.  it  is  good  for  me  that  I  have  been  a. 
75.  and  that  thou  in  faithfulness  hast  a.  me 
107.  I  am  a.  very  much,  quicken  me,  O  Lord 
129.  1.  many  time  have  they  a.  mu  from  youth, 2. 
140.  12.  Lord  will  maintain  the  cause  ol  the  a. 
Prov.  15.  15.  all  the  days  of  the  a.  are  evil 
22.  22.  neither  oppress  the  a.  in  the  gate 
26.  28.  a  lying  tongue  hatetli  those  that  arc  a. 
31.  5.  lest  they  pervert  the  judgment  ofthe  a. 
Isa.9.  1.  when  at  first  he  lightly  a.  the  land  of  Zeb. 
49.  13.  the  Lord  will  have  mercy  on  his  a. 
51.  21.  hear  now  this,  thou  a.  and  drunken 
.53.  4.  did  esteem  him  smitten  of  God  and  a. 
7.  he  was  oppressed, and  was  a. yet  he  opcmed  not 
54.1I.Othou  a.tossed  with  tempest,not  comforted 
58.  3.  wherefore  have  we  a.  our  souls'! 

10.  and  if  thou  satisfy  the  a.  soul,  thy  light 
60.  14.  the  sons  of  them  that  a.  thee  shall  come 
63.  9.  in  all  their  affliction  he  was  a.  and  angel 
Lam.  1.  4.  her  priests  sigh,  her  virgins  are  a. 
5.  enemies  prosper,  for  tiie  Lord  hath  a.  her. 
12.  iny  sorrow  wherewith  the  Lord  hath  a.  me 
Mic.  4.  6.  and  1  will  gather  her  that  I  have  a. 
J\l'uh.  1.  12.  though  I  have  a.  I  will  afflict  no  more 
Zc/)h.  3.  12.  I  will  leave  in  thee  an  a.  people 
Mdi.  24.  9.  they  shall  deliver  you  up  to  be  a. 
2  Cor.  1.  6.  whether  we  be  a.  it  is  for  consolation 
1  Tim.  5.  10.  if  she  have  relieved  the  a. 
Ueb.  11.  37.  being  destitute,  a.  and  tormented 
.Jam.  4.  9.  be  a.  and  mourn,  and  weep 
5.  13.  is  any  among  you  a.?  let  him  pray 

AFFLICTION 

Signifies,  [1]  Jidvcrsity,  trouble,  or  distress.  Job 

5.  6.     [2]  Uutward  oppression ,  Exod.  3.  7.  |  4. 

31.     [3]  Persecution  for  religion,  Mark  4.  17. 

Ileb.  10.32.  [i]Correctionfro7n  Oorf,Jonah2.2. 

Geii.  16.  11.  because  the  Lord  hath  heard  thy  a. 

29.  32.  surely  the  Lord  hath  looked  ujion  my  a. 
31.  42.  God  halh  seen  mine  a.  and  labour 

41.  52.  caused  me  to  be  fruitful  in  the  land  of  a. 
Ezod.'S.l.l  have  seen  the  a.of  my  people,  ./lets'!. 34. 

17.  I  will  bring  you  out  ofthe  a.  of  Egypt 
4  31.  and  th.at  he  had  looked  on  their  a. 
Dcut.  16.  3.  thou  shalt  eat  even  the  bread  of  a. 
1  Kings  22.  27.     2  Chron.  18.  26. 
26.  7.  the  Lord  heard  and  looked  on  our  a. 

1  Sam.  1.  11.  if  thou  wilt  indeed  look  on  my  a. 

2.  t  32.  thou  shalt  see  the  a.  ofthe  tabernacle 
iSam.  16. 12.  it  may  be  the  Lord  will  look  on  my  a. 

2  Kings  14.  26.  the  Lord  saw  the  a.  of  Israel 

2  Chron.  20.9.  cry  to  thee  in  our  a.  thou  wilt  hear 
.33.  12.  Manasseh  was  in  a.  and  sought  the  Lord 
AWj.  1..3.  the  remnant  are  in  great  a.  and  reproach 

9.  9.  and  didst  see  the  a.  of  our  fathers  in  Egypt 
Job  5.  6.  though  a.  eonieth  not  forth  ofthe  dust 

10.  15. 1  am  full  of  confusion,  see  thou  mitie  a. 

30.  II).  the  days  of  a.  have  taken  hold  on  me 
27.  the  days  of  a.  prevented  me 

30.  8.  and  if  they  be  holden  in  cords  of  a. 

15.  he  delivereth  the  poor  in  his  a. 

21.  for  this  hast  thou  chosen  rather  than  a. 
P.ial.  25.  IS.  look  upon  my  a.  and  pain,  forgive 
44.  24.  and  forgettest  our  a.  and  ojipression 
6(i.  11.  thou  laidst  a.  upon  our  loins 
78.  t  42.  day  when  he  delivered  them  from  a. 
88.  9.  mine  eye  mourneth  by  reason  of  i. 
106.  44.  he  regarded  their  a.  when  he  heard 
107. 10.  sit  in  darkness,  being  bound  in  a. and  iron 

39.  they  are  brought  low  through  a.  and  sorrow 

41.  yet  settcth  he  the  poor  on  high  from  a. 
119.  50.  this  is  my  comfort  in  my  a.  thy  word 

92.  I  should  then  have  perished  in  mine  a. 

1.53.  consider  mine  a.  and  deliver  me,  for  I  do  not 
fsa.  30.  20.  though  the  Lord  give  you  water  of  a. 
48  10.  I  have  chosen  thee  in  the  furnace  of  a. 
r>3.  9.  in  all  their  a.  he  w.is  afflicted,  and  the  angel 
.fev.  4.  15.  publishctli  a.  from.mount  Ephraim 
1.1.  )  1.  to  intreat  thre  well  in  the  time  of  a. 
16. 19.  O  Lord,  my  refuge  in  the  day  of  a. 
30.  1.5.  why  criest"  thou  for  thine  a.?  thy  sorrow 
48.16.  Mnab'scalamity  isnear,and  n.  hasteth  fast 
hnm.^  .3.  Judah  is  gone  into  captivity  because  ofa. 

7.  Jerusalem  remembered  in  the  days  of  her  a. 

9.  had  no  comforter,  O  Lord,  behold  mine  a. 

3.  1. 1  am  the  man  that  hath  seen  a.  by  the  rod 
19.  remembering  my  a.  ami  my  misery 

Tfos.  5.  15.  in  their  a.  they  will  seek  me  early 
.^mos  fi.O.thcy  are  not  grieved  for  the  a.of  Joseph 
OAa(i.l3.thou  shouldest  not  have  looked  on  theira. 
.hnah  2.  2.  I  cried  by  reason  of  my  a.  to  the  Lord 
JVoA.  1.9.  a.  shall  not  rise  up  the  second  time 
Hab.  3.  7.  I  faw  the  tentuof  Cushan  iu  a. 


AFR 

Zcch.  1.  15.  and  they  helped  forward  tlio  a 

8.  10.  that  went  out,  or  came  in,  because  ofa. 

10.  11.  and  he  shall  pass  tlirougli  the  sea  with  a. 
Murk  4.  17.  when  aariselh  for  the  word's  sak» 

13. 19.  for  ill  those  days  shall  be  a.  such  as 
Mets  7.  11.  tlioro  came  a  dearth,  and  great  a. 
2  Cor.  2.  4.  for  out  of  much  a.  I  wrote  to  you 

4.  17.  our  liglit  a.  which  is  but  for  a  moment 

8.  2.  how  that  in  a  great  trial  of  a. 
P/til.  1.  16.  supposing  to  add  a.  to  my  bonds 

4. 14.  that  ye  communicate  with  me  in  my  a. 

1  Thess.  1. 6.  having  received  the  word  in  much  a, 
3.  7.  we  were  comibrted  over  you  in  all  our  a- 

Heb.  11.2.5.  choosing  rather  tosuHer  a.  with  people 
Jam.  1.  27.  to  visit  the  fatherless  in  their  a. 

S.lO.for  an  example  of  .suffering  a.and  of  patience 

AFFLICTIONS. 
Psal.  34.  19.  many  are  the  a.  ofthe  righteous 

132.  1.  Lord,  remember  David,  and  all  his  a. 
Jlcts  7.  10.  «nd  delivered  him  out  of  all  his  a. 

20.  23.  saying,  that  bonds  and  a.  abide  me 

2  Cor.  6.  4.  approving  in  much  jiatience,  in  a. 
Col.  1. 24.  fill  up  what  is  behind  of  the  a.  orChrirt 
1  Thess.  3.  3.  no  man  should  be  moved  by  these  a. 
2Tim.  1.  8.  be  partakers  ofthe  a.  ofthe  gospel 

3.  11.  known  the  a.  which  came  to  me  at  Antioch 

4.  5.  but  watch  in  all  things,  endure  a. 
Heb.  10.  32.  ye  endured  a  great  fightof  a. 

33.  whilst  ye  were  made  a  gazing-stock  by  a. 

1  Pet.  5.  9.  the  same  a.  atcomiilished  in  brethren 

AFFORDING. 
Psal.  144.13.  our  garners  full, a.all  manner  of  stcre 

AFFRIGHT,  ED. 
Dcut.  7.  21.  thou  shalt  not  be  a.  at  them 

2  Chron.  32.  18.  they  cried  with  a  loud  voice  to  a. 
Job  18.  20.  as  they  that  went  before  were  a. 

39.  22.  he  niocketh  at  fear,  and  is  not  a. 
Isa.  21.  4.  my  heart  panted,  fearfulness  a.  me 
.ler.  51.  32.  reeds  are  burnt,  and  men  of  war  a. 
Mark  16.  5.  and  they  were  a.  J,uke  24.  37. 

6.  he  saith,  be  not  a.  ye  seek  Jesus  crucified 
Rev.  11.  13.  and  the  remnant  were  a.  gave  glory 

AFOOT. 
Mark  6.  33.  many  ran  a.  thither  out  of  all  cities 
Acts  20.  li.  Paul  minding  himself  to  go  a 

AFORE. 
2Kings  20. 4.  a.  Isaiah  was  gone  out  into  the  court 
Psal.  129.  6.  which  withereth  a.  it  groweth  up 
Isa.  18.  5.  a.  the  harvest  when  the  hud  is  perfect 
Kick.  33.  22.  a.  he  that  was  escajied  came 
Horn.  1.2.  which  he  had  promised  a. by  his  prophets 
9.  23.  which  he  had  a.  prepared  unto  glory 
Kph.  3.  3.  the  mysterv,  as  I  wrote  a.  in  few  words 

AFOREHAND. 
Mark  14.  8.  she  is  come  a  to  anoint  my  body 

AFORETIME. 
.Teb  17.  6.  me  a  by-word,  and  a.  I  was  as  a  labret 
Isa.  52.  4.  my  people  went  down  a.  into  Egypt 
Jer.  30.  20.  their  children  also  shall  be  as  a. 
/Jan.  6.  10.  he  prayed  before  his  God,  as  he  did  a. 
.John  9.  13.  they  brought  him  that  a.  was  blind 
Rotn.  15.  4.  for  whatsoever  things  were  written  a. 

AFRAID. 
Gen.  42.  35.  saw  bundles  of  money,  tbeywcrc  a. 
Kzod.  34.  30.  and  thoy  were  a.  to  come  nigh  him 
Aen.  2K.  6.  and  none  shall  make  you  a.  Job  II.  19. 
-Vum.  12.  8.  why  not  a.  to  s[)eak  against  Moses  ? 
/.)fHf.7.19.doto  all  the  people  of  whom  thou  art  a. 
Judg.  7.  3.  proclaim  whosoever  is  fearful  and  a. 

1  .Sam.  4.  7.  the  Philistines  were  a.  for  they  said 
18. 29.  Saul  was  yet  the  more  a.  of  David 

2  Sa7n.  1.  14.  how  wast  thou  not  a.  to  destroy 

14.  15.  because  the  people  have  made  me  a. 
17.  2.  I  w  ill  come  on  him,  and  make  him  a. 

22.  5.  ungo<lly  men  made  me  a.  Psal.  18.  4. 
JVeh.  6.9.  tor  they  all  made  us  a.saying, their  hands' 
./ob  9.  28.  I  am  a.  of  all  my  sorrows,  I  know  that 

11.  19.  shalt  lie  down,  and  none  shall  makethec  o. 
13.  11.  shall  not  his  excellency  make  you  a.? 
21.  and  let  not  thy  dread  make  me  a. 

15.  24.  trouble  and  anguish  shall  make  him  a. 
18. 11.  terrors  shall  make  him  a.  on  every  side 
21.  (i.  even  when  I  remember,  I  am  a.  and  tremble 

23.  15.  when  I  consider,  I  am  a.  of  him 

33.  7.  behold,  my  terror  shall  not  make  thee  a. 
39.  20.  canst  thou  make  him  a.  as  a  grasshopper? 
41.  25.  ho  raiseth  up  himself,  the  mighty  are  a. 

Psal.  56.  3.  what  time  I  am  a.  I  will  trust  in  thee 
6.5.  8.  they  that  dwell  are  a.  at  thy  tokens 
77. 16.  the  waters  saw  thee,  and  they  were  a. 
83.  15.  and  make  them  a.  with  thy  storm 
119.  120.  and  I  am  a.  of  thy  judgments 

Isa.  17.  2.  and  none  shall  make  them  a.  Eiek.  34. 
28.     Mic.  4.  4.     y.eph.  3.  13 
33.  14.  the  sinners  in  Zion  are  a.  fearfnIne.sBhatli 
41 .  .5.  the  ends  of  the  earth  were  a.  and  came 
57.  11.  and  of  whom  hast  thou  been  a.  or  feared 

.Ter.  30.  10.  be  quiet,  and  none  shall  make  him  «. 
36. 24.  yet  they  were  not  a.  nor  rent  garrnenU 
■18.  19.  Zedekiah  said,  I  am  a.  ofthe  Jews 


AFT 

Jer.  39. 17.  not  given  to  men,  of  whom  thou  art  a 
Ezek.  3i).  v!t}.  and  none  made  them  a.  JVaA.  '2.  U 
JJan.  4.  5.  1  saw  a  dream,  which  made  me  a. 
Jonah  1.  5.  then  the  mariners  were  a.  10. 
Hob.  2.  17.  made  them  a.  becauseof  men's  blood 
JUark  5.  15.  in  liis  right  mind,  were  a.  Luke  d.  3.5. 

y.  32.  they  understood  not,  and  were  o.lo  ask  iiiin 

10.  3-2.  and  as  they  followed  they  were  a. 

Itj.  ti.  nor  said  they  any  thing,  tor  they  were  a. 
Luke  S.  25.  and  they  bumg  a.  wondered,  saying 
jicts  9.  2b.  but  Uiey  were  all  a.  of  Saul 

'i2.  9.  they  with  nie  saw  the  light,  and  were  a. 
Cfal.  4. 11. 1  am  a  of  you,  lest  I  have  bestowed 
Heb.  11.  23.  not  a.  of'tlie  king's  commandment 
1  Pel.  3.  ti.  and  are  not  a.  with  any  amazement 
2J'eJ.2.10.  they  are  not  a.to  si)eak  evil  ofdiguities 

.Be  A KR All). 
Z)euf.  1.29.  dread  not,  ncitlicr  ic  a.  of  them,  31.6. 

1  Sam.  23.  3.  behold  we  be  a.  here  in  Judah 

2  Sam.  22. 46.  be  a.  out  ofclose  places,  Pi:al.  18.43. 
JV*«A.  G.  13.  was  he  hired  that  1  should  be  a. 

Job  5.  21.  nor  shalt  thou  be  a.  of  destruction 
19.  29.  be  ye  a.  of  tlic  sword,  for  wrath  bringeth 
Psa/.  27.1. L.  ismystrecigth,  of  whom  shall  I  be  a.? 
Jsa.  H.  12.  nor  fear  ye  their  fear,  nor  be  a.  44.  S. 
19. 17.  tliat  maketh  mention,  shall  be  a.  in  himself 
51.  12.  thou,  that  thou  shouldest  be  a.  of  a  man 
Rom.  13.  4.  if  tliou  do  that  which  is  evil,  be  a. 

JSTot  be  AFRAID. 

Z>eut.  1.  17.  you  shall  not  be  a.  of  the  face  of  man 

7.  18.  thou  shalt  not  be  a.  of  them,  18.  22. 

Psal.'i.G.  I  will  not  be  o.of  ten  thousands  of  iieople 

50.  11.  I  will  not  be  a.  what  man  can  do  to  mo 

91.  5.  thou  shalt  not  be  a.  for  the  terror  by  night 

112.  7.  he  shall  not  be  a.  of  evil  tidings,  his  heart 

8.  his  heart  is  established,  he  shall  not  be  a. 

Prov.  3.  24.  when  thou  liest  down,  shalt  not  be  a. 

/«-a.l2.2.God  my  salvation,!  will  trust  and  nut  be  a. 

31.  4.  ho  will  not  be  a.  of  their  voice,  nor  abase 

Jimos  3.6.  a  trumjiet  be  blown, and  people  not  be  a. 

Horn.  13.  3.  wilt  thou  then  not  be  a.  of  the  power  t 

Be  not  AFRAID. 
•  Dcu.t.  20.  1.  be  not  a.  of  them,  Josh.  11.  6.  JVcA.  4. 
14.  Jer.  10.  5.  Eiek.  2.  6.  Luke  12.  4. 

1  Sam.  28. 13.  Saul  said,  be  not  a.what  suwesl  thou 

2  Kings  1. 15.  angel  said,  go  down,  be  nut  a.of  him 
Psal.  49.  16.  be  not  a.  when  one  is  made  rich 
Prov.  3.25.  ic  ?io«  a.of  sudden  fear  nor  desolation 
J.ia.  40.  9.  lift  up  thy  voice,  lift  it  up,  be  not  a. 
Jcr.  1.  8.  be  not  a.  of  their  faces,  for  I  am  with  thee 
Ezck.  2.  6.  and  thou  son  of  man  be  nut  a.  of  Ihc^ni 
Mat.  14.  27.  it  is  I,  be  not  a.  Mark  (i.  50.  John  (i.20. 

17.  7.JeBUS  touched  them  and  said, arise,  Ae  nut  a. 
28.  10.  be  not  a.  go  tell  iny  brethren  that  they  go 

Mark  5.  36.  saith  to  the  ruler,  he  not  a.only  believe 
4ctj(18.9.4e  not  a.but  si>eak,and  hold  not  thy  peace 

1  Pel.  3. 14.  be  not  a.  of  their  terror,  nor  be  troubled 
Sore  AFRAID. 

Oen.  20.  8.  told  these  things,  and  men  were  sore  a. 

Ezod.  H.lO.Egyptians  marched,  they  were  sore  a. 

JVum.  22.  3.  Aloab  was  sure  a.  of  the  people 

Josk.  9.  24.  therefore  we  were  sore  a.  of  our  lives 

1  Sam.  17.  24.  fled  from  Goliath,  and  were  sore  a. 
28.20.  Saul  fell  along  on  Uie  earth, and  was  som  a. 

31.  4.  hi.')  armour-bearer  was  sure  a.  1  Chr.  10.  4. 
JVcA.  2.2.  nothing  but  sorrow,  and  was  very  sore  a. 

■  .Var^9.6.  wist  not  what  to  8ay,for  they  were  sure  a. 
Lukc2. 9.  shone  about  them, and  they  were  sore  a. 

Was  AFRAID. 
Oen.  3.  10.  1  heard  thy  voice,  and  I  was  a. 

18.  15.  saying,  I  laughed  not,  fur  she  was  a. 
:^2.  7.  then  Jacob  was  greatly  a.  and  distressed 

/,'/orf.3.6.Mo«cs  hid  his  tacc,u;ua-  a.  to  look  on  (Jod 
JJeut.  9.  19. 1  was  a.  of  the  anger  and  diBjileasure 
J<ulh3.  8.  at  midnight  the  man  was  a.  and  turned 

1  .Sam.  18.  12.  Haul  Kin.«  a.  of  David,  15. 

21.  1.  Ahimelecli  wiw  a.  at  the  meeting  of  David 
28.  5.  Saul  saw  the  host  of  Philistines,  Iwj  was  a. 

2  .Sam.  6.9.  David  was  a.  of  the  Lord,  1  Chr.  13.  12. 
1  Chron.  21.  30.  David  could  not  go,  for  he  was  a. 

foil  3.  25.  lluit  which  I  woji  a.  of,  is  come  to  me 

32.  6.  I  1C0.1  a.  and  dufst  not  shew  my  opinion 
Jer.  2(!.  21.  when  Urijali  hiard  il,  he  wat  a. 
A'an.8.17.when  he  rami-, was  a. and  fell  on  my  face 
Hub.  3.  2.  O  Lord,  I  heard  thy  spcerh,  and  was  a. 
Mai.  2.  .5.  he  feared  me,  and  was  o.bofore  my  name 
Mat.  2.  22.  Joseph  was  a.  to  go  thither 

14.  .10.  when  he  saw  the  wind  boisterous,  joas  a. 

2.5.  25.  I  wa.f  a.  ami  hid  thy  talent  in  the  earth 
John  19.  8.  when  I'ilate  himrd,  he  was  the  more  a. 
.'lets  10.  4.  when  Ooriieliiui  lookeil,  he  was  a. 

AFRI'.SII. 
//ci.d.G.thcy  crucify  the  Hon  ofOod  o.and  put  him 

AFTKR. 
Oen.  18.  12.  saying,  a.  I  am  waxed  old,  shall  I 

38.  21.  about  three  months  a.  it  was  told  Judah 
JVuin.  15.  39.  that  ye  seek  nut  o.  yiNir  own  heart 
Jieut.  6.  14.  yo  shall  not  gon.  other  pods 
Jo.ih.  10.  14.  no  day  like  that  before  it,  or  a.  it 
I  Sam.  15.  31.  Samuel  turned  ajain  a.  Saul 


AGA 

1  .Sam.24.14.a.whom  Ls  the  king  come  ouf?  n.adog 

1  King's  17.  13.  and  a.  make  for  thee  and  thy  son 
JVeh.  13. 19.  not  be  oi>ened  till  a.  the  sabbath 
Job  10.  6.  that  thou  inquirest  a.  mine  iniquity 

:W.  5.  they  cried  a.  them,  as  a.  a  lliief 
Psal.  28.  4.  give  them  a.  the  work  of  their  hands 
Keel.  1.11.  with  those  that  shall  come  a. 
Isa.  11.3.  he  shall  not  judge  a.  the  sight  of  eyes 
Kzek.  46.  17.  a.  it  shall  return  to  the  prince 
Hos.  11.  10.  they  shall  walk  a.  the  Lord 
Mat.  26.  ;i2.  a.  1  am  risen  again,  I  will  go  before 
Mark  16. 14.  which  had  seen  him  a.  he  was  risen 

19.  so  then  a.  the  Lord  had  spoken  to  them 
Jjitke  6.  1.  on  the  second  sabbath  a.  the  first 

22.  58.  and  a.  a  little  while  another  saw  him 
59.  about  tile  space  of  an  hour  a.  another 

2.3.  26.  that  he  might  bear  it  a.  Jesus 
./ohn  13.  27.  a.  the  sop  Satan  entered  into  him 
Jicts  5.  7.  about  the  space  of  three  hours  a. 
(Jul.  3. 17.  tlie  law  which  was  430  years  a. 

2  Pet.  2.  6.  to  those  that  a.  should  live  ungodly 

AFTER  that. 
Exod  3.  20.  and  a.  that  he  will  let  you  go 
Deut.  24. 4.  shall  not  take  her  a.  that  the  is  defiled 
./«(/o»15.7.I  willbe  avenged,and  a.  that.l  will  cease 
2  Sam.  21.14.  a.lhat  God  was  intreated  for  the  land 
Job  21.  3.  a.  that  I  have  spoken,  mock  on 
Heel.  9.  3.  and  a.  that  they  go  to  the  dead 
.Icr.  31.  19.  a.  that  I  was  turned,  I  repented 
Ijuke  12.  4.  a.  that  have  no  more  that  they  can  do 

13.  9.  then  a.  thai  thou  shalt  cut  it  down 

13.  4.  a.  that  which  is  lost,  until  he  find  it 
Jicts  1.1. a.lhat  shall  they  come  forth  and  serve  me 
ICor.  15.6.  a.thaliiK  was  seen  of  above  500  at  once 
Jicv.  20.  3.  and  a.  that  he  must  be  loosed  a  little 

AFTER  (Ais. 
Gen.  23. 19.  a.  this  Abraham  buried  Sarah  his  wife 
2  Sam.  2.  J.  a.  this  David  enquired  of  the  Lord 
Jicts  15.  16.  a.  this  I  will  return,  and  build  again 

AFTERNOON. 
Judg.  19.  8.  they  tarried  till  a.  and  did  eat 

AFTERWARD,  S. 
Kzod.  11.  1.  a.  he  will  let  you  go  hence 
M'um.  31.  2.  a.  shalt  thou  be  gathered  to  thy  people 
.Judg.  7.  11.  a.  shall  thy  hands  be  strenglliened 
1  .Sum.  9.  13.  he  blesseth  ihe  sacrifice,  a.  they  eat 

24.  .5.  a.  David's  heart  smote  him 
./ub  18.  2.  mark,  and  u.  we  will  speak 
Psal.  73.  24.  guide  me,  and  a.  receive  me  to  glory 
Prov.  20.  17.  bread  of  deceit  is  sweet,  hut  a. 

24.  27.  prepare  thy  work,  and  a.  build  thy  house 

28.  2.3.  a.  shall  find  more  favour  than  he  that 

29.  1 1.  but  a  wise  man  keepeth  it  in  till  a. 
Hus.  3.  .5.  a.  shall  the  children  of  Israel  return 
Juel  2.  28.  a.  I  will  pour  out  my  Spirit  upon  all 
Mai.  4. 2.  fasted,  he  was  a.  a  hungered,  J.uke  4. 2. 

21.  32.  ye  when  ye  had  seen  it,  repented  not  a. 
Juhn  3.  14.  a.  Jesus  findeth  him  in  tlie  temple 

13.  36.  hut  thou  shalt  follow  me  a. 

1  Cor.  15.  23.  a.  they  that  are  C'hrisfs  at  his  coming 
Gal.  3.  2;}.  the  faith  that  should  a.  be  revealed 
Heb.  4.  8.  would  not  a. have  spoken  of  another  day 

12.  11.  a.  it  yicldeth  the  peaceable  fruit  of  right. 
17.  a.  when  he  would  have  inherited  the  blessinj 
.Tude  5.  a.  destroyed  them  that  believed  not 

AGAIN. 
Gen.  8.  21.  I  will  not  a.  curse,  nor  a.  smito 
15.  16.  but  they  shall  come  hither  o. 
:«).  31.  I  will  a.  feed  and  keep  thy  (lock 
3i.  26.  Judah  knew  her  a.  no  more 
F.iod.  10.  29.  said,  I  will  see  a.  thy  face  no  more 

14.  13.  ye  shall  see  them  a.  no  more  for  ever 
2:t.  4.  thou  shalt  surely  bring  it  back  to  him  a. 

JVum. 32.15.willyet  a.  leave  thcmin  the  wilderness 
Josh.  5.  2.  and  circumcise  a.  the  children  of  Israel 

2  .S'am.  16.  19.  and  a.  whom  should  I  serve 
lA'in/,/-.'<17.-22.thc  soul  of  the  child  came  into  him  a. 
2  Kings  19.  30.  shall  yet  u.  take  root  downward 
KiraW.  14.  should  we  «. break  thycominandnunls 
J^rh.  13.  21.  if  yo  do  so  a.  I  will  lay  hands  on  you 
Job  14.  14.  if  a  man  die,  shall  ho  live  a.l 

Psal.  35.6.  wilt  thou  not  revive  us  a.  that  thy 
107.  39.  a.  they  are  minislied  and  brought  low 
140.  JO.  into  deep  pita,  that  they  rise  not  up  a. 

Prov.  2.  19.  nunuthatgo  to  h(^r  return  a. 
19.  19.  if  thou  deliver  him,  thou  must  do  it  a. 

I'.ccl.  8.  14.  a.  there  be  wicked  men  to  whom 

Kiek.  26.  21.  yet  shalt  thou  never  be  found  a. 

./linos  7.  8.  I  will  not  a.  pass  by  them,  8.  2. 
8.' 14.  they  shall  fall,  and  never  rise  up  a. 

y.cch.  2.  12.  the  Loni  shall  choose  Joru.salitm  a. 

Juhn  4.  13.  drinkolh  of  this  water  shall  thirst  a. 

Hum.  8.  15.  not  received  ."piritofbondagoa.  to  fear 
9.  t  20.  who  art  thou  that  answcrest  a.J 

I'hil.  4.  4.  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  a.  I  say,  rejoice 

I  fell.  I.  .'>.  (z.  I  will  be  to  hirn  a  Father,  and  he  shall 
2.  13.  and  a.  I  will  put  my  trust  in  him 

1  Pel.  1.  3.  hath  begotten  us  a.  to  «  lively  hojm 

See  HoRM,   Rrino,    Bkouuut,   Ccmk,    Ti;at<, 
Turn  KB. 


AGR 

AGAINST. 
Oen.  16. 12.  his  hand  will  be  a.  every  man 
Eiod.  7.  15.  stand  by  the  river's  brink  a.  he  corn* 
/>TO.  20. 3.  I'll  set  my  face  a. that  man,  Deut.  29.20 
2A'(wg-»  16.ll.so  Urijanmade  it  a. king  Ahaz  camr 
19.  22.  a.  whom  hast  thou  exalted  thy  voice  1 
Isa.  40. 1 10.  the  Lord  will  come  a.  thf  strong  hand 
Jer.  25.  13.  which  1  have  jironounced  a.  it 
Ezck.  13.  20.  behold,  I  am  a.  your  ])illowB 
Mat.  10. 35.  to  set  a  man  a.  his  father,  Luke  12. 53. 
12.  30.  he  that  is  not  with  me,  is  a.  mo 
Lulce  2.  34.  for  a  sign  which  shall  bo  spoken  a. 
14.  31.  that  Cometh  a.  him  with  20,000  to 
Acts  19.  36.  these  things  cannot  be  spoken  a. 
23.  22.  this  sect  is  every  where  spoken  a. 
See  Anothkr,  God,  Him,  Jerv's.\lem,  Israel, 
Lord,  Me,  Over,  Thee,  Them,  Us,  You. 
AGATE,  S. 
Eiod.  28.  19.  third  row,  an  a.  an  amethyst,  39.  12 
Isa.  54.  12.  I  will  make  thy  windows  of  a. 
Euk.  27.  16.  Syria  occupied  in  thy  fairs  with  a. 

AGE 
Signifies,  [1]    The  whole  cnntinuance  of  a  man's 
life,  Cen.  47.  28.     [21  'J'imrs  past,  present,  or 
to  come,  Eph.  2.  7.  |  3.  5.     [3]  Ji  time  apt  for 
conception,  Heb.  11. 11. 
Gen.  47.  28.  the  whole  a.  of  Jacob  \va*  147  years 
48.  10.  the  eyes  of  Israel  were  dim  for  a. 
JVum.  8.25.  from  the  a.  of  50  years  cease  waiting 
I  .Sam.  2.  33.  shall  die  in  the  fiowcr  of  their  a. 
IKiiigs  I4.4.Ahijah's  eyes  were  set  by  reason  of  a. 

1  Chron.  23.  3.  Levites  numbered  from  Ihe  a.  of  30. 
24.  from  the  a.  of  twenty  years  and  upward 

2  Chron.  36.  17.  or  on  him  that  sloo))ed  for  a. 
.lob  a.  26.  shalt  come  to  thy  grave  in  a  full  a. 

8.  8.  enquire,  I  pray  thee,  of  the  former  a. 
11.  17.  thy  o.  shall  be  clearer  thnn  noon-day 

I'sal.  39.  5.  my  a.  is  as  nothing  before  thee 
Isa.  38.  12.  my  a.  is  departed  and  removed 
Zech.  8.  4.  every  man  with  bis  staff  for  a. 
Mark  5.42.she  was  of  Ihe  a.of  12  years,  J.tike  8.42 
J^uke  2.  36.  Anna  a  jiroiihetess  was  of  a  great  a. 

t  52.  Jesus  increased  in  wisdom  and  a. 
3.  23.  Jesus  began  to  be  about  30  years  of  o. 
./ohn  9.  21.  he  is  of  o.  ask  him,  23. 
Jlcts  13.  t36.  David  had  in  his  own  a.  served  God 

1  Cur.  7.  36.  if  she  pass  the  flower  of  her  a. 

14.  t  20.  in  understanding  be  of  a  ripe  a. 
F.ph.i.  t  13.  till  we  come  to  o.  of  fulness  of  Chri«l 
i-/eb.5.  14.  strong  meat  belongs  In  them  of  full  a. 

11.  11.  Sarah  was  delivered  when  she  was  past  a 

Sec  Old,  Stricken. 
AGES. 
Psal.  14.").  t  13.  thy  kingdom  a  kingdom  of  all  o. 
lsa.'2Vi.  t4.  in  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  the  rock  of  a. 
Kpk.2.  7.  that  in  the  a.  to  come  he  might  shew' 
3.  3.  which  in  other  a.  was  not  made  known 
21.  to  him  be  glory  in  the  church  through  all  a 
Col.  1.  26.  mvstery  which  hath  been  hid  Irom  a. 
AtJED. 

2  Sam.  19.  '.S.  Barzillai  was  a  very  a.  man 

.fob  12.  20.  helakelh  away  the  understanding  of  • 

15.  10.  the  grey-headed  and  very  a.  men 
29.  8.  and  the  a.  arose  and  stood  up 

32.  9.  neither  do  the  n.  understand  judgment 
./rr.  6.  11.  the  a.  with  him  that  is  full  of  days 
7Vt.  2.  2.  that  the  a.  men  be  sober,  grave,  sound 

3.  Ihe  a.  womeu,that  they  be  in  behaviour 
Philem.  9.  being  such  a  one  as  Paul  the  a. 
AGO. 

1  Sam.  9.  20.  the  asses  that  were  lost  three  days  a. 
■2  Kings  19.  2.5.  thou  nol  heard  long  a.  Isa.  37.  28 
Ezra  5. 11.  house  that  was  budded  many  years  o. 
Isa.  22.  11.  respect  to  him  that  fashioned  it  long  a. 
.l/.jM1.21.wouldhav(^repenledlonga./,uA(;10.l3. 
Mark  9.  21.  how  long  a.  .lince  ihis  came  to  liim  ? 
Jlcts  10.  30.  4  days  u.  I  was  fo.'sling  fitil  this  hour 

15.  17.  ye  know  how  thai  u  good  while  a. 

2  Cur.  8. 10.  hut  also  to  be  forward  a  year  a. 

9.  2.  that  Achaiii  was  ready  a  year  a. 

12.  2.  I  knew  a  man  above  fuurteen  years  a. 

AGONE. 
I  Sam.  30.  13.  because  Ihree  days  a.  I  fell  sick 

ACt)NY. 
I.ukc  22.44.boing  in  an  a. he  prayed  more  earnestly 

AGREE 

Signifies,  [1]    To  bargain   with,   Mat.  20.2,  13. 

[2]   To  ajijiriivr,  or  give  cunsrnt  to.  Ails  .5.  40. 

[3)  To  be  like,  Mark  14.  70.     [4]   To  eon.'tpira, 

or  resolve,  John  9.  22. 

AGREE,  ED,  ETII. 

.Imns  3.3. can  two  walk  together  except  they  he  a.? 

Vat.  5.  2.5.  a.  with  thine  odversary  quickly 

18.  19.  if  Iwu  of  you  shall  a.  oil  earth,  touching 

20.  2.  wliin  he  hud  a.  with  labourers  for  a  peno) 

i:t.  didht  thou  nol  a.  with  me  for  a  penny  ? 

Mark  14.  56.  their  witness  a.  not  together,  59. 

70.  art  a  Galiluan,  and  thy  speech  a.  thereto 

f.vkr  '■).  36.  taken  out  of  the  new,  a.  not  with  oM 

John  9.  22.  llio  Jews  had  a.  already  if  any  luan 


ALI 

jleU  5.  9  )•  iiw  ii  it  that  ye  have  a.  to  tompt 
40.  and  to  hiin  they  a.  and  when  they  huJ  called 
15.  15.  and  to  this  a.  the  words  ol'  the  proi)hot 
23.  20.  the  Jewa  have  a.  to  desire  thee  tu  bring 
28. 25.  when  they  a.  not  among  themselves 

1  John  5.  8.  spirit,  water,  blood,  these  a.  in  one 
Rev.  17.  17.  a.  to  give  their  kingdom  to  the  beast 

AGREEMENT. 
S  Kings  18. 31.  make  an  a.  by  a  present,  Isa.  36. 16. 
Isa.  28.  15.  yo  have  said,  with  hell  are  we  at  a. 

18.  and  your  a.  with  hell  shall  not  stand 
Dan.  11.  6.  to  the  kii;g  of  the  north,  to  make  an  a. 

2  Cor.  6. 16.  what  a.  hath  the  temple  of  God  with 

AGKOUND. 
Seta  27.  41.  two  seas  met,  they  ran  the  ship  a 

AGUE. 
Leo.  26. 16. 1  will  appoint  terror  and  the  burning  a. 

AH. 
Fsal.  35.  25.  nor  say,  a.  so  would  we  have  it 
/.ja.l.4.a.sinful  nation,a people  ladenwitli  iniquity 

24.  a.  I  will  ease  me  of  mhie  adversaries 
Jer.  1.  6.  then  said  J,  a.  Lord  God,  I  cannot  speak 
4. 10.  a.  Lord  God,  thou  hustdeceived  thispeopl 
14.  13.  a.  Lord  G(  d,  the  prophets  say  to  them 
22.  IS.  a.  brother,  a.  sister,  a.  Lord,  a.  his  glory 
32.  17.  a.  Lord,  thou  hast  made  the  heaven 
34.  5.  they  will  lament  thee,  saying,  a.  Lord 
Ezek.  4. 14.  a.  Lord,  my  soul  hath  not  been  polluted 
9.8.  a.  Lord,  wilt  thou  destroy  the  residue  of  Israel 
11.  13.  a.  Lord,  wilt  thou  make  a  full  end  of  the 
20.  49.  a.  Lord,  they  say  of  me,  doth  he  not  speak 
2L  15.  a.  the  sword  is  made  bright,  it  is  wrapt  uji 
Mark  15.  29.  a.  thou  that  destroyest  the  temple 

AHA. 
Psal.  35.  21.  they  said,  a.  our  eye  hath  seen  it 
40.  15.  let  them  be  desolate,  that  say  unto  me  a. 
70.  3.  let  them  be  turned  back  that  say  a.  a. 
Isa.  44.  16.  o.  I  am  warm,  I  have  seen  the  fire 
Ezek.  25.  3.  saidst  a.  against  my  sanctuary 
26.  2.  because  Tyrus  hath  said,  a.  she  is  broken 
36.  2.  a.  the  ancient  places  are  ours 

AIDED. 
Judg.  9.  24.  a.  him  in  the  killing  of  his  brethren 

AILED,  ETH. 
Gen.  2].  17.  what  a.  thee,  Hagarf  fear  not 
Jadg.  18.  23.  they  said  to  Micah,  what  a.  thee  ? 

1  Sam.  11.5.  Saul  said,  what  a.  the  peojile  to  weep? 

2  Sam.  14.  5.  the  king  said,  what  a.  2  h'ingsG.  28. 
Psal.  114.  5.  what  a.  thee,  O  sea,  (hat  thou  fledst? 
Isa.  22.  1.  what  a.  thee  now,  that  thou  art  gone  up 

AIR. 
2  .Sam.  21.  10.  nor  birds  of  the  a.  to  rest  on  them 
Jab  41.  16.  that  no  a.  can  come  between  them 
Prov.  30.  19.  the  way  of  an  eagle  in  the  a. 
Eccl.  10.20.  a  bird  of  the  a.  shall  carry  the  voice 
JUat.  8.  20.  and  the  birds  of  the  a.  have  nests 
1.3.  32.  the  birds  of  the  a.  come  and  lodge  in  the 


ALI 

L,am.  5.  2.  and  our  houses  are  turned  to  a. 
Uph.  2.  12.  o.  from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel 
Heb.  11.34.  waxed  valiant  in  fight,  turned  to  flight 
the  armies  ot  a 
ALIENATE,  ED. 
Isa.  1.  t4.  have  forsaken  the  Lord,, they  are  a. 
Eiek.  23.  17.  her  mind  was  a.  from  them 
Id.  my  mind  was  a.  from  her  as  from  her  sister 

22.  thy  lovers  from  whom  thy  mind  is  a.  28. 
48.  14.  they  shall  not  a.  the  first  fruits  of  the  land 

Eph.  4. 18.  'I.  from  the  life  of  God  thro'  ignorance 
Cut.  1.  21.  and  you  that  were  sometimes  a.  enemies 

ALIKE 
Signifies,  [1]  Without  any  difference,  Rom.  14.  5. 
[2J  .'JJtcr  one  and  l/ie  same  manner,  Psal.  33. 1.5, 
[3J  K(jually  truubltsome,  Prov.  27.  15. 
Uiut.  12.  22.  unclean  and  clean  eat  a.  15.  22. 
1  Sam.  30.  21:  that  tarrieth,  they  shall  part  a. 
Job  21.  26.  they  shall  lie  down  a.  in  the  dust 
Psal.  33.15.  he  fashioneth  their  hearts  a.  considers 
139.  12.  darkness  and  light  are  both  a.  to  thee 
Prov.  20.  10.  both  are  a.  abomination  to  tiie  Lord 
27. 15.  dropping  and  a  contentious  woman  are  a 
Ecel.  9.  2.  all  things  come  a.  to  all ;  one  event 

11.  6.  whether  they  both  shall  be  a.  good 
Rom.  14.  5.  another  esteemeth  every  day  a. 

ALIVE 

Is  taken  [1]  Jfaturalltj,  Gen.  43.  27.     [2j  .Super- 

naturally,  being  raised  from  the  dead,  Luke  24 

23.  [3]  Hpiritually,  when  a  person  is  made 
alive  to  God  by  his  special  grace,  and  thepoic- 
erful  operation  of  his  .Spirit,  working  with  thi 
?««r</-o/ ^j'eti,  Luke  15. 24,32.  [4]  Opinionative- 
ly,  when  persons  apprehend  themselves  to  be 
righteous,  although  in  truth  they  are  not, 
Rom.  7.  9.     [5J  Eternally,  Rev.  1.  18. 

Gen.  7.23.  Noah  only  remained  a.  and  they  in  ark 

12.  12.  they  will  kill  me,  and  save  thee  a. 
50.  20.  as  it  is  this  day,  to  save  much  jieople  a. 

Eiod.  1. 17.  but  saved  the  men-children  a.  18. 
22.  and  every  daughter  ye  shall  save  a. 

22.  4.  if  the  theft  be  found  in  his  hand  a. 
J^ev.  10. 16.  he  was  angry  with  Aaron'ssons  left  a 

14.  4.  command  to  take  tw  o  birds  a.  and  clean 

16.  10.  the  scape-goat  shall  be  presented  a. 

26.  36.  are  left  a.  of  you,  I  will.send  a  faintness 
JVum.  16.  33.  they  went  down  a.  into  the  jiit 

21.  35.  smote  Og,  till  there  was  none  left  a. 

22.  :J3.  I  had  slain  thee,  and  saved  her  a. 

31.  15.  have  ye  saved  all  the  women  a.  ? 
Dcut.  4.  4.  are  a.  every  one  of  you  this  day 

5.  3.  who  are  all  of  us  a.  here  this  day 

6.  24.  I  hat  he  might  preserve  us  a.  at  this  day 
20.  16.  shall  save  a.  nothing  that  bieatheth 

32.  39. 1  kill,  and  I  make  a.  1  iSam.  2.  6. 
hsh.  2.  13.  that  ye  will  save  a.  my  father 
6.  25.  Joshua  saved  Rahab  the  harlot  a. 


branches  thereof,  Mark  i'.  32.    Luke  9.  58.     8.  23.  and  the  king  of  Ai  they  took  a. 


jff<s22.  23.  and  as  they  threw  dust  into  the  a 
1  Cor.  9.  26.  so  fight  I,  not  as  one  that  beateth  the  a 
14.  9.  for  ye  sliall  speak  into  the  a. 
Eph.  2.  2.  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  a. 

1  Thess.  4. 17.  caught  up  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  a. 
Rev.  9.  2.  the  sun  and  the  a.  were  darkened 

16.  17.  the  angel  poured  out  his  vial  into  the  a 

iee  Fowls. 

ALARM. 

JVttW!.  10.  5.  when  ye  blow  an  a  then  the  camps,  6. 

7.  you  shall  blow,  but  shall  not  sound  an  a. 

9.  and  if  ye  go  to  war,  then  ye  shall  blow  an  a 

2  Chron.  13. 12.  trumpets  to  cry  an  a.  against  you 
Isa.  18.  t  9.  a.  is  fallen  on  thy  summer-fruits 
Jer.  4.  l9.  thou  hast  heard,  O  my  soul,  the  a.  ofwar 

49.  2.  the  day  is  come,  I  will  cause  an  a.  of  war 
Joel  2.  1.  and  sound  an  a.  in  my  holy  mountain 
Zeph.  1.  16.  a  day  of  a.  against  the  fenced  cities 

ALAS. 
•Vam.  12.  11.  A.aron  said  to  Moses,  a.  my  lord 

24.  23.  a.  who  shall  liye  when  God  doth  this  ? 
Josh.  7.  7.  .Toshua  said,  a.  O  Lord,  why  hast  thou 
Judg.  6.  22.  a.  because  I  have  seen  an  angel 

11.  35.  a-  daughter,  thou  hast  brought  me  low 

1  Kings  13.  30.  mourned  over  him,  a.  my  brother 

2  Kings  3.  10.  a.  that  the  Lord  hath  called  these 
6.  5.  he  cried  a.  master,  for  it  was  borrowed 

15.  servant  said,  a.  my  master,  how  shall  we  do? 
Jer.  .30.  7.  a.  for  that  day  is  great,  none  is  like  it 
Ezek.  6.  11.  stamp  with  thy  foot,  and  say  a. 
.Toel  1.  1.5.  a.  for  the  day,  for  the  day  of  the  Lord 
Amos  5.  16.  they  shall  say  in  the  highways,  a. 
Reo.  18.  10.  a.  a.  that  groat  city,  Babylon,  J6,  19. 

ALBEIT. 
K:ek.  13.  7.  the  Lord  saith,  a.  I  have  not  spoken 
P/iilem.  19.  a.  I  sav  not,  how  thou  owest  to  me 

ALIEN,  S. 
Exod.  18.  3.  I  have  been  an  a.  in  a  strange  land 
Dent.  14.  21.  or  thou  mayest  sell  it  to  an  a. 
Job  19.  15.  I  am  an  a.  in  their  sight 
Psal.  69.  8.  I  am  an  a.  to  my  mother's  children 
laa.  01.  5.  BOM  of  the  a.  shall  be  your  plowmea 


14.  10.  the  Lord  hath  kejit  me  a.  as  he  said 
Judg.  8.  19.  if  ye  had  saved  them  a.  I  would  net 

21.  14.  gave  them  wives  which  they  had  saved  a. 
1  Sam.  15.  H.  he  took  .Agagthe  kiiigof  Amalek  a. 

27.  9.  David  left  neither  man  nor  woman  a. 

1  Kings  18.  5.  to  save  the  horses  and  mules  a. 
20.]8.whether  come  for  jieaceor  wartake  tliema. 
21.  1.').  for  Naboth  is  not  a.  but  dead 

2  Kings  5.  7.  am  I  God,  to  kill  and  make  a.  ? 
7.  4.  if  they  save  us  a.  we  shall  live 

12.  when  they  come  out  we  shSU  catch  them  a. 

10. 14.  he  said  take  them  a.  and  they  took  them  a. 
2  Chron.  25.  12.  and  other  tetw  thousand  left  a. ' 
Psal.  30.  3.  O  Lord,  thou  hast  kept  me  a.  that  I 
Prov.  1. 12.  let  us  swallow  them  up  a.  as  the  grave 
Jer.  4'.>  \\.  the  fatherless  I  will  preserve  a. 
Ezek.  13.  18.  will  ye  save  the  souls  a.  that  come 
10.  to  save  the  souls  a.  that  should  not  live 

18.27.  doth  what  is  right,  he  shall  save  his  soul  a. 
Dan.  5.  19.  and  whom  he  would,  he  kejit  a. 
Hab.  3.  t,2.  O  Lord,  preserve  a.  thy  work 
Mark  16.  11.  when  they  heard  that  he  was  a. 
I.uke  15.  24.  for  this  my  son  w.asdead  and  is  a.  32. 

24.  23.  they  had  seen  angels  who  said  he  was  a. 
./icts  1.  3.  he  showed  himself  a.  after  his  passion 

9.  41.  had  called  the  widows,  presented  her  a. 
20.  12.  and  they  brought  the  young  man  a. 

25.  19.  Jesus,  whom  Paul  affirmed  to  be  a. 
Rom.G.  ll.buta.toGod  through  Christ  our  Lord 

l5.  to  God,  as  those  that  are  a.  from  the  dead 
7.  9.  for  I  was  a.  without  the  law  once,  but  when 
1  Cor.  15.  22.  so  in  Christ  shall  all  be  ni.idc  a. 

1  Thess.  4.  15.  that  we  which  are  a.  and  remain,  17. 

2  Tim.  2.  t26.  who  are  taken  a.  by  him  at  his  will 
Rev.  1.  18.  and  behold  I  am  a.  for  evermore 

2.  8.  ihe  first  and  last,  which  was  dead,  and  is  a. 

19.  20.  these  were  both  cast  a.  into  a  lake  of  fire 

Keep  Ai-ive;  see  Kkkp. 

Yet  ALIVE. 

Gen.  43. 7.  asked  us,  saying,  is  your  ftither  yet  a.  7 

27.  is  he  yet  a.  ?  \\  28.  he  is  well,  he  is  yet  a. 

45. 36.  tbey  told  bim,  saying,  Joaeph  is  y«(  a.  23. 


ALL 

Gen.  46.30.  now  let  me  die,  because  thou  art  yet  a 
Exod.i.lS.  let  me  go  and  see  whether  they  be  yet  a 
Veut,  31.27.  while  1  am  yet  a.  with  you  this  da> 
2  Sam.  12.  18^  while  the  child  was  yet  a.  21,  22. 
18. 14.  while  he  was  yet  a.  in  the  midst  of  the  oal 
1  Kings  20.  32.  is  he  yet  a.  ?  he  is  my  brother 
Eccl.  4. 2. more  than  the  living  which  are  yet  a. 
Ezek.  7.  13.  which  is  sold,  altho'  they  were  yet  a 
jUai.  27.63.  this  deceiver  said,  while  he  was  acta. 

ALL 
Signifies  [1]  A;»fry  creature, Prov.  16. 4.  Psal.  119, 
91.     [2J  Every  man,  or  person,  2  Cor.  5  10. 
[3]  Plentiful,  or  perfect,  Rom.  15.  13.  1  Cor 
13.  2.     [4]  Some  of  all  nations  and  degrees,  1 
Tim.  2.  4.  Tit.  2.  11.     [5]  Many,  or  the  great- 
est part,  Mat.  3.  5.  Phil.  2.  21.     [6]  Those  that 
believe,  John  12.  32. 
Oe7i.  20.  7.  thou  shalt  surely  die,  thou  and  a.  thine 
24.  36.  to  him  hath  he  given  a.  that  he  hath 
31.  43.  Luban  said,  a.  that  thou  seest  is  mine 
37.3.Jacob  loved  Joseph  more  than  a.  his  children 
39.  3.  the  Lord  made  a.  he  did  to  prosper 
42.  11.  we  are  a.  one  man's  sons,  we  are  true  men 
45.  11.  lest  thou  and  a.  thou  hast  come  to  poverty 
48.  15.  the  God  which  fed  me  a.  my  life  long 
Exod.20. 1 1.  made  heaven,earth,sea,and  a.  in  them 
33. 19.  I'll  make  a.  my  goodness  pass  before  thee 
J^am.  19. 14.  a.  that  come  into  the  tent  are  unclean 
23.  13.  see  the  utmost,  and  shalt  not  see  them  a. 
Deut.  5.  3.  who  are  a.  of  us  here  alive  this  day 

13.  six  days  shalt  thou  labour  and  do  a.  thy  work 
29.10.ye  stand  a.  of  you  before  the  Lord  your  God 
Josh.  21.  45.  failed  not,  a.  came  to  pass,  ZJ.  14. 

1  Sam.a.i.  one  plague  was  on  you  a. and  your  lorda 
9.  19.  I  will  tell  thee  a.  that  is  in  thy  heart 
16.  11.  Samuel  said,  are  here  a.  thy  children  1 
30.  a.  shalt  overtake,  and  without  fail  recover  a. 

2  6'a7«.  16.4.  thine  ar.e  a.  that  pertained  toMephibo. 
1  Kings  14. 10.  taketh  away  dung  till  it  be  a.  gone 

16.  25.  Omri  did  worse  than  a.  before  him 
20.  4.  my  lord,  I  am  thine,  and  a.  that  I  have 
1  Chron.  It  3.  the  sons  of  Uzzi,  a.ofthem  chief  men 
Ezra  8.  22.  wrath  is  against  a.  that  forsake  him 
JVeh.  9.  6.  Lord,  thou  j)reservest  them  a.  and  haat 
.Tob  16.  2.  miserable  comforters  are  ye  a. 
34.  t  13.'  who  hath  disposed  a.  of  it 

19.  for  they  a.  are  the  work  of  his  hands 
Psal.  14.  3.  are  a.  gone  aside,  a.  become  filthy 
22. 17. 1  may  tell  a.  my  bones,  they  stare  upon  me 
34.  19.  the  Lord  delivereth  him  out  of  them  a. 
3fi.  9.  Lord,  a.  my  desire  is  before  thee 
44.  17.  a.  this  is  come  upon  us,  yet  have  we  not 
69.  19.  mine  adversaries  are  a.  before  thee 
104.27.  these  wait  a.  on  thee.that  thou  mayest  give 
119.  91.  they  continue,  for  a.  are  thy  servants 
Prov.  1. 14.  cast  in  thy  lot,  let  us  a.  have  one  purse 
22.  2.  the  Lord  is  the  maker  of  them  a. 
Eccl.  3.  20.  a.  are  of  dust,  a.  turn  to  dust  again 

12.  1 13.  a.  that  hath  been  heard  is,  fear  God 
Isa.  64.  9.  behold,  see,  we  are  a.  thy  people 
fer.  9.  2.  they  be  a.  adulterers,  Hos.  7.  4. 
Ezek.  7. 16.  a.  of  them  mourning,  every  one  for 

20.  40.  a.  of  them  in  the  land  shall  serve  me 
37.  22.  and  one  king  shall  be  king  to  them  a. 
40.  4.  son  of  man,  declare  o.  that  thou  seeat 
43. 11.  shew  them  a.  the  forms,, a.  the  ordinances 
Dan.  1.  19.  among  them  a.  none  found  like  Daniel 
Hos.  5.  2.  tho'  I  have  been  a  rebuker  of  them  a. 
Jimos  9. 1.  and  cut  them  in  the  head  a.  of  them 
-VaA.  3. 1.  woe  to  the  bloody  city,  it  is  a.  full  of  lies 
JV/a/.2.10.  have  we  not  a.  one  Father,  hath  not  one 
Mat.  5.  18.  pass  from  the  law,  till  a.  be  fulfilled 

13.  56.  and  his  sisters,  are  they  not  a.  with  us? 
22.  23.  whose  wife  shall  she  be,  for  they  a.  had  her 

Mark  12.  33.  is  more  than  a.  burnt-offerings 
44.  she  cast  in  a.  even  a.  that  she  had, /,tt/fe21.4. 

Duke  4.  7.  if  thou  worship  me,  a.  shall  be  thine 
6.  10.  looking  round  about  on  them  a.  he  said 
8.  40.  for  they  were  a.  waiting  for  him 
13.  3.  except  ye  repent,  ye  shall  a.  likewise  perith 

15.  31.  he  said,  son,  a.  that  I  have  is  thine 

17.  10.  so  ye,  when  ye  have  done  a.  say,  we  ar« 
13.  22.  sell  a.  that  thou  hast,  and  distribute  to  poor 

./ohn  1.  16.  of  his  fulness  have  a.  we  received 
4.  39.  woman  said,  he  told  me  a.  that  ever  I  did 
13.  10.  Jesus  saith,  ye  are  clean,  but  not  a. 
17.21.  thatthey  a.  may  be  one,  as  thou  art  in  ni« 

J9cts  4.  33.  and  great  grace  was  upon  them  a. 
10.  33.  we  aie  a.  here  present  before  the  Lord 
11. 23.  ho  e.xhorted  them  a.  to  cleave  to  the  Lord 

16.  28.  do  thyself  no  harm,  we  are  a.  here 

22.  3.  zealous  towards  God,. as  ye  a.  are  this  day 

26.  29.  but  also  a.  that  hear  me  this  day, were  both 

27.  35.  Paul  gave  thanks  in  presence  of  them  a 
Rom.  1. 8. 1  thank  God  thro'  Jesus  Christ  for  you  a. 

8.  32.  but  delivered  him  up  for  us  a.  liow  shall  he 
1  Cor.  3.  22.  a.  are  yours,  and  ye  are  Christ's 

15.10.but  I  laboured  more  abundantly  than  thejr  a. 
Gal.  3.22.  the  scripture  hath  concluded  a.  undersin 
Phil.  4  18  but  I  have  a.  and  abound,  I  am  AiU 


ALL 

Zntst.^.  Tfi-  that  they  a.  might  be  damned,  who 
S  Tim.  3.  11.  out  of  them  a.  thu  Lord  dein  ored  mo 
Jieb.  1. 14.  ate  they  not  a.  ministering  spirits,  sent 

12.  8.  chat^tisenienl,  wiiereofo.  are  partukcri 
1  Pet.  3.  8.  tinatly,  bo  ye  a.  of  one  mind 
S  Pet.  3.  St.  that  a.  sliould  come  to  rejientunce 
1  John  a.  lit.  manifest  that  tliey  were  not  a.  of  us 
Above  All,;  see  Abovk. 
jiccordiitg  to  ALL. 
Gen.  G.  22.  Noah  did  ac.  to  a.  CJod  commanded,"..'). 
Etoi.'il.ll.according  to  a.  the  Lord  commanded, 
36.  1.  I  39.  3-.>,  42.  |  4U.  IG.    JV«m.  2.  34. 
\S.  20.  I  9.  5.  I  29.  40.    VeiU.  1.  3,  41. 
Josk.  11.  !£<.  took  the  land  ac.  to  a.  the  Lord  said 
1  Kings  6.  ad.  given  rest  ac.  to  a.  that  he  promised 
11.37.  shall  reign  ac.  to  a.  that  tiiysoiil  desireih 
22.53.  ac.  to  a.  his  father  had  done,  2  Kings  23.32, 
37.  I  24.  9, 19.  2  Chron.  20.  4.  |  27.  2. 
S  Kings  10.  30.  done  ac.  to  a.  that  was  in  my  heart 
18.  3.  ac.  to  a.  Uavid  his  father  did,  2  CAr.29.2. 

1  Chrun.  17.  l.'i.  ac.  to  a.  these  words,  ac.  to  a.  this 

2  Ckron.  2 1 16.  we  will  cut  wood  ac.  to  a.  thy  need 
«V«A.5.19.think  on  me  for  good, ac.fo  a.  I  have  done 
Jir.  21.2.  deal  with  u?ac.  to  a.  Ids  wondrous  works 

42.  20.  ac.  to  a.  that  the  Lord  shall  say,  will  we  do 
50. 29.  ac.  to  a.  that  Babylon  hath  done,  do  to  her 
Bzek.  24.  24.  ac.  to  a.  that  he  hath  done,  shall  ye  do 
Oan.^.lG.ac.lo  a.thv  righteousness,  I  beseech  thee 

Jiftcr  ALL. 
Deut.  20.  18.  not  to  do  after  a.  their  abominations 
S  Chr.  34. 21.  have  not  kept  the  word  to  do  after  a. 
£:ro9.13.  after  a.  that  is  come  onus  for  our  deeds 
Kzek.llj.'i'.i. after  a.  thy  wiii;kednes.'5,wo,wo  to  tlioe 
Mat.r^.'.a. after  a.  these  things  do  the  Geiili.es  seek 
/'Aii.2.2(j.for  he  longed  after  you  a.  and  was  full  of 

.fit  ALL. 
Exod.  5.  23.  nor  hast  delivered  thy  peojile  at  a. 
a.  23.  if  thou  afflict,  and  they  cry  at  a.  to 
/^o.  27.  13.  but  if  he  will  at  a.  redeem  it 
A'uwi.22.38.  ha%'e  I  now  any  power  at  a.  to  say  any 
Jjeut.  8. 19.  if  thou  do  at  a.  forget  the  Lord 
1  .Satn.  20.  6.  if  thy  father  at  a.  miss  me,  then  say 
J  Kings  9.6.  if  ye  shall  at  a.  turn  from  following  me 
Jer.  U.  12.  but  they  shall  not  save  them  at  a. 
/?:<!*.  20.32.comcth  in  your  mind  shall  not  be  at  a. 
Has.  11.7.  most  high,  none  at  a.  would  exalt  him 
JUic.  1.  10.  weep  ye  not  at  a.  roll  thyself  in  dust 
^ah.  1.  3.  Lord  will  not  at  a.  acquit  the  wicked 
Jokn  19.  11.  thou  couldst  h.ive  no  [lOwer  at  a. 
1  Oor.  16.  12.  but  his  will  was  not  at  a.  to  come 

1  .hhn  1.  5.  and  in  him  is  no  darkness  at  a. 
Rrn.  18. 21.  Babylim  shall  bo  found  no  more  at  a. 

22.tlie  sound  shall  be  heard  no  more  at  a.  in  thee 
iirfore  ALL. 
Gcn.23.18.ftc/wrc  a.that  went  in  at  the  gates  of  city 
/<«ii.  10.  3.  before  a.  the  people  I  will  be  glorified 

2  Chr.  33.  7.  Jerusalem  wlijch  I  have  chosen  hef.  a. 
./cr.3.3.0.shall  be  to  me  an  honour  before  a.  nations 
Mat.  26.  70.  but  he  denied  before  iliem  a.  saying 
Oal.  2.  14.  I  said  to  Peter  before  them  a. 

1  TVot.  5.  20.  them  that  sin  rebuke  before  a.  that 

For  ALL. 
J^'um.  8.  IP.  I  have  taken  Levifes/or  a.  firsl-horn 
/>cul.22.5. /or  a.that  do  so  arcabominatioii,25.1f). 

31.  18.  hide  my  face  in  that  day  for  a.  the  evils 
Psal.  lO..').  as/or  a.  his  enemies,  he  pulTeth  at  them 

78.  32. /.r  a.  this  they  sinned  still,  believed  not 

116. 12.  what  render  to  the  Lord/»r  n.hisbenefiis 
Eccl.  5.  9.  the  profit  of  the  earth  is  for  a. 

11.9.  /or  n.these  Ond  will  bring  thee  to  judgment 
fsa.  40. 2.  she  hath  received  double  for  a.  b"r  sins 
F.zek.  6.  II.  nias  for  a.  the  evil  abominutiona 

20.43. and  ye  shall  loathe  your.selves/or(i.thi^  evils 
/>on.4.2l. fruit  was  much,  and  in  it  was  moat /or  a. 
/.!(*«  3.  10.  for  n.  ,thp  evils  Herod  had  done 

20.  ;18.  God  of  the  living, /or  a.  live  unto  him 
Aoni.  3.  23./i'ira.  have  sinned  and  come  short  of 

2  Cor.  .5.  14.  if  one  i\\c>\  for  a.  then  were  ail  dead 
Phil.  2.  21; /«r  a.  seek  their  own,  not  the  things 

1  Tim.  2.  6.  who  gave  himself  a  ransom  for  a. 
Hrh.  8.  11. /or  a.  shall  know  me.  from  the  least 

10.  10.  offering  of  the  body  of  Christ  once /or  a. 
From  ALL. 
/7/"n.  48  16.  nngel  who  redeemed  me  from  a.  evil 
Jy:v.  10.  30.  that  ye  may  be  rlcan/rom  a.  your  sins 
Psal.  34.  4.  and  d'  livcri'd  mn  from  a.  my  fo rirs 
Jer.  18.  m.  from  a.  lands  whither  ho  had  driven 
Dan.  7.7.  it  was  diveme/rom  n.  the  boasts  before  it 
//f^.4.4.God  rested  the  seventh  day /rom  a.  works 

In  ALL. 
Cm.  21.  12.  in  a.  th  it  Rarali  haih  said,  hearken 

52.  fJod  is  with  tli<'e  in  a.  that  thou  dost 
Deat.  29.  9.  that  ye  may  prospir  in  a.  that  ye  do 
.fo.ih.  22.  2.  and  hive  obeyed  my  voice  in  a.  that 

2  .Sam.  23.  39.  mighty  men,  thirty  and  seven  in  a. 
I  Kings  2.  3.  thou  muynst  prosper  in  a.  tbnu  doit 

26.  afnicied  in  a.  niv  father  was  afflicted 
]  C^ron.  2.  rt.  sons  of  Zerah,  five  of  them  in  a. 
AVA.fl.  33.  thou  art  just  in  a.  tlint  is  brought  on  us 
f  at.  10.  4.  God  is  not  in  a.  his  thuufbln 
10 


ALL 

Proi'.  3.  0.  in  a.  thy  ways  acknowledge  him 
Isa.  39.2.  nothing  in  a.  his  dominion  shewed  not 
63.  9.  in  a.  their  afflictions  he  was  afflicted 
Jer.  38.  9.  have  done  evil  in  a.  they  have  done 
F.zek.  21.  24.  in  a.  your  doings  your  sins  appear 
Hos.  12.  8.  in  a.  my  labours  shall  tind  no  iniquity 
.'lets  27.  37.  we  were  in  a.  in  the  ship  27C  souls 
Horn.  8.  37.  in  a.  thtso  more  than  conquerors 

1  Cor.  12.  6.  the  same  God  worketb  all  in  a. 
15.  28.  put  all  under,  that  God  may  be  all  in  a. 

F.ph.  1.  23.  the  fulness  of  him  that  tilleth  all  in  a. 
Col.  3.  11.  but  Christ  is  all  and  in  a. 

2  'J'/iess.  1. 10.  to  be  admired  in  a.  them  that  believe 
Heb.  13.  4.  marriage  is  honourable  iii  a. 

2  Pet.  3.  16.  as  also  in  a.  his  epistles,  speaking 
All  JV(>/i«;  see  Nioht. 
Of  ALL. 
Gen.  6. 2.  took  them  wives  of  a-  which  they  chose 

14.  20.  he  gave  him  tithes  of  a.  Neb.  7.  2. 

28.22.  of  a.  thou  shall  give  me,  1  will  give  tenth 
Exod.  9.  4.  nothing  die  of  a.  is  children's  of  Israel 
Josh.a.'io.nol  a  word  of  a.  which  Moses  command. 
fudg.  13.  13.  of  a.  I  said  to  the  woman,  beware 
2  Sam.  16. 21.  shall  hands  of  a.  with  thee  he  strong 
2  Kings  9.  5.  and  Jehu  said,  to  which  of  a.  us 
Ksl/i.  6. 10.  let  nothing  fail  of  a.  thou  hast  spoken 
.hh  8.  13.  so  are  the  paths  of  a.  that  forgot  God 
F.ccl.  6.  2.  he  wanteth  nothing  of  a.  he  desireth 
/■.':ci'.43.11.if  they  be  ashamed  o/a.tliey  have  done 
.rimos'.i.'i.  you  only  have  1  known  of  a.  the  families 
Mark  9. 35.  the  same  shall  be  servant  of  a.  10.  44. 
.hhn  6.  39.  of  a.  which  hath  given  me,  lose  nothing 
.^ets  10.  36.  peace  by  Jesus  Christ,  he  is  Loid  of  a. 

1  Cor.  l'^  24.  he  is  convinced  of  a.  judged  of  a. 
Gal.  4. 1.  now  I  say,  the  heir,  though  he  be  I.  of  a. 
F.ji/i.  4.  6.  God  who  is  Father  of  a.  above  all 
//ei.l2.23.and  to  God  the  Judge  o/a.andio  spirits 
Jam.  2.  10.  olfend  in  one  point,  he  is  guilty  of  a. 

On  or  Upon  ALL. 
Gen.  39. 5.  blessing  of  the  Lord  was  upon  a. he  had 
Isa.  4.  5.  for  upon  a.  the  glory  shall  be  a  <lefence 
F.zek.  40.  4.  set  thy  hearlM/)0«a.  that  I  shall  shew 
Kom.  3.22.  unto  all,  and  upon  a.  them  that  believe 
II.  32.  thai  he  might  have  mercy  upon  a. 
■  fu'tc  l.^.to  execute  judgment  upon  a. and  convince 
/<cc.3.10.the  hour  of  temiitation  shall  come  upona. 
Over  ALL. 

2  Sam.  3.  21.  that  thou  mayest  reign  over  a. 

I  Chr.  29.  12.  and  thou  reignest  ovir  a.  in  thy  hand 
Psal.  103.  19.  his  kingdom  rulelh  over  a. 
Mat.  24.  47.  make  him  ruler  ouer  a.  I.uke  12.44. 
.hhn  17.  2.  as  thou  hast  given  him  power  over  a. 
Knm.  9.  5.  who  is  over  a.  God  blessed  for  ever 

10.  12.  the  same  Jjord  over  a.  is  rich  unto  all 

ALL  these.. 
Gen.  15. 10.  he  took  to  him  a.  these  and  divided 

42.  36.  Jacob  said,  a.  these  things  are  against  me 

49.  28.  a.  these  are  the  twelve  tribi^s  of  Israel 
Find.  20.  1.  God  spake  a.  these  words,  saying 
.lob  12.  9.  who  knoweth  not  that  in  a.  these 
.Jer.  9.  26.  for  a.  these  nations  are  uncircumcised 
Ndh.  2.  6.  shall  not  n.  these  take  up  a  parable 
Mnt.e<.X\.a.these  shall  be  added  to  you,  /.«4cl2.31. 

24.  8.  a.  these  are  the  bi^ginning  of  sorrows 
Mark  1.  23.  a.  these  evil  things  come  from  within 
.iels  2.  7.  are  not  a.  these  which  speak  Galileans? 
1  Cor.  12.11.  a.  these  workelh  that  self-same  Spirit 
CoZ.3.P.but  now  you  put  off  a.  these,  anger,  wrath 
/feb.  11.  13.  a.  these  died  in  faith,  not  having  re- 
ALL  this.  [ceived 

Gen.  41.  30.  as  God  hath  shewed  thee  a.  this 
r)rut.  32.  27.  and  the  Lord  hiitli  not  done  a.  this 
.Jadg.  6.  13.  why  then  is  a.  this  befallen  us  ? 

1  .Sum.  22.  1.5.  thy  servant  knew  nothing  of  a.  this 

2  .S/im.  14. 19.  is  not  the  hand  of  Joab  in  a.  this  ? 

1  Chr.  2"^.  19.  a.  this  the  Lord  made  me  understand 

2  Chron.  21.  18.  after  a.  this  the  Lord  smote  him 
20.  2H.  a.  this  continued  till  the  burnt-offering 

KzraS.  3.5.  a.  this  was  a  burnt -offering  to  iIk-  Lord 
.Veh.  9.  33.  because  of  a.  this  we  make  a  covenant 
Esth.  5.  13.  yet  a.  this  availeth  me  nothing 
./oh  1.  22.  in  n.  this  Job  sinned  not,  2.  10. 

13.  1.  lo,  mine  eye  hntli  seen  a.  this 
Psal.  44.  17.  a.  this  is  come  upon  us,  yet  not  forgot 

78.  ;J2.  for  a.  this  tliev  sinned  slill 
Feel.  7.  23.  n.  this  have  1  proved  by  wisdom 

8.  9.  a.  this  linve  I  soi-n,  and  applied  my  heart  to 

9.  1.  a.  this  I  considered  in  my  heart,  to  dfcrlnre 

fa.  this 
Isa.  5.15.  for  a.  this  his  anger  is  not  turned  away 
9.  12,  17,  21.  I  10.  4. 
48.  ft.  thou  hast  beard,  see  a.  this 
I)nn.  4.  28.  a.  this  came  upon  Nolmchadnozzar 
5. 22.  hast  not  humbled,  tho'  thou  kiirwosi  a.  this 
7.  16.  I  came  and  aske.l  him  the  trnib  of  a.  thi 
Itiis.  7.  10.  do  not  return,  nor  sei^k  him  for  a.  thi 
Mic.  1.  5.  for  the  trnnsgression  of  Jacob  is  a.  thi 
Mat.  1.22.  a.  this  was  done  tbnt  the  prophets  inijlit 
befiiinilod,  21.  4.  |  26.  .56 
LukM  IG.  23.  bsiidcs  a.  this  there  is  a  gulph  fixed 


ALM 

7,uA:e24. 21.  besides  a.  this  to-day  is  tho  third  d«y 

ALL  that  he  had,  or  she  had. 
Gen.  12.  20.  Pharaoh  sent  him  and  a  t/tat  he  had 
lil.l.Abram  weiitoutofKgypt,  and  a.  thathehad 
25.  5.  and  Abraham  gave  a.  that  he  had  to  Isaac 
31.21.  Jacob  Hed  with  a.  that  he  had,  and  rose  up 
39.  4.  a.  that  he  had  he  put  Into  Joseph's  hand,  6. 
5.  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  was  on  a.  (Aat  A«  had 
jVaM8.2.5.be  sold, a.  (Aa( Ac  Aurf, payment  be  made 
J/arA5.26.6he  sjient  a.tAat  she  Aa(i,nolhingbetteied 
12.44.of  her  want  cast  in  a.tAat  she  had,Luke'i\.i 
To  or  Unto  ALL. 
Psal.  145. 9.  the  Lord  is  good  to  a.  and  his  merci.y 
Eccl.2.  14.oneeventhappenetlitoa.  them, 9.  3,11. 
9.  2.  all  things  come  alike  to  a.  one  event  lo  right. 
Isa.  36.  G.  so  is  Pharaoh  to  a.  that  trust  in  him 
Mark  13.37.  what  I  say  to  you,  Isoy  unto  a.  watch 
I.uke  12.  41.  speakcsl  thou  this  to  us,  or  even  to  a.l 
Jicts  2.  39.  the  promise  is  to  a.  that  are  afar  ofl' 
4.  16.  manifest  to  a.  that  dwell  in  Jerusalem 
i<om.l0.12.the  Lord  is  rich  unto  a.that  call  on  him 
13.  7.  render  therefore  to  a.  their  dues 
1  Cor.  9.  19.  I  made  myself  a  servant  unto  a. 

1  Tiwi.  4.  15.  that  thy  profiting  may  appear  to  a. 

IVith  ALL. 
J\'um.  16.  30.  with  a.  that  appertain  to  them 
Deut.  6.  5.  thou  shall  love  the  Lord  with  a.  thy 
heart,  wi(A  a.  thy  soul,  11.  13.  J»fa«.  22.  37. 

2  Chron.  25.  7.  with  a.  the  children  of  Ephraim 
Prov.  4.  7.  icith  a.  thy  getting,  get  understanding 
.lets  ]0.2.that  feared  God  with  a.  his  house,  16.  34. 
1  Cor.  1.2.  loitha.  that  in  every  place  call  on  Jeeua 
/'At7.  1.  25.  I  shall  abide  and  continue  icitA  you  a< 

2.  17.  if  offered,  I  joy  and  rejoice  with  you  a. 

ALL  tAe  while. 
1  .Sam.  22.  4.  a.  the  while  David  was  in  the  hold 
2.5.7.nothing  missing  a.lhe  while  they  were  in  Car. 

27.  11.  so  will  be  his  manner  a.  the  while  he  dwell- 
Job  27.  3.  a.  the  while  my  breath  is  in  me        [elh 

ALL  ye. 
Isa.  48.  14.  a.  ye  assemble  yourselves,  and  hear 
50.1 1. behold  a.  ye  that  kindle  a  tire,  that  compasl 
66.  10.  be  glad  with  her,  a.  ye  that  love  her 
.fe.r.  29.  20.  hear  the  word,  a.  ye  of  the  captivity 
I -am.  1. 12.  is  it  nothing  to  you,  a.  ye  that  pass  by  ! 
Mat.  11.  28.  come  to  me,  a.  yc  that  labour  and  are 
2.3.  8.  one  is  your  master;  and  a.  ijc  arc  brethren 
2().  31.  a.  ye  shall  be  offended,  Mark  14.  27. 
./lets  2.  14.  a.  ye  that  dwell  at  Jerusalem,  hearken 
See  farther  other  usual  Substantives  :  Co.nork. 
CATION,  Day,  Earth,  Israel,  Men,  Peoplb 
Things,  &c. 

ALLEGING. 
.^cts  17.  3.  a.  Christ  must  needs  have  suffered 

ALLEGORY. 
Gal.  4.  24.  which  things  are  an  a.  fur  these  are 

ALLELUIAH. 
liev.  19.  I.  I  heard  a  sreat  voice,  saying,  a.  3,4.0 

ALLIED. 
J^eh.  13.  4.  Eliashib  the  priest  was  a.  to  Tobiah 

ALLOW. 
I.uke  11.  48.  that  ye  a.  the  deeds  of  your  fathers 
J?cts24.l5.which  they  themselves  also  a.  that  there 
Rom.  7.  15.  for  thai  which  I  do,  I  a.  not 

ALLOWED,  ETH. 
Rom.  14.  22.  himself  in  thai  thing  which  he  a. 

1  Thcss,  2.  4.  but  as  wo  were  a.  of  God  to  be  put 

ALLOWANCE. 

2  Kings  25. 30.  bis  a.  was  a  continual  a.  given  hiio 
Prov.  30.  t''.  'ced  me  with  food  of  my  a. 
Luke  3.  t  14.  be  content  with  your  a. 

ALLUUE. 
Hos.  2. 14.  I'll -a.  and  bring  her  into  the  wilderness 
2  Pet.  2.  18.  they  a.  through  the  lusts  of  the  flesh 

ALMS. 
.Mat.  6. 1.  that  ye  do  not  your  a.  before  men 

2.  therefore  when  thou  dost  thine  a.  do  not  sonnd 
4.  that  thine  a.  maybe  in  secret,  and  thy  Father 

I.nke  11.  41.  give  a.  of  such  things  as  you  have 

12. 33.  sell  that  ye  have,  and  give  a.  provide  bags 

.ilels  3.2.  they  laid,  lo  ask  a.  of  them  that  entered 

3.  who  seeing  Peter  and  John,  asked  an  a. 
10.  llioy  knew  that  it  was  ho  which  sal  for  a. 

10.  2.  (.'ornclius  gave  much  a.  tolho  people 

4.  tliino  a.  Qie  come  up  fur  a  memorial,  31. 

24.  17.  I  came  to  bring  a.  lo  mv  nation  and  offer. 

ALMS-DEEDS. 
.9cts  9.  36.  Dorcas  full  of  a.-deeds  which  she  did 

ALMIGHTY. 
Gen.  17.  1.  T  am  the  a.  God,  walk  before  mo 

28.  3.  Goil  a.  bless  thee,  an.l  make  tlieo  fruitful 
35.  11.  I  am  God  a.  be  fruitful  ami  multiply 
43.  14.  God  a.  give  you  mercy  before  tho  man 
4."^.  3.  God  a.  appeared  lo  me  at  Lu7  in  Cnnnaa 
'1P.2.">.  bv  Ihf  a. who  shall  bless  Ihee  with  blessing* 

F.rnd.ft.'.i.]  appeared  to  .Abrnm  bytho  name  God  a. 
.VHm.24.  4.  which  saw  the  vision  of  the  a.  16. 
Uuth  1.  20.  for  the  a.  hath  dealt  bitlorly  with  vaa 

21.  S'leing  the  a.  hath  aflVicted  mo 
Job  5. 17.  despise  not  thou  Iho  chasloning  of  the  tk 


ALO 

Joh  6.  4.  for  tho  arrows  of  tlie  a.  are  within  me 
14.  but  he  I'orsakcth  the  fear  of  tlie  a. 

8.  3.  or  doth  the  a.  pervert  justice  1 

5.  and  make  thy  yiipphcation  to  tho  a. 

11.  7.  canst  thou  find  out  the  a.  to  perfection? 

13.  3.  surely  I  would  speak  to  the  a.  and  desire 

IS.  25.  he  atrengthcneth  himself  against  the  a. 

S21.  15.  what  is  the  a.  that  we  siiould  serve  him? 
'■Jfi.  and  he  shall  drink  of  the  wrath  of  the  a. 

St2.  3.  is  it  any  pleasure  to  the  a.  thou  art  righteous 
17.  which  said,  what  can  the  o.  d6  for  them  7 
23.  if  thuu  return  to  the  a.  thou  shalt  be  built 
85.  yea,  the  a.  shall  be  thy  defence,  thou  shall 
26.  then  shult  thou  have  thy  delight  in  the  a. 

23.  16.  my  heart  sol^,  and  the  a.  troubleth  nie 

24.  1.  why,  seeing  times  are  not  hid  from  the  a. 
•7.  2.  and  the  a.  who  iiath  vexed  my  soul 

10.  will  he  delight  himself  in  the  a.  ? 

11.  what  is  with  the  a.  will  I  not  conceal 
13.  which  they  shall  receive  of  the  a. 

29.  5.  wlien  the  a.  was  yet  with  me 

31.  2.  what  inheritance  of  the  a.  from  on  high  ? 
35.  my  desire  is,  that  the  a.  would  answer  me 

32.  8.  inspiration  of  the  a.  giveth  understanding 
33.4.  and  the  breath  of  the  a.  hath  given  me  life 

34.  ID.  far  bo  it  from  the  a.  to  commit  iniquity 

12.  neither  will  the  a.  pervert  judgment 

35.  13.  surely  the  a.  will  not  regard  vanity 

37.  23.  touching  the  a.  we  cannot  find  him  out 

40. 2.  siiall  he  that  contendeth  with  the  a.  instruct 
Psal.  68.  14.  when  the  o.  scattered  kings  in  it 

91.  1.  he  shall  abide  under  the  shadow  of  the  a. 
Isa.  13.  6.  shall  come  as  destruction  from  the  a. 
Eiek.  1.  24.  I  heard  as  the  voice  of  the  a.  10.  5. 
Dan.  11.  t  33.  for  the  a.  God  he  shall  honour 
Joel  1.  15.  as  destruction  from  the  a.  shall  it  come 
2  Cor.  6.  18.  shall  be  my  sons,  saith  the  Lord  a. 
Bev.  1.  8.  which  is,  was,  and  is  to  come,  the  a. 

4.  8.  the  Lord  God  a.  which  was,  and  is,  11.  17. 

15.  3.  Lord  a.  just  and  true  are  thy  ways,  16.  7. 

16.  14.  the  battle  of  that  great  day  of  God  a. 
19. 15.  treadeth  wine-press  of  wrath  of  the  a.  God 
21.22.  God  a.  and  the  Lamb  are  the  temple  of  it 

ALMOND,  S. 
Oen.  43.  11.  carry  spices,  myrrh,  nuts,  and  a. 
F.xod.  25.  33.  made  like  to  a.  34. 1  37.  19,  20. 
JVum.  17.  8.  the  rod  of  Aaron  for  Levi  yielded  a. 
Keel.  12.  5.  when  the  a.  tree  shall  flourish 
Jer.  1.  11.  and  I  said,  I  see  a  rod  of  an  a.  tree 

ALMOST. 
F.zod.  17.  4.  they  be  a.  ready  to  stone  me 
Psal.  73.  2.  as  for  me,  my  feet  were  a.  gone 
94.  17.  my  soul  had  a.  dwelt  in  silence 
119.  87.  thoy  had  a.  consumed  me  ujion  earth 
Prov.5.lA.  I  was  a.in  all  evil  in  the  midst  of  congre- 
Jlcts  13.44.  came  a.  the  whole  city  together  [gation 
19.  26.  only  at  Ephesus,  but  a.  through  all  Asia 
21.  27.  and  when  the  seven  days  were  a.  ended 
26.28.  a.  thou  persuadest  me  to  be  a  Christian 
29.  weie  both  a.  and  altogether  such  as  I  am 
Heb.  9.  22.  a.  all  things  by  the  law  are  purged 

ALMUG-TREES. 
VKings  lO.ll.brought  from  Ophir  plenty  oia.-trees 
12.made  of  a.-fr.pillars,there  came  no  such  a.-tr. 
ALOES. 
Psal.  45.  8.  thy  garments  smell  of  a.  and  cassia 
Pruv.  7.  17.  I  have  perfumed  my  bed  with  a. 
Cant.  4.  14.  myrrh,  a.  with  all  the  chief  spices 
John  19.  39.  Nicodemns  brought  a  mixture  of  a. 

ALOFT. 
Prov.  18.  1 10.  the  righteous  runneth  and  is  set  a. 

ALONE 
Signifies,  [1]  One  solilary,  or  by  himself,  Lev. 

13.  46.     Psal.  102.  7.    [2]    Only,  Dan.  10.  7. 
Mat.  4.  4.     [3]  To  ecase  from,  E.xod.  14.  12. 

Oen.  2. 18.  it  is  not  good  that  man  should  be  a. 
F.zod.  18.  18.  art  not  able  to  perform  it  thyself  a. 
24.  2.  Moses  a.  shall  come  near  the  Lord 
T-ev.  13.  40.  the  leper  dwell  a.  without  the  camp 
JVitm.  11.  14.  I  am  not  able  to  bear  all  this  peo- 
ple n.  Deut.  1.  9,  12. 
17.  that  thou  bear  it  not  thyself  a. 
23.  9.  lo,  the  people  shall  dwell  a.  not  be  reckoned 
Deut.  32.  12.  so  the  Lord  a.  did  lead  him 
33.28.  Israel  then  shall  dwell  in  safety  a. 
Jo!>h.  22.  20.  Achan  perished  not  a.  in  his  iniquity 
2  fSnm.  18.  24.  behold,  a  man  running  a.  26. 
2.5.  if  he  be  a.  there  is  tidings  in  his  mouth 

1  Kiiiirs  11.  29.  they  two  were  a.  in  the  field 

2  Kings  19. 15.  art  God  a.  Tsa.  37. 16.  Psal.  So.  10. 
1  Chr.  29.  1.  Solomon,  whom  a.  God  hath  chosen 
F.sth.  3.  6.  scorn  to  lay  hands  on  Mordecai  a. 
Job  1.  15.  I  only  am  escaped  a.  to  tell,  16,  17,  19. 

9.  8.  God  who  a.  spreadeth  out  the  heavens 
1.5.  19.  to  whom  a.  the  earth  was  given 

31.  17.  or  have  I  eaten  my  morsel  myself  a.  ? 
Psal.  83. 18.  thou  whose  name  a.  is  Jehovah 
102.7.1  watch  and  am  as  asparrow  a. on  the  house- 
136.  4.  to  him  who  a.  doeth  great  wonders    [top 
148.  13.  for  bis  name  a.  is  excellent 
11 


ALS 

Eccl.  4. 8.  there  \a  one  a.  and  there  is  not  a  second 

10.  but  woo  to  him  that  is  a.  when  he  fallelh 
Isa.  2. 11.  Lord  a.  shall  be  e.xalted  in  that  day,  17. 

14.  31.  none  shall  be  a.  in  his  appointed  times 

51.  2.  for  I  called  him  a.  and  blessed  him 

63.  3.  I  have  trodden  the  wine-press  a. 
Lam.  3.  28.  he  sittcth  a.  and  keepeth  silence 
Dan.  10.7.  and  I  Daniel  a.  saw  the  vision 
Hos.  8. 9.  gone  to  Assyria,  a  wild  ass  a.  by  himself 
Mat.  4. 4.  man  shall  not  live  by  bread  a.  Lulie  4.  4. 

14.  23.  evening  was  come,  he  was  a.  J^uke  9.18. 

18.  15.  tell  his  fault  between  thee  and  him  a. 
Mark  4.  34.  when  they  were  a.  he  expounded 

6.47.ship  was  in  midst  of  3ea,and  he  a.  on  the  land 
Luke  5.  21.  who  can  forgive  sins  but  God  a.  ? 

6.  4.  not  lawful  to  eat,  but  for  the  priests  a. 

9.  18.  it  came  to  pass,  as  Jesus  was  a.  praying 
36.  when  tho  voice  was  past,  Jesus  was  found  a. 

10.  40.  that  my  sister  hath  letl  me  to  serve  a. 
John  6.  15.  he  departed  into  a  mountain  a. 

22.  but  that  his  disciples  were  gone  away  a. 

8. 16.  for  I  am  not  a.  but  I  and  the  Father,"  16,  32. 

17.  20.  neither  pray  I  for  these  a.  but  for  them 
Jiifts  19.  26.  ye  see  and  hear  that  not  a.  at  Ephesus 
Rom.  4.  23.  it  was  written  for  his  sake  a. 
Gal.  6.  4.  he  shall  have  rejoicing  in  himself  a. 
Hcb.  9.  7.  went  the  higli-priest  a.  once  every  year 
Jam.2.17.failh  if  it  hath  not  works  is  dead,beijig  a. 

Left  ALONE. 
Gen.  32.24.  Jacob  left  a.  and  there  wrestled  a  man 

42. 38.  his  brother  is  dead,  and  he  is  left  a.  44.  20. 
Isa.  49.21. 1  was  left  a.  these  where  had  they  been? 
Dan.  10.  8. 1  was  left  a.  and  saw  this  great  vision 
John  8.  9.  and  Jesus  was  left  a.  and  the  woman 

29.  the  Father  hath  not  left  me  a.  for  I  do  always 
Rom.  11.  3.  I  am  left  a.  and  they  seek  my  hfe 

Let  ALONE. 
£xod.l4.12.  let  us  a.  that  we  may  serve  Egyptians 

32.  10.  let  mo  a.  that  ray  wrath  may  wax  hot 
Deut.  9.  14.  let  me  a.  that  I  may  destroy  them 
Judg.  11.  37.  let  me  a.  two  months,  that  I  may  go 
2.Sa7n.l6.11.  let  ium  a.  let  him  curse,  L.  has  bidden 
2  Kings  4.  27.  let  her  a.  her  soul  is  vexed  in  her 
Ezra  6.  7.  let  the  work  of  this  house  of  God  a. 
Job  10.  20.  and  let  me  a.  that  I  may  take  comfort 

13.13.  hold  your  peace,  let  me  a.  that  I  may  speak 
Hos.  4. 17.  Ephraini  is  joined  to  idols,  let  him  a. 
Mat.  15.  14.  let  them  a.  they  be  blind  loaders 
Mark  1.  24.  let  us  a.  what  have  we  to  do  with 
thee,  thou  Jesus  of  Nazareth?  J^ukc  4.34. 

14.  6.  Jesus  said,  let  her  a.  why  trouble  ye  iier? 

15.  36.  let  a.  let  us  see  whether  Elias  will  come 
//utc  13.  8.  Lord,  let  it  a.  this  year  also,  till  I  dig 
John  11.48.  if  we  let  him  a.  all  men  will  believe 

12.  7.  let  her  a.  against  the  day  of  my  burying 
Acts  5.  38.  refrain  from  these  men,  let  them  a. 

ALONG. 
JVam.  21.  22.  we  will  go  a.  by  the  king's  highway 

1  Sam.  6.  12.  the  kine  went  a.  the  highway,  lowing 
28.  20.  then  Saul  fell  all  a.  on  the  earth 

2  Sam.  3.16.  her  husband  went  with  her  a.  weeping 
16. 13.  Shimei  went  a.  cursing,  and  threw  stones 

Jer.  41.  €.  Ishmael  went,  weeping  all  a.  as  he  went 

ALOOF. 

Psal.  38.  11.  ray  friends  stand  a.  from  my  sore 

Aloud;  see  Cry,  Cried,  Si.sg. 

ALPHA. 

Rev.  1.  8.  I  am  a.  and  Omega,  11.  |  21. 6.  |  22.  13. 

ALRE.\DY. 
F.xod.  1.  5.  for  Joseph  was  in  Egypt  a. 
Eccl.  1.  10.  it  hath  been  a.  of  old  time,  before  us 
j>/«/.2.2.  your  blessings,  yea,  I  have  cursed  them  a. 
Mat.  17.  12.  I  say  unto  you,  Elias  is  come  a. 
.John  3.  18.  he  that  believeth  not  is  condemned  a. 
1  Cor.  5.  3.  but  present  in  spirit,  have  judged  a. 
Phil.  3.  16.  whereto  we  have  a.  attained 
1  Tim.  5.  15.  some  are  a.  turned  aside  after  Satan 
Rev.  2.  25.  but  that  which  ye  have  a.  hold  fast 

ALSO. 
Gen.  n.  3.  strive  with  ipan,  for  that  lie  a.  is  flesh 
JVum.  16. 10.  and  seek  ye  the  priesthood  a.  ? 

1  .Sam.  14.  44.  Saul  answered,  Go<l  do  so  and 

more  a.  2  Sam.  3.  35.  |  19.  13. 

2  Kings  7.  4.  and  if  we  sit  still  here,  we  die  a. 
Psal.  68. 18.  gifts,  yea,  for  the  rebellious  a. 
ha.  7.  13.  but  will  ye  weary  my  God  a.  ? 
Zeeh.  8.  21.  to  seek  the  Lord  of  hosts  I  will  go  a. 
Mat.  6. 21.  there  will  your  heart  be  a.  Luke  12.  34. 

26.  73.  surely  thou  art  a.  one  of  them 
Mark  1.  38.  that  I  may  preach  there  a. 

2.  23.  Son  of  man  is  Lord  a.  of  sabbath,  Luke  6.  5. 
Luke  11.  45.  thus  saying,  thou  reproachcst  us  a. 
John  5.  19.  what  he  doth,  these  a.  rioth  the  Son 

12.  26.  where  I  am,  there  shall  a.  my  servant  be 

14.  3.  that  where  I  am,  there  ye  may  be  a. 
Acts  12.  3.  he  proceeded  to  take  Peter  a.        ' 
Rom.  16.  2.  succourer  of  many,  and  of  myself  a. 

1  Cor.  9.  8.  or  saith  not  the  law  tho  same  a. 
1,5.  8.  and  la.U  of  all,  ho  was  seen  of  me  a. 

2  Tim.  1.  S.  I  am  persuaded  that  io  thee  a. 


ALT 

.Tarn.  2.  26.  faith  without  works  is  dead  a 

1  John  4. 21.  that  lovelh  God,  love  his  brother  a. 

ALTAR 
Signifies,  [1]  A  material  altar,  on  which  sacrifices 
were  offered,  1  Kings  13. 1, 2. 1 18. 30.  [2]  Christ, 
who  is  the  only  Christian  altar,  to  whom  tot 
bring  all  our  sacrifices  and  services,  Heb.13.10. 
Oen.  8.  20.  Noah  builded  an  a.  to  the  Lord 
12.7.  there  Abraham  built  an  a.  to  the  Lord, 22.  9. 
35.  I.Jacob,  go  to  Beth-el,  and  make  there  ano. 
3.  up  to  Beth-el,  I  will  make  there  an  a.  lo  GoU 
Exod.  17.  15.  Moses  built  an  a.  Jchovah-nissi 

20.  24.  an  a.  of  earth  shalt  thou  make  to  me 

21.  14.  shalt  take  him  from  mine  a.  that  he  die 

29.  37.  sanctify  it,  it  shall  be  an  a.  most  holy 
44.  I  will  sanctify  the  tabernacle  and  a. 

30.  27.  a.  of  incense  \\  40.  10.  a.  of  burnt-offering 
Leo.  6.  9.  the  fire  of  the  a.  shall  be  burning  in  it 
J^um.  7.  84.  this  was  the  dedication  of  the  o. 

18.  3.  they  shall  not  come  nigh  the  a. 

Josh.  22.  34  the  children  of  Gad  called  the  a.  Ed 
Judg.  6.  25.  throw  down  tlie  a.  of  Baal,  and  grove 
31.  because  one  hath  cast  down  his  a. 

1  Sam.  2.  33.  whom  1  shall  not  cut  oil' from  mine  a. 

2  .Sam.  24.  18.  go  up,  rear  an  a.  to  the  Lord 

1  Kings  13.  2.  he  cried  against  the  a.  O  a.  a. 
.18.  30.  Elijah  repaired  the  a.  of  the  Lord 
35.  and  the  water  ran  round  about  the  a. 
VKings  18.22.shall  worship  before  this  a.  /«a.36.7 
Psal.  20.  6.  so  will  I  compass  thine  a.  O  Lord 

43.4. then  will  I  go  to  the  a.  of  God,  to  God  my  joy 
Isa.  19. 19.  an  a.  to  the  Lord  in  the  midst  of  Egypt 

27.  9.  the  stones  of  the  a.  as  chalk-stones 

56.  7.  their  sacrifices  be  accepted  on  mine  a. 
Lam.  2.  7.  the  Lord  hath  cast  off  his  a. 
Ezek.  8.  16.  between  the  porch  and  a.  25  men 
Joel  1.  13.  lament,  howl,  ye  ministers  of  the  a. 

2.  17.  the  priests  weep  between  the  porch  and  s. 
Amos  2.  8.  upon  clothes  laid  to  pledge  by  every  a. 
Mai.  1.  7.  ye  offer  polluted  bread  on  mine  a. 
10.  nor  do  kindle  fire  on  mine  a.  for  nought 

2.  13.  covering  the  a.  of  the  Lord  with  tears 
Mat.  5.  23.  if  thou  bring  thy  gift  to  the  a. 

23.  18.  whoso  shall  swear  by  the  a.  it  is  nothing 
35.yes!ew  between  the  temple  and  a.LukeH.51 
Acts  17.  23.  I  found  an  a.  with  this  inscription 
1  Cor.  9. 13.  wait  at  the  a.  partakers  with  a.  10. 18. 
Heb.  7.13.  of  which  none  gave  attendance  at  the  a. 

13. 10.  we  have  an  a.  whereof  they  have  no  right 
Rev.  6.  9. 1  saw  under  the  a.  the  souls  of thtm  slain 

8.  3.  should  offer  it  with  prayers  on  the  golden  a. 

9.  13.  heard  a  voice  from  horns  of  the  golden  a. 

See  Built. 

ALTARS. 
Exod.34.lXsha\\  destroy  their  a.  Deut.  7.  5.  )  12.3. 
JV«m.  23.  1.  Balaam  said,  build  here  seven  a. 

1  Kings  19.10.Israel  have  thrown  down  thine  a.l4 

2  Chron.  34.  5.  burnt  the  hones  of  priests  on  the  a. 
Psal.  84.  3.  even  thine  a.  O  Lord  of  hosts,  my  kin^ 
Isa.  17.  8.  and  he  shall  not  look  to  the  a.  the  work 
Jer.  17.  1.  sin  of  Judah  graven  on  horns  of  the  a. 

2.  whilst  their  children  remember  their  a. 
Ezek.  6.4.  and  your  a.  shall  be  desolate,  images  be 
Hos.  8. 11.  made  a.  to  sin,  a.  shall  be  to  him  to  sia 

10.  8.  thorn  and  thistle  shall  come  on  their  a. 
12.  11.  their  a.  are  as  heaps  in  the  furrows 

Amos  3.  14.  I  will  also  visit  the  a.  of  Beth-el 
Rom.  11.  3.  Lord,  they  have  digged  down  thine  a 

ALTER. 
T^ev.  27.  10.  he  shall  not  a.  it,  a  good  for  a  bad 
Ezra  6.  11.  that  whosoever  shall  a.  this  word 
12.  destroy  all  that  put  their  hand  to  a.  this 
Psal.  89.  34.  not  a.  the  thing  gone  out  of  my  lips 
Prov.  31.  t  5.  lest  thev  a.  the  judgment  of  afflicted 

ALTERED. 
F.sth.  1.  19.  be  not  a.  that  Vashti  come  no  more 
Luke  9.  29.  the  fashion  of  his  countenance  was  a 

ALTERETH. 
Dan.  6.  8.  according  to  the  law  which  a.  not,  12 

ALTERING. 
JVam.  14.  t  34.  ye  shnll  know  my  a.  of  purpose 

ALTHOUGH. 
Exod.  13.  17.  a.  that  was  near,  for  God  said 
2  Sam.  23.  5.  a.  my  house  he  not  so  with  God 
.Tob  2.  3.  a.  thou  movedst  me  against  him 
.Ter.  31.  32.  a.  I  was  a  husband  unto  them 
i^zet.  11.  16.  a.  I  have  cast  them  far  off 
Hab.  3.  17.  a.  the  fig-trce^hall  not  blossom 
Mark  14. 29.  a.  all  shall  be  offended,  yet  will  not  I 
Gal.  6.  t  L  a.  a  man  be  overtaken  In  a  fault 

ALTOGETHER. 
J\l\im.  16.  13.  make  thyself  a.  a  prince  over  us 
Dent.  16.  20.  which  is  a.  just  shalt  thou  follow 
Psal.  14.  3.  they  are  a.  become  filthy,  Psal.  53.  3L 

19.  9.  judgments  of  the  Lord  are  righteous  a. 
39.  .5.  every  man  at  his  best  state  is  a.  vanity 
.50.  21.  that  I  was  a.  such  a  one  as  thyself 
139.  4.  but  lo,  O  Lord,  thou  knowest  it  a. 

Cant.  a.  16.  his  mouth  is  sweet,  yea,  he  is  a.  lovely 
John  9.  34.  thou  wast  a.  born  in  sins,  dost  thou 


AMB 

^cit  26.  39.  were  almost  an  a.  such  as  I  am 

1  Oir.  5.  10.  yet  not  a.  with  the  tbrnicatora 
9.  10.  or  Bailh  he  it  a.  for  our  sakcs  ? 

2  Cor.  4.  I  a.  perplexed,  but  not  a.  without  help 

ALWAY,  ALWAYS, 
Signifies,  [1]  ContinuaUy,  John  8.  29.     [2]  Fre- 
quently, Acla  10. '2.  [3]  I'o  the  end  of  the  world, 
Mat.  2d.  20.     [4J  During  life,  2  Sam.  9.  10. 
X>f u(.5.29.0  that  theywould  keeji  my  commandsa. 

11.  1.  thou  shalt  keep  his  commandmeuUi  a. 

14.  23.  tJiou  maycst  learn  to  tear  the  Lord  a. 
Job  7.  16. 1  loatlie  it,  I  would  not  live  a. 

27   10.  will  he  a.  call  upon  God  ? 
Fgal.  lb.  8.  1  have  set  the  Lord  a.  before  me 

103.  9.  he  will  not  a.  chide,  nor  keep  his  anger 

119.  112.  inclined  to  perform  thy  statutes  a. 
Prov.  8.30.1  was  by  him,  rejoicing  a.  before  him 
/sa.  57.  Hi.  neither  will  I  be  a.  wrotii 
.fl/at.28  20. 1  am  with  you  a.  to  the  end  of  the  world 
Mark  14.  7.  but  me  ye  have  not  a.  John  12.  S. 
John  8.  29.  1  do  a.  (hose  Ihin^  that  please  him 

11.  42.  I  know  that  thou  hearest  me  a. 
^cts  10.  2.  Cornelius  prayed  to  God  a. 
2  Cor.  2.  14.  God,  who  a.  causeth  us  to  triumph 
Phil.  1.  4.  a.  in  every  prayer  of  mine  for  you 
20.  as  a.  so  now  also,  Christ  shall  be  magnified 

2.  12.  as  ye  have  a.  obeyed,  not  in  my  presence 

4.  4.  rejoice  in  the  Lord  a.  and  again  rejoice 

1  Thess.  2.  10.  to  fill  up  their  sins  a.  for  wrath 

2  Pet.  i.  15.  to  have  these  a.  in  remembrance 

I  AM,  I  AM  that  I  AM. 
Exod.  3.  14.  /  am  that  I  am  hath  sent  me  to  you 
JVum.  11.  21.  the  people  amongst  whom  I  am 
JVeh,  G.  11.  who  is  there  that  bemg  as  /  am 
Job 'J.  32.  he  is  not  a  man  as  /  am,  that  I  should 
Psal.  35.  3.  say  to  my  soul,  /  am  thy  salvation 
39.  4.  lliat  I  may  know  how  frail  /  am 
50.  7.  O  Israel,  /  am  God,  even  thy  God 
143.  12.  destroy  them,  for  /  am  thy  servant     [11. 
/ja.44.b.  lam  the  first, /am  the  last,  48. 12.  Rev.  1. 
47.  8.  lam,  and  none  else  besides  ine,  Zeph.^2. 15. 

58. 9.  thou  shalt  cry,  and  he  shall  say,  here  /  am 
Mat.  16.  13.  whom  do  men  say  that  /  the  Son  of 

man  am  ?  jlfark  8.  27.  J^uke  9. 18. 
Luke  22.  70.  art  the  Son  of  God,  ye  say  that  /  am 
John  a.  35.  Jesus  said,  /  am  the  bread  of  life 

8.  12.  saying,  I  am  the  light  of  the  world 

58.  I  say  to  you,  before  Abraham  was,  lam 
12.  2ti.  where  /  am  there  shall  my  servants  be 
17.24.1  will,thatthey  may  be  with  me  where  I  am 
Acts  26.  2!).  almost  and  altogether  such  as  /  om 
■27.23.angel  of  God,  whose  /  am,and  whom  I  serve 
1  Cor.  15.  10.  by  the  grace  of  God  /  am  what  /  am 
Gal.  4.12.  brethren,  be  nn  I  am,  for  I  am  as  you  are 
Phil.  4.  11.  for  I  have  learned  in  what  state  /  am 
Rev.  1. 18.  /  om  he  that  liveth,  /  am  alive  for  ever 

19. 10.  see  thou  do  it  not,  lam  thy  fellow-servant 

AM  I. 
Oen.  4.  9.  I  know  not,  am  I  my  brother's  keeper? 

30.  2.  am  1  in  God's  stead,  who  hath  withheld 
3  Kings  5.  7.  am  /  God,  to  kill  and  to  make  alive? 

IH.ii.am  /come  up  without  the  Lord,  /sa.  36.10. 
Jer.  23.  23.  am  /a  God  at  hand,  saith  the  Lord 
Mat.  18.  20.  there  am  /in  the  midst  of  them 
John  7.  33.  yet  a  little  while  am  /with  you 

1  Cor.  y.  1.  am  /not  an  apostle?  am  I  not  free? 

2  Cor.  12.  10.  when  (  am  weak,  then  am  /strong 

Here  Am  I,  or  Here  I  AM.     Hee  Here. 
A.MAZKD. 
Judg.  20.  41.  the  men  of  Benjamin  were  a. 
Job  32.  15.  they  were  a.  they  answered  no  more 
Isa.  13.  8.  they  shall  be  a.  one  at  another 
Eiek.  32.  10.  1  will  make  many  peojile  a.  at  thee 
Mat.  19.  25.  the  disciples  were  exceedingly  a. 
.»/arA2.12.were  all  a.and  glorified  God,  AuA-e5.26. 
14.  33.  he  began  to  be  sore  a.  and  very  heavy 
Luke  4.  3(').  all  a.  and  spake  among  themselves 

9.  43.  were  all  a.  nl  the  mighty  |iower  of  God 
JlcU  9.  21.  but  all  thill  heard  Saul  were  a. 

A.MA/KMKNT. 
.'Ids  3.  10.  filli^l  with  a.  at  what  had  happened 

1  Pel.  3.  G.  and  ar«  not  afraid  with  any  a 

AMUASSADOR. 
Prov.  13.  17.  but  a  failhfnl  a.  is  health 
Jer.  49.  14.  an  a.  si'nt  to  the  heathen,  Ohad.  1. 
Kph.  6.  20.  for  which  I  am  an  n.  in  bonds 

.\.MI!AS.SAr)On.«t. 
.Tosh.  9  4.  went  and  maili:  as  if  iht-y  had  been  a. 

2  Chrnn.  32.  31.  the  biiKines*  of  Ih.'  n.  of  Babylon 
.35.  21.  he  sent  a.  what  liavf  I  to  do  with  the.!  ? 

ha.  18.  2.  that  sendi-th  a.  by  the  sea  in  vessrli 
30.  4  princes  at  Zoan,  his  a.  came  to  Haneg 
33  7.  the  a.of  (K-nre  aliall  wcffi  bitterly 

h.ztk.  17.  I.'i.  he  rch<'lled  in  sendinc  a.  to  Rgypt 

3  Cor  5.  20.  now  then  wo  arc  n.  tor  Christ 

AMHASSAGK. 

Luke  14.  32.  sendelh  an  a.  nnddenireth  ronditions 

Amber  ;  .•"•'•  Coi.ihtr. 

AMjn'SI^  T.9. 

Jc»h.  8.  2.  lay  thee  an  a.  for  the  city  behind  it 

12  • 


ANC 

Jer.  51.  12.  set  up  the  watchmen,  prepare  the  a. 
AMBUSHMEiNT,  S. 

2  Chron.  13.  13.  Jeroboam  caused  an  a.  the  a.  was 
20.  22.  the  Lord  set  a.  against  Ammoo 
AMEK 

Signifies,  in  Hebrew,  true,  faithful,  certain.  It 
IS  made  use  of  likewise  to  affirm  any  thing,  and 
was  an  affirmation  used  often  by  uur  Saviour, 
which  is  rendered  in  our  translation,  verily, 
vetily  ;  amen,  amen,  /  say  unto  you,  John  3.  3, 
5.  Jill  the  promises  of  Oud  are  amen  in  Christ;, 
that  is,  certain  and  Jirm,  2  Cor.  1.  20.  Christ 
himself,  the  faithful  prophet  and  teacher  of  his 
church,  is  called  the  Amen,  Kuv.  3.  14.  In 
Isa.  65.  IG.  shall  bless  himself  in  the  (Jvd  of 
truth,  and  swear  by  the  God  of  truth  ;  which  in 
the  Hebrew  is,  the  God  amen.  Jlndit  is  used 
in  the  end  of  prayer  in  testimony  of  an  earnest 
wish,  desire,  or  assurance  to  be  heard;  ainun, 
BO  be  It,  so  shall  it  be.  The  word  amen  is  used 
in  many  languages. 

J^um.  5.  22.  and  tliu  woman  snail  say  a.  a. 

Ihut.  27.  15.  all  the  peojde  shall  say  a.  to  the  end 

I  Kings  1.3G.Benaiah  answered  a.  the  Lord  say  go 

IChron.  16. 36.  people  said  a. and  praised  the  Lord 

/'.sa/.41.13.fiom  everlasting  to  everlasting;  a.ando. 
72.  19.  earth  filled  with  his  glory  ;  a.  and  a. 
89.  52.   blessed   be  the  Lord  for  evermore,  a. 
106.48.  and  let  all  the  people  say  a.  [and  a. 

Jer.  28.  G.  even  the  prophet  Jer(!niiah  said  a. 

Mat.  6.  13.  the  power  and  the  glory  for  ever,  a. 

1  Cor.  14.  16.  the  room  of  the  unlearned,  say  a. 

2  Cor.  1.  20.  the  promises  in  hiin  are  yea  and  a. 
Rev.  1.  18.  behold,  I  am  alive  tor  evermore,  a. 

3.  14.  write  these  things,  saith  the  a.  the  faithful 
5.  14.  and  the  four  beasts  3:iid  a.  19.  4. 
22.  20.  surely  I  come  quicklv,  a.  evtn  so,  come 
AMExND.'  [Lord  Jesus 

.Jer.  7.  3.  a.  ways,  and  doings,  5.  |  26.  13.  |  35. 15. 
John  4.  52.  the  hour  when  he  bigan  to  a. 

A.MENDMENT. 
Mat.  3.  t8.  bring  fruits  answerable  to  a.  of  life 

A. MENUS. 
Lev.  5.  16.  he  shall  make  a.  for  tlie  harm  done 

A.MERCE. 

Vcut.  22. 19.  they  shall  u.  him  in  an  100  shekels 

Amethyst;  see  AoATii  and  Jacinth. 

AMIABLE. 

Psal.  84. 1.  how  a.  are  thy  tabernacles,  O  Lord 

AMISS.  •  1 

2  Chron.  0.  37.  wo  ha\  e  sinned,  we  have  done  a. 
Dan.  3.  29.  speak  any  thing  a.  against  the  God 
I^uke  23.  41.  but  this  man  hath  done  nothing  a. 
Jam.  4. 3.  ask  and  receive  not,  because  ye  ask  a. 

AMONG. 
JVum.  14.  14.  heard  that  thou,  Lord,  art  a.  them 
F.zra  10.  18.  a.  the  sons  of  the  priests  were  found 
JVch.  13.  26.  yet  a.  many  nations  was  no  king 
.lob  33.  23.  if  an  interpreter,  one  a.  a  thousand 
36.  14.  and  their  life  is  a.  the  unclean 
Eccl.  6.  1.  there  is  an  evil  common  a.  men 
7.  28.  one  a.  1,000,  but  a  woman  a.  all  those 
Cant.  5.  10.  the  chiefesl  a.  ten  thousand 
Jer.  5.  26.  a.  my  peojde  are  found  wicked  men 
Mic.  7.  2.  and  there  is  none  upright  a.  men 
Luke  1.  28.  blessed  art  thou  a.  women 
10.  3.  I  send  you  forth  a.H  lambs  a.  wolves 
John  6.  9.  but  wliat  are  they  a.  so  many  ? 
Cot.  1. 1 IH.  a.  all  he  might  have  the  pre-eminence 

ANATHEMA. 
1  Cor.  16.  22.  let  him  be  a.  maran-atha 

ANCESTORS. 
Lev.  26.  43.  remember  the  covenant  of  their  a. 

ANCHOR. 
.^cts  27.  30.  as  though  tln-y  would  have  cast  a. 
Hcb.ii.  19.  which  hopewe  havens  an  a. of  the  soul 
ANCIENT 


ANG 


Signifies,  [1]  Old,  nf  firmer  time,  1  Chron.  4. 22. 
[2]  Very  old  men,  Job  12. 12.     [3]  Men  of  for- 
mer times,  1  Sam.  24.  13.     [4]  Governors,  po- 
litical and  ecclesiastical,  Isa.  3.  14.  Jer.  19.  1. 
/.><ru/.33.l5.j(ir  the  chief  things  of  the  a.  mountains 
.hutg.  5.  21.  that  a.  riv.-r,  the  river  Kishon 
2  Kings  19.  'i'Lof  <i.  limes,  I  formed  it,  I.ta.  37. 90. 
I  Chron.  4.  22.  ami  lh<«e  are  a.  things 
Kirii  3.12.wero  a.  men, and  had  scon  the  first  house 
Job  12.  12.  with  the  a.  is  wisdom,  and  in  dayi 
Prnr.  22.  2^^.  remove  not  the  a.  land-mark 
/.»«.  3.2.  prudent  and  a.  the  Lonl  doth  lake  away 
9.  15.  the  a.  and  honourable,  he  is  the  head 
19.  11.  how  guy  ye,  I  am  the  son  of  a.  kings? 
23.  7.  whose  anlKiuiiy  is  of  a.  days 
41.  7.  since  I  appointed  the  a.  people 
47.  0.  upon  the  a.  hast  thou  laid  thy  yoke 
51.9.  awake,  Oarm  nf  the  Lord,  n»  in  thea.dayii 
Jr^.  IS.  15.  rniiscd  thi-m  to  stunilile  from  a.  patiis 
F.ifk.  9.  6.  then  thoy  began  at  ihe  a.  men 
Dan.  7.  9.  thi'  a.  of  days  ilid  sit,  wliosi'  garment 
13,  one  like  the  Son  of  man  cnme  to  a.  of  days 


ANCIENTS. 

1  Sam.  24.  13.  as  saith  the  proverb  of  the  a. 
Psal.  119.  100.  1  understand  more  than  the  a. 
Isa.  3. 14.  Lord  will  enter  into  judgmunt  with  the  a. 

24.  23.  tlie  Lord  shall  reign  bel'ore  his  a. 
Jer.  19. 1.  take  of  a.  of  the  people  and  a.  of  priesta 
Ezek.  7.  26.  counsel  shall  jierish  from  the  a. 

8.  12.  son  of  man,  hast  thou  seen  what  the  a.  do  7 
27.  9.  the  a.  of  Gubal  were  in  thee  thy  calkets 

ANCLE-BONES. 
Acts  3.  7.  his  a.-bones  received  strcogth 
ANCLES. 

2  Sam.^i.]  37.that  my  a.  did  not  slip,  Psal.  18. 1 36. 
Eiek.  47.  3.  llie  waters  weie  to  tiio  a. 

ANGEL 
Signifies,  A  messenger,  or  bringer  of  tidings,  and 
is  apjdied  [1]  To  those  intelUctual  and  imma- 
terial beings,  whom  God  makes  use  of  as  his 
minislers  to  execule-the  orders  of  providence, 
llcv.  22. 8.     [2J  To  Christ,  who  is  the  Mediator 
and  Head  of  the  church,  Zech.  1. 12.     Rev.  10. 
1.     [3]    'To  ministers  of  the  gospel,  who  are 
ambassadors  for  Christ,  Rev.  2.  1.  |  3.   1,  7. 
[4]    'To  such  whom  God  employs  to  execute  his 
judgnunts.  Rev.  15.  H.  |  16.  1.     [51   'To  devils, 
M,,t.  25.  41.   1  Cor.  6.  3. 
fV'cn.22.11.  a.  of  the  Lord  said  .Abraham,  Abraham 
24.  7.  he  shall  send  his  a.  before  thee,  40. 
48.  16.  the  a.  who  redeemed  me  from  all  evil 
Kzod.  23.  20.  send  a.  before  thee,  23.  |  32. 34. 1 33.  2. 
./Vum.2l).16.sent  an  a.  and  brought  us  out  of  Egypt 
Judg.  13.  19.  and  the  a.  did  woiidurously 
2  Ham.  24. 16.  the  a.  stretched  out  hisliand,  the  a. 
that  destroyed  the  people,  1  Chron.  21. 15. 
17.  David  spake  when  he  saw  the  a.  that  smote 
I  Kings  13. 18.  a.  spake  to  me  by  the  word  of  LoiJ 
19.  5.  an  a.  touched  Elijah  and  said,  arise  and  eat 

1  CAr.21.15.  God  sent  an  a.  to  Jerusalem  to  destroy 
20.  and  Oman  turned  back,  and  saw  the  a. 
27.  the  Lord  commanded  the  u.  and  he  put  up 

2  ('Airu7i.32.21.the  Lord  sent  an  a.  which  cut  off 
Eccl.  5.  6.  nor  say  before  the  a.  it  was  an  error 
Isa.  63.  9.  the  a.  of  his  presence  saved  them 
Dan.  3.  28.  Gotl  who  hath  sent  a.  and  dehvered 

6.  22.  my  God  hath  sent  his  a.  and  shuT  up 
Hos.  12.  4.  yea,  he  had  power  over  the  a. 
Zech.  1.  9.  the  a.  thtjt  talked  with  me  said,  4.  5 

13.  Lord  answered  the  a.  that  talked  with  me 

14.  the  a.  that  communed  with  me  said 
19. 1  said  to  the  a.  that  talked,  4.  4.  |  5.  10.  |  6. 4 

2.  3.  the  a.  that  tajked  went  out,  and  another  a. 

3.  3.  with  filthy  garments,  and  stood  belbre  the  a 

5.  5.  the  a.  that  talked  with  me,  went  Ibrth 

6.  5.  the  a.  answered,  these  are  the  four  spirits 
Mat.  28.  5.  the  a.  answered  the  woman,  fear  not 
Luke  1.  13.  the  a.  said,  fear  not,  Zacharias 

19.  the  a.  answered  and  said,  I  am  Gabriel 
26.  in  the  si.vth  month  the  a.  Gabriel  was  sent 
30.  the  a.  said  to  her,  fear  not,  Mary 
35.  a.  answered.  Holy  Ghost  shall  come  on  the* 
2.  10.  the  a.  said  to  the  shejiherds,  fear  not 
13.  suddenly  there  was  with  the  a.  a  multitude 
SI.  sonamerl  of  the  a.  before  he  was  conceived 
22.  43.  there  aj)peared  an  o.  strengthening  him 
John  5.  4.  an  a.  went  down  at  a  certain  season 

12.  29.  others  said,  an  a.  spake  to  him 
.lets  6.  15.  as  it  had  been  the  face  of  an  a. 

7.  35.  by  hands  of  the  a.  that  appeared  in  the  bush 
38.  in  the  wilderness  with  the  a.  which  spake 

10.  7.  when  the  a.  which  spake  to  Cornelius 
22.  was  warneil  from  God  by  a  holy  o.  to  send 

11.  13.  how  he  had  seen  an  a.  in  his  house 
12.8.  the  a.  said  to  Peter,  bind  on  thy  saiidall 

9.  that  It  was  true  which  was  dime  by  the  a. 

10.  and  forthwith  the  a.  dejiarted  from  him 

11.  the  Lord  halh  sent  his  a.  and  delivered  me 
15.  Rliodn  affirmed,  then  said  they,  it  is  hig  a. 

23.  8.  the  Sadducees  say,  neither  u.  nor  spirit 
9.  if  a  s|iiril  or  an  a.  hath  spoken  to  him 
2  Cur.  II.  14.  is  transformed  into  an  a.  of  light 
Gat.  1.  8.  though  we  or  an  a.  frcuii  heaven  preach 
Rev.  1.  1.  and  lie  signified  it  by  his  a.  to  John 

2.1.uiitolhea.ofthe  church,  8,  12,  18.  \X  1.7,14. 

5. 2. 1  saw  a  strong  a.  proclaiming  with  loud  vuicft 

7.  2.  I  saw  aniilber  a.  ascending  from  the  east 

8.  .3.  and  nnothi'r  a.  came  and  stood  at  the  altat 

4.  ascended  betiire  God  out  of  the  a.  hand 

5.  the  a.  look  the  censer,  and  filled  it  with  fire 
7.  the  first  a.  sounded  1 8.  second  a.  \  10.  third  a. 

12.  fourth  a.  |  9.  1.  fifth  a.  I  13.  sixth  <i.  sounded 

8.  13.  I  heard  an  a.  flying  ihru'  midst  of  heaven 

9.  11.  which  is  the  a.  of  the  bottcinless  pit 

14.  saying  to  the  sixth  a.  loose  the  four  angels 

10.  1.  I  saw  another  a.  come  down,  18.  1.  |  20  1 
5.  and  thn  n.  which  I  saw  stand  on  the  sea 

7.  but  in  the  days  of  the  voire  of  the  seventh  a 

8.  go  and  tiike  the  book  in  the  hand  of  the  a. 
10.1  took  the  book  ||  II. 1.  and  the  a.  stood, saying 

11.  15.  sevi'nth  o.  sounded,  and  there  were  voice* 


.  till  the  a.  of  days  came,  and  judgment  given|   14.  C.  I  saw  another  a.  fly  iu  uiiilst  of  heaven 


ANG 

Rev.  14-  8.  nnojkor  a.  followed,  saying,  Babylon  it: 
1).  third  (1.  followed  |{  Ij.  another  a.  came,  17, 18. 
19.  and  the  a.  thrust  in  his  siclile  into  the  earth 
IG.a.  a.  poured  out  hie  vial,  3,  4,  8,  10,  12,  17. 
5.  and  1  hoard  the  a.  of  tlie  waters  say 

17.  7.  tlie  a.  said,  wherefore  didst  thou  marvel? 

.   18.  21.  and  mighty  a.  toolv  up  a  stone  like  a  great 
11).  17.  and  I  saw  an  a.  standing  in  the  sun 

21.  17.  the  measure  of  a  man,  tliat  is  of  the  a. 

22.  8.  fell  down  to  worship  before  the  feet  of  a. 
Hi.  1  Jesus  have  sent  mine  a.  to  testify  to  you 

ANGEL  oj  Ood. 
Eiod.  14. 19.  a.  of  Ood  who  went  before  removed 
Judg.  13.  C.  like  the  countenance  of  an  a.  of  (iod 

1  Sam.  29.  9.  art  good  in  my  sight,  as  an  a.  of  God 

2  Sam.  14. 17.  as  an  a.  of  God,  so  is  my  lord,  19.  27. 
20.wi8e  according  to  the  wisdom  of  an  a.  of  God 

Acts  27.  2;^.  stood  by  me  this  night  the  a.  of  God 
Oal.  4.  14  hut  received  me  as  an  a.  of  Ood 

ANGEL  of  the  Lord. 
Gen.  Ifi.  7.  a  of  the  L.  found  Ilagarby  afountam 

9.  the  o.  oJ  the  Lord  said  to  her,  10,  11.  |  22.  11. 

jXam.  22.  32,  35.  Jadg.  13.  18.  2  Kings  1.  3, 15. 
22.11.  o.  of  the  L.  called  to  him  outof  heaven,  15. 
ffum.'H.  23.  ass  saw  the  a.  of  L.  standmg,  25,  27. 

24.  o.o/Z/.  stood  in  a  path  of  the  vineyards,  2G. 

31.  Balaam  saw  a.  of  the  L.  standing  in  the  way 

34.  and  Balaam  said  to  a.  of  the  L.  1  have  sinned 

35.  a.  of  the  J,,  said  to  Balaam,  go  with  the  men 
Judg.'i.y.a.of  L.  came  up,  1  Kings  19.7.  Jlcts  12.7. 

4.  when  a.  of  the  L.  spake  these  words  to  Israel 

5.  23.  curse  ye  Meroz,  said  the  a.  of  the  Lord 

6.  11.  came  an  a.  of  the  L.  and  sat  under  an  oak 
12.  a.of  L.  appeared  to  Gideon,  and  said  to  him 
21.  the  a.  of  the  L.  put  forth  the  end  of  the  stalf 
22.wheu  Gideon  perceived  he  was  ana.  of  the  L. 

13.3.0.  o/tAe  L.  appeared  to  the  woman,  and  said 

16.  Manoah  knew  not  he  was  an  a.  of  the  L.  21. 

20.  a.  of  the.  L.  ascended  in  the  flame  of  the  altar 

2  Sam.  24.16.  a.  ofL.was  by  threshing,  \Ch.  21.15. 

'i  Kings  19.  35.  a.  of  L.  smote  in  camp,  Isa.  37.  'M. 

1  CArc<n.21.12.a.o/-6.destroyingthrougliout  coasts 

18.  a.  of  ike  L.  commanded  Gad  to  say  to  David 

30.afraid,  because  of  the  sword  of  a.  of  the  Lord 

Psal.'ii.'i.a.  of  L.  encampeth  round  thein  that  t(;ar 

35. 5.  let  a.  ufL.  chase  them  ||  6.  persecute  them 

ZccA.l.Il.they  answered  the  o.o/t/teiy.that  stood 

12.  a.  of  L.  answered,  wilt  thou  not  have  mercy- 

3.5.  a.of  A.  stood  by  Joshua  ||  ti.  a.  of  L.  protested 

12.  8.  house  of  David  as  the  a.  of  L.  before  (hem 
Mat.  1. 20.  a.  of  L.  appeared  in  a  dream,  2. 13,  19. 

24.Joseph  did  as  the  a.  of  the  L.  had  bidden  him 
28. 2;  for  the  a.  of  the  L.  descended  from  heaven 
IjU.ke\.\\.  there  appeared  to  Zacharias  an  a.of  L. 
2.  9.  a.  of  L.  came  upon  them,  and  glory  of  Lord 
Jlcts  5.Vi.a.of  L.  by  night  opened  the  prison-doors 
8.  2(>.  a.  of  the  Lord  spake  to  Pliilip,  saying,  arise 
12. 2.3.  a.  of  L.  smote  Herod,  because  he  gave  not 

ANGELS. 
Oen.  19. 1.  there  came  two  a.  to  Sodom  at  even 

15.  when  the  morning  arose,  the  a.  hastened  Lot 
Psal.  8.  5.  a  little  lower  than  the  a.  Hcb.  2.  7,  9. 

68.17.  the  chariots  of  God  are  thousands  of  a. 
78.  2.5.  man  did  eat  a.  food,  he  sent  them  meat 

49.  and  trouble,  by  sending  evil  a.  among  them 
Mat.  4. 11.  a.  came  and  ministered  to,  M(i.rk  1. 13. 

13.  39.  end  of  the  world,  the  reapers  are  the  a. 
49.  the  a.  shall  come  forth  and  sever  the  wicked 

18.  10.  their  a.  always  behold  the  face  of  God 
24. 3fi.  no  man,  not  the  a.  in  heaven,  Mark  13.  32. 
25.  31.  Son  of  man,  and  all  the  holy  a.  with  him 
2fi.  53.  give  me  more  than  twelve  legions  of  a. 

Jlfar48.;iH.when  the  Son  of  man  cometh  in  the  glory 
of  his  Father,  with  the  holy  a.  Luke  9.  26. 

12.  25.  nor  marry,  but  are  as  the  a.  in  heaven 
Ltike  2.  15.  as  the  a.  were  gone  away  from  them 

16.  22.  the  beggar  died,  and  was  carried  by  the  a. 

iJO.  .36.  nor  die,  for  they  are  equal  unto  the  a. 

24. 23.  that  they  had  also  seen  a  vision  of  a. 
John  20.  12.  and  seeth  two  a.  in  white,  silting 
Acts  7..53.wlio  received  the  law  by  disposition  of  a. 
Rom.  8. 38.  nor  life,  nor  a.  able  to  separate  us  from 

1  Gor.  4.  9.  a  spectacle  to  the  world,  to  a.  and  men 
6.  3.  know  ye  not  that  we  shall  Judge  a. .' 

11. 10. to  have  power  on  her  head,becau8e  of  the  a. 

13. 1.  though  I  speak  with  tongues  of  men  and  a. 
Gal.  3.  19.  it  was  ordained  by  a.  in  the  hand 
Col.  2. 18.  no  man  beguile  you  in  worship|)ing  of  a. 

2  Thess.  1.  7.  revealed  from  heaven  with  mighty  a. 
1  Tim.^.  16.  seen  of  a.  preached  to  (he  Gentiles 

5.  21. 1  charge  thee  before  God  and  the  elect  a. 
Hcb.  1.  4.  being  made  so  much  better  than  the  a. 

5.  to  which  of  the  a.  said  he  at  any  time,  13. 
7.  of  the  a.  he  saitli,  who  maketh  his  a.  spirits 

2.  2.  if  the  word  spoken  by  a-  was  steadfast 
5.  to  the  a.  hath  he  not  put  m  subjection 

16.  he  took  not  on  him  the  nature  of  a.  but  seed 

12.  22.  ami  to  an  innumerable  company  of  a. 

13.  2.  for  some  have  entertained  a.  unawares 

.  Pet.  1. 12.  which  things  the  a.  desire  to  look,  into 
13 


ANG 

1  Pef  .3.22.a.and  powers  being  made  subject  to  him 

2  I'l  t.  2.  4.  if  God  spared  not  the  a.  that  sinned 
11.  whereas  a.  greater  in  power  and  might 

Jude  6.  the  a.  who  kept  not  their  first  estate 
Rev.  1.  20.  seven  stars,  a.  of  the  seven  churches 
5.  11.  the  voice  of  many  a.  about  the  throne 
7. 1. 1  saw  four  a.  standing  on  the  four  corners 
2.  and  he  cried  with  a  loud  voice  to  the  four  a. 
11.  all  the  a.  stood  round  about  the  throne 
8.13.trumpct  of  the  three  a.which  are  yet  to  sound 
9.14. loose  the  four  a.  which  are  bound  in  tho  river 

15.  the  a.  were  loosed,  which  were  prejiared 
14. 10.  be  tormented  in  presence  of  the  holy  a. 
21.  12.  twelve  gates,  and  at  the  gates  twelve  a. 

ANGELS  of  Ood. 
Gcn.W.12.a.of  Ood  ascend  and  desccnd,,/oAnl.51. 
32. 1.  Jacob  went  his  way,  and  a.  of  God  met  him 
jl/at.22.30.but  as  a.  of  God  in  heaven,  Mark  12.25. 
ZyKA:(12.6.him  shall  the  Son  confess  beforea.o/'C.tK/ 
9.denieth  me,  shall  be  denied  before  the  a.of  God 
15. 10.  there  is  joy  in  the  presence  of  the  a.  vf  God 
Hcb.  1.  6.  let  all  the  a.  of  God  worship  him 

His  ANGELS. 
Job  4.  18.  and  his  a.  he  charged  with  folly 
/'««MM.ll.give  his  a.  charge, JliaA.  4.  ti.Lu.ke  4.10. 

103.  20.  ye  his  a.  which  e.^ccel  in  strength 

104.  4.  who  maketh  his  a.  spirits,  Heb.  1.  7. 
148.  2.  praise  ye  him  all  his  a.  praise  ye  him 

Mat.  13.  41.  the  Son  of  man  shall  send  forth  his  a. 

l(i.  27.  come  in  the  glory  of  his  Father  with  his  a. 

24.31.send  his  a.  with  a  great  sound,  Mark  13.  27. 

2.5.  41.  tire  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  a. 
Rev.  3.  5.  will  confess  before  my  Father  and  his  a. 

12.  7.  Michael  and  his  a.  the  dragon  and  his  a. 
y.  the  great  dragon  was  cast  out,  and  his  a. 

ANGER,   Ferb. 
Rom.  10. 19.  by  a  Ibolish  nation  I  will  a.  you 

ANGER. 
Gen.  27.  45.  till  thy  brother's  a.  turn  away 

44.  18.  and  let  not  thine  a.  burn  against  me 

45.  t  5.  neither  let  there  be  a.  in  your  eyes 
49.  7.  cursed  be  their  a.  for  it  was  fierce 

Ezod.  32. 19.  saw  the  dancing, Moses'  a.wa.ved  hot 

22.  Aaron  said,  let  not  the  a.  of  my  lord  wa.x  hot 

Deiit.  9. 19. 1  was  afraid  of  the  a.  and  displeasure 

13. 17.  Lord  may  turn  from  the  fierceness  of  his  a. 

29.  24.  what  meaneth  the  heat  of  this  great  a.  ? 
./osA.7.2G.Lord  turned  from  the  fierceness  of  his  a. 
Judg.  8.  3.  then  their  a.  was  abated  toward  him 
F.sth.  1.  12.  Ahasuerus  his  a.  burned  in  him 

Job  4.  t  9.  by  his  a.  are  they  consumed 

9.  13.  if  God  will  not  witiidraw  his  a.  the  proud 
Psal.  21.  9.  as  a  fiery  oven  in  the  time  of  thine  a. 

30.  5.  for  his  a.  endureth  but  a  moment 

37.  8.  cease  from  a.  and  forsake  wrath,  fret  not 

38.  3.  no  soundness  in  my  flesh  because  of  thine  a. 
69.  24.  let  thy  wrathful  a.  take  hold  of  them 
74.  1.  why  doth  thy  a.  smoke  against  the  sheep 
78.  2i   and  a.  also  came  up  against  Israel 

38.  many  a  time  turned  he  his  a.  away 

49.  he  cast  on  them  the  fierceness  of  his  a. 

50.  he  made  a  way  to  his  a.  he  spared  them  not 
85.  3.  hast  turned  from  the  fierceness  of  thine  a. 

4.  and  cause  thine  a.  towards  us  to  cease 

5.  wilt  thou  draw  out  thine  a.  to  all  generations'! 
90.  7.  for  we  are  consumed  by  thine  a. 

11.  who  knowetli  the  power  of  thine  a.? 
103.  9.  nor  will  he  keep  his  a.  for  ever,  Jcr.  3.  5. 
Prov.  15.  1.  but  grievous  words  stir  up  a. 
19.  11.  the  discretion  of  a  man  deferreth  his  a. 

21.  14.  a  gift  in  secret  pacitieth  a. 

22.  8.  and  the  rod  of  his  a.  shall  fail 

27.  4.  wrath  is  cruel,  and  a.  is  outrageous 
Eccl.  7.  9.  a.  restetli  in  the  bosom  of  tools 

11.  t  10.  therefore  remove  a.  from  thy  heart 
Isa.  5.  25.  for  all  this  his  a.  is  not  turned  away,  9. 
12,  17,  21. 1 10.  4. 

7.  4.  fear  not,  for  the  a.  of  Rezin  with  Syria 

10.  5.  O  .'\ssyrian,  the  rod  of  mine  a.  and  staff 
25.  shall  cease,  and  my  a.  in  their  destruction 

12. 1.  though  thou  wast  angry,  thine  a.  is  turned 

13.  9.  the  day  of  the  Lord  comeih  with  fierce  a. 
13.  and  in  the  day  of  his  fierce  a.  Lam.  1.  12. 

30.  27.  name  of  the  Lord  cometh  burning  with  a. 
30.  the  Lord  shall  shew  the  indignation  of  his  a. 
42.  25.  therefore  he  poured  on  him  the  fury  of  o. 
48.  9.  for  my  name's  sake  will  I  defer  inino  a. 
65. 1 5.  these  are  a  smoke  in  mine  a. 
06. 1.5.  Lord  will  come  to  render  his  a.  with  fury 
.fcr.  2.  35.  surely  his  a.  shall  turn  from  me 
3.12.1  will  not  cause  mine  a.  to  fall  on  you,  I  am 
merciful,  and  I  will  not  keep  mine  a.  for  ever 
4.  26.  all  the  cities  were  broken  down  by  his  a. 
7.  20.  mine  a.  shall  be  poured  on  this  place 
18.  23.  deal  with  them  in  the  time  of  thine  a. 
25.  38.  the  land  is  desolate  because  of  his  a. 
32.  31.  city  hath  been  as  a  provocation  of  mine  a. 
36.  7.  great  is  the  a.  the  Lord  hath  pronounced 

42. 18.  as  mine  a.  hath  been  poi.red  on  Jerusalem 
44.  6.  wherefore  mine  a.  was  poured  forth 


ANG 

Jir.  49.  37. 1  will  bring  evil  on  them,  my  fierce  a. 

Lam.  2.1.  remembered  not  his  footstool  in  day  of  a. 

6.  Lord  hath  despised  in  the  indignation  of  his  a. 

21.  thou  hast  slain  them  in  the  day  of  thine  a. 

22.  in  the  day  of  the  Lord's  a.  none  escaped 

3.  43.  thou  hast  covered  with  a.  and  persecuted  Uf 

4.  11.  he  hath  poured  out  his  fierce  a. 

Eick.  5. 13.  thus  shall  mine  a.  be  accomplished 

7.  3.  and  I  will  send  mine  a.  upon  thee 
8.  and  accomplish  mine  a.  on  tliuo,  20.  8,  21. 

2.5.  14.  shall  do  in  Edom,  according  to  mine  a. 

35.  11. 1  will  even  do  according  to  thine  a 
Dan.  9.  IG.  let  thine  a.  be  turned  away 
Hos.  11.9.  will  not  execute  the  fierceness  of  mine  & 

14.  4.  for  mine  a.  is  turned  away  from  him 
Amos  1.  11.  his  a.  did  tear  perpetually,  and  kept 
Jonah  3.  9.  if  God  will  turn  from  his  fierce  a. 
Mic.  7.  18.  he  retained  not  his  a.  for  ever 
jVuA.  1.  6.  who  can  abide  the  fierceness  of  his  a.7 
Hab.  3.  8.  was  thine  a.  against  the  rivers? 
Zeph.  3.  8.  to  pour  upon  them  all  my  fierce  a. 
Marks.  5.  when  he  had  looked  on  them  with  a* 
Ljih.  4.  31.  let  all  a.  be  put  away,  Col.  3.8. 

ANGER  of  the  Lord. 
JVam.  25.  4.  fierce  a.  of  the  Lord  may  be  turned 

32.14.  to  augment  the  a.  of  the  J^ord  against  Israel 
7J«tt«.29.  20.  the  a.  of  the  Z,»r</ shall  smoke  against 
.Judg.  2. 14.  a.  of  Lord  against  lsr.2().  1 3.  8.  \  10.  7. 
2  Kings  24. 20.  thro'  the  a.  of  the  Lord  it  came  to 

pass,  Jer.  52.  3. 
.7(Tr.4.8.the  fierce  a.  of  the  J^ord  hitol  turned  away 
12.  13.  because  of  the  fierce  u.  of  the  Lord, 25.  37. 
23. 20.  the  a.  of  the  Lord  shall  not  return,  30.  24. 
51. 45.  deliver  his  soul  from  the  fierce  a.  of  the  L. 
Lam.  4.  16.  the  a.  of  the  Lord  hath  divided  them 
Zr//A.2.2.before  the  fierce  a.  of  the  Z-.  come  on  you 
3.  it  may  be  ye  shall  be  hid  in  the  day  of  a.  of  L. 
In  ANGER.- 
Gen.  49.  6.  for  iji  their  a.  they  slew  a  man 
F.xod.  11.  8.  he  went  out  from  Pharaoh  in  a. 
Dcut.  29.  23.  which  the  Lord  overthrow  in  a. 
28.  the  Lord  rooted  them  out  of  the  land  in  a, 

1  Sam.  20.  34.  Jonathan  rose  from  the  table  in  a. 

2  Chron.  25.  10.  they  returned  home  in  great  a. 
.fob  9.  5.  which  overturneth  them  m  his  a. 

18.  4.  he  teareth  himself  in  his  a. 

21.  17.  God  distributeth  sorrows  in  his  a. 

35.15.  because  itisnotso,  he  hath  visited  in  his  a 
Psal.  6.1.  Lord,  rebuke  me  nolin  thy  a.  Jcr.  10.  24 

7.  6.  arise,  O  Lord,  jm  thine  a.  lift  up  thyself 

27.  9.  put  not  thy  servant  away  in  a.  . 

56.  7.  in  thine  a.  cast  down  the  people,  O  Lord 

77.  9.  hath  he  in  a.  shut  up  his  tender  mercies .' 
Isa.  13.  3. 1  have  also  called  my  mighty  ones  in  a, 

14.  6.  he  that  ruled  the  nations  in  a. 

63.  3.  for  I  will  tread  them  in  mine  a.  G. 
.hr.  21.  5.  I  will  fight  against  you,  even  in  a. 

32.  37.  whither  I  have  driven  them  in  mine  a. 

33. 5.  whom  I  have  slain  in  mine  a.and  in  my  fury 

Lam.2.1.  Lord  covered  Zion  with  a  cloud  i?i  his  a. 

3.  he  hath  cut  off  in  a.  all  the  horn  of  Israel 

3.  CG.  persecute  and. destroy  them  in  a. 
Kzek.  3.  t  14.  and  1  went  in  hot  a. 

5.15.  when  I  shall  e.xecute  judgments  in  thee  in  a 
■13.  13.  shall  be  an  overflowing  shower  in  uiino  a. 

22.  20.  so  will  I  gather  you  in  mine  a.  and  fury 
43.  8.  wherefore  I  have  consumed  them  in  mine  a. 

Daii.ll.W.  be  destroyed,  neither  in  a.  nor  in  battle 
Hus.  13.  11.  I  gave  tliee  a  king  in  mine  a. 
Mic.  5.  15.  and  I  will  execute  vengeance  in  a. 
Hab.  3.  12.  thou  didst  thresh  the  heathen  in  a. 

ANGER  kindled. 
Gen.  30.2.  a.  of  Jacob  was  kindled  against  Rachel 
Exod.  4. 14. the  a.  of  the  Lord  was  k.  against  Mose» 
JV»M.  11. 1.  a.  of  the  L.  was  k.  10.  [  12.  9.  ]  22.  22. 
22.  27.  Balaam's  a.  was  k.  and  he  smote  the  ass 
24.  10.  Balak's  a.  was  kindled  against  Balaam 
2.5.3.the  a.  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  against  Israel 
32.  13.  ./u*A.  7.  1.  2  Sam.  24.  1.  2  Kings  13.  3. 
32.  10.  (he  Lord's  a.  was  kindled  the  same  time 
Dcut.Ct.15.  lest  the  a.  of  the  Lord  be  k.  against  thee 
7.  4.  so  will  the  a.  of  the  Lord  be  k.  against  you 
29.  27.  the  a.  of  the  Lord  was  k.  against  this  land 
31. 17.  mine  a.  shall  be  kindled  in  that  day,  .lush. 

23.  IQ. 
32.  22.  for  a  fire  is  kindled  in  mine  a.  .Tcr.  15. 14. 
Judg.  9.  30.  Zebul's  a.  was  kindled  against  Gaal 
14.19.Sanison'a  a.A.and  he  went  up  lo  his  father's 

1  .Sam.  11.6.  when  Saul  heard,  his  a. was  k.  greatly 
17.28.  Eliab's  a.was  A",  against  David,  and  he  said 
20.  30.  Saul's  a.  was  kindled  against  Jonathan 

2  *-a7ri.6.  7.  a.  of  L.  k.  against  Uzzah,l  Chr.  13.10. 
12.  5.  David's  a.  was  kindled  against  the  man 

2  Kings  23.  2G.  the  wrath  wherewith  his  a.  was  *. 
2  CArun.25.  10.  their  a.  was  kindled  against  Judah 
15.  a.  of  the  Lord  was  AmrfW  against  Amaziab 
Isa.  5.  25.  the  a.  of  the  Lord  k.  against  hiapeople 
.Ter.  17. 4.  for  ye  have  kindled  a  fire  in  mine  a. 
//rt.<.  8.  .5.  mine  a.  is  kindl.  against  them,  how  long 
Zt  cA.lO  J.mine  a.was  kindl.  against  the  shepherds 


ANI 

Provoke  or  Provoked  to  \NGER. 
Deut.  4.  -25.  to  provoke  him  lu  a.  l».  Id.  [  31.  29. 
i  Kings  17.  17.  j  :il.  ti.  |  i.i.  19.  3  Clir.  Si.  ti. 
32. 10. with  al)oiiiinations/)rouoA(,i/tJiuyliim  to  a 
21.  they  have  pr.  me  to  a.  1  wiW  pr.  them  io  a. 
Judg^.X'i.  they  bowed  to  them,  ami  pr.  the  L.fu  u. 
1  Kings  14.9.ma(Je  molten  imagta  lopr.to  a.I5.3U. 
IS  made  their  gtovespr.  tlie  Ivord  to  a.  10.  7, 13 
16.2.  lo/)r.  me  to  a.  with  their  sins,  -2  Kini's  17.  11 
Jcr.  11. 17.  I  32.  29,  32.  izcA.  16.  26 
33.  Ahab  did  more  to  pr.  the  Lordtu  a.  than  all 

21.  22,  wherewith  thou  hmlprucokcd  me  to  a 

22.  53.  Ahaz;;r.  to  (f..  the  Lord  God  ot'I:jrael 
9  Kings  21.  15.  tliey  have  provoked  me  to  a.  since 

the  day 

22.  17.  forsaken  me,  that  they  might  jjrwoo/.c  me 

to  a.  2  Citron.  34.  25.  Jcr.  25.  7. 

3  CAron.'28. 25.  j^r.  to  a.  the  L.  God  ol'liis  fathers 

JVeA.  4.  5.  have  ^r.  thee  to  a.  before  the  builders 

Paal.  Iti.a.pr.  him  to  a.  with  high  places,  106.  29. 

Prov.  20.  .2.  whuso/jr.  him  to  a.  smncth  against 

Jsa.  1.4.  tiiey  have  pr.  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  to  a. 

65.  3.  a  i)eu|ile  that  yjrwuo/ie  me  to  a.  continually 

Jier.  7.  Id.  Ihatthey  niay/irotoAc  mc  tuu.  [pr.toa. 

19.  do  they/>r.  me  to  a.  \\  8.  19.  why  have  they 

25.6.;<r.fne  not(y  a.\\  32.30.Israelhave^r.me  tuu. 

44.  3.  thuir  wickedness  to;>r.  me  to  a.  Kzck.  8. 17. 
£2e4.32.t9. 1  will/jruootc  to  a.  tlie  hearts  of  many 
Hos.  12. 14.  E|ihraini/;roy(;/ied  him  to  a.  bitterly 
Col.  3.  21.  fathers, ;;ri;to/;e  not  your  children  to  a. 

filuw  to  ANGhK 
Jfek.  9. 17.  thou  a  God  ready  to  pardon, s/ojc  to  a. 
Psat.  103.  d.  slow  to  a.  plenteous  in  mercy,  145.  8. 
Prov.  15.  18.  he  that  is  slow  to  a.  aj)peaselh  strife 
16.  32.  he  that  is  stow  to  a.  better  than  the  mighty 
Joeli.  I'i.sloicto  a.  of  great  kindness,  .fonaki.  2. 
J^ah.  1.  3.  the  Lord  is  slow  to  a.  great  in  power 
.AXGEUED. 

1  Sam.  1.  t  6-  ai'l  ''er  adversary  also  a.  her  sore 
Psal.  106.  32.  they  a.  him  at  the  watets  of  strife 

ANGLE. 
Isa.  19.  8.  and  all  they  that  cast  a.  shall  lament 
Hab.  1.  15.  they  take  up  all  of  them  with  the  a. 

A.NGKY. 
Ocn.  13.  30.  let  not  the  Lord  be  a.  I'll  speak,  32. 

45.  5.  be  not  a.  with  yourselves  that  yo  sold  me 
Lev.  10.  16.  and  Moses  wan  a.  with  Eleazar  and 
Deut.  1.  37.  the  Lord  was  a.  with  me  loryou,4.2l. 

9  8.  Lord  w  as  a.  with  you  to  have  destroyed  you 
20.  the  Lord  was  very  a.  with  Aaron,  1  jirayed 
3vdg.  18.  25.  lest  a.  fellows  run  upon  thee 

2  iam.  19.  42.  wherefore  be  ye  a.  for  this  matter 

1  Kings  8. 46.  and  Ihou  be  a.  with  ihem,  2  C'A.6.36. 
11.  9.  and  the  Lord  was  a.  with  Solomon,  because 

0  Kings  J7. 18.  therefore  the  L.  was  a.  with  Israel 
/Jrru  9. 14.  wouldsl  thou  not  be  a.  with  us  till  thou 
J^TJi..  'i.  6.  I  was  very  a.  when  I  heard  their  cry 
Psal.2. 12.  kiss  the  Son,  h.-st  he  be  a.  and  ye  perish 
7.  11.  God  is  a.  with  the  wicked  every  day 
76.  7.  who  may  stand  when  once  thou  art  a.  ? 
79.  5.  how  long  will  thou  be  a.  ?  80.  4.  J  85.  5. 
Prov.  14.  17.  lie  that  is  soon  a.  dealelh  foolishly 
21.19.  dwell  in  wiiderness,than  with  an  a.  woman 
22.  24.  make  no  friendship  with  an  a.  man 
25.23.  BO  doth  an  a.  countenance,  a  backbiting 
29. 22.  a.  man  stirrolh  uji  strife,  and  a  furious  man 
£cct.5.6.  wherefore  should  God  bea.  atthy  voice? 
7.  9.  be  not  hasty  in  thy  sjiirit  to  be  a. 
Cant.  1.  6.  my  mother's  children  were  a.  with  me 
fsa.  12.  1.  though  thou  wast  a.with  me,thine  anger 
Kick.  16.  42.  1  will  be  quiet,  and  will  be  no  more  a. 
Dan.  2.  12.  for  this  cause  the  king  was  a. 
JonahA.  Lit  displeased  Jonah,  and  he  was  very  a. 
4.  the  Lord  said,  dost  thou  well  lo  be  a.  7  9. 
9.  he  said,  I  do  well  lo  be  a.  even  unto  death 
Mat.  5.  22.  whosoever  is  a.  with  his  brother 
I.,uke  14.  21.  the  rnastcr  of  the  house  being  a. 
15.  28.  and  he  was  a.  and  would  not  go  in 
John  7.  23.  are  ye  a.  at  mo  because  I  have  made 
K/)A.4.26  be  a.  and  sin  not,  let  not  the  sun  go  down 
Tit.  1.  7.  a  bishop  must  be  blameless,  not  soon  a. 
lieo- 11. 18.  the  nations  were  a.  Ihy  wrath  is  coino 

ANGUISH, 
^cn.  42. 21.  guilty,  in  that  we  saw  the  a.  of  his  soul 
F.iod.  6.  9.  but  they  hearkened  not  lo  Moses  for  a. 
lJeut.2.2ry.  tremble,  and  be   r.  a.  been  use  of  thee 

2  Sam.  1.  9.  slay  me,  for  a.  is  come  upon  mo 
JobT.  II.  I  will  sjieak  in  tne  a.  of  m^ spirit 

1.5.  24.  trouble  and  a.  shall  make  liim  afraid 
PiaM19.l43.troubIeand  a.  have  taken  hold  on  me 
Prov.  1.  27.  when  dislrci's  and  a.  come  upon  you 
/<u.R.22.1ook  tothc  earth, and  behold  dimness  of  a. 

30.  6.  into  the  land  oftronble  and  a.  from  whence 
Jer.  4.31.  the  a.  as  of  her  that  bringetli  forth  child 

6.  24.  a.  hath  taken  li<dd  of  us,  49.  2-1.  |  .W.  4.3. 
John  10.21. she  rcniembercth  no  more  her  a.  for  joy 
7to/7i.2.n.  tribulation  and  a.  upon  every  soiil  ofman 
2  Cer.2.4.for  out  of  much  a.  of  heart  I  wrote  loyou 
ANISE. 


ANO 

ANOINT 

Signifies,  [1]  To  pour  oil  upon,  Gen.  28.18. 1 31.13. 
L2J  To  consecrate  and  set  one  apart  to  an  office; 
iiiiumUng  bring  generalli/  practised  among  the 
Jews  on  that  occasion,  to  denote  the  person's 
being  endued  with  the  gifts  and  graces  of  the 
Spirit,  Exod.2d.4 1.  [3J  To  use  spiritual  means 
to  get  saeing  knowledge,  Kev.  3.  18.  [4J  'J'u 
smear,or  daub,iu\u\  9.6,11.  [5]  Oneparticular- 
hj  designed  and  chosen  bij  (iod  to  be  the  King, 
Pricst,and  I'rophetof  his church,namLlij, Christ 
Jesus,  whu  was  filled  with  the  Uoly  (/host  in  an 
ex-truurdinarij  manncr,und  thereby  consecrated 
and  authorised  to  be  the  JhssiaJi,  Psal.  2.  2. 1 
45.7.     Acts  4.  27.     [Vt]  j]  king,  L:im.  4. -M. 

Touch  not  mine  anointed,  Psal.  105.  15.  JJurt 
not  the  people  consecrated  to  myself  by  the 
gifts  and  graces  of  my  Spirit,  nur  those  c.ipe- 
ciiilly  among  them  to  whom  J  familiarly  reveal 
vnj  mind  and  will,  that  they  may  teach  others. 

Thou  anoinlesl  my  head  with  od,  Psal.-S.i.5.  Thou 
bestowest  upon  me  thcconsolalionsuf  thyi<pirit. 

The  anointing,  1  John  2.  27.  The  tipirit  of  illu- 
mination; great  knowledge  in  heavenly  things. 

F.iod.  28.  41.  shalt  a.aiid  consecrate,30.30. 1 40. 15. 
29.  7.  take  anointing  oil  and  a.  him,  40.  13. 
36.  thou  shalt  a.  the  altar  to  sanctity  it,  40.  10. 
;JU.'  2ii.  thou  shalt  u.  the  tabernacle,  40.  9. 
40.  IL  thou  shalt  a.  the  lavor  and  h'S  foot 

Lev.  10.  32.  and  the  priest  whom  he  shall  a. 

Deut.  28.  40.  but  thou  shalt  not  a.  thyself  with  oil 

Jiidg.  9. 8.  the  trees  went  to  a.  a  king  over  them 
1.5.  if  in  truth  ye  a.  me  king  over  you 

Hnlh  3.  3.  wash  thyself  therelbre  and  a.  thee 

1  .Sam.  9.  10.  shalt  a.  liim  to  be  captain  over  Israel 
15. 1.  the  Lord  sent  me  to  a.  thee  king  over  Israel 
16.  3.  thou  shalt  a.  him  whom  1  name  unto  thee 

12.  the  Lord  saiil,  arise,  a.  him,  this  is  he 

2  Sam.  14.  2.  a.  not  thyself  with  oil,  but  be  as 

1  Kin^s  1.  34.  let  Zadok  a.  him  king  over  Israel 
19.  la.  a.  Hazael  king  ||  16.  a.  jehu,  a.  Elislia 

Isa.  21.  5.  arise  ye  princes,  and  a.  the  shield 
]Jan.  9. 24.  seal  up  the  vision, and  a. the  most  Holy 
10.  3.  neither  did  I  a.  myself  at  all,  till  weeks 
Hnios  6.  0.  a.  themselves  with  the  chief  ointments 
J\lic.6.  1.5.  shalt  tread  the  olives,  but  not  a.  thee 
-)/a<.  6.  17.  when  thou  fastest  a.  thine  head 
Mark  14.8.she  is  come  to  a.iny  body  to  the  burying 
16.  1.  had  bought  spices  that  they  might  «.  liim 
Jukel.  46.  my  head  with  oil  thou  didst  not  a. 
Rev.  3.  18.  and  a.  thine  evf-s  with  eye-salve 

ANOINTED. 
Eior/.29.29.  garm.  be  Aaron's  sons  after  him,  to  a. 
Lev.  4.  3.  if  the  prie.<t  that  is  a.  do  sin  according  to 

6.  20.  the  offering  of  Aaron,  when  he  is  a. 

7.  36.  in  the  day  that  he  a.  them,  by  a  statute 

8.  JO.a.the  tabernacle  |i  11.  a.  the  altar,  J^um.  7.1. 
12.Moses  poured  oil  on  Aaron's  head, and  a.  him 

jVujn.-l.S.namesof  the  sons  of  Aaron  which  were  a. 

7.  10.  the  princes  ofT.^red  after  it  was  a.  84,  88. 
l.Saw.lO.l.  the  Lord  a. the  captain  ||  15.  17.  a.  Saul 

16.  13.  a.  David,  2  .Sam.  2.  4,  7.  |  5.  3,  17.  I  12.  7. 
2  Kings  9.  3,  6,  12.  1  Chron.  11.  3.  |  14.  8. 

2  .Sam.  2.  7.  the  house  of  Judah  have  a.  me  king 
3.  39.  I  am  thisduy  weftk, though  a.  king 
12.  20.  David  arose  from  the  earth,  and  a.  himself 
23.  1.  David  the  a.  of  tl»e  God  of  Jacob  said 

Psal.  2.  t  6.  yet  have  I  a.  my  king  on  Zion 
/j-a.61.1.theLord  hath  a.meto  preach,  Lukei.  18. 
F.iek.  28.  14.  thou  art  the  a.  cherub  that  covers 
Luke  7.  38.  she  kissed  his  feet  and  a.  them 

4().bul  this  woman  hath  a.my  feet  with  ointment 
John  1. 1 41.  we  found  the  Messiah,  which  is  the  a. 

9.  (i.  he  a.  the  eyes  of  the  blinrl  man  with  clay 
II.  Jesus  made  clay,  and  a.  mine  eyes 

11.2.  it  was  that  Mary  which  a.  the  Lord 
12.3.thcn  took  Mary  ointment  niid  a.  feet  of  Jcsui 
.ids  4.  27.  holy  child  Jesus,  vthoin  thou  hast  a. 

JO.  38.  how  (;od  n.  Ji'sus  of  Nazareth  with  holy 
2  Cor.  1.  21.  he  which  hath  a.  us  is  God 

A.NOINTED  Ones. 
Zech.4. 14.  these  are  the  two  a.  onM  which  stand 

His  ANOINTED. 
1  •9flm.2. 10.  give  strength,  and  exult  horn  of  his  a. 
12.3.witness  against  me  before  the  Lord  and  Ai*  a. 
5.  the  Lord  and  Am  a.  is  witness  this  day 
2.Sam. 22.51. shcweth  mercy  toAi4  a.  Vsul.  18.50. 
Psal.  2.  2.  against  the  Lord,  and  against  Aiu  a. 
20.  0.  now  know  I  that  (he  Lord  iiavelh  his  a. 
'28  8.  and  ho  is  the  saving  strength  of  his  a. 
Isa.  45.  1.  thus  sailh  the  Lonl  to  his  a.  to  Cyrus 

Lord's  ANOINTED. 
1  Sam.  16.  r>.  surely  the  Lord's  a.  is  before  him 
24. 6. 1  should  do  this  lo  my  master,  the  Lord's  a. 
10.  put  my  hand  ngainsi  my  lord,  for  he  is  /-.  a. 
20.9.slretcli  his  hand  against  L.  a.  and  be  guiltlcs.a 
lO.lo  die, because  yo  have  not  kept  the  Lord's  n. 
I'fam.l.H.wastthounot  afraidtodeslroythe /,.n.7 
19.  21.  put  lo  death,  because  ho  cursed  the  A 


Mat.  2?  23.  yo  pay  lithe  of  mint,  a.  and  cummin!  Lam.  4.  20.  the  a.  of  Lord  was  taken  in  their  piu 


ANS 

Mine  ANOINTEfli 
1  Sam. 2.  35.  he  shall  walk  before  mine  a.  for  ever 

1  Chron.  16. 22.  touch  not  mine  a.  Psal.  105. 15. 
Psal.  132.  17.  1  have  ordained  a  lamp  lor  mine  a. 

ANOlN'l'ED  with  Uil. 
JVuni.  35.25.  death  of  high  iiriest  a.  with  holy  oil 

2  6am._L  21.  as  though  he  had  not  been  a.  with  ou 
f «a/.4.J.7.God  a. thee  with  oil  of  gladness,  JIeb.1.9 

e9.20.  with  my  holy  oil  have  1  a.  hini 
92. 10.  my  horn  ctalt,  I  shall  be  a.  joitA  fresh  oti 
Thine  ANOINTED. 
2  Chron.  6.42.  O  Lord  God,  turn  not  away  the  fac« 
of  thine  a.  Psal.  132.  10 
Psal.  84.  9.  behold,  O  God,  look  on  face  of  tAinc  a. 
89.  38.  thou  hast  been  wroth  willi  thine  a. 

51. they  have  rejiroached  the  footsteps  uf  thine  a. 
Hab.  3.13.  wenlest  even  lor  salvation  with  tJiine  a 

ANOINTEDST. 
fJen.  31 .  13. 1  am  the  God  of  Bel  h-el  where  thou  a. 
I'sal.  23.  5.  a.  my  head  with  oil,  my  cup-runncth 

ANOINTING. 
E.rod.  40. 15.  their  a.  be  an  everlasting  priesthood 
/iu. 10.27. yoke  shall  be  destroyed  because  of  the  a. 
1  Juhn'i.  27.  but  the  a.  which  ye  have  received  of 
liim,  as  the  same  a.  teacheth  you  uU  things 
ANOINTING  Vil.  [cense 

Kxod.  37.  29.  he  made  the  holy  a.  oil  and  pure  in- 
Lev.ti.  12.  he  poured  of  the  a.  oil  on  Aaron's  head 
iO.  7.  for  the  a.  oil  of  the  Lord  is  upon  you 
21.  10.  on  whose  head  the  a.  oil  wiis  poured 
Aum.4.16.  to  tiieolfice  of  Eleazar  pertaineth  a.  oi. 
Jam.  5. 14.  a.  him  with  oil  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 

ANON. 
Mat.  13.  20.  heareth,  and  a.  with  joy  receiveth  it 
Mark  1.  30.  mother  lay  sick,  and  a.  they  tell  him 
ANOTHER.  [of  her 

Oen.  4.  25.  appointed  me  a.  seed  instead  of  Abel 
30.  24.  the  Lord  shall  add  to  me  a.  son 

43.  7.  the  man  asked  us,  have  ye  a.  brother  ? 
Kxod.'H.M.Xosl  thing, which  a.  challengelh  to  be  his 
J^ev.  18.  1 18.  thou  shalt  not  take  one  wife  to  a. 
JVum.  14.  24.  Caleb,  because  he  had  a.  spirit 
Judg.'i.  10.  a.  generation  that  knew  not  the  Lord 

1(>.  7.  then  shall  1  be  weak,  and  be  as  a.  man 

1  .Sam.  10.  6.  and  shalt  be  turned  into  a.  man 
9.  and  it  was  so,  that  God  gave  him  a.  heart 

2  Chron.  20.  t  22.  and  they  smote  one  a. 
F.slh.  1.  19.  let  the  king  give  her  royal  estate  to  a 
Job  19.27.  whom  mine  eyes  shall  behold  and  not  a. 
Psal.  109.  8.  let  a.  take  his  office,  .-lets  1.  20. 
Prov.  25.  9.  and  discover  not  a  secret  to  a. 

27.  2.  let  a.  praise  thee,  and  not  thy  own  mouth 
Isa.  42.  8.  my  glory  will  I  not  give  to  a.  48.  )1. 

44.  5.  a.  shall  call  himself  by  the  name  of  Jacob 
57.  8.  Ihou  hast  discovered  thyself  to  a.  than  me 
05.  1.5.  and  shall  call  his  servants  by  a.  name 
66.  t  17.  and  purify  themselves  one  after  a. 

Hos.  3.  3.  and  thou  shalt  not  be  for  a.  man 
4.  4.  yet  let  no  man  strive  nor  reprove  a. 
Mat.  11.  3.  art  Ihou  ^o,  or  do  we  look  for  a.  ? 
jMark  14.  19.  began  to  say,  is  it  I  ?  a.  said,  is  it  P 
/.MAel6.7.ihen  said  he  to  a. how  much  owest  thou'! 

12.  if  not  faithful  in  that  which  is  a.  man's 
2  Cor.  11.  4.  a.  Jesus,  a.  Spirit,  or  a.  gospel 
(lot.  1.  7.  which  is  not  a.  but  there  be  some 
0.  4.  then  have  rejoicing  in  himself,  and  not  in  s. 
1  V'im.t).  tS.galliiigs  one  of  a.  destitute  of  the  truth 
Heb.  3.13.  e.xhorlone  a.  while  called  to-day,  10. 25. 
4.  8.  he  would  not  have  Sfioken  of  a.  day 
One  Another,  See  Love. 
One  against  ANOTHER. 
1  .Sam.2.2.5.ifo7if  mansin  against  a.ihejudgesliiilt 
Jer.  13.  14.  I  will  dash  Ihem  one  against  a. 
1  C«r.4.6.no  one  of  you  be  pufled  up  one  against  a. 
Jam.  5.  9.  grudge  not  one  against  a.  brethren 
Chie  for  ANOTHER. 

1  Cor.  11.  33.  when  ye  come  lo  eiit,  tarry  one  for  a. 
12.2.3.  members  should  have  same  care  one/ur  a 

.Jam.  5.  16.  piay  one  for  a.  that  ye  may  be  heulcd 
ANSWER 

Signifies,  [1]  To  reply  to  a  question,  Prov.  26.  4. 
[2]  'J'o  begin  to  spcak,ichrn  no  question  isasked, 
Dun.  2.  26.  Acu  5*  8.  [3]  To  witness,  Gen. 
:tO.  .-a.  [4]  To  obey,  Isu.  r.5.  12.  Jer.  7.  13. 
[!i]  To  grant  what  one  desires  in  prayer,  Pssl. 
27.  7.  1 8().  7.  Isu.  05. 24.  [6]  To  give  account, 
J.di  9.  3.  I  40.  2.     [7]   To  punish,  Ezek.  14.  7. 

Oen.  41.  10.  Gtirl  shall  give  Pharaoh  an  a.  ofpeuca 

IJrut.  21).  11.  if  the  city  make  llwe  nn  a.  of  peace 

2  Sam.  24.  13.  rro  what  a.  I  shall  return  to  him 
K.^tA. 4. 1.5.  Esther  bode  Ihem  return  Mordecoithisa. 
yu/>l9. I6.I  calird  my  servant,  and  he  gave  me  no  a. 

32.3. because  they  Imd  found  no  a  and  condemned 
35.  12.  I  here  they  cry,  but  none  givelh  a. 

I'rnv.  15.  1.  a  soil  a.  liirncth  away  wrath 
23.  a  mnn  bath  joy  by  the  a.  of  his  mnulh 
10.  1.  tlin  a.  of  the  lonifue  is  from  the  Lord 
24.  20.  shall  ki.<s  his  lips  that  givelh  a  right  a. 

Clint.  5.  0.  I  called  him,  but  ho  gave  me  no  a. 

Mic.  3.  7.  cover  the  li|>«,  for  there  is  oo  a.  of  God 


ANS 

Luke  20.  2C.  0ii  they  marvelled  at  his  a. 
lo/in  1.  '2i.  that  wo  may  give  a.to  them  that  sent  us 
U'.  9.  whence  art  thou  7  Jesus  gave  him  no  a. 
lium.  11.  4.  but  what  saith  the  a.  of  God  to  him  1 

1  Cor.  9.3.  mine  a.  to  them  that  do  e.\amine  me  is 
80r.  1. 1 9.  but  we  had  the  a.  ofdcath  in  ourselves 

2  Tim.  4.  16.  at  my  first  a.  none  stood  with  me 
1  Pet.  3.  15.  and  be  ready  to  give  an  a.  to  every 

21.  but  the  a.  of  a  good  conscience  toward  God 
ANSWERS.  • 

Job  21.  34.  seeing  in  your  a.  remaineth  falsehood 

34.  36.  because  of  his  a.  for  wicked  men 
Luke  2.  47.  and  all  were  astonished  at  his  a. 

ANSWER,  ycrb. 
Oen.  30.  33.  so  shall  ray  righteousness  a.  for  me 
I)cut.  27. 15.  all  the  people  shall  a.  and  say  amen 

1  Kings  18.  t  2G.  they  called,  saying,  O  Baal  a.  us 
29.  ttiere  was  neither  voice,  nor  any  to  a. 

Job  13.  22.  call  thou,  and  I  will  a.  and  a.  thou  me 
23.5.1  would  know  the  words  that  he  would  a.  me 
31.  14.  when  he  visiteth,  what  shall  I  a.  him  7 
33. 12. will  a.  thee,  God  is  greater  than  man,  35.  4. 
40.  2.  he  that  reproveth  God,  let  him  a. 
Psal.  27.  7.  have  mercy  also  on  me,  and  a.  me 
65.  5.  by  terrible  things  in  right,  wilt  thou  a.  us 
86.7.  will  call  on  thee,  for  thou  wilt  a.  me,3S.  f  15. 
102.  2.  in  the  day  when  I  call  a.  me  speedily 
108.  6.  save  with  thy  right  hand,  and  a.  me 
143.  1.  O  Lord,  in  thy  faithfulness  a.  me 
Prov.  15.  28.  heart  of  the  righteous  studieth  to  a. 
22.21.  that  thou  mightest  a.  the  words  of  truth 
26.  5.  a.  a  fool  according  to  his  folly,  lest  he  bo 
Isa.  14.  32.  what  shall  one  then  a.  the  messengers 
50.  2.  when  I  called  was  there  none  to  a.?  (16.  4. 
58.  9.  then  shall  thou  call,  and  the  Lord  will  a. 
Dan.  3. 16.  arc  not  careful  to  a.  thee  in  this  matter 
Joel  2. 19.yea  the  Lord  will  a.  and  say  to  his  people 
Hab.  2.  1.  what  I  shall  a.  when  I  am  reproved 
Mat.  22.  46.  no  man  was  able  to  a.  him  a  word 
Mark  11.  30.  was  it  from  heaven  or  of  men'?  a.  me 

14.  40.  neither  wist  they  what  to  a.  him 
Luke  11.  7.  and  he  from  within  shall  a.  and  say 
12.  11.  how  or  what  thing  ye  shall  a.  or  say 
13.25.  he  shall  a.  I  know  you  not  whence  you  are 

21.  14.  not  to  meditate  before  what  ye  shall  a. 

2  Cor.  5. 12.  that  ye  may  have  somewhat  to  a.  them 
Col.  4. 6.  may  know  how  ve  ought  to  a.  every  man 

/MiZi  ANSWER. 
Jo!,  13.22.  call,  Irelll  a.  14. 15.  Ps.Ql.  15.  .Trr.  33.3. 
/*•«.  1)5.  24.  come  to  pass,  before  they  call  I  will  a. 
Ezek.  14.  4../the  Lord  !/!(7Z  a.  him  that  Cometh,  7. 

.\-ot  ANSWER. 
Oen.  45.  3.  Joseph's  brethren  could  not  a.  him 
Kiod.  23.  t2.  shall  not  a.  in  a  cause  to  decline 
2  .Sam.  3.  11.  he  could  not  a.  Abner  a  word 
2  Kirnrs  18.  36.  king's  command,  was,  a.  nnt,  ha. 
Jn4  9.3.hp  cannot  a.  him  one  of  a  thousand  [36.21. 
Prop.  1.  23.  they  shall  call,  but  I  will  not  a. 
26.  4.  a.  not  a  fool  according  to  his  folly,  lest  thou 
29. 19.  for  though  he  understand,  he  will  not  a. 
/."a.  65.  12.  because  when  I  called,  ye  did  not  a. 
Jtr.  7.  27.  thou  shall  call,  but  they  will  not  a.  thee 
lyUkfM.  6.  thev  could  not  a.  him  again  to  these 

22.  68.  if  I  ask  you,  von  will  not  a.  nor  let  me  go 

ANSWERABLE. 
F.rod.  38.  18.  a.  to  the  hangings  of  the  court 
Mat.  3.  t  8.  bring  forth  fruit  a.  to  amendment 

ANSWERED. 
J'ufi^'-.8.8.menofPenuel  a. as  the  mm  of  Succoiha. 
.  Sam.  3.4.  the  Lord  called,  and  he  a.  here  am  1, 16. 

T.  7.  the  women  a.  one  another  as  they  played 
2  .9am.  19.42.  the  menofJudnh  a.  the  men  of  Israel 
'.  Kivffs  2.  30.  thus  said  ,Toab,  and  thus  he  a.  me 

12. 13.  the  king  a.  people  roughly,  2  Chron.  10.  13. 
18.  26.  but  there  was  no  voice,  nor  any  that  a 
2  Chrnit.  25.  9.  the  man  of  God  a.  the  F.ord  is  able 
Job  11.2.  should  not  the  multitude  of  words  be  a.  ? 
F.irk.  37.  3.  [  a.  O  Lord  God,  thou  knowest 
J'>an.  2.  14.  Daniel  a.  with  counsel  and  wisdom 
Mic.  6.  5.  what  Balaam  the  son  of  Beor  a.  him 
Mat.  27.  12.  when  he  was  arcused  he  a.  nothing, 
14.  Mark  14.  61.  |  15. 3,  .5.  Lukr  2:5.  9. 
Mark  J2.  2^.  perceiving  that  he  had  a.  well 

34.  when  Jesus  saw  that  he  n.  discreetly 
^cts  15. 13.  after  thev  held  their  peace,  James  a. 

2i.8.  I  a.  who  art  thou.  Lord?  and  he  said  to  me 
'  25.  8.  %yhile  he  n.  for  himself,  26.  1. 

ANSWERED,  meant  of  Gon. 
/ren.  35.  3.  who  a.  me  in  the  day  of  my  distress 

Rzni/.lO.lO.MoJCs  spake,  and  Goda.himbya  voice 

1  .Sam.  7.  t  9.  Samuel  cried,  and  the  Lord  a.  him 

2  Sam.  21.  1.  and  the  Lord  a.  it  is  for  Saul 

1  Chron.  21.  26.  he  a.  him  from  heaven  by  firo 
2^.  when  David  saw  that  the  Loid  had  a.  him 

/'.^-a^8|.7.  t  a.  thee  in  the  secret  place  of  thunder 
99.  6.  they  called  on  the  Lord,  and  he  a.  them 
118.5.  the  Lord  a.  me,  and  set  me  in  a  large  place 

ha.  6.  11.  ho  a.  till  the  cities  be  wasted  without 

Jer.  23.  35.  what  hath  the  Lord  a.  and  spoken,  37. 

HaJ).  2.  2.  the  Lord  a.  me,  write  the  vision 


APO 

Zech.  ^.  13.  the  Lord  a.  the  angel  that  talked 
Mat.  20.  13.  he  a.  one  of  them  and  said,  friend 
2.5.  26.  his  lord  a.  and  said,  thou  wicked  servant 
ANSWERED  not. 

1  Sam.  4.  20.  she  a.  not,  nor  did  sho  regard  it 
14.  37.  but  he  a.  him  not  that  day,  28.  6. 

2  ^am.  22.  42.  looked,  but  a.  them  not,  Fs.  18.41. 

1  Kings  18.  21.  and  the  people  a.  him  not  a  word, 

2  Kings  18.  36.  Jsa.  36.  21. 
./er.  7.  13.  and  I  called  you,  but  yo  a.  not,  35.  17. 
Mat.  15.  23.  but  he  a.  her  not  a  word 
ANSWERED  and  said. 
Exo(/.4.1.  Moses  a.  and  said,  they  will  not  believe 

2  Arni^s7.13.one  of  his  servants  a.a;«/snK/,letsome 
JWA.  2.  20.  then  a.  1  them  and  said  unto  them 
./o6  3.t2.Joba.  andsaid6.1.19.1.|12.1.|16.1.|19. 1. 
Isa.  21.9.  he  a.  aitdsaid  Babylon  is  fallen,  is  fallen 
Jer.  11.  5.  then  a.  I  and  said,  so  be  it,  O  Lord 

ANSWEREDST. 
Psal.  99.  8.  thou  a.  them,  O  Lord  our  God,  thou 
133.  3.  in  the  day  when  I  cried  thou  a.  me 

ANSWEREST. 
1  Sam.  26. 14.  David  cried,  a.  thou  not,  Ahncr  ? 
.hb  16.  3.  what  emboldeneth  thee,  that  thou  «  7 
Mat.  26.  62.  a.  thou  nothing  7  Mark  14.  60. 1 15.  4. 
.hhn  18.  22.  a.  thou  the  high-prieat  so  ? 
Rom.  9.  t  20.  who  art  thou  that  a.  against  God  7 

ANSWERETH. 
1  Sam.  28.  15.  God  is  departed  and  a.  me  no  more 
1  Kings  18.  24.  let  the  God  that  a.  by  tire,  be  God 
.rob  12.  4.  who  calleth  on  God,  and  he  a.  him. 
Prov.  18.  13.  that  a.  a  matter  before  he  hcareth 
23.  the  poor  intreat,  but  the  rich  a.  roughly 
27.  19.  as  face  a.  to  face,  so  the  heart  of  man 
Eccl.  5.  20.  God  a.  him  in  the  joy  of  his  heart 
10.19.  wine  maketh  merry,  but  money  a.  all  things 
^/aZ.2.tl2.Lord  will  cut  offhim  that  wakclh  and  a. 
Gal.  4.  25.  and  a.  to  Jerusalem  that  now  is 

ANSWERING. 
I.vke  23.  40.  but  the  other  a.  rebuked  him 
Tit.  2.  9.  servants  be  obedient,  not  a.  again 

ANT,  S. 
Prov.  6.  6.  go  to  the  a.  thou  sluggard,  consider 
30. 25.  the  a.  are  a  people  hot  strong,  yet  prepare 

ANTIQUITY. 
Isa.  23.  7.  jojous  city,  whose  a.  is  of  ancient  days 

"ANVIL. 
Isa.  41.  7.  encouraged  him  that  smote  the  a. 

ANY. 
F.rod.  11.  7.  against  a.  of  the  children  of  Israel 
J^ev.  4.  2.  if  a  soul  shall  sin  against  a.  of  the  com- 
mandments, 13.  22,  27.  I  5. 17. 

6.  3.  lieth,  in  a.  of  all  these  that  a  man  dotli 
/?(*!/(. 32.  39.  nor  a. that  can  deliver  out  of  my  hand 
2-SrtOT.  7.  7.  spake  I  a  word  with  a.  1  Chron.  17.  6. 

9.  1.  is  there  yet  a.  left  of  the  house  of  Saul  ? 

1  Kings  18.  26.  was  no  voice,  nor  a.  that  answered 
.Toh  33.  27.  he  looketh,  and  if  a.  say,  I  have  sinned 
Psal.  4.  6.  many  say,  who  will  shew  us  a.  good 7 

5.  t  9.  no  faithfulness  in  the  mouth  of  a.  of  them 
Prov.  30.  30.  a  lion  tiirneth  not  away  for  a. 
fsa.  44.  8.  there  is  no  God,  I  know  not  a. 
Amos  6. 10.  he  shall  say,  is  there  yet  a.  with  thee  7 
Mark  8.  26.  nor  go  nor  tell  it  to  a.  in  the  town 

1 1.  25.  forgive,  if  ye  ha»e  ought  against  a. 
/.nkeB.  43.  had  spent  all,  nor  could  be  healed  of  a. 
Acts^.  2.  if  he  found  a.  of  this  way,  men  or  women 
IPor.  6. 12. 1  wi  1  not  be  brought  under  power  of  a. 
./a?H.  1.  .5.  if  a.  lack  wisdom,  let  him  ask  of  God 

2  Pet.  3.  9.  not  willing  that  a.  should  perish 
2.AH/i?(10.if  there  come  a. and  bring  not  this  doctrine 
See  Further,  Gon,  Man,  More,  Thing,  Time, 

WisK.  Any  while,  see  Dead. 

APACE,  see  Flke,  Fled. 
APART. 
F.rod.  13.  12.  shall  set  a.  all  that  open  the  matrix 
Lev.  15.  19.  she  shall  be  put  a.  seven  days 

18.10.  thou  shall  not  approach,  as  long  as  she  is  a. 
JVcA.  12.  t  47.  set  a.  holy  things  to  the  Lcvites 
Psal.  4.  3.  the  Lord  hath  set  a.  him  that  is  so(]\y 
7.eeh.  12.  12.  every  family  a.  their  wives  a.  14. 
Mat.  14.  13.  Jesus  departed  into  a  desert  place  a. 
23.  he  went  up  inio  a  mountain  a.l7.1./.):A-c9.2S. 
17. 19.  then  came  the  disciples  to  Jesus  a. 
.Mark  6.  31.  and  he  said,  come  ye  yourselves  a. 
Jam.  1.  21.  wherefore  lay  a.  all  filthincss 
ApE.s,  see  IPeacocks. 
APIECE. 
JVum.  3.  47.  thou  shall  take  five  shekels  a.  by  poll 

7.  86.  the  golden  spoonsw'cighing  ten  shekels  a. 
17.  6.  every  one  of  their  princes  gave  him  a  rod  a. 

1  Kings  7. 15.  two  pillars  eighteen  cubiis  high  a. 
/.uJte9.3.neither  take  money,nor  have  (wo  coats  a. 
John.2.  6.  containing  two  or  three  firkins  q. 
Apollyox,  see  Grelk. 
APOSTLE 
Signifies,  j?  mcssenirer  sent  vpon  any  speeial  er- 
rand, Rom.  16.  7.  2  Cor.  8.23.     It  is  aiiplied  [1] 
To  Christ  Jesus;  who  was  sent  from  heaven  to 
assume  our  nature,  and  work  out  salvation. 


APP 

with  authority  to  execute  his  prophetical  and 
ailhis  offices,  and  to  send  forth  Ins  apuatl.s  to 
publish  the  gospel,  Heb.  3.  1.  [2J  To  a  vtiui.'^ 
ter  immediately  sent  by  Christ  to  preach  Che 
gospel,  Mat.  10.  2.-  Gal.  1.  1. 
Horn.  1.  1.  Paul  called  to  be  an  a.  1  Cor.  1.  1. 
II.  13.  inasmuch  as  I  am  the  a   of  the  Gentilos 

1  Cor,  9.  1.  am  I  not  an  a.  ?  am  1  not  free  7  2. 
15.  9.  thai  am  not  meet  to  be  called  an  a. 

2  Cor.  1.  1.  Paul  an  a.  of  Jesus  Christ,  Eph.  1.  1 

Col.  1.  1.  1  Tim.  1.  1.  2  Tim.  1.  1.  (ial.  1. 1 
12.12.lhesign6of  an  a.  were  wrought  among  yci 
1  Tim.  2.7.whereto  I  am  ordained  an  a.  2  7'ihi.1.11. 
Til.  1.  1.  Paul  a  servant  of  God,  and  a.  of  Christ 
//ei.3.1.  consider  the  a.  and  high-priest  of  our  prof 

APOSTLES. 
Mat.  10.2.  now  the  names  of  the  12  a.  are  these 
Mark  6.  30.  tlie  a.  gathered  themselves  together 
Luke  6.  13.  he  chose  twelve,  whom  he  named  a. 
9.  10.  the  a.  when  they  were  returned,  told  him 

11.  49.  1  will  send  theni  prophets  and  a. 

17.  5.  the  a.  said  to  the  Lord,  increase  our  faith 
22.  14.  he  sal  down,  and  the  twelve  a.  with  him 
24.  10.  the  women  told  these  things  to  the  a. 

Jicts  1.  26.  he  was  numbered  with  the  eleven  a. 
2.  43.  many  signs  were  done  by  the  a.  5.  12. 

4.  35.  laid  them  down  at  the  a.  feet,  37.  ]  5.  2. 

5.  18.  laid  their  hands  on  the  a.  and  put  th'era 

6.  1.  were  all  scattered  abroad,  except  the  a. 
Horn,  16.  7.  who  are  of  note  among  the  a. 

1  Cor.  4.  9.  God  hath  set  forth'us  the  a.  last 

12.  28.  God  hath  set  first  a.  ||  29.  are  all  a. 

15.  9.  for  I  am  the  least  of  the  a.  that  am  not  meet 
2Cor.  11.  5.  not  a  whit  behind  the  chiefest  a.  12.  11. 

13.  such  are  false  a.  deceitful  workers 
Gal.  1. 17.  nor  went  to  them  that  were  a.  before  me 

19.  but  Giber  of  the  a.  saw  I  none  save  James 
Eph.  3.  5.  as  it  fs  now  revealed  to  his  holy  a. 
4.  11.  he  gave  some  a.  and  some  prophets 
1  Thess.  2.  6.  been  burdensome  as  the  a.  of  Christ 
2P((.3.2.  of  the  commandment  of  nsihe  a.  of  Lord 
Judc  17.  the  words  spoken  before  of  the  a. 
Rev.  2.  2.  them  which  say  they  are  a.  and  are  not 

18.  20.  rejoice  over  her,  ye  holy  a.  and  prophets 

APOSTLESHIP 
Signifies,  The  office  of  the  apostles  ;  which  was, 
to  preach  the  gospel,  baptize,  work  miracles, 
plant  and  confirm  churches,  and  ordain  minis- 
ters. Mat.  10. 1.  28. 19.  Acts  14.23.  1  Cor.  3.  C. 
Acts  1.  25.  that  he  may  take  part  of  this  a. 
Rom.  1.5.  by  whom  we  have  received  grace  and  a. 
1  Cor.  9.  2.  the  seal  of  mine  a.  are  ye  in  the  Lord 
Gal.  2.  8.  wrought  efti^ctudllv  in  Peter  to  the  a. 

APOTHECARY. 
Exad.30.  25.  ointment  compounded  after  art  of  a 

35.  a  confection  afler  the  art  of  the  a.  37.  29. 
Eccl.  10. 1.  dead  flies  cause  the  ointment  of  the  a. 

APP.^RENTLY. 
JVum.  12. 8.  with  him  wUl  I  speak  even  a.  and  not 

APPAREL. 
Judg.  14.  t  19.  Samsnn  slew  30  men,  and  took  o. 
2.S'a/«.  12.  20.  David  arose  and  charged  his  a. 
1  Kings  10.  5.  queen  of  Sheba  bad  seen  the  attend- 
ance of  his  ministers,  and  their  a.  2  CAron.9.  4 
Isa.  3.42.  the  changeable  suits  of  a.  and  mantles 
4.1. we  will  eat  our  own  bread  and  wear  our  owna. 
63.  1.  who  is  Ibis  that  is  glorious  in  his  a.  7 
Zcph.  1.8.and  all  such  as  are  clothed  in  strange  a. 
Acts  1.  10.  two  men  stood  by  them  in  while  a. 
20.  33.  I  have  coveted  no  man's  silver  or  a. 
1  Tim.  2. 9.  that  women  adorn  thenis.  in  modest  a. 
.Jam.  2.  2.  if  a  man  come  in  goodly  a.  and  a  poor 

1  Pet.  3.  3.  not  of  wearing  gold,  or  putting  on  a. 

See  RoyaT.. 
APP.ARELLED. 

2  Sam.  13.18.  the  king's  daughters,  virgins,  were  a. 
Luke  7.  25.  behold  thev  which  are  gorgeously  a. 

APPEAL,  ED.  [21. 

.lets  25.  11.  no  man  deliver  me,  I  a.  unto  Cesar, 
26.  .32.  been-set  at  liberty,  if  he  had  not  a.  to  Ce- 
28. 19.  I  was  constrained  to  a.  to  Cesar  [sar 

APPEAR 
Signifies,  [1]  To  be  in  sisrht.  Gen.  1.  9.  Heb.  11.  .3. 
[2]  To  come  before,  Exod.  34.  23.  Acts  22.  30. 
[3]  To  be  discovered,  or  laid  open,  Jer. 13.26.  [4] 
To  present  one's  self  ns  an  advocate,  Heb.9.24. 
Oen.  1.9.  God  said,  let  the  dry  land  a.  and  it  was  so 
Ezod.  23.  15.  and  none  shall  a.  before  me  empty,, 
34.20.  Pnit.  16.  16 
17.  three  tirfics  in  the  year  all  males  shall  a. 
34.  24.  desire  thy  Innd,  when  thou  shall  go  to  a 
Dcut.  31.11.  when  al'  Israel  is  come  to  a.  beforeL 
Psal.  42.  2.  when  shall  I  come  and  a.  before  God  7 
90.  16.  lei  thy  work  a.  to  thy  servants,  and  giory 
Cant.l.  12.  the  flowers  /;.nn  the  earth,  the  lime  of 
4.  1.  tbv  hair  as  a  flock  of  goats  that  a.  6.  5. 
Fsa.  1.  12.  when  ye  come  to  a.  before  mo 
Jer.  13.  26.  will  discover,  thai  thy  shame  may  a. 
Fzpt.21.24.sothatin  all  your  doings  your  sins  do« 
Mat.  6.  16.  that  they  may  a  to  men  to  fast 


APP 

Mat.  23. 2fi.  even  bo  yc  outwardly  a.  righfe.  to  men 
24.  3U.  then  shall  a.  the  sign  of  the  Sun  of  man 
IjUke  11.  44.  lor  ye  are  as  graves  which  a.  not 
19.11.  they  thought  the  kingdom  of  God  should  a. 
Jlcta  26.  Iti.  of  things  in  which  1  Will  a.  tolheo 
Rom.  7.  13.  but  sin,  that  it  might  a.  sin,  working 
2  Or.  5.10.  we  must  all  a. before  the  judgment-seat 
Col.  3.  4.  when  Christ  who  is  our  life  sliall  a.  then 
1  Tim.  4.  15.  that  thy  profiling  may  a.  to  all 
//e6.9.24.now  to  a.  in  the  presence  of  God  for  us 
28.to  them  shall  hcii.the  second  time  to  salvation 
11.  3.  were  not  made  of  things  which  do  a. 

1  Pet.  4. 18.  where  shall  the  ungodly  and  sinner  a.  ? 
5.4.  when  the  chief  Sliejiherd  shall  a.  shall  receive 

lJoAn2.28.  when  he  shulia.wc  may  have  confidence 

3.  2.  it  doth  not  yet  a.  what  we  shall  he,  but  we 
know  that  when  he  shall  a.  we  shall  be  like  him 

Rto.  3. 18.  the  shame  of  thy  nakedness  do  not  a. 

APPE.AR,  r(/f  rrcrf  to  God. 
Lev.  9.  4.  for  to-day  the  Lord  will  a.  to  you,  6. 
16.  2.  I  will  a.  in  the  clotid  on  the  mercy-seat 
lSam.2.27.did  I  plainly  a.tothe  houseofthy  father 

2  Chron.  1.  7.  that  night  did  God  a.  to  Solomon 
P«a/.102. 16.  build  up  Zion,  he  shall  a.  in  his  glory 
Isa.Gii.  5.  but  ho  shall  a.  to  your  joy,  they  ashamed 
.^cts  26.  16.  of  those  things  in  the  which  I  will  a. 

APPEARANCE. 
^um.  9. 15.  was  on  tabernacle  as  the  a.  of  fire,  16. 

1  Sam.  16.  7.  for  man  looketh  on  the  outward  a 
/)an.8.15.stood  before  me  as  the  a.of  a  man,  10.18. 

10.6.  his  face  as  the  a.  of  lightning,  his  eyes  as 
John  7-  24.  judge  not  according  to  the  a.  but  judge 

2  Cor.  5.  12.  which  glory  in  a.  and  not  in  heart 
10. 1 1.  who  in  outward  a.  am  base  among  you 

7.  do  ye  look  on  things  after  the  outward  a.  ? 
IThess.  5.  22.  abstain  I'rom  all  a.  of  evil 

APPEARED. 
Oen.  12.7.  the  L.a.to  ,\bram  and  said,  17.1.  |  18.1. 

26. 2.  the  Lord  a.  to  Isaac,  and  said,  go  not,  24. 
48.  3.  Jacob  said,  God  Almighty  a.  to  me  at  Luz 

Kxod.  3.2.  angel  of  the  Lord  a.  in  niidst  of  the  bush 

4.  1.  they  will  say,  the  Lord  hath  not  a.  to  thee 

6.  3.  I  a.  to  Abraham  by  name  of  God  Almighty 
14.  27.  the  sea  returned  when  the  morning  a. 

S^am.  22.  16.  and  the  channels  of  the  sea  a. 
\  Kings  11.  9.  which  had  a.  to  Solomon  twice 
2  Kings  2.  11.  behold  there  a.  a  chariot  of  fire 
JWA.4.21.  wc  laboured  in  the  work  till  the  stars  a. 
Jer.  31.3.  the  Lord  hath  a.  of  old  to  me,  saying 
Mat.  2.  7.  Herod  inquired  what  time  the  star  a. 
13.  26.  the  blade  sprung,  then  a.  the  tares  also 

17. 3.  there  o.to  them  Moses  and  Elias,  Mark  9. 4. 
27. 53.  and  went  into  the  holy  city,  and  a.  to  many 

Mark  16.  9.  Jesus  a.  first  to  Mary  Magdalene 
12.  after  that  hea.in  another  form  to  two  of  them 
14.  after  he  a.  to  the  eleven  as  they  sat  at  meat 
Luke  1.  11.  there  a.  to  him  an  angel  of  the  Lord 
9.  31.  who  a.  in  glory,  and  spake  of  his  decease 
22.  43.  there  a. an  angel  to  him,  strengthening  him 
24.  34.  the  Lord  is  risen  indeed,  and  a.  to  Simon 
Jicts'2.  3.  there  a.  to  them  cloven  tongues  like  fire 

7.  2.  the  God  of  glory  a.  to  our  father  Abraham 
9.  17.  even  Jesus,  that  a.  to  thee  in  the  way 

26.  16.  1  have  a.  to  thee  for  this  purpose 

27.  20.  and  when  neither  sun  nor  stars  a. 
Tit.  2. 11.  the  grace  of  God  hath  a.  to  all  men 

3.  4.  afier  the  love  of  God  toward  man  a. 
ffeb.  9.  26.  in  the  end  hath  he  a.  to  put  away  sin 
Hev.  12.  1.  there  a.  a  great  wonder  in  heaven,  3. 

APPRARETH. 
Lev.  13. 43.  as  the  lepro-iy  a.  in  the  skin  of  the  flesh 
J)eut.  2.  30.  that  he  might  deliver  him,  as  a.  this 
Psal.  40.  t  5.  God  shall  liclp  her,  when  morning  a. 
84.  7.  cvrrv  one  of  them  in  Zion  a.  before  God 
Prov.  27.  2.).  the  hay  a.  and  the  tender  grass 
yer.  6.1.  forevila.  out  of  the  north,  and  destruction 
Mai.  3.  2.  end  who  sliall  stand  when  ho  a.f 
Jam.  4.  14.  your  W^ct  is  even  ai  a  vapour  that  a. 

APPEARING. 
1  Tim.  6.14.  keep  commandment  till  ^.ofour  T/ord 
S  Tim.  1.  to.  but  is  now  made  manifi-ntby  the  a. 

4.  1.  who  sliaU  judge  the  e|uick  and  deud  at  his  a. 

8.  but  to  all  them  also  that  love  his  a. 

Tit.  2.  13.  Idokins  for!;lofiou9  a.  of  the  great  God 
1  Pet.  1.  7.  ho  found  to  praise  at  the  a.  of  Jesus 

APPK.\SR. 
001.32.  20.  I  will  rt.  Iiim  with  the  present 

APPEASED,  ETII. 
Kg£A.  2.  1.  AhnsiicruH  a.  ho  remembered  Vashti 
Pron.  15.  18.  ho  that  is  slow  to  anger  a.  strife 
.Sets  19.35.whcn  the  loun-clerk  had  a.  the  people 

,      APPERTAIN. 

■Num.  16.  30.  earth  swallow  them,  with  all  that  a. 

Jt.  10. 7.  who  would  not  fear,  for  to  thee  doth  it  a. 

Srr  Pfrtain. 

APPRRT.MNED. 

A"u77i.  16. 32.  and  all  the  men  that  a.  to  Korah,  33. 

APPRRTAINETH,  ING. 
Lev.  6.  .5.  niid  give  it  to  him  to  whom  it  a. 
iiom.i.  1.  Abraham,  our  father,  as  a.  to  the  flesh 
16 


APP 

APPETITE. 
./(;&38. 39.  wilt  thou  fill  thua.  of  the  young  lional 
Pr0t).23.2.to  thy  throat,  ifthou  be  a  man  given  toa. 
Keel.  6.  7.  all  labour  for  mouth,  yet  a.  not  tilled 
/.<a.  29. 8.  but  ho  awaketh,  und  his  soul  hath  a. 
56.  t  II.  they  arc  strong  of  a.  not  satisfied 

APPLE  o/«Ac  eye. 
Deut.  32.  10.  he  kept  him  as  the  a.  of  his  eye 
Psal.  17. 8.  keep  me  as  the  a.  of  t/ie  eye,  hide  me 
Prov.  7.  2.  keep  my  law  as  the  a.  of  thine  eye 
Lam.  2.  18.  let  not  the  a.  of  thine  eye  cease 
Zech.  2.8.  touchelh  yon,  toucheth  the  a.  of  his  eye 

APPLE-TREE. 
Caji(.2.3.as  the  a.-tree  among  the  treesof  the  wood 
8.  .5. 1  rai'scd  thee  up  under  the  a.-tree,  thy  mother 
■/uel  1.  12.  the  palm-tree  and  a.-tree  are  withered 

APPLKS. 
Prov.  25.  11.  like  a.  of  gold  in  pictures  of  silver 
Cant.  2.  5.  comfort  inc  with  a.  for  I  am  sick  of  love 
7.8.breasts  as  clusters,and  smell  (ff  thy  nose  like  a. 

APPLY. 
Psal.  90. 12.  that  wo  may  a.  oar  hearts  to  wisdom 
Prov.  2.  2.  and  a.  thine  heart  to  understanding 
22.17.  hear  words,  a.  thine  heart  >.o  my  knowledge 
23.  12.  a.  thine  heart  to  instruction,  and  thine  ears 

APPLIED. 
Eecl.  7.  25. 1  a.  my  heart  to  know  and  seek  wisdom 
8.  !>.  I  a.  my  heart  to  every  work  that  is  done 

16.  when  I  a.  mine  heart  to  know  wisdom 
Has.  7. 1 6.  they  have  a.  their  heart  like  an  oven 

APPOINT 
Signifies,  [1]  To  constitute  or  ordain,  Josh.  20.9. 
[2]  To  assign  or  allot.  Numb.  4.  19.  [3]  To  set 
over,  Gen.  41.  34.  Lev.  26.  16.     [4]  To  decree. 
Acts  17.  31.  Heb.9.  27.     [5]  To  purpose  or  re- 
solve. Acts  20. 13.  [6]  To  promise,  Luke  22.  29. 
[7J  To  nominate  or  prefix.  Acts  28.23.     [8]  To 
command  or  order,  2  Sam.  15.15. [9]  To  establish 
or  settle,  Prov.  8.  29.     [101  To  set,  or  place,  2 
Kings  10.  24.  Neh.  7.  3.     [11]  To  limit,  1  Sam. 
13.  11.     [121  To   ordain  or  set  apart  for  an 
ojjice.  Acts  b.  3. 
Gen.  ,30.  23.  a.  me  thy  wages,  and  I  will  give  it 
41.  34.  let  Pharaoh  a.  officers  over  the  land 
/jCv.  26,  16.  I  will  a.  over  you  terror,  consumption 
JVHm.4.19.Aaron  and  his  sonsa.cveryone  to  service 
2  'Sam.  (i.  21.  to  a.  me  ruler  over  the  people  of  Lord 

7.  10.  I  will  a.  a  place  for  my  people  Israel,  and 
.Toll  14.  1.3.  that  thou  wouldest  a.  me  a  set  time 
fsa.  26.  1.  salvation  will  God  a.  for  walls  and  bul- 

61.3.to  a.them  that  mourn  in  Zion,  to  give  [  warks 
./er.  ir>.  3. 1  will  a.  over  them  four  kinds,  sailh  L. 

49.  19.  and  who  is  a  chosen  man  that  I  may  a. 
over  her?  who  will  a.  me  the  time  7  50.  44. 

51.  27.  will  the  kingdoms  a.  a  captain  against  her 
K:fA.2I.  19.  a.  thee  two  ways  ||  20.  a.  a  way  that 
Hos.  1.  11.  they  shall  a.  themselves  one  head 
Mat.  24.  51.  a.  him  his  portion  with  the  hypocrites 
/..uke  12.  46.  a.  him  his  portion  with  unbelievers 

22. 20.  I  a.  you  a  kingdom,  as  my  Father  unto  me 
.^cls  6.3.seven  men  whom  we  a.  over  this  business 

APPOINTED, 
^ffn.  24. 14.  beshethat  thouhasta.  for  thy  servant 
J^am.  9.2.  Israel  keep  the  passover  in  a.  seasons,  3. 
7.  may  not  offer  an  offering,  but  at  an  a.  season 
13.  because  he  brought  not  offering  in  a.  season 
■  fosh.  20.  9.  these  were  the  cities  a.  for  refuge 
./(/r<n'.20.3H. there  was  an  a. sign  between  Israel  and 
I  S'im.  13.  11.  thou  camest  not  within  the  days  a. 

19.20.  Samuel  standing  as  a.  over  them,  the  Spirit 
2.S'r(m.l7.  14.  the  Lord  hail  a.  to  defeat  the  counsel 
1  Kings  1.  3.5.  I  have  a.  him  to  be  ruler  over  Israel 

20.  42.  let  go  a  man  whom  I  had  a.  to  destruction 
JVcA.  6.  7.  thou  hast  a.  prophets  to  preach  of  thee 

9. 17.  in  their  rebellion  a.  a  captain  to  return,  but 
■Tub  7.  3.  and  wcari><omo  nights  are  a.  to  me 

14.  5.  thou  hast  a.  his  hound.-i,  that  he  cannot  pass 

20.  29.  and  the  herilage  a.  to  him  by  God 

30. 23.  to  death,  and  to  the  house  n.  for  all  living 
P.9a/.44.11.thou  hast  given  us  like  sheep  a. for  meat 

78.  .5.  a.  a  law  in  Israel,  which  ho  commanded 

79.  11.  preserve  thou  those  that  are  a.  to  die 
102.  20.  to  loose  those  that  are  a.  to  death 

Prov.  7.  20.  ho  will  come  homo  at  the  day  a. 

8.  29.  when  he  a.  tli"  foiiuilations  of  the  earth 
31.  H.  in  cause  of  all  such  as  are  n.  todo.-itriiction 

Fsa.  1.  14.  now  moons  and  your  a.  feasts  my  soul 
44.  7.  and  who,  since  I  a.  the  ancient  people 
ler.  5.24.  he  resorvelh  the  a.  weeks  of  the  harvest 
47.  7.  against  the  sea-shore,  thero  hath  ho  a.  it 
F.zrk.  4.  6.  I  have  a.  thee  each  day  for  a  year 
Mic.  6.  9.  hear  ye  the  rod,  and  who  hafh  a.  it 
.Mat. 11.  10.  gave  for  the  potter's  field,  as  the  L.  a. 
f.uke  3.  13.  exact  no  more  than  what  is  o^ou 
10.  I.  after  thene  the  Lord  a.  other  seventy 
22.29.  to  you  a  kingdom,  nsniy  Father  hnlh  a.  me 
Jirls  1.  23.  thoy  a.  two,  Jo.icph  nn<l  Matthias 
17.  31.  he  hath  a.  a  day  in  which  hn  will  judge 
I  Cor.  4.9.  God  hath  set  ns  apostles  last,  a.  to  death 
1  Thess.  3.  3.  for  you  know  that  wo  arc  a-  thereto 


*  APP 

1  TAM5.5.9.God  both  not  a. us  to  wrath,  but  obtain 

2  Tim.  1. 11.  whereunto  I  am  a.  a  preacher,  apostle 
Tit.  1.5.  and  ordain  elders  in  every  city,  as  1  a. 
Neb.  3.  2.  who  was  faithful  to  him  that  a.  him 

9. 27.  And  as  it  is  a.  to  men  once  to  die,  but  after 
lPe£.2.8.disobedient,  whereunto  also  they  were  a. 

APPOINTED  time  and  times. 
Gen.  18.  14.  at  the  time  a.  will  1  return  to  thcc 
Kzod.'X5.lhc  Lord  a. a  set  time,  saying,  to-morrow 
23. 15.  ^lou  shall  eat  unleavened  bread  in  time  a. 
ISam.  13. 8.  according  to  the  set  time  Samuel  a. 
20.  35.  Jonathan  went  into  the  field  at  the  time  a. 
2  Sam.  20.  5.  tarried  longer  than  the  sel  time  a.  him 
F.sth.9.  27.  according  to  their  a.  time  every  year 
.Job  1.  1.  is  there  not  an  a.  time  to  man  on  earth  ? 
14.  14.  all  the  days  of  my  a.  time  svill  1  wait  till 
Psal.  81.  3.  blow  uj)  the  trumjiet  in  the  time  a. 
Isa.  14.  31.  and  none  shall  be  alone  in  his  a.  times 
40.  t  2.  cry,  that  her  a.  time  is  accomplished 
.Jcr.  8.  7.  the  stork  in  heaven  knowcth  her  n^  times 
46.  17.  Pharaoh,  he  hath  passed  the  time  a. 
Dan.  8.  19.  for  at  the  time  a.  the  end  shall  be 
10.  1.  the  thing  was  true,  but  the  time  a.  was  lonj 
11.27.  for  yet  the  end  shall  be  at  the  time  a. 
29.  at  tbe  time  a.  shall  return,  and  come  south 
35.  time  <if  the  end,  because  it  is  yet  for  a  time  a. 
//aA.2.3.the  vision  is  yet  for  an  a.time,  wait  for  it 
.Ict.'i  17. 20.  God  hath  determined  times  before  ii. 
Crai.4.2.undcr  tutors,  until  the  Jiwie  a.  of  the  father 

APPOINTETH. 
Psal.  104. 19.  he  a.  the  moon  for  seasons,  the  fun 
iJan.  5.  21.  he  a.  over  it  whomsoever  he  will 

APPOINTMENT. 
JVam.  4.27.  at  the  a.  of  Aaron  and  his  song  shad  be 
.fosh.  11.  t  5.  when  kings  were  assembled  by  a. 
EzraG.  9.  wheat,  salt,  according  to  a.  of  the  |i/ie8t8 
2.Sam.  13.  32.  by  the  a.  of  Absalom  this  deterrtiined 
.hb  2.  11.  they  had  made  an  a.  together  to  eome 

APPREHEND 
Signifies,  To  seize,  or  take  prisoner,  Acts  12.  4. 
That  I  may  apprehend  that  for  which  also  I  am 
apprehended  of  Christ  Jesus,  Phil.  3. 12.  That 
I  may  obtain  that  prize,  for  the  obtaining 
whereof  I  was  laid  hold  on  by  Christ,  con- 
veTtcd  and  brought  into  the  way  of  salvation, 
when  I  icas  running  on  to  destruction. 

1  Kings  18.t40.a.the  prophets  of  Baal, and  let  none 

2  Cj)r.  11.  32.  with  a  garrison  desirous  to  a.  me 
Phil.  3. 12. 1  mav  a.  that  for  which  also  I  am  ai)i>r 

APPREHENDED. 
J}cts  12.  4.  when  he  a.  Peter,  he  put  him  in  prison 
Phil.  3.  12.  for  which  I  am  a.  of  Christ  Jesus 
13.  brethren,  I  count  not  mvself  to  have  a.  but 
APPROACH 
Signifies,  [1 1  To  draw  nigh,  or  come  near,  2  Sam. 
11.  20.     [2]  To  draw  near  to  God  in  the  duties 
of  his  worship,  VauI.  1)5.  4.     Isa.  58.  2.     [3]  7V 
contract  marriage  with,  Lev.   18.  6.    [4]  To 
hasten,  or  draw  o7i,  Deut.  31. 14. 
Lev.  18.  6.  none  of  you  shall  a.  to  any  near  of  kin 
21.  17.  not  a.  to  offer  the  bread  of  his  God,  18. 
Drut.  20.  3.  ye  a.  this  day  to  battle  against  enemies 
31.  14.  behold,  thy  days  a.  that  thou  must  die 
Job  40.  19.  can  make  his  sword  to  a.  to  him 
/',•.•. 05.4.blessed  is  the  man  whom  thou  cnusost  toa. 
Jqr.  30.  21.  he  shall  «.  to  me,  for  who  is  this  that 
cngagnd  his  heart  to  a.  to  mo,  saith  the  Lord  ? 

1  7V7n.(i.l6.dwellin!;  in  the  licht  no  man  can  a.  unto 
APPROACHED. 

2  -Sam.  11.  20.  wherefore  a.  ye  so  nigh  the  city  1 

1  Kings  20.  t  13.  there  a.  a  prophet  to  Ahab 

2  Kin<^s  16. 12.  the  king  a.  to  the  altar  and  offered 
P.-.al.H.  t2.  when  my  enemies  a.  thejr  stumbled 
fsa.  8.  t  3.  I  a.  to  the  prophete.-ss,  she  bare  a  son 

APPROACIIETH,  INt;. 
fsa.  58.  2.  they  take  delight  in  a.  to  God 
f.uke  12. 33.  where  no  thief  a.  nor  moth  corrupteth 
ffeb.  10. 2.5.  and  so  much  more  as  ye  sec  the  day  a. 

APPROVE 
Signifies,  To  like  or  command,  Psal.  49.  13. 
Approved  of  God,  .^cts  2.  22.     Demonstrated, 
and  beyond  any  contradiction  proved,  to  be  the 
Messiah. 
Psal.  4'.t.  13.  yet  their  posterity  a.  their  sayings 
1  Ciir.  16.  3.  whom  you  shall  a.  by  your  letters 
f'AiM.lO.that  ye  mav  a.  things  that  arc  e.\cellent 

APPROVED. 
.lets  2.  22.  Jesus,  a  man  a.  of  God  among  vou 
fiiim.  14.  IS.  is  acceptable  to  God,  and  a.  of  mtn 
16.  lO.salute  Apniles  a.  in  Christ, saluio  Aristob. 

1  Ciir.  11.19.  they  that  are  o.  may  be  mademanifeit 

2  Cor.  7.  1 1,  in  all  things  you  have  n.  yourselves 
10.  18.  not  ho  that  commendeth  himself  is  a. 
13.  7.  not  that  we  should  appear  a.  but  Ihatyo 

2  Tim.  2.  15.  study  to  shew  thyself  a.  unto  God 

APPRO  VEST,  ETII. 
f.am.  3.  36.  to  subvert  a  man,  the  Lord  a-  not 
f<om.  2.  18.  a.  the  tbinirs  that  are  more  excellent 

APPROVING 
2  Cor.  6.4.  but  in  all  things  a.  ourselves  as ministen 


ARI 

APRON,  S. 

Oen3'Ahcy  tewed  lig-leavcs  togcther,nnd  madca. 
huth  3. 1 15.  bring  the  a.  tliou  liast,  and  hold  it 
Jictal'dAi.t'iom  his  body  were  brought  to  the  sicka. 

APT. 
iKings  24. 16.  a.  for  war,  king  of  Babylon  brought 
1 7'jm.3.2.a  bishop  must  be  a.  to  teach,  '2  'IHin.  2.24. 

AliCHANGEL. 
1  Thcss.  4.16.  shall  descend  with  the  voice  of  the  o. 
Jude  9.  Michael  the  a.  when  contending  with  devil 

ARCHEJR,  S. 
Ocn.  21.  20.  Ishmacl  grew  and  bccanio  an  a. 
,    4!).  23.  the  a.  have  sorely  grieved  him,  and  shot 
I  Ham.  31.  3.  and  the  a.  hit  him,  1  Citron.  10.  3. 
/ob  16.  13.  his  a.  compass  mc  round  about 
Isa.  22.  3.  thy  rulers  tltd,  they  are  bound  by  the  a. 
/i;r.51.3.against  him  that  bendelh  lot  a.  bend  bow 

ARCHES. 
Ezck.  40. 16.  there  were  narrow  windows  to  the  a. 

ARE 
Signifies,  [1]  To  be  of  great  value  and  esteem 
among  men,  1  Cor.  1.28.  [2]  To  kavc  atitlwrity 
from,  1  John  4.  1.  [3]  Heputcd,  judged,  esteem 
ed,  1  Cor.  7.  14.  [4J  Represent,  or  betoken, 
Gen.  41.  26,27.  Rev.  1.  20. 
Things  which  are  not,  1  Cor.  1.  28.     Wkieh  are 

of  so  small  esteem,  as  if  they  had  no  being. 
Gen.  Irf.  24.  for  the  fifty  righteous  that  a.  therein 
31.  15.  a.  we  not  counted  of  him  strangers  ? 
42.  36.  Jacob  said,  all  these  things  a.  against  me 
Ezod.  8.  21.  and  also  the  ground  whereon  they  a. 
JVum.  15.  15.  as  ye  a.  so  shall  the  stranger  be 
Dcut.l.ll.a.  thousand  times  so  many  more  as  yea. 
1  Kings  8.  8.  and  there  they  a.  to  this  day 
Job  24.  t  24.  a.  exalted  for  a  while,  but  a.  not 
38.35.that  they  may  go  and  say  to  thee,  here  we  a. 
Psal.  68t26.  bless  ye  God,  ye  that  a.  of  the  fountain 

107.  27.  they  stagger,  and  a.  at  their  wit's  end 
Ijam.  5.  7.  our  fathers  have  sinned,  and  a.  not 
Amos  9.7. a.  ye  not  as  children  of  Ethiopians  to  me 
JVaA.  3.  17.  the  place  is  not  known  wiiere  they  a. 
Mat.  2.  18.  not  be  comforted,  because  they  a.  not 
6.26.  fowls  of  air,  n.  ye  not  much  belter  than  they 

22.  30.  but  a.  as  the  angels  of  God  in  heaven 
Mark  6.  3.  and  a.  not  his  sisters  here  with  us  1 
J.uke  13.  25.  I  know  not  whence  you  a.  27. 

18. 11.  God,  I  thank  thee,  I  am  not  as  other  men  a. 
John  17. 11. given  me,  that  they  may  beone,as  wea. 
Rom.  15.  27.  and  their  debtors  they  a. for  if  Gentiles 
1  Cor.  1.  28.  things  which  a.  not,  things  that  a. 
i  Cor.  11.  22.  a.  they  Hebrews?  a.  they  Israelites  1 
a.  they  the  seed  of  Abraham"!  so  am  I 
Jfcb.  4.  15.  tempted  like  as  we  a.  yet  without  sin 
Rev.  1.  19.  write  the  things  which  a.  and  shall  be 
4.  11.  for  thy  pleasure  tliey  a.  and  were  created 
10. 6.  created  heaven  and  things  which  therein  a. 
ARGUING. 
Job  6.  2.5.  but  what  doth  your  a.  reprove  ? 

ARGUMENTS. 
Job  23.  4  I  would  fill  my  mouth  with  a. 

ARIGHT. 
P»a/.50.23.to  him  thatordereth  his  conversation  a. 
78.  8.  a  generation  that  set  not  their  heart  a. 
Prov.  4.  t  26.  all  thy  ways  shall  be  ordered  a. 
15.  2.  the  tongue  of  the  wise  useth  knowledge  a. 

23.  31.  the  wine,  when  it  moveth  itself  «. 
Jer.  8.  6.  1  hearkened,  but  they  spake  not  a. 

ARISE 
Si;nifie8,  [1]  To  take  rise,  or  proceed  from,  Acts 
20.  30.     [2]  To  repent,  Eph.  5.  14.     [3]  To  be 
raised  and  comforted,  Amos  7.  2.     It  is  like- 
wise a  word  of  encouragement,  to  excite  one  to 
do  a  tiwig,  Josh.  1.  2.  Acts  22.  16. 
Oen.  31  V<.  now  a.  get  thoe  out  of  this  land 
35.  1.  a.  go  up  to  Beth-el,  and  dwell  there 
Deut.  13.  1.  if  there  a.  among  you  a  prophet 
17.  8.  then  shalt  thou  a.  and  get  thee  up  to  the 
Josh.  1.  2.  now  therefore  a.  go  over  this  Jordan 
Judg.  5.  12.  a.  Barak,  lead  thy  captivity  captive 
iSam.  2. 14.  let  tne  young  men  a.aud  play  before  us 

3.  21.  I  will  a.  and  gather  all  Israel  to  my  lord 
11.  20.  and  if  so  be  that  the  king's  wrath  a. 

XKings'i.  12.  nor  after  thee  shall  any  a.  like  thee 
iKings^.'i.  make  Jehu  a. from  among  hi*  brethren 
\Chriin.  22.  16.  a.  he  doing,  the  Lord  be  with  thee 
JV<:A.2.20.theref'ore  we  his  servants  will  a. and  build 
F.sth.  1. 18.  thus  shall  there  a.  too  much  contempt 

4.  14.  then  shall  enlargement  a.  to  the  Jews 
Job  7.  4.  when  shall  I  a.  and  night  be  gone  1 

11.  t  17.  thy  age  shall  a.  above  noon-day 
25.  3.  and  upon  whom  doth  not  his  light  a.  ? 

Psal.  3.  7.  a.  O  Lord,  save  me,  O  my  God,  for  thou 
7.  6.  a.  O  Lord,  in  thine  anger  lift  up  thyself 

12.  5.  now  will  I  a.  saith  the  Lord,  I  will  set  him 
44.26. a.  for  our  help,  and  redeem  us  for  thy  mercy 
68.  1.  let  God  a.  let  his  enemies  be  scattered 

88.  10.  shall  the  dead  a.  and  praise  thee? 

89.  9.  when  the  waves  of  sea  a.  thou  stillest  them 
102.  13.  thou  shalt  a.  and  have  morcy  on  Zion 

Prov.  6.  9.  when  wilt  thou  a.  out  of  thy  sleep  ? 
17 


ARK 

Caret.  2.13.a.  my  love,  my  fair  one,  and  conin  away 
Isa.  21.  5.  a.  yo  princes,  and  anoint  the  shield 
26.  19.  together  with  my  dead  body  shall  they  a. 
49.  7.  kings  shall  a.  princes  shall  worship 
60. 1.  a.  shine,  ior  thy  light  is  come,  and  the  glory 
2.  but  the  Lord  shall  a.  upon  thee,  and  his  glory 
Jer.  2.  27.  in  trouble  they  will  say,  a.  save  us 
8.  4.  saith  the  Lord,  shall  they  fall,  and  not  a.  ? 
31.  6.  a.  ye,  let  us  go  up  to  Zion  to  the  Lord 
I^ani.  2. 19.  a.  cry  out  in  the  night,  pour  out  thy 
Dan.  2.  39.  after  thee  shall  a.  another  kingdom 
yVwos7.2.0Lord,by  whom  shall  Jacuba.for  he  is,5. 
Mic.  2. 10.  a.  ye  and  depart,  this  is  not  your  rest 
4.  13.  a.  and  thresh,  O  daughter  of  Zion,  I  will 
7.  8.  O  mine  enemy,  when  1  fall  I  shall  a. 
i/a6.2.19.wo  to  him  that  saith  to  the  dumb  stone  a. 
Jlal.i.^.you  that  fear  shall  the  Sun  of  righteous,  a. 
Mat.i).5.  is  it  easier  to  say  a.  and  walk  7  Mark  2.9. 
24.24. for  there  shall  a.falseChrists,  false  prophets 
Mark  5.  41.  damsel,  1  say  to  thee  a.  Luke  8.  54. 
Luke  7.  14.  Lord  said,  young  man,  1  say  to  thee  a. 
15.  18.  I  will  a.  and  go  to  my  lather,  and  say 
24.  38.  and  wliy  do  thoughts  a.  in  your  hearts  ? 
John   14.  31.  even  so  I  do,  a.  let  us  go  hence 
j^cts  9.  40.  turning  to  the  body  said,  Tabitha,  a. 
20.30.alsqofyour  own  selv.es  shall  niena.speaking 
22.  16.  why  tarriest  thou?  a.  and  be  baptized 
Eph.  5.14.  a.fromtlic  dead,  and  Christ  shall  give 
2  Pet.  1.  19.  till  the  day-star  a.  in  your  hearts 
tice  Risk. 
ARISETH. 
1  Kings  18.  44.  behold,  there  a.  a  little  cloud 
Psal.  112.  4.  to  the  ujiright  a.  light  in  darkness 
/i-a.2.19.when  he  a.  to  shake  terribly  the  earth,  21. 
Mat.  13.21.  when  persecution  a.  Mark  4. 17. 
./ohn  7.  52.  search,  for  out  of  Galileo  a.  no  projihet 
Heb.  7.  15.  after  the  similitude  of  Melchizedeo  a. 
Hee  Sun. 
ARK 
Signifies,  [1]  .^  chest  or  coffer  to  keep  things  sure 
or  secret,  Exod.  2.  3.     [2]  The  great  vessel  i?t 
which  jVoaA  and  his  family  wei'e  preserved  dur- 
ing the  flood,  ill  livglh  MT  feet,  Gen.  6.  14,  15. 
•    Heb.  11.  7.     [3.J  That  chest  wherein  the  two 
tables  of  the  law,  jjaron's  rod,  and  the  pot  of 
manna  were  kept,  Exod.  37.  1.  Heb.  9.  4. 
The  ark  of  thy  strength,  Psal.  132.8.   The  seal  of 
thy    powerful    and  glorious   presence,  from 
whence  thou  dost  put  forth  and  manifest  thy 
strength  in  behalf  of   thy  people,  when  they 
desire  and  need  it. 
Was  seen  the  ark  of  his  testament,  Rev.  11.  19. 
Christ  the  true  Ark   of  our  covenant,  more 
known,  and  the   mysteries  of  religion    made 
more   common    and  familiar  than  formerly, 
either  under  Ike  Old  Testament  dispensation, 
or  daring  the  reign  of  anti-christ. 
Gen.  6.  14.  make  tliee  an  a.  of  gopher-wood 

7.  18.  and  the  a.  went  on  the  face  of  the  waters 
Exod.  2.  3.  she  took  for  him  an  a.  of  bulrushes 

25. 16.  and  thou  shalt  put  into  the  a.  the  testimony 
which  I  shall  give  thee,2l.|40.  3,20. 

'37.  1.  Bezaleel  made  the  a.  of  shittim-wood 
JSTum.  3.  31.  their  charge  shall  be  the  a.  and  tables 
JosA.4.11.a.  of  L.  6.12.  1  Aam.4.6.  |  6.  1.  2  Sam.6.9. 

1  Sam.  6.  19.  he  smote  bdcause  they  looked  into  a. 

2  5am.  11.  11.  the  a.  and  Israel  abide  in  tents 

1  A'm^.s2.26.becauso  thou  barest  the  a. of  the  Lord 

8.  9.  was  nothing  in  the  a.  save  the  two  tables 

1  Chron.  6.  31.  after  that  the  a.  had  rest 

13.  3.  letr.  us  bring  again  the  a.  of  our  God  to  us 
9.  Uzza  put  forth  his  hand  to  hold  the  a. 
15.  1.  David  pre|iared  a  place  for  the  a.  of  God 

2  Chr.  6.  41.  thou  and  a.  of  ihy  strehglh,  Ps.  132.8. 
8.11. places  are  holy  whereunto  the  a.  hath  come 

Mat.  24.  38.  till  Noah  enten^d  the  a.  hukc  17.  27. 
//p4.ll.7.by  faith  Noah  warned  of  God  prep.  ana. 
1  Pet.  3.  20.  God  waited  while  the  a.  was  prejiaring 
Rev.  11. 19.  and  there  was  seen  in  his  temple  the  a. 

Before  the  ARK. 
Kro(/.40.5.thou  shall  .<et  altar  of  gold  before  the  a. 
./o.«A. 4. 7. waters  of  Jordan  were  culoff  before  the  a. 
7.6.  Joshua  tell  to  the  earth  on  his  faco  before  the  a. 
1  Sam.  5. 3.  Dagon  was  fallen  on  his  f.  before  the  at 
lC/(r.l0..37.  left  Af/«re  the  a.  Asnph  and  hisbrelhr. 
2CAr.5.6.Solom.  and  congr.assemhled  before  the  a. 

ARK  of  the  Covenant. 
JVhot.  10.33.  a.  of  covenant  of  L.  went  before  them 
/)f«f.31.26.put  book  oflaw  inside  of  a.o/r»«c7ia7it 
./o«A.4.7.the  waters  were  cut  off  before  a.  of  coven. 
.Tudg.  20.  27.  a.  of  covenant  of  God  was  there  in 

1  Sam.  4. 3.  let  us  fetch  the  a.  of  the  covenant  t>{ 

2  .Sam.l5.24.Lcvites  bearing  a.  of  covenant  oiGodi 
IChr.  17.1.  a.  of  covenant  remained  under  curtains 
Jer.  3.  16.  shall  say  no  more,  the  a.  of  the  covenant 
Heb.  9. 4.  tabernacle  which  had  the  a.  of  covenant 

ARK  of  God. 
1  .Sam.  3.  3.  in  the  temple  where  the  a.  of  Ood  was 
4.  11.  the  a.  of  God  was  taken,  17,  22. 
6.3.if  ye  send  away  the  a.of  God,3end  it  not  empty 


ARM 

2Sam.  6.  7.  there  ho. died  before  the  a.  of  Ood 
7.  2.  but  the  a.  of  God  dwelleth  within  curtains 
15.  25.  carrv  back  the  a.  of  God  into  the  city 
1  CAr.  13.12.ho  w  shall  I  bring  the  a.  of  God  home 
15.2.nono  ought  to  carry  the  a.o/Goiibut  Levited 
ARM 
Signifies,  [1]  That  part  of  the  body  so  called,  2 
Sam.  1.  10.  [2]  Outward  strength,  and  all  the 
instruments  of  cruelty  and  mischiif  used  by  the 
wicked,  Psal.  10. 15.  [3]  God's  infiinli: power  in 
creating  the  world,  Jer.  27.  5.  |  32. 17.  [4]  The 
mighty  power  of  God  making  the  gospel  effec- 
tual to  the  conversion  of  sinners,  Isa.  53  1 
John  12.  38. 
Exod.  15.  16.  by  greatness  oflhinea.they  shall  be 
Deal.  33.20.  he  teareth  the  a.  with  crown  of  head 

1  Sam.  2. 31.  behold  the  days  come  when  I  will  cut 

oft' thy  a.  and  the  a.  of  thy  father's  house 

2  Sam.  1. 10. 1  took  the  bracelet  that  was  on  his  a. 
2  Chron.  32.  8.  with  him  is  an  a.  of  tlesh,  with  us 
Ezra  4.  t  23.  made  them  to  cease  by  a.  and  power 
.Job  20.  2.  savesl  thou  the  a.  that  halli  no  strength 

31.  22.  let  my  a.  fall  from  my  shouldei-blado 
35.  9.  cry  out  by  reason  of  the  o.  of  the  mighty 
38.  15.  and  the  high  a.  shall  be  broken 
40.9.hast  thou  an  o.  like  God  ?  or  canst  thunder 

Psal.  10.  15.  break  thou  the  a.  of  the  wicked 
44.  3.  nor  did  their  own  a.  save  them,  but  thy  a 
71. 1 18.  I  have  showed  thy  a.  to  this  generation 
77. 15.  thou  hast  with  thy  a.  redeemed  thy  people 
89.  13.  thou  hast  a  mighty  a.  strong  is  thy  hand 

21.  mine  a.  also  shall  strengthen  him 
98.  1.  his  holy  a.  hath  gotten  him  the  victory 

Cant.  8.  6.  set  me  as  a  seal  on  thine  a. 

/.sa.9.20.they  shall  eat  every  man  the  tlesh  of  hia  a, 
33.  2.  be  thou  their  a.  every  morning  our  salvation 
40. 10.  God  will  come,  and  his  a.sha-ll  rule  for  him 
11.  he  shall  pather  the  lambs  with  his  a. 

51.  5.  mine  a.  shall  judge  the  peojde,  the  isles  shal 

wait  upon  me,  and  on  my  a.  shall  they  trus 
9.  put  on  strength,  O  a.  of  the  Lord,  awake 

52.  10.  the  Lord  hath  made  bare  his  holy  a. 

53. 1. who  hath  believed  our  report  ?  and  to  whom 

is  the  a.  of  the  Lord  revealed  ?  John  12. 38 

.59.  16.  therefore  his  a.  brought  salvation,  63.  5. 

62.  8.  Lord  hath  sworn  by  the  a.  of  his  strength 

63.  12.  that  led  them  with  his  glorious  a. 

Jer.  17.  5.  cursed  be  he  that  maketh  llesh  his  a. 

21.  .5.  I  will  fight  against  you  with  a  strong  a. 
F.iek.  4.  7.  and  thine  a.  shall  be  uncovered 

22.  \  6.  were  in  thee  to  their  a.  to  shrd  blood 
:iO.  21.1  have  broken  a.  of  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt 
31. 17.  they  went  down  into  hell  that  where  his  a. 

Dan.  11.6.  she  shall  not  retain  the  power  of  the  a. 
Zech.  11. 17.  sword  be  on  hi^  a.  his  a.  bci  dried  up 
J.uke  1.  51.  he  hath  shewed  strength  with  his  a. 
Jlcts  13.  17.  with  an  high  a.  broujlit  he  tliem  out 

Slretched-out  ARM. 
-Exo(i.6.6.I  will  redeem  you  with  a  strrlehcd-out  a, 
Deut.  4.  34.  assayed  to  take  nation  with  str.-outa. 

5.  15.  the  Lord  thy  God  brought  thee  out  thence 
wiih  a  stretched-out  a.  7. 19. 1 26. 8.  .fer.  32.  21. 

11.  2.  your  children  have  not  seen  his  str.-out  a. 
2CA;-.6..32.  stranger  is  come  for  thy  slretched-out  a. 
Psal  136. 12;  with  a  stretched-out  a.  for  his  mercy 
./cr.27.5.I  made  earth  by  my  stretched-ont  a.33.17. 
£zf  ft.  20.33.  with  a  stretched-out  a.  will  I  rule  over 
34. 1  will  gather  vou  with  a  stretched-out  a.and 
ARM-HOLES.  [fury 

./er.38. 12.  put  these  rotten  rags  under  thy  a.-holes 
Ezek.l2.18.wo  to  them  that  sew  pillows  to  a.-holes 

ARMS. 
Gen.  49. 24.  the  a.  of  his  hands  were  made  strong 
Deut.  3.3.  27.  and  underneath  are  the  everlasting  a. 
.Judg.  16.  12.  he  brake  them  from  bis  a.  like  thread 
2iam.22.  35.  he  teacheth  my  hands  to  war,  so  that 
a  bow  ofstcel  is  broken  by  mine  a.  Psal.  18.34. 
2A7ni'-.9  9. 24.  Jehu  smote  Jehoram  between  his  a. 
.lob  22.  9.  the  a.of  the  fatherless  have  bi'en  broken 
Psal.  37.  17.  the  a.  of  the  wicktxl  shall  be  broken 
Prov.  31.  n.she  girdeth,  and  strengihenetli  her  a. 
Isa.  44.  12.  and  workcth  it  with  strengtli  of  Ins  a. 

49.  22.  they  shall  bring  thy  sons  in  their  a. 

51.  5.  and  my  a.  shall  judge  the  people 
Eiek.  13.  20.  I  will  tear  them  from  your  a. 

30.  22.  behold,  I  will  break  Pharaoh's  n.  24. 
24.1  will  stra^iglhen  the  a.  of  kingof  Biibyloti,25. 
Dan.  2.  .32.  his  breast  and  his  a.  of  silver,  hisboUjr 

10.6.  his  a.  and  feet  like  to  polished  brass 

11.  15.  the  a.  of  the  south  shall  not  withstand 

22.  with  the  a.  of  a  flood  shall  they  be  overflown 

31.  and  a.  shall  stand  on   his  part, and  sliall 
Hog.  7.1.5.  Ihave bound  and  strengthened  their  a. 

11.3.  taught  them  togo,  taking  them  by  their  «. 
Jl/arft  9.36.  when  he  had  taken  him  in  his  a.  he  said 

10.16.took  them  up  in  his  a.put  hishandsoii  them 
Luke  2.28.Simeon  took  Christ  in  his  a.  and  blessed 

ARM,  Verb, 
Is  taken,[l]  Corporally,  to  be  furnished  with  arma 

for  war,  Gen.  14.14.  Num.  31. 5.  [8]  Spiritually, 


ARO 

to  get  and  ezercise  thos*  graces  and  spirilual 
uiapons  ichtcli  are  appointed  and  besloiccd  by 
Oud  todtfend  the  soul,  1  Pet.  4.  1. 
A'iiut.31.3.  a.somuofyuurselvos  tu  tiiu  warandgo 
I  Pet.  4.  1.  o.  yourselves  with  the  same  mind 

ARMED. 
Oen.  14. 14.  Abram  a.  hid  truincd  sorvanU  born  iii 

41.  t  40.  at  thy  word  simll  all  my  |h.>u|)Iu  be  a. 
JVum.  31.  .').  of  tribe,  twelve  tliou:iaiicl  a.  I'ur  war 

3'J.  17.  but  we  ourselves  will  go  reudy  a.  3*2. 
Jjeut.  3.  Iri.  ye  shull  puss  over  a.  Joni't.  I  14. 
Josh.  4. 1 13.  ubout  40,000  a.  for  war  passed  over 

6.  7.  let  liiin  that  is  a.  pasj  un  before  the  nrk 
iChroji.2S.  14.  so  the  a.  men  lell  tlie  captives 
Job  3'J.  'Jl.  lie  goetli  on  to  meet  the  a.  men 
Psal.  76.  '.).  the  children  of  Ephraim  being  a. 
Proc.  U.  11.  and  thy  want  as  an  a.  man,  'i4.  34. 
Z,u>l'<;11.21.wheii  a  strong  man  u.kucpeth  llie  house 

AU.MY. 
Deut.  11.4.  what  he  did  to  the  o.  of  the  Egyp|tian8 
Judg.  ti.  ti.  that  wc  should  give  bread  to  lliine  a. 

9.  Vi.  he  said,  increase  thine  a.  and  come  out 
1  Sam.  4.  I'J.  tliereran  a  man  of  Benjaininout  of  a. 

17.  il.  and  the  Philistines  had  put  a.  against  a. 
\Kings  520.  'Vt.  number  thee  an  a.  like  the  a.  lost 
S  CArort.'JO.'Jl.tliat  iliey  should  praise  before  the  a. 

25.  7.  O  king,  let  not  the  o.  of  Israel  go  with  thee- 
A'eA.  4. 2.  bu  spake  before  his  bretliren,  and  the  a. 
Job  39.  25.  sat  chief,  I  dwelt  as  a  king  in  the  a. 
Psal.  (i8.  t  11-  great  was  the  a.  that  niblishcd  it 
Cant.  C.  4.  terrible  as  an  a.  with  banners,  10. 
Jer.'il.  11.  was  broken  up  for  fear  of  Pharaoh's  a. 
Kzek.  29. 18.  caused  his  a.  to  serve  a  great  service 

37.  JO.  there  stood  up  an  exceeding  great  a. 
/)an. 4.3J.according  to  his  will  in  tlie  a.  of  heaven 
Joel  2.  11.  Lord  shall  utter  his  voice  before  his  a. 
25.  locust,  my  great  a.  which  I  sent  among  you 
Zech.  4.  \f>.  saying,  not  by  a.  nor  by  power 

O.S.will  encamp  about  my  house,  because  of  tbea. 
Jlcts  23.  27.  then  came  I  with  an  a.  and  rescued 
Reo.  9.  16.  the  number  of  the  a.  of  horsemen 

19.  19.  against  him  that  sat  on  horse  and  bis  a. 

See  CiiM.DE.v.NS. 
ARMIES. 
Ezod  7.4. lay  hand  on  Kgypt,  and  bring  forth  my  a. 
12.  17.  same  day  I  biougiit  your  a.  out  of  Esypt 
Jfam.  33.  1.  went  forth  witli  their  a.  under  -Moses 
y.>ruf.20.U.tbey  shall  make  captains  ofthea.to  lead 
1  .S'urn.  17.  10.  said,  I  defy  the  a.  of  Israel  this  day 
21).  that  he  should  detythc  a. of  the  living  God 
45. 1  come  in  the  name  of  the  God  of  tlie  a.  of  Isr. 
Jiib  25.  3.  is  there  any  number  of  his  a.  ? 
Psal.  44.  9.  thou  goest  not  forth  with  our  a. 
M.  12.  kings  of  a.  did  flee  apace,  she  thai  tarried 
Cant.  C.  13.  as  it  were  the  company  of  two  a. 
Isa.  34.  2.  and  his  fury  upon  oil  their  a. 
Dan.^i.  t  27.  with  abominable  o.  make  desolate 
,Mat.ifi.  7.  be  sent  forth  his  a.  and  destroyed 
ImIu  21.  20.  ye  see  Jerusalem  compassed  with  a. 
Hcb.  11.34.  who  turned  to  flight  the  a.  of  llie  aliens 
Rev.  19.  14.  and  the  a.  in  heaven  followed  him 
19.  the  kings  of  the  earth  and  their  a.  gathered 
ARMOUR 
Signifies,  [1]  IVcapons  or  iiuitrvmentf  of  mar.,  \ 
Sam.  17.54.  [2]  Thcalrong  and  powerful  lu.tts  of 
sin,  ignorance,  error,  and  prnfanrnr.<.<,  vhick 
arc  the  armour,  ichcrehy  the  dinil  krcpn  up  his 
power  and  tit/miniun  in  thehcarts  ofmrn,  Luke 
11.  22.    [3)  Spoil,  2  .Sam.  2.^2l.   [4]  Such  graces 
and  spirit iinl  weapons  as  areforlhedrfrnce  of 
tlf  soul,  and  whrrrby  wr.  may  be  enabled  to  roni- 
bat  with  our  spiritual  enemies,  Rom.  13.  12. 
E;ih.  0.  II.  [.'i]  .1  good  conscience,  which  being 
always  attended  with  uprightness  of  life,  is  a 
defence  against  all  temptations,  either  from 
prosperity  or  adnersity,  2  Cor.  6.  7. 
.Sam.  17.  .'vl.  David  put  fJoliah's  a.  in  his  tent 
■^am.  2.  21.  tiini  thee  aiide  and  take  thee  his  a. 

1  Kings  22.  .18.  they  washed  his  a.  according  to 

2  Kings  3.  21.  ihoy  gathered  all  able  to  put  on  a. 
JO.  2.  seeing  ye  have  a  fenced  city  also  and  a. 

20.  13.  Il"zekiali  shewed  his  precious  thingi,  sil- 

ver and  gold,  the  house  of  his  a.  Isa.  ',Ki.  2. 
Job  39.  t  21.  he  go'lh  on  to  meet  the  a. 
740.^.8.  didst  look  in  that  day  to  a.  of  the  house 
Luke  11.22.  he  lakelh  his  a.  wherein  b<-  iriisled 
Rom.  13.  12.  and  Irt  ni  put  on  the  a.  of  light 
S  Cor.  6.  7.  approving  by  the  a.  of  righieoiiiin"Bs 
Eph.  0.  11.  put  on  tin-  a.  of  (;()d  tniitanrl  ng.  d^'vil 
13.  take  to  vm  the  whole  a.  of  God  to  wiilismnil 
ARMfWIR-llKARRR. 
Judg.  0  TA.  .\himelirh  culled  his  n.  bearer,  sayini' 
1  Sam.  14.  7.  a.-b.  «nid,  do  all  that  is  in  thine  lienri 
JO.  21.  Paullove<l  Daviil,  and  he  becnme  his  a.  b. 
31.  0.  Saul  died,  bin  ihn  e  sons,  and  his  a.-bearer 

ARMOURY. 
Oiiit.4.4.  like  the  tir.vi'r  of  Divid  liiiiMcd  for  an  a. 
Jer.  50.  25.  the  Lord  hmli  opened  his  a. 

AROSE. 
0«n.  19.  33.  lit  p«rceiv'-d  not  when  «h«  a.  35. 
U 


ARR 

<7fn.37. 7.  and  lo  my  sheaf  a.  and  stood  upright 
Eiod.  1.  H.  now  there  a.  up  a  new  king  over 
Egypt  who  knew  not  Joseph,  Jicts  7.  Iti. 
Judg.  2.10.a.  a  generation  that  knew  not  the  Lord 
5.  7.  till  I  Deborah  a.  till  1  a.  a  niotber  in  Israel 
20.  ti.  all  the  people  a.  as  one  man,  saying 

1  .Sam.  9.  2(j.  and  they  a.  early,  Isa.  37.  30. 
17.  35.  when  he  a.  against  me,  I  slew  him 

2  Kings  ^.  25.  neither  after  liijii  a.  there  any  like 
2  Chron.  30.  16.  till  the  wrath  of  the  Lonl  a. 
.lob  29.  ti.  young  men  bid,  aged  a.  and  stood  up 
I'sal.  76. 9.  when  God  a.  to  judgment,  lo  save  the 
y.cet.  I.  5.  the  sun  hastelli  lo  his  place  where  he  a. 
Dan.  0.  19.  the  king  a.  early  ami  went  to  the  den 
Mat.  2.  14.  he  a.  and  took  the  young  child,  21. 

8.  15.  she  a.  and  ministered  to  them,  J.uke  1.  39. 
26.  he  a.  and  rebuked  the  winds  and  the  sea,  and 

there  wiis  a  great  calm,  Mark  4.  39. 1.uke  8.24. 

9.  9.  and  he  a. and  followed  him,  19.  Mark2.  14. 
25.  he  took  her  by  the  hand,  and  the  maid  a. 

27.  52.  and  many  bodies  of  saints  which  slept  a- 
Mark'.t.  27.  but  Jesus  lifted  him  up,  and  he  a. 
Luke  6.  4-<.  when  the  flood  a.  the  stream  beat 
15. 20.  he  a.  and  came  to  bis  father,  he  kissed  iiim 
^■Jets  11.19.tlie  persecution  which  a.  aboulStephen 
19.  23.  there  a.  no  small  stir  about  that  way 
2^1.  7.  when  iie  so  said  there  a.  u  diasension,  10. 
See  RosK. 
AROSE  and  wcvl. 
l.Sam.S.fi.Samuel  n.ajid  went  to  Eli,  and  said,  here 
23.16.Jonatlian((.an<iu)tn<  to  David  into  tliewood 
2.5.1.  Daviil  a.and  icentto  the  wilderness  of  Parau 
1  Kings  19.21.  Elishaa.  a«d  went  alter  Elijah 
.lonah  3.  3.  so  Jonah  a.  and  went  to  Nineveh 
Acts  9.  39.  tlK;n  Peter  a.  and  went  with  them 
ARRAY 
ignifies,  [I]  To  put  on  apparel,  Esth.  6.  9.  Rev. 
7.13.     [2]  To  put  an  army  in  a  Jit  posture  to 
fight,  2  Sum.  10.  9. 
The  terrors  of  God  set  themselves  in  array  against 
me.  Job  6.  4.  His  judgments  are  like  a  numer- 
ous and  well-ordered  army,  under  the  conduct 
of  an   irresistible  general,  who  designs  and 
directs  them  to  invade  me  on  every  side. 
F.st/t.  6.  9.  that  they  may  a.  the  man  withal 
.lob  40.  10.  and  a.  thyself  with  glory  and  beauty 
.Irr.  43.  12.  shall  a.  himself  with  the'  land  of  Egypt 
1  'I'im.  2.  9.  that  women  adorn,  not  with  costly  a. 

ARRAY. 
1  .Sam.  4.  t  2.  they  slew  of  the  a.  in  the  field 
2.s'am.l0.9.Joab  jiut  the  choice  ina.against  Syrians 
.lob  6.  4.  the  terrors  of  God  set  themselves  in  a. 
.Jer.  5(1.  14.  put  yourselves  in  a.  against  iSubylon 
See  Battlf:. 
ARRAYED. 
Gen.  41.  42.  Pharaoh  a.  Josejih  in  fine  linen 
2CAron.28.15.  look  the  captives,  with  spoil  a.  them 
Miit.Ci.'i^.  was  not  a.  like  one  of  these,  Luke  12. 27. 
I.uke  23.  11.  Herod  and  his  men  of  war  a.  Christ 
.lets  12.  21.  Herod  a.  iu  royal  apparel  salon  bis 
Rev.  7.13.what  are  these  that  nre  u.in  white  robes? 
17.4.the  women  was  a.fn  purple  and  scarlet  colour 
19.  8.  to  her  was  granted  to  be  a.  in  fine  linen 

ARRIVED. 
AutcP.  20.  they  a.  at  the  country  of  the  Gadatenes 
.'lets  20.  15.  and  the  next  dav  we  a.  at  Samoa 

ARROGANCY. 
I  Sam.  2.  3.  let  not  a.  come  out  of  your  mouth 
Prop.ri.  13.  priilennd  a.  and  the  evil  way  do  I  hate 
Isa.  13.  1 1. 1  will  cause  the  a.  of  the  proud  to  cease 
./(•r.48.29.  heard  pride  of  Moab,  his  loftiness,  his  a. 

ARROW 
•Signifies,  [1]  ..1  dart  used  for  pleasure  or  inwar, 
1  Sam. 20.  20.  Jer.  51.  11.  (2)  Inward  terrors 
from  C.»&,  Job  6.  4.  Psal.  3,-<.  2.  [3]  Hickcd 
intentions,  Psal.  11.  2.  [4]  .-Ihusirr  or  .■/landrr- 
ous  wonts,  Psal.  64.  3.  [5]  The  judgments  of 
God,  surk  as  thunder,  hchtiiing,  tempests, 
famine,  A-c.  2  Sam.  22.  15.  Ez''k.  .5.  16.  Ilab.  3. 
11.  [6]  The  Word  of  God,  which  is  .'■harp  and 
powrful  in  piercing  and  turning  the  hearts 
of  sinners,  Psal.  45.  5. 

1  .Sam.  20.  36.  Jonathan  shot  an  a.  beyond  him 

2  Kings  '.).  24.  and  the  a.  went  out  at  bis  heart 
13.  17.  a.  of  Lord's  deliverance  from  Syria 

19.  :i2.  nor  shall  In-  sliool  an  a.  there,  Isa.  37.  .33. 
.Job  34. to.  my  o.  is  incurable  witliowt  transgression 

41.  2/*.  the  a.  cannot  make  him  flee,  sling  stones 
Psal.  11.2.  they  make  nrady  their  a.  on  the  string 

fi4.7.  with  an  u.  su.ldenly  shall  Iliiybe  wounded 

!il..'».  nor  afraid  for  the  a.  thai  flietli  by  day 
/Vol'.  25. 18.  tliatbeuruth  false  witiies.«  is  a  sharp  a. 
Jer.  9.  8.  their  tongiio  is  as  an  a.  shot  out 
l.am.  3.  12.  he  hath  sol  nic  as  a  mnik  for  the  a. 
y.cch.  9.  14.  and  his  a.  shall  go  forth  as  lightning 

ARROWS. 
ATum.  21.8.  he  shall  pierce  th«Mii  tbro'  with  his  a. 
Deut.  32.  2.3.  \  wilL||iend  mine  a.  u^on  them 

42.  I  will  make  mmn  a.  drunk  with  blood 
1  .Sam.  20.  20.  I  will  shoot  three  a.  on  th«  iid« 


AS 

2  Sam.  22. 15.  the  Lord  tliif ndcrrd,  and  he  icnt  niil 

a.  and  scattered  them,  I'sal.  18.  l\ 

2A't'n^jl3.15.take  bow  and  a.  took  him  bow  and  a. 

18.  take  the  a.  and  smite  upon  the  ground 
Job  6.  4.  the  a.  of  the  .\lmighly  are  within  m* 
I'sal.  7. 13.  he  ordaineth  a.  against  the  persecuton 
21.  12.  shall  make  ready  thine  a.  against  them 

38.  2.  for  thine  a.  stick  fast  in  mc,  and  thy  hand 
45.  5.  thine  a.  are  sharp  in  tho  heart  of  enemies 

57. 4.  sons  of  men,  whose  teeth  are  spears  and  a. 
58.  7.  when  he  bendclh  his  bow  to  shoot  his  a. 
64.  3.  bows  lo  shoot  their  a.  even  biiter  word* 
76.3.  there  brake  he  ihea.  of  the  bow,  the  shieic 
77.  17.  clouds  poured,  thine  a.  also  went  abroad 
120.4.sharp  a.of  the  mighty,  witli  coals  of  juni|ier 
127.  4.  as  a.  are  in  the  hand  of  a  mighty  man 
144.  fi.  shoot  out  thine  a.  and  destroy  them 

/'r0ii.26.I8.aB  a  mad  man  who  castelh  a.and  deatli 
Isa.  5.28.  whose  a.  are  sharjiand  their  bows  bent 
7.  24.  with  a.  and  bows  shaH  men  come  thither 
.ler.  50.  9.  their  a.  shall  be  as  of  an  expert  man 

14.  shoot  at  Babylon,  spare  no  a.  she  hatli  Binnc<l 
51.  11.  make  bright  the  a.  gather  the  shields 

Lam.  3. 13.  hath  caused  the  a.  ofhisquiverto  enter 
Ezek.  5.  16.  I  shall  send  the  evil  a.  of  famine 

21.  21.  he  made  his  a.  bright,  he  consulted  images 

39.  3.  I  will  cause  thy  a.  to  fall  out  of  thy  hand 
9.  Israel  shall  go  forth,  and  burn  bows  and  a. 

Ilab.  3.  11.  at  the  light  of  thine  a.  they  went 
ART,  Verb. 

Gen.  3.  9.  God  said  to  Adam,  where  a.  thou? 
13.14.Lord  Baid,loLik  from  the  ^ilace  where  thou  a. 
24.  23.  he  said  whose  daughter  a.  thou  1  47. 
27.  24.  and  he  said  a.  thou  my  very  son  Esau  1 
32.  17.  whose  a.  thou  ^  whither  goest  thou  7 
39.  9.  kept  back  but  thee,  because  thou  a.  his  wife 
41.39.  there  is  none  so  discreel  and  wise  as  thou  a. 
46.30.  now  let  me  die  because  thou  a.  yet  alive 

Kiod.  4.  26.  she  said,  a  bloody  husband  thou  a. 

Josh.  5.  13.  a.  thou  for  us,  or  our  adversaries? 

Judg.  8. 18.  they  answered  as  thou  a.  so  were  they 

12. 5.  the  men  said  to  him,  a.  thou  an  Ephraimilc? 
13.11. a.  thou  the  man  that  spakest  to  the  woman? 

1  Sam. 19.3. 1  will  go  out  and  stand  by  where  thoua. 
lA'in^«13.18.hesaid,  I  am  a  prophet  also  as  thouo. 

22.4.Jthortliaphalsaid,Iam  us  thoua. 2A'(k^«  3.7. 

2  C'Aron.  20.  7.  a.  not  thou  our  God,  who  didst  drivg 
./»4  35. 8.  wickedness  may  hurt  a  man  as  thou  a. 
/so. 14. 10.  a.  thou  also  become  weali  as  we?  a.  like 
Jer.  14. 22.  a.  not  thou  he,  O  Lord  our  God,  we 
/.«A-c7.19.a.  thou  he  that  should  come,  or  look  w« 
.A)A7(  1.49.Rabbi,  thoua. the  Son  of  God,  King  of  Is. 
..lets  21.  38.a.  not  lliou  that  Egyptian  made  uproit 

22.  27.  the  captain  said,  tell  ine,a.thou  a  Roman  1 
Rev.  11.  17.  a.  and  wast,  and  a.  to  come,  16.5. 

ART,  6,  Substantive. 

K/O(i.30.25.an  ointm. after  the  n.  of  the  apothecary 

2C/;r(/7;. 16. 14.<livers  spices  prepared  by  o.ofapoth. 

.irts  17.29.tlic  Godhead  not  like  stones  graven  byo 

19.  19.  many  also  of  tbem  which  used  curious  a. 

ARTIFICER. 

Gen.  4.  22.  Tubal-cain  an  instructor  of  every  a. 

Isa.  3. 3.  take  awav  tliooantniiiatid  thecunning  a 

ARTIFICERS. 

1  Chron.  29.  5.  for  all  manner  of  works  made  by  a. 

2  C'Aron.  34.11.  to  a.  ami  builders  gave  they  mone^" 

ARTILLEKY. 
I  Sam.  20.  40.  Jonathan  gave  bis  a.  to  the  lad 

AS 

Signifies,  [11  Like.   1  Pet.  3.  8.     [21  H7jj7e,  Ac!« 

20,  9.     [3J  Kor,  Mat.  6.  12.    [4]  Reeause,  John 

15.  12.  I  1/  2.  [.Jj  .Ifter  the  manner  of,  Job 
31.  ;13.  It  shewclh,  (ij  Likeness  in  quality, 
but  not  in  quantity.  Mat.  H.  48  [2]  Equally, 
John  5.  2;i.  [3]  The  likeness  of  a  t/ttig,  but  «/>! 
the  truth  of  that  thing,  Mat.  26.  5.5.  [4]  Tht 
likene..is  and  truth  of  a  thing,  Ileb.  12.  7. 

Gen.  2.  t  18.  I  will  make  him  a  help  a.  befon-  him 
3.  5.  ye  shall  be  a.  gods  knowing  good  and  evil 
22.  behold  the  man  is  become  a.  one  of  us 

1  Sam.  10.  7.  the  Lord  seeth  not  a.  man  seeth 

2  Kings  8. 27.  bo  did  evil  a.  did  the  house  of  Ahnb 
24.l3.bad  made  in  the  temple,  a.  the  Lord  had  said 

F.ira  10.  12,  a.  thou  hast  said,  so  must  wo  do 
f  i'a/.185..'i.a.  for  surha.turii  aside  lo  crooked  ways 
/V(iiv24.29.say  not,  I  will  do  to  him  a.he  hath  dono 
Isa.  24.  2.  a.  with  the  people,  o.  with  the  servant 
.Var.l0.2.5.disciplea.his  master,  lervnnt  a.hisLord 
19.19.  shall  lovf  thy  neighb.o.thysclf,  Horn.  13.  9. 
.hhn  1.  14.  beheld  the  glory  a.  of  the  only  begotten 
.lets  7.  t  37.  the  Lord  raise  up  a  propbii  a.  myself 
Sl.yerrsist  II. Ghost,  a,  your  fathers  did,  sodoya 
2  Cor.  2.17.  but  a.  of  sincerity,  but  a.  of  God, speak 
Gnl.  4. 12.  brethren,  be  a.  Invn,  for  I  am  a.  ye  aro 
Col.  2.  6.  a.  ye  have  received  CliriBl  Jesus, so  walk 

r.ccn  A3. 
1  Cor.  3.  .I.  even  a.  the  Lord  gave  lo  every  man 
F;)A.5.33.evory  onoso  love  his  wife  cttti  a.bimMj 
Cot.  3.  13.  ei(o«  a.  Christ  forgave  you,  ^o  do  yo 
licv.  2.27.  even  a.  I  received  of  my  rather 


ASH 

ASCEND 

Signifies,  [1]  Ta  get  ar  climb  up,  Josh.  6.  5.     [2] 

To  go  up  to  heaven,  Eph.  4.  y,  10. 
Who  shall  ascuiul  into  the  hill  of  ihe  Lord  I  Psal. 
24. 3.     fVlio  shall  be  admitted  and  accounted  a 
true  member  of  the  church,  and  enjoy  the  fa- 
vour and  blessing  of  God  ? 
No  iiiuii  hath  ascended  up  to  heaven,  John  3.  13. 
JVu  »;ia7i  hath  attained  a  perfect  knowledge  of 
Itcar.tnlij  things,  so  as  to  knou)  the  secret  will 
and  counsels  of  God. 
Josh.  a.  5.  the  puoidu  sliall  a.  up  every  man  straight 
Psal."i.  3.  who  shall  a.  into  the  hill  of  the  Lord, 
and  shall  stand  in  his  holy  place  1  A'om.  10.6. 
135.7.hi:  causeth  vapours  to  a.  ./tr.  10. 13.  |  51. 10. 
131).  C.  if  I  a.  up  into  heaven,  thou  art  there 
Jsa.  14.  13.  thou  hast  said,  I  will  a.  to  heaven,  14. 
i^iek.  38.  it.  thou  shall  a.  and  coine  like  a  storm 
John  0.  &i.  if  ye  shall  see  the  Son  of  man  a.  up 
ii0.17.  la.  10  my  Father,  and  your  Father,  my  God 
hec.  17.  ti.  beast  shall  a.  out  of  the  bottomless  pit 

ASCKNUED. 
Judg.  13.  '20.  the  angel  of  the  Lord  a.  in  the  flame 
Psal.Gti.  Id.  thou  hast  a.  up  on  high,  thou  hast  led 
Prov.  30.4.  who  hath  a.  up  into  heaven,  or  descend. 
John  3.  13.  no  man  hath  a.  to  heaven,  but  he  that 
'20.17.  touch  me  not,  I  am  not  yet  a.  to  my  Father 
.^cts  2.  34.  David  is  not  yet  a.  into  the  heavens 
£;)A.4.8.whenhea.upon  liigh,  he  led  captivity  cap 
9.  now  that  he  a^  \\  10.  is  tlie  same  also  that  a. 
Rev.  8. 4.  the  smoke  of  the  incense  a.  before  God 
11.12.lhey  a.up  to  heaven  inacloud,  and  enemies 
ASCENDETH. 
Rev.W.l.  the  beast  that  a.  out  of  the  bottomless  pit 
14.  11.  the  smoke  of  their  torment  a.  for  ever 

ASCEiNDlNG. 
Gen.  28.  12.  the  angels  of  God  a.  and  descending 

1  Sam.  28.  13.  said,  I  saw  gods  a.  out  of  the  earth 
Luke  19.  28.  he  went  before,  a.  up  to  Jerusalem 
JoA7»1.51.aiigtls  of  G.  a.  and  descending  on  the  Son 
Hev.  7.  2.  I  saw  another  angel  a.  from  the  east 

ASCENT. 

2  Sam.  1.5.  30.  David  went  up  by  the  a.  of  Olivet 
Ifi'tJio'slO.S.aud  his  a. by  which  he  went,  2C'Ar.9.4. 

ASCRIBE. 

Deut.  32.  3.  a.  ye  greatness  to  our  God,  he  is  the 
Job  36.  3.  I  will  a.  righteousness  to  my  Maker 
Psal.  (58.  34.  a.  ye  strength  to  God,  his  excellency 
ASCRIBED. 

1  Sam.  18.  8.  a.  to  David  10,000,  to  me  a.  but  1000 

ASH. 
ha.  44.14.  he  planteth  an  a.  the  rain  doth  nourish  it 

ASHAMED. 
Oen.  2. 2.J.  naked,  the  man  and  his  wife  were  not  a. 
Judg.  3.  2.5.  and  they  tarried  till  they  were  a. 

2  Sam.  10.5.  the  men  were  greatly  a.l  Chron.  19.  5. 
I'J.  3.  as  people  being  a.  steal  away  when  they  Hee 

2A''in^«2.17.and  when  they  urged  him  till  he  was  a. 

8.  11.  he  settled  his  countenance  till  he  was  a. 

5  Chron.  .'iO.  15.  the  priests  and  the  Levites  were  a. 
£zra8.  22.  I  was  a.  to  require  of  the  king  a  band 

9.  6.  I  am  a.  and  blush  to  lift  up  my  face  to  thee 
fob  6.  20.  they  came  thither,  and  were  a. 

11.3.  when  thou  raockest,  shall  no  man  make  a.? 

19.3.  ye  are  nota.to  make  yourselves  strange  to  me 
Psai. 34. 5.  were  lightened,  their  faces  were  not  a. 

74.  21.  O  let  not  the  oppressed  return  a.  let  poor 
Prov.  12.  4.  she  that  makelh  a.  is  as  rottenness 
l.ta.  20.  5.  shall  be  a.  of  Ethiopia,  their  expectation 

24.23.thesun  shall  he  a.  when  the  Lord  shall  reign 

30.  5.  all  a.  of  a  people  that  could  not  profit  them 
33.9.earth  mourns,  Lebanon  is  a. and  hewn  down 

^er.  2.  26.  as  the  thief  is  a.  when  he  is  found,  so  is 
0. 15.  were  they  a.  ?  they  were  not  at  all  a.  8.  12. 
8.  9.  the  wise  men  are  a.  they  are  dismayed 
14.  4.  plowmen  were  a.  they  covered  their  heads 
48.13.Moiib  shall  bea.of  Chemosh,as  Israel  wasa. 

Kiek.  16.  27.  the  daughters  of  the  Philistines  are  a. 
32.  30.  with  terror  they  are  a.  of  their  might 

/.uAfl3.17.all  his  adversaries  wereo. and  the  people 
16.  3.  what  shall  I  do?  I  cannot  dig,  to  beg  I  am  a. 

Rom.  1. 10. 1  am  not  a.  of  the  gospel  of  Christ 

5.  5.  hope  maketh  not  a. because  the  love  of  God  is 

6.  21.  what  fruit  in  things  whereof  ye  are  now  a.l 
2  Cor.  7. 14.  ifl  have  boasted  any  thing,  I  am  not  a. 
2  Tim.  1.  12.  I  suffer,  nevertheless  I  am  not  a. 

IB.  Onesiphorus  was  not  a.  of  my  chain 
Hcb.  2.  11.  he  is  not  a.  to  call  them  brethren 
11.  16.  God  is  not  a.  to  be  called  Iheir  God 
Ashamed  and  confounded :  see  Confocnded. 

Be  ASHAMED. 
Psnl.  6. 10.  let  all  my  enemies  be  a.  and  sore  vexed 
25.3.  yea,  let  none  that  wait  on  tliee  be  a.  let  them 
be  a.  who  transgress  without  cause 

31.  1.  in  thee  do  I  put  my  trust,  let  meneverfcea. 
17.  let  me  not  be  a.  let  the  wicked  be  a.  35.26. 

fiO.  6.  let  not  them  that  wait  be  a.  for  my  sake 
86.  17.  they  which  hat"  mc,  may  see  it  and  be  a. 
109.  28.  when  they  arise,  let  them  be  a.  hut  let 
119.  78.  lot  proud  be  a.  for  they  dealt  perversely 
19 


ASK 

fsa.  1. 29.  for  they  shall  be  a.  of  the  oaks  which  yo 
23.  4.  be  thou  a.  O  Zidon,  the  sea  halh  spoken 
26.  11.  they  shall  see  and  be  a.  for  their  envy 
42.  17.  they  shall  be  greatly  a.  that  trust  in  images 

44.  9.  they  see  not  nor  know,  that  they  may  be  a. 
11.  all  his  fellows  shall  be  a.  shall  be  a.  together 

45.'24.all  that  are  incensed  against  him  shall  be  a. 

65.  13.  my  servants  rejoice,  but  yo  shall  be  a. 

66.  5.  shall  api>car  to  your  joy,  and  they  shall  be  a. 
./cr.2.36.  thou  shaltic  a.  of  Egypt,  as  a.  of  Assyria 

3.3.  and  hadst  a  whore's  foreliead,refusedsttoica. 

12.  13.  and  they  shall  be  a.  of  your  revenues 
17.  13.  O  Lord,  all  that  forsake  thee  shall  be  a. 
20.  11.  my  persecutors  shall  stumble  and  be  a. 
48.13.  Moab  shall  be  a.  of  Chcmosh,  as  Israel  was 
50.  12.  your  mother  that  hare  you  shail  be  a. 

Kzek.  16.  61.  shalt  remendier  thy  ways,  and  be  a 

43.10.sliew  Israel,  they  may  be  a.of  tlieir  iniquities 

11.  and  if  they  be  a.  of  all  that  they  have  done 

//os.4.iy.they  shall  be  a.  because  of  their  sacrilice 

10.  6.  and  Israel  shall  be  a.  of  his  own  counsel 
Joel  l.ll.Aeyea.Oye  husbandmen,  howl  tor  wheat 

2.  26.  and  my  peojile  shall  never  he  a.  27. 
Z.cch.  9.  5.  lor  her  ex^iectation  shall  be  a. 

'13.  4.  the  prophets  every  one  be  a.  of  his  vision 
JliurA-8.38.shall  be  a.of  me  and  my  words,  Z.u.y.26. 
2  Cot-,  y.  4.  we  (that  we  say  not,  you)  should  be  a. 
Phil.  1.20.  that  in  nothing  I  shall  be  a.  but  with 
2  T/tess.3. 14.no  coinp.  with  him,  that  he  may  be  a. 
Tit.2.  8.  he  that  is  on  the  contrary  part  may  4c  a. 

1  Pet.  3. 16.  may  ii;  a.  that  falsely  accuse  your  good 

J\rot  be,  or  Be  not,  ASHAMED. 
JJ'um.  12.  14.  should  she  nut  be  a.  seven  days'? 
/'sai.25.2.0my  God,  I  trust  in  thee,  let  ment)t  be  a 
31.  17.  let  me  not  be  a.  O  Lord,  119.  116. 
37.  19.  ihey  shall  not  be  a.  in  the  evil  time 
119.6.  then  shall  1  not  be  a.  when  I  have  respect  to 
46.  I  will  speak  of  thy  testimonies,  and  noJ  ie  a 
80.  let  my  heart  be  sound,  that  I  be  not  a. 
127.  5.  they  shall  nut  be  a.  but  shall  Sjieak  with 
/sit.  29.  22.  saith  the  Lord,  Jacob  shall  nut  be  a. 

45.  17.  ye  shall  nut  be  a.  world  without  end 
49.  23.  they  shall  not  be  a.  that  wait  for  me 
50. 7.  my  face  like  a  flint,  I  know  I  shall  not  be  a. 
54.  4.  fear  not,  for  thou  shalt  not  be  a. 

Zrph.  3.  11.  in  that  day  shalt  thou  not  be  a.       [11 
Hum.  9.  33.  who  believeth  on  him  shall  7iot  be  a.  10 

2  Cor.  10.  8.  for  thougii  I  boast,  I  should  not  be  a 
2  'J'im.  1.  8.  be  not  therefore  a.  of  testimony  of  L. 

2.  15.  to  God,  a  workman  that  needeth  nut  be  a. 
1  Pet.  4. 16.  suffer  as  a  Christian,  let  him  not  be  a. 

1  John  2.  28.  not  be  a.  before  him  at  his  coming 

ASHES 

Signifies,  The  remains  of  fuel  after  it  has  been 
burned,  2  Pet.  2.6.  They  denote,  [1]  '1  he  frailty 
and  extreme  vilenessofman,whinciimprircd 
with  his  Creator,  Gen.  18.  27.  [2]  Ueep  hu- 
miliation, Esth.  4. 1.  Jonah  3.  6. 

Gc7i.  18.  27.  to  speak,  which  am  but  dust  and  a. 

Lev.  6.  10.  and  the  priest  shall  take  up  the  a. 
11.  and  carry  forth  the  a.  without  the  camp 

JVum.  19.9.  a  man  that  is  clean  shall  gather  the  a 

2  Sam.  13. 19.  Tamar  put  a.  on  her  head,  and  rent 

1  Kings  13.  3.  altar  shall  be  rent,  and  a.  poured  out 
20.  38.  the  prophet  disguised  himself  and  a. 

Esth.  4.  1.  Mordecai  put  on  sackcloth  with  a. 

3.  and  many  lay  in  sackcloth  and  a. 
Job  2  8.  Job  sat  down  among  the  a, 

13.  12.  your  remembrances  are  like  to  a.  your 
30.  19.  into  mire,  I  am  become  like  dust  and  a. 
42.  6. 1  abhor  myself,  and  repent  in  dust  and  a. 

Psal.  20.  t  3.  and  turn  to  a.  thy  burnt-sacrifice 
102.  9.  for  I  have  eaten  a.  like  bread,  and  mingled 
147. 16.  he  scattereih  the  hoar-frost  like  a. 

/«o.  44.20.  hefeedetli  on  a.  a  deceived  heart  turned 
.58.  5.  and  to  spread  sackcloth  and  a.  under  him 
61.  3.  to  give  them  beauty  for  a.  the  oil  of  joy 

.7(T.  6.  26.  O  daughter,  wallow  thyself  in  a. 

Lam.  3.  16.  he  hath  covered  me  with  a. 

Eiek.  28.  18.  I  will  bring  thee  to  a.  on  the  earth 

Dan.  9.  3.  Iset  my  face  to  seek  in  sackcloth  and  a. 

./oHaA3.6.king  covered  with  sackcloth, and  sat  ina. 

Mai.  4.  3.  the  wicked  shall  be  a.  under  your  feet 

Mat.  11.  21.  if  works  were  done,  they  would  have 
repented  long  ago  in  sackcloth  and  a.  Luke  10.13. 

ffrb.9.  13.  if  the  a.  of  a  heifer  sanclifieth  to  thee 

2  Pet.  2.6.  and  turnine  the  cities  of  Sodom  into  a. 
ASIDE. 

2  Kings  4. 4.  said ,  thou  shalt  set  n.tliat  which  is  full 
Tob  1.  t  19.  came  a  great  wind  from  a.  wilderness 
Mark  7.  33.  he  took  him  a.  from  the  multitude 
.Tuhn  13.  4.  ho  riseth  and  laid  a.  his  garment 
Hcb.  12.  1.  let  UB  lay  a.  every  weight,  and  the  sin 
which  doth  so  easily  beset  us 
.See  Go,  Gone,  Turn,  Went,  Lay. 
ASK 
Signifies,  [l]ro  enquire,  Gen.  32.  23.  Mark  9.  32. 
[2]  To  require,  or  demand.  Gen.  34.  12.    Dan. 
2.  10.     [31  To  seek  coun.oel,  l8a.30.2.  Hag.  2. 
11.    [4]  To  pray,  John  15.  7.  Jam.  1. 6.  [5]  To. 


ASK 

expect,  Luke  12.  48.     [6]  To  salute,  1  9am. 
25.  t  5.  2  Sam.  8. 1 10.     [7]  To   lay  to  one's 
charge,  I'sal.  35.  f  11. 
Ocn.  32.29.  wherefore  dost  thou  a.  after  my  namo? 

34. 12.  a.  me  never  so  much  dowry  and  gifl,Igiv8 
Deut.  4.  32.  for  a.  now  of  the  days  that  are  past 

13.  14.  shall  a.  diligently,  and  ifit  be  truth 
32.  7.  a.  thy  father,  and  he  will  shew  thee 

Josh.  4.  6.  when  your  children  a.  their  fathers,  21, 
.fudg.  18.  5.  a.  counsel,  we  jiray  thee,  of  God 

1  Sam.  10.  t  4.  and  they  will  a.  thee  of  peace 
12. 19.  we  have  added  this  evil  to  a.  us  a  king 
25.15.  a.  him  in  my  name  ofpeace,  2.'>a/H.8.  f  10 
28.  16.  why  dost  thou  a.  of  me,  seeing  the  Lord 

2  Sam.  14. 18.  hide  not  from  me  the  Ihuig  I  a. 

1  Kings  3. 5.  a  what  I  shall  give  thee,  2  C'Ar.  1.  7 

14.  5.  the  wife  of  Jeroboam  Cometh  to  a.  thee 
~Kings  2.9.  Elijah  said,  a.  what  1  shall  do  for  thee 

2  Chron.  20.  4.  Judah  gathered  to  a.  help  of  God 
./ob  12.  7.  a.  the  beasts,  and  they  shall  teach  thee 
Psul.2.S.  a.  ofmc,  andl  will  give  thee  the  heathen 
Isa.  7.  1 1,  u.thee  a  sign  of  Lord,  a.  it  of  the  depth 

12.  1  will  not  a.  nor  will  1  tcin|)t  the  Lord 
45.  11.  saitli  the  Lord,  a.  me  of  things  to  come 
58.  2.  they  a.  of  me  the  ordinances  of  justice 
.Jer.  6.  16.  a.  for  the  old  paihs,  and  walk  therein 

15.  5.  who  shall  go  aside,  to  a.  what  thou  doest 

18. 13.  a.  ye  now  among  the  heathen  who  heard 
30.  6.  a.  and  see  whether  a  man  doth  travail 

38.  14.  Twill  a.  thee  athing,  hide  nothing  from  mo 

48.  19.  a.  him  that  tteeth,  and  her  that  escapeth 

50.5.  they  shall  a.the  way  to  Zion  with  their  facei 
/-o;n.4.4.  the  young  children  a.  bread,  and  no  man 
J  J  an.  6.  7.  who  shall  a.  a  petition  of  any  God,  12. 
Jfos.  4.  12.  my  people  a.  counsel  at  their  stocks 
Hag.  2. 11.  a.  now  the  priests  concerning  the  law 
Zcch.  10.  1.  a.  ye  of  the  Lord  rain  in  tiinc  of  latter 
Milt.  6.  8.  what  ye  have  need  of,  before  ye  a.  hint 

7.  7.  a.  and  it  shall  be  given  you,  Luke  11.  9. 
y.whatman  of  you,  if  his  son  a.  bread,  Lu.  11.11. 
11.  shall  give  good  things  to  them  that  a.  him 

14.7. promised  to  give  her  whatsoever  she  woulda. 

18.  19.  agree  touching  any  thing  they  shall  a. 

20.  22.  ye  know  not  what  ye  a.  Mark  10.  38. 

21.22.what6oeveryea.in  prayer, believing,ye  shall 

22. 46.  nor  durst  any  maa  a.  him  more  questions, 

Mark  12.  34.  Luke  20.  40. 

Mark  C.  22.  a.  what  thou  wilt,  I  will  give  thee,  23. 

9.  32.  they  were  afraid  to  a.  him,  Luke  9.  4.5. 
Jjuke  0.  30.  taketh  thy  goods,  «.  them  not  again 

11.  13.  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  a.  him 

12.  48.  much  committed,  of  him  they  will  a.  more 
./(/Art  1. 19.  when  the  Jews  sent  priests  to  a.  him 

9.  21.  we  know  not,  he  is  of  age,  a.  him,  23. 
11.  22.  whatsoever  thou  wilt  a.  of  God,  he  will 

13.  24.  Peter  beckoned  to  him  that  he  should  a. 

14.  13.  whatsoever  ye  a.  in  my  name,  15. 16. 
I'J.  if  ye  a.  any  thing  in  my  name  I  will  do  it 

15. 7.  if  ye  abide  in  me,  a.  what  ye  will,  it  shall  be 
lli.  19.  Jesus  knew  that  they  were  desirous  to  a. 
23.  and  in  that  day  ye  shall  a.  me  nothing 
24.«.and  ye  shall  receive,that  your joymay  he  full 
30.  and  needest  not  that  any  man  should  a.  thee 
18.  21.  a.  lliem  which  heard  me  what  I  said 
jicts  10.  29. 1  a.  therefore  for  what  intent  ye  sent 
1  Cor.  14.  35.  let  them  a.  tlieir  husbands  at  homo 
F.ph.  3.  20.  to  do  above  all  that  we  can  a.  or  think 
.7am.  1.  5.  if  any  lack  wisdom, let  himo.ofGod 
6.  but  let  him  a.  in  faiih,  nothing  wavering 

4.  2.  yet  ye  have  not,  because  ye  a.  not 

3.  ye  a.  and  receive  not,  because  ye  a.  amiss 
1  .foitn  3.  22.  whatsoever  we  a.  we  receive  of  him 

5.  14.  if  we  a.  anything  according  to  his  will 

15.  if  we  know  he  heareth  us,  whatsoever  we  a. 

16.  sin  a  sin  which  is  not  unto  death,  he  shall  a. 

See  CoiTNSKL. 
ASKED. 
^f7?.32.29.Jacob  a.  him  and  said,  tell  me  thy  name 
43.  7.  Ihe  man  a.  us  siraitly  of  our  kindred 
.lush.  19.  50.  they  gave  him  the  city  whicii  he  a. 
.Judg.  5.  25.  ho  a.  water,  she  gave  him  milk 
13.  6.  but  I  a.  him  not  whence  he  was 
18.  t  15.  a.  him  of  peace,  1  Sam.  17. 1 22. 1  30.t21. 
1  Sam'.  1.  17.  God  grant  the  petition  thou  hast  a. 
120.  she  called  his  name  Samuel,  that  isa.  of  God 
27.  Ihe  I/ord  hath  given  me  my  petition  I  a. 

1  Kings3. 11.  because  thou  a.  this  thing  and  not  a. 

2  Kings  2.  10.  he  said,  thou  hast  a.  a  hard  thing 
F.ira  5.  10.  we  a.  their  names  to  certify  thee 
./oA21.29.have  yenot  a.  them  that  go  by  the  way? 
P.ial.  21.  4.  he  a.  life  of  thee,  thou  ?avest  him 

35.  t  11.  they  a.  me  things  that  I  knew  not 
105.  40.  the  people  a.  and  he  brought  quails 

rsa.  30.  2.  and  have  not  a.  at  my  mouth 
41.  28.  when  I  a.  of  them,  could  answer  a  worj 
65.  1.  T  am  sought  of  them  that  a.  not  for  me 

Dan.  2.  10.  there  is  no  king  that  a.  such  things 
7.  Ifi.  I  came  and  a.  him  the  truth  of  all  this 

JlfnM6.13.hea.his  disciples,  J»/arA8.27  7,«te9.18 
22.33.  Sadduceei  a.him,  35.  J»/ar.9.11.'10.2.112.13. 


ASS 

lAikt  18.  40.  when  come  near  he  a.  what  wilt  thou 
Ju/iai.  10.  tlioii  wouldust  have  a.  of  him 

16.  t^i.  Iiiiiiurtu  huve  yu  a.  nothing,'  in  my  name 
Rom.  10.  20.  inadu  inuiiifcsl.  tu  liium  iJmt  a.  nut 

ASKKST. 

Judg.  13.  18.  why  a.  thou  thus  afler  my  name  ? 

Jo/in  i-  9.  <i.  drink  of  me,  a  woman  of  Samaria 

16.  -il.  why  a.  thou  me,  usik  them  which  heard 

ArflvKTU. 

£iod.  13. 14.  thy  son  a.  tliue  in  time,  Deul.  6.  20. 

■y/ic.  7. 3.  pruice  u.  and  tlie  judge  a.  lor  a  reward 

Mat.  5.  4i.  give  to  him  tliat  a.  thee,  AuAe  6.  30. 

7.  8.  every  one  lliat  a.  ruceiveih,  J^uke  11.,  10. 

John  10.  5.  none  of  you  a.  me  wliitlicr  goost  ihuu? 

IPet.'i.lb.  to  every  one  that  a.  you  a  reason  ol  hope 

ASKING. 
1  Sam. 12. 17.  may  see  your  wickedness  in  a.  a  king 
J  C/ir.  10. 13.  vjaul  died  fur  a.  counsel  of  a  familiar 
Psal.  7a.  Iti.  templed  G.  by  a.  nieal  for  their  lusts 
J^uke  2.  4U.  hearing  ihein,  and  u.  them  questions 
Jokn  8.  7.  they  coulinued  a.  he  lifted  uj>  himself 
1  Cot.  10.  25.  a.  no  question  for  conscience,  27. 

ASLKEP 
Signifies,  [1]  To  take  real  in  sleep,  Jonah  1.  5. 
Mat.  20.  40.     [-'j^/'o  die,  Acts  7.  tiO.  2  Pet.  3.4. 
Judg.  4.  21.  for  Sl^era  was  fast  a.  and  weary 
Cant.  7.  U.  the  lips  of  those  that  are  a.  to  speak 
Jonah  1.  5.  hut  Jonah  lay,  and  wag  fast  a. 
J>/ut.8.24.  arose  a  storm,  but  he  was  a.  Mark  4.28. 
26.  40.  he  findeth  the  disciples  a.  Mark  14.  40. 
^cts  7.  GO.  when  Stephen  had  saiil  this,  he  fell  a. 
1  Cur.  15.  6.  part  remain,  but  some  are  fallen  a. 

18.  then  they  which  are  fallen  a.  in  Christ 
IThess.  4.13.  ignorant  concerning  them  that  are  a. 

15.  we  alive  shall  not  prevent  Iheni  that  are  a. 
S  Pet.3.  4.  for  since  the  fathers  fell  a.  all  things 

ASP,  S. 
Dr.ut.  .32.  33.  their  wine  is  the  cruel  venom  of  a. 
Job  20.  14.  his  meat  is  the  gall  of  a.  within  him 

IG.he  shall  suck  the  poison  ufa.the  viper's  tongue 
Jsa.  11.  8.  the  child  shall  play  on  the  hole  of  the  a. 
Rom.  3.  13.  the  poison  of  a.  is  under  their  lips 

ASSAULT,  ED. 
Esih.fi.W.ln  cause  to  perish  all  that  would  a.  them 
j4ct«14.5.wlien  there  wasana.madeof  the  Gentiles 
17.  5.  they  a.  the  house  of  Jason,  and  sought  to 
ASSAV,  ED,  ING. 
Jieut.  4.  34.  hath  God  a.  to  go  and  take  a  nation 
J  Sam.  17.  39.  David  a.  to  go,  for  he  had  not  proved 
Job  4.  2.  if  we  a.  to  commune  with  thee,  will  thou 
^ct«9.  26.  Saul  a.  to  join  himself  to  the  disciples 

16.  7.  they  a.  to  go  to  Bitliynia,  but  the  Spirit 
Hcb.  11.29.  the  Egyptians  a.  to  do,  were  drowned 

ASS. 
0('n.22.3.Abraliam  rose  up  early,and  saddled  hisa. 
5.  abide  you  here  with  the  a.  and  I  and  the  lad 
49.  14.  Issachar  is  a  siroiig  a.  couching  between 
F.zod.  13.  13.  every  firstling  of  an  a.  redeem  with 
23.  4.  if  thou  meet  thine  enemy's  a.  going  astray 
12.  shall  rest ;  that  thine  ox  and  thine  a.  may  rest 
JVum.  10.  15.  I  have  not  taken  one  a.  from  tliem 
22.  2:1.  the  a.  saw  the  angel  standing,  2.>.  27. 
28.  the  Lord  opened  the  mouth  of  the  a. 
30.  the  a.  said  to  Kalaam,  am  not  I  thine  a.? 
/>cut.  22. 10.  not  plow  with  an  ox  and  a.  together 
yosA.15.lH.and  Achsah  lighted  off  hera.Caleli  said, 
what  wilt  thou  ?  .ladir.  1.  14.  1  Sam.  25.  23. 
Judg.  l.'i.  16.  with  the  jaw-bone  of  an  a.  heaps 
1  Kings  13.  2S.  the  lion  had  not  torn  the  a. 
i  Kings  0.  25.  until  an  a.  head  sold  for  80  pieces 
a'bA  24.  3.  they  drive  away  the  a.  of  the  fatherless 
Prov.  26.3.  a  bridle  for  the  a.  and  a  rod  for  fool's 
Jsa.  1. 3.  ox  his  owner,  and  the  a.  his  master's  crib 
32.20.  that  send  forth  the  feet  of  the  ox  and  a. 
Jer.2-2.  19.  shall  be  buried  with  thcburialof  an  a. 
Zech.  9.  9.  thy  king  cometh  lowly,  riding  on  an  a. 
and  on  a  colt  the  foal  of  an  a.  jt/at.21.5. 
14.  15.  and  so  shall  be  the  phigiie  of  the  a. 
Mat.  21.  2.  ye  shall  find  an  a.  lied,  and  a  colt 
J^uke  13.  15.  doth  not  each  loose  hisa.  on  sabbath 

14. 5.  which  of  you  shall  have  an  a.  fallen  into  pit 
John  12.  14.  when  ho  hail  foiinil  a  young  n.  sat 
SPe(.2.16.the  dumb  a.  sp(Mkiiig,  forbad  madness 
Ser  Sxnnr.K. 

ASS'S  cor,T. 

Gen.  49.  II.  binding  \\\»n.ciili  to  the  choice  vino 
Job  11.  12.  though  man  b<;  born  like  a  wild  a.  cult 
John  12.  15.  thy  king  cometh  silting  on  an  a.  cull 

mid  A  S3. 
Job  fi.  5.  doth  the  wild  a.  brny  when  ho  hath  grass? 

39.  5.  who  halli  sent  out  ihi-  wild  a.  frei7 
Jrr.l.  24.  a  wild  a.  ii«ed  to  the  wililerness  sniifTcth 
Jfn.i.  8. 9.  they  are  gone,  ii  wild  a.  alone  by  himself 

ASSES. 
<7m.l2  in.  Abram  had  he-a.and  »he-(i.  and  camoli 

30.  43.  Jacob  hid  much  entile,  camels,  and  a. 

36.  21.  as  hi'  fed  the  a.  ofZibeon  his  fiilhor 

47.  17.  Joseph  gave  broad  in  exchange  for  a. 
Judi;.  5.  10.  speak,  yo  that  ride  on  whito  a. 
1  Sam.  i.  16.  he  will  take  vour  a.  to  work 
90 


ASS 

1  Sam.  9.  3.  tho  a.  of  Kish,  Saul's  father,  were  lost 
20.  thy  a.  that  were  lost,  they  are  found,  10.  2. 
2*a(n.  16.  2.  the  a.  be  lor  the  king's  household 

1  Chrun.  27.  30.  and  over  the  a.  was  Jehdeiah 

2  C/iron.  28. 15.  carried  the  feeble  of  them  upon  a. 
Kzra  2.  07.  a.  that  went  up  to  Jerusalem,  6720. 

JVtA.  7.  69. 
Job  42.12.  for  Job  liad  sheep,  and  a  thousand  she-a. 
Jsa.  21.  7.  he  saw  a  chariot  of  a.  and  of  camels 
Kzek.  23.  20.  whose  tlesh  is  as  the  flesh  of  a. 

Wtld  ASSES. 
Job  24.  5.  as  wild  a.  in  the  desert  go  they  forth 
fsal.  104.  11.  the  wild  a.  quench  their  thirst 
Isa.  32.  14.>,tbe  forts  shall  be  a  joy  o\'  wild  a. 
Jer.  14.  6.  wild  a.  snutfed  up  the  wind  like  dragons 
i.' an. 5. 21.  ^iebuchadne/zar's  dwell,  was  with  w.  a 

i'uuiig  ASSES. 
Isa.  30.  6.  they  will  carry  their  riches  on  young  a. 
24.  y.  a.  that  ear  the  ground  shall  eat  provender 
ASSEMBLE. 
JVttTn.  10.  3.  when  they  blow,  the  assembly  shall  a 
2  6'am.  20.  4.  a.  me  the  men  of  Judah,and  be  here 
Isa.  11.  12.  he  shall  a.  the  outcasts  of  Israel 
45.20.rt.yi)Urselves,  and  come,  draw  near  together 

48.  14.  all  ye  a.  yourselves  and  hear 
.ler.  4.  5.  a.  yourselves,  and  let  us  go  into  the  cities 

8.  14.  why  do  we  sit  stilH  a.  yourselves,  let  us 
Kzek.  11.  17.  I  will  a.  you  out  of  the  countries 

3',*.  17.  a.  yourselves,  gather  to  iny  sacrifice 
Has.  7.  14.  they  a.  themselves  for  corn  and  wine 
./oil  2.  16.  a.  the  elders,  gather  the  children 

3. 11.  a.  yourselves  and  come,  all  ye  heathen 
.imos  3.  9.  a.  yourselves  on  the  mount  of  Samaria 
Mic.2.  12.  1  will  surely  a.  O  Jac(;b,  all  of  thee 

4.  6.  saith  the  Lord  I  will  a.  her  that  halteth 
Zcpk.  3.  8.  I'll  a.  the  kingdoms  to  pour  indignation 

ASSE.MBLED. 
.Kxorf.38.8.women  which  a. at  thedoorof  thetaber. 
1  Sam.  2.  22.  they  lay  with  the  women  that  a. 

1  Chron.  15.  4.  David  a.  the  children  of  Aaron 

2  Chron.  30. 13.  a.  much  people  to  keep  the  feast 
Ezra  9.  4.  then  a.  to  me  every  one  that  trembled 

10.  1.  when  Ezra  had  prayed,  there  a.  to  him 
JVc/i.  9.  1.  the  childieu  of  Israel  a.  with  fasting 
Psal.  48.  4.  lo  the  kings  were  a.  they  pas<ed  by 
Isa.  43. 9.  let  the  peojile  be  a.  who  can  declare  this 
./er.  5. 7.  a.  themselves  by  troops  in  harlots'  houses 
Dan.  6.  1 1.  these  men  a.  and  found  Daniel  praying 
Mat.  28.  12.  when  they  a.  they  gave  large  money 
Juhn  20.  19.  the  discijiles  a.  for  fear  of  the  Jews 
Jicts  1.  4.  being  a.  commanded  them  not  to  depart 

4.  31.  the  place  was  shaken  where  they  were  a. 

11.  26.  a  whole  year  they  a.  with  the  church 

15.  25.  it  seemed  good  to  us  a.  with  one  accord 

ASSEMBLING. 
Ileb.  10. 25.  forsake  not  the  a.  Yourselves  together 

ASSEMBLY. 
Gen.  28. 1 3.  that  thou  mayest  he  an  a.  of  people 

49.  6.  to  their  a.  mine  honour  be  not  thou  united 
Kr.od.  12.  6.  the  whole  a.  shall  kill  it  in  the  even 

16.  3.  to  kill  this  whole  a.  with  hunger 
Lev.  4.  l.'l.  the  thing  be  hid  from  the  eyes  of  the  a. 
JVum.  10.2.  and  make  2  trumpets  for  calling  the  a. 

20.  6.  Moses  and  Aaron  went  from  pri-sence  of  a. 
Deut.  9.  10.  spake  in  the  invunt  out  of  the  midst 
of  the  fire,  in  the  day  of  your  a.  10.  4.  1 18. 16. 
.Judg.  31.  8.  none  from  jabesb-Gilead  to  the  a. 

1  .Sam.  17.  47.  all  this  a.  shall  know  the  Lord  saves 

2  Chron.  30.  23.  the  whole  a.  took  counsel  to  keep 
JVcA.  5.  7.  I  set  a  great  a.  against  them 
/'.■fui.22.1fi.the  a.of  the  wicked  have  inclosed  me 

89.  7.  God  is  to  be  feared  in  the  a.  of  the  saints 

107.  32.  praise  him  in  the  a.  of  the  elders 

HI.  1.  I  will  praise  him  in  tho  a.  of  the  upright 

ProB.  5.  14.  I  was  in  all  evil  in  the  midst  of  the  a. 

.Jer.  6.  11.  I  will  pour  it  on  the  a.  of  young  men 
9.  2.  for  they  be  an  a.  of  treacherous  men 
15.  17.  I  sal  not  in  the  a.  of  the  mockers 

T,am.  2.  0.  he  bath  destroyed  the  places  of  the  a. 

F.zek.  13.  9.  they  shall  not  be  in  the  a.  of  my  people 
23.24.  shall  come  against  Aholihah  with  an  a. 

Jlcts  19.  32.tlio  a.  was  confnseil,  and  part  knew  not 
39.  it  shall  be  determined  in  a  lawful  a. 
41.  he  had  thus  spoken,  he  dismissed  the  a. 

JJeb.  12.23.  lo  the  general  a.  of  tho  first  born 

Jam.  2.  2.  if  there  come  to  voiir  n.  a  man 
Solemn  ASSEMBLY. 

Act).  2.3.  36.  on  the  eighth  dav  it  is  a  solemn  a. 
J^,im.'-£\.  S.").  JVcA.  8.  18. 

neut.XdH.  on  the  sevrnlh  day  a  solemn  a.  to  the  L. 

2  Kings  10. 20.  Jehu  said,  proclaim  a  s.  a.  for  Buul 

2  Chron.  7. 9.  in  the  eighth  day  ihi-y  made  n  snl,  a. 

■  Iiirl  1. 14.  sanctify  a  fiisl,  call  asolrmn  a.  8. 15. 

Xcph.  3.  18.  them  that  are  siirrowfiil  for  the  sol.  a. 
ASSEMBLIES. 

Psal.  Rfi.  14.  the  a.  of  violnnl  men  sought  my  ton! 

A.Vc/.  12.  1 1.  as  nails  fa-itened  by  Ihi'  miislers  of  a. 

Isa.  1.  13.  tho  calling  of  a   I  cannot  away  with 
4  a.  God  will  create  on  her  a.  A  cloud  and  imuko 
14.  t  31.  ho  ihall  not  be  alone  in  his  a. 


AST 

F.zek.  44.  24.  they  shall  keep  my  laws  in  hll  mine  •, 
jIjuos  5.  21.  I  will  not  smell  in  your  solemn  a. 

ASSENT,  ED. 
2  Chr.  18. 12.  declare  good  to  the  king  with  one  a. 
/<u/[e:  23.124.  Pilate  a.  it  should  be  as  ihey  required 
Jlcts  24. 9.  Jews  also  a.  that  these  things  were  so 

ASSIGNED. 
Gen.  47.  21..  for  the  priests  bad  a  portion  a.  tbem 
Josh.  20.  8.  they  o.  Bezer  a  city  of  refuge 
2  Sam.  11. 16.  he  o.  Uriah  to  a  tilace  he  know 

ASSIST. 
Rom.  16. 2.  that  ye  a.  her  in  whatsoever  businesa 

ASSOCIATE. 
Isa.  8.  9.  a.  yoitrs.  and  ye  shall  be  broken  in  pieces 
JJan.  11.  t  6.  at  the  end  of  years  they  shall  o. 

AS  SOON. 

Exod.  9.  29.  o.  08  I  am  gone  out  of  the  city 

2  Chr.  31.  5.  a.  as  the  commandment  came  abroad 

Psal.  18.  44.  a.  as  they  hear  of  me,  shall  obey  me 

Isa.  66.  8.  a.  as  Zioii  travailed,  she  brought  forth 

Luke  1.44. a.as  the  voice  of  thy  salutation  sounded 

8.  6.  a.  as  it  was  sprung  up  it  withered  away 

John  18.  6.  a.  as  he  said,  1  am  he,  they  went  back 

^cts  10.  29.  therefore  came  I  a.  as  1  wassentfor 

12.  18.  a.  as  it  was  day  there  was  no  small  stir 

Rev.  10. 10.  a.  as!  had  eaten  it,  nry  belly  was  bitter 

12.  4.  for  to  devour  the  child  a.  as  it  was  born 

ASSUAGE,  ED. 
Gen.  8.  1.  over  the  earth,  and  the  waters  were  a. 
Job  16.  5.  moving  of  my  lips  should  a.  your  grief 
6.  though  I  speak,  yet  my  grief  is  not  a. 
ASSURANCE? 
Deut.  28.  66.  thou  shall  have  none  a.  of  thy  life 
Isa.  32.  17.  and  the  eficct  of  righteousness,  a. 
Acts  17.31.  whereof  he  hath  given  a.  to  all  men 
Co/.  2. 2.  to  all  riches  of  the  lull  a.  of  understanding 
1  'Phess.  1.  5.  our  gospel  came  in  much  a. 
Htb.  6.  11.  to  the  full  a.  of  hojie  to  the  end 

10.  22.  let  us  draw  near  in  full  a.  of  faith 
ASSURE. 

1  John  3.  19.  and  shall  a.  our  hearts  before  hini 
ASSURED. 

/.eB.27. 19.  add  the  fifth,  and  it  shall  be  a.  to  hira 
Jtr.  14.  13.  1  will  give  you  a.  jieace  in  this  place 
Rom.  14.  \  5.  let  every  one  be  fully  a.  in  his  mind 

2  7'i7n.  3.  14.  continue  in  thinss  thou  hast  been  a 
ASSUREDLY. 

1  Sam.  28.  1.  know  a.  thou  shall  go  out  with  me 

1  Kings  1. 13.a. Solomon  thy  son  shall  reign,  17,  30. 

Jer.  32.  41.  I  will  plant  them  in  this  land  a. 
38. 17.  if  thou  a.  go  forth  to  the  king  of  Babylon 
49.12.  they  have  a.  drunken,  and  shall  thou  go 

..ids  2.  36.  let  all  the  house  of  Israel  know  a. 
16.  10.  a.  gathering  that  the  Lord  had  called  us 
ASTONIED. 

F.zra  9.  3.  plucked  otf  the  hair,  and  sat  down  a. 

Job  17.  8.  upright  men  shall  be  a.  at  this 
18.  20.  they  that  come  after  him  shall  be  a., 

Ezek.  4.  17.  that  they  may  be  a.  one  with  anotlier 

7.'an..3.24. Nebuchadnezzar  was  a.and  rose  in  haste 
4.  19.  then  Daniel  was  a.  for  one  hour 
5.9.  his  countenance  was  changed,  his  lords  a. 
ASTONISHED. 

Lev.  26.  32.  and  your  enemies  shall  be  a. 

1  Kings  9.8.  every  one  that  passeth  by  shall  be  a. 
.Ic'r.  18.  16.  I  19. 8.  |  49.  17.  |  50. 13. 

./o4  26.  11.  tho  pillars  of  heaven  tremble  and  area 

Isa.5i.  14.  as  many  as  were  a.  at  thee,  his  visage 

.Jer.  2.  12.  be  a.  O  ye  heavens,  at  this 

4.  9.  the  heart  of  the  priests  shall  be  a. 
14.  9.  why  shouldest  ihuu  be  as  a  man  a. 

F.zck.'i.\5.  I  remained  a.  among  them  seven  Haya 
21).  16.  shall  tremble  at  every  moment,  and  be  a. 
28.  19.  they  that  know  thee  shall  be  a.  at  thee 
Dan.  8.  27.  I  Daniel  was  o.  at  the  vision 

Mat.  7.  28.  the  people  wore  a.  at  his  doctrine, 22. 
33.  Mark  1.  22.  |  6.  2.  |  11.  18.  Luke  4. 32. 

Mark  5.  42.  they  were  u.  with  great  astonishment 

7.  37.  and  were  beyoml  measure  a.  10.  26. 
10.  24.  the  disciples  were  a.  at  his  words 

Luke  2.  47.  a.  at  his  understanding  and  anawera 

5.  9.  ho  was  a.  at  the  draught  of  fishes 

8.  56.  her  parents  were  a.  out  bo  charged  thorn 

24.  22.  yen,  and  ccrlain  women  also  made  us  a. 
.lets  9.  6.  Saul  trembling  and  a.  said,  Lord,  what 

10.45.  of  the  circumcision  which  believed,  wore  a. 

12. 16.h«d  opened  door  and  saw  Peter, Ihey  wcrca. 

13. 12.  llio  dejiulv  when  he  saw,  believed,  being  a 
ASTONISHMENT. 
Deut.  28.  28.  the  Loril  shall  smite  thee  with  a. 

.37.  thou  sbnlt  become  an  a.  and  a  proverb 
2  Chr.  7.  21.  this  house  shall  be  an  a.  lo  every  ona 

2*.l.  8.  he  bath  delivered  iheni  to  a.  and  hissing 
Psal.  60.  3.  hast  made  us  to  drink  tho  wine  of  a 
.Jer.  Ti.  t  30.  a.  is  commitind  in  the  land 

8.  21.  I  am  black,  a.  hath  taken  hold  on  mo 

25.  <.i.  I  will  make  them  nn  a.  and  a  hissing,  18. 

11.  this  whole  land  shall  be  a  dosidalion  and  a 
2!l.  18.  I'll  deliver  them  to  be  a  curiio  and  an  a. 
42.  18.  ye  shall  be  an  execration  and  oji  a.  44.13 


ATT 

Jtr  44. 22.  therefore  is  your  land  an  a.  and  a  curse 
51.  37.  Babylon  ehall  become  heaps  and  an  a. 
Ezck-  4.  It),  son  of  man,  behold,  tliey  shall  drink 
water  by  measure,  and  with  a.  12.  19. 
5.  15  it  shall  be  an  a.  to  the  nations  about  tliee 
23.  .33.  thou  shalt  be  filled  with  the  cup  of  a. 
ZecA.  12.  4. 1  will  smite  every  horse  with  a. 
Astray;  see  Went,  Co,  Gonih. 
ASTUOLOGEKS. 
Jsa.il.  13.  let  now  the  a.  the  star-gazers,  stand 
Dan.  1. 20.  he  found  them  ten  times  bet:er  than  a 
2.  27.  the  secret  cannot  the  a.  shew  to  the  king 

4.  7.  then  came  in  the  magicians  and  the  a. 

5.  7.  the  king  cried  aloud,  to  bring  in  the  a. 
Asundkr;  see  Cleavk,  Cut,  Divide,  Put. 

AS  WELL. 
hev.'H.Vj.as  well  the  stranger,  as  he  that  is  born  in 
22.one  law,(is  well  for  the  stranger,as  for  your  own 
Deut.^0.8.  lest  his  brethren's  heart  famt,as  well  as 
2  Sam.  11.  2o.  the  sword  devours  one  as  well  as 

another 

1  C/tr.2.5.8.  tJiey  cast  lots,  as  well  the  small  as  great 
SCAr.  31.15.togiveaj5  well  to  the  great  as  the  small 
Job  12.  3.  but  I  have  understanding  as  well  as  you 
Ps.  87.  7.  as  well  the  singers  as  the  players  shall  be 
^cts  10.47. who  received  the  Holy  Ghost  as  well  as 
ICor.9.5.to  lead  about  a  sister  as  well  as  other  apos. 
Heb.  4.2.  to  us  the  gospel  jireached  as  well  as  them 

ATE. 
Psal.  106.  28.  they  a.  the  sacrifices  of  the  dead 
Dan.  10.  3.  I  a.  no  pleasant  bread  nor  flesh 
Rev.  10.  10. 1  took  the  little  book,  and  a.  it  up 

ATHIRST. 
J'urfn-.lS.lS.Samson  wa^sore  a.and  called  on  Lord 
Rut/i  2.  9.  wlien  a.  go  to  the  vessels  and  drink 
Mat.  25.  44.  when  saw  we  thee  a.  or  a  stranger 
Rev.  21.  6.  I'll  give  to  him  that  is  o.  of  fountain 
22. 17.  Spirit  and  bride  say,  let  him  tiiat  is  a.  come 

ATONEMENT 

Signifies,    [1]   Reconciliation,  or  appeasing  of 

anger,  Rom.  5.  1.   [2]  A  ransom.  Job  33.  f  24. 

Ezod.  29.  33.  eat  things  wherewith  a.  was  made 

36.  thou  shalt  offer  a  bullock  every  day  for  a 

37.  seven  days  thou  shalt  make  <i.  fur  the  altar 

30.  10.  Aaron  once  in  year  shall  make  a.  upon  it 

15.  to  make  an  a.  for  your  souls,  /,e«.  17.  11. 
16.  thou  shalt  take  the  a.  money  of  Israel 

32.  30.  peradventure  I  shall  make  an  a.  for  sin 
hev.  1.  4.  it  shall  be  accepted  for  him  to  make  a. 
4.  20.  the  priest  shall  make  an  a.  for  them,  and 
be  forgiven,  26,  31,  :«.  |  5.  6.  |  6.  7.  | 
12.  8.  1  14.  18.  JV«/n.  15.  25. 

8.  34.  so  the  Lord  hath  commanded  to  make  a. 

9.  7.  make  a.  for  thyself  and  for  them,  16.  24. 

10.  17.  God  hath  given  it  yon  to  make  a.  for  them 
12.  7.  make  an  a.  for  her,  and  she  shall  be  clean 
14.  53.  make  an  a.  for  the  house,  it  shall  be  clean 
Ui.lQ.ttie  scape-goat  shall  he  presented  to  makea. 

11.  Aaron  shall  make  an  n.for  himself  and  house 

16.  he  shall  make  an  a.  for  the  holy  place 

17.  shall  be  no  man  there,  when  he  maketh  a. 

18.  he  shall  go  and  make  a.  for  the  altar 

27.  whose  blood  was  brought  in  to  make  a. 

33.  he  shall  make  a.  for  the  holy  sanctuary 

34.  everlasting  statute  to  make  a.  once  a  year 
23.  27.  tenth  day  of  "tli  monih  shall  be  a  day  of  a. 

28.  do  no  work,  for  it  is  a  day  of  a.  to  make  a. 
25.  9.  in  the  day  of  a.  make  the  trumpets  sound 

JVu7n.8.21.  made  a.  for  the  Levites  to  cleanse  them 

19.  given  the  Levites  to  make  a.  for  Israel 

16.  46.  go  quickly,  make  a.  for  wrath  is  gone  out 
25.  13.  Phineas  have  it,  because  he  made  an  a. 

28.  22.  a  goat  for  a  sin-otfering  to  make  a.  30. 

29.  5.  a  kid  of  the  goats  to  make  an  a.  for  you 

31.  50.  ear-rings  to  make  an  a.  for  our  souls 

2  f!am.  21.  3.  wherewith  shall  I  make  the  a.? 

1  Chr.  6.  49.  Aaron  and  sons  appointed  to  make  a. 

2  Chr.  29.  24.  the  priests  killed  ihem  to  make  an  a. 
J^ch.  10.  33.  ordinances  for  offering  to  make  an  a. 
Job  33.  t  24.  deliver  him,  I  have  found  an  a. 
Rom.  5.  11.  by  whom  we  have  now  received  a. 

ATTAIN. 
Psal.  139.  6.  it  is  high,  I  cannot  a.  unto  it 
Prop.1.5.  man  of  imderstanding  shall  a.  to  wisdom 
Kick.  46.  7.  according  as  his  hand  shall  a.  to  it 
Hos.  8.  5.  how  long  ere  they  a.  to  innocency? 
.^cts  27.  12.  if  they  might  a.  to  Phcnice 
PAi7.3.11. 1  might  a.  to  the  resurrection  of  the  dead 

ATTAINED. 
Gen.  47.9.  and  have  not  a.  to  thedays  of  my  father 
7^15. 2.5. t26.  his  hand  hath  a.  and  found  sufficiency 
2  Sam.  23.  19.  howboit  he  a.  not  to  the  first 
three,  23.  1  Chron.  11.  21,  2.5. 
Rom.  9.  30.  the  gentiles  have  a.  to  righteousness 
31.  Israel  hath  not  a.  to  the  law  of  righteousness 
Pkil  3. 12.  i/ot  as  though  I  had  already  a.  or  perfect 

16.  whereto  we  have  already  a.  let  us  walk 
1  Tim.  4.  6.  good  doctrine,  whereto  thou  hast  a. 

ATTEND. 

Esth.  4.  5.  Hatach  whom  he  appointed  to  a.  bor 

31 


AUN 

Psal  17.  1.  O  Lord,  a.  to  my  cry,  61.  1.  |  142.  C. 
55.2.  a.  to  me,  hear  me,  I  mourn  and  make  a  noise 
Psal.  86. 6.  and  a.  to  the  voice  of  my  sup|)lication 
Prov.  4.  1.  hear  and  a.  to  know  understanding 
20.  my  son,  a.to  my  words,  incline  thine  ear,  7.24. 
5. 1.  my  son,  a,  to  my  wisdom,  and  bow  thine  ear 
1  Cor.  7.35.  may  a.  on  the  Lord  without  distraction 

ATTENDANCE. 
1  Kings  10.5.  saw  the  a.  of  his  ministers,  2  CAr.9.4. 

1  7'i/rt.  4.  13.  till  I  come,  give  a.  to  readmg 
Heb.  7. 13.  of  which  no  man  gave  o.  at  the  altar 

ATTENDED. 
.7ob  32. 12. 1  a.  to  you,  none  of  you  convinced  Job 
Psal.  66.  19.  he  hath  a.  to  the  voice  of  my  prayer 
.4ct«  16. 14.  slie  a.  to  the  things  spoken  by  Paul 

ATTENDING. 

iJom.l3.6.ministers  a.continually  on  this  very  thing 

ATTENT. 

2  Chron.  6.  40.  let  thine  ears  be  a.to  the  prayer 
7.  15.  mine  ears  shall  be  a.  to  the  prayer  made 

ATTENTIVE. 
JVeA.  1.6.  let  thine  ear  now  be  a.  11.  Psal.  130.  2. 

.8.  3.  tlie  ears  of  the  people  were  a.  huke  19.  48. 

ATTENTIVELY. 
.Tob  37.  2.  hear  a.  the  noise  of  his  voice  and  sound 

ATTIRE,  ED. 
I^ev.  16.  4.  with  the  linen  mitre  shall  Aaron  be  a. 
Prov.  7. 10.  met  him  a  woman  with  a.  of  a  harlot 
Jcr.  2.  32.  can  a  bride  forget  her  a.  ?  yet  my  people 
Ezck.  23.  15.  exceeding  in  dyed  a.  on  their  heads 

ATTRIBUTED. 
Job  I.  t  22.  Job  sinned  not,  nor  a.  folly  to  God 

AVAILETH. 
Esth.5.13.  yet  all  this  a.  me  nothing  so  long  as  I  see 
Oal.  5.  6.  in  Christ  circumcision  a.  not,  6.  15. 
Jam.  5. 16.  the  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  a.  much 
AUDIENCE.  [pie 

(ren.23.13.  Abraham  spake  toEphron  in  o.ofpeo- 
Exod.  34. 7.  took  book  of  covenant,  and  read  in  a. 
1  Satn.  25.  24.  let  thine  handmaid  speak  in  thy  a. 
1  Chron.  28.  8.  in  the  a.  of  our  God  keep  and  seek 
JVeA.  13. 1.  they  read  in  the  book  of  Moses  in  the  a. 
/^M^e 7.1. ended  all  his  sayings  in  the  a.of  the  people 

20.  45.  in  a.  of  the  peojde  he  said  to  his  disciples 
Acts  13.  16.  Israel,  and  ye  that  fear  God,  give  o. 

15. 12.  then  all  the  multitude  gave  a.  to  Barnabas 

22.  22.  and  they  gave  him  a.  to  this  word 

AVENGE. 
Lev.  19.  18.  thou  shalt  not  a.  nor  bear  grudge 

26.  25.  that  shall  a.  the  quarrel  of  my  covenant 
JVuiii.  31.  2.  a.  Israel  of  the  Midianites,  3. 
Dent.  32.  43.  he  will  a.  the  blood  of  his  servants 
1  Sam.  24.  12.  the  Lord  judge  and  a.  me  of  thee 
2Kings9.~.  smite  the  house  of  Ahab,that  I  may  a. 
Esth.  8.  13.  Jews  a.  themselves  on  their  enemies 
Isa.  1.  24.  I  will  a.  me  of  mine  enemies 
.7er.  46.  10.  a  day  of  vengeance  that  he  may  a. 
Hos.  1.  4.  I  will  a.  the  blood  of  Jezreel  on  Jehu 
Luke  18.  3.  saying,  a.  me  of  mine  adversary 

7.  shall  not  God  a.  his  own  elect,  who  cry  day 

8.  I  tell  you  that  he  will  a.  them  speedily 
Rom.  12. 19.  beloved,  a.  not  yourselves,  but  give 
Rev.  6.  10.  how  long  dost  thou  not  a.  our  blood 

AVENGED. 
Gcn.4.24.  if  Cain  should  be  a.  seven-fold,  Lamech 
Exod.  21.  t  20.  and  he  die,  he  shall  be  surely  a. 
Josh.  10.13.  sun  and  moon  stayed  till  people  had  a. 
Jadg.  VS.  7.  tho'  je  have  done  this,  yet  I  will  be  a. 
16.28.  may  be  a.  of  the  Philistines  for  my  two  eyes 

1  .Sam. 14.24.  that  eateth  any  food,  that  I  may  be  a. 
18.  2,5.  a  hundred  foreskins,  lo  be  a.  of  enemies 
25.  31.  or  tliat  my  Lord  hath  a.  himself 

2  .Sam.  4.  8.  the  Lord  hath  a.  my  lord  the  king 
18.  19.  how  the  Lord  hath  a.  him  of  his  enemies 

31.  the  Lord  hath  a.  thee  this  day  of  them 
Jcr.  5.  9.  my  soul  be  a.  on  such  a  nation,  29.  1 9.  9. 
Jicts  7.  24  Moses  a.  him  that  was  oppressed 
Rev.  18.  20.  rejoice,  for  God  hath  a.  you  on  her 
19. 2.  hath  a.  blood  of  his  servants  at  her  hand 
AVENGER. 
JVum.  35.12.  cities  for  refuge  from  the  a.  Jb«A.20.3. 
Dcut.  19.  6.  le»t  the  a.  of  blood  pursue  the  slayer 
12.  the  elders  deliver  him  into  the  hand  of  llie  a. 
.Jo.ih.  20.  .5.  if  the  a.  of  blood  pursue  after  him 

9.  not  die  by  the  hand  of  the  a.  till  he  stood 
Psal.  8.  2.  thou  mightest  still  the  enemy. and  a. 

44.  16.  by  reason  of  the  enemy  and  a. 

1  Thes.  4. 6.  because  the  Lord  is  the  a.  of  all  such 

AVENGETH. 

2  Sam.  22. 48.  it  is  God  that  a.  me,  Pial.  18.  47. 

AVENGING. 

.hiilg.  5.  2.  praise  the  Lord  for  the  a.  of  Israel 

ISam.  25.26.  Lord  hath  withholilen  thee  from  a. 

33.  blessed  be  thou  who  kept  me  from  a. 

AVERSE. 

Mic.  2.  8.  pass  by  securely,  as  men  a.  from  war 

AUGMENT. 
JVum.  32. 14.  ye  are  arisen  to  a.  the  fierce  anger 

AUNT. 
Lev.  18  14.  nor  approach  to  his  wife,  she  is  thy  a 


AWA 

AVOUCHED. 
r>eut.26.17.  hast  this  day  a.  the  Lord  to  be  thy  God 

18.  the  Lord  hath  a.  thee  to  be  his  people' 

AVOID. 
Prov.  4.  1.5.  a.  it,  pass  not  by  it,  turn  from  it 
Rom.\6.n.  mark  them  that  cause  divisions,  and  a. 

1  Cor.  7. 2.  to  o.  fornication,  let  every  man  have  hi« 

2  Tim.  2.  23.  foolish  and  unlearned  questions  a. 
Tit.  3.  9.  a.  foolish  ouestions  and  genealogies 

AVOIDED,  ING. 

1  Sam.  18. 11.  David  a.  out  of  his  presence  twice  ^ 

2  Cor.  8.  20.  a.  this,  that  no  man  should  blame  luP 
1  Tim.  6.  20.  a.  profane  and  vain  babbhngs 

AUSTERE. 
Luke  19.  21. 1  feared,  because  thou  art  an  a.  raao 

AUTHOR. 
Mts  3.  1 15.  and  killed  the  a.  of  life 
1  Cor.  14.  33.  God  is  not  the  a.  of  confusion 
Heb.  5.  9.  he  became  the  a.  of  eternal  salvation 
12. 2.  looking  to  Jesus,  the  a.  and  finisher  of  faith 
AUTHORITy 
Signifies,  [1]  Power,  rule,  or  dignity,  Prov.  ^.2. 
Luke  19.  17.     [2]  j4  convincing  efficacy  and 
power.  Mat.  7.  2*,).     [3]  j?  warrant,  order,  or 
authentic  permission,  Mat.  21.  23.  Acts  9.  14. 
Esth.  9.  29.  Esther  and  Mordecai  wrote  with  a. 
Prot).  29. 2.  when  righteous  are  in  a.  people  rejoice 
.iUat.7.29.  taught  them  as  one  having  a.  Mark  1.22. 

8.  9.  for  I  am  a  man  under  a.  and  say,  Luke  7.8. 
20. 25.  they  that  are  great  exercise  o.  Mark  10.42. 

21.  23.  by  what  a.  doest  thou  these?  Jl/or*  11.28. 
Mark  1.  27.  for  with  a.  commandeth  he  even  the 

unclean  spirits,  and  they  obey  him,  /,u/t«  4.36. 

13.  34.  left  his  house,  and  gave  a.  to  his  servants 
Luke9.1.  he  gave  them  power  and  a. over  all  devils 

19. 17.  been  faithful,  have  thou  a.  over  ten  cities 
20.  20.  might  deliver  him  to  a.  of  the  governor 

22.  25.  that  exercise  a.  are  called  benefactora 
John  5.  27.  hath  given  him  a.  to  execute  judgment 
Jicts  8.27.  eunuch  of  great  a.  under  Candace  queen 

9.  14.  here  he  hath  a.  to  bind,  20.  10,  12. 

1  Cor.  15.  24.  when  he  shall  have  put  down  all  a. 

2  Cor.  10.  8.  should  boastsomewhat  moreof  ouro. 
1  Thes.  2.  t  6.  when  we  might  have  used  a. 

1  Tim.  2.  2.  supplication  for  kings  and  all  in  a. 

12. 1  suffer  not  a  woman  to  usurp  a.over  the  man 
Tit.  2.  15.  exhort  and  rebuke  with  all  a. 

1  Pet.  3.  22.  angels  and  a.  made  subject  to  him 

Rev.  13. 2.  the  dragon  gave  him  power  and  great  a. 
AWAKE 

Signifies,  [1]  To  come  out  of  natural  sleep,  Luke 
9.  32.  [2]  To  rouse  up  out  of  spiritual  sleep, 
by  a  vigorous  exercise  of  grace,  by  leaving  off 
all  sinful  courses,  and  setting  about  the  per- 
formance  of  duties  required,  Rom.  13. 11.  Eph. 
5.  14.  [3]  To  raise  from  the  dead.  Job  14.  12. 
John  11.  11.  [4]  To  give  present  help  after  it 
hath  long  been  kept  from  us,  as  though  God 
had  forgotten  us,  Psal.  7.  6.  Isa.  51.  9. 

Awake  not  my  love  tUI  he  please.  Cant.  2. 7.  Oive 
my  beloved  Saviour  no  occasion  of  offence  or 
departure;  neither  interrupt  that  peace  I  enjoy 
in  him,  so  long  as  he  is  pleased  to  continue  it. 

Judg.  5. 12.  a.  a.  Deborah,  a.  a.  utter  a  song,  arise 

.hb  8.  6.  surely  now  he  would  a.  for  thee 

14.  12.  til!  heavens  be  no  more,  they  shall  not  a. 
19.  t26.  I  shall  a.  though  this  body  be  destroyed 

Psal.  7.  6.  a.  for  me  to  the  judgment,  3.5.  23. 
17.  15.  be  satisfied  when  I  a.  with  thy  likeness 
44.  23.  a.  why  sleepest  thou,  O  Lord  7  arise 
57.  8.  a.  my  glory,  I  myself  will  a.  early,  108.  2 
59.  4.  they  prepare,  a.  to  help  me,  and  behold 
5.  O  Lord  God,  a.  to  visit  all  the  heathen 

Prov.  23. 35.  when  shall  I  a.  I  will  seek  it  yet  again 

Cant.  2.  7.  not  a.  my  love  till  he  please,  3.  5.  |  8. 4. 
4.  16.  a.  O  north  wind,  and  come  thou  south 

Isa.  26. 19.  a.  and  sing  ye  that  dwell  in  the  dust 
51.  9.  a.  a.  put  on  strength,  O  arm  of  the  Lord,  a. 
as  in  the  ancient  ftys,  52.  1. 
17.  a.  a.  stand  up,  O  Jerusalem,  which  hast  drunk 

.Trr.  51.  57.  sleep  a  perpetual  sleeji,  and  not  a. 

Dan.  12.  2.  many  that  sleep  in  the  dust  shall  a. 

Joel  1.  5.  a.  ye  drunkards,  weep  and  howl  all  ye 

Hab.  2.  7.  shall  they  not  a.  that  shall  vex  thee 

19.  woe  to  him  that  saith  to  the  wood,  a. 
Zcch.  13.7.  a.O  sword,  against  my  Shepherd,  smite 
Mark  4.  38.  he  was  asleep,  and  they  a.  him 
Luke  9.  32.  when  fhey  were  o.  they  saw  his  glory 
.Tohn  11.  11.  I  go  that  I  tnay  a.  him  out  of  sleep 
Rom.  IX  11.  it  is  high  time  to  a.  out  of  sleep 

1  Cor.  15.  34.  a.  to  righteousness,  and  sin  not 
F.ph.5.i4.  a.  thou  that  sleepest, and  arise  from  dead 

2  Tim.  2.  t26.  may  <{.  themselves  out  of  tlie  snare 

AWAKED. 
Gen.  28.  16.  Jacob  a.  out  of  his  sleep,  and  said 
.fudg.l6.14.  Samson  a.and  went  away  with  the  pin 
1  Sam.  26.12.  no  man  saw  it  nor  knew  it,  neither  a. 

1  Kings  18.  27.  he  sleepeth  and  must  be  a. 

2  Kings  4.  31.  Gehazi  told  him,  the  child  is  not  a 
Psal.  3.  5.  I  a.  for  the  Lord  sustained  ma 


BAG 

fsal.  78.  Bo.  tlien  the  Lord  a.  as  one  out  of  sleep 
Jer.  31.  -tj.  upon  ibis  I  a.  and  beheld,  and  ray  bleep 

AWAKEST. 
Psal.  73.'20.  when  thou  a.  shalt  despise  their  imaga 
Prov.  6.  i-2.  when  thou  a.  it  shall  talk  witli  tliee 

AWAKETH,  LNG. 
Psal.  73.  20.  as  a  dream  when  one  a.  so,  O  Lord 
Isa.  -29.8.  he  a.  and  his  soul  is  empty,  a.  and  is  taint 
.^cls  16.27.  the  keeper  of  the  prison  a.  out  of  sleep 
^  AWAKE, 

t^ant.  6. 12.  or  e\'er  I  was  a.  my  soul  made  mo  like 
./er.50.24.art  taken,  O  Babylon,  and  thou  art  not  a. 
■Luke  11.  44.  men  that  walk  over  ihum,  aru  not  a. 

AWAY. 
Oen.  ]5.n.whcn  fowlscameAbrah.  drove  them  a. 
Ecod.  S.  28.  only  ye  shall  not  go  very  far  a. 
10.  24.  the  Lord  said  to  him,  a.  gel  thee  down 
2  Chron.  35.  23.  have  me  a.  lor  I  am  wounded 
ha.  1.  13.  calling  of  assemblies  I  cannot'a.  with 
J.ukc  4.  t  34.  a.  what  have  we  to  do  with  theo 
23.  18.  a.  with  this  man,  release  to  us  Barabbas 
Jo/in  19.  1.5.  a.  with  him,  a.  with  him,  .icU  21.36. 
.lets  22.  22.  a.  with  such  a  fellov/  from  tlie  earth 

AWE,  ETll. 
Psal.  4.  4.  stand  in  a.  and  sin  not,  commune  with 
33.3.  inhabitants  of  the  world  stand  in  a.  of  him 
119.  161.  my  heart  standeth  in  a.  of  thy  word 
Prov.  17.  t  10.  a  reproof  a.  more  a  wise  man 

AWL. 
Kxod.  21. 6.  his  master  shall  bore  his  ear  with  an  a. 
Deut.  15. 17.  thou  shalt  take  an  a.  and  thrust  it 

AWOKE. 
Oen.  9.  24.  Noah  a.  from  his  wine,  and  know  what 
41.  4.  eat  up  the  fat  kine,  so  Pharaoh  a.  7,  21. 
Jadg.  16.  20.  Samson  a.  out  of  his  sleep  and  said 
1  Kings  3.15.  Solomon  a.and  behold  it  was  a  dream 
jVat.o.25.his  disciiilos  came  and  a.  him,  LukcS.'H. 

AX 
Signifies,  [I]  Jl  carpenter's  tool,  Judg.Q.  48.   [2] 
A  human  instrument,  the  king  of  Aiisyrin,  Isa. 
10.15.  [3]  God's  vengeance  and  judgment  upon 
banen  and  incorrigible  sinners,  Mat.  3.  10. 
Deut.  19. 5.  his  hand  fetched  a  stroke  with  the  az 
20.  19.  nor  destroy  the  trees  by  forcing  an  az 
Judg.  9.  48.  Abimelcch  took  an  ax  in  his  hand 
1  .Sam.  13.20.  Israel  went  down  to  sharpen  his  ax 

1  Kings  6.  7.  neither  hammer  nor  az  was  hoard 

2  Kings  6.  5.  tlie  ax-head  fell  into  the  water 
Isa.  10.  15.  shall  the  ax  boast  itself  against  him 
Jer.  10.  3.  for  one  cuts  a  tree  with  the  az 

51.  20.  thou  art  my  battle-ai  and  weapons 
^fat.  3.  10.  the  ax  is  laid  to  root  of  trees, /,u/.e  3. 9. 
AXES. 

1  Sam.  13.  21.  yet  they  had  a  file  for  the  a. 

2  Sam.  12.  31.  he  put  them  under  saws  and  a.  of 

iron,  and  made  them  pass  through,  1  C7»r.20.3. 
Psal.  74.  5.  a  man  was  famous  as  he  lifted  up  a. 

6.  they  break  down  the  carved  work  with  a. 
Jer.  46. 22.  and  come  against  her  with  a.  as  hewers 
Kick.  26.  9.  with  a.  he  shaH  break  down  thy  tower 

AXLE-TREES. 
IKings  7. 32.  the  a.-t.  of  the  wheel  join  to  the  base 
33.  a.-trees,  naves,  and  felloes,  were  all  molten. 


B. 


BABBLER. 

Eccl.  10.  11.  serpent  will  bite,  and  a  b.  is  no  better 
^cts  17.  18.  and  some  said,  what  will  this  4.  say  7 

BABBLING,  S. 
Proi'. 23. 20.  who  lialh  contentions  ^  who  hath  ft.? 
1  Tim.  6.  20.  avoiding  profane  and  vain  b. 
ZTim.  2.  16.  but  shun  profane  and  vain  b.  they 

BABE 
Signifies,    [I]  .^n  infant  or  child,   Exod.  2.  C. 
Luke  2. 12.    [2]  .Such  as  are  weak  in  faith  and 
knowleiige,   bring  ignorant   and  inconstant, 
like  infants,  1  Cor.  3.  1.  Heb.  5.  13.    [3]  Fool- 
ish, frowarti,  and  unteachalilc.  men,  incapable 
of  government,  for  want  of  understanding, 
experience,  and  manners,  Isa.  3.  4. 
F.xod.  2.  0.  saw  ths  child,  and  bclndd  the  b.  wept 
JmUc  1.  41.  heard  Mary,  the  b.  leaped  in  her  w  oinb 

44.  the  b.  leaped  in  my  womb  for  joy 
2.  12.  ye  shall  find  ^.wrapped  in  swaddling  clothes 

10.  came  and  found  the  b.  lying  in  a  manger 
Ucb.  5. 13.  unskill'ul  in  tllt>  word,  for  he  is  a  b. 

BABES. 
Psal.  8.  2.  out  of  the  mouth  of/;.  Mai.  21.  10. 

17. 14.  they  leave  rest  of  their  substunce  to  their  4. 
Jsa.  'i.  4.  their  princes  and  4.  shall  rule  over  them 
^VaM1.25.and  hiutt  revealed  them  to4.  /,uAcl0.21. 
horn.  2.  20.  instructor  of  foolish,  a  teacher  of  4. 
1  0)r  3.  1.  OS  to  carnal,  oven  as  unto  b.  in  Christ 
1  Tet.  2.2.  as  new-born  4.  d«siro  the  sincere  milk  of 

BACK. 

f.xod.  18.  2.  Zipporah,  after  ho  had  flcnt  her  4. 

23.  4.  or  BBS  going  astray,  thou  shall  bring  it  4, 

ffum.  22.  34.  if  it  pleo-'e  theo,  I  will  get  ifle  4. 

23 


BAD 

JVB7n.24.11.the  Lord  hath  kept  thee  h.  from  honour 
yusA.8.  26.  Josbuadrow  not  his  hand  4.  till  he  had 
Ruth  2.  6.  the  Moabitiah  damsel  Uiut  came  4. 
2  Sam.  15.  20.  return,  and  take  4.  thy  brethren 
19.  10.  why  speak  ye  not  of  bringing  the  king  4..' 

1  Kings  13. 22.  but  earnest  4.  and  liast  eaten  bread 
22.  26.  and  carry  him  4.  to  .'\mon  the  governor 

2  Chron.  13.  14.  when  Judah  looked  4.  behold 
25.  13.  but  the  soldiers  that  Amaziah  sent  4. 

Job  26.  9.  he  holdeth  4.  the  face  of  his  throne 
Jer.  46.  5.  they  are  tied  apace,  and  look  not  4. 
Hos.i.  16.  Israel  slideth  4.  as  a  backsliding  heifer 
^Va/j.2.  8.  stand,  shall  tliey  cry,  none  shall  look  4. 
Mat.  24.  18.  nor  let  him  that  is  in  field  return  4. 
28.  2.  angel  rolled  4.  llie  stone  from  the  door 
Luke  8.37.  went  into  the  6hip,and  returned  4.  again 

9.  62.  put  his  hand  to  plough,  and  lookmg  4. 

17.  31.  let  him  hkewise  not  return  4. 
See  Dkaw,  Uo,   Bkinu,  Keep,  Kept,  Turn, 

Went. 

BACK,  Substanticc. 

1  Sam.  10.  9.  he  tur.ied  his  4.  to  go  from  Samuel 
IKings  11.9.hastea.st  me  behind  thy  4.  Kzek.~3.'35. 
Psal.  21.12.  thou  shalt  make  them  turn  their  4. 

129. 3.  the  plowers  jilowed  on  my  4.  made  furrows 
Prov.  10. 13.  a  rod  for  the  4.  of  him,  19.  29.  |  26. 3. 
Isa.  38. 17.'thou  hast  cast  my  sins  behind  tliy  4. 

5U.  6.  I  gave  my  4.  lo  the  smiteis,  and  my  cheeks 
Jer.  2.  27.  they  have  turned  their  4.  to  thee 

18.  17.  I  will  shew  them  tlie  4.  and  not  the  face 
32.  33.  they  have  turned  to  me  the  4.  and  not  face 
48.  39.  how  hath  Moab  turned  the  4.  with  shame 

Dan.  7.  6.  which  had  on  the  4.  of  it  four  wings 
Rom.  11. 10.  not  see,  and  bow  down  their  4.  alway 

BACK-BtiNE. 
/,e«.3.9.thc  rump  shall  he  take  offhard  by  the  4.-4. 

BACK-PARTS. 
/i;zo(i.33.23.away  my  hand,  thou  shalt  see  my  b.-p. 

BACKS. 
JVt/t.  9.  26.  they  cast  thy  law  behind  their  4.    . 
Ezck.  8.  16.  men  with  their  4.  towards  the  temple 

10.  12.  their  whole  body  and  4.  full  of  eyes 

See  TiRNED. 

BACKBITERS. 
Rom.  1.  30.  b.  haters  of  God,  despiteful,  proud 

BACKBITETH. 
Psal.  15.  3.  he  that  4.  not  with  his  tongue 

BACKBITING. 
Prov.  25.23.  so  an  angry  countenance,  a  4.  tongue 

2  Cor.  12.  20.  lest  there  be  debates,  strifes,  4. 

BACKSIDE. 
Exod.3.1.  Moses  led  the  tiock  to  the  4.  of  the  desert 
26.  12.  the  half-cuitain  shall  hang  over  the  4. 
Rev.  5.  1.  on  the  4.  sealed  with  seven  seals 

BACKSLIDER. 
Prov.  14.  14.  4.  in  heart  be  filled  with  his  ways 

BACKSLIDING,  S. 
./er.  2.  19.  and  tliy  4.  shall  reprove  thee 
3.  6.  hast  thou  suun  what  4.  Israel  hath  done  1 

8.  causes  wher^jby  4.  Israel  committed  adultery 
Jer.  3.  11.  the  4.  Israel  hath  justified  herself  more 
12.  return  thou  4.  Israel,  saitli  the  Lord 
14.  return,  O  4.  children,  saith  the  Lord,  22. 
5.  6.  because  their  transgressions  and  4.  increased 
8.  5.  this  people  slidden  back  by  a  jierjietual  4. 
14. 7.  for  our  4.  are  many,  we  sinned  against  thee 
31.22.  how  Ions  go  about,  O  4.  daughter,  49.  4. 
Uos.  4.  10.  Israel  slideth  back,  as  a  4.  heifer 
11.7.  my  people  are  bent  to  4.  from  me 

14.  4.  1  will  heal  their  4. 1  will  love  them  freely 
Zech.  7.  t  IL  they  gavr;  a  4.  shoulder  and  stopped 

BACKVV,\UI). 
Oen.  9.  23.  went  4.  and  thfir  faces  were  4. 
49. 17.  Dan  a  serpent,  so  that  his  rider  shall  fall  4. 

1  Sam.  4. 18.  Eli  fell  from  otf  the  seat  4.  by  the  gate 

2  Kings  20. 10.  let  the  shadow  return  4.  Isa.  38.  8. 
Job  23.  8.  and  4.  but  I  cannot  [lerceive  him 
Psal.  40. 14.  lot  them  be  driven  4.  that  wish  mo  evil 

70.  2.  let  them  be  turned  4.  that  desire  my  hurt 
Isa.  1.  4.  they  provoki-d,  and  are  gone  away  b. 
28.  13.  that  they  might  go  and  fall  4.  be  broken 
44.25.  that  tnrnolh  wise  men  A.  and  makelh  tlieir 
59..  14.  judgment  is  turned  away  4.  and  justice 
Jer.  7.  24.  but  they  went  4.  and  not  forward 

15.  6.  thou  art  gone  4.  therefore  I  will  destroy 
J.atn.  1.  8.  Jerusalem  sigheth  and  turneth  4. 
.fuhn  18.  0.  they  went  4.  and  fell  to  the  ground 

BAD. 
Oen.  24.  50.  wo  cannot  spi:ak  to  thee  4.  or  good 
31.  24.  speak  not  to  Jacob  good  or  4.  29. 
Lev.  27.  10.  a  good  for  a  4.  or  a  4.  for  a  good 
12.  the  priest  value  it,  wlioll»;r  it  be  good  or  4. 
M.  estimate  llio  house,  whi^lher  it  bo  good  or  4. 
33.  he  shall  not  search  whether  it  bo  good  or  4. 
JVura.  13.  19.  (he  land  they  dwell  in,  if  good  or  4. 
24.  13.  to  do  either  good  or  4.  of  my  own  mind 
2  Sam.  13.  22.  Absalom  spake  neither  good  nor  4. 
14. 17.  so  is  my  lord  tlie  king  to  discern  good  or  4. 
I  Kings  3. 9.  a  heart  that  I  mav  discern  good  and  4. 
Ezra  4.  12.  building  tlie  rebellious  and  4.  city 


BAL 

Jer.  24.2.  the  figs  could  not  be  eaten, they  were  so  b. 
Mat.  13. 48.  gathered  the  good  but  cast  the  4.  away 

22.10.  good  and  4.  and  the  wedding  was  furnished 
2  Cur.  5. 10.  that  he  hath  done,  whether  good  or  b. 

BADNESS. 
Oen.  41. 19.  never  saw  in  the  land  of  Egypt  for  b. 

BADE,  EST. 
Gen.  27.  19.  I  have  done  according  as  thou  4-  me 

43. 17.  and  the  man  did  us  Joseph  4.  and  brought 
Exod.  16.24.  laid  it  up  till  morning,  as  Moses  b. 
JVuHi.  14.  10.  all  tJie  congregation  4.  stone  them 
Josh.  11. 9.  Joshua  did  to  theTn  as  the  Lord  4.  him 
Ruth  3.  6.  to  all  that  her  mother-in-law  4.  her 

1  Sam.  24.  10.  some  4.  me  kill  tliee,  but  1  spared 

2  Sam.  1.  18.  David  4.  them  teach  Judah  the  use 
14.  19.  for  thy  servant  Joab  he  4.  me,  and  he  put 

2Chron.  10. 12.  came  on  the  third  day  as  the  king 4. 
Esth.  4.  15.  Esther  4.  them  return  this  answer 
Mat.  16. 12.  how  he  4.  them  not  beware  of  leaven 
Luke  14. 9.  and  he  that  4.  thee  and  him,  come,  10. 
16.  a  certain  man  made  a  supper  and  4.  many 
Jlcts  11.  12.  and  the  Spirit  4.  me  go  with  them 
18.  21.  but  4.  tliem  farewell,  saying,  I  must  keep 
22. 24.4.  that  he  should  be  examined  by  scourging 

BADGERS'-SKINS. 
Ezod.25.5.  take  of  them  b.-skins  and  shittim-wood 
26.14. and  a  covering  for  the  tent  above  of  4.-*Ainj 
35.7.rams'  skins  dyed  red,  4.-SA.and  shitlim-wood 
23.  with  whom  were  found  skins  of  rams, and4.-»'t. 
36.19.  and  he  made  a  covering  of4.-iA-.  above  that 
J^um.  4.  10.  put  it  within  a  covering  of  b.-skins 
Ezek.  16.  10.  and  I  shod  thee  with  b.-skins 

BAG 
Signifies,.'9sacil  or ;)0!icA,Deut.25.13.  lSiim.]7.40. 
Bags  which  wax  not  old,  Luke  12.33.   Hravcnly 
treasures, which  perish  not, as  earthly  things  do. 
Earneth  wages  to  jiut  into  a  bag  with  holes.  Hag.\. 
6.  IVhathe gets orlabours for, doeshimno  man- 
ner of  service,  hut  a  secret  curse  consumes  it. 
Deut.  25.  13.  not  have  in  thy  4.  divers  weighta 

1  Sam.  17.  40.  smooth  stones,  and  put  them  in  a  6 
./o4  14.  17.  my  transigression  is  sealed  up  in  a  4. 
Prov.  7. 20.  he  hath  taken  a  4.  of  money  with  liira 
f  roi>.  16.  ll.ull  the  weights  of  the  4.  are  his  work 
Isa.  46.  6.  they  lavish  gold  out  of  the  4.  and  weigh 
Mic.  6.  11.  and  with  the  4.  of  deceitful  weights 
Hag.1.6.  he  earneth  wages  to  (mt  in  a  4. with  holes 
John  12.  6.  because  he  was  a  thief,  and  had  the  4. 

13.  29.  some  liiouglit,  because  Judas  had  llie  4. 
BAGS. 

2  Kings  5. 23.  and  he  bound  two  talents  in  two  A. 
12.  10.  they  put  up  in  4.  and  told  tiie  money 

Lake  12. 33.  provide  vourselves  4.that  wax  not  old 

BAKE. 
Oen.  19.  3.  Lot  did  4.  unleavened  bread,  Iheveat 
Exod.  16.  23.  4.  that  which  you  will  4.  to-day 
Jec.  24.  5.  take  Hour  and  A.  twelve  cakes^bereof 
26. 26.  ten  women  shall  4.  your  bread  in  one  oveu 

1  iam.  28.24.  woman  atEndor  did  4.  unleav.  bread 

2  Sam.  13.  8.  Tamar  took  fiour  and  did  4.  cakes 
Ezck.  4.  12.  thou  shalt  4.  it  with  man's  dung 

46. 20.  the  place  where  they  shall  4.  nieal-utl'eriDg 

BAKED. 
Exod.  12.  39.  they  4.  unleavened  cakes  of  dough 
jVum.  11.8.  and  4.  it  in  pans,  and  made  cakes  of  it 
1  Chron.  23. 29.  and  for  that  which  Is  4.  in  the  pan 

BAKE-MEATS. 
Ofn.40. 17.  all  mnnner  of  b.-meats  for  Pharaoh 

BAKEN. 
Lev.  2.  4.  meat-otVering  4.  in  the  oven,  5,  7.  |  7.9. 
6. 17.  it  shall  not  be  4.  with  leaven,  it  is  most  holy 
23.  17.  two  wave-loaves  shall  be  4.  with  leaven 
1  Kings  19.  6.  behold,  a  cake  was  4.  on  the  coala 

BAKER. 
Gen.40.  l.the  butler  and  4.  had  ofiended  the  king 
20.  lifted  up  the  head  of  the  chief  butler  and  4. 
22.  lie  hanged  the  4.  as  Joseph  interpreted 
41.  10.  ami  put  in  ward  both  me  and  the  ehiafi. 
Hos.  7.  4.  they  are  as  an  oven  heated  by  the  A. 
G.  their  A.  sleepeth  all  (he  night,  it  burncth 
BAKERS. 
Gen.  40.  2.  was  wroth  against  the  chief  of  the  6. 
1  Sam.S.  IX  ho  will  take  your  danghlers  to  be  A. 
17.  21.  gave  Jeremiah  bread  out  of  4.  street 
B.-VKETII. 


.ler.  37 


Isa.  44.  15.  he  4.  bread,  yea,  ho  inakcth  a  god 

BALD. 
Lrp.  13.  40.  he  is  h.  yet  is  he  clean,  41. 
2  Kings  2.23.  go  up  thou  4.  head,!»(i  up  thou  4.  head 
Jer.  16.  6.  noi  make  themselves  A.  for  them 
48.  37.  every  head  shall  be  A.  and  biardclipt 
K:fA.27. 31.  they  shall  make  themselves  utterly  A. 
29.18.every  head  was  made  A.and  shoulder  peeled 
Mic.  1. 16.  make  thee  4.  and  poll  lliee  for  children 

BALD-LDCl  .-^ T. 
/>c».11.22.yo  maveai  the  h.-lucust  aAor  hiskind 

iBALUNESS. 
Signifies,  [1]  O'ant  o/Aa/r  on  rAcAcaJ,  Lev.  21. .5 
[2]  .i  sign  of  mourning,  Isa.  15.  2.    Jer.  47.  a 
Lev.  21.  S.  they  shall  not  make  4.  on  their  head 


BAN 

r>eut.  14.  1.  nor  make  any  b.  between  your  eyes 
Isa.  'i.  24.  and  instead  of  well-3et  hair,  b. 

15.  2.  on  all  their  lieadg  b.  and  evcy  beard  cut 
22.  12.  the  Lord  did  call  to  weeping  and  to  4. 

J(/r.  47.  5.  b.  is  come  upon  Gaza,  Ashkelon  cut  oft" 
Eick.  7. 18.  and  b.  on  all  their  heads,  Amos  8.  10. 
Mic.  1.  It),  jioll  thee,  enlarge  thy  b.  as  the  eagle 

BALANCE. 
Job  31.  6.  let  me  be  weighed  in  an  even  ft. 
Psal.  62.  9.  laid  in  the  b.  are  altogether  vanity 
Prot).  11.  1.  a  false  ft.  is  abomination,  20.  23. 

16.  11.  a  just  weight,  and  A.  are  the  Lord's 
Isa.  40.  12.  who  weighed  the  hills  in  a  ft.? 

15.  nations  counted  as  the  small  dust  of  the  ft. 
46.  6.  lavish  gold,  and  weigh  silver  in  the  ft. 

BALANCES. 
Lev.  19.  36.  just  ft.  a  just  ejdiah,  Ezek.  45.  10. 
lob  6.  2.  and  my  calamity  laid  in  the  ft.  together 
'er.  32.  10.  I  weighed  liim  the  money  in  the  ft. 
Eiek.  5.1.  take  ft.  to  weigh,  and  divide  the  hair 
Dan.  5.  27.  thou  art  \veiglied  in  the  ft.  and  wanting 
Mas.  12.  7.  the  ft.  ol'  deceit  are  in  lus  hand 
.'imos  8.  5.  and  falsifying  the  A.  by  deceit 
Mic.  6. 11.  shall  I  count  ihem  pure  with  wicked  A.? 
Reo.  6.  5.  he  that  sat  on  them,  had  a  pair  of  A. 

BALANCINGS. 
Job  37.  16.  dost  thou  know  the  ft.  of  the  clouds  ? 

BALL,  S. 
l.ta.  3. 1 19.  the  Lord  will  take  away  their  sweet  ft. 
22. 18.  he  will  surely  turn  and  toss  thee  like  a  A. 

BALM. 
Gen.  37.  25.  Ishniaelites  bearing  b.  and  myrrh 
43. 11.  take  in  your  vessels  a  httle  A.  and  honey 
Jer.  8.  22.  is  tliere  no  A.  in  Gilead  ?  is  there  no 
physician  ? 
46.  11.  go  up  to  Gilead,  and  take  ft.  O  virgin 

51.  8.  howl  for  her,  and  take  ft.  for  her  pain 
Ezck.  27. 17.  Judah  traded  in  honey,  and  od,  and  ft. 

BAND,  S 
Signifies,   [1]  A  company  of  soldiers,  Acts  10.  1. 
[2]  Material  chains,  Luke  S.  29.    Acts  16.  26. 
[3J    Arguments  or  instances  of  love,  which, 
might  draw  and  engage  persons  to  their  duty 
Hos.  11.  4.    [4]  Government  and  laws,  which 
like  fetters,  restrain,  men  from  wicked  prac- 
tices,'Vs^\.  2.  3.  Zech.  11.  7, 14.   [.5]  Faith  and 
love,  which  attract  the  soul  to  Christ,  Col.  2. 19. 
Exod.  39.  23.  a  ft.  round  that  it  should  not  rend 
Lcr.  26.  13.  I  have  broken  the  ft.  of  your  yoke 
Judg.  15.  14.  and  his  ft.  loosed  from  off  his  hands 
^ Kings  2.3.  33.  Pharaoh  i)Ut  Jehoahaz  in  ft. 
Job  38.  9.  I  made  darkness  a  swaddling  ft.  for  it 

31.oanst  bind  thcPleiades,or  loose  theft.of  Orion? 
39.  5.  or  who  hath  loosed  the  ft.  of  the  wild  ass? 
I       10.  canst  thou  bind  tlio  unicorn  with  his  A 
P.-ai.2.3.1et  us  break  theirA.asunder,and  cast  away 
T^.  4.  for  there  are  no  A.  in  their  death 
107.  14.  and  he  brake  their  ft.  in  sunder 
F.ccl.  7.26.  woman  whose  heart  snares,  hands  as  A. 
Isa.  28. 22.  be  not  mockers,  lest  A.  be  made  strong 

52.  2.  loose  thyself  from  the  A.  of  thy  neck 
58.  6.  this  the  fast,  to  loose  the  ft.  of  wickedness 

Jir.  2.  20.  I  have  broken  thy  yoke,  burst  thy  A. 
Eiek.  3.  25.  son  of  man,  tliey  shall  put  A.  on  thee 
4.  V:  and  behold  I  will  lay'ft.  upon  thee 
34.  27.  when  I  have  broken  the  A.  of  their  youth 
Dan.  4.  15.  even  with  a  A.  of  iron  and  brass,  23. 
Uos.  11.  4. 1  drew  them  with  ft.  of  love,  and  I  was 
Heck.  11.  7.  I  took  me  two  staves,  beauty  and  ft.  . 
14.  then  I  cut  asunder  mine  other  staff,  even  A. 
Luke  8. 2!i.  ho  brake  A.  and  was  driven  of  the  devil 
Acts  16.  26.  and  every  one's  A.  were  loosed 
22.  30.  the  centurion  loosed  Paul  from  his  6. 
Col.  2.  19.  the  head,  from  which  all  the  body  by  ft. 
■See  Bonds. 
BAND,  S. 
Gen.  32.  7.  Jacob  divided  the  camels  into  two  ft. 
10. 1  passed  over,  and  now  I  am  become  two  ft. 

1  Sam.  10. 26.  and  there  went  with  him  a  A.  of  men 

2  Sam.  4.  2.  Saul's  son  had  two  men,  captains  of  A. 
2  Kings  6.  23.  so  the  ft.  of  Syria  came  no  more 

33.20.  and  theft.of  the  Moabites  invaded  the  land 
21.  as  they  were  burying  a  man,  they  spied  a  A. 
24;  2.  the  Lord  sent  against  him  ft.  of  Chaldeans, ft. 
1  Ckron.  7.4.  with  them  were  ft.  of  soldiers  for  war 
12.  18.  David  mode  thorn  captains  of  the  ft. 

21.  tliev  helped  David  against  the  A.  of  the  rovers 
£zra8.22.I  was  ashamed  to  require  of  the  kingaft. 
Job  1. 17.  the  Chaldeans  made  out  three  A.  and  fell 
Psal.  1 10. 61.  the  A.  of  the  wicked  have  robbed  me 
Prov  30.  27.  the  locusts  go  forth  all  of  them  by  A. 
Eiek  12.14. 1  will  scatter  all  his  A.  and  draw  sword 

38.  6.  Gomer  and  all  his  A.  Togarmah  his  A. 

22.  I  will  rain  upon  him  ami  upon  his  ft. 

39.  4.  fail  on  mountains  of  Israel  thou  and  thy  A. 
Mat.  27.27.  gathered  to  him  whole  ft.  Mark  15.16. 
John  18.  3.  .Judas  having  received  a  ft.  of  men 

12.  the  ft.  and  captain  and  officers  took  Jcsue 
^cts  10.1.  a  centurion  of  the  ft.  called  the  Italian  6. 
2L31.  tidings  came  to  the  chief  captain  of  the  ft. 


BAP 

Acts  27. 1.  to  Julius  a  centurion  of  Atigustus'  J. 

BANDED. 
Acts  23.  12.  certain  of  the  Jews  A.  together 

BANK 
Signifies,  [1]  The  side,  or  brink  of  aricer,Gea. 
41.  17.     [2]  A  mount,  or  heap  of  earth  raised 
to  cover  besiegers,  while  they  batter  the  walls 
of  a  city,  or  shoot  at  those  who  defend  them, 
2  Sam.  i^O.  15.     [3]  A  place  where  there  is  a 
great  sum  of  money  taken  in,  and  let  out  to 
use,  Luke  19.  23. 
Oen.  41. 17.  behold  I  stood  on  the  A.  of  the  river 
Lieut.  4.  48.  from  Aroer  which  is  by  the  ft.  of  the 
river  Arnon,  Josh.  12.  2.  |  13.  9,  16, 
2  Sam.  20. 15.  they  cast  up  a  ft.  agamst  the  city 
2  Kings  2.  13.  Elisha  stood  by  the  A.  of  Jordan 

19.  32._the  king  of  Assyria  not  cast  a  ft.  Jsa.  37.33. 

Ezek.  47.  7.  at  the  ft.  of  the  river  were  many  trees 

Van.  12.  5.  one  on  this  side  of  the  A.  of  the  river, 

the  other  on  that  side  of  the  A.  of  the  river 

Luke  19.23.  gavest  not  thou  my  money  into  the  ft.;' 

BANKS. 
Josh.  3.  15.  Jordan  overtloweth  all  his  A.  4.  18. 

1  Chrvn.  12.  15.  Jordan  had  overflowed  his  ft. 
Jsa.  8.  7.  the  king  of  Assyria  shall  go  over  all  his  ft. 
Lau.  8.  lb.  1  beard  a  man's  voice  between  the  A. 

BANNER 

Signifies,  A  standard,  or  ensign,  Isa.  13.  2. 

Thou  hast  given  a  banner  to-them  that  tear  thee, 
Psal.  60.  4.  An  army  of  men  united  under  one 
banner,  with  ability  to  defend  thansdoes  and 
conquer  their  enemies ;  a  banner  being  a  siiru 
of  victory,  as  well  as  of  battle  and  union. 

His  banner  over  nie  was  love,  Cant.  2.  4.  The 
love  uf  Christ  displayed,  like  a  banner,  in  the 
gospel,  conducted,  encouraged,  and  engaged 
me  to  come  tu  him. 

Exod.  17.  t  15.  called  the  altar,  the  Lord  my  ft. 

Psal.  60. 4.  hast  given  a  A.  to  them  that  fear  thee 

Cant.  2.  4.  to  banquet,  and  his  A.  over  me  was  love 

Isa.  13.  2.  Uft  ye  up  a  A.  on  the  high  mountain 
BANNERS. 

Psal.  20.5.  in  the  name  of  our  God  we  set  up  our  ft. 

Cant.  a.  4.  thou  art  terrible  as  an  army  with  A. 
BANISHED. 

2  Sam.  14. 13.  the  king  doth  not  fetch  home  his  ft. 
14. he  doth  devise  means  that  his  ft.be  not  exuefied 

BANISHxMENT. 
Ezra  7.  26.  whether  it  be  to  death  or  to  ft. 
Lam.ii.li.  have  seen  false  burdens  and  causes  of  ft. 
BANaUET.  [5,8, 

Esth.  5.  4.  let  the  king  and  Haman  come  to  the  ft 
0.  the  king  said  to  Esther  at  the  4.  of  wine,  7.  2, 
Job  41.  6.  sliall  the  companions  make  a  ft.  of  liim'i 
Amosii.  7.  the  ft.  of  them  that  stretched  themselves 

BANaUET-HOUSE. 
Dan.  5. 10.  now  the  queen  came  into  the  A.-house 

BANUUETING,  S. 
Cant.  2.  4.  he  brought  me  into  the  ft. -house 
1  Pet.  i.  3.  we  walked  in  lusts,  revelbngs,  ft. 

BAPTISM 
Signifies,  [1]  The  outward  ordinance,  or  sacra- 
ment, wherein  the  washing  with  water  repre- 
sents the  cleansing  of  the  soul  from  sin  by  the 
blood  of  Christ,  Luke  7. 29.  1  Pet.  3.  21.  [2j  In- 
ward spiritual  washing,  whereby  the  gifts  and 
graces  of  the  Spirit,  signified  by  the  outward 
sign,  are  really  and  actually  br.slowed,M'dt.'.i. 
11.  [3]  The  sufferings  of  Christ,  ichacby  he 
was  consecrated  and  prepared  fur  his  entrance 
vpou  his  kingly  off.ce.  Mat.  20. 22.  Luke  12.  'M. 
[4]  So  much  of  the  gospel  as  .lohn  the  Baptist 
taught  his  disciples  when  Ice  baptized  them. 
Acts  IS.  2.5. 
Mat.  :l.7.whenlie  saw  the  Pharisees  come  to  his  ft. 

20.  22.  and  to  be  baptized  with  the  ft.  J\Iark  10.  ;J6. 

21.  25.  theft,  of  John,  whence  was  it,  from  heaven 
or  of  men?   Mark  11.  30.  Luke  20.  4. 

•Mark  1.  4.  John  did  baptize  in  tlie  wilderness,  and 
preach  the  A.  of  repentance,  l.,uke  3.  3. 

Luke  7.  29.  publicans  baptized  with  the  A.  of  John 
12.50. 1  havea  A.  to  be  baptized  with,  and  how  am 

Acts  1.22.  b;ginning  from  ilie  ft.  of  John  to  that  day 
10.37.  that  w  ord,  after  the  ft.whi.h  John  preached 
13.24.  John  preached  the  ft.of  repentance  to  Israel 
18.  25.  .•\iJollos  knowing  oniy  the  b.  of  John 
I'J.  3.  were  yc  baptized?  they  said,  unto  John's  ft. 

4.  John  baptized  will)  the  A.  of  repentance 
Hom.d.  4.  we  are  buried  with  him  by  A.  into  death 
F.ph.  4. 5.  there  is  one  Lord,  one  faith,  one  ft. 
Co/.  2. 12.  buried  with  him  in  ft.  yc  are  risen  with 
//(A.6.  2.  of  doctrineof  A.  and  laying  on  of  hands 
1  Pet.  3. 21.  the  like  figure  whereunto,  even  ft.  dotii 

BAPTIST. 
Mat.  3.  1.  in  those  days  came  John  A.  preaching 
11. 11.  among  them  born  of  women  there  hath  not 
risen  a  greater  than  John  the  A.  J,\ike  7. 28. 
11.  12.  from  the  days  of  John  the  A.  till  now 
14.2.  this  is  John  theft,  he  is  risen  from  the  dead 

5.  said,  give  me  John  the  ft.  head  in  a  ciiarget 


BAR 

2Iat.  16. 14.  say,  thou  art  John  the  b.  Mark  8.2a 

17.  13.  understood  that  he  spake  of  John  the  A. 

Mark  6.  14.  John  the  ft.  was  risen  from  the  dead 

25.  gjve  me  in  a  charger  the  head  of  John  the  A. 

Luke  7. 20.  John  the  ft.  hath  sent  us  to  thee,  saying 

33.  John  the  ft.  came  neither  eating  nor  drmking 

9.  19.  they  answering  said,  John  the  ft. 
BAPTIZE. 

Mat.  3. 11. 1  ft.  you  with  water,  he  shall  A.you  with 
the  H.  Ghost,  Mark  1. 8.  Luke'i.  16.  John  1.26. 
Mark  1.4.  John  did  A.  in  the  wilderness,  and  preac)^ 
John  1.  33.  he  tliat  sent  me  to  A.  said  unto  me 
1  Cor.  1. 17.  Christ  sent  me  not  to  ft.  but  to  preach 

BAPTIZED. 

Mat.  3.  6.  were  ft.  of  him  in  Jordan,  Mark  1.  5. 

13.  then  cometh  Jesus  to  John  to  be  A.  of  him 

14. 1  have  need  to  be  A.  of  thee,  and  comest  thou 

16.  Jesus,  when  he  was  A.  went  up  out  of  water 

Mark  1.  9.  Jesus  was  ft.  of  John  in  Jordan 

10.  39.  the  baptism  I  am  ft.  withal,  shah  ye  be  ft. 
16.  16.  he  that  believeth  and  is  ft.  shall  be  saved 

Luke  3.  7.  said  to  the-multitude  that  came  to  be  A. 

12.  then  came  the  publicans  to  be  ft.  7.  29. 

21.  Jesus  being  ft.  and  praying,heaven  v.asopened 
7.30.  Piiarisees  and  lawyers,  being  not  ft.  of  hira 

John  3.  22.  tliere  he  tarried  with  them  and  ft. 

23.  much  water  there,  and  they  came  and  were  ft. 

4.1.  Jesus  made  and  ft.  more  disciples  than  John 

2.  though  Jesus  himself  ft.  not,  but  his  disciples 

10.  40.  into  the  place  where  John  at  first  ft. 

Acts  1.  5.  for  John  truly  ft.  with  water,  but  ye 

shah  be  ft.  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  11.  16. 

2.  38.  repent,  be  ft.  every  one  of  you  in  the  name 
of  Jesus 

41.  tliey  that  gladly  received  his  word  were  ft. 

8.  12.  they  were  6.  both  men  and  women 

13.  Simon  believed  also,  and  when  he  was  6. 
16.  only  they  were  A.  in  the  nami  of  Jesus 

30.  here  is  water,  what  doth  hinder  me  to  be  b.  ? 
38.  went  down  Philip  and  eunuch,  and  he  A.  him 

9.  18.  Saul  received  sight,  and  arose  and  was  A. 
10. 47.  can  any  forbid,  that  these  should  not  be  ft.? 

48.  Peter  commanded  tHem  to  be  A. 
16. 15.  Lydia  when  she  was  A.  and  her  household 
33.  jailer  w  as  ft.  and  all  his  straightway 

18.  8.  many  of  the  Corintli.  believed,  and  were  A. 

19.  3.  he  said  to  ilieni,  to  what  then  were  ye  6.  ? 
5.  when  they  heard  this  they  were  A. 

22.  10.  arise,  and  be  ft.  and  wash  away  thy  sins 
Rom.  6.  3.  were  A.  into  Jesus,  were  ft.  into  his  death 
1  Cor.  1.  13.  were  ye  A.  in  the  name  of  Paul? 

14.  thank  God  that  I  A.  none  of  you,  but  Crispue 
16. 1  A.  household  of  Stephanas,  not  A.  any  other 

10.  2.  and  were  all  A.  to  Moses  in  the  cloud 
12.  13.  for  by  one  Spirit  are  we  all  A.  into  one  body 
15.  29.  else  what  shall  they  do  who  are  A.  for  the 

dead  ?  why  are  they  "ft.  for  the  dead? 
Gal.  3.  27.  as  manv  as  have  been  ft.  into  Christ 

BAPTIZEST. 
John  1.25.  why  ft.  thou,  if  ihou  be  not  the  Christ  t 

BAPTIZETH. 
.John  1.  33.  the  same  is  he  who  ft.  with  the  H.  Ghost 

3.  26.  behold,  the  same  ft.  all  men  come  to  him 
BAPTIZING. 

Mat.  28. 19.  go  ye  and  teach  all  nations,  ft.  them 
John  1.28.  done  beyond  Jordan,  where  John  was  ft. 

31.  therefore  am  I  come  ft.  with  water 
3. 23.  and  John  was  also  A.  in  Enon,  near  to  Salim 

BAR,  RED. 
J^eh.  T.  3.  let  them  Kliut  the  doors,  and  A.  ihem 
Cant.  4.  1 12.  a  garden  ft.  is  my  sister,  my  spouse 

B.\R,  Substantive. 
Exod.  20.  26.  the  middle  ft.  in  midst  of  tlie  boards 
36.  33.  he  made  the  middle  ft.  to  shoot  through 
J^um.  4.  10.  and  they  slmll  put  it  upon  a  ft.  12. 
Judg.  10. 3.  took  doors  of  the  city,  posts,  A.  and  all 
Amos  1.  5.  I  will  break  also  the  ft.  of  Damascus 

BARS 
Signify,   [1]   That  by  which  doors  and  gates  art 
made  fast,  Neil.  3. 3,  6.   [2]  That  which  is  madi 
as  a  rafter  to  fasten  boards  unto,  Exod.  20.  26. 
[3]  Rocks  in  the  sea,  Jonah 2.  6.  [4]  The  boun- 
dary of  the  waves  of  the  sea.  Job  38.  10. 
Ezod.  26.  26.  thou  shalt  make  A.  of  shittini-wood 
for  the  boards  of  the  tabernacle,  36.  31. 
J^Tum.  3.36.  under  the  charge  of  the  sons  of  Merari, 
shall  be  the  boards  and  A.  of  the  tabernacle,  4.31. 
Dcut.  3.  5.  all  these  cities  were  fenced  with  galea 
and  ft.  1  Kings  4.  13.  2  Ckron.  8.  5. 1 14.  7. 
1  Sam.  23.  7.  entering  into  a  town  that  hath  ft. 
JVf  A.  3.  3.  set  up  locks  thereof  and  A.  6, 13, 14, 15. 
Job  17.  16.  they  shall  go  down  to  the  A.  of  the  pit 
18.  t  13.  it  shall  devour  tlie  A.  of  his  skin 
.38.  10.  and  set  A.  and  doors  for  the  sea 
40.  18.  Behemoth,  his  bones  are  like  ft.  of  iron 
Psal.  107. 16.  and  cut  ft.  of  iron  in  sunder,  7x4.45.2 
147.  13.  he  hath  strengthened  the  ft.  of  thy  gates 
Prov.  18.  19.  contentions  are  like  tiie  A.  of  a  castle 
Isa.  43.  t  \i.  I  have  brought  down  all  their  ft. 
Jer.  49. 31.  nation,  which  have  neither  gateo  nor  6 


BAR 

Jer.  50.  t36.  a  sword  upon  her  4.  shall  be  dismayed 
51.  30.  Uiey  have  IJubylon,  lier  b.  are  broken 
L-am.  'i.  9.  he  iialh  destroyed  and  broken  her  b. 
Eiek.  38.  11.  and  having  neither  gates  nor  b. 
Jonah  3.  6.  the  earth  witJi  her  b.  was  about  nic 
JVoA.  3.  13.  gates  open,  the  Kre  shall  devour  thy  b. 
^  BAKUAKIAN. 

1  Cor.  14. 11.  shall  be  to  hnn  a  b.  and  he  a  b.  to  me 
Cal.  3. 11.  where  there  is  neither  Greek  nor  Jew,  b. 

BARUAKlAiXS. 
Acts  i28.  4.  when  the  b.  saw  the  venomous  beast 
Rom.  1. 14. 1  am  debtor  both  to  the  Greeks  and  b. 

BAUBAKOUS. 
Acts  28. 2.  the  b.  peoi>le  shewed  no  little  kindness 

BARBED. 
Job  41.  7.  canst  thou  till  his  skin  with  b.  iroi.s  1 

BAKBER. 
Eiek.  5.  1.  son  of  man,  take  thee  a  b.  razor 

BARE. 
Oen.  7. 17.  b.  the  ark,  Deut.  31.  9,  25.  .Josh.  3.  15. 
4. 10. 1  8.  33. 2  Sam.  G.  13,  1  Chron.  15. 15, 2G,  27. 
31.  39.  that  torn  by  beasts,  I  b.  ihu  loss  of  it 
Exod.  19.  4.  and  how  1  b.  you  on  eagles'  wings 
JOcut.  1.  31.  thy  God  b.  thee  as  a  man  doth  bear 
Judg.  3.  18.  sent  the  people  that  b.  the  present 
1  Sam.  14.  1.  Jonathan  said  to  the  young  man 
that  b.  his  armour,  6.  2  Ham.  18. 15. 
1  Kings  5.  15.  that  b.  burdens  70,000,  jVe/j.  4.  17. 
1  Chron.  12.24.  of  Jiidah  that  i.  shield,  2  Chr.  14.8. 
Isa.  53.12.  bed.  the  sin  of  many,  made  intercession 
63.  9.  he  4.  them  all  the  days  of  old 
Eiek.  12.  7.  the  stutf  I  4.  ujion  my  shou.lder 
Mat.  8.  17.  saying,  himself  4.  our  sicknesses 
Luke  7.  14.  and  they  that  4.  him  stood  still 
John  2.  8.  the  water  made  wine,  and  they  b.  it 
12.  6.  had  the  bag,  and  b.  what  was  put  therein 

1  Pet.  2.  24.  ids  own  self  4.  our  sins  on  the  tree 

BARE. 
001.25.26.  Isaac  was  60  years  old  when  she  4. them 
31.  R.  then  all  the  cattle  4.  speckled 
38.  5.  and  he  was  at  Chezib,  when  she  4.  him 
44.  27.  ye  know  that  my  wife  4.  me  two  sons 
JSic«i.6.20.Jochebed  4.toAmram  Moses  and  Aaron 
Judg.  13. 2.  Manouh's  wife  was  barren,  and  4.  not 

2  Sam.  12. 15.  struck  the  child  that  Uriah's  wife  4. 
1  Kings  1.  6.  his  mother  4.  him  after  Absalom 

1  Chron.  4.  9.  Jabez,  because  I  4.  him  with  sorrow 
Prov.  17.  25.  and  bitterness  to  her  that  4.  him 
23.  2.>.  and  she  that  4.  thee  shall  rejoice 
Cant.  6.  9.  she  is  the  choice  one  of  her  that-4.her 
8.  5.  there  she  brought  thee  forth  that  4.  Jliee 
Isa.  51.  2.  and  look  unto  Sarah  that  4.  you 
Jer.  16.  3.  concerning  their  mother  that  4.  them 
20.  14.  let  not  the  day  wherein  my  mother  4.  me 
22.26.  cast  thee  out,  and  thy  mother  that  4.  thee 
.50.  12.  she  that  4.  you  shall  be  ashamed 
Luke  11.27.  blessed  is  the  womb  that  4.  thee 
23.  29.  blessed  are  the  wombs  that  never  4. 

BARE  fruit. 
I.uke  8.8.  other  sprang  uj),  and  b.f.  a  hundred-fold 
/{ep.22.2.  Uie  tree  of  life  4.  twelve  manner  of  fruits 

BARE  rule. 
1  Kings9.^.  Ihechief  officers  that  4.  n/^c  over  the 
people  that  wrought  in  the  work,  2  CAro7i.8.10. 
JVch.  5.  15.  their  servants  4.  rule  over  the  people 

BARE  witness,  and  record. 
JUark  14.56.  many  4.  fal^e  witness  against  him,  57. 
Liukc  4.  22.  all  4.  him  witness,  and  wondered 
John  1.  15.  John  4.  witness  of  him,  32,  34. 
5.  33.  John  4.  witness  to  the  truth 
12.  17.  the  people  that  was  with  him  4.  record 
19.35. he  that  saw  it  4.rcc«rrf,and  his  record  is  true 
Acts  1.5.  8.  knoweth  the  hearts,  4.  them  initness 
Rev.  1.  2.  who  4.  record  of  the  word  of  God 

BAREST. 
1  Kings  2.  26.  because  thou  4.  the  ark  of  the  Lord 
Isa.  fS.  19.  thou  never  4.  rule  over  them 
John  3.20.  he  to  whom  thou  4.  witness,  baptizeth 

BARE,  JIdjcctire, 
BignificR,  [1]  JVaked,  or  uncovered,  Lev.  13.  4.5. 
Isa.  32.  II.     [2]  Plain,  or  real,   1  ("or.  1.5.  37. 
f31  Deprived  of  outward  comforts.  Jit.  49.  10. 
[4]  Fiolmtty  taken  incatj,  Jir.  13.  f  22. 
Made  bare  his  holy  arm,   /.ia.  .52.  10.     /Jtitji  dis- 
covered and  put  forth  his  great  power,  which  for 
a  long  time  seemed  to  be  hid  and  unemployed. 
J-ev.  IX  45.  his  rlothes  be  rent  and  his  head  4. 

."is.  whether  it  be  4.  within  or  without 
Psal.  137.  t  7.  make  4.  make  4.  to  Ihe  foundntion 
Jca.  32.  11.  strip  ye,  make  yc  4.  and  gird  sack- 
cloth 
47.  !!.  make  4.  the  lej,  uncover  the  thigh,  pass 
52.  10.  the  Lord  hath  made  4.  his  holy  arm 
Jer.  13. 22.  for  thine  iniquity  are  thy  heels  made  4. 
49. 10. 1  have  made  Fsau  4.  I  have  uncovered  his 
t'.zek.  10.  7.  whereas  thou  wnsi  naked  nnd  4. 
22.  when  thou  wast  naked,  nnd  4.  nnd  pidluted 
39.  they  shall  leave  thee  naked  and  4.  23.  29. 
Jorl  1.  7.  my  fig-treo  he  halh  made  it  clean  and  4. 
I  Cor.15.37.  not  that  bodv  that  shall  be,  but  4. grain 
24 


BAS 

BAREFOOr 

2  Sam.  15.  30.  he  went  4.  end  the  people  with  him 

Asa.  20.  2.  Isaiah  did  se,  walking  naked  and  4.  3, 

4.  lead  the  Egyptians  prisoners,  naked  and  4. 

BARK. 

Isa.  50.  10.  they  are  uumb  dogs,  they  cannot  b. 

BAKKEU. 
Joel  1.  7.  laid  my  vine  waste,  and  4.  Uie  fig-tree 

BARLEY. 
F.iod.  9.31.  the  4.  was  smitten,  for  4.  was  in  tlie  ear 
JLeo.  27.  IC.  a  homer  of  4.  seed  shall  be  valued 
JVum.  5. 15.  the  tenth  part  of  an  ephah  of  4.  meal 
Deut.S.ti.a.  land  of  wheat,  and  4.vines,and  fig-trees 
Judg.  7. 13.  lo  a  cake  of  4.  bread  tumbled  into  the 
Ruth  1.  22.  came  in  the  beginning  of  4.  harvest 

2.  17.  she  had  gleaned  about  an  ephah  of  4. 
23.  so  she  kept  fast  to  the  end  of  4.  harvest 

3.  2.  behold  Boa/,  winnoweth  4.  to-night 

15.  he  measured  six  measures  of  4.  and  laid  it 
2  Sam.  14.30.  Joab's  field  is  near,  he  hath  4.  there 

17.  28.  Barzillai  brought  beds,  4.  and  Hour 
21.  9.  Saul's  sons  were  hanged  in  4.  harvest 

1  Kings  4.  28.  4.  also  and  straw  for  the  horses 

2  Kings  4.  42.  brought  the  man  of  God  20  loaves 

of  4. 
7.  1.  two  measures  of  4.  for  a  slickel,  16,  18. 

1  Chron.  11.  13.  a  parcel  of  ground  full  of  4. 

2  Chron.  2.  10. 1  wiU  give  20,000  measures  of  b. 
15.  wheat,  and  4.  the  oil,  and  wine,  let  him  send 

27.  5-  Ammon  gave  10,000  measures  of  4. 
Job  31.  40.  and  let  cockle  grow  instead  of  4. 
Isii.  28.  25.  the  princijial  wheat,  and  appointed  4. 
Jer.  41.  8.  we  have  treasures  of  wheat  and  4. 
Eick.  4.  9.  take  to  thee  wheat,  and  4.  and  beans 
12.  tliou  shall  eat  it  as  4.  cakes,  and  bake  it 
13.  19.  will  ye  pollute  me  for  handfuls  of  4. 
4.5.  13.  si-vth  part  of  an  ephah  of  a  homer  of  4. 
JJos.  3.  2.  bought  her  for  a  homer  of  4.  and  half 
Joel  1. 11.  O  husbandmen,  howl  for  wheat  and  4 
John  6.  9.  a  lad  here  which  hath  five  4.  loaves 
6.  13.  witli  the  fragments  of  the  rtve  4.  loaves 
Rev.  6.  6.  a  voice  say,  3  measures  cf  4.  for  a  jienny 

BARN 
Signifies,  [1]  A  repository  for  any  sort  of  grain, 

Luko  12.  24.     [2]  Heaven,  Mat.  13.  30. 
2  Kings  6.  27.  shall  I  help  thee  out  of  the  4.  floor  7 
.lob  39.  12.  and  gather  thy  seed  into  the  4. 
Hag.  2.  19.  is  seed  yet  in  4.  vine  not  brought  forth 
Mat.  13.  30.  but  gather  the  wheat  into  my  4. 
Luke  12.  24.  which  have  no  store-house  nor  4. 

BARNS. 
£)fi<t.28. 1 8.  the  Lord  shall  command  the  blessing 
upon  thee  in  thy  4.  and  in  all  thou  dost 
Prov.  3.  10.  so  shall  thy  4.  be  filled  with  plenty 
.Joel  1.  17.  the  4.  are  broken  down,  and  withered 
Mat.  6.  20.  the  fowls  sow  not,  nor  gather  into  4. 
Luke  12.  18. 1  will  pull  down  my  4.  and  build 

BARREL,  S. 

1  Kings  17.12.  but  a  handful  of  meal  in  a  4.  and  r>il 

14.  the  4.  of  meal  shall  not  waste,  nor  oil  fail 

18.  33.  fill  four  4.  with  water,  and  pour  it  on 

BARREN. 
Oen.  11.  30.  but  Sarai  was  4.  she  had  no  child 
2.5.  21.  Rebekah  was  4.  ||  29.  31.  Rachel  was  4. 
Exod.  2.3.  26.  nothing  shall  cast  young  nor  be  4. 
Deut.  7.  14.  there  shall  not  be  male  or  female  4. 
Judg.  1.3.  2.  Manoah's  wife  was  4.  and  bare  not,  3. 

1  Sam.  2.  5.  so  that  the  4.  hath  born  seven 

2  A'i>in-,v2.19.tlie  water  is  naught, and  the  ground  4. 
21.  shall  not  be  from  thence  death,  or  4.  land 

Job  24.  21.  he  evil  rntrcateth  the  4.  that  bare  not 
39.  6.  I  have  made  the  4.  land  his  dwellings 

/'.saM13.9.  he  muketh  the4.  woman  to  keep  house 

Prov.  .30.  16.  the  grave  and  4.  womb  not  satisfied 

Cant.  4.  2.  and  none  is  4.  among  them,  6.  6. 

Isa.  54.  1.  sing,  O  4.  thou  that  didst  not  bear 

Joel  2.  20.  and  1  will  drive  him  Into  a  land  4. 

J.uke  1.  7.  had  no  eiuld,  because  Elisabelh  was  6. 

30.  the  sixth  month  with  her  who  was  called  4. 
23.29.  they  shall  say,  blessed  are  the  4.  and  wond)s 

Oal.  4.  27.  for  it  is  written,  rejoice  thou  4. 

2  Pet.  1.  8.  that  ve  be  neither  4.  nor  unfruitful 
ftARRKNNl-.Sfl. 

Psal.  107.  .34.  he  turnelh  a  fruitful  land  into  4. 
BASK,  S. 

1  Kings  7. 27.  ten  4.  four  cubits  Ihe  length  of  one  4. 

2  Kings  25.I3.tlie  4, Solomon  made,  brake  they, 10. 
i^zra  3.  3.  and  they  set  the  altar  upon  his  4. 
rsal.  104.  t  •">■  tiiiinded  Ihe  earth  <m  her  4. 
Z.cch.  5.  11.  it  shall  be  set  there  upon  her  own  4. 

BASE,  Adjective. 
2  Sam.  fi.  22.  and  will  lie  4.  in  mine  own  sight 
.Job  .30.  8.  yea,  thoy  were  children  of  4.  men 
Isa.  3.  5.  and  the  4.  against  the  honourable 
F.zek.  17.  14.  that  the  kingdom  might  be  4. 
2t).  L4.  and  they  shall  be  there  n  4.  kingdom 
Afnl.  2.  9.  therefore  I  have  made  you  4. 
Jlrts  17.  tl8.  some  said, what  will  this  4.  fellow  say 

1  Cnr.  1.28.  4.tliing8of  the  wotid  lialhGod  chosen 

2  Cor.  10. 1.  I,  Paul,  who  in  presence  am  4  among 


BAT 

BASER. 
Aett  17.  5.  Jews  took  lewd  fellows  of  the  4.  a  Kt 

BASEST. 
Ezek.  29.  15.  Pathros  i^hall  be  the  4.  of  kingdomt 
Dan.  4.  17.  and  setteth  up  over  it  the  4.  of  men 

BASKET. 
Gen.  40.  17.  in  the  4.  all  manner  of  bake-meata 
Exod.  29.  23.  out  of  the  4.  of  the  unleavened  bread, 
Lev.  8.  2,  20.  jVum.  6.  15,  17 
J.,ev.  8.  31.  the  Dread  in  the  4.  of  consecrations 
Deut.  26.  4.  priest  shall  take  the  4.  out  of  thy  hand 
28.  5.  blessed  shall  be  thy  4.  and  thy  store 

17.  cursed  shall  be  thy  4.  and  thy  store 
Judg.  6.  19.  and  Gideon  put  the  Oesh  in  a  4. 
Jer.  24.  2.  ope  4.  had  very  good  figs,  the  other  b. 
Amos  8.  1.  and  behold  a  4.  of  summer  fruit,  2. 
Acts  9.25.the  disciphs  took  Saul,  and  let  him  down 
by  the  wall  in  a  4.  2  Cor.  11.  33. 
BASKETS. 
Gen.  40.  16.  I  had  three  white  4.  on  my  head 
18.  Joseph  said,  llie  three  4.  are  three  days 
2  Kings  10.  7.  slew  70.  and  put  their  heads  in  4. 
Jer.  b.  9.  turn  hand  us  a  grajie-galherer  into  the  4. 
24.  1.  behold,  two  4.  of  figs  before  the  temple 
Mat.  14.  20.  and  they  took  up  twelve  4.  full,  Mark 
6.  43.  Luke  9.  17.  John  6.  13. 
15.  37.  they  did  all  eat,  and  took  of  broken  meat 
seven  4.  full,  Mark  8. 8. 
16. 9.  do  ye  not  remember  the  five  loaves,  and  how 
many  4.  ye  took  up?  10.  Mark  8. 19,  20. 
BASON. 
Exod.  12.  22.  dip  it  in  the  blood  that  is  in  the  4. 

1  Chron.  28. 17.  gave  gold  by  weight  for  every  4. 
John  13.  5.  after  that  lie  poureth  water  into  a  4. 

BASONS. 
Exod  24.  6.  Moses  put  half  of  the  blood  in  4. 

2  Sam.  17.  28.  Barzillai  brought  beds  and  4. 

1  Kings  7.  40.  Hiram  made  the  lavers  and  the 

shovels  and  the  4.  45.  |  2  Chron.  4. 8,  11. 

Jer.  52. 19. 4.  and  fire-pans  the  captain  took  away 

BASTARD,  S. 
Deut.23.'2.  a  4.shall  not  enter  into  the  congregation 
Zcch.  9.  6.  and  a  4.  shall  dwell  inA»hdod,eut  off 
i/e4.12.8.if  ye  be  without  chastisement,  then  are  A. 

BATH 
fVas  a  measure  used  among  the  Hebrews,  of  the 
same  bigness  with  the  V-yUuh,  which  contained 
60  wine  pints,  and  almost  a  half:  or  seven 
gallons  and  a  half. 
/.5a.5.10.yea,ten  acres  of  vineyard  shall  yield  one  4. 
Ezek.  45.  10.  ye  shall  have  a  just  ej>hah,  a  just  4. 
II.  the  ephah  and  4.  shall  be  of  one  measure 
14.  ye  shall  ofler  the  tenth  part  of  a  4. 
BATHE. 
Lev.  1.5.  5.  shall  4.  himself  in  water,  8,  11, 13,  21. 
22,27. 1 16.  26,28.  |  17. 15.  A'um.  19.  7,  8, 19. 
17. 16.  but  if  he  wash  tliem  not,  nor  4.  his  flesh 

BATHED. 

Isa.  34.  5.  my  sword  shall  be  4.  in  heaven,  behold  it 

BATHS. 

1  Kings  7.  26.  molten  sea  contained  2000  4. 
38.  one  laver  containing  40  4.  e\ery  laver 

2  ;'Aron.2.  10.  give  thy  servants  20,0004.  of  wine 
4.  5.  the  8(  a  received  and  held  :«X)0  4. 

Ezra  7.  22.  to  a  hundred  4.  of  wine,  100  4.  of  oil 
Ezek.  45.  14.  a  homer  of  ten  4.  ten  4.  are  a  homer   ' 

BAT,  S. 
7x(;t).11.19.  lapwing  and  4. are  unclean,  Dcut.\4.l8. 
Isa.  2.  20.  shall  cast  his  idols  to  the  mole*  and  4. 

BAT'J'LE 
Signifies,  [1]  A  general  fight,  Deut.  20.  3.     [2] 
Victory,  Eccl.  9.  11.     [3]  Har,  1  Sam.  17.  13. 
Gtn.  14.8.  they  joined  4. 1  Sam.i.'i.  1  AV«^.<t  20.2D. 
JVum.  32.  27.  will  pass  over  before  Ihe  Lord  lo4 
Deut.  2.  24.  rise  up,  contend  with  Sihon  in  4. 
20.  3.  O  Israel,  you  approach  this  day  to  4. 
5.  let  him  return,  lest  he  die  in  the  4.  6,  7. 
.Josh.  11.  19.  of  (.'ibeon,  all  other  they  took  in  4 
.Judg.  20.  28.  siiiill  I  yel  again  go  out  to  4. .' 
42.  they  turned,  but  the  4.  overtook  tlK-m 
1  Sam.  I4.  22.  followed  haid  after  Philistines  in  4 
17.  20.  he  rame,  as  the  host  shouted  for  the  4. 
28.  for  thou  art  come  down  to  see  Ihe  4. 
47.  for  Ihe  4.  is  the  Lord's,  2  Chron.  20.  15. 
26.  10.  he  shall  dt  sceiiil  into  the  4.  iind  perish 

28.  1.  know  that  thou  shall  go  out  with  me  to  b. 

29.  4.  lest  in  Ihe  4.  he  be  an  ndvcmary  lo  us 
2S«CT.11.1.  when  kings  go  fiirth  to  4.  1  CAro;i.20.L 

1.5.  sot  I'riah  in  the  forefront  of  the  hottest  4. 
10.  10.  Absalom  whom  wo  anointed  is  ilead  int. 
1  A'!n/p.'i8.44. if  thy  peoplego  out  to4. against  enemy 
20.  !)9.  Ihy  servant  went  out  into  midst  of  tlie  4. 
22.  4.  wilt  Ihoii  go  with  me  lo  4. .'  2  Ki?ig»  3.  7. 

1  (  hron.  .5.  20.  for  they  cried  lo  God  in  Ihe  4. 
12.  8.  of  Ihi!  Giidites,  men  of  war  fit  for  Ihe  4. 
19.  17.  David  came  upon  lln'm,  and  set  4.  inarrnr 

against  the  Syrians,  2  Ckron.  13.  3.  |  14.  10. 

2  CAron.25. 8.  if  thou  will  i{u,  do  it,  be  strong  for  4. 
lob  15.  24.  shall  prevail,  as  a  king  ready  to  iha  b. 

30.  25.  and  he  smellctii  tlio  4.  afar  off 


BE 

Jot  ^ . .  8.  remember  the  b-  do  no  more 

Psai  »t).39.  thou  hast  girded  me  with  strength  to  h 

24.  a  tne  Kirig  of  glory,  the  Lord  mighty  in  b. 

55.  J8.  he  hath  dehvercd  my  soul  frpm  the  b. 

76.  3.  he  brako  the  shield,  the  uword,  and  the  A. 

89.  43.  and  hast  not  made  him  to  st.ind  in  the  b 
Ei'cl.  9.11.  race  not  to  the  swift,  nor  b.  to  the  strong 
Isa.  9.  5.  every  b.  of  the  warrior  i«  with  noise 

13.  4.  the  Lord  mustereth  the  host  of  the  4. 

22.  2.  thy  slain  men  are  not  dead  in  b. 

27.  4.  who  set  briars  and  thorns  against  me  in  b. 

28.  6.  strength  to  them  that  turn  tl»e  b.  to  the  gate 
42. 25.  he  hath  poured  on  him  the  strength  of  the  4. 
ler.  8.  6.  turned  as  the  horse  rusheth  into  the  b. 
18. 21.  let  their  young  men  be  slain  by  sword  in  b. 
4ti  J.  order  buckler  and  shield,  draw  near  to  b. 
40.  14.  come  against  her,  and  rise  up  to  the  b. 
SO.  K.  a  sound  of  b.  is  in  land,  and  destruction 

4?  put  in  array,  like  a  man  to  b.  against  thee 
T.zr.k.  7.  14.  have  blown,  but  none  goelh  to  the  b. 

13.  5.  to  stand  in  the  b.  in  the  day  of  the  Lord 
Mas.  1.  7,  I  will  not  save  them  by  bow  nor  by  b. 

2. 18. 1  \»ill  break  the  bow  and  b.  out  of  the  earth 
10.  9.  b.  in  Gibeah  ;  did  not  overtake  them 
Joel  2.  5.  es  a  strong  people  set  in  b.  array 
Obad.  1.  let  us  rise  up  against  Edom  in  b. 
Zech.  10.3.  made  them  as  his  goodly  horse  in  the  b. 
5.  which  tread  down  their  enemies  in  the  b. 

14.  2.  gather  all  nations  against  Jerusalfun  to  b. 
1  Cor.  14.  8.  who  shall  prepare  himself  to  the  b.  ? 
iict).9.7.  shapes  of  locusts  like  horses  prepared  to  b. 

9.  sound  of  chariots  of  many  horses  running  to  b. 
16.14.to  gather  them  to  the  A.of  the  great  day,  20.8. 
nay  of  B.M'TLE. 
1  Sam.  13. 22.  so  it  came  to  pass  in  the  dayofb.lhul 
Job  38.  23. 1  reserved  against  the  duy  of  b.  and  war 
Psal.  78.9.  Ephraim  turned  back  in  ihe  day  of  b. 
140. 7.  thou  hast  covered  my  head  in  the  day  of  b. 
Prov.  21. 31.  the  horse  is  prepared  against(/u7/o/A. 
j^o.s.10.14.  Shalman  spoiled  Beth-arbel  in  day  ufb. 
jSmos  1. 14.  devour  with  shouting  in  the  day  of  b. 
Zcch.  14.  3.  as  when  he  fought  in  the  day  of  b. 
Battt,e-Ax,  sec  Ax. 
BATTLE-BOW. 
Zech.  9.  10.  and  the  h.-boic  shall  be  cut  off 
10.  4.  out  of  him  came  forth  the  b.-bow 

BATTLES. 
I  Sam.  8. 20.  may  go  out  before  us  and  fight  our  b. 
J8.  17.  only  be  valiant,  and  fight  the  Lord's  b. 
25.  28.  my  lord  fightelh  the  b.  of  the  Lord 

1  CArort.  2('>.  27.  out  of  the  spoils  won  in  4.  dedicate 

2  CArore.  32.  8.  but  with  us  is  God,  to  light  our  b. 
Isa.  30.  32.  and  in  4.  of  shakings  will  he  tight  with 

BATTERED. 
a  Sam.  20.  15.  the  people  with  Joab  4.  the  wall 

BATTERING. 
Eiek.  4.  2.  and  set  b.  rams  against  it  round  about 
21.  22.  to  api)oint  4.  rams  against  the  gales 

BATTLEMENT,  S. 
Deut.  22.  8.  thou  shall  make  a  b.  for  thy  roof 
Jer.  5. 10.  take  away  her  b.  they  are  not  the  I^ord's 

BAY. 
Zi'ck.  l.fS.  behind  him  red  horses,  4.  and  white 

6.  3.  in  the  fourth  chariot  grilled  and  4.  horses 
7.  and  the  4.  went  forth  and  sought  to  go 

BAY-TREE. 
Psal.  37. 35.  wicked  spreading  like  a  green  b.-tree 

BDELLIUM. 
f5cn.2. 12.  in  Havilah  there  is  4.  and  ony,\  stone 
A"""!.  11. 7.  the  colour  of  manna  as  the  colour  of  4. 

BE 
Signifies,  [1]  To  exist,  or  have  a  being,  Rom.  4. 
17.     [2]    To  be  made  or  become,  Jer.  32.  33. 
Mat.  19.  5.     [3]  To  be  known  and  apparently 
seen,  Rom.  14.  9.     [4]   To  consecrate  and  set 
apart  to,  Judg.  11.  31. 
Oen.  2. 18.  it  is  not  good  that  man  should  be  alone 
27.21.  whether  thou  4c  my  very  son  Esau,  or  not 
Deut.  10.  5.  there  they  4c  as  the  Lord  commanded 
Jwlg.  fi.  13.  if  the  Lord  4c  with  us,  why  is  all  this 
S  .Sawi. 18.32.  thine  enemies  4c  as  that  yoimg  man  is 
S  Kings  6.  Ifi.  fear  not,  for  they  that  be  with  us, 
arc  more  than  they  that  be  with  them 
2  CAr..36.  23.  Lord  his  God  4e  with  him,  Ezra  1.3. 
F.traGG.  beya  far  from  thence,  let  the  work  alone 
Job  10.15.  if  I  ;>c  v.'ickedjWO  to  me ;  if  I  4e  righteous 
19.4.  and  be  it  indeed  that  I  have  erred,  mine  error 
Psal.  139.  24.  see  if  there  4e  any  wicked  way  in  me 
Cant.  8.  9.  if  she  4e  a  wall,  if  she  be  a  door 
/*a.8.13.  let  him  4c  your  fear,lct  him  4c  your  dread 
41.  22.  let  them  shew  former  things  what  they  4c 
Jer.  36.19.  go  hide, and  let  none  kuow  where  you  be 
47.  6.  how  long  will  it  4c  ere  thou  be  quiet  ? 
/>iin.  19.  13.  but  go  thou  thy  way  till  the  end  be 
//o«.8.5.how  long  will  it  4c  ere  they  attain  toinnoc. 
Mat.  4.  3.  if  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  6.  |  27.  40. 

7.  13.  and  many  there  Jc  that  go  in  thereat 

16  23.  forthousavourest  not  the  things  that  ic  of 
God,  hut  those  that  4eof  men,  jWarA  8.  33. 
18.  i7.  let  liim  be  to  thee  as  a  heathen  man  or  a 
33 


BE 

Mat.  19. 9.  shall  put  away,  except  It  be  for  fornica. 
Luke  10.  6.  and  if  the  son  of  peace  be  there,  your 
John  3.9.Nicodcn.-n3  .~aid,  how  can  these  things  be? 
Jlcts  19.2.  not  heard  whether  there 4e  any  II. U host 

24.  21.  e.vcept  it  4c  for  this  one  voice,  tliai,  I  cried 
Jiom.i.ll.  who  calloth  those  things  which  4c  not  as 

8.  31.  if  God  4e  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  ? 
14.9.  that  he  might  4e  Lord  of  the  dead  and  living 

1  Cor.  15.  28.  under  him,  that  God  may  4c  ad  in  all 
16. 22.  love  not,  let  bim  4c  anathema,  maran-atha 

2  Cor.  5. 1 17.  if  in  Ohrisi  let  him  4c  a  new  creature 
8.  12.  if  there  4c  first  a  willing  mind,  it  is  accepted 

Gal.  3.9.  they  which  4e  of  faith  are  blessed  with 
4. 12. 1  beseech  you,  4e  as  I  am,  furl  am  as  ye  are 
5. 10.  shall  bear  his  judgment,  whosoever  he  4e 
Phil.  2.  5.  let  this  n.ind  4c  in  you  that  was  in  Christ 
Mib.  12.  8.  but  if  ye  be  without  chastisement 
lPet.2.3.  if  so  4e  ye  have  lasted  that  L.  is  gracious 
3.  17.  for  it  is  better,  if  the  will  of  God  4e  so 
Rev.  18.  22.  craftsman,  of  whatsoever  craft  he  4c 
22.  11.  he  that  is  unjust,  let  him  4e  unjust  still ; 
he  who  is  filthy,  let  him  be  lilthy  still 
Jf  it  BE. 
Oen.  23.  8.  if  it  be  your  mind  that  I  bury  my  dead 

25.  22.  and  she  said,  if  it  be  so,  why  am  1  thus  ? 
Exod.l.K).  ifitbc  ason  kill  him,  r/jt  4c  a  daughter 
iKings  10.1,5.// !£4e,give  me  thy  hand, and  he  gave 
ZcfA.8.6.  if  it  be  marvellous  in  the  eyes  of  remnant 
jUaJ.14.28.  if  it  be  thou,  bid  ine  come  on  the  water 
.icts  5.  39.  if  it  be  of  God,  ye  cannot  overthrow  it 

18. 15.  but  if  it  be  a  question  of  words  and  names 

G(tZ.3.4.have  ye  suffered  in  vain  ?  if  it  be  yet  in  vain 

May  Be,  see  May.     Peace  Bk,  see  Pkack. 

^Tot  BE.    BE  not. 

Oen.  21.  12.  let  it  not  be  grievous  in  thy  sight  [8. 

24.  5.  if  the  woman  will  not  he  willing  to  follow 

33.  9.  Onan  knew  that  the  seed  should  not  be  his 

44.30. 1  come  to  my  father,  and  the  lad  4e  not  with 

Lev.  26.  13.  that  ye  should  not  be  their  hond-nien 

J^um.  12.  12.  let  her  not  be  as  one  dead,  of  whom 

10.  40.  that  he  4c  not  as  Korah  and  his  company 

Josh.l.  12.  neither  will  I  4e  with  you  any  more 

Rutk  3.  18.  the  man  will  not  be  in  rest  till  finished 

2  A7»5'«20.tl9.shall  there  not  be  peace  in  my  days? 

2  Chron.  30. 7.  4c  not  like  your  fathers,  Zech.  1.  4. 

Psal.  22. 19.  4e  not  thou  far  away,  35. 22.  |  38. 21.  | 

Isa.  28. 22.  be  ye  not  mockers,  lest  bands      [71. 12. 

JZccA.8.11. 1  wiirnw£4fi  to  the  residue  of  this  people 

Luke  13.  33.  for  it  can  not  be  that  a  prophet  perish 

14. 26.  hate  his  life,  he  can  nut  be  my  disciple,  33. 

John  1.  2.J.  if  thou  4c  not  that  Christ,  nor  Elias 

Horn.  12.  16.  4e  not  wise  in  your  own  conceits 

1  Cor.  2. 1 5.  your  faith  not  be  in  the  wisdom  of  men 
9.2.  if  I  benot  an  apostle  unto  others,  yet  to  you 

14. 20.  4e  nut  children  in  understanding,  but  in 

2  Cor.  6. 14.  4e  not  unequally  yoked  together 
Gal.  1.  10.  I  should  not  be  the  servant  of  Christ 
Eph.  5.  7.  4c  not  theretbre  partakers  with  them 

17.  4c  ye  not  unwise,  but  understanding  what 
Tit.'i.  14.  good  works,  that  they  Ac  not  unfruitful 
Philem.  14.  thy  benefit  should  not  be  of  necessity 
Hcb.  8.4.  if  he  were  on  earth,  should  not  be  a  priest 
lPet.3.3.  let  it  not  Ac  that  outward  adorning  of  hair 

Let  there  BE. 
f?cn.l.3.Zc<  fAcrc 4clight||6./ct£Ac7-c4cafirmament 
13.  8.  let  there  be  no  strife  between  me  and  thee 
26.28./ct  tAc7'c  4c  now  an  oath  betwi.xtus  and  thee 
Exod.  5.  9.  let  there  be  more  work  laid  on  the  men 
Ezra5.}7.  let  there  4c search  made  in  king's  Ireas 
Psal.  69. 1 25.  let  there  be  no  dweller  in  their  tents 

Shall  BE,  or  shalt  BE. 
Gen.  2.24.  to  his  wife,  and  ihoy  shall  be  one  flesh 
4. 7.  to  thee  ^'AaZi  4c  his  desire,  and  thou  shalt  rule 

9.  25.  a  servant  shall  he  4e  to  his  brethren 
26.God  of  Shem,aiid  Canaan  shall  be  his  servant 

12.2. 1  will  bless  thee,  and  thou  shalt  be  a  blessing 
15.5.  hesaid  to  him,so  shall  thy  seed  Ac,  ftom.4.18. 
17.  16.  Sarah  shall  be  a  mother  of  nations 

27.  33. 1  have  blessed  him,  andhe  shall  be  blessed 

28.  21.  so  I  come  again,  then  shall  L.  Ac  my  God 
35.10.but  Israel  shall  be  thy  name,  1  Kings  18.31 . 

48. 21.  but  God  shall  be  with  you  and  bring  you 
49.  10.  to  him  shall  the  gathering  of  the  people  4e 

Exnd.i.^d.lhii  water  shall  be  blood  on  the  dry  land 
16.  thou  shalt  be  to  him  in.^tead  of  God 

19.  5.  ye  shall  be  a  peculiar  treasure  to  me 

21.36.  pay  ox  for  ox,  and  the  dead  shall  b^h'ts  own 
//Cw. 13.46. without  the  cam))  sAa/Z  his  habitation  Ac 

20.26.  ye  shall  be  holy  to  me,  ve  shall  be  mine 
Ccu^28.44.  he  shall  be  head, and  thou  shalt  4c  tail 

32. 20.  hide  my  face,  I  see  what  their  end  shall  be 

1  Sam.  17.  36.  this  uncircumci.ied  PhW. shall  be  as 
l.K'!n^s20.40.the  king said,sosAaH  thy judgmenlAe 

2  Chron.  19. 11.  the  Lord  shall  be  witli  the  good 
.fob  20.  22.  in  fulness  he  shall  be  in  straits 

22.  25.  yea,  the  Almighty  shall  be  thy  defence 
Psai.l28.2.happy  shalt  thou  Ac,it  shall  Aewell  with 

141.  5.  my  prayer  also  shall  be  in  their  calamities 
Eccl.  1.  9.  that  hath  been,  is  that  which  shall  be 

10.  14.  a  man  cannot  tell  what  ikall  bt 


BEA 

Eccl.  11.  3.  where  the  tree  fallelli,  there  it  sXall  b« 
Isa.  6. 13.  so  the  holy  seed  ahull  be  the  substance 
58.8.  the  glory  of  the  Lovd  shall  be  thy  rere-ward 
Jcr.l3.27.iiot  be  made  clean,when  shall  it  once  A«? 
15. 19.  thou  shalt  be  as  my  inuuth,  let  them  return 
32.  5.  and  there  shall  he  Ac  till  I  visit  him 


33.  9.  it  shall  be  to  me  a  name  of  joy,  a  praiie 
£zcA.16.16.  like  shall  not  come,  neither  .sAa// Ac  so 

18.  20.  wickedness  of  the  wicked  shall  be  on  him 

27.  36.  thou  shalt  be  a  terror,  never  shalt  be  more 
Dan.  2.  28.  what  shall  be  in  the  latter  days 

8.19.  at  Ihe  lime  ajipointed  the  end  shall  be,  11.27. 
Hos.  5.  9.  have  I  made  known  that  which  shall  be 
Jimos  5. 14.  so  the  God  of  hosts  shall  be  with  you 
ZccA.8.13.so  will  I  save  you, and  ye  shall  be  a  bless. 

12.8.  shall  be  as  David,  house  of  David  shall  be  a« 
Mai.  3.  12.  for  ye  shall  be  a  delightsome  land 
Jl/a«. -24.21. this  time,  nor  ever  shall  be,  Mark  1319. 
./l/ar/i:9.]9.how  long  .sAaZn  Ac  with  you, /.u/tc  9.41. 
John  14. 17.  he  dwelleth  with  you,  and  shall  be  in 

19.  24.  hut  cast  lot.s  for  it,  whose  it  shall  be 
.lets  27.  25.  that  it  shall  be  even  as  it  was  told  me 
1  Cor.  I5.37.thou  sowest  not  that  bcjdy  that  shall  be 
1  ./ohn  3.2.  itdolhnotyetappear  what  we  shall  be 
Iirv.l6.5.0  Lord  which  art,  and  wast,  and  shall  be 

22.  12.  to  give  every  man  as  his  work  shall  be 

Shall  not,  or  shalt  not  BE. 
Gen.  15.  4.  saying,  this  shall  itut  be  thine  heir 
Exod.  22.  25.  thou  shalt  not  be  to  him  as  an  usurer 
Deut.-2ii.yS.he  above only,lhou,^AaZ<  no«4cbeneath 
•2,  Kings  2.  10.  if  thou  see  me  not,  it  shall  not  be  bo 
Jdb  7.21.shaltseck  me  inmorning.hutl5AuH?tot  4« 

8.  f22.the  dwelling  place  of  the  wicked  shall  not  be 
/'s.37.10.it.sA.n.Ac,.7cr.48.30./>ion.ll.29..Sm.7.3,6 
Hos.  3.  3.  thou  shalt  not  be  for  another  man 
jWuJ.  16.22.  b>;  it  far  from  thoe,lhissA.no«  Aclotheo 

2U.26.i\7i.4e  so  among  you,  Jtfa?-.10.43./,ji/£.22.26. 

To  BE. 
Gen.  17.  7.  to  be  a  God  to  thee  and  ihy  seed  after 

39.  10.  he  hearkened  not  to  her,  to  be  with  her 
Lev.  22.  33.  brought  you  out  to  be  your  God,25.3& 
I'rov.  24.  1.  neither  desire  to  be  with  them 
Eccl.  3. 15.  that  which  is  to  be  hath  already  been 
/-KAcl5.14.wheiihespent  all,hebcgau  (oAcin  wai»i! 

1  Cor.  7.  26. 1  say  it  is  good  for  a  man  so  to  be 

2  Cor.  12.  6.  above  that  which  he  seelh  me  to  be 
Phil.  1.  23.  having  a  desire  to  be  with  Christ 
.Tarn.  3.  10.  these  things  ought  not  so  to  be 
2  Pet.  3.  11.  what  manner  of  persons  ought  ye  foAa 

IVill  BE. 

Of  n.l6.12.Ishmael  willbc  a  wiM  man, his  hand  will 

be  against  every  man,  and  every  man's  ag.  him 

17. 8. 1  tcill  be  their  God,  Exod.  29.  45.  Jer.  24.  7 

1 32.  38.  2  Cor.  6.  16. 

26. 3. 1  will  be  with  thee,  and  will  bless  thee.  31.  a 

Exod.  3.  12.  .Judg.  6.  16.  1  Kings  11.38. 

28.  20.  if  God  icill  be  with  me,  and  will  keep  me 

34.  15.  if  ye  will  Jcas  we  be,  circumcised 
JW  A.  4.  12.  from  all  places  they  will  be  upon  you 
Psal.  48. 14.  he  will  Ac  our  guide,  cven'unto  death 
./cr.  7. 23.  obfiy  my  vo\i:B,l  will  be  your  God,  30.22. 
Kick.  11. 16. 1  will  be  to  them  as  a  little  sanctuary 

20.  32.  that  ye  say,  we  will  be  as  the  heathen 
Hos.  13. 14. 1  will  reileem  them  ;  O  death,  I  will  be 

thy  plagues,  O  grave,  I  will  be  thy  destruction 

14.5. 1  loill  be  as  the  dew  to  Israel,  he  shall  grow 

Joel,  3. 16.  the  Lord  will  he  the  hope  of  his  people 

ZccA.2. 5. 1  the  Lord  tcill  be  to  her  a  wall  of  fire 

round  about,l!c//i  Ac  the  glory  in  Ihomidstofher 

Mat.  6. 21.  where  treasure,  there  will  your  heart  be 

2  Cnr.  6. 18.  I  will  be  a  Father  to  you,  and  ye  my 

10. 11.  such  will  we  4e  also  indeed,  when  present 

1  T!m.6.9.they  that  loill  Acrich  fall  into  temptations 

Hib.  1. 5. 1  will  be  to  him  a  Father,  he  to  me^a  son 

8. 10. 1  will  be  to  them  a  God,  they  to  me  a  people 

.Tarn.  4.  4.  whosoever  will  be  a  friend  of  the  world 

/icy.  21. 7. 1  will  Ac  his  God,  ainl  he  shall  be  my  son 

Bden,  see  after  Bkk. 

BEACON. 

Isa.  30.  17.  be  left  as  a  A.  on  the  top  of  a  mountain 

BEAM. 
.Tndg.  16. 14.  he  went  away  with  the  pin  of  the  4. 

1  .Sam.  17.  7.  and  the  stafiof  his  spear  was  like  a 
weaver's  4.  1  Chron.  11.  23.  |  20.  .5. 

2A7n^*6.2.  let  usgo  to  Jord.Tn,and  lake  thence  a  4. 
5.  as  one  was  felling  a  A.  ax-head  fell  into  water 
Hnb.  2.  11.  the  4.  out  of  the  timber  shall  answer 
Mat.  7.  3.  but  considercst  not  the  A.  Ijuke  6.  41,  42. 

4.  and  behold,  a  A.  is  in  thine  own  eye 

5.  thou  hypocrite,  fir^t  cast  out  the  4.  Luke  6.  42. 
BEAMS. 

2  Chron.  3. 7.  he  overlaid  the  4.  the  posts,  the  walla 
J^eh.2.  8.  that  he  may  give  timber  to  make  4. 
Psal.  104.  3.  who  layeth  the  A.  in  the  waters 
Cant.  1.17.  tlie  A.  of  ourhoiise  are  cedar  and  raRera 

BEANS. 
2  Sam.  17. 28.  Barzillai  brought  A.  lentiles  to  David 
Ezck.  4.9.  take  unto  thee  wheat,  A.  lentiles,  millet 

BEAR 
Signifies,  [1]  To  carry,  Jei.  17.  21.  Mat.  87.  38 


BEA 

T9]  To  tuffer,  or  endure,  2  Cor.  11. 1.  Rer.  2. 2. 

['A]  To  bring  forth,  iit;n.ld.l3.  [4]  Tu  produce, 
or  yield.  Jam.  3.  I'i.  [5]  Tu  uphold,  ur  support, 
Paal.  75.  i.  \  Dl.  l:i.  [OJ  To  6e  punished  for. 
Num.  14.  33.  [7]  To  undergo  the  care  and 
fatigue  of  ruling  a  people,  Deut.  1.  12.  [8]  'I'u 
speak  and  utter,  Deut.  5.  20.  ['JJ  To  tell,  or 
relate,  2  Sam.  18  19.  [10]  To  be  answerable 
in  payment  for,  2  Kings  IS.  14.  [11]  To  lay  a 
thing  sadly  to  heart,  I'sal.  89.  50.  [12]  To  give 
satisfaction  for,  Isa.  53.  11.  Hcb.  'J.  28.  [13] 
To  perform,  vr  fully  observe.  Acta  15. 10. 

To  bear  the  iiitiniiitk-s  of  the  weak,  Uum.  15.  1. 
To  comply  icilhthiir  weakness  so  far  as  not  to 
use  our  liberty  to  their  offence,  and  also  to  bear 
tcith  then  in  their  failings  thro'  ignorance  or 
weakness,  and  not  to  condemn  or  despise  them. 

Gen.  4. 13.  my  punishment  is  greater  timn  I  can  4. 

13.  6.  the  land  was  not  able  to  b.  them,  .36.  7. 
43.  9.  let  me  *.  the  blame  for  ever,  44.  32. 
49.  15.  Issachar  bowed  his  shoulder  to  b. 

F.xod.  18.  22.  they  shall  t.  the  burden  with  thee 

25.  27.  to  *.  the  ark,  27.  7.  |  30.  4.  |  37. 5.  Deut.  10. 
8.  Josh.  3.  8,  13,  14.  I  4.  16.  2  Sam.  15.24. 

28  12.  Aaron  shall  b.  their  names  before  the  Lord 
J,ev.  19.  18.  thou  shall  not  b.  any  grudge  against 
JVum.11.14.  not  able  to  b.  all  this  people,  iJeut.X.'i. 

14. 27.  how  long  shall  I  b.  with  this  consrcgation  'i 
3;}.children  shall  i.your  whoredoms, K2f/i.23. 35. 
Deut.  1.  31.  God  bare  thee  as  a  man  doth  b.  his  son 
2  Sam.  18.  19.  let  me  run  and  b.  the  king  tiilings 
2  Kings  18. 14.  which  thou  puttest  on  me,  I  will  6. 
Fsal.  75.  3.  I  b.  up  the  pillars  of  the  earth 

89.  50.  how  I  do  b.  in  my  bosom  the  reproach 

91. 12.  they  shall  b.  thee  up.  Mat.  4. 6.  J.ake  4. 11. 

144.  1 14.  that  our  oxen  be  able  to  b.  burdens 
Prov.  9. 12.  if  thou  scornest,  thou  alone  .-ihalt  b.  it 

18.  14.  but  a  wounded  spirit  who  can  b.  7 

30.  21.  and  for  four  which  it  cannot  b. 

Isa.  1.  14.  your  feasts,  I  am  weary  to  4.  them 
46.  4.  I  have  made  and  I  will  4.  you,  even  carry 
7.  they  4.  him  upon  the  shoulder,  they  carry  him 
.52.  1 1,  be  ye  clean  that  4.  the  vessels  of  the  Lord 

Jer.  10.  lO.'truly  this  is  a  grief,  and  I  must  4.  it 

17.  21.  4.  no  burden  on  the  sabbath-day,  27. 

31 .  19.  because  I  did  ft.  the  reproach  of  my  youth 
44  22.  so  that  the  Lord  could  no  longer  6. 

Lam.  3.  27.  it  is  good  to  4.  the  yoke  in  his  youth 

Ezek.  12. 6.  in  their  sight  shalt  tl;ou  4.  on  shoulders 

12. the  prince  shall  4. upon  his  shoulder  in  twilight 

14.  10.  they  shall  4.  punishment  of  their  iniquity 
in.  52.  ft.  thou  thine  own  shame  for  thy  sins,  54. 
32..%.  and  ft.  th.jir  shame  with  them,  36. 7.  |  44. 13. 
34.  23.  nor  4.  the  shame  of  the  heathen,  36. 15. 

.^mos  7.  10.  the  land  is  not  able  to  4.  his  words 
•*/(c.  6.  16.  yc  shall  4.  llio  reproach  of  my  peojile 

7.  9. 1  will  4.  the  indignation  of  the  Lord,  I  sinned 
H'lg.  2.  12.  if  one  ft.  holy  fieah  in  the  skirt  of  his 
y.rch.  5.  10.  whither  do  these  4.  the  cphah'? 

6.  13.  he  shall  ft.  glory,  and  shall  rule  <m  his  throne 
Mat.  3.  11.  whose  shoes  I  am  not  worthy  to  ft. 

27.  32.  thcv  found  Simon,  thev  compelled  him  to 

4'4iU  cross,  Mark  15.  21.  Luke  23.  2<i. 

Luke  14.  27.  and  whosoever  doth  not  4.  Iiis  crosi 

18.  7.  avenge  his  elect,  tho'  he  4.  long  with  theml 
John  16.12.  many  things,but  ye  cannot  4. them  now 
Jlcts  9.  15.  he  is  a  chosen  vessel  to  4.  my  name 

15. 10.  s  yoke,  our  fathers  nor  we  were  able  to  6 
18.  14.  O  Jews,  reason  would  I  should  4.  with  you 
Horn.  15. 1.  we  ought  to  ft.  infirmities  of  the  weak 

1  ror.3.2.  hitherto  ye  were  not  able  to  ft.  it,  nor 
10.  13.  a  way  to  escape,  that  ye  maybe  able  to  ft.it 

15.  49.  we  shall  also  ft.  the  image  of  the  heavenly 

2  Cor.  II.  1.  would  to  God  ye  could  ft.  with  me 

4.  have  not  accepted,  yc  might  well  4.  with  him 
Gal.  6.  2.  ft.  one  another's  burdens  and  so  fulfil 

5.  for  every  man  shall  ft.  his  own  burden 

17.  I  ft.  in  Miy  body  the  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
WcA.5.  t2.  who  can  reasonablyft  withthc  ignorant 
.fum.  3.  12.  can  the  fig-tree  4.  olive-berries? 
Jtcn.  2.  2.  thou  canst  not  4.  them  that  are  evil 

Rear  fruit,  sec  Fruit. 

'      BK.AR  iniquity. 

Erod.l".  38.  Anron  may  4.  iniquity  ofhnly  things 

43.  Aaron  and  his  sons,  that  they  4.  not  iniquity 

Lev.  5.  1.  he  ihall  4.  his  iniquity,  17.  |  7.  18.  1 17. 

16.  I  19.  a  I  20.  17. 

10.17.  hnlh  given  to  yoiilo4.iTii7»nry  of  ilie^on:,'. 

16.22.  the  goat  shall  4.  upon  him  all  liic'it  ininuily 

20.  19.  they  »hall  4.  their  iniquiti/,  JVum.  18.  23. 

kick.  44.  10,  12. 

22.16.  or  suflTer  them  to  4.mi7«ify  ofiheir  trespass 

,V«m.  5  31.  this  woman  shnli  4.  her  iiiiquily 

14.  :H.  ye  shall  ft.  your  iniquity  even  forty  years 

TH.  1.  Aaron  and  his  sons  A.  iniyi/iVy  of  sanctuary 

30.  15.  after  he  heard,  then  he  shall  4.  her  iniquity 

Isa.  ax  II.  my  right.ser»nnt  shall  A.  ihn\r  iniquity 

JE:et.4.4.numberofd'iys.thoii  shalt  4. their  ini.5,6. 

18.  19.  why  doth  notnon  A.  iniquity  of  tho  father? 
3C>.  the  ion  ihall  notft.  the  iniqwty  of  tho  father 

•Mi 


BEA 

DE.VR  judgment.  [Israel 

Exod.  23.  30.  Aaron  shdll  b.judg.  of  children  of 
(Jal.  5.  10.  he  that  troubleth  you  shall  4.  his  judg. 
Bear  record,  see  Kkcord. 
BEAK  rule. 
Esth.  1.  22.  every  man  should  ft.  rule  in  his  house 
I'rov.  12.  24.  the  hand  of  the  diligent  shall  ft.  rule 
./cr.  5.  31.  the  priests  4.  rule  by  their  nieans 
Ezek.  19. 11.  had  strong  rods  for  them  that  4.  rule 
Dan.  2. 39.  a  kingdom  of  brass  which  shall  4.  rule 

BEAR  sin. 
Lev.  19. 1 17.  rebuke,  that  thou  4.  not  sin  for  him 
20.  20.  they  shall  A.  their  sin,  they  shall  die 

22.  9.  lest  they  4.  sin  for  it,  and  die,  therefore 
24. 15.  whosoever  curseth  his  God,  shall  4.  his  fin 

JVk;h.9.13.  shall  be  cut  off,  that  man  sliull  ft. his  sin 

18.  22.  not  come  nigh,  lest  they  4.  sin  and  die 

32.ye  shall  ft.nu  sin  when  ye  heaved  the  best  of  it 

Ezek.  23.  49.  and  ye  shall  4.  the  sin  of  your  idols 

Hcb.  9.  28.  so  Christ  was  once  offered  to  4.  sin 

BEAR  witness. 

Exod.  20.16.  thou  shalt  not  4.  false  witness  against 

thy  neighb.  DeaC.  5.  20.  Mat.  19.18.  Uom.  13.9. 

1  Kingsil.  10.  set  two  men  sons  of  Belial  to  b.wit. 

Mark  10.  19.  do  not  4.  false  witness,  Luke  18.  20. 

Jjuke  11.48.  truly  ye  ft.  wit.  that  ye  allow  the  deeds 

John  1.7.  the  same  came  for  a  witness,  to  b.witness 

8.  he  was  sent  to  A.  witness  of  that  light 

3.  28.  ye  yourselves  4.  me  witness  that  I  said 

5.  31.  if  I  ft.  wit.  of  myself,  my  witness  is  not  true 

3t>.  same  works  that  1  do  ft.  witness  of  me,  10.25. 

8.18. 1  am  one  that4.ici£.of  myself,and  thcFalher 

15.  27.  ye  shall  also  4.  wit.  because  ye  have  been 

18.23.  if  I  have  spoken  evil,  A.  witness  of  the  evil 

37.  for  this  cause  came  I,  that  I  should  b.witness 

.lets  22.5.  also  the  high-priest  doth  ft.  me  witness 

23.  11.  so  must  thou  4.  witness  also  at  Rome 
I.John  1.2. we  have  seen  it,  and  b.witness,a.u(l  shew 

5.  8.  and  there  are  three  that  4.  witness  in  earth 

BEAR. 
Orn.  17.1".  and  shall  Sarah  that  isOOj'carsold  ft.? 

18.  13.  shall  I  of  a  surety  ft.  a  child,  who  am  old 
Lev.l'i.  5.  but  if  she  ft.  a  maid  child,  then  unclean 
Dcitt.'iS.  57.  and  toward  her  children  she  shall  4. 
Ju'Ig.  13.  3.  but  thou  shalt  conceive  and  A.  a  son 
1  /('(no'jf3.21.behold,itwas  not  my  son  that  I  did  A. 
Cani!.  4.2.  sheep,  whereof  every  one  4.  twins,  CO. 
Isa.  7. 14.  a  virgin  shall  conceive  and  ft.  a  son,  and 

54.  1.  sing,  O  barren,  thou  that  didst  not  4. 
.fer.  29.  0.  that  they  may  4.  .sons  and  daughters 
Luke  1.  13.  thy  wife  Elisabeth  shall  4.  a  son 

1  Tim.  5.  14.  younger  women  marry,  A.  children 

BEAKERS. 

2  Chron.  2.  18.  he  set  70,000  to  be  4.  of  burdens 
34.  13.  also  they  were  over  the  4.  of  burdens 

JVch.  4.  10.  the  strength  of  tlie  4.  is  decayed 

BEA REST. 
Judg.  13.  3.  behold,  thou  art  barren,  and  A.  not 
I'sul.  106.  4.  with  the  favour  thou  A.  to  thy  people 
John  8.  13.  thou  A.  record  of  thyself,  thy  record 
Kom.  11.  18.  A.  not  the  root,  but  the  root  thee 
Gal.  4.  27.  rejoice  thou  barren,  that  A.  not 

BEARETH. 
Lev.  11.  2S.  he  that  ft.  the  carcase  of  them,  wash 

15.  10.  and  he  that  ft.  any  of  these  things 
JVum.  11.  12.  as  a  nursing  father  A.  the  child 
Deut.  25.  6.  the  first-born  she  A.  shall  succeed 

29. 18.  lest  there  be  among  you  a  root  that  A.  gall 
23.  it  is  not  sown,  nor  A.  nor  grass  groweth 

32.  11.  as  an  eagle  4.  her  young  on  her  wings 
.lob  24.  21.  evil  cntreatcth  the  barren  that  4.  not 
Cant.fi.  6.  whereof  every  one  A.  twin.--,  none  barren 
.lull  2.  22.  be  not  afraid,  for  the  tree  4.  her  fruit 
.Mat.  13. 23.  which  also  A.  fruit,  and  bringeth  forth 
./«Ati  15.  2.  every  branch  that  jj.  not  fruit,  taki 
Kiim.  13.  4.  for  he  b.  not  the  sword  in  vain 
1  Cor.13.7.  chnritv  i.  o"  things,  believcth  all  things 
Ileb.  6.  8.  that  wliicS  i.  tliorna  is  rejected 

BEARETH  rule. 
Pror.  29.2.  when  the  wicked  b.ruie,  people  mourn 

Bl^ARE'I'II  witness, 
.fob  16.8.my  lea  imess  rising  up  h.witnrsslo  my  face 
Prov.  25. 18.  a  man  that  A.  false  witness  is  a  maul 
./ohn  5.  32.  there  is  another  that  A.  witness  of  me 

8.18.  and  the  Father  that  sent  me,  6. in7?ics«  of  me 
Ront:  8.  16.  tho  Spirit  A.  witness  with  our  spirit 
1  .John  i.  6.  and  it  is  the  Spirit  that  A.  witness 

BEARING. 
(Irn.  1.  29.  I  have  given  you  every  herb,  A.  aeed 

16.  2.  the  Lord  hatli  restrained  me  from  A. 
29.  35.  she  called  his  name  Judah,  and  left  4. 
37.  25.  Ishmnelites  with  camels  A.  spioery 

JViini.  10.  17.  set  forward,  6.  the  tabernacle 

21.  the  Kohathitcs  set  forward,  ft.  the  sanctuary 
.Josh.  3.  3.  tho  priests  ft.  ilio  ark,  14.  2  Sam.  15.  24. 
I  .Sam.  17.  7.  one  ft.  a  shield  went  before  him 
Psal.  126.  6.  ho  that  eoeth  forth  ft.  precious  seed 
Mark  14.  13.  there  shall  meet  you  a  man  A.  a 
pitcher  of  water,  follow  him,  Luke  22.  10. 
John  10. 17.  he  ft.  his  croM,  went  forth  to  a  place 


BEA 

Rom.  2.  15.  their  con«cience  also  ft.  witncM 
9.  1.  I  lie  not,  my  conscience  A.  me  witne.ss 
2  Cor.  4.  10.  A.  in  the  body  the  dying  of  the  L.  Jesr 
Uib.  2.  4.  God  also  4.  them  witness  with  signs 

13.  13.  let  us  go  forth  to  him,  4.  his  reproach 

1  Tim.  2.  15.  she  shall  be  saved  in  child-4ear*n;(f 
BEAR,  S. 

1  Sam.  17.  34.  came  a  lion  and  a  4.  took  a  lamb 
36.  thy  servant  slew  both  the  lion  and  tiie  A. 

'2  Sam.  17.  8.  chafed,  as  a  4.  robbed  of  her  whelp* 

2  Kings  2. 24.  there  came  forth  two  she-A.  and  laio 
Prov.  17.  12.  a  A.  robbed  of  her  whelps  meet  a  man 

28.  15.  as  a  roaring  lion,  and  a  ranging  4. 
Isa.  11.  7.  the  cow  and  4.  shall  feed  their  young 

59.  11.  we  roar  all  like  A.  and  mourn  like  dovea 
I^am.  3.  10.  he  was  to  me  as  a  A.  lying  in  wait 
Dan.  7.  5.  another  beast,  a  second  like  tO  a  b, 
IIos.  13.  8.  I  will  meet  them  as  a  A.  bereaved 
.imos  5.  19.  as  if  a  man  did  flee  from  a  4. 
Hev.  13.  2.  his  feet  were  as  the  feet  of  a  b. 

BEARD,  S. 
Lev.  13.  29.  if  a  man  hath  a  plague  on  head  or  I>. 

14.  9.  shall  shave  all  his  hair  off  his  head  and  b. 
19. 27.  nor  shalt  thou  mar  the  corners  of  A.  21.  5. 

1  .Sam.  17.  35. 1  caught  him  by  his  A.  and  slew  him 

21.  13.  David  let  his  spittle  fall  on  his  A. 

2  Sam.  10.  5.  tarry  at  Jericho  till  your  A.  be  growri 

and  then  return,  1  Chron.  19.5 

19.  24.  Mejihiboshelh  irinmied  not  his  A. 

20.  9.  Joab  trjok  Amasa  by  the  A.  to  kiss  him 
F.zraii.'.i.  plucked  offhairofmy  head,  and  of  my  S 
Psal.  133.  2.  ran  down  on  the  A.  even  Aaron's  A. 
Isa.  7.  20.  and  it  shal}  also  consume  the  A. 

15.  2.  on  all  heads  ba.'dness,  and  every  A.  cut  off 
Jer.  41.  5.  fourscore  men  having  their  A.  shaved 

48.  37.  every  head  shall  be  bald,  every  A.  dipt 

Ezek.  5. 1.  cause  u  razor  to  pass  on  thy  head  and  b. 
BEAST 

Signifies,  [1]  .^  brute  void  of  reason,  Prov.  12. 10. 
[2]  .'ill  kinds  of  cattle,  1  Kings  4. 33.  Psal.  8.  7. 
[3J  Ministers  of  the  gospel,  who  are  full  of 
liveliness  and  nimbltness,  in  executing  God's 
commands,  Rev.  4.  6,  8.  ]  7.  11.  [4]  Cruel  and 
unrcasoniililc  men,  who  arc  led  viercly  by  their 
natural  brutish  inclinations,  1  Cor.  15.  32. 
2  Pet.  2.  12.  [5]  Kingdoms,  Dan.  7.  11.  |  8.  4. 
[6]  ,1ntiihri.^t.  Rev.  13.  2.  |  20.  4.  [7]  PeopU 
of  several  nations,  Dan.  4.  12,21.        . 

Gen.  1.24.  God  said,  let  the  earth  bring  forth  the  b 
25.  God  made  the  4.  of  the  earth  after  his  kind 
3.  I.  the  serpent  was  more  subtil  than  anv  A. 
37.  21).  some  evil  A.  hatli  devoured  him,  33. 

Exod.  13.  12.  every  firstling  that  cometh  of  a  b. 

22.  5.  put  his  A.  and  feed  in  another  man's  field 

10.  deliver  to  his  neighbour  any  A.  to  keep 

19.  whoso  lieth  with  a  A.  shall  be  put  to  death 
J^ev.  18. 23.  I  20.  15, 16.  Dent.  27.  21 

23.  29.  the  4.  of  the  field  multiply  against  thee 
Lev.  11.  47.  A.  that  may  be  eaten,  and  A.  that  may 

no 
27.9.  if  it  be  a  A.  whereof  men  bring  an  offering 
Deut.  4.  17.  the  likeness  of  any  A.  on  the  earth 
.fudg.  20.  4*.  smote  them,  as  well  the  men  as  the  b 
2  Chron.  25.  1 18.  a  A.  trod  down  the  thistle 
A7A.  2.  12.  nor  any  4.  save  the  A.  I  rode  on 
Psal.  08.  1 30.  rebuke  the  A.  of  the  reeds 
73.  22.  so  ignorant,  I  was  as  a  4.  before  thee 
147.  9.  he  civcth  to  the  4.  his  food,  and  to  ravenf 
I'rov.  12. 10.  a  righteous  man  regards  life  of  his  b 
I'ccl.  3.19.  a  man  hath  no  pre-eminence  above  ah 
La.  43.  20.  the  4.  of  the  Held  shall  honour  mo 
63.  14.  as  a  4.  that  goctli  into  the  valley 
Ezik.  44.  31.  dead  or  torn,  whether  it  be  fowl  or  b 
Dan.  4.  16.  let  a  A.  heart  be  given  to  him 
7.  11.  I  beh<ld  even  till  the  4.  was  slain 

19.  I  would  know  the  truth  of  the  fourth  A. 
Hos.  13. 1 8.  the  6.  of  the  field  shall  le.ir  them 
AuA'C  10.34.  set  him  on  hi*  own  A.  and  brought  hini 
.^els  28.  5.  Paul  shook  off  the  A.  into  the  fire 
flib.  12.20.  if  so  much  as  a  A.  touch  the  mountaio 
A't".  4.  7.  first  4.  like  a  lion,  second  4.  third  4. 

6.  3.  I  hoard  tlie  fccond  4.  say,  come  and  see 
11  7.  4.  that  ascendeth  out  ol'th(!  bottomlc's  pit 
13. 1.  and  I  saw  a  4.  rise  up  out  of  the  sea,  having 

11.  I  beheld  a  4.  roniing  out  of  the  earth 

15.  2.  them  that  had  got  the  victory  over  the  b. 
16. 13.  unclean  spirits  came  out  of  mouth  of  the  ( 
17.  8.  thou  sawest  the  4.  thai  win,  and  is  not,  11 

19.  19.  I  saw  the  4.  and  the  kings  of  tho  earth 

20.  10.  where  the  4.  and  false  prophet  arc 

Every  BEAST. 
Gen.  1.  30.  to  every  b.'\  liavc  given  green  Urth  To. 

2.  19.  out  of  thi-  ground  God  formed  rtery  A. 

20.  Adam  pave  names  to  every  4.  of  the  field 

3.  II.  thou  art  cursed  above  every  4.  of  tho  Gold 
7. 2.  nf  every  clean  4.  lake  to  thee  bv  sevens,  8. 

14.  Ihcy  arid  every  A.  after  his  kinci,  and  cattte 
8. 19.  furry  4.  after  their  kinds  went  oi.l  of  the  &  t 

20.  of  crrry  clean  A.  and  clean  fowl  he  offered 
9. 2.  dread  of  you  nhall  be  on  every  4.  of  llie  ear  .< 


fiEA 

Oen  9.5  yourbloodwill  I  require  at  handof  «re»'y6 
lO.w'iiheveryb.  ofearlli  I  establish  my  covenant 
34.  '23.  shall  not  every  b.  of  theirs  be  ours  1 
Lev.  11.26.jhecarcase»  otevery  d.  which divideth 
the  hoof,  nor  cheweth  the  cud,  Deal.  14. 6. 
Vsal  50.  10.  for  every  b.  of  the  forest  is  mine 
104.  11.  they  give  drink  to  every  b.  of  the  field 
Ezek.  34.  8.  my  llock  became  meat  to  every  b. 

39.  17.  son  of  man,  speak  to  every  b.  of  the  field 

BEAST,  joined  with  Man. 
Gen. 6.7.  Lord  said,l  will  destroy  both  man  and  b 
jEiod.8.17.smote  dust,  it  became  lice  in  man  and  b. 
9.9.boil  breaking  with  blains  upon  man  and  b.  10. 
19.  hail  shall  come  down  on  7nan  and  b.  2i,  2.5. 
11.  7.  not  a  dog  move  his  tongue  against  vian  or  b 
12. 12.  and  will  smite  all  the  first-born  in  Egypt 
both  of  man  and  b.  13. 15.  Psal.  135.  8 
13.2.first-born  of  »nanand*.  is  mine,  JVum.8.  17. 
19.  13.  whether  man  or  b.  it  shall  not  live 
Lev.  27.  28.  no  devoted  thing  of  man  or  b.  shall  be 
JVum.3.13.I  hallowed  to  me  lirst-born  of  mart  and  b 
31.26.the  prey  that  was  taken,  both  of  77ia;i  and  b. 
Psal.  36.  6.  Lord,  thou  preservest  man  and  b. 
Jer.  7.20.  fury  poured  on  man  and  b.  21. 0.  |  36. 29 
Ezek.  14c  13, 17, 19,  21.  [  25. 13.  |  29. 8.  Zep/i.  1. 3. 
27.  .5. 1  have  made  man  and  b.  that  are  on  ground 
31.  27. 1  will  sow  Judah  with  seed  of  man  and  b. 
32. 43.  ye  say,  it  is  desolate  without  man  or  b.  33. 
10,  12.  I  36.  29.  1  51.  62. 
50.  3.  they  shall  depart,  both  man  and  b. 
Ezek.  36. 11. 1  will  multiply  upon  you  man  and  b. 
Jonah  3.  7.  let  not  man  nor  b.  taste  any  thing 

Unclean  BEAST. 
Lev.  5.  2.  or  if  a  soul  touch  any  unclean  b.  7.  21 
27.11. if  it  be  unc/.J. of  which  they  do  not  offer,  27. 

IVild  BEAST. 
ZKings  14.9.  there  passed  by  a  ?ci7d  4. of  Lebanon, 
and  trod  down  the  thistle,  2  Chron.  25. 18. 
Job  39. 15.  forgetteth  that  wild  b.  may  break  them 
Psal.  80. 13.  the  wild  b.  of  the  field  doth  devour  it 
Hos.  13.  8.  the  wild  b.  shall  tear  them 

BEASTS. 
Gen.  31. 39.  that  which  was  torn  of  A.  Exnd.  22.  31. 
Lev.  7.  24.  1 17.  15.  |  22.  8. 
t  54.  then  Jacob  killed  b.  upon  the  mount 

36.  6.  Esau  took  all  his  b.  and  his  substance 

45.  17.  lade  your  b.  and  go  to  the  land  of  Canaan 
Exod.  8.  t21.  I  will  send  a  mixture  of  noisome  b. 

11.  5.  all  the  first-born  of  A.  shall  die 
Lev.  11.  2.  these  b.  ye  shall  eat,  Deut.  14.  4. 
3.and  chew  cud  among  b.  shall  ye  eat,7)e«(.14.6. 

25.  7.  for  b.  shall  the  increase  thereof  be  meat 

26.  6.  I  will  rid  evil  A.  out  of  the  land 

J^am.  20.8.  give  the  congregation  and  their  b.  drink 

31.  30.  of  all  A.  give  a  portion  to  the  Levites 
Deut.  ^.  24.  I  will  send  the  teeth  of  A.  on  them 

1  Kings  4.  f  28.  barley  for  mules,  or  swift  A. 

33.  Solomon  spake  of  A.  and  of  fowl,  and  fishes 
18.  5.  may  find  grass,  that  we  lose  not  all  the  A. 

2  Kings  3.  17.  drink  both  ye,  your  cattle  and  A. 
Ezra  1.  4.  help  him  with  gold,  goods,  and  with  A. 
Job  12.  7.  ask  the  A.  and  they  shall  teach  thee 

18.  3.  wherefore  are  we  counted  as  A.  artd  vile 

37.  8.  then  the  A.  go  into  dens,  and  remain 
Psal.  49.  12.  man  is  like  the  A.  that  perish,  20. 

78.  t  50.  he  gave  Iheir  A.  to  the  murrain 
104.  20.  wherein  all  the  A.  of  the  forest  creep 
2.5.  in  the  sea,  are  both  small  and  great  A. 
148.  10.  A.  and  all  cattle,  praise  the  Lord 
Prov.  9.  2.  wisdom  hath  killed  her  A. 
30.  30.  a  lion  which  is  strongest  among  A. 
Eccl.  3. 18.  they  might  see  that  themselves  are  b. 

19.  that  which  befalleth  men,  befalleth  A. 
Isa.  30.  6.  the  burden  of  the  A.  of  the  south 

40.  16.  nor  A.  thereof  for  a  burnt-offering 

46.  1.  their  idols  were  on  the  A.  and  cattle 
66.  20.  upon  swift  A.  to  my  holy  mountain 

Jer.  9. 10.  the  A.  are  fled  ||  12.4.  the  A.  are  consumed 

Ezek.  5. 17.  I  will  send  on  you  famine  and  evil  A. 

pestilence,  blood,  and  the  sword,  14.  15. 

32.  4.  I  will  fill  the  A.  of  whole  earth  with  thee 
13. 1  will  destroy  all  the  A.  thereof,  34.  25,  28. 

Dan.  4.  14.  let  the  A.  get  away  from  under  it 
15.  let  his  portion  be  with  the  A.  in  the  grass 

7.  17.  these  four  great  A.  are  four  kings 

8.  4.  so  that  no  A.  might  stand  before  him 
Joel  1. 18.  how  do  the  A.  groan,  herds  perplexed 
y]mns5.  22.  nor  regard  the  peace-offcringsof  fat  A. 
Hab.  2.  17.  spoil  of  A.  which  made  them  afraid 
Zeph.  2.  15.  become  a  place  for  A.  to  lie  down  in 
Zech.  14.  15.  so  shall  be  the  plague  of  all  the  A. 
Jicts  7. 42.  O  Israel,  have  ye  offered  to  me  slain  A.? 

23.  24.  provide  them  A.  that  ye  may  set  Paul  on 
Rom.  1   13.  changed  into  an  image  made  like  to  A. 

1  Cor  15.  32.  if  I  have  fought  with  A.  at  Ephesus 
Jam.  3. 7.  for  every  kind  of  A.  is  tamed,  but  tongue 

2  Pet.  2. 12.  but  these  as  natural  brute  A.  speak  evil 
Jade  10.  but  what  ihey  know  naturally  as  brute  A. 
liev.i.  6  four  A.  full  of  eyes  before  and  behind 

8.  the  Icur  A.  had  each  six  winga  about  bim 
27 


BEA 

iJ«r.4.9.when  those  A.give  glory  and  honour  to  him 

5.6.in  midst  of  the  throne  and  four  A.otood  a  Lamb 
14.  the  four  A.  said  Amen,  and  the  24  elders  lell 

6. 1.  one  of  tho  four  A. saying,  come  and  see,  15.  7. 

7. 11.  angels  stood  about  the  throne  and  the  four  b. 

14.  3.  a  new  song  before  the  throne  and  four  A. 

19. 4.  the  24  elders  and  four  A.  fell  down  to  worship 

BEASTS  of  the  Earth. 
Deut.  28.26.  carcase  shiill  be  meat  to  a\.  A.  of  earth 
1  Sam.  17.  46.  carcases  of  Philistines  to  A.  of  earth 
Job  5.  22.  nor  shalt  thou  be  afraid  of  the  A.  of  earth 

35. 11.  who  teacheth  us  more  than  the  A.  of  earth 
PsaZ.  79. 2.  the  flesh  of  thy  saints  to  the  A.  of  earth 
Isa.  18.  6.  they  shall  be  left  to  the  A.  of  the  earth 
Jer.  7.  33.  the  carcases  of  the  people  meat  for  b.  of 

the  earth,  16.  4.  |  19.  7.  |  34.  20. 

15.3.1  will  appoint  over  them  A.  of  earth  to  devour 

^ctisl0.12.allmanneroffour-footedA.o/cartA,11.6. 

Hev.  6.  8.  kill  with  hunger,  and  with  the  A.  of  earth 

BEASTS  of  the  Field. 
£j:od.23.11.what  the  poor  leave,  b.  of  field  may  cat 
7>eu<.7.22.1est  the  b.of  the  field  increase  upon  thee 
lSam.l7.44.come,  I  will  give  thy  flesh  to  A.  of  field 
2Sam.21.10.birds  by  day, nor  A.  of  the  field  by  night 
Job  5.  23.  A.  of  the  field  shall  be  at  peace  with  thee 

40.  20.  mountains,  where  aUthab.  of  the  field  p\Ay 
Psal.a.l.  thou  hast  put  A.  of  the  field  under  his  feet 
Isa.  56.  9.  all  ye  A.  of  the  field  come  to  devour 
Jer.l2.9.as3emble  all  b.of  the  field,  come  to  devour 

•il.(S.b.of field  have  I  given  him,  28. 14.  Dan .  2. 38. 

£2eA.  29. 5. 1  have  given  thee  for  meat  to  tho  A.  of 

the  field,  and  to  the  fowls,  34. 5.  |  39.  4. 

31.  6.  under  his  branches  A.  of  the  field  bringforth 

13.  all  the  A.  of  the  field  shall  be  on  his  branches 

38.20.the  A.  of  the  field  shpll  shake  at  my  presence 

Dan.  4. 12.  the  A.  of  the  field  had  shadow  under  it 

25.  thy  dwelling  shall  be  with  A.  of  the  field,  32. 

//b*.2.18.make  a  covenant  for  them  with  A.  of  field 

4. 3.  therefore  shall  the  land  mourn  with  A.  of  field 

Joel  1.  20.  A.  of  field  cry  also  to  thee,  for  the  rivers 

2.22.be  not  afraid,  ye  A.  offield,the  pastures  spring 

mid  BEASTS. 
Lev.  26.  22. 1  will  also  send  wild  A.  among  you 

1  Sam.  17.46.  gave  carcases  of  Philistines  to  wildb. 
Psal.  50.  11.  and  the  wild  A.  of  the  field  are  mine 
Isa.  13.  21.  but  wild  b.  of  the  desert  shall  lie  there 

22.  and  the  wild  A.  of  the  islands  shall  cry 

34.  14.  tho  wild  b.  of  the  desert  shall  also  meet 

with  wild  A.  of  the  island,  Jer.  50.  39. 

Mark  1. 13.  Christ  was  there  with  the  wild  A.  and 

Jlcts  10. 12.  sheet,  wherein  were  all  wild  A.  11.  6. 

BEAT 

Signifies,  [1]  To  smite,  or  strike,  Deut.  25. 3.  Mat. 

21.  35.     p]   To  bruise,  or  bray,  Exod.  30.  36. 

Num.  11.  8.     [3]  To  batter,  or  demolish,  Judg 

8.  17.  2  Kings  3.  25.     [4]  To  get  the  better  of, 

or  overcome,  2  Kings  13.  25.     [5]   To  thresh, 

Ruth  2. 17.  Isa.  28. 27.     [6]  To  turn,  or  convert 

one  thing  into  another,  Isa.  2.  4.  Joel  3.  10. 

Exod.  .30. 36.  some  of  the  spices  shalt  A.  very  small 

39.  3.  they  did  A.  the  gold  into  thin  plates 

JVam.  11.8.  the  people  A.  the  manna  in  a  mortar 

Deut.^5.3.  lest  if  he  exceed  and  A.  him  above  these 

Judg.  8.  17.  he  A.  down  the  tower  of  Penuel 

9.  45.  Abimelech  A.  down  the  city,  and  sowed  it 

19. 22.  certain  sons  of  Belial  A.  at  the  door 
Ruth  2.  17.  she  A.  out  that  she  had  gleaned 

2  Sam.22.43.  then  did  I  A.  them  small,  Psal.  18.  42. 
2  Kings  3.  25.  the  Israelites  A.  down  the  cities 

13.  25.  three  times  did  Joash  A.  Ben-hadad 

23. 12.  the  altars  did  the  king  A.  down,  and  brake 
Psal.  52.  t  5.  God  shall  likewise  A.  thee  down 

89.23.  I  will  A.  down  his  foes  before  his  face 
Prov.  23.  14.  thou  shalt  A.  him  with  the  rod  and 
/«a.2.4.  A.  their  swords  into  plow-shares,  Mic.  4. 3. 

3.  15.  what  mean  ye,  that  ye  A.  my  people 
27.  12.  the  Lord  shall  A.  off  from  the  channel 

41.  15.  thresh  the  mountains,  A.  them  small 
Joel  3. 10.  A. your  plow-shares  into  swords,  and  your 
Jonah  4.  8.  the  sun  A.  on  the  head  of  Jonah 
Mic.  4.  13.  thou  shalt  A.  in  pieces  many  people 
Mat.  7.25.  and  A.  on  that  house,  27.  Luke  6.  48,  49. 

21.  35.  the  husbandman  took  his  servants,  and  A. 

one,  Mark  12.  3.  Luke  20.  10,  11. 

^/ar4'4.  37.  waves  A.  into  the  ship,  it  was  now  full 

Luke  12.  45.  and  shall  begin  to  A.  the  men-servants 

./lets  16.22.  the  magistrates  commanded  to  A.  them 

18.  17.  ihe  Greeks  took  Sosthenes  and  A.  him 

22.  19.  I  imprisoned  and  A.  in  every  synagogue 
27.  1 14.  there  A.  a  wind  called  Euroclydon 

BEATEN. 
Exod.  5.  14.  the  officers  of  Israel  were  A.  16. 

25.  18.  cherub,  of  A.  work,  37.  17,  22.  JVum.  8.  4. 

37.  7.  made  two  cherubims  A.  out  of  one  piece 
T^ev.  2.  14.  shalt  offer  corn  A.  out  of  full  ears 
Deut.  2.5.  2.  if  the  wicked  man  be  worthy  to  be  A. 
.rosh.S.15.  all  Israf*!  made  a.s  if  were  A.  before  them 
2  oam.2.17.and  .Abner  was  A.  and  the  men  of  Israel 
2  Chron.  15.  t  6.  nation  was  A.  in  pieces  of  nation 

34. 7.  when  be  bad  A.  graven  images  to  powder 


BEA 

Job  4.  t  20.  they  are  A.  in  pieces  from  morniog 
I'roo.  10.  t  8.  but  a  pratuig  fool  shall  he  b. 
23.  35.  they  have  A.  me,  and  I  felt  it  not 
Isa.  28.  27.  fitches  arc  b.  out  witli  a  statf 

30.  31.  thro'  voice  of  Lord  the  Assyrian  shall  be  6 
Jer.  46.  5.  and  their  mighty  ones  are  A.  down 
Mic.  1.  7.  the  graven  images  shall  be  A.  to  pieces 
Mark  13.  9.  in  tlie  synagogue  ye  shall  be  A. 
Luke  12.  47.  serv.  who  knew  and  did  not  shall  be  A. 
Jlctsa.iO.wheu  they  called  the  apostles  and  A.  them 

16.  37.  they  have  A.  us  openly  uncondenmed 
2  Cor.  11.25.  thrice  was  I  A.  with  rods,  once  stoned 

BEATEN  Gold. 

JVum.6.4.thiswork  of  the  candlestick  was  ofb.gold 

IKings  10.16.  made  two  hundred  targets  of  b. gold 

17.n)ade  three  hund. shields  of  A.  o'oW,2  CAr.y.]6 

2  C'Aro.9.15.  six  hundred  shekels  A.  gold  to  a  target 

BEATEN  Oil. 
Exod.  27.  20.  pure  oil  A.  for  the  light.  Lev.  24.  2. 
29.  40.  fourth  part  of  a  hin  of  A.  oil,  jVu/n.  28.  5. 

BEATEST. 
Deut.  24.  20.  when  thou  A.  thy  olive  tree,  shalt  not 
Prou.  23. 13.  for  if  thou  A.  him  with  rod,  shall  not 

BEATETH. 

1  Cor.  9.  26.  so  fight  I,  not  as  one  that  A.  the  {lir 

BEATING. 

1  Sam.  14. 16.  they  went  on  A.  down  one  another 
Mark  12.5.  many  others,  A.  some,  and  killing  soma 

BEAUTY 

Signifies,  [1]  Comcliness,orha7idsomeness,"  Sum. 
14.25  [)i]  .^  chief  person,  or  city, 2Sa.m.  1.19. 
Isa.  13. 19.  Lam.  2.  1.  [3]  Splendor,  glory,  or 
dignity.  Lam.  1.  6.  Zech.  11.  7.  [4]  Joy  and 
gladness, Isa.  fil.  3.  [5]  The  excellent  order  of  a 
government,  the  prosperity,  riches,  and  peace  * 
of  a  country,  together  with  the  holiness,  pu- 
rity, and  truth  of  their  religion,  which  were 
their  ornament  and  glory,  Ezek.  16.  14. 

£iod.28.2.holy  garment  for  Aaron, for  glory  and  A. 

2  .Sam.  1.  19.  the  A.  of  Israel  is  slain  on  high  places 
14.  25.  none  so  much  praised  as  Absalom  for  A. 

IC'hro.  16.29.  worship  the  Lord  in  the  A.  of  holiness 
Psal.  29.  2.  I  96.  9. 

2  Chro.  20.  21.  that  should  praise  the  A.  of  holinesa 

F.sth.  1.  11.  to  shew  the  people  and  princes  her  A. 

.fob  40.  10.  and  array  thy^felf  with  glory  and  A. 

Psal.  27.4.  to  behold  the  A.  of  the  Lord,and  inquire 
39.  11.  thou  makest  his  A.  to  consume  away 
45.  H.  so  shall  the  king  greatly  desire  thy  A. 
49.  14.  their  A.  shall  consume  in  the  grave 
50. 2.  out  of  Zion  the  perfection  of  6.  Godshined 
90. 17.  let  the  A.  of  the  Lord  our  God  be  on  ua 
96.  6.  strength  and  A.  are  in  his  sanctuary 

Prov.  6.  25.  lust  not  after  her  A.  in  thy  heart 
20.  29.  the  A.  of  old  men  is  the  gray  head 

31.  30.  favour  is  deceitful,  and  A.  is  vain 
Isa.  3.  24.  there  shall  be  burning  instead  of  A. 
Isa.  4.  t2.  branch  of  the  Lord  shall  be  A.  and  glory 

13. 19.  Babylon  the  A.  of  the  Chaldees'  excellency 
28.  1.  whose  glorious  A.  is  a  fading  flower,  4. 

5.  the  Lord  will  be  for  a  diadem  of  A.  to  residue 
33.  17.  thine  eyes  shall  see  the  King  in  his  A. 
44.  13.  hemalielh  it  according  to  the  A.  of  a  man 
.53.  2.  there  is  no  A.  that  we  should  desire  him 
61.  3.  to  give  to  them  that  mourn  A.  for  ashes 
Lam.  1.  6.  from  Zion  all  her  A.  is  departed 
2.  1.  and  cast  down  from  heaven  the  A.  of  Israel 

15.  is  this  Ihe  city  men  call  the  perfection  of  A.  ? 
Ezek.  7.  20.  as  for  the  A.  of  his  ornament  he  set  it 
16. 14.  thy  renown  went  among  the  heathen  for  A. 

15.  but  thou  didst  trust  in  thine  own  A. 

2.5.  thou  hast  made  thy  A.  to  be  abhorred 
27.  3.  thou  hast  said  I  am  of  perfect  A.  28.  12. 

4.  thy  builders  have  perfected  thy  A.  11. 
28. 7. shall  draw  swords  against  the  A.of  Ihywisdom 

17.  thine  heart  w.is  lifted  up  because  of  thy  A. 

31.  8.  no  tree  was  like  the  Assyrian  in  his  A. 

32.  19.  Egypt,  whom  dost  thou  pass  in  A.  ? 
Hos.  10.  1 11.  I  passed  over  on  the  A.  of  her  neck 

14.6.  Israel's  A.  shall  be  as  the  olive-tree,  his  smell 
Zech.  9.  17.  how  great  is  his  goodness  and  his  A. 
11.  7.  I  took  two  staves,  one  1  called  A.  10. 

BEAUTIES. 
Psal.lW.3.  in  the  h.  of  holiness,  from  the  womb  of 

BEAUTIFY. 
Ezra  7.27.put  in  the  king's  heart  to  A.  Lord's  houso 
Psal.  149.  4.  he  will  A.  the  meek  with  salvation 
Isa.  60.  13.  to  A.  the  plitce  of  my  sanctuary 

BEAUTIFUL. 
Oen.  29.  17.  Rachel  was  A.  and  well-favoured 
Deut.  21. 11.  seest  among  the  captives  a  A.  woman 

1  Sam.  16.  12.  David  was  of  a  A.  countenance 
25.  3.  Abi?ail  was  of  a  A.  countenance 

2  .S;n;«.  11.  2.  Bath-sheba  was  very  A.  to  look  upon 
14.  t  25.  in  Israel  was  not  a  A.  man  as  Absalom 

Esth.'i.'!.  Esther  was  fair  and  A.  Mordecai  tookfor 
Psal.  48.  2.  A.  for  situation  is  mount  Ziim 
Reel.  3.  11.  hath  made  every  thing  A.  in  his  time 
Cant.  6.  4.  thou  art  A.  O  my  love,  as  Tirzah 
7.  I.  how  A.  are  thy  feet  with  shoes,  O  princes 


BED 

Isa.  i.  2.  in  that  day  shall  the  branch  of  Loid  be  b 

52.  1.  O  Zion,  put  on  thy  0.  garments 
7.  how  b.  the  Ifel  oi'thtni  thai  bring,  Rom.Ui.l5. 

64.  11.  our  holy  and  b.  house  is  burnt  up 
Jer.  IJ.  tiO.  where  is  the  flock,  tiiy  b.  flock  1 

48.  17.  how  is  tJie  stafl' broken,  and  the  b.  rod 

Kiek.  10.  1-.  1  put  a  b.  crown  ujion  thine  head 

13.  thou  wast  exceeding  b.  and  liidsl  prosper 

2J.  4^.  the  Sabeans  put  6. crowns  on  tlieir  heads 
Mat.  '2'J.  iil.  wbited  sepulchres,  w  inch  appear  b. 
jicts  3.  i.  at  the  gate  of  tlie  temple  called  b.  iO. 

BECAME. 
Gert.2.7.  the  brcathol  lite,  and  man  b.  a  living  soul 

IH.-Jti.  Lot's  wile  looked  back  and  b.  ajiillar  ul  salt 

4U.  15.  issachar  b.  a  servant  to  tribute 
KzoU.  4.  a.  it  b.  a  serpent  |{  4.  b.  a  rod  in  his  hand 

3(i.  I'i.  he  coujiled  it,  so  it  b.  one  tabernacle 
1  Sam.  2o.  37.  Nabal's  heart  died,  he  b.  as  a  stone 
1  Kinirs  I'i.  JO.  and  this  thing  b.  a  sm,  13.  34. 
Uan.'-i.'ii.  the  stone  b.  a  great  mountain,  and  tilled 
1  Cvr.  U.  '20.  to  the  Jews  1  A.  a  Jew, to  gain  the  Jews 
Hcb.  7.  !i(i.  such  a  High  Priest  b.  us,  who  is  holy 

lU.  33.  whilst  ye  b.  coni|ianioiis  of  them  so  used 

Jiev.  lU.  3.  the  sea  b.  as  tlie  blood  of  a  dead  man 

BECAMKST. 

1  Otron.  17.  22.  and  thou,  Lord,  b.  their  God 
£zek.  16.  b.  1  sware  unto  thee,  and  thou  b.  mine 

BECAUSE. 
Gen.  3.  f  1-  *•  God  hath  said,  ye  shall  not  eat 
14.  said  to  the  serpent,  4.  thou  hast  done  this 
Z,cv.  2l5. 43.  b.  even  b.  they  despised  my  judgments 
Jjeut.  7.  t  12.  b.  ye  hearken  to  these  judgments 

2  Ham.  12.  6.  *.  he  did  this,  b.  he  had  no  pity 
Prov.  1.  2^.  4.  I  have  called,  and  ye  refused 
Isa.  7.  t9.  do  ye  not  believe,  b.  ye  are  not  stable 
£iek.  13.  10.  b.  even  b.  they  seduced  my  people 

36. 1 3.  b.  for  b.  they  have  made  you  desolate 
Mat.  26.  31.  all  ye  shall  be  otfended  b.  of  me 
Mark  9.41.  give  you  water,  b.  ye  belong  to  Christ 
John  6. 26.  ye  seek  me,  not  b.  ye  saw  the  miracles, 
but  b.  ye  did  eat  of  the  loaves,  and  were  filled 
8.  43.  even  b.  ye  cannot  hear  ray  word 
lU.  13.  the  hireling  Ueetli,  b.  he  is  a  hireling 
14.  ID.  but  ye  see  me,  b.  1  live,  ye  shall  live  also 
f^om.  8.  10.  the  tipirit  is  life  b.  of  righteousness 

1 11.  tjuicken  your  mortal  bodies  i.  of  his  Spirit 
Eph.  5.  0.  b.  of  these  coineth  the  wrath  of  God 
UibA.  t2.  not  profit,  6.  not  united  by  faith  to  them 
6. 13.  b.  he  could  sware  by  nogrealer,  he  sware  by 
1  Jukn  3.  14.  from  deaib  to  lili',  b.  we  love  brethren 

4.  19.  we  love  him  b.  ho  fust  loved  us 

BECKUNEU. 
I.uke  1.  22.  Zecliarias  b.  and  remained  speechless 

5.  7.  they  b.  to  their  jiartners  in  the  other  ship 
John  Vi.  24.  Peter  b.  to  him  that  he  should  ask 
^cls  I'J.  33.  Alexander  4. with  his  hand,  and  would 

21.  40  Paul  stood  on  stairs,  and  b.  with  the  hand 
24  10.  Paul,  after  the  governor  had  b.  answered 

BfiiCKONlNG. 
Acts  12.  17.  Peter  b.  unto  them  with  the  hand 
13.  16.  Paul  stood  up,  and  h.  with  his  hand,  said 

BECOME. 
Oen.  3.22.  man  isi.as  oneof  n3,to  know  good  and 
17.  t  16.  I  will  bless  her,  and  she  shall  b.  nations 

37.  20.  we  will  see  what  will  b.  of  his  dreams 

38.  t  — i.  let  her  take  it,  lest  we  b.  a  contempt 
Ezod.  15.  2.  the  Lord  is  my  strength,  and  is  b.  my 

salvation,  I'sal.  \\S.  14.  Isa.  12.  2. 

32. 1.  for  as  for  this  Moses  that  brought  us  up,  we 

wot  not  what  is  b.  of  him,  23.  ..^cls  7.  40. 

Jleut.  27. 9.  O  Israel,  tliou  art  6.  the  people  of  God 

1  .Sam.  2S.  16.  seeing  the  JjOrd  is  b.  thine  enemy 
Jonah  4.  5.  he  might  see  what  would  b.  of  the  city 
Mat.  21.  42.  the  same  is  A.  the  head  of '.he  corner, 

Mark  12.  10.   J^uke  20.  17.   .ids  4.  11. 
John  1.  12.  he  gave  power  to  b.  the  sons  of  (Jod 

2  Cor.  5.  17.  in  Christ,  heboid,  all  things  are  b.  new 
Jiev.  11.  15.  are  b.  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord 

BECOMETH. 
P.ial.  93.  5.  holiness  b.  thy  house,  O  Lord,  for  over 
/'ro«.10.4.hcA.poorthatdealeth  with  a  slack  han<l 
17.  7.  excellent  s|K'Cch  b.  not  a  fool,  much  less  do 

18.  a  man  void  of  nndurslnnding  b.  surely 

F.rcl.  4.  14.  he  that  is  born  in  his  kincdom  b.  poor 

Mat.  3.  15.  Iliiis  it  /).  US  to  fulfil  all  righteiniHiiess 

13.  22.  the  di'ceilfulness  of  riclies  choaketh  the 

word,  and  ho  b.  unfniitfiil.  Murk  4.  19. 

32.groatnal  among  horilM,and  b.a  tree, jViirA  4.32. 

iioin. lK.2.that  ye  receive  Phnbeoiir  sis.  as  i.sainti 

/r;iA.5.3.covelou«n.  nut  lio  once  named,  a»4.  saints 

Phil.  1.27.  let  your  convcrtalion  bens  b.  the  gospel 

1  Tim.  2.  10.  08  b.  women  profi-ssing  godliness 

7"(t.2.3.  aged  women  In"  in  hcliaviour  as  4.  holiness 

BED 
Signifies,  [1]  That  vhcrron  prrgon.i  flrrp  in  thr 
night,  I  Ham.  19.  13.  [2]  .i  courh  to  rrst  on 
in  thr  day,  2  Sam.  4.  ."i.  (3)  fain,  lormnil,  or 
tri4u<a(i«7i,  Rev.  2.  22.  [4]  Thr  prnrr,rrhirh 
is  as  a  shrping  house  for  the  riirhtroiis,  Iiia.  .'>7. 
2.  [5]  The  lawful  xue  of  wedlock,  Ueb.  13.  4. 
SB 


BEE 

On  my  bed.  Cant.  3.  X.  while  I  jcas  tn  a  secure 
or  slothful  frame. 

Our  bed  is  green.  Cant.  1.  16.  The  ordinances 
and  means  of  grace,  where  I  enjoy  sweet  fiUoic- 
ship  and  cootmunion  with  thee,  are  not  only 
pleasant  and  delightful,  but  also  fruitful;  and, 
by  the  fipirit's  accompanying  them,  they  arc 
made  effectual  for  the  converting  of  many. 

Gtn.  47.  31.  bowed  himself  on  the  4. 1  Kings  1.47. 
49.  4.  wentest  up  to  thy  father's  4. 1  Chron.  5.  1. 

F.zod.  21.  18.  and  he  die  not,  but  Jteepetti  his  b. 

Lee.  15. 4.  every  4.  whereon  he  lieth  is  unclean,  24. 

1  Aa/rt.  19.13.  Michal  took  an  image  and  laid  it  in  b. 

2  Ham.  3.  t31.  king  David  himself  followed  the  4. 
4.  5.  Ish-bosheth  who  lay  on  a  4.  at  noon 
11.2.  in  an  evening-tide  David  arose  from  his  4. 

2  Kings  1.4.  shall  not  come  down  from  that  4.6.16. 

4.  10.  let  us  set  there  for  him  a  4.  and  a  table 
Job  7. 13.  when  I  say,  my  4.  shall  comfort  me 

17.  13.  I  have  made  my  4.  in  the  darkness 

33.  15.  God  speaketh  in  sluiuberings  ujion  the  4. 
P«ai.4.4.comniune  with  your  own  heart  on  your  4. 

36.  4.  he  deviseth  mischief  on  his  4. 

41.  3.  thou  wilt  make  all  his  4.  in  his  sickness 

63.  6.  when  I  remember  thee  upon  my  4.  and 
Psal.  132.  3.  nor  go  up  into  my  4.  till  1  find  a  place 

139.  8.  if  I  make  my  4.  in  hell,  thou  art  there 
Prov.  7. 16. 1  have  decked  my  4.  with  tapestry,  17. 

22.27.  why  should  he  take  thy  4.  from  under  thee  1 

26.  14.  on  hinges,  so  doth  the  slothful  on  his  4. 
Cant.  1.  16.  fair,  yea  pleasant,  also  our  4.  is  green 

3.1.  by  night  on  my  4. 1  sought  him  whom  my  soul 

7.  behold,  his  4.  which  is  Solomon's,  valiantmen 

t '.'.Solomon  made  himself  a  4.  wood  of  Lebanon 

/«(i.28.  20.  the  ft.  is  shorter  than  a  man  can  stretch 

57.  7.  on  a  lofty  mountain  hast  thou  set  thy  4. 
Jimos  3.  12.  Israel  taken  out  in  the  corner  of  a  4 
Mat.  9.  6.  Jesus  saith,  take  up  thv  4.  and  walk, 
Mark  2.  9,  11.  John  5.  11,  It! 
Mark  4.21. a  candle  to  be  put  under  a  4.  J-ukc8.1lj 
Luke  11.  7.  my  children  are  with  me  in  ft.  I  cannot 

17.  34.  two  men  in  one  4.  one  taken,  the  other  left 
Rev.  2.  22.  behold  I  will  cast  her  into  a  ft. 

BED  of  love. 
Ezek.^.  17.  Babylonians  came  to  herin  the  4.  of  I. 

BED  of  spices. 
0!H<.5.13.his  cheeks  are  as  a  b. of  spices, us  flowers 

6.  2.  my  beloved  is  gone  down  to  the  ft.  of  spices 

BED  unde filed. 
//eft. 13.4. marriage  is  honorable  and  the  ft.uniif/iZcri 

BED-CHAMBER. 
F.xod.  8.  3.  frogs  come  into  thy  b.-c.  and  on  thy  bed 
2  Sam.4.7.Ish-bo.>ihelh  lay  in  hisft.-c.  theyslew  him 
2A7n^Ai-6.12.telleth  the  words  thouspea'kestin  b.-c. 

11.2.  hid  him  and  nurse  in  the4.-c.  2  C/ircn.  22. 11. 
Eccl.  10.  20.  and  curse  not  the  rich  in  thy  b.-c. 

BEDS. 
Psal.  149.  5.  let  the  saints  sing  aloud  on  their  b. 
/.•,vt.57.2.  they  shall  rest  in  their4.each  one  walking 
Hos.7.14.  not  cried  when  they  howled  upon  their  4. 
.?/«o,'!6.4.  lie  on  A.  of  ivory,  and  stretch  themselves 
Jilic.  2.  1.  woe  to  them  that  work  evil  on  their  4. 
Mark  7.  f  4.  washing  of  cups,  and  4.  brazen  vessels 

BEDSTEAD. 
Deut.'i.  11.  king  of  Bashan,  his  4.  was  a  4.  of  iron 

BEE,  BEES. 
Dent.  1.44.  the  Amorites  chased  yon  as  ft.  in  Soir 
Judg.  14.  8.  a  swarm  of  ft.  in  the  carcase  of  the  lion 
Psal.  118.  12.  they  compassed  me  about  like  4. 
fsa.  7. 18.  the  Lord  shall  hiss  for  the  4.  in  Assyria 
BEEN. 

1  ."^am.  10.  t  27.  Saul  was  as  tliough  he  had  A.  deaf 

2  Snm.  1.  26.  very  pleasant  hast  thuu  4.  to  me 
12.  H.  if  that  had  4.  too  little,  I  would  have  given 

.fob  3.  13. 1  should  have  sh'pt,  then  had  I  4.  at  rest 
r.<i«/.27.9.  thou  hast  4. my  help,  leave  me  not,  63. 7. 

94.  17.  unlese  the  L.  had  4.  my  help,  my  soul  had 
f.ta.  18.  18.  then  had  thy  peace  4.  as  a  river 

49.21. 1  was  left  alone;  these,  whore  had  they  4.  ? 
Mai.  23.30.  if  we  had  A.  in  the  days  of  our  fathers 

28.  t2.  bi'hold,  there  had  A.  a  great  earthquake 
/,)//«■  24. 21.  but  vN'c  trusted  that  it  had  4.  he  which 
.lets  4. 13.  look  knowledge  ihey  had  A.  with  Jesus 
Worn.  9.29. we  had  4.  as  Sodom,  and.like  Gomorrah 
1  7Ym.5. 9.  n  widow,  having  A.  the  wife  of  one  man 
27Vm.  3.t  10.  thou  hast  A.  a  (lili!.'i'nt  follower  of  my 
i  Pel.  2.21.  it  had  A.  t«<iler  not  to  have  known  tlie 
1  .fohni.  19.  if  thev  had  A.  of  iis,  no  doubt  they 

Hath  BRR.N. 
nrn.  31.  5.  the  God  of  my  father  hath  A.  with  me 
Drill.  2.  7.  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  A.  wirli  Ihi'c 

1  Sam.  14.  38.  sen  wherein  this  sin  hath  A.  this  day 

2  Chron.  15.  3.  lernel  halh  A.  willioul  the  true  Gi>d 
P.ccl.  3.  15.  that  which  hath  A.  is  now,  and  that 

which  is  to  \w  hath  already  A. 
fsa.  28.  t  10.  for  precept  hath  A.  upon  precept 
./<T.  2-2. 21.  this  A«MA.  thy  manner  from  thy  vouth 
.Tori  1.  '2.  hnlh  this  A.  in  vonr  days  or  vour  tallieri? 
.lohn  II.  39.  f.ir  h"  hnlh  A.  dead  four  days 
Horn.  11.  34.  or  who  halh  b.  Iiji  couniulior? 


BEP 

Have  BEEN. 
1  .Sam.4.9.  not  servants  to  Hebrews  as  the/ iaM 
1  Chr.  17.8./iafe4.with  thee  whither  thou  walked*" 
Ezra  9.  7.  since  the  days  of  our  fathers  have  we  b 
Job  10. 19.  I  should  have  ft.  as  if  1  had  not  4. 
Psal.  25.  6.  thy  tender  mercies  have  4.  ever  of  old 
37.25.Aai'c  4.young,and  now  old,yet  have  notseeii 
42.  3.  my  tears  have  4.  my  meat  day  and  night 
7«u.l.9.siiouldAafc4.asSodom,/jact4.asGouiorrab 
26.  17.  so  have  we  ft.  in  thy  sight,  O  Lord 

18.  have  A.  with  child,  Aace  4.  in  pain,  asitwerA 
66.  2.  all  those  things  have  4.  saith  the  Lord 
Jer.  2.  31.  have  1  4.  a  wilderness  to  Israeli 
28.  8.  the  prophets  that  Itave  4.  before  me 
Hos.  5.  2.  though  1  have  4.  a  rebuker  of  thejn  al 
Mai.  2.  9.  but  have  4.  partial  in  the  law 
Mark  8.  2.  they  have  A.  with  me  three  days 
Luke  1.  70.  which  have  4.  since  the  world  began 
John  14.  9.  have  I  4.  so  long  time  with  you? 

15.  27.  because  ye  have  4.  w  ith  me  from  the  begin. 
Acts  20. 18.  after  what  manner  1  have  4.  with  you 
2  Cur.  11.  25.  a  night  and  day  have  1  4.  in  the  deep 
Gal.  3. 21.  righteousness  should  have  ft.  by  the  law 

JV<,t  BEEN. 
£j'od.9.18.  to  rain  hail  such  as  hath  not  ft.io  Egypt 
1  Kings  3. 1 13.  not  4.  among  the  kings  like  thee 

14.  8.  yet  hast  not  4.  as  my  servant  David 
Job  3. 16.  as  a  hidden  untimely  birth  I  had  not  b 
10.  19.  I  should  have  been  as  Iho'  1  had  not  4. 
Psal.  124. 1.  if  it  had  not  4.  the  Lord  on  our  side,  2. 
F.ccl.  4.  3.  better  than  both  is  he  that  hath  not  b. 
Obad.  10.  they  shall  be,  as  though  they  had  not  b 
Mat.  26.  24.  good  for  that  man  he  had  not  4.  born 
Luke  16.  II.  if  therefore  ye  have  not  4.  faithful,  12 

BEETLE. 
Lev.  11.  22.  these  of  them  ve  mav  eat,  the  b. 

BEEVES. 
Lev.  22. 19.  offer  at  your  own  will  of  the  ft.  of  sheep 

21.  whosoever  oft'ers  a  free-will-oft'ering  in  4. 
A'lim.  31.  28.  levy  a  tribute  to  the  Lord  of  the  b. 
3d.  the  Lord's  tribute  of  ft.  threescore  and  twelve 
BEFALL. 
Gen.  42.  4.  lest  peradventure  mischief  ft.  him 
38.  if  mischief  4.  him  by  the  way  then,  44.  29. 
49. 1.  that  I  may  tell  you  what  shall  4.  you  in  the 
last  days,  Veut.  31.  29.  JJan.  10.  14. 
Drut.  31. 17.  many  evils  and  troubles  shall  4.  them 
Psal.  iil.  10.  there  shall  no  evil  4.  thee,  nor  (flag ue 
^ct4'20.  22.  not  knowing  things  that  sliall  ft.  me 

BEFALLEN. 
Lev.  10.  19.  and  such  things  have  A.  mo 
JV'«jn.20.14.thouknowest  all  travail  that  hath  4.  ut 
Oeut.  31.  21.  when  many  troubles  are  A.  them 
Judg.  6. 13.  if  Lord  be  with  us,  why  is  all  this  ft.usi 

1  .Sum.  30.  26.  he  thought  something  had  ft.  him 
Ksth.G.  13.  Hainan  told  every  thing  that  had  A.      ' 
.^/a«.8.33.and  w  hat  was  A. to  the  possessed  of  devils 

BEFALLETH. 
Eccl.  3.  19.  for  that  which  A.  the  sons  of  men,  b 
beasts,  even  one  thing  4.  them 
BEFELL. 

2  .^nm.  19.  7.  will  be  worse  than  all  that  4.  thee 
Mark  5.16.  told  how  it  4.to  him  that  was  possessed 
Jlcts  20. 19.  4.  me  bv  the  Ivins  in  wait  of  the  Jews 

BEFORE 
Signifies,  [1]  /n  sight  of,  Gen.  43. 14.    [2]  Rather 
than,  2  Sam.  6.  21.     [3]  Free  to  one's  view  and 
choice.  Gen.  20.  15.     [4]   At,  Rev.  3.  9.     [5] 
J\''ol  being  sent,  or  com  missioned  bv,  John  10. 8. 
[6]  FirsI,  [\]  In  order  of  time,  Isa".  43. 13.     [2] 
/,-.  order  of  place,  Josh.  8.  10.     Luke  22.  47. 
[3]  In  order  of  dignity,  John  1.  15,  27. 
Oen.  an.  15.  behold  my  land  is  4.  thee,  dwell  where 
24.  45.  4   I  had  done  speaking  in  my  heart 
31.  2.  his  countenance  was  not  toward  him  as  b. 
43.  14.  the  Lord  give  you  merry  ft.  the  man 
48.  20.  and  he  set  Kpliraini  4.  Manassch 
ExoU.  16.34.  Aaron  laid  it  up  ft.  the  testimony 
JVum.  6.  12.  hut  the  days  that  were  4.  shall  be  loft 
.fosh.  4.  18.  Jordan  flowed  over  his  banks  as  A. 

10.  14.  there  was  no  day  like  that  A.  it,  or  after  it 
.fudg.  3. 2.  at  least  such  as  6. knew  nothing  tliereof 

16.  2U.  said,  I  will  go  ns  A.  and  shake  myself 
2  .<runi.6.21.chosenieA.  thy  father,  and  A.  his  house 

10.  9.  Joab  saw  the  battle  was  against  him  4.  and 
behind,  1  Chron.  19.  JC 
22.  t25.  ncoordiiig  to  my  cleanness  A.  his  eyes 

1  Kings  13.  6.  the  king's  hand  became  ns  it  was  b 

2  ChioH.  13.  14.  th<-  battle  was  A.  and  heliind 
.33.  19.  Manassch  his  trespass  ft.  he  was  humbled 

.fob  3.  24.  for  my  sighing  comcth  ft.  I  fat 
10.  21.  A.  I  eo,  whi'nce  1  shall  nut  return 
42.  10.  Lord  gave  Job  twice  asinnch  as  he  had  i. 

I'sal.  31.  2>2.  1  am  cut  olTfrom  A.  thine  eyes 
39.  13.  spare  me  A.  I  go  hence  and  he  no  more 
80.9.  thou  preparcdsl  room  A.  it,  and  didst  rauseit 
119.67.  h.  I  was  afllicled  I  went  astray,  but  now 
i:^.  5.  thnii  hast  beset  me  behind  anil  A.  and  laid 

Feel.  7.  17.  why  shoiildesi  tliini  die  A.  thy  limKl 

Isa.  9.  12.  ?yiian«  b.  and  the  Pbiliilinot  behind 


BEG 

fsa.  17.  14  and  behold,  b.  the  morning  he  is  not 
43. 13.  b.  me  daj  Wiis,  I  am  he,  and  tliero  is  none 
65.  2-1.  that  b.  they  call  I  will  answer  and  hear 
JcT.  i.'i.  b.l  formed  thee  in  the  belly,  I  knew  thee 
Eiek.  44. 1'2.  they  ministered  to  them  b  their  jdols 
22.  tiiey  shall  take  a  widow  that  had  a  priest  b 
Hos.  7.  i.  their  own  doings,  tlicy  are  A.  my  face 
^inos  4.  3.  every  cow  at  that  wliieh  is  b.  her 
Mal.2.5.  he  feared  me,  and  was  afraid  b.  my  name 
4.  5. 1  will  send  Elijah  the  prophet  b.  the  comin^ 
^/oX.1.18.  i.lhey  came  together,she  was  with  child 
•i.  8.  knoweth  what  things  ye  need  b.  ye  ask 

8.  29.  art  thou  come  to  torment  us  4.  the  time  1 
24.  25.  behold,  I  have  told  you  b. 

JLuke  2. 2G.  not  see  death  b.  he  had  seen  the  Lord 
23.  12.  for  ft.  I  hey  were  at  enmity  between  thems. 

^oAn  6.()2.seo  the  Son  of  man  asce.  where  he  was  ft. 
7.  51.  doth  our  law  judge  any  man  ft.  it  hear  him  1 
13.  19.  now  I  tell  you  ft.  it  come,  14.  29. 

.W<:is  2.31. he  seeing  this  ft.spakoof  the  resurrection 
4  28.  to  do  thy  counsel  determined  A.  to  be  done 
10.  41.  but  to  witnesses  chosen  ft.  of  God  to  us 

C  Cor.  8.  10.  who  have  begun  ft.  not  only  to  do 

Oal.  5.  21.  of  which  I  tell  you  ft.  as  I  told  you 

Eph.  3.  t  3.  as  I  wrote  a  little  A. 

Phil. 3.13.  reaching  forth  tothose  things  thatare  A. 

Col.  1.  5.  whereof  ye  heard  A.  in  the  word  of  truth 

1  Thess.  2. 2.  but  even  after  that  we  had  suffered  A. 

3.  4.  when  we  were  with  you,  we  told  you  A. 

1 7'im.l.l3.  who  was  A.  a  blasphemer,  a  persecutor 

Heb.  7.  18.  disannulling  of  the  command,  going  A. 

10. 15.  for  after  that  he  had  said  A.  this  is  covenant 

2  Pet.  3. 2.  mindful  of  words  spoken  A.  by  prophets 

17.  seeing  ye  know  these  things  A.  beware  lest 
Reo.  3.  9.  make  them  to  worship  ft.  thy  feet 

4.  6.  were  four  beasts,  full  of  eyes  ft.  and  behind 

Come  BEFORE. 
Kzod.  22.  9.  both  parties  shall  come  A.  the  judge 
Psal.  100.2.  come  ft.  his  presence  with  thanksgiving 
Jl/i'c.  6.  G.  wherewithal  shall  I  come  A.  the  Lord  1 
2  Tim.  4.  21.  do  tliv  diligence  to  come  A.  winter 

^VaV'OliV,  tlic  people. 
Gcn.23. 12.  Abraham  bowed  b.thcpeople  of  the  land 
Ezod.  13.22.  nor  the  pillar  of  lire  Irom  A.  the  people 
17.  5.  the  Lord  said  to  Moses,  go  on  A.  the  people 
34.  10.  ft.  all  thy  people  I  will  do  marvels 
.Jos/i.8.1  O.Joshua  and  elders  went  b.t/icpeople  to  Ai 
lA'am.lS.  13.  ha  went  out,  and  came  in  ft.  the  people 
Mark  8.  0.  gave  disci|)les,di<l  set  them  A.  the  people 
J^ake  20.20.  not  take  hold  of  his  words,  b.the  people 
Rtv.  10.  11.  thou  mn.si  prophesy  A.  iminy  peoples 

BBFOKE  whom. 
Octi.24.40.  Lord  b.iehoni  I  walk  will  send  his  angel 
48.  15.  God  ft.  whom  my  fathers  did  walk 

1  Kings  17.  1.  Elijah  said  to  Ahab,  as  the  Lord 

God  of  Israel  liveth,  ft.  whom  I  stand,  18. 
15.  i  Kings  Z.  14.  |  5.  IC. 
F.?£A.6.13.Mordecai  b.whom  thou  hast  begun  to  fall 
Dan.l.S.b.  t/jAoHt  there  were  throe  of  thehrst  horns 

20.  and  A.  whom  three  fell,  even  of  that  horn 
.fcts  20.  2(i.  the  king,  A.  whom  also  I  speak  freely 
See  further,  All,  Auk,  Gou,  Him,  Lord,  Mk, 
Mount,  Stand,  Stood,   Thek,   The.m,  Us, 
Wknt,  You. 

BEFOREn.\ND. 
.Murk  13.  11.  take  no  thought  A.  what  to  speak 

2  Cor.  9.  5.  go  and  make  up  ft.  your  bounty 
1  7"/m.  5.  24.  some  men's  sins  iire  open  A. 

25.  the  good  works  of  some  are  manliest  A. 
1  Pet.  1.  11.  testified  A.  the  sutTerings  of  Christ 

BEFORETIME. 
Josh.  20.  5.  because  he  hated  him  not  A. 

1  Sam.  9.  9.  ft.  in  Israel,  when  a  man  went ;  he 

who  is  called  a  prophet  was  ft.  called  a  seer 

2  .'^am.  7.  10.  nor  afflict  them  any  more  as  A. 
2  Kings  13.  5.  Israel  dwelt  in  their  tents  as  ft. 
JVtA.  2.  1.  I  had  not  been  A.  sad  in  his  presence 
Isa.  41.  20.  who  hath  declared  A.  that  we  may  say 
.^cts  8.  9.  called  Simon  which  A.  used  sorcery 

BEGAN. 
Gen.  4.  26.  then  ft.  men  to  call  on  the  name  of  Lord 
JV«in.25.1.  the  people  A.  to  commit  whoredom  with 
.TiLdg.  20.31.  they  ft.  to  smite  Israel  as  at  other  times 

1  .Sam.  14. 1 35.  that  altar  he  ft.  to  bnild  to  the  Lord 

2  Kings  10.  32.  the  Lord  A.  to  cut  Israel  short 

2  Chron.  20.  22.  when  they  A.  to  sing,  the  Lord  set 
31  7.  in  the  third  month  they  ft.  to  lay  the  heaps 
34.  3.  while  yoimg,  Josiah  A.  to  seek  after  God 
Ezek.  9.  6.  then  they  A.  at  the  ancient  men 
Mat.i.Vi.Unm  that  time  Jesus  A.to  preach  and  say 
Mark  14.  t72.  he  A.  to  weep  when  he  thought 
J.xike  1.  70.  which  have  been  since  the  world  ft. 

14.30.  this  man  A.  to  build  and  was  not  able 
John  4.  .52.  en'piired  the  hour  when  ho  A.  to  amend 

9.  32.  since  the  world  A.  Acts  3.  21.  Rom.  10.  2.5. 
Jli-.ls  12. 1 1.  Hirod  ft.  to  ve.\  certain  of  the  church 

Tim.  1.  9.  in  Christ  before  the  world  ft.  Tit.  1.2. 
Wcft.2.3.salvation  at  fir.'^t  A.  to  be  spoken  by  theLd. 

BEGAT 

Prov.  23.  £S.  hearken  to  thy  fathoi  that  i.  thee 

29 


BEG    - 

Jcr.  16.  3.  concerning  their  fathers  that  b.  them 
Dan.  11.  6.  she  shall  be  given  up,  and  he  that  A.hcr 
Zcch.  13.  3.  his  father  and  mother  that  A.  him 
Jam.  1. 18.  of  his  own  will  A.  he  us  with  the  word 
XJohn  5. 1.  every  one  that  loveth  him  that  A.  lovetl 

BEGET. 
Gen.  17. 20.  twelve  princes  shall  he  ft.  I  will  make 
Deut.  4.  25.  when  thou  shall  ft.  children,  children's 
28.  41.  thou  shalt  ft.  sons,  but  shall  not  enjoy  them 
2  Kings  20.  18.  of  thy  sons  which  thou  shalt  A. 
shall  they  take  and  make  eunuchs,  /sa.  3'J.  7. 
Eccl.  0.  3.  if  a  man  A.  100  children,  and  live  many 
Jer.  29.  C.  take  wives,  and  A.  sons  and  daughters 
Ezek.  18.  10,  if  he  A.  a  son  that  is  a  robber 
14.  if  he  A.  a  son  that  seeth  all  his  father's  sins 
BEGETTEST. 
Gen.  48.  6.  issue  which  thou  ft.  shall  be  thine 
Isa.  45.  10.  that  saith  to  his  father,  what  ft.  thou  1 

BEGETTETH. 
Prov.  17.  21.  he  that  A.  a  fool,  doetli  it  to  his  sorrow 
23.  24.  he  that  A.  a  wise  child  shall  have  joy 
Eccl.  5. 14.  he  A.  a  son,  and  nothing  in  his  hand 

BEG. 
Psal.  109. 10.  let  his  children  be  vagabonds  and  A 
Pro«.20.4. therefore  shall  the  sluggard  A.  in  harvest 
Lake  10.  3.  I  cannot  dig,  to  A.  1  am  ashamed 

BEGGED. 
Mat.  27.  58.  and  A.  the  body  of  Jesus,  Luke  23.  52. 
John  y.  8.  is  not  this  he  that  sat  and  A. .' 

BEGGAR. 
1  Sam.  2.  8.  he  lifteth  the  ft.  from  the  dunghill 
Luke  10.  20.  and  there  was  a  A.  named  Lazarus 
22.  the  A.  died,  and  was  carried  by  the  angels 
BEGGARLY. 
Gal.  4.  9.  how  turn  ye  again  to'the  A.  elements 

BEGGING. 
Psal.  37.  2,5.  I  have  not  seen  his  seed  ft.  bread 
Mark  10.  40.  Bartimeus  sat  A.  Lake  18.  35. 

BEGIN. 
Gen.  11.  6.  this  they  A.  to  do,  and  now  nothing 
Deal.  2.  25.  this  day  I  A.  to  put  the  dread  of  you 
Josh.  3.  7.  this  day  will  I  A.  to  magnify  thee 

1  .Sam.  3.  12.  when  I  A.  I  will  also  make  an  end 
22.  15.  did  I  then  A.  to  enquire  of  God  for  him  ? 

JiTeh.  11.  17.  Mattaniah  to  A.  thanksgiving 
Jer.  25.  29.  I  ft.  to  bring  evil  on  the  city  called 
Eze/c.O.O.slay  old  and  young ,and  ft. at  my  sanctuary 
Hos.  8.  1 10.  they  shall  A.  a  little  for  the  burden 
Lake  3.  8.  and  A.  not  to  say  within  yourselves 

13.  20.  then  shall  ye  ft.  to  say,  we  have  eaten 

14.  29.  all  that  behold  it,  A.  to  mock  him 
21.  28.  when  these  things  A,  to  come  to  pass 

2  Cor.  3.  1.  do  we  A.  again  to  commend  ourselves? 
1  Pet.  4. 17.  the  time  is  come,  that  judgment  must 

A.  at  the  house  of  God,  and  if  it  first  A.  at  us 
BEGINNER. 
Heb.  12.  t  2.  Jesus  the  A.  and  tinisher  of  our  faith 

BEGINNING 
Signifies,  [1]  That  which  is  the  first,  E.vod.  12.  2. 
[2]  The  creation.  Gen.  1.  1.     [3]  At  the  fir^t, 
Prov.  20.  21.     Isa.  1.  2t3.     [4]   7'Au£  which  is 
chief,  or  most  excellent,  Prov.  1.  7.  |  9.  10. 

1  am  the  beginning  and  ending.  Rev.  1.  8.  /  am 
the  eternal  God,  and  gave  all  things  a  being 
and  beginning. 

Gen.  49.3.  Reuben,  thou  art  the  A.  of  my  strength 
F.jcod.  12.  2.  this  month  shall  be  the  A.  of  montlis 
Deal.  21. 17.  he  is  the  A.  of  his  strength,  the  right 
Jobs.  7.  tho'  thy  ft.  was  smull,  yet  thy  end  increase 

42.  12.  blessed  the  latter  end  of  Job  more  than  ft. 
Psal.  111.10.  fear  of  Lordft.  of  wisdom,  Prov.'J.W. 
Prov.  1.  7.  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  ft.  of  knowledge 

17. 14.  ft.  of  strife,  as  when  one  letteth  out  water 
Eccl.  7.  8.  better  is  the  end  of  a  thing  than  the  A. 

10. 13.  the  A.  of  words  of  his  mouth  is  foolishness 
Isa.  64.4.  since  A.  of  the  world,  men  have  not  heard 
Mic.  1. 13.  is  the  A.  of  sin  to  the  daughter  of  Zion 
Mat.24.8.  all  these  are  the  A.of  sorrows, Jl/ar/i:  13.8. 

21.  tribulation,  such  as  was  not  since  the  A. 
Mark  1.  1.  the  A.  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ 
John  2.  11.  this  ft.  of  miracles  did  Jesus  in  Cana 
Col.  1. 18.  who  is  the  ft.  the  tirst-horn  from  the  dead 
Heb.  3.  14.  if  we  hold  the  A.  of  our  confidence 

6.  1 1.  leaving  the  word  of  the  A.  of  Christ 

7.  3.  having  neither  A.  of  days,  nor  end  of  life 

2  Pet.  2.  20.  the  latter  end  is  worse  than  the  ft. 
Rev.  1.  8.  I  am  the  A.  and  the  ending,  21.  0.  |  22. 13. 

3.  14.  these  things  saith  the  A.  of  creation  of  God 

At  the  BEGINNING. 
WH<A3.10.more  kindness  at  latter  end, than  at  the  A. 
1  Chr.  17.9.  nor  child,  of  wickedness  wa!<te  as  at  A. 
Prov.  20. 21.  an  inheritance  gotten  hastily  at  the  A. 
Isa.1.26. 1  will  restore  thy  counsellors  as  at  the  A. 
Dan.  9.  23.  attheb.  of  thy  gupplica.  the  command. 
Mat.10.4.  which  made  them,  at  ft.  made  them  male 
.Tohn  16.  4.  these  things  I  said  not  to  you  at  the  ft. 
Acts  11. 15.  H.  Ghost  tell  on  them  as  on  us  at  <Ac  A. 

From  the  BEGINNING. 
Deut.  11. 12.  eyes  of  L.  are  mi  itfrom  the  A. of  year 

32.  42.  from  the  A.  of  revenges  on  tlio  enemy 


i3EH 

Psal.  119.160.  word  is  true  from  tho  b.  and  evMy 

Prov.  a.  23. 1  was  set  up /rum  A.  or  ever  earth  v»m 
Eccl.3.U.  no  man  can  find  work  G.maketh/ron;* 
Isa.  18.  2.  go  to  a  people  terrible /cujh  the  L  t 

40.  21.  hath  it  not  been  told  you  from  the  b  ? 

41.  26.  who  hath  declared //urn  the  A.  ? 

40. 10  declaring  the  end  frum  ft. and  ancient  timet 

48.  16.  1  have  not  spoken  in  secret /cwj/i  £Ae  A. 
.Ter.  17.  12.  a  glorious  high  thione J /ihh  the  b. 
Mat.  19.  8.  but /ror«  the  A.  it  was  not  so 
/ji(/>cl.2.unto  us,which/ro)H  ft. were  eye-witnesses 
JoA7(  6.04. Jesus  knew/ro7n  the  ft. who  believed  not 

8.  25.  Jesus  saith,  even  same  I  said  to  you  fromb. 
44.wasamurdcrer/7-omft.  and  abode  not  in  truth 

15.  27.  because  ye  have  been  with  mc  from  the  b 
Eph. 3.'J.  winch  fromb.  of  the  world  hath  been  hid 
2  7'Acs«.2.13.  God  hath/rom  ft.  chosen  you  to  salv. 
2  Pet.  3.  4.  all  continue  as  they  were  Jrinn  tke  b. 

1  .fohn  2.7. word  which  ye  have  heard /ram  A.  3.11. 

13.  because  ye  have  known  him  tliat  is  from  b. 
3.8.  is  of  the  devil, for  the  devil  sinneth/rum  theb. 
2./ohn  5.  but  that  which  we  had  from  the  b. 

In  the  BEGINNING. 
Gcn.l.l.in  tke  ft. God  created  the  heaven  and  earth 

2  .Sam.  20.  f  18.  they  plainly  spake  m  A.  ask  at  Abel 
Prov.  8.22.  the  L.  possessed  me  in  the  ft.  of  his  way 
.fohn  1. 1.  (ji  ft.  was  the  Word,Woid  was  with  God 

2.  the  same  was  in  the  A.  with  God 
P/iil.  4.  15.  ye  know  that  ill  the  ft.  of  the  gospel 
//fft.  1. 10.  thou  Lord  in  the  ft.  hast  laid  foundation 

BEGINNING. 
Mat.  14.  30.  ft.  to  sink  he  cried.  Lord,  save  me 
20.  8.  give  their  hire,  ft.  from  the  last  to  the  first 
JMke  24.  47.  among  all  nations,  A.  at  Jerusalem 
John  8.  9.  went  out,  ft.  at  the  eldest  even  to  the  last 
Acts  1. 22.  A.  from  the  baptism  of  John  to  that  day 

BEGINNINGS. 
JViim.  10. 10.  also  in  the  ft.  of  your  months,  28. 11. 
Ezek.  36.  11.  I  will  do  better  tlian  at  your  A. 

BEGINNEST. 
Deut.  16.  9.  time  thou  ft.  to  put  the  sickle  to  corn 

BEGOTTEN 
Is  taken,  [1]  Properly  and  naturally,  Judg.  8.  30. 
[2]  Supervatarally,  thus  Isaac  was  begotten 
of  the  dead  body  and  womb  of  Abraham  and 
Sarah,  Heb.  11. 17.  [3]  Spiritually,  thus  CArj>- 
tians  are  said  to  be  begotten  by  such  ministers 
as  were  instruments  of  their  conversion,  1  Cor. 
4.  15.     [4]  Eternally,  such  only  is  Christ  tha 
onlv  begotten  of  the  Father,  John  1.  14. 
J^Tum.  11.  12.  have  I  conceived,  have  I  A.  them  ? 
Deut.  23.  8.  the  children  A.  of  them  shall  enter 
.Judg.  8.  30.  Gideon  had  70  sons  of  his  body  A. 
./wft  38.  28.  or  who  hath  A.  the  drojis  of  dew  ? 
Psal.  2.  7.  thou  art  my  Son,  this  day  have  I  b, 
thee.  Acts  13.  33.  Heb.  1.  5.  |  5.  5. 
Isa.  49.  21.  thou  shalt  say,  who  hath  ft.  me  these? 
Jer.  2.  t27.  saying  to  a  stone,  thou  hast  A.  me 
Hos.  5.  7.  for  they  have  A.  strange  children 
John  1.  14.  the  glory  as  of  the  only  A.  of  the  Father 

18.  the  only  A.  Son,  he  hath  declared  him. 
3.  16.  God  so  loved,  that  ho  gave  his  only  A.  Son 
18.  not  believed  in  the  name  of  the  only  A.  Son 
1  Cor.  4.  15.  for  I  have  ft.  you  through  the  gospel 
Philem.  10.  Onesimus,whom  I  have  ft.  in  my  bonds 
Heb.Vi.Vl.  Abraham  by  faith  oflered  up  only  ft.son 
1  Pet.  1.  3.  who  bath  A.  us  again  to  a  lively  hope 

1  .John  4. 9.  sent  his  only  A.  Son,  that  we  might  live 
5.  1.  that  bcsat,  loveth  him  also  that  is  ft.  of  him 

18.  he  that'is  A.  <if  God  kcepeth  himself 
FIRST-BEGOTTEN. 
Heb.  1.6.  when  he  hringeth  m  jirsl-b.  into  world 
Rev.  1.5.  from  Jesus,  wlio  is  \heftrst-b.  of  the  dead 

BEGUILE. 
Col.  2.  4.  lest  any  man  A.  you  with  enlicing  words 
18.  let  no  man  ft.  vou  of  your  reward 
BEGUILED,  INC. 
Gen.  3.13.  woman  said,  serpent  ft.  me,  and  Idid  eat 
2't.  2.5.  wherefore  then  hast  thou  A.  me  ? 
jVum.2.5. 18.  they  have  A.  you  in  the  matter  of  Peor 
h.<<h.  9.  22.  saying,  wherefore  have  ye  ft.  us  ? 

2  Cor.  11.3.  but  {  fear  lest  as  the  serpent  ft.  Eve 
2  Pet.  2.14.  cannot  cense  from  sin,  ft.  unstable  souU 

BEGUN. 

J\rum.  16.  46.  the  plague  is  A.||47.  the  plague  was  6 
Deut.  3.  24.  thou  hast  ft.  to  shew  thy  greatness 
F.sth.  6.  13.  before  whom  thou  hast  ft.  to  fall 
9.  23.  the  Jews  undertook  to  do  as  they  had  b. 
Mat.  18.  24.  and  when  he  had  ft.  to  reckon 
2  Cor.  B.  6.  as  he  had  6.  so  he  would  also  finish 

10.  this  is  expedient  for  you  who  have  A.  before 
Gnl.  3.  3.  are  ye  so  foolish,  having  A.  in  the  Spirit 
Phil.  1.  6.  he  which  hath  A.  a  good  work  in  you 
ITim.  5.  11.  when  thev  have  A.  to  wax  wanton 

BEHALF. 
Krn(Z.27.21.  a  statute  on  ft.  of  the  children  oflsrad 
2  Sam..  3.  12.  Abner  sent  to  David  on  his  A. 
2  Citron.  16.  9.  shew  himself  strong  in  ft.  of  them 
Tob  36. 2.  shew  that  I  have  yet  to  speak  on  God's  A 
Dan.  11. 18.  but  a  prince  for  his  own  ft.  shall  causa 


BEH 

Pam.  16.  19. 1  am  glad  therefore  on  your  b. 

1  (.or.  1.  4.  I  thuiik  iiiy  GoJ  uhvuya  on  your  b. 

2  Cor.  1.11.  tiiuiiks  iiiiiy  be  given  by  muiiy  on  our  b. 
5.  \'2.  but  give  you  occasion  to  ylory  on  our  b. 

Phit.l.'H).  to  you  it  18  given  in  b.  ol'C'lirist,  not  only 
1  Pet.  4.  10.  let  him  glorify  God  on  this  b. 

BEHAVE. 
/)cu(.32.27.Ie8t  adversaries  A.thomselvcs  strangely 
1  Chron.  I'J.  13.  let  us  b.  ourselves  valiantly 
Job  41.  t  33.  who  b.  themselves  without  I'cur 
Psal.  101.  2.  I  will  b.  wisely  in  a  perl'ect  way 
/tfa.3.5.the  child  shall  b  himself  proudly  ag. ancient 
4-,'.  1 13.  the  Lord  will  b.  himself  mightily 
1  C^}r.  13.  5.  charity  doth  not  b.  itself  unseemly 
1 7'<m.3.15.how  thou  ou^'htcst  to  b.in  house  of  God 
BEll.WEU. 

1  Sam.  18.  5.  David  b.  himself  wisely,  14,  15,  30. 
Psal.  35.  14.  I  b.  as  though  he  hud  been  my  friend 

131.  2. 1  have  b.  myself  as  a  child  that  is  weaned 
Jlos.  12.  t  3.  Jacob  b.  himself  princely 
Mic.  3.  4.  as  they  have  b.  themselves  ill  in  doings 
ITkess.  2.  10.  liow  uiiblanieiibly  wc  b.  ourselves 

2  TAess.  3.7.  b.  not  ourselves  disorderly  among  you 

BEMAVETH. 
1  Cor.  7.  3G.  if  a  man  think  he  b.  uncomely  to  his 

BEIIAVIOUH. 
1  Sam.  21.  13.  David  changed  his  b.  bePore  them 

1  Tim.  3.  2.  a  bishop  musX  bu  sober,  of  good  b. 
7'U.  2.  3.  aged  women  in  b.  as  becometh  holiness 

BEHKADED. 
/)ffK^21.6.  elders  shall  wash  hands  over  heller  i. 

2  Sam.  4.  7.  they  smote  Ish-bosheth,  and  b.  him 
Mat.  14.  10.  b.  John,  Mark  U.  10,  27.  Luke  '.t.  9. 
Jiev.  20.  4.  1  saw  the  souls  of  ihein  that  were  b. 

BEHELD. 
JVum.21."J.  when  he  b.  the  serpent  of  brass, he  lived 

23.  21.  he  hath  not  b.  iiiii|uity  in  Jacob 
I  CAron.  21. 15.  as  he  was  destroying,  the  Lord  b. 
Job  31.  20.  if  1  b.  the  sun  when  it  shiiied,  or  moon 
P.fal.  110. 1.58.  I  b.  transgressors,  and  was  grieved 

142.  4.  I  b.  but  there  was  no  man  would  know  ine 
Proo.'.l.  and  i. among  the  simple  ones,  I  discerned 
Ecd.  8.  17.  then  I  b.  all  the  work  of  God 
Jaa.  41.  28.  I  b.  and  there  was  no  man,  Jer.  4.  25. 
Jer.  4.  23.  1  b.  the  eaxth,  and  it  was  without  form 
Mark  15.47. Mary .Magdaleiie,and  .Mary  the  mother 
of  Joses,  b.  where  he  was  laid,  Luke  23.  55. 
Ltt-ke  lO.H.Ii.  Satan  as  lightning  fall  from  heaven 

19.  41.  he  b.  the  city,  and  wept  over  it 
Juhn  1.  14.  and  we  b.  his  glory,  the  glory  as  of 
.Hcl.i  1.  9.  while  they  b.  Jesus  was  taken  up 

17.  it.  as  I  passed  by  and  b.  your  devotions 
Rev.  5.6. 1  b.  and  lo,  in  midst  of  the  throne  a  Lamb 

11.  12.  they  ascended,  and  their  enemies  b.  them 

BEHK.MOTH. 

Job  40. 13.  behold  now  h.  which  I  made  with  thee 

BEHIND 
Signifies,  [1]  BacAw«r(/.«,  Judg.  20.40.  [2]  .?/«cr, 
2  Sam.  3.  Hi.     [3]  lirmaiiiing,    Lev.  25.  51. 
[4]  Pa«t,  Phil.  3.  13.     [5]  Unexpected,  Isa.  30. 
21.     [G]  Disregarded,  Psal.  50.  17. 
Ezod.  10.  20.  there  shall  not  a  hoof  be  left  b. 
Lev.2.'i  !i\.  if  there  he  yet  many  years  i.  according 
JudiT.  M.  40.  the  Benjamites  looked  b.  them 
1  Sam.  30.  9.  where  those  that  were  left  b.  stayed 
2. Sam.  3.  10.  her  husband  went  weeping  b.  her 
1  Kings  14.9.  hast  cast  me  A.  thy  back,  F.zek.^l.Xi. 
Jfek.  4.  16.  the  rulers  were  b.  the  house  of  Judah 

9.26.  they  rebelled  and  cast  thy  law  b.  their  hacks 
Cant.  2.  9.  heboid,  he  standelh  b.  our  wall,  lookelli 
Isa.  38.  17.  thou  hast  east  all  my  sins  h.  thy  back 
Amos  7.  t  l.'>.  the  Lonl  took  me  from  h.  tin;  (lock 
Mark  5.  27.  she  came  in  the  press  b.  and  touched 
Jjuke'i.  43.  the  child  Jesus  tarried  b.  in  Jerusalem 

1  Oor.  1.7.  so  that  yo  como  b.  in  no  gift,  wailing  for 

2  Cor.  11. .'..  I  was  not  a  whit  b.  thechiefest,  12.  11. 
Phil.  3.  13.  forgetting  those  things  which  are  b. 
Col.  1.24.  till  up  what  is  A.  of  ntlliclions  of  Christ 
See  further,  Bi:FORK,HiM,Wii,TiiEii,TiiKM,Us. 

BKIIOLD 
BignificB,  [I]  .Idmiratiun,  Isa.  7.  14.    [2]  ./oy  nnd 
gladnrs.i,  >tal.  21.  5.     [3]  Obedience,  1  Sam. 
23.  t_12.     Isn.  0.  t  fi.     [4]  J].i.ievcration,  Gen. 
W.  15.     [5|  F.rhorlation  to  a  provident  care, 
John  19.  27.     [0]   Consideration,  or  nhsemti- 
tion,  Luke  24.  39.  John  1.29.    [7]  .Suddenne.i.i, 
or  unezprrlrdness,   Kuv.   10.    15.  |  22.  7.     [HI 
Certainty,  Mat.  23.  38.  Luke  1.  20. 
Gen.  28.  1.5.  A.  I  am  with  tliee,iinil  will  keep  thee 
31.  51.  b.  this  heap,  b.  Ihis  pillar  I  have  cast 
40.6.  Jo4i'|ili  looked  on  them,  and  b.  they  were  sad 
48.  I.  ».thy  father  is  sick  ||  21.  Israel  said,  b.  I  die 
F.iod.  3.  2.  and  b.  the  bush  hurmd  with  Ore 
JR.  4.  b.  I  will  raiii  bri'ail  from  heaven  for  you 
23.  20.  h.  I  send  an  angel  hi-fori'  thee  lo  keep  thee 
34.  8.  Mos('<i  said,  6.  the  lilooci  of  the  nnveniint 
Jfum.  20.  10.  b.  wp  ore  in  Kadesh  in  the  utmost 
1  .Slim..  12.  13.  A.  the  king  whom  ye  have  chosen 
9  Sam.  9.  0.  and  ho  answered,  A.  thy  servant 
IXtnrs  132.  A.  child  shall  be  born  tu  house  ofDav. 
90 


•      BEH 

2  Kings  13.  21.  that  A.  they  spied  a  band  of  men 
22. 10.  A.  1  will  bring  evil  upon  this  place  and  the 
inhabitants  thereof,  2  Chron.  34.  24. 
2  Chron.  20.  11.  A.  1  say,  how  they  reward  us 
Job  1.  12.  A.  all  that  he  lialh  is  in  thy  jiower 
•26.  2)i.  A.  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  that  is  wisdom 

33.  12.  A.  in  this  thou  art  not  just,  1  will  answer 
30.  5.  A.  God  is  mighty,  and  despiseth  not  any,  20. 
40.  4.  A.  1  am  vile,  what  shall  1  answer  thee  ! 

I'sal.  33. 18.  A.  eye  of  the  Lord  is  on  them  that  fear 
51.  .5.  A.  I  was  shapen  in  iniquity,  and  in  sin  did 
73. 12.  A.  these  are  the  ungodly  who  pros,  in  world 
78.  20.  A.  he  smote  the  rock,  the  waters  gushid 
139.  8.  if  1  make  my  bed  in  hell,  A.  thou  art  there 

Cant.  1.  15.  A.  thou  art  fair,  my  love,  A.  10.  |  4.  1. 

fsa.  7.  14.  A.  a  virgin  shall  conceive.  Mat.  1.  23. 
8.18.  A.  land  the  children  whom  the  Ld.  A/eA.2.13. 
22.  they  shall  look  to  the  earth,  and  A.  trouble 
12.  2.  A.  God  is  my  salvation,  1  will  trust,  and  not 
29.  8.  a  hungry  man  dreamelh,  and  A.  he  eatcth 

40.  9.  say  to  the  cities  of  Judah,  A.  your  God 

41.  27.  the  first  shall  say  to  Zion,  A.  A.  them 

42.  1.  A.  my  servant  whom  I  uphold,  mine  elect 

43.  19.  A.  1  will  do  a  new  thing,  it  shall  spring 
48.  7.  lest  thou  shouldest  say,  b.  I  knew  them 
(55. 1. 1  said,  A.  me,  A.  me,  to  a  nation  not  called  by 

Jf^.8. 15. we  looked  for  peace,  and  A.  trouble, 14. 19. 

20  14.  A.  I  am  in  your  bands, do  with  me  us  seems 
y-am.l.l2.A.and  see  if  any  sorrow  belike  mysorrow 
Kzck.  30.  9.  A.  I  am  for  you,  and  will  turn  to  you 
y.ech.  3.  8.  A.  I  will  bring  my  servant  the  Branch 

0.  12.  A.  the  man  whose  name  is  the  Branch 

9.  9.  A.  thy  King  cometh.  Mat.  21.  5.  Johri  12.  15. 
Mai.  3.  1.  A.  I  will  send  my  messenger,  and  he  shall 

prepare  the  way,  4.  5.  Mat.  11. 10.  Mark  1.2. 
Mat.  7.  4.  and  A.  a  beam  is  in  thine  own  eye 
24.  20.  A.  he  is  in  the  desert,  A.  he  is  in  the  secret 
Mark  10.0.  is  risen,  A. 'he  place  where  they  laid  him 
J^uke  21.  39.  A.  my  hands  and  my  feet,  tiuit  it  is  I 
49.  A.  I  send  the  promise  of  my  Father  upon  you 
John  1.29.  A.  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh,  30. 
47.  A.  an  Israelite  indeed,  in  whom  is  no  guile 

19.  5.  Pilate  saith  unto  them,  A.  the  man 
~1cts  9.  11.  Saul  of  Tarsus,  for  A.  he  prayeth 

2  Cur.  0.  9.  as  dying,  and  A.  we  live,  as  cliaslened 
1  .hhn  3.  1.  A.  what  manner  of  love  the  Father 
Rev.  3.  20.  A.  I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock 

10.  15.  A.  I  come  as  a  thief,  blessed  is  he  that 
22.7.  A.I  come  quicklyiblessed  is  he  lliat  keeps,12. 

BEIUJLD  it  !.<,•. 
Ge7i.  10.  14.  A.  it  is  between  Kadesh  and  Bered 

34.  21.  for  the  land,  A.  it  is  large  enough  for  them 
F.jod.  .32.  9.  and  A.  it  is  a  stift'-necked  i)eople 
.hsh.  9.  12.  but  now  A.  it  is  dry,  it  is  mouldy 
Judg.  18. 9.  1  have  seen  the  land,  A.  it  is  very  good 
/a'a.52.0.know  that  I  am  he  that  doth  speak,A.i7  r.*I 
F.zek.l.W.  b.  the  day,  A.  it  iscome,morningisgone 

39.  8.  A.  it  is  come,  and  it  is  done,  saith  the  Lord 

JV««i  BEIUJLD,  or  BEHOLD  now. 

1  Sam.  12.  2.  now  A.  the  king  walketh  before  you 

2  Kings  1M.21.JIUKJ  A. thou  Irustest  on  stafTof  Egypt 
.lob  10.  19.  also  now  A.  my  witness  is  in  heaven 
./cr.  40. 4.  noi/j  A.  I  loose  thee  this  day  from  chains 
Mat  26.  ()5.  now  A.  ye  have  heard  his  blasphemy 
Jlcts  13. 11.  now  A.  tlie  hand  of  the  Lord  is  on  thee 

20. 22.  now  A.  I  go  bound  in  the  Sjiirit  to  Jerusalem 
2  Cor.  (>.2.  b.now  is  the  accepted  time,  b.now  is  day 
Bkhold  it  teas,  I'kiioi.d  there  was,  see  Was. 
BEHOLD,  Ferb, 
Signifies,  [1]  To  look  on  a  thing  with  our  eyes, 
(len.  31.  51.     [2J  To  think  over  a  thing  in  our 
viinds,  Lam.  1.  12.  Horn.  11.22. 
jVi/m.  12.H.and  the  similitude  of  the  Lord  shall  ho  A. 
23.  9.  I  see  him,  and  from  the  hills  I  A.  him 
24.17.sep  liim,bul  not  now,shaiiA.hini,biit  not  nigh 
iJeut.  3. 27.  A.  it  with  thine  eyes,  thou  shall  not  go 
1  .Sam.  22.  t  12.  A.  mo,  Isa.  6.  f  8. 
.Job  19.  27.  mine  eyes  shall  A.  and  not  another 

20.  0.  nor  shall  his  place  any  mure  b.  him 

23.  9.  where  hu  doih  work,  but  I  cannot  A.  him 
34.  29.  when  he  liideth  his  face;  who  can  A.  ? 

36.  24.  that  thou  magnify  his  work,  which  men  A. 
Psal.  11.  4.  his  eyes  A.  his  eye-lids  try  the  children 

7.  his  pounlonanco  doth  A.  the  upright 
17.  2.  lot  thine  eyes  A.  the  things  that  are  equal 

1.5.  I  will  A.  Ihy  face  in  righteousness 
27.  4.  to  A.  thi'  benuiy  of  the  Lord  and  innuiro 

37.  ;rr.  mark  the  perfect  man,  A.  the  uprigiit 

40.  8.  come,  A.  Ihc  works  of  the  Lord 

.59.  4.  they  prepare,  awake  to  help  me,  and  b. 
till.  7.  he  rulelh  for  ever,  his  eyes  A.  the  nations 
80.  14.  look  down  from  heaven,  A.  nnd  visit 
91.  8.  only  with  thine  eyes  shall  thou  A.  and  see 
1112.  19.  Irom  heaven  did  the  Lord  A.  the  earth 
113.  0.  he  humbleth  himself  to  A.  the  things 
119.  18.  open  Ihou  mine  i*»ns,  that  I  may  A. 
Proi).  23.  ;13.  thine  eyes  shall  A.  strange  women 
F.ir.l.  11.7.  and  n  ple.-isniil  thing  it  is  to  h.  the  sun 
Isn.  20  10.  he  will  not  A.  the  majesty  of  the  Lord 
38.11  J  said,  I  shall  A. man  no  more  with  ihoinbab. 


BEL 

/.sa.41.23.do  good  or  evil  that  we  may  J. it  togethfli 
03.  15.  A.  from  the  habitation  of  Ihy  holineosi 

Jer.  20.  4.  and  thine  eyes  shall  A.  Ihy  terror 
2U.  .32.  nor  A.  the  good  I  will  do  for  my  people 
32.  4.  and  his  eyes  shall  A.  his  eyes,  34.  3. 
42.  2.  wc  are  letl  but  a  few,  as  thine  eyes  do  i.  ua 

J.am.  1.  18.  hear  all  people,  and  A.  my  sorrow 
3.  50.  till  the  Lord  look  down  and  A.  from  heavay 
5.  1.  O  Lord,  consider  and  A   our  reproach 

Ezck.  8.  9.  A.  the  wicked  abominations  they  do 
28.  17.  lay  thee  before  kings  that  they  may  A. 
18.  bring  thee  to  ashes  in  sight  of  all  that  A. 
40.  4.  son  of  man,  A.  with  thine  eyes,  44.  5. 

JJUH.  9.  18.  o|)en  thine  eyes,  and  A.  our  desolation 

Ohnd.  t  12.  do  not  A.  the  day  of  thy  brother 

jV/tc.7.9.  inc  to  light,  and  I  shall  A. his  righteousness 
10.  she  that  is  my  enemy,  mine  eyes  shall  A.  her 

Hub.  1.  3.  why  dost  thou  cause  me  tu  A.  grievance} 
13.  thou  art  of  purer  eyes  than  to  A.  evil,  canst 

Mat. IS.in.  their  angels  always  A. face  of  my  Father 

J.ukc  14.  29.  all  that  A.  it  begin  to  mock  him 
21.  6.  as  for  these  things  which  ye  b.  the  days  will 

./oAii  17.  24.  be  with  nie,  that  they  may  A.  my  glory 

.^cts  7.  31.  as  he  drew  near  to  A.  it,  the  voice  came 
32.  then  Moses  trembled,  ami  durst  not  A. 

2  Cor.  3.  7.  Israel  could  not  A.  ibe  face  of  Moses 

1  Pet.  2.  12.  your  good  works  which  they  shall  A. 

3.  2.  while  they  A.  your  chaste  conversation 
licv.  17.  8.  when  they  A.  the  beast  that  was,  is  oot 

BEHOLDERS. 
./ub  34.  t  26.  God  striketh  them  in  the  place  of  ft. 

BEHOLDEST. 
Psal.  10.  14.  thou  A.  all  mischii^f  to  requite  it 
Mat.  1.  3.  why  A.  thou  the  mote  1  Luke  0.  41. 
J^ukc  6. 42.  A.  not  the  beam  that  is  in  thine  own  eye 

BEHOLDETH. 
Job  24.  18.  he  A.  not  the  way  of  the  vineyards 
Psal.  33.  13.  th-'  Lord  A.  all  the  sons  of  men 
Jam.  1.  24.  for  he  A.  himself  and  goeth  his  way 

BEHOLDING. 
Psal.  119.  37.  turn  away  mine  eyes  from  6.  vanity 
/'roK.15.3.  Lord  in  every  place,  A. the  evil  and  good 
F.ccl.  5.  11.  saving  the  A.  of  them  with  their  eyes 
./Wa«.27..55.inaiiy  women  were  there,A.  Luk  2.3.49. 
Mark  10.  21.  Jesus  A.  him,  loved  him,  aiiJ-.aid 
Luke  23. 35.  people  stood  A.  and  rulers  dcrir  jd  him 
48.A.thijigs  done,smote  their  breasts  and  f  jrned 
Acts  4.  14.  and  A.  man  which  was  healed  c  ild  say 
23.  1.  and  Paul  earnestly  A.  the  council,  i  id 

2  C'«r.3.18.  with  open  face  A.  as  in  a  glass  t'  e  glory 
C«Z.2.5.  withyou  in  spirit, joying,  and  A.yoo'orde* 
Jam.  1.  23.  a  man  A.  his  natural  face  in  a  /lass 

BEHOVED. 
Luke  24.  46.  and  thus  it  A., Christ  lo  suffer  r.nd  riM 
Htb.  2. 17.  A.  him  to  be  made  like  to  his  brethren 

BEING. 
<7en.24.27. 1  A.in  the  way, the  Lord  led  me  to  house 
F.xod.  22.  14.  the  owner  thereof  not  A.  with  it 
y>('«.21.4.  he  shall  not  defile  himself,  A.  a  chief  mao 
JVhmi..30.  3.  vow  avow,  A.  in  her  father's  bouse,  16. 
Deut.  32.  31.  our  enemies  themselves  A.  judges  • 
Josh.  9. 23.  none  of  you  be  freed  from  A.  bond-men 
1  Sam.  15. 2;i.  hath  rejected  thee  from  A   king,  36. 
1  Kings  1.5. 13.  Maachah  his  mother,  even  her  he 
removed  from  A.  queen,  2  Chron.  15.  16. 
16.7.  in  provoking,  in  A.  like  house  of  Jcioboain 
J^eh.  6. 1 1,  who  is  there  that  A.  a.s  I  am  would  flee  1 
Psal.  49. 12.  man  A.  in  honour,  aliiileth  noi^  is  like 
83.4.  come,  ami  let  us  cut  them  offfrom  b.r  Bitlioa 
.fer.  34.  9.  A.  a  Hebrew  or  Hebrewess  gt)  Uee 
Mat.  1.  19.  Joseph  her  husband  A.  a  just  «jan 
J>uke  13. 10.  this  woman  A.  a  daughlcrof  Abraham 
10.  23.  in  hell  he  lillup  his  eyes  A.  in  torcients 
18.  t  9.  trusted  in  themselves  as  6.  rlithtnous 
2t).  30.  A.  the  children  of  the  resurrection 
22. 44.  A.  in  an  agony,  he  prayeii  more  enincstly 
./r)/in.5.13.Jes. conveyed — multiludoA.iri  that  place 

10. 3;l.  mat  thou  A.  n  man,  makest  thyrc'f  God 
1  Cor.  12  12.  all  the  members  A. many  arf  one  body 
Kph.  2.  20.  Jesus  Christ  A.  the  chief  cr-rnrr-stona 

4.  1 15.  A.  .sincere  in  love  may  irrow  up  into  him 
rAi7.2.  0.  who  A.  in  the  form  of  God,  thought  it  not 
f/cb.  13.  3.  as  A.  yourselves  also  in  the  body 
liev.  12.  2.  she  A.' with  child,  cried,  Ua«oiling 

BEING. 
Psal.  104.  33.  I  will  sing  lo  the  Loid,  I  will  sinj 
praise  lo  my  God  while  I  hav    raf  b.  140.  2 
j4ct»  17.28.  in  him  wn  live,  move,  and  have  our  6. 

BELCH,  K.TII. 
Psal.  .W.  7.  behold,  they  A.  out  wiih  l.Heir  mouth 
Prov.  15.  t  2.  the  month  of  fools  A.  o  Jt  foolishnesg 

BELIEF. 
2TAfj,«.2.13.  sanctificaiion  of  Spirit,  anj  A. of  truth 

BELIEVE 
Signifies,  [1]  To gire  credit  ^o  (in?/ fA'»n-,  Gen.  45. 
2(!.  f2]  To  assint  barely  to  gospel  truths,  Acla 
8.  1.3.  [3]  Tn  reeetre,  depend,  nrd  rely  upon 
Clirist  for  life  and  solrntion,  Jo  in  1.  "l2.  |  3. 
1.5,  10.  Rom.  9.  :t3.  1  10.  4.  [4]  To  be  fully 
persuaded,  John  a.Oi).    [5]  Torrftct,orkop» 


BEL  * 

Pial.  97.  13.     [6]  To  put  confidence  in,  2Chr. 
i>0.  20.     [7]  To  know,  Jolin  17.  2).  Jiim.  2.  19. 
KiodA.5.li\d.l  lliey  may  b.  thy  Lord  halli  niipcared 
lit.  y.  that  lliey  may  liear  and  b.  tlieu  lor  ever 
JVum.  14.  11.  Iiow  long  will  it  bo  ure  tliey  b.  me? 
2  CAr.  20.  20.  b.  in  the  Lord  God,  b.  his  prophets 
Jsa.  43.  10.  that  yc  may  know  and  b.  mo 
Mat.  'J.  2d.  4.  ye  that  I  am  able  to  do  this  ? 
Id.  6.  but  wlioso  shall  otiend  one  of  those  little 
ones  which  b.  in  me,  Mark  9.  42. 
in.32.  repented  not  afterward  that  ye  might  i.him 
27.  42.  let  him  come  down,  ;ind  we  will  b.  him 
Mark  1.  15.  repent  yc,  and  b.  the  gospel 
5.  'M.  he  saith,  be  not  afraid,  only  *.  Luke  8.  50. 
B.  23.  if  thou  canst  b.  all  things  are  possible 
24.  Lord,  I  ft.  help  mine  unbelief,  John  9.  38. 
11.23.  but  shall  ft.  those  things  he  saith  shall  come 
24.  ft.  ye  receive  them,  and  ye  shall  have  them 
15.  32.  let  him  descend,  that  we  may  see  and  A. 
IC.  17.  these  signs  shall  follow  them  which  ft. 
J^uke  8.12.  devil  laketh  away  the  word,  lest  they  ft. 

13.  ilieso  have  no  root,  which  for  a  while  A. 
24.  25.  O  fools,  and  slow  of  heart  to  ft.  all  that 
John  1.  7.  that  all  men  through  him  might  ft. 

12.  sons  of  God,  even  to  them  that  ft.  on  his  name 
3.12.how shall  yeft.if  I  tcllyouof  heavenlythings? 

4.  21.  woman,  A.  me,  the  hour  cometh  when  ye 

shall  not  worship  tJie  Father 
42.  and  said,  now  weA.not  because  of  thy  saying 

5.  44.  how  can  ye  ft.  which  receive  honour  one  of 
47.  if  not  his  writings,  how  shall  ye  ft.  my  words? 

6.  29.  work  of  God,  that  ye  A.  on  him  he  hath  sent 

7.  5.  for  neither  did  his  brethren  ft.  in  him 
39.Spirit, which  theythatft.on  him  should  receive 


BEL 


BEL 


9.  35.  dost  thou  ft.  on  the  Son  of  Gad  1 
36.  he  said, who  is  he, Lord,  that  1  inight  A.on  him 

10.  38.  ft.  the  works,  that  ye  may  know  and  ft. 

11.  15.  I  was  not  there,  to  the  intent  ye  may  ft. 
27.  I  ft.  that  thou  art  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God 

40.  said  I  not  to  thee,  if  wouldst  ft.  thou  shouldst 
42.  that  they  may  ft.  that  thou  hast  sent  me 
48.  if  we  let  him  alone,  all  men  will  ft.  on  him 

12.  36.  while  ye  have  light,  A.  in  the  light 
13. 19.  when  it  is  come  to  pass,  ye  may  A.  I  am  he 

14.  1.  not  troubled,  ye  A.  in  God,  ft.  also  in  me 
11.  A.  I  am  in  the  Father,  or  ft.for  the  works'  sake 
29.  that  when  it  is  come  to  pass  ye  might  A. 

16.  30.  by  this  'fc  A.  thou  earnest  forth  from  God 
31.  Jesus  ans-v">rcd  them,  do  ye  now  ft.  ? 

17.  20.  I  pray  lor  them  also  which  shall  A.  on  me 
21.  that  the  world  may  A.  thou  hast  sent  me 

19.35.  he  knows  that  he  saith  true, that  yc  might  A. 
20.  31.  these  are  written  that  ye  might  6. 
Jlcts  8.  37. 1  ft.  that  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God 
l,3.39.by  him  all  that  ft.  arejustified  from  all  things 

41.  I  work  a  work  which  you  shall  in  no  wise  A. 

15.  7.  that  the  Gentiles  by  me  should  hear  and  ft. 
11.  we  A.  thro'  grace  we  shall  be  saved,  as  they 

16.31. A. on  the  Lord  Jesus,and  thou  shall  be  saved 

19. 4.  should  A.  on  him  that  should  come  after  him 

21 .20.1  hou  seost  bow  manyJews  there  are  whichA. 

2-5.  as  touching  the  Gentiles  which  A.  have  writ. 

27.25.  I  A.  God  that  it  shall  be  as  it  was  told  me 

i?o)n.3.22.  righteousness  of  God  on  all  them  that  ft. 

4.  11.  he  might  be  father  of  all  them  that  A. 

24.  to  whom  it  shall  be  imputed,  if  we  A.  on  him 

G.  8.  if  dead,  we  A.  that  we  shall  alt^olive  with  him 

10.9.  and  shall  A.  in  thy  heart  that  God  raised  him 

14.  bow  shall  they  A.  in  him  of  whom  not  heard? 

1  Cur.  1.  21.  by  preaching  to  save  them  that  A. 

11.  18.  I  hear  there  be  divisions,  and  I  partly  A.  it 

14.22.  tongues  are  for  a  sign,  not  to  them  that  ft. 

but  prophesying  serveth  for  them  which  ft. 

t  Cor.  4.  13.  we  also  b.  and  therefore  speak 

Gal.  3.  22.  promise  might  be  given  to  them  that  A. 

Kph.  1. 19.  the  greatness  of  his  power  to  us  who  ft. 

yhil.  1.  29.  to  us  it  is  given  not  only  to  A.  on  him 

1  Thrss.  1.  7.  ensamples  to  all  that  ft.  in  Macedonia 

2.  10.  we  behaved  ourselves  among  you  that  ft. 

13. word  which  effectually  workelh  in  you  that  A. 
4.  14.  if  we  A.  that  Jesus  died  and  rose  again 
HThess.l.lO.  come  to  be  admired  in  all  those  that  A. 
2.  11.  send  delusion  that  they  should  A.  a  lie 
\Tim.  1.  ]6.  for  a  pattern  to  them  that  should  ft. 
4.  3.  received  with  thanksgiving  of  them  that  b. 
10.  Saviour  of  all  men,  especially  of  those  that  A. 
Jleb.  10.  39.  but  of  them  that  6.  to  saving  of  soul 

11.  6.  he  tluit  Cometh  to  God  must  A.  that  he  is 
Jam.  2.  19.  the  devils  also  A.  and  tremble 
IP«(.1.21.  who  by  him  do  A.  in  God  that  raised  him 
2.  7.  to  you  therefore  which  A.  he  is  precious 
1  -Tokn  3.2't.  is  his  commandment  that  we  should  A. 
5. 13. 1  have  written  to  you  that  A.  that  ye  may  A. 

BELIEVE  not,  or  not  BELIEVE. 
t^jod.  4.  1.  behold,  they  will  notb.mn,  nor  hearken 
8.  it  shall  come  to  pass,  if  they  will  not  6.  thee,  9. 
Deut.  1.  32.  yet  in  this  ye  did  not  ft.  the  Lord 
8  King's  17. 14.  like  their  fathersdid  not  ft.  in  Lord 

/n6  9. 16.  yet  would  I  not  ft.  that  he  had  hearkened  I   ll.45.mani/ of  the  Jews  which  came  to  Mary  A.on 
°rov.  26.  25.  when  he  speaketh  fair,  A.  him  not    I   12.42.  among  the  chief  rulers  alsomanu  J.  on  him 
31 


ha.  7. 0.  if  ye  will  not  A.  ye  shall  not  be  established 
./cr.  12.  C.  A.  not  them,  tho'  they  sjieak  fair  «  ords 
Hab.l.b.  which  ye  will  nut  A.  though  it  be  told  you 
.Wu«.21.25.whythendid  ye  notft. him?  Jli<i Will. 31. 
24.  23  lo,  here  is  Christ,  ft.  it  not,  20.  ji;«r/t  13. 21 . 
Luke  22.  67.  he  said,  if  1  tell  you,  you  will  not  b. 
John  3.  12.  if  I  told  earthly  things,  and  ye  ft.  not 
4.48.e.\cept  ye  see  signs  and  wonders  yewill  not  A. 
5  38.  for  whom  he  hath  sent,  him  ye  ft.  not 

47.  if  ye  A.  not  his  writ,  how  shall  ye  A. my  words? 
0.30. 1  said  to  you,ye  also  have  seen  me  and  A.  not 
04.  but  there  are  some  of  you  which  A.  not 
8.  24.  if  ye  b.  not  that  X  am  he,  ye  shall  die  in  sins 
45.  because  I  tell  you  the  truth,  ye  ft.  me  not 
40.  if  I  say  the  truth,  why  do  ye  not  ft.  ine  ? 

10.  20.  ye  A.  not,  because  ye  are  not  of  my  sheep 

37.  if  1  do  not  the  works  of  my  Fatlier,  ft.  me  not 

38.  if  I  do,  though  ye  ft.  n«f  me, believe  the  works 

12.  39.  they  could  nut  ft. because  Isaiah  said  again 
47.  if  any  near  words,  and  A.  not,  I  judge  him  not 

16.  9.  reprove  of  sin,  because  they  A.  not  on  me 

20.  25.  thrust  my  hand  into  his  side,  I  will  nut  ft. 
Rom.  3.  3.  what  if  some  did  not  ft.  shall  unbelief 

15.31. 1  may  be  delivered  from  them  that  do  not  ft. 

1  Cor.  10.  27.  if  any  that  ft.  not  bid  you  to  a  feast 
14.  22.  tongues  are  for  a  sign  to  them  that  ft.  7iot 

2  Cor.  4. 4,  hath  blinded  minds  of  them  that  A.  not 
2  Tim.  2.  13.  if  we  A.  not,  he  abideth  faithful 
1  JoAn  4.  1.  A.  not  every  spirit,  but  try  the  spirits 

BELIEVED. 
Gen.  15.  6.  he  ft.  in  the  Lord,  and  he  counted  it  for 
righteousness,  Rom.  4.  3.  Gal.  3.  0.  Jam.  2.  23. 
Exod.  4.  31.  Aaron  spake,  and  the  people  ft. 

14.  31.  they  ft.  the  Lord  and  his  servant  JIosos 
1  Sam.27.l'i.  and  Achish  ft.  David,  saying,  he  hath 
Psal.  27.  13. 1  had  fainted,  unless  1  had  A.  to  see 

100.12.  then  A.  they  his  words,they  sang  his  praise 

116. 10.  I  ft.  therefore  have  I  spoken,  2  Cor.  4.  13. 

119.65.  teach  me,  for  1  have  ft. thy  commandments 
Jsa.  53. 1.  who  hath  A.  our  report,  to  whom  arm  of 
the  Lord  revealed?  ./ohn  12.  38.  Rum.  10.  16. 
/>an.6.23.  no  hurt  on  him,  because  he  A.  in  his  God 
.Jonah  3.  5.  so  the  people  of  Nineveh  A.  God 
Mat.  8.  13.  as  thou  hast  A.  so  be  it  done  to  thee 

21.  32.  but  the  publicans  and  harlots  A.  him 
Mark  16.  13.  went  and  told  it,  neither  A.  they  them 
J^uke  1. 1.  of  those  things  which  are  most  surely  A. 

45.blessed  is  she  that  A.for  there  shall  be  perform. 

John  2.  11.  his  glory,  and  his  disciples  A.  on  liim 

22.  they  A.  the  scripture  and  the  word  Jesus  said 

4.  50.  the  man  A.  the  word  that  Jesus  had  spoken 
53.  the  father  himself  A.  and  his  whole  house 

5.  46.  had  ye  A.  Moses,  ye  would  have  A.  me 

7.  48.  have  any  of  rulers  or  Pharisees  A.  on  him  ? 

8.  31.  then  said  Jesus  to  the  Jews  that  A.  on  him 
11.45.  who  had  seen  the  things  Jesus  did,  A.on  him 

12.11.  many  ofthe  Jews  went  away  and  A. on  Jesus 
16.27.  the  Father  loveth  you,  because  you  have  A. 
17.  8.  and  they  have  A.  that  thou  didst  send  mc 
20. 8.  then  went  that  other  disciple  and  saw  and  A.  ] 

29.  thou  hast  A.  have  not  seen  and  yet  have  ft 
Mcts  2.  44.  all  that  A.  were  together,  had  things 

4.  4.  many  of  them  which  heard  the  word  A. 
32.  multitude  of  them  that  A.  were  of  one  heart 

5.  t  36.  as  many  as  ft.  Theudas  were  scattered 
8. 12.  but  when  they  A.  Philip  jireaching  things 

13.  then  Simon  himself  A.  also  and  was  baptized 
10.45. they  of  circumcision  who  A.  were  astonished 
11.  17.  God  gave  them  like  gift  as  to  us  who  ft. 

21.  a  great  number  ft.  and  turned  to  the  Lord 

13. 12.  then  deputy  ft.  being  astonished  at  doctrine 
48.  as  many  as  were  ordained  to  eternal  life  b. 

14.  1.  a  multitude  of  both  Jews  and  Greeks  A. 
23. commended  them  lo  the  Ld.  on  whom  they  ft. 

17.  4.  some  of  them  ft.  and  consorted  with  Paul 
34.  howbeit  certain  men  clave  to  him  and  A. 

18. 8.  Crispus  chief  ruler  of  the  synagogue  A.  on  L. 
27.  helped  them  much  which  had  A.  thro'  grace 

19.  2.  received  ye  the  Holy  Ghost  since  ye  A.  ? 

22.  19.  I  beat  in  every  synagogue  them  that  A. 

27.  11.  the  centurion  A.  tho  master  ofthe  ship 

28.  24.  some  A.  the  things  spoken,  and  some  ft.  not 
Rom.  4.  18.  who  against  hope  ft.  in  hope,  might 

13.  11.  our  salvation  is  nearer  than  when  wo  A. 

1  Cor.  3.5.  but  ministers  by  whom  ye  A.  as  the  Lord 

15.  2.  ye  are  saved,  unless  ye  have  A.  in  vain 

11.  whether  I  or  they,  so  we  preach,  and  so  ye  A. 
Gal.  2. 16.  even  we  have  A.  in  Jesus  Christ  tliat  wc 
Kph.  1.  13.  in  whom  after  ye  A.  ye  were  scaled 

2  Thcss.  i.  10.  our  testimony  among  you  was  ft. 
17^'ni.3.16.  A.on  in  the  world,  received  up  into  glory 
2  Tim.  1. 12.  for  I  know  whom  I  hnve  ft.  he  is  able 
Tit.  3.  8.  they  which  have  ft.  in  God,  be  careful  to 
ffch.  4.  .3.  wc  which  have  ft.  do  enter  into  rest 
1  John  4.  16.  we  have  ft.  the  lovo  of  God  to  us 

Jlfany  BELIEVED. 
Tohn  2.  23.  at  the  passover  many  ft.  in  his  name 
4.  39.  many  ofthe  Samaritans  b.  on  him 


j3cts  18.  8.  many  ofthe  Corinthians  hearing,  J. 
I'J.lS.many  thatft.came  and  confessed  their  deed* 
BELIEVED  nut,  or  nut  BELIEVED. 

Gen.  45.  26.  Jacob's  heart  fainted,  he  ft.  them  not 
JV«7«.  20.  12.  because  he  ft.  me  not,  to  sanctify  me 
Deut.  Q.23.  rebelled,  and  A.  him  nut,  nor  hearkened 
IKings  10.7.  howlieit  1  A.  nut  the  v.  ords,  2CAr.fl.6. 
Job  29.  24.  if  I  laughed  on  them,  they  ft.  it  not 
Psal.  78.22.  because  they  ft.  not  in  G(jd,  trusted  not 
32.  sinned,  and  A.  not  for  his  wondrous  works 

100.  24.  despised  the  land,  they  ft.  not  his  word 
Jer.  40.  14.  but  Gedaliah  ft.  them  not 
J^am.4.  12.  inhabitants  of  world  would  not  have  A. 
Jl/ut.21.32.  John  came  unto  you,  and  ye  A.  him  not 
^/(tr-AlO.ll.whcn  they  had  heard  he  was  alive  b.iwt 

14.  he  upbraided  Uiem  because  thiy  A.  not 
Luke  20.  5.  he  will  say,  why  then  ft.  ye  him  not  ? 

24.  41.  while  they  A.  not  for  joy  and  wondered 
JnhnS.  18.  condemned  already,  bee.  he  hath  not  A. 

6.  04.  Jesus  knew  who  they  were  that  A.  not 

10.  25.  Jesus  answered,  I  told  you  and  ye  A.  not 
12.  37.  had  done  so  many  miracles,  yet  they  A.  nol 

Jicts  9. 26.  afraid,  and  ft.  not  that  he  was  a  discipla 
17.  5.  the  Jews  which  A.  not  moved  with  envy 
19.  9.  but  when  divers  were  hardened  and  A.  nol 

Rom.  10.  14.  how  call  on  him  in  whom  have  not  6 

11.  30.  for  as  you  in  times  past  have  not  ft.  God 
31.  even  so  have  these  also  now  not  ft. 

2  Thcss.  2. 12.  they  all  inight  be  damned  who  ft. nol 
Neb.  3.  18.  not  enter  into  his  rest,  that  ft.  not 
11.  31.  Rahab  perished  not  with  them  that  ft.  not 
Jiide  5.  Lord  afterward  destroyed  them  that  ft.  not 

BELIEVERS. 
Jlets  5.  14.  A.  were  the  more  added  to  the  Lord 
1  Tim.  1.  12.  but  be  thou  nn  examule  ofthe  A. 

BELIEVEST. 
Z.uAel.20.  be  dumb  because  thou  A.  not  my  word* 
John  1.  .50.  I  saw  thee  under  the  fig-lree,  A.  thou  ? 

11.  26.  believeth  in  me,  never  die,  A.  ilioii  this? 
14.  10.  A.  thou  not  that  I  am  in  the  Father 

Jicts  8.  37.  if  thou  A.  with  all  thine  heart,  thou 
26.  27.  A.  thou  the  jirophets  ?  1  know  lliou  ft. 
Jg,m.  2.  19.  thou  A.  (hat  there  is  one  God,  thou  dost 

BELIEVETH. 
.Job  15.  22.  ho  A.  not  that  he  shall  return  out  of 
Proe.  14.  15.  the  sinijde  ft.  every  word,  but  the 
Isa.  28.  16.  ho  that  ft.  shall  not  make  haste 
Mark  9.  23.  all  things  are  possible  to  him  that  b 
10.  10.  he  that  A.  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved, 
but  he  that  A.  not  shall  be  damned 
John  3. 15.  whoso  ft.  in  him  should  not  perish,  IG 
18.  he  that  A.  on  him  is  not  condenmcd,  but  he 
•that  A.  not  is  condemned  already 
36.  he  that  A.  hath  everlasting  life,  6.  47. 

5.  24.  A.  on  him  that  sent  me  hath  everlasting  life 

6.  35.  he  that  ft.  on  me  shall  never  thirst 
40.  he  that  seeth  the  Son  and  A.  on  him  hath  life 

7.  38.  he  that  ft.  on  me,  out  of  his  belly  shall  flow 
11.25.  he  that  A. though  he  were  dead  yet  shall  live 

26.  whosoever  liveth  and  A.  in  me  shall  never  die 

12.  44.  he  that  A.  on  me,  A.  not  on  me,  but  on  him 
46.  whoso  ft.  on  me,  should  not  abide  in  darkness 

14.  12.  he  that  ft.  on  me,  the  works  that  I  do 
jHcts  10.  43.  who  A.  in  him  receive  remission  of  sins 
flyjn.l. 16.it  is  the  powerof  God  toevery  one  thatA 

3.  26.  and  the  jusiifier  of  him  that  ft.  on  Jesus 

4.  5.  but  to  him  that  workcth  not,  but  ft.  on  him 

9.  33.  whoso  ft.  on  him  shall  not  be  ashamed, 10.11 

10.  4.  Christ  is  ihecndof  law  to  every  one  that  b 
10.  for  with  the  heart  man  A.  to  righteousness 

14.  2.  for  one  A.  thai  he  may  eat  all  ihings 

1  Cor.  7. 12.  if  any  brother  halh  a  wife  that  A.  not 
13.7.  love  A.  all  things,  liopeth  all  things,  endureth 
14.  24.  and  there  come  in  one  that  ft.  not 

2  Cor.G.  15.  what  part  hath  he  that  ft.  with  infidel 
ITim.  .5.  16.  if  any  man  that  ft.  have  widows 
1  Prt,  2.  6.  he  that  ft.  shall  not  be  confounded 
1  John  5. 1.  whoso  A.  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  is  of  God 

5.  who  is  he  that  overcometh,  but  he  that  A. 
10.  he  that  A.  on  the  Son  of  God  ;  he  that  b.  not 
God,  because  he  ft.  not  the  record 
BELIEVING. 
Mat.  21.  22.  ask  in  prayer,  ft.  ye  shni!  receive 
John  20. 27.  said  lo  'Thomas,  be  not  faithless  but  ft. 
31.  that  ft.  ye  might  have  life  through  his  nanKi 
.^ets  16.  .34.  rejoiced,  A.  in  God  with  all  his  houpe 
24.  14.  A.  all  Ihings  which  are  written  in  the  law 
Rom.  15.  13.  fill  you  with  all  joy  and  peace  in  A. 
ITim.  6.2.  they  that  have  A.  masters,  not  despise 
fbut  ralhcr  do  them  service  because  they  are* 
1  Pet.  1.  8.  yet  A.  ye  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable 

BELL,  S. 
Exod.  28..33.  ft.  ofgold  betw.  pomegranates,  39.25. 

34.  a  golden  A.  and  a  pomcgranaie,  39.  26. 

Zcch.  14.20.  upon  the  A.  of  horses,  holiness  to  LoHl 

Bellow,  see  Bulls. 

BELLOWS. 

Jer.  6.  29.  the  A.  are  burnt,  the  lead  is  consumed 

BELLY 
Signifies,  [\]Thai  part  of  the  bodf  which  conlaim 


BEL 

(he  boiccls,  Mat.  15.  17.    [2]   The  Komb,  Jer. 

I.  5.  [:)J  The  entrails,  Ki;v.  10.  9,  10.  [4] 
The  heart,  Jolin  7.  'M.  [5j  The  uhole  man, 
Til.  1.  I'J.     [<i]  Carnal  pleasure,  Rom.  JO.  18. 

Oen.  3.  1-1.  on  thy  b.  shall  thou  go, "and  dust  eut 
Afc.  II.  4'J.  gueth  on  the  6.  \>u  an  abomination 
JVum.  5.  Ul.  tiiy  thigh  to  rot,  and  thy  b.  to  swell 

ij.  H.  thrust  man  ol  Israel  and  woman  thro'  the  b. 
Veut.  28.  1 11.  iilenteous  in  the  fruifof  thy  b. 

t53.  and  thou  shalt  eat  the  fruit  of  thy  b. 
Judjf.  3.  21.  the  dagger,  and  thrust  it  in  his  b. 
\ Kings  7.'iU.  had  pomegranates  over-against  the  J. 
Job  3.  11.  give  up  ghost  when  I  came  out  of  the  i. 

15.  2.  and  till  his  b.  with  the  cast-wind 
35.  bring  vanity,  and  their  b.  preparclh  deceit 

19.  1 17.  iiitrejted  for  children's  sake  of  my  b, 

20.  15.  God  shall  cast  them  out  of  his  b. 

20.  surely  he  shall  not  feel  quietness  in  his  b. 
23.  when  about  to  till  his  b.  Ood  shall  cast  fury 
JE.  1 18.  llic  spirit  of  my  b.  constrainelli  rne 

19.  behold  my  b.  is  as  wine  which  hath  no  vent 
Paal.YS.H.  wh.ise  b.  thou  fillest  with  thy  hid  trcas. 

22.  10.  tliou  art  my  God  from  my  mother's  b. 
44.  25.  soul  bowed  down,  our  4.  cleaveth  to  earth 
58.  t  3.  they  go  astray  from  the  b. 
132.  til.  of  the  fruit  of  thy  b.  I  will  set  on 
Prov.  13.  25.  but  the  b.  of  the  wicked  shall  want 
18.  8.  go  into  innermost  parts  of  the  b.  "ft.  22. 

20.  a  man's  b.  shall  be  satislicd  with  fruit 
20.  27.  searching  all  the  inward  parts  of  the  b. 

30.  so  do  stripes  the  inward  parts  of  the  b. 

22.  1 18.  is  a  pleasant  thing,  if  keep  them  in  thy  J. 
Cant.  5.  14.  his  b.  is  as  bright  ivory  overlaid  with 

7.  2.  thy  A.  is  like  aheap  6f  wheat  set  about  with 
/jo.  46.  3.  which  are  born  by  me  from  the  b. 
Jer.  1.5.  before  I  formed  thee  in  the  b.  I  knew  thee 

51.  34.  he  hath  filled  his  b.  with  my  dclicutes 
Rifk  3.  3.  he  said,  sou  of  man,  cause  thy  b.  to  cat 
Dan.'i.  32.  this  image's  b.  and  his  thighs  of  brass 
Jonah  1. 17.  Jonah  was  in  b.  of  the  fish,  Mat.Vi.H). 

2.  2  jut  of  the  b.  of  hell  cried  I,  and  thou  heardst 

Mic.  6.  t  7.  fruit  of  my  b.  for  the  sin  of  my  soul 

Hub.  3.  IG,  when  I  heard,  my  b.  trembled,  my  lips 

Mat.  15.  17.  whatsoever  entcreth  in  at  the  month 

goelh  into  the  b.  and  is  cast  out,  Mark  7. 19. 

I.,uhe  15. 10.  fain  have  filled  his  b.  with  the  husks 

John  7.  38.  out  of  his  b.  shall  flow  rivers  of  water 

ifom.lC.J8.  they  serve  not  our  Lord  but  their  own/;. 

1  Cur.  6.  13.  meats  for  the  b.  and  the  b.  for  moats 

PAii.  3.19.  whosctJod  is  their  h.  and  glory  in  shame 

Uev.  10.  9.  eat  it  up,  and  it  shall  make  thy  b.  bitter 

10.  ai  goon  as  I  had  ca'en  it,  my  b.  was  bitter 

BKLLIES. 

Tit.  1.  12.  the  Cretiaiis  are  always  liars,  slow  b. 

BfiLONG. 
Oen.  40.  P..  do  not  interpretations  h.  to  God  7 
Lev.  27.  24.  in  jubilee  return  to  whom  it  did  b. 
Deut.  29.  09.  secret  things  *.  to  God,  revealed  b. 
Psal.  47.  9.  for  the  shields  of  the  earth  b.  to  God 

68.  20.  to  our  God  b.  the  issues  from  death 
Prov.  21.  23.  these  things  also  b.  to  the  wise 
F.zck.^X.^lX  shall  they  not  b.  to  the  despising  rod? 
Dan.  9.  9.  to  the  Lord  our  God  h.  mercies 
Mark  9.  41.  in  my  name,  because  ye  b.  to  ChrL^it 
J.nke  10.  42.  tin;  things  which  b.  to  thy  peace 

1  Cor.  7.  32.  cnreth  for  things  that  ft.  to  the  Lord 

IJELONGED,  EST. 
1 .9am.  30. 13  to  whom  b.  thou,  whence  art  thou  ? 
XKingB  1.8.  nnd  the  mighty  men, which  ft.  to  David 

2  Kings  7. 12.  a  lord  which  A.  to  the  king  answered 
Jjuke^i.l.  as  he  knew  he  ft.  to  Ifcrod's  jurisdiction 

BELONGETir. 
Dcut.  32.  35.  to  ine  ft.  vengeance  and  recomponce, 
l'.ial.9i.  1.   Hrb.  10.30. 
Judg.  19.  14.  Gibcah  which  b.  to  Benjamin,  20.  4. 
Ezra  10.  4.  iiris",  for  this  matter  ft.  to  thee 
P/ra/.  3.^  RJilvalicin  ft.  unto  the  Lord 
62.  11.  twice  hive  I  licnrd,  power  ft.  unto  God 

12.  n\m  unto  thee,  ()  t,ord,  ft.  mercy 
Dan.  9.  7.  O  F^onl,  righteousness  ft.  to  tlico 

8.  to  n<i  A.  confusion  of  face,  to  oiir  kings 
//eft.  5.  14.  strong  meat  ft.  to  Ihem  of  full  age 

BELONGING. 
J\^m.  7.  9.  tho  B-rvico  of  the  sanctuary  ft.  to  them 
flufA2.3.  10  light  on  a  part  of  a  field  A.  to  Boa/, 
Pito.  2(1.  17.  meddl'-th  with  strife  ft.  not  to  him 
jMke  0.  10.  he  went  into  n  desert  A.  to  Bcthsnida 

BELOVED 
h  applied,  [1]   To  rhrisf,  Mat.  3.  17.   Mnrk  1. 

II.  I  9.  7.  [21  T,>  the  Chiirrh,  Jer.  11.  l.'i. 
Rom.  9.  2.'>.     [3]   Tn  particular  gnintu,  Neb. 

13.  26.  Dan.  9.  23.  [4]  Tu  wifr  nnd  rhildrm, 
Dout.  21.  15,  IldB.  9.  16.  [5]  To  the  JV<ir 
Jerutalem,  Rev.  20.  9. 

Drut.  21.  15.  two  wives,  the  one  ft.  the  other  hated 
33.  12.  the  ft.  of  the  Lord  shall  dwell  in  safrty 
iSan.  12.  tW.  Jedidlah,  that  is,  A,  of  the  Lord 
Jfeh.  13.  26.  Solomon,  who  was  A.  of  his  God 
Paal.  CO.  5.  that  thy  A.  may  he  delivered,  103,  6. 
127.  2.  for  go  he  giveth  his  A.  sleep 
32 


BEN 

Prov  4.3.  and  only  A.  in  the  sight  of  my  motlier 
Cant.  5.  1.  cat,  O  triends,  drink  abundantly,  O  A. 

9.  what  is  thy  A.  more  than  another  A.  ? 

G.  1.  whither  is  thy  A.  gone,  O  thou  fairest  1 

8.  5.  who  is  this  tliat  cometh  leaning  on  her  A.  ? 
Dan.  9.  23.  for  thou  art  greatly  A.  10.  11,  19. 
Hos.  3.  1.  go  yet,  love  a  woman  A.  of  her  friend 

U.  16.  I  will  slay  the  A.  fruit  of  their  womb 
,Hcta  15.25.  chosen  men  with  ft. Barnabas  and  Paul 
Horn.  1.  7.  to  all  that  arc  in  Rome,  ft.  of  God 

9.  25.  I  will  call  her  ft.  which  was  not  A 

11.  28.  they  are  A.  for  the  Father's  sake 

16.12.  salute  A.Persis  who  laboured  much  in  Lord 
F.ph.  1.  6.  he  hath  made  us  accepted  in  the  ft. 

6.21.  Tychicus  u  ft.  brother  and  minister,  Col.  4.7. 
Col.  3.  12.  put  op  as  the  elect  of  God,  holy  and  ft. 

4.  9.  with  Onesimus,  a  faithful  and  ft.  brother 

14.  Luke  the  ft.  physician  and  Demas  greet  you 
IThess.  1.  4.  knowing  A.  your  election  of  God 
ITim.  6.  2.  do  them  service,  because  they  are  A. 
Vhilcm.  10.  but  above  a  servant,  a  brother  A. 
Ileb.  0.  9.  A.  we  are  persuaded  better  things  of  you 
2  Pet.  3.  8.  A.  be  not  ignorant  of  this  one  thing 

15.  even  as  our  A.  brother  Paul  hath  written 

1  John  3.  2.  A.  no  w  we  are  the  sons  of  God,  it  doth 
21.  A.  if  our  heart  condemn  us  not,  then  have 
4.  1.  A.  believe  not  every  spirit,  but  try  the  s|)irits 
7.  A.  let  us  love  one  nuotlier,  for  love  is  of  God 
11.  A.  if  God  so  loved  us,  we  ought  also  to  love 
'^John\\.  A.  follow  not  that  which  is  evil,  but 
that  which  is  good 
Jude  20.  but  ye  A.  building  up  yourselves  in  iaith 
Hcv.  20.  9.  and  they  compassed  the  A.  city 
Dearly  Beloved,  see  Dearly. 
My  BELOVED. 
Cant.  1. 14.  my  A.  is  to  me  a  cluster  of  camphire 

10.  behold  thou  art  fair,  my  ft.  yea  pleasant 

2. 3.  as  the  apple-tree,  so  is  my  A.  among  the  sons 

9.  my  ft.  is  like  a  roe  or  a  young  hart 

16.  my  ft.  ia  mine,  and  I  am  his,  he  feedeth,  6. 3. 

17.  turn  my  A.  and  be  thou  like  a  roe  o{  a  hart 
4,  10.  let  my  A-  come  into  his  garden  and  eat 
5.2.  it  is  the  voice  o( my  A.  that  knocketh,  2.  8. 

5. 1  rose  up  to  open  to  my  A.|1G.  I  opened  to  my  A. 

10.  my  A.  is  white  and  ruddy  ||  10.  this  is  my  A. 

6.  2.  my  A.  is  gone  ||  3.  I  am  my  A.  and  my  A. 

mine,  7.  10. 

7.  13.  which  I  have  laid  up  for  thee,  ()  my  A. 
Istt.  5.  1.  a  song  of  my  A.  touching  his  vineyard 
.hr.  11.  15.  what  hath  my  A.  to  do  in  my  house 
Mat.  3.  17.  this  is  mi/  A.  Son,  17.  5.  Mark  1. 11.  | 

9. 7.  Luke  3. 22.  |  9. 3.5.  2  Pet.  1.  17. 

12.  18.  behold  my  ft.  in  whom  my  aoul  is  pleased 
l.nkc  20. 13.  1  will  send  my  ft.  son,  it  may  be  they 
Horn.  Ki.  8.  greet  Amplias  my  A.  in  the  Lord 

1  Car.  4.  14.  but  as  my  A.  sons  I  warn  yon 

17.  I  sent  Timothy  my  A.  son,  2  Tim.  1.  2. 
.Tarn.  I.  16.  do  not  err,  wi»/  ft.  brethren 

BELIE,  BELIED. 
Proti.  30. 1 9.  lest  I  bo  full  and  A.  theo 
Jrr.  5. 12.  they  have  A.  the  Lord,  and  said,  it  is  not 

BEMOAN,  EI),  ING. 
.Tub  42.  11.  they  A.  Job,  and  comforted  him 
Jer.  15.  5.  who  shall  ft.  thee,  O  Jerusalem  1 
16.  5.  neither  go  to  lament,  nor  ft.  them 
22.  10.  weop  ye  not  for  the  dead,  nor  ft.  him 

31.  18.  I  have  surely  heard  Ephraim  ft.  himself 

45.  17.  all  ve  that  are  about  him  ft.  him 
jVa/i.3.  7.  Nineveh  is  laid  waste,  who  will  A.  hcrl 

BENCHES. 
Ezek.  27.  6.  the  Ashiiritcs  made  thy  ft.  of  ivory 

BEND. 
Punl.  11.2.  for  lo,  the  v\'ickcd  ft.  their  bow 
64.  3.  who  ft.  their  bows  to  shoot  their  arrows 
.Ter.  9.  3.  they  ft.  their  tongue  like  a  bow  for  lies 

46.  9.  the  Lydians,  that  handle  and  A.  the  bow 
.■SO.  14.  nil  ye  that  A.  the  bow  shoot  at  her,  29. 
51.  3.  against  him  that  bendeth,  let  the  archer  A. 

Kzek.  17.  7.  behold,  this  vine  did  A.  her  roota 

BENDETH,  ING. 
Psal.  .M.  7.  when  ho  ft.  his  bow  to  shoot  arrows 
Atn.  60.  14.  ihnl  atllicird  thee  shall  come  ft.  tn  thee 
Jer.  51.  3.  agiinst  him  that  A.  let  the  archer  bend 

BENEATH. 
F.iod.  20.  4.  or  that  is  in  the  earth  A.  Dent.  5.  8. 

32.  10.  he  briiko  the  tables  A.  the  mount 
f>ruf.  4.  39.  on  the  earth  A.  there  is  none  else 

2H.  13.  thou  shalt  be  above  only,  and  not  A. 

33.  13.  blessed,  for  the  deep  that  coucheth  A. 
F,irn  9,  1 13.  liast  withheld  A.  our  iniquities 
.fob  18.  16.  his  roots  shall  bn  drie<l  up  A. 
Prnv.  15.  24.  that  ye  may  depart  from  hell  A. 
ha.  14.  9.  hell  from  A.  is  moved  for  thoe 

51.  6,  lift  up  your  eyes,  look  on  the  earth  A. 
Jrr.  31,  37,  if  foundations  can  be  searched  6. 
,/oAn  8.  23,  ye  am  from  A.  I  am  from  above 

BRNKFAtn'OIIS. 
AuAf  22.25.they  thatexerrino  nuthori.  arccallcdA. 

BENEFIT. 
fer  18  10  repent  of  good  wborcwith  I  b.  tliom 


BES 

BENEFIT,  3. 
Signifies,  [1]  The  gifts  and  favours  of  Ood  n 
men,  2Chron.  32.  25.  Psal.  68.  19.  [2)  TU 
favour  of  Ood  tu  others,  2  Cor.  1.  15.  Philom. 
14.  [3]  God's  righteous  acts,  1.  Sam.  12. 1 7 
[4]  Salvation,  1 'Tim.  6.  2.  [.5]  Favour, grace, 
or  spiritual  blessings,  P9al.'l03.  2.  [6]  Ta 
profit,  or  do  good,  Jer.  18.  10. 

1  Sam.  12. 1 7.  reason  with  you  of  all  the  A.  of  Lord 
2CAr.32.25.  Ilczekiuh  rendered  not  according  to  6. 
Psal.  fiH.  19.  Lord  who  daily  loadelh  us  with  A. 

103.  2.  bless  the  Lord,  and  forget  not  all  his  b. 
1 16.  12.  what  shall  I  render  to  Lord  for  all  his  A.  7 

2  Cur.  1.  15.  that  you  might  have  a  second  A. 
ITim.  6.  2.  faithful  and  beloved  partakers  of  the  A. 
I'hilcm.  14.  that  thy  A.  should  not  be  of  necessity 

BENEVOLENCE. 
1  Cor.  7.3.  let  the  husband  render  to  the  wife  due  A. 

BENT. 
Psal.  7.  12.  ho  hath  A.  his  bow,  /.om.2.  4.  |  3.  l^ 
37.  14.  have  A.  their  bow  to  cast  down  the  poor 
/.s-rt.5.28.who8e  arrows  Bharj),  and  ail  their  bows  A 
21.  15.  for  they  fled  from  llie  swords  and  A.  bovr 
flos.  11.7.  my  |>eople  arc  A.  to  backsliding  from  m6 
Zech.  9.  13.  when  I  hsivc  A.  Jiidah  fur  me 

BEREAVE. 
Dent.  32.  t25.  sword  and  terror  shall  A.  younemen 
Fccl.A.B.  for  whom  I  labour  and  ft.  my  soul  ol  good 
Jer.  15.  7.  I  will  ft.  them  of  children,  18.  21. 
Fzek.  5. 17.  send  evil  beasts,  and  they  shall  A.  th«a 
14. 1 15.  if  I  cause  noisome  beasts  to  A.  the  land 
3(5.  12.  no  more  henceforth  A.  them  of  men,  14. 
lios.  9.  12.  bring  up  children,  yet  will  I  A.  them 

BEREAVED. 
f;cn.42.36.Jacob  said, me  ye  have  ft.of  my  children 
43.  14.  if  I  be  A.  of  my  children,  I  am  A. 
Fzek.  .36.  13.  thou  land  hast  A.  thy  nations 
•//os.13.8. 1  will  meet  them  asbear  A.  of  her  whelp* 

BEREAVKTII. 
Lam.  1.20.  abroad  the  sword  A.  at  home  is  as  death 

BERRIES. 
Isa.  17.  6.  two  or  three  A.  in  the  top  of  the  boughs 
Jam.  3. 12.  can  the  fie-tree  bear  olive  A.  avinengsl 

Beryl. 

Dan.  10.  6.  his  body  also  was  like  the  A.  and  face 
licv.  21. 20.  eighth  foundation  was  ft.  ninth  a  topaa 

BESEECH. 
F.xod.  33. 18.  he  said,  I  ft.  thee  show  me  thy  glory 
J^um.  12.  13.  heal  her  now,  O  Lord,  I  A.  thee 
Psal.  80.  14.  return,  we  A.  thee,  O  God  of  host« 
110.  4.  O  Lord,  I  A.  thee  deliver  my  soul 
118Ji).  save  Ift.  O  Lord,  I  A.  thee,  send  prosperity 
119.  lOH.  accept,  I  A.  thee,  free-will  ofterings 
Jer.  38.20.  obey,  I  A.  thee,  the  voice  of  the  Lord 
Jimos  7.  2.  I  said,  O  Lord  God,  forgive,  I  A.  thee 
Jonah  1.14.  they  said, we  ft.thco,  O  Lord,  we  A.thee 

4.  3.  O  Lord,  take,  I  A.  thee  my  life  from  me 
Mai.  1.9.  A.  God,  that  ho  will  be  gracious  to  us 
Luke  8.  28.  Jesus,  I  A.  thee,  torment  me  not 

9.  38.  saying,  master,  I  ft.  thee  look  on  my  son 
Jicts  26.  3.  wl;erefore  I  ft.  thee  to  hear  me  patiently 
Rum.  12.  I.  I  A.  you  by  the  mercies  of  God 

1  Cor.  4.  16.  I  A.  you,  be  ye  followers  of  me 

2  Cor. 2.  8.  I  A.  you,  confirm  your  love  toward  him 

5.  20.  as  though  God  did  A.  you  by  us,we  pray  you 
6. 1.  we  ft. you  receive  not  the  grace  of  God  in  vnia 

10.  1.  I  Paul  ft.  you  by  the  meekness  of  Christ 
Gal.  4. 12.  I  ft.  you,  be  as  I  am,  for  I  am  as  ye  are 
F.ph.  4. 1.  I  the  prisoner  of  the  Lord  ft.  you  to  walk 
Phitem.  9.  yet  for  love's  sake  I  rather  ft.  theo 

10.  Ift.  thee  for  my  son  Onesimus,  whom  I  have 
Ileb.  1.3.  19.  but  I  ft.  you  the  rather  to  do  this 

1  I'et.i.  II,  I  ft,  you  as  slranjers  and  pilgrims 

2  John  5.  now  I  ft.  thee,  Imly,  not  as  though  I  wrote 

Srr  Brethren. 
BESEECHING. 
Mat.P.  5.  there  came  a  centurion  A.  him,  /,iiis7.3 
Mark  1.40.  there  cnme  a  leper  to  him,  A.  him 

BESET. 
./'ud/!'.19  22.  sons  of  Belial  A.  the  house  round,  20.5 
Psal.  22.  12.  strong  bulls  of  Bashan  have  ft.  me 

139.  .I.  thou  hast  A.  me  behind  anil  before 
Ifos.  7.2.  their  own  doings  have  ft,  them  aboni 
//eft,  12. 1.  lay  nsidn  sin  wlijcli  doth  so  easily  A.  u* 

BESIDE,  BESIDES. 
Grn.  19. 12.  hast  thou  here  any  A.  bring  them  out 
28.  I.  there  was  a  famine  ft.  the  first  famine 
Lev.  18.  18.  A.  the  other  in  her  life-time 
23.  38,  A.  sabbaths,  A.  your  gifts,  A.  your  vows,  *. 
your  free-will  oflTerings,  which  ye  give  lo  Lord 
JV\(m.  5. 20,  man  has  lain  with  then  A,  thy  husband 

6.  21.  law  of  Nazarilo,  A.  that  his  hand  shall  got 
11.6.  there  is  nothing  at  all  ft.  this  mannn 

28,  23,  ofTor  these  A.  the  burnt-om<ring,  29.  6 
Deut.  29. 1.  A.  the  covenant  he  made  in  Horoh 
.Ao,«A,  22,  19.  in  building  an  altar,  A.  the  nliar,24. 
.hidfr.  6.  37,  if  it  ho  dry  on  aU  the  earth  ft, 

11,34,  ft,  her  Jephthah  lind  no  son  nor  daiiehtnr 
1  .Sam,  19.3.  I  will  go  out  and  stand  A.  my  father 
1  Kings  10.  13.  A.  tliat  which  Solomon  gave  ber 


fi&T 

{Kingi  22. 7.  not  a  prophet  of  tho  L.  b.  2  Chr.M.  6. 
fi  Kings  «1.16.  i.hia  siii,»  liurcwilli  iie  iiiado  .luduli 
^sal.  '23.  3.  ho  Icadcth  mo  i.  tlio  alill  wuturs 
Cant.  1.  8.  feed  thy  kids  b.  Ihu  sheiiherds'  tents 
Isa.  32.  20.  blusaed  are  ye  that  suw  6.  all  waters 

5ti.  8.  I  will  gather  others  to  liiiii  b,  those  that 
J,uke.  16.  'jl<.  i.  all  this,  butwccii  us  and  you  a  gulf 

S4.21.  b.  all  this,  tu-duy  is  the  third  day  8incu 
P/iilem.  ID.  thou  owest  to  nie  thine  own  se.'t'i 

BESIDIi 
Mark  3.  31.  his  friends  said,  he  is  b.  himself 
Mcls  2(i.  34.  Paul,  thou  art  b.  thyself,  learning 
S  Cot.  5.13,  whether  we  he  A.  ourselves,  it  is  to  God 

BESIEGE. 
Deut.  28.  52.  he  shall  b.  thee  in  thy  gates 

1  Kings  8.  37.  if  their  enemies  A.  them,  3  C'Ar.  C.28. 
Isa.  21.  2.  go  up,  O  Elam,  A.  O  Media 

BESIEGED. 

2  Kings  19.24.  with  the  sole  of  my  feet  I  have  dried 

up  ull  the  rivers  of  A.  places,  /«a.37.  25. 
Eccl.  9.  14.  came  a  great  king  against  it  and  A.  it 
Isa.  1.  8.  the  daughter  of  Zion  is  left  as  a  A.  city 
Eiek.  6.  12.  he  that  is  A.  sliall  die  by  the  famine 

BESOM. 
Isa.  14.23. 1  will  sweep  it  with  the  A.  of  destruction 

BESOUGHT. 
Oen.  42. 21.  when  he  A.  us,  and  we  would  not  hear 
Kzod.  :J2.  11.  Moses  A.  tho  Lord,  Deut.  3.  23. 
2  Sam.  12.  IC.  David  6.  God  for  the  child 

1  Kings  13.  6.  and  the  man  of  God  A.  the  Lord 

2  Kings  1. 13.  third  captain  fell  on  his  knees  and  A. 
13.4.  Jehoahaz  A.  the  Lord,  the  Lord  hearkened 

2  Chron.  33. 12.  Manasseli  in  affliction  A.  the  Lord 
Kzra  8.  23.  so  we  fasted  and  A.  our  God  for  this 
Egth.S.'i.  A. him  with  tears  to  put  away  the  mischief 


BET 

2  CXron.36.15.  God  sent  by  his  messengers  rising  b. 
Job  S.  a.  if  thou  wouldoal  seek  unto  God  A. 
34.  5.  as  wild  asses  go  thev,  rising  A.  for  prey 
f  rot).  13.  34.  be  that  loveth  him,  cliastenelh  bun  A. 

BETRAY. 
1  Chron.  12. 17.  if  ye  be  come  to  A.  mo  to  enemies 
Mat.  24.  10.  and  shall  b.  one  another  and  hate 
2lj  10.  from  that  time  besought  oppurtunity  to  A. 
him,  Mark  14.  11.  I.ukc-i-i.  (j. 
21.  I  say  unto  you   that  one  of  you  shall  A.  me, 
Mark  14.  IH.  Juhn  13.  21. 
46.  behold,  he  is  at  hand  that  doth  b.  me 
Mark  13.  12.  brother  shall  A.  brolher  to  death 
John  G.  t)4.  Jesus  knew  who  should  b.  him,  13. 11. 
13.  3.  the  devil  i)ut  into  the  heart  of  Judas  to  A. him 
BETRAYED. 
Mat.  10.  4.  Judas  Iscariot  who  A.him,  MarkX  19. 
17.  32.  Son  of  niiin  shall  be  A.  into  the  hands  of 
men,  20.  Id.  ]  26.  2,  45.  Mark  14.  41. 
20.34.  woo  to  that  man  by  whom  the  Son  of  man 
is  A.  Mark  14.  21.  Luke  22.  22. 
48.  ho  that  A.  gave  them  a  sign,  Mark  14.  44. 
27.  4.  I  have  sinned,  in  that  1  A.  innocent  blood 
I,ukc  21.  II).  and  ye  shall  be  A.  both  by  parents  and 
John  18.  2.  Judas  which  A.  him  knew  the  place 
1  Cor.  11.33.  same  night  he  was  A.  he  took  bread 

BETRAYERS. 
Jlcts  7. 52.  just  One,  of  whom  ye  have  been  the  A. 

BETRAYEST,  ETU. 

Markl^.  42.  let  us  go,  lo,  he  that  A.  me  is  at  hand 

Luke  22. 21.  the  hand  of  him  that  A.  me  is  with  me 

48.  Judas,  A.  thou  the  Son  of  man  with  a  kiss  7 

John  21.  30.  Lord,  which  is  ho  that  A.  thee  1 

BETROTH. 
/>eKt.28..30.3lialt  A.a  wife,another  shall  lie  with  her 


Jer.  26. 19.  did  not  HezeUiah  fear,  and  A.  the  Lord  \Uos.'i.  19. 1  will  A.  thee  to  me  forever  in  righteous. 


Mat.  8.  31.  so  the  devils  A.  him,  Mark  5.  10,  12, 

/<uAe8.  31,32. 

34.  saw  him,  they  b.  him  to  depart,  JAike  8.  37. 

18.  t26.  servant  A.  him,  Lord,  have  patience 
Mark  5.  23.  Jairus  A.  him  greatly,  Luke  8.  41. 
John  4.  40.  Samaritans  A.  that  he  would  tarry 

47.  the  nobleman  of  Cajiernaum  b.  him  to  come 

19.  38.  A.  Pilate  that  he  might  take  the  body 
Mcts  13.42. Gentiles  A.that  these  words  be  preached 

16.  15.  Lydia  A.  U3,saying,  if  ye  have  judged  me 
39.  magistrates  A.  them,  and  brought  them  out 

21.  12.  we  A.  him  not  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem 
8  Cor.  12.  8.  for  this  thing  I  A.  the  Lord  thrice 

BEST. 
Oen.  43.  11.  take  of  Iho  A.  fruits  in  the  land 

47.  6.  in  A.  of  the  land  make  thy  father  dwell,  11. 
Kxjd.  22.  5.  of  A.  of  his  own  field  make  restitution 
JVuit.  18.  29.  every  heave-otfering  shall  be  of  the  A. 

.16.  6  let  them  marry  to  whom  they  think  A. 
Deut.  23.  16.  he  shall  dwell  where  it  likes  him  A. 

1  Sam.  9. 14.  ho  will  take  the  A.  of  your  vineyards 
1.5.9.Sanl  and  the  people  spared  theA.  of8heep,I5. 

2  .Saw.  18.  4.  what  seemeth  you  A.  I  will  do 

2  Kings  10.  3.  look  out  the  b.  of  your  master's  sons 
Psal.  39.  5.  every  man  at  his  A.  state  is  vanity 
CrtnY.  7.9.  the  roof  of  thy  mouth  like  the  A.  wine 
Mic.  7.  4.  the  A.  of  them  is  as  a  brier,  most  upright 
Luke  15.  22.  bring  forth  the  A.  robe  and  put  it  on 

1  Cor.  12.  31.  but  covet  earnestly  the  A.  gifla 

BESTEAD. 

yia.8. 21.  they  shall  pass  thro'  it  hardly  A.  hungry 

BESTIR. 

2  Sam.  5.24.  when  hearost  the  sound  then  A.  thyself 

BESTOW. 
Kzod.  32.  29.  that  ho  may  A.  on  yon  a  blessing 
Deut.  14  26.  A.  money  for  what  thy  soul  lusts  after 
2  Chron.  24.  7.  the  things  they  did  A.  on  Baalim 
Ezra  7.  20.  which  thou  shall  have  occasion  to  A. 
A.  it  out  of  the  king's  treasure-house 
Luke  12. 17. 1  have  no  room  where  to  A.  my  fruits 
18.  and  there  will  I  A.  all  my  fruits  and  goods 

1  Cor.  12.  23.  on  these  we  A.  more  abundant  honour 
18.3.  though  I  A.  nil  my  goods  to  feed  tho  poor 

BESTOWED. 

2  Kings  5.  24.  Gehnzi  A.  them  in  the  house 

1  Chron.  29. 25.  Lord  A.  on  Solomon  royal  majesty 
Isa.  63.  7.  according  to  all  the  Lord  hath  A.  on  ua 
John  4.  '^8.  to  reap  that  whereon  ye  A.  no  labour 
Horn.  16.6.  greet  Mary,  who  A.  much  labour  on  us 

1  Cor.  Mi.  10.  his  grace  A.  on  mo  was  not  in  vain 

2  Cor.  1. 11.  for  the  gift  A.  on  us  by  means  of  many 
8.  1.  do  you  to  wit  of  the  grace  A.  on  the  churches 

Oal.  4.  11.  lest  I  have  A.  on  you  labour  in  vain 
I  John  3.  1.  what  manner  of  love  Father  A.  on  us 

BETAKE. 
ha.  14.  t32.  poor  of  his  people  b.  themselves  to  it 

BETHINK. 
l.fftn^*8.  47.  if  they  shall  A.  themselves  in  the  land 
whither  they  were  carried  raptives,2CAr.  6.37. 
BETIMES 
Kgnifies,  [1]  Early,  Gen.  26.  31.    [2]  Seasonably, 
in  due  and  proper  time,  Prov.  13.  24.   [3]  Con- 
ttnt^ally,  and  carefully,  2  Chron.  36.  15. 
Qen..  2tS.  31.  rose  up  b.  and  sware  one  to  another 
93 


20. 1  will  A.  thee  to  me  in  l'ailbfulne3M,sbalt  know 
BETROTHED. 

i^xorf.  21.  8.  if  she  please  not  h(!r  master  who  A.  her 
22. 16.  if  a  man  entice  a  maid  not  A.  Deut.  23.  28. 

Lev.  19.  20.  whosoever  lieth  with  a  woman  A. 

Dtul.  20. 7.  who  hath*A.  a  wife,  and  not  taken  her 
22^23.  if  a  man  find  a  virgin  A.  and  lie  with  her 
27.  A.  damsel  cried,  and  there  was  none  lo  save 
BETTER 

Signifies,  [1]  More  valuable,  or  preferable,  Eccl. 
9.  4,  lei,  18.  [2]  More  accrjitublr,  1  Sam.  15. 
22.  [3]  More  able,  Dan.  1.  20.  [4]  More  con 
venieni,  1  Cor.  7.  38.  [5]  More  casij,  Mat.  18. 
0.  [6]  More  advantageous,  Phil.  1.  33.  [7J 
More  holy,  1  Cor.  H.  8.  [8]  More  safe,  Psal. 
1 18.  8.  [11]  More  comfortable,  Prov.  15. 10, 17. 
[10]  Mure  precious,  Prov   8.  11. 

A  better  hope,  Heb.  7.  19.  The  new  covenant,  or 
Christ  and  his  priesthood,  and  thepromises  of 
the  gospel  drpcnding  thereupon  ;  which  give 
hope  to  Inst  sinners  of  obtaining  reconciliation 
with  (iod,  and  afford  more  clear  and  solid 
grounds  to  expect  the  full  pardon  of  their  sins, 
and  ctcrval  life,  than  could  be  discovered  from 
the  dark  shadows  under  the  legal  dispensation. 

Might  obtain  a  bctte'  resurrection,  //eb.  11.3.').  .^ 
tesnrrertion  to  a  far  better  life  than  they  could 
have  enjoyed  on  earth;  for  though  thry  viighl 
have  been  preserved  for  a  lohil/froiii  ilrath  now 
threatened,whichwas  akin(lofti-surxrr\\u\\,yrt 
■was  it  not  to  be  compared  with  the  resurrection 
to  eternal  life,  glory,  bliss,  and  pleasure,  lo  be 
enjoyed  by  them  with  God  in  heaven,  which 
would  abundantly  recompense  them  for  all 
their  sufferings. 

Better  sacrifices,  Heb.  9.  23.  The  sacrifice  of 
Christ  himself,  which  is  of  more  value,  and 
compriies  all  the  virtue,  benefit,  and  significa- 
tion of  the  legal  sacrifices.  It  is  expressed  in 
the  plural  number,  both  to  answer  the  opposite 
term,  and  to  set  out  its  excellency ;  being  far 
above  all  nthcrs,and  the  very  substance  of  them. 

Oen.  29.  19.  A.  I  give  her  to  thee  than  lo  another 

Kxod.  14. 12.  A.  for  us  to  have  served  the  Egyptians 

.Arum.14.3.  were  it  not  A.  for  us  to  return  to  Egypt  ? 

.Judg.  8.  2.  gleanings  of  Ephraim  h.  than  vintage 
11.  25.  nor  art  thou  any  thing  A.  than  Balak 

I  Sam.  1.  8.  am  not  I  A.  fo  llice  than  ten  sons  ? 
27.  1.  nothing  A.  than  to  go  lo  the  Philistines 

1  Kings  1. 47.  (Jod  make  the  name  of  k.  Solomon  A. 
2.  32.  who  fell  upon  two  men  A.  than  he,  and  slew 
19.  4.  Elijah  said,  I  am  not  A.  than  my  fathers 
21.2.  I  will  give  thee  for  it  a  A.  vineyard  than  it 

2  Kings  5.  l2.  rivers  of  Damascus  A.  than  Jordan 
2  CAron.21. 13.  hast  slain  bnthrcn  A.  than  thyself 
P.iai.  69.31.  this  shall  please  the  Lord  A.  than  an  ox 
Kcc/.2.24.nolhing  A.for  a  man  than  to  eat  and  drink 
.  3.22.thore  is  nothing  A. than  to  rejoice  in  his  works 

4.  3.  b.  is  he  than  both  they,  which  have  not  been 
9.  two  are  A.  than  one||  6.  II.  what  is  man  the  A.? 

7.  10.  that  the  former  days  were  A.  thjp  these  ? 
1 11. wisdom  is  nssood  as  an  inheritance, yea  A. too 

10. 1 1.  the  serpent  will  bite,  and  a  babbler  is  no  A. 
Isa.X.5.  givo  a  oame  A.than  of  sons  and  daughters 


BET 

Lam.  4.  9.  they  that  bo  slain  with  the  sword  are  i 
Kick.  30.  11.  1  will  setlle  you,  and  do  A.  to  you 
Dan. i.-2i).  in  all  matters  he  found  them  ten  Uvnetb 
Bos.  3.  7.  then  was  it  A.  with  mo  than  now 
Jimos  0.  2.  bo  they  A.  than  these  kingdoms  t 
►jVuA.  3.  8.  art  thou  A.  than  populous  No? 
Mat.  6.  30.  behold  the  fowls  of  the  air,  are  ye  not 
much  A.  than  they  7  Luke  12.  34, 
12. 12.  how  much  then  is  a  man  A.  than  u  sheep  t 

18.0.  it  were  A. for  him  that  a  millstone  were  hang- 
ed about  his  nock,  Mark  9.  42.  Luke  17.  3. 

Horn.  3.  9.  are  we  A.  than  they  7  no,  in  no  wiso 
1  Cur.7.38.ho  that  givelh  her  no'  i.-i  niarriage,doth'A. 

8.  y.  for  neither  if  wo  eat  are  we  tho  A. 

9.15. A. for  me  to  die,tlian  to  make  my  glorying  void 

11.  17.  you  come  together  not  for  A.  but  lor  wors* 
Phil.  2.  3.  let  each  esteem  other  A.  than  himself 
I/ib.  1.  4.  being  made  so  much  A.  than  the  angels 

0.  9.  but  beloved, we  aro  persuaded  A.ihingsol  you 

7.  7.  without  contrad.  the  less  is  blessed  of  tho  A, 
19.  nothing  perfect, but  bringing  in  of  a  A. hope  did 
32.  Jisus  was  made  a  surely  of  a  A.  testament 

8.  0.  by  how  much  also  he  is  the  Mediator  of  a  A. 

covenant,  established  on  A.  promises 

9.  23.  but  heavenly  things  with  A.  sacrifices 

10.  34.  in  heaven  a  A.  and  enduring  substance 

11.  10.  they  desire  a  A.  country,  a  hoaveidy 
35.  ihat  they  might  obtain  a  A.  resurrection 
40.  God  having  provided  some  A.  thing  for  ui 

12.  24.  that  speaketh  A.  things  than  thaLof  Abel 
"Pet.  2.  21.  A.  (or  them  not  to  have  know'n  tho  way 

BETTER  i*. 

Prov.  15.  10.  A.  is  little  with  the  fear  of^e  Lord 

17.A.i>  a  dinner  of  herbs  where  love  is,t^n  an  o.t 

10.8.  b.is  a  little  with  righteousness  than  levenuca 

16.  how  much  A.  is  it  to  get  wisdom  than  gold 

17. 1.  A.  is  a  dry  morsel  and  quietness  therewith 
19.  1.  A.  is  the  poor  thot  walks  in  integrity,  28.  6 
27.  10.  for  A.  is  a  neighbour  that  is  near,  than 

Bed.  4.  6.  A.  is  a  handful  with  quietness,  than 
13.  A.  is  a  poor  wise  child  than  a  foolish  king 
0.  9.  A.  i>lhe  sight  of  the  eyes  than  the  wandering 

7.  8.  A.  is  the  end  of  a  thing  than  the  beginning 
Cant.  4.  10.  how  much  A.  is  thv  love  than  wine 

;*  BETTER,  or  is  i7  BETTER. 
./udg.  9.  2.  whether  is  A.  for  you,  that  all  rcijn 
IH.  19.  is  it  A.  to  be  a  priest  to  one,  than  to  a  tribe? 
i<H«A4.15.lhy  daughter  is  A. to  thee  than  seven  sons 

1  Sam.  15.  22.  behold,  to  obey  is  b.  than  sacrifica 
28.  given  to  a  neighbour  that  is  A.  than  thou 

2  Sum.  17. 14.  counsel  of  Ilushai  the  Archile  is  b. 
Ksth.  1.  19.  estate  to  another  that  is  b.  than  she 
Psal.  37.  16.  a  little  a  righteous  man  hath  is  A. 

63.  3.  thy  loving-kindness  is  b.  than  lift) 

84. 10.  a  day  in  thy  oourts  is  A.  than  a  thousand 
119.73.  the  law  of  thy  mouth  is  A.  to  mo  than  gold 

Prov.  3.  14.  for  the  merchandise  of  wisdom  is  b. 

8.  11.  wisdom  is  b.  than  rubies,  and  all  things 
19.  my  fruit  is  b.  than  gold,  yea,  Ihan  fine  gold 

12.  9.  is  A.  than  he  that  honourelli  himself 

10. 32.  that  is  slow  to  anger  is  A.  than  the  mighty 

19.  22.  and  a  poor  man  is  A.  than  a  liar 

22. 1 1,  favour  is  A.  Ihan  silver  and  gold 
27.  5.  open  rebuke  is  A.  than  secret  love 

Keel.  6.  3.  an  untimely  birth  is  A.  than  ho 
7.  I.  a  good  name  is  A.  than  precious  ointment 
3.  sorrow  is  A.  than  langhler,  for  by  the  sadne.'W 
of  the  countenance  the  heart  i*  made  b 
8.  the  patient  in  spirit !»  A.than  the  proud  in  spir': 

9.  4.  a  living  dog  is  A.  than  a  dead  lion 

16.  then  said  I,  wisdom  is  A.  than  strength 

18.  wisdom  is  A.  than  weapons  of  war 
Cant.  1.  2.  for  thy  love  is  A.  Ihan  wino 
Luke  5.  39.  for  ho  saiih,  the  old  is  A. 

Phil.  1.  23.  and  to  he  with  Christ,  which  is  far  b 

It  is  BETTER,  or  BETTER  it  is. 
Gen.  29. 19.  it  is  A,  I  give  her  to  ihee  than  another 
2  Sam.  18.  3.  ?7  i.«  A.  thou  succour  us  outof  tho  city 
Psal.\  IS.S.it  is  A.to  trust  in  the  Lord  Ihan  to  put,9, 
Prov.  16.  19.  A.  it  is  to  be  of  an  humble  spirit 

21.9.  i7i.»  A.to  dwell  inapornerof  the  house,2.5.24. 

19.  it  is  A.  to  dwell  in  the  wilderness  than  with 
25.7.  A.  it  is  that  it  be  said  to  thee,  come  up  hither 

Kcct.  5.  5.  A.  it  is  that  thou  shouldest  not  vow 
7.  2.  it  is  A.  to  g«  lo  the  house  of  mourning  than 
5.  it  is  b.  to  hear  the  rebuke  of  the  wise  than 
Jonah  i.  3.  it  is  A.  for  mc  to  die  than  to  live,  8. 
Mat.  18.  8.  it  is  b.  for  thee  to  enter  into  life  halt  or 
maimed,  Ihan  to  be  cast,  9.  Mark  9. 43,  45, 47. 
I  Cor.  7.  9.  for  it  is  A.  to  marry  than  lo  burn 
1  Pet.  3. 17.  it  is  A.  that  ve  snfTer  for  well  doing  thai 

BETTERED. 
.^fttrA5.20.8hc  was  not  hi  iie  A.bnt  rather  grow  won* 

BETWEEN. 
Oen.  1. 1  4.  God  divided  A.  light  and  darknen 

1 14.  to  divide  A.  light  and  darkness 
3.  1.5.  I  will  put  enmity  A.  thy  seed  and  her  seed 
9.  16.  tho  covenant  A.  God  and  every  crnaturo 
1.5.  17.  a  burning  lamp  passed  A.  those  piecra 

49. 10.  Dor  a  lawgiver  from  A.  bii  feet,  tiU  Sbilo^ 


/ 


/ 


BID 

EMod.  8.  33. 1  will  put  a  dmsioD  b.  mj  people 

12.  t  6.  kill  it  b.  tlie  two  eveiiiugs,  A'utn.  D.  t  3. 

13.  U-  and  it  slialt  be  for  a  sign  to  tbue,  and  a  iiic- 

nioriul  6.  thine  ejrcs,  10.  Deal.  tj.  6.  \  11.  18. 

18. 16.  they  come,  and  1  judge  b  one  and  another 

26.  33.  the  vail  shall  divide  b.  holy  and  most  hu^f 
J^um.  11.  33.  while  tlie  tlesli  wa^  b.  their  teeth 

as.  t  -1.  the  oUicr  lamb  ortur  b.  two  evenings 
Ueut.  17.  8.  b.  blood  and  blood,  b.  plea,  b.  stroke 

33.  12.  and  he  shall  dwell  b.  his  ilioulders 
Jadg.  4.  5.  Deborah  dwelt  b.  Ramah  and  I3eth-el 
l&ain.T.  14.  there  was  peace  i.  Israel  and  Amoritcs 
2  Sam.  19. 35.  discern  6.  good  and  evil,  IKings  3.'.l. 
I  Kings  18.  21.  Low  long  halt  ye  b.  tw  o  opinions  ? 
Proo.  18.  18.  the  lot  parieth  b.  the  mighty 
Jer.  34.  18.  they  passed  b.  parls  of  the  calf,  19. 
Ezek.  34.  17.   I  judge  b.  cattle  and  cattle,  b.  rams 
Hot.  2.  2.  and  her  adulteries  from  b.  lier  breasts 
,loel  2.  17.  the  priests  weep  b.  the  porch  and  altar 
Zech.  11.  14.  break  the  brotherhood  b.  Judah 
Mat.  23.  35.  ye  slew  b.  the  temple  and  the  altar 
John'i.  25.  a  question  b.  John's  disciples  and  Jews 
..^cls  13.  142.  might  be  preached  the  sabbath  b. 
Rom.  10.  12.  no  difference  b.  the  Jew  and  Greek 
1  Cor. 7.34.  there  is  difl'erence  4.  a  wife  and  a  virgin 

1  Tim.'i.  5.  there  is  one  Mediator  b.  God  and  men 

BETWIXT. 
Job  36.  32.  not  to  shine  by  the  cloud  thatcomcth  4 
Cant.  1.  13.  he  shall  lie  all  night  b.  my  breasts 
Phil.  1.  23.  I  am  in  a  strait  b.  two,  having  a  de.'iire 

BEVV.VIL. 
/.«o.  10.  6.  b.  the  burning  the  Lord  h.ith  kindled 
Ueut.  31-  13,  and  b.  her  father  ami  mother  a  month 
Judg.^.  37.  that  1  may  go  and  b.  my  virginity,  38. 
Jsa.  16.  9.  I  will  b.  with  the  weejiing  of  Jazer 

2  Cor.  12. 21.  tliat  I  shall  b.  many  who  bave  sinned 
Rev.  18.  9.  shall  b.  her,  when  they  see  the  smoke 

BEWAILED,  ETH. 
Jer.  4.  31.  the  daughter  of /.ion  that  b.  herself 
J^uke  8.  52.  and  all  v(ept  and  b.  her,  but  he  said 
23.  27.  of  women  also  who  b.  and  lamented  him 

BEWARE 
Signifies,  [\]To  takecare,  I'rov.19.25.  [2]  To  have 
a  singular  and  special  regard  lo,  E.\od.  'Si.  21. 
We  must  beware  [1]  Uf  forgetting  God,  Deut.  6. 
12.  I  8.  11.     [2]  Of  evil  t/ioughts,  Deut.  15.  9. 
[3]  Of  things  forbidden,  J\id^.  13.4,  13.  [4]  Of 
dangers  foretold,  2  Kings  6.  9.  Job  36.  18.     [5] 
Of  God's  wrath,  Acts  13.  40.     [6]   Of  false 
Uachers,  Mat.  7.  15.  |  16.  6,  11.     [71  Of  men, 
Mat.  10.  17.     [8]  Of  evil  workers,  Phil.  3.  2. 
[9]  Of  the  error  of  the  wicked,  2  Pet.  3. 17.  [10] 
Of  covet ousness,  Luke  12.  15.  |  20.  46. 
Oen.  24.  6.  b.  that  thou  bring  not  my  son  thither 
Eiod.  23.  21.  b.  of  him  and  obey  his  voice 
Deut.  6. 12.  then  b.  lest  thou  forget  the  Lord,  8. 1 1. 
15.9.  b.  there  be  not  a  wicked  thought  in  thy  heart 
Jadg.  13.  4.  b.  I  pray  thee,  and  drink  no  wine,  13. 
2  Sam.  18.  12.  b.  that  none  touch  the  young  man 
iKings  6.9. saying  A. that  thou  pass  not  such  a  place 
Job  36.  18.  b.  lest  he  take  thee  away  with  his  stroke 
Prov.  19.  25.  smite  a  scorncr,  and  the  simple  will  b. 
/«i.36.  )8.  b.  lest  Ilezekiah  persuade  you,  saying 
Mat.  7.  15.  b.  of  false  prophets  ||  10. 17.  ft.  of  men 
16.  6.  take  heed  and  b.  of  the  leaven  of  the  Pha- 
risees, 11.  Mark  8.  l.'i.  Luke  12.  1. 
Mark  12.  38.  b.  of  the  scribes,  Luke  20.  46. 
Luke  12.  15.  take  heed  and  4.  of  covetoi^nes-s 
./ids  13.  40.  4.  lest  that  come  which  is  si»kcn 
PhiL^.i.  4.of  dogs,  4. of  evil  workers,  4.of  concision 
Col.  2.  8.  4.  lest  any  man  spoil  you  thro'  philo8o[>hy 
2  Pet.  3.  17.  4.  li'Bl  ye  niso,  being  led  away  with 
BEWITCHED.  [error 

•Acts  8.  9.  Simon  ft.  the  people  of  Samaria,  11. 
Oal.  3.  1.  O  foolish  Galaiianfi,  who  hath  4.  you  7 

BEWRAY. 
/<a.l6.3.hidethcnutcnsi8,ft.nnthimthatwanderetli 

BEWRAYETH. 
Ptov.YI.  16.  the  oinlmcnt  of  his  right  hand  4.  itself 
29.  24.  he  hcareth  cursing,  and  ft.  it  not 
^a<.26.73.  thou  art  one  of  them,  Ihy  speech  ft.  thee 

BEYOND. 
Mum.  22. 18.  Balaam  said,  I  cannot  go  ft.  the  word 
of  the  Lord  my  God,  to  do  lessor  more,  24. 13. 
Deut.  30. 13.  nor  is  it  ft.  the  sea,  that  shouldest  say 

1  Salk.  20.  22.  the  arrows  ore  ft.  thee,  3<;,  37. 

S  Sam.  10.  16.  ft.  the  river,  1  Kings  14.  15.  1  Chron. 
19.  16.  F.ira  4.  17,aO.  |  6,  6,  a  1  7.  21,  25. 
JV«A.  2.  7,  9.  laa.  7.  20.  |  18.  1.  ZepA.3. 10. 

2  Chr.  20.  2  multitude  from  ft.  the  sea,  Jer.  25.  22. 
Mark  6.  51.  they  were  amazed  A.  measure,  7.  37. 

3  Cor.  8.  3.  and  4.  Iheir  power  they  were  willing 
10.  14.  for  we  glretch  not  ft.  our  meajiuro 

Oal.  1.13.  ft.  measure  1  persecuted  Ihi!  rhurrhofO. 

1  7'ike««.4.n.ihal  nomnngoft.and  defraud  his  brutli. 

BlYOKK  .Jordan.     .Sre  JoRDiN. 

Bibber.     .SVr  Wine. 

RID 

8i(tnifie«,  fl]  To  invite,  Mai.  22.  9.  Luke  14.  12 

121  To  command,  Mat.  14.  23.     [3]  To  tcish, 

34 


BIN 

SJoho  10.    [4]  To  sanctify,  or prtpare,  Zeph. 
1.  t7. 
.fosh.  6. 10.  till  the  day  I  4.  you  shout,  then  shout 

1  Sam.  i).  27.  said,  4.  the  servant  pasf  on  before  ue 

2  Sam.  2.26.  how  long  ere  4.  the  people  return  from 
•iKiiigs  4.24.  slack  not  riding  for  mee.\ccptI4.thee 

5.  13.  if  the  prophet  hod  ft.  thee  do  a  great  thing 
10.  5.  we  will  do  all  that  thou  shall  4.  ue 
Jonah  3. 2.  preach  to  it  the  preaching  that  I  4.  thee 
Zeph.  1.  7.  for  the  Lord  hath  ft.  his  guests 
Mat.  14.  28.  4.  me  come  to  thee  on  the  water 
22.  9.  as  many  as  ye  shall  find  ft.  to  the  marriage 
23.3.  what  tliey  ft. you  observe,tliat  observe  and  do 
Luke  9.  61.  let  me  first  ft.  them  farewell  at  home 
10.  40.  4.  her  therefore  that  she  help  me 
14.12.lest  they  also  4. thee  again,and  a  recompenco 

1  Ror.10.27.  if  any  that  believe  not  4.  you  to  a  feast 

2  John  10.  receive  him  not,  nor  ft.  him  God  speed 

BIDDEN. 

1  Sam.  9.  13.  and  afterwards  they  eat  that  be  ft. 

2  .Sa7H.  16W1.  let  him  curse,  for  the  Loiu  hath  4. 
Mat.  1.  24.  then  Joseph  did  as  the  angel  had  ft.  him 

'22.3.  and  sent  to  call  Ihem  that  were  4.  to  wedding 
4.  tell  thcin  who  are  ft. I  have  prepared  my  dinner 
8.  but  they  who  were  ft.  were  not  worthy 
Luke  7.39.when  the  Pharisee  wlio  had  4. him  saw  it 

14.  7.  he  jiut  forth  a  parable  to  those  who  were  4. 
8.  when  thou  art  4. lest  a  more  honourab. man  be  4. 

10.  when  thou  art  ft. go  and  sit  in  the  lowest  room 
24.  none  of  those  men  ft.  shall  taste  of  my  supper 

BIDDETH,  BIDDING. 

1  Sam.  SS.  14.  goeth  at  thy  4.  and  is  honourable 
~John  11.  he  that  4.  him  God  speed,  is  partaker 

BIDE. 

ftom. 11.23.  if  they  4.not  still  in  unbelief,  be  grafted 

BIER. 

2  Sam.  3.  31.  king  David  himself  followed  the  4. 
Luke  7.  14.  he  came  and  touched  the  ft.  and  said 

BILL. 

Luke  16.  6.  take  thy  ft.  and  write  50.  H  7.  take  thy  ft. 

See  Divorce. 

BILLOWS. 

Psal.i2.7.  all  thy  4.  are  gone  over  me,  JbnaA 2. 3. 

BIND 
Signifies,  [1]  To  tie  up,  or  fasten  together.  Gen. 
37.  7.  Deut.  14.  25.  [2]  To  bind  with  chains, 
Mark  5. 3.  Acts  12. 6.  [3]  Tv  keep  fast,  or  sure, 
Prov.  3.  3.  I  6.  21.  [4]  To  engage  by  vow,  or 
promise.  Num.  30.  2,  II,  13.  [5]  To  confirm,  or 
ratify,  RIat.  16.  19.  [f^]  Judiciously  to  declare, 
or  pronounce  a  person  s  sins  unpardoned,  ac- 
cording to  the  directions  of  God's  word,  and 
to  inflict  any  church  censure  upon  him  for  the 
same.  Mat.  16.  19.  |  18.  18.  [7]  To  distress,  or 
trouble,  Luke  13.  16.     [8]  To  restrain,  Job  28. 

11.  [9]  To  be  under  a  marriage  tic,  or  obli- 
gation to  perform  the  duties  incumbent  on  a 

ferson  in  thai  relation,  Rom.  7. 2.  1  Cor.  7.  39 
10]  Powerfully  to  persuade,  influence,  or  con- 
strain. Acts  20.  22. 
They  bind  heavy  burdens  on  men.  Mat.  23.  4. 
They  impose   many  strict   injtinctions,   over 
and  above  what  the  lata  requires,  and  seventy 
exact  obedience  thereto  from  others. 
F.zod.  2H.  28.  they  shall  4.  the  breast-plate  by  rings 
fij'um.  30.  2.  if  a  man  swear  an  oath  to  ft.  his  soul 
IJeut.a.S.  thoushalt  ft.  them  for  a  sign  on  thy  hand 
14.  25.  shall  ft.  up  the  money,  and  go  to  the  place 
fosh.  2.  18.  thou  shalt  ft.  this  line  in  the  window 
Judg.  15.  10.  to  ft.  Samson  are  we  come  up 

12.  they  said,  we  are  come  down  to  ft.  thee 

13.  no,  but  we  will  4.  thee  fast,  and  deliver  thee 
16.  5.  that  we  may  4.  Samson  to  afflict  him 

.fob  31.  36.  I  will  ft.  it  as  a  crown  to  me 
34.  t  n.  shall  even  he  that  hateth  right  4.7 
.38.  31.  canst  ft.  the  sweet  influences  of  Pleiades  ? 

39.  10.  canst  thou  ft.  the  unicorn  with  his  band  ? 

40.  1,3.  hide  them,  and  ft.  their  faces  in  secret 

41.  5.  wilt  thou  ft.  Leviathan  for  thy  maidens  ? 
Psnl.  105.  22.  to  ft.  his  princes  at  his  pleasure 

118.  27.  ft.  the  sacrifice  with  cords  to  the  aliar 
149.  8.  to  ft.  their  kings  with  chains  and  nobles 
Pron.  3.  3.  A.  them  about  thy  neck,  write  them 

6.  21.  ft.  them  continually  upon  thine  heart 

7.  3.  ft.  them  on  thy  fingers,write  them  on  thy  heart 
Isa.  8.  16.  ft.  up  the  testimony,  seal  the  law 

49.  18.  and  ft.  them  on  thee  as  a  bride  doth 
61.  1.  he  hath  sent  me  to  4.  up  the  broken-hearted 
F.iek.  34.  10.  I  will  4.  up  what  was  broken 
Dan.  3.  20.  he  commanded  moat  mighly  men  to  6. 
Ifos.  6.  1.  he  h«th  smitten  us,  and  will  4.  us  np 
10.  10.  when  they  ft.  themselves  in  two  furrows 
Mie.  I.  13.  ft.  the  chariot  to  the  swift  beast 
Mai.  12.29.  except  ho  first  4.  the  slrorg  man,  anil 
then  ho  will  spoil  his  hmisi',  Mark  3.  27. 
13.  30.  ft.  the  tares  in  bundles  to  bum  them 
16.  19.  whatsoever  thou  slialt  ft.  on  enrlh,  18.  18. 
22.  13.  ffrliim  hand  and  foot,  take  nnd  cast  him 
2H.  4.  ft.  heavy  burdens  grievous  to  be  borne 
Mark  5.  3.  no  man  could  4.  bim  with  cboini 


BIR 

.ids  9. 14.  authority  to  4.  all  that  call  on  thy  naot 
12.8.  angel  said,  gird  thyself,  4.  on  thy  sandals 
21.  11.  so  shall  the  Jews  4.  the  man  that  ownetb 

Bl.NDETlI. 
Job  5.  18.  he  maketli  sore  and  ft.  up,  he  woundetb 
2<J.  8.  he  ft.  up  the  waters  in  his  thick  clouds 
28.  II.  he  ft.  the  floods  from  overflowing 
30.  '^.  it  ft.  me  about  as  the  collar  of  my  coal 
36.  13.  hypocrites,  they  cry  not  when  he  4.  tlitni 
Psal.  129.  7.  nor  he  that  4.  sheaves,  his  bosom 
147.  3.  he  healeth  the  broken  in  heart,  and  4.  np 
Prov.  26. 8.  as  he  that  4.  a  stone  in  a  sling,  so  is  he 
Isa.  30. 26.  in  day  Lord  ft.  up  breach  of  his  people 

BlNDmG. 
<7cn  37.7.  we  were  ft.sheavcs  in  field, my  sheaf  arose 
49.  11.  ft.  his  foal  to  the  vine,  and  his  aes's  cult 
JVum.  30.  13.  every  4.  oath  to  afflict  the  soul 
yhts  22.  4.  4.  and  delivering  into  prisons  men 

BIRD 
Signifies,  [I]  j?  fowl,  small  or  large.  Jam.  3.  7 
[2]  Cyrus,  who  came  swiftly  from  Persia  to  de 
stroy  Babylon,  Isa.  40. 11.     [3]  The  Chaldeane, 
or  other  neighbours  that  persecuted  and  afflict- 
ed the  Jews,  Jer.  12.  9.     [4]  The  polluted  atid 
corrupt  inhabitants  of  Babylon,  Kev.  18.  2. 
Gen.  7. 14.  every  4.  of  every  sort  went  into  the  ark 
/.ec. 14.52.  shall  cleanse  the  house  with  the  livin^ft 
.fob  41.  5.  wilt  thou  play  with  him  as  with  a  ft..* 
Psal.l\.  1.  to  my  soul,  flee  as  a  ft.to  your  mountain 
""  ''  our  soul  18  escaped  as  a  ft.  out  of  the  snare 


124. 


ProD.1.17.  in  vain  the  net  is  spread  in  sight  of  anyft 

6.  5.  and  as  a  ft.  from  the  hand  of  the  fowler 

7.  23.  as  a  ft.  hasteth  to  the  snare,  knows  not 
26.2.  as  the  A. by  wandering,so  the  curse  causeles* 
27.8.  as  a  ft. that  wandereth  from  her  nest,eo  a  man 

Eccl.  10.  20.  the  ft.  of  the  air  shall  tell  the  matter 
12.  4.  he  shall  rise  up  at  the  voice  of  the  4. 

Isa.  16.  2.  as  a  wandering  ft.  cast  out  of  her  nest 
46.  11.  calling  a  ravenous  A.  from  the  east 

Jer.  12.  9.  my  heritage  is  to  me  as  a  speckled  ft. 

Lam.  3.  52.  mine  enemies  chased  me  like  a  ft. 

IIos.  9.  11.  their  glory  shall  fly  away  like  a  ft. 

11.  11.  they  shall  tremble  as  a  A.  out  of  Egypt 
Jlmos  3.  5.  can  a  ft.  fall  where  no  gin  is  for  him  1 
Hcu.  18.2.  a  cage  of  everv  unclean  and  hateful  ft. 

BIRDS. 
Gen.  15.  10.  but  the  ft.  divided  he  not 

40.  17.  tiie  ft.  did  eat  them  out  of  the  basket 

19.  the  ft.  shall  eat  thy  flesh  from  off  thee 
/-eij.14.4.  priest  shall  command  to  lake  two  ft.alivs 
Deul.  14.  11.  of  all  clean  A.  ye  shall  cat 
2  Sam.  21.  10.  suffered  not  the  ft.  to  rest  by  day 
Psal.  104.  17.  where  the  ft.  make  their  nests 

148.  1 10.  praise  the  Lord,  ye  ft.  of  wing 
Keel.  9.  12.  as  ft.  that  arc  caught  in  the  snare 
Cant.  2.  12.  the  time  of  the  singing  of  ft.  is  come 
/.<a.31.5.  asft.flying,so  will  Lord  defend  Jerusalem 
.ler.  4.  2.5.  and  all  the  ft.  of  the  heavens  were  fled 

5.  27.  as  a  cage  full  of  ft.  so  are  Iheir  houses 

12.  4.  the  beasts  are  consumed,  and  the  ft. 
9.  the  A.  round  about  are  against  her,  come  ye 

Kick.  .39.  4.  I  will  give  thee  to  the  ravenous  ft. 
Oan.  4.  33.  his  nails  were  grown  like  ft.  claws 
Mat.  8. 20.  the  A.  of  the  air  have  nests.  Luke  9.  58 

13.  32.  the  A.  lodge  in  the  branches  thereof 
fiom,  1.  23.  into  an  image  like  to  A.  and  beasts 

1  Cor.  15.  39.  another  of  fishes,  another  of  ft. 
Jam.  3.  7.  every  kind  of  bcosts  and  ft.  is  tamed 

BIRTH 

Is  [1]  J^atural,  Exod.  28.  10.  [2]  Mortive,  or 
untimely.  Job  3.  16.  Psal.  5,8.  8.  Eccl.  6.  3.  [3] 
Supernatural,  as  was  the  bitlh  of  Christ,  Mat. 
1.  18.  Luke  1.  14.  [4]  Figurative,  for  heavy 
anguish  and  distress,  2  Kings  19.  3.  Isa.  37.  3 
[5]  For  deliverance  at  hand,  Isa.  (ifi.  9.  [6]  Fbr 
a  natural  state  in  sin,  Ezek.  16.  ,3.  [71  Fhr 
regeneration.  Tit.  3.  5.  [8]  For  earnest  desire 
for  the  good  of  souls.  Gal.  4.  19. 

The  children  are  come  to  the  birth,  2  Kings  19t  3 
H'e  have  begun  a  happy  reformation,  but  are 
hindered  by  this  insolent  Assyrian,/rom  bring- 
ing  it  to  perfection. 

ThybirlhisofthelandofCanaan,  KzrA-.lfi  3.  Tht 
root  whence  thou  didst  spring,  the  rock  whence 
thou  wast  cut,  the  place  where  thou grewrsl  up, 
the  company  and  commerce  thou  didst  use,  all 
were  of  the  land  of  Canaan  ;  thy  original  it  no 
better  than  the  worst  of  nations,  thou  hast  their 
vicious  naturr,manners,and practices,  and  art 
as  vile  and  obnoiious  to  my  curse  as  they  are. 

2  Kings  19.  3.  children  are  come  to  the  A.  /.»a.37.3 
./"ft  3.  16.  as  a  hidden  untimely  A.  I  had  not  been 
rsiil.  Ttt*.  8.  let  them  pass  like  Ihe  iinlimely  ft. 
Keel.  fi.  3.  an  uniimely  A.  is  betler  than  he 

7.  1.  day  of  death  is  better  than  day  of  one's  A. 
Isa.  66.9.  shall  1  bring  to  the  A.  not  cause  to  brmp 
Kzek.  16.  3.  thy  A.  and  nativity  is  of  Canaan 
Hot.  9.  1 1,  glory  of  E|ihraim  shall  fly  from  the  ft 
Mat.  1.  18.  the  A.  of  Jesus  Christ  was  on  this  wis* 
Luke  1.  14.  and  many  shall  rejoice  at  his  ft. 


BIT 

fohn  9.1.  he  saw  a  man  who  was  blind  from  his  J. 
Oal.  4.  19.  my  children,  of  whom  1  travail  in  b 
Reu.l'i.'J.  and  she  cried,  travailing  in  b.  and  ^mincd 

BIRTH-DAY. 
<ren.40.20.the  thii-d  day, which  was  Pharaoh's  J.-d. 
wWa£.14.(i.when  Herod's  b.-d.  was  kept,  jVark6.21. 

IJIRTH-RIGHT. 
Oc;i.25.31.Jacoh  said,  sell  me  this  day  thy  b.-righl 

33.  and  he  s\«ire,  and  sold  his  b.-right  to  Jacob 

34.  thus  Esau  despised  his  b.-right 
27.36.to»»k  away  myi(.-riVA«,and  now  my  blessing 
43.  'Si.  s^t,  the  first-born  according  to  his  b.-right 

1  Cliron.a  1.  Reuben's  6.-r.given  to  sons  of  Joseph 
JJeb  I-.  Ifi.  Esau  for  one  morsel  sold  his  b.-rig/it 

BISHOP,  S. 
Signifies,  [l]  Spiritual  overseers  that  have  the 
charge  o'  souls,  to  instruct  and  rule  them  by 
the  word,  1  Tim.  3. 1, 2.  Acts  20.  28.   [2]  Christ 
himself,  1  Pet.  2.  25. 
Phil.l. l.to  all  saints  atPhilippi,with  b.aad  deacons 
ITim.  3.  1.  if  a  man  desire  the  office  of  a  b. 
2.  a  *.  then  "must  be  blameless,  Tit.  1.  7. 
I  Pet.  2.  25.  now  returned  to  the  b.  of  your  souls 

BISHOPRIC. 
Sets  1.  20.  and  his  b.  let  another  take 

BIT,  S. 
Pial.  32.9.  who-se  mouth  must  be  held  in  with  b. 
Jam.  3.  3.  behold  we  put  b.  in  the  horses'  mouths 

BIT. 
JVum.  21. 6.  Lord  sent  fiery  serpents,  they  6. people 
Amos  5. 19.  leaned  on  a  wall,  and  a  serpent  b.  hira 

BITE. 
Eccl.  10.8.  breaketh  a  hedge,  a  serpent  shall  b.  him 

11.  the  serpent  will  4.  without  enchantment 
Jer.  8.17. 1  will  send  serpents,  and  they  shall  b.  you 
Amos  9. 3. 1  will  command  serpent,  and  he  shall  b. 
Mic.  3.  5.  the  prophets  that  b.  with  the  teeth 
Hab.  2. 7.  shall  they  not  rise  up  that  shall  4.  thee  ? 
Oal.  5.  15.  but  if  ye  4.  and  devour  one  another 

BITETH. 
Oen.  40. 17.  Dan  an  adder,  that  4.  the  horse-heels 
Prov.  23.  32.  at  the  last  it  4.  like  a  serpent 

BITTEN. 
JVam.  21.  8.  every  one  that  is  4.  when  he  looks  on 

9.  came  to  pass,  that  if  a  serpent  had  4.  any  man 

BITTER. 
Oen.  27.  34.  Esau  cried  with  an  exceeding  4.  cry 
Exod.  1.  14.  the  Egyptians  made  their  lives  4. 

12.  8.  with  4.  herbs  shall  ye  eat  it,  JV«ra.  9.  11. 
15.23.  not  drink  of  the  waters,  for  they  were  4. 

Deut.  32.  24.  shall  be  devoured  with  4.  destruction 

32.  are  grapes  of  gall,  their  clusters  are  4. 
Judg.  18.  t  25.  lest  fellows  4.  of  soul  run  on  thee 
liulh  1.  1  20.  call  me  not  Naomi,  but  4. 

1  Ham.  1.  1 10.  Hannah  was  4.  of  soul  and  prayed 

22.  t2.  everv  one  4.  of  soul  gathered  to  him 

30.  to.  spake  of  stoning,  the  people's  soul  was  4. 

2  .Sam. 17.  t8.  father's  men  be  mighty,  and  4.  of  soul 
2  Kings  4.  t  27.  let  her  alone,  her  soul  is  4.  in  her 

14. 26.  Lord  saw  affliction  of  Israel  that  it  was  4. 
Ksth.  4. 1.  Mordecai  cried  with  a  loud  and  a  4.  cry 
fob  3.  t5.  terrify  it,  as  those  who  have  a  4.  day 
20.  and  why  is  life  given  to  the  4.  in  soul  1 

13.  26.  thou  writest  4.  things  against  me 

23.  2.  even  to-day  is  my  complaint  4. 

27.  t2.  the  Almighty  who  hath  made  my  soul  4. 
Psal.  64.  3.  to  shoot  their  arrows,  even  4.  words 
Prov.  5.  4.  but  her  end  is  4.  as  wormwood 

27.  7.  to  the  hungry  soul  every  4.  thing  is  sweet 

31.  1 6.  give  wine  to  those  that  are  4.  of  soul 
J^ce/.  7.  26.  I  find  more  4.  than  death  the  woman 
Isa.  5.  20.  that  put  4.  for  sweet,  and  sweet  for  4. 

22.  t  4.  look  from  me,  I  will  be  4.  in  weeping 

24.  9.  strong  drink  shall  be  4.  to  them  that  drink 
Jer.  2.  19.  it  is  an  evil  thing  and  4.  that  thou 

4.  18.  this  is  thy  wickedness,  because  it  is  4. 

6.  26.  make  most  4.  lamentation  as  for  a  son 

31.  15.  a  voice  was  heard  in  Ramah,  4.  weeping 
F.zek.  3. 1 14.  Spirit  took  me  away,  and  I  went  4. 

27.  31.  shall  weep  for  thee  with  b.  wailing 
^mos  8.  10.  and  the  end  thereof,  as  a  4.  day 
Hah.  1.  6.  Chaldeans,  that  4.  and  hasty  nation 
Col.  3. 19.  love  your  wives,  be  not  4.  against  them 
Jam.  3.  14.  if  ye  have  4.  envying  and  strife 
PcB.  8.  11.  men  died  of  waters  because  made  b. 

10.  9.  eat  it  up,  and  it  shall  make  thy  belly  ft. 

10.  as  soon  as  I  had  eaten  it,  my  belly  was  ft. 

BITTER-WATER. 
J^um.  5.  18.  the  b.-water  that  causcth  the  curse 
Jam.  3. 11.  doth  a  fountain  send  forth  at  the  same 
place  sweet  water  and  4.? 
BITTERLY. 
Judg:  .5.53.  curse  ye  4.  the  inhabitants  thereof 
Ruth  1.  20.  the  Almighty  hath  dealt  ft.  with  me 
Jsa.  22.  4.  look  away  from  me,  I  will  weep  ft. 
33  7.  the  ambassadors  of  peace  shall  weep  4. 
F.zek.  27.  30.  the  pilots  of  Tyre  shall  cry  ft. 
J/os.  12.  14.  Ephraim  provoked  him  most  4. 
y.eph.  1.  14.  the  mighty  man  shall  cry  4. 
Mat.  20.  75.  Peter  went  out,  wept  ft.  Luke  22. 63. 


BLA 

BITTERN. 

Isa.  14.  23.  make  it  a  possession  for  the  ft.  34.  11. 

Zcph.  2. 14.  the  4.  shall  lodge  in  the  upper  lintels 
BITTERNESS 

Signifies,  [1]  That  which  is  opposed  to  sweetness, 
E.xod.  15.  2:J.  [2]  Deep  sorrow  and  heaviness  of 
s;/lVi(,Job 7.11. Prov. 14.10.  [3].^  thingmostper- 
7iicious,or  that  produces  dreadful  effects,2Sam. 
2.26.  [4]  f^iulent  inward  displeasure  against 
others,  Eph.  4. 31.  [5]  Great  impiety,  Acts  8.23. 

The  gall  of  bitterness,  .tcts  8. 23.  In  a  state  most 
offensive  and  distasteful  to  God;  under  the 
power  of  corruption,  hypocrisy,  and  aiiihition. 

A  root  of  bitterness,  Ilcb.  12.15.  Jliiy  scandalous 
sin,dangirous  error , or schism,tending  to  draw 
personstoapostasy,thecndwhcreufwiUliebitter. 

Gen.  26.  135.  which  were  4.  of  s))irit  to  Isaac 

Ezod.  15.  t23.  the  name  of  it  was  called  4. 

Hulh  1.  1 13.  I  have  much  ft.  for  your  sake 

1  .Sim.  1. 10.  Hannah  was  in  4. of  soul  and  prayed 
15.  .'W.  surely  the  4.  of  death  is  past 

2  .Sam.  2.  26.  the  sword  will  be  4.  in  the  latter  end 
Jdb  7.  11.  I  will  complain  in  the  ft.  of  my  soul 

9.  18.  to  take  my  breath,  but  filleth  me  with  4. 

10.  1.  I  will  speak  in  the  4.  of  my  siiul 
21.  25.  another  diclh  in  the  4.  of  his  soul 

Prov.  14.  10.  the  heart  knoweth  his  own  4. 
17.  2).  a  foolish  son  is  4.  to  her  tliat  bare  him 

Isa.  38.  15.  go  softly  all  my  life  in  4.  of  my  soul 
17.  behold,  for  peace  I  h;id  great  4. 

Lam.  1.  4.  her  virgins  are  atliicted,  and  she  is  in  4. 
3.  15.  he  hath  filled  me  with  4.  he  hath  made 

Ezek.  3. 14.  Spirit  took  me  away,  and  I  went  in  4. 
21.  6.  and  with  4.  sigh  before  their  eyes 
27.  31.  they  shall  weep  for  thee  with  4. 

Hos.  12.  1 14.  Ephraim  provoked  him  with  ft. 

Zech- 12. 10.  be  in  4.  for  him  as  one  that  is  in  ft.  for 

Jicts  8.  23.  I  perceive  thou  art  in  the  gall  of  4. 

Rom.  3.  14.  whose  mouth  is  full  of  cursing  and  6. 

Eph.  4.  31.  let  all  4.  be  put  away  from  you 

Heb.  12.  15.  lest  any  root  of  4.  springing  up 
BLACK 

Signifies,  The  colour  so  called,  which  is  opposite 
to  white.  Mat.  5.  36. 

It  is  applied,  [1]  To  the  church,  whose  outward 
beauty  is  of tcneclipsed,hy  reason  of  infirmities, 
scandals,  reproaches,  and  persecutions.  Cant. 
1.  5.  [2]  To  the  Jews,  whose  countenance 
changed  and  turned  black,  like  persons  ready 
to  be  strangled,  being  struck  with  terror  at 
the  approach  of  God's  judgments,  Joel  2.  6. 
Nah.  2.  10.  [3]  To  hell,  the  place  of  extreme 
darkness,  horror,  and  misnry,  Jude  13. 

Lev.  13.  31.  and  that  there  is  no  4.  hair  in  it 
37.  and  there  is  4.  hair  grown  up  therein 

1  Kings  18.  45.  the  heaven  was  4.  with  clouds 
.Job  30.30.  my  skin  is  ft.  upon  me,  my  bones  burnt 
Prov.  7. 9.  in  the  evening,  in  the  ft.  and  dark  night 
Cnnt.\.h.  I  am  ft.  but  comely,  O  daughters  of  Jerus. 

6.  look  not  upon  me,  because  I  am  A. 
5.  11.  his  locks  are  bushy  and  4.  as  a  raven 
Jer.  4.  28.  for  this  the  heavens  shall  be  4. 
8.  21.  for  the  hurt  of  my  people  I  am  hurt,  I  am  4. 
14.  2.  the  gates  thereof  languish,  they  are  4. 
Lam.  5.  10.  our  skin  was  4.  like  an  oven 
Ezek.  31.  f  15.  I  caused  Lebanon  to  be  4.  for  him 
Zech.  6.  2.  in  the  second  chariot  4.  horses 

6.  4.  horses  go  forth  into  the  north  country 
Mai.  3.  I  14.  what  profit  that  we  walked  in  4.? 
Mat.  5.  36.  canst  not  make  one  hair  white  or  A. 
Rev.  6.  5.  and  I  beheld,  and  lo  a  4.  horse 
12.  the  sun  became  4.  as  sackclolli  of  hair 
BLACKER. 
Lam.  4.  8.  their  visage  is  4.  than  a  coal 

BLACKISH. 
Job  0.  16.  which  are  4.  bv  reason  of  the  ic8 

BLACKNESS. 
.fob  3.  5.  let  the  ft.  of  the  day  terrify  it 
Isa.  50.  3.  I  clothe  the  heavens  with  4. 
Lam.  4.  f  8.  their  visage  is  darker  than  ft. 
./oel  2.  6.  all  faces  shall  gather  4.  JVaA.  2.  10. 
Heb.  12.  18.  ye  are  not  come  to  4.  and  darkness 
Jude  13.  to  whom  is  reserved  the  ft.  of  darkness 

BLADE. 
Judg.  3.  22.  the  haft  also  went  in  after  the  4. 
./o4  31. 22.  then  let  my  arm  fall  frommy  shoulder-4. 
Jl/aM3.20.  when  the  A.  was  sprung  up,  Mark  4.28. 

BLAINS. 
Ezod.  9.  9.  a  boil  breakint  forth  with  4.  10. 

BLAME. 
Grn.  43.  0.  then  let  me  bear  the  4.  for  ever,  44.  32. 

2  Cor.  8.  20.  avoiding  that  no  man  should  ft.  us 
Eph.  1.  4.  holy  and  without  4.  before  him  m  love 

BLAMED. 
2  Cor.  6.  3.  no  offence,  that  the  ministry  be  not  ft. 
Gal.  2. 11.  withstood  him,  because  he  was  to  be  4. 

BLAMELESS.  •* 

Gen.  44. 10.  he  shall  be  my  servant,  ye  shall  be  4. 
Josh.  2.  17.  we  will  be  4.  of  this  thine  oath 
Judg.  15.  3.  now  shall  I  be  more  4.  than  Philistines 


BLA 

Mat.  12.5.  the  priests  profane  sabbath,  and  are  4. 
Luke  1.  6.  walking  in  ordinances  of  the  Lord  ft 
1  Cor.  1.  8.  that  ye  may  be  4.  in  the  day  of  the  Lord 
Phil.  2.  15.  that  ye  may  be  4.  and  harmless 
3.  6.  touching  the  righteousness  in  the  law  ft. 

1  Thess.  5.  23.  spirit,  soul,  and  body,  preserved  b 
17'i(H.  3.  2.  a  bishop  then  must  be  4.   Tit.  1.  7. 

10.  use  the  olfice  of  a  deacon,  being  found  A. 
5.  7.  give  in  charge,  that  they  may  be  4. 
Tit.  1.6.  if  any  be  4.  the  husband  of  one  wife 

2  Pet,  3. 14.  ye  may  be  found  without  spot  and  ft 

BLASPHE.ME 

Signifies,  [l^To  speak  ceil  of  God,  Rom.2.24.  Tit. 
2.  5.  [2]  To  rail  against  and  deny  the  work  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  out  of  malice,  Mat.  12.  31. 

2  .Sam. 12.14.  occasion  the  enemies  of  the  Lord  to  A 

1  Kings2\.  10.  thou  didst  4.  God  and  the  king,  13. 

Psal.  74. 10.  shall  the  enemy  4.  thy  name  forever"? 

Mark  3.  28.  wherewith  soever  they  shall  4. 
W.  but  he  that  shall  4.  against  the  Holy  Ghost 

Acts  26.  11.  and  I  compelled  them  to  4. 

1  Tim.  1.  20.  that  they  may  learn  not  to  4. 
./am.  2.  7.  do  not  they  A.  that  worthy  name 
Rev.  13.  6.  to  4.  his  name  and  his  tabernacla 

BLASPHEMED. 
I,ev.  24.  11.  the  Israelitish  woman's  son  ft. 

2  Kings  10.  6.  with  which  the  servants  of  the  king 

of  Assyria  have  4.  me,  22.  Isa.  37.  6,  23. 
Psal.  74. 18.  the  foolish  people  have  4.  thy  namo 
Isa.  52.  5.  my  name  continually  every  day  is  4. 
65. 7.  have  burnt  incense,  and  4.  me  on  the  hilli 
Ezek.  20.  27.  in  this  your  fathers  have  4.  me 
.lets  18.  6.  when  they  opposed  themselves  and  b 
Rom.  2.24.  for  the  name  of  God  is  4.  through  you 
1  Tim.  6. 1.  name  of  God  and  his  doctrine  be  not  A. 
Tit.  2.  5.  that  the  word  of  God  be  not  4. 
Rev.  16.  9.  men  were  scorched  with  heat,  and  ft. 
11.4.  the  God  of  heaven  because  of  their  pains 
21.  men  ft.  God  because  of  the  plague  of  hail 
BLASPHEMEST,  ETH. 
Lev.  24.  16.  whoso  4.  the  I,ord,  be  put  to  death 
Psal.  44.  16.  for  the  voice  of  him  that  4. 
Mat.  9.  3.  certain  of  the  scribes  said,  this  man  ft. 
John  10.  36.  whom  the  Father  sanciifieth,  thou  ft. 

BL.\SPHEML\G. 
Acts  13.  45.  spoken  of  Paul,  contradicting  and  6. 

BLASPHEMER,  S. 
Acts  19.  37.  which  are  not  4.  of  your  goddess 

1  7'?™.  1. 13.  who  was  before  a  4.  and  a  persecutor 

2  Tim.  3  2.  in  the  last  days  men  shall  be  A. 

BLASPHEMY. 
2  Kings  19.  3.  this  day  is  a  day  offt.  Isa.  37.  3. 
Mat.  12.  31.  all  manner  of  4.  shall  be  forgiven,  but 
ft.  against  the  Holy  Ghostshall  not  be  foigiven 
26.  65.  he  hath  spoken  ft.  behold,  now  ye  have 
heard  his  ft.  Mark  14.  64. 
Mark  7.  22.  out  of  the  heart  of  men  proceed  A. 
.Tiihn  10.  33.  we  stone  thee  not,  but  for  A. 
Col.  3.  8.  but  now  ye  also  put  oil"  malice,  ft. 
Rev.  2.  9. 1  know  4.  of  them  that  say  they  are  Jews 
13.  1.  and  upon  his  heads  the  name  of  A. 
0.  and  he  opened  his  mouth  in  4.  against  God 
BLASPHEMIES. 
Ezek.  35.  12.  know  that  I  have  heard  all  thy  b. 
Mat.  1.5.  19.  out  of  the  heart  firoceed  thefts,  A. 
Mark  2.  7.  why  doth  this  man  thus  speak  4.? 
3.  28.  and  4.  wherewith  they  shall  blasphemo 
Luke  5.  21.  who  is  this  which  speakelh  4.? 
Rev.  13.  5.  was  a  month  given  him  speaking  A. 

BLASPHEMOUS. 
Acts  6.  11.  we  have  heard  him  speak  4.  words 
13.  this  man  ceaseih  not  lo  speak  4.  words 
BLASPHEMOUSLY. 
Luke  22.  65.  many  other  things  A.  spake  they 

BLAST 
Signifies,  [1]  IVind  and  frosts  that  immediately 
foUj'w  ruin,  and  are  very  destructive  to  fruits. 
Gen. 41.6.  lKings8.37.  (^]  A  blowing  in  horns. 
Josh.  6.  5.     [3]  God's  anger  and  power,  Exod. 
15.  8.  2 Sam.  22.  16.  Job  4.  9.      [4]  A  violent, 
sudden,  and  terrible  stroke  sent  by  God  upon 
the  wicked,  2  Kings  19.  7.     [5]  The  furious 
temptations  of  men  and  the  devil,  Isa.  25.  4 
Exod.  15.8.  with  4.  of  thy  nostrils  the  waters  were 
.Tosh.  6.  5.  when  they  make  a  long  ft.  with  horns 
2  Sam.  22.  16.  at  rebuke  of  the  Lord,  at  the  A.  of 
the  breath  of  his  nostrils,  Psal.  18.  15. 
2K')n^s]9.7.  I'll  send  a  ft^on  Sennacherib,  Isa.31.7. 
.Tob  4.  9.  by  the  4.  of  God  they  perish 
Isa.  25.  4.  when  the  4.  of  the  terrible  is  as  a  storm 

BLASTED. 
Gen.  41.  6.  thin  cars  4.  with  the  oast  wind,  23, 27. 
2  Kings  19.  26.  as  corn  h.  before  grown,  Isa.  37.27. 

BLASTING.^ 
Dent.  28.  22.  the  Lord  shall  smite  thee  «ith  ft. 
1  Kings  8.  37.  if  there  be  4.  mildew,  2  CAron.  6.28. 
Amos  4.  9.  I  have  smitten  you  with  A.  and  mildew 
Hog.  2.  17.  I  smote  vou  with  4.  and  mildew 

BLAZE. 
Mark  1.  45.  he  began  to  ft.  abroad  the  matter 


BLE 

BLEATING,  S. 

/i(4».5.1C.  aboJcst  in  sliofpl'olds  to  ^carj.of  flocks 

1  Sam.  15.  14.  what  meanuili  this  b.  of  the  ehetp? 

BLExMISU. 

Exod.  12.  5.  lamb  shall  bo  without  A.  a  male  of  first 

year,  J.eo.  U.  3.  |  14.  10.  [  '23. 1-2.  JV'um.  C.  14. 

i29. 1.  lake  a  young  bullock  ujid  two  rams  without 

b.  J.ev.  5.  15,  18.  |  li.  0.  |  9.  '2.  Kick.  46.  4. 

Lev.  X.  3.  olfer  a  main  witliout  b.  10.  |  4.23.  \  ii-i.l'J. 

3.  1.  whether  male  or  female  without  b.  0. 

4.  3.  a  bullock  without  b.  Deal.  17.1.  Enk.  45.18. 
28.  he  Bhall  bring  a  kid,  a  female  without  b. 

21. 17.  he  that  hath  b.  shall  not  ai)i)roach,  'Jl,  23. 

2J.  20.  but  whatsoever  hatli  a  b-  that  shall  ye  not 

.offer,  it  shall  not  be  accc|)tablc,  Deul.  15.  21. 

21.  in  peace  offering  and  free-will  offering  no*. 

24.  19.  if  a  n)an  cause  a  b.  in  his  neighbour 

20.  as  he  haili  caused  a  b.  in  a  man,  so  shall  it  be 

JVum.  19.  2.  they  bring  a  red  heifer  without  b. 

29.2.  one  bullock,one  ram,  seven  lambs  without  b. 

2  Sum.  14.  25.  there  was  no  b.  in  Absalom 
/Jan.  I.  4.  children  in  whom  was  no  b. 

y.ph.  5.  27.  that  it  should  be  holy  and  without  h. 

1  Pel.  1.  lU.  as  of  a  lamb  without  b.  and  spot 

BLEMISHES. 
l.ec.  22.  25.  b.  in  them,  they  shall  not  be  accepted 

2  Pel.  2.  13.  spots  they  are  and  b.  sporting 

HLESS 

tB referred,  L  To  God;  ands\gmfies,{\'\Tobeslow 
plenty  of  temporal  good  things  upon  a  persoji, 
and  make  his  affairs  prosperous  and  success- 
ful, Gen.  30.  27.  |  39.  5.  [2]  To  bestow  both 
temporal  and  spiritual  blessings  upon  a  per- 
son. Gen.  12.  2. 1  24. 35.  Eph.  1.  3.  [3J  To  make 
one  perfectly  happy  in  the  full  enjoyment  of 
himself  in  heaven.  Rev.  14.  13.  [4]  To  conse- 
crate and  set  apart  any  thing  for  a  holy  and 
sacred  use.  Gen.  2.  3.  E.\od.  20. 11.  [5]  To  give 
power  of  procreation  and  fruitfulncss,  so  as 
the  creatures  might  multiply  their  kind,  Gen. 
1.  22.  [0]  To  endue  one  with  an  heroic  spirit, 
gingular  valour,  miraculous  strength  of  body, 
and  all  other  gifts  and  graces  necessary  to  his 
calling,  Judg.  13.24.  11.  To  Christ;  and  sig- 
nifies, [1]  To  give  thanks  to  God  the  Father  in 
a  special  manner,  and  pray  for  his  blessing, 
thcreliy  palling  the  homage  of  his  human  nature 
to  his  Fatlur,  Mat.  14.  19.  Mark  0.  41.  [2]  To 
commend  others  to  Gnil  in  prayer,  as  he  icas 
vtan,  Mark  10.  10.  [3]  Powerfully  and  effec- 
tually to  work  on  men  for  their  conrersion,  so 
as  to  save  them  from  their  sins,  Acts3.'it\  III. 
To  men;  and  signifies,  [IJ  To  extol  and  praise 
God,  for  the  infinite  cxcellcacies  and  perfec- 
tions of  his  nature,  Psal.  104. 1.  1  148.  1,2.  [2] 
To  give  thanks  to  God  for  kis  mercies  and 
benefls  to  us,  Psal.  10.  7.  1 103. 1, 2.  [3]  To  pro- 
nounce a  solemn,  extraordinary,  andpropUrtic- 
al  benediction  upon  a  person,  whereby  the  holy 
patriarchs,  by  God's  appointment,  and  with 
his  concurrence,  did  declare  and  constitute  one 
of  their  sons  as  heir,  not  only  of  their  inherit- 
ance, but  of  the  promises  and  blessings  of  the 
covenant  which  God  made  with  them  and  their 
fathers  ;  both  praying  for,andforitelling  those 
blessings  which  God  would  confer  upon  them, 
Gen.  27.  4,  25,  30.  [4]  To  salute  persons,  to 
wish  them  peace  and  prosperity.  Gen.  47.  7. 
1  Sam.  13.  f  10.  Psal.  129.  8.  [',]  To  pray  to 
Ood  in  behalf  of  others,  that  he  may  hrstoic 
hit  blessing  upon  them.  Num.  fi.  23,  24.  2  Sam. 
6.  18.  Luke  6.  28.  [6]  To  account  and  reckon 
one's  self  happy  in  having  God  for  his  God. 
Isa.  65.  Ifi.  Jcr.  4.2.  [7]  To  applaud  one's  self 
as  a  wise  and  happy  person,  taking  outward 
prosperity  for  an  argument  of  God's  love  and 
favour,  P.Ha\.  49.  18.  [8]  To  flatter  one's  self 
with  the  hopes  of  impunity,  as  if  God  did  not 
take  notice  uf  sin,  and  either  could  not,  or  would 
not,  punish  sinners,  Deut.  29.  19. 

3od  hath  promined  In  bless,  fl]  .Suehasput  their 
trust  in  him,  Psal.  2. 12.  [2]  Such  as  fear  him, 
and  walk  in  his  ways,  Psal.  128. 1 .  [3)  Suck  as 
Ood  chooses  and  causes  to  draw  nigh  to  him  in 
the  duties  of  his  worship,  Psal.  05.  4.  [4)  Such 
as  have  the  saving  knowledge  of  .lesus  Christ 
wrought  in  them  by  the  Spirit  of  fio't,  Mai.  Hi. 
17.  [5]  Such  as  mourn  for  their  sins  and  spi- 
ritual wants,  Mat.  5.  4«[fi]  Such  as  are  humble 
and  lowly  in  mind,  affection,  and  coniirrsulion, 
who  are  sensible  of  their  lost  and  undone  ron- 
dilion  in  themselves,  and  of  their  own  inability 
to  help  themselves,  Mnl.  5.  3.  [7]  Such  as  are 
grnlle,patirnt,and  quiet-spirited;  irho  murmur 
not  against  God,  but  siihmit  to  all  his  correc- 
tions ;  and  who  i/varrel  not  with,  nor  revenge 
themselves  of  those  that  wrong  them.  Mat.  5. .'), 
[8]  SueJi  as  hunger  and  thirst  after  Christ  and 
kis  benefits  ;  after  freedom  from  sin.  and  holi 
*eis  of  life,  Mat.  5. 0.  [9]  Such  who,  being  in 
30 


BLE 

toardlf  affected  with  the  miseries  of  others,  do 
relieve  them  according  to  their  ability.  Mat. 5.7. 
[10]  i>uch  as  love  and  labour  for  peace  among 
all  that  are  at  odds,  whether  with  God.  with 
themselves,  or  one  jcitit  another,  Mat.  5.  9.  [llj 
Such  as  arc  sincere,  ichose  hearts  and  course 
of  life  agree  with  their  profession,  Psal.  119.  1. 
[12J  Huch  as  do  not  associate  themselves  with 
the  wicked,  nor  follow  their  evil  instigations  or 
examples,  Viidl.l.l.  [13]  SucA  whose  transgres- 
sions are  forgiven, whose  sin  is  pardoned,  I'sal. 
32.  1.  [14]  Such  as  do  not  censure  or  condemn 
a  person  under  sickness  or  affliction,  as  if  he, 
was  wicked  or  hated  of  God,  but  pity  and  re- 
lieve him,  Psal.  41.  1. 

liLESS,  God  being  agent. 

Gen.  12.  2.  the  Lord  said,  I  will  b.  tliee,  20.3,24. 

3.  I  will  6.  them  that  bless  thee,  and  curse  him 

17.  IG.  1  will  b.  her,  and  give  thee  a  son  of  her 

22.  17.  in  blessing  1  will  b.  thee,  Heb.  G.  14. 
28.  3.  God  Almighty  b.  thee,  and  multiply  thee 

32.  26.  I  will  not  let  thee  go,  except  thou  b.  me 
4S.  IG.  b.  the  lads,  and  let  my  name  be  named 
49.  25.  by  the  Almighty  who  shall  b.  thee 

F.xod.  20.  24. 1  will  come  to  thee,  and  I  will  b.  thee 

23.  25.  he  shall  b.  thy  bread  and  thy  water 
JVi/m.  6.  24.  the  Lord  b.  thee  and  keep  theo 

27.  put  my  name  on  Israel,  and  I  will  b.  them 

24.  1.  saw  that  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  b.  Israel 
Deut.  1.  11^  and  b.  you  as  be  hath  promised  you 

7.  13.  he  will  b.  thee,  b.  the  fruit  of  thy  womb 

14.  29.  that  the  Lord  may  b.  thee,  23.  20.  1 24.  19. 

15.  4.  shall  be  no  poor,  for  the  Lord  shall  b.  tliee 
10.  for  this  thing  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  b.  thee 
18.  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  b.  thee  in  all,  30. 16. 

10.  15.  because  the  Lord  shall  b.  thee  in  all 

20.  15.  look  down  and  b.  thy  people  Israel 

28.  8.  he  shall  b.  thee  in  the  land  he  giveth 

12.  and  to  4.  all  the  work  of  thine  hand 

33.  11.  b.  Lord,  his  substance,  and  accept 
Ruth  2.  4.  saying,  the  Lord  b.  thee,  Jer.  31.23. 

2  Sam.  7.  29.  therefore  now  let  it  please  thee  to  b. 
the  house  of  thy  servant,  1  Chron.  17.  27. 
1  Chron.  4.  10.  O  that  thou  wouldest  b.  ine  indeed 
Psal.  5.  12.  thou  Lord,  wilt  b.  the  righteous 

28.  9.  save  thy  people,  b.  thine  inheritance 

29.  11.  the  Lord  will  b.  his  people  with  peace 
07.  1.  God,  even  our  own  God,  shall  b.  us,  6,  7. 
115.  12.  the  Lord  will  b.  us,  he  will  b.  the  house 

of  Israel,  he  will  b.  the  house  of  Aaron 
1.3.  he  will  b.  them  that  fear  the  Lord 
128.  .5.  the  Lord  shall  b.  thee  out  of  Zion 
132.  15.  I  will  abundantly  4.  her  provision 

134.  3.  the  Lord  b.  thee  out  of  Zion 

Isa.  19.  25.  whom  the  Lord  of  busts  shall  b. 
Hag.  2.  19.  from  this  day  will  I  b.  you 
Acts  3.  20.  sent  him  to  b.  you  iu  turning  you 

BLESS,  God  being  the  object. 
Deut.  8.  10.  art  full,  then  thou  shalt  b.  llio  Lord 
.fudg.  5.  9.  h.  ye  the  Lord,  Psal.  103.  21.  |  134.  1. 
1  r7iroH.29.20.  David  said,  now  b.  Lord  yourGod 
J^eh.  9. 5.  stand  up  and  b.  Lord  for  ever  and  ever 
rsrt/.10.7.  I  will  b.  Ld.  who  hath  given  nn:  counsel 
2li.  12.  in  the  congregations  will  I  b.  the  Lord 

34.  1.  I  will  b.  the  Lord  at  nil  tiin.s 
03.  4.  thus  will  I  b.  thee  while  I  live 

GO.  8.  O  A.  ourG(»d,  make  his  praise  to  be  heard 
fi8.  20.  b.  ye  God  in  the  congregations,  even 
90.  2.  sing  to  the  Lord,  A.  his  name,  shew  forth 
100.  4.  be  thankful  to  him,  A.  his  name,  10.3.  1. 
103.  1.  A.  the  Lord,  O  my  soul,  2,  22. 1 104.  1,  35. 
20.  A.  the  Lord,  ye  his  angels  ||  21.  A.  ye  his  hosts 
22.  A.  the  Lord  all  his  works  in  all  places 
115.  18.  we  will  A.  the  Lord  from  this  time 
l.')4.  2.  lift  up  your  hands,  and  A.  the  Lord 

135.  19.  A.  the  Lord,  O  house  of  Israel,  A.  the 

Lord,  O  house  of  Aaron 

20.  O  Levi,  ye  that  fear  the  liOrd,  A.  the  Lord 
145.  1.  I  will  A.  thy  name  for  ever  and  ever 

2.  evcivday  will  I  A.  thee,  and  praise  lliy  name 
10.  O  liorcl,  thy  saints  shall  A.  thoe 

21.  let  all  flesh  A.  his  holy  name  for  over 
./am.  3.  0.  therewith  A.  we  God,  even  the  Father 

BLESS,  man  agent  and  object. 
Gen.  27.  4.  my  soul  may  A.  thee  before  I  die,  25. 
34.  A.  me,  oven  me  also,  O  my  father,  38. 
48.  9.  bring  them  to  me,  and  I  will  A.  them 
20.  in  thee  shall  Israel  A.  saying,  God  make  llico 
F.jod.XI  30.  lake  flocks  and  begoni!,  and  A. mo  also 
JVum.  G.  23.  on  thin  wise  ye  Khali  li.  Israel 

23.  20.   I  have  rcrnivcd  conimaiidmint  to  A. 
25.  neither  cilrsc  them,  nor  A.  them  at  all 

Drul.  10.  8.  the  Lord  «epnraled  Levi  to  A.  21.  5. 

24.  13.  sleep  in  lii«  own  raiment,  and  A.  tlieo 
27.  12.  these  shall  stand  on  mount  Gerizim  to  b. 
29   19.  heareth  word.i  oflliiit  cursf,  he  A.  himself 

.losli.  8.  ^.  as  Moses  cnnminndcd  llicy  should  b. 
I  Sam.  9.  13.  because  he  doth  A.  the  sacrifice 
13.  t  10.  Paul  wont  to  meet  Samuel  to  A.  him 
2Aam.G.20.Dav.rcturncdtoA.houB0hoM,lCA.16.43. 


BLE 

2  Sam.  S.  10  Toi  sent  Joram  his  son  to  A.  David 

21.  3.  that  ye  may  A.  the  inheritance  of  the  Lord 
1  Kings  1.  47.  servants  came  to  A. our  lord  k.  D.ivid 
1  Chron.  23.  13.  and  to  A.  in  his  name  for  ever 
Psal.  02.  4.  they  A.  with  their  nipuihs,  but  curse 

109.  28.  let  them  curse,  but  A.  thou 
129.  8.  we  A.  you  in  the  name  of  the  Loid 
Prov.  30.  11.  there  is  a  generation  that  curseth 
their  father,  and  doth  not  A.  thi'ir  mother 
Isa.  05.  10.  shall  A.  himself  in  the  God  of  truth 
Jer.  4.  2.  the  nations  shall  A.  themselves  in  him 
.Mat.  5.  44.  A.  them  that  curse  you,  I.uke  6.  28. 
/iom.l'i.M.  A.  those  persecute  you,  A.  and  curse  not 
1  Cor.  4. 12.  being  reviled  we  b.  being  persecuted 
14.  16.  else  when  shalt  thou  A.  with  the  spirit 

BLESS. 
1  Cor.  10.  16.  the  cup  of  blessing  which  we  4. 

BLESSED,  man  agent  and  object. 
Gen.  14.  19.  Melchizedek  A.  Abram,  and  said.  4.  b« 
24.  CO.  they  A.  Rebekah,  and  said  unto  het 
27.  23.  eo  Isaac  4.  Jacob  and  said,  27. 
29.  and  A.  be  he  that  hlesseth  thee 
33.  I  have  A.  him,  yea,  and  he  shall  be  4. 
41.  the  blessing  wherewith  his  father  A.  him 
28. 1.  Isaac  called  Jacob,  A.  him  and  charged  hire 

6.  as  he  A.  him  he  gave  him  a  charge,  Heb.  11.20 

30.  13.  for  the  daughters  will  call  me  A. 

31.  55.  kissed  his  sons  anil  daughters,  and  A.  them 
47.  7.  Jacob  A.  Pharaoh,  10.  ||  48.  15.  he  A.  Joseph 
4S.20.JacobA.ManassehandEphraim,//tA.11.2L 
49.  28.  Jacob  A.  his  sons,  every  one  he  A. 

F.xod.  .39.  43.  and  Moses  A.  them,  i:>eut.  33.  1. 
/>fB.  9.  22.  .^aron  lift  up  his  hands  and  4.  them 

23.  Moses  and  Aaron  A.  the  people 

JVum.  22.  6. 1  wot  that  he  whom  thou  blessest  is  ft. 
2.3.  11.  thou  hasl  A.  ihem  altogether,  24.  10. 
Deut.  33.  20.  A.  be  he  that  enlargeth  Gad 

24.  let  Aslier  be  A.  with  children 
Jo.«/<.14.13.  Joshua  b.  Caleb,  and  save  him  Hebroa 

22.  6.  Joshua  A.  them,  and  sent  ihem  away,  7. 

24.  10.  Ilicrcfore  Balaam  A.  you  still 
.Judg.  5.  24.  A.  above  women  shall  Jael  bo 
Ruth  2.  19.  4.  be  he  that  took  knowledge  of  thee 

1  Sam.  2.  20.  Eli  A.  Elkanah  and  his  wife  Hannab 

25.  33.  A.  be  thy  advice,  and  A.  be  thou  who  kept 
20.  25.  Saul  said,  A.  be  thou  my  son  David 

2  .Sam.  6.  18.  David  4.  the  people,  1  Chron.  16.  i 
13.25.  howheit  he  would  not  go,  but  4.  him 

19.  39.  the  king  kissed  Barzillai,  and  A.  him 

1  Kings  2.  45.  and  king  Solomon  shall  be  4. 

8.  14.  king  Solomon  4.  all  the  congregation,  55. 
60.  congregation  A.  Solomon,  2  Chron.  6.  3. 

2  Chron.  30.  27.  priests  and  Levites  A.  the  people 
JVeh.  11.  2.  people  A.  all  that  willingly  offered 
.hb  29.  11.  when  the  ear  beard  me,  it  A.  me 

31.  20.  if  his  loins  have  not  A.  me 
Psal.  49.  18.  while  he  lived  he  A.  his  soul 

72.  17.  men  shall  be  A.  in  him,  nations  call  him  b. 

118.  26.  A.  be  he  that  comeih  in  name  of  the  I.ior(l, 
we  have  4.  you  out  of  I  he  house  of  the  Lord 
Prop.  31.  28.  her  childien  arise,  and  call  her  4. 
Feel.  10.  17.  4.  art  thou,  O  land,  when  thy  king 
Cant.  6.9.  the  daughters  saw  her,  and  4.  her 
Isa.  66.  3.  that  burneth  incense,  as  if  he  A.  an  idol 
./fr.  20.  14.  let  not  the  day  my  mother  bare  me  be  b, 
Mai.  3.  12.  and  all  nati<ms 'shall  call  you  A. 
Mark  11.  10.  A.  be  the  kingdom  of  our  father 
J.uke  1.  48.  all  generations  shall  call  me  A. 

2.  31.  Sirrioan  4.  them,  and  said  to  Mary 
Jlets  20.  35.  it  is  more  h.  to  give  than  to  receive 
Tit.  2   13.  Inoking  for  that  4.  hope  and  appearing 
Heh.l.  I.  Melchizedek  met  .Abraham  and  4.him,6 

7.  without  CDntradiction  the  less  isA.  ofthe  belter 

lU.ESSED,  God  the  ajrent. 
(7CJ1.1.22  G..dA.  them,saying,l)efruiiful,28.  |5.a 
2.  .3.  and  God  A.  Ilic  seventh  day,  F.iod.  20.  11 
9.1. mid  God  A.Noah  and  hissnns,  and  said  to  them 
12.  3.  in  thee  shall  all  families  l>e  4.  18.  18.  |  22. 
18,  1  20.  4.  I  2".  14.  Jiets  3.  25.  Gal.  3.  8 
17.C0. 1  have  4.  Ishmaol  ||  24.  1.  Lord  A.  Abraham 
24.  31,  and  he  said,  come  in  thou  4.  of  ihe  Lord 
2.")  II.  nfl.r  death  of  Ahraham.God  A.Isaac, 26.12. 

26.  29.  ihoii  art  now  the  4.  of  the  Lord 

27.  27.  thrsmellofafiiMwhich  the  Lord  h.ith  ft 
30.  27.  that  the  Lord  hath  4.  me  for  thy  sake 

.30.  the  LnrrI  linlli  A.  thee  since  inv  coming 
.12.  29.  and  he  A.  Jucih  there,  35.  9.  |  48.  3. 
39.  5.  thai  the  Lord  A.  the  Egyptian's  house 
JVum.  22.  12.  shall  not  curse,  for  Ihe  peiiple  are  ft 

23.  20.  he  hnth  4.  and  I  cannot  reverse  it 
Dctif  .2.7.thy  God  hath  A.lhee,  12. 7. 1 15  14. 1 10. 10 

7.  14.  IhiMi'slinll  be  A.  above  all  people 

14  24.  if  phic-  be  t.io  far,  when  Ww  Lord  hnlh  ft 

28.  3.  4.  shall  Ihoii  be  in  Ihe  cilv,  4.  in  the  field 
4.4.  Bhnll  befruitofthvbodvII.'S.  A.  ihv  b.iskct 

33.  13.  of  Joseph  he  said,  A.  ofthe  Lnril  he  hi^ 
.hs!i.  17.  14  forasmuch  as  the  Lord  huih  A.  ine 
.fiidir.  13.  21.  Samson  grew,  and  the  Lord  A.  him 

17.2.A.  hethouofLord,  RnthX  10.  I  Sam.  15  13. 
Rulh  2.  20.  A.  be  he  of  the  Lord  who  liulh  not 


BLB 

Rulh  3  10.  b.  he  thou  of  the  Lord,  my  daughter 
1  Sam  23.  21.  b.  be  ye  of  the  Lord,  2  Sam.  2.  5. 
iSam.  6.  11-  the  JLord  b.  Obed-edom,  and  all  his 
household,  12.  1  C/iroii.  13.  14.  |  26.  5. 
7.  29.  the  house  of  thy  servant  be  b.  for  ever 

1  C/iroii.  17.27.  blessest,  O  Lord,  and  it  shall  bei. 

2  Chron.  31.  10.  the  Lord  hath  b.  his  people 
Job  1.  10.  thou  ha.st  h.  Ihe  work  of  his  hands 

42.  12.  the  Lord  b.  the  latter  end  of  Job 
Psal.  21.  6.  for  thou  hast  made  him  most  b. 
33.  12.  b.  is  the  nation  whose  God  is  the  Lord 
37.  22.  for  such  as  be  b.  of  him  shall  inherit 

26.  he  is  merciful  and  lendeth,  and  his  seed  is  b. 
41  2.  the  Lord  will  keej)  him,  and  he  shall  be  b. 
45k  2.  therefore  God  hath  b.  thee  for  ever 
89.  15.  b.  is  the  people  that  know  the  joyful  sound 
112.  2.  the  generation  of  the  upright  shall  be  b. 
115. 15.  you  are  A.  of  the  Lord  who  made  heaven 
119.  1.  b.  are  the  undetiled  in  tjie  way 
128.  1.  b.  is  every  one  that  fcareth  the  Lord 

4.  thus  shall  the  man  be  b.  that  feareth  the  Lord 
147.  13.  he  hath  b.  thy  children  within  thee 
Prov.  3.  18.  let  thy  fountain  be  b.  and  rejoice 
/  10.  7.  the  memory  of  the  just  is  b. 
20.  7.  the  just  man's  children  are  b.  after  him 

21.  but  the  end  thereof  shall  not  be  b. 

22.  9.  he  that  hath  a  bountiful  eye  shall  be  b. 
Isa.  19.  25.  saying,  b.  be  Egypt  my  people 

51.  2.  for  I  called  him  alone  and  i.  him 

61.  9.  they  are  the  seed  the  Lord  hath  b.  65.  23. 

^i2t.5.3.  A.are  the  poor  in  spirit  ||  5.  b.  are  the  meek 

7.  b.  are  the  merciful  ||  8.  b.  are  the  pure  in  heart 

9.  b.  are  the  peace-makers  ||  10.  b.  are  persecuted 

13.  IG.  b.  are  your  eyes,  for  they  sec,  Luke  10.  23. 
14. 19.  he  b.  and  brake,  and  gave  the  loaves,26.26. 

Mark  6.  41.  |  14.  22.  Luke  9.  16.  |  24.  30. 
16.  17.  Jesus  said,  4.  art  thou  Simon  Bar-jona 
24.  46.  b.  is  that  servant,  Luke  12.  43. 
25. 34.  come  ye  b.  of  my  Father,  inherit  kingdom 
Mark  10. 16.  took  them  up  in  his  arms,  and  b.  them 

14.  61.  thou  art  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  b. 
Luke  1.  28.  b.  art  thou  among  women,  42. 

45.  4.  is  she  that  believed  |{  6.  20.  b.  be  ye  poor 
11.  27.  4.  is  the  womb  that  bare  thee,  and  paps 
12. 37. 4.  are  those  servants  whom  the  Lord  when 
he  Cometh  shall  find  watching,  38. 
14.  14.  thou  shall  be  4.  they  cannot  recompense 
19.  38. 4.  be  the  King  that  cometli  in  name  of  Lord 

23.  29.  4.  are  the  barren  that  never  bare 

24.  50.  he  4.  them  ||  51.  while  he  4.  them 
Gal.  3.  9.  they  are  4.  with  faithful  Abraham 
F.ph.  1.  3.  who  hath  4.  us  with  spiritual  blessings 
Jam  1.  25.  this  man  shall  be  4.  in  his  deed 
Ret.  14.  13.  4.  are  the  dead  that  die  in  the  Lord 

BLEt~SED,  Ood  the  object. 
Gen.  9.  26.  he  said,  4.  be  the  Lord,  24.  27.  F.xod. 
13.  10.  Ruth  4.  14.  1  Sam.  25.  32,  39.  2  Sam. 

18.  28.  1  Kitifrs  1.  48.  I  5. 7.  1  8. 15, 56.  |  10. 9. 
1  Oiron.  16.  36.  2  Chrori.  2.  12.  |  6.  4.  |  9.  8, 
Ezra  7.  27.  Psal.  23.  6.  |  31.  21.  |  41. 13.  |  68. 

19.  1  72.  18.  1  89.  52.  |  106.  48.  |  124.  6.  |  135. 
21.  1  144.  1.  Zech.  11.  5.  Luke  1.  63. 

Gen.  14.  20.  4.  be  most  high  God  who  delivered 
Josh.  22.  33.  and  the  children  of  Israel  4.  God 
t  Sam.  22.  47.  and  4.  be  my  rock,  Psal.  18.  46. 

1  Chr.  29.  10.  David  4.  the  Lord,  4.  thou,  O  Lord 
20.  all  Ihe  congregation  4.  the  Lord  God 

'C  Chron.  20.  26.  for  there  they  4.  the  Lord 

31.  8.  when  they  saw  the  heaps,  they  4.  the  Lord 
ATcA.  8.  6.  and  Ezra  4.  the  Lord,  the  great  God 

9.  5.  4.  be  thy  glorious  name,  Psal.  72.  19. 
Job  1. 21.  4.  be  the  name  of  the  Lord,  Psal.  113.  2. 
Psal.  66.  20.  4.  be  God,  68.  35.  2  Cor.  1.  3. 

119. 12.  4.  art  thou,  O  Lord,  teach  me  thy  statutes 
Ezck.  3.  12.  saying,  b.  be  the  glory  of  the  Lord 
Dan.  2.  19.  Daniel  4.  the  God  of  heaven,  20. 

4.  34.  Nebuchadnezzar  4.  the  most  High 
Luke  2.  28.  took  him  in  his  arms  and  4.  God 
John  12.  13.  4.  is  the  King  of  Israel  that  cometh 
Rom.  1.  25.  than  the  Creator,  who  is  4.  for  ever 

9.  5.  Christ,  w  ho  is  over  all,  God  4.  for  ever 

2  Cor.  11.  31.  is  4.  for  evermore,  knoweth  I  lie  not 
Eph.  1.3.  4.  be  the  Father  of  our  Lord,  1  Pet.  1.3. 
1  Tim.  1.  11.  the  glorious  gospel  of  the  b.  God 

6.  15.  who  is  the  4.  and  only  Potentate 

BLESSED  are  they. 
Psal.  2. 12.  4.  are  they  that  put  their  trust  in  him 
84.  4.  4.  are  they  that  dwell  in  thy  house 
106.  3.  4.  are  they  that  keep  judgment  at  all  times 
119.  2.  4.  are  they  that  keep  hi&  testimonies 
Prov.  8.  32.  for  4.  are  they  that  keep  my  ways 
Isa.  .30.  18.  4.  are  they  that  wait  for  him 
JIat.fi.i.  b.  are  they  that  mourn,  shiill  be  comforted 
6. 4.  are  they  who  hunger||  10.  who  are  persecuted 
Z,tt/ce  11 .28.yea, rather  b.are  theylhat  hear  the  word 
JbiiDi 20.29.  4.  are  IheyiUat  have  not  seen,  believed 
Rom.  4. 7.  4.  are  thfy  whose  iniquities  are  forgiven 
Reo.  19.  9.  4.  are  they  which  are  called  unio  the 
marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb 
S2. 14.  b.  are  they  that  do  bis  commandments 
37 


BLE 

BLESSED  are  ye. 
Isa.  32.  20.  4.  are  ye  that  sow  beside  all  waters 
Mat.  5.  11.  4.  are  ye  when  men  shall  revile  you 
Luke&.'i].  b.  arc  ye  that  hunger  now, ye  shall  be 
tilled ;  b.are  ye  that  weep  now, for  ye  shall  laugh 
22.  4.  arc  ye  when  men  shall  hate  you 
BLESSED  is  he. 
J^um.  24.  9.  4.  is  he  that  blesseth  thee,  and  cursed 
Psal.  32. 1.  6.  is  he  whose  transjression  is  forgiven 
41.  1.  4.  is  he  that  considereth  the  poor 
Dan.  12.  12.  4.  is  he  that  waiteth,  cometh  to  days 
Mat.  11.  6.  and  4.  is  he  whosoever  shall  not  be 
oH'ended  in  me,  J^uke  7.  23. 

21.  9.  4.  is  he  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord,  23.  39.  Mark  11.  9.  Luke  13.  35. 

Luke  14.15. 4.  is  he  that  shall  cat  bread  in  kmgdom 
Rev.  1.  3.  4.  is  he  that  readeth,  and  they  that  hear 
lij.  15.  4.  is  he  that  watchelh,  and  keepeth 
20.0.  4.  is  he  that  hath  part  in  the  first  resurrection 

22.  7.  4.  is  he  that  keepeth  sayings  of  the  prophecy 
BLESSED  is  the  man. 

Psal.l.  1.  4.  is  the  man  that  walketh  not  in  counsel 

32.  2.  4.  is  the  man  to  whom  the  Lord  imputeth 

not  iniquity,  Rom.  4.  8. 

34. 8. 4.  is  man  that  trusteth  in  him,  84.12.  J(,r.l7.7. 

40.  4.  4.  is  the  man  that  maketh  the  Lord  his  trust 

65.4. 4. IS  themanwhom  thou  choosest,and  causest 

84.  5.  4.  IS  the  man  whose  strength  is  in  thee 

94.12.  b.is  the  man  whom  thou  chastenest,  O  Lord 

112.1. 4.  is  tlieman  that  feareth  Lord,  tfiat delights 

Prov.S.^i.  b.is  the  matt  that  heareth  me,  watching 

/sa.56.2.4.istAe?«a7i  that  doth  this,  and  son  of  man 

Jam.  1. 12.  4.  is  the  man  that  endurcth  temptation 

BLESSEDNESS. 
Ro7n.  4.  6.  even  as  David  describeth  the  4. 

9.  cometh  this  4.  on  the  circumcision  only? 
Gal.  4.  15.  where  is  tlien  the  4.  ye  spake  of? 

BLESSEST. 
JiTum.  ^2.(i.  I  wot  that  he  whom  thou  4.  is  blessed 
1  C7ir.l7. 27.  thou  4.0  Lord,  and  it  shall  be  blessed 
Psal.  65.  10.  thou  4.  the  sprijiging  thereof 

BLESSETH. 
f?cn.  27.29.  blessed  is  he  that*,  thee,  JVim.  24.9. 
Deut.  15.  6.  thy  God  4.  thee  as  he  promised 
Psal.  10.  3.  4.  covetous  whom  the  Lord  abhorreth 
107.  38.  he  4.  them  so  that  tiiey  are  multiplied 
Prov.  3.  33.  but  he  4.  the  habitation  of  the  just 
27.  14.  he  that  4.  his  friend  with  a  loud  voice 
Jsa.  65.  16.  he  who  4.  himself  in  the  earth 

BLESSING 
Signifies,  [1]  The  favour,  kindness,  and  goodness 
of  God,  making  what  his  people  do  to  succeed 
and  prosper,  Psal.  3.  8.     [2]  .^11  good  things, 
gifts, graces, and  privileges, whichGodbestvics 
upon  his  2>eoplc,  whether  spiritual  or  temporal, 
whether  they  respect  the  soul,  or  the  body,  this 
present  lifc,or  that  which  is  to  come,  Deut.28.2. 
Psal.  24. 5.  Isa.  44.  3.  Eph.  1.  3.    [3]  The  means 
of  conveying  a  blessing  to  others,  Isa.  19.  24. 
Thus  the  Jews  are  called  a  Blessing,  because 
Christ  was  to  be  born  of  them,  and  the  gospel- 
church  and  ordinances  were  first  established 
among  them,  and  by  them  conveyed  to  the  Gen- 
tiles.    [4]  IVishing,  praying  for,  and  endea- 
vouring the  good  of  our  enemies,  1  Pet.  3.  9. 
[5]  Jllms,  bounty,  or  liberality,  2Cor.  9.  t5. 
[6]  A  gift,or  prcsent,Qea.Z'3.\\.  2  Kings  5.15. 
Thou  shalt  be  a  blessing.  Gen.  12.2.    Thou  shall 
be  a  means  of  conveying  blessedness,  [\]  To 
thy  posterity,  who  shall  be  blessed  for  thy  sake. 
[2]  To  thy  friends  and  servants,  who  shall  be 
blessed  by  thy  instruction  and  example.     [3] 
To  all  the  world,  by  being  the  progenitor  of 
Christ,  and  an  eminent  pattern  of  faith  and 
holiness  to  all. 
Leave  a  blessing  behind  him,  .7oel2. 14.  Reserve 
some  of  the  fruits  of  the  earth  from  the  com- 
mon destruction,  for  their  support,  and  hit 
own  worship. 
The  blessing  of  Abraham,  OaLZ.  14.   The  bless 
ing  conferred  on  Abraham,  n&me\y,  justifica 
tion    and  reconciliation   with    God,    through 
faith  in  the  blood  of  Christ. 
Gen.  12.  2.  I  will  bless  thee,  thou  shalt  be  a  4. 

22.  17.  that  in  4.  I  will  bless  thee,  Heb.  6.  14. 

27.  12.  I  shall  bring  a  curse  on  me,  and  not  a  4. 
35.  thy  brother  hath  taken  away  thy  4. 
38.  Esau  said,  hast  thou  but  one  4.  my  father  ? 

28.  4.  God  give  theo  the  4.  of  Abraham 
33.  11.  take,  I  pray  thee,  my  b.  that  is  brought 
39.  5.  the  4.  of  Ihe  Lord  was  on  all  that  he  had 
49.  28.  every  one  according  lo  his  4.  he  blessed 

Erod.  32.  29.  then  he  may  bestow  on  you  a  4. 
Lev.  25.  2).  then  will  I  command  my  4.  on  you 
Deut.  11.  26.  behold,  I  set  before  you  a  4.  30.  19. 
27.  a  4. if  ye  obey  the  cominandments  of  the  Lord 
29.  thou  shalt  put  the  4.  on  mount  Gerlzim 
12.  15.  according  to  Ihe  4.  of  the  Lord,  16.  17. 

23.  5.  the  Lord  turned  the  curse  iuto  a  4. 
38,  8.  Lord  shall  command  a  4.  on  store  bouse 


BLI 

Deut.  33. 1.  this  is  4.  wherewith  Moses  blessed,  7, 
16.  let  the  4.  come  upon  the  head  of  Joseph 
23.  Nai)hlali  full  with  the  4.  of  the  Lord 

Josh.  15.  19.  answered,  give  me  a  ft.  Judg.  1.  15 

1  Sam.  25.  27.  this  4.  thy  handmaid  hath  brought 
30. 1 26.  behold  a  4.  for  you  from  the  spoil 

2  Sam.  7.  29.  with  thy  4.  let  my  house  be  blessed 
2  Kings  5. 15.  I  pray  thee  take  a  4.  of  thy  servan* 

18.  t31.  make  with  me  a  4.  and  come  out  to  me 
and  eat  of  his  own  vine,  Isa.  36.  16 

JVf/t.  9.  5.  which  is  e.valted  above  all  4.  and  praiso 
13.  2.  our  God  turned  the  curse  into  a  4. 

yo4  29. 13.  the  4.  of  him  that  was  ready  to  perish 

Psal.  3.  8.  thy  4.  is  upon  thy  people 
24.  5.  he  shall  receive  the  4.  from  the  Lord 
109.  17.  as  he  delighted  not  in  4.  let  it  be  far 
129.  8.  the  4.  of  the  Lord  be  upon  you 
133.  3.  there  the  Lord  commanded  the  h.  even  life 

Prov.  10.  22.  the  4.  of  the  Lord  maketh  rich 
11.  11.  by  the  4.  of  the  upright  the  city  is  exalted 
t25.  the  soul  of  4.  shall  be  made  fat 


2().  but  a  4.  on  the  head  of  him  that  selleth  it 

24.  25.  a  good  4.  shall  come  on  them  that  rebuke 
Isa.  19.  24.  even  a  4.  in  the  midst  of  the  land 

44.  3.  and  I  will  pour  my  4.  on  thy  offspring 

65.  8.  destroy  it  not,  for  a  4.  is  in  it 
Eiek.  34.  26.  I  will  make  them  and  the  places 
about  my  hill  a  4.  there  shall  be  showers  of  4. 

44.  30.  he  may  cause  the  4.  to  rest  in  thy  house 
■Toel  2.  14.  if  he  will  leave  a  4.  behind  him 
Zech.  8.  13.  I  will  save  you,  and  ye  shall  be  a  J. 
Mai.  3.  10.  open  heaven,  and  pour  you  out  a  ft. 
Luke  24.  53.  in  the  temple  praising  and  4.  God 
Rom.  15.  29.  in  the  fulness  of  the  4.  of  the  gospel 

1  Cor.  10. 16.  the  cup  of  4.  which  we  bless 

2  Cor.  9.  fS.  make  up  beforehand  your  4. 
Gal.  3.  14.  that  the  4.  of  Abraham  might  come 
Heb.  6.  7.  for  the  earth  receiveth  4.  from  God 

12.  17.  when  he  would  have  inherited  the  4. 
./am.3.10.of  the  same  mouth  proceeds4.and  cursing 
1  /*£«.  3.  9.  but  contrariwise  4.  knowing  that  ye  are 
thereunto  called,  that  ye  should  inherit  a  4. 
Rev.  5.  12.  wortliy  to  receive  honour,  glory,  4. 

13.  4.  to  him  that  siiteth  on  the  throne 
7. 12.  4.  and  glorv  to  our  God  for  ever  and  ever 

"BLESSINGS. 
Gen.  49.  25.  Almighty  who  shall  bless  thee  with  J 
of  heaven  above,  4.  of  the  deep,  4.  of  the  breasts 
26.  4.  of  thy  father  prevailed  above  the  4.  of  my 
jDcuZ.28.2.  all  these  4.shall  come  on  tliee,if  hearken 
Josh.  8.  34.  afterw  ard  he  read  the  4.  and  cursings 
Psal.  21.  3.  for  thou  preventest  him  with  the  ft 

t6.  thou  hast  set  him  to  be  4.  for  ever 
Prov.  10.  6.  4.  are  upon  the  head  of  the  just 
28.  20.  a  faithful  man  shall  abound  with  ft. 
Mai.  2.  2. 1  will  send  a  curse,  and  will  curse  your  h 
Eph.  1. 3.  who  hath  blessed  us  with  all  spiritual  ft. 

BLEW. 
Josh.  6. 8.  priests  passed  on  before  the  Lord  and  ft 
JinJg.  3.  27.  Ehud  4.  a  trumiiet  in  the  mount 

6.  34.  Spirit  come  on  Gideon,  and  he  4.  a  trumpe 

7.  19.  they  4.  the  trumpets  and  brake,  20,  22. 

1  Sam,  13.  3.  Saul  4.  saying,  let  the  Hebrews  hear 

2  Sam.  2.  28.  Joab  4.  a  trumpet,  18.  16.  ]  20.  22. 
20.  1.  Sheba  a  Benjamite  4.  a  trumpet  and  said 

1  Kings  1.39.  they  4.  Ihe  trumpet,  people  said,  God 
save  king  Solomon,  2  Kings  9. 13.  |  11.  14. 

Mat.  7.25.  winds  4.  and  beat  on  that  house,  27. 

Johtt  6.  18.  ihe  sea  arose  by  a  great  wind  that  ft. 

Acts  27.  13.  when  the  south-wind  4.  28.  13. 
BLIND 

Signifies,  [1]  Such  as  are  deprived  of  natural 
sight,  John  9.  1.  Acts  13.  11.  [2]  Such  whose 
judgments  are  so  corrupted  by  taking  of  gifts, 
that  they  cannot,  or  will  not  discern  between, 
right  and  wrong,  E.xod.  23.  8.  Deut.  16. 19.  [3] 
Such  as  are  wilfully  and  obstinately  ignorant, 
in  matters  that  concern  salvation.  Mat.  15. 14. 
[4]  Such  as  through  simplicity  and  ignorance 
arc  casilif  misled  and  seduced  by  the  pernicious 
counsel  of  others,  Deut.  27.  18.  Mat.  15.  14. 

It  is  applied,  [1]  To  ignorant  ministers.  Isa.  56. 
10.  [2]  To  deceitful  teachers,  who  are  blinded 
by  their  own  interest  against  any  conviction, 
Isa.  42.  19.  Mat.  23.  16.  [3]  To  an  ignorant 
people.  Mat.  1.5.  14.  Rom.  2.  19.  [4]  To  such 
as  reject  the  knowledge  and  faith  of  Christ, 
notwithstanding  the  clear  discoveries  of  the 
way  of  salvation  in  the  gospel,  2  Cor.  4.  4. 
[5]  To  such  as  live  in  hatred,  1  John  2. 11.  [6] 
To  such  as  are  self-conceited,  being  puffed  up 
with  a  high  opinion  of  their  qualifications  and 
attainments.  Rev.  3.  17. 

Ezod.  4.  11.  who  maketh  the  seeing  or  the  ft.? 

Lev.  19.  14.  not  put  a  slumbling-block  before  4. 

21.  18.  a  4.  or  lame  man  shall  not  offer 

22.  22.  not  offer  the  4.  to  the  Lord,  Deut.  15.  SI. 
Deut.  27.  18.  cursed  that  maketh  the  4.  lo  wander 

23.2J).  grope  at  noon-day,  as  4.gropeth  in  durknesa 
2  -te/i.  5. 6.  except  thou  take  away  the  ft.  and  lama 


BLO 

2  San.  5.8.  smiteththc  lame  and  b.  hated  ofDavid, 
the  b.  and  the  lume  shull  not  cuine  into  house 
Job  Sil.  15.  1  was  eyes  to  the  b.  feet  to  llio  lanio 
/"aai.  140.  8.  tho  Lord  openelh  tlie  eyes  of  the  b. 
Isa.  2!).  18.  tlie  eyea  ofthe  *.  shiill  see,  35.  5. 
42.  7.  give  thee  lor  o  light  to  open  ihe  b.  eyes 
it).  1  will  bring 4ho  b.  by  u  way  they  knew  not 
18.  hear,  ye  deal",  look,  ye  b.  that  ye  may  see 
J'J.  who  is  b.  but  my  serviint?  who  is  *.  as  he 
that  is  perfect,  and  b.  as  the  Lord's  servant "? 
4.1.  8.  bring  forth  the  b.  people  that  have  eyes 
3S.  10.  his  watchmen  are  b.  they  are  all  ignorant 
50.  10.  wo  gropo  for  the  wall  like  the  b. 
Jtr.  31.  8.  X  will  gulher  with  them  the  b.  and  lame 
J^am.  4.  14.  tliey  wandered  as  4.  men  in  the  streets 
Zeph.  1.  17.  that  they  shall  walk  like  b.  men 
Mai.  1. 8.  if  ye  olTer  tlie  *.for  sacrilicc  is  it  not  evil  ? 
Mat.  y.  i'l.  two  b.  men  followed  him,  crying,  20.;10. 
11.5.  the  b.  receive  their  sight,  li!.  'A!.  Luke  7. 92. 
15. 14.  they  be  4.  leaders  of  the  b.  if  the  i.  lead  the 
6.  both  shall  fall  into  the  ditch,  Luke  ti.  J'J. 

23.  Hi.  woe  to  you,  ye  4.  guides,  whicli  say 
17.  ye  fools  and  4.  whether  is  greater,  lU. 
26.  thou  4.  Pharisee,  cleanse  tirst  within 

Mark  8.  23.  and  he  took  tlie  ft.  man  by  the  hand 

10.  4t).  4.  Bartimeus  sat  by  tho  way  side  begging 
Luke  4.  18.  to  preach  recovery  of  sight  to  the  4. 

7.  21.  to  many  that  were  4.  he  gave  sight 
14.  13.  when  thou  makcst  a  feust,  call  tho  b. 
John  5.  3.  in  these  lay  a  great  multitude  of  A. 
"J.  1.  he  saw  a  man  that  was  b.  from  his  birth 

39.  that  they  which  see  might  be  made  4. 

40.  are  we  4.  also  7  ||  41.  if  ye  were  4. 
10.  21.  can  a  devil  open  the  eyes  of  the  4.? 

.ids  13.  II.  thou  slialt  be  4.  not  seeing  the-sun 
lium.i.  19.  art  confident  thou  art  a  guide  to  the  b. 
2  Pet.  1.  9.  he  that  lacketh  these  things  is  ft. 
Jieo.  3.  17.  and  knowest  not  that  tJiou  art  4. 

BLIND,  yerb. 
J)eut.  16.  19.  a  girt  doth  4.  tho  eyes  of  the  wise 

1  Sam.  12.  3.  of  whom  received  I  a  bribe  to  4. 

BLINDED,  ETH. 
Kxod.  23.  8.  take  no  gift,  for  a  gift  ft.  the  wise 
.ler.  52.  t  IL  then  he  ft.  the  eyes  of  Zedekiah 
Jahn  12.  40.  he  hath  4.  their  eyes,  and  hardened 
Horn.  11.  7.  election  hath  obtained,  the  rest  are  ft. 

2  Cor.  3.  14.  but  their  minds  were  4. 

4.  4.  in  whom  god  of  this  world  hath  ft.  the  minds 

1  Jolin  2.  11.  because  darkness  hath  ft.  his  eyes 

BLINDFOLDED. 
Luke  22.  04.  when  they  had  ft.  him,  they  struck 

BLINDNESS. 
Oen.  19.  11.  smoto  the  men  at  the  door  with  J. 
JJeut.  28.  28.  the  Lord  shall  smile  thee  with  A. 

2  Kivgs  6.  18.  Elisha  prayed,  smile  this  people,  I 

pray 'thee,  with  ft.  and  he  smoto  Ihem  with  ft. 
Zeeh.  12.  4.  I  will  smile  every  horse  with  ft. 
Mark  3.  t5.  being  grieved  for  their  ft.  of  heart 
Horn.  11.  25.  ft.  in  part  has  happened  to  Israel 
Eph.  4.  18.  because  of  the  6.  of  their  heart 
Block.     .See  Stumbling. 
BLOOD 
Signifies,  [1]  JJ  warm  red  liquor  or  humour  cir- 
culating through  the  whole  body,  Exod.  29. 12. 
[2]  Death,  nlaaghter,  or  murder,  together  with 
the  guilt  folloiriiig  upon  it,  Oen.  4. 10.  Mat.  27. 

24.  [3]  'J'he  punishment  or  vengeance  due  for 
the  shedding  of  blood,  Mat.  27.  2.5.  [4]  That 
which  was  bought  or  purchiiied  with  the  price 
of  blood,  Acls"l.  19.  [5]  IVealth,  goods,  or 
money  got  by  taking  away  the  lives  of  the  in- 
nocent, and  then  seizing  upon  their  estates, 
Nah.  3.  10.  Hah.  2.  12.  [ti]  The  guilt  and 
punishment  of  sin.  Acts  18.  (i.  [7]  Fallen  na- 
ture, E/ok.  10.  f>.  John  1. 13.  [8]  Thefrstman 
Jldam,  who  was  the  root  or  stork  from  which 
all  mankind  descended.  Acta  17.21).  [9]  Jlu 
Man  reason  or  wisdom.  Mat.  10.  17.  [10]  The 
ijuice  of  grapes,  Oen.  49.  11.  [11]  j?  sacra- 
mental symbol  and  representation  of  the  blood 
of  Christ,  Mai.2fi.2^.  [12J  77ic  death  and  suf- 
ferings of  Christ,  Uom.  3.  2.').  |  5.  9.  Eph.  1.  7. 

The  blood  of  the  covenant,  Jfeb.  10.  29.      The 
blood  of  Christ,  tehrreby  the  new  concnanl  or 
teslammt  iras  confirmed  and  ratified. 
Where  marked  icilh  \  it  is  in  Original,  BLOODS. 
Oen.  4.  t  10.  the  voice  of  thy  brollier's  ft.  crielh 
9.  4.  the  life  wliicli  is  the  4.  shall  you  not  eat 
5.  lurely  your  4.  of  your  lives,  I  will  re(iuiro 
37.  31.  they  killed  a  kid  and  dipped  Ihe  coal  in  ft. 
F.zod.  4.  9.  water  shall  become  A.  on  the  dry  land 
7.  17.  and  the  waters  shall  be  turned  into  A. 

12.  13.  tho  ft.  shall  be  for  a  token,  when  I  see  ft. 
03.  IB.  shall  not  offrr  the  A.  with  leaven,  34.  2.'>. 
2<.l.  21.  thou  <ihall  lake  of  Ihi!  4.  upi>n  the  allar 

Lev.  10.  18.  thn  4.  of  it  was  not  brought  in 

13.  19.  anil  if  tho  issue  in  her  flesh  shall  be  A. 
17.  4.  A.  shall  hn  imputed  unto  that  man 

11.  for  it  is  the  A.  that  maketh  an  atonement 
19.  IG.  nut  itand  aguinsi  tho  4.  of  thy  neighbour 

38 


BLO 

yum.  23.  24.  and  drink  the  ft.  of  the  slain 
35.33.not  cleansed  but  by  thu4.  of  lain  that  shed  it 
Deut.  17.  8.  matter  between  A.  and  A.  2  Chr.  19. 10. 

21.  8.  and  the  A.  shall  be  forgiven  them 

22.  8.  make  a  battlement,  thut  thou  bring  not  ft. 

32.  43.  iie  will  avenge  tlie  4.  of  his  servants 
Judg.  9.  24.  and  their  A.  be  laid  ujion  Abiiuelecli 
1  Ham.  2().  20.  let  not  my  A.  fall  lo  the  earth 

2. Sum.  1.  1().  David  said,  thy  A.  be  u|)oii  thy  head 

22.  from  the  4.  of  the  slain,  from  tlie  fat 

3.  t  28.  I  and  my  kingdom  guiltless  trom  the  4. 
lU.  t  7.  come  out,  conio  out,  thou  man  of  4. 

8.  thii  Lord  hath  relumed  upon  thee  all  the  A. 
20.  12.   Viiiasa  wallowed  in  4.  in  the  highway 
2;i.  17.  is  not  this  the  4.  of  the  men]  1  CVir.  11. 19. 
1  Kings  2.  o.  and  jiut  the  4.  of  war  on  his  girdle 

37.  thy  A.  shall  be  on  Ihv  head,  Kzek.  33.  4. 
18.  28.  till  the  A.  gushed  out  upon  them 

2JCiugs  3.22.  the  Moabites  saw  ilie  waters  red  as  4. 

23.  they  said,  this  is  4.  the  kings  are  surely  slain 
9. 1 20. 1  liave  seen  the  ft.  of  Nabolli,  A.  of  liis  eons 

Job  16.  18.  O  earth,  cover  not  thou  my  4. 
39.  ;jO.  the  eagles'  young  ones  also  suck  up  ft. 

Psal.  30.  9.  what  prolit  is  there  in  my  4.? 
50.  13.  or  will  I  Ocink  the  ft.  of  goats  ? 
58. 10.  righteous  wash  his  feet  in  the  A.  of  wicked 
t>8.  23.  foot  may  be  dipped  in  the  A.  of  thy  enemy 
72.  14.  precious  shall  their  A.  be  in  his  sight 

Prov.  28.  •17.  that  doth  violence  to  tho  A.  of  any 

Isa.  1.  t  15.  your  iiands  arc  full  of  ft. 

4.  4.  the  Lord  shall  purge  the  A.  of  Jerusalem 
9.  5.  with  noise,  and  garments  rolled  in  4.  wash  ye 
15.  9.  the  waters  of  Dmion  shall  be  full  of  4. 
26.  t21.  the  earth  shall  disclose  her  A. 

33.  f  15.  that  sto|ipeth  his  ear  from  hearing  A. 

34.  3.  the  mountains  shall  be  melted  with  tlieir  A. 
Jer.  2.  34.  is  found  the  A.  of  tho  poor  innocents 

18. 21.  pour  out  their  A.  by  the  force  of  the  sword 
48.10.  cursed  be  he  thatkeepelh  his  sword  from  4. 
!>\.  35.  my  A.  be  on  the  inhabitants  of  C'haldea 

iMm.i.  14.  they  have  jiolluted  themselves  with  4. 

Kick.  5.  17.  pestilence  and  A.  pass  through  thee 

9.  9.  the  land  is  full  of  A.  and  the  city  is  full  of 

14.  19.  or  if  1  |)our  out  my  fury  ujioii  it  in  A. 

10.  6. 1  said  to  thee  when  thou  wast  in  thy  4.  live 
t9.  I  thoroughly  washed  away  thy  A.  from  thee 

38.  I  will  give  tliee  A.  in  fury  and  jealousy 

18.  10.  if  he  beget  a  son  that  is  a  shedder  of  A. 
tl3.  he  shall  die,  his  A.  shall  be  U|>on  iiim 

19.  10.  thy  mothiT  is  like  a  vine  in  thy  A. 
21.32.  thyA. shall  be  in  midst  of  tlie  land,  22. 12. 

22.  3.  the  city  sheddeth  4.  in  the  midst  of  it 

23.  .37.  and  ft.  is  in  their  hands,  45. 

24.  8.  I  have  set  her  4.  on  the  top  of  a  rock 
28.  23.  for  I  will  send  ft.  into  lier  streets 
.32.  6.  I  will  also  water  with  thy  4.  the  land 
35.6.  saith  the  Lord,  I  will  prepare  thee  to  A.  thou 

hast  not  hated  4.  even  4.  shall  pursue  thee 
44.7. when  ye  otter  my  bread,  the  fat  and  the  A.  l.'j. 
Hos.  1.  'I.  for  yet  I  will  avenge  the  ft.  of  Jezreei 
4.  t2.  they  break  out,  and  ft.  touchelh  4. 
Joel  2.  30.  A.  tire,  and  pillars  of  smoke,  .lets  2. 19. 
31.  the  moon  shall  be  turned  into  4.  .'Jets  2.  20. 
3.21.1  will  cleanse  their  ft. that  I  have  not  elean.^ed 
Xeph.  1.  17.  their  ft.  shall  be  |H)ured  out  us  dust 
Mat.  9. 20.  behold  a  woman  diseased  with  an  issue 
of  ft.  twelve  years,  Mark  5.  2.5.  Luke  8.  43. 

16.  17.  Hesh  and  ft.  hath  not  revealed  it  to  thee 
23.  30.  not  partakers  in  the  ft.  of  the  prophets 

35.  from  tho  A.  of  righteous  Abel,  J.uke  II.  51. 
26.  28.  my  ft.  of  the  new  testament,  Mark  14.  24. 
27.6.not  to  put  into  treasury , because  it  is  priceof  A. 

8.  was  called  the  field  of  4.  to  this  day,  Jicls  1.19. 

24.  I  am  innocent  of  the  ft.  of  this  just  person 
Luke  13.  1.  whoso  4. 1'ilale  mingled  with  sacrifices 
22.  20.  ihe  new  lefltament  in  my  ft.  1  Cor.  II.  25 

44.  his  sweat  was  as  great  drops  of  ft.  falling 
.John  1.  13.  which  were  born  not  of  4.  nor  of  Hesh 
6.  .54.  who  cateth  my  flesh  and  drinketh  mv  ft.  .56. 

55.  my  lli\sli  is  meal,  and  my  A.  is  drink  indeed 

19.  34.  forthwith  caiiia  there  out  ft.  and  water 
Mets  5.  28.  ye  intend  to  bring  this  man's  ft.  on  us 

15.  20.  that  Ihev  abstain  from  ft.  29.  |  21.  25. 

17.  26.  and  hath  made  of  one  ft.  all  nations 

18.  6.  your  4.  b(i  on  your  own  heads.  I  am  cleon 

20.  26.  I  am  pure  from  tho  ft.  of  all  men 
1  Cor.  11.27.  guilty  of  the  body  and  A.  of  the  Lord 

1.5.  .50.  flesh  and  ft.  cannot  inherit  'he  kingdom 


BLO 

Hcb.  13. 11.  whose  ft.  is  brought  into  the  lanctaary 

1  ]'et.  1.  2.  and  sprinkling  of  the  ft.  of  Jesus  Christ 
1  John  1.  7.  the  ft.  of  Jesus  Christ  cleanseth  u*  from 

5.  6.  this  is  he  that  came  by  water  and  ft 

8.  three  in  earth,  the  Spirit,  the  water,  and  4. 
Jieo.  5.  9.  thou  hast  redeemed  us  to  God  by  thy  ( 

6.  10.  how  long  dust  thou  not  avenge  our  b  J 

12.  the  sun  was  black, and  the  moon  became  ai6 

7.  14.  made  them  while  in  the  ft.  ot'lhe  Lamb 

8.  8.  the  third  part  of  the  sea  became  4.  16.  3. 
11.  6.  have  power  to  turn  the  waters  into  A. 

12. 11.  they  overcame  him  by  the  A.  of  the  Lamb 
14.  20.  and  4.  came  out  of  the  wine-piesu 
16.  6.  and  Ihvu  hast  given  them  A.  to  drink 

18.  21.  in  her  wa.s  found  the  4.  of  the  pruphctt 

19.  2.  he  hath  avenged  the  4.  of  his  servants 

13.  ho  was  clothed  with  a  vesture  dipped  in  ft. 

i>ee  AvKNfiEK,  Revenger. 

BLOOD  Ae  upon. 

/.ci!.20.9.  that  curselh  his  father,  his  A.  bcvpon  him 

11.  incest  |{  13.  sodomy,  their  A.  fte  upon  them 

16.  bestiality  ||  27.  wizard,  their  ft.  Ae  upon  them 

/.•AMH.lO.iiiiiocentA.slieil.  and  so  A.  4e  i/;^o7i  thee 

F.iek.ia.y.i.  done  abumiualioiis,  his  4.  be  upon  hiiH 

33.  5.  took  not  w  arning,  his  4.  shall  Ac  upon  him 

BLOOD  with  bullock. 
^:a:o(/.20.]2.  take  4.  olbiilloek.  Lev.  4.5.  |  16.14,18. 
/.fi'.  4.  7.  pour4.  of  4i/»oft  at  bottom  of  ihe  altar 
16.  15.  do  with  that  as  he  did  with  4. of  Ihe  bullock 
Isa.  1. 11. 1  delight  not  in  ft.  of  bullocks  or  of  laniba 

BLOOD  ,;/  Chri.it. 
ICi)r.l0.16.  is  it  not  comniunion  of  the  b.of  Christ? 
F.ph.'i. l'.i.\v<.'te  far  oir,are  made  nigh  by  b.of  Christ 
Heb.'d.Xi.  how  much  more  shall  b.of  Christ  purge'? 
1  Pet.  1.  19.  with  precious  4.  of  Christ  as  of  a  lamb 
\Johnl.'l.  the  A.  of  Christ  cleanseth  us  frofil  ail  sin 

BLOOD  of  the  Covenant. ' 
Exod  24.8.Mose8  s:iid,behold  the  A.o/(Acco»<jiant 
Zech.  9.  11.  as  for  thee  also  by  the  A.  of  thy  cov. 
/AkA. 10.20.  hath  counted  A.  of  coo.  an  unholy  thing 
13. 20.  through  the  A.  of  the  everlasting  covenant 

BLOOD  with  eat. 
Lev.  3.  17.  a  statute  that  ye  eat  neither  fat  nor  ft. 
7.26.  ye  shall  eat  no  manner  offt.  of  fowl  or  beast, 
27.  I  17.  14.  Deut.  12.  16,  23.  I  15.  23. 
;  cut  off,  17. 10. 


F.ph.  6.  12.  we  wtcglle  not  against  flesh  and  A. 
C(d.  1.20.  having  made  peace  ihro'  A.  of  his  cross 
Hrh.'i.  14.  Ihe  children  are  partakers  of  flesh  and  A. 

9.  7.  not  without  b.  which  he  offered  for  himself 

12.  nor  by  the  4.  of  goals,  hut  by  his  own  A. 

13.  if  the  4.  of  hulls  and  goats  snnclifu'lh 

20.  this  is  the  ft.  of  the  leslamenl  (!od  enjoined 
22.  without  shedding  of  A.  there  is  no  remission 

10.  19.  lo  Ciller  into  Ihe  holiest  by  Ihe  A.  of  Jesus 
11.28.  he  kept  the  passover,  and  sprinkling  of  A. 
12.  4.  yo  have  not  yet  resisted  unto  4.  striving 

24.  to  llio  ft.  of  sprinkling  that  ipeakcth  better 


27.  that  eulcth  ft.  ihiil  soul  shali  be  . 

1  Sam.  14.  .32.  the  peopli;  did  cut  them  with  the  4. 
Kick.  33.  25.  ye  eat  with  4.  and  lift  up  your  eye* 

For  BLOOD. 
jYum.  35.  33.  not  pollute  land, /or  4.  it  de6Ieth  land 
i^am.  3.  27.  he  died /or  the  ft.of  Asaliel  his  brother 

2  Chron.  24.  25. /or  the  ft.  of  the  sons  of  Jehoiuda 
Psal.  9.  12.  when  he  inakelh  inquisition /or  ft. 
Prov.  1.11.  they  siiy,  come  let  us  lay  wail/ur  ft.  J8. 

12.  6.  the  words  of  wicked  are  lo  he  in  wait/or  A. 
Jlic.  7.  2.  they  all  lie  in  wail  fur  A.  they  hunt  - 

His  BLOOD. 
r;e7i.37.26.if  weslny  our  brother  and  c<v>'_enl  hisb. 

42.  22.  therefore  behold  his  A.  is  require;' 
■losh.  2.  19.  his  A.  shall  bo  upon  his  hek. 
2  Sam.i.  II.  shall  I  not  re(|uireAi.<  ft.of  your  handl 
1  A^in o-s  2. 32.  Lord  shall  return  hisb.ovt  his  head 
F.iek.  3.  18.  shall  die  in  his  ini(|uitv,  but  his  ft.  will 
I  require  at  thy  hand,  '20.  |  33.  4,  6,  8. 
Has.  12.  14.  therefore  shall  he  leave  his  ft.  on  him 
7,rch.  9.  t7.  take  away  his  ft.  out  of  his  mouth 
Mat.  27.  25.  his  4.  be  tm  us  and  our  children 
Jlets  20.  28.  church  he  halh  purcha.sed  with  his  b. 
Horn.  3.  25.  a  propitiation  through  faith  \i\his  ft. 

5.  9.  much  more  being  now  jiistilii'il  by  Am  ft. 
F.ph.\.l.  we  have  redemjition  Ihro'  hisb.  Co/.1.14 
lleb.  9.  12.  but  by  his  own  A.  he  entered  in  once 

13.12.thnt  he  might  sanctify  Ihe  people  with  his  b 
Itev.  I.  5.  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his  b. 

Innocent  BLOl^D. 

Deut.  19. 10.  that  inuocrnl  b.  be  not  shed  in  land 

13.  thou  shall  |>ul  away  giiiltof  I'niiocrat  A.  21.  9. 

21.8.  lay  not  innocent  A  lo  thy  people's  charge 
l.S«)ii.l".).  5.  will  ihdu  >in  against  nmoreFi*  A.  to  slay 

1  Kings  2.31.  take  away  innocent  A. that  Jonb  shed 

2  Kini'S  21.  16.  Mnnasscli  shed  innoernt  h.  24.  4. 
/'.so/.  94.21.  they  gather  and  condemn  innorerif  A 

10(i.38.ehed  innocent  b.  even  A.  of  eons  and  daugh 

/'roi'.6.l7.Lord  halelli  hands  that  shed  innocent  b. 

Isa.  .59.  7.  anil  they  make  hnsle  to  shed  innocent  b. 
. 7/^.7.6.  if  ye  oppnss  not,  shed  not  in»ocrn(A.22.nL 

22.  17.  thine  eyes  and  heart  are  to  shed  invoc.  4. 

26.1.5.  ye  shall  surely  bring  innoe.  A.nn  yourselvea 
.foil  3.  io.  hi'rauso  they  have  shed  innoe.  A.  in  land 
.lonnh  I.14.()  Ld. we  beseech,  lay  noton  us  I'nnoc.A. 
.l/(i(.27.l.  1  sinnorfin  thai  I  Iihv.' betrayed  iniiocft 

.SAf</  BLOOD. 
^fn.O.O.who  sheddeth  man's  A.hvmnn  his  4. be  shed 

37.  22.  Reuben  said  lo  Iheni,  shed  no  A. 
F.nid.  22.  2.  there  shiill  no  A.  he  shed  (ra  him 

3.  if  ihe  Klin  be  risen  upon  him,  A.  be  thed  for  hint 
l.ei<.  17.  4.  he  hnlh  shed  A.  that  man  shall  he  cut  off 
JVi/m.  3.5.  33.  land  not  rieiinscd  of  A.  .'bed  but  by  6. 
Deut.  21.  7.  our  hands  have  not  shed  this  A. 
I  5am.  25.  26.  wilhholdon  from  coming  to  iked  !• 


BLO 

I  King$'2.5,w]wm  nc  slewandiAcfZ  i.of  war  in  peace 

1  Chr.  2'2.  8.  because  thou  hasl shed  b.  much,  '28. 3. 

Psa/.Ty.J.  lliuir  b.shcd  like  water  round  Jerusalem 
lU.  known  by  revenging  b.  of  thy  servants  sked 

Prov.  1. 10.  they  make  haste  to  s/tcd  b.  Rom.  3. 15. 

Z.om.4.13.  proplifits  that  liiive  shed  the  J.ot'the  just 

Eick.  1().38.  judge  thee  as  women  that  shed  b.  '2;t.45. 

22.  4.  art  become  guilty  in  thy  b.  thou  hast  sAcd 
0.  the  princes  in  thee  to  their  power  to  shed  b. 

23  45.  al'ier  the  manner  of  women  that  shed  b. 

33.  25.  ye  shed  b.  and  shall  ye  possess  the  land  7 

35. 5.  because  thou  hast  shed  A.  of  children  of  Isr. 

36.  18.  poured  fury  on  them  for  the  b.  they  shed 

Mat.  23.  35.  on  you  come  all  the  righteous  b.  shed 

Mark  14.24.  this  is  my  fr. which  is  shed,  Lxike  22.20. 

/<uA-e  11.  50.  b.  of  all  the  jirophels  which  was  shed 
Acts  22.  20.  when  the  b.  of  Stephen  was  shed 

Rev.  1(5.  G.  for  they  have  shed  the  b.  of  the  saints 
Spiin/de  BLOOD. 

£xo(i.29.1.fi.  take  the  ram'sA.  and, iprinkle on  altar 
20.  shall  sprinkle  b.  upon  the  altar  round  about, 
Leo.  1.  5,  11. 1 3.  2,  8,  13. 1 7. 2. 1 17.  6.  JVum. 
16.  17. 
Z-ev.  4.  6.  priest  sp.  b.  seven  times,  17.  1 16. 14, 19. 

5.  9.  sprinkle  b.  ofsin-otferingon  side  of  the  altar 

7.  14.  it  shall  be  iho  priests  that  sprinkle  the  b. 
JVu»i.l9. 4.  sprinkle  of  the  b.  before  the  tabernacle 
i Kings  W.\h.spri,nkle  on  it  the  i.of  hurnt-oftering 
Ezek.  43. 18.  when  make  an  altar  to  spr.  b.  thereon 

BLOOD  sprinkled. 
£i;o(/.24.6.halforA. Moses  sp.on  altar, 7,ct).8. 19,24. 

-  8.  Moses  took  the  b.  and  sprinkled  on  the  people 
Z<e».6.27.when  there  is  sprinkled  6.on  anygarment 

8. 30.  Moses  tookof  the  A. and  .'sprinkled  on  Aaron 

9.12.Aaron's  sons  presented  him  b.  he  sprinkl.l8. 
ZKingsi).'S3.  some  of  Athaliah's  b.  sprinhl.  on  wall 

16. 13.  Ahaz  sprinkled  the  b.  of  his  peace-otVering 
2  Chr.  29.  22.  sprinkled  the  b.  of  bullocks,  30. 16. 

35.11.  the  priests«pri?iAif(/ the  A.  from  their  hands 
/«a.63.3.  their  A.  shall  be  sprinkledon  my  garment 
Heb.  9.  21.  he  sprinkled  with  b.  the  tabernacle 

tVilh  BLOOD. 
-Exoi.  30. 10.  Aaron  shall  make  atonement  with  b. 
Lev.  14.  52.  cleanse  the  house  icith  b.  of  the  bird 

19.  26.  ye  shall  not  eat  any  thing  with  A. 
\Kings  2.9.his  hoary  head  bring  thou  down  xeith  b. 
Psal.  106.  38.  and  the  land  was  polluted  icith  A. 
/sa.34.6.3word  of  Ld. tilled  with  b.  made  fat  with  b. 
7.  and  their  land  shall  bo  soaked  with  b. 

49.  2C>  they  shall  be  drunken  with  their  own  b. 

59.  3.  for  your  hands  are  defiled  xcith  b. 
Jer.  19.  4.  filled  this  place  with  the  A.  of  innocents 

46.  10.  it  sliall  be  made  drunk  with  their  b. 
Lam.  4. 14.  they  have  polluted  themselves  with  b. 
Ezek.  38.  22.  I  will  plead  against  him  with  A. 
Hvs.  6.  8.  Gilead  is  a  city  polluted  with  A. 
J/ic.3;10.they  build  up  Zion  with  b.  and  Jerusalem 
Hab.  2. 12.  woe  to  him  that  buildeth  a  town  with  b. 
Gal.  1.  16.  immediately  I  conferred  not  with  A. 
Heb.  9.  22.  all  things  are  by  the  law  purged  with  b. 
Hcv.  8.  7.  followed  hail  and  fire,  mingled  with  b. 

17.C.  saw  the  woman  drunken  with  A. of  the  saints 

I!L0OD-GU[LTINESS. 
Psal.  51. 14.  deliver  me  from  b.-iriiiltiness,  O  God 

BLOOD-THIUSTY. 
Proc.  29.  10.  the  b.-thirslij  hate  the  upright 

BLOODY. 
Kzod.  4.  25.  surely  a  A.  husband  art  thou  to  me,  26. 
2  Ham.  16.  7.  Shiraei  said,  come  out,  thou  A.  man 

21.  1.  the  famine  is  for  Saul,  anjj  hi.s  b.  house 
Psal.  .5.  6.  tlie  Lord  will  abhor  iJie  A.  man 

26.  9.  gather  not  my  life  with  A.  men 
55.  23.  b~  men  shall  not  live  out  half  their  days 
59.  2.  deliver  me,  and  save  me  from  A.  men 
139.  li).  depart  from  me  therefore  ye  b.  men 
Ezek.  7.  23.  for  the  land  is  full  of  A.  crimes 

22.  2.  son  of  man,  wilt  thou  judge  the  A.  city  ? 
24.  6.  woo  to  the  A.  city,  9.  JVaA.  3.  1. 

jicts  28.  8.  father  of  Pubiius  lay  sick  of  a  A.  flu.x 

BLOOMED. 
JVum.  17. 8.  Aaron's  rod  A.  blossoms  and  almonds 

BLOSSOM 
Signifies,  [1]  Jl  flower  of  a  tree  or  plant,  (ion.  40. 
10.    [2]  To  put  forth  into  flowers  or  blossoms, 
Num.  17. 5.  Hab.  3.17.  [3]  To  increasc,flourish, 
and  prosper,  Isa.  27.  6.  |  35.  1,  2. 
Their  root  shall  be  as  rottenness,  and  their  blossom 
shall  go  up  as  dust,  Isa.  5.  24.  that  is,   Utter 
destruction  shall  seize  upon  them;  they  shall 
be  destroyed  both  root  and  branch. 
The  rod  hath  blossomed,  Ezek.  7. 10.   The  instru- 
vtent  that  God  will  make  use  of  for  your  cor- 
rection is  ready  made  and  prepared. 
Gen.  40.  10.  her  A.  shot  forth,  and  the  clusters 
ha.  5.  24.  and  their  A.  shall  go  up  as  dust 

BLOSSOM,  ED. 

Wum.  17. 5-  the  man's  rod  whom  I  choose  shall  b. 

ha.  27. 6.  Israel  shall  A.  and  bud,  and  fill  the  world 

35.  1.  the  desert  shall  rejoice  and  A.  as  the  rose 

3.  it  ih»U  i.  abundantly  and  rejoice  with  joy 

39 


BLO 

Ezek.  7. 10.  the  rod  hath  A.  pride  hath  budded 

Uos.  14.  t5.  and  he  shall  b.  as  the  lily 

Hab.  3. 17.  altho'  the  fig-tree  shall  not  A.  nor  fruit 

BLOT 
Signifies,  [1]  Censure,  scorn,  or  reproach,  Prov. 
y.  7.    [2]   Unjust  gain,  which  is  a  blemish, 
scandal,  and  disgrace  to  a  person,  Job  31.  7. 
Blot  me  out  of  thy  book,  Kxod.  32.  32.     Hot  me 
out  of  the  book  of  life,  out  of  the  catalogue  or 
number  uf  those  that  shall  be  saved;  let  me 
die  rather  than  see  the  evil  that  shall  come  to 
this   people,   if   thou  do  not  forgive    them. 
Wherein   Moses    does    not  express   what  he 
thought  might  be  done,  but  rather  wishcth,  if 
it  were  possible,  that  God  would  accept  of  him 
as  a  sacrifice  in  their  stead,  and  by  his  utter 
destruction  and  annihilation  precent  so  great 
a.mischief  to  them;  In  which  he  was  a  type  of 
Christ,  who  laid  down  his  life,  and  was  made 
a  curse  for  us.  Gal.  3.  13. 
That  I  may  blot  out  their  name  from  under  hea- 
ven, Veut.  9.  14.     That  I  may  utterly  destroy 
and  consume  tlLcm,  and  make  their  name  to  be 
forgotten  among  men. 
Blot   out    my  transgression,    Psal.  51.  1.     Sins 
are  compared  to  debts.  Mat.  6.  12.  which  arc 
written  in  the  creditor's  book,  and  crossed  or 
blotted  out  when  they  arc  paid.     Men's  sins 
are  loritten  in  the  book  of  God's  remembrance 
or  accounts,  out  of  which  all  men  shall  be 
judged  hereafter.  Rev.  20.  12.  and  when  sin  is 
pardoned,  it  is  said  to  be  blotted  out,  Isa.  44.  22. 
and  not  to  be  found  any  more,  though  it  should 
be  sought  for,  Jer.  50.  20. 
T)eut.  32.  1  5.  their  A.  is  not  of  his  children 
Job  31.  7.  if  any  A.  hath  cleaved  to  my  hands 
Prov.  9.  7.  that  rebukes  the  wicked,  gctteth  a  A. 

BLOT  out. 
Gen.  7.  t4.  every  living  thing  will  I  A.  out 
Exod.  32.  32.  and  if  not,  A.  me  out  of  thy  book 
33.  whosoever  hath  sinned,  him  will  I  A.  out 
JVuin.  5.  23.  shall  b.  them  out  with  bitter  water 
£>eut.Q.U.\et  me  alone  that  1  may  b.out  their  name 
25.  19.  shall  b.  out  the  remembrance  of  Amalek 
29.20.  the  Lord  shall  A.oathis  name  from  under  h. 
2  Kings  14.27.  said  not,  that  he  would  A.  out  Israel 
/"sai.Sl.l. have  mercy,  O  God,  A.out  transgressions 

9.  hide  my  sins,  and  6.  out  all  mine  iniquities 
.Jer.  18.  23.  nor  A.  out  their  sin  from  thy  tight 
liev.  3.  5. 1  will  not  A.  his  name  out  of  book  of  life 

BLOTTED. 

JVt/i.  4.  5.  let  not  theirsin  be  A.  out  from  before  thee 

P.'>'((i.09.  28.  let  them  be  A.  out  of  book  of  the  living 

109.  13.  posterity  cut  off",  let  thcnr  name  he  A.  out 

14.  let  not  the  sin  of  his  mother  be  A.  out 
Isa.  44.  22.  I  have  A.  out  as  a  thick  cloud 
.^icts  3.  19.  repent,  that  your  sins  may  be  A.  out 

BLOTTETH,  ING. 
Isa.  43. 25. 1  am  he  that  A.  out  thy  transgressions 
Col.  2.  14.  A.  out  the  hand  writing  of  ordinances 

BLOW 
Signifies,  A  stroke,  calamity,  or  judgment,  such 
as  sword,  or  famine,  which  God  inflicts  upon 
a  people  for  their  sins,  Jer.  14.  17. 
Awake,  O  north-wind,  and  blow  u]ion  myganlen 
&.C.  Cant.  4.  16.  Let  the  Huly  Spirit  in  his 
several  operations,  both  convincing  and  mor- 
tifying, and  also  comforting,  stir  up  and 
quicken  my  heart  and  soul,  that  the  graces 
that  are  in  memay  be  quickened  and  exercised. 
The  wind  bloweth  where  it  listelh ;  so  is  every  man 
that  is  born  of  the  Spirit,  .fohn  3.  8.  As  there 
arc  many  things  in  nature,  particularly  the 
wind,  which  are  evident  in  their  effects,  yet  no 
man  can  give  a  clear  and  full  account  of  them, 
man' s reason cannotreach  to  know  fromwhence 
the  wind  rises,  from  how  great  a  distance  it 
comes,  or  how  far  it  goes ;  so  is  this  spiritual 
change  wrought  fredy,  where,  in  whom,  when, 
and  in  what  meajfure,  the  Spirit  pleases  ;  and 
also  powerfully,  so  as  to  make  an  evident, 
sensible  change;  though  the  manner  thereof 
be  incomprehensible,  it  is  known  by  the  effects. 
I  did  blow  upon  it,  flag.  1. 9.    /  did  blast  it,  that 

it  did  you  no  good. 
A  fire  not  blown,  ./oh  20.  26.     Some  heavy  judg- 
ment that  comes  no  man  knows  how. 
r»aZ.  39. 10. 1  am  consumed  by  the  A.  of  thy  hand 
.Icr.  14.  17.  people  is  broken  with  a  grievous  b. 

BLOW,  rerb. 
Exod.  15. 10.  thou  didst  A.  with  thy  wind 
JVu»H. 10.5.  when  ye  A.  an  alarm,  camps  shall  go,  6. 

9.  then  ye  shall  A.  an  alarm  with  Irnmpcts 
,Judg.  7.  18.  when  I  A.  with  a  trimipet,  then  A.  yc 
Psod.  78.  26.  he  caused  an  east-wmd  to  A. in  heaven 
147.18.  causcth  his  wind  to  A.  and  the  waters  flow 
Cant.  4.  16.  come,  thou  south,  A.  upon  my  garden 
Isa.  40. 24.  he  shall  also  A.  upon  them,  shall  wither 
Ezek.  21.  31.  I  will  A.  against  thee,  22.  21. 
H«t.  5.  8.  b.  ye  this  cornet  in  Gibeab,  cry  aloud 


BOD 

Hag.  1.  9.  when  ye  brought  It,  I  did  b.  upon  it 
Luke  12.  55.  when  ye  see  the  south-wind  A. 
Rev.  7.  ].  that  wind  should  not  A.  on  the  earth 
See  Tkumi'kt. 
BLOWETH. 
Isa.  40.  7.  because  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  A.  on  it 
54. 16. 1  have  created  the  smith  that  A.  the  coalf 
John  3. 8.  the  wind  A.  where  ii  listeth,  thou  heare* 

BLOWN. 
.hb  20.  26.  a  fire  not  A.  shall  consume  him 
Mai.  1.  1 13.  whereas  ye  might  have  A.  it  awav 

BLUE. 
Exod.  25. 4.  h.  purple,  scarlet,  26. 1,31,  36.  \  27.  IG. 
28.31.  make  the  robe  of  the  ephod  of  A.  39.  22. 
39.  3.  they  cut  gold  into  wires  to  work  it  in  the  b. 
JVum.  15.  38.  put  on  the  fringes  a  ribband  of  A. 
2  Chron.  2.  7.  send  a  man  cunning  to  work  in  A.  14. 
Esth.  1.6.  A.  hangings,  a  pavement  of  A.  marble 
8.  15.  Mordecai  went  in  a  royal  apparel  of  A. 
Ezek.  23.  6.  the  Assyrians  were  clothed  with  b. 
See  PuRPi.K,  Cloth,  Lace,  Looi-s. 
BLUENESS. 
Prov.  20.  30.  A.  of  a  wound  cleanseth  away  ovil 

BLUNT. 
Eccl.  10.  10.  if  iron  he  A.  and  he  do  not  whet  it 

BLUSH. 
Ezra9.  6. 1  A.  to  lift  up  my  face  to  thee,  my  God 
Jer.  0.  15.  not  ashamed,  nor  could  tiiey  A.  8.  12. 

BOAR. 
Psal.  80.  13.  A.  out  of  the  wood  doth  waste  it 

BOARD,  S. 
Exod.  26.  29.  shalt  overlay  A.  with  gold,  36.  34. 
27.  8.  hollow  with  A.  shalt  thou  make  it,  36.  34. 
36.  30.  under  every  A.  were  two  sockets 
JVttjrt.  3.  .36.  under  custody  of  Merari  shall  be  b. 
Cant.  b.  9.  we  will  enclose  her  with  A.  of  cedar 
Acts  27.  44.  the  rest,  some  on  A.  came  to  land 

BOAST,  .Substantive. 

Psal.  34.  2.  my  soul  shall  make  her  A.  in  the  Lord 

Rom.  2.  17.  art  a  Jew,  and  makcst  tiiy  A.  of  God 

23.  thou  that  niakest  thy  A.  of  the  law 

BOAST,  rerb. 

1  Kings  20.  n.  not  A.  as  he  that  putteth  it  off 

2  Chron.  25.  19.  thine  heart  lifleth  thee  up  to  b. 
Psal.  44.  8.  in  God  we  A.  all  the  day  long 

49.  6.  a."d  A.  themnelves  in  their  riches 
94.  4.  the  workers  of  iniquity  A.  themselves 
97.  7.  confounded  be  they  that  A.  of  idols 

Prov.  27.  1.  A.  not  thyself  of  to-morrow 

Isa.  10.  1.5.  shall  the  ax  6.  itself  against  liim  thai 
61.  6.  in  their  glory  shall  you  A.  yourselves 

Rom.  II.  18.  A.  not  against  branches,  if  thou  A. 

2  Cor.  9.  2.  for  which  I  A.  to  them  of  Macedonia 

10.  8.  for  though  I  should  A.  somewhat  more 
13.  we  will  not  A.  of  tilings  without  our  measure 

16.  and  not  to  b.  in  another  man's  line 

11.  16.  receive  me,  that  I  may  A.  myself  a  little 
Eph.  2.  9.  not  of  works,  lest  any  man  should  A. 

BOASTED.' 
Ezek.  35.  13.  with  mouth  ye  have  A.  against  me 
2  Cor.  7.  14.  if  1  hnve  A.  nnv  thing  to  him 

BOASTERS. 
Rom.  1.  30.  proud,  A.  inventors  of  evil  thincs 
2  Tim.  3.  2.  covetous,  A.  proud,  bhisphenu  rs 

BOASTEST,  ETH. 
Psal.  10.  3.  the  wicked  A.  of  his  hear!'.')  deaire 
.52.  1.  why  A.  thou  thyself  in  mischief? 
Prov.  20.  14.  when  he  is  gone' his  way,  then  he  b. 
25.  14.  whoso  A.  bimsclfof  a  false  gift 
./a7n.3.5.  ton?iiea  litlliMneniber,  and  A.great thing! 

BOASTING,  Participle. 
Acts  5. 36.  rose  Thendas,  A. himself  to  be  somebody 
2  Cor.  10.15.  not  A.  of  things  without  our  measuro 

BOASTING,  Substantive. 
Rom.  3.  27.  where  is  A.  then  ?  it  is  excluded 
2  Cor.7.14.evcn  so  our  A. before  Titus  is  found  truth 
8.  24.  shew  yc  to  them  the  proof  of  our  A. 
9.3Jcst  our  A.of you  should  be  in  vain  in  this  behalf 
4.  we  should  be  ashamed  in  this  same  confident  A 
11. 10.  no  man  shall  stop  me  of  this  A.  in  Achaia 

17.  but  as  it  were  foolishly  in  this  confidence  of  A 
.Jam.  4.  16.  but  now  ve  rejoice  in  your  A. 

BOAT,  S. 

John  6.  22.  the  people  saw  there  was  no  ofl»'    a. 
there,  and  that  Jesus  went  not  into  t.e  A. 
23.  there  came  other  A.  from  Tiberias 

Acts  27.  16.  had  much  work  to  come  by  the  A. 
30.  when  they  had  let  down  the  A.  into  the  sea 
32.  the  soldiers  cut  ofTlhc  ropes  of  the  *. 
BODY 

Signifies,  [1]  The  material  part  of  man ,  1  Cor.  15. 
44.  Yi]  The  whole  man,B.om.fi.n.\\'i.\.  [3] 
The  substance  of  a  shadow  or  ceremony,  Col. 
2.  17.  [4]  The  church  of  God  firmly  united  t» 
Christ  and  among  themselves,  by  the  Spirit, 
faith,  love,  sacrament,  word,  and  ministry, 
which,  like  the  veins  and  arteries  in  the  body, 
serve  to  join  them  withChrist,and  among  thcm- 
selvee,and  also  to  convey  influence  andnourish' 
mtntfrom  theheadto  every  particular  mctubet 


BOD 

•/  tkis  mystical  body,  1  Cor.  10.  17.  Eph.  4.  16. 
Col.  J.  ItJ.     [5J  The  human  nature  of  Christ, 
Htb.  10.  5.     [b]  The  unrenewed  part  of  man, 
such  as  the  sensitive  poicers,  carnal  ajfictions, 
and  sinful  inclinations,  1  Cor.  9.  i!7. 
TliiB  18  ray  body,  .Mat,    <li.  26.     This  bread  is  a 
irign  >»■  reprcsentulu^-,  and  is  hereafter  tu  be 
a  memorial  also,  of  my  body,  and  of  my  suf- 
feringa  in  it;    and  also  a  seal   and  pledge, 
whereby  I  make  over  to  you  all  the  bcnejils  J 
have  purchased  thereby  :  Or,  This  taking  and 
eating  is  a  holy  rite  of  cummemorateng  my 
death,  and  a  means  of  making  all  worthy  re- 
ceivers partakers  of  the  benefits  thereof. 
The  body  of  this  dealli,  Horn.  7.  iM.    The  corrup- 
tion of  nature,  acting  chiefly  by  the  body,  which 
tends  to,  and  binds  me  over  to  death. 
Exod.  24.  10.  a»  ttie  b.  of  lieuveii  in  its  clearness 
1  .Sam.  31.  12.  touk  the  6.  of  Saul,  1  Chron.  10. 12. 
Job  19.  17.  lor  the  children's  sake  of  my  own  b. 
26.  though  alter  my  skin  worms  destroy  this  b 
20.  25.  it  IB  drawn  and  conieih  out  of  the  b. 
Psal.  139.  1 15.  my  b.  was  not  hid  from  thee 
Prov-  5.  11.  when  thy  tleah  and  b.  are  consumed 
Isa.  10.  18.  and  shall  consume  both  soul  and  b. 
51.  23.  and  thou  hast  laid  thy  b.  as  the  ground 
Ezek.  10.  12.  their  whole  b.  was  full  of  eyes 
Dan.  7.  15. 1  was  grieved  hi  sjiiritin  midst  of  my  A. 
Mat.  5. 29.  that  thy  whole  b.  be  cast  into  hell,  30. 

6.  22.  the  light  of  tiie  b.  is  the  eye,  J.uke  11.  34. 

thy  b.  shall  be  full  of  light,  Luke  11.  34,  30. 
33.  thy  whole  b.  shall  be  full  of  darkness 
25.  take  no  thought  for  your  b.  J^uke  12.  22. 
und  the  4.  more  than  raiment,  I^uke  12.  23. 
10.  28.  fear  not  them  that  kill  the  4.  Luke  12.  4. 
14.  12.  John's  disciples  came  and  took  up  the  4. 
25.  12.  she  hath  poured  this  ointment  on  my  4. 
SO.Jes.  took  bread  and  said,  takc,eat,this  is  my  4. 
Mark  14.  2J.  Luke  22.  19.  1  Cor.  11.  24. 
27.  58.  Joseph  of  Arimathea  went  to  Pilate,  and 
begged  the  4.  of  Jesus,  Mark  15.43.  y.ijtc  23.52. 
Mark 5.  20. she  felt  in  lur  b.  that  she  was  healed 

14.  8.  she  is  come  aforehand  to  anoint  my  4. 
51.  having  a  linen  cloth  cast  about  his  4. 

15.  45.  Pilate  gave  the  4.  to  Joseph,  Mat.  27.53. 
/.wAe  17.  37.  where  the  4.  is,  thither  the  eagles 

24.  3.  they  found  not  (he  4.  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
John  20.  12.  where  the  4.  of  Jesua  had  lain 
Rom.  6.  6.  that  the  4.  of  sin  may  be  destroyed 

7.  4.  become  dead  to  the  law  by  the  4.  of  Christ 
34. who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  4.  of  this  death? 

8.  10.  Christ  in  you,  the  4.  is  dead  because  of  sin 
13.  if  ye  thro'  the  Spirit  mortify  deeds  of  the  4. 
23.  for  the  adoption,  the  redemption  of  our  4. 

I  Cor.  6.  13.  now  the  4.  is  not  for  fornication,  but 
for  the  ijord,  and  the  Lord  for  the  4. 

18.  every  am  a  man  doth  is  without  the  4. 

6.  19.  your  4.  is  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost 

7.  4.  the  wife  hath  no  power  of  her  own  4. 

9.  27.  but  I  keep  under  my  4.anc'  brin"  it  to  subjec. 

10.  16.  the  communion  of  the  i».  li' Christ 

11.  27.  be  guilty  of  the  4.  and  bloc*  c""  the  Lord 
29.  eats  damnation,  not  discerning  the  L«  nl's  4. 

12.  14.  for  the  4.  \m  not  one  member,  but  many 

15.  xt  it  therefore  not  of  the  4.7  16. 
17.  if  whole  4.  were  an  eye,  whore  were  hearing? 

19.  where  were  the  4.?  (|  20.  yet  but  one  4. 
27.  now  ye  are  the  4.  of  Christ,  and  members 

13.  3.  tho'  I  give  my  4.  to  be  burned,  and  have  not 
15.  35.  and  with  what  4.  do  tho  dead  come  T 

37.  thou  Rowest  not  that  4.  that  shall  be 

38.  but  God  giveth  it  a  4.  as  it  bath  pleased  hira 
44.  it  is  sown  a  natural  4.  raised  a  spiritual  4. 

8  Cor.  5.8.  willing  rather  to  be  absent  from  the  b. 
Kph.  3.  6.  Gentiles  be  fellow-heirs  of  tho  same  4. 

4.  12.  for  the  edifying  of  ihe  4.  of  Christ 

16.  from  whom  the  whole  4.  filly  joined  together 

5.  33,  and  he  is  the  Saviour  of  the  4. 
P4»7. 3. 21.  who  shall  change  our  vile  4.  that  it  may 
Col.  1.  18.  he  is  the  head  of  the  4.  the  church 

2.  11.  in  putting  ofTlhe  4.  of  the  sins  of  tho  flesh 

17.  which  are  a  shadow,  but  the  4.  is  of  Christ 
19.  from  which  the  4.  by  joints  and  bands 
23.  a  show  of  wisdom  in  negli'Cting  of  the  4. 

1  TAe.M.  5. 23. 1  pray  your  soul  and  4.  bo  preserved 
Heb.  10.  5.  but  a  4.  hast  thou  prepared  me 

10.  through  the  offering  of  the  4.  of  Jc.»ii8 
Jam.i.  Iti.  give  not  things  that  are  needful  to  Ihe  4. 

36.  as  the  4.  without  the  spirit  is  dead,  so  faith 

3.  3.  and  is  able  also  to  bridle  Ihe  whole  b. 
3.  and  wo  turn  about  their  whole  4. 
6.  the  tongue  denletli  the  whole  4. and  sets  on  lire 

Jude9.  Michael  dirt|iiite<l  ai>out  tho  4.  of  Moses 

Dead  RODY. 

/,,irr.21.11.nor8hall  ye  go  in  ton'/y/caif  ft.JVu»n.6.fi. 

JiTum.  9.  0.  certain  nvn  were  defiled  l>y  a  dead  h.  7. 

10.  any  i)fyoul»e  nnclean  by  adead  b.  //i^.S.l.l. 

19. 11.  he  tiiat  touch'.lh  deail  4.  bo  uncloiin,  16. 

8  h'ims  8.  5.  how  hn  had  restored  a  dead  b.  to  life 

Isa.  26  19.  with  my  dead  b.  shall  Ihuv  arise 

40 


BOI 

Jer.  26.  23.  and  cast  his  dead  4.  info  the  gravel 
36.  30.  his  dead  b.  shall  be  cast  out  in  the  day 
Fruit  of  thy  BODY . 
Vcut.  28.  4.  blessed  shall  be  tUe  fruit  of  thy  b. 
11. make  thee  plenteous  in  l\iti  fruit  of  thy  4.30.9. 
18.  curted3hullbe/rui(6i/'(A^4.  und  uf  thy  land 
53.  thou  shalt  eat  tbe/ruii  of  Iky  4.  in  the  siege 
Psal.Vii.  M.fruilofthyb.  will  I  set  on  thy  throne 
w1/iC.C.7.shall  I  give/ru(£  ofmyb.iut  sin  of  my  soull 

Jtlis  BODV. 
Exod.  21. 1 3.  if  he  came  in  with  his  4.  he  shall  go 
iJcut.  21.  23.  hisb.  not  remain  all  nigh;  on  the  tree 
Judg.  8.  30.  Gideon  had  70  sons  of  his  4.  begotten 
1  Sam.  31. 10.  fastened  his  4.  to  wall  of  Belhshaii 

7>a7i.4.33.  his  4.  wet  wilh  the  dew  of  heaven,  5.21.1    H.  21.  how  belt,  wherein  any  is  4.  1  am  4.  also 
7.  11.  till  beast  wag  slain,  and  his  4.  destroyed       Phil.l.ii.  by  my  bonds,  are  much  more  4.  lo  speak 
10.  6.  his  4.  also  was  like  the  beryl  1  Thess.i.^i.  we  were  4.  in  our  God  to  speak  lo  you 

Lukei'.i.  55.  the  women  beheld  how  his  4.wa8laid   Philem.  8.  though  I  might  be  much  4.  in  Christ 
24.  23.  when  Ihey  found  not  his  4  they  came  BULDLY. 

John  2.  21.  but  he  spake  of  the  IWnjile  of  his  b.       Gen.  34.25.  Simeon  and  Levi  came  on  the  city  b. 
.lets  19.  12.  from  his  4.  w  ere  brought  to  the  sick    Mark  15. 43.  Joseph  eaiiie,  and  went  in  4.  to  Pilate 
Rom.  4.  19.  he  considered  not  his  4.  now  dead       UJohn  7.26.  he  si)eakelh  4.  and  they  say  nothing 
1  Cor. 6. 18  commits  fornication  sins  against  his  b.\-^cts  9.  27.  how  he  preached  4.  at  Damascus 


BON 

2  Kings  6.  29.  so  wc  4.  my  son,  and  did  eat  bia 
Job  30.  27.  my  bowels  4.  and  rested  not 

BOILETH,  ^WG. 

Psal.  45.  1 1.  my  heart  6.  up  a  good  matter 

£:ei.  46. 23.  made  wilh  4.  jilaces  under  the  row» 

Boil.,  see  BoYL. 

BOISTEKOUS. 

Mat.  14.  30.  when  he  saw  wind  4.  he  wa»  afiaid 

BOLD. 
Prov.  28.  1,  but  the  righteous  arc  4.  as  a  lion 
.fJets  13.  46.  Paul  and  Barnabas  wa.ted  4. 
Uom.H)  20.  Ksaias  is  very  4. and  saith,  I  was  found 
2  Cor.  10.  J.  but  being  absent,  am  4.  toward  you 
2.  I  may  not  be  4.  wherewith  I  think  lo  be  A. 


4.  the  husband  hath  not  jiower  of  his  own  4 
2  Cor.  5. 10.  may  receive  the  things  done  in  his  4. 
Fph.  1.  23.  which  is  his  b.  fulness  of  him  that  fills 
Phil.  3.  21.  may  be  fashioned  like  to  his  glorious  4. 
Col.  1.  24.  for  his  b.  sake,  which  is  the  church 
ly'tt.  2.24.  who  bare  our  sins  in  hisb.  on  the  tree 

In  BODY. 
Lam.  4.  7.  they  were  more  ruddy  in  b.  than  rubies 
Rom.  6.  12.  let  not  sin  reign  in  your  mortal  4. 

1  Cor.  5.  3.  I  verily  as  absent  in  4.  have  judged 
6. 20.  therefore  glorify  God  in  your  A.  and  spirit 
7.  34.  that  she  may  be  holy  in  4.  and  in  sjiirit 
12.  13.  God  hath  set  members  every  one  in  the  4. 

25.  that  there  should  be  no  schism  i«  Ihe  A. 

2  Cor.  4.10.  bearing  about  ni  the  4.  the  dying  of  our 
Ld. that  life  of  Jesus  might  be  manifest  in  our  A. 

5.  6.  knowing  that  whilst  we  are  at  home  in  A. 
12.  2.  whether  in  A.  or  whether  out  of  the  body 


29.  he  spake  4.  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
14.  3.  long  lime  abode  ihey,  speaking  4.  in  the  Ld 

18.  26.  Ajiollos  began  lo  speak  4.  in  the  synagogue 

19.  8.  spake  4.  for  the  space  of  three  months 
Horn.  15.  15.  I  have  written  the  more  4.  to  you 
Eph.  6. 19.  given  me,  that  I  may  open  my  mouth  b 

20.  that  1  may  speak  4.  as  I  ought  lo  speak 
J-/tb.  4.  16.  let  us  come  A.  to  the  IhroDe  of  grace 
13.  6.  that  we  may  A.  sav,  the  Lord  is  my  neiper 

BOLDNESS. 
Eccl.  8. 1.  and  the  4.  of  his  face  shall  be  changed 
.^cts  4. 13.  when  they  saw  the  4.  of  Peter  and  John 
29.  that  wilh  all  4.  Ihey  may  speak  thy  word 
31.  and  they  spake  the  woid  of  God  with  4. 
2  Cor.  3.  1 12.  we  use  great  A.  of  speech 
7.  4.  great  is  my  4.  of  speech  toward  you 
Eph.  3.  12.  in  whom  we  have  4.and  access  by  faith 
Phil.  1.  20.  but  that  with  all  4.  as  always,  so  now 


Gal.  6.  17. 1  bear  in  4.  the  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus  1  Tim.  3.  13.  they  purchase  great  4.  in  the  faith 


Phil.  1.  20.  Christ  shall  be  magnified  iti  my  4 
Col.  1.  22.  reconciled  in  4.  of  his  fiesh  ihro'  death 
IJeb.  13.  3.  as  being  yourselves  also  in  the  A. 

One  BODY. 
Rom.  12.  4.  as  we  have  many  members  in  one  b. 

5.  we  being  many  are  one  4. in  Christ,  1  Cor.  10. 17. 
1  Cor.  6. 16.  he  that  is  joined  to  a  harlot,  is  oncb. 
12. 12.  as  the  4.  is  one,  and  hath  many  members 
13.  we  are  baptized  into  one  4.  whether  Jews 
20.  now  are  they  many  members,  yet  bul  one  4. 
Eph.  2.  16.  he  might  reconcile  both  to  God  in  one  b. 
4.4.  there  is  one  b.  and  one  Spirit,  as  ye  are  called 
Col.  3.  15.  to  which  ye  are  also  called  in  one  4. 

BODIES. 
Gen.  47.  18.  not  ought  left,  but  our  b.  and  lands 
1  .Sam.  31.  12.  took  4.  of  Saul's  sons,  1  Chr.  10. 12. 
JV'cA.9.37.  they  have  dominion  over  our  4. and  cattle 
.fob  13.  12.  your  4.  are  like  unto  4.  of  clay 
Eiek.  1.  11.  two  wings  covered  their  A.  23. 
Dan  3.  27.  on  whose  4.  the  fire  had  no  power 
28.  yielded  their  4.  that  they  might  not  serve 
Mat.  27.  52.  many  A.  of  saints  which  slept,  arose 
John  19.  31.  the  4.  should  not  remain  on  the  cross 
Rom.  1.24.  gave  them  up  to  dishonour  their  own  4. 
8.  II.  shall  quicken  your  mortal  4.  by  his  Spirit 

12.  1.  that  ye  present  your  4.  a  living  sacrifice 

1  Cor.  6.  15.  your  A.  are  members  of  Christ 
15.  40.  there  are  celestial  A.  and  4.  terrestrial 

F.ph.  5.  23,  to  lovo  Iheir  wives  as  their  own  4. 
Hcb.  10.  22.  and  our  4.  washed  with  pure  water 

13.  11.  tho  4.  of  beasts,  whose  blood  is  brought 
Rev.  IB.  1 13.  the  merchandise  of  4.  and  souls 

n,ad  BODIES. 

2  Chrnn.  20.  34.  behold  they  were  dead  A.  fallen 
S.V  they  found  wilh  dead  b.  precious  jewels 

P.^a/.  79. 2.  rfca(/4.of  ihy  servants  given  to  be  meat 

110.  6.  he  shall  fill  the  places  with  the  dead  A. 
JtT.  31.  40.  whole  valley  of  dead  A.  shall  be  holy 
33.  5.  but  it  is  lo  fill  them  with  dead  A.  of  men 
34. 30.  their  dead  b.  shall  be  for  meat  lo  the  fowls 
41.9.  the  pit  wherein  Ishmael  cast  dead  A.  of  men 
.9mosfi.  3.  shall  bo  many  dead  A.  in  every  pinro 
Wet).  11.8.  their  deadb.  shall  lie  in  the  street  of  citv 
9.  nation.^  see  ihoir  deadb.  three  days  and  a  half, 
nor  ButTor  their  dead  A.  lo  be  put  in  graves 
BODILY. 
T.uke  3.  22.  the  Holy  Ghosl  descended  in  a  4.  shape 
2  Cor.  10.  10.  but  hie  4.  presence  is  weak 
Col.  2.  9.  in  him  all  tho  fulness  of  the  Godhead  A. 
1  Tim.  4.  8.  for  A.  OJcercisn  profilulh  little 

BOIL. 
Lev.  8.  31.  A.  the  flesh  al  the  door  of  the  tabernacle 
.fob  41.  31.  he  makoUi  Ihe  deep  to  A.  like  a  pot 
r.ta.  64.  2.  the  fire  causulh  the  waters  to  A. 
f'.zck.  24.  5.  burn  tho  bones,  and  make  it  A.  well 
46.  20.  the  pUc«  where  tho  priests  shall  A.  24. 

BOILED. 
I  King$  19. 21.  bo  took  a  yoke  of  uxoo  and  b.  them 


Heb.  10.  19.  having  A.  to  enter  into  the  holiest 
1  John  4.  17.  that  we  may  have  4.  in  judgment 

BOLLED. 

Exod.  9.31.  barley  was  in  the  ear,  and  the  flax  ft. 

BOLSTER. 

1  .Sam.  19.  13.  a  pillow  of  goals'  hair  for  his  A.  16 
26.7.  spear  al  his  4.  11,  12.  ||  16.  water  al  his  A. 

BOLT,  ED. 

2  Sam.  13.  17.  4.  the  door  ||  18.  he  A.  the  door 
BOND 

Signifies,  [1]  .fin  obligation,  or  rtna.  Num.  30.  5, 
14.  [21  Snjferings  for  Christ  and  his  gospel, 
Heb.  13.  3. 

Thou  hast  loosed  my  bonds,  Psnl.  116.  16.  Thou 
hast  rescued  me  from  mine  enemies,  whose  cap 
tine  and  vassal  I  was,  and  therefore  hast  a 
just  right  and  title  to  me  and  to  my  service. 

He  looseth  the  bonds  of  kings,  .Job  12.  18.  ffe 
deprives  them  of  that  majesty,  poicer,  and  ou- 
thority,!rhirh  should  kfrplheirsubjeetsin  awe, 
and  whcretrith  thry  bind  Ihem  to  obedience. 

Cliarily  is  the  bond  of  perfectness,  Co/.  3. 14.  iMve 
to  our  neighbour,  flowing  from  love  to  God,  is 
thcehief  means  to  uprrfect  union  among  all  the 
members  of  the  church,  and  to  make  their  gifts 
andgraeea  subservient  to  the goodnf  each  other. 

JVum.  30.  2.  or  s«enr  to  hind  his  soul  with  a  A. 

3.  if  a  woman  vow  and  bind  herself  by  a  A. 

4.  and  her  father  he.ir  her  vow  and  her  A. 
Ezek.  20.  37.  1  will  bring  you  into  4.  of  covenant 
/.like  13.  16.  be  loosed  from  his  4.  o.i  llie  sabbalh 
.lets  8.  23.  thou  an  in  the  4.  of  iniquity 
Fph.  4.  3.  the  uniiy  of  the  Spirit,  in  ihe  4.  ofpeaca 
Col.  3.  14.  put  on  charitv,  the  A.  of  perfectness 

BO'XD. 
1  Cor.  12.  13.  baptized  into  one  body,  A.  or  free 
See  Frke. 
BONDS. 
JV>im.  30.  5.  not  any  of  her  vows  or  A.  shall  stani) 
7.  4.  wberewilh  she  bound  her  sou!  shall  stand 
11.  he  c'stnMisliod  all  her  A.  which  arc  on  her 
./,)4  12.  13.  he  looseth  the  A.  of  kings 
Psal.  116.  16.  O  Lord,  thou  hast  loosed  my  b. 
.Jer.  5.  5.  have  broken  the  yoke,  ami  burst  the  *. 
27. 2.  make  thee  4.  ami  yokes,  and  put  on  'hy  necfc 
30.  8.  I  will  break  bis  yoke,  and  hurst  thy  b. 
J\raA.  1.  13.  and  I  will  bursl  thy  4.  in  sunder 
.•lets  20.  23.  that  A.  and  nlllictions  abide  me 
23. 29.  done  nothing  worthy  of  dealh  or  A.  26. 31. 
35.  14.  there  is  a  ceilain  man  left  in  A.  bi-  Felij 
26.29.  allogelher  such  as  I  am,  except  these  b. 
F.ph.  6.  20.  for  which  I  am  an  ambassador  in  A. 
PAi7. 1.  7.  in  A.  ye  ore  all  parlakers  of  my  grac* 

13.  so  that  my  A.  in  Christ  are  manifest 

14.  tho  brethren  waxins  confident  by  my  i< 
16.  supposing  to  add  afHiclion  to  my  A 

Cnl.4.  3.  for  which  I  am  in  A.  ||  18.  remember  mr  ft, 
2  Tim.  2.  0.  wherein  1  suflei  trouble,  ovea  to  ft. 


BON 

PhUem.  10.  whom  I  have  begotten  in  my  b 

13.  have  ministered  to  me  in  the  b.  of  the  gospel 
£{eb.  10.  34.  ye  had  compassion  of  me  in  my  b. 
11  36.  others  had  trial  of  b.  and  imprisonment 
*   13.  3.  remember  them  tliat  are  in  b.  as  bound 
BONDAGE 
Signifies,  [IJ  Outward  slavery  and  oppression, 
£xod.  C.  5.  Ezra  9.  8,  9.     [2]  Spiritual  subjec- 
tion to  sin  and  Satati,  Heb.  2.  15.     [li]  Hubjcc- 
tion  to  the  yoke  of  the  ceremonial  law,  Gal.  2, 
-  4.  I  4.  9.     [4]  Servile  fear,  Horn.  6.  15.     [5J 

Corruption  and  deat/i,  Kom.  8.  21. 
The  one  gondereth  to  bondage,  Qal.  4.  31.     Be- 
gets cliildren  to  bondage ;  that  is,  I'hey  who 
adhered  to  the  old  covenant,  or  legal  dispensa- 
tion, by  Moses,  were  not  thereby  freed  from 
tlieir  bondage  to  sin,  Satan,  and  Ood^s  wrath, 
Gal.  3.  10.  and  were  of  a  servile,  mercenary 
disposition,  doing  what  they  did  in  God's  ser- 
vice, not  from  love,  but  slavish  fear,  Koni.8.15. 
mand  thinking  to  merit  heaven  by  their  works. 
Exod.  1.  14.  made  their  lives  bitter  with  hard  b. 
i.  23.  and  Israel  sighed  by  reason  of  the  b.  and 
they  cried  to  God  by  reason  of  the  b. 
6.  6.  and  I  will  rid  you  out  of  their  4. 

9.  but  they  hearkened  not  to  Moses  for  cruel  b. 
13.  .3.  day  in  which  ye  came  out  of  the  house  of  A 
14  Lord  brought  us  out  of  the  house  of  A.  20.  2. 
Veut.  5.  6.  I  6. 12.  |  8.  14.  |  13.  5,  10. 
Josh.  24.  17.  Judg.  6.  8. 
Deut.  26.  6.  the  Egyptians  laid  upon  us  hard  J, 
JVeh.  5.  5.  we  bring  into  b.  our  sons  and  daughters 
some  of  our  daughters  are  brought  into  b 
18.  because  the  b.  was  heavy  on  this  people 
9.  17.  they  appointed  a  cajitain  to  return  to  b. 
Jsa.li.  3.  Lord  shall  give  thee  rest  from  thy  hard  b. 
Horn.  8.  15.  ye  have  not  received  the  spirit  of  ft. 
21.  shall  bo  delivered  from  theft,  of  corruption 
Oal.i.'ii.  from  mount  Sinai,  which  gendereth  to  ft. 
5.  1.  be  not  entangled  again  with  the  yoke  of  ft. 
//eft.  2.  1.5.  were  all  their  life  subject  to  ft. 

In,  into,  or  «;irfcr  BONDAGE. 
Exod.  6.  5.  Israel,  whom  the  Egyptians  keep  in  b. 
Ezra  9.  8.  and  give  us  a  little  reviving  in  our  A. 

9.  our  God  hath  not  forsaken  us  in  our  ft. 
John  8.  33.  we  were  never  i«  ft.  to  any  man 
^ct*7. 6.  and  that  they  should  bring  them  into  b. 
7.  and  the  nation  to  whom  they  shall  be  in  b. 

1  Cor.  7.  15.  a  brother  or  sister  is  not  under  A. 

S  Cor.  11.  20.  ye  sufl'er,  if  a  man  bring  you  into  ft. 
Gal.  2.  4.  that  they  might  bring  us  into  ft. 
4.  3.  were  in  A.  under  the  elements  of  the  world 

9.  whereunto  ye  desire  again  to  be  in  ft. 

25.  answereth  to  Jerusalem,  which  is  in  ft. 

2  Pet.  2.  19.  of  the  same  is  he  brought  into  ft. 

BOND-MAN. 
Gen.  44.  33.  lot  me  abide  instead  of  the  lad  a  A. 
Z>euM5.15.vemember  thou  wastaft.  in  Egypt,  and 
the  Lord  redeemed  thee,  10.  12.  |  24.  18,22. 
Rev.  6.  15.  everv  A.  hid  themselves  in  the  dens 

BOND-MAID,  S. 
Lfv.  19.  20.  whoso  lielh  with  a  A.  betrothed 
25.  44.  thy  A.  shall  be  of  the  heathen,  buy  ye  A. 
Oal.  4.  22.  one  by  a  A.  the  other  by  a  free-woman 

B0ND-3IEN,  WOMEN. 
fi'eit.43. 18.  he  may  take  us  for  A.  and  our  asses 
44.  9.  let  him  die,  and  we  will  be  my  lord's  ft. 
Lev.  25.  42.  they  shall  not  be  sold  as  A. 

44.  A.  shall  bo  of  the  heathen,  of  them  buy  ft. 
46.  they  shall  be  your  A.  for  ever 
28.  13.  that  ye  should  not  be  their  A. 
Deut.  6. 1 12.  beware  lest  thou  forget  the  Lord,  who 
brought  thee  out  of  the  house  of  A.  13.  f  10. 
21.  then  say  to  thy  son,  we  were  Pharaoh's  6. 
7.  8.  and  redeemed  you  out  of  the  house  of  ft. 
28. 08. there  ye  shall  be  sold  for  A. and  bond- women 
Josh.  9.  23.  none  of  you  be  freed  from  being  ft. 

1  Kings  0.  22.  but  of  Israel  Solomon  made  no  A. 

2  Kings  4.  1.  is  cpme  to  take  my  two  sons  to  be  A. 
2  Chron.  23.  10.  to  keep  the  children  of  Judah  for  A. 
Ezra  9.  9.  we  were  A.  yet  God  hath  not  forsaken 
£»tA.7.4.if  we  had  been  sold  for  A.  and  bond-wom. 
Jer.  34.  13.  I  brought  tliein  out  of  the  house  of  A. 

BOND-SKRVANT. 
L,ev.  25.  39.  shalt  not  compel  him  to  serve  as  a  A. 

BOND-SERVICE. 
I  Kings  9.  21.  Solomon  did  levy  a  tribute  of  A. 

BOND-WOMAN. 
Oen.  21. 10.  cast  out  this  A.  and  her  son,  for  the  son 
of  the  A.  shall  not  be  heir^  Gal.  4.  30. 

12.  let  it  not  grieve  thee  because  ol  the  6. 

13.  of  the  son  of  the  A.  will  I  make  a  nation 
Oa.1.  4.  23.  son  of  the  A.  was  born  after  the  flesh 

31.  we  are  not  children  of  the  ft.  but  the  free 
BoND-Wo.MEN,  See  Bond-Men. 
BONE 
ffignifies,  [1]  TTiat  part  of  the  body  while  and 
hard,  affording  support  to  the  whole  fabric. 
Job  10.  11.    [2]  The  dead  body,  1  Kings  13.  31. 
[31  The  whole  man,  Job  20.  11.     Psal.  35.  10. 
41 


BON 

The  bones  which  thou  hast  broken,  Psal.  51.  8. 
My  heart,  which  hath  been  sorely  wounded  and 
terrified  by  the  dreadful  message  sent  by  Na- 
than, and  by  the  dismal  sentence  of  thy  law, 
denounced  against  such  sinners  as  I  am. 

This  is  bone  of  my  bones,  and  flesh  of  my  flesh, 
Gen.  2.  23.  God  hath  provided  me  a  meet 
help  and  wife,  not  out  of  the  brute  creatures, 
but  of  mine  own  body,  and  of  the  same  nature 
with  myself. 

We  are  members  of  his  flesh  and  bones,  Eph.  5, 
30.  Jill  that  grace  and  glory  which  the  church 
hath  is  from  Christ,  1  Cor.  1.  30.  Eph.  2.  10, 
(as  the  woman  was  taken  out  of  the  man.  Gen. 
2.  23.)  and  she  has  the  same  graces  and  glory 
that  Christ  hath,  John  1.  16.  ]  17.  22. 

Gcn.2.23.this  is  ft.of  my  bones,  and  tlesh  of  my  flesh 

29.  14.  surely  thou  art  my  A.  and  my  flesh 
Exod.  12. 40.  neither  shall  ye  break  a  A.  JV«m.9.12. 
J\rum.  19.  16.  louchelh  a  A.  of  a  man,  be  unclean 
Judg.  9.  2.  remember  that  I  am  your  6.  and  flesh 
2  Sam.  5.  1.  behold  we  are  thy  ft.  1  Chron.  1).  1. 

19.  13.  art  thou  not  of  my  ft.  and  of  my  flesh? 

Job  2.  5.  touch  his  ft.  and  flesh,  and  he  will  curse 
19. 20.  my  A.  cleaveth  to  my  skin,  and  to  my  flesh 
31.  22.  let  my  arm  be  broken  from  the  ft. 

Prov.  25.  15.  a  soft  tongue  breaketh  the  A. 

Ezck.  37.  7.  the  bones  came  together,  A.  to  his  A. 

39.  15.  when  any  seeth  a  man's  A.  tlien  set  up 
John  19.  36.  a  A.  of  him  shall  not  be  broken 

BONES. 
Exod.  13.  19.  Moses  took  the  A.  of  Joseph  with 
Josh.  24.  32.  the  A.  of  Joseph  buried  in  Shechem 
Judg.  19.  29.  divided  his  concubine  with  her  A. 
2  Sam.  21.  12.  took  the  A.  of  Saul,  A.  of  Jonathan 
14.  A.  of  Saul  and  Jonathan  buried  in  Zelah 

1  Kings  13.  2.  men's  A.  shall  be  burnt  upon  thee 

2  Kings  13.21.  touched  the  ft.  of  Elisha,  he  revived 

23.  14.  he  lilled  the  places  with  the  A.  of  men 
16.  and  took  ihe  A.  out  of  the  sepulchres 

20.  and  he  burnt  men's  A.  upon  the  altars 
2  Chron.  34.  5.  he  burnt  the  A.  of  the  priests 

Job  10.  11.  thou  hast  fenced  me  with  A.  and  sinews 
Psal.  51.  8.  the  A.  thou  hast  broken  may  rejoice 
53. 5.  God  scattereth  the  A.  of  bun  that  encampelh 
141.  7.  our  A.  are  scattered  at  the  grave's  mouth 
Prov.  3.  8.  fear  Lord,  it  shall  be  marrow  to  thy  A. 

14.  30.  but  envy  the  rottenness  of  the  A. 

15.  30.  a  good  report  maketh  the  A.  fat 

16.  24.  pleasant  words  are  health  to  the  A. 

17.  22.  but  a  broken  spirit  drieth  the  A. 

Eccl.  11.  5.  nor  how  the  A  do  grow  in  the  womb 
Isa.  58.  11.  the  Lord  shall  make  fat  thy  A. 
66.  14.  your  A.  shall  flourish  like  an  herb 
Jer.  8.  1.  bring  the  A.  of  the  kings,  and  A.  of  the 
priests,  A.  of  projihets,  and  6.  of  inhabitants 
Ezek.  6.  5. 1  will  scatter  your  A.  about  your  altars 

24.  4.  fill  it  with  the  choice  A.  ||  5.  burn  A.  10. 

37.  1.  valley  full  of  A.  ||  3.  can  those  A.  live  ? 

4.  prophesy  upon  these  A.  and  say,  O  ye  dry  A. 
11.  these  A.  are  house  of  Israel,  our  A.  are  dried 

j?mos2. 1.  because  he  burnt  A.  of  the  kingof  Edom 
6. 10.  that  burneth  him,  to  bring  out  the  A. 

Zeph.  3.  3.  they  gnaw  not  the  A.  till  the  morrow 

Jilat.  23.  27.  but  are  within  full  of  dead  men's  A. 

Luke  24.  39.  for  a  spirit  hath  not  flesh  and  A. 
His  BONES. 

lA'>7i^«]3.31.whenIamdead  lay  my  A.besideAjj^A. 

2 A7n^«23.18.1et  no  man  moveA(>  A.so  they  lelAii  A. 

Job  2U.  11.  his  A.  are  full  of  the  sin  of  his  youth 
21.  24.  his  A.  are  moistened  with  marrow 
33.  19.  the  multitude  of  his  A.  with  strong  pain 

21.  and  his  A.  that  were  not  seen,  stick  out 

40.  18.  Ais  A.  ns  pieces  of  brass,  his  A.  as  iron 
Psal.  34.20.  he  keepeth  all  his  A.  not  one  is  broken 

109.  18.  so  let  it  come  like  oil  into  his  A. 
/'ro!).]2.4.  makes  ashamed  isns  rottenness  InAi'^i. 
Jer.  50.  17.  Nebuchadnezzar  hath  broken  his  A. 
Eph.a.^O.weatc  members  of  his  flesh  and  of  his  b. 
//eA.11.22.  and  gave  conmiand.  concerning  Ai\s  A. 

My  BONES. 
Gen.  50.  25.  ye  shall  carry  up  my  A.  Exod.  13. 19. 
2  Sam.  19.  12   ye  are  my  ft.  and  my  flesh 
1  Kings  13. 31.  when  I  am  dead  my  A.  beside  his  A. 
Job  4.  14.  trembling  made  all  my  b.  to  thake 

7. 1 15.  my  soul  chooseth  death  rather  than  my  A. 

30.  17.  my  A.  are  pierced  in  me  in  the  night 

30.  my  skin  is  black,  and  my  A.  burnt  with  heat 
Psal.  6.  2.  O  Lord,  heal  me,  for  my  b.  are  ve.xcd 

22.14.  all  myb.are  out  ofjoint||  17. 1  may  tell  my  A. 
31. 10.  my  A.  arc  conpumed||32.3.  my  A.  waxed  old 
35. 10.  all  my  A.  shall  say.  Lord  who  is  like  to  thee 

38.  3.  neither  is  there  any  rest  in  my  b. 

42. 10.  as  with  a  sword  in  my  A.  enemies  reproach 
102.3.  days  consumed,  my  h.  are  burnt  as  a  hearth 

5.  by  reason  of  groaning  my  A.  cleave  to  my  skin 
fsa.  38.  13.  ns  a  lion,  so  will'  he  break  all  my  b. 
Jer.  20.  9.  as  a  burning  fire  shut  up  in  my  b. 

23.  9.  inv  heart  is  broken,  all  my  ft.  shake 
Lam.  1.  13.  be  iiaih  sent  fire  into  my  A. 


BOO 

/,9m.3.4.my  flesh  he  made  old, he  hath  broken  myb 
JJab.  3.  lb.  rottenness  entered  into  my  b. 

Their  BONES. 
JV'«7H.  24.  8.  Israel  shall  break  their  b.  and  pierce 
LSam. 31. 13.took  (Atir  A.and  buried  them  at  Jabesh 
IC'Ar.  10. 12.  buried  iAeir  A.  underan  oak  at  Jabesh 
Lam.  4.  8.  their  skin  cleaveth  to  their  A. 
Eztk.  32.  27.  their  iniquity  shall  be  on  their  b. 
Dan.  6.  24.  the  lions  brake  all  their  ft.  in  pieces 
JMjt.,3.2.  pluck  ofl'llieirskin  and  flesh  from  their  b 
3.  they  break  their  A.  and  chop  them  in  pieces 
BONNETS. 
Exod.W.  40.  for  Aaron's  sons  thou  shalt  make  4 
29.  9.  thou  shall  put  the  A.  on  them.  Leu.  8.  13. 
39.  28.  they  made  goodly  A.  of  fine  linen 
Isa.  3.  20.  Ihe  Lord  will  take  away  the  A. 
Ezek.  44. 18.  they  shall  have  linen  A.  on  their  headi 

BOOK 
Signifies,  [1]  j3  register  wherein  things  arewrit- 
leii.  Gen.  5.  1.  Eslh.  0.  1.    [2]  The  holy  scrip- 
tures, I'sal.  40.  7.   Rev.  22.  19.     [3]  7'Ae  con- 
sciences of  men,  Dan.  7.  10.  Rev.  20.  12.     [4] 
God's  counsel  and  purpose,  Psal.  139.  16.    [5] 
His  omniscience,  or   careful  remembrance  of 
the  services  and  afflictions  of  his  people,  Psal. 
56.  8.  Mai.  3. 16.     [0]  Bis  election  to  life  eter 
nal.  Rev.  21.  27. 
Exod.  17.  14.  write  this  for  a  memorial  in  a  A. 
32.  32.  if  wilt  not  forgive,  blot  me  out  of  thy  A. 
33.  who  hath  sinned,  him  will  I  blot  outof  my  b. 
JV"ii7n.5.23.  the  priest  shall  write  these  curses  in  a  ft 
21.  14.  it  is  said  in  the  A.  of  the  wars  of  the  Lord 
X'cKt.n.lS.sball  writehirn  acopy  of  this  law  in  aA. 
31.  24.  made  an  end  of  writing  this  law  in  a  A. 
Josh.  10. 13.  written  in  the  A.  of  Jasher,  2  Sam.1.18. 
18.  9.  the  men  described  it  inio  seven  parts  in  a  A. 
1  Sam.  10.  25.  Samuel  told,  and  wrote  it  in  a  6. 

1  Kings  11. 41.  written  in  the  A.  of  acts  of  Solomon 

2  Kings  22.  8.  Ililkiah  gave  the  A.  to  Shaphan 
10.  Ililkiah  delivered  me  a  A.  2  CAron.  34.  15, 13, 
16.  I  will  bring  evil,  even  all  the  words  of  the  A. 

23.24.  might  perlbrm  the  words  written  in  the  A. 

1  Chron.  9.  1.  were  written  in  the  A.  of  the  kings 

29.  29.  are  written  in  the  A.  of  Samuel  the  seer 

2  CAroji.9. 29.  acts  of  Solomon  in  the  A.  of  Nathan 
12.  15.  acts  of  Rehoboam  in  the  A.  of  Shenuiiah 
20.  34.  the  acts  of  Jehoshaphat  in  the  A.  of  Jehu 
34.  10.  Shaphan  carried  the  A.  to  the  king 

21.  concerning  the  words  of  the  A.  that  is  found 
24.  all  the  curses  that  are  written  in  the  A. 
Ezra  4.  15.  search  may  be  made  in  A.  of  recordi 
A'ch.  8.  5.  Ezra  opened  the  A.  in  the  sight  of  all 
Esth.  9.  32.  of  Purim,  and  jt  was  written  in  the  4 
Job  19.  23.  oh  that  they  were  printed  in  a  A. 
31.  35.  that  mine  adversary  had  written  a  A 
Psal.  40.  7.  in  the  volume  of  the  A.  Heb.  10.  7. 

50.  8.  jmt  thou  my  tears,  are  they  not  in  thy  b.T 

09.  28.  let  them  be  blotted  out  of  A.  of  the  living 
139.  10.  in  thy  A.  all  my  members  were  written 

Isa.  29.  11.  as  the  words  of  a  A.  that  is  sealed 
12.  ft.  is  delivered  to  him  that  is  not  learned 
18.  the  deaf -■ihall  hear  the  words  of  the  b. 

30.  8.  npw  go  and  note  it  in  a  A.  that  it  may  b« 
34.  10.  seek  ye  out  of  the  A.  of  the  Lord,  and  read 

.Jer.  30.  2.  write  the  words  I  have  spoken  in  a  4 
32. 1 10.  I  wrote  in  the  A.  the  evidence 

12.  witnesses  that  subscribed  A.  of  the  purchase 
36.  2.  take  a  roll  of  a  b.  \\  10.  reid  in  the  A. 
45.  1.  written  the  words  in  a  A.  from  Jeremiah 

51.  00.  so  Jeremiah  wrote  in  a  A.  all  Ihe  evil 
Ezek.  2.  9.  and  lo,  a  roll  of  a  A.  was  therein 
Dan.  12.  1.  every  one  found  written  in  the  A. 

4.  O  Daniel,  shut  up  the  words,  and  seal  iho  4. 
A'uA.  1.  1.  the  A.  of  Ihe  vision  of  Nahum 
Mai.  3.  16.  a  A.  of  remembrance  was  written 
Mat.  1.  1.  the  A.  of  the  generation  of  Jesus 
Luke  3.  4.  as  it  is  written  in  the  A.  of  Esaias 

4.  17.  there  was  delivered  to  Jesus  the  A.  of  the 
prophet  Esains,  and  when  he  had  opened  the  A. 

20.  he  closed  the  A.  and  gave  it  to  the  minister 
20.  42.  in  the  A.  of  the  Psalms,  ./lets  1.  20. 
.irts  7.  42.  it  is  written  in  the  A.  of  the  Prophets 
Nth.  9.  19.  he  sprinkled  the  A.  and  the  people 
liev.  1.  11.  what  thou  seest,  wiite  in  a  A. 

5.  I.  a  A.  written  within,  on  the  backside  sealed 

2.  whois  worthy  lo  open  theft,  and  to  loose  seals? 

3.  and  no  man  was  able  to  open  the  6. 

10.  2.  and  he  had  in  his  hand  a  little  A.  open 

8.  go  and  take  the  little  A.  which  is  open 

9.  give  me  the  little  A.  ||  10.  I  took  the  little  4. 
20.  12.  another  A.  was  opened,  the  A.  of  life 

22.  19.  if  any  take  away  from  the  words  of  tie  4. 
See  Covenant. 
BOOK  of  the  Law. 
/) rM«.28.6]. every  plague  not  written  in  A. o/Me^ms 
29.  21.  according  to  the  curses  in  this  A.o/tAc/aw 
30. 10.  to  keep  his  statutes  written  in  this  A.  of  law 
31.  20.  take  this  A.  ef  the  law  and  pnt  it  in  the  ark 
Josh.J.  8.  this  b.  of  Ihe  law  sh.ill  not  depart  outol 
8. 31.  written  in  A  of  laid  ofMosea,ZKiitgt  14.6 


BOR 

tKingsfH  8. 1  have  found  b.ofthelaio  In  the  house 
AVA.  d.  3.80  they  rend  in  the  b.  o/iAe/airilislinctly 
Gat.  3. 10.  that  ate  written  in  ti.  of  taw  to  do  iheni 

BOOK  of  Life. 

PMl.  4.  'X  wjiose  names  ore  written  in  the  b.  of  life 

Rev.  3.  5. 1  will  not  blot  his  name  out  of  b.  of  life 

13.  8.  names  are  not  written  in  the  b.  of  life,  17. 8. 

SJO.  12.  another  b.  opened,  which  is  the  b.  of  life 

15.  was  not  found  written  in  Iheb.oftife  wascust 

21.  27.  which  are  written  in  the  Lamb's  b.  of  life 

22. 19.  shall  takeaway  his  partoutof  theA.ff//i/"e 

BOOK  of  Moses. 

S  Chr.  25.  4.  but  did  as  it  is  written  in  b.  of  Moses 

35. 12.  to  offijr  as  it  is  written  in  the  b.  of  Jtoses 

EzraC).  IB.  set  priesls,  as  it  is  written  in  b.of  Moses 

,VifA.13.  1.  on  that  day  lliey  read  in  the  b.  of  Moses 

Mark  12.  2U.  have  ye  not  read  in  theft,  of  Moses  ? 

This  BOOK. 

Oen.5. 1.  this  is  the  ft.  of  the  generation  of  Adam 

Z)eut.28.58.  do  all  written  in  fAis  ft.  2  Ckron.  34.21. 

29.  20.  the  curses  that  are  written  in  this  ft.  27. 

2JSfinn-i22. 13.  inquire  concerning  words  of  fAiS  A. 

fathers  have  not  hearkened  to  words  of  this  ft. 

23.  3.  to  perform  the  words  written  in  this  ft. 
Jer.  25.  13.  I  will  bring  all  that  is  written  in  this  ft. 

51.  63.  when  hast  made  an  end  of  reading  this  A. 
John  20.  31).  signs  which  are  not  written  in  this  ft. 
Rev.  22.  7.  the  sayings  of  the  prophecy  of  this  ft. 

9.  of  them  which  keep  the  sayings  of  this  ft. 

10.  seal  not  the  sayings  of  the  prophecy  of  Jfti*  h. 

18.  hearrth  the  wordsof  the  prophecy  of  this  b.  if 
any  add,  add  to  him  plagues  written  in  this  ft. 

19.  his  part  from  the  things  written  in  this  ft. 

BOOKS. 
EtraC.  1 1.  search  was  made  in  the  house  of  the  ft. 
Eccl.  12.  12.  of  making  many  ft.  there  is  no  end 
Van.  7.  10.  and  the  ft.  were  opened,  Kev.  20.  12. 
U.  2.  I  understood  bv  A.  the  number  of  years 
John  21.  25.  the  world  could  not  contain  the  ft. 
.icts  19. 19.  many  brought  their  A.  and  burned  them 
2  Tim.  4.  13.  bring  the  ft.  especinlly  the  parchments 
Rev.  20. 12.  dead  judgeil  out  of  things  written  in  A. 

BOOTH. 
Job  27.  13.  as  a  A.  that  the  keeper  maketh 
Jonah  4.  5.  Jonah  went  and  made  him  a  6. 

BOOTHS. 
Oen.  33.  17.  and  Jacob  made  A.  for  his  cattle 

t  therefore  the  name  of  the  place  is  called  ft. 
hev.  23.  42.  ye  shall  dwell  in  A.  seven  days 

43.  [  made  the  children  of  I.srael  dwell  in  A. 
^eA.8.  14.  Israel  should  dwell  in  A.  ||  16.  made  ». 

BOOTY,  lES. 
JVum.  31.  32.  ft.  the  rest  of  the  prey,  675,000  sheep 
Jer.  49.  32.  and  their  camels  shall  be  a  ft. 
Hab.  2.  7.  thou  shalt  be  for  A.  unto  them 
Zcph.  1.  13.  thereforr'  their  nouds  shall  become  a  A. 

BORDKR. 
Gen.  49  13.  Zebniiin  his  ft.  shall  be  to  Zidon 
F.zod.  19.  12.  or  touch  the  ft.  of  the  mount 
JVum.  21.  23.  not  sulTer  Isra^'l  to  pass  tliio'  his  ft. 

34.  P.  from  Hor  ye  shall  point  out  your  A. 

35.  26.  if  the  slayer  shall  come  without  the  ft. 
Deut.  12.  20.  when  the  Lord  shall  enlarge  thy  A. 
Josh.  22.  25.  the  Lord  hath  made  Jordan  a  A. 

24.  30.  and  they  buried  Joshua  in  the  A.  of  his 

inheritance  in  mount  Ephraim,  Judg.  2.  9. 
2  Sam.  8.  3.  smote  him  as  he  went  to  recover  his  ft. 

1  Kingx  4. 21.  and  Solomon  reigned  over  all  kiii?- 

doms  unto  the  ft.  of  Egypt,  2  Chron.  9.  26. 

2  Kinps  3.  21.  all  that  were  able  stood  in  thr-A. 
/'/»a/.7fi..')4.  brought  them  to  the  A.  of  his  sanctuary 
Prov.  15.  25.  he  will  establish  the  A.  of  the  widow 
ha.  2m.  t2.3.  cast  in  \Wieat  and  rye  in  their  ft. 

37.  24.  I  will  enter  into  the  height  of  his  A. 
JcT.  31.  17.  thy  children  come  again  to  their  ft. 
F.irk.  11.  10.  1  will  judge  you  in  the  A.  of  Israel,  11. 
47.  13.  lilts  shall  bo  the  A.  wheri^by  ye  inherit 
.Jotl  3.  6.  might  remove  them  from  their  ft. 
.Imoa  1    13.  that  they  might  enlarge  their  ft. 
6.  2.  or  their  A.  erenter  ilian  your  ft. 
Obad.  7.  the  men  nave  brought  thee  oven  to  the  A. 
ZepA.2.°.nnd  tnainified  themselves  against  their  A. 
Mai.  1.4.  Ihey  sh:ill  lall  them  the  ft.  of  wickedness 
5.  Lord  will  bo  magnified  from  the  A.  of  Israel 
See  East,  Sot  tii. 
BORDER. 
Ezod.  2'.  2.5.  make  to  it  a  A.  of  a  hand-tireadlh. 
inak''  a  goldi'n  crown  to  the  A.  round  about 
Mark  6.  ."V).  tocirh,  if  it  were  but  tlif  ft.  of  his  g:irm. 
yyiiJ|[«8.44.came  behind. and  touched  ft.ofhisgarm. 

r.ORDEU,  Kerft. 
ZccA.  9.  2.  anil  Ilaina'li  also  shall  ft.  thereby 

ROROERS. 
f7cn.23. 17.  the  trees  in  all  the  ft.  were  made  sure 
Ezod.  16.  35.  till  tiiry  come  to  the  A.  of  Canaan 
34.21.  I  will  cast  out  nations,  and  enlarge  thyA. 
^iiTTi.  20.  17.  until  we  have  passed  thy  ft.  21.  22. 
2  Kings  19  23.  I  will  enter  the  Inilcings  of  his  ft. 
Psal.''H.  17.  thou  hast  set  the  ft.  of  the  earth 
147.  14.  he  maketh  pcnco  in  thy  A.  fillclh  thoo 
42 


BOR 

Isa.  15.  t  5.  my  heart  shall  cry  out  to  the  I. 
54.  12.  1  will  make  thy  ft.  of  jileasunt  stones 
.ler.  15.  13.  that  for  all  thy  sins,  even  in  all  tliy  ft. 
Ezek.  45.  1.  this  shall  be  liuiy  lu  all  the  ft. 
Mic.  5.  6.  when  he  treadetb  within  our  ft. 
Mat.  4.  13.  in  the  ft.  of  Zubuloii  and  Mephtholim 

BOUUKliS. 
J^um.  15.38.  fringes  in  A.  on  fringe  of  A.  a  ribband 
IKings  7.28.  they  had  A.andA.were  between  ledgi:s 
2  Kings  16.  17.  Ahaz  cut  olt'the  A.  of  the  bases 
Cant.  1. 11.  we  will  make  the  A.  of  gold  with  studs 
Mat.  23.  5.  and  enlarge  the  ft.  of  their  garments 

BOKE. 
Exod.  21.  6.  his  master  shall  ft.  his  ear  through 
M'um.  16. 1 14.  wilt  thou  A.  out  eyes  of  these  men  ? 
Job  40.  t  24.  will  any  ft.  his  nose  with  a  gin  7 
41.  2.  canst  thou  A.  his  jaw  through  with  a  thorn  1 

BOKEU. 
Judg.  16.  t  21.  the  Philistines  A.  out  his  eyes 
2  Kings  12.  9.  Jehoiada  took  a  eliest  and  ft.  a  hole 

BORN 

Is  taken,  [1]  Naturally, /or  Aein^ftrou^Af  into  the 
KorW,  (Jen.  30.  i«.  Job  1.2.  [-2]  Supernaturally, 
lints  the  mighty  and  tniraculous  power  of  God 
was  seen  in  the  production  of  Isaac,  enabling 
Abraham  to  beget,  and  Sarah  to  conceive  and 
bear  him,  when  both  their  bodies  were  as  dead. 
Gen.  17.  17.  Rom.  4.  19.  lleb.  11.  11.  [3J  Car- 
nally, so  teas  Ishmael  born,  according  to  the 
ordinary  course  of  nature,  and  not  by  promise, 
as  Isaac  teas.  Gal.  4.  23,  'M.  [4]  Sjiirilually, 
such  as  are  regenerated  and  renewed  by  the 
power  and  grace  of  the  ■'Spirit  of  God,  in  the 
ministry  of  the  word,  and  so  are  made  like 
God,  by  partaking  of  a  divine  nature,  John  1. 
13.  I  3.  5,  0.  2  Pet.  1.  4.  1  John  3.  9. 
BORN  again. 
JoA7i3.3.e.TCeptamanbeft.a.5.  ||  7.  ye  must  be  A.  a. 
1  I'et.  1.23.  being  A.  again,  not  of  corruptible  seed 

Sec  FiRST-BoRN,  VVlTNKSS. 

BORN,  for  brought  forth. 

Gen.  17. 17.  a  child  A.  to  him  100  years  old,  21.  5. 

21.  7.  I  have  ft.  him  a  son  in  his  old  age 

24.  15.  Rebckah  came,  who  was  ft.  to  Bethuel 

29.  34.  because  1  have  ft.  hiin  three  sons 

30.  20.  because  I  have  A.  him  six  sons 

31.43.  whatdotothechildren  which  they  have  ft? 
Exod.  1.  22.  every  son  A.  ye  shall  cast  into  the  river 
/,cv.  12.7.  this  is  the  law  of  her  that  lialliA.  a  male 

19.  34.  the  stranger  shall  be  as  one  A.  among  you 
23. 42.  all  that  are  Israelites  ft.  shall  dwell  in  booths 

Mum.  15. 29.  one  law  for  him  that  is  A.  andsiranger 
lush.  5.  5.  A.  in  the  wilderness  had  not  circumcised 

8.  33.  as  well  the  stranger,  as  he  that  was  ft. 
Judg.  13.  H.  what  do  to  the  child  that  shall  be  ft. 

18.  2.1.  called  city  afier  the  name  of  Dan  ft.  to  Ur. 
Uuth  4.  !.">.  for  thy  daughter-in-law  bath  ft.  him 

1  Sam.  2.  5.  so  that  the  barren  hath  ft   seven 

4.  20.  the  women  saiil,  fear  not,  thou  hast  ft.  a  son 

2  Sam.  12.  14.  the  child  A.  to  thee  shall  surely  die 
I  Kings  13.2.  a  child  shall  beft.lo  the  house  of  Dav. 
1  Chr.  7.  21.  the  men  of  Gatli  A.  in  that  land  slew 

20.  to.  he  also  was  A.  to  the  giant 

22.  9.  behold  .T  son  shall  be  ft.  to  thee 

Joli  3.  3.  l(-t  the  day  perish  wherein  I  was  A. 

5.  7.  yet  man  is  ft.  in  trouble  as  sparks  fly  upward 
11.  12.  thtiugh  man  be  ft.  like  a  wild  ass's  colt 
15.  7.  ait  thou  the  first  man  that  was  A.? 

38.  21.  knowest  thou  it,  because  wast  then  A.? 
r.?a/.22  31.  shall  declare  to  a  people  that  shall  be  A. 

.18.  3.  Ihey  go  astray  as  soon  as  they  bo  A. 

78.  6.  even  the  children  that  should  bo  A. 

87.  4.  this  man  was  A.  there,  ti.  ||  5.  that  man  A. 
Prov.  17.  17.  a  brother  is  6.  for  adversity 
F.ccl.  3. 2.  a  time  to  he  A.  ||  4.  14.  ft.  in  his  kingdom 
/stt.9.  6.  for  unto  us  a  child  is  ft.  tons  a  son  is  given 

60.  8.  or  shall  a  nation  be  ft.  at  once? 
,hr.  15.  9.  she  that  h^ith  ft.  seven  l.ingnisheth 
10.  woe  is  me, that  thou  hast  ft. me  a  man  of  strife 

16.3.  concerning  sons  and  daughters  ft. in  tlii»  place 

20.  14.  cursed  be  the  day  wherein  I  was  A. 

22.  26.  where  ye  were  not  ft.  there  shall  yo  die 
F.iek.  16.  4.  in  day  thou  wast  ft.  lliy  iiavid  not  cut 
5.  to  the  loathing  of  thy  person  in  day  thou  wast  A. 
20.  hast  taken  thy  sons  whom  thou  hast  A.  to  me 
//os.  2.3.  lest  I  aether  OS  in  the  day  thai  she  was  ft. 
.V.l^2.  2.  where  is  he  that  is  ft.  king  of  the  Jews? 

4.  Herod  demanded  where  Christ  shiuild  be  A. 

19.  12.  there  are  some  runiirhs  which  were  so  ft. 
26.  24.  food  if  ho  had  not  been  A.  Mark  14.  21. 

lAtkt  1.  35.  thai  holy  thing  that  shall  be  ft.  of  ihce 
2.  11.  to  you  is  ft.  this  day  in  the  city  of  David 
John  3.  4.  how  can  a  man  be  A.  when  he  is  old  ? 

5.  except  a  man  be  A.  of  water  and  of  the  Spirit 

6.  ihal  A.  of  flesh  is  flisli,  that  ft.  ol'Spirii  is  spirit 
8.  so  in  every  one  that  is  ft.  of  the  Spirit 

8.41  they  said  to  him,  we  bf  not  ft.  of  fornication 

9.  2.  muster,  who  did  sin,  tliiit  he  was  ft.  blind  ? 
3-1.  wast  altogether  ft.  in  sins,  ami  dost  leach  us  ^ 

10.  21.  for  joy  that  a  man  is  A.  into  the  world 


BOS 

John  18. 37.  to  thli  end  was  I  b.  and  fnr  thi4  eaoM 
.4ct.<'2.8.liear  incur  own  tongue  wherein  wewereft 
7.  20.  in  which  time  Alosus  was  ft.  and  was  fair 
18.2.  Paul  found  a  Jew  named  AquilaA.inPonlut 
24.  a  Jew  named  Apollos  ft.  ul  Alexandria  » 
22.  3.  I  am  a  Jew  ft.  in  'J'arsus  ||  28. 1  was  free  b 
Horn.  9.  11.  for  the  children  being  not  yet  ft. 
1  Cor.  15.  8.  seen  of  me,  as  of  one  ft.  out  of  due  time 
fra/.4.23.  of  bond-woman, was  ft.after  lhefleth,29 
Heb.  11.  23.  by  faith  Moses  when  ft.  was  liid 
1  /'ft.2.2.asnew  ft.babesdesiresinccre  milk  of  word 

1  ^oAn  2.  29.  that  doth  righteousness,  is  ft.  of  hiia 
Rev.tii.  4.  to  devour  the  child  as  soon  as  it  wai  ft. 

BORN  of  God. 
.fohn  1.  13.  which  were  ft.  not  of  blood,  but  of  God 
1. /uAn  3.9.  ft. o/ find  doth  not  commit  sin,  because  ft. 
4.7.evety  one  that  loveth  isA.o/  Gud,anii  knoweth 
5. 1.  who  believeth  that  Jesus  is  Christ  is  ft.  o/ God 
4.  whatsoever  is  ft.  o/frorfoverconieth  the  world 
18.  whosoever  is  ft.  of  God  sinnelh  not 

BORN  in  the  house.  ^ 

Trm. 14. 14. armed  his  trained  servants  ft. in  his  Aoiue 
15.  3.  to  me  no  seed,  one  A.  in  iny  house  is  my  heir 
17.12. ft.j'n  thehoHseB\m\]  be  circumcised, 13,23,27. 
Lev.^1. 11.  ft.  in  the  priest's  house  cat  of  big  Beat 
Eccl.  2.  7.  I  had  servants  ft.  in  my  house 

DOKN  in  the  land. 
Ei«rf.l2.19.no  leaven, whether  stranger  orft.in  land 

48.  the  stranger  shall  be  as  one  ft.  in  the  land 
I.ev.^.  16.  ft.  in  land  that  blasphemelh  jiul  to  death 
jVi(m.9.14.  one  ordinance  forstrangerandft.iw  land 
15.30.  doth  ought  presumptuously,  whetiier ft  in/. 
BORN  of  a  woman,  or  if  omen. 
Job  14. 1.  man  that  is  A.  of  a  woman  is  of  few  day* 
15.  14.  that  is  ft.  o/ a  ui.  that  he  should  berighteoii* 
25.  4.  how  can  he  be  clean  that  is  ft.  of  a  tcoman  ? 
./VaMl.ll.  among  them  that  are  b.ofw.  /-7(Ae7.28. 

BORN. 
frcn.SO. t23.children  of  Machir  ft.  on  Joseph's kntJCS 
Ezod.  25.  14.  that  the  ark  may  be  ft.  with  them 

28.  that  the  table  may  be  ft.  with  them 
./«(/n'.lC.29.the  pillars  on  which  the  house  was  A. up 
Jsa.  46.  3.  which  arc  ft.  by  me  from  the  belly 
66. 12.  ye  shall  be  A.  upon  her  sides  and  bedaodlfd 
Jer.  10.  5.  they  must  be  ft.  because  they  cannot  go 
Jlmos  5.  26.  ye  have  ft.  the  tabernacle  of  Moloch 
MaTki.2.  bringing  one  sick  of  palsy,  was  ft. of  four 
John  20.  15.  if  thou  hast  ft.  him  hence  tell  me 
.lets  21.  35.  so  it  was  that  he  was  ft.  of  the  soldiers 
ICur.  15.  49.  as  we  have  ft.  the  image  ofthecartblT 

BORNE. 
./«ft34.31.  to  be  said  to  God,  I  have  A.f  hasiiscment 
/'.sa/.5.'>.12.ltwasnotanenemy,lhen  I  could  have  ft 
69.  7.  because  for  thy  sake  I  have  A.  reproach 
Isa.  .53.  4.  surely  he  hath  A.  griefs,  carried  sorrows 
I, am.  3.  i!8.  because  he  haili  A.  it  upon  him 
5.  7.  fathers  sinned,  and  we  have  A.  their  iniquities 
/CzfA.16.58.  thou  hast  A.  thv  lewdness  and  abomin. 
:i2.  24.  they  have  A.  their  shame,  36.  6.  |  39.  26. 
J^fn^  20. 12.  which  have  A.  burden  and  heal  of  day 
23.4.  heavy  burdens,  grievous  to  beft.  AtiAf  11.4B. 
Rev.  2. 3.  hast  ft.  and  hast  patience,  and  not  fainted 

BORROW. 
f;73(/.3.22.every  woman  shall  ft.of  neighbour,  11.2. 
22.  14.  if  a  Mian  ft.  ought,  and  it  bo  hurt  or  die 
Deut.  15. 6.  thou  shall  lend,  but  shalt  not  ft.  28. 12. 

2  Kings  4.3.Elisha  said,go  ft.vessels  abvo.,ft.not  few 
Mat.  5. 42.  him  tint  would  ft.of  thee,  turn  not  away 

BORROWED. 

F.Tod.  12.  35.  they  A.  of  Egyptians  jewels  of  Filrei 

2  Kings  6.  5.  he  cried,  alas,  master,  for  it  was  ft. 

M'eh.tt.4.  we  have  ft.rnonev  for  the  king's  tribute 
BORROWER. 

Prov.  22.  7.  and  the  ft.  is  servant  to  the  lender 

fsa.  24.  2.  ne  v\ith  the  lender,  so  with  the  ft. 
BORROWETH. 

Psal.  37.  21.  the  wicked  A.  and  paycth  not  again 
BOSOM 

Signifies,  [1]  That  part  of  tje  body  which  in- 
closes the  heart,  Exod.  4.  C.  [2]  Tlu  arms, 
Psal.  129.  7. 

The  Son  which  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father, 
.hhn  I.  18.  irha  i.i  one  with  the  Father, entirely 
beloved  by  him,  and  intimately  acquainted  with 
all  his  counsel.'!  and  will. 

Render  into  their  bosom,  Psal.  79.  12.  Punitk 
them  srn.>:ibly,  so  as  it  may  come  home  to  tktm, 
and  fall  'lenrily  upon  them  in  their  oirn  persons. 

Ho  shall  carry  them  in  his  bosom,  fsa.  40.  11. 
f/r  shall  perform  all  the  offices  of  a  tender  and 
faithful  shepherd  toward  his  people,  carrying 
himself  with  great  wisdom,  condescension,  and 
compassion  to  every  one  of  them,  according  t» 
their  several  enpacties  and  infirmities. 

Abr.iham's  besimi,  f.nke  16.23.  J.ainrus  was  in  « 
place  of  rest,  where  he  had  communion  with  (As 
saints,  andenjny,  d  Ihesom' felicity  u)ith..9bro- 
ham  thefriendoff!od;andthisplaeewashra\en. 

ff'cn.  16.  5.  Snrai  said,  I  have  given  my  maid  into 

F.iod.4.  6.  put  now  thy  hand  into  thy  A.  7.    [thy  ft 


BOT 

A'uni-ll-12.  that  shouldeet  say,  carry  tliem  in  thy  b. 
Veut.  13.  6.  if  the  wile  of  thy  b.  emice  Ihee  secretly 

28.  5-1.  his  eye  evil  toward  the  wife  of  his  b. 

5ti.  her  eye  evil  toward  the  husband  of  her  4. 
KutA  4. 16. Naomi  took  the  child  and  luid  it  in  her*. 
2  Ham.  I'J.  3.  drank  of  his  cup,  and  lay  in  his  b, 

8.  I  gave  thee  thy  master's  wives  into  thy  b. 
1  Kings  1.  2.  a  young  virgin,  let  her  lie  in  thy  b. 

3.  21).  she  arose  and  took  my  son,  and  laid  it  in 
her  b.  and  laid  her  dead  child  in  my  b. 

17.  19.  Elijah  took  him  out  of  her  b. 

22.  t  35.  the  blood  ran  into  the  b.  of  the  chariot 
Job  19.  t  -^  though  my  re  ins  be  consumed  inmy  i. 

31.  33.  oy  hiding  mine  iniquity  in  my  b. 
P$al-  ^.  13.  ray  prayer  returned  into  my  own  b. 

74.  11.  pluck  thy  right  hand  out  of  thy  b. 

79.  1'2.  and  render  seven-fpid  into  their  b. 

89.  50.  how  1  do  bear  in  my  b.  the  reproach  of  all 

129.  7.  nor  he  that  bindeth  sheaves,  his  b. 
Prov-  5.  20.  wilt  thou  embrace  the  *.  of  a  stranger? 

6.  27.  can  a  man  take  lire  in  his  A.? 

17.  23.  a  wicked  man  taketh  a  gift  out  of  the  b. 

19.  2^.  a  slothful  man  hideth  his  hand  in  b.  26. 15. 
21.  14.  a  reward  in  the  *.  pacitielh  wrath 

Eccl.  7.  9.  for  anger  restelh  in  the  b.  of  fools 
Isa.  40.  11.  he  shall  carry  the  lambs  in  his  b. 

49.  t  22.  they  shall  bring  thy  sons  in  their  b. 

65.  6.  will  recompense,  even  recomp.  into  their  b. 
7.  I  will  measure  their  former  work  into  their  b. 
Jer.  32.  IS.  iniquity  of  fathers  into  the  b.  of  children 
L.am.%  12.  their  soul  was  poured  into  mother's  A. 
Ezek.  43.  f  13.  b.  of  the  altar  shall  be  a  cubit 
Mic.  7.  5.  keep  from  her  that  lieth  in  thy  b. 
J.,ukt  6.  38.  good  measure  men  give  into  your  b. 

16.22.  was  carried  hy  the  angels  into  Abraham's  A. 
23.  seeth  Abraham,  and  Lazarus  in  his  b. 

John  1.  18.  which  is  in  the  b.  of  the  Father 

13.23.  now  there  was  leaning  on  Jesus'  A.a  disciple 

BOSSES. 
Job  15.  26.  upon  the  thick  b.  of  his  bucklers 

BOTCH. 
ZJeut. 28. 27.  Lord  will  smite  thee  with  the  b.  35. 

BOTH. 
0^^.2.25. were  i.naked  ||  3.  7.  the  eyes  of  i.  opened 
19.:!C.  thus  were  A.  the  daughters  of  Lot  with  child 

21.  27.  and  A.  of  them  made  a  covenant 

22.  6.  so  they  went  4.  of  them  together 

27.45.  why  should  I  be  deprived  of  yoa  A.  in  one  day 
31.  37.  ihat  they  may  judge  betwixt  us  A. 
Ezod.  22.  9.  cause  of  A.  shall  come  before  judges 
11.  then  shall  an  oath  of  the  Lord  be  between  A. 
Lee.  20.  11.  A.  of  them  surely  be  put  to  death,  their 
blood  shall  be  upon  them,  12.  J)eut.  22.  22. 
JVMm.l2  5.  called  Aaron  and  Miriam,  they  A.canie 
25.  8.  Phinehas  went  after  and  thrust  A.  through 
Deut.  19. 17.  A.  the  men  shall  stand  before  the  Loid 

1  Sam.  2.  34.  in  one  day  they  shall  die  b.  of  them 
9.  26.  went  out,  A.of  them,  he  and  Samuel,  abroad 

20.  42.  forasmuch  as  we  havfr  sworn  A.  of  us 
Jeb  9.3.7.3  ny  d ays-man  that  might  layhis  hand  on  A. 
Prov.  17.  15.  A.  are  abomination  to  the  Lord,  20.10. 

20.  12.  the  Lord  hath  made  even  A.  of  them 
24.  22.  and  who  knoweth  the  ruin  of  them  A.? 
Eccl.  4.  3.  better  than  A.  is  he  that  hath  not  been 
Isa.  1. 31.  they  shall  A.  burn  together,  none  quench 

7.  16.  the  land  shall  be  forsaken  of  A.  her  kings 
Jer.  46.  12.  and  they  are  fallen  A.  together 
Ezek.  21.  19.  A.  twain  shall  come  forth  of  one  land 

23.  13.  then  I  saw  that  they  A.  took  one  way 
Mic.  7.  3.  that  they  may  do  evil  with  A.  hands 
Zech.  6.  13.  counsel  of  peace  shall  be  between 

9.  1 15.  they  shall  fill  A.  the  howls  [^them  A. 
Mat.  1.5.14.  A.  shall  fall  into  the  ditch,  LukeG.  39. 
l,ukr  7. 42.  nothing  to  pay,  frankly  forgave  Ihem  A. 
.^c(.«  2.3. 8. nor  angel  nor  spirit,  hut  Pharis.  confess  A. 
Eph.  2. 14.  he  is  our  peace,  who  hath  made  A.  one 

16.  he  might  reconcile  A.  unto  God  by  the  cross 

2  Pet.  3.  1.  in  ft.  I  stir  up  your  pure  minds 

Reo.  19.20.  A.  were  cast  alive  into  the  lake  of  fire 

BOTTLE 
Signifies,  [1]  A  ves.iel  to  contain  liquids,  Gen.  21. 

14.  Josh.  9.  4.  [2]  TUe  inhabitants  n/ Jerusa- 
lem, whom  God  threatened  to  fill  with  the  wine 
of  terror  and  astonishment  for  their  sins,  Jer. 
13.  12.  [3]  The  clouds,  in  which  the  rain  is 
kepi,  as  in  bottles,  out  of  which  Ood  poureth 
it  when  he  sect  fit,  JnU  38.  37. 

Put  n;y  tears  in  thy  bottle,  Psal.  56.  8.  Regard 
and  consider  all  my  lrnul>les,which  have  caused 
so  much  grief  tome,  and  deliver  me  from  them. 

Oen.  21.  l-l!  took  a  A.  of  water  and  gave  it  Hagar 

15.  water  was  spent  in  the  A.  1|  19.- she  filled  the  A. 
,rH<Zn-.4. 19.  she  opened  a  A.of  milk,  and  covered  him 
l.Sam.1.24.  Hannah  took  a  A.olwine,  brought  him 

10.  3.  shall  meet  another  carrying  a  A.  of  wine 
IH.  20.  Jfsse  took  a  A.  of  wine  and  sent  to  Saul 

2  Sarri.  16.  1.  Ziba  brought  to  David  a  A.  of  wine 

Ps.5(\.H.  put  thou  my  tears  into  thy  A. are  they  not  in 

119.  83.  I  am  become  like  a  A.  in  the  smoke 

ha.  30. 1 14.  he  shall  break  it  as  the  b.  of  potleri 

43 


BOU 

Jer.  13.  12.  every  A.  shall  be  filled  with  wine 

19.  1.  get  a  putter's  earthen  A.  |{  10.  break  the  A. 
//aA.2.l5.  puttest  thy  A. to  l.im  and  makust  drunken 

BOTTLES. 

Josh.  9.  4.  the  Gibeonites  look  wine  b.  and  rent 

13.  these  b.  of  wine  which  we  filled  were  new 

16'a7».25.18.Abigail  took  two  A.of  wine,  five  sheep 

Job  32.  19.  my  belly  ready  to  hurst  like  new  A. 

38.  37.  or  who  can  stay  the  A.  of  heaven  7 
Jer.  48.  12.  shall  empty  his  vessels,  and  break  A. 
Hos.  7.  5.  the  prince  made  him  sick  with  A.  of  wine 
Mat.  9. 17.  neither  dd  men  put  new  wine  into  old  A. 

else  the  b.  break,  Mark  2.  22.  J.uke  5. 37,  3ti. 
BOTTOM. 
Exod.  15.  5.  they  sank  into  the  A.  as  a  stone 

29.  12.  thou  shalt  pour  blood  beside  the  A.  of  the 
altar,  l.ev.  4.  7,  18,  25,  30.  |  5.  9.  |  8.  15.  |  'J.  y. 

.fob  36.  30.  behold,  God  covereth  the  A.  of  the  sea 
Cant.  3.  10.  he  made  the  A.  thereof  of  gold 
Kick.  36.  t  4.  thus  sailh  the  Lord  to  hills  and  A. 
Dan.  6.  24.  oi  ever  they  came  at  the  A.  of  the  den 
jimos  9.  3.  tho'  they  be  hid  from  my  sight  in  the  A. 
Jonah  2.  6. 1  went  down  to  the  A.  of  the  mountains 
Zech.  1.  8.  he  stood  among  myrtle-trees  in  the  A. 
Mat.  27.  51.  vail  rent  from  top  to  A.  Mark  15.  38. 

BOTTOMLESS. 
Rev.  9.  1.  to  him  was  given  the  key  of  the  A.  pit 

2.  he  opened  the  A.  pit,  and  there  arose  smoke 
11.  had  a  king,  which  is  the  angel  of  the  A.  pit 

11.  7.  the  beast  that  ascendelh  out  of  the  A.  pit 
17.  8.  the  beast  shall  ascend  out  of  the  A.  pit 

20.  1.  an  angel  having  the  key  of  the  b.  pit 

3.  and  cast  him  into  the  A.  pit,  and  shut  hun  up 

BOUGH. 
Gen.  49.  22.  Joseph  is  a  fruitful  A.  even  a  fruitful 
A.  by  a  well,  whose  branches  run  over  the  wall 
Judg.9.4%.  Abimelech  cut  down  a  A.  from  the  trees 

49.  the  people  cut  down  every  man  his  A. 
Isa.  10.  33.  the  Lord  shall  lop  the  A.  with  terror 

17.  6.  two  or  three  berries  in  top  of  uttermost  A. 
9.  in  lhat  day  his  strong  cities  be  as  a  forsaken  A. 
BOUGHS. 
Lev.  23.  40.  A.  of  goodly  Uee^,  A.  of  thick  trees 
Deut.  24.  20.  thou  shalt  not  go  over  the  A.  again 
iSam.  18.9.  the  mule  went  mider  the  A.  of  an  oak 
Job  14.  9.  and  brought  forth  A.  like  a  plant 
Psal.  80. 10.  the  A.  were  like  the  goodly  cedar- trees 
11.  she  sent  out  her  A.  to  the  sea,  branches  to  river 
Cant.  7.  8.  I  will  take  hold  of  the  A.  thereof 
Isa.  27.  11.  when  the  A.  thereof  arc  withered 

30.  1 17.  till  ye  be  left  as  a  tree  bereft  of  A. 
Eiek.  17.  2:t.  it  shall  bring  forth  A.  and  bear  fruit 

31.  3.  his  lop  was  among  the  thick  A.  14. 

6.  the  fowls  made  their  nests  in  his  A.  Dan.  4. 12. 
BOUGHT. 
1  Sam.  25.  f  29.  in  the  midst  of  the  A.  of  a  sling 

BOUGHT. 
Gen.  17.  12.  circumcised  every  man-child  born  in 
house,  A. with  his  money,  13,23,27.  Eiod.  12.44. 
3.3.  19.  Jacob  A.  a  parcel  of  a  field,  Jo.ih.  24.  32. 

39.  1.  Poliphar  A.  Joseph  of  the  Ishmaelitcs 

47. 14.  Joseph  gathered  money  for  the  corn  they  A. 

20.  Joseph  A.  all  the  land  of  Egypt,  23. 
49.  30.  which  Abraham  A.  50.  13.  Jlcts  7.  16. 
Z,ci.'.25.28.shall  remain  in  the  hand  of  him  that  A.  it 

30.  shall  be  established  for  ever  to  him  that  A.  it 

50.  he  shall  reckon  with  him  that  A.  him 

25.  51.  give  out  of  the  money  that  he  was  A.  for 
27.  22.  sanctify  to  the  Lord  a  field  that  he  A. 

24.  in  jubilee  return  to  him  of  whom  it  was  A. 
Deut.  32.  6.  is  not  he  thy  father  that  6.  theel 
Ruth  4.  9.  I  have  A.  all  that  was  Elimelech's 
2Som.  12.  3.  one  little  ewe-lamb  which  he  had  A. 
24.  24.  so  David  A.  the  thresliing-floor  and  o.\en 
1  Kings  16.24.  Omri  A.  the  hill  Samaria  of  Sliemer 
JVcA.  5. 16. 1  continued  in  work,  nor  A.  we  any  land 
Jer.  32.9. 1  A.  the  field  of  Hanameel  my  uncle's  son 

43.  and  fields  shall  be  A.  in  this  land 
Hos.  3.  2.  so  I  A.  her  to  me  for  15  pieces  of  silver 
Mat.  13.  46.  he  sold  all  thathe  had,  and  A.  that  field 
21. 12.  Jesus  cast  out  all  them  that  sold  and  A.  in 
the  temple,  Mark  11.  15.  Luke  19.  45. 
27.  7.  took  counsel,  and  b.  with  them  poiters'  field 

t  9.  whom  they  A.  of  the  children  of  Israel 
Mark  15.46.Joseph  A.fine  linen  and  took  him  down 
16. 1.  had  A.  sweet  spices  to  come  and  anoint  him 
Luke  14.18.  F  have  A. a  piece  of  ground, and  go  see  it 
19. 1  have  A. five  yoke  of  o.xen,  I  go  to  prove  them 
17.  28.  they  did  eat,  they  drank,  they  A.  and  sold 

1  Cor.  6.  20.  for  ye  are  A.  with  a  price,  7.  2.3. 

2  Pet.  2.  1.  even  denying  the  Lord  that  A.  them 
Rev.  14.  t  4.  these  were  A.  from  among  men 

BOUND,  activclij. 
fjcn.22.9.  A.Isaac  his  son,  and  laid  him  on  the  altar 
38.28.  the  midwife  A.  on  his  hand  a  scarlet  thread 
42.  24.  took  Simeon  and  A.  him  before  them 
Lev.  8.  7.  he  A.  the  ephod  with  the  curious  girdle 

t  13.  he  A.  bonnets  on  Aaron's  sons 
JV«m.  30.  4.  she  had  A.  her  soul, 5,6,7,  P,  9,  10,11. 
Joih.  2.  21.  she  A.  a  scarlet  hne  in  the  window 


BOU 

4 
Judg.  15. 13.  they  1.  Samson  w  ith  two  new  cordt 

It).  8.  A.  with  withs  ||  12.  ropes  |1  21.  fetters 
2  Kings  5.23.  he  A.  two  lalenls  of  silver  in  tw  o  bagt 

17.  4.  he  shut  uji  lloshea  and  A.  him  in  prison 

25.  7.  they  A.  Zedekiah  with  fetters  of  brass 

2  Chr.  33.  il.  A.  Muna.wcb  ||  36.  6.  A.  Jehoiakim 
Prov.  30.  4.  who  hath  A.  the  waters  in  a  garment 
//«s.7.15.tho'  1  have  A. and  strengthened  their  arnn 
JI/aM4.3. Herod  A.John  and  put  in  [xia.  Mark  6.11. 
27.  2.  they  had  A.  Jesus,  Murk  15. 1.  John  18. 12. 
J^uke  13.  16.  this  daughter  whom  Satan  liuth  A 
Jlcts  21.  II.  Agabus  A.  his  own  hands  and  feet 

22.  25.  as  they  A.  Paul  with  thongs  he  said,  29. 

23.  12.  A.  themsilves  under  a  curse,  14.  21. 
Rev.  20.  2.  he  A.  Satan  a  thousand  years 

BOUND,  passively. 
Gcn.3d."0.  a  place  where  the  king's  prisoners  are  4. 
40.  3.  into  the  prisim  wliere  Joseph  was  A. 
5.  the  bullcr  and  baker  which  were  A.  in  prison 
42.tl6.ye  shall  be  A.  in  jirison  to  prove  your  word* 
19.  let  one  of  your  brethren  be  A.  in  prison 
J^uiii.  19.  15.  vessel  which  hath  no  cover  A.  on  it 
.fudg.  16.  6.  wherewith  thou  mightest  be  A.  10, 13. 

1  ■S'ajH.  25.  29.  the  soul  of  my  lord  shall  be  A. 

2  Sam.  3.  34.  thy  hands  were  not  A.  nor  feet 
.Job  36.  8.  and  if  they  be  A.  in  fetters  nnd  holden 
Psal.  107.  10.  being  A.  in  affliction  and  iron 
Prov.  22. 15.  foolishness  is  A.  in  the  heart  of  a  child 
Isa.  22. 3.  are  A.  by  the  urchers,  all  are  A.  together 

61.  l.the  opening  of  the  prison  to  them  that  are  A. 
Lam.  1.  14.  the  yoke  of  my  transgressions  is  i. 
Dan.  3.  21.  A.  in  their  coats  ||  23.  fell  down  A. 

24.  did  not  we  cast  three  men  A.  into  the  furnace  ? 
Mat.  16. 19.  bind  on  earlh,  be  A.  in  heaven,  18. 18 

23.  t  18.  he  that  swcareih  by  the  gift,  he  is  A. 
Mark  15.7.  lay  A.  with  them  lhat  made  insurrection 
John  11.  44.  A.  hand  and  foot,  his  face  was  A. 

18.  24.  Annas  had  sent  him  A.  to  Caiaphas,  f  13 
Acts  9.  2.  that  he  might  bring  them  A.  21.  |  22.  5. 

12.  6.  Peter  A.  with  chains  ||  24.  27.  left  Paul  A. 

20.  22.  behold  I  go  A.  in  the  Spirit  to  Jerusalem 

21.  13.  I  am  ready  not  to  be  A.  only,  but  to  die 
Rom.'i.'i.  isA.hythelaw  to  her  husband,  lCor.7.39. 

1  Cor.  7.  27.  art  thou  A.  unto  a  wife,  seek  not  to  be 

2  Thess.  1.  3.  we  aieA.lo  thank  God  always, 2. 13. 
2  Tim.  2.  9.  but  the  word  of  God  is  not  A. 

Hcb.  13.  3.  them  that  are  in  bonds, as  A. with  them 
iicy.9.14.  loose  I  lit  angels  A.  in  the  river  Euphrates 

BOUND  with  chains. 
2  Chr.  33.tll.  Manasseh  A.  -  ||  36.t6.  Jehoiakim  A. - 
Psal.i^S.G.  God  bringeth  out  those  which  are  A.  jc.c. 
Jer.  39.  7.  A.  Zedekiah  -  52.  ll.||40. 1.  Jeremiah  A.- 
A"aA.  .3. 10.  all  her  great  men  were  A.  ifi(A  chains 
Jl/ar/r  5.4.because  he  had  been  often  b.with  chains 
LukcS.'i^.  he  was  kept  A.  with  chains,  in  fetters 
Acts  21.  .33.  commanded  Paul  to  be  A.  with  two  e. 

28.20.  for  hope  of  Israel  I  am  A.  with  this  chain 

BOUND  «/). 
Gen.  44.  ?.0.  his  life  is  A.  vp  in  the  lad's  life 
2  Sam.  20. 1 3.  they  were  b.up  living  in  widowhood 
•  Kings  12.  t  10.  which  A.  up  money  in  bags 
Isa.  1.  6.  ihey  have  not  been  closed  neither  A.  vp 
Jer.  30.13.  none  to  plead,  that  thou  tnayest  be  b.up 
Eiek.  30.  21.  it  shall  not  be  A.  up  to  be  healed 

34.  4.  nur  have  ye  A.  up  that  which  was  broken 
Hiis.  4.  19.  the  wind  halh  A.  her  up  in  her  wings 

13.  12.  the  iniquity  of  Ephraim  is  A.  up 

Luke  10.  34.  he  A.  up  his  wounds,  pouring  in  oil 

BOUND,  Substantive. 
Gen.  49.  26.  to  utmost  A.  of  the  everlasting  hills 
Job  38.  20.  thou  shouldest  take  it  to  the  A.  thereof 
Psfl/. 104.9.  to  waters  set  a  A. that  they  may  not  pass 
Prov.  22.  t  28.  remove  not  the  ancient  A.  23.  f  10. 
.fcr.  5.22.  have  ))laccd  the  sand  for  the  A.  of  the  sea 
Kzek.  40.  t  '2.  the  A.  before  the  little  chambtrs 
Hos.  5. 10.  the  princes  like  them  that  remove  the  A. 

BOUNDS. 
Ezod.  19. 12.  thou  shalt  set  A.  to  the  people  round 

23.  set  A.  about  the  mount,  and  sanctify  it 
23.  :n.  I  will  set  thy  A.  from  the  Red-sea  to  sea  of 
Deut. 3-2.8.  he  set  the  A.  of  the  people  by  number 
.hb  14. 5.  hast  appointed  his  A.  that  he  cannot  pasj 

26.  10.  he  hath  compassed  the  waters  with  A. 
Isa.  10.  13.  I  have  removed  the  A.  of  the  people 
.^cial7.26.ha6t  determined  the  A.of  their  habitation 

BOUNTY. 

1  Kings  3.  t  6.  thou  hast  shewed  to  David  great  b 
10.  13.  which  Solomon  gave  her  of  his  royal  b. 

ProtJ.20. 16.  most  men  will  proclaim  their  own  ft. 

2  Cor.  9.  5.  and  make  up  beforehand  yonr  A.  that 

the  same  miL'ht  be  ready  as  a  matter  of 
BOUNTIFUL. 
Psal.  145.  1 17.  the  Lord  is  A.  in  all  his  works 
Prov.  22.  9.  he  that  hath  a  A.  eye  shall  be  blessed 
Isa.  32.  5.  nor  shall  the  churl  be  said  to  be  ft. 

BOUNTIFULNF.SS. 
2  Cor.  9. 11.  beins  enrirhrd  in  every  thing  to  all  0 

BOUNTIFULLY. 
Psnl.  13.  6.  bccnuse  he  haih  dealt  A.  with  me 
116.  7.  for  the  Lord  hath  dealt  A.  with  Uie« 


BOW 

PmoL  119.  17.  deal  h.  with  thy  servant  that  I  may 

143.  7.  for  thou  shalt  deal  b.  with  me 

9  Cor.  9.  6.  he  which  Boweth  b.  shall  reap  h. 
BOW 

Signifies, [1]  Aninstrumenl  for  shooting  arrows, 
Gen.  27.  3.  2  Kings  'J.  24.  [2j  VAe  whole  fur- 
niture for  war,  Psal.  44.  (5.  [3]  Strength,  Job 
29.  20.  [4]  77te  rain-bow,  the  sign  of  (Jod's 
cooenant  in  the  cloud,  which,  though  naturally 
a  sign  of  rain,  yet  by  (iod's  ayjiointmcnl  was 
turned  into  an  assurance,  that  there  should  be 
vo  more  such  overflowing  rain  as  then  had 
been,  Oen. 'J.  13,  14.  [5]  His  promise  and  help, 
Hab.  3.  9.    [6]  Faith  and  patience.  Gen.  4'J.  24. 

If  he  turn  not,  he  hath  bent  his  bow,  Psal.  7.  12. 
Jf  he  leave  not  his  wicked  course,  thcit  God 
hath  prepared,  and  will  speedily  execute  his 
judgnunts  on  him. 

Bis  bow  abode  in  strength,  Oen.  49.  24.  His  in- 
nocence, patience,  temperance,  his  faith  and 
hope  in  (iod,  continued  firm,  whereby  he  re- 
sisted and  vanquished  all  the  temptations  and 
difficulties  he  met  with,  so  that  his  eneviics 
could  neither  defile  nor  destroy  htm. 

Oen.  9.  13.  I  do  set  my  b.  in  the  cloud  for  a  token 

14.  that  the  b.  shall  be  seen  in  the  cloud,  10. 
27.  3.  take,  I  pray  thee,  thy  quiver  and  thy  b. 

48.  22. 1  took  of  the  Aniorite  with  my  sword  and  ft. 

49.  24.  his  ft.  abode  in  strength,  and  arms  of  hands 
Josh.  24.  12.  but  not  with  thy  sword  nor  thy  b. 

1  Sam.  18.  4.  Jonathan  gave  David  his  sword,  b. 
2Sttm.  1.18.  bade  them  teach  Judah  the  use  of  the  ft. 

22.  the  b.  of  Jonathan  turned  not  buck 
IKinrrs  22.  34.  a  certain  man  drew  a  ft.  at  a  venture 
and  smote  the  king  of  Israel,  2  Chron.  18.  33. 

2  Kings  f).  22.  smite  those  taken  with  sword  and  ft. 
9.  2lT  Jehu  drew  a  4.  with  his  full  strength 

13.  15.  take  ft.  and  arrows,  he  took  6.  and  arrows 

16.  put  thy  hand  upon  the  ft.  ho  put  his  hand 

1  Chron.  5.  18.  valiant  men,  able  to  shoot  with  ft. 

12. 2.  armed  with  ft.  and  shooting  arrows  out  of  ft. 
Job  20.  20.  my  ft.  was  renewed  in  my  hand 
Psal.  44.  6.  I  will  not  trust  in  my  ft.  nor  sword 

46.  9.  he  brcaketh  the  ft.  and  cntteth  the  siiear 

76.  3.  there  brake  he  the  arrows  of  the  ft. 

78.  57.  they  were  turned  aside  like  a  deceitful  ft. 
Isa.  41.  2.  he  gave  them  as  stubble  to  his  ft. 

66. 19.  that  escape  to  the  nations  that  draw  the  J. 
Jer.  6.  23.  tliny  shall  lay  hold  on  ft.  ami  sjiear 

49.  3.">.  behold,  I  will  break  the  ft.  of  Elani 

50.  42.  they  shall  hold  the  ft.  and  the  lance 
J.,am.  2.  4.  he  hath  bent  his  ft.  like  an  enemy 
Eiek.  1. 23.  as  the  appearance  of  the  ft.  in  the  cloud 

30.  3.  I  will  smite  thy  ft.  out  of  thy  left  hand 
Hos.X.^.  I  w  ill  break  ft.  of  Israel  in  valley  of  Jezreel 

7.  I  will  not  save  them  by  ft.  nor  by  sword 
2.  IS.  I  will  break  the  ft.  and  the  sword 
7. 16.  not  to  most  High,  they  are  like  a  deceitful  ft. 
Amos  2. 15.  he  that  haiidlcth  6.  not  deliver  himself 
Hab.  3.  9.  thy  ft.  was  made  quite  naked,  thy  word 
Zech.  9.  13.  when  I  fdled  the  ft.  with  Kphraim 
Rev.  6.  2.  he  that  sat  on  the  white  horse  had  a  J. 
See  Bend,  Bknt,  Battlk-Bow. 
BOW-SIIOT. 
Gen.  21.  10.  sat  over-against  him  as  it  were  a  ft. 

BOWS. 
1  Sam.  2.  4.  the  )>.  of  the  mighty  are  broken 

31,  t3.  and  men  with  ft.  hit  him,  1  Cbrnn.  10.  3. 
]  CAron.12.2.  they  were  armed  with  ft. and  could  use 
ZChron.  14.8.  army  out  of  Benjamin  that  drew  ft. 

26.  14.  Uzziah  prepared  for  them  A.  and  slings 
AVrA.  4.  13.  I  even  set  the  people  with  their  ft. 

16.  the  other  half  of  them  held  botli  spears  and  ft. 
Psal.  37.  15.  and  their  ft.  shall  be  brokim 
Ita.  1.  24.  with  arrows  and  ft.  shall  men  como 

13.  18.  their  ft.  shall  dash  young  men  to  pieces 
21.  1 17.  the  number  of  ft.  shall  be  diminished 

Jer.  51.  .W.  every  one  of  their  ft.  is  broken 
Eiek.  30.  9.  they  shall  burn  the  ft.  and  the  arrows 

BOW. 
Josh.  23. 7.  neither  make  mention,  nor  serve,  nor  ft. 
yournclvcs  to  their  gods,  2  Kinns  17.  35. 
S  Kings  5.  18. 1  ft.  myself  in  the  house  of  Uimmon 
Job  39.  3.  they  ft.  themselves,  they  bring  forth 
P-fd/.  22.  29.  all  that  go  down  to  the  dust,  shall  h. 
72.  9.  that  dwell  in  wildernORS  shall  ft.  before  him 
78. 1 31.  wrath  of  God  made  to  h.  down  chosen  men 

144.  5.  ft.  thy  heavens,  O  Lord,  and  come  (V)wn 
Prov.  5.  1.  and  ft.  thine  ear,  to  my  understanding 

14.  19. evil  ft.  before  the  good,  wirki^d  at  gates  of 
Keel.  12.  3.  the  strong  men  Bhall  ft.  themselves 
Mie.  6.  6.  and  ft.  myself  before  the  high  God 
//aft. 3.6  the  perpetual  hills  ilid  ft.  his  ways  eviTlnst. 
Eph.  3.  14.  for  this  rn\w  I  ft.  my  knees  to  Father 

BOW  down. 
0/-n.  27.20.  nations  ft.  down,  mother's  sons  b.down 
37.  II).  shall  I,  thy  mother,  and  brethren  A.  down  7 
40.  8.  father's  children  shall  ft.  down  before  mo 
Find.  11.8.  these  thy  servants  shall  A.  dnien  to  me 
20. 5.  Shalt  not  ft.  down  thyself  to  them,  Deut.  5.9. 
44 


BOW 

Ezod.  33.  34.  thou  shall  not  ft.  down  to  their  gods 
Aeu.  26. 1.  neither  set  up  any  image  to  ft.  down  toit 
Judg.  2.  19.  in  following  other  gods  to  A.  down 
'iKtni's  5.  18.  when  I  b.down  in  house  ofUimnion 

19.  lii.  L.  A.  down  thine  ear,  and  hear,  Psul.  86. 1. 
Job  31.  10.  and  let  others  ft.  down  upon  her 
I'sal.  31.2.  ft.  down  thine  ear  to  me,  Frov.  22.  17. 

93.  6.  O  come,  let  us  worship  and  ft.  down,  let  us 

kneel  before  the  Lord 

Isa.  10.  i.  without  me  thcyft.  rfojcHUnder  prisoners 

46.2.  they  stooj),  they  b.down  together,  they  could 
49.  23.  kings  and  queens  shall  A.  down  to  thee 
51.23.  have  said,  ft.  down,  that  we  may  go  over 
58.  5.  is  it  to  ft.  down  his  head  as  a  bulrush  ? 
60.  14.  they  that  desjjised  thee  sliini  A.  down 

65.  12.  ye  shall  all  A.  down  to  the  slaughter 
/i«m. 11. lO.eyes darkened, A.(iou;?Hheir  back  alway 

BOW  knee. 
fJen.  41.  43.  and  they  cried  before  him,  ft.  the  knee 
Isa.  45.  23.  to  me  every  knee  shall  ft.  Horn.  14. 11. 
Kph.3.]4.  1  ft.  my  tnee  to  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Fhil.  2. 10.  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every  kyiee  shall  ft. 

BOWEU. 
Oen.  33.  6.  the  handmaidens  and  their  children  ft. 
7.  Leah  also  with  her  children  ft.  Uachel  ft. 

43.  20.  Joseph's  brethren  A.  themselves  to  him 
49. 15.  Issachar  ft.  his  shoulder  to  bear,  became  a 

Josh.~3.\6.  transgressed  the  covenant,  served  other 
gods,  and  ft.  yourselves  to  them,  Judg.  2. 12, 17. 
JuUg.  5.  27.  at  her  feet  he  ft.  where  he  A.  he  fell 
UiUh  2.  10.  she  fell  on  her  face  and  A.  herself 
l.'Sam.i.  19. 1'hinehas'  wife  A.  herself  and  travailed 

20.  41.  David  ft.  himself  ||  25.  23.  Abigail  ft.  41. 
2  ^'am.19.14.  Uavidft.the  heart  of  the  men  of  Judah 

22. 10.  he  ft.  heavens  and  came  down,  Psal.  18.  9. 

1  Kings  1. 10.  Bath-sheba  ft.  and  did  obeisance,  31 . 

19.  18.  knees  which  have  not  ft.  to  Baal,  Rom. ll.i. 

2  Kings  1.  1 13-  the  third  captain  ft.  before  Elijah 
2.  15.  the  sons  of  the  jiroplieis  ft.  before  Elisha 
4.  37.  ft.  herself  to  ground,  and  took  up  her  son 

2  Chron.  7.  3.  ft.  themselves  upon  the  pavement 
29.  2il.  the  king  and  all  present  ft.  themselves  • 
F.sth.  3.  2.  ft.  to  Ilaman  i|  5.  Mordeeai  ft.  not 
I, am.  3.  t  20  and  my  soul  is  ft.  in  me 
Mat.  27.  2'.t.  ft.  the  knee  before  him,  and  mocked 
/yuie  13.  11.  a  sjiirit  of  infirmity,  and  was  6. 

BOWED  down. 
Oen.  23.  12.  Abraham  ft.  down  before  the  people 
42. 0.  Joseph's  brethren  came  and  ft.  down,  43.28. 
J\'*in)i.25.2.  people  did  eat,  and  b.down  to  their  gods 
Judg.  7. 0.  rest  of  the  people  b.down  on  their  knees 
2  Kings  9.  t24.  Jornm  A.  down  in  his  chariot 
2C/tr.25.14.  set  them  up  to  be  his  gods,  and  b.down 
Psni..35. 14. 1  A.  (/«?/??£  heavily  as  one  that  mournelh 
38.  0. 1  am  A.  down  greatly,  I  go  mourning  all  day 

42.  t  5.  why  art  thou  A.  down,  O  my  soul?  hope 

thou  in  God 

44.  25.  our  soul  is  ft.  down  to  the  dust,  our  belly 
.')7.  0.  my  soul  is  ft.  down,  they  have  digged  a  pit 
145.14.  raiseth  up  all  those  that  hn  b.down,  140.8. 

/sa.  2. 11.  the  haughtiness  of  men  shall  be  A.  down 
17.  and  the  loftiness  of  man  shall  be  b.down 

21.  3.  I  was  A.  down  at  the  hearing  of  it 
A«A'c24.5.  they  were  afraid  and  b.down  their  faces 

Bf)VVED  head. 
Oen.  24.  26.  man  A.  his  head  and  worshipped,  48. 

43.  28.  they  ft.  their  heads  and  made  obeisance 
Ezod.  4.  31.  then  they  A.  their  heads  and  wor- 
shipped, 12.  27.  JV(A.  8.  6. 

34.  8.  Moses  made  haste  and  ft.  his  head  toearth 
JVum.22.31.  Balaam  ft.  his  head  and  fell  flat  on  face 

t  Balaam  A.  down  his  head,  and  ft.  himself 
1  CAr.  2".l.  20.  ft.  down  their  head  and  worshipped 
2CAr.  20. 18.  Jehoshnphnt  ft.hisArn'/to  the  ground 

20.  30.  they  sang  praises  and  ft.  their  hoads 
John  19. 30.  Jesus  ft.  his  head  and  gave  up  theghost 

BOWED  himself. 
«7f>i.lP.2.  Abraham  A.  A.  23. 7, 12.  ||  19. 1.  Lot  A.  A. 

33. 3.  Jacob  A.  himself,  47. 31 .  ||  48.12.  Joseph  A.  A. 
Judg.  16.  30.  Samson  A.  himstlf  with  all  his  might 
1  .Sam. 24. 8.  Daviil  stooped  to  Saul  and  A.  himself 

28.  14.  Saul  perreived  it  was  Samuel  and  A.  Aims. 
2.S«m.  9.  8.  Mi'phibosheth  A.  hi  m.-ic  If  to  David 
14.22. Joabft.Ai'm.i.  to  David|133.  Absalom  ft.Ai'ms. 
18.  21.  and  Ciishiii  ft.  himself  io  Joab,  and  ran 
24.20.  Aiannnh  ft.  A.  before  the  king,  1  CAr.21.21. 
iKings  1.23.  Nathan  A.  A.  ||  47.  the  king  A.  A.  on  bod 
.')3.  Adonijah  nainn  and  A.  Aim.v.to  king  Sohnnon 
"  19  Solointm  rose  and  A.  Ann.'jf// to  his  mother 

BOWETII. 
Judg.l.  a.  every  one  that  A.  on  his  knrns  to  drink 
Isa.  2.  9.  the  moan  man  ft.  ||  4ti.  1.  Bel  ft.  down 

BOWING. 
Oen.  24.  .52.  F.lie/.er  A.  himself  to  the  earth  . 
./..ft  4.  t4.  Ihnu  hast  stri^ngthened  the  A.  knees 
PkiU.  17.  11.  set  their  eyi'S,  A.  down  to  the  earth 
02.  3.  n»  n  ft.  wall  shall  ye  be,  and  a  tottering  fence 
Mark  15. 19.  they  did  B|dt  upon  him,  ft.  their  knees 

BOWMEN. 
Jer.  4.20.  tho  city  shall  lice  from  tho  noiio  of  the  ft. 


BRA 

BOWELS 
Signiiy,  11]  Tke  entrails.  Job  20. 14.  Acts  1.  la 
[2]  The  heart,  2Ci)T.  6.  12.  Philem.  7.   [3]  The 
womb.  Gen.  25.  23.     [4]  Pity,  or  compassion^ 
ka.  03. 15.  Jer.  31. 20.    [5]  Ojie  greatly  beloved^ 
whom  a  person  loves  as  his  own  »ouZ,l'hilem.l2. 
[0]  Tender  mercies,  Psal.  25  ]  6.  Prov.  12. 1 10. 
Otn.  15.  4.  out  of  thine  own  ft.  shall  be  thy  heir 
25.  23.  two  manner  of  people  shall  be  from  thy  fr, 
43.  3U.  for  his  ft.  did  yearn  upon  his  brother 
A'u/H.  5.  22.  this  water  shall  go  into  thy  4. 
2  .Sum.  7.  12.  thy  seed  which  proceed  out  of  thy  i. 
16.  11.  behold  my  son  which  came  forth  of  my  ft. 
20.  10.  Joab  shed  out  Amasa's  ft.  to  the  ground 

1  Kings  3.  20.  for  her  ft.  yearned  upon  her  son 

2  Chron.  21.  15.  great  sickness  by  duease  ot'lhy  b, 

18.  Lord  smote  him  in  his  ft.  {|  19.  his  ft.  fell  out 
32.21.  they  that  came  forth  ofhisown  A.  slew  him 
Job  20.  14.  yet  his  meat  in  his  ft.  is  turned 

30.  27.  my  ft.  boiled,  and  rested  not 

Psal.  22.  14.  it  is  melted  in  the  midst  of  my  A. 
25.  t  0.  remember,  O  Lord,  thy  A.  and  kiiidnesBet 
4(1.  t  8.  thy  law  is  in  the  midst  of  my  A. 
71.  0.  art  he  that  took  me  out  of  my  mother's  b. 
109.  18.  let  it  come  into  his  A.  like  water 
Prov.  12.  t  10.  the  ft.  of  the  wicked  are  cruel 
Cant.  5.  4.  and  my  6.  were  moved  for  him 
Isa.  10.  11.  my  ft.  shall  sound  like  a  harp 
48.  19.  the  offspring  of  thy  ft.  like  the  gravel 
49. 1.  from  the  ft.  ot  my  mother  he  made  mention 
()3.15.  where  is  the  sounding  of  thy  ft.  and  mercies? 
Jer.  4.  19.  my  ft.  my  A.  I  am  pained  at  my  heart 

31.  20.  therefore  my  A.  are  troubled  for  him 
/,atn.l.20.behold,  O  Lord,  my  A.  are  troubled, 2.1L 
F.iek.  3.  3.  fill  thy  A.  with  this  roll  I  give  thee 

7.  19.  not  satisfy  their  souls,  nor  fill  their  A. 
Jonah  1.  1 17.  Jonah  was  in  the  A.  of  the  fish 
I.uke  1. 1 78.  through  the  A.  of  the  mercy  of  our  God 
.lets  1. 18.  Judas  burst,  and  all  his  ft.  gushed  out 
2  Cor.  6.  12.  ye  are  straitened  in  your  own  ft. 
7.  t  15.  Titus,  his  A.  are  more  abundant 
Phil.  1.  8.  I  long  after  you  in  the  ft.  of  Christ 
2.1.if  consol.  ill  Chr.  if  there  be  any  ft.  and  merciei 
Col.  3.  12.  put  on  A.  of  mercies,  kindness,  meek/iess 
Philem.  7.  the  A.  of  the  saints  are  refreshed  by  ^hee 
12.  therefore  receive  him  that  is  my  own  A. 
20.  yea,  brother,  refresh  ray  ft.  in  the  Lord 
1  ./ohn  3. 17.  and  shutteth  up  his  ft.  of  compassion 

BOWL. 
M'um.  7.  85.  each  A.  weighing  seventy  shekels 
.Judg.  6.  38.  and  wringed  the  dew,  a  A.  full  of  water 
F.ccl.  12.  6.  or  ever  the  golden  ft.  be  broken 
Zech.  4.  2.  a  candlestick  of  gold  with  a  ft.  on  it 
3.  two  olive  trees  one  on  the  right  side  of  the  4. 
BOWLS. 
F.xod.  25.  29.  thou  shalt  make  A.  to  cover,  37.  16 
JV«7n.  4.7.  spread  a  cloth  of  blue,  dishes  and  A.  tH. 

1  A'ino-s7..')0.ft.nnd  snutlVrsof  pure  gold, lCAr.28.17. 

2  Chron.  4.  t  8.  Solomon  made  a  100  ft.  of  gold 
JImos  6.6.  that  drink  wine  in  ft.  but  not  grieved  for 
Zech.  9. 1.5.  shalt  be  filled  like  A.  as  corners  of  altar 

14. 20.  the  pots  in  the  Loril's  house  shall  be  like  b 

BOX. 

2  Kings  9.  1.  take  this  A.  of  oil  in  thine  hand,  3. 

[Mat.  26.  7.  having  an  alabaster  ft.  Mark  14.  3. 

Mark  14.3.  she  brake  the  A.  and  poured,  Luke'.yi, 

BOX-TREE. 
Isa.  41.  19.  I  will  set  in  the  desert  tho  pine  and  b. 
00.  13.  the  glory  of  Lebanon  shall  come,  the  ft, 

BOY,  S. 
Oen.  25.  27.  the  A.  grew,  and  Esau  was  a  hunter 
.Joel  3.  3.  they  have  given  a  A.  for  a  harlot 
Zech.9. 5.  streets  shall  he  full  of  A.  and  girls  playing 

BOYL,  S. 
F.xod.  9.  0.  it  shall  be  a  ft.  with  blains  on  man 

10.  it  became  a  ft.  breaking  forth  with  blaing 

11.  magicians  could  not  stand,  because  of  the  A, 
Lev.  13.  18.  the  flesh  also  in  which  was  a  ft. 

'i  Kings  20.7.  took  figs  and  laid  on  the  ft.  /*a. 38.21. 
Job  2.  7.  so  Satan  smote  Job  with  sore  b. 

BRACELET,  S. 
Orn.  24.  30.  when  he  saw  ft.  on  his  sister's  hands 
.38.  18.  Ihv  signet,  thv  ft.  and  thy  stall',  25. 
F.xod.  35.  ^2.  were  willing,  brouciit  ft.  J^um.  31. 50. 
2  Sam.  1.  10.  the  ft.  on  his  arm  I  have  brought 
Isa.  3.  19.  I  will  take  away  the  chains,  ft. 
Kick.  16.  II.  and  I  put  A.  upon  thine  hands 

BRAKE. 
F.xod.  9.  25.  the  hail  ft.  every  tree  of  the  field 

32.  3.  the  people  ft.  olTthe  golden  ear-rings 

10.  he.  east  the  tables  and  ft.  them,  Dent.  0.  17 
Judg.  7.  19.  they  ft.  pitchers  in  their  hands,  20. 
9.  ."Tn.  cast  n  piece  of  B  millstone  to  ft.  his  skull 
16.  9.  A.  the  wilhs  na  a  thread  '|  12.  A.  new  ropes 

1  Sam.  4.  18.  Eli  fell  Imckwa.d  and  his  neck  A. 

2  .v.im.23.16.  thice  miehty  men  ft.  thro',  1  CAr.l  1 .18, 

1  h'itirrs  19.  II.  a  strong  wind  A.  in  pieces  the  rockl 

2  Kin^gs  11.  18.  Baal's  imaees  A.  they  in  pieces 
18.  4.  ft.  images,  ft  brazen  serpent  Moses  had  made 
23.  14.  Josiah  ft.  the  images,  2  Chron.  34.  4. 


BRA 

S  '  %roR.  21.17.  Arabians  came  and  b.  inlo  Judah 
.'11.  t5.  as  soon  as  the  coniinandment  b.  forth 

Job  29.  1 17.  I  b.  the  jaws  of  the  wicked 
38.  a.  who  shut  up  the  sea  when  it  b.  forth  ? 
10.  and  b.  up  for  it  my  decreed  place,  and  set  bars 

Psal.  76.  3.  there  b.  iie  the  arrows  of  the  bow 
105.  IG  moreover,  he  4.  the  whole  stalT  of  bread 

33.  lie  iniote  their  vine*  4.  trees  of  Iheir  coast 
lOG  '2!)  and  the  plague  b.  in  upon  them 
107. 14   .^ut  of  darkness  he  b.  Ilicir  hands  in  sunder 

Isa.  59.  t  5.  as  if  there  b.  out  a  viper 
Jcr.  2ti.  10.  took  the  yoke  from  Jeremiah  and  b.  it 
31.  32.  my  covenant  they  A.  tl^j'  I  was  a  husband 
Eiek. 17.16.  whose  oath  he  despised,  and  cov.  lie  b. 
Dan.  2.  1.  spirit  troubled  and  sleep  b.  from  liim 

34.  smute  the  image  on  his  feet,  and  b.  them,  45. 

6.  24.  the  lions  b.  all  their  bones  in  pieces 

7.  7.  the  fourth  beast  devoured  and  A.  in  pieces 

8.  7.  goat  smote  ram,  and  b.  his  two  horns 
JUat.  14. 19.  he  blessed  and  b.  and  gave  the  loaves, 

15.  36.  I  26.  26.  Mark  fi.  41.  |  8.  G.  |  14.  22. 
J^vke  9.  16.  I  22.  19.  |  24.  30.  1  Cor.  11.  24. 
Mark  8.  19.  when  I  A.  the  five  loaves  among  5000 
14.  3.  she  A.  tho  box  and  poured  it  on  his  head 
Luke  5.  6.  their  net  6.  |{  8.  29.  he  ft.  the  bands 
John  19.  32.  the  soldiers  A.  the  legs  of  the  first 
33.  and  saw  that  he  was  dead,  they  A.  not  his  legs 
BR.\KE  down. 
2  Kings  10.27.  A.  down  image  of  Baal,  2  CAr.23.17. 

11.  18.  people  went  and  b.down  the  house  of  Baal 
14.  13.  king  of  Israel  h.  down  wall  of  Jerusalem, 

2  Ckron.  25.  23.  |  36.  19.  Jrr.  39.  8.  |  52.  14. 
23.  7.  he  A.  dozen  the  houses  of  the  Sodomites 
8.  he  A.  down  high  places  1|  12.  b.down  altars,  15. 
2  CAron.14.3.  Asa  A. rfoiou  images,  cut  down  groves 
26.  6.  Uzziah  A.  down  the  wall  of  Gath 
34.  4.  they  A.  down  the  iillars  of  Baalim 

BRAKES'!'. 
j:j:od.34.1.  words  in  the  first  table  thou  A.  Deul.W.'i. 
Psfil.  74.  13.  thou  A.  the  heads  of  the  dragons,  14. 
Tsa.  9.  t  4.  when  thou  A.  the  yoke  of  his  burden 
Ezck.  29.  7.  when  they  leaned  on  thee,  thou  A. 

BRAMBLE,  S. 
Judg.  9.  14.  then  said  all  the  trees  to  the  6. 
l.V  the  A.  said,  let  fire  come  out  of  the  A. 
/4a.34. 13.  nettles  and  A.  shall  come  up  in  fortresses 
LiUke  6.  44.  nor  of  a  /i.-bnsh  gather  they  grapes 

BRANCH 

Signifies,  The  bough  of  a  tree,  Teal.  104.  12. 

To  which   are  compared,    [I]  Jisus  Christ  the 

Messiah,  who  was  born  of  the  royal  house  of 

David,  at  that  time  when  it  wa?  in  an  afflicted 

and    contemptible   condition,    like  a  tree   cut 

down,  and  whereof  nothing  is  left  but  a  stump 

or  root  under  ground,  Isa.   II.  1.    Jer.  23.  5. 

Zeeh.  3.  8.  ]  6.  12.     [2]  True  believers  who  are 

ingrafted  into  Christ  the  true  vine;  who  is 

the   root,    fountaii\,    and  head   of    influence, 

vfhence  his  people   and  members  derive  life, 

grace,  fruitfulness,  and  all  good ;  as  fruitful 

branches  derive  cnnlinunl  influence  from  the 

cine,  John  15.  5.    [.3]  F.arthlij  king.-i  descended 

of  royal  ancestors,  a.'  branches  spring  fiom 

the  root,  Ezek.  17.  3.  Dnn.  11.  7.    [4]  Children 

of  posterity,  Job  8.  16.  |  !.'».  32. 

F.xod.  25.  33.  a  knop  and  a  flower  in  one  A.  37. 19. 

JVum.  13.23.  rut  down  a  A.  with  one  cluster  of  grapes 

Job  8.  16.  his  A.  shooteth  forth  in  his  garden 

14.  7.  and  the  tender  A.  thereof  will  not  cease 

15.  .32.  and  his  A.  shall  not  be  green 

18.  16.  and  above  shall  his  A.  be  cut  off 
29.  in.  and  the  dew  lay  all  ni!j;ht  upon  my  A. 

P«aZ.  80. 15.  the  A.  Ihouinadest  strong  for  thyself 
I'ron.  II.  2>i.  the  righteous  shall  flourish  as  a  A. 
/isa.4.2.  in  Ihatdavshall  A.  of  the  Lord  bpboanlifnl 
9.  14.  the  Lord  will  cntoffA.  and  root  in  one  day 
11.1.  and  a  A.  shall  grow  out  of  his  roots 

14.  19.  thou  art  cast  out  like  an  abominable  A. 
17.0  strong  cities  shall  be  as  an  uppermost  A.  left 

19.  15.  nor  any  work  which  A.  or  rush  may  do 
2.5.  5.  theft,  of  terrible  ones  shall  be  brought  low 
60.21  theA.  of  my  planting,  the  work  of  my  hands 

Jer.  23.  5.  I  will  raise  lo  Dnvid  a  righteous  A. 
33. 15. 1  will  ciinso  the  ft.  of  righteousness  to  grow 
F.zek.  H.  17.  and  lo,  they  put  the  A.  to  their  nose 

15.  2.  what  is  the  vino  tree  more  than  the  ft.? 
17.  3   an  eagle  came,  and  took  the  hiahest  ft.  22 

Dan  11.7.  out  ofa  ft.  <if  her  roots  shall  one  stand 

Zerh.  3.  8.  T  will  bring  fort'.i  my  servant  the  A. 
6.  12.  behold  the  man  whose  name  is  the  A. 

Mat.  4.  I.  It  shall  leave  them  neither  root  nor  A. 

Jifat.'H.  32.  when  his  A.  is  yet  lentler,  Mark  13.  23. 

J.uke  1.  t  78.  the  A.  from  on  high  hath  visited 

John  1.5.2.everyft.  that  bearelh  not,  A. that  beareth 
4.  as  the  ft. cannot  bear  fruit  itself,  except  it  abide 
6.  if  he  abide  not  in  me.  he  is  cast  forth  as  a  A. 
BRANCHES. 

Oen.  40.  10.  and  in  the  vine  were  three  A. 

12.  .Tosenh  said,  the  three  A.  are  three  davs 
49.  32  a  bough,  whose  A.  run  over  the  wall 

45 


BRA 

Ezod.  25.  32.  six  A.  come  out  of  the  sides  of  the 
candlestick,  three  6.  out  of  one  side,  37.  18,21 
Leo.  23.  40.  shall  take  b.  of  palm  treer,  jVeA.  8. 15. 
Job  15.  30.  the  flame  shall  dry  up  his  b. 
Psal.  80.  11.  she  sent  out  her  A.  to  tho  river 
104.  12.  the  fowls  which  sing  among  the  A. 
Isa.  16.  8.  Moab's  A.  are  stretched  out 

17.  6.  four  or  five  in  the  outmost  fruitful  A.  thereof 

18.  5.  he  shall  take  away  and  cut  down  the  * 
27.  10.  there  jjhall  he  lie  and  consume  the  A. 

30.  t  17.  till  ye  be  left  as  a  tree  bereft  of  A. 
Jer.  11.  16.  and  the  A.  of  it  are  broken 
/:ze/i:.17.6.became  a  spreading  vine  whose  ft. turned 

19.  10.  she  was  fruitful  and  full  of  A. 
14.  fire  is  gone  out  ofa  rod  of  her  A. 

31.  8.  the  chesnut-trecs  not  like  the  Assyrian's  A. 

36.  8.  O  mountains  of  Israel,  ye  shall  shoot  A. 
Dan.  4.  14.  hew  down  the  tree,  cut  otf  his  A. 
//os.  11.6.  the  sword  shall  consume  Ephraiin's  A. 

14.  6.  his  A.  shall  spread,  and  his  beauty  as  olive 
Joel  1.7.  my  vine  waste,  A.  thereof  are  made  white 
JVc/t.  2.  2.  the  emptiers  have  marred  their  vine  A. 
Zech.  4.  12.  I  eaid,  what  be  these  to  olive  A..' 
Mat.  13.  32.  the  birds  lodge  in  the  A.  Luke  13.  19. 

21.  8.  others  cut  down  b.  Mark  11.  8.  ./ohn  12.  13. 
Jlark  4.  32.  greater  than  all  herbs,  shooteth  out  A. 
./ohn  15.  5.  I  am  the  vine,  ye  are  the  6. 
Rom.  11.  16.  iftlie  root  be  holy,  so  are  the  b. 

17.  if  som(i*t>f  the  A.  be  broken  off,  19. 

18.  boast  not  against  the  A.  but  if  ihou  boast 
21.  for  if  God  spared  not  the  natural  A.  take  heed 

BRAND,  S. 

Judg.  15.  5.  and  when  he  had  set  the  A.  on  fire 

Zech.  3.  2.  is  not  this  a  A.  plucked  out  of  the  fire  7 
BRANDISH. 

Ezek.  32. 10.  when  I  shall  A.  my  sword  before  them 
BRASS 

fs  a  sort  of  metal,  Exod.  31.  4.  and  denotes,  [1] 
^1  people  impudent  in  sin,  Isa.  48.  4.  Jer.  6.  28. 
Ezek.  22.  18.  [2]  The  infinite  power  of  Christ, 
Rev.  1.  15. 

A  kingdom  of  brass,  Dan.  2. 39.  The  Grecian  mo 
narchy  under  Alexander  the  Great,  said  to  be  of 
brass,  because  of  their  many  wars,  andfrequcnt 
use  of  arms, which  were  generally  made  o/brass. 

I  will  make  thy  hoofs  brass,  Jl//c.  4.  1.3.  /  will 
give  thee  strength  to  tread  under  foot,and  break 
the  power  of  thine  enemies  into  pieces,  that  it 
shall  never  be  repaired.  It  is  a  metaphor,  taken 
from  their  maimer  of  threshing  corn,which  was 
by  the  treading  of  oxen,  whose  hoofs  were  shod 
with  iron  or  brass,  Deut.  25.  4.  Hos.  10.  11. 

Mountains  of  brass,  Zeeh.G.  1.  denote  theimmove- 
able  decrees  of  God,  his  steady  execution  of  his 
counsels, andthe  insuperable  restraints  thatarc 
upon  all  empires  and  counsels,whir.h  God  keeps 
within  the  barriers  of  such  impregnable  moun- 
'ains,  that  notonecan  start  till  he  open  the  leay. 

Exod.  25.  3.  the  oflfcriiig,  take  gold,  silver,  A.  3.5.  5. 

26.  11.  make  laches  of  ft.  36.18  ||  30.18.  laver  of  A. 

37.  thou  shalt  cast  five  sockets  of  A.  for  them,  27. 
10,  17,  18.  I  36.  38.  I  38.  11,  17,  19. 

27.  2.  shalt  overlay  tho  altar  with  A.  6.  |  38.  2. 
4.  net  work  of  A.  ||  19.  pins  of  the  court  of  A. 

31.  4.  to  work  in  gold,  silver,  and  A.  3.5.  32. 

38.  5  rings  of  A.  ||  6.  overlaid  the  staves  with  A. 

29.  the  A.  of  the  offering  was  seventy  talents 

39.  39.  the  brasen  altar,  and  his  grate  of  A. 
A*«m.  21.  9.  made  a  serpent  of  A.  and  put  it  on  a 

pole,  when  he  beheld  the  serpent  of  ft.  he  lived 
Deut.  8.  9.  out  of  whose  hills  Ihou  mayest  dig  A. 

28.  23.  the  heaven  over  thy  head  shall  be  A. 
.Tudg.  16.  21.  Samson  hound  with  fetters  of  A. 

1  Sam.  17.  .5.  Goliath  had  a  helmet  of  A.  38. 
6.  and  he  had  greaves  of  A.  on  his  legs 

2  .Sam.  8. 8.  king  David  took  much  A.  1  C/tron.18.8. 

1  Kings  7.  14.  Hiram  was  a  worker  in  A. 

15.  for  he  cast  two  pillars  of  A.  2  Kings  25.  13. 

16.  chapiters  of  A.  2  Kings  25.  17.  ./er.  .52.  22. 
27.  bases  of  A.  1|  30.  plaies  ||  38.  lavers,  2  CAr.4.16. 
45.  the  pots  and  shovels  were  of  bright  A. 
47.  weight  of  the  A.  was  not  found,  2  CAron.4.18. 

2  Kings  25.  7.  bound  Zedekiah  with  fetters  of  A. 
13.  carried  the  A.  to  Babylon,  .fer.  52.  17. 

1  Chrov.  15.  19.  to  sound  with  cymbals  of  ft. 

22.  3.  David  prepared  A.  in  abundance,  29.  7. 

20.  2.  I  have  prepared  the  A.  for  things  of  A. 
2Chron.  12.  10.  Rehnboam  made  shields  of  A. 
.fob  6. 12.  the  strength  of  stones,  or  is  my  flesh  A.? 

40.  18.  his  bones  are  as  strong  pieces  of  A. 

41.  27.  Leviathan  cstei'meth  A.  as  rotten  wood 
Psal.  107.  16.  he  hath  broken  the  gates  of  A. 
fsa.  45.  2.  I  will  break  in  pieces  the  gales  of  A. 

60.  17.  for  wood  I  will  bring  A.  for  A.  gold 
F.zek.H.  11.  that  the  A.  of  it  maybe  hot  and  burn 
Dan.  2.  32.  his  belly  and  his  thighs  were  of  A. 

30.  shall  arise  another  third  kinjdom  of  A. 
7.  10.  the  fourth  beast,  whose  nails  were  of  A. 
10.  6.  his  feet  like  in  colour  to  polished  A. 

Mic.  4. 13.  will  make  thine  horn  iron,  and  hoofs  ft., 


BRE 

Zech.  6.  1.  the  mountains  were  mountains  of  J. 
Mat.  10.  0.  jirovide  neither  gold  nor  silver,  nor  4 
I  Cor.  13.  1.  I  am  become  as  sounding  A.  or  cymba 
Rev.  1.  15.  and  his  feet  like  to  fine  b.  2.  18. 
9.  20.  that  they  should  not  worship  idols  of  A. 

Iron  and  BRASS. 
Oen.  4.  22.  Tubal-cain,  instructor  in  A.  and  iron 
J.tv.2G.VJ.  I'll  makeyour  heaven  iro7i,your earth  A 
jVum.  31.  22.  A.  and  iron  which  may  abide  the  fira 
ncut.:a.25  thy  shoesshall  be  iron  a;i(/A.as  thydavi 
./0.5A.22.8.  return  with  A.  andiron,  and  much  raim 

1  <:'AroH.22.14.  prep,  b.and  iron  without  weight,  16. 

2  Citron.  2.  7.  a  cunning  man  to  work  in  b.and  iron 
14.  sent  a  cunning  man  to  work  in  A.  and  iron 

24. 12. hired  such  as  wrought  in  iron  and  A. to  mend 
.fob  28.  2.  iron  taken  out  of  the  earlh,  and  A. 
/sa.48.4.  and  thy  neck  is  a«i  iron  sinew,  and  brow  b 
60.  17.  for  A.  I  will  bring  gold,  for  iron  silver 
Jir.  6.  28.  they  are  A.  and  iron,  Ezek.  22.  1& 
K2fA-.22.20.  as  they  gather  iron  andb.uilo  furnaccB 
Dan.'i.'Sa.  then  was  iro7i,clay,  A.brok.  to  pieces,  45. 
4.15.  with  a  band  ofironudfiA.in  tender  grass,  23. 
5. 4.  they  praised  gods  of  silver,  ft.  ajid  iron,  wood 

rcs.'iels  of  BRASS. 

jF:zo(;.27.3.make  aUvessels  (y/ft.||38.3.madep.o/A. 

.Josh.Ci.lO.  all  vessels  o/A.are  consecrated  to  the  L. 

'ii.ves.iels  of  b.and  iron  they  put  into  the  treasury 

2  .Sam.8.  lO.Joram  brought  tit  »«f/.v  »/A.  lCA.r.18.10. 

Z  Kings25.H.  ves.of  b.  took  they  away,  ./er .52.18, 

16.  which  Solomon  had  made,  the  A.  of  all  these 

vessels  was  without  weight,  Jer.  52.20. 

Ezra  8.  f  27.  two  vessels  of  yellow  or  shining  A. 

Ezek.  27.13. they  traded  luvesscls  ofb.  Rcv.K.li. 

BRASEN. 
Exod.  27.  4.  make  A.  rings  ||  35.  16,  A.  grate,  38.  4. 
38.  t8.  b.  glasses  ||  10.  their  A.  sockets  twenty 
/^cv.  fi.  28.  the  sin-offering  sodden  in  a  A.  pot 
J\rum.  16.  30.  A.  censers  ||  1  Kings  4.  13.  A.  bari 

1  Kings  7.  30.  A.  wheels  ||  14.  27.  made  A.  shields 

2  Kings  16. 17.  A.  oxen  ||  18.  4.  brake  the  A.  serpent 

25.  13.  the  A.  sea  did  Chaldees  break,  .Jer.  52.  17. 
•iChron.  6.  13.  Solomon  had  made  a  A.  scaffold 
.fob  6. 1 12.  strength  of  stones,  or  is  my  flesh  A.? 
Jer.  1.  18.  I  have  made  thee  this  day  A.  walls 

15.  20.  I  will  make  thee  a  fenced  A.  wall 
52.  20.  the  A.  bulls  ||  Mark  7.  4.  A.  vessels 
See  Altar. 
BRAVERY. 
Asa.  3.  18.  the  Lord  will  take  away  their  A. 

BRAWLER,  S. 
lTim.3.  3.  a  bishop  must  be  no  A.  ||  Tit. 3.9.  to  be 
BRAWLING,  S.  [no  A. 

Pror'.25.24.with  a  A. woman  in  a  wide  house,21.19. 
./am.  4.  1 1.  from  whence  come  wars  and  A.? 

BRAY,  ED,  ETH. 
7oA6. 5.  doth  the  wild  ass  A.  when  lie  hath  gra?8  7 
30.  7.  among  the  bushes  they  A. they  were  gathered 
Psal.  42.  t  I.  as  the  hart  A.  afier  the  water-brooks 
Proi'.27.22.tho' thoushouldest  A.  a  fool  in  a  mortar 

BREACH 
Signifies,  [I'lThc  ruin  of  a  wall  made  by  warlike 
engines,  Ezek.  26.  10.  [2]  The  altering,  or  not 
performing  one's  promise,  'Num.  14.  34.  [3] 
Jl  fracture,  or  bruise.  Lev.  24.  20.  [4]  De- 
cayed nr  ruined  places,  Isa.  58.  12.  [5]  .fudg- 
mcnt,  or  punishment,  2  Sam.  6.  8.  [6]  Con- 
fusion nnd  animosities,  Psal.  60.  2. 
Had  not  Mbses  stood  in  the  breach,  Psal.  106.  23. 
God  had  made  a  hedge  or  wall  about  them  ; 
but  they  had  made  a  gap  or  breach  in  it,  by 
their  sins,  at  ichich  God,  who  was  now  justly 
become  their  enemy,  might  enter  to  destroy 
them ;  which  he  would  have  done,  had  not 
Moses  interceded  for  them. 
Gen.  .38.  29.  the  midwife  said,  this  A.  be  upon  thee 

t  therefore  his  name  was  called  a  A. 
Lev.  24.  20.  A.  for  A.  eye  for  eye,  tooth  for  tooth 
JVum.  14.  34.  ye  shall  know  my  A.  of  promise 
/»«/"-.  21. 15.  the  Lord  hath  made  a  A.  in  Ihetribcfl 
2  .Sam.  5.  20.  broken  forth  as  the  A.  of  waters 
6.  8.  Lord  made  a  A.  on  Uzzah,  1  Chron.  13.  11. 
2  Kings  12.  5.  wheresoever  any  A.  shall  be  found 
1  CAr.  1.5.  13.  the  Lord  our  God  made  a  A.  on  us 
JVeh.  6.  I.  builded  the  wall,  and  there  was  no  A. 
.fob  16.  14.  he  breaketh  me  with  A.  upon  A. 
Psal.  106.  23.  had  not  Moses  stood  in  the  b. 
Prov.  15.  4.  but  perverseness  is  a  A.  in  tho  spirit 
/sa.7.6  let  us  make  a  A. therein  for  us, and  set  a  king 
30.  13.  this  iniquity  shall  he  lo  you  as  a  A. 

26.  in  the  day  that  the  Lord  bindeth  up  the  A. 
.58.  12.  thou  shalt  be  called  the  repairer  of  the  A. 

.frr.  6.  1 14.  they  have  healed  the  ft.  slightly 
14. 17.  daughter  of  my  people  is  broken  with  a  b. 
17.  t  18.  brealf  them  with  a  double  A.  fthoel 
Lam.  2. 13.  thy  ft.  is  great  like  the  sea,  who  can  heal 
F.zek.  26.  10.  enter  into  a  city  wherein  is  made  a  i 
Dan.  9.  t25.  the  ft.  built  in  troublous  times 
Jimos  6.  jG.  not  grieved  for  the  A.  of  Joseph 

BREACHES. 
Judg.  5.  17.  Asher  continued  and  abode  in  hig  t, 


BRE 

S  Sam.  0.  t  20.  called  place,  plain  of  4. 1  Chr.  14.11 

1  Kings  U.  'i~.  rejiaired  the  b.  of  the  cily  of  Uand 

2  Kind's  I'i.  5.  let  them  rei>air  the  b.  of  the  house 
6.  the  pnestj  had  not  repaired  the  b.  of  the  house 
12.  toiiiasoriii  to  repair  i.  of  house  of  Lord,  2*2.5. 

JVeA.4.7.  that  the  4. began  to  be  stopped,  were  wroth 

Psai.  1)0.  2.  heal  the  4.  thereof  for  it  shaketh 

Ita.  22.  "J.  ve  have  seen  the  4.  of  the  city  of  David 

Eiek.  13.  t  5.  ye  havg  not  gone  up  to  tJie  4. 

Amos  i.  3.  and  }e  shall  go  out  at  the  4. 
6.  11.  Lord  will  smite  the  great  house  with  4. 
U.  11.  and  I  will  close  up  the  4.  thereof 
BUKAU 

Signifies,  [1]  .yaluralfoud,  or  that  eatable  made 
of  corn,  i;en.  3.  I'J.  |  4'.t.  20.  [2]  ^U  tliingg 
necessary  fur  this  lif e^Mal.  C.  11.  [3J  Manna 
Kkereicitk  God  fed  the  children  of  Israel  in 
the  icilUcrness,  Neh.  t).  15.   John  0.  31. 

To  bread  are  compared,  (I)  Jesus  Christ,  who  is 
the  true  food  fur  the  soul,  and  bath  the  author 
and  matter  of  spiritual  life,  John  G.  41,  51. 
(2)  The  gospel,  and  ordinances  and  jirir.ilrgcs 
thereof,  Prov.  9.  5.  (3)  The  Canaanilcs,  who 
were  destroyed  by  the  Israelites  as  easily  as 
men  eat  up  their  bread,  or  common  food. 
Num.  14.9. 

tVe  are  one  b.-ead,  1  Cor.  10.  17.  We  are  joined 
together  into  one  viyslical  body,  and  declare 
ourselves  to  be  so,  by  our  fellowship  together 
in  the  ordinance  of  the  Lord's  supper;  for  the 
bread  we  there  cat  is  one  bread,  and  the  wine 
Vie  drink  is  one  wine ;  though  the  one  be  com- 
posed of  many  grains  of  com,  and  the  other 
made  up  of  many  particular  grapes. 

Children's  brearj,  Jiat.  15. 2(i.  'J'he publication  of 
the  gospel,  and  working  miracles,which  belong- 
ed to  the  Jews,  who  were  God's  peculiar  people. 

Shew  bread,  1  Sam.  21.  G.  The  Hebrew  signifies 
Bread  of  faces,  or  of  the  face.  They  thus  called 
th:  loaves  of  bread,  that  the  priest  of  the  week 
put  every  sahbalh  day  upon  the  golden  table 
which  was  in  the  Sanctum  before  the  Lord. 
They  were  twelve  in  number,  and  represented 
the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel.  Every  loaf  must 
have  been  of  a  considerable  bigness,  si7icc  they 
used  two  tenth  deals  of  flour  for  each,  which 
are  about  six,  pints.  Lev.  24.  5,  (5,  7.  T/tey 
lerved  them  up  hot  on  the. sabbath  day  in  the 
presence  of  the  Lord,  and  at  the  same  time 
took  away  the  stale  ones,  which  had  been  ex- 
posed for  the  whole  week,  and  which  could  not 
be  eaten  but  by  the  priests  alone.  If,  in  an 
extraordinary  case,  David  thought  he  might 
eat  of  them,  nothing  but  urgent  necessity  could 
exempt  him  from  sin,  1  Sam.  21.4, 5.  Mai.  12.  4. 

Gen.  14.  18.  the  king  of  Salem  brought  forth  4. 
It*.  5.  and  I  will  fetch  a  morsel  of  4. 
21.  14.  Abraham  took  4.  and  gave  to  Ilagar 
25.  34.  then  Jacob  gave  Ksau  4.  and  po'tairn 
27.  17.  she  gave  8av(mry  meat  and  4.  to  Jijob 
41.  .'54.  in  the  land  of  Egvpt  there  was  b. 
55.  the  people  cried  to  Pharaoh  for  4. 
43.  31.  set  on  4.  |1  4.5.  23.  4.  for  his  father 
47. 12.  Joseph  nourished  his  father's  house  with  4. 
15.  give  us  4.  II  17.  gave  them  4.  for  horses 
19.  tmv  us  and  our  land  for  4.  that  we  may  live 
49.  20.  out  of  Ashcr  his  4.  shall  be  fat 

Rxod.  lt>.  4.  I  will  rain  b.  from  heaven  for  you 
8.  and  in  the  morning  4.  to  the  full,  12. 
29.  he  giveth  on  the  sixth  day  the  4.  of  two  days 
32.  they  may  see  the  4.  wherewith  I  fed  you 
23.  2.5.  he  shall  bless  thy  4.  and  thy  water 
29.  32.  and  the  4.  in  the  basket  by  the  door 

34.  if  ought  of  the  4.  remain  unto  the  morning 
40.  23.  he  set  the  4.  in  order  uppn  the  table 

Lev.  8. 2<i.  he  took  a  rake  of  oili^d  4.  and  a  wafer 
32.  what  rnmaincih  of  the  4.  ye  shall  burn 

21.  6.  the  6.  of  their  God  Ihey  do  offer,  H,  17,21,22. 

22.  25.  nor  from  a  stranger  shall  ye  oflTer  4. 

23.  1ft.  yc  shall  offer  with  the  4.  seven  lamba 

38  36.  ten  wnni>'n  shall  bake  your  4.  in  one  oven 
Jfum.  4.  7.  and  the  continual  4.shalll>e  lliireon 
14.9.  the  piiopic  of  the  land,  tlioy  are  4.  for  us 
21. 5.  no  4.nor  water,  our  soul  limlheth  tliiiili:;ht4. 
H'.  2.  my  4.  for  my  sacrifices  shall  ye  obsorvi 
Dent.  8.  3.  Hint  he  might  make  thre  know  that  man 
doth  not  live  by  4.  onlv,  Jifat.  4.  4.  /.uke  4.  4 
23.  4.  they  met  you  not  with  4.  and  water 
29.  6.  ye  nave  not  eaten  4.  nor  drunk  water 
J4*A.9..ValI  4.oftheir  provision  was  dry 'ind  mouldy 

12.  this  our  4.  we  took  hot  for  our  provision 
J'urfn-. 7.13.  a  cake  of  barley  4.  tumbled  into  the  host 
8  l\.  that  we  shoulil  give  4.  to  thy  army,  15. 
19.  5.  comfort  thy  heart  with  a  morsel  of  4. 
19.  and  there  is  4.  and  wine  also  for  me 
liuth  1.  r..  T,ord  visited  his  people  in  giving  them  4 
I.Sam.  2.  5.  they  hired  out  themselves  tor  4. 

Sfi.shall  come  and  crouch  to  him  for  a  morsel  of  4 

9. 7.  for  'he  4.  is  spent  in  our  vessels,  not  a  present 

IC.  20.  Jesse  took  an  ass  laden  with  4.  and  buttle 

40 


BRB 

lSam.21.4.  but  there  is  hallowed  4.1|5.  4. is  common 
0.  priest  gave  him  hallowed  4.  to  put  hot  4.  in  day 
22.  13.  thou  liast  given  iiiiii  4.  and  a  sword 
•23.  11.  sliall  I  take  my  4.  and  my  water  to  give 
2ri.  22.  let  me  set  a  morsel  of  4.  before  thee 

30.  II.  ihcy  found  an  Egyptian  and  gave  him  4. 
2 .S'am.3.29.tet  nut  faiilrum  Joubonethatlacketh4. 

35.  if  I  taste  4.  or  ought  else  till  the  sun  be  down 
0. 19.  he  dealt  to  every  one  a  cake  of  4.  and  piece  of 

1  Kings  4. 1 22.  Solomon's  4.  for  joneday  was  thirty 
13.2J.  but  earnest  back  and  hast  eaten  4. and  drunk 

23.  after  he  had  eaten  4.  and  after  he  fiad  drunk 

17.  6.  ravens  brought  4.  uud  llesh  in  the  evening 
11.  bring  me,  I  pray  thee,  a  morsel  of  4. 

18.  4.  and  fed  them  with  4.  and  water,  13. 

2  Kings  4.  42.  and  brought  the  man  of  God  4. 
18.  3i'.  till  1  take  you  to  u  land  of  4.  Jsa.  30.  17. 

1  Chr.  12.  40.  they  of  Ztbulun  brought  4.  on  asses 
JWA.5.  14.  have  not  eaten  the  4.  of  the  governor 
9.  15.  and  gavest  them  4.  from  heaven  lor  hunger 
13.2.  because  they  met  npt  Israel  with  4. and  water 
J(;415.23.wanderelh  abroad  for  4.8aying,  where  is  it 
22.  7.  thou  hast  withholdcn  4.  friim  llie  hungry 

27.  14.  his  offspring  shall  not  be  satisfied  with  4. 

28.  5.  as  for  the  earth,  out  of  it  cometh  4. 
33.20.  his  life  abhorreth  4.  and  soul  dainty  meat 

I'sal.  37.  25.  nor  have  I  seen  his  seed  begging  4. 
78.  20.  can  he  give  4.?  ||  W2.  9.  eate^  ashes  like  4. 
80.  5.  thou  feedest  Iheiii  with  the  4.  of  tears 

104.  15.  and  4.  which  slrenglheiieth  man's  heart 

105.  40.  and  satistieil  them  with  the  4.  of  heaven 
KW.IO.  let  them  seek  their  4. out  of  desolate  places 
132.  15.  I  will  satisfy  her  poor  with  4. 

frut)  .9. 17. stolen  waterssweet,4.eat.  secret  is  pleas. 

IJ.y.he  that  is  desjiised  and  hath  a  servant  is  lietter 

than  he  that  hmiuureth  himself  and  lackelh  4. 

11.  tilleth  land  shall  be  satisfied  with  4.  28.  19. 

20. 13.  open  thy  eyes, thou  shaft  be  satisfied  with  4. 
17.  4.  of  deceit  is  sweet  to  a  man,  but  afterward 

22.  9.  for  he  giveth  of  his  4.  to  the  poor 

31.  27.  she  eateth  not  the  4.  of  idleness 

Reel.  9.  11. 1  saw  race  is  not  to  swift,  nor  4.  to  wise 
11. 1.  cast  thy  4.  upon  the  waters,  for  shall  find  it 
fsa.  3.  1.  Lord  doth  take  away  the  whole  stay  of  4. 
7.  for  in  my  house  is  neither  4.  nor  clothing 

21. 14.  they  prevented  with  their  4.  him  that  fled 
.30.  20.  tlio'  the  Lord  give  you  the  4.  of  adversity 
33.  lU.  his  4.  shall  be  given  him,  his  water*  be  sure 
44.  15.  he  baketh  4.  on  the  coals  thereof,  19. 
51.  14.  should  not  die,  nor  that  his  4.  should  fail 
55.  2.  why  sjiend  money  fur  that  which  is  not  4.? 

10.  that  it  may  give  seed  to  the  sower,  4.  to  eater 
.58.  7.  is  it  not  to  deal  thy  4.  lo  ilie  hungry  1 

.Jcr.  11.  t  19-  let  us  destroy  the  stalk  with  his  4. 

42.  14.  we  shall  see  no  war,  nor  have  hunger  of  4. 

44.  t  17.  for  then  had  we  plenty  of  4. 
J^am.  1.  11.  all  her  people  sigh,  they  seek  4. 

4.4.  young  children  ask  4. no  man  breaks  it  to  them 

5.0.  given  hand  to  Egyptians  to  be  satisfied  with  4. 

9.  we  gat  our  4.  with  llie  peril  ol'our  lives 
Kzek.  4.  15.  thou  shall  prejiare  thy  4.  therewith 
17.  that  they  may  want4.and  water  and  consume 

in.49.  pride,fulnessof4.and  abuiidaneeof  idleness 

18.  7.  but  hath  given  his  4.  to  the  hungry,  10. 

44.  7.  brought  strangers  when  yc  offer  my  4. 
Hos.  2.  5. 1  will  go  after  my  lovers  that  give  me  4. 

9.  4.  their  sacrifices  shall  be  as  the  4.  of  mourners 
.inios  4.  6.  given  you  want  of  4.  in  all  your  places 

8.  11.  not  a  famine  of  4.  but  of  hearing  the  word 
f/ag.  2.  12.  if  on(!  with  his  skirt  do  touch  4.  or  wine 
Mai.  1.  7.  ye  offer  iiolluted  4.  U[)on  mine  altar 
Mat.  4.3.  comm.  these  stones  be  made  4.  J^ukci.  3. 

0.  11.  give  us  this  day  our  daily  4.  Luke  II.  II. 
7.  9.  if^his  son  ask  4.  will  he  give  him  a  sloiie  ? 
15.2G.notmect  to  take  the  children's  4.  .IfarA- 7.-J7. 
33.whence  should  we  liaveso  much  b.TMark  8.4. 

10.  5.  they  had  forgotten  to  take  4.  Mark  8.  14. 

11.  that  I  spake  it  not  to  you  concerning  4. 

12.  he  bade  them  not  beware  of  the  leaven  of  4. 
2fi.  2«.  Jesus  took  4.  and  blessed  it,  Mark  14.  2*2. 

jMke  7.  3.3.  John  Baptist  came  neither  eating  4. 

9.  3.  lake  notliing  for  your  journey,  neither  4. 
15.  17.  servants  of  my  father  have  4.  enough 
22.  19.  look  4.  gave  thanks,  and  brake  it,  24.  30. 
24.3.5.  how  he  was  known  of  them  in  breaking  4. 

./oAnG.  5.  twohundreil  penny-worth  of  4. is  not  sufT. 

32.  Moses  gave  you  not  that  4.  from  In-aven,  my 

Father  giveth  you  the  true  4.  from  heaven 

33.  the  4.of(;od  is  he  ||  34.  Lord,  give  us  this  4. 
35.  JcHUS  said  to  them,  I  am  the  4.  of  life,  48. 
41.1  am  the  4.  which  came  down,  50,  58. 

Sf*.  he  that  eateth  of  this  4.  shall  live  for  ever 
13. 18.  he  that  eateth  4.  with  me  hath  lifted  his  heel 
21.  9.  thev  saw  a  fire  anil  fi»li  laid  tliereon  and  4. 

13.  Jesus  then  lakelh  4.  and  giveth  them 
jlrls  2.  42.  they  continued  in  breaking  of  4. 

40.  and  brealiing  4.  from  house  to  house 
20.  7.  when  the  rlisciples  came  to  break  4. 

1 1.  when  ho  had  broken  4.  and  eaten,  and  talked 
27.  35.  ho  took  4.  and  gave  thanks  to  God 


BRE 

1  Cor.  10.  IG.  4.  vc  break,  is  it  not  tlie  communion 
17.  for  we  being  many  are  one  4.  and  one  body 

11.23.  have  received  ol  Lord,  that  the  Lord  Jesus, 
the  same  night  in  which  he  was  betrayed, took  ft. 

2  Cor.  9.  10.  both  minister  4.  for  your  food 

See  Af>liction. 

BREADCUKN. 

/.ya.28.28.  b.-corn  is  bruised,  because  he  will  not  be 

BKEAD  with  eat. 
Gen.  3. 19.  in  the  sweat  of  thy  face  shall  thou  eat  b. 
28.  20.  if  Lord  will  give  me  4.  to  eat  and  raimenl- 
31.  54.  Jacob  calli^  his  brethren  to  cat  4. 
37.  25.  Joseph's  brethren  sat  down  to  lat  4. 
:^.I.G.  knew  not  ought  he  hadgsave  the  4.  he  did  ra< 

43.  25.  they  heard  that  they  should  eat  4.  there 
32.  Egyptians  might  not  eat  4.  with  the  Hebrews 

Exod.'i.'iti.v,  here  is  he7  call  him  that  he  may  eat  b. 
16.  3.  and  when  we  did  cut  4.  to  the  full 
IS.  this  is  the  4.  the  Lord  hath  given  you  to  cat 
18.  12.  came  to  eat  4.  Willi  Moses'  laiher-in-la«r 
34.  28.  he  did  not  eat  4.  forty  days,  Veut.  9.  9, 18. 
Lev.  8.  31.  there  eat  it,  w  ith  the  4.  in  the  basket 
21.22.  he  shall  flit  the  4.  of  his  God,  both  of  holy 
23.  14.  ye  shall  neither  tat  4.  nor  parched  corn 
2G.  5.  and  ye  shall  cat  your  4.  to  the  full  and  dwei) 
jVuHi.  15.  19.  when  ye  eat  the  4.  of  the  land 
Diut.  8.  9.  thou  shall  cat  4.  without  scarceness 
./Hr/^.13.1G.tho'  thou  detain  nie.l  v\  ill  not  cat  thy  ft 
liuth  2.  14.  at  meal-time  conic  thou,  and  eat  4. 
2  .Sarn.  9.  7.  thou  shall  cat  b.  at  iny  table,  10. 
12.  17.  neither  did  he  eat  4.  with  them 
20.  set  4.  and  he  did  cat  \\  21.  didst  rise  and  eat  b 
10.  2.  4.  and  summer  fruit  for  young  men  to  eat 
1  Kings  13.  8.  nor  will  I  cut  4.  nor  drink  water,  IQ 
9.  charged  me  by  the  Lord,  saying,  eat  no  4. 
15.  then  said  he,  come  home  with  me  and  eat  ft 
21.  7.  arise,  cat  4.  let  :hy  heart  be  merry 
2A'(n^s4.8.Shunamite  co.istrained  Klisha  to  rat  ft. 
G.  22.  set  4.  and  water,  they  may  eat  and  drink 
23.  9.  but  iliey  did  eat  ot  the  unleavened  4. 
25.29.  did  ciK  4.  continually  before  him,  Jer.52.33. 
./(lb  42.  11.  and  did  eat  b.  with  Job  in  his  house 
f.«a/.14.4.v\ho  eat  up  my  people,  as  they  ta«  4.53.4. 
41.  9.  who  did  cat  of  my  4.  hath  lifted  up  his  heel 
78.  t  25.  every  one  did  eat  the  4.  of  the  mighty 
102*4. my  heart  smitten, so  that  I  forget  to  eat  my  4. 
127.  2.  vain  to  sit  up  late,  to  eat  tfie  4.  of  sorrow* 
/'roj'.  4.  17.  for  they  eat  the  4.  of  vvickedness 
9.  5.  come,  eut  of  my  4.  and  drink  of  the  wine 

23.  G.  cat  not  ihe  4.  of  him  that  halli  an  evil  eye 
25.  21.  if  thy  enemy  hunger,  give  )iim  4.  to  eat 

Eccl.  9.  7.  go  thy  w  ay,  cat  thy  4.  with  joy 
Isa.  4.  1.  we  will  eat  our  4.  and  wear  our  apparel 
./er.  5. 17.  they  shall  eat  up  thy  harvest  and  thy  ft. 
41.  1.  there  liny  did  eat  4.  together  in  Mi/pah 
Ezek.  4.  13.  thus  shall  they  eat  their  defiled  4. 
IG.  they  shall  eat  4.  by  weight  and  with  care 

12.  18.  eat  4.  with  quaking  {|  19.  eat  4.  with  car« 

24.  17.  cover  not  thy  lips,  and  cat  not  4.of  men,  255. 

44.  3.  prince  sit  in  it  to  cat  4.  before  the  Lord 
.'?mo.'!7.12  fleeinloJudali,theiefat4.and  prophesy 
Obad.  7.  they  that  cat  thy  4.  have  laid  a  wound 
Mat.  15.  2.  wash  not  their  hands  when  they  eat  ft 
Mark  3.  20.  that  they  could  not  so  much  as  cat  6 

0.  36.  and  buy  4.  for  tiny  have  nothing  lo  cat 
7.  2.  saw  disciples  eat  4.  with  defiled  hands,  5. 
J.uke  14.1.  to  Pharisee's  house  to  f«t  4.  on  sabbath 
15.  blessed  is  he  that  shall  eat  4.  in  kingd.  of  God 
.fohn  G.5.W  hi'me  shall  we  buy  4.thal  these  may  eat? 
23.  nigh  to  the  place  where  they  did  eat  b. 
31.  he  gave  them  4.  from  heaven  to  eat 
51.  if  any  man  cot  of  this  4.  he  shall  live  forever 

1  Tor.  11.  2G.  for  as  often  as  yc  eat  this  4.  and  drink 

27.  w  hosocver  shall  cnnliis  4.  and  drink  this  cup 

2  Thess.  3. 8.  did  we  eat  any  man's  4.  for  nought  ?  " 
12.  that  with  quietness  thev  work  and  cat  ft. 

Leavened  IlKEAD. 
K3-nrf.12.15.  who  eateth  leai'.  h.  that  soul  bo  cut  ofi 

13.  3.  there  shall  no  leavened  4.  be  I'aten 

7.  there  shiill  no  /car.  4.  be  seen,  Deut.  16.  3,  4. 
23.  18.  not  offer  blooil  of  mv  sacrifice  with  Irav.b. 
Lev.  7.  13.  heshall  offer  forliis  offeiinp/factnfdft. 

Loaf,  or  Loaves  of  HUEAD. 
Kiorf.29.23.  one /(ja/o/4. with  ram  ofconsecralion 
Judg.  8.  5.  give  loaf  of  4.  to  people  that  follow  m« 
1  .Sum.  10.  3.  another  carrying  three  loaves  of  b. 

4.  they  will  salutp,  and  give  thee  two  loaves  ofb, 
21.  3.  give  me  five  loaves  of  h.  in  iny  hand 

2. Sam.  10.  1.  anil  U|ion  aimcs  ^00  loaves  of  h. 

1  Chr.  Ifi.  3.  dealt  to  everyone  of  Israel  o/o(//o/ ft. 

J^o  nftEAD. 
r?/-7i.  47.  13.  thi're  was  ho  4.  in  all  the  land 
Kum.  21.  5.  there  is  no  4.  and  our  soul  loalhoth 
1  Xnm.  21.  4.  there  is  no  common  4.  under  my  hnnj 

G.  for  there  was  no  4.  there,  Imt  shew-bread 
2^.  20.  Haul  had  eaten  no  4.  all  the  day  nor  nighl 
30.  12.  the  Egyptian  hid  eaten  no  4.  three  dnya 
1  Kings  13.  9.  eat  no  4.  nor  drink  waliT,  17.  22. 
21.  4.  tiirmd  away  his  face,  and  would  eat  itsh 

5.  why  is  thy  spirit  so  sad,  that  thou  catest  no  ft.) 


BRE 

tKings  25.3.there  was  no  i.for  the  people, ./er.SiC. 
Ezra  10.  6.  when  he  came  Ihither,  lio  did  oat  ho  b. 
Jer.  38-  9.  for  there  is  no  more  b.  in  ihe  city 
Dan.  10.  3.  I  ate  no  pleasant  b.  nor  came  tiesh 
J/(iC  10. 7.  reasoned  among  themsulves,  saying,  it  is 
because  we  have  taken  no  b.  S.  AfarkS.  1G,17. 
Mark  6.  6-  taiie  ao  scrip,  no  b.  no  money  in  purse 

Piece,  or  Pieces  of  BREAD. 
ISam  2.36.pulme,Ipray,thutImayeata/)ieceo/6. 
0    PrTV.  6.  26.  for  by  means  of  a  wliorish  woman  a 
man  is  brought  to  Apiece  of  b. 

28.  21.  for  apiece  of  b.  thatjimn  will  transgress 
Jer.  37.  21.  to  give  Jeremiah  daily  a  piece  of  b. 
Etek.  13. 19.  and  will  ye  pollute  me  (or  pieces  ofb.l 

Siiew-Bread;  See  Shew. 

Staff  of  BRE.AD. 

Lev.  26.  26.  when  I  have  broken  staff  of  your  b. 

Psal.  105. 16.  moreover,  he  brake  whole  staff  of  b. 

Eiek.  4.  16.  I  will  break  staff  of  b.  5.  16.  |  14.  13. 

Unleavened  BKE.'\D. 

Oen.  19.  3.  Lot  did  bake  unleavened  b.  tliey  did  eat 

Eiod.l'i.8. eat  passo^er  with  nnleav.  A.  JVum. 9. 11. 

15.  seven  days  eat  unleavened  b.  lit.  6, 7. 1 23.15.  | 

34.  18.  Leo.  23.  6.  JVuwi.  28.  17.  Deut.  16.  3. 

18.  on  fourteenth  day  of  month  eat  unleavened  b. 
20.  in  all  your  habitations  shall  ye  eat  unleav.  b. 

29.  2.  lake  unleavened  b.  to  hallow  the  priests 
Lev.G.  16.  meat-offering  ye  shall  eat  v/\\.hunlcav.b. 
JVitm.6.15.wafers  of  Hn/eacencd  A. anointed  withoil 
Deut.  IG.  8.  six  days  thou  shall  eat  unleavened  b. 
1  Sam.  28.  24.  witch  of  Endor  did  bake  unleav.  b. 
HKinfs  23.9.d  id  eat  tin/eac. ft. among  their  brethren 
£ieA.45.21 .  on  14th  day  passover  ofunl.  b.  be  eaten 
Mark  14.  12.  first  day  of  unl.  b.  when  they  killed 
i«jte22.7.  then  came  the  days  of  unZ.  b.  Mcts  12.3. 
^cts  20.6.  after  Ihe  days  of  unleavened  b.  we  sailed 
1  Cor.  5. 8.  but  with  the  unleavened  b.  of  sincerity 

See  Basket,  Feast. 
BREADTH. 
Oen.  6. 15.  the  fashion  of  the  ark  ;  the  i.  fifty  cubits 
13. 17.  arise,  walk  through  the  land  in  the  b.  of  it 
£iod.27.18. 6.  of  the  court  fifty  cubits  everywhere 
88.  16.  breast-plate,  a  span  the  b.  thereof,  39.  9. 
J8. 1.  he  made  the  altar,  five  cubils  the  b.  thereof 
Deut.%5.  not  give  of  their  land,  so  much  as  a  foot  6. 
Judg.  20.  16.  could  sling  stones  at  a  hair's  b. 
1  Kings  6.2.  the  A.  of  the  Lord's  house  was  twenty 
cubits,  Ihe  length  threescore  cubils,  2C/£r.3. 3. 
7.  6.  Ihe  b.  of  the  porch  was  thirty  cubits 
S  Chron.  4.1.  the  A.  of  the  altar  was  twenty  cubits 
Ezra  6.  3.  the  A.  of  the  Lord's  house  si.^ty  cubits 
'  Job  37.  10.  and  the  A.  of  the  waters  is  straitened 
38.  18.  hast  thou  perceived  the  A.  of  the  earth  1 
/so.  8.  8.  his  wings  shall  fill  the  A.  of  :hy  land 
EieA:.40.5.  the  A. ofthe  building  1|  11.  A.  ofthe  entry 
13.  the  A.  ofthe  gate,  20,  48.  ||  49.  A.  of  the  porch 
41. 1.  the  A.  ofthe  tabernacle  ||  2.  A.  ofthe  door,  3. 
5.  A.  ofsidechambers||7.  6.  of  house  was  upward 
11.  the  A.  of  place  left  ||  14.  A.of  face  of  the  house 
«5.  1.  the  A.  ofthe  holy  portion  ofthe  land 
Dan.  3.  1.  the  A.  ofthe  image  was  si.x  cubits 
Hab.l.G.  which  shall  march  ihro'  the  A.of  the  land 
Zech.  2.  2.  to  measure  Jerusalem,  to  see  the  b. 
5.  2.  I  see  a  flying  roll,  the  A.  thereof  ten  cubits 
Eph.  3.  18.  what  is  the  A.  and  length  and  depth 
Rev.  20.  9.  they  went  up  on  the  A.  ofthe  earth 
21.  16.  the  length  ofthe  citv  is  as  large  as  the  A. 
BREAK. 
iSam.  2.  32.  Joab  came  to  Hebron  at  A.  of  day 
^cts  20.  11.  he  talked  a  long  while  till  A.  of  day 

BREAK 
Signifies,  [1]   To  dash  to  pieces,   E.xod    34.  13. 
[2]  To  make  void,  or  of  none  effect,  1  Kings  HI. 

19.  [3]  To  punish,  or  afflict,  Job  13.  25.     [4] 
To  di.<unite  and  sever,  Zech.  11.  14.     [5]  To 

pant,  or  faint,  Psal.  119.  20.    [6]  To  take  away, 
Psal.  10.5.  16.      [7]   To  weaken,  Psal.  10.  \'>. 
[8J  To  plough,  Jer.  4.  3.     [9]  To  cause  great 
sorrow  of  heart,  Acts  21.  13.     [10]  To  shine, 
or  appear,  Cant.  2.  17.    [11]  To  pro/ane,  Psal. 
89.  t3I. 
Gen.  19.  9.  they  came  near  to  A.  the  door 
27.  40.  thou  shall  A.  his  yoke  from  olTlhy  neck 
Ezod.  12.  46.  nor  shall  ve  A.  a  bone,  JVi/m.  9.  12. 
13.  13.  then  thou  shall  A.  his  neck,  34.  20. 
34. 13.  but  ye  shall  A.  their  images,  and  cut  down 
/-ej).11.33.  every  earthen  vessel  unclean  ye  shall  A. 
26.  19.  \  will  A.  the  pride  of  your  power 
Jifum.  24.  8.  Israel  shall  A.  their  bones,  pierce  them 

30.  2.  if  a  man  vow,  he  shall  not  A.  his  word 
32.  t  7.  wherefore  A.  ye  the  heart  of  Israel  ? 

7)e«£.]2. 3.  ye  shall  A.  their  pillars,  and  burn  groves 
1  Sam. 25.  If).  A.  away  everv  man  from  his  master 
lJrino-sl5.l9.A.thyleagiie\vithBaa»ha,2CAr.I6.3. 
Ezra  9. 14.  should  we  again  A.  thv  commandments 
Job  13.  25.  wilt  thou  A.  a  leaf  driven  to  and  fro  I 

39. 1.5.  forgfltetli  that  the  wild  beast  may  A.  them 
Psal.  2.  3.  let  ns  A.  their  bands  asunder 
9.  thou  stialt  A.  them  wilh  a  rod  of  iron 

10.  15.  A.  thou  the  arm  of  the  wicked 
47 


BRE 

Psal.  58.  0.  b.  their  teeth,  O  God,  In  their  mouth 
74.  t  8.  they  said  in  their  hearts,  let  us  A.  them 
8y.31.  if  they  A.  my  statutes  and  keep  not  my  com. 
104.  1 11.  the  wild  asses  A.  their  thirst 
141.  5.  shall  be  an  oil  which  shall  i*ut  A.  my  head 

Cant.'i.  17.  until  day  A. and  shadows  Hee  away,  4.6. 

Isa.  14.  25. 1  will  A.  the  Absyrians  \n  my  land 

28.  24.  A.  the  clods  ||  28.  nut  A.  it  with  a  wheel 
30.  14.  b.  it  as  the  breaking  of  a  potter's  vessel 
38.  13.  as  a  lion  so  will  he  A.  all  my  bones 

42.  3.  a  bruised  reed  will  he  not  A.  Mai.  12.  20. 
58.  6.  is  not  this  the  fast,  that  ye  A.  every  yokel 

.fcr.  15. 12.  shall  iron  A.  the  northern  iron  and  steel  1 

16.  1  7.  neither  shall  men  A.  bread  for  them 

17.  t  18.  A.  them  with  a  double  breach  - 

19.  10.  A.  the  bottle,  so  will  I  A.  this  people,  11. 
28.4.  I  willA.  yoke  of  king  of  Babylon,  11. 1  30.8. 

43.  13.  he  shall  A.  the  images  of  Belh-shemesh 
48. 12. 1  will  send  wanderers  and  b.  Moab's  bottles 
49.  35.  saith  the  Lord,  I  will  A.  the  bow  of  Elain 

Eiek.i.  16.  I  wiUA.thestaffofbread,5.16.  |  14.13. 
16.  38.  judge  thee  as  women  that  A.  wedlock 
23.  34.  thou  shall  A.  the  sherds  thereof 

29.  7.  when  they  took  hold  of  thee  thou  didst  A. 

30.  18.  when  I  shall  A.  the  yokes  of  Egypt 
22.  and  I  will  A.  Pharaoh's  arms,  24. 

Hos.  1.  5.  I  will  A.  the  bow  of  Israel  in  Jezreel 
2.  18.  I  will  A.  the  bow,  the  sword  and  battle 
lO.ll.Judah  shall  plow, and  Jacob  shall  A. his  clods 
.Joel  2.  7.  they  shall  inarch  and  not  A.  their  ranks 
Jinios  1.  5.  I  will  A.  the  bar  otLaDamascus 
Mic.  3.  3.  who  flay  their  skin,  and  A.  their  bones 
JVa/i.  1.  13.  now  will  I  A.  his  yoke  from  off  thee 
Zech.  11.  14.  that  I  might  A.  the  brotherhood 
Mat.  5.  19.  A.  one  of  these  least  commandments 
9.  17.  else  the  bottles  A.  and  the  wine  runneth  out 
Acts  20.  7.  the  disciples  came  together  to  A.  bread 
21. 13.  what  mean  ye  to  weep  and  to  A.  my  heart? 

1  Cor.  10.  16.  the  bread  which  we  A.  is  it  not 

BREAK  covenant. 
Z,ep.26.15.bulthatyeA.my  c.  ||44.I  will  nolA.my  c. 
Deut.  31. 16.  this  people  will  A.  my  cov.  I  made,  20. 
.Judg.  2. 1. 1  said,  I  will  never  A.  my  cov.  with  you 
Psetl.  89.  34.  my  c.  will  I  not  A.  nor  alter  the  thing 
Jer.  14.  21.  remember,  '.  not  thy  covenant  with  us 
33.  20.  if  you  can  A.  my  cov.  of  ihe  day  and  night 
Kzek.  17.  IS.shall  he  b.covenant  and  be  delivered? 
Zech.  11. 10.  that  I  might  A.  my  cov.  which  I  made 

BREAK  down. 
Exod.  23.  24.  quite  A.  down  their  images,  Deut.7.5. 
Lev.  14.45.  and  he  shall  A.  down  house,  the  stones 
Deut.  12.  t  3.  ye  shall  A.  down  their  altars 
Judg.  8.9.  when  I  come  again,  I  will  A.</otcJi  tower 
JVeA.  4.  3.  if  a  fox  go  up,  he  shall  b.down  stone  wall 
Psal.  74.  6.  now  they  A.  dowit  ihe  carved  wurk 
Ecel.  3.  3.  a  time  to  A.  down  and  a  lime  to  build 
Isa.  5.  5.  I  will  A.  down  the  wall  ofthe  vineyard 
Jer.  31. 28.  as  I  have  watched  over  them  to  b.down 
45.  4.  that  which  I  have  built  will  I  A.  dnwn 
Eiek.  13. 14.  so  will  I  A.  doien  wall  ye  have  daubed 
16.  39.  they  shall  A.  down  thy  high  places 
26.  4.  they  shall  A.  down  the  lowers  af  Tyrus 

12.  and  they  shall  A.  down  thy  walls 
Hos.  10.  2.  he  shall  A.  down  tlieir  altars,  and  spoil 

BREAK  forth. 
Exod.  19.  22.  lest  the  Lord  b.  forth  upon  them,  24. 
Isa.U.l.  they  A./,  into  singing,44.23. 1 49.13. 1 54.1. 
Sfi.'i.b -forth  into  joy, sing  togelhcr,ye  waste  places 
54.  3.  fcr  thou  shall  b.  forth  on  the  right  hand 
55. 12.  hills  shall  b.  forth  before  you  into  singing 
58.  8.  then  shall  thy  light  b.  forth  as  the  moining 
Jer.  1.  14.  out  ofthe  north  an  evil  shall  b.  forth 
Oal.4.27.  b.  forth  and  cry,  thou  that  Iravailest  not 

BREAK  off. 
Gen.  27.  40.  thou  shall  A.  his  yoke  o/f  thy  neck 
Exod.  32.  2.  A.  off  the  golden  ear-rings,  24. 
Dan.  4.  27.  O  king,  A.  off  thy  sins  by  righteousness 

BREAK  out. 
/:3:or/.2-2.6.iffireA.nH«||  /.fu.13.12.  if  leprosy  A.owt 
Lev.  14.  43.  if  the  plague  come  again  and  A.  out 
Psal.  58. 6.  A.  out  the  great  teeth  of  the  young  lion 
Isa.  35.  6.  in  Ihe  wiUlerness  shall  waters  A.  out 
Hos.  4.  2.  they  A.  out,  and  blood  loucheth  blood 
./?mos5.6.lesthe6.«wMlk(^  fire  in  the  house  of  Joseph 
BREAK  m  pieces. 

2  K7no-.«25.13.ClialdpansA.rn  pieces  pillars  of  brass 
.7nA  19.2. how  long  will  ye  A.niei/i/ji'cce.iwilhwords? 

34.24.  shall  b.inpieees  mishly  men  without  nmnb. 
Psal.  72.  4.  he  shall  b.  in  pieces  the  oppressor 

94.  5.  they  A.  m  pieces  thy  jieople,  O  Lord 
fsa.  45.  2.  I  will  A.  in  pieces  the  gales  of  brass 
Jer.  1.  tl7.  lest  I  A.  Ihee  in  pieces  before  them 

51.  20.  wilh  thee  will  T  A.  in  pieces  ihe  nations 

21.  with  Ihee  A.  in  pieces  horse  and  lidcr,  chnriol 

22.  with  thee  A.  in  p. man, woman,  old  and  young 
Don.  2.  40.  shall  it  6.  in  p.  and  bruise  kingdoms,  44. 

7.23. the  fourth  beasi  shall  b.  inpieces  whole  earth 

„A;;AK  through. 

Kind.  19. 21.  lest  they  b.  thro'  to  the  Lord  to  gaze 

24,  let  not  tho  priests  and  people  4.  through 


BRE 

'i  Kings  3.  26.  to  A.  through  to  the  king  of  Edom 
Mat.  6.  19.  thieves  A.  thro"  ||  20.  thieves  A.  not  thro 

BREAK  up. 
2  CAron.  32.  f  1.  Sennacherib  thought  to  A. them  up 
Jtr.  4.  3.  A.  up  your  fallow  ground,  JJos.  10.  12, 

BREAKER. 
Eiek.  18.  1 10.  if  he  beget  a  son,  a  A.  up  of  a  houM 
JIYic.  2. 13.  A.  is  come  up  ||  Pom.  2.  25.  if  a  A.  oflaw 

BREAKERS. 
Rom.  1.  31.  without  understanding,  covenant-J. 

BREAK  EST. 
Psal.48.7.  thou  A.ships  of  Tarshieh  with  east-wind 

BREAKETH. 
Gen.  32.  2C.  he  said,  let  me  go,  for  the  day  A. 
Job  9. 17.  for  lie  A.  me  with  tempest  and  multiplies 
12.  14.  he  A.  down,  ami  it  cannol  be  built  again 
16.  14.  he  A.  me  wilh  breach  upon  breach 

28.  4.  the  blood  A.  out  from  the  inhabitants 
Psal.  10.  1 10.  he  A.  himself,  that  the  (joor  may  fall 

29.  5.  A.  the  cedars  ||  46.  9.  he  A.  the  bow 
119.  20.  my  soul  A.  for  the  longing  that  it  hath 

Pruv.  25.  15.  and  a  soft  tongue  A.  the  bone 
Eccl.  10.  8.  whoso  A.  B  hedge,  a  serjient  shall  bite 
Ira.  59.  5.  which  is  crushed  A.  out  into  a  viper 
Jer.lO.ll.asone  A.a  potter's  vessel, not  made  whole 

23. 2'.l.  is  not  my  word  like  hammer  thai  A.  rock  1 
Lam.  4.  4.  children  ask  bread,  and  no  man  A.  it 
Dan.  2.  40.  forasmuch  as  iron  A.  in  pieces  uU  these 

BREAKIKG. 
Gen.  32.  24.  there  wrestled  a  mnn  till  the  A.  of  day 
Exod.  9.  9.  shall  be  a  boil  A.  forth  with  blaing,  10. 

22.  2.  if  a  ihief  be  found  A.  up,  and  be  smitten 
.fudg.7.]l5.  Gideon  heard  ihe  dream,  and  A. thereof 
2/i'i7(^sll.t6.keep  the  watch  of  ihe  house  ffoniA. up 
1  Chron.  14. 11.  on  enemies,  like  A.  forth  of  waters 
.fob  30.  14;  came  ui)on  me  as  a  w  ide  A.  in  of  waters 

41.  25.  by  reason  of  A.  they  purify  themselves 
Psal.  144.  14.  that  there  be  no  b.  in  nor  going  out 
Isa.  22.  5.  A.  down  walls,  and  of  crying  to  mount 

30.  13.  whose  A.  comelh'suddcnly  at  an  instant 
14.  shall  break  it  as  the  A.  ol  tiie  potter's  vesse' 

E:e/f.l0.59.despised  the  oath  in  A.  covenant,  17.18. 
21.  6.  sigh,  son  of  man,  with  A.  of  thy  loins 
Hos.  13. 13.  not  stay  long  in  place  of  A. forth  of  chil. 
/,w  Ac  24.  35.  he  was  known  of  them  in  A.of  bread 
.7ohn  7.  t2:!.  without  A.  the  law  of  Moses 
jJc<s  2.42.  they  continued  in  A.of  bread  and  prayers 
46.  in  the  temple,  A.  bread  from  house  to  house 
Roni.  2.  23.  through  A.  the  law,  dishonourest  God 

BREAST. 
F.Tod.  29.  26.  take  the  A.of  ihe  lam  of  consecration 

27.  shall  sanctify  the  A.  ofthe  wave-offering 

Lev.  7.  30.  A.  may  be  waved,  il.e  fat  with  the  ft. 

31.  but  the  b.  shall  be  Aaron's  and  his  sons' 

34.  the  wave-A.and  henve-shonlder  have  I  taken 

8.2fl.Mosestook  IheA.and  waved  it  for  anoffering 

10.  14.  the  wave-A.  shall  ye  eat  in  a  clean  place 

A''um.  6.20.  is  holy  to  the  priest,  with  the  wave-ft 

18.  18.  as  wave-A.  and  right  shoulder  are  thine 
./oh  24.  9.  they  pluck  Ihe  latherless  from  the  A. 
Isa.  rO.  16.  thou  shall  suck  the  A.  of  kings 
Lam.  4.  3.  even  the  sea  monsters  draw  out  the  ft 
Dan.  2.  32.  head  of  gold,  his  A.  and  his  arms  of 
Luke  18. 13.  the  publican  smote  upon  his  A.  saying 
John  13.  25.  he  then  Iving  on  Jesus'  A.  saith,  21.20. 

BREASTS. 
^fn.49.25.  bless  with  blessings  ofthe  A.  and  womb 
Lev.  9.  20.  put  fat  on  the  A.  1|  21.  A.  Aaron  waved 
Job  3.  12.  or  why  the  A.  that  I  should  suck 
21.  24.  his  A.  full  of  milk,  and  his  bones  moistened 
PsaA22.9.make  me  hope  when  I  was  on  mother's  A. 
Prov.  5.  19.  let  lier  A.  satisfy  thee  at  all  times 
Cant.  1.  13.  he  shall  lie  all  night  belwi.vt  my  ft. 
4.  5.  thy  two  A.  are  like  two  young  roes,  7.  3. 

7.  7.  thy  A.  are  like  two  clusters  of  grapes 
8.  thy  A.  shall  be  as  clusters  ofthe  vine 

8.  1.  my  brother  that  sucked  the  A.  of  my  mother 
8.  we  have  a  little  sister,  and  she  halh  no  A. 
10.  I  am  a  wall  and  my  A.  like  towers 

fsa.  28.  9.  are  weaned  from  the  milk  drawn  from  ft. 
66.  11.  be  satisfied  wilh  the  A.of  her  consolations 
F.zrk.  16.  7.  thy  A.  are  fashioned,  and  hair  grown 
23.3.  there  were  their  A.  pressed,  lliere  they  bruised 
8.  and  they  bruised  the  A.  of  her  viriinity 
34.  and  thou  shall  pluck  off  thine  own  A. 
Hos.2  2.  put  away  her  adulteries  from  hetw.  her  ft. 

9.  14.  give  them  a  miscarrying  womb  and  dry  A. 
.roel-2.  \6.  and  gather  those  that  suck  the  A. 
JVoA.2.7.  as  w  ith  voice  of  doves  labering  on  their  ft. 
I.nke  23. 48.  the  people  smote  their  A.  and  returned 
iVcB.15.6.  having  their  A.  eirded  with  golden  girdles 

BREASTPLATE 
Was  apiece  of  embroidery  of  about  ten  inchta 
si)unrr,of  very  rich  work,irhirh  the  high-priest 
of  the  i^'Vis,  wore  upon  hi.''  brenst,nnd  whichwat 
set  wilh  fovrrowsof  precious. '■tiive.<,upon  every 
one  of  which  was  eiigrnren  the  name,  of  one  oj 
the  tribes  of  Israel :  It  was  double,  or  made  o} 
tvn  pieces  folded  one  ujinit  the  other,  like  a  kind 
ofpurse,or  bag,that  tl  might  tlic  better  support 


BRE 

tHe  preeioit)  stones,  and  that  it  might  receive 
the  Urim  and  Thuinmim,  Lev.  8.  6.  It  was 
called  the  Breast-plate  of  judgment,  Exod.  US. 
15.  because  from  thence  JAc  Israelites  were  to 
expect  and  receive  their  judgment,  and  the 
mind  of  God  in  all  those  icetghly  and  momen- 
tous matters  of  war  and  peace,  wherein  they 
consulted  Oodfor  directions. 

Breast-plate  is  likewise  a  piece  of  defensive  ar- 
mour, Rev.  9.  9.  In  which  sense,  faith  and  love 
are  called  BreaBt-platcs;  lThess.5.8.  Faith 
is  a  defensive  grace ;  not  only  as  it  assents  to 
the  doctrine  of  the  gospel  as  true,  but  also  as 
it  doth  depend  upon  (iod'a  faithfulness  and 
ail-sujjictency  to  perform  his  promises,  and 
apply  them,  to  our  souls  for  our  support  and 
comfort.  Love,  when  it  worketh,  will  defend 
against  the  persecutions,  afflictions,  and  temp- 
tations  of  the  world,  Cant.  B.  7.  Slavish  fear 
mill  overcome  us,  if  we  want  love  to  defend 
against  it,  when  true  religion  is  under  dis- 
grace, and  persecuted  in  the  world,  1  John  4. 18. 
liove  will  defend  against  apostasy,  and  so  help 
us  to  persevere  to  the  coming  of  Christ ;  and 
love,  being  seated  in  the  heart,  is  fitly  compared 
to  a  Breaet-plate  that  encompasseth  the  heart. 

Exod.  25.  7.  and  etoiies  to  be  set  in  the  b.  35.  9. 
28.  4.  shall  make  a  b.  and  ephod,  15.  [  39.  8. 
J2.  thou  shalt  make  upon  the  b.  chains  at  the  end 
23.  put  rings  on  two  ends  of  the  b.  26.  |  39.  16. 

28.  they  shall  bind  the  b.  by  the  rings,  39.  21. 

29.  Aaron  shall  bear  the  names  of  Israel  in  b. 

30.  put  in  b.  of  judgment  the  Urim,  Lev.  8.  8. 

1  ArinCTsaS.  t34.smote  Aliab  between  joints  and  b. 
Isa.  59.  17.  he  put  on  righteousness  as  a  b. 
Eph.  6.  14.  having  on  the  b.  of  righteousness 
IThess.  5.  8.  putting  on  the  b.  of  faith  and  love 
Rev.  9.  9.  they  had  b.  as  it  were  b.  of  iron 
17.  having  b.  of  fire,  of  jacinth  and  brimstone 
BREATH 
Sgnifies,  [1]  The  air  received  and  discharged  by 
mir  bodies,  by  the  dilatation  and  xompressivn 
of  the  lungs.  Job  9.  18.   [2]  The  life,  I'sal.  146. 
4.  Dan.  5.  23.    [3]  (iod's  powerful  word,  Psal. 
33.  6.     Isa.  II.  4.     [4]  His  anger.  Job  4.  9. 
laa.  30.  33. 
Octj.2.7.  God  breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  6.  oflife 
6.  17.  to  destroy  all  Hesh  wherein  is  the  b.  of  life 
7. 15.  entered  two  and  two  wherein  is  the  b.  oflife 
22.  all  in  whoso  nostrils  was  b.  of  life  died 
Josh.  11.  t  11-  he  destroyed,  there  was  not  any  b. 
8.Sam.22.I6.foundntionsofthe  world  discovered, at 
the  blast  of  theft,  of  his  nostrils,  Psal.  18.  15. 
1  Kings  17.  17.  and  there  was  no  b.  left  in  him 
Job  4.9.  by  the  b.  of  his  nostrils  are  they  consumed 
0.  18.  he  will  not  suffer  me  to  take  trvy  b. 
11.  t  20.  their  hope  shall  be  as  a  puflof  6. 
-  12.  10.  in  whose  hand  is  the  b.  of  all  mankind 
15.  30.  by  the  b.  of  his  mouth  shall  he  go  away 
17.  1.  my  b.  is  corrupt,  my  days  are  extinct 
19. 17.  my  b.  is  strange  to  my  wife,  tho'  I  entreated 
87.  3.  all  the  while  my  b.  is  in  rne,  and  Sp.  of  God 

33.  4.  the  b.  of  the  Almighty  hath  given  me  life 

34.  14.  if  he  gather  to  himself  his  Spirit  and  b. 
37.  10.  by  the  b.  of  God  frost  is  given 

41.  21.  his.*,  kindleth  coals,  and  a  flame  goeth 
r»al.  33.  (i.  all  of  them  made  by  the  b.  of  his  mouth 

104.  29.  tliou  lakest  away  their  b.  they  die 
135.  17.  nor  is  there  any  b.  in  their  mouths 
148.  4.  his  b.  goeth  forth,  he  rclurneth  to  earth 
150.6.  let  every  thing  that  liatji  ft.  praise  the  Lord 
Fxcl.  3.  19.  yea,  they  have  all  one  ft.  all  is  vanity 
y*a.2. 22.  cease  from  man,whoBeft.is  in  his  nostrils 
11.  4.  with  ft.  of  his  lips  will  he  slay  the  wicked 
30.  28.  and  his  ft.  as  an  overflowing  stream  reach 
33.  ft.  of  the  Lord  like  a  stream  of  brimstone 
33.  II.  your  ft.  as  firt:  shall  devour  you 

42.  5.  he  that  giveth  A.  to  the  people  upon  it 
Jer.  10.  14.  an<l  there  is  no  ft.  in  them,  51.  17. 
y.,ani.  4.20.  the  ft.  of  our  nostrils,  the  anointed  ofL. 
£teA.37.5. 1  will  cause  A.to enter  into  you,sliall  live 

6.  I  will  cover  you  with  skin  and  jiiit  ft.  in  you 
8.  there  was  nfi  ft.  in  tliem||'.).  and  say,  come,  Oft. 
10,  and  the  ft.  came  into  them  and  they  lived 
Dan.  5.  23.  (he  (!iid  in  whose  hand  thy  ft.  is 

10.  17.  no  siri;ngth,  neither  is  there  b.  left  in  mo 
Hab.i.  19.  Ihcre  is  no  ft.  at  all  in  midst  oftlie  image 
Jlcts  17.  25.  sieinsr  hi'  givelh  to  all  life  and  A. 
Jam.  2.  t2n.  the  body  without  A.  is  dead 
Rev.  13. 1 15.  he  h;id  [lower  to  ijive  A.  to  the  image 

URKATIIK 
8<^nifies,  [1]  To  draw  breath  naturally,  as  man 
and  beast  do.  Josh.  10.  40.     [21  To  infuse  the 
tout  into  the  body.   Gen.  2.  7.      (3)    To  live, 
breathing  nr  respiration  being  a  sign  oflife. 
Josh.   n.   II.      [4]    To  inspire  with  the  eifls 
and  graces  of  the  Holy  (Ihnst,  Jfihn  20.  22. 
Josh.  11.  11.  there  was  not  any  left  to  ft.  14. 
Job  31.  t  39.  caused  soul  of  the  owners  to  A.  out 
ri.27.12  witnessei  risen,  and  luch  as  A.  out  cruelty 

4a 


BRE 

Cant.  4. 1 6.  till  the  day  ft.  and  shadows  flee  away 
Eiek.  37.  9.  come,  O  breath,  and  A.  on  these  slain 

BREATHED. 
Gen.  2.  7.  God  A.  into  man's  nostrils  the  A.  oflife 
Josh.  10.  40.  but  utterly  destroyed  all  that  A. 
I  Kings  15. 29.  he  laft  not  to  Jeroboam  any  that  b. 
John  20.  22.  he  ft.  on  them,  and  saith,  receive  ye 

BREATHETH,  ING. 
Deut.  20. 16.  thou  shalt  save  alive  nothing  that  A. 
Lam.  3.  56.  hide  not  thine  ear  at  my  A.  at  my  cry 
Jicts  9. 1.  Saul  yet  A.out  threateninjjsand  slaughter 

BRED. 
Exod.  IG.  20.  some  left,  and  it  A.  worms  and  stank 

BREECHES. 
Krod.  28.  42.  thou  shalt  make  them  linen  A.  39. 28. 
Lev.  6.  10.  the  priest  shall  put  on  his  linen  A. 

16.  4.  he  shall  have  the  linen  A.  on  his  tlesh 
Eiek.  44. 18.  they  shall  have  linen  A.  on  their  loins 

BREED. 
Oen.B.  17.  that  they  may  ft.  abundantly  on  the  earth 

BREED. 
DevX.  32. 14.  rams  of  the  A.  of  Bashan  and  goats 

BREEDING. 
Zep^.2.9.  as  Sodom,  even  A.  of  nettles  and  salt-pits 

BRETHREN. 
Men  are  so  called,  [I]  By  being  the  sons  of  one 
father  and  mother,  or  of  either  of  them.  Gen. 
42.  13.     [2]  liy  community  of  nature,  vr  habi- 
tation. Gen.  19.  7.     [3]  JJy  natural  affinity,  or 
by  being  kinsmen,  Gen.  13.  8.     [4]  Uy  regene- 
ration, and  a  professionof  the  same  faith  and 
religion.  Col.  1.  2.     [5]  By  adoption,  John  20. 
17.     [0]  By  office,  1  Chron.  25.  9.    2  Cor.  8.  23. 
Gen.  13.  8.  let  there  be  no  strife,  for  we  be  ft. 
19.  7.  Lot  said,  I  pray  you  A.  do  not  so  wickedly 
24.  27.  Lord  led  me  to  the  house  of  my  master's  A. 
34.  11.  Shechem  said  to  her  father  and  to  her  A. 
25.  Dinah's  ft.  took  each  man  his  sword  and  slew 
42.  .3.  Joseph's  ten  A.  went  down  to  buy  corn 

6.  A.  came  and  bowed  ||  13.  we  are  twelve  ft.  32. 
45. 16.  Joseph's  4.  are  come  II  49.5.  are  A.of  cruelty 
50.  15.  Joseph's  6.  saw  their  father  was  dead 

JVu7H.  27.  4.  give  us  a  possession  among  the  A. 

7.  give  us  a  possession  among  our  father's  A. 

10.  if  he  have  no  A.  give  it  to  his  father's  A. 

11.  ifhis  father  have  no  ft.ye  shall  give  to  kinsman 
Deut.  25.5.  if  ft.  dwell  together  and  one  of  them  die 
Josh.  6.  23.  Rahab  brought  out  her  father  and  A. 

17.  4.  ho  gave  them  an  inheritance  among  the  A. 
Judg.  9.  1.  Abimelech  went  to  his  mother's  A. 

3.  his  mother's  ft.spake  of  him  to  men  of  Shechem 
'iKings  10.  13.  tliey  answered,  weareft.of  Ahaziah 

1  Chron.  12.  2.  there  came  to  David  of  Saul's  A. 
2<).  7.  sonsof  Shemaiah,  whose  A.  were  strong  men 
27.  18.  of  Judah,  Elihu,  one  of  the  A.  of  David 

2  Chron.  21.  2.  he  had  A:  the  sons  of  Jehoshaiihat 
22.  8.  when  Jehu  found  the  ft.  of  Ahaziah 

rsaM33.1.  pleasant  for  ft. to  dwell  together  in  unity 
Frov.  6. 19.  and  him  that  soweth  discord  among  ft. 

17.  2.  shall  have  part  of  the  inheritance  among  A. 

19.  7.  all  the  ft.  of  the  poor  do  hate  him 
Jimos  1.  t 'J-  remembered  not  the  covenant  of  ft. 
Mat.i.  18.  Jesus  saw  two  ft.  ||21.  saw  other  two  A. 

19.  29.  every  one  that  hath  forsaken  houses,  A. 

20.24.  wore  moved  with  indignation  against  two  A. 

22.25.  there  were  with  us  seven  A.  Mark  12.  20. 
23. 8.  one  is  your  Master,  even  Christ,  all  ye  are  ft. 

Mark  10.  29.  no  man  hath  left  house  or  ft.  father, 
mother,  wife  or  childr.  for  mysnke,  Au/ic  18.29. 
30.  shall  receive  a  hundred-fold,  houses,  A. 

Luke  14. 26.  if  any  come,  and  hate  not  children,  A. 
16.2^.  for  I  have  five  A.  that  he  may  testify  to  them 
21.  16.  ye  shall  be  betrayed  by  parents  and  A.       t 

.fohn  21.  23.  this  saying  went  abroad  among  the  A. 

jlr.ts  3.  17  A.  I  wot  that  through  ignorance  ye  did  it 
6.  3.  wherefore  ft.  look  out  among  you  scveif  men 
7.26.  sirs,  ye  are  ft.  119.30.  which  when  the  A.  knew 

10.  23.  certain  A.  from  Joppa  accompanied  him 

11.  12.  moreover  these  si.v  A.  accompanied  mo 
29.  they  determined  to  send  relief  to  the  A. 

12.  17.  go  show  these  things  to  James  and  to  the  A. 
14.2.  made  their  mindnevil-afTeclid  against  the  A. 

15.  1.  certain  men  from  Judea  taught  tho  A. 
3.  and  they  caused  great  joy  to  all  tho  A. 

22.  Barsubas  and  Silas  chief  among  the  A. 

23.  apostles  and  elders  ami  A.  send  greeting  to 
tho  A.  which  are  of  the  Gentiles  in  Antioch 

32.exhortcdthe  ft. with  many  words,!  7'Af.'!.s.5.14. 
33.  were  let  go  in  peace  from  the  ft.  to  apostles 
40.  being  recommended  by  the  ft.  to  grace  of  God 

16.  2:  TimotheuH  was  well  reported  of  by  the  ft. 
40.  when  they  had  seen  the  A.  they  comforted 

17.  6.  they  drew  Jason  and  certain  A.  to  the  rulers 
10.  the  A.  immcdiotely  sent  away  Paul,  14. 

18.  18.  Paul  then  took  his  leave  of  the  A. 

27.  the  A.  wrote  exhorting  to  receive  Apolloj 

20.  32.  now  A.[  commend  you  to(!od  and  hisgriice 

21.  7.  we  came  to  Plolemais  and  sniutrd  the  ft. 
17.  werocorac  to  Jerusalem,  ft.  received  us  gladly 

22. 5.  from  whom  al(u  I  recaived  letters  to  the  A. 


BRE 

Acts  23.  5. 1  wist  not  A.  that  he  was  the  high-prie* 
28. 14.  where  we  found  A.  and  were  desired  to  tarry 

15.  when  the  A.  heaid  of  us,  they  came  to  meet  us 
21.  nor  any  of  the  A.that  came  spake  harm  of  theo 

Rom.  I.  13.  now  I  would  not  have  you  ignorant* 
11.  2.5.  1  Cor.  10.  1.  I  12.  1.  IThess.  4.  13 

7.  1.  know  ye  not  A.  that  the  law  hath  duminioD 

8.  12.  ft.  we  are  debtors,  not  to  the  flesh,  to  live 

29.  that  he  might  be  the  first-born  among  many  b. 
10. 1,  ft.  my  prayer  toGod  for  Isr.  is,  may  be  saved   ^ 
12.  1.  1  beseech  you  therefore  ft.  by  the  merciet   ' 

of  God,  15.  30.  I  16.  17.  1  Cor.  1.  10.  1  16. 
15.  Gal.  4.  12.  Heb.  13.  22. 
t  10.  be  kindly  afli-ctioned  in  love  of  the  A. 
16. 14.  salute  the  A.  which  are  with  them,  CoZ.  4.13. 

1  Cor.  1.  26.  for  ye  see  your  calling  A.  how  that 
2. 1,  and  1  A.  when  I  came  to  you,  came  not  with 

3.  1.  I  A.  could  not  speak  to  you  as  to  spiritual 

4.  6.  these  things  ft.  I  have  in  a  figure  transferred 
7.  29.  but  this  1  say  A.  the  lime  is  short,  15.  50. 
8. 12.  when  ye  sin  so  against  the  ft.  ye  sin  ag.Cbrisit 

9.  5.  and  as  the  ft.  of  the  Lord  and  Cephas 

11.  2.  now  1  praise  you  A.  that  ye  remember  bm 

14.  26.  how  is  it  A.  when  ye  come  together 

15.  6.  after  he  was  seen  of  above  500  A.  at  once 
58.  thereforemy  belovedA.  bestedfast,  Jam. 3. 3. 

16.  11.  for  I  look  for  him  with  the  A. 

12.  I  desired  him  to  come  to  you  with  the  A. 
20.  all  the  ft.  greet  you,  Phil.  4.  21. 

2  Cor.  9.  3.  yet  have  I  sent  the  ft.  lest  our  boasting 
5.  I  thought  it  necessary  to  exhort  the  A. 

II.  9.  the  ft. which  came  from  Macedonia  supplied  . 

20.  I  have  been  in  perils  among  false  ft. 
13.11. finally  ft. farewell, be  perfect,of  good  comfort 
Gal.  1.  2.  all  A.  that  are  with  me  to  the  churches 

2.  4.  because  of  false  ft.  unawares  brought  in 
Eph.  6.  23.  peace  be  to  the  ft.  and  love  with  faith 
Phil.  1.  14.  many  of  the  A.  waxing  confident 
Col.  I.  2.  to  the  saints  and  faithful  A.  in  ("hrist 

1  Thess.i.\.vie  beseech  you  ft.l0.|  5.12.  2TAfaj.2.1. 
10.  indeed  ye  do  it  towards  all  ft.  in  Macedoiiia 

5.  25.  A.  pray  for  us,  2  Thess.  3.  1. 

26.  greet  all  the  ft.  with  a  holy  kiss 

27.  that  this  epistle  be  read  to  all  the  holy  h. 
\Tim.i.&.  put  the  A.  in  remembrance  of  these  things 

5. 1.  intreat  him  as  a  father,  andyounger  men  as  A. 

6.  2.  let  them  not  despise  them  because  they  are  A. 
Heb.  2.  11.  he  is  not  ashamed  to  call  them  A. 

3.  1.  holy  A.  partakers,  consider  the  Apostle 
1  Pet.  1.  22.  unto  unfeigned  love  of  the  A. 

3.8.beof  one  mind, love  as  A.be  pitiful, he  courteous 

1  John  3. 14.  from  death  to  life,  because  we  love  b. 

16.  we  ought  to  lay  down  our  lives  for  the  A. 
3./uA7i  3.  rejoiced  greatly  when  A.  testified  of  truth 

5.  whatsoever  thou  dost  to  the  ft. and  to  strangers 

10.  neither  doth  he  himself  receive  tho  A. 

His  BRETHREN. 
Gen.  n.  22.  and  Ham  told  Ai's  two  A.  without 
2.').  Canaan,  a  serv.  of  servants  shall  be  \.ohisb. 
16. 12.  he  shall  dwell  in  presence  of  his  A.  25.  18. 
27.  37.  his  A.  have  I  given  to  him  for  servants 

37.  2.  Joseph  was  feeding  the  flock  with  Ai'a  b. 
5.  Joseph  ilrcamed  a  dream  ond  told  it  Ai's  b. 

11.  Ai's  A.envied  him,  his  father  observ.  the  saying 

30.  Reuben  returned  toAij  A.and  said,child  isnol 

38.  II.  for  he  said,  lest  be  die  also  as  hi*  A.  did 
44.  .33.  and  let  the  lad  go  up  with  hts  A. 

47.  12.  Joseph  nourished  his  father  nnd  A(.*  A. 

49.  26.  on  the  crown  of  the  head  of  him  that  was 

separate  from  his  A.  Dnit.  33.  16. 

Krfl(/.1.6.Josephdied,  Ai>  A.and  all  that  generation 

2.  II.  Moses  went  out  to  Ai's  A.  and  looked  on  their 

burdens, and  spied  aiiEgypt.sniiling  one  ofAi'jA. 

Afi>.2I.  10.  and  he  that  is  high-priesi  amongAi>A. 

25.48.afierhe  is8old,one  ofAi.?  ft. may  redeem  him 
JVum.  25. 6.  brought  to  Ai,«  A.  a  Midianitish  womaa 

27.  9.  then  shall  ye  give  his  inheritance  to  Ai>  A. 
Deut.  10.  9.  Ijovi  hath  no  part  with  Ai.*  ft. 

17.  20.  that  his  heart  be  not  lifted  up  above  his  A. 
l.-^.  7.  he  shall  minister  as  all  Ai>  ft.  the  Levites  do 
20.  8.  lest  his  ft.  heart  faint  as  well  as  his  heart 

24.  7.  if  a  man  be  found  stealing  any  of  Ai>  A. 
33.  9.  nor  did  he  acknowledge  Ai's  ft.  nor  knew 

24.  let  Aslier  be  blessed  and  acceptable  to  Ai'«  A. 

./udg.  9.  5.  Ahinielerh  slew  Ai*  ft.  being  70  persons 

26.  GanI  cnme  with  his  A.  and  went  to  Plierhem 

."ifi.  which  he  did  to  his  father  in  slaving  his  70  A. 

11.3.  Jephlhah  fled  fromAi«6.  and  dwelt  inTob 

Ruth  4. 10.  name  of  dead  be  not  cut  olf  from  Ai'»  A. 

l.Vnm.16.13. Samuel  anointed  him  in  midst  of  Aij  4. 

22.  1.  when  his  A.  and  father's  house  heard  it 

2  h'ines  9.  2.  make  him  rise  up  from  among  his  ft. 

1  Chron.  4.  9.  Jabcr  more  honourable  than  Ai«  ft. 
5.  2.  for  Judah  prevailed  above  Ai>  A. 
7.22.F,phriiim  moHrned,Ai'.«  A. came  to  comfort  him 

25.  9.  with  his  A.  and  sons  were  twelve 

[.So  to  the  end  of  the  rhapter.'l 

2  rSr.  21.  4.  Jehornm  slew  all  Ai'.i  A.with  the  sword 
K.''rA.]0.3.Mordecai  the  Jew  was  accepted  of  Aia  A 
Uos.  13.  15.  though  he  be  fruitful  among  Ai«  A. 


BRE 


l/ie.5.3  llie  remnant  of /««  b-  shall  return  to  Israel 
MatAiAG.  his  mother  ami  Ais  6.  stood  without,  de- 
siring to  speak  with  him,  JIIark3.3l.LukeS.19. 
JoKn  7.  5.  for  neither  did  his  b.  beheve  in  him 
^cts  7.  13.  Joseph  was  made  known  to  his  b. 
'•Zi.  it  came  into  Moses'  heart  to  visit  his  b. 
25.  for  he  supposed  his  i. would  have  understood 
1  Car.  G.  5.  no  not  one  able  to  judge  between  A(*  b. 
Heb-  2. 17.  it  behoved  him  to  be  made  like  to  his  b 

Men  onrfBRETHKEN. 
^cts  l.lC.mcn  andb.  this  scripture  must  be  fulfilled 
2.^9.  men  andb.  let  me  freely  speak  to  you  of  D. 

37.  to  Peter  and  rest,  men  a7i(i4.what  shall  we  do 
7  2.  and  he  said,  men,  b.  and  fathers,  hearken 

13.  15.  men  andb.  if  ye  have  any  word  ol'e.xhorta 
2u.  men  and  6.  children  of  the  stock  of  Abraham 

38.  be  it  known  to  you,  men  andb.  thro'  this  man 
15.7.mcn  and  b.ye  know  G.made  choice  among  us 

13.  James  answered,  men  a;i(ii. hearken  unto  me 
22.  1.  men,  b.  and  fathers,  hear  my  defence 
23.1. men  andb.l  have  lived  in  all  good  conscience 

6.  men  andb.  I  am  a  Pharijee,  the  son  of  a  Phar. 
28. 17.  men  and  b.  tho'  I  h^ive  committed  nothing 

^fy  BRETiIREN. 
0»7i.29.4.  Jacob  said  to  them,  my  b.  v.hence  be  ye? 
31.  37.  set  it  here  before  my  b.  and  thy  brethren 
37.  16. 1  seek  my  b.  tell  me  where  they  feed  ilocks 
46.31.my  A.and  father's  house  arc  come  to  me,47.l. 
Exod.  4. 18.  let  me  go  and  return  to  my  b.  in  Egypt 
Josh.  2. 13.  they  will  save  alive  my  father  and  viy  b. 

14.  8.  my  b.  made  the  heart  of  the  people  melt 
Judg.  8.  19.  Gideon  said,  they  were  my  b. 

IS).  23.  my  b.  I  pray  you,  do  not  so  wickedly 

1  Sam.  20.29.  let  me  get  away,  I  pray,  and  see  myb. 

30.  23.  then  David  said,  ye  shall  not  do  so,  viy  b. 

2  Sam.  19. 12.  ye  are  my  b-  my  bones,  and  my  flesh 

1  Chr.  28.  2.  David  said,  hear  me,  my  b.  and  people 
JWA.  1.  2.  Hanani,  one  of  my  b.  came  and  men 

4.  23.  I  nor  my  b.  nor  guard  put  off  our  clothes 

5.  10.  I  and  my  b.  might  exact  of  ihem  money 

14.  I  and  my  b.  have  not  eaten  bread  of  governor 
Job  6.  15.  my  b.  have  dealt  deceitfully 

19.13.  he  hath  put  my  J. far  from  me, and  acquaint 
P«.22.22. 1  will  declare  thy  name  to  my  b.Heb.l.Vi. 

69.  8.  I  am  become  a  stranger  to  vty  b.  an  alien 

122.  8.  for  my  b.  and  companions'  sake,  I  will  say 

JlfaM2.48.he  said  to  him,w  ho  are  in7/A.?.VarA-3.33 

49.  behold  my  mother  and  my  b.  Mark  3.  34. 

25.  40.  ye  have  done  it  to  the  least  of  these  my  b. 

28.  10.  go  tell  viy  b.  that  they  go  into  Galilee 
Luke'i*.  21.  my  b.  are  these  which  hear  word  ofGod 
John  20. 17.  go  to  my  b.  and  say  to  them,  I  ascend 
Rom.9.3.  myself  were  accursed  from  Chr.  for  my  b. 
yfl»n.5.10.take  my  6. the  pro])het>!  who  have  spoken 

12.  but  above  all  thing'!,  my  b.  swear  not 

Our  BRETHREN. 
O(>n.31.32.before  our  A.discern  \vhHtistbine,takeit 
JVum.  20.  3.  when  our  b.  died  before  the  Lord 
Dent.  1.  28.  our  b.  have  discouraged  our  hearts 

2  Sam.  19.  41.  why  have  our  ft.  stolen  thee  away? 

1  Chr.  13.2  let  us  send  abroad  to  our  A.  every  where 
Jfeh.  5.  5.  yet  now  our  flesh  is  as  theflesh  of  ourb. 

8.  after  our  ability  have  redeemed  our  ft. the  Jews 
.^cts  15.  36.  let  us  go  again  visit  ourb.  in  every  city 

2  Cor.  8. 23.  or  our  6.  be  inquired  of,  are  messengers 
Rev.  12. 10.  for  the  accuser  of  our  h.  is  cast  down 

Their  BRETHREN. 
A'um.8. 26.  but  shall  minister  with  fAfi'r  A.  in  taber. 
Ueut.]fi.2.  Levites  have  no  inherit,  among  their  b. 

18.  I  will  raise  a  prophet  from  among  their  b. 
Judg.  20.  13.  not  hearken  to  the  voice  of  thrir  ft. 
21.  22.  when  their  A.  come  to  us  to  complain 
2.9am.2.2().bid  people  return  from  following  <Aci>  ft. 
2  A'inirs  23.9.  did  cat  unleav.  bread  amongMci'r  A. 

1  CArr8..32.  thefedweltwilh(Af(r  A.  inJerus.9.38. 

12.  32.  ail  their  A.  were  at  tliei;  commandtncnt 
39.  drinking,  for  their  A.  had  prepared  far  them 

2  CAr.  28.  15.  brought  them  to  (Afir  A.  to  Jericho 
JVVA.  5. 1.  was  agr^nt  cry  against  their  b  the  Jews 

13.  13.  their  office  was  to  distribute  to  their  b. 
Job^.  15.  father gtive  them  inherit,  among  theirb. 
Jer.  41.  8.  for  he  slew  them  not  among  thrir  A. 
Heb.  7.  5.  to  take  tithes  of  people,  that  is  of  their  A. 
Rev.  6. 11.  till  tA'j'r  A.  should  be  killed  as  they  were 

Thy  BRETHREN. 
Ocn.27.29.  be  lord  over  thy  A. let  mother's  sons  bow 

31.  37.  set  it  before  thy  A.  that  they  may  judge 
37. 10. 1  and  thy  ft.  come  to  bow  ouiselves  lathee 

13.  do  not  thy  A.  feed  the  flock  in  Shechem  1 

14.  whether  it  be  well  with  thy  A.  and  the  flocks 
48.22. 1  have  given  to  thee  one  portion  above  thy  A. 
49.  8.  thou  art  he  whom  thy  b.  shall  praise 

Drut.  15.  7.  if  a  poor  man  of  ^Ay  A.  be  within  gates 
17. 15.  from  among  thy  A.flhalt  Ihou  set  king  over 
18.15.  G.  will  raise  up  a  prophet  of<Ay  ft. like  to  me 
24.  14.  not  oppress  the  poor  of  thy  A.  or  stranger 
Josh.i.  18.  thou  shah  bring  thyb.  home  unto  thee 
Jvdo-.  14.3.  no  woman  amnni  daughters  of  «Ay  6. 
1  .f  ?m.  17.  17.  take  for  thy  b.  run  to  camp  to  thy  b. 
18.  look  how  thy  b.  fare,  and  take  their  pledge 
49 


BRI 

25ani.  15.  20.  return,  take  back  thy  ft.  with  tl.«e 
2  Chron.  21. 13.  hast  slain  thy  A.  belter  than  thyself 
Jer.  12. 6.  thy  A.  have  dealt  treacherously  with  ihee 
F.lek.  11. 15.  thy  A.  even  thy  b.  men  of  thy  kindred 
Mat.  12.  47.  behold,  thy  mother  and  thy  b.  gland 
without,  ^WnrA  3.  32.  J.uke  8.  20. 
Lukf  14. 12.  call  not  thy  A.  lest  they  bid  thee  again 
2-J.  32.  when  thou  art  converted  strengthen  Ikyb. 
Rev.  19. 10.  see  Ihou  do  it  not,  I  am  ol  thy  A.  ti.  9. 

Your  BRE'^HREN. 
Cien.  42.  19.  let  one  of  your  b.  be  bound  in  prison 

33.  leave  one  ofyour  A.  here  with  me 
/.eu.  10.  4.  carry  yourb.  from  before  the  sanctuary 

C.  let  j/oiir  A. bewail  the  burning  the  Lord  kindled 
25.  46.  over  your  A.  ye  shall  not  rule  with  rigour 
JVum. 18.6.  behold  I  have  taken  your  A.  the  Levitts 
32.6.  shallY/ourA.go  to  war  and  shall  ye  sit  here? 
Dcut.  i.  16.  hear  the  causes  between  yourb. 
3. 18.  pass  over  armed  before  your  A.  Josh.  1. 14. 

20.  till  Lord  hath  given  rest  to  your  b.  Josh.\.\f). 
JojA.22.3.  ye  have  not  left  your  A.  these  many  days 

4.  and  now  the  Lord  hath  given  rest  to  your  A. 

8.  divide  the  spoil  ofyour  enemies  with  yourb. 
\Kings  12.24.  not  fight  against  your  A.  2  Cir.U.4. 
2CAro7i.  19.  10.  what  cause  shall  come  to  you  of 

yourb.  and  so  wrath  come  upon  you  atiii  your  h. 
28.  11.  deliver  captives  ye  have  taken  ofyour  A. 
30.  7.  be  ye  not  like  your  A.  which  trespassed 

9.  if  ye  turn,  your  A.  shall  find  compassion 
J\''fA.4.14.  and  fight  for  j/our  A.  your  sons  and  wives 

5. 8.  will  ye  even  sell  your  A.  or  shall  they  be  sold  ? 
Isii.  66. 5.  your  A.  that  hated  you,  that  cast  you  out 
20.  they  shall  bring  your  ft.for  an  offering  to  Lord 
Jer. 7. 15.  cast  you  out  as  I  have  cast  out  all  yourb. 
//05.2.1.  say  to  your  b.  Ammi,  to  sisters,  Ruhamah 
Mat.5.i7.  if  ye  salute  your  A. only,  what  do  yc  more 
.^cts  3.22.a  prophet  shall  Lord  raise  ofyour  A.  7.37. 
1  Cor.6.8.  ye  do  wrong  and  defraud  and  thgt  r/our  A. 

1  Pet.  5. 9. same  afflictions  accomplished  in  your  A. 
BRIBE,  S. 

l.Sam.8.3.Samuel's  sons  took  A. and  perverted  judg. 
12.  3.  of  whose  hand  have  I  received  any  A..'^ 
Psal.  26.  10.  and  their  right  hand  is  full  of  A. 
Isa.33.  15.  that  shaketh  his  hands  from  holding  A. 
Jlmos  5. 12.  they  take  a  A.  and  turn  aside  the  poor 

BRIBERY. 
Job  15.  34.  fire  shall  consume  the  tabernacles  of  A. 

BRICK. 
Gen.  11.  3.  let  us  make  A.  they  had  A.  for  stone 
Exod.  1.  14.  they  made  their  lives  bitter  in  A. 
5. 7.  no  more  give  the  people  straw  to  make  6. 16 
Isa.  65.  3.  and  burnclh  incense  on  altars  of  ft. 

BRICKS. 
Exod.  5.  8.  the  tale  of  A.  you  shall  lay  upon  them 

18.  yet  shall  ye  di'liver  the  tale  of  A.  19. 
Isa.  9. 10.  the  6.  are  fallen  down,  but  we  will  build 
BRICK  KILN. 

2  Sam.  12.31.  and  made  them  pass  through  tho  ft. 
Jrr.  43.  9.  hide  great  stones  in  the  clay  in  the  A. 
JVaA.  3.  14.  tread  the  mortar,  make  strong  the  ft. 

BRIDE. 
Isa.  49.  18.  and  bind  them  on  thee,  as  a  A.  doth 

61.  10.  as  a  ft.  adorneth  herself  with  jewels 

62.  5.  as  the  bridegroom  rejoiceth  over  the  b. 
Jer.  2.  32.  or  can  a  A.  forget  her  attire? 

7. 34. cause  to  cease  the  voice  of  the  A.  16.9.  |  25.10. 

33. 11.  shall  be  heard  in  this  place  voice  of  the  A. 
.Joel  2.  16.  and  let  the  A.  go  out  of  her  closet 
.John  3.  29.  he  that  hath  the  ft.  is  the  bridegroom 
Rev.  18.  23.  voice  of  the  A.  heard  no  more  in  thee 

21.  2.  prepared  as  a  A.  adorned  for  her  husband 
9.  I  will  shew  thee  the  A.  the  Lamb's  wife 

22.  17.  and  the  Spirit  and  the  A.  say,  Come 
BRIDE  CHAMBER. 

Mat.  9.  15.  can  the  children  of  the  A.  mourn? 
Mark  2. 19.  can  the  children  of  A.  fast  ?  Luke  5. 34. 

BRIDEGROOM. 
Psal.  19.  5.  as  a  A.  coming  out  of  his  chamber 
Isa.  61. 10.  as  a  A.  decketh  himself  with  ornaments 
62.  5.  as  A.  rejoiceth  over  bride,  so  God  over  thee 
Mat.  9.  15.  can  children  of  bride-chamber  mourn 
while  A.  is  with  them  ?  Mark2. 19.  /,uA-e5.34. 
25.  1.  ten  virgins  went  forth  to  meet  the  A. 

5.  while  the  A. tarried  II 6.  cry  made,A.conieth,  10. 
John  2.  9.  the  governor  of  the  feast  called  the  A. 
3.  29.  he  that  hath  the  bride  is  theft,  but  the  friend 
of  the  A.  rejoiceth  greatly  because  of  the  A. voice 
See  Bridk. 
BRIDLE 
Is  taken,  [1]  Properly, /or  the  rein.'s  or  bit  where- 
by horses,  mules,  ^c.  are  kept  in,  and  made  to 
go  which  pace   and  which  way  their  riders 
please,  Psal.  32.  9.     [2]  Figuratively,   (1)   For 
those  restraints  of  law,  humanity,  or  modesty, 
whereby  people  are  kept  in  awe.  Job  30.  11.  and 
(2)  For  the  restraining  power  and  providence 
of  God,  2  Kings  19.  28.   Isa.  30.  28. 
2Kings  19.28. 1  will  put  my  ft.in  thy  lips,  /ja.37.29. 
.Job  .30.  11.  they  have  let  loose  the  6.  before  me 
41.  13.  who  can  come  to  him  with  his  double  b.t 


BRI 


i 


Ptal.  32.9.  whose  mouth  must  be  held  in  with  a  J7 
39.  1.  I  will  keep  my  mouth  with  a  A. 
Prov.  26. 3.  a  A.  for  the  ass,  a  rod  for  the  feel's  back 
Jsa.  30.28.  there  shall  be  a  A.  in  jaws  of  the  people 
Zceh.  14.  t  20.  on  the  A.  holiness  to  the  Lord 
./am.1.26  if  any  seem  religious  and  ft. not  his  lungM 

3.  2.  and  able  also  to  A.  the  whole  body 
Rev.M.W.  blood  came  out  of  wine-ptess  to  horse  J. 

BRIEFLY. 
Rom.  13.  9.  it  is  A.  comprehended  in  this  saying 
1  Pet. 5. 12.  bySylvanus  a  brother  I  have  written 4 

BRIER 
Is  a  prickly  hurtful  sort  of  plant,  Isa.  5.  6.     To 
which  are  conjpared,  [1]  Jin  enemy,  the  .Assy- 
rian army,  that  molested  the  children  of  Israel, 
Isa.  10.  17.     [2]  Mischievous  and  hurtful  per- 
sons, Ezck.  28.  24.     [3]  Sins,  lusts,  and  cor- 
ruptions, which  spring  from  a  stony  and  un- 
rrgenerated  heart,  Jleb.  6.  8. 
Isa.55.  13.  instead  of  the  A.  come  up  the  myr'.le-tree 
Eiek.'JS.'ii.  shall  be  no  more  a  pricking  A.  to  Israel 
Mic.  "  4.  the  best  of  them  is  as  a  A. 

BRIERS. 
Judg.  8.  7.  then  I  will  tear  your  flesh  with  b. 

16.  he  took  the  elders  of  the  city  and  A. 
Isa.  5.  6.  there  shall  come  up  A.  and  thorna 
7.  23.  it  shall  even  be  for  A.  and  thorns 

24.  because  all  land  shall  become  A.  and  thorna 

25.  not  come  thither  the  fear  of  A.  and  thorns 
9.  18.  wickedness  shall  devour  the  A.  and  thorn* 
10. 17.  it  shall  devour  his  A.  and  thorns  in  one  day 
27.4.  would  set  A.  and  thorns  against  me  in  battle 
32.  13.  on  the  land  shall  come  up  A.  and  thorns 

Ezck.i.G.  son  of  man, tho'  A. and  thorns  be  with  thee 
//cA.6.8.that  which  heareth  ft. and  thorns  is  rejected 

BRIGANDINE. 
.Jrr.  46.  4.  furbish  the  spears  and  put  on  the  ft. 
51.  3.  against  him  that  lifteth  up  himself  in  hi»S. 

BRIGHT. 
Lev.  13.  2.  when  a  man  shall  have  a  A.  spot,  24,  38. 

4.  if  the  A.  spot  be  white  in  the  skin  of  his  flesh 
23.  if  ft.  spot  stay  in  his  place  and  spread  not, 28. 

14.  56.  this  IS  the  law  for  a  scab  and  for  a  A.  spot 

1  Kings  7.  45.  all  the  vessels  Hiram  made  for  the 
housb  of  the  Lord  were  of  A.  bra8.=,  2  CAr.  4. 16. 

.Job  37.  11.  he  scattered  his  A.  cloud 

21.  now  men  see  not  the  A.  light  in  the  clouds 
Caw  <. 5. 14. belly  is  asA. ivory  overlaid  with  sapphires 
.Jer.  51.  11.  make  A.  the  arrows,  gather  the  shielda 
Ezek.}.13.lhe  fire  was  A.  and  out  of  fire  lightning 
21.  15.  the  sword  is  made  A.  it  is  wrapt  up 
21.  for  the  king  of  Babylon  made  his  arrows  A. 

27.  19.  A.  iron  and  cassia  were  in  thy  market 
32.  8.  A.  lights  I  will  make  dark  over  thee 

JVaA.  3.  3.  the  horseman  lifteth  up  the  A.  sword 
Zech.  10.  1.  so  the  Lord  shall  inake  ft.  clouds 
Mat.  17.  5.  behold  a  A.  cloud  overshadowed  them 
Luke  11.  .36.  as  when  the  A.  shining  of  a  canille 
ylcts  10.  30.  a  man  stood  before  me  in  A.  clothing 
Rev.  22.  16.  I  am  the  ft.  and  morning  star 

BRIGHTNESS 
Signifies,  [1]  Light,  or  lucidness,  Isa. 59. 9.  Amos 

5.  20.  [2]  J^'atural  form  and  beauty,  Dan.  4. 
36.  [3]  Royal  dignity,  glory,  and  splendour, 
Ezek.  28.  7. 

2  Sam.  22.  13.  through  the  A.  before  him  were 
coals  of  fire  kindled,  Psal.  18. 12. 

.Job  31.  26.  or  beheld  the  moon  walking  in  b 

Psal.  89.  t  44.  thou  madest  his  ft.  to  cease 

Isa.  59.  9.  we  wait  for  A.  but  we  walk  in  darkness 

60.  3.  and  kings  shall  come  to  the  A.  of  thy  rising 
19.  nor  for  ft.  shall  the  moon  give  light  to  thee 

62.  1.  till  the  righteousness  thereof  go  forth  as  b. 

66.  1 11.  be  delighted  with  the  A.  of  her  glory 
Ezek.  1.  4.  and  a  fire  and  a  A.  was  about  it,  27. 

28.  so  was  the  appearance  of  A.  round  about 
8.  2.  as  the  appearance  of  A.  asthecolour  of  amber 
10.4.  the  court  was  full  of  A.  of  the  Lord's  glory 
2-^.  7.  behold,  strangers  shall  defile  thy  ft. 

17.  thou  hast  corrupted  by  reason  of  thy  b. 
7?a7i.2.31.  this  great  image,  whose  ft.  was  excellent 

4.  .36.  my  honour  and  A.  returned  unto  me 

5.  t  6.  then  the  king's  A.  was  changed,  t9. 
12. 3.  the  wise  shall  shine  as  the  ft. of  the  firmament 

.^mo.5  5.20.  dayof  Lord  shall  be  very  dars  and  no  A. 
Hab.  3.  4.  his  ft.  was  as  the  light,  he  had  horns 
Jicts  26. 13.  light  from  heaven  above  ft.  of  the  srm 
2TAcs.«.2.8.  shall  destroy  with  the  ft.  of  his  rominf 
Heb.  1.3.  who  being  the  ft.  of  his  glory  and  image 

BRIM. 
.Josh.  3. 15.  feet  of  the  priest  dipped  in  A.  of  water 

1  A'i7i^.<!7.26.  J.  wrought  like  A.  of  a  cup,  2  Chr.  4..% 

2  Chron.  4.  2.  he  made  a  molten  sea  from  ft.  to  6. 
John  2.  7.  and  thev  filled  them  up  to  the  A. 

BRIMSTONE. 
fren.I9.24.rainrdonGom.A.and  fire,  /,«*•«  17.29. 
Deut.  29. 23.  the  whole  land  thereof  is  A.  and  salt 
.Job  18.  15.  ft.  shall  be  scattered  on  his  habitation 
Psal.  11.  6.  upon  wicked  he  shall  rain  snares,  firf 
and  A.  and  a  horrible  tempest,  Ezck.  38.  8S 


BRl 


Isa.  30.  33.  breath  of  ihe  Lord  like  a  Btream  of  i. 

34.  9.  and  the  duBt  thereof  turned  into  b. 
R(V.  y.  17-  oul  of  (heir  mouths  issued  fire  and  4. 

18.  the  third  part  of  men  was  killed  by  the  *. 
14.  10.  he  Bhall  be  tormented  with  fire  and  b. 
19.20.casl  into  a  lake  of  tire,  burning  with  4. 2U.  10. 
S1.8.  whoremongers,  and  all  liars,  shall  have  their 

part  in  the  lake  which  burnetii  with  tire  uiid  b. 
BRING. 
Oen.  6.  17.  I  do  i.  a  flood  of  waters  on  the  earth 

19.  two  of  every  sort  shall  lliou  A.  into  the  ark 
9.  14.  when  I  !i.  a  cloud  over  earlh,  the  bow  seen 
18.  IG.  Abraham  did  b   them  on  their  way 

IQ.Lord  may  4. on  Abraham  what  heliaOi  spoken 
5f7.  4.  and  b.  it  to  me  that  1  may  eat,  '25. 
5.  4.  me  venison  1|  1-2.  I  shall  4.  a  curse  on  me 

42.  20.  4.  your  youngest  brother  to  me,  34. 
37.  if  I  b.  \nm  not  to  thee,  43.  9.  |  44.  32. 

43.  16.  4.  lhi-.se  men  home,  slay  and  make  ready 
45. 19.  lake  wagons  and  4.  your  father,  and  come 
48.  9.  4.  them  I  pray  to  ine,  and  I  will  bless  Ihein 

Ezod.  10.  4  else  to-morrow  I  will  4.  the  locusts 
11.  1.  yet  will  I  4.  one  plague  more  on  Pharaoh 
13.5.  it  snail  be  when  the  L.oid  shall  4.  thee,  11. 

18.  19.  that  thou  inayest  4.  the  causes  to  God 

21.  6.  his  master  shall  4.  him  to  the  judges 

22.  13.  if  it  be  torn  in  pieces,  4.  it  for  witness 
2;t.  4.  tliuu  shall  surely  4.  it  back  to  him  again 

19.  first  of  first-fruilB  of  thy  land  shall  4.  34.20. 

20.  I  will  send  un  Angel  to  4.  thee  into  the  place 

35.  5.  whoso  is  of  a  willing  heart,  let  him  4. 
3C.  .'5.  the  peojile  4.  much  more  than  enough 

Lev.  5.  7.  if  he  be  not  able  to  4.  a  lamb,  1 1.  1 12.  8. 
8.  and  he  shall  4.  them  to  the  priest,  li. 
16.  12.  shall  b.  firo  and  incense  wilhin  the  vail 
17. 5.  that  Israel  may  4.  their  sacrifices  to  the  Ld. 
JVum.  8.  I),  and  thou  shall  4.  the  Levites,  10. 
14.  8.  if  the  Lord  delight  in  us,  then  he  will  4.  us 
16.  because  the  L  was  not  able  to  4.  Veut.'XZri. 

24.  my  servant  Caieb,  him  will  I  4.  into  the  land 

16.  17.  b.  before  the  Lord  every  man  his  censer 

20.  12.  ye  shall  not  4.  this  congregation  into  land 

32.  5.  give  this  land,  and  4.  us  not  over  Jordan 
Dtul.  1.  17.  the  cause  too  hard  for  you,  4.  it  to  me 

7.  1.  when  the  Lord  shall  4.  thee  Into  lift  land 

21.  12.  then  thou  shall  4.  her  home  to  lliy  house 

22.  2.  then  thou  shall  4.  it  unto  thine  own  house 
30.  12.  4.  it  to  us,  that  we  may  hear  and  do,  13. 

33.  7.  hear.  Lord,  and  4.  Judah  to  his  people 
1  Sam.  1.22.  till  child  be  weaned,  then  I  will  4.  bin 

9.  7.  then  said  Saul,  what  shall  we  b.  the  man? 

23.  4.  the  portion  1  gave  thee,  of  which  I  said 

IL  12. 4.  the  men,  thai  we  may  put  them  to  death 

20. 8.  for  why  ehouldest  thou  4.  me  lo  thy  father  ? 

S  .Sam. 3. 12.  my  hand  with  thee,  to  4.  Israel  to  thee 

13.  except  thou  4.  Michal  when  thou  comesl 
14. 10.  whosoever  sailh  ought  to  thee,  4.  him  to  me 

19.  11.  why  are  ye  last  lo  4.  the  king  back  1 

1  Kings  3.  24.  and  the  king  said,  4.  uie  a  sword 

8.  32.  the  wicked,  lo  4.  his  way  on  his  head 
t  47.  if  4.  back  to  their  heart,  2  Cliron.  G.  1  3' 

13.  18.  4.  him  hack  with  thee  to  thine  house 

17.  11.  4.  me  a  morsel  of  bread  in  thine  hand 

20.  33.  then  he  said,  go  ye  4.  him 

2  Kings  2.  20.  4.  me  a  new  cruse,  and  put  salt 
4.  6.  4.  yet  a  vessel  ||  41.  4.  meal  and  cast  it 
C.  19.  I  will  h.  you  to  the  man  whom  ye  seek 

.  Chron.  13.  f  3.  lei  us  4.  about  the  ark  of  our  God 
Ifi.  29.  4.  an  offering  and  come  before  him 

21.  2.  4.  the  number  of  them  lo  iiie,  that  I  may 
2CAron.31.10.  ^in^;ethe  people  begiin  toft.olferiiigs 
JVcA.  13.  18.  did  not  our  Goil  4.  this  evil  on  us? 
Job  6.  22.  did  I  say  4.  unto  nic,  or  give  a  reward 

10.  9.  will  thou  4.  mo  into  the  dusl  again  1 

14.  4.  who  can  4.  a  clean  thing  out  of  an  unclean  7 

18.  14.  it  shall  4.  him  lo  the  king  of  terrors 
30.  23.  for  I  know  thou  will  4.  me  lo  death 
33.  30.  to  4.  back  his  soul  from  the  pit 

Ptial.  43.  3.  let  them  4.  me  to  thy  holy  hill 
60.  9.  who  will  4.  me  into  strong  city?  108.  10. 
72.  3.  the  mountains  shall  4.  pearp  to  the  people 
94.  23.  he  shall  4.  on  them  Iheir  own  initpiily 
Prov.  29.  8.  scornful  men  A.  a  city  into  a  snare 
£cW.3.22.  who  shall  4.  him  to  see  what  shall  be? 

11.  9.  know  that  (Jod  will  4.  thee  into  jiidCTiient 

12.  14.  G'lil  sluill  4.  every  work  into  jiidgmcnl 
Cant.  8.  2. 1  wool  I  4.  thee  into  my  mother's  liousi 
Ua.  7.  17.  Loril  sluill  4.  on  thee  ami  my  people 

14.  2.  the  people  shall  4.  them  lo  ihtir  pliice 
15.9.  for  I  will  4.  more  upon  Dirnon,  lion><  on  him 
Id.  t3.  4.  i-oiinsel,  i-xecule  judgMierit,  niiike  thy 

25.  12.  shall  he  4.  to  the  ground,  even  lo  the  dusl 
45.  21.  tell  ye  and  4.  them  near,  let  thiTii  Inkc 
40.  13.  I  4.  near  my  righteousnest,  it  nol  lie  far  off 
56.7.  evi'n  them  will  I  4.  lo  my  holy  niounlnin 
58.  7.  nnd  that  thou  4.  the  poor  to  thy  house 
CO.  17.  for  brass  I  will  4.  gold,  for  iron  4.  silver 
66.  4.  I  will  4.  their  fears  upon  them 
fcr.  3.  14.  I  will  take  you  and  A.  you  to  Zion 

10.  24.  Qot  in  anger,  lest  thou  4.  ino  to  nothiug     )  20.  M.  I  w 
SO 


BRl 

Jir.ll.S.  I  will  4.  on  them  all  the  words  of  this  cov. 
17.  18.  4.  upon  them  day  of  evil,  and  destroy  llieni 
31.  8.  I  will  4.  them  from  the  north  country 
3-2.  42.  so  1  will  4.  on  them  all  the  good  promised 
'S.i.  U.  behold  I  will  4.  it  health  and  cure 

11.  them  that  shall  4.sacrificeofpraise  into  house 
49.  5.  behold,  I  will  4.  a  fear  upon  thee 

J.am.  1.  1 16.  that  should  4.  back  my  soul  is  far 
y.ick.  6.  3.  I,  even  I,  will  4.  a  sword  upon  you 

11.  9.  I  will  4.  you  oul  of  the  midst  thereof 

20.  15.  that  I  would  Slot  4.  them  into  the  land 
21.29. 1  will  4.  on  Ihe  necks  of  them  that  are  slain 
23.  22.  I  will  4.  them  against  tliee  on  every  side 
34.1.3.  I  will  4.  them  lo  their  land,  36.  24.  1 37. 21. 
38.  17.  that  I  would  4.  thee  against  Ihein 

Hos.  2.  14.  I  will  allure  and  4.  her  to  wilderness 
Mmos  i.  1.  4.  and  let  us  drink  ||  4.  4.  your  sacrifices 
Mic.  1.  15.  yet  will  I  4.  an  heir  to  thee 
'/.ech.  8.  8.  1  will  4.  them,  and  they  shall  dwell 
Jilal.  1.  t7.  ye  4.  polluted  bread  lo  mine  altar 

3.  10.  4.  all  the  tithes  into  the  store-house 
Mat.  2.  13.  be  thou  there  till  I  4.  Ihue  word 

5.  23.  therefore  if  thou  4.  thy  gift  lo  the  altar 

17.  17.  4.  him  hither  lo  me,  Mark  9.  19. 
21.2.  ye  shall  find  an  ass  and  a  coll,  loose  ihem  and 

4.  them  to  me,  Mark  11.  2.  Luke  19.  30. 
Mark  7.  32.  and  they  4.  lo  him  one  that  was  deaf 
I.uke  2.  10.  for  1  4.  you  good  tidings  of  great  joy 
8. 14.  choked  with  tares,  and  4.  no  fruit  to  perfect. 

12.  11.  when  they  4.  you  into  the  synagogues 
.John  10.  16.  other  sheep,  them  also  I  must  4. 

14.  26.  anil  4.  all  things  to  your  remembrance 

18.  29.  rilate  said,  what  accusation  4.  you? 

21.  10.  4.  of  the  fish  which  ye  have  now  caught 
Acts  5.  'is.  ye  intend  to  4.  this  man's  blood  on  us 

7.  6.  that  they  should  4.  them  into  bondage 
9.  2.  he  might  4.  them  bound  to  Jerusalem,  21. 

22.  5.  I  went  to  Damascus  to  4.  them  bound 

23.  10.  commanded  to  4.  Paul  into  the  castle 
17.  4.  this  young  man  to  the  chief  captain 

1  Cor.  1. 19.  i  will  4.  to  nothing  the  understanding 
28. things  that  are  not,  4.  lo  nought  things  that  are 

4.  17.  shall  4.  you  into  remembrance  ol  my  ways 

8.  27.  keep  under  my  body,  I  4.  it  into  suhjeclion 
16.6.  thai  ye  may  4. me  on  my  journey  whither  I  go 

2  Cor.11.20.  ye  suffer,  if  a  man  4.  you  into  bondag 
(ial.  3.  24.  our  school-master  to  4.  us  to  Christ 
\Tlicss.i.  14.  them  that  sleep  will  God  4.  with  him 
2  Tim.  4.  11.  take  Mark  and  4.  him  with  thee 

1  Pet.  3.  18.  suffered  thai  he  might  4.  us  lo  God 
2.fu/in  10.  if  any  come  and  4.  nut  this  doctrine 
W.lohn  6.  whom  if  thou  4.  forward  on  their  journey 
Rev.  21.  24.  and  kings  do  4.  their  glory  lo  it 

26.  they  shall  4.  the  glory  of  nations  into  it 

See  Home,  Hither. 

BRINB  again. 

Gen.  24.  5.  must  I  4.  thy  son  again  to  the  land  ? 

6.  bewarethou,  that  thou  4.  nol  my  sona^ain,8 

2.S.  15.  I  will  b.  thee  again  into  this  land,  48.  21. 

37.  14.  if  well  with  bietliren,  and  4.  word  again 

42.  37.  deliver  him,  and  I'll  4.  him  to  thee  again 

Kr.od.  23.  4.  shall  surely  4.  il  back  to  him  again 

.,Vi/jn.l7.10.  4.  .Aaron's  rod  again  before  testimony 

22.  8.  lodge  this  night,  and  I'll  4.  you  word  again 

/)rut.\.1'i.  4.  us  word  again  what  way  wemu^tgo 

22.  1.  in  any  rase  4.  them  again  to  thy  brother 

28.  08.  the  Lord  shall  4.  thee  into  Kgypt  again 

Judg.  11.  9.  if  ye  4.'me  home  again  '"  ''o'" 

19. 3.  her  husband  arose,  and  went  to  4.  her  acrain 

2  Sam.  12.  23.  can  I  4.  him  again,  1  shall  go  lo  him 
14.  21.  4.  the  young  man  Absalom  again 
1.')  8.  if  the  Lord  shall  4.  me  again  to  Jerusaleiii 

25.  he  wil,l  4.  ine  again  and  sliew  nic  it     [6.25. 
1  Kings  H.  34.  forgive  and  4.  Ihem  n/rin'Ti,  2  C/ir. 

12.  21.  he  assembled  Judah  againsi  Israel  lo  4. 
kingdom  again  to  IJehoboam,  2r4i-.  11.  1. 

1  Chron.  13.3.  let  us  4.  again  lli(^  nrk  of  our  God 
21.  12.  advixe  what  word  I  shall  4.  again  to  him 

2f /ir«n.24.  19.  he  sent  prophets  to  4.lhem  again 

yell.  9.  2*.!.  that  mightesl  4.  them  attain  lo  thy  law 

/'»rti.f>8.22.  I<ord  said,  I  will  b.agnin  from  Ilashnn, 
I  will  A.  again  my  people  from  the  depths  of  sen 

Trwr. 19.24.  not  so  much  as  4. it  lo  his  mouth  again 
26.  15.  grieveth  him  to  4.  it  again  to  his  mouth 

Avrt.38. 8. 1  will  4.  again  the  shadow  of  the  degrees 
40.  8.  4.  it  again  to  mind,  O  yi^  transgressors 
4'.l.  5.  sailh  the  Lord,  In  4.  J:icid)  again  to  him 
.W.S.  shall  see  when  the  Lord  shall  4.  again  /ion 

.hr.  12.  15.  I  wilt  reiurn  and  4.  tlicm  again,  .50. 19. 
15. 19.  if  ihnu  wilt  return,  then  will  I  4.  then  airnin 
10. 15. 1  will  4.  them  ag.  lo  Iheir  land,  24. 0.  |  32.37. 
23.  3.  I  will  4.  them  again  into  their  folds 
28.  3.  in  two  years  1  will  4.  again  the  vessels 
4.  I  will  4.  again  to  this  place  Jcconiah,  0. 
30.3.1  will  h. again  ciiptivilyof  mv  people  Isr.  nnd 
Ju.lah,  18.  I  31.  23.  F.iek.  39.' 25.  ./7mr..»  9. 1 1. 
48.  47.  ypl  I  will  4.  again  Ihe  rnplivi'v  of  Moal 


BRl 

Kick.  34. 16. 1  will  4.  a^ain  that  wiiich  was  diivcB 
Ztph.  3.  20.  at  that  time  I  will  4.  you  again 
Zecli.  10.  6.  I  will  4.  them  again  to  place  them 

10.  I  will  4.  Iheni  again  out  of  land  of  Kgypt 
Mat.  2.  8.  4.  me  word  again  that  1  may  woriihip 

Ste  Captivity. 
BRING  dawn. 
Gen.  42.  38.  4.  down  my  grey  hairs,  44.  29,  3L 
43.  7.  he  would  say,  4.  your  brother  down,  44.  21 
45.  13.  ye  shall  haste  and  4.  duun  my  father 
iJcut.  9.  3.  he  shall  4.  them  down  belore  Ihy  face 
ludg.~.i.b.  them  down  lo  the  water  and  I  will  try 

1  6'ain. 30. 15.  canst  4. me  down,  I  will  4.  thee  dmon 

2  Sam.  22.28.  eyes  on  Ihe  haughty  to  4.  them  dovn 

1  Kings  1.  33.  Solomon  4.  him  down  to  (jihon 

2.  9.  his  hoary  head  4.  thou  down  v,\\\t  blood 
Psal.  18.27.  wilt  save  afilicted,  4.  down  high  looki 

55.  23.  shall  4.  them  down  to  pit  of  desiruclion 
Isa.  25.  &  thou  shall  4.  down  the  noise  of  strangeta 
1  l.he  shall  b.down  their  pride  together  with  spoil* 
12.  the  high  fort  of  thy  walls  shall  he  4.  duton 
63.  6.  I  will  4.  down  their  strength  to  llie  earth 
7cr.49.16. 1  will  4.  thee  down  from  thence,  Obad.A. 
51.  40. 1  will  4.  them  down  like  lambs  to  slaughter 
£zcA;.  26. 20.  when  I  shall  4.  thee  down  with  them 
28.  8.  they  shall  4.  thee  down  to  pit,  anil  shall  die 
Hos.l.  12. 1  will  4.  them  down  as  fowls  of  heaven 
.Joel  3.2. 4.  them  doujn  to  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat 

t  U.  the  Lord  shall  4.  down  thy  mighty  ones 

.'Imos  3. 11.  he  shall  4.  down  thy  strength  trom  thee 

9.2.  liio'  climb  to  heaven,  Ihence  will  4.them(iaion 

Obad.  3.  sailh  in  his  heart,  who  shall  4.  mcdoicnJ 

Jicis  23. 15.  that  he  4.  him  down  to  you  to-morrow 

20.  the  Jews  desire  thou  wouldsl  4.  down  Paul 

Kom.  10.  6.  that  is  lo  4.  Christ  down  from  above 

See  Evil. 

BRING  forth. 

(?en.l.lL  let  earlh  4. /or tA,  24.||20.  waters  6./orlA 

3.  16.  in  sorrow  thou  shall  b.  forth  children 
18.  thorns  and  thistles  shall  il  b.  forth  lo  thee 

8.  17.  b.  forth  every  living  thing  that  is  with  thee 
9. 7.  b.  forth  abundantly  in  the  earlh  and  multiply 
38.24.  .Iiidah  said  4.  her/oriA,nnd  let  her  be  burnt 
£3-0^.3.10.  that  thou  mayest  b.  forth  my  people  In. 

11.  who  am  I,  that  I  should  b.  forth  Israel? 

7.  4.  that  I  may  b.  forth  my  armies  and  people 

8.  3.  the  river  shall  b.  forth  frogs  abundantly 
18.  magicians  did  so  to  4./ortA  lice,  but  could  not 

f.rv.  24.  14.  b.  forth  him  that  hath  cursed,  23. 
25.  21.  it  shall  b.  forth  fruit  for  three  years 
20.111.  yeshall  eat  and  b. forth  old,  because  of  new 
JV««i.20. 8.  shiilt  b.  forth  to  them  water  out  of  rock 
Df  «M4.26.  thou  shall  b.  forth  all  lithe  of  increase 
17.  5.  then  shall  thou  b.  forth  that  man  or  woman 
22. 15.  b. forth  thetokens  oflhedamsel'svirginhy 
.losh.  2.  3.  b.  forth  the  men  that  are  come  to  thee 
Judg.  0.  18.  till  I  come  and  b.  forth  my  present 
19.  22.  b.  forth  Ihe  man  that  came  to  thy  house 

2  A*i»^sl0.22.4./ortA  vestments  for  the  worshipper* 

19.3.  and  there  is  no  strength  to  4. /or<A,  /sa.  37.3. 

23.4.  to  b.  forth  all  the  vessels  were  made  for  Baal 
F.zra  1.8.  those  did  Cyrus  b.  forth  by  Mithredath 

10.  t3.  make  a  covenant  to  b.  forth  oiir  wives 

Job  14.9. it  will  bud  and  b. forth  boughs  like  a  plant 

15. 35.  they  conceive  mischief,  and  b.  forth  vanity 

38.32.canst  lliou  b.  forth  Mazzarolh  in  his  season? 

39.  1.  knii  west  thou  when  wild  goats  4. _/'nrr  A?  2,3 

40.  20.  surely  the  mountains  4.  him /or/A  food 
Psal.  25  1 15.  he  shall  b.  forth  my  feet  out  of  the  net 

37.  0.  he  shall  b.  forth  thy  righteousness  as  light 
92.  14.  lluy  shall  still  b.  forth  fniit  in  old  age 
lot.  14.  that  he  may  b. forth  food  out  of  the  earth 
144.  13.  that  our  sheep  may  b.  forth  thnusandf 

Prov.S.  1 35.  whoso  findeth  me  shall  h.  forth  favoui 
27. 1.  Ihiiu  knowest  not  what  a  day  may  b.  forth 

fsa.  5. 2.  he  looked  that  it  should  b.  forth  grapes,  4. 
23.  4.  saying,  I  travail  not,  nor  h.  forth  children 
33  1 1 .  ye  shall  conceive  chaff,  nnd  b.  forth  stubble 
41.21.  4. /(jr(A  your  strong  rAeons,  sailh  the  King 

22.  let  them  b.  forth  and  shew  what  shall  happen 
42.  1.  he  shall  4. /orf A  judgment  to  the  (ienlilei 

3.  he  sh:ill  4.  forth  judgment  unto  truth 
43.8.  h.  forth  bilnil  people  that  hnvo  e.ves,Bnd  dear 

9.  let  them  4. /crrA  their  witnesses  that  they  may 
45  8.)et  earth  open,  and  let  them  h.  forth  salvation 
,'i.5.  10.  wntereth  the  earth,  nnd  maketli  it  b.forik 
.VI.  4.  Ilievi  onceive  misrhicf,  and  h.  forth  iniquity 
(■i5.  9.  iinil  I  will  b.  forth  n  seed  out  of  Jacob 

23.  not  labour  in  vain,  nor  b.  forth  for  trouble 
6(i.8.sliallllie  earth  be  made  lo4./oi7A  ill  onedayT 

9.  shnll  I  bring  to  birth,  nnd  not  cmise  to  b-ftrlkf 
Jrr.  12.  2.  they  grow,  yea  they  b.  forth  fruit 
51.44  I'll  4. /oifA  out  ofmouthwlKit  lie  swallowed 
F:rk.  12.  4.  then  slinlt  h.  forth  thy  slulTby  day 
17.23.  and  it  shall  b.  forth  boiighs  nnd  bear  fruit 
00.  0.  lo  b.  Ihom  forth  of  Ihe  land  of  F.sypt 
18.  I  will  4.  Ihein  .f-ir^A  out  of  Ihe  country 


49.6.4.rtVa'n  the  cnplivitv  of  .Aminon||39.orf;iain     28. 1.^.  Iherefnre  will  I  A./or«A  a  firo  in  the  midst  of 

f:ia.l0..53.whenI4.ni''.theirrnpt>vitv,T  willA.a^'.i   38.  4. 1  will  4.  ihee/»rfA  Ihy  armv  aed  horsemen 

4.  Of  am  the  captivity  of  Egypt  47. 12.  shall  b.  forth  now  fruit  accord  iiig  to  nionlli* 


BRI 

H03.9. 13.  but  Ephraim  shall  b.  forth  hiscliildren 

l(i  Uiough  thoy  b.  f.  yet  will  1  slay  beloved  I'ruil 

JHic  4.  lU.  be  in  pain  and  labour  to  b.  /.,  O  Zion 

7.  9.  he  will  b.  me  forth  to  tlie  light 
Zeph.  i.2.  before  the  decree  b.  forth  the  day  pass 
Zech.  'S.  8.  1  will  b.  forth  my  servant  the  Branch 

4.  7.  shall  b.  forth  the  head-stone  with  shuutiugs 

5.4.  6. /ort/t  a  curse,  and  it  shall  enter  the  house 
Mat.  1.  'I'i.  behold,  a  virgin  shall  b.f.  a  son,  '21. 

3.  6.  b.  f.  fruit  meet  for  repentance,  Luke  'A.  8. 

7. 18.  ^ood  tree  cannot  b.  f.  evil  fruit,  Luke  6. 43. 
Mark  4. 20.  b.  f.  fruit,  some  thirty  fold,  some  sixty 
Luke  i .  31 .  A./,  a  son,  and  shall  call  bis  name  Jesus 

8.  15.  having  heard  word,  keep  it,  and  b.  f.  fruit 

15.  2-2.  b.  forth  the  best  robe  and  put  it  on  him 
John  15.  2.  purgeth,  that  it  may  b.  f.  more  fruit 

16.  I  ordained  you,  that  you  should  b.f.  fruit 
19.  4.  I  b.  \\\\a  forth  to  you  that  ye  may  know 

Acts  12.  4.  after  Easter  to  b.  him  /.  to  the  people 
Rom.  7.4.  that  we  should  b.  forth  fruit  unto  God 
5.  the  motions  of  sin  to  b.f.  fruit  unto  deaih 
BRING  in. 
Ezod.G.S.  I  will  b.  you  into  the  land  I  did  swear 
15. 17.  shall  b.  in  and  plant  them  in  the  mountain 

16.  5.  on  the  sixth  day  prepare  that  they  b.  in 

23.  23.  my  Angel  shall  go  before  and  b.  thee  in 
JVam.  14.  31.  your  little  ones,  them  will  I  4.  iji 
£  Chron.  24.  9.  they  made  proclamation  to  b.  in  to 

the  Lord  the  collection  Moses  laid  on  Israel 
28.  13.  ye  shall  not  b.  in  the  captives  hither 
Jer.  17.  '24.  b.  in  no  burden  on  tiie  sabbalh-day 
/>an.2.'24.  A.  me  in  before  the  king,  and  I  will  shew 
5.  7.  the  king  cried  to  b.  in  the  astrologers 

9.  24.  to  b.  in  everlasting  righteousness 
Hag.  1.  6.  ye  have  sown  much  and  b.  in  little 
Luke  5.  18.  sought  means  to  6.  him  in  and  lay  him 

14.  21.  b.  in  hither  the  poor,  the  maimed,  and  halt 
8  Pet.  2.  1.  who  privily  b.  in  damnable  heresies 

BRING  out. 

G«n.l9.5.  6. them  out  to  us  that  we  may  know,8.12. 

40. 14.  make  mention,  and  b.  me  out  of  tliisiiouse 

50.  21.  God  will  visit  and  b.  you  out  of  this  land 

Ezod.  fi.  6.  I  will  b.  you  out  from  under  the  burden 

13.  gave  them  a  charge  to  b.  the  childr.  of  Israel 

out  of  Egypt,  '20, 27.  |  7.  5. 1 12.  51.  .Ter.  31 .  32. 

32. 12.  for  mischief  did  he  b.  them  out  to  slay  them 

Deut.  21. 19.  lay  hold  and  b.  him  out  to  the  elders 

22.21.  A.  out  the  damsel  ||  24. 4.  both  out  to  the  gale 

34. 11.  sliiill  b.out  the  pledge  abroad  unto  thee 

Josh.  6.  22.  4.  out  thence  llahaband  all  she  hath 

10.  '2'2.  b.  out  those  five  kings  out  of  the  cave 
Jadg.  6.  30.  4.  out  thy  son  that  he  may  die 

19.  24.  them  I  will  b.  out,  and  humble  ye  them 
Psal.  25.  17.  O  b.  thou  me  out  of  my  distresses 

142.  7.  4.  my  soul  out  of  prison,  that  I  may  praise 

143.  11.  O  Lord,  4.  my  soul  out  of  trouble 
Isa.  42.  7.  to  4.  out  the  prisoners  from  the  prison 
/cr.  8.1.  shall  4.  out  the  bones  of  the  kings  of  Judah 

38. 23.  4.  out  thy  wives  and  children  to  Chaldeans 

F.iek.  11.7.  but  I  will  4.  you  forth  out  of  midst  of  it 

20.  34.  I  will  4.  you  out  from  the  people,  34.  13. 
41.  accHjit  you,  when  I  4.  you  out  from  people 

24.  6.  b.  it  out  piece  by  piece,  let  no  lot  fall 
^mos  6.  10.  that  burneth  him  to  4.  out  the  bones 
.ffcts  17.  5.  sought  to  4.  them  out  to  the  people 

BRING  to  pass. 
Oen.  41.  32.  thedream,  G.  vyill  shortly  4.  it  to  pass 
50.20.  to  4.  to  p.  as  at  this  day,  to  save  people  alive 
Psal.  37.  5.  trust  in  hirn,  and  he  shall  4.  it  t.opass 
Isa.  28.  21.  and  4.  to  pass  his  act,  his  strange  act 
46.11.  I  have  spoken,  I  will  also  b.  it  to  pass 

BRING  up. 
Oen.  46.  4.  and  I  will  also  surely  4.  thee  up  again 
Exod.  3.  8.  and  to  4.  them  up  out  of  that  land 

17.  I  have  said,  I  will  4.  you  up  out  of  affliction 
33.  12.  see,  thou  sayest  to  me,  b.up  this  people 

f^Tum.  14.  37.  men  that  4.  up  evil  report  on  thi;  land 
20.  25.  4.  up  Aaron  and  his  son  to  mount  Hor 
Deut.  22. 14.  4.  up  an  evil  name  on  her,  and  say 
ludg.  li.  13.  did  not  the  Lord  4.  us  up  from  Egypt 
I  Sarn.  19.  15.  4.  him  up  in  the  bed,  that  I  may  slay 
28.  II.  whom  shall  I  4.  up,  he  said  4.  me  up  Sam. 
i  Sam.  2.  3.  his  men  did  David  b.  up  every  man 
6.2  to  4.  up  from  thence  the  ark  of  God,  1  Kings 
8. 1,  4.  1  Chron.  13. 6.  |  15.  3, 12, 14, 25. 
2  Chron.  5. 2,  5. 
I  Chron.  17.  5.  since  I  did  b.  up  Israel  to  this  day 
Ezra  1.11.  did  Sheshbazzar  4.  up  with  them 
JVfh.  10.  38.  shall  4.  up  tithes  to  the  house  of  God 
/ia.23.4. 1  travail  hot,  nor  b.  forth  children,  nor 
do  I  nourish  up  young  men,  nor  4.  up  virgins 
Jer.  27.  22.  then  will  I  4.  them  up  and  restore 
Eiek.  16.  40.  shall  b.  vp  a  company  against  thee 
23  46.  I  will  4.  up  a  company  upon  them 
26.  19.  when  I  shall  4.  up  the  deep  upon  thee 
2!'.  4.  will  4.  thee  up  out  of  midst  of  thy  rivers 
32.  3.  a  company  shall  4.  thee  up  in  my  net 
.37.  6.  I  will  4.  i/p  fle.«h  on  you,  and  cover  you 
//oi.9.12.though  they  4.  up  children,!  will  bereave 
dmos  8. 10.  I  will  4.  up  sackcloth  upon  all  loini 
51 


BRO 

Rom.  10.  7.  to  b.  up  Christ  again  from  the  dead 
Eph.  6.  4.  b.  them  up  in  the  nurture  of  the  Lord 

BKINGERS. 
2  Kings  10.  5.  the  4.  up  of  ciiildren  sent  to  Jehu 

BRING  EST. 
./o4  14.  3.  and  4.  inc  into  judgment  with  ihee 
Isa.  40.9.  O  Jerus.  that4.  goodtidings,lil't  up  voice 
Jlcts  17.  20.  for  thou  4.  strange  things  to  our  ears 

BUINGETH. 
Exod.  6.7.  who  4.  yououtfrom  under  the  burden 
Lev.  11.45.  I  am  the  Lord  that  4.  you  out  of  Egypt 

17.  4.  4.  it  not  to  the  door  of  the  tabernacle,  9. 
Deut.  8.  7.  the  Lord  4.  thee  into  a  good  land 

1  Sam.  2.  6.  be  4.  down  to  the  grave,  and  4.  up 
7.  Lord  maketh  poor,  he  4.  low,  and  lifteth  up 

2  Sam.  22.  48.  that  4.  down  the  people  under  me 
49.  and  that  4.  me  Ibrth  from  mine  enemies 

Job  12.  6.  into  whose  hand  God  4.  abundantly 
22.  he  4.  out  to  light  the  shadow  of  death 

19.  29.  wrath  4.  the  punishments  of  the  sword 
28.  11.  the  tinng  that  is  hid  4.  he  forth  to  light 

Psal.  1.  3.  that  4.  forth  his  fruit  in  his  season 
14.  7.  when  the  Lord  4.  hack  the  captivity,  53.6. 
33.  10.  Ld.4.  the  Counsel  of  the  heathen  to  nought 
37.  7.  the  man  who  4.  wicked  devices  to  pass 
08.  6.  he  4.  out  them  that  are  bound  with  chains 

Psal.Wl.^J&.  and  4.  them  out  of  their  distresses 
30.  so  he  4.  them  to  their  desired  haven 
135.7.  4.wind  out  of  treasuries,7cr.  10.13.  |  51. 16. 

Pruv.  10.  31.  the  mouth  of  the  just  4.  forth  wisdom 

16.  30.  moving  his  lips  he  4.  evil  to  pass 

18.  10.  a  man's  gift  4.  him  before  great  men 
19. 26.  a  son  that  causeth  shame,  and  4.  reproach 

20.  26.  a  wise  king  4.  the  wheel  over  them 

21.  27.  much  more  when  he  4.  it  with  a  wicked 
20.  15.  but  a  child  left,  4.  his  mother  to  shame 

21.  that  delicately  4.  up  liis  servant  from  a  child 

25.  the  fear  of  man  4.  a  snare,  but  whoso  trusts 

30.  33.  4.  forth  butter,  4.  blood,  4.  forth  strife 

31.  14.  like  ships,  she  4.  her  food  from  afar 
Eccl.  2.  6.  to  water  the  wood  that  b.  forth  trees 
Isa.B.l.  Lord  4.  on  them  the  waters  of  the  river 

26. 5.  4.  down  them  that  dwell  on  high,  4.  to  dust 
40.23.  that  4.  the  princes  to  nothing,  he  makes 

26.  that  4.  out  their  host  by  number 
43. 17.  which  4.  forth  the  chariot  and  horse 
54.  16.  the  smith  that  4.  forth  an  instrument 
61.  11.  for  as  the  earth  4.  forth  her  bud 

Jer.  4. 31.  anguish  of  her  that  4.  forth  her  first  child 
Ezek.  29.  16.  which  4.  iniquity  to  remembrance 
Hos.  10.  1.  Israel  4.  forth  fruit  to  himself 
Hag.  1.  11.  drought  on  tliatwhich  ground  4. forth 
Mat.  3. 10.  every  tree  that  4.  not  forth  good  fruit  is 
hewn  down,  and  cast  into  fire,  7. 19.  Lukc'i^. 
7.  17.  even  so  every  good  tree,  4.  forth  good  fruit 
12.35.  a  good  man  outofheart4.forth  good  things, 
and  an  evil  man  4.  forth  evil  things,  Luke  6. 45. 

13.  23.  4.  forth  some  a  hundred  fold,  some  sixty 
52.  who  4.  out  of  bis  treasure  things  new  and  old 

17.  1.  Jesus  4.  them  up  into  a  high  mountain 
Mark  4.  '28.  the  earth  4.  forth  fruit  of  herself 
I^uke  6.  43.  a  good  tree  4.  not  forth  corrupt  fruit 
./o/j7i  12. '24.  if  it  die,  it  4.  forth  much  fruit,  15  5. 
Col.  1.6.  gospel  4.  forth  fruit,  as  it  doth  also  in  you 
Tit.  2.  11.  the  grace  of  God  that  b.  salvation 
Heb.  1.  6.  4.  in  the  first-begotten  into  the  world 

6.  7.  the  earth  4.  forth  herbs  meet  for  them 
Jan;.1.15.  lust  4.  forth  sin,  and  sin  4.  forth  death 

See  Tidings. 

BRINGING. 
Exod.  12.  42.  to  be  much  observed  for  6.  them  out 
36.  6.  so  the  people  were  restrained  from  4. 
jVuot.  5. 15.  an  offering  4.  iniquity  to  remembrance 

14.  36.  by  4.  up  a  slander  upon  the  land 
2  Sam.  19.  10.  speak  ye  not  of  4.  the  king  back,  4.3.  | 

1  KingslO.'2-i.  navy  4. gold  and  silvor,2CA7on.9.21. 

2  Kings  i}.  12.  I  am  4.  such  evil  on  Jerusalem 
JVcA.  13. 15.  some  on  the  sabbath  4.  in  sheaves 
Psal.  126.  6.  rejoicing,  4.  his  .sheaves  with  him 
Jer.  17.  26.  4.  burnt  offering.^,  4.  sacrifices  of  praise 
Eiek.'iO.^.  I  made  myself  known  in  4.  them  out 
Dan.  9. 12.  his  word  by  4.  upon  us  great  evil 
Mat.  21.  43.  to  a  nation  4.  forth  the  fruit  thereof 
JV/arA-2.3.  4.  one  sick  of  the  palsy  borne  of  four 
Luke  24.  1.  A.  the  spices  which  they  prepared 
Jicts  5.  16.  a  multitude  4.  sick  folks 
Rom.  7.23.  4.  me  into  captivity  to  the  lawof  sin 
2  Cor.  10.  5.  and  4.  into  captivity  every  thought 
//c4.2.10.  in  A.  many  sons  untogloiy  tomake  Capl. 

7.  19.  but  the  A.  in  of  a  better  hope  did 
2  Pet.  2.  5.  4.  in  the  flood  on  the  world  of  ungodly 

BRINK. 
Gm.  41.  3.  stood  by  the  other  kine  on  the  4.  of  river 
Exod.  2.  3.  laid  the  ark  in  flags  by  the  river's  4. 
7. 15.  shall  stand  by  the  river's  4.  when  he  comes 
Deut.  2.  36.  from  Aroer  by  the  4.  of  the  river 
.losh.  3.  8.  \*hen  ye  are  come  to  the  A.  of  Jordan 
Ezc&.47.6.  caused  me  return  to  the  4.  of  the  river 

BROAD. 
Kxitn.  18. 38.  make  censers,  4.  plates  for  coveting 


BRO 

J^um.  10.39.  n)ake  4.  plates  for  covering  of  altar 

jVt'A.  3.8.  Uzziel  and  Uananiah  repaired,  and  ihej 

foi  tilled  Jerusalem  to  the  4.  wall,  12.  3li, 

7.  t4.  the  city  was  4.  in  spaces,  the  people  few 
./o4  36. 16.  removed  out  of  the  strait  into  a  4.  plac« 
Psal.  119.  96.  thy  commandment  is  exceeding  4. 
Cant.  3.2.  and  in  the  4.  ways  1  will  seek  him 
Isa.  33.  21.  the  Lord  will  be  a  place  of  A.  rivers 
Jtr.  5.  1.  know  and  seek  in  the  4.  plai;LS  thereof 

51.  58.  the  4.  walls  of  Babvlon  shall  be  broken 
JVaA.  2.  4.  the  chariots  shall  juslle  in  the  4.  ways 
Mat.  7. 13.  4.  is  the  way  that  luadeth  to  deslruclioa 

23.  5.  they  make  4.  their  |)hylacleriesaiideiilarg« 

BROADER. 
Job  11.  9.  the  measure  thereof  is  4.  than  the  sea 

BROIDERED. 
Exod.  28. 4.  make  a  robe,  a  4.  coat,  a  mitre,  a  girdla 
Kiek.  16.  10.  I  clothed  thee  also  with  A.  work 
13.  and  thy  raiment  was  of  silk  and  A.  work 
18.  tookest  thy  A.  garments  and  coveredsl  them 

26.  16.  the  princes  shall  jmt  otf  their  4.  gurmenti 

27.  7.  linen  with  A.  vi nrk  irom  Egypt  to  be  thy  sail 

16.  they  occupied  in  thy  fairs  with  4.  worii 
24.  thy  merchants  in  blue  clothes  and  4.  work 

1  Tim.  2.  9.  that  wohicn  adorn  not  with  4.  hair 

BROILED. 
Z,uA«24.  42.  they  gave  him  a  piece  of  a  4.  fish 

BROKEN. 
Gen.  17.  14.  he  hath  A.  my  covenant,  P^uZ.  55.20 
76(1.24.5.  I  33.  8.  Jer.  11.10 
/>ci'.6.28.earthen  vessel  wherein  sodden, shall  be  b. 
15.  12.  the  vessel  that  he  touched  shall  be  4. 

21.  19.  or  a  man  that  is  4.  footed,  or  A.  handed 
'20.  that  hath  his  stones  4.  let  him  not  otfer 

22.  2'2.  blind,  4.  or  maimed,  ye  shall  not  otfer,  34. 
26.  13.  and  I  have  A.  the  bands  of  your  yoke 

26.  when  1  have  A.  the  slafl'of  your  bread 
JiTum.  15. 31.  because  he  hath  A.  his  commandment 
Judg.  5.  22.  then  were  horse-hoofs  4.  by  prancings 
16.9.  he  brake  thewilhs,as  a  thread  of  tow  is  b. 
1  Savi.  2.  4.  tho  bows  of  the  mighty  men  are  4. 
2Sa7«.22.  35.  that  a  bow  of  steel  is  A.  Psal.  18.34 
1  Kings  '22.  48.  the  ships  were  A.  at  Ezion-geber 
1  CArun.  14.  II. God  hath  A.  in  upon  mine  enemies 
2CAroji.  20.  37.  Lord  hath  A.  thy  works,  ships  4. 

32.  5.  also  he  built  up  all  the  wall  thai  was  A. 
/o4  4.  10.  the  teeth  of  the  young  lions  are  4. 
7.5.  my  skin  is  4.  and  become  loathsome 

10.  12.  I  was  at  ease,  but  he  hatii  4.  me  asunder 

22.  0.  tlie  arms  of  the  fatherless  have  been  4. 

24.  '20.  and  wickedness  shall  be  4.  as  a  tree 
31.  22.  and  let  mine  arm  be  4.  from  the  bone 
38.  15.  and  the  high  arm  shall  be  4. 

Psal.  3.  7.  thou  hast  4.  the  teeth  of  the  ungodly 
31.  12.  I  am  forgotten,  I  am  like  a  4.  vessel 
34. 18.  the  Lord  is  nigh  inem  of  a  4.  heart,  51. 17. 

20.  he  keepelh  his  bones,  not  one  of  them  is  b. 
37. 15.  their  bows  shall  be  4.  ||  17.  armsshall  be  b, 
38.  8.  I  am  feeble  and  sore  A.  1  have  roared 
44.  19.  tho'  thou  hast  4.  us  in  the  placeof  dragoM 
51.  8.  that  the  bones  thou  hast  4.  may  rejoice 

17.  the  sacrifices  of  God  are  a  4.3pirit,acontrito 
60.  t  1-  thou  hast  cast  us  ofl',  thou  hast  4.  us 

2.  hast  made  the  earth  to  tremble,  thou  hast  6.  it 
69.  20.  reproach  hath  4.  my  heart,  and  I  am  full 
107. 16.  for  he  hath  4.  the  gates  of  brass  and  barf 
109.  16.  that  he  might  even  slay  the  4.  in  heart 
124.  7.  the  snare  is  4.  and  we  aie  escaped 
147.  3.  he  healeth  the  4.  in  heart,  and  bindethup 
Prov.  6. 15.  suddenly  shall  he  be  4.  without  remedy 
ll.t  15.  thatissurety  for  a  stranger,  shall  be  sore  b, 

13.  t20.  a  companion  of  fools  shall  be  4. 

15.  13.  but  by  sorrow  of  the  heart  the  spirit  is  4 
17.  22.  but  a  A.  spirit  drieth  the  bones 

25.  19.  is  like  a  A.  tooth  and  a  foot  out  of  joint 
Eccl.  4.  12.  and  a  threefold  cord  is  not  quickly  b, 

12.  6.  or  the  golden  bowl  be  4.  or  pitcher  be  4. 
Isa.  5.  27.  nor  the  latchcl  of  their  shoes  be  4. 

7.  8.  within  sixty-five  years  shall  Ephraim  be  b 

8.  15.  many  among  them  shall  fall  and  be  b. 

9.  4.  for  thou  hast  4.  the  yoke  of  his  burden 

14.  5.  the  Lord  hath  4.  the  staff  of  the  wicked 
29.  because  the  rod  of  him  that  smote  tliee  is  b 

19.  10.  they  shall  be  4.  in  the  purposes  thereof 
21.  9.  all  graven  images  he  hath  4.  to  the  ground 
28. 13.  that  they  might  fall  backward  and  be  4. 

33.  8.  ho  hath  4.  covenant,  he  regardeili  no  maa 
20.  nor  shall  any  of  the  cords  thereof  be  4. 

36.  6.  lo,  thou  trustest  in  the  slafl'of  tlii.s  A.  reed 

42.  t  4.  he  shall  not  fail  nor  be  4.  till  wo  have  so; 

Jer. 2. 13.  hewed  out  4.  cisterns  that  hold  no  water 

16.  the  children  have  4.  the  crown  of  thy  head 

20.  of  old  I  have  4.  thy  yoke,  and  binsl  bands 

5.  5.  these  have  4.  thy  yoke,  and  burst  thy  bonds 

10.  20.  all  my  cords  are  A.  my  children  gone 

11.  16.  kindled  a  fire,  and  the  branches  of  it  areft 
14.  17.  for  the  virgin-daughter  of  my  people  is  4. 
22.128.  is  this  man  Coniah  a  despised  4.  idol  1 

23.  9.  mine  heart  is  4.  because  of  the  prophets 
98.  2.  I  have  4.  the  yoke  of  the  king  of  Bab)'lov 


BRO 

JtT.  28.  13.  Hananiah,  Ihou  hast  b.  the  yokes  of 
3.1. 21. then  may  also  my  covenant  he  A.  witli  David 
18.17.  how  is  ihe  ."irong  statTA.  and  beaulilul  rod  ? 

25.  the  arm  ut'Moab  is  b.  saith  the  Lord 

3rf.  tor  I  have  6.  Moab  hkea  vessel,  wherein  is  no 
SO.  17.  ihis  Nubuchadjie/.zar  hath  b.  Isracl'K  bones 

23.  the  hainincrofwhule  earth  out  asunder  iiiidA. 
51.55.  Babyh>n,  every  one  oftheii  bows  is  b. 

58.  the  broad  walls  of  Babylon  shall  be  utterly  A. 
l.am.  'J.  9.  he  hath  destroyed  and  A.  her  bars 
3.  4.  he  hath  A.  my  bones  |{  Iti.  he  hath  A.  my  teeth 
^zct.G.l.your  altars, and  your  images  shall  be  A  G. 

9.  because  I  am  A.  with  their  wlmrish  heart 
17.  19.  and  my  eovenant  that  he  haih  A. 

lit.  12.  her  strong  rods  were  A.  and  withered 
26.2.  aha,  she  is  A.  that  was  the  gales  of  tlie  people 
27.  'Jfi.  the'east-wind  hath  A.  thee  in  Ihe  seas 
34.  the  time  when  thou  shall  be  A.  by  the  seas 

30.  '21.  I  have  A.  the  arm  of  I'haraoh  king  of  Egypt 
22. 1  will  break  the  strong  and  that  which  was  A. 

31.  Vi.  his  lioughs  are  A.  by  all  Ihe  riversof  land 
3°2.'28.  be  A.  in  the  midst  of  the  uneircumciscd 
34.  4.  nor  have  ye  hound  up  that  which  was  b. 

16.  and  1  will  hind  uj)  that  which  was  A. 
27.  when  I  haie  A.  the  bands  of  their  yoke 
44.  7.  and  ihey  have  A.  my  covenant 
Dan.  2.  42.  so  kingdom  partly  strong,  and  partly  A 
8.  8.  when  he  was  strong,  the  great  horn  was  A. 
22. now  that  being  A.  whereas  four  stood  up  for  it 
25.  but  he  shall  be  A.  without  hand 
]1.  4.  his  kingdom  shall  he  A.  and  shall  be  divided 
2"2.  with  Ihe  armsofa  flood  be  overflown  and  A 
//u»'.5.l  1.  Ephraiin  is  oppressed  and  A.  in  judgment 
Juntih  1.  4.  so  that  the  ship  was  like  to  be  A 
Zcih.  11.11.  and  it  was  A.  in  that  day,  and  so  poor 

If),  a  shepherd  shall  not  heal  that  which  is  b. 
Mat.  15.  37.  took  up  of  the  A.  ment,  Mark  8.  8. 
21.  44.  tall  on  lliis  stone,  shall  be  A.  Luke  20.  18. 
I. like  12.39.  not  have  siifTcred  his  house  to  be  A. 
John  5. 18.  because  he  had  nut  only  A.  the  sabbath 
7.23.  that  the  lawof  .Mosesshould  not  be  A. 
10. 3.5.  word  ofG.  oame.nnd  scripture  cannot  he  A. 
19. 31.  .lews  h.sought  Pilate  their  legs  might  he  A. 
.3().  script  iri^  fill  tilled, a  bone  of  him  shall  not  be  A. 

21.  1 1.  for  all  so  many,  yet  was  not  the  net  h. 
^rt.i"0.  11.  had  A.  bread  and  talked  a  long  while 

27.  35.  gave  thanks,  when  he  had  A.  it  he  began  to 
41.  but  the  hinder  part  was  A.  with  the  waves 

1  Cor.  11.24.  th  s  is  my  body  which  is  A.  for  you 
/iUB.  2.27.  as  ven^idsof  a  potter  shall  they  be  A. 

BROKEN  down. 
/,rr. 11.35.  oven  or  ranges  A. </.  for  they  are  unclean 
IKinf^s  18.  3(1.  repaired  altar  of  Lord  that  was  A.rf. 

2  Kings  11.  f).  keep  the  watch,  that  it  be  nolA.rf. 

2  ('Avon.  33. 3.  built  high  places  Hezekiah  had  A.  d. 

3.J.  7.  .losiah  had  A.  '/mm  the  altars  and  groves 
^rA.  1.3.  the  wall  nf  Jerusalem  is  A.  d.  gates  burnt 

2. 13.  and  I  viewi'd  the  walls  which  were  A.  r/. 
Pfal.  80.  12.  why  hast  thou  then  A.rf.  her  hedges 

89.  40.  thou  hast  A.  down  all  his  hedges 
f'ror.  21.  31.  Ihe  stone-wall  thereof  was  A.  down 

25.2^.  hath  no  rule  over  h'S  spirit,  like  a  city  A.  rf. 
Jaa.  H).  H.  h  ive  A.  rf.  the  principal  plants  thereof 

22.  10.  the  houses  have  ye  A.  d.  to  fortify  the  wall 
24. 10   city  ol  confusicm  is  A.  d.  every  house  shut 

10.  the  earth  is  utterly  b.  down,  it  is  dissolved 
Jer.  4.2r..  cities  were  A.'d.  ||  48.  20.  Moab  A.  d.  39. 
Kick.  30.  4.  and  her  foundations  shall  bt-  A.  down 
Jorl  1. 17.  the  h-irns  are  A.  d.,  the  corn  withered 
Eph.".  14.  Christ  hath  A.  d.  middle  wM  between  us 

miOKF.N  forth. 

Orn.  30.  t  30.  and  it  is  now  A.  /.  lo  a  multitude 

38  29.  how  hast  thou  A./.  ?  breach  be  on  thee 

2  Sam.  5.  '20.  the  Lord  hath  A./,  oii  »;jine  enemies 

BROKEN  in. 
1  Chron.  14.  11.  Ond  hath  A.  in  on  mine  enemies 

BROKEN  off. 
Job  17.  11.  mv  days  are  past,  my  purposes  are  A.  off\ 


BRO 

Mat.  24. 43.  not  havesuflcred  his  house  to  be  b.  up 
Mark  2.4.  when  they  had  A.  roof  u/j  they  let  down 
jJcts  13.  43.  when  ihe  congregation  was  A.  vp 

BROKEN-HEAKTKU. 
Isa.  01. 1.  Lord  sent  me  to  hind  up  the  b.-hearltd 
Luke  4.18.  to  heal  b.-hearted,lo  preach  deliverance 

BROOD. 
Lukr  13.34.  as  a  hen  gathers  her  J.  under  her  wings 

BROOK. 
G^fn.  32.23.  he  took  them  and  sent  them  over  the  A. 
/,(•«.  23.  40.  take  willows  of  the  A.  and  rejoice 
JVum.  13.23.  came  to  A.  Eshcol  and  cut  a  branch 
24.  called  A.Eshcol  becaust  of  cluster  of  grapes 
Dcut.2.  13.  get  over  the  A.  Zcred,  went  over  A.  14. 
9.21.  and  I  cast  the  dust  thereof  into  the  A. 

1  .Sum.  17.  40.chosefive  smoolh  stonesoufof  the  A. 
30.  9.  David  and  (i(H)  men  came  lo'the  A.  Besor 

2  Sam.  15.23.  the  king  jtassed  over  the  A.  Kidron 
17.  20.  they  be  gone  over  the  A.  of  water 

1  A'inn-«2.37.  be  on  theday  thou  passestoverthe  A. 
15. 13.  idol  burntby  the  A.'Kidron,  2  CAron.  15. 16. 
17.3.  get  hence,  hide  thyself  by  the  A.  Cherelh,  5. 

6.  the  ravens  brought  bread,  he  drank  of  the  A. 
18.40.  Elijah  brought  them  to  Ihe  A.  Kishon 

2  Kiiigi^i'i.  6.  he  burnt  the  grove  at  the  A.  Kidron 
12.  cast  (lust  into  the  A.  Kidron,  2  CAron.  30.  14. 

2  Chron.  20. 16.  ye  shall  find  them  at  end  of  the  A. 

29. 16.  the  Levites  carrii^  it  to  the  A.  Kidron 

32.  4.  much  people  gathered  and  stopt  the  A. 
JVf'A.  2. 15.  went  up  by  the  A.  and  viewed  the  wall 
.lob  6.  15.  my  brethren  dealt  deceitfully  as  a  A. 

40.  22.  the  willows  of  the  A.  compass  him  about 
P.sa/.  83. 9.  do  to  them  as  to  Jabin  at  the  A.  Kison 

1 10.7.  he  shall  drink  of  the  A.  in  the  way,  therefore 
Prov.  18.  4.  well-spring  of  wisdom  as  a  flowing  A. 

30.  t  17.  the  ravens  of  the  A.  shall  pick  it  out 
Isa.  15.7.  shall  carry  away  to  the  A.  of  the  willows 
.fer.  31. 40.  all  fields  to  A.  Kidron  be  holy  to  I.,ord 
John  18. 1.  went  with  his  di.seiples  over* A.  Cedron 

BROOKS. 
JV«m.21.14.what  hedid  in  Red  sea  and  A.  of  Arnon 
15.  and  at  the  stream  of  the  A.  that  goeth  to  Ar 
Deut.H.T.  to  a  landof  A.  of  water  and  fountains 
2.>--am.23  30.  of  the  A.  of  Gaash,  1  CAron.  11.32. 
1  h'ings  18.5.  Ahab  said,  go  unto  all  A.  of  water 
./oh  G.  15.  and  as  the  stream  of  A.  they  pass  away 

20.  17.  he  shall  not  see  the  A.  of  honey  and  butter 
22.  24.  then  shall  lay  up  gold  as  stones  of  the  A. 

Psal.A^i.  I.  as  the  hart  pantelb  after  the  water-A. 
/sa.19.6.  A. of  defence  shall  be  emptied  and  dried  up 

7.  the  paper-reetis  by  the  A. by  the  mouth  of  the  A. 
and  every  thing  sown  by  the  A.  shall  wither 

6.  all  they  that  cast  angle  into  the  A.  shall  lament 
BROTH. 
./i/i/n-.  6.  19.  Gideon  put  the  A.  in  a  pot,  brought  it 
20.  the  angel  said,  pour  out  the  A.  and  he  did  so 
/4'a.65.4.  A.  of  abominable  things  is  in  their  vessels 
BROTHER. 
See  Signification  on  Brkthrkn. 
f?fn.9.5.  at  hand  of  every  man's  A. will  I  require  life 
24. 29.  Rebekah  had  a  A.  whose  name  was  Lalian 
.53.  gave  also  to  her  A. and  mother  precious  things 
29.  12.  Jacob  told  Rachel  he  was  her  father's  A. 
43.6.  why  dealt  you  so  ill  with  :r.e,  p.s  lo  tell  ye  had 
a  A.  the  man  asked,  have  ye  another  A.  ?  44.19. 
Dent.  25.  .5.  her  husband's  A.  sliiill  go  in  to  her 
.Jndg.  9.24.  their  blood  laid  on  .Abimelech  their  A. 

21.  6.  Israel  repented  them  (or  Benjamin  their  A. 
.Job  1.  13.  were  eating  in  their  elder  A.  house,  18. 

.30.29.  I  am  a  A.  to  dragons,  a  companion  to  owls 
Pror.  17. 17.  and  a  A.  is  born  for  adversity 
18.9.  he  that  is  slothful  is  A.  to  him  that  isa  waster 
19.  a  A.  ofTended  is  harder  to  be  won  than  a  city 
24.  there  isa  friend  that  slicketh  clo.serthan  a  A. 
27.  10.  bettor  a  neighbour  near  than  a  A.  far  oft" 
Keel.  4.  8.  yea  he  hath  neither  child  nor  A. 
/cr.9.4.  trust  not  in  any  A.  for  every  A.  will  supplant 
F.iek.  44. 25.  for  A.  they  may  defile  themselve 


/.»«.  27.11.  when  hooL'hs  are  withered  shall  be  b.  off  Mai.  1.2.  was  not  Esau  Jacob's  A.  ?Siiith  Ihe  Lord 


Horn.  II.  17.  aiirl  if  some  of  the  branches  he  b.off 

20.  because  of  nnbelief  they  were  A.  off  19. 

BROKEN  out. 

/.«).  13.20.  nlnsMcofleprosv  A.  oi(<oftheboil,25. 

BKOKEN  rn.of  to  pircea. 
1  Sam.  2.  1(1.  adversaries  of  Lord  shall  be  A.  in  p 


Mat.  10. 21.  A.  shall  deliver  up  the  A.  Mark  13.  12. 
Mark  12.  lO.ifa  man's  A. die  and  leave,  /.ufri"  20.28, 
John  11.  2.  Mary,  whose  A.  I,ttzuru8  was  sick 

19.  Jews  came  to  comfort  them  concern,  their  b. 
^ets9.  17.  A.  Saul,  receive  Ihv  sight,  2'2.  13. 
12.^2.  he  killed  Jas.  the  A.  of  John  with  Ihe  sword 


i  Chron.  25.  12.  cast  them  from  rock,  were  A.  in  p.     21.20.  Ihou  scest,  A.  how  many  thousands  believe 
F-inlf".).  10.  thou  hast  A.  Rahab  in  p.  as  oneslain    Worn.  16.23.  and  Qiiartus  a  A.sahitelh  you 
Isa.  8.  !(.  asaor'iate  ye  people,  ye  shall  be  b.  in  p.     1  Cor.  5.  II.  if  any  "lan  cnlli'd  a  A.  he  a  fornicator 
.30.  14   break  it  as  a  potter's  vessel  thai  is  A.  in  p.     6.  (i.  b.  goeth  lo  law  with  A.  before  unbelievers 
/rr..')0.2.Meri><laeh  is  A. in  pi><:r.i, her  ima^'es  A.in/>.     7.  12.  if  any  A.  hath  a  wife  that  belicvelh  not 
/.'nn.2.  35.  bra«s,  silver,  gold  b.to  pieces  t<igi'lher;      15. aA. or  sister  is  not  underbondage  in  such  cases 


f/r>.?.8.r..hiitihecalf<if.-^ainnria«hallbeA.  inpirrr* 
Mark  5.4.  had  been  hoiiii'l,  and  fetters  been  A. in  p. 

BROKEN  up 
(lev~.  11.  nil  the  fciuntaiiis  of  the  gieal  deep  A.i/p 
2  Kln|Ts'i:^.\  cilv  Jems  ilemA.  i/p,./rr  39.2.  |  .')'2.7. 
2CAr«n.2l.7.sons  of  Alhaliah  had  A  up  house  of  G. 
Pron.  3.20.  hv  his  kn!)wlodge  the  depths  are  b.  up 
Jer.  37.  II.  when  the ortnvof  Chaldeans  was  A.  up  flen.  25.  26.  and  after  that  came  his  A.  out 
tlie.  2.  13.  they  have  A.  »  >  and  passed  the  gate    .    38.  9.  lest  that  he  should  give  seed  to  his  b 

sa 


8.11.  thro'  thy  knowledge  shall  the  weak  A.  iierish 
2  dr.  8.  IH.  and  we  have  sent  with  him  the  A. 
2  Thrss.  3.  6.  that  ye  withdraw  from  every  A. 

15.  count  not  an  enemy,but  admonish  him  as  nA. 
Philem."!.  bowels  of  saints  are  red  eshetl  by  thee,  A. 

16.  hut  above  a  servant,  a  A.  beloved  lo  mo 
«M BROTHER 


BRO 

(7cn.42.38.  his  b.  Is  dead,  and  he  is  Icrt  alone,  14.30. 

F.xod.  32. 27.  slay  every  man  his  A.  and  comiianied 

Lev.  21.  2.  for  his  father  or  Ai«  A.  he  may  he  defiled 
JVum.G.  7.  shall  not  make  himself  unclean  forAi>6. 
iJeul.  15.  2.  not  exact  it  of  his  neighbour  or  Ai*  A. 

19.  19.  as  he  had  thought  to  have  done  to  his  b. 

25.6.  the  first-born  shall  succeed  in  iiameof  Ai>  A. 

28.  54.  his  eye  shall  be  evil  toward  his  b. 
./w(/«-.9.21.Jotham  fled  forfear  of  Abimelech  Ai*  b 
2  .Sam.  3.  27.  smote  him  for  blood  of  Asanel  his  b. 
1  Kings  1. 10.  but  Solomon  his  b.  he  called  not 
JVeh.  5.  7.  you  exact  usury  every  one  ii(  his  b. 
Psul.  49.  7.  none  can  by  any  means  redeem  his  b. 
Isa.  3.  6.  when  a  man  shall  take  hold  of  Ais  A. 

9.  19.  people  be  as  fuel,  no  man  shall  spare  Ai>4 
19.  2.  they  shall  fight  every  one  against  his  A. 
41.(1.  every  one  said  to  his  A.  be  of  good  courage 

.ler.  13.  t  14.  I  will  dash  a  man  against  Ais  A. 

31.34.  teach  no  more  every  man  Ai«  A.  Heb.8.\l. 

34.  9.  that  none  serve  himself  of  a  Jew  his  b. 
14.  let  ye  go  every  man  his  A.  a  Hebrew 
17.  in  proclaiming  liberty  every  one  to  his  b. 
Kiek.  18.  18.  because  he  spoiled  Ais  A.  by  violence 

33.  30.  speak  every  one  to  Ais  A.  saying,  come 
//os.l2.3.Jacoh  took  Ais  A.  by  the  heel  in  the  womb 
.iniBsX.W.  because  he  did  pursue  Ais  A.  with  sword 
Mic.  7. 2.  they  hunt  every  man  Ais  A.  with  a  net 
Hag.  2.  22.  every  one  by  the  sword  of  Ais  A. 
ZfcA.7. 9.  and  shew  mercy  every  man  to  Ais  A. 

10.  let  none  imagine  evil  against  AisA.  in  heart 
Mai. '2.  10.  why  deal  treacherously  against  Ais  A.? 
.4/u«.5.22.  whoso  is  angry  and  sayeth  Ilacn  to  Ais  b. 

18.  .35.  my  Father  do  also  to  you  if  ye  from  your 
hearts  forgive  not  every  one  AisA.lheirtrespasses 

22.24.  raise  seed  to  Ais  A.  Mark  12.19.  Luke  20.28. 
25.  having  no  issue,  left  his  wife  lo  Ais  A. 
.lohn  1.  41.  he  findclh  Ais  A.  Simon,  and  saith  to  him 
Horn.  14  13.  or  an  occasion  to  fall  in  Ais  A.  way 
1  T'Afss.4.6.that  no  man  defraud  Ais  A. in  any  matter 
./«m.4.11.  speakelh  evil  of  Ais  A.  and  judge  I  h  his  b. 
I. John  2.  9.  in  the  light,  and  hateth  Ais  A.  II. 
10.  he  that  loveth  Ais  A.  ahidcth  in  the  light 
3.  10.  neither  he  that  loveth  not  Ais  A.  14. 
12.  not  as  Cain,  who  was  of  that  wicked  one, and 
slew  Ais  A. because  Ais  A. works  were  righteous 
1.5.  whoso  hateth  Ais  A.  is  a  murderer,  4.  20. 

1  .John  4.21.  he  who  loveth  God,  love  Ais  A.  also 
5.  16.  if  any  see  Ais  A.  sin  a  sin  not  to  death 

Mtj  BROTHER. 

Gen.i.Q.  Cain  said,  1  know  not, am  Imjj  b.  keeper? 
20.  5.  herself  said,  he  is  my  A.  13.  1  A'in^s  20.  32. 
27.41.  Esau  said,  then  will  I  slay  my  b.  Jacob 
29.  IS.Laban  said  to  Jacob,becan8e  thou  art  7nyb. 

.Jiidg.  20. 2.3.  to  battle  against  Benjamin  my  A.  28. 

2  .Sam.  1.  26.  distressed  for  thee,  my  A.  Jonathan 
13. 12.  nay  my  A.  do  not  force  me,  do  not  Ihis 

1  Kings  13.  30.  they  mourned,  saying,  alas  my  b. 
Psal.3a.14.  I  behaved  as  though  he  had  been  myb 
Cant.S.  1.  O  that  thou  wert  as  vnj  A.  that  sucked 
.Jer.  22. 18.  they  shall  not  lament,  saying,  ah  my  b. 
Mat.  12.  .50.  same  is  my  A.  and  sister,  Mark  3.  35. 

18.21.  Lord,  howofl  shall  my  A. sin  against  mel 
/.ir/.c  12.  13.  speak  to  my  A.  that  he  divide  inherita. 
./nAnll.21.  if  hndst  been  here,  my  A.  had  not  died 
lCor.P.13.  if  meat  make  my  A.tootfend,  eat  no  fleah 

2  Cor.  2. 13.  because  I  found  not  Titus  my  A. 
Our  BROTHER. 

Qen.Ti.id.  what  profit  is  it  if  we  slay  our  A.  ? 
27.  for  he  isowr  A.  and  our  flesh,  Judg.  9.  3. 
42.  21.  we  arc  verily  guilty  concerning  our  b. 
43. 4.  if  thou  wilt  send  our  A.  with  us,  we  will  go 
2C.)r.8.22.  and  we  have  sent  with  them  our  A. 
Pliilem.l.  and  Timothv  «>ir  A.  lo  Philemon 

7'Ay  BROTHER. 
Gen.  4.  9.  Lord  said  to  Cain,  where  is  Abel  thy  b.  7 

10.  the  voice  of  iAy  A.  blood  crielh  unto  mo 

27.  40.  live  by  thy  sword,  and  shall  serve  thy  b. 
.38.8.  go  in  to  thy  b.  wife  ond  raise  up  seed  to  thyh. 

F.iod.A.  14.  is  not  .Aaron  the  Lovite  thy  A.  ? 

28.  1.  take  to  thee  Aaron  thy  A.  and  his  song 
Lev.  19.  17.  thou  shall  not  hale  thy  b.  in  thine  henti 

25. 36.  fear  thy  God  that  fAy  A.  may  live  with  thee 
A"Mm.27.13.as.Aar.My  A. was  gathered,  />««r32..50. 
Deut.  13.6.  if  thy  h.  nnliee  thee  secretly,  saying 

1.5. 11.  open  Ihy  hand  wide  to  thy  A.  lo  thy  poc 
12.  \(thyb.  a  Hebrew  he  sold  to  thee  and  serve 

22.  I.  in  any  case  bring  Ihem  again  lo  thy  A. 
3.  in  hke  tnaiiner  with  all  lost  things  of  thij  4. 

23.  7.  not  abhor  an  Edomile,  for  he  is  thy  b 

19.  Ihou  shall  not  lend  upon  usury  to  thy  b. 

2  Sam.  2.  22.  how  hold  up  my  facoto  Joa'b  thy  b. 

13.  20.  h(dd  thy  pence,  my  sister,  he  is  thy  A. 
1  Kini'S  20.  3;i.  and  Ihey  snid,rAyA.  Benhadnd 
.lob  v'2.ll.  hast  taken  a  pledge  from  thy  b.  for  noiiehl 
Psa/.  .50.20.  Ihou  sitlesl  and  speukesi  agnmsl/Af/A. 
rr((i'.27.  10.  nor  go  into  thy  A.  house  in  calamity 
Ohnd.  10.  for  thy  violence  ngainsi  thy  A.  Jacob 

12.  shouldost  liot  have  lookeil  on  the  day  of  My  A. 

.W(7/.5.23.  rcmcmborost  thai  My  A.  hath  ought  np. 

24.  first  be  rcconcilod  to  thy  A.  then  olTor  thy  gift 


BRO 

JMa<.7.3.  behold,  mote  in  t/iyb.eye,5.Lukc6A'[,i'2. 

18.15. if  tnyA.lrespass,  hast  gained  t.  b.Lukell.d. 

Jo/in  n.  2;i.  Jesus  saitli,  thy  b.  shall  rise  again 

/{ofrt.H.lO.but  wiiy  dost  tliou  judge  t/iy  h.  ?  or  why 

dost  thou  set  at  nought  Ihyb.  ? 

r«ur  BROTHER. 

Gen.  42.  34.  bring  yuur  b.  so  will  I  deliver  youy.  A. 

43.  3.  not  see  my  lUce,  except  your  b.  be  with  you 

13.  take  your  b.  arise,  and  go  again  unto  the  man 

45.4  lam  Joseph  your  i.  whom  ye  sold  into  Egypt 

Jiidg.  9.  18.  Abimelech  king,  because  he  is  your  b. 

Rco.  1  9.  John, who  also  am  yoar  i.and  companion 

BROTHERHOOD. 
Zech.  11 .14.  might  break  b.  between  Judah  and  Is. 
iPct.i.  17.  love  the  A.  fear  CJod,  honour  the  king 

BROTHERLY. 
fimos  1.9.  they  remembered  not  the  b.  covenant 
Kom.  12.  10.  be  kindly  affectioncd,  with  4.  love 
1  T/icss.  4. 9.  as  touching  b.  love,  ye  need  not  that  I 
Ueb.  13.  1.  let  b.  love  continue 
PcM.T.to  godliness  A.  kindness,andto  J.  kindness 
BROUGHT. 
Gfn.20.9.  hast  J.on  me  and  my  kingdom  agreatsin 
27.  20.  because  the  Lord  thy  God  b.  it  to  me 

31.  39.  that  torn  of  beasts  I  b.  not  to  thee 
43.  26.  they  b.  him  the  present  in  their  hand 

Ezod.  9.19.  every  beast  in  field  not  i.homeslialldie 
10. 13.  Lord  b.  east-wind,  the  east-wind  b.  locusts 

18.  26.  the  hard  causes  they  b.  to  Muses 

19.  4.  how  I  bare  you  and  b.  you  to  myself 

32.  1.  the  man  that  b.  us  up  oUt  of  Egypt,  23. 
21.  that  thou  hast  b.  so  great  a  sin  on  them 

35.  23.  they  that  had  purjjle  and  scarlet  b.  them 
Lrv.  13.  2.  Ire  shall  be  b.  to  .\aron  the  priest,  9. 
2,3.  14.  till  he  have  b.  an  offering  to  your  God 

24.  11.  they  b.  the  blasphemer  to  Moses 

J\l'um.  ().  13.  he  shall  be  4.  to  the  door  of  tabernacle 

9.  13.  because  4.  not  the  olTering  in  his  season 
14.  3.  wherefore  hath  the  Lord  b.  us  to  this  land? 
It).  10.  and  he  hath  4.  thee  near  to  him 

27.  5.  Moses  4.  their  cause  before  the  Lord 

31.  00.  we  have  therefore  4.  an  oblation  for  Lord 

32.  17.  tijjfcve  have  4.  them  to  their  place 
Dcut.  5.  m  the  Lord  thy  God  4.  thee  out  thence 

26.  10.  I  have  4.  the  first-fruits  of  the  land 

13.  I  have  4.  away  the  hallowed  things 
Josh.  7.  14.  in  the  morning  ye  shall  be  4. 

23.  they  took  and  4.  them  to  Joshua 

24.  they  4.  them  to  the  valley  of  Achor 

24.7.  Lord  4.  the  sea  upon  them  and  covered  them 
Juilg-.  2.  1.  I  have  4.  you  unto  the  land  I  sware 

16.  18.  the  Philistines  4.  money  in  their  hand 
18.  3.  who  4.  thee  hither  1  and  what  raakest  thou 

1  Sam.  1. 24.  she  4.  Samuel  to  the  house  of  the  Ld. 

25.  they  slew  a  bullock  and  4.  the  child  to  Eli 

10.  27.  they  despised  him,  and  4.  him  no  presents 

21.  14.  wherefore  then  have  ye  4.  him  to  mel 

25.  35.  David  received  what  Abigail  had  4.  him 
30.  11.  they  found  and  4.  an  Egyptian  to  David 

ZSatn.  1.10.  crown  and  bracelet,  4.  them  to  my  lord 

7.  18.  who  am  I,  O  Lor.I  God?  what  is  my  house, 

that  thou  hast  4.  me  hitherto?  1  CAron.  17.  Ifi. 
1  A'ni<r«9.0.Lord  6. on  them  this  evil,  2  Chron.  7.22. 
10.  25.  they  4.  each  his  present,  2  Chron.  9.  24. 

17.  20.  hast  thou  also  4.  evil  upon  the  widow  1 

22.  37.  so  the  king  died,  and  was  4.  to  Samaria 
2ft'in5-A-5.20.sparBd  Naaman,  not  receiv.what  he  4. 

17.  4.  Hosliea  4.  no  presents  to  the  king  of  Assyria 
27.  carry  thither  the  priest  ye  4.  from  thence 

20.  11.  he  4.  the  shadow  ten  degrees  backward 
24.  16.  craftsmen  the  king  4.  caplive  to  Babylon 

1  Chron.  11.  19.  with  jeopardy  of  lives  they  4.  it 
14.  17.  the  Lord  4.  fe:ir  of  him  on  all  nations 

2  Chr.  13.  18.  the  children  of  Israel  were  4.  under 
17.  5.  all  Judah  4.  to  Jehoshaphat  presents 

22.  9.  4.  Ahazlah  to  Jelin,  and  when  had  slain 

28.  5.  the  king  of  Syria  4.  Israel  to  Damascus 
15.  4.  captives  to  Jericho  to  their  brethren 

32.  23.  many  4.  gifts  to  the  Lord  to  Jerua.ilem 
Ezra  8.  18.  they  4.  us  a  man  of  understanding 

10.  1 10.  ye  have  4.  back  strange  wives 
Neh.  4.  15.  God  had  4.  their  counsel  to  nought 

8.  in.  the  people  4.  them  and  made  them  booths 

9.  33.  thou  art  just  in  all  that  is  4.  upon  us 
13.  12.  Judah  b.  tithe  of  corn  and  new  wine 
F.slh.  6. 8.  let  the  roval  apparel  be  4.  the  king  useth 
9.  11.  number  of  slain  in  Shushan  4.  to  the  king 

Jiib  4.  12.  now  a  thing  was  secretly  4.  to  me 

21.  32.  yet  shall  he  be  4.  to  the  grave  and  tomb 
P.*aZ.  35.  4.  let  them  be  4.  to  confusion, 26. 

4.5.  15.  with  gladness  and  joy  shall  they  be  4. 

71.  24.  they  are  4.  to  shaiue  that  seek  my  hurt 
Prov.  6.  2C.  a  man  is  4.  to  a  piece  of  bread 
Cant.  2.  4.  he  4.  me  to  the  banqueting-house 
fsa.  15.  1.  Ar  4.  Kir  of  Moib  is  4.  to  silence 

23.  13.  4.  the  .and  of  the  Chaldeans  to  ruin 
2rt.  20.  for  the  terrible  one  is  4.  to  nought 

43.  23.  thou  hast  not  4.  small  cattle  to  me,  24. 
48.  15.  yea,  I  have  called  him,  I  have  4.  him 
53.  7.  be  u  4.  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter 
53 


BRO 

fsa.  59.  16.  therefore  his  arm  4.  salvation,  63.  5. 
60.  11.  and  that  their  kings  may  be  4. 
03.  9.  they  that  4.  it  shall  drink  it  in  the  courts 

.fer.  11.  19.  as  an  ox  that  is  4.  to  the  slaughter 
15.  8.  1  have  4.  on  them  a  spoiler  at  nooji-day 
32.  42.  as  I  have  4.  all  this  evil  on  this  people 
40.  3.  now  Lord  hath  4.  it  and  done  as  he  said 

F.zek.  14.  22.  be  comlbrted  concerning  the  evil  I  4. 
23.  8.  nor  left  she  her  whoredoms  4.  froin  Egypt 
29.5.  thou  shall  not  be  4.  together  nor  gathered 
40.  4.  that  I  might  shew  them,  art  thou  4.  hither 
47. 3.  he  4.  me  through  the  waters  to  the  ancles,  4. 

Da7t.  6. 18.  nor  instruments  of  music  4.  before  him 
7.  13.  4.  him  near  before  the  ancient  of  days 

9.  14.  Lord  watched  on  the  evil,  and  4.  it  on  us 

11.  6.  she  be  given  up,  and  they  that  4.  her 
Nag.  1.  9.  when  ye  4.  it  home  I  did  blow  on  it 
JUal.  1 .  13.  ye  4.  what  was  torn,  and  lame,  and  sick 
Mat.  10. 18.  ye  shall  be  4.  before  kings  for  my  sake, 

for  a  test,  against  them,  Mark  13. 9.  J.uke  21. 12. 

12.  25.  kingdom  is  4.  to  desolation,  I^uke  11.  17. 

14.  11.  she  4.  John  Baptist's  head  to  her  mother 
17.  16.  1  4.him  to  thy  disciples,  could  not  cure  him 

13.  24.  one  was  4.  that  owed  him  10,000  talents 
19.  13.  were  4.  to  him  little  children,  Mark  10. 13. 

Mark  4.  21 .  a  candle  4.  to  be  put  under  a  bushel 

6.  27.  the  king  commanded  his  head  to  be  4. 
10. 13.  the  disciples  rebuked  those  that  4.  them. 

Luke  2.  22.  4.  him  to  Jerusalem  to  present  him 

7.  37.  a  woman  4.  an  alabaster-box  of  ointment 

10.  34.  4.  him  to  an  inn  and  took  care  of  him 
.fohn  7.  45.  they  said,  why  have  ye  not  4.  him  1 
.Sets  5.  21.  and  sent  to  the  prison  to  have  them  4. 

9.  27.  Barnabas  4.  him  to  the  apostles  and  declared 

15.  3.  and  being  4.  on  their  way  by  the  church 
16. 16.  who  4.  her  masters  gain  by  soothsaying 

20. 4.  them  to  the  magistrates,  saying,  those  men 

19.  12.  from  his  body  were  4.  to  the  sick,  aprons 
19.  4  their  books, and  burned  them  before  all  men 
24.  Demetrius  4.  no  small  gain  to  ihe craftsmen 
37.  ye4.  hither  these  men,  no  robbersofchurches 

20.  12.  and  they  4.  the  young  man  alive 

21.  5.  they  all  4.  us  on  our  way,  with  wives 
25.  6.  the  next  day  commanded  Paul  to  be  4. 
27. 24. fear  not,  Paul,  thou  must  be4.beforeCa;sar 

Rom.  15.  24.  to  be  4.  on  my  way  thither  by  yim 

1  Cor.  6. 12.  I  will  not  be  4.  under  the  power  of  any 

2  Cor.  1.16.  of  you  to  be  4.  on  my  way  to  Judea 
2  Tim.  1. 10.  hath  4.  life  and  immortality  to  light 

1  Pet.  1. 13.  for  the  grace  that  is  to  be  4.  to  you 

2  Pet.  2.  19.  of  the  same  is  he  4.  in  bondage 

BROUGHT  again. 
(7cn.14.16.Abram  4.  ag.  hisbroiher  Lot  and  goods 

43. 12.  and  the  money  that  was  4.  again  in  sacks 
Exnrl.  10.8.  Moses  and  Aaron  4.  again  to  Pharaoh 

15.19.  Lord  b.again\he  watcrsof  thesoa  on  them 
7)e«M.25.  4. us  word  ag.  and  said, it  is  a  good  land 
.Tosh.  14. 7.  I  4.  him  word  ag.  as  it  was  in  my  heart 
Ruth  1.  21.  the  Lord  hath  4.  me  home  ag.  empty 

1  Sam.  6.21.  the  Philistines  4.  ag.  ark  of  the  Lord 

2  Sam.  3.  26.  4.  ag.  Abner  from  Ihe  well  ofSirah 
2  A'lHfrs  22.  9.  Shaphan  the  scribe  came  and  4.  the 

king  word  ag.  20.  1  Kings  20. 9. 2  Chron.  34. 28. 
2C/ir.33.13.  Lord  4.  Manasseh  ag-ain  to  Jerusalem 
JVeA.  13.9.  thither  4.  I  a^.  Ihe  vesscUof  the  house 
.Ter.  27.  IC.  the  vessels  shall  shortly  be  4.  again 
F.zek.  34.  4.  ye  have  not  4.  an-am  what  was  driven 
39.  27.  when  I  have  4.  them  ag.  from  the  people 
.^fai!.  27. 3.  repented  and  4.  a^.  30  pieces  of  silver 
Heb.  13. 20.  God  of  peace  that  4.  ag.  from  the  dead 

BROUGHT  back.  ' 
^en.l4.  16.  Abrani  4.  back  all  the  goods  and  Lot 
JVkoi. 13.26.  h.bnck  word  to  them  and  congregation 
1  Kings  13.23.  for  the  prophet  whom  he  had  4.  back 
2CArri9.  4.  Jehoshaphat  4.  them  hack  io  the  Lord 
Psal.  85. 1.  thou  hast  4.  back  the  captivity  of  Jacob 
Eiek.  38.  8.  come  into  land  4.  back  from  the  sword 

BROUGHT  down. 
Gen.  39.  1.  and  Joseph  was  4.  down  into  Egypt 
.Tudg.  7.  5.  he  4.  down  the  people  to  the  waters 

16.  21.  the  Philistines  4.  down  Samson  to  Gaza 
\Sam.  30.16.  when  he  had  4. him  rf.they  were  spread 
1  Kings  1..53.  they  4.  Adnnijah  (/own  from  Ihe  altar 

17.  23.  Elijah  4.  the  child  d.  out  of  the  chamber 

18.  40.  4.  them  d.  to  brook  Kishon  and  slew  them 
P.in/.20.8.  they  are  4.  d.  and  fallen,  but  we  arc  risen 

107.  12.  he  4.  down  their  heart  with  labour 
Isa.  5. 15.  and  the  mean  man  shall  be  4.  down 

14.  II.  thy  pomp  is  4.  down  to  the  grave 

15.  thou  shall  be  4.  down  to  hell,  to  sidrs  of  pit 
29.  4.  thou  shall  be  4.  d.  and  speak  out  of  ground 
43.  14.  for  your  sake  I  have  4.  d.  all  the  nobles 
I,am.  2.  2.  he  halh  4.  them  doien  to  the  ground 
Eiek.  17.  24.  I  the  Lord  have  4.  d.  Ihe  high  tree 
31.  18.  shall  be  4.  dawn  with  the  trees  of  Eden 
Zech.  10.  11.  the  prideof  Assyria  shall  be  4.  r/own 
Mat.  11.  23.  thou  Capernaum  be  h.down  to  hell 
.lets  9.  30.  the  brethren  4.  him  down  to  Cesarea 

BROUGHT  forth. 
Gen.  1. 12.  the  earth  4.  forth  grass  and  herbs 


BRO 

Oen.  1.  21.  waters  4./.  abundantly  afterlheir  kind 

14.  18.  the  king  of  Salem  4.  forth  bread  and  wine 

15.  5.  the  Lord  4.  /or(A  Abram  abroad,  and  said 

19.  16.  angels  4.  Lot/.,  and  set  him  without  city 
24.  53.  the  servant  4.  /.  jewels  of  silver  and  gold 
38. 25.  when  4./or«A,  she  sent  to  her  father-in-law 
41.  47.  in  plenteous  years  earth  b.  f.  by  handful* 

Ezod.  3.  12.  when  thou  hast  b.  forth  the  jieople 

16.3.  for  ye  have  4.  na  forth  into  the  wilderness 
29.  46.  shall  know  I  am  the  L.  who  4.  them /ortA 

out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  Lev.  25. 38.  12G.  13,  45. 
Jil'um.  17.  6.  .Aaron's  rod  4.  /.  buds,  and  bloomed 

20.  16.  sent  an  angel,  and  4.  us/ortAout  of  Egypt 

24.  8.  God  4.  him  forth  out  of  Egypt,  he  halh  the 

strength  of  a  unicorn 
Deut.  6.  12.  lest  forget  L.  who  4.  thee  forth,  8.  14 

8.  15.  who  b.  forth  water  out  of  the  rock  of  flint 
9. 12.  thy  people  thou  4./.  have  corrupted  tberns 
2<>.  8.  the  Lord  4.  us  forth  with  a  mighty  hand 
29.  25. Ihe  covenant  he  made  when  he  4. them  /. 
33.  14.  for  precious  fruits  b.  forth  by  the  sun 

./osh.  10.  23.  b.  f.  those  five  kings  out  of  the  cave 
Judg.  5.  25.  she  b.  forth  butter  in  a  lordly  dish 
6. 8.  I  4.  you  forth  out  of  the  house  of  bondage 

1  .Sam.  12. 8.  sent  Moses,  who  4.  forth  your  fathers 

2  .S'um.22.20.  4.  me/,  into  large  place,  Psal.  18.  19 

1  Kings  9. 9.  they  forsook  Ihe  Lord  who  4.  /.  their 

fathers  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,2  CAr.  7.  22. 
'i  Kings  10.  22.  b.f.  vestments  for  worshippers 

11.  12.  b.f.  the  king's  son,  and  put  the  crown  oh 
./o4  10.  18.  wherefore  hast  4.  me/or(Aoutof  womb 

21.  30.  the  wicked  shall  be  4.  /.  to  day  of  wrath 
Psal.l.li.  conceived  mischief,and  b.f.  lalsehood 

90.  2.  before  the  mountains  were  4./.,  art  God 
105.  30.  their  land  b.  forth  frogs  in  abundance 
43.  he  b.  forth  his  people  with  joy  and  gladnesn 
Prov.  8.  24.  when  there  were  no  depths,  I  was  4./. 

25.  before  the  hills  was  I  4.  forth 
Cant.  8.  5.  there  thy  mother  4.  ihee  forth,  she  4./. 
fsa.5.  2.  looked  for  grapes,  and  it  4.  /.  wild  grapes 
26.  18.  4.  /.  wind  ||  45. 10.  what  hast  thou  4./.  ? 
51.  18.  to  guide  her  among  sons,  she  halh  b.  forth 

66.7.  before  she  travailed,she  4./.  before  her  pain 
8.  for  soon  as  Zion  travailed,  she  b.f.  children 

.^cr.  2. 27.  saying  to  a  stone,  thou  hast  b.  me  forth 

11.4.  I  commanded  in  Ihe  day  I  4.  them/.  34. 13 
17. 1 11.  galhereth  young  which  he  hath  not  b.f. 
20.3.  Pashur  4. /or«A  Jeremiah  outof  the  stocks 
32.  21.  hast  b.  forth  thy  people  Israel  with  signs 
.50.  25.  Lord  4./.  the  weapons  of  his  indignation 
51.  10.  Ihe  Lord  hath  4.  forth  our  righteousness 

Ezek.  12.  7.  I  b.f.  my  stuff  by  day  in  their  sight 
14.  22.  a  remnant  4.  /.,  both  sons  and  daughters 
20  22.  the  heathen  in  whose  sight  I  4.  them/oriA 
Mir.  5.  3.  till  time  she  which  travaileth  halh  b.f. 
Hag.  2.  19.  and  the  olive-tree  hath  not  b.  forth 
Mat.  1.  25.  till  she  had  4.  forth  her  first-born  son 

13.8.  fell  in  good  ground,  and  4./.  fruit,  Mark4.8. 
Luke  1.57.now  Elisabeth's  time  came,she  4./.asori 

2.7.  she  b.f.  her  first-born  son  and  wrapped  him 

12.  Ifi.  the  ground  of  a  rich  man  4./.  plentifully 
John  19.  13.  when  Pilate  heard  that,  he  4,  /.  Jceus 
Jicts  5.  19.  opened  the  prison  doors  and  4.  them  /. 

12.  6.  when  Herod  would  have  4.  h'\m  forth 

25.  17.  I  commanded  Ihe  man  to  be  b.  forth 
Jam.  5.  18.  he  prayed,  and  Ihe  earth  4./.  her  fruit 
Rev.  12.  5.  she  4.  /.  a  man-child,  who  was  to  rule 

13.  the  dragon  persecuted  Ihe  woman  which  4./ 

BROUGHT  in. 

Gen.  39.  14.  he  halh  4   in  an  Hebrew  to  mock  us 

47. 7.  Joseph  4.  in  Jacob  his  father,  Jacob  blessed 

Lev.  10. 18.  blood  was  not  4.  in  within  holy  place 

16.27.llie  bullock  and  goat,  whose  blood  was  b-in 

.Vum.  12.  15.  journeyed  not  till  Miriam  was  4.  in 

Dcut.  9.4.  for  my  righteousness  Ihe  Lord  4.  me  in 

11.29.  when  the  Lord  hath  4.  thee  in  to  the  land 

2  Sam.  3.  22.  Joab  4.  in  a  great  spoil  with  him 

6.  17.  they  4.  in  the  ark  of  the  Lord,  1  Kings  8.6. 
JVcA.  13.  19.  no  burden  4.  in  on  the  sabbath-day 
Psal.  78.26.  by  his  power  he  4.  in  the  south  wind 
Dan.  5.  13.  then  was  Daniel  4.  in  before  the  king 
Mat.  14.  11.  John's  head  was  4.  in  in  a  charger 
j^cts  7.45.  4.  in  with  Jesus  into  posses.  ofGentiles 
Gal.  2.  4.  false  brethren  4.  in  to  spy  our  liberty 
Heb.  9. 1 16.  must  be  4.  in  Ihe  death  of  Ihe  testator 

BROUGHT  17.(0. 
M'um.  16.  14.  not  4.  us  in(o  n  land  that  floweth 
Deut.  6. 10.  when  the  L.  halh  4.  thee  into,  31.  20. 

1  Sam.  5.2.  4.  Ihe  ark  into  Dagon's  house  and  set  it 

9.  22.  4.  Ihem  into  the  parlour,  and  made  them  sit 

20.  8.  4.  thy  servant  into  a  covenant  with  thee 

2  Kinirs  12. 16.  sin-monev  not  4.  in^o  house  of  L. 
Psal.  22.  15.  hast  4.  me  into  the  dust  of  death 
Cant.  1.  4.  the  king  hath  4.  me  in(o  his  chambera 
.Ter.  2.  7.  I  4.  you  in<o  a  plentiful  country  to  cat 
Lam.  3.  2.  halh  h.  me  info  darkness,  but  not  light 
F.zek.  27.  26.  ihy  rowers  have  4.  thee  in(o  water* 

44.  7.  ye  have  4.  into  mv  sanctuary  strangers 
j?ci',«9.a.  they  led  him  and  0.  mm  in(o  Damascus 

21.  28.  4.  Greeks  into  the  tomjde,  and  polluted  . 


BRO 


1  THm  6.  7.  for  we  b.  nothin;  into  this  world 
Ueb.  13.  II'  whose  blood  is  b.  into  the  sanctuar)' 

BUOUGHT  lotc. 
Judff. 11.35.  daughter,  thou  hast  b.  me  very  lota 
2CAri/n.3tt.  19.  Ld.A.  Judahiuir,  because  ofAhaz 
Job  14.21.  tliey  are  b.  loic,  but  he  jiurceivtih  it  not 
34. 24.  wicked  are  gone  and  b.luic,  the/  are  taken 
Piu/.  79.8.  let  mercies  prevent  U9, 1'or  »e  are  ft.  low 
101).  43.  and  were  b.  low  lor  tlieir  iniijuily 
l(17.3y.  they  are  iiuic.thro'  oppression  and  sorrow 
116.  ti.  I  was  ft.  low,  and  he  helped  me 
142.  6.  attend  to  my  cry,  for  1  am  4.  very  tow 
F.ccl.  12.  4.  all  daugliters  of  music  shall  be  ft.  low 
/;ia.2.12.  upon  every  one  lil'tud  up,  he  shall  be  b.hiw 

23.  5.  the  branch  of  terrible  ones  shall  be  ft.  low 
Luke  3.5.  every  mountain  and  hill  ft.  low,  Ina.  40.4. 

UKtJUGHT  out. 
Oen.  15.  7.  ihat  ft.  thee  out  of  VTt  of  the  Chaldecs 
41.  14.  tliey  ft.  him  hastily  out  of  the  dungeoa 
43.  2;i.  and  he  ft.  Srmcon  out  unto  them 
Exod.  13.  3.  for  by  strength  of  hand  the  Lord  ft.  you 
out  from  this  place,  9,  14,  1(5.  Deut.  6.  21. 
20.2.  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God,  which  ft.  thee  out, 
i^n.l9.36.JV'um.  15.41.  Deul.5.&.  Psal.SX.W. 
Lee. '■Si.  43.  when  I  A.  them  out  Eg.,  1  Kinffs 8.'2l. 
I)eut.5. 15.  remember  that  Lord  ft.  Iheeoui  thence 
9.  28.  ft.  them  out  to  slay  them  in  the  wilderness 
Josh.ii.'Zi.  young  men  ft.  out  Rahab  and  allshehad 

24.  5.  plagued  Egypt,  and  al'icrwnrd  I  ft.  youou( 
2. Sum.  13.18.  servant  6.  her  ou<,  and  bolted  the  door 

2  Kin^s  23.  6.  he  ft.  out  the  grove  from  house  of  L. 

1  Chron.  20. 3.  he  ft.  out  the  people  that  were  in  it 

2  Chron.  23.  11.  then  they  ft.  out  the  king's  son 
29.  16.  priests  ft.  out  all  uncleanness  they  found 

Psal.  78.  16.  he  ft.  streams  also  out  of  the  rock 
80.  8.  thou  hast  ft.  a  vine  out  of  Egypt 
107.  14.  he  ft.  them  out  of  darkness,  and  brake 
136.  11.  and  ft.  out  Israel  from  among  them 
Jer.  7. 22.  in  the  day  I  ft.  them  out  of  Egypt 
i)an.5.13.  whom  the  king  my  father  ft.  out  of  Jewry 
Mos.  12.  13.  by  a  prophet  the  Lord  ft.  Israel  out 
jictsl.  40.  this  Moses,  which  ft.  us  out  of  Egypt 
12. 17.  declared  how  the  Lord  ft.  him  out  of  prison 
13.  17.  with  a  high  arm  ft.  them  out  of  Egypt 
]6.30.ft.  out,  and  said,  what  must  I  do  to  he  saved  1 
39.lhey  came  and  besought  them, and  ft.  them  out 
BROUGHT  to  pa.9.?. 
2  Kingf  19. 25.  now  1  have  ft.  it  to  pas-i,  Isa.  37. 20. 
£zei.  21.  7.  it  cornelh,  and  shall  he  ft.  to  pass 
1  Cor.  15.  54.  then  sicill  be  ft.  to  pass  the  sayin, 

BROUGHT  up. 
l^ioJ.  17.3.  wlieref.  hast  thou  6.  us  up  ?  Aum.21.5. 

32.  1.  as  for  Moses,  the  man  that  ft.  us  up,  23. 
4.  thy  gods  which  ft.  thee  up,  8.  1  Kings  12.28 

33.  1.  thou  and  the  people  which  thou  hast  ft.  vp 
J^'am.  13.  32.  they  ft.  up  an  evil  report  of  the  lanil- 

16. 13.  is  it  a  small  thing  that  thou  hast  ft.  us  up  ? 

20.  4.  why  have  ye  ft.  up  congregation  of  Lord  ? 
7>fut.  20.  I.  the  Ld.  is  with  thee,  which  ft.  thee  up 

22.  19.  because  he  b.vp  an  evil  name  on  a  virgin 

Jo»A.24. 17.  he  it  is  that  A.  us  up  and  our  fathers 

32.  bones  of  Jos."  ft.  up,  they  buried  in  Sliechem 

Judg.  6.  8.  I  ft.  you  up  from  Egypt,  1  Sam.  10.  18. 

15.°13.  ft.  Samson  up  \\  16. 31.  ft.  him  up  and  buried 

16.  8.  the  lords  ft.  up  to  her  seven  green  withs 

1  -Sam.  2. 14.  all  the  Hesh-hook  A.  up  the  priest  took 
8. 8.  done  since  the  day  I  A.  them  up,  2  .Sam.  7.  6. 

1  Chron.  17.  5. 

12.  6.  Lord  that  A.  your  fathers  np  out  of  Egypt 

2Sam.  6.12.  David  wont  and  ft.wp  thoarkofGod,15. 

1  Kings  8.  4.  1  Chr.  15.  28.  2  Ckr.  1.  4. 

21.8.  ft.  t/p  for  Adrieiy  13.  ft.  up  the  bones  of  Saul 

2  Kings  10. 1.  to  them  Ihat  ft.  up  Ahab's  children, 0. 
17.7.  Israel  sinned  against  Lord  who  ft.tliem  vp 

36.  the  Ld.  who  ft.  you  up,  him  fear  and  worship 

2.5.  6.  A.  up  Zedekiah  to  king  of  Babyl.  ./f  r.  39.  5. 
2  Chr.  8.  1 1.  Solomon  A.  vp  the  daugh.  of  Pharaoh 

10.  8.  counsel  with  young  men  ft.  wp  with  him,  10. 
Ezra  I.  11.  all  these  vessels  ft.  up  from  Babylon 

4.  2.  Ezar-haddon  king  of  .AsJur  ft.  us  up  hither 
JVeh.0. 18.  this  ia  thy  GotI  that  ft.  thee  up  out  of  Eg 
£.«tA.2.  7.  Morderai  A.  up  Enlher  his  uncle's  daug 

20.  like  as  when  she  w.-is  ft.  up  with  him 
Job  31.  18.  fr(mi  my  youth  ho  was  A.  up  with  mo 
P.ial.  30. 3.  thou  hast  ft.  up  my  soul  from  the  grave 

40.  2.  he  *.  mo  up  f>ut  of  a  horrible  jiil 
Prov.  H.  30.  I  was  by  him,  as  one  A.  up  with  him 
Jsn.  1.2.  I  have  nourished  anil  A.  up  children 

49.  21.  who  ft.  up  these?  where  had  they  been? 

51.  18.  nono  to  guide  herofall  Ihc  sons  she  ft.  up 

63.  11.  whnro  is  he  that  ft.  them  up  ?  .ter.  2.  6. 
Jr.  11.  7   1  proteited  in  the  d'ly  I  ft.  them  lip 

16.14.  the  Ld.  that  ft.  up  Israol  out  of  Egvpl,  23.7. 

15.  the  Lord  ihat  ft.  up  Isr.  from  the  norlh,03.  8, 

J. am  2.22.lho<eI  ft. up  hath  mine  enemy  consumed 

4. 5.  that  were  A.  up  in  aenrlet  enihraco  dunghill: 
Ezek.  19.  3.  A.  up  one  of  her  whelps,  a  young  lion 

31.  t  4.  the  deep  A.  him  up  on  high  with  her  rivers 


BUC 

Jonah.  2. 6.  yet  hast  A.  up  my  life  from  corruption 
JViiA.  2.  7.  she  shall  be  ft.  up,  and  her  maids  lead  her 
Luke  4. 16.  to  Nazareth,  where  he  had  been  ft.  up 
Acts  13. 1.  had  been  ft.  up  with  Herod  the  tetrarch 
22.  3.  yet  A.  up  in  this  city  at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel 

1  Tim.  5.  10.  a  widow,  if  she  have  A.  up  children 
BROUGHTEST. 

Kiod.  32.  7.  thy  people  thou  A.  out  have  corrupted 
J^am.  14.  13.  thou  A.  up  this  people  in  thy  might 
Deut.  9. 28.  lest  the  land  whence  thou  A.  us  out  say 

29.  thy  inheritance  thou  A.  out,  1  Kings  8.  51. 

2  Sum.  5.2.  wast  he  that  A.  in  Israel,  1  Chron.  11.2. 
1  A'ni^i' 8. 53.  when  thou  A.  our  failiers  out  Egypt 
jVtA.^.  7.  A.  him  forth  out  of  Ur  of  the  Chaldees 

15.  thou  A.  for'h  water  for  them  out  of  the  rock 
23.  ft.  them  into  the  land  thou  hadst  promised 
Psal.tW.  11.  thou  ft.  us  into  the  net,  thou  laidst 
12.  but  thou  ft.  us  out  into  a  wealthy  place 
BROW. 
fsa.  48.  4.  thy  neck  is  an  iron  sinew,  thy  A.  brass 
Luke  4.  29.  they  led  him  lo  the  A.  of  the  hill 

BROVVxN. 
Ocn.  30.  32.  all  A.  cattle  among  the  sheep,  35.  40. 
33.evcry  one  that  is  not  A.  shall  beaccouni.stolen 
BRUISE,  Substantive. 
Isa.  53.  t  5.  and  wilh  his  A.  we  are  healed 
fr.r.i).  1 14.  they  healed  the  A.  of  my  people  slightly 
30.  12.  thus  sailh  the  Lord,  thy  A.  is  incurable 
jVaA.3.19.therei8no  healing  of  thy  A.  wound  griev 

BRUISES. 
Isa.  1.  6.  no  soundness,  but  wounds,  ft.  and  sores 
Eick.  47.  t  12.  the  leaf  thereof  for  ft.  and  sores 

BRUISE 
Signifies,  [1]    To  crush,  injure,  or  oppress,  Gen. 
3.  15.  Dan.  2.  40.  [2]  7'o  punish,  chastise,  or 
correct,  Isa.  53.  10.     It  is  spoken,  (1)  Corpo- 
really, of  the  body,  Luke  9.  39.    (2)  Spiritually, 
of  doubts  and  troubles.  Mat.  12.  20.     (3)  Mo- 
rally, of  corruptions,  Isa.  1.  6.     (4)  Politically, 
of  a  weak  decaying  nation,  2  Kings  18.  21. 
A  bruised   reed  shall  he  not   break,    Isa.  42.  3. 
Christ  will  not  deal  roughly  and  rigorously 
with  those  that  come  to  him,  but  will  use  all 
gentleness  and  tenderness  to  them  ;  passing  by 
their  greatest  sins,  bearing  with  their  present 
infirmities,  cherishing,  and  encouratring  the 
smallest  beginnings  of  grace,  and  comforting 
and  healing  wounded  consciences. 
To  bruise  the  teal*,  Ezek.  23.  3,  21.     T>  commit 
bodily  whoredom;  or  idolatry,which  is  spiritual 
whoredom. 
<7eH.3.15.  it  shall  A.  thy  head,  thou  shalt  A.  his  heel 
Isa.  28   28.  nor  will  he  A.  it  with  his  horsemen 
.53.  10.  yet  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  A.  him 
Dan.  2.  40.  as  iron  shall  it  break  in  pieces  an^J  A. 
Rom.  16.  20.  God  of  peace  shall  A.  Satan  shortly 

BRUISED. 
Lev.  22. 24.  ye  shall  not  offer  to  ihe  Lord  what  is  A. 
2  Kings  18.21.  trusieih  on  llie  stafTof  this  6.  reed 
Isa.  42.  3.  a  A.  reed  shall  he  not  break.  Mat.  12.20. 
.53.5.  he  was  ft.  for  our  iniquities,  the  chastisement 
Eiek.23.  3.  there  ihey  ft.  Ihe  teats  of  their  virginity 

8.  and  they  ft.  the  breasts  of  her  virginity 
Luke  4.18.  sent  me  to  set  at  liberty  tbem  that  are  ft. 

BRUISING. 
Ezek.  23.  21.  in  A. thy  teals  bythe  Egyptians 
Luke  9.  39.  the  spirit  ft.  him,  hardly  departethfrom 

BRUIT. 
.Ter.  10.  22.  behold,  the  noise  of  the  ft.  is  rome 
JVuA.  3. 19.  all  Ihat  hear  the  6.  of  thee,  shall  clap 
Bri'tk  ;  See  Beasts. 
BRUTISH. 
Psal.  49.  10.  Ihe  fool  and  the  ft.  person  perish 
92.6.  a  A.  man  knowclh  not,  nor  a  fool  understand 
94.  8.  understand,  ye  ft.  among  the  people 
Prop.  12.  1.  bill  he  that  hatelh  reproof  is  A. 

30.  2.  surely  I  am  nio'O  A.  than  any  man 
/ia. 19.1 1. the  princes  of  Zoan  are  fools,  the  counsel 

of  the  wise  counsellors  of  Pharaoh  is  become  A 
.ler.  10.  8.  they  are  allogelher  A.  and  foolish 

14.  every  man  is  A.  51. 17.  ||  21.  pastors  are  A. 
Ezek.  21.  31.  deliver  thee  into  the  hand  of  A.  men 

BUCKETS. 
JVum.24.  7.  he  shall  pour  the  water  out  of  his  A 
Isa.  40. 15.  the  nations  ate  as  drop  of  a  A.  and  dust 

BUCKLER 
Is  a  piece  of  defensive  armour,  1  Chron.  5.  18. 
nod  is  often  called  the  Buckler,  or  Shield  of  his 
people,  Psal.  18.  2.  Prov.  2.  7.  l/e  vill  protect 
and  suite  them  from  that  mischief  and  ruin 
which  will  befall  nil  wicked  men.  jlnd  in  Cant. 
4.  4.  the  faith  of  the  church,  or  of  believers, 
whereby  they  are  united  to  Christ,  is  compared 
to  the  lower  of  David,  whereon  Imni.'  a  tlioiij^and 
bucklers;  noting,  how  strong  and  invincible 
faith  is,  which  furnishes  wilh  weapons  out  of 
Christ' f  fulness,  and  nhundnnlhj  defends  from 
nil  spiritual  enemies,  Eph.  fi.  16 


37. 13.  when  I  have  A.  you  up  out  of  your  graves  2. Sam.  22.  31.  a  A. to  all  that  trust  in  him,  Ps.  18.30 
imos  2.  10.  I  A.  you  up,  3.  1.  1  9.  7.  Mic.  6.  4.       1 1  CAron.  5.  18.  men  able  to  bear  A.  and  iword 
54 


BUI 

1  Chr.  12.  8.  Gadites  that  could  handle  shield  and  b. 
Psal.  18.  2.  Lord  is  my  God,  my  ft.  my  high  tower 

35. 2.  take  hold  of  shield  and  ft.  stand  up  fur  help 
91.  4.  his  truth  shall  be  thy  shield  and  ft. 
Prov. 2.1.  he  is  a  A.  to  them  that  walk  uprightly 
./er.  46.  3.  order  ye  the  ft.  and  shield,  and  draw  near 
Ezek.  23.  24.  shall  set  against  the  ft.  shield,  and 
2U.  8.  he  shall  lift  up  the  A.  against  thee  [helmet 
BUCKLERS. 

2  CAr.  23.  9.  Jehoiada  deliver,  spears,  ft. and  shicldf 
Job  15.26.  runneth  upon  the  thick  bosses  of  his  6. 
Cant.  4.  4.  whereon  there  hanged  a  thousanil  ft. 
Ezek.  3d.  4.  a  great  company  with  ft.  and  shieldf 

39.  9.  they  shall  set  on  fire  shields,  ft.  and  bows 

BUD,  Suhstaiitive. 
.r»A38.  27.  cause  Ihe  ft.  of  the  tender  herb  to  spring 
Isa.  18. 5.  afore  the  harvest, when  theft,  is  perfect 
61.  II.  for  as  the  earth  bringeth  forth  her  A. 
Ezek. 16.  7.  caused  thee  to  multiply  as  A.ofihe  field 
//oi>-.  8.7.  A.shall  yield  no  meal,  stranger  swallow  it 

BUD,  P'erb. 
Gen.  3. 1 18.  thistles  sliall  it  cause  to  A.  lo  thee 
.fob  14.9.  vet  Ihrough  the  scent  of  water  it  will  A. 
Psal.  132.  n.  I  will  make  the  horn  of  David  to  ft. 
Cant.  7.  12.  let  us  see  if  the  pomegranates  A.  forth 
Isa.  27. 6.  Is.  shall  bloom  and  A.  and  fill  the  world 
55.  10.  inuketh  the  earth  lo  bring  forth  and  A. 
Ezek.  29.  21.  cause  the  horn  of  Israel  to  A.  forth 

BUDS. 
JVum.  17. 8.  Aaronfe  rod  bro't  forth  A.  and  bloomed 
BUDDED.  [forth 

t7c7i.  40. 10.  the  vine  was  as  though  il  b.  and  shot 
^'um.  17.  8.  Aaron's  rod  for  the  house  of  Levi  A, 
Cant.  6.  11.  to  see  whether  the  pomegranates  A. 
Ezek.  7. 10.  Ihe  rod  hath  blossomed,  pride  huih  A. 
//eft.  9.  4.  the  ark  wherein  was  Aaron's  rod  thai  b. 

BUFFET. 
2  Cor.  12.  7.  the  messenger  of  Satan  to  i.  me 

BUFFETED. 
J/«t.26.67.  spit  in  his  face  and  ft.  him,  Mark  14. 65 
1  Cor.  4.  11.  even  to  this  present  hour  we  are  A. 
1  Pet. 2.  20.  if  when  ye  be  A.  for  youri|ulU 

BUILD  ^ 

Signifies,  [I]  To  erect,  or  make  houses, i-cVeai 
28.  30.  [2]  To  strengthen  and  increase  know 
ledge,  faith,  love,  and  all  other  graces.  Acts  20. 
.32.  [3]  'I'o  cement  and  knit  together  spiritually ; 
t/iiui  believers  are  united  to  Christ  by  faith,  and 
among  themselves  by  love,  Eph.  2.  22.  [4]  To 
preserve,  bless,  and  prosper,  Psal.  127.  1.  Jer 

24.  6.  [.5]  To  settle  and  establish,  I  Sam.  2.  35. 
Who  dill   build  Ihe   house  of  Israel,  Ruth  4.  11. 

lyho  did  increase  his  family  by  a  numerous 
progeny. 

I  will  build  up  ihy  throne,  Psal.  89.  4.  I  will  per- 
petuate the  kingdom  to  thy  posterity. 

Shall  build  the  old  wastes,  Jsa.  61.  4.  7'Ac  Gen- 
tiles, who  have  becji  lonir  destitute  of  the  true 
knowledge  of  Gnd,  and  like  a  wilderness  over- 
grown with  briers  and  thorns,  shall  be  brought, 
by  the  ministry  of  the  word,  to  know  and  serve 
the  true  God. 

BUILD  referred  to  God. 

1  Sam.  2. 35.  I  will  raise  np  a  priest,  and  will  A.  him 
a  sure  house,  2Snm.  7.27.  1  Kings  II.  38. 

1  Chron.  17.  10.  ihal  the  Lord  will  A.  thee  a  house 

25.  hast  told  thai  thou  will  A.  him  a  house 
r.inZ.  28. 5.  he  shall  destroy,  and  not  A.  Ihem  up 

51.18.  do  good  toSion,  A.  the  walls  of  .lerusaleia 
69.  35.  for  God  will  A.  the  cities  of  Judah 
89.  4.  and  A.  up  thy  llironc  to  all  sencralions 
102.  16.  when  Lord  shall  A.  up  Zion,  will  appear 
127.  1.  except  Lord  A.  house,  they  labour  in  vain 
147.2.  Ld.  dolh  A.  up  Jerusalem,  gathers  outrasia 
,Irr.  18.  9.  I  speak  eoiiceriiiiig  a  nation  lo  A.  it 
24.  6.  I  will  A.  and  not  pull  them  down.  31.28. 
31.  4.  again  I  will  A.  thee,  O  virgin  of  Israel 
33.7.  I  will  ft.  Juiliih  and  Israel  as  nt  the  first 
42. 10.  If  ve  will  abide  in  this  land  I  will  A.  you 
F.zek.  .30.  36.  that  I  Ihe  Lord  ft.  the  ruined  places 
.^mo.«9.  II.  I  will  ft.  it  as  in  the  days  of  old 
Mai.  16.  18.  on  this  rock  will  I  A.  my  church 
26  61.  InmiihleloA.iliiilhreednys.  J/urA-  14.  58. 
.1cts\5. 16.  I  will  ft.  again  the  laberuacloof  David 

BUILD  altars. 
Erod.  00.  25.  shalt  not  A.  an  altar  of  hewn  sinne 
JVum.2:i. l.HaliiHiiisnid,A.mehereseven  allars,^X 
DeutM,'.^.  tliire  thou  shall  A.  iiii  attnnotlie  Lord 
6  Ihou  shall  A.n/tnrof  Ihe  Lord  of  whole  slone« 
Josh.  22.  29.  God  liiibid,  we  rebel  and  A.  un  altar 
See  Bko.^n. 
BUILD  joineil  wilh  house. 
Deut.  2,5.  9.  man  that  will  noi  A.  his  brother's  ». 
2><.  31).  shall  A.  a  A.,  not  dwell  in  it,  /.rpk.  1.  13. 
Kulh  4.  11.  which  two  did  A.  the  Ao«.«r  of  Israel 
2.S<iin.  7.  5.  shall  Ihuu  A.  me  n  house  lo  dwell  in  t 
7.  spake  I,  saving,  why  A.  ye  nol  me  n  A.ofc^Har  1 
13.  thy  seed  shall  A.  a  house  for  mv  iiHmo,l  Kinc* 
5.  3.  1  8.  19.  1  CAr.  17.  12.  \  22. 10. 
1  Kings '2.  36.  A.  thee  a  A.  in  Jerusalem,  and  dwell 


BUI 

Kings  3.  3.  David  could  not  b.  a  k.  for  wars  about 

5.  I  purposi;  to  ft.  a  A.  to  Lord,  2  Chr.  2. 1.  [him 

8. 16.  I  cliose  no  city  "to  b.  a  koiise,  2  Chron.  6.  5 

17.  it  was  in  heart  of  David  my  father  \.o  b.  a.  h 

for  God  of  Israel,  1  Chr.  28.  2.  2  Chr.  0.  7 

■  Ckr.  17.  12.  he  shall  b.  me  a  Ao««c,  2  CAr.  6.  9. 

22.  6.  9halt  not  b.  a  h.  because  thou  shed  blood 

11.  my  son,  b.  the  A.  of  Lord,  as  he  said  of  thee 
2d.  G.  Solomon  shall  b.  my  house  and  my  courts 
3  CAr.  2.  -1.  behold,  t  ft.  a  house  to  Lord  my  God 

5.  the  house  I  ft.  is  great,  for  great  is  our  God 

6.  who  is   able  to  ft.  him  a  house'!  who  am  I 

then  that  I  should  ft.  him  a  house 

30.23.  lie  hath  charged  me  to  A. him  aA.£irttl.2. 

iCira  1. 3.  go  to  Jerusalem  and  ft.  the  house  of  Lord 

5.3.  who  hath  comniundedyou  to  ft.  Onshouse?  9 

(i.  7.  let  the  governor  of  the  Jews  ft.  this  house 

PsaC.  127. 1.  they  labour  in  vain  that  ft.  the  house 

/*rop.24.27.  prepare,  and  afVerwards  A.  thy  house 

Isa.  65.  21.  they  shall  b.  houses  and  inhabit  them 

66.  1.  where  is  the  house  that  ye  b.  unto  me  1 

Jer.a.\i.\  will  ft.  me  a  wide  A.  and  large  chambers 

29.  5.  b.  houses  and  dwell  in  them,  and  plant,  28 

35.  7.  neither  shall  ye  ft.  Aoksc  nor  sow  seed 

F.zrk.  11.3.  whichsay,  it  isnotnear,let  usb.  houses 

2-S.  26.  they  shall  dwell  safely,  and  shall  ft.  houses 

Hag.  1.  8.  g«  to  the  mountain,  bring  wood,  h.  house 

Zech.o.  11.  to  ft.  it  a  house  in  the  land  of  Shinar 

j!lct«7.49.what  kar^ise  will  ve  ft.  me,  saith  the  Lord  7 

BUILD. 
Gen.  11.  4.  go  to,  let  us  ft.  us  a  city  and  a  tower 

8.  and  they  left  off  to  A.  the  city 
■Num.32.  16.  we  will  6.  sheep-folds  for  our  cattle 

24.  ft.cities  for  your  little  ones, and  folds  for  sheep 
/?eK(.20.20.  thou  shall  ft.  bulwarks  against  the  city 
\Kin>rs  9.  19.  all  the  cities  of  store,  and  that  which 
Solomon  desired  to  ft.  in  Jerusalem, 2CAr.  8.  6. 
24.Pharaoh's  daughter  came  up,then  did  A.  Millo 
11.7.  Solomon  did  ft.  a  high  place  for  Clieniosh 
In.  34.  inAliab'sdavs  Hiel  the  Bethelite  ft.  Jericho 
1  CAr.  22.  19.  ft.  ye  the  sanctuary  of  the  Lord  God 
29. 19.  give  to  Solomon  a  heart  to  A.  the  palace 
Chron.  I'^y.  let  us  ft.  these  cities  and  make  walls 
F.zra  4.  2.Tet  us  ft.  with  you,  we  seek  your  God 

5.  t  4.  what  are  the  men  that  A.  this  building  ? 
JVrA.  2. 17.  let  us  ft.  the  wall  |1  18.  let  us  rise  and  ft. 

20.  therefore  we  his  servants  will  rise  and  ft. 
4.3.  which  iheyft.if  afoxgo  up,lio  shall  break  down 

10.  so  that  we  are  not  nhle  to  ft.  the  wall 
r.ccl.  3.3.  a  time  to  break  down,  and  a  time  to  A.  up 
Cant.f^.  9.  if  she  be  a  wall,  we  will  A.  npon  her 
Isa.  9. 10.  the  bricks  are  fallen,  but  we  will  ft. 
45.  13. 1  have  r:iised  him  up,  he  shall  ft.  my  city 
58.  12.  they  shall  6.  the  old  waste  places,  61.  4. 
60.  10.  the  sons  of  strangers  shall  ft.  up  thy  walls 
65.  22.  Ilicy  shall  not  A.  and  another  inhabit 
Jer.  1.  10.  have  set  thee  over  nations  to  A.  and  plant 
F.zek.  4.  2. lay  siege,  b.  a  fort  against  it,  21.  22. 
.39.  f  15.  then  shall  ye  ft.  up  a  sign  by  the  bone 
Van.  9.  25.  to  restore  and  A.  Jerusalem  to  Messiah 
J?mn.t9.  11.  I  will  6.  it  as  in  the  days  of  old 

14.  Israel  shall  A.the  waste  cities  and  in  habit  them 
Mic.  3.  10.  thev  ft.  up  Zion  with  blooil,  and  Jerus. 
Z<'cA.6. 12.  bo  shall  ft.  the  f'mple  of  the  Lord,  13. 

15.  tliat  are  far  oflTshall  ft.  in  the  temple  of  Lord 
9.3.Tyrus  didft. herself  a  strong  h<dd,  heaped  silver 

,VriI.  1.  4.  they  shall  ft.  but  I  will  throw  down 
MaL  23.29.  ye  ft.tombs  of  prophets, /,)(/■?  11.  47,48. 
Luke\'i.\B.  I  will  pull  down  my  hams  and  ft.greater 

14.  28.  which  of  you  intending  to  ft.  a  tower  7 
'.V\.  this  man  bpgan  lo  ft.  and  not  able  to  fiidsh 

.'7r(.?20  32. to  the  word  of  his  grace,  able  to  ft.  you  up 
Horn.  15.20.  lest  I  ft.  on  another  man's  foundation 
lC>r.  3.  12.  if  nnv  h.  on  this  foundation,  gold,  silver 
Oal.  2.18.ir  I  ft.  again  the  things  which  I  destroyed 

nillLDF.D. 
Gen.  2.  t  27.  of  the  rib  the  Lord  ft.  a  woman 
4.  17.  Cain  A.  a  ciiy,  and  called  it  Enoch 
8.  20.  Noah  ft.  an  altar  to  the  Lord,  and  offered 
10.  11.  Asher  ft.  Nineveh,  Kehobnth.  and  Caleb 
11.. 5.  Ld.  came  to  see  the  tower  children  of  men  ft. 
12.  7.  Abram  ft.  an  altar  to  the  Lord,  13.  18. 
16.  t2.it  niav  be  I  may  be  ft.  bv  lier,  .30.  f  3. 
20.  2.5.  Isnae  ft.  nn  aVar  ||  F.xod.  24.  4.  Moses  ft. 
.Tosh.  22.  16.  in  tlint  ye  have  ft.  you  an  altar 
1  R'/nnr.e<'.27.howmu'-b  less  this  house  I  have  ft.  43. 

15.  22.  the  s'nn"S  wh°rpwi(b  Bnasha  had  A. 
^fCinrrs  23.  13.  Solomon  had  ft.  for  Aslitnreth 

1  Ckron.  22. 5.  the  house  to  be  ft.  must  be  magnifical 
F.tra  4. 1,  when  (he  adversaries  heard  that  they  ft. 
13.  he  it  known,  that  if  this  cilv  be  A.  IG. 

21.  give  commandment  that  this  city  be  not  ft. 
5. 8.  we  wen!  to  the  house  of  great  God  which  is  ft. 
11. wo  build  the  houao  that  was  ft.  manv  years  ajo 

1.5.  l»t  the  house  of  God  be  ft.  i  i  his  place,  fi.  3. 

6.  14.  elders  of  the  Jews  ft.  and  thev  prospered 
.VfA.4.1  "every  onehnd  h'S  sword  jirded,  and  so  ft. 
./fift20. 19.  he  hath  taken  awnv  a  housn  he  ft.  not 
Psnl.  122.  3.  .Teru«ale'n  is  h.  a  city  that  iscomtmet 
Pr«B.9  1.  Wisdom  hath  ft.  her  house,hewnoutpill. 

53 


BUI 

Prov.  24.  3.  through  wisdom  is  a  house  ft.  and  by 

understanding  it  is  established 

Eccl.  2.  4.  I  ft.  me  houses,  I  planted  vineyards 

Cant.  4.  4.  thy  neck  like  tower  of  D.  A.  for  armoury 

.Jer.  30.  18.  the  city  shall  be  A.  on  her  own  heap 

Aam.3.5.  he  hath  ft.  against  me,  and  compassed  me 

F.iek.  36.  10.  and  the  waste  shall  be  ft.  33. 

/>Micl7.28.tliey  bought,they  sold,they  plant.they  ft 

Epk.  2, 22.  in  whom  ye  are  ft.  together  for  habitat. 

Ueb.  3.  3.  he  who  ft.  the  house  hath  more  honour 

4.  for  every  house  is  ft.  by  some  man,  he  that  built 

BUILDEST. 

/?ett(.  6.  10.  to  give  thee  goodly  cities  thou  6.  not 

BUILDER,  S, 

Is  spoken,  [1]  Of  suck  as  erect  kouses,  &c.2Kings 

22.  6.     [2]    Of  Gad,  tke  great  -Irckitcct,  wko 

created  tke  heavens  and  Ike  earth,and  all  thing s 

in  them.,  Hcb.  11.  10.   [3]  Of  faithful  minister 

of  tke  gospel,  wko  like  wise  mastcr-buildcr.-< 

ougktfirst  to  lay  tkefoundatiun,  and  then  build 

uponit; first  to  acquaint  such  as  they  kave  tke 

charge  of  with  tke  fundamentals  of  religion, 

skewing  Lkem  tkat  Ckrist  is  Ike  only  way  to 

salvation,and  then  to  make  their  superstructure 

upon  this  foundation,  1  Cor.  3.  10. 

I  Kings  5. 18.  Solomon's  and  Hiram's  ft.  did  hew 

2Arm^sl2.11.1aid  money  out  to  the  ft.  that  wrought 

22.  6.  give  it  to  carpenters  and  ft.  2  Ckr.  34.  11. 

Kzra3.  10.  wlien  ft.  laid  foundidion  of  the  temple 

JVcA.4.5.have  provoked  thee  to  anger  before  the  ft. 

Psal.  118. 22.  stone  which  ft.  refus.  be.  head-stone. 

Mat.  21. 42.  Mark  12.10.  Luke  20.17.  yicts  4. 11. 

127. 1 1.  they  labour  in  vain  that  are  ft.  in  it 

F.iek.  27.  4.  thy  ft.  have  perfected  thy  beauty 

1  Cor.  3.  10.  as  a  wise  master-ft.  I  have  laid  founda. 

Wicft.ll.lO.looked  for  a  city  whoseft.and  maker  is  G. 

IPet.  2.  7.  the  stone  which  the  ft.  disallowed 

BUILDEST. 
/)c«<.22.8.when  thouft.  a  new  bouse  make  battlem. 
JVck.&.  6.  for  which  cause  thou  ft.  the  wall 
F.iek.  15.  31.  in  that  thou  ft.  thine  eminent  place 
Alat.  27.  40.  thou  that  destroyest  the  temple  and 
ft.  it  in  three  day.',  save  thyself,  Mark  15.  29. 
BUILDETH. 
./b.sA.  6. 26.  cursed  be  the  man  that  ft.  this  city 
.fob  27.  18.  he  ft.  his  house  as  .a  moth,  as  a  booth 
/'roi!.14.1.  every  wise  woman  ft. her  house,but  fool. 
.Trr.  22. 13.  woe  to  him  that  ft.  by  unrighteousness 
Hos.  8. 14.  Israel  hath  forgotten  Maker,  ft.  temple 
.1  nuts  9.  a.  it  is  he  that  ft.  his  stories  in  the  heavens 
f/ab.  2. 12.  woe  to  him  that  ft.  a  town  with  blood 
ICor.  3. 10. 1  laid  the  foundation, another  ft.thereon 

BUILDING. 
.fosh.  22. 19.  but  rebel  not  against  L.  in  A.  an  altar 
1  A'(»o-s3. 1.  till  he  made  an  end  of  ft.  his  own  house 

6.  7.  no  tool  of  iron  heard  in  the  house  while  A 
3R.  so  was  Solomon  seven  years  in  ft.  it 

7.  l.Solotnon  was  A.  his  own  house  thirteen  years 
2CAron.lC.6.  the  stones  wherewith  Baasha  was  ft. 

Ezra  4.  12.  ft.  the  rebellious  and  the  bad  city 
Ezek.  17. 17.  by  ft.  forts  to  cut  off  many  persons 
.Johnl.  20.  this  temple  was  forty-si.\  years  in  ft. 
.Tude  20.  ft.  iin  vourselvrs  on  your  most  holy  faith 

BUILDING,  Substantive. 

1  fTino-s  9. 1.  when  Solomon  fini.sbed  A.  house  of  L. 
15.21.  he  left  off  ft.  of  Ramah,  2  CAron.  16.  5. 

\Chron.  28.  2.  and  bad  made  ready  for  the  ft. 

2  CAr»ji.  3.  3.  Solomon  was  instructed  for  the  ft. 
Ezra5.  4.  the  names  of  the  men  that  made  this  ft. 

6.  3.  what  ve  shall  do  for  the  ft.of  this  house  of  God 

F.rrl.  10.13.  by  much  slothfnlnes^  the  A.  dccayeth 
F.zrl;.4U.^.  he  measured  the  breadth  oflhe  ft.  41. 15. 

46. 23.  there  was  a  row  of  ft.  roimd  about  in  them 
1  Cor.  3. 9.  ye  are  God's  hinbandry  ye  are  God's  ft. 
2Cor.  5. 1.  we  have  a  ft.  of  God,  a  house  not  maile 
F.ph.  2.  21.  in  whom  all  the  ft.  fitly  framed  together 
//sA.9.11.  a  higb-priest  by  a  tabernacle  notofthisft. 
Kcv.  21. 18.  ft.  of  wall  was  of  jasper,  city  pure  gold 

BUILDINGS. 
Mat.'H.  1.  disciples  came  to  shew  him  ft.  of  temple 
Mark  13.  1.  Master,  see  wlis.t  6.  are  here,  2. 

BUILT. 
Orut.  13.  16.  it  shall  he  a  heap  and  not  be  ft.  again 
1  h'ings'ii.  39.  the  cities  that  Ahab  ft.  are  written 
2CAr.  14.  7.  rest  on  overy  side,  so  they  ft.  and  pros. 

20.  8.  ibey  have  ft.  Iliec  a  sanctuary  therein 

26.  9.  Uzziab  ft.  towers  in  Jerusalem,  10. 

27.4.  Jolham  ft.  in  the  forests  castles  and  towers 
.Toh3. 14.  who  ft.  desolate  pla'-es  for  themselves 

12.  14.  hebreaketh  down, and  it  cannot  be  ft.  again 

22.23.  if  thou  mturn  to   .\bnirhtv,  shall  be  ft.  up 
P.svjY.  78.  69.  he  ft.  bis  sanctu:irv  like  high  palaces 

89.  2.  I  have  said,  mercy  shnll  be  ft   up  for  ever 
fsa.^.'i.  he  ft.  a  tower  in  thi- mid-t  of  his  vineyard 

44.  26.  saith  to  the  cities  of  Judah,  ve  shall  be  A. 

2^^.  sav  ng  to  Jerusalem,  thou  shall  be  ft. 
■  Ter.  12.  16.  shall  they  b"  ft.  in  midst  of  my  people 

31.  4.  thou  shnit  be  A.  O  virgin  of  Israel 

32.  31.  as  a  provocation  from  the  day  the?  b.  it 
4.5.  4.  that  which  I  have  ft.  will  I  break  down 


BUL 

Ezek.  16. 24.  thou  hast  ft.  lo  thee  an  eininont  place 
25.  bast  ft.  thy  high  place  at  every  head  of  way 
26.  14.  thou  shull  be  b.  no  more,  saith  the  Lord  G. 
/Jan.  4.30.  is  not  this  great  Babylon  I  have  ft.  1 
9.  25.  the  street  shall  be  ft.  again  and  tbu  wall 
ZccA.  6. 0.  let  hands  be  strong,  that  tem|)le  be  ft. 
Mat.  21.33.dig.  a  wine-press,6.a  tower,  Mark  12. 1. 
Luke  7.  5.  the  centurion  liatb  ft.  us  a  synagogue 
I  Cor.  3. 14.  if  work  abide  which  he  haih  ft.  tliereon 
Eph.  2.  20.  are  A.  on  the  foundation  of  the  apostles 
C'ui.2.7.  rooted  and  A.  up  in  him,cslablisln.d  in  faith 
Hcb.  3.  4.  but  he  that  ft.  all  things  is  God 

BUILT  altar. 
Gen.  33. 120  Jacob  ft.  an  altar,  El-clohe-Israel 
Exod.  17.  15.  Moses  ft.  a.  24.4.  ||  32. 5.  Aaron  A.  a. 
.fosk.  8.  30.  Joshua  ft.  an  a.  ||  22  10.  half  tribe  ft.  a. 
Judg.  6. 24.  Gideon  ft.  an  a.  |{  21.4.  people  A.  an  a. 
ISam.  7.  17.  Samuel  ft.  altar  \\  14. 35.  Saul  ft.  altar 
^Sam.  24.  25.  David  ft.  an  altar  to  the  Lord 
1  Kings  9.  25.  Solomon  offered  on  the  altar  he  ft 
18.32.  with  stones  Elishaft.  altar  in  name  of  LorJ 
-Kings  16.  11.  UriJMh  the  priest  A.  an  altar 

BUILT  altars. 
Ji'am.  23. 14.  Balak  ft.  seven  altars,  and  offered 
'ZKings  21.  4.  he  b. altars  in  the  house  of  the  Lord 
5.  ft.  a.  for  all  thehost  of  heaven,  2  CAron.  33. 5 
2CAro?i.33.15.  took  away  a.  he  had  A.  in  the  mount 

BUILT  City. 
JVum.21.27.  let  the  city  of  Sihon  be  ft.  and  prepared 
.Tosh.  19.  50.  Joshua  ft.  the  citi/  and  dwelt  therein 
J«'/o-.18.28.Danitesft.c.  II  l^;n<,rs  16.24.  Oinii  A.c. 
ICAron.  11.  8.  David  ft.  c.  round  about  from  Millo 
fsa.  25. 2.  a  palace  to  be  no  c.  it  shall  never  be  A. 
.Ter.  31.  38.  days  come,  the  city  shall  be  ft.  to  the  L. 
Lukei.  29.  tobrowof  the  hill  whereon  city  \vas  6. 

BUILT  Cities. 
Eiod.  1. 11.  they  ft.  for  Pharaoh  treasure-cid'c^ 
Josh.  24. 13. 1  have  given  you  cities  which  ye  ft.  not 
1  Kings  15.  23.  the  cities  which  Asa  ft.  are  written 
2CA)-«7i.R.  2.  fitics  Fluram  had  restored,  Solomon  ft. 
11.  5.  Rehoboam  ft.  cities  for  defence  in  Judah 
14  6.  Asa  ft.  fenci;d  c.  in  Judah,  the  land  bad  rest 
17.  12.  Jehosliaphat  ft.  castles  and  cities  of  store 
26.  6.  Uzziah  6.  cities  about  Ashdod,  and  among 

27.4.  Jotliam  ft.  cities  in  the  mountains  of  Judah 
/sa.  44.26.saithto  the  cities  of  Judah,  ye  shall  be  ft. 

BUILT  kousc,  or  Anuses. 
Drut.  8.  12.  when  thou  ha«t  ft.  goodly  k.  and  dwelt 

20.5.  Whatman  is  there  tbathntli  ft.  a  new  Ao«.?e? 
\  Kings  3.  2.  there  was  no  A.  ft.  lo  the  name  of  L. 

6.9.  Solomon  ft.  A.  14.  ||  8  13.  I  have  ft.  thee  a  A. 
8.  2(1.  and  have  ft.  a  Ao«sf  for  the  name  of  the  L 
44.  toward  kouse  I  have  ft.  48.  2  Chron.  6.  .34, 38 
11.  38.  build  thee  a  sure  kouse,  as  I  ft.  for  David 
ICftr.  17.  6.  saying,  why  have  ye  not  ft.  me  a  A.  ? 
2CAr.  6. 18.  how  much  less  this  house  \  have  A  ? 
Amos  5.  11.  ye  have  ft.  kousrs  of  hewn  stone 
Wo.o-.  1.2.  the  time  that  the  Lord's  A.  shmild  be  ft. 
ZeeA.  1.  Ifi.  my  A.  shall  be  A.  in  it,  saith  the  Lord 
Mat.'.  24. wise  man  ft.  his  A.  on  a  rock,  /.ukeG.  4fi. 
20. foolish  man  which  ft.  his  A.on  sand,/,7iA-e  0.49. 
Jlc's  7.  47.  but  Solomon  ft.  hii;i  a  kousc 
IPct.  2.  5.  ve  also  are  ft.  up  a  spiritual  h.  a  holy 

BUILT  AiVA/i/nres. 
1 /Tmj.sll.  23.  Judah  ft.  Au'Ap.  images,  and  groves 
iKings  17.  9.  children  of  Israel  ft.  fiigh  p.  in  cities 
21.  .3:  Manassehft.np  aga^n  AiVftp.  2rAron.3.3.  3 
7;.r.7.31.  ft.  high  V-  orTophetl|19..5.of  Baal,  32.  35 

BUILT  xroll,  or  walls. 
IKingsCt.  15.  Sidomon  ft.  the  walls  of  bouse  within 
2CAr.27.  3.nnd  on  the  irnH.«  of  Ophel  he  ft.  much 
32.  5.  Ilezekiah  ft.  up  the  wall  that  was  broken 
33.14.  Mamisseh  ft.  a  trail  without  city  of  David 
A'Vft.  4. 6.  BO  ft.  we  the  wall  ||  7. 1.  when  wall  was  ft 
F.zek  13. 10.  one  ft.  up  the  wall,  another  daubed  it 
T^rtW.  9.25.the  street  shall  be  ft.  again  and  the  wall 
Mic.  7.  11.  in  the  day  that  Ihy  walls  are  to  be  ft. 

BULL 
SisnificB,  fl]    The   beast   so   railed,  .Tob  21.  10. 
[2]   Pillars  in  the  shape  of  bulls,  Jer.  .52.  20. 
[3'!  lVicked,violcnt,  andfurious  enemies, PsfA 
22. 12. 

.Tab  21.  10.  their  ft.  gcndercth  and  faiVth  not 
fsa.  51.  20.  thy  sons  lie  as  a  wild  ft.  in  a  net 

BTTLLS. 
f7rn.  32. 1.5.  Jacob  took  ton  ft.  as  apreionlto  Ktu 
P.«a/. 22.12.  manv  ft.  have  comiia'^sed  me,  strong  A. 

.50. 13.  %ill  I  eat  flesh  of  ft.  or  drin'<bloodof  goati 

68.  30.  rebuke  the  mulfimdc  o''the  ft. 
fsa  34.  7.  bullocks  with  the  ft.  ^hall  come  down 
T-r.  .50.  11.  because  ve  bellow  as  6.  O  flcs-royerg 

.52.20.twe1vp  brasen  ft.  under  the  bases  with  calveg 
Heli.f\.  n.ifthe  blood  of  ft.  and  ff'iats  sanctifieth 

10.4.  it  is  not  pos-'i'de  blond  of  ft.  lake  awaysiiw 

BTTLLOCK. 

i^ro'Z.29.3.sh"ill  lirinstbemintbebasketwilh  iheA. 

11.  shall  kill  the  ft. before  l,ord,  /.ei-.  1..5.  i  9. 18. 

Aeri.4.4.  brinelbe  ft. to  ihedonr  of  the  tnbern3cl« 

JVitm.lS.'J.bring  with  theft,  a  meat-offering,  S89.37 


BUR 

Deut  17.'  not  sacrifice  to  Lord  anyJ.  with  blemiah 

33.  17.  [.',»  glory  is  liku  the  tirstliiig  ol'a  b. 
ludg.  G.  'ib.  lake  the  young  b.  the  sucujid  b.  '26 
\Kings  \ti.  23.  and  let  them  cliuuse  uiiu  b.  'io. 

'Si.  Elijuli  cut  b.  in  piece:!,  and  laid  liiin  on  wood 
Psal.  5U.  !J.  1  will  take  no  b.  out  ot°  thine  liousr; 
6'J.  31.  butler  than  a  b.  that  haih  honia  and  hoort 
ha^  t)5.  25.  the  lion  shall  eat  straw  like  the  b. 
Jer  31.  la.  as  a  b.  unaccustomed  to  the  yoke 

BULLOCK  with  sin-vffcring. 
Exod.  29.  30.  olfur  every  d.iy  a  b.  lor  a  sin-offering 
Ltns.  It).  0.  ehall  otTer  his  b.  ol'thc  sin-uffering 
izcA.  45. 22.  shall  prepare  a  b.  lor  a  sin-offering 
Hee  Blood. 
Young  BVLLOCK. 
I^evA  3.  if  pricslsin,  bring  ayoung  b.  F.ielc.  43.19. 
14.  congregation  shall  oiler  a  y.  b.  JVum.  15.  24 
Iti.  3.  .\aron  come  into  holy  place  with  a  young  b. 
A'um.  7.  15.  one  young  b.  one  ram,  one   lamb, 
21,  27,  33,  3'J,  45,  51,  57,  ()3,  tiU,  75,  81. 
SOiron.  I3.y.  lo  consecrate  himself  with  ayoungb. 
F.ztk.  45. 18.  take  a  young  b.  and  cleanse  the  sane. 
46.  G.  in  the  day  of  the  new  moon  a  young  b. 

BULLOCKS. 
Jfum.  29.  23.  on  the  fourth  day  ten  b.  two  rams 
lCAroft.2y.21.  they  offered  a  thousand  4.  for  Israel 
F.zra  6.  17.  they  offered  at  the  dedication  100  b. 
Psal.  51.  19.  then  shall  they  offer  b.  on  thy  altar 
60.  15.  I  will  offer  unto  thee  b.  with  goals 
Isa.  1.  11.  I  delight  not  in  the  blood  of  6.  orlarabs 

34.  7.  the  b.  with  the  bulls  shall  come  down 
Jer.  40.  21.  her  hired  men  are  like  fatted  b. 

50.27.  slay  all  her  4.  let  them  go  down  to  slaughter 
Ezck.  39.  18.  ye  shall  drink  the  blood  of  goats,  of  i. 
Hos.  12.  11.  arc  vanity,  they  sacrifice  b.  in  Gilgal 
See  Sevkn. 
BULRUSH,  ES. 
Exod.2.  3.  she  took  for  him  an  ark  ofb.  and  daubed 
/£a.l8.2.sendumbassador9  bythesea  in  vessels  of  4. 
58.  5.  is  it  to  bow  down  his  head  like  a  b.  ? 

BULWARKS. 
J)ntt.  20.  20.  thou  shall  build  b.  against  the  city 
iChron.  20.  15.  Uzziah  made  engim-s  on  the  b. 
Psal.  48.  13.  mark  well  her  b.  consider  her  palaces 
Keel.  9.  14.  a  great  king  came  and  built  b.  against  it 
Jsa.  20. 1.  salvation  will  G.  appoint  for  walls  and  A. 

BUNCH,  i:s. 

F.zod.  12.  22.  take  a  b.  of  hyssop  and  dip  it  in  blood 
2.t(7m.  16.  1.  Ziba  mei  him  with  100  h.  of  raisins 
lCAron.l2.40.Zebulunbroughli. of  raisins  and  wine 
/f  a. 3U.6.  will  carry  their  treasures  upon  6. of  camels 

BUNDLE,  S. 
Gen.  42.  35.  every  ni.Tn's  b.  of  money  in  his  sack 

1  Sam.  2.).  29.  the  soul  of  my  lord  bound  in  b.  of  life 
Cant.  1. 13.  a  b.  of  myrrh  is  my  well-beloved  tome 
/io.  .58.  to.  this  is  the  fast,  lo  undo  b.  ofthe  yoke 
..Imos  9.  t  R.  he  hath  founded  his  b.  in  the  earlh 
Mat.  13.  30.  bind  the  lares  in  b.  to  burn  them 
Jicts  28.  3.  when  Paul  bad  eathcred  a  b.  of  slicks 

BUR URN 

Signifies,  [1]  A  load,  or  weight  of  any  thing,  as 
much  a.^  a  man,  horse,  &.c.  can  well  carry, 
2  Kings  5.  17.  Jer  17.  27.  [2]  Labour  and 
tervitude,  Exod.  2.  11.  Psal.  81.  0.  [3]  Jl 
burden  someprvphecy,aheavydoom,ora  prophecy 
delivered  in  heavy  ami  threatening  words,  Isa. 
13.  1.  Nah.  1.  1.  [4]  Jiffiictions,  crosses,  cures 
or  fears,  Psal.  55.  «.  [5]  lmptTfecli(ins,fail 
ings,  and  infirmities,  with  which  persons  are 
loaded  nrgricred,G!i\.  6.2.  [6]  Toil  tindfuligue. 
Mat.  20.  12,  [7]  Tribute,  or  taxes,  Hos.  8.  10. 
f8)  The  office  of  a  vtagitlrnte,  E.xod.  18.  22, 
(9)  Human  lrnditions,or  strictinjunctions over 
and  above  what  the  law  rcr/iitres,  Mat.  23.  4. 
[10]  Sin, which  is  the  greatest  slavery  and  bur- 
den, Psal.  38.  4.  Heb,  12.  1.  [11]  The  lading, 
or  cargo  of  a  ship.  Acts  21.  3. 

The  doctrine,  or  commands  of  Christ  are  called  a 
burden,  Mat.  II.  30.  JVuthing  makes  them  so, 
but  one  corruption,which  flows  from  the  depra- 
vity of  our  nature;  to  the  unrerrwed  person  they 
art  a  grievous  burden  :  yet  thisburdeuis  light, 

(1)  In  comparison  of  the  service  of  sin,  the 
covenant  of  works,  and  the  ceremonial  law. 

(2)  To  them  thai  love  (iod,  1  John  5,  3,  (3) 
To  suck  as  are  regenerated,  so  far  as  they  are 
renewed,  Rnm,  7.  22.  It  is  light  ^n  such,  be- 
cause {\)  The  law  is  written  in  their  hearts, 
Tual.  37.  31,  (2)  Tk'y  are  endued  with  faith, 
Mark  0.  23  (3)  nei/  are  strengthened,  and 
enabled  by  Christ,  Pliil.  4,  13. 

FTorf,IP,22,8hnlll)c:irthr.«,wilhthpp,  JN'Hm.ll.  17 
23.  5,  th''  ass  of  him  that  hatnlh  lheelyin?iiniler  *, 

J^um.  4,  19.  Aaron  shiill  appoint  each  to  his  A. 
II,  II,  (hoii  iayest  the  b.  nrnlltbis  people  on  inf 

Dent.  1.  12   how  ran  I  tiiVHelf  alone  berir  yourA.  ? 

2  Vrtm    l.'i.  .33.  then  thou  "halt  bo  a  A,  t«  me 
19  35.  why  should  ihy  servant  be  a  A.  to  my  lord  7 

'ifCings  II.  1 28,  Jeroboam  ruler  over  A.  of  Juseph 

iKingsH.  17.  to  thy  servant  two  muloa'  6.  of  earlh 

X 


BUR 

2ff'(>!^«8.0.nazael  brought  fortycainels'A.to  Elislia 
il'hr.  35.  3.  it  shall  nol  Oe  a  b.  on  your  shiiuldurs 
jVeh.  13,  19.  no  b.  be  brought  lu  on  the  sabbath 
Job  7. 2U.  as  a  mark,  so  that  1  am  a  b.  to  myself 
f  sa^38. 4.  iniquit.  ag  a  6. they  are  too  heavy  for  nu 
55.  22.  cast  thy  A.  on  the  Lord,  he  will  sustain  llieu 
81.  6.  I  removed  his  ^houlder  lioin  the  A. 
Eecl.  12.  5.  and  the  grusshopjier  shall  be  a  A. 
Jsa.  9.  4.  for  thou  tiu<t  broken  the  yoke  of  bis  A. 
lU.  27.  his  A.  shall  be  taken  from  off  thy  shoulder 
14.  25.  his  A.  depart  from  off  their  shoulders 
30.  27.  name  ofthe  Lord,  the  A.  thereof  is  heavy 
46.  1.  your  carriages  are  a  A.  to  the  weary  beast 
Jer.  17.  21.  bear  no  A.  on  the  sabbath-day,  22,  27. 
Zeph.  3.  18.  to  whom  the  reproach  of  it  was  a  A. 
Mat.ll.'.H).  my  yoke  is  easy,  and  my  A.  is  light 
20.12.  which  have  borne  the  A.  and  heat  of  the  day 
.dels  15.  28.  seemed  good  to  lay  on  you  no  greater  A. 
21.  3.  for  there  the  ship  was  lo  unlade  her  A. 
Heo.  2.  24.  1  « ill  put  iijion  you  none  other  A. 

BURUKN. 
'iKings  9.  25.  the  Lord  laid  this  A.  upon  him 
Jsa.i'3.  l.the  A.  of  Babylon  which  Isaiah  did  see 
14.  28.  the  year  king  Ahaz  died,  was  this  A. 
1.5.1.  the  A.  of  Moab  )|  17.  1.  the  A.  of  Damascus 
19,  1.  the  A.  of  Egypt  II  23.  1.  the  A.  of  Tyre 

21.  1.  the  A.  of  the  desert  ofthe  sea,  as  whirlwinds 
11.  the  A.  of  Uuniah  ||  13.  the  A.  upon  Arabia 

22.  1.  the  A.  ofthe  valley  of  vision,  what  ailelh 
25.  the  A.  that  was  upon  it  shall  be  cut  off' 

30.  0.  the  A.  ofthe  beasis  ofthe  south 
40,  2.  they  could  not  deliver  the  A.  are  gone  into 

Jer.  23.  ;13,  what  is  the  A. of  the  Lord  !  what  A  .' 
30.  the  A.  ofthe  Lord  shall  ye  mention  nu  more 
38.  but  since  ye  say,  the  A.  of  the  Lord 
Ezek.  12,  10,  this  A.  concerneth  the  prince  in  Jerus 
Hos.  8.10.  sorrow  a  little  for  the  A.  olthe  kingofjir 
JVaA.  1,  1,  ibe  A.  of  IVineveh,lhe  book  ofthe  vision 
Jlab.  1.  1.  A.  which  llabakkuk  the  jirophet  did  see 
ZccA.9.1.the  A.  of  the  woidof  the  Lord  in  Hadrach 

12, 1.  the  A.  ofthe  word  of  the  Lord  for  Israel 
Mai.  1. 1.  the  A.  ofthe  word  ofthe  Lord  to  Israel 
(ial.  0.  5.  for  everv  man  shall  bear  his  own  A. 

BURDEN,  EU. 
Zech.  12.  3.  all  that  A.  themselves  be  cut  in  pieces 
2Cor.  5.4.  in  this  tabernacle  we  groan  being  A. 

8.  13. 1  mean  not  that  others  be  eased,  and  you  A. 

12.  16.  but  be  it  so,  I  did  not  A.  you,  caught  with 

BURDENS. 
^cn, 49. 14, Issachar  couching  down  between  twoA. 
F.xod.  1.11.  taskmasters  lo  afflict  them  with  theirA. 

2.  11.  Moses  went  out  and  looked  on  their  A. 

5.  4.  the  king  of  Egypt  said,  gel  you  lo  your  A. 
5.  you  make  them  ret^t  from  theirA. 

0.  6. 1  will  biing  you  from  the  A.  of  Egyptians,  7. 
jV/jm.4,27.  ye  shall  appoint  to  them  all  their  A. 
JVfA.4. 10.  the  strength  of  ihe  bearers  of  A.  decayed 
17, they  that  bare  A.  with  other  band  held  a  weup. 

13. 15.  all  manner  of  A.  brought  in  on  the  sabbath 
/.S(i.  58. 6.  this  is  the  fast,  to  undo  the  heavy  A. 
/-am.  2.  14.  the  prophets  have  seen  for  thee  false  A, 
Amos  5.  11.  ye  lake  from  the  poor  A,  of  wheat 
Mai.  23,  4.  Ihey  bind  heavy  A.  I.uke  11.  40. 
Oa/.  6. 3.  bear  ye  one  annther's  A.  and  so  fulfil 

BURDENSOME. 
Zech.  12.  3.  I  will  make  Ji.'rnsiilem  a  A.  stone 
'iCor.  11,  9, 1  havekept  myselffrom  beingA,  to  you 

12,  13.  except  it  be  that  I  myself  wasnot  A,  to  you 
14.  the  third  time  I  come,  I  will  not  be  A.  to  you 

1  Thcss.%^}. when  we  might  have  beenA.  as  apostles 
BURIAL, 

Feci.  6,  3,  and  also  that  he  have  no  A. 

Isa.  14,  20,  thou  shall  not  be  joined  with  them  in  A. 

./(T,  22, 19.  he  shall  be  buried  with  the  A.  of  an  ass 

Mat.  26.  12.  poured  ointment,  she  did  it  for  my  A. 

Acts  8.  2.  devout  men  carried  Stephen  to  his  A. 
BURY 

Signifies,  To  inter  a  dead  body.  Gen.  2.3.  4. 

To  be  burii'd  with  Christ  in  h  iplism,  Horn,  fi,  4, 
To  have  communiim  with  him  in  his  death  and 
burial.  Baptism  doth  not  only  represent  our 
mtrrtification  and  death  to  .fin,  by  which  we  have 
communion  with  Christ  in  his  death;  but  also 
our  progress  and  perseverance  inmorlification, 
by  which  we  have  eummvnion  irith  him  in  hi 
burial  also;  biirlnl  implies  a  continuing  under 
ilenlh, snis  mnr\ifirnt\onacnnlinualttyingto  sfn. 

Clm.  23,  4.  llial  I  may  A.  my  dead  out  of  my  sight 

fi.  in  choice  of  our  sepulchres  A.  thy  dead,  II,  15. 

47,  20.  A.  me  not,  I  pray  llieo.  in  Egypt,  49. 29. 

50.  5,  lot  me  go  and  A,  iny  father  I  will  como  again 

0,  go  np  and  A.  thy  falhc-r,  as  hemado  thcesweiir 

Deut.  21,23,  Ihou  shall  in  any  wise  A,  him  thai  day 

\Kings  2,  31,  en  and  fall  upon  Juab  and  A,  him 
11,  15.  wlion  Joab  was  gone  up  lo  h.  thr  slain 

13,  29,  the  old  prophet  came  lo  mourn  and  A.  him 

31.  when  I  am  dead,  A,  me  in  Ihi:  sepulchre 

14,  13,  Isra>"l  shall  mourn  for  him  and  A,  him 
'iKinaa^.  10, and  there  shall  be  none  to*,  Jezi'bel 

34,  go  see  now  this  cursed  woman,  and  A.  her 


BUR 

2A'in^»9.35,  they  went  lo  A.  her,  but  found  only  th« 

I'sal.  79.  3.  and  there  was  none  to  A.  thein  [scull 
Jer.  7.  32.  for  liiey  shall  A,  in  Tophet,  19.  11. 

14.  16.  and  they  shall  have  none  to  A.  them 

i!.'2et.39.l  l.there  sh.ill  iheyA  Gog  and  his  multitude 

13.  yea,  all  the  people  of  tne  land  shall  A.  them 

Hns.  9.  0.  Egyjit  gather  up,  Wemiihis  shall  A.  Iheik 

jMu«.  8. 21.  suiter  me  to  go  A.  my  father,  Luke'i.b'J. 

22,  and  let  the  dead  A.  their  dead,  J,uke\i.  60. 

27.  7.  bought  the  potter's  lield  to  A.  strangers  in 
John  19.  40,  as  the  manner  ofthe  Jews  is  to  A. 

BURIED.  [wife 

(7fn.  25.  10.  there  was  Abraham  A.  and  Sarah  hia 

49.  31.  there  they  A.  Abraham  and  Sarah  his  w  ife, 

Isaac  and  Rebekah  his  wife,aiid  there  I  A.  Leah 

J^um.  11,  34.  there  they  A.  the  people  that  lusted 

20,  1.  Miriam  died  there,  and  was  A.  there 

33.  4.  for  the  Egyptians  A.  all  their  tirst-burn 
iJeut.  10.  6.  there  .Aaron  died,  and  there  he  was  A. 
/usA.24.32.lhe  bones  of  Joseph  A.  they  in  Shechen\ 
WutAl. 17. where  diesll  will  die,  and  there  will  be  A. 
i-Sam.  4.  12.  they  took  head  of  Ish-boshelh  and  A.  it 

21. 14.  bones  ol  Saul  amlJunalhan  they  A.in  Zelah 
i  Kings  13.31.  bury  me  where  the  man  of  God  is  A. 
Keel.  8. 10,  and  so  1  saw  Ihe  wicked  A.  [33. 

/er.  8.  2.  not  be  gathered  nor  A.  10,  6.  |  20.  6.  |  25. 

16.  4.  they  shall  not  be  lamented  nor  A. 

22.  19,  he  shall  be  A.  with  the  burial  of  an  agg 
i^Zfi.  39,15,  set  up  a  sign,  till  burieis  have  A,  it 
Mat.  14.  12.  his  iliscijiles  look  the  body  and  A.  it 
J^uke  10.  22,  the  rich  man  also  died  and  was  A. 
Aets2.W.  the  patriarch  David  is  both  dead  and  A. 

5.  9.  the  feet  of  them  which  A,  lliy  husband 

10.  carrying  her  Ibrtli,  A.  her  by  her  husband 
Rom.  0. 4,  we  are  A.  with  him  by  baptism  into  death 
iCor.  15,  4.  that  he  was  A.  and  rose  again  third  day 
Col.  a.  12.  A.  »ilh  him  in  baptism,  wherein  are  risen 

BURIED  A,m. 
Deut.  34,0, lieA.  Aim  in  a  valley. in  the  land  ofMoab 
2ium.  2.  5.  blessed  be  ye  that  have  A.  Saul 
I  A'ings  14.  18.  they  A.  Arm,  all  Israel  mourned  him 
2CArort.21.20.  they  A,  Jeborain  in  Ihe  My  of  David 
24,  10.  A.  Jehoiada  in  ciiy  of  David,  «nong  kinga 
S.'i.tbey  A.  Aim  iiol  in  the  sepulchres  of  the  kiiigi 
Actsb.6.  the  young  men  carried  him  out,  and  b.him 

BURIED  !7i. 
Gen.  15.  15.  and  thou  shall  be  A.  in  a  good  old  age 
iKings  2. 10.  Daviil  was  A.  in  the  city  of  David 

.34.  Joab  A.  in  his  own  house  in  the  wilderness 

"Kings^i  .IS.Manasseh  w  asA.ingarden  of  his  house 

20.Ainon  was  A.in  sepulchre,  in  garden  of  Uzzah 

■  hb  27.  15,  those  that  remain  shall  be  A.  in  dea;h 
BURIED  If  i7/i  his  fathers. 

]Kingsi4.'M.  Rehoboam  ||  15,24, AsaA, icj'fA  Ai>/ 
22,.50.  Jehoshaphal  ||2A'i;i^'-/i8,24,  Jorani  b.withf 
12.21.  Joa»h  A.  withf.  ||  14.20,  Amaziah  A.  withf. 
15.7.Azariah  1| 38.  Joi ham  ||  10.  20.Almz  A.  uiiAf 

BURIERS. 
Kzek.20.  15.  shall  set  up  a  .«i;n  till  A.  have  buried 

BURYING. 
Ocji,23,4,  a  possess.of  a  A,  place,  9. 1 49.  .30,  |  .'iO.  1.3. 

■  fudg.  16,  31,  buried  Samson  in  A.  place  of  Manoah 
2A'i7i^'-«]3.2l.asthey  MereA.aman,theyspicd  aband 
Kzck.X).  12,  seven  months  shall  Israel  be  A.  of  them 
Mark  14.8.  she  is  come  lo  anoint  my  body  lo  Ihe  b. 
John  12.  7.  against  dav  of  iny  A.  halh  she  kept  this 

BURN 
Signifies, [1]  Tnci>nsume,or  destroy  trith fire, io^h. 

11,  13.  [2]  To  be  inflamed  vithjust  angerani 
indignalion,lAun.^.3.  [3]  To  be  perpetually 
haunted  with  riolryit,  lustful  desires,  1  Cor. 7,9. 
[■1]  Tobe  filled  with  a  holy  zeal  for  the  glory  of 
God,  and  the  good  of  others,  2  Cor.  11.  29, 

The  bush  burned,  and  was  not  consumed,  F.zod.  3, 
2,    TAi>  reprrsented  the  condition  of  the  church 
and  people  of  Israel,  who  were  then  in  the  fire  of 
affliction  ;  yet  so  as  that  God  was pmrnt  with 
them,  and  that  they  should  not  be  consumed  in 
it,  whereof  this  vision  teas  a  pledge. 
The  spirit  of  biiniin;,  Isa.  4.  4.     The  Holy  ■''piril 
of  God,  who  is  rmnpared  to  fire,  Mai.  3.  1 1    be- 
cause he  dofh  burn  vp  and  ennswrne  the  dross 
which  is  in  the  church,  and  in  the  minds  and 
heartsvf  men,  and  inflames  the  souls  of  believ- 
ers with  lore  to  God,  and  zeal  for  his  glory. 
Gen.  ■14,  18,  Jndah  said,  let  mil  thine  anger  A. 
f;i«(/.27.20,conininnd  IhnI  they  Firing  pure  olive-oiJ 
to  causo  Ihe  lamp  lo  A.  al«  ay,  Lev.  24.  2. 
29.  13.  shall  lake  caul,  liver,  ami  kidnevs,  nrd  A. 
upon  the  atlnr,  18,  25.  Lev.  I,  9,  15,  [  5,  2,r,  10. 
I  3,  5,  1 1,  16.  I  5,  12,  I  6.  15,  I  9.  17,  JV»m,  5  86. 
/.fc,4,I9.  priest  shall  lake  fat  mihI  A.  npnn  thonllnr, 
20,  3J,  I  7.  31,  I  10,  25,  I  17.  fi.  JTum.  IR  17. 
A"l/m,  19.  .I,  one  shall  A,  the  h.Mfer  in  hid  sight 
.losh.  II.  13,  save  flavor  onlv,  thai  di<l  Jnshiin  b. 
l■^'am,  2.  10.  let  I  hem  not  fail  lo  A.  Ihe  fnl  prewnlly 
IChron.  2.  fi.  save  only  to  A,  sacrifii-e  before  ihoni 
13,  11.  and  Ihey  A.  lo  Ihe  Lord  every  morning 
Isa.  1.  31.  they  shall  bnlh  A.  loeMher,  none  quench 
10. 17.  It  shall  A.  and  dcTour  hia  ihoins  and  brier' 


BUR 

/sa.27.4.I  would  go  thro'  them,and  i.them  together 
40.16.  Lebanon  is  not  sufficient  to  i.nor  the  beasts 
44. 15.  then  shall  it  be  for  a  man  to  b.  he  will  take 
Jer.  7.  iiO.  my  fury  shall  b.  and  not  be  quenched 
'M.  5.  so  shall  they  b.  odours  for  thee,  and  lament 
36.  25.  that  the  king  would  not  *.  the  roll 
Eiek.  24.  5.  b.  also  tlie  bones  under  it,  make  it  boil 
11.  that  the  brass  of  it  may  be  hot  and  may  4. 
39.  9.  they  shall  set  on  fire  and  b.  the  weapons 
43.  21.  he  shall  b.  bullock  in  the  appointed  place 
JWA.  2.  13.  I  will  b.  her  chariots  in  the  smoke 
Mel.  4.  1.  the  day  cometh  that  shall  b.  as  an  oven 
Mat.  13.  30.  bind  the  tares  in  bundles  to  b.  them 
Luke  3. 17.  but  chaff  he  will  b.  witli  fire  unquencha 
24.  32.  they  said,  did  not  our  heart  b.  within  us  ? 

1  Cor.  7.  9.  for  it  is  better  to  marry  than  to  b. 

2  Ckir.  11.  29.  who  is  oflended,  and  I  b.  not  t 

BURN,  joined  with^re. 
Eocod.  10. 10.  that  which  remaineth  of  it  till  morn- 
ing ye  shall  b.  with  fire,  29.  34.  Lev.  8.  32. 
Lev.  13.  57.  b.  that  wherein  the  plague  is  with^re 

16.  27.  b.  withjjre  their  skins,  flesh,  and  dung 
Deut.  5.  23.  for  the  mountain  did  b.  with  fire 
7.  5.  b.  their  images  with_^re,  25.  ||  12.  3.  b.  groves 
32. 22.  afire  shall  b.  to  the  lowest  hell,  Jer.  17.  4. 
Josh.  11.  6.  thou  shalt  b.  their  chariots  with  fire 
Judg.  9.  52.  went  to  the  tower  to  b.  it  withyjre 

12.  1.  will  b.  thine  house  with/.  ||  14. 15.  b.  thee  /. 

Psal.  79.  .5.  how  long  shall  thy  jealousy  J.like^^rc.' 

89.46.  how  long.  Lord,  shall  thy  wrath  b.  \\V.efire7 

Jsa.  47. 14.  shaflbe  as  stubble,  the^re  shall  b.  them 

Jer.  4.  4.  my  fury  come  forth  iike^rc  and  b.  21. 12. 

7.  31.  to  b.  sons  and  daughters  in  the  fire,  19.  5. 

21.  10.  Nebuchadnezzar  shall  b.  this  city  with/. 

32.  29.  1  34.  2,  22.  |  37.  8,  10.  |  38.  18. 

Kiek.  5.  2.  b.  with^re  a  third  part  in  midst  of  city 

16.41.  they  b.  thine  houses  with_^re,  23.  47. 

Mat.  3. 12.  he  will  gather  his  wheat,  but  he  will  4. 

up  the  chaff  with  unquenchable /re,  Lukei.YI. 

Rev.  17. 16  shall  eat  her  flesh  and  A.  her  withjSre 

BURN  incense. 

J5zod.30.1.thou  shalt  make  an  altar  to  b.incense  on 

7.  Aaron  shall  6. thereon  sweet  inc.  every  morn.  8. 

IKings  13.1.  Jeroboam  stood  by  the  altar  to  4.  inc. 

2  Kings  18. 4.  the  children  of  Israel  did  4.  rac.  to  it 

1  Chron.  23. 13.  he  and  his  sons  for  ever  to  4.  inc. 
2Chron.  2.  4.  I  build  a  house  to  4.  sweet  incense 

13. 11.4.  every  morning  sweet  incense  to  the  Lord 

26. 16.  Uzziah  went  into  temple  to  A.  incense,  19. 
2a  25.  iu  Judah  Ahaz  made  high  placesto  4.  inc. 
29  11.  my  sons,  the  Lord  hath  chosen  you  to  b.inc. 
32.  12.  worship  before  one  altar,  and  4.  inc.  on  it 

Jer.  7.9.  will  ye  steal  and  4.  incense  to  Baal  ?  11.13. 

44. 17.  we  will  4.  incense  to  the  queen  of  heaven 
JIos.4.13.  they  6.  incense  upon  the  hills  under  oaks 
JIab.  1.  16.  therefore  they  4.  incense  to  their  drag 
Luke  1.9.  Zacharias  his  lot  was  to  4.  inc.  in  temple 

BURNED. 
Ezod.3.2.  bush  4.  with  fire,  and  was  not  consumed 

3.  I  will  turn  and  see  why  the  bush  is  not  4. 
Deut.  9.  15.  I  came  down,  and  mount  4.  with  fire 
32. 1 22.  a  fire  kindled  and  hath  4.  to  lowest  hell 
.Tosh.  7. 25. 4. them  with  fire,  after  they  stoned  them 

2  Chron.  25.  14.  Amaziah  4.  incense  to  the  gods 
34. 25.  have  forsaken  me,  and  b.  incense  to  gods 

Esth.l.l2.  the  king  was  wroth,  and  anger  b.  in  him 

Psal.  39.  3.  while  I  was  musing  the  fire  b. 

/xa.24.6.therefore  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  are  J. 
42.  25  it  4.  him,  yet  he  laid  it  not  to  heart 

Lam.  2.  3.  he  4.  against  Jacob  like  a  flaming  fire 

John  15.  6.  withered  branches  are  gathered  and  4. 

.^cts  19. 19.  many  brought  their  books  and  4.  them 

Rom  1.  27.  b.  in  their  lust  one  toward  another 

1  L-vT.  13.  3.  and  though  I  give  my  body  to  be  4. 

Heb.  6.  8.  is  rejected,  whose  end  is  to  be  4. 
12.  18.  for  ye  are  not  come  to  the  mount  that  4. 

Rev.  1. 15.  his  feet  like  brass,  as  if  4.  in  a  furnace 
16.  t9.  and  men  were  4.  with  great  heat 
BURNETH. 

Lev.  in.  28.  he  that  4.  them  shall  wash  his  clothes 
and  bathe  his  flesh  in  water,  J^um.  19. 8. 

P.«a?.46.9.he  breaketh  the  bow  and  4.  chariot  in  fire 
83. 14.  as  the  fire  4.  wood,  and  as  the  flame  setteth 
97.  3.  a  fire  4.  up  his  enemies  round  about 
■sa.  9. 18.  for  wickedness  4.  as  the  fire 
44. 16.  he  4.  part  thereof  in  fire,  he  warms  himself 
62.  1.  the  salvation  thereof  as  a  lamp  that  4. 
64.  2.  as  when  the  melting  fire  4.  the  fire  causeth 
65.5.  these  are  a  smoke  and  afirethatA.all  the  day 
66.  3.  he  that  4.  incense,  as  if  he  blessed  an  idol 

7»!r.48.35.  cause  to  cease  that  4.  incense  to  his  gods 

Joel  2.  3.  a  fire  before  them,  behind  them  a  flame  4. 

Jiet). 21 .8.  shall  have  part  in  lake  which  4.  with  fire 
BURNING. 

Oen.  15.  17.  a  4.  lamp  passed  between  the  pieces 

Lni.  6. 9.  the  fire  of  the  altar  shall  be  4.  in  it,  12,13. 
26.  16.  I  will  appoint  over  you  the  4.  ague 

Deut.  28. 22.  Lord  sHiall  smite  thee  with  extreme  4. 
32.  24.  they  shall  be  devoured  wilh  4.  heat 

Jab  5. 1 7.  as  sons  of  tha  4.  coal  lift  up  to  fly 
St 


BUR 

Job  41.  19.  of  his  mouth  go  4.  lamps,  sparks  of  fire 
Psal.  11.  t6.  on  wicked  lie  shall  rain  a  4.  tempest 

140.  10.  let  4.  coals  fall  upon  them,  cast  into  fire 
Prov.  16.  27.  in  his  lips  there  is  as  a  4.  fire 

26. 21.  as  coals  are  to  4.  coals,  and  wood  to  fire 

23. 4.  lips  and  a  wicked  heart  are  like  a  potsherd 

Isa.  30.27.  name  of  Lord  cometh  far,  4.  with  anger 

34.  9.  the  land  thereof  shall  become  b.  pitch 
Jer.  20.  9.  his  word  was  in  my  heart  as  a  4.  fire 
Eiek.  1.  13.  their  appearance  was  like  4.  coals 

21.  t  31.  I  will  deliver  into  the  hand  of  4.  men 
Dan.'i.G.  shall  be  cast  into  midst  of  a  4.  furnace,ll. 
17.  is  able  to  deliver  us  from  the  4.  furnace 
20.  to  cast  them  into  the  4.  fiery  furnace,  21,23. 
26.  Nebuchadnezzar  came  near  the  4.  furnace 

7.9.  his  throne  likeflame,  his  wheels  were  as  A.fire 
Hub.  3.  5.  and  4.  coals  went  forth  at  his  feet 
Luke  12. 35.  let  your  loins  be  girded,  and  lights  4 
John  5.  35.  John  was  a  4.  and  a  shining  light 
Rev.  4.  5.  there  were  seven  lamps  4.  before  throne 

8.  8.  and  as  it  were  a  great  mountain  4.  with  fire 
10.  there  fell  a  great  star  4.  as  it  were  a  lamp 

19.  20.  they  both  were  cast  alive  into  a  lake  4. 

BURNING. 
Gen.  11.  t3.  and  let  us  burn  the  bricks  to  a  4. 
Exod.  21.  25.  4.  for  4.  wound  for  wound,  stripe  for 
Lev.  10. 6.  bewail  the  ft.  which  the  Lord  kindled 

13.  28.  if  the  spot  stay,  it  is  a  rising  of  the  4. 
JVum.  11.  t  3.  he  called  the  name  of  the  place  a  4. 
X)e!i£.29.23.the  whole  land  is  brimstone,  salt,and  4. 
2  Chron.  16. 14.  they  made  a  very  great  4.  for  him 

21. 19.  people  made  no  4.  like  the  4.  of  his  fathers 
Isa.  3.  24.  there  shall  be  4.  instead  of  beauty 
4. 4.  purged  blood  of  Jerusalem  by  the  spirit  of  4. 

9.  5.  but  this  shall  be  with  ft.  and  fuel  of  fire 

10.  16  under  his  glory,  kindle  4.  like  4.  of  fire 

32.  1 13.  4.  shall  come  upon  all  houses  of  joy 

33.  12.  the  i)eople  shall  be  as  the  4.  of  lime 
Jlmos  4.11.  even  as  a  firebrand  plucked  out  of  the  4. 
Rev.  18.  9.  when  they  shall  see  the  smoke  of  her  4. 

BURNINGS. 
Josh.  11. 1 8.  they  chased  them  to  the  4.  of  waters 
Isa.  33.  14.  who  shall  dwell  with  everlasting  ft.  ? 
Jer.  34.  5.  with  4.  of  thy  fathers  the  former  kings 

BURNISHED. 
Ezek.  1.  7.  they  sparkled  like  the  colour  of  4.  brass 

BURNT. 
Gen.38.24.  Judah  said,  bring  her  forth,  let  her  be  4. 
Lev.  2.  12.  but  they  shall  not  be  4.  on  the  altar 
6.  22.  meat-offering  shall  be  wholly  A.  23.  |  8.  21. 

10.  16.  Moses  sought  the  goat,  and  it  was  4. 
J\rum.  16.  39.  Eleazar  the  priest  look  the  brazen 

censers,  wherewith  they  that  were  A. had  offered 
Deut.  32.24.  shall  be  ft.  with  hunger,  and  devoured 
15am.  2.15.  before  they  4.  fat,  priest's  servant  came 
2  Sam.  5.  21.  David  and  his  men  ft.  their  images 

1  Kings  13.  2.  men's  bones  shall  be  ft.  upon  thee 

15.  13.  Asa  ft.  her  idol  by  the  brook,  2  Chr.  15.  16. 

2  Kings  23.  6.  he  ft.  the  grove  at  the  brook  Kidron 

15.  he  ft.  the  high  place,  and  stampt  it  small 

16.  he  took  bones  out  of  sepulchres  and  ft.  them 
25.  9.  4.  the  house  of  L.  2  Chr.  36. 19.  Jer.  52. 13. 

./oft  30.  30.  and  my  bones  are  4.  with  heat 

Psal.  102.3.  my  skin  black,  bones  are  4.  as  a  hearth 

Prov.  6.  27.  take  fire,  and  his  clothes  not  be  4. 

28.  can  one  go  on  coals  and  his  feet  not  be  4.  ? 
Jer.  2.  15.  his  cities  are  ft.  ||  6.  29.  the  bellows  are  4. 
36.  28.  in  the  roll  which  jehoiakim  hath  4. 
51.  25.  and  I  will  make  thee  a  4.  mountain 
Ezek.  20.  47.  and  all  faces  shall  be  4.  therein 
24.  10.  kindle  the  fire,  and  let  the  bones  be  4. 
Joel  1. 19.  the  flame  hath  4.  all  the  trees  of  the  field 
Jlmos".  1.  because  he  4.  the  bones  ofkingofEdom 
JVaA.  1.  5.  and  the  earth  is  ft.  at  his  presence 
1  Cor.  3. 15.  if  any  man's  work  be  4.  shall  suffer  loss 
Heb.  13.  11.  those  beasts  are  4.  without  the  camp 

BURNT,  joined  with /re. 

Exod.  32.  20.  he  4.  the  calf  in  the/re,  Deut.9.  21. 

Lev.  6.  30.  the  sin-offering  shall  be  4.  in  the /re 

7. 17.  but  the  remainder  of  the  flesh  of  the  sacrifice 

on  the  third  day  shall  be  ft.  with /re,  19.  C. 

20. 14.  if  a  man  lake  a  wife  and  her  mother,  they 

shall  be  ft.  with /re,  both  he  and  they 

21. 9.  if  the  daughter  of  any  priest  profane  herself 

by  playing  the  whore,  she  shall  heft,  with /re 

JN'iim.  11. 1.  Ihe/rcof  the  Lord  ft.  among  them,  3. 

Dcxtt.A.U.  ye  came  near,  the  mountain  ft.  wiOi/re 

12.  31.  their  sons  and  daughters  they  4.  in  the/re 

Josh.  6. 24.  they  4.  Jericho  with/re  and  all  therein 

7. 15.  it  shall  be,  he  that  is  taken  with  the  accursed 

thin»  shall  lie  A.  wilh  fire,  he  and  all  he  hath 

11.  9.  Jbshua  4.  their  chaViots  wilh /re 

11.  and  he  took  Hazor  and  A.  it  with /re 
Judg.  1.5.  6.  they  4.  her  and  her  father  with/r« 

14.  the  cords  became  as  fla.t  that  was  b. wilh  fire 
18.  27.  they  came  to  Laish  and  ft.  it  with /re 

1  Sam.  30.  1.  the  Amnlekilcs  ft.  Ziklag  with/re 

2  Sam.  23.  7.  they  shall  be  ulterly  4.  with/re 
1  Kinsrs  9. 16.  for  Pharaoh  had  A.  Gezer  with /re 

16.  18.  Zimri  4.  the  king's  house  with /re 


k 


BUR 

^Kings  1.14./j-e  from  heaven  4.up  the  two  captains 
17.  31.  the  8epharvrtes  ft.  their  children  with /re 
23.  11.  and  A.  the  chariots  of  the  sun  with  firt 
25.  9.  every  great  man's  house  4.  he  with /re 

1  Chron.  14.  12.  their  gods  were  4.  with /re 

2  Chron.  28.  3.  Ahaz  4.  his  children  in  the /re 
JVeA.  1.  3.  the  gates  thereof  are  4.  wilh /re,  2. 17. 
Psal.  80.  16.  it  IS  A.  with /re,  it  is  cut  down 
Isa.  1.  7.  your  cities  are  A.  with /re 

43.2.  when  walkest  thro' /re  ihou  shalt  not  bed. 

64. 11.  our  holy  and  beautiful  house  is  A.  with/re 
Jer.  38.  17.  this  city  shall  not  be  A.  with /re 

33.  thou  shalt  cause  this  city  to  be  4.  with /re 
49.  2.  and  her  daughters  shall  be  A.  with /re 
51.  32.  and  the  reeds  they  have  A.  with /re 
58.  Babylon's  high  gates  shall  be  4.  wiih/re 
Mic.  1.  7.  the  hires  thereof  shall  be  4.  with  the /re 
Rev.  18.  8.  she  shall  be  utterly  A.  with /re 

,  _       BURNT  incense. 
Exod.  40. 27.  ft.  sweet  inc.  thereon,  as  commanded 

1  Kings  3.  3.  only  Solomon  4.  inc.  in  high  places 
9.  25.  Solomon  4.  inc.  upon  the  altar  helbre  Lord 
12.  33.  Jeroboam  offered  on  the  altar  and  4.  inc. 
22. 43.  people 4.  inc.^ Kings  12.3. 1  14.4.  |  15.4,35. 

^KingslG.i.Ahaz  b.inc.in  high  places,2CAr .28.3,4. 

2  CAro7;.29.  7.  put  out  lamps  and  have  not  A.  inc. 
Isa.  65.  7.  which  have  A.  inc.  on  the  mountains 
Jer.  18.  15.  my  people  have  ft.  incense  to  vanity 

44.15.  men  which  knew  that  their  wives  had  b.ine. 
Hos.  2.  13.  the  days  wherein  she  4.  inc.  to  them 
11.  2.  they  sacrificed  and  A.  inc.  to  graven  images 

BURNT-OFFERING. 
Oen.  22. 7.  but  where  is  the  lamb  for  a  b.-offering7 
8.  my  son,  God  will  provide  a  lamb  for  a  b.-off. 
13.  he  offered  him  for  a  A.-o^.  instead  of  Isaac 
Exod.  18. 12.  and  Jethro  look  a  b.-offering  for  God 
29.  18.  the  ram  is  a  b.-offering  unto  the  Lord 
Lev.  1.  4.  he  shall  put  his  hand  on  head  o(  b.-off. 
4. 29.  he  shall  slay  the  sin-offering  in  the  place  of 
the  b.-offcring,  33.  |  6.  25.  |  7.2.  |  14.  13. 
6. 9.  saying,  this  is  the  law  of  the  b.-offering,  7  J7. 
7.  8.  the  priest  shall  have  the  skin  of  the  b.-off. 
9. 2.  take  thee  a  ram  for  a  b.-off.  16. 3, 5. 1  23. 18. 
5.  take  a  calf  and  a  lamb  for  b.-off.  12.  6.  |  23. 12. 
JV«m.7. 15.  one  lamb  of  the  first  year  for  a  b.-off. 
21,  27,  33,  39,  51,  57,  63,  69,  75,  81 
Ezek.  45.  15. 
23.  3.  stand  by  thy  b.-offering  and  I  will  go,  15. 

28.  30.  this  is  the  b.-offering  of  every  sabbath 

13.  for  a  b.-off.  of  a  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord 

14.  this  is  the  b.-offcring  o{  eyery  month 

29.  6.  beside  the  meat-offering  and  the  daily  b.-nff. 
./osA.22.20.to  build  us  an  altar  not  for  a  b.-offering 
Judg.l3.2'.i.  not  have  received  a  ft.-o_^.atour  hands 
lSam.7.10.a3  Samuel  was  offering  up  a  b.-offering 

13. 12.  I  forced  myself  and  offered  a  b.-offering 
2  Kings  3. 27.  offered  him  for  a  b.-off.  on  tho  wall 
2  Chr.7.1.  fire  came  down  and  consumed  the  b.-off. 

29.  24.  the  b.-off.  should  be  made  for  all  Israel 
Psal.  40.  6.  b.-offcring  hast  thou  not  required 

51.  16.  for  thou  delightest  not  in  b.-offering 

19.  shall  be  pleased  with  b.-off.  and  whole  b.-off. 
Isa.  40.  10.  nor  the  beasts  thereof  for  a  b.-offering 

61.  8.  for  1  the  Lord  hate  robbery  for  b.-offering 
Ezek.  44.11.  they  shall  slay  the  b.-off.  and  sacrifice 

45.  17.  princes  shall  prepare  the  b.-off.  for  Israel 

46.  2.  the  priest  shall  prepare  the  prince's  b.-off. 
13.  thou  shalt  dailv  prepare  a  b.-off.  to  the  Lord 

Contimial  BURNT-OFFERING. 
Exod.  29.  42.  a  continual  b.-offering,  JVum.  28. 
3,  6,  10,  15,  24,  31.  I  29.  11,  16,  19,  22.  Ezra 
3.  5.  JVfA.  10.  33.  Ezek.  46.  15. 

Offer  BURNT-OFFERING. 
Oen.22.2.take  Isaac  and  o/er  him  there  for  a  b.-off. 
I.cv.9.  7. go  to  the  altar  and  offer  thy  b.-offering 
JV«m28.  11.  in  beginnings  of  months  offer  &b.-off. 

23.  ye  shall  offer  these  besides  the  b.-offering 
.Judg.  11.  31.  I  will  offer  it  up  for  a  b.-offering 
13.  16.  if  thou  offer  a  b.-off.  offer  it  to  the  Lord 

1  Sam.  6. 14.  and  offered  the  kine  for  a  b.-offering 

7.  9.  Samuel  offered  a  sucking  lamb  for  a  b.-off 

2  Kings  5.  17.  will  henceforth  offer  neither  b.-off. 
2  Chr.  29. 27.  Hezekiah  commanded  to  offer  b.-off. 
.Job  42.  8.  and  offer  \\\t  for  yourselves  a  h.-offering 
Ezek.  40.4.  b.-offerimr  the  prince  shall  offer  in  sab. 

BURNT-OFFERINGS. 
Gen.  S.  20.  Noah  offered  b.-offerivgs  on  the  altar 
/CTorf.10.25.  also  give  us  sacrifices  and  h.-offerings 
20.  24.  and  shalt  sacrifice  thereon  thy  b.-offcrings 
JVum.  10. 10.  blow  wilh  trumpets  over  vonr  b.-off. 
Deut.  12.  6.  thither  bring  your  b.-off.  11,  14,  27. 
.Jnsh.  22. 27.  do  the  service  of  the  Lord  with  b.-off. 
1  Sam.  15.  22.  hath  Lord  as  great  deliffht  in  b.-off, 
1  Kings  3.  15.  Solomon  stood  and  offired  b.-off. 

8.  64.  middle  of  the  court,  there  he  offered  b.-off 

1  Chron.  29.  21.  thev  offered  b.-off.  to  the  Lord 

2  Chron.  2.  4.  behold,  I  bndrt  a  hunse  for  b.-off. 
7.7.  brazen  altar  was  not  able  to  rereivc  A  -off 
29.  7.  have  not  offered  b.-off.  in  the  holy  place 

34.  the  priest  could  not  slay  all  tlie  b.-offeringt 


BUS 


2  r^r.30.15.  Lovites  were  ashamed,  brought  h.-off. 

35.  14.  sons  of  Aaron  busied  in  otrering  b.-oj'. 
Kzra'i.  4.  otlcred  the  Uaily  b.-offcriiij/g  by  number 

6. 9.  tliat  which  they  have  need  of  lor  b.-offtrings 
Job  1.  5.  olferid  b.-off.  according  to  the  number 
Paul.  50.  ?.  I  will  not  reprove  thee  for  thy  b.-off. 

(Hi.  13.  I  will  go  into  thy  house  with  b.-offerin^s 
Ua.  1.  11    I  am  full  of  the  b.-offe.riiigs  of  rams 

43. 23.  nor  brought  me  small  cattle  of  thy  b.-vjf. 

5S.  7.  their  b.off.  shall  be  accepted  on  mine  altar 
Jer.  6.  20.  your  b.  offerings  are  not  acceptable 

7.  21.  put  your  b.-uJj'eriHgn  to  your  Bacritices 
22.  spake  not  to  your  fathers  concerning  h.-off. 

17. 2C.  shall  come  from  the  south,  bringing  b.-ujf. 

19.  5.  to  burn  their  sons  for  b.-offcrings  to  15aal 
J5:eA:.45.47.be  the  prince's  part  to  j^ixu b.-vffiriiigs 
JHos.  6.  t>.  the  knowledge  of  God  more  than  b.-uff. 
Jllic.  G.  0.  shall  I  cojne  before  him  with  b.-off.  ? 
Mark  12.33.  to  Idvl-  neighbour  is  more  tlnin  b.-nff. 
//ci.lO.ti.in  b.-og.Utx  .sin  thou  hast  bad  no  pleasure 

Offer  UUKNT-OKFEllIiNGS. 
ISam.lO.  8. 1  will  come  down  to  thee  to  offer  b.-off. 
2  Ham.  24.  24.  nor  will  I  offer  b.-offirings  of  that 
which  doth  cost  me  nothing,   1  C'Aro7i.21.24. 

1  Eings'i.i.  a  thousand  b.off.  did  Solomon  offer 
9.  20.  three  times  a  year  did  Solomon  offer  b.  off. 

F.zra  3.  2.  Jesliua  builded  the  altar  to  offer  b.-off. 
Jcr.  33. 18.  Lcvites  not  want  a  man  to  offer  b.-off. 
F.iek.  43. 18.  in  the  day  they  make  it  to  offer  b.-off. 
Amos  5.22.  tho"  ye  offer  me  h.-off.  I  will  not  accept 

liUUNT-SACRlFICE. 
i!:3;od.30.9.ofl'er  no  strange  incense,norA.-«. thereon 
J.eM.  1. 9.  the  priest  shall  burn  all  to  be  a  b.-s.  3.  5. 
JV!(m.23.ti.  lo  he  stood  by  his  b.-s.  and  the  princes 
Dent.  33. 10.  shall  put  whole  b.-s.  on  thine  altar 

2  Sam.  24.  22.  behold,  here  be  o.\en  for  b.-sacrifice 
1  King.i  18.  38.  fire  fell  and  consumed  the  b.-s. 
HKings  lli.15.on  the  great  altar  burn  the  king's  ft.-s. 
Psal.  20.3.  remember  thy  offerings,  accept  thy  b.-s. 

BURNT-SACRIFICES. 

1  Chron.  23.  31.  lo  otter  all  b.-s.  in  the  sabbaths 

2  Chron.  13.  11.  burn  morning  and  evening  b.-s. 
Psal.  CG.  15.  I  will  offer  tf)  thee  b.-s.  of  fatlinga 

BURNT  up. 
Judg.  15.  5.  the  fo.\es  b.  up  I  he  shocks  and  corn 
'iKing.i  1.14. tire  came  down, and  b.up  thetwocapt. 
Job  \.  10.  the  tire  of  God.  hath  b.  up  the  sheep 
Psal.  74.  8.  they  have  b.  up  all  the  synagogues 
106.  18.  fire  was  kindled,  llame  b.  up  the  wicked 
Isa.  3.  1 14.  for  ye  have  b.  up  the  vineyard 
64.  11.  our  holy  and  beautiful  bouse  is  b.  up 
Jcr.  9.  10.  i.  up  that  none  can  pass  thro'  them,  12. 
Mat.  22.  7.  the  king  sent  and  b.  up  their  ciiy 
2  Pet.  3.  10.  earth,  and  works  therein  shall  be  6.  up 
./fep.8. 7.  they  werocast  on  the  earth,  and  the  third 
part  of  trees  was4.«;), and  a  II  green  grass  wasA.w;) 
BURST. 
Job  32.  19.  it  ie  ready  to  b.  like  new  bottles 
Prov.  3. 10.  thy  presses  shall  4.  out  with  now  wine 
./(•r.2.20. 1  have  ^.ihy  bunds, 5.5.  |  30. 8.  jVuA.l.  13. 
Mark  2.22.else  new  wine  doth  4.bottle9,/.uAe  5.37. 
.4ctil.18.he  4. asunder  in  midst,  bowels  gushed  out 

BURSTING. 
/»a.  30.  14.  not  be  found  in  the  4.  of  it  a  sherd 

BUSH,  ES. 
Exorl.  3.  2.  in  a  flame  of  fire  in  the  4.  Jlcts  7.  30. 
4.  God  called  to  him  out  of  the  midst  of  the  4. 
Dcrut.  33.  16.  the  good-will  of  him  that  dwelt  in  4. 
Job  30. 4.  who  cut  up  mallows  by  the  4.  for  meal 
7.  among  the  4.  tliey  brayed,  under  the  nettles 
Isa.  7.  19.  they  shall  come  and  rest  upon  all  4. 
Mark  12.  26.  how  in  the  4.  God  spake  to  him 
J.ukrJ).  44.  nor  of  a  bramble  4.  gather  they  grapes 
20.37. 1  hat  dead  are  raised, Moses  shewed  at  the  4. 
Acts  7.  35.  the  angel  which  appeared  in  the  4. 

BUSHEL. 

Af/it.S.l.'i.nor  do  men  light  a  candle  and  put  it  under 

a  t.but  on  a  candlestick,  J»/(trt4.21.  LukcW.'Xi. 

BUSHY. 

Cant.  5.  11.  his  locks  are  h.  and  black  as  a  raven 

nusY-Bonv,  ies. 

2  Thcss.XU.  but  some  of  you  are  4.-4. 1  Tim. 5,13 

1  Pct.i.  15.  but  lei  none?  of  you  sulfer  as  a  b.-bodtj 

BUSY,  lED. 

1  Kings  20.  40.  as  thy  servant  was  4. here  and  there 

2  Chrun.  35.  14.  the  >^ons  of  Aaron  4.  in  offering 

BUSINESS. 
Otn.  39.  11.  Jo.aepli  went  into  house  to  do  Ids  4. 
Deut.  24.  5.  nor  shall  he  be  charged  with  any  b. 
Jonli.  2. 14.  our  life  for  yours,  if  ye  ulter  not  our  4. 

20.  if  lh"U  ntler  this  our  4.  we  will  bo  ^uit 
Judg.  H.  7.  thi'v  had  no  4.  with  anv  man,  2^. 
ISaw.  10. 1 2.  thy  father  hath  loft  tho'4.  ofthensses 
SM).  10.  didathide  thyself  when  tho  4.  was  in  hand 
21.  2.  let  no  man  know  any  thing  of  the  4. 
8.  because  the  king's  4.  rrcpiired  haste 
25.  t2.  llieto  was  a  man  whoso  4.  was  in  Carinel 
2  Chron.  13   10.  and  the  T.cvilen  wail  on  Ihoir  4. 
29.  1 15.  gathered  their  hrelbri'n  in  ft.  of  the  Lord 
32.  31.  in  the  4.  of  the  nmhaasadors  God  IcU  him 


BUY 

JWA.  13.  30. 1  appointed  every  man  in  his  h. 
Ksth.  3.  9.  to  tliem  that  have  the  charge  of  the  4. 

9.  I  3.  those  that  did  the  kuig's  b.  helped  the  Jews 
I'sal.  107.  23.  they  that  do  4.  in  great  waters 
Fruv.  18.  1 1-  he  tlial  intermeddleth  in  every  4. 

22.  29.  seest  thou  a  man  diligent  in  his  4.? 
Keel.  5.  3.  adreamcomelhllirough  multitude  of  4. 
JJun.  8. 27.  afterward  1  rose,  and  did  the  king's  4. 
AuAe2.49.wistyeuot  I  must  be  about  my  Father's  4. 
Acts  6.  3.  whom  we  may  appoint  over  this  4. 
Horn.  12.  11.  not  slothful  in  4.  fervent  in  spirit 

16.  2.  assist  her  in  what  4.  she  bath  need  of  you 
1  TAcss.  4.  11.  thai  ye  study  to  do  your  own  4. 
BUT. 

1  Sam  .20.3.  there  is  ft.  a  step  between  me  and  death 

2  Kings  7.  4.  and  if  they  kill  us,  we  shall  4.  die 
I'sal.  115.  5.  mouths  4.  speak  not ;  eyes  ft.  see  not 

6.  have  ears  4.  hear  not;  noses  4.  smell  not 

7.  have  hands  b.  handle  not ;  feet  4.  walk  not 
Mat  24.36.  4.of  that  day  and  hourknowethnoman 

37.  4.as  the  days  of  Noe  were,so  shall  the  coming 

Mark  5.  28.  she  said,  if  1  may  touch  ft.  his  clothes 

lC'or.4.19. 1  will  know  not  the  speech,  4.  the  power 

6.11.  ft.  ye  are  washed  ||  7.]0.yet  not  1,  ft. the  Lord 

12.  4.  4.  the  same  Spirit  ||  5.  4.  the  same  Lord 

6.  4.  it  is  the  same  God  which  worketh  all  in  all 

2  Ck>r.  2.  5.  he  hath  not  grieved  me  4.  in  part 

4.  17.  our  light  afiliction,  which  is  4.  for  a  moment 

(ial.  1.  12.  b.  by  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ 

But  the  end.     See  End. 

BUTTER. 

Gen. 18.8.  Abraham  took  4.  and  milk,  and  tho  calf 

/>fwt.32. 14.  ft.  of  kine,  milk  of  sheep,  fat  of  lambs 

Judg.  5.  2.5.  she  brought  forth  ft.  in  a  lordly  dish 

2i'(im.l7.29.Barzillai  brought  honey  and  ft. for  L)av 


CAL 

Ruth  4.  5.  what  day  thou  4.  the  field  of  Naomi 

BUYETH. 

Prov.  31.  16.  she  considereth  a  field,  and  6.  it 
Mat.  13.  44.  he  selleth  all  he  hath,  and  ft.  that  field 
Hev.  id.  11.  no  man  4.  her  merchandise  any  more 

BY  and  BY. 
Jl/at.13.21.  when  persecution,  ft.  and  ft.  is  oifcndet 
il/ari  6. 25.  give  me  4.  and  b.  in  a  charger  the  head 
/Mke  17.7. will  say  to  him  b.and  4.  sit  down  to  meat 
21. 9.  come  to  pass,  but  the  end  is  not  4.  and  b. 

BY-WAYS. 
Judg.  5.  6.  and  the  travellers  walked  through  6. 

BY-WORD.  [tion3 

Dcut.  28.  37.  thou  shall  become  a  4.  among  all  na- 
IKings  9.7.Israel  shall  be  a  4. among  all  the  people 
2  CAron. 7. 20.  make  this  house  a  proverb  and  a  6. 
Job  17.  6.  he  hath  made  me  a  4.  of  the  people 
30. 9.  and  now  am  I  their  song,  yea,  I  am  their  b. 
jPsa/.44.14.  thou  makest  us  a  4.  among  the  heathen 
Jod2.tl7.why  heath,  should  use  a  ft. against  them'! 


c. 


CABINS. 

Jer.  37. 16.  when  Jeremiah  was  entered  into  the  c. 

CAGE. 

Jcr.  5. 27.  as  a  c.  is  full  of  birds,  so  are  their  houses 
full  of  deceit,  therefore  they  are  become  great 
Rev.  18.  2.  Babylon  is  a  e.  of  every  uncleau  bird 

CAKE,  S. 
Kio(f.l2.39.  they  baked  unleavened  c.  of  the  dough 
/^eu.7. 12.  with  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving,  unleav.c. 
24.  5.  take  fine  flour,  and  bake  twelve  c.  thereof 
JVa7n.  15. 20.  otTer  up  ac.  of  the  fi:3t  of  yourdough 
Job  20.  17.  shall  not  see  the  brooks  of  honey  and  4.  |.^urfi''.7.13.  and  lo,  a  c.  tumbled  into  host  of  Midian 


29. 6.  when  1  washed  my  steps  with  4. rock  poured 
I'sal.  55.  21.  words  of  his  mouth  smoother  than  4. 
Prov.  30.  33.  churning  of  milk  bringcth  forth  4. 
Isa.  7.  15.  ft.  and  honey  shall  he  eat,  22. 

BUTLER,  S. 
Gen.  40.  1.  the  4.  of  the  king  of  Egypt  ofl"ended 
9.  the  chief  4.  told  his  dream  to  Joseph 

21.  he  restored  his  chief  ft.  to  his  butiership 
41.  9.  the  chief  4.  said,  I  remember  my  faults 

BU'i'TOCKS. 
2  Sam.  10. 4.  cut  ofi'garments  to  their  4.  1  CAr.19.4. 
Asa.  20. 4.  with  4.  uncovered  to  the  shame  of  Egypt 

BUY 
Signifies,  [1]  To  procure  any  commodity  by  price, 
iiSam.  24. 21.     [2]  To  receive,  by  such  ways 
and  means  «.«  God  has  directed,  those  spiritual 
bli:s.')ings  which  are  freely  offered  in  the  gos- 
pel, even  Chriat  and  all  his  benefits,  Isa.  55. 1. 
Rev.  3.  18. 
Gen.  42.  2.  get  you  down  to  Egyi>t  and  4.  for  us 
7.  said,  from  land  of  Canaan  to  4.  food,  43.  20. 
47. 19.  4.  us  and  our  land  for  bread,  we  be  servants 
Kxod.  21.  2.  if  thou  4.  a  Hebrew  servant 
Jjcv.  22.  11.  if  the  priests  4.  any  soul  with  money 
25.  15.  after  the  jubilee  4.  of  thy  neighbour 

44.  of  them  shall  ye  4.  bondmen  and  maids,  45. 
Deal.  2.  6.  ye  shall  4.  meat  of  them  for  money 
28.  68.  ye  shall  be  sold,  and  no  man  shall  4.  you 
Ruth  4.  4.  4.  it  before  the  inhabitants,  before  elders 

5.  thou  must  4.  it  also  of  Ruth  the  Moabitess 
2  Sam.  24.21.  David  said,  lo4.  the  threshing-floor, 
nd  build  an  altar  to  the  Lord,  24.  1  Chr.  21.24 
2  Kings  12. 12.  gave  it  to  masons  to  4.  timber,  22.6 
JVcA.  10.  31.  we  would  not  4.  it  on  the  sabbath 
Isa.  .55.  1.  come,  4.  and  eat,  4.  wine  and  milk 
.ler.  32.  7.  4.  thee  my  field  that  is  in  Anaihoth 

44.  men  shall  4.  fields  for  money  and  subscribe 
Jl/aM4.1.).  may  4.  themselves  victuals,  JIMrAr  fi.IJfi 
25.  9.  go  lo  them  that  sell,  and  4.  fi)r  yourselves 
10.  while  they  went  to  4.  tlie  bridegroom  came 
Mark  6.  37.  shall  we  go  and  4.  200  pennyworth  7 
/.uke  9.  13.  except  we  4.  meat  for  all  this  people 

22.  36.  let  him  sell  his  garment  and  4.  one 
.John  4.  H.  his  disciples  were  gone  to  ft.  meat 

6.  .5.  whenci?  shall  we  4.  bread  that  thesie  may  eat? 
13.  29.  4.  those  things  that  we  have  need  of 
I  Cor.  7.  30.  they  that  4.  as  tho'  Ihny  possessed  not 
.fam.  4.  13.  and  wo  will  4.  and  sell,  and  get  gain 
W(/).3.18. 1  counsel  thee  to4.(if  mi; gold  tried  in  fire 
13.17.  no  man  4.  or  sell,  save  he  that  had  the  mark 

BUY  rnrn 

Grn.  41.57.  all  countries  came  lo  Joseph  toft,  cor?! 
42.  3.  Joseph's  brethren  went  down  to  ft.  com 
„N7A.  5. 3.  we  have  morigiiged  our  lands  to  ft.  corn 

BUY/)oor. 
Amos  8.  0.  that  we  may  4.  the  ;)«or  for  silver 

BUY  truth. 
/Vo«.23.23.  J.  the  truth  and  sell  it  not,  also  wisdom 

BUYER. 
rrni'.20. 14.  it  is  nought,  it  is  nought,  saitb  tho  A. 
Isa  24.  2.  as  with  tho  4.  so  with  tho  seller 
Kick.  7. 12.  let  not  the  ft.  rejoice,  nor  seller  mourn 

BUY  EST. 
Ltv.  25.  14.  and  if  thou  goll  ought,  or  b.  ought 


2  .S'«wi.  6.  19.  David  dealt  to  every  one  a  c.  of  bread 
13.  ().  make  me  a  cou|ile  of  e.  in  my  sight  to  eat 

1  Kings  17. 12.  as  the  Lord  liveth,  I  have  not  ac 
13.  make  me  a  little  c.  first,  and  bring  it  to  me 

19.B.there  was  ac.bakenon  coal3,a  cruse  of  water 
Jer.  7.18.  to  make  c.  to  the  queen  of  heaven,  44.1!) 
F.z(k.  4.  12.  and  thou  shall  eat  it  as  barley  c. 
Hvs.  7.  8.  Ephraim  is  a  c.  not  turned. 
See  Flos,  Unle.^vened. 
CALAMITY,  lES. 
Deut.  32.  35.  for  the  day  of  their  c.  i§  at  hand 

2  Sam.  22.  19.  prevented  me  in  day  of  c.  Ps.  18  18 
.Job  6.  2.  and  my  c.  laid  in  the  balances  together 

30.13.  they  set  forward  my  r.  they  have  no  helper 
Psal.  57.  1.  my  refuge  until  these  c.  he  overpast 
141.  5.  for  yet  my  prayer  also  shall  be  in  their  c. 
Prov.  1.  2ti.  I  will  laugh  at  your  c.  I  will  mock 
6.  15.  therefore  his  c.  shall  come  suddenly 
17.  5.  he  that  is  glad  ate.  shall  not  be  unpunished 
19.  13.  a  foolish  son  is  the  c.  of  his  father 
24.  22.  for  their  c.  shall  rise  suddenly 
27.  10.  nor  go  into  thy  brother's  hou.se  in  day  of  e. 
Jer.  18.  17.  I  will  shew  them  the  back  indayofc. 
46.  21.  the  day  of  their  c.  was  come  upon  Ihera 

48.  16.  the  c.  of  Moab  is  near  to  come,  hasleth 

49.  8.  for  I  will  bring  the  c.  of  Esau  upon  him 
.32.  and  I  will  bring  their  c.  from  all  sides  thereof 

F.zck.  :<5.  ,5.  hast  shed  blood  of  Isr.  in  day  of  their  c. 
Obad.  13.  on  their  substance  in  the  day  of  their  c. 

CALAMUS. 
Fiod.  30.  23.  take  of  sweet  c.  2.50  shekels 
Cant.  4.  14.  spikenard,  safl'ron,  c.  and  cinnamon 
F.zck.  27.  19.  f.  was  in  the  market  of  Tyrua 

CALDRON. 

1  Sam.  2.  14.  he  struck  it  into  the  pan,  c.  or  pot 
Job  41.  20.  iroeth  smoke,  as  out  of  a  seething  c. 
F.zek.  11.  3.  this  city  i.'  the  r.  anil  we  the  flesh,  7. 

11.  this  city  shall  not  be  your  c.  nor  ve  the  flesh 
Mic.  3.  3.  tliey  chop  them  as  flesh  within  the  c. 
CALDRONS. 

2  Chr.  3.5. 1.3.  holy  ofl'erings  sold  they  in  pots  end  e. 
Jcr.  52.  18.  c.  also  and  spoons  took  they  away,  19. 

(■ALF. 
Grn.  18. 7.  Abraham  fetched  a  e.  lender  nnd  good 
F.rod.  32.  4.  after  he  had  made  it  a  molten  r. 

20.  Moses  burnt  r.  and  sirawed  it  on  the  water 
/,ev.  9.  2.  take  thee  a  young  c.  for  a  sin-oficring 

3.  lake  a  c.  and  a  lamb  for  a  burnt-nfleriiig 
/5n/r.9.16.  ye  had  sinned  against  the  Lord, and  had 

•  made  vou  a  molten  r.  J^rh.9. 18.  I'sal.  106.19. 
.Tob'i].  10.  their  cow  calveth  and  casleth  not  here. 
Psal.  2i».  6.  he  mnketh  them  also  to  skip  like  a  e. 
Isa.  II.  6.  the  c.  and  the  young  lion  together 
27.  10.  there  shall  the  c.  feed,  nnd  there  lie  down 
./rr.34.IH.  when  Ihey  cut  the  r.  in  twain  and  passed 
F.zrk.  1.7.  their  feet  were  like  the  solo  of  a  c.  foot 
Hns.  8.  ,5.  thy  r.  O  Samarin,  hath  cast  thee  ofl" 

6.  till-  r.  of  Samaria  shall  he  broken  in  pieces 
f.ukr  15.23.  and  bring  hither  the  failed  c .and  kill  it 

27.  thv  father  hath  killed  the  failed  c.  30. 
Acts  7.  A\.  and  they  made  a  c.  in  those  days 
Rev.  4.  7.  and  the  pcrond  beast  was  like  a  c. 

CALKERS. 
Eick.  27.  0.  ancients  of  Gsbal  were  in  thee  thy  « 


CAL 


JEieA.  27. 27.  thy  e.  Bhall  falj  into  the  midst  of  seas 

CALL 
8igni6es,  [1]  To  name,  Gen.  1.  5.  |  5.  2.  [2]  To 
appoint  and  qualify  a  person  for  some  work 
and  service,  E.vod.  31.  2.  Isa.  22.  20.  [3]  To 
cause,Oy  apoictrful  u>ord,tliosc  things  to  exist, 
■akick  had  no  being  before,  Horn.  4.  17.  [4] 
'J'o  invite,  warn,  and  exhort  by  the  dispensa- 
tions of  Providence,  Isa.  iti.  iH.  [5]  1'ocause 
to^ruWjEzek.  30.  29.  [6]  To  invite  sinner, 
repentance,  either  by  the  ministry  of  the  word, 
by  awful  dispe7isations  of  providence,  by  the 
motions  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  or  by  their  own 
consciences,  Prov.  1.  24.  Mat.  22.  14.  [7]  To 
bring  persons,by  tkeprcaching  of  the  word  and 
effectual  operation  of  the  Spirit,  to  know,  be- 
lieve, and  obey  the  gospel,  Horn.  8.  28,  30.  [fi] 
To  own  and  acknowledge,  Hcb.  2.  11.  [9]  'Jo 
worship, Gen.  4.'iG.  Acts  9.  14.  [10]  To  pray 
to,  Psal.  50. 15.  Jonah  1.  6.  [11]  To  appeal  to, 
2  Oor.  1.  23.  [12]  To  proclaim,  Jool  1. 14.  |  2. 
15.  [13]  To  reckon,  or  account,  Mai.  3.  15. 
Acts  10. 15.  [14]  To  be,  Lulto  1.  32.  where  it  is 
said  of  Christ,  Thou  shalt  be  called  the  Son 
of  the  flighest;  that  is,  Thou  shalt  really  be, 
and  be  acknowledged,  the  true,  eternal,  and 
essential  Son  of  (iod. 

Oen.  2. 19.  to  Adam,  to  see  what  he  would  c.  them 

Exod.  2.7.  c.  to  thee  a  nurse  of  the  Hebrew  women 
20.  where  is  he  ?  c.  him  that  he  may  eat  bread 

JVkw.  16. 12.  Moses  sent  to  c.  Dalhan  and  Abirara 
22.20.  if  the  men  c.  thee,  rise  up  and  go  with  them 

Deal.  4. 7.  as  God  is  in  all  things  we  c.  on  him  for 
26. 1  c.  heaven  and  earth  to  witness  against  you 
tills  day,  shall  not  pro.  your  days,  30. 19.  |  31.28. 

Judg  16.25. c.forSamsunthat  he  muymake  us  sport 

21.  13.  they  sent  to  c.  peaceably  unto  them 

1  Sam.  3.  6.  here  am  I,  for  thou  didst  c.  me,  8. 
16.  3.  c.  Jesse  to  the  sacrifice,  and  I  will  shew  thee 

22.  11.  then  king  sent  to  c.  Ahimelech  the  priest 

2  Sam.  17.  5.  then  said  Absalom,  c.  now  Hushai 
'iKings\.'2&.  c.  Bathsh.  ||  32.  c.  Zadok  and  Nathan 

8. 52.  hearken  to  them  in  all  they  c.  for  unto  thee 
17.18.art  come  to  me  to  c.my  sin  to  remembrance? 
18.  24.  and  c.  ye  on  the  name  of  your  gods,  25. 
S  Kings  4.  12.  Elisha  said,  c.  this  Shunamite 

10.  lit  c.  unto  me  all  the  prophets  of  Baal 
Job  5.  1.  c,  now  if  there  be  any  that  will  answer 

13.  '22.  then  c.  thou,  and  I  will  answer,  14.  15. 
Psai.4.1.hear  when  I  c.O  God  of  ray  righteousness 
3.  the  Lord  will  hear  when  I  c.  unto  him 
14. 4.  who  eat  up  my  people,  and  c.  not  upon  Lord 
20.  9.  save.  Lord,  Icl  tlie  king  hear  us  when  we  c. 
49    11.  they  c.  their  lands  after  their  own  names 
77  6.  I  e.  to  remembrance  my  song  in  tlie  night 
86.  5.  and  plenteous  in  mercy  to  all  that  c.  on  thee 
99.  6.  Samuel  among  them  that  c.  on  his  name 
102.  2.  in  the  day  when  I  c.  answer  me  speedily 
145.  18.  the  Lord  is  nigh  all  them  that  c.  on  him 
Proi).8.4.toyou,Omen,lc.myvoiceistosonsofmen 
9.  15.  to  c.  passengers  who  go  right  on  their  ways 
31.  23.  her  children  arise,  and  c.  her  blessed 
Isa.  3.  1 12.  O  my  people,  they  who  c.  thee  blessed 
cause  thee  to  err,  and  destroy  thy  paths,  9. 1 16. 
5. 20.  woe  to  them  that  c.  evil  good,  and  good  evil 
22.  12.  In  that  day  did  the  Lord  c.  to  weeping 
45.  3.  I  the  Lord  which  c.  thee  by  thy  name 
48.  2.  for  they  c.  themselves  of  the  holy  city 

13.  when  1  c.  to  them  they  stand  up  together 
55.  6.  c.  ye  upon  him  while  he  is  near 
58.  5.  wilt  thou  c.  this  a  fast  to  the  Lord  1 

13.  c.  the  sabbath  a  delight,  holy  of  the  Lord 
6.5.  IS.  and  c.  his  servants  by  another  name 

24.  itshall  come,that  before  they  e.  I  will  answer 
Jer.  9. 17.  consider  and  c.  for  the  mourning  women 
33.  3.  c.  unto  me,  and  I  will  answer  thee 
/.,(i?rt.2.15.is  this  city  men  c.  perfection  of  beauty? 
Hos.  \.  4.  the  Lord  said,  c.  his  na  ne  Jezreel 
6.  God  said  unto  him,  c.  her  name  Lo-ruhamah 
9.C.  his  name  Loammi,  for  ye  are  not  my  people 
7.  11.  they  c.  to  Egypt,  they  go  to  Assyria 
Joel\.  14.  sanctify  a  fast,  c.  solemn  assembly,  2.15. 
Jonah  1.  6.  O  nleeper,  arise,  e.  upon  thy  God 
Z.ech.  3.  10.  ye  shall  c.  every  man  his  neighbour 
Mai.  3. 15.  now  we  c.  proud  happy,  they  that  work 
Mat.  9.  13  I  am  not  come  to  c.  the  righteous,  but 
Binners  to  repentance,  Mark  2. 17.  I.uke  5. 32. 
20.  8.  c.  the  labourers  and  give  them  their  hire 
22.3.  sent  his  servants  to  c.  them  that  were  bidden 
43.  how  then  doth  David  in  spirit  e.  him  Lord  ? 
2.3.  9.  c.  no  man  your  father  upon  the  earth 
/-H/ireR.46.whyc.  ye  me  li.and  do  not  things  I  say? 
14.  13.  when  thou  makest  a  feast  e.  the  poor 
John  4.  16.  go  c.  thy  husband  and  come  hither 

13. 13.  vee.  me  Master  and  Lord,  and  ye  say  well 
Jlcts  9.  14.  to  bind  all  that  c.  on  thy  name 
19.  13.  to  c.  over  them  which  had  evil  spirits 
24.  14.  that  after  the  way  which  'hey  c.  heresy 
Horn.  10. 12.  same  Lord  is  rich  to  all  that  c.  on  him 
S  Cor.  1.  23.  I  c>  God  for  a  record  upoo  my  aoul 
S9 


CAL 

2  Tim.  1.  5.  when  I  c.  to  remembrance  the  faith 
2.  22.  follow  peace  with  iheni  liiat  c.  on  the  Lord 
Heb.  2.  11.  he  is  not  asliamed  to  c.  them  brethren 
10.  32.  butc.  to  remembrance  the  former  days 
Jam.  5.  14.  let  him  c.  the  elders  of  tlio  churcli 
1  Pet.  1.  17.  if  ye  c.  on  the  Father  who  judgeth 

CALL  on  the  name  of  the  Lord. 
Gen.  4.  26.  then  began  men  to  c.  upon  name  of  L. 
1  Kings  18.24. 1  wih  c.  on  nameof  L,.Psal.  116.17. 
'2hings  5.11. he  will  come  out  anU  c.  on  name  ofL. 
lC'AroH.16.8.c.upMnhi8  nainc,t'sal.U)5.i.Jsa.V2.i. 
Joel  2.32.whoaoover  shall  c.  on  the  name  of  the  L. 
shall  be  delivered,  Jicts  2.  21.  hom.  10.  13. 
Zeph.'i.SS.  that  they  may  all  c.  upon  name  ofUie  JL. 
1  car.  1. 2.  that  in  every  place  c.onthenameof  L. 

JVot  CALL. 
Oen.  17. 15.  shall  not  c.  her  name  Sarai  but  Sarah 
Judg.  12.  1.  and  didst  not  c.  us  to  go  with  thee 
Huthl.W.  she  said,c.  me  not  Naoini,e.  me  Mara 
Psal.  14.  4.  and  they  c.  not  upon  the  Lord 
Isa.  31.  2.  yet  he  will  not  c.  back  his  words 
^cr.lO.  25.  upon  families  that  c.  not  upon  tliy  name 
Luke  14.  12.  c.  not  thy  friends,  nor  thy  brethren 
John  15.  15.  hencelbrth  1  c.  you  not  servants 
jJcts  10. 15.  that  c.  not  thou  common,  11.  9. 
28.God  hath  shewed  me  7j.to  cany  man  common 
Shall,  or  shall  CALL. 
Gen.  17.  19.  and  thou  shalt  c.  his  name  Isaac 
IJcut.  25.  8.  then  the  ciders  of  his  city  shall  c.  him 
30.1. thou  shalt  c.thein  to  mind  among  the  nations 

33.  19.  tiiey  shall  c.  the  people  to  the  mountain 
Job  14.  15.  thou  shalt  c.  and  1  will  answer  thee 
Psal.  50.  4.  he  shall  c.  to  the  heavens  from  above 

72. 17.  blessed  in  him,  all  nations  s.  c.  him  blessed 
Isa.  7. 14.  shall  c.  his  name  Emmanuel,  jtfat. 1.23. 

34.  12.  they  shall  c.  the  nobles  to  the  kingdom 
41.25.  from  rising  of  sun  shall  hec.  on  ray  name 
44.5.another  shall  c.himscif  by  the  name  of  Jacob 

7.  and  who,  as  I,  shall  c.  and  shall  declare  it? 
55.5.  thou  shalt  c.  a  nation  that  thou  kno  west  not 
58.9.  then  shalt  thou  c.  and  the  Lord  shall  answer 

60.  14.  they  shall  c.  thee  the  city  of  the  Lord 

18.  shalt  c.  thy  walls  salvation,  and  gates  praise 

61.  6.  men  shall  c.  you  the  ministers  of  our  God 
62.12.they  shall  c.  them  the  holy  people,redcemed 

Jer.  3. 17.  they  shall  c.  Jerusalem  the  throne  of  L. 

19.  shall  c.  mo,  my  father,  shalt  not  turn  away 

6.  30.  reprobate  silver  shall  men  c.  them 

7.  27.  s.  c.  to  them,  but  they  will  not  answer  thee 
Hos.  2.  16.  and  thou  shalt  c.  rae  no  more  Baali 
Joel  2.  32.  in  the  remnant  whom  the  Lord  shall  c. 
Jlmos  5.16.  they  s.  c.  the  husbandmen  to  mourning 
y.ech.Vi.^.shall  con  my  name  and  I  will  hear  them 
Mal.l.i.  they  sA.c  them  the  border  of  wickedness 

3.  12.  and  all  nations  shall  c.  you  blessed 
Mat.  1.21.  thou  shalt  c.  hisname  Jesus,  shall  save 

10.25. how  much  more  shall  cthem  of  household? 
]^uke  1.  13.  and  thou  shalt  c.  his  name  John 

48.  behold,  all  generations  shall  c.  me  blessed 
Jlcts  2.  39.  as  many  as  the  Lord  our  God  shall  c. 
/i«m.l0.14.how  then  shall  they  c.  on  him  in  whom 

IVill  CALL. 
Gen.  24.57.  we  will  c.the  damsel  and  inquire  at  her 

30.  13.  for  the  daughters  will  c.  me  blessed 

1  Sam.Vi.  17. 1  will  c.  unto  Lord,  and  he  shall  send 

2  Sam.  22.  4.  I  will  c.  on  the  Lord,  Psal.  18.  3. 
,/ob  27.  10.  will  the  hypocrite  always  c  on  God? 
Psal.  55.  16.  as  for  me  I  will  c.  upon  God,  86.  7. 

80.  18.  quicken  us,  and  we  icill  c.  on  thy  name 

116.  2.  therefore  will  I  c  on  him  as  long  as  I 
Isa.  22.  20.  that  I  will  c.  my  servant  Kliakim 
.ler.  1.  15.  I  will  c.  all  the  families  of  the  norlh 

25.  29.  for  I  will  c.  for  a  sword,  F.zek.  38.  21. 
A'2cA.21.23.  he  will  c.  to  remembrance  the  iniquity 

36.  29.  I  will  c.  for  the  corn,  and  will  increase  it 
.flcts  24.25.  a  convenient  season  I  will  c.  for  thee 
iion2.9.25. 1  will  cthem  my  people  which  were  not 

CALL  upon  me. 
Ps.50.15.cup«n  me  in  day  of  trouble,  I  will  deliver 

91.  15.  he  shall  c.  upon  me  and  I  will  answer  him 
Prov.  1.28.  shall  c.  uponme,  but  I  will  not  answer 
Jer.  29.  12.  shall  ye  c  upon  me  and  I  will  hearken 

CALLED. 
Gen.  11.  9.  therefore  is  the  name  of  it  e.  Babel 

21.  17.  the  angel  of  God  c  to  Hagar  out  of  heaven 

22.  11.  the  angel  c.  to  Abraham  out  of  heaven 
35.  10.  thy  name  shall  not  be  c.  any  more  Jacob 

18.C  himBen-oni,but  his  father  c  him  Benjam. 

39.  14.  she  e.  to  the  men  of  her  house,  and  spake 
Kxod.  1. 18.  the  king  of  Egypt  c  for  the  midwives 

8.  8.  Phar.  e.  for  M.  25.  |  9. 27.  |  10.  Ifi,  24.  |  12.  31. 
.Vum.13.16.  Moses  c.  Osliea  son  of  Nun,  Jehoshua 
/Jf««.5. I.Moses  e.  all  Israel  and  snid  to  them,29.2. 

I5.2.not  exact  it,bccause  it  is  cthe  Lord's  relaaso 

28.  10.  shall  see  thou  art  c  by  name  of  the  Lord 
.losh.  21.  t  9.  save  these  cities  here  c.  by  name 

Tudg.  12. 1 1.  the  men  of  Ephraim  were  e.  toijethor 

14.  15.  have  ye  c.  us  to  take  that  we  have? 

15.17.  he  cast  away  the  jaw-bone,  and  e.lhc  place 
18.  Samson  was  sore  athirst,  and  e.  on  the  Lord. 


CAL 

J«rfn'.]5.tl9.  he  c.  it  the  well  of  him  tliat  c.  or  cried 
16.  28.  Samson  c  to  the  Lord  and  said,  O  Loid 

ISam.  9.  9.  tliat  is  now  c.  a  prophet,  was  c.  a  seer 

2Sam.  6.  2.  whose  name  is  c  by  the  name  of  the  L. 
12. 28.  lest  1  take  city,  and  it  be  c.  alter  my  name 
18.  26.  the  watchman  c.  to  the  porter,  and  said 
21.  2.  the  king  clheGibeonitcs,  and  said  to  tlienj 

1  Jiings  1.  9.  Adonijah  c.  all  his  brethren,  19.  25. 
18.  3.  Ahab  c  Ubadiah,  who  was  the  governor 
26.  they  c.  on  the  name  of  Baal  from  morning 

2A'tn^4-4.22.she  cto  her  husband  and  said.send  me 
7.  10.  they  came  and  c.  to  the  porter  ol  the  city 

1  Chron.  4. 10.  and  Jabez  c  on  the  God  of  Israel 
13. 6.  bring  the  ark  of  God,  whose  name  is  c  on  it 
21.  26.  David  c  on  the  Lord,  he  answered  him 

Esth.'i.lA.cB.me  no  more,e.\cepl  she  weroc.bynanie 
4.  11.  who  is  not  c.  1  have  not  been  f.  to  come 

.lob  17.  t  i4.  I  have  c  to  corruption,  my  liither 

P.?.53.4.  eat  up  my  people,they  have  not  c.upon  G. 
79.  6.  the  kingdoms  that  have  not  c.  on  thy  name 

/sa.31.4.a  mult,  of  shepherds  is  c. forth  against  liini 
43.  22.  but  thou  hast  not  c.  on  mc,  O  Jacob 

48.1. 0  Jacob,  ye  that  are  c.  by  the  name  of  l.^iiacl 
12.  hearken  unto  me,  O  Jacob,  and  Israel  my  c. 

61.  3.  that  they  might  be  c.  trees  of  righteousness  ' 
Jer.  7.  32.  that  it  shall  no  more  be  c.  Tophet 
Lam.  1.  21.  thou  wilt  bring  day  that  thou  haste. 

2.  22.  thou  haste  as  a  solemn  day  my  terrors 
Ezek.  20.  29.  and  the  name  thereof  is  c.  Bauiah 
Dan.  5. 12.  now  let  Daniel  be  c  and  ho  will  shew 
Mat.l.lty.  of  whom  was  born  Jesus,who  is  c.Chriat 

10.  2.  the  first  Simon,  who  is  c.  Peter 

13.  55.  they  said,  is  not  his  mother  c.  Mary? 

18.  2.  and  Jesus  c  a  httle  child  unto  him 
20.  16.  for  many  be  c.  but  few  chosen,  22.  14. 

32.  and  Jesus  stood  still,  and  c.  them,  and  said 
2;}.  8.  be  ye  not  c.  Rabbi,  one  is  your  Master,  iO 

26.  14.  one  of  the  twelve  c  Judas  Iscariot 

27.  17.  or  shall  I  release  Jesus,  c  Christ?  22. 
Mark  10.  49.  Jesus  commanded  him  to  be  c. 

14.  72.  Peter  c.  to  mind  the  word  that  Jesus  said 
Luke  1.  61.  none  of  thy  kindred  isc  by  this  name 

62.  they  made  signs  how  he  would  have  him  c. 

15.  19.  I  am  no  more  worthy  to  bo  c.  tliy  son,  21. 

19.  15.  ho  commanded  the  servants  to  bo  c. 
23.  33.  when  come  to  the  place  that  is  c  Calvary 

John  1.  48.  before  that  Philip  c  thee  I  saw  thie 

4.  25.  I  know  Messiah  cometh,  who  is  c.  Chri.st 
9.11. a  man  c.Jesus  made  clay  and  anoint.my  eyes 

j9c<.s9.11.go  into  the  streetc.Straiglit,for  one  e.Saul 
11.26.  disciples  were  c  Christians  lirsl  at  Antioch 
13.7. who  f  .for  Barnabas  and  Saul,de3ired  to  hear 
9.  then  Saul,  c  Paul,  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost 
15. 17.  all  the  Gentiles  on  whom  my  name  is  c. 

19.  40.  to  be  c  in  question  for  this  day's  uproar 

23. 6. 1  am  c  in  question  by  you  this  day,  24.  21. 
18.  Paul  the  prisoner  c.  and  prayed  me  to  bring 

Rom.  1.  1.  Paul  c.  to  be  an  apostle,  1  Cor.  1.  1. 

6.  among  whom  are  ye  also  the  c  of  Jesus 

7.  to  them  that  are  c  to  be  saints,  1  Cor.  1.  2. 
2. 17.  thou  art  c  a  Jew,  and  reatest  in  the  law 

8.  28.  who  are  the  c.  according  to  his  p»rpose 
1  Cor.  1.  9.  by  whom  ye  were  c.  to  the  lellowship 

24.  to  them  which  are  c.both  Jews  and  Greeks 
26.  not  many  mighty,  not  many  noble,  are  c. 
.5.  11.  if  any  man  c  a  bvolhrr  be  a  fornicator 

7.  18.  is  any  man  c  being  cirrumcised?  is  any  c. 
21.  art  thou  c.  being  a  servant?  care  not  for  it 
24.  let  every  man  wherein  he  is  c  therein  abide 

Gal.  1.  C.  so  soon  removed  from  him  that  c.  you 

5.  13.  for,  brethren,  ye  have  been  c  to  liberty 
Fph.  2.  11.  who  are  c.  uncircumcision  by  thate. 

4. 1.  walk  worthy  of  vocation  wherewith  ye  are  c 
4.  even  as  ye  are  c.  in  one  hope  of  your  calling 
Col.  3.  15.  to  the  which  ye  are  e.  in  one  body 

4.  11.  Jesus,  which  is  c.  Justus,  sahitoth  you 
2  TAcs.2. 4.  who  cxalteth  above  all  that  is  c.  God 
1  Tim.  6.  12.  eternal  life,  whereto  thou  art  c. 

20.  avoiding  oppositions  of  science,  falsely  so  r. 
ffrh.  3.  13.  but  exhort  daily  while  it  is  c.  to-day 

9.  2.  the  tabernacle  which  is  c.  the  sanctuary 
15.  they  that  are  e.  might  receive  the  promise 

11.  Ifi.  God  is  not  ashamed  to  be  c.  their  God 
24. Moses  refused  to  be  f  .son  of  Pharaoh's  daugh . 

./am. 2.  7.  blaspheme  that  name  by  which  ye  arec. 

1  Prt.i.  9.  of  him  who  hath  c.  you  out  of  darkness 

21.  for  hereunto  were  ye  c.  because  Ch,  suffored 
3.  9.  knowing  that  ye  are  thereunto  c  to  inherit 

2  Pet.  1.  3.  that  hath  c.  us  to  glory  and  virtue 
1  .John  3.  1.  that  we  should  be  r.  the  sons  o'God 
Tude  1.  to  sanctified,  preserved  in  J.  Christ,  and  n. 
Brv.  8.  11.  the  name  of  the  star  is  c  wormwood 

n.S.city  which  spiritually  is  c.  Sodom  nnd  Egypt 

12.  9.  that  old  serpent  c  the  Devil,  and  Satan 
17.  14.  they  that  are  with  him,  are  c.  and  chosen 
19.  9.  blessed  that  are  c  to  the  marriage  supper 

CALLED, joined  with  God,  or  lord. 
Gen.  1.  5.  God  c  lijrht  day,  darkness  he  c.  night 

8.  and  God  c  the  firmament.  Heaven 
10.  God  c.  dry-land  Earth,  the  waters  c.  ho  Seaa 


CAL 

Oen.5.2.God  blessed  them.and  c.  their  nameAdam 
£zuti.3.4.(juiJ  c.  lu  him  out  ul  tliu  midst  ol  Uie  t>uaJi 
lU.  'i.  llio  Lurd  c.  to  bim  out  ul'  the  muunluia 
3U.  thu  Ld.  c.  MoBtiS  up  to  ibe  toput'llie  inuuiit 
35.  M.  see,  the  Lord  hulli  c.  my  nume  Bczuieel 
J\rum.  V2.  5.  and  the  Lord  c.  Aaron  and  Miriam 
1  Sam.  3.  4.  the  Lord  c.  Ijainuel,  tj,  8,  10. 
iKings  3.  lU.  alau,  L.  bath  c.  these  tliree  kings,  13. 
8.  1.  lor  the  Ld.  hath  c.  for  a  famine  on  the  land 
Ps.  50. 1.  Lord  hath  c.  the  earth  from  rising  of  sui 
Isa.  41.  2.  tlie  Lurd  raised,  and  c.  iiini  to  Ins  foot 
42.  6.  1  the  Lord  have  c.  thee  in  righteuusnuiis 
49.  1.  Uiu  Lord  hath  c.  me  from  the  womb 
H.  6.  the  Ld.  tiath  c.  tiiee  as  a  woman  forsaken 
Jer.  11. 10.  Lord  c.  thy  name  a  green  ohve-tree 
20.  3.  the  Lord  lialli  not  c.  Uiy  name  I'ashur 
Mvios  7.  4.  the  Lord  God  c.  to  contend  by  tire 
^cti  10.  10.  gathering  Lhat  the  Lord  liaU  c.  lu 
\Cor.  7.  15.  but  God  hatli  c.  us  to  peace 

17.  as  tiie  L.  liatJi  c.  every  one,  so  let  him  walk 
Oat.  1.  15.  it  pleased  God,  who  c.  me  by  his  grace 

1  Thess.  2. 12.  who  c.  you  to  his  kingdom  and  glory 
,      4.  7.  for  God  hath  not  c.  us  to  uuclcanness 

2  T/uiS.  2.  14.  whereunto  God  c.  you  by  our  gospel 
2TV»i.  1.  9.  who  hath  c.  us  with  a  holy  calling 
/leb.  5.  4.  but  he  lhat  is  c.  of  God,  as  was  Aaron 

10.  c.  of  God  a  high-priest  afUjr  order  of  Melchis. 
IPet.  5. 10.  tiie  God  of  all  grace,  who  hath  c.  us 

He  CALLED. 

Oen.  21. 31.  wherefore  Ae  c.  lliat  place  Beer-sheba 

20.  18.  At' c.  their  names  as  his  father  called  the 

35.  10.  thy  name  is  Jacob,  ke  c.  hjs  name  Israel 

Kxod.  24.  16.  tlie  L.  c.  to  Moses  out  of  the  cloud 

Judg.  6.  32.  on  that  day  Ae  c.  him  Jerubbaal 

S.'iam.  1.7.  when  he  looked  he  saw  me  and  c.  to  me 

13. 17. then  Ac.  c.  his  servant  that  ministered  to  him 

IKingsl.H).  but  Solom.  his  brother  Ae  c.  not,  19»26. 

9.  13.  Ae  e.  them  land  of  Cabul  to  this  day 
iKingsi.  36.  and  Ac  c.  to  Gehazi,  so  Ae  c.  her 

18.  4.  he  brake  brazen  serpent,  Ae  c.  it  Nehushtan 
Psal.  105.  16.  Ac  c.  for  a  famine  on  the  land 
Jer.  42.  8.  then  c.  Ae  Johanan  and  all  the  captains 
I^am.  1.  15.  Ae  hath  e.  an  assembly  against  me 
F.zek.  9.  3.  Ae  c.  to  the  man  clothed  with  linen 
^a«.  10.  l.Aec.  the  twelve  ||  15.  10.  Aec.  multitude 
Mark  1.  20.  straightway  Ac  c.  them,  and  they  left 
L,uke  13.  12.  when  Jesus  .law  her,  Ae  c.  her  to  him 
•/oAn  10. 35.  if  Ae  c.  them  Gods,  to  whom  the  word 
.Acts  9.  41.  when  Ae  had  c.  the  saints  and  widows 

10.  23.  then  c.  he  them  in,  and  lodged  them 
10.  29.  then  Ae  c.  for  a  light,  and  sprang  in 

19.  25.  whom  Ac  e.  together  with  the  workmen 
23.  23.  Ac  c.  unto  him  two  centurions,  saying 

Rom.  8.  .30.  them  Ac  also  c.  whom  Ae  c.  he  justified 
9.  24.  even  us  whom  Ae  hath  c.  not  of  Jews  only 
IPet.  1. 15.  but  as  Ae  which  hath  c.  you  is  holy 
See  Called  the  name. 
I  CALLED,  or,  /  Aaoe  CALLED. 
J^am.  34.  10.  I  c.  thee  to  curse  mine  enemies 
Judg.  12.  2.  when  I  c.  you,  ye  delivered  me  not 
\Sam.  3.  5.  Eli  said,  I  c.  not,  lie  down  again,  6. 
28.15./ A.  e.  thee,  thou  mayest  make  known  to  me 
S.Sam.  22.  7.  in  my  distress  Ic.  Psal.  18.  6.  |  1 18.  5. 
•VcA.5.12.  I  c.  the  priests,  and  took  an  oath  of  them 
Job  9.  16.  if  /  had  c.  and  he  had  answered  me 

19.16.  I  c.  myservant,  and  he  gave  mc  no  answer 
Psal.  17.  6.  I  kapp.  c.  on  thee,  for  thou  wilt  hear 

31.17.  let  me  not  be  ashamed,  for  /  A.c.  upon  thoc 
88.  9.  Lord,  /  Artwe  c.  daily  upon  thee 
116.  4.  then  e.  I  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord 

Frov.  1.  24.  because  /  have  c.  and  ye  refused 
Cant.  5.  6.  /c   him,  but  he  gave  mc  no  answer 
Jsa.  13.  3.  /A.  c.  my  mighty  ones  for  mine  anger 
41.  9.  I  have  c.  thee  from  the  chief  men  thereof 
43.  \.  I  c.  thee  by  thy  name,  thou  art  mine,  45.  4. 
48.  1,5.  yea,  I  have  c.  him,  I  have  brought  him 

50.  2.  when  I  e.  was  there  none  to  answer? 

51.  2.  for  f  c.  him  alone,  and  blessed  him 
■65.  12.  when  /c  ye  did  not  answer,  ./er.  7. 13. 
66.  4.  because  when  I  c.  none  did  answer 

Jer.  15.  17.  because  /A.  c.  to  them,  but  they  not 
/^am.1.19.  /c.  for  my  lovers,  but  they  deceived  mo 

3.  .55.  /r.  on  thy  name  out  of  the  low  dungeon 

37.  thou  drcnvest  near  in  the  day  f  c.  upon  thro 
fros.^^  l.thcn  fc.  my  Son  outofEgypt,  .^fat.2.15. 
JFfag.  I.  II.  and  /  r .  for  a  drought  upon  the  land 
Zeeh.  II.  7.  one  I  c.  Heauty,  the  other  f  c.  Hands 
Jdhn  1.5.  15.  not  servants,  but  f  h.  c.  you  friends 
^ets  13.  2.  for  the  work  whereunto  [ h.  e.  them 

28.  20.  for  this  cause  have  I  c.  for  you  to  soo 
CA  LI, ED  Ay  my  name. 
2r'Ar»n.  7.14.  mj  people  who  are  r.  A.  m.n.  humble 
Isa.  43.  7.  bring,  even  nverv  one  that  ii  c.  hymyn. 

<)5.1.  behold,  to  n  nation  fha'  was  not  r.  hv  my  n. 
Jrr.  7. 10.  housec.  b.  m.  n.  1 1 ,14,30.  |  :t2.  3.«.  |  34.15. 

25.20.  lo  bring  evil  on  the  city  which  is  c.hymyn. 
.^mo»  9.12.  remnant  of  heath,  which  nroc.  bymyn. 

CALLED  hv  thv  name. 

lff't»'r.a43.house(huildodisc.At/awn.2C*.6.33. 

/j(a.4.I.let  usbec.  i.i.H.  tot.ikc  av/ay  our  rqiroach 

60 


CAL 

/>a.43.M  have  c.  thee  by  thy  n.thou  art  mine,  45.4. 
03.  ly.  we  are  thine,  tliey  were  not  c.  by  Iky  n. 
Jer.  14.  9.  O  Lord,  we  are  c.  by  thy  n.  leave  us  not 
15.  10.  for  1  am  c.  by  thy  n.  O  Ld.  God  of  hosts 
JJan.\).lii.  and  behold  the  city  which  is  c.  by  thy  n. 
ly.  defer  not,  Icirthy  city  and  peo.  are  c.  by  thy  n. 
CALLED  his  name. 
Gen.  35.  10.  thy  name  is  Jacob,  he  c.  his  n.  Israel 
18.  she  c.  his  n.  lienoni,  but  his  father  Benjamin 
ICAroji.  4.  9.  his  mother  c.  his  n.  Jabez,  saying 
T.lti.she  c.  A.  71. 1'eresh  ||  23.  and  he  c.  A.  7i.  lleriah 
Mat.  1. 25.  her  tirst  born  son,  and  he  e.  his  n.  Jesus 
Rev.  19.  13.  and  Ais  n.  is  c.  the  Word  of  God 

CALLED  (Ac  name. 
Gen.  28.  19.  c.  the  n.  of  the  place  Beth-el,  35.  15. 
Kzod.  16.  31.  and  Israel  c.  tAc  n.  thereof,  manna 
17.7.he  c.  <Ae  n.  of  the  place  Massali  and  Meribah 
15.  Moses  c.  (Ac  n.  of  the  altar  jEHOV.^H-nissi 
.Judg.lb.VJ.  :5amBon  c.  (Ac  n.  thereof  En-hakkore 
2iiu;«.5.20.  c.  (At  n.  of  that  place  Bual-perazim 
lA'ino-«7.  i>l.  c.  the  n.  thereof  Jachin,  2  CAr.3.17. 
Job  42.  14.  and  he  c.  (Ac  n.  of  the  tirst,  Jemima 

Sent  and  CALLED. 
<re7i.27. 42.  she  sent  andc.  Jacob  her  younger  son 
31.4.  Jacob  stnt  and  c.  Rachel  and  Leah  to  field 
41.  14.  then  I'haraoli  sent  andc.  Joseph 
Josh.  24.  y.  Balak  sint  and  c.  Balaam  to  curse  you 
Judg.  4.  6.  she  sent  and  c.  Barak  out  of  Kadesh 
10.  18.  she  sent  and  c.  the  lords  of  the  Philistines 
2Sam.  12.  2.'>.  he  sejtt  and  c.  his  name  Jedidiah 
I  Kings  2.  3(1.  the  king  sc7it  and  c.  for  Sbimei,  42. 
12.  3.  they  sent  and  c.  Jeroboam,  2  Chron.  10.  3. 
Ksth.  5.  10.  Haman  sent  and  c.  for  his  friends 
Acts  20.  17.  he  stnt  lo  Ephesus,  and  t.  the  elders 

Shall  be  CALLED. 
r>'en. 2.2.3. «A. Ace.  woman, because  taken  out  of  man 
17.  5.  thy  name  shall  be  c.  Abraham,  for  a  father 
21.12.  hearken  to  Sarah's  voice,  for  in  Isaac  shall 
thy  seed  be  c.  horn.  9.  7.  Hcb.  11.  18. 
32. 28.  name  shall  be  c.  no  more  Jacob,  but  Israel 
48.  0.  thy  issue  shall  be  c.  after  their  brethren 
Deut.  25.  10.  his  name  sh.  be  c.  in  Israel,  house  of 
Prov.  16.  21.  the  wise  in  heart  shall  be  c.  prudent 
24.  8.  deviseth  evil,  s.  Ac  c.  a  mischievous  person 
/.sa.4.3.  that  remaineth  in  Jerusalem  sh.  be  c.  holy 
9.6.and  his  name  sh.  be  c.  Wonderful, Counsellor 
19.  18.  one  shall  be  c.  the  city  of  destruction 
32.  5.  the  vile  person  shall  no  mofe  Ac  c.  liberal 
35.  8.  and  a  way,  and  it  sh.  be  c.  way  of  holiness 
54.  5.  the  God  of  the  whole  earth  shall  he  Ac  c. 
56.  7.  house  sh.  be  c.  house  of  prayer,  J/a(.21. 13. 
Jer.  1.  32.  it  shall  no  more  Ac  c.  Tophet,  19.  6. 

23.  6.  he  sh.  be  c.  Ld.  our  Righteousness,  33. 16. 
Zech.  8.  3.  Jerusalem  shall  be  c.  a  city  of  truth 
Mat.  1.  t  23.  and  his  name  shall  be  c.  Emmaimel 

2.  23.  it  might  be  fulfilled,  shall  be  c.  a  Nazarene 

5.  9.  peace-makers  .9A.  Ac  c.  the  children  of  (Jod 

19.he  sh.  be  c.  the  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven 

I.ukc  1.  32.  and  he  shall  be  c.  Son  of  the  Highest 

35.  also  that  holy  thing  shall  be  c.  Son  of  Cod 

60.  his  mother  said,  not  so;  but  he  sh.  bee.  John 

2.  23.  every  male  shall  be  c.  holy  to  the  Lord 

Rom.  7.  3.  if  she  be  married,  sh.be  c.  an  adulteress 

9.  26.  they  shall  be  c.  the  children  of  God 

A-Aa/(Ae  CALLED. 

/.?a.  1.20.  thou  .fAa/(  Ac  c.  the  city  of  righteousness 

47. 1. thou  shalt  be  c.  no  more  tender  and  delicate 

5.  thou  shalt  no  more  Ae  c.  lady  of  kingdoms 

.53.  12.  thou  shalt  he  c.  the  repairer  of  the  breach 

62.  2.  shalt  be  c.  by  a  new  name,  Ld.  shall  name 

4.  thou  shalt  be  c.  Hephzi-bali,  thy  land  Heulah 

12.  thou  ,s-A.  Ac  c.  sought  for,  a  city  not  forsaken 

I.ukel.lf,.  thou  shalt  be  c.  Prophet  of  the  Iliglirel 

John  1.42.  thou  .vA.  Ae  e.  Cephas,  which  is,  a  stone 

J'hey  CALLED. 
Oen. 19.5. (Aey  c.  Lot,  and  8aid,where  arc  the  men? 
J^um.  2.5.  2.  they  c.  the  people  to  the  sacrifices 
Judg.  10.  2.).  thiyc.  for  Samson  out  of  the  prison 
Ksth.  9.26.  thry  c.  these  days  Piirim,  after  Pur 
Pa.  99.  6.  they  c.  upon  the  Lord,  and  be  answered 
Jer.  12.  6.  they  have  c.  a  multitude  after  thee 
30.  17.  becaiiHe  tliry  e.  thee  an  outcast,  sayin 
//o J. 1 1. 2. as  thiy  c. to  them,  so  they  wont  iromthom 

7.  though  thry  c.  them  to  the  most  High 
Mat.  10.  2.5.  if  they  have  c.  the  master  Itoclzcbub 
f.uke  1..59.  thry  c.  him  Zacharias,  after  his  father 
./ohn  9.18.(Ac7/  c.  parents  of  him  that  receivc<l  sight 

24.  then  again  thry  c.  the  man  that  was  blind 
Act.i4.\H.th.  c.  them,  and  commanded  not  to  speak 

5.  40.  when  (Acy  had  c.  the  apostles,  and  beaten 
14.12.  tAeyc.  Barnabai,  Jupiter,  Paul,  Morcurius 

IVas  CALLED. 
Deut.  3.  13.  which  leas  c.  the  land  of  giants 
Jiirlrr.  6.  t  34.  and  .Abiezer  tnas  r.  after  him 
2C.'Aron.  20.20.  place  toasc.  the  valley  of  I'orachRli 
F.tral.  61.  and  was  c.  after  their  name,  JWA.7.63. 
Isa.  48.  8.  wast  c.  s  transgressor  from  the  womb 
f)nn.  10.  1.  whose  name  was  c.  Bolteshnzznr 
Mat.  26.  3.  the  high  priest,  who  vins  c.  Caiaphaa 
27,  8.  was  c.  the  field  of  blood,  unto  tliis  day 


CAL 

/,uA:eI.3<i.six'h  month  with  her  who  was  e.  barrel 

2.21.  his  name  lo.  c.  J£SL'!>,  so  named  ul  liie  aiigef 
John'i.i.  Jesus  w.  c.  and  bis  disciples  to  mair;itge 
Acts  13.1.  in  the  church  Simeon,  tliat  teas  c.  iNiger 
24.  2.  and  when  he  was  c.  forth,  Tertullus  began 
28. 1.  they  knew  that  the  Island  was  c.  Melita 
1  Cor.  7. 20.  abide  iu  the  calling  wherein  in:  was  c 
tieb.  11.  8.  Abraham  when  he  was  c.  obeyed 
Jam.  2.  23.  and  he  was  c.  the  friend  of  God 
Rev.  19.  11.  he  that  set  on  him  was  c.  Faithful 

CALLEDST,  CALLEST. 
Judg.  8. 1.  that  thou  c.  us  not  when  thou  weDteat 
iSam.  3.  5.  and  he  said, here  am  I,  for  thou  cms 
Ps.  81.  7.  thou  c.  in  trouble,  and  I  delivered  thee 
Kiek.  23.21.  c.  to  remembrance  lewdness  of  youth 
Mat.  19.  17.  why  c.  thou  me  good  ?  there  is  non» 
good  but  God,  Mark  10.  18.  I^uke  18.  19. 
CALLETH. 
1  Kings  8.  43.  hear  thou  in  heaven,  do  according 
to  all  that  the  stranger  c.  to  thee  for,  2CAr.  6. 33. 
Job  12.  4.  who  c.  on  God,  and  he  answered  him 
Psal.  42.  7.  deep  c.  unto  deep  at  the  noise  of  thy 
147.  4.  he  c.  them  all  by  their  names,  Isa.  40.  26. 
Prov.  18.  6.  a  fool's  mouth  c.  for  strokes 
Isa.  21.  11.  he  c.  to  me  out  of  Seir,  watchman 
59.  4.  none  c.  for  justice,  nor  any  pleadoth 
04.  7.  and  there  is  none  that  c.  on  thy  name 
Hos.  7.  7.  there  is  none  among  them  that  c.  to  me 
.'iv^os  5.  8.  that  c.  for  the  waters  of  the  sea,  9.  6. 
Mat.  27. 47.  this  man  c.  for  Elias,  Mark  15,  35. 
Mark  3.  13.  c.  to  him  whom  he  would,  they  came 
6.  7.  c.  to  him  the  twelve,  and  began  to  send  tliem 
8.  1.  JcEus  c.  his  disciples,  and  saith  to  them 

10.  49.  be  of  good  comfort,  arise,  he  c.  thee 
12.37.  if  David  therefore  c.  him  Ld.  y.uAc  20.44. 

Luke  15.  6.  he  e.  together  his  friends,  saying 

9.  she  e.  her  friends  and  her  neighbours 
20.  37.  when  he  c.  the  Lord,  the  G.  of  Abraham 
John  10.  3.  and  he  c.  his  own  sheep  by  name 

11.  28.  the  master  is  come  and  c.  for  thee 
ftom.4.17.  c.  things  which  be  not,  as  tlio'  they  were 

9. 11.  purpose  of  elect,  mightstand,  of  him  thate. 
ICor.  12.  3.  no  man  by  the  Spirit  c.  Jesus  accursed 
Gal.  5.8.  persuasion  comcth  not  of  him  lhat  c.  you 
1  7'Acss.5.24.  faithful  is  he  that  c.  you, who  will  do 
Rev.  2.  20.  Jezebel,  that  c.  herself  a  prophetess 

CALLING 
Signifies,  [1]  Any  lawful  employment^  or  war)  of 
fining,  ICor.  7.20.   "[2]  That  effectual  calling, 
whereby  sinners  savingly  believe,  and  obey  the 
go.ipei;Phi\.3. 14.  Ileb.  3.  1.     [3]  The  state  of 
glory,  and  blcssed7icss  in  heaven,  to  tchich  be- 
lievers are  called,  2  Thess.  1. 11. 
JVum.  10.  2.  use  trumpets  for  c.  of  the  assembly 
/sa.1.13.  the  c.  of  assemblies  I  cannot  away  witk 
f.zek.  23.  19.  in  c.  to  remembrance  her  youth 
Rom.  11.  29.  the  c.  of  God  without  repentance 
ICor.  1.  £C.  for  ye  see  your  c.  brethren,  not  man/ 
7.20.  let  every  man  abide  same  c.  wherein  called 
Fph.  1,  18.  may  know  what  is  the  hope  of  his  c 
4.  4.  as  ye  are  called  in  one  hope  of  your  c, 
Phil.  3,  14.  for  the  prize  of  the  high  c.  of  God 
2TAe.f.t.l.ll.  thalGod  count  you  worthy  of  this e 
2  Tim.  1.  9.  who  hath  called  us  with  a  holy  c, 
Ifeb.  3.  1.  partakers  of  the  heavenly  e.  consider 
2fci,  1,  10.  lo  make  your  c.  and  election,  sure 

CALLING,  Participle, 
fsa.  41.  4.  c.  the  generations  from  the  beginning 
46.  11.  c.  a  ravenous  bird  from  the  cast 
Mat.  11.  16.  and  e.  to  their  fellows,  I.ukel.  32. 
Mark  II.  21.  Peter,  c.  to  remembrance,  saith 
Acts  7.  .59,  they  stoned  Stephen  c.  upon  God 
22.  16.  wash  away  thy  sins,  e.  on  name  of  Lord 
IPct.  3.  6.  Surah  obeyed  .Abraham,  c.  him  Lord 

Calm. 

Psal.  107.  29.  he  makelli  the  storm  a  e. 
Jonah  1.  II.  that  the  sea  may  be  c.  unto  ui 

12.  rnst  me  forth,  so  shall  the  sea  be  c.  lo  yon 
,Waf.8.26.lhere  was  a  great  e.Mark4.29.].uk(&.3A, 

CALVE,  ED,  ETII. 
Job  21.  10.  their  cow  c.  and  castelh  not  hor  calf 
39.  1.  cnnst  thou  mark  when  the  hinds  do  c.J 
Psal.  29.  9.  the  voice  of  the  L.  makelh  hinds  to  •> 
.Jer.  14.  5.  the  hind  c.  in  the  field,  and  forsook  it 

CALVES. 
ySam.  6.  7.  nnd  bring  Ihcir  r.  home  from  them 
XKings  12.  28.  the  king  made  twoc.  of  gold 
32.  sacrificing  to  the  c.  that  he  had  made 
2  A'm/T«10.29.  Jehu  departed  not  from  the  colden  c 
2rAro7i.  11.  15.  he  ordained  him  priests,  for  the  cl 
13.  8.  and  there  ore  wilh  you  golden  c. 
Ps.  68.  30.  rebuke  the  bulls  with  the  r.  of  people 
ffos.  10.  5.  shall  fear,  because  off.  of  Beth-avea 

13.  2.  let  the  mm  llmt  siirrifice  kiss  llio  c. 

14.  2  so  will  we  reniler  the  c.  of  our  lips 
Imos  6.  4.  and  eat  c.  out  ofthe  midst  of  the  stall 

Mir.  fi.  6.  shall  I  romn  with  c.  of  a  year  old? 
Mat.  4.  2.  yc  shall  crow  up  as  e.  ofthe  stall 
//rA.9.12.nor  bv  blood  of  cnnts  and  r.bul  own  blood 
19.  took  blood  of  c.  sprinkled  look  ind  peopi* 


CAM 

CAME. 

Ofn.10.14.  outofwhomc.  Philistim,  ICkron.l.lZ. 
lO.l.two  angels  c.toSodom  at  even, Lot  sat  ingaie 
20.  3.  God  c.  to  Abimelech  in  a  dream  by  night 
27.  .35.  brother  c.  with  eubtilty  and  taken  blessing 
31.'24.God  c.toLabantheSyrian  in  dream  by  night 
;j2.6.c.to  thy  brotlier  Esau, he  Cometh  to  meeltliee 
39.16.she  laid  up  his  garment  until  his  lordc.home 

J^u7n.  13.27.  e.  to  the  land  whither  thou  sentcst  us 
19.  2.  a  red  heifer,  upon  which  never  c.  yoke 
22.  9.  God  c.  to  Balaam  at  night,  and  said,  20. 
24.2.Sp.  of  G.  c.  on  him,  Judff.  3. 10.  ISaiii.  10.10. 

toeut.  1.  19.  and  we  c.  to  Kadesh-barnea 
33.2.  the  Lord  c.  from  Sinai,  and  rose  up  from  Seir 

^osA.15.18.  as  she  c.  to  him  she  moved,  Judg.l.M. 

Judg.  5.  19.  kings  c.  and  fought,  kings  of  Canaan 
7.13.  the  cake  of  bread  c.  to  a  tent,  and  smote  it 
9.25.they  robbed  all  thatc.along  that  way  by  them 
57.  upon  them  c.  curse  of  Jotham  son  of  Jerubb. 

11.  18.  but  c.  not  within  the  border  of  Moab 
13.  10.  the  man  that  c.  to  me  the  other  day 

11.  Manoah  arose  and  c.  to  the  man,  and  said 
19.22.  bring  forth  the  man  that  c.  into  thy  house 

20.  48.  Israel  smote  Benjamin,  all  that  c.  to  hand 
Ruth  2.  6.  it  is  the  Moabitish  damsel  that  c.  back 
Z-Sam.  2. 13.  custom  was,  the  priest's  servant  c.l5. 

14.  so  they  did  to  all  Israelites  that  c.  thither 
27.  there  c.  a  man  of  God  to  Eli,  and  said  to  him 
4.  1.  and  the  word  of  Samuel  c.  to  all  Israel 
7.  13.  they  c.  no  more  into  the  coasts  of  Israel 

9.  15.  Lord  told  Samuel  in  his  ear  before  Saul  c. 

10.14.  when  we  saw  asses  no  where,  c.  to  Samuel 
13.8.  but  Samuel  c.  not  to  Gilgal,  people  scattered 
17.  34.  there  c.  a  lion  and  a  bear,  and  took  a  lamb 

2Sam.2.4.nicn  of  Judah  c.and  anointed  David  king 
3. 25.  thou  knowest  Abner,  that  <-.  to  deceive  thee 
13.  30.  while  in  the  way  the  tidings  c.  to  David 
36.behold,  king's  sons  c.and  wept,  the  king  wept 

15. 2.  when  any  c.  to  king  for  judgment,  Absalom 

16. 15.  Absalom  and  Ahithophel  c.  to  Jerusalem 
20.  12  saw  every  one  that  c.  by  him  stood  still 

lA'i(!ff-sl.42.whilehe  spake,Jonat.son  of  .^biath.c. 

4.  34.  c.  of  all  people  to  hear  wisdom  of  Solomon 

10.  10.  there  c.  no  more  such  spices  as  these 

12.  there  c.  no  such  almug-trees  to  this  day 
12. 12.  Jerob.  and  all  the  people  c.  2  Chron.  10. 12. 
13. 10.  he  returned  not  by  the  way  ho  c.  to  Bethel 

19.  9.  he  c.  thither  to  a  cave  and  lodged  there 

20.  43.  the  king  of  Israel  c.  heavy  to  Samaria 
2  Kings  4.  11.  it  fell  on  a  day  that  he  c.  thither 

27.  when  she  c.  to  the  man  of  God  to  the  hill 

5.  15-  Nanman  c.  and  stood  before  Elisha 

6.  23.  the  bands  of  Syria  c.  no  more  into  Israel 
32.  but  ere  messenger  c.  to  him,  he  said  to  elders 

8.14.Ha/.ael  departed  from  Elisha, c.to  his  master 

9.  11.  wherefore  c.  this  mad  fellow  to  thee  7 

10.  12.  Jehu  arose,  departed,  and  c.  to  Samaria 

21.  all  worshippers  of  Baal  c.  house  of  Baal  full 
17.  28.  one  of  the  priests  c.  and  dwelt  in  Beth-el 
19.  33.  by  the  way  that  he  c.  shall  he  return 

24.3.  at  the  command  of  the  Lord  c.this  on  Judah 
I  Chron.  4.  41.  these  c.  in  the  days  of  Hezekiah 

5.  2.  Judah  prevailed,  of  him  c.  the  chief  rnler 

7.  22.  Ephraim's  brethren  c.  to  comfort  him 
12.1.now  these  are  they  that  c.to  Da  v.  day  by  day 

22.  there  c.  to  David  to  help  him  a  great  host 
^JCAroTi.  11. 14.  the  Levites  left  all  and  c.  fo  Judah 

12.  11.  the  guard  c.  and  fetched  the  shields 
14.  14.  for  the  fear  of  the  Lord  c.  upon  them 
22.  1.  the  band  of  men  that  c.  with  the  .'\rabians 
24.18.wrath  c.onJudah  andJerusalem  for  trespass 
25.  20.  Amaziah  would  not  hear,  for  it  c.  of  God 
30. 11.  divers  humbled  themselves  and  c.  to  Jerus 
31.  5.  and  as  soon  as  commandment  c.  abroad 
F.ira  2.  2.  which  e.  with  Zcrubbabel,  Mordecai 
5. 5.  not  cause  to  cease  till  the  matter  c  to  Darius 
^"64.7.73.  when  seventh  monthc.were  in  their  cities 
■  F.sth.  1. 17.  Vashti  to  be  brought  in,  but  she  c.  not 
2.  13.  then  thus  c.  every  maiden  to  the  king 
4.  2.  Mordecai  e.  even  before  the  king's  gate 

8.  17.  whither  the  king's  decree  c.  Jews  had  joy 
Job  3.  t25.  1  feared  a  fear,  and  it  c.  upon  me 

26.  T  was  not  in  safefy,nor  had  rest,  yet  trouble  c. 
S9.13.  the  blessing  of  him  ready  to  perish  con  him 
30.  26.  T  looked  for  good,  evil  c.  darkness  c. 
Taal.  18.  6.  my  cry  c.  before  me,  even  to  his  ears 
27.  2.  when  mv  foes  c.  upon  me  they  stumbled 
78. 31.  wrath  of  God  c.  upon  them,  and  slew  them 
105.19.  until  time  that  his  word  c.  word  tried  ( hem 
31.  ho  spake,  and  there  c.  divers  sorts  of  flies 
34.  he  snake,  and  locusts  c.  and  caterpillars 
Keel.  5.  15.  fo  go  as  he  r.  and  fake  nothing,  16. 
Jsn.  20. 1.  in  the  year  that  Tartan  c.  to  Ashdod 
30.  4.  and  his  ambassadors  c.  to  Hanes 
41.  5.  ends  of  earth  were  afraid,  drew  near  and  c. 
Jer.l.  31.  nor  c.  it  into  my  mind.  10.  5.  |  32.  35. 
8.  15.  wo  looked  for  peace,  but  no  good  c. 
44.  21.  incense  you  burnt,  c.  it  not  into  his  mind7 
K2ci:.4.14.norc.  there  abominable  flesh  into  mouth 
17.3.  c.  to  Lebanon,  and  took  the  highest  branch 
01 


CAM 

.EieA:.33.22.  afore  he  that  escaped  c.  opened  mouth 
37.  7.  the  bones  c.  together,  bone  to  his  bone 

10.  breath  c.  into  them,  they  lived  and  stood  up 
43.  2.  the  glory  of  God  of  Israel  c.  from  the  east 
Dan.  2.  \  29.  thoughts  c.  up  into  thy  mind  on  bed 
4.  28.  all  this  c.  on  the  king  Nebuchadnezzar 
7.13.one  like  Son  of  Man  c.  witJi  cloudsof  heaven 
22.  till  the  ancient  of  days  c.  and  judgment  given 
Jlmos  6.  1.  to  whom  the  house  of  Israel  c. 
Jonah  3.  6.  for  word  c.  to  the  king  of  Nineveh 
Hab.  3.  3.  God  c.  from  Teman,  and  the  lioly  One 
Hag.  1. 9.  ye  looked  for  much,  and  lo  it  c.  to  little 

2.  16.  when  one  c.  to  the  press-fat  to  draw  out 
Zcch.  7. 12.  c.  a  great  wrath  from  the  Lord  of  hosts 

14.  16.  of  all  the  nations  that  c.  against  Jerusalem 

Mat.  2.  1.  there  c.  wise  men  from  the  east  lo  Jerus. 

9.  till  it  c.  and  stood  over  where  the  child  was 

3.  1.  In  those  daysc.  John  the  Baptist  preaching 
7.25.  and  the  rains  descended,  and  the  Hoods  c.  27. 
9.  1.  he  passed  over  and  c.  into  his  own  city 

20.  a  woman  c.  behind,  touched  hem  of  his  garm. 

28.come  into  the  house,  the  blindnien  c.  to  Jesus 
20.  28.  Son  of  Man  c.  not  to  be  ministered  to 
21. 28.  c.  to  the  first  and  said,  son,  go  work  to-day 

30.  he  c.  to  the  second,  and  said  likewise 

32.  John  c.  to  you  in  the  way  of  righteousness 

25.  10.  they  went  to  buy,  the  bridegroom  c. 
30.  I  was  in  prison,  and  ye  c.  to  me 

26.  49.  forthwith  he  c.  to  Jesus  and  kissed  him 
60.though  false  witnesses  c.yet  found  they  none 

28.13.his  disciples  c.  by  night,  and  stole  him  away 
Mark'i.^.heaiA  what  great  things  he  did,  c.  to  him 

9.  21.  how  long  is  it  ago  since  this  c.  to  him? 

12.  28.  one  of  the  scribes  c.  and  asked  him 
42.  c.  a  certain  poor  widow  threw  two  mites 
Juke  1. 57.  now  Elisabeth's  full  time  c.  to  be  deliv 

9.  34.  there  c.  a  cloud  and  overshadowed  them 
35.  and  there  c.  a  voice  out  of  the  cloud,  saying 

15. 17.  when  he  c.  to  himself,  he  said,  how  many 
20.  and  he  arose  and  c.  to  his  father 
.John  1.  7.  the  same  c.  to  bear  witness  of  the  light 
11. he  e.  to  his  own,  and  his  own  received  him  not 
17.  but  grace  and  truth  c.  by  Jesus  Christ 

3. 2.  the  same  c.  to  Jesus  by  night,  7.  50.  |  19.  39. 
23.  and  they  c.  and  were  baptized 

4.27.  upon  this  c.  his  disciples,  and  marvelled  that 

10.  35.  if  he  called  gods  to  whom  word  of  God 
12. 30.  the  voice  c.  not  because  of  me,  but  for  you 
20.  19.  at  even  c.  Jesus,  and  stood  in  the  midst 

Jicts  8.40.  preached  in  all  cities,till  he  c.  toCesarea 
9.21.  c.  hither  for  that  intent,  to  brmg  them  bound 

10.  45.  as  many  as  c.  with  Peter  were  astonished 

11.  5.  the  vessel  descended,  and  it  c.  even  to  me 
23.  when  he  c.  and  had  seen  the  grace  of  God 

19.  18.  and  many  that  believed  c.  and  confessed 
28.21.nor  brethren  that  c.  spake  anv  harm  of  thee 
Rom.  5.  18.  judgment  c.  the  free  gift  c.  on  all  men 
7.  9.  when  the  commandment  c.  sin  revived 
9.  5.  of  whom,  as  concerning  the  flesh,  Christ  c. 
1  Cor.  15.  21.  since  by  man  c.  death,  by  man  c.  also 
Gal.  2.  12.  for  before  that  certain  c.  from  James 
3.  23.  before  faith  c.  we  were  kept  under  the  law 
i5pA.2.17.and  c.and  preached  peace  to  you  afar  off" 
1  Thes.  1.  5.  our  gospel  c.  not  in  word  only  but  in 

1  Tim.  1 .  15.  that  Christ  c.  to  save  sinners   [power 

2  T'j;n.3.11. persecutions  which  c.  to  me  at  Antioch 
2  Pet.  1.  17.  when  there  c.  such  a  voice  to  him 

18.  this  voice  which  c.  from  heaven  we  heard 

21. prophecy  c.  not  in  old  time  by  the  will  of  man 

1  .John  5.  6.  this  is  he  that  c.  by  water  and  blood 

3JoAn  3.  when  brethren  c.  and  testified  of  the  truth 

Rev.  16.  19.  and  great  Babylon  c.  in  remembrance 

See  Spirit  of  the  Lord. 

CAME  again. 

.Tudg.Vi.  9.  angel  c.  again  to  the  woman  as  she  sat 

15.  19.  his  spirit  c.  again  to  him,  1  Sam.  30.  12. 

21.  14.  and  Benjamin  c.  again  at  that  time 
1  A'in^«17.22.the  soul  of  the  child  c.  into  him  again 

19.7.the  angel  of  the  Ld.  c.  again  the  second  time 
2Kings  5.14.  his  flesh  c.  again  like  flesh  of  a  child 

7.8.  lepers  c.  again,  and  entered  into  another  tent 
ii;zra2.l.thcse  c.  an-ai'n  toJudah  and  Jeru.JVrA.7.6. 
F.sth.  6.  12.  Mordecai  c.  again  to  the  king's  gate 
/.>an. 10. 18. c.a^am  and  touched  me  one  like  a  man 
Zeeh.  4.  1.  the  angel  c.  again  and  waked  me 
/.ukcS.ry^.  her  spir.  c.  a.  and  she  arose  straightway 
.fohn  8.  2.  and  early  he  c.  again  into  the  temple 

CAME  down. 
Gen.  11.  5.  Lord  c.  d^)^cn  to  see  the  city  and  tower 

15.  11.  when  the  fowls  c.  downjan  the  carcases 

43.  20.  O  Sir,  we  c.  doien  at  first  to  buy  food 
F.red.  19.  20.  the  Lord  c.  down  upon  mount  Sinai 

34.  29.  when  Moses  c.  down  from  mount  Sinai 
T.ev.  9.  22.  and  Aaron  c.  down  from  offering 
M'unt.  11.  25.  the  Lord  c.  down  in  a  cloud,  12.  5. 

14.  45.  then  Amalekites  c.  down  and  smote  them 
tudg.  5.  14.  out  of  Machir  c.  down  the  governors 
2.Sa»n.  22.10.  bowed  heavens  and  c.  down.  Pa. 18.9. 
1  Kings  l.lO.there  c.  down  fire  from  heaven,  12,14. 
1  Chron.  7. 21.  men  of  G  ath  c.  c/.  to  take  their  cattle 


CAM 


2  Chron.  7.  1.  made  an  end  of  praying,  fire  «r.  d.  3, 
Lam.  1.  9.  therefore  she  c.  down  wonderfully 
Dan.  4.  13.  a  holy  one  c.  down  from  heaven 
Mic.  1. 12.  evil  c.  down  from  the  Lord  to  the  gate 
Mat.  17. 9.  as  they  c.  d.  from  mountain,  Mark  9.9. 
Luke\Q.'3,\.  there  c.  down  a  certain  priest  that  way 
19.6.he  made  haste  and  c.  down  and  received  him 
./oAn3.13.he  thatc.  do2Dn  I'roin  heaven, Son  of  Man 

6.  38. 1  c.  d.  from  heaven,  not  lo  do  mine  ow  n  will 
41.  the  bread  which  c.  down  from  heaven,  51,58. 

Jlcts  15.  1.  men  which  c.  down  from  Judea  taught 

21.10.  there  c.  down  from  Judea  a  certain  prophet 
/ira.20.9.  (iro  c.  d.  from  God  and  devoured  thoni 

CAME  forth. 
/i;xo(/.13.8.Lord  did  to  me  when  I  c.f.  out  of  Egypt 
JSTuin.  11. 20.  wept,  sayirjg,  wliy  c.f.  out  of  Egypt} 

12.  5.  Aaron  and  Miriam,  they  both  c.  forth 

Dcut.  23.4.  met  you  not  with  water  when  ye  c.f 

■lush.  9.  12.  our  bread  hot  on  day  we  c.  /.  to  you 

Judg.  14. 14.  he  said  to  them,  out  of  the  eater  c./ 

meat,  and  out  of  the  strong  e.  f.  sweetness 

2  Sam.  16.  5.  Shimei  c.  f.  and  cursed  ass  he  came 

11.  son  which  c.f.  of  my  bowels  seekcth  my  litis 

\Kings  22.  21.  c.f.  a  spirit,  and  stood  before  Ld. 

2  Kings^.'i^.  c.f.  little  children  and  mocked  him 

24.  c.  forth  two  she-bears  and  fare  42  children 

21. 15.  their  fathers  c.  /.  out  of  Egypt,  Jer.  7.  25.  ' 
2  Chron.  32.  21.  that  c.f.  of  his  bowels  slew  him 
Prov.  7.  15.  therefore  c.  I  forth  to  meet  thee 
Reel.  5.  15.  as  he  c.  forth  naked,  shall  he  return 
Jer.  20.  18.  wherefore  c.  If.  out  of  the  womb? 
JJan.  3.  26.  they  e.  forth  of  the  midst  of  the  fire 

5.  5.  e.  forth  fingers  and  wrote  on  plaster  of  wall 

7.  10.  a  fiery  stream  c.  forth  from  before  him 

8.  9.  out  of  one  of  them  e.  forth  a  little  horn 

9.  23.  the  command  c.f.  and  I  am  come  to  shew 
Zeeh.  10.  4.  out  of  him  c.  f.  the  corner,  the  nail 
Mark  1.  38.  that  I  may  preach,  for  therefore  c.  I  /. 
John  11.  44.  and  he  that  was  dead  c.foitA  bound 

16.  28.  le.  forth  from  the  Father  into  the  woiW 
19.  5.  Jesus  c.f.  wearing  the  crown  of  thorns 

/  CAME. 
Gen.  24.  42.  and  /  c.  this  day  to  the  well,  and  gaid 
30.  30.  for  it  was  little  thou  had.^t  before  I c. 
48.  5.  which  were  born  before  /  c.  into  Egypt 

7.  when  I  c.  from  Padan,  Rachel  died  by  me 
Ezod.5.^3.  since  le.  to  speak  to  Pha.  in  thy  name 
Dent.  22. 14.  when  /  c.  to  her  found  her  not  a  maid 
./udg.  20.4.  Levite  said,  I  c.  into  Gibcahof  Beni. 
IKings  10.  7. 1  believed  not  till  /c.  2  Chron.  9.  6. 
J^rh.  6.  10.  afterwards  I  e.  tohouse  of  Shemaiah 

13.  6.  I  e.  to  the  king  and  obtained  leave 
7.  /  c.  to  Jerusalem  and  understood  of  the  evil 
Isa.  50.  2.  wherefore,  when  /  c.  was  there  no  man 
Eiek.  3.  15.  llien  /  c.  to  them  of  the  captivity 

43.  3.  when  /  c.  to  destroy  the  city 
Mat.  10.  34.  /  c.  not  to  send  peace,  but  a  sword 
Mark  2. 17.  /  c.  not  to  call  righteous,  J.ukeb.  32. 
John  8.  14.  I  know  whence  /  e.  and  whither  I  go 
42.  I c.  from  God,  nor  c.  /  of  myself,  he  sent  m<» 

12.  27.  but  for  this  cause  I  e.  to  this  hour 
47.  for  /  c.  not  to  judge  the  world,  but  to  save 

18.  37.  for  this  cause  c.  /  into  world,  that  I  bear 
Jlets  10.  29.  therefore  c.  /  as  soon  as  I  was  sent  for 

20.  18.  ye  know  from  the  first  day  /c^ltifo  Asia 

22. 11.  being  led  by  the  hand,  /  c.  into  Damascus 

23.  27.  then  c.  /  with  an  army  and  rescued  him 

24.17. /c.  to  bring  alms  to  my  nation, and  offerings 
ICor.  2.1.  when  /c.to  you  /c.  not  with  excellency 
2G9r.l.23.lhattospare  you  /c.not  as  yet  toCorinth 

2.3.1eBt  when  le.  I  should  have  sorrow  from  them 

12.  when  /  c.  to  Trons  to  preach  Christ's  gospel 

Gal.\.  21.  afterwards  I  e.  into  the  regions  of  Syria 

CAME  in. 
(?en.6.4.  the  sons  of  God  c.  tn  fo  daughters  of  men 

19.5.where  are  the  men  that  c.in  to  thee  this  night? 

38.  18.  Judah  c.  in  unto  her,  and  she  conceived 

39.  14.  he  c.  in  to  lie  with  me,  and  I  cried  loud 
Kiod.  21.  3.  if  he  c.  in  by  himself,  he  shall  go  oul 
.Josh.  6. 1.  none  went  out,  and  none  c.  in  to  Jericho 
\Sam.  18. 13.  went  out  and  e.  in  before  people,  16. 
2.S(im.  11.  4.  she  r.  in  to  him,  and  he  lay  with  her 
1  AVnn'.'!  14.6.  as  she  c  in  at  the  door,  Ahijah  said 
2CAron.l5.5.  no  peace  to  him  thatc.  in,  ZfcA.8.10 
F.sth.  2.  14.  she  e.  in  to  the  king  no  more  except 
.Jer.  32.  23.  and  they  c.  771  and  possessed  it 

37.4. now  Jerem.  c  in  and  went  out  among  people 
F.iek.  46.  9.  not  return  by  way  of  the  gate  he  c.  in 
Dan.  4.7.  then  e.  in  the  magicians,  the  Chald.  5. 8. 
8.  but  at  the  last  Daniel  c.  in  before  mo 

Jonah  2.  7.  my  prayer  c.  in  to  thy  holy  temple 
Mat.  22.  11.  when  the  king  c.  in  to  see  fhcirncsts 
Jukel.  28.  the  angel  c.  in  to  Mary,  and  said,  hail 

7.  45.  but  this  woman  since  I  c.  in  kissed  my  feet 
yicts  5.7.  his  wile  not  knowing  what  was  done  c.  in 

10.  the  young  men  c.  in  and  found  her  dead 
Gal.  2.  4.  who  c.  in  privily  to  spy  out  our  liberty 

CAME  near. 
Gen.  10.  9.  they  pressed,  and  c.  near  fo  break  dooi 
Exod.  14.  20,  the  one  c.  not  n.  the  other  uli  night 


CAM 

Exod.40.32.whon  they  c.near  to  altar,they  washed 
J^um.  31. 4£-.  ullicers  nud  caplaiiiB  c.  near  loMoses 

36.  1.  the  cluut  ol  Jobeph  c.  near  bt'toto  Moses 
Jjeul.  1.  ".  y«  c.  n.  to  me  every  one  ot  you,  5.23. 
Josli.  10.  '■W.  c.  n.  and  put  your  leet  on  the  necks 

17.  4.  they  c.  n.  belore  Kleazar  llio  priest,  21.  1. 
IKin^s  lb.  30.  at  tlie  lime  of  tlie  ottering  ol'  the 

evening-sacritiee,  £hjah  c.  7Uar  and  i-aid 
2King£  4.  ii7.  Ueliazi  c.  near  to  thrust  her  away 
SCVjroH.ia.  23.  Zedekiahc.  n.  and  smote  Micaiah 
Jer.  42.1.  t'roui  the  least  even  to  tlie  greatest  c.iicur 
JJan.  3.  b.  Chaldeans  c.  n.  and  aceused  the  Jews 

26.  J^cbuchaduezzar  c.  near  to  the  Curiiace 
Acts  U.  3.  he  c.  >t.  to  Damascus,  there  sliioed  light 

CAME  mgh. 
Exod.  32. 19.  OS  soon  as  he  c.  nigh  he  saw  the  calf 
34.  32.  afterward  all  the  children  ol  Israel  c.  n. 
2 Sam.  15.  5.  when  any  c.  7i.  to  do  iiim  obeisance 
Mat.  15.  29.  JcsuE  c.  nigh  to  the  sea  of  Galilee 
Mark  11.  1.  when  they  c.  nigh  lo  Jerusalem 
Luke  7.  12.  when  he  c.  n.  to  the  gate  of  the  city 

CAME  over. 
Josh.  4. 22.  Israel  c.  uoer  ihis  Jordan  on  dry  land 
Judg.  19.  ID.  tlic  Lcvite  c.  over  against  Jebus 
Mark  5. 1.  they  c.  over  to  llie  other  side  of  the  sea 

CAME  out. 
Gcn.24.15.  behold  Rebekah  c.  out  with  her  pitcher 
25.25.lirst  c.  out  red,  all  over  like  a  hairy  garment 
38.  28.  the  midwife  said,  tiiis  t.  out  lirst 
46.  26.  all  the  souls  which  c.  out  of  his  loins 
Kx^)d.l'3.'X  remember  the  day  in  which  ye  c.  out,4. 
L,ev.  9.  24.  a  fire  c.  out  from  Lord,  J^Tum.  16.  35. 
^um.12.4.  tlie  L.  spake  suddenly,  they  three  c.  out 

16.  27.  Dathan  and  Abirum  c.  out  and  stood 
20. 11. he  smote  rock,  and  water  c.  out  abundantly 

JJeut,  11.10.  not  as  land  of  Egypt  whence  ye  c.  out 
Josh.  6.  4.  all  that  c.  out  were  circumcised,  5. 
6.  till  all  that  c.  out  of  Egypt  were  consumed 
Judg.4.  22.  Jael  c.  ou£to  meet  hiin,and said, come 
lSam.4. 16.  the  man  said  to  Eli,  lam  he  that  c.  out 
of  the  army,  1  tied  to-day  out  of  the  army 
21.  5.  about  these  three  days  since  I  c.  out 
SSam.  2.23.  the  spear  c.  out  behind  him,  and  he  fell 
0.  20.  Michael  c.  out  lo  meet  Uavid  and  said 
11.  2.1.  the  men  prevaUcd  against  us  and  c.  out 

18.  4.  and  all  the  peo.  c.  out  by  hundreds  and  by 
J  Kings  8.  9.  when  the  Ld.  made  a  covenant  with 

Israel  when  they  c.  out  of  Egypt,  2  Oir.  5.  10. 

20.19.  these  young  men  princes  ol'provinces  c.out 
SOlron.  20.10.  not  let  Isr.  invade,  when  they  c.  out 
Joh  1.  21.  naked  c.  I  out  of  my  mother's  womb 

3.11. why  died  I  not  from  the  womb?  why  did  I  not 
give  up  the  ghost,  when  I  c.  out  of  the  belly? 
Jtr.  17.  16.  that  which  c.  out  of  my  lips  was  right 
.E:et.l.4.a  whirlwind c.  out  of  the-north,  a  cloud 
Jlab.  3.14.  they  c.  o.  as  a  whirlwind  to  scatter  me 
ZecA.5.9.  c.  o.  two  women, and  wind  in  their  wings 
Mat.  8.  34.  the  whole  city  c.  out  to  meet  Jesus 

]2.44.return  to  house  whence  I  c.  out.,  Luke\\.\!A. 

27. 32.  as  they  c.  out  they  found  Simon  of  Cyrene 

53.  and  c.  out  of  the  graves  after  his  resurrection 

MarkX.^Vi.  unclean  spirit  had  cried,  he  c.  out,  9.26. 

6.  34.  when  he  c.  out  he  saw  much  people 

9. 7.  a  voice  c.  out  of  the  cloud,  saying,  this  is  my 
/yU^el.iK.when  hoc.  o.  he  could  not  speak  to  them 

4.  3.5.  and  he  c.  out  of  him,  and  hurt  him  not 

15.  28  therefore  c.  out  his  father  and  introated 
John  16.27.  because  ye  believed  I  c.  out  from  G. 

17.  8.  they  have  known  that  I  c.  out  from  thoo 

19.  34.  his  side,  forthwith  c.  out  blood  and  water 
Actt  8.  7.  unclean  spirits  c.  out  of  many  possessed 

16.  18.  and  the  spirit  c.  out  the  same  hour 
ICor.  14. 36.  c.  word  of  G.  out  from  you,  or  to  you 
Heb.  3. 16.  not  all  that  c.  out  of  Egypt  by  Moses 
Itev.  7.  14.  these  c.  out  of  great  trihulation  and 

have  washid  their  robes 

14.  l.").  another  angel  c.  out  of  the  temple,  17. 
IH.  another  angel  c.  out  from  the  altar 

15.  0.  the  seven  angels  c.  out  of  the  temple 

19.  5.  a  voice  c.  orit  of  the  throne,  praise  our  G 

CAME  to  pass. 
Exod.  12.  41.  and  it  c.  to  pass  at  the  end  of  430 
years,  even  the  self-same  day  it  r.  to  pass,  51. 
Deut.  2. 16.  so  it  c.  to  pass,  lHam.  13. 22.  'ih'ings 
l.").  12.  F.itk.  2.  a.  ./lets  27.  44. 
Josh.  17.  13.  it  r.  to  pass  when  Israel  grew  strong 
21.  4').  th'Tc  fnileil  not  any  thing;  all  e.  to  pass 
Juilg.  n.  20.  for  it  c.  to  pass,  1  Kings  II.  4,  I.*). 
15. 1.  it  c.  lo  pass,  2  Kings  3.  .1.  JV.  A.  2.  I .  (  4.  I, 
7.|  0.  l.|  7.  1.  ./rr.  35.  II. 
lSnm.1.20.  it  c.  to  pass  when  the  time  was  come 
10.  0.  and  all  those  siuns  c.  to  pass  that  day 

16.  23.  it  c.  to  pass  when  the  evil  spirit  from  God 
ZSam.  2.  1.  it  c.  tn  pass  afti'r  this,  8.  1.  |  10.  I. 

2  Kings  6.  2-1.  2  Chron.  20.  1. 

2  Kings  8.  15.  and  it  r.  to  pass  on  the  morrow, 

1  Chron.  10.  ft.  .//•»■.  20.  3.  Jlcts  4.  5. 

Jsn.  4H.  3.  T  did  them  siidilenlv,  and  lliey  c.  to  pass 

5.  lioforo  it  c.  to  pa.is  I  shewed  it  tho« 
1  TTuss.  3.  4.  even  a.»  it  e.  to  pass  and  ye  know 
69 


CAM 

Then  CAME. 
Kxod.  17. 8.  thcnc.  Amulek  and  fought  with  Israel 
JV'um.27.  1.  then  c.  the  daughters  of  Zelophehad 
li'um.  21. 1.  then  c.  Uavid  lo  Ahimelech  the  priest 
26a;n.  5. 1.  then  c.  all  the  tribes  to  IJd.  to  Hebron 

24.  6.  then  they  c.  to  Gilead,  and  numbered  peo. 
'■ZKingslH.'i'.  then  c.  Eliak.  and  Shebua,yiu.36.22. 
2thron.  1.  13.  then  c.  Solomon  from  his  journey 

12.  5.  then  c.  Shemaiah  the  prophet  lo  Kehoboam 
Eira  S.lU.tAcn  c.Sheshbazzar  and  laid  loundalion 
JVVA.  1.  2.  then  Hanani  one  ol  my  brethren  c. 

2.  9.  then  1  c.  to  the  governors  beyond  the  river 
Job  30.  26.  when  1  looked  lor  good,  (/ten  evil  c. 
Jtr.19.14.  then  c.  Jeremiah  from  Tojihel,  whither 

38.  27.  then  c.  all  the  princes  uiilo  Jeremiah 
Ezek.  14.  1.  then  c.  certain  of  the  elders  of  Israel 

23.39.  tAc7i  they  c.  same  day  into  my  sanctuary 
Mat.  9.  14.  then  c.  to  him  the  disciples  of  John 

15.  1.  then  c.  to  Jesus  scribes  and  I'harisees,  say. 
12.  then  c.  his  disciples,  and  said  lo  him,17,l'J. 
25.  then  c.  she,  and  worshipped  him,  Mark  7.25. 

18.  21.  then  c.  Peter  to  him,  and  said.  Lord,  how 

20.  20.  then  c.  the  mother  of  Zebedee's  cliildren 

26.  5U.  then  c.  they,  and  laid  hands  ou  Jesus 
J^uke  3.  12.  then  c.  also  publicans  to  be  baptized 

22.  7.  then  c.  the  day  of  unleavened  bread 
John  7.  45.  then  c.  the  officers  to  the  chief  priests 

12.  28.  tAf7i  there  c.  a  voice  from  heaven,  saying 

20.  26.  then  c.  Jesus,  the  doors  being  shut,  and 

'J'hcy  CAME,  or  CAAIE  they. 
Gen.  11.  31.  they  c.  to  Haran  and  dwelt  there 

12.  5.  and  into  the  land  of  Canaan,  they  c. 

22.  9.  they  e.  to  the  place  which  God  told  them  of 
Exod.  16.  35.  till  thfy  c.  to  a  land  inhabited 

19.1.  same  day  e.  they  into  the  wilderness  of  Sinai 
2.'!)'am.4.7.when  thcyc.  he  lay  on  bed, they  slew  him 
\  Kingsl.'ii.'La.iXok  and  Nathan, tAf?/  c. before  king 
2.  7.  BO  they  c.  lo  me,  when  1  lied  from  Absalom 
13.25.  t/iey  e.  and  told  it  in  city,  where  old  prophet 
2tCings  2.  4. 1  will  not  leave,  so  they  c.  to  Jericho 
6.  4. when  they  c.  to  Jordan,  tlioy  cut  down  wood 
20.14.  these  men  whence  c.  they  to  thee,  Isa.  39.3. 
iChron.  20.  4.  out  of  all  Judix  they  c.  to  seek  Lord 

29.  17.  on  eighth  day  c.  they  to  the  porch  of  Lord 
Ezra  2.  {)8.  some  when  they  c.  offered  freely 
JVfA.  13.21.  from  that  time  forth  c.  they  no  more 
Job  6.  20.  they  c.  thither  and  were  ashamed 

30.  14.  tAf^  c.  upon  me  as  a  wide  breaking  in 
Psal.  88.  17.  they  c.  round  about  me  like  water 
■fer.  14.  3.  they  c.  to  the  pits  and  found  no  water 

43.  7.  thus  c.  tAc^cven  loTahpanhes 
Ezek.  23.  40.  a  messenger  was  sent,  lo  they  c. 
Dan.  2.  2.  they  c.  and  stood  before  the  king 

6.  24.  or  ever  they  c.  at  the  bottom  of  the  den 
Jlfttt.  1.  18.  before  they  c.  together  she  was  found 

14.  34.  they  c.  into  the  land  of  Gennesarel 

18.31.  tAf y  c.  and  told  their  Ld.  all,  J.uke  14.2J. 

26.  73.  after  a  while  c.  they  that  stood  by 
Mark  1.  45.  they  c.  to  him  from  every  quarter 

3.13.  he  called  whom  he  would,  and  they  c.  to  him 
I^uke  2.  16.  they  c.  with  haste  and  found  Mary 

24.  2;).  tAf y  c.  saying,  that  they  had  seen  a  vision 
.hhn  12.  9.  and  they  c.  not  for  Jt^sus'  sake  only 
Jicts  8.36.tAc2/c.unto  a  certain  water,  eunuch  said 

12.  10.  they  c.  to  the  iron  gate  which  opened 
20.  they  c.  with  one  accord  and  desired  peace 

17.  13.  ihey  c.  thither  also  and  stirred  up  people 

23.  14.  they  c.  to  the  chief  priests  and  elders 

33.  who  when  they  c.  to  Cesarea,  jiresented  Paul 
Rev.  7. 13.  what  are  these,  and  whence  c.  they'! 

IVord  of  the  J.ord  CAME. 
t?f7!.I5.1.  word  of  Lord  c.  to  A  brain  in  a  vision,  4 
l.S'am.  15.  10.  word  of  L.  c.  to  Samuel,  saying 
2.S'am.  24.  II.  c.  the  toord  of  7.or(t  lo  Gad, David's 
IKingsti.  II.  -wordof  J.ordc.  lo  Solomon, suyin^ 
16.1.  word  of  I..C.  to  Jehu  aga.  Uaasha,  saying,7. 

17.  2.  the  word  of  Lord  c.  untotlijah,  8.  |  18.1. 

I  19.  9.  1  21.  17,  28. 

18.  31.  whom  w.  of  L.  c.  saying,  Israel  thy  name 
ZKings  20.  4.  the  ic.  of  L.  c.  lo  Isaiah,  Asa.  38.  4 
ICAr.  17.  3. 10.  of  L.  c.  to  Nathan  ||  22.8.  lo  David 
2CA.I1.2. 10.0/ /..c.toShemaiah, 12.7.]  llfino^sl2.22. 
Jer.  1.  2.  word  of  the  Lord  c.  lo  Jcremiiin,4.  |  2. 

1.  I  14.  1.  I  29.  30.  I  33.  1,  19.  /;a7t.  9.  2. 
Fiek.  1.  3.  10.  of  L.  c.  expressly  to  K7.ckiel,3.  16. 
Hos.  1.1.  w.of  /..r.lo  Ilosea  ||./i»7  1. 1,  f.  to  Joe' 
Jonah  I.  1.  wordof  Lordc.  to  Jonah,  3.  I.  J  Mic. 
1.  I.  lo  Micnh 
7.eph.\.l.w.of  I,  c.to7eph.||//ar'.l.l-f.by  llaggni 
ZccA.1.1.  c.  to  Zecli.  ||  7.  4.  c.  of  hosts  lo  nic,  8.1. 

CAMEL. 
Oen.'iA.M.  Rehekah  saw  Isaac,  lighted  of  the  c. 
I.cv.  1 1. 4.  these  ye  shall  not  eat,  the  c.  /)irut.]4.7. 
I.Sam.  15.  3.  hut  slay  infant,  ox,  and  c.  and  ass 
/«cA.I4.I.5.  so  shall  be  the  plagueof  the  c.  and  nss 
Mat.  19.24.  it  is  easier  for  a  c.  t<i  go  through  the 
cyo  of  a  needle,  Mark  10.  25.  /.nkr  18.  25 
23.  24.  which  strain  at  r  gnat  and  swallow  a  c. 

CAMELKON. 
/.er. 11.30.  these  shall  be  unclean,  the  c.  the  lizard 


CAM 

CAMELS. 
Gen  12.16  Abram  had  sheep,o.xen,6he-as8Cs,and«. 
24.  19.  I  will  draw  water  tor  tiiy  c.  also,  44. 

30.  43.  Jacob  had  much  cattle,  us::es,  and  e. 

31.  34.  Rachel  put  them  in  the  c.  I'urniture 
37.  25.  Ishmaelitee  came  with  their  c.  bearicg 

Exod.  9.  3.  hand  of  the  L.  on  the  c.  and  the  oxen 
Judg.  6.  5.  they  and  their  c.  without  number,  7. 12 

8.  21.  took  away  ornaments  on  their  c.  necks,  26 
lHam.  27.9.  David  took  away  c.  and  the  apparel 

30.17.  save  400  young  men  who  rode  on  c.  and  fled 
IKings  10.  2.  came  to  Jerusalem  withe.  2C'A.9.1. 
2Kings  8.  9.  Hazael  took  a  present  forty  c.  burden 
ICAr.  5.21.  the  Reubenites  look  away  ol  c.  50,000 

12.  40.  they  of  Zebulun  brought  bread  on  c. 

27.  30.  over  the  c.  also  was  Obil  the  Ishmaelite 
Ezra  2.  67.  their  c.  were  435.  A'ch.  7.  69. 
F.sth.  8.  10.  he  sent  letters  by  post  on  mules,  c.l4. 
Job  1.  3.  his  substance  also  was  three  thousand  c. 
17.  the  Chaldeans  fell  on  the  c.  and  carried  them 
Isa.  21.  7.  he  saw  a  chariot  of  asses  and  of  c. 

30.6.will  carry  their  treasures  on  the  bunches  of  c. 

60.  6.  the  inullitude  of  c.  shall  cover  thee 
Jer.  49.  29.  they  shall  take  to  themselves  their  e. 

32.  their  c.  shall  be  a  bootv.  and  their  cattle 
Ezek.  25.  5.  I  will  make  Rabbah  a  stable  for  c. 
Mat.  3. 4.  John  had  raiment  of  c.  Aair,  Mark  1.6. 

CAMEST. 
Gen.  16.  8.  Hagar,  Sarai's  maid,  whence  c.  thoul 

24. 5.  bring  again  to  the  land  from  whence  thou  a. 

27.  33.  and  I  have  eaten  of  all  before  ihou  c. 
£zo<i.23.15.  for  in  it  thou  c.  out  from  Egypt,  34.18. 
JVum.  22.  37.  wherefore  c.  thou  not  unto  me? 
Deut.  2.  37.  to  the  land  of  Ammon  thou  c.  not 

16.  3.  remember  the  day  tliou  c.  thou  c.  in  haste 
lSam.13.11.  thou  c.  not  within  the  days  appointed 

17.  28.  Eliab  said,  why  e.  thou  down  hither? 
~Sam.  11.  10.  c.  thou  not  from  thy  journey? 

15.  20.  whereas  thou  c.  but  yesterday,  should  I 
IKings  13.  9.  not  return  by  the  way  thou  c.  17. 

14.  art  thou  tlie  man  of  God  that  c.  from  Judoh? 
IKings  19.  28.  I  will  turn  thee  back  by  the  way 

by  which  thou  c.  Isa.  37.29 
jVeA.  9.  13.  thou  c.  down  also  on  mount  Sinai 
Isa.  64.  3.  thou  c.  down,  the  mountains  tlowc-d 
Jer.  1.  5.  before  thou  c.  forth,  I  sanctified  thee 
Ezek.  32.  2.  and  thou  c.  forth  with  thy  rivers 
.1/at.22. 12.  friend,  how  c.  thou  in  hither  not  having 
John  6.  25.  they  said.  Rabbi,  when  c.  thou  hither  ? 

16.  30.  we  '.-elieve  that  thou  c.  forth  from  God 
.lets  9.17.Jesus  appeared  to  Uiee  in  wav,os  thou  c 

CAMP. 
Exod.  14. 19.  the  angel  of  Lord  went  before  the  c 

16.  13.  at  even  the  (juails  came  up  and  covered  e. 

32.  17.  there  is  a  noise  of  war  in  tlie  c. 

27.  go  thro'  the  c.  and  slay  every  man  his  brother 
36. 0.  they  caused  it  to  be  proclaimed  thro'  the  c 

Lev.  17.  3.  what  man  killelli  any  goal  in  the  c' 
24.  10.  they  strove  together  in  the  c. 

JVum. 1.52.Israel  shall  pitch  every  one  by  his  own  c 
2.  3.  on  the  east-side  shall  the  c.  of  Judah  pilch 
4.  5.  when  c.  settelh  forward.  Aaron  shall  come 

15.  as  the  c.  is  to  set  forward,  after  that  the  sons 
11.  1.  consume  them  in  the  utmost  parts  of  thee. 

20.  Eldad  and  Medad  prophesied  in  the  c. 
Deut.  23.  lU.  he  shall  not  come  within  the 

14.  tlie  Lord  walked  in  the  midst  of  thy  c. 
./osh.  0.  18.  and  make  the  c.  of  Israel  a  curse 
Judg.  7.  17.  when  I  come  to  the  outside  of  the  e. 
13.  25.  Spirit  of  God  began  to  move  him  in  thee. 
21.  8.  there  came  none  lo  the  c.  from  Jahesh 

12.  young  virgins,  they  brought  them  to  the  c. 
ISam.  4.  6.  the  noise  of  this  great  shout  in  tJie  e. 

13.  t  2^1.  the  standing  e.  of  the  Philislincs  went 

17.  17.  and  run  lo  the  e.  lo  thy  brethren 

1  Kings  16. 16.  all  Israel  made  Oniri  king  in  the  c. 
'iKiiigs  6.8.in  such  and  such  a  place  shall  be  my  e. 

7.  7.  they  left  the  c.  as  it  was,  and  fled  for  life 
8.  and  when  these  lepers  came  lo  the  c. 
'iKings  19.  35.  the  angel  of  the  Lord  smote  in  the 
c.  of  Assyrians  185,(X)0,  Isa.  37.  36. 
2CAr.  22. 1.  the  band  came  with  the  Arabians  to  c 
Psal.  78.  28.  lot  it  fall  in  the  midst  of  their  c. 

106.  16.  they  envied  Moses  also  in  the  c. 
Ezek.  4.  2.  lay  siege,  set  the  c.  also  against  it 
.h(l~.  II.  for  his  c.  is  very  great,  for  he  is  strong 
liev.  20.  9.  compassed  the  e.  of  the  sainls  about 

Into  tAf  CAMP. 
/,n>.14.8.afler  that  he  shall  come  i'^lo  c.  16. 20,  28. 
^Vi/m.  II.  30.  Moses  gat  him  into  c.  he  and  eldon 
^Vut.23.1l.8un  is<lown,ho8liallcome  into  c. again 
I  .Sam.  4. 7.  the  Philistines  saiil,  God  is  come  into  c. 

Out  of  tAf  CAMP. 
F.Tod.  19. 17.  Moses  brought  forth  people  out  oft. 
/,fr>.10.4.  come  near,  carry  your  hrclhrcn  out  of  c. 

14.  3.  the  priest  shall  go  forth  out  of  e.  and  look 
17.  3.  what  mnn  soever  killeth  n  goat  out  of  thee 
24.  23.  should  bring  him  that  had  riirsod  out  of  e. 

.Vum.5. 2.  command  the vpul  every  leper  ont  of  u 
12. 14.  let  Miriam  bo  shut  out  of  the  c.  seven  dayt 


CAN 

Jfum.li.a.lhe  nrk  andMoses  departed  notout  ofc. 
/Jtut.iS.lO.  unclean  person  shall  go  abroad  o.  ofc. 
ISam.  13. 17. spoilers  came  out  of  c.  oi'Fliilistines 
iSam.1.2.  behold,  a  man  came  out  o/c.  from  Saul 
3.  he  said  to  him,outofc.  ol'laracl  am  1  escaped 
Hound  about  the  CAMP. 
JViim.ll.Sl. quails  feU,spread  them  round  a  J.  c.  32. 
Judff  7. 21.  stood  every  man  in  place  round  ad.  c 

mthout  the  CAMP. 
Excd.  29.  14.  the  flesh  of  the  bullock  shalt  thou 
burn  without  the  c.  Lev.  8. 17.  |  9. 11.  1 16. 27 
33.7.  pitched  labern.  sguglit  Lord,  went  without  c. 
Lev.  6.  11.  and  .-^hall  carry  forth  ashes  w.  the  c. 
13.  46.  tiiat  hath  the  plague  shall  dwell  w.  the  c. 
J\rum.  5.  3.  every  leper  shall  be  put  out  without  c. 
15.  35.  gatherer  of  sticks  shall  be  stoned  lo.  thee. 

19.  3.  bring  the  red  heifer  w.  the  c.  and  slay  her 
31. 19.  and  do  ye  abide  without  the  c.  seven  days 

Deut.  23. 12.  thou  shalt  have  a  place  also  w.  the  c 
Josh.  6.  23.  Rahab  left  her  kindred  without  the  c 
Heb.  13. 11.  bodies  of  those  beasts  are  burnt  w.  c. 
13.  let  us  go  forth  to  him  without  c.  bearing  his 
CAMP. 
Jsa.  29.  3.  I  will  c.  against  thee  round  about 
Jer.  50.  29.  all  ye  that  bend  the  bow  c.  against  it 
M'ah.  3. 17.  which  c.  in  the  hedges  in  the  cold  day 

CAMPED. 
Exod.  19.  2  and  there  Israel  c.  before  the  mount 

CAMPS. 

<re7i.32.t  2.  he  called  the  name  of  that  place  two  c. 

JVaw.  5.3.  leper  put  out,  that  they  delile  not  their  c. 

10.2.  make  two  trumpets  for  journeying  of  thee. 

Jlmos  4.  10.  I  have  made  stink  of  your  c.  to  come 

CAMPHIRE. 
Cant.  1. 14.  my  beloved  is  to  me  as  a  cluster  ofc. 
4.l3.thy  plants  are  an  orchard  of  c.with  spikenard 

CAN. 
f;e«.41.38.Phara.said,  c.  we  find  such  a  one  as  this? 
Deut.  31.  2.  1  c.  no  more  go  out  and  come  in 
2Sam.}ii.  23.  he  is  dead,  c.  I  bring  him  back  again? 
19. 35.  c.  I  discern,  c.  I  hear  voice  of  singing-men? 
Job  6.  6.  c.  that  which  is  unsavoury  be  eaten? 

8. 11.  c.  the  rush  grow  without  mire?  c.  the  flag? 

22.  2.  c.  a  man  be  profitable  to  God  ? 
13.  c.  he  judge  through  the  dark  cloud? 

30. 29.  c.  any  understand  the  spreading  of  clouds? 
Psal.  78.  19.  they  said,  c.  God  furnish  a  table? 

20.  c.  he  give  bread  also?  c.  he  provide  flesh? 
89.  6.  who  c.  be  compared?  c.  be  likened  to  Lord? 

Prov.  6.  27.  c.  a  man  take  fire  in  his  bosom  ? 

28.  c.  one  go  on  hot  coals  and  not  be  burnt? 

ha.  46.  7.  one  shall  cry,  yet  c.  he  not  answer 

49.  15.  c.  a  woman  forget  her  sucking  child? 

Jer.'i.^-i.  c.  a  maid  forget  her  ornaments,  or  a  bride 

23.  24.  c.  any  hide  himself  in  secret  places  that  I 
Jimos  3.3.c.two  walk  together  exc.  they  be  agreed? 

5.  c.a  bird  fall  in  a  snare  where  no  gin  is  for  him? 

8.  Lord  God  hath  spoken,  who  c.  but  prophesy? 
.'V/aS.19.25.whoc.besaved?^UafAlU.26.y.uftel8.26. 

27.  65.  go  your  way,  make  it  as  sure  as  you  c. 
Mark'i.lSi.  c.  the  children  of  bride- chamber  fast? 

9.  29.  this  kind  c.  come  forth  but  by  prayer 

10.  38.  c.  ye  drink  of  the  cup  that  I  drink  of? 
/,uAe6.39.  spake  a  parable,  c.  the  blind  lead  blind? 
John  1.  46.  c.  any  good  come  out  of  Nazareth? 

6.  60.  this  is  a  hard  saying,  who  e.  hear  it? 

10.  21.  c.  a  devil  open  the  eyes  of  the  blind? 

15.  4.  no  more  c.  ye,  except  ye  abide  in  me 
Acts  10.  47.  c.  any  man  forbid  water,  that  these 
7Jo7n.8.7.mind  is  not  subject  to  law,norindeed  c.hc 
Jam.  2.  14.  and  have  not  works,  c.  faith  save  him? 

3. 12.  e.  the  fig-tree  bear  olive-berries?  a  vine  figs? 

How  CAN. 
Deut.  1.  12.  how  c.  I  alone  bear  your  cumbrancc? 
l.S(i7n.l6.2.  Ao;o  c.  I  go,  if  Saul  hear,  he  will  kill  me 
F.sth.K  6.  hoio  c.  I  endure  to  see  evil  or  destruction 
.Job  25.  4.  how  c.  a  man  be  justified  with  God  ? 
Prov.  20.  24.  how  c.  a  man  understand  his  way? 
Keel.  4.  11.  but  how  c.  one  be  warm  alone? 
./f r.47.7.  how  e.  it  be  quiet  seeing  Ld.  given  charge 
i  how  canftthoa  be  quiet  seeing  L.  given  charge 
.VaM2.34.  hoio  c.  ye  being  evil  speak  good  things? 
John  3.  4.  how  e.  a  man  be  born  when  he  is  old? 

9.  Nicodemus  said,  how  c.  these  things  be? 
6.  52.  how  c.  this  man  give  us  his  flesh  to  cat? 
14.  5.Thomassaid,  Lord,  h.  c.  we  know  the  way? 

Acts  8.  31.  how  c.  I  except  some  man  guide  nic? 

CANNOT. 
If  a.  1. 13.  the  calling  of  assemblies  1  c.  away  with 

29.  11.  read  this  ;  he  saith,  I  c.  for  it  is  sealed 
.Trr.  .5.  iK2.  yet  the  waves  c.  prevail,  c.  pass  over 

18.  6.  e.  I  do  with  you  as  this  potter,  saith  Lord? 
Dan.  2.  27.  secret  king  demanded,  c.  astrologers 
Mat.  16.  3.  c.  ye  discern  the  signs  of  the  times? 
/-uicl3.33.itc.be  that  a  prophet  perish  out  of  .leru. 

Ifi.  26.  which  would  pass  from  hence  to  you  c. 
ICor.  11.  t  20.  ye  c.  cat  the  Lord's  supper 
tfeb.  9.  5.  of  which  we  c.  now  sj>eak  particularly 

CANST. 
Exod.  33.  20.  tliou  c.  not  see  my  face  and  live 
63 


CAN 

X)<!««.28.27.with  itch,whereof  tliou  c.not  bo  healed 
Job  33.5.if  thou  c.  answ.  me,  set  thy  words  in  order 
Mat.S.'i.  Lord,  if  thou  will,  thou  c.  make  me  clean 
Mark  9.  22.  it  thou  c.  do  any  thing,  have  compas. 
Acts  21.37.chief  captain  Baid,c.  tliou  speak  Greek? 

CANDLE 
Is  a  long  roll  or  cylinder  made  of  tallow.,  wax,  <$-c. 

for  giving  light,  Jer.  25.  10.  Luke  15.  8. 
To  which  are  compared,  [1]  The  reasonable  soul 
which  is  as  a  light  set  u/t  in  man  by  Hod,  and 
as  his  dcputij  to  observe  and  judge  our  actions, 
and  to  inform  and  direct  us,  Prov.  20.  27.  [2] 
Ministers,  or  the  gifts  and  graces  which  God 
bestows  on  men,  which  are  not  given  them  only 
for  their  own  sahes,  but  for  the  good  of  others 
also;  as  when  men  light  a  candle,  they  arc  not 
to  hide  it  under  a  bushel,  but  to  put  it  on  a 
candlestick  that  it  may  communicate  its  light 
to  all  in  the  house.  Mat.  5. 15.  [3]  The  favour 
and  blessing  of  God,  which  both  direct  and 
comfort  the  soul.  Job  29.  3. 
They  need  no  candle,  Hev.  22.  5.  Light,  in  its 
metaphorical  notion,  signifies  knowledge,  or 
comfort:  The  saints  in  heaveii  shall  have  no  need 
of  any  created  beings  to  help  them  to  either  of 
these;  God  and  Christ  shall  therefill  their  souls 
with  knowledge  and  joy  not  to  be  expressed. 
Job  18.  6.  his  c.  shall  be  put  out  with  him 

21.  17.  how  oft  is  the  c.  of  the  wicked  put  out? 
29.  3.  when  his  c.  shined  upon  my  head 

Ps.  18. 28.  for  thou  wilt  light  my  e.  the  L.  my  God 
Prov.  20.  27.  the  spirit  of  man  is  the  c.  of  the  Ld. 

24.  20.  the  c.  of  the  wicked  shall  be  put  out 

31.  18.  her  c.  goeth  not  out  by  night 
Jer.  25.  10.  and  from  them  tfie  light  of  the  c. 
Mat.  5.  15.  nor  do  men  light  a  c.  and  put  it  under 
a  bushel,  Mark  4.  21.  Luke  8.  16.  |  11.  33. 
Luke  11.30. when  brightshining  of  a  c.  giveth  light 

15.8.  doth  not  she  light  a  c.  and  sweep  the  house 
Rev.  18.  23.  light  of  a  c.  shine  no  more  in  thee 

22.  5.  and  they  need  no  c.  nor  light  of  the  sun 
CANDLES. 

Zep!i.  1.  12.  I  will  search  Jerusalem  with  c. 
CANDLESTICK. 

In  Exod.  25.  31, 32,  &c.  we  read  of  the  candlestick 
of  gold  with  six  branches,  which  Moses  made  by 
the  command  of  God  to  beput  into  the  taberna- 
cle: It  was  of  hammered  gold,  a  talCnt  in 
weight:  It  had  one  foot  of  the  same  metal,  and 
a  stock  with  the  branches  adorned  at  equal  dis- 
tances with  sixflowers  like  lilies,  with  as  many 
bowls  and  knops  placed  alternately:  Upon  the 
stock  and  six  branches  of  the  candlestick  were 
the  goldenlamps  whichwrreimviovcable,where- 
in  there  was  put  oil  and  cotton.  It  was  placed 
on  the  south  side  in  the  holy  place,  and  served  to 
illuminate  the  altar  of  perfume,  and  the  table  of 
shew-bread,  which  were  in  the  same  place. 

The  seven  golden  candlesticks  represent  the 
church.  Rev.  1. 20.  enlightened  by  the  Spirit  of 
God  with  his  seven-fold,or  various  operations, 
Rev. 1.4.  .^nd  a  candlestick  may  be  an  emblem 
of  the  church,  which  has  not  the  light  it  shews 
from  itself,  but  only  holds  it  forth  from  Christ. 

Exod.25.31.  makec.  of  pure  gold,  37.17.  J^um.  8.4. 
33.  six  branches  that  came  out  of  the  c.  37. 19. 
.34.  in  the  c.  shall  be  four  bowls,  37.  20. 
26.  35.  thou  shalt  set  the  c.  over  against  the  table 
40.  24.  put  the  c.  in  the  tent  of  the  congregation 

I^ev.  24.  4.  he  shall  order  the  lamps  on  the  c. 

JVum.  3.  31.  their  charge  shall  be  the  ark  and  c. 
4.  9.  shall  take  a  cloth  and  cover  the  c.  of  light 
8. 2.  the  lamps  shall  give  light  over  against  the  c. 

2A1in^«4.10.1et  usset  forhim  there  a  bed, a  table, ac. 

ICAr.  28.  15.  lamps  of  gold,  by  weight  for  every  c. 

2Chr.  13.  11.  also  set  they  in  order  the  c.  of  gold 

Dan.  5. 5.  and  wrote  over  against  the  c.  on  plaister 

Zeck.  4.  2.  I  looked,  and  behold  a  c.  all  ot  gold 
11.  two  olive-trees  on  the  right  side  of  the  e. 

Mat.  5. 15.  but  on  a  c.  and  it  giveth  light  to  all  in 
the  house,  Luke  8.  16.  |  11.  33. 

Mark  4. 21.  is  a  candle  bro't  not  to  be  set  on  a  e.? 

Heb.  9.2.  the  first,  wherein  was  the  c.  and  the  table 

/iejj.2.5.repent,  else  I  will  come  and  remove  thy  c. 
CANDLESTICKS. 

1  Kings  7.  49.  made  the  c.  of  pure  gold,  2CAr.  4.7. 

1  Chrvn.  28. 15.  even  the  weight  for  the  c.  of  gold 

.Ter.  ,V2. 19.  he  took  away  the  c.  spoons,  and  cups 

Rev.  11.  4.  the  two  c.  standing  before  the  Lord 
See  Seven. 
CANE. 

Isa.  43. 24.  hast  bought  me  no  sweet  c.  with  money 

Jer.  6.  20.  and  the  sweet  e.  from  a  far  country 
CANKER,  ED. 

iTim.  2.  17.  and  their  word  will  eat  as  doth  a  c. 

,Iam.  5.  3.  your  gold  and  silver  is  c.  and  the  rust 
CANKER-WORM. 

.Tori  1.  4.  hath  r.  eaten,  and  what  c.  left,  2.  25. 

JVaA.  3.  15. shall  eat  theclikec.makethyselfasc. 
16.  the  c.  spoileth,  and  flieth  away 


CAP 

CAPTAIN 

Is  a  name  applied,  [Ij  'Jo  the  king,  or  prince  of  a 
people,  1  Sam.  9.  16.  [2J  7'/  a  chief  marshal, 
Gen.37. 136.  [3]  To  a  general,  or  commander 
m  an  ar/Hj/,  Gen.  26.  26.  2Sam.  5.  8.  \i'\  To 
the  head  of  a  family,  or  tribe.  Num.  2.  3.  [5] 
To  the  governor  of  a  province.  Hag.  1.  t  l, 
[0]  To  such  as havethecoinmandof  a  company, 
consisting  sometimes  of  mure,  sumetinun  of 
fewer  men,  Deut.  1.  15. 

Christ  Jesus  is  called  the  Captain  of  salvation, 
Heb.  2.  10.  He  is  the  author  and  guide,  ur 
leader  to  salvation.  He  by  his  sufferings  and 
death  merited  salvation  for  his  people;  by  hi3 
wordand  Spintfits  themforit;  hevanijuishe^ 
all  opposcrs  of  it;  and  puts  them  finally  into 
the  actual  possession  of  it  in  heaven. 

Otn.37.36.  sold  Joseph  toPotiphar,  c.  of  thcguard 
40.  4.  c.  of  the  guard  ciiarged  Joseph  with  them 

JSTum.  2. 3.  Nahshon,  c.  of  the  chiluren  of  Israel 
5.  Nothancel,  c.  of  the  children  of  Issuchar 

14.  4.  lot  us  make  a  c.  and  return,  JS'eh.  9.  17. 
Josh.  5.  14.  but  asc.  of  the  host  of  the  Ld.  I  coma 

15.  the  c.  of  the  Lord's  host  said  to  Joshua  , 
J'u(/n'.4.2.c.of  Jabin's  host  wasSisera,7.  liurn.12.9. 
Ik  6.  they  said  to  Jephthah,  come  and  be  our  c. 
11.  the  people  made  him  head  and  c.  over  them 
lSain.9.16.shalt  anoint  him  c.  over  my  people,10.1. 
13. 14. Ld. commanded  him  to  be  c.  over  his  ))eople 
17.  18.  carry  these  ten  cheeses  to  c.  of  thuusuiid 

22.  2.  and  David  became  a  c.  over  them 
~Sam.5.%  thou  shalt  feed,  and  be  a  c.  over  Israel 

8.  he  shall  be  chief  and  c.  IChron.  11.  6. 

19.  13.  if  thou  be  not  e.  of  host  in  room  of  Joab 

23.  19.  Abishai  was  therefore  their  c. 
IKings  16.  16.  Isr.  made  Omri,  c.  of  the  host,  king 
2Kings  1.  9.  the  king  sent  a  c.  with  his  fifty 

11.  he  sent  to  him  another  c.  with  his  fifty,  13. 
4.13.wouldest  thou  be  si>oken  for  to  the  c.  of  host? 
5.  1.  Naaman,  c.  of  the  host  of  the  king  of  Syria 
9.  5.  he  said,  1  have  an  errand  to  thee,  O  c. 

15.  25.  Pekah,  a  e.  of  hia,  conspired  against  him 
18.24.will  turn  away  the  face  of  one  c.  /«a.36.9. 

20.  5.  and  tell  Hezekiah  the  c.  of  my  people 

25.8.  came  Nebuzar-adan,  c.  of  guard,  ,/(r.52.12. 
1 19.  took  away  scribe  ofc.  of  host,  Jer.  52.  j  25. 

ICAr.  11.  21.  more  honourable,  for  he  was  their  c. 

19.  18.  killed  Shophach  c.  of  host,  2Sa?n.  10.  la 
27.  5.  the  third  c.  Benaiah  ||  7.  fourth  c.  Asahol 

8.  the  fifth  c.  Shamhuth  ||  9.  the  sixth  c.  Ira 
iChron.  13. 12.  God  himself  is  with  us  for  our  e. 
Isa.  3.  3.  the  Lord  doth  lake  away  the  e.  of  fifty 
■Jer.  37.13.  a  c.  of  the  ward,  Irijah,  took  Jeremiah 

40.  2.  the  c.  of  the  guard  took  Jeremiah,  and  said 
5.  c.  gave  victuals  and  a  reward,  and  let  him  go 

51.  27.  call  together,  appoint  a  c.  against  her 
Hag.l.^l.viord  came  to  Zerubbabel,  c.  of  Judah 
.John  18.  12.  then  the  band  and  the  c.  took  Jesua 
.^ets  5. 26.  then  the  c.  with  ofiicers  went  and  bro't 
Heb.2.10.  to  make  c.  of  their  salvation  perfect  thro' 

CAPTAINS. 
Exod.\5.4.his  chosen  c.  also  are  drowned  in  Red-s. 
JVum.  31.14.Moscs  was  wroth  with  c.  of  thousands 
Unit.  1.  15.  I  made  wise  men  c.  over  thousands 

20.9.  shall  make  c.  of  the  army  to  lead  the  people 
1  Sam.  8. 12.  he  will  appoint  him  c.  over  thousands 

22.7.willson  of  Jesse  make  you  allc.of  thousands? 
iSam.  18.  5.  when  the  king  gave  all  the  c.  charge 

2.3.  8.  that  sat  in  the  seat,  chief  among  the  c. 

t  13.  the  three  c.  came  to  the  cave  of  AduUam 
IKings  2.  5.  thou  knowcst  what  Joab  did  to  the  c. 

9.  22.  they  were  his  princes,  and  c.  and  rulers 

20.  24.  take  kings  away,  and  put  c.  in  their  rooms 
22.  33.  when  the  c.  perceived  that  he  was  not  the 

king  of  Israel,  they  turned  back,  2C'Ar.  18.  32. 
2A'?7?o-«'ll,]5.Jehoiada  commanded  c.  of  hundreds 
IChron.  4.  42.  having  for  c.  Pelatiah  and  Neariah 

11.15.  now  three  of  the  30  c.  went  down  to  David 

12.  34.  of  Naphtali  a  thousand  c.  and  with  them 
■2C/lron.2^.  9.  Jehoram  smote  the  Edomitesand  c. 

33. 11.  Lord  brought  on  them  the  c.  of  the  host 
JVeh.'i.O.  the  king  had  sent  c.  of  the  army  with  me 
Job  39.  25.  the  thunder  of  the  c.  and  the  shouting 
.7cr.  13.  21.  for  thou  hast  taught  them  to  be  c. 

51.23.with  thee  will  I  break  in  pieces  c.  and  rulers 
.57.  I  will  make  drunk  her  c.  and  her  rulers 
Ezek.  21.  22.  c.  to  open  the  mouth  in  the  slaughter 

23.6.  c.  and  rulers  all  desirable  young  men,  12, 23. 
7)nn.  3.  27.  the  c.  saw  these  men  on  whose  bodies 

6.7.  the  c.  have  consulted  to  establish  a  statute 
JVah.  3.  17.  and  thy  c.  as  the  great  grasshoppers 
Jl/ar/.-6.21  .He;od  on  birth-day  made  sujiper  to  his  e. 
Luke'ia.  4.  Judas  went  and  communed  wilh  thee. 
Rev.  19. 18.  may  eat  the  flesh  ofc.  and  mighty  men 

CAPTIVE. 
Ofn.  14. 14.  heard  that  his  brother  was  taken  c. 

.34.  29.  their  wives  took  they  c.  and  spoiled  all 
j:rod.]2.29.  unto  the  first-born  of  the  c.  in  dungeon 
Deut.  21.  10.  and  thou  hast  taken  them  c. 
2Kin£S  5. 2.  and  had  brought  away  c.  a  little  maid 


CAP 

iKings  6.22.8mitc  those  thou  hasttakenc.with  thy 
IsaAS.'ilA  uin  (lusulute,uc.and  rvinuviii^'  to  and  Iru 

SM.  or  shall  thu  lawful  c.  bu  delivurud! 
51.14.tbt:  c.  exdu  hastuncth,thiit  he  may  be  loosed 
52.  2.  loose  lliyself,  O  c.  daugliter  ol'Zion 
,  tmos  6.  7.  they  shall  go  c.  wiUi  the  first  that  go  c. 
iVim.  -i.  26.  who  are  taken  c.  by  him  at  his  will 
Carry  or  carried  CAl'TIVE,  or  CAl'TlVEri. 
Gen.'il.'Ho.  carried  away  my  daughters  as  c.  taken 
J\rum.  24.  22.  until  Ashur  shall  carry  thee  away  c. 
lA7n^*8.40.that  theycurrythein  awayc.2CA.ti.3(j. 
47.  it°  they  shall  bethink  themselves  in  the  land 
whither  they  were  carried  c.  'iChron.  6.  37. 
iKings  15. 29.  Tiglath-pileser  carried  them  c.  to 
16.9.  he  carried  the  people  otDamascusc.  to  Kir 
ICAron.  5.6.  whom  the  king  ol  Assyria  carried  c. 
SChroji.  25.  12.  other  10,000  did  Judah  carry  c. 

28.  5.  they  carried  away  a  great  multitude  c. 
8.  Israel  carried  c.  of  their  brethren  200,000 

P*. 106. 46.  be  pitied  of  those  that  carried  them  c. 

137.3.they  that  carried  us  c.  required  of  us  a  song 
Jer.  13.  17.  because  the  Lord's  tiock  is  carried  c. 
19.  Judah  shall  be  wholly  carried  away  e. 

TO.4.  he  sliull  carry  them  c.  to  Babylon,  and  slay 

24.5.  I  will  acknowledge  them  that  are  carried  c. 

27.  20.  took  not  when  he  carried  c.  Jeconiah» 

29.  4.  saith  the  Lord  to  all  that  are  carried  c. 
14.  I  will  bring  you  again  into  the  place  whence 

1  caused  you  to  be  carried  away  c. 
40. 1.  Judah  which  were  carried  away  c.  52.  27. 
7.  of  them  that  were  not  carried  c.  to  Babylon 
41.  10.  Isliinael  carried  away  c.  all  the  residue 
43.12. sliallcrtcri/theEgyptiaiisc. and  array  himself 
52.29.Neb.  carried  c.  from  Jerusalem  832  persons 

30.  carried  away  c.  of  the  Jews  745  persons 
l^am.  4.  t  22.  he  will  carry  thee  c.  for  thy  sins 
Eiek.  6.9.  nations,  whither  they  shall  be  carried  c. 
Dan.  11.  y.  and  shall  also  carry  c.  into  Egypt 
/Imos  1.  6.  because  they  carried  c.  the  captivity 
Obad.  11.  in  the  day  that  strangi;rs  carried  c.  his 

Carrying  CAPTIVE. 
Jer.  1.  3.  to  the  carrying  away  of  Jerusalem  c. 

J.ead,  or  led  CAPTIVE. 
Jiui^.5.12J(;a(/ thy  captivityc.thousonofAbinoam 
lA'jn^x8.4d.in  land  ofthcir  enemies  who/^^fi  theme. 
iChron.  30.  9.  compa.ssion  before  them  that  lead  c. 
Sgal.  68.  18.  thou  hast  led  captivity  c.  KpU.  4.  8. 
^R".  22.  12.  die  in  place  whither  they  led  him  c. 
JImos  7.  11.  Israel  shall  be  led  c.  out  of  their  land 
JVaA.2.7.Huzzab  shall  he  led  c.her  maids  shall  lead 
Liuke  21.  24.  shall  be  led  away  c.  into  all  nations 
iTim.  3.  6.  lead  c.  silly  women  laden  with  sins 

CAPTIVKS. 
Jfum.  31.9.  Israel  took  all  the  women  of  Midian  e. 

12.  they  brought  the  c.  ||  19.  purify  your  c. 
T)eut.  21.11.  seest  among  the  c.  a  beautiful  woman 

32. 42.  mine  arrows  drunk  with  the  blood  of  the  c. 
I.Sam.  30.  5.  David's  two  wives  were  taken  c. 
'iKings  24.14.  he  carried  from  Jerusalem  10,000  c. 
'iChron.  28.  11.  hear  me,  and  deliver  the  c.  again 

13.  and  said,  ye  shall  not  bring  in  the  c.  hither 
Ilia.  14.  2.  shall  take  them  c.  whose  c.  they  were 

20. 4.  lead  away  the  Ethiopians  c.  young  and  old 
45. 13.he  shall  let  go  my  c.  not  for  price  nor  reward 

49.  25.  the  c.  of  the  migbty  shall  bo  taken  away 
61.  1.  to  proclaim  liberty  to  the  c.  J^uke  4.  18. 

Jer.  48.  46.  thy  sons  and  daughters  are  taken  c. 

50.  33.  and  all  that  took  them  c.  held  them  fast 
Eiek.\.\.tv3  I  was  among  the  c.by  theriver("h(d)ar 

16.53.  I  will  bring  again  the  captivity  of  thy  c. 

Dan.  2. 25.  I  have  found  a  man  of  the  c.  of  Judah 
CAPTIVITY. 

Odd  generally  punishrd  the  rices  and  infidrlilies 
•  of  his  jiritpleliyiliffrrrnt  captiriliisorscrniliide.H 
rBherrintohf  pi-rinittrd  Ihrin  to  fall.  Jlflrr  the 
deliverance  nf  l/ie  iMfaelites  out  of  Egypt,  there 
are  reckoned  air  bondages  or  captivities  during 
the  government  of  .Judges :  The  first  underCUu- 
Bhnn-rishathaim,  king  of  Mesopotamia,  which 
continued  about  eight  years.,  Jiidg.  3.  8.  The 
second  un'lrr  Kirlon,  king  of  Moab,  from  which 
they  were  delivered  by  Ehud,  ./iidg.  3.  14,  15. 
Tkf  third  under  «A''Pliili3tinns,oui:  of  which  they 

■  wne  rescued  by  Sliamgar,  .ludg.  3.  31.  The 
fourth  un(/cr  Jabin,  king  of  na/,or,/i'om  which 
they  were  delivered  hii  Deborah  and  Hnrak, 
Judg.  -1.  22,  23.  The  fifth  under  the  Midianitcs, 
from  which  Gideon  freed  them,  Jiiilg.  6.  2,  12. 
TTie  sixth  under  the  Ammonites  and  Philis- 
tines,  during  .he  judiratures  of  Jephtliali,  Ib- 
7Bn,  Elon,  .'\hdoii,  Eli,  Pamson,  PamiK^I. 

The  greatest  and  most  remarkable  captivities  of 
the  Hirbrews,  were  those  of  Judah  and  l^fraol, 
which  hitppened  under  the  kings  of  each  of 
these  kingdoms. 

Tiglath-pileser,  king  nf  .\ssyria,  in  the  year  of  the 
world  3264,  look  several  cities  belonging  to  the 
kingdom  of  Israel,  and  carried  away  a  great 
numbernfeaptir,es,prineipntbi  from  the  tribes 
0/Rouben,Ga(l,  and  the  half  tribe  of  yiaa&aneh, 
M 


CAP 

ZlCings  15. 29.     J^ext  to  kirn  Shalmanescr  took 
and  destroyed  Samaria,  after  a  siege  of  three 
years,in  'SMiJ,aud  transplanted  the  tribes  tcliich 
had  been  spared  by  Tiglath-pileser,  to  t/ic  pro 
vinces  beyond  the  Euphrates,  2  A'zH^'-sl8.y,lU,ll. 
And  it  is  generally  beht'oed  that  thcrewas  no  re 
turn  from  this  captivity,  and  that  the  ttn  tribes 
never  came  back  again  after  their  dispersion 
As  to  the  captivities  o/  Judah  ;  in  the  fifth  year 
of  Kehuboam,  son  of  Solomon,  Shishak,  king 
of  Egypt,  came  up  against  Jerusalem  with  a 
numerous  army,  and  sacked  the  city,  took  away 
the  treasures  out  of  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and 
out  of  the  house  of  the  king,  2  Chron.  12.  2. 
AfterwardSjin  the  reign  o/IIezekiah,Sennacherib 
king  of  Assyria  sent  a  great  army  and  laid 
close  siege  to  it.    Upon  this  Uvzukiah  fortified 
and  repaired  it,  2  Chron.  32.  5.  and  the  hand  of 
the  Lord  being  with  him,  for  he  was  a  pious 
good  king,  the  Assyrians,  after  a  time,  were 
forced  to  raise  the  siege,  not  being  able  to  take 
the  city,  yet  after  this,  it  was  taken  and  plan 
dered  three  several  times  by  Nebuchadnezzar 
king  of  Babylon;  first,  in  the  reign  of  Jelioi- 
akim  ;  again,  471  that  0/ Jelioiachin,  Ai«  so7i ; 
and  a  third  time,  in  that  of  Zedekiah  his  bro- 
ther ;  when  he  burnt  the  whole  city,  and  carried 
away  all  the  people  to  Babylon,  where  they  re- 
mained seventy  years,  Jer.  25.  12. 
Upon  their  being  permitted  to  return  by  Cyrus 
king  of  Persia,  after  they  had  remained  in  cap- 
tivity seventy   years,  Zerubbabel  rebuilt  the 
temple,  and  Nelieiniah  the  city ;  and  Ezra  the 
priest  and  scribe  restored  the  law.     .Ind  thus 
they  stood,tiU  the  time  0/ Antiochus,Epiplianes, 
who  plundered  the  city,  burned  the  law,  and 
profaned  the  temple. 
But  all  was  soon  after  set  right  again  by  the 
valorous  conduct  0/ Judas  Maccabeus;  and  they 
continued  in  afiourishing  eunditiun  for  many 
years;  till  Hyrcanus    and  Aristobulus,   two 
brothers,  contending  about  the  crown,  Pompey, 
who  at  that  time  was  at  the  head  of  the  Kuman 
army  in  Syria,  took  advantage  of  the  dissen- 
sion, and  seized  the  city;  which  Antigonus,  the 
son  of  Aristobulus,  by  the  assistance  of  the 
Parthians,  soon  after  recovered, 
from  him  it  was  presently  after  taken  by  the 
first  Herod,  who,  by  the  favour  of  the  Romans, 
and  the  assistance  of  their  Proconsul  of  Syria, 
was  declared  king  thereof. 
Thenceforward  it  continued  in  subjection,  some- 
times to  the  Herods,  but  mostly  to  governors 
sent  from  Rome,  till  about  forty  years  after 
the  Jews  had  crucified  Christ,  because  of  the  re- 
bellious disposition  of  its  inhabitants,  it  wa 
together  with  the  temple,  utterly  destroyed  and 
levelled  with  the  ground,  by  Titus,  the  son  of 
Vespasian  Ca)sar.    After  which,  the  Jews  never 
attempted  more  to  return  to  it. 
It  is  said,  Job  42.  10,  that  The  Lord  turned  the 
captivity  of  Job,  that  is,  he  brought  him  out  of 
that  state  of  bondage  in  which  lie  had  been  so 
long  held  by  tiatan  and  his  own  spirit,  and  out 
of  all  his  distresses  and  miseries. 
In  Eph.  4.  8,  He  led  captivity  captive.     Jle  led 
them  captive  who  had  led  others  into  captivity. 
Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  head  of  the  church, 
by  his  ascension  and  victory  over  death,  .Satan, 
and  sin,  conquered  and  triumphed  over  them 
and  all  our  spiritual  enemies. 
JVum.  21.  29.  he  hath  givim  his  daughters  into  e. 
Deut.  21. 13.  he  shall  put  the  raiment  of  c.  from  her 
30.  3.  Lord  will  turn  thy  c.  and  have  compassion 
./«'/«•.  18.  30.  till  the  day  of  the  c.  of  the  land 
'iKings  24.  15.  those  carried  he  into  c.  to  Babylon 
25.27.  in  thirty  seventh  year  of  the  e.Jer.^i.'il. 
IChr.  5.  22.  they  dwelt  in  iheir  steads  until  the  c. 
6.15.Jehozadak  went  into  c.  when  the  Ld.  carried 
iChrnn.  6.  37.  if  they  pray  to  lliee  in  the  land  of  c. 
38.  if  tliey  return  to  thee  in  the  lanil  of  Iheir  c. 
29.  9.  our  sons  ami  our  wives  arc  in  c.  for  this 
F.ira  9.  7.  have  been  delivered  to  c.  and  to  a  spoil 
JVVA.  1.2.  the  Jews  which  were  left  of  the  c. 
4.  4.  give  them  for  a  prey  in  the  land  of  their  c. 
F.sth.  2.  6.  Mnrdeciii  carried  away  willi  the  c. 
.Job  42.  10.  and  the  Lord  (urned  the  <•.  of  Job 
Ps.  14.  7.  when  the  Lord  hriiigetli  back  the  e.  85.1. 
78.  61.  and  he  delivered  bis  strength  into  c. 
125.  1.  when  the  Lord  turned  ngniii  thee  of  Zion 
4  turn  again  our  c.  O  Lord,  as  strt'iiins  in  south 
Jsa.  5.  13.  therefore  my  people  are  cone  into  c. 
20.  1 4.  so  Assyria  shall  lead  away  the  r.  of  Egypt 
22. 17.  Lord  will  carry  thee  away  with  a  mighty  c. 
46.  2.  but  themselves  are  gone  into  c. 
49.  t  25.  c.  of  the  mighty  shall  be  taken  away 
.Jer.  15.  2.  such  nn  am  for  the  r.  to  the  c  43. 11. 
24.  t  5.  ns  good  figs,  so  will  I  acknowledge  the  r. 
29.  14.  I  will  turn  awav  voiir  e.  saith  the  Lonl, 
30.  3. 1  32.  44.  1  33.  7, 11,  26. 


CAR 

.Ter.  29.  20.  hear  yc,  all  ye  of  c.  ||  28.  this  e.  is  long 
22.sliall  be  taken  up  a  curse  by  all  the  c.  of  Judah 
31. send  to  all  them  of  the  c.  saying, thus  saith  Ld. 
30. 10.  and  thy  seed  from  the  land  ol  their  c.  46. 27. 
48.  11.  Moab  is  at  ease,  nor  hath  he  gone  into  c. 
t46.woe  to  lhee,OMoab,thy  sons  are  taken  intoc. 
2,um. 1.3.  Judah  is  gone  into  c.  because  of  atiliction 
5.  her  children  are  gone  into  c.  belore  the  enemy 
2.14. they  have  not  discovered,  to  turn  away  thy  c. 
4.  22.  he  will  no  more  carry  thee  away  into  c. 
Eiek.  1.  2.  was  the  fifth  year  of  Jehoiachin'sc 
3.  11.  get  to  them  of  the  c.  and  speak  to  them 

15.  then  I  came  to  them  of  the  c.  11.  24. 

11.  25.  1  Bjiakc  to  them  of  the  c.  all  things 

12.  7.  I  brought  forth  my  stuff,  as  stufl"  lor  c. 
16.  53.  when  I  shall  bring  again  their  c.  the  c.  of 

Sodom,  and  the  c.  of  Samaria,  and  her  daugh. 
25.  3.  when  thou  went  into  c.  thou  saidst,  Aha 
33.  21.  in  the  twelfth  year  of  the  c.  one  escaped 

39.  23.  that  the  house  of  Israel  went  into  c. 

40.  1.  in  the  five  and  twentieth  year  of  our  c. 
iJan.  6.  13.  Daniel  which  is  of  the  c.  of  Judah 

11.  33.  shall  fall  by  c.  and  by  spoil  many  days 
Hos.  6.  11.  when  I  return  the  c.  of  my  people 
Amos  4.t  10.  slain  young  men  with  c.  of  your  horses 
Obad.  20.  the  c.  of  this  host,  the  c.  of  Jerusalem 
Mic.  1 .  16.  for  tliey  are  gone  into  c.  from  thee 
JSTah.  3.  10  No  went  into  c.  her  children  dashed 
Hab.  1. 1  7.  from  them  shall  proceed  the  c.  of  these 

'j.  and  they  shall  gather  the  c.  as  the  sand 
Zeph.  2.  7.  the  Lord  shall  turn  away  their  c.  3.  20 
Zech.d.  10.  takeof  themof  the  c.  even  of  Heldai 
Horn.  1. 2;J.  and  bringing  me  into  c.  to  the  law  of  sin 
2Cor.  10. 5.  bringing  into  c.  every  thought  to  obed. 
See  Captive. 
Bring  CAPTIVITY. 
Ezra  1.11.  he  did  bring  up  with  them  of  the  c. 
Ps.  53.  6.  when  (jod  bringeth  baekc.iif  hisjicople 
Jer.  30.18. 1  will  bring  again  the  c.  of  Jacob's  tents 

31.  23.  when  I  shall  bring  again  their  c. 

48.  47.  yet  will  I  bring  again  the  c.  of  Moab 

49.  6.  I  will  bring  again  the  c.of  Ammon 
39. 1  will  bring  again  the  c.of  Elam,  saith  the  L. 

Ezek.  29.  14.  I  will  bring  again  the  c.  of  Egypt 
39.  25.  now  will  I  bring  again  the  c.  of  Jacob 
foel  3.  1.  when  I  bring  again  the  c.  of  Judah 
.dmos  9. 14.  I  will  bring  again  the  c.  of  my  people 

Childrni  0/ CAPTIVITY. 

£zra4.1.heard  that  c/u'Wr.o/c.  builded  the  temple 

6.  16.  the  rest  of  cAiWj-cn  ofc.  kept  the  dedication 

19.  the  cliildr.  ofc.  kept  passover  on  the  14th  day 

20. killed  passover  for  cA/Wren  ofc.  and  brethren 

10.7.  they  made  proclamation  to  the  children  ofc. 

16.  the  childr.  ufc.  did  so,  and  all  were  separated 
Dan.5.13.  Daniel  which  art  o(  child,  ofc.  of  Judah 

Go  into  CAPTIVITY. 
/)<;«t.28.41.  thy  sons  and  daughters  shall  go  intoc. 
./er.20.6.thou  and  all  in  thine  house  shall  go  into  c, 
22.22.ent  thy  pastors  and  thy  lovers  shall  ^oiw^n  c. 
30. lO.adversaries, every  one  of  them  shall  viru  in.c. 
46.  19.  O  daughter,  furnish  thyself  to  ^0  into  c. 
48.7.Chemosh^oin^>c.  ||  49.3.tlieir  kings ^om.c. 
Ezek.  12.  4.  shalt  go  lorth,  as  they  that  go  into  c. 
30.  17.  and  these  cities  shall  go  i'lto  c. 
18.  as  for  Egypt,  her  daughters  rhall  go  into  c. 
.4m<»5l.5.thepeopleofSyriashall^«>n.  c.unto  Kir 
15.  their  king  shall  go  into  c.  he  and  his  princes 
5.5  for  Gilgal  shall  surely  o-o  intoc.  and  Belh-el 
27. therefore  will  I  cause  you  to  go  into  c.  beyond 
7. 17.  Israel  shall  surely  ^j-h  into  r.  forth  of  his  land 
9.  4.  and  tho'  they  go  intoc.  befiire  their  enemies 
Zreh.  14.  2.  and  half  of  tho  city  shall  go  into  c, 
Hcv.  13. 10.  he  that  leadeth  into  e.  shall  go  into  c. 

Owto/ CAPTIVITY. 
Ezra^.  1.  now  these  went  up  out  of  c.  JWA.  7.  6. 
3.  8.  all  that  were  come  up  out  of  c.  JVVA.  8.  17. 

6.  21.  the  children  of  Israel  which  were  come 
again  out  of  c.  kept  llio  feast  with  joy 

8. 35.  were  come  out  of  r.  offered  to  God  of  Israel 

CARUrNCLE,  S. 
Eiod.  28. 17.  the  first  row  shall  be  a  c.  39.  ID. 
Isn.  54.  12.  and  I  will  make  thy  gates  ofc. 
Ezek.  28.  13.  the  topaz  and  c  were  thy  covering 

CARCASE. 
Lev.  5.  2.  touch  r.  of  unclean  thing,  is  unclean 

7.  t  24.  fat  of  the  r.  may  bo  used,  hut  not  eaten 
11.  8.  their  c.  ye  shall  not  touch,  Dent.  14.  8. 
17.  t  15.  every  soul  that  cateth  a  r.  shall  wash 

Deut.  28.  26.  t'liyr.  shall  bo  meal  unto  fowls  of  air 
.Josh.  8.  29.  that  they  should  take  his  c.  down 
.Judg.  14.  8.  to  see  tlie  c.  of  tho  lion,  honey  in  thof. 
1  Kings  13.22. thy  f .  shall  not  come  to  the  sepulchre 
24.  his  c.  cast  in  the  way,  a  lion  stood  hy  the  c. 
■2 Kings  9.  37.  the  c.  of  Je'rebel  shall  be  as  dung 
Isa.  14.  19.  cast  out  as  a  c.  trodden  under  feet 
Mat.'ii.  28.  where  the  c.  is,  thire  will  tho  eagles  b« 

CARCASE.S. 
^cn.  15.  11.  when  the  fow  Is  came  down  on  tho  c 
/.rr. 11.1 1,  ve  shall  have  thiircin  nbomination,26. 
26.  30.  I  will  cast  yourc.  on  the  t.  of  your  idoU 


CAR 

Kum.  14.  29.  your  c.  shall  fall  in  the  wilderness 
ISam.  17.  46.  I  will  give  the  e.  of  the  I'lulistines 
Ua.  5  25.  their  c.  were  torn  in  midst  of  llie  streets 
34.  3.  their  stink  shall  come  up  out  of  their  c. 
(>(>.  24.  look  on  c.  of  them  that  have  transgressed 
Jor.  7.  33.  and  the  c.  of  this  j)eoi)le  shall  he  meat 
for  the  fowls  of  heaven,  16.  4.  |  19.  7. 
l&lS.they  have  filled  mine  inheritance  with  the  c. 
Kick.  6.  5. 1  will  lay  the  c.  of  Israel  before  idols 
43.  7.  my  name  no  more  defile  by  c.  of  their  kings 
y.  let  them  put  the  c.  of  their  kings  far  from  me 
J^ah.  3.  3.  and  there  is  a  great  number  of  c 
//c(;.3.17.grieved  with  them  whose  c.  fell  in  wilder. 

CAKE 
Is  applied,  [I]  To  Cod,  (1)  In  general,  inrespcct 
of  Ids  care  fur  all  his  creatures,  Mat.  6. 26,  30. 
ICor.  9. 9.     (2)  In  particular,  in  respect  of  the 
godly,  1  Pet.  0.  7.     [11]  To  men,  and  is  either 
lawful,  (1)  when  they  endeavour  to  please  (iod 
to  vwurn  for  their  sins,  and  amend  what  has 
been  amiss  in  their  conduct,  2  Cor.  7.  11.     (2) 
IVhcn  they  are  concerned  and  solicitous  about 
the  welfare  of  others,  and  the  salvation  of  their 
.couis,2Cor.7.12.  Phil.2.20.    (3)  fVhcn  they  mo- 
derately take  thought  for  the  things  of  this  pre- 
sent life,  resigning  themselves  at  the  same  time 
to  the  will  and  providence  of  God,  IPet.  5.  7. 
Or  xmlawful,  (1)  When  they  are  careful  about 
things  that  are  not  in  any  case  warrantable,  as 
to  make  provision  for  theflesh,to  fulfil  the  lusts 
t/i6:rco/,Rom. 13.14.    (2)  IVhenihey  have  apcr- 
plezing  distrustful  care  about  things  which  in 
their  own  nature  arelawful  andwarrantable,as 
for  one  to  be  so  diligent  in  his  particular  catling 
as  to  bo  careless  of  the  worship  of  God,  or  to 
distrust  his  providence,  Mat.l3.  22.  Lukel0.41. 
We  are  not  careful  to  answer  thee  in  this  matter, 
JDan.  3. 16.    The  case  is  so  plain,  that  it  admits 
no  dispute,  or  deliberation;  it  requires  no  an- 
swer at  all,  at  least  in  words,  but  rather  in 
deeds  of  constancy  and  courage  on  our  parts. 
ISam.  10. 2.  thy  father  hath  left  the  c.  of  the  asses 
2A'tnn-s4.13.hast  been  careful  for  us  with  all  this  c. 
Jer.  49.  31.  the  nation  that  dwclleth  without  c. 
Ezek.  4. 16.  shall  eat  bread  by  weight  and  with  c. 
Mat.  13.22.  the  c.  of  this  world  chokes  the  word 
//«if  10. 34.  he  took  c.  of  him  ||  35.  take  c.  of  him 
ICor.  9.  9.  doth  God  take  c.  for  oxeaf 

12.  25.  should  have  the  same  e.  one  for  another 

SGjr.  7. 12.  but  that  our  c.  for  you  might  appear 

b.  16.  put  the  same  earnest  c.  in  Titus  for  you 

11.  28.  besides  the  c.  of  all  the  churches 

1  Tim.  3.  5.  how  shall  he  take  c.  of  church  of  God 
IPet.  5.  7.  casting  your  c.  on  liim,  for  he  careth 

CARE,  ED. 
2j>(jm.  18.  3.  for  if  wc  flee,  they  will  not  c.  for  us 
Fsal.  142.  4.  refuge  failed,  no  man  c.  for  my  soul 
fyiike  10.  40.  dost  thou  note,  that  my  sister  left  me? 
John  J2.  6.  this  he  said,  not  that  he  c.  for  the  poor 
.^cts  18. 17.  and  Gallio  c.  for  none  of  those  things 
ICor.  7.21.  art  called  being  a  servant,  c.  not  for  it 
Phil.  2.  20.  who  will  naturally  c.  for  your  state 

CAREFUL. 
"Kings  4. 13.  behold  thou  hast  been  c.  for  us  with 
Jer.  17.  8.  and  shall  not  be  c.  in  the  year  of  drought 
J5a»i.3.]6.0  Nebuchad.wc  are  not  c.to  answer  thee 
I^uke  10. 41.  Martha,  thou  art  c.  about  many  things 

12.  t  29.  live  not  in  c.  suspense 

Phil.  4. 6.  c.  for  nothing,  but  by  prayer  let  requests 

10.  wherein  ye  were  c.  but  lacked  opportunity 

Tit.  3.  8.  they  might  be  c.  to  maintain  good  works 

CAREFULLY. 
Dfut.  15.  5.  if  thou  c.  hearken  unto  the  Lord 
2Chron.  36.  t  15.  sending  his  messengers  c. 
Jific.  1. 12.  for  the  inhabitant  of  Maroth  waiteth  c. 
Phil.  2.  28.  I  sent  him  therefore  the  more  c. 
Heb.  12.  17.  though  he  sought  it  e.  with  tears 

CAREFULxVESS. 
Kzck.  12. 18.  drink  thy  water  with  trembling  and  c. 

19.  they  shall  cat  their  bread  with  c.  and  drink 
1  Ccr.  7.  32.  but  I  would  have  you  without  c. 
2Cor.  7.  11.  what  e.  it  wro't  in  you,  what  clearing 

CARELESS. 
.^udg.  18.  7.  the  five  men  saw  how  they  dwelt  c. 
Jsa.  32.9.  hear  my  voice,  ye  c.  daughters,  give  ear 
lO.shall  be  troubled  ye  c.  women  1|  11.  ye  r .  ones 
Kzck.  30.  9.  to  make  the  c.  Ethiopians  afraid 

CARELESSLY. 
Txa.  47.  8.  hear  now  this  thou  that  dwellest  c. 
F.iek.  39.  6.  send  a  fire  among  them  that  dwell  c. 
Zepk.  2.  15.  this  is  the  rejoicing  city  that  dwelt  c. 

CARES. 
Mark  4.  19.  the  e.  of  this  world  choke  the  word 
/.uke  8. 14.  and  they  are  choked  with  e.  and  riches 
21.  34.  lest  be  overcharged  with  the  e.  of  this  life 

CAREST„ETn,  ING. 
Deut.  11.12.  a  land  which  the  I-ord  thy  God  c.  for 
lSam.9.  5.  lest  my  father  leave  c.  for  the  asses 
Mat.  22  16.  thou  art  true,  nor  c.  thou  for  any  man 
.VarA4.38.  Master,  e.  thou  not  that  we  perish? 
65 


CAR 

Mark  12.14.  know  thou  art  true,  and  c.  for  no  man 

JohnM.l'i.  because  a  hireling  c.  not  for  the  sheep 

ICor.  7.  32.  that  is  unmarried  c.  for  the  things,  34. 
33.  that  is  married,  c.  lor  things  of  the  world,  34. 

If6<.5.7.ca8ting  your  cure  onlum,  for  he  c.  for  you 
CARNAL 

Signifies,  Belonging  tutheJicsh,fleshly,OTsensual 
This  word  is  applied,  [1]  'Jo  such  as  are  in  a 
natural  unrcgenerated  state,  who  arc  enemies 
to  (rod,  and  given  to scnsualpleas ures,  John'3, 
6.  Rom.8.7.  [2]  7'<>  one  who  is  in  part  renewed 
by  the  grace  of  God,  yet  so  as  that  there  are  re- 
mainders of  sin  and  corruption,  which  oppose 
and  war  against  this  gracious  principle,  Rom 
7.14.  tSuch  a  one  is  carnal,  in  part,  in  regard  of 
thercmainders  of  corruption;  an(Z  compurativ 
ly,  t7t  respect  of  the  purity  of  the  law  of  God. 
[3]  To  the  ceremonial  law,  which  consisted  of 
such  rites,  ceremonies,  and  ordinances,  as  only 
related  to  the  body  and  the  purifying  of  the 
Jiesh,  but  did  not  reach  the  soul,  Heb.  'J.  10 
[4]  To  worldly  things,  such  as  silver  and  gold 
and  other  things  needful  for  the  sustentatiun 
of  the  body,  Rom.  15.  27.  1  Cor.  9.  11. 

fto;n.7.14.  law  is  spiritual,  but  I  am  c.  sold  under 
8.  7.  because  the  c.  mind  is  enmity  against  God 
15.  27.  duty  is  to  minister  to  them  in  c.  things 

\Cor.  3.  1.  but  as  unto  c.  even  to  babes  in  Christ 
3.  for  ye  are  yet  c.  \\  4.  are  ye  not  c.l 
9. 11.  is  it  a  great  thing  if  we  reap  your  c.  things? 

2Cor.lO.  4.  the  weapons  of  our  warfare  are  not  c 

Hcb.l.iiy.  made  not  after  the  law  of  a  c.  cojumand. 

9.10.which  stood  in  c.ordinances  imposed  on  them 

CARNALLY. 

Xc».18.20.shalt  not  lie  c.with  thy  neighbour's  wife 

19.  20.  whosoever  lieth  c.  with  a  bond-maid 
Jfum.  5. 13^  and  a  man  lie  with  her  c.  and  it  be  hid 
/iom.  8.6.  for  to  be  c.  minded  is  death,  but  to  be  sp. 

CARPENTER,  S. 
'iSam.  5.  11.  Hiram  sent  c.  to  David,  ICAr.  14. 1. 
2  Kings  12.  11.  they  laid  it  out  to  c.  and  builders 
2Chron.  24. 12.  they  hired  c.  to  repair,  Ezra  3.  7. 
Isa.  41.  7.  so  the  c.  encouraged  the  goldsmith 
44.  13.  the  c.  stretcheth  out  his  rule,  he  marketh 
.7cr.24.1.  the  c.  and  smiths  he  carried  away, 29.2. 
Zech.  1.  20.  and  the  Lord  shewed  me  four  c. 
Mat.  13.  55.  they  said,  is  not  this  the  c.  son? 
Mark  6.  3.  is  not  this  the  c.  the  son  of  Mary? 

CARRIAGE,  S. 
J\rum.  4.  t  24.  this  is  the  c.  of  the  Gershonites 
Judg.  18.  21.  the  Danites,  and  the  c.  before  them 
\Sam.  17.  t  20.  David  came  to  the  place  of  the  c 

22.  David  left  his  c.  with  the  keeper  of  the  c. 
fsa.  10.  28.  at  Michmash  he  hath  laid  ii,T  his  c. 
46.1.  your  c.  were  heavy  laden,  they  are  a  burden 
.4c^s21.15.wetook  up  our  c.  went  up  to  Jerusalem 

CARRY 

Signifies,  [1]  To  bear,  or  remove,  2  Sam.  15.  29. 

[2]   7'o  protect  and  keep  safdy,  Isa.  46.  3,  4. 

[3]  7^0  lead,  or  drive,  Gen.  31.18.    [4]  Tomaki 

to  ride,  1  Chron.  13.  f  7. 

Gc7?.37.25.Islimaelites  going  to  c .  spicery  to  Egypt 

42.19.  go  ye,  c.  corn  for  the  famine  of  your  houses 

43.  11.  e.  the  man  a  present,  a  little  balm,  honey 
12.  the  money  brought,  c.  it  again  in  your  haiid 

44.  1.  fill  the  sacks  with  as  much  as  they  can  c. 
45.27.  he  saw  wagons  Joseph  sent  to  c.  him,  4G.  5. 
50.  25.  ye  shall  c.  up  my  bones,  Exod.  13.  19. 

£3-0(^.33.15. thy  presence  go  not,  c.  us  not  up  hence 
Lev.  10.  4.  c.  your  brethren  out  of  the  camp 
J^um.  11.  12.  should  say,  c.  them  in  thy  bosom 
J'Jeut.  14.  24.  so  that  thou  art  not  able  to  c.  it 
.hsh.  4.  3.  c.  the  twelve  stones  over  with  you 
I.Sam.  17.  18.  c.  these  ten  cheeses  to  the  captain 

20.  40.  Jonathan  said,  go,  c.  them  to  the  city 
2Sam.  19. 18.  a  ferry-boat  to  c.  over  king's  house. 
\Kings  18. 12.  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  shall  c.  thee 
'iKingsi.  19.  his  father  said,  c.  him  to  his  mother 

9.  2.  and  c.  Jehu  to  an  inner  chamber 
17.  27.  saying,  c.  thither  one  of  the  priests 

\Chrnn.  10.  9.  sent  to  the  Philistines  to  c.  tidings 
15.  2.  none  ought  to  c.  the  ark  but  the  I^eviles 
2.1.2G.  the  Levites  shall  no  more  c.  the  tabernacle 

2CAr.  2.1G.  thou  shalt  c.  the  wood  up  to  Jcrusaloni 
36.  6.  bound  him  to  c.  him  to  Babylon,  Jer.  39.  7. 

Ezra.  5.15.  c.  these  vessels  into  the  temple  at  Jeru. 
7.  15.  c.  the  silver  and  gold  freely  offered  to  God 

Keel.  10.  20.  a  bird  of  the  ai;  shall  c.  the  voice 

/;sa.23.7.hor  own  feet  shall  c.her  afar  off  to  sojourn 
30.  6.  they  will  c.  their  riches  on  young  asses 
40.  11.  he  shall  c.  the  lambs  in  his  bosom 
46.  4.  and  even  to  hoary  hairs  will  I  c.  you 
7.  they  c.  him  and  set  him  in  his  place 

.7cr .20.5. will  I  take  them  and  e.  them  to  Babylon 
39.  14.  that  Gedaliah  should  c.  Jeremiah  home 

F.zck.  22.  9.  in  thee  are  men  c.  talcs  to  shed  blood 

Mnrkfi.  55.  and  began  to  c.  about  in  beds  the  sick 
11.16.  not  suffer  any  to  c  a  vessel  thr,o'  the  temple 

I,uke\Q.  4.  c.  neither  purse,  nor  scrip,  nor  shoes 

John  5. 10.  it  is  not  lawful  for  thee  to  e.  thy  bed 


CAR 

John  21.18.  and  c.  thee  whither  thou  wouldest  not 

CARRY  away. 
iKings  18. 11.  king  of  Assyria  did  c.  away  Israel 

25.  11.  the  fugitives  did  Nebuzar-adan  c.  away 
2C/tJo?i.2U.ii5.lound  more  than  they  could c.  away 
Job  15.  12.  why  doth  thine  heart  c.  thee  awayf 
Ps.  49.17.  when  he  dieth  he  siiall  c.  nothing  aujay 
Keel.  5. 15.  nothing  lett  which  he  may  c.  a.  m  hand 
Jsa.  5.  29.  they  shall  c.  the  prey  away  safe 

15.7.which  they  have  laid  up,  shall  they  c.  awag 
22. 17.  behold  the  l^ord  will  c.  thee  away 
41.  16.  tiiou  shalt  liin  them,  and  tlic  wind  shall  c 
them  away,  57.  13. 
/.am.  4. 22.  he  will  no  more  c.  thee  away,  U  Zion 
Ezek.  38.  13.  art  thou  come  to  c.  away  sdver? 
jJcts  7.43.  and  1  will  c.  you  away  beyond  Babylon 
Hee  C.iPTivE. 
CARRY  back. 
"Sam.  15.25.  c.back  the  ark  of  God  into  the  city 
IKings  22. 26.  c.  M icaiah  b.  to  Anion,  2CAr.l8.25. 

CARRY  forth. 

E2orf.]2.46.shalt  not  c./or«/t  ought  of  the  passover 

14. 11.  dealt  thus  with  us  to  c.  us/,  out  of  Egypt 

Lev.4.l'i.  even  the  whole  bullock  shall  be  c.f.  21. 

6.11.  c. /.  ashes  without  the  camp,  14.45.  ||  16.27. 

2C7ir.  2i'.  5,  c.  forth  the  filthincss  out  of  holy  place 

Jer.  17.  22.  nor  c.f.  a  burden  on  the  sabbath-day 

Ezek.  12.  G.  in  their  sight,  c.  il  forth  in  the  twiB^C 

CARRY  out.  ^ 

f?cji47.30.Jacob  said,tliou  shalt  c.me  out  of  Egypt 

rjcut.  28. 38.  shall  c.  much  seed  out,  gather  little  m 

1  Kings  21.  10.  then  c.  him  out  and  stone  him 

22.34.  he  said,  c.  me  owfof  the  lio3t,2CAr.  18.  33. 

2C7iro?(.29. 16.  c.  it  out  abroad  into  brook  Kidron 

£2i/i.l2.5.  dig  through  the  wall,  and  c.  out  thereby 

Jlets  5.  9.  the  feet  at  the  door,  and  shall  e.  thee  out 

1  Tim.  6.  7.  it  is  certain  we  can  c.  nothing  out 

CARRIED. 
Gen.  46.  5.  the  sons  of  Israel  c.  Jacob,  50.  13. 
J^ev.  10.  5.  c.  them  in  their  coasts  out  of  the  camp 
Josh.  4.  8.  they  c.  the  stones  over  with  them 
Judg.  16.  3.  he  c.  them  up  to  the  top  of  a  hill 
ISam.  5.  8.  let  the  ark  of  God  be  c.  unto  Gath 
2Sam.  6.  10.  David  c.  the  ark  aside,  ICAr.  13.  13. 

15.  29.  Abiathar  c.  the  ark  of  God  to  Jerusalem 
} Kings  17.  19.  he  c.  him  into  a  loft  and  laid  him 

21.  13.  they  c.  Naboth  forth  and  stoned  him  4^ 
'2Kings  7.  8.  and  c.  thence  silver  and  gold  and  hi(nr 

9.  28.  his  servants  c.  him  in  a  chariot,  23.  30. 
20.  17.  that  which  thy  fathers  have  laid  up  in 

store  shall  be  c.  to  Babylon,  Jsa.  39.  (i. 

23.  4.  c.  the  ashes  of  the  vessels  to  Beth-el 

24.  13.  he  c.  out  thence  all  the  treasures 
25.7.  they  bound  Zedekiah  and  c.  him  to  Babylon 

2Chron.  24.  11.  c.  the  chests  to  his  place  again 
28.  15.  and  c.  all  the  feeble  of  them  upon  asses 
.33.  11.  who  took  and  c.  Manasseh  to  Babylon 
34.  16.  Sliaphan  c.  thybook  to  the  king 

36.  4.  Netlio  took  and  c.  Jehoahaz  to  Egypt 
.Job  5. 13.  the  counsel  of  the  froward  is  c.  headlong 

10.  19.  I  should  have  been  e.  from  the  womb 
Psal.  46.  2.  tho'  the  mountains  bo  c.  into  the  sea 
Isa.  46. 3.  remnant  of  Jsr.  which  are  c.  from  womb 

49.  22.  thy  daughters  shall  be  c.  on  thy  shoulders 
.53.4.surely  he  hath  borne  our  griefs, c. our  sorrows 
63.  9.  he  bare  and  c.  them  all  the  davs  of  old 

,Ier.  27.  22.  be  c.  into  Babylon,  28.  3.'|  52.  11, 17. 

Ezek.  17.  4.  he  c.  twigs  into  a  land  of  traffic 

37.  1.  and  c.  me  out  in  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord 
TJan.  I.  2.  which  he  c.  into  tho  land  of  Shinar 
//o.s.]0.6.it  shall  be  also  c. into  Assyria  for  a  present 

12.  1.  make  a  covenant,  and  oil  is  c.  into  Egypt 
.Joel  3.  5.  and  ye  have  c.  Into  your  temples 
Jvke  7.  12.  behold,  there  was  a  dead  man  c.  out 

16.  22.  and  the  beggar  was  c.  by  the  angels 
24.51.wa3  parted  from  them, and  c.  up  into  heaven 

Jlets  3.2.onc  lame  from  his  mother's  womb  was  c. 
5.  6.  young  men  e.  Ananias  out  and  buried  him 

7.  16.  our  fithers  were  c.  over  into  Sycliom 

8.  2.  devout  men  c.  Stephen  to  his  burial 
21.  34.  commanded  him  to  be  c.  into  the  castle 

£pA.4.14.andc.  about  with  every  wind  of  doctrine 
Neb.  13.  9.  be  not  c.  about  with  divers  doctrines 
2Pet.  2.  17.  clouds  that  are  c.  with  a  tempest 
Judc  12.  clouds  without  water,  c.  about  of  wind* 
See  Captive. 
CARRIED  away. 
f?cn.31.18.  Jacob  c.  areay  all  his  cattle  and  goods 

26.  hath  c.  aicay  my  daughters  as  captives 
l.Snm.  30.  2.  slew  not  any,  but  c.  tliem  away,  18 
2Kings  17.  6.  c.  Israel  away  into  Assyria,  23. 

H.  heathen  whom  the  Ld.  c.  away  before  them' 
28.  then  one  of  the  priests  whom  they  had  c.  a. 

24. 14.  c.  away  all  Jerusalem  and  ali  the  princea 
15.  c.  awn?/ Jehoiachin  to  Babylon  and  his  wives 

25.  21.  so  Judah  was  c.  away  out  of  Ihfir  land 
ICAr.  5.  26.  Tilsath-pilneser  c.  away  Ri  iibcnifes 

6.15.  when  the  Ld.  c.  away  Judah  and  .lerusalem 

9.  1.  who  were  c.  array  for  their  transgression 
3CAro».  12. 9.  Shi«hak  c.  away  the  shields  of  gold 


CAS 

2CA.]4.13.Asa  and  the  peo.  c.  a.  much  spoil,  21.17, 
15.  they  c.  away  sheep  and  caniela  in  iihundanci 
Kzra  a.  1.  these  tnat  hud  been  c.  away,  JV'cA.  7.  (i, 
i).4.ti'ansgrce:iiuu  ul  those  tliat  iiad  been  c.  a.  10.0. 
lU.(i.separatcd  t'runi  con^re^'atiunot'tliose  c.utcuy 
Job  \.  17.  I'ell  upon  tlie  camels,  and  c.  tiieni  aaay 
^i,r .i2i).4.whoiu  1  have  caused  to  be  c.away  captive 
Dan.  2. 35.  iron,  gold  broken,  and  windii  c.  them  a. 
.Vah.  3.  10.  No  was  c.  away  into  captivity 
^/uM. 11. about  time  they  were  c.  utctty  toliabyloii 
Mark  15. 1.  c.  Jesus  u.  and  deUvered  him  to  I'llute 
1  Cor.  12.  2.  were  Gentiles  c.  a.  to  those  dumb  idols 
<lal.  2.  13.  Barnabas  was  c.  u.  witli  dis.-^iiiiulation 
Uea.  12.15.  might  cause  her  be  c.  aicuy  ot'the  tlood 
17  3.  so  he  c.  me  away  in  the  Spirit,  21.  10. 
CARRlEtST,  ETH,  iSG. 
ficn.ia.  1 23.  ten  asses  c.  tiie  good  tilings  of  Egyiit 
lia»i.l0.3.one  c.tiiree  kids,  c.lhree  loaves  olbiead 
Job  21.  18.  are  as  chart'  that  the  storm  c.  away 
27.  21.  the  east-wind  c.  the  rich  man  away 
hs.  78.  9.  Ephraira  c.  bows,  turned  back  in  battle 
90.  5.  thou  c.  them  away  as  witli  a  tlood 
JUat.  1.  17.  till  the  c.  into  Babylon,  from  the  c. 
,/)cts  5.10.theyc.her  and  buried  her  by  her  husband 
Jiev.  17.  7.  the  mystery  ol"  the  beast  that  c.  her 

CAUT. 
ISam.  6.7.  make  a  new  c.  and  tie  the  kinc  to  the  c. 
2Sam.6.'3.  they  set  the  ark  on  a  new  c.  and  brought 
ICIiron.  13.  7.  and  Uzza  and  Ahio  dravc  the  c. 
Jsu.  29. 28.  nor  break  corn  with  the  wheel  of  the  c. 
jtmoi  2. 13.  as  a  c.  is  pressed  that  is  lull  of  sheaves 

CAKT-llOi'E. 
Isa.  5.18.  woe  to  them  that  draw  sin  as  with  a  c.-r. 

CAUT-WHEEL. 
Isa.  23.27.  nor  lac.-wheel  turned  about  on  cummin 

CARVED,  ING,  INGS. 
Ezod.  31.  5.  Bezalcel  in  c.  of  timber,  35.  33. 
Judg-.  18.  18.  men  went  and  fetched  the  f .  image 
1  Kings  0. 18.  the  cedar  of  the  house  within  was  c. 
29.  he  c.  all  the  walls  of  house  round  about,  3J. 
2CAr.  33.  7.  he  set  a  c.  image  in  the  house  of  God 

22.  Amon  sacrificed  to  all  the  c.  images 
34.  3.  Josiah  purged  Judah  from  the  c.  images 

4.  he  cut  down  the  c.  images,  and  brake  in  pieces 
Psal.  74.  ti.  they  break  down  the  c.  work  at  once 
Prov.  7.  16. 1  have  decked  my  bed  with  c.  work 
m  CASE,  S. 

F.xod.  5.19.  officers  did  see  that  they  were  in  evil  c. 
A>euM9. 4.  this  is  the  c.  of  the  slayer  who  shall  flee 
22.  1.  thou  shalt  in  any  c.  bring  them  again 
24.  13.  in  any  c.  thou  shalt  deliver  the  pledge 
Ps.  144.  15.  happy  that  people  that  is  in  such  a  c. 
Je.T.  2.  t  25.  but  thou  saidst,  is  the  c.  desperate? 
12.  t  1.  yet  let  me  reason  the  c.  with  thee 
J^at.  5.  20.  y»  shall  in  no  c.  enter  the  kingdom 
19.  10.  if  the  e.  of  the  man  be  so  with  his  wife 
John  5.  6.  and  had  been  now  long  time  in  that  c. 
ICor.  7.  15.  is  not  under  bondage  in  such  c. 

CASEMENT. 
Prov.  7.  6.  at  the  window  I  looked  through  my  c. 

CASSIA 
Is  o  swttt  spice.,  mentioned  by  Moses  as  an  inj^re- 
dient  in  the  cowpositionof  the  holy  oil,whichwas 
to  btmadeuse  offoranointingtkr.  sacred  vcs.iel.'i 
of  the  tabernacle,  E.'c.30.24.  TAeHcbre  w  calls  it 
Kidda;  and  the  Septaag-int  Iris.    This  aromatic 
is  said  tobc  thcbark  of  atrce  Berylihe  cinnamon 
and ^row.s  in  the  Indies  without  cultination. 
Eizod.':30.  24.  take  of  c.  500  shekels  for  the  oil 
Psal.  45.  8.  all  thy  garments  smell  of  aloes  and  c 
Ezek.  27.  19.  c.  and  calamus  were  in  thy  market 

CAST. 
Z/V&e 22.41.  he  was  withdrawn  about  a  stone's  c. 

CAST 
Signifies,  [1]  To  fiing,  or  throw,  Dan.  3.  G 

To  miscarry,  or  bring  forth  before  the  time. 
Gen.  31.  38.  E.iod.  23.  26.    [3 
or  frame,  Exod.  25.  12. 
They  cast  him  out,  .lohn  9.  34.     They  put  him 
out  of  the  synagogue,  or  excommunicated  him. 
Thou  hast  cast  me  behind  thy  back,  I  Kings  14.  9. 
Thou  hast  despised,  disregarded,  and  forsaken 
me,  and  my  commands  and  worship,  a.-'  men  do 
things  which  they  cast  behind  their  backs. 
F.zod.  :J8. 27.  oftalents  of  the  silver  wore  c.  sockets 
.Job  18.  8.  for  ho  is  c.  into  a  net  by  his  own  feet 
Psnl.  22.  10.  1  was  c.  upon  thee  from  the  womb 
76.  6.  chariot  and  horse  are  c.  into  a  dead  sleep 
140.  10.  let  him  be  c.  into  the  fire,  into  pits 
Prov.  16.  ;i3.  the  lot  is  c.  into  the  lap,  hut  tho 
ha.  2.5.7.  tho  face  of  the  covering  c.  over  all  pr  ople 
Jrr.  22.  28.  are  «.  into  a  land  which  thuy  know  not 
38.  11.  and  look  thence  old  c.  clouts  and  rags 
12.  put  now  these  old  c.  clouts  under  thy  arm 
F.iek.  \Tt.  4.  the  vine-tree  is  c.  into  the  fire  for  fucd 
Dan.  3.  G.  bo  c.  into  the  midst  of  a  fiery  furnace 
21.  these  were  c.  into  tho  midst  of  the  furnace 
6.  7.  he  shall  ho  c.  into  tho  don  of  lions,  16. 
Jonahl.  4.  then  1  said,  I  am  c.  out  of  thy  sight 


CAS 

JI/at.5.25.dcliver  thee  tojudge,and  bee. into  prison 
29.  not  that  thy  whole  Uoily  be  c.  into  bell,  30. 
C.30.and  to-morrow  is  c.into  the  ovcn,AuAcl2.2a. 
21.  21.  say  to  mountain,  be  thou  c.  into  tho  sea 
Mark  y.42.better  lie  were  c.mto  the  sea,  hukcll.'i. 
45.  having  two  eyes,  feet,  to  be  c.  into  hell,  47. 
Luke  3.  0.  every  tree  is  hewn  down,  and  c.  into 
the  tire,  Mat.  3.  10.  |  7.  19. 
23.  19.  and  for  murder  was  t.  into  prison,  25. 
John  3.  21.  for  John  was  not  yet  c.  into  prison 
yitii27.2(j.liowbeit,we  must  be  t  .on  a  certain  island 
iieo.  8.  7.  hail  and  fire  were  c.  on  the  earth 
8.  a  mountain  burning  was  c.  into  the  sea 
12.  13.  dragon  saw  that  he  was  c.  unto  tho  earth 

19.  20.  these  both  were  c.  alive  into  the  lake 

20.  10.  the  devil  was  c.  into  the  lake  of  fire 

14.  death  and  heli  were  c.  into  the  lake  of  fire 

15.  not  found  in  the  book  of  life,  c.  into  the  l»k-; 

CAST. 
Gen.  21.  15.  Ilagar  c.  the  child  under  a  shrub 
31.  38.  thy  she-goats  have  not  c.  their  young 
37.  20.  lei  us  slay  him,  and  c.  Iiim  into  some  pit 
■'"  "   his  master's  wife,  c.  her  eyes  upon  Josepl 


39. 


t'.xod.  1.  22.  every  son  ye  shall  c.  into  the  river 
4.  3.  said,  c  it  and  he  c.  the  rod  on  the  ground 
25.  Zipporah  c.  the  foreskin  at  his  teet 
10.  19.  took  locusts  and  t.  them  into  the  Red-sea 
15.  4.  Pharaoh's  chariots  he  c.  into  tho  sea 
25.  when  he  had  c.  the  tree  into  the  waters 

22.  31.  not  eat  tlesh  torn  of  beasts,  c.  it  to  the  dogs 

23.  26.  there  shall  nothing  c.  their  young,  nor  be 
25.  12.  shall  c.  four  rings  of  gold,  37. 3, 13.  |  38.  5. 
32. 19.  Moses  c.  tables  out  of  his  hand,  and  brake 

24.  I  c.  into  the  tire,  there  came  out  this  calf 
JiTuin.Vd.  6.  priest  c.  cedar  wood  into  midst  of  burn. 
35.  22.  c.  any  thing  on  him  without  laying  wait 
23.  scenig  him  not,  and  c.  it  on  him  that  he  die 
JJeut.  29.  28.  the  Lord  t.  them  into  another  land 
■/osh.8.  29.  c.  king  of  Ai  at  the  gate  of  the  city 
10.  27.  c.  tliem  into  the  cave  wherein  had  been  hid 
Judg.  8.  25.  c.  every  one  the  ear-rings  of  Ids  prey 
9.  f  17.  for  my  father  c.  his  life  far 
5'J.  a  woman  c.  a  piece  of  millstone,  2Sam. 11.21. 
liom.  18.  II.  Saul  c.  the  javelin,  20.  33. 
2.Sa«i.l6. 6.  Shimeic.  stones  at  David  and  hisserv. 
13.  Sbimei  cursed,  and  threw  stones  and  c.  dust 

18.17.  they  c.  Absalom  into  agreatpit  in  tho  wood 
20.  12.  Joab's  man  c.  a  cloth  upon  Ainasa 

\Kings  7.  41).  in  plain  of  Jordan  c.  them,  2(7i.4.17. 
14.  9.  and  thou  hast  c.  me  ticliind  thy  back 
19.  19.  Elijah  c.  his  mantle  upon  Elisha 

2/fi7!^42.1t).le8t  theSpirit  c.him  on  some  mountain 
21.  ho  went  to  spring  and  c.  the  salt  in  there 
3.25.  on  every  good  piece  of  land  c.  each  his  sione 
4.  41.  then  bring  meal,  and  he  c.  it  into  the  pot 

*6.  6.  he  c.  in  tho  slick,  and  the  iron  swam 
9.25.  c.  hira  in  tiie  portion  of  field  of  Naboth,  26. 
13.  21.  c.  the  man  into  the  sepulchre  of  Elisha 
23.  neither  c.  he  them  from  his  presence  as  yi;t 

19.18.  have  c.  their  gods  into  the  fire,  Isa.  37. 19. 
32.  nor  c.  a  bank  against  it,  Isa.  37.  33. 

Xch.  9.  26.  and  c.  thy  law  behind  their  backs 
A'.siA.3.7.they  c.  Tur,  that  is,  the  lot,  before  llaman 
9.  24.  Hainan  had  c.  Pur,  that  is,  the  lot 
Job  20.23.God  shall  c.  the  fury  of  his  wrath  on  him 

27.  22.  God  shall  c.  upou  him,  and  not  sjiure 
29.  t  17.  1  c.  the  spoil  out  of  his  teeth 

30. 19.  he  hath  c.  me  into  the  mire  and  am  become 
40. 11.  c.  abroad  the  rage  of  thy  wrath 

Psal.  55.  3.  they  c.  iniquity  on  me,  and  hato  nie 
22.c.thy  burden  on  tlieLord,lie  shall  sustain  thee 
74.  7.  they  have  c.  fire  into  thy  sanctuary 
78.  49.  he  c.  on  them  the  fiierceness  of  his  wrath 
Prov.  1.  14.  c.  in  thy  lot  among  us,  let  us  all  have 
F.ccl.  11. I.e.  thy  bread  on  the  waters,  for  shalt  find 
Isa.  2.  20.  a  man  shall  c.  his  idols  to  the  hats 
38.  17  thou  hast  c.  all  my  sins  behind  thy  back 
./(■r.26.23.c.Urijah's  body  into  the  graves  ofpeople 
3t).  23.  c.  it  into  the  Sre  that  was  on  tho  hcarlli 
3.S.  6.  they  c.  Jeremiah  into  the  dungeon,  9. 
41.  7.  Isliinael  slew,  and  c.  them  into  the  pit 
Lam.  3.53.  cut  ofl"  my  life,  and  c.  a  stone  upon  me 
Eick.  7.  19.  Ihey  shall  r.  their  silver  in  the  sireels 
11.16. altho'  I  havoc,  them  faroH'uniong  heathen 
23.  35.  because  thou  hast  c.  me  behind  thy  back 

28.  17. 1  will  c.  thee  to  the  ground,  I  will  lay  tliec 
Dan.  3.  20.  and  to  c.  them  into  the  fiery  furnace 

24.  did  not  wo  c.  tlirco  men  bound  into  thofiro? 
6. 24.  c.  thom  into  tlui  den  of  lions,  their  children 

Jonah  2.  3.  for  thou  hadet  c.  me  into  tho  deep 
.Mic.  4.  7.  I  will  make  her  c.  oil',  a  strong  notion 

7.  10.  thou  will  c.  all  their  sins  into  tlie  sea 
JVfl/(.  3.  6.  I  will  c.  abnminnhle  fillh  on  tlicQ 
'/.reh.  5.  8.  c.  it  into  the  ephah,  c.  tlio  weight 

11.  13.  c.  it  to  the  |>ottor,  c.  tliein  to  tho  potter 
.Mai.  3.  1 1,  nor  vine  c.  her  fruit  before  time  in  field 
Mat.  3.  10.  is  hewn  down  and  c.  into  the  fire,  7.19. 

5.  29.  pluck  it  out  and  c.  it  from  thee,  30.  1 18.8,9. 

7.  6.  nor  e.  your  pearls  before  swine,  lest  they 


.Afa(.4.12.  Jesiu  board  tliat  John  was  c.  into  prison  I    15.26.chilUran'sJ]rcad,andc.il  todogs,  JdnrkLZJ. 


CAS 

Mat.  17.27.  c.  ahook,  andtakeupfishfirstcomotk 
lb.  3U.  c.  him  inio  prison,  till  he  pay  the  debt 
22.  13.  c.  hnii  into  outer  darkness,  25. 30. 
27.  41.  the  thieves  c.  the  same  in  ids  teeth 

Mark  9.  22.  oft-times  it  halli  t.  him  into  the  fire 

11.  7.  c.  their  garments  on  him,  Luke  19.  35. 

12.  4.  another  servant,  and  al  him  they  c.  stone* 
41.  c.  money  into  the  treasury,  Luke  21.  4. 
43.  this  poor  widow  hath  c.  more  in  than  all,  44. 

J^uke  12.5.  who  hath  power  toe.  into  hell,  fear  him 
19.  43.  tliy  enemies  shall  c.  a  iLencli  about  thee 
John  8.  7.  let  him  lirst  c.  a  stone  at  her 
21.  7.  Peter  did  c.  him^elf  into  the  sea  » 

.^cts  12.  8.  c.  thy  garment  about  iliee,  follow  ine 
16.  23.  they  c.  Paul  and  Silas  into  prison 
27.43.  who  could  swim  c.  themselves  first  into  sea 
IC'or.  7.  35.  not  that  I  may  c.  a  snare  upon  you 
licv.  2.  10.  devil  should  c.  some  ol  you  into  prison 
14.  who  taught  lialak  to  c.  a  stumbling-block 
22. 1  will  c.  her  into  a  bed,  and  them  that  commit 
4.  10.  the  elders  c.  their  crowns  before  the  throna 
18.  21.  like  a  mill-stone  and  c.  it  into  the  sea 

CAST  away. 
/-ej).26.44. 1  will  not  c.  tliem  away,  nor  abhor  them 
■ludg.  15.17.  c.  away  the  jaw-bone  out  of  his  hand 
2.S"u«i.  1.  21.  the  shield  ol  the  mighty  is  c.  away 
'iKings  7. 15.  vessels  the  Syrians  had  c.  a.  in  hasto 
iiChr.  29. 19.  vessels  Ahaz  in  his  reign  did  c.  away 
Job  8.  4.  have  c.  iliem  away  for  their  transgression 
20.  behold  God  will  not  c.  away  a  perfect  man 
Psal.  2.  3.  let  us  c.  away  their  cords  from  us 
51.  11.  c.  nie  not  away  from  thy  presence 
Keel.  3.  5.  a  time  to  c.  away  stones,  and  gather,  6. 
Isa.  5.  24.  because  they  have  c.  away  the  law 

30.  22.  shall  c.  them  away  as  a  menstruous  cloth 

31.  7.  every  man  shall  c.  away  his  idols  of  silver 
41.  9.  I  have  chosen  thee,  and  not  c.  thee  away 

Jtr.  7.29.  cut  thy  hair,  and  c.  haway,  O  Jerusalem 
33.  26.  then  will  1  c.  away  the  seed  of  Jacob 
A':cA.18.31  c.  a.  from  you  all  your  transgressionj 
20.7.  c.  oioay  every  man  abominations  ol  his  eyes 
8.  they  did  note,  ajoay  the  abominations  of  eye« 
JIos.  9.  17.  my  God  will  c.  them  away,  because 
j1/uM3.48.  gathered  the  good,  but  c.  the  bad  away 
J^ukc  9.  25.  if  a  man  lose  himself,  or  bee.  away 
A'o HI. 11.1.  hath  God  c.  away  his  people,  God  forbid 
2.  God  hath  not  c.  away  his  people,  he  foreknew 
Ileb.  10.35.  c.  not  a.  your  confidence  which  hath 

CAST-AWAY. 
lCor.9.27.  lest  that  I  myself  should  be  aca*;  vceay 

CAST  down. 
F.xod.  7.10.Aaron  c.  down  his  rod  ||12.they  c  iown 
Josh.  10.11.  Eoid  e.  down  great  stones  u]ion  them 
■  fudg.t).28.  altar  olHaal  was  c.down  and  iliegro\e 
1  Kings  18.  42.  Elija h  c.  himself  rioirn  on  the  carl h 
2Chr.  25.  8.  God  hath  power  to  help  and  e.  doie» 
12.  and  c.  them  down  from  the  top  of  the  rock 
.VfA.  6. 16.  they  wore  c.  down  in  their  own  eyes 
Job  18.  7.  his  own  counsel  shall  c.  him  doicn 
22.  29.  when  men  an;  c.  (/oion,  then  say,  lifting  up 
29.  24.  light  of  my  countenance  they  c.  not  down 
41.  9.  shall  not  one  be  c.  down  at  the  sight  of  himi 
Psal.  17.  13.  O  Lord,  disappoint  him,  e.  him  down 

36.  12.  they  arc  c.  d.  and  shall  not  be  able  lo  rite 

37.  14.  bent  their  how  to  c.  down  poor  and  needy 
24.  thougli  he  fall,  he  shall  not  be  utterly  c.dovnt 

42.5.  why  art  thou  e.  down,  O  my  soul,  11.  |  43.5. 
6.  O  my  Coil,  my  soul  is  c.  down  within  me 
56.  7.  in  thine  anger  c.  down  the  people,  O  Lord 
62.  4.  consult  to  e.  him  down  from  his  excellencjr 
89.  44.  thou  IfBst  c.  his  throne  d.  to  the  ground 
102.  10.  tlioii  hast  lifKil  me  up,  and  c.  me  down 
Prov.  7.  26.  (or  she  hath  c.  down  many  wounded 
Isa.  28.  2.  the  Lord  shall  c.  down  with  his  hand 
.ler.  6. 15.  time  I  visit,  Ihey  shall  hoc.  down, H.  12L 
Lam.  2.  1.  e.  d.  to  the  earth  the  beauty  of  Fsrnel 
F.iek.  6. 4.  1  will  c.  d.  your  ^lain  before  your  idoli 
1-0.  12.  thy  mother  was  c.  down  lo  the  ground 
31.  16.  when  f  e.  the  Assyrian  down  lo  hell 
32.18.  wnil  for  Egvpl,  and  c.  hi  r  d.  ond  dntiglitcrt 
Dan.  7.  9.  I  beheld  till  the  thrones  were  c.  down 
8.  7.  the  hi'-goBt  cd-oirn  the  rnm  to  the  ground 
10  it  r.  down  »^omn  of  llio  host,  and  of  the  s'an 
11.  sanrtuitry  was  c.  d.\\  12.  c.  d.  irii  h  togrouna 
11.  12.  he  slrill  c.  down  many  ten  thoos  iiids 
Mat.  4. 6.  i  f  the  Son  of  Go<l,  c.  thyself  rf.  /  vke  4.9. 
1.5.  30.  c.  thorn  down  utJesus'  fool,  and  hn  healed 
27. 5.  ho  c.  doion  the  pior.tH  of  silver  in  the  tcmpl« 
I  tike  4.  29.  Ihey  might  e.  Jesus  down  hcndlcig 
20;r.  4.  9.  wo  arec   down,  but  nol  desi roved 

6.  God  that  com ''orlolh  those  that  arc  c.  rioun 
2/'cr.  2.  4.  hut  c.  the  nnpels  dmrv  lo  l:ill 
Iieo.  12.  10.  the  accuser  o<"our  brethren  isc.  doten 

CAST  frth. 
JVrA.  13.  8.  \e.f.  nil  lb  ■  household  stiiirofTobiM 
Psal.  144.  6.  c.  forth  I'ghlnirg,  nnd  srattor  them 
.fn-.  22.  19.  Jchoiakim  c.  forth  beyo'  d  the  gnloa 
Fzek.V~.  4.  I  will  r.  Ihvr  firrib  upon  the  open  field 
I/os.  14.  5.  he  slinll  c.  forth  his  roots  o»  Lcbnnoa 
Jonah  1. 1  4.  the  Lord  will  c.  forth  a  great  wind 


CAS 

Jon.l.S.mariners  c./.  the  wares  in  ship  Into  the  sea 

12.  c.  me  /.  into  llie  sea,  so  siiall  the  sea  be  calm 

J5.  they  took  Jonah  and  t.  him  forth  into  the  sea 

Mark!,  -ti.  would  c.f.  devil  out  oflier  daughter 

Jolin\o.Q.  he  is  c.furt/t  as  a  branch  and  withered 

CAST  lots. 
I.cv.  16. 8.  Aaron  sliould  c.  lots  on  the  two  goats 
Jush.  18.  10.  Joshua  c.  lots  for  Uiem  in  Shiloli 
lHam.  14.  4-2.  c.  lots  between  me  and  Jonathan 
IC/iroH.  26.  13.  tliey  c.  lots  as  well  small  as  great 
i'sai.  22.  18.  ihey  i)art  my  garments  and  c.  lots 
upon  my  vesture,  Mat.  in.  35.  John  19.24. 
Tff.  34.  17.  he  hath  c.  the  lot  for  tiiem 
Joel  3.  3.  and  they  have  c.  lots  for  my  people 
Uuad.  11.  in  the  day  foreigners  c.  lots  upon  Jerus. 
,/u;ioA1.7.come  and  let  us  clots  that  we  may  kntow 
JVak.  3.10.  aud  they  c.  /o^s'  for  her  honourable  men 

CAST  off. 
^fCings  23.  27.  I  will  c.  off  tiiis  city  Jerusalem 
IC'Ar.  28.  9.  if  forsake,  he  will  c.  thee  off  (ot  ever 
2CAr.  11. 14.  for  Jeroboam  and  sons  had  c.  themoj^' 
.7«4  15.  33.  and  shall  c.  off  his  (lower  as  the  olive 
I'sal.  43.  2.  why  dost  thou  c.  me  off?  why  go  I? 
44.  9.  thou  hast  c.  off,  GO.  1,10.]  89.  38.  1  108.  11. 
23.  awake,  O  I-ord,  arise,  c.  us  not  off  for  ever 
71.  9.  c.  me  not  off'  in  the  time  of  old  age 
74.  1.  O  God,  why  hast  thou  c.  us  off  for  everf 

77.  7.  will  the  Lord  c.  off  for  ever  ? 

94. 14.  Lord  will  not  c.  off  his  people,  lyam.  3.  31. 
^er.2S.  It).  I  will  c.  Hananiah  o_^'  from  the  earth 

31.  37.  I  will  c.  ojf  the  seed  of  Israel,  33.  24. 
J.a:u.  2.  7.  the  Lord  hath  c.  off  iiis  altar,  abhorred 
Hos.  8.  3.  Israel  hath  c.  off  ihn  thing  tliat  is  good 

5.  thy  calf,  U  Samaria,  liaili  c.  thee  off' 
Jlmos  1.  11.  because  Edom  did  c.  off  all  pity 
y.r.ch.  10. G.  shall  be  as  though  Iliad  note,  them  off 
.rlcls  22.  23.  as  they  cried  and  c.  off  their  clothes 
flow.  13.  12.  let  us  c.  o^'tlie  works  of  darkness 
1  7'i/n.5.12.becau3e  they  have  c.  ojf' their  first  faith 

CAST  out 
Cfcn.  21. 10.  c.  out  this  bond  woman  and  her  son 
Kxod.  34.  24.  I  will  c.  out  the  nations  before  thee 
y^tr. 18.24. nations  are  defiled  whicii  I  c.  out  before 
you,  20.  23.  Dcut.  7.  1. 
Dent.  9.17.  I  c.  the  two  tables  out  of  my  two  hands 
.fgs/i.  13.12.  these  did  Moses  smite,  ami  c.  them  out 
2Sam.  20.  22.  Ihey  c.  out  Sheha's  head  to  Joab 
I  hilars  9.  7.  this  house  will  I  c.  out,  2  Chr.  7.  20. 

21.  2G.  as  did  the  Anmritcs,  whom  the  Lord  c.  out 

before  the  children  of  Israel,  ^2ltiv<rs  16.  3. 
"/•.'inS's  10.  25.  the  captains  c.  them  out  and  went 

17.  20.  till  he  had  c.  them  o((«of  his  sight,  24. 20. 
ZChr.  13.9.  have  ye  note,  out  priests  of  tlie  Lord 

20.  11.  to  come  to  c.  us  out  of  thy  possession 
jVr4.1.9.  if  ye  turn,  though  they  were  of  you  c.out 
Job  20.  15.  God  shall  c.  thern  out  of  his  belly 

3;l.3.they  how  themselves,theyc.ou£  their  sorrows 
Psnl.  5.  iO.  c.  thom  out  m  their  transgressions 

18.  42.  I  did  c.  them  out  as  the  dirt  in  the  streets 

44.2.  how  thou  didst  afflict  people  and  c.  them  out 
r.O.  8.  over  Edom  will  I  c.  out  my  shoe,  108.  9. 

78.  .55.  he  c.  out  the  heathen  before  them,  80.  8. 
/'rrtr.22.10.cO(/.i  the  scorner,and  contention  go  out 
Isa.  14.  19.  but  thou  art  c.  out  of  thy  grave,  like  an 

Jli.  2.  as  a  wandering  bird  c.  out  of  the  nest 
20.  19.  and  the  earth  shall  c.  out  the  dead 

34.3.  their  slain  shall  also  be  c.  out  and  slink  come 
S-*.  7.  that  thou  bring  the  poor  that  are  c.  out 
CO.  5.  brethren  that  c.  you  ont  for  my  name's  sake 

./*!r.7.1.5. 1  will  c.  you  o.  of  my  sight,  as  I  have  c.aut 
P.  19.  because  our  dwellings  have  c.  us  out 
15.  1.  c.  them  out  of  my  sight,  23.  39.  j  52.  .3. 
1*1.  13.  therefore  will  I  c.  yon  out  of  this  land 

22.  26.  I  wil  e.thee  n«/,  and  thy  mother  that  bare 
nCi.  30.  his  dead  bo  ly  shall  be  c.  out  in  the  day 
51.  34.  Nebnchadne/./.ar  hath  f.  me  out 

F.zr:!:.  10.  5.  but  thou  wast  c.  out  m  the  open  field 
28.10.  will  r..  thee  as  profane  out  of  moimt.  of  Gad 
Jlinn.i  8.  8.  the  land  shall  be  c.  out  and  drowned 
J:fic.  2.  9.  the  women  of  my  people  have  ye  c.  out 
Z,e]ili.  3.  15.  the  Lord  liath  c.  out  thine  enemy 
y.cch.  1.  21.  to  c.  out  the  horns  of  the  Gentiles 
9.  4.  the  Lord  will  c.  her  out,  and  smite  her  power 
Jilnt.  5.13.  salt  unsavoury  to  be  c.  out,  T^ike  14. 35 
7.  5.  hypocrite  first  c.  o»«  the  beam,  /yH/cc  6. 42. 
22.  Lord,  have  we  not  in  thy  name  c.  nut  devils'! 
8. 12.  the  children  of  the  kingdom  shall  be  c.  out 
'16.  and  ho  c.  out  the  spirits  with  his  word 
31.  if  thou  c.  us  out,  suffer  us  to  go  into  swine 
9.  33.  when  the  devil  was  c.  out  the  dumb  spake 
lO.l.^ave  thim  power  against  spirits  toc.lheni  out 
8.  heal  the  sick,  raise  the  dead,  c.  out  devils 
12.24.not  c.nvt  devils  but  bv  Beelzeb.  I.vke.  11.18. 
2*1.  if  Satan  c.  nut  Satan,  divided  against  himself 
28.  but  if  I  ny  the  Spirit  of  God  c.  nut  devils 
15.  17.  goeth  into  belly,  and  is  c.  out  into  draught 
17.  19.  whv  could  not  wee.  him  nut7  Jfnric  9.  28. 
21.12.  c.  out  a'l  that  sold, . Voi-A- 1 1 . 1 .5.  /,u/i:rl9.45. 
39.  r.h'm  nut  of  vineyard,  Jir,irA-12.8.  /.M^-r20.15. 
^ar;tl.34.hoalcd  and  c.  out  many  dovil.s,  39.  [  6.13. 
67 


CAT 

Mark  3.15.and  have  power  to  heal  and  c.ojit  devils 
23.  he  said  to  them,  how  can  Satan  c.  out  Satan? 
lG.9.Magdalene,o«<  of  whom  he  hadc.seven  devils 
17.  in  my  name  shall  they  c  out  devils 

/^M/icG.22.  CO  jtt  your  name  us  evil,  for  Son  of  Man 

11.  20.  if  I  with  the  linger  of  God  c.  out  devils 
13.  32.  I  c.  out  devils,  and  do  cures  to-day  and 

20.  12.  tliey  wounded  him  also  and  c.  him  out 
John  6.  37.  him  that  cometh  1  will  in  no  wise  c.  out 

9.  34.  dost  thou  teach  us?  and  they  c.  him  out 

12.  31.  now  shall  the  prince  of  this  world  be  c.  out 
Actsl.  19.  so  that  they  t.  owt  their  young  children 

21.wlienMos.was  c.out  Pharaoh's  daughter  took 

58.they  c.  Stephen  oii<  of  the  city  and  stoned  him 
27.  19.  third  day  we  c.  out  the  tackling  of  the  ship 

29.  c.  four  anclioi's  out  \\  38.  c.  out  wlicat  into  sea 
Oal.  4.  30.  c.  out  the  bond-woman  and  her  son 
/i;ei;.12.9.and  the  great  dragon  was  c.  out,  the  devil 

15.  the  serpent  c.  out  <>f  his  mouth  waters,  16. 

j^ord  Cast  oat. 

l/r(n^sl4.24.whicli  i\\el^ordc.  out  before  children 
of  Israel,  ^Kings  16.  3.  2CAr.  28.  3.  |  33. 2. 
SlKivgs  17.8.  the  Lord  c.  out  before  Israel,  21.  2. 
Zec/i.9.4.behold,  the  I^onl  will  c.  her  out  and  smile 

CAST  up. 
2Sam.  20.  15.  they  c.  up  a  bank  against  the  city 
Isa.  57.  14.  c.  ye  up,  prepare  the  way,  62.  10. 

20.  troubled  sea,whose  writers  c.  up  mire  and  dirt 
.J^cr.  18.  15.  to  walk  in  paths,  in  a  way  not  c.  up 
oQ.  26.  c.  her  up  as  heaps,  and  destroy  her  utterly 
Lam.  2.  10.  c.  up  dust  on  their  heads,  Ezek.  27.  30. 
Dan.  11. 15.  king  of  the  north  shall  c.  up  a  mount 

CASTEST,  ETH. 
.fob  15. 4.  yea,  thou  c.offfcar  and  restrainest  prayer 

21.  10.  their  cow  calveth  and  c.  not  her  calf 
Psal.  50. 17.  seeing  thou  c.  my  words  behind  thee 

73.  18.  thou  c.  them  down  into  destruction 
88.  14.  why  c.  thou  off  my  soul?  why  hidest  face 
147.  6.  the  Ld.  c.  the  wicked  down  to  the  ground 
17.  he  c.  forth  his  ice  like  morsels,  who  can  stand 
Prow. 10.  3.  he  c.  away  the  substance  of  the  wicked 
19.15.slothrulncss  c.  into  a  deep  sleep,  an  idle  soul 
21.  22.  c.  down  the  strength  of  the  confidence 

26.  IS.  as  a  mad-man  c.  fire-brands,  arrows,  death 
.Icr.  6. 7.  as  a  fountain  so  she  c.  out  her  wickedness 
Hos.  9.  t  14.  give  them  a  womb  that  c.  the  fruit 
JV/nt.9.34.  he  c.  out  devils,  Mark  3.  22.  Luke  11.15. 
l.lohn  4. 18.  no  fear  in  love,  but  perfect  love  c.  fear 
'■i./o/ni  10.  and  c.  them  out  of  the  church 

Rev.  6.  13.  even  as  a  fig-tree  c.  her  untimely  figs 

CASTING. 
2Sam.  8.2.  he  smote  Moab,  c.  them  down  to  ground 
lluuffs  7.  37.  the  bases,  all  of  them  had  one  c. 
Ezra  10.1.  weeping  and  c.  himself  down  bef.  house 
.fob  6.  21.  ye  see  my  c.  down  and  are  afraid 
Psal.  74.  7.  by  c.  down  dwelling  place  of  thy  name 
89.39. and  profaned  his  crown  byc.it  to  the  ground 
j1/;'c.6.14.and  thy  c.  down  sliall  be  in  midst  of  thee 
Mat.  4.  18.  Peter  and  Andrew  c.  a  net  into  the  sea 

27.  35.  parted  his  garments,  c.  lots,  Mark  15.  24. 
Mark  9.  38.  we  saw  one  c.  out  devils,  lAikeO.iQ. 
J^ukc  21.1.  he  saw  the  rich  men  c.  their  gifts  into 

2.  he  saw  also  a  poor  widow  c.  in  two  mites 
Rom.  11.  15.  if  c.  away  of  them  be  the  reconciling 
2Cor.  10.5.  c.  down  imaginations  and  every  thing 
IPct.  5.  7.  c.  all  your  care  on  him,  for  he  careth  for 

CASTLG. 
ICAr.  11.5.  David  took  c.  ofZion,  cityof  David 

7.  David  dwelt  in  the  c.  th?  city  cf  David 

Prov.  18.  19.  their  contentions  are  like  barsof  a  c. 

Acts  21.34.  the  chief  captain  commanded  Paul  to 

be  carried  into  the  c.  37.  ]  22.  24.  |  23.  10. 

23.  IG.  he  went  and  entered  into  c.  and  told  Paul 

CASTLES. 
Gen.  25.  16.  names  of  Ishmael's  eons  by  their  c. 
J\rum.  31.  10.  they  burnt  their  goodly  c.  with  fire 
ICkron.  6.  .54.  these  the  priest's  c.  in  their  coasts 
27.  25.  over  treasures,  and  in  c.  Jehonathan 
•■iChrun.  17.  12.  Jehoshaphat  liuilt  in  Judah  c. 
27,  4,  Jotham  in  the  forest  built  c.  and  towers 
Castor  ;  .irr  Sign. 
CATCH. 
Exnd.  22.  6.  if  fire  break  out  and  c.  in  thorns 
Judir.  21.  21.  and  c.  you  every  man  his  wife 
IKiugs  20.  33.  now  the  men  did  hastily  c.  it 
2/i7ni.r.s7.12.we  shall  c.them  alive,  and  get  into  city 
Ps.  10.9.  ill  wait  toe.  the  poor,  hedolh  c.  the  poor 
35.  8.  let  his  net  that  he  h.ith  hid  c.  himself 
109.  11.  let  the  extortioner  c.  all  he  halh 
.'■(:r.5.2G.they  laid  wait,  they  set  a  trap,  Ihey  r.  men 
F.ick.  19.  .3,  and  it  learned' to  c.  the  prey,  6. 
ffah.  1.  15.  they  c.  them  in  their  net  and  gather 
Mark  12.  13.  send  Herodians  to  c.  him  in  his  words 
f.ukr!rt.  10.  from  henceforth  thou  shall  c.  men 
11.54.  seeking  to  c.  somolhinc  out  of  his  mouth 

C.VrCilKTII,  I.\G. 
A.oj.  17.13.whn  r.  any  beast  or  ti)-.vl  may  be  eaten 
Eirk.  1.  1  4.  a  fire  c.  itself,  and  bri'litncss 
M'lt.  13.  19.  the  devil  c.  away  what  was  gown 
.John  10. 12.  the  wolf  c.  and  scattereth  the  sheep 


CAU 

CATERPILLAR,  8. 

IKingt  8.  37.  if  there  be  any  c.  2Chron.  6  28 
Psal.  78.  46.  he  gave  their  increase  to  the  c. 
105,  34.  he  spake,  and  c,  came  without  number 
Isa.  33.  4.  your  spoil  hke  the  gathering  of  the  c 
/er.  51.  14.  I  will  fill  thee  with  men  as  with  c. 
27.  cause  the  horses  come  up  as  the  rough  c. 
Joel  1,4. what  canker-worm  left,  hath  the  c.  eaten 

2.  25.  I  will  restore  the  ears  the  c,  hath  eatea 

CATTLE. 
Gen.  1.  25.  God  made  the  c.  after  their  kind 

3,  14,  Ld.  God  said,  thou  art  cursed  above  all  c, 
7. 21.  all  flesh  died,  both  of  fowl  and  c.  and  beael 
8.1. God  remembered  Noah,  and  c.with  him  in  ark 
9.  10.  I  establish  my  covenant  with  fowls,  c. 

13.  2.  Abram  was  very  rich  in  c.  silver,  and  gold 

30.  40.  Jacob  put  them  not  to  Laban's  c. 

31.  9.  God  hath  taken  away  the  c.  of  onr  father 
43.  these  c.  are  my  c.  all  thou  seest  is  mine 

34.  5.  his  sons  were  with  the  c.  in  the  field 

46.  32.  for  their  trade  hath  been  to  feed  c. 

47.  6.  then  make  them  rulers  over  my  c. 
17.  Joseph  gave  bread  in  exchange  for  c. 

£jo(/.9.4. shall  sever  betw.  c.of  Isr.  and  c.  of  Egypt 
20.  made  his  servants  and  c.  flee  into  the  houses 

12.  29.  Lord  smote  all  the  first-born  of  the  c. 
I^cv.  1.  2.  ye  shall  bring  your  ofiering  of  the  c, 
JVi/m.  3.  41.  take  c.  of  the  Levites  instead  of  a 

20.  19.  if  I  and  my  c.  drink,  I  will  (lay  for  it 

32.  4.  is  a  land  for  c.  and  thy  servants  have  c. 
Deut.  2.  35.  the  c.  we  took  for  a  iirey,  3.  7, 
Josk.  8.  2.  only  the  c.  shall  ye  take  for  a  prey 

27.  only  Ihe  c.  Israel  took  for  a  prey,  11.  14. 
1  Kings  1.  9.  Adonijah  slew  o.xen  and  c.  19,  25. 
IChron.  28. 1 1-  David  .assembled  stewards  over  e. 
Job  1.  t  3.  his  c.  also  was  seven  thousand  sheep 
t  10.  his  c.  was  increased  in  the  land 

36.  33.  the  c.  also  concerning  Ihe  vapour 
Psal.  ."iO.  10.  the  c.  upon  a  thousand  hills  is  mine 

104.  14.  he  causeth  the  grass  to  grow  for  the  e. 

148.  10.  beasts  and  all  c.  praise  the  Lord 
jEcci.2.7.had  great  possessions  ofgreatand  smallc 
Isa.  7.  25.  and  for  the  treading  of  lesser  c. 

43.  23.  thou  hast  not  brought  me  the  small  e. 

46.  1.  their  idols  were  upon  the  beasts  and  the  e 
Jcr.  9.  10.  nor  can  men  hear  the  voice  of  the  c. 
Ezek.  34.  17.  I  judge  between  c.  and  c.  20,  22. 
Mag.  1.11.  I  called  for  a  drought  upon  land  and  » 
Zech.  2. 4.  for  the  multitude  of  men  and  c.  therein 

13.  5.  men  taught  me  to  keep  e.  from  my  youth 
7ju/icl7.7.having  servant  feeding  c.  will  say  to  him 
John  4.  12.  Jacob,  his  children  drank,  and  his  c. 

Muck  CATTLE. 
Gen.  30.  43.  Jacob  increased  and  had  much  c. 
Ezod.  12.  38.  Isr.  went  out  of  Egypt  withniucA  c. 
Deut.  3. 19.  for  I  know  that  ye  have  much  c. 
.fash.  22.  8.  return  lo  your  tents  with  very  much  c 
2Ckron.  26.  10.  Uzziah  had  much  c.  in  the  pia.ns 
Jonah  4.  11.  spare  Nineveh,  wherein  is  7«acA  c. 

Our  CATTLE, 
F.jcnd.  10.  26.  our  c.  also  shall  go  with  us 

17.3.  to  kill  us,  our  children,  and  our  c.  with  thirst 
M'um.  20.  4.  that  we  and  our  c.  should  die  there 

,32.  16.  we  will  build  sheepfolds  here  for  our  c. 

26.  all  om-c.  shall  be  I  here  in  Ihe  cities  of  Gilcad 

./o.tA.  21.  2.  givo'us  cities  with  suburbs  for  our  c. 

.Vf7i.9.37.have  dominion  over  our  bodies  andourc. 

10. 36.10  bring  also  first-born  of  our  sons  and  our  c. 

Their  CVTTLE. 
Gen.  34.23.  shall  not  their  c.  and  substance  be  ours 
.VHm.Sl.O.slcwMidianiteSiand  tooksiKiiloft/jftrc. 

35.  3.  the  suburbs  shall  be  for  their  c.  .fosh.  14.  4. 
Judg.  6.  5.  Ihe  Midianites  rame  up  with  their  c. 

1  .Sam.23.5.David  fought, and  brought  awayMejrc, 
ICkron.  5.  9.  because  their  c.  were  multiplied 

7.21.  because  Ihey  came  down  to  take  aw.  their  c. 
Psal.  78.  48.  he  gave  up  their  c.  also  to  the  hail 

107.  38.  he  suffered  not  their  c.  to  decrease 
.fcr.  49.  ;i2.  their  camels  a  booty,  their  c.  a  spoil 

Thy  CATTLE. 
Gen.  30. 29.  thou  knowesf  how  thy  e.  was  with  me 

31.  41.  I  served  thee  six  years  for  thy  c. 
Krnd.  9.  3.  hand  of  the  Ld.  is  on  thy  c.  in  the  field 
19.  send  therefore  now  and  gather  thy  c. 

20. 10.  servant  nor  thy  c.  do  any  work.  Dent.  5.14, 

34,  19.  every  firstling  amotig  thy  c.  is  mine 
Len.  19.19.  let  not  thy  c.  gender  with  i\  diverse  kind 

25.  7.  sabbath  of  the  land  shall  he  meat  foi  Ihyc. 
Deut.  11.  15.  I  will  send  jrass  in  fields  for  thy  t 

28.4.  blessed  shall  be  the  fruit  of  r/«/c.  ll.|  30.  9. 
51.  he  shall  eat  the  fruit  of  thy  c.  and  thy  land 

/ija.30  23  that  dav  shall  thv  r.feeil  in  large  pastures 

Your  CATTLE. 
O'en.  47.16.  give  j/mn-c.give  yon  bread  for  youre. 
f^rv.  26.  22.  if  ye  will  not  hearken.will  destroy  y.  e. 
Devt.  3. 19.  ?/oi'rc.  shall  abide  in  cities,  .'osh.l.H. 
7.14.  male  nor  (i^male  shall  be  barren  amongy.  e. 
'ifCin  rrs  3. 17.  that  ye  inav  drink,  both  ye  and  y.  c 

CAUGHT, 
rreii.  22. 13.  behold,  behind  him  a  ram  c.  by  horn* 


CAU 

Wen .39.12.shce.him  by  garment,8aj'ing,Hc  with  me 
JCxud.  4.  4.  put  forth  im  hand,  and  c.  Ihu  serpen 
M'um.  31.  3'J.  lOMt  of  the  prey  Uie  men  of  wur  hud  c. 
J%Ldg.  1. 1>.  c.  Adoni-hejcek,  and  cut  ort'  his  thumb 
8.  14.  c.  a  young  mauof  men  ofSuccuth,and  8uid 

15.  4.  Samson  went  and  c.  three  hundred  foxe 
S!l.ii3.  took  wives  of  thum  danced,  whom  theyc. 

\>sain.  IT.  35.  I  c.  him  by  his  beard  and  slew  hun 
'2tiam.  SJ.  16.  and  tlicy  c.  every  one  his  fellow 

18.  9.  Absalom's  head  c.  hold  of  the  oak 
ih'in^s  1.  51).  and  Adunijah  c.  hold  on  the  altar 

a.  '&  Joab  c-  hold  on  the  horns  of  the  altar 

11.  30.  Ahijah  c.  the  new  garment  and  rent  it 
2A'tn  »•»•  4.  'J7.  the  Shunaniile  c.  Elisha  by  the  feet 
"C/tron.  ii2.  9.  they  c.  Ahaziah  and  brought  liim 
ProB.  7.  13.  so  she  c.  him,  and  kissed  him,  and  said 
Jer.  50.  ^4.  U  Babylon,  thou  art  found  and  also  c. 
.Vat.  14.  31.  Jesus  c.  I'eter,  and  said  unto  him 

•21.  39.  the  husbandmen  c.  him  and  cast  him  out 
Mark  12.  3.  they  c.  the  servant  and  beat  him 
J.uke  8.  iJ9.  oftentimes  it  c.  him,  and  he  was  bound 
John  -1.  3.  they  went,  and  that  night  c.  nothing 
.9cts  0.  12.  they  came  upon  Stephen  and  c.  him 

8.  39.  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  c.  away  Philip 

16.  19.  they  c.  Paul  and  Silas,  and  drew  ihem 
!2<i.2I.for  llioso  causes  the  Jews  c. me  in  the  temple 
27.  15.  wlien  the  ship  was  c.  we  let  her  drive 

SCVr.  12.  2.  I  knew  a  man  c.  up  to  the  third  heaven 

4.  Iiow  ho  was  c.  uj)  into  paradise,  and  heard 

10.  lM;ing  crafty,  I  c.  you  with  guile         [words 

1  'J'he.<s.  4. 17.  we  shall  be  c.  up  together  with  them 

Mev.  12.  5.  her  child  was  c.  up  to  God,  to  his  throne 

CAUL,  S. 

Kzod.  29.  13.  the  c.  that  is  above  the  liver,  22. 

Lev.  3.  4, 10, 15.  1  4. 9.  |  7.  4.  |  8.  Hi,  25. 

I  9.  10,  19. 

Isa.  3.18.  the  Lord  will  take  away  their  c.  and  tires 

Hos.l'i.S.  will  rend  tlie  c.  of  their  heart  and  devour 

CAUSE 
Signifies,  [1]  .<?  ground,  reason,  or  motioe,  1  Sam. 
17.  29.     [2]   j1   suit,  action,   or  coiUrovcrsii. 
Exod.  22.  9.  isa.  1.  23.     [3]  Sake,  or  account, 
2  Cor.  7.  12. 
F.zod.  22.9.  the  c.  of  both  shall  come  before  judges 
2;}.  2.  nor  speak  in  a  c.  to  decline  after  many 
3.nor  slialt  thou  countenance  a  poor  man  in  his  c. 
6.  nor  wrest  the  judgment  of  the  poor  in  his  c. 
^um.  16.11.  for  which  <-.  thou  and  all  thy  company 
are  gathered  together  against  the  Lord 
27.  r>.  Moses  brought  their  c.  before  the  Lord 
Dent.  1. 17.  the  c.  that  is  too  hard  tor  you,  hrins 
Jiisk.  20.  4.  the  manslayer  shall  declare  his  c. 
ISam.  17.  29.  and  Uaviil  said,  is  there  not  a  c? 
2.5.  39.  Lord  hath  pleaded  the  c.  of  my  reproach 
S.Sam.  13. 16.  there  is  no  c.  this  evil  is  greater  than 
15.  4.  that  hath  any  suit  or  c.  might  come  to  me 
1  Kinirs  8. 45.  maintain  their  c.  49, 59.  2CA.«.35,39. 

11.  27.  this  was  the  c.  that  he  lift  up  his  hand 

12.  1.5.  for  the  c.  was  from  the  Lord,  iChr.  10. 15. 
lCAr.21.3.  why  will  he  be  a  c.  of  trespass  to  Israel? 
'2(:hr.  19.  10.  what  c.  shall  come  of  your  brethren 
F.zra  4.  15.  for  which  c.  this  city  was  destroyed 
•VrA.  6.  f).  for  which  c.  thou  buildeet  the  wall 
.Jnh  5.  8.  and  unto  God  will  I  commit  my  c. 

13.  18.  behold  now,  I  have  ordered  my  c. 

2;l.  4.  I  would  order  my  c.  before  him,  and  fill 
29.  16.  the  c.  which  I  knew  not,  I  searched  out 
31.  13.  if  [  did  despise  the  c.  of  my  man-servant 

Psal.  9.  4.  for  tliou  hast  maintained  my  c. 
35.  2.3.  awake  to  my  c.  my  God  and  my  Lord 
27.  let  them  bo  glad  that  favour  my  righteous  c. 
140. 12.  I  know  that  the  Lord  will  maintain  the  c. 

/'ror.l8.I7.  he  that  is  first  in  his  own  c.  seems  just 
25.  9.  debate  thy  c.  with  thy  neighbour  himself 
29.  7.  the  righteous  eonsidereth  the  c.  of  the  poor 
31.  H.  open  thy  mouth  for  the  dumb  in  the  c. 

Kcet.  7.  10.  Ray  not  thou,  what  is  the  c.  that 

/.'a.  1.  23.  nor  doth  r.  of  the  widow  come  to  them 
41.21.  produce  your  e.  saith  the  Lord,  bring 
50    f  8.  who  is  the  master  of  my  e.  let  him  come 
51.  22.  God  that  pleadelh  the  c.  of  his  iiooplc 

Jnr.  5.  28.  they  judge  not  the  c.  of  the  fatherless 
11.  20.  for  to  thee  have  I  revealeil  my  c. 
20.  12.  Lord,  unto  thee  have  I  opened  my  c. 
VS.  16.  he  judged  the  c.  of  the  poor  and  needy 

Ijam.  3.  :16.  to  subvert  in  n  «.  the  Ld.  approvitli  not 
.50.  Lord,  thou  hast  seen  iny  wronj,  judge  my  c. 

Jonah  1.  7.  that  ho  may  know  for  whoso  c.  8. 

Mat.  .5. 32.  his  wife,  saving  for  the  e.  offornicalion 
19.  3.  for  a  man  to  put  away  his  wife  fur  every  r. 

J.uki  P.  47.  dc-clnred  for  what  r.  she  touched  him 
23.  22.  I  have  found  no  e.  of  death  in  him 

./Irts  10.  21.  what  is  the  c.  wherefoni  ye  are  cimie? 
13.  28.  though  they  found  no  c.  of  di'ath  in  him 
25.  14.  Festiis  declared  Paul's  r.  In  the  king 
2H.  18.  b  'Cause  there  was  no  r.  ofdenlh  in  ino 

2rvir.  4.  16.  for  which  c.  we  faiiil  not,  but  though 
.5.  13.  or  whether  wo  be  sober,  it  is  for  your  c. 
7.  12.  I  did  it  not  foi  his  r.  that  h  ul  done  wrong 

Phil.  2.  16.  for  the  same  c.  also  do  yo  joy  with  me 
63 


CAU 

'2 Tim.  1.  12.  for  which  c.  I  suffer  these  things 

Heb.  2.  J 1.  lor  wlucii  c.  lie  is  not  asljumea  lo  cul 

IPet,  2.  t  23.  committed  Ins  c.  to  him  ilial  judgull 

PUad  CAUSE. 

ISain.  24.  15.  tliu  Lord  bujudge,  and  plead  my  c 
Psal.  3j.  1.  I  43.  1.  I  nu.  154. 
Psal.  74.  22.  arise,  O  God,  plead  iliine  own  c. 
Proo.  22.  23.  lor  tliu  Lo.d  willyaZcui/  ihuir  c. 

23.  11.  he  shall  plead  their  c.  with  thee 

31.9.  open  thy  mouth,  plead  the  t.  ol  poor,  needy 
,)er.  30.  13.  there  is  none  to  plead  lliy  c. 

M.  :{4.  the  Lord  shall  thoroughly  plead  thuir  c. 

51.  36.  behold,  1  vi'\[\  plead  iliy  c.  and  take  veiig. 
lUic.  7.  9.  until  he  plead  my  c.  and  execute 

h'or  tins  CaL  SK. 
Exod.  9.  16. /or  thts  c.  have  1  raised  up  Pharaoh 
iCkr.  '3'2.'H).  fur  t/tis  c.  Hezekiah  and  Isuiuli  pray. 
Dan.'2.i2.f,  Ikisc.  the  king  was  angry  and  luiious 
jMat.  19.  5.  for  tins  c.  shall  a  man  leave  lather  and 
mother,aiid  cleave  lo  wife,  MarkM.l.  t.ph.J.'Si. 
John  12.  27.  but /or  this  c.  came  1  unto  tins  hour 

18.  37.  and  fur  this  c.  came  1  into  the  world 
/iy/n.l.  26. /.  thisc.  G.gave  them  up  to  vilealiect. 

13.  6.  for  this  c.  pay  ye  tribute  also 

15.9./.  this  c.  1  will  conf.  to  thee  among  the  gent. 
ICor.  1 1. 30.  for  this  c.  many  are  weak  and  sickly 
P.ph.'i.l-l.  for  this  c.  1  bow  my  knees  to  the  Father 
1  J'hess.  2.13.  fur  this  c.  thank  G.  without  ceasing 
'i'J'liess.2.1\.  f.this  c.  G.  shall  send  strong  delusion 
1  'Piin.  1.  J6.  howlieit,  for  this  c.  1  obtained  mercy 
Jlcb  .9.15./.  this  c.  he  is  the  mediator  of  new  testa. 
If  tt.4.6.  for  this  c.  was  the  gospel  preach.to  them 

nUhuut  CAUSE. 
l$am.l9.5.wiltthou  sin, to  slayDavidtcit/ioutac' 
Job  2.  3.  thou  move([st  nie  to  destroy  him  wtlk.  u  c. 

9.  17.  iie  multi])lielli  my  wounds  without  c. 
I'sat.  7.  4.  I  delivered  him  that  w.  c.  is  my  enemy 

25.  3.  let  them  be  ashamed  that  transgress  uj.  c. 
35. 7.  w.  c.  they  hid  for  me  a  net,  diggeU  a  jut  u).  c. 

19.  that  hate  me  without  c.  69.  4.  .John  15.  25. 

109.  3.  and  they  fought  against  me  without  a  c. 

119.78.  the  proud  dealt  perversely  with  me  w.  ac. 

161.  princes  have  jiersecuted  me  without  c. 
Prov.  1. 11.  let  us  lurk  for  the  innocent  without  c. 

3.  30.  strive  not  with  a  man  w.  c.  if  he  have  done 

23.  29.  who  hath  sorrow,  who  hath  wounds  w.  t. 

24.28.  be  not  witness  against  neighbour  without  c. 
ha.  52.  4.  the  Assyrian  oppressed  them  without  c. 
/.,«;/(. 3. 52. mine  enemies  cliased  me  sore  without  c. 
Ezck.  14.  2;i.  have  not  done  w.  c.  all  1  have  done 
jMat.  5.  22.  whoso  is  angry  with  his  brotliet  w.  c. 

CAUSE. 
Oryi.  7.  4.  I  will  c.  it  ruin  on  the  earth  forty  days 

45.  1.  he  cried  c.  every  man  to  go  out  from  me 
F.zod.  8.5.  c.  frogs  to  come  up  on  the  land  of  Egypt 

21. 19.  and  shall  c.  him  to  be  thoroughly  luialed 
/,«>.  19.29.  thy  daughter,  to  c.  her  lo  be  a  whore 

26.  16.  consume  the  eyes,  and  c.  sorrow  of  hi'art 
J^uni.  8.  t  T   c.  a  razor  to  pass  over  the  Levites 

16.  5.  who  IS  holy,  the  Lord  will  c.  him  to  come 
Deut.  1.  38.  encourage  him,  for  he  shall  c  Israel 
to  inherit  it,  3.  28.  |  31.  7.  .tosh.  1.  t  6. 
12.  11.  God  shall  choose  to  c.  his  name  to  dwell 
24. 4.  and  thou  shall  not  c.  the  land  to  sin  which 
28.  t  61.  them  will  Ld.  c.  to  ascend  till  destroyed 
Jiidg.  6.  t  11.  Gideon  threshed  wheat  to  c.  it  ileu 
2.S(i;rt.  13.  13.  whither  .shall  I  c.  my  shame  to  go! 
\  Kings  S.  31.  an  oath  laid  on  him  toe.  him  swear 
'ih'ings  19. 7.  will  c.  him  to  fall  by  sword,  Jsa.'Si.l. 
JVfA.  13.  26.  him  did  outlandish  women  c.  to  sin 
KatU.  3.  13.  c.  to  [lerish  all  the  Jews,  7.  f  4.  |  8.1 1. 

5.  5.  c.  Kaman  make  haste  to  do  as  Esther  said 

6.  f  9.  c.  him  to  ride  on  horseback  through  the  city 
,/ui6. 24.  c.  me  to  understand  wherein  I  have  erred 

t  27.  yea,  ye  c.  to  fall  upon  the  fathi-rless 
34.  1 1.  c.  every  man  to  find  according  to  his  ways 
38.  t37.  who  can  c.to  lie  down  the  bottles  of  heaven 
Psal.  10.  17.  thou  will  c.  thine  ear  to  hear 
67.  Land  c.  his  face  to  shine  upon  us,80.  3, 7,  19. 
76.8.  th(m didst  c.  judgm.  lobe  heard  from  lieav. 
90. 1 12.  we  may  c.  our  hearts  to  come  !o  wisdom 
143.  8.  c.  mo  to  bear,  c.  mo  to  know  the  woy 
Pruv.  4.16.  sleep  taken  away,  unless  c.  soino  to  fall 
19.  t  18.  let  not  thy  soul  spare  to  c.  him  lo  die 
23.  f  .5.  will  c.  thine  eyes  lo  Hee  on  what  is  not? 
Keel.  5.6.  suffer  not  thy  moulii  to  c.  thy  llesh  to  sin 
Cant.  8.  13.  Iicarki-n  to  thy  voice,  r.me  lo  hear  it 
fsn.  3.  12.  they  who  load  liieec.  thee  loerr,  9.  10. 

27.  6.  he  whall  c.  them  of  Jacob  to  take  root 

28.  12.  this  is  the  rest  ye  may  e.  the  wenry  to  rest 
30.  30.  the  Lord  c.  his  glorious  voice  lo  be  heard 
42.  2.  nor  r.  his  voice  to  bo  heard  in  the  streets 
.5w.  14.  I  will  r.  thi-e  lo  riile  upon  the  high  places 
(il.ll.  so  I,ord  willc.  righlooiisni'sslo  spring  forth 
r)ti.9.Khnll  I  bring  to  birth, and  not  clo  bring  forth? 

.frr.  3.  l-J.  I  will  not  r.  mine  nngcr  lo  fall  on  you 

7.  3.  I  will  r.  yon  lo  dwell  in  this  place,  7. 
12.  t  9.  r.  beasts  of  the  field  to  come  mid  devour 
13.|li.sive;:lorv  to  the  Lord  before  he  r.  darkness 
15.  IL  1  will  c.  the  enemy  to  entrcDt  Uioo  wuU 


CAU 

I  Jer.  23.  27.  who  think  to  c.  my  people  brgel  my  n 
2.5.  t  10.  I  will  c.  to  jK'rish  tlie  voice  of  mirth 

31.  2.  even  Israel,  when  1  went  to  c.  him  to  rest 
9.  I  willc.  them  to  walk  by  the  rivers  of  waters 

32.  44.  I  will  c.  their  cajitivity  to  return,  33.  26. 
J^uin.  3.  32.  tho'  hec.griet',  yet  will  he  have  com. 
J<iik.  20.  37.  I  will  c.  you  to  pass  under  the  rod 

21.  8.  that  it  might  <:.  fury  to  come  to  \eiigeance 
34.  15. 1  will  c.  ihem  to  lie  down,  saith  the  Lord 
36.  12.  1  will  c.  men  to  walk  on  you,  even  Isrne 

Dan.  8. 25.  ho  shall  c.  craft  to  prosper  in  his  hand 
9.17. 0  our  God,  c.  thy  face  to  shine  on  sanctuary 

t  18.  we  do  not  c.  lo  fall  our  supplication 
11.  t  •i2.  shall  he  c.  to  dissemble  by  tlatterics 
1/os.  4.  t  9.  1  will  e.  lo  return  for  their  ways 
./oet  3.  11.  thither  c.  thy  mighty  ones  come  down 
.imus  6. 3.  and  c.  the  seat  ol  violence  to  come  nea 

8.  9.  I  will  c.  sun  to  go  down  at  noon  and  darken 

9.  t  9.  c.  to  move  Israel  among  all  nations 
jYah.  2.  t  8.  stand,  but  none  shall  c.  them  to  turn 
/ya6.1.3.  why  dost  thou  r.  me  lo  behold  grievance'? 
Mat.  5.  1  29.  if  thy  right  eye  c.  thee  to  offend 

6.  1 2.  c.  not  a  trumpet  to  be  sounded 
10.21.children  rise  up  against  parents  and  c.  them 
to  be  put  to  death,  ^lark  13. 12.  J.ukc  21. 16. 
fto;n.lU.17.mark  them  wlior.divisions  and  offences 
Cul.  4.16.c.that  it  be  read  in  church  of  Laodiceans 
Cause  to  cease.     Hee  Ckask. 
CAUSED. 
Oen.  2.  21.  God  c.  a  deep  sleep  to  fall  on  Adam 
20.  13.  God  c.  me  to  wander  from  my  fathers 
Exod.  14.  21.  the  Lord  c.  the  sea  to  go  back 
.\'um.  31. 16.  these  c.  Israel  to  commit  whoredom 
Vcut.  34.  4.  this  is  the  land,  I  have  c.  thee  to  see  it 
2.Sam.  7.  11.  c.  thee  to  rest  from  thine  enemies 

22.  t  40.  hast  thou  c.  to  bow,  Psal.  18.  f  39. 
1  Kings  2.19.<;.a  seat  to  he  set  for  the  king's  mother 
'iChron.  34.32.  he  call  present  in  Jerus.  tustundit 
Kiral.tl.Cyriis  c.a  voice  to  pass  thro'  his  kingdom 

6.  12.  the  God  that  hath  c.  his  name  to  dwell 
^''i  A.8.7.Lcvites  c.  people  to  understand  the  law,8. 
Ksth.  5.  t  lO.Haman  sent  and  r .his  friends  lo  come 

14.  Ilaman  e.  the  gallows  to  he  made         ' 
Job  31.  16.  if  I  have  c.  eyes  of  the  widow  to  fail 
Ps.  f)().  12.  thou  hast  c.  men  to  ride  over  our  heads 

78.13.  he  divided  the  sea,  and  c.  them  lo  pass  thro 
26.  he  c.  an  east-wind  to  blow  in  the  heaven 

119.49.  word  on  which  thou  hast  c.  me  to  ho|io 
Prov.  7.  21.  with  fair  speech  she  c.  him  to  yield 
Isa.  6.  t  7.  r.  it  to  touch  my  mouth,  and  said  to 

19.  14.  they  have  c.  Egypt  to  err  in  every  work 

43.  23.  I  have  not  c.  thee  to  serve  with  an  otrering 

47.  t  10.  thy  wisdom  c.  thee  to  Inin  away 
63.  14.  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  c.  Iilm  to  rest 

./er.  3.  t  18.  to  the  land  I  c.  your  fathers  possess 
12. 14. which  I  have  c.  my  people  Israel  lo  inherit 
13.  11.  I  have  r.  lo  cleave  to  me  house  of  Israel 
29.  31.  Slieniaiah  c.  you  to  trust  in  a  lie 
32.  23.  therefore  thou  hast  c.  nil  this  evil  to  come 
34.  II.  afler  they  c.  the  servants  lo  return,  16. 

48.  4.  her  little  ones  have  c.  a  cry  to  be  heard 
F.zrk.  16.  7.  I  have  c.  thee  to  multiply  as  the  bud 

24.  13.  till  I  have  c.  my  fury  to  rest  on  thee 
29.18.  Nebuch.  c.  his  army  to  serve  against  Tyrus 
32.  23.  which  c.  terror  in'the  land,  24,  25,  26. 
ftan.  9. 21.  Gabriel  being  c.  to  Hy  swiftly,  touched 
Mus.  4.  12.  the  sjiirit  of  whoredoms  r.  them  loerr 
Jimus  2.  4.  and  their  lies  c.  them  lo  err,  after  which 
4.7.  I  c.  rain  on  one  city,  I  e.  not  to  rain  on  nnotli. 
ZccA.S  4.  I  have  r.  thine  iniquity  to  pass  from  Iheo 
Mnl.  2.  8.  ye  have  c.  many  lo  stumble  at  the  law 
.lohn  11.  37.  havcc.  thisman  should  not  have  died 
.^Icls  15.  3.  they  c.  great  joy  to  all  the  breihren 
20(r.2.5.  but  il'anv  have  r.  grief,  hath  grieved  part 

"  CAUSES. 
F.xod.  18.  19.  thai  llioii  mayesi  briiiff  c.  to  God 

26.  the  hard  r.  they  brought  lo  Moses 
Drul.  1.  16.  Iiear  Ihi'  r.  biiween  voiir  bn'thren 
.fir.  3.  8.  all  the  r.  whereby  bncksliiong  Israel 
f,nm.  2.14.  but  have  seen  for  thee  e.  of  hniiishmont 
3.  .58.  O  Ijord.  thou  hnst  pleaded  the  r .  of  my  soul 
. 'Jcr.f  26.21. for  these  C.I  he.iews  caught  mo  in  temple 

CAI'SESI'. 
.fob  .30.22.  thou  r.  me  lo  rido  on  the  wind 
Ps.  1)5.  4.  bli-ssed  is  man  Ihoii  c.  approach  to  Ihce 

•  AUSE'/'M. 

.Vt/m.5.18.  the  water  Ihnl  r.  thecurse,  10.92,24,27. 

.fob  12.  24.  he  <•.  Ihem  lo  wander  in  a  wilderness 

where  tlipre  is  no  way,  I'sal.  107.  40. 

20.  3.  tho  spirit  of  iinderslandin!;  r.  me  lo  answer 

.17.  13.  he  r.  it  to  come  hither  for  coiVeclion 

/'.«.  104.  M.  ho  r.  tho  grass  to  grow  for  the  cntllo 

J3.5.7.  her.  vn  pours  to  ascend,  .'rr.  10.  13.  |  51.10. 

147.  18   r.  his  wind  lo  blow,  and  the  wnlers  flnw 

Pror.  10.  5.  is  ii  son  tlint  r.  shame,  17.  2.  |  19.  2& 

t  17.  ho  thai  refiisclh  reproof  r.  lo  err 

17.  2.  a  wise  servant  silinll  rule  over  a  son  r.  shame 

19.  '27.  censp  to  honr  the  inslrurtion  that  r.  loerr 

2>*.  10.  wluxn  r.  righteous  to  !?o  a^trav  in  evil  way 

Jsa.  G4.  2.  the  fire  c.  the  waturs  to  boil,  to  iimkt 


CEA 

Ezck.  44. 18.  not  gird  with  anything  that  c.  sweat 

2Jan.ll.  t  -.JO.oue  Ihatc.  anexacter  ol'tho  Iciiigdoin 

Mat.a.'i-i.  pui  away  wile  c.  her  to  commit  adultery 

8Cor.  SJ.14.  Uiauks  be  to  God,  whoc.  us  to  triumpli 

9.  11.  which  c.  through  us  thanlvsgiviiig  to  God 

Hec.  13.  li.  c  tiie  earth  to  worship  the  tirst  heast 

10.  c.  all  til  receive  a  mark  in  iheir  right-liaud 

CAUSEWAY. 

IChr.  '26. 10.  lot  came  Ibrth  by  the  c.  of  going  up 

If!,  at  l'!irbai  westward  lour  at  tlill  c.  and  two 

Prov.  15.  t  19  way  of  righteous  raised  up  as  a  c. 

Isa.  7  t  i  go  up  iu  the  c.  of  the  fuller's  lield 

C.A  USING. 
"Kings  2.  t  19.  ilie  ground  c.  to  miscarry 
Cant.  7.  9.  c.  tlio  Ups  of  those  asleep  to  speak 
Isa.  30.  -8.  a  bridle  in  the  jaws  c.  them  to  err 
Jrr.  !29.  10.  in  c.  vou  to  return  to  this  i)lace 
33.  1'2.  sliejjherds  c.  their  flocks  to  lie  down 
£zck.  39.  t  26.  know  1  am  the  Ld.  c.thcm  to  bo  led 

CAUSKLESS. 
I.Sam.  25.  31.  either  that  thou  hast  shed  blood  c. 
Pruv.  20.  2.  so  the  curse  c.  sliall  not  come 

U.WE,  S. 
Ge?i.l9.  30.  Lot  dwelt  in  ache  and  his  daughters 

23.  17.  field  and  c  made  sure  to  Abrahaiy,  20. 
19.  Abraham  buried  Sarah  in  thee,  of  the  held 

49.  29.  bury  nie  with  my  father  in  c.  of  Ephron 
»/(>,5A.10.10.  these  hvu  kings  fled  and  hid  in  a  c.  17. 
Judit.6.2.  because  of  the  Midianites  Israel  made  c. 
I.b'a(n.l3.6.  Israel  did  hide  themselves  in  c.  in  rocks 

22.  1.  David  escaped  to  the  e.  of  AduUam 

24.  10.  Lord  delivered  thee  into  my  hand  in  the  c. 
'2Sam.  23.  13.  came  to  David  to  the  c.  of  Adullam 
IKings  18.  4.  the  prophets  hid  by  fifty  in  a  c.  13. 

19.  9.  Elijah  came  to  a  c.  and  lodged  there 
Isa.  2.  19.  they  shall  go  nito  c.  for  fear  of  the  Ld. 
Ezck.  33.  27.  they  shall  die  that  be  in  the  c. 
John  11..38.  the  grave,  it  was  a  c.  a  stone  lay  upon  it 
JJeb.  11.  38.  they  wandeied  in  dens  and  c.  of  earth 

CEASE 

Signifies,  [1]  Tu  leave  off,  or  give  over,  ISam. 
7.  8.  Isa.  33.  1.  [2]  To  be  utterly  forgotten, 
Deut.  32.  26.  [3]  To  be  quiet,  Judg.  15.  7. 
[4]  To  he  tcanting,  Deut.  15.  11.  [5]  To  be 
removed  by  death,  or  otherwise.  Lam.  5.  14. 
[>}]  J^ol  to  lean  to,  or  depend  on,  Prov.  23.  4. 
[7]  To  abstain  from,  Psal.  37.  8.  Isa.  1.  16. 

Oen.  8.  22.  and  day  and  night  shall  not  c. 

Ezod.  9.  29.  as  I  am  gone  the  thunder  shall  c. 

23.  t  5.  would  c.  to  leave  thy  business  tor  him 
A''um.  8.  25.  from  the  age  of  fifty  years  shall  c. 

11.  25.  seventy  elders  prophesied,  and  did  not  c. 
17.  5.  I  will  make  to  c.  the  murmurings 
Deut.  15. 11.  the  poor  shall  never  c.  out  of  the  land 

32.  20.  I  would  make  remembrance  of  them  to  c. 
/nsA  .22.25.  so  make  our  children  c.  from  fearing  L. 
Jadg.  15.  7.  yet  will  I  be  avenged,  after  I  will  c. 

20. 28.  shall  I  yet  again  go  to  battle,  or  shall  I  c? 
l.S"a;n.  7.  8.  c.  not  to  cry  to  Lord  our  God  for  us 
IKings  23. 1 5.  caused  to  c.  the  idolatrous  priests 
2C'Ar.  16.5.  when  Baasha  heard  it,  let  his  work  c. 
Ezra  4.  23.  made  them  to  c.  by  force  and  power 
C.  f  8.  that  they  be  not  made  to  e. 
JVeh.  G.  3.  why  should  the  work  c.  while  I  comel 
Job  3.  17.  there  the  wicked  c.  from  troubling 
10.  20.  my  days  few,  c.  then,  let  me  alone 
14.  7.  that  the  tender  branch  thereof  will  not  c. 
P.<nl.  37.  8.  c.  from  anger,  and  forsake  wrath 
4H.  9.  ho  makelh  wars  to  c.  to  the  end  of  the  earth 
89.  44.  thou  hast  made  his  glory  to  c.  and  cast 
119.  t  119.  thou  causest  the  wicked  to  c. 
P-rov.  19.  27.  c.  to  hear  instruction  that  causeth  to 
err  from  the  words  of  knowledge 

20.  3.  It  is  an  honour  for  a  man  to  c.  from  strife 

22.  lO.cast  scorner,  yea  strife  and  reproach  shall  c. 

23.  4.  labour  to  be  rich,  c.  from  thy  wisdom 
Eccl.  12.  3.  the  grinders  c.  because  they  are  few 
laa.  1.  10.  c.  to  do  evil  ||  2.  22.  c.  ye  from  man 

10.  25.  vet  a  little  while  and  indignation  shall  c. 
10.  10. 1  have  made  their  vintaffc  shouting  to  c. 
17.  3.  the  fortress  also  shall  e.  from  Ephraim 

21.  2.  an  the  sighing  thereof  have  I  made  to  r. 

33.  1.  when  fliou  shaltc.  to  spoil  shnlt  be  spoiled 
Jer.  14.  17.  let  tears  run  down  and  let  them  not  c. 

17.  8.  leaf  green,  noi  shall  c.  from  yielding  fruit 

31.  36.  then  the  seed  of  Israel  shall  c. 
Earn.  2.  18.  let  not  the  apple  of  thine  eye  c. 
Ezek.  fi.  6.  that  your  idols  may  be  broken  and  c. 

7.  24.  I  will  make  the  pomp  of  the  strong  to  c. 

12.23.  saiththe  Lord,  I  will  make  this  proverb  c. 

2.3.  27.  thus  will  T  make  thy  lewdness  to  c. 

30.  10.  I  will  ninke  the  multitude  of  Egypt  to  c. 

18.  ihe  pomp  of  her  strength  shall  c.  33.28. 
tfo-^.  7.  t  4.  raiser  will  c.  from  raL^ng 
..Imns  7.5.0  Ld.God,  c.  by  whom  shall  Jacob  arise 
Jirts  13. 10.  will  not  c.  to  pervert  the  right  ways 
1  C'nr.  13.  8.  whether  they  be  toniues,  they  shall  c. 
F-nh.  1.  16.  I  r.  not  to  give  thanks  for  you 
titl.  1 .  9.  we  do  not  c.  lo  pray  for  you  to  be  filled 
IPct.  2.  14.  having  eyes  that  cannot  c.  from  sin 
69 


CBD 

Cause  to  CEASE. 
/.ci!.26.t6.I  will  caase  to  c.cvil  beasts,  jE2eA-.34.25 
Hulh  4.  f  14.  not  caused  to  c.  to  thee  a  kinsman 
2Kings  23.  f  5.  cause  lo  c.  tlie  idolatrous  priests 

Ezra  4. 21.  cause  these  men  to  c.  city  be  not  built 

5.  5.  the  eye  of  their  God  on  them,  they  could  not 
cause  them  to  c.  till  matter  came  to  Darius 
jYch.  4.  II.  slay  them  and  cause  the  work  tu  c. 
t'sal.  85.  4.  cause  thine  anger  toward  us  lo  c. 
Pruv.  18.  IS.  the  lot  causet/i  contentions  to  c. 
Jsa.l3.il.  I  will  cause  the  arrugancy  of  proud  to  c. 

30.  11.  cause  the  holy  One  of  Israel  to  c.  belbre  us 
./fr.  7.34.  cause  miilh  to  c.  from  the  cities  of  J  udah 

36.  29.  cause  to  c.  man  and  beast,  Hus.  2.  11. 

48.  35.  1  will  cause  tucin  Aluab  him  that  olfereth 
Kzek.  16.  41.  ca^isc  thee  to  c.  from  playing  harlot 

23.  48.  thus  will  1  cause  lewdness  to  c. 

26.  13.  1  will  cause  the  noise  of  thy  songs  to  c. 

30.  13.  I  will  cause  their  images  <oc.  out  of  JN'oph 

34.  10.  cause  them  to  c.  from  feeding  the  flock 
Dan.  9.  27.  he  shall  cause  the  oblation  to  c. 

11.  18.  cause  the  reproach  otfured  by  him  to  c. 
Uus.l.i.  will  cause  to  c.  kingdom  of  house  of  Israel 

CEASED. 
Oen.  18. 11.  it  c.  to  be  with  Sarai  after  manner  of 
Ezod.  9.  33.  thunders  and  hail  c.  and  rain  was  not 

34.  when  Pharaoh  saw  that  the  thunders  c. 
Josh.  5.  12.  the  manna  c.  on  the  morrow  after 
.Judg.  2.  19.  they  c.  not  from  their  own  doings 

5.  7.  the  inhabitants  of  villages  c.  they  c.  in  Israel 
ISam.  2.  5.  and  they  that  were  hungry  c. 

25.  9.  they  spake  in  the  name  of  David  and  c. 
Ezra  4.  24.  tlien  c.  the  work  of  the  house  of  God 
Job  32.  1.  so  these  three  men  c.  to  answer  Job 
Psal.  35.  15.  they  did  tear  me  and  c.  not 

77.  2.  my  sore  ran  in  the  night  and  c.  not 
Isa.  14.  4.  how  hath  the  oppressor  c.  golden  city  c. 
Earn.  5.  14.  the  elders  have  c.  from  the  gate 

15.  the  joy  of  our  heart  is  c.  our  dance  is  turned 
Jonah  1.15.  they  look  up  Jonah,  sea  c.  from  raging 
Mat.  14.  32.  the  wind  c.  Mark  4.  39.  |  0.  51. 
Luke  7. 45.  tliis  woman  hath  not  c.  to  kiss  my  feet 

11.  1.  as  he  was  praying  in  a  place,  when  he  c. 
Acts  5.  42.  they  c.  not  to  teach  and  preach  Jesus 

20.  1.  after  the  uproar  was  C.Paul  called  disciples 
31.  by  space  of  three  years  I  c.  not  to  warn  every 

21.  14.  when  he  would  not  be  persuaded  we  c. 
Oal.  5.  11.  then  is  the  offence  of  the  cross  c. 
Heb.  4.  10.  he  also  hath  c.  from  his  own  works 

10.  2.  for  then  they  would  not  have  c.  to  be  oftler. 
IPtt.  4.  1.  who  suflfered  in  flesh,  hath  c.  from  sin 

CEASETH. 
Psal.  12. 1.  help,  Lord,  for  the  godly  man  c. 

49.8.  rcdempt.  of  soul  precious,  and  it  c.  for  ever 
Pro(;.20.2U.so  where  there  is  no  tale-bearer  strife  c. 
/.««.  16.4.  the  extortioner  is  at  an  end,  the  spoiler  c. 

24.  8.  the  mirth  of  tabrets  c.  joy  of  the  harp  c. 


CER 

I  Jcr.  22.  14.  it  is  ceiled  with  c.  painted  with  vcrmil 

15.  because  thou  clost^st  thyself  in  c. 
Eick.  17.  3.  a  great  eagle  took  highest  branch  of  c 

22.  I  will  take  of  tlie  higliest  branch  of  the  c. 

23.  it  shall  bear  fruit  and  he  a  goodly  c. 

27.  24.  chests  made  of  c.  among  the  merchandise 
31.  3.  the  Assyrian  was  a  c.  m  Lebiinon 
Zeph.2.  14.  for  he  shall  uncover  tlie  c.  work 
Zeck.  11.  2.  howl,  fir-tree,  for  the  c.  is  fallen 

CEDAR-TREES. 
.VKn(.24.6.  Israel's  labernacles  are  c.  betide  waters 
26am.  5. 11.  Hiram  sent  c.  to  David  and  carpenters 
IKings  5.  6.  that  they  hew  me  c.  out  of  Lebanon 
10.  so  Hirain  gave  Solomon  c.  and  fir-trees,  9.  11. 
2Kings  19.  23.  I  will  cut  down  the  tall  c.  thereof 
IVhron.  22.  4.  David  prepared  c.  in  abundance 
2Chron.  1.  15.  c.  made  he  as  the  sycamore,  9.  27. 
2.  8.  send  me  c.  and  fir-trees  out  of  Lebanon 
Ezra  3.  7.  gave  money  to  bring  c.  from  Lebanon 

CEDAR-WOOD. 
Lev.  14.  4.  take  c.  and  hysso|),  6,  49,  51,  52. 
J^um.  19.  6.  the  priest  shall  lake  c.  and  hyssop 
\Ckron.  22.  4.  they  brought  much  c.  to  David 

CEDARS. 
IKings  10.27.  c.  made  he  to  be  as  sycamore-trccs 
ICA)'.  17.  1.  David  said,  I  dwell  in  a  house  of  c. 
2Chr.  2.  3.  didst  send  David  c.  to  build  a  house 
Psal.  29.  5.  the  voice  of  the  Lord  breaketh  the  c. 
80.  10.  the  boughs  thereof  were  like  goodly  c. 
148.  9.  praise  lum  also  c.  and  fruitful  trees 
Cant.  5.  15.  his  countenance  excellent  as  the  e. 
Isa.  9.  10.  we  will  change  the  sycamores  into  c. 
37.  24.  I  will  cut  down  the  tall  c.  thereof 
44.  14.  he  heweth  him  down  c.  and  taketh  oak 
Jer.  22.  7.  they  shall  cut  down  thy  choice  c. 

23.  O  Lebanon,  that  makest  thy  nest  in  the  c. 
Ezck.  31.  8.  c.  in  garden  of  God  could  not  hide  him 
Amos  2.  9.  Amorites  height  as  the  height  of  c. 
Zcch.  11.1.  O  Lebanon,  that  fire  may  devour  thy  c 

CEDARS  of  Lebanon. 
,/«<f^.9.15.fireoutofthe  bramble  devour  c.  of  Leb 
Ps.  104. 16.  the  c.  of  Leb.  whicii  he  hath  jilanted 
Isa.  2.  13.  day  of  the  Lord  upon  all  the  c.  of  Leb 
14.  8.  c.  of  Leb.  rejoice  at  thee,  saying,  since  thou 
Ezek.  27.  5.  c.  from  Leb.  lo  make  masts  for  thee 

CELEBRATE. 

Lev.  23.32.  from  even  to  even  shall  c.  your  sabbatn 

41.  a  statute,  ye  shall  c.  it  in  the  seventh  month 

Isa.  38.18.  the  grave  cannot  praise,  death  canuot  c. 

CELESTIAL.  [thee 

ICor.  15.  40.  arec.  bodies,  glory  of  the  c.  is  one 

CELLARS. 
IGAron.  27.  28.  and  over  the  c.  of  oil  was  Joash 

CENSER,  S. 

Lev.  10. 1.  sons  <yf  Aaron  took  either  of  them  c. 

16.  12.  he  shall  take  a  c.  full  of  burning  coals 

J\''um.  4.14.  they  shall  put  upon  it  vessels  even  c 


33.  8.  high-ways  lie  waste,  the  way-faring  man  c.     16.  6.  this  do,  take  ye  c.  ||  17.  every  man  his  c. 


Lam.  3.  49.  mine  eye  trickleth  down  and  c.  not 
Hos.  7.  4.  c.  from  raising  after  he  kneaded  dougl: 
.lets  6.13.this  man  c.not  speak  blasphemous  words 

CEASING 
Exod.  21.  t  19.  he  shall  pay  for  the  c.  of  his  time 
\Sam.  12.  23.  I  should  sin  in  c.  to  pray  for  you 
Isa.6.  t9.  hear  ye  without  c.  but  understand  not 
Acts  12. 5.  but  prayer  was  made  without  c.  for  him 
Rom.l.  9.  without c.  I  make  mention,  IThcss.  1.3. 
lThess.2. 13.  for  this  we  thank  God  without  c. 
5.  17.  pray  without  c.  in  every  thing  give  thanks 
2  Tim.  1. 3.  without  c.  I  have  remembrance  of  thee 

CEDAR. 
This  tree  is  much  celtbratcd  in  the  scriptures:  It 
shoots  out  its  branches  at  ten  or  twelve  feet  from 
the  ground:  Its  branclws  are  large,  and  at  a 
distance  from  one  another;  its  leaves  arc  some- 
thing like  those  of  rosemary;  it  is  always  green, 
and  distils  a  kind  of  gum,  to  which  different 
effects  are  attributed:  The  wood  of  it  is  incor- 
ruptible, beautiful,  solid,  and  inclining  to  a 
brown  colour;  it  bears  a  small  apple,likethaluf 
the  pine.  1  hey  made  use  of  this  wood  not  only 
for  the  beams  and  planks  which  covered  edifices, 
and  served  for  ceilings  to  apartments,  but  they 
placed  tkem  likewise  in  the  substance  of  their 
walls,  and  so  disposed  them  and  the  stone  toge- 
ther, that  there  were  three  rows  of  slone  and  one 
of  cedar  wood,  1  Kings  6.  36.  By  the  cedar  of 
Lebanon,  the  king  of  Israel  may  be  understood, 
2  Kings  14.  9.  Hereunto  also  the  felicity  and 
groirihof  the  faithful  are  compared,  Ps.  92.12. 
iSam.  7.  2.  king  said,  I  dwell  in  a  house  of  c. 

7  saying,  why  build  ye  not  me  a  house  of  c? 
IKings 4. 33.  he  spake  from  the  c.  to  the  hyssop 
5.  8.  I  will  do  all  thy  desire  concerning  c. 
2Kings  14. 9.  the  thistle  sent  lo  the  c.  2C7ir.25. 18. 
.Toh  40.  17.  Behemoth  niovelh  bis  tail  like  a  c. 
P.'^nl.  92.  12.  the  righteous  shall  crow  like  a  c. 
Cant.  1.  17.  Ihe  beams  of  our  house  are  c. 
8.  ;i.  we  will  inclose  her  willi  hoards  of  e. 
ha.  41. 19. 1  will  plant  in  the  wilderness  the  c. 


19.  Eleazar  the  priest  took  the  brasen  c. 
iKing.<  7.  50.  made  c.  of  pure  gold,  2Chron.  4.  22. 
2Chr.  26.  19.  Uzziah  had  a  c.  in  his  hand  to  hurt 
Ezek.  8. 11.  with  every  man  his  c.  in  his  hand 
Ueb.  9. 4.  the  holiest  had  the  golden  c.  and  the  ark 
Rev.  8.  3.  the  angel  came,  having  a  golden  c. 
5.  the  angel  took  the  c.  and  filled  it  with  fire 
CENSURE. 
2Cor.  2.  t  6.  sufficient  to  such  a  man  is  this  c. 

CENTURION,  S. 
Mat.  8. 5.  there  came  unto  him  a  c.  beseeching  him 
8.  c.  said.  Lord,  I  am  not  worthy  thou  shouldest 
27.  54.  when  the  c.  saw  the  earthquake  [come 
Luke  7.2.  c.  servant,who  was  dear  to  him,was  sick 
23.  47.  now  when  the  c.  saw  what  was  done 
Acts  10.  1.  Cornelius  was  a  c.  of  the  Italian  band 

22.  Cornelius  the  c.  a  just  man  that  fcareih  God 

21.  32.  who  immediately  took  c.  and  ran  down 

22.  26.  when  the  c.  heard  that,  he  went  and  told 

23.  17.  then  Paul  called  one  of  thee,  to  him 

23.  he  called  to  him  two  c.  saying,  make  ready 

24.  23.  and  he  commanded  a  c.  to  keep  Paul 
27.1.deliver.Paul  to  Julius  a  c.  of  Augustus'  band 

11.  the  c.  believed  the  master  more  thiin  Paul 
43.  c.  willing  to  save  Paul,  kept  them  from  purp. 
28.16.  the  c.  delivered  the  prisoners  to  the  captain 

CEREMONIES. 
JV«m.9.3.shall  keep  passover  according  to  all  the  & 
Heb.  9.  t  1-  the  first  covenant  had  also  c. 
A  Certain  Man.    See  Man. 
CERTAIN. 
F.Tod.  16.  4.  ye  shall  gather  a  c.  rate  every  day 
A''um.  16.  2.  Korah  rose  with  c.  of  children  of  Isr. 
Deut.  13. 13.  c.  men  the  children  of  Belial  arc  gone 

25.  2.  the  wickfd  man  be  beaten  by  a  c.  number 
iChron.  8.  13.  after  a  c.  rate  every  day  offering 
JWA.  1.  2.  Hannni  came,  he  and  c.  men  of  Judah 

4.  I  mourned  c.  days,  and  fasted,  and  prayed 
11.  23.  a  c.  portion  should  be  forsin^ers  everyday 
13.  25.  I  smote  c.  of  them,  and  plucked  off  hair 
/<r.41.5.  there  came  c.  from  Sberbem,  fromSliiloh 
52. 15.  the  captain  carried  away  c.  of  poor  people 


CHA 

Pan.  8.  27.  I  Daniel  fainted  and  was  sick  c.  days 
11. 13.  iliu  king  of  north  shall  como  after  c.  years 

Jltat.ia.—i.  killed,  ofheav.  likened  toe.  king,  •Ji!.  ii. 
2U.  l2U.  slic  and  her  sons  de:iiring  a  c.  thing  ol'  hi  ni 

Mark  1:^.4'2. there  came  u  c.puur  H'idow,yyu/((21.'J. 

14.  57.  arose  c.  and  bare  falee  witness  against  him 
L,ukc  5.  Vi.  it  came  to  (lass  when  he  was  in  u  c.  city 

8.  'JU.  told  him  by  c.  tliy  mother  stands  to  see  thee 
lU.  'M.  as  he  went  into  a  c   village,  17.  12. 

11.  'J7.  a  c.  woman  lilled  up  her  voice  and  said 
37.  a  c.  Pharisee  besought  hiin  to  dine  witli  him 

m.  9.  this  parable  to  c.  wlio  trusted  in  themselves 

23.  19.  wiio  for  a  c.  sedition  and  for  murder 
St-l^j.c.womeD  also  made  us  astonished, whowere 

24.  f.  of  llieui  witli  us  went  to  the  sepulchre 
John  5.  4.  an  angel  went  down  at  a  c.  season 
^cL-i  'J.  I'J.  Saul  was  c.  days  with  the  disciples 
10.  4d.  tliey  prayed  Peter  to  tarry  c.  days 

12.  1.  Ilurod  the  king  to  ve.x  c.  of  the  church 

15.  24.  c.  which  went  from  us,  have  troubled  us 
17.  23.  as  c.  of  your  own  poets  have  said,  for  we 

Hom.lb.  20.  to  make  a  contribution  for  c.  saints  at 
Oal.  2.  12.  for  before  that  c.  came  from  James 
J!/e6. 2.0.butone  in  ac.  place  teslilied,  what  is  man 
4.  4.  he  spake  in  a  c.  place  of  7th  day  on  this  wise 
7.  he  limited  a  c.  day,  saying,  in  JJavid,  to-day 
10.  27.  but  a  c.  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment 
Jxuie  4.  for  there  are  c.  men  crept  in  unawares 

CERTAIN. 
Deut.  13.  14.  if  it  be  truth  and  the  thing  c.  17.  4. 
IKingsi.  37.  knowforc.  thou  shnlt  surely  die,  42. 
Jcr.  2(5.  15.  know  for  c.  if  ye  put  mo  to  death 
Dan.  2.45.  the  dream  isc.  and  interpretation  sure 
.Acts  25.  2().  I  have  no  c.  thing  to  write  to  my  lord 
\Cor.  4.  11.  we  have  no  e.  dwelling-place 
]  Tim.  6.  7.  it  is  c.  we  can  carry  nothing  out 

CERTAINLY. 
Oen.  18.  10.  he  said,  I  will  c.  return  to  thee 
26.  28.  we  saw  c.  the  Lord  was  with  thee 
43. 7.  could  we  c.  know  he  would  say,  bring  your 
44. 15.  wot  ye  not  such  a  man  as  I  can  c.  divine? 
SO.  15.  will  c.  requite  us  all  the  evil  we  did  to  him 
Ezod.  3.  12.  c.  I  will  be  with  thee,  this  be  a  token 

22.  4.  if  theft  be  c.  found  in  his  hand  alive 
L,en.  5.  19.  he  hath  c.  trespassed  against  the  Lord 

24.  16.  all  the  congregation  sli:tll  c.  stone  him 
Josh.  9.  24.  because  it  was  c.  told  thy  servants 
Judir.  14.  12.  if  ye  can  c.  declare  the  riddle  to  me 
16'a/ii.  20.  3.  thy  father  c.  knoweth  I  have  found 

9.  if  I  knew  c.  evil  were  determined  by  my  father 

23.  10.  c.  heard  that  Saul  will  come  to  Kcilah 

25.  28.  Lord  will  c.  make  my  lord  a  sure  house 
1  Kingt  1.  30.  even  so  will  I  c.  do  this  day 
Zliinrrs  H.lO.go,  say  to  him,tliou  miiyest  c.  recover 
2CAr.l8.27.  Micaiah  said,  if  thou  t.  return  in  peace 
Prov.  23.  5.  for  riihes  c.  make  themselves  wings 
Jer.  8.  8.  we  are  wise,  lo,  c.  in  vain  made  he  it 

13.  12.  do  we  not  c.  know  every  bottle  be  filled 
25.  28.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  ye  shall  c.  drink 
36.  29.  king bf  Babylon  shall  c.  destroy  this  land 
40.  14.  dost  thou  c.  know  that  Baal  is  scnf! 

42.  19.  know  c.  I  have  admonished  you  this  day 
22.  e.  ye  shall  die  by  the  sword  and  by  famine 
44. 17.  c.  do  what  thing  goeth  out  of  our  mouth 
J.nm.  2.  1(>.  f.  this  is  the  day  that  we  looked  for 
JJan.  11.  10.  one  shall  e.  come  and  overflow,  13. 
Xech.  11.  t  11.  poor  c.  knew  it  was  word  of  the  L. 
Luke  23.  47.  saying,  c.  this  was  a  righteous  man 

CiSRTAINTY. 

Josh.  23.  13.  know  for  c.  Lord  will  no  more  drive 

ISam.  23.  23.  come  ye  again  to  mi'  with  the  c 

Prov.  23.21.  make  known  the  r.  of  words  of  truth 

Dan.  2.  8.  I  know  of  c.  ye  would  gain  the  time 

Jyuke  1 .4.  thou  mightost  know  the  c.  of  those  things 

j?r(»  21.  34.  he  could  not  know  the  e.  for  tumult 

22.  30.  because  ho  would  have  known  the  c.  why 

CERTIFY,  lED. 

2S/:ni. 15.28.  till  there  come  word  from  you  to  e.  me 

Ezra  4.  14.  therefore  have  we  sent  nnd  c.  the  king 

16.  we  c.  the  king,  that  if  this  city  be  built  again 

5.  10.  wo  asked  their  names  also  to  c.  thee 

7.  24.  wo  e.  you  to  impose  no  toll  on  the  Levites 

£(tA.2.22.  Esth.f.king  thereof  in  Mordecai'n  name 

Oal.i.ll.  I  c.  you  gospel  I  preached,  not  after  man 

CHAFED. 
SSam.17.8.  they  b«  e.  in  their  minda  as  hear  robbed 

CHAFF 
Is  thi^  rrfusf  nf  irinnnvtrd  com,  which  is  h'lrrm 
light,  ""''  "/>'  '"  '"  flrivrn  to  aud  fro  viith  the 
wind,  Psnl.  I.  4.      To  which  are  compared,  (1) 
false  doctrine , or  mm' s  dreams  nndinventions, 
Jcr.  23.  28.     (2)  Fruitless  plots  and  designs, 
I«a.  33.  11.     (3)  Hypocrites  and  umrodly  per- 
sons, who  are  vile,  barren,  and  inconstant,  like 
chaff.  Mat.  3. 12. 
Job  21.  IH.  wicked  as  c.  that  storm  cnrricth  nway 
Paul.  1.4.  like  the  r.  which  the  wind  drivi-lh  away 
35.  Ti.  let  them  he  as  r.  Iiet'ore  the  wind 
Ita  Ti.li.  a«  flniiie  rnnfiiiinoth  the  c.  so  their  root 
17. 13.  the  nations  shall  he  chased  aa  the  c. 
70 


CHA 

/so.29.5.ternbIe  ones  shall  be  as  c.that  paiseth  aw. 
33.11.  ye  ^hull  conceive  c.  and  bring  lorlh  stubble 
41.15.  thresh  mouiiluinx,  and  make  the  hills  as  c. 
.ler.  23. 28.  what  is  the  c.  to  the  wheutl  saith  Lord 
iJan.  2. 35.  became  like  the  c .  of  the  threshing  lloor 
Hus.l'i.'i.  as  the  c.  which  is  driven  with  whirlwind 
'/..eph.  2. 2.  before  the  decree,  before  day  puss  as  c. 
.)7(it.3.12.  will  bum  up  thee,  with  lire,  J.ukt'S.  17. 

CHAIN 
Signifies,  [I]  /.inks  uf  iron,  gold,  or  silver,  one 
wilkin  another,  which  were  (.1)  HacrcU,  those 
made  by  the  command  of  God,  for  the  breast- 
plate worn  by  the  high-priist,  £.\od.  39. 15, 17, 
lb.     (2)   Jdolatroujs,  such  as  were   made  fur 
idols,  or  images,  Isa.  40.  19.     (3)    (Jumiitan, 
wherewith  prisoners  icere  chained.  Acts  12.  7. 
[IIJ  Bondage,  or  aijliction.  Lam.  3.  7.     [IIIJ 
Heucre  laws  fur  thccurbiiig  uf  all  open  impiety. 
Rev.  20.  1. 
f;en.41.42.gold  c. about  his  neck,  Dan.  5.  7, 16,29. 
I'sal.  73.  6.  pride  composseth  them  about  as  a  c. 
Cant.  4.9.  have  ravished  me  with  one  e.  of  thy  neck 
yvOH(.3.7.hedged  me  about,  hath  made  my  c.  heavy 
Kick.  7. 23.  make  a  c-  land  is  full  of  bloody  crimes 
16.  11.  I  put  bracelets,  and  a  c.  on  thy  neck 
.Ids  -28. 20.  for  hope  of  isr.  lam  bound  w  iUi  this  c. 
Kph.  6.  t  20.  for  which  I  am  ambassador  in  a  e. 
2  yim.l.lG.Onesiphorus  was  not  ashamed  of  my  c. 
Jiev.  20.  1.  an  angel  and  a  great  c.  in  his  hand 

CHAIN-WORK. 
\Kin<rs  7.  17.  wreaths  of  c.  for  chapiters  of  pillars 

CHAINS. 
Exod.  23. 14.  fasten  the  wreathen  c.  to  ouches,  24. 
39. 15.  they  made  on  breast-plate  c.  at  the  ends 
JVum.  31.  50.  for  atonement,  c.  and  bracelets,  rings 
■/udg.  8.26.  besides  the  c.  about  tlieir  camels'  necks 
1  Kings  6.  21.  by  the  c.  of  gold  bel'ore  the  oracle 
Psal.  149.  8.  to  bind  their  kings  with  c.  and  nobles 
Prov.  1.  9.  instruction  shall  be  c.  about  thy  neck 
Cant.  1.  10.  thy  neck  comely  with  c.  of  gold 
Isa.  3.  19.  the  Lord  will  take  away  thy  c. 
40.  19.  goldsmith  with  gold,  and  casteth  silver  c. 
45.  14.  they  shall  come  alter  thee  in  c.  come  over 
.7cr.  40.  4.  I  loose  thie  this  day  from  thy  c. 
F.zek.  19.  4.  they  brought  him  with  c.  into  Egypt 
9.  they  put  him  in  ward  in  c.  and  nrought  liiin 
Mark  5.  3.  no  man  could  bind  him,  no  not  withe. 

4.  the  c.  had  been  oft  plucked  asunder  by  liiia 
Jlcts  12.  7.  Peter's  c.  foil  olV  from  his  hands 
2/•'c^2.4.  to  hell,  delivered  them  into  c.  of  darkness 
JudcG.he  hath  reserved  in  evcrlastingc.uiider  dark 
Sie  Bound. 
CHAl-CEDONY. 
Rev.  21.  19.  the  third  foundation  was  a  c. 

CHALK-STONES. 
Isa.  27.  9.  he  maketh  all  the  stones  of  the  altar  c. 

CHALLENGETII. 
Kxod.  22.  9.  any  lost  thing  another  c.  to, be  his 

CHAMBER 
Signifies,  [1]  .In  apartment,  or  room  in  a  house. 
Gen.  43.  30.  Dan.  6.  10.  [2]  The  clouds,  Psal. 
104.  13.  [3]  Mn  upper  room,  or  an  apartment 
wherein  people  generally  eat,  where  the  disci- 
ples did  cat  the  passucer,  and  did  partake  uf 
the  Lord's  supptr,  and  where  afUrtcards  thiij 
assembled  for  divine  worship,  Acts  1.  13. 1 20.8. 
The  chambers  of  the  south,. /«6  9.  9.  Those  star: 
and  constellations  which  are  toward  the  south 
em  pole;  so  called,  because  thry  arc  fur  the 
most  part  hid  and  shut  up,  as  chambers  cotn- 
monly  arc,  from  these  parts  of  the  world,  and 
do  not  rise  or  appear  to  us  till  the  beginning 
of  summer,  when  they  raise  winds  and  tem- 
pests, as  astronomers  observe. 
The  king  hath  brought  me  into  his  chambers. 
Cant.  1.4.  Christ  the  King  of  his  church  ho.-, 
vouchsafed  unto  me  most  intimate  and  familiar 
fellowship  with  himself  in  his  ordinances. 
Enter  thou  into  thy  chambers,  /.<o.2l>.  20.  Fly  to 
CJod  by  faith,  prayer  and  repentance,  for  pro- 
teclion,depend  upon  his  providence, lay  hold  up- 
on his  promises,  and  make  use  of  his  attributes. 
He  alludes  to  the  common  practice  of  men, 
who,  when  there  are  storms  or  dangers  abroad, 
betake  themselves  to  their  own  chambers  or 
houses  for  safety;  or,  as  some  think,  to  that 
history,  Exod.  9.  J9, 20.  or  to  that  eiimmand,a( 
not  going  out  of  Ih'-ir  houses,  F.iod.  12.  22.  or 
to  the  like  charge  given  to  Rahnb,  .hsh.  2.  19. 
fien.  43.  30.  Joseph  entered  into  his  c.  ami  wept 
Judg.  15.  1.  I  will  go  in  lo  my  wife  into  the  c. 

16.  9.  there  viere  lii'rs  in  wait  abiding  in  the  e.  12. 
2.Srtm.  13.  10.  bring  meat  into  thee,  ihat  I  may  cat 
IKings  4.1 1.  Elisha  turned  into  the  r.  and  lay  there 
JVcA.  13.  5.  he  prepared  for  Tobiali  a  groat  c. 

H.  rnsi  forth  all  the  household  slnfl'oul  of  iho  c. 
.fob  37.  t  9.  out  of  the  c.  rometh  tlin  whirlwind 
Psal.  19.  5.  ns  a  bridegroom  comi'th  out  of  his  c. 
Cant.  3.  4.  into  the  e.  of  her  llial  coiKeivcd  me 
Jer.  30.  10.  read  the  book  in  the  c.  of  Cuiuaiiah 


CHA 

.7irr.36.20.1aid  up  the  roll  ine.of  Elishama  the  scribe 
f^zek.  40. 45.  c.  whosu  prospect  tow  ard  the  south 

46.  e. whose  prospect  toward  the  north  lor  priettf 
/>u;i.6.10.his  windows  being  o|H.-n  in  his  c.to  Jerua 
Joel  2.  16.  let  the  bridegroom  go  lurth  of  his  c. 
Bed-Chambi:r;  j)ee  1)cd.     Guard-Ckambkr, 
Hee  (iUAHD. 

Oitest-CHAMtiER. 
Mark  14.14.  say,  where  is  the^u«»(-c.Auile22.]l 

•  Vniicr  CHAMBER. 
lA7n^s20.30.  Benhadad  tied,  and  came  into  in.  c. 

22.  25.  shalt  go  into  inner  c.  lo  hide,  2(7ir.  lb. 24. 
2A'in''s9. 2.  carry  Jehu  intoi'n.c.  andtuKe  the  box 

jAttle  CHAMBER. 
-Kings  4.  10.  let  us  make  a  tittle  c.  on  the  wall 
£2(A.40.7./itt/ec.wasone  rtnid  long  and  one  broad 
13.iucasured  the  gate  from  thcroofofoufcZtti/ee. 
.•iide  CHAMBER,  S. 
Eick.  41. 5.  the  breadth  of  every  side-c.  four  cubits 
6.  the  side-c.  were  three,  one  over  another 
O.thicknesE  of  wall  for  jt-i(/c-c. without,  live  cubita 
f;);.er  CHAMBER. 
'2Kings  1. 2.  Aha/,  fell  thro'  a  lattice  in  his  uppcr-c. 
23.12.allnr8  in  top  of  thcH;>per-e.Josiah  beat  down 
Jlcts  9.  37.  washed,  and  laid  Dorcas  in  an  upper-c. 
39.  brought  Peter,  when^ome  into  the  uppcr-c. 
20.8.niany  lights  in  upper^.  where  were  gathered 

CHAMBERS. 
Deut.  32.  t  25.  sword  without,  terror  from  the  c. 
lKings6.  5.  against  vt'all  of  the  house  he  built  c. 
ICAr.  9.  26.  chief  jiorters  were  over  the  e.  23.  28. 
2CAr.  31.  11.  Hezekiah  commanded  to  prepare  c 
F.zra  8.  2Si.  keci>  them  till  ye  weigh  them  in  the  e. 
jV(  A.  13. 9.  I  commanded,  and  they  cleansed  tlie  c. 
.lob  9.  9.  which  maketh  the  e.  of  the  south 
Ps.  104.3.  wholayeth  beamsof  his  c.  in  the  waters 
Kt.lie  wulereth  the  hills  from  his  e. earth  satisfied 
105.  30.  land  broughl  forth  frogs  inc.  of  their  king 
Prov.!.  27.  way  to  hell  going  down  to  e.  of  death 
24.  4.  by  knowledge  c.  shall  be  filled  with  riches 
Cant.  1.  4.  the  king  hath  brought  me  inio  his  c. 
Isa.  26.20.  enter  thou  into  thy  c.  and  shut  thy  doori 
Jer.  22.13.  woe  to  him  thatbuildeth  his  c.  by  wrong 

14.  I  will  build  me  a  wide  house,  and  large  c. 
.ler.  35.  2.  bring  the  Rechabiles  into  one  of  the  c. 
F.zrk.  8.  12.  every  man  in  the  c.  of  his  imagery 
21.14.  the  sword  which  entereth  into  their  privy  e 
42.  13.  they  be  holy  e.  where  priests  shall  cat 
Mat.  21.26.  behold,  he  is  in  the  secret  e.  believe  not 

(>/.er-CH  AMBERS. 
'2Chr.  3.9.  and  he  overlaid  the  upper-c.  with  goM 
F.zek.  42. 5.  the  upper-c.  were  shorter  for  galleries 

CHAMBERING. 
Rom.  13.  13.  walk  not  in  e.  and  wantonness 

CHA.VIBERLAIN,  S. 
2  Kings  9. 1 32.  looked  out  to  Jehu  two  or  three  c. 

23.  11.  by  the  chamber  of  Nathan-molech  tlie  e. 
F.sth.  1.  10.  the  seven  c.  that  served  the  king 

2.  15.  but  what  Hacai  the  king's  e.  a)ipointed 
21.  two  of  king's  e.  were  wrot.h,  and  sought  to  lay 
.lets  12.  -^0.  Blastus  tlie  king's  c.  their  friend 
Horn.  16.  23.  Erasliis,  r.  of  the  city,  suluteth  vou 

CHAMOIS. 
IJeut.  14.5.  these  ve  shuU  cat,  wild  ox  and  tiic  c. 

CHAMPAIGN. 
/>eM<.l  1.30. who  dwell  in  the  r.  over  against  Gilgal 
Kick.  37.  t  '-•  many  bones  in  the  open  c. 

CHA.MPION. 

\Sam.  17.  4.  there  went  out  a  e.  out  of  the  ramp 

51.  when  the  Philislineg  saw  their  c.  was  dead 

CHANCE. 

Deut.  22.  6.  if  a  bird's  nest  r.  lo  be  before  theo 

ICur.  15.  37.  it  may  r.  of  wheat  or  other  grain 

CHANCE. 
\Sam.  6.9.  it  was  a  r.  that  happened  to  us 
•iSam.  I.  6. as  I  happened  by  e.  on  mount  Gilboa 
Keel.  9.  11.  but  time  and  e.  hnpponeth  to  them  all 
Juke  10.31.  bv  f .  a  prirst  came  down  that  way 

CIIANCETH. 
Deut.  23.  10.  unclennness  llml  r.  him  by  night 

CHANCELLOR. 

F.zra  4.8.  Rehiiin  r.  wrote  a  letter  to  .Artaxerxes,  9. 

17.  tJien  the  kins  sent  answer  lo  Rehum  the  c. 

CHANGEABLE. 

Isa.  3.22.  Lord  lake  nwav  the  c.  suits  of  apparel 

CHANGi;S. 
I.rv.  27.  33.  both  it  and  Iho  t  thereof  shall  be  how 
Judg.  14.  12.  I  wHI  give  you  thirty  e.  of  raiment 

13.  you  shiill  give  mo  lliirly  e.  of  raiment 
.fob  11.  t  10.  if  he  make  a  e.  who  can  hinder? 
14.  14.  all  my  days  will  I  wait  till  my  c.  como 
Vrov.  24.  21.  meddle  not  with  them  given  lo  e. 
7.eeh.  3.  4.  I  will  riolhc  thee  with  e.  of  raiment 
Ilrb.  7.12.  there  is  made  of  necessity  a  e.  of  the  law 

CHANGE,  Verb. 
Gen.  35.  2.  he  clean  nnil  r.  vour  gnrmrnls 
I.er.  27.  10.  hit  shall  not  r.  it  II  33.  nor  e.  it,  if  he  c. 
.'oh  17.  12.  Ihey  c.the  night  inliiduy,  'ight  is  short 
I'sal    102.  26.  n«  a  vrslure  shall  llioii  e.  Ihcin 
Isa.  9.  10.  but  we  will  c.  tiiem  into  cudart 


CHA 

Isa.  40.  t31.  that  wait  on  the  Lord  shall  e.  strength 
Jcr.  li.'M.  why  gadilfsi  tliou  so  much  lo  c.  thy  way ! 

13.  -3.  can  Klliiopian  c.hiaskiu,  orleoiiard  spots.' 
Jjaii.  7.  '^5.  he  sliull  think  to  c.  linius  and  laws 
Hus.  4.  7.  1  will  c.  their  glory  into  shainu 
Hab.  1.  11.  then  shall  his  uund  c.  and  pass  over 
Mai.  3.  U.  for  I  am  the  Lord,  1  c.  not,  therutoru 
Jicts  t).  14.  and  shall  c.  the  cusloms  delivered 
Jtoin   1.  'iO.  Iheir  women  did  c.  the  natural  use 
Oal.  4.  ilO.  1  desire  to  be  present,  and  c.  my  voice 
I'hil  3.  °.^1.  Christ,  who  shall  c.  our  vile  body 
Jlei   12.  t  17.  be  found  no  way  to  c.  hid  mind 

CHAxVUED,  ETH. 
Oen.  31.  7.  your  father  c.  my  wages  ten  times,  41. 

41.14.Josepli<;.hidraiment,andcamein  toFharaoh 
/.ei'.  13.  10.  if  raw  HesU  turn  and  be  c.  to  white 

55.  if  the  plague  have  not  c.  his  colour 
lHam.  2i.  13.  he  c.  his  behaviour  before  them 
2  bam. l'2.;£U.l)d.  c.  his  apparel,  came  to  house  of  L 
SKiuirs'Zi.  17.  k.  of  Babylon  c.  his  name  to  Zedek. 

25.  lii).  c.  his  prison-garments,  Jcr.  ^•2.  33. 
Est/i.'H.  fi).  he  c.  her  and  maids  to  the  best  place 
Job  29.  t  20.  my  bow  was  c.  in  my  hand 

30.  18.  great  force  of  my  disease  is  my  garment  c. 
Psal.  15.  4.  he  sweareth  to  his  hurt,  and  c.  not 

102.  2().  as  a  vesture  they  shall  be  c.  Heb.  1. 12. 

10(5.  20.  thus  they  c.  their  glory  into  an  ok 
Eccl.  8.  1.  the  boldness  of  his  face  shall  be  c. 
Isa.  24.  5.  c.  the  ordinance,  broken  the  covenant 
JtT.2.11.c.theirgods,  my  people  have  c.  their  glory 

43.  11.  his  taste  remamed,  and  his  scent  is  not  c. 
J. am.  4.  1.  gold  dim,  how  is  the  most  fine  gold  c.l 
JEzek.  5.0.  she  hath  c.  my  judgments  into  wickedn. 
Dan.  2.  9.  prepar.  lying  to  speak,  till  the  time  be  c. 

21.  he  c.  the  times  and  seasons,  removetli  kings 
3.  19.  form  of  his  visage  was  c.  against  Shadrach 

27.  nor  were  their  coats  c.  nor  smell  of  tire  passed 

4.16.  let  his  heart  bee. from  man'8,and  let  a  beast's 

6. 8.  sign  writing  that  it  be  not  c.  according  to  law 

15.  that  no  decree  the  king  established  may  be  c. 

17.  that  the  purpose  might  not  be  c.  about  Daniel 

JUic.  2.  4.  he  hath  c.  the  portion  of  my  people 

JlctsW.6.  the  barbarians  c.  their  minds,  and  said 

Rom.  1.23.  c.  the  glory  of  the  uncorruptible  God 

25.  who  c.  the  truth  of  God  into  a  lie 
ICor.  15.  5J.  not  all  sleep,  but  we  shall  all  be  c. 52. 
2Cor.  3.  18.  c.  into  same  image  from  glory  to  glory 
Heb.  9- 12. 1'or  priesthood  being  c.  a  change  of  law 

CH.\NGEST,  ED,  countenance. 

Job  14.20.thouc.hiscountertance,seiideat  him  away 

Z>an.  5.  6.  the  king's  countenance  wasc.  in  him,  9. 

lO.nor  let  thy  count  ha  c.\\  7.28. my  count,  c.  in  me 

CHANGERS. 

Pro  D.24.t  21. fearLord  and  king,meddle  not  with  c. 

Jmt.  31.  12.  Jesus  went  to  temple  and  overthrew 

tables  of  money-c.  Mark  11.  15.  JoAn2. 14, 15. 

CHANGES. 

Qen.  45. 22.  to  each  he  gave  c.  to  Benjamin  five  c. 

iKings  5.  5.  he  took  with  him  ten  c.  of  raiment 

22.  give  them,  I  pray  thee,  two  c.  of  garments 

23.  bound  two  c.  of  garments,  and  laid  them 
Job  10.  17.  c.  and  war  are  against  me 

Psal.  55.19.  because  they  have  no  c.  they  fear  not 

CHANGING. 
Ruthi.l.  this  was  manner  in  Israel  concerning c. 

CHANNEL,  S. 
2Sfl.m.22. 16.  c.  of  the  sea  appeared,  Psal.  18. 15. 
Job  31.  t  22.  let  my  arm  be  broken  from  c.  bone 
Isa.H.l.  he  shall  come  up  over  all  his  c.  and  banks 
27.  12.  the  Lord  shall  beat  off  from  c.  of  the  river 

C^!APITER,  S. 
Emd.  30.  38.  he  overlaid  their  c.  with  gold,  38.  28. 
38. 17.  the  overlaying  of  their  c.  were  silver,  19. 
1  fCin^s  7. 16.  made  two  c.  of  brass,  2CAr.  4. 12,13. 
iKiiigs  2.5. 17.  the  c.  upon  it  was  brass,  .Tnr.  52. 22. 
JImos  9.f  1.  smite  the  c.  of  the  door  that  posts  shake 
Zeph.  2.  1 14.  the  bittern  shall  lodge  in  the  c. 

CHAPMEN. 
2G4r.  &  M.besides  what  c.  and  merchants  brought 

CHAPEL, 
.^ino'.  7. 13.  it  is  the  king's  c.  and  the  king's  court 

CHAPT. 
Jer.  14.  4.  because  sround  is  c.  there  was  no  rain 

CHAUASHIM. 
\Chron.A.  14.  Joab  the  father  of  the  valley  of  c. 

CHARGE 
Signifies,  [1]  To  command,  Exod.  1.  22.     [2]  To 
prohibit,  or  interdict,  Gen.2l^.\.  [3]  To  adjure, 
or  bind  by  a  solemn  oath,  ISani.  14.  27.     [4] 
Tn  load,  or  burden,  Dcut.  24.  5.  ITim.  5.  16. 
[5]  To  erhort,  1  Thess.  2.  11.     [6]  An  office,  or 
'.mploy.  Num.  8.  26. 
To  lay  any  thing  to  one's  charge,  is  to  accuse 
him  of   '.,  and  jirostcute  and  pimish  htm  for  it, 
Psal.  "35.  11. 
To  have  the  charge  of  any  thing,  to  be  intrusted 
xoilh  it,  cr  tn  hare  the  oversiirht  and  manage- 
ment of  it.  Acts  8.  27. 
Omi.  26.  5.  Abraham  kept  my  c.  and  my  statutes 
',]8.6.l8aac  gave  Jacob  a  c.  saying,  not  take  a  wife 
71 


CHA 

Exod.  6.  13.  the  Lord  gave  Moses  and  Aaron  a  c. 
jVum.  4.  31.  this  u  the  c.  of  their  burden  in  taberii. 

8.26.thu8  Shalt  do  to  the  Levites,  touching  their  c. 

9. 19.  then  Israel  kept  the  c.  ol  the  Lord,  23. 

27.  23.  Aloses  gave  Joshua  a  c.  Vtul.  31.  23. 
J>eut.2l.  8.  lay  not  innocent  blood  to  people's  c. 
Josh.  22.  3.  Keubcniles  have  kept  c.  of  the  Lord 
•2i>am.  17.  t  23.  Ahithophel  gave  c.  cuncerning 

18.  5.  the  king  gave  c.  concerning  Absalom 
lliitigs  11.28.  Jeroboamniaderuler  over  all  the  c. 
2Ai;i»-s7. 17.  the  Lord  lohave  the  c.  of  the  gate 
1CA7UH.  9.  27.  because  the  c.  was  upon  them 

20.  t  30.  of  llebronites  1700  over  the  c. 
~C/ir.  30. 17.  Levites  had  the  c.  of  killing  passovcrs 
AVA.  7.  2.  1  gave  Hanani  c.  over  Jerusalem 
Ksth.  3.  9.  ot  those  that  had  c.  of  the  business 
./ob  34.  13.  who  hath  given  him  a  c.  over  the  earth  1 
Psal.  35.  11.  they  laid  to  my  c.  things  1  knew  not 

109.  t  tJ.  let  another  take  his  c.  .^cls  1. 1  20. 
.7er.39.1  l.king  of  Bab.gave  c.  concerning  Jeremiah 

47.  7.  Lord  hath  given  it  a  c.  against  Aslikelon 
Ezck.9. 1.  cause  them  that  have  c.  ever  the  city 

44.8.  ye  hare  not  kept  the  c.  of  my  holy  things 
15.  the  priests  that  kept  tlie  c.  of  my  sanctuary 

48.  11.  priests  kept  my  c.  who  went  not  astray 
Mcts  7.  liO.  Lord,  lay  not  this  sin  lo  their  c. 

8.  27.  a  eunuch,  who  had  c.  of  all  her  treasure 

12.  1 25.  when  Barnabas  and  Saul  fulfilled  their  c. 
16. 24.  received  such  a  c.  thrust  them  into  prison 
23.  29.  nothing  laid  to  his  c.  worthy  of  death 

/io»i.8.33.who  shall  lay  any  tiling  toc.of  God's  elect 
ICor.  9. 18.  make  the  gospel  ot  Christ  without  c. 
1  Tim.  1. 18.  this  c.  I  commit  to  tliee,  son  Timothy 
•2Tim.  4. 16.  1  pray  it  may  not  be  laid  to  their  c. 
See  Keep. 
Give  CHARGE. 
JVum.  27. 19.  and  give  Joshua  a  c.  in  their  sight 
JUcut.  31.  14.  call  Joshua  that  I  may  giue  him  a  c. 
2.S'nm.  14.  8.  go,  and  I  will  give  c.  concerning  thee 
2A7«o-s20.tl.  ^jocc.  concerning  house,  Isa.'SS.jl. 
ICAr.  22.12.  only  the  Lord  ^iuc  thee  wisdom  and  c. 
Ps.91.  11.  ^jDchis  angels c.  Mat. 4.6.  J^ukei.  10. 
Isa.  10.  6.  will  1  gioe  him  a  c.  to  take  the  spoil 
1  Tim.  5.  7.  these  things  give  in  c.  that  they  be 

6.13.  I^ioctheec.in  sight  of  God,  who  quickeneth 

CHARGE. 
Exod.  19. 21.  the  Lord  said,  go  down,  c.  the  people 
Mum.  5.  19.  the  priest  shall  c.  her  by  an  oath 
Deut.  3.  28.  but  c.  Joshua  and  encourage  him 
.'Vi'A.  10.  32.  to  c.  ourselves  yearly  with  third  part 
Esth.  4.  8.  c.  Esther  that  she  go  in  to  the  king 
Cant.2.'!.  I  c.  you,  O  ye  daughters,  3.  5.  |  5. 8.  |  8. 4. 

5.  9.  what  is  thy  beloved,  that  thou  dost  so  c.  us? 
Mark  9. 25.  I  c.  thee  come  out  and  enter  no  more 
1  Thess.  5.  27.  I  c.  you  that  this  epistle  be  read 
1  Tim.  1.  3.  c.  that  they  teach  no  other  doctrine 

5.21. 1  c.  thee  before  God  and  J.Christ,  2  7'im.4.1. 

6. 17.  e.  them  that  are  rich  in  this  world,  that  they 

CHARGEABLE. 
2Sam.  13.  25.  let  us  not  all  go,  lest  we  be  c.  to  thee 
JVeh.  5.  15.  the  former  governors  were  c.  to  people 
2C'»r.  11.  9.  when  with  you,  I  was  c.  to  no  man 
1  TAcs.S. 9. because  we  would  not  bee.  to  any  ofyou 
'2Thes.  3.  8.  that  we  might  not  be  c.  to  any  ofyou 

CHARGED. 
Oen.  26.  11.  Abimelech  e.  his  people,  saying 

28.  1.  Isaac  called  Jacob,  and  e.  him,  and  said 
40.  4.  captain  of  the  guard  c.  Joseph  with  them 

49.  29.  Jacob  c.  his  sons,  and  said  to  them,  I  am 

50.  t  16.  they  c.  a  messenger  to  Joseph 
Etod.  1.  22.  Pharaoh  c.  all  his  people,  saying 
Deut.  1. 16.  I  c.  your  judges  at  that  time,  saying 

24.5.  nor  shall  he  be  c.  with  any  business,  but  free 
27.  1] .  Moses  c.  the  jieojile  the  same  day,  saying 
l.Sara. 14.27. Jonathan  heard  not  when  Saul  c.peop. 
2Sam.  18. 12.  for  in  our  hearing  tlie  king  c.  thee 
lA7n^s2.1.Uavid  c.  Solomon  his  son, saying,  I  go 
43.  the  commandment  that  I  have  c.  tiioe  with 

13.  9.  so  was  It  c.  me  by  the  word  of  the  Lord 
2CAr.  36. 23.  Lord  c.  me  to  build  house,  Ezra  1.0. 
.IVVA.  13.  19.  c.  they  not  bo  opened  till  after  sabbath 
/^.9£A.2.10.not  shewed  people, as  Mordecai  c.her,20. 
.fob  1.  22.  Job  sinned  not,  nor  c.  God  foolishly 

4.  18.  and  his  angels  he  c.  with  folly 
Jer.  32.  13.  I  c.  Baruch  before  them,  saying 
35.8.have  obeyed  Jonadab  in  all  that  he  hath  e.us 
Mat.  9.  30.  Jesus  straitly  c.  thorn,  saying,  see  tliat 
no  man  know  it,  Mark  5.  43.  J.ukc  9.  21. 
]2.16.Jcsu3  e.not  to  make  him  known,Mark  3.12. 
.1/ttrA7.36.  c.  nottotell,8.30.|  9.9.  AnAe 5.14. 18.56. 
10.  48.  many  e.  him  that  he  should  hold  his  peace 
Rom.3. 1 9.  we  have  e.  Jews  and  Gentiles  under  sin 
1  Thess.  2.  11.  we  c.  every  one  ofyou  as  a  father 
1  Tim.  5. 16.  and  let  not  church  be  c.  that  it  may 

CHARGEDST. 
Exod.  19.  23.  thou  c.  us,  saving,  set  bounds  about 

CHARGER,  S. 
JVum.  7. 13.  his  offering  was  one  silver  c.  19.  25, 
31,37,43,49,61,67,73,79. 
84.  this  was  tl>e  dedication  of  the  altar,  twelve  c. 


CHA 

JVum.  7.  85.  each  c.  of  silver  weighing  130  shekela 
Ezra  1.9.  tliik  is  number  of  them,  one  tliousaudc 
Mat.  14. 8.  give  John  Bajn.  head  in  a  c.  Murk  6.25 

CllAlK.La. 
2Chron.  8. 14.  he  appointed  the  Levites  to  their  c 
31.  17.  from  20  years  in  their  c.  by  courses 
35.2.ho  set  priests  in  their  t.  and  encouraged  them 
yJctsiil.  24.  them  take,  and  be  at  c.  with  lliem 
iCor.  9.  7.  who  goeth  a  warfare  at  his  own  c.7 

CHARGLST. 
25am.  3.  8:  thou  c.  nic  to  day  with  a  fault 

CH  ARGUN  G. 
.^cts  16.  23.  c.  the  jailer  to  keep  them  safely 
i'l'im.  2. 14.  c.  that  they  strive  not  about  woids 

CHARIOT 
Signifies,  [1]  A  sort  of  light  coach.  Gen.  46.  29. 
[~\  Chariuls  uf  war,  out  of  which  some  of  the 
ancients  fought,  thiy  were  armed  withjaoelina 
and  scythes  in  several  places,  which  tore  every 
thing  they  met  with  to  pieces,  Exod.  14. 7.  Josh. 
11.4.     [ii]  Hosts,  or  armies,  I'sai.dii.n.     [4] 
Human,ur  worldly  things,  wherein  men  repeat 
their  confidence,  I'sal.  20.  7. 
Elijah  is  called  the  chariot  of  Israel  and  horse- 
mcn  thereof,  2  Kings  2.  12.  that  is,  By  his  ex- 
ample,  his  counsels , his  pray  ers , and  power  Kit^ 
(Jod,  he  did  more  for  the  di fence  and  preserva- 
tion of  Israel,  than  all  their  chariots  and  horses, 
and  other  warlike  provisions. 
Solomon  made  a  chariot  of  the  wood  of  Lebanon, 
Cant.  3.  9.     Christ,  of  whom  Solomon  was  a 
type,  established  for  the  glory  of  his  grace  the 
new  covenant,  or  t/ie  gospel,  whereby  believers 
are  carried  to  heaven;  which  is  of  an  cverlast- 
ing  nature,  Heb.  13.  20.     Rev.  14.  6. 
Gen.  41.  43.  he  made  him  to  ride  in  the  second  c. 
Exod.  14.  25.  the  Lord  took  off  their  c.  wheels 
IKings  7.33.  the  wheels  like  the  work  of  a  c.  wheel 

18.  44.  prepare  thy  c.  and  get  thee  down 

20.  25.  number  thee  c.  for  c.  and  we  will  fight 
33.  he  caused  him  to  come  up  into  the  e. 

22.  35.  the  blood  ran  into  the  midst  of  the  c. 
33.  one  washed  the  c.  in  the  pool  of  Samaria 

2A'in^rs2. 11.  there  appeared  ac.  of  fire  and  horses 
12.  cried,  my  father,  the  c.  of  Israel,  13.  14. 

5.  21.  he  lighted  from  the  c.  to  meet  Gehazi 

9.  16.  Jehu  rode  in  a  c.  ||  27.  smite  him  in  the  e. 
28.  servants  carried  him  in  a  c.  to  Jerus.  23.  30. 
1  Chron.  28.  IS.  gave  gold  for  the  pattern  of  the  c. 
'HCIiron.  35.24.  his  servants  took  him  outof  th«  c 
Psal.  46.  9.  he  burnelh  the  e.  in  the  fire 

76.  6.  c.  and  horse  are  cast  into  a  dead  sleep 
Cant.  3.  9.  made  a  c.  of  the  wood  of  Lebanon 
Isa.  21.  7.  he  saw  a  e.  with  horsemen,  ae.  of  as6C4 
9.  here  Cometh  a  c.  of  men  with  horsemen 

43.  17.  who  bringeth  forth  the  c.  and  horse 
Jer.  51.  21.  will  I  break  in  pieces  the  c.  and  rid«f 
Mic.  1.  13.  bind  the  e.  to  the  swift  beast 
'/.ech.  6.2.  first  c.  red  horses,  second  c.  black  horses 

9.  10.  I  will  cut  off  the  c.  from  Ephraim 
.lets  8. 29.  said,  go  near  and  join  thyself  to  his  c. 

38.  he  commanded  the  c.  to  stand  still 
His  CHARIOT. 
Gen.  46.  29.  Joseph  made  ready  his  c.  and  went 
Exod.  14.  6.  Pharaoh  made  ready  his  r.  and  took 
Judg.  4. 15.  Sisera  lighted  off  Aj.v  c.  and  tied  away 
5.  28.  why  is  his  c.  so  long  in  coming?  why  tarry 
1  A"in^s]2.18.'king  made  speed  toAisc.2CAr.10.18. 
22.  34.  he  said  to  the  driver  of  Ai*  c.  turn  thy  hand 
35.  Ahab  was  stayed  up  in  hisc.  and  died  at  even 
'ih'ings  5.  9.  Naaman  came  with  his  c-  and  stood 
26.  when  the  man  turned  again  from  his  c. 
9.21. Aisc. was  made  ready,  went  out  each  in  hise 
24.  smote  Jehoram,  and  he  sunk  down  iahis  c. 

10.  10.  so  they  made  him  to  ride  in  his  c. 
Psal.  104.  3.  who  niakcth  the  clouds  his  c. 
Jer.  4.  13.  his  c.  shall  be  as  a  whirlwind 

Acts  8. 28.  sitting  in  his  c.  read  Esaias  the  propb«t 

CHARIO'i'-CITIES. 
2CAr.  1. 14.  horsemen  which  he  placed  in  c.-citie3 

8.  6.  Solomon  built  c.-cities,  and  store  ci7;f » 

9.  25.  bestowed  in  the  c.-cities  and  with  the  kin^ 

CHARIOT-HORSES. 
2.SaOT.  8.4.  Duvid  houghed  all  c.-horsrs,  ICAr.lS.n 
2Kings  7.  14.  they  took  therefore  two  c.-horses 

CliARIOT-MAN. 
2CAr.  18.  33.  he  said  to  the  c.-man,  turn  thy  hand 

CHARIOTS. 
Gen.  50. 9.  there  went  up  with  Joseph  c.  and  horse 
Exod.  14.  7.  Pharaoh  took  600  c.  and  all  the  c. 
17.  I  will  get  honour  upon  his  c.  and  horsemen 

23.  the  waters  covered  all  the  c.  and  all  the  host 
15.  4.  Pharaoh's  e.  and  host  hath  lie  cast  into  sea 

19.  for  the  horse  of  Pharaoh  went  in  with  his  « 
.Tosh.  17. 16.  have  c.  of  iron,  18.  Judg.  1. 19.,  |  4.  3. 
.Judg.  4. 15.  Lord  discomfited  Sisera  and  all'his  t. 

5.  28.  she  cried,  why  tarry  the  wheels  of  his  c.7 
iSam.  8.  11. the  king  willappoinl  them  for  his  «, 

13. 5.  Philistines,  to  fight  against  Israel,  30,ll00t. 
2.Sam.  1.6.  the  c.  and  horsemen  followed  after  Saul 


M'^ 


CHA 

ZSam.  10.  18.  D.  slew  the  men  of  700  c.  of  Syrians 
IKtngs  lU.-.ilJ.!5oloHioii  ha<114(J0  c.l:2,U0UI]orst;iin;n 
l(i.  \).  Ziiiiri  captain  ul  lialt'tiia  c.  cuiispired 
'■iri.  'i'Z.  when  tliu  capts.  ot'lhu  c.  saw  Juiiushaphat 
a  Kings  l'.i.  7.  left  but  ten  c.  and  til'ty  liorsenien 

18.  :H-  liow  put  thy  trust  on  Kgypt  for  c.  /sa.  30.9. 
Psal.  tiri.  17.  the  c.  of  God  are  twentynhousand 
Cant.  ti.  1-.  my  soul  like  the  c.  of  Ainini-nadib 
Jsa.  2.  7.  full  of  horses,  nor  is  any  end  of  their  c. 
iti.  18.  c.  of  thy  glory  be  the  shame  of  thy  lord 
31.  1.  woe  to  them  that  trust  in  c.  because  many 
37.  iJ4.  by  the  multitude  of  my  c.  am  I  come  up 
CO.  15.  behold  the  Lord  will  come  with  lire  and 
c.  like  a  whirlwind,  Jcr.  4. 13.  J  Jan.  11.  40. 
Jtr.  47. 3.  at  rushing  of  his  c.  fathers  not  look  back 
Ezek.  23.  24.  they  shall  come  against  thee  with  c. 
20.  lU.  thy  walls'shall  shake  at  the  noise  of  the  t. 
Joel  2.  5.  like  the  noise  of  the  c.  shall  they  leap 
JUic.  a.  10.  1  will  cut  otl"  horses,  and  destroy  thy  c. 
JfaA.  2.  3.  the  c.  shall  be  with  (laming  torches 
4. the  c.sliall  rage  in  Btrecti;  and  jostle  one  another 
13.  I  am  against,  and  will  burn  her  c.  in  smoke 
Ha(r.  2.  22.  1  will  overthrow  the  e.  and  those  ride 
Rev.  y.9.  the  sound  of  their  wings  as  the  sound  of  c. 

CHARIOT8  with  korscs. 
Exod.  14.  9.  all  the  horses  and  c.  of  I'haraoh,  23. 
Veut.  11.  4.  what  he  did  to  their  horses  and  c. 
20.  1.  when  thou  seest  horses  and  e.  fear  not 
Josh.  11.  0.  thou  shall  hough  thaiihvrscs,  burn  c. 
9.Joshua  houghed  Aorscs,  burntlheir  c.  with  tire 
2Sam.  15.  1.  Absalom  prepared  horses  and  c. 
lKinffs20.  1.  against  Samaria  with  c.  and  horses 
2A'i7iD-s6.17.lhe  mountain  was  full  ofc.  und  horses 
7.  6.  the  Syrians  to  hear  a  noise  of  horses  and  c. 
10.  2.  are  with  you  c.  and  horses,  a  fenced  city 
Paal.  20.  7.  some  trust  in  c.  and  some  in  horses 
Cant.  1. 9.  compared  thee  to  horses  in  Pharaoh's  c. 
/so.  00.  20.  bring  your  brethren  on  horses  and  in  c. 
Jer.  17.  25.  shall  enter  princes  riding  in  c.  22.  4. 
40.  9.  come  up,  ye  horses,  and  rage,  ye  c. 
50.  37.  a  sword  is  upon  their  horses  and  their  c. 
Eiek.  26.  7.  upon  Tyrus  Nebuchadnezzar  with  c. 
39.20.shall  be  filled  at  my  table  with  horses  and  c. 
JVoA.  3.  2.  noise  of  prancing  horses  and  jumping  c. 
.^a6.3.8.didst  ride  on  thy  Aorse.?and  c.ofsalvation 
Rev.  18. 13.  no  man  buys  their  horses  and  c. 

CHARITABLY. 
Rom.  14.  15.  brother  grieved,  now  walkest  not  c. 

CHARITY 
In  a  principle  of  prevailina-  lone  to  God  andgood 
will  to  men,  which  effectually  inclines  one  en- 
dued with  it  to  glorify  God,  and  to  do  good  to 
others;  to  be  patient,  slow  to  anger,  andready 
to  forgive  wrongs;  to  show  kindness  to  all,  and 
seek  the  good  of  others,  though  with  prejudice 
to  himsilf.  Ji  person  endued  therewith  does 
not  interpret  doubtful  things  to  the  worst  sense, 
but  the  best;  is  sorry  for  the  sins  of  others,  but 
rijoices  when  any  one  does  well,  and  is  apt  to 
bear  with  their  failings  and  infirmities;  and 
lastly,  this  grace  is  never  lost,  but  goes  with 
us  into  another  world,  and  is  exercised  there, 
1  Cor.  13.  1,  4,  &c. 
J2o7n.l4.t  15.  now  walkest  thou  not  according  to  c. 
iCor.  8.  1.  knowledge  pufTcth  up,  but  c.  edifietli 

13.  1.  speak  with  tongues^  and  have  not  c.  2,  3. 
4.  c.  suft'ereth  long,  and  is  kind,  e.  envieth  not 
13.  faith,  hope,  c.  but  the  greatest  of  these  is  c. 

14.  1.  follow  after  c.  and  desire  spiritual  gifts 
16.  14.  let  all  your  things  be  done  with  c. 

Col.  3.  14.  above  nil  these  things  put  on  c. 

1  TAc.?. 3.0. brought  good  tidings  of  your  faith  and  c. 
iThes.  1.  3.  c.  toward  each  other  aboundeth 
ITint.  1.  5.  now  the  end  of  the  commnndnientis  c. 

2.  15.  be  saved  iflliey  continue  in  faith  and  e. 

4.  12.  be  an  example  in  c.  in  spirit,  in  faith 

2  Tim.  2.  22.  follow  righteousness ;  faith,  c.  peace 

3.  10.  hast  fully  known  my  doctrine,  life,  faith,  c. 
Tit.  2.  2.  aged  m"n  be  sober,  sound  in  faith,  in  c. 
I  Pet.  4.  8.  have  fervent  c.  for  c.  shall  cover  sins 

5.  14.  greet  ye  one  another  with  a  kiss  of  c. 
ZPet.  1.  7.  and  to  brotherly-kindness  c. 
3./oAn6.»trangers  who  have  borne  witness  of  thy  c. 
Jude  12.  these  are  spots  in  your  feasts  of  c. 
Rev.  2.  19.  I  know  ihy  works,  and  c.  and  service 

niAUMKI). 
Jer.  8. 17. 1  will  send  serpents  which  will  not  be  c. 

CIIAIIMER,  S. 
75ei/t. 18.11  there  shall  not  be  found  among  you  ac. 
Psal.  ."VS. 5.  n'll  hearken  to  the  voice  of  c.  charming 
t  not  hearken  to  r.  be  the  e.  never  »o  cunning 
CM  ASK. 
J^ev.  26.  7.  ye  shall  c.  your  enemi''ii,  and  thoy  fall 
8.  and  five  of  you  shall  r.  a  hundred 
36.  and  the  sound  of  a  shaking  leaf  slmll  c.  them 
7>(Mi«..12.  30.  how  should  one  r.  10(K).  .losh.  23.10. 
Psal.  35.  5.  lei  the  nncel  of  the  !,ord  r.  them 

CIIASEO,  KTII,  INC. 

Deut.  1.  44.  and  the  .Amorites  e.  you  as  heps  do 

Judg.  9. 40.  Abimelech  r.  him,  he  fled  before  him 

73 


CHE 

Judg.  20.  43.  they  inclosed  Benjamites  and  c.  them 
1  A«Hi.l7. 53.  Israel  returned  from  c.  the  I'liilistines 
jVeh.  13.  28.  therelbre  1  c.  him  from  me 
Job  18.  18.  he  shall  be  c.  out  of  the  world 
21).  8.  he  shall  be  c.  away  as  a  vusion  of  the  night 
Prov.  19.  20.  and  he  thatc.  away  his  mother 
Isa.  13. 14.  it  shall  be  as  the  c.  roe,  as  a  sheep  that 
17.  13.  they  shall  be  c.  as  the  chatf  before  the  wind 
Lam.  3.  52.  mine  enemiea  c.  me  sore  like  a  bird 
1  Thess.  2. 1 15.  killed  their  prophets,  and  c.  us  out 

CHASTE. 
2Cor.  11.2.  that  I  may  present  you  as  a  c.  virgin 
'J'lt.  2.  5.  that  the  young  women  be  c.  obedient 
1  Pet.  3.  2  while  they  behold  your  c.  conversation 

CHASTEN 
Signifies,  [1]  To  correct  in  love,  Psal.  118.  18. 
Heb.  12.  5,  6.     [2J  To  punish  in  justice,  Lev. 
20.  28.     [3]  To  humble  one's  self  before  Hod  by 
fasting  and  prayer,  Uan.  10.  12. 
The  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  him,  Tsa. 
53.5.    That  punishment  by  which  uur/zcucc, that 
is,  our  reconciliation  to  (rod,  and  sulpaliun  or 
happiness,  were  to  be  purchased,  was  laid  upon 
Christ  by  (rod's justice,  with  his  own  consent. 
2Sam.  7.  14.  I  will  c.  him  with  the  rod  of  men 
Psal.  0.  1.  ncn'  c.  mo  in  thy  hot  displeasure,  38. 1. 
Prov.  19. 18.  c.  thy  son  while  there  is  hope,  spare 
JJan.  10.  12.  thou  didst  c.  thyself  before  thy  God 
Hev.  3.  19.  as  many  as  I  love  I  rebuke  and  c. 

CHASTENED. 
Deut.^l.  18.  they  havec.  him,  he  will  not  hearken 
Job  33.  19.  he  is  c.  also  with  pain  on  his  bed 
Psal.  09.  10.  1  wept,  and  c.  my  soul  with  fasting 
73.  14.  all  day  been  plagued,  and  c.  every  morning 
118.  18.  Lord  hath  c.  me  sore,  he  hath  not  given 
IJos.  7.t  15.  though  I  havoc,  they  imagine  mischief 
ICor.  11.32.  we  are  c.  that  we  be  not  condemned 
'2Cor.  0.  9.  as  dying,  yet  live,  as  c.  and  not  killed 
Jleb.  12.  10.  for  they  verily  for  a  few  days  c.  us 

CHASTENEST,  ETH,  1N(;. 
Dent.  8.  5.  as  a  man  c.  his  -son,  so  the  Lord  c.  thee 
Job  5.17.  happy  whom  God  correcteth  ;  despise  not 
thou  c.  of  Almighty,  Prov.  3.  11.  /Jib.  12.5. 
Psal.  94.  12.  blessed  is  the  man  whom  thou  c. 
Prov.  13.  24.  but  he  that  loveth  him  c.  betimes 
/.srt.20.10. poured  out  a  prayer  when  r .was  on  them 
Hih.  12.  0.  for  whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  c. 
7.  if  ye  endure  c.  what  son  whom  father  c.  not? 
1  l.no  c-  for  present  seems  to  be  joyous,  but  gricv. 
CHASTISE. 
Lev.  26.  28.  1  will  c.  you  seven  times  for  your  sins 
IJeut.  22.18.  elders  shall  take  the  man  and  c.  him 
IKings  12.11.  I  will  add  to  your  yoke,  I  will  c. 
you  with  scorpions,  14.  iChron.  10.  11,14. 
Uos.  7.  12.  1  will  c.  them  as  their  congregation 
hath  heard 
10.  10.  it  is  my  desire  that  I  should  c.  them 
l^ukc  23. 10.  I  will  c.  him,  and  release  him,  22. 

CHASTISED,  ETH. 

IKings  12.  11.  did  lade  with  heavy  yoke;  father 

hath  c.  you  with  whips,  14.  2CAr.  10.  II,  14. 

Ps.  94.  10.  he  that  c.  heathen,  shall  not  he  correct  ? 

Jer.  31.  18.  hast  c.  me,  and  1  was  c.  turn  thou  me 

CHASTISEMENT. 
Deut.  11.  2.  your  children  who  hath  not  seen  the  c 
Job  34.  31.  I  have  borne  c.  I  will  not  otfend  more 
Psal.  73.  t  14.  my  c.  was  every  morning 
Jsa.  53.  5.  the  c.  of  our  peace  was  upon  him 
.Jer.  30.14.  have  wounded  with  thee,  of  a  cruel  one 
//c4.12.8.if  withoutc.lhen  are  ye  ba«tard8,not8on8 

CHANT. 
Amos  O.S.they  c.  to  the  sound  of  the  viol  and  invent 

CHATTER. 
Isa.  38.  14.  like  a  crane  or  swallow,  so  did  I  c. 

CHAWS. 

Eiek.  29.  4.  but  I  will  put  hooks  in  thy  c.  38.  4. 

CuEAKKfl, ;  see  ('heerful. 

CHECK. 

Job  20.  3.  I  have  heard  the  r.  of  my  reproach 

CHECK  LR-WORK. 
lA'in^«7.17.IIirain  made  netsof  c.-io.and  wreaths 

CHEKK. 
IKings  22.24.  Zedekiah  smote  Micninh  on  the  r. 
said,  which  way  Spirit  of  Lord,  2CAro?i.  18.2.'). 
Job  18.  10.  have  smitten  ineon  llioc.  reproachfully 
/,ani.3. 30.  hegivelli  his  r.  to  him  Ihnt  siniteth  him 
Mic-.t-l.  shall  smite  the  Judge  with  a  rod  on  the  c. 
J.ukc  6.29.to  him  siniteth  one  c.  oflcr  also  the  other 

wi>a<chei:k. 

Mat.  5. 39.imito  thee  on  t  by  right  c.  turn  the  other 

cheek-hone. 

Ps.  3.  7.  hast  smitten  all  mine  enemies  on  e.-bonr 

CHEKKS. 
Deut.  IH.  3.  shall  give  to  priest  the  two  c.  and  maw 
Cnnl.  I.  10.  thy  c.  are  comely  with  rows  of  jewels 
5.  lit.  his  c.  are  as  a  bed  of  spices,  as  sweet  flowers 
/.so..''i0.fi.  I  pave  my  c.  to  ihem  that  plucked  olf  hair 
I, am.  1.2.  she  weepetli,  and  her  tears  are  on  her  r. 

CHEEK-TEETH. 
Joel  l.G.nalioD  come  up,bath  c-tecth  of  a  great  lion 


CHE 

CHEER. 

Deut.  24.  5.  and  shall  c.  up  his  wife  he  hath  takes 
Keel.  11. 9.  let  thy  heart  c.  thee  in  days  of  thy  youth 

CHEER. 
Prov.  17. 1 1.  than  a  house  full  of  good  c.  with  strife 
wWat.9.2.  son,  be  of  good  r.  thy  sins  be  lorgiven  tlieo 
14.27.  be  ol  good  c.  it  is  1,  be  not  alraid,.)/arA-  0.50. 
John  10. 33.  be  of  good  c.  1  have  overcome  world 
.,'/ct.<23.  11.  Blood  by  him  and  said,  be  of  good  c.P. 

27.  22.  and  now  I  exhort  you  to  be  of  good  c. 
25.  wherefore  sirs,  be  of  good  c.  lor  1  believe  God 
30.  then  were  they  all  ol  good  c.  and  took  meat 

CHEEREIH. 

Judg.  9. 13.  leave  my  wine,  which  c.  God  and  man 
CHEERFUL. 

Prov,  15. 13.  merry  heart  maketh  a  c.  countenance 

ZmA.8.  19.  shall  be  to  house  of  J  udah  joy  and  c.  f 
9. 17.  corn  shall  make  young  men  c.  and  new  wine 

2C'or.  9.7.  or  of  necessity,  for  God  loveth  a  c.givet 
CHEEREULNESS. 

Jiom.  12.  8.  he  that  shewelh  mercy  with  e. 
CHEERFULLY. 

JJcts  24.  10.  I  do  the  more  c.  answer  for  myself 
CHEESE,  S. 

\Sam.  17.  18.  carry  these  ten  c.  to  the  captain 

■J-'iaoi.  17. 29.  liarzillai  brought  slu'e|i  and  c.  to  D. 

Job  10.  10.  hast  thou  not  curdled  me  like  c? 
CHERISH. 

IKings  1.2.  let  her  c.  him,  and  lie  in  thy  bosom 
CHERISHED. 

IKings  1.4.  the  damsel  was  fair  and  c.  the  king 
CHERISHETH. 

Pph.  5.  29.  c.  his  own  flesh,  as  the  Lord  the  church 

1  7'At»s.2.7.  were  gentle,  even  as  a  nurse  c  childteu 
CHERUB. 

This  word  in  tAfllebrew  signifie.ifi\\neas  of  know- 
ledge ;  a7id  angels  are  so  called  from  their  ez- 
(juisite  knowledge,  and  were  therefore  used  for 
the  punishment  of  ;ho71,  who  sinned  by  affecting 
divine  knowledge,  Oen.  3.  m.  'J'here  is  but  an 
obscure  description  given  us  in  scripture  of 
these  cherubims,  which  Moses  placed  upon  the 
ark  of  the  corenant,  Exod.  25.  18.  as  well  as  of 
those  which  (jod  posted  at  the  entrance  of  that 
delightful  garden  out  of  which  he  had  driven 
Adam  and  Eve.  Put  it  is  probable  that  both 
one  and  the  other  had  a  human  figure,  since  it  is 
said  of  those  which  were  placed  at  the  entrance 
of  Parndisr,  that  they  hnd  their  station  there 
assigned  them,  to  guard  the  entrance  to  it,  and 
held  a  flaming  swurd  in  Ihrir  hands.  And  Eze- 
\i\t:\compares  the  king  of  Tyre  to  the  cherub  that 
covered  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  Ezek.  28.  14. 
that  is,  he  was  like  to  this  cherub,  glittering  all 
over  with  gold  and  glory.  Moses  says,  that  two 
cherubims  covered  the  mercy-sent  .with  their 
wings  extended  on  both  sides,  and  looked  one  to 
another,  having  their  faces  turned  toward  the 
mercy-seat  which  covered  the  ark.  (iod  is  sup- 
posed to  sit  on  the  mercy-seat,  whose  fad  the 
angels  in  heaven  always  behold, and  upon  whom 
their  eyes  arc  fired  to  observe  and  riceire  his 
commands,  and  toward  Christ,  the  true  Propi- 
tiatory, which  mystery  thry  desire  to  took  into, 
1  Pet. 1.12.  not  envying  mankind  their  near  and 
happy  relation  to  him,  but  taking  pleasure  m 
the  contemplation  of  it.  ^ioneti  liki  wise  calls 
those  lepresentutions  which  were  made  in  em- 
broideries upon  the  veils  of  the  tabernacle, 
cherubims  ot  cunning  work.  Find.  26.  1. 

Exod.  25.  19.  make  one  c.  on  oiw  end,  and  the 
other  c.  on  the  other  end,  37.  8. 

2.S"am.  22.  11.  he  rode  upon  a  c.  I' sal.  18. 10. 

IKings  6.  25.  and  the  other  c.  was  ten  cubits 
20.  the  height  of  one  r. ten  cubits, so  of  the  other 

Kick.  U.  3.  the  glory  of  God  was  gone  up  from  the 

c.  to  the  threshold  of  the  house,  10.4. 

10. 7.  and  one  c.  stretched  forth  bis  hand  from  the 

14.  first  face  was  the  face  of  a  c.  second  of  a  man 

28.  14.  thou  art  the  anointed  r.  that  rovereth 
16.  and  I  will  destroy  thee,  O  covering*;. 

41. 18.  between  n  <•.  and  n  r.  every  r.  had  two  face* 

CHERUBIMS". 
Gm.  3.24.  he  placed  at  the  east  of  the  garden  c. 
Kxod.  25.  18.  thou  sbnit  make  two  r.  of  gold 
26.  1.  the  tabernacle  of  r.  ofciinning  work   31. 
;17.  7.  he  made  two  c.  of  beaten  go  d  of  one  piece 
IKings  6.  2:1.  within  the  oracle  he  mnde  two  e. 
25.  both  the  r.  were  of  one  measure  nnd  one  size 
28.  and  he  overlaid  the  r.  willi  gohl 
8. 7.  the  e.  covered  the  ark,  2rAr.  5. 8.  Jlrb.  9.  5. 
2rAr.  3. 1(1.  ill  the  most  holy  place  beinadetwoc. 
Etek.  10.  5.  the  sounil  of  ihn  f.  wings  was  heard 
16.  wbenthee.  went, (he  wheels  wenl  bylhem 
jO.  c.  lirt  up  (heir  wings  nnd  mounted,  11.  22. 
Hetween  the  CHERUBIMS. 
Frnd.  25. 22.will  meet  (bee  from  brfirrrn  the  two  o. 
.\'um.  7.  89.  from  hetw.  the  (wor.  he  spiike  In  liiir 
I.*>rtni.4.4.  llipnik  ofLoril  which  dwctlelh  brlwrei 
the  c.  asam.  0  2.  iKwgs  19. 15.  Jta.  37.  ]< 


CHI 

Psal.  80. 1.  that  dwelleth  between  the  c.  shine  forth 
99  1.  he  sitleth  between  the  c.  let  earth  bo  moved 
Eiek.  lO.i.  HU  with  coals  of  tire  t'rom  between  tlu  c. 
7.haiid  iVom  between  c. to  fire  that  was  between  c 
CllESNUT-TREE,  S. 
Ocn.  30.  37.  and  Jacob  took  him  rods  o( c.-tree 
Ezek.  31. 8.  the  c.-trecs  wore  not  like  his  branches 

CHEST,  S 

ZKings  12.9.Jehoiada  took  c.  and  bored  hole  in  lid 
2Chr.  'J4.  8.  at  king's  commandment  they  madec. 
11.  high-priest's  officer  cainc,  and  emptied  the  c. 
Ezek.  27.  24.  thy  merchants  in  c.  of  rich  apparel 

CHEW. 
Z.et;.11.4.not  eat  of  them  that  c.  the  cad,Deut.l4.7 

CHEWED. 
JVum.ll.  33.  ere  the  flesh  was  c.  wrath  was  kindled 

CHEWETH. 

Lev.  11. 4.  because  he  c.  the  cud,  5, 0.  Deut.li.  6. 

7.  yet  the  swine  c.  not  the  cud,  l)eut.  14.  8. 

CHICKENS. 

^/at.  23.37.  gathered  even  as  a  hcngatliereth  her  c. 

CHIDE 

Exod.  17.  2.  the  people  did  c.  why  c.  you  with  me? 
Judff.  8. 1.  the  men  of  Ephraim  did  c.  with  Gideon 
Psal.  103.  9.  he  will  not  always  c.  not  keep  anger 

CHIDING 
Ezod.  17. 7.  called  Meribah,  because  of  c.  of  Israel 

CHIEF 

Signifies,  [1]  The  principal  person  of  a  family, 
congregation,  tribe,  army,  &c.  Num.  3.  30 
Deut.1.15.  1  Sam.  14.38.  2  Sam.  5. 8.  [2]  The 
best,  or  most  valuable,  1  Sam.  15. 21.  [3J  The 
highest,  or  uppermost,  Mat.  23.  6.  [4J  The 
dearest,  or  most  familiar,¥rov.l6.  28.  [5]  The 
"     '  ~      ' '  tid 


markable  and  wonderful.  Job  40.  19. 
Gen.  37.  t  30.  they  sold  Joseph  to  a  c.  marshal 

40.  9.  the  c.  butler  told  his  dream  to  Joseph 
21.he  restored  the  c.butler  to  his  butlershlp  again 
22.but  hanged  the  c.  baker  as  Joseph  interpreted 
JVum.  3.  32.  Eleazar  shall  be  c.  over  c.  of  Levites 
Devi.  1.  15.  I  took  the  c.  of  your  tribes,  wise  men 
\Sam.  15.  21.  the  people  took  the  c.  of  the  things 
2Sam-23.18.  Abishai  brother  of  Joab  c.  among  three 
\Kings  9.  23.  these  were  the  c.  of  the  officers 
IChron.  5.  2.  for  of  Judah  came  the  c.  ruler 

11.  6.  whosoever  smiteth  the  Jebusites  first  shall 
be  c.  and  captain,  Joab  went  first  and  was  c. 

18. 17.  the  sons  of  David  were  c.  about  the  king 

26.  10.  tlio'  not  first-born,  his  father  made  him  c. 
Ezra  9.  2.  the  rulers  have  been  c.  in  this  trespass 
Jfeh.  11.  3.  these  are  c.  of  the  province  that  dwelt 
Job  12.  24.  he  taketh  away  heart  of  c.  of  people 

29.  25. 1  chose  out  their  way,  and  sat  c.  dwelt  as 

40.  19.  Behemoth  is  the  c.  of  the  ways  of  God 
Psal.  78.  51.  he  smote  c.  of  their  strength,  105. 36. 

137.  6.  if  I  prefer  not  Jerusalem  above  my  c.  joy 
Proi). 1.21.  Wisdom  criethin  c.  place  of  concourse 

S.tSO.nor  had  made  c.  part  of  the  dust  of  the  world 

16.  28.  a  whisperer  separateth  c.  friends 
Cant.  4.  14.  an  orchard  with  all  the  c.  spices 
Isa.  14.  9.  he  stirreth  up  the  c.  ones  of  the  earth 
Jer.  13.  21.  thou  hast  taught  them  as  c.  over  thee 

31.  7.  sing  and  shout  among  the  c.  of  the  nations 

50.  t  36.  a  sword  is  upon  their  c.  stays,  shall  dote 

51.  t  59.  this  Seraiah  was  a  c.  chamberlain 
Lam.l.o.hcT  adversaries  are  the  c.  enemies  prosper 
Ezek.  4.  f  2.  set  c.  leaders  against  Jerusalem  round 

20.  t  40.  there  will  I  require  c.  of  your  oblations 
44.  t  30.  c.  of  the  first  fruits  shall  be  the  priest's 

Dan.  2.  f  14.  Daniel  answer.  Arioch  the  c.  marshal 
11.  41.  the  c.  of  children  of  Ammon  shall  escape 

Amos  6.  1.  which  are  named  c.  of  the  nations 
G.drunk  and  anoint  themselves  with  c.  ointments 

Mat.  20.  27.  whosoever  will  be  c.  among  you,  let 

23.  6.  they  love  the  uppermost  rooms  at  feasts 
and  c.  seats  in  the  synagogues,  Mark  12.  39. 

Mark  6.  21.  Ilerod  made  a  supper  to  his  c.  estates 
J^uke  11.15.  casteth  out  devils  thro'  c.  of  the  devils 

14. 1.  he  went  into  house  of  one  of  the  c.  Pharisees 
7.  he  marked  how  they  chose  the  c.  rooms,  20.46. 

22.  26.  and  he  that  ia  c.  as  he  that  doth  serve 
John  12. 42.  among  c.  rulers  many  believed  on  him 
..Octs  14.  12.  because  Paul  was  the  c.  speaker 

17.  4.  some  believed,  and  of  c.  women  not  a  few 
Eph.  2.  20.  J.  Christ  the  c.  corner-stone,  iPet.%6. 
1  7'irn.l.l5.  Jes.  came  to  save  sinners,  of  whom  I  c. 
lPc£. 5.4. when  c.  Sheph.  shall  appear,  shall  receive 

CHIEF  captain. 

QSam.  5.  8.  who  smiteth  he  shall  be  c.  and  captain 

Acts  21. 31.  tidings  came  to  the  c.  captain  of  band 

S2.  when  they  saw  the  c.  capt.  they  left  beating 

23. 17.  Paul  said,  bring  this  young  man  to  c.  capt. 

24.  7.  c.  captain  Lysias  came  upon  us,  took  him 
22.  c.  captain  shall  come,  I  will  know  uttermost 

CHIEF  captains. 

2Som.23.8.AdinotheTachmonito  sate. among  cap. 

ICAr.  27.  3,  c  of  all  the  captains  for  first  month 

73 


CHI 

2CAro>t.8. 9.  but  Israel  were  c.  of  Solomon's  cff;>t. 
Mcls  25.23.whenAgrippa  was  entered  with  c.  capt. 
Hcv.  6.  15.  rich  men  and  c.  capt.  hid  themselves 

CHIEF  fathers. 
JVum.31.26.thou  and  the  c./a/Aer-i  of  congregation 
ICAr.  9.  34.  these  c.  fathers  of  Levites  were  chief 
24.  31.  the  c.  fathers  of  the  priests  and  Levites 
20.  32.  were  2700  c.  fathers  David  made  rulers 
2C/jr.  26. 12.  whole  number  oic.  fathers  of  mighty 
Ezra  1.5. then  rose  up  thec.of  the/atAtrs  of  Judah 
JVeA.7.70.the  c.of  the/atAcr*  gave  to  the  work,  71. 

CHIEF  house. 

JVuj/t.3.24.  the  c.  of  Aouseof  Gerslionitcs,  Eliasaph 

30.  thec.of  Aouseof  the  Kohathites,  Elizajiiiun 

35.  c.  of  the  house  of  the  Mcrarites,  was  Zuriel 

25. 14.  Zimri  was  of  a  c.  house  among  Simeonites 
15. name  of  woman  wasCozbi,of  a  c.  A.  in  Midian 

Josh.  iS.  14.  out  of  each  e.  house  a  prince  was  sent 

CHIEF  771074,  or  men. 
Lev.  21.  4.  not  defile  himself,  being  a  c.  77(a7i 
IChron.  7.  3-  the  sons  of  Uzzi,  all  of  them  c.  men 

24.  4.  more  c.  men  of  Eleazar,  than  of  Ithamar 
Ezra  5.  10.  the  names  of  the  men  that  were  c. 

7. 28.  I  gathered  together  c.  men  to  go  up  with  me 
Isa.  41.  9.  I  called  thee  from  the  c.  men  thereof 
Acts  13.  50.  but  the  Jews  stirred  up  the  c.  men 

15.  22.  Judas  and  Silas,  t.  men  among  brethren 

28.7.  were  possessions  of  thee.  7;ia7iof  the  island 

CHIEF  priest. 

2Kings  25.  18.  the  capt.  took  Seraiah  the  c.  priest 

IChron.  27.  5.  Benaiah  a  c.pricit  was  third  capt. 

29.  22.  and  anointed  Zadok  to  b-;  c.  priest 
2Chr.  19. 11.  Amariah  c.  p.  is  over  you  in  matters 

26.  20.  and  Azariah  the  c.  priest  looked  on  him 

CHIEF  priests. 
Ezra  8. 24.  then  I  separated  twelve  of  c.  o{ priests 

10.  5.  made  the  c.  priests  and  all  Israel  to  swear 
JVeh.  12.  7.  these  were  c./)ries£s  in  days  of  Joshua 
Mat.Vi.'il.  and  sufierniany  things  of  the  c.  priests 

26. 47.  a  multitude  with  staves  from  the  c.  priests 

27.  12.  when  he  was  accused  of  c.^.,  Mark  15.  3. 
41.  c.^iests  mocking  with  scribes,  Mark  15.31. 

Mark  14. 1.  c.  p.  sought  to  take  him  and  put  him  to 

death, 55.  Mat.  26.59.  Luke9. 22. 1 19.47. 1 22.2. 

i.MAe23.23.voices  of  them  and  c.priests  prevailed 

John  7.32.  c.priests  sent  officers  to  take  him,  18.3. 

19. 15.  c.  p.  answered,  we  have  no  king  but  Cesar 
Acts  9. 14.  he  hath  authority  from  c.priests,  26.10. 

22.30.  commanded  the  c.p.  and  counsel  to  appear 

CHIEF  prince,  or  princes. 

IChron.  5.  t2.  and  of  Judah  came  the  c.  prince 

7.  40.  were  children  of  Asher,  c.  oi'lha  princes 

Ezek.  38.  2.  Gog  c.  prince  of  Meshech,  3.  |  39. 1. 

Dan.  10.  13.  Michael  one  of  the  c.  princes  came 

CHIEF  singer,  or  singers. 
.Ve/i. 12.46.  in  days  of  David  were  c.  of  the  si^igers 
Uab.  3.  19.  to  the  c.  singer  on  my  instruments 

CHIEFEST. 
lSa7n.2.29.to  make  yourselves  fat  with  c.  ofi'erings 
9.  22.  Samuel  made  them  sit  in  the  c.  pjace 
21.7.Doeg  an  Edomite,  c.  of  the  herd-men  to  Saul 
iChron.  32. 33.  Hezekiah  buried  in  c.  of  sepulchres 
Cant.  5.  10.  my  beloved  is  the  c.  among  10,000 
Mark  10.  44.  who  will  be  c.  shall  be  servt.  of  all 
2Cor.  11.  5.  not  a  whit  behind  c.  of  apostles,  12. 11 

CHIEFLY. 
Rom.  3.  2.  c.  because  to  them  were  commit,  oracles 
Phil.  4.  22.  c.  they  that  are  of  Cesar's  household 
2Pet.  2.  10.  but  c.  them  that  walk  after  the  flesh 

CHILD 
Signifies,  [1]  One  young  in  years,  1  Sam.  1.  22. 
[2]  One  weak  in  knowledge,  Isa.  10. 19.  1  Cor. 
13. 11.  [3]  Such  as  are  young  in  grace,  1  John 
2.  13.  [4]  Such  as  are  humble  and  docile, 
Mat.  18.  3,  4.  [5]  Whatsoever  is  dear  to  a 
person,  Jer.  1.5.  7. 
Child,  Children,  or  Sons,  are  taken  different 
ways  in  Scripture.  The  descendants  of  a  man, 
how  remote  soever  they  may  be,  are  called  sons, 
or  children.  Fore.vample;  the  children  of  ¥A\om, 
the  children  of  Moab,  the  children  of  Israel. 
These  expressions,  the  children  of  light,  the 
children  of  darkness,  are  used  to  signify  those 
who  follow  light,  and  those  who  remain  iri 
darkness:  the  children  of  the  kingdom,  those 
who  belong  to  the  kingdom.  Persons  who  are 
almost  of  age,  are  often  called  children.  For 
example:  Joseph  is  called  a  child,  though  he 
was  at  least  sixteen  years  old,  Gen.  37. 30.  and 
Benjamin  nf  the  age  of  abone  thirty,  is  still 
called  a  little  child,  Gen.  44. 20.  JJkewisemen 
of  full  age  have  often  the  name  of  children 
given  them,  lea.  65.  20,  The  child  shall  die  a 
hundred  years  old  ;  that  is,  men  shall  die  at  the 
age  of  a  hundred  years;  there  shall  be  no  more 
untimely  deaths  seen. 
Children,  or  Sons  of  God.  By  this  name  angels 
are  sometimes  described, as,  Jobl.6.  |  2.1,  There 
was  a  day  when  the  sons  of  God  came  to  present 
themselves  before  the  Lord.  Good  men,  in 
M 


CHI 

oppcgition  to  ths  wicked,  are  likewise  called  by 
this  name;  the  childi  en  of  Seth'a  family,  iti  op 
position  to  the  race  of  Cain,  Gen.  6.  2,  Tlie 
sons  of  God  saw  the  i  iugliters  of  men.  Judges 
and  ma  gistrates  are  likewise  termed  children 
of  God,  Psal.  82.  6,  I  liave  said,  ye  arc  gods; 
and  all  of  you  are  children  of  the  Most  High. 
hi  the  JVcifl  Testament,  Believers  are  commonly 
called  the  children  of  God,  by  virtue  of  their 
adoption,  and  the  prerogatives  which  Christ 
purchased  for  them  by  the  merits  of  his  death 
and  sufferings.  John  1.  12,  He  hath  given  us 
power  to  become  the  sons  of  God:  and  else- 
where; see  Horn.  8.  14.  Gal.  3. 26. 
Children,  ur  Sons  of  men.  This  name  is  gircn 
to  the  men  of  Cum^s  family,  who  lived  before  the 
deluge;  and  in  particular  to  the  giants,  those 
violent  and  corrupt  men,  who  before  the  deluge 
had  corrupted  theirways, and  drtwdownthemost 
terrible  effects  of  God's  anger  upon  the  earth. 
.Afterwards  the  impious,  the  wicked  Israelites 
were  called  the  sons  of  men,  Ps.  4.  2,  O  ye  sons 
of  men,  how  long  will  ye  love  vanity?  See  Psal. 
12.  1.  1  57.  4.  }lut  very  often,  by  sons  of  men, 
mankind  are  to  be  understood,  without  any  odi- 
ous notion,  as, T&a.\.  8. 'i.  What  is  the  son  of 
man,that  thou  visitest  him?  Psal.  11. 4. 1 145.12. 

Gc7!.2i.l5.IIagarcast  (hec. under  one  of  the  shrub* 
16.  she  said,  let  me  not  see  the  death  of  the  c. 

37.  30.  the  c.  is  not,  and  I,  whither  shall  I  go? 

42.  22.  spake  I  not,  do  not  sin  against  the  c? 
Exod.  2. 8.  the  maid  went,  and  called  the  c.  raotlier 

22.  22.  ye  shall  not  affiict  any  fatherless  c. 
Judg.  11.  34.  Jephthah's  daughter  was  his  only  c 

13.  8.  and  teach  us  what  we  shall  do  to  the  c. 
I.Sam.  1.  25.  and  they  brought  tlie  c.  to  Eli 

3.  8.  Eli  perceived  the  Lord  had  called  the  c. 
iSam.  12.  14.  the  c.  that  is  born  to  thee  shall  die 

15.  Lord  struck  the  c.  that  Uriah's  wife  bare 

16.  David  therefore  besought  God  for  the  c. 
19.  David  perceived  that  the  c.  was  dead 

\Kings  3.  25.  he  said,  divide  the  living  c.  in  two 
14.3.he  shall  tell  thee,  what  shall  become  of  the  c 
17.22.  the  soul  of  the  c.  came  into  him  again 

2Kings  4.  31.  he  told  him,  the  c.  is  not  awaked 
35.  the  c.  neesed,  and  the  c.  opened  his  eyes 

Prov.  23. 13.  withhold  not  correction  from  the  c 

Eccl.  4.  8.  yea,  he  hath  neither  e.  nor  brother 
15. with  second  c.  that  shall  stand  up  in  his  stead 

Isa.  3.  5.  the  c.  shall  behave  himself  proudly 
7. 16.  for  before  thee,  shall  know  to  refuse  thecvli 

8.  4.  before  the  c.  shall  know  to  cry,  my  father 
11.8.the  weaned  c.  put  his  hand  on  cockatrice  den 
05.  20.  the  c.  shall  die  a  hundred  years  old 

Jer.  4.  31.  as  of  her  that  bringeth  forth  her  first  c. 

31.  20.  is  Ephraim  my  son?  is  he  a  pleasant  c? 

44.  7.  to  cut  off" from  you  man,  woman,  and  c. 
Mat.  10.  21.  the  father  shall  deliver  the  c.  to  deatli 

17.18.  the  c.  was  cured  from  that  very  hour 

23. 15.  ye  make  him  twofold  more  the  c.  of  hell 
Luke  1.  59.  on  8th  day  they  came  to  circumcise  c. 

66.  saying,  what  manner  of  e.  shall  this  be? 
76.  thou  c.  shall  be  called  Prophet  of  tlie  Highest 
80.  the  c.  grew,  and  waxed  strong  In  spirit, 2. 40. 
2.  27.  when  the  parents  brought  in  the  c.  Jesus 

9.  38.  Master,  look  on  my  son,  he  is  my  only  c. 
42.  Jes.  healed  c.  and  delivered  him  to  his  father 

.Tohn  4.  49.  sir,  come  down  ere  my  c.  die 
16.  21.  but  as  soon  as  she  ia  delivered  of  the  c. 
Acts  4.  27.  of  a  truth  against  thy  holy  c.  Jesus 
30.  that  signs  may  be  done  by  name  of  thy  c.  Jes. 
13. 10.  Saul  said,  thou  c.  of  the  devil,  thou  enemy 
Pev.  12. 4.  to  devour  her  c.  as  soon  as  it  was  born 
5.  her  c.  was  caught  up  to  God  and  to  his  throne 
A  CHILD. 
(rfTi.lS.lS.shalllofasurety  bearac.  whoamoW 
44.  20.  a  father,  and  a  c.  of  his  old  age,  a  little  one 
Kiorf.  2.  2.  shesaw  he  was  a  goodly  c.  Heb.  11.23. 
15(1771.2. 18.  Samuel,  nc.  girded  with  a  linen  cphod 
1  Kijigs  3.17.  was  delivered  of  a  c.  witli  her  in  house 
13.  2.  a.  c.  shall  be  born  to  house  of  David,  Josiah 
.hb  .33.  25.  his  flesh  shall  be  fresher  than  a  c. 
Ps.  131.2.  I  quieted  myself  as  a  c.  as  n  weaned  e. 
Prov.  20.  11.  even  a  c.  is  known  by  his  doings 
22.  6.  train  up  a  c.  in  the  way  he  should  go 
15.  foolishness  is  bound  in  the  heart  of  a  c. 
29.  15.  hut  a  c.  left  to  himself  bringeth  to  shame 
21.  he  that  bringeth  up  his  servant  from  a  c. 
Keel.  4.  13.  better  is  a  wise  c.  than  a  foolish  king 

10.16.  woe  to  thee,  O  land,  when  thy  king  is  a  c. 
Isa.  9.  6.  for  to  us  a  c.  is  born,  to  us  a  son  is  given 

10. 19.  trees  shall  be  fcw,that  ac.  may  writethoni 
Jer.  1.6.  behold  I  cannot  speak,  for  1  am  a  c.  7. 
20.  15.  tidings,  saying,  a  man  c.  is  born  to  thee 
Hos.  11. 1.  when  Israel  was  a  c.  then  I  loved  him 
Mark9.2\.ho\v  long  since  this  camo?  he  said  of«  c 
36.took  a  c.  and  set  him  in  the  midst,  LukeQ.A7. 
ICor.  13.  11.  when  I  was  a  c.  I  spake  as  a  e.  I 
understood  as  a  c.  I  thought  as  a  c. 
Gal.i.l.l  say , the  heir  as  long  as  he  is  a  c.differi  n<A 


cm 


CHI 


5  Tim.  3. 15.  li  om  a  e  hast  known  holy  scriptures  I  X>fu<.33.2-l.of  Ashur  he  said,  letAshur  be  blessed  c. 
Jieb.ll.il.  Saruhdelivertd  of  a  c.  \\tiuui)U=lii^ti\juiih.-i-2.\).c.oiiii:\ii>cna.iuiG-^d,hM  tribuolMa- 
Jico   n.  5.  blie  brou-lit  forth  a  muQ  c.  wlio  wad  lo         ua^ch,  reluniud  aad  built  there  an  altar,  10,  li. 
rule  all  nations  with  a  rod  ol  irou  U/^ui/i'-  i.  b.  take  10,00U  men  ot  the  c.  ot  JNaphlali 
Little  C1II1.U.  Ci-  Id.  each  one  resembled  the  c.  ol'  a  king 

r;eK.47.tl2.nouridh.hisl'alher'shou3cad  aii«Ze  c.     U.  lb.  iliuuhast  put lotth a  riddle  to  col  people 


IKtiigs  3.  7.  am  a  little  c.  I  know  not  how  lo  go  out 
11.17.  lladudHed  into  Kg,  pt,  bejiig  yvim Utile  c. 
2Kings  5. 14.  came  again  like  the  tlesh  ol'a  little  c. 
Jsa.  11.  tj.  and  a  ItttU  c.  shall  lead  them 
^l/ut.lri.iJesus  called  a  little  c.  to  him,  and  set  him 
5.  who  shall  receive  one  such  littU  c.  in  my  name 
Jilar/i  10. 15.  whosoever  shall  not  receive  llie  king- 
dom ofG.  as  a  lit.  c.  shall  not  enter  il,Lul:eiS.n. 
J\-u  CHILD, 
frcn.  11. 31).  but  Sarai  ,vas  barren,  she  had  no  c. 
Lcc.  ~i.  13.  but  it'  the  priest's  daughter  have  uu  c. 
J)eut.  i!5.  5.  if  one  brother  die,  and  have  no  c. 
•2.'iam.ii.-Ii.  ilichael  had  hoc.  to  the  day  of  death 
21^'iiiirs  4.14.(;ehazi  answered,verily  she  hath  ito  c. 
J^ulic  1.1. Iht  )■  had  ;iu  c.  because  Eh^ab.was  barren 
jJc(s  7. 5.  promised  to  him  when  as  yet  he  had  no  c. 

l.ueking  CHILD. 
JS*"!/?/!.  11.12.  as  •!  nursing  father  beareth  sucking  c. 
Isa.ll.S.sucking  c.  shall  play  on  the  hole  of  the  asp 
4'J.15.can  a  woman  forget  lier  s.  c.l  yea,  they  may 
I.iun.  4.4.  tongue  of  the  suck.  c.  cleaveth  lo  the  roof 

This  CHILD. 

Ezod.  il.  9.  take  this  c.  and  nuise  him  for  me 

yyi/tc-i.l7.saying,which  was  told  concerning Wusc. 

'M.lhis  c.is  set  for  fall  and  rising  of  many  in  Israel 

9.46. whoso  shall  receive  this  c.  my  name,  receives 

;f7(/i  CHILD. 
Gen.  16. 11  the  angel  said,  Ilagar,  thou  art  u:ith  c 
19.  3(3.  da  ight.  of  Lot  were  wUh  c.  by  their  father 
3d.24.Tamar  thy  daughter  is  icitli  c.by  whoredom 

iio.  by  the  man  whose  these  are,  am  I  wit/i  c. 

F.xod.iL2-Z.ii'mea  strive  and  hurt  a  woman  with  c. 

1  Sam.  4.19.  bis  daughter,  Phinehas'  wife,  was  w.  c. 

"Sam.  11. 5.  Bath-slieba  sent  and  said,  I  am  with  c. 

'2Kings  8. 12.  wilt  rip  up  their  women  u}ith  c.  15.16. 

£cc/.11.5.boncs  grow  in  womb  of  her  that  is  with  c 

Isa.  26. 17.  like  a  woman  with  c.  that  draweth  near 

Id.  we  have  been  with  c.  we  have  been  in  pain 

54. 1.  sing,  O  barren,  thai  didst  not  travail  with  c. 

Jey.  30.  6.  see  whether  a  man  doth  travail  with  c. 

31.  8.  I  will  bring  forth  from  north  women  with  c. 

Hos.  13.  16.  their  women  with  c.  shall  be  rii>ped  U] 

.■imos  L  13.because  they  ripped  up  the  women  w.  c 

Mtit.  1. 18.  she  was  found  with  c.  ofthe  Moly  Ghost 

2.'J.  a  virgin  shall  be  with  c.  and  bring  Ibrih  ason 

24.19.  woe  to  them  that  are  w.  c.  and  to  thcjn  give 

suck  in  those  days,  J/urA  13. 17.  Lu/ce-2l.  23. 

IjVke  2.5.to  be  ta.xed'wiih  Mary,bcing  great  with  c. 

1  Thcs.i.  5.  3.  as  travail  upon  a  woman  with  c. 

Hee.  12.  2.  and  she  being  with  c.  cried,  travailing 

Voutig  CHILD. 
l.^am.l.  24.  she  brought  him,  and  the  c.  was  young 
Mat.  2. 8.  go  and  search  diligently  tor  the  young  c. 

13.  take  the  young  c.  and  his  mother,  and  Ifee 

14.  he  took  the  young  c.  and  his  mother  by  night 

CHILD-BEAUING. 
1 7'(m.2.15.notwithsland.  she  shall  be  saved  in  c.-b. 

CHILDHOOD. 
1  Sam.  12.  2.  I  have  walked  before  you  from  my  c 
Job  33.  t  25.  his  flesh  shall  be  fresher  than  c.  ' 
Keel.  11.10.  for  c.  and  youth  are  vanity 

CHILDISH. 
ICor.  13.11  when  a  man,  I  put  away  c.  things 

CIHLDLES.S. 
Gen.  15. 2.  what  wilt  thou  give  me,  seeing  I  go  c.? 
/^eo.20.20.lhoy  shall  bear  their  sin,  they  shall  die  c. 
ISain.  15.  33.  Samuel  said,  as  thy  sword  hath  made 
women  c.  so  shall  thy  mother  be  c. among  women 
Jcr.  22.  30.  saith  (he  Lord,  write  you  this  man  c. 
Luke  20.30.  the  second  took  her  lo  wife,  and  died  c. 

CHILDREN'. 
Gen.  3.  IC.  in  sorrow  shall  thou  bring  forth  c. 

16.  2.  it  may  be  Ihnt  I  may  obtain  c.  by  her 

25.  22.  the  c.  struggled  togclhcr  within  her 
2((.  1 1.  Jacob  came  into  land  of  the  c.  of  tho  oast 
30. 1.  Hachel  naiil  to  Jacob,  give  me  cor  I  dio 
33.  5.  the  c  which  Cod  lialli  given  thy  servant 
40.  8.  thy  father's  c  shall  bow  (low  n  before  (hoe 

/i;j :orf.l2.:'rr.ionrneycd  about600,(KX)men,lKBidc«  c 
20.5.  a  jealous  Cod,  visitin?  the  inifjoity  of  the  fa- 
thers upon  (hoc  34.7.  M'lim.li.li*.  JJeut.^.i). 
21.4.  the  wife  and  her  c.  shall  be  her  master's 

JV'ijjn.  13.  28.  and  wo  saw  the  c.  of  Anak  thoro 

17.  i  10.  for  a  token  aeainst  (he  c  of  rebillion 

26.  11.  no(withB(anding  the  e.  of  Korali  died  not 
J)ent.  2.  9.  I. have  piven  Ar  to  tho  f.  of  Lot,  19. 

9.  2.  who  can  stnnd  before  the  c.  of  Anak? 

13.  l.T  the  c.  of  Belial  ari!  gone  nut  from  you 

14.  1.  ye  are  the  e.  ofthe  Lord  your  GimI 
21. 15.  have  borne  him  c  both  beloved  and  hated 
23.  P.  the  f .  begotten  of  (hem  shall  enter  into  corig. 
84.  l(i.  (he  faihers  shall  not  ho  put  (o  dnadi  for 

the  r.  nor  the  e.  for  tho  fathers,  2rAron.2").  4 
32.  20.  tlicy  arc  c.  in  whom  there  is  no  faith 
74 


0. 13.  now  deliver  us  tlie  men,  the  c  of  Uehal 

iSaiit.  2. 5.  she  that  hath  many  c.  is  wa.ved  leeble 

10.27.  c.of  Belial  said,  how  shall  tiiis  man  save  us! 

■2Sain.  3. 1 34.  as  a  man  falleth  before  t.  of  iniquity 

7.i0.ncilher  shall  the  c.  of  wickedness  afflict  lliein 

any  more  as  before  lime,  IChrun.  17.  9. 

iKings  21. 13.  there  came  in  two  men,  c.  of  Behal 

iJiings  2. 24.  two  she-bears  came  and  tare  42  c. 

9.  1.  Ehsha  called  one  of  the  c.  of  the  prophets 
10. 13.  lo  salute  the  c.  of  the  king,  c.  of  the  queen 
14.  6.  but  the  c.  of  murderer^  he  slow  not,  as  is 

writtcu  111  the  law  of  Moses,  ^ZUiron.  25.  4. 
17. 34.  nor  do  as  Lord  commanded  the  c.  of  J  acob 
19. 3.  for  the  c.  are  oome  lo  the  birih,  Isa.  37.  3. 
IChron.  2.  30.  but  Suled  died  without  c. 

32.  and  Jether  died  without  c. 
4.  27.  but  Shimei's  brethren  had  not  many  c. 

10.  13.  O  ye  c.  ol' Jacob  his  chosen,  i'j.ai.  105. 6. 
iChroH.  13.  7.  gatliered  to  Jeroboam  e.  of  Behal 

25.  7.  llie  Lord  is  not  with  ad  the  c.  of  Ephraim 

11.  Amaziuh  smoie  ofthe  c.of  tieir  10,UOO 
Ezra  2. 1.  these  are  c.  ofthe  province,  A'ch.  7.  0. 

10.  44.  some  had  wives  by  whom  they  had  c. 
jYch.  9. 23.  the  c.  inullipliedst  thou  as  stars  of  heav. 
Job  19. 17.  1  inttealed  lor  the  c.  sake  of  my  body 

30.  8.  they  were  c.  of  fools,  yea  c.  of  base  men 
41.  34.  he  is  a  king  oyer  aU  the  c.  of  pride 

J'sal.  17. 14.  they  are  full  of  c.  and  leave  iJie  rest 
34. 11.  come,  ye  c.  hearken  lo  me,  I  wdl  teach  you 
6'J.  8.  I  am  become  an  alien  to  ray  mother's  c. 
72.  4.  he  shall  save  the  c.  of  the  needy 
78.  6.  the  c  which  should  be  born  might  know 

82.  6.  and  all  of  you  are  c.  of  llie  must  High 

83.  8.  they  have  holpen  the  c.  of  Lot.     t<eiah 
102.  28.  the  c.  of  thy  servants  shall  continue 
113.9.  makes  the  barren  to  be  a  joyful  mother  of  c. 
127.  3.  lo  c.  are  a  heritage  of  the  Lord 

4.  as  arrows  in  the  hand,  so  are  the  c.of  youth 
137.  7.  remember,  O  Lord,  the  c  of  Kdom 

148.  12.  let  old  men  and  c.  praise  the  Lord 

149.  2.  let  the  c.  of  Zion  be  joyful  in  their  king 
Prof.  4.1.  hear,  ye  c.  instruction,  5.7.  |  7. 24.  |  8.32. 

17.  6.  and  the  glory  of  c.  are  their  fathers 

31.  28.  her  c  arise  up  and  call  her  blessed 
Eccl.  6.  3.  if  a  man  beget  IIKJ  c.  and  live  years 
Cant.  1.  6.  my  mother's  c.  were  angry  with  me 
Jsa.  1.  2.  1  have  brought  up  c.  and  they  rebelled 

4.  ah  sinful  nation,  c.  that  are  corrupters 
2.  6.  they  please  themselves  in  the  c.  of  strangers 
3.4. and  1  will  give  c.  to  be  their  princes,  and  babes 

12.  as  for  my  people,  c.  are  their  oppressors 
8.18. 1  and  c.  whom  Lord  hath  given  me,yyei.2.13. 
13. 18.  shall  have  no  pity,  their  eye  not  spare  c. 
21. 17.  mighty  men  of  c.  of  Kedar  be  diminished 
23.  4.  saying,  I  travail  not,  nor  bring  forth  c. 

30.  1.  woe  to  the  rebellious  c.  saith  the  Lord 
9.  lying  c.  c.  that  will  not  hear  the  law  of  the  Ld. 

38.  19.  father  to  the  c.  make  luiown  thy  truth 

47.  8.  neither  shall  1  know  the  loss  of  c. 

9.  come  in  one  day  the  loss  of  c  and  'vidowhood 
49.  20.  the  c.  which  ihou  shalt  have,  shall  say 
54.  1.  sing,  O  barren,  for  more  are  c.of  the  deso- 
late than  c.  ofthe  married  wife.  Gal.  A.  27. 

57.4. are  ye  note,  of  transgression, a  seed  of  falseh. 

5.Hlaying  the  c.  in  the  valleys  under  clifls  of  rocks 
C3.  8.  they  are  my  peojde,  c.  that  will  not  lie 
66.8.as  soon  as  Zion  travailed,she  brought  forth  c. 
Jer.  3.  14.  turn,  O  backsluiing  c.  saith  the  Lord,  22. 

19.  I  said,  how  shall  1  put  thee  among  the  c? 
4.  22.  for  my  people  is  foolish,  they  are  sottish  c. 
6.  11.  I  will  pour  it  out  upon  the  c.  abroad 
7.18.  the  c  gather  wood,  the  fathers  kindle  the  fire 
9.21.  for  death  entered  to  cut  oll'c.  troin  without 
15.  7. 1  will  fan  them,  I  will  bereave  them  of  c. 

31.  15.  Rachel  weeping  for  her  c.  JIat.  2.  18. 
29.  tho  c  teeth  ate  set  on  edge,  Kzrk.  18.  2. 

48.  t45.  shall  devour  the  crown  ofthe  c  of  noise 
/.am.  2.  20.  shall  tho  women  eat  c.of  a  span  long? 

5.13.  young  men  to  grind,  c.  fell  under  tho  wood 
F.zek.i.i.  for  (hey  are  impudent  r .  and  stiH-hearted 
20.  21.  the  c.  rebelled  against  me,  they  walked 
23. 1 17.  c.  of  Babel  came  (o  her  into  bed  of  love 

33.  .30.  (he  c.  sdll  are  talking  against  theo  by  walls 
44.  t  7.  brought  into  my  sanctuary  c  of  a  s(ranger 
47.  22.  (os(ranjters  (hat  shall  beget  r.  among  you 

/.'<i;i.  1.4.  c.  in  whom  was  no  bli'inish,  but  skilful 
]5.(hoircountenancci  fairer  and  l'at(er  than  all  c. 
17.  a;!  for  these  four  c.  God  eave  them  knowledge 
2.  t  ~y  (bund  a  man  ofthe  c.  ofthe  captivity 
12.  1.  Michael  shall  stand  for  the  c  of  thy  people 
ffos.  I.  2.  take  unto  thoo  c.  of  whoredoms 
2.  4.  1  will  no(  have  mercy  on  here,  forthoybcc. 

10.  9.  (he  ba(tlo  against  the  c.  of  iiiic|uity  did  not 
14.  the  mother  was  dashed  in  pieces  ujHjn  her  c. 


CHI 

Hot.  11. 10.  then  tlie  c.  shall  tremble  from  the  wert 

13.13.  not  »tay  long  in  place  of  breaking  forth  ot'c, 

Jucl  2. 16.  gather  c  and  those  tliat  suck  the  breast* 

23.  be  glad  then  ye  c.  of  Zion,  and  rejoice  in  Lord 

Mvius  9. 7.  aie  ye  not  as  c.  of  the  Ethiopians  to  ine? 

Mic.  1.  16.  make  bald,  and  poll  thee  for  delicate  c 

Zeph.  1.  8.  I  will  punish  the  princes  and  king's  e. 

Jlal.  4. 6.  he  shall  turn  llie  heart  of  fathers  to  tl  e  c. 

and  the  heart  of  c.  to  their  faihers,  J^ulie  1. 17 

Mat.  2.  16.  Herod  slew  all  the  c  in  Bethlehem 

3.  9.  able  of  these  stones  to  raise  up  c.  Luke  3. 8 
5. 45.  tliatye  may  be  the  c.  of  your  Father  in  hi  av. 

8.  12.  but  the  c.  ofthe  kingdom  shall  l>e  cast  out 
9. 15.  Jes.  said,  can  c  of  bride-cham.  mourn  w  die 

bridegroom  with  themi  Murk  2. 19.  Lukei  34. 

10.  21.  c.  shall  rise  against  parents,  Mark  13  12. 

11. 19. but  Wisdom  is  juslilied  of  her  c.  Luke  7.35. 

13.  38.  the  good  seed  are  the  c.  of  tlie  kiugdoto, 
but  the  tares  are  the  c.  ofthe  wicked  ona 

15.  26.  not  meet  to  take  the  c.  bread,  J/ort7.27. 

17.  26.  Jesus  saith  to  him,  then  are  the  c.  free 

19.29.forsaken  wife  or  c.  for  my  sake,  JV/ar/c  10.29. 

20.  20.  then  came  the  mother  of  Zebedee's  c. 

21.15.priests  and  scribes  saw  the  c.  crying  in  temp. 

23.  31.  ye  are  c.  of  them  that  killed  prophets 
Mark  7. 27.  Jesus  said  to  her,  let  the  c.  tirsl  be  filled 
28.  the  dogs  under  the  table  eatof  tUec.  crumbj 

9.37.  shad  receive  one  of  such  c.  in  my  name,  41. 
Luke  a.  35.  begreat,  ye  shall  be  the  c.of  the  High. 

10.  8.  lor  c.  of  this  \\orld  are  wiser  than  c.  of  light 

20.  29.  the  first  took  a  wife,  and  died  without  c. 
34.  the  c.  of  this  world  marry,  and  are  given  in 

.John  8.39.  if  ye  were  Abraham's  c.  would  do  works 

21.  5.  Jesus  saith  to  them,  c.  have  ye  any  meat? 
./Jets  3.25.ye  are  the  c.of  the  prophets  and  covenant 
Jiom.  8. 17.  il'c.  then  heirs,  heirs  of  God,  joint-heirs 

9.  7.  because  the  seed  of  Abraham  are  they  all  c. 
11.  tor  c.  being  not  yet  born,  nor  done  good  or  evil 

1  Cor.14.20.  be  not  c.  in  understanding,  in  malice,  c. 

~Cor.  12.  14.  for  the  c  ought  not  lo  lay  up  for  the 

parents,  but  the  parents  for  the  c. 

Gal.  3. 7.  of  faith,  the  same  are  the  c.  of  Abraham 

4.  3.  so  we,  when  we  were  c.  were  in  bondage 

25.  Jerusalem,  which  is  in  bondage  with  her  c. 
31.  we  are  not  c.  of  bond- woman,  but  of  the  free 

Eph.  1. 5.  having  predestinated  us  to  adoption  of  c. 
2.  2.  the  spirit  that  worketii  in  c.  of  disobedience 
3.  were  by  nature  c.  of  wrath,  even  as  others 
4.14.WC  be  h*;iicel'orlh  no  more  c.  tossed  to  and  fro 

5.  1.  be  ye  therefore  followers  of  God  as  dear  c. 
6.  wrath  comelh  on  c.  of  disobedience,  Cul.3.6. 

0.  1.  c.  obey  your  parents  in  the  Lord,  Cut.  3.  20. 

1  'J'iiu.  5.  4.  bat  if  any  widow  have  c.  or  neiiliewa 

10.  if  she  hath  brought  up  c.  if  she  hath  lodged 

14.  I  will  that  tlie  younger  women  marry,  bear  c 

Hcb.  2.14.  as  the  c.  are  partakeis  of  tlesh  and  blood 

12.  5.  exhortation  which  speaketb  to  you  as  toe. 

H'ut.  1. 14.  as  obedient  c.  not  fasiiioning  by  lusts 

2l'ct.  2. 14.  having  eyes  full  of  adultery,  cursed  c 

\Juhn  3.10.  c.  of  God  manifest,  and  c.  of  the  devil 

2Juhu  1.  the  elder  to  the  elect  lady  and  her  c. 

13.  (he  c.  of  (by  elect  sister  greet  thee 

Jieu.  2.  23. 1  will  kill  her  c.  with  death,  churches 

See  Ammon,  Captivity. 

CHILDREN  of  JJin/amin. 

jVum.1.36.  ofthe  c.ofli.  by  their  genealogy  35,400 

Judff.l.  21.  c.of  /i.iiid  not  drive  out  the  Jebusites 

20.  13.  thee. o//<.  would  not  hearken  to  brethren 

•2Sa>a.  2. 25.  c.  ofli.  gathered  together  after  .Xbncr 

IChr.  9.  3.  in  Jerusalem  dwell  of  c.  of  11.  ./V.-A.11.4. 

12.  10.  there  came  of  e.  of  H.  to  the  hold  to  David 

Jcr.  6.  1.  O  ye  c.  of  B.  gather  yourselves  to  fleo 

Children's  CHILDREN. 
Gen.  45. 10.  shall  be  near  to  me,  thou  and  thy  c.  e. 
Exud.  34.7.  visiting  iniquity  of  fathers  on  childr.  c. 
JJrut.  4.25.  when  thou  shalt  beget  c.  and  childr.  t. 
2AVn^'':;17.41.  served  images  both  their  c  and  cA.  c. 
J'sal.  103. 17.  and  his  righ(eousness  un(oe*iWr.  e. 
128. 6.  shaU  see  thy  child/-,  c.  and  peace  on  IsiacI 
Prof.  13. 22.  leavoth  an  inheritance  to  his  childr.  c. 
17.  6.  childr.  c.  are  crown  of  old  men,  glory  of  e. 
.fer.  2.  9.  and  with  your  children's  c.  will  I  plead 
£zcA.37.25. shall  dwell,  and  theirr A/'Wr.  c.  forevei 

Fatherless  CHILDREN. 
Ps.  109. 12.  nor  lot  there  bo  any  to  favour  father,  r. 
Jcr.  49. 11.  leave  thv/iirArr.  c.  1  will  preserve  tliom 

CHILDREN  of  Gad. 
Mat.  5. 0.  peace-makers  shall  be  called  the  c.  of  G. 
J.uki  20.3i).are  the  c.  of  G.  being  c.  of  resurrection 
.John  11.  52.  should  gather  together  inane c. of  G. 
Jiom.  ^.  111.  beareth  wiUiPRS  that  we  are  thee,  o/ (7. 
21.  delivered  into  the  glorious  liberty  nfc.ofG. 
9.8.  (ho  c.  ofthe  flosh,  (liese  are  not  the  c.ofO. 

26.  (here  shall  (hoy  be  called  t.  of  (ho  living  God 
Gat.  3.  26.  yo  are  all  c.  of  God  by  failh  in  Christ 
I./iiAm  3.10.  c.of  God  iiianifosl,and  c.  of  the  devil 

5.  2.  by  this  wo  know  that  wo  love  the  c.  of  God 

///»  (CHILDREN. 
Gri^  18. 19.  I  know  .A  bra  ham  will  command  Ai'ae. 
37.  3.  Israel  loved  Joseph  more  than  all  his  *. 


CHI 

Dent.  17.  20.  may  prolong  his  days,  he  and  kis  c. 
22. 5.  corrupted,  their  spot  is  not  the  spot  of  his  c. 

t  they  are  not  his  c.  that  is  their  blot 
33.  9.  neither  acknowledge,  nor  knew  his  own  c. 

1  Sam.  30. 2-2.  save  to  every  man  his  wife  and  his  c. 

2  Sam.  12.3.  a  little  ewe-lamb  it  grew  up  with  his  c. 
a  Kings  6.19  togive  him  always  a  lighl,and  lo  his  c. 
2  Chr.  28.  3.  burnt  his  c.  in  fire  alter  the  heathen 

33.  6.  he  caused  /Us  c.  to  pass  through  the  (ire 

Job  5.  4.  his  c.  are  far  from  safety,  and  are  crushed 
17.  5  even  the  eyes  of  his  c.  shall  fail 
20-  10.  his  c.  shall  seek  to  please  the  poor 
21   19.  God  layeth  up  his  ijiiquity  lor  his  c. 
27.  14.  if  his  c.  be  multiplied,  it  is  for  the  sword 

Psal.  89.  30.  if  his  c.  Ibrsiike  my  law,  and  walk  not 
103. 13.  like  as  a  father  pitielh  Ai5  c.  so  Lord  pities 
109.  9.  let  his  c.  be  fatherless,  his  wife  a  widow 
10.  let  his  c.  be  vagabonds,  and  beg  bread 

Pruc.  14.  26.  his  c.  shall  have  a  place  of  refuge 
20.  7.  the  just  man,  kis  c.  are  blessed  alter  him 

/sa.14.21. prepare  slaughter  for  hisc.  for  iniquity  of 
29.  23.  when  he  seeth  his  c.  in  I  he  midst  of  him 

Has.  9.  13.  but  Ephraim  shall  bring  forth  his  c. 

John  4.  12.  his  c.  and  catlle  drank  thereof 

ITAess.S-U.we  charged  you  as  a  father  doth  his  c. 

I  Tim,  3. 4.  having  his  c.  in  subjection  with  gravity 
CHILDREN  «//srffie/. 

<ien.  50. 25.  Joseph  took  an  oath  of  th«  c.  of  Israel 

E7:o(Z.1.7.tbec.o//sra<;/ were  fruitful  and  increased 

12.  they  were  grieved  because  of  the  c.  of  Israel 
2.23.  c.  of  fsr.  sighed  ||  25. God  looked  on  c.  of  Isr. 
4.31.  when  they  heard  Lord  had  visited  c.of  Israel 
6.5. 1  have  also  heard  the  groaning  of  the  c.o//s»- 

13.  to  bring  e.o//5r.  out  of  Egypt,2<j,  27.  |  12.51 
9.  4.  shall  nothing  die  of  all  that  is  ihe  c.  of  Israel 
12. 37.  c.  of  kr.  journeyed  about  600,000  on  foot 
29.  43.  and  there  I  will  meet  with  the  c.  of  Israel 
31.17.  it  is  a  sign  between  me  and  c.  of  Isr. (or  ever 

/^eo.17.13.  who,soever  he  he.,  c.of  Israel  or  stranger 

25.  55.  for  to  me  the  c.  of  Israel  are  servants 
JVam.14.10.  glory  of  Lord  ap|icared  before  co/Zsr. 
/osk.l.  12.  c.of  Isr.  could  notstand  before  enemies 
%Sam.  11.8.  when  uumbered  c.of  Isr.  were  300,000 
2*'(im.21.2.  theGibeonites  were  not  of  c.o/  Israel 
2  /Ttnn-s  17. 24.  and  placed  tliciti  instead  of  c.of  Isr. 
.ATeh.  8.  17.  to  that  day  had  not  the  c.  of  Isr.doae  so 
Psal.  lO.J.  7.  he  made  known  his  acts  to  c.  of  Israel 

1 48. 14. even  ■  if  the  c.  «f  lsriiel.i&  people  near  to  him 
/sa.27.  I2.phall  be  gathered  one  by  one,  O  ye  c.of  Is. 
Kick.  44.  15.  when  c.ef  Israel  went  astray,  48.  II. 
Jlmos  2.  11.  is  it  not  even  thus,  O  ye  c.  of  Israel? 

4.5.  this  liketh  you,  O  ye  c.  o/ /sr.  saith  the  Lord 
I.vke  1. 16.  many  of  thee.  n/Zsr.  shall  turn  to  Lord 
jicts  7.  23.  to  visit  his  breihren  the  c.  of  Israel 
37.  thi<isthal  Moses  which  said  \.ot\ii  c.of  Israel 

9. 15.  ciiosen  to  hear  my  name  before  the  c.  of  Isr. 

10.30.  word  God  sent  toe.  of  Isr.  preaching  peace 
i?07n. 9.27  though  number  ofc.o/lsr.be  as  the  sand 
2  Cor.  3. 7.  c.  of  Isr.  could  not  behold  face  of  Moses 
JHeb.  11.22.  made  mention  of  departing  of  c.  of  Isr. 
fteo.2.14.  tocast  a  stumbling-block  belbrec.  of  Isr. 

7.  4.  sealed  144,000  of  all  the  tribes  oftliec.  of  Isr. 

21.12.thenames  of  the  twelve  tribesofthec.*/ /sr. 

CHILDREN  o/./iida/(- 
J^um.  1.2G.  of  the  c.  of  -liidah  by  their  generations 
.Tosk.  14.  0.  c.  of  .ludah  came  to  Joshua  to  Gilgal 
2  .9«m.l.l8.  bade  teach  c.o/. /tt'/.  the  use  of  the  how 
2  Chr.  13.  18  c.  of.I.  prevailed,  because  they  relied 

25. 12.  other  10,600  did  c.of  J.  carry  away  captive 

23.  10.  now  ye  purpose  to  keep  under  the  c.  o/. /lid. 
Jer.  32. 32.  because  of  all  the  evil  of  the  c.  of  .ludah 

50.  4.  they  and  the  c.  nf  ./wdnA  going  and  weeping 

33.1sraeland  c.of  -Tudnk  were  oppressed  together 

Joel  3. 19.  for  the  violence  agninst  the  c.  ofjudah 

CHILDREN  o/ii/r At. 
lAike  16.  8.  c.of  this  world  are  wiser  than  c.  oflifrht 
.John  12.  36.  believe,  that  ye  may  be  the  c.  of  Ushl 
F.pk.a.8.  but  now  are  light  in  Lord,  walk  as  c.of  I. 
1  TAess.5.5.yeare  all  c.  ofliirht,ani\  children  of  day 

Aitfie  CHILDREN. 
JVwm.  16.27.  little  c.  Blood  in  the  door  of  their  tents 
S  Kin^sl.  23. came  forth  lUtle  c.  and  mocked  him 
J^!st/i.3.13.in  one  ilay  to  destroy  little  c.  and  women 
F.7.eh.  9.  6.  play  utterly  maids,  littU  c.  and  women 
.V<iMH.3.excnpt  con  veiled,  and  lieconieris/)7.t/cc. 

19.  13.  then  were  there  brought  to  him  little  c. 

14.8uflrer/it«i«c.tocomc,^ar/t10.14./.uAe  18.16. 

John  13.  .33.  lit.tle.c.  yet  a  little  while  I  am  with  you 

frol.  4.  19.  my  Utile  c.  of  whom  I  travail  in  birth 

l.lohv  2.  1.  my  little  c.  I  write  to  you,  12,  13. 

18. 1,  c.  it  is  last  time  1|  28.  now  I.  c.  abide  in  him 

3.7.  Z.c.  let  no  man  dpceivn||I8./.c.  not  love  in  word 

4.4.  tire  of  God,  little  c.  and  have  overcome  world 

5.  21.  tittle  c.  keep  yoorsflves  from  idols 

CHILDREN  of  men. 
<?CTi.  11.  a.  to  see  Ihe  tower  which  c.  of  min  built 

1  Sam.  2fi.  19.  if  they  be  c.  of  men,  cursed  be  they 

2  fiom  7. 14.  I'll  chastise  him  with  stripes  of  e.  ofm. 
1  fTivors  8.  39.  knowest  hearts  of  c.o/m.  2  CAr.6.30. 
Psal  11.4.  eyes  behold,  his  eye-lids  try  the  e.  ofm. 

75 


CHI 

Psal.  12. 1.  for  the  faithful  fail  from  among c.  of  m. 

14.2.  looked  down  from  heaven  upon  c.  of  in.  53.2. 
36.7.  the  c.of  men  put  their  trust  under  die  shadow 
4.5.2.thou  art  iairer  than  c.  ofiitcn,  grace  is  poured 

90. 3.  lurnest  man,  and  sayest,  return  ye  c.  of  men 
107.8.  his  wonderful  works locc/me/i, 15,21, 31. 
115.  16.  the  earth  hath  he  given  lo  the  c.of  men 

Prov.  15. 11.  how  much  more  then  hearts  of  c.  ofm. 
Lam.  3.  33.  he  doth  not  afflict,  nor  grieve  c.  of  men 
Dan.  2. 38.  wherever  c.  of  ?«(•«,  dwell  hath  he  given 

./Wen-CIIILDREN. 
£j;od.l.l7.  the  midwives  saved  the  7«e«-c.alive,18. 
34.  23.  all  the  men-c.  shall  appear  belbre  the  Lord 
Josh.  17.  2.  these  were  the  mule  c.  of  Manasseh 

Jlen,  Women,  and  CHILDREN. 
Deut.i.fj.  inBashan  we  destroyed  ;n.)o</Hicn,ajtdc. 
31.12.gather  men,  women,  and  c.  to  hear  and  learn 
lSa»i.'.;2. 19.  smote  Nob,  m.  w.andc.  and  sucklings 
Ezra  10.1. a  great  congregat.  of  mc«,  women,  and  c. 
,Ier.  40.  7.  had  committeil  to  Gedaliah  m.  w.  and  c. 
Mat.  14.  21.  and  they  that  had  eaten,  were  about 
5000  )«en,  beside  icomcn  and  c.  15.  3d. 
JWj^  CHILDREN. 
Weie.  30. 26.give  me  my  wives  and  my  c.  for  whom 
31.  43.  these  e.  are  my  c.  these  cattle  my  catlle 

42.  36.  Jacob  said,  me  ye  have  bereaved  of  my  c. 

43.  14,  if  I  be  bereaved  of  my  c.  I  am  bereaved 
F.Tod.  13.  15.  but  the  first-liorn  of  my  c.  I  redeem 

21.  5. 1  love  my  master,  wife,  and  my  c.  I'll  not  go 

1  Kings'iQ.  7.  he  sent  to  me  for  my  wives  and  my  c. 
.hb  29.  5.  that  I  were  as  when  my  c.  were  about  me 
Isa.  49. 21 .  seeing  I  have  lost  my  c.  and  am  desolate 
■Jer.  10. 20.  my  c.  are  gone  forth  of  me,  and  are  not 
I„am.  1. 16.  my  c.  are  desolate,  the  enemy  prevaile<l 
Kick.  16.  21.  is  it  small  that  ihou  hast  slain  myc.l 
LukeW.l.  trouble  me  not,  my  c.are  with  me  In  bed 

2  Cor.  6.  13.  I  speak  as  to  my  c.  be  ye  enlarged 

3  Jokn  4.  joy  to  hear  that  my  c.  walk  in  the  truth 

JVo  CHILDREN. 
Gen.  16. 1.  now  Sarai  Abram's  wife  bare  him  noc. 
30. 1.  when  Rachel  saw  that  she  bare  Jacob  noc. 
Mum.  3.  4.  Nadab  and  Abihu  died,  and  had  no  c. 
1  Sam.  1.  2.  Peninnah  had,  but  Hannah  had  vo  c. 
J/o(. 22.24.  if  any  man  die  having  no  c.  Mark  12.19. 
Luke  20.  31.  the  seven  took  her,  and  left  no  c. 

Our  CHILDREN. 
Oen.  31.  16.  all  the  riches  are  ours  and  our  c. 
Ezod,  17.  3.  to  kill  us,  and  our  c.  and  our  catlle 
Mum.  14.  3.  that  our  wives  and  our  c.  be  a  prey 
IJeut.  29.  29.  belong  to  us  and  to  our  c.  for  ever 
,/ash.  22.  24.  your  c.  might  sjieak  lo  our  c.  saying 
2.5.  your  c.  make  our  c.  cease  from  fearing  Lord 
Meh.5.5.  as  ihe  flesh  of  brethren,  our  c.  as  their  c. 
J/ui.27.2o.and  said, his  hlooil  be  on  us  and  on  our  c. 

CHILDREN  of  promise. 
fiom.9.8.but  the  c.o/prom.  are  counted  for  the  seed 
(ial.  4. 28.  we,  brethren,  as  Isaac  was,  are  c.  of  p. 

Strange  CHILDREN. 
.VeA.9.  t2.  Israel  separated  themselves  from  sir.  c. 
Psal.  144. 7.  rid  and  deliver  me  from  strange  c.  11. 
Has.  5.  7.  for  ihey  have  begotten  strange  c. 

Their  CHILDREN. 
Gen.  31.43.  what  can  I  do  lo  daughters  or  their  c? 
Deut.  4.  10.  and  that  they  may  teach  their  c. 
5.  29.  that  it  might  be  well  with  their  c.  for  ever 
31.  13.  that  their  c.  may  learn  to  fear  the  Lord 
.losh.  5.  7.  and  their  c.  them  Joshua  circumcised 

1  friugs  9. 21.  of  tAci'rc.  did  Solomon  levy  a  tribute 

2  liings8.V2.  thou  wiltdash  (Acirc.and  rip  women 

17.  31.  burnt  their  c.  in  the  fire  to  the  gods 
41.  Ilieir  c.  served  images  aa  did  their  fathers 

2  Chron.  20. 13.  Iiefore  Lord  with  wives  and  their  c 

25.  4.  he  slew  not  tAttV  c.  but  did  as  it  is  wriller 
JV*eA.9. 23.  tAeir  c.  thou  multipliest  as  stars  of  heav. 

13.  24.  their  c.  spake  half  in  the  speech  nf  Ashdod 
.lob  21.  11.  send  their  little  ones,  their  c.  dance 

24.  5.  the  wilderness  yieldelh  food  for  tluir  c 

Psal.  78.  4.  we  will  not  hide  them  from  their  c. 

6.  should  arise  and  declare  them  In  their  c. 

90.  16.  and  let  thy  glory  appear  to  their  c. 

132.  12.  tlecir  c.  shall  sit  on  thy  throne  for  ever 
Isa.  13.  16  their  c.  shall  be  dashid  to  |iiece.<  before 
•Icr.  17.  2.  whilst  their  c.  remember  their  altars 

18.  91.  therefore  deliver  up  their  c.  to  the  famine 
30.  20.  their  c.  also  shall  be  as  aforetime 
32.18.  the  iniquity  of  fathers  into  bosom  of  their  c. 

39.  for  good  of  them  and  of  their  c.  after  them 
47.  3.  the  fathers  shall  not  look  back  to  their  c. 
/,am.4.10.the  hands  of  women  have  sodden  their  c. 
F.ze.k.  20.  18.  1  said  to  their  c.  in  the  wilderness 
23.  39.  when  they  had  slain  their  c.  lo  idols 
37.  25.  they  and  their  c.  shall  dwell  therein 
/)nn.  6.  24.  cast  Ihein  and  their  c.  into  dufl  of  lions 
Hrs.  9. 12.  tho'  bring  up  their  c.  yet  1  will  bereave 
.lorl  1 .  3.  let  your  c.  tell  f  Act r  c.and  their  c.  another 
Mic.'i.9.  from  fAcirc.have  ye  taken  away  my  glory 
Zeeh.  10.  7.  yea,  their  c.  shall  tee  it  and  be  glad 

9.  thcv  shall  live  with  their  c.  and  turn  again 
Jlcts  13.33.God  hath  fulfilled  the  same  lo  us  their  r. 
1  Tim.  3. 12.  deacons  rule  tAeir  c.  and  houses  weil 


CHO 

T'/t.2.4.young  women  to  love  husbands  End  their  c. 

T/aj  CHILDREN. 
Exod.  13.  13.  the  first-born  among  thy  c.  ledceni 
Dcut.-i.iO.^o  well  with  thy  c.  after  thee,  12.  25, 2S 

6.  7.  thou  shall  teach  them  diligently  to  thy  c. 

30.2.  thou  and  thy  c.  shall  obey  wilh  u"ll  thine  heai t 
.losh.  14.  9.  the  land  be  thine  and  thy  c.  for  ever 

1  Sam.  16.  11.  Samuel  said,  are  here  all  ihi/  c? 
IKings  2.  4.  if  thy  c.  take  heed  to  their  way  to  walk 

S.  25.  so  that  thy  c.  take  heed,  2  Chron.  0.  16. 
20.  3.  saith,  thy  wives  also  and  thy  c.  are  iiiiiio 

2  Kings  4.  7.  live  thou  and  tliy  c.  of  the  rest 
iO.'.iO.Uiy  c.of  Ibunli  generation  shall  sit  on  throne 

2  Chron.  21.  14.  Lord  will  smile  thy  people  and  c. 
./ob  8.  4.  if  thy  c.  have  sinned  against  him,  he  cast 
Psal.  45.  16.  inslead  of  thy  fatliers  shall  be  thy  c. 

73.  15.  should  oti'tnd  against  geiieralion  of  tAy  t. 

l2S.3.«Ayc.  likeoliveplants  round  about  thy  table 

132,  12.  if  thy  c.  will  keep  my  covenant  and  test. 

147.  13.  he  hath  blessed  thy  c.  within  thee 
Isa._  49.  17.  thy  c.  shall  make  haste,  thy  di^stroycrs 
2.5.  I  will  conleiid,  and  I  will  save  t/ty  c. 

54. 13.  and  all  thy  c.  shall  be  taught  of  the  Lord, 

and  great  shall  be  the  peace  of  Uty  c. 

Jer.5.1  .thy  c.hdve  forsaken  ihe,  and  sworn  by  them 

31.  17.  there  is  hope  that  tliy  c.  shall  come  again 
38.23.  they  shall  bring  out  Ihyc.  to  the  Chaldeans 

Eiek.lC>.3fi.  by  blood  of  thy  c.  thoudidstgivelheni 
Uos.  4.  C.  furgotten  the  law,  I  will  also  forget  thyc. 
.yi/af.23. 37.  gathered  tAyc,  as  a  hen  ga.  AuAe  13.34. 
Luke  19.  44.  they  shall  lay  thy  c.  within  thee 
2  John  4.  that  I  found  of  thy  c.  walking  in  truth 

I'oKr  CHILDREN. 
Ezod.  12.  26.  when  your  c.  shall  say  unto  you 

22.  24.  wives  be  widows,  and  your  c.  be  fatherless 
Lev.  25.  46.  take  lliem  as  inheritance  for  your  c. 

26.'22.  said,  wild  beasts  shall  rob  you  of  your  c. 
Mum.  14.  33.  your  c.  shall  wander  in  the  wildernesn 
Deut.  1.  39,  your  c.  shall  go  in  thither  and  possess 

11.2. 1  speak  not  with  your  c.who  have  not  known 
19.  these  my  words,  ye  shall  leach  them  your  c. 

21.  that  days  of  j/o«rc.  be  inulliplicd  in  the  land 
29.  22.  the  generation  to  come  of  your  c.  shall  say 

32.  46.  which  ye  shall  command  your  c.  to  observe 
Josh.  4.  6.  when  yottr  c.  ask  their  fathers,  21. 

22.  then  ye  shall  let  your  c-  know,  saying,  Israel 
1  Kings  9.  6.  if  ;/oar  c.  turd  from  following  me 

1  CAroH.  28. 8.  for  an  inherit,  to  yourc.  Ezra9. 12. 

2  Chron.  30.  9.  your  c.  shall  find  compassion  before 
PsaM15.14.the  Lord  shall  increase  you  and  yourc. 
.Ter.  2.  30.  in  vain  have  I  smitten  yourc. 
Mat.l.  II.  to  give  good  gifts  to  (/o«re.  Lukell.Vi. 

12.  27.  by  whom  do  your  c.  cast  them  out? 
lyuke  23.  28.  but  weep  lor  yourselves  and  your  c. 
..Sets  2.  39.  for  the  promise  is  to  you  and  your  c. 
1  C53r.7.I4.  else  were  yourc.  unclean,  but  now  holy 
F.ph.  G.4.  provoke  not  vour  c.  to  wrath.  Col.  3, 21. 

JoKfi^  CHILDREN, 
.fob  19.  18.  yea,  young  c.  dosjiised  me,  they  spake 
/,nm.4.4.  t\te  young c.n&k  biead,no  man  bieaketli 
Mah.  3.  10.  her  young  c.  were  dashed  in  pieces 
j1/ari-10. 13.  brought  7/oan^e.  to  hiin  to  touch  them 
Jicts  7.  19.  so  that  Ihev  cast  out  their  young  c. 

CHIMNEY. 
Hos.  13.  3.  they  shall  be  as  smoke  out  of  the  c. 

CHODE. 
Gen.  31.  36.  Jacob  was  wroth,  and  c.  with  Lahan 
Mam.  20.  3.  the  people  c.  wilh  Moses  and  spake 

CHOICE. 
Gen.  23.  6.  in  c.  of  our  sepulchres  bury  thy  dead 

49.  U.  binding  his  ass's  colt  to  the  c.  vine 
Dejit.  12.  U.  thither  shall  bring  all  your  c.  vows 

1  Sam.  9.  2.  Saul  a  c.  young  man  and  a  goodly 

2  Sam.  10.  9.  he  chose  of  c.  of  Israel,  1  CAr.  19. 10. 
2  Kings  19. 23.  cut  down  the  c.  fir-trees,  Isa.  37.24. 
2  CA;ori.  25.  5.  he  found  theni  300,0(10  c.  inon 
JVeA.  5.  18.  now  prepared  for  me  daily  six  c.  sheep 
Prov.  8.  10.  and  knowledge  rather  than  c.  gold 

19.  and  my  revenue  is  better  than  c.  silver 
10.  20.  the  tongue  of  the  just  is  as  c.  silver 
Otnt.  6.  9.  she  is  the  c.  one  of  her  that  bare  het 
.Trr.  22.  7.  they  shall  cut  down  thy  c.  cedars 
48. 1 15.  thee.of  Moabaregoiiedown  to  slaughter 
f?2cA.  23. t7.  committed  whoredom  wilh  c.of  Ashcr 
24.  4.  set  on  a  pot,  fill  it  with  the  c.  bones 

5.  lake  the  c.  of  the  flock  and  burn  the  bones 
Acts  15. 7.  God  made  c.  among  us,that  the  Gentile* 

CHOICEST. 
Isa.5.'2.  and  pisnicd  the  vineyard  wilh  the  c.  vine 
22.  7.  thy  c.  vallev  fhall  bo  full  of  chariots 

"  CHOKE. 
Mat.  13. 22.  Ihe  care  of  this  worM,  and  the  deceit- 
fulness  of  rielies  c.  the.word,  Mark  4   19. 
CHOKED. 
Mat.  1.3.  7.  thorns  c.  them,  Mark  4.  7.  f.ukc  8.  7. 
Mark  5.  13.  and  were  c.  in  the  sea,  T.uke  8.  .3.3. 
/.ttAcc8.14.go  forth  and  are  e.  with  cares  and  richej 

CHOLER. 
Dan.  8.  7.  a  he-goat  moved  with  c.  smoto  the  raiu 
11. 11. the  king  of  the  south  shall  benioved  with.1 


CHO 

CHOP. 

Mic.  3.  3.  break  their  bones  and  c.  them  in  pieces 
CHOOriE 

Signifie9»l.l]  To  select,  or  make  choice  of,  Exod. 
17.  9.  Paul.  2.5.  12.  [2J  'I'o  renew  a  choice,  or 
to  choose  again,  Isa.  14. 1. 1  48.  10.  [3]  To  fol- 
low, imitate,  or  practise,  Prov.  3.  31. 

It  is  spoken  (I)  Of  persons,  as,  [1]  C/Chrisl,  who 
teas  chosen  and  set  apart  from  eternity  by  (rod 
the  Father  for  the  ojjice  of  .Mediator,  Isa.  42.  1. 
[2]  Of  such  whom  (lud  from  all  cti  rnity  eltctid 
and  separatedfrom  among  the  children  of  men, 
to  deliver  them  from  sin  and  hell,  and  by  his 
■Spirit  working  in  them  to  unite  thivi  by  faith  to 
Christ,  the  Head  of  the  church,  and  Iv  sanctify 
and  save  them  by  kirn,  -Maik  13.  20.  Epli.  1.  4. 
131  Of  the  li-w3,  who  were  set  apart  as  God's 
peculiar  people,  I)eut.7.ti.  Psal.  lUo.ti.  [4]  Of 
persons  chosen  to  office,  John  6.  70.  (IJ)  Of 
thinirs,  Isa.  58.  6.  (Ill)  Of  places,  2Chr.  0.  38. 
CHOOSE,  as  an  act  of  God. 

Kum.  16.  7.  Ihi-  man  ihe  Lord  ilolh  c.  sliall  be  holy 

17. 5.  the  man's  rod  whom  I  shall  c.  shall  blossom 
Deut.  7.  7.  the  Lord  did  not  c.  you  because  more 

12.  5.  the  place  which  Lord  shall  c.  11,  14,  18,20. 
I  14.  23,  24,  25.  |  15.  20  |  16.  2,  ti,  7,  15,  10.  | 
17.  8,  10.  I  18.  (5.  I  2C.  2.  |  31.  II.  Jush.  U.  27. 

17. 15.  shall  set  him  king,  whom  the  Lord  shall  c. 
1  Sam.  2. 28.  did  I  c.  him  out  of  all  tribes  of  Israel 
hSam.  16.  18.  whom  the  Lord  and  his  people  e. 

21.6.  will  hang  them  in  Gibeali  whom  Lord  did  c. 
1  KiniTs  14.  21.  the  city  which  the  Lord  did  c. 
J^eh.§.  7.  thou  art  the  God  who  did.st  c.  Abram 
Psal.  25.  12.  him  shall  he  teach  in  way  he  shall  c. 

47.  4.  he  shall  c.  our  inheritance  for  us 
Jsa.  14.  1.  for  the  Lord  will  yet  c.  Israel 

49.  7.  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  he  shall  c.  thee 

66.  4. 1  also  will  c.  their  delusions,  and  bring  fears 
Zeeh.  1. 17.  the  Lord  will  yet  c.  Jerusalem,  2.  12. 

CHOOSE. 
Kzad.  17. 9.  c.  us  out  men,  and  go  out,  fight  with 
/)«<«.  23. 16.  he  shall  dwell  in  that  place  he  shall  c. 

30.19.  thorcforec.  life,  that  thou  and  seed  may  live 
Josh.  24.  15.  c.  this  day  whom  you  will  serve 

1  Sam.  17.  8.  c.  you  a  man  for  you,  let  him  come 

2  Sam.  17.1.  let  me  c.  12,000  men,  and  I  will  pursue 
19.  t  38.  what  thou  shall  c.  that  will  I  do  for  ihee 
24. 12.  I  off.T  thee,  c.  one  of  them,  1  CAr.2).  10. 

1  Kings  18.  23.  let  them  c.  one  bullock,  25. 
Job  9.  14.  c.  out  my  words  to  reason  with  him 

34.  4.  let  us  c.  to  us  judgment,  let  us  know 

33.  whether  thou  refuse,  or  whether  thou  c. 
I'j  84.  f  10. 1  would  c.  rather  to  git  at  the  threnhold 
Prov.  1.  2i).  and  did  not  c.  the  fear  of  iho  Lord 

3.  31.  the  oppressor,  and  c.  none  of  his  ways 
Jsa.l.  15.  may  know  to  refuse  evil,  and  c.  good,  16. 

56.  4.  to  the  eunuchs  that  c.  things  that  please  me 

65.  12.  and  did  c.  that  wherein  1  dcliglitud  not 
Kk*.  21.  19.  c.  a  place,  c.  it  at  the  head  of  the  way 
Phil.  1.  22.  vet  what  I  shall  c.  I  wot  not 

CHOO.SE9T,  ETH.INO. 
Job  7.  15.  so  that  inv  soul  c.  strangling  and  death 

15.  5.  and  thou  c.  the  tongue  of  the  crafty 
P.tal.  65.  4.  blessed  is  the  man  whom  thou  e. 
ha.  40.  20.  he  c.  a  tree  that  will  not  rot 

41.  24.  an  abomination  is  he  ihat  c.  you 
Heb.  11.25.  c.  rather  to  sntfer  affliction  with  people 

CHOSE. 
Gen.  (i.  2.  they  look  them  wives  of  all  which  they  c. 

13.  II.  then  Lot  c.  him  all  the  plain  of  Jordan 
Fzod.  18.  25   Moses  c.  able  men,  and  made  heads 
Deut.  4.  37.  he  c.  their  seed  after  tln'm,  10.  15. 
./b*A.8.3.  Joshua  c.  :I0,(K)0  mighty  men  of  valour 
Judg.  5.  8.  they  c.  new  go<l8,  then  was  war  in  gates 

2  .Sim. 6.  21.  Ihe  Lord  who  c.  nie  before  thy  father 
1  Kingsi^.  16.1  c.  no  city  out  of  all  the  tribes  of  Isr. 

to  build  a  house  for  my  name,  2  Chr.  6.  5. 
I  Chr.  28.  4.  the  Lord  c.  me  before  all  the  house  of 
Job  29.  25.  I  c.  out  llieir  way  and  sal  chief 
Psiil.  78.  67.  and  c.  noi  ihe  irib'^  of  Eiiliraim 
88.  but  c.  the  tribe  of  Judah,  the  mount  Zion 
70.  he  c.  David  also  his  servant,  nnd  took  him 
Jga.  66.  4.  and  c.  that  in  which  I  didiglited  not 
Kiek.  20.  !>.  say  to  them,  in  Ihe  day  when  I  c.  Israel 
J.uke  6.  I'.l.  "f  his  discip'es  h>-  c.  twelve  aposllc^s 

14.  7.  when  he  markid  how  On'S  c.  cbi'M'  rooms 
./?cM6.5.  c  Stephen  a  man  full  of  faith  and  H.tihost 

13.  17.  God  of  this  people  Israel  e.  our  fathers 

13.40.  Paul  c.Siliis  nnd  dcpaited,  being  rccommen. 

CHOSEN. 
>!TO<f.  15.4.  bin  r.cnpt'iins  nre  drowned  in  theses 
JVum.  16.  5.  him  whom  ho  bulb  c.  ciusc  to  come 
Jonh.'it.  22.  ye  havr  c.  you  the  Lord  lo  serve  hlin 
Jiidrr.  10.  14,  go  nnd  cry  to  the  gods  ye  hiivf  c. 
1  .Sam.  8.  IH.  because  of  the  king  ye  hiive  c.  12.  13. 

20.30.  I  know  that  thou  bast  c.  Ihosim  of  Josso 
1  /i'in^,»3.8.hnsl  e.n  grout  peopb'.rannoi  be  number 

8.  44.  Iho  rity  thou  hnst  e.  48.  2  Chron.  6.  34, 38. 
1  Chron.  16.  13.  vo  children  of  Jacob  his  «.  ones 

fob  36.  21.  this  ha»l  thou  e.  rather  than  affliction 
70 


CHR 

Psal.  33.  12.  people  be  hath  c.  for  his  inheritance 
6'U.  3.  I  have  made  a  covenant  with  my  o. 

19.  I  have  exalted  one  e.  out  of  the  people 
105.6.  seed  of  .Abraham,  ye  childr.  of  Jacob  his  c. 
i'.\.  he  brought  forth  his  c.  with  gladness 
lot).  5.  that  1  may  see  the  good  of  Ihy  c. 
23.  had  not  Moses  his  c.  stood  before  him 
Prov.  16. 16.  understand,  rather  to  be  c.  than  silver 
22.  1.  a  good  name  is  rather  to  be  c.  than  riches 
Isa.  43.  20.  to  give  drink  to  my  people,  my  c. 

65.  15.  shall  leave  your  name  a  curse  to  my  c. 

66.  3.  yea,  they  have  c.  their  own  ways 

.ler.  8.  3.  and  death  shall  b«  c.  rather  than  life 
49. 19.  who  is  a  c.  man  that  I  may  ajipoiiit,  50.  44. 

Mat.  20.  16.  many  be  called,  but  few  c.  'J2.  14. 

Mark  13.20.  for  his  elect's  sake  whom  be  lialh  c. 

I.ukc  10.  42.  and  Mary  hath  c.  that  good  part 

Jlcts  1.24.  shew  whether  of  these  two  thou  hast  c. 
9.  15.  go  thy  way,  for  he  is  a  c.  vessel  to  rae 

Rom.  16.  13.  salute  Ilufus  c.  in  the  Lord 

2  Cur.  8. 19.  who  was  c.  of  the  churches  to  travel 

1  Tim.  5.  1 9.  let  not  a  widow  be  c.  into  the  number 

2  7'im.2.4. please  him  who  balh  c.  him  to  be  a  soldier 
1  Pel.  2.  9.  ye  are  a  c.  generation,  a  royal  priesthood 
Rev.  17.  14.  they  are  called  c.  and  faithful 

CHOSEN  of  God. 
Luke  23.  .35.  if  he  be  the  Christ,  the  c.  of  God 
.lets  10.  41.  but  to  witnesses  c.  before  of  God 
1  Pet.2.  4.  a  living  stone,  c.  of  God  and  precious 

God  hath  CHOSEN. 
Deut.  12.21.  Godhalhc.lo  put  name  there,  16.  II. 
21.  5.  them  God  hath  c.  to  minister  unto  iiini 
1  CAro7i.29.1.  Solomon  whom  God  hatkc.  is  young 
.>icts  22.  14.  the  God  of  our  fathers  hath  c.  thee 

1  Cur.  1.27.  Godhath  c.  foolish  things  of  the  world 

to  confound  wise,  God  hathc.  weak  things 
28.  things  desjiised  G.  hath  c.  and  things  that  are 

2  Thess.  2.  13.  God  from  the  beginning  Aa^A  c.  you 
.rain.  2.  5.  A<i/A  not  God  c.  the  pour  of  this  world 

/Aowe  CHOSEN. 
1  KiniTS  II.  13.  for  David's  sake  and  Jerusalem's 
sake  / have  c.  2  Kings 21 . 7. 1 23.27.  2  Chr.  6. 6. 
32.  the  city  which  I  have  c.  out  of  all  the  tribes 
vVfA.  1.9.  bring  them  to  )dace  J  have  c.  to  set  name 
I'sal.  119.  30.  /have  c.  the  way  of  tiuib,  173. 
/id.  4 1.8.  Jacob  whom  t  have  c.  the  seed  of.\brah. 

9.  I  hace  c.  thee,  and  not  cast  thee  away 

43.  10.  my  servant  whom  I  have  c.  Mat.  12.  18. 

44.  1.  Israel  whom  I  have  c.  \\  2.  Jesurun  I  have  c. 
48.  10.  I  have  c.  thee  in  the  furnace  of  affliction 
.58.  5.  is  not  this  the  fast  that  /  Aatie  c?  6. 

Hag.  2.  23.  /  have  c.  thee,  sailh  the  Lord  of  hosts 
John  13. 18.  speak  not  of  all,  I  know  whom  I  have  c. 

15.  16.  ye  have  not  c.  me,  but  f  have  c.  you 

19.  but  I  have  c.  you  out  of  the  world,  therefore 

/.ord  hath  CHOSEN. 

/)cw<.7.fi. /.or;/ Aa<Ac.  thee  a  special  people,  14.2. 

18.  5.  the  /.ord  hath  c.  him  out  of  all  the  Iriliis 

1  Sam.  10. 24.  see  him  whom  /.ord  hath  c.  none  like 

16.  8.  and  be  said,  neither  hath  the  J.urd  c.  this 

10.  Samuel  said,  the  Lord  hath  not  c.  these 

1  CAr.  15.  2.  for  them  the  Lord  hath  c.  to  carry  ark 
28.4.  /,orrfAn«/(C.  Judah  ruler,  and  bouse  of  fath. 

5.  /.ord hath  c.Solomon  to  sit,to  build  a  house,  10. 
2CAr.29.  11  /.orr<Aa«Ac.  you  to  stand  to  serve  him 
Psnl.  105.  26.  he  sent  Aaron  whom  he  had  c. 
132.  13.  /,.  A«(A  c.  Zion  ||  13.5.  4.  L.  hath  c.  Jacob 
./(!)•.  33.  24.  the  two  families  which  the  /.ord  hath  c. 
y.ech.X'i.  /.ord\\m\  AatA  C.Jerusalem  rebuke  thee 
F.ph.  1.  4.  according  ns  he.  hath  c.  us  in  him 

CHOSEN  men. 
Judg.  20.  16.  seven  hundred  e.  men  left-handed 
\Kings  12.21.ufJudab  lbO,0UOc.  iiien,2  CAr.ll.l. 

2  Chron.  13.  3.  Abijuh  set  the  battle  in  army  with 

400,000 c.  men,  Jeroboam  with  800,000  c.  men 
Psal.W.  31.  wrath  smote  down  thee,  men  of  Israel 
.'lets  15.  22.  to  send  c.  men  of  their  company,  25. 

{;hrist. 

The  anointed  of  God ;  the  same  with  the  Ilibrew 
Mrs.uah,  I'sal.  4.5.  7.  Isa.  61.1.  The  ilcriial  Son 
of  God,  the  second  Person  of  the  gloriout  Tri- 
nity, Milt.  28.  19.  1  John  5.  8.  /n  his  divine 
naiurehe  is  equal  with  the  Father,  and  over  all, 
God  blested  for  ever ;  but  in  his  human  nature, 
subordinate  and  inferior  lo  the  Father,  being 
like  to  men  in  all  things,  sin  cicrplrd.  /inth 
natures  are  united  in  the  person  of  Christ,  that 
he  might  be  our  prophet,  priest,  and  king,  and 
the  author  of  a  complete,  perfect,  all-sufficient 
and  eternal  salnation.  /le  ever  lives  lo  inter- 
rede  for  all  Ihat  come  to  him,  Ilcb.  7.  25. 

/n  Christ  all  the  types,  prophecies,  and  promises 
centre,  //e  is  the  most  suitable  object  for  the 
.linnrr  to  look  to,  lrn.il  in,  and  eipect  all  hit 
hopes,  jnys,  and  consolations  frum,  an  by  h 
alone  life  and  salrntion  are  procured.  He  is 
the  head  of  principalities  and  powers,  th 
briehtness  of  his  Father's  glny  ;  and  the  ei 
press  image  of  his  person,  Ilcb.  13.  the  glory 
of  all  worlds,  and  the  refulgent  luminary  of 


CHR 

ike  universe,  John  1.9.  the  inezhaustibte  fouH 
tain  of  all  the  treasures  of  nature,  grace,  and 
glory,  Jer.  2.  13.  and  the  matchless,  incompa- 
ralile  Redeemer  of  all  that  come  to  him,  John 
6.  37.  Christ  was  the  grand  subject  of  all  the 
apostles'  ministry.  Acts  8.  5.  and,  indeed,  a 
sermon  without  Christ  is  like  a  cloud  without 
water,  or  a  shadow  without  substance.  Onemo- 
nicnt's  communion  with  Christ  i.«  of  more  wort/l 
than  ten  thousand  worlds ;  his  person  most 
glorious,  anil  he  is  altogether  lovely,  Cant. 5. 16. 

The  ancient  Hebrews,  being  instructed  by  thepro' 
phets, had  very  clear  notions  of  the  Messiah:  but 
they  were  changed  by  little  and  little,  so  that 
when  Christ  appeared  in  Judca,  they  had  enter- 
tained a  very  wrong  notion  of  tlu  Messias,  ei- 
peeling  a  temporal  monarch  and  conqueror, 
that  should  bring  the  whole  world  tinder  sub- 
jection. Frum  whence  it  came  to  pass,  that  lliejf 
were  much  scandalized  at  the  outward  appear- 
ance, the  liuinility,  and  seeming  weakness  of 
our  .Saviour,ichieh  hindered  them  from  acknoto- 
Icdging  him  as  the  Christ  whom  they  erpected. 

'J'heancientprophetshadforetold,lhatthctiie»siat 
should  be  God  and  Man,  exalted  and  abased, 
Master  and  Servant,  Priest  and  Fictim,  King 
and  Subject,  mortal,  and  a  conijuerur  of  death, 
rich  and  poor,  a  king,  a  conqueror,  glorious, 
yet  a  man  of  griefs,  involved  in  our  infirmities, 
in  a  state  of  great  humiliation,  .ill  these  seem- 
ing contrarieties  were  to  be  reconciled  in  Ike 
person  of  the  Messiah,  as  they  did  really  meet 
in  the  person  of  Christ.  It  was  known  that  the 
Messiah  was  to  be  born  of  a  virgin,  of  the  tribe 
of  Judah,  of  the  race  of  David,  in  the  village 
of  Beth-lehem :  that  he  was  to  continue  for 
ever,  that  his  name  should  be  continued  as  long 
as  the  sun,  that  he  was  the  great  prophet  pro- 
mised in  the  law,  that  he  was  both  the  Son  and 
Lord  of  David,  that  he  teas  to  perform  great 
miracles,  that  he  should  restore  all  things,  Ihat 
he  should  die  nnd  rise  again,  that  Elins  should 
be  the  forerunner  of  his  appearance,  that  a 
proof  of  his  coming  should  be,  the  cure  of  the 
lepers,  life  restored  to  the  dead,  nnd  the  gospel 
preached  to  the  poor:  that  he  should  not  destroy 
the  law,  but  sfu/utd  perfect  and  fi'Ifl  it ;  that 
he  should  be  a  stone  of  offence,  anil  a  stunibling- 
bloc/i,  against  irhich  many  should  bruise  them- 
selves; that  he  should  suffer  oppositions  and 
contradictions , and  that  a  strange  people  should 
come  and  submit  themsclces  to  his  discipline. 

When  Christ  upprared.  these  notions  of  him  teere 
still  common  among  the  Jews.  Our  Saviour 
herein  appeals  even  to  themselves, and  osks  them 
if  these  loere  not  the  characters  of  thei]esg\ah, 
and  if  the)/  do  nut  see  the  completion  of  them  in 
himself.  The  Evangelists  take  care  to  put  them 
in  mind  of  them,  to  jf^ore  thereby,  that  Jesus  t5 
thei'hrwl  whom  they  expected.  The  F.vangelitt 
Luke  says,  that  our  Saviotir  entering  into  a 
synagogue  at  Nazareth,  there  opened  the  book 
of  the  prophet  Isniah,  leA/TR  Ae  read.  The  Spirit 
of  the  I.ord  is  upon  me,  because  he  hath  anoinl- 
eil  me  to  prencli  the  gospel  to  the  poor,  /.uke4. 
18.  Jlfter  which  he  shewed  them  that  this  pro- 
phecy was  accomplished  in  his  person,  .^nd 
St.  Peter  and  the  other  believers  being  assem- 
bled together,  Acts  4.  24,  25,  &c.  say  to  God 
from  Psal.  2.  1,  2,  Why  did  the  heathen  rnp«, 
Slc.  and  apply  this  prophecy  to  Christ,  versed. 
Jhid  in  Aets'lO.  38,  Peter,  speaking  to  Corne- 
lius (Ac  eniturion,  and  In  those  that  were  teith 
him,  tells  them  that  the  Lord  had  sent  pence  to 
men,  bi/  Jesus  Christ,  whom  (5od  hnd  iinointed 
wilh  llie  Holy  Ghost  nnd  with  power.  So  that 
when  Christ,  or  his  disciples,  are  said  lo  b* 
anointed, it  is  to  he  understood  of  the  spiritual 
and  internal  unci  inn  of  grace  and  of  the  Holy 
Gho.ll,  of  which  the  outward  and  sensible  une- 
tion,teith  which  they  anciently  anointed  kingr, 
prieits,  and  prophets,  teas  but  the  figure  and 
symbol.     See  Messiah. 

Christ  i.<  taken  for  the  mystical  body  of  Christ, 
both  himself  the  llrad,  and  the  church  as  hiit 
members,  tchirh  make  hut  one  body,  I  Cor.  12. 
12.  Likewise  for  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  or  the 
rule  of  life  prescribed  by  him,  Eph.  4.  20.  .^nd 
for  the  Spirit,  and  spiritual  gifts  and  gractt 
of  Christ,  Rom.  8.  10. 

Mat.  2.  4.  he  demnmled  where  C.  should  bo  bom 
16.  16.  Ihon  art  C.  Ihe  Son  of  the  living  God 
23  8.  for  <me  is  vour  Mnstnr,  even  C.  10. 
21.  5.  manv  sbnil  come,  siiving,  t  am  C.  and  Vnall 
(lec.ive  many,  Murk  13.  6.  /.uke  21.  8 
26.  68.  prophesy  lo  us',  ihoii  C  who  sinot.-  theel 

.Mark  9.  41.  in  my.  name  brTause  ve  belong  to  C. 
15  :f2.  I'-t  C  descend  now  from  the  cioss 

r.nke  2.  26.  should  not  ilir,  before  he  bad  seen  O 
4.  41.  the  devils,  they  knew  that  be  was  C. 


C1^ 

itiJle  23. 35.  save  himself,  if  he  be  C.  chosen  of  God 

39.  saying,  if  thou  be  C.  save  thyself  and  us 
84.  26.  ought  not  C.  to  have  sufFured  these  things? 
46.  thus  it  believed  C  to  suffer  and  rise  from  dead 

/oAn  4.  25.  the  Messias  coineth,  which  is  called  6. 

7.  27.  when  C.  corneth,  no  man  knowclh 

31.  when  C.  corneth,  will  he  do  more  miracles? 

41.  but  some  said,  shall  C.  come  out  of  Galilee  ? 

42.  said,  that  C.  corneth  of  the  seed  of  David 
9.  22.  that  if  any  man  did  confess  that  he  was  C. 
12.  34.  we  have  heard  that  C.  ahidelh  for  ever 

^cls  2.  30.  he  would  raise  up  C.  to  sit  on  his  throne 

36.  God  hath  made  that  Jesus  both  Lord  and  C. 

3. 18.  God  had  before  shewed  that  C.  should  sutler 

8.  5.  Pliili|>  went  and  preached  C.  to  them 

9.  20.  and  straightway  he  preached  C.  in  synagog. 
17.  3.  alleging  that  C.  must  needs  have  sulfured 
26.23.  that  C  should  suffer,  and  rise  (irst  from  d. 

Rom.  5.  6.  in  due  time  C.  died  for  the  ungodly 

8.  ill  that  while  we  were  yet  sinners  C.  died  lijr  us 

6.  4.  like  as  C  was  raised  up  from  the  dead  by 

9.  knowing  that  C.  being  raised,  dieth  no  more 

7.  4.  ye  are  become  dead  to  law  by  the  body  of  C. 
8. 9.  if  any  have  not  Spirit  of  C.  he  is  none  of  his 

10.  if  C.  be  in  you,  the  body  is  dead  because  of  sin 

11.  he  that  raised  up  C  from  dead  shall  quicken 

9.  3.  I  could  wish  myself  were  accursed  from  C 

5.  of  whom  C.  came,  who  is  over  all,  God  blessed 

10.  4.  C.  is  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness 

6.  that  is,  to  bring  C.  down  from  above 

7.  that  is,  to  bring  up  C.  again  from  the  dead 
)4. 9.  for  lo  Ibis  end  C.  died,  and  rose,  and  revived 

15.  deslroy  not  him  with  meat  for  whom  C.  died 
18.for  he  that  in  these  things  serveth  C.  is  accept. 

15.3.  for  even  C.  pleased  not  himself,  but  reproach. 
7.  as  C.  also  received  us,  to  the  glory  of  God 

18.  of  things  which  C.  hath  not  wrought  by  me 

20.  I  strive  to  preach,  not  where  C.  was  named 
16.  5.  Epenetus  the  first-fruits  of  Achaia  to  C. 

I  Cor.  1.2,3.  but  we  preach  C.  crucified,  to  the  Jews 
24.  C.  the  power  of  God,  and  the  wisdom  of  God 

3.  23.  and  ye  are  C.  and  C.  is  God's 

5.  7.  even  C.  our  passover  is  sacrificed  for  us 

8.  11.  the  weak  brother  perish,  for  whom  C.  died 

9.  21.  but  under  the  law  to  C.  that  I  might  gain 

10. 4.  all  drank  of  that  rock,  and  that  rock  was  C. 
9.norlet  ustcmpt  C.as  someofthem  alfo  tempted 

15. 3. 1  delivered  to  you,  how  C.  died  for  our  sins 

12.  if  C.  be  preached  that  he  rose  from  the  dead 

16.  if  the  «lead  rise  not,  then  is  not  C.  raised 

17.  and  if  C.  be  not  raised,  your  faith  is  vain 

23.  every  man  in  his  own  order,  C  the  first-fruits 
2Cor.  3. 4.  such  trust  have  we  ihro'  C.  to  God- ward 

5.  16.  yea,  tho'  we  have  known  C.  after  the  fle»h 

6.  15.  and  what  concord  hath  C.  with  Belial? 

11.  2.  I  may  present  you  as  a  chaste  virgin  to  C 
Cnl.  2.  20.  I  live,  yet  not  I,  but  C.  liveth  in  me 

21.  if  right,  come  by  law,  then  C.  is  dead  in  vain 
3.13.  C.hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law 

24. 1  he  law  was  our  schoolmaster, to  bring  us  to  C 
29.  if  ye  be  C.  then  are  Abraham's  seed,  and  heirs 

4.  7.  if  a  son,  then  an  heir  of  God  ihrough  C. 

19.  of  whom  I  travail,  till  C.  be  formed  in  you 

5. 1.  the  liberty  wherewith  C.  hath  made  us  free 
2.  if  ye  be  circumcised,  C.sliall  profit  you  nothing 
4.  C.  is  become  of  no  effect  unto  you,  whosoever 

ofynu  are  justified  by  the  law 

24.  that  are  C.  have  crucified  the  flesh  wiih  affect. 
Fpk.  2.  12.  at  that  time  ye  were  without  C. 

3.  17.  that  C.  may  dwell  in  your  hearts  by  faith 
4. 15.  may  grow  in  him  which  is  the  head,  even  C. 

20.  but  ye  have  not  so  le:irned  C. 

5.2.  a.-i  t.  also  loved  us,  and  hath  given  himself  for 
14.arisefrom  tliedead,and  C  slmll  give  thee  light 

23.  husb.  is  head  of  wife,  as  C.  is  heart  of  church 

24.  as  ihe  church  is  subject  to  Or'so  let  wives  he 

25.  love  your  wives,  as  C  also  loved  Ihe  church 

32.  but  I  speak  concerning  C.  and  the  church 
6.  5.  obedient,  in  singleness  of  your  heart  as  to  C. 

PAiM.15.  some  indeed  preach  C.  of  envy  and  strife 
16.  the  one  preach  C.  of  content  ion,  not  sincerely 

18.  C.  is  preachfd,  and  I  therein  do  rejoice 
20.  so  now  C  shrill  be  magnified  in  my  body 

3.  8.  r  count  them  but  dung,  that  I  may  win  C. 

4.13.  I  can  do  nil  through  C.who  slien^lheneih  me 

Col.  2.8.  after  rudi incnts  of  world,  iind  not  afier  C. 

3.  1.  where  C.  silteth  on  the  right  hand  of  God 

4.  when  C.  who  is  our  life  shall  appear,  then  shall 

11.  bond  nor  free,  but  C.  is  all  and  in  ail 

13.  even  ns  C.  forgave  you,  so  also  do  ye 

24.  receive  the  reward,  for  ye  servo  the  Lord  C. 

Jfi-b.  3.  6.  but  C.  ns  a  son  over  l.i-i  own  hou^e 

5.5.  .«i  also  (7.  glorifii.-d  nut  liim-i  Ifto  he  a  higli-pr. 

9.  II.  but  C.  b.iing  come  a  higli-|irip<l  of  good 

24.  C.  notenter.intoholypluc(sm;ide  wilhhands 

28.  C  was  once  offered  to  hear  ilie  sins  of  many 

1  Pet.2.21.  becauseC.  nlsoBiiffoifd  for  u",  an  exam. 

3. 18.  C  hath  once  suffered  Tor  sins,  just  for  unjust 

4.1.asC.  suffered  fur  ns  in  the  He-h,:irm  yourselves 

Fev.  11.  15  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord  and  his  C. 

77 


CHR 

Rcv.K.  10.  now  is  come  kingd.  of  C.  power  ofhis  C. 

.tguinst  CHUIST. 
.^cls  4.20.  kings  and  rulers  gathered  against  his  C 
1  Cor.  8.  12.  when  ye  sin  against  the  breihren  ye 
ein  against  C. 

1  Tim. 5.1  l.wa.v  wanton  against  C.  they  will  marry 

By  ClilUST. 

2  Cor.  1.  5.  so  our  consolation  aboundeth  by  C. 
Oal.'i.  17.  butif  while  we  seek  to  be  justified  iy  C. 
Kph.  3.  21.  to  him  be  glory  in  church  by  C.  Jesus 

Fur  CHIUST. 

1  Cor.  1.  17.  for  C.  sent  me  not  to  baptize,  but  to 
4. 10.  wearefools/«r  C.  sake,  hut  ye  are  wise  in  C 

2  Cor. 5. 20.  now  we  are  ambassadors /or  C.  we  pray 

12.  10.  I  take  pleasure  in  distresses /or  C.  sake 
Kp/i.  4.  32.  as  God  for  C.  sake  hath  forgiven  you 
Phil.  3.  7.  gain  to  me,  those  I  counted  loss /or  C. 
2  T/tess.3.5.  L.  direct  to  the  patient  waiting/or  C. 
//ti.ll.t26.  esteeming  reproach/or  C.  greater  rich. 

Jesus  with  CHRIST. 

jVaM.lG.was  born  Jesus,  who  is  called  C.  27.17,22. 

./u/in  1.  17.  but  grace  and  truth  came  by  Jesus  C. 

17.  3.  know  thee,  and  Jesus  C.  whom  thou  sent 

Jlcts  2.  38.  be  baptized  in  the  name  oi' Jesus  C. 

3.  6.  in  the  name  of  Jesus  C.  rise  up  and  walk 
20.  shall  send  Jesus  C.  who  was  preached  to  you 

4.  10.  by  the  name  of  ./csus  C.  doth  this  man  stand 
5. 42.  and  daily  they  ceased  not  to  preach  Jesus  C. 

8.  12.  when  they  believed  Philip  preaching  things 
concerning  name  of  Jesus  Cthey  were  baptized 

37.  I  believe  that  Jesus  C.  is  the  Son  of  God 

9.  34.  Eneas,  Jesus  C.  maketh  thee  whole,  arise 
10.36.preaching  peace  hy  Jesus  C.  he  is  Lord  of  all 
16. 18. 1  command  thee  in  (he  nameof./.C.come  out 
17.  3.  and  that  this  Jesus  I  preach  to  you  is  C. 
18. 5.  Paul  testified  to  the  Jews  that  ./esus  was  C. 

23.  shewing  by  the  scriptures  that  Jesus  was  C. 

19.  4.  that  they  should  believe  on  C  Jesus 
Rom.  1.  1.  Paul  a  servant  of  Jesus  C.  Phil.  I.  1. 

3.  concerning  his  Son  Jesus  C.  our  Lord,  of  seed 
6.  among  whom  are  ye  the  called  of  Jesus  C. 
8.  I  thank  my  God  through  Jesus  C.  for  you  all 

2.  16.  shall  judge  the  secrets  of  men  by  Jtsus  C. 
3.22.  righteousness,  which  is  by  faith  of  Jesus  C. 

24.  justified  through  the  redemption  in  Jesus  C. 
5. 15.  gift  by  grace,  which  is  by  one  man  Jesus  C. 

17.  shall  muidi  more  reign  in  life  by  one  ./esaj>  C. 
6.  3.  so  many  as  were  baptized  into  Jesus  C. 
8.  1.  no  condemnation  to  them  that  are  in  C.  Jesus 

2.  theSpirit  of  lifein  C.Jesus  hath  made  me  free 
16.  3.  Priscilla  and  Aquila,  my  helpers  in  C.  ./esu 

1  Cor.  1.1.  Paul  apostle  of./.  C.  2  Cor.  1.1.  Eph.l.i. 
■  2.  with  all  that  call  on  the  name  of  ./esus  C. 

4.  for  the  grace  of  God  given  you  by  ./esus  C. 
30.  but  of  him  are  ye  in  C.  Jesus,  who  is  made  to 

2.2.  not  to  know  any  thing,  save  Jis^us  C  crucified 
4. 15.  for  in  C.  J.  have  I  begotten  you  thro'  gospel 

2  Cor.  4.  6.  the  knowledge  of  God  in  face  of  J.  C. 

5.  18.  hath  reconciled  us  to  himself  by  Jesus  C. 

13.  5.  know  ye  not,  how  that  Jesus  C.  is  in  you 
Oal.2. 16.  a  man  is  justified  by  the  faith  of  Jesus  C. 

3.  14.  blessing  come  on  the  Gentiles  thro'  ./esus  C 
28.  male  nor  female,  for  ye  are  all  one  in  C.  ./esus 

4. 14.  ye  received  me  as  an  angel,  even  as  C.Jesus 
E//A.2.6.  made  us  sit  in  heavenly  places  in  C  Jesus 

20.  Jesus  C.  being  the  chief  corner  stone 
Phil. 1.8. 1  long  after  you  in  ihe  bowels  of.fesus  C. 

2.5.  mind  be  in  you,  which  was  also  in  C.  Jesus 

11.  Jesus  C.  is  Lord,  lo  the  glory  of  God  the  F 

21.  all  seek  not  the  things  which  are  ./esus  C. 
3.  8. 1  count  all  loss  for  Ihe  excellency  of  C.  ,/esus 

12.  for  which  also  I  am  apprehended  of  C.  ./esus 
4. 19.  according  to  his  riches  in  glory  by  C.  Jesus 

Col  2.6.  as  ye  have  received  C.J.  so  walk  ye  in  him 

1  Tim.  I.  15.  that  C.  Jesus  came  to  save  sinners 
2.  5.  mediator  between  God  and  men, man  C.Jesiis 
6. 13.  before  CAwho  witnessed  a  good  confession 

2  Tim.  1.  9.  according  to  his  grace  given  us  in  C.  J. 

13.  in  faith  and  love,  which  is  in  C.  Jesus 
Pkilem.  1.  Paul  a  prisoner  of  ,/esus  C.  9,  23. 
Heb.  13.  8.  J.  C.  the  same  yesterday,  and  for  ever 
1  ./ohn  1.7.  blood  of  Jesus  C.  cleanselh  from  all  sin 

2.  1.  we  have  an  advocate,  ./esus  C.  the  righleous 

5.  6.  this  is  he  that  came  by  water  and  blood,  J.  C. 

20.  we  are  in  him,  even  in  his  Son  Jesus  C 

Lord  .Jesus  CHRIST. 

Jlcls  11. 17.  as  to  us  who  believe  on  Ihe  />.  J.  C. 

15.  ll.thro'thegraceof/-../.  C.  weshMJlbesaved 

16.  31.  believe  on  the/..  J:  C.  thou  shall  he  saved 

20.  21.  testifying  faith  toward  our  Lord.Jrsus  C. 
Rom.  5. 1.  we  have  peace  wiih  God  thro'  /-. ./.  C 

11.  we  also  jnv  in  God,  thro'  our  /.ordJ'-sus  C. 
0.  23.  gifl  ofGnd  is  eternnl  life  ihio'  eur  /-. ./.  C. 
8.30.  .wpiirale  from  Invc  of  Goil  inC.  Jesus  our  1 .. 
13.  M.  putyeon  L.J.  C.  «nd  make  not  provision 
16.  20.  erare  of  A.  ./  C  be  with  you,  24.  2  Cor. 
13.  14.  Onl.  6.  18.  2  rAf.«.  3.  18.  /?<fu.22.2l. 
1  Cor.  1 . 7.  waiting  for  the  coming  of  /.ord  ./esus  C 
8.  R.  hut  to  us  one  /-.  J.  C  by  whom  are  all  thinjs 
15. 57.  Godgivethus  the  victory  thro' our/-.  J.  C 


CHR 

'1  Cor.  16.  22.  if  any  man  love  not  the  L.  Jesus  C 
2  Cor.  1.  2.  grace  and  peace  from  God,  and  from 
the  L.  J.  C.  (ial.  1.  3.  Kph.  1.  2.  Col.  1.  2. 
8.  9.  for  ye  know  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  C 
Gal.  6.  14.  glory  save  in  the  cross  o>'our  /.,.  J.  C. 
i'.>A.1.3.  blessed  be  the  Father  of  our /,orrf. /esus  C 
17.  God  of  our  />.  7.  C.  give  you  Spirit  of  wisdom 

1  Thess.  1.  3.  your  patience  of  hope  in  our  L.  J.  C. 

2.  19.  ye  are  our  joy  in  presence  of  our  L.  J.  C. 
3. 13.  may  establish  you  at  coming  of  our  L. ./.  C. 
5.  23.  be  preserved  unto  coming  of  our  /..  J.  C. 

2  Thess.  2.  1.  we  beseech  you  hy  coming  of  A.  J.  C 

16.  now  our  L.  J.  C.  hath  given  us  consolation 
17im.5.21.  I  charge  tin  ebefy..y.  C.27"uh.4.1. 
2  7'im. 4. 22.  the  /,../.  C.  be  wiih  thy  spirit,  amen 
2  Pet.  1.  11.  an  entrance  into  kingdom  of/,.  J.  0 

3.  18.  grow  in  grace  and  in  knowledge  of /,.  J.  C. 

/n  CHRIST. 
.icts  24.  24.  heard  him  concerning  the  faith  ir.  C 
Jiiim.  9.  1. 1  say  the  truth  in  C.  I  he  not,  my  cons. 
12.  5.  so  we  being  many  are  one  body  in  C. 

16.  7.  are  of  nolo,  who  also  were  in  C.  before  mo 

9.  salute  Urbane,  our  helper  in  C.  and  Siachyg 

10.  salute  Apelles  approved  in^C.  salute  Aristo. 

1  Cor.  3. 1. 1  speak  to  you,  even  as  unto  babes  j'n  C. 

4.  10.  we  are  fools,  but  ye  are  wise  in  C. 

15.  tho'  ye  have  10,000  instruct,  in  C.  not  many 
15. 18.  they  that  are  fallen  asleep  in  Care  perished 
19.  if  in  this  life  only  we  have  hope  in  C. 
22.  even  so  in  C.  shall  all  be  rtiade  alive 

2  Cor.  1.21.  he  which  est.iblishetli  us  with  you  in  C. 

2.  14.  God  who  causeth  us  to  triumph  in  C. 

17.  as  of  God,  in  the  sight  of  God  speak  we  in  C. 

3.  14.  vail  uniaken  away,  vail  is  done  away  in  C 

5.  17.  if  any  man  be  in  C.  he  is  a  new  creature 

19.  that  God  was  in  C.  reconciling  ihe  world 

20.  we  pray  you  in  C.  slead,  be  reconciled  lo  G. 
12.2. 1  knew  a  man  in  C.  above  fourteen  years  ago 

19.  we  speak  before  God,  in  C-  we  do  all  ihingg 
Gal.  1.22.  unknown  to  the  churches  of  Judea  in  C 

3. 17.  the  covenant  confirmed  before  of  (Jod  in  C 
27.  as  many  as  have  been  baptized  into  C. 
Kph.  1.  3.  blessed  us  with  spiritual  blessings  in  C 
10.  he  might  gather  in  one  all  things  in  C. 
12.  should  he  to  his  glory,  who  first  trusted  in  C 

20.  which  he  wrought  in  C.  when  he  raised  him 
3.  6.  partakers  of  his  promise  in  C.  by  the  gospel 

Phil.  1.  13.  so  that  my  bonds  in  C.  are  manifest  in 

2.  1.  if  there  be  any  consolation  in  C.  if  comfort 
Col.  2. 5.  beholding  stedf  istness  of  your  faith  in  C. 
1  Thess.  4.  16.  and  the  dead  in  C.  shall  rise  first 

1  Tim.  2.  7.  I  speak  the  truth  in  C.  and  lie  not 
1  Pet.  3.  16.  accuse  your  good  conversation  in  C 

Is  CHRIST. 
Mat.  24.  23.  if  any  say,  lo,  here  is  C.  Mark  13.  21. 
Mark  12. 3.5.  that  C.  is  son  of  David,  Luke  20.  41. 
Luke  2.  11.  is  born  a  Saviour  who  is  ('.  the  Lord 
2.1.  2.  saying,  that  he  himself  i.-;  C  a  king 
./ohn  7.  41.  others  said,  this  is  the  C  some  said 
Jicts  9.  22.  Saul  increased,  proving  this  is  very  G 

17.  3.  that  this  Jesus  whom  I  preach  to  you  is  C 
Rom.  8.34.  it  is  C  1  ha  I  died,  yea  ral  her  risen  again 

1  Cor.  I.  13.  is  C.  divided  ?  was  Paul  crucified  for 

7.  22.  he  that  is  called,  being  free,  is  C.  servant 

11.  3.  know  ih:\i  ihe  head  of  every  man  is  C. 

12.  12.  members  being  many  an  one  body,  so  is  C. 
15.  13.  if  dead  rise  not,  then  is  C.  not  risen,  16. 

20.  but  now  is  C-  risen  fiom  the  dead,  andi,  first 

2  Cor.  10.  7.  if  any  man  trust  thai  he  is  C.'s 
Gal.  2.  17.  is  therefore  C.  the  minister  of  sin  ? 

3.  16.  but  as  of  one,  and  to  tliy  seed,  which  is  C. 
Phil.  1.  21.  f.ir  me  lo  live  is  C.  but  lo  (lie  is  gaiu 
Col.  1.  27.  which  is  C.  in  you,  the  hope  of  glory 

Of  CHRIST. 
Mat.  11.  2.  John  heard  in  prison  the  works  of  C. 
22.  42.  what  ihink  you  of  C?  whose  son  is  he'? 
Rom.  8.  9.  if  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  C 
35.  who  shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of  C.J 
14. 10.  we  '^hnll  all  Bland  before  judgment  seat  ofC 

1  Cor.  1.  17.  lest  cross  of  C.  be  made  of  none  effect 
2.  16.  hut  we  have  Ihe  mind  of  C. 

6. 15.  know  ye  not  your  bodies  are  members  of  0. 

10.  16.  cup,  is  it  not  the  communion  of  blood  ofC 
ihe  bread,  is  it  not  the  communion  of  body  o/C. 

11.1.  be  ye  followers  of  me,  even  as  I  also  am  of  C 
3.  heail  of  woman  is  man,  the  head  of  C.  is  God 
12.  27.  now  ye  are  the  body  of  C.  and  members 

2  Cor.  1.  5.  as  Ihe  sufferings  of  C.  abound  in  us 

2.  10  for  you  forgave  it  in  the  person  of  C. 
15.  for  we  are  to  God  a  sweet  savour  of  C. 

3.  3.  ye  are  Ihe  epistles  of  C.  ministered  by  us 
4.4.  lest  the  light  of  the  glorious  gospel  o/C.  shine 
5.  14.  for  Ihe  love  of  C.  constraineth  us,  because 

8.  23.  or  our,  brethren,  Ihey  are  Ihe  L'lory  of  C. 
lO.l.heseerh  hy  the  meekness  and  geiilleness  o/CL 

5.  bringing  every  ihoneht  lo  the  obedience  of  C. 

11.  10.  as  the  Iriiih  of  C.  is  in  me,  none  shall  stop 

12.  9.  p!iwer  of  C  may  rest  on  me,  Rrv.  12.  10. 

13.  3.  since  ye  seek  a  proof  o/  C.  speaking  in  ma 
Gal.  1. 10.  if  pleased  men,  should  not  be  scrv.  of  (X 


CHU 

f7at.2.  IS.lhat  we  might  be  juslificd  bythe  faith  ofC- 

6.  12.  lest  suffer  pcMucution  lor  the  cross  of  C. 
JEpk.  2.  13.  ye  are  made  nigh  by  the  blood  of  C 

3. 4.  understand  my  knovvlcd.  in  the  mystery  of  C. 
8.  should  preach  the  unsearchable  riches  of  C. 
19.  know  I  he  love  o/C  which  passeth  knowledge 

4.  7.  according  to  the  measure  of  the  gift  of  C. 

5.  5.  hath  any  inheritance  in  the  kingdom  of  C. 
C>.  6.  as  servants  of  C.  doing  the  will  of  God 

Phil.  1.  10.  be  without  offence  till  the  day  of  C. 
29.  for  to  you  it  is  given  in  behalf  of  C-  to  believe 

2.  16.  that  I  may  rejoice  in  the  day  of  C. 
:}0.  for  the  work  of  C.  he  was  nigh  to  dealh 

3.  18.  they  are  the  enemies  of  the  cross  of  C. 
Col.  1.  24.  till  up  what  is  behind  of  afflictions  of  C. 

2. 2.  mystery  of  God,  and  of  the  Father,  and  of  C. 
17.  are  a  shadow  of  thing;!,  hut  the  body  is  of  C. 

3.  16.  let  the  word  of  C.  dwell  in  you  richly 

4. 3.  open  to  ua  a  door,  to  speak  the  mystery  of  C. 
2  '/"Atas.S.tS.Lord  direct  you  into  the  patience  of  C. 
2  7VfH.2. 10.  everyone  that  nameth  the  name  of  C. 
//fi.3.l4.for  we  are  made  p.irtakers  of  C.if  we  hold 

9. 14.  how  mucli  more  blood  of  C.  purge  conscien. 
11.26.  reproach  o/Cgreater  riches  than  treasures 
1  Pet.  1.  11.  what  time  the  Spirit  of  C.  did  signify 
19.  ye  are  redeemed  with  the  precious  blood  of  C. 
4.r.{.iis  ye  are  partakers  of  C.  sufferings,  that  wlien 

14.  if  ye  be  reproached  for  the  name  of  C. 
Rev.  20.' 6.  they  shull  bo  priests  of  God  and  of  C. 

■That  CHRIST. 
John  I.  25.  if  be  not  that  C.  nor  Klias,  nor  prophet 
6.69.  we  are  sure  thou  art  that  C.  the  Son  of  God 

TArCHRIST. 
Mat.  16.  20.  saying,  tell  no  man  that  he  xvas  the  C. 
26.  fiS.  I  adjure  thee,  tell  whether  thou  be  the  C. 
JHark  8.  23.  Peter  saltli  unto  him,  Ihou  art  the  C. 

14.  61.  art  thou  the  C.  the  Son  of  the  Blessed  7 
J.uke'i.  15.  mused  of  John,  whether  he  wererAcC. 

9.  20.  Peter  said,  thou  art  the  C.  of  God 

02.  67.  scribes,  saying,  art  thou  the  C?  tell  us 
John  I.  20.  but  he  confessed,  I  am  not  the  C. 

41.  we  have  found  the  Messias,  which  is  the  C. 
3. 28. 1  said,  I  am  not  the  C.  hut  sent  before  him 
4.29.  see  a  man  who  told  me  all,  is  not  (hie  the  C.  ? 

42.  we  know  that  this  is  indeed  the  C.  7.  26. 

7.  41.  others  said,  this  is  the  C.  but  some  said 

10.  24.  if  thou  be  the  C.  tell  us  plainly 

11.  27.  I  believe  thou  art  the  C.  the  Son  of  God 
20.  31.  that  ye  might  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  C. 

l.hhn  2. 22.  but  he  that  denicth  that  Jesus  is  the  C. 
5. 1.  whoso  believeth  JesiiK  is  the  C.  is  boru  of  Goil 

IVith  CURIST. 
Pom.  6.  8.  if  we  be  dead  with  C.  we  shall  also  live 

8.  17.  if  children,  then  joint-heirs  with  C. 

Gal.  2.20.  I  am  crucified  with  C.  1  live,  C.  liveth 
Kjih.  2.  .*>.  God  halh  quickened  us  together  with  C. 
Phil.  I.  23.  having  a  desire  In  depart  and  be  with  C. 
Col.  2.  20.  if  ye  be  dead  with  C  from  the  world 

3.  1.  if  ye  be  risen  with  C.  feek  the  things  above 
3.  ve  are  dead,  and  your  life  is  hirl  with  C.  in  God 

Ren.  20.  4.  and  they  reijned  with  C.  1000  years 

CHRISTIAN,  S. 
.Act.i  11.26.  disciples  were  first  called  e.  at  yVntioch 
26.  28.  almost  Ihou  persnadesl  me  to  he  a  c. 
1  Pet.i.  16.  yetifanv  mnn  sDlPr  asac.  notboasho. 

CIIRISTS. 
Mat.  24. 24.  there  shall  arise  false  c.  Mark  13. 22. 

CHRONICLES,     y 
l/unrr.»14  19.  restofactsof  Jeiobo^narein  thee. 
1  CAron.  27.24.  nnrnumbcr  put  in  the  account  off. 
Est.\.  6.  1.  to  bring  the  bonk  of  the  records  of  c. 
.'^re  Rook. 
CIIUYSOMTR. 
Jlco.  21. 20.  seventh  f.undaiion  ofthecity  wasa  c. 

CIIRYPOPR,\SITS. 
Reo.  21.  20.  tenlh  fiiniidniion  of  the  city  was  a  c. 

CHURCH 
Biffnifies,  [1]  ^  reli/riou.i  assembly  selected  and 
c<ilUd  out  of  the  world  Inj  the  iloctrine  of  the 
foiprl,  to  worship  the  true  (,'od  in  Christ,  ac- 
cording to  his  word,  1  Cor.  1.  2.  Rev.  2.  7.  [2] 
.^11  the  rlrrt  of  f.'od,  of  what  nation  soever, 
from  the  hr/rinning  to  the  end  of  the  world, 
who  make  but  one  body,  whereof  Jesus  Christ 
is  the  llrnd.  Col.  1.  IH,  [3]  Tlir  fmlhfid  of 
aome  one  family,  together  with  surh  rhristiavs 
as  were  wont  to  assembU  with  then  for  solemn 
tenrship,  Rom.  16.  5.  Col.  4.  15.  Ph  Inm.  2.  [I] 
The  fnithful  of  some  one  prorince,'iT\w»».  1.1. 
r.*)!  The  (Tonrrnors,  or  rrprrseniatives  of  thr 
cliureh.  Mat.  !•<.  17.  T.ll  it  to  the  cblirch; 
thni  is,  to  svrh  rulers.  In  trhnm  the  eensurrs 
of  the  rkurch  do  nf  rii'hl  belong,  that  by  firm 
it  may  be  rommunieiitrd  to  the  irhoh  .loeirly. 
[fl|  .n' multitude  oj  people  nssemhird  togrthrr, 
whether  good,  or  had,  Artu  1«».  37.  f7|  The 
congregation  of  thr  Jews,  whieh  was  formerly 
thr  ehvreh  and  people  of  Ood,  Actn  7.  38. 
Mat.  16.  18.  nnd  upon  thi«  rock  I  will  build  mye. 
18.  17.  tell  it  to  thu  c.  if  ho  neglect  to  hear  tlie  e. 
7« 


CHU 

Jlcts  9.  47.  Lord  added  to  c.  daily  such  sb.  be  saved 
5. 11.  andgreatlear  cameon  all  thee,  and  as  many 
8. 1.  was  a  great  persecution  against  the  cat  Jeru. 
11.  26.  they  assembled  themselves  with  the  c. 

14.  23.  when  they  had  ordained  elders  in  every  c. 
27.  when  they  had  gathered  the  c.  together 

15.  3.  being  brought  on  their  way  by  the  c. 

22.  it  pleased  the  elders  with  the  whole  c.  to  send 

18.  22.  when  he  had  gone  up  and  saluted  the  c. 
Rom.  16.  5.  greet  the  c.  that  is  in  tlieir  house 

1  Cor.  4.  17.  as  I  teach  every  where,  in  every  c. 
14.  4.  but  he  that  prophesieth  cditieth  the  e. 
5.  e.xcept  interpret  that  the  c.  may  receive  edify. 

23.  if  the  c.  be  come  together  into  one  place 

16.  19.  salute  you,  with  c.  that  is  in  their  house 
Eph.  1.  22.  gave  him  to  be  head  over  all  to  the  c. 

3. 10.  might  be  known  by  the  c.  the  wisdom  of  God 
5.  24.  as  the  c.  is  subject  to  Christ,  so  let  wives 
25.  as  Chri.st  loved  the  c.  and  gave  himself  for  it 

27.  that  he  might  present  to  himself  a  glorious  c. 
29.  but  cheiisheth  it,  even  aa  the  Lord  the  c. 
32.  but  1  speak  concerning  Christ  and  iJie  c. 

Phil.  3.  6.  Concerning  zeal,  persecuting  the  c. 
4.  15.  no  c.  communicated  with  me,  but  ye  only 
Col.  1.  18.  and  he  is  the  head  of  the  body  the  c. 

24.  for  his  body's  sake,  which  is  the  c. 

4.  15.  salute  the  c.  which  is  in  Nymphus'  house 
1  Tim.  i.  16.  and  let  not  the  c.  be  charged 
Philem.  2.  Paul  a  prisoner,  to  the  c.  in  thy  house 
Heb.  12.  23.  to  the  c.  of  the  first-born  in  heaven 
1  Pet.5. 13.  the  c.  at  Babylon  elected  salutcth  you 
3  John  6.  borne  witness  of  thy  charity  before  the  c. 
9. 1  wrote  unto  c.  but  Diotrephes  recoivcth  us  not 
In  the  CHURCH. 
j?cts7. 38.  this  is  he  that  was  in  the  c.  in  wilderness 

13.  1.  there  were  prophets  i)i  the  c.  at  Antioch 

1  Cor.  0.  4.  to  judge, who  are  least  esteemed  in  thee. 

11.  IS.first  of  all  when  ye  come  togelbertn  the  c. 

12.  28.  God  hath  set  some  in  the  c.  first  apostles 

14.  19.  yet  in  the  c.  I  had  rather  speak  five  words 

28.  let  him  keep  silence  in  tAec.and  speak  to  God 
35.  it  is  a  shame  for  women  to  speak  in  the  c. 

Fph.  3. 21.  to  him  be  glory  iu  the  c.  by  Christ  Jesus 
Col.  4. 16.  cause  it  to  be  read  in  the  c.  of  Laodicea 

0/lAc  CHURCH. 

~9cts  8.  3.  as  for  Saul,  he  made  havoc  of  the  c. 

11.22.  tidings  from  Antioch  came  to  ears  o/(Ae  c. 

12. 1.  at  that  time  Herod  vexed  certain  of  the  c. 

5.  prayer  was  made  of  the  c.  unto  God  for  Peter 

15.  4.  they  were  received  of  the  c.  and  elders 
20.  17.  Paul  sent  and  called  the  elders  of  the  c. 

Rom.  16.  I.  Phebe  our  sister,  a  servant  of  the  c. 

23.  Gaius  mine  host  and  of  tAe  whole  c.  saluteth 
1  Ciir.  14.  12.  may  excel  to  the  edifying  of  the  c. 
Eph.  5.  23.  even  as  Christ  is  the  head  of  the  c. 
Heb.  2.  12.  in  midst  of  the  c.  I  will  sing  praise 
Jam.  5.  14.  let  him  call  tor  the  elders  of  the  c. 
3  ./ohti.  10.  Diotrephes  caeleth  thenj  out  of  the  c. 
Rev.  2.  1.  to  the  angel  of  the  c.  of  Epiiesiis,  write 

8.  c.  in  Smyrna  ||  12.  Pergamus  ||  18.  Thyatira 
3. 1.  c.  of  Sardis  ||  7.  Philadeliihia  i|  14.  Laodicea 

CHURCH  of  God. 
Jlcts  20. 28.  feed  the  c.  of  God  which  he  purchased 
1  Cor.  1.  2.  to  the  c.  of  God  which  is  at  Corinth 

10.  32.  give  none  offence  to  the  c.  of  God 
11.22.  or  despise  ye  the  c.  of  God  an(\  shame  them 
15.9.  because  I  perseculed  c.of  God,  Gal.  1.  13. 

1  Tini.3.5.  howsliall  hetakecnre  of  the  c.of  God? 

CHURCHES. 

.^cts  9.  31.  then  had  the  c.  rest  Ihrniigh  all  Judea 

1.^.  41.  Paul  went  through  Syria  confirming  the  c. 

16.  5.  so  were  the  c.  established  in  the  faith 

19.  37.  these  men  who  are  neither  robbers  of  e. 
Rnm.  16.4.  to  whom  nil  c.  of  Gentiles  give  thanks 

16.  salute  one  another,  the  e.  of  Christ  salute  you 
1  Cor.  7.  17.  so  let  him  walk,  so  ordain  I  in  nil  r. 
11. 16. we  have  no  such  custom,  neither  c.  ofCliriBt 
14  33.  but  author  of  peace  as  in  all  c.of  the  saints 
34.  let  voiir  women  keep  silence  in  the  c. 
16. 1.  as  I  have  given  ordc  rtor.of  Galatiasodo  ve 
19.  f.  of  Asia  salute  you  ;  Aquila  nnd  Prmcilla 
20/r.8. 1.  o(  the griice bestowed  on  c. ofMncedonin 

19.  but  who  was  chosen  of  thee,  to  travel  with  us 
23.  brethren,  (hey  are  the  messengers  of  the  c. 

1 1.  8.  I  rolibril  o'her  c.  taking  wiiges  of  thfin 
28.  comith  upon  me  daily  the  cure  of  ail  the  e. 

12.  13.  what  is  i>  wherein  ye  were  inferior  lo  e.  ? 
Gal.  1.  22.  woie  unknown  by  fiico  to  c.  of  Judea 

1  Thess.i.  14.  ye  became  followers  ofthee.  ofGod 

2  Thrss.  1.  4.  Hi>  thnt  we  ourBejveS  jlory  in  you  in  e. 
liev.  1.  4.  Joliii  Id  'ho seven  e.  in  Asia, grace  (oyou 

11.  si'nd  it  to  (he  seven  r.  which  nrf  in  .Asia 

20.  (hes'-ven  stars  are  (ho  aiijc'sof  (he  seven  e. 

nnd  the  seven  cnndle-tirks  arc  the  seven  e. 

2.  7.  ho  tliMl  halh  an  ear,  let  him  hour  what  S|iiril 

s:iith  unto  the  ell,  17,  '>9.  |  3.  6,  13,  22. 

23.  c.  know'I  am  ho  which  wnrrhn'h  (ho  reins 

22. 16.  I  Jesus  rent  (o  (e-d'V  liiese  things  in  (he  c. 

CHURL. 
ha.  32.  5.  nor  shall  llic  e.  be  said  to  bo  bountiful 


cm 

ha.  32.  7.  tho  instrnments  also  of  the  c.  are  evil 

CHURLISH. 
15am.25.3.  manNnbal  was  c.  and  evil  in  hisdoinst 

CHURNING. 
Prov.  30.  33.  Butely  the  c.  of  milk  bringeth  butler 

CEILED. 
2  CAron.  3.  5.  he  c.  the  greater  house  with  fir  tree 
Jer.  22. 14.  it  is  c.  with  cedar  and  painted  with  ver. 
Hag.}  .4.  is  it  time  for  you  to  dwell  in  vour  c.  houses 

CEILING. 
1  Kings  6.  15.  he  built  walls  of  the  house  with  c. 
Ezek.  41. 1 16.  ovei-againsl  the  door  c.  with  wood 

CINNAMON. 
Exod.  30.  23.  take  of  sweet  c.  half  so  much 
Prov.l.  17. 1  have  perfum.my  bed  with  aloes  and  t. 
Canl.i.  14.  thy  plants  are  an  orch.  of  calamus  and  c. 
Rev.  18. 13.  no  man  buveth  her  mcrcliandise  of  e. 

CIRCLE. 
Prov.  8.  1 27.  when  he  set  a  c.  on  face  of  the  depth 
Isa.  40.  22.  it  is  he  that  sitteth  on  the  c.  of  the  earth 

CIRCUIT,  S. 
1  Sam.l.\f>.  he  went  from  year  to  year  in  c.  to  Bethel 
Job  22.  14.  and  lie  walketh  in  the  c.  of  heaven 
Psal.  19.  6.  e.  and  his  c.  from  the  ends  of  the  eartif 
Eccl.  1.6.  wind  rcturneth  again  according  to  hise. 

CIRCUMCISE. 
Gen.  17. 11.  ye  shall  c.  the  flo?h  of  your  fore-skins 
lieul.W.  16.  e.  therefore  the  fore-skin  of  your  heart 
30.  0.  the  Lord  thy  God  will  c.  thine  heart 
J««A.5.2.  and  e.  again  children  of  Israel  second  time 

4.  and  this  is  the  cause  why  Joshua  did  c. 
Jer.  4.  4.  c.  yourselves  to  the  Lord,  and  take  away 
I.uke  1.59. on  eighth  day  they  came  toe.  the  child 
John  7.  22.  and  ye  on  the  sabbath-day  e.  a  man 
.lets  15.  5.  saying,  it  was  needful  to  c.  them 
21.  21.  that  thov  oiiirht  not  to  e.  their  children 

CIRCUMCISED. 
<?C7I.17. 10.  every  man  child  among  you  shall  bee. 
14.  whose  flesh  is  not  c.  that  soul  shall  be  cut  off 

23.  and  Abraham  c.  the  Hesh  of  their  fore-i^kin 
26.  in  that  day  Abrah.  wasc.  and  Ishmaelhisson 

34.  15.  if  as  we  be,  that  every  male  of  you  be  t. 

24.  and  every  male  was  c.  Exod.  12.  48. 
Josh.  5.  3.  Joshua  c.  children  of  Israel  at  the  hiU 

7.  because  they  had  not  c.  them  by  the  wny 
t8.  when  the  people  had  made  an  end  lo  be  c. 

,Ter.  9.  25.  will  punish  all  c.  with  the  uncircumcised 

Jlcts  15. 1.  except  ye  be  c.  ye  cannot  be  saved, 24. 
16.  3.  Paul  e.  Timothy  because  of  the  Jews 

fto;n.4.11.befatherof  ail  that  believe,  though  nott. 

1  Cor.  7. 18.  is  any  man  called  being  e.  let  him  not 
become  uncirciim.  in  uncircum.  not  become e. 

Gal.  2.  3.  neither  was  Titus  compelled  to  be  c. 
.5.  2.  if  ye  be  c.  Christ  shall  profit  you  nothing 
6.  12.  they  constrain  you  to  be  c.  lest  they  suffer 
13.  neither  they  who  are  c   keep  the  law 

Phil.^.  5.  c.  the  eighth  day,  of  the  stock  of  Israel 

Col.  2. 11.  in  whom  also  ve^ree.  with  circumcision 
CIRCUMCISING. 

./(j.'tA.  5.  8.  when  they  had  done  c.  all  the  jienplo 

/,uAc2.21. when  eight  dav*  accomplished  forc.child 
CIRCUMCISION. 

This  term  is  taken  from  the  J.atin,  circumcidere, 
which  signifies  to  cut  all  round,  because  the 
Jews  who  circumcised  their  children,  cut  offths 
little  skin,  or  prepuce  after  that  niannir,  which 
covers  the  nut  of  the  prnis,  or  natural  part. 
God  evjoined  Ahtaham  to  use  circv7ncislon,af 
a  sign  of  that  covtnmi'  trhich  he  had  entered 
into  with  him.  Gen.  17.  10, 11,  &c.  This  was  a 
sign,  evidence,  and  assurance,  bvthofthe  bless- 
ing promised  by  that  God  who  appointed  this 
ordinance,  particular!!/  thnt  he  wmild gjrethem 
Christ,  the  promised  seed,  otit  of  the  loitis  of 
Abraham,  and  in  him  accept  of  them  fhr  his 
peculiar  people,  pardon  their  sins,  and  cleanse 
thrni  from  their  nulurnl  corruption,  signified 
by  the  cutting  off  of  their  fore-skins:  ana 
also  of  men's  obligation  to  the  duties  required: 
nam'ly,  to  beliene  in  this  Messiah,  to  put  off 
the  old  man,  and  serve  him  as  new  creatures  ; 
which  is  signified  bv  bis  acceptance  of,  and 
submission  to  the  ordinance. 

Circumcision  is  likewise  put  for  the  Jew«,  who 
were  cirenmrisrd,  as  uncirciimcis'on  is  put  for 
the  vnrirrunicisid  Gentiles,  Cn].  2.  7,  8,'  9 
Jtnd  for  such  as  are  spirituollii  circumrised, 
who  are  the  true  spiritual  seed  of  Abrnhnm, 
who  have  the  thing  signified  by  thnt  sign,  or 
cerrmonv,  and  prrform  that  which  rirevmri- 
sion  wa<  designed  to  engage  unto,  Piiil.  3.  3. 

.fohv  7.  22.  Mo-^o-i  therefore  c  'vn  nnio  you  c. 
23.  if  n  minon  ihesablmthdny  receive  e.  nreyn 

R»m  2.  2.'>.  lore,  profited!,  if  (hoii  keep  the  Inw  ;  if 
ihoii  break  ihi-  law,  thv  f.  is  mndi'  iincirrum 
28.  nor  is  that  e.  »  hich  is  outward  in  the  flesh 
2*1.  nnd  c.  is  that  of  the  bf-nri,  in  (be  Spirit 
3.  30.  one  Ood,  who  shun  jiislifv  (he  r.  by  faith 
4  9.  conir(h  (his  hlcBSidiiess  ilion  on  (he  c.  only? 
lO.how  w  as  it  leckon  when  he  was  in  c?  not  inc. 


CIT 

\Cor.  7. 19.  c.  is  the  keeping  of  the  commandments 
Oal.  2.  9.  and  that  they  should  go  unto  the  c. 
5.  6.  tor  in  Jesus  Christ  neither  c.  availcth,  6. 15. 

11.  and  I,  brethren,  ifl  yet  preach  c.  why  do  1  yet 
JEph.  3. 11.  by  that  which  is  called  thee,  in  the  tlesh 
P/iil.  3. 3.  we  are  the  c.  which  worship  G.  in  spirit 
Col.  2.  11.  witJi  c.  without  hands,  by  c.  ol"  Clirist 

3. 11.  there  is  neither  c.  nur  iiiiciixum.  butChr.  is 
Of  CIRCUMCISION. 
Exod.  4.26.  a  bloody  husb.  art  thou,  because  of  c. 
.Sets  7. 8.  ho  gave  Abraham  tlie  covenant  of  c. 

10. 45.  they  of  c.  which  believed  were  astonished 

11.2.  they  that  were  of  the  c.  contended  witli  Pet. 
/i!om.3.1.what  profit  is  there  o/c. 7rnucli  every  way 

4. 11.  he  received  the  sign  of  c.  asealofrighteous. 

12.  a  lather  of  c.  to  them  who  are  not  of  the  c. 
15.8.  Jes.Chr.  was  a  minister  cp/c.  for  truth  of  G. 

Oal.  2.1.  as  the  gospel  o/c.  was  committed  to  Pet. 
8.  he  that  wrought  in  Peter  to  ajiostlesh.  of  the  c. 

ColA.  11.  Marcus  and  Justus  who  are  o/c.  sal.  you 

Tit.  1.10.  for  many  are  unrulv,  especially  they  ofc. 
ClRCUfllSPECT. 

£zo(2.23.13.in  all  things  that  thave  said  to  you, bee. 
CIRCUMSPECTLY. 

JCph.5.15.see  that  ye  walk  c. not  as  fools  but  as  wise 
CISTERN 

Signifies,  [1]  A  vessel  of  lead  to  hold  water  for 
household  uses,  2  Kings  18.  31.  [2]  .Inij  thing- 
that  persons  put  their  trust  in  besides  God, 
tohetker  in  idols,  powerful  neighbours  and  al- 
lies, friends,  traditions,  merits,  f,c.  which  are 
but  broken  cisterns,  Jer.  2.  13.  [3]  The  left 
ventricle  of  the  heart,  Eccl.  12.  6. 

2.Kjau-5  18. 31.drink  ye  every  one  waters  of  hisc. 

Prov.  5.  15.  drink  waters  out  of  thine  own  c. 

JEccl.  12.  6.  or  the  wheel  broken  at  the  c. 

/sa.36. 16.  drink  every  one  the  waters  of  his  own  c. 
CISTERNS. 

2  Chron.  26.  f  10.  Uzziah  cut  out  many  c. 

JVeh.  9. 1 25.  possessed  houses  full  of  goods  and  c. 

Jer.  2. 13.  my  people  have  hewed  out  c.  broken  c. 
CITY 

Signifies  [1]  j3  walled  town  for  people  to  dwell  in. 
Josh.  6.  3.  [2]  The  inhabitants  of  cities,  Gen. 
35.  5.  Isa.  14.  31.  Jer.  26.  2.  [3]  The  church 
of  Ood  upon  earth.  Cant.  3.  2,  3.  Rev.  11.  2. 
[4]  The  church  triumphant  all  united  in  glory. 
Rev.  21.  2.  I  22.  19.  [5]  Heaven,  the  eternal 
inheritance  of  all  believers,  Heb.  11.  10,  IG. 
[6]  That  wherein  a  man  puts  his  trust  and 
confidence,  Prov.  10.  15. 

Oen.  4.  17.  Cain  builded  a  c.  and  called  it  Enoch 
11.  4.  let  us  build  us  a  c.  and  a  tower,  whose  top 
S.Lord  came  down  to  see  the  c.  and  the  tower 
8.  Ld.  scattered  them,  and  they  left  ofi'to  build  c. 

18.  26.  if  J  find  in  Sod.  fifty  righteous  within  the  c. 
28.  wilt  thou  destroy  all  the  c.  for  lack  of  five? 

24. 13.  the  daughters  of  thee,  come  to  draw  water 
34.24.  hearkened  all  that  went  out  of  the  gate  ofc. 

25.  came  upon  the  c.  boldly,  and  slew  the  males 
Vum.  21.  28.  a  flame  is  gone  out  from  c.  of  Sihon 
22.  t  39.  Balaam  came  to  a  c.  of  streets 
Tieut.  2.  36.  there  was  not  one  c.  too  strong  for  us 
3.  4.  there  was  not  a  c.  we  took  not  from  them 
13.15.  shall  surely  smite  the  inhabitants  of  that  c. 
21.  3.  e.  next  to  slain  man  shall  take  a  heifer,  6. 
Josh.  3.  16.  on  a  heap  very  far  from  the  c.  Adam 
6.  3.  ye  shall  compass  e.  and  go  round  six  days,  7. 

24.  they  burnt  the  c.  with  fire  and  all  therein 

Deut.  1.1.  16.  JosA.  8.  8,  19.. /udg.  1.  8.  |  13.  27. 
8.  2.  lay  thee  an  ambush  for  the  c.  behind  it 

17.  they  left  the  e.  open,  and  pursued  after  Isr. 

20.  the  smoke  of  the  c.  ascended  up  to  heaven 
11.  19.  was  not  a  c.  made  peace,  save  the  Hivites 
/osh.  15.13.to  Caleb  the  c.  of  Arba,  which  c.  isHeb. 

19.  .TO.  they  gave  Joshua  the  c.  which  he  asked 

20.  4.  ho  shall  stand  at  the  entry  of  the  gate  ofc. 
7ud/r.  6.  27.  because  he  feared  the  men  of  the  e. 

8.  17.  and  Gideon  slew  the  men  of  the  c. 

9.  45.  and  beat  down  the  c.  and  sowed  it  with  salt 
51.  all  they  of  the  c.  fled,  and  shut  it  to  them 

20.  40.  the  flame  of  the  c.  ascended  up  to  heaven 
Ruth  1.  19.  that  all  the  c.  was  moved  about  them 

3.  11.  for  all  the  c.  of  my  people  know  that  thou 
1  Sam.  1.3.  this  man  went  out  ofc.  yearly  to  wors. 

4.  13.  when  the  man  told  it,  all  the  e.  cried  out 
.5.11. there  was  a  deadly  destruction  thro' all  the  t. 
8.  22.  Samuel  said  to  Israel,  go  ye  every  man  to 

his  c.  1  Kings  22.  36.  Ezra  2.  1.  JVcA.  7.  6. 
2?.  3.  Israel  buried  him  in  Ramah,  his  own  c. 
"i  .Sam.  12. 1  two  men  in  one  c.  one  rich,  other  poor 
15.  2.  then  Absalom  called,  of  what  e.  art  thou? 

19.  37.  I  may  die  in  mine  own  c.  and  be  buried 

20.  19.  seckcst  to  destroy  a  c.  and  mother  in  Israel 

1  icings  1.  45.  rejoicing,  so  that  the  e.  rang  again 
11.  32.  for  Jerusalem's  8ake,c.  I  have  chosen,  36. 

2  /lings  6.  19.  neither  is  this  the  c.  follow  me 
11.  20.  the  people  rejoiced,  and  the  c.  was  in  quiet 
24.  10.  the  c.  Jerusalem  was  besieged,  25.  2. 

iChr.  15. 6.  c.  was  destrovedofc.foriCr.did  ve.x  ihera  I 
79 


CIT 

2  Chr.  19. 5.  and  lie  set  judges  in  the  Jand  e.  by  c. 

30,  10.  so  the  posts  passed  from  c.  toe. 

32. 18.  to  trouble  them  that  they  might  take  the  c. 
Ezra  4.  12.  the  Jews  are  building  the  rebellious  c. 
JVcA.  2.  3.  why  not  sad,  when  the  c.  lielh  waste, 5. 

11.9.  JudahsonofSenuah  was  second  over  thee. 
Esth.  3. 15.  but  the  e.  Shushan  was  perple.ved 

8.  15.  the  c.  of  Shushan  rejoiced  and  was  glad 
PioZ.  48.  2.  the  c.  of  the  great  King,  JWat.  5.  35. 

59.6.  and  they  go  round  about  the  c.  14. 
72.  16.  they  of  c.  shall  flourish  like  grass  of  earth 
107.4.  they  wandered,  they  found  no  c.  to  dwell  in 
122.  3.  Jerusalem  is  builded  as  a  e.  compact 
127. 1.  except  Lord  keep  thee,  watchmen  in  vain 
Prov.  8.  3.  VVisdom  crieth  at  the  entry  of  the  c. 

10.  15.  rich  man's  wealth  is  his  strong  c.  18.  11. 

11.  10.  when  itgoeth  well  with  the  righteous,  the 
e.  rejoiceth,and  shouting  when  wicked  perish 

11.  by  blessing  of  the  upright  the  c.  is  exalted 

16.  32.  rulelh  his  spirit,  than  he  that  taketh  a  c. 
25.28.  is  like  ac.  broken  down  without  walls 
29.  8.  scornful  men  bring  a  c.  into  a  snare 

Eccl.  9.  14.  there  was  a  little  c.and  few  men  in  it 

15.  and  the  poor  wise  man  delivered  the  c. 
Isa.  1.  26.  called  c.  of  righteousness,  faithful  c.21. 
14.  31.  howl,  O  gate,  cry,  O  e.  whole  Paleslina 

17.  1.  Damascus  is  taken  away  from  being  a  c. 
19.2.  shall  fight,  c.  against  c.  kingd.  against  kingd. 

24.  10.  the  c.  of  confusion  is  broken  down 

25.  2.  thou  hast  made  of  a  c.  a  heap,  to  be  no  c. 
33.  20.  look  on  Zion,  the  c.  of  our  solemnities 
GO.  14.  they  shall  call  thee  thee,  of  the  Lord 
62.  12.  thou  shall  be  called  a  c.  not  forsaken 

Jer.  3.  14. 1  will  lake  you  one  of  a  c.  two  of  a  tribe 

4.  29.  whole  c.  shall  flee  from  noise  of  horsemen 
19.  12.  thus  will  I  do,  even  make  this  c.  as  Tojlhet 
25.  29.  to  bring  evil  on  the  c.  called  by  my  name 

32.24.  they  are  come  to  the  e.  and  the  c.  is  given 
39.  2.  the  c.  was  broken  up,  men  of  war  fled,  52. 7. 
46.  8.  I  will  destroy  the  c.  and  the  inhabitant- 

49. 25.  how  is  the  c.  of  praise  not  left,  the  c.  of  joy 
/.OCT.  1.  1.  how  doth  c.  sit  solitary,  full  of  people 

2.15. is  this  c.  that  men  called  perfection  of  beauty? 
Ezek.  4.  1.  pourtray  on  it  the  c.  even  Jerusalem 
7.23.  make  a  chain,  for  the  c.  is  full  of  violence 

9.  1.  cause  them  that  have  charge  over  the  c. 
4.go  through  the  midst  of  C.Jerusalem  set  a  mark 
9.  land  full  of  blood,  the  c.  is  full  of  perverseness 

10.  2.  and  scatter  the  coals  of  fire  over  the  c. 
27.  .32.  what  c.  is  like  Tyrus  in  midst  of  the  sea? 
33.  21.  one  came  to  me,  saying,  the  c.  is  smitten 
48.  35.  name  of  the  c.  shall  be,  the  Lord  is  there 

Dan.  9.  18.  behold  the  c.  called  by  thy  name,  19. 
Hos.  6.  8.  Gilead  a  e.  of  them  that  work  iniquity 
Jimosi.  7. 1  caused  to  rain  on  one  c.  not  on  another 

5.3.  the  c.  tliat  went  out  by  a  thousand  shall  leave 
Mic.  6.  9.  Lord's  voice  crieth  lo  the  c.  hear  the  rod 
f/^a4.2.12.woe  to  him  thatstablisheth  ac.  by  iniqui. 
Zrph.  3. 1.  woe  to  filthy  and  polluted,  oppressing  e. 
Zech.  8.  3.  Jerusalem  shall  he  called  a  c.  of  truth 
5.  streets  of  the  c.  shall  be  full  of  boys  and  girls 

14.2.  the  c.  shall  be  taken  and  the  houses  rifled, the 

residue  of  people  shall  not  be  cut  ofl'from  thee. 

Mat.  5.  14.  a  e.  that  is  set  on  a  hill  cannot  be  hid 

35.  nor  by  Jerusalem,  for  it  is  the  c.  of  great  King 

8. 34.  behold,  the  whole  c.  came  out  to  meet  Jesus 

10.  II.  into  whatsoever  c.  ye  shall  enter,  inquire 

15.  than  for  that  e.  Mark  6.  11.  Luke  10.  12. 

21. 10.  all  the  c.  was  moved,  saying,  who  is  this? 

22.  7.  the  king  sent  and  burnt  up  their  e. 

23.  34.  and  persecute  them  from  e.  lo  e. 

jl/arA  1.33.  all  thee,  was  gathered  together  at  door 

5.  14.  they  that  fed  swine,  told  it  in  c.  Luke  8.  34. 
Luke/i.  3.  went  to  be  taxed,  every  one  to  his  own  c. 

7.  12.  and  much  people  of  the  e.  was  with  her 
10.  41.  he  beheld  the  c.  and  wept  over  it 

23.  51.  Joseph  wasof  Arimathea,a  c.  of  the  Jews 
■John  4.  39.  many  of  that  e.  believed  on  him 
Jlr.ts  8.  8.  and  there  was  great  joy  in  that  e. 

13.  44.  came  together  almost  the  whole  c.  to  hear 

16.  12.  we  were  abiding  in  that  c.  certain  days 

17.  5.  and  set  all  the  c.  in  an  uproar  and  assaulted 
19.  29.  the  whole  e.  was  filled  with  confusion 
21.  ,30.  all  the  c.  was  moved,  and  the  peojile  ran 

Hrb.W.W.  helookcdfor  ac.  that  hath  foundations 

16.  for  he  hath  prepared  for  them  a  c. 

12.  22.  ye  are  come  to  the  e.  of  the  living  God 

13.  14.  for  here  we  have  no  continuing  c.  but  seek 
.Jam.  4.  13.  we  will  go  into  such  a  c.  buy  and  sell 
/?r».20.9.  they  went  and  compa.ssed  the  beloved  e. 

21.  14.  the  wall  of  the  c.  had  twelve  foundations 
18.  thee,  was  pure  gold,  like  to  clear  glass 
23.  thee,  had  no  need  of  the  sun  nor  moon 
Bloody  CITY. 
Ezck.Vi.1.  son  of  man,wilt  thou  judge  the  bloody  c. 

24.  6.  woe  to  the  bloody  e.  to  the  pot,  9.  JVaA.  3. 1. 

Defenced  CITY. 
Isa.  25.  2.  thou  hast  made  of  a  defenced  c.  a  ruin 
27.  JO.  yet  the  defenced  r.  shall  be  desolate 
Jer.  1.  is.  I  have  mads  thee  this  day  adcfcnccd  c. 


CIT 

CITY  of  David. 

2Sa?n.5.9.  called  it  thee,  of  David,  1  CAr.  11.7 

6. 10.  would  not  remove  the  ark  into  c.  of  David 

12.  brought  up  the  ark  into  the  c.  of  David,  IB. 

1  Kings  2. 10.  David  was  buried  in  thee.  o/V^aeii 
3.  1.  Solomon  brought  her  into  the  c.  vf  David 

8.  1. bring  thearkout  of  c.o/  David,  2  CAr.5.  2. 
11.  43.  Solomon  buried  int.  of  I).  2  Chr.  9.  31 
14.  31 .  Rehoboam  buried  in  c.  of  D.  2  CAr.  12. 16. 

15.8.  they  buried  Abijam  in  c.  of  D.  2  CAr.  14. 1. 
22.50.Jelioshaphat  buried  in  c.  o/ i).2  CAr.21. 1. 

2A'/7i^A-8.24.Joram  buried  in  e.  ofD.  2  Chr.  21.  20. 

9.  28.  Ahaziah  was  buried  in  the  e.  of  David 
12.21.  Jehoash  buried  in  c.o/ />. 2  CAron.  24.25. 
14.20.  Amaziah  ||15. 7.  Azariah  buried  in  c.o/ £*. 
15.38.  Jolhani  was  buried  in  c.  ofD.  2  Chr.21.  9. 

10.  20.  Aliaz  was  buried  in  the  c.  of  David 

2  Chron.  24. 16.  they  buried  Jehoiadain  thee.  ofD. 
Isa.  22.  9.  seen  the  breaches  of  the  c.  of  David 

29.  1.  woe  to  Ariel,  the  c.  where  David  dwelt 
Duke  2.  4.  Jose^ih  also  went  unto  the  c.  of  David 

11.  lo  you  is  born  in  the  c.  vf  David  a  Saviour 

Elders  with  CITY. 
Deut.  10.  12.  the  elders  of  his  e.  shall  fetch  him 

21.  6.  the  ilders  of  that  e.  next  to  tiie  slain  man 

20.  say  to  the  elders  ol'his  c.  our  son  is  stubborn 

22.  17.  spread  the  cloth  before  the  ciders  of  the  c. 
25.  8.  then  the  ciders  of  his  e.  shall  call  him 

.Josh.  20.  4.  declare  his  cause  to  the  tWer^  of  that  c. 

Judg.  8.  16.  Gideon  took  the  elders  of  the  e. 

Ruth  4.2.  Boaz  took  ten  men  of  ihc  elders  of  the  c 

Ezra  10.  14.  and  with  them  the  elders  of  every  c 
Every  CITY. 

,Iudg.  20.  48.  smote  as  well  the  men  of  every  c. 

2  Kings  3.  19.  ye  shall  smite  every  fenced  c. 

2  Chron.  11.  12.  in  every  c.  Rehoboam  put  shielda 
28.  25.  in  every  c.  of  Judah  he  made  high  placed 
31.  19.  ofsons  of  Aaron  which  were  in  every  c. 

Jer. i.'i'J. every  c.  shall  be  forsaken, not  a  man  dwell 
48.  8.  and  the  spoiler  shall  come  upon  every  c. 

Mat.  12.  25.  and  every  c.  divided  against  itself 

Luke  10.  1.  sent  them  two  and  two  into  every  c. 

Jlcis  15.  21.  hath  in  every  c.  them  that  preach  hitn 

36.  let  us  go  and  visit  our  brethren  in  every  c. 

20.  23.  the  Holy  Ghost  witnesseth  in  every  c.that 

Tit.  1. 5.  that  thou  shouldest  ordain  eld.  in  every  c. 

Fenced  CITY. 

2  Kings  10.2.  with  you  a  fenced  c.  also  and  armour 

17. 9.  from  the  towerof  watchmen  to the/t/iccrfc. 
2  CAro7i .  1 1 .23.  hedispersed  of  all  his  children  thro' 

Judah  and  Benjamin  unto  every  fenced  c. 
CITY  of  God. 
Psal.  46.4.  the  streams  shall  make  glad  the  cof  G. 
48. 1.  Lord  greatly  to  be  praised  iii  c.  of  our  God 
8.  the  c.  of  God,  God  will  establish  it  for  ever 
87. 3.  glorious  things  spoken  of  thee,  O  c.  of  God 
Heb.  12.  22.  ye  are  come  to  the  c.  of  the  living  God 
Rcv.3. 12.  write  on  him  the  name  ofc.  of  my  Oud 

Great  CITY. 
<?f 71.10. 12..Ashur  builded  Resen,  same  taagreat  c. 
Josh.  10.  2.  feared,  because  Gibeon  was  ngreat  c. 
JVeA.7.4.now  thee,  was  large  and  great,  but  people 
./cr.22.8.why  hath  Lord  done  thus  to  this ^rcaf  e.? 
,/o;(aA1.2.  arise,  go  lo  Nineveh,  that  great  c.  3.  2. 

3.  3.  now  Nineveh  was  an  exceeding  nreat  c. 

4.  11.  should  I  not  spare  Nineveh  that  great  e.  ? 
ficB.ll.S.dead  bodies  lie  in  the  street  of  the  great  c. 

14.  8.  Babylon  fallen,  ^hal ^rc«<e.  18.10,16,19,21. 

16.  19.  the  ^reut  c.  was  divided  into  three  parts 

17.  18.  the  women  thou  sawest,  is  that  great  e. 

21. 10.  he  shewed  me  that  great  c.  holy  Jerusalem 

Holy  CITY. 
.VfA.ll  Least  lots  to  dwell  inJerusalem  the  holye. 

18.  all  the  Levites  of  the  holy  c.  were  284 
fsa.  48.  2.  they  call  themselves  of  the  holy  c. 
.52.  1.  put  on  thy  beautiful  garments,  O  holy  c. 
/? (171.9.24.  seventy  weeks  determined  on  thy  holy  c 
Mat.  4.  5.  the  devil  taketh  him  up  into  the  holy  c. 
27.53.  went  into  Iheholy  c.  and  appeared  to  many 
liev.  11.  2.  the  holy  c.  shall  they  tread  under  foot 
21.2.IJohn  saw  the  Ao/;/c. coming  down  from  God 
22. 19.  God  shall  lake  his  part  out  of  the  holy  c. 

In,  or  Into  the  CITY. 
Gen.  19. 12.  whatsoever  thou  hast  in  the  c.  brin| 
Deut.  20.  14.  all  that  is  in  the  c.  lake  to  thyself 

28. 3.  blessed  shall  thou  he  in  the  c.  and  in  thefielo 
IG.  cursed  shall  Ihou  be  in  thee,  and  in  the  field 

Josh.  6.  20.  so  that  I  he  people  went  into  the  c. 

21.  they  utterly  destroyed  all  that  was  in  the  c 
8.  19.  they  entered  into  the  c.  and  set  it  on  fire 

.ludg.  1.  24.  shew  us  the  entrance  into  the  c. 

8.  27.  Gideon  put  the  ephod  ni,  his  c.  in  Ophrah 
lSam.4.13.  when  the  man  came  into  thee,  and  told 
2  .Sam.  15.  25.  carry  back  the  ark  of  God  into  thee 

27.return  into  the  c.  and  your  sons  with  you 
1  Kings  13.25.  and  they  came  and  told  il  in  the  c. 

14.  ll.  that  dielh  of  Jeroboam  in  the  c.  doga  eat 

12.  arise,  and  when  thy  feet  enter  into  the  c. 

16.4.  that  dielh  of  Baasha  in  the  c.  shall  dogs  eat 
20.  30.  came  into  the  c.  Into  an  inner  chamber 


CIT 

1  Kings 31.24.that  dieth  of  Ahab,  in  the  e.dogs  eat 

2  Kings  7. 4.  if  we  say,  we  will  cnlur  into  the  c. 

Vi.  weslmli  catcli  tlicin,  and  gel  into  the  c. 
20.  3U.  bow  Hezekiab  brought  water  into  the  c. 
25.3.  famine  prevailed  in  thcc.  tbere  was  no  bread 
P£a/.3 1.21. blessed  be  the  Lord, for  be  hatb  shewed 
me  his  marvellous  kindness  in  a  strong  c 
55.  9.  I  have  seen  violence  and  strife  in  the  c. 
Prov.  1.  '21.  in  tAcc.  Wisdom  uttereth  her  words 
Eccl.l.  19.  than  ten  mighty  men  which  are  in  thee. 

8.  10.  and  tlie  wicked  were  forgotten  in  the  c. 
Jsa3i.l2.inthc  c.is  left  desolation  and  gate  smitten 
Jer.  14.  Id  if  I  enter  into  the  c.  then  behold  sick 

3d.9.  like  to  die,  for  there  is  no  more  bread  in  the  c 
5-i.  6.  famine  was  sore  in  thee,  tliere  was  no  bread 

l^am.  I.  11).  my  elders  gave  up  the  ghost  m  the  c. 

Eiek.  7.  15.  in  the  c.  famine  shall  devour  him 

9.  7.  and  they  went  forlli  and  slew  in  the  c. 
Hos.  11.  9.  and  I  will  not  enter  into  thee. 
JueU.M.ihe^  shall  run  to  and  fro  in  Vie  con  the  wall 
Jlmus  3.  ti.  shall  a  trumpet  be  blown  in  thee,  shall 

lliere  be  evil  in  a  c.  and  Lord  haih  not  done  it7 
7.  17.  thy  wife  shall  be  a  harlot  in  the  c  thy  sons 
Jonah  3.  4.  and  Jonah  began  to  en;er  into  the  e. 
Mat.  9.  1.  be  passed  over  and  came  into  liis  own  c. 

10.  5.  into  any  c.  of  llie  Samaritans  enter  not 
11.  and  into  whatsoever  c.  ye  shall  enter 

2(3. 18.  goiK^a  fAec.toeuch  a  man,  and  say  to  him 
•li.  11.  behold,  some  of  the  watch  came  into  thcc. 

.Varh  14.  13.  he  sailh,  go  into  the  c.  Jlcts  9.  C. 

LMke'i.2.  all  went  to  be  laxed,every  one  into  his  c. 
7.  37.  a  woman  («  the  c.  which  was  a  sinner 
18.2.  there  was  uiac.  a  judge,  who  feared  not  G. 
3.  there  was  a  widow  in  that  c.  and  she  came 

22.  10.  behold,  when  ye  are  entered  into  the  c. 
24.  4'J.  but  tarry  ye  in  the  c.  of  Jerusalem 

John  4.  8.  bis  disciples  were  gone  into  the  c. 
.ids  11.  5.  I  was  in  the  c.  of  Joppa,  praying 
14.  20.  howbeit,  he  rose  up  and  came  iiito  the  c. 
yi.  2'J.  had  seen  Trophinius  with  him  in  the  e. 
24.  12.  neither  in  the  synagogues  nor  in  the  c. 
2  Ciir.l  1.215. 1  have  been  in  perils  in  t/iec.  inthcsea 
Rev.ii.li  and  may  enter  thro'  the  gates  i7itu  the  c. 

Cl'CYoftheJ.ord 
Psal.  101.  8.  I  will  destroy  the  wicked,  that  I  may 
cut  off  all  the  wicked  doers  from  the  e.oflheLurd 
Isa.  60.  14.  they  shall  call  thee  the  c.  of  the  Lord 

Out  of  the  CITY. 
Oen.  44.  4.  when  they  were  gone  out  of  the  c. 
£j:o(/.'.l.29.Mo8es  said, as  soon  as  lam  gonenut  ofc. 

33.  and  Moses  went  out  of  thee,  from  Pharaoh 
Lev.  14.  45.  he  shall  carry  them  forth  out  of  the  c. 
J<;«A.8.22.tlie  other  side  issued  out  of  thee,  against 
Judg.  1.  24.  the  spies  saw  a  man  come  out  of  the  c. 
2  Sam.  18.  3.  better  thou  succour  us  out  of  the  c. 

20.  115.  then  cried  a  wise  woman  out  of  the  c. 

1  Kings  21.  13.  they  carried  Nahoth  out  of  thee. 
QKinasl.li.  when  they  come  out  o/iAc  c.  we  shall 
9.  15.  Jehu  said,  let  none  escape  out  of  the  c. 

1  CAron.  20.  2.  he  brought  much  spoil  out  of  thee. 

2  CAron.  33.  15.  Josiali  cast  the  idols  out  nf  thee. 
Job  24. 12.  men  groan  from  out  of  the  c.  the  soul 
J'jr.  39.  4.  Zedekiah  went  out  of  the  c.  52.  7. 
F.zek.  48.  30.  these  are  the  goings  out  of  the  c. 
.Vie.  4.  10.  now  shall  thou  go  forth  out  of  the  c. 
.Mat.  21.  17.  he  left  them,  and  went  out  of  the  c. 
wVor A 11. 19. wlien  even  was  come, went  «m«  of  thcc. 
L-ukei.  29.  they  rose  and  thrust  him  out  of  the  e. 

9.  5.  when  ye  go  out  o/ that  c.  shake  off  the  dust 
John  4. 30.  then  they  went  out  of  the  c.  and  came 
.4cM7.58.cast  Stephen  out  of  thcc.  and  stoned  him 

14.  19.  having  stoned  Paul,  drew  him  out  of  the  c. 

16.  13.  and  on  the  sabbath  we  went  out  of  thee. 

21.  5.  they  broushi  in,  till  we  were  out  of  the  c. 

CITY  of  rtfuge. 
JAim.  35.  25.  shall  restore  him  to  the  c.  of  refuge 

26.if  come  without  border  of  thee,  of  refuge,  27. 

28.  he  should  have  remained  in  the  c.  of  refuge 

32.  for  him  that  is  fliil  to  the  c.  of  rrfuge 
7(<«A.  21. 13.  tiii'v  gave  Hebron  to  ben  c.nf  refwe 

21.SheclicmTl27.Golan  ||3'2.Kfde»h  ||:t8.Ramo'tli 
1  C'Aron.ti.57.lo  sons  of,\Hr(m, Hebron  a  c.of  refuge 

This  CITY. 
Om.  19.  14.  Lnt9nid,up,for  Ld.will  destroy  <Ais  c. 

20.  behold  now,  thi.i  c.  is  near  to  llio  unto 

21.  and  he  said,  I  will   not  overthrow  this  c. 
Jos/t.(i.'2C>.  cursed  be  he  that  buildeth  this  c.Jerii-ho 
Judg.  19.11.  come,  and  let  us  turn  in  unio  this  c. 

1  Sam.  9.  6.  there  is  in  this  c.  a  man  of  God 

2  Kinns  2.  19.  the  titiiaiicin  of  fAi.i  e.  i.s  pleasant 
H.  W).  this  c.  shall  net  be  ililiverrd,  ha.  3(1.  15. 
19.  3-2.  shall  not  come  into  Ihisc.  33.  I.ia.  37.  34. 

34.  1  will  defend  this  c.  20.  6.  Isa.  37.  35.  |  38.  6. 

23.  27.  I  will  cast  off  Mi>c.  Jems.  I  have  chosen 
2  Chron.  6.  34.  they  pray  lo  thee  toward  this  c. 
Ezra  4.  13.  thai  ifthis  e.  bo  builded  again,  16. 

I."?,  know  that  this  c.  is  a  rebellioiig  city 

Veh.  13.  18.  did  not  God  bring  evil  upon  rAi*  e.  ? 

'rr.  fi.  0.  this  is  the  c.  to  bo  visited,  is  oppreHsicm 

l7.21i.Joruialeio,  and  this  c.  shall  remain  fur  ever 

80 


CIT 

Jer.  19. 8. 1  will  make  this  c.  desolate,and  a  hissing 
11.  even  so  will  1  break  this  people  and  this  c 
Ij.l  will  bring  upon  this  c.  and  towns  all  llie  evil 

20.  5.  I  will  deliver  all  the  strength  of  this  c. 
iil  .9.he  that  abideth  in  this  c.shall  die  by  the  sword 

lO.lset  my  face  against  (Aisc.for  evdand  nutgoud 
22.  8.  why  hath  the  Lord  done  thus  unto  this  c? 
2(5.  0  1  will  make  this  c.  a  curse  to  nations  of  eailh 

15.  ye  shall  bring  innocent  blood  on  this  c. 
27.  17.  wherefore  should  this  c.  be  laid  waste  ? 
32.  3. 1  will  give  this  c.  lo  Chaldeans,  28. 1 34.  2. 
31.  this  c.  hath  been  lo  me  as  a  provocation 
33.5. for  wickedness!  have  hid  my  face  (lomthis  c. 
34.22.coinmaiid  and  cause  them  to  return  luthisc. 
'ja.  17.  this  c.  shall  not  be  burnt  with  liie 
23.  thou  shall  cause  this  c.  to  be  burnt  with  fire 
39.  16. 1  will  bring  my  words  on  this  c.  for  evil 
/'.'zeA.11.2.thesenieii  give  wicked  counsel  IntAi^-c. 
3.  thisc.  is  the  caldron,  and  svc  be  the  desb,  7. 
ll.tAi'jJC.sliall  nut  be  your  caldron, nor  ye  the  flesh 
Mat.  10.  23.  when  they  persecute  you  in  this  c.  flee 
.'lets  18.  10.  lor  1  have  much  people  in  this  c. 
22.3.1  was  brought  upin  t/iio>- cat  feel  of  Gamaliel 

Ifil/wut  CITY. 
Gen.  19.  10.  and  the  men  set  him  without  the  c. 
Aco. 14.40. into  an  uncleanplace  without  thee.  41. 
.Vuni.35.  a.  ye  shall  measure  from  without  the  c. 
2  CAron.  32. 3.  to  stop  the  founiaiiis  without  the  c. 
yiiD.14.20.tho  wine-press  was  IttMiiieiiwithoutlhuc. 

CITIES. 
Gen.  19. 29.  when  God  destroyed  the  c.  of  the  plain 
35.  5.  terror  of  God  was  upon  the  c.  round  about 
41.  48.  Joseph  laid  up  the  food  in  the  c. 
47.21.  as  for  the  peo|)le  he  removed  them  to  thee. 
/.,ep.25.  32.  the  c.  of  the  Leviles  may  be  redeemed 
JV«;n.  13. 19.  whale,  they  be  that  they  dwell  in 
35.8.  everyone  shall  give  of  his  c.  to  the  Leviles 
Deut.'i.  37.  nor  camesl  thou  to  e.  in  the  mountains 
3. 12.  c.  thereof  gave  I  to  Keubenites  and  Gadiles 

19.  abide  in  yourt.  which  I  have  given  you 
6. 10.  into  the  land  to  give  the  great  and  goodly  e. 
19.  5.  he  shall  dee  to  one  of  these  e.  and  live 
Josh.  9. 17.  Israel  came  to  their  c.  on  the  third  day 

10.  19.  sutler  them  not  to  enter  into  their  c. 

11. 13.  as  for  the  e.  that  stood  still  in  their  strength 

18.  9.  described  it  by  c.  into  seven  parts  in  a  book 
Judg.  12.  7.  Jephthah  was  buried  in  one  of  thee. 

20. 48. men  of  Israel  set  fire  on  all  thee. they  came  lo 

21.  23.  they  repaired  llie  c.  and  dwelt  in  ihein 

1  Sam.  31.  7.  the  Israelites  forsook  the  c.  and  fled 

2  Sam.  10. 12.  for  the  c.  of  our  God,  1  Chron.  19.13. 
1  Kings'J.  12.  Hiram  came  from  Tyre  to  see  thee. 

13.  w  hat  c.  arc  these  that  ihuu  liast  given  me  .' 
20f  34.  the  c.  my  father  took  I  will  restore 

1  Chron.2.  22.  Jair  had  23  c.  in  the  land  of  Gilead 
4.  31.  these  were  their  c.  to  the  reign  of  David 

2  Chron.  34.  6.  and  so  did  he  in  the  c.  of  Manasseh 
Ezra  3. 1,  when  the  seventh  month  was  come,  and 

the  Israelites  were  in  their  c.  JVeA.  7. 73. 
JVcA.  11.1.  and  nine  parts  do  dwell  in  other  e. 
./o/il5.2ri.dwelletli  in  desolate  e. and  houses  no  man 
Fsal.  9.  6.  O  enemy,  thou  hast  destroyed  c. 
Isa.Ct.  11.  he  answered,  tille.be  wasted,  and  houses 
14.  21.  nor  fill  the  face  of  ibe  world  with  c. 

19.  18.  in  that  day  shall  five  c.  in  the  land  of  Egypt 
33. 8.  he  hath  despised  the  c.  be  regardeth  no  man 
64. 10. thy  holy  c.  are  awildern.  Zion  isa  wildern. 

Jcr.2.15.  they  made  his  land  waste,  bis  e.  are  burnt 
28.  according  to  the  number  of  thy  c.  11.  13. 
13.  10.  c.  of  south  be  shut  up,  and  none  shall  open 
20.1G.tliut  man  bo  as  the  c.  which  Lord  overthrew 
31.21.  turn  again,  O  virgin  of  Israel,to  these  thy  c. 
49. 13.  all  the  c.  ihereofshall  be  perpetual  wastes 
50.  32. 1  will  kindle  6rc  in  his  c.  it  shall  devour 

F.zek.  20.  19.  like  the  c.  that  are  not  inhabited 

30.  17.  and  these c.  shall  go  into  captivity 

35.  9.  thy  e.  shall  not  return,  know  that  I  am  Lord 
I{o3.8.\i.  I  will  send  fire  upon  bis  c.il  shall  devour 

11.6.  the  sword  shall  abide  on  his  c.  and  consume 
^niog4.8.  Iwoor  throe  c.  wand,  unto  one  fur  water 
Mic.  5.  II.  and  I  will  cut  olf  the  c.  of  thy  land 

14.  pluck  up  groves,  so  will  1  deslroythy  c. 
Zrph.  3.  0.  their  c.  are  destroyoil,  there  is  no  man 
ZrcA.1.17.my  c.by  prosper,  shall  yetspread  abroad 
Mat.  10. 23.  sholl  not  have  gone  over  the  c.  of  Israel 

11.  1.  he  departed  to  tiarli  and  preach  in  their c. 
^cts  ">'>.ll. I  pcrsecuteil  them  even  to  strange  e. 

2  Pet.  2. 6.  turningc.  of  Sodom  and  Gomor.lo  ashes 
/urff7.andc. about  them  in  like  manner  nn  example 
y<et).16.19.andthee.  nfllie  nations  fell  and  Babylon 

.////  CITIKS. 
jV«m.21.25.an'n3tacd  took  «// these  r.  and  dwell  in 
c.  of  Amorites,  y^fut.  2.34.  |  3.  4../o.'iA.  10.  39. 

31.  10.  they  burnt  alt  their  c.  Judg.  20.  48. 
j\'um.  3.5. 7.n//  the  c.of  the  Levitrs  shall  be  48  e. 
/)enl.  20.  15.  thus  do  to  all  c.  afar  off  from  thee 
.fnsh.  11.12.  all  thee,  of  the  kings  utterly  destroy. 

21.19.  n//lhe  c.of childrenof  .Aaron  werw  13  c. 
3:1.  all  the  c.  of  Ihe  Oersbonites  were  13  c. 
40.  all  Uioc.ofcbildroQ  of  Moruri  by  lot  12  c. 


CLA 

Josh.  21.  41.  all  the  e.  of  the  Levites  were  48  e. 

1  Sam.  18.  6.  the  women  came  out  of  all  c.  of  U;. 

2  Sam.  12.  31.  thus  did  he  to  all  c.  of  the  Aiumon 
24.  7.  ihey  came  lo  all  the  c.  of  the  Hivites 

1  A'in^i'22.39.  allc.  Ahab  built  are  written  in  book 

2  Chron.  14.  14.  Asa  smote  all  the  e.  about  Gerar 
jVeh.  JO.  37.  have  tithes  in  a// the  c.of  our  tillage 
./(/-.  4.  20.  all  the  c.  thereof  were  broken  down 

33. 12.  in  allc.  thereof  ahabilation  of  shepherds 
I/os.  13.  10.  any  that  may  save  thee  in  all  Iby  c. 
-ictsS.  40.  preached  in  all  c.  till  he  came  to  Cesarea 

Vefenced  CITIKS. 
Isa.  3G.  1.  Sennacherib  comcth  against  the  def.  c 

37.26.that  shouldest  be  to  lay  waste  the  dift  uceJx. 
Jcr.4.5.  assenible,let  us  go  into  the  iie/enee(^e.8.14. 

34.  7.  for  these  difcnced  c.  remained  of  Juduh 

I-enccd  CITIES. 

jViim.  32. 17.  little  ones  shall  dwell  in  Ihc  fenced  c 

JJeut.  3.  5.  all  these  c.  were  fenced  with  high  walls 

9. 1.  to  possess  c.  fenced  up  lo  heaven,  ./uj;A.14,12. 
.losh.  10.  20.  the  rest  of  them  entered  into /tncri/c. 
2  Sam,  20.  6.  lest  liegethim/eneedc.  and  escape  us 
2  Chr.  12.  4.  Shishak  took  lite  fenced  c.  of  Judah 

14.  0.  Asa  hui\t  fenced  c.  in  Judah,  land  had  re*! 

17.  2.  Jehoshaphat  placed  forces  in  the  fenced  c 

19.5.  set  Judges  through  allthe/enceiZc.  of  Judah 
21.3.  Jelio^shapbatgave  his  sons/encci/  c.  in  Jud 

Jer.  5.  17.  they  shall  impoverish  ihy  fenced  c. 

Dan.  11. 15.  k.  of  the  north  take  the  most  fenced  c 

Hos.  8.  14.  and  Judah  hath  multiplied /tncei/  c. 

Ztph.  1. 16.  a  day  of  an  alarm  against  \\w  fenced  c 
ViriES  of  Judah. 

2  Sam.  2.1.  shall  I  go  up  to  any  of  the  e.  of  Judah? 

2  Kings  23.  5.  that  burnt  incense  in  the  c.of  Judah 

1  CAr.  6.  57.  to  sons  of  Aaron  they  gave  thee.  of./. 

2CAr.l7.7.to  teach  inc.  of  J.  ||13.busine6s  in  c.of  J. 
19.  5.  set  Judges  in  the  c.  of  Judah,  ciiy  by  city 
23.2.  gather  the  Leviles  out  of  all  thee,  of  Judah 

31.  6.  Israel  in  the  c.  of  Judah  brought  tithes 
33. 14.  and  put  captains  of  war  in  thee,  vf  Judah 

J\7A.]1.3.  in  e.o/JuJ.  each  dwell  in  his  possession 
f.iai.69.35.  for  God  will  save  Zion,  and  will  build 
the  e.  of  Judah 
Isa.  40.  9.  say  lo  the  e.  of  Judah,  behold  your  God 
44.  26.  and  that  saithtoe.  «/7u<i.  ye  shall  be  built 
Jer.  1.  15.  the  families  of  the  north  against  c.o/.  A 

4. 16.  give  out  their  voice  against  the  e.  of  Judah 

7. 17.  seestthou  not  what  they  do  in  thee,  of  Jud. 
9. 1 1 .  1  will  make  e.  o/  J.  desolate,  10. 22. 1 34. 22 
11. 12.  then  shall  e.  of  Jud.  go  and  cry  lo  the  gods 

32.  44.  buy  fields,  and  take  witness  in  the  e.  of  J 
33. 10.  without  man  and  beast, even  in  thee.  «/. A 

13.  inc.  of./u(/.  shall  docks  pass  under  the  bandj 

44.6.  my  lury  and  anger  was  kindled  inc.  of  .Jud 
21.  the  incense  that  he  burnt  in  the  c.  of  Judah 

I.am.5.\\.  they  ravished  the  maids  in  thee,  of  Jud. 
ZccA.1.12.  wiltthon  not  have  mercy  on  the  c.  of  J. 

CVVIES  of  refuge. 
JVMm.35. 6.  there  shall  be  six  c- for  refuge,  13.14. 
11. ye  shall  appoint  for  youc.o/rc/u^c,./oiA. 20. 2. 
1  CAr.G.67.lhey  gave  lo  sons  ofKohulhofc.  ofrrf 

Six  CITIES. 
jV«m.  35.  6.  six  c.  shall  ye  have  for  refuge,  13,  \S, 
Josh.  15.  59.  in  the  mountains  of  Judah  six  c. 

CITIES  with  Suburbs. 

Afi'.25.34.  tlie.'!uAur*.<  of  their  c.  may  not  be  sold 

JV«wi.35.  2.  shall  give  to  Leviles  sniurAi  for  thee. 

Josh.  21.  3.  Israel  gave  to  Levites  c.  and  suburbs 

41.  the  c.  of  Levites  fortv-eighl  with  their  sub. 

CITIES  Willi  tillages. 

1  Sam.C.  18.  of  fenced  c.  and  of  country  villages 

lC7iron.27. 25.  over  store-houses  inc.  and  villages 

Jl/iir.9. 35.  Jesus  went  about  all  {hoc.  am]  villages 

teaching  and  preaching  tbrpnspel,  /-«Ael3. 22. 

jlfiirA6.56.  whithcrs.  he  entered  into  villages  ore. 

CITIES  with  Haste. 
Lev.  26.  31.  and  I  will  make  yourc.  irnsfc,  3.1. 
/.su.Ol.  4.  they  shall  repair  the  wiiste  c.  desolations 
./(r.4.7.thyc.sball  be  laidu<n.«(rwiihoul  inhabitants 
F.zek.  0.  (5.  in  all  your  dwellings  yourc.  shall  be  to. 
19.  7.  laid  tr.  their  c.  ||  35.  4.  I  will  lay  thy  c.  it. 
36.  35.  len.srce.  are  become  fenced  find  inhabited 
38.SO  shall  their<(i.«(cc.be  filled  with  flocks  of  men 
.^mos  9.  14.  and  tbev  shall  build  thy  waste  e. 

Yoiir  CITIES. 
Isa.  1.7.  voiir  r.  are  burnt  with  lire,  land  desolate 
.frr.  40.  Itl.  ami  dwell  in  your  c!  that  ye  have  taken 
.Jmos4.6.have  given  rieiinness  of  teeth  in  allyourc. 

CITIZEN,  S. 
I.ukr  15.  15.  the  prodigal  joined  himoelf  to  a  e. 
19.  14.  his  c.  bated  him,  and  sent  after  him 
.lets  21.  39.  I  am  of  Tarsii.i,  a  c.  of  no  mean  city 
F.uh.".  19.  but  fellow-c.with  saints  and  household 

CLAD. 
1  A'ln  it;>1  I.29..Tcroboamc.him9elf.with  n  new  gniro 
Aid.  59. 17.  for  clothing  wns  r.  with  zcol  as  a  clok* 

CLAMOUOITS. 
Pror.  9. 13.  a  foolish  woni«n  is  c.  she  is  simple 

CLAMOUR. 
Eph.A.  31.  all  anger  and  c.  be  put  awoy  fromyoit 


CLE 

CLAP. 

Tab  '<!7  S3,  men  ehall  c.  hands  at  liim,  and  hiss  him 
f'^.47. 1.  c.  your  hands,  all  yepeoplu,shout  toGod 
'Jo.  8.  let  floods  c.  thdir  hands,  lut  hills  be  joyful 
fsa.  So.  12.  tho  trees  olthelield  sliall  c.  their  hands 
Lam.  i.  15.  all  that  pass  by  c.  their  hands  at  tJiee 
A'uA.  3.19.  that  bear  fruit  ot'thee  shall  c.  their  hands 

CLAPPED. 
Ezek.  25.  6.  because  tliou  hast  c.  thiae  hands 

CLAPPETH. 
Job  34.  37.  he  c.  his  hands  ajiong  us,  multip. words 

CLAPT. 
iKings  11.12  c.  their  hands,  and  said  G.  save  Iting 

CLAVE. 
Oen.  22. 3.  .^.braliam  c.  tho  wood  for  burnt-offering 
A''um.  IG.  31.  the  ground  c.  asunder  under  iliem 
Judg.  15.  1"J.  God  c.  a  hollow  place  in  the  jaw 
ISain.  6.  14.  they  c.  wood  of  the  cart  and  ottered 
Ps.  78. 15.  he  c.  the  rocks  in  wilderness,  Isa.  48.  21. 

CLAVE. 
<7«^34.3.Shechem  his  soul  c. to  Dinah,  Jac.daugh. 
Rum  1.  14.  but  Ruth  c.  to  her  mother-in-law 
2Sam.  20.  2.  the  men  of  Judah  c.  to  their  king 
23.  10.  he  sraote  till  his  hand  c.  to  the  sword 
IKings  11.  2.  Solomon  c.  to  these  in  love 
ZKings  18.  0.  for  Uezekiah  c.  to  Lord,  departed  not 
JVcA.  10.  29.  they  c.  to  their  brethren,  their  nobles 
Jicts  17.  34.  certain  men  c.  to  Paul  and  believed 

CLAW^S. 
Deut.  14.6.  beast  that  cleaveth  the  cleft  in  twoc. 
Dan.  4.  33.  his  nails  were  grown  like  birds'  c. 
Zeck.  11.  16.  he  shall  tear  their  c.  in  pieces 

CLAY. 

Job  4. 19.  much  less  them  that  dwell  in  houses  of  c. 
10.  9.  remember  thou  hast  made  me  as  the  c. 
13.  12.  your  bodies  are  like  to  bodies  of  c. 
27.  16.  though  he  prepare  raiment  as  the  c. 
3,3.  6.  I  also  am  formed  out  of  the  c. 
38.  14.  it  is  turned  as  c.  to  the  seal,  they  stand 
Psal.  40.  2.  he  brought  me  up  out  of  the  miry  c. 
Isa.  29.  16.  shall  be  esteemed  as  the  potter's  c. 
41.  25.  on  princes,  as  the  potter  treadeth  the  c. 
45.  9.  shall  the  c.  say  to  him  that  fashioneth  it? 
64.  8.  we  are  c.  thou  our  potter,  work  of  thy  hand 
Jer. 19.  4.  the  vessel  that  he  made  of  c.  was  marred 
6.  as  c.  is  in  the  potter's  hand,  so  are  ye  in  mine 
43.  9.  take  great  stones,  hide  them  in  the  c. 
Dan.  2.  33.  his  feet  partof  iron,  partof  c.  34.  42. 
3.5.  then  was  the  c.  broken  in  pieces,  45. 
41. thou  sa  west  the  feet  and  toes  part  of  potter's  c. 
A"a/4.  3. 14.  go  into  c.  and  tread  the  mortar 
fiab.  2.6.  woe  to  him  that  ladeth  himself  with  c 
John  9.6.  he  spat  on  the  ground,  madec.  of  spittle, 
and  anointed  the  eyes  of  the  blind  man  with  c. 
1.5.  he  put  c.  on  mine  eyes,  I  washed,  and  do  see 
Rom.  9.  21.  hath  not  the  jiotter  power  over  the  c.l 

CLAY-GROUND. 
IKings  7.  46.  cast  vessels  in  c.-g.  2  Chron..  4.  17. 

CLEAN. 
/,«t).23.  22.  thou  shalt  not  make  c.  riddance  in  field 
JosA.3.17.  the  people  passed  cover  Jordan,  4. 1,11. 
Ps.  77.  8.  ishismercyc.  gone  forever?  his  promise 
ha.  24.  19.  the  earth  is  c.  dissolved,  is  moved 
Joel  1.  7.  he  hath  made  it  c.  bare,  and  cast  it  away 
ZecA.11.17.his  arm  shall  be  c.dried  up,and  right  eye 
%Pet.  2.  18  were  c.  escaped  them  who  live  in  error 

CLEAN,  Adjective, 

Signifies,  [1]  That  which  is  free  from  filth,  or 

ceremonially  pure,  Lev.  10.  14.     [2]   One  who 

is  free  from  the  guilt  of  siji,  by  the  blood  of 

Christ,  Psal.  51.  7.     [3]  One  who  is  delivered 

from  the  power  of  sin  by  sanctifying  grace, 

John  13.  10.     [4]  That  which  maybe  lawfully 

Bscrf,  Luke  11.  41.     [5]  Guiltless,  orinnocent, 

Acts  18.  6.      [6]  Cured,  2  Kings  5.  12.      [7J 

Empty,  Prov  14.  4. 

The  fear  of  the  Lord  iii  clean,  Psal.  19.  9. '   The 

holy  law  jf  God,  which  works  a  due  fear  of 

God,  and  leaches  men  how  to  worship  him,  is 

sincere,  not  adulterated  with  any  mixture  of 

vanity,  falsehood,  or  vice;  not  requiring  or 

allowing  any  wickrdness,hut  cleansing  from  it. 

Ocn.7.2.  of  every  c.  beastthou  shalt  take  by  sevens 

8.  20.  Noah  took  of  every  c.  beast  and  c.  fowl 

35.  2.  Jacob  said,  be  c.  and  change  your  garments 

Lev.  4.  12.  carry  tho  bullock  unto  a  c.  place,  6. 11. 

7.  19.  the  flesh,  all  that  be  c.  shall  eat  thereof 

10.  10.  that  ye  may  put  difference  between  c.  and 

unclean,  1 1 . 47. 1 20.  25.  F.zik. 22. 26.  |  44.  23. 

14  the  wave-breast  eat  in  a  c.  place,  JVum.  19.  9. 

16.  30.  that  ye  may  bee.  fw>m  your  sins  before  Ld. 

22.  4.  he  shall  not  eat  of  holy  things  till  he  be  e. 

/fum.  19.  12.  purify,  on  seventh  day  he  shall  be  c. 

18.  a  c.  person  shall  take  hyssop  and  dip  it  in  water 
X)eKM2. 15.  unclean  and  c.  may  eat  thereof,  15.22. 
I  Sam.  20.  26.  he  is  not  c.  surely  he  is  not  c. 
8S'inir.?5.10.thyflesh  come  again,  nndthoubee.l4. 

12.  may  not  I  wash  in  them  and  be  c? 

13.  when  he  saith  to  thee,  wash  and  be  c. 

fob  11.  4,  for  thou  hast  said,  I  am  c.  in  thine  oye« 
81 


CLE 

Job  14.4.  who  can  bring  a  c.  thing  out  of  unclear 

15.  14.  what  is  man  that  he  should  be  c? 

15.  yea,  the  heavens  are  not  c.  in  his  sight 
25.  4.  how  can  he  be  c.  that  is  born  of  a  woman? 
33. 9.  1  am  c.  without  truu.sgres.  nor  iniquity  in  nic 
Prov.16  2.  the  ways  of  a  man  are  c.  in  his  own  eyes 
Eccl.y.%  all  things  come  alike  to  the  c.  and  unclean 
Isa.  1.  16.  wash  ye,  make  you  c.  put  away  evil 
28.  8.  all  tables  full,  so  that  tliere  is  no  place  c. 
30. 24.o.\en  and  young  asses  shall  eatc.  provender 
52.  11.  be  ye  c.  that  bear  the  vessels  ol  the  Lord 
66.20.  bring  an  offering  in  a  c.  vessel  to  house  of  L. 
Jer.  13.  27.  O  Jerusalem,  wilt  thou  not  be  made  c? 
Ezek.  36.  25.  then  will  1  sprinkle  c.  watCF  on  you 
jyiat.  8.2.  a  leper  came,  saying.  Lord,  if  thou  wilt, 
thou  canst  make  me  c.  Mark  1. 40.  Luke  5. 12. 
3.  I  will,  be  thou  c.  Mark  1.  41.  Luke  5.  13. 
23.  25.  for  ye  make  c.  the  outside,  Luke  11.  39. 
Luke  11.  41.  behold,  all  things  are  c.  unto  you 
John  13.  11.  therefore  said  he,  ye  are  not  all  c. 
15.3.nowyearec.  thro'  word  1  have  spoken  to  you 
Acts  18.6.  your  blood  be  on  your  own  heads,  I  am  c. 
Rev.  19. 8.  ihe  be  arrayed  in  fine  linen,  c.  vvliite,  14. 

CLEAN  harids. 
Job  9.  30.  if  I  make  my  hands  ever  so  c. 

17.  9.  he  that  hath  c.  hands  shall  be  stronger 
Psal.  24.  4.  he  that  hath  c.hands  and  a  pure  heart 

CLEAN  heart. 
Psal.  51.  10.  create  in  me  a  c.  heart,  O  God,  renew 
73.  1.  God  is  good  to  Isr.  and  such  as  are  of  a  c.  A. 
Prov.  20. 9.  who  can  say,  I  have  made  my  heart  c.7 

Is  CLEAN. 
Lev.  13.  13.  he  is  c.  17, 37, 39.  ||  40.  yet  is  he  c.  41. 
15.  8.  that  hath  the  issue  spit  on  him  that  is  c 
Jfum.  9.  13.  a  man  that  is  c.  not  on  a  journey,  19. 9. 
Psal.  19.  9.  fear  of  the  Lord  is  c.  enduring  lor  ever 
Prov.  14.  4.  where  no  oxen  are,  the  crib  is  c. 
John  13.  10.  to  wash  his  feet,  but  is  c.  every  whit 

Pronounce  CLEAN. 
Lev.  13.  6.  the  priest  shall  pronounce  him  c.  14. 7. 

:ihaU  be  CLEAN. 

Lev.  11.  36.  a  fountain  wherein  is  water  shall  be  c. 

12.8.she-c.  15.28.  ||  13. 58.  it-c.  14.53.  JVmwi.  31.23. 

14.  9.  he  shall  wash  his  flesh  in  water,  he  shall 

be  C.20.  I  15.13. 1  17.15. 1 22.7.  JVu/n.  19. 12,19. 

M'um.  31.  24.  and  ye  shall  be  c.  E-.tk.  36.  25. 

Ps.  51. 7.  purge  me  with  hyssop,  and  I  shall  be  c. 

CLEANNESS. 

2Sam.  22.  21.  according  to  the  c.  of  my  hands  hath 

the  Lord  recompensed  me,  Psal.  18.  20. 

25.  according  to  my  c.  in  his  eye-sight,  Ps.  18.  24. 

Amos  4. 6.  I  have  also  given  you  c.  of  teeth  in  cities 

CLEANSE. 
Exod.  29.  36.  thou  shalt  c.  the  altar.  Lev.  16.  19. 
Lev.li  49.  shalt  take  to  c.the  house,  two  birds,  52. 
JVum.  8.  6.  take  the  Levites  and  c.  them 
2  Chron.  29.  15.  to  c.  the  house  of  the  Lord,  16. 
JVcA.  13.  22.  that  the  Levites  should  c.  themselves 
Psal.  19.  12.  c.  thou  me  from  secret  faults 
51.2.  wash  me  thoroughly,  and  c.  me  from  my  sin 
119.  9.  wherewjith  shall  a  young  man  c.  his  way? 
,kr.  4.  11.  a  dry  wind  not  to  fan  nor  to  c. 

33.  8.  I  will  c.  them  from  iniquity,  Ezek.  37  23. 
Ezek.  36.  25.  from  all  your  idols  will  1  c.  you 

39.  12.  burying,  that  they  may  c.  the  land,  16. 

43.  20.  thus  shalt  thou  c.  and  purge  it 

45. 18.  take  a  young  bullock,  and  c.  the  sanctuary 
.fuel  3.  21.  I  will  c.  their  blood  1  have  not  cleansed 
Mat.  10.  8.  heal  the  sick,  c.  lepers,  raise  the  dead 

23.  26.  c.  first  that  which  is  within  the  cup 
2Cor.  7.  1.  let  us  c.  ourselves  from  all  fillhin.  offlesh 
Eph.  5.  26.  might  c.  it  with  the  washing  of  water 
■  Jam.  4.  8.  c.  your  hands,  ye  sinners,  purify  hearts 
IJohn  1.  9.  to  c.  us  from  all  unrighteousness 

CLEANSED. 
I^ev.  11.32.  be  unclean  until  even,  so  shall  it  bee. 

12.  7.  she  shall  be  c.  from  the  issue  of  her  blood 

14.  4.  to  take  for  him  that  is  to  be  c.  19.  31. 

14.  the  ear  of  him  that  is  to  be  c.  17,  18,  25,  28. 

M'um.  :J5.  33.  the  land  cannot  be  c.  of  the  blood 

/osh.  22.  17.  from  which  we  are  not  c.  tdl  this  day 

2C/iro7!.2!).  18.  we  havec.  all  the  house  of  the  Lord 

30.  18.  formany  had  not  c.  themselves,  yet  did  eat 
19.  that  prepareth  his  heart,  thoiigh  he  be  note. 

34.  5.  Josiah  c.  Judah  and  Jerusalem 

JVfA.  13.  9. 1  commanded,  and  theyc.  the  chambers 

30.  thus  I  c.  them  Irom  all  strangers 
Job  35.  3.  what  profit,  if  1  be  c.  from  my  sin? 
Psal.  73.  13.  verily  I  have  e.  my  heart  in  vain 
Isa.  3.  t  26.  she  being  c.  shall  sit  on  the  ground 
Ezek.  22.  24.  thou  art  the  land  that  is  not  c. 

44.  26.  after  he  is  c.  reckon  to  him  seven  days 
Dan.  8.  14.  then  shall  tho  sanctuary  be  e. 

.loci  3.  21.  cleanse  their  blood  that  I  have  not  c. 

Mat.  8.  3.  immediately  his  leprosy  was  c. 
11.5.  the  lepers  are  c.  the  deaf  hear,  Luke  7.  22. 

Mark  1.  42.  the  leprosy  departed,  and  he  was  c. 

Luke  4.  27.  none  was  c.  save  Naaman  the  Syrian 
7.22.  the  lepersc.  the  deaf  hear,  the  dead  raised 
17.  14.  that  as  the  lepers  went  they  were  t. 
N 


CLl 

Luke  17. 17.  were  not  ten  c.  but  A'hore  are  the  ninct 
Acts  10.15.  the  voice  spake,  what  God  hath  c.  1 1. 9, 

CLEA^SETH. 
.lob  37.  21.  but  the  wind  passuth  and  c.  thera 
Prov.  20.  30.  blueniss  of  a  wound  c.  away  evil 
I  John  1.  7.  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  c.  usl'roinaU  sin 

CLEAASING. 
/.CO.  13.  7.  hath  been  seen  of  the  priest  for  his  c. 
JVum.  6.  9.  shave  his  head  in  tho  day  of  his  c. 
Mark  1.  44.  go  and  oH'er  lor  tliy  c.  Luke  5.  14. 

CLEAR. 
Oen.  24. 8.  thou  shall  be  c.  from  this  my  oath,  41. 
44.  16.  or  how  shall  we  c.  ourselves? 
Exod.  34.  7.  and  that  will  by  no  means  e.  the  guilty 
2Sam.  23. 4.  as  tender  grasa,  by  c.  shining  alter  raia 
Psal.  51.  4.  mightest  ho  c.  when  thou  judgeat 
Eccl.  3.  t  18.  that  they  might  c.  God,  and  see 
(.'ant.  6.  10.  fair  as  moon,  c.  as  the  sun,  as  an  army 
y*a.l8.4.in  my  dwelling  place  like  a  e.lieat  on  herbs 
Amos  8.  9.  I  w  ill  darken  the  earth  in  a  c.  day 
Zech.  14.  6.  the  light  shall  not  be  c.  nor  dark 
2Cor.  7.  11.  ye  have  approved  yourselves  to  be  e. 
Rev.  21.  11.  her  light  was  c.  as  crystal,  22.  1. 
18.  the  city  was  pure  gold,  like  to  c.  glass 
CLEARER. 
Job  11. 17.  thine  age  shall  be  e.  than  the  noon-day 

CLEARING. 
J^um.  14.  18.  and  by  no  means  c.  the  guilty 
2Cur.  7.  11.  what  c.  of  yourselves  it  wrought 

CLEARLY. 
.Tob  33.  3.  my  lips  shall  utter  knowledge  c. 
Mat.  7.  5.  see  c.  to  jiullout  the  mole,  Luke  6.42. 
Mark  8.  25.  was  restored,  and  saw  every  man  c. 
Rom.  1.  20.  things  from  creation  are  c.  seen 

CLEARNESS. 
Exod.  24.  10.  and  as  the  body  of  heaven  in  bis  e. 

CLEAVE. 
Lev.  1.  17.  he  shall  c.  it  with  the  wings  thereof 
Psa/.74. 15.  thoudidstc.  the  fountain  and  the  flood 
Hab.  3.  9.  thou  didst  c.  the  earth  with  rivers 
Zech  14. 4.  the  mount  shall  e.  in  the  midst  thereof 

CLEAVE,  Verb. 
Oen.  2. 24.  a  man  shall  leave  father  and  mother  and 
shall  c.  to  his  wife.  Mat.  19.  5.  Mark  10.  7 
Deut.  4.  4.  ye  that  did  e.  to  the  liOrd  your  God 

10.  20.  him  serve,  to  him  shalt  thou  c.  and  swear 
by  ills  name,  11. 22.  |  13.  4.  ]  :iO.  20.  .Josh.  22. 5. 

13.  17.  shall  c.  nought  of  cursed  thing  to  thy  hand 
Josh.  23.  8.  but  c.  to  the  Lord  your  God 

t  if  you  will  c.  to  the  Lord  your  God 
2Kings  5.27.  the  leprosy  of  Naaman  shall  c.  to  thee 
Job  38.  38.  and  the  clods  c.  fust  together 
Psal.  101.  3.  I  hate  the  work,  it  shall  not  c.  to  roe 

102.  5.  by  my  groaning  my  bones  c.  to  my  skin 

137.  6.  let  my  tongue  c.  to  the  roof  of  my  mouth 
Isa.  14.  1.  they  shall  e.  to  the  house  of  Jacob 
,/cr.  13.  11.  so  have  I  caused  to  c.  to  me  Israel 

42.  f  16.  the  famine  whereof  ye  were  afiaid  shall 
c.  after  you  in  Egypt,  and  there  ye  shall  die 
Ezek.  3.  26.  I  will  make  thy  tongue  c.  to  the  roof 
JJan.  2.  43.  but  they  shall  not  c.  one  to  another 

11.  34.  many  shall  e.  to  them  with  flatteries 
Acts  11.  23.  with  purpose  of  heart  e.  to  the  Lord 
Horn.  12.  9.  abhor  evil,  c.  to  that  which  is  good 

CLEAVED. 
IKings  3.  3.  Jehoram  e.  to  Jeroboam's  sins 
./«ft2y.  10.  their  tongue  c.  to  the  roof  of  their  mouth 
31.  7.  and  if  any  blot  have  e.  to  my  hands 

CLEAVETH. 
.Tob  19.  20.  my  bone  c.  to  my  skin  and  to  my  flesh 
Ps.  22.  15.  strength  dried  up,  my  tongue  c.  to  jaws 
41.  8.  an  evil  disease,  say  they,  c.  fast  to  him 
44.  25.  our  soul  bowed  down,  our  belly  c.  toeartJi 
119.  25.  my  soul  c.  to  the  dust,  quicken  me 
.fcr.  13.  11.  as  the  girdle  c.  to  the  loins  of  a  man 
Lam.  4. 4.  the  tongue  of  sucking  child  c.  to  the  roof 

8.  their  skin  e.  to  their  bones,  it  is  withered 
Luke  10. 11.  the  dust  of  your  city  which  c.  on  us 

CLEAVETH. 
Deut.  14.  6.  beast  that  c.the  cleft  into  two  claws 
Job  16.  13.  bee.  my  reins  asunder,  and  spareth  not 
Psal.  141. 7.  when  one  culteth  and  c.  wood  on  earth 
£,'eeM0.9.  thatc.  wood  shall  be  endangered  thereby 

CLEFT. 
Mic.l.A.  the  vaUey  shall  be  c.  as  wax  before  thefira 
Deut.  14.  6.  that  cleaveth  the  c.  into  two  claws 

CLEFTS. 
Cant.  2.  14.  O  my  dove,  that  art  in  c.  of  the  rocks 
Isa.  2.  21.  to  go  into  the  c.  of  the  rocks  for  fear 
Jer.  49.  16.  O  thou  that  dwellest  in  the  e.  Obad.  3. 
Amos  6.  11.  he  will  smite  the  little  house  with  e. 

CLEMENCY. 
Acts  34.  4.  that  thou  hear  us  of  thy  c.  a  few  words 

CLERK. 
Acts  19.  35.  when  town-;?,  had  appeased  the  people 

CLIFT,  S. 
Exod.  33.  22.  I  will  put  thee  in  a  e.  of  the  rock 
IChrun.iO  16.  they  come  up  by  the  c.  of  Zix         ' 
/ob  30.  6.  to  dwell  in  the  c.  of  the  valleys 
laa.  57. 5.  slaying  child,  in  vuUeys  under  c.  of  naka 


CLO 

CIJMB,  ED,  ETH. 
ISam.  14.  13.  Joiiiitlian  c.  up  upon  hia  hands 
Jer.  4.  2y.  they  shall  c.  up  upon  llie  rocks 
JoiU  'i.  7.  they  Khali  c.  Ihu  wall  like  men  of  war 

9.  they  shall  e.  up  upon  the  houses,  sliull  enter 
Amos  9.  2.  they  c.  up  to  heaven,  llience  bring  tliCin 
L,uke  19.  4.  Zaccheug  c.  up  into  a  sycamore-tree 
John  lU  1.  but  c.  up  some  other  way,  is  a  thief 

CLIPT. 
Jcr.  48.  37.  every  head  be  bald,  every  beard  be  c. 

CLODS. 
Job  7.  5.  my  flesh  is  clothed  with  c.  of  dust 
21.  33.  thee,  of  tlie  valley  shall  be  sweet  to  him 
38.  38.  and  the  c.  cleave  fust  together 
/»-a.  2rf.  24.  doth  plowman  breakc.of  his  ground? 
.//vA-.lU.U.Judah  shall  plow,  Jac.  shall  break  his  c. 
Joel  1. 17.  seed  is  rotten  under  their  c.  the  garners 

CLUKE. 
Isa.  59.  17.  he  was  clad  with  zeal  as  a  c. 
Mat.  5.  40.  iftake  thy  coat,  let  him  have  thy  c.  also 
J.uke  (j.  2S).  him  that  taketh  thy  c.  forbid  not  to  take 
John  15.  22.  now  tlu^y  have  no  c.  for  their  sin 

1  Tkess.  2.  5.  nor  used  we  a  c.  of  covetousness 

2  Tim.  4. 13.  the  c.  i  left  at  Troas  bring  witJi  thee 
\Pet.i.VJ.  not  using  libertvlbiac.  of  maUciousn. 

CLOSE. 
A*um.  5.  13.  and  it  be  kept  c.  from  her  husband 
2.Su/«.  22.  46.  be  afraid  outofc.  places,  Ps.  18.45. 
IChTTin.  12.  1.  while  David  yet  kept  himself  c. 
Job  28.  21.  and  kept  c.  from  the  fowls  of  Uie  air 
41. 15.  his  scales  shut  up  together  as  with  a  c.  seal 
^er.  42.  10.  famine  follow  c.  aAer  you  into  Egypt 
Dan.  8.  7.  and  I  saw  him  come  c.  to  the  ram 
.Imos  9.  11.  and  c.  up  the  breaches  thereof 
J.akc  9.  3t).  they  kept  it  c.  arid  told  no  man  in  those 
Acts  27.  13.  loosing  thence,  they  sailed  c.  by  Crete 

CLOSED. 
Gen.  2.  21.  Lord  c.  up  the  Hesh  instead  thereof 

20.  18.  the  Lotd  had  fast  c.  up  all  the  wombs 
-Viim.  16.  33.  the  earth  c.  upon  them,  they  perislied 
Judg.  3.22.  and  the  fat  c.  upon  the  blade,  so  thatlie 
Isa.  1.  6.  they  have  not  been  c.  nor  bound  up 

29.  10.  for  the  Lord  hath  c.  your  eyes 
Dan.  12.  9.  for  the  words  are  c.  up  and  sealed 
Jonah  2.5.the  depth  c. me  round  about, weeds  wrapt 
Mat.  13.  15.  their  eyes  they  have  c.  Acts  28.  27. 
J^uke  4.  20.  be  c.  book,  and  gave  it  to  the  minister 

CLOSER. 

Proo.  18.  24.  there  is  a  friend  that  sticketh  c.  than 

a  brother 

CLOSEST. 

Jer.  2-2.  15.  thou  rei!;n,  be(:au9e  c.  thyself  in  cedar 

CLOSET,  S. 
Jotl  2.  Ifi.  let  the  bride  go  out  of  her  c. 
Mat.  6.  6.  when  thou  [)rayest,  enter  into  thy  c. 
Luke  12.  3.  what  ye  have  s])oken  in  the  ear  in  c. 

CLOTH. 

ynm.  4. 8.  they  shall  spread  on  them  a  c.  of  scarlet 

12.  take  instruments  and  put  them  in  a  c.  of  blue 

Dcut.  22.  17.  shall  spread  the  c.  before  the  elders 

l.<fam.  19.  13.  Michal  covered  the  image  with  a  e 

21.  9.  the  sword  of  Goliath,  it  is  wra|)t  in  a  c. 
S.Sam.  20. 12.  removed  Amasa,  and  casta  r.  on  him 


CLO 


iKingg  8.  15.  Hazael  took  a  thick  c.  and  dipt  it 
/sa.^0. 22.  shall  cast  them  away  as  a  menstruous  c. 
Mat.  9  16.  putteth  a  piece  of  new  c.  Mark  2.  21. 

27.  59.  taken  the  body,  he  wrapped  it  in  a  linen  c. 
Mark  14.  51   having  a  linen  c.  about  his  body 

CLOTHE. 
F.zod.iO.lA.  sbalt  bring  his  sons  and  c.  with  coats 
F.sth.  4.  4.  she  sent  raiment  to  e.  Mordecai 
Psal.  132.  16.  I  will  r.  her  priests  with  salvation 
18.  his  enemies  will  I  c.  with  shame,  but  oiihims, 
Prov.  23.  21.  drowsiness  shall  c.  a  man  with  rags 
//ifl.22. 21.  I  will  c.  him  with  thy  robe  and  strength. 

49.  18.  thou  slialt  surely  c.  thee  with  them  all 

50.  3. 1  c.  the  heavens  with  blackness,  and  make 
F.ifk.  26.  16.  shall  c.  themselves  with  trembling 

34.  3.  ye  cat  the  fat,  and  c.  you  with  tho  wool 
Hag.  1.  6.  ye  c.  you,  but  there  is  none  warm 
Z«eA.  3.  4.  I  will  c.  thee  with  change  of  raiment 
^a£.6.30.ifG.  soc  grass  of  field,  shall  he  not  much 
more  c.  you,  Oyeof  liltle  fMitlil  Luke  12.28. 
CLOTHED. 
O-^.  3.  21.  L.  God  made  roalji  ofskijis  and  e.  them 
LnH.  7.  MogoBc.  Aaron  with  robe,  and  put  ephod 
J%dg.  6.  t  .34.  the  Spirit  of  iho  Lord  e.  Gideon 
1.9am.  17.  t  5.  Goliath  was  c.  with  n  coat  of  mail 

t  38.  Saul  e.  David  with  his  clothes 
2Sam.l.24.  wocpovciSaul  whoe.  you  with  scarlet 
\Chron.  12.  t  l*^-  then  the  Spirit  c.  Ainn-iai 

21.1C.D»vid  and  Isr.  who  were  c.  with  sackcloth 
Sdroji.  (5.  41.  let  thy  priests  be  c  with  salvation 

18.  9.  the  king  of  Israel  nnd.Iudah  c.  in  robes  sat 

5M.  t  20.  the  Spirit  of  God  c.  Zncharinh 

28.  15.  spoil  c.  all  that  were  naked  among  Ihem 
F.sth.  4.  2.  none  enter  king's  gitpc.  with  sackcloth 
Job  7.  5.  my  flesh  ia  c.  with  worriis  and  clods 

10. 11.  thou  hast  c.  me  with  skin  and  flesh 

29.  14. 1  put  on  righteoutncss  and  it  c-  me 

88 


Joh  39.  19.  ha«t  thou  c.  his  neck  with  thilnder? 
Psal.  35.  20.  let  them  be  c.  with  shame,  109.  29. 
65.  13.  the  pastures  are  c.  witli  Hocks,  the  valliei 
93.  1.  Lord  is  c.  with  majesty,  Lord  is  c.  witli 
1U4.  1.  thou  art  c.  with  honour  and  majesty 
109.  18.  as  he  c.  hims.  with  cursing  as  w  itii  garm 
132.  9.  let  thy  priests  be  c.  with  righlcousnees 
Prov.  31.  21.  for  all  her  househ.  are  c.  with  scarlet 
Isa.  61.  10.  he  hath  c.  me  with  garm.  of  salvation 
Kick.  16.  10.  I  c.  thee  also  with  bioidered  work 
Dan.  5.  29.  they  c.  Daniel  with  scarlet  and  u  chain 
'/.cph.  1.  8.  all  such  as  are  c.  with  strange  apjiarel 
Z.tch.  3.  3.  Joshua  was  c.  with  tilthy  garments 
Mat.  11.  8.  a  man  c.  in  soft  raiment,  Luke  7.  25 
25.36.  nak.  and  ye  c.  me  j|  43.  nak.  and  ye  c.  me  not 
Mark  1.  6.Jolm  was  c.  with  camel's  hair  and  girdle 
5.  15.  they  see  him  sitting  and  c.  Luke  8.  35. 
15.17.  and  they  c.  Jesus  with  purple,  and  platted 
Z.uAcl0.19.a  certain  rich  man  c.  in  pur(dc  and  linen 
2C«r.  5.  2.  desiring  to  be  c.  upon  with  our  house 
3.  ifsobo  that  being  c.  we  shall  not  be  found  nak. 
1  /'££.5.5.nnd  be  c.  with  humility,  God  resists  jiroud 
Rev.'i.  18.  white  raiment,  that  thou  inayest  be  c. 

10.  1.  I  saw  another  mighty  angel  c.  with  a  cloud 

11.  3.  the  two  witnesses  shall  projihesy  c.  in  sackc. 

12.  1.  there  appeared  a  woman  c.  with  the  sun 
19.  13.  he  was  c.  with  a  vesture  dipt  in  blood 

CLOTHED  with  linen. 
F.zck.  9.  2.  one  man  among  them  was  c.  with  linen 

44.  17.  they  shall  be  c.  with  linen  garments 
Dan.  10.  5.  behold  a  certain  man  c.  with  linen 

12.  0.  one  said  to  the  man  c.  in  linen,  how  long 
Hc«.  15. 6.  c.  in  pure  and  white  Z/nen,  18.16.  ]  19.14. 

Hhall  be  CLOTHED. 
.hb  8.2'i.  they  tliat  hate  thco  shall  be  c.  with  shame 
Kzek.  7.  27.  the  prince  shall  be  c.  with  desolation 
/)an.  5. 7.  read  this  writing,  shall  bee.  with  scarlet 
Mat.  6.  31.  or  wherewithal  shall  we  be  c.! 
Hev.  3.  5.  ho  that  overcometh  shall  he  c.  4.  4 

CLOTHES. 
Gen.  49. 11.  he  washed  his  c.  in  the  blood  of  grapes 
Kjod.  12.  34.  their  troughs  bound  up  in  their  c. 

35.  19.  the  c.  of  service  to  do  service,  39.  1,  41. 
/-ey.  10.  0.  nor  rend  your  c.  lest  ye  die,  21.  10. 
JJeut.  29.  5.  your  care  not  waxen  old,  JVeA.  9.  21. 
Ruth  3.  t  4.  lift  up  the  e.  that  are  at  his  feet 
ISam.  19.  24.  Saul  stript  off  his  c.  and  i)rophcsied 
\Kings  1.  1.  covered  k. David  withe,  but  no  heat 
'ifCings  2.  12.  he  took  hold  of  his  own  c.  and  rent 
~Chron.  34.  27.  thou  didst  :end  thy  c.  and  weep 
jVc/i.  4.  23.  I  nor  brethren,  none  of  us  put  off  our  c. 
■Job  9.  31.  and  my  own  c.  shall  abh»r  me 

22.  t  0.  thou  hast  stripped  the  c.  of  the  naked 
Prov.  6.  27.  take  fire,  and  his  c.  not  be  burnt? 
F.iek.  16.  39.  shall  strip  thee  also  of  thy  c.  23.  26. 
Mat.  24.  18.  nor  let  lim  return  back  to  take  his  c. 
Mark  5.  28.  if  I  touch  but  his  c.  I  shall  be  whole 

15.20.  took  olf  purple,  and  put  his  own  c.  on  him 
Luke  2.  7.  and  wrupjied  him  in  swaddling  c.  12. 
8.27.a  man  that  ware  no  c.  nor  abode  in  any  house 

19.  ,36.  as  he  went  they  spread  their  c.  in  the  way 
•24. 12.  he  beheld  the  linen  c.  laid,  .lihn  20.  5. 

John  1 1.44.came  bound  hand  and  foot  with  grave  c. 
19. 40.  took  body  of  Jesus,  and  wound  it  in  linen  c. 

20.  7.  the  na|)kin  not  lying  with  the  linen  c. 
Acts  7..58.witnes6es  laid  down  theire.  at  Saul's  feet 

22.  33.  as  they  cried  out  and  cast  oil  their  c. 

Rent  CLOTHES. 
Gen.  37.  29.  Reuben  ||  34.  Jacob  rent  his  c. 
44.13.  Joseph's  brethren  rcn^  Iheirc.  and  returned 
JVum.  14.  6.  Joshua  and  Caleb  rent  their  c. 
./o.«/i.7.0.  .Toshual|./Krfg-.11.35.Jephthahrp?t«his  c. 
•2Snm.  3.  :}1.  rent  yourc.  gird  you  with  sackcloth 
I  Kings  21.  27.  Ahab  rent  his  c.  \\  2  Kings  5.  8. 
♦  king  of  Israel  rent  his  c.  6.  30. 

'iKings  11. 14.  Athaliah  rent  her  c.  2CAr.  23.  13. 
19.  J.  when  Ilezt^k.  heard  ho  rent  his  c.  Isa.  37. 1. 
F.sth.  4.  1.  when  Mordecai  perceived,  horent  his  c. 
Mat.  26.  65.  high  |)riest  rent  his  c.  Mark  14.  OH. 
Aeln  14. 14.  apost.  Karnabas  and  Taul  rent  their  c. 
16.  22.  and  the  magislrates  rent  offtheir  c. 

CLtrrilKS  raxt. 
A,tn.l3.45.  tho  leper's  c.  shall  horent,  his  head  bare 
I.Sam.  4.  12.  a  man  came  toShiloh  with  hisc.  rent 
2.Siim.  1.  2.  caiirc  a  man  from  Saul  with  his  c.  rc7if 

13.  31.  all  his  servants  stood  with  their  c.  rent 
IKings  18.  .37.  toHezek.  withe  rent,  fsa.X.  22 
■fer.  4l.  5.  men  came  to  Mizpeh  with  their  c.  rent 

WnnA  CLOTMKS. 
F.Tod.  19.  10.  lot  thom  wash  their  c.  JVum.  8.  7. 
/,cc.  11. 2.';.  shall  ira.?A  his  (-.40. 1  i:i.  6.  114.8,9,47. 
1 15.  5,  8,  1 1,  22.  I  16.  20.  2H.  jVum.  19. 10, 19. 
JiTum.  19.  7.  then  the  priest  sliall  wash  his  a.  8,19. 
31.  24.  ye  shall  wash  your  c.  nn  the  seventh  day 

fVashed  (JLOTHKS. 
F.rnd.  19.  14.  and  the  p<'oplo  washed  their  c. 
.Yum.  8.21.  Levites  purified  and  washed  thoir  c. 
2. Sam.  19.  24.  Mephibnaheth  washed  not  bia  c. 

CLOTH  EST. 
Jcr.  4.  30.  though  thou  c.  tliyiclf  with  crimsoo 


CLO 

CLOTHING. 

.Tub  22.  6.  tliou  hast  stripped  the  naked  of  th<>ir  c 
24.  7.  they  cause  the  naked  to  lodge  without  e 

10.  tliey  cause  him  to  go  naked  without  c. 
31.  19.  if  I  have  seen  any  perish  for  want  of  c 
I'eal.  .35. 13.  but  as  for  nie,  my  c.  was  sackcloth 
45. 13.  king'sdaughter,  here,  is  of  wrouglit  gold 
Prov.  27.  26.  the  lambs  are  for  thy  e.  and  goats 
31.  22.  the  virtuous  woman's  c.ia  silk  and  purplfl 
25.8tr('iigth  and  honour  are  her  c. she  shall  rejoice 
Isa.  3. 0.  saying,  thou  hast  c.  be  thou  our  ruler 

7.  for  in  my  house  is  neither  bread  nor  c. 
23.  18.  her  merchandise  shall  be  for  durable  c. 
59. 17.  he  put  on  the  garments  of  vengeance  for  e. 
Jer.  10.  9.  blue  and  purple  is  (heir  c.  are  the  work 
Mat.  7. 15.  in  sheei)'B  c.  |{  11.8.  that  wear  soft  c. 
Mark  12.  38.  tho  scribes  that  love  to  go  in  long  c. 
Acts  10.  30.  a  man  stood  before  me  in  bright  c. 
/am.  2.  3.  respect  to  hinri  that  wcareth  the  gay  e. 

CLOUD 
Signifies,  [1]  A  congeries  chiefly  of  watery  poli- 
cies, dratcn  or  sent  out  of  the  earth  in  vapmirs^ 
into  the  middle  region  of  the  air,  2 Sam.  22.12. 
[2]  7AeA.:ai)cn«,P8.36.  5. 108.34.     ['.i]  A  great 
number,  Heb.12.1.     [4]  A  fug,  or  mist,  Hos.6.4. 
The  scripture  represents  the  clouds  as  conserva- 
tories of  water,  or  rain,  which  are  scattered 
vponthe  earth  at  God's  command,  iob^O.S,  He 
bindeth  up  the  waters  in  his  thick  clouds.     God 
cunfnes  the  waters  in  the  clouds,  as  in  a  bottle; 
he  scatters  them  afterwards  upon  the  earth,as 
it  were  through  a  watering-pot.    Job  speaking 
of  the  matter  of  the  Chaos,  which  covered  the 
whole  earthatthebeginning  of  theworld,  says, 
that  God  had  hemmed  in  the  sea,  or  the  tcaters, 
as  it  were  with  a  cloud,  and  covered  it  with  dark- 
ness, as  a  child  is  wrapped  up  in  swaddling- 
clothcs,Jo\>'38,9.  IVhni  t he saeredwriters speak 
of  the  second  coming  o/Chrisl,(Acj/  dcscribehim 
to  us  as  descending  upon  the  clouds,  encompas- 
sed with  oil  his  majesty,  Mat.  24.  30.  Rev.  1.7. 
The  prophi  t  Isaiah,  speaking  of  the  conversion 
of  the  (Jentilcs,  compares  their  flocking  into  the 
church  to  the  flight  or  quick  motion  of  a  cloud ; 
noting  that  they  should  come  in  great  multi- 
tudes, and  with  great  speedandeagerncss,  Isa. 
60.  8.    St.  Peter  compares  seducers  to  clouds 
that  are  carried  with  a  tempest,  2  Pet.  2. 17.    By 
which  comparison  he  sets  forth  both  the  incon- 
stancy of  these  seducers,  that,like  clouds  driven 
with  the  wind,  they  are  tossed  to  and  fro  from 
one  doctrine  to  another;  and  likewise  their  dt- 
ceilfulncss,  that  they  make  a  shew  of  what  they 
have  not,  as  clouds  do  of  rain,  and  yet  are 
scattered  without  yielding  any.     And  Solomon 
compares  Oie  infirmities  of  old  age,  which  arise 
suecessir,  ly  one  ofti  r  another,  to  clouds  relum- 
ing after  rain,  Heel.  12.  2. 
When  the  Israelites  departed  out  of  Egypt,  God 
gUvt  them  a  pillar  of  cloud  to  direct  them  in 
their  inarch.     This  pillar  was  commonly  in  the 
front  of  the  Israclitish  arviy;  but  whcv  they 
were  come  to  the  Red  Sen,  and  the   Fgi/ptian 
army  appeared  to  them,  thepillar  of  cloud  which 
stood  before  the  camp  of  Israel,  placed  itself 
between  that  and  the  camp  of  the  Egyptians,  so 
that  the  Egyptians  could  not  come  near  the  Is- 
raelites ali  night,  Exod.  14.  19,  20.     Hvtin the 
morning  about  break  of  day,  sedng  the  cloud 
moving  on  toward  the  sea,  and  following  Ute 
Israelites  who  had  passed  through  its  channel, 
which  was  left  dry  for  them  in  the  night  time, 
the  Egyptians  resolved  upon  pursuing  them, 
and  were  nil  covered  with  the  waters  of  the  Red 
Sea,  which  returned  upon  them  and  destroyed 
them.      This  cloud  continued  always  from  that 
time  to  attend  the  Israelites  in  the  wilderness. 
It  was  clear  and  bright  during  the  night,  in 
orderto  give  thrm  light  when  it  grew  dark;  and 
in  the  day-time  it  was  thick  and  gloomy,  the 
better  to  defend  them  from  the  excessive  heats 
of  the  Arabian  deserts,  through  which   they 
performed  their  journey. 
The  same  cloud  by  its  motions  gave  likewise  the 
signal  to  the  Israelites,  either  to  encamp  or  to 
decamp;  so  that  where  that  stayed,  the  people 
stayed  till  it  rose  again;  then  they  brokt  up 
their  camp,  and  followed  it  till  it  stopped.     It 
was  called  a  Pillar,  by  reason  of  its  form,  which 
was  high  and  elevated,  as  it  were  a  pile  and 
heap  of  fogs.      This  cloud  not  only  enlightened 
the  Idraiiilis,  but  also  protected  Chcm,  andwa* 
a  continual  pledge  of  God's  presence,  paieer, 
a-d  protection.      To  this  the  prophet  laaiah 
alludes,  when  he  says,  Tho  Lord  will  creatfl 
upon  every  dwelling-place  of  moiml  Zion,  and 
upon  her  assemblies,  a  cloud  and  smoke  by  day, 
and  the  shining  of  a  flaming  firo  by  night,  Isa. 
4.  5.  that  is.  That  God  would  be  thi  dirutor 
protector,  and  glory  of  his  cAurcA. 


CLO 

Gen.  9.  13.  I  do  set  my  bow  in  the  e.  for  a  token 
14.  that  the  bow  shall  be  seen  in  the  c.  IG. 

Exod.  14.  20.  it  was  c.  and  darkness  to  them 
16.10.  behold,  the  glory  of  the  L.  appeared  in  the  c 
19.  9.  Lord  said,  lo,  I  come  unto  tiiee  in  a  thick  c 

24.  15.  Moses  went  up,  and  a  c.  covered  the  mount 
16.  and  thee,  covered  it  six  days,  and  seventh  day 

•  God  called  to  Moses  outof  the  midst  of  thee. 

18.  Moses  went  into  the  midst  of  the  e. 

34.  5.  th«  Lord  descended  in  the  c.  JVum.  11.  25. 

40.  34.  a  c.  covered  the  tent  of  the  congregation 

36.  the  c.  of  Lord  was  on  the  tabernacle  by  day 
J^ev.  16.  2.  I  will  appear  in  the  e.  on  mercy  seat 
JVum.  9.  19.  when  thee  tarried  long  on  tabernacle 

10.  34.  the  c.  of  the  Lord  was  upon  them  by  day 

IjLiHgs  8. 10.  priests  came  out  of  holy  places,  the  e. 

tilled  house  of  Lord,2CAron.  5. 13.  jEzeA.10.4. 

18.  44.  there  ariseth  a  little  c.  like  a  man's  hand 
Job  3.  5.  that  day  be  darkness,  let  a  c.  dwell  upon  it 

22.13.how  God  know?  can  he  judge  thro'  dark/;..? 

30.  15.  and  my  welfare  passeth  away  as  a  c. 

33.' 9.  when  I  made  the  c.  the  garment  thereof 
Psal.  78.  14.  in  the  day-time  he  led  them  with  a  c. 

105.  39.  he  spread  a  e.  for  a  covering,  and  fire  to 
Prov.  16.  15.  his  favour  isasae.of  tlie  latter  rain 
Isa.  4.  5.  Lord  will  create  on  her  assemblies  a  c. 

18.  4.  like  a  e.  of  dew  in  the  heat  of  harvest 

19.  1.  behold,  the  Lord  rideth  upon  a  swifl  c. 
44.  22.  I  have  blotted  out  as  a  thick  c.  thy  trans- 
gressions, and  as  a  c.  thy  sins;  return  unto  me 

60.  8.  who  are  these  that  flee  as  a  c.  as  the  doves? 
l^am.  2. 1.  covered  the  daughter  of  Zion  with  a  e. 

3.  44.  thou  hast  covered  thyself  with  a  c. 
Ezek.  1.  4.  a  great  c.  and  a  lire  infolding  itself 
28.  as  the  appearance  of  the  bow  that  is  in  thee, 

8.  11.  and  a  thick  c.  of  incense  went  up        ' 

10.  4.  and  the  house  was  tilled  with  the  c. 
30.18.as  for  her,ac.  shall  cover  her,  her  daughters 
32.  7.  1  will  cover  the  sun  with  a  c.  and  the  moon 
38.  9.  thou  shalt  be  Uke  a  c.  to  cover  the  land,  16. 

^at.17.5.  c.  overshadowed,  MarkQ.  7.  L.uke9.3i 

behold,  a  voice  outof  the  e.  said,  I^uke  9.35. 

Luke  12.  54.  when  ye  see  a  c.  rise  out  of  the  west 

21.  27.  shall  see  the  Son  of  Man  coming  in  a  c. 
4cts  1.  9.  a  c.  received  him  out  of  their  sight 
ICor.  10.  1.  all  our  fathers  were  under  the  c. 

2.  and  were  all  baptized  to  Moses  in  the  c. 
RtTD.  10. 1.  a  mighty  angel  came  clothed  with  a  c 

11.  12.  they  ascended  up  to  heaven  in  a  c. 

14.  14.  white  c.  and  upon  the  c.  one  sat,  15,  16. 

CLOUD  abode. 

Rzud.  40.  35.  because  the  c.  abode  thereon 

Jifuvi.  9. 17.  where  e.  abode  there  pitched  their  tents 

18.  as  long  as  c.  abode  they  rested  in  the  tents 

Morning  CLOUD. 

Hos.  6;  4.  for  your  goodness  is  as  a  morning  c. 

13.3.  they  shall  be  as  the  mornivg  c.  and  early  dew 

Pillar  of  CLOUD. 
Exod.  13.  21.  went  before  them  by  day  in  a  p.  of  c. 
22.  he  took  not  away  the  p.  of  c.  by  day,  nor  fire 
14. 24.  Lord  looked  on  Egyptians  thro'/i  j7iar  of  c. 
A'um.12.5.  Ld.  came  down  inpillar  ofc.  and  stood 
/^cut.Sl.lS.L.  appeared  in;). o/c.  and;),  o/c.  stood 
JVeA.  9. 19.  the  pillar  of  c.  departed  not  Irom  them 

CLOUD  taken  up. 
f;iod.40.36.when  the  c.  was  taken  up,  J\!'um.  9.1 

37.  if  the  e.were  not  taken  up,  theyjuurneyed  not 
JV*um.9. 17. c.w&stakenup  from  tabernacle,  10. 11. 

IVhite  CLOUD. 
Rev.  14.  14.  behold  a  white c.  and  on  thee,  one  sat 

CLOUD  of  witnesses. 
.ffe6.12.1.we  are  compassed  with  so  great  ac.ofw. 

CLOUDS. 
Dent.  4.  11.  with  darkness,  c.  and  thick  datkness 
Judg.  5.  4.  heavens  dropped,  c.  also  dropped  water 
Si'ram.  22.  12.  about  him  thick  c.  of  the  skies 
23.  4.  lie  shall  be  as  a  morning  without  e. 
\Kings  18.  45.  the  heaven  was  black  with  c. 
Job  20.  6.  though  his  head  reach  to  the  e. 

22.  14.  thick  e.  are  a  covering  that  he  seeth  not 
26.  8.  he  bindeth  up  the  waters  in  his  thick  c. 
36.29.can  any  understand  the  spreading.-*  of  the  c.? 

37.  Ifi.  knowest  thou  the  balancings  of  the  c.? 

38.  37.  who  can  number  the  e.  in  wisdom? 
Psal.  36.  is.  thy  faithfulness  reacheth  to  the  c. 

57.  10.  and  thy  truth  reacheth  to  the  c.  108.  4. 
6.^.  34.  and  his  strength  is  in  the  c. 
77. 17.  c.  poured  out  water,  skies  sent  out  a  sound 
78.  23.  tho'  ho  had  commanded  thee,  from  above 
97.  2.  c.  and  darkness  are  round  about  him 
104.  3.  e.  his  chariot  II  147.fi.  covers  heaven  withe. 
Prov.  3.  20.  and  the  c.  dropped  down  tho  dew 
8.  28.  when  he  established  the  e.  above 

25.  14.  is  like  c.  and  wind  without  rain 
F.cd.W.  4.  he  that  regnrdeth  the  e.  shall  not  reap 

12.  2.  nor  the  e.  return  after  the  rain 

Isa.  5.  6.  I  will  command  the  c.  that  they  rain  not 

14.  14.  I  will  ascend  above  the  height  of  the  c. 

7^.4.13.  beholil  he  shall  come  up  as  e.  and  chariots 

JPait.  7. 13.  SoDof  Man  come  with  the  c.  of  heaven 

83 


COA 

Joel  2.  2.  a  day  of  e.  and  darkness,  Zcph.  1.  15. 
JVoA.  1.  3.  and  the  e.  are  the  dust  of  his  feet 
Zech.  10.  1.  so  the  Lord  shall  make  bright  e. 
Jtfa£.24.30.  they  shall  see  the  Son  of  Man  coming  in 
the  c.  with  power, 26. 64.  Mark  13.  26. 1 14. 62. 
IThess.  4.  17.  sliall  be  caught  up  with  them  in  e. 
•2Pet.  2.  17.  they  are  c.  carried  with  a  tempest 
Jude  12.  c.  they  are  without  water,  carried  about 
Hev.l.  7.  beh.  he  cometh  with  c.  every  eye  shall  see 

CLOUDY. 
£2:od.33.9.thec.pillar  descended,  and  stood  at  door 
10.  all  the  jieople  saw  the  c.  pillar  stand  iitdoor 
JVeA.  9. 12.  thou  leddest  them  in  the  day  by  c.  pillar 
Psal.  99.  7.  he  spake  to  them  in  the  c.  pillar 
F.ick.  30.  3.  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  near,  a  c.  day 
34.  12.  tliey  have  been  scattered  iu  the  c.  day 

CLOVEN. 

Lev.  11.  3.  whatsoever  is-c.-footed  that  shall  ye  cat 

7.  though  the  swine  be  c.-footed  he  is  unclean 

26.  not  e.-footed  are  unclean  to  you,  Dcut.  H.  7 

Acts  2.  3.  there  appeared  to  them  e.  tongues 

CLOUTED. 
Josh.  9.  5.  they  took  old  shoes  and  c.  on  their  feet 

CLOUTS. 

Jer.  38.  11.  Ebed-melechtook  old  caste,  and  rags 
12.  put  these  old  cast  e.  under  thine  arm-holes 
CLUSTER. 
JVum.  13.  23.  cut  from  Eshcol  a  branch  with  one  c. 
Cant.  1.  14.  my  beloved  is  as  a  c.  of  camphire 
Isa.  65.  8.  as  new  wine  is  found  in  the  c.  so  will  I  do 
Mic.  7.  1.  woe  is  me,  there  is  no  c.  to  eat 

CLUSTERS. 
Gen.  40. 10.  the  c.  thereof  brought  forth  ripe  grapes 
JJeut.3i.  32.  grapes  are  grapes  of  gall,  their  c.  bitter 
lSam.25.  18.  Abigail  brought  100  c.  of  raisins 
30.  12.  they  gave  the  Egyptian  two  c.  of  raisins 
Cant.  7.  7.  thy  breasts  like  two  c.  of  grapes,  8. 
Rev.  14.  18.  gather  the  c.  of  the  vine  of  the  earth 

COAL. 
2Sa7n.  14.  7.  so  shall  quench  my  e.  which  is  left 
Isa.  6.  6.  seraphim  having  a  live  c.  in  his  hand 
47.  14.  there  shall  not  be  a  e.  to  wariA  at 
Lam.  4.  8.  their  visage  is  blacker  than  a  e. 

COALS. 

Lev.  16. 12.  he  shall  take  a  censer  full  of  burning  c 

Deut.  32.  t  24.  shall  be  devoured  with  burning  e, 

\Kings  19.  6.  a  cake  baken  on  the  c.  and  a  cruse 

Job  41.  21.  his  breath  kindleth  e.  and  a  dame  goeth 

Psal.  18.  8.  there  went  fire,  c.  were  kindled  by  it 

12.  thick  clouds  passed,  hail-stones  and  c.  of  lire 

120.  4.  sharp  arrows  of  mighty  with  c.  of  juniper 

140.  10.  let  burning  c.  fall  on  them,  let  them 

Prov.  6.  28.  can  one  go  on  hot  c.  and  uot  be  burnt? 

25.  22.  thou  shalt  heap  c.  of  fire,  Rom.  12.  20. 

26.  21.  as  c.  are  to  burning  c.  and  wood  to  fire 
Cant.  8.  6.  the  c.  thereof  are  e.  of  fire,  which  hath 
Isa.  44.  12.  the  smith  with  tongs  worketh  in  the  c 

19.  I  have  baked  bread  upon  the  c.  thereof 
54.  16.  I  created  the  smith  that  bloweth  the  c. 

Kzek.  1.  13.  their  appearance  was  like  burning  e 
10.  2.  go  in  and  fill  thine  hand  with  e.  of  fire 
24.  ]1.  then  set  it  empty  on  the  e.  thereof 

Nab.  3.  5.  burning  e.  went  forth  at  his  feet 

John  18.  18.  the  servants  who  had  made  a  fire  of  c. 

21.  9.  they  saw  a  fire  ofc.  and  fish  laid  thereon 

COAST. 

F.xod.  10.  4.  I  will  bring  the  locusts  into  thy  c. 

JVum.  24.  24.  ships  shall  come  from  c.  of  Chittim 

Deut.  11.  24.  to  the  uttermost  sea  shall  youre.  be 
19.  8.  if  the  Lord  thy  God  enlarge  thy  e. 

Josh.  1.  4.  going  down  of  the  sun  shall  be  your  e. 

18.  5.  Judah  shall  abide  in  their  e.  on  the  south 
•Judg.  11.  20.  Sihon  trusted  not  Israel  to  pass  his  c. 
\Sam.  6.  9.  if  it  go  up  by  the  way  of  his  own  e. 

7.  13.  they  came  no  more  into  the  e.  of  Israel 
17.  t  1.  the  Philistines  pitched  in  c.^of  Dammini 

27.  1.  to  seek  me  any  more  in  any  c.  of  Israel 
30.14.  we  made  an  invasion  on  the  c.  of  Judah 

iKings  14.  25.  Jeroboam  restored  the  c.  of  Israel 
lCVi?07i. 4. 10.  wouldest  bless  me,  and  enlarge  my  c. 
Zeph.  2.  7.  thee.shallbefor  the  remnant  of  Judah 

Sea  COAST. 
Kzek.'25.l6.  I  will  destroy  the  remnant  of  the  sea  c. 
Zeph.  2.  5.  woe  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  sea  c. 
0.  thesea  e.  shall  be  dwellings  for  the  shepherds 
J>/at.4.13.Jesus  dwelt  inCapernaum  upon  the. «f  a  e. 
Luke  6.  17.  multitude  from  sea  c.  came  to  hear 

South  COAST. 

Josh.  15.  1.  Zin  the  uttermost  part  of  the  south  c. 

4.  were  at  the  sea,  this  shall  be  your  south  c. 

18.19.  at  south  end  of  Jordan;  this  was  the  5ok«A  c. 

COASTS. 
Exod.lO.  14.  tho  locusts  rested  in  all  the  c.  of  Egypt 
19.  remained  not  one  locust  in  all  thee,  of  Egypt 
Dent.  2.  4.  to  pass  through  the  e.  of  your  brethren 
16.  4.  no  leavened  bread  be  seen  in  all  thy  c. 

19.  3.  thou  shalt  divide  the  e.  of  thy  land 
losh.  18.  5.  Joseph  shall  abide  in  their  t.  on  north 
Tudg.  13.  2.  Dan  sent  five  men  from  their  e. 

19. 29.  sent  his  concubine  into  all  the  c.  of  laraol 


COL 

ISam  7.14.  the  t.  thereof  did  Israel  deliver  out  of 
11.3.  may  send  messengers  into  all  c.  of  Israel,  7 
iSam.  21.  5.  be  destroyed  from  the  c.  of  Israe' 
ICVirflfc.  21.  12.  angel  of  Ld.  destroying  thro' all 
iChron.  11.  13.  resorted  to  him  out  of  all  their  c 
Psal.  105.  31.  there  came  lice  in  all  their  e. 

33.  he  smote  their  tines,  brake  trees  xif  their  t. 
.ler.  25.  32.  a  great  whirlwiiid  be  raised  from  the  e 
Eiek.  33.  2.  if  the  people  take  a  man  of  their  r.. 
Joel  3.  4.  what  to  do  with  me,  all  c.  ol' Palestine? 
Mat.  2.  lO.Herod  sent  and  slew  children  in  all  ihe  c 
8.  31.  ho  would  de|iartout  of  their  c.  Mark  5. 17. 
15.21.  then  Jesus  depart,  into  c.  of  Tyre  andSidon 
Mark  7.31.departing  from  the  c.  of  Ty  te  and  Sidon 
Mcts  13.  50.  expelled  Paul  and  Bariiubajoutulc. 

COAT. 
<5cn.37. 3.  Jacobmade  Joseplia  e.  of  many  colours 
32.  they  sent  thee,  of  many  colours,  and  said,  this 
have  we  found,  know  whether  it  be  thy  son's  e- 
i^xorf.28. 4.  make  lor  .\arona  robe  and  broiderede. 
29.  5.  and  thou  shalt  put  upon  ."^aron  the  e. 
Lev.  8.  7.  he  jiut  upon  him  the  e.  and  girded  bira 
10.  4.  he  shall  put  on  the  holy  linen  c. 
iSam.  2.  19.  his  mother  made  Samuel  a  little  c. 
17.  5.  Goliath  was  armed  with  a  c.  of  mail,  38 
~Sam.  15.  32.  Hushai  met  David  with  his  c.  rent 
Job  30. 18.  it  bindeth  me  about  as  collar  of  my  c. 
Cant.5.3.  I  haveput  olfmy  c.  how  shall  I  put  it  on? 
.iilat.  5.  40.  if  any  sue  thee,  and  take  away  thy  c. 
Luke  6.  29.  thy  cloke,  forbid  not  to  take  thy  c.  alNO 
John  19.  23.  now  the  c.  was  without  seam,  woven 
21.  7.  Peter  girt  his  fisher's  c.  unto  him,  cast  hiute. 

COATS. 
Gen.  3.  21.  God  made  c.  of  skins,  and  clothed  thbrn 
Exod.^3.40.  for  Aaron's  sous  thou  shalt  makec. 
29.  8.  bring  his  sons,  and  put  c.  on  them,  40.  14. 
Lev.  8.  13.  Moses  put  c.  upon  Aaron's  sons 
10.  5.  they  carried  them  in  theirc.  out  of  the  camp 
Da}i.  3.  21.  then  these  men  were  bound  in  their  c. 
27.  nor  were  their  c.  changed,  nor  smell  of  fire 
Mat.  10.  10.  neither  provide  two  c.  nor  shoes,  nor 
Mark  6. 9.  shod  with  sandals,  and  put  not  on  two  e. 
Lukc2.li.he  that  hath  two  c.  let  him  impart  to  hira 
Mcts  9.  39.  shewing  the  e.  which  Dorcas  made 

COCKLE. 
Job  31.  40.  and  let  e.  grow  instead  of  barley 

COCKATRICE,  S. 
Prov.  23.  t  32.  at  last  it  stingeth  like  a  e. 
Isa.  11.8.  weaned  child  put  his  hand  on  the  e.  den 
14.  29.  outof  serpent's  root  shall  come  forth  a  c 
59.  5.  they  hatch  e.  eggs,  weave  the  spider's  web 
Jer.  8.  17.  I  will  send  serjients,  e.  among  you 

COCK. 
J/aZ.2G.34.tliis  night  beforec.crow,thoushaltdeny 
me  thrice,  75.  Mark  14.  20, 72.  Luke  22. 34, 61. 
74.  and  immediately  the  e.  crew,  J^uke  22.  60. 
John  18.  27 
Mark  13.  35.  if  the  master  cometh  at  e.  crowing 
14.  68.  he  went  out  into  porch,  and  the  e.  crew,  72. 
John  13.  38.  verily,  verily,  I  say  to  thee,  thee,  shall 
not  crow  till  thou  hast  denied  me  thrice 
COFFER. 
ISam.  6.  8.  and  put  the  jewels  of  gold  in  a  e. 
11.  Ihey  laid  ark  andc.  with  mice  of  gold  on  cart 
15.  the  Levites  took  down  the  e.  with  the  ark 
Ezra  6.  f  2.  there  was  found  in  a  c.  a  roll 

COFFIN. 
Gen.  50.  2G.  Joseph  was  put  in  a  e.  in  Egypt 
Luke  7.  t  14.  he  came  and  touched  the  e.  and  said 

COGIT.'VTIONS. 
Dan.  7.  28.  as  for  me  mv  e.  much  troubled  roe 

COLD, 
^f  7(.8.22.  e.  and  heat,  day  and  night  shall  not  cease 
Job  24.  7.  the  naked  have  no  covering  in  the  c. 
37.  9.  and  c.  cometh  out  of  Ihe  north 
Psal.  147.  17.  who  can  stand  before  his  e.? 
rrot'.20.4.the  sluggard  will  not  plow  by  reason  of  e 
25. 13.  as  the  e.ofsnow  in  the  time  of  harvest,  so  is 
20.  that  taketh  away  a  garment  in  c.  weather 
25.  as  c.  waters  to  a  thirsty  soul,  so  is  good  new* 
.hr.  18.14.  shall  the  e.  flowing  waters  be  forsaken? 
JVah.  3.  17.  which  camp  in  the  hedges  in  the  c.day 
.Mat.  10.  42.  give  to  little  ones  a  cup  ofc.  water 
24.  12.  iniquity  abound,  love  of  many  shall  wax  e 
■lohn  18. 18.  servants  had  made  a  fire,  for  it  was  c 
.lets  28.  2.  they  received  us,  because  of  the  c. 
2Cor.  11.  27.  in  fastings  often,  in  e.  and  nakednesi 
Rev.  3.  15.  that  thou  art  neither  e.  nor  hot,  16 

COLLAR,  S. 
.hidg.  8. 20.  golden  ear-rings  from  Midian,  beside  c. 
Job  30.  18.  my  disease  bindeth  me  as  e.  of  my  coal 

COLLECTION. 
2CAron.  24.  6.  to  bring  in  out  of  Judah  the  e.  9. 
ICor.  16.  1.  now  concerning  tho  c.  for  the  saints 

COLLEGE. 
2A'iw  <rs  22.  14.  Huldah  dwelt  in  e.  2CAron.  34. 23. 

COLLOPS. 
Job  15. 27.  because  he  maketh  c.  of  fat  on  his  flankfl 

COLONY. 
.<2c(s  16.12.  Philippi  chief  city  of  Macedonia  ande 


COM 

COLOUR. 

Ijtv.  13.  55.  if  the  plague  have  not  changed  his  c. 

Jfum.  11.  7.  the  c.  thereof  as  the  c.  ol'bdeUiura 

Estk.  1.  t  •>■  alabaster  and  stone  of  blue  c. 

Prov.  23.  31.  when  the  wine  giveth  his  c.  in  thecUjT 

£zek.l.4.  out  of  the  midst  thereof  as  the  c.  of  amber 
7.  sparkled  like  c.  of  burnished  brass,  Dan.  10. 6. 
36.  the  wheels  like  unto  c.  of  a  beryl,  10.  9. 
22.  the  firmament  was  as  the  c.  of  llie  crystal 

Rev.  17.  4.  woman  was  arrayed  in  purple  and  scar- 
COLOUKt;i).  [let  c. 

Rev.  17.  3.  I  saw  a  woman  sit  on  a  scarletc.  beast 
COLOURS. 

Gen.37.3.  Jacob  made  a  coat  of  many  c.  for  Joseph 

Judg.  5.  30.  loSiseraaprey  of  divers  c.  meet  for 

26'aj/i.  13.  18.  Tamar  had  a  garment  of  divers  c. 

\Chron.  29.  2.  1  have  prepared  stones  of  divers  c. 

Isa.  54.  11.  I  will  lay  thy  stones  with  fair  c. 

JCiek.m.  It),  deckedst  thy  high  places  with  divers  c. 

17.  3.  an  eagle  with  divers  c.  came  to  Lebanon 

COLOUR. 

^ctj)27.  SO.underc.  as  tho'  they  would  cast  anchor 
COLT,  S. 

Gen.  32.  15.  thirty  milch  camels  with  their  c.  forty 
49.  11.  binding  liia  asses'  c.  to  the  choice  vine 

Judg.  10.4.  Jair  had  30  sons  that  rode  on  30  ass's  c. 
12.14.  A  bdon's  sons  and  nephews  rode  on  70  ass's  c. 

Job  11.  12.  though  man  be  born  like  a  wild  ass's  c. 

Zech.  9.  9.  riding  upon  a  c.  .Mat.  21. 5.  John  12. 15. 

Jfa£.21.2.Jes.6ent  two  disciples,saying,  go,  ye  shall 
find  ass  tied,  c.  with  her,  Mark  11.2.  Jjuke  19.30. 
7.  broiight  aas  and  c.  and  set  thereon,  Mark  11.  7. 

j|f<irA11.5.whaldo  you  loosing  thee  .'  Litkc\'i.2'i. 

Luke  19.  35.  castgarm.  on  c.  and  set  Jesus  thereon 
COME 

Signifies,  [1]  To  draw  nigh,  or  approach,  Exod. 
34.  3.  [2J  To  proceed  from,  1  Chron.  29.  H. 
[3]  To  befall,  Ezra  9.  13.  Job  4.  5.  [4]  To  be- 
lieve, John  5.  40.  I  6.  37.  [5]  To  attain  tu. 
Acts  26.  7.  [G]  To  join  iCi</(,  Proverbs  1.  11. 
[7]  Tu  toucA,  Ezek.  44.  25.  [8]  Tobcmairicd 
to,  Dan.  11.  ti.  [9]  To  lie  carnally  with,  Gen. 
38.  16.  [10]  To  invade,  Gen.  34.  25.  [11]  To 
arise,  Num.  24.  7. 

fJen.6.20.  two  of  every  sort  sliall  c.  to  keep  alive 

7.  1.  c.  thou,  and  all  thy  house  into  tho  ark 

8.  t  9-  he  caused  her  to  c.  to  him  into  the  ark 

19.  32.  c.  let  us  make  our  father  drink  wine 
26.  27.  wherefore  c.  ye  to  me,  seeing  ye  hale  inel 
31.  44.  c.  let  us  make  a  covenant,  1  and  thou 
37.  20.  c.  let  us  slay  him,  and  cast  into  some  pit 

41.  t  21.  when  they  had  c.  to  inward  parts  of  ihem 

42.  7.  he  said  to  them,  whence c.  yel  .Josh.  9.  8. 
45.  19.  take  wagons,  bring  your  father  ami  c. 
49. 10.  sceptre  not  depart  from  Judah  till  Shiloli  c. 

Exed.  19.  9.  lo,  I  c.  to  thee  in  a  thick  cloud 
20. 24.  where  [  record  my  name  I  will  c.  and  bless 

23.  27.  destroy  all  people  to  whom  thou  slialt  c. 
Jfam.  10.  29.  c.  thou  with  us  we  will  do  thee  good 

22.  6.  c.  I  pray  thee,  curse  me  this  people,  11. 

24.  19.  out  of  Jacob  shall  c.  he  that  shall  have  do- 
minion, and  destroy  him  that  reinaineth  of  city 

7)cut.lH.6.  if  aLevite  c.  and  c.  with  desire  of  mind 
28.  2.  all  these  blessings  shall  c.  on  thee,  overtake 
15.  all  these  curses  c.  on  thee,  overtake  thee,  45. 
Jadg.  13.  5.  no  razor  c.  on  his  head,  l.S'dm.  1.  11. 
I.Sam.  2. 34.  that  shall  con  thy  tsvo  sons  in  one  day 

9.  13.  for  the  people  will  not  eat  till  he  c.  because 

10.  8.  seven  days  thou  shalt  tarry,  till  I  c.  to  thee 

17.  45.  but  I  c.  to  thee  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 

20.  21.  then  c.  thou,  for  there  is  peace  to  thee 

2  Sam.  0.  9.  how  shall  the  arlt  of  the  Lord  c.  to  me? 

15.  t  2.  when  any  c.  to  the  king  for  judgment 
_,  17.  2.  i  will  c.  on  him  while  he  is  weary  and  weak 

19.  33.  c.  thou  over  with  me  and  I  will  feed  thee 
\Kings  8.  31.  and  the  oath  c.  before  thine  altar 

20.  X).  observe,  if  any  thing  woulil  c.  from  him 
22.  27.  feed  this  fellow  until  I  c.  in  peace 

iKingn  5.  8.  let  him  c.  now  to  me,  he  shall  know 
6.  \  19.  this  is  not  tho  way,  c.  ye  after  me 

18.  32.  till  J  c.  and  take  you  away,  Isa.  36.  17. 
\Chron.  29.  12.  both  riches  and  honour  c  of  thee 

14.  all  things  c.  of  thee,  ami  of  thine  have  we 
SC!lron.8.  II.  holy,  whereto  the  ark  of  liord  hathc. 
.K»tA.  1.12. queen  Vashti  refused  to  c.  at  king'scom. 

5.  1 10.  Maman  caused  his  friends  to  c. 

8.  6.  how  endure  to  nee  evil  c.  lo  my  people? 
Job  3.  7.  let  no  joyful  voice  c.  therein 

13.  13.  that  I  may  gpeak,let  r.  on  mo  what  will 

14.  14.  all  my  time  will  I  wait  till  my  change  c. 
21.  his  sonar,  to  honour,  and  ho  knowoth  it  not 

37.  13.  ho  caused  it  to  c.  for  correction  on  land 

38.  11.  hitherto  ahalt  thon  c.  but  no  further 
Psal  40.  7.  then  said  I,  lo,  I  c.  Heh.  10.  7,  9. 

42.  2.  wh(^n  ahnll  I  c.  and  appear  before  God? 
.V).  3.  onr  God  ihall  c.  and  not  keen  silence 
65.2. thai  hnarcit  prayer,  unto  Ihne  shall  all  flesh  c. 
80.  2.  stir  up  thy  strength,  and  r.  and  save  us 
86.  9.  all  nations  shall  c.  and  worship  thee 
90. 1  12.  wo  may  cause  our  heart  to  c.  to  wisdom 
£4 


COM 

Ps.  101. 2.  O  when  wilt  thou  e.  unto  me,  I  will  walk  [ 
109.  17.  as  he  loved  cursing,  so  let  it  c.  unto  him 
119.  41.  let  thy  mercies  c.  unto  me,  O  Lord,  77. 

Prov.  6.  11.  so  shall  thy  poverty  c.  as  one,  24.  34. 

10.  24.  the  fear  of  the  wicked  eliuU  c.  upon  him 

20.  2.  so  the  curse  causeless  shall  not  c. 
i'cc/.9.2.  all  things  c.  alike  to  all,  there  is  one  event 
Cunt.  2.  10.  rise  up,  my  love,  and  c.  away,  13. 

4.8.  c.  with  me  from  Lebanon,  my  spouse,  with  me 

16.  and  c.  thou  south,  blow  uj>oii  my  gardi^n 
/sa.  5.19.  let  ibe  counsel  of  the  holy  One  of  Israel  c. 

13.  5.  they  c.  from  a  far  country,  even  the  Lord 
6.  the  day  of  the  Lord,  it  shall  c.  as  destruction 

21.  12.  if  ye  will  inquire,  inquire  ye;  return,  c 

26.  20.  «.  my  people,  enter  into  thy  ehaftibers 

27.  6.  cause  them  that  c.  of  Jacob  to  take  root 
35.  4.  your  God  will  c.  with  vengeance,  he  will  c. 

40.  10.  the  Lord  will  c.  with  a  strong  hand 

41.  25.  I  have  raised  up  one,  and  he  shall  c. 

44.  7.  I  ajipoinlcd  things  coming,  and  shall  c. 

45.  20.  assemble  yourselves,  and  c.  draw  near 
24.  even  to  him  shall  men  c.  and  all  that  are 

51.  11.  the  redeemed  shall  c.  with  singing  toZion 
55.  1.  c.  ye  to  the  waters,  c.  ye,  buy,  c.  buy  wine 
3.  c.  unto  me,  hear,  and  your  soul  shall  live 

59.  20.  and  the  Redeemer  shall  c.  to  Zioii 

60.  3.  and  the  Gentiles  shall  c.  to  thy  light,  5. 
66.  15.  behold.  Lord  willc.  with  fire  and  chariots 

./<?r.  2.  31.  why,  say  they,  we  willc.  no  more  to  thee 

3.  22.  behold,  we  c.  to  thee,  for  thou  ail  our  God 
9.  17.  call  the  mourning  women,  that  they  may  c. 
13.  22.  wherefore  c.  these  things  upon  me? 

17.  J5.  where  is  the  word  of  the  Lord  ?  let  it  c. 

27. 7.  shall  serve  him  till  the  very  lime  of  his  land  c. 
31.9.  they  shall  c.  with  weeping  and  with  suiiplic. 
38.  25.  if  the  princes  hear,  and  c.  to  thee,  and  say 
40.  4.  if  ilseemgood  to  c.  if  itseemill  toe.  forbear 

46.  18.  and  as  Carmel  by  the  sea,  so  shall  he  c 
49.  4.  that  trusted,  saying,  who  shall  c.  unloim 

J. am.  1.4.  waysofZion  mourn,  none  f.  to  solemn 

22.  lei  all  their  wickedness  c.  before  thee  [feasts 

F.zi^k.  12.  16.  declare  abominations  whither  they  c 

13.  18.  will  ye  save  the  souls  alive  that  c.  to  you 
21. 19.  two  v\'ays  that  the  sword  may  c.20.|  32  11. 

27.  shall  be  no  more,  till  he  c.  whose  right  it  is 
33.  3.  when  he  seeth  the  sword  c.  on  the  land,  6. 

31.  they  c.  to  thee  as  the  people  cometh 

33.  lo  it  will  c.  then  shall  know  that  a  projihel 

36. 8.  to  my  people  Israel,  ihey  are  at  hand  to  c 
Hos.0.1.  c.let  us  return  to  the  Lord,  for  he  hath  torn 

3.  and  he  shall  c.  to  us,  as  tlie  rain  to  the  eartl 

10. 12.  it  is  time  to  seek  the  Lord  till  he  c.  and  rain 

.loel  1.15. day  of  the  Lord,as  a  destruction  shall  itc. 

2.  31.  before  the  terrible  day  of  the  Lord  c. 
.hnah  1.7.  c.  lei  us  cast  lots,  that  we  may  know 
Mic.  4.  8.  to  tliee  shall  it  c.  tho  kingdom  shall  c. 
Hab.  2.  3.  because  it  will  surely  c.  and  not  tarry 
y.iph.i.  2.  before  the  fierce  anger  of  Lord  c.  on  yon 
Zech.  1.  21.  then  said  I,  what  c.  these  to  do? 

14.  5.  God  shall  c.  and  all  the  saints  with  thee 
Mai.  3.  1.  the  Lord  ye  seek  sliall  c.  to  his  tempi 

4.  6.  lest  I  c.  and  smite  the  earth  with  a  curse 
Mat.  2.  6.  for  out  of  thee  sliall  c.  a  Governor 

5.  24.  first  be  reconciled,  then  c.  and  ofter  thy  gift 

6.  10.  thykiiigdomc.  thy  will  be  done,  Am/ic1  1.2. 

7.  15.  false  prophets  c.  to  you  in  slieeps'  clothii 

8.  7.  Jesus  saitii  to  him,  I  will  c.  and  heal  him 

8.  lam  not  worthy  thonshouldestc.und.  my  roof 

9.  and  to  another  c.  and  he  cometh,  I,uke  7.  8. 
11. many  shall  c.  from  east  and  west,  and  sit  down 

11.  3.  art  thou  he  that  should  c?  J.uke  7. 19,  20. 

28.  c.  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden 

16.  24.  If  any  man  will  c.  after  me,  let  him  deny 

17.  10.  why  say  the  scribes,  Eliaa  mustfirstc?  11. 

19.  21.  go,  sell  that  thou  hast,  and  c.  Luke  18.  22. 

22.  4.  all  things  are  ready,  «.  unto  the  marriiige 

24.  14.  gospel  shall  be  preached,  then  shall  end  c. 
42.  ye  know  not  what  hour  your  Lord  doth  c. 

25.  34.  c.  ye  blessed  of  mv  Father,  inherit  kingd. 
.»fort8...34.  if aiw  will  r.  after  ine,/,uAc9.23.|  14.2r 

10.14.  siifler  little  children  to  t.  to  me,  Luke  18.16. 
21.  and  c.  take  up  the  cross,  and  follow  mo 
12. 7.  this  is  the  heir,  r.  let  us  kill  him,  /.iikr'iO.  14. 
Juke  lO.l.cvery  place  whither  he  himself  would  c. 
13.  7.  three  years  I  c.  seeking  frdit  on  this  tig-tree 
14.  there  are  six  days,  in  them  r.  and  be  healed 
U.  20.  when  the  kingdom  of  (Jod  should  c. 
11).  13.  he  said  imto  them,  occupy  till  I  c. 

20.  16.  ho  shall  r..  and  ilestroy  these  husbandmen 
22.  18.  fruit  of  vine,  till  kingdom  of  God  shall  c. 

.fiihn  1.  39.  he  aaith  unto  t'leni,  c  and  see 

3.  26.  the  same  baptizetli,  and  all  men  c.  lo  him 

5.  14.  sin  no  more,  lest  a  worse  llnnz  r.  to  thi'e 
40.  ye  will  not  c.  to  me,  that  ye  niisht  have  life 

6.  :i7.  all  that  the  Father  giveth  meshiill  r.  tome 
44.  no  niancnnr.  tome,  except  F.  draw  him,  65. 

7.  :M.  and  where  I  am,  thither  ye  cannot  c 

37.  if  any  man  thirst,  let  him  c.  tume  and  drink 

8.  14.  ye  cannot  tell  whence  I  r.  and  whither  I  go 
13  lO.'now  I  tell  you  before  it  e  that  when  it  i»  e. 


COM 

JohnM.lS.  I  will  not  leave  you  comfortlese,  I  will  t 
23.  and  we  will  c.  unto  him,  and  make  our  abodt 
17.  11.  but  these  are  in  the  world,  1  c.  to  tliee,  13» 
21.  22.  if  1  will  he  tarry  till  I  c.  what  to  tbecl  23 

J3ct3  1. 11.  this  J.  shall  so  c.as  ye  have  seen  liim  go 

2.  20.  before  that  great  and  notable  day  of  Lord  e. 

3.  19.  sine  blolledout,  when  timesof  reliesningc. 

7.  34.  and  now  c.  1  will  send  thee  into  Egypt 

8.  24.  pray  that  none  of  these  things  c.  upon  me 

9.  38.  that  he  would  not  delay  to  c.  to  them 

13.  40.  lest  that  c.  on  you  that  is  spoken  in  jiroph. 
16.  y.  saying,  c.  over  into  Macedonia,  ^nd  help  ua 
19.  4.  believe  on  hira  that  should  c.  after  him 
24.  23.  should  forbid  no  acquaintance  toe.  to  him 
26. 7.  to  which  promise  our  twelve  tribes  hope  to  c. 
22.  no  other  than  proph.  and  Moses  say  should  e, 
Rom.  3.  8.  that  we  say,  let  us  do  evil,  thatgood  e. 

9.  9.  the  word  of  promise,  at  this  time,  will  I  e. 
IC'or.  4.  5.  judge  nothing  till  the  Lord  c.  who  wili 

11.  26.  ye  do  shew  the  Lord's  death  till  he  c. 
34.  the  re.-it  will  I  set  in  order  when  I  c. 

15.  35.  the  dead,  and  with  what  body  do  thcy'c.7 

16.  2.  that  there  be  no  gatherings  when  I  c. 

10   if  Timothy  e.  see  he  be  with  you  withoutfcar 

12.  as  to  Apollos,  1  desired  him  to  e.  to  you 
2C'or.  1.  15.  I  was  minded  lo  c.  lO  you  before 

12.  20.  for  I  fear,  lest  when  I  c.  I  sliall  not  find  you 
such  as  I  would,  and  be  to  you  as  you  would  not 

Gal.  2.  21.  if  righteousness  c.  by  the  law,  then  is 
3.14.  the  blessing  of  Abraham  might  c.  on  Geutites 

19.  it  was  added,  till  the  seed  should  e.  to  whom 
2  77icf.l.lU.wlienheshall  e.  to  be  glorified  in  saints 

2.  3.  not  c.  except  there  c.  a  falling  away  first 
1  Tim.  4.  8.  the  life  that  now  is,  and  of  that  to  c. 

13.  till  I  c.give  atlendance  to  reading,  todoctrine 
•ZTfin.  3.  1.  in  last  days  perilous  times  bhall  c. 

4.  3.  time  will  c.  will  not  endure  sound  doctrine 
Tit.  3.  12.  be  diligent  to  e.  to  me  to  Micapulin 
Heb.  4.  16.  let  us  c.  boldlyto  the  throne  of  grace 

7.  25.  he  is  able  to  save  them  that  e.  lo  God  by  bim 

10.  37.  he  that  shall  c.  will  c.  and  not  tarry 
Jam.  4. 1.  whence  c.  wars,  e.  they  not  of  yourlustst 

5.  1.  weep  for  your  miseries  that  shall  c.  on  you 
•iPet.  3.  9.  but  that  all  should  c.  to  repentance 

10.  day  of  Ld.  will  c.  as  a  thief,  Rev.  3.  3.  |  16. 15 
I.John  2. 18.  as  ye  have  heard,  antichrist  shall  c. 
"i.lohn  10.  if  I  c.  I  will  remember  his  deeds 
Rev.  2.  5.  repent,  or  else  [  will  c.  lo  Ibce  quickly 
25.  that  which  ye  have  already,  hold  fast  till  1  c. 
3. 11.  behold,  I  c. iiuickly,  hold  that  fasl,22. 7, 20. 
0.1. One  of  the  four  beasts,  saying,  c.  and  see,  3.5,7. 

18.  10.  for  in  one  hour  is  thy  judgment  c. 

22.  17.  and  let  him  that  is  atliirst  t.  whoever  will 

COME  agaiji. 
Gen.  28.  21.  so  that  I  e.  a^'ain  to  my  father's  house 
iCiorf.l4.26.that  watersmay  c.  again  on  Egyptians 
Jev.  14.  43.  if  the  plague  c.  again  and  break  out 
Judg.  8. 9.  when  I  c.  ag.  in  peace  I  will  break  down 

13  8.  let  man  of  God  c.  a^Qin  tons,  and  teach  US 
lA'iHn'«2.41.Shimei  had  gone  toGath, and  wasc.  a. 

12.5.  depart  for  3  days,  and  then  c.ag.  2Ci>^10.5. 

17.21.  OLord,  I  pray,  let  this  child's  soulc.  again 
f'.zra  t).  21.  children  of  Israel  c.  again,  JVVA.  8. 17. 
Psal.  126.  6.  he  shall  c.  again  v^•ilh  rejoicing 
Prov.  3. 28.  say  not  to  thy  neighbour,  go  and  c.  ag. 
.fer.  37.  3.  the  Chaldeans  shall  c.  again  and  fight 
/.am.  1. 1 11-  given  for  meat  to  make  their  soul  e.  a. 
Luke  10.  35.  when  I  c.  again  1  will  repay  thee 
.luhn  14.3.  I  will  c.  «»-.  and  receive  yon  lo  myself 
28.  ye  have  heard  how  I  said,  I  go  away  anil  c.a 
iCor.  2. 1.  that  I  would  not  c.  asain  in  heaviness 

12.  21.  lest,  when  I  c.  ngain,GoA  will  humble  mo 

13.  '.y  write,  that  if  [  c.  again  I  will  not  spare 

^  CO.MErfowii. 

Gen.  45.  9.  thus  saitli  Joseph,  c.(/.  to  me,  tarry  not 
F.Tod.  3.  8.  I  am  c.  d.  to  deliver  and  bring  them  up 

19.  II.  the  Lord  will  c.  down  on  Mouni  Sinai 
j\"um.  11.  17.  I  will  c.  d.  and  talk  with  thee  there 
iJrut.  28.  24.  from  heaven  it  shall  e.  doirn  on  thee 
./ndg.7.'24.  saying,  c.  doicn  aganstthe  Midianites 

15.  12.  they  said,  we  are  c.  down  to  bind  tliee 
l.Snm.  6.  21.  c.  doKn  and  fetch  the  ark  up  to  you 
2.3.  II.  will  Saul  c.rf.?  the  Lord  said,  howillc.rf. 

20.  c.  down,  according  to  tho  desire  of  thy  soul 
'i Kings  1.4.thoushalt  note.  rf.  from  Uiatbcd,  6. 16. 

9.  thou  nianofGod,e.  rf.  ||  10.  letfiree.  rf.  11,  12. 

.\'cli.  6.  3. 1  am  doing  n  great  work,  I  cannot  c.doion 

Ps.  7.  16.  his  dealing  shall  e.  doicn  on  his  own  pate 
72.  6.  he  shall  c.  dotrn  like  rain  on  mown  grass 
144.  5jbow  the  heavens,  O  Lord,  and  c.  down 

Isa.  34.  5.  my  sword,  it  shall  e.  doten  on  Idiimea 
47.  1.  e.  dotrn,  sit  in  tho  dust,  O  virgin  daughter 
64.  1.  oh,  Ihatthou  wouldeste.rfoirn,  that  mount 

.Jrr.  13.  18.  your  principalities  shall  c.  down 
21.  i:i.  which  say,  who  shall  c.down  ngainst  UB? 
4'^.  ^f.  r.  down  from  thy  glory,  and  sit  in  thirst 

F.irk.  06.  16.  tho  princes  of  the  sea  shtill  e.  doten 
27.  29.  nil  pilots  shall  c.  down  from  their  ships 
30.  6.  the  pride  of  her  powiT  she II  r.  down 

Van.  5. 1 20.  hardened  in  jiridc,  lie  was  made  lo  c.  fl 


COM 

/     fotl  3.  11.  cause  thy  miglity  ones  to  c.  doicn 
Mat.  24. 17.  not  c.  d.  to  lake  any  lliin;;  out  of  house 

27.  Hi.  c.  duiDii  from  the  cross,  42.  Mar/c  15.  M. 
Z'Ukei).  54.  wilt  thou  that  we  command  lire  to  c.  d.? 

19.  5.  Jesus  said,  Zaccheus,  makeliaste  and  c.d. 
.John  4.  4'J.  saith.  Sir,  c.  duion  ere  my  child  die 
^cts  14.  11.  the  gods  are  t.  down  to  us  like  men 
Rev.  Vi.  12.  devil  isc.  dowit  to  you,  having  wrath 

13.  13.  maketh  tirec.  down  from  heaven  on  eartli 

20. 1.  angel  c.  d.  having  the  key  of  bolloinless  jiil 

COME  forth. 
Gen.  15.4.  he  that  shall  c.  forth  out  of  thy  bowels 
1  Sam.  14.  11.  Hebrews  c.  forth  out  of  their  holes 

1  Kings'i.  3U.  Benaiah  said,  thus  saith  the  k.  c.f. 

2  Kings  10.  25.  go  in  and  slay  them,  let  none  c.  f. 
Job  23.  10.  when  tried,  I  shall  c.  forth  as  gold 
Psal.  17.  2.  let  my  sentence  c.  /.  from  thy  presence 

88.  H.  J  am  shut  up,  and  I  cannot  c.  forth 
JEcd.  7.  18.  that  feareth  God  shall  c.  /.  of  them  all 
Isa.  11.  1.  shall  c./.  a  rod  out  ol  the  stem  of  Jesse 
48.  1.  and  art  c./i/rtAout  of  the  watersof  Judah 
Jer.  4.  4.  lest  my  fury  c.  forth  like  hie  and  burn 
37.  5.  Pharaoh's  army  was  c.f.  out  of  Egyjit,  7. 
46.  9.  let  mighty  men  c.  forth,  the  Etliioinans 
48.  45.  a  tire  shall  c.  forth  out  of  Heshbon        ■ 
Eiek.  21.  19.  both  twain  shallc./.  out  of  one  land 
Dan.  it.  2G.  ye  servants  of  the  most  high  God,  c.f. 

9.  22.  O  Daniel,  I  am  c.  forth  to  give  thee  skill 
Joeii.  18.  a  fountain  shall  c.  forth  ol  house  of  Lord 
J^ic.  5.  2.  out  of  thee  shall  c.f.  that  is  to  be  ruler 
Zech.  2.  6.  c.  /.  and  flee  from  the  land  of  the  north 
^a£.J3. 49.  angels  shall  c.forlhand  sever  wicked 

15. 18.  c.  forth  from  the  heart,  and  detile  the  man 
Mark  9. 29.  this  kind  c.  forth  by  nothing  but  prayer 
■*y>uftc  12.  37.  and  will  c.  forth  and  serve  them 
J^kn  5. 29.  shall  c.  forth,  they  that  have  done  good 

11.43.  he  cried  with  a  loud  voice, Lazarus,  c.  forth 
t^cts  7.7.  after  that  they  shall  c.  forth  and  serve  me 

COME  hither. 
Gen.  1.5. 16.  in  the  fourth  generation  shall  c.  hither 
.Tudg.  16.  2.  it  was  told  Gazites,  Samson  is  c.  hither 
Huth  2.  14.  at  meal-lime  c.  thou  hither  and  eat 

1  Sam.  10. 22.  they  inquired  if  the  man  should  c.  h. 
16.  11.  we  will  not  sit  down  till  he  c.  hither 

2Sn»!.14.  32.  e.A.  that  I  may  send  thee  to  the  king 
20.16.say  to  Joab,  c.h.  that  I  may  speak  with  tliee 

2  Kings  8.  7.  told  Ben-hadad,  the  man  of  G.  is  c.  h. 
Prov.  25.  7.  better  it  be  said  to  thee,  c.  up  hither 
JJan.3.2(i.  ye  servants  of  G.  c.  forth  anrtc.  hither 
Mat.  8.  29.  artthou  c.  h.  to  torment  us  before  time 
John  4.  15.  that  I  thirst  not,  neither  c.  h.  to  draw 

16.  Jesus  saith,  call  thy  husband  and  c.  hither 
J3cts  17. 6.  that  have  turned  the  world  are  c.  hither 
Rev.  4. 1.  voice  said,  c.  up  h.  11. 12.  |  17.  1.  |  21.  9. 

COME  in,  or  into. 
Gen.  6.  18.  thou  shall  c.  into  the  ark,  and  thy  sons 
19.  31.  there  is  not  a  man  in  the  earth  lo  c.  in  to  us 
24.  31.  and  .he  said,  c.  uithou  blessed  of  the  Lord 
Exod.  12.  23.  Lord  will  not  suffer  destroyer  to  c.  in 
28.  43.  when  they  c.  in  unto  the  tabernacle 
Leo.  16.26.  heshall  bathe  his  flesh,  and  afterward 
shall  c.  into  the  camp,  28  JV«m.  19  7.  |  31.  24. 
N'v.m.  27.  21.  and  at  his  word  they  shall  c.  in 
Deut.  31.  2.  I  can  no  more  go  out  nor  c.  in 
Josh.  14.  11.  so  is  my  strength  to  go  out  and  c.  in 

2.1.  t  1.  Joshua  waxed  old,  and  c.  into  days 
I  Kings  1.  14.  I  will  c.  in  after  thee  and  confirm 
3.7. 1  am  a  child,  I  know  not  how  to  gooutorc.  j/i 

14.  6.  he  said,  c.  in  thou  wife  of  Jeroboam 

15.  17.  he  might  notsufl'er  any  to  go  out  or  c.  in 
-King.ii.  4.  when  c.  in  shut  the  door  upon  thee 

11.  9.  they  took  each  his  men  to  c.  in  and  go  out 
^Chron.  1.  10.  go  out  and  c.  in  before  this  people 

16.  I.  that  he  might  let  none  go  out  or  c.  in  to  Asa 

23.  6.  nonce,  info  the  house  of  the  L.  save  priests 
JiTeh.  2.  7.  convey  me  over,  till  I  c.  into  Judah 
Ksth.  5.  12.  Esther  let  no  man  c.  j'n  with  the  king 

6.  5.  and  the  king  said,  let  Haman  c.  in 
P.ial.  24.  7.  and  the  King  of  glory  shall  c.  in,  9. 

69.  1.  for  the  waters  are  c.  in  unto  my  soul 

96.  8.  bring  an  offering  and  c.  into  his  courts 

109. 18.  so  let  it  c.  into  his  bowels  like  water 

Cunt.  4.  16.  let  my  beloved  c.  into  his  garden 

Isa.  19.  1.  behold,  the  Lord  shall  c.  into  Egypt 

23.  the  .Assyrian  shall  c.  into  Egypt,  Egyptian 

•   24  10.  every  house  shut  up,  that  no  man  c.  in 

39.  19.  when  the  enemy  shall  c.  in  like  a  flood 
Jer.  17. 19.  gate,  whereby  the  kings  of  Judah  c.  in 

5L  50.  and  let  Jerusalem  c.  into  your  mind 
51.  for  strangers  are  c.  into  the  sanctuaries 
Ezek.  11.  5.  I  know  things  that  c.  into  your  mind 

38.10.at  the  same  time  shall  things  c.into  thy  mind 
.Vic.  5.  5.  when  the  Assyrian  shall  c.  into  our  land 
Mat.  10.  12.  when  ve  c.  into  a  house,  salute  it 

10.  27.  Son  of  Man  shall  c.  in  ^glory  of  his  Father 

24.  5.  for  many  shall  c.  in  my  name, saying,  lam 
Christ,and  deceive  many,  Mark  13.6.  /.,Hie21.8. 

25.  31.  when  the  Son  of  Man  shall  c.  in  his  glory 
Luke  II.  33.  they  which  c.  in  may  see  the  light 

12.  38.  c.  in  ilie  second  watth,  or  c.  in  the  third 

(si 


COM 

Luke  12.  40.  will  c.  in  a  day  when  he  looketh  not 

for  hini 

14.  23.  go  out,  and  compel  them  to  c.  in,  that  my 

16.  28.  lest  they  c.  into  this  place  of  torment 

.John  5.43. 1  am  c.  in  n<y  Father's  name,  ye  receive 

me  not,  if  another  c.  in  Ins  own  name  ye  receive 

6.14.  prophet  that  should  c.  tjito  the  world,  11.  27. 

./ictsl6.15.Lydia, saying,  c.  into  house,  abide  there 

Horn.  11.  25.  till  the  fulness  of  Gentiles  be  c.  in 

1  Cor.  14.  23.  there  c.  in  those  that  are  unlearned 

24.  if  there  c.  in  one  that  believeth  not 
Jum.2. 2.there  c.  in  also  a  poor  man  in  vile  raiment 
Hev.  3.  20.  1  will  c.  in  lo  liini,  and  sup  with  him 

COME  near. 
Gen.  12.  11.  Abram  was  c.  7ieurto  enter  into  Egypt 
20.  4.  but  Abimelech  had  not  c.  near  her 
Ezod.  12.  48.  then  let  him  c.  near  and  keep  it 
16.  9.  say  unto  Israel,  c  ?tear  before  ihe  Lord 
28.  43.  or  when  they  c.  near  lo  the  altar,  30.  20. 
JVum.  16.  5.  and  will  cause  him  to  c.  near  to  him 

40.  that  no  stranger  c.  near  to  oiler  incense 
Josh.  10.  24.  c.  near,pal  your  feet  on  the  necks 
1  Sam.  10.  20.  had  caused  all  the  tribes  to  c.  near 
Psal.  32.  9.  be  held  in,  lest  they  c.  near  unto  thee 
119.  169.  let  my  cry  c.  near  before  thee 
Isa.  41.  1.  let  us  c.  near  logether  to  judgment 

t  21.  cause  to  c.  near  your  cause,  saith  the  L. 
48.  10.  c.  ye  near  unto  me,  hear  ye  this 
50.8.  who  is  mine  adversary  ■?  let  him  c.  near  me 
£ic/£.18.6.nor  hath  c.ncar  lo  a  menslruous  woman 
40.  46.  which  c.ncar  to  the  Lord  to  minister  lo  him 
44.  15.  they  shall  c.  near  to  me  to  minister  lo  me 
lO.theyshall  c.near  to  my  table  to  minister  to  lue 
jJ/«046.3.which  cause  the  seat  of  violence  to  c.near 
Mai.  3.  5.  and  I  will  c.  7tear  to  you  to  judgment 
Lukel'i.41.  when  he  was  c.  near,  he  beheld  the  city 
.4cts23.15.andwe,or  he  c.near,are  ready  to  kill  him 

COME  nigh. 
Exod.  34.  30.  but  they  were  alraid  to  e.  nigh  him 
J^ev.  10.  3. 1  will  be  sanctified  in  all  thatc.  nigh  me 
21.21.  no  man  that  hath  blemish  shallc.  ni^'^A,23. 
j\ru)n.  18.  4.  a  stranger  shall  not  c.  ni^A  to  you 
Z^c«t.20.2.when  you  are  c.nigh  to  battle,  the  priest 
LukelO.9.  kingdom  of  God  isc.  nigh  unto  you,  11. 

COMi:  not. 
Exod.  19.  15.  he  ready,  c.  not  at  your  wives 
24.  2.  but  they  shall  riot  c.  nigh,  nor  the  people 
JV"«?n.  14.  30.  ye  shall  not  c.  into  the  land  I  sware 
16.12  Dathan  and.Vbiram  said,wewill  no£c.up,]4. 
Deut.  23. 10.  unclean  shall  iiot  c.  within  the  camp 
Josh.  3.  4.  c.  not  near  unto  the  ark,  that  ye  may 

23.  7.  that  ye  c.  not  among  these  nations 
fudg.  16.17.  there  hath  not  c.  a  razoi  on  mine  head 

2Sam.  14.29.  Absalom  sent  for  Joab,  but  he  would 
not  c.  he  sent  the  second  time,  he  would  jtot  c. 

1  Kings  13. 22. carcase  note,  to  sepulchre  of  fathers 

2  Kings  19. 32.  king  of  Assyria  shall  not  c.  into  this 
city,  nor  shoot  arrow  there,  33.  Isa.  37.  33,  34. 

2  Chron.  35.  21.  I  c.  not  against  thee  this  day 
iCzralO.S.whosoeverwould  note. within  three  days 
JVeA.I3.1.Moabite  not  c.  into  congregation  for  ever 
./oi3.  6.  let  it  noi!c.  into  the  number  of  the  months 
13.  16.  for  a  hypocrite  shall  not  c.  before  him 
Psal.  32.  6.  in  floods  they  shall  not  c.  nigh  to  him 
69.  27.  let  them  not  c.  into  thy  righteousness 
91. 7.tliousands shall  fall, but  itshallnotc.nighthee 
132.3.1  will  not  c.  into  the  tabernacle  of  my  house 
Prov.  5.  8.  c.  not  nigh  the  door  of  her  house 
Isa.  7.  17.  Lord  shall  bring  days  that  have  not  c. 
25.  there  shall  not  c.  the  fear  of  briers  and  thorns 
28.  15.  the  overflowing  scourge  shall  not  c.  to  me 
32. 10.  vintage  shall  fail,  the  gathering  shall  not  c. 
54.  14.  far  from  terror,  for  it  shall  note,  near  thee 
65.  5.  which  say,  stand  by  thyself,  c.  not  near  me 
.Icr.  37. 19.  sayins,  the  king  of  Babylon  shall  not  c 
Ezuk.lti  16.  like  things  shall  not  c.  nor  shall  it  beso 
44.  13.  they  shall  not  c.  near  to  me  to  do  olfice 
Hos.  4.  15.  c.  nut  ye  unto  Gilgal,  nor  go  to  Beth-. 
9.  4.  their  «oul  shall  not  c.  into  house  of  the  Lord 
Zech.  14.  18.  and  if  the  family  of  Egypt  c.  not 
Mat.  22.  3.  sent  to  call,  and  they  would  not  c. 
Marki.i.lhiiycoiM  not  c.  nigh  for  press, Luke  8.19. 
Luke  14.  20.  I  have  married  a  wile,  1  cannot  c. 
.John  5.  24.  and  shall  not  c.  into  condemnation 

40.  ye  will  not  c.  to  me  that  ye  might  have  life 
7.  34.  where  I  am  thither  ye  cannot  c.  36. 
11.  56.  think  ye  that  he  will  not  c.  lo  the  feast  ? 

15.  22.  if  I  had  not  c.  they  had  not  had  sin 

16.  7.  if  r  go  not  away,  the  Comforter  will  not  c. 
1  Cor.  4.  18.  as  thouuh  I  would  not  c.  lo  you 

COME  out.  [stance 

Gen.  15. 14.  afterwards  shall  c.  out  with  great  sub- 

17.  6.  and  kings  shall  c.  out  of  thee,  35.  II. 

24.  13.  the  daughters  of  city  c.  out  to  draw  w;iter 
Lev.  16. 17.  till  ho  c.  out  and  have  made  atonement 
J\rum.  11.  20.  shall  eat  till  it  e.  out  at  your  nostrils 

12.4.  c.  out  ye  three  to  tabernacle  of  cnngrcgat. 
20.  18.  lest  I  c.  out  against  thee  with  the  sword 
22.  5.  there  is  a  people  c.  out  of  Egypt,  II. 
33.  38.  Aaron  died  fortieth  year  after  Israel  c.  out 


COM 

Deut.  28.  7.  c.  out  one  way,  and  flee  seven  ways 
Judg.  9.  15.  if  not,  let  fire  c.  out  of  the  bramble 

29.  he  said,  increase  thine  army  and  c.  out 
lSani.2.  3.  let  not  arrogancy  c.  out  of  your  mouth 

11.  3.  to-morrow  we  will  c.  out  unto  thee,  10. 

24.  14.  after  whom  is  the  king  of  Israel  t.  out  ? 
2  Sam.  16.  7.  c.  out,  c.  out,  thou  bloody  man 
IKingstJ.  l.in  the  480th  year  afur  Isr.  were  c.  out 

20.  17.  saying,  there  are  men  c.  out  of  Samaria 
2h'ings5.  U.hewillc.  out  to  mo,  and  layhishand 

18.  31.  make  an  agreement  and  c.  out,  Isa.  36. 16. 

19.  9.  behold,  he  is  c.  out  lo  fight  against  thee 
Psal.  14.  7.  O  that  salvation  were  c.  out  ol  Zioo! 

08.  31.  princes  shall  c.  out  of  Egypt,  Ethiopia 
I'rov.  12.  13.  but  the  just  shall  c.  out  of  trouble 
Isa.  34.  3.  their  stink  shall  c.  out  of  their  carcasea 
J\i'ah.  1.  11.  there  is  one  c.  out  that  imagiiietli  evil 
Mat.  5.  26.  by  no  means  c.  out  till  thou  hast  paid 

26.  55.  are  ye  c.  out  as  against  a  thief  with  swords 

and  slaves  to  take  me?  Mark  J4.48.  y,u/ie  22.52. 

Mark  I. 'i5.boli\  thy  peace,  c.  out  of  hirn,  LukcA.  35. 

5.  8.  said,  c.  o«t,lhou  unclean  sjiiril,  /.«/re8.  29. 
John  1.  46.  can  any  good  thing  c.  out  of  Nazareth? 

7.  41.  some  said,  shall  Christ  c.  out  of  Galilee? 
~'lcls  16.  18.  in  the  name  of  Jesus  to  c.  out  other 
A'o/rt.  11. 26.  there  shall  c.  out  of  Zion  the  Deliverer 
2  Cor.  6.  17.  wherefore  c.  out  from  among  thern 
//(*.7.5.though  they  c.  out  of  I  he  loins  ol  Abraham 
/vCi).  16.13.  saw  spirits  c.  out  of  the  mouth  ol  dragon 

18.  4.  a  voice  sayina,  c.  out  of  her,  my  people 
COME  to  pass. 

Exod.i.S.h  shnW  c.to pass  if  they  will  notbelieve,9. 

JV«?«.11.23.whptlier  my  word  shall  c.  topassor  not 

17.5. c. to  pa^sthe  man's  rod  I  choose  .'■hall  blossom 

/;eut.7.12. shallc.  topassifyelieark.il.  13.  I  28.1. 

13.  2.  and  the  sign  or  the  wonder  c.  lo  pass 
.hsh.-23.  14.  all  are  c.  to  pass,  no  gnod  thing  failed 
■Judg.  13. 12.  Manoah  said,  let  thy  word^c  to  pass 

17.wlien  thy  sayings  ctopas.*  we  may  do  honour 

21.  3.  O  Lord,  why  is  this  c.  to  pass'in  Israel,  that 
1  Kings  i3.  32.  the  saying  shall  surely  c.  to  pass 
Isa.  7.  7.  it  shall  not  stand,  nor  shall  it  r.  to  pass 

14.  24.  as  I  have  thought,  so  shall  it  c.  to  pass 
42.  9.  behold,  the  former  things  are  c.  to  pass 

Jer.  17.24.it  shall  c.  topassifye  liiligcnily  hearken 
32.  24.  what  lluiu  hast  spoken  is  c.  to  pass 

Ezfk.  12.  25.  the  word  that  I  speak  shall  c.  to  pass 
24.  14. 1  have  spoken,  it  shall  c.  to  pass, I  will  do  it 

/)a7i. 2.29.niakelh  known  to  thee  what shal^.  top. 

Hos.  1.  5.C.  topass  that  I  will  break  the  bow^fltr. 

■  !oel  2.  32.  c.  to  pass  that  whosoever  shall  call  on  L 
■linos  8.  9.  c.  top.  I  will  cause  sun  go  down  at  noon 
7.ech.  6.  15.  this  shall  c.  top.  if  ye  diligcntlv  obey 

7.  13.  therefore  it  is  c.  to  pass,  that  as  he  cried 
jlfat.24.6.all  theselhings  must  c.to  pass,enii  not  yet 
Mark  11.  23.  things  which  he  saith  shallc.  to  pass 

13.29.  when  ye  shall  see  these  c.  to  p.  I.uki.  21. 31. 
Luke  2.  15.  and  see  this  thing  which  is  c.  lo  pass 

21.  7.  what  sign  when  these  things  shall  c.  top.  28. 

24.12.  wondering  in  himself  at  w:hal  wasc.  to  pass 
IS. hast  not  known  the  things  which  are  e.loposs 
./oA»13. 19.  when  it  isc.  top.  ye  may  believe, 14.29. 
.?ct.5  3.2.3.  c.  top.  that  every  soul  that  will  not  hear 
Rev.  1.  1.  to  shew  things  must  shortly  c.  to  p.  22. 6. 

COME  sAort. 
/?om.3.23.alI  have  sinned  and  c.short  of  gloryof  G. 
//ei.4.1.le*tany  of  vousihould  seem  toe.  sAortof  it 

COME  together. 
.Toh  9.  32.  and  we  should  c.  togclher  in  judgment   ' 

19. 12.h;f  troops  e.t<'orrtAcragainstnie  and  encnmp 
Ji  r.  3. 18.  shall  Cp  together  out  of  land  of  the  north 

50.4.Isr.and.Iuir.sliall  c.to^ctAcr.going  und  weep 

■  •!i/s  1.  6.  when  they  were  c.  together,  28.  17. 
10.  27.  he  found  many  that  were  c.  together 

19.  .^i. knew  not  wherefore  they  were  c.  together 
21.  22.  the  multitude  miftt  neeils  c.  togdhtr 

1 0/r.7.5.  c.  together  again,  that  Sat.  tempt  vou  not 
11. 17.  you  c.  together,  not  for  better  but  for  worse 

18.  when  yec.  to^etAcr  in  church,  20.  .33. 1 14.26- 

34.  that  ye  c.  not  together  to  condemnation 
14. 23.  if  whole  church  be  c.  together  to  one  place 

COME  vp. 
Pxof/.19.]3.trnmpet  sound  theyshall  c.wp  to  mount 

24.  thou  shall  c.  up,  thou  and  Aaron  with  ihee 
24.  12.  c.  wp  lo  me  into  the  mount,  and  bi>  there 
33.  5. 1  will  c.  up  into  mid.^t  of  thee  in  a  moment 
.34.  2.  and  c.  up  in  the  morning  to  mount  Sinai 

3.  no  man  shall  c.  up  with  thee  nor  be  seen 
.Vnm.  20.5.  whv  have  ye  made  us  c.  vp  out  Egypt! 
/o.'!A.4.1G.that  the  priests  c.i/p  out  of  Jordan,  17,18 
10.  4.  c.  up  to  me,  and  help  me  to  smite  Gibeon 

6.  c.  vp  to  us  quickly,  save  us,  and  help  us 
hidir.  1.  3.  Judah  said,  r.  up  with  me  into  my  lot 

15.  10.  Judah  said,  why  are  ye  c.  up  ag.iinst  u;? 

16.  18.  Delilah  scirt,  saying,  c.  up  this  once 
1  Sam.  14. 10.  if  they  say  c.  up  to  us,  we  will  go  up 

17.  25.  said,  have  ye  seen  this  m.nn  that  is  c.  upT 
1  Kirnrs  1. 35.  t.hen  yo  shall  c  up  after  him,  that  he 

20.  22.  the  king  of  Svria  will  c.  up  against  Ihee 
•2King3 16. 7.  e.  up  and  save  me  from  king  of  Sjrii 


COM 

iKings  18.25.aml  iiowc.  jy)  without  L.  TsaM.lO. 
i  Chr.  -M.  16.  beliolcl,  they  c.  up  by  llie  cliff  of  Ziz 
Job  7. 9.  that  goelh  to  thegrave,  sliall  c.  u;/  no  inorc 
Proo.  25.  7.  better  Ihalit  be  said,  c.  u;)  liitber 
Isa.  5.  6.  but  there  sh^ll  c.  up  briers  and  tlionis 
8.  7.  and  he  shall  c.  up  over  all  his  chaciiiels 
14.  8. since  laid  down  no  fellow  is  c.  up  ugamst  us 
60.  7.  they  shall  c.  up  with  accept,  on  mine  altar 
Jer.  9.  21.  lor  death  is  c.  up  into  our  windows 
49.  19.  behold,  he  shall  c.  up  like  a  lion,  50.  44. 
22.  behold,  he  shall  c.  up  and  liy  as  the  eagle 
51.  27.  cause  the  horses  to  c.  up  as  caierpillurs 

42.  the  sea  is  c.  up  upon  llabylon,  she  is  covered 
Aam.  1.  14.  are  wreathed,  and  c.  up  upon  my  neck 
Eiek.  24.  8.  that  it  might  cause  fury  to  c.  up  to  take 

37.  12.  and  cause  you  to  c.  up  out  of  your  graves 

38.  16.  thou  shalt  c.  tip  against  my  peoi>le  Israel 
47.  t  12.  on  the  bank  shall  c.  up  all  trees 

Hos-  1.  11.  and  thev  shall  c.  up  out  of  the  land 
10.  8.  the  thistle  shall  c.  up  on  their  altars 
13.  15.  the  wind  of  Lord  shall  c.  up  from  wildern. 

Joel  2.  20.  his  stink  and  ill  savour  shall  c.  up 

3.  9.  let  all  men  of  war  draw  near,  let  them  c.  up 
12.  let  heathen  c.  up  to  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat 

^mos  4.  10. 1  made  the  stink  of  your  camps  to  c.  up 
Oftad.21. saviours  shall  c.u;yon  mountZion  tojudge 
Jonah  1.  2.  tlieir  wickedness  is  c.  up  before  me 

4.  6.  the  Lord  made  a  gourd  to  c.  up  over  Jonah 
Mic.  2.  13.  the  breaker  is  c.  up  before  them 
J^ah.  2.  1.  he  that  dasheth  in  pieces  is  c.  up 
Zech.  14.  17.  it  shall  be,  that  whobo  will  not  c.  zip 

18.  if  the  family  of  Egypt  go  not  up^  c.  not 
Jlcts  8. 31.  he  desired  Phil,  to  c.  up  and  sit  with  him 

39.  when  they  were  c.  up  out  of  the  water 
lO.  4.  Cornelius,  thy  alms  are  c.  up  before  God 
Rev.  4. 1.  c.  up  hither,  and  I  will  shew  thee,  11. 12. 

COME,  Passive. 
Ocn.  6.  13.  the  end  of  all  flesh  is  c.  before  me 

18.  5.  for  therefore  are  ye  c.  to  your  servant 
21.  according  to  the  cry  which  is  c.  to  me 

42.  21.  therefore  is  this  distress  c.  upon  us 
F.xod.  3.  9.  cry  of  the  children  of  Israel  is  c.  to  me 

20.  20.  fear  not,  for  God  is  c.  to  prove  you 
JVum.  22.  11.  there  ie  a  people  c.  out  of  Egypt 
/)cii«.  31.11.  when  all  I.^r.  is  c.  to  apjiear  before  L. 
Josh.  5.  14.  as  captain  of  the  host  of  Lord  am  I  c. 
Judg.  16.  0.  it  was  told,  Samson  is  c.  hither 

1  Sam.  4.  7.  for  they  said,  God  is  c.  into  the  camp 
9.1C.kiokcd  on  my  poo.  because  tlieir  cry  is  c.to  mc 

2  .SamT  1.  9.  slay  mo,  for  anguish  is  c.  upon  me 

19.  11.  the  speech  of  all  Israel  is  c.  to  the  king 
S  Kings  4.  1.  the  creditor  is  c.  to  take  my  sons 

5.  (5.  when  this  letter  is  c.  to  thee,  I  sent  Nuaman 
8.  7.  told  him,  saying,  the  man  of  God  is  c.  hither 

Ezra  9.  13.  and  after  all  that  is  c.  upon  us 
Job  3.  2.5.  the  thing  I  greatly  feared  is  c.  4.  5. 
Psal.  44. 17.  all  this  is  c.  upon  us,  yet  wo  have  not 

53.  6.  O  that  the  salvation  of  Israel  were  c. 

5.5.  5.  fearfulness  and  treiYibling  are  c.  upon  me 

69.2. 1  am  c.  into  deep  waters,  floods  overflow  me 

102. 13.  lime  to  favour  Zion,  yea  the  set  time  is  c. 
Jsa.  10. 28.  he  is  c.  to  Aiath,  he  is  passed  to  Migron 

56. 1.  for  my  salvat.  is  near  to  c.  and  my  righteous. 

60. 1.  arise,  shine,  for  thy  light  is  c.  and  glory  of  L. 

6.3.  4.  and  the  year  of  n'ly  redeemed  is  c. 
Jer.  40.  3.  have  sinned,  therefore  this  is  c.  upon  you 

47.  5.  baldness  is  c.  on  Gaza,  Ashkclon  iscutoff] 

50.27.  woe  to  them,  for  their  day  is  c.  the  time  of 
'      31.  thy  day  is  c.  the  time  that  I  will  visit  thee 

51.13.  thatdwellest  on  many  waters,  thy  end  isc. 
Lam.  4.  18.  our  days  are  fulfilled,  our  end  is  c. 

5.  1.  remember,  O  Lord,  what  is  ?.  upon  us 
Ezek.  7.  2.  an  end,  the  end  is  c.  upon  the  land,  6. 
5.  thus  saiili  L.  an  evil,  an  only  evil,  behold  isc. 
7.  the  morn,  is  c.  upon  thee,  O  thou  that  dwcllest 
10.  behold  the  day,  behold,  it  is  c.  39.  8. 

17.  12.  the  king  of  Babylon  is  c.  to  Jerusalem 

521.  25.  thou  wicked  prince  whose  day  is  c.  29. 
Dan.  9.  13.  as  it  is  written,  all  this  evil  is  e.  on  us 
Amos  8.  2.  the  end  is  c.  on  my  people  of  Israel 
Mie.  1. 9.  he  is  c.  to  gate  of  my  people,  to  Jerusalem 
Jtfaf..  3.  7.  who  warned  you  to  flee  from  wrath  to  c? 

12.  28.  the  kingdom  of  God  is  c.  unto  you 
44.  when  he  is  c.  he  findeth  it  empty,  swept 

18.11. Son  of  Man  is  c.  to  save  that  which  was  lost 
Mark  1.  24.  art  thou  c.  to  destroy  us?  J.ukeA.  34. 

4.29.  ho  puts  in  the  »irkli',bccauso  the  harvest  Is  c. 

14.  8.  she  is  c.  aforehand  to  anoint  my  body 
41.  sleep  on  now,  it  is  enough,  the  hour  is  c. 

Luke  7.  34.  tho  Son  of  Man  is  c.  eating  and  drink. 

l.'5.27.thvlirother  ia  e.  father  hath  killed  fattcdcalf 

19.  9.  this  day  is  salvation  r..  to  this  house 

10.  the  Son  of  Man  is  c.  toseek  ami  to  save  lost 
Tohn  3. 10.  that  light  is  c.  into  tho  world,  men  loved 
4.  25.  when  bo  is  c.  ho  will  toll  us  all  things 
11.28.  the  Master  is  e.  and  calleth  for  thee 
12.23.  the  hour  is  c.  Sonof  Miin  be  glorified,  17.1 
l.').  26.  when  the  Comforter  is  c.  whom  I  will  send 
Ifi.S.when  he  is  c  ho  will  reprove  the  world  of  sin 
13.  whon  the  Spirit  of  truth  is  c.  lio-will  guido 
88 


COM 

JoAnl6.21.awomanhatli  sorrow  because  hour  isc. 
Koin.  11.  11.  salvation  is  c.  unto  the  Gentiles 

16.  ly.  for  your  obedience  is  c.  abroad  among  all 
1  Cor.  13.  lO.  when  that  which  is  perfect  is  c.  ilieii 
Gal.  3.25.  but  after  that  faith  is  c.  we  are  no  longer 
C'yM  .b.whicli  gospel  is  c.to  you, as  it  is  in  all  world 
1  John  4.  2.  that  Jesus  Christ  is  c.  in  the  flesh 
3.  every  spirit  that  confesselh  not  that  Jesus 
Christ  is  e.  in  the  flesh  ie  not  of  God,  ■2Johnl. 

5.  20.  we  know  that  the  Son  of  God  is  c.  and  given 
Jiev.  6.  J7.  for  the  great  day  of  his  w  rath  is  t. 

11.  18.  and  thy  wrath  is  c.  and  lime  ol  the  dead 

12.10.now  isc.  salvat.and  strength,  and  king.of  G. 

14.  7.  fear  God,  lor  the  hour  of  his  judgment  is  c. 

18.  17.  in  one  hour,  so  great  riches  is  c.  to  nought 

19.  7.  for  marriage  of  the  Lamb  is  c.  and  his  wile 

/  am  COME,  or  am  J  COME. 
Ezod.  18.  6.  /  thy  father-in-law  am  c.  to  thee 
JVum.  22.  38.  Balaam  said,  lo  /  am  c.  to  tli-e 
/^eut.26.3.  I  am  c.  into  the  country  the  Lord  sware 
1  Sam.  16.  2.  /  am  c.  to  sacrilice  to  the  Lord,  5. 
2Sam.  14. 15.  nowthat/u7ttc.  tospeakof  this  thing 
32.  to  say,  wherefore  am  I  c.  from  Geshur7 

19.  20.  /  am  c.  first  to  meet  my  lord  the  king 
Ps.  69.  2.  /  am  c.  into  deep  waters  where  the  Hoods 
i-'cc/.  1.16.  I  communed,  lo,  /  am  c.to  great  estate 
Ca«£.5.1.  latiic.  into  my  gar.  my  sister,  my  spou.,e 
JJan.  9.  23.  and  J  am  c.  to  shew  thee,  10.  14. 

10.  12.  thy  words  were  heard,  /  am  c.  for  thy  w. 
Mat.  5.  17.  think  not  /  avi  c.  to  destroy  the  law 

9. 13.  /  aui  not  c.  to  call  the  righteous  but  sinners 
10.34.think  not  that  I  am  c.to  send  peace  on  earth 

35./amc.  toset  aman  at  variance  against  father 
Luke  12.  51.  suppose  ye  that  lam  c.  to  give  peace 
John  1.  31.  therefore  am  J  c.  baptizing  with  water 
5.43./am  cinmyFather's  name, ye  receive  me  not 
7.  28.  /  a7H  note,  of  myself,  he  tliatsentme  islrue 
9.39.  Jesus  said,  for  judgm./am  c.  into  this  world 
10.10./ am c.that  Ihey  inighthave  lile,and  abund. 
12.46./ am  c.a  light  into  the  world, whoso  believes 
16.  28.  /  am  c.  into  the  world,  again  I  leave  world 

COME  joined  with  time. 
f?cn.30.33.  shall  my  righteous,  answer  in  time  to  c. 
Kxod.  13. 14.  when  thy  son  asketli  thee  in  time  to  c. 
saying,  what  is  this  1  J)cut.  6.  iJO.  Jonh.  4.6,21. 
./o»7i.22.24.in  time  to  c.yourchildr.inightspeak,28. 
1  Sa7rt.  1.  20.  time  was  c.  after  Hannah  conceived 
Psal.  102.  13.  time  to  favour  Zion,  the  set  time  is  c. 
I'rov.  31.  25.  she  shall  rejoice  in  time  to  c.  [tie 
Caut.  2. 12.  time  of  singing  of  birds  is  c.  voice  of  tur- 
Isa.  13.  22.  her  tnnc  is  near  to  c.  her  days  shall  not 
30.  8.  note  in  a  book  that  it  may  be  f6r  time  to  c. 
42.  23.  who  will  hearken  and  hear  for  time  to  c. 
Ezck.  7.  7.  the  time  is  c.  the  day  of  trouble  is  near 
//a^r.l.2.tbe  time  is  note,  the  Lord's  house  be  built 
Luke\i.5l.  the  time  was  c.  he  should  be  received  up 
Gnl.  4.  4.  but  when  the  fulness  of  time  was  c. 
1  Tim.&.l^).  lay.  up  good  foundat.  against  time  to  c. 
1  Pet.  4.  17.  the  time  is  c.  that  judgm.niust  begin 

Yet  COME. 

Dcut.  12.  9.  for  ye  are  not  as  yet  c.  to  rest  L.  giveth 

./ohn  2.  4.  Jeius  sailh, woman,  my  hour  is  not  yet  c. 

7.  0.  Jesus  said  to  them,  my  time  is  not  yet  c.  8.. 

30.  because  his  hour  was  not  yet  c.  8.  20. 

11.  30.  Jesus  was  not  yet  c.  into  the  town 
Rev.  17.  10.  five  arc  fallen,  the  other  is  not  yet  c. 

COMELY. 
1  Sam.  16.  18.  David,  a  son  of  Jesse,  a  c.  person 
Job  41.  12.  I  will  not  conceal  his  c.  proportion 
Psal.  33.  1.  praise  is  c.  for  the  upright,  147.  1. 
Prov.  30.  29.  yea,  four  are  c.  in  going 
Ecel.  5.  18.  it  is  c.  for  one  to  eat,  drink,  and  enjoy 
Cant.  1.  5. 1  am  black  but  c.  Odaughtersof  Jerus. 
10.  thy  cheeks  are  c.  with  rows  of  jewels 

2.14.  thy  voice  is  sweet,  and  thy  countenance  is  c. 
4.  3.  thy  lips  are  iike  scarlet,  thy  speech  is  c. 
6.4.thou  art  c.  O  my  love,  as  Jerusalem,  terrible  as 

fsa.A.  2.  fruit  of  the  earth  shall  bee.xcellent  anilc. 
.fer.  6. 2.  I  likened  daughter  of  Zion  to  a  c.  woman 
1  Cor.  7.  35.  but  I  speak  for  that  which  is  c. 
11.13.is  it  f  .that  a  woman  pray  to  God  uncovered? 

12.  24.  for  our  c.  parts  have  no  need,  but  God 

CO.MELLNKSS. 
fsa.  .53.  2.  he  hath  no  form  nor  c.  nor  beauty,  that 
Kzek.  16.  14.  for  it  was  perfect  through  my  c. 
27.  10.  they  of  Persia  and  Lud  set  forth  thy  c. 
Dan.  10.8.  my  c.  was  turned  in  me  into  corruption 
lQ;r.l2.23.ouruncomelvpnrts  have  more  abund.c. 

COMK.KS. 
Ifeb.  10. 1.  can  never  make  the  c.  thereunto  perfect 

CO.MEST. 
Oen.  10.  19.  was  from  Sidon  as  thou  r.  to  Gornr 

13.  10.  like  tho  land  of  Egypt,  as  thou  c.  to  Zonr 
24.  41.whenthou  c.to  my  kinrlred,if  then- give  not 

r)nit.  2.  19.  Ibou  c.  nigh  the  children  (ifAmmoii 

20.  10.  when  thou  r.  nigh  to  city  to  fight  against  it 
2H.  6.  blessed  shall  thou  be  when  thou  e.  in 

19.  cursed  shnlt  thou  bo  when  thou  r.  in 
.Ttitttr.  17.  9.  Miinh  saiil  to  Li-vito,  «  hcnco  r.  Ihoul 
19.17.  the  old  man  said  to  Levitc,  whence  c.  thou? 


COM 

1  .Sam. 16.4. and  said,c.thou  peaceul>Iy71  A'i7i^«2.13 

17.  43.  am  1  a  dug,  that  thou  c.  lu  nie  w  iili  staveal 
45.  thuu  c.  to  me  with  a  sword  and  w  ith  a  spear 

2  ^am.  3.  13.  bring  Miclial  w  hen  ihuu  c.  lu  see  me 
lAi;i^sl9.J5.Hlienlhou  c.anointUazaeltobe  king 
•Jhings  5.-2!}.  Elisha  said,  whence  c.  thou,Gehazi! 
./vb  1.  7.  whence  c.  thou  1  Satan  answered,  2.  3. 
Jer.  51.  61.  when  thou  c.  to  Babylon  and  shall  see 
Junah  1.  8.  w  hat  thy  occupation  .'  whenci^c.lhou? 
J/u2.3.14.  to  be  baptized  ot  lhee,a/>d  c.  Uiou  to  me? 
y^uA'c  23.42.  remeuib.  me  whenc.  into  thy  kingdom 

COME'l'U. 

Gen.  37.  19.  they  said,  behold  this  dreamer  c. 

Lev.  11.  34.  on  which  such  water  c.  is  unclean 

JJcut.  18.8.  beside  what  c.  of  sale  of  his  paKimony 
2,').13.turn  backwardcuver  ihalwhichc.frum  the£ 

i.'Sam.  4.  3.  when  ark  c.  among  us,  it  may  save  U8 
9.6.all  that  the  man  of  God  saith  c.  surely  lo  pasa 
20.  27.  wherefore  c.  not  the  son  of  Jesse  luineutl 
29.  therefore  he  c.  not  lo  the  king's  table 

1  Kings  14.  5.  for  «  hen  she  c.  in  w  ill  feign  herself 

iHiiiigs  9. 18.  came  to  lliem,  but  he  c.  not  again,  20. 
11.8.  be  ye  with  the  king  as  bee.  in, 2  tin:  'iJ.T. 

Job  3.  21.  which  long  for  death,  and  it  c.  not 
28.  20.  whence c.  wisdom,  where  understanding? 

Psttl.'M.  5.  weeping  for  night,  bui  joy  c.  in  morning 
62.1. my  soul  waiteth  unGud,from  hmi  c.  my  salv. 

j75.  6.  promotion  c.  not  from  the  east  nor  west 
96.  13.  belbre  Lord,  for  he  c.  lo  judge  the  earth 
118.  26.  blessed  is  he  that  c.  in  name  of  the  Lord 
121.  1.  my  eyes  to  hills,  from  whence  c.  my  help 
2.  my  help  c.  from  the  Lord  who  made  heaven 

Prnv.  1.  26.  I  will  mock  when  your  fear  c. 
27.  when  your  desiruction  c.  as  a  whirlw  ind 

11.  2.  when  pride  c.  then  c.  shame,  but  with  lowly 

18.  3.  when  the  wicked  c.  liien  c.  contempt 
Eccl.S.i.hKc.  in  with  vanity,  departetli  in  darkness 

11.8.  if  a  man  live  many  years,  all  thatc  is  vanity 
Cant.  2.  8.  he  c.  leaping  upon  the  mountains 
/.«a.  13.  9.  the  day  of  the  Lord  c.  with  wrath 

30.  13.  whose  breaking  c.  suddenly  at  an  instant 
27.  the  name  of  the  Lord  c.  from  far,  burning 

44.  t  10.  fall  down  to  that  which  c.  on  a  tree 

62.  11.  say  ye  to  Zion,  behold,  thy  salvation  c. 

t)3.  1.  who  is  thisihatc.  from  Edoin,  from  Bozrat 
./tr.n.O.like  heathen,  he  shall  not  see  when  goodc. 

8.  and  shall  not  see  when  heal  c.  but  her  leaf 
43. 11.  when  he  c.  he  shall  smite  the  land  of  Egypt 

/.am.  3.  37.  who  is  he  that  saith,  and  it  c.  lo  pass 
5.  t  4.  our  water  for  money,  our  wood  c.  for  price 
Ezek.  14.  4.  and  c.  to  a  projihet  to  inquire,  7. 

20.  32.  that  which  c.  in  your  mind  shall  not  be 

21.  7.  for  the  tidings,  because  it  c.  behold  it  c. 

24.  24.  when  this  c.  you  shall  know  1  am  the  Lord 
33.  3).  they  come  lo  thee  as  the  people  c.  i  nd  sit 

33.  when  this  c.  to  pass,  then  shall  they  know 
47.  9.  every  thing  shall  live  whither  the  riv  ers  c. 
Dan.  11.  16.  that  c.  against  him  shall  do  e.vploiH 

12.  12.  blessed  is  he  that  r.  to  the  1335  days 
Uos.  7.  1.  the  thief  e.  in,  and  the  Iroop  of  robber* 
./oc;2.1.  day  of  the  L.  c.  Zech.  14. 1.  1  /hess.  5.  2. 
Mic.  5.  6.  deliver  us  from  the  .Assyrian  when  he  c. 
Mai.  4.  1.  the  day  c.  that  shall  burn,  day  that  c. 
JV/at.3.11.he  that  c.  after  me  is  might,  than  I, whose 

shoes  not  worthy  to  bear,  JIark  1.7.  Luke3.16. 

5.  37.  whatsoever  is  more  than  these  c.  of  evil 

8.  9.  I  say  to  another,  come,  and  he  c.  J.uke7.S 
13. 19.  then  c.  the  wicked  one,  and  colchelh  away 
21.  5.  behold,  thy  king  c.  unto  thee,  .lobn  12.  15. 

9.  blessed  is  he  that  c.  in  name  of  l^ord,  hosanna 
in  the  highest,  Mark  11.  9.  J.uke  13.35.  |  19.  38 

25.  19.  after  a  longtime  lord  of  those  servants  c. 
Mark  6.  48.  he  c.  to  them  walking  on  the  sea 

8.38.  be  ashamed  when  he  c .  in  glory  of  his  Father 

9.  12.  p;iias  c.  first,  and  restoreth  all  things 
14.43.wliilehc  yet  spake  c.Judas  one  of  the  twelve 

7,1(4^6.47.  whoso  e.  lo  me,  and  beareth  my  sayingg 
12.  37.  the  Lord  when  he  c.  shall  find  watching 
40.  Son  of  Man  c.  at  an  hour  when  ye  think  not 
43.  his  lord,  when  be  c.  shall  find  so  doing 
55.  ye  say,  there  will  be  heat,  and  if  c.  lo  pass 

17.  20.  kingdom  of  God  c.  not  with  observation 

18.  H.  Son  of  Man  c.  shall  he  find  failli  on  earth? 
.hhn  3.  8.  but  Ihon  .-anst  not  tell  whence  it  c. 

20.  nor  c.  to  the  light,  lest  his  deeds  be  reproved 

21.  he  that  doetli  the  truth,  e.  to  the  light 

4.  21.  woman,  believe  me, the  hourc.  23.  |  16.  32. 

6.  :15.  he  that  c.  to  mo  shall  never  hunger,  37. 
45.  man  thai  halh  learned  of  the  Father  c.  lo  ma 

7.  27.  when  ('hrist  e.  no  man  knowelh,  31. 
49.  said,  that  Christ  c.  of  the  seed  of  David 

i).  4.  the  night  r.  when  no  man  ran  work 
14.  6.  no  man  c.  to  the  Father  but  by  me 
16.  2.  the  fmio  c.  that  whosoever  killelh  you 
25.  tho  lime  c.  I  shall  no  more  spo.Tk  in  proverbs 
32.  Iho  hour  c.  that  yo  shall  bo  sratlered 
.'?(•(.')  10.  32.  who  when  he  c.  shall  spoak  lo  thee 
/<om.4.9./-.thi8ble»sedness  on  the  rirrumcisiononly 
I0.17.sn  then,  fnilh  e.  by  hoaring,  henrin-:  hy  word 
1  Cor.  15.  24.  then  c.  llie  end,  when  he  shall  hava 


COM 

SCkir.  11.  28.  besides  tbat  which  c.  on  me  daily 
Epii.  5. 6.  for  these  things  c.  the  wrath  ofGod  upon 
the  children  of  disobedience,  Col.  3.  6. 
IThess.  5.2.  day  of  the  Ld.  bo  c.  as  a  thief  in  night 
Jieb.  11.  (5.  hethatc.  to  God  must  believe  that  he  is 
Jude  14.  the  Lord  c.  with  10,000  of  his  saints 
Hev.  1.  7.  hec.  with  clouds,  every  eye  shall  see  him 

17.  10.  when  he  c.  he  must  continue  a  shortspace 

COMETH  down. 
Jsa.  55.  10.  as  the  rain  c.  doion  from  heaven 
Jokn  6.  33.  bread  of  God  is  he  which  c.  down,  50. 
James  1.  17.  every  good  and  perfect  gift  c.  doicn 
Hev.  3. 12.  new  Jerusalem  which  c.  down  from  God 

COMETH  forth. 
Gen.  24.43.  when  the  virgin  c.  forth  to  draw  water 
Exod.  4.  14.  also  behold  he  c.  forth  to  meet  thee 
8.  20.  before  Pharaoh,  lo,  he  c.  forth  to  the  water 
Judg.  11.  31.  whatsoever  c.  forth  of  the  doors 
\Sam.  11.  7.  whosoever  c.  not  forth  after  Saul 
Jab  5.  6.  though  affliction  c.  not  forth  of  the  dust 
14.  2.  ho  c.  forth  like  a  flower,  and  is  cut  down 
Isa.  28.  29.  this  also  c.  forth  from  the  Lord 
Ezek.  33.  30.  hear  what  word  c.  forth  from  Lord 
Mic.  1.  3.  behold,  the  Ld.  c.  forth  oat  o(  Ins  place 

COMETH  nigh. 
JVum.l.  51.  Levitessetup tabernacle, thestranger 
tJiat  c.  n<  o-Ashall  be  put  to  death,  3. 10,  33.  |  18.  7. 
.  COMETH  oiU. 
Eiod.28.35.be  heard  when  he  c.  out^  that  he  die  not 
A'"um.  12.  12.  flesh  is  half  consumed  when  he  c.  out 
Dcut.  28.  57.  her  eye  evil  toward  young  that  c.  out 
1  Kings  8.  41.  astranger  thatc.outof  a  far  country 
Job  20.  25.  it  is  drawn,  and  c.  out  of  the  body 
37.22.  fair  weather  c.  out  of  the  north,  with  God  is 
Cant.  3.  6.  who  is  this  that  c.  out  of  the  wilderness? 
Isa.  2!>.  21.  the  Lord  c.  out  of  his  place  to  punish 
42.5.  spread  forth  earth,  and  that  which  c.  o«tof  it 
Jer.it). 20.  destruction  cometh,  itc.outof  the  north 
i?:eA.4.12.shall  bake  it  with  dung  that  c.out  of  man 
Mat.  15.  11.  but  that  which  c.  out  of  the  mouth, 
this  defileth  a  man,  Mark  7.  20. 
24.  27.  for  as  the  lightning  c.  out  of  the  east 

COMETH  up. 
lSam.28.14.  and  she  said,  an  old  mane,  up  covered 
Cant.  8.  5.  who  is  this  that  c.  up  from  wililernessl 
/.■ja.  24. 18.  andhethatc.  up  outof  midst  of  the  pit 
Jer.  46.  7.  who  is  this  that  c.  up  as  a  flood? 
50.  3.  outof  north  there  c.  up  a  nation  against  her 
//aft.3.16.  when  he  c.  up  to  ])eople,  will  invade  them 
Mat.  17.  27.  casta  hook,  take  up  the  fish  firstc.  up 

COMFORT,  Substantive. 

Jab  6.  10.  then  should  I  yet  have  c.  yea,  I  would 

10.  20.  let  me  alone,  that  I  may  take  c.  a  little 

Ps.  119.  50.  this  is  my  e.  in  my  affliction,  thy  word 

76.  let  thy  merciful  kindness  be  for  my  c. 
Isa.  57.  6.  should  I  receive  c.  in  these! 
Rzek.  16.  54.  in  that  thou  art  a  c.  to  them 
Mat.  9.  22.  daughter  be  of  good  c.  Luke  S.  48. 
Mark  10.  49.  be  of  good  c.  rise,  he  calleth  thee 
^cts  9.  31.  walking  in  the  c.  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
/fom.15.4.  through  patience  and  c.  of  the  scriptures 
ICor.  14.  3.  speaketh  to  men  to  exhortation  and  c. 
ZCor.  1.  3.  blessed  be  God,  even  the  God  of  all  c. 

4.  by  the  c.  wherewith  we  are  comforted  of  God 
7. 4.  great  is  my  glorying  of  you,  I  am  filled  with  c. 

13.  therefore  we  were  comforted  in  your  c. 
13.  11.  brethren,  be  perfect,  be  of  good  c. 
Phil.  2.  1.  if  there  be  therefore  any  c.  of  love 

I'J.  that  I  may  also  be  of  good  c.  whpn  I  know 
Col.  4. 11.  these  onlv,  which  liave  been  a  c.  to  nie 

COMFORT,  rerb. 
Gen.5.29.thi8  same  shall  c.  us  concerning  our  work 

18.  5.  c.  ye  your  hearts,  after  that  you  shall  pass  on 
27.  42.  Esau  as  touching  thee  doth  c.  himself 
37.  ;J5.  all  his  sons  and  daughters  rose  up  toe.  him 

Judg.  19.  5.  e.  thy  heart  withamorsel  of^breart,  8. 
iSain.  10.  2.  David  sent  to  c.  him,  1  Chron.  19.  2 
]  Chron.  7.  22.  and  his  brethren  came  to  e.  him 

19.  2.  servants  of  David  came  to  Ilanun  to  c.  him 
Job  2.11.  his  friends  came  to  mourn  with  and  e.  him 

7.  13.  when  I  say,  my  bed  shall  c.  me,  my  couch 
9.27.  if  I  say,  I  will  forget,  I  will  c.  myself 
21.34.how  then  c.yeme  in  vain,  seeing  in  answers 

Psal.  23.  4.  thy  rod  and  thy  staff,  they  e.  me 
71.  21.  thoushalt  increase  and  c.  me  on  every  side 
119.  t  76.  lot  thy  merciful  kindness  e.  me 
82.  my  eyes  fail,  saying,  when  wilt  thou  c.  me"? 

Cant.  2.  5.  c.  me  with  apples,  for  t  am  sick  of  love 

Jsa.  22.  4.  look  away  from  me,  labour  not  to  e.  me 
40.  1.  c.  ye,  c.  ye  my  people,  sailh  your  God 
51.3.  Ld.  shallc.Zion,he  will  c.  her  waste  places 
19.  two  things  are  come,  by  whom  shall  I  c.  thee? 
61.  2.  he  hath  sent  me  to  c.  all  that  mourn 
66.  13.  so  will  I  c.  you,  ye  shall  be  in  Jerusalem 

./'or.8.18.whenI  woulde.myself,  heart  is  faint  in  me 
16.  7.  nor  shall  men  tear  to  c.  them  for  the  dead 
31. 13.  for  I  will  e.  them,  make  rejoice  from  sorrow 

f,am.  1 . 2.  among  lovers  she  hath  none  to  e.  her,  17. 

21.  they  heard  that  I  sigh,  there  is  none  to  c.  me 

2.1XwhatEbaUIequal  to  thee,  that  Imay  c.  thee? 

g7 


COM 

i^zf  A-.14.23.they  shall  c.  you  when  ye  see  their  ways 
Zech.  1. 17.  Ld.  shall  yet  c.  Zion,  and  choose  Jerus. 
10.  2.  diviners  told  false  dreams,  they  c.  in  vain 
John  11.  19.  to  c.  them  concerning  their  brother 
2  Cor.  1.  4.  that  we  may  be  able  to  c.  them  who 

2.  7.  ye  ought  rather  to  forgive  and  c.  him 
Kph.  6.  22.  and  that  he  might  c.  your  hearts 
Cul.  4.8.  he  might  know  your  estate,  c.your  hearts 

1  Tkess.  3.  2.  to  c.  you  concerning  your  faith 

4.  18.  wherefore  c.  one  another  with  these  words 

5.  11.  wherefore  c.  yourselves  together  and  edify 
14.  c.  the  feeble-minded,  support  the  weak 

2T'A('SS.  2. 17.  now  our  Lord  Jesus  c.  your  hearts 
COMFORTABLE. 

2  Sam.  14. 17.  the  word  of  my  Lord  shall  now  bee. 
Zech.  1. 13.  Lord  answered  the  angel  with  c.  words 

COMFORTABLY. 
2  Sam.  19.  7.  go  forth  and  speak  c.  to  thy  servants 
2  Chron.  30.  22.  he  spake  c.  to  all  the  Levites 

32.  6.  hesetcaptainsover  the  people,  and  spake  e. 
fsa.  40.  2.  speak  ye  c.  to  Jerusaleni,  cry  to  her 
Hos.  2.  14.  1  will  allure  her,  and  speak  c.  to  her 

COMFORTED. 
Oe7i.  24.  67.  Isaac  was  c.  after  his  mother's  death 

37.35.Jac.  refused  to  be  c.  for  he  said,  I  go  to  grave 

38. 12.  Jud.  was  c.  and  went  up  to  his  sheep-shear. 

50.  21.  Joseph  c.  his  brethren,  and  spake  kindly 
Ruth  2.  13.  let  me  find  fa  v.  for  that  thou  haste,  me 
2  Sam.  12.  24.  David  c.  Bath-sheba  his  wife 

13.  39.  for  he  was  c.  concerning  Amnon 

Job  42.  11.  all  his  brethren  e.  him  over  all  the  evil 
Psal.  77.  2.  my  sore  ran,  my  soul  refused  to  be  e. 

86.  17.  because  thou.  Lord,  hast  hplpen  and  e.  me 

119..52. 1  remembered  thy  judgments,  have  e.  mys. 
Isa.  49.  13.  for  God  hath  c.  his  people,  52.  9. 

54.  11.  oh,  thou  afflicted,  tossed,  and  not  c. 

66.  13.  and  ye  shall  be  c.  in  Jerusalem 
./cr.31.15.  Rachel  weeping,  refus.  to  be  c.  for  child. 
Kzek.  5.  13.  I  will  cause  fury  to  rest,  I  will  be  e. 

14.  22.  ye  shall  be  c.  concerning  all  the  evil 
31.16.  all  that  drink  water  be  c.  in  parts  of  earth 
32.  31.  Pharaoh  shall  see  them,  and  shall  be  c. 

Mat.  2.  18.  would  not  be  c.  because  they  were  not 
5.4.b!essed  are  they  that  mourn,  for  they  shall  be  c. 
Luke  16.  25.  now  he  is  c.  and  thou  art  tormented 
John  11.  31.  the  Jews  which  e.  her,  saw  Mary  rise 
Jlcts  16.  40.  when  they  had  seen  brethren,  e.  them 
20. 12.  brought  young  man  alive,  were  not  a  lit.  c. 
Rom.  1.  12.  that  1  may  be  c.  together  with  you 
IGir.  14.  31.  that  all  may  learn,  and  all  may  be  c. 
2Cor.  1.4.  thecomfortwherewith  wearec.  of  God 
7.  6.  God  c.  us  hy  the  coming  of  Titus 
7.  the  consolation  wherewith  he  was  e.  in  you 
13.  therefore  we  were  e.  in  your  comfort 
Col.  2.  2.  that  their  hearts  might  be  e.  being  knit 
1  Tb^ss.^.ll.  ye  know  how  he  exhorted  and  c.  you 

3.  7.  we  were  c.  over  you  in  all  our  affliction 

COMFORTEDST. 
/sa.l2.1.thine  anger  is  turned  away,  and  thou  e.  me 

COMFORTER,  S. 

2.5nm.  10. 3.  that  he  hath  sent  c.  to  thee.lC/tr.  19.  3 

.lob  16.2.heard  many  things,  miserable  e.  are  ye  all 

Psal.  69.  20.  I  looked  for  c.  but  found  none 

EccZ.  4.1.  tears  of  the  oppressed,  and  they  had  noc. 

/^nm.l.9.she  came  down  wonderfully,she  had  noe. 

16.  c.  that  should  relieve  my  soul  is  far  from  me 

JVa/i.  3.  7.  whence  shall  I  seek  c.  for  thee? 

John  14.  16.  he  shall  give  you  another  C.  to  abide 

26.  but  the  C.  which  is  Holy  Ghost,  shall  te^ch 

15.26. when  the  C.  is  come  ||  16.  7.  C.  will  not  come 

COMFORT  ETH. 
.Tob  29.  25.  I  dwelt,  as  one  that  e.  the  mourners 
/.fa.51.12. 1,evenl,  am  hctliat  c.you,wlioart  thou 
66.  13.  as  one  whom  mother  c.  will  I  comfort  you 
2Cor.  I.  4.  who  e.  us  in  all  our  tribulations 
7.  6.  God  that  e.  those  that  are  cast  down 

COMFORTLESS. 
.John  14.18.  I  will  not  leave  yfi\i  c.  will  come  to  you 

COMFORTS. 
Psal.  94.  19.  of  my  thoughts,  thy  c.  delight  my  soul 
/sa.57.1S.I  willlead  him  also,  and  restore  c.  to  him 

COMING. 
Gen.  30.30.  the  Lord  hath  bKssed  thee  since  my  c. 

43.  t  20.  O  sir,  c.  down  we  came  to  buy  food 
/.«?).  14. 1 48.  if  the  priest  f.  in  shall  come  and  look 
JVum.  22.  16.  let  nothing  hinder  thee  from  c. 
Judg.  5.  28.  why  is  his  chariot  so  long  in  c.7 
XSam.  16.  4.  elders  of  the  town  tremble  at  his  e. 

29.  6.  thy  going  and  e.  in  with  me,  since  day  of  c. 
2.9am.  3.  25.  to  know  thy  going  out  and  thy  c.  in 
iKingsU.-iQ.  invaded  the  land  ate.  in  of  the  year 

19.27.  I  know  thy  going  out  and  c.  in,  Isa.  37.  28. 
Psal.  37.  13.  for  he  seeth  that  his  day  is  e. 

121.  8.  Lord  shall  preserve  thy  going  out  and  e.  in 
Isa.  14.  9.  hell  is  moved  for  thee  to  meet  thee  at  e. 

44.  7.  the  things  that  are  c.  let  them  shew  to  them 
Jcr.  8.  7.  and  swallow  observe  the  time  of  their  e. 
Dan.  4.  23.  saw  a  holy  one  c.  down  from  heaven 
Mic.  7. 15.  accord,  to  the  days  of  the  c.out  of  Egypt 
Mai.  3.  2.  who  may.  abide  the  day  of  his  r,  ? 


COM 

Mai.  4.5.  beforethec.ofthegreatday  of  thcLord 
'l/aM6.28.tili  they  see  Son  of  Man  c.in  his  kingdom 
24.  3.  toll  us  what  shall  be  the  sign  of  thy  c.7 
27.  so  shall  the  c.  of  the  Son  of  Man  be,  37,  39, 
30.  when  they  shall  see  the  Son  of  M  an  c.in  clouds, 
26.  64.  Mark  13.  26.  |  14.  62.  J.uke'ii.  27 
48.  shall  say,  my  Ld.  delayetli  his  c.  J^kc  12.45 
25.27.  atmyc.  have  received  my  own,  jLiiie  19.23 
Mark  6.  31.  for  there  were  many  c.  and  going 
Luke  9.  42.  as  he  was  yet  c.  the  devil  tare  him 
18.  5.  lest  by  her  continual  c.  she  weary  me 
lohn  5. 7.  while  1  am  c.  another  steppeth  before  me 

25.  the  hour  is  c.  28.  ||  10.  12.  seeth  the  wolf  t. 
Acts  1.  t  8.  receivethe  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  c. 
7.  52.  shewed  before  of  the  c.  of  the  just  One 

9.  28.  he  was  with  them  c.  in  and  going  out 

10.  2.5.  as  Peter  was  e  in  Cornelius  mot  him 
13.  24.  when  John  had  preached  before  his  c. 

ICor.  1.  7.  waiting  for  tiie  c.  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
15.  23.  afterward  they  that  are  Christ's  at  his  a. 
16.17. 1  am  glad  off.  of  Siephanus  and  Fori  iinatus 

2C'or.  7.  6.  God  comforted  us  by  the  c.  of  Titus 

7.  not  by  his  e.  only,  but  by  the  consolation 
Phil.l.  26.  be  more  abundant  by  my  c.  to  you  again 

1  7'Af.9.«.  2. 19.  are  not  ye  our  rejoicing  at  our  Ld'ec. 

3.  13.  hearts 'unblameable  at  the  c.  of  our  Lord 

4.  15.  we  who  remain  to  the  c.  of  our  Lord 

5.  23.  preserved  blameless  to  the  c.  of  our  Lord 
'iThess.  2.  1.  we  beseech  you  by  the  c.  of  our  Lord 

8.  and  shall  destroy  with  the  brightness  of  his  s. 
O.even  hi.m  whose  c.  is  after  the  working  olSatan 

Jam.5.T.  be  patient,  brethren,  to  the  c.  of  the  Lord 

8.  for  the  c.  of  the  Lord  draweth  nigh 
IPet.  2.  4.  to  whom  c.  as  unto  a  living  stone 
2Pet.l.l6.make  known  power  and  c.  of  our  L.Jesua 
3.  4.  saying,  where  is  the  promise  of  his  c? 

12.lookingand  hasting  to  the  c.  of  the  day  of  God 
l.fohn  2.  28.  not  be  ashamed  before  him  at  his  e. 
Ren.  13.11.  beheld  another  beast  c.  up  outof  earth 
21.  2.  new  Jerus.  c.  down  from  God  out  of  heaven 

COMINGS. 

Ezek.  43. 11.  shew  them  the  goings  out  and  c.  in 

CO.MMAND. 

2  Sam.  23.  f  23.  David  set  Bcnaiah  at  his  c. 
./ob  39.  27.  doth  the  eagle  mount  up  at  thy  e.? 

COMMAND 

Is  referred  (I)  To  God,  whose  commajidexlrndeth 
to  the  earth,  Psal.  33.9.  To  the  heavens,  VsKi. 
148.  5.  To  his  people,  E.xod.  34.  11.  To  the 
adoersaries  of  the  church,  Lam.  1. 17.  7'o  the 
clouds,  Isaiah  5.  6.  To  serpnits,  Amos  9.  3. 
To  unclean  spirits,  Mark  1.  27.  It  signifies, 
[I]  His  authority  and  power  over  his  creatures, 
Psal.  143.  5.  [2]  His  will  and  readiness  to 
help  his  own  children  in  tlifir  distress,  Psal. 
42.8.  [3]  To  require  due  obedience  lo  his  laws, 
Deut.  11.  22.  [4]  To  procure,  or  work,  PsaL 
44.  4.  [5]  To  enable  and  incline,  Job  36.  10. 
[6]  To  restrain,  Isa.  5  6.  [7]  To  appoint,  or 
establish  firmly,  Psal.  111.  9.  [8]  To  stir  up 
by  his  providence,  Isa.  13.  3.  [9]  To  give,  or 
it6'to!o,  Lev.25. 21.  This  word comprehendetk 
instruction,  prediction,  exhortation,  and  con- 
solation, Mat.  11.  1.  compared  with  Mat.  10. 
0,  17,  26,  40. 

(II)  To  man,  us  parents  commanding  their  chil- 
dren. Gen.  18.  19.  |  50.  16.  Governors  their 
officers,  Joshua  1.  10.  Kings  their  subjects, 
2  Chron.  14.  4.  Pastors  their  people,  2Tiiee8. 
3.  4,  6. 

Cfen.  1^.  19.  Abrah.  will  e.  his  child,  and  household 

Fiod.  8.  27.  we  will  sacrifice  .as  God  shall  c.  us 
18.  23.  if  ihoii  do  this  thing,  and  God  c.  thee  BO 

JVinH.  9.  8.  I  will  hear  what'lhe  Lord  will  c. 
36.  6.  this  ie  the  thing  which  the  Lord  dolh  c. 

£»■  ut.  28.  8.  the  Lord  shall  c.  the  blessing  on  theo 
32.  46  ye  shall  r.  yayr  children  to  observe  to  do 

.losh.  II.  15.  so  did  ilflsee  c.  Joshua,  and  so  he  did 

Psal.  42.  8.  the  Lord  will  c.  his  loving  kindness 
44. 4.  art  my  king,  O  God,  c.  deliverance  for  Jacob 

Isa.  45.11.  concerningthe  workofmy  hands,  c.  me 

.7er.  27.  4.  c.  them  to  say  to  their  masters 

Lam.  1.  10.  heathen  didst  c.they  should  not  enter 

Milt  .4.^.  c.  these  stones  be  made  bread,  I.uk(*4.3. 
19.7. why  did  Moses  c.  to  give  writing  of  divorcem. 
27.  64.  c.  therefore  that  sepulchre  be  made  sure 

jlMrit  10.3. he  said  to  them,  whatdid  Moses  c.  you? 

Luke  8.31.that  he  would  not  c.  them  to  go  into  deep 
9.54.wiltthou  wec.fire  to  come  down  from  heaven 

Jlcts  5.  28.  saying,  did  not  we  straitly  e.  you 
15.  5.  and  to  e.  them  to  keep  the  law  of  Moeea 

2  Thess.3.4.ye  both  do,  and  will  do  tiling,^  wr  c.  yon 
6.  we  f .  you,  brethren,  in  name  of  our  Lord  Jphus 
12. that  are  such  we  e.  and  exhort  by  our  Ld.  Jes 

ITim.  4.  11.  these  thines  c.  and  teach 
/  COMM.AND. 

Exod.  7. 2.  shall  speak  all  that  Ic.  thee,  .Ter.l.  7,17 
34.  n .'  observe  thou  what  /  e.  thee,  Veut.  12. 28 

Lev.  25.  21.  then  /will  r.  my  blessing  upon  yo« 

Dcut.  4.  2.  ye  shall  not  add  to  the  word  /  c  you 


•    COM 

Dent.  7.11.  Blialt  keep  command.  Fc.  thoe  this  day, 

todotlium.rf.  H.  I  10.13.1  1].8,27.|  13.  18.|30.ti. 

24.  1ft.  therefore  /  c.  thee  to  do  this  thing,  22 

30. 10.  Ic.  ihee  this  day  to  love  the  Lord  thy  God 

Jsa.  5.  0.  /  will  c.  the  clouds  that  they  rain  not 

Jer.  11.4.  obey  my  voice,  and  do  all  which  /c.you 

34.22.  behold,  /  will  c.  saith  the  Lord,  ajid  cause 

jJmusy.3.  thence  will /c.  serpent,  he  shall  bite  them 

4.  thence  /  c.  the  sword,  and  it  shall  slay  ihem 

9.  /  will  c.  and  I  will  sill  the  house  of  Israel 

John  15.14.  ye  arc  my  friends,  ifyedowh.it  /c.you 

17.  these  things  /c.you,  that  ye  love  one  another 

Jicts  16.  1».  /  c.  thee  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ 

1  Cor.  7.  10.  to  the  married  /c.  yet  not  I,  but  Lord 

CO.MMANDEl). 
Oen.  4.').  19.now  thou  art  c.  this  do  ye,  lake  wagons 

50.  12.  Joseph's  sons  did  to  him  as  he  c.  them 
Ezod.  1.  17.  midwives  did  not  as  king  of  Egyj)t  c. 
Ji,ev.  10.  13.  cat  it  in  the  holy  place,  for  so  1  am  c. 
Deut.  1.18. 1  c.you  at  that  time  all  things,  3.  18,21. 
Josh.  4.  8.  the  i-liildrcn  of  Israel  did  as  Joshua  c. 

8.  8.  set  the  city  on  tire,  see  1  have  c.  you 
22.  2.  ye  have  obeyed  my  voice  in  all  I  c.  you 
Judg.  13.  14.  all  that  I  c.  her,  let  her  observe 

1  Sam.  20.  2'J.  my  brother,  he  hath  c.  me  lo  be  there 
21.2.  David  said,  the  king  c.  me  a  business,  and 

2  Sam.  13.  28.  then  kill  Amnon,  have  not  I  c.  you 
21.  14.  they  performed  all  that  the  king  c. 

9A'in;7j(l  l.'.l.accordinglo  all  that  Jehoiada  priest  c. 

16.  16.  thus  did  according  to  all  that  king  Ahazc. 

1  Chron.  21.17.  is  it  not  I  c.  people  to  be  numbered 

3  Chron.  8.  14.  for  so  had  David  the  man  of  God  c. 
14.4.  Asac.  Judah  to  seek  L.  God  of  their  fathers 
32.  12.  Hezekiah  ||  33.  16.  Manasseh  c.  Judah 

AVA.  13.  19.  1  c.  that  the  gates  should  be  shut 
22.  I  c.  Levitesto  cleanse  themselves,  keep  gates 

£«(A.  3.2.  for  the  king  had  so  c.  concerning  Human 
12.  was  written  according  to  all  that  ifaman  c. 

4.  17.  Mordecai  did  according  as  Esther  c.  him 
8.  9.  written  according  to  all  that  Mordecai  e. 

Job  33. 12.  hast  thou  c.  the  morning  since  thy  days? 
lea.  48.  5.  say,  my  molten  image  hath  c.  them 
yer.35.6.  Jonadab  our  father  c.  us,  10,  14,  16,  18. 
Ezek.  12.  7.  and  I  did  so  as  I  was  c.  37.  7. 
Dan.  3.  4.  cried,  to  you  it  is  c.  O  peo4)le,  nations 

19.  he  c.  that  they  should  heat  the  furnace 
6.  16.  then  the  king  c.  and  they  brought  Daniel 

24.  the  king  c.  and  they  brought  those  men 
Amos  2.  12.  c.  the  prophets,  saying,  prophesy  not 
Mai.  14.  9.  he  c.  it  to  be  given  her,  .Mark  6.  27. 

19.he  c.  multiludeto  sit  down, 15.  35.  Murk  6.  39. 
18.  25.  his  lord  c.  him  to  be  sold,  and  all  he  had 

51.  6.  the  disciples  went  and  did  as  Jesus  c.  them 
W.  20.  leaching  toobserve  all  things  1  have  c.  you 

I.,uke  9.21.  he  c.  them  lo  tell  no  man  that  thing 
>JeM  10.  4S.  hec.  them  to  be  baptized  in  the  name 

25.  6.  the  next  day  Festus  e.  Paul  to  be  brought 
1  Cor.  14.  34.  but  are  c.  to  be  under  obedience 

1  Thfs.i.  4.  11.  work  with  your  hands  as  we  c.  you 
S  TAms.3.10.  we  c.you  that  if  any  would  not  work 
//ei.l2.20.they  could  not  endure  that  which  wasc. 
RcB.  9.  4.  it  wa-  c.  them  not  to  hurt  the  grass 

r;»d  COMMANDED. 
Oen.  2.  in.  Godc.  man  to  eat  freely  of  every  tree 
6.  22.  according  to  all  that  God  c.  him,  so  did  he 
7.9.  there  went  into  the  ark  as  God  had  c.  Noah, 
16.  I  21.  4.  Deut.  20.  17.  Jn.ih.  10.  40. 
Dent.  5.  15.  God  c.  thee  to  keep  the  sabbath-day 

5.  32.  observe  to  do  as  the  Lord  your  God  c.  you 

33.  walk  in  all  the  ways  the  L.  your  God  c.  you 
6.1.  whichL.  your  Oodc.  to  teach  you,  20. 1  13.5. 

26.  16.  this  day  the  Lord  thy  Godc.  thee  to  keep 
./itrf/j-.  4. 6.  hath  notL.  Godc.  logo  toward  Tabor? 

1  Chron.  14.  Ifi.  David  therefore  did  as  God  c.  him 

2  Chr.  35.21.  ri>o</ c.  me,  make  haste,  forbear  thou 
/lira  7.  23.  whatsoever  is  c.  by  the  (Vorf  of  heaven 
P»ai.<>8.28.  Ihy  G.  hath  c.  thy  strength,  strengthen 
Mat.  15.  4.  for  God  c.  sayinjt,  honour  thy  father 
Acts  10.  33.  to  hear  all  things  that  are  c.  thee  of  G. 
t  CSi>r.  4. 6.  G.  whoc.  light  to  shine  out  of  darkness 

/-orrf  COMMANDED. 

♦Jen.  7.  5.  Noah  did  according  to  all  the  f.ord  e. 

tStod.  7.  6.  Moses  and  Aaron  did  as  the  Lord  c. 

them,  10,  20.|  12.  2S,  r,{).  jYum.  17.  II. 

16.16.  this  is  the  thins  hd.  c.  32. 1 35.  i.JVam.  30. 1 . 

34.  OB  the  I.ordc.  Moses,  34.  4.  |  39.  1,  5,  7,  >?-«:. 

I  40.  19,  iS-c.  /,/•!>.  H.  9.  I  9.  10. 
t«>  8.4.MoBCsdid  as/..  c.him,JVitm.20.27. 1  27.  II. 
ffum.  36.  2.  /,ord  c.  my  lord  to  give  land  lo  Israel 
Oeut.fi.  24.  the  /.nrdc.  us  to  do  all  these  statutes 

9. 16.  had  turned  aside  out  of  the  way  /.ord  c.  you 

10.  5.  the  tables,  there  they  be  as  tho  I.ordc.mn 
\  Sam.  13.  14.  /..  c.him  to  bo  captain  over  people 
Lfam.  17. 1 14.  /-.  c.to  defeat  counsel  of  Ahithophel 

24.  19.  and  David  went  up,  as  the  f.nrd  c. 
I  Chr.  21.  27.  /,.  c.  tho  angel,  hn  put  up  his  sword 

24.  19.  the  ordorings  as  /,.  God  of  Israel  c.  him 
Pial.  106   34.  conf^erning  whom  the  f. ord  e.Xhem 

133.  3.  (or  there  the  horde,  the  blessing,  even  life 
Jtr.  13.  5.  I  hid  it  by  Euphrates,  astho />or(^«.  me 


COM 

Lam.  1.  17.  the  Lord  hath  c.  concerning  Jacob 
jicls  13.  47.  we  turn  to  Gentiles,  so  hath  the  L.  c. 

l.ord  or  God  COMMANDED,  implicitly. 
Gen.  3.  11.  eaten  of  the  tree  I  c.  not  to  eat,  17. 
Exod.  23.  15.  as  I  e.  ihee  in  the  lime  ajipoiuled 
Liv.  7.  :J8.  in  the  day  he  c.  the  children  of  Israel 

10.  1.  offered  strange  fire  which  he  c.  them  not 
Deut.  17.  3.  hath  served  other  gods,  which  I  have 

not  c.  18.  20.  .h.r.  19.  5.  |  23.  32.  |  29.  23. 
Josh.  1. 9.  have  I  not  c.  thee  7  be  strong  and  of  cour. 
7.  11.  transgressed  my  covenant  Ic.  .Judg-. 2.  20. 
13.  6.  divide  thou  it  by  lot,  as  I  have  c.  thee 
2Sa//i.7.7.  whom  I  c.  to  feed  my  people,  1  Qir.  17. 6, 
11.  since  the  time  that  I  c.  judges,  1  Chr.  17. 10, 
1  Kings  11.  10.  had  c.  him  concerning  this  thing 
17.  4.  I  have  c.  the  ravens  to  feed  thee  there 
9. 1  have  c.  a  widow  woman  there  to  sustain  thee 
1  C/ir.  16.  1.5.  be  mindful  of  Ilia  covenant,  the  word 
which  he  c.  to  a  thousand  generations,  Ps.  105.8. 
40.  that  it  is  written  in  the  law,  which  he  c.  Israel 
/"*«/.  7. 6.  awake  to  the  judgment  that  thou  hast  c. 
33.9.hes|)ake  and  it  was  done,hec.and  it  stood  fast 
111.9.  hathc.  his  coven,  for  ever,  holy  is  his  name 
1 19  4. thou  hast  c.  us  to  keep  thyprecepts  diligently 
138.  thy  testimonies  thou  hast  c.  are  righteous 
148.  5.  for  the  Lord  c.  and  they  were  created 
Isa.  13.  3.1  liavec.  my  sanctified  ones,  I  have  called 
34.  16.  for  my  mouth  it  hath  c.  and  his  spirit 
45.  12.  the  heavens  and  all  their  host  have  I  c. 
Jcr.  7.  23.  but  this  thing  c.  I  them,  obey  my  voice 

31.  which  I  c.  them  not,  19.  5.  |  .32.  35. 

11.  8.  all  words  of  covenant  wliich  I  c.  them  to  do 
17.  22.  but  hallow  thesabbiylh,  as  I  c.  your  fathers 
50.  21.  do  according  lo  all  that  I  have  c.  thee 

Liini.  2.  17.  his  word  that  he  had  c.  in  days  of  old 
Ezek.  9.  11.  I  have  done  as  thou  hast  c.  me 

24.  18.  I  did  in  the  morning  as  I  was  c.  37.  10. 
Zech.  1.  6.  my  words  which  I  c.  did  they  not  take 
ATal.  4.  4.  remember  the  law  which  I  c.  in  Iloreb 
J^uke  14.  22.  Ld.  it  is  done  as  thou  hast  c.artd  room 
Acts  10.  42.  he  r.  us  to  preach  to  the  people 

Jlfosc*  COMMANDED. 
JVum.  16.  47.  Aaron  took  as  Moses  had  c.  and  ran 
/Jc7/t.  31.29.  turn  aside  from  the  way  I  havec.  you 

33.  4.  Jl/b.scs  c.  us  a  law,  even  the  inheritance 
.Tosh.  1.7.  observe  to  do  according  to  all  Moses  c. 

22.  2.  ye  have  kept  all  that  Moses  c.  you 

1  CAr.  15.15.  Jl/o«M  c.  according  to  word  of  the  L. 
Mtct.S.i.  offer  the  gift  that  Moses  c.  for  a  testimony 
Mark  1.  44.  offer  for  thy  cleans,  those  things  which 
Moses  c.  for  a  testimony  to  them,  Luke  5.  14. 
JohnH.5. Moses  in  law  c.thatsuch  should  be  stoned 

COMMANDEDST. 
.VfA.  1.  7.  which  thou  c.  thy  servant  Moses,  8. 
9.  14.  thou  e.  them  precepts,  stututes,  and  laws 
./cr.  32.  23.  they  have  done  nothing  that  thou  c. 

COMMANDER. 
fsa.  55.  4.  given  him  for  a  leader  and  c.  to  people 

COMMANDEST. 
Josh.  1.  16.  all  that  thou  c.  us  we  will  do 
18.  whoso  will  not  hearken  in  all  that  thou  e. 

Acts  23.  3.  c.  me  to  he  smitten  contrary  to  the  law 

COMMANDETH. 
J^am.  32.  25.  thy  servants  will  do  as  my  lord  c. 
.foil  9.  7.  God,  who  c.  the  sun,  and  it  riseth  not 

36.  10.  he  c.  that  they  return  from  iniquity 

32.  he  covereth  the  light,  and  c.  it  not  to  shine 

37.  12?  that  they  may  do  wl.atever  he  c.  them 
Psal.  107.  25.  he  c.  and  rniselh  the  stormy  wind 
/.«m.3.37.  who  saith  it  rometh,  when  I,d.  r.  it  not? 
.^mns  6.  11.  Lord  c.  and  he  will  smite  great  horse 
Mark  1.  27.  he  e.  the  unclean  spirits,  J.uke  4.  36. 
Lvke  H.  25.  he  c.  the  winds,  and  they  obey  him 
Acti  17.  30.  now  r..  nil  men  every  where  to  rejient 

COMMANDING. 
Grn.  49.  33.  Jacob  made  an  end  of  c.  his  sons 
Mil.  II.  1.  J(«us  made  an  end  of  c.  his  disciples 
./?rre  24.  8.  r.  his  af-cnsers  to  come  to  thee 
1  Tim.  4.  3.  e.  lo  abstain  from  meats  God  created 

COMMANDMENT. 
Frorf.34.32.h"  save  them  in  call  Lord  had  spoken 
JViim.  15.31.  broken  his  r.  that  soul  shall  be  cut  off 

23.  20.  behold,  I  have  received  e.  to  bless 

27.  14.  ve  rebelled  against  my  c.  in  the  desert 
Drut.  30.  11.  this  c.  I  commniirl  thee  this  day 

1  AVni!'.»2.43.whvhaBt  thou  not  kept  the  r.  I  charged 

2  Kings  18.  36.  king's  r.  was,  nns.  not,  I.ia.  36.21. 
1  Chrnn.  12.  32.  all  their  brethren  were  at  their  e. 

28.  21.  all  the  people  will  be  whollv  at  thy  e. 
Vhrnn.  8.  13.  offering  nrcording  lo  tho  c.  of  Moses 

t  14.  BO  was  the  c.  of  David  the  man  of  God 
19.  10.  what  cause  shall  come  between  law  and  c. 

30.  12.  one  heart  to  do  the  r.  of  king  and  princes 

31.  5.  and  as  soon  as  the  r.  came  abroad,  Israel 
Ezra  8.  17.  I  sent  them  with  r.  lo  Iddo  the  chief 

in.  3.  of  those  thot  tremble  at  the  c.  of  Ond 
ffeh.  II.  23.  it  was  the  king's  c.  nmceming  Ihem 

13.  t5.  wine  and  oil,  which  was  the  c.o''  Lcvites 
Eath.  1. 12.  Vashti  refused  to  como  at  the  king's  c. 


COM 

/?siA.2.20.Estherdidthec.of  Mordecaijlite  a»  whea 
3.  3.  why  transgresseat  thou  the  king's  c.  ? 
9.1. when  king's  c. drew  nigh  to  be  put  in  executioa 

./of)  23.  12.  nor  gone  back  from  tlie  c.  of  his  lip« 

Psal.  119.  96.  but  thy  c.  is  exceeding  broad 
147.  15.  he  sendeih  forth  his  c.  upon  earth 

Prov.  6.  23.  the  c.  is  a  lamp,  and  the  law  is  light 

8.  29.  that  the  waters  should  not  pass  his  c. 
13.  13.  he  thatfearelh  the  c.  shall  be  rewarded 
19.  16.  he  that  keepeth  the  c.  keepeth  his  soul 

Eccl.  8. 5.  whoso  keepeth  c.  shall  feel  no  evil  thing 
.7er.  35.  14.  but  they  obey  their  father  Jonadab'g;. 
/Ian.  3.  22.  because  the  king's  e.  was  urgent 

9.  23.  the  c.  came  forth,  and  I  am  come  to  shew 
Jios.  5. 11. because  he  willingly  walked  aftcrlhct. 
Mai.  2.  1.  now,  O  ye  priests,  this  c.  is  for  you 

4.  ye  shall  know  that  I  have  sent  this  c.  to  yon 
Mat.  15.  3.  why  do  ye  transgress  the  c.  of  God? 

6.  thus  have  ye  made  the  c.  of  God  of  no  effect 

22.  36.  Master,  which  is  the  great  c.  in  the  law  T 
38.  this  is  the  first  and  great  c.  Mark  12.  30. 

Mark  7.S.  for  laying  aside  the  c.  of  God,  ye  hold 
9.  he  said,  full  well  ye  reject  the  c.  of  God 
12.  31.  there  is  no  other  c.  greater  than  these 
J.uke  15.  29.  nor  transgressed  I  at  any  time  thy  e. 

23.  56.  rested  Ihesabbalh-day  according  to  thee 
./ohn  10.  18.  this  c.  have  I  received  of  my  Father 

12.  49.  he  gave  me  a  c.  what  I  should  say 
50.  I  know  that  his  c.  is  life  everlasting 

14.  31.  as  the  Father  gave  me  c.  even  so  I»do 

15.12.  my  c.  that  ye  love  one  another, UoAn  3.23. 
Acts  15.  24.  to  whom  we  gave  no  such  c. 

17.  15.  receiving  a  c.  to  Silas  to  come  to  him 

23.  30.  and  gave  e.  lo  his  accusers  also  to  say 
•25.  23.  at  Festus'  c.  Paul  was  brought  forth 
Rom.  7.  8.  but  sin  taking  occasion  by  the  c.  11. 

9.  when  the  e.  came,  sin  revived,  and  I  died 

10.  c.  which  was  ordained  to  life,  I  found  to  death 

12.  and  the  c.  is  holy,  and  just,  and  good 

13.  that  sin  by  c.  might  become  exceeding  sinful 

13.  9.  if  there  be  any  other  c.  it  is  briefly  in  this 
16.  26.  according  to  the  c.  of  the  everlasting  God 

1  Cor.  7.  6.  I  speak  this  by  permission,  not  of  e. 

2  Cor.  8.  8.  I  speak  not  by  c.  but  by  occasion  of 
Eph.  6.  2.  which  is  the  first  c.  with  promise 

1  Ti'm.l.l.bythec.of  God  our  Saviour,  Tit.l.X 

5.  the  end  of  the  c.  is  charity,  out  of  a  pure  heart 
//f  A.7.16.  who  is  made  not  after  law  of  a  carnal  «. 

18.  there  is  a  disannulling  of  the  c.  going  before 

11.  22.  Joseph  gave  c.  concerning  his  bones 

23. Moses  hid, they  were  not  afraid  of  llie  king's  e. 

2Pft.  2.  21.  to  turn  from  holy  c.  delivered  lo  Ihem 

3.  2.  mindful  of  c.  of  us  the  apostles  of  the  Lord 

1  John  2  7.  hut  an  old  c.  which  ye  have  heard 

3.  t  11.  thisis  thee,  ye  heard  from  the  beginning 

23. this  is  his  c.thatwe  should  believe  on  the  name 

4.21.  this  c.  have  we  from  him,  he  wholoveth  God 

2./0A71  4.  as  we  have  received  a  c.  from  the  Father 

6.  thisis  thee. that  as  ye  have  heard  from  btginik 

Give  or  given  COMMANDMENT. 
Ezod.  25.  22.  thinss  which  I  will  give  thee  in  e. 
Deut.  1.  3.  the  Lord  had  given  him  in  c.  unto  them 
Ezra  4. 21.  givec.  to  cease  till  another  c.  be  given 
Psal.  71.  "A.  hnat  given  c.  to  save  me,  thou  my  rock 
Isa.  23.  ll.theljord  hath  given  c.  against  the  city 
JVnA.  I.  14.  the  Lord  hath  given  c.  concerning  thee 
.fohn  11.  57.  given  e.  if  any  knew  where  he  were 
Keep  ('oMMANOMKNT,  see  Kkkp. 
COMMANDMENT  of  the  Lord. 
Fzo(/.I7.I,journ.  e.  of  J..  ^i(»n.9.  18,  30.  |  10.  IX 
JVh7».3.39.  Moses  and  Aaron  numbered  at  c.  of  L. 

24.  13.  I  cannot  go  beyond  thee.  0/  /,.  todogood 
33.38.  Aaron  v^ent  up  to  Hor  at  c.of  Lord  and  died 

.Tosh.  22.  3.  ye  have  kept  charge  of  c.o/  A.  your  G. 

1  Sam.  12.  14.  and  not  rebel  against  c.  of  Lord 
IS.if  yn  will  not  obey,hut  rebel  against  c.of  Lord 

13.  13.'  thou  hast  not  kept  Ihee.o/  /.orrf  thy  God 

15. 13.  Paul  said,  I  have  performed  the  c.  of  Lord 
24.  Ihnvo  transsrossenthee.  of  L.  and  thy  word 

2  .^nm.  12.  9.  wherefore  hasl  thou  despised  e.  of  A. 
2  Kings"4. 3.  at  thee,  of  Lord  came  Ihison  Judah 
2rAron.  29.  25.  for  so  was  c.  of  L.  by  his  prophets 
r.ial.  19.8.1  he  e.  of  L.  ispure.enlighteningtheeyes 
1  Cor.  7. 25.  concernine  virjins  I  have  no  e.  of  /.. 

J\7ic  COMMANDMENT. 

fnAn  13  34.  a  new  c.  I  give  unto  you.  that  ye  lore 

1  .fnhn  2.  7.  brethren,  I  write  no  nnt  e.  iinio  you 

8.  anriee.  I  write  unto  you,  which  is  true  in  him 

2./a/m  5.  not  as  though  I  wrote  a  new  r.  iinio  liiee 

llehrlhd  against  the  COMMANDMENT. 
,V?/m.27.  \4.yi:  rebelled ag.  my  e.in  thedes.  ofZin 
Peul.  1.26.  but  ye  rrM.  o^.eiof  L.  vour  God,  43 
9.  23.  tli<>n  ye  rebel,  ag.  e.  of  L.  and  '■"licved  not 
Lam.l.  18.  L.  isriehleoiis,!  hnvorrbeUedag.h\ae 

COMMANDMENTS. 
Gen.  26.  5.  because  that  Abraham  kept  my  e. 
Ernd.  15.  26.  and  if  Ihou  will  give  ear  lo  his  e. 
34.28  wroteoninblesthelenc. /)CK<.4  13.  |  10.4. 
/-rr.4.13.havn  done  some  wliatdiT.  any  of  ihee.  27. 
5.  17.  commit  sin  forbiddcD  by  tho  c.  of 'Jr  Tjord 


COM 

Z>r.  527  34.  theee  are  the  c.  the  Lord  commanded 
JVuffi.  i5.  3y.  remember  all  the  c.  ol'the  Lord 
Deut.Q.W.  in  not  keepingc.  which  I  command  thee 
11. 13.  if  you  shall  hearken  to  c.  28.  13.  Jadg.  3.  4. 

27.  if  ye  will  ubey  the  c.  of  the  Lord  your  God 

28.  if  ye  will  not  obey  the  c.  of  the  Lord  your  G. 

1  Sam.  15.  11.  Saul  hath  not  performed  my  c. 
\ Kings  II.  34.  becausehehathkept  my  c.and  8tat. 

14.  B.  David  who  kept  my  c.  and  followed  me 

18. 18.  in  that  ye  have  forsaken  the  c.  of  the  Lord 

'iKings  17.  16.  and  they  lell  all  the  c.  of  the  Lord 

19.  Judah  kept  not  the  c.  of  the  Lord  their  God 

18.6.  but  kept  his  c.  which  he  commanded  Moses 

2  Chrun.  7.  19.  if  ye  forsake  my  c.  1  set  before  you 
24.  20.  why  transgress  ye  the  c.  of  the  Lord  1 

Ezra  9. 10.  O  our  God,  for  we  have  forsaken  thy  c. 

14.  should  we  again  break  thy  c.  and  join  in  alHii. 

Psal.  89.  31.  if  tliey  keep  not  my  c.  then  will  I  visit 

111.  7.  his  works  are  verity,  all  his  c.  are  sure 

112.  1.  blessed  is  he  that  delight,  greatly  in  his  c. 
119. 10.  O  let  me  not  wander  from  thy  c. 

19.  I  am  a  stranger,  hide  nut  thy  c.  from  me 
35.  make  me  to  go  in  the  path  of  thy  c. 
47.  I  will  delight  in  thy  c.  which  I  have  loved 
66.  teach  me,  for  I  have  believed  thy  c. 
73.  give  understanding,  that  I  may  learn  thy  c. 
86.  all  thy  c.  are  faith.  |1  151.  all  thy  c.  are  truth 
98.  thou  through  thy  c.  hast  made  me  wiser  than 
127.  I  love  thy  c.  ||  131.  I  longed  for  thy  c. 
143.  thy  c.  are  my  delights  {|  172.  c.  righteous. 
1C6.  I  have  done  thy  c.  ||  176.  not  forgot  thy  c. 
Prov.  2.  1.  if  thou  wilt  hide  my  c.  with  thee 
7.  1.  keep  my  words  and  lay  up  my  c.  with  thee 
10.  8.  the  wise  in  heart  will  receive  c. 
Jta.  48.  18.  O  that  thou  hadst  hearkened  to  my  c. 
Mat.  5.  19.  whoso  shall  break  one  of  these  least  c. 
15.9.  teach,  for  doctrines  thec.ofmen,^UarA7.  7. 
22.  40.  on  these  two  c.  hang  all  the  law  and  proph. 
Mark  10.  19.  thou  knowest  the  c.  I^uke  18.  20. 
12.  29.  the  first  of  all  the  c.  is,  hear  O  Isr.  the  L. 
Jjuke  1. 6.  walking  in  all  the  c.  of  the  L.  blameless 
John  14.  21.  he  that  hath  my  c.  and  keepeth  them 

15.  10.  if  keep  my  c.  as  I  have  kept  my  Father's  c. 
1  Cor.  7.  19.  is  nothing,  but  keeping  thee,  of  God 

14.  37.  things  I  write  you,  are  the  c.  of  the  Lord 
Col.  2.  22.  after  the  c.  and  doctrines  of  men 
1  T'/iess.i.'i.  for  ye  know  what  c.  we  gave  you  byL. 

1  .h/in  2.  4.  he  that  keepeth  not  his  c.  is  a  liar 
2.  24.  he  that  keepeth  his  c.  dwelleth  in  him 

2  Jo/in  6.  this  is  love,  that  we  walk  after  his  c. 

J)o  COMMANDMENTS. 
J^um.  15.  40.  do  all  my  c.  and  be  holy  to  your  God 
Deut.  6.  25.  obs.  to  do  all  c.  15.  5.  ]  28.  1, 15.  |  30.  8. 

1  Chron.  28.  7.  if  he  be  constant  to  do  my  c. 
Psal.  103.  18.  those  that  rememberhisc.  toiio  them 

111.  10.  understanding  have  they  ihat  do  his  c. 
Rev.  22.  14.  blessed  are  they  that  do  his  c. 

JVut  do  COMMANDMENTS. 
Lev.  26.  14.  but  if  ye  will  not  dn  all  these  e. 
15.S0  that  ye  will  Tioi  do  all  myc. but  break  coven 
Keep  Co.MM.vNDMENTS,  see  Keep. 
COMMEND 
Sisrnifies,  [1]  To  extol  or  praise,  2  Cor.  3. 1. 1  5. 12. 
T2]  To  commit  or  give  in  charge,  Luke  23.  46. 
[3]  To  render  more  illustrious  and  commend- 
able, Rom.  3.  5.     [4]  To  make  or  render  one 
more  acceptable,  1  Cor.  8.  8. 
Jyuke  23.  46.  Father,  into  thy  hands  I  c.  my  spirit 
Jicts  20.  32.  and  now,  brethren,  I  c.  you  to  God 
i?.'>7n.3.5  if  our  unrighteousness  c.righteous.of  God 

16.  1.  I  c.  unto  you  Phebe  our  sister,  a  servant 

2  Cor.  3.  1.  do  we  begin  again  to  c.  ourselves  7 

5.  12.  for  we  c.  not  ourselves  again  to  you 
10.  12.  or  compare  ourselves  with  some  that  c. 

COMMENDATION. 
2Cor.3.1.  or  need  we,  as  some  others,  epistles  of  c? 

COMMENDED. 
Oeji.  12.  15.  the  princes  e.  Sarai  before  Pharaoh 
Prov.  12.  8.  a  man  shall  bo  c.  accord,  to  his  wisdom 
Eccl.  8.  15.  then  I  c.  mirth,  because  a  man  hath 
lAike  16.  8.  the  Lordc.  the  unjust  steward,  because 
Acts\^.  23.C.  them  to  the  L.  on  whom  they  believed 
S  Cor.  12.  11.  I  ought  to  have  been  c.  of  you 

COMMENDETH. 
Rom.  5.  8.  but  God  c.  his  love  toward  us,  in  that 

1  Cor.  8.  8.  but  meat  e.  us  not  to  God 
2Cor.l0.18.not  he  that  c.  is  approved,  but  whom  L. 

COMMRNDING. 

2  Cor.  4.  2.  e.  ourselves  to  every  man's  conscience 

6.  t  4.  in  all  c.  ourselves  as  the  ministers  of  God 

COMMISSION,  S. 
Eira  8.  36.  and  they  delivered  the  king's  e. 
.^cts  26. 12.  as  I  went  with  r.  from  the  chief  priest 

COMMIT. 
Exod.  20. 14.  thou  shalt  not  c.  adultery, Deut.  5.18. 
Mat.  5.  27.  I  19.  18.  Rom.  1.3.  9. 
Lcv.^.  17.  if  sin,  and  cany  of  these  things  forbidden 
18.  26.  not  c.  any  of  these  abominations,  30. 
29.  who  shall  e.  any  of  these  abominations 
A'ktm.  5. 6.  if  a  man  or  woman  cany  lin  that  men  e. 
89 


COM 

Devt.W,  20.  c  no  more  any  such  evil  among  you 
Judff.yS.^  1.  adde<l  to  c.  evilin  thesight  ol  the  Lord 
2  Chr.  21.  11.  caused  Jerusalem  to  c.  Ibrnicalion 
Job  5.  8.  unto  God  would  1  c.  my  cause 
fsal.  31.  5.  into  thine  hand  1  c.  my  spirit 

37.  5.  c.  thy  way  to  the  Lord,  trust  also  in  him 
Pruv.m.'^.c.  thy  works  unto  the  Lord, thy  thoughts 

12.  an  abominatiori  to  kings  to  c.  wickedness 
Isa.  22.  21.  1  will  c.  thy  government  into  his  hand 
./cr.  37.  21.  c.  Jeremiah  to  the  court  of  pri 

44.  7.  why  c.  ye  this  great  evil  against  your  souls? 
Ezek.  8.  17.  c.  abominations  which  they  c.  here 

16.  43.  and  ihou  shalt  not  c.  this  lewdness 

22.  9.  in  the  midst  of  thee  they  c.  lewdness 
Hos.  6.  9.  the  priests  murder,  they  c.  lewdness 

7.  1.  for  they  c.  ialsehood,  and  the  thief  Cometh 
Luke  12.  48.  and  did  c.  things  worthy  of  stripes 

10.  11.  who  will  c.  to  your  trust  the  true  riclits  ? 
./vh}i  2.  24.  Jesus  did  nut  c.  himself  to  them 
Rom.  1.  32.  who  c.  such  things  are  worthy  of  death 

2.  2.  is  against  them  which  c.  such  things 
j     22.  that  abhorrest  idols,  dost  thou  c.  sacrilege  ? 
1  Cor.  10.  8.  neither  let  us  c.  fornication 

1  Tim.  1.  18.  this  charge  I  c.  to  thee,  son  Timothy 

2  Tim.  2.  2.  the  same  c.  thou  to  faithful  men 
./am.  2.  9.  if  ye  have  respect  to  persons  ye  c.  sin 
1  Pet.  4.  19.  c.  the  keeping  of  their  souls  to  him 

1  John  3.  9.  whoso  is  born  of  God  doth  not  c.  sin 
Rec.  2.  14.  who  taught  Israel  to  c.  fornication 

20.  to  teach  and  seduce  my  servants  to  c.  forni- 
See  Adultery.  [cation 

COMMIT  iniquity. 

2  Sam.  7.  14.  if  he  c.  iniquity  I  will  chasten  him 
Job  34.  10.  Almighty,  that  he  should  c.  iniquity 
Jer.H.  5.  they  weary  themselves  to  c.  iniquity 
Ezek.  3.  20.  turn  from  righteousn.  and  c.  (7i.33. 13. 

COMMIT  trespass. 
Lev.  5. 15.  if  a  soul  c.  a  trespass  through  ignorance 
jVum.5. 12.  if  a  man's  wife  go  aside  and  c.  trespass 
31.16.caused  Israel  to  c.tre^/iass  against  the  Lord 
Josh.  22.  20.Achan  c.a  trespass  in  the  accur.thing 

COMMIT  whoredom,  or  whoredoms. 

Lev.  20.  5. 1  will  cut  off  that  c.  whor.  with  Molcch 

A'um.  25.  l.to  c.  whor.  with  thedaughtersof  Moab 

Eiek.  16.  17.  and  thou  didst  c.  whor.  with  images 

34.  whereas  none  followeth  thee  to  c.  whoredom 

20.  30.  c.  ye  whoredom  after  their  abominations  ? 

23.  43.  will  they  c.w.  with  her,  and  she  with  them 

//os.4.10.they  shall  c.  whoredoms  and  not  increase 

13.  therefore  your  daughters  shall  c.  whor.  14. 

COMMITTED. 

Gen.  39.  8.  he  hath  c.  all  that  he  hath  to  my  hand 

22.  the  keeper  c.  to  Joseph  all  the  prisoners 
Leo.i.  35.  priest  make  atonement  for  sin  be  hath  c. 
18.  30.  these  abominable  customs  which  were  c. 

20.  23.  they  c.  these  things,  and  I  abhorred  them 
JVum.  15.  24.  if  ought  be  c.  by  ignorance 
Deut.  17.  5.  bring  forth  that  man  or  woman  that  c. 

21.  22.  if  a  man  have  c.  a  sin  worthy  of  death 
./udg.W.G.  they  have  c.  folly  and  lewdness  in  Israel 
1  Kings  8.  il.  we  have  sinned, we  have  c.  wickedn. 

14.  22.  they  provoked  him  with  sins,  they  c.  1 

27.brasen  shields  c.he  to  the  guard, 2  CAr.  12.  10.  i./urf(;3.  di 
1  Chr.  10.  13.  Saul  died  for  his  transgression  he  c.| 
Jcr.  2.  13.  for  my  people  have  c.  two  evils 

5.  30.  a  wonderful  and  horrible  thing  is  c.  inland 

16.  10.  what  is  our  sin  that  we  have  c.  against  Ld. 

44.  3.  which  they  have  c.  to  provoke  to  anger,  9 
Ezek.  16.  26.  thou  hast  c.  fornication  with  Egypt 
51.  nor  hath  Samaria  c.  half  of  thy  sins 

18.  21.  turn  from  all  his  sins  he  hath  c.  28. 

20.  43.  shall  loathe  yourselves  for  evils  ye  have  c, 

23.  3.  they  c.  whoredoms  in  Egypt  in  their  youth 
7.  thus  she  c.  whoredoms  with  them 

33.  16.  none  of  the  sins  he  c.  shall  be  mentioned 
Hos.  1.  2.  for  the  land  hath  c.  great  whoredom 

4.  18.  they  have  c.  whoredom  continually 
Mark  15. 7.  who  had  c.  murder  in  the  insurrection 
/yuA:«'12.48.and  to  whom  men  have  c.  much,  of  him 
John  5.  22.  Father  hath  c.  all  judgment  to  the  Son 
.Sets  8.  3.  haling  men  and  women,  c.  them  to  prison 

25.  11.  if  I  have  c.  any  thing  worthy  of  death 
25.  had  found  he  h;id  c.  nothing  worthy  of  death 

27.  40.  they  c.  themselves  to  the  sea  and  loosed 

28. 17.  though  I  have  c.  nothing  against  the  people 
/Jom.3.2.becau3e  to  them  were  c.the  oracles  ofGod 
1  Cor  .O.n.digpensation  of  gospel  is  c.to  me,  Tit.  1.3. 

10  8.  nor  let  us  commit  fornic.  as  some  of  them  c. 
ICor.  5. 19.  hath  c.  to  us  the  word  of  reconciliation 

12.  21.  and  lasciviousness  which  they  have  c. 
Oai.2.  7.  gospelof  theuncircumcision  was  c.  tome 
as'gospel  of  circumcision  to  Peter,  1  Tim.  1.11. 

1  Tim.  6.  20.  O  Timothy,  keep  what  is  c.  to  thee 

2  T!m.l.]2.he  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  c.  to  him 
Jam. 5. 15.  if  he  have  c.  sins,  they  shall  be  forgiven 
1  Pet.2.23.e. himself  to  him  that  judgcth  righteously 
. J'«del5.of  all  their  ungodlydeeds  which  theyhavec. 
Rev.  17.  2.  with  whom  the  kings  of  the  earth  have 

c.  fornicalioR,  18.  3,  9. 
Set  Abominatiohs. 


COM 

COMMITTED  iniquity. 
PjaZ.lOe.O.we  have  c.  iniq.  we  have  done  wickedly 
Kzek.'ii.li.  for  his  iniy.  he  hath  c.  he  shall  die,  la 
Van.  9.  5.  we  have  t.  iniquity  and  done  foolighlv 

COMMITTED  trespass. 
/,eK.5.7.bringforhis«re.s7>a.54liec.lwoturtlc-dovet 
./osh.  7.1.  Israel  c.  a  trespass  in  the  accursed  thing 
22.]6.what<r(;.^i/(a«si8  lliisye  havec.against  GodJ 
31. because  ye  have  not  c.lhis  trespass  agaiiistL. 
Ezek.  15.  8.  because  they  c.  a  trespass,  1  will 
20.  27.  ill  that  they  c.  a  trespass  against  me 

COMMITTEST,  ETH,  ING. 
Psal.lO.  14.  the  poore.  himself  to  thee,  thou  helper 
Ezck.S.G.  the  great  abominations  that  Israel  c.  here 
33.  15.  walk  in  statutesof  life  without  c.  iniquity 
Hos.i.2.  by  lying,  killing,  i^tealing,  and  c.  adultery 
5.  3.  for  now,  O  Ephraim,  thou  t.  whoredom 
■John  6.  34.  whosoever  c.  sin  is  the  servant  of  sin 
1  Cor.  6.  18.  but  he  that  c.  fornic.  sinneth  against 
l./oA7i3. 4.  whoso  c.  sin  transgresseih  also  the  law 
8.  he  that  c. sin  is  of  the  devil, l<>r  the  devil  sinneth 
COMMODIOUS. 
..^cta  27.  12.  the  haven  wa.')  not  c.  to  winter  in 

COMMON. 
By  common,  is  meant  that  which  is  ordinary,  or 
usual ;  as  a  common  death,  JVu»h.  16.29.  a  com- 
mon evil,  Eccl.  6.  1.  Sotnetinies  that  ichich  is 
ceremonially  unclean,  Acts  11.  9.  To  eat  with 
common  hands,  that  is,  without  washing  one  s 
hands,  Mark  7.  2.  Common  biead,  that  is 
imhalloucd  bread,  1  Sam.  21.  4.  /t  is  said, 
Acts  2.  44,  That  such  as  believed  had  ail 
things  common  ;  that  is,  as  to  use,  but  not  at  to 
title.  ^XosKS  calls  a  uiMcyuri/ common,  or  pro- 
fane :  What  man  is  he  that  hath  planted  a  vine- 
yard, and  hath  not  yet  made  it  common  T 
Deut.  20.  t  6.  If  there  be  such  a  one,  he  may 
return  to  his  house;  because  the  first-fruits  of 
trees  and  vines  were  reckoned  unclean, or  rather 
were  consecrated  'o  the  Lord. andl.he owner wa» 
not  allowed  to  toich  thtm,  till  after  the  fourth 
year.  Lev.  19.  24.  25. 

Ste  Profane. 
JVum.lfi.  29.  if  these  men  die  thee,  death  of  all  men 
I'ent.aO.  t6.  planted  a  vineyard,  and  not  made  itc. 
28.  T  .30.  shall  plar.t,  and  not  use  it  as  c.  meat 
1  Sam.  21.  4.  there  i*  no  r.  bread  under  my  hand 
S.lhe  vessels  holy,  and  the  bread  is  in  a  mannere. 
Eccl.  6.  1.  there  is  ;m  evil,  and  it  isc.  among  me» 
./er.  31.  5.  the  |)lan'ers  shall  eat  ihem  as  c.  things 
Ezek.  23.  42.  men  of  c.  sort  were  brought  Sabcana 
Mat. '27.  27.  the  soldiers  took  Jesus  into  thee,  hall 
Mark  7. 1 2.  the  disciples  eat  bread  with  c.  handi 
.^cts  2.  44.  believers  had  all  things  c.  4.  32. 
5.  18.  and  put  the  apostles  in  the  c.  pri.^on 
10. 14. 1  have  nevereaten  anv  thing  that  is  c.  11. 8. 
].>.  what  Cod  hath  cleansed  call  not  thou  c.  11.9. 
28.  that  I  should  not  call  any  thing  cor  unclean 
Rom.  14.  t  14.  there  is  nothing  c  of  itself;   but  to 
him  that  esteemeth  any  thing  to  be  c. 

1  Cor.  10. 13.  no  temptation  taken  you  hut  c.  to  mea 
Tit.  1.  4.  to  Titus  my  own  son,  after  thee  faith 

nee  to  write  to  you  of  the  c  salvation 

COMMON  pro///c 

/,/'r.4.27.  ifnny  ofthe'«.;)fo/y/rsin  thro' ignorance 

./fr.26.23.cast  hisdeadnodv  into  the  Kravrs  ofcp. 

Mark  12.  37.  and  the  c  peoiile  heard  him  gladly 

COMMON-WEALTH. 

Eph.'H.  12.  being  aliens  from  the  c-waZtAoflsraot 

CoMMONt.v;  see  Kkported. 

COMMOTION,  S. 

2  CAroTi.  29.  t  8.  Lord  hath  delivered  thnm  to  e. 
Jcr.  10.  22.  a  great  c.  out  of  the  north  country 
/,uAe21.  9.  when  ve  h^ar  of  c  be  not  terrified 

COMMUNE. 
Fzod.  2.5.22.  and  there  I  will  meet  and  c  with  thea 
I  Sam.  18. 22.cwith  David  secretly, and  say,  behold 

19.  3.  and  I  will  c  with  my  father  of  thee 
.Aoi4.2.  if  we  essay  toe  wiih  thee,  willbegrieved  t 
R'!/7i.4.4.cwilh  yonrown  heart  on  your  bid,be  still 

64.  5.  they  c  of  laying  snares  privily,  they  say 

77.  6.  in  the  night  T  c  witli  mine  own  heart 

COMMUNED. 
t7™.23.R.  Abraham  c  ||  34.6.  Hamor  c  with  Jac.  8. 

42.  24.  Joseph  c  ||  .hidcr.  9.  1.  Abimelech  r. 
l.Srtm.9.25.  Samiiclf  .|I  25.39.David  c  with  Abigail 

1  A'in^il0.2.the  queen  of  Sheba  c  with  S'  lomon  of 
all  that  was  in  her  heart,  2  Chrnn.9.  1. 

2  Kings'iZ.  14.  thev  c  with  Huldah  the  propheten 
Eccl.  1.  16.  I  c  with  mine  own  heart,  sayine,  lo 
Dan.  1. 19.  and  king  r.  with  them,  none  like  Daniel 
ZccA.1.14.  the  angel  that  c  with  me,  said  unto  me 
Luke  6.  11.  they  c  what  they  might  do  to  Jciua 

22.  4.  Judas  c  to  betray  Jesus  unto  them 
24.  15.  that  while  they  c  Jesiis  himselfdrew  near 
./9ctJi24.26.  Felix  sent  and  r.  the  oftener  with  Paul 

COMMUNICATE. 
r?n?.6.6.1ethim  thalis  taught  cto  him  that  feacheA 
Phil.  4.  14.  that  ye  did  c  with  my  affliction 
1  Tim.  C.  18.  that  they  do  good,  be  willioj  to  «. 


COM 

Hib.  13.  16.  but  to  do  good  aad  to  c.  forget  Dot 
CUMMUMCATEU. 

OcU.  2.  2.  le.  to  lliem  that  goapel  which  I  proacli 

f  Alt.  4.  15.  no  cliurch  c.  with  me  but  yu  only 
COMMUNICATION,  S. 

3  Sam.  3.  17.  Abiier  hud  c.  with  tlie  etdera  of  Israel 

iKiiigs'd.il.  he  said,  ye  know  tlie  man  and  hiii  c. 

Mai.  3.  37.  but  let  your  c.  be  yea,  yea,  nay,  nay 

J.uke  •2A.  17.  what  manner  of  c.  are  these  ye  have! 

1  Cor.  lit.  33.  evil  c.  corrupt  good  manners 

Epk.  4.  '^9.  let  no  corrupt  c.  proceed  out  of  your 
mouth.  Col.  3.  ti. 

Philem.  6.  that  c.  of  thy  faith  may  becouie  etfeclual 
COMMUNING. 

Oen.  18.  33.  the  Lord  left  c.  with  Ahraliam 

£zod.31.1ci.when  he  iiad  made  un  end  of  con  Sinai 
COMMUNION. 

This  word  signijies  fellowship,  concord,  or  agree- 
ment, 2  Cor.  6.  H,  What  communion  hatli  liglit 
with  darkness  1  .'iuch  as  are  enlightened  by  the 
word  and  Spirit  of  (rod  can  have  no  profitable, 
agreeable,  or  comfortable  conoer.':e  with  such  as 
are  in  darkness  or  ignorance.  Communion  /i 
likewise  taken  for  a  sacrament, or  sacred  sign 
of  our  spiritual  fellowship  with  Christ,  1  Cor. 
10.  16,  The  cup  of  blessiii",  is  it  not  the  com- 
munion of  the  blood  of  Clirisf!  Our  drinking  uf 
thcwine  in  the  cup,is  a  religious  action,whereby 
and  wherein  Christ  communicates  himself  and 
hisgrace  to  us, and  we  communicate  our  souls  to 
him;  so  that  Christ,  and  believers  in  that  ac- 
tion,have  a  mutual  communion  one  with  ano- 
ther. Believers  have  communion  with  Christ 
by  election  in  him ;  by  their  kindred  with  his 
humanity ;  and  by  a  participation  nfhis  .Spirit. 
They  have  communion  witli  the  Father  and  the 
Son,  1  ./ohn  1.  3.  They  partake  of  all  those 
blessings  that  (Jodthe  Father  has  promised  to 
those  that  are  in  covenant  with  him;  and  also 
of  all  those  privileges  which  Christ  has  pur- 
chased for  his  members ;  such  as,  pardon,  re- 
conciliation, adoption,  sanctificntion,  iSc. 

Tlio  communion  of  saints :  That  fellow  ship  whicTi 
the  saints  have  with  Christ,  and  all  his  benefits 
by  faith,  and  among  themselves  by  love,  IJohn 
1.3.  This  Communion  is  both  active  andj)  as  stve; 
that  is,  it  consists  both  in  doing  good  to,  andre- 
cciving  goodfrom,  one  another.  There  be  divers 
sorts  of  it,  as,  (1)  Fellowship  in  doctrine,  orbe- 
lii-f,  Acts  2.  42.  Oal.  2.  9.  (2)  In  exhortation, 
Heh.  10.  24,2.5.  (3)  In  consolation,  Eph.  5.  19. 
1  Thess.  4.  IH.  (4)  In  humility,  or  submission, 
Rom.  12.  10.  E(ih.  ,5.  21.  (5)  In.  love,  Rom.  12. 
10.  (6)  In  pity,  Rom.  12.  16.  (7)  In  prayer, 
Kph.  6.  18,  19.  (81  In  helping  and  relieving 
one  another.  Acts  4.  32,  34,  3.'). 

I  Cor.  10.  16.  c.  of  the  blood  of  Christ,  c.  of  the 
body  of  Christ 

S  Cor.  6.  14.  what  c.  hath  light  with  iL-irkness  1 
13.  14  the  c.  of  the  Holy  Ghost  be  with  you  all 
CO.MPACT. 

Psal.  122.  3.  Jerusalem  is  a  city  c.  together 
COMPACTED. 

f;nA.4.16.from  whom  whoh-  body  filly  joined  and  c. 
COMP/liNY. 

Or.n.  30.  t  H.  Leah  called  his  name  Gad,  a  e. 
32.  8.  if  Ksaii  come  to  iho  one  c.  and  smite  it 
21.  and  himself  bulged  that  night  in  the  c. 
3.1.  II.  a  r.  of  nations  shall  be  of  thee,  kings  come 

Jifam.  16.  6.  take  ye  censors,  Korah  and  all  his  c. 
16.  be  thou  and  all  thy  c.  before  the  Lord 
40.  noiinii.  niror,tii;il  hi^  be  not  a^  Korah  and  c. 
22.  4.  now  shall  this  r.  lick  up  all  that  are  round 
2.").  9.  who  strove  in  the  c.  of  Korah,  27.  3. 

Jaig.  9.  yi.  another  c.  come  along  by  the  plain 
lfl.23.  what  alls  th-c,  lliou  '^omest  wiih  such  a  c.? 

1  film.  10.  ."i.  thou  shall  meet  n  c.  of  prophets 
19.21).  they  sa'.v  the  c.  of  prophets  prophesying 
30.  1.").  canst  t'lou  brim!  me  down  to  ibis  e.J 

9  Kin'rs  5.  1.5.  he  and  all  his  c.  came  to  Elisha 
9.  17.  lie  npied  the  «.  of.I'ihu,  and  said,  I  see  a  e. 

2  Chron.  21.  21.  Ihn  Syrians  cume  with  a  small c. 
.fob  16.  7.  thou  hast  made  desidnte  all  my  c. 

34.  8.  gorth  ill  c.  with  the  workers  of  iniiptity 
Ptnl.  .>.">.  M.  we  walked  to  the  hiiiise  of  God  inc. 
68.  t  27.  the  princ's  of  Juilah  with  their  c. 

3().rel>uke  the  c.  of  spearmen.thc  bulls,  the  calves 
84.  t  "•  ll'ey  so  from  c.  to  e.  every  one  in  7.ion 
106.  17   llir-  eirth  covered  the  c.  of  Abiram 

18.  anri  a  fire  was  kindled  in  their  r. 
Prov.  21.  t  19.  keep  not  r.  with  th';  wicked 
SK).  3.  that  kecpetti  c.  with  harlots,  spendeth 
Cant.  1.  9.  to  a  c.  of  horsi's  in  Ph.iraoti's  chariots 
6.  13.  as  it  \vere  the  c.  of  two  armies 
F.irk.  16.  40.  thoy  shall  briiiir  up  a  c.  against  thee 
23  46.  sai'h  the  Lord,!  will  bring  npac.  on  them 
32.  22.  Ashtir  is  there  and  all  her  c.  his  graves 
38.  7.  prepare  for  thvsclf,  thou  and  ,ill  thy  c. 
J/tn.  n.  9.  so  'he  r.  of  priests  miird>-r  in  the  way 
Jjuke  2.  44.  supposing  him  to  have  btcn  in  c. 
W 


COM 

LukeCn.  he  came  down,  and  the  c.of  his  disciples 

22.  when  they  separate  you  from  their  c. 

9.  14.  make  them  sit  down  by  fillies  in  a  c. 

38.  a  man  of  the  c.  cried  out,  saying,  Master 

24.  22.  a  woman  of  our  c.  made  us  astonished 

.dcts  4.  23.  being  let  go,  tliey  went  to  their  own  c. 

10. 28.  unlawful  for  a  man  tiiat  is  a  Jew  to  keep  c. 

15.  22.  to  send  chosen  men  of  their  c.  to  Aiitioch 

17.  5.  Jews  gathered  a  c.  and  set  city  on  an  uproar 

21.8.  next  day  we  that  were  of  Paul's  c.  departed 

Aom. 15.24.  if  first  I  be  somewhat  filled  with  your  c. 

lCur.5.11.  not  tokeepc.with  a  fornicator,  a  drunk. 

2  7'Aess.3.14.note  that  man, and  iiave  no  c.withhiin 

//eA.12.22.are  come  to  an  innumerable  c.  of  angels 

i^cv.  18. 17.  allc.insbips  and  sailors  siood  afar  olf 

(Vrcat  COMPANY. 
Oen.  50.  9.  there  went  up  with  Josejih  a  great  c 
2C/iron.9.1.the(iueen  of  Sheba  came  with  agreatc. 
20.  12.  we  have  no  might  against  Ih'iB  great  c. 
Psal.SB.ll.  great  was  tlie  c.of  those  that  published 
./er.  31.  8.  n great  c.  shall  return  thither 
Kick.  17.  17.  nor  shall  Pharaoh  with  his  great  c. 
John  6.  5.  saw  a  great  c.  come  to  him,  he  saith 
.dctsG.'.&great  c.  of  priests  obedient  to  the  faith 

COMPANY. 
1  Cor.  5.  9.  I  wrote  not  to  c.  with  fornicators 

COMPANIED. 
jicts  1.  21.  of  these  men  which  have  c.  with  us 

COMPANIES. 

Judg.  7.  16.  he  divided  the  300  men  into  three  c. 

20.  and  the  three  c.  blew  the  trumpets 

9.  34.  they  laid  wait  against  Shecliera  in  four  c. 

43.  the  people  he  divided  them  into  three  c. 

1  Sam.  11.  11.  Saul  put  the  people  in  three  c. 

13.  17.  the  Bjioilers  came  out  of  camp  in  three  c. 

2  Kings  5.  2.  the  Syrians  had  gone  out  by  c. 
11.  17.  two  c.  of  you  shall  keep  the  watch 

JVeh.  12.  31.  two  great  c.  of  them  gave  thanks,  40. 
/ob  6.  19.  the  c.  of  Sheba  waited  for  them 
Isa.  21.  13.  O  ye  travelling  c.  of  Dedanim 

57.  13.  when  thou  criest,  let  thy  c.  deliver  thee 
..Uar/i6.39.  to  make  all  sit  down  by  con  green  grass 

COMPANION. 
£iod.32.27.go  thro'camp  and  slay  every  man  his  c. 
./uc/^.14.20.Samson's  wife  was  given  to  his  c.l5.  6. 
1  Chron.  27.33.  Hushaitho  Archite  was  king's  c 
.fob  30.  29.  I  am  a  brother  to  dragons,  a  c.  to  owls 
Psal.  119.63.  lam  ac  to  all  them  that  fear  thee 
Prov.  13.  20.  but  a  c  of  fools  shall  be  destroyed 

28.  7.  but  a  c.  of  riotous  men  shameth  his  father 

24.  the  same  is  the  c.  of  a  destroyer 
Cant.  1.  t  15.  thou  art  fair,  my  c.  thou  art  fair 
Alal.  2.  14.  yet  she  is  thy  c.  wife  of  thy  covenant 
PAi7.2.25.Ei)aphroditu3my  brother  and  c.in  labour 
Kev.l.'J.  I  John,  your  brother  and  c.  in  tribulation 

COMPANIONS. 
Judg.  11. 38.  with  her  c.  and  bewailed  her  virginity 

14.  11.  they  brought  thirty  c  to  be  with  him 
Job  35.  4.  I  will  answer  thee  and  thy  c  with  thee 

41.  6.  :ihall  the  c.  make  a  banquet  of  him 
Pso.1.  45.  14.  her  c  shall  be  brought  unto  thee 

122.8.  for  my  c  sake,  I  will  say,  peace  be  in  thee 
Cant.  1.  7.  that  tiirneth  aside  by  the  flocks  of  thy  e. 

8.13.the  c. hearken  to  thy  voice,  cause  me  to  hear 
/so.  1.23.  thy  princes  are  rebellious  and  c.of  thieves 
Kzek.  37.  16.  write  on  it  for  Judahand  Israel  his  c 
Dan.  2.  17.  he  made  the  thing  known  to  his  c 
.ids  19.  29.  having  caught  Paul's  c.  in  travel 
//cft.lO.  33.  ye  became  c  of  them  that  were  so  used 

COMPARABLE. 
Lam.  4. 2.  the  precious  sons  of  Zion  e.  to  fine  gold 

COMPARE,  EU,  INC. 
r^a/.  89. 6.  who  in  heaven  can  be  c.  to  the  Lord? 
Prov.  3.  15.  are  not  to  be  c  to  wisdom,  8.  II. 
Cant.  1.9.  I  have  c  thee,  O  my  love,  to  a  company 
Isa.  40.  18.  or  what  likeness  will  ye  c.  to  him? 

46.  5.  to  whom  will  ye  c.  me,  that  we  may  be  like? 
Rom.  8.48.  are  not  worthy  to  be  c  with  the  glory 

1  Cor.  2.  13.  c  spiritual  things  wiili  spiritual 
'iCor.  10.  12.  c.  ourselves  with  some  that  commend, 

and  c  themselves  amongst  Iheins.  are  not  wise 

COMPARISON. 

.fndg.  P.  2.  what  have  I  done  now  in  c  of  you  ?  3. 

IIng.2.^.  is  it  not  in  your  eyes  in  c  of  it  as  nothing  ? 

Marh  4.  30.  or  with  what  c  shnll  wo  compare  it? 

COMPASS,  Substantive. 
F.Tod.  27.  5.  shall  put  the  net  under  the  e.  of  altar 
38.  4.  he  made  a  grate  of  net- work  under  the  e. 

2  Sam.  5.  23.  but  fetch  ac.  behind  them  and  comr 
2  A'in^.?3.9.tliey  fetched  a  c.  of  seven  days' journey 
Prov.  8.27.  when  ho  sot  a  c.  on  the  face  of  the  earlli 
I.'a.  44.  13.  ho  marketh  the  image  out  with  thee. 
-^cf.'i28. 13.from  thence  we  fetched  a  c  to  Rhcgium 

COMPASS,  rerb. 
.Vum.2L  4.  they  journeyed  to  c.  thelandof  F.dom 
.fosh.  6.  3.  ye  shall  c.  the  city,  all  ye  men  of  war 
4.  and  the  seventh  day  c.  the  city  seven  times 
2  Sam.  24.  t  2.  c.  the  tribes  of  Israel  [in  I  number 
2  A'jn/Tjn.R.c.thekingioiindah'iiit,'.'  CAr.  23  " 
Job  16. 13.  bis  archcne.  me  round  about,  he  cleav. 


COM 

loh  40.  22.  the  willows  of  the  brook  e.  bim  about 
Psal.  5.  12.  with  favour  wilt  thou  chim  as  a  shield 

7.  7.  the  congregation  of  the  people  c  thee  about 

17.  9.  from  my  deadly  enemies  who  c  me  about 
20.  6.  wash  my  hands,  so  will  I  c.  thine  altar,  O  L 
32.  7.  shalt  c.  me  about  with  songs  of  deliverance 

10.  trusteth  in  the  Ld.  mercy  shall  c.  iiim  about 
49.  5.  the  iniquity  of  my  heels  shall  c  me  about 
140.  9.  as  for  the  head  of  tliose  that  c  me  about 
142.7. thcrightuous shall  c  me  about,for  shalt  deal 
Prov.  4. 1 9.  she  shall  c.  thee  with  a  crown  of  glory 
Isa.  50.  11.  that  c  yourselves  about  with  sparks 
fer.  31.  22.  a  new  thing,  a  woman  shall  c.  a  man 
Hab.l.4.foT  the  wicked  doth  c.  about  the  righteous 
jMat.  23.  15.  woe  to  yoU,  for  ye  c  sea  and  land 
J.,uke  19.  43.  thine  enemies  shall  c  thee  round 

COMPASSED. 
Gen.  19.  4.  the  men  of  Sodom  c.  the  house  round 
iJeut.  2.  1.  and  we  c.  mount  Seir  many  days 
.fosh.  6.  11.  so  the  ark  of  the  Lord  c  the  city 
Judg.  II.  18.  then  they  c  land  of  Edom  and  Moab 
16.  2.  they  c  Samson  in,  and  laid  wail  all  night 

1  Sam.  23.  26.  Saul  and  his  men  c  D.  and  liismeo 

2  6om.22.5.  waves  of  death  erne,  f«.18.4.  ]  116.  3. 
'iKingsO.  15.  behold  a  hostc  the  city  with  horses 
2  Chron.  21. 9.  smote  the  Edomiles  which  c.liim  in 
Job  19.  6.  know  that  God  hath  c.  ;ne  with  his  net 

26.  10.  he  hath  c  the  waters  with  bounds 
Psal.  17.  II.  tliey  have  now  c  us  in  our  steps 

22.  12.  many  bulls  c  me  ||  16.  for  dogs  have  c  me 
Keel.  7.  t  25.  I  and  my  heart  c.  to  know  wisdom 
I^am.  3.  5.  he  hath  c.  me  with  gall  and  travail 
ZccA.  14.  t  10.  all  the  land  shall  he  c  as  a  plain 
/>u/ie21.20.  when  ye  shall  see  Jerus.cwith  armies 
Heb.a.  2.  for  that  he  himself  also  is  c.  with  intirmity 

COMPASSED  about. 
Dci(£.32.tl0.in  howlingwildernesshe  c.them  abevt 
2  Sam.  18.  15.  ten  young  men  c.  Absalom  about 

22.  6.  the  sorrows  of  hell  c  me  about,  Psal.  18.  5. 
2  Kings  6.  14.  Syrians  came  by  night  and  c.  city  a. 

8.  21.  Joram  smote  Edomites  which  c.  him  about 
2  Chron.  18.31.  they  c.uAout  Jehoshaphai  to  fight 
Psal.  40.  12.  innumerable  evils  have  c.  me  about 

88. 17.  they  c.  me  a.  together,  109.  3.  1 118. 11, 12. 

118.  10.  all  nations  c  me  about,  but  in  the  name 
Jonah  2.3.rtoocls  erne  a.thybillows  passed  over  me 
Heh.  11.  .30  walls  of  Jericho  fell,  after  c.  a.  "days 

12.  1.  c.  about  with  such  a  cloud  of  wiinesses 
/ic».  20.  O.they  went  upandccanipofsaints  oJwri 

COMPASSEST,  ETH. 
(7cn.  2.  Il.cHavilah  ||  13.  c  the  land  of  Ethiajia 
Psal.  73. 6.  therefore  pride  e.  them  about  ae  a  chain 

J39.  3.  thou  c.  my  path  and  my  lying  down 
i/«s.ll.I2.Ephraimc.me  aboutwithlies,and  Israel 
COMPASSION. 

1  Kings  8.  50.  give  them  c.  before  them  who  carry 

2  CAr.  30. 9.  your  children  shall  find  c  before  thens 
Mat.  9. 36.  Jesus  moved  with  c.  14.14.  Mark  6.  34. 

J8.  27.  the  lord  of  thatservant  was  moved  with  e 
Markl.  41.  Jesus  moved  with  c.  put  forth  his  hand 
iPet.  3.  S.beof  one  mind, havingconeof  another 
1  John  3.  17.  shiiltcthuphisbowclflof  c.  from  him 

Full  of  CO.MPASSION. 
P.'in;.78.3H.he  beine/i///o/  e.foreave  iheir  iniquity 

86. 15.  thou  art  a  G.f.  ofc.  1 11.4.  |  1 12.  4.  |  145. 8. 

Have  or  had  COMPASSION. 
Fxod.  2.  6.  the  babe  wept,  and  she  had  c.  on  him 
Deut.VJ.n.  the  Lord  may  turn  and  Ani'cc.  on  thee 

30.  3.  then  the  T,ord  thy  God  will  have  c.  on  thee 
I.Sam. 23.21.  blessed  be  ye  of  L. for  ye  have  c.  on  me  ^ 

1  King.t  8.  .50.  that  they  may  Aaiic  e.  on  them 

2  A'in»-«13.23.Lord  was  craciou?  and  had  c.onthem 
2  Chron.  36.  15.  because  he  had  c.  on  his  jioople 

17.  (^hnlilees  Aflf/no  c.  on  young  man  or  maiden 
Asa. 49.15. that  she  should  nntAan^con  R<m  of  womb 
.Fer.  12.  15.  I  will  return  and  Aai)c  c.  on  them 
f.am.  3.  32.  vet  will  he  have  c.  Mic.  7.  19. 
Mat.  15.32.'lAaucc.onlhemultiliide,  Jl/nrA-a  2. 

18.  33.  also  have  had  c.  on  thy  fellow-servant 
20.34  BO  Jos. Artrfcon  them  and  touched  their  cyo« 

Mark  5.  19.  how  the  Loid  hath  had  c.  on  thee 

9.  22.  if  thou  canst,  AdJic  c.  on  us.  and  help  us 
/.ut«7. 13.  when  the  Lord  saw  her,he  Anrfc.on  her 

10.  33.  the  Samaritan  saw  him,  he  hade,  on  him 
15.  20.  father  Art7  c.  and  ran  and  fell  on  hi"  neck 

Horn.  9.  15.  I  will  have  c.  on  whom  I  wiUhavee. 
//ci.5.2.  who  can  have  e.  on  the  ignorant, and  thrm 
10.  34.  for  ye  had  e.  of  me  in  my  bon'ls 
Jutlc  22.  of  some  have  e.  makin?  a  ditferencc 

COMPASSIONS, 
/.am. 3.22.  are  not  consumed,  because  bis  c.fail  no« 
i'ech.  7.9.  shew  mercy  nndc.  every  man  to  brother 

COMPEL. 
I.rr.  2.5.39.  not  e  him  to  serve  as  a  brmd  servant 
Mat.  5.  41.  whosoever  shall  c  ihei-  In  so  a  mile, 
go  with  him  twain 
Mark  15.  21.  they  e.  one  Simon  to  bear  his  crom 
I.uke  14.23.  go  inlnhish-wnvf,  c.iliem  to  come  is 

rOMPELLED,  EST. 
1  Sam.  98.  23.  his  lorvants  with  the  woman  c  San! 


CON 

i7Aron.21. 11.  moreover  Jehoram  c.  Judah  thereto 
Mat.  27.  32.  Simon,  him  they  c.  to  bear  his  cross 
'4c<j2ti.  Il.and  Ic. them  to  blaspheme  and  persecut. 
12  C»r.l2.  11. 1  am  a  fool  in  glorifying, ye  have  c.  me 
6ai.2.3.norTitusa  Greek  was  c. to  be  circumcised 
14.  why  c.  thou  the  Gentiles  to  live  as  the  Jews? 
COMPLAIN,  ED,  ING. 
A'uOT.  11.  1.  the  people  c.  il  displeased  the  Lord 
Judg.  21.  22.  or  their  bretliren  came  to  us  to  c. 
Job  7.  11.  1  will  c.  in  the  bitterness  of  my  soul 
31.  33.  that  the  furrow.s  likewise  thereof  c. 
Vsal.  77.  3.  1  c.  and  my  spirit  was  overwhelmed 

141.  1-1.  that  there  be  no  c.  in  our  streets 
/.am.  3.  39.  wherefore  doth  a  living  mane?  a  man 

COMPLAINERS. 
A'«m.ll.tl.when  people  werec.  it  displeased  Lord 
Jade  16.  these  are  murmurers,  c.  walking  after  lusts 

COMPLAINT,  S. 
ISom.l.lS.out  of  abundance  of  my  c.have  I  spoken 
Job  1.  13.  when  1  say,  my  couch  shall  ease  my  c. 

9.  27.  if  I  say,  I  will  forget  my  c.  I  will  leave  off 

10.  1.  I  will  leave  my  c.  on  my.self,  I  will  speak 
21.  4.  as  for  me,  is  my  c.  to  man?  and  if  it  were  so 
23.2.  even  to-day  is  my  e.  bitter,  my  stroke  heavier 

Psal.  55.  2.  I  mourn  in  my  c.  and  make  a  noise 

142.  2.  1  poured  out  my  c.  before  him,  and  trouble 
Acts  25.7.  laid  c. against  Paul,  they  could  not  prove 
Col.  3.  t  13.  if  any  man  have  a  c.  against  any 

COMPLETE. 
Z/eo.23.15.ye  shall  count,  seven  sabbaths  shall  be  c. 
Col.  2.  10.  ye  are  c.  in  him  who  is  the  head  of  all 
4.  12.  that  ye  may  stand  c.  in  all  the  will  of  God 

COMPOSITION.  . 
Eiod.  30.  32.  nor  make  any  like  it  aftei  the  c.  37. 

COMPOUND,  ETH. 

EiO(i.30.25.an  ointment  c.  after  art  of  apothecary 

33.  whosoever c.  any  thing  like  it,  or  putteth  any 

COMPREHEND. 

Job  37.5.  great  things  doth  he  which  we  cannot  r. 

Eph.3. 16.  may  be  alile  to  c.  with  saints  the  breadth 

CO.MPREHENDED. 
/su.40.12  hathc.  tbedust  of  the  earth  in  a  measure 
John  1.  5.  liglit  sliined,  and  the  darkness  c.  it  not 
/iu»t.l3.9.  is  briefly  c.in  this  saying,  thou  shalt  love 

CONCEAL,  ED,  ETH. 
Cfcn.  37. 26.  if  we  slay  our  brother  and  c.  his  blood 
JJeut.  13.  3.  not  spare,  neither  shalt  thou  c.  him 
Job  G.  10.  I  have  not  c.  the  words  of  the  holy  One 
27.  11.  what  is  with  the  Almighty  will  I  not  c. 
41.  12. 1  will  not  c.  his  parts  nor  his  proportion 
Psal.id.lO.l  have  note,  thy  loving-kindn.  and  truth 
Proo.ll.li.he  that  is  of  a  faithful  spiritc.the  matter 
12.23.  u.  prudent  man  c.  knowletige,  heart  of  fools 
25.  2.  it  is  the  glory  of  God  to  c.  a  thing 
Jer.  50.  2.  declare  ye,  publish  and  c.  not 

CONCEIT,  S. 
Prov.  18. 11.  rich  man's  wealth  as  a  high  wall  in  c. 
2>).  5.  answer  a  fool,  lest  he  be  wise  in  his  own  c. 
12.secst  thou  a  man  wise  in  his  ownc?  morehope 
Iti.sluggard  is  wiser  in  his  own  c.  than  seven  men 
23.  11.  the  rich  man  is  wise  in  his  own  c. 
horn.  11.  25.  lest  ye  should  be  wise  in  your  ownc. 
12.  Itj.  be  not  wise  in  your  own  c. 
CONCEIVE,  ING. 
Gin.30. 33.  they  should  c.  when  they  came  to  drink 
.Vu'n.  .1-  23.  then  she  shall  be  free,  and  shall  c.  seed 
Jadg-.l^.S.  shalt  c.  and  bear  a  son,  5,  7.  Luke  1.  31. 
Jub  15.35.  they  c.  mischief,  bring  vanity,  Isa.  5i).  4. 
Piul.  51.  5.  and  in  sin  did  my  tnolher  c.  me 
/sa.  7.  14.  a  virgin  shall  c.  and  bear  a  son 
33.11.  shall  c.  chaff  II  50.  13.  c.  words  of  falsehood 
Kzek.38.  t  10.  thou  shalt  c.  a  mischievous  purpose 
Hcb.  11.  11.  Sarah  received  strength  to  c.  seed 

CONCEIVED. 
Girn.  4. 1 .  Eve  c.  and  bare  Cain  ||  17.  Cain's  wife  c. 
16.  4.  Hagar  c.  ||  21.  2.  Sarah  c.  and  bare  Isaac 
0.).  21.  R.^bekah  his  wife  c.  ||  29.  32.  Leah  c.  33. 
30.  5.  B.lliali  c.  II  23.  Rachel  c.  and  hare  a  son 
39.  the  flocks  c.  31.  10.  ||  38.  3.  Shuah  c.  4,  5. 
SS.lS.Tamar  c.  \\  F.iod.  2. 2.  Jochubed  c.  and  bare 
T.io.  12.  2.  have  c.  seed,  and  borne  a  man  child 
.A"am.  11. 12.  Moses  said,  have  I  c.  all  this  people? 

1  .'?a;ii.l.20.Haiinah  r.  and  barea8on,Samuel,2.21. 

2  Sain..  11.5.  Bathsheba  c.  sent  and  told  David 

•i Kiii^s i.\l .  Shunaniitec.  ||  /sa.8.3.  prophetess  c. 
.T,)b  3.  3.  it  was  said,  there  is  a  man  chihi  c. 
I'sal.  7.  14.  c.  mischief,  brought  forth  falsehood 
Cant.  3.  4.  into  the  chamber  of  her  that  c.  me 
Jcr.  40.  30.  and  hath  c.  a  purpose  against  you 
Hos.  1.  3.  Goiner,  which  c.  and  biire  him  a  son 

2.  5.  she  that  c.  them  hath  dune  shamefully 
Mat.  1.20.  that  wliich  is  c.in  herisof  the  H.  Ghost 
Au/ifi  1.  33.  Elisabeth  haih  c.  a  son  in  her  old  age 

2.  21.  was  so  named  before  he  was  c.  in  womb 
.lets  5.  4.  why  hast  thou  c.tliis  thing  in  thine  heart? 
Rom.  H.  10.  when  Rebekah  had  c.  even  by  Isaac 
Jam.  1.  15.  when  lust  hath  r.  it  brings  forth  sin 

CONCEPTION. 

Clen.'H.  IG.  Twill  greatly  multiply  thysurrow  and  c. 

hulh  i.  13.  tlie  Lord  gave  her  c.  and  she  bare  a  son 

01 


CON 

Woi.O.n.  their  glory  shall  flee  from  the  bjrth  and  c. 

CONCERN,  ETH. 
Eiek.  12.  10.  say  to  them,  this  burden  c.  the  prince 
..lets  28.  31.  teaching  things  which  c.  the  L.  J.  C. 
2  Cor.  11. 30.  glory  in  things  which  c.  my  infirmities 

CONCERNING. 
Oen.  19.  21.  I  have  accejited  thee  c.  this  thing 
Ezud.G.S.c.  which  1  did  swear  to  give,  J\rum.  14.30. 
Lev.  4. 26.  priest  make  alonem.  for  him  c.  sin,  5. 0. 
6.  3.  hath  found  what  was  lost,  and  lieth  c.  it 
JVttm.  10.29.  the  Lord  hath  spoken  good  c.  Israel 

1  Kings  11. 10.  had  commanded  him  c.  this  thin" 

2  A'in^s20.tl.give  charge  c.  thy  house,  /sa.38.tl. 
J^eh.  1.  2.  I  asked  them  c.  the  Jews  that  escaped 
Psal.  90.  13.  repent  thee  c.  thy  servants,  135.  14. 
Keel.  7. 10.  for  thou  dost  not  inquire  wisely  c.  this 
Isa.  5.  t  20.  woe  to  them  that  say  c.  evil,  it  is  good 

30.  7.  shall  help  in  vain,  theref.  have  I  cried  c.  this 

4.^.11.  ask  mec.  my  sons,  and  c.  work  of  my  hands 

Jer.  16.  3.  thus  saith  the  Lord  c.  sons,  c.  daughters 

horn  in  this  place,  c.  tlieir  mothers,  c.  their  fathers 

27.  19.  c.  the  pillars,  c.  the  sea,  c.  bases,  c.  vessels 

Eiek.  14.22.  shall  be  comforted  c.  evil,  even  c.  all 

21.28.  thus  saith  i^oLord  God  c.  the  Ammonites 

47.  14.  c.  which  I  have  lifted  up  my  hand  to  give 

Dan..  2. 16.  would  desire  mercies  of  G.  c.  this  secret 

6.17.  that  purpose  might  not  be  changed  e.  Daniel 

Mat.  16.  11.  that  I  speak  it  not  to  you  c.  bread 

Mark  5.  16.  they  that  saw,  told  also  c.  the  swine 

Luke  24.  27.  he  expounded  the  things  c.  himself 

Jicts  13.34.  as  c.  that  he  raised  him  up  from  dead 

23. 22.  as  c.  this  sect,  we  know  it  is  spoken  against 
Rom.Q.5.  of  whom  asc.  flesh  Christ  came,  who  is  G. 

11. 23.  as  c.  the  gospel,  are  enemies  for  your  sake 
16. 19.  you  wise  to  what  is  good,  and  simple  c.  evil 

2  Cor.11.21. 1  speak  asc.  rejiroach,  as  though  weak 
Eph.  5.  32.  but  I  speak  c.  Christ  and  the  church 
Phil.  4. 15.  as  c.  giving  and  receiving,  but  ye  only 

1  7'im.  6. 21.  some  professing  have  erred  c.  Ihefiith 

2  Tim.  2.  13.  who  c.  the  truth  have  erred,  nayiiig 
3.  8.  men  of  corrupt  minds,  reprobates  c.  the  faitli 

1  Pet.  4.  12.  think  it  not  strange  c.  Ihi^  fiery  trial 
See  Hi.M,  Mk,  Thee,  TnK.vi,  Us,  You. 

CONCISION. 
Beware  of  the  concision,  Phil.  3.  2.  that  is,  sueh 
who  under  pretence  of  maintaining  circumci- 
sion, which  is  now  no  longer  a  seal  of  God's 
covenajit,  and  so  is  no  hitter  than  a  mere  ettt- 
ting  or   sla.ihing   of  the  Jltsh,  do  prove  de- 
stroyers and  renders  of  the  church. 
.Joel  3.  t  14.  multitudes  in  tite  valley  of  c. 
Phil.  3.  2.  beware  of  dogs,  beware  of  the  c. 

CONCLUDE. 
Rom.  3.  23.  we  c.  a  man  is  jiislitV;d  by  faith  without 

CONCLUDED. 
Acts  21.2-5.  as  touching  the  Gentiles,  we  have  c. 
Rom.  11.  32.  for  God  hath  c.  them  all  in  unbelief 
Gal.  3.  22.  but  the  scripture  hath  c.  all  under  sin 

CONCLUSION. 

Eccl.  12. 13.  let  us  hear  the  c.  of  the  whole  matter 

CONCORD. 

2  Cor.  0.  15.  and  what  c.  hath  Christ  with  Belial? 

CONCOURSE. 
Prov.  1.  21.  she  crieth  in  the  chief  place  of  c. 
Acts  19. 40.  whereby  we  may  give  account  of  this  c. 

CONCUBINE. 
This  term  in  scripture  signifies  a  wife  of  the  se- 
cond rank,  who  was  inferior  to  the  matron,  or 
mistress  of  the  house.  The  chief  wives  differed 
from  the  concubines,  (1)  /n  that  th.-y  were  taken 
into  fellowship  with  their  husbands  by  solemn 
stipulation,  and  with  consent  and  solemn  re- 
juicing  of  friends.  (2)  They  broughi.  with  them 
dowries  to  their  husbands.  (3)  They  had  the 
government  of  their  families  under  and  with 
their  husbands.  (4)  The  inheritance  belonged 
to  the  children  brought  forth  by  them.  Though 
the  children  o/ concubines  did  not  inherit  their 
father's  estate,  yet  the  father  in  his  life-time 
might  provide  for  them,  and  make  presents  to 
them:  Thus  Sarah  was  Abraham's  wife,  of 
whom  he  had  Isaac,  the  heir  of  all  his  wealth: 
But  he  had  besides  two  concubines,  namely, 
Hagar  and  Keturah  ;  of  these  he  had  other  chil- 
dren, whom  he  distinguished  from  Isaac,  and 
madepresents  to  them.  Aspolygamy  was  some- 
times practised  by  thepatriarchs  andainong  the 
Jews,  cither  by  God's  permissioii,  who  could 
rightly  dispense  with  his  own  laws  when  and 
where  he  pleased;  or  by  their  mistake  about  the 
lawfulness  of  it;  as  this  was  their  practice, it 
was  a  common  thing  to  see  one,  two,  or  many 
wives,  in  a  family  ;  and  besides  these  several 
concubines.  David  had  seven  wives,  and  ten 
concubines,  2  Sam.  3.  2,  3,  4,  5.  1  20.  3.  So- 
lomon had  seven  hundred  wives,  who  all  lived 
in  the  quality  of  gueens,  and  three  hundred  con- 
cuhinrs;  and  his  icives  turned  away  his  heart, 
1  Kings  11.  3.  Rehnbiiam  his  son  had  eighteen 
wives,  and  sizty  concubines,  2  Chron.  11.  21. 


CON 

But  ever  since  the  abrogation  of  polygamy  by 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  reduction  of 
marriage  to  its  primitive  institution,  theabust 
of  concubines  has  been  condemned  and  forbid- 
den among  Christians. 
Judg.  19.  2.  his  c.  played  the  whore  against  him 
29.  he  laid  hold  on  his  c.  and  divided  her 

20.  4.  I  came  into  Gibeah,  I  and  my  c.  to  lodge 
2  Sam.  3.7.  why  hast  thou  gone  in  to  my  father's  c? 

21.  11.  what  Rizpah  the";:,  of  Saul  had  done 

CONCUBINES. 

Gen.  25.  6.  to  sons  of  the  c.  Abraham  gave  gifts 

2  6am.  5.  13.  David  took  him  more  c.  and  wives 

16.22.Al)salom  went  in  to  father's  c  in  sight  of  Isr. 

19.  5.  have  saved  thy  life,  and  the  lives  of  thy  e 

20.  3.  the  king  put  his  c.  in  ward  and  fed  Iheiu 

1  Kings  11.  3.  and  Solomon  had  three  hundred  c. 

2  Chron.  11.  21.  for  Rehoboam  took  threescore  c. 
E.'i</i.2.14.  to  custody  of  Shaashgaz  who  kept  thee. 
Ca«t.  6. 8.  thereareliOfjueens  and  80  c.  and  virgins 

9.  yea, the  queens  and  the  c.  and  they  praised  her 

Dan.  5.  3.  the  king  and  his  c.  drank  in  them,  23. 
CONCUPISCENCE 

Signifies,  [1]  Sinful  lusts,  the  depravity  of  ovr 
nature,  or  that  original  concupiscence  which  is 
the  fountain  from  whence  all  particular  lusts 
do  flow,  the  furnace  from  which  all  sinful 
motions,  as  so  many  sparks,  do  continually 
arise,  Rom.  7.  t  7.  Jam.  1.  14.  [2]  Actual  mo- 
tions and  inclinations  to  sin,  .•springing  from 
this  natural  concupiscence,  Rom.  7.  8. 

Rom.l.  17. 1  had  not  khown  c.  e.vcept  law  had  said 
8.  sin  wrought  in  me  all  manner  of  c. 

Col.  3. 5.  mortify  members,  evil  c.  and  covetousnosi 

1  Thess.  4.  5.  not  in  the  lust  of  c.  as  the  Gentiles 
CONDEMNATION 

Signifies,  [1]  A  declaring  guilty,  or  pronouncin" 
the  sentence  of  punishment  npon  any  malefactor 
by  s'ime  judge,  John  8.  10.  [2]  That  which 
aggravates  one's  sin  and  punishment,  or  that 
which  is  thcreasontheevidence,n7id  great  cause 
of  condemnation,  iobn  3.  UK  [3]  The  punish- 
ment itself,  wherrunto  one  is  adjudged  and  con- 
demned, I  Cor.  11.  32.  [4]  A  censuring  other 
men' spersons,purposes, words  or  act  ion3,either 
rashly,  unjustly,  or  vncharitably,  Luke  6.  37. 
[5]./J  witnessingagainstandcon victingpcrson.t 
of  their  wickedness  and  faults  by  the  good  ex- 
ample and  conduct  of  others ;  thus  M«  Nine- 
vaes  shall  condemn  the  obstinate  jQws,Ma.t.  12. 
4).  because  the  former  repented  at  the  prearh- 
ingof  Jonas, Ak<  the  others  shewednosignsof  re- 
pentaiice, notwithstanding  our  Saviour  preach- 
ed and  did  many  mighty  ivorks  among  them. 

God  condemned  sin  in  the  flesh,  Rom.  8.  3.  //; 
adjudged  it  to  destruction,  passed  sentence 
upon  it,  and  accordingly  puni.'^hed  it  by  the 
sufferings  of  his  So?i  in  the  flesh;  and  thereby 
declared  openly  before  all  the  icorld,  by  these 
sufferings  of  his  Son,  how  abumivable  sin  was 
to  him,  and  how  contrary  to  his  nature. 

Christ,  being  no  civiljudga  nr  magistrate,  did  not 
condemn  the  woman  taken  in  adultery  to  a  civil 
punishment:  J\l'either  did  he  acquit  her,  for  that 
joould  have  been  making  void  the  law  of  God : 
He  only  performs  the  office  of  a  minister,  and 
speaks  to  her  as  the  Mediator  and  Saviour  of 
men,  in  calling  her  to  repentance  and  refor- 
mation, John  8.  10,  11. 

The  manner  of  passing  sentence  upon  persons, 
varied  nt  most  countries.  TAc  Jews  by  a  simple 
pronunciation  of  the  sentence,  as  Thou  JV.  art 
just;  Thou  jV.  art  guilty  ;  both  absolved  and 
condemntd  them.  The  Romans  gave  sentence, 
by  casting  in  tables  into  a  certain  boz  or  urn 
prepared  for  the  purpose.  If  they  absolved  any, 
they  wrote  the  letter  A  in  the  table,  it  being  tht 
first  letter  «/ Absolvo;  if  they  condemned  any, 
they  wrote  the  letter  C,  the  first  o/Condcmno. 
Among  the  Grecians,  Condemnation  was  signi- 
fied by  giving  a  black  stone;  Absolution  by 
giving  a  white  stone:  To  this  last  there  seemeth 
to  be  an  allusion,  Rev.  2.  17,  To  him  that  over- 
comelh  I  will  give  a  while  stone:  that  is,  I  will 
absolve  and  acquit  him  in  the  day  of  judgment. 

Luke  23.  40.  seeing  thou  art  in  the  same  c. 

■lolin  3.19.  this  is  the  e.  that  light  is  come  into  world 
5.  24.  he  that  believeth  shall  not  come  into  e. 

Rom.  5.  16.  for  the  judgment  was  by  one  to  e. 

18.  as  by  one,  judgment  came  upon  all  men  to  e. 
8. 1.  there  is  no  c.  to  them  who  are  in  Christ  Jesus 

1  Cor.  II.  34.  that  ye  come  not  together  to  c 

2  Cor.  3.  9.  if  the  ministration  of  c.  he  glorious 
1  Tim.  3.  6.  lest  he  fall  into  the  c.  of  the  devil 

■  Tarn.  3. 1.  knowing  we  shall  receive  the  greater  e. 
5.  12.  let  your  nay  be  nay,  lest  ye  fall  into  c. 
.Tude  4.  who  ■were  of  old  ordained  to  tliis  c. 

CONDEMN. 
Kiod.  22.  9.  whom  the  judges  shall  e.  he  shall  pay 
Z>eut.25.].  judges  may  judge  thorn,  anA  e.the  wick 


CON 

Jth  9.20.  if  I  justify  myself,  my  mouth  shall  t.  me 
10.2.  I  will  say  lu  G.  do  not  c.  me,  sliuw  mo  why 
34.  17.  and  will  ihou  c.  Iiim  liial  is  must  just.' 
40.  8.  wilt  thou  c.  me,  that  thou  inayesl  be  rightc. 

Psal.yi.  Si.  not  leave  iilm,  nurc.  him  when  judged 
ti4.  'Ji.  uiid  they  c.  the  innocent  blood 
lO'.l.  31.  to  .save  hioi  from  those  that  c.  his  soul 

Froo.  1"2.  2.  a  man  of  wicked  devices  will  he  c. 

ysa.5J.U.  L.  will  help  me,  who  is  he  that  shall  c.  ine? 
.M.  17.  every  tongue  that  shall  rise  ag.  thee  shall  c. 

Mat.  12.  41.  and  shall  c.  it  because,  hake  1 1,  '.i'2. 
42.  queen  of  the  south  shall  rise  u)i  in  judgment 
anil  c.  It,  I.vike  11.  31. 
20.  18.  they  shall  c.  him  to  death,  Mark  10.  33. 

I^uke  t>.  37.  c.  not,  and  ye  sliall  not  be  condemned 

John  3.  17.  God  sent  not  his  Son  lo  c.  the  world 
d.  II.  neither  do  I  c.  thee,  go  and  sin  no  more 

2  Cor.  7.  3.  I  speak  not  this  to  c.  you,  for  I  said 

1  .lokn  3.  20.  if  our  heart  c.  us,  God  is  greater  than 

21.  if  our  heart  c.  us  not,  then  have  we  confidence 
CO.NUKMNKI). 

2  CAron.  36. 3.  andc.  the  land  in  100  talents  of  silver 
Job  32.  3.  they  found  no  answer,  yet  had  c.  Job 
Psal.  10!).  7.  when  he  shall  be  judged,  let  him  bee. 
j?/nc'«2. 8.  drink  the  wine  of  c.  in  house  of  theirgod 
JUal.  12.  7.  ye  would  not  have  c.  the  guiltless 

37.  and  by  ihy  words  thou  shall  be  c. 
27.  3.  Judas,  when  he  saw  that  he  was  c.  repented 

.Mark  14.  IJ4.  they  all  c.  hiin  to  be  guiliy  of  death 

J.H.ke  24.  20.  how  the  rulers  delivered  him  to  be  c. 

John  3. 18.  he  that  believeth  on  him  is  nut  c.  bul  he 
that  believeth  not  isc.already, because  noibelieved 
8.  10.  Jesus  said,  woman,  hath  no  man  c.  thee? 

Rrm.  8. 3.  sending  his  Son,  fur  sin  c.  sin  in  the  flesh 

1  Cor.  11.  32.  we  should  not  be  c.  with  the  world 
Tit.  2.  8.  sinC'Tily,  sound  speech  thai  cannot  be  c. 

3.  11.  siniietli,  being  c.  of  himself  is  subverted 
Ueb.  11.  7.  an  ark,  by  tlie  which  he  c.  the  world 
Jam.  5.  6.  ye  have  c.  and  killed  just,  not  resist  you 
9.  judge  not  one  another,  brethren,  lest  ye  be  c. 

2  Ftt.  2.  6.  (Jod  c.  them  with  an  overthrow 

CO.XUKM.NEST,  ETH,  ING. 
1  /Tinw-sS.  32.  and  judge  thy  servants  c.  the  wicked 
Job  15.  ti.  thine  own  mouth  c.  thee,  and  nut  I 
Prov.  17.15.  he  that  c.tlie  just, is  abomination  toLd. 
^cls  13.  27.  they  have  fulfilled  them  in  e.  him 
Roia.  2.1.  wherein  judgest  another  thou  c.  thyself 
8.  34.  it  is  God  that  justirieih,  who  is  he  that  c.J 
14.  22.  thalc.  not  himself  in  that  thing  heallowelh 

CONDESCEND. 

Rom.  12. 16.  not  high  things,  but  e.  to  men  of  low 

CONDI  riON,  S. 

1  Sam. 11. 2.  on  thisc.  I  will  make  a  coven,  with  you 
Dan.  11.  t  17.  set  his  face  to  enter  with  equal  c. 
Liuke  14.  32.  he  sendeth  and  desircth  c.  of  peace 

CONDUCT,  ED. 

2  Sam.19.15.  Judali  came  to  e.  king  over  Jordan,  31. 
4(1.  all  the  people  of  Judah  c.  the  king  and  Israi  I 

.^ct.i  I7.15.they  ihatc.  I'aul  brought  him  to  .Athens 

1  Cor.  lli.  11.  butc.himforlh  in  peace  tocometo  me 

CONDUIT. 

3  /iTinirs  18. n.lhey  came  and  stood  bye.  ha.3C).  2. 
20.  20.  Hezi-kiah,  how  he  made  a  pool  and  a  c. 

/.'I0.7. :l.gu  forth  to  meet  Ahaz  at  the  end  of  thee. 
Kick. '31.  t4.  sent  out  here  to  the  trees  of  the  field 

CONFECTION. 
£zo(^.30.33.shaltinakea  e.  afier  art  of  apothecary 

CONL'ECTIONAKIES. 
I  Sam.  8.  13.  he  will  lake  your  daughters  to  be  c. 

CONFEDEKACY. 
Jsa.  8.  12.  say  ye  not,  a  c.  to  whom  people  say  a  c. 
Vbad.l.  all  men  of  Ihy  c.  brought  thee  to  the  border 

CONFEDERATE. 
Ocn.  14.  13.  and  these  were  e.  with  Ah'am 
Piial.  8.3.5.  have  consulted,  they  are  c.  against  thee 
Ilia.  7.  2.  it  was  told,  Svria  is  c.  with  Ephraim 

CONFERENCE. 
Oal.  2.  6.  for  they  in  e   nilded  nothing  to  me 

CONFERRED. 
1  Kins'  !•  7-  Adonijah  e.  with  Joah  and  Abiathnr 
jJrU'4.15.  they  c.  among  theni  what  do  to  these  men 
25.  12.  Festus,  when  he  had  e.  with  the  counsel 
Oal.l.H).  iinmediatelv  I  e.  not  with  llehli  and  blood 

C(3nfi;ss 

Bignifies,  [1]  Piihliclij  to  own  and  acknowledsre. 
as  Aiji  own:  Thu.t  Christ  will  confess  the  faith- 
ful in  thcdny  of  judgment,  Luke  12.8.  [2]  To 
oien  and  profess  the  truths  of  Christ,  and  to 
obey  his  commandments,  and  that  in  spile  of  all 
opposition  and  danptr  from  enemies.  Mat.  10, 
32,  Whosoever  ahull  confess  me  before  men 
[3]  To  litter,  or  speak  forth  the  praises  of  Ood, 
or  to  eive  him  thanks,  Heb.  13.  t  I5,  Offer  to 
God  the  fruit  of  your  lips,  confssing  liis  name  ; 
that  is,  acknowledge  his  benefits,  and  irive  him 
thanks  for  them.  [4)  To  own,  and  lay  open  our 
sins  and  offences,  either  unto  f/od  in  private,  or 
public  confessions;  or  to  our  neiffhbourwho  mire 
have  iori>ns[id:oT  tosomegodlit persons, alicho^e 
hands  we  look  to  receive  comfort  and  spiritual 
1» 


CON 

instruction;  or  to  the  whole  eongreffation,  when 
our  fault  is  public,  Fsal.  32.  5.  MaL3.  (i.  Jam. 
5.  lU.  1  John  1.  9.  [5]  To  acknowledge  a  crime 
before  a  judge^  Josh.  7.  19.  [tij  To  own  and 
profess  the  gospel  of  Christ,  and  pay  obedience 
to  It,  Luke  12.  8,  We  are  to  make  coiit'ossion, 

(1)  To  Ood,  whom  we haoe offended,  whokiio-Ms 
our  sins,  can  pardon  us,  or  else  will  punish  us 
if  we  refuse  to  confess,  I'tal.  32.  5.  I'rov.  28. 13. 

(2)  'J\>  our  neighbour  hart  by  us,  who  otherwise 
complaining  to  (rod,  shall  have  him  to  revenge 
his  quarrel;  and  thus  man  can  and  ought  to  for- 
give so  much  of  the  offence  as  is  done  against 
him,  if  his  adocrsary  repent  and  confess,  and 
seek  pardon,  Mat.  5.  2;),  24.  Luke  17.  4.  (3) 
To  the  mi.ii.'iter  of  (iod,  or  to  some  godly  per- 
son,  that  pitying  the  sinner's  case,  can  and 
will  give  him  spiritual  advice  against  his  sin, 
and  pray  for  him.  Job  33.  2;l. 

Confession  to  God  is  made  by  a  man  for  himself, 
Psal.  32.  5.     ^  father  for  his   children,  J.ib 
1.  5.     Jl  magistrate  for  those  under  his  autho- 
rity, Neh.  1.  6.     Jind  must  be  with  knowledge 
of  sin,  Jer.  2.  23.    Consideration  of  that  which 
is  dune,  Jer.  8.  6.  Humiliation,  2  Chron.  7.  14. 
•Accepting  of  punishment  for  sin.  Lev.  26.  41. 
./?  particularizing  of  sins.  Lev.  5.  5.    1  Sam. 
12.19.    f  raj^er,  Exod.  32.  32.    Jind  forsaking 
of  sin,  Prov.  28.  13. 
Z^eo.5.5.  he  shall  e.  that  he  hath  sinned  in  that  thing 
16.21.  Aaron  shall  e.  over  live  goat  all  the  iniquit. 
26.  40.  if  they  shall  c.  their  iniquity  and  fathers' 
JVu;n.  5.  7.  they  shall  c.  their  sins  they  have  done 
1  A'(n»-s8.33.  Isr.  e.  thy  name  and  pray,  2  CAr.6.  24. 
;<5.  c.  thy  name  and  turn  from  sin,  2  Chron.  6. 26. 
JVrA.  1.  6.  and  e.  the  sins  of  the  children  of  Israel 
.fob  40.  14.  I  will  c.  that  thy  hand  can  save  thee 
Psal.  18.  t  49.  I  will  c.  to  thee  among  the  heathen 
32.5. 1  said,  I  will  c.  mytransgressions  to  theLord 
Mat.  10. 32.  whosoever  shall  e.  me  before  men,  him 
will  I  c.  before  my  Father  in  heaven,  /^uke  12.  8. 
John  9.  22.  if  any  mandid  c.  that  he  was  Christ 

12.42.rulersdid  note,  him,  lest  be  putoutofsynag. 

./lcts'2'.i.  S.sayno  resurrection,  bul  Pharisees  c.both 

24.  14.  this  I  c.  that  after  the  way  they  call  heresy 

Horn.  10.  9.  shall  e.  with  thy  mouth  the  Lord  Jesus 

14. 11.  every  knee  bow,  every  tongue  shall  r.  to  G. 

15.  9. 1  will  c.  to  thee  among  the  Gentiles  and  sing 

Phil.  2.  11.  that  every  tongue  shall  c.  Jesus  w  Lord 

./am.  5.  16.  e.  your  faults  one  to  another  and  pray 

1  John  1.9.  if  wee.  ouijsins,  he  is  faithful  to  forgive 

4.  15.  whoso  shall  c.  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God 

'iJohnl.  whoe.  not  that  Jesus  Chr.  is  come  in  Hesh 

/ieu.3.  5.  but  I  will  c.  his  name  before  my  Father 

CONFESSED,  ETH,  ING. 
F.:ra  10. 1.  when  Ezra  had  :.  weeping  and  casting 
jV«/i.9.  2.  fsr. stood  and  c.  theirsins,  a  fourth  part  c. 
Proo.^iS.  13.  but  whoso e.  and  forsakeih  them  shall 
/>«/!.  9. 20.  while  e.  my  sin  and  the  sin  of  my  people 
jl/ii«.3.6.were  baptized  of  him  in  Jordan, e.tlieir  sins 
.liihn  1.  20.  John  c.  ihit  I  am  not  the  Christ 
.^c««19.18.manycr.meand  e. and  shewed  theirdeeds 
//eA.lI.  13.  these  e.that  they  were  strangers  on  earth 

13.  t  15.  the  fruit  of  our  lips,  c.  to  his  name 

1  ./«A7i4.2.  every  sjiirit  that  c.Christis  come  in  flesh 
S.every  spirit  that  c.not  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come 
CONFESSION. 
.fish.  7.  19.  give  glory  to  God  and  make  do  him 
i  CAr.30.22. otferin:;  peacc-otferings  and  making  c. 
F.ira  10.  II.  now  therefore  makec.  to  ihe  Ld.  (Jod 
Dan.  9.  4. 1  prayed  to  the  Ld.  my  God  and  made  c. 
lioin.  10.  10.  witli  the  iiioulh  c.  is  made  to  salvation 

1  7'im.  6.  13.  who  before  Pilate  w  itnessed  a  good  c. 

CONFIDENCE 

Signifies,  [1]  .1s.^urance,  2  Cor.  8.  22.  [2]  liold- 
ness,or  covvagenusness.  Acts  28.  31.  [3]  Trust, 
or  hope.  Job  4.  6.  [4]  7'Aat  icherein  one  trii.it- 
elh,  Jer.  48.  13.  [5]  Succour,  or  help,  2  Kings 
18.  19.  [6]  Safety,  or  security,  Ez-k.  28.  26. 
[7]  Ji  due  resolution,  2  Cor.  10.  2.  [8]  .'i  free 
and  hold  profession  of  Christ  and  the  gospel, 
Jleh.  10.  35.  [9]  .«  well-grounded  persuasion 
of  audience  and  acceptance,  Eph.  3.  12. 

■fiidg.  9.26.  men  of  Sheehem  put  their  e.  in  Gaal 

2  Kings  18. 19.  thus  sail  h  the  groat  king  of  .Assyria 

what  e.  is  this  wherein  Ihou  trusti'sl  ?  fsa.  30. 4. 
.fob  4.  0.  is  this  not  thy  fear,  thy  c.  thy  hopel 
18.  14.  his  c.  shall  be  rooted  out  of  his  lahcrnacle 
31.  24.  if  I  linvi!  sajd  In  fine  gidd,  Ihou  art  my  c. 
Psal.  65.  5.  who  art  the  e.  of  all  ends  of  the  earth 
118.  8,  better  to  trust  in  Ld.  than  lo  put  e.in  man 
9.  belter  to  trust  in  Loid  than  lo  put  c.  in  princes 
Prov.:i.  26.  for  Ld.  shall  be  thy  c.  and  keep  thy  fool 

14.  26.  in  the  fear  of  iho  Ijord  is  strong  e. 

21.  22.  casteth  down  the  stringlh  of  the  c.  thereof 
2.').  19.  c.  in  an  unfailh.  man  is  like  a  broken  lonlh 
fsa.  30.  15.  in  quietn.  and  r.  shall  be  voiir  sirengtii 
./rr.  4H.  13.  ns  isr.  wiis  nshnniiMl  of  llrih  el  iheirr 
f;irA.'28.2().  phiiit  vinuya.  Ihi-y  sliiill  dwell  willi  c. 
29.  16.  Egypt  vhall  be  no  mure  llie  c.  of  h.  of  lir. 


CON 

^le.  7.  5.  trust  not  a  friend,  put  ye  not  c.  in  aguida 
.'lets  28.  31.  preaching  the  kiiigd.  of  G.  wnli  all  e. 
2  Cor.  I.  15.  in  this  c.  I  was  minded  lo  come  before 
2.  3.  having  c.  in  you  all,  that  my  joy  is  joy  of  you 

7.  10.  1  rejoice  that  1  have  e.  in  you  in  all  things 

8.  22.  diligent  on  Ihe  great  c.  which  I  have  in  you 

10.  2.  with  that  c.  wherewith  I  think  to  be  hold 

11.  17.  but  as  it  were  foolishly  in  tiiia  c.  of  boast. 
(Jal.  5.  10.  I  have  c.  in  you  through  the  Lord 
F.ph.  3. 12.  in  whom  access  with  c.  by  faiih  in  him 
Phil.  1.  2.'>.'having  this  e.  I  shall  abide  with  you  all 

3. 3.  we  rejoice  in  Chr.  Jes'.  and  have  no  c.  in  flesh 
4. though  1  might  also  have  e.in  flesh,  if  any  other 

27'Aess.3.  4.  we  have  e.  in  the  Lord  touching  you 

/'Aiicm. 21. having  e.in  thy  obedience,!  wrote  toyou 

Hrb.  3.  6.  if  we  hold  fast  the  c.  and  hope  lo  the  end 

14.  if  we  hold  beginning  of  our  c.  stedfasl  to  end 

10.  35.  casl  not  away  therefore  your  c  which  hath 

11.  t  I.  faith  is  the  c.  of  things  hoped  fur 

1  ./ohn2.  28.  when  he  shall  appear,  we  may  havee. 
3.21.  if  heart  condemn  not,  then  havee.  toward  G. 
5.  14.  and  this  is  the  e.  that  we  have  in  him 

CONFIDENCES. 
.hr.  2.37.  the  Lord  liiilh  rejected  thy  e.  not  prosper 

CONFIDENT. 
P.sar27.3. though  war  should  rise,in  this  will  I  be  e. 
Pruv.  14.  10.  but  the  fowl  rageth  and  is  c. 
/ii/m.2.19.ari  c.thou  Ihyselfarlaguide  of  the  blind 

2  Cor.  .5.  6.  therefore  we  are  always  c.  knowing 
8.  we  are  e.  willing  rather  to  be  absent  from  body 

9. 4.  we  should  be  ashamed  in  this  same  e.  boasting 
/'AiV. 1.6. being  e. of  this  very  thing,  who  hath  begun 

14.  many  of  the  brethren  waving  e.  by  my  bunds 
CONFIDENTLY. 
1  fi'/nn'sl.  125.  Judah  and  Isr.  dwell  c.  under  his  vine 
Psal.  16.  t  9.  my  flesh  shall  ilwell  c.  in  hope 
F.zek.  38.  t  H-  I  will  go  to  them  that  dwell  c. 
39. 1 6.  I  will  send  a  fire  among  them  that  dwell  c. 
/-uAe22.59.anotliere.aUirme(l, this  fellow  was  with 

CONFIRMATION. 
Phil.  1.  7.  in  defence  and  c.  of  the  gospel  partakers 
Hcb.G.  16.  an  oath  of  e.  is  to  them  an  end  of  all  stiifo 

CONFIRM 
Signifies,  [1]  To  strengthen,  settle,  or  establish, 
1  Chron.  14.  2.  Acts  14.  22.  [2]  To  give  new  as- 
surance of  the  truth  and  certainty  of  any  thimr, 
1  Kings  1.  14.  2Cor.  2.  8.  [3]  To  ratify,  or 
make  sure,  Ruth  4.  7.  [4]  To  refresh.  Psalm 
68.  9.  [5]  To  continue  to  perform,  Deut.  27. 
26.  [6]  To  fulfil,  accomplish,  or  make  good, 
Rom.  15.  8,  To  confirm  the  promises  made  to 
the  fathers.  To  make  it  evidently  appear  unto 
men,  that  God  who  promised  to  send  his  Son 
unto  the  Jews,  was  faithful  and  true,  because 
in  the  fulness  of  time  he  did  send  him.  The 
promises  of  God  are  in  themselves  most  firm 
and  stable,  as  heaven  and  earth,  so  they  are 
immoveable  and  constant :  they  are  said  to  be 
confirmed  in  respect  of  vim,  whose  faith  being 
weak  and  full  of  doubts,  had  need  to  be  helped 
and  strengthened;  not  God's  promises,  but 
men's  belief  is  feeble. 
Confirmation  is  a  work  of  the  Spirit  of  Ood, 
strengthening  faint  and  weak  minds  in  faith 
and  obedience  unto  the  end,  1  Pet.  5.  10,  The 
God  of  all  grace  confirm  and  strengthen  you. 
Oodconfirmelh  as  the  author  or  efficient  cause 
of  strength;  the  tpord,  sacraments,  and  minis- 
ters, ennfirm  as  instruments  or  helps,  Luke  22. 
32,  When  converted,  strengthen  thy  brethren. 
.hid  a  man  confirms  himself  when  he  takes 
heart  and  courage  to  himself  in  a  good  cau.ie, 
upon  hope  and  confidence  of  Ood's  help,  I  Cor. 
l.i.  13.  But  David  encouriiged  himself  in  the 
Lord  his  God,  1  .Sam.  30.  6. 
Ruth  4.  ".this  WHS  the  manner  for  lo  e.  all  thinffs 

1  Kings  1.  14.  I  will  come  in  alter  and  c.  thy  words 

2  Kini'S  15.  19.  to  c.  Ihe  kingdom  in  his  hand 
/^.«rA.  9. 29.  Esih.  wrote  toe.  second  letter  of  Purim 

31.  to  c.  ilicse  days  of  Piirim  in  their  times 
Psal.  68.  9.  didst  e.  thine  inheritance  when  wi'arr 
/.<(!. 35. 3. strengthen  weak  hands  and  c.  feulile  knees 
F.zek.  13.  6.  to  hope  that  they  would  c.  the  worn 
Dan.  9.  27.  he  shall  e.  Ihe  covenant  for  one  week 
II.  I.  even  I  stood  to  c.  and  to  strengthen  him 
Rom.  15.  8.  lo  e.  Ihe  promises  made  lo  the  fathers 

1  Cor.  1.  S.  Hho  shall  also  e.  you  to  the  end 

2  Cor.  2.  t^.  Ihalyo  would  e.  ynurlove  toward  him 

CONFIRMED. 
iSam.  7.  24.  thou  host  e.  to  thyself  Ihy  people  Im 
2  Kings  M,5.assoon  ns  the  kingdom  was  <-.  iinslew 
I  Chron.  14.  2.  Lord  had  e.  him  king  over  Israel 

16.  17.  nil. I  bathe.  Ihe  same  to  Jacob,  Ps.  105.  10. 
2CArnii.  25.  f  3.  when  the  kintjdoni  w»<  r.  he  <lcw 
F.sth.  9.  :«.  Esther  e.  these  niatt.'rs  of  Poiim 
/)ii«.9.12.  hathe.  his  words  wliioli  he  spuke  ne.  u» 
.lets  15.  32.  exhorted  Ihe  hroihren  ami  c.  them 
1  t'lir.  1.  6.  Ihe  testimony  of  Chris'  was  r.  m  you 
Got.  3.  15.  yet  if  it  be  e.  no  iiinn  di-anniill»lli  it 
17.  tiie  covenant  that  was  c.  before  uf  God 


CON 

Meb.  2.  3.  wdi  c.  lo  ue  by  them  that  heard  him 

6. 17.  irorQulability  of  counsel,  he  c.  it  by  an  oath 

CONFIRMETH,  ING. 

JVum.  30  14.  bonds  which  are  on  her,  he  c.  them 

iJeut.  27. 2tj.  cursed  be  he  that  c.  not  all  the  words 

Isa.  44.  26.  that  c.  ihe  word  of  his  servant 

Mark  16.20.  preached,  c.  word  with  signs  following 

Sets  14.22.  c.  souls  of  the  disciples,  exliorting  them 

15.41.  went  thro'  Syria  aiidCilicia  c.  the  churches 

CONFISCATION. 
Ezra  7.26.  lei  judgin.  be  executed  to  c.  or  imprison. 

CONFLICT. 
PsaZ.  39.tlO.  I  am  consumed  by  thee,  of  thine  hand 
PkH.  i.  30.  having  the  same  c.  which  ye  saw  in  me 
C^i.'l.  1.  that  ye  knew  what  great  c.  1  have  for  you 

CONFOR.VIABLE. 
PAi/.S.iO.may  know  him, being  made  c.to  his  death 

CONFORMED, 
iiom.  8.29.  predestinate  to  bee.  to  image  of  his  Son 
12.  2.  be  not  c.to  this  world,  but  be  ye  transformed 
CONFOUND 
Signifies,  [1]  To  disorder^  mingle,  or  jumble  to- 
gether. Genesis  11.  7.  [2]  To  Oaffie,  or  confute, 
Acts  9.  22.     [:)]  To  be  ashamed  by  reason  of 
some  disappointment.  Job  6.  20.  [4J  To  destroy, 
or  break  in  pieces]  Jerem.  1.  17.    Zech.  10.  o. 
[5]  'Jo  be  amazed,  astonished,  or  troubled  in 
mind.  Acts  2.  6. 
It  is  said,  1  Pet.  2.  6,  He  that  believeth  shall  not 
be  C(uifouiided;  that  is,  he  shall  not  be  disap- 
pointed of  his  expectation  of  salvation ;    the 
scripture  referred  to  by  the  apostle  js, Isa. 23.16, 
Ue  that  believeth  shall  not  make  haste:  that  is, 
ha  shall  not  hastily  and  greedily  catch  at  any 
way  of  escaping  his  danger,  whether  it  be  right 
or  wrong:  but  shall  patiently  wait  upon  God 
for  deliverance  and  saloation  in  his  way. 
lien.  1 1.  7.  let  us  go  down  and  c.  their  language,  9. 
Jir.l.yi.  be  not  dismayed,  lest  I  c.  thee  bel'ore  them 
lCor.l.27.to  c.  the  wise,lo  c.  things  that  are  mighty 

CONFOUNDED. 
2  Kings  19.  2(5.  the  inhabitants  were  c.  [sa.  37.  27. 
Job  6.  20.  they  were  c.  because  they  had  hoped 
Fsal.  35.  4.  let  them  be  c.  that  seek  after  my  soul 
69.6.  let  not  those  that  seek  thee  be  c.  for  my  sake 
71.13.let  them  be  c.tliat  are  adversaries  to  my  soul 

24.  for  they  are  c.  that  seek  my  hurt 
83.  17.  let  them  be  c-  and  troubled  for  ever 
97.  7.  c.  be  all  they  that  serve  graven  images 
129.5.  let  ihem  all  be  c.  turned  back  that  hate  Zion 
Isa.  1.29.shall  bee.  for  gardens  that  ye  have  chosen 
■    19.  9.  they  that  weave  net-works  shall  be  c. 
37.  27.  their  inhabitants  were  dismayed  and  c. 
Jer.  9.19.greatly  c.  because  we  have  forsaken  land 
10.  14.  every  founder  is  c.  by  graven  image,  51.  17. 
17.  18.  let  ihem  be  c.  that  persecute  me,  let  not  me 
4').  24.  daughter  of  Egypt  c.  ||  48.  20.  Moab  is  c. 
41).  23.  Hamalh  is  c.  ||  50. 2.  Babylon  taken,  Bel  c. 

50.  12.  your  mother  shall  be  sore  c.  be  ashamed 

51.  47.  Babylon,  her  whole  land  shall  be  c. 

51.  we  are  c.  because  we  have  heard  reproach 
F.-.fk  10.  52.  be  thou  c.  and  bear  thy  shame,  54.  63. 
Mic.  7.  16.  nations  shall  sl'O  and  be  c.  at  their  might 
7.cch.  10.  5.  and  the  riders  on  horses  shall  be  e. 
Jicts  2.  6.  the  multitude  came  together  and  were  c. 

9.  22.  Saul  c.  the  Jews  who  dwelt  at  Damascus 

Jl.ihamed  and  CONFOUNDED. 
P.<'7i.40.14.a.yAa.aa(i  c.tliat  seek  after  my  soul,  70.2. 
/.>'i.24.23.the  moon  shall  be  c.  anrf  the  sun  ashamed 

41.11.  incensed  against  thee  shall  be  asham.  andc. 

4.>.16.  idol  makers  shall  hsasha.  andc.  all  of  them 

51.4.  thou  slialt  not  be  ashamed,  neither  be  thou  c. 
Jrr.  14.  3.  nobles  and  little  ones  were  asham.  andc. 

1.5.9.that  halh  born  seven  hath  been  asham.  andc. 

22.  22.  surely  then  shall  thou  be  ashamed  and  c. 

31.  19. 1  was  asham.  yea  and  c.  because  I  did  bear 
Ezcly  3fi.32.  be  ashamed  andc.  for  your  own  ways 
•W/c.3.7.then  shall  sei^rsbe  ashamed  anti diviners  c. 

JTot  CONFOUNDED. 
Psal.  22  5.  our  fathers  trusted,  and  were  not  c. 
Isa.  45.  17.  not  ashamed  nor  c.  world  wiihout  end 

50.  7.  God  will  help,  therefore  shall  I  not  be  e. 
1  Pet. 2. 6.  he  that  bi-lievelh  on  him  shall  not  be  c. 

CONFUSED. 
Isa.  9.  5.  for  every  battle  of  warrior  is  with  e.  noise 
^cts  19.  32.  some  cried,  for  the  assembly  was  c. 

CONFUSION. 
Gen.  11.  t  9.  therefore  is  the  name  of  it  called  e. 
I.rr.  18.  23.  a  beast  to  lie  down  thereto,  it  is  e. 

20.12.siirely  be  put  to  death,  they  have  wrought  c. 
1  Sam.  20.  30.  hast  chosen  David  to  thy  c.  and  to  c. 
iC:rfi9.7.heen  dflivered  to  c.  of  face,  as  at  this  ilay 

Job  10.  15.  I  am  full  of  c.  therefore  see  mine  afllict. 
P.'.  3.5.  4  let  them  be  brought  to  c.  devise  my  hurt 

41.  15.  my  c.  is  continually  before  me  and  shame 

TO.  2.  IpI  them  he  put  to  c.  that  desire  my  hurt 

71.  1.  O  liOrd,  let  mo  never  be  put  to  e. 

1(19.  20.  let  them  cover  thems.  with  their  own  c. 
I."i.  21.  10.  the  city  of  c.  is  broken  down 

30. 3.  and  the  trust  in  the  shadow  of  Egypt  your  c. 
93 


CON 

Isa.  34. 11.  he  shall  stretch  out  upon  it  the  line  of  c. 

41.  29.  their  molten  images  are  wind  and  c. 

45.  16.  makers  of  idols  shall  go  to  c.  together 

61.  7.  for  e.  they  shall  rejoice  in  their  portion 
Jer.  3.  25.  we  lie  in  shame  and  our  c.  coverelh  us 

7.19.do  they  not  provoke  thems.  to  e.of  their  faces 

20. 11.  their  everlasting  c.  shall  never  be  forgotten 
Dan.  9.  7.  but  to  us  belongeth  c.  effaces,  8. 
Jicts  19.  29.  Vlie  whole  city  was  filled  with  c. 

1  Cor.  14.  33.  for  God  is  not  author  of  e.  but  peace 
Jam.  3. 10.  for  whore  envying  and  strife  is,  there  is  c. 

CONGEALED. 
Exod.  15.  8.  the  depths  were  e.  in  heart  of  the  sea 

CONGRATULATE. 
1  Chron.  18. 10.  to  inquire  of  his  welfare  and  c.  him 

CONGREGATION. 
Lev.  4.  21.  it  is  a  sin-offering  for  the  c. 
10. 17.  God  hath  given  it  you  to  bear  iniquity  of  c. 
16.  33.  he  shall  make  an  atonement  for  all  the  c. 
JVum.  1.  16.  these  were  the  renowned  of  the  c. 
10.  7.  but  when  c.  is  to  be  gathered  you  shall  blow 
14.  27.  how  long  shall  I  bear  with  this  evil  c? 
1.5.  15.  one  ordinance  shall  be  for  e.  and  stranger 
16.21.separate  yourselves  from  e.that  I  may  cons. 
45  get  you  up  from  among  this  e.that  I  may  cons. 
47.  Aaron  took  and  ran  into  the  midst  of  the  e. 
19. 20.  that  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from  among  the  e. 
27.  16.  let  the  Lord  set  a  man  over  the  e. 

35. 12.  cities  of  refuge  that  manslayer  die  not,  till 
he  stand  before  the  e.  for  judgment.  Josh.  20. 6. 

Josh.  9.  27.  made  them  drawers  of  water  for  the  e. 
>/urf^.20.1.thee.was  gathered  asone  man  from  Dan 

21.  5.  that  came  not  up  with  the  c.  to  the  Lord 

1  Kings  12.  20.  they  sent  and  called  Jerob.  to  the  e. 

2  Chr.  30.  24.  Hezekiah  did  give  to  c.  1000  bullocks 
Ezra  10.  8.  and  himself  separated  from  the  c. 
J^ch.  13. 1.  the  Moabite  should  not  come  into  the  c. 
.Job  15. 34.  for  the  c.  of  hypocrites  shall  be  desolate 

30.  28.  I  stood  up  and  cried  in  the  e. 
Psal.  1.  5.  nor  sinners  in  the  c.  of  the  righteous 

22.  22.  in  the  midst  of  the  c.  will  I  praise  thee 

26.  5.  I  have  hated  the  c.  of  evil  doers 

58.  1.  do  ye  indeed  speak  righteousness,  O  e.? 
74.2.  remember  thy  e.  thou  hast  purchased  of  old 

19.  forget  not  the  e.  of  thy  poor  for  ever 
75.  2.  when  I  receive  ihec.  1  will  judge  uprightly 
82.  1.  God  standeth  in  the  e.  of  the  mighty 
89.  5.  thy  faithfulness  also  in  the  e.  of  the  saints 
107.  32.  let  them  exalt  him  also  in  e.  of  the  people 
111.  1.  I  will  praise  the  Ld.  in  the  assembly  and  c. 
Prov.  5.  14.  1  was  almost  in  all  evil  in  midst  of  c. 

21.16.  the  men  shall  remain  in  the  c.  of  the  dead 
fsa.  14.  13.  I  will  sit  upon  the  mount  of  the  c. 
Jer.  6.  18.  and  know,  O  e.  what  is  among  them 

30.  20.  their  c.  shall  be  established  before  me 
/^am.  1.  10.  that  they  should  not  enter  into  ihy  c. 
Has.  7.12. 1  will  chastise  them  as  their  c.  hath  heard 
.foel  2.  16.  gather  the  people,  sanctify  the  c. 
jicls  13.  43.  now  when  the  c.  was  broken  up 

Jill  the  CONGREGATION. 
Lev.8. 3.  gather  all  the  c.  together  to  door  of  tabern. 

16.  17.  make  atonement  for  all  the  c.  of  Israel 

24.  14.  let  all  the  c.  stone  him,  16.  M'um.  15.  3.5. 
JVum.  14.  10.  all  thee,  bade  stone  them  with  stones 

16.  3.  seeing  all  the  c.  are  holy,  every  one  of  Ihem 
22.  shall  one  sin,  wilt  thou  be  wroth  with  all  c? 

20.  27.  they  went  up  in  sight  of  aH  the  c.  25.  6. 

27.  19.  set  him  before  Eleazar  and  all  the  c.  22. 
.Josh.  8.  35.  which  .loshua  read  not  before  all  the  c. 

9.  18.  all  the  c.  murmured  against  the  princes 
22.  20.  wrath  fell  on  all  the  c.  of  Israel 
1  KingsS.  14.  the  king  blessed  all  the  c.  of  ler.  55. 

1  Chron.  29.  20.  all  the  c.  blessed  the  Lord  God 

2  Chron.2'i.3.all  the  c.  made  a.  covenant  with  the  k. 
29.  28.  all  the  c.  worshipped  and  the  singers  sang 

JVih.  5. 13.  all  the  c.  said,  amen,  and  praised  the  L. 
8. 17.  all  the  c.  that  were  come  again  made  booths 

Elders  of  the  CONGREGATION. 

Lev.  4.  15.  elders  of  the  c.  shall  lay  their  hands 

./ii(/«'.21.16.eW.o/e.said,howshallwedo  for  wives? 

Great  CONGREGATION. 

1  Kings  8.G5.  at  that  time  Solomon  held  a  feast,  all 

Israel  with  him,  a  create.  2  CAro7i.  7. 8.  |  .30.  13. 
Ezra  10.1. assembled  to  him  out  of  Israel  a  great  c. 
P.S(jZ.22.25.my  praise  shall  be  of  thee  in  tlie^reat  c. 
35.  18. 1  will  give  thfe  thanks  in  the  great  c. 
40.9.1  have  preached  righteousness  in  the  great  c. 
10.  I  have  not  concealwl  thy  truth  from  great  c. 
CONGREGATION  «/  Israel. 
Exod.  12. 6.  e.  of  Israel  shall  kill  it  in  the  evening 
10.  that  soul  shall  he  cut  ofT  from  the  c.  of  Israel 
47.  all  (he  c.  of  Israel  shall  keep  the  passover 
/,eD.4.13.if  whole  c.n//.jrafZ  sin  through  ignorance 
.Vuin.16.9.  Lord  hath  separated  you  from  c.  of  Isr. 

2  Chr.  5.  6.  fiolom.  and  c.  of  Israel  sacrificed  sheep 
24.  6.  according  to  thecomtiiandmentof  c.  of  Isr. 

CO.NGREGATION  of  the  Lord. 
JVum. 16.3.  whylift  you  yourselves  above c.t)/(A«  /,. 

27. 17,  c.  of  L.  not  as  sheep  that  have  no  shepherd 
31.16.  was  a  plague  among  c.  of  the  L.Joth.^.Vi. 


CON 

Deut.  23. 1 .  shall  not  enter  into  the  c.  »fthe  L.  2, 3L 
1 CA?  on.  28. 8.  in  sight  of  c.  0/  /,.  keep  commandra. 
Mic.  2. 5.  that  shall  cast  a  cord  by  lot  in  the  c.  of  L 

Tabernacle  of  the  CONGREGATION. 

Exod.  29.  10.  bullock  brought  before  the  tab.  of  c 

44.  I  will  sanctify  t.  of  c.  ||  30. 26.  anoint  t.  of  c 

33.  7.  called  it  the  t.  of  c.  went  out  to  the  ^.  of  c 
Aet).3.8.kill  it  bef  t.  ofc.lX  ||  4.5.  bring  it  tot.  ofc 

10.  7.  ye  shall  not  go  out  from  the  door  of  t.  of  c 
9.  drink  no  wine  when  ye  go  into  the  tab.  of  c 

16. 16.  so  do  for  t.  of  c.  ||  33.  atonement  for  t.  ofc 
JVum.  4.  3.  work  of  the  t.  (/c.  23, 25, 30,  35, 39,  43 

8.  9.  thou  shalt  bring  the  Levites  bel'ore  tab.  of  c 

12.  4.  Lord  spake,  come  out  ye  three  to  tab.  ofc. 

14. 10.  glory  of  the  Lord  appeared  in  the  tab.  ofc. 

17.4.  lay  upin  t.  o/e.  ||  18.4.  keep  charge  oft.  o/c. 

25.6.  Israel  weeping  before  the  door  of  lab.  ofc. 
Deut.  31. 14.  present  yourselves  in  tabern.  of  the  o 
.fosh.  18. 1.  at  Shiloh,  and  set  up  the  tab.  of  c.  there 

1  Kings  8.  4.  they  brought  up  tab.  of  c.  2  Chr.  5.  5 

2  Chron.  1.  3.  for  there  was  the  tab.  ofc.  of  God 

See  Door. 
Tent  of  the  CONGREGATION. 
Ezod.  39.  .32.  t.  o/e.  finished  ||  40.  2.  set  up  t.  o/c. 
40.22.  table  in  t.  ofc.  ||  24.  candlestick  in  t.  o/c. 
26.  and  he  put  the  golden  altar  in  the  tent  of  c. 
.34.  then  a  cloud  covered  the  tent  of  the  c. 
35.  Moses  was  not  able  to  enter  into  the  lent  ofc 
fVhole  CONGREGATION. 
Exod.  16.  2.  the  whole  c.  of  Israel  murmured 
.Vum.  3.  7.  they  shall  keep  the  charge  of  the  w.  c 
Josh.  22. 18.  to-morrow  he  will  be  wroth  with  w.  r 
.Judg.H.Vi.  ihe  whole  c.senHo  speak  to  Benjamin 
2  Chron.  6.  3.  the  king  blessed  the  whole  c.  of  Israel 
Ezra  2.  64.  the  whole  c.  was  42,360.  JVeh.  7.  66. 
Prov.  26.  26.  wickedness  be  shewed  before  whole  c 

CONGREGATIONS. 
Psal.  26.  12.  in  the  e.  will  I  bless  tJie  Lord 
68.  26.  bless  ye  God  in  the  c.  even  the  Lord 
74.  4.  thine  enemies  roar  in  the  midst  of  thy  e. 

CONaUER.  • 
Rev.  6.  2.  he  went  forth  conquering  and  to  c. 

CONaUERORS. 
Rom.  8.  37.  in  all  these  things  we  are  more  than  e. 

CONSCIENCE 
Is  the  testimony  and  secret  judgment  of  the  soul, 
which  gives  its  approbation  to  actions  that  it 
thinksgood,or  reproachcsitsclf  wilhthose  which 
it  believes  to  be  evil:  Or, it  is  aparticular  know- 
ledge which  we  have  with  us  of  our  own  deeds, 
good  or  evil,  arising  out  of  the  general  know- 
ledge of  the  mind,  which  shews  us  what  is  good, 
or  evil;  and  Conscience  tells  us  when  we  have 
done  the  one,  or  the  other,  Rom.  2  15.  It  is 
either  (I)  Good,  1  Tim.  I.  5.  .^nd  this  is 
called,  [1]  A  conscience  void  of  offence  toward 
God  and  man;  which  does  not  accuse  a  person 
for  any  wilful  offence,-either  against  God,  or 
men.  Acts  24.  16.  [2]  A  conscience  bearing 
a  person  witness  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  is,  by 
the  conduct  and  guidance  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
who  cannot  lie,  Rom.  9.  1.  [3]  Pure  and  good, 
being  purified  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  Heb.  9. 
14.  1  Tim.  3.  9.  [4]  Purged  from  dead  works: 
that  is,  freed  from  that  sentence  of  deathwhich 
it  receives  by  reason  of  sin,  Heb.  9.  14.  [5]  .1 
conscience  not  troubled  with  a  sense  of  guilt, 
Heb.  10.  2.  [0]  .4  conscience  checking  and  con- 
demning persuns,  when  they  have  gone  against 
their  light, and  approving  and  j  ustifying  them, 
when  they  have  conformed  to  it,  Rom.  2.  15. 
Or,  (II)  "Evil,  Heb.  10.  22.  when  it  is  defiled 
with  vicious  habits,  so  that  it  does  not  perform 
its  office  aright.  It  is  called,  [1]  A  conscience 
seared  with  a  hot  iron ;  that  is,  quite  extinct 
and  cut  off,  or  utterly  hardened,  which  has  lost 
all  sense  and  feeling,  1  Tim.  4.  2.  [2]  A  de- 
filed conscience;  when  it  is  blinded  and  perocrl- 
rd,  so  that  it  cannot  judge  of  its  own  actions. 
Tit.  1.  15  This  evil  conscience  is  sometimes 
quiet,  sometimes  stirring  and  t7\>ubled:  ft  ac- 
cuseth  when  it  should  excuse,  and  excuseth 
when  it  should  accuse.  The  conscience  also 
even  of  the  best,  is  note  and  then  erroneous 
and  doubtful. 
The  apostle  Paul  permits  thefaitkfulto  go  and  eat 
at  the  houses  of  the  Gentiles,  if  they  were  invited 
thither,  and  to  partake  of  every  thing  which  wat 
served  up  at  their  tables,  without  making  parti' 
cular  inquiries  out  of  any  scrupulosity  of  con- 
«e(Vnee;aeking  no  questions  for  conscience' sake, 
1  Cor.  10. 27,  &c  But  if  any  one  says  to  them, 
this  has  been  sacrificed  to  idols;  do  not  eat  of  it, 
says  he,for  his  sake  who  gave  you  this  informa- 
tion; andlikeicisc  lest  ye  wound  not  your  own, 
but  another's  conscience:  Conscience,  I  say,  not 
thine  own,  but  of  the  other.  If  he  who  gives 
you  this  notice  is  aChr'\-<Uar\,andniitwithstand- 
ing  the  information  so  given  you  forbear  not  to 
eat,  he  will  condemn  you  in,  his  heart,  or  will 


CON 

eat  of  it  ajlcr  your  example  against  his  own 
conscience,  and  so  the  gniU  of  his  sin  will  be 
imputed  to  you.  If  he  is  a  Heallieii,  who  thus 
advertises  you,  and  he  sees  you  eat  of  it,  Ac  will 
conceive  a  contempt  for  you  and  your  rtligiun. 
Jn  another  place  the  same  .iposLle  reqatrcs 
Christians  to  be  submissive  to  secular  power, 
not  unly  lur  wrath,  but  iiUu  lui  CuiibCiciicu'  sake, 
Jiom.  13.  5.  that  is,  not  only  for  fear  of  punish- 
ment from  the  magistrate,  but  moretspecialli/ 
out  of  conscience  of  duty,  both  to  God,  ichu  is 
the  ordainer  of  hiiu  tu  that  special  ministry, 
under  himself;  and  tu  the  magistrate,  whose 
due  it  is,  in  respect  of  his  office. 

Reel.  10.  f2t).  cursu  not  llii;  king,  uo,  not  in  ihy  c. 

John  8. 9.  being  convicted  by  their  own  c.  went  out 

Sets  23.  1.  Paul  said,  I  have  lived  in  all  good  c. 
2i.  IG.  to  have  a  c.  void  of  olieiice  toward  God 
and  toward  men 

/Jcv7n.2.15.their  c. also  bearing  witness,andtliou2;hts 
y.  1.  my  c.  bearing  me  witness  in  the  Holy  Gliust 
13.  5.  ye  inusi  be  subject  also  for  c.  sake 

1  Cor.8. 7.  for  some  with  c.  of  the  idol  to  this  hour 

eat  it,  and  their  c.  being  weak  is  delilud 
10.  shall  not  the  weak  c.  be  emboldened  to  eat? 

12.  but  when  ye  wound  their  weak  c.  ye  sin 

Hgainst  Christ 
10.25.  that  eat,  asking  no  question  fore,  sake,  27. 

28.  eat  not,  for  his  sake  that  she  wed  it,  for  c.  sake 
2!K  c.  I  say,  not  thine  own,  but  of  the  oilier 

2  Cor.  1. 12.  our  rejoicing  is  this,  testimony  of  our  c. 
•'..  2.  coiiimendiiig  yourselveu  to  every  man's  c. 

1  77 ni.  1.  5.  out  of  a  jiure  heart,  and  of  a  good  c. 

19.  war  a  warfare,  holding  faith  and  a  good  c. 

3.  9.  holding  the  mystery  of  faith  in  a  pure  c. 

4.  2.  having  their  c.  seared  with  a  hot  iron 

2  Tim.  1.  3.  I  thank  God,  whom  I  serve  with  c. 
'J'it.  k  15.  but  even  their  mind  and  c.  is  defiled 
Ueb.  9.  y.  make  perfect,  as  pertaining  to  the  c. 

14.  purge  c.  from  dead  works  to  serve  living  God 
10.2.  worshippers  should  have  hadno  morec.of  sins 

22.  having  our  hearts  sprinkled  from  an  evil  c. 
13.  18.  we  trust  we  have  a  good  c.  in  all  things 

1  I'el.  2. 19.  if  a  man  for  c.  toward  God  endure  grief 
3.  IG.  having  a  good  c.  as  they  speak  evil  of  you 

21.  but  the  answer  of  a  good  c.  toward  God 

CONSCIENCES. 

2  Cor.  5.11.1  trust  also  are  made  manifest  in  your  c. 

CONSECRATE. 
I'o  consecrate,  i«  to  offer,  or  devote  any  thing  to 
(rod's  worship  and  service.  Jn  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, God  ordained  that  all  the  first-born,  both 
of  man  and  beast,  should  be  consecrated,  E.xod. 

13.  2,  12,  15.  JJe  consecrated  the  whole  race 
(./  Israel  particularly  to  his  worship,  Exod.  19. 
U.  ^'ind  likewise  he  devoted  the  tribe  of  Levi, 
and  the  family  o/ Aaron,  in  a  more  especial 
manner  to  his  service,  Num.  1.  49.  |  3.  12. 
Jiesides  these  consecrations ,whichG od  thus  or- 
dained by  his  own  alsuliite  aiidsovereign  autho- 
rity, there  were  others  which  depended  on  the 
good  will  of  men, ichu  consecrated  lhem.^rlves,ur 
the  things  belonging  to  them,  or  the  persons  de- 
pending on  them,  to  the  service  of  God,  for 
ever,  or  for  a  time  only,  llannali,  Samuel's 
mother,  offered  her  son  to  the  Kord,  to  serve 
all  his  life-time  in  the  tabernacle,  1  Sam.  1. 11, 

22.  Some  (if  the  Nazarites  consecrated  them- 
selves to  the  Lord  only  for  a  certain  lime. 
Num.  f).  13.  Jind  the  Hebrews  sometimes  de- 
voted their  fields,  or  cattle  to  the  Lord;  after 
jchicb  they  were  no  longer  in  their  power.  Lev. 
27.  28.  In  the  New  Testament  all  the  faithful 
earc  consecrated  to  the  Lord;  they  are  a  chosen 
generation,  a  myal  priesthood,  a  holy  nation, 
a  peculiar  people,  1  Pet.  2.  9. 

Kr«rf.28.3.c. Aaron  ||  41.  anointandc.  Aaron'ssons 

29.  9.  Ihou  shall  c.  Aaron  and  his  sons,  30.  30. 
35.  ?evon  days  shiili  Ihou  e.  Ihcin,  /.ev.  S.  33. 

'.fi.  29.  Moses  said,  c.  ynursclves  this  day  to  the  h. 
A'um.  0. 12.  slmll  c.  to  L.  the  days  of  his  separation 

1  Chron.  29.  5  to  c.  his  service  this  day  to  the  Lord 

2  Chron.  13.  9.  to  c.  himself  with  a  young  bullock 
7':f<-.43.2l).pnrgealtar,anil  they  shall  c.  themselves 
Mic.  4.  13.  I  will  c.  their  eiiin  to  L.  and  substance 

CONSEf  IIATKD. 
A'«J»i.3.3.  thcBonsof  Aaron,  whom  hoc.  to  minister 
Jnsh.O.  TO.  vessels  of  brass  and  iron,  are  c.  to  the  L. 
y»rf;.'.17.5.  Micnhc.  oi)eofhis»iin^rorliisprio»l,12. 

1  Kings  13.33.  whosoever  would,. Icrobonm  e.  him 

2  Chr.  29.  31.  now  yc  have  c.  yonrselvos  to  the  L. 
31.1).  the  lithe  of  holy  things  wliich  were  c.  to  L. 

F.zra  3.  5.  of  all  the  set  feiisis  of  Lord  that  witc  r. 
/W).".?-*  mnkolh  the  Son,  who  is  e.  for  evermore 
J.l.  20.  by  a  new  and  livinj  wnv  which  he  halli  c. 
CONSRCRATEn. 
2  CSr.  29.  33.  r.  Ihinffs  were  (100  oxen,  304">0  sheep 

CONSECRATION,  S. 
£r()(/.29. 92.  shall  tnkcofrnm,  for  it  is  n  ram  off 
34.  if  oiibIiI  of  the  fle.^h  of  the  c.  remain 


CON 

Lev.  7.  37.  tliis  is  the  law  of  the  e.  and  sacrifice 
C).  28.  iliey  were  c.  for  a  sweet  savour  to  the  LorrI 

31.  eat  it  with  the  bread  that  is  in  the  basket  of  c. 

33.  till  Uie  days  of  your  c.  be  at  an  end 
jYi/hi.G.  7.  because  the  c.  of  his  G.  is  upon  his  head 

U.  and  he  halii  defiled  the  head  of  his  c. 
_  CONSENT,  ED,  ING. 
Gen.  34.  15.  but  in  this  will  we  c.  unto  you 

23.  only  lefus  c.  to  them,  they  will  dwell  with  us 
Dcul.  13. 8.  shall  not  c.  to  him,  nor  hearken  to  him 
Juilg.ll.  17.  sent  to  king  of  Moiib,  but  would  not  c. 

1  Kings  20. 8.  elders  said,  hearken  not  to  liim,  nor  c. 

2  A'iH^'-sl2.8.  tliepriestsc.to  receive  no  more  mon. 
Psal.  50. 18.  when  suwest  a  thief,  thou  c.  w  itii  hmi 
Prov.  1.  10.  if  sinners  entice  thee,  e,  thou  nut 
/)an.l.\i.  so  he  do  them, and  proved  them  ten  days 
y>u/ic23.51.  the  same  had  not  c.  to  the  deed  of  them 
,Octs  8.1.  and  Saul  was  c.  to  Stephen's  death,  22. 20. 

18. 20.  desired  to  tarry  longer  with  them,  he  c.  not 
Horn.  1. 1  32.  not  only  do  the  same,  but  c.wiih  them 
7. 16.  what  I  would  not,  I  c.  to  law  that  it  is  good 
1  Tim.  G.  3.  if  any  man  c.  not  to  wholesome  words 

CON;W,NT. 
1  Sam.  11.  7.  and  they  came  out  with  one  c. 
PsaLKi.  5.  they  have  consulted  together  with  one  c. 
//os.6.9.  so  the  companyof  the  piiestimnrder  by  c. 
Zeph.  3.  9.  may  all  call  on  L.  to  serve  with  one  c. 
Luke  14.  18.  all  with  one  c.  began  to  make  e.\ciise 
1  C«j'.7.5.one  another,  except  it  be  with  c.for  a  time 

CONSIDER 
Signifies,  []]T«  think  of,  or  meditate  vpon,^Tim. 
2.  7.  [2]  To  vittc,  mark,  or  observe,  Lev.  13.  13. 
[3]  To  resolve,  or  determine,  Judg.  18.  14.    [4] 
To  wonder  and  admire  at.  Job  37.  14.    [5]  To 
pity,  comfort,  or  relieve,  Psal.  41.  1.  [G]  To  re- 
member, or  call  to  mind,  1  Sam.  12.  24. 
AcB.  13.  13.  then  the  priest  shall  c.  the  leprosy 
yjcut.  4. 3y.  know  this  day  and  c.  it  in  thine  heart 
32. 29. 0  that  they  were  wise  to  c.  their  latter  end 
.Tudg.  18. 14.  now  therefore  c.  what  ye  have  to  do 
1  .Sam.  12.  24.  c.  how  great  things  hath  done  for  you 
25.  17.  therefore  know  and  c.  what  thou  will  do 
Job  II.  11.  he  scelh  also,  will  he  not  then  c.  it? 
23.  15.  when  I  c.  I  am  afraid  of  him 
34.27.  turned  back  and  would  not  c.  of  his  ways 
37.14.  stand  still  and  c.  the  wond  rous  works  of  God 
Psal.  5.  1.  f.  my  meditation  ||  9.  13.  c.  my  trouble 

8.  3.  when  I  c.  the  heavens,  the  work  of  thy  fingers 

13.  3.  c.  and  hear,  45.  10.  ||  25.  19.  c.  my  enemies 
37. 10.  shall  diligently  c.  his  place,  it  shall  not  be 
48.  13.  c.  her  palaces,  that  ye  may  tell  it  to  gener. 
50.22.  now  c.  this,  yc  that  forget  God,  lest  [tear 
G4.  9.  for  they  shall  wisely  c.  of  his  doing 

119.  95.  but  1  will  c.  thy  testimonies 
153.  c.  mine  affliction,  and  deliver  me,  I  forget  not 
159. c. howl  love  thy  prece])ts,  quicken  me,OLord 
Prov.  6.  6.  go  to  the  ant,  c.  her  ways,  and  be  wise 

23.  1.  with  aruler  c.  diligently  what  is  before  thee 

24.  12.  doth  not  he  that  pondcreth  the  heart  c.  il? 
Keel.  5.  1.  for  they  c.  not  that  they  do  evil 

7.  13.  c.  the  work  of  God,  who  can  make  straight 
14.  in  prosperity  be  joyful,  but  in  day  of  advcr.  c. 
A<a. 1.3. Israel  doth  not  know,  my  people  doth  not  c. 
5.  12.  neither  c.  the  ojieration  of  his  hands 

14.  IG.  shall  narrowly  look  upon  thee  and  c.  thee 
18.  4.  and  I  will  c.  in  my  dwelling-place 

41.  20.  that  they  may  see,  and  know,  and  c. 

43.  18.  remember  yc  not,  nor  c.  the  things  of  old 

52.  15.  what  they  had  not  heard  shall  they  c. 
Jer.  2.  10.  c.  and  see  if  there  be  such  a  thing 

23.  20.  in  the  latter  diiys  ye  shall  c.  it,  .30.  24. 
Aa;n. 2. 20.  O  Lord,  c.  to  whom  thou  hast  done  this 

5.  1.  O  Lord,  c.  and  behold  our  reproach 
Kiek.  12.  3.  it  may  be  they  will  c.  though  they  be 
a  rebellious  house 
7)071.9.23.  understand  the  matter,  and  e.  the  vision 
//os.7. 2.  they  c.notin  Iheir  hearts  that  I  renicmlier 
Hag.  I.  5.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  c.  your  ways,  7. 

2. 15. 1  pray  yon,  c.  from  this  day  and  upwaid,  18. 
Mat.  6.  28.  c.  the  lilies  of  the  field,  Luke  12.  27. 
Luke  12.24.  c.  the  ravens,  they  neither  sow  nor  reap 
./oAn  II.  50.  nor  e.  it  isoxpcdient  for  us  that  one  ilic 
.IrU  15.  fi.  the  elders  came  to  c.  of  Ihii!  matter 
27'n«.2.  7.  c.  and  the  Lord  give  thee  understanding 
llrh.  3.  1.  brethren,  c.  the  Ajiostle  and  High-priesI 

7.  4.  now  c.  how  great  this  man  was,  unto  whom 

10.  24.  let  us  c.  one  anoihor  to  provoke  to  love 

12.  3.  c.  him  Ihalendnnd  rontrndirtion  of  sinners 

CO.NSIDERED,  EST. 

I  W/n;T.«3.2I.vhenIc.  in  morning,it  w.isnot  myson 

5.  8.  I  have  c.  things  which  thou  sentrst  to  mo  for 
Jiih  I.  **.  hi»t  thou  c.  my  servant  Job?  2.  3. 
/';t(i/. 31.7. 1  willbeilad,for  thou  basic  my  trouble 
Prov.  21.  32.  then  I  saw  and  r.  it  wi>ll 
Fed.  4.  1.  I  r.  nil  the  oppressions  that  are  done 
4.  ncain  I  c.  all  travail  and  ovcry  right  work 

9.  I.  for  all  this  1  «.  in  my  heart  to  declare  this 
Jer.  33.  24.  c.  not  what  this  people  have  spoken 
Dan."!.  8. 1  r.  the  horns,  and  Iteliold  there  cnnic  up 
Mat.  7.  3.  c.  not  the  beam  that  is  in  thine  own  eye 


CON 

JilarkG.  52.  they  c.  not  the  miracle  of  the  loaves 
.dcts  12. 12.  when  Peter  bad  c.  the  thing,  he  cama 
Kom.  i.  19.  he  c.  not  his  own  bodv  now  dead 

CONSIDERETH,  ING. 
Pi. 33. 15.  fashion,  hearts  alike,  lie  c.  all  their  works 
41.1. blessed  is  he  that  c.the  poor,Lord  will  deliver 
Pruv.  21.  12.  righteous  man  c.  house  of  the  wicked 

t  29.  but  as  for  the  upright,  he  c.  his  way 
23.  22.  and  c.  not  that  poverty  shall  come  on  him 
29.  7.  the  righteous  c.  tlie  cause  of  the  poor 
31.1G.slie  c.  a  field,  and  buyeih  it,planis  vineyards 
Isa,  44.  19.  none  c.  in  his  heart  to  say,  I  have  burnt 
57.  1.  none  c.  that  ttie  righteous  is  taken  away 
Ezek.  18.  14.  and  c.  and  doeth  not  such  like,  28. 
Dan.  8.  5.  as  I  was  c.  behold,  a  he-goat  came 
Gal.  6.  1.  c.  thyseir,  lest  thou  also  be  tempted 
Ueb.  13.  7.  c.  the  end  of  their  conversation 

CONSIST,  ETH. 
Luke  12.  15.  a  man's  life  c.  not  in  the  abundance 
Col.  1.17.  he  is  before  all  things,  bv  him  all  things  c. 

CONSOLATION 
Is  that  inward  spiritual  refreshing  and  strevgtb- 
cning  of  the  heart,  by  the  consideration  andei- 
pericnce  of  Oud's gracious  pronii.^es  in  Christ, 
2  Cor.  1.  5.     The  Holy  Ghost  is  the  worker  of 
comfort,  and  is  therefore  called  the  Comforter, 
John  16.  7.     The  promises  of  the  word  are  the 
grounds  of  comfort,  1  Thess.  4. 18. ;  and  godly 
viinisters  and  the  faithful,  are  the  helpers  of 
our  comfort  and  consolation,  2  Cor.  7.  6,  7. 
Wailing  for  the  consolation  of  Israel,  Luke  2.25. 
He  icaited  for  Christ  to  comfort  them  against 
their  troubles,  both  s/tirilual  and  outward.  The 
prophets  used  to  comfort  the  people  of  God 
among  the  Jews,  against  all  their  sad  tidings 
they  brought  them,  with  the  prophecies  of  the 
coming  and  kingdom  of  Christ,  Isa.  66.  12, 13. 
Herein  Simeon  shewed  the  truth  of  his  piety 
and  devotion,  that  he  believed,  and  waited  for 
the  coming  of  Christ. 
Jer.  16.  7.  nor  shall  men  give  them  the  cup  of  c 
Jyuke  2.  25.  Simeon,  waiting  for  the  c.  of  Israel 
G.  24.  w  oe  to  yon  rich,  for  ye  have  received  your  e. 
-■Jets  4. 36.  which  is,  being  intcrpieteii,  the  son  of  e. 
15.  31.  which  when  read,  they  rejoiced  for  the  c. 
i?07H.  ■.5.5.thc  God  of  c.graiit  you  to  be  hkc-minded 
2  Cor.  1.  5.  so  our  c.  also  aboundetli  by  Christ 
G.  afflicted,  for  your  c.  and  sal.  conif.  for  your  c. 
7.  of  sufrerings,soshall  yc  be  partakers  of  the  c. 
7.  7.  but  by  the  c.  wlierewitii  he  was  comforted 
Phil.  2. 1.  if  there  bo  any  c.in  Christ,fulfil  ye  my  joy 
2  Thess.  2.  16.  who  hath  given  us  everlasting  c. 
Philem.  7.  we  have  great  joy  and  c.  in  thy  love 
Heb.6. 18.  we  might  huve  a  strong c.  who  have  fied 

CONSOLATIONS. 
.Tob  15.  11.  are  the  c.  of  God  small  with  thee? 
21.  2.  hear  my  speech,  and  let  this  be  your  c. 
/sa.  6G.  11.  and  be  satisfied  with  the  breasts  of  here. 

CONSORTED. 
jScts  17.  4.  some  orihcin  c.  with  Paul  and  Silas 

CONSPIRACY. 
2  .Sam.  15.  12.  and  Absalom's  c.  was  strong 
2  Kings  12. 20.  his  serv.  made  a  r.  and  slew  Jt.ai-h 
14.  19.  they  made  a  c.  ng.  .Amaziah,  2CAr.25. 27. 
15. 15.  acts  of  Shallum  and  his  c.  which  he  made 
.30.  Hoshea  made  a  c.  against  Pekah 
17.  4.  the  king  of  Assyria  found  c.  in  Hoshea 
.hr.  11.  9.  a  c.  is  found  among  the  men  of  Juilnh 
F.zek.  22.  25.  is  a  c.  of  her  prophets  in  midst  thereof 
.lets  23. 13.  more  than  fnrty  who  had  made  thiee. 

CONSPIRATORS. 
2  Sam. 15.31.  Aliithophel  is  among  c.  with  Absalo.T. 

CONSPIRED. 
Gen.  37.  18.  Ihoy  r.  against  Joseph  to  sloy  him 
1  .Sam.  22.  8.  that  all  of  you  have  e.  against  ni'.' 
13.  why  have  yc  c.  ag.  me,  thou  and  son  of  Jesse 

1  Kings  15.27.  Banshason  of  .Ahijnh  c.  ag.  Niidab 
IG.  9.  Zimri  r.  against  Elah  and  slew  him,  16. 

2  Kings 'J.  14.  Jchusonof  Niinshi  r.  against  Jorurr. 
10.  9.  I  e.  ng.iinst  my  master  and  slew  him 
15.10.Shalluiiic.ngainslZachariah,nndsmotehim 

25.  Pcknh  c.  against  Pekaliiali,  and  smote  him 
21.  23.  till'  servniita  of  .Anion  c.  against  him 

24.  slew  all  that  c.  ngain.^t  Amon,  2  CAr.  :'3.  ll. 
2  Chron.  24.  21.  and  they  c.  against  Jehoiad.1 

25.  the  servants  of  Joai^h  c.  against  him,  26. 
J^eh.4. 8.  r.  nil  of  them  together,  and  come  and  fi;:!it 
.•inw.t  7.  10.  Amos  ha'h  c.  against  tliec  in  Israel 

CONSTANT,  LY. 

1  rAro7i.28. 7.  if  he  be  c.  to  do  my  fommnndments 
FzrnO.  fH.  in  give  us  a  c.  abode  in  his  holy  place 
Psal.  51.  t  10.  and  renew  n  e.  spirit  within  me 
Prov.-'..  28.  bill  the  man  that  henreth,sprnkelh  c. 
.lets  12  15.  Rhoda  f.  nfflmird  ihut  it  wn«  oven  «o 
Tit.  3.  8.  these  Ihines  I  will  that  ihou  afflrrn  », 

CONSTELLATION.'^. 

2  A'lTt  "■.«23.t5.put  down  those  that  burnt  incense  loc 
tsa  13. 10.  the  c.  thereof  «hnll  not  give  llioir  light 

CONSTRAIN. 
Gal.  C.  12.  ihcy  c.  you  to  bo  circumcised,  only  lc«- 


qoN 

CONSTRAINED,  ETH. 
S  Kings  i  8.  woman  ofShuneitic.hiin  to  eat  bread 
Job  3'i.  18.  full  of  matter,  the  spirit  within  me  c.  me 
Mat.  14.  22.  Jesus  c.  his  di.sciplcs,  Mailc  6.  45. 
Xu4e  24.  29.  but  they  c.  him,  saying,  abide  with  us 
Acts  16.  15.  Lydia  c.  us  to  come  into  her  house 
28.  19.  I  was  c.  to  appeal  to  Ctesar 
2Q)r.5. 14.  for  love  otChr.  c.  us,  because  we  judge 

CONSTRAINT. 
IPet.  5.  2.  taking  oversight,  not  by  c.  but  willingly 

CONSULT. 
Piai.62. 4.  only  c.to  cast  him  down  from  excellency 

CONSULTATION. 
MarklS.l.the  chief  priests  held  a  c.  with  the  elders 

CONSULTED. 
1  liing-s  12.  6.  Rehoboam  c.  with  the  old  men,  8. 

1  Chr.  13. 1.  Dav.  c.  with  thecaptains  of  thousands 

2  Chron.  20.  21.  Jehoshaphat  c.  with  the  people 
Jfeh.5.  7. 1  c.  with  myself,  and  rebuked  ilie  nobles 
Psal.  83.  3.  they  have  c.  against  thy  hidden  ones 

5.  fur  they  have  c.  together  with  one  consent 
Ezek.  iil.  21.  the  king  of  Babylon  c.  with  imager 
I)an.6.~.  all  the  presidents  and  captains  c.  together 
JUic.  6.  5.  remember  what  Calak  kingof  Muab  c. 
i/a*.2.10.hastc.  shame  to  thy  house,  by  cuttingoff 
Mat.  26.  4.  c.  that  they  might  take  .lesus  and  kill 
Jo/in  12. 10.  chief  priests  c.  to  put  Lazarus  to  death 

CONSULTER. 
Dent.  18. 11.  not  found  among  you  a  c.  with  spirits 

CONSULTKTII. 
ititcl4.3I.c.whetherhc  be  able  with  10,000  tomeet 

CONSUME 
Signifies,  [1]  To  waste,  destroy,  and  bring  to  utter 
ruin  and  desolation,  Exod.  :t2.  10.  [2]  To  spend, 
or  squander  away,  Jam.  4.  3.   [3]    To  vanish 
awali.  Job  7.  9.  [4]  To  make,  or  cause  to  pass 
away,  I'sal.  78.  33.  [5]  To  burn  up,  Luke  U. 
54.     [6J    To  mdt  away,  Jer.  G.  29.   [7]    To 
crush,  Esth.  9.  t  24. 
Oen.  41.  30.  and  the  famine  shall  c.  the  land 
Ezod.  3.3.  3.  lest  I  c.  thee  in  the  way,  5. 
/,eu.  26.  10.  the  burning  ague  tliat  shall  c.  the  eyes 
Deut.  5.  25.  for  this  great  fire  will  c.  us 
7.16.  thou  shall  call  people  which  Lord  God  shall 
28.  38.  gather  but  little,  for  locust  shall  c.  it,  42. 
32.  22.  a  fire  kindled  in  mine  anger  shall  c.  earth 
Josh.  24. 20.vvill  c.  you  after  he  hath  done  you  good 
lSam.2.33.the  man  of  thin^  shall  bo  to  c.  thine  eyes 
2  Kinfrs  1.  10.  let  lire  c  thee  and  thy  fifty,  12. . 
Job  15.  34.  fire  shall  c.  the  tabernacles  of  bribery 

20.  26.  a  fire  not  blown  shall  c.  him 

24.  IS),  drouglit  and  heat  c.  the  snow-waters 
Psal.  37.  20.  shall  c.  into  smoke  shall  they  c.  away 
39.  11.  makest  his  beauty  to  c.  away  like  a  moth 
49.  14.  their  beauty  shall  c.  in  the  grave 
78.  33.  therefore  their  days  did  he  c.  in  vanity 
Isa.  7.  20.  and  it  shall  also  c.  the  beard 
10. 18.  and  shall  c.  the  glory  of  his  forest  and  field 
27.  10.  there  shall  the  calf  c.  the  branches 
Jer.  49.  27.  fire  shall  c.  the  palaces  of  Ben-hadad 
Eiek.  4.  17.  and  c.  away  for  their  iniquity 

13.  13.  and  great  hail-stones  in  my  fury  to  c.  it 

21.  2^.  the  sword  is  drawn,  it  is  furbished  to  c. 

22.  15.  I  will  c.  thy  filthine.-s  out  of  thee 

24. 10.  kindle  the  fire,  c.  the  flesh,  and  S|)iceit  well 
35.  12.  they  are  desolate,  thoy  are  given  us  to  c. 
Dan.l.  44.  it  shall  c.  all  these  kingdoms  and  stand 
Hos.  11.  6.  and  the  sword  shall  c.  his  branches 
Zeph.  1.  2.  I  will  C-.  all  things  fro;n  off  the  land 

3.1  will  c.  man  and  beast,  I  will  c.  fowls  of  heaven 
Zcc/i.  5.  4.  it  shall  remain  in  his  house  and  e.  it 

14.  12.  their  flesh,  eyes,  tongue  shall  e   away 
27'/ie»'«.2.8.that  wicked  one, whom  the  Lord  shallc. 
Jam.  4.  3.  ye  ask  that  ve  mav  c.  it  on  your  lusts 

CO.NSUME  ikcm. 
.Eiod.  32.10. wrath  wax  hot,  that  I  rnayc.  «4rni,  12. 
JVum.  16.21.  that  I  mayc.  them  in  a  moment,  45. 
Deut.  7.  22.  thou  mayest  not  c.  them  at  once 

1  Sam.  15. 1 1'^.  destroy  Amalekiies  till  thou  c.  them 

2  Chron.  18.  1 10-  push  Syria,  till  thou  c.  them 
JVeh.  9.  31.  thou  didst  not  ut'erly  c.  them 
Ksth  9.  21.  Ilaman  had  cast  the  lot  to  c.  them 
Psal.^O.l'i.  c.t/i.Ui  wrath,c.£A.  that  they  niaynot  be 
Jer.  8.  13.  I  will  surely  c.  them,  saith  the  Lord 

14.  12.  but  I  will  c.  them  by  the  sword  and  famine 
F.zek.  20.  13. 1  would  pour  fury  on  them  (o  c.  Ihr.m 
L-uke  1).  54.  fire  to  come  and  c.  them,  as  Elias  did 

CONSI'MKD. 
Gfn.19. 15.  lest  thou  bee.  in  ihe  initpiity  ofthocity 

17.  escape  to  the  mountain,  lest  thou  be  c. 
31.  40.  thus  I  was,  in  the  day  Ihe  drought  c.  me 
Kzod.  3.  2.  behold  the  bush  burned,  and  was  nni  c. 

15.  7.  sentest  thy  wrath,  which  c.  them  as  stubble 
22.  6.  if  the  corn  or  the  fi'  Id  be  c.  therewith 

Dev.9.  24.  and  c.  upon  the  altar  the  burnt-offering 
A'um.  11. 1.  c.  them  in  uttermost  iiarts  of  the  camp 
12. 12.  let  her  not  bo  as  one  of  whom  Hcsh  is  halfc. 

16.  26.  depart  lest  ye  be  c.  in  all  their  sins 
35.  there  came  out  fire  and  c.  the  250  men 

II.  28.  a  fire  ia  gone  oni,  it  hath  c.  Ar  of  Moab 
95 


CON 

JVwn.  25.  11.  that  I  c.  not  the  children  of  Israel 
32. 13.  till  the  generation  that  had  done  evil  was  c. 
Deut.  2. 16.  when  the  men  of  war  were  c.  and  dead 
Judrr.  6.  21.  there  rose  fire  out  of  rock  and  c.  Hesh 
1  .Som.27. 1 1.1  shall  one  day  bee.  by  hand  of  Saul 
2.S'am.  13.  j  39.  the  soul  of  David  was  c.  to  go  forth 

21.  5.  the  man  that  c.  us,  and  devised  against  us 

1  Kinffs  18. 38.  then  the  fire  of  the  Lord  fell  and  c. 
the8acrifice,andlickedup  thewater,2C'Aron.7.I. 

2  Kings  1.  10.  and  fire  c.  him  and  his  fifty,  12. 

2  Chron.  8.  8.  whom  the  children  of  Isratd  c.  not 
JVcA.  2.  3.  the  gates  thereof  are  c.  with  fire,  13. 
Job  1. 16.  the  fire  of  God  hath  c.  sheep  and  servaats 
4.  9.  by  the  breath  of  his  no;=trils  are  they  c. 

6.  17.  the  snow  and  the  ice  are  c.  out  of  their  place 

7.  9.  as  the  cloud  is  c.  and  vanished  away 

19.  27.  my  reins  c.  \\  33.  21.  his  flesh  is  c.  away 
Psal.  6. 7.  mine  eyes  c.31.9.  {|  10.  my  bones  c.102.3. 

39.  10.  I  am  c.  by  the  blow  of  thine  hand 
64.  t  6.  we  are  c.  by  that  which  they  searched 
71.  13.  let  them  be  confounded  and  c.  that  aie 
73.  19.  they  are  utterly  c.  with  terrors 
78.  63.  fire  c.their  young  men,  maidens  not  given 
90.  7.  for  we  are  c.  by  thine  anger  and  thy  wrath 
104.  35.  let  the  sinners  be  c.  out  of  the  earth 
119.  87.  they  had  almost  c.  me  upon  the  earth 
139.  my  zeal  hath  c.  me,  because  mine  enemies 
Prov.  5.  11.  when  thy  flesh  and  thy  body  are  c. 

22.  t  8.  with  the  rod  of  his  anger  he  shall  be  c. 
Isa.  16.  4.  the  oppressors  are  c.  out  of  the  land 

29.20.  scorneris  c.  and  all  that  watch  for  iniquity 
64.  7.  thou  hast  c.  us,  because  of  our  iniquities 
■fer.  5.  3.  haste,  them,  but  they  refused  correction 
6.  29.  the  lead  is  c.  {{  12.  4.  the  beast.s  are  c. 

20.  18.  that  my  days  should  be  c.  with  shame 
36.  23.  till  all  the  roll  was  c.  in  the  fire  on  hearth 
44.  18.  we  have  been  c.  by  sword  and  famine 

I^am.  2.  22.  those  I  swaddled  hath  mine  enemy  c. 

3.  22.  it  is  of  the  Lord's  mercies  we  are  not  c. 
Eiek.  19.  12.  her  rods  broken,  fire  c.  them,  22. 31. 

24. 11.  on  the  coals,  that  the  scum  of  it  may  bee. 

43.  8.  wherefore  I  have  c.  them  in  mine  anger 
Mai.  3.  6.  therefore  the  sons  of  Jacob  are  nor.  c. 
(ral.  5.  15.  take  heed  ve  be  not  c.  one  of  anotlier 

Shall  be  CONSUMED. 
JiTum.  14.  35.  in  this  wilderness  shall  they  be  c. 

17.  13.  shall  die,  shall  we  be  c.  with  dying? 
I'^flT?!.  12. 25.  ye*Aa?i  Jcc.both  you  and  your  king 
fsa.  1.  28.  they  that  forsake  the  Lord  shall  be  c. 

66.  17.  eating  swine's  flesh,  and  the  abominaiion, 
and  the  mouse,  shall  be  c.  together 
.Ter.  14.  15.  by  famine  shall  those  prophets  be  c. 

16.  4.  they  shall  be  c.  by  the  sword,  44.  12,  27. 
f;:e/i:.5.12.  with  famine  shall  they  be  c.  in  the  midst 

I3.14.it  shall  fall,yes/ta/i6ec.in  the  midst  thereof 

34.  29.  they  shall  be  no  more  c.  with  hunger 

47.12. leaf  not  fade, nor  shallihe  fruit  thereof  iec. 
Dan.  11.  16.  laud  which  by  his  hand  shall  be  c. 

CONSUMED  with  till,  or  until. 
Deut.'i.  15. to  destroy,  untillhay  werec.  ./n.^A.  5.6. 

28.  21.  pestil.  cleave  to  thee,  nnlilhe  have  c. thee 
.fosh.  10.  20.  an  end  of  slay  ing  them  till  they  were  c. 

1  Sam.  15.  IS.  and  fightagainst  them  till  they  be  c. 

2  Sam.  22.  3i^.  I  have  pursued  my  enemies,  and  1 
turned  not  again  until  I  hade,  them, Psal.  18.37. 

1  Kin<Ts  22.  11.  shalt  push  the  Syrians  -ttntil  thou 
hav?  c.  them,  2  Kings  13.  17,  19.  2  CAr.  18.  10. 
Ezra  9.  14.  be  angry  with  us  till  thou  hadst  e.  us 
.fcr.  9.  16.  and  I  will  send  a  sword  after  them  till 
I  have  c.  them,  24. 10.  |  27.  8.  I  49.  37. 
CONSUMETH,  ING. 
Deut.  4. 24.  the  Lord  thy  O.  is  a  c.  fire,  Heb.  12.  29. 
9.  3.  the  Lord  goeth  over  before  theo  as  a  c.  fire 
Jnh  13.  2S.  he  c.  asa  garment  that  is  moth-eaten 
22.  20.  but  the  remnant  of  them  the  fire  e. 
31.  12.  for  it  is  a  fire  that  c.  to  destruction 
^«a. 5.24. as  fire  thps'ubble,nnd  as  the  flame  c. chaff 

CONSUMMATION. 
DaH.9.  27.  shall  makeitdesolale,  even  until  the  c. 

CO.\'SU.MPTION. 
Tjcn.  26  16.  1  will  appoint  over  you  terror,  c. 
neul.  28.  22.  the  Lord  shall  smite  thee  with  a  e. 
Jndg,  20.  1 40.  the  whole  c.  of  the  city  ascended  up 
Isa.  10.22.  the  c.  decreed  shall  overflow  with  right. 

23.  for  the  Lord  God  of  hosts  shall  make  a  c. 
28.  22.  for  I  have  heard  from  the  L.  G.  of  hosts  a  c. 

CONTAIN. 
1  Kings  8.  27.  behold  the  heaven  and  heaven  of 
heaven*  cannot  c.  thee,  2  Chron.  2.  6.  |  6.  18. 
F.ick.  45.  11.  balh  may  c.  tenih  part  of  a  homer 
7()A!i21.25.the  world  could  note. the  books  written 
1  C^r.  7.  9.  but  if  thev  cannot  c.  let  them  marry 

CONTAINED,  RTH,  ING. 
F.-.ck.  23.  32.  drink  of  thy  sister's  cup,  ite.  much 
lohn  2.  6.  six  water-pots  c.  2  or  3  firkins  a  piece 
Hnm.  2.  14.  do  by  nature  the  things  c.  in  the  law 
^■/)A.2  15. having  abolished  the  lawc.in  ordinances 
1  Pet.  2.  6.  wheref.  it  ise.  in  scripture,  behold  I  lay 

CONTEMN,  ED,  ETH. 
Psal.  10.  13  wherefore  do  the  wicked  c.  God  I 


CON 

Ps.l5.4.inwhosccycsa  vile  person  isc.but  honour! 
107.  11.  they  c.  tJie  counsel  of  the  most  High 
Cant.  8.  7.  if  give  substance  for  love,  it  would  be  c 
/sa.l6.14.glory  of  Moab  shall  be  c.  with  great  mult. 
Ezek.  21.  10.  it  c.  the  rod  of  my  son,  as  every  tree 
13.  and  what  if  the  sword  c.  even  the  rod  .' 
CONTEMPT. 
Gen.  38.  t  23.  let  her  take  it  lest  we  become  a  c. 
Esth.  1.  18.  thus  shall  there  arise  too  much  c. 
Job  l2.21.1iepoureth  c.  on  princes,  Psal.  107.  40 
31.  34.  or  did  the  c.  of  families  terrify  me! 
Psal.  119.  22.  remove  from  me  reproach  and  c. 
123.  3.  for  we  are  exceedingly  filled  with  c. 
4.  our  soul  is  filled  with  the  c.  of  the  proud 
Pru!).]8.3.wlien  the  wicked  cometh,  then  comethc. 
/.<a.23.9.  to  bring  into  c.  all  the  honourable  of  earlii 
Dan.  12.  2.  some  shall  awake  to  everlasting  c. 

CONTEMPTIBLE. 
Mai.  1.  7.  in  that  ye  say,  the  table  of  the  Lord  is  c. 
12.  even  his  meat  is  c.  ||  2.  9. 1  also  made  you  c. 
2  Cor.  10.  10.  his  presence  is  weak,  his  speech  c. 

CONTE.MI'TUOUSLY. 
Psal.  31.  18.  which  speak  c.  against  the  righteous 

CONTEND 
Signifies,  [1]   To  strive,  Jer.  18.  19.  [2]   To  dis- 
pute. Acts  U.  2.  [3]    To  debate,  or  jilcad,  Job 
9.  3.  I  40.  2    [4]    To  fight,  Deut.  2.  9.  [5]   To 
reprove  sharply,  Neh.  13.  11.  [6]  To  endeavour 
to  conoitice  a  pirsuti  of,  and  reclaim  him  from 
his  evil    way,  Prov.  29.  9.     [7]     7'o  punish, 
Amos  7.  4. 
Earnestly  to  contend  for  the  faith,  .Tude  3.  slrc- 
vuously  tomaintain  and  defend  the  apostolical 
doctrine,  by  constancy  in  the  faith,  zeal  for  the 
truth,  holiness    of  life,  mutual    exhortation, 
prayer,  sufferingfor  Ihe  gospel,  c?-c.  inthftan  !• 
ing  all  such  heretics  as  would  impugn  and  cor- 
rupt the  doctrines  reuealrd  in  the  gospel. 
Deal.  2.  9.  neither  c.  with  Moaliites  in  battle,  2t. 
./o69.3.if  die  cannot  answerhimtmeof  a  thousand 
13.  8.  will  ye  accept  his  person,  and  c.  tor  God  1 
Prov.  28.  4.  such  as  keep  the  law  c.  with  them 
Eccl.  6. 10.  nor  may  he  e.  with  him  that  is  mightier 
Isa.  49.  25.  I  will  c.  with  them  that  c.  with  thee 
50.8.heis  near  ihatjustifieth,  who  will  c.  withmel 
.57.  16.  I  will  not  c.  for  ever,  nor  will  I  be  wroth 
Jer.  12.  5.  then  how  canst  ihou  c.  with  horses? 

18.  19.  hearken  to  voice  of  them  that  c.  with  me 
./3mos  7.  4.  behold  the  Lord  Gud  called  to  c.  by  fire 
Mic.  6.  1.  hear  ye,  arise,  c.  thou  before  the  mount 
.fude  3.  should  earnestly  c.  for  faith  deliv.  to  saints 

CO. \T  END  ED. 
.^'V//.  13.  11.  then  c.  I  with  the  rulers  and  said,  17. 
25.  I  c.  with  them,  and  cursed  them,  and  eniole 
.Job  31.  13.  if  I  despised  my  servants  when  theyc. 
Fsa.il.  12.  thou  shalt  not  find  Ihem  that  e.  with  the*; 
Jicts  11.  2.  they  of  the  circumcision  c.  with  him 

CONTENDEST. 
Job  10.2.  shew  me  wherefore  thou  c.  with  me 

CONTENDETH. 
.Tab  40.  2.  shall  he  that  c.  with  .Mmighty  instrurl 
Prov.  29.  9.  if  a  wise  man  c.  with  a  foolish  man 

CONTENDING. 
7M(Zc9.c.withdevil,hei!isputed  about  bodyof  Moscg 

CONTENT. 
(7cn.37. 27.  let  us  sell  him,  and  his  brethren  weren. 
Ezod.  2.  21.  Moses  was  c.  to  dwell  with  the  man 
Lee.  10.20.  when  Moses  heard  that,  he  was  c. 
.Tosh.l.'.  would  to  G.  we  had  been  c.d  welt  on  otJier 
■!udg.  17.  11.  Lcvite  was  c.  to  dwell  with  Micah 

19.  6.  be  e.  I  pray  thee,  antl  tarry  all  night 

2  Kings  5. 23.Naaman  said,  bo  c.  take  two  talents 
6.  3.  one  said,  be  c.  and  go  with  thy  servants 

Jib  6.  28.  now  therefore  he  c.  look  upon  me 
Pr«i^6.35. nor  will  lierest  c.lhougli  thougivcslgifts 
Mark\5.\rt.  Pilate  willing  toe.  people  released  liar. 
/,u/.f3. 14. nor  accuse  falsely,  be  r.  with  your  wagts 
Phil.  4.  11.  I  have  learned  in  every  state  to  be  c. 
1  VV/n.O  8.  having  food  ami  raiment,  let  us  be  « 
Fieb.  13.  5.  and  be  c.  with  such  things  as  ye  have 

3  John  10.  and  not  c.  with  prating  against  us 

CONTENTION. 
Oen.  26.  f  20.  he  called  the  name  of  the  well  c. 
Psal.  95.  t  8.  harden  not  your  heart,  as  in  the  c. 
Pnio. 13.10. only  bypride  comethe.Uut  wisdom  with 
IT.  14.  leave  off  t.  before  it  be  meddled  witli 
18.  6.  a  fool's  lips  enter  into  c.  and  his  mouth  csl!« 
22.  10.  cast  out  the  scorner,  and  e.  shall  go  OHt 
fsa.4\.  t  12.  thou  shalt  not  finil  the  men  of  thy  e 
./cr.15.10.  woe  is  me,  thou  hast  born  me  a  manol  t 
ffnb.  1.  3.  and  there  arc  that  raise  upstrifeandc 
./?r^5  15.  39.  the  c.  was  so  sharp  between  tliem 
PAi7. 1.16.  the  one  preach  Christ  of  c.  not  sincerely 
1  T'AffS.2.2.tospeak  the  sosnel  of  God  with  much  e. 

CONTENTIONS. 
Prov.  18.18.  thelotcaiiBcthr.  to  cense,  and  parteth 

19.  and  their  c.  are  like  the  bars  of  a  castle 
19.13.  c.  of  a  wife  are  a  continual  dropping, 27. 1.1 
21.  t  9.  than  with  a  woman  of  c.  in  a  wide  houn> 
23.29.  who  hatii  wcc.^whohath  c;  bath  bubbKng'< 


CON        ' 

1  Cor.  1.  11. 1  hear  Ihat  there  are  c.  among  you 
Tit.  3.  9.  avoid  c.  aiid  strivings  about  tlio  law 

COiNTENTlOUd. 
Pri»}.  21.  19.  than  with  a  c.  and  angry  woman 
!i(i.'il.a8  wood  to  fire,  so  ie  a  c.inan  to  kindle  strife 
'.i7.  15.  a  continual  dropimig  and  a  c.  woman  alike 
Jlom.  2.  8.  but  to  them  tliai  are  c.  and  do  not  obey 
lC'or.11.16.  butilaiiy  man  seem  to  be  c.no  custom 
COr^TKATiMKA'T. 

1  Tim.  6.  6.  but  godliness  with  c.  is  great  gain 

COI^TINUAL. 
Kxod.  29.  42.  this  shall  be  a  c.  I'urnt-ofTering 
.Vum.  4.  7.  and  Iho  c.  bread  shall  be  thereon 

2  C/iron.  2. 4.  I  build  a  house  lor  the  c.  shew-bread 
I'ruv.  15.  15.  that  is  ol  a  murry  heart  hath  a  c.  least 
Inn.  14. 1),  he  who  smote  the  peojile  with  a  c.  stroke 
Jer.  48.  5.  lor  iii  the  going  up  c.  weei)iiig  shall  go  up 

52.34. there  was  a  c.  diet  given  him,  2  Kiiigs'^.'iU. 
Kzek.  39. 14.  shall  sever  out  men  of  c.  employment 
J.uke  IS.  5.  lest  by  her  c.  coming  she  weary  me 
Jiiiiii.  9.  2.  that  1  have  c.  sorrow  in  my  heart 

See  BtJRNT-OKKERINOS. 

CONTINUALLY. 
(Teii.6.5.  every  imagination  of  his  heart  was  evil  c. 
Kzod.  28.  30.  upon  his  heart  before  tl>e  Lord  c. 
29.  38.  two  lambs  of  the  first  year,  day  by  day  c. 
Lev.  a.  2.  bring  oil  olive  to  cause  lamps  lo  burn  c. 

1  Sam.  18.  29.  and  Saul  became  David's  enemy  c. 

2  4'am.9.  7.  thou  shalt  eat  bread  at  my  table  c. 

2  Arino-s25.29.  Jehoiakimeat  bread,  c.  Jer.  52. 33. 

1  CliroH.  16.  11.  seek  the  Lord,  seek  his  face  c. 

2Chron.  12. 15.  wars  between  Jerob.  and  Rehob.c. 
3C).t  15.  sent  to  them,  rising  up  c.and  sending  them 

Job  1.5.  sent  and  sanctified  lii.s  sons,  thus  did  Job  c. 

Psui.  34.  l.his  praise  shall  bee.  in  my  mouth,71.(). 
35. 27.  say  c.  the  Lord  be  magnified,  40.  16.  |  70. 4. 
38. 17.  ready  to  halt  and  my  sorrow  is  c.  before  me 
40.11.  let  thy  loving-kindntss  and  trulli  c. preserve 
42.  3.  while  they  c.  say  to  me,  where  is  tliy  God? 
44.  15.  my  confusion  is  e.  before  me,  and  slianie 
50.  S.thy  burnt-otl'e rings  to  have  been  c. before  me 
52.  l.O  mighty  man,  goodness  of  God  endurelh  c. 

71.  3.  my  habitation,  whereunlo  1  may  e.  resort 
6.  I  have  been  holden  up,  my  praise  shall  be  c. 
14.  I  will  hope  c.  and  praise  thee  more  and  more 

73.  23.  I  am  c.  with  thee,  thou  hast  holden  me 
74.23. the  tumult  of  those  that  rise  up  increaseth  c. 
109.  15.  let  them  be  beiiire  the  Lord  c.  to  cutoff 
19.  44.  so  shall  I  keep  thy  law  c.  for  ever  and  ever 
109.  my  soul  is  e.  in  my  hand,  yet  do  I  not  forget 
117.  and  1  will  have  respect  to  thy  statutes  c. 
140.  2.  c.  are  they  gathered  together  for  war 
f  ruu.G.ll.hedeviseth  mischief  c. he soweth  discord 

21.  bind  them  c.  on  thy  heart,  and  tie  thera 
7su.21. 8. 1  stand  c.on  the  watch-tower  in  day-time 
49.  16.  I  have  graven  thee,  walls  arc  c.  belore  me 
5J.  13.  hast  feared  c.  every  day,  because  of  fury 
52.  5.  my  name  c.  every  day  is  blasphemed 
58. 11.  and  the  Lord  shall  guide  thee  c.  and  satisfy 
60.  11.  therefore  thy  gates  shall  be  open  c. 
65.  3.  a  people  that  piovokelh  me  to  anger  c. 
Jer.  6.  7.  before  me  c.  is  grief  and  wounds 
Kzek.  46.  14.  a  meat-oflering  c.  to  the  Lord 
J)an.  6.  16.  thy  God  whom  thou  servest  c.  20. 
Jios.  4.  18.  they  have  committed  whoredom  c. 

12.  6.  keep  mercy,  and  wait  on  thy  God  c. 
Obad.  16.  so  shall  all  the  heathen  drink  c. 

M'ah  3.  19.  for  hath  not  thy  wickedness  passed  c.? 
Mab  l.n.shall  they  notspare  e.  to  slay  the  nations? 
y.er.h  8.  t  21.  let  us  go  c.  and  pray  before  the  Lord 
J.ulce  24.  53.  were  c.  in  the  temple,  praising  God 
.IcU  6.  4.  we  will  give  ourselves  c.  to  prayer 

10. 7.asoldier  oftli(!m  that  wailed  on  Cornelius  c. 
Horn.  13.  6.  attending  c.  upon  this  very  thing 
Heb  7.  3.  like  the  Son  of  God,  abideth  a  priest  c. 

10.  I.  with  those  sacrifices  offered  year  by  year  c. 

13.  13.  by  him  let  ii!<(ifler  the  sacrifice  of  praise  c. 

CONTINUANCE. 
Deut.  28.  59.  even  great  plagues  and  of  long  c. 
Ps.  139.  16.  my  members  which  in  c.  were  fashion. 
Jja.  64.  5.  in  those  is  c.  and  we  shall  be  saved 
Kick.  39.  t  M.  they  shall  sever  out  men  of  c. 
/)ort.  1.  t  10.  faces  worse  liking  than  children  of  c. 
Horn.  2.7.  by  natiente.  in  well  doing  seek  for  glory 

CONTINUE. 
£zo(i.  21. 21.  if  bee.  a  day  or  two,  not  be  punished 
J.ev.  12.  i.e.  in  the  blond  of  her  purifying,  5. 

1  Sam.  12.  14.  c.  following  the  Lord  your  God 
13.  14.  but  now  thy  kingdom  shall  not  c. 

2  Sum.  7.  2!!.  that  it  may  e.  for  over  before  thco 

1  S'iH„'s2.4.  the  Lord  may  e.  his  word  that  he  spake 
.fob  15.  29.  not  be  rich,  nor  shall  his  substance  c. 

17.  2.  doth  not  mine  oyo  c.  in  their  provocation  ? 
Psal.  36.  10.  O  c.  thy  loving-kindnrss  tinto  them 

49.  II.  thought  that  their  houses  shall  c.  forever 

72.  \  17.  shall  be  as  n  son  lo  e.  his  father's  namo 
102  28.  the  children  of  thy  servants  shall  c. 

JI9  91.  they  e.  according  to  thine  ordmancofl 
ha.  j.  11.  that  e.  till  night,  till  wine  inflame  them 
65.  t  22.  and  mine  elect  shall  make  them  c.  long 
96 


CON 

Jer.  32.  14.  that  the  evidences  may  c.  many  days 
Dan.  1 1 .  8.  e.  more  years  than  the  king  ot  the  north 
Mai.  15.  32.  because  they  c.  with  me  three  days 
John  8. 31.  if  ye  c.in  my  word,  then  are  ye  disciples 

15.  9.  so  have  I  loved  you,  c.  ye  in  my  love 
Jicls  13.  43.  persuaded  lo  c.  in  tiie  grace  of  God 

14. 22. confirming  and  exhorting  them  toe.  in  faith 

26.  22.  having  obtained  helpol  God,  le.  unto  day 
ijom.  6.1.  shall  we  c.in  sin  that  grace  may  abound! 

11.22.towards  thee  goodness,  il  thou  c.in  goodness 
Gal.  2.  5.  that  the  truth olgo^pcl  might c. with  you 
Phil.  1.  25.  1  know  that  J  sliall  c.  with  you  all 
Coi.  1.  23.  if  ye  c.  in  the  failh,  and  be  not  moved 

4.  2.  c.  in  prayer,  and  wutch  with  thanksgiving 

1  7'»n.  2. 15.  if  they  c.  in  faith, charity,  and  holiness 
4.  16.  take  heed  to  thy  doctrine,  c.  in  them 

2  fim.'i.  14.C.  in  the  things  which  thou  hast  learned 
//ci.7.23.priestsnotsuirered  to  c.lijreason  of  death 

13.  1.  let  brotherly  love  c.  entertain  strangers 
Jam.  4.  13.  and  e.  there  a  year,  and  buy  and  sell 
2PU'i.  4.  since  the  fathers, all  things  c. as  they  were 
1  John  2.  24.  ye  shall  c.  in  the  Son  and  Father 
Rev.  13.  5.  power  was  given  him  to  c.  42  months 

17.  10.  when  he  cometh,  he  must  c.  i  short  space 

CONTINUED. 
Gen.  40. 4.  lie  served  them,  and  c.  a  season  in  ward 

1  Sam.  1.  12.  as  she  c.  praying  before  the  Lord 

2  Chron.  29.  28.  c.  till  burnt-ofi'ering  was  finished 
JVt'A.  5. 16.  yea,  also  I  c.  in  the  work  of  this  wall 
Psal.  72. 17.  his  name  shall  be  c.  as  long  as  the  sun 
JcT.  31.  t  32.  should  I  have  c.  a  husband  to  them 
Dan.  1.  21.  Daniel  c.  to  first  year  of  king  Cyrus 
Mat.  20.  t  12.  these  last  have  c.  one  hour  only 
Luke  6.  12.  he  c.  all  night  in  prayer  to  God 

22.  28.  ye  are  they  thatc.  with  me  in  temptation 
Mcts  1.  14.  these  all  e.  with  one  accord  in  prayer 

2.  42.  they  e.  stedfastly  in  the  apostles' doctrine 
8. 13.  Simon  himself  c.  with  Philip,  and  wondered 
12. 16. but  Peter  e.knockiiig,when  they  had  opened 
20.7.  Paul  preached  and  t. his  speech  till  midnight 
Htb.  8.  9.  because  they  c.  not  in  my  covenant 
1  Juhn  2.  19.  they  would  no  doubt  have  c.  with  us 

CONTINUETH,  ING. 
Job  14.  2.  he  fleeth  also  as  a  shadow,  and  c.  not 
Jer.  30.  23.  a  c.  whirlwind,  it  shall  fall  on  wicked 
Jiets  2.  46.  they  c.  daily  w  ith  one  accord  in  temple 
Hnm.  12.  12.  rejoicing  in  hope,c.  instant  in  prayer 
Gal.Z.  10.  cursed  thatc.  not  in  all  things,  in  the  law 
1  Tim.  5.  5.  she  that  is  a  widow  c.  in  8upi)lications 
Heb.  7. 24.  but  this  man, because  he  c.  ever, hath  an 
13.  14.  for  here  we  have  no  c.  city,  but  we  seek 
Jam.  1. 25.  lookcth  into  the  perfect  law,  and  c.  in  it 

CONTRADICTING. 
Jlcta  13.  45.  filled  with  envy,  c.  and  blaspheming 

CONTRADICTION. 
Heb. 1.1.  without  c.  the  kss  is  blessed  of  the  better 
12. 3.  consider  him  that  endured  such  c.  of  sinners 

CONTRARY. 
Lev.  26.  21.  and  if  ye  walk  c.  to  me,  23,  27,  40. 

24.  then  will  I  also  walk  c.  to  you,  28,41. 
Ks/A.9.  l.tho'itwas  turned  to  thee.  Jews  had  rule 
Kiek.  16.  34.  the  c.  is  in  thee,  therefore  thou  arte. 
Mat.M.'ii.  the  ship  was  tossed, for  the  wind  was  c. 
Jicis  17.  7.  these  all  do  c.  to  the  decrees  of  Ca:sar 
18.13.  persuaded  men  to  worship  God  c.  to  the  law 

23.  3.  commandest  me  to  be  smitten  c.  to  the  law 
26.  9.  to  do  many  things  c.  to  the  name  of  Jesus 

Worn.  11 .24.  graft,  c.  to  nature  into  a  good  olive-tree 

16.  17.  c.  to  the  doclrine  which  ye  have  learned 
flal.  5.  17.  and  these  are  c.  the  one  to  the  other 
Col.  2.  14.  the  hand-writing  which  was  e.  to  us 

1  Thess.  2.  15.  please  not  God,  and  are  c.  to  all  men 
)Tim.  1.  lO.ifany  thing  ihat  ise.  to  sound  doctrine 
Tit.  2.  8.  that  he  of  the  c.  part  may  be  ashamed 

CONTRARIWISE. 

2  Cor.  2.  7.  c.  yo  ought  rather  to  forgive  him 
^Ta/.2.7.c.when  they  saw  the  gospel  wascommittcd 
1  Pet.  3.  9.  not  rendering  railing,  but  c.  blessing 

CONTRIBUTION. 
Rom.  15.26.  to  make  e.  for  ihe  poor  saints  at  Jerus. 

CONTRITE. 
They  are  of  a  contrite  spirit,  7cliose  hearts  are 
truly  anil  dei ply  humh'.rd  undirr  a  ncnscof  their 
sin  and  ffuitt,aAd  God'.s  displeasure  following 
upon  It :  icho.ie  proud  and  self-willed  hearts  are 
subdued,  and  made  obedient  lo  God's  ipill,  and 
submissive  to  his  providence,  being  loilliug  lo 
accept    of  rrconeiliation   with  find  upon  any 
terms,  Psal.  34.  18.  |  51.  17.  Isa.  06.  2.    This  is 
opposed  to  the  stony  heart,  that  is  insensible  of 
the  burden    of  sin,  slubhcirn    and    rebellious 
against  God,  impenitent  and  incorrigible. 
Psal.  34.  18.  ho  saveth  such  us  be  of  a  c.  spirit 
51.  17.  a  c.  heart,  O  God,  thou  wilt  not  despise 
Isa.  57. 15.  with  him  also  that  is  of  a  e.  and  humble 
spirit,  to  revive  the  henrt  of  the  c.  oni>« 
C6.2.  that  is  of  a  c.  si>irit  nnd  tremhietli  at  my  word 

CONTROVERSY. 
Deut.  17.  8.  being  matters  of  e.  within  thy  gates 
19.  17.  mou  between  whom  the  c.  is  shall  stand 


C0N 

Deut.  21.  5.  by  iheir  woid  shall  every  c.  Ur  tried 
25. 1.  if  there  bea  c.  between  men,  and  they  coma 
i  Sam.  15.  2.  when  any  man  that  Jiad  a  c.  came 
2  Chron.  19.  8.  Jehoshajdial  set  the  Leviles  for  c. 
Jsa.'ii.  8.  the  year  ol  recumpencea  for  the  e.  ol  Zioa 
,)c-r.  25.  31.  the  Lord  hath  a  c.  with  the  nations 
Eiek.  44.  24.  in  c.  they  shall  stand  in  Judgment 
yyvA-.4.1.tlie  Lord  hath  a  c.  w  ith  iiihabuuiits  of  luad 
12.  2.  the  Lord  hath  also  a  c.  Willi  Judah 
Mic.  6.2.  the  Lord  hath  a  c.  with  his  people 
1  7'i»H.3. 16.  without  c.  great  is  ihe  mjateryofgodl. 

CONVKMENT. 
Prov.  30.  8.  feed  me  with  food  c.  for  me 
./er.  40.  4.  it  seemeth  good  and  c.  for  thee  to  go,  5. 
.4/arA6.21.anil  when  ae.daywascomellerod  made 
.•3c(s24.25.whenl  have  a  c.  season  will  call  for  lliee 
RoiH.  1.  28.  to  do  those  things  which  are  not  e. 
1  Cor.  16.12.  will  come  when  he  shall  have  e.  time 
Kph.  5.  4.  talking,  nor  jesting,  which  aie  not  c. 
/^/ii/e»i.  8.  might  he  bold  to  enjoin  that  wkichiac 

CONVENIENTLY. 
Mark.  14.11.  Judas  sought  how  he  might  c.  betray 

CONVERSANT. 
./osA.  8.  35.  and  strangers  were  e.  among  them 

1  Sam.  25.  15.  as  long  as  we  were  c.  with  Iheni 

CONVERSATION. 
Psal.  37.  14.  to  slay  such  as  be  of  upright  c. 
50. 23.  to  him  thatordereth  liisc.  aright  shew  salv. 

2  Cor.  1.  12.  in  godly  sincerity  we  have  had  ourc 
Gal.  1.  13.  ye  have  heard  of  my  c.  in  time  past 
Kph.  2.  3.  among  whom  we  had  our  c.  in  limes  past 

4.  22.  that  ye  put  otf  concerning  the  former  c 
Phil.  1.  27.  only  let  your  c.  be  as  becumeth  gospel 

3.  20.  for  our  c.  is  in  heaven,  whence  we  look 
1  Tini.4.12.be  an  example  of  believers  in  c.in  purity 
Heb.  13.  5.  let  your  c.  be  without  covetousiiess 

7.  whose  faith  ibliow,considuring  end  of  their  i. 
■Jam.  3.  13.  let  him  shew  out  of  a  good  c.  his  work* 

1  Pet.  1.  15.  so  be  ye  holy  in  all  manner  of  c. 
18. not  redeemed  w  ith  coirup.  things  from  vain  c 

2.  12.  having  your  e.  honest  among  the  Gentiles 

3.  1.  they  also  may  be  w  on  by  the  e.  of  the  wivei 
2.  while  they  behold  your  chaste  c.  with  fear 
16.  be  ashamed  that  falsely  accuse  your  good  e. 

2  Pet.  2.  7.  Lot  vexed  with  the  filthy  e.  of  wicked 
3.  11.  ought  ye  to  be,  in  all  holy  c.  and  godliness 

CONVERSION 
Is  the  turning,  or  total  change  of  a  sinner  from 
his  sins  to  God,  Psal.  51.  13,  And  sinnera 
shall  be  converted  nnto  thee.  Gvd  is  the  .luthof 
of  this  change,who  by  his  Spirit  puis  ri-pnttance 
faith,  love,  and  every  grace,  into  the  soul,  Jer 
31.  18,  Turn  thou  me.  John  6.  44,  No  man 
can  come  unto  me  cxco.(>t  the  Father  draw 
him.  'I'he  word  of  God  is  a  menns,  or  instru- 
ment of  conversion.  Psal.  19.  7,  The  law  of 
the  Lord  is  perfect,  converting  Ihe  soul.  Mi- 
ni.iters,  by  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  arc  also 
in.strumcntat  in  this  change,  1  Cor.  4.  15,  In 
Christ  Jesus  I  have  begotii  n  yon  through  the 
gospel.  .'Ind particular  Christians,  by  prinatt 
admonitions  and  exhortations,  are. sometimes  a 
means  of  this  change,  Jam.  5.  19,20.  Rege- 
neration is  the  infusion  of  grace  into  the  soul; 
conversion  is  the  eiercise  of  grace.  Draw  me,  I 
will  run,  Cant.  1.  4.  Converts  are  new  crea- 
tures, 2  Cor.  5.  17. ;  being  formed  in  the  imagt 
of  Christ,  Rom.  8.  29.  and  made  holy  in  part 
here,  and  shall  have  a  perfection  of  it  afttr 
death,  1  John  3.  2.  Rev.  21.  27. 
.?c/«15.3.dcclaring  the  r.  of  the  Gentiles  caused  jor 

CONVERT,  ED. 
Psal.  51.  13.  and  sinners  shall  bo  e.  unto  thee 
/.so. 6. 10.  lest  they  understand,  and  r.  and  be  healed 
60.  5.  the  abundance  of  ihe  sia  shall  be  c.  to  the« 
JI/<iM3.15.bec.  and  I  should  heal  tin  m,.l/nrA4.I2. 
18.  3.  except  ye  be  c.  and  become  as  childien 
I.ukc  22.  32.  when  c.  stn.nsilien  ihv  breihren 
John  12.  40.  be  c.  and  1  heni  them, '.'/.rs 28.  27. 
Jlcts  3.  19.  repi  nt  ye  therefore,  and  be  c.  that  sins 
Jam.  5.  19.  do  err  from  the  truth,  and  one  c.  him 

CONVKRTETII,  ING. 
ra-o/.lO.  7.  the  law  of  ihe  Lord  is  perfect,  r.  tliesuul 
Jam.  5.  20.  that  he  w  ho  e.  a  sinner  from  the  error 

CONVERTS. 
Isa.  1.  27.  her  c.  shall  be  redeemed  witli  righteoua 

CONVEY,  ED. 
}  Kings  5.  9.  nnd  I  will  c.  them  by  sea  in  flonfa 
AVA.  2.  7.  thai  ihey  may  c.  me  over  till  I  come 
John  5.  13.  for  Jesus  had  c.  himself  away 

CONVICTED. 
JohnS.  9.  bcinff  c.  bv  their  own  ronscience  went  out 

CONVINCE,  EI),  ETH. 
.fob  32.  12.  there  is  none  of  joii  thai  c.  Job 
.lohn  8.  46.  which  of  you  r.  me  of  sin? 

16.  1 8.  when  he  is  come  he  will  e.  the  world  of  sin 
.'Ids  18.  28.  for  he  mightily  c.  the  Jews,  shcwinij 
1  Cor.  14.  24.  he  is  c.  of  all,  he  is  judged  of  all 
Tit.  1.  9.  that  he  may  be  able  to  c.  gainHnyera 
Jam.  2.  9.  and  ar«  c-  of  the  law  as  transgresaon 


COR 

jKie  15.  to  f .  all  that  are  ungodly  among  them 

CONVOCATION,  S. 

Ezod.  12.  IG.  in  the  first  day  there  shall  be  a  holy 

c.  Lev.  i!3.  7,  24,  35.  JVitm.  -28.  18.  ]  29.  1. 

Lvc.  23  2.  ye  shall  proclaim  to  be  holy  c.  4, 21, 37 

3.  the  seventh  day  is  a  holy  c.  8.  jVum.  28.  25. 

27.  tenth  day  7Ui  month  a  holy  c.  J\rum.  29.  7. 

36.  on  the  eighth  day  shall  be  a  holy  c.  to  you 

JVu(n.28. 2G.  the  day  ofrirst-fruits  shall  have  holy  c. 

29.  12.  on  fifteenth  day  ot"  seventh  month  a  holy  c 

CONEY,  lES. 
L,m.  11.  5.  and  the  c.  because  he  cheweth  cud,  hut 
divicleth  not  hoot',  is  unclean  to  you,  JJeut.li.  7. 
Psal.  104.  18.  the  rocks  are  a  reluge  tor  the  c. 
/'roo.30.  26.  c.  are  but  a  feeble  folk,  make  houses 

COOK,  S. 

OcK.  40. 1 17.  in  uppermost  basket  was  work  of  a  c. 
ISam.  8. 13.  he  will  take  your  daughters  to  be  c. 
9.  23.  Samuel  said  to  e.  bring  portion  I  gave  thee 
24.  c.  took  up  the  shoulder  and  set  it  before  Saul 
COOL,  Substantive. 
G«n.3.8.  walking  in  the  garden  in  the  c.  of  the  day 

COOL,  Adjective. 
ProD.n.j  27.a  man  of  understanding  is  of  a  c.  spirit 

COOL,  Verb. 
L-uke  16.  24.  dip  tip  of  his  finger  and  c.  piy  tongue 

COPIED. 
Pror.  25. 1.  menof  Hezekiah  kingof  Judabe.  out 

COPING. 
IKings  7.9.  costly  stones  from  the  foundation  to  c. 

COPPER. 
Ezra  8.  27.  two  vessels  of  fine  e.  precious  as  gold 

COPPER-SMITH. 
2  Tiro.  4. 14.  Alexander  the  c.-x.did  me  much  evil 

COPULATION. 
Leo.  15.  16.  if  any  man's  seed  of  c.  go  out 

17.  skin  whereon  is  seed  of  c.  shall  bo  washed 

18.  with  whom  man  shall  lie  with  seed  of  c. 

COPY. 

Rent.  17.  18.  write  him  a  c.  of  this  law  in  a  book 

./o.sA.  8. 32.  he  wrote  on  stones  ac.  of  law  of  Muses 

Ezra  4. 1 1.  this  is  c.  of  a  letter  sent  to  him,  5.  6. 

23.  e.  of  Artaxerxes'  letter  was  road  before  Reh 

7. 11.  this  is  c.  of  the  letter  Artaxerxes  gave  Ezra 

Esth.X  14.  c.of  a  writing  for  .i  commandment,  8.13. 

4.  8.  Mordecai  gave  Hatach  a  c.  of  the  writing 

COR. 

Eick.  45.14.  offer  a  tenth  part  of  a  bath  out  of  the  c. 

CORAL. 
^134  28. 18.  no  mention  sliall  bemadeofr.  or  pearls 
Eiek.H.i^.  Syria  was  thy  merchant  in  c.  aud  agate 

CORBAN. . 
Markl.  11.  itisc.thatistosay,  a  gift,  shall  be  free 

CORD. 
The  cards  of  the  wieked,u?-e  the  snares  with  which 
they  catch  weak  andvnwary peojile,  Psal.  129. 4. 
Thecordsof  sin,  P)op.5.  22.  are  the  consequen- 
ces of  crimes  and  bad  habits.     Sin  never  goes 
Unpuiiiskcd;  and  the  bad  habits  which  are  con- 
tracted., are  as  it  were  indissuluble biifids  from 
which  it  is  almost  impossible  to  get  free.     Let 
us  cast  away  their  cords  from  us,  Psal.  2. 3.  J^et 
us  cast  off  Ikeir  government,  and  free  ourselves 
.from  subjection  to  their  laws,  which  like  fetters 
re.strain  us  from  our  purposes.     To  draw  ini- 
quity with  cords  of  vanity,  Isa.  5.  18.  that  is, 
lo  spare  no  cost  nor  pains  in  the  pursuit  of  sin. 
These  cords  of  vanity  may  signify  worldly 
taniliesandpleasures, profit  or  pr< ferment,  by 
which,  as  hycords,  the  devil  withdraws  persons 
from  God  and  his  latos,  and  the  way  to  heaven, 
and  leads  them  down  to  the  bottomless  pit.   Or, 
those  vain  and  deceitful  argum-nls  and  pre- 
tences, whereby  sinners  generally  draw  them- 
selves to  sin,  as  hop'  of  impunity  and  thelike. 
I  drew  them  with  the  cords  of  a  man,  Hos.  11.4. 
I  used  all  fair  and  gentle  means,  such  as  are 
Jilted  to  man's  temper,  as  he  is  a  reasonable 
creature,  to  allure  them  to  obedience:  I  found 
thr.m  backward  and  unapt  to  lead,  I  therefore  in 
my  piti/  laid  my  hand  on  them,  and  as  a  father 
or  friend  drew  them  gently  to  me.     To  stretch  a 
lineorcord  aboiitacity,  />am.2.8.  signifies, to 
ncin,  to  destroy  it  utterly,  to  Uvel  it  with  the 
ground.      The  cords  extended  in   setting  up 
tents,  do  likewise  furnish  several  metaphors, 
denoting  either  the  stability  or  ruin  of  a  place 
or  people,  according  as  Ihey  are  said  to  be  ex- 
tended or  loose,  Isa.  33.  20.  .7er.  10.  ^0.  • 
Jb»A.9.15.Ral)ab  let  spies  down  by  a  c.  thro' wind. 
.fob  30. 11.  he  hath  loosed  my  c.  and  afflicted  me 
41. 1.  canst  draw  outleviathan's  tongue  witliac? 
Eccl.  4.  12.  a  threefold  c.  is  not  quickly  broken 
12.6.  or  ever  the  silver  c.  be  loosed,  or  golden  bowl 
f.oa.  54.  2.  spare  not,  lengthen  c.  strengthen  stakes 
'Mic.  2.  5.  a  c.  by  lot  in  conjregation  of  the  Lord 

CORDS. 

F.xod.  35.  18.  the  pins  of  the  court  and  their  e. 

hidg.  15.  13.  thov  bound  Samson  with  new  e. 

7oi  38.  8.  if  they  be  holdea  in  c.  of  afflictioQ 

97 


COR 

Psal.  3.  3.  let  us  cast  away  their  f.'lrom  us 
118.  27.  bind  the  sacrifice  with  c.  to  horns  of  altar 
129.  4.  be  hath  cut  asunder  the  c.  of  the  wicked 
14D.  5.  the  proud  have  hid  a  snare  and  c.  for  me 

Prov.5.2'2.  he  shall  be  holden  with  the  c.  of  liis  sins 

Jsa.  5.  18.  woe  to  them  that  draw  iniciuity  with  c 
33.  20.  nor  shall  any  of  the  c.  thereof  be  broken 

./er.  10.  20.  tabernacle  is  spoiled,  all  my  e.  broken 

38.  6.  and  they  let  down  Jeremiah  with  c. 
13.  so  they  drew  up  Jeremiah  with  c.  took  him 

Ezek.il.  24.  in  chests  of  rich  apparel  bound  with  c. 
Hos.  11.  4.  I  drew  them  with  the  c.  of  a  m 
.lohn%  15.  when  he  had  made  a  scourge  of  small  c. 

CORIANDER. 
Exod.  16.  31.  manna  was  like  c.  seed,  JVum.  11. 7, 

CORMORANT. 
Lev.  11. 17.  ye  shall  have  in  abomination  the  little 
owl,  and  the  c.  and  thegreat  owl,  J^eut.  14. 17. 
Isa.  34.11.  but  the  c.  shall  possess  it,  Zeph.  2.  14. 

CORN. 
Oen.  41.  57.  all  countries  came  to  Joseph  tobuyc. 

42. 2.Jacob  heard  there  was  c.  in  Egypt,.'if*s7.12. 

19.  go  ye,  carry  c.  for  the  famine  of  your  houses 

F.xod.  22.  6.  so  that  the  staiiks  of  c.  be  consumed 

/yCc.2.16.  priest  shall  burn  part  of  beaten  c.  thereof 

23.  14.  ye  shall  eat  neither  bread  nor  parched  c. 
JVum.  18. 27.  as  tho'  it  were  the  c.  of  threshing-fioor 
Deut. 16.9.  as  thou  beginnest  to  put  the  sickle  to  c. 

25.  4.  thou  shall  not  muzzle  the  ox  when  he  tread- 

eth  out  the  c.  ICor.  9.  9.  1  Tim.  5.  18. 

.7osh.  5. 11.  they  did  eatofthe  old  c.of  the  laiidj  12. 

Ruth  2.14.  he  reached  her  parched  c.  and  she  did  eat 

3.  7.  Boaz  went  to  lie  down  at  end  of  the  heap  of  c. 
1  Sam.l7.17.take  for  brethren  an  ephah  of  parchedc. 

25.  18.  Abigail  took  five  measures  of  parched  c. 
2Sam.  17.  28.  they  brought  parched  c.  and  beans 
'iKings  19.  2G.  they  were  as  blasted  c.  Isa.  37.  27. 
jVeA.  5.  2.  we  take  up  c.  for  them,  that  we  may  eat 
Job  5.  26.  as  a  shock  of  c.  cometh  in  his  season 

24.6.  they  reap  every  one  his  c.  in  the  field 

39.  4.  their  young  ones  they  grow  up  with  c. 
Psal.  65.  9.  prepares!  them  c.  when  thou  providest 

13.  the  valleys  also  are  covered  over  with  c. 

72.  16.  there  shall  be  a  handful  of  c.  in  the  earth 

78.  24.  and  had  given  them  of  the  c.  of  heaven 
Prov.  11. 26.  that  withholdeth  c.  people  shall  curse 
Isa.  17.  5.  when  the  harvest-man  gathereth  the  c. 

62.  8.  I  will  no  more  give  thy  c.  to  thine  enemies 
Ezek.  36.  29.  I  will  call  for  the  c.  and  will  increase 
Hos.l.^.  I  will  takeaway  my  c.  in  the  time  thereof 

10.  11.  Ephraim  loveth  to  tread  out  the  c. 

11  7.they  shall  revive  as  thee. and  grow  as  the  vine 
.foci  1. 10.  for  the  c.  is  wasted,  new  wine  is  dried  up 

1.  17  barns  are  broken  down,  for  c.  is  withered 
.4mos<?.5.tlic  new  moon  begonethat  wemay  sell  c. 

9.  9.  I  w  ill  sift  Israel  like  as  c.  is  silted  in  a  sieve 
Mark  4.  28.  after  that  the  full  c.  in  the  ear 
.John  12.  2-1.  except  a  c.  of  wheat  full  into  ground 

Ears  of  CORN. 
<ren.  41.5.  seven  (?arso/c.  came  up  upon  one  stalk 
y>ej).2.14.shalt  olfer  green  ear5o/c.  dried  by  the  fire 
Huth  2.  2.  let  mo  go  and  glean  ear;;  o/c.  after  him 
'iKingsi.\'i.  brought  full  ears  of  c.  in  husk  thereof 
.lob  24.  24.  they  are  cut  off  as  loyjs  of  the  ears  of  c. 
.Wat.l2.1.to pluck  ears  of  c.  Mark  2.  23.  Luke  6.1 

CORN-FIELDS. 

Mark  2.  23.  itcamc  to  pass,  that  lie  went  through 

c.-fields  on  the  sabbath-day,  Mat.\i.\. Luke6.\. 

CORN-FLOOR. 

/sffi.  21. 10.  O  my  threshing,  and  the  c.of  my  floor 

Hos.9. 1.  thou  hast  loved  a  reward  on  eyery  c.-Jioor 

Standing-COUN. 
Erod.  22.  6.  so  that  the  standing-c.  be  consumed 
/>e?i£.23.25.come  into  .stanAnor  c.of  thy  neighbour 
Judg.15.5.  let  foxes  go  into «<a?irf.-c.  burn  upj>t.-t. 

'  CORN  and  wine. 
Oen.  27.  28.  God  give  thee  plenty  of  c.  and  wine 

37.  with  c.  and  wine  have  I  sustained  him 

Deut.  7.  13.  he  will  also  bless  thy  c.  and  nine 

11. 14.  that  mayest  gather  in  thy  c.  and  !c.  andoi! 

12.  17.  mayest  not  eat  tithe  of  thy  c.  and  w.  14. 23. 

16.  13.  after  thou  hast  gathered  in  thy  c.  and  wine 

18.  4.  give  him  first  fruit  of  thy  c.  and  w.  and  oil 

28.  51.  which  shall  not  leave  thee  c.  wine  or  oil 

33.  28.  Jacob  shall  be  upon  aland  of  c.  and  wine 

;  Kings  18.  32.  to  a  land  of  c.  and  wine,  Isa.  36. 17. 

2C/ir.  31.  5.  Israel  brought  first-fruits  of  c.  and  w. 

32.28.  store-houses  for  increase  of  e.  wine,  and  oil 

Keh.  5. 11.  restore  the  100th  part  of  c.  wine,  and  oil 

10.  39.  bring  offering  of  c.  of  new  wine,  13.  5, 12. 
Psal.  4.  7.  than  in  time  theirc.anrf  wine  increased 
/,am.2.12.  say  to  their  mothers,  where  is  c.  and  w.? 
Hos. '2.8.  she  knew  not  that  I  gave  her  c.  w.  and  oil 

22.  the  earth  shall  hear  the  e.  and  w.  and  the  oil 
7.  14.  they  assemble  themselves  for  c.  and  wine 
.Toel  2.  19.  behold,  I  will  send  you  c.  and  w.  and  oil 
Mag.  1. 11.  Icalledfordroughton  c.  andneyiwinr 
7.ech.  9.17.  e.  make  men  cheerful,  and  w.  the  maids 

CORNER. 
Lev.  21. 5.  ahall  they  shave  off  the  c.  of  their  beard 


COR 

iChron.  28.24.  he  made  altars  in  every  c.  ofJerus. 
Prov.  7.  8.  passing  through  the  street  near  her  e. 
12.  she  is  without,  and  lieth  in  wait  nt  every  c. 
21.  9.  better  to  dwell  in  c.of  the  house-top,  25. 24. 
/sa.30.20.  yet  thy  teachers  not  be  removed'intoac. 
./er.  48.  45.  a  flame  shall  devour  the  c.  of  Moab 
51.  26.  they  shall  not  take  of  thee  a  atone  for  a  c. 
Exek.  46.  21.  in  every  c.of  court  there  was  a  court 
Jlmos  3.  12.  that  dwell  in  Samaria  in  thoc.  of  abed 
Zech.  10.  4.  out  of  him  came  forth  the  c.  and  nail 
jUa«.21.42.  the  stone  the  builders  rejected,  the  same 
is  become  the  head  of  the  c.  Psal.  118.22 
Markn.W.  LiikeW.il.. Sets i.il.  lfc(.2.7. 
Jicts  26.  26.  for  this  thing  was  not  done  in  a  c. 

CORNER-GATE. 
2  Kings  W.  13.  from  gate  of  Ephraim  to  the  c.-gatt 
■ZChron.  26.  9.  built  towers  at  Jerusalem  at  c.-^o£« 
./er.31.38.crty  shall  be  built  from  tower  to  gate  ofc. 
Zech.  14.  10.  land  shall  be  inhabited  to  the  c.-gaCe 

CORNI-.R-SrONE. 
.lob  38.  6.  or  who  laid  the  c.-stone  thereof? 
Psal.  118.  22.  is  become  the  head-.stonc  of  the  e. 
144.  12.  that  our  daughters  may  be  as  c.-stones 
Isa.  28.16.  in  Zion  a  precious  c.-«tone,  IPet.  2.6. 
Eph.  2.  20.  Christ  himself  being  the  chief  c.-stone 

CORNERS. 
Exod.  25.12.  put  rings  in  lour  c.of  ark,  two  on  one 
side,  and  two  on  the  other,  26.  |  27. 4.  |  37.13. 
27.  2.  make  the  horns  upon  the  four  c.  38.  2. 
Lev. 19.  9.  shaltnotreap  the  c.of  your  field, 23.22. 
27.  ye  shall  not  round  e.  of  your  heads  nor  beard 
JVum.  24.  17.  a  sceptre  shall  smite  the  c.  of  Moab 
JJeut.  32.  26.  I  said,  I  will  scatter  them  into  c. 
I.Sam.  14.  t  38.  draw  near,  ye  c.  of  the  people 
JVcA.  9.  22.  moreover  thou  didst  divide  them  into  c. 
Job  1.19.a  great  wind  smote  the  four  c.  of  the  house 
Isa.  11.  12.  gather  dispersed  of  Judah  fromfoure. 
.Jer.  9.  25, 26.  I  will  punish  circumcised  with  uncir- 
cumcised,all  that  are  in  utterm.c.25. 2.3.  |  49.  32. 
Ezek.  7.  2.  the  end  iscomeupoii  fourc.of  theland 
45. 19.  put  blood  upon  the  four  c.  of  settle  of  altar 
Zeph.  3.  t6.  their  care  desolate,  Iheirstreets  waste 
Zeeh.  9.  t  15.  shall  be  filled  as  the  c.  of  the  altar* 
Mat.  6.  5.  they  love  to  pray  in  the  c.  of  the  streets 
Jicts  10.  11.  a  great  sheet  knit  at  four  c.  11.  5. 
Rev.l.l.  four  angels  standing  on  four  c.  oftheearth 

CORNET. 
Exod.  19. 1 13.  when  the  c.  soundeth  long,  come  up 
IChr.  15.  28.  brought  up  the  ark  with  sound  of  e. 
Ps.  98. 6.  with  sound  of  the  c.  make  a  joyful  noise 
150.  t  3.  praise  him  with  the  sound  of  the  c. 
Daii.  3.  5.  at  what  time  ye  hear  the  sound  of  c.  15. 
10.  made  decree,  every  man  shall  hear  sound  ofc. 
Hos. 5.8.  blow  ye  thec.inGibeah,and  the  trumpet 
.loel  2. 1 1.  blow  ye  the  c.  in  Zion,  and  sound  alarm 

CORNETS. 
2  Sam.  C.  5.  David  played  before  the  Lord  on  c 
2  CA;0K.15. 14.  sware  to  the  Lord  shouting  withe 

CORPSE,  S. 
iKings  19. 35.  bch.  they  were  all  dead  c.  /s (1.37.36. 
JVah.  3.  3.  there  is  no  end  of  c.  they  stumble  on  e, 
Mark  6.29.disciple8  took  John's  c. and  laid  in  tomb 

CORPULENT. 
Jcr.  50.  1 11.  because  ve  are  grown  c.  as  a  heifer 

CORRECT. 
Psal.  39.  11.  when  thou  dost  c.  man  for  iniquity 
94.  10.  he  that  chastiscth  heathen,  shall  not  he  c? 
Prov.  29.  17.  c.  thy  son,  and  he  shall  give  thee  rest 
Jer.  2.  19.  thine  own  wickedness  shall  c.  thee 
10. 24.0  L.c.  me,  but  with  judgment,  not  in  anger 
30.  11.  but  I  will  c.  thee  in  measure,  46.  28. 

CORRECTED,  ETH. 
.lob  5.  17.  behold,  happy  is  tho  man  whom  God  e. 
Prov.  3.  12.  for  whom  the  Lord  loveth,  he  c. 
29.  19.  ft  servant  will  not  be  c.  by  words 
//«A. 12.9.  we  have  had  fathersof  ourflesh  whiche. 

CORRECTION. 
.Tob  37.  13.  rain  to  come,  whether  for  c.  or  mercy 
/VotT.3.1  l.my  son, despise  not  nor  be  weary  of  his  e. 
7.  22.  he  goeth  as  a  fool  to  the  c.  of  the  stocks 
15.10.  c.  is  grievous  to  him  that  forsaketh  the  way 
t  32.  he  that  refuselh  c.  despiseth  his  own  soul 

22.  15.  but  the  rod  ofc.  shall  drive  it  from  him 

23.  1.3.  withhold  not  c.  from  the  child 
.fer.  2.  30.  your  children  they  received  no  e. 

5.  3.  but  they  have  refused  to  receive  c. 
7.  28.  this  is  a  nation  that  receiveth  not  c. 

Hos.  5.  t  2.  though  I  have  been  a  c.  of  them  alt 

Hab.l.12.0  God,  thou  hast  established  them  for  c. 

Zeph.  3.  2.  she  obeyed  not,  she  received  not  «. 

2  Tim.  3.  16.  the  scripture  is  profitable  for  c. 

^  CORRUPT 

Signifies,  [1]  To  consume,  Mat.  6. 19.  [2]  To  de- 
file, or  pollute,  Exod.  32. 7.  [3]  To  mar,  spoil, 
or  infect,  ICor.  15. 33.  [4]  To  entice,  or  allure, 
2Cor.  II.  3.  [5]  To  break,  or  make  void,  Mai. 
2.  a  [6]  To  cause  to  dissemble,  Dan.  11.  f  32. 
[7]  Vicious  and  unsound,  wholly  biassed  by 
carnal  interest  and  corrupt  affections,  1  Tinv. 
6.  5.  2  Tim.  3.  8.    [8]  Fillhy  and  unaavoury 


COR 

corrupt  communicatiun,  Eph.  4.  29.;  that  is, 
tuck  communication  as  proceeds  from  corrup- 
tion in  the  speaker,  and  lends  to  infect  and 
corrupt  the  minds  ami  manners  of  the  hearers. 
[a]  Deceitful,  Dan.  i.  tt. 
Corru|>iion  sometimes  signifies  rottenness  or  pu- 
trefaction, such  as  our  bodies  are  subject  to  in 
the  grave,  I'saLlC.  10,  Tliou  wilt  not  surt'crtliiiie 
boly  One  to  sec  currujitiun;  IC'or.  15.  4^,  It  is 
town  ill  corrtiptiun:  J^ike  seed  it  is  laid  in  the 
earth,  subject  to  rottenness.     It  likewise  sig- 
iiifies  the  infectious  and  poisonous  nature  of  sin, 
which  spiritually  wastes  the  soul,  being  con- 
trary to  that  intigrity  and  soundness  in  urhich 
vie  were  created.    Ki)li.4.-2;!,  Putctl'tlieold  man 
which  is  corrupt;  that  is,  labour  to  mortify  and 
subdue  that  corruption  uf  nature  which  has  in- 
fected the  whole  man,  both  soul  and  body,  and 
which  daily  grows  worse  and  more  corrupt  by 
the  fuljilling  of  its  lusts.      The  apostle  Peter, 
speaking  of  seducers,  says,  that  Uiey  are  tlie 
»ervants  of  corruption,  i  fet.  2.  19.     They  are 
slaves  to  their  lusts,  and  under  the  power  and 
dominion  of  sin.     'J  he  mount  u/OUves  is  called 
the  mount  of  corruption,  •iHings  23. 13.  because 
Solomon  built  thereon  temples  to  the  gods  of  the 
AmmonituB  and  of  the  Moabitos,  to  gratify  his 
wives  who  icere  natives  of  these  nations. 
Oen.  C.  II.  the  earth  also  was  c.  before  God,  12. 
Judg.  2. 1 19.  when  the  judge  was  deaii  they  were  c. 
Job  17.  1.  my  breath  is  c.  my  days  are  extinct 
PsaK  14. 1.  they  are  c.  none  doth  good,  53. 1. 1  73. 8. 
38.  5.  my  wounds  slink  and  are  c.  because  of  folly 
Prov.  25.  26.  as  a  lrouhle<l  fountain  iind  c.  spring 
/;:H-.20.44.  not  according  to  your  c.  doing,*,  O  Isr. 
23. 11.  she  was  more  e.  in  her  inordinate  love  than 
Dan.  2.  9.  ye  have  prepared  lying  and  c.  words 
Mai.  1. 14.  cursed  that  sacnliceth  to  Ld.  a  c.  thing 
Mat.  7.  17.  a  c.  tree  bringeth  forth  evil  fruit 
18.  nor  can  a  c.  tree  bring  good  fruit,  J^uke  6.  43. 
12.  33.  or  else  make  the  tree  c.  and  his  fruit  c. 
Eph.  4.  22.  put  olTthe  old  man  which  is  c. 
29. let  no  c. communication  proceed  out  of  mouth 

1  Tim.  G.  5.  perverse  disputings  of  men  of  c.  minds 

2  Tim.  3.  8.  these  resist  the  truth,  men  of  c.  minds 

CORRUPT. 
Deut.  4. 16.  take  heed  lest  ye  c.  yourselves,  25. 
31.  '!9.  after  my  death  ye  will  c.  yourselves 
Dan  11. 1 17.  give  him  ihcdaughter  of  women  toe. 
32  such  as  do  wickedly  shall  ho  c.  by  flatteries 
.Vi/.  2.  3.  beheld  I  will  c.  your  seed,  spread  dung 
Mat.  6. 10.  on  earth,  where  inolh  and  rust  doth  c. 
20.  treasures,  where  neither  moth  nor  rust  doth  c. 
1Ci>r.  15.33.  evil  communications  c.  good  manners 
2Cor.  2. 17.  we  are  not  as  many  that  c.  the  word 
Jude  10.  in  those  things  they  e.  themselves 
Rett.  11. 1 18.  shouldest  destroy  them  that  c.  earth 
19.2.<»reat  whore  did  c  earth  with  her  fornications 

CGRRITPTKD,  ETH. 
0(m.6.12.  for  all  flesh  had  c.  his  way  u|)on  the  earth 
Er/)d.  8.  24.  the  land  was  c.  by  reason  of  the  flies 
3i.  7.  Lord  said  to  Moses,  get  thee  down,  for  thy 
people  have  c.  thcniselves,  Dcut.0. 12.132.  .5. 
Judg.  2.  19.  e.  themselves  more  than  their  fiithers 
F.ick.  Ifi.  47.  thou  wast  c.  more  than  they  in  ways 
28.  17.  thou  hast  c.  thy  wisdom  by  thy  brightness 
ffo*.fi.9.  have  deeply  c.thems.  asindaysofGibeah 
^moil.tll.  pursued  broth,  and  c.  his  compassions 
7.epk.  3.  7.  they  rose  early  and  e.  all  their  doings 
>/a/.2. 8.  ychavec.  the  covenant  of  Levi  saith  l,.d. 
A,uil[el2.33.wlierenotliiefapproachetli, nor  moth  c. 
20i>r.7.2.wc  have  wronged  no  man,  have  e.  no  man 
1 1.3.  lest  your  minds  be  c.  from  simplicity  in  Christ 
Jam.Tt.  1,  2.  go  to  ye  rich  men,  your  riches  are  c. 

CORRUPTERS. 
[la.  I.  4.  nh  sinful  nation,  children  that  are  e. 
Jrr.  6.  28.  ihcy  are  bra»!<  and  iron,  they  are  all  c. 

CORRUPTIBLE. 
Worn. 1.23.  changed  loan  image  made  like  toe.  man 
I  Cot.  9.  25.  now  they  do  it  to  obtain  a  c.  crown 
15.  53.  for  this  e.  must  put  on  incorruption 
\Pet.  1. 1'',  ye  were  not  redeemed  with  e.  things 
ftl.  being  born  again,  not  of  c.  seed  but  incorrupt. 
'i.  4.  but  let  it  bn  in  that  whieh  is  not  c.  meek  spirit 

CORRUPTING. 
/)<in.lI.17.givc  him  thndniightor  of  women  c.  her 

CORRUPTION. 

A.(W .22.25. hecnnse  their  r .  is  in  them, and  blemishes 

2/i'inn-;»2:i.  L3.  on  the  right  hand  of  the  mount  of  c. 

Job  17. 14.  I  have  said  to  r.  thou  art  my  father 

Pittl.  IB.  10.  not  leave  my  soul,  nor  wilt  thou  sufTer 

thine  holy  One  to  soe  c.  Jlcts  2.  27.  j  13.35. 

43.  9.  that  ho  should  live  for  ever,  and  not  see  e. 

ha.  38. 17.  thou  hast  delivered  it  from  the  pit  of  «. 

/>an.  lO.H.  for  my  comelinnsi  was  turned  in  mo  toe. 

.hnahl.fi.  yet  hast  thou  brniight  up  my  life  fromc. 

.Arts  2.31 .  soul  not  left  in  hell,  nor  his  flesh  did  joo  e. 

13.  34.  he  raised  him  up,  no  more  to  return  to  e 

3fi.  David  was  laid  to  his  fnlhers  and  saw  e. 

37  bat  he  H-bom  God  raised  again  law  no  c 


cov 

iJom.8.21.  shall  be  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  e. 
HJor.  15.  42.  it  is  sown  in  c.  raised  iu  incorruption 

59.  neither  doth  c.  inherit  iucorrupliun 
(r  u/.ti,8.tliat  soweth  to  the  t1e6h,8hall  ol  flesh  reape. 
•il'et.  1.  4.  escaped  the  c.  that  is  in  world  tliro'  lust 
2.  12.  and  shall  utterly  perish  in  tiieir  own  c. 
19.  they  themselves  are  the  servaulg  of  c. 
CORRUPTLY. 
2  Chron.  27.  2.  and  the  people  did  yet  c. 
JV«A.  1.  7.  we  have  dealt  very  c.  against  ihce 

COST. 
2S«m.  19.  42.  have  we  eaten  at  all  of  the  king's  c? 
24.24. nor  oHer  to  God  of  that  which  c.  me  nothing 
ICIiroH.  21.  24.  nor  otler  burnt-oll'erings  without  c. 
Luke  14.  28.  sitleth  not  down  first,  and  counleth  c. 

COSTLINESS. 
Rev.  18. 19.  all  that  had  ships  made  rich  by  her  c. 

COSTLY. 
XKings  5. 17.  they  brought  c.  stones,  hewed  stones 
7.  9.  all  these  were  of  c.  stones  by  the  measures 

10,  foundation  was  of  c.  stones,  even  great  stones 

11.  and  above  were  c.  stones  and  cedars 
John  12.3.  Mary  took  a  pound  of  spikenard,  very  c. 

1  'y'im.2.y.that  women  adorn  thems.nol  with  c. array 

COTES. 

2  Chron.  32.  28.  Hczekiuh  made  c.  for  flocks 

COTTAGE,  S. 

Isa.  1.  8.  daugh.  of  Zion  is  left  as  a  c.  in  a  vineyard 
24.  20.  ihc  earth  shall  be  removed  like  a  c. 

Z.eph.  2.  li.  the  sea-coast  shall  be  c.  tor  shepherds 
COUCH,  ES. 

Gen.  49.  4.  Reuben  defiled  it  and  went  up  to  my  c. 

Job  7.  13.  I  say,  my  c.  shall  ease  my  complaint 

Psal.  6.  tj.  all  night  I  water  my  c.  with  my  tears 

Jimos  3.  12.  Israel  be  taken  out  in  Damascus  in  ae. 
6.  4.  that  strelch  themselves  upon  their  e. 

Luke  5. 19.  let  him  down  through  tiling  with  his  c. 
24.  arise,  take  up  thy  c.  and  go  to  thy  house 

Acts  5.  15.  they  laid  the  sick  on  beds  and  c. 
COUCH. 

.hb  38.40.  when  they  c.  in  dens,  and  abide  in  covert 
COUCHED. 

Oen.  49.  9.  Judah  c.  as  a  lion,  and  as  an  old  lion 

jVuni.24.9.  he  c.  he  lay  down  as  a  lion,  as  great  lion 
COUCHETH. 

DexU.  33. 13.  for  dew,  and  for  deep  that  c.  beneath 
COUCHING. 

Oen.  49. 14.  Issachar  c.  down  between  two  burdens 

£icAr.25.5.will  makeAmmonitcsac.placefortlocks 
COVENANT 

Is  a  mutual  agreement  between  two  or  more  par- 
ties, Gen.  21.  32.  Thtri:  is  [1]  A  cuvniant  of 
works,  the  terms  whereof  arc,  Do  and  live;  si7i 
and  die.  Gen.  2.  17.  Isa.  1.  19,  20.  -.chich  cove 
nnnt  was  broken  by  our  first  parents  sinning 
against  (rod,  in  eating  the  forbidden  j'ruit,  and 
the  covenant  being  made  with  Adam  as  a  public 
person,  not  only  for  himself  but  for  his  pos- 
terity, nil  mankind,  descending  from  him  by 
ordinary  gcneriition,  sinned  in  him,  and  fill 
with  him  ill  their  first  transgression,  Rom.  5. 
12 — 20.  [2]  'The  covenant  of  redemption,  and 
salvation  by  grace,  entered  into  by  the  snered 
Three,  in  behalf  of  elect  siimers,  on  whom 
grace,and  glory  were  settled  for  ever,  in  Christ, 
their  covenant-head,  Psal.  89. 3,  28.  Eph.  1.3,  4. 
2 Tim.  1.  9.  This  covenant  is,  (1)  /'he  fruit 
of  the  sovereign  love  and  good  will  of  (lod, 
John  3. 16.  CoF.  1. 19.  (2)  Sure,  Isa.  55.  3.  (3) 
It  is  everlasting,  Isa.  61.8.  (4)  Absolute,  Jer. 
32. 38, 40.  (5)  A  covenant  filled  with  all  spirit- 
ual blessings  to  true  believers  in  Christ,  Eph, 
1.  5.  (6)  Ciillednew,  Heb.8.6,8.  nutin  respect 
of  its  date,  it  being  made  from  everlasting,  but 
in  the  manner  of  its  dispensation  and  mani- 
festation: J^ot  that  it  differed  in  substuvce 
from  the  old,/flr  thrreiv  <  lirist  was  promised, 
his  death,  and  sufferings  shadowed  furlh  by  the 
legal  aaerifices;  and  such  as  were  saved  under 
the  Old  Testanient,  were  so  only  by  faith  in  the 
blood  of  the  Messiah  that  was  to  tome;  Gal.  4, 
3,  Abraham  believed  God,  and  it  was  counted 
to  him  for  righteousness ;  he  believed  in  a  special 
manner  the  promise  of  the  covenant  concerning 
Christ,  in  whom  believers  of  all  nations  shall 
be  blessed,  Gen.  12.  3.  (1)  Hut  this  teslnmcnt 
or  covenant  is  called  new,  in  regard  of  the  man- 
ner of  its  dispensation;  bring  ratified  afresh 
by  the  blood  and  actual  sufferings  »/ Christ; 
bring  freed  from  those  rites  or  ceremonies 
wherewith  it  was  formerly  administered;  as  it 
contains  a  more  full  and  clear  revelation  of  the 
mi/steries  of  religion;  as  it  is  attndrd  with  a 
larger  mea.iure  of  the  gifts  and  graces  of  the 
Spirit;  and  as  it  is  never  to  war  old  or  be 
aholished.  (2)  For  circumcision,  which  was 
the  sign  or  seal  of  the  old  covenant.  Gen.  17. 
9,13.  (3)  For  the  duties  of  the  covenant;  Pint. 
25. 14,  Me  will  shew  them  his  covenant  ■  He  will 
reveal  to  them,  and  make  Ihem  understand  the 


COV 

duties,  and  bestow  on  them  the  octssmgs  of  the 
covenant.  (4)  For  the  laws  or  conditions  re- 
quired of  men  by  the  covenant;  or  the  precepts 
of  God,  which  are  the  testimonies  or  witnesses 
of  God's  will  and  of  man's  duty,  Psal.  23.  10. 
(5)  For  the  decalogue,  or  tin  commandments, 
which  contain  the  articles  of  the  covenant, 
Deul.  4.  13.  (6)  For  the  law,  religion,  and 
people  of  the  Jews,  if  Ao  were  m  covenant  with 
God,  Dan.  11.  28.  (7)  h'or  the  vow,  promise, 
or  engagement,  whereby  a  man  and  woman 
mutually  bind  themselves  to  each  other  in  mar- 
riage; and  this  is  called  the  covenant  of  God, 
Frov.  2.  17.  because  God  is  the  instilutor  of 
that  society  and  mutual  obligation;  and  because 
(rod  is  called  to  be  the  witness  and  judge  of 
that  solemn  promise  and  covenant,  and  the 
avenger  of  the  transgression  of  it. 
Gen.  9.  12.  this  is  the  token  of  the  c.  13, 17. 1 17.  II. 
17.  4.  as  for  me,  behold,  my  c.  is  with  thee 

13.  my  c.  shall  be  in  your  flesh  for  an  everlast.  c. 

14.  that  soul  be  cut  ofi",  he  hath  broken  my  c. 
Eiod.  31.  16.  keep  the  sabbath  for  a  (wrpetual  e. 

34.28.  he  wrote  upon  the  tables  the  words  of  thee. 
/,ci'.26. 15.  yedonjt  my  coimn.  but  ye  break  my  c. 
wViim.  25^12.  behold,  1  give  to  him  niyc.  of  peace 

13.  even  the  c.  of  an  everlasting  priesthood 
Deut.  4.  13.  and  he  declared  unto  you  his  e. 
23.  lest  ye  forget  the  c.  of  the  Lord  your  God 
31.  Lord  will  not  forget  the  c.  of  thy  fathers 
9.9.  when  I  was  gone  to  receive  the  tables  of  thee. 

11.  the  Lord  gave  me  the  tables  of  l.'ie  c. 

15.  thetwo  tables  of  the  c.  were  in  my  two  handi 
29.1.  these  are  the  words  of  the  c.  which  L.  comra. 

12.  thou  shouldest  enter  into  e.  with  the  Lord 
21  .accord ing  to  all  the  curses  of  t he c.  in  this  book 
25.  because  ye  have  forsaken  tiiei;.  of  the  Lord 

31.  20.  they  will  provoke  me,  and  break  my  c. 
.Judg.  2.  1.  I  said  I  will  never  break  my  e.  with  you 
1  Su/n.20.8.hast  brought  thy  servant  info  c.  of  L4R 
\  Kings  19.  10.  for  Israel  have  forsaken  thy  c.  14. 

20.34.Ahab  said, I  will  send  thee  away  with  this  e. 
ih'ings  13.  23.  because  of  bis  e.  with  Abraham 

2;i.  3.  to  (lerform  words  of  the  e.  written  in  book 
and  all  the  people  stood  to  Ihc  c.  2  CAr.34.  31. 
ICAron.  IG.  15.  be  ye  mindful  always  of  his  c. 
2CAro?i.l5. 12.  they  entered  into  a  c.  to  seek  L.God 
JVeA.  13.  29.  they  have  defiled  the  c.  of  priesthood 
Psal.  25. 14.  that  feat  him,  he  will  shew  them  his  c. 

44.  17.  neither  have  we  dealt  falsely  in  thy  e. 

50.1G.  that  thou  shouldest  take  my  e.  in  thy  mouth 

.55.  20.  he  put  forth  his  hands,  he  halli  broken  e. 

74.  20.  have  respect  to  c.  for  dark  places  of  earth 

78.  37.  heart  notright,  nor  were  tiiey  sleilfast  inc. 

89.28.  mercy  keep  and  c'-hall  standfast  with  him 
34.  my  c.will  1  not  hreak.  nor  alter  the  thing  gon« 
M.  thou  hsst  made  void  ihc  c.  ofiliy  servant 

111.  5.  he  will  ever  be  mindful  of  his  c. 

9.  commanded  his  c.  for  ever,  holy  is  his  name 
Prov.  2.  17.  and  forgetteth  the  f.  of  her  God 
/sa.W.  18.  your  r.  with  death  shall  be  disnnnullcd 

33. 8.  he  hath  broken  the  c.  he  hath  despised  citie< 
42.  6.  and  give  thee  for  a  e.  of  the  people,  49.  8. 
54.  10.  nor  shall  the  c  of  my  peace  be  removed 
.56.  4.  the  eunuchs  that  lake  hold  of  my  c.  6. 
59.  21.  as  for  me,  this  is  my  c.  with  them 

.ler.  11.  2.  hear  ye  the  words  of  this  r.  6. 
3.  cursed  be  the  man  that  olx-yeth  not  words  of  c. 
14.  21.  remember,  break  not  thy  c.  with  us 

22.9.  bccnuse  they  have  forsaken  the  r.  of  the  Ld. 
31.  32.  which  my  c.  they  brake,  snith  the  Lord 
33.20.  if  you  can  break  my  c.  ofday  and  e.  of  night 

21. then  may  c.  be  broken  with  David  my  servant 
25.  if  my  c.  be  not  with  day  and  night 

34.10.  theppoplciwhich  had  entered  inloe.  heard 

18.  who  have  not  performed  the  words  of  this  c. 
no.  5.  let  us  join  to  the  Lord  in  a  perpetual  e. 

F.tek.  16.  8.  I  swareaiid  entered  into  a  r.  wilh  ihce 
59.  hast  despised  oath  in  bienking  the  e.  17.  18. 
61.  give  them  tothce  for  dnughlrrs,  not  by  thyc. 
17.  1.5.  or  shall  he  break  the  c.  and  be  delivered? 

16.  whose  oath  he  despised,  whose  c.  he  brake 

19.  my  c.  he  bath  broken,  it  will  I  rocompcnee 
20.  37.  I  will  bring  you  into  the  bond  of  the  e. 
44. 7. they  have  broken  my  c.  because  of  abominat. 

/.'/in.9,27.  shall  confirm  c,  with  many  for  one  week 
11,22,  shall  be  broken,  vcn  also  the  prince  of  thee. 

28.  and  his  hc.irt  shall  be  against  the  holy  r. 

30.  be  shall  have  indignaiion  ngainsi  the  holy  «. 

32.«iirh  nsdo  wickcdiv  against  e.  t-hall  be  corrupt 
Wo.t.  10.4. spoken  words,  swearing  falsely  in  niak.c 
y.eeh.  11.  10.  that  I  might  break  my  c.  !  bad  made 
Mal.'iA.  that  myc.  might  be  with  f/evisailh  I,d.5. 

8.  yr  have  corrupted  e.  of  Levi,  snith  L.  ol  hosit 

10.  by  profaning  the  r.  of  oiir  fathers 

M.yet  she  is  thy  companion,  and  the  wifeofthy*. 

3.  I.  even  messenger  of  the  r.  whom  yedelignl  in 
.fc^<3.  2.5.  ye  are  children  nf  the  t,  God  made  witk 

7.  8.  and  he  gave  him  the  c.  of  rircunic  sion 
Roth.  1.  31.  without  understanding,  e.  breukert 


cov 

Ron.  U  27.  this  is  my  c.  when  I  take  away  thoir 
<V(U.  i  15.  tiiough  itlie  a.  man's  c.yetifconlirmed 

17.  the  c.  that  was  coiitirmed  before  of  God 

Ueb.B.  6.  ho  is  Mediator  of  a  better  c.  cstabUshed 

7.  if  that  first  c.  had  been  faultless,  then  no  place 

9.they  coutinued  in  myc.and  I  regarded  them  noi 

9.  1.  then  verily  the  Jiiot  c.  had  also  ordinances 

4.  Aaron's  rod  that  budded,  and  tables  of  thee. 

Hee  Ark,  Blood,  Break. 

Book  of  Uie  COVENANT. 

Exod.  24.  7.  Moses  took  tlie  book  of  the  c.  and  road 

iKmffS'i'i.'i.  Josiah  read  in  their  ears  all  the  words 

of  the  book  of  the  c.  Ibuiid,  2  C/tron.  34.  30. 

S!  .keepthepassover,asit  is  written  in /xiaA'o/c. 

EslaOlis/i  COVENANT. 

&en.G.18.  with  thee  will  I  atab.  my  c.  and  sons,9.9. 

17.7. 1  will  estaO.  my  c.  between  me  and  Abraliain 

19.  eslab.  c.  with  Isaac  and  his  seed  after  hini,21. 

Kxod.dA.  I  have  estab.  myc.with  them  to  give  land 

Z/«c.2G.y.  1  will  multiply  and  estab.  my  c.  with  you 

Z>eu£.rf.lt5.tliat  he  may  estab.  his  c. which  he  sware 

Ezek.  16.  (JU.  I  will  estab.  to  thee  an  everlasting  c. 

&i.l  will  estab.  my  c.  with  thee,  thoushalt  know 

Everlasting  COVENANT. 

Oen.  9.  16.  that  I  may  remember  the  encrlast.  c. 

17.  13.  it  sha.l  be  in  your  flesh  for  an  cverlast.  c. 

19.1  will  establish  my  c.  with  Isaac  for  an  everl.c. 

/,eo.24.8.being  taken  from  Israel  by  an  eoerlast.c. 

USam.  23.  5.  yet  he  hath  made  with  me  an  evirrl.  c. 

1  Chr.  16.  17.  confirmed  the  same  lo  Jacob  for  a 

law,  and  to  Israel  for  an  everlagt.e.  Psal.  105.10. 

/»a.24.5.  because  they  have  broken  the  evcrlast.  c. 

55.3. 1  will  make  ever.c.  with  you,61.8.  Jer.  32. 40. 

£zek.  37.  26.  it  shall  be  an  everlast.  c.  with  them 

J/eb.  13.  20.  through  the  blood  of  the  everlast.  c. 

Keep,  keepest,  keepeth,  or  kept  COVENANT. 

Oen.  17. 9.  thou  shalt  keep  my  c.  thou  and  thy  seed 

10.  this  is  my  c.  which  ye  shall  keep  between  me 

Exod.  19. 5.  if  ye  will  obey  my  voice  and  keep  my  c. 

Deut.  7.  9.  he  is  G.  faithful  God,  who  keepctli  c.  12. 

1  Kings  S.  23. 2  Chron.  6. 14.  JVtA.  1.  5 .  j  9. 32. 

29.9.4ee;>thererore  the  words  of  this  c.and  do  them 

33.  9.  they  have  observed  thy  word,  kept  thy  c. 
IKingsU.ll.thouttaslnot  kept  my  c.  Psal. IS.  10. 
Ps(i/.25.10.iner.and  truth  to  such  as  keep  c.  103. 18. 

132. 12.  if  thy  children  will  keep  my  c.  and  testiin. 
Ezek.  17.  14.  by  keeping  of  his  c.  it  might  stand 
DaH.9.i.keeping c.and  mercyto  them  that  lovehim 

Made  COVENANT. 
Ge7t.\5.  18.  same  day  the  L.madeac.  with  Abram 

21.  27.  Abraham  and  Abimelech  made  a  c.  32. 
Ezod.  34.  27.  I  have  made  a  c.  with  thee  and  Israel 
JJeut.  5.  2.  L.  our  G.  made  a  c.  with  us  in  Horeb 
3.  L.  made  not  this  c.  with  our  fathers,  Heb.  8.9. 

29. 1.  besides  the  c.  he  made  with  them  in  Horeb 

31.  16.  will  break  my  c.  1  have  made  with  them 
Josh.  24.  25.  Joshuawadf  ac.  with  people  that  day 
1  >iain.  18. 3.  Jonathan  and  David  made  a  c.  23. 18. 

20.16.  Jonathan  made  a  c.  with  the  house  of  David 

1  Kings  8.  9.  L.  made  a  c.  with  Israel,  2  Chr.  6. 11. 
21.  ark  wherein  is  c.  of  the  L.  which  he  made 

20.  34.  .Wvdb  made  a  c.  vWth  Ben-hadad 

2  Kings  11.  4.  Jehoiada  made  a  c.  with  the  rulers 
17.  made  a  c.  between  the  Lord  and  the  kin^ 

17.  15.  Israel  rejected  his  c.  he  made  with  fathers 

35.  with  whom  the  L.  had  made  a  c.  and  charged 

.38.  the  c.  made  with  you  ye  shall  not  forget 

23.  3.  Josiah  made  a  c.  before  Lord,  2  Chr.  34. 31. 

lC'Aro«.11.3.David  made  a.  c.\\\\.h  elders  in  Hebron 

16. 16.  be  ve  mindful  even  of  the  c.  which  he  made 

with  Abraham,  JVeA.  9.  8.  Psal.  105.  9. 

2CRro?i.21.7. because  of  c.  he  had  made  with  David 

2;).3.all  thecoiigregation  made  ac.withkingjoash 

Job  31.  1.  I  made  a  c.  with  mine  eyes,  why  then 

P«a?.50.5.  that  have  made  a  c.  with  me  by  sacrifice 

89.3.have  made  a  c.  with  my  chosen,  I  have  sworn 

Jsa.  23.  15.  ye  said,  ye  have  made  a  c.  with  death 

57.  8.  enlarged  thy  bed,  and  made  a  c.  with  them 

.Tcr.  11.  10.  broke  the  c.  I  made  with  their  fathers 

31. 32.  not  according  to  the  c.  I  made  with  fathers 

34.8.aftei<l''.edckiah  had  made  a  c.  with  |)eople,15. 

13.  giiitli  the  Lord,  I  made  a  c.  with  your  fathers 

15.  ye  had  made  a  c.  before  me  in  house  called 

IS.perforined  not  the  words  ofthe  eye  had  made 

f:zcA:.17.13.and  made  a  c.  with  him, and  taken  oath 

^fakc  COVENANT. 
Oen.  17. 2  I  will  make  my  c.  between  me  and  thee 
26.28.1ot  us  viake  a  c.  with  thee,  31.  44.  Ezra  10.3. 
Eiod.  23.  32.thou  shalt  make  no  c.  Deut.  7.  2. 

34.  10.  behold  I  make,  a  c.  before  all  thy  people 
12.  lest  thou  make  a  c.  with  the  inhabitants,  15. 

Deut.  29.  14.  nor  with  yon  only  do  I  make  this  c. 

1  .Snm.  11.  1.  make  a  c.  with  us,  and  we  will  serve 
2.  on  this  condition  will  I  make  a  c.  with  you 

2  Ohron.  29.  10.  now  it  is  in  my  heart  lomaieac. 
J^eh.  9.  ;J3.  and  we  make  a  sure  e.  and  write  it 
Job  41.  4.  will  he  make  a  c.  with  thee ': 

Jer.  31. 3.3.  this  isc.  I  will  make,  Heb.  8.  lO:  1 10.  Ifi. 
Ezek.  34.  25. 1  will  m.  with  them  a  c.  of  peace, 
and  will  vause  evil  beasts  to  cease,  37.  26. 
90 


GOV 

Hoa.l.  18. 1  willmaite  a  c.  for  them  with  the  beasts 

12.  1.  and  they  do  make  a  c.  with  the  Assyrians 

jVetc  COVENANT. 

,Jer.  31.  31. 1  will  make  a  new  c.  with  Isr.  Ueb. 8.8. 

Heb.  8.  13.  a  new  c.  he  hath  made  the  first  old 
12.  24.  and  to  Jesus  the  Mediator  ofthe  new  c. 
Remember  COVENANT. 

r?cn.9.15. 1  will  r£7n.my  c.  Lev.  26.42.  £2cA.  1 6. 60. 

Exod.  6.  5,  6.  I  have  rememb.  my  c.  wherefore  say 

y>eB.26.45.for  their  sakes  rem.  c.  of  their  anecBtors 

Psal.  105.  8.  he  hath  rem.  his  c.  for  ever,  106.  45. 

.fimos  i.  9.  because  they  rem.  not  the  brotherly  c. 

Luke  1. 72.  mercy  promised,  and  to  rem.  his  holy  c. 
COVENANT  of  Halt. 

Lev.  2.  13.  the  salt  of  c.  of  thy  God  to  be  lacking 

jVum.  18. 19.  it  is  a  c.  of  salt  for  ever  before  Lord 

'iCAroH.  13.5.  to  David  and  his  sons  by  a  c.  o/ suit 
Transgressed  COVENANT. 

DeuM7.2.hath  wrought  wickedness  in  trajis.hisc. 

Josh.  7.  11.  they  have  also  transgressed  my  c. 

15. because  he  i.c.of  L.Jud^.2.20.2  A'i7(»^«l8.12. 
23.  16.  when  ye  have  transgressed  c.  of  the  Lord 

Jer.  34.18.  and  I  will  give  the  men  that  trans. my  c. 

//o«.6.7.buttlieylike  men  \ia.\etransgres.tcd\\\eK. 

8.1.  because  they  have  trans. mv  c.  and  trespassed 

COVEN  AN  I'ED. 

2  Chron.  7.  18.  according  as  I  have  c.  with  David 

Hag.  2.  5.  according  to  the  word  that  I  c.  with  you 

Jtfat.26.15.they  c.with  bim  for  thirtypieces  ofsilver 

Z.u^e22.  5.  were  glad,  and  e.  to  give  him  money 
COVENANTS. 

Rom.  9. 4.  to  whom  pertaineth  the  glory  and  the  c. 

C;ai.4.24.  these  are  the  two  e.one  from  mount  Sinai 

Eph.  2.  12.  and  strangers  from  the  c.  of  promise 
COVER 

Signifies,  [1]  To  hide,  Prov.  12.  16.  [2]  To  clothe 
1  Sam.  28. 14.  [3]  To  protect  and  defend.  Psal. 
91.  4.  [4]  To  pardon,  or  forgive,  Psal.  32.  1 
Rom.  4.  7.  [5]  To  vail,  1  Cor.  11.  6.  [6] 
To  inclose,  Exod.  29.  13.  [7]  JVo£  to  confess, 
Prov.  28.  13. 

Violence  covereth  themouthof  the  wicked,  Prov. 
10.  6.  Their  violent  unjust  courses  shall  bring 
down  God's  judgmcntupon  them, ichereby  they 
skull  be  so  convinced  of  their  former  injurious 
practices,  that  they  shall  have  nothing  to  say 
for  theiiiselves,  their  mouths  shall  be  stopped. 

To  cover  the  feet,  Jadg.  3.  24.  and  1  Sam.  24. 
3.  This  phrase  is  commonly  understood  in  both 
these  places,  of  casing  nature  ;  because  the 
men  not  wearing  breeches  as  we  do,  but  long 
coats,  they  did  in  that  act  coyer  their  feet.  But 
others  ezpoun^  it,  of  composing  one's  Sflf  to 
taken  little  sleep  or  rest,  as  was  very  us  ualto  do 
in  the  day-time  in  those  hot  countries,  2  Sam.  4 
5.  and  when  they  did  so  in  a  cool  place,  they  used 
to  cover  their  feet,  as  appears  from  Ruth  3.  7 
.4nd  this  exposition  seems  best  to  agree  with  the 
history  in  both  places  where  this  phrase  is 
found.  For  the  servants  of  Ehud  staying  su 
long  for  their  lord,  seems  to  imply,  that  they 
judged  him  gone  to  sleep,  which  might  take  up 
a  considcrabln  time,  rather  than  lo  that  other 
work,  which  takes  up  but  a  little  time.  .Ind  if 
Saul  was  asleep  in  the  cave,  then  it  is  not 
strange  that  he  neither  heard  David  and  his 
men  talking  of  him,  nor  perceived  when  David 
cut  off  the  skirt  of  his  robe. 

Ezod.W.  5.  the  locnstsshall  c.  the  face  of  the  earth 

21.  33.  if  a  man  shall  dig  a  pit  and  not  c.  it 

28.  42.  make  linen  breeches  to  c.  their  nakedness 
33. 22. 1  will  c.  thee  with  my  hand  while  I  pass  by 
40.  3.  thou  shalt  c.  the  ark  with  the  vail 
Lev.  16. 13.  cloud  of  incense  mayc.  the  mercy-seat 
17.  13.  pour  out  the  blood,  and  c.  it  with  dust 
JViim.  22.  5.  behold  they  c.  the  face  of  the  earth 
Deut.  23.  13.  and  c.  that  which  comeih  from  thee 
33.  12.  the  Lord  shall  c.  him  all  the  day  long 
1  Sam.  24.  3.  and  Saul  went  in  to  c.  his  feet 
J\leh.  4.  5.  c.  not  their  iniquity,  let  not  their  sin 
.TnbVh.  18. 0  earth,  c.  not  thou  my  blood,  let  my  cry 
21. 20.  shall  liedown  in  dust,  worms  shall  c.  them 

22.  11.  the  abundance  of  waters,  c.  thee,  38.  34. 
40.  22.  the  shady  trees  c.  him  with  their  shadow 

Psal.  91.  4.  he  shall  c.  thee  with  his  feathers 
104.  9.  that  they  turn  not  again  to  c.  the  earth 
109.  29.  c.  themselves  with  their  own  confusion 

139.  11.  if  I  say,  surely  the  darkness  shall  c.  me 

140.  9.  let  the  mischief  of  their  lips  c.  them 
[sa.  11.  9.  as  the  walers  c.  the  sea.  Hah.  2.  14. 

14.  11.  is  spread  under  thee,  the  worms  c.  thee 
22.  17.  behold,  the  Lord  will  surely  c.  thco 
26.  21.  the  earth  shall  no  morec.  her  slain 
30. 1.  that  c.  with  a  covering,  but  not  of  my  Spirit 

58.  7.  when  thou  see.st  the  naked,  that  thou  c.  him 

59.  6.  neither  c.  themselves  with  their  works 

60.  2.  for  behold  the  darkness  shill  c.  the  earth 
6.  the  multitude  of  camels  shall  c.  thee 

.Ter.  46.  8.  I  will  go  up,  and  will  c.  the  earth 
Ezek.  7. 18.  horror  shall  c.  thorn,  shame  on  all  faces 


COV 

Ezei.  12.  6.  thou  shake,  thy  face  that  thou  s«enat 
12.  he  shall  c.  his  face  that  he  see  not  theground 

24.  7.  poured  it  not  on  ground  to  c.  it  with  dust 
17.  c.  not  thy  lips,  and  eat  not  the  bread  of  men 
iB.  ye  shall  note,  your  lijis,  nor  eat  bread  of  men 

26.10.  abund.  of  his  horses,  their  dust  shall  c.  thee 
19.  and  when  great  waters  shall  c.  thee 

30.  18.  as  for  her,  a  cloud  shall  c.  her  and  daught. 
32.  7.  I  will  e.  the  heaven,  I  will  c.  the  sun 
37.G.  1  will  c.you  with  skin,  and  put  breatli  in  you 
38.  9.  thou  shalt  be  like  a  cloud  lo  c.  the  land,  16. 

/^os.'J.  9.  recover  my  flax  given  to  t.her  nakediiesd 
10.8.slmll  say  to  the  nioumaiiisc.us,  LukeSi'i.  30. 
Obad.  10.  for  thy  violence  shame  shall  c.  thee 
Jl/(e.3.7.  yea,  they  shall  all  c.  their  lijis,  no  answer 

7.  10.  and  shame  shall  c.  het  that  said  to  me 
Hab.  2.  17.  the  violence  of  Lebanon  shall  c.  thee 
JV/ar/(14.65.some  began  to  spiton  him  andc.hisface 
1  Cor.  11.  7.  a  man  ought  not  to  e.  his  head 

1  Pel.  4.  8.  for  charily  shall  c.  the  multitude  of  sins 
COVERED. 

(Ven.  7. 19.  the  mountains  were  e.  with  waters,  20. 
9.  Mi.  they  c.  the  nakedness  of  their  father 
24.  65.  Rebekah  look  a  vail  and  c.  herself 
38.  14.  Tainarc.her  with  a  vail,  sal  iuojien  place 

Exod.  8.  6.  the  frogs  came  up  and  c.  land  of  Egypt 

14.  28.  the  waters  c.  the  chariots  and  horsemen 

15.  5.  the  depths  e.  them,  they  sank  as  a  stone 
lO.thoseae.  them,  they  sank  as  lead,  JosA.24.7. 

16.  13.  at  even  the  quails  came  and  c.  the  camp 

24.  15.  Moses  went  up,  a  cloud  c.  the  mount,  16. 
37.  9.  c.  with  their  wings  over  the  mercy-seat 
40.  i!l.  the  vail  c.  the  ark  of  the  teslimuny 

34.  a  cloud  c.  the  lent  of  the  congregation 
i>CD.13.13.behold,  ifthe  leprosy  have  c.  all  his  flesh 
JVarn.  4.  20.  to  see  when  the  holy  things  are  «. 
9.  15.  the  cloud  c.  the  tabernacle,  16.  |  16.  42. 
Deut.'i2. 15.  art  wa.\en  fat,  thou  art  c.  with  fatnes* 
Judg.  4.  18.  Jael  c.  him  wiih  a  mantle,  19. 
1  Sam.  19.  13.  Michal  c.  the  pillow  with  a  cloth 

28.  14.  an  old  man  cometh  up  c.  with  a  mantle 

1  Kings  1.1.  c. king  David  with  clothes,  but  no  heat 

8.  7.cheruhim3c.ark,l  CAr.  28. 18. 2  CAr.  5.8. 

2  Kings  19.  1.  king  Ilezekiah  heard  it,  he  rent  his 

clothes  and  c.  himself  with  sackcloth,  Isa.  37. 1. 
'iChr.  3. 1 6.  Solomon  c.  house  with  precious  stones 
Job  23.  17.  nor  c.  he  the  darkness  from  my  face 

31.  33.  if  I  c.  my  transgressions  as  Adam 
Psal.  44.  15.  the  shame  of  my  face  hath  c.  me 

19.  tho'  thou  hast  c.  us  with  the  shadow  ofdeath 
55.  t  5.  are  come  upon  me,  and  horror  hath  c.  me 
65.  13.  the  valleys  also  are  c.  over  with  corn 
68.13.  shall  be  as  the  wiiigsof  a  dove  c.  with  silver 
71.  IB.  let  them  be  e.  with  reproach  that  seek 
78.  t  53.  but  the  sea  c.  their  enemies,  106.  f  11. 
89.45.  glory  to  cease, Uiou  hast  c.  hini  with  shame 
lOli.  17.  the  earth  c.  the  comjiaiiy  of  Aljiram 
139.  13.  thou  hast  c.  me  in  my  mother's  womb 
Prnv.  26.  23.  like  a  potsherd  c.  wiih  silver  dross 
26.  whojie  hatred  is  c. by  deceit,  his  wickedness 
F.ccl.  6.  4.  his  name  shall  be  c.  with  darkness 
Isa.  6.  2.  with  twain  he  c.  his  face,  he  c.  his  feet 
22.  1 17.  the  Lord  whoc.  with  excellent  covering 

25.  t  7.  will  destroy  the  covering  c.  over  all  people 

29.  10.  and  your  rulers  the  seers  hath  he  e. 

51.  16.  I  have  c.  thee  in  the  shadow  of  my  hand 
61.  10.  he  c.  me  with  Ihe  robe  of  righteousness 
Jer.  51.  42.  she  is  c.  with  the  multitude  of  waves 
Lam.~.  1.  c.  the  daughter  of  Zion  with  a  cloud 
3.  16.  broken  my  teeth,  he  hath  c.  me  with  ashes 

43.  thou  hast  e.  with  anger,  and  persecuted  us 

44.  thou  hast  c.thyself  with  a  cloud,  that  prayer 
Ezek.  1.11.  and  two  wings  c.  their  bodiis,  23. 

16.  8.  I  spread  my  skirt,  and  c.  thy  nakedness 
10.  I  girded  thee  with  linen,  I  c.  thee  with  silk 
18.  7.  and  hath  e.  the  naked  with  a  garment,  16. 
24.8.  top  ofa  rock,  that  her  blood  should  not  boc. 
27.  7.  blue  and  purple  was  that  which  c.  thee 
31.  15.  I  c.  the  deep  for  him,  and  I  restiained 
37.  8.  the  flesh  came  up,  and  skin  c.  them  above 
.Jonah  3.  6.  tho  king  of  Nineveh  c.  with  sackcloth 

8.  let  man  and  bt-ast  be  c.  with  sackcloth 
Hab.  3.  3.  God  came,  his  glory  c.  the  heavens 
Jlfat.  8.  24.  the  ship  was  c.  with  the  waves 
10.26.  there  is  nothing  c.  that  shall  not  be  revealed 
and  hid  that  shall  not  be  known,  Luke  12. 2. 

1  Cor.  11.  6.  if  the  woman  be  not  e.  let  her  be  shorn 
COVERED  face. 

Oen.  38.  15.  because  Tamar  had  e.  her/af« 
F.xod.W.  15.  the  locusts  c.  the/aeeof  whole  enrlJi 

2  .Sam.  19.  4.  but  David  e.  h'm  face  and  cried 
Eslk.  7.  8.  as  the  word  went  they  c.  Haman's  /ae« 
Psal.  69.  7.  because  shame  hath  c.  my  faf. 
Prov.  24.  31.  nettles  had  c.  the  face  thereof 

fsa.  6.  2.  with  twain  he  c.  his  face,  and  with  twain 
Jer.51. 51.  heard  reproach,  shame  hathc.our/acfti 

Head  COVF.RF.U. 
2  .Sam.  15. 30.  David  and  every  man  hadhisAearfe 
Esth.  C).  12.  Haman  went  mourning,  h  s  h^nrl  e. 
Psal.  140.  7.  hast  e.  my  head  in  the  day  of  baltb 


cov 

Jtr.  14.3.  were  confounded,  and  c.  their  heads,  4. 
1  Cur.  11.  4.  every  man  praying,  huving  his/ieai  c. 

COVEUl::U  iin,  or  stns. 
Psal.  32.  I.  biuseeJ  is  he  wliuse  sm  m  c.  Rom.  4.  7. 
8S.  2.  thou  hasl  c.  all  their  siim,  :Si:lah 

COVEUEDST. 
Psal.  104. 6.  thou  c.  it  with  the  ilocp  as  a  garment 
£ze«c. lt>.18.looliu8lbroiderucJ  garineiitHuiid  c-  tliein 

COVEKEK. 
A*aA.2.t5.shaU  make  huHtu,ancl  c.shall  be  prepared 

COVEUE.-T. 
Deut.  22.  12.  vesture,  wherewitli  ihou  c.  thyself 
Psal.  5.  1 11-  ohout  tor  joy,  because  thou  c.  ihein 
KM.  2.  who  c.  Ihyseir  wiili  light  as  with  a  garni. 

COVERETtl. 
Ezod.  29. 13.  thou  shall  take  all  the  fat  that  c.  the 
inwards,  22.  Uv.  3.  3,9,14.  1  4.  tj.  |  7.3.  1 1).  I'J. 
iVKm.22.  11.  a  people  which  c.  the  laceof  the  earth 
Judff.  3.  24.  surely  he  c.  his  feet  in  his  ehainbet 
Job  9.  24.  he  c.  the  laces  of  the  judges  thereof 

15.  27.  because  he  c.  his  lace  with  his  fatness 
36.  30.  boliold,lie  c.  the  bottom  of  the  sea 

32.with  clouds  he  c.  light,  commands  not  to  shine 
Ps.  73.  t).  pride  as  a  chain, violence  c.  them  as  a  gar. 
84. t6.ihrough  valley  of  liaca,raiii  also  c.tlie  pools 
109.  19.  be  to  him  as  the  garment  which  c.  him 
147. 8.  who  c.  the  heavens  with  clouds,  prep,  rain 
ProD.lU.G.  violence  c.  the  mouth  of  the  wicked,  II. 
12.  love  c.  all  sins  ||  12.16. aprudent  man  c.  shame 
17.  9.  he  that  c.  a  transgression  seeketh  love 

23.  13.  he  that  c.  his  sins  shall  not  prosper 
Jer.3.25.  we  he  down  in  shaine,  our  confusion  c.  us 
Kiek.  28.  14.  thou  art  the  anointed  cherub  thatc. 
Mai.  2.  16.  for  one  c.  violence  with  hu  garment 
Xu/teS.lG.when  he  lighied  candle  c.it  with  a  vessel 

COVERINO. 
Oen.  8.  13.  Noah  removed  the  c.  of  the  ark 
20.  16.  behold,  he  is  to  thee  a  t.  of  the  eyes 
JEiod.  22.  27.  for  that  is  his  c.  raiment  for  his  skin 
Z,ev.  13.  45.  the  leper  shall  put  a  c.  on  his  upper  lip 
JVum.19.15.  every  vessel  wiiicli  hath  noc.houndon 
QSam.  17. 19.  woman  spread  ac.  over  well's  inoutli 
JohH.  14.  thick  clouds  are  a c.  to  himheseeth  not 

24.  7.  tliat  the  naked  have  no  c.  in  the  cuid 
26.  6.  naked  before  him,  destruction  hath  no  c. 
31.  19.  if  I  have  seen  any  jioor  without  c. 

Psal.  105.  39.  he  spread  a  cloud  for  c.  and  fire 
C'aiU.  3.  10.  he  made  the  c.  of  it  of  purple 
ha.  4.  t  5.  for  upon  all  the  glory  shall  be  a  c. 
22.  8.  and  he  discovered  the  c.  of  Judali 

t  17.  who  covered  thee  with  an  excellent  c. 
2.5.  7.  destroy  the  face  ofthe  c.  cast  over  all  people 
28.20.  the  c.  narrower  than  he  can  wrap  hims.  in 

30.  1.  that  cover  with  a  c.  hut  not  of  my  Spiiit 
2-J.  ye  shall  defile  the  c.  of  thy  graven  images 

50.  3.  I  clothe  heavens,  aiW  make  sackc.  their  c. 
£:eJi;.23.13.  every  precious  stone  was  thy  c.  sardius 
1  Cor.  11.  t  10.  a  woman  ought  to  have  a  c. 
15.  glory  to  her,  for  her  hair  is  given  her  for  a  c. 
See  Badoer'.s  fikins. 
COVERING. 
£xod.  2.5.  20.  e.  the  mercy  si^at  with  their  wings 
JVuTTi.  4.  5.  Aaron  shall  take  down  the  c.  vail 
Eiek.  28.  16. 1  will  destroy  thee,  O  e.  cherub 
^al.2.13.1  have  done  c.alt:ir  ofthe  Lord  with  tears 

COVERINGS. 
Prov.  7.  16.  decked  my  bed  with  c.  of  tapestry 

31.  22.  she  inaketh  herself  c.  of  tapestry 

COVERS. 
F.Tod.  25.  29.  make  c.  ||  37.  16.  he  made  his  c. 
^um.  4.  7.  put  thereon  c.  to  cover  withal 

COVERT 
Signifies,  [ll-.^n  umhrasrc,  nr  shady  plane,  1  Sam. 
25.  20.     [i]  .i  thicket  fur  wild  b>:ast.s,  Job  38. 
40.     [3]   Sumfthing  made  to  .•ihrller  the  people 
from  the  weather un  the  sabbath  ;  or.iomecustly 
chair  of  slate,  whrrcin  the  kings  o/ Judah  used 
to  hear  the  prie.'its  expuuii'l  the  lain  on  the  sab- 
bath, 2    Kin?s  16.  IH.     [4]    (.'hrisl  .lesns,    the 
$ainls'  shelter,  defence,  or  refuge,  Isa.  :12.  2. 
1  .Sam.  25.  20.  Abigail  came  down  hy  e.  of  the  hill 
2Kinfil6.IH.thee.  forthe»abbijth.\hs7,  lookdown 
^06.38. 40.  when  lions  nhido  In  the  c.  to  lie  in  wait 
40.  21.  behemoth  lieth  in  the  c.  of  the  reed 
Psai.  61.  4.  I  will  trust  in  the  c.  of  ihy  wings 
/jo.  4.6.  atahernaclo  for  a  c.  from  storm  and  rain 

16.  4.  bo  thou  a  e.  to  them  from  the  fuce  of  spoiliT 

32.  2.  a  man  shall  he  a  e.  from  tlio  tempest 
Jtr.  25.  38.  ho  hath  for»Rkfn  his  c.  as  n  lion 

COVET. 
TTiis  trordis  unmetimrs  taken  in  a  good  sense,  as 
in  1  Cor.  12.  31,  Covet  earnestly  the  best  gifis. 
7Tii>  covetousnrs.n  i.i  good  and  commendable, 
when  spiritual  blrs.iings  are  earnrstly  desired 
and  sought  after.  Hut  mn.it  commonly  it  is 
taken  in  a  bad  sense,  for  an  eager  and  im- 
moderate  desire  after  earthly  things,  Josh.  7. 
21.  Prov.21.20.  Covoloiisnen  is  called  idohitry. 
Col.  3.  5.  because  the  eovtinus  man  places  that 
loce,  delight,  and  cunfdenct  in  riches,  ichich  are 
100 


cou 

due  to  God  alone.  This  sin  is  condemnedin  all 
surts  of  persons,  andis  expressly  forbidden  by 
the  tenth  commandment,  'I'hou  shait  not  covet, 
Kzud.  20.  17.  6uch  as  are  addicted  to  this  sin, 
are  hated  of  God,  Fsal.  10.  3.  'J'hey  are  cruel 
and  opprensice,  Mic.  2.  2.  The  riches  they  are 
so  eager  in  the  pursuit  of,  prove  but  putsun  to 
kill  Lhcm,  and  thus  Ihcy  are  miserable,  Job  20. 
15,  16,  17.  Prov.  1.  19.  The  inordinate  love  of 
wealth  does  likewise  betray  men  to  manifulu 
sins,  and  exposes  them  to  manifold  sufferings  ; 
both  from  themselves,  in  denying  themselves 
the  comfort  of  their  estates  ;  and  from  others, 
as  extortioners,  thieves,  and  the  like,  lieut.  lU. 
19.  Eccl.  4.  8.  Mat.  26.  15.  1  Tim.  6.  10. 
£iui/.20.17.thou  slialt  notc.thyneighbour's  house, 
wit'e,  nor  servant,  Deut.  5.  21.  Hom.l.  7.  |  13.  9. 
jMic.  2.  2.  they  c.  fields  and  take  them  by  violence 
1  Cur.  12.  31.  but  c.  earnestly  the  best  gifts 
14.  39.  c.  to  prophesy,  and  forbid  not  to  speak 

COVETED. 
Josh.  7.  21.  Achan  said,  then  1  c.  them,  took  them 
Jlcts  20.  33.  1  have  c.  no  man's  silver  or  gold 
1  Tim.  6. 10.  which  while  somec.  after  llicy  erred 

COVETETH. 
Prov.  21.  26.  he  c.  greedily  all  the  day  long 
Hub.  2. 9.  woe  to  him  that  c.  an  evil  covetousncss 

COVETOUS. 
Psal.lO.  3.  the  wicked  blesselhc.  whom  Ld.  abhors 
/.uA-6lG.14.riiarisees  who  were  c.heardthese  thing: 
1  Cur.  5.  10.  yet  not  altogether  with  the  c. 

11.  if  any  brother  he  c.  with  such  not  to  eat 
6.  10.  nor  t.  shall  inheritking.  of  God,  Kph.  5.5 

1  7'ii/i.  3.  3.  a  bishop  then  must  not  be  e. 

2  Tim.  3. 2.  ill  Hit;  lust  times  men  shall  hec.  boasters 
Pet.  2.  14.  a  heart  exercised  with  c.  practices 

COVETOUSAESS. 
Exod.  18.  21.  provide  able  men,  men  haling  c. 
Psal.  119.  30.  incline  not  my  heart  to  c. 
Prov.'iS.  16.  he  that  hateth  c.  shall  prolong  his  days 
Isa.  57.  17.  for  the  iniquity  of  his  c.  was  I  wroth 
Jer.  6.  13.  every  one  is  given  to  c.  8.  10. 

22.  17.  thy  eyes  and  heart  are  not  but  for  thy  e. 

51.13.  thine  end  is  come,  and  the  measure  of  thy  c. 
Kzik.  33.  31.  but  their  heart  goeth  af;er  their  c. 
Hah.  2.  9.  woe  to  him  that  coveteth  an  evil  c. 
Mark  7.  22.  out  of  the  heart  proceedeth  c. 
l.uke  12. 15.  he  said,  take  heed,  and  beware  of  c. 
Hum.  I.  29.  being  filled  with  alt  c.  fornication 
2  Ovr.  9.  5.  as  a  matter  of  bounty,  and  not  of  c. 
F.pji.  5.3.  butc.  let  it  not  be  once  named  among  you 
G<^3. 5. mortify  your  niemb.andc.whicli  is  idolatry 
1  Thess.  2.  5.  nor  at  any  time  used  we  a  cloke  of  c. 
Iteb.  13.  5.  h^t  your  conversation  be  without  c. 
'iPtt.'i.'i.  thro't.shall  they  make  merehand.  ofyou 

COULU. 
Gea.'^.\.  when  Isaac  was  ohl,  so  that  hec.  not  see 
F.xud.  8.  18.  did  so  to  bring  forth  lice,  but  6.  not 
l.Va«(.3. 2.  Eli's  eyes  began  to  wa.xdinijhecnotsee 
1  Kings  14.  4.  Aliijah  e.  not  see  his  eyes  were  set 
■ZKings  3.  26.  to  break  to  king  of  Edom,  but  c.  not 

1  Chron.  21.  30.  but  David  c.  not  go  before  it 

2  Chron.  13.  7.  Rchohoani  c.  not  withstand  them 
/•'»flY.37.30.yea,  I  sought  iiim,but  he  c.  not  be  fouml 
/.•;«. 5.  4.  vvh;it  c.  have  been  done  more  to  vineyard  ? 
Jer.  15.  1.  my  mind  c.  not  be  toward  this  people 
./vnah  1.13. men  rowed  to  bring  it  to  land,  butc.not 
.llarAG.  l9.lhcreforelierodias  had  a  quarrel  against 

John,  and  would  have  killed  him,  but  shoe,  not 
9.  Ifi.  cast  him  out,  and  they  c.  not,  J.uke  9.  40. 
14.  8.  she  hath  done  what  she  c.  she  is  come 
,/uhn  21.  25.  the  world  c.  not  contain  the  books 
~icls  13.39.  from  wliirh  ye  r.not  be  justified  hy  law 

COIIhDE.ST. 
Jer.  3.  5.  and  hast  done  evil  things  as  thou  c. 
Eiek.  16.  28.  and  vet  thou  r.  not  bo  satisfied 
COULTER,  S. 

1  .Sam.  13.  20.  Israel  went  to  sharpen  each  his  e. 
21.  they  had  a  file  for  their  c.  and  the  forks 

COUNCIL. 

2  Sam.  23.  t  23.  Daviil  set  lienaiah  over  his  c. 
.Mat-  5.  22.  shall  say,  Raca,  shall  be  in  danger  of  e. 

26.  59.  the  c.  sought  false  witness,  Mark  14.  55. 
j1/'ir/[1.5.1.wliole(-.boundJes.and  enriied  him  away 
f.uke  22  66.  iho  elders  led  Jesus  into  their  c. 
.Ai/(nll.47.  lhechiefpiicBtsg'itheri:da  c 7r*.''5.21. 
.1cts4.  1.5.  had  commanded  them  to  go  out  of  the  c. 
5.  27.  they  brought  and  set  them  before  tho  c. 
34.  thin  stood  there  up  one  in  the  e.  a  Phnri.Kcc 
41.  and  they  departed  from  the  e.  rejoicing 
C.  12.  caught  Stephen,  and  brought  him  to  Ihoc. 

15.  all  in  tho  c.  looking  nn  him,  saw  his  face 
22.  .30.  he  commanded  all  their  c.  to  appear 
2.3.  15.  ye  with  the  c.  signify  to  the  rliluf  captain 
21.  20.  any  evil  in  me,  while  I  stood  before  the  c. 

COUNCILS. 
.VaMO.17.  they  will  deliver  vou  up  to  c.MarklX9. 

COUNSEL 
Signifies,  ri]    .Idvier,  Prov.  20.  18.    Dan.  4.  27. 
[2]  God's  purpose  and  decree,  .\cl»  4.  28.  [3] 


COU 

The  directions  of  his  word,  the  moliom  of  Kit 
Spirit,and  the  kindness  of  his  providinct  yVtKi. 
73.24.  [4]  His  will  or  doctrine  concerning  the 
way  of  salvation,  Luke  7.  30.  Acts  20.  SS7. 
[5J  7'Ae  designs,  thoughts,  and  most  secret  reso- 
lutions, 1  Cor.  4.  5. 

Christ  Jesus  j*  called  Counsellor,  Jsa.  9.  0.  [1] 
Un  account  of  his  infinite  tcisdom.  Col.  2.  3. 
[2]  On  account  of  his  willingness  to  ni.'ttructaHd 
give  counsel  to  men;  as  also,  to  plead  their  cause 
before  his  throne.  Rev.  3.  18.  1  J.ihn  2.  1. 

Exod.  18.  19.  hearken  to  me,  I  will  give  thee  c. 

JV«m.27.21. before  Eleazar,  who  shall  ask  c.forhim 

31.  10.  these  caused  Isr.  thro'  the  c.  of  Balaam,  tu 

commit  trespass  against  L.  in  the  matter  of  Peor 

/>'eut.32.28.are a  nation  voidofc.noris  understand. 

Josh.  9. 14.  asked  not  c.  at  the  mouihof  tiie  Lord 

Judg.  20.  7.  behold,  give  here  your  advice  and  c. 

2.S'a»i.  15.  31.  turnc.of  Ahitbophel  into  foolishness 

16. 23.  so  wus  all  thee,  of  .'Miithophel  with  David 

17.  14.  the  L.  defeated  the  good  i.of  Ahithophel 
20.  18.  saying,  they  shall  surely  ask  c.  at  Abel 

1  Kings  1.  12.  let  me,  1  pray  thee,  give  thee  c. 
12. 8.  forsook  the  c.  of  old  men,  13. 2  Chr.  10.8, 13 
2AVn^'«6.8.  king  of  Syria  tookc.  with  his  servants 

18.  20.  1  have  c.  and  strengili  for  war,  Isa.  36.5. 

1  Chron.  10.  13.  so  Saul  died  for  asking  c.  of  one 

2  Chron.  22.  5.  Ahaziah  walked  atior  their  c. 
25.  16.  king  said,  art  thou  made  ofthe  king's  c? 

30.  2.  the  king  had  taken  c.  to  keep  the  passover 
23.  thfe  assembly  took  c.  to  keeji  other  seven  dayi 

£z)'al0.3.  according  to  the  c.  ofmy  lord,  and  thuse 

8.  according  to  the  c.  of  Ihc  princes  and  clUera 
jVeA.  4.  1.5.  God  had  brought  tlieir  c.  to  nought 
.Job  5.  13.  the  c.  of  the  fioward  is  carried  headlong 
10. 3.  and  should  shine  upon  the  c.  ofthe  wicked 

12.13.  wisdom  and  strength  he  haih  c.and  undersU 
21. 16.  the  c.  of  the  wicked  is  far  from  me,22. 18. 
38.  2.  who  is  this  that  darkeneth  c.  by  wordj  ? 
42.3.  who  is  he  that  hideih  c.  without  knowledge? 

Psal.  1. 1.  that  walketh  not  in  thee,  of  the  ungodly 

14.  6.  you  have  shamed  the  c.  of  tho  poor 

16.  7.  I  will  bless  the  Lord,  who  hntii  given  me  e. 
20.  4.  the  Lord  grant  thee,  and  fulfil  all  ihy  c. 

31.  13.  while  they  took  c.  together  ag;iinst  me 
33.  10.  Lord  brings  thee,  of  the  heath,  to  nought 
55.  14.  we  took  sweet  e.  together,  and  walked 
64.  2.  hide  me  from  the  secret  c.  ofthe  wicked 
(J8.  27.  the  princes  of  Judah  and  their  e. 

73.24.  thou  shall  guide  me  with  thy  c.  afterward 
S3. 3.  they  have  taken  crafiy  c.  against  thy  peoplw 

106.  13.  they  waited  not  for  his  c.  but  lusted 
43.  but  they  provoked  him  with  their  e. 

107.  11.  they  contemned  tho  c.  ofthe  Most  High 
Prov.  8. 14.  c.  is  mine,  sound  wi.*dom,I  ^m  undeisL 

11.14.  where  no  c.  is,  the  people  full,  hut  in  multit. 

12.  15.  but  he  that  hcarkeneth  unto  r.  is  wise 

15.  22.  without  c.  purposes  are  disnppulnted 

19.  20.  bear  c.  ai:d  receive  instruction,  Ihut  thou 

20.  5.  e.  in  the  heart  of  man  is  like  deep  water 
18.  every  purpose  is«st8blished  by  c.  and  with 

21.  30.  there  is  no  wisdom  nor  e.  against  the  L. 
24.  6.  for  by  wise  c.  thou  shall  niak'-  Ihy  war 
27.9. so  doth  thesweetncssofa  friend  hy  hearty  c. 

Isa.  5.  19.  let  thee,  of  tiie  lloiy  One  druw  nigh 
7.  5.  Ihey  have  taken  evil  r.  against  thee,  saying 
11.  2.  spirit  of  e.  and  might  shall  rest  upon  him 
19.  3.  and  I  will  destroy  the  c.  of  Fgypt 

11.  the  e.of  counsellors  of  Plinr. is  become  brutish 
23.  8.  who  hath  taken  this  e.  against  Tyre  ? 

28.  29.  from  the  Lord,  who  is  wonderful  in  e. 

29.  15.  that  seek  deep  to  hide  r.  I>nm  the  Lord 
40.  t  13.  who  being  of  his  e.  hath  taught  him? 

14.  with  whom  took  he  e.?  who  instructed  him? 
44.  26.  and  performeth  the  r.  of  hi.'i  messengers 
Jer.  18.  18.  nor  shall  e.  perish  from  tlie  wise 
23.  Ihon  kiiowestall  their  r. against  me  to  slay  me 
19. 7.  I  will  make  void  r.  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem 

32.  19.  mighty  God,  great  in  c.  mighty  in  work 
.38. 15.  if  I  give  thee  r. wilt  not  thou  hwrken  tome 
49.7.isc.l>erished  from  prudent?  is  wisJ.  vanished? 

^W.the  king  of  Dnhylon  hath  taken  c.  against  you 
Kiek.  7.26.  and  e.  shall  perish  from  the  ancients 
II.  2.  and  that  give  wicked  e.  in  this  oily 

13.  t  9.  tliiy  shall  not  be  in  the  r.  of  my  people 
/Jan.  2.  14.  Pavid  answered  with  e.  and  wisdom 
Has.  4.  12.my  people  ask  e.nt  thelrsl<u{ks  and  stofT 
.Vie.  4.  12.  neillier  understand  they  ni<  r. 
ZceA.6.l3.lher.ofpeaceshall  biibet»veeii  them  both 
Mat.  12.  14.  the  Pharisees  hehl  a  c.  against  him 

27.  7.  they  took  e.  nnil  hought  tho  potter's  field 

28.  12.  when  thev  had  taken  r.  Iln  y  gnvi- nionvT 
Mark  3.  6.  Ihey  took  e  ngnimit  Jesii»,  ./cAn  II.  53. 
l.iikr  23.  51.  he  had  not  consented  to  the  e.  oflheca 
.Inhn  IH.  H.  now  Caiaphas  was  he  who  pave  r. 
.•?rr-l.  28.wlmt  thve.  dilerniined  before  to  be  dons 

5.33.  wh>-n  they  heard,  they  look  r.  to  slay  their 
:'8.  if  this  r.  be  of  leen,  it  will  come  In  nought 
9.  23.  after  that  the  Jews  look  e.  to  kill  him 
27.  42.  tho  soldiers'  c.  was  to  kill  tho  pr<wners 


cou 

E^/ul.  11.  who  workoth  nfter  the  c.  of  his  own  will 
hcb.  6.  17.  lo  shew  the  immutability  of  his  c. 

COUNSEL  of  Gad  or  Lord. 
Judg.  18.  5.  they  said,  ask  c.  we  pray  iUco  of  God 

20.  18.  the  children  of  Israel  asked  c.  of  God,  23. 
lSam.14.37.  Saul  asked  c.o/  God,  shall  1  go  down? 
/•s.S.'l.ll.tliec.  o/tlie/,or(/standelii,  frov.  19. '21. 
Isa.  111.  17.  because  of  thee,  o/thc  y.flrrf  01' hosts 
Jer.  23.  18.  who  hath  stood  in  the  c.  of  the  J.ord  ? 

49.  20.  therefore  hear  the  c.  of  tlie  Lord,  50.  45. 
l.uke  7.  30.  the  lawyers  rejected  the  c.  of  God 
,icts2.23.lum  delivered  by  the  determinate  c.«/<?. 

20i  27.  not  ashamed  to  declare  to  you  all  c.  of  God 

HCh'oii.  25. 16.  and  hast  not  hearkened  to  myc. 
Job  2il.  21.  men  waited  and  kept  silence  at  my  c. 
Pt.  119.  t  24.  thy  testimonies  are  the  men  of  mij  c. 
Prov.  1.  25.  but  ye  have  s<  t  at  nought  all  my  c. 

30.  they  wouW  none  o^ my  c,  tiiey  dcspisid  my 
Isa.  46.  10.  my  c.  shall  stand  ami  1  will  do  all 

11.  man  thate.xecuteth  jwyc.  from  a  far  country 
Jer.  23.  22.  but  if  they  had  stood  in  viy  c. 
'  Dnn.  4.  27.  O  king,  let  mvc.  be  acceptable  to  thee 
Ow7i  COUNSEL. 
.lob  18.  7.  and  his  own  c.  shall  cast  him  down 
Uos.  10.  6.  Israel  shall  be  ashamed  of  his  oicn  c. 

Take  COUNSEL. 
A'e/t.  6.  7.  come  now,  and  let  us  take  c.  together 
Ps.  2.  2.  rulers  <dA:e  c.  against  Lord  and  Ajiointed 
13.  2.  how  long  shall  I  lake  c.  in  my  soul? 
71.  10.  that  wait  for  my  soul,  take  c.  together 
Isa.  8.  10.  take  c.  and  it  shall  come  to  nought 

16.  3.  take  c.  execute  judgn\ent,  make  thy  shadow 
30. 1.  woe  to  children  that  take  c.  but  not  of  me 
45.  21.  tell  ye,  yea  let  them  take  c.  together 

COUNSEL,  El). 
2.9aOT.  16.  23.  which  Ahitiiophel  c.  in  those  days 

17.  t  7.  that  Ahithophel  hath  c.  is  not  good 
11.  I  c.  that  all  Israel  be  gathered  unto  thee 
15.  thiisandthusAhithophelc.  and  thus  I  c.  21. 

iCkron.  25.  t  16.  God  hath  c.  to  destroy  thee 
./o/i 26.3.how  hast  thou  c.  him  that  hath  no  wisdom? 
Ps.  32.  t  8.  I  willc. thee,mineeyes  shall  beonthee 
F.cel.  8. 2.  !<■.  thee  to  keej)  the  king's  commandment 
Rev.  3.  18.  I  c.  thee  to  buy  of  me  gold  tried  in  fire 

COUNSELLOR. 
SSarn.  15.  12.  Ahithophel,  David's  c.  lCAr.27.33. 
ICjiron.  26.  14.  for  Zcchariah  his  son,  a  wise  c. 

27.  32.  Jonathan,  David's  uncle,  was  ac.  a  scribe 
2Chron.  22.  3.  Atlialiah  was  his  c.  to  do  wickedly 
Jsa.  3.  3.  Lord  taketh  away  the  c.  and  artificer 

!>.  6.  his  name  shall  be  called  Wonderful,  C. 

40.  13.  or  who  being  his  c.  hath  taught  him 

41.  28.  for  I  beheld,  and  there  was  no  man,  no  c. 
^Wr.4.9.  is  there  no  king  in  thee?  is  thy  c.  perished? 
J\''aA.  1.  11.  there  is  come  out  of  thee  a  wicked  c. 
Markl^.  43.  Joseph  an  honourable c.  /,Kie23. 50. 
/fo/H.l  1.34.  who  known  mind  of  L.  who  been  his  c? 

COUNSELLORS. 
2CAr.  22.  4.  they  were  his  c.  after  his  father's  death 
Kir  a  4.  5.  they  hired  c.  against  them,  to  frustrate 

7.  14.  as  thouart  sentof  the  king,  and  his  seven  c. 
28.  e.xtended  mercy  to  me  before  the  king  and  c. 

8.25.  gold,  which  the  king  and  his  c.  had  offered 
./oA3. 14.  been  at  rest  with  kings  andc.  of  the  earth 

12.17.leadeth  c.  away  spoiled,  makes  judges  fools 
Ps.  110.  24.  thy  testimonies  are  my  delialit  and  c 
Prov.  11.  14.  in  the  multitude  of  c.  is  safety,  24.6. 

12.  2l).  deceit  in  heart,  but  to  the  c.  of  ]ioace  is  joy 

15.  22.  in  the  multitude  of  c.  they  are  established 
/.«-.i.  1.26.  I  will  restore  thy  c.  as  at  the  beginning 

19.  11.  counsel  of  wise  c.  of  Pharaoh  is  brutish 
DaiL^.-i.  said  to  his  c.did  we  not  cast  three  men? 
27.  the  king'sf.  being  gathered,  saw  these  men 

4.  36.  my  c.  and  my  lords  sought  unto  me 

6.  7.  all  the  c.  and  the  captains  havo  consulted 

^  COUNSELS. 

Job  37.  12.  and  it  is  turned  round  about  by  his  c. 
Psal.  5.  10.  O  God,  let  them  fall  by  their  own  c. 

81.  12.  and  they  walked  in  their  own  c. 
i'roD. l.o.man  of  understand,  shall  attain  to  wiset. 

12.  5.  but  the  c  of  the  wicked  are  deceit 

22.  20.  have  not  I  written  excellent  things  in  c? 
Isn.  25.  1.  thy  c.  of  old  ire  faithfulness  and  truth 

47.  13.  are  wearied  in  the  multitude  of  thy  e. 

/er.  7.  21.  walked  in  the  c.  of  their  evil  heart 
fios.  11.  6.  devour  them,  because  of  their  own  c. 
Mic.  6.  16.  ye  walk  in  the  c.  of  the  house  of  Ahab 
\.Cor.  4.5.  will  make  manifest  the  c.  of  the  heart 

COUNT. 
F.zod.  12.  4.  shall  make  vour  c.  for  the  lamb 

COUXt,  Virb. 
T.fn.  23.  15.  c.  from  the  morrow  after  th«  sabbath 

25.  27.  let  him  c.  the  years  of  the  sale,  32. 
A'um.  23.  10.  who  can  r.  the  dust  of  Jacob? 
i.S'nm.  1.  16.  c.  not  me  for  a  daughter  of  Belial 
Job  19.  15.  and  my  maids  e.  me  for  a  stranger 

31.  4.  doth  not  ho  see  my  ways,c.  all  my  steps? 
Panl.  87.  6.  the  Lord  shall  c.  when  he  writeth 

139.  18.  if  I  c.  tJiem,  they  are  more  than  tho  sand 
101 


COU 

Pxal.  139. 22.  I  hate  them,  I  c.  them  mine  enemies 
JV/(C.6.11.shall  I  c.  them  pure  with  wicked  balances 
Jlcts  20.  24.  neiiher  c.  1  my  life  dear  to  myself 
Pliil.3.S.  1  call  things  loss,  and  do  c.  them  but  dung 
13.  I  c.  not  myselt' to  have  apprehended,  but  this 
2  Thcss.l.li.O.  would  c.  you  worthy  of  this  calling 

3. 15.  c.  him  nut  as  an  enemy,  but  admonish  hiin 
1  Tim.  a.  1.  c.  their  masters  worthy  of  all  honour 
Philem.  17.  if  thou  c.  me  a  partner,  receive  him 
./am.  1.  2.  c.  it  joy  when  ye  fall  into  temiitations 

5.  11.  behold,  we  c.  them  happy  which  endure 
2/V^  2. 13.  as  they  that  c.  it  pleasure  to  riot  in  day 

3.  y.  Lord  is  not  slack,  as  some  men  c.  slackness 
J<ev.  13.  18.  let  him  c.  the  number  of  the  beast 

COUNTED. 
Gen.  15. 6.  Abram  believed,  and  he  c.  it  to  him  for 
righteousness,  Ps.  106.  31.  Kom.  4.  3.  Gal.  3. 6. 
.10.  3.3.  the  sheep  that  shall  be  c.  stolen  with  me 
31.  15.  are  we  not  c.  of  him  strangers?  sold  us 
1  /wnn-.?  3.8.that  cannot  be  numbered  or  c.  for  mult. 
ICkron.  21.  6.  but  Levi  and  Benjamin  c.  he  not 
/WA.  13.  13.  for  they  were  c.  laithful,  otiice  was 
./ub  18.  3.  wherefore  we  are  c.  as  beasts  and  vile 

41.  29.  darts  are  c.  asslubble,  laugheih  atshaking 
Psal.  44.  22.  we  are  c.  as  sheep  for  the  slaughter 

88.  4.  1  am  c.  with  them  that  go  down  lo  the  pit 
Proi). 17.28.  even  a  fool,  when  he  holdeth  his  peace 

is  c.  wise,  and  he  that  shulteth  his  lips  is  a  man 
27.  14.  rising  early,  it  shall  he  c.  a  curse  to  him 
Isa.  5.  28.  their  horses'  hoofs  shall  be  c.  like  Hint 
.32.  15.  and  the  IViftful  field  be  c.  for  a  forest 
33.  18.  where  is  he  that  c.  the  towers? 
40. 15.  the  nations  are  c.  as  small  dust  of  balance 
17.  all  nations  are  c.  to  him  less  than  nothing 
Jios.  8.  12.  but  they  were  c.  as  a  strange  thing 
Mat.  14.  5.  they  c.  him  as  a  prophet,  Mark  11.32. 
J.uke  21.  36.  be  c.  worthy  to  escape  these  things 
Jicts  5.  41.  rejoicing  that  they  were  c.  worthy 
19.  ly.  they  burned  their  books,  and  c.  the  price 
Rom.  2.26.  uncircumcision  he  c.  for  circumcision 

4.  5.  to  him  believeth,  his  faith  is  c.  for  righteous. 
9.  8.  but  the  chddren  of  promise  arc  c.  for  his  seed 

Phil.  3. 7.  what  were  gain,  those  I  c.  loss  for  Christ 
IThess.X.h.  be  <;.  worthy  of  the  kingdom  of  (Jod 
1  Tim.  1. 12.  enabled  n(e,  for  that  he  c.  mo  faithful 

5.  17.  let  elders  be  c.  worthy  of  double  honour 
}leb.  3.  3.  this  man  was  c.  worthy  of  more  glory 

7.  6.  he  whose  descent  is  not  c.  from  them 

10. 29.  hath  c.  blood  of  the  covenant  unholy  thing 

See  Accoi'NTED. 

COUN  I'ETH,  ING. 

.Ub  19.  11.  he  c.  me  as  one  of  his  enemies,  33. 10 

F.ccl.  7.  27.  c.  one  by  one,  to  find  out  the  account 

Luke  14.28.  sitteth  not  down  fir?!,  and  c.  the  cost 

COUNTENANCE 
Signifies,  [1]  The  face, mr  visage,  ISam.  16.  7. 
[2]  Love,  favour,  and  affection.  Gen.  31.  5.  [3J 
Brig-ktness,  festivity,  or  alacrity,  Dan.  5.  6. 
[4]  God's  love  and  favour,  manifested  by  the 
graces  and  benefits  which  he  bestows  upon  his 
people,  Psal.  4. 6.  Because  men  by  their  coun- 
tenance (/iSC»i;er/,/ifiir  anger,  or  love'  hence  His 
that  ichen  it  is  attributed  to  God,  uho  is  said 
sometimes  to  lift  up  the  light  of  his  countenance 
upon  his  people,  at  other  times  to  hide  his  face, 
or  countenance,  it  signifies  ei^cr  his  grace  and 
favour,  or  his  anger,  or  displeasure. 
Gen.  4.  5.  Cain  was  very  wroth,  and  his  c.  fell 

24.  t  16.  the  damsel  was  good  of  c.  a  virgin 

31.  2.  Jacob  beheld  the  c.  of  Laban,  and  behold 
5.  I  see  your  father's  c.  that  it  is  not  toward  me 
JSTum.  6.  26.  the  Lord  lift  up  his  c.  upon  thee 
Deut.  23.  50.  Lord  will  bring  a  nation  of  fierce  c. 
■fudg.  13.  6.  his  c.  was  like  the  c.  of  an  angel 
15am.  1.  18.  Hannah,  her  c.  was  no  more  sad 
16.  7.  look  not  on  his  c.  or  the  height  of  his  stature 
12.  now  David  was  of  a  beautiful  c.  17.  42. 

25.  3.  Abigail  ||  2.S«i;(.  14.  27.  Tamar  of  a  fair  c. 
2.S'ani.23.  f  21.  he  slew  an  Egyptian,  a  man  of  c. 
'ih'imrs  5. 1 1.  Naaman  was  a  man  lifted  up  in  c. 

8.  11.  he  settled  his  e.  stedfastly  on  Hazael 
JW/i.2. 2.why  is  thy  c.  sad,  seeing  thou  ort  not  sick? 

3.  why  should  not  my  c.  be  sad,  when  the  city 
.Toh  14.20.thou  chansest  his  c.and  sendest  him  away 
29.  24.  and  the  IJght  ofniv  c.  they  cast  not  down 
Psal.  4.  6.  Lord,  lift  up  the  light  of  thy  c.  upon  us 
10.4.  the  wicked,  thro'  pride  of  c.  will  not  seek  Cod 
11.  7.  righteous  Ld.  his  r.  doth  behold  the  upright 
21.  fi.  thou*nst  made  him  glad  with  thy  r. 

42.  5.  I  shall  yet  praiss  him  for  the  help  of  his  e. 
11 .  who  is  the  health  of  my  c.  and  my  God,  43.  5. 

44.  3.  but  the  light  of  thy  c.  did  save  them 
80.  16.  they  perish  at  the  rebuke  of  thy  c. 

89.  15.  shall  walk,  O  Lord,  in  the  light  of  thy  c. 

90.  8.  hastsetcursecretsinsin  the  light  of  thy  c. 
Prov.  15.  13.  a  merry  heart  maketh  a  cheerful  c. 

16.  1.5.  in  the  light  of  the  king's  c.  is  life 
2.5.  23.  so  doth  the  angry  r.  a  backbiting  tongue 
27.  17.  so  a  man  sliarp 'neth  the  c.  of  his  friend 
F.ccl.  7. 3.  by  sadness  of  c.  the  heart  is  made  belter 


COU 

Cant.  2.  14.  let  me  see  thy  c.  thy  c.  is  comely 
5.  15.  his  c.  is  as  Lebanon,  e.xcellent  as  cedars 

Jsa.  3.  t  3.  Lord  doth  take  away  man  eminent  in  « 
9.  the  shew  of  their  c.  doth  w  iliies!-  against  them 

F.zek.  'i'l.  35.  they  shall  be  troubled  in  their  c. 

Jjan.5.6.  then  king's  c.  was  changed,  and  thoughli 
8.  23.  a  king  of  nerce  c.  shall  stand  up 

jy/at.  6.  16.  be  not  as  the  hypocrites,  of  a  sad  c 

28.  3.  his  c.  was  like  lightning,  J.uke  9.  29. 
.^cts  2.  28.  shall  make  me  full  of  joy  with  thy  c 
2C'or.  3. 7.  could  not  behold  Muses  lor  glory  of  hist. 
licv.  1.  16.  and  his  c.  was  as  ti.e  sun  sliineth 

See  Ch.vnged. 

COUNTENANCE. 

F,zod.22. 3.nor  shall  thou  e.  a  poor  man  in  his  cause 

COUNTENANCES. 

I)an.\.13.  then  letour  e.  be  looked  upon  before  the* 

15.  their  c.  appeared  fairer  and  latter  in  llesh 

COUNTERVAIL. 

KstA.7.4.lhough  enemy  could  not  c.  king's  damage 

COUNTRY. 
Gen.  19.  28.  and  lo,  the  smoke  of  the  c.  went  up 

24.  4.  but  thou  shall  go  to  my  c.and  my  kindred 

29.  26.  Laban  said  it  must  not  be  so  done  in  our  c 

30.  25.  send  me  away,  that  1  may  go  to  my  c, 
34.  2.  Sliechf^m  1^  prince  of  the  c.  saw  her 
42.  33.  the  man,  the  Lord  of  the  c.  said  unto  us 

A'lim.  15.  13.  all  born  in  thee,  shall  do  these  things 
32.  4.  the  c.  which  the  Lord  smote  beibre  Israel 
Ijeut.  26.  3.  I  am  come  into  the  c.  L.  sware  lo  give 
.Josh.  2.2.  there  came  men  lo  search  out  llie  c.  3. 

7.  2.  Joshua  sent,  saying,  go  up  and  view  the  c. 
Judg.  11.  21.  Israel  possessed  the  land  of  that  e. 

16.  24.  our  enemy  and  the  destroyer  of  our  c. 
Kuth  1.  2.  and  they  came  into  the  c.  of  Moab 

22.  who  returned  out  of  the  c.  of  .Moab 
2.Srt'H.  15.  23.  all  thy  c.  wept  with  a  loud  voice 

21. 14.  bones  of  Saul  buried  they  in  e.  of  Bciijaiuin 
1  Kings  20.  27.  but  the  Syrians  filled  the  c. 
"Kings  3.  20.  and  the  c.  was  filled  with  water 
/s«.1.7.yourc.  is  desolate,  your  cities  burnt  with  fire 

20.  t  6.  the  inhabitants  of  this  c.  shall  say 

22.  18.  he  will  toss  thef!  like  a  ball  in  a  large  c. 
Jer.  22.  10.  he  shall  not  return,  nor  see  his  native  c. 

31.  8.  behold  I  will  bring  them  iVom  the  north  e. 
48.  21.  and  judgment  is  come  ui>on  the  jilain  c. 
50. 9.  caus'^  an  assembly  loconie  IVom  the  north  c. 
51.  t49.  at  Babylon  fall  the  slain  of  all  the  c. 

F.trk.  20.  38.  I  will  bring  them  tiirtli  out  of  the  c. 

25.  9.  glory  of  the  c.  Bc:th-jesliinioth,  Baal-nieoo 
47.  22.  thty  shall  be  lo  you  as  born  in  the  c. 

Jonah  4.  2.  my  saying,  when  I  w  as  yet  in  my  c. 
Mic.  1. 1 11.  the  inhabitants  off.  of  Hocks  came  not 
J/at.9. 31.  they  spread  abroad  his  fame  in  all  ihale. 
Mark  5.  10.  th.at  he  would  notsend  them  out  oft. 
14.  told  il  in  the  city,  and  in  the  c.  l.uke  8.  34. 
/.I/Ac  15.  15.  he  joined  himself  to  acitizcH  ofthate 
.lets  12.  20.  bee.  their  c.  was  nourished  by  king'^e. 
27.  27.  shipmcn  deemed  they  drew  near  losome  t. 
//fft.ll.O.sojourncd  in  land  of  prom.'as  in  strange  c 

14.  they  declare  plainly  that  they  seek  a  c. 

15.  andtruly  if  they  had  been  mindful  of  that  c. 

16.  now  they  desire  a  better  c.  that  is  a  heavenly 

Far  COUNTRY. 
.Tosh.  9. 6.  they  said  we  be  come  from  a  far  c.  9. 
1  Kings  8.41.  out  of  a  far  c.  for  thy  sake,  '2fhr.V,.3-2. 
iKings  'H).}4.  Ilezekifih  said,  they  are  come  from 
a  fur  c.  even  from  Babylon,  Jsa.  39.  3. 
Prov.  2.5.  25.  so  is  good  news  from  a  far  c. 
Isa.  13.5.  from  a/nr  c.  to  destroy  the  whole  land 
46.  ll.inanthatexecuteth  my  counsel  from  far  c. 
Jir.  4.16.  publish,  tfiut  watchers  come  from  a/«rc. 

8.  19.  becau.'ie  of  them  that  dwell  in  a/ar  c. 
•Ifrtf.  21.33.  hoeseh.  went  into  a /nrc.  jl7«)/i  12.1. 

25.14.kingd.  of  heaven  is  as  a  man  trav.  into /are. 
/.HAcI5.13.youngerson  took  his  journey  into /arc. 

tj,cn  COUNTRY. 
I,Fr.  16.29.  whether  one  of  your  ().  e.l7. 15.  |24.22. 
XKivgs  10.  13.  she  turned  and  went  tohero?cM  c. 

11.  21.  let  me  depart,  that  I  may  go  to  my  own  c. 

22.  36.  a  proclamation  every  man  lo  his  own  c. 
Jer.  51.  9.  let  us  go  every  one  to  his  own  <-. 
Mat.  2.  12.  they  departed  into  their  own  e. 

13.  57.  save  in  his  own  r.  MarkCt.A.  Luke  4  24. 
Mark  6. 1.  he  went  thence  and  came  into  his  «"■»  c. 
John  4.  44.  a  prophet  hath  no  honour  in  hi?  uicn  c. 

TAy  COUNTRY. 
Gen.  12.  1.  Abram,get  thee  outofrA?/ c.  .lels'.X 

32.9.returnto  (Ay  c.  and  to  thy  kindred,  I  will  deal 
JVu77i.  20.  17.  let  us  pass,  I  jiray  thee,  thro'  thy  c. 
.Tonah  1.  8.what  is  thy  c?  of  what  people  art  thou? 
Luke  4.23.  heard  done  in  Ca  pern,  do  herein  thyt. 

COUNTRY-VILLAGES. 
\Sam.  6.  18.  both  of  fencerl  cities  and  c.villngit 

COUNTRYMEN. 
2ror.  11.26.  in  ioiirnevinff,  in  perils  !>y  mine  own  « 
1  TAcs.?. 2.14. ye  havesuft'ered  Ijke  things  of  youri; 

COUNTRIES. 
(7r7/.2G.3.  to  thee  and  thy  seed  will  Isivethesoc.  4 

41. 57.  all  c.  Amc  into  Egyi'' '"  Joseph  to  buy  corn 


cou 

iKings  18.35.  wlio  among  all  c.  that  have  delivered 
lC*ron.!i'-!.5.h9Use  ol'laiiieaud  glory  liiruuglioutc. 
2CArjn.  i!0.  !29.  tlie  I'ear  of  Ciod  was  on  all  those  c. 
£ira3.3.l'eur  on  them,  because  of  people  of  those  t. 
4.  iiO.  mighty  kings  who  have  ruled  over  all  c. 
Ps.  110.  0.  he  shall  wound  the  heads  over  many  c. 
/*a.8.  'J  and  give  car  all  ye  offarc.  gird  your.selves 
Jer.  23.3.  1  will  gather  the  remnant  of  niy  (look  out 
of  all  c.  and  bring  theiu  again,  b.  |  3'J.  37. 

28.  8   the  prophets  prophesied  against  many  c. 
£iek.  5.  5.  1  have  set  Jerusalem  in  midst  of  the  c. 

6.  she  hath  changed  my  statutes  more  than  thee. 
6.  8.  when  ye  sliall  be  scattered  through  the  c. 
11.  Iti.  Iho' 1  have  scattered  them  among  lliec.  yet 
1  will  be  to  them  as  a  little  sanctuary  in  the  c. 

37.  I  will  a^selnblc  you  out  of  the  c.  20.  34,  41. 

22.  4.  I  liave  made  thee  a  mocking  to  all  c. 
25.  7.  I  will  cause  thee  lo  perisli  out  of  the  c. 

29.  12.  I  will  disperse  them  through  the  c.  3b.  19. 
35.  10.  thou  hast  said,  these  two  c.  shall  be  mine 

JJan.  11.  4U.  heshallenterinto  thee. and  overflow 

41.  many  c.  shall  be  overthrown,  but  these  escape 

42.  he  shall  stretch  forth  his  hand  upon  the  c. 
Zech.  10.  y.  and  they  shall  remember  ine  in  a  far  c. 
Luke  21.  21.  let  not  them  that  are  in  the  c.  enter 

COUl'LE.^ 
iSam.  13.  G.  let  Tamar  make  me  a  c.  of  cakes 

16.  1.  Ziba  met  David  with  a  c.  of  asses  saddled 
/(a.21.7.  he  saw  a  chariot  with  a  c.  of  horsemen,  9. 

COUPLE,  t^erb. 
£i«d.2C.6.thou  shalt  r.  the  curtains  with  taches,  9. 
11.  shall  make  taches  toe.  lent  together,  3ti.  18. 
39.  4.  made  shoulder-pieces  to  c.  ephod  together 

COb'I'LED,  ETH. 

Ezod.  26.  3.  the  five  curtains  be  c.  36.  10,  13,  16. 

10.  in  the  edge  of  the  curtain  which  c.  the  second 

24.  the  two  boards  shall  be  c.  together,  36.  29. 

39.  4.  by  the  two  edges  was  it  c.  together 

\l'et.  3.  2.  your  chaste  conversation  c.  with  fear 

COUPLING. 

Exod.  26.  4.  make  loops  from  selvedge  in  c.  36. 11. 

4.  likewise  make  in  c.  of  the  second,  36.  11,  12. 

Kl.  one  curtain  that  is  outmost  in  the  c.  36.  17. 

28;  27.  over-agalnst  the  other  c.  thereof,  39.  20. 

COUPLINGS. 
SCAron.  34. 11.  tobuv  hewn  stone  and  timber  for  c. 

COUR.AGE. 
Josh.  2. 11.  nor  did  there  remain  anymore  c.  in  any 
2C/iron.  15.  H.  he  took  c.  and  put  away  the  idols 
19.  t  U.  take  c.  and  do,  and  Ld.  be  with  the  good 
Isa.  44.  1  14.  which  he  taketh  c.  for  himself 
J)aH.  11.  25.  shall  slir  up  his  c.  ag.  king  of  south 
^eU  28.  15.  when  Paul  saw  thanked  God,  took  c. 

Good  COURAGE. 
tYum.  13.  20.  be  ye  of  ffood  c.  and  bring  the  fruit 
i)eut.3l.li.  bf  strong,  and  of  goudc.  fear  not,  7, 23. 
.losk.  1.  6,  9, 18. 1  10.25.  lCAr.22.  13.  |  28.  20. 
'2Sam.  10.  12.  be  of  food  c.  let  us  plav  the  men, 
ICAron.  19.  13.  Ezra  10.  4.'lsa.  41.  6. 
Ps.  27. 14.  wait  on  Lord,  be  of  /rood  c.  and  he  shall 
strengthen  thine  heart,  wait  on  I^ord,  31.  24. 
COURAGEOUS. 
JosK.  1.7.  be  thou  strong  and  c.  23.  6.  2CAr.  32.  7. 
2.Snm.  13.  28.  fear  not,  be  c.  and  be  valiant 
Jlmos  2.16.lie  thai  is  c.  among  migh.  shall  tlee  away 

(JOURAGEOUSLY. 
2Car.l9. 11.  deal  c.  and  Lord  shall  be  with  the  good 

COURSE 
Signifies,  [1]  That  race  which  is  prescribed  us  to 
run  and  fiiUoiD^'lTxmA.l.    [21  Order  or  turn, 
2Chron.  5.  U.     [31  Manner  or  way,  Eph.2.  2. 
[4]  Progress  andsuccess,  2Tlieas.  3. 1.     [5]  .1 
Doya^c,  Acts  21.  7.     [6]   The  gospel-ministrtj, 
Acts  13.  25. 
XChron.  Ti.  1.  the  chief  fathers  of  every  c.  24,000 
iChran.  5.  Jl.  the  priests  did  not  then  wail  by  c. 
F.zra  3.  11.  they  sung  logellier  by  <-.  in  praising 
Ps.  82.  5.  all  the  foundations  of  earth  areoulofc. 
Jer.  8.  6.  every  one  turned  to  hi«  c.  as  the  horse 

23.  10.  their  r.  is  evil,  and  their  force  is  not  right 
LuJce  1.  5.  Zacharias  was  of  the  c.  of  Abiah 

8.  while  he  executed  in  the  order  of  his  e. 
Arts  13.  25.  and  as  .lolin  fulfilled  his  c.  he  said 
16.ll.came  with  straight  c.  to  Samothrncia,  21. 1. 
'M.  24.  'hat  I  might  finish  my  c.  with  joy 
2L  7.  When  we  had  finished  our  c.  from  Tyro 
iCor.  U.  27.  or  at  most  by  three,  and  that  iiy  c. 
2  Thegg.'Xl .  that  word  of  the  Lord  may  have  free  c. 
"ITim.  4.  7.  1  have  finished  my  c  kept  the  faith 
.'am.  3.  (i.  the  tongU''!'eltcth  on  fire  the  r.  of  nature 
WATBR-Cni'RSK.     See  Watkr. 
COURSES. 
.Tudg.a.'iO.thc  stars  in  I  heir  r.  fought  against  Pisern 
ICAron.  23.  G  David  ilivideil  the  Levitfs  into  e. 
2CAron.H.14.S,)lomon  apjiointed  the  r.ofthc  priests 
23.  8.  for.lehoiftda  the  priest  dismissed  not  the  c. 
3).  2.  Hczekinh  appointed  the  c.  of  the  priests 
3.').  10.  and  the  Levites  stood  in  their  r. 
-zro  8.  18.  Ihev  set  the  Lfvites  in  their  r.  for  the 
service  uf  4t>d  which  i#at  Jerusalem 


CRA 

COURT. 

In  Hebrew  Chazer,  is  an  entrance  into  a  palace 
or  house,  Esth.  6.  4,  5.      'J'hc  great  courts  b 
longtng'to  the  temple  were  three;  thejirsl  called 
the  court  of  the  Gentiles,  because  the  G entile 
were  allowed  to  enter  so  far,  and  no  farther. 
The  second  called  the  court  of  Israel,  because 
all  the  Israelites,  if  purijied,  had  a  right  of 
admission.      The  third  court  was  that  of  the 
Priests,  where  the  altar  of  barnt-ojf'eruiffs  stood, 
and  where  the  Priests  and  Levjtes  exercised  their 
ministry.     It   signifies  the  church  of  Christ, 
Zech.  3.  7.     Also  the  false  church.  Rev.  11.  2. 
.^,'zc(i.27.9.tliou  shalt  make  the  c.ofthetabern.  shall 
be  hangings  for  the  c.  35.  17.  |  38.  9.  [  39.40. 
12.  breadth  of  the  c.  13.  1|  18.  length  of  the  c. 
19.  all  the  puis  of  the  c.  35.  18.  1|  38.  2U,  31. 
40.  8.  and  thou  shalt  set  up  the  c.  round  about 
Atii.6.16.  in  the  c.  ol  the  tabernacle  shall  eat  it,  26. 
"iHam.  17.  18.  a  man  which  had  a  well  in  his  c. 
'ZKings  20.  4.  afore  Isaiah  was  gone  into  middle  c. 
2CAr(/n.20. 5.  JehoshaphatstooU  before  the  new  c. 
24.21.  they  stoned  Zechariahin  c.  of  Lord's  house 
29.  16.  brought  out  the  uncleanness  into  the  c. 
i,'s«A.5.1.Estherstoodin  the  iunerc.  of  king's  house 
6.  4.  and  the  king  said,  who  is  in  the  c? 
S.servanls  said,  behold  Hainan  standeth  in  the  c. 
Isa.'M.  13.  habitation  of  dragons,  and  a  c.  for  owls 
35.  t  7.  shall  be  a  c.  for  reuds  and  rushed 
.yCT-.19. 14.  Jeremiah  stood  in  the  c.  of  Lord's  house 
26.2.  stand  in  thee.  oftheLoWs  house  and  speak 
32.  2.  and  Jeremiah  the  prophet  was  shut  up  iii 
the  c.  of  the  prison,  33. 1.  |  39.  15. 
38.  6.  they  cast  Jeremiah  into  the  dungeon  in  th»c. 
F.zek.  8.  7.  he  brought  me  to  the  door  of  the  c.  16. 

10.  3.  the  man  went  in,  the  cloud  filled  the  inner  c. 
40. 17.  he  brought  me  intooutward  c.42. 1.  |  46.21. 

28.  he  brought  me  to  the  inner  c.  and  measured 
43.  5.  the  Spirit  brought  me  into  the  inner  c. 

45.  19.  put  blood  upon  the  gate  of  the  inner  c. 

46.  21.  in  every  corner  of  the  c.  there  was  a  e. 
Jimos  7.  13.  king's  chapel,  and  it  is  the  king's  c. 
Jicts  16. 1 19.  they  drew  Paul  and  Silas  into  the  c. 

17.t22.Paul  stood  in  midst  of  c.  of  the  Areopagites 
lit.  t  J^-  the  c.  days  are  kept,  there  are  deputies 
Phil.  1.  t  13.  my  bonds  are  manifest  in  Ca'sar's  c. 
Rev.  11.  2.  the  c.  without  the  temple,  leave  out 

COURTS. 
'ilCings  21.  S.Manasseh  built  altars  for  all  the  host 
of  heaven  in  the  two  c.  XChron.  33.  5. 
23.  12.  altars  in  the  two  c.  Josiah  brake  down 
ICAron.  2!!.  28.  their  office  was  to  wait  in  the  c. 
28.  6.  Solomon  shall  build  my  house  and  my  c. 
12.  David  gave  Solomon  the  pattern  of  the  c. 
'iChron.  23.  5.  all  the  people  shall  be  in  the  c. 
Psal.  65. 4.  api)roach  to  thee,  that  he  dwell  in  thy  c. 
84.  2.  my  soul  fainteth  for  the  e.  of  the  Lord 
92.  13.  they  shall  flourish  in  the  c.  of  our  God 
96.  8.  bring  an  offering  and  come  into  his  c. 
100.  4.  enter  into  hisc.  with  praise,  be  thankful  to 
116.  19.  pay  my  vows  in  the  c.of  the  Lord's  house 
135.  2.  ye  that  stand  in  the  c.  of  the  house  of  God 
ha.  1.  12.  who  hath  required  this  to  tread  my  c.> 
62.  9.  they  shall  drink  in  the  c.  of  my  holiness 
Eiek.  9.7.  and  fill  the  c.  with  the  slain,  go  ye  forth 
ZccA.3.7.thou8halt  judge  my  house, and  keep  my  c. 
Luke  7.  25.  they  (lat  live  delicately  are  in  king's  c. 

COURTEOUS. 
IPet.  3.  8.  love  as  brethren,  be  pitiful,  be  c. 

COURTEOUSLY. 
.^r(»-27.3.  Julius  c.  intreated  Paul  and  gave  liberty 
28.  7.  Publius  received  us  and  lodgediis3day.s  e. 

COURTIER. 
.John  4.  t  46.  there  was  a  certain  c.  whose  son  was 

COUSIN. 
Luke  1.  36.  thy  c.  Elisabeth  hath  conceived  ason 

COUSINS. 
Luke  1.  58.  her  neighbours  and  c.  heard  how  L. 

COW. 
Lev.  22.  28.  whether  c.  or  ewe,  ye  shall  not  kill  it 
J^um.  18.  17.  firstling  of  a  c.  thou  shalt  not  redeem 
Job  21. 10.  their  c.  calveth,  and  casteth  not  her  calf 
/sa.  7.  21.  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  a  man  shall 
nourish  a  young  c.  and  two  sheep 

11.  7.  and  the  e.  and  the  bear  shall  feed,  lion  eat 
Kick.  4.  15.  I  have  given  thee  c.  dung  for  man's 
Jlmoa  4.  3.  every  c.  at  that  which  is  before  her 

CRACKLING. 
Keel.  7.6.  asc.  of  thorns  under  a  potjAo  is  laughter 

(MIACKNRLS. 
XKinirg  14.  3.  take  with  tlu-e  ten  loaves  and  c. 

CRAFT. 
Dnn.f^.  25.  thro'  his  policy  shall  causer,  to  prosper 
Marli  14.  1.  lake  him  by  c.  and  put  him  to  death 
.Octs  IH.3.bocausn  he  was  of  the  same  r. abode  with 
19.  25.  yo  know  that  by  this  c.  wo  have  wealth 
27.  so  that  not  only  this  our  r.  is  in  danger 
Hev.  18.  22.  no  craftsman  of  whatsoever  e.  he  bo 

(UlAFTILY. 
Judg.  9.  I  31.  ho  sent  messengers  to  Abimolech  c. 


CRB 

CRAFTINESS. 
Job  5. 13.  he  taketh  the  wise  in  theit  c.  1  Cor.  3.  19 
J^uke  20.  'Zl.  but  he  perceived  their  e.  and  said 
2C(/r.  4.  2.  nut  walking  in  c.  nor  handling  the  word 
Kph.  4.  14.  we  be  no  more  carried  by  cunning  c. 

CRAFTY. 
Job  5.  12.  he  disappointed  the  devices  of  the  c. 

15.  5.  and  thou  choosest  the  tongue  ol'  the  c. 
Ps.  83.  3.  have  taken  c.  counsel  against  thy  people 
~Cor.  12.  16.  being  e.  1  caught  you  with  guile 

CRAFTSAIAN. 
Dcut.  27.  15.  the  work  of  the  hands  of  the  c. 
Hev.  18.  22.  no  c.  shall  be  found  any  more  in  thee 

CRAFTSMEN. 
2A'(iiu-.9  24.14.carried  away  allllier.  and  smilh8,16 
IChron,  4.  14.  of  Ciiarashiin,  for  they  were  c. 
AVA.  11.  35.  Lod  and  Oiio,  the  valley  of  c. 
ilos.  13.  2.  molten  images,  all  of  it  the  work  oft 
.'lets  lil.'24.  Demetrius  brought  no  small  gain  toe 
38.  if  the  c.  have  a  matter  against  any  man 
CRAG. 
Job  39.  28.  the  eagle  abidcth  on  the  c.  of  the  rock 

CRANE. 
Isa.  38.  14.  like  a  c.  or  swallow  so  did  I  chatter 
Jer. 8.  7.  c.  and  swallow  observe  the  time  of  coming 

CRASHING. 
Zcph.  1.  10.  there  bliall  be  a  great  e.  from  the  hills 

CRAVED. 
jMark  15.43.  Joseph  went  in,  and  c.  the  body  of  Jee. 

CRAVETH. 
ProB.  16.  26.  labours  fur  himself,  his  mouth  e.  it 

CREA'l'E 
Signifies,  [1]   To  make  out  of  nothing,  to  bring 
being   out   of  nou-entity,  Gen.  1.  1.      [2]    To 
change  the  form,  ttate,  and  situation  of  mutter, 
ichiclt  IS  tchully  indisposed  for  such  a  change, 
and  requires  as  great  power  as  to  make  out  of 
nothing,  Gen.  1.  21.  |  2.19.     [3J    To  give  and 
work  grace  where  it  is  not,  Eph.  2.  10.     [4j 
'J'o  cleanse  the  heart  more  and  more  from  its 
natural  corruption  by  the  power  of  sanctifying 
grace,  Psal.  51.  10. 
A'um.  16.  t  30.  but  if  tlie  Lord  c.  a  creature 
Psal.  51.  10.  e.  in  me  a  clean  heart,  O  God,  renew 
/sa.  4.5.  c.  on  every  dwelling-place  of  Zion  a  cloud 
45.  7.  I  form  the  light  and  c.  darkness,  1  c.  evil 
57.  19.  1  c.  the  fruit  of  the  lips,  peace  to  him 
65.  17.  behold,  I  c.  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth 
18.  be  glad  and  rejoicefor  ever  in  that  which  f  c 
CREATED. 
Gen.  1. 1.  in  the  beginning  God  c.  heaven  and  earth 
*  21.  God  c.  great  whales  and  every  living  creature 
27.  BO  Gode.  man  in  his  own  image,  in  the  image 
of  (Jod,  male  and  female  c.  he  them,  5.  2. 

2.  3.  in  it  he  had  rested  from  all  he  e.  and  made 
6.  7.  Lord  said,  I  will  destroy  man  w  hom  [  have  c 

Dcut.  4.  32.  since  the  day  God  c.  man  on  the  earth 
Psal.  89.  12.  the  north  and  south  thou  hast  c.  them 
102.  18.  people  which  shall  be  c.  shall  praise  Lord 
104.  30.  thou  sendest  forth  thy  Spirit,  they  are  c. 
148.  5.  for  he  commanded,  and  they  were  c. 
Isa.  40.  26.  behold  who  hath  c.  these  things 

41.  20.  and  the  holy  One  of  Israel  hath  c.  it 

42.  5.  saiih  Lord,  he  that  c.  the  heavens 

43. 1.  the  L.  that  e.  thee,  O  Jacob,  and  formed  thee 
7.  have  c.  him  for  my  glory,  yea,  1  have  made  hiib . 
45.  8.  let  the  earth  open,  1  tiie  Lord  have  c.  it 
12.  I  have  made  the  earth,  and  c.  man  u|>on  it 
18.  he  hath  established  it,  c.  it  not  in  vain 
48.  7.  they  are  e.  now,  and  not  from  the  beginning 
54.  16.  I  have  c.  the  smith,  1  have  e.  the  waster 
.Irr.  31.  22.  for  the  Lord  hath  c.  a  new  thing  in  earth 
F.iek.  21.  30.  I  will  judge  thee  where  thou  waste. 
28.  13.  prepared  in  the  day  thatlhou  wast  c. 

15.  wast  perfect  from  the  day  that  thou  wast  c. 
Mai.  2. 10.  have  one  father,  hath  not  one  God  c.  us? 
Mark  13.19.  from  beginning  of  rreat.  which  God  '■. 
If '«r.  11.  9.  neither  wasthe  man  c.  for  the  woman 
Kph.".  lO.wearehis  workmanshipf.  inChr.  Jesus 

3.  9.  hid  in  God,  wlioc.  all  things  by  Jesus  Christ 

4.  24.  the  new  man,  after  God  r.  in  righteousness 
Col.  1.  16.  for  by  him  were  all  things  e.  in  heaven, 

all  tilings  were  c.  by  him,  and  for  him 

3.  10.  new  man  after  th^mage  of  him  that  r.  h^i 

1  7'im.4. 3.  from  meats,  wliich  God  c  lo  be  received 

/C<i>.4.11.lhouiirt  worthy,  forthou  haste. nil  things, 

and  for  thy  pleasure  they  ate,  and  were  r. 

lO.G.whoe.  heaveii  and  the  things  tliat  therein  aie 

CREATETH. 

ylmos  4. 13. he  that  e.  the  wind,  the  Lord  is  his  name 

('RE.\TION. 
Mark  lft.fi.  from  the  C.God  made  male  and  female 
13.  I'.l.  ns  was  not  from  the  beginning  of  the  c. 
rinni.\. •2(1.  things  of  him  from  Iher.  arc  clearly  seen 
H.  22.  fiir  we  know  that  the  whole  c.  groaneth 
2/V<.  3.  4.  things  continue  as  they  were  from  thee. 
licv.  3. 14.  the  Amen.theheeinningof  the  e.  of  God 

CREATOR. 
Tee/. 12.1.  remember  thy  e.  in  the  days  of  tny  youth 
Isa.  40.28.  the  Lord,  the  c.of  the  ends  of  the  eatt^ 


CRI 

fsa.  43. 15. 1  am  the  Lord,  the  c.  of  Israel,  your  k. 
/{om. 1.25.  who  served  the  creature  more  than  the  c. 

1  Pet.  4. 19.  to  him  in  well-doing  aa  to  a  faithful  c. 

CREATURE. 
Oen.  1.  20.  let  waters  bring  forth  the  moving  c. 
Ln  11.  4C.  this  is  the  law  of  every  c.  that  iiiovcth 
J^um.  16.  t30.  if  the  Lord  creiito  a  new  c. 
Mark  16. 15.  preach  the  gospel  to  every  c.  Cul.  1.2.3. 
RomS.Vi.  the  earnest  exjiectation  of  ihec.  waitelh 

20.  for  the  c.  was  made  subject  to  vanity 

21.  the  c.  shall  be  delivered  from  the  bondage 
122.  that  <iveryc.groaneth  and  travailethinpain 
39.  nor  any  c.  shall  be  able  to  separate  us 

2  Cor.  5.  17.  if  any  man  be  in  Christ,  he  is  a  now  c. 
Qal.  6.  15.  nor  uncircumcisipn,  but  a  now  c. 
Col.  1.  !.'>.  who  is  the  first-born  of  every  e. 

1  Tim.  4.  4.  for  every  c.  of  God  is  good,  if  it  be 
fleb.4. 13.  nor  is  there  any  c.  that  is  not  manifest 
ftec5. 13. every  c.in  heaven  heard  I, saying, blessing 

LiDin^  CRE.ATURE. 
Oen.  1.  21.  and  God  created  every  living  c. 
24.God  said,  let  the  earth  bringforth  the  lioingc. 

2.  19.  whatsoever  Adam  called  every  living  c. 
9. 10.  establish  my  covenant  with  every  living  c. 

12.  the  token  between  me  and  every  living  c.  15. 
Lev.  1 1.  46.  the  law  of  every  living  c.  that  moveth 
ii:ieA.1.20.spirit  o{ living  c.  was  within,  21. 1 10.17. 

10. 15.  theiii'in^-c.  that  I  saw  by  riverChebar,20. 

CREATURES. 
Isa.  13.  21.  their  houses  shall  be  full  of  doleful  c. 
Jam.  1. 18.  should  be  a  kind  of  first-fruits  of  his  c. 
Rev.  8.  9.  a  third  part  of  the  c.  in  the  sea  died 

Living  CREATURES. 
Ezek.  1.  5.  came  the  likeness  of  four  living  c. 

13.  it  went  up  and  down  among  the  living  c. 

14.  living  c.  ran,  and  returned  as  lightning 

15.  as  1  beheld  living  c.  one  wheel  by  living  c. 
19.  when  the  living  c.  went,  the  wheels  went 

3.  13.  I  heard  noise  of  the  wings  of  the  living  c. 

CREDITOR. 
Deut.  15.  2.  every  c.  that  lendeth  shall  release  it 
1507/1. 22.t2.  everyone  that  had  ac.  went  to  David 
2 Kings 4.  I.e.  is  come  to  take  my  two  sons  bund. 

4.  t7.  he  said,  go,  sell  the  oil,  and  pay  the  c. 
Luke  7.  41.  there  was  a  certain  c.  who  had  two 

CREDITORS.  [debtors 

Isa.  50.  1.  to  which  of  my  c.  have  I  sold  youl 

CREEK,  3. 
Judg.  5. 1 17.  Asher  continued  on  the  c.  and  abode 
Acts  27.39.they  discovered  a  certain  c.  with  a  shore 

CREEP. 
Lev.  11.  31.  these  are  unci,  to  you  among  all  that  c. 
Psal.  104.  20.  Ihe  beasts  of  the  forest  do  c.  forth 
2  Tim.  3.  6.  of  this  sort  are  they  who  c.  into  houses 

CREEPETH. 

Oen.\  25.  G.  made  every  thing  that  con  earth,  26. 

128.  have  dominion  over  every  liv.  thing  that  c. 

30.  have  given  to  every  thing  c.  herb  for  lueat 

7.  8.  every  thing  that  c-.went  in  two  and  two,  14. 
21.  all  flesh  died  of  every  thing  that  c.  on  earth 

8.  17.  bring  forth  with  thee  every  thing  that  c. 
19.  whatsoever  c.  on  the  earth  went  out  of  ark 

Lev.  11.  41.  every  creeping  thing  that  c.  on  the 
earth  shall  be  an  abomination,  43, 44.  |  20.25. 
Deut.  4. 18.  likeness  of  any  thing  that  c.  on  ground 
Peal.  69.  f  34.  let  every  thing  that  c.  praise  him 

CREEPING. 
Oen.  1.  t  20.  let  waters  bring  forth  c.  creature 

26.  let  them  have  dominion  over  every  c.  thing 
7.  14.  every  c.  thing  after  his  kind  wont  into  ark 

Lev.  5.  2.  if  touch  the  carcase  of  unclean  c.  things 
11.  21.  yet  these  may  ye  eat,  of  every  c.  thing 
22.  5.  or  whosoever  loueheth  any  c.  thing 
Deut.  14.  19.  every  c.  thing  that  llieth  is  unclean 
I  Kings  4.  '.K\.  spake  of  beasts,  c.  things  and  fishes 
Psal.  104.  2.">.  in  the  sea  are  c.  things  innumerable 

148.  10.  flII  cuttle,  c.  things  praise  the  Lord 
Ezek.  8.  10.  form  of  c.  things  pourtrayed  on  wall 
38.  20.  all  c.  things  shall  shake  at  my  presence 
Hos.i.XH.  I  will  make  a  coven.int  with  the  c. things 
Mic.1. 1 17.  move  out  of  their  holes  like  c.  tVings 
Hub.  1.  14.  and  makcth  men  as  the  c.  things 
Acts  10.  12.  Peter  saw  c.  things  and  fowls,  11.  6. 
Rom.  1.23.  into  an  imnge  made  like  to  c.  things 

CREPT. 
Jtide  4.  for  there  are  certain  men  c.in  unawal'es 

creW. 

Mat.  26.74. 1  know  not  the  man,  and  immediately 

the  cock  c.  Mark  14.  68.  Luke  22.  60. 

Mark  14.72.  theseconrl  time  ihecock  c.  John  18.27. 

CRIB. 
Job  39.  9.  will  the  unicorn  abide  by  thy  c.7 
Prov  14.  4.  wnere  no  oxen  are  the  c.  is  clean 
Isa.  1.  3.  and  the  ass  knnweth  his  mas^r'g  c. 
CklEn,  .<>(■>•  after  Crv. 
CRIME,  S. 
^0631.  II.  this  i.i  a  heinous  f.yea  it  is  an  iniquity 
JEze*.  7. 23.  for  the  hmdisfuli  of  binody  c.  and  the 
Acts  2.'i.  IG.to  answer  concerning  c.laid  aga  Inst  him 

27.  aail  not  to  signify  the  c.  laid  agaiost  him 

103 


CRO 

CRIMSON. 

Some  tliink  that  it  is  the  same  2C(«/(  scarlet;  others 
that  it  is  of  a  deeper  dye.  In  the  Hebrew  it  is 
called  Tolahat  Shani ;  that  is,  the  double  worm, 
or  Ihe  worm  Shani ;  as  r/Shani  were  the  proper 
name  of  this  worm :  In  the  Arabic  it  is  called 
Kermes,  or  Karmes;  whence  comes  the  word 
crimson,  because  they  made  use  of  these  little 
worms  to  dye  this  colour.  The  Kermes  is  a 
small  round  shell,  membraneous,  thin,  smooth, 
and  shining ;  of  a  reddish  brown  colour,  mixed 
with  a  whitish  ash  colour,  about  a  quarter  of 
an  inch  diameter,  generally  divided  into  two 
unequal  cavities,  the  greatest  of  which  is  full 
of  a  vast  number  of  little  oval  eggs,  very  red, 
or  vermilion;  and  the  smaller  cavity  is  full  of 
a  kind  of  liquor,  which  is  red  likewise,  and  not 
much  different  from  blood.  This  cod,  or  shell, 
grows  upon  a  kind  of  green  oak,  that  grows 
only  to  the  height  of  a  shrub.  These  shrubs 
are  found  in  Palestine,  in  Provence,  in  Lan- 
guedoc,  in  Spain,  a)id  elsewhere.  They  loosen 
these  cods,  or  shells,  from  the  leaves  to  which 
they  are  fastened,  and  the  worms  of  which  they 
are  full  come  out  of  the  hole  made  by  taking 
them  from  the  leaf;  they  separate  these  little 
animals  from  the  shells  with  a  siet>e,  and  put 
them  together  by  pressing  them  lightly,  and 
make  them  into  balls  of  the  site  ofapulUt'segcr. 
2  Chron.  2.  7.  send  a  man  cunning  to  work  in  c.  14. 
3.  14.  he  made  the  vail  of  blue,  c.  and  fine  linen 
/sa.  l.lB.though  your  sins  be  red  likec.  they  shall  be 
Jer.  4.  30.  though  thou  clothest  thyself  with  c. 

CRIPPLE. 
Mcts  14.  8.  being  a  c.  from  his  mother's  womb 

CRISPING-PINS. 
Isa.  3.22.  Lord  will  take  away  the  mantles  and  c. 

CROOK-BACKED. 
Lev.  21.  20.  a  man  that  is  c   shall  not  approach 

CROOKED. 

Deut.  32.  5.  they  are  a  perverse  and  c.  generation 

.Judg.  5.  f  6.  the  travellers  walked  through  c.  ways 

Job  26.  13.  his  hand  hath  formed  the  c.  serpent 

Ps.  125. 5.  as  for  such  as  turn  aside  to  their  c.  ways 

Prov.  2.  15.  whose  ways  are  c.  and  they  Howard 

Eccl.\.\a.  what  is  c.  cannot  be  made8traighl,7.13. 

/s(j.  27. 1.  shall  punish  Leviathan,  that  c.  serpent 

40.  4.  c.  shall  be  made  straight,  42.  16.  Luke  3.  5. 

45.  2.  I  will  go  and  make  the  e.  places  straight 

59.  8.  no  judgment,  they  have  made  theme,  paths 

Lam. 2.  9.  he  inclosed,  he  hath  made  my  paths  c. 

Fhil.  2. 15.  the  sons  of  God,  in  midst  of  a  c.  nation 

CROP. 
Lev.  1. 16.  shall  pluck  away  his  c.with  his  feathers 

CROP,  }\rb. 
Eiek.Yi."2.  I  will  c.  off  from  the  lop  of  his  twigs 

CROPPED. 
Eiek.  17.  4.  he  c.  off  the  top  of  his  young  twigs 

CROSS. 
By  the  word  cross  is  understood  a  gibbet  made  of 
two  pieces  of  wood  put  across  ;  whether  they 
cross  with  right  angles  at  the  top,  as  a  T.  or  in 
the  middle  of  their  length  like  an  X.  The  cross 
wasthepunishmtnt  ofthevilestslaves,andwas 
called  a  servde  punishment:  This  punishment 
our  Saviour  underwent,  Mat.  27.  35.  Phil.  2.  8. 
This  pcnallyirns so  common  amongtheHomans, 
that  pains,  afflictions, troubles,  and  unprosprr- 
ous  affairs  were  called  crosses;  and  the  verb 
cruciaretcfls  iisedfor  all  sorts  of  chastisements, 
and  pains  of  body  and  mind.  SeePuNiSH.MENT. 
Our  Saviour  says  often  in  his  gospel,  that  he 
who  would  be  his  disciple,  must  lake  up  his 
cross  and  follow  him.  Mat.  16.  24.  He  must 
submit  readily  to  irhatsoever  afflictions  God 
lays^upon  him,  or  any  suffering  that  befalls 
him  in  the  service  of  God,  everi  todralh  ilsclf 
Cross  ts  taken  for  the  whole  of  Christ's  suf- 
ferings, from  his  birth  to  his  death,  but  espe 
daily  those  upon  the  tree,  Eph.  2.  16.  Heb,  12. 
2.  .^ndfor  the  doctrine  of  the  gosprl;  that  is, 
of  salvation  through  Christ  crucified,  1  Cur. 
1.  18.  False  teachers,  tcho  pressed  the  obser- 
vation of  the  law  of  Moses,  as  necessary  to 
salvation,  besides  faith  in  Christ,  are  called 
enemies  of  the  crofS  of  Christ,  PMl.  3.  18.  be- 
cause by  such  doctrine  they  did  really  oppose 
and  undermine  the  power  and  merit  of  Christ's 
passion,  and  sought  to  avoid  persecution, 
which  ihey  would  have  been  exposed  to,  had 
th'-y  preached  salvation  only  by  Christ  cruci- 
fied, as  the  apostle  Paul  vas.  Gal.  5.  11. 
To  crucify,  is  not  only  taken  for  putting  to 
death  on  a  cross,  Mat.  27.  35.  but  also  for  the 
subduing  and  mortifying  sin;  for  breaking 
the  strength,  and  suppressing  the  motions 
and  breakings  out,  of  corrupt  nature.  Gal.  5. 
24,  They  that  are  Christ's  have  crucified  the 
fle>h.  Christ's  death  on  the  cross  has  not  only 
nerittd  reconciliaiion  with  God,  but  is  also 


CRO 

made  effectual  to  mortify  and  s\Abdue  the  lusts 
of  the  fiesh.  Gal.  2.  20,  1  am  crucified  with 
Christ.  Vt  is  said  of  them,  who  for  some  time 
have  made  profession  of  religion,  and  after- 
wards turn  apostates,  that  they  crucify  to 
themselves  the  Son  of  God  alVesli,  Heb.  6.  6. 
that  is,  They  .shew  thcmstives  to  be  of  the  same 
opinion  wtlh  those  that  did  crucify  Christ, 
and  would  do  it  again,  were  it  in  thiir  power. 

The  apostle  tells  the  Galatians,  that  Christ 
Jesus  had  been  evidently  set  forth  crucified 
among  them,  Gal.  3.  I.  'J'hry  had  been  as 
fully  and  clearly  informed  of  the  nature  and 
design  of  Christ's  sufferings,  as  if  all  had 
been  transacted  in  their  sight. 

Milt.  10.  38.  he  that  takelh  nut  his  c.  Luke  14.  27. 

16.  24.  let  him  deny  himself,  take  up  his  c.  and 

follow  me,  Mark  8.  34.  |  10.  21.  Luke  9.  23. 

27.  32.  they  found  Simon,  hini  thty  compelled  to 

bear  his  c.  Mark  15.  21.  Luke  2;i.  26. 

40.  saying,  if  thou  be  the  Son   of  God,  come 

_down  from  the  c.  42.  Mark  15.  30,  32. 

John  19. 17.  he  bearing  his  c.  went  forth  to  a  plac« 
19.  Pilate  wrote  a  title,  and  put  it  on  the  c. 
25.  there  stood  by  the  c.  of  .lesus  bis  mother 
31.  bodies  should  not  remain  on  the  con  sabbath 

1  Cor.  1.  17.  lest  c  of  Christ  be  made  of  none  effect 
18.  preaching  of  the  c  is  to  them  foolishneM 

Gal.  5.  11.  then  is  the  offence  of  the  c  ceased 
6.  12.  lest  they  suffer  persecution  for  Ihec  of  Chr. 
14.  God  forbid  that  I  should  glory,  save  in  the  e. 

Eph.  2.  16.  reconcile  both  in  one  body  by  the  e. 

Phil. ^.8.  he  became  obedient  to  the  death  of  the  e. 
3.  18.  that  they  are  enemies  of  the  c  of  Christ 

Col.  1.20.  having  made  peace  thro'  the  blood  oft. 
2. 14.  and  took  it  out  of  ihe  way,  nailing  it  to  his  e 

Heb.Vi.U.  for  the  jo)  set  before  him,  endured  the  c. 
CROSS-WAY. 

Obad.  14.  norshouldesi  thou  have  stood  in  the  e. 
CROUCH. 

1  Sam.  2.  36.  shall  come  and  c.to  him  for  a  piec« 
CROUCH  ETH. 

Psal.  10. 10.  he  c  and  huniblelh  himself,  that  poor 

Crow,  Crowino.     See  Cock. 

CROWN 

Ik  properly  taken  for  a  cap  of  state  worn  on  the 
heads  of  sovereign  princes,  1  Chr:  20.  2.  But 
in  a  figurative  sense  it  signifies  honour,  splen- 
dour, or  dignity,  Lam.  5. 16,  The  crown  is  fallen 
from  our  head.  Jind  the  apostle  says  of  the 
Philifipians,  that  they  were  his  joy  and  crown 
Phil.  4.  1.  They  were  his  honour  and  glory, 
the  great  ornament  of  his  ministry,  by  means 
whereof  they  had  been  converted  to  Christ.  It 
is  used  likewise  forre\v;in\,hreause  conquerors 
in  the  public  games  were  crowned,  1  Cor.  9.  23, 
They  do  it  to  obtain  a  corrujitible  crown,  but 
we  an  incorruptible:  that  is,  Ihe  wrestlers  in 
those  games  which  are  practised  amoner  you. 
contend  in  order  to  obtain  a  wreath,  or  garland 
of  flowers,  herbs,  or  leaves  of  laurel,  olive,  and 
the  like ;  but  we  Christians  strive  for  an  in- 
heritance incorruptible,  undrfiird,  and  that 
fadcth  not  away,  reserved  in  heaven  for  vs. 
St.  John,  speaking  of  Christ  governing  tie 
affairs  of  his  church,  says,  that  on  his  hefld 
were  many  crowns,  Rer.  19.  12.  votimr  his 
absolute  sovereignty,  and  many  triumphs.  Ji 
crown  IS  a  sign  of  victory.  Rev.  4.  4. 

The  high-priest  among  the  iews  wore  a  crown, 
which  girt  about  his  mitre,  or  lower  part  of 
his  bonnet,  and  was  tied  behind  his  head.  On 
the  forepart  was  a  plate  of  gold,  icilh  these 
Words  engraven  on  it,  Holine>s  to  Ihe  Lord, 
Eiod.  28.  36.  I  29.  6.  A'ew  married  men  and 
women  wore  crowns  upon  their  wedding-day, 
Cant.3.  11.  The  spouse  invites  her  companions 
to  see  king  So\onum  with  the  crown  wherewitX 
his  mother  crowned  him  in  the  day  of  his  es- 
pousals;  and  alluding  to  this  custom,  it  is 
said,  Ezek.  16. 12.  that  when  God  entered  into 
cnninant  with  the  Jewish  nation,  he  put  a 
beau'iful  crown  upon  their  head. 
Eiod.  25.25.  shalt  make  a  golden  c  to  the  border 

29.  6.  and  put  the  holy  c  u|)nn  the  mitre     • 

30.  4.  make  golden  rings  to  it  under  the  c  37.  27. 
39.  30.  made  the  plate  of  the  c.  of  pure  ifnid 

Lev.  8.  9.  upon  his  forefront  he  put  the  hol\  c. 
21.  12.  Ihe  c.  of  Ihe  anointinj  nil  is  upon  him 
2  Kings  11.12.  put  the  c  upon  Joash,  2  Chr.  23.11. 
F.sth.  1.  11.  to  bring  Vashti  with  the  e.  royal 
fob  31.  36.  purely  I  would  bind  ii  as  a  c  to  me 
Psnl.?9.  39.  thou  hast  profaned  hisc  by  casiingit 
132.  18.  but  upon  himself  shall  his  e.  flourish 
Prov.  4.  9.  a  c.  of  glory  shnll  she  deliver  to  thee 
12.  4.  a  virtuous  woman  is  a  c.  lo  her  husband 
14.  24.  Ihe  t.  of  the  wise  is  their  riches 
16.31.  the  hoary  head  is  a  c  of  glory  iffonnd  m 
17.  n.  children'ii  children  are  the  c  of  old  mwi 
27.  24.  d«lh  tb«  c.  endure  to  every  geoAralioD  1 


CRU 

Cant.  3. 11.  go  forih,  behold  king  Solomon  witlfc. 
Ina.  'ic.  1.  wou  lo  tile  c.  ut  pride,  to  tliu  drunkurj 
3.  ih^tt  day  Lord  of  iiosts  Bliuil  be  lor  u  c.  ol'glury 
Gi.  3.  iliuusliuilulso  be  a  col  ;;lor>  in  ilie  liuiidol 
Jer.  13.  IH.  the  c.  of  your  glory  shuil  come  down 
Ezck.  til.  '26.  remove  the  diudom,  take  oil  liiu  c. 
Hcch.  i).  16.  ihuy  utiiill  be  ais  the  stones  of  u  c.  lifted 
Ju/tn  lU. .).  JeriUd  wearing  a  c.of  lhoriid,iiiul  purple 
1  Cor.  9.  2j.  they  do  it  lo  obtain  a  corruptible  c. 
PAi7.4.1. dearly  belov.  and  longed  for,  iiiy  juy  and  c. 
1 1'hcss.'i.ii).  I'ur  what  is  our  hope,  oi  c.  ol  rejoicing 
S  Tim.  -4. 8.  Ihero  in  laid  up  for  ine  a  c.  of  ngnteous. 
Jam.  I.  lii.  he  fliall  receive  c.  of  life  Lord  prom:sid 
1  Pet.  5.  4.  ye  shall  receive  a  c.  of  glory  ladeth  not 
Rev.  2.  10.  lUitiiful  to  death,  I  will  give  a  c.  of  life 
3.  II.  hold  that  fa^t,  that  no  man  lake  thy  c. 
6. 2.  a  c.  given  to  him,  and  went  forth  conquering 

CKOVVN  of  i' old. 

Ezod.'iZi.  11.  thou  sliiilt  make  upim  it  a.  c.  of  gold 

ronii.l  about,  21.  |  30.  3.  |  37.  2,  11, 12,  26. 

JCjW.8.15.Moid(.cui  vventoutwith  agreatc.i//»-u/J 

PsaL.i\.2.  thou  seltest  a  c. "/  pure  gold  on  his  uead 

CROWN  with  head. 
G«i.49. 26.  thoy  shall  be  on  the  c.  of  Joseph's  head 
Z>«;u«.33.20.  leurelh  the  arm  with  thee,  ol  llie  Atuii 
Z  Ham.  1.  10.  I  look  the  c.  that  was  upon  \\i9  head 
12.  30.  look  king's  c.  from  his  head,  1  Chr.  20.  2. 
14.25.  from  the  sole  even  to  c.  of  his  head.  Job  2.7. 
Eslh.  2.  17.  the  king  set  the  royal  c.  on  her  head 
6.  8.  the  c.  royal  which  is  set  upon  his  head 
Job  19.  9.  he  haih  taken  the  c.  from  my  head 
/so.3.17.  Lord  will  smite  with  a  scab  the  c.  of  head 
Jer.  2.  It),  have  broken  the  c.  of  thy  head 
48.  45.  the  c.  of  the  head  of  the  tumultuous  ones 
I^am.5.  IS.  the  c.  is  fallen  from  uurhead,  woe  to  us 
Kzek.  16.  12.  1  put  a  beautiful  c.  on  thine  head 
Mat.  27.  29.  tliey  platted  a  c.  of  thorns,  and  put 
it  on  his  luad,  Mark  15.  17.  .John  19.  2. 
Rev.  12.  I.  and  upun  her  head  a  c.  of  twelve  stars 
14. 14.  having  cm  ii'is  head  a  golden  c.  and  a  sickle 

CROWN,  Verb. 
Psal.  5.  t  12.  with  favour  wiit  thou  c.  him,  as  with 

CROWNED. 
PsaZ.  8.5.  thou  hast  c.  him  with  glory  and  honour 
Pruv.  14.  18.  the  prudent  are  c.  willi  knowled^'e 
Cant.'i.  11.  the  cruwn  wherewilh  his  mother c.  him 
A'n/i.  3.  17.  thy  c.  are  as  locusts,  and  thy  captains 
8  7V(H.  2.  5.  he  is  not  c?  except  he  strive  lawfully 
Heb.  2.  9.  we  see  Jesus  c.  with  glory  and  honour 

CROWNKUST. 
ffeb.  2.  7.  thou  c   him  with  glory  and  honour 

CROWNKST. 
Pnal.  IJ5    11.  thou  c.  the  year  with  thy  goodness 

CROWNKTH. 
Pnal.  103.  4  who  c.  thee  with  loving-kindness 

CROWNING. 
Isa.  2.1.  8.  taken  counsel  iigriinst  Tyre  the  c.  city 

CROWNS. 
1  Chron.  2.  t  54.  Ihe  c.  of  the  house  of  Joab 
Kiek.i'i.  42.  which  put  beautiful  c.  on  their  heads 
Zccft.  6.  11.  make  c.  ||  14.  the  c.  shall  be  toHelem 
Rev.  4.  4.  the  elders  had  on  their  heads  c.  of  gold 
10. and  they  cast  their  c.  before  the  throne,  saying 
0.  7.  on  the  locusts'  heads  were  c.  like  gold 

12.  3.  a  red  dragon  having  seven  c.  on  his  heads 

13.  I.  a  beast  rise  up,  having  upon  his  horns  ten  c. 
19.  12.  and  on  his  head  were  many  c. 

CRUCIFY. 
Mat.  20.  19.  shall  deliver  him  to  Gentiles  to  c.  him 
23.34.»om»ofllicm  ye  shall  kill, and  c. and  scourge 
27. 31.  they  led  him  away  to  c.  him,  Mark  15.  20. 
Mark  15.  13.  and  they  cried  out  again,  c.  him,  14. 

27.  and  wi:h  him  they  c.  two  thieves,  the  one 
iMk'-.  23. 21 .  they  cried  c.  him,  c.  him,  ./ohn  19.6,15. 
Heb.  G.  6.  they  c.  to  themselves  the  Son  of  God 
CRUCIFIED.  [afresii 

Mat.^.'i.Son  of  Man  is  betrayed  to  be  c.  iMke'H.'i. 
27.  22.  they  nil  said  unto  him,  let  him  be  c.  23. 
2f>.  Pilate  delivered  him  lo  be  c.  .John  19.  16. 

35.  c.  him  bnd  parted  his  garments,  .lohn  19.  23. 
38.  Iheu  were  there  two  ihieves  c.  with  biin,  44. 

Mark  15.  32.  Lxtke  23.  33.  ./uAn  19.  18. 
28.5.  I  knciw  vebcek  Jesus  who  was  c.  Mark  16.6. 
John  19.  20.  lor  the  place  where  Je.^ua  was  c  41. 
Jlela^.  23.  by  wicked  liand.i  ye  have  c.  and  slain 

36.  mnde  Jesim,  whom  ye  c.  I<.  and  C.  4.  10. 
Rom.  6.  6.  knowing  that  our  old  man  isc.  with  him 

1  Car.  1.  13.  isChiistdivided?  wasPaul  c.  forvou? 
23.  we  preach  I',  c.  unto  the  Jews  a  slumbliiig 

2.  2.  know  any  thing,  save  Jesus  C.  and  him  c. 
8.  ihey  would  not  have  c.  Ihc  Lord  of  glory 

2  Cor.  13.4.  for  llio'  he  was  c.through  weakness,  yet 
Oal.  2.  20.  I  am  c.  with  Chrisl,  nevertliolcm,  I  live 

3.  I.  Christ  hath  been  set  forth,  c.  among  you 

5.  24.  they  that  are  ("hrist's  have  c.  Ihe  flesh  with 

6.  14.  by  whom  the  woild  is  c.  to  me,  I  to  world 
Rev.  11.8.  and  Egypt,  where  also  our  Lord  was  c. 

CRUEL. 
Oen.  49.  7.  curbed  be  their  wrath,  for  It  was  e. 
CxuJ.  6. 9.  but  Ihey  hearkened  nut  for  c.  bondage 
104 


CRY 

Deut.  32.  33.  their  wine  as  the  c.  venom  of  asps 
Job  30.  21.  ihouart  become  c.  to  ine,  thou  oppusest 
I'sal.io.  19.  mine  eiieiiiies  hate  me  with  c.  lialred 
71.  4.  deliver  me  out  of  the  hand  of  the  c.  man 
I'rov.  5.  9.  lest  ihou  give  thy  years  to  the  c. 

11.  J7.  but  he  that  is  c.  troubielh  his  own  flesh 

12.  10.  bul  the  tender  mercies  of  the  wicked  are  c. 
17.  11.  a  c.  messenger  shall  be  sent  against  him 
27.  4.  wrath  is  c.  \\  Cant.  8.  6.  jealousy  is  c. 

Isa.  13.  9.  behold,  the  day  of  the  Lord  comelh,  c. 
19.  4.  the  Kgyplians  will  1  give  over  to  a  c.  lord 
Jer.  6.  23.  they  are  c.  and  have  no  mercy,  50.  42. 
.'(0.  14.  wounded  with  chaslisenieiit  of  a  c.  one 
l^am.  4. 3.  the  daughter  of  my  people  is  become  c. 
Ileb.  11.  30.  others  had  trial  of  c.  uiockiiigs 

CRUELLY. 
Eiek.  18. 18.  because  he  c.  oppressed,  he  shall  die 

CRUELTY. 
(?en.49.5.  instiuinenlsofc.  aie  in  their  habitations 
.fudg.  9.  24.  the  c.  done  to  the  sons  of  Jerubbaal 
Psal.  27.  12.  such  as  breathe  out  c.  are  risen  up 
74.  20.  dark  places  are  full  of  ihe  habitations  oi  c 
Prov.  ill.  t  4.  wraih  is  c.  anger  is  outrageous 
£:eA'.34.  4.  with  force  and  c.  have  ye  ruled  them 

CRUMBd. 
Mat.  15.  27.  the  dogs  eat  of  the  c.  Marl:  7.  28. 
Luke  10.  21.  to  be  led  wiih  c.  winch  fell  from  rid 

CRUSE. 

1  Sam.  26.  1 1.  take  spear  and  c.  of  water  let  us  go 
12.  so  David  took  the  spear  and  the  c.  16. 

1  Kings  14. 3.  take  with  thee  a  c.  of  honey  and  go 
17.  I'i.  she  said,  I  have  but  a  little  oil  in  a  c. 

14.  nor  c.  of  oil  fail,  till  the  Lord  send  rain,  16. 

19.  6.  Elijah  had  a  c.  of  water  at  his  head 
2^in/'j2.'20.bring  me  a  new  c.  and  put  salt  therein 

CRUSH. 

Job  39. 15.  ostrich  forgetteth  her  foot  may  c.  them 
y>a»«.  1.15. assembly  iigainstme  to  c.  my  young  nieii 
3.  34.  to  c.  under  his  feet  all  the  prisoners  of  earth 
Jimos  4.  1.  ye  kine  of  llashan  which  e.  the  needy 

CRUBHEU,  CRUSHT. 
l^ev.  22.  24.  ye  shall  not  offer  to  the  Lord  what  is  c, 
JiTum.  22. 2.'>.  the  ass  c.  Balaam's  foot  against  wall 
iJeut.  28.  33.  shall  be  only  oppressed  and  c.  alway 
Jiidg.  10.  t  8.  the  I'hilisiines  c.  the  children  of  Isr. 

2  Chr,  16.  I  10.  Asa  c.sonie  of  ihe  people  same  time 
./ob  4. 19.  in  the  dust,  which  are  c.  before  the  moth 

5. 4.  his  children  far  from  safety  are  cm  the  gale 

20.  t  19.  because  he  hath  c  and  forsaken  the  poor 
34. 125.  he  overturnetb  ihein,  so  that  they  are  c. 

/ita.  59. 5.  that  which  is  c  breakelh  out  into  a  vijier 
.fer.  51.  34.  Nebuchadnezzar  the  king  hath  c  me 

CRY 
Is  taken /or  aloud  extending  of  the  voice,  Eccl.9. 
17.  Mat.  21.  15.    Jllso  for  weeping,  wourning, 
and  lamentation,  Exod.  11.6.  |  12.  30.     In  the 
Psalins,avd  clsewhere,it  is  often  put  fur  fervent 
and  earnest  prayer,  either  witn  the  voice,  or  in 
the  heart  only,  I'sal.  17.1,  Attend  unto  my  cry. 
F.iod.  14.  15,  (iud  says  to  Moses,  Wherefore 
criesl  thou  unto  me7  though  as  yet  Moses  had 
said  nothing.  To  cry,  likewise  signifies,  to  call 
to  Godjor  vengeance.  Gen.  4. 10.   .Sins  are  said 
to  cry,  when  they  art  ^ross,  manifest,  and  im- 
pudent, and  such  •«  highly  provoke  (rod  lo 
anger  ;  thus  the  Cry  of  the  sins  and  irrcgvla- 
rilirs  of  Sodom  ascended  vp  to  heaven,  and 
called  fur  vengeance.  Gen.  18.  20.    1  looked  for 
rigliteousne.KS,  but  behold  a  cry,  Isa.  5.  7.    The 
cry  of  the  irppressed,  praying  for  help  from 
vicn,  and  vengeance  from  God  ujton  their  op- 
pressors.    The  prophets,  by  proso|>opeias,/r<^ 
qucntly  make  beasts,  trees,  mountains,  lands, 
and  cities,  to  speak.  The  young  ravens  cry,  anil 
speak  their  wants  to  Goil  after  their  manner, 
Psal.  147.  9.   Hce  Isa.  15.  4.  |  :14.  14.  Joel  1.  20. 
^<^i.  18.  21.  accoriling  lo  tUc  c  which  is  come  up 
F.zod.  2.  23.  and  their  c.  came  up  unto  God,  3.  9. 
3.  7.  I  have  heard  their  c.  I  know  their  sorrows 
JVum.  16.  34.  and  nil  Israel  fled  at  the  c  of  them 
./udg.^.  tl3.  Sisera  gathered  by  call  his  chariots 

1  Sam.  5.  12.  the  c.  of  the  city  wont  up  to  heaven 
9.  16.  because  their  c  is  come  up  unto  me 

2  Sam.  22.  7.  and  my  c  did  enter  into  his  oars 

\  Kings  S.'if*.  to  hearken  to  thee  and  to  the  prayer 
which  thy  scivant  prayeth,  2  Chron.  6.  19. 
Jfeh.  5.  6.  I  was  angry  when  I  hcnrd  iheir  c 

9.  9.  thou  heardest  Jhoir  c  by  the  Red  Sea 
Kslh.  4.  1.  Mordccai  cried  with  a  loud  and  bitter  c 

9.  31.  the  matters  of  their  fastings  and  their  c. 
.Job  16.  18.  O  earth,  lei  my  c  have  no  place 

34  23.  80  ihat  they  cauie  the  cof  the  poor  lo  come 

to  him,  he  heareih  the  c.  of  ihe  afflicted 

r.<.5.2.  hearken  lo  voice  of  my  r  .my  King,  mv  God 

0.  12.  he  forgeltelh  not  the  e.  of  Ihe  humble 

17.  1.  hear  the  right,  O  Lord,  attend  unto  niy  e. 

18.  6.  my  c  came  before  iiim,  even  into  hii  cars 
34.  l.l.  and  his  cars  are  open  to  their  c 

39.  12.  hear  my  prayer,  O  Lord,  give  ear  to  my  c 

40.  1.  be  incliacd  unto  me,  and  heard  my  c. 


CRY 

Ti.SS.S.  G.  ofmy  aalv.  incline  thine  car  unto  my  « 
102.1.  hear,  O  Lord,  and  let  my  c.  come  unto  tlic« 
106.  44.  he  regarded,  when  he  heard  their  c 
1 19. 169.  let  my  c.  come  near  before  thee,  O  Lord 
142.  6.  attend  to  my  c.  1  am  brought  very  low 
Ptov.  21. 13.  who  stoppeth  his  ears  at  then  of  poor 
Keel.  9.  17.  more  than  the  c  of  him  llial  ruleth 
Isa.  5.  7.  he  looked  for  righteousness,  behold  a  c 
15.  5.  they  shall  raise  up  a  c.  of  de.<lruclion 
8.  ihec  isgone  roundabout  the  borders  olMoab 
30.  19.  he  will  be  gracious  at  the  vuiie  ol   thy  c 
43.  14.  the  Chaldeans,  whose  c.  is  in  llie  ships 
.ItT.  7. 16.  nor  lill  up  c  nor  prayer  for  them,  11. 14 
8.  19.  behold  the  voice  of  the  e.  of  my  people 
14.  '2.  and  the  c  of  Jerusalem  is  gone  up 
18.  22.  let  a  c.  be  heard  from  thi;ir  houses  4 

2.5.  36.  the  c  of  the  shepherds  shall  be  heard 
46.  12.  and  thy  c  hath  tilled  the  land 

48.  4.  her  liltle  ones  have  caused  a  c  to  be  hea'J 

5.  ihc  enemies  have  heard  a  c  of  destruction 

49.  21.  the  earth  is  moved  at  the  c  of  Edom 

50.  46.  the  c  is  li'mrd  at  the  taking  of  Babylon 

51.  54.  a  sound  of  a  c  cometh  from  Babylon 
y^am.3.  56.  hast  heard,  hide  nut  ibiiie  ear  at  my  t. 
F.zek.2i.  23.  the  suburbs  shake  at  the  c  of  jiilot^ 
Zeph.  1.  10.  there  shall  be  a  c  from  the  fish-gate 
.VuJ.25.6.  at  midnight  there  was  a  c  made,  behold 

Ureal  CRY. 
(7en. 18.20.  because  the  cof  Sodom  is  great,19.13. 
27.  34.  Esau  cried  with  a  great  and  bitter  c 
F.zod.l\.6.  there  shall  be  a.greal  c.  through  Egypt 

12.  30.  Pharaoh  rose,  there  was  a^reatcin  Egypt 
JVrA.5.1.  was  great  c.  of  the  peojile  and  their  wivet 
./Jets  23.  9.  wlien  he  so  said,  there  arose  agreatc 

Hear  CRY. 
Kiod.22.23.  if  they  cry,  I  will  surely Aeartheirc 
./ob  27.  9.  will  God  hear  his  c  when  trouble  comet 
Psal.  61. 1.  hear  my  c  O  God,  attend  to  my  prayer 
145.  19.  he  also  will  hear  their  c  and  save  them 
Jer.  20.  16.  let  him  hear  ihe  c  in  the  morning 

J^ot  hear  CRY'. 
Jer.  14. 12.  when  ihev  fa.at,  I  will  not  hear  their  e. 

CRIES. 
.Tarn.  5.  4.  the  c  of  them  that  reaped  are  entered 

CRY,  yerb. 
Kxod.  5.  8.  for  Ihey  are  idle,  therefore  they  c 
22.  23.  if  thou  afflict  ihein,  and  they  c  unto  me 

32.  18.  iieilher  is  it  the  voice  of  them  that  c 
/jCJ). 13.45.  shall  cover  his  upper  lip,  and  c  unclean 
■ludg.  10.  14.  go  c  to  the  gods  ye  have  chosen 

2  .S-im.l9. 28.  w hat  right  have  I  yet  to  c  to  the  king 
2  Kings  8.  3.  she  went  lo  c  for  her  house  and  land 
2  CAr.  20.  9.  and  c  in  our  affliction,  thou  wilt  ho.nr 
./ob  30.  20.  I  c  unto  thee,  and  thou  dost  not  bear 
24.  though  ihey  c  in  his  destruction 

35.  9.  they  make  the  oppressed  to  c.  they  c  out 

12.  there  they  f .  but  none  givelh  answer,  because 

36.  13.  they  c.  not  when  he  bindelh  them 
38.41.  when  his  young  ones  cto  God,tliey  wander 

P.iai.  22.  2.  I  c.  in  the  day  lime,  thou  hearcsl  not 

27.  7.  hear,  O  Lord,  when  I  c  with  my  voice,28il. 

28.  1.  to  Ihee  will  I  c  O  Lord,  my  rock,  2. 
.'14.  17.  the  righteous  c  and  the  Lord  heareth 
56. 9.  when  I  c.  then  shall  mine  enemies  turn  back 
.57.  2. 1  will  c  to  God  most  high,  ihat  performeth 
01.2.  from  the  end  of  the  earth  will  I  c  unio  thee 
8li.  3.  be  mercifyl  to  rae,  O  Lord,  for  I  c.  lo  thee 
89.  26.  he  fhnll  c  unto  me,  thou  art  my  father 
141.  1.  Lord,  I  c.  unto  thee,  make  basic  unio  me 
147.  9.  he  givelh  food  to  young  ravens  which  c' 

Prov.  8.  1.  doth  not  wisdom  c  and  underslanding 
21.  13.  he  also  shall  c  but  shall  not  be  heard 

/sa.H.i.  before  the  child  shall  know  toe  mv  father 
lO.taO.cshrillwilhlhy  voice,Odaught.oCGallim 

13.  22.  the  wild  beasts  of  ihe  island  shall  c 

14.  31.  c  O  city,  thou  Palcstina,  art  dissolved 

15.  4.  and  Ileslibon  shall  c.  and  Ele^leh 

33.  7.  behold  their  valiant  ones  shall  c  without 

34.  14.  and  the  satyr  shall  c  to  his  fellow 

40.  2.  c  lo  Jeru«alem,  her  warfare  accomplished 

6.  the  voice  i^aiil,  c  and  he  said,  what  shall  I  c.' 
42.  2.  he  fhall  not  r.nor  cau.ie  his  voice  to  bo  hoard 

13.  he  shall  e.  yen,  prevail  against  his  enemies 

14.  now  will  I  c  like  a  travailing  woman 

46.  7.  one  shall  c.  to  him,  yet  can  he  not  answer 
58.  9.  ihou  shall  c  and  hn'shall  say,  heio  I  am 
65.14.  but  ye  shall  c  forsorrow  ofhi'Brl,aiiil  bowl 
./er.  2.  2.  go  and  c  in  iho  crs  of  Jerusalem 

3.  4.  wilt  Ihou  not  from  this  lime  c.  unio  nin 

4.  5.  blow  ye  the  trum|)el  in  the  Innil,  c.  gather 
11.  11.  though  Ihey  c  lo  me,  I  will  not  Iwnrkrn 

12.  c  lo  the  gods  to  whom  they  ofT  r  inrenso 
14.  for  I  will  not  hear  when  Ihey  e.  F.irk.S.  18. 
22  20.  go  up  to  Lebanon,  and  e.  from  the  nnssaj;p« 
2.1.34.  howl  ye  shepbcrdH  and  c.  4S.20.  f.:-A-.21.12. 
31.  6.  the  w'aichmen  on  mount  Ephimin  shall  e. 
/-am.  3. 8.  when  I  c  and  shout  he  shu'ic'h  nut  my 
F.zrk.  9.  4.  that  c  for  all  the  abominations  done  in 
24.  17.  forbear  to  c  make  no  mourning  for  dead 
26.  13.  the  is!c«  shake,  wbou  the  wounded  c 


CRl 

Etek.  27.  30.  and  they  shall  c.  bitterly  fbr  Tyrui 
Hos.  8.  2.  Israel  shall  e.  untu  me,  we  know  ihee 
Joel  1.  19.  O  Lord,  to  thee  will  1  c.  for  the  tire 

20.  the  beasts  of  the  field  c.  also  unto  thee 
Jonah  3. 8.  let  man  and  beast  c.  mightily  unto  God 
.Mic.'S.5.  prophets  bite  with  their  teetli|and  c. peace 
JVa/i.  3.  8.  eland,  shall  they  c.  but  none  look  back 
Zi-ph.  1.  14.  the  mighty  men  shall  c.  bitterly 
Zcch.  1. 14.  the  angel  said  unto  me,  c.lhou,  saying 
Jilat.  12.  19.  he  shall  not  strive,  nor  c.  nor  shall  any 
/.uke  18.7.9hall  notGod  avenge  his  elect,  who  c.duy 
Horn.  8.  l.i.  the  Spirit,  whereby  we  c.  Abba,  Father 
GalA.'il.bfeiik.  tbrth  and  c.thou  thai  iravallest  not 

CRY  against 
Deut.  15. 9.  and  he  c  to  the  Lord  aff.  thee,  24.  15. 
8  Chron.  13.  12.  his  priests  to  c.  alarm  against  you 
Jub  31.  38.  if  my  land  c.  against  me,  or  the  furrows 
Junah  1.  2.  arise,  go  to  Nineveh,  and  c.  against  it 

CRY  aloud. 
1  Kings  18. 27.  Elgah  said,  c.  aloud,  for  he  is  a  god 
Job  19.  7.  I  c.  aloud,  but  there  is  no  judgment 
Psal.  55.  17.  at  noon  will  I  pray  and  c.  aloud 
Jsa.  24.  14.  they  shall  c.  aloud  from  the  sea 
54.  1.  sing,  break  forth  into  singing,  and  c.  aloud 
58.  1.  c.  aloud,  spare  not,  lift  up  thy  voice  like  a 
Uos.5. 8.  trumpet  in  Ramah,  e.  aloud  at  Beth-aven 
Mic.  4.  9.  why  dost  thou  c.  aloud  ?  is  there  no  king 

CRY  to  the  Lord. 
1  Sam.  7.  8.  cease  not  to  e.  unto  the  Lord  for  us 
Psal.  107.  19.  they  c.  to  tlie  Lord  in  trouble,  28. 
/ia.lSl.iO.they  shall  c.  to  Ld.  because  of  oppressors 
Toel  1.  14.  sanctify  ye  a  fast,  and  c.  to  the  Lord 
Hie.  3.  4.  shall  c.  to  the  Lord,  but  he  will  not  hear 

CRY  out. 
1  5am.  2.  1 24.  ye  make  the  Lord's  people  to  c.  out 
4.119-  Phinehas'  wife  was  with  child, near  to  c.out 
8. 18.  ye  shall  c.  out  that  day,  bocause  of  your  k. 
Job  19.  7. 1  c.  out  of  wrong,  but  I  am  not  heard 
35.  9.  they  c.  out  by  reason  of  the  arm  of  mighty 
/sa.12.6.  c.out  and  shout,  thou  inhabitant  of  Zion 
15.  4.  the  armed  soldiers  of  Moab  shall  c.  out 
5.  my  heart  shall  c.  out  for  Moab,  his  fugitives 
29.9.  stay  yourselves  and  wonder,  c.  out  and  cry 
Jer.  48.  31.  I  will  howl,  and  c.  out  for  all  Moab 
Lam.  2. 19.  arise,  c.out  in  the  night,  in  the  watches 
jivios  3.  4.  will  a  young  lion  c.  out  of  his  den? 
/fab.  1.  2.  I  c.  out  to  thee,  but  thou  wilt  not  sa»e 

2.  11.  for  the  stone  shall  c.  out  of  the  wall 
Jitark  10.47.  he  began  to  c.out  and  say,  have  mercy 
Luke  19.  40.  the  stones  would  immediately  c.  out 

CRIED. 

Gen.  27.  34.  Esau  c.  with  a  great  and  bitter  pry 

39.  15.  he  heard  that  I  lifted  up  my  voice  and  c. 

41.  43.  and  they  c.  before  him,  bow  the  knee 

55.  people  c.  to  Pharaoh  for  bread,  go  to  Joseph 

45.  I.  he  c.  cause  every  man  to  go  out  from  me 

Ezod.  5.  15.  the  officers  came  and  c.  to  Pharaoh 

J^um.  11.  2.  the  people  e.  to  Moses,  and  he  prayed 

Z>rut.22.24.  stone  them,  the  damsel,  bee.  she  c.  not 

27.  the  damsel  c.  and  there  was  none  to  save  her 

Judg.  5.  28.  Sisera's  mother  c.  through  the  lattice 

7.  21.  and  all  the  host  ran  and  c.  and  fled 

10.  12.  and  ye  c.  to  me,  and  I  delivered  you 
15.  1 19.  called  the  name  the  we!l  of  him  that  c. 

1  Sam.  14.t20.  Saul  and  the  people  were  c.together 

17.  8.  he  stood  and  c.  to  the  armies  of  Israel 
20.  37.  Jonathan  e.  after  the  lad,  and  suid,  38. 

S.Sam.  20.  Iti.  then  c.  a  wise  woman  out  of  the  city 
22.  7.  I  e.  to  my  God,  and  he  did  hoar  my  voice 

1  Kings  13.  2.  he  c.  ag.  the  altar  iji  Beth-el, 4. 32. 

18.  28.  and  they  e.  aloud,  and  cut  themselves 

2  Kings  2. 12.  Elisha  saw  it,  and  c.  my  father,  my 

3.  t2l.  all  the  Moabiles  were  c.  together 
6.  5.  he  c.  alas,  master,  for  it  was  borrowed 

8.  5.  the  woman  c.  to  the  king  for  her  houee 

11.  14.  and  Athaliah  c.  treason,  treason 

1  Chron.  5.  20.  they  c.  to  God  in  the  battle,  and  he 

2  Chron.  32.  20.  Isaiah  prayed  and  c.  to  heaven 
JWA.  9.  27.  when  they  c.  to  thee  thou  heardest,  28. 
Job  17.  t  1"1.  I  have  c.  to  corruption,  my  father 

29.  12.  because  I  delivered  the  poor  that  c. 

30.  5.  they  c.  after  them,  as  after  a  thief 
Psal.  18.  6.  in  my  distress  I  c.  unto  my  God 

41.  they  c.  but  there  was  none  to  save  them 
22.  5.  they  c.  to  thee  and  were  delivered 

24.  but  when  he  c.  unto  him  he  heard 
30. 2. 0  Lord  my  God,  I  e.  to  thee, and  hast  healed 

8.  I  c.  to  thee,  O  Lord,  and  made  supplication 

31.  22.  heardest  my  supplications  when  I  c.to  thee 
34.6.  this  poor  man  c.  and  the  Lord  heard  him 
66.  17.  I  c.  unto  him  with  my  mouth,  77.  1. 
88. 1.  O  Lord,  I  have  c.  day  and  night  before  thee 


CRY 

Eiek.  9.  8.  that  I  fell  on  my  face  and  c.  and  »aid 

10.  13.  it  was  c.  to  them  in  my  hearing,  O  wheel 

Dan.  ().  20.  he  c.  with  a  lanientublo  voice,  O  Dan 

Hos.  7.  14.  they  have  not  c.  to  me  with  their  lieari 

Jonah  1.  5.  the  mariners  c.  every  man  to  his  god 

2.  2. 1  c.  by  reason  of  mine  affliction,  to  the  Lord, 

and  he  heard  me ,  out  of  ihu  belly  of  hell  c.  1 

ZecA.7.13.  tliat  as  he  c.  and  they  would  not  hKar,su 

they  c.  and  1  would  not  hear,  suith  L.  of  hosts 

Mat.  14.  30.  Peter  c.  saying,  Lord  save  me 

20.  31.  but  they  c.  the  more,  saying,  have  mercy 

on  us,  O  Lord,  Mark  lU.  48.   Luke  18.  39 

Mark  9.  2b.  the  sjiirit  c.  and  rent  him  sore 

.lohn  7.  37.  Jesus  c.  if  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come 

Jicts  19.32.  some  t.  one  thing,  some  another,  21.34. 

22.  24.  might  know  wherel.  they  c.  so  against  him 

/ico. 10.3. when  he  c.  seven  thunders  uttered  voicen 

12.  2.  aiid  she  being  with  child,  c.  travailing  in 

14.  18.  c.  with  a  loud  cry  to  him  that  hud  sickle 

18.  2.  he  c.  mightily  with  a  strong  voice,  saying 

18.  c.  when  tliey  saw  the  smoke  of  her  buriiing 

19.  they  c.weepirtg  and  wailing,  saying,  alus,alas 
CRIED  to  the  Lord. 

£r.8.12.  Uose&c.toL.  15.25.]  17.4.  JVum.  12.13. 

14.10.  Ut.c.to  L.  ./ud^.3.9,15.  ]  4.3.  I  6.7.  |  10.10. 

JVu7H.20.l6.  when  we  c.  to  L.  he  heard,  Of ul.^H.T. 

Josh.  24.  7.  when  they  c.  to  the  J^.  he  put  darkness 

1  Sam.  7.9.  Sam.c.  to  L.  15. 11.  ||  1  Kings  17.  20. 
Elijah  c.  to  the  Lord,  21. 

2  .fir«n.20.11.  lea.  e.  to  L.\\1  Chr.  14.11.  Asa  c.  to  L. 
2  CVir.13.14.  they  c.  to  L.  Ps.  107.6,13.  Jonah  1.14. 
Psal.  3. 4.  I  c.  to  L.  with  my  voice,  120. 1.  |  142. 1. 
Lain.  2. 18.  their  heart  c.  to  L.  O  daughter  of  Zion 

CRIED  with  a  loud  voice. 

lSam.28. 12.  woman  at  En-dor  c.wilh  a  loud  voice 

2Sam.l9.4.David  c.withloudvoice,0  Absalom, my 

2Kings  18.28.  Rabshakeh  c.with  loud  v.  /4a.36.13. 

JVcA.  9. 4.  Lev.  c.  with  I.  v.  \\  Eiek.  11.  13.  Ezek.  c. 

jWat.27.46.  about  ninth  hour  Jesus  c.icitA  a  I.  voice 

50.  Mark  15.  34, 37.  Luke  23.  46.  .John  11.  43. 

Markl.^.e\i\spii.  c.with  l.v.\\./)cts  16.28.  Panic. 

.4cis7.57.  Steph.  enemies  c.jcjfA  I.  v.  ||  bO.Sleph.c. 

liev.  6. 10.  they  c.  with  loudv.  saying,  how  long,  O 

7. 2.  the  angel  c.  with  a  loud  voice,  10.  3.  |  19. 17. 

10.  mult,  stood  before  Lamb  c.  with  a  loud  voice 

CRIED  out. 

lSam.4.13.  all  the  city  c.out l|5.10.Ekronites  c.out 

1  Kings  22.  32.  Jehoshaphat  c.  out,  2  Chron.  18.31. 

2  Kings  4.  40.  they  c.  out,  there  is  death  in  the  pot 
.fer.  20.  8.  I  c.  out,  I  cried  violence  and  spoil 
Mat.  8.  29.  behold,  the  spirits  c.  out,  Luke  4.  33. 

14.  28.  the  disciples  c.  out  for  fear,  Mark  6.  49. 
20.  30.  the  blind  man  c.  out,  have  mercy  upon  us 

Mark  1.23.  the  man  with  an  unclean  spirit  c.  out 
9.  24.  the  father  of  the  child  c.  out,  Luke  9.  38. 

15.  13.  and  they  c.  out  again,  crucify  him.  Mat. 
27.  23.  Luke  23.  18.  John  19.  6. 

Jicts  19. 28.  they  c.  out,  saying,  great  is  Diana,  34. 

22.  23.  as  they  c.  out,  and  threw  dust  in  the  air 

23.  6.  Paul  c.  out  in  the  council,  I  am  a  Pharisee 
CRIEST,  ETH. 

Gen.  4. 10.  the  voice  of  thy  brother's  blood  c.  to  me 
Exod.  14.  15.  wherefore  c.  thou  to  me  ?  speak  to 

22.  27.  when  he  c.  unto  me,  that  I  will  hear 
1  Sam.  2(i.  14.  who  art  thou  that  c.  to  the  king? 
Job  24.  12.  and  the  soul  of  the  wounded  e.  out 
Psal.  72. 12.  he  shall  deliver  the  needy  when  he  c. 

84. 2.  my  heart  and  flesh  e.  out  for  the  living  God 
Prov.  1.  20.  wisdom  c.  without,  8.  3.  |  9.  3. 

3.  3.  yea,  if  thou  c.  after  knowledge,  ami  liftest 
/«o.  26.17.  like  as  a  woman  that  c.out  i<i  her  pangs 

40.  3.  the  voice  of  him  that  c.  in  the  wilderness 

57.  13.  when  thou  c.  let  companies  deliver  thee 
Jer.  12.  8.  my  heritage  e.  out  against  me 

30.  15.  why  c.  thou  for  thine  affliction  7 
Mic.  6. 9.  Lord's  voice  c.  to  the  city,  hear  the  rod 
Mat.  15.  23.  send  her  away,  for  she  c.  after  us 
Jjuke  9.  39.  he  suddenly  e.  out,  and  it  tcareth  him 
Worn. 9.27.  Esaias  also  e.  concerning  Israel,  though 
Jam.  5.  4.  behold,  the  hire  of  the  labourers  c. 
CRYING. 

1  Sam.  4.  14.  when  Eli  heard  the  noise  of  the  c. 

2  Sam.  13.  19.  Tamar  put  ashes,  and  went  on  c. 
Job  39.  7.  nor  rogardeth  he  the  e.  of  the  driver 
Prov.  19.  18.  and  let  not  thy  soul  spare  for  his  c. 

30. 15.  the  horse-leech  hath  two  daughters  c.  give 
Isa.  22.  5.  it  is  a  day  of  c.  to  the  mountains 

24.  11.  there  is  a  c.  for  wine  in  the  streets 
65.  19.  voice  of  c.  shall  be  no  more  beard  in  her 

Jer.  48.  3.  a  voice  of  e.  shall  be  from  Horonaim 
7.cch.  4. 7.  shall  bring  forth  the  head-stone  with  c. 
Mai.  2.  13.  covering  the  altar  of  the  Lord  with  c. 


CUP 


13.  unto  thee  have  I  c.  O  Lord,  in  the  morning  L/l/ot.  3.  3.  voice  of  one  c.  in  the  wilderness,  pre 
119.  145.  I  c.  with  my  whole  heart,  hear  me  pare,  Mark  1.  3.  Luke  3.  4.  John  1.  23. 

130. 1,  out  of  the  depths  have  le.  to  thee,  O  Lord    21.  15.  and  saw  the  children  e.  in  the  temple 
138.3.  in  the  day  when  I  c.  thou  answeredst  me    Lukei.  41.  devils  c.thou  art  Christ,  the  Son  of  G. 


Jsa.6.4.  the  posts  moved  at  the  voice  of  him  that  e. 

30.  7.  therefore  I  c.  concerning  this,  their  strength 
Jcr.4.20.  destruction  upon  destruction  is  e.  for  land 

13.  t  6.  thr  brsthreo  c.  after  thee  fully 
IM 


j9cts  8. 7.  for  unclean  spirits  c.  came  out  of  many 
14.  14.  they  ran  in  among  the  people,  e.  out 
21.  28.  laid  hands  on  him,  c.  out,  men  of  Israel 
36.  the  multitude  followed,  t.  awaj  with  him 


Gal.  4.  6.  Spirit  into  your  hearts,  e.  Abba  Father 
Heb.  5.  7.  he  ofi'ercd  uji  prayers  with  strong  e. 
Hev.  21.  4.  there  will  be  no  more  death  nor  c. 

CRYSTAL. 
Job  28.  17.  the  gold  and  the  c.  cannot  equal  it 
Kiek.  1. 22.  firmament  was  as  colour  of  terrible  a. 
hev.  4.  6.  there  wus  a  sea  of  glass  like  nnto  c. 

21.  11.  the  light  of  the  great  city  was  clear  as  c. 

22.  1.  a  pure  river  of  water  of  life,  clear  as  c. 
CUHIT 

Is  the  distance  from  the  elbow  bending  inwards  to 
the  extremity  of  the  middle  finger:  this  ts  callid 
a  common  cubit,  (Ac  cubU  of  u  man,  containing 
afoot  and  a  half,  or  half  a  yard,  Deut.  3.  11. 
There  is  likewise  the  sacnd  cubit,  which  is  a 
full  yard,  and  contains  two  common  cubits; 
There  is  mention  made  of  both  these  sorts  of 
cubits,  in  1  Kings  7. 15.  and  2  Chron.  3.  15.  Vn 
the  former  the  two  columns  of  brass  which  wert 
in  Solomon's  tirnplc,  are  suid  to  be  eighteen 
cubits  high ;  and  in  the  Chronicles,  thiriy-fice 
cubits  :  which  is  double  the  other.  Some  are 
of  opinion,  that  the  cubit  which  Noah  jnade  use 
of  when  he  built  the  ark,  was  equal  to  sixcoin 
inon  cubits;  they  cull  this  a  giomctrical  cubit. 
Gen.Q.  16.  in  a  c.  shall  tliou  finish  the  ark  above 
L>eut.'.i.  Jl.ihe  bieadih  of  it,afiei  the  c.  of  a  man 

1  Kings  7.  24.  the  kiiops  compassing  it,  ten  in  a  e. 

2  Chron.  4.  3.  ten  in  a  c.  coinpasaing  the  sea  about 
Ezck.  43.  13.  the  c.  is  a  c.  and  a  hand  breadth 
Mat.ii.27.  can  add  one  c.  to  hisstature,  Luke  12.25. 

CUBITS. 
Gen.  6.  15.  length  of  the  ark  300  c.  bread  ih  50  t. 
7.  20.  fifteen  c.  upward  did  the  waters  prevail 
Exod.25. 10.  two  e.ond  a  half  the  Unglh  ullbe  aik 
1  Sam.  17   4.  Goliath's  height  six  c.  and  a  span 

1  Kings  6.2.  length  of  the  house  60  e.  breadth  20 
23.  each  of  the  cherubims  was  ten  c.  high 

7.  38.  and  every  laver  was  four  c.  high 

2  Kings  14.  13.  Jehoash  brake  down  the  walls  of 
Jerusalem,  400  c.  2  Chron.  25. 23. 

Ezra  6.  3.  the  height  60  c.  the  breadth  60  c. 
Esth.  5.  14.  let  a  gaUows  be  made  50  c.  high,  7  9. 
Ezek.  40.  23.  he  nien.surcri  from  gate  to  gale  100  e. 
47.  the  court  100  c.  ||  43.  17.  the  settle  14  e. 
41.  2.  and  the  breadth  of  the  door  was  ten r. 
9.  the  thickness  of  the  wall  was  five  c. 
43.  16.  and  the  altar  shall  be  twelve  c.  long 
Dan.  3.  1.  the  height  of  ihe  image  was  CO  e. 
Zerh.  5.  2.  the  length  of  the  Hying  roll  is  20  e. 
■fohn  21.  8.  they  were  from  land  as  it  were  200  c. 
Rev.  21. 17.  he  measured  the  wall  of  the  city  144  c. 

CUCKOW. 
Lev.  11. 16.  c.  have  in  abomination,  Deut.  14.  15. 

CUCUMBERS. 

J^um.  11.  5.  we  remember  the  c.  and  the  melons 

Isa.  1.  8.  Zion  is  left  as  a  ludge  in  a  garden  of  e. 

Cud;  see  Chkw  and  Chewktii. 

CUMBERED. 

Luke  10.  40.  Martha  was  c.  about  much  serving 

CUMBERETH. 
Luke  13.  7.  cut  it  down,  whv  c.  it  the  ground  t 

CUMRR.ANCE. 
Deut.  1. 12.  how  can  I  mvself  alone  bear  your  e.T 

CUMMIN. 

Isa.  28.  25.  doth  he  not  scatter  the  c.  and  cast  in 

27.  nor  is  a  cart-wherl  turned  about  up"nthe«. 

but  the  c.  is  beaten  out  with  a  rod 

Mat.  23.  23.  woe  to  yon  srrihes,  ye  pay  tithes  of  «. 

CUNNING. 
(? en  25. 27. the  boys  grew, itnd  Esau  was  ac.  hunter 
Exod.  26.  1.  wiih  cherubims  of  c.  work,  36.  8. 
28. 15.  thou  shalt  make  the  breasf-plaip  of  c.  work 
31.  4.  to  divise  c.  works  in  gold  and  silver 
38.  2.'>.  Aholiiib  a  c.  workiiKin  and  embroiderer 
.39.  8.  he  made  the  brPMBt-|ilate  of  c.  work 
1  Sam.  16.  16.  a  man  who  is  a  e.  player  on  a  harp 
18. 1  have  seen  n  son  of  Jesse  that  isr.  in  playins 

1  CAron.  25.  7.  nil  that  were  c.  in  acmjs,  were  288 

2  Chron.  2.  7.  send  me  a  mnn  r.  to  work  in  gold 
13.  I  have  sent  a  c.  man  of  Huram  my  lather's 

Psa/..'>8.t5.  not  hearken,  be  Ihe  rharnier  never  soc 
137.  5.  if  I  forg.-t,  let  my  riirht  hand  forget  hor  c. 
Pron.  19.  t25.  and  the  simple  will  be  c. 
Cant.  7.  1.  thy  joinis,  the  work  of  n  c.  workman 
Isa.  3.  3.  I  will  take  away  ilie  e.  ariificor 
40.20.  hesceketh  to  him  a  c.  workman  to  prepare 
Jer.  9. 17.  send  for  e.  women  ihiit  they  may  come 
10.  9.  they  are  oil  the  work  of  c.  men 
Dnn.  1.4.  children  well-favoured,  e.  in  knowledge 
Hos.  6.  t  8.  Gilead  is  a  c  ly  c.  for  blood 
Eph.i.  14.  carried  about  bv  c.  craftiness,  whereby 

CUNNINGLY. 
2  Pet.  1. 16.  we  have  not  followed  e.  devised  fables 

CUP. 
This  word  is  taken  in  .Scripture  in  a  proper,  and 
in  a  figurative  sense.  In  a  proper  sense  it  sig 
nifies  a  material  cup,  which  people  drink  out  of 
at  meals.  Gen.  40. 13.     In  the  figurative  sens* 
it  is  taken  (1)  For  the  wine  in  the  tup,  1  C«i 


CUP 

U.  27.  (2)  For  those  sufferings  and  affiictio'  t 
tcMcA  Ood  sends  upon  a  person  or  people:  To 
drink  of  this  cup,  signijies  to  undergo  and  en- 
dure tliuse  sufferings  ;  Isa.  51. 17,  Sluiid  up,  O 
Jeru^iiluin,  winch  hiist  drunk  at  the  hand  ut'thc 
Lord  the  cup  of  hia  fury.  fsal.  75.  8,  lii  the 
hand  of  the  Lord  there  is  a  cup,  the  dregs  thereof 
all  the  wicked  of  the  earth  shall  wring  them  out, 
and  drink  them.  In  these  and  the  like  passages 
God  is  compared  to  the  master  of  a  feast,  who 
then  used  to  distribute  portions  of  meats  or 
drinks  to  the  several  guests,  as  he  thought  fit. 
Our  Haviour  prays.  Mat.  SO.  3'.),  Let  this  cup 
pass  from  njc.  Let  me  be  freed  from  these  suf- 
ferings both  in  my  soul  and  body :  Jind  he  tells 
his  disciples.  Mat.  '20.  'Si,  Tliat  they  should  in- 
deed drink  of  his  cup  ;  that  is.  They  should 
taste  of  inward  affiietions  and  desertions,  and 
have  their  share  of  outward  sufferings  for  the 
gospel,  as  well  as  himself.  (3)  For  God's 
blessings  and  favours,  Psal.  23.  5. 
Babylon  is  called  a  golden  cup,  Jer.  51. 7,  because 
of  her  great  riches  and  plenty,  .ind  it  is  said 
of  the  woman  arrayed  in  purple,  or  of  the  anti- 
christian  church,  that  she  had  a  golden  cup  in 
her  hand,  Uev.  17.  4.  which  may  denote  the  en- 
ticing means,  and  specious  pretences,  which 
she  uses  to  allure  people  to  idolatry,  particu- 
larly by  sensuality,  luxury,  and  affluence, 

1  will  take  the  cup  of  salvation,  fsal.  116.  13.  / 
viill  offer  the  sacrificeof  thanksgiving  unto  God. 
Itdenotesjoyand  thanksgiving, and  is  aphrase 
taken  from  the  common  practice  of  the  Jews  iyi 
their  thank-offerings , in  which  a  feast  was  made 
of  the  remainder  of  their  sacrifices,  and  the  of- 
ffrers.togelhcr  with  the pricst,did  eat  and  drink 
before  the  Lord;  and,  among  other  rites,  the 
master  of  the  feast  took  a  cup  of  wine  into  his 
hand,  and  solemnly  blessed  God  for  it,  and  for 
the  mercy  w'lich  was  then  acknowledged ;  and 
Vim  gave  it  to  all  the  guests,  of  which  every 
one  did  drink  in  his  turn,  1  Chr.  16.  2,  3.  To 
which  custom  it  is  supposed  that  our  blessed 
J^ord  alludes  in  tfie  institution  of  the  cup,  which 
also  is  called  the  cup  of  blessing,  1  Cor.  10.  16. 

Gen.  40.  11.  and  Pharaoh's  c.  was  in  mine  hand 
44.  2.  pvit  my  c.  the  silver  c.  in  the  sack's  mouth 

2  .Sari.i2.3.  it  drank  of  his  own  c.  and  lay  in  bosom 
1  Kings  7.  26.  wrought  like  brim  of  a  c.  2  Chr.  4.  5. 
I'sal.  11.  6.  this  siiall  be  the  portion  of  their  c. 

16.  ">.  the  Lord  is  the  portion  of  my  c.  thou 
23. :'(.  thou  anointest  my  head,  my  c.  runneth  over 
73.  10.  waters  of  a  full  e.  are  wrung  out  to  them 
".I.  S.  in  the  hand  of  the  Lord  there  is  a  c. 
116  13.  [  will  take  thee,  of  salvation  and  call  on 
Prov.  23.  31.  when  it  giveth  its  colour  in  the  c. 
Isa.  51.  17.  which  hast  drunk  at  the  hand  of  the 
I^<ird  the  c.  the  dregs  of  the  c.  of  trembling 
22  taken  out  of  thy  hand  the  c.  of  trembling 
Jr.r.  16. 7.  nor  shall  men  give  iheni  c.  of  consolation 
25.  15.  take  the  wine-c.  of  his  fury  at  my  hand 
17   tlii-ii  took  1  the  c.  nt  the  Lord's  hand 
2'^.  if  ihcy  refuse  to  lake  the  c.  at  thine  hand 
49.  12.  wlio.-iO  julgiMCnt  was  not  to  drink  the  c. 
51.  7.  Rihylon  halh  been  a  golden  c.  in  the  hand 
Lam.  4.  21.  the  c.  also  shall  puss  through  to  thee 
F.irk.  23.  31.  I  wili  give  her  c.  into  thine  hand 

32.1  lum  shall  drink  of  ihysister'sc.deepiind  large 
7/a//.2.1li.  r.ofihe  Lord's  right  hand  shall  be  turned 
y.rth.Mi.  I  will  make  Jerusalem  a  c.oflreinhling 
Mal.W.Vi.  give  a  c. of  cold  waier  only,  Mark  9.41 
20.  Zi.  are  ye  able  lo  drink  of  c..»  J\lark  10.  38. 
'23.  ve  shall  drink  in.loe.1  of  my  c.  Mark  10.  39. 
2.3.  25.  lor  you  make  ch^an  the  outside  of  the  c. 

20.  clc'inse  first  what  is  within  the  c.  and  platter 
£6.2.'.  and  he  took  thoc.  and  gave  thanks,  Mark 

1 1.  23.  Luke  22.  17,  20.  1  Cor.  11.  25. 

39.  O  my  Father,  if  it  be  possible,  let  this  e.  pa>B 

fioiii  me,  Mark  14.36.  Luke  22.  42. 

40.  iftliis  e.  may  thit  pass  away  from  mo 
l.uke  22.  20.  this  c.  is  the  new  testami'nt  in  my 

blood,  1  Cor.  11.25. 
Jtihni^  11. 'ho  c.  which  my  Father  hath  given  me 
1  Car.  III.  III.  the  c.  of  blessing  we  bless,  is  it  not  (he 

21.  ye  '•arm  it  drink  the  r.of  Lord  and  c.  of  devils 
l!.2ii.  !i-  often  as  ye  drink  of  this  c.  ye  do  shew 

27.  and  drink  tins  c.  of  the  Lord  unworthily 
Itrv.  14.  10.  poured  without  mixture  into  the  e. 

16.  19.  lo  give  unio  lu^r  the  c.  of  his  wrath 

17.  4.  the  womin  having  n  golden  c.  in  her  hand 

18.  6.  in  the  c.  she  filled,  fill  to  her  double 

Ct'l'  Ili;,\RKIL 
JVtA.  1.  11.  for  I  wai  the  kind's  r.-bearer. 
CVV-ttV.\KEH». 

1  ICinirs  10. 5.  nuecn  of  Sheba  saw  c.-b.  2  Chr.  9. 4. 

cirps. 

2  Kam.  17.  t  2=^.  Parzillai  bronchi  bods  and  c. 

1  Cliron.  28.  17.  David  gave  pure  gidd  for  the  c. 
/»a.22.  24.  slia'l  hang  on  F.liakirn  the  vessels  of  c 
'cr.  35.  5.  and  I  set  nots  full  of  wino  and  c. 
10« 


CUR 

Jer.  52. 19.  the  Chaldeans  took  away  spoons  and  e. 
Mark  7.  4.  as  the  washing  of  c.  and  puts,  8. 

CLKULED. 
Job  10.  10.  haat  not  tliou  c.  mo  like  cheese  1 

CURE. 
Jer.  33.  6.  behold,  I  will  bring  it  health  and  e. 
46.  til.  daughter  of  Egypt,  no  c.  shall  be  to  thee 
CURE,  ED. 
Jer.  33.  6.  I  will  c.  them  and  will  reveal  peace 
46.  11.  O  daughter  of  Egypt,  thou  shall  not  be  c. 
//os.  5. 13.  yet  could  he  not  c.  you  of  your  wound 
Mat.  17.  16.  thy  disciples,  they  could  not  c.  him 

18.  the  child  was  c.  from  that  very  hour 
Luke  7.  21.  in  that  same  hour  he  c.  many 

9.  1.  he  gave  thoin  power  to  c.  diseases 

John  5.  lU.  the  Jews  said  to  him  that  was  c 
CURES. 

Luke  13.  32.  I  cast  out  devils,  I  do  c.  to-day  and 
CURIOUS. 

F.zod.'iS..^.  c.  girdle,  27,28.  |  29.5. 1 39.  5.  Lev.  8.  7. 
35.  32.  and  to  devise  c.  works,  to  work  in  gold 

Mcts  19. 19.  many  of  them  that  used  c.  arts  brought 
CURIOUSLY. 

Psal.  139.  15.  and  c.  wrought  in  the  lowest  parts 
CURLED. 

Cant.  5.  t  !!■  his  locks  arc  e.  and  black  as  a  raven 
CURRENT. 

Gen.  23.  16.  c.  money  with  the  merchant 
CURSE. 

To  curse,  signifies  to  imprecate,  to  call  down 
mischief  upon,  or  to  wish  evil  to  :  Noah  cursed 
his  grandson  Canaan,  Gen.  9.  25.  Cursed  be 
Canaan;  may  he  be  hateful  to  God,  abhorred  by 
men,  and  miserable  in  hisperson  and  posterity. 
Jacob  cursed  the  fury  of  his  two  sons  Simeon 
and  Levi,  who  massacred  tAcShechcmites,  and 
plundered  their  city,  Gen.  49.  7.  Moses  enjoins 
the  people  of  Israel  to  denounce  curses  against 
the  violators  of  the  law,  Deut.  27.  15,  16,  &.c. 
Jlud  Joshua  cursed  him  who  should  undertake 
to  Aui'W  Jericho,  JusA.  6. 2t).  These  curses  were 
either  ordained  by  God  himself,  and  pronounced 
by  men  abounding  with  the  Spirit;  or  were  pre- 
dictions of  what  evil  should  happen  to  aperson 
or  people,  uttered  in  the  terms  of  imprecations, 
which  had  their  accomplishment:  Theywcrenut 
the  effects  of  passion,  impatience,  or  revenge, 
and  thrreforc^were  not  such  as  God  condemns 
in  his  law,  and  in  his  word.  For  e.xample  :  he 
ordains  that  no  one  shall  presume  to  curse  his 
father  or  his  mother  upon  pain  of  death,  E.xod. 
21.  17.  He  shall  not  wish  any  mischief  to  be- 
fall them,nor  use  any  kind  of  malicious  reviling 
speeches,which  argue  acontcmpt  of  his  parents. 
He  ordains  that  no  one  curse  the  prince  of  his 
people,  Exod.  22.  28.  or  one  that  is  deaf.  Lev. 

19.  14.  In  the  gospel,  our  Saviour  pronounces 
those  of  his  disciples  to  be  blessed,  who  arc 
loaded  with  curses,  and  requires  them  lo  bless 
those  that  curse  them,  to  render  blessing  for 
cursing.  Mat.  5.  11.   Luke  6.  28.  Rom.  12.  14. 

God  denounced  his  curse  against  the  serpent 
whichseduccdEve,  and  against  the  earth,which 
thenceforth  was  to  produce  briers  and  thorns  : 
it  should  produce  both  fewer  and  worse  fruits, 
and  that  with  more  trouble  of  men's  minds  and 
labour  of  their  bodies.  Gen.  3.  14, 17.  Jfe  curs- 
ed Cain  also,  who  had  imbrued  his  hands  in  his 
brother  Abel's  blood.  Gen.  4.  11.  J{c  was  de- 
votrd  to  destruction,  cast  out  from  God'l  pre- 
sence and  the  communion  of  the  church,  anil  the 
society  of  his  kindred  and  acquaintance,  and 
wandered  fromone  country  to  another  by  reason 
of  the  trouble  and  perplexity  of  his  conscience. 
The  divine  maledictions  are  not  merely  impre- 
cations, impotent  and  fruitless  desires  ;  they 
carry  their  effects  with  them,  and  are  attended 
with  all  the  iniscries  denounced  by  God. 

Gen.  27.  12.  I  shall  bring  a  c.  on  me,  not  a  blessing 
13.  Iiis  mother  said,  upon  mo  be  ihy  c.  my  son 

J^Tum.  5.  IH.  and  the  priest  have  in  his  hand  the 
bitter  water  that  canseth  the  e.  19,  22,  24,  27. 

27.  the  woman  shall  be  a  c.  among  her  people 
Prut.  11.26. 1  set  before  you  a  blessing  and  c.  30. 1. 

28.  a  c.  if  you  will  not  obey  the  commandments 

29.  and  shalt  put  the  c.  upon  mount  Ebal 
21.  t23.  ho  that  is  hanged  is  the  c.  of  God 
23.  .5.  God  turned  the  c.  into  a  blessing,  JVcA.  13.2. 
29.  19.  when  he  heareth  the  words  of  this  c. 

./ash.  6.  18.  and  make  the  camp  of  Israel  a  e. 
Juilg.  9.  57.  on  them  came  the  c.  of  Jolham 

1  Kings  2.  8.  who  cur-icd  mo  with  a  grievous  c. 

2  Kini's  22.  19.  that  they  should  boromc  a  e. 
A>A.  10.2il.  Ihey  entered  into  a  c.  and  into  an  oath 
■fob  31.  30.  nor  to  sin  by  wishing  a  c  to  his  soul 
I'rov.  3.33.  ihec.  ofLord  is  in  the  house  of  wicked 

26,  2.  so  I  he  c.  CBUsiloiiR  shall  not  come 
27. 14.  rising  early  it  shall  be  r.ninted  a  c.  to  hitn 
28.27.  that  hidelh  his  eyes  shall  have  many  a  e. 
Isa.  24. 6.  therefore  hath  the  c.  devoured  the  earth 


CUR 

Isa.  34.5.  it  shall  come  down  on  the  people  ofmye. 

43.  28.  therefore  1  have  given  Jacob  to  the  c. 
65. 15.  shall  leave  your  name  fur  a  c.  to  my  chosen 

Jer.  24.  9.  I  will  deliver  them  to  be  a  taunt  and 
a  c.  25.  18.  1  29.  18.  |  42.  18.  |  44  8,  12. 
2G.  6.  I  wili  make  this  city  a  c.  to  all  nations 

44.  22.  therefore  is  your  land  a  c.  at  this  day 
49. 13. 1  liavesworn  that  Bozrah  shall  become  a  e. 

Lam.  3.  65.  give  them  sorrow,  thy  e.  unto  them 
/Jan.  9.  11.  therefore  the  c.  is  poured  ujion  us 
Zech.  5. 3.  this  is  the  c.  that  goeth  forth  over  earlb 

8.  13.  that  as  we  were  a  c.  among  the  heathen 
Mai.  2.  2.  ifye  will  not  hear,  I  will  send  a  c.  on  yoo 

3. 9.  ye  are  cursed  with  a  c.  for  ye  have  robbed  me 

4.  6.  lest  I  come  and  smite  the  earth  with  a  c. 
Jicts  23. 12.  and  bound  themselves  under  a  c.  14. 
Gal.  3.  10.  as  are  of  the  works  of  law,  are  under  c. 
13.  Christ  redeemed  us  from  ihec.being  made  at. 
Rev.  22. 3.  shall  be  no  more  a  c.  but  throne  of  God 

CURSE,  Verb. 
Gen.  8.21.  the  Lord  said,  I  will  not  c.  the  ground 

12.  3.  and  I  will  c.  him  that  curseth  thee 
Kzod.  22. 28.  thou  shalt  not  c.  the  ruler  of  thy  peo. 
I^ev.  19.  14.  thou  shalt  not  c.  the  deaf,  nor  put  a 
J^um.  22.  6.  come,  I  pray  thee,  c.  me  this  people, 17. 

11.  Balak  said,  come  now,  c.  me  them,  23.  7, 13. 

12.  God  s'lid  to  Balaam,  thou  shall  note,  people 
23. 6.  how  shall  I  c.  whom  God  hath  not  cursed  1 

11.  I  took  thee  to  c.  mine  enemies,  24.  10. 

25.  neither  c.  them  at  all,  nor  bless  them  at  all 
Deut.^\.A.  they  hired  Balaam  toe.  thee,  JV"(:A.13.2. 

27.  13.  and  these  shall  stand  on  mount  Ebal  to  e. 
./((sA.24.9.  Balak  king  of  Moab  called  Balaam  toe. 
Judg.  5,  23,  c.  Meroz,  said  the  angel,  e.  ye  bitterly 
2  A'a/n.  16. 9.  why  should  this  dead  dog  e.  the  king  7 
10.  let  him  c,  because  Ld,  hath  said,  e.  David,  IL 
Job  1.  11.  and  he  will  c.  thee  to  thy  face,  2.  5. 

2.  9.  then  said  his  wife  to  him,  c.  God  and  die 

3.  8.  let  them  c.  it  that  e.  the  day,  who  are  ready 
P*rti.62.  4.  they  bless  with  mouth,  but  c.  inwardly 

109.  28.  let  them  e.  but  bless  thou,  when  lliey 
Prov.  11. 26.  wilhholdetb  corn,  people  shall  c.  him 

24.  24.  him  shall  the  people  c.  nations  abhor  him 
.  30.  10.  accuse  not  a  servant  to  master,  lest  he  c. 
Feci.  7.  21.  lest  thou  hear  thy  servant  e.  thee 

10.  20.  e.  not  the  king  in  thought,  c.  not  the  rich 
Isa.  8.  21.  c.  their  king  and  God,  and  look  upward 
Jer.  15.  10.  yet  every  one  of  them  dolh  e.  me 
Mai.  2.  2.  I  will  c.  your  blessings,  1  have  cursed 
Mat.  5.  44.  bless  them  that  c.  you,  Luke  6.  28. 

26.  74.  he  began  lo  c.  and  to  swear,  Mark  14.  71. 
Rom.  12. 14.  which  persecute  you ;  bless  and  e.  not 
Jam.  3.  9.  therewith  c.  we  men,  which  are  made 

CURSED. 
Gen.  3.  14.  the  serpent  c.  \\  17.  c.  is  the  ground 

4.  11.  Cain  e.  ||  9.  £5.  Noah  said,  c.  be  Canaan 

5.  29.  because  of  ground  which  the  Lord  hath  e 

27.  29.  c.  be  every  one  that  curseth,  M'um.  24.  91 
49.  7.  e.  be  their  anger,  for  it  was  fierce  and  cruel 

Lev.  20.  9.  he  hath  c.  his  father  or  his  mother 
24.  11.  blasphemed  the  name  of  the  Lord  and  e. 

14.  saying,  bring  forth  him  that  hath  e.  23. 
JVum.  22.  6.  I  wot  that  he  whom  thou  cnrsest  Is  e. 
Dcut.  27.  15.  c.  be  he,  16,  17,  18,  19,  20,  21,  22, 

23,  24,  25;  2*1. 

28.  16.  e.  shalt  thon  be  in  the  city,  c.  in  the  field 

17.  c,  shall  be  thy  basket  and  thy  store 

18.  e.  shall  be  the  fruit  of  thy  body  and  land 

19.  c.  when  thou  comest  in,  when  thou  goest  out 
.hsh.  6.  20.  c.  be  the  man  that  buildeth  Jericho 

9.23.  now  therefore  ye  Gibeoniles  are  e.  none  of 
./udi'.9.27.  they  did  eat  and  drink,  and  e.Abiinclccli 
21.  18.  c.  be  lie  that  giveth  a  wife  to  Benjamin 

1  Sam.  14.24.  e.  that  cateth  food  till  evening,  28. 
17.  43.  and  the  Philistine  c.  David  by  his  godg 

26.  19.  but  if  men,  e.  be  they  before  the  Lord 

2  Sam.  16.  5.  Shiinei  came  forth,  and  c.  still,  7. 13. 

19.  21,  for  this,  because  ho  e,  the  Lord's  anointed 

1  Kings  2,8.Sliiinei  who  c,me  with  a  grievous  rurse 

2  Kings  2.24.  and  c.  them  in  the  name  of  i  he  Lord 
9.  34.  go  see  now  this  c.  woman,  and  bury  her 

JVrh.  13.  25.  I  contended  wilh  thi'm,  and  c.  them 
.lob  1.5.  it  may  be  my  sons  have  sinned  anile.  God 
3.  1.  then  Job  opened  bis  month  and  r.  his  day 
5.3,  fiinlish  lakin?  root, suddenly  I c.his habitation 
21.  18.  ihiMr  portion  is  e.  in  the  earth 
Psal.  37.  22.  Ihi  y  that  be  c.  of  him  shall  be  cut  off 
119.  21.  ihmi  hast  rebuked  the  proud  that  are  e. 
Feci.  7.22.  knowest  thyself  likewise  hast  e.  others 
Jrr.  11.  3.  c.  be  the  man  obeyeth  not  this  covenant 
17,  5,  e,  be  the  man  thnt«trusletli  in  man 

20,  14,  e.  be  the  ilny  wherein  I  was  born 

15,  f.hc  the  man  who  brought  tidings  to  my  father 
48.  10.  c.  be  he  that  doeth  the  Lord's  work  decoi»- 

fnlly,r.tliat  kcepethhnrk  his  sword  from  blood 
Mol.  1.14.  but  c.  be  the  deceiver,  who  hath  a  male 
2. 2,  yea,  I  have  e.  your  blrs.'sings  nli endy,  because 
3,  9,  ye  aree,  wilh  a  curse,  for  ye  have  robbed  me 
Mat.  25.  41.  he  shall  say,  depart  from  me  ye  e. 
John  7. 49.  people  who  knowctli  not  the  taw,  arc*. 


CUT 

Oill.  3. 10.  c.  is  every  one  that  continucth  not  in  all 

13.  c.  is  every  one  that  hangeth  on  a  tree 
3  Pet.  a.  14.  c.  children, who  liave  I'orsaiieu  tlie  way 

CURSED  thing. 

Dcut.7.^6.  lest  thou  be  a  c.  thing,[or  It  is  a  e.  thing- 

13. 17.  shall  cleave  nouglit  of  the  c.  t.  to  thy  hand 

CUKSEDCJT. 

Judg.  17.  2.  silver  taken  IVom  thee,  which  thou  c. 

Mark  11. 21.  the  fig-tree  thou  c.  is  withered  away 

CUllSErf. 
Jfwrn.  .5.  23.  the  priest  shall  write  these  c.  in  a  book 
y.>fi;(.28.15.that  all  these  c.  shall  come  on  thee,  45. 
2J.  2U.  all  the  c.  that  arc  written  in  this  book  shall 
lie  ui)on  him,  27.2  (Jhron.  34.  24. 
21. according  to  all  the  c.  of  the  covenant  in  book 
30. 7.  liOrd  thy  G.  will  put  these  c.  on  thy  enemies 

CURSETU. 
£iO(i.21.17.  he  that  c.his  father  or  his  mother  shall 
surely  bi-  put  to  death,  Lev.  20.  9.  Prou.  20.  20. 
L€v.~i.  15.  whosoever  c.  his  God  shall  bear  his  sin 
Pruu.  30.  11.  a  generation  that  c.  their  lather 
Mat.  15.  4.  honour  father  and  mother,  he  that  c. 
father  or  mother,  let  him  die  death,  Mark  7. 10. 
CURSING. 
J\"um.  5.21. priest  charge  woman  with  an  oath  of  c. 
l)eul.  27.  t  13.  these  shall  stand  for  a  c.  on  Ebal 
28.20.the  Lord  shall  send  upon  thee  c.in  all  thou 
Deut.'iO.  Vd.  I  have  set  before  you  blessing  and  c. 
2  Sam.  16. 12.  Lord  will  requite  ine  good  for  his  c. 
Psal.  10.  7.  his  mouth  is  lull  of  c.  Horn.  3.  14. 
59.  12.  and  for  c.  and  lying  which  they  speak 
lOD.  17.  as  he  loved  c.  .so  let  it  come  unto  him 
18.  as  he  clothed  hmiself  with  c.  as  a  garment 
Prov.  2it.  24.  he  hcarelh  c.  and  bewrayeih  it  not 
Jcr.  23.  t  10.  for  because  of  c.  the  land  mournetli 
Heb.  6.8.  earth  which  beareth  thorns  is  nigh  to  c. 
Jam.  3. 10.  out  of  the  same  mouth  blessing  and  c. 

CURSINGS. 
Josh.  8.  34.  he  read  all  the  blessings  and  c. 

CURTAIN. 

Psal.  104.  2.  who  coverest  thyself  with  light,  who 

stretcliest  out  the  heavens  like  a  c.  Isa.  40.  22. 

CURTAINS. 

Exod.^iCi.  l.make  tabernacle  with  ten  c. 2.  |  36.9. 

J\ruiii  4.  25.  the  Gershonites  shall  bear  the  c  of  lab. 

e  Sam.7.2.ark  ofGod  dwelleth  within  c.l  CAr.l7.I. 

Cant.  1.  5.  but  I  am  comely  as  the  c.  of  Solomon 

Isa.  54.  2.  let  them  stretch  forth  c.  of  thy  habitation 

Jcr.  4.  20.  my  tents  spoiled,  and  my  c.  in  a  moment 

10.  20.  none  to  stretch  my  tent,  and  set  up  my  c. 

49.  29.  they  shall  take  to  themselves  their  c.  and 

^Jlab.  3. 7.  the  c.  of  ihe  land  of  Midian  did  tremble 

CUSTODY. 
JVum.  3. 36.  under  c.  of  the  sons  of  Merari,  boards 
F.sth.  2.  3.  gather  fair  virgins  to  the  c.  of  Hege,  8. 
H.to  the  c.  of  Shaashsaz  the  king's  chamberlain 
CUSTOM 
Signifies,  [1]  Manner  or  way,  Luke  4.  16.     [2] 
That  which  has  been  established  by  long  nse, 
end    the   consent  of  ancestors,  Judg.  11.  39. 
Johri  18.  39.     [3]  J]  duty  paid  to  the  king  or 
prince  upon  the.  importation  or  exportation  of 
commodities,  Rom.   13.  7.     [4]    The  way  of 
women,  namely,  thenatural  disease  for  which 
they  used  to  be  put  apart.  Gen.  31.  35. 
Oen.  31.  35.  for  the  c.  of  women  is  upon  me 
Judg.  11.  39.  and  it  ivas  a  c.  in  Israel 
1  Sam.  2.  13.  Ihe  priests'  c.  with  the  people  was 
Ezra  3.  4.  according  to  the  c.  .Jer.  33.  11. 
4.  13.  then  will  they  not  pay  toll,  tribute,  and  c. 
20.  been  mighty  kings,  and  c.  was  paid  to  them 
7. 24.  shall  not  be  lawful  lo  impose  c.  on  priests 
Psal.  119.  t  132.  be  merciful  according  to  the  c. 
Jl/at.9.9.  Jesus  passed  forth,  and  saw  Matthew  sit- 
tin?  at  Ihe  receipt  of  c.  Mark  2.  14.  Luke  5.  27. 
17.  25.  of  whom  do  the  kings  of  the  earth  take  c? 
Liilte  ^.  9.  according  to  the  c.  of  the  priest's  office 
2.  27.  to  do  for  him  after  the  c.  of  the  law 

42.  went  lo  Jerusalem  after  the  c.  of  the  feast 
4.16.a'=  .Tesus'  c.  was,  he  went  into  the  synagogue 
John  18.  39.  ye  have  a  c.  tiiat  I  should  release  one 
Rom.  13.  7.  render  therefore  c.  to  whom  c.  is  due 
1  Cor.  11. 16.  we  have  no  such  c.  nor  the  churches 

CUSTOMS. 
T^rv.  If.  30.  commit  none  of  these  abominable  c. 
Jer.  10.  3.  for  the  c.  of  the  people  are  vain 
./?(■*.«  6. 14.  shall  change  the  c.  Moses  delivered  us 
16.  21.  teach  c.  which  are  not  lawful  to  receive 
21.  21.  that  Ihey  ought  not  to  walk  after  the  e. 
26.  3. 1  know  thee  to  be  expert  in  all  c.  and  quest. 
23.17.  though  I  committed  nothing  against  the  c. 

CUT. 
/y«n  22. 24.  ye  shall  not  offer  to  the  Lord  what  is  e. 
Kirk.  I'i.  4.  when  born  thy  navel  was  not  e. 
.4ct$5.33.  when  they  heard  that,  they  were  c.  7.  54. 

CUT. 
F.Tctd.  39.3.  and  c.  it  in  wires  to  work  it  in  the  blue 
t.e.rf  1.  6.  shall  c.  the  burnt-offerinc  into  pieces,  12. 
8. 20.  he  r.  I  lie  ram  into  pieces,  F.iod.  29.  17. 
Oiut   14.  1.  ye  shall  not  c.  yourselves  nor  make 
107 


CUT 

Jurf^.30.6.1  took  my  concubine  and  c.her  in  pieces 

1  Kings  18.  23.  and  c.  the  bullock  in  pieces,  33. 
28.  they  c.  themselves  after  their  manner  with 

2  Kings  24.13.  he  c.  in  pieces  all  the  vessels  of  gold 

Solomon  had  made  in  temple,  2  Chron.  28.  24 

1  Chron.  20.  3.  the  peojde,  he  c.  them  with  saws 

2  Chron.H.  8.  thy  servants  can  skill  to  c.  timber,  10. 
Psal.  58.  7.  he  bendeth,  lei  them  be  as  c.  in  pieces 

107.  It),  c.  the  bars  of  iron  in  sunder,  Isa.  45.  2. 

Isa.  9.  t  20.  ho  shall  c.  on  the  right  and  be  hungry 
51.  9.  art  thou  not  it  that  halli  c.  Rahab  1 

Jer.  16.  6.  nor  lament,  nor  c.  themselves  for  them 
34. 18.  when  they  c.  the  calf  in  twain,  and  passed 
36.  23.  he  c.  the  roll  with  the  iienknife,  and  cast 
41.  S.  their  clothes  rent,  and  having  c.  themselves 

47.  5.  how  long  wilt  thou  c.  thyself? 

Dan.  2.  5.  if  ye  will  not,  ye  shall  be  c.  in  pieces 
3.  29.  who  speak  against  God  shall  be  c.  in  i>ieces 
Jlmos  9.  1.  and  c.  them  in  the  head,  all  of  I  hem 
Hab.  3.  t  16.  he  will  c.  them  with  his  troops 
ZccA.12.3.tliatburden  themselves  with  itsliall  bee. 
Jicts  27.  f  40.  and  when  they  had  c.  the  anchors 

CUT  asunder. 
PsaM29.4.  he  hath  c.  asunder  cords  of  the  wicked 
Jer.  5U.  23.  hammer  of  the  whole  earth  c.  asunder 
Zech.  11. 10. 1  took  start'  Beauty,  and  c.  it  asunder 
14.  then  1  c.  asunder  my  other  statt',  even  Bands 
Mat.2i.  51.  and  shall  c.  him  asunder,  Luke  12. 46. 

CUT  down. 
Exod.  34. 13.  but  ye  shall  c.  dozen  their  groves 
Lev.  26.  30.  I  will  c.  dofgn  your  images,  and  cast 
JVi/m.  13.  23.  and  c.  d.  from  thence  a  branch,  24. 
Deut.  7. 5.  ye  shall  break  down  llieir  images,  and 
c.  down  their  groves,  2  Kings  18.  4.  |  23.  14. 
20.  19.  trees  for  meat  thou  shall  not  c.  down 
20.  the  trees  not  for  meat  thou  shall  c.  down 
Judg.  6.  25.  and  c.  down  the  grove  that  is  by  it 
2  Kings  19.  23.  I  will  c.  down  cedars,  Isa.  37.  24. 
2  Chr.  15. 16.  and  Asa  c.  d.  her  idol,  and  stamped  it 
34.  7.  Josiah  c.  down  all  the  idols  in  the  land 
Job  8. 12.  while  in  his  greenness,  and  note,  down 
14.  2.  Cometh  forth  like  a  flower,  and  is  c.  down 
7.  for  there  is  hope  of  a  tree  if  it  be  c.  down 
22.  16.  the  wicked  were  e.  do7cn  out  of  time 

20.  whereas  our  substance  is  not  c.  down 
Psal.  37.  2.  they  shall  soon  be  c.  down  like  grass 
80.  16.  branch  is  burnt,  it  is  c.  down,  they  perish 
90.  6.  in  the  evening  it  is  c.  down,  and  wiliiereih 
Isa.  9. 10.  sycamores  are  c.  down,  but  wo  will  build 

14.  12.  how  art  thou  c.  down  to  the  ground 

22.  25.  the  nail  shall  be  removed  and  c.  dozen 
Jcr.  22.  7.  they  shall  c.  down  thy  choice  cedars 

25.  37.  the  peaceable  habitations  are  c.  down 

48.  2.  also  thou  shall  be  c.  down,  O  madmen 
Ezek.  6.  6.  that  your  images  may  be  c.  down 
JVah.  1.12.though  many,  yet  thus  shall  they  be  e.  d 
Zcph.  1.  11.  for  all  the  merchant-people  are  c.  d. 
Mat.  21.  8.  others  c.  down  branches,  Mark  11.  8. 
Luke  13.  7.  c.  it  d.  why  cumberelh  it  the  ground.' 

9.  then  after  that  thou  shall  c.  it  dowji 
CUT  off. 
Gen.  9.  11.  neither  shall  all  flesh  be  c.  off 
17.  14.  the  uncircumcised  child  shall  be  c.  off 
41.  t  36.  ihat  the  land  be  not  c.  off  through  lam. 
Exod.  4.  25.  and  c.  o^the  foreskin  of  hei  son 
8.  t  9.  to  c.  off  the  frogs  from  thee,and  ihy  houses 
12.  15.  that  soul  shall  be  c.  off  from  Israel,  19. 
1  31.  14.  J^um.  15.  30,  31.  |  19.  13. 

23.  23.  Angel  go  before,  and  I  will  c.  them  off 
30.  33.  shall  be  c.  off  from  his  people,  38.  Lev. 

7.  20,"21,  25,  27.  |  17.  4,  9.  |  19.  8. 
I  2.3.  29.  JVum.  9.  13. 
I,ev.l7. 10. 1  will  c.  him  off  from  among  his  people, 
18.  29.  I  20.  3,  6,  18.  JVum.  19.  20. 
14.  whosoever  eateth  blood  shall  be  c.  off 

20.  17.  shall  be  c.  c^in  the  sight  of  their  peojde 

22.  3.  that  soul  shall  be  c.  off  from  my  presence 
25.  t23.  land  shall  not  be  sold  lo  be  quite  c.  off 

J^u.m.  4.  18.  c.  ye  not  oj'the  tribe  of  Kohathiies 

15.  31.  that  soul  shall  utterly  be  c.  off,  his  iniquity 
Deut.  12.  29.  when  thy  God'  shall  c.  off  nations 

19.1.  when  God  hath  c.  off  the  nations,  .hsh.  23.  4. 

23.  1.  or  hath  his  privy  member  c.  off  shall  not 
25.  12.  then  thou  shall  c.  off  her  hand,  pity  not 

.Josh.  3.  13.  Ihat  the  waters  of  Jordan  shall  be  c.  off 
from  the  waters  that  come  down,  16.  |  4.  7. 
7.  9.  and  shall  c.  off  out  name  from  the  earth 
9.t  23.not  be  c.  o^  from  you  from  being  bond-men 
II.  21.  at  that  time  Joshua  c.  o^  thi^  .Aiinkims 

Judsr.  1.  fi.  and  c.  off  his  thumbs,  and  his  great  toes 

21.  6.  there  is  one  tribe  c.  off  from  Israel  this  day 
Ruth  4.  10.  Ihat  the  name  of  the  dead  be  not  c.  off 
1  Sam.  2.31.dayscomethalI  willc.oj'lhinearin 

33.  mnn  whom  I  shall  not  c.  off  from  mine  altar 

5.  4.  the  palms  of  Dagon's  hands  were  c.  off 

17.  51.  David  ran  and  c.  o/ Goliath's  head 

20.  15.  thou  shah  not  c.  n^thy  kindness  from  my 

house,  24.  21.  no,  not  when  the  Lord  halh  e.  off 

the  enemies  of  David  from  Ihe  face  of  Ihe  earth 

24.  4.  David  c.  off  the  skirt  of  Saul'*  robe,  5. 


CUT 

1  Sam.  24.  t  7.  eo  David  c.  off  his  iervanls  with 

these  words 
11.  for  in  thai  I  c.  off  the  skirt  of  thy  robe 

28.  9.  knowest  how  Saul  hath  c.  off  the  wiza."** 
31.9.  and  they  c.  o^  Saul's  head,  and  stripped  otf 

2  Sam.  4. 12.  they  slew  them  and  c.  off  their  hands 

10.  4.  Hainan  look  David's  servants,  and  c.  off 

their  garments  in  the  middle,  1  Chr.  19.  4 

20.  22.  and  they  c.  off  the  head  of  Sheba 

21.  t  5.  the  man  that  consumed  us  and  c.  us  off 

1  A'in^'-«8.t25.not  be  c.offlo  iheoa  man  in  my  sight 

9.  7.  then  will  I  c.  off  Israel  out  of  the  land 

11.  16.  till  he  had  c.  off  every  male  in  Edom 

13.  34.  even  to  c.  off  Jeroboam's  house,  14.  14. 
14.10. 1  will  c.  off  from  Jeroboam  him  that  pissetli 
18. 4.  when  Jezebel  c.  off  the  prophets  of  ihe  Lord 

21.  21.  behold,  I  will  c.  o^from  Ahab  him  that 

pisseth  against  the  wall,  2  Kings  9.  8. 

2  Kings  16.17.Ahaz  c.  off  the  borders  of  Ihe  bases 
18.  16.  Hezekiab  c.  off  ihe  gold  fiom  the  doors 

1  Chr.  17.8.  have  cuff  all  thine  enemies  before  llice 

2  Chr.  22.  7.  Lord  anointed  to  c.  off  house  of  Ahab 
32.21.  the  angel  to  c.  off  all  mighty  men  of  valour 
Job  4.  7.  or  where  were  the  righteous  c.  off  7 

6.  9. that  he  w  ould  let  loose  his  hand,  and  c.  me  off 

8.  14.  whose  ho|)e  shall  be  c.  off,  and  whose  trust 

10.  t  l.my  soul  is  c.  off  while  1  live,I  will  leave  my 

11.  10.  if  he  c.  off,  llien  who  can  hinder  him? 
14. 1 10.  man  dieih,  and  is  c.  off,  and  w  here  is  he? 
18.  16.  and  above  ehall  his  branch  be  c.  off 
21.21.  when  number  of  his  months  is  c.o^  in  midst 

23.  17. because  I  was  not  c.off  before  the  darkness 

24.  24.  they  are  c.  off  as  the  tops  of  ears  of  corn 
36.  20.  when  people  arc  c.  off  in  iheir  jilace 

Psal.  12.  3.  the  Lord  shall  c.  off  all  flattering  lips 
31.  t  17.  let  the  wicked  be  c.  off  for  the  graves 
22.  I  said,  I  am  c.  off  from  before  thine  eyes 
34. 16.  lo  c.  q^  remembrance  of  them  from  earth 
37. 9.  for  evil  doers  shall  be  c.  off,  but  those  who 
22.  they  that  be  cursed  of  him,  shall  be  c.  off 
28.  bul  Ihe  seed  of  ihe  wicked  shall  be  c.  off' 
34.  when  the  wicked  are  c.  off,  Ihou  shall  see  it 
38.  the  end  of  the  wicked  shall  be  c.^tiff 
54.  5.  he  shall  reward,  c.  them  off  in  thy  truth 
7.5.  10.  all  the  horns  of  the  wicked  will  I  c.  off 
76.  12.  he  shall  c.  off  the  spirit  of  princes 
83.  4.  they  said,  come,  and  let  us  c.  them  off 
88.  5.  and  they  are  c.  off  from  thy  hand 

16.  wrath  goeth  over  me,  terrors  have  c.  me  off 
94.  23. he  shall  c.  them  off  jn  their  wickedness 
101.  5.  that  slanderelh  his  neighbour  w  ill  I  c.  off 
8.  that  I  may  c.  off  all  wicked  doers  from  the 
city  of  Ihe  Lord 
109.  13.  let  his  poslerity  be  c.  off  and  blotied  out 
15.  that  Ihe  Lord  may  co^  the  memory  of  them 

118.  t  lO.in  Ihe  name  of  the  Lord  I  will  c.  them  off 

119.  1 139.  my  zeal  halh  c.  me  off,  because 
143.  12.  and  of  thy  mercy  c.  off  mine  enemies 

Proi) .2.22.  but  Ihe  wicked  shall  be  c.  offWom  earth 
23.  18.  thy  expectation  shall  not  be  c.  off,  24.  14. 
Isa.  6.  t  5.  then  said  I,  woe  is  me,  for  I  am  c.  off 

9.  14.  the  Lord  will  c.  off  from  Israel  head  and 

tail  in  one  day 

10.  7.  to  destroy  and  e.  off  nations  not  a  few 

11.  13.  the  adversaries  of  Jodah  shall  be  c.  off 

14.  22.  I  will  c.  off  from  Biibylon  the  name 

1.5.  1 1.  Moab  is  c.  off  \  2.  and  every  beard  c.  off 

22.  25.  a  burden  that  was  upon  it  shall  bo  c.  off 

29.  20.  all  that  watch  for  iniquity  are  c.  off 
38.  12.  he  will  c.  me  off  with  pining  sickness 
48.9.  my  prai>e  will  refrain,  that  I  c.  thee  not  off 

19.  his  name  should  not  have  been  r.  off 
.53.  8.  he  was  c.  off  out  of  the  land  of  the  living 
.55.  13.  shall  be  for  a  sign  Ihat  shall  not  be  c.  off 
66.  3.  that  sacrificeth,  as  if  he  c.  off  a  dog's  neck 
Jer.  7.  28.  truth  is  perished  and  c.  off  from  mouth 

29.  c.  off  thine  hair,  O  Jerusalem,  cast  it  away 
9.21. to  c.off  the  children  without,  and  young  men 
11.  19.  let  us  c.  him  o^froni  the  land  of  the  living 
44. 7. to  c.ojf  from  you  man  and  w  oman  out  of  Jud. 

8.  that  ye  might  c.  yourselves  o^nnd  be  a  ciirte 
44.  11.  set  my  face  against  vou  to  c.  off  Judah 

46.  t  28.  yet  will  I  nol  ulterly  c.  thee  off 

47.  4.  to  c.  of  from  Tyrus  {|  5.  Ashkelon  is  c.  nff 

48.  2.  come,  let  us  c.  il  off  from  being  a  nation 
25  the  horn  of  Moab  is  c.  off.hh  arm  is  broken 

49.  26.  all  Ihe  men  of  war  shall  he  c.  off,  .50.  .'JO. 
50. 16. c. of  the  sower  from  Babylon,  and  him  that 
51.  6.  flee  out,  and  be  not  c.  off  in  her  iniquity 

02.  ihou  hast  spoken  against  this  place  toe.  it  off 
Lnm.  2.  3.  c.  off  in  his  anger  the  horn  of  Israel 
3.  53.  they  have  c.  off  my  life  in  Ihe  dungeon 
Ezek.  14.  8.  and  I  will  c.  "him  of  from  mv  people 
13.  CO/ man  and  beast,  17, 19,21.  1 2.5. 13.  |  29.8 
17.  9.  shall  he  not  c.ojffrnit  therPof,lhat  it  wither? 

17.  and  building  forts  lo  c.  off  many  persons 
21.3. 1  will  c.  of  Ihe  righteous  and  Ihe  wicked,  4. 

25.  7.  behold,  1  will  c.  thee  off  from  the  people 
16.  I  wiH  e.  »f  the  Chcrelhims,  and  destroy  the 

remnant  of  the  sea-co&st< 


CYP 

Eiek.  30. 15.  and  I  will  e.  offlYie  multitude  of  No 
31.  IS.  lerrilile  of  the  nations  have  c.  Inm  off 
35.  7.  I  will  c.  ojf  fromSeir  hini  that  passctli  out 
37.  11.  our  hope  i»  lost,  we  are  c.  off  for  our 

parts 

Dan.  4.  14.  hew  down  the  tree,  c.  off  his  branches 

9.  2(j.  Mtssiah  shall  he  c.  off,  but  not  for  himself 
ftos.  4.  t  3.  c.  o^  thy  mother  |  t  •>•  people  are  c.  off' 

e.  4.  Ihey  have  made  idols,  that  thuy  may  be  c.  off 

10.  7.  rianiaria,  her  king  is  c.  t>Jf  as  tlie  foam,  15. 
'uel  1.5.  the  new  wine  is  c.  off  from  your  mouth,  9. 

\C.  is  not  the  meat  c.  off  before  our  eyes  ? 
jimo.i  1.  5.  I  will  c.  off  the  inhabitant  from  Avcn 

6.  1  will  c.  off  the  inhabitant  from  Ashdod 

3.  1  willc.Oj^"  the  judge  IVom  the  midst  thereof 
3.  14.  the  hoins  of  the  altar  shall  be  c.  off 

Obad.  5.  if  robbers  by  night,  how  art  thou  c.  off 

9.  every  one  of  Ksau  may  be  c.  off  by  slaughter 

10.  and  thou  shalt  be  c  off  for  ever 
14.  nor  stand  to  c.  ojf'  those  of  liis  that  did  escape 

Mic.  f>.  9.  and  all  thine  enemies  shall  be  c.  off 
10.  horses  ||  11.  cities  ||  li.  witchcrafts  e.  off 
13.  thy  graven  images  will  I  c.  off,  M'ah.  1.  14. 
.VaA.  1.  15.  for  the  wicked  is  utterly  c.  off 
0.  13.  and  I  will  c.  off  thy  prey  from  the  earth 
3.  15.  the  sword  shall  c.  thee  »/,  it  >hall  eat 
//ai.3.l7.  tho'  the  flock  shall  be  c.  off  from  the  fold 
Zcph.  1.  3.  I  will  c.  off  man  from  ort'  the  land 

4.  c.  »/remii.  of  Baalll  11.  that  bear  silver  c.  o/ 
3.  f).  I  have  c.  off  the  nationii,  towers  are  desolate 

7.  so  their  dwelling  should  not  bee.  off 
Z«A.5.3.for  every  one  that  f  t(!alelh  as  on  this  side, 

and  every  one  that  sweareth,  «liall  be  e.  off' 
9.  fi.  1  will  c.  off  the  pride  of  the  Philistines 
10.  anil  I  will  c.  off  the  chariot  from  Epiiraim 

11.  H.  three  shepherds  also  I  c.  off  in  one  month 
9.  and  that   that  is  to  be  c.  off,  let  it  be  c.  off 

13.  '2.  I  will  c.  offlhi:  names  of  idols  out  of  land 

8.  two  parts  in  the  land  shall  be  c.  off  and  die 

14.  2.  the  residue  of  the  people  shall  not  be  c.  off 
Mai.  2. 12.  Lord  will  c.  off  the  man  ihatdoelh  this 
Mat.  5.  30,  if  thy  right  hand  otfend  thee,  c.  it  dff, 

"  18.  8.  Mark  9.  43,  45. 

Mark  14.47.  c.  off  ear,  LukrMi.  50.  .John  Irt.  10,  20. 
Jir.ts  27.  32.  the  soldiers  c.  off  the  ropes  of  the  boat 
Rnm.  II.  22.  otherwise  thou  shalt  also  be  c.  off 
2  Cof.  II.  12.  that  I  may  c.  ((^occasion  from  thim 
Gal.'hVi.  I  would  they  were  c.  oJf  that  trouble  you 

CUT  oat 
2  Chron.  2f).  f  10.  Uzziah  c.  out  many  cisterns 
.Affi  :J3.  t  <>•  I  also  am  c.  out  of  the  clay 
ProB.  10.  31.  the  froward  tongue  shall  be  c.  out 
Dan.  1.  34.  a  stone  was  c.  out  with.iul  hands,  4.5. 
Rom.  11. 24.  for  ifthoii  wert  c.out  of  the  olive-tree 

CUT  short. 
2  A'inj-.'  10.  32.  the  Lord  began  to  c.  Israel  short 
Hom.'S.-X.vixW  finish  and  c.  it  .^kort  in  righteousness 

CUT  up. 
.lib  30.  4.  who  e.  up  mallows  by  the  bushes 
ha.  33.  12.  as  thorns  r.  up  shall  they  bo  burnt 

CUTTEST,  ETH. 
Drut.  24.  19.  when  thou  c.  down  thine  harvest 
Joh  '2H.  10.  hf  c.  out  rivers  among  the  rocks 
r.ial.  29.  t  7.  the  voice  of  the  Lord  c.  flames  of  firo 
4fi.  9.  he  hreaketh  bow,  and  c.  the  spear  in  sunder 
141.7.  as  when  onec.  ami  cleaveth  wood  on  earth 
Prov.  26.  6.  he  that  sendclh  a  message  by  a  fool, 
e.  off  the  feet 
Jrr.U).  3.  for  one  e.  a  tree  out  of  the  forest  with  nxe 
22.  14.  build  chambers  and  c.  him  out  windows 

CLTTLVG. 
F.rnd.M.  5.  and  in  c.  of  slones  to  set  them,  3.5.  33. 
/,(■('.  25.  t  23.  the  land  shall  not  be  sold  for  c.  off 
Drut.  24.  \  1.  let  him  write  her  a  bill  of  e.  off 
!.ia.  3S.  10.  I  said  in  the  c.  of  my  days,  I  shall  go 
.hr.  30.  t  23.  a  c.  whirlwind,  it  shall  fall  with  pain 
F.z''k.  7.  t  25.  c.  off  Cometh,  they  shall  seek  peace 

If).  t3.  thy  e.  out  is  of  the  land  of  Canaan 
Huh.  2.  10.  consulted  shame  by  c.  off  many  people 
Mark  5..5.  tombs,  crying  ami  c.  himself  with  slones 

COTTLNGS. 
/,rn.l9.2f'.  ye  shall  not  make  any  e.  for  dead,  21.  5. 
./t.  4*^.  37.  upon  all  tho  hands  shall  be  c.  and  on 
Jonah  1.  \^.\  went  down  to  the  c.  of  tho  mount 

CVMII.AL. 
1  Cor   13.  1.  I  am  hecoine  as  sounding  brass,  or  a 

CYMB.ALS.  [linklinp 

Q  ftam.fi.  5.  played  on  cornets  and  c.  1  C/ir.  13.  H. 

1  fhrnn.  15.  16.  harps  and  c.  Bounding,  16.  42 
16.  5.  hill  .Asaph  made  a  sound  with  r.. 
25.  6.  ihi-se  were  iimler  the  hands  of  their  father 

for  song  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  with  c. 

2  Chr.in.  5.  13.  lliey  lift  up  their  voice  with  c 
29.  25.  he  set  Levites  in  house  of  the  Lord  wilhr. 

F.ira  3.  10.  the  gons  of  Asaph  with  c.  JVrk.  12. 27. 
Psal.  l.^O.  5.  praise  him  upon  loud  sounding  c 

CYPRESS. 
Cant.  !.♦  14.  mv  beloved  is  lo  me  as  a  cliiqlcr  oft. 

4.  t  13.  with  plensnnt  friiit«,  e.  with  spikenard 
Jta.  U.  14.  ho  laknth  the  e.  and  iht  oak 

«       lOd 


DAN 

D. 


DAGGER. 
Jadg.  3.  16.  Ehud  made  him  a  d.  with  two  edges 

21.  he  took  the  d.  from  his  right  thigh 

22.  that  he  could  not  draw  the  d.  out  of  his  belly 
Daily  ;  see  after  Davs. 

DAINTY,  TIES. 
Gen.  49.  20.  Asher  shall  yield  royal  d. 
Job  33.  2U.  and  his  soul  abhorrelh  d.  meat 
Psal.  141.  4.  and  let  me  not  eat  of  their  d. 
Prov.  23.  3.  be  not  desirous  of  his  d.  lor  they  arc 

6.  an  evil  eye,  neither  desire  thou  his  d.  meats 
Hab.  1.  t  16.  their  portion  is  fat,  their  meat  d 
lieo.  Id.  14.  all  things  which  were  d.  are  departed 

DALE. 
Gen.  14.17.  valley  of  Shaveh, which  is  the  king's  d. 
2  Sam.  18.  IS.  a  pillar  which  \k  in  the  king's  d. 

DAMAGE. 
F.trai.  22.  why  should  </.  grow  to  the  hurt  of  kings 
/:,"i7A.7.4.eneray  could  not  countervail  the  king's  d. 
Proo.  26.  6.  cutteth  off  the  feet,  and  drinketh  d. 
Dan.  6.  2.  and  the  king  should  have  no  d. 
Acts  27. 10.  voyage  will  be  with  hurt  and  much  d. 
2  Cor.'t.  9.  tliat  ye  might  receive  d.  by  us  in  nothing 

DAM. 
Ezod.  22.  30.  seven  days  it  shall  be  with  his  d. 
on  the  eighth  shall  give  it  me,  /,ev.  22.  27. 
Dent.  22.  6.  thou  shalt  not  take  the  d.  wilh  young 

7.  but  thou  shalt  in  an)»wise  let  the  d.  go 
DAMNABLE. 

2  Pet.  2.  1,  who  privily  shall  bring  in  d.  heresies 

DAMNATION. 
Mat.^.  14.  therefore  ye  shall  receive  the  greater 
d.  Mark  12.40.  Luke  20.  47. 
33.  ye  serpents,  how  can  ye  escape  the  d.  of  helH 
Mark  3.  29.  but  is  in  danger  of  eternal  d. 
.John  5. 29. have  dune  evil,  to  the  resurrection  of  d. 
/iujH .3.8.evil,  that  good  may  come,  whose  rf.  is  just 

13.  2.  they  shall  receive  to  themselves  d. 
1  Cor.  11.29.  he  eatelli  and  drinketh  d.  to  himself 

1  Tim.  5.  12.  having  d.  because  they  have  cast  oil 
their  first  faith 

2  Pet.2.3.  lingereth  not,  and  their  d.  slumberelh  not 
I  DAMNED. 

Mark  16.  16.  but  he  that  believeth  not  shall  be  d. 
Rom.  14.  2;).  and  he  that  doubtetli  is  d.  if  he  eat 
27'A6«s.2.12.  that  all  might  be  d.  who  believed  not 

DAMSEL. 

fjc7i.24.55.her  mother  said, let  therf.ahideafewdays 

:t4.  3.  and  he  loved  the  d.  and  spake  kindly  to  d. 

12.  ask  never  so  much,  but  give  me  the  d.  to  wife 

Dcut.  22.  15.  bring  fori  h  tokens  of  the  d.  virginity 

20.  but  if  the  tokens  be  not  found  for  the  d. 

21.  they  shall  bring  out  the  d.  and  stone  her 
24. the  d.  because  she  cried  not, being  in  the  city 
2t).  there  is  in  the  d.  no  sin  worthy  of  death 

29.  shall  give  the  d  father  fifty  shekels  of  silver 
.Jud/r.  5.  ;{0.  divided  (o  every  man  a  d.  or  two 

19.  4.  the  d.  father  retained  him,  and  he  abode 
liuth'i.  5.  then  Boaz  said,  whose  d.  is  this? 

6.  it  is  Moahilish  d.  that  came  back  with  Naomi 
1  Kintrs  1.  t  2.  he  sought  for  the  king  a  young  d. 

4.  and  the  d.  was  very  fair,  and  chcri.^hed  him 
Mat.  14.  11.  John  Baptist's  head  was  brought  in  a 
charger,  and  given  to  the  d.  Mark  6.  28. 
26.  69.  a  d.  came  to  Peter,  saying,  .John  18.  17. 
Mark  5.  39.  the  d.  is  not  dead,  but  sleepeth 
40.  he  taketh  the  father  and  mother  of  the  d.  and 
enlereth  in  where  the  d.  was  lying 
Jlcts  12.  13.  a  d.  came  to  hearken,  named  Rlioda 
16. 16.  a  certain  d.  possessed  with  a  spirit,  met  us 

DAMSELS. 
Gen.  24.  61.  Rehekah  arose  and  her  d.  and  rode 

1  Sam.  25.  42.  Abigail  rode  with  five  d.  of  hers 
Psal.  08.  25.  amongst  them  were  tho  d.  playing 

DANCE. 
I\tal.  149.  3.  let  them  praise  him  in  the  rf.  150.  4. 
.Jrr.  31.  13.  the  virgins  shall  rejoice  in  the  d. 
J.am.  5.  15.  our  d.  is  turned  into  mourning 

DANCE, 
./u'//^.  21.21.if  thedaiigliters  of  Sliiloh  come  to  rf. 
./»A2I.  11.  send  forth  little  ones,  thiir  chihlren  d. 
F.ccl.  3.  4.  a  time  lo  mourn,  and  a  time  lo  d. 
ha.  13.  21.  owls  dwell  there,  satyrs  shall  d.  there 

DANCED. 
.Jud/r.  21.  03.  according  to  their  niimbor  that  d. 

2  Sam.  6.  14.  and  David  d.  before  the  Lord 
.^f (if.  11. 17. have  piped, and  yn  have  imlrf. /,i/ft<'7.32. 

14.  6.  the  daughter  of  Herod  ia«  d.  Mark  6.  22. 

DANCES. 
Find.  15.  20.  the  women  went  after  her  wilh  d. 
.Judir.  11.  34.  diiughlcr  ramo  to  meet  him  wilh  d. 
1  Sam.  21.  11.  did  they  not  sing  of  him  in  rf.  29.  5. 
.Jcr.  31.  4.  thou  shalt  go  forth  in  the  rf.  of  them 

DANCING. 
Ftod.  32.  19.  he  came  nigh,  he  saw  the  cnlf  and  d. 
I  .S'<77n.  IH.6.  the  women  came  out  sinjing  and  rf. 

30.  16.  wcro  spread  on  all  the  cailh,  eating  and  d. 


DAR 

2  Sam.  6. 16.  she  saw  king  David  d.  1  Chr.  15.  20 
Psal.  30. 11.  thou  hast  turned  my  mourning  into  3 
huke  15.  25.  as  lie  came  he  heard  music  und  d. 

DANDLED. 
Isa.  66.  12.  and  ye  shall  be  d.  upon  her  knecf 

DANGER. 

Mat.  5.  21.  shall  be  in  d.  of  the  judgment,  22. 
22.  shall  be  in  d.  of  council,  in  d.  of  hell-fire 
Mark  3;  29.  but  is  in  d.  of  eternal  damnulion 
Jlcts  19.27.not  only  this  our  craft  is  in  d.bul  leinpl* 
40.  in  d.  to  be  called  in  question  for  this  uproar 
DANGEROUS. 
/icts  27.  9.  and  when  sailing  was  now  d.  bccauM 

DARE. 
Job  41.  10.  none  is  so  fierce  that  d.  stir  him  up 
Ho7n.  5.  7. for  a  good  man  sonie  would  even  d.lo  die 
15.  18.  for  1  will  not  d.  to  speak  of  any  lliing 

1  C(/r.6.1.d.  any  of  you  go  to  law  before  the  unjust? 
2Cur.lU.12.we  d.not  make  ourselves  of  Uie  nunibci 

DARK. 
Gen.  15. 17.  when  the  sun  went  down, and  it  was  d. 
F.xod.  9.  t  ^2.  for  the  wheat  and  the  rye  were  d. 
Lev.  13.  6.  if  the  plague  be  d.  21,  26,  28,  5fi. 
J\'u7n.  12.8. speak  apparently,  and  not  in  d.  siieechei 
Josh.  2.  5.  when  it  was  d.  the  men  went  out 

2  .Sam.  22.  12.  aboijt  him  d.  waters,  Psal.  18.  11. 
JVch.  13. 19.  the  gates  of  Jerusalem  began  lo  be  d. 
Job  3.  9.  let  the  stars  of  the  tw  ilight  thereof  be  d. 

12.  25.  Ihey  grope  in  the  d.  without  light 
18.  6.  the  light  shall  be  d.  in  his  tabernacle 
22.  13.  can  he  judge  through  the  d.  cloud  ? 
24.  16.  in  the  d.  lliey  dig  thro'  houses,  which  they 
30.  t  3.  want  and  famine  ihey  were  d.  as  night 
Psal.  35.  6.  let  their  way  be  d.  and  slippery 
49.  4.  1  will  open  my  d.  saying  on  the  harp 
74.  20.  d.  places  of  the  earth  are  full  of  cruelly 
78.  2.  in  parables,  I  will  utter  d.  sayings  of  old 
88.  12.  shall  thy  wonders  be  known  in  the  d.7 
105.  28.  he  sent  darkni^ss  and  made  it  d. 
Prov.X.  6.  the  wordsof  the  wise  and  their  d.sayinga 
7.  9.  in  the  twilight,  in  the  black  and  d.  night 
ha.  5. 1 30.  it  shall  bed.  in  the  destruction  thereof 
29.  15.  and  their  works  are  in  the  d.  and  they  siiy 
45. 19. 1  have  not  spoken  in  a  d.  place  of  the  earth 
,Jer.  13.  10.  your  feet  stumble  on  the  d.  ini  untuina 
Lam.  3.  6.  he  hath  set  me  in  d.  places,  us  they  that 
Ezek.  8.  12.  what  the  house  of  Israel  do  in  the  d. 
32.  7.  and  I  will  make  the  stars  thereof  d. 
8.  the  bright  lights  of  heaven  will  I  make  d. 
34. 12. have  been  scattered  in  the  cloudy  and  d.day 
Dan.K  23.  a  king  understanding  d.  sentences  shaft* 
Joel  2.  10.  the  sun  and  the  moon  shall  be  d. 
JImos  5.  8.  seek  him  that  maketh  the  day  d.  20. 
Mic.  3.  6.  it  shall  he  d.  to  you,  the  day  shall  be  d. 
Zrch.  14.  6.  the  light  shall' not  be  clear,  nor  d 
J-ukc  11.36.  if  thy  body  be  light,  having  no  part*. 
.John  6.  17.  went  over  the  sea,  and  it  was  now  d. 

20.  1.  Mary  came  early,  when  it  was  yet  d. 
2  Pet.  1.  lO.'as  lo  a  lisht  that  shinuth  in  a  d.  plac« 

DARKEN. 
Amos  6.  9.  and  I  will  rf.  the  earth  in  the  clear  day 

DARKLY. 
1  Cor.  13.  12.  for  now  we  see  through  a  glass  d. 

DARKENED. 
f;jorf.l0.15.for  they  covered, so  that  the  land  t/asd. 
I'.ial.  69.  2:{.  let  their  eyes  be  d.  Horn.  11.  10. 
F.ccl.  12.  2.  while  sun,  moon,  or  the  stars  be  not  d. 

3.  those  that  look  out  of  the  windows  be  rf. 
ha.  a.  30.  the  light  is  rf.  in  Ihe  heavens  thereof 
9.  19.  tho  land  is  d.  ||  13.  10.  the  sun  rf.  .Joel  .3. 15, 
24.  II.  all  joy  is  rf.  tho  mirth  of  Ihe  land  gone 
F.iek.  30.  18.  at  Tehaphnehes  Ihe  day  shall  be  d. 
y.ech.  11.  17.  his  right  eve  shall  be  utlerly  rf. 
Mat.  24. 29.  then  shall  the  sun  be  d.  Mark  13. 24. 
/.«*<•  23. 45.  and  Ihe  sun  was  rf.  and  vail  was  root 
Rom.  1.  21.  and  their  fool  sli  heart  was  rf. 
F.ph.  4.  18.  having  the  understanding  d.  alienated 
Rev.  8.  12.  so  as  Ihe  third  part  of  them  was  d. 
9.  2.  and  Ihe  sun  and  Ihe  iiir  were  d. 

D.ARKENETH. 
.Job  38.  2.  who  is  tins  Ihni  rf.  counsel  by  words  t 
Psal.  1.39. 1 12.  yen,  the  rlarknoss  rf.  not  from  tlice 

DARKISH. 
Lev.  13.39.  if  the  bright  sfots  in  skin  be  d.  while 

D  \RKNE.''S 
Signifies,  fll  The  pririition,  or  teant  of  natural 
liirhl.  Mat.  27.  45.  [2]  ffrll,  the  pinre  of  eternal 
niisrrii,cunfus>on,andhorror,eallritii»\vti\nrV.- 
nes",  lVii(.22.  13.  [3]  Itrnorancr  and  unbrlirf, 
trhirh  is  Ihe  trant  of  spiritual  li/.'hl,  John  3.  19. 
[4]  T/ie  minds  of  men,  trhieh, since  the  fall,  am 
full  of  ignorance  and  error,  John  1.  5.  [5]  .1 
'prirate  or  secret  place,  where  hut  fcie  pcrsont 
are  present.  Mat.  10.  27,  Wlinl  I  li'll  you  in 
darkness;  that  is,  in  vnrahles,  nnil  in  privatt 
hclirern  ourselres.  (6)  Great  distress,  prr- 
pleritv,  and  ealamilv,  Isa.  8.  *2.  Joel  2.  2. 
[7]  ,Siti,  or  impurilu,  1  John  1.  5. 
The  land  of  darkniw  i".«  Ihe  (rrare,  Jnh  10.21,22 
Such  as  lit  in  darkness  and  in  tho  siiadow  of 


a««Lth,  Psal.  107. 10.  such  as  are  in  a  disconso- 
late j.nd  forlorn  condUion.shut  up  inprisons,or 
dungeotis.  TAc children  ot']io|it,.<c(  171  opposition 
to  ilie  cliildren  of  darkness,  7«ea;is  the  righteous 
in  opposition  to  the  wicked;  the  faithful  in  op- 
position to  the  incredulous  and  inJidcls,'iCoi.ii. 
14.  Our  Saviour  calls  the  ezercise  of  Satan's 
power,  llie  power  of  darkness,  J^uke  'H.  53. 
But  this  is  your  hour,  and  the  power  of  dark 
iiess  ;  this  is  the  time  wherein  power  is  given 
to  the  devil,  and  his  iytstrumcnts,  to  execute 
their  dcsigiis  against  me.  The  power  of  dark- 
ness, is  likewise  taken  for  the  dominion  of  sin, 
and  slavery  to  the  devil,  under  which  all  unre- 
generalcd  persons  are,  Col.  1. 13. 
Ocn.  1.  "2.  and  d.  was  upon  the  face  of  tha  deep 
5.  the  light  day,  and  the  d.  he  called  night 

18.  God  set  them  to  divide  the  light  from  the  d. 
15.  12.  a  horror  of  great  d.  fell  upun  Abram 

Ezod.  10.  21.  that  there  may  be  d.  over  Egypt 
22.  there  was  a  thick  d.  in  all  Egypt  three  days 

14.  20.  it  was  a  cloud  and  d.  to  them,  but  light 
20.  21.  and  Moses  drew  near  to  the  thick  d. 

Deut.  4.  11.  the  mountain  burnt  with  thick  d. 

5.  22.  these  words  the  Lord  spake  out  of  thick  d. 
JoshMi.! .he  put  ^.between  you  and  the  Egyptians 
2  Sam.  22.  10.  d.  was  under  his  feet,  Psal.  Iti.  9. 

12.  he  made  d.  his  pavilions  round  about  him 
29.  the  Lord  will  enlighten  my  d.  Psal.  18.  28. 
Job  3.  5.  let  d.  and  the  shadow  of  death  stain  it 
C.  as  for  that  night,  let  d.  seize  upon  it 
5. 14.  they  meet  with  d.  in  the  day  time 
10.  22.  a  land  of  d.  as  d.  itself,  without  any  order 

19.  8.  and  he  hath  set  d.  in  my  paths 

20.  26.  all  d.  shall  be  hid  in  his  secret  places 

22.  11.  or  d.  that  thou  canst  not  see 

23.  17.  because  I  was  not  cut  off  before  the  d. 
neither  hath  he  covered  the  d.  from  my  face 

28.  3.  he  setteth  an  end  to  d.  the  stones  of  d. 
34.  22.  no  d.  where  workers  of  iniquity  may  hide 
37. 19.  we  cannot  order  our  speech  by  reason  ofd. 
38.  9.  when  I  made  thick  d.  a  swaddling  band 

19.  and  as  for  d.  where  is  the  place  thereof? 
Psal.  18.  11.  he  made  d.  his  secret  place 

3.5.  t  G.  let  their  way  be  d.  and  slipperiness 
S.  18.  and  hast  put  mine  acquaintance  into  d. 
97.  2.  clouds  and  d.  are  round  about  him 
104.  20.  thou  makest  d.  and  it  is  night 
10.).  28.  he  sent  d.  and  made  it  dark 
139.  11.  if  I  say,  surely  the  d.  shall  cover  me 

12.  yea,  the  d.  hideth  not  from  thee 
Prov.  2.  13.  leave  paths  to  walk  in  the  ways  of  d. 

4. 19.  the  way  of  the  wicked  is  as  d.they  kno  w  not 
Ecel.  0.  4.  his  name  shall  be  covered  with  d. 
Isa.  .>.  30.  and  if  one  look  to  the  land,  behold  d. 

8.  22.  they  shall  look,  and  behold  trouble  and  d. 

45.  3.  I  will  give  thee  the  treasures  of  d. 

47.  5.  get  thee  into  d.  O  daughter  of  Chaldeans 

60.  2.  tor  behold,  the  d.  shall  cover  the  earth,  and 
gross  d.  the  people,  but  Lord  shall  arise  on  thee 
Jer.  13.  16.  before  he  cause  d.  and  make  gross  d. 
Ezck  32.  8. 1  will  set  d.  upon  thy  land,  saith  Lord 
Joel  2.  2.  a  day  of  d.  of  clouds  and  of  thick  d. 
31.  the  sun  shall  be  turned  into  d.  ^jcts  2.  20. 
Jlmos  4.  13.  he  that  maketh  the  morning  d. 
^VoA.  1.  8.  and  d.  shall  pursue  his  enemies 
Mdt.e.  23.  thy  whole  body  full  of  d.  Luke  11.  34. 

8.  12.  be  cast  out  into  outer  d.  22.  13.  ]  25.  30. 

27.45.  from  sixth  hour  there  was  d.  Mark  15.  33. 
J.iike  22.  53.  this  is  your  hour  and  the  power  of  d. 

2.3.  44.  and  there  Wixs  d.  over  all  the  earth 
^ct.?  13.  1).  there  full  on  him  a  mist  and  a  d. 
£/(A.5. 11.  have  no  fellowship  with  the  works  of  d. 

6.  12.  against  the  rulers  of  the  d.  of  this  world 
Cut.  1. 13.  who  hath  delivered  us  from  power  of  d. 

1  Thrss.  5.  5.  we  aie  not  of  the  night  nor  of  d. 
Jieb.  12.  18.  ye  are  not  come  to  blackness  and  d. 

2  Pet.  2.  4.  and  delivered  them  into  chains  of  d. 
17.  to  whom  the  mist  of  d.  is  reserved  for  ever 

1  .Tohn  2. 11.  because  thatd.  hath  blinded  his  eyes 
Jud<:6.hath  reserved  in  everlasting  chains  under  d. 

13.  to  whom  is  reserved  the  blackn.  of  d.  for  ever 
Rev.  16.  10.  and  his  kingdom  was  full  of  d. 

D.'VUKNESS  with  day. 
Job  3.  4.  let  that  day  be  d.  let  not  God  regard  it 

15.  23.  he  knowelh  that  the  day  of  d.  is  at  hand 
F.ccl.  11.  8.  yet  let  him  remember  the  days  of  d. 
Isa.  58.  10.  then  shall  thy  d.  be  as  the  noon-day 
Joel  2.  2.  a  day  of  d.  and  gloominess,  Znph.  1.  15. 
.^mos  5.  20.  shall  not  the  tlni/  of  the  Lord  be  d.? 

In  D.\RKNESS. 
Deut.  28.  20.  thou  shalt  grope  as  the  blind  in  d. 
1  Sam.  2.  9.  and  the  wicked  shall  be  silent  in  rf. 
1  lyings  8. 12.  Solomon  spake,  the  Lord  said  that 
ho  would  dwell  in  the  thick  d.  2  Chr.  6.  1. 
Job  17.  13.  I  have  made  my  bed  in  the  d. 
P^al.  11.  t  2.  they  may  in  d.  shoot  at  the  upright 
82.  5.  they  know  not,  they  walk  on  in  d. 
88.  6.  thou  hast  laid  me  in  d.  in  the  dcijia 
91.  6.  nor  for  the  pestilence  that  walkai  in  d. 
109 


DAU 

P«.107.10.8uch  as  sit  in  d.  and  the  shadow  ofdeath 
143.  3.  the  enemy  hath  made  me  to  dwell  in  d 
/'rou.20.20.  his  lamp  shall  be  |jut  out  in  ubscuro  d. 
EccLH.  14.  but  the  fool  walketh  in  d. 
5.  17.  he  ealelh  in  d.  ||  6.  4.  he  departeth  in  d. 
Isa.  42.  7.  bring  them  that  sit  in  d.  out  of  prison- h. 
49.  9.  to  them  that  are  in  d.  shew  yourselves 
59.  9.  we  wait  for  light,  but  we  walk  in  d. 
Jer.23.]2.their  ways  shall  be  as  slippery  ways  ind. 
Dan.  2.  22.  he  knowelh  what  is  in  the  d.  and  light 
./oAn8.12.he  that  followelh  me  shall  not  walk  in  d. 
12.  35.  for  he  that  walketh  in  d.  knowetli  not 
46.W  hosoever  believeth  me, should  not  abide  in  d. 
1  Thess.  5.  4.  but  ye,  brethren,  are  not  in  d. 
1  John  1. 6.  and  walk  in  d.  we  lie  and  do  not  truth 
2.  9.  hateth  his  brother,  is  in  d.  even  till  now 
11.  hateth  his  brother,  is  in  d.  walketh  in  d. 
Land  of  DARKNESS. 
Job  10.  21.  before  1  go  even  to  the  land  of  d. 

22.  a  la7id  of  d.  as  d.  itself,  and  shadow  of  death 
Jer.  2.  31.  have  I  been  to  Israel  a  land  of  d.? 

DARKNESS  with  light. 
Gen.  1.  4.  and  God  divided  the  light  from  the  d. 
18.  two  great  lights  to  divide  the  light  from  d. 
Job  10.  22.  a  land  where  the  light  is  as  d. 
17. 12.  the  light  is  short  because  of  d. 
18.  18.  he  shall  be  driven  from  light  into  d. 
26.  t  10.  until  the  end  of  light  with  d. 

29.  3.  when  by  his  light  I  walked  through  d. 

30.  26.  when  I  waited  for  light,  there  came  d. 
Psal.  112.  4.  to  upright  there  ariseth  light  in  d. 

139.  12.  the  d.  and  light  are  both  alike  to  thee 
Eccl.  2. 13.  wisdom  excels  folly  as  far  as  I.  excels  d. 
Isa.  5.  20.  that  put  d.  for  light,  and  light  for  d. 
9.  2.the  people  that  walked  in  d.  have  seen  a  great 
light,  upon  them  hath  light  shined,  Mat.  4. 16. 
42.  16.  I  will  make  d.  light  before  them 
45.  7.  I  form  light  and  create  d.  I  make  peace 
.50.  10.  that  walketh  in  d.  and  hath  no  light 
./er.13.16.  while  yelook  for  light,be  make  it  grossd. 


Lam.  3.  2.  he  brought  me  into  d.  but  not  into  light 
^moso.  18.  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  d.  and  not  light 
Mic.  7.  8.  when  I  sit  in  d.  the  Lord  shall  be  a  light 
JIal.  6.  23.  light  in  thee  be  d.  how  great  is  that  d.  / 

10.  27.  what  I  tell  in  d.  speak  in  light,  Luke  12. 3. 
Luke  1. 79.  light  to  them  that  sit  in  d.  Horn.  2.  19. 

11.  35.  that  the  Zi^At  which  is  in  thee  be  not  d. 
John  1.5.1ight  shineth  in  d.  d.  comprchendeth  it  not 

3. 19.  and  men  loved  d.  rather  than  light 

12.  35.  walk  while  ye  have  light,  lest  d.  come 
.lets  26.  18.  and  to  turn  them  from  d.  to  light 
Rom.  13.  12.  cast  off  the  works  of  d.  put  on  light 

1  Cor.  4. 5.  to  bring  to  light  the  hidden  things  of  d. 

2  Cor,  4.  6.  who  commanded  light  to  shine  out  of  d. 
6.  14.  what  communion  hath  light  with  d.? 

1  Ptt.2.9.  called  you  out  of  d.  into  marvellous  light 

1  .lohn  1.  5.  God  is  light,  and  in  him  is  no  d.  at  all 
2.  8.  d.  is  past,  and  the  true  light  now  shineth 

Out  of  DARKNESS. 
Detit.  5.22.  when  ye  heard  the  voice  out  of  tlie  d. 
.Tob  12.  22.  he  discovereth  deep  things  out  of  d. 
15. 22.  believeth  not  that  he  shall  return  out  of  d. 
30.he  shall  not  depart  out  of  d.ihe  flame  dry  up 
P5aMO7.i4.he  brought  them  out  of  d.  and  shadow 
Isa.  29. 18.  the  eyes  of  the  blind  shall  see  out  of  d. 

DARLING. 
Psal.  22.  20.  deliver  my  d.  from  power  of  the  dog 
35.  17.  Lord,  rescue  my  d.  from  the  lions 
DART,  S. 

2  Sam.  18.  14.  Job  took  three  d.  in  his  hand 
2  Chron.  32.  5.  Hezekiah  made  d.  and  shields 
■lob  41.  26.  the  spear  nor  the  d.  cannot  hold 

29.  d.  are  counted  as  stubble,  he  laugheth  at 
Prov.  7.  23.  till  a  d.  strike  through  his  liver 
.loel  2.  t  8.  when  they  fall  on  d.  not  be  wounded 
Eph.  6.  16.  to  quench  the  fiery  d.  of  the  wicked 
//eft.  12.  20.  it  shall  be  thrust  through  with  a  d. 

DASH. 
2  Kings  8.  12.  and  thou  wilt  d.  their  children 
P.«ai. 2. 9. lest  d.  them  in  pieces  like  a  (lottor's  vessel 
91.  12.  they  shall  bear  thee  up,  lest  thou  d.  thy 
fool  against  a  stone.  Mat.  4.  6.  Luke  4.  11. 
Isa.  13. 18.  their  bosvs  shall  d.  the  young  men 
Jer.  13.  14.  I  will  d.  them  one  against  another 

DASHED 

Kiod.lS.e.thy  right  hand,0  Lord,  hath  d.  in  pieces 

Isa.  13  16.  their  children  also  shall  be  d.  in  pieces 

before  their  eyes,  Has.  13.  16.  Xah.  3.  10. 

Hos.  10.  14.  the  mother  was  d.  upon  her  children 

DASHETH 
Psal.W!.  9.  that  d.thy  little  ones  against  the  stones 

DATES. 
2  Chron.  31.  f  5.  the  children  of  Tfirael  brought  d. 

DAUB,  ED,  I\G. 
Exod.  2.  3.  she  d.  the  ark  with  slime  and  pitch 
Eick.  13.  10.  others  d.  it  with  untempered  mortar 

11.  Bay  to  them  which  d.  it,  that  it  shall  fall 

12.  where  is  the  d.  wherewith  ye  have  d.  if? 
14.  so  will  I  break  down  the  wall  ye  have  d. 

22.  28.  her  prophets  have  d.  them  with  mortar 


DAU 

DAUGHTER 
Signifies,  [1]  A  female  child,  Gen.  34.  1.  [2]  A 
sister.  Gen.  34.  17.  [3]  ^  niece,  or  brother's 
daughter,  Exod.  ^.  21.  [4]  A  daughter-in-law, 
or  son's  wife,  Ruth  3.  18.  [5]  The  wovien  that 
dwell  in  a  country,  Gen.  34.  1.  [6]  The  in- 
habitants of  a  city  or  country,  both  men  and 
women,  Isa.  16.  2.  Alat.  21.  5.  [7]  Posterity, 
lineage,  or  offspring,  Luke  1.  5.  fb]  The  lungs, 
and  other  organs  of  singing,  called  the  daugh- 
ters of  music,  Eccl.  12.  4.  ^91  The  branches 
of  trees.  Gen.  49.  f  22.  [10]  The  church  of 
God,  Psal.  45.  9,  10.  Cant.  5.  8. 
Gen.  20.  12.  is  d.  of  my  father,  not  d.  of  my  mother 

24.  23.  «  hose  d.  art  thou  ?  tell  me,  I  pray  thee,  47. 
48.  to  lake  my  master's  brother's  d.  to  his  son 

34.7.he  had  wrought  folly  in  lying  with  Jacob's  d. 
8.  soul  of  my  son  Shechem  iongeth  for  your  d. 
17.  then  will  we  take  our  d.  and  we  will  be gona 
19.  because  he  had  delight  in  Jacob's  d. 
Exod.  1. 16.  but  if  it  be  a  d.  then  she  shall  live 

21.  31.  whether  he  have  gored  a  son  or  a  d. 
Lev.  12.  6.  when  the  days  are  fulfilled  for  a  d. 

14.  t  10.  to  take  an  ewe-lamb,  the  d.  of  her  ycaf 

18.  17.  nor  shalt  thou  take  her  daughter's  d. 

21.  9.  the  d.  of  any  priest,  if  she  profane  herself 
22. 12.  if  the  priest's  d.  be  married  to  a  stranger 

13.  if  the  priest's  d.  be  a  widow  or  divorced 
M'u.m.  27.  9.  if  he  have  no  d.  give  his  inheritance 
.36.  8.  every  d.  that  possesseth  an  inheritance 
Deut.  27.22.  cursed  be  he  that  lieth  with  his  sister, 
the  d.  of  his  father  or  the  d.  of  his  mother 
28.  56.  her  eye  shall  be  evil  toward  her  d. 
Judg.  11.  34.  Jephthah's  d.  came  out  to  meet  him 
40.  to  lament  Jephthah's  d.  four  days  in  a  year 

1  Sam.  1. 16.  count  not  thy  handmaid  a  d.  of  Belial 
18.  19.  when  Saul's  d.  should  have  been  given 

2  Sam.  12.  3.  little  ewe-lamb  was  unto  him  as  ad. 

1  Kings  3.  1.  Solomon  took  Pharaoh's  d. 
11.  1.  loved  many  women,  with  the  d.  of  Pharaoh 

2  Kings  8. 18.  the  d.  of  Ahab  was  Jehoram's  wife 

9.  34.  go  bury  Jezebel,  for  she  is  a  king's  d. 
1  Chron.  2.  49.  and  the  d.  of  Caleb  was  Aclisah 
Esth.  2.  7.  he  took  his  uncle's  d.  for  his  own  d. 
Psal.  45.10.  hearKen,0  d.  and  consider,and  incline 

1.3.  the  king's  d.  is  all  glorious  within 
Cant.  7.  1.  how  beautiful  with  shoes,  O  prince's d. 
Jer.  31.  22.  how  long  go  about,  backsliding  d.  49. 4. 
46.  19.  O  d.  dwelling  in  Egypt,  furnish  thyself 
48.18.thou  d.  that  dost  inhabit  Dibon,  come  down 
Eiek.  14. 16.  neither  deliver  son  nor  d.  18,  20. 
16.  44.  saying,  as  is  the  mother,  so  is  her  d. 
45.  thou  art  thy  mother's  d.  that  liJatheth 
27.  t  6.  the  d.  of  the  Ashurites  made  thy  benches 
44.  25.  for  son  or  d.  they  may  defile  themselves 
Dan.  11.  6.  the  king's  d.  of  the  south  shall  come 

17.  shall  give  him  the  d.  of  women  corrupting 
Hos.  1.  6.  and  she  conceived  again,  and  bare  ad. 
Mic.  5.  1.  gather  thyself  in  troops,  O  d.  of  troops 
7.  6.  d.  riseth  up  against  her  mother,  daughter-in- 
law  ag.her  mother-in-law  JIMMO.  35./,uiel2.53. 
Zeph.  3.  10.  the  d.  of  my  dispersed  shall  bring 
Mai.  2.  11.  hath  married  the  d.  of  a  strange  god 
Mat.  9.  22.  Jesus  said,  d.  be  of  good  comf.  ttiy  faith 
hath  made  thee  whole,  Mark  5.  34.  Luke  8. 48- 

10.  37.  he  that  Joveth  son  or  d.  more  than  me 

14.  6.  the  d.  of  Herodias  danced  before  them 

15.  28.  her  d.  was  made  whole  from  that  hour 
Mark  7. 26.  he  would  cast  forth  devil  out  of  her  d. 
y>«ic8. 42.  he  had  one  only  d.aboutl2year9ofnge 

13.1fi.ought  not  this  woman,  being  d.  of  .^brahnm 
.lets  7.21.PhaRoh's  d.  took  him  up  and  nouri.-^hcd 
/fcft. 11.24.  Moses  refused  to  be  sonof  Pharaoh's  d. 

DAUGHTER  of  Babylon. 
Psal.l^l.B.Od.of  Babijlon,v:\\o  art  to  be  destroyed 
Isa.  47.  1.  O  d.  of  Babylon,  sit  on  the  ground 
Jer.  50.  42.  to  battle  against  thee,  O  d.  of  Babylon 
51.  33.  d.  of  Babylon  is  like  a  threshing  floor 
ZecA.2.7.  O  Zion.that  dwcllest  with  d.  of  Babylon 

D.\UGHTEa  of  the  Chaldeans. 
Isa.  47. 1.  there  is  nothrQne,0  d.  of  the  Chaldeans 
5.  get  thee  into  darkness,  O  d.  of  the  Chaldeans 
DAUGHTER  of  Edow. 
Lam.  4.  21.  rejoice  and  be  glad,  O  d.  of  F.dom 

22.  he  will  visit  thine  iniquilv,  O  d.  of  F.dom 
DAUGHTER  of  'Egypt. 

Jer.  46. 11.  go  into  Gilead,  O  virgin,  d.  of  Egypt 
24.  the  d.  of  Eirrrpt  shall  bn  confounded 
DAUGHTER  of  Gallim. 
Isa.  10.  30.  lift  up  thy  voice,  O  d.  of  Oallim 

His  DAUGHTER. 
Gen.  29.  6.  Rachel  his  d.  cometh  with  the  sheep 
Exod.  21.  7.  if  a  man  sell  Ai.*  d.  to  be  a  servant 
Lev.  21.2.  for  his  son  or  his  d.  ho  may  be  defiled 
JVlifl..27.8  shall  cause  inheritance  to  pass  Uihis  d. 
30.  10.  the  statutes  between  the  father  and  Ai.td. 
Deut.  7.  3.  nor  his  d.  shalt  thou  take  to  thy  son 
18.  10.  there  shall  not  be  found  one  that  maketh 
Ais  d.  to  pass  through  the  fire,  2  Kings  2:t.  10. 
Judg.  21.  1.  not  any  of  us  give  Ai*  d.  to  Bcnjamia 


.  DAU 

Sam.  17.  25.  king  will  enrich  and  give  him  his  d. 

DAUGHTER  of  Jerusalem. 

i  Kings  I'J.  ~l-  tbe  dauglitcr  of  Zion,  the  d.  of 

Jerus.  haUi  ishaken  her  huad  ut  iheu,  Isa.  37.  'ii. 

JLaiu.  !2.  13.  wliiit  thing  shall  1  liken  to  thee,  O  U. 

of  Jirusali;m,0  diiught.  of  Zion,  to  comfort  thee 

1  j.  they  wag  their  head  at  the  il.  of  Jerusalem 

Jl//c.4.;^.iJie  kingdom  shuU  come  to  d.uf  Jerusalem 

Z<;;;//t.3.14. rejoice  with  all  the  heart,  U  d.  of  Jerus. 

iSit/t.  U.  y.  slioui,  O  d.  of  Jcrus.  thy  King  comelh 

DAUGHTER  of  Judak. 
Lam.  1. 15.  the  Lord  hath  trodden  the  d.  of  Juduh 
*.  li  he  hath  thrown  down  strong  holds  of  d.  of  J. 

5.  he  hath  increased  in  d.  of  Judah,  mourning 

DAUGllTER-h\-LAVV. 
OcH.38. 16.he  knew  not  that  she  w  as  his  d.-in-lato 
24.  Tamar  thy  d.-in-law  hath  jdayed  tlie  harlot 
Z/fo. iy.15.  not  uncover  nakedness  ol  thy  d.-in-lau> 
iiO.l-.  if  a  man  he  withlus  d.-in-law  both  shall  die 
llutk  l.Si.Naonii  returned,  a.nd  Ruth  her  d.-in-law 
4. 15.  d.-in-law  whicti  loveth  thee, hath  born  hi 
l.Va«i.4.19.ii.-iH-/uu;i'hinehas'  wife  was  with  child 
Ezek.  ii.  11.  another  lewdly  dortleth  his  d.-in  law 
Jltc.  7.  ti.  for  the  d.-in-law  riseth  up  against  the 
mother-in-law,  Mai.  10.  35.  Luke  12.  53. 
^/(/DAUGHTER. 
Deut.  22.  16.  I  gave  my  d.  to  this  man  to  wife 

17.  these  are  the  tokens  of  myd.  virginity 
Josh.  15.  16.  to  him  will  I  give  my  d.  Jiidg.  1.  12. 
Jadg.  11.  35.  alas,  my  d.  tliou  hast  brought  me  low 

19.  24.  behold,  here  is  my  d.  a  maiden 
Rutk  2.  2.  and  she  said  unto  her,  go,  my  d. 

3.  10.  he  said,  blessed  be  thou  of  the  Lord,  my  d. 
16.  her  mother  said,  who  art  thou,  my  d.? 

IB.  sit  still  my  d.  till  thou  know  the  matter 
Mat.  9.  Iri.  a  ruler,  saying,  my  d.  is  even  now  dead 

15.  ii.  my  d.  is  grievously  ve.\ed  with  a  devil 
Mark  5. 23.  i«y  little  d.  lieth  at  the  point  of  death 

DAUGHTER  of  my  people. 
/3a.22. 4.  because  of  the  spoiling  of  the  (Z.  of  my  p. 
Jer.  4. 11.  a  dry  wind  toward  d.  of  my  p.  not  to  fan 

6.  14.  healed  the  hurt  of  (/.o/ mi/;). slightly,  8.  11. 
26.  O,  d.  of  my  people,  gird  thee  with  sackcloth 

8. 19. behold,  the  voice  of  the  cry  ofthei/.  (i/zHy;;. 

21.  for  hurt  of  (i.  of  my  p.  am  1  hurt,  I  am  black 

22.  why  is  not  health  of  the  (/.  o/;ny  p.  recovered 

9.  1.  that  I  might  weep  for  slain  of  the  d.  o/wiy  p. 
7.1  will  try  them, for  how  shall  I  do  for  d.  of  my  p. 

14. 17.  virgin  d.  of  my  p.  is  broken  with  a  breach 
i/0TO.2.ll.fur  the  destruction  of  the  d.ofmyp.'i.iS. 

4.  3.  tiled,  of  my  p.  is  become  cruel,  like  ostriches 

6.  the  iniquity  of  the  d.  of  my  p.  is  greater  than 
lO.were  their  meat  in  the  destruction  oli/.o/ my;;. 

*  DAUGHTER  of  Tarskish.. 

/ja.23.10.pa3s  through  as  a  river, O  d.  of  Tarskish 

Thy  DAUGHTER. 
Gen.  29. 18. 1  will  serve  7  years  for  thy  younger  d. 
Etod.  20.  10.  nor  thy  son,  nor  thy  d.  iJeut.  5.  14. 
/,«o.  Irt.  10.  the  nakedness  of  thy  daughter's  d. 
19.  29.  do  not  prostitute  thy  d.  to  be  a  wiore 
Deut.  7.  3.  thy  d.  shalt  thou  not  give  to  his  son 

12.  IS.  thou  shalt  rejoice  and  Ihy  d.  16.  11,  14. 

13.  6.  if  thy  son  or  thy  d.  entice  thee,  saying 
22.  17.  saying,  I  found  not  thy  d.  a  maid 

2  A'/nnrsl4.9.give/Ay  d.  to  my  son,  2  Chron.lj.  18. 
jViir/.-5.35.certain  who  said, t/iyrf.is  dead, /.,«/irc8.4y. 

7.  29.  go  thy  way,  the  devil  is  gone  out  of  thy  d. 

D.\U(;ilTER  of  Tyre. 
Paal.  45.  12.  d.  of  Tyre  shall  be  there  with  a  gift 

DAUGHTER  of  Zidon. 
/»a.23.  12.  O  thou  oppressed  virgin,  d.  of  Zidon 

DAUGHTER  of  Zi»n. 

2  KingsX^.'H.d.of  Z.hath  desjiised  thee,/sa.37.22. 

P.-<al.  9. 14.  thy  praisi!  in  the  gates  of  the  d.  of  Zion 

Isa.  1.8.  d.  of  Ziun  left  as  a  cottage  in  a  vineyanl 

4. 4.  have  washed  away  the  filth  of  the  d.of  Zion 

10.  32.  shake  against  mount  of  (i.  of  Zion,  16.  1. 
52.  2.  loose  ihysi'lf,  O  captive  d.  of  Zion 

62.  ll.sav  to  the  d.of  Zion,  thy  salvation  Cometh 
Jrr.  4.31.1  have  heard  the  voice  of  the  d.  of  Zion 
0.2. 1  have  likened  d.  of  Zion  to  a  comely  woman 

2.i.  MS  men  of  war  against  iheo,  O  d.  of  Zion 
Aam.  1.  6.  from  llied.  of  Zion  beauty  is  departed 
2.  l.Lord  coverelh  the  d.  of  Z.ion  with  a  cloud 
4.  and  slew  in  the  tabernacle  of  the  d.  of  Zion 
8. Lord  purposed  to  deptroy  the  wall  uid.of  Ziun 
10.  the  elders  ofd.  of  V.ior  sit  on  the  ground 
13.  what  shall  I  eijunl  to  thee,  O  d.  of  ZAonl 
IH.  O  wall  of  the  d.of  Zion,  Kit  tears  run  down 
4.  22.  piinishrnrnt  is  accomplinhed,  O  d.  of  Z.ion 
Mie.  1.  13.  the  beginning  of  sin  to  the  d.  of  Z.ion 
4.  8.  O  tower,  the  strong  hold  of  the  d.  of  Z.ion 
10.  he  in  pain,labonr  to  bring  forth,  O  d.  of  Z.ion 
13.  arigo  and  thresh,  O  d.  of  Z.ion,  I  will  make 
7.iph.  3. 14.  sing,  O  d.  of  Z.ion,  shout  O  Israel 
Z.irh.  2.  10.  »ing  and  rejoice,  O  d.  of  Z.ion,  9.  9. 
Mat.  21.  .5.  tell  ye  the  d.  of  Z.ion,  thy  king  cometh 
John  12.  15.  fear  noi  (/.  of  '/.ion,  thy  king  comelh 

DAUGHTER  of  Zur. 

JV'um.  25. 15.  llio  woman  wa*  Cozbi  tho  d.  of  Zur 

llO 


DAU 

DAUGHTERS. 
Gen.  6.  1.  and  when  d.  were  born  to  them 

2.  the  sons  of  God  saw  the  d.  of  men,  and  took 
•6.4.  the  sons  of  God  came  in  unto  the  d.  of  men 

19.  14.  Lot  gpake  to  them  which  married  his  d. 

36.  both  the  d.  of  Lot  with  child  by  their  lather 
2-1. 3.  take  not  a  wife  of  d.  of  Canaan,  37.  |  28. 1,6, 

13.  the  d.  of  the  city  came  out  to  draw  water 
27. 46.  weary  of  my  life  because  of  the  d.  of  Heth 
30. 13.  hai)py  am  J,  for  the  d.  will  call  me  blessed 
31.26.  thou  hast  carried  away  my  d.  as  captives 

43.  these  d,  are  my  d.  \\  50.  if  thou  afflict  my  d 
34.  1.  Dinah  wciit  out  to  sec  the  d.  of  the  land 

9.  give  your  d.  to  us,  and  take  our  d.  unto  you 

16.  then  will  we  give  our  d.  to  you,  and  take  d. 
49.  t  22.  Joseph  is  a  bough  whose  d.  tun  over 
Eioii.  2.  16.  the  priest  of  Midian  had  seven  d. 
21.  9.  he  shall  deal  with  her  after  the  manner  of  d. 
34.  16.  their  d.  .go  a  whoring  after  their  gods 
Lev.  26.  29.  the  Hesh  of  your  d.  shall  ye  eat 
JVu7H.  2].  t  25.  dwelt  in  Heshbon  and  d.  thereof 

26.  33.  names  of  d.of  Zelopheliad,  27.1..7os/t.l7.3. 

27.  7.  the  d.  of  Zelophehad  speak  right 
36.  10.  even  so  did  the  d.  of  Zelophehad 

Deut.  23. 17.  shall  be  no  whore  of  the  d.  of  Israel 
Judg.  3.  6.  they  took  their  d.  to  be  their  wives 
21.  7.  we  will  not  give  them  of  our  d.  to  wives 

]8.howbeit,we  may  not  give  them  wives  ofourd 
Ruth  1.  11.  turn  again,  my  d.  why  will  ye  go7  12. 

13.  nay,  my  d.  il  grieveth  me  for  your  sakes 

1  iS'a/n.  8.  13.  take  your  d.  to  be  conl'ectionaries 

2  Sam.  13.  18.  were  king's  d.  virgins  aiiparclled 
jVeh.  3.  12.  next  repaired  Shalluin,  he  and  his  d. 

5.  5.  our  d.  are  brought  into  bondage  already 
7.63.took  one  of  d.  of  Barzillai  to  wife,  Ezra  2.61. 
10.  30.  not  give  our  d.  to  the  peoiile  of  the  land 
Jobi'i.  15.no  women  were  so  fair  as  the  d.  of  Job 
/^•aZ.45.y.  king's  d.  among  thy  honourable  women 
144.  12.  that  our  d.  may  be  as  corner-stones 
/'ro«.31.2y.inany  d.have  done  virtuously,  but  thou 
Cant.  2.  2.  as  the  lily,  so  is  my  love  among  the  d. 
6.9.  the  d.  saw  her  and  blessed  her,  yea  thOTjueens 
Isa.  13.  t  21.  d.  of  the  owl  dwell  there,  34.  f  13. 
32.  9.  hear  my  voice,  ye  careless  d.  give  ear 
43.  t  20.  the  d.  of  the  owl  shall  honour  me 
60.  4.  and  thy  d.  shall  be  nursed  at  thy  side 
Jcr.  9.  20.  O  ye  women,  teach  your  d.  wailing 
29.6.  give  yourd.  to  husbands,  that  they  may  bear 
49.  2.  and  her  d.  shall  be  burnt  with  (ire 

3.  cry,  ye  d.  of  Rabbah,  gird  ye  with  sackcloth 
Lam.  3.  51.  because  of  all  the  d.  of  my  city 
Eiek.l'i.Xl.idX.  thy  face  against  the  d.  of  thy  people 

16.  131.  in  thy  d.  is  thine  eminent  place 
46.  sister  Samaria,  and  her  d.  Sodom,  and  her  d. 
49.abundance  of  idleness  was  in  her  and  in  her  d. 
53.  when  I  bring  back  the  captivity  of  her  d. 
55.  when  thy  sister  Sodom  and  d.  shall  return 
61.  and  1  will  give  them  unto  thee  for  d. 
23.  2.  there  were  two  women, the  d.  of  one  mother 
26.  6.  her  d.  shall  be  slain  in  the  field,  8. 
30.  18.  and  her  d.  shall  go  into  captivity 
32.  16.  the  d.  of  the  nations  shall  lament  her 
//u,?.4.]3. therefore  your  d. shall  commit  whoredom 
14. 1  will  not  punish  your  d.  when  they  commit 
Mic.  1.  t  8.  make  a  mourning  as  the  d.  of  the  owl 
Luke  1.  5.  and  his  wife  was  of  the  d.  of  Aaron 
Acts  21.  y.  the  same  man  had  four  d.  virgins 

1  Ptt.  3. 6.  whose  d.  ye  are  as  long  as  ye  do  well 
DAUGHTERS  of  Jerusalem. 

Cant.  1.  5.1  am  black,  but  comely,  Od.  of  .Jcrus. 

2.  7. 1  charge  you,  O  d.  of  .hrus.'^.  5.  |  5.  8.  j  8.  4. 

3.  10.  paved  with  love  for  the  d.  of  Jerusalem 
5.  16.  this  is  my  beloved,  O  d.  of  .Irrusalcm 

Luke  23.  28.  d.  of  Jerusalem,  weep  not  for  me 

DAUGHTERS  of  Israel. 
Deut.  23. 17.  there  shall  be  no  whore  of  d.  of  Isr. 
Jadg.  11.  40.  d.  of  Israel  went  yearly  to  lament 

2  Sam.  1.21.  ye  d.  of  Israel,  weep  over  Saul,  who 

DAU(;HTERS  of  Judah. 
Psal.  48. 11.  let  the  d.  of  Judah  be  ghid,  because 
97.  8.  Zion  heard,  and  the  d.  of  Judah  rejoiced  • 

DAUGHTERS-IN-LAW. 

liuth  1.  0.  then  she  arose  wilh  her  d.-in-law,  7. 

8.  Naomi  said  to  her  two  d.-in-law,  go,  return 

DAUGHTERS  of  Moab. 

JVum.25.1.I»r.commilted  whoredom  wilh  d.  of  M. 

Isa.  16. 2.  BO  the  d.  of  M.  fhall  be  at  fords  of  Arnon 

DAUGHTERS  of  music. 
Keel.  12.  4.  the  d.  of  music  shall  be  brought  low 

DAUGHTERS  of  the  rhilislinrs. 

Judg.MA.  Samson  saw  a  woman  of  the  d.of  Phil. 

2.1  have  seen  a  woman  of  d.of  Phil-S't  her  for  m? 

2.Sam.l.20.  publish  it  not  lest  I  ho  d.  of  Phil,  rejoice 

K-.rk.Ut.^l.  I  hnvedelivered  ihec  to  tho  d. «/  Phil. 

5~.l\\o  d.of  Phil-  which  despise  I  hen  round  about 

DAUGHTERS  of  Shiloh. 

Judg.  21.21.  if  the  d.  of  .Shituh  come  out  todnnce, 

calch  yo  every  man  a  wife  of  the  (/.  of  Shiluh 

DAirGHTERS  joined  wilh  .ions. 

Ocn.SA.  bo  begat  »w.»  and  d.  7, 10, 13, 16. 1 11. 11. 


DAW 

Oen.  19. 12.  thy  tovs  and  d.  bring  out  of  thi«  place 

31.  28.  not  suffered  nie  to  kiss  ray  sons  and  d. 
55.  he  kissed  his  sons  and  d.  and  blessed  theiB 

37.35.  all  his  sons  and  d.  rose  to  comfort  him 
£xod.3. 22.  ye  shall  put  them  on  your  sons  andd. 
10.  9.  with  our  sons  and  with  our  d.  will  we  go 
21.  4.  and  she  have  born  him  suns  or  d. 

32.  2.  ear-rings  of  your  sons  and  d.  bring  to  me 

34.  16.  and  thou  take  of  their  d.  to  thy  sons 
Lev.  10.14.  thou,thy  sons  and  d.with  thee,fch3ll  eat 

in  the  holy  place,  A'um.  18.  11,  19 
J^um.  21.  29.  given  his  sons  and  d.  into  captivit* 
26. 33.Zelophehad  had  no  sons,  but  d.  Josh.  17.  3. 
Deut.  12.  12.  ye  and  your  sons  and  d.  rejoice 
31.  their  sons  and  d.  they  have  burnt  in  the  fire, 
2  Kings  17.  17.  Jer.  7.  31.  ,  32.  35. 
28.  32.  Ihy  sons  and  d.  given  to  anotner  people 
41.  beget  sons  and  d.  but  shall  not  enjoy  them 
53.  thou  shalt  cat  the  flesh  of  thy  sons  and  d. 
32.  19.  becau.»e  of  provoking  of  his  sons  and  d. 
Josh.  7.  24.  they  brought  .\clian,  his  sons  and  d. 
17.  6.  d.  of  Maiiasseh  had  inheritance  among  son$ 
Judg.  3.  6.  they  gave  their  d.  to  their  sons 

12.  9.  Ibzan  took  in  thirty  d.  for  his  sons 
lSom.l.4.he  gavePcninnah,her  son^andd.portionB 

2.  21.  so  Hannah  hare  three  suns  and  two  d. 

30.  3.  their  sons  and  d.  were  taken  captives 

6.  grieved,  every  man  for  his  suns  and  for  his  d. 

19. there  was  nothing  lacking,  neither  sons  nor  J. 

2  Ham.  5. 13.  and  there  were  vet  sons  and  d.  born 

to  David,  1  Chrov.  14.  3. 

lO.S.which  saved  the  lives  ofthysoB^andof  thyd. 

1  Chron.  2.  34.  now  Sheshan  had  no  sons  but  d. 

4.  27.  Shimei  had  si.Tteen  sons  and  si.\  d. 

23.  22.  Eleazar  died,  and  had  ro  sons  but  d. 

2.5.  5.God  gave  Heinan  fourteen  sons  and  three  d. 

2  Chroa.  11.  21.  Rehobnam  had  28  sons  and  60  d. 

13.  21.  Abijah  begat  22  sons  and  sixteen  d. 

24.  3.  Jchoiada  took  wives  and  begat  sons  and  d. 

28.  8.  curried  captive  200,000  women,  sorts  and  d. 
20.9.our  4-0715  d.and  wives  are  in  captivity  for  ihig 

31.  18.  to  the  genealdgy  of  their  son.t  and  d. 
Ezra  9.  2.  have  taken  of  their  d.  for  their  sons 

12.  give  not  your  d.  to  their  sons,  JVch.  13.  25. 
JV(A.4.14.and  fight  for  your  .To7i.5,d.and  your  wives 

5.  2.  that  said,  we,  out  sons  and  our  d.  are  many 
5.  we  bring  into  bondage  our  sons  and  our  d. 

10.  28.  their  sons  and  d.  clave  to  their  brethren 
.7o4  1.2.  there  were  born  to  Job 7  ».  and  3  d.  42.  13. 

13.  a  day  when  his  sons  and  d.  were  eating,  18. 
Psal.  106.  37.  they  sac.  their  sovs  and  d.  to  devils 

38.  and  shed  even  the  blood  of  their  sotis  and  d. 
Isa.  43. 6.  bring  my  s.  from  far,  and  my  d.  from  the 

49.  22.  bring  thy  sons  in  their  arms,  and  thy  d. 

56.  5.  will  I  give  a  name  better  than  of  5.  and  d. 
Jer.  3. 24.  shame  hath  devoured  their  sons  and  d. 

5.  17.  eat  that  which  thy  sons   and  d.  should  eat 

11.22.  their  S07I.?  and  their  d.  shall  die  by  famine 

14. 16.  they  shall  have  none  to  bury  their  .«.  anil  d. 

lfi.2.  neither  shalt  thou  have  s.  nor  d.  in  this  place 
3.  saith  the  Lord  concerning  the  sons  and  d. 

19.  9.  I  will  cause  them  eat  the  flesh  of  .i.  and  d. 

29.  6.  take  ye  wives  and  beget  sons  and  d. 

35.  8.  we,  our  sons  and  our  d.  drink  no  wine 
48.  40.  thy  sons  and  thy  d.  are  taken  captives 

£:' A-.14.16.they  shall  deliver  neither  sons  nor  d.l9. 
22.  left  a  remnant  brought  forth,  bolh  sons  andd. 
16.  20.  taken  thy  sons  and  d.  and  sacrificed  them 
23.  4.  and  they  were  mine,  and  hare  .'otis  and  d. 
10.  they  look  her  sons  and  d.  and  slew  her,  25. 
47.  ihey  shall  slay  their  sons  and  d.  and  burn  up 
24.2l.yourson»  and  d.fall  bythc  s«  or(l,j97nos7.17. 

25.  when  I  take  from  them  their  son.f  and  d. 
.Joel  2.  28.  your  sons  and  d.  prophesy,  .^cts  2. 17. 

3.  8.  I  will  sell  your  sons  and  d.  to  Jndah 

2  Cor .6.]8.ve shall  be  mv  .tons  and  d.saith  theLord 

DAUGHTERS  of  Syria. 
Ezek.l6.S7.  tinieof  thv  repronch  of  Ihei. o/5yria 

T^co  D.AUGHTERS. 
(7f7t.lS.f.Iliave  tiro  d.\ct  me  bring  1  hem  out  to  you 
1.5.  take  ihy  wife  and  thy  t7co  d.  which  arc  here 
30.  Lot  dwell  in  a  cave,  he  and  his  tiro  d. 
29.  10.  Laban  had  tiro  d.  Leah  and  Rachel 
31.  41. 1  served  thee  fourteen  years  for  thy  tteo  d. 
Ruth  1.  7.  Nnoini  went  ni|t  with  her  two  d. 
1  .Sam.  2.  21.  Hannah  conceived  and  hnr'-  lirn  d. 

14.  49.  Sriiil's  two  d.  were  Merab  and  Mirlinl 
Prov.  PO.  l.").  the  horseleech  hath  two  d.  crying 

DAUGHTEIiS  of  the  iinrireumrisrd. 
9  Sam.l.20.piil>lish  it  not.h'!'t  d.  of  the  Kne.triumph 

DAUGHTERS  of  Zinn. 
Cant.  3. 11.  go  forth,  O  yo  rf.  of  Zion,  and  behold 
Isa.  3.  10.  because  the  d.  of  Zion  are  haughty 

17.  smite  with  a  scab  the  head  of  the  d.  of  Zion 
4.4.hnvo  washed  nwiiv  the  fillhofthe  d.  o/ Zioh 

D.WVV,  I.NG. 
.^.1*.  6. 15.  they  rose  abmit  the  d.  of  the  day 
Judg.  19.  20.  then  came  the  woman  inlhr  d.  of  dB> 
/.diS  9.  neither  h-l  il  see  the  d.  of  the  dny 
7.  4.  I  am  full  of  tossings  to  tho  d.  of  the  day 


DAY 

Psal.  1J9. 147.  I  prevented  the  i.  or  the  morning 

Mat.  '28.  1.  as  it  began  to  d.  toward  the  first  day 

S  Pet.  1.  ly.  till  the  day  d.  and  the  day-star  arise  in 
DAY. 

The  day  is  distinguished  into  natural,  civil,  and 
artificial.  T/ie  natural,  or  solar  day,  tjs  the  du- 
ration of  four  and  twenty  hours.  7  'he  artificial 
day,  is  the  time  of  the  sun's  continuance  above 
the  horizon,  which  is  u/icijual,  accardiitff  to  dif- 
ferent times  and  seasons,  by  reason  of  the  ob- 
iiijuity  of  the  sphere.  God  called  the  light  day, 
Uiat  fcs,  the  artificial  day.  The  evening  and  tlic 
moriiing  were  the  first  day,  iiavuly,  natural, 
Gen.  1. 5.  Tlio  civil  day,  is  that,  the  beginning 
and  end  wheroff  is  deteriuincd  by  the  cotniuo/i 
custom  of  any  nation.  7'i(tellebre\vs  began  their 
civil  and  ecclesiastical  day  from  one  evening  to 
anotlur.  From  even  unto  even  shall  ye  cele- 
brate your  sabbath.  Lev..  s!3.  3J.  7'Aa  Bahylo 
uians  reckoned  their  days  from  one  sun-ristng 
to  another;  the  Italians /rom  one  sun-set  to 
another :  some  from  noon  to  noon;  and  others 
from  midnight  to  midnight. 

Til  id  day,  or  to-day,  do  not  only  signify  the  par- 
ticular day  on  which  one  is  speaking,  but  like- 
wise any  indefinite  time.  Thou  art  to  pass  over 
Jordan  liiis  day,  Deut.  9.  1.  tliat  is,  in  a  short 
time  after  this,the  word  day  being  oftcnputfor 
lime,  as  in  Gen.  2.  4,  17.  In  the  day  wlieu 
God  made  the  earth  and  the  heavens:  in  the 
day  thou  eatest  tliereof"  thou  shalt  surely  die, 
that  is,  at  the  time  when  thou  eatcst  thereof. 
To-day,  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice,  Heb.  3.  lb ; 
that  is,  in  this  present  season  of  grace,  while 
you  enjoy  the  means  of  grace.  Tht»  night  is  far 
spent,  ihe  day  is  at  hand,  Bom.  13. 1'i.  The  lime 
of  heathenish  ignorance  and  profaiieness  is 
m  a  great  measure  over;  and  the  time  of  gospel- 
light  andsaeingknowledge  is  begun  among  us. 
Ttie  day  of  Jerusalem,  i«  the  time  of  its  calamity 
and  destruction,  Psal.  137.  7.  Abraham  de- 
sired to  sue  my  day,  says  our  Saviour,  John  6. 
5l).  He  desired  to  have  a  prospect  of  the  time 
of  my  coming  i'/i  the  fiesh.  One  man  esteemeth 
one  day  above  another,  Horn.  14.  5.  He  thinks 
that  the  Jewish  festivals  are  holier  than  other 
d  :ys,  and  still  to  be  observed.  He  seelh  that 
his  day  is  coming,  Fsal.  37.  13.  77ie  time  ap- 
pointed by  God  for  his  punishment  or  destruc- 
tion. Tills  day  liave  I  begotten  thee,  Psal.  '2.  7. 
that  is,  from  all  eternity,  in  which  there  is  no 
succession,  no  yesterday,  no  to-morrow,  but  it 
is  all  as  one  continued  day  or  moment,  without 
change  or  flux.  Or,  this  day,  may  refer  to  the 
manifestation  of ChtisV  s  eternalsoiishipin  time, 
either  in  his  birth  and  life,  wliin  his  being  the 
Son  of  God  was  demonstrated  by  the  testimony 
of  the  angel,L\ike  1.32.  j3nd  of  (rod  the  Father, 
Mat.  3. 17.  I  17.  5.  But  chirjiy  at  his  resurrec- 
tion, by  which  he  was  declared  to  bo  the  Son 
of  God  with  power,  Rom.  1.  4.  In  one  day, 
that  is,  suddenly  and  unexpectedly.  Rev.  Id.  8. 
7'Ac  Christian  sabbath  is  called  the  Lord's  day, 
tico.  1. 10.  05  the  siicramcnt  is  called  the  Lord's 
supper,  1  Cor.  11.  20.  because  Christ  instituted 
it,  or,  because  the  end  of  its  institution  was  the 
remembrance  o/ Christ's  resurrection, as  the  end 
of  the  Lord's  supper  was  the  commemoration 
of  his  death ;  or,  because  it  is  employed  in  his 
worship  and  service.  The  day  of  judgment  is 
likewise  called  the  Lord's  day,  1  Thcss.  5.  2. 
It  is  his  by  destination,  because  thereon  he  has 
appointed  to  judge  the  world;  but  the  sabbath 
is  his  by  con.secration,  choice,  and  institution. 

<VeJt.l..5.Gi)d  called  the  light  d.  and  darkness  night 
32.  21).  he  said,  let  me  go,  for  the  d.  hreaki;th 

Kz»^.21.2l.  if  he  continue  a  d.  or  two,  he  shall 
40.  37.  journeyed  not,  till  the  d.  it  was  taken  up 

Lett.  ~?i.  37.  feasts  of  Lord,  every  thing  upon  his  d. 

/J'am.  3.  13.  on  the  d.  I  smote  first-born  in  Egypt 
7.  11.  each  prince  shall  otter  his  offering  on  his  d. 
14.34.  each  '/.  tor  a  year  sluiil  bear  your  iniquities 
3t).  8.  if  her  husband  disallow  her  on  the  d.  12. 

Deut.  4. 10.  the  rf.ihou  sioodost  before  L.in  Horcb 

15.  yc  saw  no  manner  of  similiiude  on  the  d. 
9.  7.  from  the  d.  tliou  didst  depart  out  of  Egypt 
24.  have  been  rebellions  from  the  d.  I  knew  you 
24.  15.  at  his  d.  thou  sbnlt  give  him  his  hire 

Josh.  (i.  10.  till  ihe  d.  I  b:d  you  shout,  then  shout 
9.  12.  on  the  d.  wo  came  forth  to  go  to  you 
JO.  13.  the  sun  hasted  net  down  about  a  whole rf. 
14.  was  no  d.  like  that  before  or  after  it 

Judg.  Iti.  2.  when  it  is  d  we  sball  kill  Samson 
19.  t  8.  and  they  tarried  till  ihe  d.  declined 
30.  from  the  d.  that  Israel  came  out  of  Eeypt 

Rutki.  5,  what  d.  thou  buycst  tlie  tiild  of  Naomi 

1  Sam  9.  1.5.  the  Lorn  t')id  Samuel  a  d.  before 
24.  4.  behold  the  d.  of  which  the  Lord  said 
26.  10.  smite  him,  or  his  (/.shall  come  to  die 

f  Sam.  3.  35.  wliile  it  was  yet  d.  Jcr.  15.  9. 
Ill 


DAY 

2  Sam.13. 32.  from  d.  he  forced  his  sister  Tamar 
19.  24.  from  the  d.  the  king  departed,  till  the  d. 

1  Kings  2.  37.  that  on  the  d.  thou  goesl  out,  42. 
8.  t  Sy.  maintain  the  thing  of  a  d.  in  his  d. 
17.  14.  till  the  d.  that  tlie  Lord  scndeth  rain 

2  Kings  4.dit  fell  on  a  d.  thatElisha  passed, 11. 18. 
J^eh.  4.  2.  he  said,  will  they  make  an  end  in  a  d.l 

22.  in  the  night  a  guard,  and  labour  on  the  d. 
Esth.  9. 17.  and  made  it  a  d.  of  feasting,  18,  lit. 
Job  1.  4.  feasted  in  their  houses,  every  one  his  d. 

6.  there  was  a  d.  when  the  sons  of  God,  13.  |  2. 1 
3.  3,  let  the  d.  perish  wherein  1  was  born 

14.  6.  he  may  rest,  till  he  shall  accomplish  his  d 

15.  20.  they  shall  he  astonished  at  his  d. 

19. 25.  he  shall  stand  at  latter  d.  upon  the  earth 
21.  30.  the  wicked  is  reserved  to  d.  of  destruction 
Psal.  IS).  2.  d.  unto  d.  uttereth  .speech,  and  night 

37,  13.  for  he  seeth  that  his  d.  is  coming 
78.42.  nor  remembered  d.  when  he  delivered  thcni 
84. 10.  a  d.  in  thy  courts  is  belter  than  a  thousand 
119. 164.  seven  times  a.  d.  do  L  praise  thee 

Proc.4.18.that  shineth  more  and  more  to  perfect  d. 

7.  20.  he  will  come  home  at  the  d.  appointeil 

27. 1.  thou  knowest  not  w  hat  a  d.  may  bring  forth 
Cant.2.17.till  d.  break, and  shadows  Hee  away,4.  0. 
Isa.  7.  17.  from  the  d.  that  Ephraim  departed 

30.  t  8.  Uiat  it  may  be  for  the  latter  d.  lijr  ever 
43.  13.  yea,  before  the  d.  was,  I  am  he 
58. 5.  a  d.  for  a  man  to  afflict  his  suul  1  wilt  thou 
call  this  a  fast,  an  acceptable  d.  to  the  Lord 

61.2.  and  the  d.  of  vengeance  of  our  God,  ti3.  4. 
Jer.  12.  3.  prepare  them  for  the  d.  of  slaughter 

27.  22.  there  shall  they  be  till  the  d.  I  visit  them 
32.  31.  from  the  d.  they  built  it,  even  to  this  d. 
3U.  2.  from  the  d.  I  spake  to  thee,  even  to  this  d. 

38.  28.  till  the  d.  that  Jerusalem  was  taken 
47.  4.  because  of  the  d.  that  Cometh  to  spoil 
50.  27.  woe  unto  them,  for  their  d.  is  come 

Ezek.4.6. 1  have  appointed  thee  each  d.  for  a  year 
7. 10.  behold  the  d.  behold  it  is  come,  the  morning 
21.  25.  thou  wicked  prince,  whose  d.  is  come,  2'J. 

28.  15.  from  the  d.  that  thou  wast  created 
30.  2.  woe  worth  the  d.  ||  3.  for  the  d.  is  near 

18.at  Tehaphnehos  also  the  d.  shall  be  darkened 
Dan.  6.  10.  maketli  petition  three  times  a  d.  13. 
Has.  9.  5.  what  will  ye  do  in  the  solemn  d.T 
Joel  2.2.  a  d.  of  darkness  and  of  gloominess 
Jlinos  5.  8.  seek  him  that  maketli  the  d.  dark 

8.  10.  I  will  make  the  end  thereof  as  a  bitter  d. 
Mic.  3.  6.  and  the  d.  shall  be  dark  over  them   • 

7.  4.  the  d.  of  thy  watchmen,  and  thy  visitation 
Z(7/A.2.2.before  the  decree,  the  d.  pass  as  the  chad 

3.  8.  till  the  d.  that  I  rise  up  to  the  prey 
ZccA.4.I0.for  who  hath des[)ised  d.  ot  small  things? 
J^Iul.  3. 2.  but  who  may  abide  tlie  d.  of  his  coming? 

4.  1.  the  d.  Cometh  that  shall  hum  as  an  oven 
^1/a<.24.38.marryi[ig  and  giving  in  marriage, till  ihe 

d.  that  Noe  entered  into  the  ark,  /,ukc  17.  27. 

50.  the  Lord  of  that  servant  shall  come  in  a  rf 

when  he  looketh  not  for  him,  Juke  12.  4(j. 

2.5.  13.  ye  neither  know  the  d.  nor  the  hour 

.4/arA  1.35. rising  upagreatwhiie  bel'orer/.went  out 

/yuA'el.20.dunib  till  thed.thesc  things  be  performed 

80. child  grew  till  thed.of  his  shewing  unto  Israel 

17.  4.  trespass  seven  times  in  a  d.  and  turn  ngain 

24.  so  shall  also  the  Son  of  Man  be  in  his  d. 

.John  fi.  39.  but  should  raise  it  again  at  the  last  d. 

40.  I  will  raise  him  up  at  the  last  d.  44,  54. 

8.  56.  your  father  Abraham  rejoiced  to  see  my  d. 
9.4.  I  must  work  the  work  of  him  while  it  is  d. 

Jicts  1.  2.  until  the  d.  in  which  he  wa.s  taken  up 

12.  21.  on  a  set  d.  Herod  sat  upon  his  throne 
]().  .'J5.  and  when  it  was  d.  23.  12.  1  27.  39. 

17.  31.  because  he  hath  appointed  a  d.  in  which 
27.  29.  they  cast  four  anchors,  and  wished  for  d. 
/iflm.2.'5.but  treasurestwrathagainst  tho(/.of  wratl; 

13.  12.  d.  is  at  hand,  let  us  therefore  cast  off  works 
14.6.hetliatregardetha(/.  regardcih  it  to  ihe  Lord 

1  Cor.3.13.for  the  d.  shall  declare  it,because  itshall 
4.  t  3.  should  be  judged  of  you  or  of  man's  d. 

2  Cor.  6.  2.  behold,  now  is  the  d.  of  salvation 
?~ph.  4.  30.  ye  are  sealed  to  the  d.  of  redemption 
PA//.  1.6.  will  perform  it  until  thcd.  of  Jesus  Christ 

1  Thcss.  5  5.  ye  are  all  the  ohildicn  of  the  d. 
8.but  let  us  who  are  of  the  d.  be  sober,  putting  on 

//fA. 4. 7. again  helimiteth  a  certain  (/.saying,  lo-d. 
8.  would  he  not  afterward  spokcnof  another  (/..' 
10.  25.  the  more  as  ye  see  the  d.  approaching 

2  Pet.  1.  19.  till  the  d.  dawn,  and  the  riay-stnr  ari.se 
3.  12.  hasting  to  the  coming  of  the  d.  of  God 

fif  c.9.15.which  were  prepared  for  an  hour  and  a  d. 
Sec  Atonkme.st,  Battlk,  Calamity,  Dark- 
ness, Evil,  Holy,  Last. 

Ml  the  DAY. 
Psa/.25.5.  teach  me,  for  on  thee  do  I  wait  all  the  d. 

71.15.niy  mouth  shew  forth  thy  snlvation«//  the  d. 

89.  16.  in  thy  name  shall  they  rcjoiie  (///  the  d. 

102.  8.  mine  enemies  reproach  nie  all  the  d. 

119.  97.  thy  law  is  my  meditation  all  thr.d. 
Isa.  26.24.doth  the  plowman  plow  all  the  d.  to  sow 


DAY 

Isa.  65. 2. 1  have  spread  out  my  hands  all  Ike  a 

5.  these  are  a  smoke,  a  fire  that  burneth  all  the  d 
/<a7n.l.l3.hath  made  nie  desolate  and  faint  all  thed. 
3.  3.  he  turneth  his  hand  against  me  all  the  d. 
14. 1  was  a  derision  to  my  jieople  all  the  d. 
62.thou  hast  heard  their  device  aga.  nie  all  the  d. 
Mat.  20.  0.  why  stand  ye  here  all  the  d.  idle  i 

Jill  the  DAY  long. 
Z)(;ut.28.32.fail  with  longing  lor  them  allthcd.long 
33.  12.  the  Lord  shall  cover  him  all  the  d.  long 
Psal.  32.  3.  thiough  my  roaring  all  the  d.  long 
35.  28.  shall  speak  of  thy  praise  all  the  d.  long 
38.  6. 1  am  troubled,  I  go  mourning  alt  the  d.long 

12.  they  imagine  deceits  all  the  d.  long 
44.  8.  in  God  we  boast  all  thcd.  long,  und  praist 

22.  for  thy  sake  we  are  killed  all  the  d.  long 
71.24. shall  talk  of  thy  righteousness  all  the  d.long 
73.  14.  for  all  the  d.  long  have  1  been  plagued 
ProB.21.  26.  he  coveleth  greedily  all  the  d.  long 

23.  17.  be  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord  all  the  d.  long 
Hom.iO.il .all  the  d.ltivglslKlcbmi  forth  my  hands 

DAY  of  death. 
Gen.  27. 2.  I  am  old,  I  know  not  the  d.  of  my  death 
.hidg.  13.  7.  a  child  he  a  Nazarite  to  d.  of  his  death 
l*'am.l5.35.Sapn.camc  not  to  seeStiul  i\\\d.of  death 
2  Sam.  6. 23.  Michal  had  no  child  till  d.  of  death 
20. 3.  concubines  were  shut  up  to  d.  of  their  death 
2  Kings  15.  S.Uzziah  the  king  was  a  leper  to  the  d. 
of  his  death,  2  Chron.  26.  21 
Kcc/.7.1.the  d.of  death  better  than  (/.of  one's  birth 
8.  8.  neither  hath  he  powe'  in  the  d.  of  death 
Jer.  .52. 11.  put  him  in  pri.son  till  the  </.  of  his  death 
34.  every  day  a  portion,  till  the  d.  of  his  death 
By  D.\Y,  and  Day  by  day. 
Gen.  39.  10.  as  she  spake  to  Joseph  d.  by  d. 
Erod.  13.  21.  the  Lord  went  before  them  by  d. 
22.  he  took  not  awiiy  the  pillar  of  the  cloud  by  d. 

29.  38.  thou  shalt  offer  two  lambs  of  the  first  year 

d.  by  d.  continually,  JVu7;i.  2^.  3. 
40.  38.  for  the  cloud  of  the  Lord  was  upon  the 
tabernacle  by  d.  and  fire  by  night,  JVum.  9. 16. 
JV*«m.  10.  34.  the  cloud  of  the  Lord  was  on  them 
by  d.  14.  14.  Dejit.  1.  33.  A^cA.  9.  J9. 
.hidg.  6.  27.  hecau.se  he  could  not  do  it  by  d. 
2  Sam.  21. 10.  nor  birds  of  air  to  rest  on  them  by  d. 

1  Chron.  12.  22.  d.  by  d.  there  came  to  hcl]!  David 

2  C/won.  21. 15.  by  reason  of  the  sickness  d.  by  d. 

24.  11.  thus  they  did  d.  by  d.  and  gathered  money 

30.  21.  the  priests  praised  the  Lord  d.  by  d. 
Ezra  6.  9.  let  it  be  given  d.  by  d.  without  fail 
.VcA.  8.  18.  (/.  by  d.  he  road  in  the  law  of  God 
Psnl.  01.  5.  nor  the  arrow  that  (licth  by  d. 

121.  6.  the  sun  shall  not  smite  thee  by  d. 

136.  8.  the  sun  to  rule  by  d.  tor  his  mercy  endurcth 
Isa.  CO.  19.  the  sun  sluiII  be  no  more  thy  light  bi/d. 
Jer.  31.  35.  who  givetli  the  sun  for  a  light  by  d. 
Ezck.  12.  3.  and  nmove  by  d.  in  their  sight 
7.  I  did  so,  I  brought  forth  my  fitufC by  d. 
Juke  11.  3.  give  us  d.  by  d.  our  daily  bread 
2  CoJi.  4.  II).  the  inward  man  is  renewed  d.  by  d. 
Rev.  21.  25.  the  gates  of  it  shall  not  be  shut  by  d. 

Every  DAY. 
Gen.  fi.  t5.  the  thoughts  of  Ins  heart  evil  erery  d. 
Exod.\6.i.^(>  out  and  gather  a  certain  rate  every  d. 

29.  3G.  thou  shalt  offer  a  bullock  every  d. 

1  Sam.  23.  14.  and  Saul  snught  D:>vid  every  ■d. 

2  Sam.  13.  37.  David  mourned  fur  his  son  every  d. 
2  Kings^f).  30.  given  him  a  daily  rate  for  every  d. 

1  Chron.  10.  37.  minister,as  every  d.  work  required 

2  Chron.  8.  13.  even  after  a  certain  rate  erery  d. 
14.  as  the  duty  of  every  d.  required,  Ezra  .3.  4. 

J^rh.  11.  23.  a  portion  for  singers,  due  for  every  d. 
12.  47.  and  the  porters  every  d.  his  portion 
Ksth.'i.  II.  Mordecai  walked  rrfry(/.  before  court 
Psal.  7.  11.  God  is  angry  with  the  wicked  every  d. 
56. 5.  errry  d.  they  wrest  my  words,their  thoughts 
145.2.£«rry  (/.will  I  bless  thee  and  prai.se  thy  name 
Isa.  51.  13.  and  hast  feared  continually  every  d. 
.52.  5.  and  my  name  every  d.  is  blasphemed 
Ezek.  43.  25.  seven  days  prepare  every  d.  a  goat 
Juke  10. 19.  lich  man  fared  sumptuously  erery  d. 
Horn.  14.  5.  another  estcemeih  every  d.  alike 

Fcast-D.W. 
Psal.  Bl.  3  blow  trumiet  on  our  solemn  feastd. 
Jlf((^2fi.  5.  they  said,  not  on  Ihc  fcast-d.Mark14.% 
John  2.  23.  in  feast-d.  mnnv  believed  in  his  nann 

First  D.AY. 
Grn.l.  a.  the  evening  and  morning  wpve  first  d. 
8.5.on  the_/ir.<tt  (/.of  the  month  the  mountains  were 
seen,  13.  Exod.  40.  2,  17.  /,(T.  2,1  24. 
JEroi/.  12. 15.  the /rs(  (/.  ye  shall  put  n  way  leaven, 
whoso  eateth  from  first  d.  to  seventh 
16.  in  the yirst  d..  shall  be  a  holy  convocation. 
Lev.  23.  7,  35.  JVi/m.  28.  18.  |  29.  1. 
Lev.  23.  39.  on  the  first  d.  shall  be  a  eahlialh 

40  .shall  take  on  first  d.  botichs  of  goodly  Ireca 

JVi/m.  1. 1.  the  Lord  spake  toMo.'es  on  <hcfi-'std. 

]8.they  assembled  the  congregation  on  tlii-/7-,et  d. 

33.38.on  \\\i; first  d.  Aaron  went  up  to  Mount  Hor 

Deut.  IC.  4.  the  flesh  sacrificed  jfr»t  d  not  rcataio 


DAY 

S  CAron-  29. 17.  they  began  oo  first  d.  to  aanctify 
£:ra3.  6.  from  the  first  d.  began  they  to  offer 
7.9.un  the/r5t  d.  began  he  to  go  up  t'ruiii  Babylon 
and  on  ibe^rjt  d.  came  he  to  Jerusalem 
JO.  16.  aat  down  on  first  d.  of  tlie  tenth  month 
17.  by  first  d.  of  tirst  month  they  made  an  end 
tATeA.S.i.Ezra  brought  llie  law  on  first  d.  of  month 
Idfromyirst  unto  last  d.he  read  m  the  law  of  God 
£;eA.2tj.l.ia  the^r«£(i.tlie  word  of  theLord  came, 
29.  17.  1  31.1.  I  3'i.  1.  JJag.  J.  1 
45.18.  in  ytritci.ofthe  month  shalt  offer  a  bullock 
iian.IO.l^.from  the  first  d.  thou  didst  set  thy  heart 
JUat.^6.l~ first  d.ofunleaTened  bread, j»/<irA- 14. 1-2 
.^cts  '20.  Is.  ye  know  from  first  d.  I  camu  into  Asia 
y/iil.  1.  5.  for  your  fellowship  i'rom  first  d.  till  now 
See  VVkkk. 
Second  DAY. 
Oen.  1. 8.  the  evening  and  morning  were  second  d 
Ktod.  2.  13.  and  when  he  went  out  the  second  d. 
A'um.  7. 18.  on  the  second  d.  Nethaneel  did  offer 
S9.17.nii  the  second  (/.offer  twelve  young  bullocks 
.'osh.  6. 14.  the  second  d.  Ihey  compassed  city  once 
10.  32.  took  Lachish  on  the  second  d.  and  smote  it 
Jud^.aO.24. Israel  came  againstBenjaminscconrfrf. 
1  .Vu'H. 21).  34.  Jonathan  did  eat  no  meat  second  d. 
2CAron.3.2.he  began  to  build  second  (/.of  the  month 
AVA.8. 13.  on  the  second  d.  were  gathered  together 
£stk.  7.  2.  the  king  said  to  Esther  the  second  d 
Jer.  41.  4.  the  second  d'.  after  he  had  slain  Gedaliah 
Eiek.  43. 22.  on  the  second  d.  thou  shalt  offer  a  kid 

Third  DAY. 

Oen.  1.  13.  evening  and  morning  were  the  third  d. 

22.  4.  on  tAird  d.  Abraham  saw  the  place  afar  oft' 

31.22.it  was  told  Laban  on  third  (/.Jacob  was  tied 

34.  25.  on  third  d.  when  they  were  sore,  two  sons 

Ezod.  4.  t  10.  nor  since  the  third  d.  Josh.  3.  \  4. 

19. 11.  be  ready  against  the  tAir(/</. for  the  third  d. 

Lord  will  come  down  on  mount  Sinai,  15. 

Lev.  7.  17.  the  remainder  of  the  flush  of  sacrtfice 

on  the  third  d.  shall  be  burnt  with  fire,  19.  6. 

.V«m.l9. 12.  shall  purify  himself  on  third  d.  31. 19. 

19.  the  clean  person  sprinkle  unclean  on  third  d. 

09.  20.  on  the  third  d.  eleven  bullocks,  two  rams 

Deut.  19.  t  4.  hated  not  from  yesterday  tAiVd  d.  6. 

i/osA.9.)7.  Israel  came  to  their  cities  on  tUethird  d. 

»7^u(/^.20.30.Isr.  went  against  Benjamin  the  third  d. 

1  .Sam.  4. 1 7.  not  such  a  thmg  yesterday  or  third  d. 

19.  t  7.  was  in  his  presence  as  yesterday  third  d. 

2  "vdm.S.f  17. ye  sought  Dav.  yesterday  and  third  d. 
1  /fi7in'5l2.12.came  to  Rehob.  third  (/'.2  CAr.lO.  12. 

0  Kings  13.  t  S.Isr.  dwnlt  as  yesterday  and  third  d. 

20.  a.  on  the  third  d.  go  up  to  the  house  of  Lord,8. 

1  (^iron.  11. 1 2.  on  tAi'rt/rf.wast  he  that  leddest  out 
I'.zra  6.  15.  the  house  was  finished  on  the  third  d. 
Ksth.5.l.on  the  £Ai>(/(/.Estlier  put  on  royal  apparel 
flos.  6.  2.  in  the  third  d.  he  will  raise  us  up  and  live 
JUjt.  IG.  21.  suffer,  and  be  killed,  and  be  raised 

agaii  the  third  d.  17.  23.  Luke  9.  22. 
20.  lO.and  the  third  d.  he  shall  rise  again,  JV/arA  9. 
31.  I  10.  34.  Luke  18.33.  |  24.  7,  46. 
27. 64.  the  sepulchre  be  made  sure  till  the  third  d. 
J.uke  13.  32.  and  the  third  d.  I  shall  be  perfected 
24.21.  to-day  is  the  third  d.  since  all  these  things 
.^An2.1.on  thethird  (/.there  was  a  marriage inCana 
.icf.»  27.19.  the  thirdd.  we  cast  out  tackling  of  ship 

1  Cor.  15.  4.  ami  that  he  rose  again  the  third  d. 

Fourth  DAY. 
Oen.1.'l9.  evening  ant",  morning  were  the  fourth  d. 
^um.29.23.on  the  fourth  d.  ten  bullock;:, two  rams 

2  Chron.  20.  26.  on  the  fourth  d.  they  assembled 
JC:raH.33.on  /our<A(/.wa8Bilver  and  gold  weighed 
ZccA.7.1.word  came  to  Zechariah  on  the  fourth  d. 

y,fth  DAY. 
^;i»n.l.23.the  evening  and  morning  were  the  fifth  d. 
.Vum.29. 2f>.  on  the  fifth  d.  nine  bullocks,  two  rams 
F.zek.  1.  1.  in  the  fifth  d.  of  the  month,  2.  |  8.  1. 

33.  21.  in  the  fifth  d.  one  came  unto  mo,  saying 

SiztA  DAY. 
Oen.  1.  31.  evening  and  morning  were  the  sixth  d. 
£IO(/.lfi..^.on  the  ii'rtAi/. gather  twice  as  much,  22. 
29.givethyou  on  lh"!5ix(A(/.tliebrcad  of  two  (jays 
yum.  7.  42.  on  the  siith  d.  Eliasaph  offered 
29.  29.  on  the  sirth  d.  eight  bullocks,  two  rams 

Seventh   DAY. 
Oeyt.  2.  2.  on  the  seventh  d.  Ood  ended  his  work 
3.  and  Ood  blc»!"d  the  seventh  d.  Kxoi/.  20.  II. 
JCiO(/.l2.15.oatfth  leaven  from  first  (/.to  seventh  d. 
16.  on  the  seventh  d.  shall  be  a  holy  convoca- 
tion, Lev.  23.  fl.  .Yum.  28.  25. 
13.  B.  and  in  the  seventh  d.  shall  be  a  fenst 
16.  36.  iiix  days  gather  it,  bui  the  seventh  d.  is 
the  sabbath,  20.  10.  Lev.  23.  3.  Deut.  5.  14. 
27.  tlierc  went  out  some  on  the  seventh  d. 
29.lcl  no  man  go  out  of  hisplarcon  thn»'-rrntA(i. 
24.  IB.  on  the  seventh  d.  he  called  unto  Moica 
31.  17  on  the  seventh  d.  God  rested,  Hrh.  4.  4. 

34.  21.  on  jeBCTt/A  i/.thou  shalt  rest,  in  earins-timc 
35. 2.  on  seventh  d.  Ihere  shill  be  a  holv  d.  to  you 

Lev  13. 5.  the  priest  ahull  look  on  him  ihc  seventh 
if  fi.  27,  32,  34,  51.  |  14.  30. 


DAY 

Lcv.li.O.  the  seventh  d.  be  ahull  share,  A'um.  6. 9. 
JVum.  19.  12.  on  the  seventh  d.  he  shall  be  clean 

19.  on  the  seventh  d.  purify  himself,  31.  19. 
31.24. ye  shall  wash  your  clothes  on  the  seventh  d. 
Deut.  16.8.  on  the  seventh  d.  a  solemn  assembly 
^«sA.6.4.on  £cc»itA(/.couipasscity  seven  limes, 15. 
./u(/^''.14.15.on«ct)entA  t^.they  said  toSamson's  wife 

17.  on  the  seventh  d.  he  told  her,  because  she 
2  .Sam.  12.  18.  on  the  seventh  d.  the  child  died 

1  Kings  20.29.  on  the  seventh  d.  battle  was  joined 
^Kings  25.8.on  the  seventh  (/.cameNibuzar-adan 
/;4'«A.1.10.on«cBcn(A(/.wheiiAba8uerus  was  merry 
Lzek.  30.  20.  in  the  seventh  d.  the  word  came 
45.  20.  and  so  do  tlie  seventh  d.  of  the  month 
Jleb.  4.  4.  he  spake  of  the  seventh  d.  on  this  wise, 
God  did  test  the  seventh  d.  from  all  his  works 
Eighth  DAY. 
Ezod.  K.  30.  on  the  eighth  d.  thou  shall  give  it  me 
Lev.  9.  1.  on  the  eighth  d.  Moses  called  Aaron 
12.3.  on  eighth  d.  flush  of  fore-skiii  be  circumcised 
14.  ]0.  on  the  eighth  d.  he  shall  take  two  he-lambs 
23.bring  two  lurtltson  eighth  (/.  15.14. JVum.fi.lO. 

22.  27.  from  the  eighth  d.  it  shall  be  accepted 

23.  36.  on  the  eighth  d.  shall  bo  a  holy  convoca. 
39.  and  on  the  eighth  d.  shall  be  a  sabbath 

J^um.  29.  35.  on  the  eighth  d.  ye  shall  have  a 

solemn  assembly,  2  Chron.  7.  9.  JVeA.  8.  18 

£z<!A:.43.27.on<n,n'AtA  (/.priests  makcburnt-ofterings 

Luke  1.  59.  that  on  the  eighth  d.  they  came  to 

circumcise  the  child,  Jicts  7.8.  PAi7.  3.  5. 

JV7n«A  DAY. 

Lev.  23.  32.  shall  afilict  your  souls  in  the  ninth  d 

2A'jn«f»25.3.on  ninth  d.  famine  was  sore, Jer. 52.6. 

Jer.  39.  2.  the  nintA  d.  the  city  was  broken  up 

Tenth  DAY. 

Exod.  12.  3.  the  tenth  d.  of  this  month  take  a  lamb 

Lev.  10.  29.  on  the  tenth  d.  of  the  month  ye  shall 

afflict  your  souls,  23.  27.  J\'um.  29.  7. 

25.9.  on  tenth  (/.the  trumpet  of  jubilee  shall  sound 

.fosh.  4. 19.  people  came  out  of  Jordan  on  tenth  d. 

2  Arin"s25.1.on  the  tenth  (/.Nebuchadnezzar  came 

against  Jerusalem,  Jer.  52.4.  Ezck.  24.  1. 

Jer.  52. 12.  on  the  tenth  d.  Neb.  burnt  house  of  Ld. 

F.zek.  20.  1.  on  tenth  d.  the  elders  came  to  enquire* 

40. 1.  on  tenth  d.  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  upon 

Eleventh  DAY. 

JVuOT.7.72.on  the  eleventh  (/.Pagicl  of  Asher  offered 

Twelfth  DAY. 
•V(rm.  7.78.on  twelfth  d.  Ahira  of  Naphtali  offered 
£2ra8.31. departed  on  twelfth  (/.to  go  to  Jerusalem 
£ieA.29.1.  on  twelfth  d.  the  word  came  to  Ezekiel 

Thirteenth  DAY. 

E.5fA.3.]2. king's  scribes  were  calledon  thirteenthd. 

13.to  destroy  all  Jews  on  thirteenth  d.  8. 12.  )  9. 1. 

9.17.on  IhetAiV/ccn^At/.of  monlliAdar  they  rested 

18. the  Jews  at  Shushan  assemb.on  thirteenth  d. 

Fourteenth  DAY. 

£io(i.l2.6.  yc  shall  keep  the  lamb  till/our/(;c7itA(/. 

18.on/our/een(A  d.ye  shall  eat  unleavened  bread 

Z,eB.23.5.in  ihe/ouWerntA  (/.is  the  Lord's  passover 

Kum.  9.  3,  .5.  I  28.  16.  Jush.  5. 10.  2  Chr. 

•M.  15.  I  3.5.  1.  Ezra  6.  19.  Ezek.  45.  21. 

^um.9.11.<)n/our/fcn«A(/.  atevcn  they  shall  eat  it 

£s/A.9.15.Jews  gathered  together  un  fourteenth  d. 

n.andon  lhe/our/cc7i/A(/.of  thesamerestedthey 

.'?c/s27.33.thi»  \i  fourteenth  d.ye  continued  fasting 

Fifteenth  DAY. 

Eio(/.16.1.camc  to  wildern.  of  Sinai  or\  fifteenth  d. 

Lev.  23. 6.  and  on  fifteenth  d.  is  feast,  A"um.28.  17. 

34.  the  fifteenth  d.  of  the  seventh  month,  39. 

^'um.  29.  12.  Ezek.  45.  25. 

JVum.33.  3.  departed  from  Ramcses  on  fifteenth  d. 

1  A'in'r.«12.32.he  ordained  a  feast  on  fifteenth  (/.33. 
f;«fA.9.18.the  Jews  on  fifteenth  d.  rested  yearly,21. 
Kzek.3i.n. on  fifteenth  (/.word  of  L.came  toEzck. 

Sixteenth  DAY. 

2  Chr.  29. 17.  and  in  sixtrenth  d.  they  made  an  end 

Seventeenth  D.AY. 
Oen.  7. 11.on»(-»c7i/rfn/A  (/.  were  fount,  broken  u|) 
8.  4.  ark  rested  on  seventeenth  d.  on  mount  Ararat 
Twentieth  DAY. 
JVum. 10. 11.  on  twentiethd.tUe  cloud  wa.<)  taken  up 
Ezra  10. 9. on  twentieth  d.  people  sal  in  the  streets 

Tacntijfirst  DAY. 
£to(J.12.18.  cot  unleaven.  bread  till  twenty-first  d. 
Hag.'i.l.in  twenty  first  (/.came  the  word  tolluggai 

Twenty-third  DAY. 
2  Chron.l.  10.  t.-t.  d.  Solomon  sent  people  to  tools 
EsthJS.'J.on  t.-t.  (/.written  nsMordecui  commanded 

Twrnlyfuurth   DAY. 
JWA.  9. 1.  on  t.-fnurth  d.  Isr.  nwtcmblod  with  fast. 
Dan.  10. 4.  on  t.-fourth  d.  I  w.is  by  rivrr  Middekel 
Hag.\.Vt.  in  t.-fourth  d.  Iwl. stirred  up  Zerubbnbel 
2.  10.  in  the  t.-fourth  d.  word  came  to  Haggai,  20. 

18.  consider  from  the  t.-fourth  d.  ofninth  month 
Ze<;A.1.7.on  thet.-/(7wr/A  (/.came  word  toZocharinli 

Ticenly-fifth  D.\Y. 
AVA.fi.l.S.  the  wall  was  tinii.li.  in  the  twenty  fifth  d. 
Jer.  52.  31.  on  twenty  fifth  d.  Evil-mcrodarh  lifl.cl 
uv  the  head  of  Jehoiacbin 


DAY 

Tieenty-seventh  DAY. 
Gen.  8.  H.on  the  t.-seventhd.  was  Ihcearth  drie4 
2  Kings  25 J27.UU  t.-s.  d.  Evil-merodach  hf'led  iiead 

Good  DAY. 
1  Sam.  25.  8.  we  come  in  a  good  d.  give  to  David 
Esth.S.  17.  Jews  had  gladness  and  a  good  d.^.  IV. 

9.  22.  was  turned  from  muniing  into  a  good  tt. 

Great  DAY. 
Jer.  30.  7.  alas,  that  d.  is  great,  none  is  like  it 
Uos.  1.  11.  tor  great  eliud  be  the  d.  of  JezreeJ 
Jocl2.  11.  thed.  of  the  Lord  is  ^rcut  and  tcriibia 
31.  sun  to  darkness,  moon  to  blood,  before  thft 
g.  and  terrible  d.  of  llie  Lord  come,  .Jets  2.  20. 
Zeph.  1.  14.  the  great  d.  of  the  Lord  is  near 
MjI.4.5.  before  the  coming  ol^rcat  d.  oflho  Lord 
John  7.  37.  that  ^reat  d.  of  tin;  least,  Je«ui  cried 
Jude  6.  reserved  unto  the  judgment  of  the  great  d. 
Hev.  6.  17.  fur  tlie  great  d.  of  ins  wiath  is  corns 

16.  14.  to  gather  to  the  battle  of  the  great  d. 

Jn  the  DAY. 

Oen.  2.  4.  in  the  d.  that  the  Lord  made  the  earth 

17.  i»  the  d.  thou  eatest  thereof  thou  shall  dio 

3.  5.  in  the  d.  ye  eat,  your  eyes  shall  be  opened 

31.  40.  ihusl  was, i?i  the  (/.drought  consumed  nie 

35.  3.  who  answered  me  in  the  d.  of  my  distresa 
Exod.  32.  34.  nevertheless  in  the  d.  when  1  visit 
Lev.  6.  5.  in  the  d.  of  his  trespass-offering 

20.  offer  in  (Ac  d.  when  he  is  anointed,  7.  36. 

7.  35.  in  the  d.  he  pri  sented  tliem  to  minister 
14. 2.  law  of  leper  in  tAe  d.  of  his  cleans.A'u»i.6.9. 

t  57.  in  the  d.  of  the  clean  and  unclean  ■ 
JVum.  28.  26.  also  in  the  d.  of  the  first-fruita 
30.  5.  if  her  fallier  disallow  in  the  d.  he  heareih 
7.  husband  held  his  peace  in  the  d.  he  heard  it 
Josh.  10.  12.  in  the  d.  L.  delivered  up  the  Amoritea 

14. 11.  as  strong  as  I  was  in  the  d.  Aloses  seut  me 

1  Sam.  20.  f  19.  where  thou  didst  hide  in  the  d. 
21.  G.  put  hot  bread  >n  (Ac  d.  it  was  taken  away 

2  Sam.'H.  1.  in  the  d.  the  Lord  had  delivered  him 
1  Kings  2.  8.  who  cursed  me  in  the  d.  that  I  fled 
A'eA.  13.  15.  in  the  d.  wherein  they  sold  victuals 
Esth.  9.  1.  in  the  d.  the  enemies  of  the  Jew  s  hoped 
Job  20.  28.  his  gooiis  flow  away  in  tAe  d.  of  wrath 
P.ial.  95.  8.  as  in  the  d.  of  temptation,  Ucb.  3.  8. 

102.  2.  hide  not  tliy  face  in  the  d.  of  trouble,  in 
the  d.  when  I  call,  answer  me  speedily 
110. 3.  thy  people  be  willing  in  the  d.  of  thy  power 
S.shall  8t;ike  through  kings  in  (Ae  d.  of  his  wrath 
137.  7.  remember  Edoni  i«  the  d.  of  Jerusalem 
138. 3. 171  the  d.  when  I  cried,  thou  answeiedsl  me 
Prov.  G.  .34.he  will  not  spare  in  the  (/.  of  vengeance 

11.  4.  riches  profit  not  in  the  d.  of  wrath 
24.  10.  if  thou  faint  jn  the  d.  of  adversity 

Eccl.  7.  14.  in  the  d.  of  prosperity  be  joyful,  but 
in  the  d.  of  adversity  consider 

8.  8.  neither  hath  he  power  in  the  d.  of  death 

12.  3.  in  the  d.  when  the  keepers  shall  tremble 
Cant.  3.  H.  crowned  him  in  the  d.  of  his  espousals, 

and  in  the  d.  of  the  gladness  of  his  heart 
8.  8.  in  the  d.  when  she  shall  be  spoken  for 
Isa.  9.  4.  broken  the  yoke  as  in  (Ae  d.  of  Midiao 

10.  3.  what  will  ye  do  in  (Ac  d.  of  visitation  ? 

11. 16.  in  Ihc  d.  he  came  out  of  Egypt,  Hos.'i.  15, 

13.  13.  shall  remove  in  the  d.  of  his  fierce  anger 

17.  11.  in  the  d.  shall  ihoii  make  thy  plant  growr 

in  the  d.  of  grief  and  desperate  sorrow 

30.25. in  (Ae  d.  of  great  slaughter,  w  hen  the  hewonj 

26.  in  (Ae  (/.  that  the  Lord  bindeth  up  the  breach 

.58.  3.  in  (Ae  d.  of  your  fast  you  find  plea-sure 

Jer.  16. 19.  O  Lord,  my  refuge  in  (Ae  d.  of  affliclioD 

17.  17.  thou  art  my  hope  in  (Ac  d.  of  evil 

18.17.  shew  hack  and  not  face  in  (Ae (/.of calamity 

36.  30.  his  dnad  body  shall  be  cast  out  in  the  d. 
Lam.  1. 12.  alllicted  me  in  (Ae  d.  of  his  fierce  anger 

2.1. remembered  not  nis  footstool  in  (Ae  (/.of  oncer 

3.  57.  thou  dretvcst  near  in  (Ae  d.  that  I  called 
KzeJt.7.I9.  g(dd  not  deliver  tlieiii  in  (Ae  d.  of  wrath 

16.  4.  thy  nativity  in  (Ae  d.  thou  wast  born,  5. 
X>.  Sodom  not  mentioned  in  (Ae  d.  of  thy  prida 
27.  27.  they  shall  fa!!  in  (Ae  d.  of  thy  ruin 
.TO.O.grcat  pain  came  on  Ihrm  as  in  (Ae  i/.of  Egypt 

32.  10.  every  man  for  his  life  in  (Ae  d.  of  thy  fall 

33. 12.  in  (Ae  </.  he  tiirnelh  fmni  Ira  wickeilnrss, 

not  able  to  lire  in  the  d.  that  he  sinneth 
Jtos.  2.  3.  lest  I  set  her  as  in  the  d.  she  waa  born 

4.  5.  Ihereforeslialt  Ihou  fall  in  the  d.  and  prophet 
JImoa  I.  14.  with  a  tempest  in  (Ae  i/.of  a  whirlwind 

8.  9.  1  will  darken  the  carlh  in  the  clear  d. 
Obad.  11.  in  the  d.  thou  stoodrg!  on  tho  other  aide 
12.  nor  rejoiced  in  the  d.  of  their  df-slraction 
14.  tho.<e  of  his  that  did  remain  in  the  d.  of  dist. 
Jital.  4.  3.  in  the  d.  that  I  shall  do  this,  saith  Lord 
l.uke  17.  30.  in  (Ae  d.  when  the  Son  is  revealed 
John  11.9.  ifnny  walk  in  the  d.  he  stumbleih  not 
/(om.2.16.  in  (/.when  G.  shall  judg.'  secrets  of  mea 
13.  1.3.  let  us  walk  honestly  as  in  (Ae  (/. 

1  Cor.  1.  8.  may  be  blameless  in  the  d.  of  onr  Lord 

2  rV)r.  6.2.  in  thed.  of  salvation  I  succoured  thee 
I'hil.  2.  16.  that  I  may  rejoice  in  the  d.  of  Christ 
Ueb.  8.  9.  in  Ike  d.  when  I  took  them  by  thi  faaad 


DAY 

1  Pet.  2. 19.  may  glorify  God  in  the  d.  jf  visitation 

DAY  of  Judgment. 

Jifat  10.  15.  it  shall  bo  more  tolerable  for  Sodora 

in  the  d.  of  judgmtnt,  11.  i!4.  Mark  ti.  11. 

11.22.more  toleriibie  tor  Tyre  ai)d  Sidoii  ind.ofj. 

l-Z.  3t).  shall  give  account  thereof  in  d.  vfjudg. 

2  I'd.  '2.  9.  and  to  reserve  the  unjust  to  d.  vfj. 
'.i.  7.  are  resbrved  unto  fire  against  the  d.  oj'j. 

1  John  4. 17.  we  may  have  boldness  in  the  d.  ufj. 

D.\Y  of  the  Lord. 
Isa.  2'  12.  d.  of  lAe  L.  shall  be  on  every  one  proud 
13.6.  d.  of  the  L.  is  at  hand,  Joel  1. 15.  Zepli.  1. 7. 
y.  tlie  d.  of  the  L.  Cometh,  Joel  2. 1.  Zech- 14. 1. 
34   8.  tor  it  is  the  d.  of  the  Lord's  vengeance 
Jer.  4G.  10.  this  is  the  d.  of  the  L.  God  ol'  hosts 
Lain.  2.22.  inlhe  d.  of  the  L.'s  anger  none  escaped 
Ezek.  13.  5.  to  stand  in  battle  in  the  d.  of  the  Lord 

30.  3.  the  d.  of  the  L.  is  near,  Joel  3.  14.  Obad.  15. 
^inos  5.  18.  woe  to  you  that  desire  the  d.  of  the  L. 
Zeph.  1.  8.  in  d.  of  the  L.'s  sacrifice  I  will  punish 

18.  shall  deliver  them  in  the  d.  of  the  L.'s  wrath 

2.  2.  bclore  the  d.  of  the  L.'s  anger  come  on  you 

3.  ye  shall  be  hid  in  the  d.  of  the  Lord's  anger 

Mai.  4.  5.  before  the  coming  of  the  d.  of  the  Lord 

1  Cor.  5.  5.  spirit  may  be  saved  in  d.  of  the  Lord 

2  Cor.  1.  14.  as  ye  are  ours  in  the  d.  of  the  J^ord 
I  Thcss. 5.  2.  d.  of  L.  cometh  as  a  thiet,  2  Pet.  3.10. 
Hev.  1.  10. 1  was  in  the  Spirit  on  the  Lord's  d. 

See  Great  Day. 
One  DAY. 
Oen.  27.  45.  why  deprived  of  you  both  in  one  d.  ? 
Lev.  22.  28.  not  kill  it  and  her  yoiing  in  one  d. 
JVujn.  11. 19.  ye  shall  not  eat  one  d.~or  two  days 
1  .Sam.  2. 34.  in  one  d.  they  shall  die  both  of  them 
^.  1.  I  shall  one  d.  perish  by  the  hand  of  Saul 

1  Kings 4.  22.  Solomon's  provision  for  one  d.  was 
20.  29.  [srael  slew  of  Syrians  100,000  in  one  d. 

2  Chr.  28.  6.  Pekahslew  m  Juriah  120,000  in  one  d. 
Ezra  10.  13.  neither  is  this  the  work  of  one  d. 
Esth.  3.  13.  kill  children  and  women  in  one  d.  b.l2. 
/sa.  9.  14.  Lord  cut  off  branch  and  rush  in  one  d. 

10. 17.  shall  devour  his  thorns  and  briars  in  one  d. 

47.  9.  two  things  shall  come  to  thee  in  one  d. 

60.8.  shall  earth  be  made  to  bring  forth  in  oned.  ? 
Zeeh.  3. 9.  remove  the  iniquity  of  land  in  one  d. 

14.  7.  it  shall  be  one  d.  which  shall  be  known 
Jirts  21.  7.  we  abode  with  the  brethren  one  d. 

2.^.  l.f.  and  after  one  d.  the  south  wind  blew 
Horn.  14.  5.  one  esteemeth  one  d.  above  another 

1  Cor.  10.8.  fell  in  one  d.  twenty-three  thousand 

2  Pet.3.8.  one  d.  with  the  Lord  as  a  thousand  years 
Rev.  18.  8.  theretbre  her  plagues  come  in  one  d. 

DAY  joined  with  night. 
O'n.  1.  14.  lights  to  divide  d.  from  the  night 

18.  to  rule  over  the  d.  and  over  the  night 
P.  22.  ciilil  and  heat,  d.  and  night, shaW  notecase 

31.  39.  I  bare  loss,  whether  stolen  by  d.  or  iiight 
Exod.  10.  13.  Lord  brought  an  east-wind  d.  and  n. 

13.  21.  to  give  them  light  to  go  by  d.  and  night 
Lrv.  8.  35.  abide  at  door  of  tabernacle  d.  and  night 
^'um.  11.  32.  people  stood  up  thatd.  and  all  night 
Deut.  2S.  66.  and  thou  shalt  fear  d.  and  night 
Josh.  1.8.  this  book  of  the  law  not  depart,  but  thou 
shalt  meditate  therein  d.  and  night,  Psal.  1.  2. 
X  Sam.  19.  24.  lay  naked  all  that  d.  and  that  night 
1  Kings  8.  29.  that  thine  eyes  might  be  opened 
toward  this  house  night  and  d.  2  Chr.  6.  20. 
A'eft.  1.  6.  which  I  pray  b  fore  thee  d.  and  flight 

4.  9.  and  set  a  watch  against  them  d.  and  night 
Esth.  4.  IR.  neither  eat  nor  drink  night  or  d. 
Jiih  17.  12.  they  change  the  night  into  d. 

2fi.  10.  till  the  d.  and  night  come  to  an  end 
Psrl.  32.4.  d.  and  night  thy  hand  was  heavy  on  me 
42.  3.  my  tears  have  been  my  meat  d.  and  night 
5."i.  10.  d.  and  night  they  go  about  it  on  the  walls 
74.  16.  the  d.  is  thine,  the  night  al-^o  is  thine 
R-*.!.' )  Tjord,  I  have  cried  d.  ;ind  night  before  thee 
139.  !2.  but  the  night  shineth  as  ilie  d. 
F.cd.  f .  16.  that  neither  d.  nor  night  seeth  sleep 
Ion.  4.  .5.  smoke  by  d.  and  Haining  fire  by  night 
27.  3.  1  the  Lord  will  keep  it  d.  and  night 
34.  10.  it  shall  not  be  quenched  d.  nor  night 
3"<.  12.  with  pininu'  sickness  from  d.  to  night 

13.  from  d  to  night  wilt  thou  make  an  end  of  mo 
60. 11.  gates,  they  shall  not  be  shut  d.  nor  night 
62.  fi.  watchmen  never  hold  their  pi^ace  rf.  nor  n. 
Jer.  9.  1.  that  I  might  weep  d.  and  night  for  slain 
14.17.eyes  rundown  tears  d.nninightJ.am.'i.XS. 
16.  13.  and  there  serve  other  gods  d.  and  night 
33.  20.  that  there  should  not  bo  d.  nor  night 
Z'rhM.T.  day  known  to  the  Lord,  nor  d.  nor  night 
Jitark  4.  27.  and  should  sleep  and  rise  night  and  d. 

5.  5.  d.  and  night  he  was  in  the  mountains 
]1..3().this(i.  even  this  night,  before  the  cock  crow 

Ltike'i.  37.  with  fasting  and  prayers  night  and  d. 

13.  7.  hi^  elect,  which  cry  d.  and  night  to  him 
Jlrts  9.  24.  watched  gates  night  and  d.  to  kill  him 

20.  31.  cease  not  to  warn  every  one  night  and  d. 

26. 7. onr  tribes  instanily  serving  God  d.  and  night 

tCoT.  1 1.25.  thrice  I  luffered  shipwreck,  a  d.  and  n. 

113 


DAY 

1  TAciS.S.O.  labouring  d.  and  n.  because  would  no*. 
3.10.ni>A(  and  d.  praying  exceedingly,  1  Tim.  5.5. 

•iThess.'i.S.  but  wrought  with  labour  Hijg At  and  d. 

2  1'im.l,  3.  without  ceasing  1  have  remembrance 

of  thee  in  my  prayetiinight  and  d. 
Rev.  4.  8.  and  they  rest  not  d.  and  night,  saying 
7.  15.  and  serve  him  d.  and  night  in  liis  temple 
8. 12.  d.  shone  not  for  a  third  jiait,  and  the  night 
12.10.  who  accused  them  before  God  d.  and  night 
14.11. they  have  no  rest  d.  nor  night,  wiw  worslup 
20.10.  be  tormented  d.  and  night  lor  ever  and  ever 

Sabbath-D  AY. 

Exod.  16. 2G.  the  seventh  d.  is  the  sabbath,  20.  10. 

20.  8.  remember  the  sabbat/i-d.  to  keep  it  holy, 

JJtut.  5.  12. 

11.  Lord  blessed  the  sabbath-d.  and  hallowed  u 

31.  15.  whosoever  doeth  any  work  on  sabbalh-d. 
35.  3.  ye  shall  kindle  no  fire  on  the  sabbath-d. 

J\'um.  15.  32.  a  man  that  gathered  sticks  on  sah.-d. 

28.9.ort'er  on  the  sa4Aat/t-d. two  lambs  of  rtrstyear 

/Jeui.5.15.God  commanded  to  keep  the  subbath-d. 

JVcA.lO.  31.  if  the  people  sell  victuals  on  sabbath-d 

13.15.burdens  brought  to  Jerusalem  on  sabbath-d 

17.  evil  that  ye  do,  and  profane  the  sabbuth-d. 

19.  should  no  burden  be  brought  in  on  sabbath-d. 

22.  Levites  keep  the  gates  to  sanctify  sabbalh-d. 

Jer.  17.  21.  and  bear  no  burden  on  the  sabbath-d. 

22.  nor  carry  forth  a  burden  on  the  sabbath-d. 

Ezek.  46.  4.  the  prince  shall  offer  in  the  sabbath-d. 

jl/o^.12.  I.Jesus  went  on  thesaiia^A-d.through  the 

coin,  and  disciples  were  a  hungered,  jl/arA- 2.23. 

8.  for  the  Son  of  Man  is  Lord  of  the  sabbalh-d. 
11.  if  it  fall  into  a  pit  on  sabbath-d.  Luke  14.  5 

24. 20.  pray  that  your  flight  be  not  on  sabbath-d. 
Mark  2.24.  why  do  they  on  s.-d.  that  is  not  lawful  1 

3.2.whether  hewould  heal  on  sabbath-d. LukeG.7. 

6.2.  he  went  into  the  synagogue  on  the  sabbath-d. 

Luke  4.  16.  Jlcts  13.  14. 

Z,uAel3.16.  be  loosed  from  this  bond  on  sabbath-d. 

14.  1.  as  he  went  to  eat  bread  on  the  sabbath-d. 
23.  56.  prepared  spices,  and  rested  the  sabbalh-d. 

John  5.  10.  it  is  sabbath-d.  it  is  not  lawful  to  carry 

16.  because  he  had  done  these  things  on  sab.-d. 
7.  22.  and  ye  on  the  sabbath-d.  circumcise  a  man 
9.14.  it  was  the  sabbath-d.  when  Jesus  made  clay 

19.  31.  bodies  not  remain  on  the  cross  on  sab.-d 
.lets  13.27.  which  are  read  every  sabbath-d.  15.21. 

44.  next  sabbath-d.  camcalmost  the  whole  city 
Same  DAY. 
Gen.7.\l.the  same  d.were  the  fountains  broken  up 
13.  the  self-same  d.  entered  Noah  into  the  ark 

15.  18.  in  that  same  d.  the  Lord  made  a  covenant 
Exod.  12.17.  the  same  d.  I  brought  your  armies, 51, 
J.ev.  7.15.  flesh  eaten  the  same  d.l6.  1 19.6.  |  22.  30, 

23.  14.  ye  shall  eat  no  parched  corn  till  same  d. 

28.  and  ye  shall  do  no  work  in  that  same  d. 

29.  that  shall  not  be  afflicted  in  that  sarne  d. 
JV^u»i. 6.11. priest  shall  hallow  his  head  that  same  d, 
Deut.  32.48.  the  Lord  spake  to  Moses  that  same  d. 

1  KingsB.  64.  same  d.  king  hallowed  middle  court 
13.  3.  and  he  gave  a  sign  the  same  d.  saying 

Ezek.  23.  38.  have  defiled  my  sanctuary,  s.  d.  39, 

24.  2.  write  thee  the  name  of  this  same  d.  king  of 
Babylon  set  himself  against  Jerusalem  this  s.  d. 

Zrph.  1.  9.  the  same  d.  also  will  I  punish  those 
y.cch.  6.  10.  take  of  them,  and  come  the  same  d. 
/^nAf  17.29.but  the  same  d.  Lot  went  out  of  Sodon 

23. 12.  the  same  d.  Pilate  and  Herod  made  friend, 
.fuhn  5.  9.  and  on  the  samed.  was  the  sabbath 

20.  19.  s.  d.  at  evening,  Jesus  stood  in  midst 
Jlcts  1.  22.  unto  that  s.  d.  that  he  was  taken  up 

2.  41.  the  s.  d.  were  added  to  church,  3,000  souls 

Since  the  DAY. 
Eiod.  10.  6.  since  the  d.  they  were  on  the  earth 
Dent.  4.  32.  since  the  d.  that  God  created  man 
lSam.S.R.si?ice  the  d.  th^t  I  brought  them  up  out  of 
Egvpt,  to  this  da  v,  1  Kings  8.  16. 1  CAron.17.5. 

2  Kings  8.  6.  since  the  d.  that  she  left  the  land 
.frr.  7.  2.5.  since  the  d.  your  fathers  came  forth 
Col.  1.  6.  as  in  you,  since  thed.  ye  heard  of  it 

9.  #j7ice  the  d.  we  heard  it,  do  not  cease  to  pray 

7'Aat  DAY. 
Exod.  8.  22. 1  will  sever  in  ^Aaf  d.  land  of  Goshen 

10. 13.  Lord  brought  east-wind  on  land  all  that  d. 
28.  that  d.  thou  seest  my  face,  thou  shalt  die 

13.  8.  thou  shalt  shew  thy  son  in  that  d.  saying 
i4.  30.  thus  the  L.  saved  Israel  that  d.  out  of  hand 

32.  28.  there  fell  of  the  people  that  d.  3,000 
/,er). 16.30.  that  d.  shall  the  priest  make  atonement 
J^um.  9.6.  they  could  not  keep  the  passovcr  that  d. 

30.  14.  because  he  held  his  peace  in  that  d. 
Dent.  1.. 39.  your  children  in  that  d.  had  no  knowl. 

21.  23.  thou  shalt  in  any  wise  bury  him   that  d. 

31.  18.  I  will  surely  hide  my  face  in  that  d. 
.Tosh.  6.  15.  only  that  d.  they  comp.lssed  the  city 

14.12.heardcst  in  that  d.how  Anakims  were  there 
Judg.  20.  26.  Israel  fasted  that  d.  1  Sam.  7.  6. 
1  Sam.  8.  18.  and  ye  shall  cry  out  in  that  d.  and 
the  Lord  will  not  hear  you  in  that  d. 
9.  S4.  so  Saul  did  eat  with  Samuel  that  d. 
R 


DAY 

1  Sam. 10.9.  and  all  those  signs  came  to  pass  that  d. 
12.  18.  the  Lord  sent  iJiunder  and  rain  tkat  d. 
14.  23.  so  the  Lord  saved  Israel  that  d. 

37.  Saul  asked,  but  he  answered  liim  not  that  d. 
16.  13.  Spirit  of  Lord  came  on  David  from  thai  d 
18.  9.  Saul  eyed  David  from  (Aut  d.  and  forward 

2  Sam.  6.  9.  David  was  afraid  of  the  Lord  tliat  d. 
11.  12.  so  Uriah  abode  in  Jerusalem  that  d. 

lA'i«^sl4.14.cut  off  the  house  of  Jeroboam  that  d 
2  Chron.  15.  f  11.  olfcred  that  d.  of  spoil  700  oxea 

18.  24.  behold,  thou  shalt  see  on  t/iat  d. 
JV*eA.  8. 17.  to  that  d.  Israel  had  not  done  so 
iCstA.3.14.they  should  be  ready  against  that  d.8.13. 
Job  3.  4.  let  thatd.  be  darkness,  let  not  G.  regard  it 
I'sal.  146.4.  in  that  very  d.  his  thoughts  jjirish 
I'rov.  12.  t  16.  a  fool's  wrath  is  in  that  d.  kiio\wp 
Jsa.  2.  11.  Lord  alone  shall  be  exalted  in  tliut  d.  17. 

10.  32.  us  yet  shall  he  remain  at  Nob  that  d. 

19.  91.  Egyptians  shall  know  the  Lord  in  that  d. 
24.  21.  in  that  d.  the  Lord  shall  punish  the  host 
26.  1.  in  that  d.  shall  this  song  be  sung  in  Juduh 
29.  18.  in  that  d.  shall  the  duaf  hear  llie  words 
52.  6.  they  shall  know  in  (Aat  d.  that  1  am  he 

Jer.  39.tl0.  Nebuz.  gave  them  vineyards  in  that  d. 

16.  they  shall  be  accomplished  in  that  d. 

17.  but  I  will  deliver  ihee  in  that  d.  saith  the  L. 
Ezek.  29.  21.  in  that  d.  Israel  shall  be  exalted 

38. 19.  in  thatd.  there  shall  be  a  great  shaking 
39.  22.  know  I  am  the  Lord  from  that  d.  forward 
48.  35.  the  name  of  the  city  from  that  d.  shall  be 

Hos.  2.  18.  and  in  that  d.  will  I  make  a  covenant 
JoclZ.  \%.\r\that  d.  mountains  shall  drop  now  wina 
.Inios  2.  IG.  he  shall  flee  away  naked  in  that  d. 
8.3.  the  songs  of  the  temple  be  bowlings  in  that  d. 
Oftad.8.shall  I  not  in  that  d.  destroy  the  wise  men  7 
Zeph.  1.  15.  that  d.  is  a  day  of  wrath,  of  trouble 
Zeck.  2.  11.  nations  be  joined  to  the  Lord  in  that  d. 

9.  16.  Lord  their  God  shall  save  them  in  that  d. 

11.  11.  my  covenant  it  was  broken  in  that  d. 

12.  8.  the  feeble  at  that  d.  shall  be  as  David 
11.  in  that  d.  shall  there  be  a  great  mourning 

13.  1.  in  that  d.  shall  there  be  a  fountain  opened 

14.  4.  his  feet  shall  stand  that  d.  on  the  mount 
9.in  tAct  d.  shall  there  be  one  Lord,  hia  name  one 

Mai.  3.  17.  in  that  d.  when  I  make  up  my  jewels 
Mat.  7.  22.  many  will  say  to  me  in  that  d.  Lord 

24.  36.  but  oUhat  d.knoweth  no  man,  jl/ar/.- 13.32. 

26. 29.  till  that  d.  I  drink  it  new,  Mark  14.  25. 
L%tke  6.23.  rejoice  ye  in  that  d.  and  leap  for  joy 

10.  12.  be  more  tolerable  in  (Aat  d.  for  Sodom 

21.  34.  anil  so  that  d.  come  on  you  unawares 
23.54. and  thatd.wSiS  the  preparation  and  sabbath 

./ohn  1.39.  they  came  and  abode  with  him  thatd. 

11.  53.  from  that  d.  they  took  counsel  together 

14. 20.  at  that  d.  ye  shall  know  lam  in  the  Father 
16.  23.  and  in  that  d.  ye  shall  ask  me  nothing 

26.  at  that  d.  ye  shall  ask  in  my  name 
1  Thcss.  5.  4.  that  d.  should  overtake  you  as  a  thief 
2TAess.l.lO.  our  testimony  was  believed  in  that  d. 
2.  3.  that  d.  shall  not  come,  excejit  there  come 
2 Tim. 1.12.1  have  committed  to  him  against  fAatd. 

18.  he  may  find  mercy  of  the  Lord  in  that  d. 
4.  8.  the  crown  the  Lord  shall  give  me  at  that  d. 

This  DAY. 
<7en.4.14.thou  hast  driven  me  out  this  d.from  earth 

24.  12.  I  pr.ay  tliee  send  me  good  speed  this  d. 

25.  31.  he  saul,  sell  me  this  d.  thy  birth-right 
33.  swear  to  me  this  d.  and  he  sware  unto  him 

41.  9.  I  do  remember  my  faults  this  d. 
48.  15.  God  who  fed  me  all  my  li!e  long  to  this  d. 
Exod.  12.  14.  this  d.  shall  be  for  a  memorial 
17.  therefore  observe  fAis  d.  in  yourgeneratiotu 

13.  3.  remember  this  d.  in  which  yc  came  out,  4. 
Deut.  1.  10.  you  are  this  d.  as  the  stars  of  heaven 

2.  25.  this  d.  will  I  begin  to  put  the  dread  of  thee 
4.  4.  are  alive  every  one  of  you  this  d.  5.  3. 
5.24.  seen  this  d.  that  God  doth  talk  with  man 

6.  24.  as  it  is  at  this  d.  8.  18.  Ezra  9.  7. 
".ll.the  statutes  which  I  commanded  thee  this  d 

4.  40.  1  6.  6.  I  8.  1,  11.  I  10.  13.  |  30.  2,  8. 

8.  19.  I  testify  against  you  this  d.  yc  shall  perish 

11. 8.  commandments  which  I  command  you  t.  d. 

13,  27, 28  1 13.  18.  |  15.  5.  |  19.  9.  1'27.  1, 4. 

32.  statutes  which  I  set  before  you  this  d. 

12.  8.  not  do  after  all  things  ye  do  here  this  d. 

26.  17.  avouched  this  d.  the  Lord  to  be  thy  God 

27.  9.  *A!S  d.  thou  art  become  the  people  of  the  L 

29.  4.  hath  not  given  you  ears  to  hear  to  this  d 

10.  ye  stand  this  d.  all  of  you  before  the  Lord 
IS.whose  heart  turneth  away  this  d.  from  the  L. 

30.  15.  I  set  before  thee  this  d.  life  and  death,  19. 
16.  I  commanded  thee  this  d.  to  love  the  Lord 

31.  97.  while  I  am  yet  alive  with  you  this  d. 
34.  6.  no  man  knoweth  his  sepulchre  to  tAi's  d. 

.Tosh.  3.  7.  this  d.  will  I  begin  to  magnify  thee 
4.  9.  the  twelve  atones  are  there  unto  this  d. 

7.  25.  the  Lord  shall  trouble  thee  this  d. 

14.  10.  and  now  I  am  this  d.  eighty-five  years  old 

11.  lam  as  strong  this  d.  as  when  Moses  sent  me 

22.  16.  to  turn  away  this  d.  from  following  Lord 


DAY 

Josh.K.  17.  which  we  are  not  cleansed  till  this  d. 

22.  if  ii  be  in  rebellion,  save  us  not  this  d. 
S3.6.cleave  to  the  Ld.  as  ye  have  done  unio  thisd 
5{4.  15.  choose  you  this  d   whom  ye  will  sern 

Judg.  I.  2G.  Luz  is  the  .■.ime  thereol  unto  this  d- 

10.  15.  deliver  us  only,  we  [iray  thee,  this  d. 
19.  3U.  since  Israel  came  u|i  uiit  of  the  land  of 

Egypt  to  this  d.  1  Ham  ri.  B.  2  Ham.  7.  6 
2  Kings  21. 15.  1  Chron.  17.  5.  Jer.  7.  25. 
Hulk  4.9.  Boaz  said,  ye  are  witnesses  this  d.  10. 
1  Sam.  10.  I'J.  ye  have  this  d.  rejected  your  God 
ll.lU.there  shall  not  a.  man  be  put  to  death  this  d 
14.  45.  Jonathan  hath  wrought  with  God  this  d 
15.28.  Ijord  hath  rent  kingdom  from  thee  this  d 

17.  10.  I  defy  the  armies  of  Israel  this  d. 

18.  21.  thou  shall  this  d.  be  my  son-in-law 
21.5.  though  it  were  sanctified  this  d.  in  the  vessc 
82.  8.  my  servant  to  lie  iti  wait  as  at  this  d.  13. 
25  32.  the  Ld.  which  sent  thee  this  d.  to  meet  me 

33.who  kept  me  this  dXrom  coming  to  shed  blood 
2G.  21.  my  soul  was  precious  in  thine  eyes  this  d. 

24.  as  thy  life  was  much  set  by  this  d.  in  my  eyes 
30.  25.  made  it  an  ordinance  for  Israel  to  this  d. 
tPam.  3.39. 1  am  this  d.  weak,  though  anoint,  king 
4.  3.  Beerolhites  were  sojourners  unto  this  d. 

1  Kings  8.61.  to  keep  his  commands  as  at  this  d. 
S  Kings  7.  9.  this  d.  is  a  day  of  good  tidings 

17.  34.  unto  this  d.  do  after  former  manners,  41. 

2  Chron.  5.  9.  and  there  it  is  unto  this  d. 

35.  21.  1  come  not  against  thee  this  d.  but  against 
J^ch.  9.  36.  behold,  we  are  servants  this  d. 
Psal.  2.7.  the  Lord  said,  thou  art  my  Son,  this  d. 
have  I  begotten  thee,  Jicts  13.  33.  Heb.  1.  5. 

lis.  24.  this  is  the  d.  which  the  Lord  hath  made 

119.  91.  they  continue  this  d.  according  to  thy 
Prov.  7.  14.  this  d.  have  I  paid  my  vows 

22.  19.  I  have  made  known  to  thee  this  d. 
ha.  38. 19.  the  living  praise  thee,  as  I  do  this  d. 

56. 12.  and  to-morrow  shall  be  as  this  d.  and  much 
Jer.  2.3. 18.  hissing  and  a  curse,  as  at  this  d.  44. 22. 

35.  14.  for  to  this  d.  they  drink  none,  but  obey 

36.  2.  from  the  days  of  josiah  even  to  this  d. 
44.  10.  they  are  not  humbled  even  unto  this  d. 

/,am.2.16.certainly  this'istbe  rf.  that  we  looked  for 
Ezelc.  39.  B.  this  is  the  rf.  whereof  I  have  spoken 
Dan.  9.  7.  to  us  confusion  effaces,  as  at  this  d. 
Hag.  2.  15.  consider  from  this  d.  and  forward,  18. 

19.  from  this  d.  will  I  bless  you 
Mat.  6.  11.  give  us  this  d.  our  daily  bread 

11.  23.  Sodom  would  have  remained  to  this  d. 

27.  8.  was  called  the  field  of  blood  to  this  d. 
19.1  have  sutfered  many  things  this  (/.in  a  dream 

28.  15.  is  rc[)orted  among  the  Jews  to  this  d. 
I,uke'2.  II.  for  to  you  is  born  this  d.  a, Saviour 

4.  21.  this  d.  is  this  scripture  fulfilled  in  your  ears 

19.  9.  this  d.  is  salvation  come  to  this  house 
42.  if  thou  hadst  known,  at  least  in  this  thy  d. 

22.  34.  cock  not  crow  this  d.  before  thou  deny  me 
Jict.i  2.  29.  his  sepulchre  is  with  us  to  this  d. 

22.  3.  zealous  toward  God,  as  yo  are  all  this  d. 

23.  1.  in  good  conscience  before  Goil  till  this  d. 

24.  21.  I  am  called  in  question  by  you  this  d. 
26.  22.  I  continue  unto  thisd.  witnessing  to  small 

29.  I  would  all  that  hear  me  this  d.  were  as  I  am 
Pom.  11.  8.  that  thev  should  not  hear  unto  this  d. 
2  Cor.  3.  14.  till  this  d.  remaineth  the  vail,  15. 

To  D.VV. 
r?--n.21.  26.  neither  yet  hoard  T  of  it  but  to  d. 

30.  3-.;.  I  will  pa.ss  through  all  thy  flock  to  d. 

40.  7.  wherefore  look  ye  so  sadly  to  d.  ? 
Krod.2.\i^.hovi  Is  it  that  ye  are  come  so  soon  lod.  ? 

14.  13.  salvaiion  which  lie  will  shew  you  to  d. 

16.21.  bake  that  which  you  will  bake  to  d. 

32.  2't.  consecrate  yourselves  to  d.  to  the  Lord 
7.ffo.  9.  4.  for  to  d.  the  Lord  will  appear  to  you 
firut.  15.  15.  I  command  ihee  this  thing  to  d. 

20.13.  thai  he  may  establish  thee  tod.  for  a  people 
1  Sam.  4.3.  wherefore  hath  Lord  smitten  \istod.  ? 

9.  f  13.  get  you  up,  for  to  d.  ye  shall  lind  him 

127.  stand  still  to  d.  thit  I  may  shew  lliec 
11.  13.  to  d.  Lord  wrought  s;ilvation  in  Inrnel 
24.  10.  behold,  how  that  the  Lord  had  delivered 
Ihi"'  In  d.  into  mine  hand  in  the  rave,  26.  23. 
OSim.  6.  20.  how  glorious  was  the  king  to  d,! 
13.  4.  why  art  Ihini  loin  from  day  to  d.  ? 
Ifi.  3.  tod.  shall  the  house  oflsra'd  f'store  mo 

1  Kin:rs  18.  15.  I  will  sh^vv  mvscif  to  him  to  d. 
22.  5.  enquire  at  word  of  Lord  to  d.  2  Chr.  18.  4. 

2  ft'/nn-.»4.23.  wherefore  wilt  thocigo  to  him  tod.  7 
0.  28.  give  Ihv  son  that  we  may  eat  him  to  d. 

T  Chron.  16.  23.  sing  to  Lord  all  the  e  irlh,  shew 
forth  from  day  lo  d.  his  salvation,  Psal.  96.  2. 
F..'<lh.  3.  7.  they  cast  the  hit  from  day  to  d. 
Job  23.  2.  even  to  d.  is  my  complaint  bitter 
Psal.  95.  7.  he  is  our  (Jorl,  we  his  pasture,  lo  d. 
if  ve  will    hear  his  voi'-e,  Ifrh.  3.  7,  15.  |  4.  7. 
^fr.31.tl5.vo  were  to  d.  turned,  and  had  done  right 
7.rrh.  9.  12.  lo  d.  do  I  declare,  that  I  will  rend   r 
Mai.  6.  30.  the  grnss  of  the  field,  whi>-h  to  d.  is, 
and  to-morrow  ii  cast  into  the  oven,  Au/if  12.28. 
114 


DAY 

Mat.  21. 28.  said,  son,  go  work  to  d.  in  my  vincjard 
J.uke  5.  26.  we  have  seen  strange  things  lu  d. 

13.32.  behold,  I  do  cures  to  d.  and  to-morrow 
33.  1  must  walk  to  d.  and  the  day  following 

19.  5.  for  to  d.  I  must  abide  at  thy  house 

23.  43.  to  d.  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in  Paradise 

24.  21.  besides  all  this,  to  d.  is  the  third  day 
Hcb.  3.  13.  e.xhort  daily,  while  it  is  called  to  d. 

5.  5.  thou  art  my  Son,  to  d.  have  I  begotten  tliee 

13. 8.  Jesus  Christ,  same  yester.  to  d.  and  for  ever 

./am. 4. 13.  ye  that  say, f«(/. or  to-morrow, we  will  go 

2Pcl.2.H.Lot  vexed  his  righteous  soul  from  day  toi/. 

DAY  of  trouble. 
2  Kings  19.3.  this  day  is  a  d.  of  trouble,  Isa.  37. 3. 
Psal.  20.  1.  Lord  hear  thee  in  the  d.  of  trouble 
50.  15.  and  call  upon  me  in  the  d.  of  trouble 
59.  16.  hast  been  my  refuge  in  the  d.  of  trouble 
77.  2.  in  the  d.  of  trouble  1  sought  the  Lord 
86.  7.  in  the  d.  of  trouble  I  will  call  on  thee 
Isa.  22.5.  it  is  a  d.  of  trouble,  and  of  treading  down 
Jer.  51.  2.  in  the  d.  of  trouble  they  shall  he  ag.  her 
F.iek.  7.  7.  the  time  is  come,  d.  of  trouble  is  near 
JVuA.  1.  7.  Lord  is  a  strong  hold  in  d.  of  trouble 
Hab.  3.  16.  that  I  might  rest  in  the  d.  of  trouble 
Zeph.l.  15.  that  day  is  a  d.  o/tcouiie and  distress 

DAY-TIME. 
Job  5. 14.  they  meet  with  darkness  in  the  d.-time 
24.  16.  dig  thro'  houses  they  marked  in  thed.-tjme 
Psa/.22.2. 1  cry  in  the  d.-time,  but  thou  hearest  not 
42.8. Lord  command  his  loving-kindness  \nd.-timc 
78.14.  in  the  rf.-fime  also  he  led  them  with  a  cloud 
/*a.4.6.shall  be  a  tabernacle  for  a  shadow  ind.-time 
21.  8.  I  stand  on  the  watch-tower  in  the  d.-time 
A«A(21.37.in  d.-time  he  was  teaching  in  the  temple 
2  Pel.  2.  13.  that  count  it  pleasure  to  riot  in  d.-time 

DAYS. 
Oen.  4.  t  3.  at  end  of  </.  Cain  brought  an  offering 
8.  3.  after  150  d.  the  waters  were  abated 
24.  t  1.  and  Abraham  was  old  and  gone  into  d. 
27.  41.  d.  of  mourning  for  my  father  are  at  hand 
29. 1 14.  and  Jacob  abode  with  him  a  month  of  rf. 
47.  9.  the  d.  of  my  pilgrimage  are  a  130  years 

1 28.  the  d.  of  the  years  of  his  life  was  147  years 
50.  4.  when  the  d.  of  his  mourning  were  past 
A'um.  11.  t  20.  ye  shall  eat  of  it  a  month  of  d. 

14.  34.  after  the  number  of  d.  ye  searched  the  land 
Deut.  4.  ,32.  for  ask  now  of  the  d.  that  are  past 

10.  10.  and  I  stayed  in  the  mount  forty  d. 
Josh.  23. 1 1.  Joshua  waxed  old  and  come  into  d. 
Judg.  11. 14. after  d.  childrenofAmmon  made  war 
1. Sam.  13.11.  Samuel  came  not  within  d.  appointed 

18.  26.  and  the  d.  were  not  expired,  wherefore 

27.  t  7.  David  dwelt  with  Philistines  a  year  of  d. 

29.  3.  which  hath  been  with  me  these  d. 
1  Kings  2.  11.  the  d.  David  reigned  over  Israel 

3.  2.  no  house  was  built  to  the  Lord  till  those  d. 

14.20.  d.  that  Jeroboam  reigned  were  22  years 

30. war  between  Rehoboam  and  Jerob.  nil  their  d. 

15.  16.  between  Asa  and  Baasha  all  their  d.  32. 
IKings  10. 1 36.  d.that  Jehu  reigned  were  28 years 

13.  3.  into  the  hand  of  Ben-hadad  all  their  d. 
15. 1 13.  and  Shallum  reigned  a  month  of  d. 
18.  4.  to  those  d.  Israel  did  burn  incense  to  it 
23.  22.  fiom  d.  of  the  judges,  not  such  a  passovcr 

1  C-liron.  2:1.  1.  when  David  was  old  and  full  of  d. 

29.  15.  our  d.  are  on  earth  as  a  shadow,  .hb  8.  9. 
28.  ho  died  full  of  d.  riches  and  honour 

2  Chron.  24.  15.  Jehoiada  was  old  and  full  of  d. 
Ezra  4.2.  since  the  d.  Ennr-haddon  brought  us  up 

9.7.since  d.of  our  fathers  have  we  hem  in  trcspas.s 
JfTch.  1.  4.  I  wept  and  mourned  certain  d. 

b.I7.since  d.  of  Joshua,  son  of  Nun,  unto  that  day 
F.sth.  9.  22.  as  the  d.  whereon  the  .lews  rested 

26.  theV  called  these  d.  Purim,  after  Pur 
28.and  that  these  d.  should  bo  rcmetnb.  and  kepi 

Job  3. 6.  let  il  not  be  joined  to  the  d.  of  the  year 
7.  1.  are  not  his  d.  also  like  the  d.  of  an  hireling  ? 
12.  12.  and  in  length  of  d.  understanding 
21. 13.  they  spend  iheird.  in  wealth,  and  godown 

30.  t  I.  but  now  they  that  are  of  fewer  d.  than  I 
16.  the  d.  of  aflliclion  have  taken  hold  on  me 

27.  the  d.  of  affliction  prevented  mo 

32.  t  4.  Elihu  waited,  for  they  were  elder  for  rf. 
7.  I  said,  d.  should  speak,  and  years  tench  wisd. 

33.  25.  he  shall  return  to  the  d.  of  his  youth 

36.  *11.  thev  shall  spend  their  d.  in  Jirosperily 
42.  17.  BO  Job  died,  being  old  and  full  of  d. 

r.»rt/.21.  4.  ihou  gavest  him  length  of  d.  for  ever 
23.  t6.  dwill  in  the  Lord's  house  to  l.nglh  of  d. 

37.  18.  the  Lord  knowelh  the  d.  of  the  upright 
44.  1.  told  us  what  work  thou  didsl  in  their  d. 
,55.  23.  deceitful  men  not  live  out  half  thi'ir  d. 
61.  t  6.  Ihou  shalt  add  d.  to  thed.  of  the  king 
77.5.  I  have  considered  the  d.  of  old,  the  years 

78. 33.  therefi)ro  their  d.  diil  he  c(in«umc  in  vanity 
89.29.  an  1  his  throne  n»  the  d.  of  heaven 

45.  the  d.of  his  youth  hast  thou  shortened 
90.  9.  nil  onrd.  are  passed  away  in  ihv  wra'h 
10.  the  d.  of  our  years  are  threnspore  and  ten 
12.Bolca('h  us  to  number  our  d.that  wo  mnynpply 


DAY 

Psal.tiO.M.  we  may  rejoice  and  be  glad  all  onr  d 
91. 1 16.  with  length  of  d.  will  I  satisfy  him 
93. 1 5. holiness  becometh  ihv  house  to  lengtl  of  4 
94.13.  mnyest  give  him  rest  trom  the  d.of  adv  jrsitj 
119.  84.  how  many  are  the  d.  of  thy  servant  1 
139.  t  IS-  written,  what  d.lhey  should  be  fash 
143.  5.  I  remember  the  d.  of  old,  I  meditate 

Prov.  3.  2.  for  length  of  d.  ihall  they  add  to  the« 
16.  length  of  d.  ia  in  her  right  hand 

Eccl.  5. 20.  not  much  remember  the  d.  of  his  life 

7.  10.  the  cause  that  the  former  d.  were  bitter 

8.  15.  that  shall  abide  with  him  the  d.  of  his  UTo 

11.  8.  let  him  remember  the  d.  of  darkne.ss 

12.  1.  while  the  evil  d.  come  not,  nor  the  yean 
Isa.  23.  7.  whose  antiquity  i»  of  ancient  d. 

1.5.  seventy  years,  according  to  the  d.  of  one  king 
60.  20.  the  d.  of  thy  mourning  shall  be  endi:d 
65.  20.  shall  be  no  more  thence  an  infant  of  d 

22.  aa  the  d.  of  a  tree  are  the  d.  of  my  people 
./er.  2.  32.  have  forgotten  me  d.  without  number 

6.  11.  the  aged,  with  him  that  is  fijl  of  d. 
28. 1 3.  in  two  years  of  d.  will  I  bring  again 

31.  33.  after  those  d.  I  will  put  my  law  in  their 
.32.  t  39.  one  heart,  that  they  may  fear  me  all  d 
36.  2.  from  the  d.  of  Josiah  even  to  this  day 

Lam.  4.  18.  our  d.  are  fulfilled,  our  end  is  come 

Ezek.  4.  4.  according  to  the  number  of  the  d.  5.  9 
12.23.  the  d.are  at  hand,  and  effect  of  every  vision 
16.  22.  not  remembered  the  d.  of  thy  youth,  43. 

Dan.  8.  14.  unto  2300  d.  sanctuary  be  cleansed 
10.  t2.  I  was  mourning  three  weeks  of  d. 
12.  11.  abomination  set  up,  there  shall  be  1290  <{• 
12.  blessed  is  he  that  waitelh  to  the  1335  d. 

//o.?.  2.  13.  I  will  visit  on  her  the  d.  of  Baalim 
9. 7.  d.  of  visitation,  d.  of  recompense  are  come 

10.  9.  thou  hast  sinned  from  the  d.  of  Gibeah 
.Imos  4.  t4.  bring  tithes  after  three  years  of  d. 

5.  t  21.  and  I  will  not  smell  your  holy  d. 
Mic.5.  t2.  have  been  from  the  d.  of  eternity 

7.  15.  according  lo  the  d.  of  thy  coming  out 
Hag.'i.  16.  since  those  d.  were,  when  one  came  to 
Zech.  8.  t4.  with  his  staff  for  multitude  of  d. 

9.  ye  that  hear  in  these  d.  these  words 

10.  before  these  d.  there  was  no  hire  for  man 

11.  I  will  not  be  as  in  former  d.  saith  the  Lord 
15.  so  have  I  thought  in  these  d.  to  do  well 

Mai.  3.  7.  from  d.  of  our  fathers  ye  are  gone  away 
Mat.  11.  12.  from  d.  of  John  the  Baptist  till  now 
24.  22.  and  except  those  d.  should  he  shortened 
no  flesh  should  he  saved,  Mark  13.  20. 
37.asd.  of  Noe,  so  shall  the  coming  of  the  Son  bft 
I.uke  1.  24.  after  those  d.  Elisabeth  conceived 
21.  22.  for  these  be  the  d.  of  vengeance 
Jicts  3.  24.  have  likewise  foretold  of  these  d. 
5.  36.  for  before  these  d.  rose  up  Theudas 

11.  27.  in  these  d.  came  prophets  to  Aniioch 

12.  3.  then  were  thed.  of  unleavened  bread 
19. 138.  if  matter  against  any  court  d.  are  kept 
20.6.  we  sailed  after  the  d.  of  unleavened  bread 
21.  38.  which  befoie  these  d.  madest  an  uproar 

Gal.  4.  10.  ye  observed  d.  and  months,  and  time* 
Eph.  5.  16.  redeeming  lime,  because  the  d.  are  evil 
Heb.  7.  3.  neither  beginning  of  d.  nor  end  of  life 

10.  39.  hut  call  lo  remembrance  the  former  d. 

1  Pet.  3. 10.  he  that  wouhi  see  good  d.  let  him  ref. 
Rrv.  11.3.  shall  prophesy  121)6  d.  in  sackcloth 
12.  6.  that  they  should  feed  her  there  1260  d. 
See  David,  Last,  Oi.n,  Journey. 
.111  Ihr  DAYS. 
Orn.X  14.  dust  shalt  thou  eat  n//  thed.  ofthy  lifc 
5.  5.  all  the  d.  Adam  lived  were  930  years 
8.  nil  d.  of Seth  912  vears  ||  1 1,  of  Enos  905  yeara 
14.  d.  of  Cninnn  910  v.nrs  ||  23.  Enoch  365  y-eari 
27.  all  the  d   of  Methuselah  were  969  years 

9.  29.  all  thr  d.  of  Noah  were  9.50  years 

J.rv.  13.  46.  nil  Ihr  d.  wherein  the  plague  shall  be 
15.  25.  all  the  d.  of  her  issue  shall  be  unclean,  28. 
J^'um.  6.  4.  all  the  d.  of  his  senarntion,  5,  6,  8. 
Deut.i.  9.  lest  lliey  depart  from  thy  heart  all  thf  A. 
10.  to  fear  mo  all  thed.  they  live,  1  Kings  8.  40. 
12.  1.  to  possess  il  all  thr  d.  ye  live  on  the  earth 
.Tosh.  4.124.  that  you  might  fear  the  Lonl  all  the  d. 
24.  31.  and   Nrael  si-rved  the  Lord  all  the  d.  of 
Jcshun  and  alt  thr  d.  of  the  elders,  .Tud^.  2.  7. 
.hidg.'i.  18.  ilclivereil  them  all  Iked,  ofihe  jtntge 
1  .<iam.  1.  II.  I  vviilgivehimlo  Lord  a//d.ofhis  life 
7.  13.  against  Philistines  all  the  d.  of  Samuel 
1.5.  Samuel  judged  Israel  all  the  d.  of  his  life 

1  A'lTtjT'' 4. 25.(1  welt  safely  all  thed.  of  S<dnmon 

11.  25.  Re/on  wasndvers.  all  the  d.  of  S<d(imon 

2  Kinr^s  13.22.  Ila/aid  oppressed  Israel  all  Ihed.ot 
23.22.  nor  in  n// ^A(^  (/.  of  the  kinss  of  Israel 

2  Chron.  24.  2.  all  Ihr  d.  of  Jehoiada  the  priest,  14. 
K:r(i4.5.tofriisirnlelheirpiirposesa//d.ofCyru« 
.fob  1. 1.5.  thus  did  .lob  all  the  d. 

14.  H.  nllthed. n(m\'  appointed  time  will  I  wail 
P.«(i/.23.6.niercv  shall  follow  me  all  Ihr  rf.  of  mv  lift 

27.  4  dwell  in  house  of  lord  (j// /Af  d.  of  mvlife 
Pror.  15.  15.  nil  the  d.  of  the  nflheted  are  evil 

31.  12.  do  him  good,  not  evil,  all  fAcd.  of  her  lift 


DAY 

Lukel.l^.in  holiness  before  him  all  Lhe  (/.of  our  life 

Hee  Bis  Like,  Thy  lilFK. 

IJAVTS  come. 

Isa.  7. 17.  shall  bring  on  thee  d.  that  have  not  come 

Jer. 23.5.beliold  the  d.  come,7. 1 30. 3.  |  31. 27,31,38. 
Ames  4.  i.  the  d.  come  that  he  will  take  you  away 

Mat.  9. 15.  the  d.  shall  come  when  tlic  bridegroom 
shall  be  taken  from  them,  j)/(irA'2.2U./.u/te  3.35. 

Luke  17.22.  the  d.  come  when  ye  shall  desire  to  see 

lU.  43.  the  d.  come  thy  enemies  shall  cast  a  trench 

21. 6.  the  d.  come  in  which  there  shall  not  be  lett 
Uelt.  8.8.  d.  come  when  I  will  make  a  new  covenant 

Few  DAYS. 
Oen.  24.  55.  let  the  damsel  abide  with  us  a /etc  d. 

27.  44.  tarty  a.  few  d.  till  thy  brother's  fury  turn 

2U.  20.  and  they  seemed  tu  him  but  a  few  d. 

47.  y.  few  and  evil  arc  the  d.  of  my  pilgrimage 
J^um.  y.20.  when  the  cloud  was  a  few  d.  on  tabern. 
Job  14.  1.  man  that  is  born  of  a  woman  is  of  few  d. 

32.  tti.  Elihu  said,  I  am  of  few  d.  and  ye  are  old 
Psal.  109.  8.  let  his  d.  be  few,  and  let  another 
Van.  11.  20.  wMiin  few  d.  he  shall  be  destroyed 
Hei.  12.  10.  they  veiily  for  a  few  d.  chastened  us 

UU  DAYS. 
Gen.  6.  3.  yet  his  d.  shall  he  120  years 

10.25.  in  Aw  d.  was  the  earth  divided,  1  Chr.  1. 19. 
Deut.  22.  19.  may  not  put  her  away  all  his  d.  29. 
1  Kings  1. 1 3.  had  not  displeased  him  from  his  d. 

15.  14.  Asa  was  perfect  all  his  d.  2  Chron.  15. 17. 

It).  34.  in  his  d.  did  Hiel  build  Jericho 

31.  29.  1  will  not  bring  the  evil  in  his  d. 

i  Kings  8.20.in  his  d.  Edom  revolted,  2  Chr.  21.8. 

12.  2.  Jehoash  did  what  was  right  all  his  d. 
15.  18.  he  departed  not  all  his  d.  from  the  sins 

1  Chron.  22.  9.  and  quietness  tu  Israel  in  his  d. 

2  Chron.  34.  33.  all  his  d.  they  departed  not  from 
Job  14.  5.  seeing  his  d.  are  determined,  his  months 

15. 20.  wicked  man  travaileth  with  pain  all  his  d. 
24.1.  why  do  they  that  know  him  not  see  his  d.  ? 

Psal.  72.  7.  in  /Us  d.  shall  the  righteous  flourish 
103.  15.  as  for  man,  his  d.  are  as  grass,  as  flower 
144.  4.  his  d.  are  as  a  shadow  that  passeth  away 

/'ro«.28.16.that  hateth  covetousness  prolong  A;'*  d. 

£ccl.  2.  23.  for  all  his  d.  are  sorrows,  his  travail 
5.  17.  all  his  d.  also  he  eateth  in  darkness 
8.  12.  and  though  his  d.  be  prolonged,  yet  I  know 
13.  the  wicked  shall  not  prolong  his  d. 

Isa.  65.  20.  nor  old  man  that  hath  not  filled  his  d. 

Jer.  17.  11.  shall  leave  them  in  the  midst  of  Ai*  d. 

22.  30.  write,  a  man  that  shall  not  prosper  in  his  d. 

23.  0.  in  hisd.  Judah  shall  be  saved,  Israel  dwell 

In  the  DAYS. 

Gen.30.14.  Reuben  went  in  the  rf.of  wheat-harvest 

Judg.  5.  6.  in  the  d.  of  Sh.arngar,  in  the  d.  of  Jael 

8.28.  was  in  quietness  40  years  in  the  d.  of  Gideon 

1  .Sam.  17. 12.  went  for  an  old  man  in  the  d.  of  Saul 

8  Sam.  21. 1.  there  was  a  famine  in  thed.  of  David 

9.  they  were  put  to  death  in  the  d.  of  harvest, 

in  the  first  d.  in  beginning  of  barley  harvest 

1  Kings  10.  21.  silver  was  nothing  accounted  of 

in  the  d.  of  Solomon,  2  Chron.  9.  20. 

22.46.  Sodomites  which  remained  in  the  d.  of  Asa 

1  Chron.  4.  41.  these  came  in  the  d.  of  Heztkiah 

13.  3.  we  enquired  not  at  it  in  the  d.  of  Saul 

2  Chron.  26.5.he  sought  God  in  the  d.  of  Zechariah 

32.  26.  came  not  on  them  in  the  d.  of  Hezekiah 
Job  29.  2.  as  in  the  d.  when  God  preserved  me 

4.  as  I  was  in  tAcd.  of  my  youth,  when  the  secret 
Psal^'S!.  19.  in  the  d.  of  famine  shall  be  satisfied 
49.  5.  wherefore  should  I  fear  in  the  d.  of  evil  ? 
Eccl.  2.  IG.  in  the  d.  to  come  shall  be  forgotten 

11.  9.  let  thy  heart  cheer  thee  in  the  d.  of  youth 
12.*  1.  remember  thy  Creator  in  the  d.  of  youth 

Jer.  26. 18.  Mlcah  prophesied  in  the  d.  of  Hezekiah 
J^am.  1.7.  Jerus.  remembered  in  the  d.of  her  afflict. 
Ezck.  16.60.  I  will  remember  my  covenant  iji  tAerf. 

iJ2. 14.  or  hands  be  strong  in  the  d.  I  shall  deal 
l)a.n.  2.  44.  in  the  d.  of  these  kings  shall  God  setup 

5.11.  in  thed.  of  thy  father,  light  was  found  in  him 
Hos.  2. 15.  she  glial!  sing  as  in  the  d.  of  her  youth 

9. 9.  have  deeply  corrupted  as  in  thed.  ofGibeah 

12.  9.  to  dwell,  as  in  the  d.  of  the  solemn  feast 
Joel  1.  2.  hath  this  been  in  the  d.  of  your  fathers  ? 
,\{at.  2.  1.  when  Jesus  was  born  in  the  d.  of  Herod 

23.  :fO.  if  we  had  been  in  tAe  d.  of  our  fathers 

24.  38.  for  as  in.  the  d.  th.it  were  before  the  flood 
>/art  2.26.  into  the  house  ofGod,  inrf.  of  Abiathar 
iMke  1.  2.5.  thus  halh  Lord  dealt  with  me  in  the  d. 

4.  25.  many  widows  were  in  the  d.  of  Elias 

17.  26.  as  in  the  d.  of  Noe  ||  28.  in  the  d.  of  Lot 
Acts  5.  37.  rose  up  Judas  in  the  d.  of  the  taxing 

11.  28.  crime  to  pass  in  the  d.  of  Claudius  Cesar 
Hch  5.7.  who  in  thed.  of  his  flesh,  when  ho  offered 
1  Pe^  3.20.  long-suffer. G.  waited  inthcd.  of  Noa.\\ 
Rev.  10.  7.  in  the  d.  of  the  voice  of  seventh  angel 

11.  6.  that  it  rain  not  in  lhe  d.  of  their  prophecy 

In  those  DAYS. 
Oen.  6.  4.  there  were  giants  in  the  earth  in  those  d. 
Deut.  17.  9.  come  to  the  judge  in  tho.ie  d.  19.  17. 

2G.  3.  go  to  the  priest  that  shall  be  in  those  d. 
115 


DAY 

Judg,  17. 6.  in  thoss  d.  there  was  no  king  in  Israel, 
18. 1.  I  21.  25. 
20.  27.  for  the  ark  of  God  was  there  in  those  d. 

1  Ham.  3. 1.  the  word  of  L.  was  precious  in  those  d. 

2  Sam.  16.  23.  which  he  counselled  in  those  d. 

2  Kings'iQ.  1.  in  those  d.  was  Hezekiah  sick  unto 
death,  2  Chron.  32.  24.  Isa.  38.  1. 
Jer.  33.  16.  in  those  d.  shall  Judah  be  saved 
50. 4.  in  those  d.  Israel  shall  go  and  seek  God 

20.  jn  tlwse  d.  iiiiq.  shall  be  sought  for,  and  none 
Joeli.'i'd.  in  those  d.  willpour  out  my  Spirit  on  the 
servants  and  on  the  handmaids,  jicts  2. 16. 
Mat.  24. 19.  woe  to  them  that  give  suck  in  those  d. 
Mark  13.  17.  huke  21.  23. 
Luke  1.  39.  and  Mary  arose  in  those  d.  and  went 
20.  1.  on  one  of  those  d.  as  he  taught  the  peoi)le 
.icts  7.  41.  they  made  a  calf  iji  those  d.  and  ortered 
Rev.  2.  13.  hast  not  denied  my  faith  in  those  d. 
9.C.in  those  d.  shall  men  seek  death  and  not  find  it 
Latter  DA  YS. 
JVum.  24.14.  people  do  to  Ihy  people  in  the  latter  d. 
Lent.  4.  30.  in  latter  d.  if  thou  turn  to  tiie  Lord 

31.  29.  and  evil  will  befall  you  in  the  latter  d. 
Jer.  23.  20.  in  latter  d.  consider  it  perfectly,  30.  24. 

48.47.  yet  wUll  bring  again  the  captivity  of  Moab 
in  tiie  latter  d.  saith  the  Lord 

49.  39.  the  captivity  of  Elam  in  the  latter  d. 
£2eit.38.16.  comeagainst  my  people  in  the  ia^terd. 
Z'an,2.28.  maketh  known  whatshall  be  in  Matter  </. 

10. 14.  what  shall  befall  thy  people  in  the  latter  d. 
Uos.  3.  5.  and  shall  fear  the  Lord  in  the  latter  d. 

Many  DAYS. 
Oen.  37.  34.  Israel  mourned  for  his  son  many  d. 
47.  f  8.  how  many  are  the  d.  of  thy  life  1 
Josh.  22. 3.  nor  left  your  brethren  these  many  d. 
2  Sam.  19.  \  34.  Barzillai  said  to  the  king,  how 
many  d.  are  the  years  of  my  lite  ? 
1  Kings  2.  38.  Shimei  dwelt  at  Jerusalem  many  d. 
3.  til.  and  hast  not  asked  for  thyself  man;/  d. 

17. 15.  she,  and  he,  and  her  house,  did  eat  many  d. 

1  Chron.  7.  22.  and  Ephraim  mourned  many  d. 
Psal.  34. 12.  what  man  is  he  that  loveth  many  d.  7 

119.  84.  how  mu?iy  are  the  d.  of  thy  servant  ? 
Eccl.  6.  3.  so  that  the  d.  of  his  years  be  many 

11.  1.  for  thou  shall  find  it  after  many  d. 
/sa.24.22.after  m. (/.shall  they  be  visited, £2eA.38.8 

32.  10.  many  d.  and  years  shall  ye  be  troubled 
Jer.  32.  14.  they  may  continue  many  d.  35.  7. 

37.  16.  Jeremiah  had  remained  there  many  d. 
Ezek.  12.  27.  the  vision  that  he  seeth  is  for  many  d. 
L>an.  8.  26.  |  10.  14, 
Dan.  11.33.  shall  fall  by  captivity  and  spoil  inany  d. 
Hos.  3.  3.  thou  shalt  abide  for  me  many  d. 

4.  Israel  sliafl  abide  many  d.  without  a  king 
Luke  15.  13.  not  many  d.  after,  younger  son  gather. 
John  2.  12.  they  continued  there  nut  many  d. 
Jicts  1.  5.  ye  shall  be  baptized  not  many  d.  hence 

13.  31.  he  was  seen  many  d.  of  them  which  came 
16. 18.  this  did  she  many  d.  Paul  being  grieved 
27.  20.  nor  sun  nor  stars  in  many  d.  appeared 

■     My  DAYS. 
f?en.29.  21.give  me  my  wife,  formed,  are  fulfilled 

2  Kings  ^.  19.  good  if  peace  and  truth  be  in  my  d. 
Job  7.  6.  my  d.  are  swifter  than  a  w  eaver's  shuttle 

16.  let  me  alone,  for  my  d.  are  vanity 

9.  25.  now  7ny  d.  are  swifter  than  a  post,  they  flee 

10.  20.  are  not  my  d.  few,  cease  then,  and  let  alone 
17. 1.  7ny  d.  are  extinct,  graves  are  ready  for  me 

11.  my  d.  are  past, 'my  purposes  are  broken 

27.  t  6.  my  heart  shall  not  reproach  me  for  my  d. 
29.  18.  I  shall  multiply  my  d.  as  the  sand 

Psai. 39.4. know  mine  end,  and  the  measure  of  mi/ d. 

5.  thou  hast  made  my  d.  as  a  hand-breadth 
]02.  3.  for  my  d.  are  consumed  like  smoke 

11.  my  d.  are  like  a  shadow  that  dcclineth 
23.he  weakened  my  strength,  he  shortened  my  d. 
24.  take  me  not  away  in  the  midst  of  my  d. 
116.  t2.  therefore  will  1  call  upon  him  in  my  d. 
Isa.  38.  10.  I  said,  in  the  cutting  off  of  my  d. 
39.  8.  there  shall  be  peace  and  truth  in  my  d. 
Jer.  20.  18.  my  d.  shall  be  consumed  with  shame 

JVoic-a-DAYS. 
I.Sam.25.10.bemany  servants noir-a-d.brcak  away 

Prolong,  ed,  eth,  DAYS. 
Deut.  4.  26.  shall  not  prolong  your  d.  on  it,  30.  18. 

40.  and  that  thou  mayest /iro/on^  thy  d.  22.  7. 
5.  16.  and  that  thy  d.  may  be  prolonged,  6.  3. 
33.lhalye  may  prolong  your  d.  in  the  land,  11.9. 
17.  20.  to  the  end  that  he  may  prolong  his  d. 
32.  47.  ye  shall  prolong  your  d.  in  the  land 
Prov.  10.  27.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  prolongelh  d. 

28.  16.  hateth  covetousness,  shall  prolong  his  d. 
Eccl.  8.  12.  though  a  sinner's  d.  he  prolonged,  yet 

13.  neither  shall  the  wicked  prolong  his  d. 
Isa.  13.  22.  and  her  d.  shall  not  be  prolonged 
53.  10.  see  his  seed,  he  shall  prolong  his  d. 
Ezek.  12.  22.  the  d.  are  proloni^rd,  vision  faileth 

.Sabbath-DAYS. 
MotA^.a.ho-w  on  the  sahbath-d.lhr;  pripsts  profane 
IQ  is  it  lawful  to  heal  on  the  sabbath-d.  ? 


DAY 

^i'aM2.12.it  is  lawful  to  do  well  on  the  sabbath-d. 
Mark  3.  4.  lawful  to  do  good  on  sab.-d.  Luke  6.  9. 
Luke  4.31.  he  came  and  taught  them  on  sabbuth-d. 

6.  2.  which  is  not  lawful  to  do  on  the  sabbath-d. 
Mcts  17.2.  three  sabbalh-d.  reasoned  with  them 
Col.  2.  16.  judge  you  in  respect  of  5u66a(A-(i 

Thy  DAYS. 
Eiod.20.12. honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother,  that 
thy  d.  may  be  long  on  land  L.  thy  G.  giveth  thee 

23.  26.  the  number  of  thy  d.  I  will  fulfil 
Deut.  12. 1 19.  forsake  not  the  Levite  all  Ihy  d. 

23.  6.  shall  not  seek  their  prosperity  all  thy  d. 
25.  15.  that  thy  d.  may  be  lengthened  in  land  God 

30.  20.   he  is  thy  life,  and  the  length  of  thy  d. 

31.  14.  thy  d.  approach  that  thou  must  die 
33.  25.  and  as  thy  d  so  shall  thy  strength  be 

1  Sam.  25.  28.  evil  not  found  in  thee  all  thy  d. 

2  Sam.  7.  12.  and  when  thy  d.  be  fulfilled 

1  Kings  3. 13.  shall  not  be  any  like  thee  all  thy  d. 

14.  walk  in  my  ways,  then  I  will  lengthen  thy  d. 
11.  12.  in  thy  d.  I  will  not  do  it,  for  David's  sake 
'i Kings  20.6. 1  will  add  to  thy  d.  15  years,  Jsa.i6.5. 
IChrvn.n.  11.  when  iAyd.  he  expired,  that  thou  go 
Job.lO.a.are  thy  d.aalhe  days  of  man,  are  thy  yearn 
38.12.hastthou  commanded  morning sinceZAi/  d.t 

21.  because  the  number  of  thy  d.  is  great 
Prov.  9.  11.  for  by  me  thy  d.  shall  be  multiplied 
£zcA.  22.  4.  thou  hast  caused  Ihy  d.  to  draw  near 

Two  DAY'S. 

Exod.  16.  29.  on  the  sixth  day  the  bread  of  two  d. 

J^um.  9.  22.  whether  it  were  two  d.  or  a  month 

11.  19.  ye  shall  not  eat  one,  nor  two  d.  nor  five 

2  Sam.  1. 1.  and  David  had  abode  two  d.  in  Ziklag 
Ezra  10. 13.  nor  is  this  a  work  of  one  day  or  two  d. 
Esth.  9.  27.  that  they  would  keep  these  two  d. 
Hos.  6.  2.  after  two  d.  will  he  revive  us,  third  day 
Mat.  26.  2.  after  two  d.  is  the  feast,  Mark  14.  1. 
John  4.  40.  and  he  abode  there  txoo  d. 

43.  now  after  two  d.  he  departed  thence 
11.  6.  he  abode  two  d.  still  in  the  same  place 

Three  DAYS. 
Gcn.40.12.  Joseph  said,  three  branches  are  three  d. 
13.within  three  ci.  shall  Phar.  lift  up  thy  head, 19. 
18.  Joseph  said,  the  three  baskets  are  three  d. 
42.  17.  he  put  them  altogether  into  ward  three  d. 
i!;iod.3.18.let  us  go  three  rf.  journey  into  wilderness 
to  sacrifice  to  Lord  our  God,  5.  3.  |  8.27.  ]  15.22. 
10.22.there  wasa  thick  darkness  in  Egypt  three  d, 
23.  nor  rose  any  from  his  place  for  three  d. 
J()«A. 1.11. within  three  rf.  ye  shall  pass  over  Jordan 
2.  16.  and  hide  yourselves  there  three  d.  22. 
Judg.  19.  4.  and  he  abode  with  him  three  d. 

1  Sam.  9.  20.  thy  asses  that  were  lost  three  d.  ago 
21.5.women  have  been  kept  from  us  these  thiced. 
.30.  12.  he  had  eaten  no  bread  three  d.  and  nights 

13. master  left  me, because  tAr.  rf.agone  I  fell  sick 

2  .Sam. 20. 4. assembled  the  men  of  Judah  in  three  d. 

24.  13.  there  he  three  d.  pestilence,  1  Chr.  21.  12. 

1  Kings  12.  5.  depart  for  three  d.  2  Chron.  10.  5. 
"Kings  2.17.sought  him  tArce  d.  but  found  him  not 

2  Chron.  20.  25.  were  three  d.  gathering  the  spoil 
Ezra  3.  1.5.  there  we  abode  in  tents  three  d. 

10.  8.  whosoever  would  not  come  in  three  d.  9. 

Esth.  4.  16.  and  neither  eat  nor  drink  three  d. 

JoKoAl.n.Lord  prepared  a  fish,  Jonah  was  in  belly 

offish  three  rf.  and  three  nights.  Mat.  12.  40. 

Jlfof.l5.32.I  have  compassion  on  multitudebccause 

they  continue  with  me  now  three  d.  Mark  3.  2. 

06.  61.  to  destroy  temple  of  God,  and  to  build  it  in 

three  rf.  27.  40.  Mark  14.  58.  |  15. 29.  .7»An  2.  19. 

27.  63.  after  three  d.  1  will  rise  again,  Mark  8. 31. 
Luke  2.  46.  after  three  d.  found  him  in  the  temple 
/2c£i9.9.Saul  was  thr.  d.without  sight,eat  nor  drink 

28.  7.  Publius  lodged  us  three  d.  courteously 
Iltv.  11.  9.  see  their  dead  bodies  tArcc  d.  and  a  half 

11.  after  three  rf.  and  a  half  spirit  of  life  entered 
Four  DAYS. 
Judg.  11.  40.  lament  daughter  of  Jephthah /our  d. 
JoA«  11.  17.  Lazarus  had  lain  in  the  grave /oKrrf. 

39.  he  stinketh,  for  he  hath  been  dead  four  rf. 
Sets  10.  20.  four  d.  ago  I  was  fasting  to  this  hour 

Five  DAYS. 
J^Tiim.  11.  19.  nor/i'«  rf.  nor  ten  d.  nor  twenty  d. 
Acts  20.  6.  we  came  to  them  to  Troas  in  five  d. 
24. 1.  after  ^e«  d.Ananias  the  high  priest  descend. 

Six  DAYS. 
Eiorf.16.26.it3;  rf.  ye  shall  gather  it,  but  on  sabbath 
20.  9.  keep  snbbalh  holy,  six  d.  shalt  thou  labour 
anddoallthy  work,23.  12.  |  34.21.  i?f«Y.  5. 13. 
11.  in  six  rf.  Lord  made  heaven  and  earth,  31. 17. 
24.  16.  the  cloud  covered  mount  Sinai  six  rf. 
31. 15.  six  d.  may  work  be  done,  35.  2.  Lev.  23.3. 
Deut.  16. 8.  six  d.  shalt  thou  eat  unleavened  bread 
.fosh.  8.  3.  go  round  city,  thus  shalt  thou  do  six  d, 
14.  they  compassed  city  once,  so  they  did  six  rf. 
F.tek.  46.  1.  gale  shall  be  shut  the  six  working  rf, 
lAtke  13.  14.  six  d.  in  which  men  ought  to  work 
JoAnl2.1.  Jesus  six  rf.beforepassovcr  came  to  Beth. 

Seven  D.\YS. 
Gen.l.i.  yet  sev»n  d.  I  will  cause  it  to  rain  od  oa'rlJi 


DAI 

Get  8. 10.  and  Noah  stayed  yet  otlier  seven  d.  12' 
50.  JO.  Josepli  iiiouiiied  for  his  I'utiier  seven  d. 
EioU. I'i.li. seven  d.  ye  shall  eat  unleavened  bread, 
lU.  6,  7.  I  23.  15.  I  34.  Id  I^cv.  23.  G. 
JVum.  28.  17.  Veut.  10.  3. 
19.  setjen  (/.shall  no  leaven  be  found,  Dcjit.  16.  4. 
H^.'JO.scveii  d.  it  shall  be  with  the  dam,y^t«.22.27. 
20.  30.  the  priest  shall  j>ut  them  on  seven  d. 
35.scuc;id.shalt  tliou  consecrate  them, y^cu.8.33. 
'il. seven  iZ.shalt  make  an  atonement  tor  the  altar 
/,cp.  12.2.  a  man-child,  she  shall  be  unclean  sei;.  d. 

13.  5.  ifthe  plague  be  at  a  stay,  then  the  priest  shall 

shut  him  up  seven  d.  more,  21,  2t;,  33,  50,  54. 

14.  8.  he  shall  tarry  abroad  out  of  his  tent  seven  d. 
15.19.havean  issue, she  shall  be  put  apart  seucnrf. 
23.  8.  shall  otTer  an  otlering  by  lire  to  Ld.  seven  d. 

39.  also  when  fruit  gathered  in,  ye  shall  keej)  a 

feast  to  the  Lord  seven  d.  40, 41.  JV'um.  29.  12. 

JWm.l2.14.should  Miriam  not  be  ashamed  sev.  d.1 

19.  14.  all  in  the  tent  shall  be  unclean  seven  d. 
/)euMO. 13.  observe  the  feast  of  taberiniclessco.  d. 
y«</u-.14.12.ifye  can  declare  it  to  me  within  scy.  d. 

17.  and  she  wept  before  him  thu  seven  d. 
1  Sam.  10.  8.  seven  d.  shall  tliou  tarry  till  I  come 
11.  3.  the  elders  said,  give  us  seven  d.  respite 
13.  8.  he  tarried  seven  d.  according  to  the  time 
31.  13.  and  they  lasted  seven  d.  1  Chrun.  10.  12. 
1  Kini'-s!^.ti5.  Solom.  held  a  feast  before  Li.seven  d. 
IG.  15.  Ziinri  did  reign  seven  d.  in  Tirzah 

0  Chrun.  7. 9.  they  kept  dedication  ofaltar  seven  d. 
30.  21.  the  children  of  Israel  kept  the  feast  of  un- 
leavened bread  seven  d.  35.  17.  Ezra  6.  22. 

23.  assembly  look  counsel  to  keep  other  seven  d. 
F.stk.  1.  5.  a  feast  both  to  great  and  small  seven  d. 
Isa.  30.  20.  light  of  the  sun,  as  the  light  of  seven  d. 
iCzek.  3.  15.  1  remained  there  astonished  seven  d. 
43.20.  seven  d.  shall  they  purge  the  altar,  purify 
//c4.11.30.fell,  after  they  were  compassed  seven  d. 

Eight  DAYS. 
Oen.\~.M.  eight  d.  old  shall  be  circumcised,  21. 4. 
2CAr()n.2y.l7.  sanct'ify  house  of  the  Ld.  in  eight  d. 
/,u/irc2.21.when  eight  d.  were  accomplished  tor  the 
John  20.  20.  after  eight  d.  Jesus  came  and  stood 
Ten  DAYS.  [in  midst 

J^um.  11.  19.  ye  shall  not  eat  ten  d.  nor  twenty  (/. 

1  Sam.  2.5.  3B.  ten  d.  after  the  Lord  smote  Nabal 
J^eh.  5.  18.  once  in  ten  d.  store  of  all  sorts  of  wine 
Jer.  42.  7.  after  ten  d.  the  w  ord  of  the  Lord  came 
Van.  1.  12.  prove  thy  servants,  I  pray  thee,  ten  d. 

15.  at  the  end  of  ten  d.  their  countenances  fairer 
.^cts  25.  fi.  when  he  had  tarried  more  than  ten  d. 
Hcv.  2.  10.  but  ye  shall  have  tribulation  ten  d. 

Eleven  DAY'S. 
Dcut.  1.2.  eleven  fZ.  journey  bet.  Iloreb  and  Kadesh 

Twelve  DAYS. 
/ids  24.  11.  there  are  but  tirelre  d.  since  I  went  up 

Fourteen  DAYS. 
1  Kin<rs  8.  65.  Solomon  held  a  feast  fourteen  d. 

Fifteen  DAYS. 
Gal.  1.  18.  I  went  and  abode  with  Veter  fifteen  d. 

Tiventy  DAYS. 
AVm.  11.  19.  ye  shall  not  e^it  fl-sh  twenty  d. 

Twenty-one  DAYS. 
Dan.  10. 13.  prince  of  Pers.  withstood  me  twrvty- 
Thirtij  T>.\\'S.  [uned. 

^um.  20.  29.  they  mourned  for  Aaron  thirty  d. 
Dent.  34.  8.  Israel  wept  for  Moses  thirty  d. 
F.sth.  4. 11.  not  been  oalled  to  the  king  these  t/iir.  d 
Dan.tj.  1.  whosoever  shall  ask  petition  for  thirty 
Thirty-three  DAYS.  [d.  12. 

Z.er.12.4.  in  the  blood  of  her  purify,  thirty-three  d. 

Forty  DAYS. 

Gen.l.i.l  will  cause  il  to  r-iin  on  the  p.;u\Yi  forty  d. 

■50.  '.i.  forty  d.  were  fulfilled  for  enibnlruiiighini 

Exod.^l.  18.  Moscri  was  in  the  mount/or/y  d.  and 

forty  nights,  34.  28.  Deut.  9.  9.  |  10.  10. 

^um.  13.  25.  ihev  returned  iSxex  forty  d.  14.  34. 

Dcut.  9.  25.  I  leli  down  before  the  Lord  forty  d. 

1  Kings  19.8. went  in  strini'th  of  that  ment/orti/  d. 

Kiek.  4.  fi.  shall  bear  the  iniquity  of  Judah/or<^(/. 

./onoA3.4.  yd  forty  rf.and  Nineveh  be  overthrown 

Jtat-i.^.  when  he  had  fasted /or.  (/.  nnd/wr.  nigliti< 

.Mark  1.  13.  .le.sus  was  forli/  d.  in  the  wilderness 

tempted  of  Satan,  was  %viih  wild  beasts,  /^«.4.2. 

..^cts  1.3.  being  seen  of  iliem/or>v  d.  and  speaking 

Fifly-tiroDWfi. 
Jfch.G.  15.  BO  the  wall  wn*  fui'shed  in  fifly-two  d. 

Your  D.AYS. 
r>rut.  11.  21.  that  your  d.  may  be  multiplied 
Jrr.  16.  9.  I  will  cause  to  ceaae  in  voiir  d.  mirth 
35.  7.  but  all  your  d.  vo  8h:ill  dwell  in  tents 
F.zeh  VX.  2.).  in  »/•  d.  will  I  sny  word,  and  perform  il 
Joel  1.  2  liiithlhio  been  in  your  d.  or  d.  of  fa' hi  rs  ? 
Uiib.  1.5. 1  will  work  a  work  in  your  d.  .lets  13.41. 

DAILY. 
F.Tod.  16.  Ti.  twice  as  much  as  they  enthered  d. 
JVuin.  4.  16.  the  d.  meat  oflVrine,  Ezrk.  40.  13. 

28.  24.  lifter  Ihis  manner  ve  shnll  oi^t  d. 

29.  6.  hesidi-  the  d.  hurnt-olTerin?,  E:rn  3.  4. 
Ju</^.10.1G.when  »ho  oresied  him  d. with  hor  words 

iia 


DEA 

2^in^.'25.30.allowance  wasatZ.rate  for  every  day 
jVeh.  5.  18.  now  that  wliicli  was  prepared  lijr  me  d. 
A'«tA.3.4.when  they  spake  d.hearkened  not  to  them 
t'sal.  13.  2.  havingSorrow  in  my  lieart  d.  h<iw  long 
42. 10.  while  they  say  d.  to  me,  where  is  thy  God  ! 
56.  1.  be  merciful,  he  fighting  rf.  ojijiresselh  me 
2.  mine  enemies  would  d.  swallow  me  up 
61.  8.  I  will  sing,  that  I  may  d.  perlbrm  my  vowg 
68. 19.  blessed  be  the  Lord  who  d.  loadeth  us 
72.  15.  he  shall  live  and  d.  shall  he  be  praised 
74.  22.  how  the  foolish  man  re|iroacheth  thee  d. 
86.  3.  I  cry  to  thee  d.  ||  88. 9. 1  called  d.  upon  thee 
88.  17.  they  came  round  about  me  d.  like  water 
Proo.  8.  30.  and  I  was  d.  his  delight,  rejoicing  in 

34.  that  heareth  me,  watching  d.  at  my  gates 
Isa.  58.  2.  yet  they  seek  me  d.  and  delight  to  know 
.hr.  7.  25.  d.  rising  up  early  and  sending  them 
20.  7.  I  am  in  derision  d.  every  one  niockeih,  8. 
Ezek.  30.  10.  and  Noph  shall  have  distresses  d. 
Dan.  1.  5.  the  king  appointed  them  a  d.  provision 
6.  11.  he  magnified  himself,  and  by  him  the  d. 
sacritice  was  taken  away,  11.  31.  |  12.  11. 
7/0^.12.1. Kphraim  d.  increaseth  lies  and  desolatiuii 
Jl/(i£.6.11.give  us  this  day  our  d.  bread,  I^uke  11.3. 

20.  55.  I  sat  d.  with  you  teaching  in  the  temple, 

Mark  14.  49.  Luke  19.  47.  |  22.  53. 
A«/i(;9.23.1ot  him  take  up  his  cross,d.and  follow  nie 
Jiets  2.  46.  continuing  d.  with  one  accord  in  temjile 
47.  Lord  added  to  the  church  d.  such  lo  be  saved 
6. 1.  widows  were  neglected  in  the  d.  ministration 
16.  5.  the  churches  increased  in  number  d. 
17. 11. the  noble  liereans  searched  the  scri|itiires  d. 

1  Cor.  15.  31.  I  die  d.  \\  Ueb.  3.  13.  but  c.vhort  d. 
Hell.  7. 27.  who  needeth  not  d.  to  oti'er  sacritice 
./aHi.2.15.ifa  sister  be  naked, and  destitute  ofc/.food 

DAYS-MAN. 
Job  9  33.  neither  is  there  anv  d.  betwixt  us 

DAY-SPRING. 

Job  38. 12.  caused  the  (/.-s;>r»i»- to  know  his  place 

I.ukeX.  78.  whereby  d.-<i.  from  on  high  visited  us 

DAY-STAR. 

2  Pet.  1.  19.  and  the  d.-star  arise  in  your  liearts 

DEACON,  S. 

Phil.  1.  1.  to  the  saints  with  the  bisho7)S  and  d. 

1  7'/w.3.8.llie  r/.must  be  grave,  not  double-tongued 
10.  then  let  them  use  the  olliee  of  a  d.  13. 
12.  let  the  d.  be  the  husbands  of  one  wife 
DEAD 

Signifies,  [1]  One  whose  soul  is  separated  from 
his  body.,  either  by  a  natural  or  violent  death, 
Ruth  1.  8.  Job  1.  19.  [2]  Such  as  are  in  a. "tote 
of  .ijiiritual  death,  being  void  of  grace,  lying 
under  the  power  of  sin,  and  as  unable  to  do 
any  thing  that  is  spiritually  good,  or  to  convert 
and  raise  themselves,  as  a  dead  bodi/  is  to  quick- 
en itself,  Eph.2.1  1  Tim.  5.6.  [3]  ■'Such  as  have 
no  heivg  at  all,  hut  are  extinct,  both  hodti  and 
soul;  Mat.  22.  32,  God  is  not  the  God  of  the 
dead,  that  is,  of  such  as  arc  finalhj  and  irreco- 
venibly  perished,  without  any  possibility  of 
living  oijiiiu,  as  the  Sadducees  thought ;  hut  he 
is  the  Gild  of  the  living;  Ihrit  is,  of  such  whose 
souls  do  live  and  are  in  beivg,and  whose  1/odirs, 
though  now  dead,  shall  be  made  alive  again..H\ 
Such  as  were  like  dead  persons,  as  the  .]i'\v<, 
who  seemedto  be  lost  in  Babylon,  of  whom  there 
was  no  more  hope  that  they  should  return  and 
line  in  th'ir  own  land,  than  Ihi't  a  dead  man 
should  rise  to  life.  I.sa.26.  19,  Thy  dead  men 
shall  live.  [5]  One  ven/i'ear  to  death,  as  good 
as  dead,  Gen.  20.  3,  Thou  art  but  a  dead  man, 
says  God  to  Jihimel^eh :  Thou  deserrrst  a 
present  and  untimely  death  ;  and  if  thou  pro- 
ceerlrst  in  thy  intended  wickedness,  it  s!iall  hr 
inflicted  upon  thee.  [6]  Dead  idols  or  imaises, 
Isa.  8.  19.  [7]  Impotent  or  unable  for  genera- 
tion, nrrording  to  the  eo'irse  of  nature,  Rom.  4. 
19.  [8]  Svrh  as  are  deeinjfd  in  grace.  Rev.  3.  1. 
[9]  I'^rre  frnoi  sin,  and  the  law,  as  to  rrperta- 
tion  of  eternal  life  thereby.  Gal. 2.  lO.flO]  The 
state  of  the  dead,  Rom.  8^  1 1 .  f  1 1  ]  The  resur- 
rerlinn  of  the  dead,  1  Cor.  15.  29. 

f7f»?.  20.3.  God  said  lo  Abim.  thoiinrthiila  d.mna 
23.  3.  iiml  .Abraham  stood  up  from  before  his  d. 

F.iod.  4.  19.  the  men  are  (/.  which  sought  thy  life 

9.  7.  there  was  not  one  of  the  Israi-liles'  cattle  d. 
12.30.  WRs  not  a  liouse  where  thiTe  was  not  one  d. 

33.  the  Effy|)linn«  suiil,  we  bo  nil  d.  men 
14.  30.  Israel  saw  the  R^'vptjans  d.  on  iho  shore 

21.  34.  and  the  d.  bcasi  sliall  be  hi^,  36. 
3.5.  and  the  d.  ox  also  thov  shall  divide 

f.ev.  22.  4.  touchclh  any  thiie  um-leiui  bv  tlio  d, 
.Vy/m.S.  2.  and  whosoevi'r  is  denied  by  ihi'  d. 
12.  12.  h't  her  not  be  as  one  d.  of  whom  tin'  llesh  is 
16.  43.  he  stood  between  the  d.  and  ihe  living 
f)iot.1^  5.  the  wife  of  the  rf.  no'  marry  a  stranger 
./H</<r. 3.  25.  beholJ,  iboir  lord  was  fallen  down  d. 
A.  22.  whi'M  he  raino  in,  beliidd,  Sis'r  i  lay  d. 

10.  30.  (/.  Samson  slew  nt  bis  death  was  more  than 
Uulh  1.  8.  as  yu  liavo  Ueult  with  d.  and  with  me 


DEA 

Ruth  4.  S.  to  raise  up  name  of  the  d.  on  his  inhft- 

ritunca 

1  Sam.  4.  17.  thy  sons  IIo[>hni  and  Phinehas  are  d 
19.  that  her  father-in-law  and  husband  were  d. 

24.14.dost  thou  pursued  after  a(/.dog,afler  a  flea'' 
31.  7.  Saul  and  his  sons  were  d.  1  Chron.  10.  7. 

2  Sam.  9.8.  shouldest  look  on  such  a  d.  dog  as  I  am 
13.  33.  to  think  that  all  the  king's  sons  are  d. 
16.9.  why  should  thisd.dngcurse  my  lord  theking 

19.  28.  all  of  my  father's  house  were  but  d.  men 
1  Kings  3. 22.  living  mine,  and  the  d.  is  thy  son,  23. 

13.  31.  when  I  am  d.  bury  me  in  the  sepulchie 
21.  15.  arise,  for  Naboth  is  not  alive  but  d. 

.fob  1. 19.  house  fell  on  young  men,  and  they  are<2. 
26.  5.  d.  things  are  formed  from  under  the  waters 

/'«uZ.  31.12. 1  am  forgotten  as  ad.  man  out  of  mind 
76.  ().  the  chariot  and  horse  are  cast  into  d.  sleep 
88.  5.  free  among  the  d.  like  slain  that  lie  in  grave 

10.  wilt  thou  shew  wonders  to  the  d.  ? 
106.  28.  and  they  ate  the  sacrifices  of  the  d. 
115. 17. tiled,  praise  not  the  Lord,  neither  any 
143.  3.  in  darkness,  as  those  that  have  been  \ongd, 

f  roi;.2.I8.honse  inclinelh,and  her  paths  unto  the  d, 
9.  18.  but  he  knoweth  not  that  the  d.  are  there 

21.  16.  shall  remain  in  the  congregation  of  therf. 
F.ccl.  4.  2.  I  praised  the  d.  which  are  already  d. 

9.  3.  anil  after  that  they  go  to  the  d. 

4.  for  a  living  dog  is  IJetter  than  a  d.  lion 

5.  the  d.  know  not  any  thing,  neilhcr  have  they 

10.  1.  d.  flies  cause  the  ointment  of  the  apoihccary 
Isa.  8. 19.  seek  to  their  God,  tor  the  living  to  the  d. 

14.  9.  it  stirrolh  u|)  the  d.  for  thee,  the  chief  onca 

22.  2.  not  slain  with  the  sword,  nor  d.  in  battle 
26.  14.  they  are  d.  shall  notlive,  they  are  deceased 

19.  thy  d.  men  shall  live,  with  riy  d.  body 
59.  10.  we  are  in  desolate  places  as  d.  men 
Jam.  3.  6.  in  dark  places,  us  they  that  be  d.  of  old 
/":f/i:.44.25.  they  shall  come  at  no  d.person  lodefilo 
J/a^2.20.  are  d.lhnt  sought  the  young  child's  lifa 

8.  22.  follow  me,  and  let  the  d.  bury  their  d. 

9.  24.  he  said  lo  them,  give  place,  for  the  maid 
is  not  d.  but  sleepeth,  Mark  5.  39.  Euke  8. 52 

10.  8.  heal  the  sick,  raise  the  d.  oast  out  devils 

11.  5.  thedeaf  hear,  d. 'are  raised  up,  I,uke~.^2 

22.  31 .  touching  the  resurr.  of  the  d.  Mark  12.  20 
32.  God  is  not  the  God  of  the  d.  but  of  the  liv- 
ing, Mark  12.  27.  Juke  20.  38. 

23.  27.  but  are  within  full  of  d.  men's  bones 
28.  4.  for  fear  the  keepers  became  as  d.  men 

Mark  9.  26.  he  was  ns  one  d.  many  said,  he  is  d. 

15.  44.  Pihite  m:iryelled  if  he  were  already  d. 
Luke  7. 12.  bchcild,  there  was  a  d.  man  carried  out 

10.  30.  and  departed,  leaving  him  half  d. 

24.  5.  said,  why  seek  ye  the  liviiiff  among  the  d.  ? 
John  5.  21.  for  as  the  Kalher  raiseth  up  the  d. 

25.wheii  thed..shii!l  hear  voice  of  ihe  Son  of  God 
6. 49.  your  fathers  did  eat  manna,  and  are  d.  .""8. 

11.  2").  thai  believeth,  tho'  he  were  d.  shall  he  live 
v'?(;i.s2.29.  the  ]>iitriarch  David  is  both  d.  and  hurled 

5.  10.  the  yi'ung  men  came  in  and  found  her  d. 
10.42.teslify  that  it  is  he  who  was  ordained  of  God 
to  be  the  Judt'P  of  quick  and  d.  2  Tim.  4.  1. 
14.  19.  drew  him  on*,  supposing  hi'  had  been  d. 

20.  9.  F.ulychos  611  down,  and  whs  taken  up  d. 

26.8.  why 'incredible  that  God  should  raise  the  d.? 
23.6.  have  swollen  or  fallen  down  d.  suddenly 

Horn.  4.  17.  even  Goil  who  quickeneth  the  rf. 
19.  he  considered  not  his  own  body  now  d. 

5.  15.  for  if  through  Ihooffence  of  one  many  bed, 

6.  2.  weihat  are  d»  lo  sin,  live  any  longer  therein  7 
8.  if  we  be  d.  with  Christ,  we  believe  that  wo 

11.  reckon  ye  yourselves  to  be  d.  to  sin,  hut  alive 

7.  2.  but  ifliio  luLsband  be  d.  3.  1  Cor.  7.  .39.« 

4.  ve  also  are  be'ome  d.  to  the  l.iw,  Gol.  2.  19. 

14.9.  that  he  might  be  lord  bothof  d.  and  living 

1  Cor.  15.  !.">.  if  so  be  ihal  the  d.  rise  not 

3."!.  hut  some  man  will  say,  how  are  Ihe  d.ralscd? 
.')2.  and  Ihe  d.  shall  be  raised  incorruptible 

2  Cor.  1.  9.  bill  Iriisi  in  God  who  raiseth  the  d. 
5.  14.  that  if  one  riled  for  nil,  tlien  wi  re  nil  >/. 

r;)A.2.1  .were  d.  in  Ire.spasses  and  sin.s,  5.  C<1.  2.13. 
Col.  2.  20.  if  ye  be  d.  with  Christ,  2  Tim.  2.  11. 

3.  3.  ye  are  d.  and  your  life,  is  hiil  with  Chrlsl  in  G. 
1  TArs.t.  4.  16.  and  Ihe  rf.  in  Christ  shall  ri.se  first 
//rA.fi.l.lheronnihillon  of  repentance  from  rf.worl'g 

9.14. blood  ofChr.  purji' eonsrience  from  d.works 
17.  n  lesliiinenl  is  of  force  after  men  are  d. 

11.4.  and  by  il  he  being  rf.  yet  spoaketh 
12.spranglliereeven  of  one, and  him  as  roodns  d. 
3.5.  women  reeeived  iheir  d.  rBiscd  lo  life  n^iin 
1  Pfr.2.24.  we  beinird.to  sin  should  livelo  ri£h'eou« 

4.  H.  who  is  ready  lo  jiidgn  the  quick  niiil  Ihe  »/. 
0.  the  t'ospel  was  prenclud  to  them  tlinl  are  d, 

hide  12.  twice  d.  plucked  up  by  the  roots_ 
Her.  1 .  .5.  Jesus,  who  is  the  firsl-begotteii  of  lh«  d. 

17.  when  I  saw  him,  I  IVII  at  bis  feet  as  rf. 
3.  I.  ihoii  bnst  a  namelbat  thou  livesi,  and  art  i 
14.  13.  blissrd  are  ihe  rf.  w  ho  die  in  Ihe  Lord 

16.  3.  Ihe  s"a  becain"  n»  llx-  blood  of  a  rf.  man 
20.  5,  but  Iho  rest  of  thu  d.  lived  iiul  ngaia 


DEA 

Rev.  20.  12.  saw  llied.  stand  bef.  G.;  the  d.  were 

juiiijed  outoftliose  things  written  in  the  book 

13.seiigaveu()  d.  wliich  were  in  it,<leatlnind  hell 

See  BoDv,  Buav,   Carca.sk,  Corpse,  IIksur- 

RKUTION. 

For  the  DEAD. 

Lev.  19-  28.  ye  shall  not  malte  cuttings  for  the  d. 

21.  1.  there  shall  none  be  defiled  fur  the  d. 
JOeiit.li.l.yc  shall  not  make  any  baldness/ur  t/ie  d. 

20. 14. 1  have  not  given  ought  tiiereof /or  tke  d 
2i'a(H.14.2.a3  a  woman  that  had  niourned/ur  tke  d. 
Jer.  Iti.  7.  not  tear  to  comfort  Iheni  /or  Uic  d. 

22.  10.  weep  ye  not/or  tke  d.  nor  bemoan  him 
Ezek.  24. 17.  forbear,  make  no  mourning /or  t/jc  d. 
1  Cor.  15.  29.  what  shall  they  do  who  are  bajitized 

for  tke  (/.why  are  they  also  baptized/or  the  d.7 
From  tke  DEAD. 
J^Iat.  14.  2.  John  Bapiist,  he  is  risen /ro7«  tke  d. 
JUrtr/iH.lO.what  the  rising/r«;K  thed.tiMu\d  mean? 
Jyake  16.30.nay,  but  if  one  went  to  them  from  tked. 
31. nor  be  persuaded,  though  one  rose  from  Ike  d. 
24.  4(5.  to  rise /rum  the  d.the  third  day,  .Jokn'H).  9 
Jlcta  10.41.  drink  with  him  after  he  rose  from  the  d. 
2(j.  2:3.  be  the  first  that  should  use  from  tke  d. 
Rovi.  6.  13.  as  those  that  are  alive  from,  the  d. 

10.  7.  that  is,  to  bring  up  Christ  again/ro;n  tke  d. 

11.  15.  roceiving  of  them  be  but  lile/ro;«  tke  d. 

1  Q)r.l5.r2.if  Chr.  be  preached  that  lose from  the  d. 
Eyk.  5.  14.  arise /rom  tke  d.  Christ  shall  give  thee 
Cut.  1.  18.  who  is  the  first-born /r«;/i  tke  d.  [light 
Htb.  11.  19.  God  was  able  to  raise  him  from  tke  d. 

13.  20.  brought  again  from  tke  d.  our  Lord  Jesus 
•See  Raised,  Risen. 
Is  DEAD. 
Gen.  42.  38;  for  his  brother  is  d.  and  he  left,  44.  20. 
Deut.  25.  6.  in  the  name  of  bis  brother  that  is  d. 
Josh.  1.  2.  Moses  my  servant  is  d.  arise,  go  over 
./«d^.20.5.  my  concubine  they  forced  that  she  is  d. 

2  Sam.  2. 7.  Saul  (i  d.  4. 10.  ||  11. 21.  Uriah  is  d.  24. 
12. 16.  the  child  ii'  d.  19.  ||  13.  32.  Amnon  only  is  d. 
14.5.1  am  a  widow  and  my  hush,  is  d.  2  Kings  i.\. 

18.  20.  no  tidings  because  the  king's  son  is  d. 
lO.lO.Absalom  is  d.\\l  Kings  21. 14.  Naboth  is  d. 

Ezek.  44.  31.  priests  shall  not  eat  that  is  d.  of  itself 
Jtfu£.9.18.my  daughter  /*  d.  Mark  5.35.  lAike  S.4i). 
Mark  9.  20.  insomuch  that  many  said,  he  is  d. 
John  8.^52.  Abraham  is  d.  and  the  prophets,  53. 

11.  14.  then  said  Jesus  plainly,  Lazarus  is  d. 
Rom.  6.  7.  for  he  that  is  d.  is  freed  from  sin 

8. 10.  if  Christ  be  in  you,  body  is  <i.  because  of  sin 
Gal.  2.  21.  if  righteous,  by  law,  Christ  is  d.  in  vain 
1  TI7B..5. 6.  livelh  in  pleasure,  />rf.  while  she  liveth 
Jam.  2.  17.  faith,  if  it  hath  nof  works  is  d.  20. 
2G.  for  as  the  body  without  thespirit  isd.  so  faith 
VVas  DEAD. 
Jadg.  2.  19.  when  the  judge  teas  d.  they  returned 

9.  55.  when  men  of  Israel  saw  Abimelech  was  d. 

1  .Sam. 17.51. Philistines  saw  their  champion  was  d. 
2.5.  39.  when  David  heard  that  Nabal  was  d. 
31.  5.  armour-bearer  saw  Saul  teas  d.  1  Chr.  10.5. 

2  Sam.  4.  1.  Saul's  son  heard  that  Abner  was  d. 

11.  26.  Bathsheba  heard  her  husband  was  d. 

12.  19.  David  perceived  that  the  child  was  d. 

13.  39.  comforted  for  Amnon,  seeing  he  teas  d. 

1  A'/;in-s3.21.togive  my  child  suck,behold,it  was  d. 
11.  21.  when  Hadad  heard  that  Joab  was  d. 

21.  15.  when  Jezebel  heard  that  Naboth  was  d. 

2  Kings  3.  5  when  Ahab  was  d.  Moab  rebelled 
4. 32.  behold,  the  chihl  was  d.  and  laid  on  his  bed 
11.  1.  .Athaliah  saw  her  son  was  rf.2  CAro7(. 22.10. 

Jl/a«.2.1H.bnt  when  Herod  was  d.  behold,  an  angel 

/,u4c  7.15.  he  that  was  d.sat  up  and  began  to  speak 

8.  .53.  laughed  to  scorn,  knowing  that  she  was  d. 

15  2t.  this  my  son  jcas  d.  and  is  alive  again 

32.  for  this  tliy  brother  was  d.  and  is  alive  again 

John  n.39.  Marthaj_the  sister  of  him  that  jcas  d. 

44.  and  he  that  was  d.  came  forth  bound 

19.  33.  saw  that  Jesus  was  d.  brake  not  his  legs 
^cts  25.  19.  qjicstions  of  one  Jesus  who  teas  d. 
Rom.  1.  6.  for  without  the  law  sin  was  d. 

Rev.  1. 18.  I  am  he  that  liveih,  and  was  d.  behold 

DEADLY. 
1  Sam.  5.  11.  was  a  d.  destruction  throughout  city 
Psni.n.O.ileliverine  from  (/.enemies  who  compass 
Kmk.  30.  24.  with  groanings  of  a  d.  wounded  man 
Mark  16.18.  if  drink  (/.thing,  it  shall  not  hurt  them 
Jam.'.i.  8.  tongue  is  an  unruly  evil,  full  ofd.  poison 
Reo.  13.  3.  and  his  d.  wound  was  healed,  12. 

DEAD.NESS. 
Rom.  4.  19.  neither  vet  Ihf  (/.  of  Sarah's  womb 

■  DEAF. 
F.rod.  4.  11.  or  who  makcth  the  d.  or  the  seeing  ? 
f,en.  19.  14.  thou  shalt  not  curse  the  d.  nor  put 
1  Sam.  10. 1 27.  Saul  was  as  though  he  had  been  d. 
F.';(7/.38.13.but  I  as  a(i!.man  heard  not,l  was  dumb 
T.P.  4.  they  are  like  the  d.  ad'ler  that  stnppelh 
[.la.  2^.  1^.  in  that  day  shall  the  d.  hear  the  words 
3.5.  5.  rind  the  ears  of  the  d.  shall  be  unstopped 
42. 1!^.  hear,  ye  d.  look,  ye  blind,  that  ye  may  aoc 
19.  wlio  is  d,  as  my  messenger  that  I  sent  ? 
117 


DEA 

/s(Z.43.8.  bring  forlli  blind,  and  the  (/.that  have  cars 
Mic.  7.  16.  their  ears  shall  be  (/.shall  lick  the  dust 
jVat.  11.  5.  the  d.  hear,  dead  are  raised,  l.ukel.'iU. 
Mark  7.  32.  they  brought  to  him  one  that  was  d. 
37.  he  maketh  the  d.  to  hear,  the  dumb  to  speak 

9.  25.  thou  dumb  and  (/.  spirit,  come  out  of  him 

DEAL. 
Gen.  19.  9.  now  will  we  d.  worse  with  thee  than 
24.  49.  now  if  you  will  d.  truly  with  my  muster 
32.  9.  Lord  said,  return,  and  1  will  d.  well  with  thee 
34.  31.  should  he  d.  with  our  sister  as  a  harlot  ? 
F.xod.  1.  10.  come  on,  let  us  d.  wisely  with  them 
21.  9.  d.  with  her  after  the  manner  of  daughters 
23.  Jl.  in  like  manner  d.  with  thy  vineyard 
/vfu.  19. 11.  ye  shall  not  steal,  nor  d.  falsely,  nor  lie 
JVnm.  11.  15.  if  thou  d.  thus  with  me,  kill  nic 
Veut.  7.  5.  but  thus  shall  ye  d.  with  them,  ye  shall 
2  CkroJt.'i.  3.  Solomon  sent  10  Huram,  as  thou  didst 
d.  with  David  my  father,  even  so  d.  with  me 
.fob  42.  8.  lest  I  d.  with  you  after  your  folly 
Psal.  75.  4.  I  said  to  the  fools,  d.  not  foolishly 
1J9.  17.  d.  bountifully  with  ihy  servant,  142.  7. 

124.  d.  with  thy  servant  according  to  thy  mercy 
Prov.  12.  22.  but  they  that  d.  truly  are  his  delight 
Isa.'2G.U).  in  land  of  uprightness  be  wWld.  unjustly 
52.  13,  behold,  my  servant  shall  d.  prudently 
58.  7.  is  it  not  to  d.  thy  bread  to  the  hungry  7 
./er.  18. 23.  d.  thus  with  them  in  time  of  thine  anger 
21.  2.  if  so  be  that  the  L'ird  d.  with  us  according 
Ezek.  8.  18.  therefore  will  I  also  (/.  in  fury,  my  eye 

10.  .59.  I  will  d.  with  thee  as  thou  hast  done 
22. 14. or  hands  be  strong  in  days  I  d.  with  thee 

23.  25.  and  they  shall  d.  furiously  with  thee 

31.  11.  he  shall  surely  d.  with  him,  I  have  driven 
Dan.  1.  13.  and  as  thuu  seesi  (/.  with  thy  servants 
5.  t  20.  his  mind  was  hardened  to  d.  proudly 

11.  7.  and  shall  d.  against  them  and  shall  (jievail 
2  Car.  2.  f  17.  d.  deceitfully  with  the  word  of  God 

See  TREAfHEROUSLY. 

DEAL. 

Exod.  29.  40.  a  tenth  d.  of  flour  mingled  with  oil. 

Lev.  14.  21.  JV((m.  15.4.  |  29.  4. 

J^um.  28. 13.  a  several  tenth  d.  21,  29.  |  29. 10, 15. 

Markl.'SG.so  much  more  a  great  d.  ihey  ))iiblished 

10.  48.  he  cried  the  more  a  great  d.  Son  of  David 

DEALS. 

Lev.  14.  10.  the  priest  shall  take  three  tenth  d.  of 

tine  flour  for  a  meat-ort'ering,  J^um.  15.  9. 

23.13.two  tenth  d.  for  a  meat-otToring,  A'um.'in.i). 

17.  shall  bring  two  wave-luaves  of  two  tenth  d. 

24.  5.  two  tenth  d.  shall  bo  in  one  cake 

JVam.  15.  6.  for  a  ram  for  a  mcat-otferinsr,  two 
tenth  d.  of  flour,  28.  20,  2rt.  |  29.  3,"  9,  14. 

23.  20.  three  tenth  d.  to  a  bullock,  28.  |  29.  3,  9, 14. 

DEALER, 
/sa.  21.2.  the  treacherous  (/.  ilealeth  treacherously 

DEALERS. 
/sa.24. 16.  treacherous  d.  havedealttreacheiously 

DEALEST. 
Exod.  5.  15.  wherefore  d.  thus  with  thy  servants  7 
Isa.  33.  1.  woe  to  thee  that  spoilest  and  d.  ticach. 

DEALETH. 
Judg.  18.  4.  thus  and  thus  d.  Micah  with  me 
1  Sam..  23.  22.  it  was  told  me  that  he  d.  siibtilly 
Prov.W.4.hu  becomeihiioor  that  (/.with  slack  hand 

13.  16.  every  prudent  man  d.  with  knowledge 

14.  17.  he  that  is  soon  angry  d.  fooli.-ihiy 
21.24.  sconier  is  his  name,  who  d.  In  jiroud  wrath 

/i-ffi.  21.2.  the  trcachirous  dealer  (/.  treacherously 

./er.6.13.  is  given  to  covetousness,from  the  prophet 
even  to  the  priest  every  one  (/.  falsely,  8.  10. 

ficb.  12.  7.  God  d.  with  vou  as  sons,  for  what  son 
DEALING,  S. 

//('?j.6.t2.  if  a  soul  sin,  and  lie  to  his  neighbour  in  (/. 

1  Sum.  2.  23. 1  hear  of  your  evil  d.  by  all  this  people 

P,?.7.16.  his  violenU'/.  shall  come  down  on  his  pate 

./ohni.  9.  the  Jews  have  no  (/.  with  the  Samaritans 
DEALT. 

Gen.  16.  6.  when  Sarai  (/.  hardly  witli  her,  she  fled 
33.11.  heraiise  God  hath  d.  graciously  with  me 
43.6.  wherefore  d.  ye  so  ill  with  me,  as  to  tell 

F.iod.  1.  20.  therefore  God  d.  well  with  midwivee 
14.  11. wherefore  hast  thou  (/.thus  with  us.Iocnrry 
18.  11.  for  in  the  thing  wlirri'iii  they  (/.  proinlly' 
21.  8.  seeing  ho  hath  d.  deceilliillv  with  her 

Judg.  9.  16.  if  ye  have  d.  well  with  Jernbbrial 

19.  if  ve  have  d.  truly,  rejuioe  in  .Xbimcl.rh 
Ruth  l.S.as  yc  have  d.  with  the  dead,  and  with  me 

20.  the  Almighty  hath  d.  bitterly  with  me 

1  Sam.  14. 1 33.  Saul  said,  ye  have  (/.treacherously 

24.  18.  how  that  thou  hast  d.  well  with  me 

25.  31.  when  the  Lord  shall  have  d.  well  with  llieo 

2  Sam.  6. 19.  he  d.  among  \h"  people,  1  Chr.  IC.  3. 
2  Kimrs  12.  15.  for  thev  d.  faithfully,  22,  7. 

21.<!.Manasseh(/.with  familiar  spirits  and  wizards 

1  Chr.  20.  3.  so  d.  David  with  the  cities  of  Ammon 

2  C7(r.  6.  37.  we  have  done  amiss,  and  d.  wickedly 
11.23.  Rehoh.  d.  wisely,  and  disfiersed  children 
33.6.  Manas,  d.  with  afamiliar  spirit  and  wiznrds 

JVVA.  1.  7.  we  have  d.  very  corruptly  against  tliee 


DEA 

J^Tch.  9.  10.  thou  kncwest  that  they  d.  proudly, 

16,  2<J. 
.Job  0. 15.  my  breth.  have  d.  deceitfully,  as  a  brook 
Psal.  13.  6.  the  Lord  hath  d.  bountifully  wiUi  me 
44.  17.  nor  have  we  d.  falsely  in  thy  covenant 
78.  57.  and  d.  unfaithfully  like  their  fftthers 
103.  10.  he  hath  not  d.  with  us  after  our  sins 
116.  7.  the  Lord  hath  d.  bountifully  with  t*";e 
119.  65.  thou  hast  d.  well  with  servant,  ace    tlinj 
78.  they  d.  perversely  with  me  without  a  cause 
147.  20.  he  haili  not  d.  so  with  any  nation 
/sa.24.16.the  treacherous  dealers  have  (/.verytrea- 
cherously,  .Jer.  :{.20.  |  5.  11.  1 12.  (i.  J^ani.  I.  2. 
Kzek.  22.  7.  in  thee  have  they  d.  by  ojipression 
25.  12.  because  that  Edom  hath  d.  against  Judah 

15.  because  the  Philistines  have  d.  by  revenge 
Nos.  5.7.  they  have  (/.  treacherously  against  the  L. 
6.  7.  there  have  they  d.  treacherov(./y  against  me 
./of/ 2.26.  name  of  your  G.  that  hath  d.  wondr'.usly 
Zec/t.  1.  6.  as  (he  L.  thought,  so  hath  he  d.  with  us 
Mal.2.ll.Ju(i.  hath  d.  treacherously  and  abomiiiat. 

14.  against  whom  thou  hast  d.  treaidieronsly 
J.nke  1.  25.  thus  hath  the  Lord  d.  with  me  in  days 
2.  48.  son,  why  hast  thou  thus  d.  willi  us  7 
./irts  7.  19.  the  same  d.  subtilcly  with  our  kindred 
25.  24.  the  multitudeof  tiie  Jews  have  </.  with  me 
Rom.  12.  3.  according  as  G.  hath  d.  to  every  man 

DEAR. 
.Ter.  1.5.  t  7.  I  will  bereave  them  of  what  is  d. 
31.  20.  is  Eph.  my  (/.son,  is  he  a  pleasant  child  ? 
7.,«/rc  7. 2. a  centurion's  servant,  who  was  d.  to  him 
Jiets  20.  24  neither  count  I  my  life  d.  to  myself 
F.pk.  5.  1.  be  ye  followers  of  God  as  d.  children 
Pkil.  2.  t  20.  1  have  no  man  so  d.  to  ine 
C0/.I.7.  ye  learned  pf  Epaiihrasourt/.fellow-srrvt 
13.  hath  Iraiislated  us  into  kingdom  ol  his(/.  Son 
1  Thess.  2.8.our  own  souls,  because  ye  were  d  to  us 

DEARLY  beloved. 
Jer.  12.  7.  I  have  given  d.  b.  of  my  soul  to  enemies 
Rom.  12.  19.  d.  beloved,  avenge  not  yourselves 

1  Cor.  10.  14.  my  d.  beloved,  P/i!7.4.1.2  Tim.i.2. 

2  C(yr.  7.  1.  d.  bilured,  12.  19.  1  Pet.  2.  11. 
Philem.  1,  Paul,  unto  Philemon  our  d.  beloved 

DEARTH. 
fi'C7!.41..54.(/.  began  to  come,  d.  was  in  all  the  lands 
2  Kings  4.  38.  and  there  was  a  d.  in  the  land 
2  Ckron.G.SlS.  if  there  be  a  (/.  in  the  land,  or  mildewf 
JV(/(.  5.  3.  we  might  buy  corn  because  of  the  (/. 
.lev.  14.1. word  came  to  Jeremiah  concerning  the  d. 
j?c^s  7.11. there  came  a  (/.over  all  the  land  ofEgy|>t 
11.23.  Agabus  signified,  there  should  be  agrtat(/. 
DEATH 
Signifies,  [1]  The  separation  of  the  soul  from  the 
bodii,  Gen.  25.  11.      This  is  temporal  death.  [2] 
Jl  separation  of  sonl  and  body  from  God's  fa' 
rour  in  this  life,  which  i^ihe  state  of  all  unre- 
gcnrrated.   and   uvrenrwm  person.",  who   are 
uithiiut  the  light  of  knoicledge,  and  the  quick- 
eningpiiwerof  grace,  Luke  1.79.    7'A7S /« spirit- 
ual ilearh.  [3]    The  perpetual  separation  of  the 
whole  man  f  mm  God's  heaoevlij  prescvee  avd 
glorn,to  he tnr meni rd for rvi r  w ith  thedcviland 
his  angels,  R'>v.  2. 1 1.  T/iis  is  the  s-cond  death, 
or  et^'rnal  death.     To  all  these  kinds  0/ death, 
Adam  made  himself  and  his  posteritij  linhle,  hy 
transgressing  thi  commandment  of  God  in  eat- 
ing the  forbidden  fruil,C,,m.'2.  17.  f4]  Some  poi- 
sonous dendli/  thing,  2  Kings  4.  "it).    [51  Immi' 
nent  dangers  ,f  death,  2  Cor.  11.  23.     [fi]  The 
pestilence  of  contagions  diseases,  Jer.  15.  2. 
By  the  gales  of  denlh,  the  grave  is  signified,  eivV 
'thestate  of  the  dead  nftir  this  /(//•,  Jiib  38.  17, 
Have  ihe  gales  of  ilenih  been  opened  iiiiiolheel 
Hast  thou  seen,  or  dost  thou  perffctly  know,  the 
place  and  state  of  the  dead  ;  the  depths  and 
bowels  of  tht>  earth,  /n  irhich  the.  gi  niralitij  of 
dead  men  are  huried ;  or  the  sevcnil  wans  and 
method.'!  of  death  ;orthi-  states  and  conditions  of 
men  after  death?  v?n(/ ^Ac  Psalmist  .■'(J//.--.  Thou 
lifte^t  me  up  from  the  gates  of  (lenlli,"f  so/.  9. 
13.    7'Ao((  didstbringmehacli  from  the  brink  or 
mouth  of  the  grave,  into  wliich  I  was  rendu  to 
droj),  heivg  as  near  di  athas  avian  is  to  the  city, 
that  is  come  to  the  very  gates  of  it.  By  tin'  in- 
strumen(s  of  death,  dangerous  nvd  deadly  ireor 
pons  are  menvt,  Psal.  7.  13.     Love  is  stronj  na 
death.  Cant.  8.  6.      The  spiritual  lore  ef  the 
church  to  Christ  is  .strong  as  death,  irhich  over- 
comes the  strongest  man.  Psal  89.  48. 
Grv.  21.  16.  let  me  not  see  the  d.  of  the  child 
24.67.  Isaac  was  comforted  aftrr  his  iTi'!!!:r:'3(/. 
2.5.  n.  after  the  r/.of  Ahrnham.God  blessed  Isaac 
27.7.  that  I  may  eit,  and  l)U!.=s  thee  before  my  d. 

10.  thnt  he  niiiv  bless  thee  before  his  d. 
F.Tod.W.  17.  that  he  may  take  from  me  this  d.  only 
vV»m.16.29.  if  these  men  die  common  //.of  all  men 
23.  10.  let  me  die  (/.  of  righteous,  and  my  last  end 
35.  25.  the  slaver  shall  abide  in  it  onto  the  .7.  o( 
the  hiffh  priest,  28.  32.  .T„sh.  20.  « 
31.no  satisfaction  for  life  of  niu-'dcrer  guilty  of  i 


DEA 

Pout.  30.  15.  I  have  set  before  you  tkis  day  life 
and  good,  d.  and  evil,  Jer.  iil.ti. 

31  27.  how  much  more  wdl  ye  rehtl  ullcr  my  ti. 
29. 1  know  alter  my  d.  ye  will  corrupt  yourselves 

33. 1. Muses  blessed  Isr.  before  his  (/.the  man  of  G. 
Judg.  5.  Id.  that  jeoparded  their  live^  to  the  d. 

1(3. 10.  she  urged  him  that  his  soul  was  vexed  to  d. 

30.  dead  which  he  slew  at  his  d.  were  more  than 

lJuU(l.  17.Kulh  said,if  ought  but  (i.pari  thee  and  me 

i.  11.  all  thou  hast  dune  since  d.  of  thy  husband 
1  Sam.  4.  i!U.  about  time  of  her  d.  the  w  omen  said 

15.  3i  Agag  said,  surely  the  bitterness  of  d.  is  past 

20.  3.  tiiere  is  but  a  step  betiveeii  me  and  d. 

2-J.  ii.  1  have  occasioned  (i.  of  thy  father's  house 

SB.flti.  ye  are  sons  of  d.  ye  kept  not  your  master 
8  .Sam.  1.  "23.  and  in  their  d.  they  were  not  divided 

15.  -Zl.  in  d.  or  life,  there  will  thy  servant  be 

19.  t  iri.  all  my  father's  house  were  but  men  of  d. 
!K.5.when  the  waves  ofd.  compassed  mfc,lioodsuf 

ungodly  made  me  afraid,  I'sal.  Itf.  4.  |  UG.  3. 
6.  the  snares  of  d.  prevented  me,  Psal.  18.  5. 
1  Kings  11.40.  Jerobuaiii  was  in  Kgypt  till  i/.ofSol. 
S  A'iH"-.s^.^l. shall  nut  be  any  mure  (i.ur  barren  land 

4.  40.  O  thou  man  of  God,  d.  is  in  the  pot 

1  Citruii.  'H.  5.  so  David  jirepared  before  his  d. 

S  Chron.  i'J.  4.  his  cuunsellors  after  d.  of  his  father 
32.  33.  all  Judah  did  llezekiah  honour  at  his  d. 

Ezra  7.  2(i.  whether  it  be  to  d.  or  to  banishment 

Jab  3.  21.  which  long  for  d.  but  it  conieth  not 
7.  15.  so  tlial  my  soul  chooseth  d.  rather  than  life 
Id.  13.  the  lirst-born  of  d.  shall  devour  his  strength 
27.  15.  that  remain  of  him  shall  be  buried  in  d. 
28. 22.  destruciion  and  d.  say,  we  have  heard  fame 
30.  23.  I  know  that  thou  wilt  bring  me  to  d. 

fsal.  6.  5.  in  d.  there  is  no  remembrance  of  thee 
7.  13.  hath  prepared  for  him  the  instruments  of  (i. 
13. 3.  lighten  mine  eyes,  lest  I  sleep  the  sleep  of  d. 
22.  15.  thou  hast  brought  me  into  the  dust  of  d. 
48.  14.  God  will  he  our  guide,  oven  unto  d. 
49. 14.  and  laid  in  the  grave,  d.  shall  feed  on  them 
5.5.  4.  and  the  terrors  of  d.  are  fallen  upon  mo 

15.  let  d.  seize  on  them,  and  let  them  go  down 
73.  4.  for  there  are  no  bauds  in  their  d.  strength 
79.  til.  reserve  the  children  of  d. 
89.  48.  what  man  that  liveth, and  shall  not  see  d.7 
102.  20.  to  loose  those  that  are  appointed  to  d. 
lib.  15.  pteciousinsight  of  Lordisd.  of  his  saints 
118. 18.  but  he  hath  not  given  me  over  unto  d. 

Prov.  2. 18.  her  house  iuclincth  to  d.  paths  to  dead 

5.  5.  her  feet  go  down  to  d.  steps  take  hold  on  hell 
7.  27.  to  hell  going  down  to  the  chambers  of  d. 

8  3G.  all  they  that  hate  me  love  d. 

11. 19.  that  pursueth  evil,  pursueth  it  to  his  own  d. 

12.  28.  in  the  path-ways  thereof  there  is  no  d. 

13.  14.  to  depart  from  the  snares  of  d.  14.  27. 

14.  32.  but  the  righteous  hath  hope  in  his  d. 

16.  14.  the  wrath  of  a  king  is  as  messengers  of  d. 
18.  21.  d.  and  life  are  in  the  power  of  the  tongue 
21.6.  vanity  tossed  to  and  fro  of  them  that  seek  d. 
24. 11.  foibear  to  deliv.  them  that  are  drawn  to  d. 

20.  18.  as  a  mad-man  who  casteth  arrows  and  d. 
Keel.  7.  26.  I  find  more  bitter  than  d.  the  woman 
Cant.  8.  C.  for  love  is  strong  as  d.  jealousy  cruel  as 
ha.  25.  8.  he  will  swallow  up  d.  in  victory 

38.  18.  for  d.  cannot  celebrate  thee 

53.  9.  and  with  the  rich  in  hi^d.  because  he 

12.  because  he  poured  out  his  soul  unto  d. 

Jcr.  8.  3.  and  d.  shall  be  chosen  rather  than  lifo 

0.  21.  fur  d.  is  come  up  to  our  windows 

1.5.  2.  ti  II  them  such  as  are  for  d.  to  d.  43.  11. 

18.  t  23.  thou  knowest  all  their  counsel  for  d. 

26.  til-  'he  judgment  of  d.  is  for  this  man 
/yam.l.20.  abroad  the  sword,at  home  there  is  asd. 
Eiek.  18.  32.  sniih  the  L.  God,  I  have  no  plea 
sure  in  the  d.  of  the  wicked,  33.  11. 

31. 14.  for  they  are  all  delivered  unto  d. 
J/os.  13.  14.  <>  d.  I  will  be  thy  plagues,  O  grave 
Jonah  4.  9.  I  do  well  to  be  angry  oven  unto  d. 
Ifab.  2.  5.  who  is  iis  d.  and  cannot  be  satisfied 
Mat.  2.  15.  and  was  there  till  the  d.of  Herod 

10.  21.  brother  deliver  brother  to  d.  .War*  13.  12. 

15.  4.  hunour  father  and  mother,  he  that  curseth 
father  or  mother,  let  him  die  the  d.  Mark  7. 10. 

IG.  28.  Borne  hero  shall  not  taste  of  d.  till  they  see 
the  Sun  of  Man  coming,  Murk  9.  1.  I.ukr  9.  27. 

20.  18.  th.'X  shall  condemn  him  to  d.  Mark  10. 33. 

26.  ;W.  my  soul  is  sorrowful  to  d.  Mark  14.  .'14. 

66.  they  saiil  ho  is  guilty  of  d.  Mark  14.  6-1. 
Mark  5.  23.  my  daughter  liith  at  the  point  of  d. 
J.ukr  2. 26.  should  not  see  d.  before  he  had  seen  C 

22.  33.  I  will  go  with  thee  both  lo  prisim  and  d. 

2.3.  92.  I  have  found  no  cause  of  d.  in  hiin 
John  A  47.  heal  his  sun  fur  he  wns  at  the  point  of  rf. 

8.51. if  a  man  keep  my  Kaying.iihall  never  see  d.52. 

11.  4.  Jesus  snid,  this  sieknisi'  is  not  unto  d. 
13.  howbnit,  Jesus  spake  of  his  d. 

12.33.  he  s.iid,  signifying  what  d.  should  die, 18.32. 
21. 19.  !<i^'ni  Tying  by  what  d.  he  slioulil  glorify  God 
/?<■«.«  2. 24.  iii^cd -in  .hiving  lo'»<>d  'hi>  p.oHiBof  o. 
8.  1.  Saul  was  corisenling  to  his  d.  22.  20. 
118 


DEA 

.^cts  13.28.tbough  they  found  no  cause  of  d.  in  him 
22.  4.  and  1  peroeculed  this  way  unto  the  d. 
28. 18.  because  tliere  was  no  cause  of  d.  m  me 

/<(/»!. 5. 10.  we  were  lecoiiciled  lo  U.  by  the  d.  of  his 
Sun,  much  more  be  saved  by  his  lile,  Co/.  1.  22. 

12.  and  d.  by  sin,  and  so  d.  passed  upon  all  men 
14. d. reigned  from  Adam  toMosesover  them,  17. 
21.  as  sin  bath  reigned  lo  d.  even  so  might  grace 

6.  3.  know  ye  nut,  tliat  su  many  ol  us  as  were  bap- 
tized into  JesusClirist, were  baptized  into  his  d.l 
4.  we  are  buried  with  him  by  baptism  iuto  d. 

5  for  if  we  have  been  planted  in  likeness  of  his  d. 

9.  diclh  no  more,  d.  hath  no  dominion  over  him 
16.  his  servants  ye  are,  vvhetlier  of  sin  unto  d. 
21.  now  ashamed,  for  end  of  those  things  is  d. 
23.  for  the  wages  of  sin  is  d.  but  thegitiof  God 

7.  5.  motions  ot  sin  did  work  to  bring  liuit  to  d. 

10.  the  coniniandment  of  life  1  Ibuiid  to  be  lo  d. 

13.  was  then  thai  which  is  good  made  d.  lo  me  1 
24.who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  d.7 

8. 2.  hath  made  nic  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  d. 
6.  to  be  carnal,  mind. is  d.  but  spirit  life  and  peace 
38.  nor  d.iior  life  shall  separate  us  from  love  ul  G. 

1  Cor.  3. 22.  whether  world,  life;  or  d.  all  are  yuuis 
4.9.G.  set  forth  apostles,  as  it  were  appointed  tod. 

11.  20.  ye  do  shew  the  Lord's  d.  till  he  come 

15.  21.  for  aince  by  man  came  d.  by  man  came  also 

26.  the  last  enemy  that  shall  be  destroyed  is  d. 

54.  saying  written,  d.  is  swallowed  up  in  victory 

55.  O  d.  where  is  Ihy  sling  1  ||  50.  sting  of  d.  is  sin 

2  C'or.l.9.but  we  had  the  sentence  ofd.in  ourselves 
10. who  deliver,  us  from  su  great  a  d.  doth  deliver 

2. 10.  lo  the  one  we  are  the  savour  of  d.  unto  d. 
3.  7.  if  the  ministration  of  d.  was  glorious 

4. 11.  we  are  always  delivered  to  d.lur  Jesus'  sake 

12.  so  then  d.  worketh  in  us,  but  hie  in  you 
7.  10.  but  the  sorrow  of  the  world  worketh  d. 

Phil.  1. 20.  Chr.  magnified,  w  hether  by  life  or  by  d. 
2.8.he  became  obedient  unlo  d.even  d.of  the  cruss 

27.  Epaphrodilus  w  as  nigh  to  d.but  G.had  mercy 
30.  because  for  work  of  Christ  he  was  nigh  to  d. 

3. 10.  know  him,  being  made  conformable  to  liisd. 

2  Tim.  1.  10.  our  Lord,  who  hath  abolished  d 

Heb.  2.  9.  but  we  see  Jesus,  for  the  sutl'ering  of  d. 

crowned,  that  he  should  '.aste  d.  for  every  man 

14.thro'd.might  destroy  him  that  had  powerofd. 

15.  and  deliver  them  who  through  fear  of  d.  were 

7.23. were  notsuli'ered  to  continue,  by  reason  of  d 

9. 15.  that  by  means  of  d.  for  the  rederniition  of 

16.there  must  of  necessity  be  the  d.of  the  testator 

11.5.Enochwas  traiislated.that  he  should  notseed. 

Jam.  1.  15.  sin  when  finished  bringeth  forth  d. 

1  Jo/in3.14.that  lovelh  not  his  brother  abideth  in  d 

5.  16.  there  is  a  sin  unto  d.  1|  17.  a  sin  not  unlo  d 
Jiev.  1.  18.  and  I  have  the  keys  of  hell  and  of  d. 

2.  10.  be  faithful  unlo  d.  I  will  give  thee  a  crown 

11.  that  overcomes  shall  not  be  hurt  of  second  d. 

6.  8.  and  his  name  that  sat  on  him  was  d.  and  hell 
9.  6.  men  shall  seek  d.  and  d.  shall  flee  from  them 

12.  11.  and  they  loved  not  their  lives  to  the  d. 
13.3.saw  one  of  his  head8,as  it  were  wouiuled  to  d. 
18.8.  her  plagues  shall  come  one  day,  d.  mourning 

•20.  6.  on  such  the  second  d.  hath  no  jiower 

13.  and  d.  and  hell  delivered  up  the  dead  in  them 

1 4.  d.  and  hell  cast  into  lake,  this  is  the  second  d. 
21.  4.  and  there  shall  be  no  more  d.  nor  sorrow 

See  Day. 

From  DEATH. 

./osA.2  n.Kahab's  sisters,deliver  our  lives  from  d. 

Job  5.  20.  in  famine  he  shall  redeem  thee /rom  d. 

Psal.'iW.  19.  lo  delive.  their  soul/rowid.  keep  alive 

56.  13.  thou  hast  delivered  my  soul  from  d.  116. 8. 

68.  20.  to  the  Lord  belong  the  issues  from  d. 

78.  50.  he  spared  not  their  soul  from  d.  but  gave 
Pror.  10. 2.  righteousness  dcliverelh /rum  d.  11.4. 
Hus.  13.  14.  1  will  redeem  thcqi /rum  d.  O  death 
./oAn 5.24.  but  isjiassed /rom  d.to  life,l  .fohn  3.  14. 
i/fi.5.  7.  lo  him  that  was  able  lo  save  him  from  d. 
Jam.  5. 20.  know  that  ho  shall  save  a  soul  from  d. 

Oatis  of  DEATH. 
.AoA38.17.have  tlie^'a(/.«  o/d.been  opened  to  thee? 
P.tal.9.  13.  thou  tlial  lifiesi  mo  up  rrum  /rates  of  d. 

107.  18.  and  they  draw  near  tu  the  gates  of  d. 

Put  to  DEATH. 
G'«n.26.11.lhat  toucheth  ihis  inan,8hall  hcput  tod. 
Kiod.  21.29.  ox  stoned,  his  owner  also  be  put  to  d. 

35.2.whoBOPvcr  work  on  8iibbath,shall  be  put  lo  d. 
Lev.  19. 20.  shall  not  be  put  to  d.  because  not  free 

20.  11.  both  of  thorn  shall  surely  hu  put  to  d. 
24.21.  that  killelh  shall  bepu(  to  d.  ^H7n.  35.30. 

JVum.  1. 51. Levitcs  shall  set  uptabernacles,slraMger 
that  rometh  nigh  shall  be;»u(  lo  d.3.10,38.  |  18.7. 

A)ruf. 13.5.1  hat  dreamer  of  dreams  shall  be  put  lo  d. 
9.  thy  hand  shall  be  first  on  him  to  put  lo  d.  17. 7. 
17.6.  at  llio  inuuihuf  one  witness  not  bc;iu<  tod. 

21.  22.  ho  he  put  to  d.  and  Ihoii  hang  him  on  a  tree 
24.16.  fiiihi'r.s  shall  not  bi  put  lo  d.  for  rhildren,  nor 

children  vut  tod.  fur  fathers,  2  A'ln^r*  14.6. 
. r.if/i.'i. If. reOel  against  thy coiiiinniidni.be ;)iir  lod. 
Judg.  6  31  ho  that  plcailoth  for  Daal  be  vut  to  d. 


DEB 

Jud^'-.20. 13.  weroay;)u£  them  tod.  1  5am  11.12 

1  Sam.  11. 13.  not  a  man  be  put  to  d.  2  Sam.  19. 22 

2  6(i/».8. 2.  with  two  lines  measured  he  \.u  puttod 

19.  21.  shall  not  Siiimei  Uupul  to  d.  for  this  1 
21. 9.  were  put  tu  d.  in  llie  uays  of  barley-harvesi 

1  Kingsi.ti.i  sware saying, 1  willnoi^^iit  lime  to  d, 
24.  Adunijah  shall  hu  py.1  to  d.  this  day 

20.  but  1  will  not  at  this  Ihwk  put  thee  lo  d. 

2  Chr.  15. 13.  nut  seek  the  Lord  should  be  put  to  dm 
23.  7.  Cometh  inlu  the  house,  shall  be/iuC  to  d. 

Ksth.  4. 11.  there  is  one  law  of  his  tu  put  him  to  d. 
Jer. iri.  21.  wives  be  widows,  their  men  be  put  lo  d. 

20.  15.  know  for  certain,  ihat  if  ye  put  me  t«  d. 
19.  did  king  and  all  Judah  put  him  at  all  tod.t 

21.  king  Jehoi.ikiin  sought  to  put  Urijah  to  d. 
38.  4.  we  beseech  thee,  let  this  man  be  put  to  d. 

15.  Jer.  said,  wilt  iliou  not  surely  put  me  to  d.l 

16.  the  king  sware,  I  will  not  put  thee  to  d.  25. 
43.  3.  handsof  Chald.  that  they  might  put  us  tod. 
52.  27.  smote  ihein  and  put  them  lo  d.  in  Uiblab 

Mat.  10. 21.  childr.  shall  rise  up  ag.  parents,  cause 
them  to  be  put  to  d.  Mark  13. 12.  Luke  21.  16. 

14.5.  when  he  would  put  him  to  d.  he  fear.  mulU 

26.59.thechief  priests  sought  false  witness  against 

Jesus  tu  put  him  to  d.  27.  1.  Murk  14.  55. 

Mark  14.  1.  bow  to  take  him  by  craft  andput  to  d. 

Luke  18.  33.  ihey  shall  scourge  andput  him  to  d, 

23. 32. there  were  two  malefacl.  led  lu  be  put  to  d 
John  11.53.  they  luok  counsel  to  put  him  tod. 

12.  10.  Ihat  they  might  put  Lazarus  also  to  d. 

18.  31.  it  is  not  lawful  for  us  to  put  any  man  to  d 
.4ct4l2.19.Herod  command. keepers  to  beput  to  d. 

20. 10. when  they  wereput  lo  d.lgave  voice  ug.lhem 

1  Pi.t.3.18.put  to  d.in  flesh, but  quickened  by  Spirit 

See  SiiRKLY. 

SAadoa;  of  DEATH. 

Job  3.  5.  let  darkness  and  the  shadoxc  of  d.  stain  it 

10  21. to  land  of  darkness  and  the  ^Aadou:  of  d.'£l 

12.  22.  and  bringeth  out  lo  fight  the  shadow  of  d 

10.  16.  and  on  my  eye-lids  is  the  shadow  of  d. 

24. 17,  morning  is  lo  them  even  as  shadow  of  d. 

28.  3.  he  searcheth  out  darkness  and  shadow  of  d 

34.22.  is  no  shadow  of  d.  whore  sinners  may  hid* 

38.17.or  hast  thou  seen  doors  of  the  shadow  of  d.l 

Psal.  23. 4.  tho'  I  w  alk  thro'  valley  of  shadow  of  d. 

44.iy.lho'  thou  liasl  covered  us  with  shadow  of  i 

107.  10.  such  as  sit  in  darkness,  and  shadow  of  ■' 

14.  brought  them  out  of  darkn.  and  shadow  of  d 

rsa.  9.  2.  that  dwell  in  the  lani  of  the  shadow  of  d 

Jer.2.6.  that  brought  us  thro'  land  u( shadow  of  d 

13.16.ye  look  for  light  he  turn  it  into  shadow  of  d 

Amos  5.  8.  turneth  shadow  of  d.  into  the  morning 

jl/at.4.  16.  peo.  that  sat  in  region  and  shadow  of  d. 

i>uA(;1.79.give  light  to  them  that  sit  in  shadow  ofd. 

Hays  of  DEATH. 
Prov.  14. 12.  the  end  thereof  are  ways  of  d.  16. 25. 

IVith  DEATH. 
Isa.  28.  15.  we  have  made  a  covenant  icith  d. 

18.  yuur  covenant  with  d.  shall  b^  disannulled 
liiv.  2.  23.  and  I  will  kill  her  children  iritA  d. 
6. 8.  and  power  was  given  to  them  tu  kill  iritA  d, 

IVorlhy  of  DEATH. 
Deal.  17.  6.  that  is  worthy  of  d.  shall  be  put  to  d. 

19.  6.  slay  him,  whereas  be  was  not  worthy  of  d. 

21.  22.  a  man  have  committed  a  sin  worlhij  of  d. 

22.  26.  there  is  in  the  damsel  no  sin  worthy  of  d. 
\  Kings  2.26.said  toAbiathar,thou  art  worthy  of  d. 
Luke  23.15.  lo, nothing  worthy  of  d.  is  done  lo  him 
.Oels  23.29.nolhing  laid  to  his  charge  worthy  of  d. 

25.11.  if]  have  commillcd  any  thing  worthy  of  d. 
25.found  he  hud  commitied  nothing  worthy  of  d. 
26.  31.  Ihis  man  duih  nulhing  worthy  of  d. 
/iom.l.32.who  commit  such  things  are  worthy  ofd. 

DEATHS. 

Jer.lG.  4.  they  shall  die  of  grievous  rf.  not  be  buried 

i',"2fA.28.8.sliHll  die  rf.  of  ihem  that  arc  slain  in  seas 

10.  thou  shall  die  the  d.  of  the  uncircumcised 

2  Cor.  11.  23.  in  prisons  more  frequent,  in  d.  oft 

DEBASE. 
fsa.  57.  9.  and  didst  d.  ihvself  even  unto  licll 

DEBATE,  ferb. 
rrot'.25.n.d.  thy  cause  with  ihy  neighbour  himself 
/«o.27.8.inmcasure,lhou  will  d.  with  it,hestnyetk 

DEllATE,  S. 
/j!a.58.4.behuhl,ye  fiist  for  strife  and  rf.and  lo  smite 
/torn. 1.29. full  ofenvv,  murder,  rf.  deceit,  maliirniiy 
2  Cor.  12.  20.  I  fear'bsl  there  be  d.  wrath,  stiifei 

DEBT 
Is  wAat  i.t  due  by  one  man  to  another,  Neb.  10.  31 
Sins  are  by  n'aemblanec  called  debts,  .V'lt.  6. 12, 
A.<!  a  il  blobli/^rs  the  debtor  to  pnymrnt,  .in  sin 
dotA  the  sinner  to  punishment.  .Ind  as  the  cre- 
ditor bath  a  right  lorzael  the  payment  from  the 
d(blor,soClodhttlh  a  right  lo  in/lirl punishmrnt 
on  the  guilty.  Thus  men  are  dcbla  t  lo  (tod,  by 
trispassing  against  him  ;  and  to  their  neigh- 
bours, when  thru  wrong,  injure,  or  ofind  thrm, 
Mal.fi.  12.  The  nposlleVniA  says, V.nin.}.}4,  I 
iiiii  a  (Irlilor  holh  lo  tlie6'rCf/.<  iinil/JarAnrrnml 
/  am  bound  by  my  ojfice  to  preach  Lht  gospe.l  t« 


DEC 

bU  nations,  whether  more  civilitcdf  or  more 
rude.  Jind  speaking  of  such  as  looked  upon  cir- 
cumcision as  necessary  to  their  justification 
and  salvation,  he  says,  I  teslity  to  every  man 
thai  .s  circumcised,  tiiut  he  is  a  debtor  to  do  the 
wh<  le  law    Oal.  5.  3.     He  obliges  himself  to 
keep  the  whole  law,  as  the  condition  of  life, 
and  so  virtually  disclaims  all  pardon  4y  Christ. 
1  Ham.  2'2.iJ.  every  one  that  was  in  d.  went  to  David 
2.ffui^s4.7.hesaid,go,sell  the  oil, pay  thy  rf.and  live 
JVVA.10.31.we  would  leave  the  exaction  ofevery  d. 
Mat.  IS.  27.  loosed  him,  and  forgave  him  the  d. 
3U.  went  and  cast  into  prison  till  he  should  pay  cf. 
32.  his  lord  said,  I  forgave  thee  all  that  d. 
Rom  4.4.  reward  is  not  reckoned  of  grace  but  d. 

DEBTOR. 
£!<;ft.  18. 7.  but  hath  restored  to  the  d.  his  pledge 
JU  jt.23.16.  shall  swear  by  gold  of  the  temple  is  a  d. 

1 18.  whoso  sweareth  by  the  gift,  he  is  the  d. 
Rom.  1.  14.  I  am  d.  to  the  Greeks  and  Barbarians 
Oal.  5.  3.  that  lie  is  a  d.  to  do  the  whole  law 

DEBTORS. 
Mat.  6. 12.  forgive  us  our  debts,  as  we  forgive  our  d. 
Luke  7.  41.  a  certain  creditor  had  two  d. 

13.  t  4.  think  ye  that  they  wered.  above  all  men? 
16.  5.  he  called  every  one  of  his  lord's  d. 

Rom.8.12.  therefore,  brethren,  we  are  rf.not  to  flesh 
15. 27.  it  pleased  them  verily,  and  their  d.  they  are 
DEBTS. 
Prov.  22. 26.  be  not  of  them  that  are  sureties  for  d. 
iflfa£.6.12.forgiveusourrf.as  weforsiveour  debtors 

DECAY. 
/.eu.  25. 35.  if  thy  brother  be  poor  and  fallen  in  d. 
Rom.  U.  1 12.  d.  of  them  the  riches  of  the  Gentiles 

DECAYED. 
JWA.  4.10.  the  strength  of  the  bearers  of  burdens  d. 
Isa.  44.  26. 1  will  raise  up  the  d.  places  thereof 

DECAYETH. 
Job  14.  11.  and  as  the  Hood  d.  and  drieth  up 
Eccl.  10.  18.  by  much  slothfulness  the  building  d. 
Heb.  8. 13.  that  which  d.  is  ready  to  vanish  away 

DECEASE. 
Luke  9.  31.  and  spake  of  his  d.  at  Jerusalem 
2  Pet.  1.  15.  after  my  d.  to  have  in  remembrance 

DECEASED. 
Isa.  26.  14.  they  are  d.  they  shall  not  rise 
Mat.  22.  25.  first,  when  he  had  married  a  wife,  d. 

DECEIT 
Siffnifies,  [1]   Guile  or  fraud,  Psal.  10.  7.  |  36.  3. 
f  2]  Deceitful  persons,  Jer.  9.  6.  [3]  Deluding 
'nessages,  dreams,  and  lies  of  false  teachers, 
whereby  they  please  the  humours,  and  comply 
ailh  Vie  lusts  of  sinful  persons,  Isa.  30. 10.  Jer. 
8.  5.  [4]  Goods  gotten  by  oppression,  false  ac- 
cusation, and  deceit,  Jer.  5.  27.  Zeph.  1.  9.  [5] 
Devices  or  fair  pretences  to  deceive,  Psal.  38.12. 
They  handle  the  word  of  God  deceitfully,  2  Cor. 
4.  2.  who  mingle  it  with  their  own  inventions, 
or  passions   of  pride,   covetousnees,   ($-c.   or 
wrest  it  according  to  men's  pleasures. 
Job  15.  35.  and  their  belly  prepareth  d. 
27.  4.  my  lips  not  speak,  nor  my  tongue  utter  d. 
31.  5.  or  if  my  foot  hath  hasted  to  d. 
Psal.  5.  t  6.  the  Lord  will  abhor  the  man  of  rf. 
10.  7.  his  mouth  is  full  of  cursing,  d.  and  fraud 
36.  3.  the  words  of  his  mouth  are  iniquity  and  d. 
43.  fl.  O  deliver  me  from  the  man  ofd. 
50.  19.  thy  mouth  to  evil,  thy  tongue  frameth  d. 
55.  ll.rf.  and  guile  depart  not  from  her  streets 

t  23.  men  of  </.  shall  not  live  half  their  days 
72.  14.  he  shall  redeem  their  soul  from  d.  and  viol. 
101.  7.  he  that  worketh  d.  not  dwell  in  my  house 
100.  t  2.  the  mouth  of  d.  is  ojiened  against  me 
119.  118.  trodden  them  that  err,  their  d.  is  falsch. 
"roil. 11. tl.  balances  of  d. are  abomination  to  Lord 
12.  5.  but  the  counsels  of  the  wicked  are  d. 
17.  hut  a  false  witness  sheweth  forth  d. 
20.  d.  is  in  the  heart  of  them  that  imagine  evil 

14.  8.  but  the  folly  of  fools  is  d. 

20. 17.  bread  of  d.  is  sweet  to  man,  but  afterwards 

t23.  and  balances  of  d.  are  not  good 
2f>.  24.  he  that  hateth,  layeth  up  d.  within  him 

26.  whose  hatred  is  covered  by  d.his  wickedness 
ha.  .53.  9.  neither  was  any  d.  in  his  mouth 
Ter.  .5.  27.  rage  full  of  birds,  so  are  houses  full  of  d. 
8.  5.  they  hold  fast  d.  they  refuse  to  return 
9. 6.  thro' d.  they  refuse  lo  know  me,  saith  the  L. 
8.  tongue  is  an  arrow  shot  out,  it  speaketh  d. 
14.  14.  I  hey  prophesy  the  d.  of  their  heart 
23.26.lhcy  are  prophets  of  d.  of  their  own  heart 
42. 1 20.  you  have  used  d.  against  your  .souls 
Ezek.  22.  1 7.  in  thee  have  thry  dealt  by  d. 
t  29.  the  people  of  the  lanil  have  used  d. 
//n.?.l  1.12.  the  house  oflsr.  compasseth  me  with  d. 
12.  7.  the  balances  of  d.  are  in  his  hands 
^mos  8.  5.  and  falsifying  the  balances  liy  d. 
Zepli-'i.  9.  who  fill  their  mnslers'  houses  with  d. 
Murk  7.  22.  out  of  the  heart  of  men  proceed  d. 
Rom.  1.  29.  lull  of  murder,  deliatr,d.  malignity 
3.  13.  with  ihoir  tongues  they  have  used  d. 
119 


DEC 

C«f.2.8.  lest  any  man  spoil  you  thro'  vain  philos.  d. 

1  Thess.  2.  3.  lor  our  exhortation  was  not  of  d. 

DECEITFUL. 

Ps.5.  6.  the  Lord  will  abhor  the  bloody  and  d.  man 
35.20.they  devise  d. matters  ag.  them  quiet  in  land 
43.  1.  O  deliver  me  from  the  d.  and  unjust  man 
52.  4.  lovest  devouring  words,  O  thou  d.  tongue 
55.23.  bloody  and  d.men  shall  nollive  half  their  d. 
78.  57.  they  were  turned  aside  like  a  d.  bow 
109. 2.  the  mouth  of  the  d.  are  ojiened  against  me 
120.  2.  deliver  my  soul  from  a  d.  tongue 

Prov.  11.  18.  the  wicked  worketh  a  d.  work 

12.  t24.  but  the  d.  shall  be  under  tribute 

14.  25.  but  a  d.  witness  speaketh  lies 

23.  3.  not  desirous  of  dainties  for  they  are  d.  meat 
27.  6.  but  the  kisses  of  an  enemy  are  d. 
29.  13.  the  poor  and  the  d.  man  meet  togettier 
31.30.favour  is  d.and  beauty  is  vain,  but  a  woman 
.fer.  17.9.  the  heart  is  d.above  all  things  and  wicked 
i/o5.7.16.relurn  not  to  mostHigh,  are  like  a  d.  bow 
Mic.  6.  11.  and  with  the  bag  of  d.  weights 
12.  and  their  tongue  is  d.  in  their  mouth 
Zeph.  3.13.  nor  shall  a  d.  tongue  be  found  in  mouth 

2  Cor.  11.  13.  such  are  false  apostles,  d.  workers 
£p/i.4.22.old  man  corrupt  according  to  the  d.  lusts 

DECEITFULLY. 
Gen.  34.13.  sons  answered  Hamorand  Shechemd. 
Exod.  6.  29.  let  not  Pharaoh  deal  d.  any  more 
21.  8.  seeing  he  hath  dealt  d.  with  her 
Lev.  6.  4.  or  the  thing  which  he  hath  d.  gotten 
./ob  6. 15.  my  brethren  have  dealt  d.  as  a  brook 

13.  7.  will  ye  talk  wickedly  or  d.  for  God  7 
PsaZ.  24. 4-  hath  not  lift  up  his  soul  nor  sworn  d. 

52.  2.  thy  tongue  like  a  sharp  razor,  working  d. 
Jer.  48.  10.  cursed  that  doeth  work  of  the  Lord  d. 
Z3an. 11.23.  after  the  league  made,  he  shall  work  d. 
2  Cor.  2. 1 17.  not  as  many  that  deal  d.  with  word 
4.2.  not  in  craftiness,  nor  handling  word  of  God  d. 

DECEITFULNESS. 
Mat.  13.  22.  the  care  of  this  world  and  the  d.  of 
riches  choke  the  word,  Mark.  4.  IB. 
Heb.  3.  13.  lest  any  be  hardened  thro'  the  d.  of  sin 

DECEITS. 
Psal.  38. 12.  seek  my  hurt,  and  imagine  d.  all  day 
Isa.  30. 10.  speak  to  us  smooth  things,  prophesy  d. 
33.  t  15.  he  that  despiseth  the  gain  of  d. 

DECEIVE 
Signifies,  [1]  To  beguile,  cheat,  or  cozen,  Gen. 
31.  7.  Lev.  6.  2.  [2]   To  mislead,  subdue,  or 
corrupt.  Dent.  11.  16.  Isa.  44.  50.     [3]  To  al- 
lure, delude,  or  entice.  Job  31.  9. 

1  the  Lord  have  deceived  that  prophet,  Ezek.  14. 9. 

/  have  given  him  up  to  the  delusions  of  his  owti 
heart,  and  justly  left  him  in  his  blindness,  that 
he  shall  not  discern  his  own  sclf-deecivings  : 
Or,  ichen  such  a  prophet  prom iseth  good,  and 
thinks  that  the  concurrence  of  all  second  cau- 
ses tend  to  it,  I  will  disappoint  and  frustrate. 
O  Lord,  thou  hast  deceived  me,  I  was  deceived, 
Jer. 20.  7.  that  is.  Thou  hast  persuaded  me  to 
undertake  this  office,  contrary  to  my  oton  incli- 
nations, and  hast  disappointed  me  of  that  com- 
fort and  satisfaction  therein  that  I  expected. 

2  Sam.  3.  25.  thou  knowcst  Abner  came  to  d.  thee 

1  Ar/w5'.?22.t20.the  Lord  said,  whoshalld.Ahab? 

2  Kings  4.28.  she  said,  did  not  I  say,  do  not  d.  me  ? 
18.29.saith  king,  let  not  Hezekiah  d.vou,not  able 

to  deliver  you,  2  Chron.  32.  \5.  Isa.  36.  14. 

19.  10.  let  not  Ihy  God  d.  thee,  saying,  Isa.  .37. 10. 
Prov.  24.  28.  be  not  a  witness,  and  d.  not  with  lips 
Isa.  .58.  t  11.  like  a  spring  whose  waters  d.  not 
.ler.  9.  5.  they  will  d.  every  one  his  neighbour 

29.  8.  your  diviners  that  be  in  midst  of  you  d.  you 

37.  9.  thus  saith  the  Lord  d.  not  yourselves 
Hos.  12.  t  7.  he  is  a  merchant,  he  loveth  to  d. 
Zech.  13.4.  neither  wear  a  rough  garmeiit  to  d. 
Jlfn«.24.4.take  heed  that  no  man  d.you,j^fflrA- 13.5. 
5.  saying,  I  am  Christ,  d.  many,  11.  Mark  13.  6. 
24.  that,  if  possible,  they  shall  d.  the  very  elect 
Jlets  ,5.  t  3.  why  hath  Satan  filled  thy  heart  to  d.  ? 
Rom.  16.18.  by  fair  speeches  d.  the  hearts  of  simple 
1  Cor.3.I8.  let  no  man  d.  himself,  if  any  man  seems 
F.ph.i.  14.  craftiness  whereby  they  lie  in  wait  to  d. 

5. 6.  let  no  man  d.  you,  2  Thess.  2.  3. 1  .Tohn  3.  7. 

1  .John  l.S.ifwcsay  we  havenosin,  we  d.oursdvcs 
Rev.  20.  3.  that  he  should  d.  the  nations  no  more 

8.  go  to  d.  nations  in  four  quarters  of  the  cartii 
DECEIVADLENESS. 

2  Thess.  2.  10.  and  with  all  d.  of  unrighteousness 

DECEIVED. 
Grn.  31 .7.  fath.  hath  d.  me  and  chanced  mv  waffes 
/,ff.6.  2.  or  if  a  soul  sin,  or  halhd.  his  ncighhour 
Dent.  11.  16.  take  heed  that  your  heart  he  not  d. 

1  Sam.  19.  17.  why  hast  thou  d.  me  sot  28.  12. 

2  Sam.  19.  26.  my  lord,  O  king,  my  servant  d.  me 
.Tnh  12.  16.  the  d.  and  the  deceiver  are  his 

15.  31.  let  not  him  that  is  d.  trust  in  vanity 
31.  0.  if  mine  heart  have  been  d.  by  a  woman 

/;?«.iri.l3.!he  princes  of  Noph  are  d.seduced  Fgvpf 
4^.20.11  d.heart  hath  turned  him  aside  that  cannot 


DEC 

Jer.  4. 10.  Burely  thou  hast  greatly  d.  this  people 
20.  7.  O  Lord,  thou  hasl  d.  ine,  and  I  was  d. 
49. 10.  thy  terriblen.hath  d.lhee  and  pride  olhcart 
I>am.  1.  19.  I  called  for  my  lovers,  but  they  d.  ma 
Eiek,  14.  9.  if  the  prophet  be  d.  I  have  d.  him 
Obad.  3.  the  jiride  of  thine  heart  hatfl  d.  tnee 

7.  men  that  were  at  peace  with  thee  have  d.  thee 
/,uie21.8.  he  said,  take  heed  that  ye  be  not  d. 
John  7.47.  the  Pharisees  answered,  are  ye  also  d.  1 
Rom  7.  11.  for  sin  taking  occasion  by  comm.d.  n»e 
1  Cor.  6.  9.  be  not  d.  15  ;«.  Gal.  6.  7. 

1  Tim.  2. 14.  Adam  was  not  d.  but  woman  being  d. 
2Tim.3. 13.  wax  w  orae  and  worse,  dec.  and  being  d. 
Tit.  3.  3.  we  were  foolish,  d.  serving  divei.^  lust* 
Rev.  18.  23.  by  thy  sorceries  all  nations  were  d. 

19.  20.  he  d.  them  that  had  received  mark  of  beast 

20.  10.  devil  that  d.  them  was  cast  into  lake  of  lira 

DECEIVER. 
Gen,  27. 12.  and  I  shall  seem  lo  my  father  as  a  (J. 
Job  12.  16.  the  deceived  and  the  d.  are  his 
Mal.\.\.\.  cursed  be  d.  who  hath  in  his  flock  a  male 
Mat.  27. 63.  rememb.  that  that  d.  said,  after  3  days 
2JohH  7.confess  not  Jes.this  is  a  d.and  an  antichriiit 
DECEIVERS. 

2  Cor.  6.8.by  evil  and  good  report,as  d.and  yet  true 
Tit.  1.  10.  many  d.  especially  of  the  circumcision 
2  John  7.  for  many  d.  are  entered  into  the  world 

DECEIVETH. 
2^tn^s]8.t32.hearken  not  to  Hezekiah  when  hed. 
Prov.  26.  19.  so  is  the  man  that  d.  his  neighbour 
.John  7.  12.  others  said,  nay,  but  he  d.  the  people 
(rcZ.6.3.to  be  something  when  nothing,  he  d.  hims. 
Jam.  1.26.  d,  his  own  heart, this  man's  relig.  is  vaiD 
/if  D.12.9.that  old  serpent,  culled  the  devil,  w  hich  d. 
13.  14.  and  d.  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth 

DECEIVING. 
Isa.  3.  1 16.  daughters  of  Zion  d.  with  their  eyes 
2T'i7n.3.13.eviln]en  wax  worse, d.and  being dcceiv. 
.lam.  1.22.  and  not  hearers  only  d.  your  own  selves 

DECEIVLNGS. 
2  Pet.  2. 13.  sporting  themselves  with  their  own  d 

DECENTLY. 
Rom.  13.+ 13.  let  us  walk  d.  as  in  day,  not  in  rioting 
J  Cor.  14. 40.  let  all  things  be  done  d.  and  in  order 

DECIDED. 
1  Kings  20.  40.  the  king  said,  thyself  hast  d.  it 

DECISION. 
Joel  3. 14.  multitudes  in  valley  of  d.  for  day  of  Lord 

DECK. 
.Tob  40. 10.  d.  thyself  now  with  majesty  and  excell. 
Jer.  10.  4.  they  d.  it  with  silver  and  with  gold 

DECKED. 
Prov.  7.16. 1  have  d.  my  bed  with  cover,  of  tapestry 
Isa.  63. 1 1.  who  is  this  that  is  d.  in  his  ajiparcl  ? 
Ezek.  16.  H.  I  d.  thee  also  with  ornaments 
13.  thou  wast  thus  d.  with  gold  and  silver 
Hos.  2. 13.  and  she  d.  herself  with  her  car-ringg 
Rev.  17.4.  the  woman  was  arrayed  and  d.  with  gold 

18.  16.  alas,  alas,  that  great  city  that  was  d. 

DECKEDST. 
Ezck.  16.  16.  didst  take  garm.  and  d.  high-place» 
23.  40.  didst  wash  and  d.  thvsilf  with  ornaments 

DECKEST,  ETH. 
Isa.  61. 10.  as  a  bridegroom  d.  himself  with  ornam. 
Jer.  4.  30.  tlio'  thon  d.  thee  with  ornaments  of  gold 

DECLARE. 
Gen.  41. 24.  there  was  none  that  could  d.  it  to  me 
/>«M.5.in  land  of  Moab  began  Moses  tod.ihis  law 
Jo«A.20.  4.  shall  d.  his  cau^e  in  ears  of  elders  of  city 
.fvdg.]4. 12.  if  ye  can  d.ii  me  within  thescven  days 
1  A'in5-522.13.prophcts  d.good  to  king,  2  rAj-.18.12. 
ICAron.  16.  24.  d.  his  glory  among  the  heath'  n,hi« 
marvellous  works  among  all  nations,  Psiil.  96.3. 
Esth.  4.  8.  to  shew  the  copy  and  d.  it  to  E.sther 
.fob  12.  8.  the  fishes  of  the  sea  shall  d.  unto  theo 

21.  31.  who  shall  d.  his  way  to  his  face  ? 

28.  27.  then  did  he  see  it,  and  d.  it,  he  prepared  it 
31.  37.  I  would  d.  to  him  the  nnmher  of  my  step* 
38.4.  found,  of  earth,  d.  if  thou  hast  umlers'anding 
18.  the  bre.ndth  of  earth,  d.  if  th'ou  knowcst  it  all 

40.  7. 1  will  demand  of  Ihcc,  d.  thou  to  nie,  42.  4. 
Psal.  9.  11.  d.  among  the  people  his  doings 

19.  1.  the  heavens  d.  the  glory  of  God 

22.31. shall  come  and  d.his  richieous.  .50.  6.  |  97.  f?. 
30.  9. shall  dust  praise  thce,"shall  it  d.  thy  truth? 
40.5. if  I  would  d.and  speak  of  them, they  iircmore 
.50.  16.  what  hast  thou  to  do  to  d.  my  statutes  ? 
64.  9.  all  men  shall  fear  and  d.  the  work  of  God 
73.  28.  my  trust  in  L.  that  I  may  d.  all  thy  worki 
75.  1.  thy  name  is  near,  thy  wondrous  works  d. 
78.  6.  should  arise  and  d.  them  to  their  children 
102.21.  lo  d.  the.  name  of  the  Lord  in  Zion 
107.  22.  and  d.  his  works  with  rejoicing 
118. 17.  but  live  and  d.  the  works  of  the  Lord 
145.  4.  one  generation  shall  d.  thy  mighty  arts 
Fr.cl.O.^.\  considered  in  my  heart  even  tod.  allthii 
Isa.  3.  9.  they  d.  their  sin  as  Sodom,  they  hide  no( 
^,4.  shall  ye  say,  d.  hisdoines  among  the  peopl< 
fl^6.  set  a  watchman,  let  him  rf.  what  he  sectb 

41.  22.  or  let  them  d.  to  us  things  for  to  come 


DEC 


Jsa-Vi.  9.  and  new  things  do  1  d.  before  ihcy  spring 

]-.  and  lul  Ihein  d.  Ins  praise  iii  tlie  isMiids 
4:t.  S).  wlio  iiinoiig  tliciii  can  d.  tliis,  and  sliew  us! 
2t).  d.  thuu  that  ihou  niaycst  bu  juslilicd 

44.  7.  ajid  who,  as  I,  shall  call,  and  siiall  d.  il  7 

45.  I'J.  1  tUe  Lord  d.  things  that  arc  right 
4(5.  0.  6i:v  uU  this,  and  will  not  ye  d.  it  ! 
5J.  8.  who  shall  d.  his  generation?  .ids  8.  33. 
66.  1!).  they  shall  d.  my  glory  among  the  Gentiles 
/er.5.2().(/.Iliis  in  house  ol  Jacob,  publish  in  Judah 
It.  1-2.  the  Lord  hath  spoken,  that  he  may  d.  it 
31.  iU.  and  d.  it  in  the  isles  alur  oil',  and  say 
3-'.  1.x  it'  I  d.  it  to  thee,  wilt  Ihou  not  put  to  death? 

25.  (/.  unto  us  what  thou  hast  said  to  the  king 
Ai'ld.  what  G.  shall  say,  (/.  to  us,  and  we  will  do  it 
50.  'iS.  d.  in  Zion  the  vengeance  of  theJL.  our  G. 
5J.  10.  let  asd.  in  Zion  the  work  of  the  L.ourG. 

Kzek.  1-i.  11).  may  d.  all  their  abominations,  23.  3li. 

40.  4.  d.  all  that  thou  scist  to  the  house  of  Israel 
Dan.  4.  18.  ()  ISelleshazzar,  d.  the  interpretation 
Mic.'S.i*.  to  d.  to  Jacob  his  transgression,  and  Israel 
y.cch.\).  12.  even  to-day  do  J  d.  that  I  will  render 
JUat.  13. 3().  d.  unto  us  the  parable  of  tares  of  tield 

15.  15.  then  said  Feter,  d.  unto  us  this  parable 
Mcts  13.  '.bi.  and  we  d.  unto  you  glad  tidings 
41.sliall  in  no  wise  believe, Iho'  a  man  d.  it  to  you 
17.23.whoin  yeignorantly  worship, him  d.  I  toyou 
20.27. not  shunned  to  d.  to  you  the  counsel  of  God 
Horn.  3.  2.').  set  forth  to  d.  his  righteousness,  26. 
1  Cur.  3.  13.  work  be  manifest,  the  day  shall  d.  it 
11. 17.  ill  this  that  I  d.  to  you,  I  praise  you  not 
15.  1.  I  d.  unto  you  the  gospel  which  1  preached 
Col.  4.  7.  all  my  state  shall  Tychicus  d.  to  you 
//fA.U.H.they  that  say  such  things  </.  plainly  that 

1  Jnhn  1.  3.  that  which  we  have  seen  d.  we  to  you 

5.  this  then  is  the  message  which  we  d.  unto  you 
I  will  DECLARE. 
Tab  15.  17.  and  that  which  I  have  seen  r  will  d. 
F.ial.  2. 7.  /  will  d.  the  decree,  the  Lord  hath  said 
22.  22.  /  icill  d.  thy  name  to  brethren,  Hcb.  2. 12. 
y.S.  Id.  I  icill  d.  my  iniquity,  I  will  be  sorry  for  sin 
6t'i.  II).  /  icill  d.  what  he  hath  done  for  my  soul 
75.9.  but  I  Kill  d.  forever,  I  will  sing  praises  to  G. 
145.  ().  speak  of  thy  acts,  /  will  d.  thy  greatness 
/ia.57.12./!r!/irf.  thy  righteousness  and  thy  works 
Jcr.  42.  4.  f  will  d.  it,  1  will  keep  nothing  back 
John  17. 26.  have  declared  thy  name,  and  will  d.  it 

DKCLARE  ye. 
Isa.  48.  20.  with  a  voice  of  singing  d.  ys,  tell  this 
Jcr.  4.  5.  d.  pe  in  Judah,  and  publish  in  Jerusalem 

46.  14.  d.  ye  in  Egypt,  and  publish  in  Migdol 
.50.2.  d.yc  among  the  nations,  publish,  conceal  not 

JUic.  1.  iO.  d.  ye  it  not  at  Gath,  weep  ye  not  at  all 

DECLARATION. 
K.tfA.  10.  2.  the  d.  of  the  greatness  of  Mordecai 
./ob  13.  17.  and  hear  my  d.  with  your  ears 
/.ul:e  1.  1.  taken  in  hand  to  set  forth  in  order  a  d. 

2  Cor.  8.  19.  and  to  the  (Z.  of  your  ready  mind 

DECLARED. 
Erod.0. 11. 1  raised  thee,  that  my  name  may  bet?. 
J.cv.  23.  44.  Moses  d.  to  the  children  of  Israel 
J^'um.  1.  18.  Ihey  d.  their  pedigrees  by  their  poll 
15.  34.  put  him  in  ward,  because  it  was  not  d. 
Drvt.  4.  13.  and  he  d.  to  you  his  covenant 
2  Ham.  10.  G.  for  thou  hast  d.  Ibis  day  that  thou 
j^ik.  H.  12.  understood  words  that  were  d.  to  them 
.Job  20. 3.  how  hast  thou  plentifully  d.  thing  as  it  is 
f  .<(«/.40.IO.I  have  d.  thy  faithfulness  and  salvation 
71.  17.  hiilierlo  have  I  d.  thy  wondrous  works' 
77. 14.  ihou  hast  d.  thy  strength  aincmg  the  people 
88.  U.  shall  thy  loving-kindness  be  rf.  in  the  grave 
119.  13.  with  my  lips  have  I  d.  all  thy  judgments 

26.  I  have  d.  my  ways,  and  ihou  lieardest  me 
Isa.  21.  2  a  grievous  vision  is  d.  unto  me 

10.  that  which  I  heard  of  <Jod  have  Id.  unto  you 

41.  20.  who  hath  d.  from  the  beginning,  45.  21 
43.  12.  I  have  d.  and  have  saved,  44.  8.  |  48.  Z 
48.  3.  I  have  d.  former  things  from  the  beginning 

14.  which  among  them  hath  d.  these  things  ? 
Jer.  36.  13  Micaiah  d.  all  the  words  he  heard 

42.  21.  ar.d  now  I  have  this  day  d.  il  to  you 
J.uke  8.  47  sIh^  d.  to  him  before  all  the  people 
Jnhti  I.  18.  no  man  hath  seen  God,  the  Hon  d.h\m 

17.26.1  have  d.  to  llieni  Ihv  name  and  will  declare 
Jlrls  9.  27.  h"  d.  to  llieni  hnw  he  had  seen  the  Lord 
10.  8.  when  he  hud  </.  all  tbcso  things  to  them 
12. 17.  he'/,  how  L.  had  brotight  him  out  of  prison 
15.  4.  d.  nil  things  that  God  had  d<mo  with  thum 

14.  tfimeoii  had  d.  how  God  at  first  iljd  visit 
25.  14.  I'esliis  d.  Paul's  cause  to  the  kiriR,  saying 
Kam.  1.  4.  and  d.  to  bo  the  Son  of  God  with  power 
9.  17.  that  my  name  might  be  d.  Ihrough  the  earth 

1  Cir.  1.11.  for  it  hath  been  d.  to  mc  of  you 

2  r„r.3.3.ye  are  manifestly  d.  to  be  the  epistle  of  P 
Ciil.  1.  8.  who  also  d.  tons  your  lovo  in  the  Spirit 
Ren.  10.  7.  the  mystery  of  God  be  finished  as  lied 

DECLARETII,  INtJ. 

Ti/r.  41.  26.  yea,  there  is  none  iluil  </.  that  heareUi 

40.  10.  (/.  the  end  from  the  hejinning,  and  fro^P 

ycr.4  IS.  a  voice  d,  from  Dan,publi8heth  afllictiun 

190 


DEE 

IIos.  4.  12.  my  people,  their  staff  d.  unto  ihem 
.linos  4.13.10,  he  that  d.  toman  what  is  his  thought 
vJct.v  1j.  3.  d.  ihe  conversion  of  the  Gentiles 

12.  d.  what  miracles  God  hath  wrought  by  tliem 

1  Cur.  2.  1.  d.  toyou  the  testimony  ol  God 
DECLIME. 

Exod.  23. 2.  nor  speak  in  a  cause,  to  d.  after  many 
iJeut.  17.  11.  thou  shalt  not  d.  from  the  sentence 
Fsal.  ll'J.  157.  yeldo  I  iiotd.  Iroiii  thy  tesiiiiionies 
i'ruv.i.  5.  neither  d.  from  the  words  of  my  mouth 
7.25.leluot  thine  heart d.to  her  ways,gouot  astray 

DECLLNED,  ETll. 
fudg.  19.  t  8.  they  tarried  till  the  day  d. 

2  Ckr.  34.  2.  d.  neither  to  the  right-hand  nor  left 
.lob  23.  11.  his  way  have  1  kept  and  not  d. 
Fsal.  44.  18.  nor  have  our  steps  d.  from  thy  way 

102.  11.  my  days  are  like  a  shadow  ihat  d. 
109.  23.  I  am  gone  like  the  sliadow  when  it  d. 
119.  ol.  yet  have  1  not  d.  from  thy  law 

DECREASE. 
Ps.iOl.  38.  blesseth  them  and  sutTer  not  cattle  tod. 
John  3.  30.  he  must  increase,  but  I  uiust  d. 

DECREASED,  ING. 

Oen.  8.  5.  waters  d.continually  till  the  tenth  month 

t  the  waters  were  in  going  and  d.till  tenth  month 

DECREE. 

2C7ir(m.30.5.so  they  established  a  d.  to  make  procl. 

Kzra  4.  t  21.  make  a  d.  to  cause  these  men  to  cease 

5.  I3.kiiig  Cyrus  made  ad.  to  build  this  house,  17. 

6.  1.  Darius  made  a  d.  12.  ||  7.  21 .  Artaxerxes  a  d. 
Kst/i.  3.  15.  the  d.  was  given  in  Shushan,  9.  14. 

9.32.d.ofEsthercoutirmed  these  matters  of  Piirim 
Job  20. 1 29.  and  the  heritage  of  his  d.  from  God 

28. 2d.  when  he  made  a  d.  for  the  rain  and  a  way 

38. 1 10.  and  established  my  d.  upon  it,  and  set  bars 
I'sal.  2.  7. 1  will  declare  the  d.  the  Lord  hath  said 

148.  6.  he  hath  made  a  d.  which  shall  not  pass 
Pr«».8.2i).when  he  gave  to  sea  his  d.waters  notpass 
Jcr.  5.  22.  for  the  bound  of  the  sea  by  a  perpetual  d. 
/>on.2.  9.  if  ye  will  not,  there  is  but  one  d.  for  you 

4.  17.  this  matter  is  by  the  d.  of  the  watchers 
24.  and  this  is  the  d.  of  the  most  High 

G.  8.  now,  O  king,  establish  the  d.  and  sign  writing 

13.  Daniel  regardeth  not  thee,  nord.  hath  signed 
2G.  I  make  a  d.  that  in  every  dominion  men  lear 

Jonah  3. 7.  proclaimed  by  the  d.  of  king  and  nobles 
Mic.'t.  11.  in  that  day  shall  the  d.  be  tar  removed 
Zeph.'i.i.  before  the  d.  bring  forth,  before  day  pass 
J^uke  2.1. there  went  out  a  d.  from  Ca-sar  Augustus 

DECREE. 
.fob  22. 28.  thou  shalt  also  d.  a  thing,  and  it  shall  be 
I'rou.8. 15.  by  me  kings  reign, and  princes  d.  justice 
Isa.  10. 1.  woe  to  thuin  thatd.  unrighteous  decrees 

DECREED. 
F.sth.  2. 1.  he  remembered  what  was  d.  ag.  Vashti 

9. 31.  as  they  had  d.  for  themselves  and  their  seed 
Job'.iS.  10.  and  brake  up  for  it  my  d.  place,  set  bars 
/ia.l0.22.consuniption  d.shall  overtlow  with  right. 
lC«r.7.  37.  hath  so  d.  in  his  heart,  thalhe  will  kueii 

DECREES. 
fsa.  10.  1.  woe  to  them  that  decree  unrighteous  d. 
.lets  16.  4.  they  delivered  them  the  df  to  keep 

17.7.  these  do  contrary  to  the  d.  of  Ca;sar,  saying 
DEDICATE. 
Dent.  20.  ,'.  Ipst  he  die  and  anothor  man  d.  il 
•2  Sam.  8.  1 1.  which  also  David  did  (I.  to  the  Lord 

1  t'A7-.2(j.27.  oiilof  spoils  they  (lidd. to  inaintain 

2  C'/tr.  2.  4.  behold  I  build  an  house  tod.  il  lo  God 
DEDICATED. 

Z>fw/.20,5.1ialh  I  uilia  new  hnusR  and  hath  nolrf. 
Judg.  17.3.  I  had  wholly  </.  the  silver  lo  the  Lord 
I  Ki)i^s7. ry\.  Sol.  brought  in  ihinss  which  David 

his  father  had  d.  \Chr.  18.  II.  2  Chr.  5.  L 

R  6-3.  Ihe  king  and  Israelrf.  thehouse,  2C/!r.7.5. 

15.15.  A.sa  briiiighlinlbpthinsshis  father  had  d. 

and  tliinis  which  hiinsolf  had  d.  1Chr.\b.\S. 

2A7«i'sl2  4.all  thrmoneyof  thpd.lhinss  brought 

18.  tlif>  IhiuES  (he  kiii(.'S  of  Judah  had  d. 

1  Clir.  26.  W.  over  the  treasures  of  d.  things,  2G. 
26.  what  the  captains  of  the  hosts  had  J. 
28.  and  all  that  Samuel.  Saul,  and  Joab  had  d. 

28.  12.  the  pattern  of  the  troa.snrPS  of  d.  ihincs 

2  f'hr.  24.  7.  the  d.  things  did  bestow  upon  Ranliin 
31.  12.  ami  brought  in  ihp  d.  ihinps  faithfully 

Ezek  44. 29.  pvpry  d.  thing  in  I.sr  shall  bo  theirs 
Heb.  9.18.  norlhe  first  leBlampiild.  without  blood 


DEDICATING. 
JJ'um.  7.  10.  the  princes  otfrred  for  d.  of  the  altar 
11.  each  prince  on  his  day  for  d.  of  the  altar 
DEDICATION. 
J^um.  7.  84.  this  was  the  d.  of  the  altar,  88. 
2  Chron.  7.  9.  for  they  kept  ihn  d.  of  the  altar 
Ezra  6. 16.  childr.  of  captivilv  kept  the  d.  with  joy 

17.  and  offered  at  the  d.  of^  this  house  of  God 
JVih.  12.  27.  at  the  d.  of  the  wall  of  Jerusalem 
/.'rtn.3.2.  romotod.  ofthe  image  the  king  set  up,  3. 
.John  10.22.  it  was  at  Jerusalem  the  feast  of  the  d. 

DEED. 
'Vf7i.44.15.JoBephsaid,whatd.i»  this  ye  have  done? 
Kzod.'J.  IG.  in  very  d.for  this  causa  I  raised  thee  up 


DEE 

Judg.  19,  30   ill  said,  there  was  no  «uc1i  d.  dor* 
1  .Sum.  25.  34.  in  very  d.  except  thou  hasl  hasted 

20.  4.  David  understood  Saul  was  come  in  very  d. 
'2  Ham.  12.  14.  by  this  d.  hast  given  great  occasion 
Eslh.  1. 17.  for  this  d.  of  queen  shall  come  abroad 
Ps.  137.  t8.  happy  that  recompenseth  thy  d.  lo  us 
Prov.  19.  t  17.  his  d.  will  he  pay  hini  again 
i^uAt  23.51.Jo8eph  had  not  con.sented  lo  d.of  tbem 

24.  19.  Jesus  who  was  a  prophet  mighty  in  d. 
Wc^s  4.9.  if  we  this  day  be  examined  <il' the  good  d. 
horn. 15. 18.  to  make  Gent,  obedient  by  word  and  d. 
1  Cor.  5.  2.  that  halh  done  this  d.  be  taken  away 

3.  concerning  him  that  hath  so  done  this  d. 
Coi.3.17.  whatever  ye  do  in  word  or  d.do  all  in  nam« 
./am.  1.  25.  this  man  shall  be  blessed  in  his  d. 
1  John  3.  J8.  let  us  not  love  in  word,  but  in  d. 

DEEDS. 
(ten.  20.  9.  hasl  done  d.  thai  ought  not  to  be  done 

1  CAro;i.ll.t22.6on  of  a  manof  Kab2eel,great  old. 
10.8.  make  known  his  d.  am.  people,  Psal.  10.5. 1. 

2  Chron.  35.  27.  his  d.  lirst  and  last,  are  wiiiten 
Ezra\)  13.  after  all  is  come  upon  us  for  our  evil  d 
JVch.  6. 19.  also  they  reported  his  good  d.  before  me 

13.  14.  wipe  not  out  my  good  d.  that  1  have  done 
Psal.  28.  4.  gave  them  according  lo  their  d. 
fsa.  59.  18.  according  to  their  d.  he  will  rejiay 
.fer.  5.  28.  they  overpass  the  d.  of  the  wicked 

2.5. 14.  will  recompense  ihcm  according  to  their  d. 
I.uke  II.  48.  that  ye  allow  the  d.  of  your  father! 

23.  41.  we  receive  the  due  reward  of  our  d. 
J«A7i3.19.1ovcd  darkness, because  their  d.were  evil 

20.  to  the  light,  lest  his  d.  should  be  rejiroved 

21.  that  his  d.  may  be  made  manifest,  that  they 

8.  41.  Jesus  saith,  ye  do  the  d.  of  your  father 
Jicls  7.22.  Moses  was  mighty  in  word  and  in  d. 

9.  36.  Dorcas  was  full  of  alms-d.  which  she  did 
19.  18.  many  confessed,  and  shewed  their  d. 

24. 2.  seeing  by  thy  providence  worthy  d.  arc  done 
Horn.  2.  6.  render  to  every  man  according  to  his  d 

3.  20.  by  the  d.  of  the  law  shall  no  flesh  bcjustilied 
28.  is  justified  by  faith  without  the  d.  of  the  law 

8.  13.  il  ye  mortify  the  d.  of  the  body  ye  shall  live 
2  Cot.  12. 12.  were  wrought  in  signs  and  mighty  d. 
Col.  3.  9.  ye  have  put  otf  the  old  man  with  his  d. 

2  Pet.i.8.  Lot  vexed  his  soul  with  their  unlawful  d. 
'iJohn  11.  for  he  is  jiartaker  of  his  evil  d. 

3  John  10.  1  will  remember  his  d.  which  he  doeth 
Jude  15.  to  convince  them  of  their  ungodly  d. 
Rev.  2.  6.  thou  hatest  the  d.  of  the  Nicolaitans 

22.  great  tribulation,  except  they  repent  of  their  d. 
16.  11.  and'thcy  repented  not  of  their  d. 
DEEMED. 

J}cts  27.  27.  the  shipmen  d.  that  they  drew  near 
DEEP 

Signifies,  [1]  Tliat  ichich  is  a  great  way  from  the 
surface  lo  the  bottom, Ezek.3/-2.'i4.  [2]  'J'hesea, 
Job  41.31.  [3]  Jlvy great  and  imminent  dangtr 
Psal.  69. 15.  [4]  iitrange,nr  unknnirn,ha.  .■13. 19. 
[5]  Hidden,  or  srcrcr,  Job  12.  22.  Dan.  2.  22.  [6] 
Jncuneeivable,  or  incomprehensible,  Psal.  92.  5. 
[7]  Jfell,  Luke  8.  31.  Rev.  20.3.  [81  The  Chal- 
dean, or  Ncbuchadncrzar's  army,  Ezek.  26.  19. 

jj  wise  man's  words  are  compared  to  deep  waters, 
Prov.  18.4.  They  are  full  of  deep  wisdom  and 
prudent  counsels.  .Iiid  the  uiiu.itle  ,«/7;/.<,Riini. 
8.39,fAot  neither  height  nordc  plh  shafl  he  able 
to  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God.  jVtither 
the  most  exalted  height,  a  prospect  of  adrance- 
mcnt  to  the  hignest  station,  nor  the  lowest  de- 
gree of  adversity  and  distress. 

To  revolt,  or  sin  deeply,  denotes  a  long  habit  of 
crimes,  and  obstinate  course  of  idolatry;  or 
else  a  profound  and  very  great  iniquity,  a 
crime  that  has  taken  deep  root  in  the  soul  by 
long  and  inveterate  custom  ;  they  have  deeply 
corrupted  themselves  as  in  ihe  days  of  Oibrah, 
Hos.  9.  9.  Thry  hare  eanied  on  their  wick- 
edness to  suck  a  pilch,  as  to  imitat'  the  an- 
cient crimes  of  the  inhiibitanis  of  Oibeah, 
which  arc  recorded  in  Judg.  19.  22,  i^-r.  .ind 
Isaiah  snyf.  Turn  ye  unto  him  from  whom  Ihe 
children  of  Israel  have  deeply  revolted, nomr/y 
by  neglecting  and  forsaking  him,'and  seeking 
to  Egypt  for  help,  Isa.  31.  6. 

Gen.  1.  'i.  and  darkness  was  upon  the  fare  of  the  d. 

7.  11.  the  fountains  of  the  d.  were  broken  up 

8.  2.  Iho  fountains  also  of  Iho  d.  were  slopped 
49.25.  who  shall  bless  thee  with  blessingsof  the  if 

Deut.  33. 13.  and  for  the  d.  Ihat  conchelh  beiieath 
.Job  38.  30.  and  the  face  of  Ihe  d.  is  frozen 

41.  31.  he  makflh  Ihe  d.  to  boil  like  a  pot 
32.  one  would  think  the  d.  lo  be  hoary 

Psal.  3ti.  6.  thy  judgments  are  a  great  d. 

42.  7.  d.  cnllelh  lo  d.  at  noise  of  thy  water-spout# 
('"9.  15.  neither  let  Ihe  d.  swallow  me  up 

104.  6.  thou  rovrredst  it  with  the  d.  iis  wilh  garm 
107.  24.  and  these  see  his  wonders  in  the  d. 

rr(ij'.8.  28.  he  Ktrenglhens  Ihe  founlains  of  the  d. 

fsa.  44.  27.  that  saith  lo  Ihe  d.  be  dry,  I  will  ;lry 
i\.  10.  thou  not  it  which  dried  watera  of  great  <<  ? 


DEP 

fea.  63.  13.  that  led  them  thro'  the  d.  as  a  horge 
£ieA-. 26. 19.  wheal  shall  bring  up  the  d.  on  thee 
ai.  4.  the  rf.  get  him  on  high  with  her  rivers 
15. 1  covered  the  d.  for  liiin,  1  restrained  Hoods 
Jiinos  7.  4.it  devoured  great  (/.and  did  eat  up  a  part 
Jonah  -.  H.  for  thou  hadet  cast  nio  into  the  d. 
Wa6.3.10.  therf.  uttered  his  voice,and  lift  up  hands 
AuAe5.4. launch  out  in  the  d.uiid  let  down  your  nets 
b.  31.  would  not  command  them  to  go  into  the  d. 
Horn.  10.  7.  or  who  shall  descend  into  the  d..» 
3  Cor.  11.25.  anight  and  day  I  have  been  in  the (2. 

DKEP,  Adjective. 
Jab  12.  22.  he  discoverclh  d.  things  out  of  darkness 
Psal.  tJ4.  B.  the  inward  thought  and  the  heart  is  d. 
G9.  2. 1  sink  in  d.  mire,  where  is  no  standing,  1  am 
come  into  d.  waters  where  iioods  overflow  me 
14.  let  me  be  delivered  out  of  the  d.  waters 
81).  it.  and  thou  didst  cause  it  to  take  d.  root 
92.  5.  O  Lord,  thy  thouglils  are  very  d. 
9.5.  4.  in  his  hand  are  the  d.  places  of  the  eartli 
135.  6.  that  did  he  in  the  seas  and  all  d.  places 
140. 10.  them  be  cast  intoii.  pits  that  they  rise  not 
Pros. iy.4. words  of  a  man's  mouth  are  as  d.  waters 
20. 5.  counsel  ui  theheart  of  man  is  hke  d.  waters 

22.  14.  the  mouth  of  strange  women  is  a  d.  pit 

23.  27.  for  a  whore  is  a  d.  ditch,  and  a  narrow  pit 
Eccl.  7.  24.  and  e,\ceeding  d.  who  can  tind  it  out? 
Isa.  7.  t  11.  ask  thee  a  sign,  make  thy  petition  d. 

29. 1.5. woe  to  them  that  seek  d.  to  hide  their  couns 

30.  33.  he  hath  made  Tophet  d.  and  large 
Jer.  49.  8.  turn  back,  dwell  d.  O  inhabit,  of  Dedan 
iCzek.  3.  1 5.  not  sent  to  a  people  d.  of  lips,  f  6. 

23.  32.  shall  drink  of  thy  sister's  cup  d.  and  large 

32.  14.  then  will  I  make  their  waters  d. 

34.  18.  and  to  have  drunk  the  d.  waters 
Dan.  2.  02.  he  revealeth  the  d.  and  secret  things 
/.ate  6.48.  digged  d.  and  laid  foundation  on  a  rock 
Joiri  4. 11.  hast  nothing  to  draw,  and  the  well  is  d. 
1  C'or.2.l0.the  Spiritsearcheth  the  d.  things  of  God 
8  Cor.  8.  2.  how  their  d.  poverty  abounded  to  riches 

DEEP  .■sleep. 
Gen.  2.  21.  God  caused  a  d.  sleep  to  fall  on  Adam 

15. 12.  a.  d.slcep  fa\i  on  Abram,and  great  darkness 
1  Sam.  26. 12.because  a  d.sleep  was  fallen  on  them 
Job  4.  13.  when  d.  sleep  falleth  on  men,  33.  15. 
Prov.  19.  15.  slolhfulness  casteth  into  d.  sleep 
Isa.  2'J.  10.  L.  poured  out  on  you  spirit  of  d.  sleep 
Dan.  8.  18.  I  was  in  a  d.  sleep  on  my  face,  10.  9. 
.^cts  20.  y.  Eutychus  being  fallen  into  d.  sleep 

DEEPER. 
Lev.  13.  3.  the  plague  in  sight  bed.  than  8kin,25.30. 

4.  if  the  bright  spot  in  sight  be  not  d.  31,  32,  34. 
Job  11.  8.11  is  d.than  hell,  what  canst  thou  know? 
[sa.  33.19.a  people  of  d.  speech  than  canst  perceive 

■'     DEEPLY. 
fsa.  31.  6.  the  children  of  Israel  have  d.  revolted 
Hos  9.9.they  haved.corrupt.themselves  as  in  days 
Mark  8.  12.  Jesus  sighed  d.  in  his  spirit,  and  saith 

DEEPNESS. 
.Vat.l3.5.8prung  up,because  theyhad  no  d.of  earth 

DEEPS. 
JWA.9.11.their  persecutors  thou  thre west  into  thed. 
£sat.  88.  6.  thou  hist  laid  me  in  the  pit,  in  the  d. 

"148.  7.  praise  the  Lord,  ye  dragons  and  all  d. 
Zech.  10.  11.  all  the  d.  of  the  river  shall  dry  up 

DF«CR. 

Deut.li.  .5.  ye  shall  eat  the  fallow  d.  and  wild  goat 

1  Kinirs  4. 23  Solom.had  fallow  d.  and  fatted  fowl 

DEFAMED. 

1  Cor.4.13.being  d.we  intreat,are  made  offscouring 

DEFAMING. 

ifer.SO.lO-for  I  heard  d.  nf  many,  fear  on  every  side 

DEFEAT. 

2  Sam.  15.  34.  d.  the  counsel  of  Ahithophel,  17.  14. 

DEFENCE. 

A''um.l4.9.  their  d.  is  depart,  from  them,  L.  with  us 

2  Citron.  11.5.  Rehoboam  built  cities  ford,  of  Jud. 

Job  22.  25.  yea,  the  Almighty  shall  he  thy  d. 

Psal.  7. 10.  my  d.  is  of  G.  who  saveth  the  upright 
31.  2.  be  thou  for  a  house  of  d.  to  save  me 
59.  9.  I  will  wait  upon  thee,  for  G.  is  my  d.  17. 

16.  thou  liastbeen  my  d.  and  refuge  in  trouble 
62.  2.  God  is  my  d.  I  shall  not  be  greatly  moved,  6. 
8!).18.for  Lord  is  our  d.hnly  One  of  Israel  our  king 
94.22.  Lord  is  my  d.  and  God  rock  of  my  refuge 

Eccl.  7.  12.  for  wisdom  is  a  d.  and  money  is  a  d. 

Isa.  4.  5.  for  upon  all  the  glory  shall  be  a  d. 
19.  6.  the  brooks  of  d.  shall  be  emptied  and  dried 
33.16.  his  pla'-.e  of  d.  shall  be  the  munition  of  rocks 

A"aA.  2.  5.  and  the  d.  shall  be  prepared 

jJcrs  19.  33.  would  have  made  his  d.  to  the  people 
22.  1.  hear  my  d.  which  I  make  now  unto  you 

Phil.  1.  7.  in  my  bonds  and  in  the  d.  of  the  gospel 

17.  knowing  that  T  am  set  for  the  d.  of  the  gospel 

DEFENCED. 

Zech.  II.  1  2.  for  the  d.  forest  is  come  down 

See  City,  Citibs. 

DEFEND. 

Jvdg.  10.  1.  Tolah  son  of  Puah  arose  to  d.  Tirael 

2  Kinffs  19  34.1  will  d.  citv,20. 6.  Isa.  37. 35. 1 38.6. 


DEF 

PjoJ.  20. 1.  thename  of  the  God  of  Jacob  d.  thee 
59.  1.  d.  me  from  thorn  that  rise  up  against  me 
82.3.d.the  poor  and  fatherless,  do  justice  to  needy 
Isa.  31.  5.  so  will  the  Lord  of  hosts  d.  Jerusalem 
Zech.  9.  15.  the  Lord  of  hosts  shall  d.  them 
12.8.in  that  day  shall  Lord  d.  inhabitants  of  Jerus. 
DEFENDED. 
2  Sam.  23.  12.  Shamniah  stood  and  d.  the  ground 
Jicts  7.  24.  he  d.  him  and  avenged  the  op|)ressed 

DEFENDEST. 
Psoi.5.ll.evershout  for  joy,  because  thoud.  them 

DE  FEW  DING. 
Isa.  31.  5.  d.  Jerus.  he  will  deliver  and  preserve  it 

DEFER. 
Eccl.  5. 4.  when  thou  vowest  a  vow,d.  not  to  pay  it 
Isa.  48.  9.  for  my  name's  sake  willl  d.  mine  anger 
Dan.  9.  19.  d.  not  for  thine  own  sake,  O  my  God 

DEFEJtRED. 
Qen.  34. 19.  the  young  man  d.  not  to  do  the  thing 
Prov.  13.  12.  hope  d.  maketh  the  heart  sick 
Jlcts  24.  22.  when  Feli.x  heard  those  he  d.  them 

DEFERRETH. 
Prov.  19.  11.  the  discretion  of  a  man  d.  his  anger 

DEFY. 
J\rum.  23.  7.  come,  curse  me  Jacob,  and  d.  Israel 
8.  how  shall  1  d.  whom  the  Lord  hath  notdefied? 
1  Sam.  17. 10. 1  d.  the  armies  of  Israel  this  day 

25.  is  come  up,  surely  to  d.  Israel  is  he  come  up 

26.  that  he  should  d.  the  armies  of  the  living  God 
DEFIED. 

.A'*K7n.23.8.how  shall  Idel'y  whomLord  hath  not  d.? 

1  Sa»n.l7.36.he  hath  d.the  armies  of  the  living  God 
45.  the  God  of  Israel  whom  thou  hast  d. 

2  Sam. 21. 21.  when  he  d.  Israel,  Jonathan,  son  of 
Shimeah,  brother  of  David,slew  him,  1  Chr.  20.  7. 
23.  9.  when  they  d.  Philistines  gathered  to  battle 

DEFILE. 
Man  is  defiled , or  polluted,  either  inwardly  yhy  sin, 
1  Cor.  8.  7.  Tit.  1. 15.  Heb.  12. 15.  or  outwardly 
and  ceremonially,  as  by  the  plague  of  leprosy, 
Lev.  13.  46.  ur  by  touc/iing  a  dead  body.  Num. 
5.2.  Both  inwardly  and  outwardly,  by  follow- 
ing the  abominations  of  the  heathen.  Lev.  18. 

24.  By  seeking  after  wizards,  hev.VJ. 31.  By 
idols,  Ezek.  20.  7.  By  unnatural  unclcanitess, 
1  Tim.  1.  10.  By  the  uJiruliness  of  the  tongue, 
lohich  involves  men  iii  the  guilt  of  siji,  and  Jills 
the  world  with  contentions  and  combustions, 
when  it  is  not  kept  under  govern7nelit,^am.3.6. 

Jilan  is  also  said  to  defile  others.  Shechem  defiled 
Dinah,  the  daughter  of  Jacob  ;  he  /tumbled,  he 
debauched  her,  or  lay  carnally  with  AtT,Gen.34. 
13.  Jlnd  such  as  commit  adultery,  defile  their 
neighbours' wives,/C2e/£.  18.11.  Those  that  gave 
their  seed  to  Molech,  are  said  to  defile  God's 
sanctuary,  Lev.  20.3.;  because  such  persons,  to 
screen  their  idolatry,  came  into  his  sanctuary 
as  others  did;  or,  because  by  these  actions  they 
did  pronounce  and  declare  to  all  men,  that  they 
esteemed  the  sanctuary  and  service  of  God 
abominable  and  vile,  by  preferring  such  odious 
and  pernicious  idolatry  before  it. 

Lev.  11.  44.  nor  shall  ye  d.  yourselves,  18.  24. 
1.5.  31.  when  they  d.  my  tabernacle  among  them 
18.  20.  to  d.  thyself  with  thy  neighbour's  wife 
23.  neither  lie  with  any  beast  to  d.  thyself 

25.  that  the  land  spue  not  you  out  when  ye  d.  it 

20. 3.  given  his  seed  to  Molech,  to  d.  my  sanctuary 

21.4.  he  shall  not  d.  himself,  being  a  chief  man 
11.  nor  d.  himself  for  his  father  or  his  mother 

22.  8.  he  shall  not  eat  to  d.  himself  therewith 
JVum.  5.  3.^put  out,  that  they  d.  not  their  camps 
35.  34.  d.  not  the  land  which  ye  shall  inhabit 
2  Kings  23.  13.  the  high  places  did  the  king  d. 
Cant.5.3.have  washed  my  feet,how  shall  I  d.  them? 
/sa.30.22.shall  d.the  covering  of  thy  graven  images 
./er.  32.  34.  in  the  house  called  by  my  name  to  d.  it 
Eiek.  7.  22.  for  robbers  shall  enter  into  it  and  d.  it 
9. '7.  d.  the  house,  fill  the  courts  with  the  slain 
20.  7.  d.  not  yourselves  with  idols  of  Egypt,  18. 
22.  S.  maketh  idols  against  herself  to  d.  herself 
28.  7.  and  they  shall  d.  thy  brightness 
33.  2i).  ye  d.  every  man  his  neighbour's  wife 
37.  23.  nor  shall  they  d.  themselves  any  more 
43.  7.  and  my  name  shall  Israel  no  more  d. 
44.25.shall  come  at  no  dead.person  tod.themsclvos 
Dan.  1. 8. would  notd.himself  with  the  king's  meat 
Mat.  15.  18.  and  they  d.  the  man,  Mark  7.  15,2.3. 
1  Cor.  3.  17.  if  any  man  d.  the  temple  of  God 
1  Tim.  1. 10.  the  law  is  for  them  thatd.  themselves 
Jude  8.  likewise  these  filthy  dreamers  d.  the  flesh 

DEFILED. 
Oen.  34.  2.  Shechem  lay  with  Dinah,  and  d.  her 
5.  Jacob  heard  that  he  had  d.  Dinah  his  daughter 
13.  because  he  had  d.  Dinah  their  sister,  27. 
Lev.  5.  3.  what  uncleanness  a  man  shall  be  d.  with 
11.  43.  unclean,  that  ho  should  be  d.  thereby 
13.  46.  while  the  plague  is  in  him  he  shall  be  d. 
15.  32.  this  is  the  law  of  him  that  is  d.  by  his  seed 
18.  24.  in  all  these  things  tUo  n&tions  are  d. 
8 


DEG 

Lev.  18.  25.  the  land  is  d.  I  visit  iniquity  on  it,  27 

19.  31.  nor  seek  after  wizards  to  be  d.  by  them 

21.  1.  there  shall  none  be  d.  for  the  dead 

3.  for  his  sister  a  virgin,  for  her  may  he  be  d. 

JiTum.  5.  2.  put  out  whosoever  is  d.  by  the  dead 

13.  and  if  she  be  d.  27.  1|  14.  if  she  bo  not  d.  88. 

6.  9.  and  ho  hath  d.  the  head  of  his  consecratioa 
12.  days  be  lost,  because  his  separation  was  d. 

9.6.men  who  were  d.  by  the  dead  body  of  a  man,7. 
19.20.because  ho  hath  d.the  sanctuary  of  theLotd 
Dcut.  21.  23.  bury  him,  that  thy  land  be  not  d. 

22.  9.  lest  the  fruit  of  thy  vineyard  be  d. 

24.  4.  former  husband  may  not  take  her  after  d. 
2  Kings  23.8.Josiah  d.high  places  ||  10.  d.  Topheth 
1  Chron.  5.  1.  forasmuch  as  he  d.  his  father's  bed 
JVcA.  13.  20.  because  they  have  d.  the  priesthood 
Job  16.  15.  I  have  d.  my  horn  in  the  dust 
Psal.  74.  7.  d.  the  dwelling-place  of  thy  name,79.1. 

106.  39.  thus  were  they  d.  with  th^ir  own  works 
Isa.  24.  5.  the  earth  is  d.  under  inhabitants  thereof 

59.  3.for  your  hands  are  d.  with  blood,  and  fingeii 
Jer.  2.  7.  but  when  ye  entered,  ye  d.  my  land 

3.9.through  lightness  of  her  whoredom  she  d.  land 

16.  13.  because  tliey  have  d.  my  land,  they  filled 

19.13.  the  houses  of  the  kings  of  Jud.  shall  bed. 
Eick.  4.  13.  thus  shall  Israel  eat  their  d.  bread 

5.  11.  surely  because  thou  hast  d.  my  sanctuary 

7.  24.  I  will  make,  their  holy  places  shall  be  d. 
18.  6.  neither  hath  d.  his  neighbour's  wife,  15. 

11.  and  hath  even  d.  his  neighbour's  wife 

20.  43.  all  your  doings  wherein  ye  have  been  d. 

22.  4.  and  hast  d.  thyself  in  thy  idols,  23.  7. 

11.  another  hath  lewdly  d.  his  daughter-in-law 

23.  13.  I  saw  that  she  was  d.  both  took  one  way 
17.  the  Babylonians  d.  her  with  their  whoredom 
38.  they  have  d.  my  sanctuary  in  the  same  day 

28.  IS.  thou  hast  d.  thy  sanctuaries  by  thy  iniqui. 
36.  17.  they  d.  it  by  their  own  way  and  doings 
43. 8.  they  have  d.  my  holy  name  by  abominations 
//os. 5.3. whoredom  of  Ephraim,  and  Isr.  is  d.  6.10. 
J\Iic.  4.  11.  many  nations  that  say,  let  her  be  d. 
Mark  7.  2.  the  disciples  eat  bread  with  d.  hands 
John  18.  28.  they  went  not  in,  lest  they  should  be  d. 
1  Cor.  8.  7.  and  their  conscience  being  weak  is  d. 
TiJ.l.lS.  but  to  them  that  are  d.  and  unbelieving  if 
nothing  pure,  even  their  mind  and  conscience  d 
Heb.^%\b.  trouble  you,  and  thereby  many  be  d. 
Ilev.  3.  4.  a  few  who  have  not  d.  their  garments 
14.  4.  these  are  they  who  are  not  d.  with  women 

DEFILF.ST. 
Gcn.49.4.  wentest  up  to  father's  bed,then  d.  thou  it 

DEFILETH. 
Exod.  31. 14. that  d.  sabbath,  surely  be  put  to  detth 
jV"«m. 19.13.  purifieth  not  himself,  d.  the  tabernacle 
35.33.  shall  not  pollute  the  land,  blood  d.  the  land 
Mat.  15. 11. not  that  which  goelh  into  the  mouth  d 

20.  to  eat  with  unwashen  hands  d.  not  a  man 
Mark!.  20.  what  comelh  out  of  man  that  d.  man 
Jam.  3.6.  so  is  the  tongue,  that  it  d.  the  whole  body 
Rev.  21.  27.  in  no  wise  enter  any  thing  that  d. 

DEFRAUD. 
Lev.  19.  13.  thou  shall  not  d.  thy  neighbour 
Mic.  2.  t  2.  so  they  d.  a  man  and  his  house 
MaU  3.  t  5.  against  those  that  d.  the  hireling 
Mark  10.  19.  do  not  bear  false  witness,  d.  not 
1  Cor.6.  8.  nijy  you  do  wrong,  and  d.  your  brcthrcfi 
7.  5.  d.  not,  except  it  be  with  consent  for  a  time 
1  Tkcss.  4.6.  that  no  man  d.  his  broth,  in  any  mat. 

DEFRAUDED. 

15am. 12.3.  whom  have  I  d?  whom  have  I  oppress.? 

4.  they  said,  thou  hast  not  d.  nor  oppressed  us 

1  Cor.  6.  7.  why  do  not  rather  suff.  yours,  to  be  d. 

2Cor.7.2.we  have  wronged  no  man,have  d.  no  mao 

DEGENERATE. 
Jer.  2.  21.  how  art  thon  turned  into  the  d.  plani  I 

DEGREE,  S. 
Psalms,  or  Songs  of  degrees  :  This  title  is  given  to 
fifteen  Psalms,  which  are  the  VlQth,  and  all  that 
follow  to  the  134«A,  inehisive.  The  Hebrew  text 
calls  them,  A  song  of  ascents.  Junius  andTre- 
mcllius,  translate  the  Hebrew  by,  A  song  of  pji- 
cellen'rieB,  or  An  e.xcellent  song;  because  of  the 
excellent  matter  of  them,as  eminent  persons 
are  called  men  of  high  degree,  1  Chron.  17.  17. 
Some  call  themTsa\ma  of  elevation;  becavse,say 
they,  thry  were  sung  vith  an  exalted  roice,  or, 
because  at  every  Psalm  the  vnice  was  raised. 
But  the  common  translation,  or,  Psalms  of  de- 
grees, Aas  more  generally  obtained.  Some  inter- 
preters think  that  they  were  so  called,  becavji 
they  were  sung  upon  the  fifteen  steps  of  the  tem- 
ple; but  they  are  not  agreed  about  the  place 
where  these  fifteen  steps  were.  Others  think 
they  were  so  called,  because  they  were  sung  in 
a  gallery,  which  thry  say,  was  in  the  court  of 
Israel,  where  sometimes  the  Lcvitrs  rrarl  the 
law.  But  others  are  of  opinion,  that  the  most 
probable  reason  why  they  are  called  songs  of 
i^rf:e3,  or  of  apcer'.,  i>,  because  they  were  com- 
pottd  and  sung  by  Uu  Jaws  on  the  occasion  »f 


DEL 

tktir  deliverance  from  the  captivity  o/Babjlon, 
vhether  tt  were  to  implure  this  deliverance  from 
God,  or  to  return  thanks  for  it  aftir  it  had  hap- 
pened,   .iil  these  Vi'Mma  have  ioiue  relation  to 
this  great  event.  Jind  the  scripture  commonly 
applies  the  phrase,  to  uscciid,  or  go  up,  to  ei- 
I^ess  Uiis  return,  Ezra  1.  3,  5,  U.  |  7.  b,  7,  9. 
l/ecausc  Babylon  iciu  situated  in  a  plain,  and 
JurUBOlcm  tit  a  mountainous  country.  Jind  al- 
though one  of  the  PBalins  is  ascribed  to  David, 
and  another  Co  Solomon,  yet  they  also,  as  well 
as  the  rest,  might  have  been  used  on  this  occa- 
sion, though  thty  were  composed  by  David  and 
Solomon  upon  other  occasions. 
The  apostle  I'uul  says,  That  Buch  as  have  used 
Ihe  oltice  of  a  deacon  well,  purchase  to  theni- 
selvoi*  a  good  degree,  1  Tim.  '.i.  I'.l.     They  gain 
great  honour,  respect,  and  reputation. 
S  Kings  yo.  9.  or  backward  ten  d.  10, 11.  Isa.  38. 8. 
t  11.  by  which  it  had  gone  down  in  d.  of  Ahaz 
1  Chron.  15.  18.  brethren  of  second  d.  with  them 
17.  17.  according  to  the  state  of  a  man  of  high  d. 
PfiU.di.'J.men  ollow  d.  vanity,  menof  high  d.  a  lie 
/,«*«  1.  52.  he  hath  exalted  them  of  low  d. 
1  Tim.  3. 13.  they  purchase  to  themselves  a  good  d. 
Jam.  1. 9.  let  brother  of  low  d.  rejoice  he  is  exalted 

DELAY,  ED,  ETH. 
F.tod.  22. 29.  thou  shalt  not  (/.to  otter  the  tirst-fruits 
32. 1.  the  people  eaw  that  Moses  d.  to  come  down 
Psal.  119.  60.  d.  not  to  keep  ihy  commandments 
.Vat.  24.  48.  my  lord  d.  his  coming,  Luke  12.  45. 
Acts  9.  38.  that  he  would  not  d.  to  come  to  them 

DELAY,  Substantive. 
Jets  25. 17.  without  any  d.  I  sat  on  the  judgm.-seat 

DELECTABLE. 
Isa.  44.  9.  and  their  d.  tliini's  shall  not  profit 

DELICACIES. 
Rev.  18.  3.  the  merchants  are  rich  through  her  d. 

DELICATE. 
Deut.  28. 54.  the  d.  man  or  woman  among  you,  56. 
/.•<o.47.I.  thou  shalt  no  more  be  called  tender  andrf. 
Jcr.  6.2.  likened  Zion  to  a  comely  and  d.  woman 
Alie.  1.  16.  make  thee  bald  for  Ihy  d.  children 

UEIJCATES. 
Jcr.  51.  34.  ho  halh  filled  his  belly  with  my  d. 

DELICATELY. 
1  .^ani. 15. 32. bring  .^gag,  and  A^ag  came  to  him  d. 
Prov.  29.  21.  he  that  d.  bringetn  u|)  his  servant 
Aa/n.4.5.they  that  did  feed  rf.are  desolate  in  streets 
l.Mke  7.  25.  they  that  live  d.  are  in  kings'  courts 
1  Tim.5.  \6.  she  that  livelh  rf.  is  dead  while  she  liv 

DELICATENESS. 
Deut.  28.  56.  to  Ret  her  foot  on  the  ground  for  d. 

DELICIOCSLY. 
Re9. 18.  7.how  she  glorified  herself  and  lived  d.  9 

DELIGHT,  Substantive. 
Gen.  34. 10.  Phechem  had  d.  in  Jacob's  daughter 
/>f«f.lO.  15.  L.  had,a  (/.in  thy  fathers  to  love  them 
21. 14.  and  it  phall  be  if  thou  have  no  d.  in  her 

1  Sam.  15.  22.  hath  the  L.  as  great  d.  in  oflTerings? 
lA.  i2.  and  nay,  behold,  the  king  hath  d.  in  thec 

2  Ham.  15.  26.  if  he  thus  say,  I  have  no  d.  in  thee 
Job  22. 26.  then  shalt  thou  have  </.  in  the  Almighty 
Psal.  1.  2.  but  his  d.  is  in  the  law  of  the  Lord 

16.  3.  and  to  the  excellent,  in  whom  is  all  my  d. 

27.  }  4.  to  behold  the  d.  of  the  Lord,  and  enquire 

119.24.  thy  testimonies  also  arc  my  (/.  and  counsel 

77.  that  I  may  live,  for  thy  law  is  my  d.  174. 


DEL 

Prov.  1.  22.  how  long  will  scorneri  d,  in  scomingT 
2.  14.  and  d.  in  ihu  t'rowardness  of  the  wicked 
t'.ccl.  2.  t  '24.  than  that  he  d.  his  senses  in  good 
Isa.  1. 11.  1  d.  nut  in  the  blood  of  bullocks 
13.  17.  and  as  for  gold,  they  shall  not  d.  in  it 
55.  2.  and  let  your  soul  d.  itself  in  fatness 
5rf.  2.  yet  llicy  seek  me,  and  d.  to  know  my  ways 
14.  then  shalt  thou  d.  thyself  in  the  Lord 
Jer.  9.  24.  In  these  tilings  1  d.  saith  the  Lord 
Mai.  3. 1.  messenger  of  the  covenant  whom  ye  d.\n 
Horn.  7. 22. 1  </.in  the  law  of  God  after  inward  man 
DELIGHTED. 

1  Sam.  19.  2.  Jonathan  d.  much  in  David 

2  Sam.  22.  20.  because  he  d.  in  me,  Psal.  18.  19. 

1  Kings  10.  9.  the  L.  who  d.  in  thee,  2  Chr.  9.  8. 
J^eh.  9. 25.  and  d.  themselves  in  thy  great  goodness 
y.sth.  2.  14.  she  came  no  more, except  kingt/.iii  her 
Psal.  22.  8.  let  him  deliver  him,  seeing  he  d.  in  him 

109. 17.  as  he  d.  not  in  blessing,  let  it  be  far  from 
Cant.  2.  t  3.  I  </.  and  sat  down  under  his  shadow 
Isa.  65. 12.  did  choose  that  wherein  I  d.  not,  66.4. 
66.  11.  be  d.  with  the  abundance  of  her  glory 

DELIGHTEST. 
P^af  51.10.  not  sacrifice,  thou  d.  not  in  burnt-offer. 

DELIGHTETH. 
Esth.&.ft.  whom  the  king  d.  to  honour,  7,  9,  11. 
>'sa/.37.23.are  ordered  by  L.  and  he  d.  in  his  way 
112.  1.  that  d.  greatly  in  his  commandments 
147.  10.  he  d.  not  in  the  strength  of  the  horse 
Prov.  3.  12.  as  a  father  the  son  in  whom  he  d. 
Isa.  42.  1.  behold  mine  elect,  in  whom  my  soul  d. 
W2.  4.  called  Hephzi-bah,  for  the  Lord  d.  in  tliee 
66.  3.  and  their  soul  d.  in  their  abominations 
Mic.l.  18.  retaineth  not  anger,  because  d.  in  mercy 
Mai.  2. 17.  w  hen  ye  say,  G.  d.  in  them  that  do  evil 
DELIGHTS. 

2  Sam. 1 .24. who  clothed  you  in  scarlet  with  other  t'. 
Psal.  119.  92.  unless  thy  law  had  been  my  d. 

143.  yet  thy  commandments  are  my  d. 
Prov.  8.  31.  my  d.  were  with  the  sons  of  men 
F.ccl.  2.  8. 1  gal  mc  men-singers,  and  ihe  d.  of  men 
Cant.  7.  6.  how  pleasant  art  thou,  O  love,  for  d. 

DELIGHTSOME. 
Mai.  3.  12.  ye  shall  be  a  d.  land,  saith  the  Lord 

DELIVER. 
rreH.40.I3.thou  shaltrf.Pharaoh'scup  into  his  hand 
Eiod.  5.  18.  yet  shall  he  d.  the  tale  of  bricks 

22.  7.  if  a  man  shall  d.  unto  his  neighbour,  10. 
96.  thou  shall  d.  it  by  that  the  sun  goeth  down 

23.  31.  I  will  d.  the  inhabitants  of  the  land 
JVum.  21.  2.  if  thou  wilt  indeeil  d.  this  people 

35.2.5.  the  congregation  shall  d.  the  slayer  out  of 
Devt.  7.24.  he  shall  d.  their  kings  into  thy  hand 
23. 15.  thou  shalt  not*/,  to  his  master  ihe  servant 
25.  11.  to  d.  her  husband  out  of  the  hand  of  him 
:fc!.39.  any  that  can  d.  out  of  my  hand,  Isa.  43.  13 
.fosh.  2.  13.  that  ye  will  d.  our  lives  from  death 
8.  7.  for  your  God  will  d.  it  into  your  hand 
20.  5.  they  shall  not  d.  the  slayer  into  his  hand 
Judg.  1.  7.  and  d.  the  Midianites  into  thine  hand 

10.  t  1.  after  Abimelech  arose  Tola  to  d.  Israel 

11.  30.  if  thou  shalt  without  fail  d.  the  Ammonites 
13.  5.  Samson  shall  begin  lo  d.  Israel  from  Philist. 

1  Sam.  7.  14.  the  coasts  thereof  did  Israel  d. 

12.  21.  after  things  which  cannot  profit  nor  d. 

23.  4.  I  will  d.  the  Philistines, 2' .Sam.  5.  19. 

24.  4.  I  will  d.  thine  enemy  into  thine  hand 
28.  19.  the  Lord  wjll  d.  Israel  lo  the  Philistines 


7V(jti.8.30.I  was  daily  his  </.  rejoicing  always  in  the  1 2  .Sam.  14. 16.  the  king  will  hear  to  d.  his  handmaid 


11.  1.  but  a  just  weight  is  the  Lord's  d 
20.  such  as  arc  upright  in  their  way  arc  his  (/. 

12.  22.  bill  they  that  deal  truly  are  his  d. 
15.  8.  but  the  prayer  of  ihe  upright  is  his  d. 
IG.  13.  righteous  lips  are  the  d.  of  kings 
IB.  2.  a  loid  hath  nod.  in  understanding 

19. 10.  d.  is  not  seemly  for  a  fool,  much  li^ns  for 
24.  25.  hut  to  them  that  rebuke  him  shall  be  d. 
29.  17.  ycB,  he  shall  giverf.  unto  thy  soul 
f?«:/.12.tl0.preacher  sought  to  find  out  wordioffi. 
C^int.  2.  3.  I  sat  under  his  shndow  with  great  d. 
ha.  5fi.  2,  thiiy  take  d.  in  approaching  to  God 

13.  if  Ihou  call  the  sablialh  a  d.  the  holy  of  Lord 
R2.  t  4.  thou  shalt  be  call.-d,  my  d.  is  in  her 
Jcr.fi.  10.  ihcyhnve  no  d.  in  the  word  of  the  Lord 
y;aT?.  II.  t  41.  he  shall  enter  into  the  land  c\( d. 
t  45.  thall  plant  tahernBi-lo  in  the  mount  of  </. 
DELIGHT,  Verb. 
Araiffl.l4.R.  if  L.  d.  in  u<,  will  bring  us  into  this  land 
.fam.  24.  3.  why  should  the  king  d.  in  this  thing? 
VA  27.  10.  will  h.-  d.  himfinlf  in  ihe  .Mmiglitv  ! 

34.  9.  that  he  should  d.  himself  with  Goil 
Pral.  22.  t  8-  let  hiin  delivir  him,  if  ho  d.  in  him 
37.4.  d.  thysi  If  also  in  the  Lord,  he  shall  give  Ihce 
II.  the  meek  shall  d.  in  the  nbiindanco  of  peace 
40.  8.  T  d.  to  do  thy  wiH,  O  my  God,  thy  law  is 
49.  t  13.  yet  their  po»lerily  d.  in  their  month 
62.4  they  d.'m  lies  |{  68.3fl.tho  people  th»t  d.\i\  war 
34.  19.  in  mult,  of  thoughts  thy  romfortji  d.  son! 
119.  10.  I  will  d.  myself  in  thy  sliitul<yi,.'t5.       , 
47.  d-  in  !hv  commandmen's  ||  70  d.  io  Uij  latv 
13S 


20.  t  6.  let  Shcba  d.  himself  from  onr  eyes 

1  Kings  18.9.lhou  wouldest  d.  thy  servant  to  Ahab 
20.  l'3.  I  will  d.  this  multitude  into  thy  hand,  28. 
22.  6.  they  said,  go  up,  for  the  Lord  shall  d.  it  into 

the  king's  hand,  12,  1.5.  2  Chron.  18.  .5,  11. 

2  A'i7i^.«3.18.he  will  d.  the  Moabilcs  into  your  hand 
12.  7.  hut  (/.  it  for  the  breaches  of  the  house 

18. 35.  that  Lord  should  d.  Jerusalem,  Isa.  36. 20. 

22.  .5.  let  them  </.  into  the  hand  of  the  workmen 

2  Chrnv.'i^i.  15.  who  could  not  d.  their  own  people 

28.  11.  now  hear  mc  and  d.  the  caplivos  again 

32.  13.  were  gods  of  naticms  able  lo  d.  their  lands? 
14.  that  your  God  should  bo  able  to  d.  you,  l~ 

K:rB7. 19. those  i/.thoii  before  the  God  ofjeruoalcm 
.fob  10.  7.  there  is  n<jne  can  d.  out  of  thy  hand 

22.  30.  he  shall  d.  tiie  island  of  the  innocent 

33.  28.  he  will  d.  his  soul  from  going  into  the  pit 
Ps.  6. 4.  </.  my  soul,  17.  ill.  1 22. 20.  ]  1 16,  4.  |  120.  2 

7  2.  renting  it  while  there  is  none  lo  d.  50.  22. 
33.  17.  nor  shall  he  d.  any  by  his  great  strength 

19.  to  d.  Iheir  soul  from  deaili,  and  to  keep  alive 
.56.  13.  wilt  thou  not  d.  my  feet  from  falling  * 
72.  12.  for  he  shall  d.  the  needy  when  he  crieth 
74.  19.  O  d.  not  the  soul  of  thy  liirtle-dovo 

82.  4. (/.the  poor  and  needy  out  of  hand  of  wicked 
89.  48.  shall  he  d.  his  soul  from  hand  oflhegr^ve  ? 
I'rnv.  4.  9.  a  crown  of  glory  shall  she  d.  to  theo 
6.  3.  do  this  now,  my  son,  ami  d.  thyself 

23.  14.  beat  him,  thou  shalt  d.  his  soul  from  hell 
F.cel.  H.  8.  nor  shall  wickedneM  <f.  those  given  to  it 
/«a.S.29  jliall  carry  it  away  Mife,aod  Dune  shall  (/.it 


DEL 

Iia.  29. 11.  which  mi>n  d.  to  one  that  is  Irarnco 
31.  5.  defending  also  he  will(/.  it,  and  passing  ovei 
44.  20.  he  cannot  d.  his  soul,  nor  say  is  there  no< 
46.  2.  they  stoop,  they  could  not  d.  the  burden 
47. 14.  they  shall  not  ii.  tiiemselves  from  the  flame 
50. 2.  is  my  hand  shortened!  have  I  no  power  to  d. 

Jcr.  15. 9.  the  residue  of  them  will  I  d.  to  the  sword 
18.  21.  therefore  d.  up  their  children  to  the  famine 
20.  5.  moreover  I  will  d.  all  strength  of  this  city 
21.7.afterward9lwill  d.  Zedvkiah  from  theiword 
22.3.(/.  the  spoiled  out  of  the  hand  of  theoppreisor 
43.  11.  he  shall  d.  such  as  are  for  death  to  death 
51.  6.  flee  out  of  Bab.  d.  every  man  his  soul,  45. 

i^2<:Ar.l3.21.I  will  d.  my  people  out  of  your  hand,23. 
14.  14.  they  should  d.  but  their  own  souls,  20. 
16.  shall  d.  neither  sons  nor  daughters,  18,  20. 

33.  5.  he  that  taketh  warning  shall  d.  his  soul 

34.  10.  for  I  will  (/.  my  flock  from  their  mouth 
/>ian.3.29.there  is  no  other  god  can  d.  after  this  sort 

8.  4.  nor  was  there  any  that  could  d.  from  the  ram 
7.  none  that  could  d.  the  ram  out  of  his  hand 
Hos.  2. 10.  none  shall  d.  her  out  of  mine  hand 
./imoa  2.  14.  neither  shall  the  mighty  d.  himself 
15.  he  that  is  swifl  of  foot  shall  not  d.  himself 

6.  8.  I  will  d.  the  city  with  all  that  is  therein 
Mic.  5.  8.  who  teareth  in  pieces  and  none  can  d. 

6.  14.  and  thou  shalt  take  hold,  but  shalt  not(/. 
Zech.  2.  7.  d.  thyself,  O  Zion,  that  dwellcst  with 

11. 6. 1  will  d.  every  one  into  his  neighbour's  hand 
.*/a/.10.21.the  brotlicr  shall  d.  the  broiJier  lo  death 
.^cts  25.16.  not  manner  of  Romans  to  d.  man  to  die 

1  Cor.  5.  5.  d.  such  one  to  Sat.  for  destruct.  of  flesh 
2C«r.l.l0.who  delivered  us  from  death, and  doth  d 

2  Pet.  2.  9.  the  Lord  knoweth  how  to  d.  the  godlj 

DELIVER  him. 
Oen.  37.  22.  rid  him,  to  d.him  to  his  father  again 
Vi.'M.d.him  into  my  hand,  I  will  bring  him  to  ihte 
F.xod.  21.  13.  but  God  will  d.  him  into  his  hand 
Deut.  2.  30.  that  he  might  d.  him  into  thy  hand 
3.  2.  I  will  d.him  and  his  people  into  thy  hand 
.'9.12.  d.  hint  into  the  hand  of  the  avenger  of  blood 
24.  13.  in  any  case  thou  shall  d.  him  ihe  pledge 
Judg.i.l.l  will  drawSisera  and  d.him  into  Ihy  hand 
14'am.2;i.20.our  partshall  belod.hini  into  thy  hand 
2  .Sam.  14.  7.  said,  d.  him  that  smoic  his  brother 
20.  21.  d.  him  and  I  will  depart  from  the  city 
.7ob  33.  24.  d.  him  from  going  down  to  the  jiit 
Psal.  22.  8.  that  he  would  d.  him,  let  him  d.  him 
41.  1.  the  Lord  will  d.  him  in  time  of  trouble 
2.  thou  wilt  not  d.  him  to  the  will  of  his  encmiea 
71.  11.  and  take  him,  for  there  is  none  to  d.  him 
91.  14.  have  .set  his  love  on  me,  thercf.will  I  d.him 
15.1  will  be  with  him,uill  d.  Aim,and  honour  him 
Prov.  19. 19.  if  thou  d.  him,  ihou  must  do  it  again 
.Ier.il.  12.  d.  him  that  is  spoiled  fK^iii  the  ojiprfHi. 
A'lf  A.33.12.  righteous,  ofrighteous  shall  not  d.  Am 
Dan.  6.  14.  the  king  set  his  heart  on  Dsn.  to  d.  hiia 
.hnah  4.6.  might  be  a  shadow  lo  d.  him  from  grief 
Mat.  20. 19.  and  shall  d.  him  to  Gentiles  lo  crucifj 
him,  Mark  10.  33.  /,i/*c20.  20.  JJcls^l.  U 

26.  15.  what  will  ye  give,  and  1  will(/.  Aim  to  yoi 

27.  43.  let  him  d.him  now,  if  he  will  have  him 

DELIVER  me. 
Oen.Ji.U.d.  ?«« I  pray  thee  from  the  hand  of  Esau 
I  Sam.  17. 37.  ho  will  d.  me  out  of  hand  of  Goliath 

23.  11.  will  the  men  of  Keilah  d.  me  upl  12. 

24. 15.  the  Ld.  be  judge,  and  d.  me  out  of  thy  hand 

26.  24.  and  lot  him  d.  me  out  of  all  tribulation 
30.  15.  nor  d.  me  into  the  hands  of  my  master 

2.Sam.3.14.  Dav.  sent,  saying,(/.  me  my  wife  MicbaJ 
I  Kings  20.  5.  ihou  shall  d.  me  thy  silver  and  "old 
.fob  6.  23.  d.  me  from  enemies,  Ps.  31.  15.  |  59.  1. 
Psal.  7.  1.  O  Lord,  save  me  from  them  and  d.  me 
25.20.  keep  my  soul,  and  d.  me,  for  I  trust  in 

27.  12.  d.  me  not  over  to  the  will  of  mine  enemiee 
31.2.  bow  down  thine  ear  to  me,  d.  me  speedily 
39.  8.  d.me  from  my  transgressions,  make  me  not 
40. 13. be  pleased  lo  (/.m(-||70.I.make  hasle  tod. me 
43.  1.  O  d.  mr  from  the  (leceitful  and  unjust  man 
51.  14.  d.me  from  blood-guiltiness,  O  God 

59. 2.  d.  me  from  the  workers  of  inirjuily,  save  rT>« 
69.  14.  (/.  mr  out  of  the  mire,  and  let  mo  not  sink 

18.  draw  iiigb  to  my  soul,  and  redeem  if,  d.  me 
71.  2  d.mr  in  Ihy  richtrousness,  rou^e  mo,  31. 1. 

4.  d.  me,  O  my  God,  out  of  hand  of  the  wir  ked 
109.  21.  because  ihy  mercy  is  good  d.  thou  me 
119.  134.  (/.  mr  from  Ihe  oppress  on  of  man 

1.53.  consider  mine  nflliclion,  and  d.  me 

1.54.  plead  my  cause,  and  d.  me,  quicken  me 
170.  (/.  me  according  to  thy  word 

140.  l.(/.mcOLd.  from  the  evil  m«n,;(rrT<crve  me 

142.  0.  (/.  mr  from  my  persocnlurs,  fiir  ihry  are 

143.  9.  d.  me  from  mine  enemies,  I  flee  unto  thf« 

144.  7.  rid  mc,  and  d.  me  out  of  grcnt  waters 
11.  (/.  mr  from  the  hand  of  strange  children 

ha.  44.  17.  lie  snith,  d.  me,  for  thou  an  my  God 
./cr.  38.  19.  lam  afraid  of  the  Jews,  lesi  they  (/.  «« 
-■Tcf.t  25.  11.  no  man  may  d.  mr  lo  them,  I  appeal 
Kom.7. 24.  who  shall  (/.me  from  the  body  of  death? 
S7V«.4.18.  the  Ld.  thall  d.me  from  evorj  evil  work 


DEL 

DELIVER  thee. 
£>c>t£.7.16.  the  people  which  the  Lord  shall  d.  thee 

23  14.  Ld.  walkelhin  midst  of  thy  camp  tod.  tAee 
Judff.  15. 12.  to  bind  tlice,  that  we  may  d.  thee,  13. 
I  Sam.  17. 46>  the  Lord  will  rf.  thee  into  mine  hand 

23.  12.  and  the  Lord  said,  they  will  d.  thee  up 
ii  Kings  18.  23. 1  will  d.  tliee  two  thousand  horses 

20.  ti.  and  I  will  d.  thee  and  .this  city,  Isa.  38.  6. 
Job  5. 19.  he  shall  d.  thee  in  six  troubles,  in  seven 

36. 18.  beware,  then  a  great  ransom  cannot  d.  thee 
Ps.  50. 15. 1  will  d.  thee,  and  thou  shall  glorify  me 

91.  3.  he  shall  d.  tJiee  from  tlie  snare  of  the  fowler 
ProD.  2. 12.  to  d.  thee  from  the  way  of  the  evil  man 
16.tod.t/ieefrora  the  strajtge  woman, the  stranger 
/^a.57.13.when  thou  cricst,let  thy  companies  d.thee 
Jer.  1.8.1am  willi  thee  to  d.  thee,  19.  ]  15.  20,  21 

38.  20.  but  Jeremiah  said,  they  shall  not  d.  thee 

39.  17.  1  will  d.  thee  in  that  day,  saith  the  Lord 
18.1  will  surely  <i.tAee,thoushalt  not  fall  by  sword 

Eiek.  21.  31.  d.  Ihec  into  the  hand  of  brutish  men 

23.  28.  I  will  d.  thee  to  them  whom  thou  liatest 

25.4.1  will  d.thee  to  men  of  the  east  for  a  possession 

7.  1  will  d.  tliee  for  a  spoil  to  the  heathen 

Dan.  6. 16.  thy  God  whom  thou  serves!  will  d.  thee 
20.  is  tliy  God  able  to  d.  thee  from  the  lions  ? 

Hos.  11.  8.  how  shall  I  d.  thee,  Israel  how  shall  I? 

^a£.  5. 25.  iuu'ged.  <Aee  to  the  officer,  Luke  12.58, 
DELIVER  them. 

Exod.  3, 8. 1  am  comedown  to  d.  them,  Actsl.  34. 

DeuL  7.  2.when  the  Lord  lliy  God  shall  d.them,i3. 

Josh.  11.  6.  to-morrow  will  I  d.  them  up  all  slain 

Judff.  11,  9.  and  if  the  Lord  d.  them  before  me 
20.  28.  to-morrow  I  will  d,  them  into  lliine  hand 

1  Sa7n.i4.37.wUt  thou  d.th.2  Sam.5.W.l  CAr.14.10. 

1  Kings  a46.and  d.th.io  the  enemy,2  Kinirs  21.14 

2  Kings  3.  10.  to  d.  Ih.  into  the  hand  of  Moab,  13. 

1  CAro»i.l4.10.  L.  said,  I  will  d.  them  into  thy  hand 

2  Chron.  6. 36.  and  d.  th.  over  before  their  enemies 
25.  20.  for  it  came  of  God,  that  he  might  d.  them 

JVeh.  9.  28.  and  many  times  didst  thou  d.  then 
Job  5.  4.  crushed,  neither  is  there  any  to  d.  them 
Psai.  22.  4.  they  trusted,  and  thou  didst  d.  them 

37.. 40.  the  Lord  shall  help  them,  and  d.  them 

106.  43.  many  times  did  he  d.  tJum  they  provoked 
ProB.ll.e.the  righteousness  of  upright  shall  d.them 

J2.  6.  the  moutn  of  the  upright  shall  d.  them 

24. 11.  forb'/ar  to  d.  them  that  are  drawn  to  death 
Isa.  19.  20.  he  shall  send  a  Saviour  and  d.  them 
Jer.  24.  9.  I  will  d.  Uiemlo  be  removed,  29.  18. 

29.21.  d.th.'mia  liandofNebuchadnezzar,  46. 26. 
Kiek.l.ig.  their  gold  shall  not  d.  thejn,  Zeph.  1. 18. 

34.  12.  so  will  I  seek  and  d.  them  out  of  all  places 
.^mos  1.6. they  carried  away  to  d.  them  up  to  Edom 
Zech.  11.  6.  out  of  their  hand  I  will  not  d.  them 
Jir.ts  7.  25.  that  God  by  his  hand  would  d.  them 
Ueb.'i.  15.  and  d.  them  who  through  fear  of  death 

DELIVER  U.S. 
iyeut.\.'27.lo  d.its  into  hand  of  Amoritcs,  .Tosh.1.1. 
Judg.  10.  15.  d.  us  only,  we  pray  thee,  this  day 

20.  13.  d.  us  the  men,  the  children  of  Belial 

1  Sam.  4.  8.  woe  to  us,  who  shall  d.  vs  out  of  hand 
12.  10.  but  now  d.  us  out  of  hand  ofour  enemies 

2  Kings  la  30.  the  L.  will  d.  us,  32.  Isa.  36. 15, 18. 

1  Chron.  16.  35.  save  and  d.  us  from  the  heathen 

2  Chron.  32.  11.  saying,  the  L.  our  God  shall  d.  us 
Psal.  79.  9.  and  d.  us,  and  purge  away  our  sin 
Jer.  43.  3.  to  d.  us  into  the  hand  of  the  Chaldeans 
/.am.  5.  8.  none  that  doth  d.  us  out  of  their  hand 
Dan.  3.  17.  owr  God  is  able  to  d.  us,  and  will  d.  us 
wVf'c.  5.  6.  thus  shall  he  d.  us  from  the  Assyrians 
Mat.  G.  13.  but  d.  us  from  evil,  Luke  11.  4. 

2  Cor.  1. 10.  in  whom  we  trust  that  he  will  yet  d.  us 
Gal.  1.  4.  that  he  might  d.  us  from  this  evil  world 

DELIVER  you. 
Oe7i.42. 34.  so  will  I  d.  y.  your  brother,  shall  traffic 
/,ev.  26. 26.  they  shall  d.  you  your  bread  by  weight 
Judg.  10.  11.  did  not  I  d.  you  from  the  Egyptians? 

13.  ye  have  forsaken  me,  I  will  rf.  yort  no  more 

14.  let  them  rf.  you  in  the  time  of  tribulation 

1  Sam.  7.  3.  he  will  rf.  you  from  the  Philistines 

2  Kinns  17.  39.  he  shall  d.  y.  from  all  your  enemies 
18.29.  shall  not  be  able  to  d.  you  out  of  his  hand 

2  Chron.  32.  14.  be  able  to  d.  you  out  ofmine  hand 
/so.  36. 14.  Hozekiah  shall  not  be  able  to  d  you 
46.  4.  I  will  hear,  I  will  carry,  and  will  rf.  you 
F.zek.  11.  9.  I  will  rf.  you  into  hands  of  strangers 
Dan.  3.  15.  who  is  that  God  that  shall  d.  you.? 
Mat.  10.  17.  for  they  will  rf.  you  up,  ^fark  13.  9. 
19.  but  when  thoy  d.  you  up, 24.  9.  Mark  13.11. 
DELIVERANCE. 
f?en.45.7.G.sent  me  to  save  your  lives  by  a  great  rf. 
Judg.  15.  18.  thou  hast  given  this  great  rf. 

1  .Sam.  11.  t  9.  to  morrow  ye  shall  have  d. 

2  .Sam.  19. 1 2.  the  d.  was  turned  into  mourning 
HKings  5. 1.  by  him  the  Lord  had  given  d.  to  Syria 

13. 17.  the  arrow  of  the  Lord's  rf.  of  rf.  from  Syria 

1  Chron.  11.  14.  the  Lord  saved  them  by  a  great  rf. 

2  Chron  12.  7.  but  I  will  grant  them  some  d. 
F.ira  0.  13.  and  hast  given  us  such  a  d.  as  thii 
Esth.  4.  14.  then  shall  there  rf.  arise  to  the  Jews 

123 


DEL 

Psal.  18. 50.  great  li.givcth  he  to  his  king,  to  David 
32.7.thou  shall  compass  me  about  with  songs  of  rf. 

/iu.  26. 18.  we  have  not  wrought  any  rf.  in  the  earth 

y*f/2. 32.  in  Zion  and  in  Jerusalem  shall  be  d. 

Obad.  17.  but  upon  mount  Zion  shall  be  d. 

Luke  4. 18.  he  sent  me  to  preach  rf.  to  the  captives 

Neb.  11. 35.  others  were  tortured,  not  accepting  d. 
DELIVERANCES. 

P£a/.44.4.thou  art  my  ICing,comniand  d.  for  Jacob 
DELIVERED. 

0«n.9.2.  on  every  beast,  into  your  hand  are  they  rf. 
14.  20.  God  who  d.  thine  enemies  into  thy  hand 
25.  24.  when  her  days  to  be  d.  were  fulfilled 

Exod.  1. 19.  are  d.  ere  the  midwives  come  to  them 
5.  23.  neither  bast  thou  rf.  thy  people  at  all 
12.  27.  he  smote  the  Egyptians,  and  rf.  our  houses 
18. 10.  who  hath  d.  people  from  under  Egypt 

Deut.  2.  36.  the  Lord  our  God  rf.  all  unto  us 
3.  3.  God  rf.  into  our  hands  the  king  of  Bashan 
9.  10.  the  Lord  d.  unto  me  two  tables  of  stone 
31.  9.  and  Moses  rf.  the  law  unto  the  priests 

J'usA.21.44.  the  Ld.  rf  their  enemies  into  their  hand 

Jud^.  1.  4.  he  rf.  the  Canaanites  into  their  hand 
3.  31.  after  him  was  Shamgar,  he  also  d.  Israel 

5.  11.  they  that  are  rf.  from  the  noise  of  archers 
8.  7.  when  L.  hath  rf.  Zebah  and  Zalmunna 

11.  21.  the  Lord  rf.  Sihon  into  the  hand  of  Israel 

16.  23.  our  god  hath  d.  Samson  our  enemy,  24, 

1  Sam.  4. 19.  Phinehas'  wife  was  near  to  be  rf. 

17.  35.  I  smote  him  and  rf.  it  oul  of  his  mouth 

30.  23.  who  rf.  the  company  that  came  against  us 

2  Sam.  21.  6.  let  seven  of  Saul's  sons  be  rf.  to  us 

1  Kings  3.  17.  and  I  was  rf.  of  child  with  her 
18.  third  day  after  I  was  d.  this  woman  was  rf. 

2  Kings  19.  II.  and  shall  thou  be  d.?  Isa.  37. 11. 
i  Chr.  11.  14.  rf.  that  parcel  and  slew  Philistines 

lii.  7.  then  on  that  day  David  d.  this  psalm 
2  Chr.  23.  9.  Jehoiada  rf.  to  the  captains  shields 

34.  9.  they  d.  money  was  brought  into  house  of  G. 

15.  and  Hilkiah  rf.  the  book  to  Shaphan 
Ezra  5.  14.  the  vessels  were  d.  to  Sheshbazzar 

8.  36.  and  they  d,  tlie  king's  commissions 

Job  22.  30.  it  is  rf.  by  the  pureness  oi  thine  hands 
23.  7.  so  should  I  be  d.  for  ever  from  my  judge 
29.12.becauseld.the  poor  that  cried, and  fatherless 

Pstd.  22.  5.  they  cried  to  thee,  and  were  rf. 
33.  16.  a  mighty  man  is  not  d.  by  much  strength 

55.  18.  he  halli  rf.  my  soul  in  peace  from  battle 

56.  13.  hast  rf.  my  soul  from  death,  86. 13. 1 116.  8. 
60.  5.  that  thy  beloved  may  be  rf.  103.  6. 

69.  14.  let  me  be  rf.  from  them  that  hate  me 
78.  61.  and  rf.  his  strength  into  captivity 
Prov.  11.  8.  the  righteous  is  rf.  out  of  trouble 

9.  but  through  knowledge  shall  the  just  be  d. 

21.  but  the  seed  of  the  righteous  shall  be  rf. 

28.  26.  but  whoso  walketli  wi.-sely  shall  be  d. 
Eccl.  9. 1.5.  poor  wise  man  by  wisdom  he  d.  '.he  city 
Isa.  20.  6.  for  help  to  he  rf.  from  the  king  of  Assyria 

29.  12.  the  book  is  rf.  to  him  that  is  not  learned 
36. 19.  and  have  they  d.  Samaria  out  of  my  hand? 
38.  17.  thou  hast  rf.  it  from  the  pit  of  corruption 
49.  24.  or  shall  the  lawful  captive  be  d.? 

25.  and  the  prey  of  the  terrible  shall  be  d. 

66.  7.  before  pain  came,  she  w  as  rf.  of  a  man-child 
.Jer.  7.  10.  we  are  d.  to  do  all  these  abominations 

20.  13.  for  he  hath  d.  the  soul  of  the  poor 

32. 16.  now  when  I  had  rf.  the  evidence  to  Baruch 
Ezek.  3.  19.  but  thou  hast  rf.  thy  soul,  21.  |  33.  9. 

14.  16.  as  I  live,  they  only  shall  be  rf.  18. 

17.  15.  or  shall  he  break  the  covenant  and  be  rf.? 

31.  14.  for  they  are  all  rf.  unto  death  to  the  earth 

32.  20.  she  is  rf.  to  the  sword,  draw  her  multitudes 
Dan.  3.  28.  and  rf.  his  servants  that  trusted  in  him 

6.  27.  who  d.  Daniel  from  the  power  of  the  lions 

12.  1.  at  that  time  thy  people  shall  be  rf. 
.loel'i.  32.  shall  call  on  name  oft  he  Lord  shall  bed. 
.Imos  9.  1.  and  he  that  cscapeth  shall  not  be  rf. 
Mie.  4.  10.  go  to  Babylon,  there  shall  ihou  be  rf. 
Nab.  ^.9.  that  he  may  be  rf.  from  the  power  of  evil 
Mnl.  3.  15.  yea,  they  that  tempt  God  are  even  d. 
Mat.  11.27.  all  things  are  rf.to  me  of  my  Fatlier,uo 

man  knoweth  Son  but  the  Father,  Luke  10.  22. 

27.  .58.  Pilate  comniiinded  the  body  to  be  rf. 

Mark  7.  13.  thro'  your  tradition  which  ye  have  d. 

]0..33.theSon  of  man  shall  be  d.  to  the  chief  priests 

15.15. released  Barahhas,and  d.Jesus,/ywA-f  23.25. 

Luke  1.  57.  time  came  that  she  should  be  d.  2.  6. 

4. 6.  tl)at  is  d.  to  me,  and  to  whom  I  will,  I  give  it 

17.  there  was  d.  to  him  the  book  of  Esaias 

9.  44.  Son  of  man  shall  be  d.  into  hands  of  men 
12.  58.  give  diligence  that  thou  mayest  be  d. 

18.  32.  for  he  shall  berf.  unto  the  Gentiles 
.fuhn  16.  21.  but  as  soon  as  she  is  rf.  of  the  child 

18.  36.  that  I  should  not  be  d.  to  the  Jews 
.^cts  2.  23.  him  being  d.  by  the  counsel  of  God 
15.. 30.  Judas  and  Silas  came  to  Ant.  and  d.  epistle 
2;i.  33.  and  they  d.  the  epistle  to  the  governor 

27.  1.  they  d.  Paul  to  one  Julius,  a  centurion 

28.  17.  vot  was  I  d.  prisoner  from  Jerusalem 
Iiom.4. 25.  was  d.  for  our  offences  and  raised  again 


DEL 

Kom."!.  6.  now  we  are  rf.  fr.  the  law, that  being  dead 
8  21. the  creature  itself  shall  be  rf.  from  corruption 
15.  31. 1  may  bo  rf.  from  them  that  do  not  believe 
2  Cor.  4. 11.  are  always  d.  to  death  for  Jesus'  sake 
2  77iesa.3.  2. we  may  be  rf.  from  unreasonable  meii 

1  TVm.l.20.whom  I  have  d.toSalan,that  they  leain 

2  Tim.  4. 17.  I  was  d.  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  lioD 
Heb.  11.  11.  by  faith  Sarah  was  d.  of  a  child 

2  fc£.2.  7.  and  d.  just  Lot,  vexed  with  the  filthy 

21.  to  turn  from  the  commandment  d.  to  them 
Jude3.for  the  faith  which  was  once  rf.  to  the  saints 
Rev.  12.  2.  travailing  in  birth,  and  pained  to  be  rf. 

4.  before  the  woman  which  was  ready  to  be  rf. 
See  H.VND,  Hands. 
DELIVERED  Am. 
Gen.  37.  21.  Reuben  rf.  him  oul  of  their  hands 
Lev.  6.  2.  in  that  which  was  rf.  Aim  to  keep,  4. 
Dcut.  2.  33.  the  Lord  our  God  d.  Aim  before  us 
1  Kings  13. 26.  therefore  the  Lord  d.  him  to  the  lion 
17.  23.  and  Elijah  rf.  him  unto  his  mother 
Psal.  7.  4.  yea,  I  have  rf.  him  that  is  mine  enemy 
Mat.  18.  34.  his  Lord  rf.  him  to  the  tormentors 
27.  2.  and  rf.  him  to  Pontius  Pilate,  Mark  15.  1. 
18.  that  for  envy  they  had  rf.  him,  Mark  15.  10. 
2ti.  he  rf.  Aim  to  be  crucified,  John  19.  10. 
Luke  7.  15.  and  Jesus  d.  him  to  his  mother 
9.42.Jcsu9  healed  the  child  and  rf.  AiTntohis  father 
24.  20.  how  our  rulers  rf.  him  to  be  condemned 
.Tohn  18.  30.  we  would  not  have  rf.  him  to  thee 
.^cts  7.  10.  God  d.  Aim  oul  of  all  his  afflictions 
12.  4.  Herod  rf.  him  to  four  quaternions  of  soldiers 

DELIVERED  me. 
Exod.  18.  4.  God  d.  7ne  from  the  sword  of  Pharaoh 
.ludg.  12.  3.  and  when  I  saw  that  ye  d.  me  not 

1  .Sam.  17.  37.  the  Lord  that  d.  me  from  the  lion 

2  Sam.  22.  18.  he  rf.  ?ne  from  my  strong  enemies 
20.  he  d.me  because  delighted  in  me,  Psal.lS.  19. 
49.  thou  hast  d.  me  from  violent  man,  Psal.\S.4S 

2  Kings^.  lO.Hilkiah  the  priest  hath  d.me  a.  book 
Job  16.  11.  God  hath  rf.  me  to  the  ungodly 
Psal.  18.  17.  he  d.  me  from  my  strong  enemies 
43.  hast  d.  me  from  the  strivings  of  the  people 
34.  4.  the  Lord  heard  and  rf.  me  from  all  my  fears 
54.  7.  for  he  hath  rf.  me  out  of  all  trouble 
■John  19. 11.  he  that  d.  me  to  thee  hath  greater  sin 
2  Tim.  3.  11.  but  out  of  them  all  the  Lord  d.me 
DELIVERED  thee. 

1  .Sa7n.24. 10.  the  Lord  d.  £Ace  to-day  into  my  hand 

2  Sam.  12.  7.  and  I  rf.  thee  out  of  the  hand  of  Saul 
Psal.  81.  7.  thou  calledsl  in  trouble,  and  I  d.  thee 
Ezek.  16. 27. 1  d.  thee  to  will  of  them  that  hate  thee 
John  18.35.  the  chief  priests  d.  thee  unto  me 

DELIVERED  them. 
Exod.  18.  8.  Moses  told  how  the  Lord  d.  them 
Deut.  5.  22.  in  tables  of  stone,  and  d.  them  to  ma 
Judg.  3.  9.  Lord  raised  uj)  a  deliverer,  who  d.  them 
2  h'ings  19. 12.  gods  of  nations  d.  them,  Isa.  37.12. 
2  CAr.29.8.hath  d.  them  to  trouble,  to  astonishment 
Psal.  78.  42.  when  he  rf.  them  from  the  enemy 

107.  6.  and  he  d.  them  out  of  their  distresses 
20.  and  he  rf.  the7n  from  their  destructions 
Isa.  34.  2.  he  hath  rf.  them  to  the  slaughter 
Ezek.  16.21.  rf.  them  to  cause  them  to  pass  thro'  fire 
J)fa(.25.  14.  called  servanl.s,and  d.tothem  hisgoodi 
Luke  1. 2.  even  as  they  rf.  thrm  to  us  eye-witnesses 

19.  13.  he  rf.  them  ten  pounds,  and  said,  occupy  lili 
.^cts  16.  4.  they  rf.  them,  the  decrees  for  to  keep 

1  Cor.  11.  2.  keep  ordinances,  as  I  d.  them  to  yoa 

2  Pet.  2.  4.  and  d  them  into  '■hains  of  darkness 

DELIVERED  vp. 
J^'um.  21.  3.  and  the  Lord  rf.  vp  the  Canaanite* 
./o.?A.10.12.when  the  Ld.  d.up  Amorites  before Isr. 
2  Sam.  18.28.  rf.  up  the  men  that  lift  up  their  hand 
j^mos  1.9.because  they  rf.  up  the  captivity  toEdom 
Oiarf.l4.nor  shouldest  have  d.up  those  that  remain 
Mat.  4. 1 12.  heard  that  John  was  rf.  up  into  prison 
Jlrts  3.  13.  haih  glorified  his  Son  whom  ye  d.  vp 
Rom.  8.  32.  spared  not  his  Son,  but  d.  him  up  for  us 

1  Cor.  15. 24. when  he  shall  have  d.  up  the  kingdom 
Rev.'m.  13.  death  and  hell  rf.  vp  the  dead  in  them 

DELIVERED  us. 
Exod.  2. 19.  an  Egyptian  d.  us  from  the  shepherds 
.tets  6.  14.  change  the  customs  which  Moses  d.  vs 

2  Cor.  1.  10.  who  d.  vs  from  so  great  a  deaih 
Col.  1.  13.  hath  d.  us  &om  the  power  of  darknew 
1  Thrss.l.\Ot  Jesus,  who  d.  us  from  wrath  to  come 

DELIVERED  you. 
Rom.H.n.yp  obeyed  the  doctrine  which  was  d.you 

1  Cor.  11.  23. 1  received  that  which  I  d.  you,  13.  3. 

DELIVEREDST,  EST. 
JWA.  9.  27.  thou  d.  Ihem  to  enemies  who  vexed 
Psa/.35.10.who  d.  poor  from  him  thai  spoileth  him 
Jlfie.  6. 14.  what  thou  rf.  will  I  give  up  to  the  sword 
Mat.  25.  20.  Lord,  thou  d.  unto  me  five  talents 

22.  and  said.  Lord,  thou  rf.  unto  me  two  talenta' 

DELIVERER. 
.Tudir.  3.  9.  the  Lord  raised  up  a  d.  to  Israel,  15. 
18. 28.  there  was  no  rf.  2  Sam.  14.  f  6.  Psal.  7.  1 5. 

2  .Sam.22.2.  the  Lord  is  my  rock  and  d.  Psal.  18.  ■> 
Psal.  40.  17.  thou  art  mj  help  and  my  d.  70.  S 


BEN 

PtaL  144. 2.  my  fortrces,  my  high  tower,  and  my  d. 
jScU  7.  35.  the  same  did  God  send  to  be  a  d. 
Mom.  11.  2ti.  there  shall  como  out  of  Sion  tiie  d< 

UELIVERETH. 
Job  35.\5.be  d.  the  poor  in  his  affliction,  opens  cars 
Psal.  18.  in.  he  d.  i\\p  from  mine  enemies 
34.  7.  about  them  that  fear  hirn,  and  d.  them 

17.  the  Lord  d.  them  out  of  all  their  troubles,)!). 
ST?.  30.  he  d.  them  out  of  the  hand  of  the  wicked 
144.  10.  who  d.  David  from  ihe  hurtful  sword 
Prov.  10.  2.  righteousness  d.  from  death,  11.  4. 
14.  2S.  a  true  witness  d.  souls,  but  a  deceitful 
31  24.  and  she  d.  girdles  unto  the  merchant 
J$a  42.  'i'i.  they  are  for  a  prey,  and  none  d. 
JJan.a.  27.  God  d.  and  rescueth,  and  workcth  signs 
Arnot  3.  t  Vi.  ae  shepherd  d.  out  of  nioulh  of  lion 

DELIVERING. 
Kaod.  5. 1 23.  d.  thou  hast  not  delivered  thy  peop. 
J^%kA\.\'i.d.yo\i  up  to  syn;Ljogues  and  into  prisons 
^clt  22.  4.  d.  into  prisons  both  men  and  women 
26.  17.  d.  thee  from  the  people  and  the  Gentiles 

DELIVERY. 
ha.  26.  17.  that  draweth  near  the  time  of  her  d. 

DELUSION. 
2  Thttt.  2.  11.  God  shall  send  them  strong  d. 

DELUSIONS. 
Ita.BG.  4. 1  also  will  choose  theird.  and  bring  fears 

DEMAND. 
Dan.  4.  17.  the  d.  by  the  word  of  the  holy  ones 

DEMAND,  ED. 
Rxod.  5. 14.  d.  why  have  ye  not  fulfilled  your  task? 
2  Sam.  11.  7.  David  d.  of  Uriah  how  Joab  did 
Job  38.  3. 1  will  d.  of  thee,answer  thou,40. 7.  |  42.  4 
Dan.  2.  27.  the  secret  which  the  king  hath  d. 
Mat.  2.  4.  he  d.  where  Christ  should  be  born 
L.Hkt'i.  14.  the  soldiers  </.  of  him,  what  shall  we  do 

17.  20.  and  when  he  was  d.  of  the  Pharisees 
-9ct»  21.  33.  the  chief  captain  d.  who  he  was 

DEMONSTRATION. 
1  Cor.  2.  4.  but  in  d.  of  the  Spirit,  and  of  power 

DEN,  S. 
Judg.  C.  2.  Ihe  children  of  Israel  made  them  d. 
Job  37.  8.  then  the  beasts  go  into  d.  and  remain 
38.  40.  when  they  couch  in  their  d.  and  abide 
Psal.  10.  9.  he  lieih  in  wait  as  a  lion  in  his  d. 
104.  22.  they  lay  themselves  down  in  their  d. 
Cant.  4.  8.  look  from  Slienir,  from  the  lion'.i  d. 
Isa.  11.  8.  shall  put  his  hand  on  the  cockatrice  d. 
32.  14.  the  lowers  shiill  bo  for  d.  for  ever 
Jcr.  7.  11.  is  this  house  become  a  d.  of  robbers'? 

9.  II.  I  will  make  Jerusalimi  a  d.  of  dragons 

10.  22.  lo  make  the  cities  of  Judah  a  d-of  dragons 
Dan.  6.  7.  he  shall  be  ca.st  into  the  d.  Ot  lions,  12. 

16.  and  they  cast  him  into  the  d.  of  lions 
19.  the  king  arose  and  went  in  haste  to  the  d. 

23.  they  should  take  Daniel  up  out  of  the  d. 

24.  and  they  cast  them  into  the  d.  of  lions 
Jimos  3. 4.  will  a  young  lion  cry  out  of  his  d.t 
^ak.  2.  12.  the  lion  filled  hia  </.  with  ravin 
Mat.  21. 13.  my  house  be  calle<l  house  of  prayer, 

but  ye  have  made  it  a  J.  of  thieves, .VarA  11.  17. 
Jfeb.  II.  38.  they  wandered  in  deserts  and  in  d. 
Rev.  6. 15.  bondman  and  freeman  hid  them.s'el.  in  d. 

DENY. 
./oj»A.24.27.  be  a  witness,  lest  ye  d.  your  God 

1  Kings '2.  16. 1  ask  of  thee,  d.  nie  not,  /Vojt.30.7. 
Job  8. 18.  if  he  destroy  him,  tlii^n  it  shall  d.  Iiim 
Prov.  30.  9.  lest  I  b';  full  and  d.  Ihec,  and  any 
Mat.  10.  33.  whosoever  shall  d.  me,  him  will  I  rf. 

16. 24.  let  him  d.  himself,  Mark  8.  34.  J.ulce  9. 2:1. 

26.  34.  Jesus  said  to  him,  before  the  cock  crow 

thou  shnlt  rf.  me  thrice,  75.  Mark  14.  30,  7-i. 

35.die  with  thee, yet  will  I  not</.thce,J>/nrA14.31. 

/y«Ae20.  27.  which  d  there  is  any  resurrection 

2  Tim.  2.  12.  if  «c  d.  him,  he  also  will  rf.  us 

13.  yet  he  abideth  faithful,  he  cannot  rf.  himself 
7Ht.  1.  16.  that  know  God,  but  in  works  they  rf.  him 

DENIED. 
Gen.  18.  15.  Sarah  rf.  saying,  I  laughed  not 
]  fTiv^f  20.  7.  he  dent  to  ine,  and  I  d.  him  not 
Job  31.  2^.  for  I  should  have  rf.  the  God  above 
^/a/.26.70.rftcr  rf.  before  them  all,  saying,  I  know 
not,  72.  Mark  14.  70.  /.nke  ■i2..57.  ./oAii  18.25,27. 
I.uke  ft.  45.  when  nil  </.  that  they  touched  him 

l2.9.whoilcnies shall  borf.  before  the  angels  ofG. 
,7oAnl.20.John  coufesio<l,nnd  rf.not,Iam  not  Christ 

13.38.  shall  not  crow,  till  thou  hast  rf.  me  thrice 
4ce#  3.  13.  whom  ye  rf.  in  the  presence  of  Pilate 

14.  but  ye  rf.  the  holy  One  and  Ihe  just 

1  Tim.  5. 8.  he  halh  rf.  the  faith,  and  is  worse  than 
f(«o.2.13.holdc9t  fasttny  nami>,  and  not  rf.iny  faith 

3. 8.  hast  kept  mv  word,  nnd  hast  not  rf.  my  name 

'^Dh.NlKTII,  ING. 
T,uke  12.  0.  but  he  that  rf.  mc  before  men,  bo  denied 

2  Tim.S.S.having  n  form  of  "{odlineiiB,  but  rf.  power 
7Yt.  2.12.  teaching  us,  that  rf.  ungridliniHsaiid  lusts 
2  Pet.  2.  1.  even  rf.  the  T.iord  that  houiht  th<-m 
1  .hhn  2.  22.  is  a  liar,  that  rf.  Jc«u«  is  Christ 

23.  whorf.  the  Son,  the  same  halh  ncpt  the  Kntlipr 

Judti  rf.  tlieonly  Lord  God,  and  our  Lord  Jesus 

194 


DEP 

DENOUNCE. 
Deut.dO.l8. 1  rf.  tliis  day,that  ye  shall  surely  perish 

DEPART. 
Oen.  13.9.  if  thou  d.  to  the  right  hand,  1  will  go 
Kiod.  18.  27.  Moses  let  his  father-in-law  rf. 
33.  1.  rf.  thou  and  the  people  thou  hast  brought  up 
JVum.lO.  30.1  will  rf.  to  mine  own  land  and  knidrerl 
Deal.  9. 7.  from  the  day  thou  didst  rf.  out  of  Egypt 
J«6A.24.28.8oJoshua  let  the  peopled. to  inheritance 
Judg.  19.  5.  the  Levite  rose  up  to  rf.  7,  8,  9. 

1  .S'air!.  22.  5.  and  God  said,  abide  not  in  the  hold,rf, 

29.  10.  as  soon  as  ye  be  up  and  have  light,  rf. 
II.  David  and  his  men  rose  up  to  rf.  in  the  morn. 

30.  22.  that  they  may  lead  them  away  and  rf. 

2  .Sam.  11.  12.  and  to-morrow  I  will  let  thee  rf. 
15.  14.  make  .■-.pood  to  rf.  lest  he  overtake  us 

1  Kings  12.5.rf.  for  three  days,  then  come  og.  to  me 
Job  20.  28.  the  increase  of  his  house  shall  rf. 
Isa.  11. 13.  the  envy  also  of  Ephraira  shall  rf. 

52.11.  d.  ye,  rf.  ye,  go  out  from  thence,  Lam.  4.  15. 

.54.  10.  for  the  mountains  shall  rf.  and  the  hills 
.Ter.  50.  3.  they  shall  rf.  both  man  and  beast      • 
Mic.  2.  10.  arise  ye,  and  d.  this  is  not  your  rest 
Z,cch.  10.  11.  the  sceptre  of  Egypt  shall  rf.  away 
Mat. 8.  34.  would  d.  out  of  their  coasts, wVurA  5.17. 

10.  14.  when  ye  rf.  out  of  that  house  or  city,  shake 

off  the  dust  of  your  feet,  MarkQ.  11.  Luke  9.4. 

Liikr%  29.  now  lettest  thou  thy  servant  d.  in  peace 

13.31.  d.  hence,  for  Herod  will  kill  thee 

21.21.  let  them  which  are  in  the  midst  rf.  out  of  it 
John  7.  3.  they  said  d.  hence  and  go  into  Judea 

13. 1.  when  Jesus  knew  he  should  d.out  of  world 
10.  7.  but  if  I  rf.  I  will  send  him  unto  you 
.lets  J').  36.  now  therefore  rf.  and  go  in  peace 
39.  and  desired  them  to  d.  out  of  the  city 
20.  7.  Paul  preaih.  to  tlium  ready  to  d.  on  morrow 
22.  21.  rf.  for  I  will  send  thee  to  the  Gentiles 
25.  4.  that  he  himself  would  rf.  shortly  thither 

27.  12.  the  more  jiart  advised  to  rf.  thence  aho 
1  Cor.  7. 11.  but  if  she  rf.  let  her  remain  unmarried 

15.  but  if  the  unbelieving' d.  let  him  rf. 
Phil.  1.  23.  a  desire  to  d.  and  to  be  with  Christ 
Jam.  2.  16.  say  to  tliom,  d.  in  peace,  be  ye  clothed 

DEPART /rom. 
Exod.  8.  11.  and  the  frogs  shall  d.  from  thee 

29. that  the  swarms  of  flies  may  d.  from  Pharaoh 

21.22.  hurt  a  woman,  so  that  her  fruit  d./rora  her 
/,ei".  25.  41.  and  then  shall  he  d.  from  thee 
M'um.  16. 2ti.  d.from  the  tents  of  these  wicked  men 
/.Ici/t.  4.9.  take  heed,  lest  they  d.from.  thy  heart 
Judg.  7.  3.  H  ho  is  fearful,  let  him  d.  from  Gilead 
1  ■'tarn.  15.6.  d.from  the  Amalekites,  lest  I  destroy 
2.Sa)H.12.10.th(!  sword  shall  never  rf./rom  thy  house 

20.  21.  deliver  Sheba,  and  I  will  d.from  the  city 
1  Kings  15.19.thnt  he  may  (/.  from  me,  2  Ckr.  16..3. 
2CAr.  18.  31.  and  God  moved  them  to  d.from  him 
.foh  21.  14.  they  say  to  God,  d.  from  us,  22.  17. 

28.  28.  and  to  rf.  from  evil  is  understanding 
P*a/.  6.  8.  d.from  me,  all  ye  workers  of  iniquity. 

Mat.  7.  2:«.  Luke  13.  27. 
34.  11.  d.  from  evil,  and  do  good,  37.  27. 
101.  4.  a  froward  heart  .«hall  d.  from  mc 
1 1 9. 1 1 5.  rf.  from  me,  ye  evil  doors,  for  I  will  keep 
139.  19.  d.from  me  therefore,  ye  bloody  men 
ProF.  3.  7.  tear  the  Lord,  and  rf.  from  evil 
13.  14.  to  (/.  from  the  snares  of  death,  14.  27. 
19.  but  it  is  abomination  to  fools  tod.  from  evil 

15.  24.  that  he  may  d.  from  hell  beneath 

16.  6.  by  the  fear  of  the  Lord  men  d.  from  evil 
17.  the  highway  of  the  upright  is  to  rf.  from  cvi 

/.•>■(!.  14.  25.  his  burden  d.from  off  their  shoulders 

./(■r.  6.  8.  be  instructed,  lest  my  soul  d.  from  thee 

17. 13.thatd. /rom  me  shall  be  written  in  the  earth 

31.  36.  if  those  oriiinances  rf.  from  before  me 

37.  9.  the  Chaldeans  shall  surely  d.  from  us 

Kick.  16.  42.  my  jealousy  shall  d.  from  thee 

//u.«.  9.  12.  woe  also  to  them  when  I  rf.  from  them 

.>/a/.2.).  41.  rf. /rom  me  yo  cursed,  intocverl.ist.  fire 

Mark  6. 10.  there  abide,  till  yc  rf.  from  that  phire 

Luke  5.  i'.d.from  me,tjir  I  am  asinful  mnn,0  Lord 

8.  37.  Gadarencs  besought  him  to  d.from  them 

.lets  1.  4.  that  they  should  not  d.from  Jeriisniem 

18.  2.  commanded  all  th"-  Jews  to  d.from  Rome 

1  Cor.7.  10.  let  not  the  wife  rf.  from  her  husband 

2ror.l2.8.I  besought  Lord  that  it  might  rf./r»m  me 

1  Tim.4.1.in  latter  limes  someslmlld./rom  the  faith 

2  7Vm.  2.  19.  that  nami^th  Christ  d.frum  iniquity 
JVot  DEPART. 

CIcn.  49.  10.  Ihe  sceptre  shall  vot  rf.  from  Judah 
.hish.X.H.  this  book  of  the  law  Khiill  nntd,  riiedilate 
.tiidg.  6.  18.  d.  not  honee,  I  pray  thee,  till  I  come 
2  Sam.  7.  15.  but  my  mercy  shall  vot  rf.  from  him 

22.  23.  ns  for  his  statutes,  I  did  not  d.  from  th«m 
2f'Aron..35. 15.  they  might  not  d.from  Iheir  service 
Job  7.  19.  how  hmg  wilt  thou  not  d.  from  mc? 

15.  30.  ho  shall  not  rf.  oul  of  darkness,  Ihe  flamo 
P.ial.Ti^.  1 1.  deceit  and  guile  rf.  not  from  her  Btrepis 
/'roc.  3.  21.  let  them  not  rf.  from  thine  eyes,  4. 21. 

5.7.  hear  ine,  and  rf.  not  from  words  of  niy  mouth 

17. 13.  evil  for  ;ood,evil  shall  not  rf.  from  his  huus* 


DEP 

Prov.  22.  6.  when  he  ia  old  he  will  not  rf.  from  it 
27.  22.  yet  will  not  his  foolishness  rf.  from  him 

Isa.  54.  10.  but  my  kindness  shall  not  rf.  from  thee 
59.  21.  my  cov.  my  Spirit,  and  words,  shall  not  d. 

JtTj2.40.putmy  fear,that  they  shall  not  rf.from  me 
37.  9.  the  Chaldeans,  for  they  shad  not  rf. 

Mat.  14. 16.  they  need  wot  rf.  give  ye  them  to  eat 

Luke  4.42.6tayed  hun,lhat  should  not  d.  from  them 

12.  59.  tiiou  shalt  7iut  rf.  thence,  till  thou  hajit  paid 

DEPARTED. 

Gen.  12.  4.  so  Abraham  rf.  as  the  Lord  had  spokeo 
14.  12.  they  took  Lot  and  d.  ||  21.  14.  Hagar  d. 
2-1.  lO.EIeazer  rf.  ||  26.17.lBaac  rf.  ||  31..55.Labaii  d 
37.  17.  and  the  man  said,  they  are  d.  iience 
42.  26.  tiiey  laded  their  asses  witii  corn  and  rf. 
45.  24.  he  sent  his  bretiiren  away,  and  they  rf. 

J^'am.  12. 9.  anger  of  the  L.  was  kindled,  and  be  d 

22.  7.  and  the  elders  of  Moab  and  Midian  rf. 
Josh.  2.  21.  she  sent  the  spies  away,  and  they  rf. 
Judg.  9.  .55.  rf.  every  man  to  his  place,  2  Sam.  0. 19 

18.  7.  then  the  five  men  rf.  and  came  to  Laish,  21. 

19.  10.  the  Levite  d.  ||  21.  24.  Israel  d.  thence 

1  .Sum.  6.  6.  did  they  not  let  Israel  go,  and  they  d.7 
20. 42.David  d.  22. 1,5.  ||  2  6am.l2. 15.  so  Nath.  rf. 

2  6'orH.  19.24.  nor  washed  from  the  day  the  king  rf 

1  Kings  12.  5.  and  the  jieople  d.  2  CAroH.  10.  5. 
14.  17.  and  Jeroboam's  wife  arose  and  d.  loTirza 
19. 19.  Elijah  rf.  and  found  Elisha,  2  Kings  1.  4. 

20.  9.  the  messengers  rf.  and  brought  word  agaia 
38.  so  the  prophet  d.  and  waited  for  the  king 

2  Kings  5.5.Naam.rf.  ||  10.12.  Jehu  arose  and  rf.15. 
19.  36.  so  Sennacherib  rf.  and  went,  Isa.  37.  37. 

1  CAr.  16. 43.  all  people  rf.  every  man  to  his  house 

21.  4.  wherefore  Joab  d.  and  went  through  Israel 

2  CAr.  21.  20.  Jehoram  d.  without  being  desired 
Psal.  105.  38.  Egyjit  was  glad  when  they  d. 
Isa.  28.  12.  mine  age  is  rf.  and  removed  from  me 
./cr.41. 10.  Ishmael  d.  to  go  over  to  the  Ammonites 
Lam.X.  6.  fromdaughter  of  Zion  all  her  beauty  isd, 
Mnt.'i.  9.  when  had  heard  the  king,wise  men  d.  12. 

14.  Joseph  and  Mary  arose,  and  d.  into  Egypt 

4.  12.  Jesus  rf.  9.  27.  I  11.  1.  |  12.  9.  |  13.  53.  |  J4. 

13.  I  15.21,29.  I  16.4.  |  19.  15. 

27.  5.  Judas  rf.  ||  Lvke  1.23.  Zach.  rf.  to  his  house 
Mark  1.  35.  Jesus  rf.  6^  46.  |  8.  13.  Lvlce  4.  42. 

John  4.  3,  43.  |  6.  15.  j  12.  36. 
Luke  5.  25.  he  d.  to  his  own  house,  glorifying  God 

7.  24.  when  the  messengers  of  John  were  d. 

8.  35.  the  man  out  of  whom  the  devils  were  rf. 
10.  30.  the  thieves  wounded  him  and  d. 

35.  on  the  morrow  when  the  Samaritan  d. 
./oAH5.15.the  man  d.aiid  toldtheJews  it  wasJesus 
J?ctsl0.7.when  the  angel  rf.  i|  11.  25.  Barnabas  rf. 
12.  17.  Peter  rf.  ||  13.  4.  they  rf.  to  Seleucia 
14.20.Paul  d.y  13.39.Paul  arid  Barnabasd.nsunder 
16.40.Paul  and  Silas  d.||  18.7.Paul  rf.23.  |  iO.  IJl. 
21.  5.  we  d.  and  went  our  way,  8.  |  28.  10,  11. 

28.  29.  when  he  said  these  words,  the  Jews  rf. 

2 TirM.l.lO.Demas  forsaken  me.isd.toThessalonica 
Phil.  15.  for  perhaps  he  therefore  rf.  for  a  season 
licv.  6.  14.  and  the  hfaven  rf.  as  a  scroll 

DEPARTED /rom. 
Gen.V^.  31.  they  aroi^e  and  d.  from  Isaac  in  peace 

31.  40.  thus  was  I,  mv  sleep  rf.  from  mine  eves 
^j-od.  19. 2.  they  were'  d.f.  Reidiidini,  jVum.. •'(3. 15 

35.  20.  all  Israel  d.from  the  jiresence  of  Moses 
I.rv.  13.  58.  if  Ihe  plague  be  d.from  ihcm,  Ihen 
JVi/m.  10.  .33.  Ihey  d.from  the  mount  of  Hie  Lord 

12.  10.  the  cloud  d.from  off  Ihe  tabernacle 

14.  9.  their  defence  is  d.  from  them,  fear  not 
33.  3.  they  rf.  from  Rnmrses  |  6.  d.  /»oi«  Succoth 

8.  d.from  Pi-hairolh  ||  1.3.  d.from  Dophkah 

jj//  tAfir  drpnrtures  set  doicn  to  verse  49. 

Dcul.  1.  19.  nnd  when  we  rf.  from  Horeli,  we  went 

.Judg.  16.  20.  he  wist  not  that  Lord  was  d.f.  him 

I  Ham.  4. 21.  saying,  the  glorj  is  d.  from  Israel,  JH. 

10.  2.  when  Ihou  nrt  d.from  me,  thou  shall  find 

15.  fi.  Keiiites,  rf.  from  among  the  .Aninlekiles 
16. 14.  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  rf.  from  Siiul,  18.  12. 

23.  wo.<  refreshed, nnd  the  evil  Spirit  d  from  him 
28.  15.  God  ixd.from  me,  nnd  answerelh  mc  not 

16.  nsk  of  mc,  sccinsthe  Lord  is  d.from  Ihce 

1  Kings  20.  36.  ns  soon  as  thou  arl  d.from  me 

2  Kings  3.27.  Ihev  rf.  from  him  lo  Iheir  own  land 
,5.  19.  so  he  d.from  Elisha  a  little  wnv,  S.  14. 
19.  8.  Scnniiclieril.  d.from  Lnchish,  Isa.  37.  8. 

2  CAroH.04.25,  nnd  when  thev  were  d.from  him 
Kzra  8.  31.  ihen  we  d.from  the  river  Ahnva 
Psal.  IS.  21.  and  have  not  wickedly  d.fmm  mv  G. 
Iin.7.  17.  from  Ihe  day  Ihnt  Ephrnim  d.from  Jud. 
./rr.  99.  2.  nnd  the  smiths  were  d.  from  Jerusniem 
.■17..5.the  Chaldinns  henrd  th«y  rf.  jfrom  Jeriisiilern 
/::rA.6.9.their\vhorish  heart  which  hnllid/rem  m« 
10. 18.  the  glory  of  the  Lord  d.from  the  ihrefihold 
Dan.  4.  31.  O  king,  the  kingdom  is  d.from  Ihco 
Hos.  10.  5.  for  the  glory  of  Snmrria  is  d.from  it 
Mnt.  15.  29.  nnd  Jesus  d.from  Ihencc,  nnil  come 
19.  1 .  hnd  finished  these  sayings, he d./rnm  Gftlilee 
20.29.as  Ihey  rf./rnmJericho,n  multitude  followei] 
24.  1.  Jesus  went  out  and  d.from  the  temple 


DEP 

Mat.  2S.  fi.  they  d.  quickly /rom  the  sepulchre 

Mark  i.  4'2.  tlie  leprosy  d.  from  lum,  J^uke  5.  13. 

J^uke  1.  3lj.  and  llie  angel  d.from  Mury 
4.  13.  llie  devil  d.  from  him  i'or  a  season 
9.  33.  us  they  d.from  him,  I'etcr  said  to  Jesus 

Jicts  5.  41.  ihey  d.  from  the  i)resunce  oftlie  council 
I'i.  10.  and  lorlhwith  tlie  ungel  d.from  him 

13.  14.  ihey  came  when  they  hud  d.from  Ferga 
1.5.  3d.  John  d.  from  them  Irom  I'anipiiylia 
17.33.Paul  d.from  them,  18.  1.  ( 19.  i).  Fhil.  4. 15. 
ly.li.diseuBes  d.from  them, and  evil  spir.  went  out 

Hev.  Id.  14.  and  the  fruits  that  thy  soul  lusted  after 
are  d.from  thee,  and  all  things  dainty  are  d. 
IIEI'AUTEU  not  from. 
2Sam.22.22.I  have  not  d.from  my  G.  Psal.  18.  21. 
2  Kings  3.  3.  he  d.  not  l/iercfrom,  13.  2. 
10  2U.Jehu  d.  not  from  tlie  sins  ot  Jeroboam,  who 
made  Israel  to  sin,  to  wit,  golden  calves,  31. 
I  13.  «,  11.  I  14.  24.  I  15.9,  18.  1  17.  22. 
18  G.  Uezekiah  d.  not  from  following  the  Lord 
S  C/ir.  S.  15.  d.  not  from  commandment  of  the  king 
20.  32.  Jehoshaphat  d.  not  from  the  way  of  Asa 
34.  33.  Ihcy  d.  not  from  following  the  Lord 
J^ek.  9.  19.  the  cloud  d.  not  from  them  by  day 
i'»aM19. 102.  I  have  not  d.from  thy  judgnienis 
jAikei-'Jl. Anna.  d. not  from  tlietenip.but  servedG 

DEPARTED  out. 

0«n.l2.4.waB  75 years  old  when  he  d.out  of  Uaran 

TJcut.  24.  2.  and  when  she  is  d.  out  of  his  house 

Judg.  6.  21.  angel  of  the  Lord  d.  out  of  his  sight 

17.  8.  the  Levite  d.  out  of  Beth-lehem-Judah 

1  .Sam.  23.  13.  David  and  his  men  d.  out  of  Keilali 
!i  Sam.  11.8.  and  Uriah  d.  out  of  the  king's  house 
Mai.  2.  8.  ye  are  d.out  of  the  way,  ye  have  corrupt. 
Mat.  17. 18.  rebuked  the  devil,  ajid  he  d.  out  of  him 

DEPARTED  not  out. 
F.xod.  33.  11.  Joshua  d.  not  out  oftlie  tabernacle 
^um.l4.44.the  ark  and  Mos.rf.  not  out  oftlie  camp 

DEPARTETH. 
Job  27.21.  the  wind  carrieth  him  away,  and  he  d. 
Prov.  11. 1 22.SO  is  a  fair  worn,  who  d.from  discret. 

14.  16.  a  wise  man  feareth,  and  d.  from  evil 
Eccl.  6. 4.  he  cometh  in  with  vanity,and  d.  in  dark. 
/sa.5y.l5.  he  that  d.  from  evil  maketh  hims.  a  prey 
Jer.  3.20.  as  a  wife  treacherously  d.  from  her  husb. 

17.  5.  cursed  be  the  man  whose  heart  d.  from  L. 
JVaA.  3.  1.  woe  to  the  bloody  city,  the  prey  d.  not 
Luke  9.  39.  and  bruising  him  hardly  d.  from  him 

DEPARTING. 
Ren.35.18.as  her  soul  was  in  rf.she  called  his  name 
Ezod.  16.  1.  after  their  d.  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt 
ha.  59.  13.  in  lying  and  d.  away  from  our  God 
Dart.9.5. we  have  sinned, by  <Z.from  thy  precept3,ll. 
Hos.l.  2.  have  committed  whoredom  d.  from  Lord 
Mark  6.  33.  the  people  saw  them  d.  and  knew  him 

7.  31.  and  d.  from  the  coast  of  Tyre  and  Sidon 
j9cl!.5  13. 13.  John  d.  from  them,  returned  to  Jerus. 

20.  29.  I  know  after  my  d.  shall  wolves  enter  in 
Hrb.  3. 12.  an  evil  heart,  in  d.  from  the  living  God 

11.  22.  Joseph  made  mention  of  the  d.  of  Israel 

DKPARTURE. 

Ezek.  26.  18.  the  isles  shall  be  troubled  at  thy  d. 

2  Tim.  4.  6.  and  the  lime  of  my  d.  is  at  hand 

DEPEND. 
Job  22.  t  2.  doth  his  good  success  d.  thereon 

DEPOSED. 
Dan.  5.  20.  he  was  d.  from  his  kingly  throne 

DEPRIVED. 
Om.  27.  45:  why  should  I  be  d.  of  both  in  one  day 
Job  39.  17.  because  God  hath  d.  her  of  wisdom 
Isa.  38.  10.  I  am  d.  of  the  residue  of  my  years 

DEPRIVING. 
Psal.  35. 1 12.  me  evil  for  good,  to  the  d.  of  my  soul 

DEPTH. 
Job  '2*..  14.  the  d.  sailh  it  is  not  in  me,  and  sea  s.iitli 

3-<.  16.  or  hast  thou  walked  in  search  of  the  d.f 
P.tal.  33.  7.  he  layeth  up  the  d.  in  store-houses 

69.  t  2. 1  sink  in  the  mire  of  d.  whore  there  is  no 
Prov.  8.  27.whfn  he  set  a  coir.pass  on  face  of  the  d. 

25.  3.  heaven  for  height,  and  the  earth  for  d. 
J.ta.  7.  11.  ask  it  cither  in  the  d.  or  in  the  height 
^wn<i/i2. 5. thed. closed  me  round  about, weeds  wrapt 
JH';M8.<).betlor  he  were  drowned  in  the  d.ofthe  sea 
Mark  4. 5.  because  it  had  no  li.of  earth, it  withered 
Horn.  8.  39.  nor  d.  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God 

11.  33.  O  the  (/.  of  the  riches  both  of  the  wisdom 
Eph.  3.  18.  what  is  hr'-ulth  nnd  d.  of  love  of  Christ 

DEPTHS. 

Erod.  15.  5.  the  d.  have  covered  them,  they  sank 

8.  the  d.  were  con;jcalcd  in  the  heart  of  the  sea 

r>e.vt.  8.  7.  the  d.  that  spring  out  of  valleys  and  hills 

/'so/.  68. 22.  bring  my  people  from  the  d.  of  the  sea 

71.  20.  shall  bring  me  up  from  (he  d.  of  the  earth 

77.16.  the  waters  were  afriid,thed.  wore  troubled 

78.  15.  he  gave  them  drink  as  out  of  the  great  d. 

106. 9.  he  led  them  thro'  the  d.  as  thro'  wilderness 

107.  26.  they  mount  up,  they  go  down  again  to  d. 

i:<0. 1.  out  oftlie  d.  have  I  cried  to  thfe,  O  Lord 
Pritv.  3. 20.  by  his  knowledge  the  d.  are  broken  up 

8.  24.  when  there  were  no  d.  I  was  brought  foith 

123 


BES 

Prop.  9.  18.  and  that  her  guests  are  in  the  d.  of  hell 
Isa.  51. 10.  that  hath  made  the  d.  of  the  sea  a  way 
Kzck.  27.  34.  thou  shalt  be  broken  in  d.  of  waters 
Mic.l.  19.  will  cast  their  sins  into  the  d.  of  the  sea 
Wcc.  2. 24.  which  have  not  known  tlie  d.  of  Satan 

DEPUTED. 
2  Sam.  15.  3.  but  there  is  no  man  d.  of  the  king 

DEPUTY. 

1  Kings  22. 47.  was  no  king  in  Edom,a  d.  was  king 

Jicts  13.7.  a  sorcerer  Barjesus  who  was  with  the  d. 

8.  seeking  to  turn  away  the  d.  from  the  failh 

18.  12.  and  when  Gallio  was  the  d.  of  Achaia 

DEPUTIES. 
£6tA.8.9.it  was  written  to  d.and  rulers  of  provinces 

9.  3.  and  the  d.  and  olKccis  helped  the  Jews 
Jlcts  19.38.there  are  d.let  them  implead  one  another 

DERIDE. 

//aA.l.lO.lhey  shall  d.  every  strong  hold,  heap  dust 

DERIDED. 
Z,uAel6.14.Pharisce8  heard  these  things,  and  d.him 

23.  35.  the  rulers  also  with  the  people  d.  him 

DERISION. 
Job  30.  1.  that  are  younger  than  I,  have  me  in  d. 
Psal.  2.  4.  the  Lord  shall  have  them  in  d. 

44.  13.  a  d.  to  them  that  are  round  about  us,  79.  4. 

59.  8.  thou  shalt  have  all  the  heathen  in  d. 

119.  51.  the  proud  have  had  me  greatly  in  d. 
Jer.  20.  7. 1  am  in  d.  daily  ||  8.  was  made  a  d.  daily 

48.  itti.  and  Moab  also  shall  be  in  d.  39. 
27.  for  was  not  Israel  a  d.  unto  thee  ? 
Jam,  3.14.1  was  a  d.  to  my  people  and  song  all  day 
Eiek.  23.  32.  thou  shalt  drink  and  be  had  in  d. 

36.  4.  to  cities  which  became  a  d.  to  the  heathen 
''//os.7.16.  this  shall  be  their  d.  in  the  land  of  Egypt 

DESCEND. 
Kum.  34.  11.  the  border  shall  d.  and  reach  to  sea 
1  Ham.  26.  10.  he  shall  d.  into  battle  and  perish 
Psal.  49.  17.  his  glory  shall  not  d.  after  him 

65.  t  10.  thou  causest  rain  d.  into  the  furrows 

104. 1  6. the  mountains  to  ascend,  the  valleys  d.  10. 
Eztk.  26.  20.  with  them  that  d.  into  the  pit,  .31.  16. 
Mark  15.  32.  let  Christ  d.  now  from  the  cross 
Acts  11.5.1  saw  vision,  certain  vessel  d.  great  sheet 
Horn.  10.  7.  or  who  shall  d.  into  the  deep  ? 

1  7'Acss.4.16.Ld.  shall  d.from  heaven  with  a  shout 

DESCENDED. 
Exod.  19.  18.  because  the  Lord  d.  on  Sinai  in  fire 
33.  9.  the  cloudy  pillar  d.  ||  34.  5.  d.  in  a  cloud 
Deut.  9.  21.  the  brook  that  d.  out  of  the  mount 
.Josh.  2.23.  so  the  two  men  d.  from  the  mountain 
Psal.  133.3.  as  dew  that  d.  on  mountains  of  Zion 
ProD. 30.  4.  who  hath  ascended  up  to  heaven, or  d.7 
Mat.  7.  25.  the  rain  d.  and  the  floods  came,  27. 
28.2.  for  the  angel  oftlie  Lord  d.  from  heaven 
I.uke'i.  22.  the  Holy  Ghost  d.  in  a  bodily  shape 
jlcts  24. I.Ananias  the  high-priest  d.with  the  elders 
Epk.  4. 10.  he  that  d.  is  the  same  that  ascended 

DESCENUETH. 
Jam.3.1o.this  wisdom  d.not  from  above,bul  sensual 

DESCENDING. 
Oen.  28.  12.  top  of  ladder  reached  to  heaven,  and 
the  angels  of  God  uscending  and  d.  John  1.  51. 
Isa.  15.  f  3.  every  one  shall  howl  d.  into  weeri-ng 
Mat.  3. 16.  he  saw  the  Spirit  of  God  d.  Mark'l.W. 
.John  1.32.  I  saw  Spirit  d.  from  heaven  like  a  dove 
33.on  whom  thou  shalt  seeSpirit  d.and  rcinuiuing 
Acts  10.  11.  a  vessel  d.  as  it  had  been  a  great  sheet 
iiei;.21. 10.  that  gi-eatcity  rf.  out  of  heaven  from  G. 

DESCENT. 

Mic.  1. 1  4.  as  waters  that  are  poured  down  a  d. 

Luke  19.  37.  when  come  nigh  at  d.  of  mount  Olives 

//eB.7.3.Melchisedec  without  father,mother,and  d. 

6.  but  he  whose  d.  is  not  counted  from  them 

DESCRIBE,  ED,  ETH. 

^o.?A.18.4.  they  simll  go  through  land  and  d.  if,  6,  8. 

8.  Joshua  charged  them  that  went  to  d.thelund 

9.anil  theyd.it  by  cities  into  seven  parts  in  a  book 

.Judg.  8.  14.  he  d.  to  him  the  princes  of  Succoth 

Ro^n.  4.6.  even  as  Dav.  silso  d.  bli^ssedn.  of  the  man 

10.  5.  for  Moses  d.  the  righteousness  of  the  law 

DESCRIPTION. 
Josh.  18.  C.  and  ye  shall  bring  the  d.  hither  to  me 

DESCRY. 
Judg.  1.  23.  the  hou.>ie  of  Joscjih  sent  to  d.  Beth-el. 

DESERT. 
Eiod.  3. 1.  he  led  his  ttock  to  the  backside  of  the  d. 
5.  3.  let  us  go  three  days'  journey  into  the  d. 

19.  2.  and  they  were  come  lo  the  d.  of  Sinai 
23.  31.  I  will  set  thy  bounds  from  d.  lo  the  river 

JsTum.  2t1. 1.  then  Israel  came  into  the  d.  of  Zin 
27.  14.  for  ye  rebelled  against  me  in  the  d.  of  Zin 
33.  16.  and'thev  removed  from  the  d.  of  Sinai 

2  Chron.  26.  lO.'U/.ziah  built  lowers  in  the  d. 
.fob  21.  5.  as  wild  asses  in  the  d.  go  they  forth 
Psal.'^.  t6.  promotion  cometh  not  from  the  d. 

78.  40.  how  oft  did  thev  grieve  him  in  the  d.? 
102   6.  I  am  like  a  pelican,  an  owl  of  the  d. 
106.  14.  but  lusted  and  tempted  Ood  in  the  d. 
/.sa.l3.  21.  but  wild  beasts  of  d.  sliall  lie  there,  their 
lioubti  full  of  doleful  creatures,  34.14.  Jcr.50.39. 


DES 

Isa.  21.  1.  as  whirlwinds,  so  it  cometh  from  tlioi 

35.  1.  the  d.  shall  rejoice  ||  6.  streams  in  the  d. 

40.  3.  make  straight  in  d.  a  high-way  tor  our  God 

41.  19.  I  will  set  in  d.  the  fir-lree  and  llie  pine 
43.  19. 1  will  even  make  rivers  in  the  d.  20. 

51.  3.  will  make  herd,  likelhe  garden  of  the  Lord 
Jer.  17.  li.  for  he  shall  be  like  the  heath  in  the  d. 
25.24.people  that  dwell  in  d.  shall  drink  after  ihcnj 

50. 12.  Chaldea  shall  be  a  dry  land  and  a  d. 
Ezek.  47.  8.  these  waters  go  down  into  the  d. 
Mat.  24.  26.  if  they  say,  behold,  he  is  in  the  d. 
John  6.  31.  our  fathers  did  cat  manna  in  the  d. 
Jicts  8.  26.  from  Jerusalem  to  Gaza,  which  is  d. 

DESERT  land. 
Deut.  32. 10.  he  found  him  in  a  d.  land,  he  Jed  him 
Prov.  21.  t  19.  better  dwell  in  the  land  of  the  d. 

DESERT  place. 
Mark  6.  31.  come  ye  yourselves  into  a  d.  place 
32.depart.  into  a  d.  place, Mat.  14. 13.  l.-uke  4.42. 
35.  this  is  a  d.  place,  Mat.  14.  15.  Luke  9.  12. 
Luke  9. 10.  he  went  aside  privately  into  a  d.  place 

DESERTS. 
/sa.48.21.  thirsted  not  when  he  led  them  through  d. 
Jer.  2.6.  the  Lord  that  led  us  through  a  land  of  d. 
5.  t  6.  a  wolf  of  the  d.  shall  spoil  them 
Ezek.  13.  4.  thy  prophets  are  like  foxes  in  the  d. 
y^u/ie  l.dO.  John  was  in  the  d.  till  his  shewing  Isr. 
Hcb.  11.38.  they  wandered  in  d.and  in  mountains 

DESERT. 
Pia^28.4. after  wock  of  hands,  render  them  their  d. 

DESERTS. 
Ezek.  7.  27.  according  to  their  d.  will  I  judge  tliera 

DESERVE. 
Ezra  9. 13.  hast  punithed  less  than  our  iniquities (i. 

DESERVETH. 
.Job  11.  6.  God  e.\aeteth  less  than  thy  iniquity  d. 

DESERVING. 
J«d^.9.16.done  to  him  according  to  d.  of  his  hands 

DESIRE 
Signifies,  [1]  Longing,  or  wishing,  1  Sum.  23.  20. 
[2]  The  prayir,  request,  or  longing  of  the  suul, 
for  some  spiritual, or  bodily  good  thiitgs,where- 
ofitfecU  a  want,  Psal.  145.  19.  [3]  J.ovc,  or 
affection.  Cant.  7.  10.  Dan.  11.  37.  [4]  hope 
or  expectation,  1  Sum.  9.  20.  [5]  An  inclina- 
tion to,  or  delight  in  the  plcasuns  of  life, 
Eccl.  12.  5.  [6]  A  wife,  called  the  desire  of 
the  eyes,  Ezek.  24.  16.  [7]  Sinful  lusts  and 
offections,  Eph.  2.  3. 
Thy  desire  shall  be  to  thy  husband,  and  he  shall 
rule  over  thee,  Geti.  3.  16.  IVcy  desires,  or 
requests  shall  be  referred,  or  submitted  to  thy 
husband^ s  will  and  pleasure,  to  grant,  or  deny 
them,  as  he  sees  fit.  'Thou  shiilt  be  obliged 
to  such  a  subjection,  as  shall  be  many  timet 
against  thy  uill,  and  be  uneasy  to  thee. 
Oen.  3.  t  6.  saw  that  the  tree  was  a  d.  to  the  eyes 

16.  thy  d.  shall  be  to  thy  husband,  he  shall  rule 
4.  7.  to  thee  shall  be  his  d.  thon  shall  rule  over  him 

Deut.  18.  6.  and  come  with  all  the  d.  of  his  mind 
21.  11.  and  hast  a  d.  lo  her,  lo  have  her  to  wife 

1  Sam.  9.  20.  and  on  whom  is  all  the  d.  of  Israel  1 
23.  20.  come  down  accord,  to  all  the  d.  of  thy  .eoul 

2  Sam.  23.  5.  this  is  all  my  salvation,  and  all  inv  d. 

1  Kings  5.  8. 1  will  do  all  thy  d.  concerning  timber 

9.  thou  shall  accomplish  myd.  in  giving  food 

10.  according  to  all  Solomon's  d.  9.  11.  * 
0.  1.  Solomon  had  finished  building,  and  ull  his  (2 

t  19.  the  d.  of  Solomon  which  he  desired 

10. 13.  king  Solomon  pave  to  the  queen  of  Sheba 
all  herd,  whulsoever  she  asked, 2  Chron  9.  12 

2  Chron.  15. 1.5.  and  soughihim  with  their  whole  d. 
21.  t  20.  Jelioram  departed  without  d. 

32.  t  27.  ho  niiide  treasures  for  instruments  of  d. 

36.  t  10.  he  look  the  vessels  of  d.  to  Babylon 
.Job  9.  t  26.  my  days  are  passc<l  away  us  ships  ofrf. 

14.  15.  Ihon  wilt  have  a  d.  to  work  of  ihinn  hands 
31.  16.  if  I  have  withheld  the  poor  from  their  d. 
3.^.  my  d.  is  that  the  Almighty  would  answer  me 

33.  t  20.  so  that  his  soul  abhorreth  meal  of  d. 

34.  36.  my  d.  is  that  Job  may  be  Irii'd  to  the  end 
Psol.  10.  3.  the  wicked  bi.'aSteth  of  his  heurl's  d. 

17.  Lord,  thou  hast  heard  the  d.  of  the  hiimbia 
21.2.  thou  hnst  given  his  heart's  d.  not  withheld 
38.  9.  Lord,  all  my  d.  is  before  then,  my  groan. 
54.7.  eye  lialh  seen  his  d.  on  mine  enemic.-,  92.  IL 
59.10.  God  shall  let  me  see  my  d.  on  mine  enemie*  g 
78.29.  were  filled,  for  he  gave  them  their  own  d. 

92.  11.  mine  ears  shall  hear  my  d.  ol'ihe  wicked 

106.  t  24.  yea,  they  despised  a  hind  of  d. 

112.  8.  not  afraid,  till  he  see  his  d.  on  his  cnemieii 

10.  the  d.  of  the  wicked  shall  perish 
118.7.  therefore  shall  I  see  myd.  on  them  hafe  mo 
145. 16.  Ihou  satisfiost  the  d.  of  every  1  ving  thing 

19.  he  will  fulfil  the  d.  of  them  that  fenr  him 
Prov.  10.  24.  the  d.  of  righteous  shull  be  grunlcd 
11.  23.  the  d.  of  the  righteous  is  only  good 
13.  12.  but  when  d.  cometh,  it  is  a  tree  of  life 

19.  the  d.  accomplished  is  sweet  to  the  soul 
10.  22.  the  d.  of  a  man  is  hit  kindness 


DES 

Prafj.  21.  25.  ihc  d.  of  the  slolhful  killeth  him 
Ef.clfi-  'J  llie  sight  of  llio  eyes  than  uuiiilenng  of</. 

\-i.5.d.  iWM  full,  bucause  man  guelh  tu  luii^  liuiue 
Cant.  7  10.  my  bc-lpved,  and  his  d.  is  toward  nie 
Ua.  i.  1 10.  ttie  day  of  the  Lord  on  all  jjivlures  of  d. 

^t).  8.  the  d.  of  our  soul  is  to  thy  nunie,  and  to 

32.  t  1-.  they  shall  lament  for  iho  fields  of  J. 
Jer.  2.  24.  snurt'elh  Uj)  wind  at  the  d.  of  her  heart 

3.  t  I'J.  how  shall  I  {jive  thee  a  land  of  d.l 

12.  t  10.  they  made  my  portion  o(  d.  a  wilderness 
25.  t  34.  you  shall  sail  like  a  vessel  of  d. 

44.  14.  the  land  to  which  you  have  ai/.  to  return 
EiekJU.  10. 1  will  take  from  tliue  the  d.  of  thy  eyes 

21.  1  will  profane  the  d.  of  your  eyes,  25. 

20.  t  12.  they  shall  destroy  houses  of  thy  d. 
Van..  11.  t  ti.  carry  inlo  Kgypt  vessels  of  llieir  d. 

37.  neither  shall  he  regard  tlie  d.  of  women 
Uos.  10.  10.  it  is  my  d.  1  should  cha.slise  them 

13.  t  15.  shall  spoil  the  treasure  of  vessels  o{  d. 
Jimos  5.  t  11.  ye  have  plauled  vineyards  of  li. 
Mic.l-  3.  the  great  man  utterelh  his  mischievous  d. 
JJ'ah.  2.  t  y.  none  end  of  all  the  vessels  of  d. 
Hob.  2.  5.  who  enlargeth  his  d.  as  hell,  is  as  death 
Half.  2.  7.  and  the  d.  of  all  nations  shall  come 
Zech.  7.  t  14.  they  laid  the  land  of  d.  desolate 
J..uke  22.  15.  he  sari,  with  d.  1  have  desired  to  eat 
Hom.W.  1.  my  heart's  d.  to  G.for  Isr.  is  to  ho  saved 

15.23.  having  a  great  d.  these  many  years  to  come 

2  Cor.  7. 7.  when  he  told  us  your  earnest  d.  toward 

11.  what  tear,  what  vehement  </.  yea  what  zeal 

Pkil.  1.  2:).  I  am  in  a  strait,  having  a  d.  to  depart 

1  Thess.  2.  17.  to  see  your  face  with  great  d. 

DESIKE,  t'crb. 
Exod.  10.  11.  serve  the  Lord,  for  that  ye  did  d. 

34.  24.  neither  shall  any  man  d.  thy  land 
iJeut.  5.  21.  nor  shall  thou  d.  thy  neighhour's  wife 

7.  25.  thou  slialt  not  d.  the  silver  or  gold  on  them 
J'u<i^.8.24. Gideon  said, I  would  d.  a  reiiuest  of  you 

1  Kinirs  2.  20.  1  d.  one  snull  (letition  of  thee 

2  Kinjfs  4.  28.  she  said,  did  I  j.  a  son  of  my  lord? 
JVeA.  1. 11.  thy  servants  who  d.  to  fear  thy  name 
Job  13.  3.  surely  I  d.  to  reason  with  God 

21.  14.  for  we  d.  not  the  knowledge  of  thy  ways 

33.  32.  speak,  for  I  d.  to  justify  thee 

30.  20.  d.  not  the  night  w  hen  jjoople  are  cut  off 
Psal.  40.  0.  sacrifice  and  ottering  thou  didol  notd. 

45.  11.  so  shall  the  king  greatly  d.  thy  heauty 
65.  t  9.  after  thou  hast  made  it  to  d.  rain 

70.  2.  let  iheni  he  put  to  confusion  that  d.  my  hurt 
73.  2.5.  there  is  none  on  earth  I  d.  besides  thee 
Prov.'.i.lo.  all  thou  canst  d.  are  not  to  he  compared 

23.  6.  neither  d.  thou  his  dainty  meats 

24.  1.  .against  evil  men,  nor  (/.  to  be  with  them 
/.>'a..53. 2.  there  is  no  beauty  that  we  should  d.  him 
Jcr  22.  27.  the  land  whereunto  they  d.  to  return 

42. 22.  ye  shall  die  in  the  place  wliithcrye  d.  to  go 
JJan.  2. 18. 1  would  d.  mercies  of  the  G.  of  heaven 
Jimos  5. 18.  woe  to  you  that  d.  the  day  of  the  Lord 
.Vark'i.  35.  he  saith,  if  any  man  d.  to  be  first 

10.  .3.5  shouldestdo  for  us  whatsoever  we  shall  d. 

11.  24.  what  things  soever  yc  d.  when  ye  pray 
1.5.  8.  began  to  d.  him  to  do  as  he  had  ever  done 

J.uke  17. 22.  when  yc  shall  d.  to  see  one  of  the  days 
20.  41).  the  scribes  which  d.  to  walk  in  long  robes 

jfr(s  23.20.  the  Jews  have  agreed  tod.  thee  to  bring 
28.  22.  we  d.  to  hear  of  thee  what  thou  thinkest 

1  Cor.-M.  1.  follow  after  charily,  and  d.spiiit.  gift.s 

2  Cor.  II.  12.  cut  off  from  them  which  d. occasion 

12.  0.  tho'  r  would  d.  to  glory,  I  shall  not  he  a  fool 
Oal.  4.!).  whereunto  ye  d.  again  to  be  in  bondage 

20.1  d.  to  b«  present  with  you  now, and  to  change 
21.  tell  mc,  ye  that  d.  to  be  under  the  law 
C.12.  aa  many  as  d.tomnke  a  fair  shew  in  the  flesh 
13.  but  d.to  have  you  circumcised,  that  they  may 
F.ph.  3.  13.  wherefore  I  d.  that  ye  faint  no! 
Pkil  4.  17.  not  b(^cau«e  I  d.  a  gift,  but  I  d.  fruit 
Col.  1.  '.•.  to  d.  ye  may  be  filled  with  knowli'dgc 
1  Tim. '2.  1 1.  I  d.  supplications  ho  made  for  all  men 
3.  l.if  n  m.in  d.thf  office  of  a  bishop, n  good  work 
fftlt.^'.  11.  we  </.  every  one  of  you  to  shew  diligence 

11.  10.  but  now  they  il.  a  better  country,  that  is 
Jam.  4.  2.  ye  kill,  ye  d.  to  have,  and  cannot  obtain 
1  I'f.l.  1.  12.  which  things  Iho  nngels  d.  to  look  into 
2.2.  as  new-horn  bahos  d.thc  sincere  milk  of  word 
Rev.  9.  G.  men  shall  d.  to  die,  and  death  shall  llee 

DEf^IUABLE. 
r?c7i.27. 1 1.5.  Rebeknh  took  d.  raiment  of  son  Esau 
1  A'ln/.'.'i  20.  t  G.d.  in  Ibyeycs,  they  sih;ill  take  away 
F.ira  8.  t  27.  two  vessels  of  copper  d.  as  gold 
/.»<j.  44.  t  9.  tn<l  their  d.  things  shall  nol  profit 
J, am.}.  1 7.  Jerusalem  remembered  all  her  d. things 

t  in.  hnlh  spread  his  hand  uimn  her  d.  things 
2.  t  4.  he  stood  and  slew  all  the  d.  of  the  evo 
F.zrk  23.  0.  all  of  them  d.  young  men,  12,  23. 
Joel  3.  t  5.  carried  into  your  lomjilcs  my  d.  thingi 

DESIRED. 
Om.  n.fi.  and  n  tree  lo  bo  d.  to  make  one  wi«c 
1  Sam.  12.  13.  and  behold  thf  king  whom  vb  d. 

1  A'i7in-.i0.10.lhc  desire  which  Solomon  d.2CAr.8.8. 

2  Chron.  11.  23.  and  Reliohoam  d.  raajiv  wivoi 

IStt 


DEB 

F.sth.  2.  13.  whatsoever  she  d.  was  given  her 

.Jot)  20.  20.  he  shall  not  save  of  that  which  he  d. 

Pnal.  19.  10.  more  to  be  d.  are  they  than  gold 
27.  4.  one  thing  1  d.  ot  the  L.  that  1  may  dwell 
39.  1 11.  that  which  is  to  be  d.  in  him  to  melt  away 
107.  30.  so  he  biiiigeth  them  lo  their  d.  haven 
132.  13.  he  hath  d.  Zion  for  his  habitation 
14.  my  rest,  here  will  I  dwell,  lor  1  have  d. 

Prov.  a.  11.  all  that  may  be  d.  not  to  be  compared 

21.  20.  there  is  a  treasure  tu  be  d.  and  oil  in  dwell. 
Eccl.  2.  10.  w  hat  my  eyes  d.  1  kejit  not  from  them 
Isa.  1.29.  shall  be  aahuiiied  of  the  oaks  ye  have  d. 

20.  9.  with  my  soul  have  1  d.  thee  in  tlie  night 
Jer.  17.  10.  nor  have  I  d.  woeful  day,  ihou  knowest 
Dan.  2.  10.  Daniel  went  and  d.  ul  the  king  time 
23.  hast  made  known  unto  me  what  we  d.  of  thee 

11.  t  38.  he  shall  honour  God  wiih  things  d. 
Hos.  0.  0.  for  I  d.  mercy  and  not  sacrifice 

Mic.  7.  1.  no  cluster,  my  soul  d.  the  firsl-ripe  fruit 
Zeph.  2.  1.  gather  together,  O  nation  not  d. 
^/<it. 13.17. many  righteous  men  have  d.to  see  those 

10.  1.  tlie  Pharisees  d.  he  would  shew  a  sign 
Mark  IS.O.one  prisoner  w  hom  they  d.  y>ii/;t  23. 25. 
J^uke  7.  30.  one  of  the  Pharisees  d.  Jesus  to  eat 

9.  9.  but  who  is  this,  and  he  d.  to  see  him 

10.  21.  many  kings  have  d.  to  see  those  things 

22.  15.  I  have  d.  to  eat  this  passover  with  you 
31. Satan  hath  d.lo  have  you  to  sift  you  as  wheat 

23. 25.  and  he  relea^ed  lo  them  him  whom  they  d. 
jlcts  3.14. and  d.a  murderer  lo  be  granted  unio  you 
7. 40.  and  d.  to  find  a  labern.  for  llie  God  of  Jacob 
8.31.  the  eunuch  d.  Philij)  lo  come  inlo  the  chariot 

9.  2.  Paul  d.  of  the  high-iiriest  letters  to  Damascus 

12.  20.  having  made  Ulastus  their  friend,  d.  peace 

13.  7.  Sergius  Puulus  d.  to  hear  tho  word  of  God 
21.  afterward  Ihey  d.  a  king,God  gave  them  Saul 
28.  yet  d.  they  Pilate  that  he  should  be  slain 

10.  39.  and  d.  them  to  dejiart  out  of  the  city 
25. 3.  d.  favour  against  Paul  that  he  would  send 

1  Cor.  10.  12. 1  greatly  d.  him  lo  come  to  you 
2Cor.8.0.inson)ucli  that  we  d.  Titus  to  finish  in  you 

12.  18. 1  d.  Titus,  and  with  him  1  sent  a  brother 
1  John  5. 15.  we  know  we  have  the  petitions  we  d. 

DESIKEDST. 
Dait.  18.  10.  according  to  all  that  thou  d.  of  God 
JMai.  18.  32.  1  forgave  lliee,  because  thou  d.  me 

DESIRES. 
Gen.  6.  t  5.  all  the  d.  of  his  heart  are  only  evil 
P.ial.  37.  4.  he  shall  give  Ihee  the  d.  of  thy  heart 
140.  8.  grant  not,  O  Lord,  the  d.  of  the  wicked 
/Jan.  9.  t  23.  for  ihou  art  a  man  of  d.  10.  f  H. 
10.  t  3.  1  ate  no  bread  of  d.  neither  came  flesh 
Hos.  9.  t  10.  yet  will  1  slay  the  d.  of  their  womb 
F.pk.  2.  3.  fulfilling  the  d.  of  the  flesh  and  mind 

DESIKKST. 

Psal.  51.  C.  thou  d.  truth  in  the  inward  parts 

10.  thou  d.  not  sacrifice,  else  would  I  give  it 

DESIRETII. 

Dcut.  14.20.  bestow  it  for  whatsoever  thy  soul  d. 

1  Sam.  2.  10.  then  take  as  much  as  thy  soul  d. 
18.  25.  say  to  David,  the  king  d.  not  any  dowry 

20.  4.  what  thy  soul  d.  I  will  c'o,  1  Kings  11.  37. 

2  .Son(.3.21.  mayest  reign  over  all  that  thy  heart  d. 
.Job  7.  2.  as  a  servant  earnestly  d.  the  shadow 

23.  13.  what  his  soul  d.  even  that  he  doeth 
Psal.  17.  I  12.  is  as  a  lion  that  d.  to  ravin 

3-1. 12.  what  man  is  he  that  d.  life  and  loveth  days 
08.  10.  this  is  the  hill  which  God  d.  to  dwell  in 
Prov.  12.  12.  the  wicked  d.  the  net  of  evil  men 

13.  4.  the  soul  of  the  sluggard  d.  and  hath  not 

21.  10.  the  soul  of  the  wicked  d.  evil 

Eccl.  6.  2.  ho  wunteth  nothing  of  all  that  he  d. 
/^«Ac5.39.havingdrunk  old  wine  slraightwayd.new 

14.  32.  he  sendeth  and  d.  rontlitioiis  of  peace 

1  7'(7n.3. 1.  thcollice  of  abishop,lie  d.a  good  work 

DESIRING. 
Mat.  12.  iCi.  his  brethren  d.  lo  speak  with  him,  47. 

20.  20.  worshipping  and  d.  a  certain  thing  of  him 
J.uke  8.  20.  thy  breth.  stand  without  d.  to  see  thee 

10.  21.  d.  lo  be  lid  with  the  crumbs  which  fell 
Jicls  25.  15.  d.  lo  have  judgment  asaiimt  him 

2  Cor.  5.  2.  d.  lo  he  clothed  upon  wilh  our  houso 
1  Thcss.  3. 0.  d.  greiitlv  to  see  us,  us  we  to  see  you 

1  7'im.  1.  7.  d.  to  be  teachers  of  the  law 

2  Tim.  1.  4.  greatly  d.  to  see  thcc,  being  mindful 

DESIROUS. 
Pro».23. 3.  be  nol  d.  of  his  diiinties,  for  they  nro 
Zrjih.  2.  t  1.  gather  togelher,  O  nation  not  d. 
Aj(A(r  23.8.  Herod  was  d.to  sec  him  of  a  long  season 
.fohn  10.  19.  Jesus  knew  they  were  d.  to  nsk  him 
2  Cor.  11.  32.  with  n  garrison  d.  to  apprchi'iid  me 
fJnl.  5.  20.  lot  us  not  be  d.  of  vain-glory,  envying 

1  Thess.  2.  8.  so  being  affectionately  d.  of  you 

DESOLATE. 

2  .<>nm.l3.20.Tamnr  remain,  d.in  Absalom's  house 
./oh  15.  28   he  dwellclh  in  d.  cities  and  in  houses 

10.  7.  Ihou  bust  made  d.  all  my  company 
30.  3.  the  wilderness  in  former  time  d.  and  waste 
.38.  27.  to  satisfy  the  d.  and  wnnte  ground 
Paul.  25. 10.  turn  and  have  motcy  on  me,for  I  am  d. 


DES 

Ps.  40.15.let  them  be  d.  for  a  reward  of  their  shama 
09.  25.  let  their  habiiatiun  be  d.  let  iioue  dwell 
143.  4.  therefore  my  heart  within  me  is  d. 

Jsu.  1.  7.  your  country  is  d.  )our  cities  burnt 

3.  20.  she  being  d.  siiall  sit  upon  ihe  giouiid 
7.  19.  Ihey  shall  rest  all  of  thcni  in  d.  valleya 
13.  22.  the  beast  shall  cry  in  tlieir  d.  hous«.s 

24.  0.  and  they  that  dwell  therein  are  d. 
49.  8.  to  cau>e  tu  inherit  the  d.  heritages 

21.  seeing  1  have  lust  my  children,  and  am  U. 
54.  1.  more  are  tlie  children  of  the  d.  Ci'ut.  4.  27 

3.  and  make  the  d.  cities  tu  he  inhabited 
Jtr.  2.  12.  be  ye  very  d.  suitli  the  Lord 

0.  8.  lest  1  make  thee  d.u  land  nut  inhabited 

9.  t  10.  the  habitations  of  tJie  wilderness  are  d. 

11.  I  will  make  the  cities  of  Judah  d.  without 

un  inhabitant,  10.  22.  |  3:t.  10.  |  44.  &. 

10.  25.  they  have  made  his  habilalion  d. 

12.  11.  they  made  it  d.  and  being  d.  il  iiiournetb 

19. 8.  I  will  make  this  city  d.  and  a  liissing 
32.  43.  it  is  d.  without  man  or  beast,  33.  12. 

49.  20.  he  shall  make  their  habitations  d.  50.  45. 
Lain.  1.  4.  all  her  gales  are  d.  her  priests  sigh 

13.  he  hath  made  me  d.  and  faint  all  day,  3. 11. 
10.  my  children  are  d.  the  enemy  prevailed 

4.  5.  Ihey  that  did  feeil  delicately  are  d.  in  streets 
5. 18.  because  of  the  mountain  of  Zion  which  in  d. 

Eiek.  G.  0.  that  your  altars  may  be  made  d. 

19.7.  he  knew  their  d.  palaces,  and  he  laid  wosta 
20.  20.  that  I  might  make  them  d.  to  the  end 

25.  13.  I  will  make  Eilom  d.  from  Teinau 
20.  19.  when  I  shall  make  thee  a  d.  city 

29.  12.  in  the  midst  of  the  countries  that  are  d. 
30. 14.  I  will  make  Palhrus  d.  and  will  set  fire 
35.  3.  O  mount  Seir,  1  will  make  thee  most  d.  7. 

12.  they  are  d.  they  are  given  us  lo  consume 

14.  when  earth  lejoiceth,  1  wilt  make  thee  d. 

15.  as  thou  didst  rejoice,  because  it  was  d. 

30. 3. because  thcyhave  made  youd. and  swallowed 

4.  thus  saith  the  Lord  to  the  hills  and  d.  wastea 
35.  the  d.  cities  are  become  fenced  and  inhabited 
30.  know  that  I  the  Lord  plant  that  that  was  d 

Dan.  9.  17.  to  shine  on  thy  sanctuary  that  is  d. 
27.  for  the  abominations  he  shall  make  it  d. 

11.  31.  the  abomination  that  makelh  d.  12.  11. 
Uos. 2. 1 12. 1  will  make  d.  her  vines  and  figHrcca 

13.  10.  Samaria  shall  become  d.  for  she  rebelled 
Joel  1.  17.  the  garners  are  laid  d.  barns  are  broken 

18.  yea  the  flocks  of  sheep  are  made  d. 
jMic.  1.  7.  and  all  tbe  idols  thereof  will  I  lay  d. 
0.  13.  in  making  thcc  d.  because  of  thy  sins 
Zcph.  3.0.  their  towers  are  d.  their  streets  waste 
jWa<.23.38.  your  house  is  left  to  you  d.  J.vke  13.35 
.'Jets  1.  20.  it  is  written,  let  his  liabitalion  be  d. 
]  Tim.  5.  5.  now  she  that  is  a  w  idow  indeed  and  d. 
Arv.n.lO.these  shall  hale  the  whore,  and  maked. 

18.  19.  for  in  one  hour  is  she  made  d. 

J.and  DESOLATE. 
Gen.  47.  19.  give  us  seed  that  the  land  he  not  d. 
iCa:ud.23.2y.  lest  Ihe /and  become  d.  beast  multiply 
/,cu.20.  34.  then  shall  the  land  enjoy  her  sabbaiha 
as  long  as  il  liclli  d.  35,  43.  'i'CJiron.  :«i.  21. 
/6-iz.  0.  11.  he  said,  until  the  land  be  utterly  d. 

13.9.  the  day  of  the  Lordcomcth  lo  lay  i\\vlandd, 
62. 4.  nor  shall  thy  land  any  more  be  termed  d, 

Jir.  4.  7.  he  is  gone  forth  lo  make  thy  land  d. 
27.  the  Lord  said,  the  whole  /a;id  shall  be  d. 
7.34.IO  cease  voice  of  mirth, for  the  /imd  shall  berf. 
12. 11.  theymiule  it  d.  the  whole  land  is  made  d. 
18.1G.to  make  their  land  d.and  a  perpetual  hissing 
25.  38.  for  iheir  land  is  d.  because  of  his  anger 

32.  43.  in  this  land  whereof  ye  say  it  is  d. 
.50,  .3.  a  nation  w  liich  shall  make  her  land  d. 

F.iek.  6.  14.  and  make  Ihe  Zand  d.  via  more  d. 

12.  19.  her  land  may  he  d.  from  nil  that  is  therein 
20.  Ihe  cities  laid  waste,  and  Ihe  /and shall  bed. 

14.  10.  but  the  land  >.|iall  be  d.  Mic.  7.  13. 

15.8.  and  I  will  make  the  land  d.  saith  the  Lord 

19.  7.  Ihe  land  was  d.  and  the  fulness  thereof 
29.9.lhi'  land  of  Egypt  shall  be  d.  ibey  shall  know 

that  I  am  the  Lord,  10, 12.  |  30.  7.  |  32.  15. 

33.  28.  for  I  will  lay  the  land  most  d.  pomp  ceas« 
2d.lliat  1  am  I. .when  I  have  laid  the/andmost  d. 

30.  34.lhed.  ^I»dshall  be  lilleil,  whereas  it  lay  d. 
35.lheZMnd  that  was  d.  ishke  the  garden  of  Eden 

./of/ 2.  20.  I  will  drive  him  to  a  land  barren  and  d. 

ZfcA.7.14. /nnd  wiib  d.  for  thevlaid  pleasant  land  d, 
DESOLATE  placrf. 

.lob  3.  14.  which  built  d.  pliires  for  themselves 

f*.109. 10.  let  them  seek  bread  also  out  itfd.placft 

/.»n.49. 19.1  by  waste  nndd./</(icr.«»hnll  be  loo  narrow 
.59.10.  we  stumble, we  are  in  d.  pinrf.i  itn  di-nd  men 

Kiri.O.fi.citips  laid  waste, and  highyi/nr/-.*  shall  be<l. 
2fi.  20.  when  I  shall  set  thi-e  \n  plarrs  d.  of  ola 
.38.  12.  to  turn  thine  hand  upon  the  d.  places 

.linos  7.  9.  Iho  high  plners  af  Dane  shall  be  d. 

Mai.  I.  4.  wo  will  return,  and  bnilil  thed.  placet 
Shall  hr,  or  shall  hr  DESOLATE. 

/,T.20.22.wild  beasls.nnd  your  highwriys  .'Art.  4«  d 
33.  your  land  shall  be  d.  and  your  cities  wMla 


DES 

Job  15.34.for  congregation  of  hypocrites  shall  be  d. 
Psal.  34.21.  ihcy  that  hale  the  xtghieous  shall  be  d. 

22.  none  of  them  that  trust  in  him  shall  be  d. 
fsa.  5.  9.  of  a  truth  many  houses  shall  be  d. 

15.  6.  for  waters  of  Nimrim  shall  be  d.  Jer.  48. 34. 
27.10.yelthe<lefenced  city  «/iaW4cd.and  forsaken 

Jer-  26.  9.  tiiis  city  shall  be  d.  without  inhabitant 
33.  10.  in  this  place  which  ye  say  shall  be  d. 

46.  19.  Noph  shall  be  d.  without  an  inhabitant 

48.  9.  Moab,  for  the  cities  tliereof  shall  be  d. 

49.  2.  Rabbah  of  Ammonites  shall  be  a  d.  heap 

50.  13.  but  Babylon  shall  be  wholly  d. 

51.  2ti.  thou  shall  be  d.  for  ever,  saith  the  Lord 
£ze*.6.4.your  altarssAa/i  bed.yoxir  images  broken 

29. 12.  the  cities  of  Egypt  shall  be  d.  forty  years 

33. 28.  and  the  mountains  of  Israel  shall  be  d. 

35.  Ifcbeh.jld,  O  mount  Seir,  thou  shall  be  d.  15. 
Hos.  5. 9.  Ephraim  shaU  be  d.  in  the  day  of  rebuke 

DESOLATE  v>ilderness. 
Jer.l2.10.made  my  pleasant  portion  ad.wilderness 
Joel  2.  3.  and  behind  them  it  is  a  d.  wilderness 

3.  19.  Egypt  and  Edom  shall  be  a  d.  wilderness 

DESOLATION. 
Lev.  26.  31.  I  will  bring  your  sanctuaries  to  d. 
32.  and  1  will  bring  the  land  into  d.  and  your  ene 
mies  which  dwell  therein  shall  be  astonished 
Josk.  8.  38.  Joshua  made  Ahi  a  d.  unto  this  day 
2  A'i;i^i22.19.that  they  should  become  ad.and  curse 
2  Chron.  30.  7.  who  gave  them  to  d.  as  ye  see 
Job'3f).  14.  in  the  d.  they  rolled  themselves  upon  me 
Psal.  73.  19.  are  they  brought  to  d.  in  a  moment 
Prov.  1.27. when  your  fear  cometh  asti.anddestruc 

3.  25.  be  not  afraid  of  the  d.  of  the  wicked 
Isa.  6.  t  11.  till  the  land  be  desolate  with  d. 

17.  9.  in  that  day  there  shall  be  rf. 

24.  12.  in  the  city  is  lell  d.  the  gate  is  smitten 

47.  11.  and  d.  shall  come  upon  thee  suddenly 
51.  19.  these  two  things  are  come  unto  thee,  d. 
64.  10.  Zion  is  a  wilderness,  Jerusalem  a  d. 

«/er.9. 1 11. 1  will  make  cities  of  Judah  arf.  34.  22. 

22.  .5.  I  swear  that  this  house  shall  become  a  d. 
25. 11.  and  this  whole  land  shall  be  a  d.  and  aston. 

16.  to  make  Jerusalem  and  Judah  a  d.  and  aston. 
t  38.  forsaken  his  covert,  for  their  land  is  d. 

44.  2.  and  behold,  this  day  they  are  d.  none  dwells 
22.  therefore  is  your  land  a  d.  and  a  curse 

49.  13.  Bozra  a  </.  ||  17.  Edom  a  rf.  ||  33.  Hazor  a  d. 

50.  23.  how  is  Bab.  become  a  d.  among  nations  1 

51.  29.  to  make  the  land  of  Babylon  a  d. 

43.  her  cities  are  a  rf.a  dry  land,  and  a  wilderness 
Lam.  3.  47.  fear  and  a  snare  is  come  on  us,  d. 
F.zek.  7.  27.  the  prince  shall  be  clothed  with  d. 

23.  .33.  thou  shall  be  filled  with  the  cup  of  d. 
33.  t  28.  for  I  will  lay  the  land  d.  and  d. 

35.  t  7.  thus  will  I  make  mount  Seir  d.  and  d. 
Dan.  8.  13.  concerning  the  transgression  of  d. 
Jfos.  12.  1.  Epiiraim  daily  increaseth  lies  and  d. 
Joel3. 19.  Egvpt  and  Edom  shall  be  a  d.  for  viol. 
JiTie.&.  16.  that  I  should  make  thee  a  d.  and  hissing 
Zeph.  1.13.goods  a  booty,  houses  shall  become  a  d. 
15.  that  day  is  a  day  of  wrath,  wasteness,  and  d. 
2.4.A3hkelon  shall  be  ad.||  9.Moaba  perpelual  rf. 
13.and  he  will  make  Nineveh  a  d.and  wilderness 

14.  d.  shall  be  in  thresholds,  uncover  cedar-work 

15.  how  is  Nineveh  become  a  d.  for  beasts  ! 
Mat.  12.  25.  Jesus  knowing  thoughts,  saith,  every 

king,  divid.  ag.  itself  is  brought  iod.Luke  11. 17. 

24.  1.5.  see  the  abomination  of  d.  Mark  13.  14. 
Lukei\.  20.  then  know  that  the  d.  thereof  is  nigh 

DESOLATIONS, 
/^iro  9. 9.  give  a  reviving,  and  to  repair  d.  thereof 
Psal.  4(1.  8.  what  d.  he  hath  made  in  the  earth 
74.  3.  lift  up  thy  feet  to  the  perpetual  d. 
ha.  15.  t  6-  for  the  waters  of  Nimrim  shall  be  d. 
the  hay  is  withered  away,  Jer.  48.  f  34. 
49. 1 6.  be  my  servant  to  rcf  tore  the  d.  of  Israel 
61.  4.  shall  build  the  old  wastes,  they  shall  raise 
up  the  former  d.  the  d.  of  many  generations 
Jer.  25. 9. 1  will  make  these  nations  perpetual  d. 

12.  make  the  land  of  the  Chaldeans  perpetual  d. 
51.  t26.  Babylon  shall  be  everlasting  d.  \  62. 
.  F.iek.  3.5.  9. 1  will  make  mount  Suir  perpetual  d. 
Dan.  9.  2.  accomplish  seventy  years  in  d.  of  Jerus. 
18. 0  my  God  ofien  thine  eyes,  and  behold  our  d. 
26.  to  the  end  of  the  war  d.  are  determined 
DESPAIR. 
2  Cor.  4.  8.  we  are  perplexed,  but  not  in  d. 

DESPAIR. 
1  Sum.  27. 1.  and  Saul  shall  d.  of  me,  to  seek  me 
£ccl.  2. 20. 1  went  about  to  cause  my  heart  to  d. 

DESPAIRED. 
S  Cor.  1.  8.  insomuch  that  wo  d.  even  of  life 

DESPERATE. 
Job  6.  26.  reprove  the  speeches  of  one  that  is  d. 
ha.  17.  11.  in  the  day  of  grief  and  of  d.  sorrow 
Jer.  2.  t  2o.  but  thou  saidst  is  the  case  d.? 

DESPERATELY 
Jer.  11.  O.heart  of  man  ii  deceitful,  andd.  wicked 

DESPISE. 
Lto.  28. 15.  and  if  ye  shall  d.  my  gtatutea 
127 


DES 

1  Sam.  2.  30.  that  d.  me  shall  be  lightly  esteemed 

2  fiam.  19.  43.  Israel  said,  why  then  did  ye  d.  us  1 
Eslh.  1. 17.  BO  that  they  shall  d.  their  husbands 
Job  5. 17.  happy  whom  God  correctelh,  d.  not  thou 

chastening  of  the  Almighty,  Pr.  3.  11.  Pfeb.  12.5. 

9.  21.  though  I  were  poTfecl,  I  would  d.  my  life 
10.3.that  thou  shouldestd.lhe  work  of  thine  hands 
31.  13.  if  1  did  d.  the  cause  of  my  man-servant 

Psal.  51. 17.  a  contrite  heart,  O  G.  thou  will  not  d. 
73.  20.  thou  awakest,  thou  shalt  d.  their  image 
102.  17.  and  he  will  not  d.  their  prayer 

Prov.  1.  7.  but  fools  d.  wisdom  and  instruction 

3.  11.  my  son,  d.  not  chastening  of  L.  Heb.  12.5. 
6.  30.  men  do  not  d.  a  thief,  if  he  steal  to  satisfy 
23.  9.  a  fool  will  d.  the  wisdom  of  thy  words 

22.  and  d.  not  thy  mother  when  she  is  old 
ha.  18.  t  2.  whose  land  the  rivers  d. 

30. 12.  because  ye  d.this  word,  and  trust  in  oppres. 
Jer.  4.  30.  thy  lovers  will  d.  thee,  they  will  seek 

23.  17.  they  say  still  to  them  that  d.  me 

Lam.  1.  8.  all  that  honoured  her,  d.  her,  because 
Ezek.  16.  57.  daughters  of  Philistines  which  d.thee 
28.  26.  executed  judgm.  on  all  those  tliatd.  them 
j?mo«5.21. 1  hate,  I  d.your  feast-days,  will  not  smell 
Mai.  1.  6.  unto  you,  O  priests,  that  d.  ray  name 
Jtfat.G.24.hold  to  one,  and  d.  the  other,  Luke  16.13. 

18.  10.  that  ye  d.  not  one  of  these  little  ones 
fioHi.l4.3.1et  not  him  that  eatetli,  d.  him  eateth  not 
1  Cor.  11.  22.  or  d.  ye  the  church  of  G.  and  Bhame 

10.  11.  let  no  man  therefore  d.  him,  conduct  him 
1  Thess.5.  20.  d.  notprophesyings,  prove  all  things 

1  Tim.  4. 12.  let  none  d.  thy  youth,  be  an  example 
6.2.  let  them  not  d.  them,  because  they  are  breth. 

Tit.  2.  15.  speak  and  e.xhort,  let  no  man  d.  thee 

2  Pet.  2.  10.  chiefly  them  that  d.  government 
Jude  8.  d.  dominion,  and  speak  evil  of  dignities 

DESPISED. 
Oen.  16.  4.  Hagar's  mistress  was  d.  in  her  eyes 

5.  saw  she  had  conceivi'd,  I  was  d.  in  her  eyes 
25.  34.  thus  Esau  d.  his  hirth-right 
Lev.  26.  43.  because  they  d.  my  judgments 
JVuTH.  11.  20.  because  that  ye  have  d.  the  Lord 

14.  31.  they  shall  know  the  land  that  ye  have  d. 

15.  31.  because  ye  d.  the  word  of  the  Lord 
Z)cu<.32.t  19. and  when  the  Lord  saw  it,  he  d.  them 
.Tudg.  9.  38.  is  not  this  the  people  thou  hast  d..' 

1  Sam.  10.  27.  they  d.  him  and  brought  no  presents 

2  Sam.  6.  Iti.  she  d.  him  in  her  heart,  1  Chr.  15.  29. 
12.9.why  hast  thou  d.  the  commandment  of  Lord? 

10.  because  thou  hast  d.  me,taken  wife  of  Uriah 
2  Kings  19  21.  the  virgin,  the  dauglit.  of  Zion  halh 

d.  thee,  and  laughed  thee  to  scorn,  Isa.  37.  22. 
2  Chron.  .36. 16.  but  they  mocked  and  d.  his  words 
J'i'eh.  2.  19.  they  laughed  us  to  scorn  and  d.  us 

4.  4.  hear,  O  our  God,  for  we  are  d.  and  turn 
.fob  12.  5.  he  is  a  lamp  d.  of  him  that  is  at  ease 

19.  18.  yea,  young  children,  d.  me,  I  arose 
Psai.  22.6.  but  I  am  d.  of  the  people,  ha.  53.  3. 

24.  he  hath  not  d.  the  affliction  of  the  afflicted 
53.5.  put  them  to  shame,  because  G.  hath  d.  them 
106.24.  yea,  theyd.  the  pleasant  land,  believ.  not 
119.  141.  I  am  small  and  d.  yet  do  not  I  forget 

Pror.  1.  30.  they  d.  all  my  reproof,  therefore 
5.12.  and  thou  say,  how  hath  my  heart  d.  leproof! 
12.  8.  he  that  is  of  a  perverse  heart  shall  be  d. 
9.  he  that  is  d.  and  hath  a  servant,  is  better 

Eccl.  9.  16.  yet  the  poor  man's  wisdom  is  d. 

Cant.  8. 1. 1  would  kiss  thee,  yea  I  should  not  be  d. 

Isa.  5.  24.  arnl  d.  the  word  of  the  holy  One  of  Israel 
33.  8.  he  hath  d.  the  cities  he  legardith  no  man 
.53.3.  he  is  d.  and  rejected  of  men,  and  acqnaiiiltd 
with  grief,  he  was  d.  and  we  esteemed  him  not 
60.  14.  all  they  that  d.  thee  shall  bow  down 

.Jer.  22.  28.  is  this  man  Coniah  a  d.  broken  idol 
33.  24.  thus  they  have  d.  my  peo|)le,  to  be  no  more 
49.  15.  I  will  make  thee  small  and  d.  among  men 

/,am.2.6.  he  hath  ri.  in  the  indignation  of  his  anger 

Ezek.  16.  .W.  which  hast  d.  the  oath,  17. 16,  18, 19. 

20.13.  they  d.  my  judgments,  which  if  a  man  do 
16.  because  they  d.  my  judgmenLs,  and  walked 

24.  but  had  d.  my  statutes,  and  h.nd  polluted 
22.  8.  thou  hast  d.  mine  holy  things,  and  profaned 

.flmos  2.  4.  because  they  d.  the  law  of  the  Lord 
Ohad.  2.  I  made  thee  small,  thou  art  greatly  d. 
ZpcA.4.10.  for  who  hath  d.  thcday  of  small  things'! 
Mai.  1.  6.  ye  say,  wherein  have  we  d.  thy  name? 
Luke  18.  9.  they  were  righteous,  and  d.  others 
.^cts  19.  27.  that  the  temple  of  Diana  should  be  d. 

1  Cor. 1.28.  the  things  which  are  d.  hath  God  chosen 
4.  10.  ye  are  honourable,  but  we  are  d. 

Gal.  4.  14.  my  temptation  in  my  flesh  ye  d.  not 
Heb.W.  28.  that  d.  Moses' law,  died  without  mercy 
Jam.  2.6.  but  ye  have  d.  the  poor,  do  not  rich  men 

DESPISERS. 
Jtct.<!  13.  41.  behold,  ye  d.  an<l  wonder,  and  perish 

2  Tim.  3. 3.  incontinent,  fierce,  d.of  those  are  good 

DESPISEST. 
Rom.  2.  4.  or  d.  thou  the  rich<8  of  his  goodness? 

DESPISETH. 
Job  36.  5.  behold,  God  is  mighty,  and  d.  not  any 


DES 

Psal.  69  33.  for  the  Lord  d.  not  his  prisoners 
Prov.  11.12.  that  is  void  of  wisdom  d.his  nciglibour 

13.  13.  whoso  d.  the  word  shall  be  destroyed 

14.  2.  but  he  that  is  perverse  in  his  ways  d.  him 
21.  he  that  d.  his  neighbour  sinneth,  but  he  that 

15.  5.  a  fool  d.  his  father's  instruction,  but  he  that 
20.  a  wise  son,  but  a  foolish  man  d.  his  mother 
32.  he  that  refuseth  instruction  d.  his  own  soul 

19.  16  but  he  that  d.  his  ways  shall  die 
30.  17.  the  eye  ihat  d.  to  obey  his  mother,  raven* 
ha.  Xl.  15.  he  that  d.  the  gain  of  oppressions 
49.  7.  thus  saith  the  Lord  to  him  whom  man  d. 
Eiek.il.]  10.  it  is  the  rod  ofmy  son,  it  d.  every  tree 
Luke  10.16.d.  you,  d.  me;  d.me,  d.  him  that  sunt  me 
1  TAess.4.8.  he  therefore  that  d.  d.  not  man  bulGod 

DESPISING. 
Eiek.  21. 1 13.  shall  not  they  belong  to  the  d.  rod? 
Heb.  12.  2.  who  endured  the  cross,  d.  the  shame 

DESPITE.    , 
J^ch.  4.  t  4.  hear,  O  our  God,  for  we  are  a  d. 
JEzei.  25. 6.  with  thy  d.  against  the  land  of  Judah 
Heb.  10. 29.  and  hath  done  d.  to  the  Spi.it  of  grace 

DESPITEFUL. 
£:ci. 25.15.  have  taken  vengeance  with  ad.  heart 
.36.  5.  with  d.  minds  to  cast  it  out  for  a  prey 
Rom.  1.  30.  haters  of  God,  d.  proud,  boasters 

DESPITEFULLY. 
Mat.^.ii.  pray  for  them  that  d.use  you,  Lvke  6.28. 
Acts  14.  5.  an  assault  was  made  to  use  them  d. 

DESTITUTE. 
f?cn.24.27.  who  hath  not  left  d.  mymaster  of  mercy 
Psal.  102.  17.  he  will  regard  the  prayer  of  the  d. 
141.  8.  in  thee  is  my  trust,  leave  not  my  soul  d. 
Prov.  11.  1 12.  d.  of  heart,  dfspiselh  his  neighbouf 
15.  21.  folly  is  joy  to  him  that  is  d.  of  wisdom 
Ezik.  32. 15.  shall  be  d.  of  that  whereof  it  was  full 
1  Tim.  6.  5.  men  of  corrupt  minds,  d.of  the  truth 
Heb.  11. 37.  wandered,  being d.  afflicted,  tormented 
Jam.  2.  15.  if  a  brother  or  sister  be  naked  and  d. 

DESTROY. 
To  destroy,  signifies  to  pull  down,  or  ruin  a  city, 
or  building,  levelling  it  with  the  ground,  Gen. 
19.  14,  The  Lord  will  destroy  this  city.    Eiod. 
34.  13,  Ye  shall  destroy  their  altars  ;  that  is,  ye 
shall  not  leave  one  stone  upon  another,  as  our 
Saviour  speaks  in  Lnke2l.6.  Also  it  signifies, 
to  take  away  a  thing  guile,  so  as  it  be  no  more 
in  this  sense  Christ   is  said  to  destroy  sib, 
Rom.  6.  6,  That  the  body  of  sin  might  be  de-        % 
stroyed  ;   that  is,  that  it  might  be  weakened 
and  subdued  more  and  more,  until  it  be  quite 
taken  out  of  our  nature.  Somctimfs  it  signifies 
to  bring  persons  into  irrecoverable  and  utter 
ruin,and  misery;  thus  Qod  destroys  the  wicked, 
Psal.  37.  38,  The  transgressors  shall  be  destroy- 
ed together:  and  Job  21.  30,  The  wicked  is 
reserved  to  the  day  of  destruction.     God  pre- 
serves the  wicked  from  the  common  cilamitifs 
of  this  life,  only  to  destroy  them,  and  display 
his  vengeance  against  them,     ft  is  taken  for 
punishing  transgressors  by  death,  as  magis- 
trates do;  Psal.  101. 8, 1  will  early  dist-oy  all  the 
wicked  of  the  land,  sny.t  David.  I  will  set  about 
this  work  upon  the  first  opportunity,as  soonas 
I  am  seated  on  the  throne,  that  so  1  may  botk 
prevent  all  that  mischief  which  otherwise  they 
might  do:  and  hindtr  the  infection  of  nthirs  by 
their  evil  example;  and  discourage  and  deter  all 
my  subjects  from  the  like  praetice.i.  The  apostle 
Paul  says,  Rom.  14.  1.5.     Destroy  not  him  with 
thy  meat. tor  <\'liom Christ  died.   7"o  edify  .sig- 
nifies tnbuilil  lip.  strengthen  nn<l enenurngf  l/e- 
lierera  in  their  friith  and  profe-ision  by  endetr- 
oiiring  to  make  them  more  wise,  hnli;.  ati'l  h uni- 
ble.  and  to  lire  more  to  thf  ^Inryo/Gnd.  On  the 
coulrary.  to  destroy,  implies  a  doing  nf  that 
u-hich  may  tenri  to  the  destruction  of  a  n-eak  be- 
liever, by  r/rmving  him  to  art  aeirtinst  his  con- 
science in   the  use  of  things   indifferent  or  bi/ 
S'ving  ki)n  sn  great  an  offence  as  7nn  v  nlitnnte 
his  mind  from  the  Christian  prnfe.\<:ion.      The 
evil  spirits  .sny  to  our  Saviour.  Mark  I .  'i\.  Art 
thou  come  to  destroy  n.i;?  that  is.  either,  art 
thou  come  to  disposse.is  us  ;  or.  art  thou  come  to 
ejreeute  the  finni judgment  upon  ns  and  toconi- 
mand  us  to  our  chains,  before  the  day  of  judg- 
ment? AndChrist  by  his  death  issaid  to  destroy 
him  that  hadthepowerof  death. that  is. the  de- 
vil.//e6.2.14.  Thedevil  issaid  to  have  the  pow- 
eTo(dea.lh.berausehe  induces  men  tomnmiit  sins 
that  meritoriously  rtnder  them  liable  to  death  ; 
because  he  inspires  them  with  furious  thoughts. 
and  inflames  the  passions,  from  u-hence  proceed 
strifes  and  wars,  that  efficiently  rnu.se  death  ; 
because  he  is  many  ti7?ies  the  erecutioner  of 
God's  wrath,  and  inflicts  death  upon  rebeilious 
and  incorrig'djle sinners ;  hence,  satis  the  P.salm- 
ist,  That  God  cast  upon  the  Egyptians  the 
fierceness  of  his  anger,  wrath,  indignation, 
and  troub!e,by  sending  eti/nHgf  is  among  thcra 
127 


^ES 


Psal.  7S.  49.  Me  is  likewise  so  called,  because 
he  makes  death  more  formidable  to  sinners,  by 
keighltning  t/uir  ffutlty  fears  of  Cod's  tribu- 
nal; and  this  title  may  also  signify  his  tor- 
menting sinners  with  unrdrnting  cruiity  in 
hell,  icJiick  is  the  second  diuUi.  These  penal 
evils  ichich  Satan  brings  upon  mankind,  are 
vpon  the  account  of  our  disobedience  ;  and  his 
migiitypoicerin  temptation  is  from  our  inward 
corruption.  The  Lord  Jtsiia  by  his  death  hath 
taken  aicay  the  guilt  andpoicir  of  sin:  the  guilt, 
in  enduring  the  curse  of  the  law,  thereby  satis- 
fying the  injurcdjustice  of  (lod;  and  Ihcpowir 
of  it,  by  crucifying  our  old  man  with  liini,  that 
tlie  body  of  bin  might  be  destroyed,  Horn.  t>.  0. 
..Ind  thus  our  Sariour  by  his  death  destroys 
the  cruel  tyranny  of  the  devil. 

Dcatruction  is  taken  for  a  temporal  death,Psa].^jO. 
3,  Thou  turnesl  man  to  destruction.  For  morti- 
Jicatiou,l  Cor.  5.  5,  To  deliver  such  a  one  to  Sa- 
tan, lur  the  destruction  of  the  flesh.  For  damna- 
tion, ii  Pet.  2. 1,  .And  bring  n\mii  tliemstlvca  swift 
deijtruction.  ,'llso  for  hell,  the  place  where  the 
vicked  are  etCT-jially  tormented,^ldl.7.V.t,P,Toa(\ 
is  the  way  that  leadeth  to  destruction.  For  ex- 
tirpation, or  utter  rooting  out,  Ksth.  8. 6,  How 
can  1  endure  to  see  llie  destruction  of  my  kin- 
dred ?  For  a  consuming  plague,  Psal.  91.  fi, 
The  destruction  that  wa.nelh  at  noon-day.  .^ind 
for  a  corrupting,  painful,  an<i^eaJy  di^ase, 
1  Sam.  T).  in  Destroy  signijiis  to  ajjiict.  Job 
2.  3,  to  destroy  him  without  cause. 

G/:n.l8.23.  wilt  thou  d.  the  righteous  with  wickedl 

24.  wilt  tliou  d.  and  not  spare  the  place  7 

25.  wilt  thou  d.  all  the  city  lor  lack  of  five  1 

19.  13.  wc  wilU.  this  place' |1  14.  d.  this  cily 
Ezod.  13.  9.  draw  my  sword,  my  hand  shall  (/.them 

34.  13.  but  ye  shall  d.  their  altars,  Deut.  7.  5. 
//«!.  2tj.  2-2.  I  will  send  beasts  to  d.  your  cattle 
J^um.  •2\.  17.  and  shall  d.  all  the  children  of  Seth 

32.  15.  and  ye  shall  d.  all  this  people 

33.  52.  shall  d.  their  pictures  and  molten  images 
/Je«MJ.15.1'!stlhB  anger  of  the  Lord  thy  G.  d.  thee 

7.  23.  L.  shall  d.  them  witli  a  mighty  destruction 
24.  thou  shall  d.  their  name  from  under  heaven 

9.  3.  he  shall  d.  them,  and  bring  them  down 
14.  let  me  alone,  that  I  may  d.  them  and  blot 
2.5.  because  the  Lord  hath  said  he  would  d.  you 

20. 20.  the  trees  that  are  not  for  mfat  thou  shalt  d. 

31.  3.  the  Lord  thy  God  he  will  d.  these  nations 

32.  25.  shall  d.  the  young  man  and  virgin 

:{3.  27.  shall  thrust  out  enemy,  and  say,  d.  them 
Josh.  7.  12.  except  ye  d.  accursed  from  among  you 

1  Sam.  1.0.  (j.  depart,  lest  I  d.  you  with  them 

2  .Sum.  14.  7.  and  we  will  d.  the  heir  also 

11.  she  said,  that  thou  wouldest  not  suffer  the 
revengiis  to  d.  any  more,  lest  they  d.  my  son 
1(5.  that  would  d.  me  and  my  son  together 

20.  20.  far  be  it  from  me  I  should  swallow  or  d. 
22.  41.  I  might  d.  them  that  hate  me,  Psal.  18.40. 

}h'ing.^  U>.12.thusdid  Zinirirf.the  house  of  IJaasha 
2  Kinirs  10.19.  he  might  rf.  the  worshippers  of  Baal 

18.  25.  go  against  this  land,  and  d.  it,  Isa.  36. 10. 
y.ira  0.  12.  d.  kings  that  shall  put  to  their  hand 
F.sth.  7.  t  4.  for  we  arc  sold,  that  they  should  d. 
Job  8. 18.  if  he  d.  him  from  his  place,  it  shall  deny 

lU.  8.  thine  hands  made  me,  yet  thou  dost  d.  me 

19.  2t).  though  ai'ler  my  skin,  worms  rf.  this  body 
Psal.  5.  fi.  thou  Shalt  d.  them  that  speak  leasing 

10.  d.  th.m,  O  G.  let  them  fall  by  their  counsels 

21.  10.  iheir  trnit  slialt  thou  d.  from  the  earth 
28.  5.  ho  shall  d.  them,  and  not  build  them  up 
52.  5.  God  shall  likewise  d.  thi'C  for  ever 

55.  9.  d.  t  >  liord,  and  divide  their  tongues 
69.  4.  they  that  would  d.  me  are  mighty 
74.  8.  they  said,  let  us  d.  them  together 
127.  t  •'>.  tbey  shall  d.  the  enemies  in  the  gate 

143.  12.  and  d.  all  them  that  afflict  my  soul 

144.  6.  shoot  oiil  thine  arrows  and  d.  them 

145.  20.  but  all  the  wicked  will  he  d. 

Prov.  1.  32.  the  pr<iBperity  of  fools  shall  d.  thom 
ll.M.Ihe  pervcr»enc8s  of  transgressors  shall  d. them 
1.5.  2.5.  the  Lord  will  rf.  the  house  of  the  proud 
21.  7.  the  robberies  of  the  wicked  shall  rf.  them 

K';r/.5.<).why  should  G.rf.  the  work  of  thine  hands? 
7.1fi.nor  ovcr-wisc,why  shouldcst  thou  rf.  thyself  7 

Isa.  3.  12.  and  they  rf.  the  way  of  thy  paths 
II.  9.  nor  rf.  in  all  my  holy  mountain,  6.5.  25. 
1.3.0.  and  he  •"hall  rf.  the  sinners  thereof  out  of  it 
25.  7.  he  will  rf.  in  this  mountain  the  face 

Jer.  5.  10.  go  ye  up  upon  her  walls  nnd  rf. 
fi.  .5.  let  ui  go  by  night  and  rf.  her  palaces 

11.  19.  let  US  rf.  the  tree  with  the  fruit  thereof 

12.  17.  I  will  plClck  up  and  rf.  that  nation 
l:i.l4. 1  will  notsparr  nor  have  mcrcy,bul  rf.  them 
15.6.  will  stretch  my  hand  against  thee  and  rf.  thee 
17   18.  and  rf.  them  with  double  destruction 
23.1. woe  to  pastors  ihatrf.thesheepof  my  pasture 
3<>.  29.  the  king  of  Babylon  shall  rf.  this  land 
i&.  18.  mill  he  shall  d.  thy  strong  holds 

12ti 


DES 

Jer.  49.  9.  if  thieves  by  night  they  will  rf.  till  have 
51.  3.  spare  ye  rol,  rf.  ye  utterly  all  her  host 
J^am.  3.  Ui3.  persecute  and  rf.  Ihein  in  anger 
Fzek.  9.  8.  wilt  thou  rf.  all  the  residue  ol  Israel  7 

25.  10.  and  rf.  the  remnant  of  the  sea-coast 

26.  4.  and  they  sliall  rf.  the  walls  of  Tyrug 

12.  and  they  shall  rf.  thy  pleasant  houses 
Ijan.  2.  t  18.  that  they  siiuuld  not  rf.  Daniel 

4.  23.  saying,  hew  tiie  tree  down  and  rf.  it 

8.  24.  he  shall  rf.  wonderfully,  and  rf.  the  mighty 
25.  and  by  peace  shall  he  rf.  many 

9.2U.the  people  shall  rf.  the  city  and  the  sanctuary 

11.  2G.  they  that  feed  on  his  meat  shall  rf.  him 
Obad.  8.  shall  I  not  rf.  the  wise  men  out  of  Edom  ? 
.Vic.  2.  10.  because  it  is  polluted,  il  shall  rf.  you 
'/.eph.'i.V.i.  stretch  hand  agst.  north,  undrf.  Assyria 
Mat.  12.  14.  they  might  rf.  lum,  Mark  3.  6.  |  \l.  18. 

2i.  41.  he  will  miserably  rf.  those  wicked  men 
27.20.that  they  should  ask  I'arubhus,  and  rf.  Jesus 
Mark  12.'.).lie  will  rf.  the  husbandmen,  JLuAc  20.16. 
Juhn'i.  19.  Jesus  said  to  them,  rf.  this  temjile 
^jc£»-6.]4.  this  Jesusof  Nazareth  shall  rf.  this  place 

1  (Jor.  3. 1 17.  if  any  man  rf.  the  temple  of  God,  him 

shall  God  rf.  for  the  temjile  of  God  is  iioly 

6.  13.  but  God  shall  rf.  both  it  and  t^em 

2  Thcss.  2. 8.  shall  rf.  with  brightness  of  his  coming 
A/t4.2.14.might  rf.  him  that  had  the  power  of  death 
1  John '3.  8.  that  he  might  rf.the  woiks  of  the  devil 
Rev.  11.  18.  shouldest  rf.  them  which  rf.  the  eartli 

/  will,  or  will  I  DESTROY. 
Gen.  6.  7.  I  will  rf.  man  whom  1  have  created 

13.  and  behold,  1  will  rf.  them  with  the  earth 

7.  4.  and  every  living  substance  will  Id. 
Kiod.  23.  27.  and  /  will  rf.  all  the  people  to  whom 
Lev.  23.  30.  the  same  soul  will  Id.  from  his  peojile 

26.  30.  and  I  will  d.  your  high-places,  Eiek.  6.  3. 

I'sal.  Wl.a.  I  will  early  rf.  all  (he  wicked  of  land 
1 18. 10.  in  the  name  of  the  L.  will  Id.  them,ll,12. 

Isa.  19.  3.  and  /  uill  rf.  the  counsel  thereof 
42.  14.  I  will  cry,  I  will  rf.  and  devour  at  once 

Jcr.  15.  7.  I  will  d.  my  people,  sith  they  return  not 
46.8./an7Zrf.  the  city, and  the  inhabitants  thereof 
49.  :J8.  I  will  d.  from  thence  the  king  and  princes 
51.20.  my  battle-axe,  with  thee  will  Id.  kingdoms 

F.ik.  14.  9.  /the  Lord  will  d.  that  prophet 

25.  7.  behold,  /  will  rf.  thee,  and  thou  s^alt  know 

that  I  am  the  Lord,  28.  16.  Zeph.  2.  5. 
30.  13.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  /  will  d.  the  idols 
32.  13.  /  will  rf.  also  all  the  beasts  thereof 

34.  16.  but  /  will  rf.  the  fat  and  the  strong 
Uos.  2.  12.  /  will  d.  her  vines  and  her  tig-trees 

4.  5.  thou  slialt  fall,  and  /  will  rf.  thy  mother 
Amos  9.  8.  and  /  will  rf.  the  sinful  kingdom 
Mic.  5.  10.  /  will  rf.  thy  chariots  ||  14.  rf.  thy  cities 
Hag.'i.'ii.  I  will  rf.  the  strength  of  the  kingdoms 
Mark  14.  58.  we  heard  him  sny,Iwill  rf.this  teniple 
1  Cor.  1.  19.  /  will  rf.  the  wisdom  of  the  wise 

J\rot  DESTROV. 
Oen.  18.  28.  if  1  find  forty-five  I  will  not  rf.  it 

31.  he  said,  I  will  nut  rf.  it  for  twenty's  sake 

32.  he  said,  I  will  not  rf.  Sodom  for  ten's  sake 
Deut.  4.  31.  he  will  not  forsake  thee,  not  d.  thee 

9.  26.  rf.  not  thy  people  and  thine  inheritance 
10. 10.  and  the  Lord  would  not  rf.  thee 

20.  19.  thou  shalt  not  rf.  the  trees  thereof 

1  .Sam.  24.21.  swear  that  thou  wilt  not  d.  my  name 

26.  9.  and  David  said  to  Abishai,  rf.  him  not 

2  Kings ii.19.  would  not  rf.  Judali  for  David's  sake 
13.  23.  would  not  rf.  them,  nor  cast  them  out 

2  Chron.  12.  7.  therefore  I  will  not  rf.  them 
12.  that  the  Lord  would  not  rf.  him  altogether 

21.  7.  the  Lord  would  not  rf.  the  house  of  David 

35.  21.  fiirliear  from  God  that  ho  rf.  thee  not 
Psal.  106.  34.  they  did  not  rf.  the  nations  of  w  hom 
/«(i.65.  8.  rf.  it  not,  for  a  blessing  is  in  it;  so  will  I  do 

for  my  servant's  sake,  that  I  may  not  rf.  iheiii  all 
F.tek.'ia.  :J0.  stand  in  the  gap,  that  I  should  not  rf.  it 
Dan.'i.^H.d.not  the  wise  men  of  Ilabylon,bring  me 
Mai.  3.  U.  be  shall  not  rf.  fruits  of  your  ground 
Kom.  14.  15.  rf.  not  him  with  thy  meat  for  whom 

20.  for  meal  rf.  not  the  work  of  God 
To  DESTROY. 
Gen.f).\~.  I  do  bring  a  flood  of  wotors  to  d.  all  flesh 
9.  11.  nor  shall  there  be  any  more  a  flood  tod.  15. 

19.  13.  and  the  Lord  hath  sent  us  to  rf.  il 
Kzod.  8.  9.  intreat  for  thee  to  rf.  the  frogs  from  thee 

12.  13.  the  plague  shall  not  be  on  you  to  rf.  you 
Deut. 1.27. brought  us  out  of  Egypt  to  deliver  u»  in- 
to the  hand  of  the  Anmrites  tod.  us,  Jush.l.l. 

2.  15.  hand  of  Ld.  to  rf.  them  from  among  the  host 
7.  10.  repaycth  thenr  that  hate  him  to  rf.  them 
9.  19.  the  Lord  was  wroth  against  you  to  rf.  you 
28.  f>3.  so  the  Lord  will  rejoice  over  you  to  d.  you 
Josh.  9. 24.  and  to  rf.  nil  the  inhabitants  of  the  lond 

22.  33.  to  rf.  the  land  where  Reubeniles  dwelt 
Judg.  6.  5.  the  Midianitcs  entered  to  rf.  the  land 

1  .Som.23.10.  Saulscekcth  lod.  the  city  for  my  sake 
26.  15.  camo  in  one  of  the  people  to  rf.  the  king 

2  Sam.  1.  14.  not  afiaid  to  d.  the  l.o'd's  anointed 
14.  11  not  suflor  the  rovengcra  of  blood  to  d. 


DES 

2  5am.5J0.19.  thou  scckest  to  d.  a  city  and  a  moUia 
24. 16.  stretched  out  his  hand  on  Jerusalem  to  rf.it 

1  Kings  13.  34.  sin  to  the  house  of  Jeroboam  tod.  it 

2  Kings  24. 2.  and  sent  them  against  J udah  tod.  it 

1  Chr.  21. 15.  God  sent  an  angel  to  Jerusalem  to  rf. 

2  Chron.  25.  16.  God  hath  determined  to  rf.  thee 
£5t/(.3.6.Haman  sought  to  rf.Jews,13.|  4.7,8.|9.24 

t  9.  let  it  be  written  to  rf.  them,  and  I  will  pay 
Job  2.  3.  thou  movedst  me  to  rf.  him  without  cause 

6.  9.  even  that  it  would  pleaee  God  to  rf.  me 
Psal.  40. 14.  that  seek  after  my  soul  to  rf.  it,  63. 9. 

119.  95.  the  wicked  have  waited  for  me  to  rf.  m« 
Isa.  10.  7.  but  it  is  in  his  heart  to  rf.  and  cut  off 
13.  5.  they  come  from  far  to  rf.  the  whole  land 
23. 11.  the  Lord  hath  given  a  commandnieut  to  d. 
32.  7.  he  deviseth  wicked  devices  to  rf.  the  poor 
51.  13.  as  if  the  oppressor  were  ready  to  rf. 
54.  16.  behold,  I  have  created  the  waster  to  d. 
Jcr.  1.  10.  I  have  set  thee  to  rf.  18.  7.  |  31.  28. 
15.  3.  I  will  appoint  the  beasts  of  the  earth  to  i. 
51.  11.  his  device  is  against  Babylon  to  rf.  it 
Lam.  2.  8.  the  Lord  hath  purposed  to  rf.  the  wall 
F.iek.  5.  16.  famine,  w  hich  1  will  send  to  rf.  you 
22.  27.  and  to  rf.  souls,  to  get  dishonest  gain 
25.15.  with  a  despiteful  heart  to  rf.  it  for-old  hatred 
30.  11.  the  nations  shall  be  brought  to  rf.  the  land 
43.  3.  the  vision  I  saw  when  I  came  to  rf.  the  city 
Dun.  2. 12.  to  rf.  all  the  wise  men  of  Babylon,  34. 

7.  26.  and  to  rf.  his  dominion  unto  the  end 

11.  44.  he  shall  go  forth  with  great  fury  to  d. 
Hos.  11.9. 1  will  not  return  tod.  £phraim,I  amG. 
Zech.  12.  9.  that  I  will  seek  to  rf.  all  the  nations 
Mat.  2. 13.  Herod  will  seek  young  child  to  rf.  him 

5.  17.  think  not  that  I  am  come  to  rf.  the  law  or 

the  prophets,  I  am  not  come  to  rf.  but  to  ful&l 
10.  23.  rather  fear  him  who  is  able  to  rf.  both 
20.  61.  this  fellow  said,  I  am  able  to  rf.  the  templa 

Mark  1.  24.  art  thou  come  to  rf.  us  7  Luke  4.  34. 

7.U  Ac  6.9.18  it  lawful  on  sab.  days  to  save  li  fe  or  to  rf. 

9.  56.  the  Son  of  man  is  not  come  to  d.  men's  livei 
19.  47.  the  chief  of  the  people  sought  to  rf.  him 

.John  10.  10.  the  thief  cometh  not  but  to  rf. 
./a)n.4.12.there  is  one  lawgiv.  able  to  save  and  to  d. 

DESTROYED. 
Ge7i.l3.10.before  the  Ld.  rf.  Sudom  and  Gomorrah 
19.  29.  when  God  d.  the  cities  of  the  plain 
Ezod.  8.  124.  the  land  was  d.  by  the  swarm  of  fliei 

10.  7.  knowest  thou  not  yet  that  Egypt  is  rf. 
Deut.  2.  21.  but  the  Lord  rf.  them  before  them,  4. 3. 

I  11.  4.  2  Kings  21.  9.  2  Chron.  33.  9. 
7.  23.  with  a  mighty  destruction,  till  they  be  rf. 
24.  no  man  be  able  to  stand  till  thou  have  rf. 

9.  8.  the  Lord  was  angry  with  you  to  have  rf.  yon 

12.  30.  after  that  they  be  rf.  from  before  thee 
28.  20.  until  thou  be  d.  24,  45,  51,  61. 

48.  shall  put  a  yoke  on  thy  neck  till  ho  have  d. 
.Josh.  24.  8.  and  I  rf.  them  from  before  you 
./urffl-.S.t  27.where  he  boweti,  there  he  fell  down  d. 
20.21.  Benjamin  d.  of  l8r.?2,000men  that  day,23. 
35.  children  of  Israel  rf.  25,100  of  Benjamin,  42. 
2  .Sam.  21.  5.  man  that  devised  that  we  should  be  rf. 
24. 16.he  said  to  the  angel  that  d.  1  CAron.21.  15. 

1  Kings  15.  13.  Asa  d.  her  idoi  and  burnt  it 

2  KingsW.  t23.  this  is  blood,  the  kings  are  surely  d. 

10.  28.  thus  Jehu  rf.  Baal  out  of  Israel 

11. 1.  .'Vthaliah  arose  and  d.  all  tlie  seed  royal 
19.  18.  therefore  they  have  d.  them,  Isa.  37.  19. 

1  Chron.  5  25.  the  people  w  hom  God  rf. before  them 

2  Chron.  14.  13.  for  they  were  d.  before  the  Lord 
1.5.  6.  nation  was  d.  of  nation,  cily  of  city 
34.11.  the  houses  which  the  kings  of  Judah  had  ^ 

Ezra  4.  15.  for  which  cause  was  this  city  rf. 

6.  t  11.  whoso  alters  this  word,  let  him  be  rf. 
Esth.  3.  9.  let  it  be  written,  that  Ihey  may  be  d. 
.Job  19.10.he hath  rf.mc  on  every  sidc,and  I  nmgone 

t  26.  though  this  body  be  rf.  yet  shall  I  see  God 
Psal.  9.  5.  thou  hast  rf.  the  wicked  ||  6.  hast  rf.  cities 

73.  27.  thou  hast  rf.  all  them  that  go  a  whoring 

78.  4.5.  he  sent  frogs  among  them,  which  d.  them 
47.he  d.  their  vines  with  hail,  nnd  sycamorc-treeii 

137.  H.  O  daughter  of  Babylon,  who  art  to  be  d. 
;'r«o. 13.23.  there  is  that  is  rf.  for  want  of  judgment 
Isa.  14.20.becausc  Ihou  hast  rf.  land,  nnd  slain  peo. 

26.  14.  therefore  hast  thou  visited  nnd  rf.  Ihem 
.Itr.  12.  10.  many  pis'ors  liaverf.  my  vineyard 

48.  4.  Moah  is  ./.  1|  51.  8.  Bubylon  is  suddenly  d. 

51. .55.  Lord  hat  hrf.  out  of  Babylon  the  ereot  voic« 
Lam.  2.  5.  the  Lord  hath  rf.  his  strong  lirdds 
6.  he  hath  rf.  his  places  of  the  osscmbly 
9.  he  hath  d.  and  broken  her  bars,  hir  kinj 
K:fA.27.35.  Tvrus,  like  the  rf.  in  the  niidsl  of  sea 

43.  t  3.  to  prophesy  that  the  city  should  be  rf. 
Dan.  7.  II.  the  beast  was  slain,  nnd  his  boily  d. 
Itos.V>9.0  Isr.  thou  hast  d.  thyself,  but  in  me  help 
JImo.f  2.  9.  yet  d.  1  the  Amorite,  I  rf.  his  fruit 
.4f(jt.22.7.be  sent  his  armies  and  rf.lhose  murderers 
Luke  17.  27.  and  the  flood  came,  nnd  rf.  them  nil 

29.  it  rained  fire  from  heaven  and  rf.  them  all 
Jicls  9.  21.  is  not  this  he  that  rf.  thom  that  called 

L).  19.  when  he  bad  d.  sovea  uationi  io  Cbanau 


DES 

Stta  19.  Vt.  and  her  magnificenco  should  be  d, 
Horn.  6.  (i.  Ihat  the  body  of  sin  might  be  d- 

1  Cor.  10.  y.  d.  of  strpuuts  ||  10.  d.  o(  the  destroyer 
OoM .iiJ.iiow  pruucbelh  the  faith  which  once  he  d. 

>.  iti.  if  1  build  again  the  things  wliich  I  d., 
Heb.  11 .  28.  lest  he  that  d.  the  lirsl-boni  touch  them 
S  P<  I.  2.  \'i.  aS  natural  brute  beasts  made  to  be  d. 
Judco.  the  L.  afterward  d.  them  that  believed  not 
Hev.  8.  9.  and  the  third  part  of  the  ships  were  d, 

Are  DESTROVED. 
Jiidg.  21.  16.  the  women  are  d.  out  of  Benjamin 
Job  4.  20.  they  are  d.  from  morning  to  night 

34.  25.  lie  ovcrturneth  them  so  that  they  are  d. 
ha.  9.  IG.  and  they  that  are  led  of  them  are  d. 
Jcr.  i^.  20.  and  cry,  for  all  thy  lovers  are  d. 
Hos.  4  C.  my  people  are  d.  for  lack  of  knowledge 
ZrpA.  3.  6.  their  cities  are  </.  there  is  no  inhabitant 
JV««  DESTROYED. 

2  Chron.  20. 10.  but  they  d.  them  not,  Psal.  78.  38 
Dan.  7.  14.  his  kingdom  which  shall  not  be  d. 
2  Cor.  4.  9.  but  not  forsaken  ;  cast  down,  but  not  d. 

Skall  be  DESTRQyED. 

Gen.  34.  30.  and  I  shall  be  d.  I  and  my  house 
Esth.  4. 14.  thou  and  thy  father's  house  sAaii  be  d. 
fs.  37.  38.but  the  transgressors  skall  be  d.  together 

92.  7.  it  is  that  they  shall  be  d.  for  ever 
Prov.  13.  13.  whoso  despiseth  the  word  shall  bed. 
20.  but  a  companion  of  fools  shall  be  d. 

29.  1.  he  that  hardeneth  his  .leck  shall  be  d. 
/s(i.l0.27.the  yoke  shall  be  d.  because  of  anointing 
y<:r.48.8.lhe  valley  shall  perish, the  plain  shall  be  d. 
F.iek.  30.  8.  and  when  all  her  helpers  shall  be  d. 
Z)an.2.44.  a  kingdom  wWich  shall  never  Aed.6. 26. 

1 1.  20.  but  within  few  days  he  shall  be  d. 
Hos.  10.  8.  placesof  Aven,  thosin  of  Isr.  sAaWie  d. 
Jlcts  3.  2:1.  he  that  will  not  hear  shall  be  d. 
1  Cor.15, 26.  the  last  enemy  that  sAniifted.  is  death 

Utterly  DESTROYED. 
F.z«d.  22.  20.  he  that  sacrificeth  to  any  god,  save 
unto  the  Lord  only,  he  shall  be  utterly  d. 
ffum.  21.  3.  they  utterly  d.  the  Canaanites 
Dent.  2.  34.  we  utterly  d.  Sihon  and  his  people 

3.  6.  we  utterly  d.  the  cities  of  Og,  Josh.  2.  10. 

4.26.if  ye  corrupt  yourselves  ye  shall  be  utterly  d. 
Josh.  6.  21.  Jericho  ||  8.  26.  Ai  utterly  d.  10.  1. 

10. 28.  Makkedah  ||  35.  Eglon  ||  37.  Hebron  ut.  d. 
39.  Debir  ||  40.  he  utterly  d.  all  that  breathed 

11.  12.  Joshua  utterly  d.  them  with  cities,  21. 
Jvdg.  1. 17.  Judah  and  Simeon  utterly  d.  Zephath 
1  Sam.  15.  8.  Saul  utterly  d.  Jl  the  peo|)le 

9.  he  would  not  utterly  d.  the  best  of  the  sheep 
1.5,  to  sacritice,  and  the  rest  we  have  utterly  d. 

20.  he  said,  I  have  utterly  d.  the  Amalekites 

21.  things  which  should  have  been  bitterly  d. 

1  Chron.  4.  41.  the  inhabitants  of  Geilor  utterly  d. 

2  Chron.  31.  1.  Hezekiah  utterly  d.  the  images 
32.  14.  gods  those  nations  my  father  utterly  d. 

Isa-  34.  2.  the  Lord  hath  utterly  d.  all  nations 

DESTROYER. 
Erod.  12.  23.  will  not  suffer  d.  to  come  into  houses 
Judff.  16.  24.  hath  delivered  the  d.  of  our  country 
Job  15.  21.  in  prosperity  the  d.  shall  come 
Psal.  17.  4.  I  have  kept  me  from  paths  of  the  d. 
Prov.  28.  24.  the  same  is  the  companion  of  a  d. 
Jrr.  4.  7.  the  d.  of  the  Gentiles  is  on  bis  way 

50.  t  9.  their  arrows  shall  be  as  of  a  mighty  d. 
1  Cor.  10.  10.  and  were  destroyed  of  the  d. 
Rev.  9. 1 11.  king  over  them  hath  his  name  a  d. 

DESTROYERS. 
.Tob  33.  22.  and  his  life  draweth  near  to  the  d. 
ha.  49. 17.  thy  d.  shall  go  forth  of  thee 
Jin.  22.  7.  and  I  will  prepare  d.  against  thee 

50.  11.  because  ve  rejoiced,  O  d.  of  my  heritage 

DESROYEST,  ETH. 
Deut.  8.  20.  as  the  nations  which  the  Lord  d. 
Job  9.  22.  lie  d.  the  perfect  and  the  wicked 

12.  23.  he  inrreaseth  the  nations,  and  d.  them 
14.  19.  and  thou  d.  the  hope  of  man 

Psal.  IS.  t  47.  it  is  God  that  d.  people  under  me 
Prov.  6.  32.  he  that  doeth  it,  d.  his  own  soul 
1 1. 9.  a  hypocrite  with  his  mouth  d.  his  neighbour 
.II.  3.  give  not  thy  ways  to  that  wliich  d.  kings 
T.ccl.  7.  7.  oppres.  mnkcth  mad,  and  a  gift  d.  heart 
9.  18.  wisd.  better  than  war,  sinner  d.  much  good 
Jrr.  51.  25.  O  mountain,  which  d   all  the  earth 
JWat,  27.  40.  thou  that  d.  the  temple,  Mark  15.29. 

DESTROYING. 
I  Chron.  21. 12.  the  anc;el  of  the  Lord  d.  thro'  Israel 

15.  and  as  he  was  d.  the  Lord  repented  him 
Pror.28. 1 2^1.  the  same  is  the  companion  of  man  d. 
r'a.28. 2.  the  Lord  hath  a  strong  one,  as  ad.  storm 
Jer.  2.  30.  your  sword  devoured  like  a  d.  lion 

13.  t  14.  I  will  not  have  mercy  from  d.  them 
31.  1.  I  win  raise  against  Babylon  a  d.  wind 

25. 1  am  against  tliee,0  d.  mountain,  saith  Lord 

/.am.  2.  8.  he  hath  not  withdrawn  his  hand  from  d. 

Ezek.  9.  1.  draw  near,  even  every  man  with  his 

d.  weapon  in  his  hand 

2P.  17.  mine  eye  spared  them  froip  d.  them 

See  Utterly 


DES 

DESTRUCTION. 
Ezod.  12. 1 13.  plague  shall  not  be  on  you  for  a  d. 
JV*um.  21.  t  3.  and  he  called  lhat  place,  utter  d. 

24.  t  20.  but  his  latter  end  shall  be  even  to  d. 
Deut.  7. 23.  L.  shall  destroy  them  with  a  mighty  d. 

32.  24.  they  shall  be  devoured  with  bitter  d. 
1  Sam.  5.9.  L.  was  against  the  city  with  agreatd. 

11.  for  there  was  u  deadly  d.  through  the  city 

1  KingsHO.  42.  a  man  wlioiii  1  appointed  to  utter  d. 

2  Chron.  20.  f  23.  one  helped  lor  the  d.  of  another 
22.  4.  for  they  were  his  counsellors  lo  his  d. 

7.  d.  of  Ahaziah  was  of  God, by  coming  to  Joram 
26.16.when  strong  his  heart  was  lifted  up  to  his  d. 
Esth.8.  6.  how  endure  to  see  the  d.  of  my  kindred ! 

9.  5.  the  Jews  smote  their  enemies  with  d. 
Job  5.  21.  neither  shalt  thou  be  afraid  of  d. 

22.  at  d.  and  famine  thou  shalt  laugh 

18.  12.  and  d.  shall  be  ready  at  his  side 
21.  17.  and  how  oft  Cometh  their  d.  upon  them  7 

20;  his  eyes  shall  see  his  d.  and  he  shall  drink 
30.  the  wicked  is  reserved  to  the  day  of  d. 
26.  6.  hell  naked  before  him,  d.  hath  no  covering 
28. 22.  d.  and  death  say,  we  have  heard  the  fame 

30.  12.  they  raise  against  me  the  ways  of  their  d 
24.  not  stretch  out  his  hand  tho'  they  cry  in  his  d 

31.  3.  is  not  d.  to  the  wicked?  and  punishment  to 

12.  for  it  is  a  fire  that  consumeth  to  d. 

23.  for  d.  from  God  was  a  terror  to  me 
29.  if  I  rejoiced  at  the  d.  of  him  that  hated  me 

Psal.35. 8.  let  d.  come  upon  him  unawares,  and  lils 
net  catch  himself,  into  that  very  d.  let  him  fall 
5.5.  23.  thou  shalt  bring  them  down  to  the  pit  of  d. 
73.  18.  surely  thou  castedst  them  down  into  d. 
88.  11.  or  thy  faithfulness  be  declared  in  d.? 

90.  3.  thou  tuinest  man  to  d.  and  sayest,  return  ye 

91.  6.  nor  for  the  d.  that  wasteth  at  noon-day 
103.4.  who  redeemeth  thy  life  from  d.  who  crowns 

Prov.  1.  27.  when  your  d.  cometh  as  a  whirlwind 
10. 14.  but  the  mouth  of  the  foolish  is  near  d. 
15.  the  d.  of  the  poor  is  their  poverty 
29.  d.  shall  be  to  the  workers  of  iniquity,  21. 15. 
13. 3. but  he  that  openeth  wide  his  lips  shall  haved. 

14.  2S.  the  want  of  people  is  the  d.  of  the  prince 

15.  11.  hell  and  d.  are  before  the  Lord 

16.  18.  pride  goeth  before  d.  and  a  haughty  spirit 

17. 19.  and  he  that  e.xalteth  his  gate  seeketh  d. 

18.7.  a  fool's  mouth  is  his  d.  and  his  lips  a  snare 
12.  before  d.  the  heart  of  man  is  haughty 

19.  t  18.  and  let  not  thy  soul  spare  to  his  d. 
24.  2.  for  their  heart  studieth  d.  and  lips  talk 

27.20.  hell  and  d.  are  never  full,  so  the  eyes  of  man 

31.8.  in  the  cause  of  such  as  are  appointed  to  d. 
Isa.  1.28.  d.  of  transgressors  and  sinners  together 

10.  25.  and  mine  anger  shall  cease  in  their  d. 

13.  6.  it  shall  come  as  a  d.  from  the  Almighty 

14.  23.  I  will  sweep  Babylon  with  the  besom  of  d. 

15.  5.  in  the  way  they  shall  raise  up  a  cry  of  d. 
19.  18.  one  shall  be  called  the  city  of  d. 
24.  12.  and  the  gate  is  smitten  with  d. 

49.  19.  the  land  of  thy  d.  shall  be  too  narrow 
51.  19.  desolation  and  d.  are  come  unto  thee 

59.  7.  wasting  and  d.  are  in  their  paths 

60.  18.  d.  shall  no  more  be  heard  in  thy  borders 
Jer.  4.  6. 1  will  bring  from  the  north  a  great  d.  6.  1. 

20.  d.  upon  d.  is  cried,  for  the  land  is  spoiled 

17.  IS.  and  destroy  them  with  double  d. 
46.  20.  d.  comelh,  it  cometh  out  of  the  north 
48.  3.  a  voice  from  Horonaim,  spoiling  and  d. 

5.  the  enemies  have  heard  a  cry  of  d. 

50.  22.  a  sound  of  great  d.  is  in  the  land 

51.  54.  great  d.  from  the  land  of  the  Chaldeans 
/,am.2.ll.for  d.  of  the  daughter  of  my  people,  3.48. 

3.  47.  desolation  and  d.  is  come  upon  us 

4.  10.  in  the  d.  of  the  daughter  of  my  people 
Ezek.  5.  16.  when  I  will  send  famine  for  their  d. 

7.  2.5.  <i.  cometh,  and  they  shall  seek  peace 

9. 1 6.  slay  to  d.  old  and  young,  maids  and  children 

32.  9.  when  I  bring  thy  d.  among  the  nations 

//os.7.13.d.to  them, because  they  have  transgressed 
9.  6.  for  lo,  they  are  gone,  because  of  d. 
13.  14.  O  grave,  I  will  be  thy  d.  repentance  hid 

.Toe.1 1. 15.  as  a  d.  from  the  Almighty  it  shall  come 

Obad.  12.  neither  rejoiced  in  the  day  of  their  d. 

Mic.  2.  10.  it  shall  destroy  you  with  a  sore  d. 

Zech.  14. 11.  and  there  shall  be  no  more  utter  d. 

Mat.  7.  13.  broad  is  the  way  that  leadeth  to  d. 

Rom.  3.  16.  d.  and  misery  are  in  their  ways 
9.  22.  endured  the  vessels  of  wrath  fitted  to  d. 

1  Cor.  5.  5.  to  deliver  to  Satan  for  d.  of  the  flesh 

2  Cor.  10.  8.  hath  given  us  not  for  your  d.  13. 10. 
Phil-  3.  19.  for  many  walk  whose  end  is  d. 

1  Thess.  5.  3.  then  sudden  d.  comelh  upon  them 

2  TAfSS.I.O.who  shall  be  punished  with  everlast.d. 

1  Tim.G.  9.  into  many  lusts  which  drown  men  in  d. 

2  Pet.  2.  1.  and  bring  on  themselves  swift  d. 
3.  16.  which  the  unstable  wrest  to  their  own  d. 

DESTRUCTIONS. 
Psal.9.C<.  O  enemy,  d.  are  come  to  a  perpetual  end 
'  j.  17.  Lord,  rescue  my  soul  from  their  d. 
107.  20.  he  delivereth  them  from  their  d,  | 


DEV 

Tea.  5.  1 30.  when  light,  it  shall  be  dark  in  the  d. 

DETAIN,  ED. 
.Judg.  13. 15.  let  us  d.  thee  till  we  have  made  ready 
16.  though  thou  d.  me,  1  will  not  eat  of  thy  bread 
li'o/tt.  21.7.  Doeg  was  ihnldayd.  before  tile  Lord 

DETERMINATE. 
.-Jets  2.  23.  him  delivered  by  the  3.  counsel  of  God 

DETERMINATION. 
Zeph.  3.  8.  for  my  d.  is  to  gather  the  nations 

DETERMINE. 

Exod.  31.  22.  and  he  shall  pay  as  the  iudges  d. 

DETERMINED. 

1  Sam.  20.  7.  then  bo  sure  that  evil  is  d.  by  him 
9.  if  1  knew  that  evil  were  d.  by  my  father 
33.  Jonathan  knew  th;^  it  was  d.  uf  his  father 

25. 17.  for  evil  is  d.  ag.  our  master  and  household 

2  Sam.  13.  32.  lor  by  Absalom  this  hath  been  d. 
2  CAr.  2. 1.  Solomon  d.  to  build  a  house  for  Lord 

25.  16.  1  know  that  God  hath  d.  to  destroy  thee 
Ksth.1.1.  he  saw  that  there  was  evil  d.  against  him 
Job  14.  5.  seeing  his  days  are  d.  number  of  months 
Isa.  10.  23.  a  consumption  d.  in  all  the  laiid,38. 22. 

19.  17.  counsel  of  Lord  which  hath  d.  against  it 
Dan.  9.  24.  seventy  weeks  are  d.  on  thy  people 

26.  and  to  the  end  of  the  war  desolations  are  d. 

27.  and  thatd.  shall  be  poured  upon  the  desolate 
11.  36.  fur  that,  that  is  d.  shall  be  dune 

J.uke  22.  22.  the  Son  of  man  goeth  as  it  was  d. 
Jicts  3.  13.  when  Pilate  was  d.  to  let  him  go 

4.  28.  to  do  what  thy  counsel  d.  before  to  be  done 
11.  29.  the  disciples  d.  to  send  relief  to  brethren 
15.  2.  d.  that  Paul  and  Barnabas  go  to  Jerusalem 

37.  and  Barnabas  d.  to  take  with  them  John 

17.  26.  and  hath  d.  the  times  before  ajipointed 
19.  39.  it  shall  be  d.  in  a  lawful  assembly 

20. 16.  for  Paul  had  d.  to  sail  by  Ephosus 
25.  25.  I  have  d.  to  send  Paul  lo  Augustus 
27.1.  when  it  was  d.  that  we  should  sail  into  Italy 
Rom.  1. 1 4.and  d.  to  be  the  Son  of  God  with  power 

1  Cor.  2.  2.  I  d.  not  to  know  any  tlung  save  Jesus 

5.  t  3.  but  present  in  spirit  I  have  d.  already 

2  Cor.  2.  1.  but  I  d.  this  with  myself,  that  I  would 
Tit.'i.  12.  toNicopolis  for  I  haved.  there  to  winter 

DETEST. 
Deut.  7.  26.  but  thou  shalt  utterly  d  and  abhor  it 

DETESTABLE. 

.Ter.  16.  13.  they  defiled  my  land  with  d.  things 

£2eA.5. 11. hast  defiled  sanctuary  with  thy  d.  things 

7.  20.  they  made  images  of  their  d.  things  therein 

11.  18.  they  shall  take  away  all  the  d.  things 

21.  whose  heart  walketh  after  their  d.  things 

37.23.nor  shall  any  more  defile  with  their  d.  things 

DEVICE. 

2  CAr.  2. 14.  to  find  out  every  d.  shall  be  put  to  him 

Esth.  8.  3.  to  put  away  his  d.  that  he  had  devised 

t  5.  let  it  be  written  to  reverse  the  d.  by  Haman 
9.  25.  his  wicked  d.  which  he  devised  against  the 
^         Jews,  should  return  upon  his  own  head 
Psal.  21.  II.  they  imagined  a  mischievous  d. 
140.  8.  O  Lord,  further  not  his  wicked  d. 
Eccl.  9. 10.  there  is  no  work  nor  d.  in  the  grave 
.Jer.  18.  11.  behold,  I  devise  a  d.  against  you 
51.  11.  for  his  d.  is  against  Babylon  to  destroy  it 
Lam.  ,3.  OQ.  and  their  d.  against  me  all  the  day 
Jlcts  17.  29.  is  like  to  stone  graven  by  man's  d. 

DEVICES. 
Job  5.  12.  he  dieappointelh  the  d.  of  the  crafty 

11.  t  3.  should  thy  d.  make  men  hold  their  peace  1 
21.27.  d.  which  ye  wrongfully  imagine  against  ma 

Ps.  10.  2.  let  them  be  taken  in  the  d.  they  imagined 
.33.10.he  maketh  the  d.  of  the  people  of  none  effect 
37.  7.  for  the  man  who  bringeth  wicked  d.  to  pass 

Prov.  1.  31.  and  be  filled  with  their  own  d. 

12.  2.  but  a  man  of  wicked  d.  will  he  condemn 
19.  21.  there  are  many  d.  in  a  man's  heart 

/«a.32.  7.  he  deviseth  wicked  d.  to  destroy  the  poor 
66.  t  4. 1  also  will  choose  th"ir  d.  and  bring  fears 

Jrr.  11.  19.  that  they  had  devised  d.  against  me 
18.  12.  no  hope,  but  we  will  walk  after  our  own  d. 

18.  come  and  let  us  devise  d.  against  Jeremiah 
7?an.ll.24.yea,nnd  he  shall  forecast  his  d.for  a  time 

25.  for  they  shall  forecast  d.  against  him 
2  Cor.  2.  11.  for  we  are  not  ignorant  of  his  d. 

DEVIL, 
A  most  wicked  angel,  the  implacable  enemy  and 
tempter  of  the  human  race,  especially  believers 
whom  he  desires  to  devour,  1  Pet.  5.  8.  He  i» 
called,  Abaddon  in  Hebrew;  Apollyon  in  Greek, 
that  is,  destroyer.— Hnv.  9.  11,  Angel  of  the 
bottomless  pit. — Prince  of  the  world,  John  12. 
31. — Prince  of  darkness,  Eph.  6.  12.— j?  roar- 
inn-  Dion,  and  an  Adversary,  1  Pet.  5.  8. — A 
simur  from  the  beginning,  1  John  3.  8. — Beel- 
zebub, Mat.  12.  ^i.— Accuser,  Rev.  12.  \Q.— Be- 
lial, 2  Cor.  6.  15.— X)eceit)fr,  Rev.  20.  10.— 
Dragon,  Rev.  12.  7.— Liar,  John  8.  44.— 
Leviathan,  Isa.  27.  1. — Lucifer,  Isa.  14.  12.— 
Murderer,  John  8.  44. — Serpent,  Isa.  27.  1. — 
Satan,  Job  2.  ^—Tormentor,  Mat.  18.  34.— 
The  god  of  this  world,  2  Cor.  4.  4. 


DEV 

He  is  cjmpared  to  a  J)o^,  Psal.  23.  16. — Foals, 
Mat.  13.  i.—.i  Fowler,  Psal.  91.  3.— Z-tVAt- 
iiin/^,  Luke  10.  18. — Locusts,  Kcv.  9.  3. — A 
Wolf,  Joliii  10.  12.— Wn  Jlddcr,  Psal.  91.  13. 

T/usc  names  are  given  to  the  prince  oftheDevits, 
icho,  ptr/iaps,  was  thejirst  and  leader  in  that 
grand  rebellion  agatnst  God,  wliereOy  tluy  all 
Jell  into  a  rooted  enmity  again iitliolincss, and  in- 
to endless  horror,blackness,and  iJespiiir,Judct}. 

Jjcvil  is  put  for,  [IJ  Idols,  Psal.  10(3. 37.  2  Chron. 
11.  15.  [iij  Jl  wicked  man,  John  C.  70.  [3J 
Persecutors,  Rev.  'i.  10. 

This  icord  comes  from  the  frrc(A-,Diabolos,  which 
signifies  a  Calumniator,  or  Accuser,  irho  uc- 
cueelli  U8  before  Goil/iay  njid  night,  Jiev.  12 
9.  10.  Hence  he  is  called.  The  accuser  of  llit 
brethren.  Hen.  12.  10.  JJe  hath  cast  off  all 
obedience  to  Ood;  and  likewise  cu//fi/ Uulial, 
which  is  a  Hebrew  word,  and  signifies  one  who 
IS  good  for  nothing,  a  libertine,  one  that  is  cx- 
iremclij  wicked.  2  Cor.  b. 15,  What  concord  liath 
Christ  Willi  Hclial  1  .ilso  Satan,  which  signi- 
fies an  Adversary,  or  an  Accuser,  in  a  court  of 
justice.  Job  2. 1,  Satan  came  also  among  them. 
//e  is  likewise  called  the  old  Serpent,  liec.  12.  9. 
Because  he  conveyed  himself  into  the  serrpent, 
wlicn  he  tempted  Eve ;  and  in  respect  of  his 
serpentine  disposition ;  his  poison  is  always 
ready,as  in  afountuin;  and  runneth  continually 
as  in  full  streams,  both  against  Christ  and 
agaitist  all  his  members  for  his  sake:  He  is 
also  crafty,  wise,  and  subtle,  as  u  serpent; 
concerning  whose  subtilty,  see  Skrpk.nt. 

77/  e  viost  subtle  of  these  spirits  contrived  a  temp- 
tation, which  might  be  must  t<iking  and  danger- 
ous to  man  in  his  exalted  an^l  hnp/iy  slate:  He 
attempts  him  with  art,by  pro/ntanUing  the  lure 
of  knowledge  and  pleasure,  to  inveigle  the  spi- 
ritual and  sensitive  appetites  atunce.  .-Ind  that 
he  might  the  better  succeed,he  addressed  the  wo- 
man, tlie  weakest  and  most  liable  to  seduction. 
He  hides  himself  in  the  body  of  a  serpent, uhich 
before  sin  was  not  terrible  unto  her,  and  by  (/«.* 
tn.<lranent  insinuates  his  temptation.  He  first 
allured  with  the  hopes  of  impunity.  Ye  sliall  not 
die;  then  he  promised  an  universal  knowledge 
of  good  and  evil.  By  these  pretences  he  ruined 
mnoceiue  itself.  For  the  woman,  deceived  by 
these  specious  attractivrSjS  wallowed  the  poisiin 
of  the  serpent;  aiid,having  tasted  dealh,sheper- 
s  itaded  her  husband,  by  the  same  motives,  to  de- 
spise the  law  of  their  (.Ireator.  Thus  sin  en- 
tered, and  brought  confusion  into  the  world. 

Man,  since  his  fall,  is  under  the  tyranny  and 
slavery  of  Satan,  who  is  called  the  god  of  this 
world,  2  Cor.  4.  4.  because  he  rules  in  wicked 
men.  Jiis  old  enmity  and  hatred  against  the 
souls  of  men  continue  :  It  is  another  hell  to  hhn 
to  see  them  restored  to  the  favour  of  God,  and 
his  "lorious  image  re-engraven  on  them.  He  is 
a  jealous  jailer,  and,  if  possible,  will  not  lose 
any  of  his  captives.  The  scriptvre  represents 
him  as  a  strong  and  subtle  adversary ;  a  roar- 
ing lion  that  goes  about  seeking  whom  he  may 
devour,  1  Pet.  5.8.  His  title,  the  Tempter,  Mat. 
<.  3.  implies  his  constant  practice.  He  bribes 
some  with  profit,  and  allures  others  with  plea- 
sure. He  is  surjtrisingly  subtle;  his  strength 
is  superior  to  ours  ."  Ai.v  malice  is  deadly  ;  his 
activity  and  diligence  are  equal  to  his  malice; 
and  he  has  a  mighty  number  of  principalities 
and  powers  under  his  command. 

iotiirtimcs  dfvil  is  taken  for  a  tciekcd  man, a  liber- 
tine, a  treacherous  person,  John  6.  70,  Have 
not  I  choncn  vou  twelve,  and  one  of  you  in  u 
di-vil  ?  /(  is  'taken  also  for  idols,  2  Chron.  1 1 . 
15.  so  called,  because  thi  dovll  is  eminently 
served  in  the  wnr.thip  of  litem  ;  and  the  spirits 
which  were  supposed  to  inhabit  them,  were  eril 
spirits  or  devils :  and  because  in  anil  by  lliem 
(Ac  devil  oftentimes  manifested  himself  to  men, 
and  gave  them  answers,  and  received  their 
worship.  Their  worship  is  an  invention  of 
the  di  nil ;  for  what  other  deity  besides  the 
devil  could  rei/uire  human  victims,  like  those 
that  were  sacrificed  to  Moloch  1  Devil  is  like- 
tnise  taken  for  persecutors,  those  instruments 
which  he  makes  use  of  in  eirculing  his  wicked 
designs  against  the  godly.  Rev.  2.  10. 

I/r;«t  he  fall  into  tlie  condonination  of  the  devil, 
1  Tim.  3.6.  /.est  he  become  guiltii  of  the  sin  for 
which  Ihedrvil  wns  condemned,and so  receive  the 
same  punishment  which  was  infiicled  upon  him. 

Mat.  4.  1.  Jcnuii  was  led  to  bo  tempted  of  the  d. 
."i.rf.lnketh  him  up  to  holy  cityll  II.  rf.  lonveth  him 
8.  thn  rf.  taketh  him  up  to  a  hi;;li  mountain 
*.  32.  u  dumb  man  povsciwed  with  n  d.  12.  22. 
It.  18.  and  they  say  ho  hnth  n  d.  Luke  7.  :i1. 
IX  39.  the  enemy  that  »owcd  iIi'mu  is  ihe  rf. 
"5.  22  dauciiler  is  grievously  vexed  with  a  d. 
130 


DEV 

./VaM7.18.Je»us  rebuked  rf.  he  departed  out  ofhim 
25.  41.  fire,  prepared  for  the  rf.  and  his  angela 
J)/urA'5.15.him  that  was  possessed  with  therf.lti,18. 
7.  29.  the  rf.  is  gone  out  of  thy  daughter,  30. 
Luke  4.  2.  Jesus  being  lorty  days  tempted  of  the  rf. 
3.  the  rf.  said  to  him,().  [|  5.  the  rf.  taking  him  up 
13.  when  tlie  rf.  had  ended  alt  the  tciiiplatioii 
33.  a  man  which  had  a  spirit  of  an  unclean  rf. 
35.  and  when  the  rf.  had  tiirown  him  in  the  midst 
8.l2.then  Cometh  thurf.  and  laketh  away  the  word 
29.  wag  driven  of  the  rf.  into  the  wilderness 
0.  42.  as  ho  wus  coming  tlie  rf.  throw  him  down 

11.  14.  casting  out  u  rf.  when  the  rf.  was  gone  out 
.John  (i.  70.  chosen  tsvelve,  and  one  of  you  is  a  rf. 

7.  20.  the  people  said,  thou  hast  a  rf.  8.  48. 

8. 44.  ye  arc  of  your  father  rf.  and  his  lusts  will  do 
49.1  have  nut  a  rf.||52.wekiiow  that  thou  hast  arf. 
10.  20.  many  of  them  said,  he  hath  a  rf. 
21 .  these  arc  not  the  words  of  hini  that  hath  a  rf. 
13.  2.  tlie  d.  having  put  into  the  heart  of  Judas 
Jlcts  10.  38.  healing  all  that  were  oppressed  of  rf. 
13.  lO.'O  lull  of  all  mischief,  thou  cliild  of  the  rf. 
Eph.  4.  27.  neither  give  place  to  the  rf. 
0.11. maybe  able  to  stand  against  the  wiles  of  thcrf. 

1  Tivi.  3. 6.  he  fall  into  the  coiiderunation  of  the  rf. 
7.  lest  he  fall  into  reproach,  and  siiure  of  the  rf. 

2  7V»H.2.2t).may  recov. themselves  out  ofsnare  of  rf. 
Ileb.  2.  14.  had  the  power  of  d<atli,  that  is  the  rf. 
.Jam.  4.  7.  resist  the  rf.  and  he  will  tlee  from  you 
1  Pet.  5.  8.  watch,  because  your  adversary  the  rf. 

1  John  3.  8.  he  that  coniniittelh  sin  is  of  the  rf.that 

ho  might  destroy  the  works  of  the  rf. 
10.  in  this  the  children  of  the  rf.  are  manifest 
.hide  9.  Michael,  when  conlending  with  the  rf. 
Rev.  2.  10.  the  rf.  shall  cost  some  into  prison 

12.  9.  the  old  serpent  called  the  rf.  and  Satan 
12.  for  the  rf.  is  comedown  to  you  having  power 

20.  2.  that  old  serpent,  which  is  the  rf.  aiul  Satan 
lO.rf.that  deceived  them  was  cast  into  lake  ol  lire 
UEVILISU. 
Jam.  3.  15.  this  wisdom  is  earthly,  sensual,  rf. 

DEVILS. 
Lev.  17.  7.  shall  no  more  otter  their  sacrifices  to  rf. 
IJeut.  32.  17.  they  sacriticed  to  rf.  not  to  God 

2  Chron.  II.  15.  he  ordained  him  priest  for  the  rf. 
Ps.  10()..37.  saciiliced  their  sons  and  daughters  to  rf. 
J)/at.4.24.  brought  him  those  which  were  posses.'ied 

with  rf.  8.  Ki,  28,  33.  Mark  1.  32.  Luke  8.  3(). 

8. 31.  so  the  rf.  besought  liim,  saying,  Mark  5. 12. 

Mark  9.  38.  Master,  we  saw  one  casting  out  rf.  in 

thy  name,  and  he  lolloweth  not  us,  J^iikc  9.  49. 

lli.  17.  in  my  name  shall  they  cast  out  rf. 

J,uke4.  41.  and  rf.  also  came  out  of  many,  saying 

8.  2.  Mary  Magdalene,  out  of  whom  went  seven  rf. 
3').  by  what  moans  he  that  was  possessed  of  rf. 

9. 1.  he  gave  them  power  and  authority  over  alt  rf. 
10.  17.  Lord,  even  the  rf.  are  subject  to  us 

13.  32.  go  and  tell  that  fo.v,  behold,  I  cast  out  rf. 
1  Cor.  10. 20.  Gentiles  sacrificed  to  rf.  and  not  to  G. 

1  would  not  ye  should  have  fellowship  with  rf. 

21.  ye  cannot  drink  the  cup  of  Ihe  Lord  and  cup 

of  rf.  of  tlie  Lord's  table  and  of  the  table  of  rf. 

1  7'iin.  4.  1.  some  giving  heed  to  doctrines  of  rf. 
./am.  2.  19.  the  rf.  al.so  believe  and  tremble 
liev.Q.'iO.  that  they  should  not  worship  rf.  and  idols 

IG.  14.  for  they  are  spirits  of  rf.  working  miracles 

18.  2.  Babylon  is  become  the  habitation  of  rf. 

isec  Cast. 

DEVISE. 

F.iod.  31.  4.  rf.  cunning  works  in  gold,  silver,  35.35. 

35. 32.  to  rf.  curious  works  in  gold,silver,and  brass 

2.S0M.  14.14.  yet  doth  he  rf.  means  that  his  banished 

Psal.Wi.  4.  be  brought  to  confusion,  that  rf.  my  hurt 

20.  but  they  rf.  deceitful  mailers  against  them 
41.7.  against  me  do  they  rf.  my  hurt 
/'rut'.  3.  29.  rf.  not  evil  against  thy  neiiilibour 

14.  22.  do  they  not  err  that  d.  evil  ^  but  merry 

and  truth  sliall  be  to  them  that  rf.  uoikI 
11).  30.  Ire  shiilleth  his  eyes  to  rf.  fioward  things 
Jer.  \6.  11.  behold,  I  rf.  a  device  against  you 

IH.  come  and  let  us  rf.  devices  against  Jeremiah 
Kick.  11.  2.  these  arc  the  men  that  rf.  mischief 
jl/ic.2.1  .woe  to  them  that  rf.  iniquity  and  work  evil 
3.  behold,  against  this  family  do  I  rf.  on  evil 
DEVISED. 

2  -S/ini.  21.  .5.  man  that  consumed  us  rf.  against  ui 
1  Kings  12.  33.  month  which  lierf.of  his  own  hcait 
F.sth.i.'i.  his  device  that  he  had  rf.agaiiisl  the  JewB 

.1.  let  it  be  written  to  reverse  letters  rf.  by  Ilamnn 
Psal.  31.  13.  they  rf.  to  take  away  my  life 
./rr.l  1 .19.knew  not  thai  they  had  rf.  devices  against 
4H.  2.  in  Ileshbon  Ihcy  have  rf.  evil  against  it 
.'il.  12.  Ihe  L.  hath  both  rf.  and  dune,  Lam.  2. 17. 
2/'f£.1.16.wcliave  not  followed  cunningly  rf.  fublo^ 

DEVISETH. 
Ps.  3fi.  4.  he  rf.  mischief  on  his  bed,  abhors  not  evil  | 
.12.  2.  lliy  tongue  rf.  mischief  like  a.  sharp  razor    | 
/'row.0.14.1icrf.miBchiefconliiiuBlly,so»elh  discord . 

18.  a  heart  that  rf.  wicked  imaginations 
/'roti.lG.9.maii'K  heart  rf.his  w  ay,L.  d  icclolh  stepi  | 


DEV 

Prov.  W.S.  d  to  do  evil  shall  be  called  mbchlevobt 

/id. 32. 7.  he  rf.  wicked  devices  to  destroy  the  poor 

8.  but  the  liberal  rf.  Iil>eral  things,  and  sliall  stand 

DEVOTE. 

Lev.  27.  28.  thing  that  a  man  shall  rf.  to  the  Lord 

DEVOTED. 
Lev.  27. 21.  shall  be  holy  to  the  Lord,  as  a  6eld  d 
28.  no  rf.  thing  sold,  every  rf.  thing  is  most  holy 
J^'uvi.  18.  14.  every  thing  rf.  in  Israel  chull  be  tliiue 
JJeut.VJ.  t  17.  there  shall  cleave  notning  of  rf.tliing 
Josh.6.  t  17.  the  city  shall  be  rf. even  it  and  all  ic  it 
F.ira  10.  t  8.  all  his  substance  sliall  be  rf. 
/'.■Ja/. 119.38.  wold  to  thy  servant,  who  is  rf.  thy  fear 
F.iek.  44.  t  29.  every  rf.  thing  shall  be  liieirs 

DEVOTIONS. 
Acts  17.  23.  for  as  I  passed  by  and  bclicld  your  rf. 

DEVOUR 
Signifies,  [1]  To  eat  up,or  swallow  down  greedily. 
Gen.  37.  20.     [2]  To  waste,  or  spend  riotously, 
Luke   15.  30.     [3]  By  cunning   pretences    to 
defraud  others  of  that  which  is  theirs.  Mat. 
23.  14.     [4]   IVilh  cruel  fierceness  to  tear,  and 
spoil  spiritually  the  sonls  aiid  bodies  of  mtn, 
as  a  lion  devours  his  prey.     1  Pet.  5.  8,  Tha  ■ 
devil  walketh  about,  seeking  whom  he  may  de- 
vour.    [5]   7'i»  kill,  or  destroy,  2  Sam.  18.  8. 
[(>]   To  convert  one's  own  private  use  Uiat 
which  is  dedicated  to  Ood,  Prov.  20.  25. 
Cien.  49.  27.  in  the  morning  he  shall  u.  the  prey 
Deul.  32.  42.  arrows  with  blood,  and  sword  rf.  Ilesh 
2  ium.2.2G.  A  bncr  said,  shall  the  sword  rf.  forever  1 
18.  t  8.  and  the  wood  multiplied  to  rf.  'he  people 
2  Chron.  7.  13.  if  I  coinmind  Ihe  locusts  to  rf. 
Job  18.  13.  first-born  of  death  shall  rf.  his  strength 
Psal.  80.  13.  the  wild  beasts  of  the  field  doth  d.  it 
Prov.  ."fO.  14.  and  their  jaw-teeih  as  knives  to  rf. 
Isa.  1. 7.  your  Uiml  strangers  rf.  it  in  your  presence 
9.  12.  they  shall  rf.  Israel  with  opi-n  mouth 

18.  for  wickedness  shall  rf.  the  briers  and  thorns 
31.  8.  the  sword,  not  of  a  mean  man,  shall  d.  hini 
42.  14.  I  will  cry,  I  will  desiroy  and  d.  at  once 
5(5.9.  all  ye  beasts  of  the  field  come  lo  d.  yea,  aU 
ye  beasts  in  the  forest,  .ler.  12.  9.  |  15.  .3. 
./i!!r.2.3.thatd.IsriRl  r^hull  oireiid,evil  come  on  thcno 
12.  12.  the  sword  of  Ihe  Lord  ^haH  rf.  4fi.  10,  14. 
30.  Ifi.  and  all  that  d.  thee  shall  be  devoured 
48.  45.  a  flame  shall  rf.  the  corner  of  Moah 
F.zek.  7.  15.  famine  and  pestilence  slmll  rf.  him 

34.  23.  ncitlier  shall  the  beasts  of  the  land  d. 

35.  t  12.  the  mour  (ains,  tlioy  are  given  us  to  d. 
3(5.  14.  therefore  shall  tlimi  rf.  men  no  more 

Dan.  7.  5.  arise  rf.  mu(  h  flesh  ||  23.  rf.  whole  earth 
Hos.  5.  7.  now  shall  a  month  rf.  them  with  portion* 

11.  6.  and  the  sword  shall  rf.  liis  branches 
13.8.lliere  will  I  rf.  them  like  alion.shall  tear  then 

Amos  1.  4.  fire  shall  d.  the  palaces,  7.  10,  12. 
Ubai.  18.  they  shall  Uindh'  in  them,  and  d.  them 
jVah.  2.  13.  ibe  sword  shall  d.  the  young  lions 
Hab.'i.  14.  their  rejoicing  was  as  to  rf.  poor  secretly 
ZccA  9.  15.  they  shall  rf.  and  subdue  with  stonti 

12.  6.  they  eliall  rf.  nil  the  people  round  about 
Mat.  23.  14.  woo  unto  vou,  hypocrites,  for  ye  d, 

widows'  houses,  Mark  12.  40.  Luke  20.  47. 
2  Cor.  11.  20.  for  ye  sutler,  if  a  man  d.  you 
(ial.  5.  15.  but  if  ye  bite  and  d.  one  anoiher 
Heb.  10.  27.  indigna.  which  shall  d.  ihc  adversaries 
1  /Vt.5.8.  walketh  iib<iu',  seeking  whom  he  may  (i. 
Rev.  12.  4.  to  d.  her  chid  as  soon  as  it  was  boro 

Fire  DEVOUR. 
Jiidg.  9.  15.  let  fire  d.  the  cedars  of  Lrbnnon 

2().let/rf  d.  iIk?  men  orSliechem,and  Abiinelech 
Psal'Z\.9.  sliail  swallow  up,  and  ^<rc  shall  d.  them 

50.  3.  God  shall  ronie,  a.  fire  shall  d.  before  him 
/»u.2(5.11.ye!i,tlie_/trf  oft  hine  enemies  snail  rf.thcni 

33.  11.  stubble,  your  breath  nafire  shaii  rf.  you 
Kirk.  15.  7.  and  another/Ire  shall  rf.  them 

2.3.  37.  lo  pass  for  them  through  Xhvfire  to  rf.  them 
Amos  5.  6.  list  he  bn  ak  out  hkf  fire  and  rf.  il 
Jfah.  3. 13. 1  he  sales  ojien,  ihe  yin' shall  rf.  thy  bars 
15.  there  shall  ihe. ft  re  rf.  line,  swoid  cut  thee  oiT 
Zech.  11.1.0  Lebanon,  tlintjlrr  may  d.  thy  ccdan 

It  shall  DEVOUR. 
.Tab  18.  13  1/  shall  rf.  the  strcnsth  of  his  skin 
ha  10. 17.  i(  .■^hall  burn  and  rf.  his  tho-ns  11  ml  briers 
Jcr.T\.\\.\  will  make  my  words  fie,  if  .«A(i//d.thcm 

17.27.1  will  kindle  a  fire  and  it  shall d.  the  puhice* 
of  Jeruvairm,  and  not  be  quenched,  Amos  2.  5 

21.  14.  it  shall  d.  all  tilings  round  about,  50.  32. 
F.zek.  20.  47.  il  shall  rf.  every  preen  tree 

2-^.  18.  it  sh'jil  rf.  and  I  will  bring  thee  lo  nshes 
Hos.  a.  14.  and  it  shall  d.  the  pnlni  r»  of  .ludab 
Amos  1.  14.  it  shall  d.  the  palaces  of  Rabbah 

2.  2.  send  a  fire,t7  shall  d.  ihc  palaces  of  Kirioth 

DEVOURED. 
<7(Ti.31. 15.  he  hath  sold  us, and  quite  rf.  our  money 

37.  20.  will  say,  some  evil  be.isl  hath  d.  him,  33. 

41.  7.  the  seven  thin  ears  d.  the  .^oxni  rank,  84. 
/.ev.  10.  2  there  went  fire  from  Ihe  L.  and  rf.  them 
J\r,im.  2(5.  10.  «  hat  lime  the  fire  d.  2.')t)  men 
Deul.  31.  17.  I  will  hide  my  face,  thoy  shall  be  4 


DEW 

Deut.  3?.  34.  they  Bliall  be  d.  witli  burning  heat 

2  Ham.  18.  8.  the  woud  d.  more  tliaii  the  sword  d. 
\ii.  9.  and  fire  out  of  his  mouth  d.  Psal.  18.  8. 

Ps.  78.45.  he  sent  divers  8orl3  of  tiies  which  t/.them 
79.  7.  for  they  have  d.  Jacob,  and  laid  waste  liis 
105.  35.  the  lucuals  d.  the  fruit  of  their  ground 

/>o.  1.  20.  if  rebel,  ye  shall  be  d.  with  the  sword 
24.  6.  therefore  hath  the  curse  d.  the  earth 

Jer.  2.  30.  your  sword  hath  d.  the  prophets 
3. 24.  for  shame  hath  d.  the  labour  of  our  fathers 
8. 16.  for  they  are  come,  and  have  d.  the  land 
10.  25  for  thfiy  have  eaten  up  Jacob,  ami  d.  him 
30.  If  all  they  that  devour  thee  shall  be  d. 
5U.  7  all  that  found  them  have  d.  them 

17  first,  the  king  of  Assyria  lialh  d.  him 
51.  34.  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  Babylon  d.  me 

Lam  4.  1).  it  halii  d.  the  foundations  thereof 

F.zek.  15. 5.  how  much  less  when  the  fire  hath  d.  it 
16.  20.  hast  sacrificed  thy  sons  to  them  to  be  d. 
i9.  3.  it  learned  to  catch  the  prey,  it  d.  men,  6. 
14.  fire  is  gone  out,  which  hath  d.  her  fruit 

22.  25.  like  a  roaring  lion,  they  have  d.  souls 

23.  25.  and  thy  residue  shall  be  d.  by  the  fire 
33. 27.  I  will  give  to  the  beast  to  be  d.  39.  4. 

Dan.1.1.  it  (^.  and  brake  in  pieces,  and  stamped,  19. 
Hos.  7.  7.  they  are  hot,  and  have  d.  their  judges 
9.strangerB  have  rf.his  strength, he  knoweth  it  not 
Joel  1.  19.  for  fire  hath  d.  the  pastures,  20. 
Amos  4.  9.  your  fig-trees,  the  palmer-worm  d.  them 
7.  4.  to  contend  by  fire,  and  it  d.  the  great  deep 
JVaA.  1.  10.  they  shall  be  d.  as  stubble  fully  dry 
2f;;A.1.18.1and  shall  be  rf.by  the  fire  of  hisjealousy 
3.8.all  the  earlh  shall  be  rf.with  fire  of  my  jealousy 
Zeck.  9.  4.  and  Tyrus  shall  be  d.  with  fire 
Mat.  13.  4.  fowls  came  and  d.  them,  Mark  4.  4. 
jMke  8.  5. 
Luke  15.  30.  this  thy  son  who  hath  d.  thy  living 
Rev.  20.  9.  fire  came  down  from  (*od  and  d.  them 

DEVOURER. 
Mai.  3.  11.  I  will  rebuke  the  d.  for  your  sakes 

DEVOUREST. 
Ezek.  36. 13.  because  they  say,thou  land  d.  up  men 

DEVOURETH. 
2  .Sam.  11. 25.  the  sword  d.  one  as  well  as  another 
Prov.  19.  28.  the  mouth  of  thfl  wickeil  d.  iniquity 
20.25.a  snare  to  the  man  who  d.  that  which  is  holy 
Jsa.  5.24. as  fire  d.gtubble,and  flame  chaff,  .hcl  2.5. 
Lam.  2.  3.  like  a  tlaming  fire  which  d.  round  about 
Ezek.  15.  4.  behold,  the  fire  d.  both  the  ends  of  it 
Joel  2.  3.  a  fire  d.  before  them,  behind  them  a  flame 
ffab.l.l3.  the  wicked  d.man  that  is  more  righteous 
Rev.  11.  5.  if  any  hurt  them,  fire  d.  their  enemies 

DEVOURING. 
BiO(i.24.17.hiB appearance  wasliked-fireon  mount 
Psal.  52.  4.  thou  lovesl  all  d.  words,  O  tongue 
fsa.  29.  6.  thou  shall  be  visited  with  d.  fire,  30.  30. 
30.  27.  and  his  tongue  is  as  a  d.  fire 
33. 14.  who  among  us  shall  dwell  with  the  d.  fire? 

DEVOUT. 
iiuAe2.25.Simeon  was  just  andrf.waitingforconsol. 
Acts  2.  5.  there  were  at  Jerusalem  Jews,  d.  men 
8.2.  d.  men  carried  Stephen  to  his  burial,  lament. 
10.  2.  Cornelius  was  a  d.  man  ||  7.  a  d.  soldier 
13.  50.  but  the  Jews  stirred  up  the  d.  women 
17.  4.  of  the  d.  Greeks  a  great  multitude  believed 
17.  Paul  disputed  with  the  Jews  and  d.  persons 
22.  12.  Ananias  a  d.  man,  according  to  the  law 

DEW 
Is  a  small  rain .,whichi'f  ailing  on  the  ground  in  the 
morning, doth  keep  it  moist,  and  make  it  fruit- 
ful. In  warm  countries,  and  inplaccs  where  it 
rainsbut  seldom,  the  night-dews  supply  in  some 
sort  the  want  of  rain,  ^nd  therefore  the  bestow- 
ing of  it  is  a  blessing  from  God,  Deut.  33. 13, 
Blessed  of  the  Lord  be  Joseph's  land  for  the 
dew;  and  the  withholding  of  it  a  curse:  2  Sam. 
1.  21,  Ye  mountains  of  Gilboa,  let  there  be  no 
dew  on  you.  Husbai  compares  an  army  sally- 
ing upon  the  enemy  to  the  dew  descending  on 
the  ground,  2  Sam.  17.  12.  God  promises  to  be 
as  the  dew  unto  Israel,  Hos.  14.  5.  Though  they 
mere  as  withered  and  dying  grass,  yet  he  would 
refresh  and  strengthen  them :  By  bestowing 
upon  them  his  grace  and  Spirit,  he  would  make 
them  fruitful  and  flourishing.  This  compari- 
to-i  of  God's  eisilaliim  of  his  people  to  dew,  is 
remarkable  in  scrernl  places  of  scripture.  Isa. 
26.  19,  Thy  dew  U  as  the  dew  of  herbs  ;  Or,  thy 
cew  is  a  bright  dew,  a  dew  of  light  and  dawn. 
The  prophet  there  speaks  of  the  captivity  of 
Babylon,  as  of  a  slate  of  death:  Thy  dead  men 
shall  live;  but  God's  visitation  of  his  peoplii, 
his  favour  and  blessing,  would  recover  them  in 
some  sort  to  life  and  light,  would  wake  them 
revive  and  flourish  again.  Heavenly  doctrine, 
or  the  word  of  God,  is  likewise  compared  to 
dew,  Deut.  32.  2,  My  speech  shall  distil  as  the 
dew  :  My  doctrine  shall  have  the  same  effect 
upon  your  hearts , as  tA«dew  Aa<  upon  the  earth; 
it  shall  make  them  soft,  pliable,  and  fruitful.  I 
131 


DID 

TheprophetlloSQa,speaking  of  the  goadness  of 
hypocrites,  compares  it  to  the  earjy  dcio  thai 
soon  goeih  away,  that  is  soon  exhaled  by  the 
heat  of  the  sun,  Hos.  0.  4.  JJrolhirly  love,  or 
the  communion  of  saints, is  compared  to  the  dew 
which  falls  upon  the  hdl  of  Hernion,  and  re- 
freshes and  makes  it  fruitful,  f'.>al.  i:t3.  3.  .'Is 
the  drops  of  dew  are  innumerable,  and  as  they 
fall  suddenly  and  secretly  without  being  per- 
ceived:  In  allusion  to  these  (jualities''vf  the 
dew,  such  as  were  converted  to  Christ  in  the 
earliest  gospel  times,  arc  compared  to  it,  Psal. 
110.  3,  I'iiou  hast  the  dew  of  ihy  yuulh.  /(  is 
said,  Cant.  5.  2,  My  head  is  filled  wiili  Ucw,  and 
niy  locks  with  the  drops  of  the  night.  Clirisl 
here  alludes  to  the  custom  of  lovers,  who  often 
and  willingly  suffer  such  inconveniences  for 
Uuir  hopes  and  desires  of  enjoying  their  be- 
loved, and  signifies  his  sufferings  for  the 
church's  good:  elsewhere,  for  a  man  to  be  wet 
with  the  dew  of  heaven,  is  a  sign  of  misery, 
Dan.  4.  25.  i'o  drops,  or  droppings,  signify 
troubles,  Amos  G.  t  11.  BiU  dew  and  rain 
upon  the  land  make  it  fruitful ;  so  is  Christ 
by  his  doctrines  to  his  church,  Deut.  32.  2. 

Gen.  27.  28.  God  give  tliee  of  the  d.  of  heaven,  30. 

£xod.  16.13.  in  tlie  morning  d.  lay  round  the  host 
14.  and  when  the  d.  that  lay  was  gone  up 

JVum.  11.  9.  when  the  d.  fell  on  the  camp  in  night 

JJeut.32.2.  my  speech  shall  distil  as  d.  as  small  rain 
33. 13.  blessed  is  Joseph's  land  for  d.  and  for  deep 
28.  also  his  heaven  shall  droji  down  d. 

Judg.  6.  37.  Gideon  said,  if  d.  be  on  the  fleece  only 
39.  on  ground  let  there  be  d.  \\  40.  there  wasrf. 

2  Sam.  1.  21.  let  there  be  no  d.  nor  rain  ujion  you 
17. 12.  we  will  fight  on  him  as  the  d.  falletb 

1A7«^517.1. there  shall  not  bei/.nor  rain  these  years 

Job  29.  19.  the  d.  lay  all  night  on  my  branch 
33.  28.  or  who  hath  begotten  the  drops  of  rf.? 

Psal.  110.  3.  thou  hast  the  d.  of  thy  youth 
133.  3.  as  the  d.  of  Herinon,  and  as  the  d.  that 

Prov.  3.  20.  and  the  clouds  drop  down  the  d. 
19.  12.  but  his  favour  is  as  d.  upon  the  grass 

Cant.  5.  2.  open  to  me,  for  my  head  is  filled  with  d. 

Isa.  18.  4.  like  a  cloud  of  rf.  in  the  heat  of  harvest 
2t).19.  for  thy  d.  is  as  the  d.  of  herbs,  earth  cast  out 

Dan.  4. 15.  let  it  be  wet  with  the  d.  of  heaven,  23. 
25.  they  shall  wet  thee  with  the  d.  of  heaven 
3:t.  and  his  body  was  wet  with  the  d.  5.  21. 

//o.«.6.4.goodness  is  as  early  d.  itgoeth  away,  13.3. 

14.  5. 1  will  be  as  d.  to  Israel,  he  shall  grow  as  lily 
Mic.  5.  7.  Jacob  shall  be  as  the  d.  from  the  Lord 
Hag.  1.  10.  the  heaven  over  you  is  stayed  from  d. 
Zech.  8.  12.  and  the  heavens  shall  give  their  d. 

DIADEM. 
.Job  29.  14.  my  judgment  was  as  a  robe  and  a  d. 
Isa.28.5.  and  for  a  d.  of  beauty  to  residue  of  his  peo. 
62.  3.  and  a  royal  d.  in  the  hand  of  thy  God 
Ezek.  21.  26.  remove  the  d.  take  off  the  crown 

DIAL. 
2.K"(no'*20.11.gone  down  in  the  d.of  Ahaz,/sa.38.8. 

DIAMOND. 
Exod.  28.  18.  and  the  second  row  a  d.  39.  11. 
./er.  17.  l.sin  of  Judah  is  written  with  point  of  a  d. 
£zcA.28.13.  the  d.  the  bervl,  was  covering  of  Tyrus 

DID. 
1  Sam.  30.  f  21.  David  asked  tliem  how  they  d. 

1  Kings  11.  25.  besides  the  mischief  that  Hadad  d. 

2  Kings  18. 3.  d.  right  according  to  all  that  David  d. 
JVcA.  2.  16.  knew  not  whilher  I  went  or  what  I  d. 
JEs£A.2.11.Mordccai  walked  to  know  howEsther  d. 
Mat.  12.  3.  have  ye  not  read  what  David  d.t 

21. 15.  when  they  saw  wonderful  things  that  he  d. 
Mark  3.  8.  they  heard  what  great  things  he  d. 
John  2.  23.  they  saw  miracles  which  he  (/.  6.  2, 14. 

4.  29.  who  told  me  all  things  that  ever  I  d.  39. 

9.  26.  then  said  they,  what  d.  he  to  thee  ? 

15.  24.  done  the  works  which  none  other  man  d. 
Jlets  3.  17.  thro'  ignorance  ye  d.  it,  as  d.  yonr  rulers 

26.  10.  which  thing  I  also  d.  in  Jerusalem 
2  Cor.  8.  5.  and  this  they  d.  not  as  we  hoped 

1  Pet.  2.  22.  who  d.  un  sin,  nor  was  guile  found 

DID  joined  with  as. 
Gen.1\.  1.  the  Lord  d.  to  Sarah  as  he  had  spoke 
43.17.  the  man  d.as  Joseph  bnde,and  brought  men 
50. 12.  his  song  d.  to  him  as  he  commanded  thorn 
Eiod.  7.  6.  d.  as  the  Lord  commanded,  10,  20.  |  12. 
28,  50.  I  39.  :J2.  Lev.  8.  4.  |  16.  34.  I  24.  23. 
J^um.  1.  .54.  1  2.  34.  |  20.  27.  j  27.  22.  (  31.  31. 
Lev.  4.  20.  as  he  d.  with  the  bullock,  16.  15. 
JV«7n.  23.  2.  Balak  d.  as  Balaam  hnd  spoken,  30. 
£)<r«f.2.12.(i5  Israel  rf.  to  the  land  of  his  possession 
22.0.?  he  d.  to  children  of  Esau  ||  3.6.(js  d  toSilion 
./b.?A.4.13.watersflowed  over  banks, ff.?ihe'.d. before 
23.  as  the  Lord  your  God  d.  to  the  Rr  i-sca 
10.28.  d.  to  kingof  Makkedah,  ns  he  rf.  I  <  Jericho 
11.  9.  Jn.shua  d.  to  them  as  the  Lord  bade  him 
Judg.  6.  27.  Gideon  d.  as  the  liord  had  s'.id  to  him 
15. 11.  as  they  d.  to  mo,  so  I  have  don  j  to  them 

2  Sam.  3. 36.  as  what  the  king  d.  pleased  the  people 


DID 

3  Sam.  5.  25.  and  David  d.  so  as  the  Lord  comm 

1  A'(ft^s21. Jl. elders  d.  a*  Jezebel  had  sent  to  theio 

26.  Ahab  d.  according  as  d.  the  Arnontes 

2  Kings  8.  18.  Jehor.an,  as  d.  the  house  of  Ahat 
17.  11.  as  d.  the  heathen  which  ilie  Lord  carried 

41.  as  d.  their  fathers,  so  do  they  to  this  day 

1  Chron.  14. 16.  David  d.  as  God  commanded  him 

2  Chr.  25.4.  d.  as  it  is  written  in  the  law  of  Woste* 
/sa.58.2.  seek  me  as  a  nation  that  d.  righteousnes* 
Dan.  6.  10.  Daniel  gave  thanks  as  he  li.albretime 
Mat.  1.  24.  Joseph  d,.  as  the  angel  had  bidden  hira 

21.  6.  and  d.  as  Jesus  conimaridDd  ihern,26.  19. 
28.15.took  money ,so  watch  d.as  they  were  taugbl 

J^uke  9.  54.  and  consume  them,  even  as  Elias  d. 
Jlct^iZ.ll.  thro'  ignorance  ye  did  it, as  rf.your  ruler* 
7.51.ye  resist  II.  Ghost,  as  your  taihers  d.  so  doye 
11.  17. God  gave  them  the  like  gift,  a.slie(y.  to  Uf 
//cfc.4.10.ceascd  from  his  works, us  God  d.  from  hir 

DID  joined  with  evil. 

Gen.  50.  15.  he  will  reriuiie  us  the  ceil  we  d.  hi™ 

17.  forgive  thy  brethren,  for  they  d.  to  thee  evU 

.Judg.  2.  11.  d.  evil  in  the  sight  of  ihe  Lord,  3.  7,12 

I  4.  1.  I  6.  1.  I  10.  6.  I  13.  1.  1  Kings  14.  22. 

I  15.  26,  34.  I  16.  7,  30.  2  Kings  8.  27.  I  13 

2,  11.  I  14.  24.  I  15.  9,  18,  24,  28.   I   17.  2 

2  Chron.  22.  4. 

1  Kings  11.6.  Solomon  rf.  evil  in  sight  of  I  he  Lord 

2  Kings  21.  2.  Manasseh  d.  evil,  2  Chron.  33.  2. 
23.  32.  Jchoahaz  d.  evil  ||  37.  Jehoiakim  a.  evil 
24.9.  Jehoiachin  d.  evil  ||  19.  Zedekiah  a.  evil 

2  Chr.  12.  14.  Rchoboam  rf.  e.  \\  33.  aij.  Arnon  d.  c. 
JVeA.  0.  28.  but  after  they  had  rest,  ihey  d.  evil 

13.7.  understood  the  c.  that  Eliashibr/.  lor  Tobiah 
/sff.65.12.not  hear,  but  d.  e.  before  mine  eyes,  66.  4. 
2  7'i/n.4.14.  Ale.\aiider  cojiper-sinith  d.  me  much  e. 

DID  not. 
Exod.  1.  17.  midwivcs  d.  not  as  king  commanded 
'iKings  ]6.2.Ahaz  d.  n.  what  was  right,2  CA7-.28.1. 
jVcA.  13.  lb.  d.  not  your  fathers  thus,aiid  d.  not  our 
G.  bring  all  this  evil  upon  us  and  upon  this  cityl 
Jer.  11.  8.  commanded  to  do,  but  they  rf.  them  not 
Jonah  3.  10.  God  rejieiited  of  the  evil  and  d.  it  not 
Mat.  13.  58.  he  rf.  nut  many  mighty  works  there 

25.  45.  rf.  it  not  to  one  of  these,  ye  rf.  it  not  to  Die 
John  8. 40.  ye  seek  to  kill  me,  this  rf.  not  Abraham 
2  Cor.  7. 12. 1  rf.it  not  for  his  cause  had  done  wrong 

DID  so. 
Gen.  6.22.  thus  did  Noah,  as  G.  command,  so rf.he 

29.  28.  Jacob  rf.  so  and  fulfilled  her  week 

42.20.  bring  youryoungest  brother,  and  they  rf.  ?o 

Exod.  7.  6.  as  the  Lord  commanded  so  rf.  Ihey,  30. 

I  12.  28,  50.  I  39.  32.  |  40.  16.  J^um.  1.  54. 

22.  magicians  rf.  so,  8.  7,  18.  ||  24.  Lord  rf.  so 
17.6.Moscs  d.so  ||  lO.Josh.  |i  JS'unt.S  3.  Aaron  rf.  so 

JVum.  36. 10.  so  rf.  the  daughters  of  Zeloplichad 
./osA.6.14.thoy  compassed  the  city,sothcyrf.six  days 

11. 15.  so  rf.  Moses  commanded,  and  so  rf.  Joshua 
.fudg.^.  17.  they  rf.  not  so  ||  6.  40.G.  d.  so  that  night 
1  Sam.  1. 7.  as  he  rf.  so  year  by  year, when  she  went 

2.  14.  so  they  rf.  in  Shiloh  to  all  the  Isiaelites 
27.  11.  so  rf.  David,  and  so  will  be  his  manner 

1  Kings  12.  32.  so  rf.  he  in  Beth-el,  sacrificing 
14.  4.  Jeroboam's  wife  d.  so,  and  went  to  Shiloh 

Ezra  6.  13.  so  they  rf.  ||  JVcA.  5.  15.  but  so  rf.  not  I 
/sa.20.  2.  Isaiah  rf.  so,  walkii:g  naked  and  barefoot 
.fer.  38.  12.  Jeremiah  rf.  so  ||  Ezek.  12.  7.  and  I  d.st 
Mat.  9.  19.  Jesus  arose,  and  so  rf.  his  disciples 
I^uke  6.  10.  stretch  forth  thy  hand,  and  he  rf.  so 

26.  so  rf.  their  fathers  to  the  false  prophets 
./oA)il8.15.foHr)wedJesu3  and  so  rf.anothor  disciple 
^c£«19.14.there  were  seven  .sonsof  Slieva  who  d.so 

Thus  DID. 
Gen.  42.  25.  to  fill  their  sacks,  thus  rf.  he  unto  them 
Exod.  36.  29.  thus  rf.  he  to  both  of  them  in  corners 
40.16.<A«.<!  rf.Moses,  according  asLd.cominanded 
A'um.  32.  8.  thus  d.  your  fathers  wheirl  sent  thera 

2  .Sam.  12.  31.  thus  rf.  he  to  all  the  eitiesof  Ammon 
2  Kings  16.16.  thus  d.  Urijnh  the  priest,  according 
2CAr.  2'1. 11.  (Airsthey  rf.  day  bvdav,and  gathered 

31.  20.  thus  d.  Hezekinh  throughout  all  Jiidah 
•Vf  A.  13. 18.  rf.  not  your  fathers  thus,an(\  did  not  G. 
.Job  1.  5.  sanctified  thoin,  thus  d.  Job  continually 

DIDST. 
fi'on.20.  e.'hourf.  this  in  the  integrity  of  thy  heart 
Xiim  21.34.  shnlf  do  as  thou  rf.  to  Sihon,/)(!M«.3.2. 

/«.5A.H.2,shall  do  as  thou  rf.  to  Jericho  and  her  king 
2  .SajH.  12. 12.  for  thou  rf.  it  secretly,  but  I  will  do 

13. 16.  is  greater  than  the  other  that  thou  d.  to  mo 
1  K>\gs  2.  44.  that  thou  rf.  to  David  my  father 

8.  18.  rf.  well  that  it  was  in  thy  heart,  2  CAr.  6.8. 
JVeh.  9.  17.  thy  wonders  that  thou  rf.  among  them 
Psal.  39.  9.  I  was  dumb,  because  thou  rf.  it 
44.1. fathers  told  us  what  work  thoud.in  their  days 
137.t8.recoinpenseth  the  deed  which  thou  rf.  to  un 
fsa.  64.  3.  when  rf.  terrible  things  not  looked  for 
.4cts7.28.  wilt  thou  kill  me  as  thou  rf.  Egyptian? 

DIDRACriMA 
Is  a  Greek  word,  signifying  n  piece  of  money  of 
two  drachms  in  value.  Jl  Didrachm  was  worth 
about  fourtecn-pcnce  English  ;  two  Didrachm*, 


DIE 

two  shillinffs  and  four  pence,  ickich  made  a 
Hebrew  shekel.     Tke  Jews  were  by  the  laic 
obliged  to  pay  every  one  half  a  shekel  to  the 
temple.     It  ta  said  in  Mat.  17.  24.  that  they 
that  received  the  tribute  or  capitation  of  two 
drachiiis,  or  half  a  shekcl,catne  and  demanded 
it  of  our  Saviour ;  and  that  he,  having  sent 
Peter  tojish  in  the  lake,  laid  him,  that  thejirst 
Jish  he  should  lake,  would  have  a  piece  of  mo- 
ney in  its  jnouth,  of  four  drachms  in  value  ; 
that  he  should  take  it,  and  give  it  to  the  re- 
ceivers of  Uiis  tribute  for  both  of  them. 
DIK. 
Sec  on  Dead  and  Death. 
Gen. 6. 17.  every  thing  that  is  in  the  eartli  shall  d. 
33. 13.  if  men  overdrive  lheni,all  the  Hock  will  d. 
44.  9.  let  him  d.  ||  22.  his  father  would  d. 
4«.  3(t.  now  let  me  d.  ||  47. 2y.  that  Israel  must  d. 
Exod.  7.  la  the  fish  that  is  in  the  river  shall  d. 

9. 4.  nothing  aliiiU  d.  that  is  the  children's  of  Israel 
10. 28.  the  dav  thou  seest  my  face  thou  shall  d. 
11.  5.  all  the  iirst-born  in  land  of  Egypt  shall  d. 
2tJ.  43.  when  they  come  to  the  altar  to  minister, 

that  they  hear  not  iniquity  and  d.  Lev.  22.  9. 
Lev.  11.  3y.  if  any  beast  of  which  ye  may  eat  U. 

30.  20.  they  shall  bear  sin,  they  shall  d.  childless 
Jfum.  4. 15.  shall  not  touch  holy  thing,  lest  they  d. 

20.  when  holy  things  are  covered,  lest  they  d. 

6.  9.  if  any  man  d.  very  suddenly  by  him 

14.  35.  in  this  wilderness,  and  there  they  shall  d. 
16.  29.  if  these  d.  the  common  death  ol  all  men 
17. 13.  who  Cometh  near  tabernacle  shall  d.VS.  22. 
18. 3.  not  come  near,  neither  the y,  nor  you  also  d. 
20. 26.  strip  Aaron,  and  he  shall  d.  on  niounl  Hor 
23.  10.  let  me  d.  the  death  of  the  righteous 
27. 8.  speak,  saying,  if  a  man  d.  and  hive  no  son 
Deut.  17.5.  shall  stone  them  that  Ihev  d.  22.  21,24. 
12.  that  man  shall  d.  \\  18.  20.  prophet  shall  d. 
22.  22.  both  shall  d.  |1  25.  the  man  only  shall  d. 

24. 3.  if  the  latter  husband  d.  ||  7.  that  thief  shall  d. 
25.  5.  if  one  d.  and  have  no  childran,  Mark  12. 19. 

31.  14.  to  Moses,  thy  days  approach  that  thou  d. 

32.  50.  behold  land  of  Canaan, and  d.  in  the  mount 
Judg.  10.  30.J^amson  said, let  me  d.  with  I'hilistines 

1  Ham.  2.  3;).  all  the  increase  of  thy  house  shall  d. 
34.  thy  two  sons  in  one  day  they  shall  d.  both 

14. 45.  the  people  said  to  Saul,  shall  Jonathan  d.7 

2  Sam.  li.  :i.  nor  if  half  of  us  d.  will  they  care 

1  Kings  M.12.when  thy  feet  enter  city,child  shall  d. 
2Kings20. 1.  thou  shall  d.andnothve,  Jsa.38. 1. 

2  Chron.  25.  4.  fathers  not  d.  for  the  children,  but 

every  man  shall  d.  for  his  own  sin,  ./er.  31.  3U. 

Job  2.9.'  then  his  wife  said  to  him,  curse  God  and  d. 

4.21. excellency  goelh  away, they  d.  without  wisd. 

12.2.  ye  are  the  people,  wi.sdom  shall  d.  with  you 

14.  8.  thciiigh  the  stock  thereof  d.  in  the  ground 

1 4.a  man  d.  shall  he  live  again?  all  my  days  wait 
:M.20.in  a  moment  shall  they  (i.people  be  troubled 
36.12.  if  obey  not, they  shall  d.  without  knowledge 
14.  they  d.  in  youth,  their  life  is  among  unclean 
P.v. 49.10.  for  he  scelh  that  wise  men  d.  also  the  fool 
104.  29.  thou  takest  away  their  breath,  they  d. 
Prov.  10.  21.  but  fools  d.  for  want  of  wisdom 
F.ccl.  7. 17.  why  shouldest  thou  d.  before  thy  lime? 

9.5.  living  know  they  shall  (/.but  dead  know  not 
/j(0.22.18.a  ball  in  large  country.there  thou  shall  d. 

5l.6.lhey  that  dwell  therein  sh'fill  d.  in  like  manner 
12.  that  shouldest  be  afraid  of  a  manlhal  shall  d. 

65.  20.  for  the  child  shall  d.  a  hundred  years  old 

Jer.  11.22. 1  will  punish  them, young  men  shall  d.hy 

sword,  their  sons  and  daughters  shnll  d.  by  lam. 

16.4.  they  shall  (/.of  grievous  deiiths,  not  lamenleil 
e.both  the  great  and  the  small  shall  dM\  this  land 

28.  16.  thus  saith  Lord,  this  year  thou  shall  d. 

34.5.  but  thou  shall  d.  in  peace,  and  with  burnings 
Kick.  18.  4.  the  soul  ihat  sinneth,  it  shall  d.  20. 

28.  8.  thou  shall  d.  death  of  them  that  are  slain 
10.  thou  shall  d.  (he  deaths  of  Iho  uncirciinieised 

33.  8.  that  wicked  man  shall  d.  in  his  iniquity 
27.  thev  in  the  caves  shall  d.  of  the  pestilunee 

JImos  2.2..Moab  shall  d.  with  liimull,  with  shouting 
0. 9.  if  there  be  ten  men  in  one  house  lliAy  shall  d. 

7.  II.  Amos  saith,  .lerobonm  shall  d.  by  Ihe  sword 
17.  saith  the  Lord,lhou shall  (/.  in  a  polluted  land 

Q.lO.tlie  sinneri  of  mv  people  shall  d.  by  the  sword 

y.cr.h.  11.  9.  then  laid  I,  Ihat  that  dieth,  lot  it  d. 

13. 8.  saith  Loril,  two  parts  shall  bo  cut  off  and  d. 

JI/a£.15.4.honoiir  father  and  molher,lie  that  cutscth 

father  or  moth<T,let  himii.  thodeath,.;War/c7.10. 

22.  '24.  if  a  man  d.  having  no  seed,  l.ukr.  20.  2-1. 

AuJtf20.:i6.nor  can  ihoy  rf.any  more,ec|ual  to  angels 

John  4.  49.  he  saith,  sir,  come  down  ere  iny  chiM  (/. 

11.  50.  that  one  man  d.  for  the  people,  18.  14. 

51. prophesied  thai  Jesus  hIiouIiI  (/.for  Ihat  nation 

12.24.e.xccpt  a  corn  of  wheal  d.  bul  if  il  (/.it  brings 

Rom.  5.  7.  scarcely  for  a  riglileous  man  will  one  d. 

1  Ccr  15. 22.  for  as  in  Adam  all  d.  so  in  Christ  shall 

3f).what  thou  sowest  is  not  quickened  exoept  it  d. 

Heb.  7.  8.  and  here  men  that  ./.  receive  tilhes 

Htv.  14. 13.  blessed  are  ihedjad  ihati/.  in  the  Lord 

132 


DIE 

He  DIE 

G!e7i.38.11.  for  he  said,  lest  Aed.a*  his  brethren  did 

44. 31.  when  he  seeth  the  lad  is  not  with  ua,he  v/iUd. 

Kzod.  21.  12.  he  that  sinitelh  a  man,  so  that  he  d. 

I4.shall  take  him  from  iriine  altar,  that  he  may  d. 

2U.  smite  ins  servaut,  and  he  d.  under  his  hand 

32.  2.  if  a  thief  be  found  and  smillen  that  he  d. 

J\'um.  35. 10.  if  he  smite  him  so  thalAci/.  20,21,23. 

JJeut.  13.  10.  I  19.  5,  11.  1  21.  21. 

17.  wherewith  he  may  d.  18,  23.  Jjeut.  19.  12. 
Deut.  20.  5.  let  him  return,  lest  he  d.  in  battle,  G,  7. 
Judg.  6.  30.  bring  out  thy  sun  that  he  may  d. 

2  Ham.  11.  15.  retire  from  him  that  he  may  d. 
1  Kings  1.  52.  if  wickedness  be  in  him,  he  shall  d. 
2. 1,  tliedays  oI'Daviddrew  nigh  lhalA(?  should  (/. 

19.4.  Elijah  requested  for  himself  that  Ae  inighlt/. 
21.  10.  carry  out  and  stone  him  that  he  may  d. 

Psal.  41.  5.  when  shall  he  d.  and  his  name  perish? 
frou. 5.23./je  shall  d.  witiiout  instruction,  go  astray 
15.  10.  and  he  that  halelli  reproof  shall  d. 

19.  16.  bul  hf  that  despiseth  his  ways  shall  d. 
Jer.  22. 12.  he  shall  d.  w hither  they  led  him  captive 

38. 10.  take  up  Jerem.  out  of  dungeon  before  hed. 
Eiek.  3. 19.  if  thou  warn  the  wicked,  he  shall  d.  in 
his  iniquity,  20.  |  18.  Id,  24,  26.  1  33.  9,  13,  18. 
12. 13.  he  shall  nut  see  il,  though  he  shall  d.  there 
17.  16.  in  the  midst  of  Babylon  he  shall  d. 
J(;/inl2.33.sigaifying  what  death  he  should  d.lS.32. 

I  DIE. 
Gen.  19.  19.  lest  some  evil  take  me,  and  Id. 
2().  9.  Isaac  said,  because  1  said,  lest  /  d.  for  her 

27.  4.  Ihat  my  soul  may  bless  thee  before  /  d. 
3U.  1.  Rachel  said,  give  me  children, or  else  Id. 
45.  23.  I  will  go  and  see  him  before  Id. 

48.  21.  Israel  said  to  Jost-ph,  behold.  Id. 

50.5.  lo.  Id.  II  24.  Joseph  said  to  his  brethren.  Id. 
IJeut.-i.  22.  bul  /must  d.  in  this  land,  I  must  not  go 
./udg.  15.  18.  now  shall  Id.  fur  thirst,  and  fall  into 
Huth  1.17.  where  thoudiest  will  Id.  and  be  buried 

1  ■'Sam.  14.  43.  I  did  but  taste,  and  lo,  /  must  d. 

2  Sam.  19.  37.  that  /  may  d.  in  mine  own  city 
1  Kings  2.  30.  he  said,  nay,  but  /  will  d.  here 
Joi2f.  5.  that  I  sh.  justify  you;  till  Id.  not  remove 

29.18.theii  1  said, /shall  d.  in  my  nest  and  multiply 
Prov.'.M.I.lwit  things,  deny  me  them  not  before  Id. 
Jir.  37.  21).  cause  mo  not  to  return,  lest  /  d.  there 
j1/(j«.26.35.  iho'  /should*/,  with  thee,  Murk  14.31. 
1  Cor.  15. 31. 1  protest  by  your  rejoicing,  /  d.  daily 

JVo£  DIE. 
G(!n.42.2.that  we  may  live  and  not  d.  43. 8.  1  47. 19. 
20.  so  shall  your  words  be  verified,  ye  shall  not  d. 
Exod.  21.  18.  and  he  d.  not,  but  keepeth  his  led 

28.  35.  his  sound  shall  be  heard,  that  he  d.not 
30.  20.  shall  wash  with  water,  that  they  d.  not,  21. 

/yf  «.8.35.keep  the  charge  of  the  Lord  that  ye  d.  not 

15.  31.  that  they  d.  not,  Mim.  4.  19.  |  17.  10. 

10. 2.  that  he  come  not  at  all  times,  that  he  d.  not 

13.  the  cloud  co\>er  the  mercy-scat,  that  he  d.  not 

JV«m.35. 12.  that  the  manslayer,  d.  not,  .losh.  20. 9. 

Dtut.  18.  10.  nor  let  me  see  this  fire,  that  Id.  not 

33.().letRouben  live  and  n.t/.letnolhis  men  be  few 

./u•ll'^\■~^.\<^■:lre  be  to  lhee,fear  not,thou shaltnot  d. 

r.^um.  21).  2.  2  Sam.  12.  13.  |  19.  23.  .hr.  38.24. 

1  Sam.  12.  19.  pray  to  the  L.  fur  us,  that  we  </.  not 

20.  1 4.  shew  nie  the  kindness  of  the  L.  that  Id.  not 

2  /lings  18.:i2.take  yi)U,that  ye  may  live  and  not  d. 
■2  Chron.  25.  4.  fathers  shall  not  d.  for  their  child 
Psal.  118.  17.  I  shall  not  d.  bul  live,  and  declare 
Prov.  23.  13.  if  thou  boate.st  him  with  rod,  he  shall 

notd.  F.iek.  18.  17,21,  28.  \  33. 15.  .fohn  21.23. 
Isa.  51.  14.  and  that  he  should  not  d.  in  the  pit 

66.  24.  their  worm  shall  not  d.  nor  fire  quenched 
.hr.  11.  21.  that  thou  (/.  not  by  our  hand 

34.  4.  Zedekiah,  thou  shall  not  d.  by  the  sword 
F.ifk.  13.  19.  to  slay  the  souls  that  should  not  d. 

1  lab.  1.  12.  we  shall  not  d.  L.  thou  hast  ordaini^d 
John  6.  50.  that  a  man  may  eat  thereof,  and  not  d. 

21.  23.  saying  that  that  disciple  should  not  d. 

Surely  DIE. 
nen.  2. 17.  thou  shall  xurely  d.  20. 7. 1  Sam.  14.  44. 
I  22.  16.  1  Kin"s  2.  37,  42.  Jer.  26.  8.  Kick.  3. 

18.  I  33.  8,  14. 

3.  4.  the  serpent  said,  ye  shall  not  surrhj  d. 
A'um.  26.  65.  ihe  L.IkkI  snid,  they  shall  surely  d. 
. /«(/^.13.22.we shall. »iirW«  (/.because  we  have  seen 
l*a/H.14.:(y.  Iho'  in  Jimnlli.  my  son.heshall  surcli/ 
(/.20.3I.2  .S(i/n.l2.  .5.  2  KingsK  10.  F.iek.  18.  13. 

2  .Sow.  12.  14.  the  child  born  lo  iheo  shall  surely  d. 
2A'iHcsl.4.notcomodowii,but  shall  siirc/y(/.6, 16. 

To  DIi;. 
r;/-7i.2">.32.E8nu  «nid,lK!hold,I  am  at  the  point  to  d, 
F.iod.  14.  II.  to  d.  in  Ihe  wilderness,  .Vum.  21.  5. 
.Vum.  IH.  t  22.  come  nigir  lost  they  boar  sin  to  d. 
.15.  30.  not  testify  against  any,  to  cause  him  tt  d. 
t  31.  no  satisfaction  for  him  who  is  faulty  to  d. 
.Tosh.  2.  t  14  our  life  instead  of  you  to  d. 
l.S'ain.2(t.lO.L.Binlle  hiin,or  hisday  shall  como<od. 

16.  yn  are  worthy  to  d.  because  ye  kept  not 
2-<.  9.  lavcsl  a  snare  for  my  life,  lo  cause  me  to  d. 
2  C/iruii.32. 11.  logive  yourselves  lo  d.  by  famine 


DIE 

P§al.  79.11.  preserve  those  that  are  appointed  t»  it, 
88.  15.  I  am  atilictcd  and  ready  to  d.  from  youth 
Prov.  19.  t  18.  soul  not  spare,  to  cause  him  to  d 
Eccl.  3.  2.  a  time  to  be  born,  and  a  time  to  d. 
Jer.  26.  11.  ij  worthy  to  d.  ||  16.  not  worthy  to  i 
38.  9.  he  is  like  to  d.  for  hunger  in  Ihe  place 
26.  lo  return  to  Jonathan's  house  to  d.  there 
Jonah  4.3.for  it  is  better  for  me  lo  d.  than  to  live,  8. 

8.  Jonah  fainted,  and  wished  in  himself /o  d. 
Luke  7.2.  the  centurion's  servant  was  ready  tod, 
John  19.7. have  a  law,and  by  our  law  he  ought  to  d- 
Jicts  21.  13.  I  am  ready  also  to  d.  at  Jerusalem 
25.  11.  if  worthy  of  death  I  refuse  not  lo  d. 

16.  not  the  mannerof  Romans  todefiver  any  tod. 
/iom. 5.7.foragood  man  some  would  even  dare  to  (i. 

1  Cor.  9.  15.  for  it  were  better  for  me  to  d.  than 

2  Cor.  7.  3.  you  are  in  our  hearts  to  d.  and  live 
Phil.  1. 21.  for  me  lo  live  is  Christ  and  lo  d.  is  gaio 
Heb.  9. 27.  as  it  is  appointed  to  men  once  to  d.  but 
kev.  3.  2.  things  that  remain,  that  are  ready  to  d. 

9.  6.  men  shall  desire  to  d.  and  death  shall  flee 

IVe  DIE. 
Oen.  47. 15.  why  should  ve  d.  in  thy  presence  ?  19. 
/'rzo(/.l4.12.than  thatuesnould  d.iii  the  wilderness 

20.  19.  let  not  God  spcsjr,  lest  we  d.  DcjLt.  5.  25. 
jYum.  17. 12.  behold,  we  a  we  perish,  we  ill  perish 

20.  4.  that  we  and  our  cattle  should  </.  there 

1  Sam.  12.  19.  pray  for  l.by  servants  that  wed.  not 

2  Sam.  14.14.  for  tee  must  needs  d.  and  arc  as  water 

1  Kings  17. 12. 1  dress  it,  that  we  may  eat  it  and  d. 

2  Kings  7.3.  they  6aid,wi»y  sit  we  here  till  we  d.?  4. 
4.  and  if  they  kill  us,  oe  shall  but  d. 

Isa.  22. 13.  for  to-morrow  we  shall  d.  1  Cor.  15. 32. 
.Tohn  11.  16.  let  us  go  that  we  may  d.  with  hisi 
Rom.  14. 8.  and  whether  we  d.  we  d.  unto  the  Lord 

Ye  DIE. 
Oen.  3.  3.  neither  shall  ye  touch  it,  lest  ye  d. 
Lev.  10.  0.  neither  rend  your  clothes,  lest  ye  d. 
7.  ye  shall  net  go  out  from  the  door,  lest  ye  d. 
J^utn.  18.  32.  nor  pollute  holy  thing.-,  lest  ye  d. 
/'sa/.82.7.  but  j/c  shall  (/.  like  men, and  fall  likeont 
Isa.  22.14.  surely  this  iniqui.  not  be  purged  till  ye  d. 
Jer.  22.  26.  anoth.  country,  there  shall  ye  d.  42. 16 
27. 13.  for  why  will  ye  dJ  Ezek.  18.  31.  |  33.  11. 
42.  22.  know  that  ye  s.^all  d.  by  the  sword 
.7o/(;t  8.21.  shall  seek  me,  andt/e  shall  (/.  in  sins,  24 
Rom.  8.  13.  if  ye  live  zhei  the  flesh  ye  shall  d. 

DIED. 
f;c7i.7.21.  all  flesh  d  Ti.  ||  11.  2".  and  Harar.  d. 
11.32.Ti!rah  d.\\  23.2.E!arah  d.\\  25.8.Abraham  d 
2.5.  17.  Ishmael  d.  ||  35.  8.  Deborah  the  nurse  <i. 
.35.  18.  Rachel  (/.  19   I  48.  7.  ||  .35.  29.  Isaac  o. 
36.  33.  Belah  d.  \\  34.  Johah  d.  \\  35.  Husham  d. 
36.  Hadad  d.  1  Chron.  1.  al.  ||  37.  Samlah  d. 
.38.  Siiul  d.  II  39.  Bael-hanan  son  of  Achbor  d. 
38.  12.  JuJah's  wife  d.\\  46. 12.  Er.Onan  (/.Canaan 
50.  16  Jacob  d.  \\  2<i.  Joseph  d.  F.xod.  1.  6. 
F.tnd.'i.  23.  the  king  of  Egypt  d.  \\  7.  21.  the  fish  d. 
8. 13.  the  frogs  (/.  ||  9.  6.  the  cattle  of  Egypt  d. 
16.  3.  would  ic  G'm\  He  had  d.hy  Ihe  har.d  cf  tht 
Lord  in  Egypt,  jVi/m.  14.  2.  \  20.  3.  j  26.  10. 
Z,fB.10.2.Nadabanfl  .\bihu(/.b('foretheLord,I6.1 
Kum.  3.  4.  1  26.  61.  1  Chron.  24.  2. 
J^iim.  14.37.  the  searchers  of  the  land  (/.  by  plasii« 
20.  28.  Aaron  d.  33,  38,  39.  Dnit.  10.  6.  |  :t2.  50. 

16.  49.  now  ihey  that  (/.  beside  them  thai  d. 

20.  1.  Miriaiitm/.  !|  21.  6.  much  people  of  I.^rael  d. 
25.  9.  those  that  d.  in  the  plague  were  24,000 
26. 11.  notwilhsland.  the  children  of  Kurah  d.  not 
27.3.daughters  of  Zelophehaii  said,onr  t"ather  d.  in 
wilderne-'s,  bul  d.  in  his  own  sin,  and  had  no  sons 

/)cM<.34.5.Moses  (/.||7.he  wa.^  100  years  when  he  d. 

.losh.  a.  4.' even  all  Ihe  men  of  war  d.  by  Iho  way 

10.  1 1.  they  were  more  which  d.  with  hail-sloiies 
94.  29.  Joshua  t.*?-  son  of  Nun  d.  .fudg.  2.  8. 

33.  Eleazar  the  son  of  Aaron  (/.  1  Chron.  23.2a. 
.fudg.  1.7.  .\dor:!hczok  d.  \\  3.  11.  Othnicl  d. 

8.  32.  Gidoon  d  ||  10.  2.  Tola  (/.  ||  5.  Jair  d. 

9.  49.  all  the  nion  of  the  tower  of  Shoehorn  d. 
12.  7  Jephlhah  luilgcd  Israel  six  years,  then  d. 

10.  Ibzan  d.  \\  12.  Elon  d.  ||  1,").  Abdon  d. 
Ruth  1.  3.  Elipioiech  d.  ||  5.  Mahlon,  Chilion  d. 

1  Sam.  4.  t  11  Ell  a  sons,  Iloplini  and  Phineha»,(/. 
.•k  12.  Ihat  d  were  not  smitten  with  the  emerod* 
25.  1.  Samuel  d.  ||  37.  Xahal's  heart  (/.within  him 
31..'».  Saul  was  dead,  his  armour-bearer  fell  on  his 

swoi.l  ii;.<I  d.  with  him,  6.  1  Chr^in.  10.  5,  13. 

2  ."?(im.2.  vT).  Asahcl  d.  \\  3.  33.  d.  .Abner  as  a  fool 
fi.  7.  there  ho  d.  before  the  Lord,  1  Chron.  13.  10. 

10.  1.  king  ofchildren  of  Amnion  (/.I  TAron. 19.1. 
IP.  Phobnrh  d.  ||  11. 17.  Uriah  the  Hittito  d. 

12. 18.  nil  seventh  diiy  child  (/.  feared  to  tell  David 

17.  23.  Ahithophel  haiigod  himself  and  d. 

18.  33.  wnold  lo  God  I  had  (/.  for  ihee,  O  Ahsniom 
19.fi.nnd  all  we  had  (/.this  day,  it  had  pleased  lliea 
24.  l.'!.thero(/.  of  people,  oven  from  Dan  lollcersh. 

1  King.f  3.  19.  this  woman's  child  d.  !n  the  night 
14.17.  when  she  rame  lo  the  Ihrcshnid  Ihe  child  (/. 
16.  18.  7,imri  d.  ||  22.  Tibni  d.  I|  22.  3.^.  .\  huh  d.  37 

2  ATi'n^tl.SO.he  sat  on  her  knees  till  noon  and  then  d. 


DIF 

2  SJngs  9.27.Ahaziah  fled  to  Meglddo  and  (2. there 
13.  14.  Elislia  d.  id.  ||  24.  Hazuel  k.  of  Syria  d. 
23.  34.  Julioahaz  came  to  Kgypt  and  d.  there 
1  Chron.  2  3a  but  Seled  d.  without  children 

32.  and  Jether  d.  ||  2  Chron.  16.  13.  Asa  d. 
S  Chr.  24.  15.  Jehoiada  was  full  of  days  when  lie  d. 

22  when  he  d.  he  said,  the  Lord  look  on  it 
Job  3.  11.  why  d.  I  not  from  the  womb  1 
42.  17.  so  Job  d.  being  old  and  full  of  days 
Iaul  6-  1.  in  the  year  that  king  Uzziah  rf.Isaw  Lord 
14.&.  in  the  year  that  king  Ahaz  d.  was  this  burd. 
Jer.lBAl.  Hananiah  d.  ||  Eiek.  11. 13.  Pelatiah  d. 
£2ei.24.18.I  spake  in  morn,  and  at  even  my  w'lkd. 
Hes.  13.  1.  but  when  he  ottended  in  Baal,  he  d. 
.Wu£.22.  27.  seven  brethren  deceased,  and  last  of 

all  the  worn.  d.  also,  Mark  12.  22.  Luke  20.  32. 
Luke  16.  22.  the  beggar  d.  the  rich  man  also  d. 
^<;Anll.21.  if  had  been  here,  my  brother  not  d.  32. 

37.  caused  that  even  this  man  should  not  haved. 
Acts  9.  37.  in  those  days  Dorcas  was  sick  and  d. 
Rom.  5.  6.  in  due  time  Christ  d.  for  the  ungodly,  8, 

7. 9.  sin  revived  and  I  d.  ||  8.34.  it  is  Christ  that  d. 
14.9.for  to  this  end  Christ  both  d.  rose  and  revived 

15.  but  if  thy  brother  be  grieved,  destroy  not  him 
with  thy  meat  for  whom  Christ  d.  1  Cor.  8. 11, 

1  Cor.  15.  3.  bow  that  Christ  d.  for  our  sins 

2  Cor.  5.  14.  if  one  d.  for  all,  then  were  all  d. 
IS.should  live  to  him  who  d.for  them  and  rose  ag. 

lTAe45.4.14.if  we  believe  that  Jesus  d.and  rose  ag. 

5. 10.  who  d.  for  us  that  we  should  live  with  him 
Heb.  10.  28.  he  f^t  despised  Moses'  law  d.  without 

11.  13.  these  d.  in  faith,  not  having  received  prom. 
22.  by  faith  Joseph  when  he  d.  made  mention  of 
Rev.  8.  9.  third  part  of  creatirres  which  had  life  d. 
11.  many  meti  d.  of  waters  that  were  made  bitter 
16.  3.  and  every  living  soul  d.  in  the  sea 
.and  he,  So  he,  That  he  DIED, 
frcn. 5. 5. the  days  of  Adam  were  930  years  andhed 
y.  29.  Noah's  days  were  950  years,  and  he  d. 
Judg.  4.  21.  Jael  emote  nail  into  his  temple,so  he  d. 
ISa;n.4.18.Eli's  neck  brake  andhe  d.for  he  was  old 
14.45. so  the.  people  rescuedjonathan  that  Aed.not 
35.  33.  that  the  Jjord  smote  Nabal  tliat  he  d. 
2.Sam. 11.21.  smote  Abimelech  that  he  d.  in  Thebez 

1  Kings  12.18.stonedAdoram  «AaY  Aed.2CAr.  10.18. 
ifCings  l.n.so  he  d.according  to  the  word  of  Lord 

7. 17.  people  trod  on  him  in  the  gate  and  he  d.  20. 
8. 15.  he  spread  a  cloth  on  his  face,  so  that  he  d. 

2  Chr.  13.  20.  the  Lord  struck  Jeroboam  andhed. 
21.  19.  Jehoram's  bowels  fell  out,  so  he  d. 

Lake  20.  29.  and  he  d.  without  children,  30. 
Actsl.  15.  Jacob  d.  in  Egypt,  he  and  our  fathers 
Rom.  6.  10.  for  in  that  he  d.  he  d.  unto  sin  once 
2  Cor.  5.  15.  that  he  d.  for  all,  that  they  who  live 

DIEST. 
TJat/t  1.17.  where  thou  d.  will  Idieand  there  be  bur. 

DIET. 
Jer.  52.34.  for  d.  there  was  a  continual  d.  given  him 

DIETH. 
I^cv.  7.  24.  fat  of  beast  that  d.  of  itself  shall  not  eat 

22.8.  whatd.  of  itself  shall  not  eat,  CeuJ.  14.  21. 
^um.  16.  t29.  if  these  men  die  as  every  man  d. 

19.14.  when  a  man  d.  in  a  tent  all  shall  bo  unclean 
2  Sam.  3.  33.  the  king  said,  died  Abner  as  a  fool  d.? 
1  Kings  14. 11.  him  that  d.in  the  city  shall  dogs  eat 

16.  4.  d.  in  the  field  fowls  of  the  air  eat,  21.  24. 
Job\A.\Q.  man  d.  and  wasteth  away,  gives  up  ghost 

21.  23.  one  d.in  his  full  strength,  being  at  ease 
25.  another  d.  in  the  bitterness  of  his  soul 

36. 1 14.  their  soul  d.  in  youth,  life  among  unclean 
Ps.  49.  17.  wlien  he  d.  he  shall  carry  nothing  away 
Prou. 11.7.when  a  wicked  mand.  his  expect,  perish 
F.ccl.^.  16.  and  how  d.  the  wise  man?  as  the  fool? 

3.  19.  as  the  one  d.  so  d.  the  other,  all  one  breath 
Isa.  50.  2.  their  fish  slinketh  and  d.  for  thirst 

59.5.he  that  cateth  of  their  eggs  d.  what  is  crushed 
Kick.  4.  14.  nor  eaten  that  which  d.  of  itself 

18.  2fi.  committeth  iniquity,  and  d.  in  them 
32. 1  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  him  that  d. 
7.ech.  11.  9.  then  said  I,  that  that  d.  let  it  die 
Mark  9.  44.  where  their  worm  d.  not,  46,  48. 
Rom.  6. 9.  Christ  being  raised  from  dead  d.  no  more 

14.  7.  none  of  us  liveth  and  no  man  d.  to  himself 

DYED. 
Exod.  25.  5.  take  of  them  rams'-skins  d.  red,  and 
shittim-wood,  26.  14.  I  35.  7.  |  36. 19.  |  39.  34. 
Isa.  63.  1.  Cometh  with  d.  garments  from  Bozrah 
F.zek.  23.15.  exceeding  in  d.  attire  upon  their  heads 
JiTah.  2.  1  3.  the  valinnt  men  are  in  d.  scaijct 
DYING.  • 

den.  2.  t  17.  when  thou  eaffest,  d.  thou  shalt  die 
.Vum.  17.  13.  shall  we  be  consumed  with  d.? 
Mark  12.  20.  and  the  first  d.  left  no  seed 
Luke  8.  42.  Jairuu'  only  daughter  lay  a  d. 
2Cor.4.10.  bearing  in  the  body  the  d.  of  Lord  Jesus 

6.  9.  as  d.  and  behold  we  live, as  chastened  and  not 
Ifeb.  11.  21.  by  faith,Jaeob  when  d.  blessed  sons  of 

DIFFER. 
Rum.  2.  1 18.  and  thou  triest  the  things  that  d. 
I  Cor.  4. 7.  who  maketh  thee  to  d.  from  another  ? 
133 


DIL 

Phil.  1.  t  10.  that  ye  may  try  the  things  that  d. 

DIFFEKKNCE. 
£iod.ll.7.Lord  put  a  d. between  Egyptians  and  Is. 
Lev.  10. 10.  may  put  a  d.  between  holy  and  unholy 

11.  47.  to  make  a  d.  between  unclean  and  clean 
20.25.  put  a  d.  between  cli  an  beasts  and  unclean 

Ezek.  'i'i.  26.  they  iiave  put  no  d.  they  shewed  no  d. 
44.2J.they  shall  teach  my  people  the  d.  betw.  holy 
Jicts  15.  9.  and  put  no  d.  between  us  and  them 
Hum.  3.  22.  on  them  that  believe,  for  there  is  no  d. 

10. 12.  there  is  no  d.  between  the  ^'ew  and  Greek 
14.  t  23.  he  that  putleth  a  d.  between  meats 

1  Cur.  7.  34.  there  is  d.  between  a  wife  and  a  virgin 
Jude  22.  of  some  have  compassion  making  a  d. 

DIFFERKACKS. 
1  Cor.  12.  5.  there  are  d.  of  administrations 
DIFFKRETH. 

1  Cor.  15.  41.  one  star  d.  from  another  in  glory 
Ga/. 4.1. heir  when  a  child  d.noiiiiiig  from  a  servant 

DIFFERING. 
Rom.  12.  6.  gifts  d.  according  to  the  grace  given 

DIFFICULT. 
Zech.  8.  t  6.  if  it  be  d.  in  the  eyes  of  this  people 

DIG. 
Exod.  21.  33.  if  a  man  d.  a  pit,  and  not  cover  it 
Deut.  8. 9.  out  of  whose  hills  thou  mayesl  d.  brass 

23. 13.  thou  shalt  have  a  paddle,  and  d.  therewith 
Job  3.  21.  d.  for  it  more  than  for  hid  treasures 

6.  27.  and  ye  d.  a  pit  for  your  friend 

11.18.  thou  shalt  d.  about  thee,  t. ike  rest  in  safety 
24. 16.  in  the  dark  they  d.  through  houses  marked 
39.  t  21.  his  feet  d.  in  the  valley 
Ezek.  8.  8.  he  said,  son  of  man,  d.  now  in  the  wall 

12.  5.  d.  thou  through  the  wall  in  (-heir  sight,  12. 
Mmos  9.2.  though  they  d.  in  hell,  though  they  climb 
Luke  13.  8.  Lord,  let  it  alone,  till  I  shall  d.  ^bout  ii 

16.  3.  I  cannot  d.  to  beg  1  am  ashamed 

DIGGED. 
Oc7i.21.30.may  be  a  witness  that  I  have  d.this  well 

26. 15.  the  wells  his  father's  servants  had  d.  18. 
19.  Isaac's  servants  d.  in  the  valley,  21,  22,  25. 
32.  and  told  Isaac  of  the  well  that  they  had  d. 

49.  6.  for  in  their  self-will  they  d.  down  a  wall 

50.  5.  in  my  grave  which  I  had  d.  for  me  bury  me 
Exod.  7. 24.  all  the  Egyptians  d.  for  water  to  drink 
J^Tum.  21.  18.  the  princes  d.  the  well,  the  nobles  d. 
Deut.  6. 11.  wells  d.  thou  diggedst  not,  JV(  A.  9.  25. 

2  Kings  19. 24. 1  have  d.  and  drunk  strange  waters, 

and  dried  up  ail  the  rivers  of  places,  Isa.  37.  25. 
2  Chrun.  16.  j  1-1.  sepulchres  he  had  d.  for  himself 
.26.  10.  Uzziah  d.  many  wells  for  his  cattle 
Psal.  7. 15.  made  a  pit  and  d.  it,  and  is  fallen,  57.6. 
35.  7.  without  cause  they  d.  a  pit  for  my  soul 

40. 1 6.  mine  ears  hast  thou  d.ott'eriiig  not  required 
94.  13.  till  the  pit  be  d.  for  the  wicked 
119. 85.  proud  have  d.  pits  for  nie  not  after  thy  law 

Isa.  5. 6.  it  shall  not  be  pruned  nor  d.  come  up  briers 

7.  25.  and  on  all  hills  be  d.  with  the  mattock 

51.  l.look  to  the  hole  of  the  pit  whence  ye  ared, 
.Jer.  13.  7.  then  I  went  to  Euphrates  and  d. 

18.  20.  they  have  d.  a  pit  lor  my  soul,  22. 
F.zek.  8.  8.  and  when  I  had  d.  in  the  wall 
Junah  1. 1  13.  the  men  d.  hard  to  bring  it  to  land 
Mat.  21.  33.  hedged  it,  and  d.  a  wine-press  in  it 
25. 18.  d.  in  the  earth,  and  hid  his  lord's  money 
J^uke  6.48.who  d.and  laid  the  foundation  on  a  rock 
Rom.  11.  3.  Lord  they  have  d.  down  thine  altars 

DIGGEDST. 
Deut.  6.  11.  and  wells  digged  which  thou  d.  not 

DIGGETH. 

Prov.  16. 27.  an  ungodly  man  d.  up  evil, fire  in  lips 
26.  27.  whoso  d.  a  pit  shall  fall  therein,  Eccl.  10. 8, 

DIGGING. 
Jijr.  2.t34. 1  have  not  found  it  by  d.  but  on  all  these 

DIGNITY. 

Gen.  49.  3.  Reuben,  thou  art  the  e.vcellency  of  d. 
Esth.  6.  3.  what  d.  haih  been  done  to  Mordecai  ? 
Eccl.  10.  6.  folly  is  set  in  great  d.  and  the  rich  sit  in 
Hab.  1.  7.  their  d.  shall  proceed  of  themselves 

DIGNITIES. 
2  Pet.2. 10.  are  not  afraid  to  speak  evil  of  d.  Jude  8. 

DILIGENCE. 
Pro».4  23.keep  thy  heart  with  all  d.for  issues  of  life 
Luke  12.  58.  as  thou  art  in  the  way,  give  d.  to  be 
/iom.I2.8.that  ruleth  with  d.  mercy  with  cheerfuln. 
2  Cor.  8.  7.  theref.  as  ye  abound  in  faitli  and  all  d. 
2  Tim.  4.  9.  do  thy  d.  to  come  shortly  to  me,  21. 
Neb.  6. 11.  that  every  one  of  you  shew  the  samed. 
2  Pet.  1.  5.  giving  all  d.  to  add  to  your  faith  virtue 
10.  brethren,  give  d.  to  make  your  calling  sure 
Jude3.  when  I  gave  all  d.  to  write  to  you  of  salva. 

DILIGENT. 
Deut.  19.  18.  the  judges  shall  make  d.  inquisition 
hsh.  22.  5.  take  d.  heed  to  do  the  commandment 
Psaf.  64.  6.  search  iniquity,  accomplish  a  d.search 
~7.  6.  with  my  heart  and  my  spirit  made  d.  search 
Pror\  10.  4.  but  the  hand  of  the  d.  maketh  rich 

12.  24.  the  hand  of  the  d.  shall  bear  rule 

27.  but  the  substance  of  a  d.  man  is  precious 

13.  4.  but  the  soul  of  the  d.  shall  be  mJilo  fat 


DIP 

ProB.21.5.  the  thoughts  of  d.  tend  only  to  plenty 
22.  29.  seest  thou  a  man  d.  in  Ins  business  .' 
27.  23.  be  thou  d.  to  know  the  state  of  tliy  flock 
2 Cor.8.22.wliom  we  have  olteiilimes  proved  d.  but 
now  much  more  d.  upon  tlitj  coiilidence  in  you 
2  Tim.  3.  t  10.  but  thou  hast  been  a  d.  follower 
Tit.  3.  12.  be  d.  to  come  uiUo  me  to  NicopoliB 
■iPct.  3. 14.  be  d.  that  ye  be  found  ol  him  in  peace 

DILIGEMLV. 
£j.«d.l5.26.ifthou  wiltd.liearken  to  the  voice  of  the 
Lord  lliy  God,  Deut.  11.  13.  |  28.  1.  Jer.  17.24 
Lev.  10.16.  Moses  d.  sought  the  goat  ofsin-olfering 
Ueut.  4.  9.  only  take  heed  and  keep  thy  soul  d. 
6.  7.  ihou  shalt  teach  them  d.  to  lliy  children 
17.  you  slialld.  keep  the  conimandmenls,  11.  H 
13.  14.  make  search,  and  ask  d.  and  it  it  be  truth 
24.  8.  take  heed  that  tliou  observe  d.  and  do 
1  .>am.20.t  I'J.then  thou  shall  go  down  d.  and  come 
1  Kings  20.33. now  the  men  did  d.  observe  whether 
Ezra  7.  23.  let  it  be  d.  done  for  the  house  of  God 
./ot)  13.n.hear  d.  my  speech  and  declaration,  21.  2 
Ps.  37.  10.  shalt  d.  consider  his  place,  it  shall  not  b« 
119. 4.  hast  commanded  us  to  keep  lliy  precepts  d. 
Prov.  7.  15.  I  came  Ibrth  d.  to  seek  thy  face 
11.  27.  he  that  d.  seekcth  good,  procureth  favour 
2'J.  1.  consider  d.  what  is  tiefore  lliee 
Isa.  21.  7.  he  hearkened  d.  with  much  heed 
35. 2.  hearken  d.  to  me, and  eat  that  which  is  good 
.ler.  2.  10.  consider  d.  see  if  there  be  such  a  thing 
12. 16.  if  they  will  d.  learn  the  ways  of  my  people 
Zech.  6. 15.  if  ye  will  d.  obey  the  voice  of  the  Lo/d 
Mat.  2.  ".  he  iii([uired  d.  when  tlu'  star  appeared 
a.Herod  said,go  and  search  d.for  ihe  young  child 
16.  which  he  had  d.  inquired  of  the  wise  men 
Mark  7.t  3.e.\cept  they  wash  hands  d.  they  eat  not 
Luke  15.  8.  sweep  house  and  seek  d.  till  she  find  it 
.dcts  18.  25.  he  taught  d.  the  things  ol  the  Lord 

1  7'i7n.5.10.if  she  have  d. followed  every  good  work 

2  7>r«.1.17.in  Rome  he  sought  ine  d.  and  found  me 
7'(t.  3.  13.  bring  Zenas  the  lawyer  and  Apollos  on 

their  journey  d.  that  nothing  be  wanting  to  them 
Ueb.  11.  6.  a  rewarder  of  them  that  d.  seek  him 

12. 15.  looking  d.  lest  any  man  fail  of  grace  of  God 
1  Pet.  1.  10.  ot  w^liich  the  prophets  searched  d. 

DIMINISH,  ED. 
£j;od.5.8.you  shall  not  d. ought  thereof,lhey  bo  idj 

11.  not  ought  of  your  work  S'hali  be  d.  19. 
21.  10.  her  duty  of  marriage  shall  he  not  d. 
30. 1 1.5.  the  rich  shall  not  multiply,  the  poor  not  d 
Lev.  25. 16.  according  to  the  years  ilioii  shalt  d. 
sN'am.  26.  j  54.  to  i'cv/  d.  his  iniieriTance,  33.  t  54 
Deut.  4.  2.  nor  shall  you  d.  ought  from  it,  12.  32 
Prov.  13.  11.  wealth  gotten  by  vanity  shall  be  d. 
ha.  21.  17.  the  mighty  men  oi'  Kedar  shall  be  d. 
Jer.  10.  t  24.  correct  not  in  anger,  lest  tliiiu  d.  me 
26. 2.  speak  what  I  command  thee,  d.  not  a  wori 
29.  6.  that  ye  may  be  increased  and  not  d. 
48.  t  37.  every  bead  bald,  and  every  beard  d. 
Ezck.5.  11.  hast  defiled,  therefore  will  I  also  d.  thee 
16.  27.  behold,  I  have  d.  thine  ordinary  food 
29.  15.  I  will  d.  them,  they  shall  no  more  rule 

DIMINISHING. 
Rom.  11. 12.  d.of  them  be  the  riches  of  the  Gentilcg 

DIM. 
Gen.  27.  1.  when  Isaac  was  old  and  his  eyes  d. 
48.  10.  now  the  eyes  of  Israel  were  d.  for  age 
Deut.'ii.  7.  Moses'  eye  was  not  d.  nor  force  abated 
1  .Vnm.  3.  2.  Eli's  eyes  began  to  wa,\  d.  4.  15. 
./ob  17.  7.  mine  eye  also  is  d.  by  reason  of  sorrow 
Isa.  32. 3.  the  eyes  of  them  that  see  shall  not  be  d. 
/yffm.4.1.how  is  gold  become  d..'  fine  gold  changed! 
5.17. for  these  things  our  eyes  are  d.  our  heart  faint 

DIMNESS. 
Isa.  8.  22.  behold  trouble,  darkness,  d.  of  anguish 
9.  1.  d.  shall  not  be  such  as  was  in  her  ve.xation 

DINE,  D. 
Grn.  43. 16.  for  these  men  shall  d.  with  me  at  noon 
Luke  11.37.  a  Pharisee  besought  him  tod.wilh  him 
John  21.  12.  Jesus  saiih  to  them,  come  and  d. 
15.  so  when  they  had  d.  Jesus  saith  to  Simon 
DINNER. 
Prov.  1.5. 17.  better  is  a  d.  of  herbs  where  love  is 
Mat.  22.  4.  behold,  I  have  prepared  my  d.  my  oxen 
Lnke  i  1. 38.  that  he  had  not  first  washed  before  d. 
14.12.  w  hen  makest  a  d  or  supper,  call  not  friends 

DIP. 
Exod.  12.  22.  d.  it  in  the  blood  that  is  in  the  basin 
Lev.  4.  6.  the  priest  shall  d.  hie  finger,  17.  14,  16. 
14.  6.  d.  the  cedar  wood  and  Ihe  living  bird,  51. 
A'uTO. 19.18.  clean  person  should  d.  hyssop  in  water 
Deut.  33. 24.  Moses  said,  let  Asher  li.  his  foot  in  oil 
W«tA2.l4.  Boazsaid  to  Ruth,  d.  niorstd  in  vinegar 
Luke  16.  24.  send  Lazarus  that  he  may  d.his  finger 

DIPPED,  ETH. 
Gen.  37.  31.  and  they  d.  the  coat  in  the  blood 
./o.?A.3  15.  the  priests'  feet  were  d.  in  brim  of  water 
2  Kings  5.  14.  Naaman  d.  in  Jordan  seven  times 
Psal.  68.  23.  that  thy  foot  be  d.  in  blood 
Mat.  26.  23.  he  that  d.  bis  hand  with  me  in  the 
dish,  the  same  shall  betray  mc,  Mark  14, 20. 


DIS 

/o/in  13.  26.  to  Avhoin  I  give  a  sop,  when  I  liave 
d.  U ;  when  hu  hud  d.  the  liOj),  he  gave  il  to  J  udas 
DU'T. 
L,ev.  9.  9.  Aaron  d.  his  finger  in  the  blood 

1  Slim.  14.  i!7.  he  d.  tlie  end  i^rod  in  a  lioney-comb 

2  h'lii^i  d.l  J.Hazael  took  a  cloth  and  d.  it  in  water 
Jiev.  li).  13.  was  clothed  wilii  a  venture  d.  in  blood 

UlUECT. 
Oen.  Alj.  28.  he  eenl  Judah  to  d.  his  face  to  Goshen 
I'sal.  5.  3.  in  the  morning  will  1  d.  my  prayer 
I'rov.  3.  ti.  acknowledge  him,  he  shall  d.  thy  pulhs 

11.  5.  the  righteousness  uf  the  |>errect  shall  d. 
y.ccl.  lU.  lU.  but  wisdom  is  protitablu  to  d. 
JsaA5.l3.  have  raised  him  up,  1  will  d.  all  his  ways 

61.  b.  1  will  d.  their  work  in  truth,  and  make 
J'n-.lU.-23.il  IS  not  ni  man  that  walketh  toii.liis  steps 

1  TAesA-.y.  11. our  L.Jesus  Christ  (^.  our  way  to  you 

2  7'A<;4»-.3.i>.  Lord  (/.our  hearts  mlo  the- love  ol'G. 

DIKECTED. 

Job  33.  14.  he  hath  not  d.  his  words  against  me 

fnal.  119.  ■)■  U  that  my  ways  were  d.  to  keepstat. 

141.  t  'i.  let  my  ]>rayer  be  d.  as  incense,  and  lilting 

Isa.  40. 13.  who  halh  d.  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  7 

DIKECTETH. 
Job  37.  3.  he  d.  it  under  the  whole  heaven 
i'rov.  Iti.  9.  his  ways,  but  the  Lord  d.  his  steps 
21.  29.  as  lor  the  upright  he  d.  his  way 

DIRECTION. 
A'u'n.21.  16.  princes  judged  it  by  </.  of  the  lawgiver 
f^al.  19. 1 4.  their  d.  is  gone  out  through  the  earth 

lUKECTLY. 
A'urn.  19.  4.  sprinkle  blood  d.  before  the  tabernacle 
Kzek.  42.  12.  even  the  way  d.  bel'ore  the  wall 

DIUT. 
Judg.  3.  22.  the  fat  closed,  and  the  d.  came  out 
I'sul.  16. 42. 1  did  cast  them  out  as  d.  in  the  streets 
lia.  57.  2U.  whose  waters  cast  up  mire  and  d. 

DISALLOW,  ED. 
JVum.  30.  5.  because  her  father  d.  her  not 

ti.  but  if  her  husband  d.  her  |{  11.  he  <i.  her  not 
1  yet.  2.  4.  d.  indeed  of  men,  but  chosen  of  Cod 
7.  the  stone  which  the  builders  d.  is  made  head 
DISANNUL. 
Job  40.  8.  wilt  thou  also  d.  my  judgment  1 
Isa.  14.  27.  Lord  hath  purposed  who  shall  d.  it  ? 
(wal.  3.  17.  this  covenant  the  law  cannot  d. 

DISANNULLED. 
fsa.  28.  18.  your  covenant  with  death  shall  be  d. 

DISANNULLETIl. 
Gal.  3.  15.  covenant  no  man  d.  or  addeth  thereto 

DISANNULLING.       • 
IJcb.  7.  18.  there  is  a  d.  of  the  commandment 

DISAPPOINT. 
I'ial.  17.  13.  arise,  O  Lord,  d.  him,  cast  him  down 

DISAPPOINTED. 
Piov.  15.  02.  without  counsel  purjioses  are  d. 

DISAPPOINTETH. 
Job  5.  12.  he  d.  the  devices  of  the  crafty 

DISCERN. 
Discerning  of  spirits  is  one  of  lite  gifts  of  God, 
mcnlionrd  by  the  apostle  PauL,  1  Cor.  12. 10.  It 
consists  in  discerning  among  those  who  say 
they  arc  inspired  by  God,  whether  they  arc 
animated  or  inspired  by  a  good  or  evil  spirit, 
ichethr.r  they  are  true  or  false  prophets.  This 
gift  Kas  of  very  great  importance  both  i?i  the 
Old  Testament,  wherein  it  is  found  that  false 
prophets  often  rose  up,  and  seducers  who  de- 
ceived the  people ;  and  also  in,  the  JVew,  in  the 
primitive  ages  of  the  church,  when  superna- 
tural gifts  were  common;  when  the  messenger 
of  Satan  was  sometimes  transformed  into  an 
angel  of  light,  and  false  apostles,  under  the 
outward  appearance  of  sheep,  concealed  the 
aentininils  of  ravening  wolves,  lyhirefure  the 
Kvajigfiist  cautioned  believers,  sayi>ig,Vrviin\c 
not  eviiy  npirit,  but  try  the  spirits  wheiher  they 
be  of  Cod,  1  John  4. 1.  Hec  in  Deut.  18.  20, 21, 
22.  the  marks  uhich  are  given  by  God  to  dis- 
tinguish the  true  from  false  prophets. 
0«)i.:il.32.iy.thnn  what  is  lliiiie  wilh  me, ami  take  it 
38.  25.  she  Buiil,  d.  I  pray  thee  whone  are  these 
8Sam.l4.17.so  is  my  lonl  the  king  toJ.good  and  bad 

19.  35.  and  can  I  d.  between  good  and  evil? 
1  A'iniM  3.  9.  that  I  may  d.  between  gcjoJ  And  bad 
ll.tliou  hast  askcil  understanding  to  (/.  juilginent 
Ezra  3.  13.  the  people  could  not  d,  Ihe  noise  of  joy 
/ob  4.  Hi.  hut  I  could  not  d.  the  form  thereof 
6.  30.  cannot  my  tnsto  rf.  perverse  thing.s  ^ 
Kze4.44.23.cuufie  tlnm  d.  betw.  unclean  and  clean 
Jonah  4.  11.  cannot  d.  between  right  hand  and  left 
Jl/u/.  3.18.  rf.betweon  the  righteous  and  the  wicked 
Jilat.  ir).3.yc  can  d.  the  face  of  the  sky,  AuAc  12.50. 
Jlcb.  5.14.  their  smseii  exercised  to  d.  good  and  evil 

DISCERNED,  ETH. 
Gen.  27.  23.  he  d.  hiin  not,  bin  hands  were  hairy 
1  Kings  20.  41.  and  the  king  of  Israel  d.  him 
JVcA.  13.  1 24.  they  d.  not  speak  in  Jews'  language 
Pron.  7.  7.  I  d.  among  the  youth  a  your.if  man 
ICccl  &.  5.  a  wise  man  d.  time  and  judgmetiC 


DIS 

fiom.l4.|  23. that  d.belween  meats  is  damncd|If  eat 

1  Cur. 2. 14. nor  kiiow,because  they  arc  Sjiiritually  d. 
1 15.  he  that  is  spiritual  d.  all  Uiings,  yet  lie  him- 
self is  d.  of  no  man,  lor  who  liath  known 
DISCERNING. 

1  Cot.  11.29.  eateth  unworthily,  notd.  Lord's  body 

12.  10.  to  another  is  given  d.  ut  spirits,  to  another 

DISCERNER. 

Hcb.  4. 12.  word  is  ad.  of  the  thoughts  of  the  bean 
DISCHARGE,  D. 

I  Kings  5.  9.  and  will  cause  tlieni  to  be  d.  there 

Eccl.  8.  8.  day  uf  death,  there  is  no  d.  in  that  war 
DISOIPLE. 

The  word  Disciple,  absolutely  taken,  signifies,  in 
the  JVejo  'J'estament,  a  beitever,  a  Clinstian,  a 
scholar,  a  folio wi  r,  vf  Christ,  or  his  .riposths ; 
as  in  Acts  (i.  1,  VVnen  the  number  ot  the  dis- 
ciples was  muUii>lieil,  there  arose  a  murmuring 
ot  the  Greci'ins  against  the  Hebrews,  because 
their  widows  were  neglected  in  the  daily  minis- 
tration. .:y;id  in  Actd  9.  1,  Haul  yet  breathing 
out  threateniiigs  and  slaughter  against  the  di«i:i- 
ples  of  the  Lord,  that  is,  against  the  loUowurs 
of  Christ. 

The  name  of  Disciple  is  often  set  down  for  that 
of  Apostle;  particularly  in  the  (Jospil,  Mat. 
5.  1.  I  8.  23.  I  10.  1.  but  in  other  places  the 
.apostles  are  distinguished  from  Jjisciples. 
The  .,Jpostlcs  Wire  chosen  particularly  by 
Christ  out  of  the  number  of  his  disciples,  to  be 
the  stewards  of  his  most  scent  mysteries,  and 
the  principal  ministers  for  propagating  and 
establishing  the  Christian  religion.  Thi  y  were 
twelve  in  number.  Mat.  10.  2.  Luke  0.  13. 

But  the  Discijjles  who  followed  our  Saviour  from 
the  beginning,  and  are  called  simply  Disciples, 
were  seventy  in  number.  The  precepts  and 
admonitions  which  our  Saviour  gave  them 
when  he  sent  them  to  preach  in  the  cities  of 
Judea,  are  recorded  in  Luke  10.  frojn  the  be- 
ginning to  verse  17. 

Mat.  10.  24.  d.  is  not  above  his  master,  LukeH.  40 

25.  enough  for  the  d.  that  he  be  as  bis  master 
42.  w  hoso  shall  give  a  cup  of  cold  water  to  a  d. 

27.  57.  Joseph  of  .^riinathea  himself  was  Jesus'  d 
Juhn\i.  28.  Ihoi'  art  his  d.  we  are  Moses'  disciples 

18.  15.  and  so  did  another  d.  that  d.  was  known 
It),  then  went  out  that  other  d.  that  was  known 

19.  20.  the  d.  standing  by,  whom  Jesus  loved 
27.then  saiili  he  to  that  d.  behold  thy  mother,  and 

from  that  hour  that  d.  took  her  to  his  own  home 
38.  being  a  d.  but  secretly,  for  fear  of  the  Jews 

20.  2.  the  other  d.  whom  Jesus  loved,  21.  7,  20. 

3.  Peter  went  I'orlh,  and  that  other  d.  and  came 

4.  the  other  d.  did  outrun  Peter,  and  came  first 
8.  then  went  in  also  that  other  d.  and  be  saw 

21.  23.  this  saying,  that  that  d.  should  not  die 
24.  this  is  the  d.  which  teslificth  these  things 

.Acts  9.  10.  there  was  a  certain  d.  at  Damascus 
20.  but  they  believed  nut  that  he  was  a  d. 
30.  now  there  was  at  Joi)pa  a  d.  named  Tabilha 

16.  1.  a  certain  d.  was  there,  named  Timolhcus 
21.  16.  an  old  d.  with  whom  we  should  lodge 

My  DISCIPLE. 

Luke  14.  21).  if  he  hate  not  his  life,  cannot  be  my  d. 

27.  whoso  doth  not  bear  his  cro8s,cannot  be  viy  d. 

33.  that  fursaketh  not  all.  he  cannot  be  viy  d. 

DISCIPLES. 

Mat.  9.14.  then  came  to  him  llie  d.  of  John,  saying 

10.  1.  when  he  had  called  unto  him  his  twelve  d. 

11.  1.  he  had  made  an  end  of  commanding  bisd. 
14.  26.  when  Ihe  d.  saw  him  walking  on  the  sea 

17.  0.  when  Ihe  d.  heard  it  they  fell  on  their  face 
19.  13.  and  the  d.  rebuked  them,  Mark  10.  13. 
20. 17.  Jesus  took  the  twelve  d.  apart  in  the  w  ay 

21.  I.Jesus  sent  two  d.  saying,  go  into  the  village 

22.  Hi.  the  Pharisees  sent  unto  him  their  d. 
26.  26.  Jesus  took  bread,  and  gave  it  to  the  d. 

.3.5. 1  will  not  deny  thee,  likewise  also  said  the  d. 
.56.  then  all  the  d.  forsook  him,  and  lied 
Mark  2.  18.  why  do  the  d.  of  John  and  of  iberiia- 
risees  fast,  but  thy  d.  fast  not  ?  J.uke  .%.  33. 
a.  14.  now  the  d.  had  forgotten  to  lake  bread 
Luke  10.  37.  the  d.  btpan  to  rejoice  and  praise  C. 
John  3.25.between  some  of  John's  d.  and  the  Jews 
4.  1.  that  Jesus  bapti/.ed  more  d.  than  John 
9.  28.  thou  art  his  disciple,  but  we  are  Moses'  d. 
13.5.he began  to  wash  the  d.feet.and  to  wipe  them 

18.  17.  art  not  thou  also  one  of  this  man's  d."! 
2i).  18.  Mary  told  the  d.  that  she  had  seen  the  Lord 

Jicls  O.I.Saul  breathing  out  slnuslitor  against  Ihed. 

26.  Saul  asHiiyed  to  join  himself  to  the  d. 
11.26. tho  d.woro  railed  Chri-tian.s  first  in  Antioch 
19.1.  Paul  came  to  Ephcaus,  and  finding  certain  d. 

30.  Paul  would  have  entered,  d.  sullered  him  not 

20.7.lirsulny  ofweekd.cnme  together  break  bread 

30.  men  speaking,  to  draw  away  d.  after  thorn 

His  DISCIPLES. 

Mat.  P.  25.  his  d.  came  and  awoke  liim,  saying 

9. 19.  Josus  arose  and  followed,  and  so  did  hia  d. 


DIS 

JI/a(.28.7.go,and  tell  AiV  d.he  Is  rison  fVom  Ihe  dekl 
13.  say  ye,  his  d.  came  by  night  and  stole  him 
Mark  10.  10.  in  the  house  his  d.  asked  him  agutp 
Luke  5.  30.  the  Pharisees  murmured  against  Aii  d 
6.  20.  he  lilted  up  his  eyes  on  liis  d.  and  said 
11.  1.  teach  us  to  pray,  as  John  taught  his  d. 
John  2.  11.  his  glory,  and  his  d.  believed  on  Kini 
4.2.  though  Jesus  himself  baptized  nut,  but  higd. 
27.  upon  this  cameA/s  d.  and  marvelled  that  he 
0. 3.  up  to  a  mountain, and  there  he  sat  w ilh  his  d. 
22.  but  his  d.  were  gone  away  alone 
9.27.  why  would  ye  hear  it  again?  will  ye  be  A>.j  d. 
II.  12.  then  said  his  d.  L.  if  he  sleep  shall  do  weU 
18.  1.  he  went  wiih  his  d.  over  the  brook  CedrDU 
2.  fur  Jesiis  often  resorted  ibilber  w  ilh  his  d. 
20.26  agaiiij/iis  d-were  wi!irm,Thi,mas  with  them 

Of  his  DISCIPLES. 
JJ/aM1.2.wheii  John  hail  heard  works  ofChrist,he 
sent  two  of  his  d.Mark  1 1.1 .  |  14.  n.Lukc  19.29. 
Mark  7. 2. some  of  his  d.  eat  witli  unwasheu  handd 
John  6.66. from  that  time  many  of  his  d.  went  back 
IS.  19.  the  high-priest  asked  Jesus  of  his  d. 
25.  art  not  thou  also  one  of  his  d.7  he  denied 
21.  12.  none  of  his  d.  durst  ask  him,  w  ho  art  lliou? 

To  his  DISCIPLES. 
Mat.  14. 19.  blessed,  and  gave  the  loaves  to  his  d. 
Mark  4.  34.  he  exjioumled  all  things  to  his  d. 
J.uke  10.  23.  he  turned  himself  to  his  d.  and  said 
./oAh  21. 14. third  timeJesiis  shewed  himself  t(//u'«d. 

My  DISCIPLES. 

Isa.  8.  10.  bind  u]i  testimony,  seal JMv  among  mi^d. 

J/.((.20.18.ma6ter  saith,  I  will  kt^theiias...overat 

thy  house  w  ilh  my  d.  Mark  14. 14.  Luke  22. 11. 

John  8.  31.  then  are  ye  my  d.  indeed,  13.  35. 

15.  8.  that  ye  bear  much  IVuit,  so  shallye  be  my  d. 

Thy  DISCIPLES. 

^Vat.9.14.why  do  we  (■ASl,thy  d.fasi  not,.1/arA: 2.18. 

12.2.  thy  d.  do  that  w  hich  is  not  lawful  on  sabbath 

15.  2.  why  do  thy  d.  transgress  the  tradition  7 
17. 16. 1  brought  him  to  thy  d.  they  could  not  euro 

Mark  7.5.w by  walk  not  thy  d.  according  to  Iradit.? 

9. 18.  Isjiaketo  thy  d.  to  cast  him  out,  A«Ac9.40. 
Luke  19.39.thePharisees  said, Master, rebuke  (^yd. 
John  7.  3.  that  thy  d.  may  see  the  works  thou  doest 

DISCIPLINE. 
Job  30. 10.  he  opeiieth  also  their  ears  to  d.  and  com. 

DISCLOSE. 
/siT.  20.  21.  behold,  the  earth  also  shall  d.  her  blood 

DISCOMFITED. 
F.xod.  17.  13.  Joshua  d.  Anialek  and  his  people 
JSTurn.  14.  45.  smote  and  d.  them,  even  to  Horrnah 
Josh.  10.10.  Lord  d.  them  before  Isr.  and  slew  them 
Judg.  4.  15.  the  Lord  d.  Sisera  and  his  chariots 

8.  12.  Gideon  [lursued  them,  and  d.  all  the  host 
l.S«m.7. lO.ihundered  on  the  Philistines, and  d.theio 

2  Sam.  22.  15.  lightning,  anil  d.  them,  Psal.  18.  14 
Isa.  31. 8.  shall  flee,  and  his  young  men  shall  be  i. 

DISCOMFITURE. 
1  Sam  14.  20.  and  there  was  a  very  great  d. 

DISCONTENTED. 
1  Sam.  22.2.  every  one  tliat  was  d.gathered  to  Day 

DISCONTINUE. 
Jcr.  17.  4.  and  tlion  shalt  d.  from  mine  heritage 

DISCORD. 
Prov.  6.  14.  he  deviselh  mischief,  he  soweth  d. 
19.  and  him  that  soweth  d.  among  brethren 
DISCOVER. 
Dent.  22.  30.  a  man  shall  not  d.  his  father's  skirl 
1  Sarn.  14.  8.  and  we  will  d.  ourselves  to  them 
Job  41.  13.  who  can  d.  the  face  of  his  garment  7 
Prov.  18.2.  but  that  his  heart  may  d.  itself 
2.5.  9.  thy  cause,  and  d.  not  a  secret  to  another 
Isa.  3.  17.  the  Lord  will  d.  their  secret  parts 
.hr.  13. 26. 1  will  d.  thy  skirts  on  thy  face,  A"iA.3.5. 
I. am.  4.  22.  O  daughter  of  Edom,hc  will  d.  thy  sins 
F.zck.  16.  37.  I  will  d.  thy  nakedness  to  them 
Hos.a.  10. 1  will  d.  her  lewdness  in  sight  of  lover* 
Jlfic.l.6.llie  stones,  T  will  d.  the  fouadntion  thereof 

DlSCttVERED. 
F.Tod.  20.  26.  that  thy  nakedness  be  not  d.  thereon 
/,ff.20.  18.  be  hntli  d.  her  fountain,  she  uncovered 
1  .SVim.  M.  II.  bo'b  d.  tbcniselves  to  the  garrison 
22.6.  whim  Saul  heard  that  David  was  d.  and  men 

3  Sam.-22.  16.  tho  foundations  of  the  world  wero 

d.  at  the  rebuking  of  the  Lord,  Psal.  18.  15. 
fsa.  22.  8.  and  he  d.  the  covering  of  Judah  •, 

.57.8.  for  thou  linst  d.  thyself  to  another  than  me 
.Trr.  13.  22.  for  ihino  iniquity  arc  thy  skirls  d. 
I.am.  2.  14.  ond  they  have  not  d.  thine  iniquity 
Kzrk.ifi.  14.  so  that  foundation  thereof  shall  bo  d 

16.  36.  thy  imkednesii  d.  through  thy  whorcdonw 
.%7.  before  thy  wickedncfw  was  rf.  ns  at  the  tim» 

21 .24.saitli  Lord,in  that  your  transgressions  arc  d 
22.10.in  thee  have  they  d.  their  father's  nakednea* 
23.  10.  those  d.  nakennms,  they  took  her  (ions 
18.  she  d.  her  whoredoms,  nndd.  her  nakedneu 
29.  the  nakedness  of  thy  whoivdonis  shall  bed 
J/os.  7.  1.  then  the  iniquity  of  Ephrnim  wag  d. 
..lets  21.  3.  now  w  hen  we  had  d.  Cyprus,  wo  left 
27.  39.  but  they  d.  a  certain  creek  with  a  ibois 


DIS 

DISCOVERETir. 
Job  12.  2i2.  he  d.  deep  things  out  of  darkness 
I'sal.  29.  9.  the  voice  of  the  Lord  d.  the  forest 

DISCOVERING. 
Uab.  3.  13.  by  d.  the  foundation  to  the  neck 

DISCOUKAGt:. 
.Vum.  32  7  why  d.  ye  the  hearts  of  the  people  ? 

UlSCOUll.VGEL). 
rVum.  31.  4.  the  soul  of  the  people  was  much  d. 
32.  9.  tliey  d.  the  heart  of  the  children  of  Israel 
Jjfut.  1.  21.  go  and  possess  it,  fear  not,  nor  be  d. 

2d  our  brethren  have  d.  our  heart,  saying 
Jsa.  42.  4.  he  shall  not  fail  nor  be  d.  till  he  set 
Col.3. 21.  provoke  not  your  children,  lest  they  be  d. 

DISCREET. 
Gfn.41.33.  let  Pharaoh  look  out  a  man  d.  and  wise 

'M.  there  is  none  so  d.  and  wise  as  thou  art 
7\t.  2. 5.  that  the  aged  teach  youiig  women  to  be  d. 
1 1).  young  men  likewise  exhort  to  be  d. 
DISCREETLY. 
Mark  12.  34.  when  Jesus  saw  that  he  answered  d. 

DISCRETION. 
Psal.  112.  5.  he  will  guide  his  atiairs  with  d. 
Proo.  1.  4.  to  the  young  man  knowledge  and  d. 

2.  11.  rf.  shall  preserve  thee,  understand,  keep  thee 

3.  21.  my  son,  keep  sound  wisdom  and  d. 

0.  2.  tiiou  mayest  regard  d.  and  keep  knowledge 
11.  22.  so  is  a  fair  woman  who  is  without  d. 
ly.  11.  the  d.  of  a  man  dafeireth  his  anger 

lua.  28.  2t).  for  his  God  doth  instruct  him  to  </. 

Ji.r.  10. 12.  he||ielched  out  the  heavens  by  his  d. 
^DISDAINED. 

'«  f<am.  17. 42.  when  Goliath  saw  David,  he  d.  him 

Job  30. 1.  whose  fathers  1  would  d.  to  set  with  dogs 
DISEASE. 

Diseases  and  death  arc  the  consequences  and  ef- 
fects of  sin;  this  is  the  idea  which  we  have  of 
them  from  scripture.  The  ancient  Hebrews, 
ic/jo  iccre  very  little  versed  in  the  study  of  na- 
tural philosophy,  and  not  much  accustomed  to 
recur  to  physical  causes,  and  consult  physi- 
cians, whin  they  were  sick,  imputed  their  dis- 
eases generally  to  evil  spirits,  the  executioners 
of  divine  vengeance.  If  their  infirmities  appear- 
ed to  be  beyond  what  was  usual,  and  the  causes 
of  them  were  not  known  to  them,  they  did  not 
fail  to  say,  that  it  was  a  blow  from  the  aveng- 
ing hand  of  God ;  to  hiip  the  wisest  and  most 
religious  had  recourse  for  cure;  and  king  Asa 
ii  blamed  for  placing  his  confidence  in  physi- 
cians,when  he  had  a  very  painful  fit  of  the  gout 
in  his  feet,  and  for  not  applying  himself  to  the 
/^ord,  2  Chron.  16.  12,  In  his  disease  he  sought 
not  to  the  Lord,  but  to  the  physicians.  Job's 
friends  immediately  ascribed  all  the  distempers 
with  which  that  holy  man  was  aff.Lcted,to  God's 
justice,  Job  4.  7,  8.  J^eprosies,  which  were  so 
common  among  the  Jews,  were  treated  as  dis- 
tases  sent  by  God ;  the  priests  were  the  persons 
who  judged  of  the  nature  and  qualities  of  this 
evil, shut  up  the  diseased,and  declared  that  they 
were  healcd,or  had  their  leprosy  upon  them;  and 
after  their  recovery  they  offered  sacrifices,  as  it 
were,  to  expiate  for  their  faults.  Miriam,  Ge- 
hazi,  and  king  Uzziah,  were  smitten  suddenly 
witli  a  leprosy ;  the  first  as  a  punishment  for 
krr  detracting  discourses ;  the  second  for  his 
avarice ;  and  the  third  for  his  presumption. 
Num.  12.  10.  2  Kings  5.  27.  2  Chron.  2tj.  21. 
•I  (A'' New  Testament, fAc  cause  of  many  diseases 
is  attributed  to  the  devil.     It  is  said  there,  that 

.  the  devil  had  bound  the  woman,  loho  had  been 
bowed  dawn  for  eighteen  years,  Luke  13.  10, 
Ousht  not  this  woman,  being  a  daughter  of 
.liraham,  whom  Satan  hath  bound,  lo,  these 
(Mgliteen  years,  to  be  loosed  from  this  bond  on 
the  sabbath  day"!  h  verse  11.  the  same  person 
is  mentioned,  as  having  a  sjiirit  of  intirmity, 
that  is,  a  sorr  disease  inflicted  by  the  devil. 
fVc  are  told  of  a  dumb  devil,  and  of  another 
that  could  scarce  speal;,MaTkO.  17.  Lake  11.14. 
that  is  In  say,  which  caused  these  infirmities 
in  those  who  were  possessed  by  them  :  and 
Khenever  Christ  or  his  Jipostles  had  a  mind  to 
restore  these  indisposed  persons  to  theirhealth, 
they  began  with  casting  out  the  devils  ;  for 
the  cure  immediately  followed. 

The  Apostle  Paul  attributes  the  death  and  dis- 
eases of  many  to  their  communicating  unwor- 
thily, i  Cor.  11.  30,  For  tins  cause  many  arc 
weak  and  sickly  among  you,  and  many  sleep. 
The  samclpostle  ascribes  theinfirmilics  wlicre- 
v>ith  he  was  afflicted,  to  an  evil  angi  1, 2  Cor.  12. 
7,  There  was  given  me  a  thorn  in  the  flesh,  the 
mcsscn?or  of  Satan  to  buffet  me.  It  was  the 
destroying  angel  that  made  such  havoc  of  Sen- 
nacherib's army,  2  Kings  19.  3.5.  It  was  the 
avenging  angel  that  drew  hit  sword  against 
the  people,  and  smote  them  with  a  pestilence, 
as  a. punishment  for  David's  .'in.  1  Chron.  81. 
135 


DIS 

15,  16.  .Vo  sooner  had  Abimclech,  king  of 
Gorar,  talccn  Surah,  the  wife  of  Abraham,  for- 
cibly away,  but  he  was  threatened  with  death, 
Gen.  20.  3,  4.  Er  ana  Onan,  the  sons  u/  Juduh, 
were  carried  off  by  unknown  diseases,  for 
having  committed  actions  of  an  infamous.und 
detestable  nature,  Gen.  38.  7,  10.  And  the 
Philistines  were  smitten  with  an  ignominious 
disease,  for  not  treating  the  ark  with  that 
respect  that  it  deserved,  1  Sajn.  5.  12.  There 
are  a  great  number  of  diseases  recorded  in 
scripture,  which  were  setU  by  God  in  the  way 
of  punishment  for  sias. 
The  diseases  of  Egypt,  from  which  God  promised 
to  defend  his  people,  Exod.  15.  2b;  uad  which 
he  threatens,  in  case  of  their  disobedience,  to 
inflict  upon  them,  Deut.  28.  (50.  These  diseases 
are  either  the  plagues  with  which  God  afflicted 
Egypt  before  the  departure  of  the  Israelites,  or 
the  diseases  which  were  most  common  in  the 
country,  such  as  bliiidness,  ulcers  in  the  legs, 
consumptions,  and  the  leprosy,  called  Elepliun- 
tiasis,  which  was  peculiar  to  this  country,  as 
Pliny  observes,  JE,gy\in  peculiare  hoc  malum 
Elephantiasis. 
2  Kings  1.  2.  inquire,  whether  if  I  shall  recov.  of  d. 
8.  8.  saying,  shall  1  recover,  of  this  d.?  9. 
2  CAr.  1().12.  Asa  diseased  till  his  d.  was  exceeding 
great,  yet  in  his  d,  lie  sought  not  to  the  Lord 
21.15.  shall  have  great  sickness  by  d.oflhy  bowels 

18.  the  Lord  smote  him  with  an  incurable  d. 
Job  30. 18.  by  force  of  myrf.  is  my  garment  cliang. 
Psal.38.  7.  my  loins  are  tilled  with  a  loathsome  d. 
41.  8.  an  evil  d.  say  they,  cleaveth  fast  to  him 
Eccl.  tj.  2.  this  is  vanity,  and  it  is  an  evil  d. 
Mat.4.  23.  healing  all  maimer  of  d.  9.  35.  |  10.  1. 
John  5.4.  was  made  whole  of  whatsoever  i/.he  had 

DISEASES. 
ii;zo(/.15.26.put  none  of  these  (/.  on  yoii,/?c«^7.15. 
De!(t.2p.60.he  will  bring  on  tliee  all  the  d.  of  Egypt 
2  CAr.  21. 19.  his  bowels  fell  out,  he  died  of  sore  d. 
24.  25.  for  they  left  him  in  great  (/.  his  servants 
Psal.  103.  :i  bless  the  Lord,  who  healclh  all  thy  d. 
Hab.  3.  1 5.  and  burning  d.  went  forth  at  his  luet 
Mat.  4.  24.  brought  to  him  all  sick  peojile  that  were 
taken  with  divers  d.  Mark  1.  34.  J^uke  4.  40. 
I.uke  9.1.  gave  them  power  over  devils, and  cure  d. 
Acts  19.  12.  and  the  d.  departed  from  ihein 
28.  9.  others  which  had  d.  in  the  island,  came 

DISEASED. 
1  Kings  15. 23.  Asa  was  d.  in  his  feet,2  CAr.  10. 12. 
Eiek.  34.  4.  d.  have  ye  not  strengthened  nor  healed 
21.  because  ye  have  push,  the  d.  with  your  horns 
Mat.  9.  20.  a  woman  d.  wilh  an  issue  of  blood 

14.  35.  they  brought  all  that  were  d.  Mark  1.  32. 
John  6.  2.  saw  miracles  he  did  on  them  that  were  d. 

DISFIGURE. 
JV/at.6.1G.be  not  as  hypocrites, for  theyd.their  faces 

DISGRACE. 
Jcr.  14.  21.  do  not  d.  the  throne  of  thy  glory 

DISGUISE,  ED. 
I  Sam.  23.  8.  and  Saul  d.  himself,  and  he  went 

1  Kings  14.  2.  Jeroboam  said,  arise,  and  d.  thyself 
20.38.  one  of  the  sons  of  the  prophets  d.  himself 
22.  30.  Ahab  the  king  of  Israel  said,  I  will  d.  my- 
self, and  he  d.  himself,  2  Chron.  18.  29. 

2  CAron.  35. 22.  Josiah  d.  himself  to  fight  with  him 

DISGUISETH. 
Job  24.15.the  adulterer  also  waileth  and  d.  his  face 

DISH,  ES. 
Exod.  25.29.  thou  shalt  make  the  d.  thereof,  37.16. 
JsTum.  4.  7.  and  ]nit  tlienion  the  d.  and  the  spoons 
.Tudg.  5.  2.').  she  brought  forth  butler  in  a  lordly  d. 
2  Kinsrs  2L  13.  as  a  man  wipeth  a  d.  turning  it 
Mat.  26.  23.  dippeth  with  me  in  the  d.  Mark  14. 20. 
Dishonkst;   See  Gai.n. 
DISHONESTY. 
2  Cor.  4.2.  have  renounced  the  hidden  things  of  d. 

DISHONOUR. 
Ezra  4. 14.  was  rot  meet  for  us  to  sec  the  king's  d. 
Psal.  35.  20.  be  clothed  with  shame  and  d.  71. 13. 
(;9.  ]9.  thou  hast  known  my  shame  and  my  d. 
Prov.  0.  33.  a  wound  and  (/.  shall  he  get 
/?o?n.9.21.  make  one  vessel  to  honour,another  torf. 

1  Cor.  15.  43.  it  is  sown  in  d.  it  is  raised  in  glory 

2  Cor.O.H.  by  honour  and  d.  by  evil  and  good  report 
2  7V77I.2.20.  arc  vessels,  some  to  honour,  some  torf. 

DISHONOUR,  EST,  ETH. 
Mic.  7.6.  for  the  son  d.  father,  daughter  ag.  mother 
.lolin  8.  49.  I  honour  my  Falh^r,  and  ye  d.  me 
i?om.I.24.torf.theirown  bodies  between  themselves 
2.  23.  through  breaking  of  the  law,  d.  thou  God  ? 
1  Ctfr.11.4.  man  d.  his  head  ||  5.  woman  d.  her  head 

DISINHERIT. 
JVi/m.l4.12.IwiIlrf.lhem,nnd  make  of  thee  agrenler 

DISJOINTED, 
./rr.fi.  1 8.  be  instructed,  lest  my  soul  ho  rf.  from  the 
Ezek.  23.  f  17.  and  her  mind  was  d.  from  them 

DIS.MAYED. 
Deut .31.8.  he  will  not  fa. I  nor  forsake  tliee,fcar  not, 


DIS 

nor  he  d.  .Tosh.  1.  9.  ]  8.  I.  ]  10.  25.  1  Chr.'X 
13.  I  2c.  20.  2  Chron.  20.  15,  17.  |  32.  7. 

1  Sam.  17.1 1.  they  were  d.  2  A  ivgs  19.26.  /su.37  27 
Isa.  21.  3.  I  Wiis  bowed  d(j  wn,  (/.  a!  the  seeing  of  X 

41.  10.  fear  not,  he  nut  d.  Jcr.  1. 17.  1  10. 2. 1  23.  4 
1  30.  10.  I  46.  27.  Ei,.k.  2.  6.  |  3.  9 
23.  that  we  may  be  d.  and  behold  it  together 
.fer.  8.  9.  the  wise  men  are  d.  and  taken,  10.  2 

17.  18.  let  them  be  d.  but  let  not  me  be  d. 

46.  5.  wherefore  havel  seen  them  </.  tiiriiedback  7 
48.  1.  Misgab  is  d.  ||  49.  37.  cause  Elam  to  be  d. 
50.  36.  the  mighty  men  of  Babylon  shall  be  d. 
Obad.  9.  thy  mighty  men,  O  Teiiian,  shall  be  d.' 

DISMAYING. 

.kr.  48.  39.  Moab  shall  be  a  d.  to  all  about  him 

Eiek.'S'U.  t23.  caused  d.  in  the  laud  of  the  living 

DISMISSED. 

2  CAr.  23.  8.  Jchoi.ada  >he  jiriest  d.  not  the  courses 
Acts  15.30.when  they  were  ri. they  came  loAntioch 

19.  41.  when  he  had  thus  spoken,  he  d.  assembly 

DISOBEDIENCE. 

fio)re.5.I9.by  one  man's  (/.many  were  made  sinners 

2  Car.  10.  6.  hu>ving  in  readiness  to  revenge  all  d. 

Eph.  2.2.  the  spirit  that  workeih  in  children  of  d. 

5.  6.  wrath  of  God  on  the  children  of  rf.  Col.  3.  0. 
//<  6.2.2.everyrf.received  a  just  recoitipence  of  rew. 

4.  t  11.  lest  any  fall  by  thesanie  example  oi'  d. 
DISOBEDIENT. 
I  Kings  13.26.  man  of  God, who  was  rf.to  Iho  word 
JVcA.  9.  26.  they  were  d.  and  rebelled  against  me 
Euke  1. 17.  turn  the  d.  to  the  wisdom  of  the  just 
.Ids  20.  19.  I  was  not  (/.  to  the  heavenly  vision 
Rum.  1.  30.  boasters  d.  to  jiarents,  2  Tim.  3.  2. 

10.  21.  I  stretched  forth  my  hands  to  a  d-  people 
15.  t  31.  that  I  may  be  delivercu  from  d.  in  Judca 

1  7'i)n.l.9.  the  law  was  made  for  the  lawless  and  d. 
Tit.  1.  10.  deny  him,  being  abominable  and  d. 
3.  3.  tor  we  ourselves  also  were  bomeiimes  d. 
Heb.  11.  t  31.  Rahab  perished  not  wilh  the  d. 
1  Pet.  2.  7.  but  to  them  which  bo  (/.  the  stone  which 
8.  to  tliem  who  stumble  at  the  word,  beii:g  d. 
3. 20.  to  spirits  in  prison,  which  sometimes  were  d 

DISOBEYED. 

1  Kings  13.  21.  as  thou  hast  d.  the  mouth  of  the  L. 

DISORDERLY. 

1  Thess.  5.  t  14.  brethren,  warn  them  that  are  d. 

2  y'Afss.S.O. withdraw  from  a  brother  who  walks li. 
7.  we  behaved  not  ourselves  d.  among  you 

11.  there  are  some  who  walk  among  you  d. 

DISPATCH. 

Eiek.  23.  47.  they  shall  rf.  them  with  tneir  swords 

DISPATCHED. 
Eira  10.  t  14.  let  them  come,  till  the  matter  be  d. 

DISPENSATION. 
1  Cor.  9.,J7.  a  d.  of  the  gospel  is  committed  to  mo 
Eph.  1.  10.  in  the  rf.  of  the  fulness  of  times 
3.  2.  ye  have  heard  of  the  rf.  of  tlie  grace  of  God 
Col.  1.  25.  a  minister  according  to  the  rf.  of  God 
DISPERSE. 

1  .Vam.l4.34.Saul  said,  rf.  yourselves  among  people 
Prow.  1.5.  7.  the  lips  of  the  wise  rf.  knowledge  • 
Ezik.  12. 15.  when  I  shall  scatter  tlirm  and  rf.  thcin 

in  the  countries,  20.  23.  |  29.  12.  |  30.  2;j,  26 
22.  15.  and  1  will  rf.  thee  in  the  couiUries 
DISPERSED. 

2  Chron.  11.  23.  Rehoboam  rf.  of  all  his  children 
Esth.3.8.  there  is  a  certain  people  rf.  among  people 
Psal.  1)2.  9.  he  hath  rf.  he  hath  given,2  Cor.  9.  9. 
Proo.  5.  16.  let  thy  fountains  be  rf.  abroad 

Isa.  11.  12.  he  shall  gather  together  the  rf.  of  Judah 
Ezek.  30.  19.  tliey  were  rf.  through  the  countries 
Zeph.  3.  10.  the  daughter  of  my  rf.  shall  bring 
.Johnl.  3.5.  will  he  go  to  the  rf.  among  the  Gcnliles? 
Acts  5.  37.  and  as  many  as  obeyed  him  were  rf. 

DISPERSER. 
Jfah.  2.  1 1.  the  rf.  is  come  before  thy  face 

DISPERSIONS. 
Jcr.  23.  31.  the  davs  of  your  rf.  are  accomplished 

DISPLAYED. 
Ps.  60.  4.  thou  hast  given  a  btiniii:r  that  it  may  berf. 

DISPLEASE. 
Gen.  31.  3.5.  let  it  not  rf.  my  lord  Ihut  T  cannot  rise 
JVmn.  22.34.  if  it  rf.  thee,  I  will  get  me  back  again 

1  Sam.  29.  7.  return,  that  thou  rf.  not  the  lords 

2  Sam.  11.  25.  say  to  Jonb,  let  not  this  rf.  thee 
Prov.  24.  1?.  Icet  the  Lord  see  il,  and  it  rf.  him 

DISPLEASED. 
Gen.  .38.  10.  the  thing  which  t,-  did  rf.  the  Lord 
48.  17.  laid  right  hand  on  henl  of  Ephraim,  it  d. 
JVi(7«.  11.  1.  the  peojile  complained,  il  rf.  the  Lord 
lO.anger  of  the  L.was  kindled, Moses  also  was  d. 
1  S.im.8.6.  but  the  thing  rf.  Samuel,  when  theysa'd 

18.  8.  then  Saul  was  very  wroth,  and  the  saying  d. 
2.SaJ«.6.8.  and  David  wasd.  because  the  Lord  had 

mnde  a  breneh  uponUzzah,  1  Chron.  13.11. 

11.  27.  the  thing  David  had  done  rf.  the  Lord 

1  Kings  1.0.  his  father  had  not  rf.  him  at  any  tiiiio 
20. 43.  the  king  of  Israel  went  to  his  house  rf!  21. 4. 
1  Chron.  21.  7.  and  God  was  rf.  with  lliis  thing 
Psal.  CO.  1.  thou  hast  been  rf.  O  tuin  thyself  to  us 


rta.SO.  15.  i*  d.  him  that  there  was  no  judgment 
JJ,in.  G.  14.  tlio  king  was  sore  d.  with  Imnsell" 
Juiialii.  l.but  it(^.  Joliiih  excccdhlgly,  vvue  angry 
JiaO.  -i-  H.  »'aj  thu  Lord  d.  against  lliu  rivers  ? 
iCec/t.  1.  -.  the  Lord  hath  been  sore  d.  with  fathers 
13. 1  am  very  Borei/.  wilii  liealheii  at  ease  ;  for  I 
was  but  a  little  i/.  they  heljjed  forward  alHiclion 
Mat.  21.  15.  when  tlie  scribes  saw,  they  were  d. 
Mark  10.  H.  when  Jesus  sasv  it,  he  was  much  d. 
41. they  l)egan  to  be  much  </.withJaines  and Jolin 
Jicts  i-i.'iO.  Herod  was  highly  </•  witli  tliem  of  Tyre 

UlSPLEASLNG. 
1  h'ings  U.t  13.  he  called  them  land  of  <Z.to  this  day 

UlSl'LEASUKK. 
Dcut.  <l.  19.  for  1  was  afraid  of  the  hot  d.  of  the  Ld. 
Judir.loM.hc  more  blameless, though  1  ilothem  ad. 
{'sal.  iJ.  5.  then  shall  he  vc.\  them  in  his  .soro  d. 
*').  1.  neither  chasten  me  in  thy  hot  d.  38.  1. 
Zech.  1.  t  -•  Lord  hath  been  withii.  disjileased 

DlSJl'OSEU. 
Job  34.  13.  or  who  hath  d.  the  whole  world  ? 
37.  15.  dost  thou  know  when  God  d.  ihem  1 
licts  18.  27.  when  he  was  d.  to  pass  into  Achaia 
I  Cor.  10. 27.  bid  you  to  a  feast  and  ye  be  d.  to  go 

DISPOSliTH. 
Pial.  50.  t  23.  to  him  that  d.  his  way  aright 

DISPOdl.NG. 
Prov.  10.  33.  the  whole  d.  thereof  is  of  the  Lord 

DISPOSINGS. 
Pruv.  16. 1 1'  the'/,  of  the  heart  in  man  is  of  the  L. 

DISPOSITION. 
9cts  7.  53.  who  received  the  law  by  the  d.  of  angels 

DISPOSSESS,  EU. 
Jii'um.  32. 39.  the  children  of  Machir  d.  the  Amorite 

33.  53.  ye  shall  d.  the  inhabitants  of  the  land 
IJeut.  7.  17.  if  thou  shalt  say,  how  can  1  d.  them? 
Judir.  11.  23.  Ld.  God  of  Isr.  hath  d.  the  Amorites 

DISPUTATION. 
Jlcts  15. 2.  Paul  and  Barnabas  had  no  small  d. 

DISPUTATIONS. 
Roth.  14.  1.  him  receive,  but  not  to  doubtful  d. 

DISPUTE. 
Jab  23.  7.  there  the  righteous  might  d.  with  him 

DISPUTED. 

Mark  9.  33.  what  was  it  that  ye  d.  by  the  way  ? 

34.  for  they  had  d.  who  should  be  the  greatest 

.4f  <«y.29.Saul  <Z.against  the  Grecians,  wont  to  slay 

17.  17.  Paul  d.  in  the  synagogue  with  the  Jews 
Jiide  'J.  Michael  d.  about  the  body  of  Moses,  dursi 

DISPUTER. 
I  Cor.  1.  20.  where  is  the  d.  of  this  world  ? 

DISPUTEST. 
liom.  9.  t  20.  who  art  thou  that  d.  with  God"! 

DISPUTING. 
.^cts  G.  9.  and  them  of  Asia  d.  with  Stephen 
15.  7.  when  there  had  been  much  d.  Peter  rose  up 
li).  8.  d.  and  persuading  the  things  of  God,  9. 
24.  12.  they  neither  found  me  d.  with  any  man 

DISPUTINGS. 
Phil.1.  14.  do  all  things  without  inurmurings  and  d. 
1  Tiin.  0.  5.  perverse  d.  of  men  of  corrupt  minds 

DISQUIET. 
Jcr.  50.  34.  and  d.  the  inhabitants  of  Babylon 
DISQUIETED. 

1  .Sam.  28.  15.  why  hast  thou  d.  me  to  bring  me  up? 
/'.?.  39.  (i.  surely  they  are  (/.in  vain,  heaps  uprichi;s 

42.  5.  why  art  thou  cast  down,  O  my  soul?  why 

art  thou  d.  within  me  ?  11.  |  43.  5. 
Prov.  30.  21.  for  three  things  the  earth  is  d. 

DISaUIETNESS. 
Ps.  38. 8. 1  have  roared  by  reason  of  d.  of  my  heart 

DISSEMBLED. 
Josh.  7.  11.  they  have  also  stolen  and  d.  also 
Jer.  42.  20.  for  ye  d.  in  your  hearts,  wlien  ye  sent 
Oal.  2.  13.  the  other  Jews  d.  likewise  with  him 

DISSEMBLERS, 
/'j.  2G.  4.  with  vain  persons,  nor  will  I  go  in  with  d. 

DlSSEMBLETll. 
Prov.  20.  24.  ho  that  haletli  d.  with  his  lips 

IJISSENSION. 
JIf.ts  15.  2.  Paul  and  Barnabas  had  no  small  d. 

23.  7.  lliere  arose  a.d.  between  the  Pharisees  and 

the  Sadducoes 
10.  when  there  arose  a  ercat  d.  the  chief  captain 
DISSIMULATION. 
Rnm.  12.  9.  let  lov*  be  without  d.  abhor  evil 
6'tt/.2.13.Barnabtt«  was  carried  away  with  their  d. 

DISSOLVE. 
Dan.  5.  10. 1  harp  h-.srd  that  lliou  canst  d.  doubts 

DISS'JLVED. 
P.tal.'iS.  3.  earth  and  all  inhabitantu  thereof  are  d. 
1.11. 14.  31.  cry,  O  city,  thou  whole  Paleslmaarl  d. 

24.  19.  the  earth  is  clean  d.  the  earth  is  moved 

34.  4.  and  all  the  host  of  heaven  shall  be  d. 
^(i/i.  2.0.  gates  opened,  and  the  palace  shall  be  d. 

2  Cor.  5. 1,  if  our  houao  of  thi.ii  tabernacle  were  d. 
C  Trt.  3.  II.  seeing  that  all  these  things  shall  hud. 

12.  wherein  the  heavens  being  on  fire  shall  be  d. 
niSSOLVEST. 
Jab  30.  22.  and  thou  d.  my  substance 
130 


DIT 

Psal.  05.  t  10.  thou  d.  the  earth  with  showers 

DISSOLVING. 
Dan.  5.  12.  and  d.  of  doubts  was  found  in  Daniel 

DISTAFF. 
Prwo.31.19.to  the  S|)indlc,and  her  hands  hold  the  d. 

DISTANCES. 
Isa.  33.  t  17.  they  shall  behold  the  land  of  far  d. 

DISTANT. 
Exod.  30.  22.  one  board  had  two  tenons  cijually  d. 

DISTIL. 
/JeMt.32.2.  my  speech  shall  d.  us  dew,  as  small  rain 
Job  30.  2d.  the  clouds  d.  on  man  abundantly 

DISTINCTION. 
1  Coi .  14.  7.  except  they  give  a  d.  in  the  sounds 

_  DISTINGUISIIETH. 
I  Cor.  4.  t  7.  lor  who  d.  thee  from  another  1 

DISTINCTLY. 
jVtA.8.8.they  read  in  the  book  olthc  law  of  God  d. 

DISTRAC'lEl). 
Psal.  88.  1.5.  while  I  sutler  ihy  terrors,  I  am  d. 

DISTRACTION. 
1  Cor.  7.35.  you  mav  attend  on  tlie  Lord  without  d. 

DISTRESS. 
<?en.35.  3.  God  who  answered  me  inday  of  my(/. 
42.  21.  therefore  is  this  d.  come  upon  us 
Judg.  11  7.  ye  come  to  nie  now,  wiien  ye  arc  in  d. 

1  4sa;H.22.S}.every  one  that  was  in  (A  came  to  David 

2  Savi.  22.  7.  in  my  d.  I  called  on  the  Lord,  and 

cried  to  my  God,  Psal.  18.  0.  |  118.5.  |  120.  1. 
1  Kmgs  1.  29.  that  redeemed  my  soul  out  of  all  d. 
"Ckron.^.  22.  in  liis  d.  Aliaz  tresiiassed  more 
JVe/i.  2.  17.  I  said,  ye  see  the  d.  that  we  are  in 

9.  37.  they  have  dominion  and  we  are  in  great  d. 
Psal.  4. 1.  thou  hast  enlarged  me  when  I  was  in  d. 
ProB.  1.  27. 1  will  mock  when  d.  comt.lh  upon  you 
Isa.  5.  t  30.  if  one  look  to  the  land,  behold  d. 

25.  4.  thou  hast  been  a  strength  to  the  needy  in  d. 

53.  t  8.  he  was  taken  away  by  d.  and  judgment 
Lam.  1.  20.  behold,  O  Lord,  lor  I  am  in  d. 
Obad.  12.  norshouldestsimken  proudly  in  day  ofd. 
14.  norshouldest  ilelivercd  up  those  in  day  of  d. 
Zep/i.  1.  15.  that  day  is  a  day  of  trouble  and  d. 
17.  I  will  bring  d.  upon  men,  they  shall  walk 
Luke  21.  23.  there  shall  be  great  d.  in  the  land 
25.  on  the  earth  d.  of  nations,  with  peri)lexity 
flo/ft.  8.35.  shall  d.  separate  us  from  love  of  Christ? 
1  Cur.  7.  20.  that  this  is  good  for  the  |iiescnl  d. 
1  yAMs.3.7.we  were  comforted  over  you  in  your  d. 

DISTRESS,  EU. 
Gen.y2.7.  then  Jacob  was  greatly  afraid  and  d. 
JVhw.  22. 3.  Moab  was  d.  \\  Jud<r.%  15.  Isr.  d.  10.  9. 
Dr.ut.  2.  9.  d.  not  the  Moabitcs  ||  19.  Ammonites 

28.  53.  wherewith  enemies  shall  d.  thee,  55,  57. 

1  Sam.Yi.  6.  for  peojde  were  d.  did  hide  themselves 
14.  24.  men  of  Israel  were  rf.  ||  28. 15.  Saul  was  d. 
30.  0.  David  was  greatly  d.  for  the  peojjle  spake 

2  Sam,  1.20.  I  am  d.  for  thee,  my  brotlier  Jonathan 
2  CAr.  28.  20.  king  of  .Assyria  came  and  d.  Ahaz 
Isa.  29. 2.  yet  I  will  d.  Ariel,  there  shall  be  sorrow 

7.  that  d.  her  shall  be  as  a  dream  of  night  vision 
Jer.  10.  18.  I  will  d.  the  inhabitant.t  of  the  land 
2  Cor.  4. 8.  we  are  troubled  on  every  3ide,yet  not  d. 

DISTRESSES. 
Psal.  25.  17.  O  bring  thou  me  out  of  my  d. 
107.  0.  and  he  delivered  them  out  of  their  d. 
13.  and  he  saved  them  out  of  their  d.  19. 
28.  and  he  hringeth  them  out  of  their  d. 
Kick  30.  10.  and  Noph  shall  have  d.  daily 
2  Cor.  0. 4.  approving  ourselves  in  necessities,  in  d. 
12.  10.  I  take  jjlea-iure  in  rf.  for  Christ's  sake 

DISTRIBUTE. 
/os/i.l3  32.  which  Moses  did  d.  for  inherit. in  Moab 
2  Chr.  31.  14.  Kore  to  d.  the  oblations  of  the  Lord 
JW/(.  13.  13.  their  office  was  to  d.  to  their  brethren 
Luke  18.  22.  sell  all  thou  hast,  and  d.  to  the  poor 
F.ph.i.  T2''.  he  may  have  to  rf.  to  him  that  needeth 
I   7'im.  0.  18.  chiirge  the  rich  to  be  ready  to  d. 

DISTRIBUTED. 

.fosh.  14. 1.  Eli^azar  and  Joshua  d.  for  inheritance 

I  CAr.  2  I.  3.  David  d.  them,  both  Zadok  and  Alii- 

melech  according  to  their  ollices,  2  CAr.  2^1.  18 

./ohn  G.ll.  Jesus  gave  thanks  and  t/.lo  the  disciples 

1  Cor.  7.  17.  but  as  God  hath  d.  to  every  man 

2  Cor.  10.  13.  ac-ording  to  the  rule  G.  hath  d.  to  U8 

DISTRIBtJTETH,  ING. 
./oA  21.  17.  God  d.  sorrows  in  hia  anger 
Horn.  12.  13.  d.  to  the  necessity  of  saints,  given 

DISTRIBUTION. 
.'?c^^4.35.  d.  was  made  to  every  one  as  he  had  need 
2  C«r.  9. 13.  for  your  liberal  d.  to  them  and  all  men 
//<;A.2.  t4.God  bearing  witness, with  (/.of  H. Ghost 

DITCH. 
1  Kin/rs  21. 1 23.the  dogs  eat  Jezebel  by  (/.of  Jer.rcel 
.fob  9.  31.  vet  shalt  thou  plun"0  me  in  the  d. 
Psal.  7.  \fi.  he  is  fallen  into  the  (/.which  he  made 
Prov.  23.  27.  a  whore  is  a  deep  (/.  and  a  slrnnse 
woman  is  a  narrow  pit 
fsa.  22.  11.  ye  made  a  d.  betwotm  the  two  walls 
Dan.  9.  t  25.  ond  the  d.  even  in  troublous  times 
Mat.  15. 14.  both  shall  fall  iniu  thu  d.  Luke  U.  39. 


DIV 

DITCHES. 
2^in^*3.16.thus  saith  L.make  this  valley  full  of  i 

DIVERS,  E. 
Lev.  10. 19.  nor  let  thy  cattle  gender  with  d.  kinds 
Dcut.  22.  9.  not  sow  thy  vineyard  with  d.  seeds 

II.  thou  shalt  not  wear  a  garment  of  (/.  sorlg 
25.  13.  thou  shalt  not  have  ui  thy  bag  d.  weighta 

14.  in  thy  house  d.  measures,  great  and  small 
Judg.  5.  30.  to  Sisera  a  prey  of  (/.  colours,  a  pre 
of  (/.  colours  of  necdlc-work,  on  both  aider 
2  Sam.  13.  16.  Tamar  had  agarm.of  (/.  colour8,l!) 

1  CAr.  29.  2.  prepared  glistering  stones  of  (/.colour* 

2  Citron.  10.  14.  they  laid  Asa  in  the  boil  whic» 

was  filled  with  odours  and  (/.  kinds  ol'8|iicc- 
21.  4.  Jehoram  slew  d.  of  the  jirinces  of  Israel 

30.  II.  (/.  of  Asher  humbled  themselves 

F.stli.  I.  7.  the  vessels  being  (/.  one  from  another 
3.  8.  their  laws  are  d.  fnmi  all  peojile 

Psal.  78.  45.  he  sent  d.  sorts  of  Hies  among  them 
105.  31.  ho  spake,  there  came  d.  sorts  of  Hies 

fr«B.20.IO.  (/.weights  an(l(/.mcasures  abominatioB 
23.  (/.  weights  are  an  abomination  to  the  Lord 

7Ccc/.5.7.tlierc  are  also  d.  vanities;  but  fear  thou  O 

.RieA.lG.lG.lhou  deckest  liighjilaccs  with(/.colourB 

17.3.  great  eagle  had  d.  colours,  came  to  Lebanon 
/.la)!. 7. 3. great  beasts  came  up,  d.  one  from  anothet 

7.  a  fourth  beast  d.  from  all  the  beasts,  19. 
21).  d.  from  all  kingdoms  ||  24.  (/.from  the  first 
Mat.  4. 24.  they  brought  to  Jesus  sick  jieople  taken 
with  d.  diseases,  Mark  1.  34.  J^nke  4.  40 
24.  7.  there   shall   be  famines, ^stilenccs,  and 
earthquakes  in  d.  places,  Markn.H.  jAihe  21.11 
Mark  8. :).  for  d.  of  them  came  from  far 
Jlcls  19. 9.  for  when  d.  were  hardened,  believed  not 

1  Cur.  12.  10.  to  another  d.  kinds  of  tongues 

2  T(m.3.G.captivc silly  women  led  away  with  (/.lusti 
Til.  3.  3.  deceived,  serving  d.  lusts  and  pleasures 
Hcb.  1.1.  who  in  if.  manners  spake  in  time  past 

2.  4.  G.  bearing  witness  with  signs  and  d.  miracles 

9.  10.  stood  in  d.  washings  ||  Kl.  9.  d.  doctrines 
.lam.  1.  2.  count  it  joy  when  fall  into  d.  temptationt 

DIVERSITIES. 

1  Cor.  12.  4.  d.  of  gifts  ||  fi.  d.  of  operations 
28.  God  hath  set  in  the  church  d.  of  tongues 

DIVIDE. 
Gen.  1.  0.  and  let  the  firmament  d.  the  waters 

14.  be  lights,  to  d.  the  day  from  the  night,  18. 
49.  27.  and  at  night  he  shall  d.  the  spoil 
F.iod.  14.10.  stretch  thy  hand  over  the  sea  and  d.  it 

21.  35.  (/.  the  money  of  it,  d.  the  dead  o.\ 

20.  'Si.  vail  shall  d.  between  holy  and  most  holy 
/,cu.  1.  17.  cleave  it,  but  not  rf.  it  asunder,  5.8. 

11.4.  not  eatoflhem  that  (/.the  hoof,7./>(-((M4.7 
jV«m.  :il.  27.  and  d.  the  prey  into  two  parts 

.33.  54.  ye  shall  d.  the  land  by  lot,  34.  17,  18,  29. 
/.^ei(/.l9.3.(/.  the  coasts  of  thy  land  into  three  parti 
Josh.  1.  0.  d.  for  an  inheritance,  13.  0,  7.  ||  18.  5. 

22.  8.  (/.the  spoil  of  your  enemies  with  brethren 

2  Ham.  19.  29.  I  said,  thou  and  Ziba  d.  the  \ani 

1  Kings  3.  25.  d.  the  living  child  in  two,  20. 
JVcA.  9.  1 1,  and  thou  didst  d.  the  sea,  Psal.  74. 13. 

22.  and  thou  didst  d.  Ihem  into  corners 
.fob  27.  17.  the  innocent  shall  d.  the  silver 
Psal.  55.  9.  destroy,  O  Lord,  and  d.  their  tongues 
Prov.  16.  19.  than  to  d.  the  spoil  with  the  proud 
Isa.  9.  3.  as  men  rejoice  when  they  d.  the  spoil 

53.  12.  he  shall  rf.  the  spoil  with  the  strong 
Ezek.  5.  1.  lake  the  balances  and  rf.  the  hair 

45.  1.  ye  shall  rf.  the  land  by  lot,  47.  21,  22. 

48.  29.  this  is  the  land  which  ye  shall  rf. 
Dan.  11.  39.  and  he  shall  rf.  the  land  for  gain 
Luke  12.  13.  tlint  he  rf.  the  inheritance  with  me 

22.  17.  take  this,  and  rf.  it  among  voursclves 

/  iritl  DIVIDE. 
<7cn.49.7.  fwiltd.  Ihem  in  Jacob  and  scatter  in  I»i. 
F.xod.  15.  9.  the  enemy  said  /  will  rf.  the  spoil 
Ps.  60.6.  /  will  rf.  Shechem,  nnd  mete  out,  108.  7. 
Isa.  53. 12.  therefore  will  I  d.  him  a  portion 

DIVIDED. 
Ocn.  1.  4.  God  rf.  the  light  ||  7.  God  rf.  the  waters 

10.  5.  by  these  were  the  isles  of  the  Gcntifes  d. 
2.5.  in  his  days  was  the  earth  rf.  1  CAron.  1.  19. 
32.  by  thcdc  were  the  nations  rf.  after  the  flood 

14.  1.5.  and  Abram  rf.  himself  against  Ihem 

15.  10.  .Abram  rf.  them  in  midst,  the  birds  rf.hc  not 

32.  7.  Jacob  (/.  the  people  that  was  with  them 

33.  1.  he  rf.  the  children  to  Leah  and  Rachel 
F.xod.  H.  21.  the  sea  dry  land, and  waters  wvttd 
JV«m.  20.  .V).  to  Ihesethe  land  shall  herf.for  inhrrit 

.lO.  by  lot  shall  the  possession  of  the  land  be  d. 

31.  42.  which  Moses  rf.  from  men  that  warred 
Dtut.  4.  19.  which  the  Lord  thy  flo.l  hnih  rf. 

29.  t  2().  gods  who  had  not  rf.  to  thi'm  any  portion 

32.  8.  when  the  most  High  rf.  to  the  natKuis 
./«.«A.  14.  .5.  thevrf.lhe  land,  18.  10.  |  19.  51   |  23.4. 
Judrr.  ,S.30.  have  they  not  rf.  the  prey,  to  every  man 

7.  16.  he  rf.  the  300  men  into  three  compiinics 
9.  43.  Abimelerh  d.  Ihem  into  three  rninpnnies 
19.  29.  T<evitcrf.  her  with  her  bones  into  12picCRS 

2  Sam.  1.  23.  and  in  their  death  tliev  were  not  d. 


DIV 

1  Kings  16. 21.  then  were  the  people  of  larael  d. 
Id.tj.Ahab  and  Obadiab  d.  the  land  between  them 

2  Kings  2. 8.  the  waters  were  d.  lather  and  thither 

1  CAr. 23.  6. Dav. d.  thera  into  couises  among  Lev. 
24.  4.  chief  men,  thus  were  they  d.  by  lot,  5. 

2  Chron.  35.  13.  they  d.  other  otierin^'a  speedily 
Job  38.  25.  who  hath  d.  a  water-course  lor  waters? 
Psal.  68.  12.  she  that  tarried  at  home  d.  the  spoil 

78.  13.  he  d.  iho  sea  and  caused  them  to  pass 

55.  d.  them  an  inheritance  by  linu.  Acts  13.  19. 
136.  13.  to  him  which  d.  the  Ued  sea  into  parts 
Isa.  33.  23.  then  is  the  prey  of  a  great  spoil  d. 
34.  IT.  his  hand  hatti  d.  it  to  them  by  line 
51.  15. 1  am  the  Lord  thy  Gud  that  d.  the  sea 
Lam.  4.  16.  the  anger  of  the  Lord  hath  d.  them 
Kzek.  1. 1  11.  their  wings  were  d.  above 
37.  22.  nor  shall  they  be  d.  into  two  kingdoms 
Van.^Al.  kingdom  shall  be  d.butstrengin  of  iron 
5.  28.  thy  kingdom  is  d.  and  given  to  tlie  Medes 
11.4.hie  kingdom  shall  bo  (/.toward  the  four  « inds 
Uus.  10.  2.  their  heart  is  d.  now  shall  they  be 
found  faulty 
Amos  1.  t  13.  because  they  d.  the  mountains 
7.  17.  thy  land  siiall  be  d.  by  line,  shall  die 
Mic.  2.  4.  turning  away,  he  hath  d.  our  fields 
Zeck.  14.  1.  thy  spoil  shall  be  d.  in  the  midst 
Jilat.  12.  25.  every  kingdom  or  house  d.  against  it- 
self shall  not  stand,  Jl'arli  3.  24,  25.  J^uU  11. 17. 
26.  he  IS  d.  ag.  himself,  Mark  3. 26.  Luke  11. 18. 
Mark  6.  41.  the  two  fishus  d.  he  among  ttiera 
LiUke  12.  52.  there  shall  be  five  in  one  iiouse  d. 
53.  the  father  shall  be  d.  against  the  son,  and  son 
15.  12.  and  he  d.  unto  them  his  living 
Acts  14.  4.  the  multitude  of  ttie  city  was  d.  23.  7. 
1  Cor.1.13.  isChristf/.)'  was  Paul  crucified  foryou! 
Rev.  16.  19.  the  great  city  was  d.  into  tliree  parts 

DIVIDER. 
£.ui"el2.14.he  said, man,  who  made  me  ad.over  you? 

DIVIDLTH. 
Z.e!'.  11.  4.  cheweth  the  cud, but  d.  not  the  hoof,5,6. 
26.  the  carcases  of  every  beast  which  d.  the  hoof 
Deut.  14.  8.  the  swine,  because  it  d.  the  hoof 
Job  26.  12.  he  d.  the  sea  with  his  power 
Psal.  29.  7.  the  voice  of  the  Lord  d.  the  flames 
Jer.  31.35.  which  d.  the  sea  when  the  waves  roar 
JV/at.25.32.as  a  shepherd  rf.his  sheep  from  the  goats 
L,uke  11.  22.  taketh  his  armour,  and  d.  his  spoils 

DIVIDING. 
Josh.  19.  49.  they  had  made  an  end  of  d.  the  land 

51.  so  they  made  an  end  of  d.  the  country 
Jia.  63.  12.  led  them,  d.  the  water  before  them 
l/au.  7. 25.  until  a  time,and  times,  and  a  d.  of  time 

1  Cor.  12.  11.  d.  to  every  man  severally  a^s  he  will 

2  Tim.2.15.  a  workman  rightly  d.  the  won!  of  truth 
ffei.  4.  12.  piercing  to  the  d.  asunder  of  the  joints 

DIVINATION. 

TheF.asternpeople.,aii.d  particularly  tke\sr3.c\\\.cs, 
toere  always  very  fond  of  div\na.tions, magic,and 
the  curious  arts  of  interpreting  dreams, anil  in- 
quiring, by  unlaioful  methods,  into  tke  know- 
ledgcof  whatiDos  to  come-  this  was  a  consequence 
of  their  timorous  and  superstitious  genius. 
HTien  Mosee published  the  law  of  God,  this  evil 
was  and  had  been  for  some  timevery  cominonin 
Egypt,  and  the  neighbouring  countries;  and  to 
cun  t/ielsra.e]\lesnj'  their  inclination  to  consult 
diviners,  fortune-tellers,  augurs,  and  interpre- 
ters of  dreams,  iS-c.  he  promised  them  from  God 
that  the  Spirit  of  prophecy  should  not  depart 
from  among  them;  and  forbade  them,under  very 
severe  penalties,  to  consult  diciners,  astrolo- 
gers, and  other  persons  of  this  ki^d.  He  co 
manded  them  to  be  stoned ,  who  pretended  to  have 
a  familiar  spirit,or  Ihespirit  «/(livination,  Lev. 
20.  27.  And  in  Deut.  18.  9,  10,  11, 15,  Ae  says, 
When  thou  art  come  into  the  land  which  the 
Lord  thy  God  givelh  thee,  thou  shalt  not  learn 
to  do  after  tlie  abominations  of  those  nations. 
There  shall  nothe  found  among  you  anyone  that 
maketh  his  son  or  his  daughter  to  pass  through 
the  fire,  or  that  useth  divination,  or  an  observer 
of  times,  or  an  enchanter,  or  a  witch:  Or  a 
cliarmer,  or  a  conaulter  with  familiar  spirits,  or 
a  wizard,  or  a  necromancer.  God  v,-!!!  raise 
up  unto  thee  a  Prophet,  from  the  midst  of  thee, 
of  thy  brethren,  like  unto  me;  unto  him  ve 
shall  hearken.  The  writings  of  the  prophets 
are  full  of  invectives  against  the  Israelites, 
who  consulted  diviners,  and  against  the  false 
prophets,  who  set  up  to  forelel  things  future, 
and  by  this  means  seduced  the  people,  Jer.  14. 
14.     Ezek.  13.  6,  7. 

There  were  several  sorts  of  divinations,  namely. 


DIV 

Joseph's  cup,  mentioned  m  Gen.  44. 5,  which  was 
concealed  iniSenjamin's  sack,  the  younger  bro- 
ther of  this  Patriarch,  is  the  subject  of  many 
different  cuvjectures,  jounded  on  the  words  of 
Joseph's  ojicer.  Is  not  lliis  the  cup  in  w  hich  my 
lord  drinketh,  and  whereby  he  divinelh  ?    kome 
question  whether  Joseph  did  indeed  make  use 
of  this  cup  in  foretelling  what  was  to  come; 
whether  his  people  believed  so,  or  whether  this 
was  said  by  them,  accordii.g  to  the  common  opi- 
nion of  the  Egyptians,  who  hi  Id  Jose))h  for  a 
great  magician;  or  whether  inujsaid  so  to  inti- 
midate Joseph's  brethren,  making  them  believe, 
that  Josej)h,  whom  as  yet  they  knew  not  to  be 
their  brother,  was  a  man  very  expert  in  the  art 
of  divining,  and  had  discovered  the  theft  which 
they  had  committed,  by  virtue  of  this  art. 
Jill  tacse  several  opinions  have  their  defenders. 
It  is  certain,  that  the  aricients  had  a  sort  of  di- 
vination by  cups.    The  easternpeople  say,  that 
old  AiH^Giamschid,  who  is  the  boloiiion  of  the 
Persians,  and  Alexander  the  Great,had  cups,  by 
means  whereof  they  luiew  things  natural,  and 
sometimes  even  supernatural.     The  ancients 
speak  of  certain  divining  cups  full  of  wine,  or 
other  liquors,  which  were  poured  out  with  cere- 
mony from  the  side  where  the  handle  was,  and 
that  from  thence  they  drew  presages  of  what 
was  to  come.    Pliny  speaks  of  divinations  with 
water  and  basins,in  lib..\.\.t.  cajj.2.   The  manner 
of  divining  by  theGoblet  was  this:  Little  plates 
of  gold,  or  silver,  or  some  precious  stones, with 
certain  characters  engraved  upon  them,  were 
thrown  into  it;  and  after  some  invocations,  and 
superstitious  ceremonies,  the  Demon  was  con- 
sulted. He  answered  in  several  ways,sometimes 
by  articulate  sounds ;  sometimes  he  made  the 
characters  in  the  Goblet  appear  upon  the  su- 
perficies of' the  water,  and  formed  his  answer 
by  the  order  in  which  they  stood.    Sometimes  he 
traced  the  images  of  the  person  on  whose  ac- 
count he  was  interrogated,    .fit  other  times  a 
ring  was  fastened  to  a  thread,  and  held  sus- 
pended over  the  water  in  the  cup:  the  ring,  by 
its  different  pei'cussions,  shewed  the  several 
things  which  were  inquired  after. 
But  as  to  Joseph  it  is  not  to  be  believed,  that  he 
used  his  cup  in  divinations :  he  was  too  wise 
and  religious  topractise  any  thing  so  vain,and 
so  contrary  to  religion,  as  divination.-,  of  what 
nature  soever  they  might  be.    }Ie  was  certainly 
very  skilful  in  the  science  of  foretelling  things 
to  come  ;  but  this  knowledge  was  not  acquired; 
it  was  no  carious  and  diabolical  art,  but  some 
supernatural  faculty  which  God  hud  commu- 
nicated to  him,  whereby  he  procured  that  high 
consideration  ae  was  in  throughout  Egypt.   It 
is  not  incredible  that  the  ICgyjilians,  and  per- 
haps some  of  his  own  people,  might  think  him 
to  be  truly  a  magician,  and  might  have  spoken 
of  him  according  to  this  prejudice;  but  it  does 
not  follow,  that  he  used  a  cup  in  divining. 
The  Hebrew  text  o/ Genesis  will  bear  another 
construction.     Is  not  this  the  cup  wherein  my 
liird  drinks,  and  searches  for  so  carefully  ?   Or, 
Is   not  this  the  cup   wherein   my  lord  drinks, 
and  by  which  he  has  tried  you  ?     He  will  try 
whether  you    arc  as    acknowledging  as   you 
ought  to  be,  for  the  particular  favours  he  has 
shewn  you.     This   cup  will  serve   to  give  a 
proof  of  your  ingratitude  and  infidelity. 
DivinHtion  hy  the  wand  is  taken   notice  of  in 
Ezek.  21.  21,  22.  and  in  Hos.  4.  12.     The  king 
of  Babylon  stood  at  the  parting  of  the  way,  to 
use   divination;    he    niaile   his    arrows   bright. 
Kither  writing  on  these  arroios,  the  names  of 
cities,  and  countries,  then  putting  them  into  a 
gainer,  and  mixing  them,  and  thence  drawing 
them   out,  and   concluding  according   as  the 
names  were,  which  were  on  the  arrows :  Or,  by 
shooting   the   arroits,   and  judging   by  their] 
flight;  or  casting  them  np  in  the  air,  and  di- 
vining by  their  fall.     In  the  same  passage, 
divination  by  the  entrails  of  victims  /*  taken 
notice  of ;  He  consulted  with  images,  he  looked 
into  the  liver.     From  the  position  and  colour 
of  the  liver,  they  used  to  judge  of  future  pros- 
perous, or  iinprosperous  events. 
JVu7n.22. 7.  with  the  rewards  of  </.  in  tfieir  hand 
23.  23.  neither  is -there  any  d.  against  Israel 
Deut.  18.  10.  or  that  useth  d.  2  Kings  17. 17. 
1  Sam.  l^t.  t  23.  rebellion  is  as  the  sin  of  d. 
Prov.  16.  t  10.  d.  is  in  the  lips  of  the  kin, 


water,  fire,  earth,  air ;  by  the  flight  of  birds,    .lev.  14.  14.  they  prophesy  unto  vou  visions  «iid  d. 
and  their  singing;  by  lots,  by  dreams,  by  the    Ezek.  12.  24.  nor  flattering  d.  in  Israel 


staff,  or  wand,  by  theentrails  of  victims,  and 
by  cups.  The  heathens  used  many  divinations, 
teing  excited  thereto  by  distrust  of  God,  and 
tke  temptations  of  the  devil,  who  had  a  great 
kandin  many  of  their  answer/,  Acts  16. 19. 
137 


13.  6.  they  have  seen  vanity,  and  lying  d. 
7.  and  have  ye  not  epoken  a  lying  d.? 

21.  21.  the  king  of  Babylon  stood  to  use  d. 
22.  at  his  right  hand  was  the  d.  of  Jerusalem 
S3,  it  shall  be  to  them  .is  a  false  d.  in  their  eight 
V 


DIV 

Acts  16. 16.  a  damsel  possessed  wij»  a  apirit  of  rf 

DiVlNA'l'lONS. 
Ezek.  13.  23.  ye  shall  bee  no  more  divine  d. 

DIVINE. 
(7c«.  44. 15. wot  ye  not  that  sucl»a  man  asl  can  d..' 

1  Sam.  28.  8.  d.  lo  iiie  by  the  familiar  spirit 
Ezek.  13.  y.  my  hand  on  the  piopliets  that  d.  lies 

23.  ye  shall  see  no  more  vanity,  or  d.diviaaiions 
21. 29.  whiles  they  d.  a  lie  unto  ihee  to  bring  liiee 
^;«;.3.6.  it  shall  be  dark  lo  you,  that  ye  shall  not<t 
il.  and  the  ]iroiihets  thereof  d.  lor  money 
DIVINE,  Adjictive. 
Prov.  16. 10.  a  d.  senlence  is  m  the  lips  of  the  king 
//ci.y.l. first  covenant  had  ordinances  aid.  service 

2  Pet.  1. 3.  as  his  (/.power  hath  given  to  ub  all  things 

4.  that  yo  might  be  partakers  of  the  d.  naturu 
DlVlNLR,  S. 
Deut.  18.  14.  for  these  nations  hearkened  to  d. 
.Josh.  13.  t  22.  Balaam  the  d.  did  Israel  slay 
1  Sam.  6.  2.  liie  Philistines  called  lor  the  d. 
Isu.  41.  25.  that  lurnuth,  that  maketh  d.  mad 
Jer.  27.  9.  therefore  hearken  not  to  your  d. 
29.  8.  let  not  your  prophets  and  d.  deceive  you 
Mic.  3. 7.  seers  be  ashamed,  and  the  d.  confounded 
Zech.  10.  2.  the  d.  have  seen  a  lie,  lold  false  dr(3am» 

DIVINETH. 
Gen.  44.  5.  is  not  this  it  whereby  indeed  he  d.? 

DIVINING. 
Ezek.  22.  28.  seeing  vanity,  and  d.  lies  to  them 
JItc.  3.  I  6.  it  shall  ho  dark  unto  you  from  d. 

DIVISION. 
Exod.  8.  23. 1  will  put  a  d.  between  my  people 

1  Chr.  1. 1  i9.  the  n;jne  ol  Eher's  son  was  Peleg,  d 

2  Chrun.  35.  5.  according  to  ilie  d.  of  ihe  Levites 
Cant.  2.  t  17.  as  a  hart  on  the  mountains  of  d. 
Luke  12.  51.  I  tell  you,  nay,  but  rather  d. 

John  7.  43.  so  there  «  as  a  d.  among  the  people, 

because  of  him,  'J.  10.  1  10.  19. 

1  Cor.  12.  t  25.  there  should  be  no  d.  in  the  body 

D1VI.S10NS. 
Josh.  11.  23.  gave  the  land  to  Israel,  according  to 
their  (/.  12.  7.  [  18.  10.  2  Chron.  35.  5,  12. 
Judg.  5. 15.  for  the  d.  ol  Reuben,  there  were  great 
thoughts  of  heart,  16. 
1  Sam.  23.  f  23.  called  the  place  the  rock  of  d. 
1  Chron.  23.  t  6.  David  divided  them  into  d. 
24.  1.  these  are  the  d.  of  the  sons  of  Aaron 
26.  1.  concerning  the  d.  of  ihe  porlers,  12,  19. 
EzraG.  18.  they  seltlie  jiriestsin  tlieir(i.JVfA.11.36. 
Tio?/). 10.17. mark  them  w  hich  cause  d.  and  offences 
1  Cor.  1.  10.  that  there  he  no  d.  among  you 
3.  3.  whereas  there  is  among  you  strife  and  d. 
11.  18.  I  hear  that  there  be  rf.  among  you 
DIVORCE 
Is  the  dissolution  of  marriage,  or  a  separation 
of  husband  and  wife.  Moses  tolerated  divorces: 
His  words  on  this  subject,  are  in  Deut.  24. 1, 
2,  3,  4,  When  a  man  hath  taken  a  wife  and 
married  her,  and  it  come  lo  pass  that  she  find 
no  favour  in  his  eyes,  because  he  hath  found 
some  uncleanness  in  her ;   then  let  him  write 
her  a  bill  of  divorcement,  iSc.     Commentators 
are  much  divided  conQcrning  the  sense  of  these 
words,  because  he  hath  found  some  unclean 
ne-s,  or,  as  the  Hebrew  has  it,  matter  of  na- 
kedness, in  her. 
The  school  of  Shammah,  who  lived  a  little  before 
our  Saviour,  taught,  that  a  man  could  not  law- 
fully be  divorced  from  his  wife,  unless  he  had 
found  her  guilty  of  some  action  which  was 
really  infamous,  and  contrary  to  the  rules  o, 
virtue.  But  the  school  (f  llWlc),  who  tra*  Sham 
mall's  disciple,  taught,  on  the  contrary,  that  tin 
least  reasons  were  sufficient  to  authorize  a  man 
to  put  away  hi^  wife;  for  example,  if  she  did 
not  dress  his  meat  well,  or  if  he  found  any 
woman  whom  he  liked  better.     He  translated 
Moses'  text  thus:  If  he  hath  found  any  Ihini 
in  her,  or  an  uncleanness.     Akiba,Ac  affxrmet 
that  it  was  svflicient  cause  for  a  wan  to  pj> 
away  his  wife,  if  she  were  not  agreeable  to  ha 
husband.     After  this  manner  he  explained  th 
text  of  Moses :  If  she.find  no  favour  in  his  eyes 
this  was  the  frst  reason  :  the  second  was.  If  he 
find  any  uncleanness  in  her.  Josephus  and  Philo 
shew  sujficiintly,  that  in  their  time  <Ae  Jews 
believed  divorce  to  he  lawful  upon  very  trivial 
causes.     But  nothing  can  justify  such  a  pro- 
cedure but  adultery,  whereby  the  marriage  re- 
lation is  radically  dissolved.  Mat.  5.  .32. 
That  the  Pharisees  explained  this  toleration  of 
Moses  in  the  like  extensive  manner,  may  be 
gathered  from  the  question  they  put   to  our 
Saviour,  Mat.  19.  3,  Is  it  lawful  for  a  man  to 
put  away  his  wife  for  every  cause  ?   This  they 
proposed  to  our  Saviour,  trying  if  they  could 
get  any  thing  from  him  to  his  prejudice.  Had 
ke  answered  in  the  affirmative,  he  had  contra- 
dicted what  he  formally  delivered  on  this  head, 
Mat  5.  32.     Had  Ae  denied,  tkty  would  havt 


DO 

accused  him  for  contradicting  tAe  iaico/ Moses, 
Jieut.  i!4. 1.  Uur  Haciour  answered  neither  yea 
nor  nay,  but  gave  litem  a  fair  occasion  to  an- 
swer t/iemsclves,  and  tacitly  charged  them  with 
ignorance  aninorruption  of  the  law  of  (/oU. 
He  referred  them  to  the  Jint  institution  of 
viarriage,  in  Ovn.  1.  27.  |  iJ.  24,  Have  ye  not 
read,thdt  he  who  made  them  at  the  bijgiiinhig, 
made  them  male  and  female  1  and  said.  For 
thia  cause  shall  a  man  leave  father  and  mother, 
and  shall  cleave  to  his  wife,  and  they  twain 
shall  be  one  flesh.  Wherefore  they  ate  no 
more  twain,  but  one  flesh.  What  therefore  God 
hath  joined  together,  let  no  man  put  asunder. 
J-'roui  hence  he  leaves  thtm  to  conclude,  ithcther 
it  was  probable  that  Moses,  whom  they  so 
reverenced,  and  who  was  so  faithful  in  the 
house  of  God  as  a  servant,  did  give  them  a 
liberty  to  put  asunder  those  whom  God  had 
Joined  together.  Or  whether  they  had  not  put 
an  interpretation  upon  the  law  of  Moses, 
which  it  could  nut  bear,  in  consistency  with  the 
law  of  God.  Our  Huviour  adds,  thai  Moses, 
because  of  the  hardness  of  your  hearts,  suffered 
you  to  put  away  your  wives;  but  from  the  bo- 
ginning  it  was  not  60  ;  that  is,  Moses  gave  you 
no  positive  command  in  the  ccu-^e  ;  he  could  not 
make  a  law  directly  opposite  to  the  law  of  God. 
But  seeing  your  wicked  and  malicious  dispo- 
sition, that  you  would  turn  away  your  wives 
without  any  just  and  warrantable  cause,  and 
to  restrain  your  extravagancies  of  cruelty  to 
your  wives,  or  disorderly  turning  them  off  upon 
any  occasion,  he  made  a  judicial,  political,  or 
civil  law,  lohereby,  upon  reason  of  state, name- 
ly, to  prevent  a  greater  civil  mischief,  he  did 
so  far  allow  of  it,  as  to  ezempt  them  that  did 
it  from  any  civil  punishment ;  but  still  it  was 
a  transgres.iion  of  the  moral  law,  and  so  a  sin 
arrainst  God.  .Hftcr  which  our  Saviour  de- 
termines on  this  qncslion,  according  to  the 
original  law  of  God,  and  limits  the  pirmission 
of  divorce  to  the  .tingle  case  of  adultery :  And 
I  say  unto  you.  Whosoever  shall  put  away  his 
wife,  czcept  it  be  for  fornication,  and  shall 
marry  another,  cornrnitteth  adultery,  and  whoso 
marrieth  her  that  is  put  away,  doth  commit 
adultery.  In  the  case  of  adultery,  the  mar- 
riage covenant  being  broken,  the  marriage- 
bond  is  fundamentally  dissolved,  and  it  lies 
in  the  power  of  the  party  wronged  to  prose- 
cute it  to  a  firuial  di.tsoiution,  by  divorce  ; 
and  then  the  wronged  party  is  at  liberty  to 
marry  again. 

Jer.'X  b.  I  had  put  her  away,  and  given  a  bill  of  d. 
DIVORCKD. 

I.cr.  21. 14.  high-priest  shall  not  take  a  d.  woman 
■i2.13.but  if  the  priest's  (hiiigliter  be  a  widow  or  d. 

.\'um.  30.  9.  every  vow  of  her  that  is  d.  shall  stand 

Mat.  5.  32.  whosoever  shall  marry  her  that  is  d. 
DIVORCKMIONI? 

Deut.  24.  1.  then  let  him  write  her  a  bill  ot  d.  3. 

/.to.  50.  1.  where  is  the  bill  of  your  mother"*  d.? 

.Mark  10.  4.  Moses  sulTered  to  write  a  bill  of  </. 
Hce  Writing. 

no. 

<7r7i.lfi.C.  Abraham  said, rfotolior  as  it  pleaseth  thee 
18.2.').  shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right? 

31.  16.  now  then  what  God  hath  said  to  thee,  do 

32.  12.  thou  saidst,  I  will  suiely  do  llice  good 
41.25.  G.  hath  shewed  what  he  is  about  to(^e<,2ft. 
Ezod.  4. 15.  and  1  will  leach  you  what  ^e  shall  </o 

12.  t  47.  all  the  congregation  shall  do  il 
15. 2C.  if  thou  wilt  (/o  that  which  is  right, and  keep 
hisBtftlutcs.yjcut.0. 18.  I  12.25.  |  13. 18.  |  21.  9. 
18.20.  and  shew  them  the  work  that  thoy  mustr/u 
19. 8.  nil  that  the  Lord  hath  spoken  we  will  do 
20.  9.  six  dayR  do  all  thy  work,  23. 12.  J)rnl.  5.  13. 

29.  35.  thus  shall  thou  do  to  Aaron  and  his  sons 
J.ev.  18.  4.  ye  shall  do  my  judgmenUi,  and  keep 

my  ordinances,  19.  37.  |  20.  22.  Ezek.  36.  27. 
S.which  if  m.in  do,  J^eh.  9.29.  K7.ek.  20.11,13,21. 
25.  18.  ye  shall  do  mv  Btatutes  and  keen  my  judg- 
m.nlB,  20.  8.  I  22.  31.  Deut.  17.  19.  |'2't).  l(i. 
^Tum.  22.  20.  word  I  say  to  thee,  that  shall  thou  do 
24.  14.  what  this  people  shall  do  to  thy  people 
32.25.thy  servants  will  do  as  toy  lord  commaiidelh 
J)rul.5.  f  1.  that  ye  may  learn, and  keep  to  do  them 
7. 11.  keep  the  commandmenl.s  to  i/o  them,  11.22. 
17.  10.  shall  do  according  to  the  sentence,  11. 
19  19.  then  shall  yo  do  to  liim  as  he  thought  to  do 
20.  15.  thus  shall" thou  do  to  all  Ww  rM.'H 
27.  20.  all  Ihe  words  of  this  law  Id  do  them 

30.  12.  that  wc  may  hear  it  and  do  it,  13. 

31.4.  the  liOrd  shall  do  to  Ihrm  ns  he  did  to  Sihon 
'JQ.G.do  yo  thus  requite  tho  L.  O  loolish  people 
y«nA.6.3.  round  the  city,  thui  shall  thou  do  six  days 
7.  9.  and  what  wilt  thou  do  to  thy  gieat  name  1 
10.  25.  thus  shall  tho  T^ird  do  to  your  enemies 
32. 24.  what  have  ye  to  do  with  the  God  of  Israfl?, 
138 


DO 

JojA.23.6.to  do  all  that  is  written  in  the  book  of  the 
law  of  Moses,  that  ye  turn  not  aside  there- 
from, 1  Chron.  Iti.  40.  2  Ctiron.  34.  21. 
Judg.  7.  17.  it  shall  be,  that  as  1  do  so  shall  ye  do 
».  3.  what  was  1  able  to  do  in  comparison  ol  you! 
10. 15.  dolo  us  whatsoever  seemeth  good  to  thee 
Id.  14.  consider  therefore  what  ye  havo  to  do 
IM.  then  said  the  priest  unto  them,  what  d.  ye  1 
Ruth  3.  4.  he  will  tell  thee  what  thou  shall  do 

1  tiam.  Iti.  3. 1  will  show  thee  what  thou  shall  do 
22.  3.  till  1  know  what  God  will  do  for  me 

21). 25.  thou  ^hall  do  greal  things,  and  still  prevail 

2  Sam.  3.  J8.  now  then  do  it,  tho  Lord  hath  spoken 
15.  4.  oh  that  I  were  judge,  1  would  do  him  justice 

20.  here  I  am,  let  lum  do  to  me  as  seemeth  good 
21.  t  4.  it  is  not  silver  we  have  to  do  with  Kaul 
24. 12.  that  I  may  do  il  to  thee,  1  Chron.  21.  10. 

1  Kings  ^2.  6.  do  therefore  according  to  thy  wisdom 

31.  do  as  he  hath  said,  and  fall  upon  him 

8.  32.  then  hear,  and  do,  and  judge  thy  servants 
39.  hear  in  heaven,  forgive,  and  do,  2  Chr.  G.  23. 

11.  33.  do  that  is  right  in  miiie  eyes,  38.  |  14.  8. 

18.  34.  do  it  the  second  lime,  do  it  the  third  time 

2  Kings 'i).  18.  what  hast  thoulot/o  with  peace!  19. 
17.34.  to  this  day  they  do  after  the  former  manners 

20.  9.  the  Lord  will  do  as  he  hath  spoken 

1  Chr.  4.  1 10.  that  thou  wouldestrfo  me  from  evil 

17.  2.  Nathan  Baid,(/u  all  that  is  in  thine  heart 
23.  let  thing  be  establish,  and  do  as  thou  hast  said 

21.  8.  do  away  the  iniquity  of  thy  servant 

2  Chron.  9.  8.  thee  king,  to  Jo  judgment  and  justice 

19.  0.  said  to  the  judges,  take  heed  what  ye  do 
7.  wherefore  now  lake  heed  and  do  it 

9.  thus  shall  ye  do  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord 
20. 12.  wc  have  uo  might, nor  know  we  what  to  do 
25.  8.  if  thou  wilt  go,  do  it,  be  strong  for  battle 
Ezra  4.  2.  for  we  seek  your  God,  as  ye  do 
7.  10.  to  seek  the  law  of  the  Lord,  and  do  it 
18.  that  do  after  the  will  of  your  God 
A'eh.  2.  12.  what  God  hath  put  in  my  heart  to  do 
5. 12.  they  should  do  according  to  this  promise 

9.  24.  that  they  might  do  with  them  as  they  would 
./«*  7.  20.  I  have  sinned,  what  shall  I  do  to  thee  ! 

1).  8.  il  is  high  as  heaven,  what  canst  thou  do  1 
13.  20.  only  do  not  two  things  unto  me 
Psal.  40.  6.  I  delight  to  do  thy  will,  O  my  God 
50. 10.  what  hast  thou  to  do  to  declare  my  statutes 
83.  9.  do  unto  them  as  unto  the  Midianites 
109.  21.  hut  do  thou  for  me,  O  God  the  Lord 
119.  t  112.  I  have  inclined  my  heart  to  do 
132.  bo  merciful  to  me,  as  thou  usest  to  do  to 
those  that  love  thy  name 
143. 10.  teach  me  to  do  thy  will,  thou  art  my  God 
Prov.  3.  27.  it  is  in  the  power  of  thy  hand  to  do  il 
Reel.  9.  10.  do  it  with  thy  might,  there  is  no  work 
Isa.  10.  3.  what  will  ye  do  in  the  day  of  visitation  ? 
28?  21.  that  he  may  do  his  work,  his  stiange  work 
4.1.  7.  I  the  Lord  do  all  Ihese  things 
Jcr.2.18.  what  hast  thou  to  do\n  the  way  of  Egypt! 
what  hast  thou  to  do  in  the  way  of  Assyria' 

4.  30.  when  thou  art  spoiled,  what  wilt  thou  </«? 

5.  31.  and  what  will  ye  do  in  the  end  thereof? 

7.  17.  seest  thou  not  what  ihey  do  in  cities  of  Jud 

11.  4.  saying,  obey  my  voice,  and  do  them 

15.  whiit  hath  my  beloved  to  do  in  mine  house? 

12.  5.  how  wilt  thou  do  in  tho  swelling  of  Jordan? 
14'.  7.  O  Lord,  do  thou  it  for  thy  name's  sake 
39.  12.  do  to  him,  even  as  he  shall  say  to  thee 
42.  3.  and  may  shew  the  thing  that  we  may  do 
50.  15.  as  she  hath  d6ne,  do  unto  her,  29. 

/,am. 1.22.  do  unto  them  as  thou  hastdone  unto  me 
F.ick.  8.  ti.  son  of  man,  seest  thou  what  thdf  do7 
Iti.  5.  no  eye  pitied  thee,  to  do  any  of  these  to  thee 

18.  5.  but  if  a  man  he  just,  and  do  that  which  is 

lawful  and  right,  21.  |  :0.  14,  19. 
24.  22.  and  ye  shall  do  as  I  have  done,  24. 
31.  t  11.  in  doing  he  shall  do  unto  him 
3ti.  37.  I  will  l)c!  enqnirid  of  lo  do  it  for  them 
Dan.  9.  19.  O  l-ord,  hearken  and  do,  defer  not 

11.  3.  he  shall  do  according  to  his  will.  Hi,  30. 
39.  thijs  shall  he  do  in  tho  most  strong  holds 

Has.  9.  5.  what  will  ye  do  in  the  solemn  day  ? 

10.  3.  what  then  should  a  king  do  to  us  ? 

.Joil  3. 4.  what  have  Ve  to  do  with  me,  O  Tyre  1 
jf  mo.?  3.  t  !>•  and  shall  not  the  Lord  do  somcwhal 

7.  the  Lord  will  do  nothing,  hut  he  icvcnlclh 
.fonah  4.  9.  I  do  well  to  be  angry,  even  unto  death 
Mic.  G.  8.  but  to  i/o  justly,  and  to  love  mercy 
'/.ech.  1.  21.  then  said  I,  what  come  these  to  dol 

8.  10.  these  are  Ihe  things  that  yo  shrill  do 
J\fat.  5.  19.  but  whosoever  shall  do  and  teach  thorn 

47.  brethren  only,  what  do  yc  more  than  others.' 

8.  29.  behold,  they  cried  out,  saying,  what  have 

wc  lo  do  with  thee  ?  Mark  1.  24.  /,uke  4. 34. 

12.  50.  for  whosoever  shall  do  the  will  of  my 

Father  who  is  in  heaven,  J\fark  3.  35. 
20. 15.  lawful  to  do  what  I  will  with  mine  own 

32.  what  will  ye  I  shall  do  to  voii?  ^fark  10.  30. 
21.  24.  I  will  nsk,  if  ye  tell  me,  I  will  tell  you  hv 

what  authority  I  do  these  tilings,  Mark  11.  !i9. 


DO 

<5/a<.21.27.  he  sail!  neither  tell  I  you  by  whal  an- 
Ihorily  1  do  lliese  things,  jV/ur/i  11.33.  J^ukeHU-i 
40.wlien  lord  of  vineyard  Cometh, what  will  he  oEo 
to  those  husbandmen?  Mark  12  9.  LukeiO.  15. 
23.  5.  all  their  works  they  do  to  be  seen  of  men 
27.  19.  have  nothing  to  do  with  that  just  man 
Mark  7.  8.  many  other  such  like  things,  ye  do,  13. 
12.ye  suffer  liim  no  more  lodofor  father  or  mothei 
11.28.  who  gave  thee  authority  to  do  the^e  thingsl 
J^uke  4.23.what  have  heard  done,rfo  in  thy  Qountry 
li.  2.  why  do  ye  that  which  is  not  law ful  to  dot 
11.  they  coniniuned  what  they  might  do  to  Jesui 
31.  as  ye  would  that  men  should  do  to  you,  do  ye 
ti.  21.  these  who  hear  the  word  of  God  and  do  it 
16.4. 1  am  resolved  what  todo  when  I  amputout 
17.10.  have  done  that  which  was  our  duty  to  d4t 
19.  48.  and  could  not  lind  what  they  might  <Zo 
23.  31.  if  they  do  these  things  in  a  green  ireo 
34.  forgi\e  them,  they  know  not  what  they  do 
John  2.  5.  whatsoever  he  saith  to  you,  do  it 
4.34.  my  meat  is  to  do  the  will  of  him  that  sent  me 

5.  30.  1  can  of  mine  own  self  do  nothing 
36.  the  works  that  I  do  bear  witness  ot  me 

6.  6.  for  he  himself  knew  what  he  would  do 
_28.  what  shall  we  du?  Jlcts  2.  37.  |  16.  30. 

7.  4.  if  thou  do  these  things  shew  thyself  lo  world 
17.  if  any  man  will  do  his  will,  he  shall  know 

8.  29.  I  do  always  those  things  that  please  him 
39.  ye  would  do  the  works  of  Abraham 

9.33.  if  he  were  not  of  God,  he  could  do  nothing 
10.  25.  tlie  works  thai  I  do  in  my  Faiher's  name 
11.47.chief  [iriests  and  Pharisees  said,what(/o  we? 

13.  7.  what  1  do  thou  knowest  not  now 

15.  that  yc  should  do  as  I  have  dune  to  you 
17.  if  ye  know  these,  hap|)y  are  ye  if  ye  do  them 

14.  12.  the  works  ihat  1  do  shall  he  do  also 

14.  if  ye  iitk  any  thing  in  my  name,  I  will  do  it 
15.14. my  friends, if  ye  do  whatever  I  command  you 

21.  these  things  will  they  do  unto  you,  10.  3. 
17.  4.  the  work  which  thou  gavest  me  to  do 

21.  21.  Lord,  and  what  shall  this  man  do7 

.'3els  1.  1.  of  all  that  Jesus  began  to  do  and  teach 

4.  28.  to  do  whatsoever  thy  counsel  determined 

9.  G.  he  said.  Lord,  what  will  thou  have  me  todo? 

10.  6.  he  shall  tell  thee  what  thou  ouglitest  to  do 

14.  15.  saying,  sirs,  why  do  ye  these  things  ? 

15.  30.  visit  our  brethren,  and  see  how  they  do 
10.  28.  do  thyself  no  harm,  for  we  are  all  here 
17.  7.  these  do  contrary  to  the  decrees  of  Cesar 

Rom.  1.  32.  notonly  (/otlie  same,  but  have  pleasure 

2. 14.  do  by  nature  Ihe  things  contained  in  the  law 

7.15.  for  that  which  Idol  allow  not,  what  I  would 

that  do  I  not,  but  what  I  hale  that  do  I 

16.  if  I  do  that  which  I  would  not,  I  consent  not 

17.  then  it  is  no  more  I  lhat  do  it,  but  sin,  20. 

12.  8.  lhat  giveth,  let  him  do  it  with  simplicity 

1  Cor.  7. 36.  let  him  do  what  he  will,  he  sinnelh  not 
10.  31.  w  hatsoever  ye  do,  do  all  lo  the  glory  of  G. 

16.  10.  he  workelh  the  work  of  the  Ld.  as  I  also  do 

2  Cor.  8.  10.  not  only  lo  do,  but  also  to  be  forward 

13.  7.  lhat  ye  should  do  that  which  is  honest 
Gal.  2. 10.  the  same  which  I  also  was  forward  to  do 

14.  not  as  do  the  Jews,  to  live  na  do  the  Jews 

3.  10.  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  lo  do  them 

5.  21.  Ihey  which r/o  such  things  shall  not  inherit 
Eph.  6.  9.  masters,  do  the  same  things  lo  servama 

21.  that  ye  may  know  my  affair.*,  and  how  I  do 
Phil.  2.  13."  God  workilh  both  lo  will  and  to  do 

4.  9.  the  things  ye  have  heard  and  seen  in  me,  rfa 
Col.  3.  17.  whatsoever  ye  do  in  word  or  deed,  do  all 

in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  giving  (hank* 

23.  whatsoever  ye  do,  do  il  liearlily,  as  to  theJL. 

1  Thess.  3.  12.  in  love,  even  as  we  do  toward  you 

4.  10.  indeeil  yo  do  it  toward  all  the  brethren 

5.  6.  Iherefore  let  us  not  sleep  as  do  others 

11.  and  edify  one  another,  even  as  also  ye  do 

24.  faithful  IS  he  that  calleth,  who  also  will  do  it 

2  Thess.  3.  4.  lhat  ye  both  do  and  will  dotlie  thing! 
27'im.4.5.  (/otlie  work  of  an  evangelist, make  proof 

9.  do  thy  diligence  to  come  shortly  to  me,  21. 
Philrm.'i\.  knowiog  thou  will  do  moie  than  I  say 
/yc6.4.13.lo  eyes  of  him  with  whom  we  have  to  d» 
10.  7.  then  said  I,  lo,  1  come  lo  do  thy  will,  O  G.  9. 
13.  6.  I  will  not  fear  what  man  shall  do  to  me 
21.  make  you  perfect  in  every  work,lodo  his  will 

1  Pet.  4. 1 1.  let  him  do  il  asof  the  ability  God  giveth 

2  Pet.  1.  10.  if  ye  do  these,  ye  shall  never  full 
3.  10.  wrest,  as  they  do  also  other  scriptures 

1  John  1.  0.  we  lie,  and  do  not  llio  Irulh 
3.  22.  do  those  Ihings  that  arc  pleasing  in  his  sight 
Rev.  2.  5.  and  repent,  and  do  the  first  works 

Can  or  canst  DO. 
(7m.  31.  43  what  can  I  do  lo  these  my  daughterg 
Dent.  3.  24.  noni'  can  do  according  lo  thy  worki 
I  .Srtw.28.  2.  shall  know  what  thy  servant  eand» 
Job  15.  3.  speeches  wherewith  ho  can  do  DO  goo4 

22.  17.  and  what  can  tho  Almighty  do  for  them  I 
42.  2.  I  know  that  thou  canst  do  every  thing 

;'.«ii/.  11.3.  found,  destroyed, what  can  righteou«dl» 
5C  4. 1  will  not  fear  what  flesh  con  da  to  me,  11. 


DO 

Ps.  118.  G  I  win  not  fear  what  man  can  do  to  me 
£ecl.i  IS.tvhatcanman  ciathatcometliatlcr  kin^ 
Jcr.  38.  5.  that  can.  do  any  thing  against  you 
Mark  9.22.  it' canst  do  any  thing,  have  coujp.  on  us 
L-uke  12.  4.  alter  that  have  no  more  tliey  can  do 
J»hn'i^i.{oi  no  man  can  do  tliese  miracles  thou  dost 

5.  19.  the  Son  can  do  nothing  of  himself,  3U. 

15.  5.,for  without  me  ye  can  do  notliing 
2  Cor.  13.  8.  we  can  do  nothing  against  the  truth 
PAj/.4.13.1  can  do  all  things  thro'C'h.strenglhen.jne 
■bee  Do  Commandments. 
DO  vtMi  evil. 
£zo(i.23.2  thou  shall  not  follow  a  multitude  lodo  e. 
iL.er.5.4.if  asoul  swear  todoet)j7orgood,or  dogood 
Dcut.  4.25.  shall  do  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 

31. 29.  because  ye  will  do  evil  in  sight  of  the  Lorit 
1  Sam.  20. 13.  if  it  please  my  father  to  do  thee  evil 
S  Sam.  12.  9.  why  despised  L.  to  do  evil  in  his  sight 
S  JCings  8.  12.  because  I  know  the  evil  Uiou  wilt  do 

17. 1'l.Bold  themselves  lodo  evil  in  sight  of  Lord 

21.  9.  Manasseh  seduced  them  to  do  more  evil 
JVck.  9.  t  28.  they  returned  to  do  evil  before  thee 
Fs.  34. 1(5.  the  face  of  L.  against  them  that  do  evil 

37.  8.  fret  not  thyself  in  any  wise  to  do  evil 
Prov.  2.  14.  who  rejoice  to  do  evil,  and  delight  in 

24.  8.  he  that  deviseth  to  do  evil  shall  be  called 
JCccl.  5.  1.  tor  they  consider  not  that  they  do  evil 

8. 11  the  heart  of  men  fully  set  in  them  to  do  evil 

12.  though  a  sinner  do  evil  a  hundred  times 
Isa.  1.16.  wash  ye, make  you  clean, cease  to  do  evil 

41. 23.  do  good  or  evil,  that  we  may  be  dismayed 
«rer.4.22.  my  peo.are  wise  to  do  evil,  but  to  do  good 

10.  5.  be  not  afraid,  for  they  cannot  do  evil 

13.23.  then  may  ye  that  are  accustomed  to  do  evil 

18.  10.  if  it  do  evil  in  my  sight,  that  it  obey  not 
£zek.  6.  10.  that  I  would  do  this  evil  unto  them 
Mic.  7.  3.  that  lliey  may  do  evil  with  both  hands 
Zep/i.l.l2.sa.y,  Ld.  notdo  good,  nor  will  he  do  evil 
Mark  3.4.is  it  lawful  to  do  good  or  do  e.?  huke^.'d. 
Jio7n.3.8.  that  we  say,  let  us  do  c«i7  that  good  may 

13.  4.  but  if  thou  do  that  which  is  evil,  be  afraid 
2  Cor.  13. 7.  now  I  pray  to  God  that  ye  do  no  evil 
1  Pel.'d.l'i.  face  of  Lord  is  against  them  thatofo  evil 

DO  joined  with  good. 
Gen.  19.  8.  do  ye  to  them  as  is  good  in  your  eyes 
27.  46.  Rebekah  said,  what^'.  shall  my  life  do  me7 
Lev.  5.  4.  if  a  soul  swear,  pronouncing  to  dogood 
JV'«;«.10.29.come  with  us,  and  we  wiWdo  Ihee good 
24.  13.  to  do  Hitber  good  or  bad  of  my  own  mind 
Vcut.  1.14.  thing  thou  hast  spoken  is  g.  for  us  to  do 
8.  16.  prove  thee,  to  do  thee  good  at  the  latter  end 
28. 63.  the  Lord  rejoiced  over  you  to  do  you  good 
30.  5.  and  he  will  do  lliee^ooii,  and  multiply  thee 
Judg.  17.13.  now  know  1  the  Lord  will  do  me  good 

19.  24.  do  with  them  what  secmeth  ^ooii  to  you 

1  Sam.  1.  23.  Elkanah  said  to  Hannah,  do  what 
seemetli  thee  good,  14.  36,  40.  2  Sam:  19.  27,  37. 

3.  18.  Eli  said,  it  is  the  Lord,  let  him  do  what 
seemeth  him  good,  2  Sum.  10.  12, 

2  Kings  10.  5.  do  that  which  is  good  in  thine  eyes 
1  Clir.  19. 13.  let  the  L.  do  what  is  good  in  his  sight 

21.23.  let  the  king  do  that  which  is  ^»-ood  in  his  eyes 
JVcA.  5.  9.  also  I  said,  it  is  not  good  that  ye  do 
Psal.  34.  li.  dagood,  37.  3,  27.  |  51.  18.  |  125.  4. 
Mat.  5.  44.  Luke  G.  9,  35, 
36.  3.  he  hath  left  off  to  be  wise  and  to  do  good 
Prov.  31.  12.  she  will  do  him  good  and  not  evil 
ElcI  3.  12.  but  for  a  man  to  do  good  in  his  life 
Isa.  41.23.  yea.  do  good  or  do  evil,  that  we  may  be 
Jcr.  4.22.  but  to  do  good  they  have  no  knovvled_ 
10.  5.  cannot  do  evil,  nor  is  it  in  them  to  do  good 
13.  23.  then  may  ye  do  good  that  are  accustomed 
26. 14. do  with  me  as  seemeth  ^ood  and  meet  to  you 
29.  32.  nor  behold  Ike  good  I  will  do  lor  my  i)ei)i)le 
32.4C.I  will  not  turn  away  from  them  todo  them^. 

41.  I  will  rejoice  over  them  to  do  them  good 
33.  9.  which  shall  hear  all  the  ^ood  I  do  to  them 
Mic.  2.  7.  do  not  my  words  do  good  to  the  upright 
Zeph.  1.  12.  that  say,  the  Lord  will  not  do  good 
Jlfur/;3.4..Icsussailh  to  them, is  it  lawful  iodo good 
on  the  sabbath-days,  or  to  do  evil7  Luke  6.  9. 
]4.7.the  poor,  when  ye  will,  ye  may  do  \.\>em  good 
£.uA'e6.33.if  ye  do  good  to  them  that  dogood  to  you 
Rom.  7.  19.  for  the  good  that  I  would,  I  do  not 
21.  when  I  would  do  n^oodevilis  present  with  me 
13.  3.  do  what  is  good,  and  thou  shah  have  praise 
OaZ.6.10.let  usdo  goodlo  all  men, especially  to  them 
1  Tim.  6.  18.  charge  tlie  rich,  that  they  do  good 
/fei.]3.16.to  do  good  and  communicate, forget  not 
Jam.  4.  17.  that  knowetb  to  dogood, and  doth  it  not 
1  Pet.  3.  11.  let  him  eschew  evil,  and  do  good 

Nave  I  to  DO. 

S  Sam.  16.  lO.what  Aauc/Zo  do  with  you  7  19.22. 

IAVh  "-517.18.  what  have  I  to  do  with  thee"?  2  Kings 

3.  13.  2  CAron.  35.  21.  Mark  5.  7.  Luke 

8.  28.  .lokn  2.  4. 

ffos.  14.  8.  what  A<t«e  fto  do  any  more  with  idols? 

lCor.5.12.what  Aare/fo  do  to  judge  them  without 

/  thall,  or  /  will  DO ;  or  will  I,  shall  I  DO. 

Gen.  27. 37.  what  shall  I  do  now  to  thee,  my  son? 

139 


DO 

0671.47.  30.andhesaid,/icj7Zdo  as  thou  hast  said 
Ezod.  3.  20.  which  J  will  do  in  the  midst  thereof 

6.  1.  thou  shult  sue  what  Iicill  do  to  Pharaoh 

17.  4.  Moses  cried,  what  shall  J  do  to  this  people  ? 
'M.lO.IwiU  do  marvels,sliall  see  work  oltlieLoid, 

for  it  is  a  terrible  thing  that  J  will  do  with  thee 

JVum.  14.35.  J  will  surely  du  it  to  this  congregation 

22.  17.  I  will  do  whatsoever  thou  sayest  to  me 

33. .56. 1  shall  do  to  you  as  1  thought  to  do  to  them 

Ruth  3.  5.  she  said,  all  thou  sayest  to  me  /  will  do 

il.  J  will  do  to  thee  all  that  thou  requirest 

13.  then  will  I  do  the  part  of  a  kinsman  to  thee 

1  Sam.  3.  11.  behold,  /  icill  do  a  thing  in  Israel 
10.2.  sorroweth,  saying, what  sAu// 1  do  for  my  son 

20.  4.  thy  soul  desiretn,  J  will  do  it  for  thee 

28.  15.  mayest  make  known  to  me  what  I  shall  do 

2  Sam.  12. 12.  but  J  will  do  this  thing  before  Israel 

18.  4.  what  seemeth  you  best  1  will  do,  19.  38 

21.  3.  said  to  Gibeonites,  what  shall  I  do  for  you? 
4.  what  you  shall  say,  that  tcill  I  do  for  you 

1  Kings  5.  8.  I  will  do  all  thy  desire  lor  timber  of 

20.  9.  all  thou  didst  send  for  at  first,  /  will  do 
'iKings  2.9.Elijah  said,ask  what  I  shall  do  for  thee 

4.  2.  Elisha  said  to  her,  what  shall  I  do  for  tl; 
Ksth.a.ti,!  will  do  to-morrow  as  the  king  hath  said 
Job  7.  20.  what  sAa/i  /do  to  thee,  O  thou  preserve 
31.  14.  what  then  shall  I  do  when  God  riseth  up 
34.32.  if  I  have  done  iniquity,  I  will  do  no  more 
Prov.  24.  29.  /  will  do  so  to  him  as  he  hath  done 
Isa.  5. 5. 1  will  tell  what  /  will  do  to  my  vineyaid 
42. 16.  these  things  will  I  do,  and  not  tcirsake  then 
43.  19.  J  will  do  a  new  thing,  now  it  shall  sjiriiit^ 
46. 10.  my  counsel  stand,  I  will  do  all  my  pleasure 

11.  I  have  purposed  it,  I  will  also  do  it 
43.  11.  even  for  mine  own  sake  will  I  do  it 
Jer.l.  14.  therefore  will  I  do  unto  this  house  called 
9.  7.  how  shall  I  do  for  daughter  of  my  people? 
19. 12.  thus  will  I  do  to  this  place,  sailli  the  Lord 
25.  6.  provoke  me  not,  and  I  will  do  you  no  hurt 

29.  32.  the  good  that  I  will  do  for  my  peopi 
51.  47.  I  will  do  judgment  on  the  graven  images 

Eiek.  5.  9.  /  will  do  in  thee  what  I  have  not  done 

7.  27.  I  will  do  unto  them  after  iheir  \^'ay 
22.14.  /have  spoken,  and  will  do  it,24. 14.  |  36.  36. 
35.  11.  /  will  even  do  according  to  thine  anger 
2^.\\.I  will  do  better  to  you  than  at  the  beginning 

Hos.  6.  4.  O  Ephraim,  what  shall  I  do  unto  thee? 
Amos  4.  12.  thus  loill  I  do  unto  thee,  O  Israel 
Mat.  19.  16.  Master,  what  good  thing  shall  I  do? 
27.  22.  Pilate  saith,  what  shall  I  do  with  Jesus? 
/>'«/iC'12.17.what  shall  /do, becauselhave  no  room 

16.  3.  what  shall  J  do?  2U.  13.  .dels  22.  10. 
John  14.  13.  whatever  ye  shall  ask,  that  will  I  do 

14.  if  ye  shall  ask  any  thing  in  my  name  Iw.do  it 

2  Cor.  11.  12.  but  what  1  do,  that  /  will  do    ■ 
l'hdem.14.  without  thy  mind  would  I  do  nothing 

.See  JUDG.MK.NT. 

Must  DO. 
i?2od.l8.20.  shall  shew  the  work  that  they  Jiiust  do 
A'km.  23.  26.  all  the  Lord  speaketh,  that  I  must  do 
Prov.  19.  19.  if  thou  deliver,  thou  inust  do  it  again 
J3cts  16.30.  jailer  said,  what  nmst  I  do  to  be  saved? 

DO  joined  with  no,  or  not. 
Gen.  18.29.  he  said,  I  will  not  do  it  for  forty's  sake 
30.  he  said,  I  will  not  do  it  if  I  find  thirty  there 
19. 22. 1  cannot  do  any  thing  till  thou  come  thither 
34. 19.  the  young  man  deferred  not  to  do  the  thini 
Eiod.  20.  10.  is  the  sabbath  of  the  Lord  thy  (Jod 
in  it  thou  shall  not  do  any  work,  7>fh.  23.  31. 

21.  11.  and  if  he  do  not  these  tluee  unto  her 
23.  24.  thou  shall  not  do  after  their  works 

Lev.  16.  29.  ye  shall  afflict  your  souls  and  do  vo 
work,  23.  3,  28.  JJeut.  15.  19.  .Jer.  17.  24 

18.  3.  and  after  their  doings  ye  shall  not  do 

19.  15.  do  no  unrighteousness  in  judgment,  35. 
23.  7.  ye  shall  do  no  servile  work  therein,  8,  21, 

25,  3.%  36.  J^um.  28.  18,  25,  26. 

20. 14.  butif  ye  will  not  do  my  commandments, 15. 
JV^um. 8. 20. from  age  offifty  years  shall  do  710  service 

23.  19.  hath  he  said,  and  shall  he  not  do  il? 
29.  7.  ye  shall  not  do  any  work,  Deut.5.14.  I  16. 8. 
/)cu£. 12.8. shallTiof  doafter  all  the  things  wo  do  here 
13.11.shalldo  7iomore  any  such  wickedne.''S  as  this 

17.  13.  shall  fear  and  do  no  more  presurn]ituousty 
.Jiidg.^.  27.  feared,  that  he  could  not  do  il  by  day 

19.  23.  my  brethren,  I  pray  you,  do  not  this  folly 
24.  but  to  this  man  do  not  so  vile  a  thing 
RuthS.  13.  if  he  will  ?io£  do  the  part  of  a  kinsman 
1  ^'a7n.26.21.  return,  I  will  710  more  do  thee  harm 
1  Kings  11.  12.  in  thy  days  I  will  7101' do  il  for  David 
2Kings  7.9.1epers  said  one  to  anoth.wc  do  not  well 

17. 15.  Lord  charged  they  should  7io(  do  like  them 

18.  12.  and  would  not  hear  them,  7ior  do  them 
Ezra  7.  26.  whoso  will  not  do  the  law  of  thy  God 
.fob  13.  20.  only  do  not  t\>o  things  unio  me 

34.  12.  yea,  surely  God  will  7io«  do  wickedly 
41.  8.  remember  the  battle,  do  no  more 
Ps.  119.3.  they  do  710  iniqui.  they  walk  in  his  ways 
J«r.l8.6.  Olsr.  cn7i7io(I  do  with  you  as  this  potter? 

22.  3.  do  no  wrong,  do  no  violcilce  to  the  stranger 


DO 

Gen.  43.  5.  the  L.  be  a  true  witness,  if  we  do  not 
Ezck.  5.  9.  I  will  7io£  do  any  more  the  like 
23.48.  may  be  taught  viot  to  do  after  your  lewdnes» 
33.  31.  hear  thy  words,  but  they  will  not  do  theia 
32.  hear  thy  words,  but  they  do  them  not 
Zeph.  3.  5.  the  just  Lord,  he  will  not  do  iniquity 
13.  the  remnant  of  Israel  shall  not  do  iniquity 
Mat.  5. 46.  do  not  even  the  publicans  the  same?  47 
6.  1.  take  heed  ye  do  not  your  alms  before  men 
2.  whendosi  alms  sound  not  a  trumpet  before  theo 
12.  2.  do  that  which  is  not  lawful  lodo  oiisabbatli 

19.  18.  Jesus  said,  thou  shall  do  no  murder 

20.  13.  he  said,  friend,  1  do  thee  710  wrong 
23.  3.  do  not  afier  their  works,  they  say  and  do  not 

Mark  6.5.  and  he  could  there  do  no  miglity  work 
Luke  6.  46.  and  do  not  the  things  which  1  say 
■John  6.  38.  I  came  down  not  to  do  mine  own  will 

10.  37.  if  I  do  not  the  works  of  my  Father 
Horn.  7.  15.  for  what  I  would,  that  do  I  not,  19. 

8.  3.  for  what  the  law  could  7io(  do,  in  that  weak 
Gal.  5.  17.  ye  cannot  do  the  things  that  ye  would 

1  John  1.  6.  we  lie,  and  do  not  the  truth 
Rev.  19.  10.  he  said  to  me,  see  thou  dfi  it  not,  22.  9. 

Observe  with  DO. 
/Jc«!.5.32.  ye  shall  observe  to  do  as  L.cominanded 
you,  8.  1.  I  11.  32.  1  12. 1.  1 24. 8.  2  Kings  17. 37 
6.  3.  observe  to  do,  12.  32.  [  28.  13,  15,  58.  |  31. 
1.:.  I  32.  46. 
2.5.  if  we  observe  to  do  these  commandments 
15.  5.  to  observe  to  do  all  these  commandments 
16.12.aiid  thou  shall  observe  and  do  these  statutes 
17.  10.  shall  obsetvc  to  do  as  they  inform  thee 
JosA. 1.7. that  thou  mayest  oi4iri-«c  to  do  all  the  law 
iKings  21.8.  if  they  will  observe  to  do  according  to 
JVtA.  10.29.  entered  into  an  oath  to  observe  and  dc 
Ezck.  37.  24.  they  shall  observe  and  do  them 
Mat.23.3.  what  they  bid  you,  that oiixrKc  anddc 

Jf^ill  we  DO.     We  will  DO. 
Etod.  19.  8.  all  the  L.  hath  said  we  will  do,  24. 3, 7. 
JVu?n.  10.  32.  the  same  goodness  will  we  do  to  thee 
Deut.  5.  27.  and  we  will  hear  it  and  do  il 
■Josh.  1. 16.  all  that  thou  commandest  us  we  will  do 
.Tudg.  20.  9.  the  thing  which  we  will  do  to  Gibeah 

2  Kings  10.  5.  we  will  do  all  that  thou  shall  bid  us 
Jer.  18.  12.  we  will  every  one  do  the  imagination 

42.  20.  so  declare  unto  us,  and  loe  will  do  it 
44.  17.  we  will  certainly  do  whatever  proceedeth 

Shall  we  DO.     He  shall  DO. 
Judg.  13.  8.  teach  us  what  we  shall  do  to  the  child 
12  how  shall  order,  how  shall  we  do  unto  him? 

21.  7.  how  shall  we  do  for  wives  for  them?  16. 

1  Sam.  5.  8.  vthal  shall  we  do  wilhlhe  ark  of  God? 
6.  2.  what  shall  we  do  to  the  ark  of  the  Lord? 

2S«77j.]6.20.give  counsel  among  you  what  shall  dc 

17.  0.  shall  we  do  after  his  saying?  speak  thou 
IKings  6. 15. said, alas  my  master, how  shall  we  do? 

2  Chr.  25. 9.  what  shall  we  do  for  the  100  talents? 
Esth.  1.  15.  what  shall  we  do  to  the  queen  Vashti? 
Ps.  00. 12.  thio'  God  weshalldo  valiantly,  108.  13. 
Cant. S.S.whal shall  we  do  for  our  sister  in  the  day? 
.Jonah  1.  11.  they  said,  what  shall  we  do  to  thee? 
Luke  3. 10.  people  a.sked,  what  shall  we  do?  12,14. 
./oA7i  6.  23.  what  shall  ice  do  that  we  might  work? 
Jlcts  2.  .37.  men  and  brethren,  what  shall  we  do? 

4.  16.  saying,  w  hat  shall  we  do  to  these  men? 

DO  joined  with  so. 
Gen.  18.  5.  they  «:tid,  so  do  as  thou  hast  said 

19.7. 1  pray  you,  do  not  .so  wickedly,  ./«d^.l9.23. 

44. 17.  Joseph  said,  God  forbid  that  I  should  do  so 
Exod.  8.  26.  Moses  said,  it  is  not  meet  so  to  do 
Lev.  4. 20.  so  shall  he  do,  16.16.  JVitm.  9. 14.|  15.14. 

8.  34.  so  the  Lord  hath  commanded  to  do 
A-Hw. 14.28.  so  will  I  do,32.31.ysa.65.8.£2cA.35.15. 

15.12.so  shall  he  do  to  every  one  accord. to  number 

22.  30.  was  I  ever  wont  to  do  so  unto  thee? 
32.  23.  if  ye  will  not  do  so  ye  have  sinned  ag.  L. 

Deut.3.  21.  so  shall  the  Lord  do  to  all  the  kings 
12.  4.  ye  shall  not  do  so  to  the  Lord  your  God,  31. 
,30.how  did  these  nations  serve  their  gods?  so  I  do 

18.  14.  Lord  thy  G.  hath  not  suffered  thee  «o  todo 
22.  3.  and  so  shall  thou  do  with  his  raiment 

5.  all  that  do  so  are  abomination  to  Lord  IhyGod 
.Tudg.l.  17.  it  shall  be,  that  as  1  do,  so  shall  ye  do 
11.  10.  if  we  do  not  so  according  to  thy  words 
14.  10.  for  so  used  the  young  men  to  do 

19.  24.  but  to  this  mnn  do  not  so  vile  a  thing 
Ruth  1.  17.  the  Lord  do  so  to  me,  1  Sam.  14.  44. 

1  Sam.  3.  17.  God  do  so  to  thee  and  more  also 
8.8.have  served  other  gods,  so  do  they  also  to  theo 

20.  13.  Lord  do  so  and  much  more  to  Jonathan 

25. 22.  .so  and  more  alsodo.G.  to  enemies  ofJDavid 

30.23.  David  said,  ye  shall  not  doso,  my  brethren 

2  Sam.  3.  9.  so  do  God  to  Abner,  even  so  1  do  to  him 
35.  God   do   so  to  me  and  more  also,  19.  13. 

1  Kings  2.  23.  ]  20.  10.  2  aW*  6.  31. 

9.  11.  then  said  Ziba,  so  shall  thy  scrvaht  do 
1  Kings  1.  30.  even  so  will  I  certainly  do  this  day 

2.  38.  as  the  king  hath  said,  so  will  thy  servant  d« 
19.  2.  so  let  the  gods  do  to  me,  and  more  also 
22.  22.  he  Miid,go  forth  and  do  sc,  2  Chr.  18.21. 


DOE 

1  Kingt  17.41. as  did  their  fatlierBiSO  <iothey  to-d.iy 
1  Ckr.  13.  4.  all  congregation  said  tlicy  would  du  au 
Kzra  10.  12.  as  lliou  liaet  said,  so  must  we  do 
jYeh  5. 12.  tliey  said,  so  will  we  du  as  tliou  sayest 
6. 13.  that  I  should  be  afraid,  and  do  so,  and  Bin 
13.21.  it' ye  do  so  again  I  will  lay  hands  on  you 
F.sth.  t).  10.  and  do  even  so  to  Mordecai  the  Jew 

7. 5.  who  and  where  is  he  durst  presume  to  do  so? 
Job  13.9.  as  one  man  iuockclli,(/oye  so  mock  I)ini7 
Froo.  20.  30.  so  do  stripes  the  inward  parts  of  belly 

m.-Z'J.  say  not,  I  will  do  so  to  him  as  he  hath  done 
Isa.lO.ll.  shall  I  sv  do  lo  Jerusalem  and  her  idols.' 
.fer.  2ti.  6.  the  Lord  do  so,  the  Lord  perl'orm  words 
Kzek.  45. 20.  .so  tiiou  shalt  do  seventh  day  of  month 
/)an.  11.  30.  so  shall  he  do,  he  shall  even  return 
//os.lO.lo.io  shallBeth-elrfoto  you  because  ofyour 
Mat.  5.  47.  do  not  even  the  publicans  so? 
7.  12.  men  should  do  to  you,  do  ye  ev('n  so  to  them 
18.  35.  so  shall  my  heavenly  Father  do  unto  you 
Jolm  14.31.  as  Fattier  gave  command rneiil,»'o  I  do 
.icU  7.  51.  as  your  fathers  did,  so  do  ye 
1  Cor.  16.  1.  as  I  have  given  order,  even  so  do  ye 
Col.  3.  13.  even  as'Christ  forgave  you,  so  do  ye 

1  Tim.  1.  4.  than  edifying,  which  is  in  faith,  .fodo 
Jam.  2.  12.  so  do  ye,  as  they  that  shall  be  judged 

DO  joined  with  this. 
Gen.  U.  6.  people  is  one,  and  tlUs  they  begin  to  do 
39.  9.  can  I  do  this  great  wicked,  and  sin  ag.  C;od 
41.34. let  Pharaoh  do  this,  let  him  appoint  ofricers 

42.  18.  Joseph  said,  this  do  and  live,  I  fear  God 

43.  11.  if  it  must  he  so  now,  do  this,  4.5.  17,  19. 
/.^r.2t).16.I  will  do  this  to  you,l  w  ill  appoint  terror 
JVam.llj.G.this  do,  take  you  censers,  Korah  and  all 
Josh.  9.  20.  this  we  will  do  to  the  (jiheonites 
Judg.  19. 23.  my  brethren,  I  pray,  do  not  this  folly 

2  Sam.  13.  12.  my  broiher,  do  not  thou  this  folly 
23.  17.  be  it  far  from  me  that  1  should  do  this 

2  JSTina^s  19.31.the  zeal  of  L.shall do  (/(i«,/sa.37.32. 
2  Chron.  19.  10.  this  do  and  ye  shall  not  trespass 
Ezra  4.  22.  take  liecd  that  ye  fell  not  l:o  do  this 
Proo.  (3.  3.  do  this  now,  my  son,  deliver  thyself 
/sa.  3d.  19.  the  living  praise  thee,  as  1  do  this  day 
/er.  32.  3.5.  that  they  should  do  this  abomination 
Eiek.  0.  10.  that  I  would  do  this  evil  to  them 
30.  22.  I  do  not  this  for  your  sakca,  O  Israel,  32. 
./Imos  4.  12.  and  because  I  will  do  this  to  thee 
Mat.  4.  3.  in  day  that  I  shall  do  this,  saith  the  Lord 
Mat.8.9.\o  my  servant  do  this  he  doeth  it,  J.uke  7.8. 

9.  28.  believe  ye  that  I  am  able  to  do  this? 

21.  21.  if  ye  have  faith,  ye  shall  not  only  do  this 
Mark  11.  3.  if  any  say  to  you,  why  do  ye  this? 
JfcuA:f7.4.hc  was  worthy  for  whom  he  shcailil  du  Ih. 

10.  28.  ho  said  to  him,  this  do,  and  ihou  shalt  live 

12,  18.  he  said,  this  will  I  do,  1  will  pull  ilown 
22. 19.  this  do  in  remembr.  of  me,  1  Cor.  11.  24,25. 

Acts  21.  23.  do  therefore  this  that  we  say  to  thee 
ICbr.O.n.for  if  I  do  <A.  thing  willingly, liave  reward 

23.  and  this  I  do  for  the  gospel's  sake 
Heb.  6.  3.  and  this  will  we  do  if  God  permit 

13.  19.  but  I  beseech  you  the  rather  to  do  this 
.Tam.i.  15.  if  the  Lord  will,  we  will  do  this  or  that 

Ste  This,  Thino. 
DO  well, 
ha.  1.  17.  learn  lo  do  well,  seek  judgment 
.Jonah  4.  9.  1  do  wrll  to  be  angry,  even  to  death 
Zech.  8. 15.  to  do  well  to  Jerusalem  and  to  Judah 
Mat.  12. 12.it  i«  lawful  to  do  well  on  sabbath-days 
John  11.  12.  Loid,  if  he  sleep,  he  shall  do  well 
Jicta  15. 29.  if  ye  keep  yourselves,  ye  shall  do  well 
Jam.  2.  8.  if  ye  fulfil  the  royal  law,  ye  do  well 

1  Pet.  2.  14.  for  the  praise  of  them  that  do  well 
20.  but  if  when  ye  do  well  and  sutler  for  it 

3. 6.  whose  daughters  yo  are  as  long  as  ye  do  well 

2  l'el.\.  19.  whereunio  ye  do  welll\\td  ye  lake  heed 

3  John6.  whom  if  thou  bring,  thou  shalt  do  well 

DOF.R. 
«7/>n.39. 22.  what  they  did  there,  he  was  the  d.  of  it 
2  .Srtm.3.  39.  the  Lord  sliall  reward  the  d.  of  evil 
P.I.  31.  2:1.  Ld.  pl.ntifully  rewardelh  llie  proi«l  d. 
Prov.  17.  4.  a  wicked  d.  giveth  heed  to  faL^c  lips 
/dfl.  9. 17. for  everyone  is  a  hypocrite  and  evil  d. 
2  Tim.'i.  9.  wherein  I  siifibr  trouble  as  an  evil  d. 
Jam.  1.  23.  if  any  be  a  hearer,  and  not  n  d.  of  word 
2.5.  he  being  not  a  forgetful  hearer,  but  a  d. 
4.  11.  thou  art  not  a  d.  of  the  law,  but  a  judge 
1  Pet.  4.  15.  lot  none  of  vou  suffer  as  an  evil  d. 

DOERS. 
5  Kintr.<i  22.  5.  let  them  give  it  to  the  d.  of  the  work 
Piial.  101.  fi.  that  I  may  cut  otf  all  wirkiid  d. 
Worn.  2.  13.  but  the  d.  of  the  law  shall  lx>  jnslifir.l 
Jam.  \.  22.  bo  ye  d.  of  the  word,  not  hearers  only 
EvtL-DoKii,  tiokhs;  See  Evil. 
nOEST. 
Gev.  4.7.  if  thou  d.  well,  mid  if  thou  d.  not  well 
21.  22.  G(f\  is  with  thee  in  all  thai  thou  d. 
Kiel.  IBTl?.  tho  thing  that  Ihou  d.  is  not  good 
lieut.  12.  28.  when  thou  d.  which  is  good  and  right 
15.  18.  (.'od  Khali  bless  thee  in  all  thai  thou  d. 

0  .Sam.  3,  2.5.  Abner  came  to  know  all  that  thou  d. 

1  Etngi  2.3.  that  thou  maycsl  prosper  in  all  thou  d. 

140 


DOC 

1  Kings  19.  0.  he  said,whal  d.thou  here,Elt]ah?  13. 
20.  22.  go,  and  murk,  and  see  wiiul  ttiou  d. 

Job  9.  12.  who  will  say  lo  him,  what  d.  thou? 
35.  ti.  if  thou  sinnest  what  d.  thou  against  him? 

Ps.  49. 18.  praise  thee, when  thou  d.  well  to  thyself 
77.  14.  thou  art  the  God  that  d.  wonders 
80.  10.  for  thou  art  great,  and  d.  wondrous  things 
119.  68.  thou  art  good,  and  d.  good,  teach  nie 

i'<;c^8.4.or  to  say  lo  him,  what  d.  ihoul  y.;an.4.35. 

Jer.  11.  15.  when  thou  d.  evil,  then  thou  rejoicest 

15.  5.  who  shall  go  aside  to  ask  how  thou  d.? 
£zc/c. 12.9.  the  rebellious  house  said,  what  d.  thou? 

16.  30.  weak  heart,  seeing  thou  d.  all  these  things 
24.  19.  tell  what  these  are  to  us,  that  thou  d.  so 

Jonah  4.  4.  Lord  said,  d.  thou  well  to  be  angry !  9. 
Mat.  6.  2.  therefore  when  thou  d.  thine  alms,  3. 

21.23.thc  priests  and  elders  saidjby  what  authority 

d.  thou  iliese  things?  Mark  11.  28.  Kv.ke'M.  2. 

J()A'n2.18.wliat  sign  seeing  that  thoud.the-e  things? 

3.  2.  no  man  can  do  these  miracles  that  thou  d. 

7.  3.  that  thy  disciples  may  see  the  works  thou  d. 

13. 27.  Jesus  said  to  him,  that  thou  d.  do  quickly 
Acts  22.  26.  saying,  take  heed  what  thou  d. 
Rom.  2. 1.  thou  that  judgest,  d.  the  same  things,  3. 
Jam.  2.  19.  thou  believest  one  God,  thou  d.  well 
3  John  5.  thou  d.  faithfully  w  hat  thou  d.  lo  brotliren 

DOETH. 
Qen.  31.  12.  I  have  seen  all  that  Laban  d.  to  thee 
Eiod.  31.  14.  for  whosoever  d.  any  work  therein 
that  soul  shall  be  cut  oti",  15.  Lee.  23.  30. 
IjCv.  6. 3.  in  any  of  all  these  that  a  man  d.  sinning 
JVum. 15. t29.one  law  for  him  ihatd.thro'  ignorance 

24.  23.  alas,  who  shall  live  w  hen  God  d.  this  I 
Job  5.9.  to  God  who  d. great  things  and  unsearch- 
able, 9.  10.  I  37.  5.  Psal.  '2.  18.  ]  130.  4. 

23.  13.  what  his  soul  desireth,  even  that  he  d. 
Psal.  1.3.  leaf  not  wither,  whatsoever  he  d.  proi^er 

14.1.  there  is  none  d.  good,  3.  153.  1,  3.  iioHi.  3.12. 

15.  5.  lie  that  d.  these  thiii^s,sliall  never  be  moved 

106.  3.  blessed  is  he  thald.  righteous,  at  all  times 

118.  15.  right  hand  of  the  Lord  d.  valiantly,  16. 
Prov.  fi.  32.  he  that  d.  it,  destroyelh  his  own  soul 

11.  17.  the  merciful  man  d.  good  to  his  own  soul 

17.  22.  a  merry  heart  d.  good  like  a  mediciiio 
Eecl.  2.  2.  and  I  said  of  mirth,  what  d.  it? 

3. 14.  wnatsoever  God  d.  it  shall  be  forever,  and 
God  d.  it  that  men  should  fear  before  him 

7.  20.  there  is  not  a  niaii  d.  good  and  sinneth  not 

8.  3.  for  he  d.  whatsoever  pleaseth  him 

Isa.  56.  2.  blessed  is  the  man  d.  this,and  son  of  man 
Kzek.  17.  15.  shall  he  escape  that  d.  such  things? 
IS.  10.  that  d.  the  like  to  any  one  of  these  things 
II.  and  that  d.  not  any  of  those  duties 
27.  and  d.  that  which  is  lawful  and  right 
Van.  4.  35.  d.  accord,  to  w  ill  in  heaven  and  earth 
9. 14.  for  the  Lord  our  God  is  righteous  in  all  he  d. 
.Imos  9. 12.  are  called,  saith  the  Lord  that  d.  this 
Mai.  2.  12.  Lord  will  cut  off  the  man  that  d.  this 
Mat.  6.  3.  let  not  left  hand  know  what  thy  right  d. 
7.  21.  but  he  that  d.  will  of  my  Father  in  hitaven 
24.  whoso  heareth  these  sayings,  and  d.  them 
26.  every  one  that  heareth  and  d.  not,  Luke  GAO. 
8.9.  to  my  servant,  do  this,  and  hed.it,  Lvkel.S. 
.John  3.  20.  every  one  that  d.  evil,  haleth  the  light 
21.  but  he  that  d.  truth  cometh  to  the  light 
5.  19.  what  things  soever  he  d.  these  d.  the  Son 
7.  51.  before  it  hear  him  and  know  what  he  d. 
9. 31?but  if  any  man  d.  his  will,  him  he  hearelh 
15.  15.  the  servant  knoweth  not  what  his  lord  d. 
Ifi.  2.  killelli  you,  will  think  ho  d.  God  service 
ftoni.2.9.anguish  upon  every  soul  of  man  thatd.ovil 
10.  5.  righteousness  of  law,  that  the  man  that  d. 
these  things  shall  live  by  them,  Gal.  3.  12. 
13.  4.  to  execute  wrath  upon  him  that  d.  evil 
1  Cor.  6. 18.  every  sin  a  man  d.  is  without  the  body 
7.  37.  decreed  tliat  ho  will  keep  his  virgin,  d.  well 
38.  so  then  he  that  giveth  her  in  marriage  d.  well 
Gal.  3. 5.  d.  he  it  by  works  of  the  law,  or  by  fuiili? 
Eph.  0.  8.  whatsoever  good  thing  any  man  d. 
Col.  1:6.  bringeth  forth  fruit,  aa  it  d.  also  in  you 
3.25.  but  he  that  d.  wrong, shall  receive  for  wrong 
1  Thess.  2. 11.  e.xliotled  as  a  father  d.  his  children 
.fam.  4.  17.  that  knoweth  lo  do  good, and  d.  it  not 
IJohn'i.  17.  be  that  d.  will  of  God  abideih  for  ever 

29.  thai  d.  riiihteousnesB  is  born  of  him,  3.  7. 
3  Joltn  10.  I  will  remember  his  deeds  which  ho  d. 

11.  but  he  that  d.  evil  hath  not  seen  God 
Rev.  13.13.  and  he  d.greai  wonders,  he  inakcth  fire 

DOCTOR. 
.Ids  5.  34.  then  stood  up  (Jamaliel,  a  d.  of  tho  law 

DOf'TOR.-s. 
f.vke  2.4fi.lhey  foiiud.li'siis  silting  in  midst  of  thed. 
5. 17.  there  were  I'lmriserK  and  d.  of  law  silling  bv 

DOCTIMNK 
Sienifies,  [1]  Knowledge,  or  learning,  Isa.  28.  9. 
[2]  .4  tenet,  or  ojiininn.  Mat.  16.  12.  [3]  Thi 
troths  nf  the  gospel  in  general.  Til.  2.  10.  [4] 
Instruejion, information,  and  confirmation,  in 
tkr  truths  of  ih'  cospel,'iT\m.  3.'lfi.  [5]  77ir 
manner  of  teaching,  wtth  the  mutter  also,  Mai. 


DOG 

7.  28.  [6]  Tkt  act  of  teachfng,  Mark  4. 2.  [7] 
Divine  insttlations,  Mat.  15.  9. 
The  doctrine  of  Balaam,  Rev.  2. 14.  77i«  history 
uf  Balaam  is  ncorded  in  Numbers,  chapters 
22,  23,  24.  He  was  sent  for  by  Balak,  king  of 
Mo;ih,to  come  and  curse  Israel;  andfnding  tliUt 
Gud  restrained  him, and  turned  him  from  curt 
ing  to  pronouncing  blessings  upon  them,  he  in- 
struclid  Balak  at  last, how  to  lay  a  sluiubling- 
block  before  them,  to  make  lliem  to  fall:  He  told 
Balak  and  the  Midianites,  that  if  they  would 
secure  themselves  from  the  attempts  that  th» 
Hebrews  might  make  against  them,  and  obtain 
some  advantage  over  them,  they  should  engage 
them  in  idolatry  and  whoredom;  that  then  they 
would  be  forsaken  by  their  (iod,aud  would  be- 
come a  priy  to  their  tnciiiics:  the  young  women 
of  Moab  invited  the  Israelites  to  the  feasts  of 
Baal-peor ;  and  aftir  they  had  persuaded  them 
lo  embrace  idolatry,  thiy  seduced  them  lo  im- 
purity. This  doctrine  is  the  same  with  what  it 
called  the  doctrine  of  the  jVicvlaitans,  Kev.  2. 

15.  This  sect  took  their  name  from  Nicolas, 
one  of  the  first  seven  deacons,  of  whom  mention 
is  made  in  .^cis  6.  5.  He  plunged  himself  into 
irregularities, as  it  is  said,and  gave  beginning 
not  only  to  this  sect,  but  al.so  to  that  of  the 
Gnostics, <z;id  to  several  others,  witu,  following 
the  bent  of  their  passions,  invented  many  dif- 
ferent sorts  of  cri/nes  and  wickedness.  Among 
these  Nicolaitans,  adulteries,  and  the  use  of 
meats  offered  to  idols,  were  held  as  indifferent 
things.  St.  Austin  says,  Ha^res,  5.  that  they 
have  their  women  in  comnion,and  make  no  scru- 
ple to  conform  to  all  the  pagan  superstitions. 

Psal.  19.  t  7.  the  d.  of  ihe  Lord  is  perfect 
Isa.  28.  9.  whom  shall  he  make  to  understand  d, 
t  19.  it  shall  be  a  ve.tation  lo  understand  d. 

29.  24.  and  Ihey  that  inurnmred  shall  learn  d. 

53. 1 1.  who  hath  believed  our  d.  or  to  whom  arm 
Jer.  10.  8.  brutish,  the  slock  is  a  d.  of  vanities 
Mat.  7.  28.  the  people  were  astonishtd  at  hie  d. 
22.  33.  Mark  1.  22.  \  11.  18.  Luke  4.  32. 

16.  12.  beware  of  the  d.  of  the  Pharisees 
Mark  1.  27.  people  amazed,  saying,  what  new  d. 

4.  2.  he  taught  and  said  to  them  in  his  d.  12.  38. 
John  7.  17.  if  do  ids  w  ill,  he  shall  know  of  the  d. 

18.  19.  the  high  priest  then  asked  Jesus  of  his  d. 
Acts  2.  42.  they  continued  in  the  apostles'  d. 

5.  28.  ye  have  filled  Jerusalem  with  your  d. 
13.  12.  being  asloni^lied  at  tho  d.  of  the  Lord 
17. 19.  saying,  may  we  know  what  this  new  d.it'i 

Rom.  6.  17.  but  ye  have  obeyed  that  form  of  d. 
16.  17.  contrary  to  the  d.  which  ye  have  learned 
1  Cor.  14.  6.  e.\ccpt  I  shall  sjieak  lo  you  by  d. 

26.  every  one  of  you  halh  a  d.  a  tongue 
Eph.  4.  14.  carried  about  with  every  wind  of  d. 

1  Tim.  1.  ii.  charge  that  they  teach  no  other  d. 

4. 13.  till  I  come,  give  attendance  to  reading,  to  d. 

16.  take  heed  to  thyself,  and  to  thy  d. 
5.17.e9pecially  th(  y  w  ho  labour  in  the  word  and  d. 

6. 1.  the  name  of  (J.  and  hisd.  be  not  blasphemed 
3.  and  lo  the  d.  which  is  according  to  godliness 

2  Tim.  3.  16.  all  scripture  is  profitable  for  d. 

4. 2.  rebuke,  exhort,  with  all  long  sutfering  and  d, 
Tit.  2.  7.  in  d.  shewing  incorruptness,  gravity 

10.  that  they  may  adorn  thed.  of  G.  our  Saviour 
Ifeb.  6. 1.  leaving  the  principles  of  the  d.  of  Christ 

2.  of  thed.  ofbiiplisnis,and  of  layini'on  of  hand* 
2  .lohn  9.  H  hoso  abideih  not  in  the  d.  of  Christ ;  he 

that  abideih  in  d.of  Christlunh  FathernndSon 
Rev.  2. 14.  thou  hast  l(iein  lliat  hold  d.  of  Balaam 

15.  that  hold  d.  of  the  Nirolailnns,  which  I  hate 
Good  DOCTRINE.  , 

Prnr.  4.  2.  I  give  you  good  d.  forsake  not  my  law 

1  Tim.  4.C.  nourishi'cl  np  in  the  words  of  good  d. 

My  DOCTRINE. 
Dent.  32.  2.  hit/  d.  shall  drop  as  Ihe  rifin,  my  speech 
.fiih  11.4.  my  d.  is  pure,  and  I  am  clean  in  thine  eyc« 
./ohn  7.  16.  my  d.  is  not  mine,  but  his  that  sent  me 

2  Tim.  3.  10."bul  Ihou  hasl  fnllv  known  my  d. 

Sound  DOCTRINE. 

1  Tim.  1. 10.  any  thing  that  is  contrary  to  sound  d. 

2  Tim.  4.  3.  when  they  will  not  endure  .tound  d. 
Tit.  1.  9.  by  sound  d.  lo  e.vhort  and  convince 

2.  1.  but  speak  things  which  liecomo  sound  d. 

This  DOCTRINE. 
i.Tohn  10.  if  there  come  any  and  bring  not  thiti. 
Ret).  2.  2-1.  and  lo  as  mnnv  a.')  have  not  thit  d. 

DOCTRINES. 
.VnM.'S  O.for  d.  thecommandm.of  men,  Mark'.!. 
Col.i.a.  after  tho  commandmonls  and  d.  of  men 
1  7'it«.4.1.  from  the faiih, giving  liei'd  tod.  of devili 
Ueb.  13.  9.  be  not  carriid  about  with  strange  d. 

DOG 
Is  a  domestic  animal  iccll  known.  By  th-r  taw  it 
was  declared  unclean,  and  was  very  muek 
despised  among  the  Jews:  The  most  offensivt 
erprestion  they  could  use,  was  to  compare  a 
man  to  a  dead  dog.    David,  in  order  to  makt 


DOI 

Saul  sensible,  that  the  vnjust  persecution 
Khich  he  carried  on  against  him,  did  himself 
no  honour,  said  to  him,  Afier  whom  is  the 
king  of  Isruel  come  out  1  after  whom  dost  thou 
pursue  1  after  a  dead  dog  1  1  Sam.  '24.  J 4. 
■  yfte  name  of  dog  is  sometimes  put  for  one  who 
has  lost  all  modesty  ;  for  one  who  prostitutes 
himself  by  committing  any  abominable  action, 
such  as  sodo7ny ;  in  this  manner  several  un- 
derstand the  injmiction  delivered  Ay  Moses,  of 
not  o^'ermg  in  the  tabernacle  of  the  I^ord  the 
hire  of  a  whore  or  the  price  of  a  dog,  Deut.  i'i. 
18.  Jind  Chritit  excludes  dogs,  sorcerers,  whore- 
mongers, murderers,  and  idolaters,  from  the 
kingdom  of  heaven.  Rev.  22.  15.  The  apostle 
Vd.\x{  calls  the  false  apostles  dogs,  by  reason  of 
their  impudence  and  greedy  love  of  sordid 
gain,  Phil.  3.  2.  Solomon  and  the  apostle  Peter 
compare  sinners  who  continually  relapse  into 
their  sins,  to  dogs  returning  to  their  vomit, 
Prov.  26.  11.  2  Pet.  2.  22.  Dog  or  dog.s,  is  put 
for,  [I]  The  devil,  Psal.  22.  20.  [2]  Persecu- 
tors, Psal.  22.  16.  [3]  False  teachers,  Isa  56. 
11.  Phil.  3.  2.  [4]  Unholy  men,  Mat.  7.  6. 
[5]  Tite  Gentiles,  Mat.  15.  27. 
Exod.  11.7.  but  against  Israel  shall  not  a  d.  move 
Veut.  23.18.  not  bring  price  of  a  d.  into  hou.se  of  L. 
Judg.  7.  5.  every  one  that  lappeth  as  a  d.  lappetli 

1  Sam.  17.  43.  Philistine  said  to  David,  am  1  a  d.? 
24.  14.  after  whom  dost  thou  pursue  7  after  a  d.? 

2  .Sam.  3.  8.  then  Abner  said,  am  I  a  dog's  head? 
9.8.thou  sliouldest  look  upon  such  dead  li.  as  I  am 
16.  9.  why  shouldest  this  dead  d.  curse  my  lord? 

2  Kings  8.l'3.1l3.zde\  said, but  what  is  thy  serv.  a  d. 
Psal.  22.  20.  my  darling  from  the  power  of  the  d. 
59.  6.  at  evening  they  make  a  noise  like  a  d.  14. 
Prov.  26.  11.  as  a  d.  relurneth  to  his  vomit,  so  a 
fool  returneth  to  his  folly,  2  Pet.  2.  22. 
17.  is  like  one  that  taketh  a  d.  by  the  cars 
Keel.  9.  4.  a  living  d.  is  better  than  a  dead  lion 
Jsa.  66.3.  sacrificeth,  as  if  he  cut  otf  a  dog's  neck 

DOGS. 
Ezod.  22.  31.  nor  eat  flesh  torn  of  beasts,  ye  shall 
cast  it  to  the  d.  Mat.  15.  26.  Mark  7.  27. 
1  Kings  14.  11.  shall  the  d.  eat,  16.  4.  |  21.  24. 

21.  19.  thussaith  the  Lord,  in  the  place  where  rf. 
licked  the  blood  of  Naboth,shnll  rf.lick  thy  blood 
23.  the  d.  shall  eat  .Tezebel,  2  Kings  9. 10,  36. 

22.  38.  and  the  d.  licked  up  Ahab's  blood 

Job  30.1. 1  disdained  to  have  set  with  d.  of  my  flock 
P«ai.22.16.  for  d.  have  compassed  me,  they  pierced 

68.  23.  and  the  tongue  of  thy  d.  in  the  same 
Isa.  56.  10.  they  are  all  dumb  d.  ||  11.  greedy  d. 
Jer.  )5.  3.  the  sword  to  slay,  and  the  d.  to  tear 
Mat.  7.  6.  give  not  that  which  is  holy  unto  d. 

15.  27.  yet  the  d.  eat  of  the  crumbs,  Mark  7.  28. 
J.,uke  16.  21.  the  d.  came  and  licked  his  sores 
Phil.  3.  2.  be^vare  of  rf.  beware  of  evil  workers 
Rev.  22.  15.  for  without  are  d.  and  sorcerers 

DOING. 
Gen.  31.  28.  thou  hast  done  foolishly  in  so  d. 

44.  5.  is  not  this  if!  ye  have  done  evil  in  so  d. 
Er.od.X^.W.  like  thee,fearfulin  praises,  rf.  wonders 
J\rum.  20.  19.  I  will  only,  without  d.  any  thing  else 
JJeut.  9.  18.  because  ye  sinned  in  d.  wickedly 
1  Kings  16. 19.  he  sinned  in  d.  evil,  2  Kings  21.  16. 

22.  43.  d.  that  which  was  right,  2  Chron.  20.  32. 

1  Chron.  22. 16.  arise,  and  be  d.  Lord  be  with  thee 
JVcA.  6.  3. 1  am  d.  great  work,  I  cannot  comedown 
.Tob  32.22.  in  so  d.  my  Maker  would  take  me  away 
Psal.  64.  9.  they  shall  wisely  consider  of  his  d. 

66.  5.  he  is  terrible  in  d.  toward  children  of  men 

116.  'i.i.  this  is  the  Lord's  d.  it  is  marvellous  in 

our  eyes,  Mat.  21.  42.  Mark  12.  11. 

/sa.  .56.  2.  and  keepeth  hie  hand  from  d.  any  evil 

as.  13.  from  d.  thy  pleasure  on  my  holy  day,  and 
Jer.  32.  t  19-  great  in  counsel,  and  mighty  in  d. 
E-.ek.  31.  t  11.  in  d.  he  shall  do  unto  hi^ 
Mat.  24.  46.  his  Lord  shall  find  so  d.  LukeM.  43. 
j?c(«  10.  38.  Jesus,  who  went  about  d.  good 

24.  20.  if  they  have  found  any  evil  d.  in  me 
Rom. 12.20.  for  in  so  d.  thou  shal.t  heap  coals  of  fire 

2  Cnr.  8.  11.  now  therefore  perform  the  d.  of  it 
Eph.  0.  6.  as  the  servants  of  Christ,  d.  the  will  of 

God  from  the  heart 
lTm.4.lR.inrf.thisthou  shall  savethyself  and  them 
5. 21.  observe  these  things,  d.  nothing  by  partiality 
.He6.13.t21.  rf.  in  you  what  is  well-pleasing  in  sight 
Jam.  1.  t  25.  this  man  shall  bo  blessed  in  his  d. 

Well-DOING. 
Rom.  2.  7.  by  patient  continuance  in  leell-d. 
<,!a/.6.9.1etus  not  be  weary  in  icell-d.  27'/ics«.3.13. 
1  Pet.  2.  15.  with  well-d.  ye  may  put  to  silence 
3.  17.  for  it  is  better  that  ye  suffer  for  well-d. 
4. 19.  commit  their  souls  unto  him  in  well-d.  as  to 

DOINGS. 
Lev.  18.  3.  after  the  d.  of  Egypt,  and  after  the  d.  of 
Canaan,  whither  I  bring  you,  ehall  ye  not  do 
Dmt.  28.  20.  because  of  the  wickedness  of  thy  d. 
Judg.  3.  19.  they  ceased  not  from  their  own  d. 

m 


DOM 

1  Sam.  25.  3.  Nabal  was  churlish  and  evil  in  his  d. 

2  Uhr.  17.  4.  and  walked  not  after  the  d.  of  Israel 
Ps.'J.  1 1.  declare  among  the  people  his  d.  Isa.  12.  4. 

77. 12. 1  will  meditate  of  thy  works,  talk  of  thy  d. 
Prov.  20.  11.  even  a  child  is  known  by  his  d. 
Jsa.  1.  16.  wash  ye,  put  away  the  evil  of  your  d. 

3. 8.  because  their  tongue  and  (/.are  against  the  L. 

10.  for  they  shall  eat  ihe  fruit  of  their  d. 

Jer.  4.  4.  lest  my  fury  come  and  burn,  because  of 
tlie  evil  of  your  d.  21.  12.  ]  26.  3.  |  44.  22. 

18.  thy  d.  have  procured  these  things  to  thee 
7.  3.  amend  your  ways  and  d.  5.  |  26. 13.  [  35. 15. 

11.  18.  then  thou  shewedst  me  their  d. 

17.  10.  according  to  the  fruit  of  his  d.  21.  14. 

18.  11.  return,  and  make  your  ways  and  d.  good 

23.  2.  I  will  visit  upon  you  the  evil  of  your  d. 
22.  and  from  the  evil  of  their  d.  25.  5.  Zech.  1. 4. 

32.  19.  to  give  accordmg  to  the  fruit  of  his  d. 
Ezek.  14.  22.  ye  shall  see  their  way  and  their  d. 

20.  43.  there  shall  ye  remember  your  d.  and  your 
44.  nor  accord,  to  your  wicked  ways,  corrupt  d. 

21.  24.  so  that  in  all  your  d.  your  sins  do  ajipear 

24.  14.  according  to  thy  d.  shall  tiiey  judge 

36.  17.  they  defiled  it  by  their  own  way  and  d. 

19.  and  according  to  their  d.  I  judged  them 
31.  shall  remember  your  d.  that  were  not  good 

Hos.  4.  9.  I  will  punish  and  reward  them  their  li. 

5.  4.  they  will  not  frame  their  d.  to  turn  to  their  G. 
7.  2.  now  their  own  d.  have  set  them  about 

9.  15.  for  the  wickedness  of  their  d.  I  will  drive 

12.  2.  according  to  his  d.  will  he  recompense 
Mic.  2.  7.  O  house  of  Jacob,  are  these  his  d.? 

3. 4. as  they  have  behaved  themselves  ill  in  their  d. 
7. 13.  land  shall  be  desolate  for  the  fruit  of  their  d. 
Zeph.  3.  7.  but  they  roseearly,corrupted  all  their  d. 

11.  shalt  thou  not  be  ashamed  for  all  thy  d.? 
Zcch.  1.6.  according  to  our  </.  so  hath  dealt  with  us 

DOLEFUL. 
Isa.  13.  21.  their  houses  full  oi  d.  creatures 
jyic.2.4.in  that  day  shall  lauient  with  ad.  lamenta 

DOMINION 
Signifirs,   [1]    Poioer,   Neh.   9.  28.     Rom.  6.  9. 
[2]  Persons  ruled  over,  Psal.  114.2.  [3]  Kings 
and  kingdoms,  Dun.  6.  26.  |  7. 27.     [4]  Jingels, 
Eph.  1. 21.  Col.  1. 16.     [5]  Magistrates,  2  Pet 
2.  t  10.     Jude8.     [6]  'J'he  universal  and  un- 
limited authority  and  government  o/God,  Psal. 
72.  8.  I  145.  13.     Dan.  4.  3,  22,  34.  [  7.  14. 
Gen.  1.  26.  have  d.  over  the  fish  of  the  sea,  28. 
27.40.and  when  ihou  shalt  have  the  d.  si. alt  break 

37.  8.  or  shalt  thou  indeed  have  d.  over  us? 

JV«  i/i.24.19.out  of  Jacob  come  he  that  shall  haved. 

.ludg.  5.  13.  he  made  him  have  d.  over  the  nobles 

14.  4.  at  that  time  the  Philistines  had  d.  over  Israel 

1  Kings  4.  24.  Solomon  hud  d.  over  all  the  region 
9.  19.  to  build  in  the  land  of  his  d.  2  (Jitron.  8.  6. 

2  Kings  20.  13.  there  was  nothing  in  his  house  or  in 

all  his  rf.  that  Hezekiah  shew ed  not,  hn.  39. 2. 

1  Chron.  4.22.  men  of  Chozeba  who  had  d.iii  Moab 

18.  3.  as  he  went  to  stablish  his  d.  by  the  river 

2  Chron.  21.8.  the  Edomites  from  under  Judah's  d. 
32.  t  9.  Sennacherib  and  all  his  d.  with  him 

JV<A.  9.  28.  so  that  they  had  the  d.  over  them 

37.  also  they  have  d.  over  our  bodies  and  cattle 
Job  25.2.  d.and  tear  are  with  him,  he  niaketh  peace 

38.  33.  canst  tApu  set  the  d.  thereof  in  the  earth? 
Psal.  8.  6.  to  have  d.  over  the  works  of  thy  hands 

19.  13.  from  sins,  let  them  not  have  d.  ovcy:  me 
49.  14.  the  upright  shall  have  d.  over  them 
72.  8.  he  shall  have  d.  also  from  sea  to  sea 
103.  22.  bless  the  Lord  in  all  places  of  his  d. 
114.  2.  Jiidah  was  his  sanctuary,  and  Israel  his  d. 
119.  133.  let  not  any  iniquity  have  d.  over  me 
145.  13.  thy  d.  endureth  through  all  generations 

Isa.  26. 13.  other  lords  besides  thee  had  d.  over  us 

./er.  2.  t  31.Svh(jrefore  say  my  people,  we  have  d.? 

Dan.  4.  3.  his  d.  is  from  generati<m  to  generation 

22.  thy  d.  reacheth  to  the  end  of  the  earth 

34.  most  High,  whose  d.  is  an  everlasting  d.  7. 14. 

6.  2G.  that  in  every  d.  of  my  kingdom  men  trem- 

ble and  fear  before  the  God  of  Daniel,  and 
his  d.  shall  be  even  unto  the  end 
7.6.the  beast  had  four  heads,  and  (/.was  given  to  it 

12.  the  rest  of  the  beasts  had  their  (/.  taken  away 
14.  there  was  given  him  d.  and  glory,  a  kingdom 

20.  they  shall  take  away  his  d.  to  consume  it 
27.lhe(/.  shall  be  given  to  thesaintsof  most  High 

11.  3.  a  mighty  king  that  shall  rule  with  great  (/.5. 
4.  not  according  to  his  d.  which  he  ruled 
Mic.  4.  8.  to  thee  shall  it  come  even  Ihe  first  d. 
Zcch.  9.  10.  his  d.  shall  be  from  sea  to  sea 
Mat.  20.  25  the  princes  of  the  Gentiles  exercise  (/. 
Rom.  6.  9.  raised,  death  hath  no  more  d.  over  him 
]4.for  sin  shall  not  have  d.  over  you,  undergrace 

7. 1.  law  hath  d.  over  a  man  as  long  as  he  livelh 
2  Cor.  1.  24.  not  that  we  have  d.  over  your  faith 
K/)/i.  1.21. above  all  power, might,and  (/.every  name 

1  Pct.i.  11.  ihatGod  may  be  glorified,  to  whom  be 
praUe  and  d.  for  ever  and  ever,  5.  II.  Rev.  A,  6. 

2  Pet.  2.  1 10.  but  them  that  despise  d.  Jwie  8. 


DON 

Jude  25.  to  tlie  only  wise  God  be  d.  and  power 

DOMINIONS. 
Dan.  7.  27.  and  all  d.  shall  serve  and  obey  him 
Col.  1.16.  whether  they  be  thrones,or  d.  or  poweri 

DONE. 
G(;«.9.24.  Noah  know  what  his  younger  son  had<i, 

18.  21.  they  haved.  according  to  the  cry  of  it 
24.  06.  the  servant  told  Isaac  ull  that  he  had  d. 

26.  29.  as  we  have  d.  to  thee  nothing  but  good 

29. 26.  Laban  said, it  must  not  be  d.  in  our  couottj 
34.  7.  wrought  folly,  which  ought  not  to  be  d. 
44.  5.  ye  have  d.  evil  in  so  doing 

15.  Joseph  said,  what  deed  is  this  ye  have  d.7 
Exod.  1.  18.  he  said,  why  have  ye  d.  this  thing? 
2.4.  his  sister  stood  to  wit  what  would  be  (/.to  him 
12. 16.  no  manner  of  work  shall  be  d.  in  them,Bave 
what  must  be  eat,  that  only  may  be  d.  of  you 
13.  8.  this  is  d.  because  of  ihat  the  Lord  did  to  me 
IS.l.Jeihro  heard  of  all  that  God  had  d.  lor  Moseg 
9.  the  goodness  which  the  Lord  had  d.  to  Israel 

21.  31.  according  to  this  judgment  shall  it  be  d. 
31.  15.  six  days  may  work  be  d.  35.  2.  /,eo.  23.  3. 
39.43.  they  had  d.  it  as  the  Lord  had  commanded, 

even  so  had  they  d.  it,  and  Moses  blessed  them 
Lev.  5.  17.  and  commit  things  forbidden  to  be  d. 

8.  5.  the  Lord  commanded  to  be  d.  Deut.  26.  14. 

11.  32.  what  vciuel  it  be,  wherein  any  work  is  d. 

18.27.  these  ab^pnations  have  the  men  of  land  (J. 
24.  20.  eye  for^e,  so  shall  it  be  d.  to  him  again 

J\runi.  5.  7.  they  shall  confess  their  sin  they  have  d. 

12.  11.  wherein  v/e  have  d.  foolishly  and  sinned 
15.34.it  was  not  declared  what  should  be  (/.to  him 
22. 2.  Calak  saw  all  that  Israel  had  d.  to  Amoritea 

27.  4.  why  should  name  of  our  father  be  d.  away? 
32.I3.all  iliat  had  i/.evil  in  sight  of  L.  were  consu. 

Deut.  10.  21.  he  is  thy  God  that  hath  d.  for  thee 
25.9.  so  shall  it  be  (/.to  that  uian  will  not  build  up 

29. 24.  nations  say,  wherefore  hath  the  Ld.  d.  thui 
to  this  land?  1  Kings  9.  8.  2  Chron.  7.21. 

Josh.  10.  32.  as  he  had  d.  als'o  to  Libnah,  39. 
35.  he  had  d.  to  Lachish  ||  37.  he  had-d.  to  Eglon 

22.  24.  if  we  had  not  rather  d.  it  for  fear  of  this 

24.  31.  had  known  all  that  he  had  d.  for  Israel 
Judg.  2.  10.  who  knew  not  w  orUs  he  had  (/.  for  Isr. 

3. 12.  because  they  had  d.  evil  in  sight  of  the  Lord 

9.  16.  if  ye  have  d.  truly  and  sincerely  and  have  d 
to  Jerubbaalaccorduig  to  deserving  of  his  hands 
24.  cruelty  d.  to  the  suventy  sons  of  Jerubbaal 

19.  30.  there  was  no  such  deed  d.  nor  seen 
Ruth.  3. 16.  told  her  all  that  the  man  had(/.  to  her 

1  Sam.  4. 16.  and  he  said,  what  is  there  d.  my  son? 
11.7.  Cometh  not  forth,  so  shall  ilbed.  to  his  oxen 
17.  26.W  hatshall  be  d.  to  the  man  that  killeth  him? 

27.  so  shall  it  be  d.  to  the  man  that  killeth  him 

25.  30.*when  the  Lord  shall  have  d.  to  my  lord 

28.  17.  the  Lord  hath  d.  as  he  spake,  Ezek.  12. 28. 

2  .Sam.  11. 27.  thing  David  had  d.  displeased  the  L. 

13.  12.  no  such  thing  ought  to  be  d.  in  krael 
24.  17.  what  have  they  d.?  1  Chron.  21.  17. 

1  Kings  8.  06.  goodness  the  Lord  had  d.  for  David 

14.  22.  above  all  that  their  fathers  had  d. 

19.  1.  Ahab  told  Jezebel  all  that  Elijah  had  d. 

22.  53.  provoked  the  Lord  according  to  all  that 
his  father  bad  d.  2  Kings  15.  3,  9,  34.  |  23. 32. 

2  Kings  4.  13.  he  said,  what  is  to  bo  d.  for  thee? 

8.  4.  toll  me  all  the  great  things  Eli.«ha  hath  d. 

10.  10.  for  the  Lord  hath  d.  that  which  he  spake 
by  his  servant  Elijah,  Isa.  38.  15.  Jer.  40.  3. 

19. 11.  thou  hast  hear(l  w  hat  the  kings  of  Assyria 

have  d.  to  all  lands,  2  Chr.  32. 13.  Isa.3~.  11 

21.  15.  because  they  have  d.  evil,  2  Chron.  29.  6. 

23.  19.  all  the  acts  that  he  had  d.  in  Beth-el 

2  Chron.  24.  16.  because  he  had  d.  good  in  Israel 

29.  36.  rcjpiccd,  for  the  thing  w  as  d.  suddenly 

32. 25.  rendered  not  according  to  benefit  d.  to  him 
31.  who  sent  to  inquire  of  the  wonder  that  was  d. 

Ezra  6.  12.  made  a  decree,  let  it  be  d.  with  speed 

9.  1.  when  these  things  were  d.  the  princes  came 
J^ch.  6.  8.  there  are  no  such  things  (/.  as  thou  sayest 

9.33.we  have  d.  wickedly,  Ps.  106.  0.  i>a7i.9.5,15. 
E.':th.  2. 1.  he  rememb.  Vashti,and  what  she  had  3. 

4.1.  Mordecai  perceived  all  was(/.  rent  his  clothes 

6.  6.  the  king  said,  what  shall  be  d.  to  the  man? 

9.  thus  shall  it  be  d.  to  the  man  the  king  honours 

.Tob  21.31.  who  shall  repay  him  what  he  hath  d.? 

34. 29.  whether  it  be  d.  ag.  a  nation  or  a  man  only 
Ps(;/.  33. 9.  he  spake  and  it  was  d.  he  commanded 

71. 19.  he  hath  d.  great  things,  106.  21.  |  120.  2,  3. 

120.  3.  what  shall  be  d.  to  thee,  false  tongue? 
Frov.  3.  30.  strive  not  if  he  have  d.  thee  no  haiiK 

4.16.  they  sleep  not,  except  they  have  (/.  mischiel 

Ecrl.  1.  9.  that  which  is  d.  is  that  which  shall  be<i 

14.  have  seen  the  works  are  d.  under  sun,  4.1,3. 

2.  12.  even  that  which  hath  be^n  already  d. 
/.?(i.3.t  11. the  reward  of  his  hands  shall  be  i/.tohim 

41.  4.  who  hath  wrought  and  (/.  it  ?  I  the  Lord 

44.  23.  sing,  O  heavens,  for  the  Lord  hath  d.  it 

46.5.  lest  thou  shouldest  say,  my  idol  hath  (/.them 
J(r.  3. 6.  hast  seen  what  backsliding  Israel  hithd. 

5. 13.  prophets  wind,  thus  shall  it  be  d.  unto  them 


DON 

/er.T.lS.bccause  ye  liavo  d.all  these  works^atth  L. 

30.  for  cliildreii  ofJudah  haved.  evil  iu  my  sight 

34.  15.  were  turned,  and  had  d.  right  in  my  sijjlit 

35.  10.  have  d.  all  that  Jonadab  commanded,  16. 
38.9.  these  men  have  d.  evil  to  Jeremiah  prophet 
44.  17.  as  we  liavc  d.  we  and  our  lathers,  kings 

43.  19.  ask  him  that  flecth,  and  say,  what  is  d. 

50.  15.  vengeance  as  she  hath  d.  do  unto  hir,'J!J. 

51.  35.  the  violence  d.  to  me  and  to  my  tlish 
Lam.2.  17.  Lord  hath  d.  that  which  he  had  devised 
EzekSJ.'M.  thus  have  they  d.  in  midst  of  my  liouse 

39.  8.  it  is  come,  it  is  d.  saith  the  Lord  Uod 
43. 11.  if  they  bo  ashamed  of  iJI  that  they  have  d. 

44.  14.  and  for  all  that  shall  be  d.  therein 
Van.  1 1 .  36.  for  that  that  is  determined  shall  be  d. 
Zeph-  3.  4.  the  priests  have  d.  violence  to  the  law 
Mat.d.  10.  thy  will  be  d.  26.  42.  Luke  11. '-'.  |  22.  42. 

8.  13.  as  thou  hast  believed,  so  be  it  d.  to  thee 

11.21.  if  the  mighty  works  which  wore  d.  in  you 
had  been  d.  in  Tyre  and  Sidon,  Luke  10.  13. 

18.  19.  any  thing  they  ask,  it  shall  be  d.  for  them 

31.  when  Ins  fellow-servants  saw  what  was  d. 
21.  21.  be  thou  cast  into  the  sea,  it  shall  be  d. 
23.  23.  tliese  ought  ye  to  have  d.  Luke  11.  42. 
25  21.  wi'll  d.  good  and  faithful  servant,  23. 

40.  inasmuch  us  ye  have  d.  it  to  one  of  the  least 

of  these  my  brethren^  have  d.  it  to  me 

27.  54.  saw  those  things  ihatWSre  d.  28.  11. 

Mark  5.14. went  out  tosee  what  was  d.  Luke  8.35. 

19.  go  home  to  thy  friends,  tell  what  great  things 

the  Lord  hath  d.  for  thee,  20.  Luke  6.  3'J. 

33.  the  woman  knowing  what  was  d.  in  tier 

6.  30.  they  told  him  what  they  had  d.  and  taught 

9.  13.  they  have  d.  to  him  whatsoever  they  listed 

13.  30.  shall  not  pass  till  all  these  things  be  d. 
15.  8.  desire  him  to  do,  as  he  bad  ever  d.  to  them 

Luke  1.  49.  he  that  is  mighty  hath  d.  great  things 

3.  19.  being  reproved  for  the  evils  Herod  had  d. 
S.  50.  he  charged  them  to  tell  no  man  what  wasd. 
9.  10.  the  apostles  told  him  all  that  they  had  d. 

14.22.  Lord,  it  is  d.  as  thou  hast  commanded 
17.  10.  ye,  w  hen  yo  shall  have  d.  all  those  things, 

we  liave  d.  that  which  was  our  duty  to  do 

23.  31.  if  ill  a  green  tree,  what  shall  be  d.  in  dry? 
47.  now  when  the  centurion  saw  what  was  d. 

24.  21.  the  third  day,  since  these  things  were  d. 
John  5.  29.  they  that  have  d.  good  to  resurrection 

of  life  ;  they  that  have  d.  evil,  to  damnation 
15.  7.  ask  what  yo  will,  and  it  shall  be  d.  unto  you 

19.  36.  these  things  were  d.  that  the  scripture  be 
jJcis  2.  43.  many  signs  were  d.  by  the  apostles 

4.  9.  of  the  good  deed  d.  to  the  impotent  man 
16.  a  noi.-ible  miracle  hath  been  d.  by  them 
21.  all  men  glorified  Cod  for  that  which  was  (/. 
•28.  what  thy  counsel  determined  before  to  be  d. 

5.  7.  his  wife,  not  knowing  what  was  d.  came  in 
12.  9.  he  wist  not  that  it  was  true  which  was  d. 

14.  27  thev  rehearsed  all  that  God  had  d.  15.  4. 

21.  14.  saying,  the  will  of  the  Lord  he  d. 
33.  the  chief  captain  demandt.'d  what  he  had  d. 

Rom.  9.  11.  neither  having  d.  any  good  or  evil 

1  Cor.  9.  15.  nor  that  it  should  be  d.  unto  me 
"3.  10.  that  which  is  in  part  shall  be  d.  away 
i4.  26.  let  all  things  be  d.  to  edifying 

40.  be  d.  decently  ||  16. 14.  be  d.  with  charity 

2  Cor.  3.  7.  which  glory  was  to  be  d.  away 
14  Old  Testament, which  vail  is  d.  away  inChrist 

5.  10.  may  receive  the  things  d.  in  his  body,  ac- 
cording io  that  he  hath  d.  whether  good  or  bad 

F.pli.  5.  12.  things  which  are  d.  of  them  in  secret 
li.  13.  able  to  withstand,  and  having  d.  all  to  stand 

Phil.  2.  3.  let  nothing  be  d.  thro'  strife  or  vain-glory 
4.  14.  ye  have  well  d.  that  yo  did  communicate 

Col.  4.  9.  will  make  known  all  things  that  are  d. 

Til.  3.  5.  not  by  works  of  righteousness  we  have  d. 

//£6.10.29.and  hath  d.  despite  to  the  Spirit  of  grace 

licv.  IC.  17.  came  a  voice,  saying,  it  is  d.  21.  6. 

22.  C.  to  shew  the  things  which  must  shortly  be  d. 

Jfave  I  DONE. 
Oen.20.5.  in  innocenoy  of  my  hands  Anue /i^  this 
40.  15.  and  here  also  hace  I  d.  nothing  to  put  me 
J\-U7n.22.28.what  Aouc  Id.?  1  Kings  19.20.  Jt/ic.6.3. 
JokA.  7. 20.  I  have  sinned,  thus  and  ihuahave  Id. 
Jm(/<»-.8.2.  hesaid.whalA.  funwd.?  I.Sam.  17.29. 
1  Savi.  20. 1.  what Aaue  Id.?  26. 18.  |  29.  8.  .;cr.8.6. 
JC2cA.39.24.  accord,  to  their  transgress.  A.  Id.  them 
Acts  25.  10.  to  the  Jews  hanc  Id.  no  wrong 
He  /lutli  J)f)Nr:,  or,  Au(A  he  DONE. 
Krod.  5.  23.  hr  hat.'i  d.  rvW  to  this  people 
/>cu.  5.  16.  m.ike  amends  for  the  harm  he  hath  d. 

6.  34.  as  hehathd.  nil  the  Lord  commanded  lodo 

19.  21.  atonement  for  his  sin  which  he  hath  d. 
24.  19.  as  hr.  hath  d.  so  ilmll  it  be  done  to  him 

Jo«A.24.20.con8ume  you,  after  hr  hath  d.  you  good 
Judg.  15.  10.  to  do  to  him  us  he  hath  d.  to  us 
1  Sam.  6.  9.  then  he  hath  d.  us  this  great  evil 
12.24.oonsider  how  great  things  Ac  huth  d.  for  you 

20.  32.  why  shall  ho  be  slain?  what  hath  ht  d.? 
1  Chron.  16.  12.  reincmbor  his  marvellous  works 

that  ht  hath  d.  Psal.  78.  4.  1  Di  1. 1  105.  5. 
142 


DON 

Psal.  66. 16. 1  will  declare  what  he  hath  d.  for  soul 

115.  3.  our  God  AutA  d.  whatsoever  he  jileased 
Prov.  24.  29. 1  will  do  so  to  him  as  he  hath  d.  to  me 
Isa.  12.  5.  sing  toL.  for  Ae  AatA  </.  e.icellent  things 
Eiek.  3.  20.  righteousness  w  hich  he  hath  d.  Id.  24. 
17. 18.  he  hath  d.  these  things,  lie  shall  not  escape 
18.  13.  he  hath  d.  all  these  abominations 

14.  that  seeth  his  father's  sins  which  he  hath  d. 

22.  in  righteousness  that  he  hath  d.  he  shall  live 
24.  24.  according  to  all  that  he  hath  d.  slia.l  ye  do 
33.  16.  he  hath  d.  that  which  is  lawful  and  right 

Joel  2.  20.  because  he  hath  d.  great  things 
Alat.  27.  23.  and  the  governor  said,  wliy,  what 
evil  hath  he  d.?  Mark  15.  14.  Luke  23.  22. 
Mark  7.  37.  saying,  he  hath  d.  all  things  well 
Jlcts  9.  13.  much  evil  hath  he  d.  to  thy  saints 
2  Cur .S.lO.may  receive  according  to  that  At  AutA  d. 
Col.  3.  25.  receive  for  the  wrong  which  he  hath  d. 

I  have  DONE. 
Gc7i.  8.  21.  nor  will  1  smite  every  thing  as  /  have  d. 
21.  23.  according  to  the  kindness  I  have  d.  thee 

27.  19.  1  am  Esau,  I  have  d.  as  thou  badest  me 

28.  15.  till  /  have  d.  that  which  1  have  spoken 
30.  26.  thou  knowest  my  service  1  have  d.  thee 

Ezod.  10.  2.  my  signs  which  /  have  d.  among  them 
Josh.  24.  7.  your  eyes  have  seen  what  1  have  d. 
Judg.  1.  7.  as  /  Uane  d.  so  God  halli  rec|uiled  me 
9.  T  -18.  what  I  have  d.  make  haste,  do  as  /  have  d. 

15.  11.  as  they  did  to  me,  so  have  1  d.  to  them 
2  Sam.  W.  21.  behold  now  1  have  d.  this  thing 

24.  10.  David  said,  1  have  sinned  greatly  in  that 
1  have  d.  I  have  d.  vciy  foolishly,  1  CAr.  21.  8. 
17.  1  have  sinned,  and  J  have  d.  « ickedly 

1  Kingsd.  12.  behold, /Aaufi/.  accord,  to  thy  word 
•2Kings  19.25. h:i»t  tliou  not  heard, huw  I  haved.ill 
A'l A.I3.  14.  that  J  have  d.  for  the  house  ol  niy  God 
.Job  34.  32.  if  J  havcd.  ini(|uity,  I  will  do  no  more 
Psal.  7.  3.  O  Lord,  my  God,  it  /  haut  d.  this 

119. 121.  /Auucd.judgnient  and  justice,  leave  not 
Prov.  30.  20.  and  saith,  I  have  d.  no  wickedness 
/sa. 10.11. shall!  not,  as  /Aaiic  d.  to  Samaria,  so  do 

13.  by  the  strength  of  my  hand  I  have  d.  it 
33.  13.  hear  ye  that  are  lar  oH'  what  1  have  d. 
37.  2t;.  hast  thou  not  heard  how  I  have  d.  11? 

Jer.  42.  10.  I  repent  of  the  evil  I  have  d.  to  you 
Kiek.  9. 11.  /  have  d.  as  thou  hast  commanded  me 

12.  11.  as  /  have  d.  so  shall  it  be  done  to  them 
14.  2:t.  ye  shall  know  that  1  have  not  d.  without 

cause,  all  that  I  have  d.  in  it  saith  the  Lord 
21.  22.  >  e  shall  do  as  1  have  d.  ye  !-hall  not  cover 
)jan.  6.  22.  before  tht  e,  U  king,  have  I  d.  no  hurt 
Zech.  7.  3.  weep,  as  /  have  d.  these  so  many  years 
John  1.21.  I  have  d.  one  work,  and  ye  aU  marvel 

13.  12.  so  after  he  had  washed  iheir  feet,  he  said 
to  them,  know  ye  what  /  have  d.  to  you? 

15.  that  ye  should  do  as  /  have  d.  to  you 
Ilast  thuu  DONE. 

Gen.  4.10.  be  said,  what  hast  thou  </.?  31.26.J\"u7;i. 

23.  11.  1  Sam.  13.  11.  2  Sam.  3.  24.  John  18.  35. 
20.  9.  what  hasl  thou  d.  to  us?  Judg.  15.  11. 

2  Sam.  7.  21.  according  to  thy  heart  hast  thuu  d. 

16.  10.  who  shall  say,  wherefore  hast  thou  d.  so? 
1  h'iiigs  1.  6.  in  saying,  why  hast  thou  d.  so? 
ICAr.  17.  19.  O  Lord,  Au.-t<Aoud.  all  this  greatne.«3 
Psal.  50.21.  these  things  Aasi  thou  d.  I  keiit  silerice 
Jonah  1. 10.  the  men  said,  why  hast  thou  d.  this? 

Thou  hast  HONE. 
Ocn.  3.  13.  what  is  this  that  thou  hast  d.1  12. 
18.  1  26.  10.  I  29.  25.  Judg.  8.  t  L  I  15.11. 
2  Sam.  12.  21. 

14.  because  thou  hasl  d.  this,  22. 16. 2  CAr.25.1G. 
2O.9./A0K  hast  d.deeds  which  ought  not  to  he  done 
27.45.  he  forget  that  which  thou  hast  d.  to  him 
31.  28.  thou  hast  now  d.  foolishly  in  eo  doing, 

1  Sam.  13.  13.  2  Chron.  16.  9. 
Josh.  7. 19.  tell  me  what  thou  hast  d.  1  Sam.  14.43. 
Huth  2  11.  it  hath  been  shewed  me  all  thuu  hast  d. 
1  .Sam.  24.  19.  for  that  thou  hast  d.  to  mo  this  day 
26.  W>.  the  thing  is  not  good  that  thou  hast  d. 

1  III  ngsli.9.hul  thou  hasl  d.iivW  above  all  bef.  thee 

2  Kings'i.  1 10.  he  said,  thou  hast  d.  hard  in  asking 
10.  30.  because  thou  hast  d.  well  in  executing 
23.  17.  thou  hast  d.  against  the  altar  of  Bcth-el 

JVcA.  9.  33.  for  tAou  hasl  d.  right,  but  wc  wickedly 
Ps.  40.  5.  thy  wonderful  works  which  thnu  hast  d. 
52.  9.  1  will  praise  thee,  because  thou  hast  d.  it 
109.  27.  that  Ibey  may  know  that  thou  hast  d.  it 
Prou.  ;'0.  32.  Uthou  hast  d.  foolishly  in  lifting  up 
/sa.25.1. exalt  thee,  for  thou  hast  d.  wonder,  works 
./ir.  2.  23.  see  thy  way,  know  what  thou  hast  d. 
3.  5.  behold,  thou  hasl  spoken  «nd  d.  evil  things 
Lam.  1.  21.  they  are  glad  that  fAou  hast  d.  it 

22.  do  unto  them  as  thou  hasl  d.  unto  mo 

2.20.  O  Lord,  con.-<i<ler  to  whom  thou  hast  d.  this 

Kzek.  16.  48.  Sodom  hath  not  done  us  thouhasld. 

51.  in  all  thy  abominations  which  thou  hast  d. 

.19.  I  will  oven  deal  with  thee  as  thuu  hast  d. 

03.  when  I  am  pacified  for  all  that  thou  hast  d. 

Ubad.  15.  as  tAou  Aast  d.  it  shall  be  done  to  thee 

Jonah  1.14.  O  Lord,  thouhast  d.  as  it  pleoicth  theu 


DOO 

^cts  10.  33.  thou  hast  d.  well  that  thuu  art  come 

■A'ot  DONE. 
(icti.UQ.  9.  hast  done  deeds  that  ought  nut  to  be  d. 

34.  7.  which  tiling  ought  not  to  he  d. 
Kxod.  34.  10.  marvels,  such  as  have  not  been  d., 
y>tt;.4.2.coiicern.things  which  ought  nut  to  be  d.13. 
JV'um.  16.  28.  1  liave  not  d.  them  of  mine  own  mind 
Veut.  32.  27r  lest  they  say,  Lord  hath  not  d.  all  thia 
Judg.  16.  t  11.  ropes  wlierewilh  work  not  been  d. 
2  Saoi.  17.  t  '23.  Ahithoi)liel  saw  his  counsel  not  d. 
2  Kings  5.13.if  ptoph.wouldest  thou  nut  have  d.itl 
•i  Chron.  30.  5.  they  had  not  d.  it  of  a  long  hnio 
JV'cA.  U.  9.  weakened  from  the  work, that  it  be  not  d, 

8.  17.  from  the  days  of  Joshua,  Isr.  Iiad  not  d.  so 
£s(A.J.16.V'ashti  liatlmot  (/.wrong  to  the  king  only 
Isa.  5.  4.  what  could  been  done,  that  1  have  not  d. 

46.  10.  declaring  the  things  that  arc  not  yet  d, 
Jer.  3.  16.  7i<((Air  shall  that  be  d.  any  more 
Kzek.  5.  9.  1  will  do  in  thee  that  I  have  not  d. 
Van.  9.  12.  for  under  the  whole  heaven  hath  not 
been  d.  as  hath  been  done  ujjon  Jerusalem 

11.  24.  do  tiiat  which  his  fathers  have  not  d. 
Jimos  3.6.shall  evil  be  in  city,  and  L.  hath  not  d.  it? 
John  15.  24.  if  1  had  not  d.  among  them  the  works? 
.•/i(il4.1S.scarce  restrained  they  had  n.  d.  sacritico 

26.  26.  for  this  thing  was  not  d.  in  a  corner 

DONE  with  this. 
Gen.  21.  26.  I  wot  not  who  haih  d.  this  thing 

42.  28.  wliat  is  this  that  God  hath  d.  to  us? 

44.  15.  what  deed  is  this  that  ye  have  d.? 
F.iod.  1.  18.  why  have  ye  d.  this  thing, and  saved 

13.  8.  this  is  d.  because  ofthat  which  the  Lord  did 

14.  5.  and  they  said,  why  have  we  d.  this? 
.losh.  9.  24.  we  were  sore  afraid,  and  have  d.  this? 

23.  8.  hut  cleave  to  Lord,  as  ye  have  d.  to  f  A;*  day 
Ju(/^.2.2.yo  have  not  obeyed, wliy  have  ye  d.  this? 
6.  29.  they  said,  who  hath  d.  this  thing?  15.  0. 

11.  37.  she  said,  let  this  thing  he  d.  for  me 
15. 7.  though  ye  have  d.  this,ycl  will  1  be  avenged 
20.12.what  wickedness  is  this  that  is  d.among  you 

1  Sam.  12.  20.  ye  have  d.  all  this  wickedness 
28.  18.  therefore  hath  the  Lord  d.  this  thing 

2  Sam.  2.  6.  because  ye  have  d.  this  thing 

12.  5.  the  man  that  hath  d.  this  thing  shall  die 
14.  20.  hath  thy  servant  Joab  d.  this  thing? 

21.  king  said,  behold  now,  I  have  d.  this  thing 

1  Kings  1.  27.  is  this  thing  d.  by  my  Lord  the  king? 

11.  11.  Lord  said,  forasinuch  as  this  is  d.  of  thee 

2  Chrun.  11.  4.  return,  for  this  thing  is  d.  of  me 
Psal.  7.  3.  O  Lord,  my  God,  if  1  have  d.  this 

22.  31.  they  shall  declare  ihat  he  hath  d.  this 
51.  4.  I  liave  sinned,  and  d.  this  evil  in  thy  sight, 

Isa.  41.  20.  that  the  hand  of  the  Lord  hath  d.thi^ 
A'ifA.  23. 38.  moreover,  this  they  have  d.  unto  me 
Mai-  2.  13.  this  have  ved.  againj  covering  the  altar 
Mat.  1.  22.  now  all  this  was  d.  21.  4.  |  26.  5t>. 

13.  28.  he  said  to  them,  an  enemy  hath  d.  this 
21.  21.  not  oiilydo  this  which  is  d.  to  the  fig-tree 
26.  13.  this  that  this  woman  hath  d.  Mark  14.9. 

Mark  5.  32.  to  see  her  that  had  d.  this  thing 
Luke  5.  6.  when  they  had  d.  <A/s  they  inclosed 

23.  41.  but  this  man  hath  d.  nothing  amiss 
John  7.  31.  miracles  than  these  this  man  hath  d.? 

12.  18.  for  they  heard  he  had  d.  this  miracle 
.'lets  4. 7.  by  what  power  or  name  have  ye  d.  this? 

10.  16.  (Ai*  was  d.  thrice,  vessel  received,  11.  10. 
28.  9.  so  when  this  was  d.  others  also  came 

1  Cor.  5. 2.  not  mourned  that  he  hath  d.this  deed,3. 
DOOR 

Properly  signifies  the  entrance  into  a  house, Gen. 
19.  9.  It  is  likewise  taken  in  (f  metaphorical 
seiise:  Our  Saviour  says,  John  10.  !t,  I  am  tho 
door;  by  ine  if  any  man  enter  in  lie  shall  be  saved. 
I  am  the  only  way  ichercby  lost  sinners  may 
come  to  God,  and  obtain  salvation  :  The  only 
vay  of  entrance  and  admission  both  into  the 
churck  militant  and  triumphant  is  by  me;  for 
nunc,  but  such  as  have  a  true  and  a  lively  faith 
in  mc,icrought  in  their  soul  by  my  Spirit,  can  be 
true  tnembrrs  of  my  ch  urch  hcrc,much  less  mem- 
bers of  the  glorious  church  in  heaven.  It  is  said, 
in  Kev.  3.  20,  Heboid  I  stand  at  the  dour,  and 
knock.  /  .s^niid  at  the  door  ofsinnrr.1'  hearts, 
in  the  gospel  dispensation,  inviting  them  to  re- 
pent, and  turn  from  their  evil  trays.  There  is 
likeu-ise  mention  ;iiadfo/tho  door  of  nuTcy,or 
the  time  or  season  of  grace.  Mat.  25.  10,  They 
Ihat  were  ready,  went  in  with  liini  to  the  mar- 
riagp,  and  the  door  was  shut.  Luke  13.  25, 
When  onre  the  ninslcrof  the  house  is  risen  up, 
and  hath  shut  to  the  door,  tc.  Hy  thr^epara- 
holical  cjprrssions  our  Saviour  intimates,  that 
there  is  a  determinate  time,  vhirrin  sinners 
must,  if  eerr,  accept  of  the  off'rs  of  grace  and 
snlrntion,  ichieh,  if  th'y  slip,  thiy  leitl  nut  be 
able  to  obtain  of  God  an  enlranee  into  the  kin^ 
rinm  of  hearen;  the  door  of  mirry  and  graef, 
the  door  of  heaven  and  glory,  will  be  shut 
against  them.  In  Arts  M.  27.  ire  rend  of  ti* 
door  of  faith;  God  hud  opened  tho  dosr  of  faith 


DOO 

to  the  Gentiles;  He  had  caused  the  g-ospel  to 
ie  preached  unto  them,  whereby  they  were 
brought  to  believe  in  Christ,  and  to  become 
viembers  of  his  church. 
1'hc  ajiostlc  Paul  writing  to  the  Corinthians,  and 
telling  them  of  the  special  ujiportunity  7chich 
(rod  had  given  him  of  doing  much  good  by  the 
gospel,  uses  this  expression,  A  dour  is  opened 
unto  me,  1  Cor.  16.  9.  ii  Cor.  2.  12.  jJnd  the 
same  apostle  speaks  of  a  door  of  utterance, 
That  God  would  open  unto  us  a  door  of  utter- 
ance, that  is,  would  afford  us  an  opportunity, 
nnd  vouchsafe  ability  and  courage,  to  preach 
the  gospel,  Col.  4.  3.  To  lie  at  the  door  ;  To 
be  at  the  door ;  To  stand  before  the  door ;  are 
phrases  denoting  that  a  person  or  thing  is 
near  at  hand.  Gen.  4.  7.  Mat.  24.  33.  Juin.  5.  9. 
Ood  promises  to  give  his  people,  upon  their 
repentance.  The  valioy  of  .Ichor  for  a  door  of 
hope,  Nos.  2.  15.  Achor  was  a  valley  in  the 
territory  of  Jericho,  and  in  the  tribe  of  Henja- 
niin,  on  the  very  entrance  into  the  land  o/ Ca- 
naan. The  Israelites,  fatigued  and  discouraged 
with  marching  and  encamping  for  forty  years 
in  the  wilderness,  and  coming  to  this  valley, 
began  to  entertain  hopes  of  enjoying  the  pro- 
mised land:  In  allusion  to  this,  Ood  promises 
his  people  by  Hosea,  that  he  would  give  them 
some  beginnings  of  mercy  and  favour,  as  the 
earnest  and  pledges  of  future  blessings. 

Oen.  4.  7.  if  thou  doest  not  well,  sin  lielh  at  the  d. 
19.  9.  they  pressed,  and  came  near  to  break  the  d. 

Ezod.  12.  23.  the  Lord  also  will  pass  over  the  d. 
21.  6.  his  master  shall  bring  him  to  the  d. 

Deut.15. 17.  shall  thrust  it  through  his  ear  to  the  d. 

2  Sam.  13. 17.  put  her  from  me,  bolt  the  d.  after  her 
18.  brought  her  out,  and  he  bolted  the  d.  after  her 

2  Kings  4.  15.  when  he  called,  she  stood  in  the  d. 

9.  3.  then  open  the  d.  and  flee,  and  tarry  not 
Esth.  2.  21.  of  those  which  kept  the  d.  b.  2. 
Job  31.  9.  if  I  have  laid  wait  at  my  neighbour's  ti. 

34.  did  I  fear,  that  [  went  not  out  of  the  d.? 
Psal.  141.  3.  O  Lord,  keep  the  d.  of  my  lips 
Prov.  20.  14.  as  the  d.  turneth  upon  his  hinges 
Cant.  5.  4.  he  put  in  his  hand  by  the  holeof  thod. 

8.  9.  if  she  be  a  d.  we  will  inclose  her  with  boards 
Eiek.  8. 3.  brought  me  to  the  d.  of  the  inner  gate,7. 

8.  when  1  had  digged  in  the  wall,  behold  a  d. 

10.  19.  every  one  stood  at  the  d.  of  tlje  east-gate 

11.  1.  behold,  at  the  (/.of  thegate,  twenty-tive  men 
41.  2.  the  breadth  of  the  d.  was  ten  cubits 
46.3.  the  people  shall  worship  at  the  d.  of  this  gate 

/><i;!.3.t26.Nebuchad.came  to  the  rf.of  the  furnace 
Has.  2.  IS.  will  give  valley  of  Achor  for  ad.of  hope 
/imos  9.  1.  he  said,  smite  the  lintel  of  the  d. 
Mat.  27.60.  he  rolleij^a  great  stone  to  the  d.  of  the 
sepulchre,  and  departed,  Mark  15.  46. 
5J8.  2.  the  angel  rolled  the  stone  from  the  d. 
Mark  1.  33.  all  the  city  was  gathered  at  the  d. 
2.  2.  was  no  room,  no  not  so  much  as  about  the  d. 
16.  3.  who  shall  roll  us  the  stone  from  the  d.? 
John  10. 1.  he  that  entereth  not  by  the  d.  is  a  thief 
2.  that  entereth  in  by  the  d.  ||  7.  I  am  the  d.  9. 
18.  16.  but  Peter  stood  at  the  d.  without 
17.  then  saith  the  damsel  that  kept  the  d.  to  Peter 
Jlcts  5.9.feet  of  them  are  at  the  d.  lo  carry  thee  out 

12.  13.  as  Peter  knocked  at  the  d.  of  the  gate 
16.  when  they  had  opened  the  d.  and  saw  him 

14.27.how  he  had  opened  the  rf.of  faith  to  Gentiles 

1  Cor.  16.  9.  a  great  d.  and  effectual  is  opened 

2  Cor.  2.  12.  a  d.  was  opened  to  me  of  the  Lord 
C«l.  4.  3.  that  God  would  opfen  a  d.  of  utterance 
Jam.  5.  9.  the  judge  standeth  before  the  d. 
Rev.  3.  8. 1  set  before  thee  an  open  d.  none  can  shut 

20.1  stand  at  of.  and  knock,if  any  man  open  the  (/. 
4.  1. 1  looked,  and  behold  a  d.  was  open  iu  heaven 

DOOR  with  Iwvse. 
Gen.\9  11.  smote  them  that  were  at  d.  orthc  house 
43.  19.  they  communed  at  the  d.  of  the  house 
i!;iorf.l2.22.noncofyougo  out  at  thed.of  his/iOKSc 
Lev.  14.38.  the  priest  shall  go  to  the  d.oftho  house 
/)eu^22.21.  bring  damsel  to  d.  of  her  father's  house 
Judg.  19. 26.  fill  down  at  d.  of  the  man's  Itouse,  27. 
ZSam.  11.  9.  Uriah  slejit  at  d.  of  the  king's  house 
2  A'!7i^s5.9.  Naaman  stood  atd.ofAoMscof  Elisha 
JVV/j.  3.  20.  unto  ihe  d.  of  the  house  of  Eliashib 

21.  Merimoth  repaired  from  the  d.  of  the  house 
Prov.  5.  8.  and  come  not  nigh  the  d.  of  her  house 

9.  14.  for  she  sitteth  at  the  d  of  her  house  on  a  seat 
Jer.  26.t  10.  the  princes  sat  at  <Z.of  the  T^ord's  house 

36.  tlO.  Baruch  read  at  the  d.  of  the  Lord's  Aohsc 
Ezek.  8. 14.  he  brought  me  16  d.  of  Lord's  A.  47. 1. 

DOOR  with  shut. 

Gen.  19. 6.  Lot  shut  the  d.  \\  10.  angels  shut  the  <f. 

2  Kings  4.  4.  when  come  in  shalt  shut  d.  upon  thee 

5.  she  shut  d.  upon  her  [|  21.  she  shut  d.  on  him 

33.  he  went  in  and  shut  the  d.  on  them  twain 

6.  32.  shut  the  d.  and  hold  him  fast  at  the  d. 

Mat.  6.  6.  and  when  thou  hast  shut  thy  d.  pray  to 

25.10.the  d.waa  shut  |i  lAike  11.7.  the  d.is  now  sk. 

143 


DOT 

Luke  13.  25.  master  risen,  and  hath  shut  to  thei. 
Rev.'i.ti.  set  before  thee  an  open  d.no  man  can  shut 

DOUR  with  tabernacle. 

Ej;od.29.4.  thou  shalt  bring  to  d.  of  the  tabernacle, 

40.  12.  J.ev.  4.  4.  |  8.  3,  4.  ]  12.6.  J^'um.  6.  10. 

11.  shalt  kill  bullock  by  iheri.  of  the  tabernacle 

32.  I  40.  29.  Lev.  1   5.  .\«m.  27.  2 

42.  burnt-oflering  at  the  d.oilUc  tabernacle, 'S'.i. 

9,10.  I  38.  8.  [40.58.  y.e».  1.3.  I  3. 2.  I  4. 7, 18. 

40.  6.  before  the  d.  of  the  tabernacle,  JsTum.  25.  6. 

Lev.  8.31.  at  the  d.  of  the  tabernacle,  35.  |  14. 11. 

I  16.  7.  I  17.  6.  JVum.  6. 18.  |  10.  3.  Josh.  19.  51. 

33.  ye  shall  not  go  out  of  the  d.  of  the  tabernacle 

10. 7.  ye  shall  not  go  out  from  the  d.  of  the  tabern. 

14.  23.  unto  the  d.  of  the  tabernacle,  15.  14,  29. 

I  19.  21.  JV«ni.  6.  13.  ]  16.  18,  19,  50.  |  20.  6. 

17.  4.bringeth  it  not  to  the  d.  of  the  tabernacle,^. 

A'"H7ft.l2.5.  stood  in  the  d.  of  the  tabernacle,  16.  lb. 

Dcut.  31.  15.  and  the  pillar  of  the  cloud  stood 

over  d.  of  the  tabernacle 

1  CAr.  9. 21.  Zechariah  was  porter  of  rf.  oi  tujtcrn. 

DOOR  joined  with  tent. 
Gen.  18. 1.  Abraham  satin  the  tentd.  in  heat  of  d. 
2.  he  ran  to  meet  them  from  the  tent  i/.and  bowed 
10.  Sarah  heard  it  in  the  tent  d.  behind  him 
£ie)rf.33.8.the  people  stood  every  man  athis  tent  d. 
10. the  people  worshipped,every  man  in  his  tent  d. 
JVii7;(.11.10.  weeping,every  man  in  the  d.of  histen^ 
]6.27.Dathan  and  Abiram  stood  in  (/.of  their  tents 
Judg.  4.  20.  he  said,  stand  in  the  d.  of  the  tent 

DOOR-KEEPER. 
Ps.  84.10. 1  had  rather  be  a  d.-kecper  in  house  of  G 
Jer.  35.4. the  chamber  of  Alaaseiah  keeper  of  the  d. 

DOOR-KEEPERS. 
2Kings  22.4.  which  keepers  of  the  (/.have  gathered 
2.3.  4.  the  keepers  of  the  d.  to  bring  the  vessels 
25.  18.  the  captain  of  the  guard  took  the  chief 
priest  and  the  three  keepers  of  the  d.  Jer.  52.  24. 
1  Chr.  15.  23.  Berechiah,  Elkanah,were  d.-kccpers 
24.0bed-edom  and  Jehiah  d.-kecpers  for  the  ark 
Esth.  6.  2.  the  keepers  of  the  d.  sought  to  lay  hand 

DOOR-POST. 
Exod.'il.a.  his  master  shall  bring  him  to  the  (/.-;)os£ 
£;cA:.41.3.ho  measured  the /7o.9/oflhe  (/.two  cubits 

DOOR-POSTS. 
J5a;o(i.l2.7.strike  blood  on  upper  d.-posls  of  houses 
i)e(i«.11.20.shall  write  them  on(/.-;?06-(s  of  thyhouse 
Isa.  6.  4.  the  posts  of  the  d.  moved  at  the  voice 
£zeA.41.16.he  measured  the  d.-posts  and  window 

DOORS. 
Josh.  2.  19.  whosoever  shall  go  out  of  the  d. 
Judg.  3.  24.  the  d.  of  the  parlour  were  locked 
25.  he  opened  not  the  d.  of  the  parlour 
11.  31.  what  Cometh  forth  of  the  d.  I  will  offer  it 
16.  3.  Samson  look  the  d.  of  the  gate  of  the  city 

19.  27.  her  lord  rose  up,  and  opened  the  d. 

1  Sam.  3.  15.  Samuel  opened  the  d.  of  the  house 
21.  13.  David  scrabbled  on  the  d.  of  the  gate 

2  Kings  18.16.IIezekiah  cut  off  the  gold  from  thed. 
2  Chron.  23.  4.  of  the  Levites  be  porters  of  the  d. 

29.  3.  Hezekiah  opened  the  d.  of  the  house 
J\reh.  3.  1.  and  they  set  up  the  d.  of  it,  3.  |  7.  1. 
Job  31.  32.  but  I  opened  my  d.  to  the  traveller 
38.  10.  when  I  set  bars  and  d.  lo  the  sea 

17.  hast  thou  seen  the  d.  of  the  shadow  of  death? 
41.  14.  who  fan  open  the  d.  of  his  facel 
Psal.  24.  7.  wye  lifted  up,  ye  everlasting  d.  9. 
78.  23.  though  he  had  opened  the  d.  of  heaven 
Prov.  8.  3.  Wisdom  crieth  at  the  coming  in  at  the  d. 

34.  hearelh  me,  waiting  at  the  posts  of  my  d. 
/sa.  57.  8.  behind  d.  hast  Ihou  set  up  remembrance 
Ezek.  'Xi.  30.  still  talking  in  the  (/.  of  the  houses 
Mic.  7.  5.  keep  the  d.  of  thy  mouth  from  her 
Zech.  11.  I.  open  thy  d.  O  Lebanon,  that  the  fire 
Mat.  24.  33.  know  it  is  near,  at  the  d.  Mark  13. 29. 
.^cfs  5. 19.  the  angel  by  night  o])ened  the  prison  d. 
23.  and  the  keepers  standing  before  the  d. 
10.  26.  immediately  ail  the  d.  were  opened 
27.  keeper  awaking  and  seeing  the  prison  d.  open 
Shut  DOORS. 
/(((/"■.  3.  23.  Ehud  shut  the  d.  of  the  parlour 
2  Chr.  28.  24.  Ahaz  shut  up  the  d.  of  Lord's  house 

29.  7.  our  fathers  have  shut  the  d.  of  the  porch 
JVch.  6.  10.  and  let  us  shut  the  (/.  of  the  temple 

3.  let  them  shut  the  d.  and  bar  them 
Job  3. 10.  hecansc  sAut  not  uyid.  of  mother's  womb 
38.  8.  or  who  shut  up  the  sea  with  (/.? 
Feci.  12.  4.  the  d.  shall  be  shut  in  the  streets 
fsa.  26.  20.  enter,  and  shut  thy  d.  about  thee 
Mai.  1. 10.  who  that  would  shut  the</.  for  nought? 
hhn  20.  19.  when  the  d.  were  shut  Jesus  came,  26. 
.^cts  21.  30.  and  forthwith  the  d.  were  shut 

DOTE. 
./cr.  50.  36.  a  sword  is  on  liars,  and  they  shall  d. 

DOTED. 

Ezek.  23.  5.  Aholah  d.  on  her  lovers  the  Assyrians 

7.committod  whoredoms  with  all  on  whom  aUcd. 

9.  into  hand  of  Assyrians,  on  whom  she  d.  12. 

1(5.  as  soon  as  she  saw  them,  she  d.  upon  them 

20.  for  she  d.  upon  their  paramours, whose  flesh 


DOU 

DOTING. 

1  Tim.  6. 4.  d.  about  ([uestions  and  strifes  of  words 
DOUBLE. 

Double  commonly  signifies  twice  as  much.  Gen. 
43.  12.  Take  douiile  money,  tAai  is,  twice  as 
much  money.  A  double  garment,  may  mean  a 
lined  habit,  siich  as  the  high-pricsCs  breast- 
plate was,  E.\od.  39.  9.  or  a  coniplite  habit  or 
suit  of  clulhes,  a  cloke  aiid  tunic,  Judg.  17.  f  11/, 
Dwell  with  mr,  and  1  will  give  Uiee  a  double 
suit  of  api)arcl,  or  an  order  of  garments.  Dou- 
ble sometimes  signifies  abundance,  us  much  as 
answers  one's  design,  Isa.  40.  2,  She  halh  re- 
ceived of  the  Lord's  hand  double  for  all  hur 
sins.  They  have  received  punishment,  though 
not  so  much  as  their  sins  deserved,  yet  abun- 
dantly sufficient  to  answer  God's  design,  which 
was  to  humble  and  refurm  them,  and  to  warn 
others  by  their  example.  See  Jer.  16.  18.  |  17. 
18.  1  Tim.  5.  17.  A  double  heart,  a  double 
tongue,  a  double  mind,  are  opposite  to  a  simple, 
honest,  sincere  heart ;  a  true  tongue  ;  a  just^ 
faithful,  stneerc  mind,  Psal.  12.  2.  1  Tim.  3.  8. 
Jam.  1.  8. 

Gen.  43.  12.  and  take  d.  money  in  your  hand 

15.  and  they  took  d.  money  in  their  hand 
Exod.  22.4.  if  theft  be  found,  he  shall  restore  d. 

7.  if  found,  let  him  pay  d.  j|  9.  he  shall  pay  d. 

39.  9.  they  made  the  breast-jilate  d.  a  span  was 
Drut.  15. 18.  been  worth  a  d.  hired  servant  to  thee 

21. 17.  by  giving  him  a.d.  portion  of  all  he  hath 
■Judg.  17.  1 10.1  will  give  thee  a  (/.suit  of  apparel 

1  .Sam.  1.  t  5.  to  Hannah  he  gave  a  d.  portion 

2  Kings  2.  9.  let  a  d.  portion  of  thy  spirit  be  on  me 
1  Chron.  12.  33.  they  were  not  of  d.  heart 
./ob  11.  6.  that  they  are  d.  to  that  which  is 

41.  13.  who  can  come  to  him  with  his  d.  bridle? 

42.  t  10.  also  the  Lord  added  to  Job  unto  the  d. 
Psal.  12.  2.  and  with  a  d.  heart  do  they  speak 
Prov.  31.  t  21.  her  household  clothed  with  i/garm 
Jsa.  40.  2.  she  hath  received  d.  for  all  her  sins 

61.  7.  for  your  shame  you  shall  have  "a.  therefore 
in  their  land  they  shall  jiossess  the  d. 
Jer.  16.  18.  I  will  recompense  their  sin  d. 

17.  18.  and  destroy  them  with  d.  destruction 
Zech.  9.  12.  I  declare,  that  I  will  render  d.  to  Iheo 

1  Tim.  3. 8.  deacons  must  be  grave,  not  (/.-tongued 
5.  17.  rule  well,  be  counted  worthy  of  li.  honour 

Rev.  18.  6.  d.  unio  her  d.  according  lo  her  works, 
in  the  cup  which  she  hath  tilled,  fill  to  her  d. 
DOUBLE,   yerb. 
EiO(/.26.9.thou  shalt  (/.  sixth  curtain  of  tabernacle 
Rev.  18.  6.  reward  her,  and  d.  unto  her  d. 

DOUBLE-MINDED. 
Jam.  1.  8.  a  d.-minded  man  is  unstable  in  his  vayt 
4.  8.  and  purify  yc^nr  hearts,  ye  d.-minded 

DOUBLED. 
Gen.  41.  32.  the  dream  was  d.  to  Pharaoh  twice 
Exod.  28. 16.  four-square  it  shall  be,  being  d. 
39.  9.  a  span  was  the  breadth  thereof,  being  d. 

2  Sam.  20.  f  10.  Joab  (/.  not  his  stroke  to  Amasa 
Ezek.  21.  14.  let  the  sword  be  d.  the  third  time 

DOUBT. 
Gen.  37.  33.  Joseph  is  without  d.  rent  in  pieces 
Deut.  28.  66.  thy  life  shall  hang  in  d.  before  thw 
Job  12.2.  no  d.  but  ye  are  the  people,  wisd.  shall  die 
jAike  11.20.  no  d,  the  kingdom  of  G.is  come  on  you 
.ficts  2.  12.  were  in  d.  saying,  what  meanclh  this? 
28.  4.  they  said,  no  d.  this  man  is  a  murderer 
1  Cor.  9.  10.  for  our  sakcs,  no  d.  this  is  written 
<7«/.4.20.to  change  my  voice  for  I  stand  in  r/.of  you 
1  John  2.  19.  would  no  d.  have  continued  with  ua 

DOUBTS. 
Dart.  !).  12.  dissolving  of  (/.  was  foimd  in  Daniel 

16.  1  have  heard  that  thou  canst  dissolve  d. 
DOUBT. 

.I\fat.  14.31.  Jesus  said,  wherefore  didst  thou  d.? 
21.21.  I  say  unto  you,  if  ye  have  faith,  and  d.  not 
.^fark  11.  23.  shall  not  d.  in  his  heart,  but  believe 
./ohn  10.  24.  how  long  dost  thou  make  us  to  d.? 

DOUBTED. 
Afat.  28.  17.  they  worshipped  him,  hut  some  d. 
..Ids  5.  24.  they  d.  whereunto  this  would  grow 
10.17.  now  while  Peter  d.  in  himself  of  the  vision 
2.').  20.  because  I  d.  of  such  manner  of  imcstiong 

DOUBTETH. 
Rom.  14.  23.  he  that  d.  is  damned  if  he  eat 

DOUBTFUL. 
Luke  12.  29.  neither  be  ye  of  d.  mind 
.Ids  25.  t  20.  because  I  was  d.  how  lo  inquire 
Horn.  14.  1.  receive  vou,hut  not  torf.  disputation* 

DOUBTING. 
John  13.  22.  they  looked,  d.  of  whom  he  spake 
lets  10.  20.  go  with  them,  nothing  (/.  11.  12. 

1  Tim.  2.  8.  that  men  pray  without  wrath  and  d. 
DOUBTLESS. 

JVKfn.  14.  30.  d.  ye  shall  not  come  info  fnc  land 

2  Sam.  5.  19.  I  will  d.  deliver  the  Philistines 
Psal.  126.  6.  he  shall  d.  come  ngain,  rejoicing 
Isa.  03.  10.  d,  thou  art  our  Father  thou,  O  Lori 


DOV 

1  Cor.  9.  2.  If  cot  to  others,  yet  d.I  am  to  ;ou 

2  Cor.  1^.  1.  it  is  not  expedient  for  me  U.  to  glory 
PAil.'i.<i.  yea  d.  1  count  ull  things  hut  Ions  fur  Chrijit 

DOVE 

/s  a  tame  bird,  which  by  tlie  laiB  of  jMoscs  was 
declared  to  be  pare.  The  law  ordained  that  when 
any  woman  went  to  the  temple  after  lying-in,she 
shouldoffcr  to  the  Jjord  a lajnb,a  dove,ur  turtle, 
or  else  a  pigeon, or  ayoung  turtle, L,i\'.  1-.  ti,  0. 
The  lamb  i4^  offered  as  a  burnt-ugering,  the 
pigeon  for  asin-offering.  Or  iflhcpenon  could 
not  afford  a  lamb,  then  instead  of  it  she  offtred 
two  pigeons,  or  two  turtles.  The  Virgin  Mary, 
to  comply  with  this  law,  offered  two  pigeons,  or 
two  turtles,  because  she  was  poor,  Luke  i.  24. 
J3nd  as  it  was  dij/icult  for  all  those  who  came 
from  remote  places,  to  bring  doves  with  them, 
the  priests  gave  permission  for  the  selling  of 
tAesc  birds  in  the  courts  of  that  holy  place 
which  our  Saviour  could  not  endure ;  and 
having  entered  into  the  temple,  he  made  a 
scourge,  and  drove  out  those  who  traded  there 
in  pigeons,  Mark  11.  15. 

The  (love  is  the  symbol  of  simplicity  and  inno- 
cen^.  The  Holy  Spirit  appeared  at  the  bap- 
tism of  our  Saviour  in  the  form  of  a  dove, 
Mat.  3.  lb.  to  signify  what  Christ  is,  (1)  In  his 
own  nature  to  them  that  come  to  him,  namely, 
meek,  harmless,  loving.  (2)  Jn  the  execution 
of  his  office,  even  He  by  whom  the  Father  is 
pacified,  and  who  brings  the  good  tidings  of 
the  assuaging  the  deluge  of  wrat/t,  as  the  dove 
did  of  the  retiring  of  the  waters  to  JN'oaA 
(3)  IVhat  he  is  in  the  operations  of  his  .'spirit 
upon  his  people,  that  they  are  made  meek,harm- 
less,  and  lowly  as  doves.  Christ  recommends 
to  his  disciples  the  wisdom  of  the  serpent,  and 
the  harmlessness  of  the  dove,  Mat.  10.  16. 
The  prophet  Hosea  compares  the  Israelites  to 
a  silly  dove  without  heart,  or  understanding, 
Ho8.  7.  41.  The  dove  is  a  defenceless  creature, 
without  gall,  or  cunning,  exposed  to  the  pur- 
suit of  men  and  beasts  ;  which  is  able  neither 
to  protect  itself  nor  its  young,  nor  take  pre 
caution  against  those  who  have  designs  upon 
its  life  and  liberty.  Thus  the  Israelites,  not- 
withstanding the  ehaslisemenls  with  which 
God  afflicted  them,  and  the  captivities  to  which 
he  had  reduced  them,  still  relapsed  into  their 
irregularities,  and  exposed  themselves  again 
to  the  same  calamities.  The  dove,  when  absent 
from  its  male,sits  sotitary,andcoos,or  mourns; 
in  allusion  to  which,  are  these  expressions, 
Isa.  M.  14,.I  did  mourn  as  a  dove.  Jind  chap. 
59.  11,  We  mourn  sore  like  doves.  JVaA.  2. 
7,  Her  maids  shall  lead  her  as  with  the  voice 
of  doves.  The  spouse,  or  church,  in  the  Can- 
ticles, is  compared  often  to  a  dove,  by  reason 
of  her  dove-like  temper  and  disposition,  be- 
cause she  is  chaste,  mild,  harmless,  andfaith- 
ftd:  also  by  reason  of  her  dove-like  condition, 
the  being  weak,  and  exposed  to  persecution, 
and  given  to  mourning,  and  subject  to  many 
fears,  as  doves  are.  Cant.  2.  14.  f  5.  2. 

ft  in  further  observed  of  the  dove  ;  that  the  male 
and  female  love  each  other,  and  keep  faithful 
one  towards  the  other  ;  and,  if  any  breach  hap- 
pen between  them,  they  arc  presently  reconciled, 
manifeslinsr  the  same  by  their  embracing  each 
other.  They  love  men's  dwelling-houses,  and 
to  be  in  their  company:  and,  being  carried 
from  home,  will  return  many  miles  to  their  own 
houses  ;  for  which  rcasori  some  make  use  of 
them  to  carry  letters,  by  tying  them  about  their 
necks,  which  their  friends  at  home  untie,  and 
read,  and  are  thereby  acquainted  with  their 
mind.  The  dovi!  I'j  n«  enemy  to  carrion  or 
ordure,  and  fredrlh  upon  the  purest  seed  or 
grain,  and  lovrth  neatness  and  pure  waters. 
ft  quickly  forgets  injuries,  as  the  spoiling  its 
nest,  taking  away  its  young,  &c.  h  is  very 
fruitfulfhtving  young ottes  almost  every  month. 
Its  feathers  are  of  diners  colours,  which,  ac- 
cording to  the  rnricly  nf  its  postures,  and  of 
the  light  shining  upon  it,  look  like  silver  or 
gold,  as  the  PsaMnist  observes,  V»;\\.  (iH.  1.1. 

n  it  said  in  2  KinRfi  (1.  2.').  that  during  the  siege 
of  Snmarin,  in  the  reign  of  Ahah,  king  of  Is- 
rnol,  the  famine  was  so  great,  that  the  fourlh 
part  of  a  cah  nf  ilovrii'  ilunjj  was  sold  for  five 
shekels.  Jl  eah  held  tiro  pints  and  somrlhing 
over.  Five  fih<kf\!i  made  about  twelve  shillings 
sterling.  Some  think  that  it  is  not  inereitible 
that  they  did  lenllij  eat  doves'  dung,  srring  a 
famine  hath  ennstrnined  people  to  rat  things  as 
improper  and  unfit  for  nourishment  as  this,  as 
is  implied,  Isn.  30.  12.  Joiophus  and  Tlirndorc'l 
were  of  opinion,  that  this  doves'  <liin!»  was 
bought  instead  of  salt.  The  Rahbini  afflrm.thtU 
it  was  not  the  dune  ">/  pigeons,  but  the  com 

m 


DRA 

in  their  crops,  which  tliey  brought  back  well 
fiUedoutof  the  fields,  whither,  during  the  siege, 
they  went  to  ftid.  Others  suppose  the  dove's 
belly,  her  guts  and  inwards  to  be  meant  here. 
The  several  species  of  the  Dove,  r.re  the  Wood- 
pigeon,  the  Tame-pigeon,  the  Kiiig-dove,  or 
Turtle,  the  Picaipinima,  and  the  Hi.  'I'honMin'a 
Pigeon.  7'he  three  first  often  occur  in  the  Bible, 
under  thenames  of  the  Pigeon  unci  Turtle-dove, 
and  Uie  two  last  are  natives  of  America;  the 
Picaiynnmaicing  thegrcy  andblackl)uVK,with 
a  white  breast ;  and  the  St.  Thomas's  Pigeon, 
being  the  Culumbo  with  yellow  legs. 

Oen.  8.  8.  JNoah  sent  forth  a  d.  trout  him,  10,  12. 
9.  the  d.  found  no  rest  for  tlio  sole  of  her  foot 
11.  the  d.  came  into  him  in  the  evening 
15.  9.  he  said  to  him,  take  a  turtle-f/.  I^ev.  12.  G. 

Psal.  55.  a.  Oh  !  that  I  had  wing^  like  a  d. 
68.  13.  ye  shall  be  as  llie  wings  of  a  d.  covered 
74.  19.  O  deliver  not  tlie  soul  of  thy  turtle-d. 

Cant.  1.  15.  thou  art  fair,  thou  hast  d.  eyes,  4.  1. 
2.  14.  O  my  d.  let  mo  see  thy  countenance 
5.  2.  open  to  me,  my  sister,  my  love,  my  d. 
ii.  !).  my  d.  my  undefiled  is  but  one,  she  is 

Isa.  38.  14.  I  did  mourn  as  a  d.  mine  eyes  fail 

Jer.  48.  28.  dwell  in  the  rock  and  be  like  the  d. 

Hos.  1.  11.  Ephraim  also  is  like  a  silly  d. 
11.  11.  they  shall  tremble  as  a  d.  out  of  Assyria 

Mat.  3. 16.  Jesus  saw  the  Spirit  of  God  descending 
like  a  d.  Mark  1.  10.  Luke  3.  22.  John  1.32. 
DOVES. 

2  Kings  6.  25.  the  fourth  part  of  a  cab  of  d.  dung 

Cant.  5.  12.  his  eyes  are  as  the  eyes  oi  d. 

/«a.59.11.  we  roar  like  bears,we  mourn  sore  like  d. 
GU.  8.  that  flee  as  the  d.  to  tlieir  windows 

Eick.  7. 16.  they  shall  be  like  tha  d.  of  the  valleys 

JVuA.  2. 7.  lead  her  as  with  the  voice  of  d.  tabering 

Mat.  10.  16.  be  wise  as  serpents,  harmless  as  d. 
21. 12.  tho  seats  of  them  that  sold  d.  MarkU.  15. 

John  2.  14.  found  in  the  temple  those  that  sold  d. 
16.  said  unto  them  that  sold  d.  take  these  hence 
Turtlc-liOVES. 

Lev.  14.  22.  he  shall  take  two  turtle-d.  or  pigeons 

Luke  2.24.otrer  sacrifice  of  two  turlle-.d.ur  pigeons 
DOUGH. 

F.xod.  8.  t  3.  the  frogs  shall  come  into  thy  d. 
12. 1 34.  the  people  took  their  d.  before  it  was  lea- 
vened, their  d.  being  bound  up  in  their  clothes 
39.  they  baked  unleavened  cakes  of  the  d. 

JVum.  J5.  20.  otfer  a  cake  of  the  first  of  your  d.  21. 

Deut.  28.  t  5.  blessed  shall  bo  thy  basket  and  d. 

jVch.  10.  37.  should  bring  the  first-fruits  of  our  d. 

Jer.  7.  18.  women  knead  their  d.  to  bake  cakes 

Ezek.  44.  30.  give  the  priests  the  first  of  your  d. 

hos.'.  4. after  he  hath  kneaded  the (i. till  leavened 
DOWN. 

/.ATO.  22.  7.  when  the  sun  is  d.  Deut.  23.  11. 

Josh.S.i'J.  as  soon  as  sun  was  d.  Josh,  commanded 
to  take  the  king  of  Ai's  carcase  d.  from  the  tree 

2  Sam.  3.  35.  if  1  taste  ought  till  the  sun  be  d. 

.fob  1.  7.  and  from  walking  up  and  d.  in  it,  2.  2. 

Psal.  59.  15.  let  them  wander  up  and  d.  for  meal 
109.  23.  I  am  tossed  up  and  d.  as  the  locust 

/^:eA-.28.)4.hast  walked  up  and  d.in  midst  of  stones 

y.ech.  10.  12.  they  shall  walk  up  and  d.  in  his  name 

jJcts  27.  27.  as  we  were  driven  U|)  and  d.  in  Adria 

Hev.  1.  13.  clothed  with  a  garments,  to  the  foot 
DOWN-SITTING. 

Psal.  139.  2.  thou  kni>west  my  d.  and  up-rising 
DOWNWARD. 

2  A'in^al9.  30.  shall  again  take  root  t^.  /*a.  37.31. 

F.ccl.  3.  21.  the  s|>irit  of  the  beast  that  gneth  d. 

Kick.  1.  27.  the  appearance  of  his  loins  d.  8.  2. 
DOWKV. 

Gen.  30.20.  God  hath  endued  mo  with  n  "ood  d. 

'.U.  12.  ask   me  never  bo  much  d.  and  gift 

F.iod.  22.  17.  pay  according  to  the  d.  of  virgins 

I  Sam.  18.  25.  the  kin:;  desircth  nut  any  d. 
DRAG. 

/lab.  1.  16.  they  burn  incense  to  their  d. 
DRAGS. 

Hob.  1.  15.  they  gather  them  in  their  d. 
DRAGGING. 

/oAr  31.  8.  came  in  litiloahip, «/.  the  net  with  fishes 
DRAGON. 

This  word  answers generallylo  the\lc\>TO\v,Than- 
nim,  or  Thannin,  which  signifies  a  large  fish, 
a  sea  dragon,  liy  comparing  the  different  pas- 
swes  where  the  word  tannin,  or  tannim,  is  to 
be  met  with,  it  lignifies  sometimes  large  river 
or  sen  fishes,  and  at  other  times  venomous  and 
land  serpents,  and  more  particularly  the  ero- 
ciidile  and  whale.  Gen.  1.21.  Job  7.  12.  Ua. 
34.13.     Ezek.  29.  3.  I  32.  2. 

Jls  to  the  dragons  whieh  are  talked  nf,  and  are 
often  mentioned  in  books, they  are  for  the  most 
part  only  old  tcrjtmts  grown  with  age  to  a  pro- 
digious size.  Some  arc  described  with  wings, 
fert, claws, crest, andhends  nf  different  figures. 
There  it  no  question  but  there  art  winged  ler- 


DRA 

pents ;  Moses  tpeaks  of  them  under  tki  nant 
of  Zeraph,  J^Tum.  21.  6.  Real  Dragons,  by  So- 
hnus'  account  of  them,  have  a  small  mouth,  and 
canjwt  bite ;  or  if  they  do,  their  biting  is  not 
venomous.  The  Egyptians  call  thtm  good 
geniuses,  and  keep  them  tame  in  their  houses.  • 
Hut  these  were  not  the  dragons  spoken  of  by 
the  prophets  ;  these  were  dangerous  creatures, 
mischievous,  deadly,  and  wild. 

Jis  serpents,  dragons,  and  venomous  beasts,  hide 
themsilocs  in  uninhabited  places,  in  the  ruins 
of  cities  and  in  rubbish;  for  this  reason,  where 
there  is  mention  of  the  ruin  of  a  city,  the  ra- 
vaging of  a  province,  or  of  a  land  reduced  to 
a  wiluerncss,  it  is  said  to  be  a  dwelling  for 
dragons,  Isa.  13.  22.  |  3-1.  13.  Jer.  0.  11. 

This  word  is  taken  in  Scripture  for  the  </n)i7,Rev. 
12.  9.  so  called  for  his  great  strength,  and 
bloody  cruelty  against  the  saints.  It  is  also 
taken  for  cruel  tyrants,  as  Pharaoh,  Ps.  74. 13. 
£2fA-.29.3.  .Indfor  any  hurtful  thing,  Ps.9I.13. 

Psal.  91.  13.  the  d.  shalt  thou  trample  under  foot 

Isa.  27.  1.  he  shall  slay  the  d.  that  is  in  the  sea 
51.  9.  that  hath  cut  Rahab,  and  wounded  the  d. 

Jtr.51.34.Nebuch.  hath  swallowed  me  up  like  a  d. 

Eiek.  29.  3.  Pharaoh,  the  great  d.  that  lieth 

Hev.  12.  3.  another  wonder,  behold,  a  great  red  d. 
4.  theif.stood  ||  7.</.  fought  ||9.d.wascastout,J3 

16.  the  flood  wliich  the  d.  cast  out  of  his  moutb 

17.  and  the  d.  was  wroth  with  the  woman 

13.  2.  the  d.  gave  him  his  power  and  his  seat 

4.  they  worshipped  the  d.  \\  11.  he  spake  as  a  d 

16.13.  like  frogs  came  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  (i. 

20.  2.  be  laid  hold  on  the  d.  that  old  serpent 

DRAGON-WELI.. 
AVA.  2.  13.  I  Went  out,  even  before  tlie  d.-well 

DRAGONS. 
Deut.  32.  33.  their  wine  is  the  poison  of  rf. 
Job  30.  29.  I  am  a  brother  to  d.  and  a  companion 
Psal.  44.  19.  thou  bast  sore  broken  us  in  place  of  i 

74. 13.  thou  breakibt  the  heads  of  d.  in  the  waters 

148.  7.  praise  Lord  iVom  earth,  ye  d.  and  all  deep* 
Isa.  13.  22.  and  d.  in  their  pleasant  palaces 

34.  13.  it  shall  be  a  habitation  for  d.  35.  7. 

43.  20.  the  d.  and  owls  shall  honour  me 
Jer.  9.  11.  I  will  make  Jerusalem  a  den  of  rf. 

10.  22.  to  make  the  cities  of  Judoh  a  den  of  d. 

14.  6.  they  snuffed  up  the  wind  like  d. 

49.33.  Hazor  ||  51.  37.  Babylon  a  dwelling  for  d. 
Mic.  1.  8.  I  will  make  a  wailing  like  tlie  d. 
Mai.  1.3.  I  laid  hisheriiage  waste  for  (i.  of  wildera. 

DRAMS. 
1  Chron.  29.  7.  they  gave  of  gold  ten  thousand  d. 

F.ira  2.  69.  they  gave  61,000  d.  of  gold 

8.27.alsi)  twenty  basinsof  gold,of  a  thousand  if. 

JVf  A.  7.70.  gave  to  the  treasure  a  tliousand  (/.ofgold 

71.  gave  twenty  thousani>d.  ofgold,  72. 

DRANK. 

fi'en.9.  21.Noah  d.  of  the  wine  and  was  drunken 

24.  46.  1  d.  and  she  made  the  camels  drink  also 

27.  25.  and  he  brought  him  wine,  and  he  d. 

43.  t  .34.  they  d.  largely,  were  merry  with  him 
JVum.  20.  11.  the  congregation  d.  and  their  beasU 
/)cu<.r{2.38.  and  d.  the  wine  of  their  drink-offoringi 
1.5am.30.12.norrf.watcr  throe  days  and  three  night* 
2.Snm.  12.3.eat  of  his  own  meat, amlrf.of  his  own  cup 
1  A'in^.?13.19.did  eat  bread  in  his  liousn,nnd<f. water 

17.6.brouglit  bread  and  flesh, and  heJ.of  the  brook 

/>/in.l.5.the  king  appointed  of  the  wine  which  bed. 

S.thathc  would  not  defile  himself  with  wine  hci. 

5.  1.  Belshazzar  d.  wine  before  the  thousand 

3.  his  wives  and  his  concubines  d.  in  them 

4.  they  d.  wine,  and  praised  the  gods  ofgold 
Mark  14. 23.  ho  gave  to  them,  and  ihe^  all  d.  of  it 
Luke  17.  27.  they  eat,  they  d.  they  marricil,  28. 
.John  4.  12.  than  our  father  Jacob  who  d.  thereof 
1  Cor.  10.  4.  for  Ihey  (/.  of  that  spiritual  reck 

DRAVK. 
F.xod.  14.  25.  rharidt-whcfls,  they  d.  litem  heavily 
./o.iA.lfi.IO.  they  d.  not  out  iheCaniinnites  in  Gezer 
24.l2.anil  d.  them  out  from  before  you,  .tudg.  6. 9. 

18.  the  Lord  d.  out  before  us  all  the  people 
./Mrf^f  .1.19.  Jndnh  rZ.oul  inhabitants  of  tho  monntaio 

1  Sam.  30.  00.  which  they  d.  before  other  rattle 

2  .«f-irH.r..3.j;zzuh  and  Ahio  d.  the  cart,  I  Chr.  1.3.7. 
0  Kings  16.fi.nl  that  lime  Rezin  d.inwt  from  Elath 

17.21'.  Jeroboam  d.  I-rnel  from  following  the  E4 

lets  7.  45.  whom  God  d.  out  before  our  fallicrt 

18.  16.  Gallio  d.  llieni  from  the  judgment-seat 

See  Drove. 

DRAUGHT. 

Mat.  15.  17.  and  is  cast  out  in  the  d.  Mark  7.  19. 

/,iiArfi.4.1iiunchoutnnd  letdown  your  nets  for  ai 

9.  for  he  wni  oslnnished  nt  the  d.  of  the  fishes 

DRAUGHT  HOUSE. 

2A.'inn-»10.27.they  mnilrHnnrB  house  ad.to  thUda 

DRAW. 
Gen.  24.  44.  nnd  I  will  also  d.  for  thy  camels 
Find.  15.9.  the  rnrmy  said,  I  will  d.  my  sworil 
./ii(^.4.0.d.toward  mounlTabor,aiidtako  with  the* 


DRA 

Juig  4.7  wil  d.lo  ihee  SJ3era.capt.0f  Jalnn's  army 

5.  f  14.  out  )f  Zebuluii  ilioy  Dial  (/.with  the  pen 

8. 54.  Abiraelech  said,  d.  thy  swurd  acid  blay  111c, 

1  Ham.  31.  4.  1  Ckrun.  10.  4. 

20.  32.  d.  them  from  the  city  to  tlie  lugh-ways 
S  Ham.  17.  13.  we  will  d.  tliut  city  into  iliu  nvcr 
Jub  il.  33.  and  every  man  shall  ii.  aflor  him 
Psal.  Sd.  3.  d.  me  not  away  with  the  wicked 
y.ccl.  'J.  t  3.  I  sought  to  d.  my  llesh  with  wine 
Cun^  1.  4.  d.  me,  wc  will  run  alter  thee 

Isa.  a  IS.  woo  to  those  d.  iniq.  with  cords  of  vanity 
6(i.  lU.  send  those  to  the  nations  that  d.  the  bow 

Ezek.  21.  3.  1  will  d.  my  sword  out  of  liis  sheuth 
36.  T.  and  strangers  shall  d.  their  swords 
30.  11.  they  shall  d.  their  swords  against  Egypt 
32.  20.  (/.  her,  and  all  her  multitudes 

John  4.1J.  thou  hast  nothing  tod.  with, well  is  deep 

15.  water  that  I  thirst  not,  nor  come  hither  to  d 
6.44.except  the  Father  which  hath  sent  me  d.  him 
12.  32.  if  1  be  lifted  up  from  earth,  d.  all  men  to  me 

21.  6.  and  now  they  were  not  able  to  d.  it 
Jets  20.  30  to  d.  away  disciples  after  them 
Jam.  2.  0.  and  d.  you  before  the  judgment-seats 

DRAW  back. 
Ezck.  39.  t  2.  I  will  d.  thee  back  with  a  hook 
Jicb.lO.'.iS.  just  shall  live  by  faith,but  if  any  d.  back 
39.  we  are  not  of  them  who  d.back  toi)erditiun 
DR.WV  near. 
Judg.  19.  13.  let  us  d.  near  to  one  of  these  cities 
1  Sam.  14.  3t5.  said  the  priest,  let  us  d.  near  to  God 

3d.  Saul  said  d.  ye  near  hither  all  the  chief 

Psiil.  73.  28.  it  is  good  for  me  to  d.  near  to  God 

107.  Id.  they  d.  ..ear  to  the  gates  of  death 

/ia.2i).13.thispeople(i.7iear  Willi  their  lips  but  heart 

45.  20.  d.  near,  ye  that  are  escaped  of  the  nations 

57.  3.  d.  near  hither,  ye  sons  of  the  sorceress 
Jer.  30.  21.  and  I  will  cause  him  to  d.  near  to  me 

4t).  3.  order  the  buckler,  and  d.  near  to  battle 
Ezek.  9.  1.  that  have  charge  over  the  city  to  d.  near 

22.  4.  thou  hast  caused  thy  days  to  d.  near 
Joel  3.  9.  wake  up,  let  all  the  men  of  war  d.  -near 
Heb.  10.  22.  let  us  d.  near  with  a  true  heart,  in  full 

DRAW  vio-h. 
Exod.  3.5. he  said,  d.aoinigh.  hiiher,  pntoff shoes 
I'sal.  69.  18.  d.  nigh  to  my  soul  and  ledeem  it 

119.  150.  they  d.  nigh  that  follow  mischief 
l^Cil.  12. 1.  nor  years  d.  nigh,  when  thou  shall  say 
Isa  5.  19.  let  the  counsel  of  the  holy  One  d.  nigh 
Heh.  7.  19.  by  the  which  we  d.  nigh  unto  God 
Jan.  4.  8.  d.  nigh  to  God.  he  will  d.  nigh  to  you 

DRAVV  out. 
Exod.  12. 21.  d.  out  and  take  you  a  lamb,  and  kill 
IjCr.  20.  33.  I  will  d.  out  a.  sword  after  you 
y«(/n-.3.22.he  could  not  d.the  dagger  out  of  his  belly 
Job  41. 1.  canst  tlioui/.  out  leviathan  with  a  hook7 
Fsal.  35. 3.  d.  out  also  the  spear,  and  stop  the  way 
36.  t  10.  d.  out  at  length  thy  loving  kindness 
85.5.  wilt  thou  d.out  thine  anger  to  all  generations'! 
I'rov.  20.  5.  a  man  of  understanding  will  d.  it  out 
[sa.  57.  4.  against  whom  do  ye  d.  out  the  tongue? 

58.  10.  if  thou  d.  out  thy  soul  to  the  hungry 
./fr. 49.20.  the  least  of  the  tlock  d.  them  out,  .50.  45. 
Jjam.i.  3.  even  the  sea-monsters  d.  out  the  breast 
Ezek.  5.  2  a  third  part  shall  scatter  in  the  wind, 

and  I  will  d.  out  a  ssvord  after  them,  12.  |  12. 14. 
TIag.  2.  16.  when  one  came  to  d.  out  fifty  vessels 
John  2.  8.  d.  out  now,  and  bear  to  tlie  governor 

DRAW  up. 
Job  40.  23.  he  trustelh  that  he  can  d.  tcp  Jordan 

DRAW  joined  with  water. 
Gpn.24.11.  tlie  time  that  women  go  out  to  d.  w.i2. 
13.  and  the  daughters  come  out  to  d.  water 
20.  Rebekiih  ran  again  to  the  well  10  d.  water 
1  .S'am.O.ll.  found  young  maidens  going  to  rf.  water 
/.sa.l2.3.\vith  joy  sh:ill  yed.i^atcrof  wells  ofsulva. 
Jfah.  3.  14.  d.  the  waters  for  the  siege,  fortify 
Johni.7.  Cometh  a  woman  of  Samaria  to  d.  water 

DRAWN. 
Kzod.  2.  t  10.  and  she  called  his  name  d.  out 
JVVim.  22.  23.  the  ass  saw  the  angel,  and  his  sword 
d.  in  hie  hand,  31.  .losh.  .5.  ll  1  Chron.  21.  16. 
Dr.ut.  21.  3.  a  heifer,  vs-hich  hath  not  d.  in  yoke 

30.  17.  but  shalt  be  d.  away,  and  worship  gods 
Joik.  8.  6.  till  we  have  d.  them  from  the  city 

16.  ihey  were  d.  away  from  the  cit.y,.fudg.  20.31. 
Rnth  2.  0.  drank  of  that  which  young  men  have  d. 
Job  29.  2.5.  it  is  d.  and  comelh  out  of  the  body 
fsal.  .37.  14.  the  wicked  have  d.  out  the  sword 

55.21.  words  softer  than  oil  yet  were  they  (/.swords 
Prov.  24.  11.  to  deliver  them  that  are  d.  to  death 
ha.  21.  15.  for  they  fled  from  the  d.  swords 

28.  9.  and  them  that  are  d.  from  the  breasts 
Jcr.  22.  19.  d.  and  cast  forth  beyond  the  gates 

31.  3.  with  loving  kindness  have  1  d  thee 
Lam.  2.  3.  he  hatli  d.  back  his  right  hand  from 
Ezek.  21.  5.  I  the  Lord  have  d.  my  sword,  23. 
Jets  11.  10.  all  were  d.  up  again  to  heaven 
Jam.  1.  14.  when  he  is  d.  away  of  his  own  lusts 

DRAWER. 

DeutSlO.ll.  from  the  hewer  of  wood  (0  d.  of  water 

143 


DRE 

DRAWERS. 
Josh.9. 21.  be  it.  of  water  to  the  congregation,  27. 
23.  and  d.  of  water  for  the  house  of  luy  God 
DRAWETU. 
Dcut."5.  11.  the  wile  of  the  one  d.  near  to  deliver 
Judg.  19.  U.  now  the  day  d.  toward  evuiiiiig 
Job  24.  22.  ho  d.  also  the  niighly  wuh  his  power 
3;t.  22.  yea  his  soul  d.  near  to  Itie  grave 
Ps.  10.  9.  catch  the  i>oor  when  he  i/.lniii  into  his  net 
88.  3.  and  my  lilij  d.  nigh  to  tne  grii.e 
prov.  3.  1 13.  happy  man  ihali/.out  undorotanding 
Isa.  26.  17.  that  d.  near  the  tune  of  her  delivery 
K:j:k.  7.  12.  the  time  is  come,  the  day  d.  near 
.Unos  9.  t  13.  overtaketh  liiiii  that  d.  furih  seed 
Mat.  15.  8.  this  people  d.  nigh  wi.li  their  lips 
/^u/re  21.8.  say  nig,  1  am  Glirisi,  and  the  tune  1/.  near 

28.  then  look  up,  for  your  redeiiiptioii  d.  nigli 
Jam.  5.  8.  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord  d.  nign 

DKAWENG. 
Judg.  5. 11.  are  delivered  in  the  (ilacesof  (/.  water 
8.  f  10.  there  fell  120,000  every  one  d.  swoid 
John  6.  19.  they  sue  Jesus  d.  nigh  to  the  siiip 

DREAD. 
Gen.  9.  2.  the  d.  of  you  shall  be  on  every  beast 
Exod.  15.  10.  fear  and  d.  shall  fall  upon  them 
Veal.  2.  25.  this  day  will  1  b  jgin  to  put  the  d.  of 
thee  and  fear  of  thee  upon  nations,  11.  25. 
Job  13.  11.  shall  not  his  d.  fall  upon  you! 

21.  and  let  not  thy  d.  make  me  afraid 
Isa.  8.  13.  let  him  bo  your  fear,  let  him  be  your  d. 

DREAD. 
Deut.  1.  29.  I  said  to  you,  d.  not,  nor  bo  afraid 
1  Chr.  22.  13.  be  strong,  </.  not,  nor  be  dismayed 

DREADFUL. 
Gen.  28.  17.  Jacob  said,  how  d.  is  this  place! 
Job  15.  21.  a  d.  sound  in  his  ears,  in  prosperity 
Ezek.  1.  18.  as  for  their  rings,  they  were  d. 
Van.l.l.  behold,  a  fourth  beast,  d.  and  terrible,  19. 
U.  4.  and  I  said,  O  Lord,  the  great  and  d.  God 
Hab.  1.  7.  the  Chaldeans  are  terrible  and  d. 
Mai.  1.  14.  my  name  is  d.  among  the  heathen 
4.5.  the  coming  of  the  great  and  (/.day  of  the  Lord 

DREAM. 
By  this  word  nre  to  be  understood  those  vain 
images,  which  are  formed  in  the  imagination 
while  we  are  asleep.  Job  20.  8,  He  shall  fly 
away  as  a  dream,  and  shall  not  be  found  ;  yea, 
he  shall  be  chased  away  as  a  vision  of  the  night. 
The  Easttrn  people,  and  in  particular  the 
Jews,  had  a  very  great  regard  to  dreams ; 
they  observed  them,  and  applied  to  those  who 
2)retended  to  explain  ihem.  He  see  the  anti- 
quity of  this  custom  among  the  Egyptians,  in 
the  history  of  Pharaoh's  butler  and  baker,  and 
in  Pharaoh  himself.  Gen.  40.  5,  8.  1  41. 15.  Ne- 
buchadnezzar (6  an  instance  of  the  same  among 
the  Chaldeans,  Ijan.  2.  J,  2,  3,  &c.  God.  had 
very  expressly  forbidden  his  people  to  observe 
dreams,  and  to  co7isidl  those  who  took  upon 
them  to  explain  them,  lie  condemned  any  one 
to  death  who  pretended  to  have  prophetic 
dreams,  and.  to  foretell  what  was  to  come, 
though  wilat  he  should  so  foretell  were  to  come 
to  pass,  if  after  this  he  would  engage  the  peo- 
ple in  idolatry,  Deut.  13. 1, 2,  3,  &c.  But  they 
were  not  forbid,  when  they  thought  they  had 
any  significative  dream,  to  address  themselves 
to  the  prophets  of  the  J-,ord,  or  to  the  high- 
priest  dressed  in  his  ephod,  in  order  to  have  it 
explained. 
fVherefore  in  that  very  place,  wherein  God  for- 
bid the  Hebrews  to  consult  diviners,  magi- 
cians, and  interpreters  of  dreams,  he  tells  them. 
The  people  whose  land  ye  are  going  to  jiossess, 
consult  soothsayers,  and  diviners;  but  ye  have 
not  been  so  taught.  The  Lord  shall  raise  up 
from  the  midst  of  you,  and  among  your  brethren, 
a  prophet  like  unto  me,  him  ye  shall  consult 
and  hearken  to,  IJcut.  18.  14,  15.  The  Is- 
raelites therefore  were  to  address  themselves 
to  God  and  his  prophets,  to  learn  the  expla- 
nation of  their  dreams,  and  the  prediction 
of  things  to  come.  Saul,  a  little  before  the 
battle  of  Gilboa,  consulted  a  woman  with  a 
familiar  spirit,  because  the  Lord  hail  departed 
from  him,  and  would  not  answer  him,  and  dis- 
cover the  success  of  this  war  to  him,  neither 
by  dreams,  nor  by  Urim,  nor  bv  prophets, 
1  San.  28.  ti,  15. 
Jnd  we  find  that  the  Lord  did  indeed  sometimes 
discover  his  will  in  dreams,  and  raised  up  per- 
sons to  explain  them.  He  informed  Ah\nK\cch 
tn  a  dream,  that  Sarah  was  the  wife  of  Abra- 
ham, Gen.  20.  3, 6.  He  shewed  Jacob  the  mys- 
terious ladder  in  a  dream.  Gen.  28.  12,  13,  14. 
Joseph  zpar  favoured  very  early  with  prophetic 
dreams,  tJie  signification  whereof  was  easily 
discovered  by  Jacob  his  father.  Gen.  37.  4,  .5, 
6,  &.C.  The  dreams  of  the  butler,  and  the  baker 
belonging  to  the  king  of  Egypt,  wfrt  explained 


DRE 

by  Joseph,  as  well  as  those  of  Pharaoh,  Gen 
40.  12.  Id.  I  41.  25.  JJnd  the  Jurd  expressly 
declares,  that  he  would  sometimes  thus  reveal 
htmsdf.  Num.  12.  6,  if  there  be  a  prophet 
among  )ou,l  the  Lord  will  make  mysell  kiiouD 
unto  liiiii  in  a  vision,  and  will  speak  unlo  him 
in  a  dream.  In  the  Kew  Testament,  we  read 
that  the  angel  of  the  Lord  appeared  unto 
Joseph  in  a  dream  several  ttiues.  Mat.  1. 
20.  1  2.  19,  22.  jJnd  it  ts  among  the  signs 
and  ejects  of  the  promulgation  of  the  go.spel, 
prophilicdlly  said;  ll  bliall  come  to  jia:.s,  iliat 
1  will  pour  out  my  SiJirit  ujion  ail  Iksli ;  your 
sons  and  your  daughleis  shall  piujihesy,  your 
old  men  shall  dream  dreams;  your  young  ineit 
sliall  see  visions,  Joil'Z.  M.  'I he piophit  Jere- 
miah exclaims  against  the  false  prophits,  who 
pretsnded  to  have  dreams,  Jer.  23.  25,  2S,  32. 
Jjreams  are,  (1)  A'atural,  Eccl.  5.  7.  (.2; 
Jjivinc,  Gen.  26.  12.  (3)  hiaboltcal  and  sin- 
ful, Dtut.  13.  1,  2.  Jer.  23.  32. 
Gen.  20.  3.  God  came  to  Abimelech  in  a  d.  G. 
31.  10.  Jacob  saw  in  a  (/.  the  lains  which  leapeii 

11.  the  angel  of  God  spake  lo  Jacob  in  a  d. 

24.  God  came  to  Lahan  llie  Syrian  in  a  it. 
37.  5.  Joseph  dieameil  a  d.  and  told  it,  9,  10. 

40. 5.  buller  and  baker  dreaii.td  a  d.  both  of  them 
41.  7.  awoke, and  behold,  it  svas  a  (/.  1  Kivirs  3.15. 

12.  did  Uileri/ret  to  eucli  man  according  lo  his  d. 

25.  Joseph  said,  the  d.  of  i'haraoh  is  one,  20. 
32.  for  that  the  d.  was  doubled  unto  Pliuraoh 

J\'um.  12.  6.  1  iho  Lord  will  Speak  to  him  in  u  d. 
Judg.  7.  13.  a  man  that  told  a  d.  to  his  lellow 
15.  when  Gideon  heard  the  telling  ol  the  d. 
1  Kings  3.  5.  the  Lord  appcarud  to  t-olumoii  in  a  d 
Job  20. 8.  he  shall  Hy  away  as  a (/.  and  not  be  lound 
33.  15.  in  a  d.  he  opineth  the  ears  of  men 
Psal.  73.  20.  as  a d.  when  one  awaketh, so,  O  Lord 
iucc/.  5.  3.  for  a  d.  cometh  through  much  busincBS 
Isa.  29. 7.  nations  that  light  against  Ariel  be  as  a  li 
Jer.  23.  28.  jirophet  that  hath  a  (/.let  him  toil  ad. 
Dan.  2.  3.  my  spirit  was  troubled  to  know  the  d, 
4.  tell  thy  servants  the  d.  ||  6.  if  ye  shew  the  d. 
36.  this  IS  the  (/.and  we  will  tell  the  interpretation 
4.  19.  my  lord,  the  d.  be  lo  them  that  hate  llieo 
7.  1.  Daniel  had  a  d.  then  he  wrote  the  d. 
JiuM. 2U.the  angel  of  the  Lord  Hppeaied  to  Joseph 
in  a  d.  saying,  I'eur  not  to  take  Maiy,  2. 13, 19. 
2.  12.  and  being  warned  of  God  in  a  d.  22. 
27.  19.  1  have  suffered  many  things  in  u  d. 

DRKAai,  Verb. 
Psal.  12c.  1.  we  were  like  them  that  d. 
Joel  2.  2d.  your  old  men  d.  dreams,  Acts  2.  17. 

DREAMED. 
Gen.  2S.  12.  Jacob  d.  ||  37.  5.  Joseph  d.  a  dream 

40.  5.  the  ofllcers  d.  \\  41.  1.  Pharaoh  d.  15. 
42.9.  Ji  seph  remembered  the  dreams  which  he  d. 

Jcr.  23.25.  the  projdiets  said,  I  have  d.  1  have  (/. 
29.  8.  to  your  dreams  whicli  you  cause  lo  be  d. 
iJari .2.1. iSebuchadn.  (/.drcumB,spirit  w  as  troubled 
3.  the  king  said  10  ihcni,  I  have  d.  a  dream 
DREA.MER. 
Gen.  37.  19.  they  said,  beliold,  this  d.  cometh 
Deut.  13.  1.  if  a  d.  of  dreams  arise  among  you 
3.  thou  shalt  not  hearken  to  that  d.  of  dreams 
5.thatprophet oil/. ofdrtams shall  bepul  todealh 
Jer.  29.  t  24.  thus  spake  to  Sheumiah  the  d. 

DREAMERS. 
,Ier.  27. 9.  therefore  hearken  not  to  diviners  nor  d. 
Jude  8.  those  lilthy  d.  defile  llesli,  despise  dominiou 

DREAMS. 

Gen.  37.  8.  they  hated  Joseph  the  more  for  his  d. 

20.  we  shall  see  what  will  becimie  of  his  d. 

41.  12.  a  Hebrew,  and  he  interpreted  our  d. 

42.  9.  Joseph  remembered  the  d.  he  dreamed 

1  Sam  28.  6.  tin;  Lord  answered  him  not  by  d.  1.5 
.lob  7. 14.  then  thouscarest  me  with  d.  and  lerrifiest 
Ecr.l.  5.  7.  in  multitude  of  d.  are  divers  vanilies 
./«;■.  23.  27.  lo  tbrget  my  name  with  Iheird. 

32.  I  am  againsi  ihem  that  prophesy  fulae  d. 

27.  t  9.  nor  hearken  to  your  d.  29.  8. 

Dan.  1.  17.  Daniel  had  understanding  in  d  5.  12. 
7.ech.  10.  2.  the  diviners  have  told  false  d. 

DREAMING. 
/5a. 56. 1 10.  his  w.'itchmen  are  d.  talking  Id  sleep 

DREAMETH. 
Isa.  29. 8.  when  a  huuL'ry  man  d.  a  thirsty  man  d. 

DREGS 
P.».  75.8.  the  d.  thnreof  the  wicked  shall  drink  out 
/«u.51. 17.  thou  hast  drunken  thed.  of  the  cu]>,22. 

DRESS. 
f?<n.2. 15.  God  put  the  man  in'o  the  garden  \od.  it 
18.7.gave  it  to  a  young  man,  and  he  liasled  to  d.  ii 
Deut.  21.  t  12.  shave  her  head,  and  d.  her  nailii 

28.  .39.  thou  shalt  plant  vineyards,  and  d.  them 

2  .Sam.l2.4.to  d.  of  his  own  for  the  way-faring  mun 
13.  5.  let  Tamnr  d.  the  meat  in  my  sight 

7.  go  to  Amnon's  house,  and  d.  him  meat 
1  Kin^s  17.  12.  th.1t  I  may  d.  it  for  me  and  ii.t  son 
I8.2J.I  will  d.the other  b'uiluck  and  lay  it  uu  wood 


DRI 

IKings  18  25.Elijiili  Biid//.  it  first,  for  ye  arc  many 

Oen.  18.  8.  Abraliiim  look  llic  calfwliicli  he  had  d. 
Lev.'M.M  lliul  IS  d.  in  ihu  Iryiiig-pan  bu  ihe  prieat'u 
J  Sam.  ii.").  18.  Abigail  took  rive  slieep  ready  d. 
S  Sam.  1-J.4.  but  look  lliojioor  inan'ii  lamb  and  d.  it 
lU.i!l..Mi;|diiliii«belli,son  olSaul,bad  iioU/.his  leet 
1  Kiii^.s  18.  '2<).  lliey  d.  it,  and  called  on  Baal 
Ucb.  (T.  7.  bringeth  herbs  lur  lliurn  by  whom  it  is  d. 

l)Rk;SSER. 
JLuke  13.  7.  then  said  he  to  the  rf.  of  the  vineyard 

I>K^;^^^^l;'^H. 
Ezod.  30.  7.  when  he  d.  the  lamps,  he  shall  burn 

UKEVV. 
Gen.  24.  20.  Rebekah  d.  water  for  his  camels,  45. 

37.  2H.  ihey  d.  and  lifted  up  Joseph  out  of  the  pit 

38.  29.  il  came  to  pass,  Ziirali  d.  back  his  hand 
Ezod.  2.  10.  hecanee  I  d.  him  out  of  the  water 

It).  J.-thro'ailaughters  came  and  d.  water 
19.  an  Egyptian  d.  water  enough  for  us 
Josh.  H.  2li.  for  Joslnm  d.  not  his  hand  back 
Jud^.  K  10.  tlh-re  fell  120,000  men  that  d.  sword 
2(r  but  the  youth  d.  not  his  sworil,  for  he  feared 

20.  2.  the  rhiif  of  Israel  40U,0llO  that  d.  sword 
l.>.  of  Heiijaiiiin  numbered  2l),000  that  d.  sword 
2.).  all  these  d.  the  sword,  3.^). 

37.  licrs  ill  wait  d.  themselves  along,  and  smote 
4f>.  fell  of  Benjamin  2.j,000  that  d.  the  sword 
Kuth  4.  8.  buy  it  for  thee,  so  he  d.  olfhis  shoe 
1  Sam.  7.  G.  Israel  gathered  to  Mi7.peh,and  d.water 

17.  .51.  David  d.  Gulialh's  .sword  outof  the  sheath 
S  .bom.  22.  17.  he  siiit  from  above,  he  took  me,  hu 

d.  ine  out  of  many  waters,  Psal.  18.  16. 

Z3.  16.  the  three  mighty  men  d.  water  out  of  the 

well  of  Bethlehem,  1  Ckron.  11.  18. 

24.9. there  were  in  Israel  800,000  that  d.  the  eword 

1  h'inff.i  22.34.  certain  man  d.  a  bow,  2  CAr.18. 33. 

2  Kin^s'.i."ti.  kingof  Moab took  700 that  d.  sword 

9.  24?  Jehu  d.  a  bow  wilji  his  full  strength 

1  Chr.  19.  IG.  thf-y  sent  and  d.  forth  the  Syrians 
81.  5.  Israel  were  eleven  hundred  thousand  men 

that  rf.Bword,  Judah  was  470,000  that  rf.  sword 

2  Chr.  5.  9.  d.  out  staves  of  the  ark,  1  Kings  H.  8. 
14.  8.  of  Benjamin  that  d.  hows,  280,000 

Jcr.  38.  13.  they  d.  up  Jeremiah  with  cords 
Hos.  11.  4.  I  d.  them  with  cords  of  a  man 
Mat.  13.  48.  when  ftril.they  d.  to  shore,  Mark  fi.  .53. 
26.51.Peter  d.  his  sword,  Mark  14.47.  John  18.10. 
J^vke  23.  51.  the  preparation,  and  the  sabbath  d.  on 
John'i.  9.  the  servants  which  d.  tho  water  knew 

21.  1 1.  and  d.  the  net  to  land  full  of  fishes 
jSc(«  5.  37.  and  d.  away  much  people  after  him 

14.  19.  stoned  Paul  and  d.  him  out  of  tlie  city 
lti.l9.  and  d.  Paul  and  Silas  inio  the  market-place 

27.  the  jailer  d.  his  sword, and  would  have  killed 
J7.  6.  they  d.  Jason  and  certain  brethren 

10.  33.  they  d.  Alexander  out  of  the  multitude 
21.30.  they  took  Paul  andrf.  him  out  of  the  temple 

heo.  12.  4.  his  tail  d.  the  third  part  of  the  stars 

DREW  near,  or  nigh. 
Oen.  18.  23.  Abraham  d.  near  and  said,  wilt  thou 

47.  29.  Ihe  time  d.  niirh  that  Israel  must  die 
Ezod.  14.  10.  when  Pharaoh  d.nigh  Israel  cried 

20.  21.  Moses  d.  nrarta  the  thick  darkness 
J.,cv.  9.  5.  the  congrrgalion  d.  near  before  the  Lord 
Josh.  8.  II.  all  the  people  d.  nigh  before  Ai 
I  Sam.  7.  10.  Ihe  PhilistincB  d.  near  to  battle 

9.  18.  Saul  d.  near  to  Samuel  in  the  gate 
17.16.0oliath  d.ncar  morning  and  evening,4],  48. 

40.  David  d.  near  to  Goliath  the  Philistine 
8  Sam.  10.  13.  Joah  d.  nigh  against  the  Syrians 

18.  25.  Ahimaaz  came  apace  and  d.  near 
Esth.  5.2.  Esiher  d.  near  and  touched  the  sceptre 

9.1. the  king's  decree  d.near  to  be  put  in  execution 
Z«pA.3.2.8he  trusted  not,  she  d.  not  near  to  her  God 
Mat.  21.  1.  and  when  ihey  d.  nigh  to  Jerusalem 

34.  when  Ihe  time  of  the  fruit  d.  near,  ho  sent 
L:uke  15. 1.  then  d.  near  the  publicans  to  hear  him 

25.  elder  son  came, and  as  he  d.  nigh  to  the  house 

22.  1.  now  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread  d.nigh 
47.  and  Judas  d.  near  to  Jesus  to  ki«a  him 

84. 15.  Jesus  himself  (i.  near,  and  went  with  them 

28.  Ihey  d.  nigh  to  the  village  where  they  went 
.AetM  7.  17.  when  the  time  of  the  promise  d.  nigh 

31.  as  ho  rf.  near  to  behold  it,  the  voice  came 

10.  9.  as  they  d.  nigh  to  the  cily,  Peter  went 
87.  27.  deemed  that  ihey  d.  near  some  country 

DREVVEST. 

£,ajiL  3.  57.  thou  rf.  near  in  the  day  that  T  called 

Driko.     See  aOor  Dry. 

DRINK. 

(7*,i.  21.10.  Hagar  filled  holtle,  and  cnvolhe  lad  d. 

24.  14.  I  will  give  thy  camels  d.  ako,  4fi. 

7,/T.  11.34.  alld.  that  mriy  he  drunk  in  siirh  vessel 

J^um.  20.  8.  thou  shall  give  the  congngalinn  d. 

Judg.  4.  19.  she  gave  Sisern  d.  and  covered  him 

Eira  3.7.  ihev  gave  meat  and  d.  lo  I  hem  of  Zidon 

E,^tti..  1.7.  Ihey  C'lve  them  d.  in  vr<.*el»  ofjold 

P»nl.78.  15.  Ill- gave  them  d  as  out  of  great  depths 

MS.  9.  for  I  have  mingled  my  d.  with  w«opiag 

14C 


DRI 

Psal.  104.  11.  they  gived.  to  every  beast  of  the  field 
latt.  32.  0.  ho  wUI  cause  the  d.  ol  the  thirsty  to  lail 

4;t.  20.  rivers,  to  give  d.  lo  my  people,  my  chosen 
Dan.  l.t  •'>•  the  king  aiipointed  llieiii  ol  liis  d.  10. 

Hos.  2.  5.  go  afler  my  lovers  that  give  me  my  d. 

4.  18.  their  d.  is  sour,  they  have  committed 
Hab.  2. 15.  woe  to  him  thai  giveih  his  neighbour  d. 
Hag.  1.  tj.  ye  drink,  but  ye  are  not  lilled  with  d. 
Mat.  25.  35.  I  was  thirsty,  and  ye  gave  me  d. 

.37.  gave  theed.||  42.lliir8ty,an(l  ye  gave  me  no  d. 
7<;Am4.9.  that  thou,  being  a  Jew,  askest  d.  of  me 

(i.  55.  my  (lesh  is  meal  indeed, my  blood  isd.iiideed 
Hum.  12.' 20.  if  thine  enemy  liiiibt,  give  hiin  d. 

14.  17.  the  kingdom  of  God  is  iiol  meat  and  d. 
1  Cur.  10.  4.  and  did  all  drink  Ihe  same  spiritual  d. 
Cul.  2.  Itj.  let  MO  man  judge  you  in  ineal  or  in  d. 

Strung  UKIMv. 
Aei).  10.  9.  do  not  drink  strung  d.  when  yc  go  in 
j\'"u/H.t).3.Na/.arit.se)iarale  himself  from  j,<;oH^d. 
Diut.  14.  20.  shall  bestow  that  money  (or strung  d. 

2sl.0.nor  have  ye  drunk  strung  d.  these  forty  years 
./u(/^r.i:i.4.  .Manoah'a  wife  not  drink  strong' d. 7. 14. 
1  Sam.  1.  15.  1  drunk  neither  wine  nor  strung  d. 
Psal.<V.ht  12.  t  was  the  song  ofdrinkersof  strtt/i^'d. 
Prov.  20.  1.  wine  is  a  mocker,  strong  d.  is  raging 

31.  4.  it  is  not  for  pnnccs  lo  drink  strung  d. 

fi.  give  strong  d.  to  him  that  is  ready  to  perish 

/su.S.ll.thatlheymay  followitroHi'-d.woetothem 

22.  woe  to  men  of  strength  lo  mingle  strong  d. 

24.9.  strung  d.  shall  be  bilter  to  llieiii  thai  drink  it 

28.  7.  bill  Ihcy  also  have  erred  through  i-tronn-d. 
and  they  are  out  of  the  way  through  strung  d. 

29.  9.  Ihey  stagger,  but  not  with  strung  d. 

5ii.  12.  come  ye,  we  will  till  ourselves  with  str.  d. 
Mic.  2.  11.  will  prophesy  to  ihee  of  .vine  and  str.  d. 
Luke  1.15.  John  shall  not  drink  wine  nor  Atru/fo-d. 

URINK-OFEEULNG. 

f;fn.35.14.Jacob  poured  a  d.-ojcring  on  the  pillar 

Kzod.  29.  40.  a  Inn  of  oil,  and  the  fourth  part  of 

a  hin  of  wine  for  a  d.-offering,  J^um.  15.  5. 

41.  shall  do  thereto  according  to  the  d.-ojfering 

30.  9.  nor  shall  vc  pour  d.-offering  thereon 
/,r.v.  2;{.  13.  and 'the  d.-offering  shall  he  of  wine 
J^um.  ti.17.  the  iirieal  shall  otter  also  his  d.-offcring 

15.7.  tor  a.  d.-offcring  a.  third  part  of  a  hin  of  wine 
10.  bring  for  a.  d.ojfering  half  a  hin  of  wino 
24.  his  d.-offering  according  lo  ihe  manner 
28.  10.  besides  the  continual  d.-oj.  15.24.  |  29.  16. 

Isa.  .57.6.  to  them  hast  thou  poured  a  d.-uffcring 
65.  1 1.  that  furniah  the  d.-offering  lo  thai  number 

.Joel  1.  9.  the  d.-off.  is  cut  ort'  from  the  house  of  L. 
13.  the  d.-off.  16  withholden  from  house  of  God 
2.  14.  if  he  will  return  and  leave  a  d.-offering 
DRINK-OFFERINGS. 

Act).  23. 18.  they  sliall  be  for  a  burnt-otfering  with 

d.-offcrings,  37.  J<fum.  6.  15.  |  28.  31.  [  29.  11, 

18,  19;  21,24,  30,  33,  37,  39. 

JVum.  28.14.  their  d.-off.  shall  be  half  a  hin  of  wine 

Deut.'Xl.  38.  and  drank  the  wine  of  their  d.-offir. 

1  Chr.  29. 21.  offered  with  their  d.-off.  2  CAr.2y.  35. 

Ezra  7. 17.  buy  speedily  meat-offerings  and  d.-off. 

Psal.  16.  4.  their  d.-uffer.  of  blood  w  ill  I  not  otl'er 

Jcr.  7.  18.  and  to  pour  out  d.-uffrrings  to_  other 

gods  to  provoke  me  to  anger,  19.  13.  |  32.  29. 

44.17.pour  out  d.-ojT-to  queen  of  heaven, 18,19,25. 

Kzek.  20.  28.  there  they  pourod  out  their  d-offer. 

45.17.princes  part  lo  givvd.-ufferiugs  in  the  feasts 

DRINK. 

Tu  i\r\nk,signijics  to  drink  liquor  moderately,  for 
the  sati.sfying  of  thirst,  Num.  6.  3.  Ruth  2.  9. 
Sometimes  it  signifies  to  drink  plentifully, 
liberally,  and  largely,  so  as  lu  be  merry,  but  not 
to  excess  nr  drunkenness  :  Thus  it  is  said.  Gen. 
43.  34.  that  Joseph's  brethren  drank  and  were 
merry  with  him  :  The  Hebrew  word  here  used 
often  signifies  to  drink  to  excess :  bitt  it  is  not 
to  be  supposed  that  Jacob's  sons  should  forget 
themsrloes  so  far  upon  this  occasion,  as  to  be 
wanting  in  that  decency  and  respect  which  they 
owed  to  one  so  considerable  as  Joseph,  whom  as 
yet  thry  knew  not  to  be  their  brother.  And  in 
John  2.  10,  Every  man  at  the  beginning  doth 
set  forth  good  wine;  and  when  men  have  well 
drunk,  then  thai  which  is  worse;  but  thou  hast 
kept  the  good  wine  until  now.  It  is  incredible 
that  our  Saoiuur  waited  till  the  gue.':ts  were 
drunk,  in  order  to  perform  the  miracle  which 
he  wrought  at  Onnu  in  their  favour.  .Ind  in 
1  ("or.  II.  21,  One  is  hungry,  and  another  is 
drunken,  that  is,  One  icants,  and  the  other 
abnnnd.i :  The  poor  Chrisli<ins  mere  hungry, 
while  the  richer  sort  had  too  much,  and  fared 
liberally.  To  drink,  i«  other  parts  of  Scrip- 
ture, is  often  taken  in  an  uilious  sense,  for 
drinking  lo  ezcess,fnr  being  intoricoted  with 
liquor:  Gen.  9.  2I^JVr>aA  drank  of  the  wino, 
anil  WHS  ilriinken,  and  he  was  uncovered  in  his 
t'lil.  Lol's  two  daughters  made  their  father 
drink  to  eiccst,  and  both  proved  with  ekild  by 
him,  Gen.  19.  32,  33,  &.c. 


DRI 

Our  .Saviour  says  in  the gospel,\{ B-ny  man  thirst, 
let  him  eoinc  unto  me  and  drink,  John  7.  37.  // 
any  man  have  a  desire  after  spiritual  bless- 
ings, let  him  come  unto  me  by  faith,  and  he 
shall  partake  largely  of  my  refreshing  grace 
And  he  tells  the  woman  uf  Samaria,  John  4. 
14,  Whosoever  drinketh  of  the  water  that  I  shall 
give  him  shall  never  thirst.  H  hosuever  par- 
takes  of  the  graces  of  the  Jfoly  .spirit,  which 
I  have  to  bcstojc,  and  do  offer  in  the  gospel,  he 
shall  never  desire  and  pursue  worldly  thingt 
as  his  chief  happiness.  It  is  said,  Job  15.  16, 
'J'hat  Ihe  wicked  drinketh  iniquiiy  like  water. 
Jiesides  his  natural  proneness  to  sin,  he  hat 
coutt  acted  habits  and  cuatums  of  sinning,  so 
that  he  sinneth  as  readily,  greedily,  and  de- 
lightfully, as  men  used  to  drink  up  water, 
especially  in  those  hot  countries.  And  Elihu 
saj^s.  Job  34.7,  Whatman  is  like. /oi,  who  drink- 
eth up  scorning  like  water  7  fVho  with  greedi- 
ness and  delight  breaks  forth  intu  scornful  and 
contemptuous  exprcssions,not  only  against  hit 
fricnds,but  in  some  sort  even  against  (Jod  him- 
self, whom  he  insolently  charges  with  rigorous 
dealing.  Rab-shakeh  says,  that  Hezekiah  de- 
signed to  persuade  the  Jews  ijito  a  resolution  of 
hulding  out  the  siege  of  Jerusalem,  that  so  he 
might  reduce  them  to  the  necessity  c// drinking 
their  own  urine  ;  that  is,ofezposing  themselvea 
to  the  utmost  extremities  of  a  siege,  2  Kings  18. 
27.  Solomon  ezhurts  his  disciple,  Prov.  5. 15, 
to  drink  water  out  of  his  own  cistern;  that  is,  to 
content  himself  with  the  lawful  pleasures  of 
marriage,  without  thinking  on  that  which  was 
prohibited  by  the  law.  To  eat  and  drink  if 
used  in  Eccl.  5. 18.  to  signify  people's  enjoying 
themselves,  using  Ihe  good  things  of  this  life 
liberally  and  decently;  and  not  with  pcnurious- 
ness,  which  is  base  and  dishonourable :  It  ii 
good  and  comely  for  one  to  eat  and  drink,  and 
to  enjoy  the  good  of  all  his  labour.  It  is  said 
tn  Mat.  11.  18,  19,  .Tohn  came  neither  eating 
nor  drinking ;  that  is,  he  did  not  live  in  thJt 
common  and  ordinary  manner,  as  other  men 
did,  but  used  a  mean  and  peculiar  diet :  but  iha 
Son  of  man  came  eating  "jid  drinking ;  using 
such  a  diet  as  other  men  did,  and  conversing 
freely  and  sociably  with  all  sorts. 

Scfuiacherib  says  in  2  Kings  19.  24.  Isa.  37.  25, 
I  have  digged  and  drunk  strange  waters,  and 
with  the  sole  of  my  feet  have  I  dried  i  p  all  the 
rivers  of  besieged  places.  I  have  brought  water 
to  places  where  there  was  none  before,  to  sup- 
ply my  army:  and  I  have  drunk  up  the  water 
belonging  to  Ihe  people  through  whose  country 
I  have  marched  my  armies  ;  J  hare  ezhansted 
their  wells  and  their  cistcr7ts.  The  prophet 
laremiab  upbraids  <Ae  Jews  with  hacmg  had 
recoxLrsc  to  Egypt /or  muddy  water,  to  drink; 
and  with  having  addressed  themselves  to  the 
Assyrians,  that  they  might  drink  the  water  of 
their  river ;  that  is,  with  having  sought  for 
the  water  of  Nile  in  Egypt,  and  the  water  of 
Euphrates  in  Assyria;  thereby  describing  the 
assistance  of  these  two  people,  which  the  Jeva 
sought  for,  Jer.  2.  18. 

To  drink  blood,  sigjiifics  to  be  satiated  with 
slaughtrr,  Ezek.  39. 18,  Ye  shall  drink  the  blood 
of  the  iirinces  of  the  earth;  ye  shall  put  them 
to  death.  David  refused  to  drink  the  water 
which  the  three  valiant  men  of  his  army  went 
and  procured  for  him  at  the  hazard  of  their 
lives ;  saying,  God  forbid  that  I  should  drink  j 

the  blood  of  thcee  men  ;  but  he  poured  it  out  ■ 

unto  tho  Lord,  as  a  kind  of  drink-offering,  * 

and  acknowledgment  of  God's  goodness  in 
preserving  Ihe  lives  of  his  captains  in  so  dan- 
gerous an  enterprise,  2  Sam.  23.  16,  17.  To 
buy  water  to  drink,  and  to  drink  water  by  mea- 
sure, denote  the  utmost  scarcity  and  extreme 
desolation,  I,am.  5.  4.     Ezok.4.  11. 

God's  ju<lgmcnts  arc  often  in  scripture  e^rpresscd 
under  the  notion  of  a  cup  of  strong  and  intozi- 
cating  drink:  and  the  suffering,  or  enduring  of 
these  is  sel  out  under  the  notion  of  drinking 
such  a  Clip.  SccCvF.  In  the  hand  of  ihc  Lord 
there  is  a  cnp,  and  the  wine  is  red,  the  drcgf 
thereof  nil  ihe  wicked  of  Iho  earlh  shall  drink 
them,  Psal.  75.  8.  Thou  hast  made  us  to  drink 
Ihe  wino  of  astonishment,  Psal.  60.  3.  Tkon 
bust  filled  us  with  horror  and  a.iloni.<hvimt,  al 
if  we  had  drunk  some  poisonous  wine.  Stand 
up,  O  .Trrusalem,  whicii  hast  drunk  at  the  hand 
of  ihe  Lord  Ihe  nip  of  his  fury:  Hear  now  tliia, 
thou  amirted  and  drunken,  but  not  with  wine, 
Isa.  51. 17,21.  I  will  fill  the  kings,  Ihc  pric»t«, 
the  prnphils,  Rnd  all  the  iiihahitants  of  .Tcry- 
snlem,  with  drunkenness,  .Trr.  13.  IH.  that  i», 
with  the  trine  of  terror  ayd  astonishment,  bf 
reason  qf  those  grievous  calauiitiis  that  ikaU 


DRI 

t^me  vpon  them,  and  which  will  put  them  to 
their  wit's  end.  And  in  Kzek.  :J3.  3!i,  Tliou 
slialt  be  tilled  with  driinkeiiiiuss  uiid  sorrow. 
Sec  Obarl.  Iti.  Rev.  ]4.  10. 

Drink  is  put  for  (1)  7'Ac  blood  of  Christ,  John 
tj.  55.  {2}  Sjiiritual  delig/il.  Cant.  d.  2<  (3) 
AffiiHions.  Mat.  'iO.  "ii.  (4)  The  wratk  of 
God,  Job  21_.  no.  Rev.  14.  10.  (.5)  GrecUij 
desire.  Job  15. 16. 

Gen   i24.  14.  let  me  d.  17.  45.  ||  18.  d.  my  lord,  4G. 

30.  38  he  set  rods  when  the  tlockg  eamo  to  d. 
Ezod.  15.  24.  people  murmured,  what  shall  wed.? 

32.  20.  Moses  made  the  cliiklren  of  Israel  d.  of  it 
Lev  10.  9.  do  not  d.  wine  nor  strong  d.  lest  ye  die 
JViim.  (i.  3.  neither  shall  he  d.  liquor  of  grajies 
Jiidg.l.  5.  that  bowetli  down  on  his  knees  to  d. 
Hulk  2  !).  when  athirst,  go  to  the  vessels  and  d. 
2  Sam.  23.  lb.  t/irce  mighty  men  drew  water,  but 
David  would  not  d.  thereof,  17.  1  Chr.  11.  Id,  lU. 
1  King6  17.  4.  that  thou  slialt  d.  of  the  brook 
Esth.  3.  1.)  the  king  and  Haman  sat  down  to  d. 

7.  1 1,  the  king  and  Hanian  came  to  (/.with  Esther 
.7ob  21.  20.  he  shall  d.  the  wrath  of  the  A'lmighty 
Vs.  36. 8.  make  them  (/.of  the  river  of  thy  pleasures 

60.  3.  made  us  to  d.  tlio  wine  of  astonishment 

C'.l.  21.  in  my  thirst  they  gave  me  vinegar  to  d. 

75.  8.  the  wicktd  of  the  earth  shall  d.  them 

78.  44.  their  rivers  into  blood,  they  could  not  d. 

80.  5.  thou  gavest  them  tears  to  d. 

110.  7.  he  shall  d.  of  the  brook  in  the  way 
Prov.  4.  17.  for  they  d.  the  wine  of  violence 

31.  5.  lest  they  d.  and  forget  the  law,  and  pervert 
7.  let  him  d.  and  forget  liis  poverty 

Cant.  5.  1.  d.  yea,  d.  abundantly,  O  beloved 
Isa.  24.  9.  strong  drink  bitter  to  them  that  d.  it 
51.  22.  thou  shalt  no  more  d.  it  again 
62.  9.  they  shall  d.  it  in  the  courts  of  my  holiness 
65.  13.  my  servants  shall  d.  but  ye  shall  be  thirsty 
/er.  16.  7.  nor  give  the  cup  of  consolation  to  d. 
23.  15.  and  make  them  d.  the  water  of  gall 
25.  15.  cause  nations,  to  whom  I  send  thee,  to  d.  it 

16.  and  they  shall  d.  and  be  moved,  and  be  mad 

17.  then  I  took  the  cup  and  made  all  nations  to  d. 

27.  d.  ye,  and  be  drunken,  and  spue,  and  fall 

28.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  ye  shall  certainly  d. 
35.  14.  to  this  day  they  d.  none,  but  obey  father's 
49.  12.  they  whose  judgment  was  not  to  d.  of  the 

cup,  shall  not  go  unpunished,  shalt  surely  d.  of  it 

E2e/r.4.11.  d.  by  mea6ure,from  time  to  time  shalt  d. 

2.3.  32.  thou  shalt  d.  of  sister's  cup  deep  and  large 

34.  19.  they  d.  that  which  ye  have  fouled 

Oan.  5.  2.  that  his  concubines  might  d.  therein 

Amns  4. 1.  say  to  their  masters,  bring,  and  let  us  d. 

Obad.  16.  so  shall  all  the  heathen  d.  continually, 

yea,  they  shall  d.  and  shall  swallow  down 

Hab.'i.  16.  d.  tlibu,  let  thy  foreskin  be  uncovered 

Hag.  1.  6.  ye  d.  but  ye  are  not  filled  with  drink 

Xech.  9.  15.  and  they  shall  d.  and  make  a  noise 

Mat.  10.42.  whoso  shall  give  to  d.  to  one  of  these 

20. 22.  are  ye  able  to  d.  of  the  cup  that  I  shall  d.  of 

and  be  baptized  with  the  baiitism"!  Mark  10. 38. 

23.  ye  shall  d.  indeed  of  my  cup,  Mark  10.  39. 

26. 27.  ho  gave  them  the  cuji,  saying,  d.  ye  all  of  it 

29. 1  say, will  not  d.  henceforth  till  thatday  when 

I  d.  it  new  with  you,  Mark  14.25.  Lukel'i.  18. 

42.if  cup  may  not  pass  except  Id. thy  will  be  done 

27.  34.  gave  him  vinegar  to  d.  mingled  with  gall 

48.  one  filled  a  sponge  with  vinegar,  and  put  it 

on  a  reed,  and  gave  him  to  d.  Mark  15.  30. 

Mark  16. 18.  if  they  d.  any  deadly  thing,  not  hurt 

John  4. 10.  who  it  is  that  saith  to  thee,  give  me  to  d. 

7. 37.  if  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  to  me  and  d. 

18.ll.cup  my  father  hath  given  me,  shall  I  not  d.? 

1  Cor.  10.  4.  and  did  all  d.  the  same  spiritual  dfink 
21.  ye  cannot  d.  the  cup  of  the  Lord  and  of  devils 

ll.QS.thisdo,  as  oft  as  ye  d.  in  remembrance  of  me 
12.13.  and  have  been  all  made  to  d.  into  one  Sjiirit 

DRINK  water,  or  waters. 
Ocn.24.43.give  me  a  little  water  of  thy  pitcher  tod. 
F.zod.  7. 18.  shall  lothe  to  d.  7/3ntpr  of  the  river,  21. 
94.  digged  round  about  the  river  (itx  water  tod. 
15.  23.  they  could  not  d.  of  the  waters  of  Marah 
17.  1.  there  was  no  water  for  the  people  to  d. 
6.  shall  come  water  out  of  it,  that  they  may  d. 
JVam.  5. 24.  cause  woman  to  d.  bitter  water,  26,27- 
20.  D.  neither  is  there  any  water  to  d.  33.  14. 

17.nor  will  we  d.of  the  water  ofthe  wells,  21.  22. 
7>f  «t.2.  6.  buy  water  for  money,  that  ye  may  d.  28 
Jndff  4. 19.  give  me  a  little  water  to  d.  I  am  thirsty 
7.  6.  the  rest  bowed  upon  their  knees  to  d.  water 
t  Sam.  30. 11.  and  they  made  the  Egyptian  d.  water 

2  Sam.23.15.David  said,  give  me  to  d.  ofthe  water 

ofthe  well  of  Beth-lehcm,  1  Ckrnn.  11.  17. 

1  King.i  13.  8.  nor  wifl  I  cat  bread,  nor  d.  water,  9. 
17. 10.  fetch  a  little  water  in  a  vessel  that  I  may  d. 

2  Kings  3.17. valley  filled  with  water  {\-iSlI  ye  may  d. 
18.31. d.every  one  waters  of  his  cistern,  /«a.36.16 

Job  22.  7.  thou  hast  not  given  water  to  weary  to  d. 
Prov.  5.  15.  d.  loatcrs  out  of  thine  own  cistern 
35.31 .  if  lliy  enemy  be  thirBty,  give  him  water  tod. 
147 


DRI 

Jer.  2.  18.  to  d.  the  waters  of  Sihor,  waters  of  river 

8.  14.  Lord  hath  given  us  water  of  gall  to  d.  9. 15. 
Kzek.  4.  11.  thou  shalt  d.  water  by  inea'ture,  16. 

12.  18.  son  of  man,  d.  thy  water  witli  trembling 

19.  they  shall  d.  their  water  with  astonishment 
31.  14.  all  their  tree,  that  d.  water,  Iti. 

Dan.  1.  12.  give  us  pulse  to  eat,  and  water  to  d. 
./J  ;hu*4.8.  wandered  tod.Matcr  but  were  not  satisfied 
Jonah  3.  7.  let  tliem  not  feed  nor  d.  water 
Mark  9.41.  who  shall  give  you  a  cuj)  ol  water  to  d. 
John  4. 7.  Jesus  saith  to  her,  give  me  water  to  d. 
1 7'iJH.5.23.  d.  no  longer  water,  but  use  a  little  wine 

DlUiNK  with  wine. 
Gen.  19.  32.  let  us  make  our  father  d.  wijie,  34. 

33.  and  they  made  their  father  d.  wine,  35. 
J.ev.  10.9.  nor  d.  wine  when  ye  go  into  tabernacle 
jVum.  6.  3.  the  IVazarite  siiall  d.no  vinegar  ul'winc 

20.  after  that  the  Nazariie  may  d.  wine 
ZJcu«.28.39.thou  shalt i)lantvineyards,bulBhult  not 

d.  ofthe  Mine,  nor  gather  the  grapes,  ./liiius^. li. 
Judg.  13.  4.  Manoah's  wife  niiglit  d.  no  «;(7ie,7,14. 
2  Sam.  16.  2.  the  wine,  that  such  as  be  faint  may  d. 
Ps.iiii.'i.  hast  made  usd.  tlie  wine  ol  astunisliiiient 
Prov.  4.  17.  for  they  d.  the  wine  of  violence 

9.  5.  and  d.  of  the  «i(«e  which  1  have  mingled 
31.  4.  it  is  not  for  kings,  O  Lemuel,  to  d.  wine 

Keel.  9.  7.  go  and  d.  tliy  wine  wiiii  a  ineny  heart 
Cant.  8.  2.  I  would  cause  thee  to  d.  of  spiced  wine 
Isa.  5.  22.  woo  to  them  that  are  mighty  to  d.  wine 
24.  9.  they  shall  not  d.  wine  with  a  song 
62.  8.  the  sons  ofthe  stranger  shall  not  d.  thy  wine 
Jer.  35.  2.  go  and  give  the  Kechabites  tcine  to  d. 
6.  we  will  d.  no  wine,  ye  shall  d.  no  wine  lor  ever 
Kzek.  44.21.  neither  shall  any  priest  d.  wine  «  hen 
JJan.  1. 16.  took  away  the  wine  that  they  should  d. 
Joel's.  3.  they  have  sold  a  girl  for  wine  to  d. 
Amos  2.  8.  they  d.  the  wine  ofthe  condemned 
12.  but  ye  gave  the  Nazarites  wine  to  d. 
6.  6.  that  d.  wine  in  bowls,  and  anoint  themselves 

9.  14.  shall  plant  vineyards,  and  d.  wine  thereof 
Mic.  6.  15.  but  shall  not  d.  wine,  jiqih.  1.  13. 
^^ar/;  15. 23. gave  him  tod. wine  mingleil  with  myrrh 
/-uke  1.  15.  John  shall  d.  neither  wine  nor  strong 
Hoin.  14.  21.  it  is  not  good  to  eat  Hesh  or  d.  wine 
Reo.  14.  8.  she  made  all  nations  d.  ofthe  wine 

10.  same  shall  d.of  the  wine  ofthe  wralh  of  G. 

DRIiNKEKS. 
Psal.  69.  t  12.  the  song  of  the  d.  of  strong  drink 
Joel  1.  5.  awake,  and  howl,  all  ye  d.  of  wine 

DRINKS. 
Hcb.  9.  10.  which  stood  only  in  meals,  and  d.  and 
divers  washings 

DRINKETH. 
Gen.  44.  .5.  is  not  this  it  in  which  my  lord  d.l 
TJcut.  11.11.  the  land  d.  water  of  llie  rain  of  heaven 
Job  6.4.  the  poison  whereof  d.  up  my  spirit 

15.  16.  how  fililiy  is  man,  who  d.  iniq.  like  water ! 
34.  7.  like  Job  who  d.  up  scorning  like  svaler 
40.  23.  behold,  he  d.  up  a  river,  and  hasteth  not 

Proei.  26.  6.  he  that  sendeth  by  a  foul,  il.  daiiiiige 
/.>•«.  29.  8.  he  d.  but  he  awaketh,  and  he  is  faint 
44.  12.  the  smith,  he  d.  no  water  and  is  faint 
Mark  2.  16.  how  is  it  that  he  d.  with  publicans'? 
John  4.  13.  whosoevei'  d.  of  this  water  shall  thirst 
14.  whosoever  d.  of  water  that  1  shall  give  him 
6.  .54.  whoso  d.  of  niy  blood,  hath  eternal  life 
56.  that  d.  my  blood  dwelleth  in  me,  and  I  in  him 
1  Cor.  11.  29.  he  that  d.  unworthily  d.  damnation 
Heb.  6.  7.  for  the  earth  which  d.  in  the  rain 

DRINKING. 
Gen.  24. 19.  water  for  camels  till  they  have  done  d. 
22.  as  the  camels  had  done  d.  the  man  took  a 
golden  ear-ring  of  half  a  shekel  weight 
Ruth  3.  3.  till  Boaz  had  done  eating  and  d. 
1  Sam.  30.  16.  they  were  eating  and  d.  and  dancing 
1  Kings  4.  20.  Judah  and  Israel  were  many,  d. 

10.  21.  Solomon's  d.  vessels  of  gold,  2  Chr.  9.  20. 

16.  9.  Elah  was  d.  ||  20. 12.  Uenhadad  was  d.  16. 
1  Chr.  12.  39.  with  David  three  days  eating  and  d. 
F.slk.  1.8.  d.was  according  to  the  Iaw,nonecom|>cl 
./ob  1.  13.  his  sons  and  daughters  were  d.  18. 
fsa.  2i.  13.  and  behold,  eating  fiesh,  and  d.  wine 
Mat.  11.  18.  for  John  came  neither  eating  nor  d. 

and  they  say,  he  hath  a  devil,  Luke  7.  33. 

19.  Son  of  man  came  eating  and  d.  /,«Ac  7.34. 

24.  3>^.  they  were  eating  and  d.  till  the  flood  came 

J.ukc  10.  7.  eating  and  d.  such  things  as  they  give 

Col.  2.  t  16.  let  no  man  judge  you  for  eating  or  d. 

DRIVE. 

Ezod.  6. 1.  with  a  strong  hand  shall  he  d.  them  out 
23.  2>^.  will  send  hornets, which  shall  d.  out  Hivile 

29.  I  will  not  d.  them  out  before  thee  in  one  year 

30.  by  lillle  and  little  I  will  d.  them  out  belbre 

31.  and  thou  shalt  d.  them  out  before  thee 

33.  2.  I  will  d.  out  the  Canrfnnite,  the  Amorito 

34.  11.  beHold  I  d.  out  before  thee  the  Amorile 
JVwrn.  22.  6.  that  I  may  d.  them  out  ofthe  land 

11.  I  may  be  able  to  overcome  and  d.  them  out 
33.  .52.  then  shall  ye  d.  out  all  the  inhabitants 

55.  but  if  yc  will  not  d.  out  the  inhabitanti 


DRO 

Devt.  4.  38.  to  d.  out  nations  from  before  thee 
greater  and  iniglitier  than  tliou,  9.4,5.  .yosA.3.10. 
9.  3.  so  shall  tliou  d.  them  out  and  destroy  them 
11.  23.  then  will  the  Lord  d.  out  these  nations 
18. 12.  Lord  thy  CJoil  doili  d.  them  out  before  thea 

./os/i.  13.  6.  them  will  1  d.  out  from  before  Israel 
14. 12. then  I  shall  be  able  to  d.  them  out,a8  L.  said 

15.  ti3.  the  children  of  J  ndah  could  not  d.  them  out 

17.  12.  tlie  children  of  Manasseli  could  not  d.  out 
13.  but  did  not  utterly  d.  them  out,  ./udg.  1.  28. 
18.  for  thou  shalt  d.  out  the  Canaanites 

'Si.  5.  the  Lord  shall  d.  Iheni  out  of  your  sight 

13.  the  Lmd  will  no  more  d.  out,  ./udn-.  2. 3, 21. 
./ur/^.1.19.Judali  couid  nol  d.  inhabitants  of  mount 
21.  lienjamin  did  not  d.  out  the  Jebusites 
27.  Manasseh  d.  ||  29.  Ephraim  1|  30.  Zebulun 
31.  Asher  ||  33.  Naphtali  did  nol  d.  out 
II.  24.  whom  the  Lord  our  God  shall  d. out 
2  Kings  4.24.  d.  go  forward,3lack  not  riding  for  ma 
iChrmi.  20.  7.  who  didst  d.  out  the  inhabitants 
./ub  la.  11.  terrors  shall  make  afraid,  and  d.  to  feel 

t  18.  he  shall  d.  hlin  from  light  into  darkness 
24.  3.  they  d.  away  the  as.i  of  the  fatherless 
Psal.  44.  2.  how  thou  didst  d,  out  the  heathen 
68.  2.  as  smoke  is  driven  away,  so  d.  them  aivay 
Pruv.  22. 15.  but  rod  of  correction  shall  d.  it  away 
Isa.  2J.  19.  and  I  will  d  thee  from  thy  station 
Jer.  24.  9.  to  be  a  curse  whither  1  shall  d.  them 
27.  10.  that  I  should  d.  you  out,  and  ye  perish,  15. 
46. 15.  they  stood  not,  because  Lord  did  d.  them 
Kzek.  4.  l.'i.  among  Gentiles,  whither  I  will  d.  them 
JJan.  4.  25.  and  they  shall  d.  thee  from  men,  32. 
Nos.  9.  15.  I  will  d.  them  out  of  my  house 
.loel2.  20.  1  willd.  the  northern  army  into  a  land 
Zejih.  2.  4.  they  shall  d.  out  Aslidod  at  noan-day 
Acts  27. 15.  the  sliiji  was  caught,  we  let  her  d. 
Gal.  5.  t  7.  ye  did  run  well,  who  did  d.  you  backl 

J>RIVEN. 
Gen.  4.  14.  behold,  thou.hast  d.  me  out  this  day 
F.Jvd.iO.l].  they  wereibfroni  Pharaoh's  presence 

22.  10.  the  beast  be  d.  away,  no  man  seeing  it 
Lev.  26.  t  36.  sound  of  a  d.  leaf  shall  chase  them 
.ArHwi.32.  21.  till  behaved,  out  enemies  belbre  hira 
yJrH^4.J9.1e^t  thou  .■ihouldest  he  d.lo  worship  them 

30.  1.  whither  the  Lord  tliy  God  lialh  d.  thee 

4.  if  any  of  them  be  d.  out  to  the  utmost  part* 
Josh.  23.  9.  the  Lord  hath  d.  out  great  nations 
1  Sam.  26.  19.  for  tlii'y  have  d.  me  out  this  day 
Job  6.  13.  and  is  wisdom  d.  quite  from  me? 

13.  25.  wilt  thou  break  a  leaf  d.  to  and  fro? 

18.  18.  he  shall  be  d.  from  light  into  darkness 
30.  5.  they  wire  d.  forth  from  among  men 

I'sal.  40.14.  let  them  be  d.  backward  that  wish  evL 
68.  2.  as  smoke  is  d.  away,  so  drive  them  away 
1 14.  3.  sea  saw  it  and  (led,  Jordan  was  d.  back,  S. 
Prov.  14.  32.  wicked  is  d.  away  in  his  wickednesJ 
flcel.  3.  t  15.  God  requirelh  that  which  is  d.  away 
Isa.  8.  22.  and  they  shall  be  d.  to  darkness 

19.  7.  every  thing  sown  by  the  brooks  be  d.  away 
41.  2.  he  gave  them  as  d.  stubble  to  liis  bow 

./ir.  8.  3.  who  remain  in  all  the  places  whither  I 
have  d.  them,  23.  3,  8.  |  29.  14,  18.  |  32.  37. 

16.  15.  from  all  the  lands  whither  he  hud  d.  them 

23.  2.  ye  have  d.  them  away,  and  have  not  visited 
12.  they  shall  be  d.  on  and  fall  therein 

40. 12.  out  of  all  places  whither  they  were  d.  43.5. 
46. 2H.  a  full  end  of  nations  whither  I  have  d.  theo 

49.  5.  ye  shall  be  d.  out  every  man  right  forth 

50.  17.  Israel,  the  lions  have  d.  him  away 
Ezelc.  31.  11.  I  have  d.  him  out  for  his  wickedness 

.34.  4.  nor  brought  again  which  was  d.  away,  16. 
I)a7i.  4.  33.  and  he  was  d.  from  men,  5.  21. 

9.  7.  thro'  all  countries  whither  thou  hast  d.  them 
If  OS.  13.3.  as  the  chaff  that  is  d.  with  the  whirlwind 
Mic.  4. 6.  I  will  gather  her  that  was  d.  Zeph.  3.  19. 
Luke  8.29.1ie  was  d.of  the  devil  into  the  wilderness 
Acts  27.  17.  they  strake  sail,  and  so  were  d. 

27.  we  were  d.  up  and  down  in  Adriii  at  midnight 
.Jam.  I.  6.  is  like  a  wave  of  I  he  sead.  with  the  wind 

3.  4.  the  ships  Ihonjligri'at  are  d.  of  fierce  winds 
DRIVER. 

1  Kings  22.  34.  Ahab  said  to  the  d.  of  his  chariot 
Job  39.  7.  nor  regardeth  the  crying  ofthe  d. 

DRIVETIl. 
'iKings  9.20.drivin"  is  like  Jehu, for  he  d.  furiously 
Psal.  1.4.  ungodly  like  chaff' which  wind  d.  away 
Prov.  25.  2.3.  the  north-wind  d.  away  rain 
Mark  1.  12.  the  siiirit  d.  him  into  the  wilderness 

DRIVING. 
.7i/dn-.2.23.  Lord  left  without  d.  them  out  hastily 

2  Kings  9.  20.  and  the  d.  is  like  the  d.  of  Jehu 

1  Chron.  17. 21.  by  d.  out  nations  before  thy  people 
DROMEDARY 

Is  a  sort  of  camel;  It  is  called Vrnt.ieiV.iry  from 
the  Giei;k,(\riiiiw,  I  run,by  reason  of  its  running 
very  swiftly.  Dromedaries  are  .smaller  than 
common  camels,  slenderer,  and  more  nimble. 
Upon  their  backs  they  have  n  kind  of  natural 
saddle,  which  is  composed  of  a  great  deal  of 
hair ;  that  stands  up,  and  forms  a$  it  toere  a 


DRO 

lar^ebunch.  In  eastemcountries,ichenpirsons 
vould  go  any  where  with  speed,  Ihey  gcneralltj 
make  u.iu  of  Uroiueilarics.  It  is  said  that  they 
can  go  a  hundred  miles  in  a  day  with  them; 
nay,  some  ajjirm,  that  there  are  some  which  will 
travcL  a  hundred  and  fifty  miles  in  a  day. 

Thero  are  tico  sorts  of  iJroiiiedaries,  tine  of  a  lar- 
ger kind,  with  two  bunches  upon  its  bach ;  the 
other  lesser,  with  only  one.  JJvth  are  very  com- 
mon in  the  westernparts  of  Ai\iv,such  as  Syria, 
ami  Arabia.  That  which  hath  but  one  bunch  up- 
on its  back.is  more  commonly  ca/^f(iCunn;l ;  the 
(it.hcr  is  HameriUrumedary.  'fhey  are  huthcapa- 
bie  of  very  great  fatigues;  their  hair  is  sofl,and 
shorn,but  about  the  middleof  their baclis,camels 
have  a  Utile  eminence  covered  with  hair,  afoot 
high  upon  their  bunch;  and  Dromedaries  have 
two  bunches,  and  two  eminences  iif  hair,  which, 
however,  are  very  small;  and  if  it  be  rightly 
'considered.  Dromedaries  and  Cuniels  arc  no 
more  hunch-backed  than  other  animals.  They 
have  no  fangers  and  fore-teeth  ;  they  have  no 
horn  up'in  their  feet,  fur  they  arc  only  covered 
with  ajleshy  skin.  It  is  said,  that  when  they 
drink,  they  disturb  the  water  with  their  feet: 
some  believe  they  do  this  to  make  the  water 
heavier,  that  it  may  continue  longer  in  their 
stomachs.  Tluy  arc  said  to  drink  a  great  deal, 
and  keep  it  a  long  time,  against  their  being 
tliirsty  afterwards;  nay,  some  will  have  it  that 
triLuellers  upon  pressing  necessities  open  their 
stomachs,  takeout  the  water  contained  in  them, 
and  satisfy  their  thirst  with  it:  The  stomach 
of  these  creatures  is  composed  of  four  ven- 
tricles, and  in  the  second  there  are  several 
mouths  which  open  a  passage  into  about 
twenty  cavities  made  like  sacks,  that  serve 
them  for  conservatories  of  water. 

Jer.  '2.  'Xi.  thou  art  a  swit'lrf.  traversing  her  ways 
DKOMEIURIES. 

I  Kings  A.  28.  they  Ijroiijrht  barley  and  straw  for  d. 

y.stk.  S.  10.  and  sfiit  letters  by  riders  on  young  d. 

Isa.  t50.  G.  (/.  ot"  Miiliiin  and  Ejihah  shall  cover  thee 
DROP. 

Isa.  40.  1').  the  nations  are  as  the  d.  of  a  bucket 
DROP,   Verb. 

Dcut.  32.  2.  my  doctrine  shall  d.  as  the  rain 
3;l.28.  also  heavens  shall  (/.down  dew,Profi.3.20. 

Job  :)ti.  28.  which  clouds  do  d.  and  distil  upon  man 

Ps.  65. 11.  crowncsl  year,  and  thy  paths  d.  fatness 
12.  they  d.  on  the  pastures  of  the  wilderness 

Prov.5.'.i.\\[m  of  a  strange  woman  d.as  li(mey-comb 

CaHf.4.11.lhy  lips,  my  gpouse,d.as  the  honey-comb 

Isa.  45.  8.  d.  down,  ye  heavens,  from  above 

E:/!t.20.4fi.rf.thy  word  toward  south, and  prophesy 
21.2.rf.  thy  word  toward  holy  places  and  prophesy 

Joel  3.  18.  the  mountains  shall d. down  new  wine, 
and  the  hills  shall  How  with  milk,  ..Imos  9.  13. 

^mosl.W.d.noi  thy  wordagainst  the  houseoflsaac 

Jilic.  2.  f  6.  d.  nut,  say  they  to  them  that  prophesy 
.DROPPED. 

.Tudg.  3. 4.  the  heavens  d.  the  clouds  also  d.  water 

1  .Som.l4.2G.were  come  into  wood, bt;iiold  honey  rf. 

2  -Sam.  21.  10.  till  water  d.  on  them  out  of  heaven 
.fob  29.  22.  and  my  speech  d.  upon  them 

Ps.  f)8.  S.tlie  heavens  also  d.  at  the  presence  of  God 
Cant  5.  5.  my  hands  d.  with  myrrh,  and  lingers 

DROPPETH. 
Psal.  119.  +  28.  my  soni  d.  for  heavincss,strengthen 
Eccl.  10.  18.  through  idleness  the  house  d.  through 

DROPPING,  S. 
Prov.  19.  13.  a  foolish  son  is  calamity,  and  the  con- 
tentions of  a  wife  are  a  continual  d.  27.  15. 
Cavt.  r>.  13.  his  lips  d.  sweet-smelling  myrrh 
.Amos  6.  t  11.  I  will  smito  the  great  house  with  d. 

DROPS. 
Joh  3fl.  27.  he  maketh  small  the  d.  of  water 
38.  28.  or  who  hnih  begotten  the  d.  of  the  dew? 
Cant.  5.  2.  ami  my  locks  with  the  d.  of  the  night 
iMke  22.  44.  his  sweut  was  as  great  d.  of  blood 

DROPSY. 
J^kt  14.2.  there  was  a  man  before  him,who  had(/. 

DROSS. 
P»aZ.  119. 119.  thou  puttest  away  the  wicked  likerf. 
Prov.  25.  4.  take  away  the  d.  from  the  silver 
26. 23.  are  like  a  potsherd  covered  with  silver  rf. 
Isa.  1.22. silver  is  become  rf.wino  mixed  with  water 
25.  I  will  purely  purge  away  thy  d.  and  thy  tin 
E-ick.  22.  18.  house  of  Israel  is  to  n'lc  become  d.  19. 

DROVE,  S. 

Otn.  32.  If),  every  d.  by  themselves,  and  said,  pass 

over  before  me, and  put  n  space  betwixt  (/.  and  rf. 

19.  so  commanded  he  all  that  followed  the  d. 

3ii what  meanest  ihoii  by  nil  Ihisd.which  I  met? 

PROVE,    Verb. 

Oen.  3.  24.  so  God  d.  out  the  man,  and  ho  placed 

nt  the  c'lBt  of  the  garden  of  Eden  chcrubims 

15.11.  when  the  fowls  cume.'Abrani  d.  them  away 

F.iod.  2.  17.  the  shepherds  came  and  //.  Ihem  away 

Wum.21  32.lhey</.out  theAniorites  tJi^t  wero  tliero 

148 


DRU 

.Tosh.  15.  14.  Caleb  d.  thence  the  sons  of  Anak 
1  C/tr.  8.  J3.  who  (/.  away  the  inhabiUinis  olGath 
Jlab.  3.  t).  he  beheld,  and  d.  u^un(ler  the  nations 
John  2.  15.  he  d.  them  all  out  of  llie  temple 

DROUGHT. 
<re7!.3].40.  thus  I  was,  in  the  day  d.  consumed  me 
IJeut.  8.  15.  wliereiii  were  tiery  serpcnis  and  d. 

26.  t  22.  the  Lord  shall  smile  tliee  wilii  the  d. 
.Job  24  19.  (Z.  and  heat  consume  the  snow-waters 
Psal.  32.  4.  my  moisture  is  turned  into  (i.uf  HUmmcr 
Isa.  58.  11.  the  Lord  shall  satisfy  thy  soul  in  d. 
./cr.  2. 6.  the  Lord  that  brought  us  thro'  a  land  of  iZ. 

17.  8.  and  shall  not  be  careful  in  the  year  of  d. 

50. 38.  a  d.  is  upon  her  waters,  they  shall  be  dried 
Hos.  13.  5.  I  did  know  thee  in  the  land  of  great  </. 
Hag.  1.  11.  and  1  called  for  a  d.  upon  the  land 

DROWN. 
Cunt.  8. 7.  cannot  (piench  love,  nor  can  floods  d.  it 
1  'i'im.G.9.into  foolish  lusts, that  d.  men  in  {)erdition 

DROWNED. 
iCzo(Z.15.4.his  chosen  captains  arerf.  in  the  Red  sea 
Jimos  8.  8.  it  shall  be  d.  as  by  flood  of  Egypt,  9.  5. 
JIat.  18.  6.  better  lie  were  d.  in  the  midst  of  the  sea 
Heb.  11.  2U.  which  the  Egyptians  assaying  to  do, 
DROWSINESS.  [wered. 

Prov.  23.  21.  and  d.  shall  clothe  a  man  with  rags 

DRUNK. 
f.ev.  11.34.  all  drink  that  may  bed.  shall  be  imcl. 
Deut.  29.  6.  have  not  eaten  bread,  nor  d.  wine 

32.  42.  I  will  make  mine  arrows  d.  with  blood 
./ud^.I5.19.when  Samson  had  d.  Spirit  came  again 
Uutk  3.7.whenBoazhad  eaten  and  d.ha  went  to  lie 

1  Sam.  1.  y.  Hannah  rose  up  after  they  d.  in  Shiloh 

15.  I  have  d.  neither  wine  nor  strong  drink 

2  S«m.ll. 13.  David  made  Uriah  d.  and  he  went  out 

1  Kings  13.  22.  and  hast  eaten  bread  and  d.  water 
1(5.  9.  as  Elah  was  in  Tirzah,  drinking  himself  d. 
20.10.  Beiihadad  was  drinking  tiimself  d.in  pavil. 

2  Kings  tj.2;{.they  had  eaten  and  d.seiit  them  away 
iy.24.have  digged  and  rf. strange  wateis,i»'tt.37.25. 

Cu7l^  5.  1.  I  have  d.  my  wine  with  my  milk 
Isa.  4.3. 1 24.  nor  hast  thou  made  me  d.  with  the  fat 
51.  17.  which  hast  d.  the  cup  of  his  fury 

03.  ti.  and  I  will  make  iheni  d.  in  my  fury 

.frr.  40.  10.  sword  shall  be  made  d.  w  ith  their  blood 
51.57. 1  will  make  d.  her  princes  and  iier  wise  men 

Ezck.  34.  18.  and  to  have  d.  of  the  deep  waters 

iJan.  5.  4.  they  d.  wine,  and  praised  the  gods 
2;{.  thou  and  thy  concubines  have  d.  in  them 

Obad.  10.  as  ye  have  d.  upon  my  holy  mountain 

I.uke  5. 39.  no  man  having  d.  old  wine  desires  new 
13.20.  we  have  eaten  and  d.  in  thy  presence 

John  2.  10.  when  men  have  well  d.  then  worse 

F.ph.  5.  18.  be  not  d.  with  wine  wherein  is  e.xcess 

liev.  17.  2.  made  d.  with  the  wine  of  her  fornication 

18. 3.  for  all  nations  have  d.  of  the  wine  of  wrath 

DRUNKARD. 

Dcut.  21.  20.  this  our  son  is  a  glutton  and  a  d. 

Pro 0.23.21. for  (/.and  glutton  shall  come  to  poverty 
20.  9.  as  a  thorn  goeth  up  into  the  hand  of  a  d. 

/.sa. 24.20.  the  earth  shall  reel  to  and  fro  like  iid. 

1  Cur.  5. 11.  with  a  brother  a  fornicator  or  a  d.  eat 
DRUNKARDS.  [not 

Psal.  09.  12.  and  I  was  the  song  of  the  d. 

Isa.  28.  1.  woe  to  pride,  to  the  (/.  of  Ejihraim,  3. 

F.zik.  23. t  42.  d.  were  brought  from  the  wilderness 

.loel  1.  5.  awake,  ye  d.  and  weep,  howl, ye  drinkers 

.N'ah.  1.  10.  and  while  they  are  drunken  as  d. 

1  Cor.  C.  10.  nor  (/.shall  inherit  tlu- kingdom  of  God 
DRUNKEN. 
See  on  Drink. 

Oen.  9.  21.  Noah  was  (/.  and  he  was  uncovered 

Deut.  29.  t  19.  to  add  the  (/.  to  the  thirsty 

1  .Sum.  1.  13.  Eli  thought  Hannah  had  been  d. 

14.  Eli  said  to  her,  how  long  will  thou  be  </.? 
25.3(i.>i'abal's  heart  was  merry,  for  he  was  very  d. 

.lob  12.  2.'i.to  stagger  like  a  (/."man,  Psal.  107.  27. 

fsa.  19.  14.  as  a  (/.  man  staggeieth  in  his  vomit 
29.  9.  they  are  d.  but  not  with  wine,  51.  21. 
34.  t  7.  and  their  hind  shall  be  (/.  with  blood 
49.  20.  they  shall  be  d.  with  their  own  blood 
51.  17.  thou  hast  d.  thu  dregs  of  cup  of  trembling 

.Jer.  2:).  9.  my  bones  shake,!  am  like  a  (/.  man 
25.  27.be  d.  and  spue,  uikI  fall,  and  rise  no  more 
48.  2<i.  make  yo  him  d.  for  he  magnified  himself 
49.12.bi'hold,  they  have  assuredly  (/.  and  art  thou 
51.  7.  liabyhm  agiddencup  that  made  all  earth  (/. 
39.  I  will  make  them  (/.  that  they  may  sleep 

/.am.  3.  15.  he  hath  made  me  (/.  with  wormwood 

4.  21.  O  Edom,  Ihoii  ubiilt  be  (/.  jXnh.  3.  11. 

5.  4.  we  have  (/.  water  for  inonev,  wood  is  sold 
F.zek.  39.  19.  yo  Bimll  drink  blood'  till  ye  lie  d. 
.,VaA.  1.  10.  and  while  tliey  are  (/.  as  driinkaril* 
Ifab.  2.  ]■'>.  hit  neighbour,  and  makest  him  d.  al«a 
J/ii/.24.49.shall  begui-to  smile  ins  tellow-»ervant», 

and  to  eat  and  drink  with  the  d.  jMke  12.  45. 
I.uke  17.8.makc  icady,«erve  till  I  have  eaten  nwAd. 
.Ids  2.  15.  for  these  are  not  </.  iis  ye  supimse 
1  Cnr.  11.21.  one  is  hungry,  and  niiolher  is  d. 
1  Then.  5.  7.  they  that  be  d.  arc  d.  in  the  night 


DRY 

Rev.  17.6. 1  saw  the  woman  d.  with  blood  of  iaiuu 
DRUNKENNESS. 

Dcut.  29. 19. 1  walk  in  imaginal.  to  add  d.  to  thirst 

Keel.  10.  17.  princes  cut  lor  strength,  and  not  lor  d. 

Jer.  13.13.  will  fill  inhabitants  of  Jcrusulein  with  J. 

Kiek.Si.  33.  thou  thalt  be  tilled  w  ilh  d.  and  suriow 

y^u.'.e  21.34.  lest  your  hearts  be  overcharged  witliii. 

Rom.  13.  13.  let  us  walk,  not  in  rioting  and  d. 

Gal.  5.  21.  the  works  of  the  flesh  arc  Diurdtrs,  d. 
DRY. 

By  the  words  annexed  to  DRY,  the  meaning  /'« 
obvious.  It  is  spoken  of  land,  ground,  pre 
vision,  waters,  trees,  and  other  things.  'J'ht 
prophet  Isaiah  speaking  of  the  Mes.siali  says, 
He  shall  grow  up  as  a  root  oulof  a  dry  ground, 
Isa.  53.  2.  H'hich  prophecy  respects  our  Sa- 
viour's mean  original,  cither  as  he  sprang  of 
t/jc  Jewish  7ialion,  which,  about  the  lime  of  his 
appearing  in  the  world,  was  poor,  de.^^pised, 
and  enslaved.  Or,  by  the  dry  ground,  may  be 
understood  the  royal  family  of  David,  which, 
at  that  time,  was  poor,  decayed,  and  contemp- 
tible. The  same  prophet  says,  chap.  56.  3, 
Neither  let  the  eunuch  say,  behold,  I  am  a  dry 
tree.  The  Lord,  by  his  prophet,  docs  here  en- 
courage the  eunuch,  wha,  being  excluded  from 
the  congregation  of  the  Lord,  IJeut.  23.  1.  and 
also  by  reason  of  his  barrenness,  which  was 
often  threatened  as  a  curse,  and  was  matter 
of  reijroach  amoiig  the  Jews,  might  be  ready 
to  think  that  he  was  cast  out  of  God's  cooe- 
nant,  and  cut  off  from  his  people,  to  whom  the 
blessing  of  anumeraus  posterity  was  promised, 
i  ct  he  is  desired  not  to  be  discouraged  on 
thisc  accounts,  and  assured  that  God  would 
accept  of  him,  notwithstanding  his  barren- 
71CSS,  and  his  being  excluded  from  the  partici- 
pation of  church  privileges. 

If  hen  our  Saviour  was  led  away  to  be  crucified, 
he  tells  the  Jews,  Luke  23.  31,  If  they  do  these 
things  in  a  green  tree,  what  shall  be  done  in  the 
dry?  If  such  evils  befall  me,  who  have  deserved 
no  svcli  thing,  but  rather  to  be  chrrisheel  and 
kindly  entreated;  what  will  befall  you,  icho  are 
fitted  for  dcslruction,likc  dry  wood  for  the  fire? 
The  prophets  sometimes  compare  a  barren  and 
wifruitf  III  people  to  a  dry  hind.  Isa.  41.  18,  1 
will  make  tlie  (ir;/ /(!?((/ springs  of  water.  I  will 
moke  (Ae  Jews  and  iicuuk's,  who  are  like  adry 
and  barren  wildaness,  to  become  fruitful. 
In  other  places, when  judgments  are  threatened 
upon  a  land,  it  is  said  to  be  made  a  wilderness 
a  dry  land,  a  desert,  .Icr.  50.  12. 

Lev.  7.  10.  meat-olfering  mingled  with  oil  and  d. 
13.  30.  it  is  a  (/.  scall,  a  leprosy  on  the  head 

./(/a/i.  9.  5.  bread  of  provision  was  (/.and  mouldy,  12. 

Judg.  0.  37.  and  it  be  (/.  on  all  the  earth  beside 
39.  Gideon  6aid,let  it  now  be  d.  only  on  the  fleece 

.lob  13.  25.  wilt  thou  pursue  the  d.  stubble? 

Psal.  10.j.  41.  they  ran  in  (/.  places  like  a  river 

Prov.  17.  1.  better  is  a  (/.  morsel  and  quietness 

/.«7.  25.  5.  as  the  heat  in  a  d.  place,  even  the  heat 
32.2. a  man  shall  be  as  rivers  of  water  in  a  d.  place 
44.  27.  that  sailh  to  the  deep,  be  d.  I  will  dry  up 
.50.  3.  neither  let  the  eunuch  say,  I  am  si  d.  tree 

Jer.  4.  11.  a  d.  wind,  not  to  fan,  nor  to  cleanse 
51.  30.  I  will  dry  up,  and  make  her  springs  d. 

Ezek.  17.  24.  that  have  made  the  (/.  tree  flourish 
20.  47.  it  shall  devour  every  d.  tree  in  thee 
30.  12.  I  will  make  the  rivers  (/.  and  sell  the  land 
37.  2.  the  bones  were  very  (/.  ||  4.  O  yo  d.  bones 

Hos.  9.  14.  give  them,  O  L.  give  them  d.  broasta 
13.15.  his  spring  shall  become  (/.  fountain  dried  up 

A*((A.  1.  4.  he  rebukeih  the  sea,  and  maketh  it  d. 
10.  they  shall  be  devoured  as  stubble  fully  d. 

Zeph.  2.  13.  will  make  Nineveh  (/.like  a  wildirn(N>« 

J/(j/.12.43.liewalkethlhro'(/.  places,  /.wAc  11.24. 

AMAc23.31.if  in  green  tree  what  shall  be  done  \nd.? 
DRY  ground. 

Gen.  8.  13.  behold  the  face  of  the  ground  was  (/. 

F.xod.\i.U>.  Isr.  shallgoon(/.^roi(?i(/intliesen,22. 

./oiA.3.17  the  jiriests  that  bore  the  ark  stood  firm  on 
d.  ground  ill  Jordan, Israel  passed  on  d. ground 

2  Kinas  2.  8.  Elijah  and  Elisha  went  over  on  d.  g. 

/'«.107.;13.  Ii(^  tiirnelh  w«ti!r-springs  into(/.  i'-roUH(i 
35.  he  turneth  d.  ground  into  waler-spriiif* 

Isa.  44.  3.  I  will  pour  Hoods  upon  tlio  d.  ground 
.Vl.  2.  he  shall  grow  as  a  root  out  of  a  d.  ground 

EicA-. 19.13. she  is  jilanted  in  a  d.  and  thirsty  ground 

See  Land. 

DRY,  I'erh. 

./i»/(  12.15.  ho  withbolilelh  the  waters  and  thoydup 
15.  30.  the  flame  shaH  (/.  up  his  branches 

I.in.  42.  15. 1  will  d.  up  berim,  I  will  d.  up  the  poo's 
44.  27.  I  will  </.  up  ihv  rivers  1|  .'lO.  2. 1  (/.  up  the  »f« 

.ler.  51.  36.  snith  Ihel^ord,  I  will  (/.  up  her  sea 

y.ech.  10.  11.  the  deeps  of  the  river  shall  d.  up 
DRIED. 

Gen.  9.  7.  until  waters  weie  </.  up  from  earth,  13 
14.  on  tlie  iwciity-tcvonth  day  was  the  oaith  a 


DUM 

Let.  2. 14.  shall  offer  green  ears  of  corn  d.  by  fire 
J^'aia.  6.  3.  nor  shall  he  eat  moist  grapes  or  d. 

J  I.  6.  our  soul  is  d.  away,  there  is  notliiiig  at  all 
Josh.  -.  10.  have  heard  liow  the  Lord  d.{i[)  Kod  sea 

4.23.  the  Lord  >  our  God  d.  up  waters  ot  Jordan, as 
Lord  did  Red  sea,  which  he  rf.up  from  before  us 

5. 1.  heard  tlieLd.  had  d.  up  the  waters  of  Jordan 
Judg.  10.  7.  bind  me  with  withs  that  were  never  d. 

1  Kings  13.  4.  and  Jeroboam's  liand  d.  up 

17.  7.  the  brook  d.  because  there  had  been  no  rain 

2  Kings  ly.  24.  and  with  the  solo  of  my  feet  have 
I  d.  all  the  rivers  of  besieged  places,  Isa.  37.  25. 

Job  18.  16.  his  roots  shall  be  d.  up  beneath 

2ti  4.  they  are  d.  up  they  are  gone  away 
Psal.  22. 15.  my  strength  is  d.  up  like  a  potsherd 

69.3.  my  throat  is  d.  mine  eyes  fail  while  I  wait 

106.  9.  he  rebuked  the  lied  sea,  and  it  was  d.  up 
Isa.  5.  13.  and  their  nmltitude  (/.  up  with  thirst 

19.  5.  the  river  shall  be  wasted  and  d.  up 
G.the  brooks  of  defence  shall  be  emptied  and  (Z.up 

51.  10.  art  thou  not  it  which  hath  d.  the  sea'? 
Jcr.  23. 10.  pleasant  places  of  wilderness  are  d.  up 

50.  38.  upon  her  waters,  and  they  shall  bo  d.  up 
E:eA.17.24.  shall  know  that  I  have  d.  up  green  tree 

19.  12.  and  the  east  wind  (/.up  her  fruit 

37. 11.  they  say,  our  bones  are  d.  and  hope  is  lost 
Has.  9.11).  their  root  is (/.up,tliey  shall  bear  no  fruit 

13.  15.  and  his  fountain  shall  be  d.  up 
Joel  1. 10.  the  new  wine  is  d.  up,  the  oil  languisheth 
12.  the  vine  is  i/.up  |{  20.rivers  of  waters  are  d.up 
Zecli.  11.  17.  his  arm  shall  be  clean  d.  up 
Mark  5.  29.  the  fountain  of  her  blood  was  d.  up 

11.  20.  they  saw  the  fig-tree  d.  up  from  the  roots 
jRco.  14.  t  1j.  lor  the  harvest  of  the  earth  is  d. 

16. 12.  the  water  of  Euphrates  was  d.  up 

URIEDST. 
Psal.  74.  15.  the  flood,  thou  d.  up  mighty  rivers 

DRIETH. 
Job  14.  11.  and  as  the  flood  decayeth  and  d.  up 
Prov.  17.  22.  but  a  broken  spirit  d.  the  bones 
JVaA.  1.4. L.  makes  the  sea  dry ,  and  d.  up  all  rivers 

DRY-SHOU. 
/sa.11.15.  shallsmite  river,and  make  men  go  d.-sh. 

DUE,  DUE. 
Leo.  IC.  13.  because  it  is  thy  d.  and  thy  son's  d.  14. 
JJcut.  18. 3.  this  shall  be  the  priest's  d.  from  people 
1  Chr.  15. 13.  we  sought  him  not  after  the  d.  order 
16.  29.  the  glory  d.to  his  name,  Psal  29. 2.  [  96.  8. 
JVeA.  11.23.  a  portion  for  singers,  d.  for  every  day 
ProB.  3r27.  withhold  not  from  them  to  whom  itisd. 
Mat.  18.34.  till  he  should  pay  all  that  was  i/.  to  him 
Lukc'iS.  41.  we  receive  thed.  reward  of  our  deeds 
Rom.  13.  7.  render  tribute  to  whom  tribute  is  d. 

DUE  benevolence. 
1  Cot  7.  3.  let  the  husband  render  to  the  wife  d.  b. 

DUE  season. 
/yPU.Sfi.  4. 1  will  give  you  rain  \ad.  s.  Dcut.  11. 14. 
JVunt.  28. 2.  observe  to  offer  to  me  in  their  d.season 
Psal.  104.  27.  give  them  their  meat  in  d.  s.  145. 15. 
Prov.  15.  23.  a  word  spoken  in  d.  s.  how  good  is  it! 
Keel.  10.  17.  when  thy  princes  eat  in  d.  season 
AIat.2i.  45.  to  give  them  meat  in  d.s.  Luke  12.  42. 
Gai.  6.9.  ind.  season  we  shall  reap  if  we  faint  not 

DUE  time. 
Dcut.  32.  35.  their  foot  shall  slide  in  d.  time 
Rom.  5.  6.  in  d.  time  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly 
1  Cor.  15.8.  seen  of  me,  asof  one  born  o\x\.o\' d.time 
1  Tim.  2.  6.  a  ransom,  to  be  testified  in  d.  time 
Tit.  1.  3.  but  hath  in  d.time  manifested  his  word 
1  Pet.  5.  6.  that  he  may  exalt  you  in  d.  time 

DUES. 
Rom.  13.  7.  render  therefore  to  all  their  d.  tribute 

DUKE. 
Oen.  36.  40.  d.  Alvali,  d.  Jetheth,  1  Chron.  1.51. 

DURES. 
Oen.  36. 15.  these  were  d.  of  the  sons  of  Esau,  19. 

21.  these  are  the  d.  of  the  Horites,  29. 
Etod.  1.5.  15.  then  the  d.  of  Eilom  shall  be  amazed 
JobIi.  13.2).  nur,and  Reba, which  were  d.  of  Si)ion 

DULCIMER. 
Dan.  3.  5.  flute,  d.  and  all  kinds  of  music,  10,  15. 

DULL. 
Mat.  13. 15.  this  people's  heart  is  waxed  gross,  and 
their  ears  are  d.  of  hearing,  .^cts  28.  27. 
Heb.S.W.  hard  to  utter,  seeing  ye  are  d.  of  hearing 

DUMB 
Is  taken  (1)  For  one  that  eannot  speak  for  want 
of  natural  ability;  E.\oil.  4.  11,  Who  maketh 
the  dumb,  or  deaf,  or  blind  t  have  not  I  the 
Lord?  (2)  For  one  that  cannot  speak  to,  and 
teach  others,  for  lack  of  grace  and  knowledge; 
Isa.  .56.  10,  His  watchmen  are  ignorant,  they 
Bre  dumb  dogs,  they  cannot  bark.  (3)  For  one 
that  will  not  speak,  though  he  can,  being  sub- 
missioe  and  silent  under  the  dispensations  of 
God's  providence ;  Psal.  39.  9,  1  was  dumb,  I 
opened  not  my  mouth,  because  thou  didst  it. 
(4)  For  such  as  cannot  speak  in  their  own 
cause,  either  through  ignorance  and  infirmity, 
or  because  of  the  dread  of  their  more  potent 
149 


DUN 

adversaries,  or  of  the  majesty  of  him  that  sits 
in  judgment ;    Prov.  31.  8,  Open  thy  mouth 
for  the  dumb  in  the  cause  of  all  such  as  are 
appointed  to  destruction.     (5)  For  one  that  is 
made  speechless  by  divine  ecstasy;  Dan.  10. 
1.5,  When  he  had  spoken  such  words,  I  became 
dumb. 
A  dumb,  or  deaf  Spirit,  is  a  spirit  that  makee 
those  persons  deaf,  or  dumb,  whom  he  pos- 
sesses.    Mark  9.  17,  25. 
Ezod.  4.  11.  or  who  maketh  the  d.  or  deaf,or  blind? 
Psal.'iH.l'i.  I  was  as  d.  man,opencth  not  his  mouth 
39.  2. 1  was  d.  with  silence,  1  held  my  peace,  9. 
Prov.  31.8.open  thy  mouth  for  the  d.  in  cause  of  ad 
Isa.  35.  6.  and  the  tongue  of  the  d.  shall  sing 
53.  7.  and  as  a  sheep  before  her  shearers  is  d. 
56.  10.  his  watchmen  are  blind,  they  are  all  d.dogs 
Ezek.  3.26.  be  d.and  shalt  not  be  to  them  a  reprover 
24.  27.  thou  shalt  speak,  and  be  no  more  d. 
33.22. my  mouth  was  opened, and  I  wasnomored. 
i->a«. 10.15.1  set  my  face  to  the  ground,  Ibecaine  d. 
//aft.  2.  18.  trusteth  therein,  to  make  him  d.  idols 

19.  woe  to  him  that  saith  to  the  d.  stone,  arise 
Mat.  9.  32.  they  brought  to  him  a  d.  man  posses.sed 

33.  devil  was  cast  out,  the  d.  spake,  Luke  11. 14. 
12.  22.  one  blind  and  d.  and  he  healed  him 

15.30.  having  with  them  those  that  were  blind,  d. 
31.  the  multitude  wondered,  when  they  saw  the 

d.  speak,  and  the  blind  to  see,  Mark  7.  37. 

Mark  9.  17.  brought  my  son  who  hath  a  d.  spirit 

25.  thou  d.  spirit,  I  charge  thee  come  out  of  him 

Luke  1.20.behold,thou  shalt  be  d.until  the  day  that 

.licts  8.  32.  and  like  a  lamb  d.  before  his  sheare 

1  Cor.  12. 2.  carried  away  to  these  d.  idols,  even  as 

2  Pet.  2.  16.  the  d.  ass  speaking  with  man's  voice 

DUNG. 

By  dung  !s  represented  any  thing  that  is  nau- 
seous, or  loathsome,  as  the  carcases  of  the  dead, 
Jer.  8.  2.  |  9,  22.  The  wicked  man,  says  Job, 
shall  i)erish  for  ever,  like  his  own  dung,  Job 

20.  7.  which  men  cast  away  with  contempt, 
and  abhorrence.  To  spread  dung  upon  the 
face,  ciprcsses  the  greatest  contempt,  wider- 
value,  and  scorn.  Mai.  2.  3,  I  will  spread 
dung  upon  your  faces,  even  the  dung  of 
your  solemn  feasts.  I' will  pour  disgrace 
and  contempt  upon  you,  and  reject  your  per- 
sons and  sacrifices,  with  as  mack  contempt  a 
if  I  took  the  dung  of  those  sacrifices  and 
threw  it  in  your  faces.  The  apostle  Paul 
says,  Phil.  3.  8,  I  count  all  things  but  dung, 
that  I  may  win  Christ.  Jill  things,  without 
Christ,  are  as  dung,  utterly  i?isuffieient  to  pro- 
cure oar  pardon  and  acceptance  with  God. 

Dovk's  Dung  ;  see  on  Dove. 

Ezod.  29.  14.  but  the  flesh,  skin,  and  d.  shalt  thou 

burn.  Lev.  4.  11.  |  8.  17.  1  16.  27.  ^rum.  19.  5. 

1  Kings  14.10.take  away,  as  a  man  taketh  away  d. 

2  Kings  fi.  25.  the  fourth  part  of  a  cab  of  doves'  d. 
9.  37.  carcase  of  Jezebel  shall  be  as  d.  in  the  field 
18. 27.  that  they  may  eat  their  own  d.  Isa.  36. 12. 

Job  20.7.  yet  he  shall  perish  for  ever  like  his  own  d. 
Psal.  83.  10.  they  became  as  d.  for  the  earth 
Isa.  5.  t  25.  their  carcases  were  as  d.  Jer.  9.  22. 
./(■r.  8. 2.  they  shall  be  ford,  on  the  face  of  the  earth 
16.  4.  they  shall  be  as  d.  |1  25. 33.  they  shall  be  d. 
Ezek. 4.  12.  bake  it  with  d.  that  cometh  from  man 
15.  lo,  I  have  given  thee  cow's  d.  for  man's  d. 
Zeph.  1. 17.  and  their  flesh  shall  be  as  the  d. 
J/uZ.2. 3. 1  will  corrupt  your  seed,and  spread  d.  on 
your  faces,  even  the  d.  of  your  solemn  feasts 
F/iii. 3.  8. 1  do  count  all  things  but  d.  to  win  Christ 

DUNG,   Ferb. 
Luke  13.  8.  let  it  alone,  till  I  di?  about  it,  and  d.  it 

DUNG  GATE. 

jVVA.3.13.Hanun  repaired  valley-gate  to  ihed.-gate 

14.  but  the  d.-^.  repaired  Malchiason  of  Rechab 

12.31.  one  company  went  on  wall  toward d.-^'a£f 

DUNGHILL. 
1  .^am.  2.  8  he  lifteth  U|)  begg  ir  from  d.  Ps.  113.  7. 
Ezra  6.  11.  let  his  house  be  made  a  d.  for  this 
Isa.  25. 10.  even  as  straw  is  trodden  down  for  the  d. 
Dnn.  2.  5.  and  your  houses  shall  be  made  a  d. 
3.  29.  their  houses  shall  he  made  a  d.  because 
I^ukc  14. 35.  unsavoury  salt  is  rot  fit  for  land  or  d. 

DUNGHILLS. 
Lam.  A.  5.  were  brought  up  in  scarlet,  embrace  d. 

DUNGY. 
Deut.  29.t  17.  ye  have  seen  d.  sods,wood  and  stone 

DUNG-PORT. 
^<.7i.2.13.Nehemiah  wentto  thod.-;)or/ and  viewed 

DUNGEON. 
Gen.  40.  15.  that  they  should  put  mo  into  the  d. 
41.  14.  they  broir^ht  Joseph  hastily  out  of  the  d. 
F.Tod.  12.  29.  to  the  first-born  of  the  captive  in  d. 
Isa.  24.  t  22.  shall  he  gathered  as  prisoners  in  the  d. 
Jer.  37. 10.  when  Jeremiah  was  entered  into  the  d. 
38.  6.  they  cast  him  into  d.  was  no  water  in  d.  9. 
10.  take  up  Jeremiah  out  of  the  d.  before  he  die 
11. let  them  down  by  cords  into  the  d.to  Jeremiah 


DUS 

Jtr.  38. 13.  so  they  drew  up  Jeremiah  out  of  tlie  d. 
Lam.  3.  53.  they  have  cut  oHiny  life  in  the  d. 
55.  I  called  on  thy  name,  O  Lord,  out  of  the  dU 
DURABLE. 
Prow.8.18.yea,d.  riches  and  righteous,  are  with  roe 
Isa.  23. 18.  her  merchandise  shall  be  for  d.  clothiiie 

DURETll. 
Mat.  13. 21.  hath  not  root  in  himself,  d.  for  a  whila 

DURST. 
Esth.  7.  5.  he  that  d.  presume  in  his  heart  to  do  so 
Job  32.  6.  afraid,  I  d.  not  shew  you  mine  opinion 
Mat.  22.  46.  no  man  able  to  answer  hiin,  nor  d.ask 
any  more  questions,  Mark  12.  34.  Luke  20. 40. 
lohn  21. 12.  none  of  disciples  d.  ask,  who  art  thoul 
Jiets  5. 13.  and  of  the  restd.no  man  join  to  them 
1.  32.  then  Moses  trembled  and  d.  not  behold 
Jude  9.  he  d.  not  bring  ag.  him  a  railing  accusation 

DUST. 
The  Hebrews,  when  they  mourned,  put  dust  or 
ashes  upon  their  heads.  Josh.  7. 6,  Joshua  and 
the  elders  of  Israel  put  dust  upon  their  heads. 
Ill  their  afflictions  they  sat  down  m  the  dust, 
and  threw  themselves  with  their  faces  upon 
the  ground.  Lam.  3.  29,  He  putleth  his  mouth 
in  the  dust,  if  so  be  there  may  be  hope.  Isa. 
47.  ],  Come  down  and  sit  in  the  dust,  O  virgia 
daughter  of  Babylon,  sit  on  the  ground.  In 
Acts  22.  23.  some  of  the  Jews,  in  the  height  of 
their  rage,  threw  dust  into  the  air,  as  it  were 
to  shew  that  they  7could  reduce  to  powder  the 
apostle  Paul,  whom  they  had  taken  in  tlie 
temple. 
The  dust  denotes  likewise  the  grave  and  death. 
Gen.  3.  19,  Dust  thou  art,  and  to  dust  thou 
shalt  return.  Job  7.  21,  For  now  shall  I  sleep 
in  the  dust.  Psal.  ?2.  15,  Thou  hast  brought 
me  into  the  dust  of  death.  The  dust  signifies 
likewise  a  multitude.  Gen.  13.  16,  I  will 
make  thy  seed  as  the  dust  of  the  earth.  Jlnd 
Balaam,  upon  the  sight  of  the  Israelilish 
camp, says,  Who  can  c«Jint  the  dust  of  Jacob? 
Num.  23.  10.  This  vUst  multitude  of  the 
Israelites,  who  arc  as  numerous  as  the  dust. 
Jlnd  in  Psal.  78.  27,  He  rained  flesh  also  upon 
them  as  dust:  a  great  multitude  of  quails,  as 
if  they  were  dust. 
Dust  signifies  a  most  low  and  miserable  condi- 
tion. 1  Sam.  2.  8,  God  raiseth  up  the  poor  out 
of  the  dust.  JVaA.  3.  18,  Thy  nobles  shall 
dwell  in  the  dust:  They  shall  be  reduced  to  a 
mean  condition.  Our  tiaviour  commands  his 
disciples  to  shake  the  dust  off  their  feet  aijainst 
those  who  would  not  hearken  to  them,  nor  re- 
ceive them,  Mat.  10.  14.  Luke  9.  5.  to  shew 
thereby,  that  they  desire  to  have  no  commerce 
with  them ;  that  Ihnj  abhor  every  thing  be- 
longing to  them  ;  and  that  they  give  them  up 
to  their  misery  and  hardness.  Lust  signifies 
earthly  things,  Amos  2.  7. 
Gen.  3. 14.  d.  shalt  thou  cat  all  the  days  of  thy  life 
19.  d.  thou  art,  and  unto  d.  shalt  thou  return 
1.3. 16.  so  that  if  a  man  ciin  number  the  d.  of  earth 
18.27.  lo  speak  to  Lord,  who  am  butd.  and  asheg 
Ezod.  8. 18.  say  lo  Aaron,  smite  the  d.  of  the  lauU 
17.  for  Aaron  smote  the  d.  of  the  earth 

9.  9.  it  shall  become  small  d.  in  nil  the  land   ■ 
Lev.  14.41.  shall  pour  out  the  d.  they  scrape  off 

17. 13.  pour  out  the  blood,  and  cover  it  with  d. 
JVum.  19.  t  17.  lake  of  the  d.  of  the  burnt  heifer 

23.  10.  who  can  count  the  d.  of  Jacob? 
I)eut.9.'i^.  I  cast  the  d.  into  brook,  2  Kings  23.  52. 

2.?.  24.  Lord  shall  make  the  rain  of  thy  land  d. 
■  Josh.  7.  6.  and  the  elders  put  d.  on  their  heads 
2  .Sam.  16. 13.  Shimei  cursed  David,  and  cast  d. 

1  Kings  18. 38.  the  fire  of  the  Lord  consumed  the  d. 
20.10.  if  the  d.of  Samaria  shall  sufiice  for  handfula 

2  Chron.  34.  4.  Josiah  made  d.  of  the  images 
.hb'i.  12.  they  sprinkled  d.  upon  their  heads 

7.5.my  flesh  is  clothed  with  worms  and  clods  ofi 

10.  9.  and  wilt  thou  bring  me  into  d.  again? 
2>'.  1 2.  i  ron  is  taken  out  of  d.  and  brass  molten 

6.  as  for  the  earth,  it  hath  d.  of  gold 
34. 15.  all  flesh  perish,  man  shall  turn  again  to  d. 
38.  38.  when  the  d.  growcth  into  hardness 
42.6. 1  abhor  myself,  and  repent  in  d.  and  ashes 
Psal.  22.  15.  thou  hast  brought  me  into  the  J. 
30.9.  shall  d.  praise  thee,  shall  it  declare  thy  truth? 
72.  0.  and  his  enemies  shall  lick  the  d. 
78.  27.  he  rained  flesh  also  upon  them  as  A 

102.  14.  thy  servants  favour  the  d.  thereof 

103.  14.  he  remembereth  that  we  are  d. 
J^ccM2. 7.  then  shall  the  d.  return  to  the  earth 
Isa.  2.  t  10.  go  into  the  caves  of  the  d.  for  fear 

34.  7.  their  d.  shall  he  made  fat  with  fatness 

9.  the  d.  thereof  shall  be  turned  into  brimstone 
40. 12.  who  hath  eomiirehcnded  the  d.  of  earth? 
49.  23.  they  shall  lick  up  the  d.  of  thy  feet 
^.  2.  shake  thyself  from  the  d.  O  Jerusalem 
65.  25.  and  d.  shall  he  the  serpent's  meat 
Zam.2.10.  have  cast  d.  on  their  heads,£2eA.27. 3© 


DWB 

Eiek.  24.  7.  she  poured  it  not,  to  cover  It  with  d. 

26.  4.  I  will  also  scrape  her  d.  from  her 
JU.  by  liis  liorse.i,  their  d.  shall  cover  thee 

Jmus  'i.  ".  that  pant  after  the  d.  of  tlie  earth 
.Wic.  7.  17.  they  shall  lick  the  d.  like  a  8i.ri)ent 
•VaA.  1.  3.  and  the  clouds  arc  the  d.  of  his  I'eot 
Hal/.  1.  10.  for  they  shall  heap  d.  and  take  it 
Mai.  10. 14.  wlieii  ye  depart  out  of  that  city,  shake 
otr  the  d.of  your  feet,  Mark  6.  11.  /.ttkc  '.).  5. 
J.uke  10.11.  even  the  d.  of  your  city  «c  do  wipuoti' 
Mcts  13.  51.  they  shook  otftlie  d.  of  their  feet 
•2-Z.  23.  and  as  they  threw  d.  into  the  air 
Hco.  Id  IS.  they  cast  d.  on  their  heads,  and  cried 

Jls  the  DUST. 
Gen.  13. 16. 1  will  give  thee  the  land,  and  make  thy 
seed  as  the  d.  of  the  earth,  JM.  14.  2  Chron.  l.V. 
Deut.  U.  -1.  1  stamped  the  calf  small  as  the  d. 
2  Sam.  •2-2.  43. 1  beat  tliem  as  small  as  d.  Fs.  18.  42. 
Job  22.  24.  then  shall  thou  lay  up  gold  as  the  d. 

27.  16.  though  he  heap  up  silver  as  the  d. 
Isa.  5.  24.  and  their  blossom  shall  goup  as  d. 

40. 15.  the  nations  as  the  small  d.  of  the  balance 
41.  2.  he  ^'avc  them  as  the  d.  to  his  sword 

Zeph.  1.  17.  llieir  blood  shall  be  poured  out  as  d. 

Zeeh.  9.  3.  and  Tvrus  heaped  up  silver  as  the  d. 
hi  the  DUST. 

Job  4.  19.  on  them,  whose  foundation  is  in  the  d. 
7.  21.  now  shall  I  sleep  in  Vie  d.  thou  shall  seek 
IG.  15.  and  I  have  defiled  my  horn  in  the  d. 
17.  10.  when  our  rest  together  is  in  the  d. 

20.  11.  which  shall  lie  down  with  him  !;i  the  d. 

21.  26.  they  shall  lie  down  alike  in  the  d. 
39. 14.  leavelh  eggs,  and  warmeth  them  in  the  d. 
40.  13.  hide  them  in  the  d.  together,  and  bind 

^sal.'. 5.lel  the  enemy  lay  mine  honour  in  the  d. 
'sa.  2.  10.  hide  thee  in  the  d.  for  fear  of  the  Lord 
36.  19.  awake  and  sing,  ye  that  dwell  in  the  d. 
47. 1.  come  down  and  sit  in  the  d.  O  virgin 
Lam.  3.  29.  he  putteth  hia  moulh  in  the  d.  if  so  be 
Dan. 1-2.2.  many  that  sleep  in  the  d.  shall  awake 
Mic.  1. 10.  weep'  not  at  all,  roll  thyself  in  the  d. 
.VaA.  3.  IS.  Ihy  nobles  shall  dwell  in  the  d. 

JJke  the  DUST. 
2  Kings  13.  7.  make  them  like  the  d.  by  threshing 
Isa  29.  5.  the  multitude  of  thy  strangers  be  liked. 

Of  the  DUST. 
^cn.2.  7.  Lord  formed  man  of  the  d.  of  the  ground 
J^'um.  5. 17.  priest  shall  take  of  the  rf.in  the  fabci  n. 
JJeut.  :^2.24. 1  will  send  poison  of  serpents  vf  the  d. 
l.S'am.2.8.he  raiseth  the  poor  out  oftkc  d.  I's.]  13.7. 

1  Kings  16.2. 1  e.xalted  thee  out  nf  the  d.  and  made 
Job  5^0.  affliction  Cometh  not  forth  of  the  d. 

14.iy.washest  away  things  that  grow  out  of  the  d. 
Proa.  P.  26.  nor  highest  part  of  the  d.  of  the  world 
Eecl.  3.  20.  all  go  to  one  place,  all  arc  of  the  d. 
Isa.  29.  4.  thy  speech  shall  be  low  out  of  the  d. 

To  the  DUST. 
I'sal.  22.  29.  all  that  go  down  to  the  d.  shall  bow 

1i.  25.  for  our  soul  is  bowed  do;,vn  to  the  d. 

104.  29.  they  die  and  return  to  their  d. 

119.  25.  my  soul  cleaveth  to  the  d.  quicken  nie 
Keel.  3.  20.  all  are  of  the  d.  and  turn  to  d.  again 
ha.  25.  12.  he  shall  bring  the  fortress  to  the  d. 

26.  5.  he  bringeth  the  lofty  city  even  to  the  d. 
DUSTED. 

2  .Sam.lC.t  ]3.Shimei  threw  stones  and  d.  with  dust 

DUTY. 
i^roJ.Sl.lO.herd.ofmarriage  shall  ho  not  diminish 
Deut.  25. 5.  shall  perform  d.  of  a  husband's  brother 
7. will  not  perform  the  rf.of  my  husband's  brother 
2  Chr.  8. 14.  as  (i.  of  everv  day  required,  F.ira  3.  4 
Ecel.  12.  13.  for  this  is  the  whole  d.  of  man 
/,uA£l7.10.we  have  done  that  which  was  ourrf.to  do 
Jioni.  15.  27.  their  d.  is  to  minister  in  carnal  things 

DUTIES. 
£i«A-.13.11.if  he  beget  a  son  that  doeth  not  those  d. 

DW.ARF. 
/>c».21.20.a  d.shall  not  come  nigh  to  offer  offerings 

DWELL. 
To  dwell  signifies  to  abide  in,  to  inhnhit,1o  have  a 
fixed  residinee  in  a  place,  Num.  33.  .53.  Psal. 
78.  .5.5.  Sometimes  it  is  taken  for  sojourning, 
Heb.  11.  9.  where  it  is  said,  that  .Ibraham 
dwell  in  taheriiacles ;  that  is,  sojourned  ;  for 
he  had  vo  fixed  abode  in  the  land  of  Canaan. 
It  is  spoken  [1]  Of  God,  vhu  is  said  to  dwell 
in  the  heavens,  Psal.  123.  1.  Ife  hnth  a  cer- 
tain and  glorious  place  where  he  residrth,rnen 
the  hi"hrst  heavens,  where  he  is  clothed  irith 
infinite  powirr  and  majesty,  and  front  whrncr 
he  beholdcth  and  gorernrth  this  lower  world  and 
all  that  is  in  it.  If  is  gracious  presence  with 
his  people  on  earth  is  signified  by  dwcllins  with 
them.  P«aJ.  9. 11,  Sing  praises  tolheI,ord  who 
dwelleth  in  Zion  :  where  the  ark  was,  which 
teas  the  symbol  of  his  sprrinl  and  irrnrious 
presence,  ^nd  in  \»a.  .57.  15, 1  dwell  with  him 
that  is  ofo  contrite  and  humhie  spirit. 
t]  0/ Christ,  signifying,  (1)  ffis  manifestation 
in  the  flesh.  John  1.  H,  The  Word  was  maile 
130 


DWB 

flesh,  and  dwelt  among  U3.  (2)  ^(«  sptrttual 
abode  in  every  faithful  soul.  Eph.  3.  17,  That 
Christ  may  dwell  in  your  hearts  by  failh.  Christ 
dwells  in  his  people  by  his  merit  to  justify 
them ;  by  his  grace  and  Spirit  to  renew  and 
purify  them;  by  his  power  to  keep  them;  by 
his  wisdom  to  lead  and  instruct  them  ;  and  by 
his  euminunion  and  cowpa&siu7i  to  share  with 
them  in  all  their  troubles. 

[3J  Of  the  Holy  Gl.ost,  who  dwells  in  the  soul  by 
his  grucioas  operations,  working  faith,  love, 
and  other  graces  therein.  Rom.  8.  9,  llut  ye 
are  nut  in  the  fiesh,  hut  in  the  Spirit,  if  so  be 
that  the  Spirit  of  God  dwell  in  you. 

[4]  Of  the  word  of  God,  which  may  be  said  to 
dwell  in  a  person,  when  it  is  diligently  studied, 
firmly  belicced,  and  carefully  practised.  Col. 
3.  16,  Let  the  word  of  God  dwell  in  you  richly 
in  nil  wisdom. 

[5]  Of  Satan,  who  dwells  in  wicked  men,  when 
he  fills  them  with  farther  degrees  of  error, 
malice,  blasphemy,  impenitence,  and  blindness; 
thereby  making  them  highly  wicked,  and  worse 
and  worse  daily,  Mat.  12.  45. 

[6]  Of  the  godly,  who  are  said  to  dwell  in  God, 
I  John  3.  24.  They  have  most  intimate  unio)t 
and  communion  with  God  in  Christ. 

f;en.9.  27.  Jajihet  shall  d.  in  the  tents  of  Shem 

16.  12.  he  shall  d.  in  the  presence  of  his  brethren 

19.  30.  Lot  went  up,  for  he  feared  to  d.  in  Zoar 

20.  15.  behold  my  land,  d.  where  it  ph.aseth  thee 
24.3.  daughters  of  Canaanites,amongsl\vhomI  d. 

34.  10.  land  before  you,  d.  and  trade  you  therein 
16.  we  will  d.  with  you,  and  become  one  jieople 

3.5.  1.  arise,  go  up  lo  Belh-el,  and  d.  there 
Ezod.  2.  21.  Moses  was  content  to  d.  with  the  man 
25.  8.  that  I  may  d.  amongst  them,  29.  46. 

29.  45.  I  will  d.  amongst  the  children  of  Israel 
J^ev.  13.  46.  the  unclean  shall  d.  alone 

23.  42.  ye  shall  d.  in  booths,  43.  J^Teh.  8.  14. 
J^um.  5.  3.  their  camps,  in  the  midst  whereof  I  d. 
23.9.  lo,  the  people  shall  d.  alone,  not  be  reckoned 

32.  17.  our  little  ones  shall  d.  in  fenced  citii^s 

35.  2.  that  they  give  to  the  Levites,  cities  lo  d.  in, 
and  subuibs  round,  3.  Josh.  14.  4.  |  21.  2. 

34.  I  the  Lord  d.  among  the  children  of  Israel 
/)<u<.12.11.lo  cause  his  name  d.  there,  F.zrad.  12. 

23.  16.  the  servant  escaped  shall  d.  with  thee 

33.  12.  he  shall  d.  between  his  shoulders 
.Josh.  9.  7.  peradventure  ye  d.  among  us,  22. 

20.  6.  he  shall  d.  in  that  city,  till  he  stand  before 

24.  13.  cities  ye  built  not,  and  ye  d.  in  them 
Jiidg.  9.  41.  that  Gaal  should  not  d.  in  Shechem 

17.  10.  Micah  said  to  the  Levite,  d.  with  me 
1  Sam.  27.  5.  that  I  may  d.  there   for  why  should 

thy  servant  d.  in  the  royal  city  with  thee? 

1  Kings  6.  13. 1  will  d.umong  the  children  of  Israel 
8.  12.  he  would  d.  in  thick  darkness,  2  Chr.  6. 1. 
17.  9.  get  thee  to  Zarephath,  and  d.  there 

2  Kings  4.  IS.  she  answered,!  d.  among  own  people 
17.  27.  let  them  go  and  d.  there,  let  him  leach 

J5:ral0.  t  10.  ye  have  caused  to  d.  strange  wives, 
to  increase  the  trespass  of  Israel,  JVeh.  13.  j  23. 

Job  3.  5.  let  a  cloud  d.  upon  it.  lei  blackness  of  day 
11.  14.  let  not  wicki^dness  d.  in  thy  tabernacle 
]8I.5.shall  (/.in  his  tabernaclc,becau3e  none  of  his 

30.  6.  lo  d.  in  the  clifts  of  the  valleys,  in  caves 
Psal.  5.  4.  neither  shall  evil  d.  with  thue 

1.5.  1.  Lord,  who  shall  d.  in  thy  holy  hilH 
16.  t  9.  my  flesh  shall  d.  in  confidence 
25.13  his  soulsha.'ld.  at  ease,  and  bin  seed  inherit 
37.  27.  dejiart  from  evil,  and  d.  for  evermore 
65.  4.  to  approach,  that  he  may  d.  in  thy  courts 
8.  they  also  lliat  d.  in  the  uttermost  parts  ofcarth 
69.  16.  this  is  the  hill  which  God  desireth  lo  d.in, 
yea  the  Lord  will  d.  in  it  for  ever  and  ever 

18.  thai  the  Lord  might  d.  among  them 
69.  35.  will  build  Judah  that  they  may  d.  there 
72.  9.  they  that  d.  in  the  wilderness  shall  bow 
78.  .55.  and  made  Israel  to  d.  in  their  tents   • 
84.  10.  than  lo  d.  in  the  tents  of  wickedness 
101.  6.  on  the  faithful,  that  they  may  d.  with  me 
107.  4.  lliey  wandered,  they  found  no  city  to  d.  in 

36.  and  there  he  maketh  ihe  hungry  to  d. 
113.  t  5.  like  the  Lord  w  ho  e.\altelli  himself  to  d. 
120.  5.  woe  is  me,  that  I  d.  in  tin'  tents  of  Kednr 
132.  14.  mv  rest,  here  will  I  d  for  I  have  desired  il 

139.  9.  if  i  d.  in  uttermost  pnrls  of  the  sea 

140.  13.  the  ui)iighl  sinill  //.  in  thy  prrsencfc 
143.  3.  he  halli  made  me  to  d.  in  darkness 

Pror.  1.  33.  whoso hearkenelh  tome  shall d.  safely 
>>.  12.  I  wisdom  d.  with  priidcnrp  and  find  out 
21.  t  7.  robbery  of  the  wirked  shall  rf.with  them 

19.  it  is  better  to  d.  in  w  iUhrness,  than  with 
F.<a.  6.  5.  I  d.  in  midst  of  a  people  of  unclean  lips 

11.6.  the  wolf  also  shall  d.  with  Ihe  lamb 
13.  21.  owls  shall  d.  there,  snivrs  shall  dance  there 
16.  4.  let  mine  outcasts  d.  with  thie,  Moah 
2n.1R.merc-hnndi8e  for  them  that  d.  before  the  Ld 
24.  6.  tliay  that  d.  therein  are  desolate 


DWE 

Tsa.  26.  5.  he  bringeth  down  them  that  d.  on  hifb 

19.  awake  and  sing,  ye  thai  d.  in  the  dust 

30.  19.  the  people  sliall  d.  in  Zion  at  Jerusalem 
32.  16.  then  judgmunl  shall  d.  in  ihe  n  ildeinesn 

18.  luy  people  d.  in  a  peaceful  habitation 
33.14.  who  among  us  shall  d.  wilh  devouring  firel 
who  shall  d.  with  everlasting  burninjsl 
16.  he  shall  d.  on  high,  his  place  of  defence 
24.  the  people  that  d.  therein  i-hall  be  Ibrgiven 

34.  11.  the  owl  and  the  laven  shall  d.  in  it 

40.  22.  he  sjireadelh  them  out  as  a  t«nt  to  d.  ia 
49.  20.  give  place  to  me  thai  I  may  d. 
58. 12.  shall  be  called  the  restorer  of  paths  to  d.  ia 
65.  9.  and  my  servants  shall  d.  there 
.fer.  29.  32.  Shemaiah  shall  not  have  a  man  to  d. 

31.  24.  there  shall  d.  in  Judah  husbandmen 

35.  7.  but  all  your  days  ye  shall  d.  in  tenia 
40.  5.  and  d.  w  ith  him  among  the  people 

10.  I  will  d.  at  Mizpah  lo  serve  the  Chaldeans 
42. 14.  we  will  go  into  Egypt,  and  there  w  ill  we  d. 
44.  14.  they  have  a  desire  lo  return  to  d.  there 
49.  8.  flee  ye,  d.  deei>,  O  inhabitants  of  Dedan 

18.  nof  shall  a  son  of  man  d.  in  il,  33.  |  50.  40. 

31.  whicli  d.  alone  |{  51.1.  that  d.  in  midst  of  thein 
F.zck.  2.  6.  and  thou  dost  d.  among  scor)>ion8 

16.  46.  she  and  her  daughters  d.  at  thy  left  hand 
43.  7.  where  I  will  d.  in  the  midst  of  Israel  for 

ever,  9.  Zech.  2.  10,  11. 
Has.  12.  9. 1  will  make  ihee  to  d.  in  tabernacles 
14.  7.  they  that  d.  under  his  shadow  shall  return 
./oil 3.20.but  J udab  shall  d.  for  ever,and  Jerusalem 
.'Jmos  3.12.Isr.shall  be  taken  out  that  d.in  Samaria 
Mic.  4.  10.  thou  shall  d.  in  the  6eld,  go  to  Babylon 

7.  14.  the  flock  which  d.  solitary  in  the  wood 
jVoA.  3.  18.  O  Assyria,  thy  nobles  shall  d.  in  dust 
Hag.  1.  4.  is  it  time  to  d.  in  your  ceiled  houses? 
2ccA.8.  4.old  men  and  w>onien  shall  d.  inJerusaV 

9.  6.  and  a  bastard  shall  d.  in  Aslidod 

14.  11.  shall  be  inhabited,  and  men  shall  d.  in  it 

Mat.  12.45.  they  elite:  in  and  d.  there,  i^uAt  11.20. 

L,uke  21.  35.  as  a  snare  shall  it  come  on  all  them 
that  d.  on  face  of  the  whole  earth,  ./'Jets  17.26. 

Jlcts  7.  4.  he  removed  into  land  wherein  ye  now  d. 

28.  16.  Paul  was  suflered  lo  d.  by  himself 
A'om.  8. 9.  ilso  be  the  SjiiritofGod  d.  in  you,  11. 

1  Cor.  7.  12.  and  she  be  pleased  to  d.  with  him 

2  Cor.  6.  16.  as  God  hath  said,  I  will  d.  in  them 
F.pli.^.M.  tliiit  Christ  may  d.in  your  hearts  by  faith 
Col.  1  19.  Father  that  in  him  should  all  fulness  d. 

3.  16.  let  the  word  of  Christ  d.  in  you  richly 

1  Pit.  3.  7.  likewise,  ye  husbands,  d.  wilh  them 
1  John  4.  13.  hereby  know  we  that  we  d.  in  him 
Itrv.  7.  15.  he  that  sittelh  on  the  throne  shall  d. 
12. 12.  rejoice,  ye  heavens,  and  ye  that  d.  in  them 
13.  6.  and  against  them  that  d.  in  heaven 
21.  3.  is  with  men,  and  he  will  d.  with  thera 
DWELL  with  earth. 

1  Kings  8.  27.  will  God  d.  on  earthl  2  Chr.  6. 18 
y^'in.  4.  1.  language  that  d.  in  all  the  earth,  0.  25. 
liri;.  3.  10.  to  try  ihom  thai  d.  on  the  earth 

6.  10.  avenge  our  blood  on  ihem  that  d.  on  earth 
11.  10.  they  that  d.  on  the  earth  shall  rejoice 

13.  8.  all  that  d.  on  the  earth  shall  worship 
14.  and  deceivelh  them  that  d.  on  the  earth 

14.  6.  to  preach  to  them  that  d.  on  the  earth 

17.  8.  they  that  d.  on  Ihe  earth  shall  wonder 

DWELL  wilh  house. 
Deut.  28.  30.  shall  build  a  house,  nni\  shall  not  d. 
therein,  plant  vineyard,  not  gaiher,^mo*5. 11. 

2  Sam.  7.  2.  I  d.  in  a  house  of  cedar,  )  Chr.  17. 1. 
5.  shall  build  me  a  house  to  d.  in,  1  Chr.  17.  1. 

1  Kings  2.36.build  house  in  Jerusalem  and  d.  there 
3. 17.  O  my  lord,  1  and  this  woman  d.  in  one  house 

8.  13.  I  have  surely  built  thee  a  house  to  d.  in 

2  Chr.  8.  11.  my  wile  shall  not  d.  in  house  of  David 
Job  4.  19.  much  less  them  thai  d.  in/ioiisrf  of  clay 

19.15.  lliey  that  d.in  my  house  count  me  a  stranger 
Ps.  23.  6.  I  w  ill  d.  in  the//(iu.<!f  of  the  Lord  forever 
2'^4.  that  I  may  d.  in  the  house  of  the  Lord 
84.  4.  blessed  are  they  that  d.  in  thy  house 
101.  7.  worketh  deceit,  shall  not  d.  in  my  house 
113.  t  9.  he  mnkelli  the  barren  lo  d.  in  a  house 
/V(ir.21.9.  belter  rf.  in  the  corner  of  a  A«M«r,  2.5. 24. 
Jer.  20.  6.  all  that  d.  in  Ihy  house  go  to  captivity 

29.  5.  buihl  y  houses,  and  d.  in  11..  ni,  28. 

35.9. not  lo  huilil  houses  for  us  to  rf.iii.nor  vineyard 

DWELL  wilh  Jerusalem. 
I  Chr.  23.  25.  that  ye  may  d.  in  .Jerusalem  for  over 
.V>A.  11.  1.  to  bring  one  often  lo  d.  in  Jrrusalcm 
2.  williiij;ly  offered  themselves  to  d.at  Jrrusulem 
./rr.33. 16.JiMliihsaved,nnil./frw.«a/r»nsIiolli/.safcly 
35.  1 1,  for  fearnfCliaUlennsso  wed.at  .'rri/.ffl/cni 
Z.r/i.8.3.  and  I  will  d.  in  the  midst  ni  Jnusalctn 

8.  and  they  shall  d.  in  the  midst  of  .frrusalem 
.lets  2.  14.  and  all  ye  that  d.  at  Jervsatem 

4.  16.  is  manifest  lo  nil  them  ihatd.  \nJrrusalem 
13.27.tliey  lhiilrf.nt.'rrM.«n/.liavr  condemned  him 

DWELL  wilh  land. 
fiVn.24.37.  of  Ihe  Canaaniles  in  whose  land  \d 
26.  2.  d.  in  the  land  whicli  I  shall  tell  tliee  of 


DWE 

G<n.34.21.  lei  iliet*.  a. in  ilie  2an(2,and  trade  therein 
45.  10.  utiil  lliou  shall  d.  in  li>e  land  of  Goshea 
40.  34.  thai  ye  may  d.  in  the  land  of  Goslien 
47.  6.  in  the  land  of  Goshen  let  them  d. 

£zod.8.2"i.lhf /tt7t(/ofGoshen,in  which  my  peopled. 

23.  33.  Ihey  shall  not  d.  in  thy  land,  lest  they 
I.ec.  25.  16.  and  yo  shall  d.  in  llie  land  in  Bal'ety 

2ti.  5.  yc  shall  eat  and  d.  in  your  land  safely 
J^um.  13.  19.  and  what  the  land  is  that  they  d.  in 

35.  34.  defile  not  the  land  wherein  I  d. 
Ueut.li.  10.  (/.  in  the  land  which  the  L.  giveth  you 

30. 20.  that  ihou  mayest  d.  in  the  land  Lord  sware 

Josh.  17.  12.  could  not  drive  them  out,  but  theCa- 

naanitcs  would  d.  in  that  land,  Judg.  1.  27. 

24.  15.  the  gods  in  w  hose  land  ye  d.  Judg.  6.  10. 
2  Kings  25.  24.fear  not,  d.  in  land,  ,/cr.25.5.  |  40.  9, 
Psal.'Sl.  3.  do  good,  so  shall  thou  d.  in  the  land 

68.  6.  but  the  rebellious  d.  in  a  dry  land 
85.  9.  salvation  near,ihat  glory  may  d.  in  our  land 
Prov.  2.  21.  for  the  ui)right  shall  d.  in  the  Ian  i 
/sa.9.  2.  thatd.  in  the  iaiid  of  the  sb-idow  of  death 
Jer.  23.  8.  they  shall  d.  in  their  own  land,  27.  ll. 

24. 8.  that  rf.  in  the/andof  Egypt,  44.  1,  8,13,20. 
35. 15.  ye  shall  d.  in  the  land,  £zeA.3«.28.  |  37.  25. 

42.  13.  if  ye  say,  we  will  not  d.  in  this  land 

43.  4.  obeyed  oot  L.  to  d.  in  the  land  of  Judah,5. 

50.  3.  make  the  land  desolate, none  shall  (/.therein 
Ezek.  28.  25.  then  shall  they  d.  in  their  land 

38.  12.  the  people  thatd.  in  the  midst  of  the  land 
Hos.  9.  3.  they  shall  not  d.  in  the  Lord's  land 
/^a6.2.8.forthe  violence  of  iand,  and  all  thatd.  17. 
Zcph.\.\B.ma.V.e  a  riddance  of  all  that  d.in  the  land 

DWELL  with  place. 
Exod.  15.  17.  in  the  place  thou  hast  made  to  d.  in 

1  Sam.  12.  8.  and  made  them  to  d.  in  this^Zace 
Q  Sam.  7.  10.  tney  may  d.  in  a.  place  of  their  own 

2  Kings  6. 1.  behold  the  place  where  we  d.  is  strait 
'      2.  let  us  make  us  a  place  where  we  may  d. 

]  Chron.  17.  9.  and  they  shall  d.  in  Ihe'it  place 
Jsa.  57.  15.  I  d.  in  the  high  and  ho\y  place 
Jer.  7.  3.  I  will  cause  you  to  d.  in  this  »/ace,  7. 

DWELL  safelij. 
Prov.  1.33.  whoso  hearkeneth  to  me  shall  d.safely 
y£r.23.6.in  his  daysjudah  shall  be  saved  and  Israel 
shall  d.  safcUj,  Ezek.  28. 26.  1 34. 25,  28.  [  38.  S. 

32.  37.  and  I  will  cause  them  to  d.  safely 
Ezek. 38.11.1  will  go  to  them  at  rest  th^l  d.  safely 

DWELL  in  safety. 
Lev.  ^5. 18.  keep  my  judgments  and  do  them, and 
ye  shall  d.  in  'he  land  in  safety,  19.  Deut.  12.10. 
Dent.  33.  12.  b*loved  of  the  Lord  shall  d.  in  safety 

28.  Israel  then  shall  d.  in  safety  alone 
Psal.  4.8. thou,Li)rd, only  makestme  to  d.insafety 

DWELL  tkerein. 
/,er.2G.  32.  enemien  which  d.  therein  be  astonished 
JVum. 1433.  the  land  I  sware  to  make  youd.tkerein 

33.  53.  and  ye  shall  d.  therein,  Deut.  11.  31. 
Psal.  24.  1.  tlie  world  and  they  that  d.  therein 

37.  29.  the  righteous  shall  d.  therein  for  ever 
69.  36.  they  that  love  his  name  shall  d.  therein 
107.  34.  for  wickcdn.  of  them  that  d.  th.  .Jer.  12.  4. 
Jsa.  24.  6.  they  that  d.  th.  are  desolate,  Amos  9.  5. 
33.24.  people  that  d.  therein  are  forgiven  iniquity 
34.17.from  general. to  general. shall  ihey  d.therein 

51.  6.  they  that  d.  therein  shall  die  in  like  manner 
Jer.  4.  29.  city  forsaken,  and  not  a  man  d.  therein 

8.  16.  devoured  the  city,  and  all  that  d.  therein 
12.  4.  for  the  wickedness  of  them  that  d.  therein 
47.  2.  overflow  the  land  and  them  that  d.  therein 

48. 9.  the  cities  desolate  without  any  to  d.  therein 
50.39.  the  wild  beasts  and  the  owls  shall  d.  therein 

Ezek.  12.  19.  the  violence  of  them  that  d.  therein 
32.  15.  when  I  shall  smite  them  that  d.  therein 
37.  25.  they  and  their  children  shall  d.  therein 
Jific.  7. 13.  desolate,  because  of  them  that  d.therein 
.VaA.  1. 5.  yea, the  world  is  burnt,  antl  all  that  d.  th. 
^cts  1.  20.  his  habitation,  let  no  man  d.  therein 

DWELL  together. 
Gen.  13.  6.  that  they  might  d.  together,  their  subjj 
stance  was  great,  so  that  they  could  not  d.  r 
36.7.  riches  more  than  that  they  might  d.  together 
Deut.  25.  5.  if  brethren  d.  together,  and  one  die 
Psal.  133. 1.  for  brethren  to  d.  together  in  unity 

DWELLED. 
Sen.  13.  7.  the  Peri/zite  d.  then  in  the  land 
12.  Abram  d.  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  Lot  d.  in 
cities  of  the  plain,  and  pitched  toward  Sodom 
20. 1.  and  .\braham  d.  between  Kadesh  and  Shur 
Ruth  1.4.  and  they  d.  there  about  ten  years 

1  Sam..  12.  11.  God  delivered  vou,  and  ye  d.  safe 

DWELLER. 
Psal.  69. 1  25.  let  there  not  be  a  d.  in  their  tents 

DWELLERS. 
Isa.  18.  3.  ye  d.  on  earth,  see  ye,  when  he  lifteth  up 
.Sets  1.  19.  it  was  known  to  the  d.  at  .Terusalem 
2.9.  thed.  in  Mesopotamia.we  do  hear  them  speak 

DWELLEST. 
/)«<<. I2.29.thnu  succeedestlhcm  andrf.in  theirland 

2  £'177^.'!  19.  15. 0  Lord  God  of  Israel,  which  d.  be- 

tween the  chcrubims,  Psal.  80.1.  Isa.  37.  16. 


DWE 

Psal.  123.  1.  O  thou  that  d.  in  the  heaven* 
Cant.  8.  13.  thou  that  d.  in  the  gardens 
/sa.l0.24.O  my  people  that  d.in  Zion,be  not  afraid 

47.  8.  hear  now  this,  thou  that  d.  carelessly 
Jer.  49.  Itj.  O  thou  that  d.  in  the  clefts,  Obad.  3. 

51.  13.  O  thou  that  d.  upon  many  waters 
Zyam.4.21. 0  daughter  of  Edom,l hat  d.in  land  of  Uz 
Ezek.  7.  7.  thou  that  d.  m  the  land,  time  is  come 

12.  2.  thou  d.  in  the  midst  of  a  rebellious  house 
Mic.  1.  t  11-  pass  ye  away,  thou  that  d.  fairly 
Zech.  2.  7.  that  d.  with  the  daughter  of  Babylon 
John  1.  38.  they  said.  Master,  where  d.  thou7 
llev.  2.  13.  I  know  thy  works,  and  where  thou  d. 

DWELLETH. 
Lev.  16.  1 16.  the  tabernacle  that  d.  among  them 

19.  34.  but  the  stranger  that  d.  with  you  shall  be 

25.  39.  if  thy  brollier  that  d.  by  thee  be  poor,  47. 
Deut.  33.  20.  God  d.  as  a  lioa,  and  tcareth  the  arm 
Josh.  6.  25.  Rahab  d.  in  Israel  even  to  this  day 

22.  19.  wherein  the  Lord's  tabernacle  d. 

1  Sam.  4.  4.  the  ark  of  covenant  of  Lord,  who  d. 
between  cherubims,  2  Sam.  6.2. 1  Chron.  13.  6. 

2  Sam.  7.  2.  but  the  ark  d.  within  curtains 
1  Chron.  23.  t  25.  the  Lord  d.  in  Jerusalem  for  ever 
.lob  15.  28.  he  d.  in  desolate  cities,  and  in  houses 

38.  19.  where  is  the  way  where  light  d.7 

39.  28.  she  d.  and  abideth  on  the  rock 
Psal.  9.  11.  sing  praises  to  the  Lord  who  d.  in  Zion 

26.8.Lord,I  loved  the  place  where  thine  honourd. 

91.1.  he  that  d.in  the  secret  place  of  the  most  High 

113.  5.  who  is  like  the  Lord  our  G.who  d.  on  high? 

135.  21.  blessed  be  the  Lord  who  d.  at  Jerusalem 
Prov.  3.  29.  seeing  he  d.  securely  by  thee 
Asa.  8.  18.  from  the  Lord,  who  d.  in  mount  Zion 

33.  5.  the  Lord  is  exalted,  for  he  d.  on  high 
Jer.  44.  2.  are  a  desolation,  and  no  man  d.therein 

49.  31.  the  wealthy  nation  thai  d.  without  care 
Lam.  1.  3.  Judah,  she  d.  among  the  heathen 
Ezek.  16.  46.  thy  younger  sister  d.  at  thy  right  hand 

17.  16.  where  Ihe  king  d.  that  made  him  king 
Dan.'i.  22.  he  revealeth,  and  the  light  d.  with  him 
Hos.  4.  3.  the  land  shall  mourn,  and  every  one 
that  d.  therein  shall  mourn,  Amos  8.  8. 
Joel  3.21.1  will  cleanse  their  blood, for  L.d.  in  Zion 
J>fa£.  23. 21.  sweareth  by  it  and  him  that  d.therein 
/oA7i6.56.drinkethmy  blood,  d.  in  me, and  I  in  him 

14.10.the  Father  that  d.  in  me,  he  doeth  the  works 

17.the  Spirit,  for  he  d.  in  you,  and  shall  be  in  you 

Acts  7.48.d.nol  in  temples  made  with  hands,  17.24. 

Rom. 7. 17.  it  is  no  morel,  bulsin  that  d.  in  me, 20. 

18.  I  know  that  in  my  flesh  d.  no  good  thing 

8.  11.  shall  quicken,  by  his  Spirit  that  d.  in  you 

1  Cor.  3.  16.  and  that  the  Spirit  of  God  d.  in  you 
Col.  2.  9.  in  him  d.  the  fulness  of  Godhead  bodily 

2  Tim.  1.14.  keep  by  the  Holy  Ghost  which  d.  in  us 
.lam.  4.  5.  the  spirit  that  d.  in  us  lusteth  to  envy 
2  Pet.  3.  13.  a  new  earth  wherein  d.  righteousness 

1  -John  3.  17.  how  d.  the  love  of  God  in  him'! 
24.  that  keepeth  his  commandments,  d.  in  him 

4.  12.  if  we  love  one  another,  God  d.  in  us 
IS.confess  thai  Jesus  is  Son  of  God, God  d.in  him 
16  he  that  d.  in  love,  d.  in  God,  and  God  in  him 

2  John  2.  for  the  truth's  sake  which  d.  in  us 
Rev.  2.  13.  was  slain  among  you,  where  Satan  d. 

DWELLING,  .Substantive. 
Gen.  27.  39.  thy  d.  shall  be  the  fatness  of  the  earth 
2  Kings  17.  25.  at  the  beginning  of  their  d.  there 
2  CAr.  6. 2. 1  have  built  a  place  lor  thy  d.  for  ever 
Ps.49.  14.  shall  consume  in  the  grave  from  their  d 

91.  10.  nor  shall  any  plague  come  nigh  thy  d. 
Prov.  21.  20.  there  is'oil  in  the  d.  of  the  wise 

24. 15.  lay  not  wail  against  the  d.  of  the  righteous 
./er. 49.33. Hazor  shall  be  a  rf.for  dragons  and  desol. 
Dan.  2.  11.  the  gods,  whose  d.  is  not  with  flesh 

4.  2.5.  thy  d.  shall  be  with  the  beasts,  32.  1  5.  21. 
J^ah.  2.  1/    where  is  the  d.  of  the  lions'? 
Mark  5.  3.  who  lad  his  d.  among  the  tombs 

DWELLING. 
Gen.  25.  2T.  Jacob  was  a  plain  man,  d.  in  tents 

30.  t  20.  and  she  called  his  name,  d. 
/,ev.  25.  29.  if  a  man  sell  a  d.  house  in  a  city 
J^um.  24.  21.  and  he  said,  strong  is  thy  d.  place 

1  Kings  8..30.hear  thou  in  heaven  lhyd.place,when 
hearest  forgive,  39,  43,  49. 2  Chr.  6.  21,  30, 3<). 

2  Chr.  30.  27.  their  prayer  came  up  to  his  holy  d. 
36.  15.  the  Lord  had  compassion  on  his  d.  place 

.fob  8.22.the  d.  place  of  the  wicked  cnme  to  nought 
21.  28.  where  are  the  d.  places  of  the  wicked? 

P.ial.  49. 11.  and  their  d.  places  to  all  generations 
.52.  5.  God  shall  pluck  thee  out  of  thy  d. 
74.  7.  Ii\  casting  <lown  the  d.  place  of  thy  name 
76.  2.  in  Salem  his  tabernacle,  his  d.  place  in  Zion 
79.  7.  for  they  have  laid  waste  his  d.  place 
90.  1.  Ijd.  thou  hiisl  been  our  d.  place  in  all  gencr. 

fsa.  4.  5.  the  Lord  will  create  on  every  d.  place 
18.  4.  and  I  will  consider  in  my  d.  place 

.Ter.  6.  j  2.  I  likened  Zion  to  a  woman  d.  at  home 
30.  18.  and  I  will  have  mercy  on  his  d.  places 
46.19.0  thou  daushter  d.  in  Egypt,  furnish  thyself 
51.  30.  have  burnt  her  d.  places,  bars  are  broken 


DWE 

Jer.51.37.Babylon  shall  become  ad.placo  for  drag. 
£26*.  6. 6.  in  all  your  d.  places  the  cities  laid  w  nste 
37.  23.  I  will  save  tiiem  out  of  all  their  d.  places 
38.11.  all  of  them  d.  without  walls,  bars,  nor  gales 
Joel  3. 17.  that  I  am  the  Lord  your  God  d.  in  Zion 
Ball.  1.6.  to  possess  the  d.  places  that  are  not  theirs 
Zrph.  3.  7.  so  their  d.  should  not  be  cut  off 
Acts  2.  5.  there  were  d.  at  Jerus.  Jews,  devout  men 
19. 17.  was  known  to  the  Greeks,  d.  at  Ephcsus 
1  Cor.  4.11.  are  naked,  and  have  no  certain  d.  place 

1  Tim.  6.  16.  d.in  the  light  no  man  can  approach 
Heb.  11.9.  d.  in  tabernacles  with  Isaac  and  Jacob 

2  Pet.  2.  8.  Lot,  that  righteous  man,  d.  among  them 
DWELLINGS. 

Eiod.  10.  23.  all  Ihe  children  of  Isr.  had  light  in  d 

Lev.  3.17.  n  shall  be  a  perpetual  statute  through 

out  all  your  d.  'Si.  14.  JSTum.  35.  29 

7.  26.  ye  shall  eat  no  blood  in  any  of  your  d. 

23.  3.  ye  shall  do  no  work  in  all  your  d.  31. 
Job  18. 19.  shall  not  have  any  remaining  in  his  d. 
21.  surely  such  are  the  d.  of  the  wicked 

39.  6.  1  have  made  the  barren  land  his  d. 
Psal.  5.5.  15.  for  wickedness  is  in  their  d. 

87.2.  gates  of  Zion,  more  than  all  thed.  of  Jacob 
Isa.  32.  18.  my  people  shall  dwell  in  sure  d. 
Jer.  9.  10.  because  our  d.  have  cast  us  out 
Ezek.  25.  4.  men  of  the  east  make  their  d.  in  thee 
Zeph.  2.  6.  the  sea-coast  shall  be  d.  for  shepherds 

DWELT. 
Gen.  11.  2.  and  they  d.  there,  31.  |  26.  17.  2  Kings 
16.  6.  1  Chron.  4.  43.  2  Chron.  28.  It 

23.  10.  Ephron  d.  among  the  children  of  Heth 
Lev.  18.  3.  the  doingsofEgypt  wherein  ye  d.notdo 
JVum.  31.  10.  wherein  they  d.  2  Kings  17.  29. 
1  Kings  13.  11.  d.  an  old  prophet  in  Bcth-el,  25. 
,Tob  29.  25.  and  I  d.  as  a  king  in  the  aimy 
Psal.  74.  2.  this  mount  Zion  wherein  Ihou  hastd 
Isa.  20.  1.  woe  to  Ariel,  the  city  where  David  d. 
Jer.  2.  6.  led  us  through  a  land  where  no  man  d. 

39.  14.  so  Jeremiah  d.  among  the  people 
Ezek.  3.  15.  that  d.  by  the  river  of  Chebar 

31.  6.  under  his  shadow  d.  great  nations,  17. 
37.  25.  the  lands  wherein  your  fathers  have  d. 

Dan.  4.  21.  under  which  the  beasts  of  the  field  d 
Z(7)A.2.15.this  is  the  rejoicing  city  that  d.  carelessly 
Luke  1.  65.  fear  came  on  all  that  d.  round  about 
JoA7il.l4.theWord  was  made  flesh  aiidd. among  us 
39.  they  came  and  saw  where  he  d.  and  abode 
Acts  13.  17.  when  they  d.  as  strangers  in  Egypt 
22.  12.  Ananias  having  good  rp;"?rt  of  all  that  d 
28.  30.  Paul  d.  two  years  in  his  own  hired  house 
Rev.  11.  10.  tormented  them  that  d.  on  the  earth 

DWELT  at. 
Gen.  22.  19.  and  Abraham  d.  at  Beer-sheba 
JVujTi. 21.34. Amor. which  d.  at  Heshbon,  Deut.  3.2. 
.ludg.  9.  41.  and  Abimelech  d.  at  Arumah 
l/w77o'il5.!8.Bcnhadadd.a(Damascus,2C/(r.?6.2 
2AV77^.vl9.3().Sennacherib  d.at  Nineveh, /.<:a.37.37 
1  C777-.2.55.  families  of  the  scribes  which  d.  at  Jahe? 
9.  34.  these  fathers  of  the  Levitcs  d.  at  Jerusalem 
.^cr.<{9.22.Saul  confounded  Jews  thatd.  at  Damas 

32.  Peter  came  to  the  saints  who  d.  at  Lvdda 
DWELT  in. 

.V«m.  20.  15.  and  we  have  d.  171  Egypt  a  long  tim« 
21.  31.  thus  Israel  d.  in  the  land  of  the  Amorites 

X>f(if.  2.12.  d.!»7  their  stead,  21, 22, 23.  1  CAr.5.22. 
.33.  16.  the  good  will  of  him  that  d.  777  the  bush 

Judg.  8. 11.  by  the  way  of  them  that  d.  777  tents 
29.  Jerubbaal  went  and  d.  in  his  own  house  . 

1  Sam.  19.  18.  Davnl  and  Samuel  d.  77?  Naloth 
31.  7.  Philistines  came  and  d.  777  them,  1  C/;r.  10.7 

2  i'a777.7.fi.whereas  I  have  not  d.in  any  house  since 
I  brought  Israel  out  of  Egypt,  1  Chr.  17.  5 

9.12.  all  that  d.in  the  house  of  Ziba  were  servants 
14.28.  Absalom  d.  two  full  years  777  Jerusalem 

1  Kings  2.  38.  Shimei  d.  771  Jerusalem  many  days 
12. 2.  Jerob.  was  fled  from  Solomon,  d.  in  Egvpt 

2  Kings  13.  5.  Israel  d.  in  their  tents  as  aforetime 
15.  5.  Ahaziah  d.  777  a  several  house,  2  Chr.  26.21 
22. 14.  Huldah  the  prophetess,  wife  of  Shallum,d. 
*    777  Jerusalem,  in  the  college,  2  Chran.  34.  22. 

1  Chron.  4.  41.  these  came,  and  d.  771  their  rooms 
5.  10.  the  Ilagarites  tell,  and  they  d.  771  their  tents 
8.  28.  were  chief  men,  these  d.  in  Jcrusalerr; 
11.7.  and  David  d.  in  the  castle,  2  Sam.  5.  9. 
Ezra  2.  70.  the  priests,  the  Levites,  and  the  Nelhi- 
nims,  d.  771  their  cities,  JWA.  3.  26.  |  11.  21. 
JWA.7.73.  Nethinims  and  all  Israel  d.  in  their  cities 
.lob  22.  8.  and  the  honourable  men  d.  in  it 
Psal.  94.  17.  my  soul  had  almost  d.  777  silence 
Isa.  13. 20.  shall  never  be  inhabited,  nor  shall  it  b« 
d.  777  from  generation  to  generation,  .ler.  ,50.39. 
./(T.  35.  10.  but  we  have  d.  777  tents  and  obeyed 
41.  17.  they  d.  777  the  habitation  ofChimham 
F.zrk.  36.  17.  when  Israel  d.  in  their  own  land 
39.26. when  d.safely  771  then-  land  none  made  afraid 
/>an.4.12.  the  fowls  of  the  heaven  d.  in  ihe  boughs 
Mat.  2.  23.  Joseph  d.  in  a  city  called  Nazareth 
4.  13.  Jesus  came  and  d.  777  Capernaum 
Luke  13.  4.  were  sinners  above  all  that  d.  in  Tcf 


EAG 

lets  7.  2.  before  Abraham  d.  in  Cliarran,  4. 

ly.lU.all  tlicy  wlio  d.  in  Asia  beard  word  of  Jesus 
2  Tim.  1.5.  which  d.  first  in  tliv  grandmother  Lois 

DWELT  tkcrcm. 
JWOT.:J2.40.he  gaveGileud  to  Machir, bed. fAcr«n 
Deut.  2JU.  Kmuns  d.th.\\-M.  giaiiLj  d.th.m  old  time 
1  Kings  11. 'i4.  Kezoii  went  tu  Uainascusniiri  d.th. 

Vi.  :25.  Jeroboam  built  Hhccliem,  and  d.  IheTein 
JVeh.  I'J.  IK.  there  d.  men  of  Tyre  also  therein 
fsal.  bt!.  lU.  thy  con<;r('ga(ion  hath  d.  therein. 

DWELT  with. 
i{u«A2.  23.  and  Uutli  d.  with  her  mother-in-law 
1  iu.-n.  22.4. his  father  and  niotlierrf.  w.  k.  of  Moab 
1  CAr.  4. 23.  there  they  d.  with  king  for  his  work 

8.  32.  these  also  d.  with  their  breihren,  9.  38. 
t'sal.  120.  C.  my  soul  baih  long  d.  with  him  that 
./<r.40.tj.  Jeremiah  d.  with  bim  among  Ihepeopl.'; 


E. 


EACH. 
Oen.  15.  10.  Abram  laid  e.  piece  again.»t  another 

34.  25.  Simeon  and  Levi  took  e.  man  bis  sword 
40.5.e.  man  bisdream  {|  45.22.  e.  changes  of  raim. 

Exod.  18.7.  and  they  asked  e.  other  of  their  welfare 
30.  34.  of  e.  shall  there  be  a  like  weight 

Jfam.  1.44.  e.  one  was  for  the  house  of  his  fathers 
7.  3.  and  they  brought  for  e.  one  an  ox 
16.  17.  thou  also  and  Aaron  e.  of  you  his  censer 

J(>iA.22.14.of«.cbiefhouseaprince,e.onewashead 

Jiidg.  8. 18.  cone  resembled  the  children  of  a  king 
21.  22.  because  we  reserved  not  to  e.  man  his  wife 

Ruth  l.O.grant  that  they  may  find  rest  e.  of  you 

1  Kings  4.7.  e.  man  his  month  in  a  year  made  prov. 
22. 10.  and  llio  kings,  e.  sat  on  his  throne 

2  Kings  15.  20.  he  exacted  of  c.  man  fifty  shekels 
Pa.  8.5. 10.  righteousness  and  peace  kissed  e.  other 
/sa.2. 20.  they  made  «.  one  for  himself  to  worship 

6.  2.  stood  the  seraphims,  e.  one  had  six  wings 

35.  7.  where  clay,  shall  be  grass,  reeds  and  rushes 
57.  2.  t.  one  walking  in  his  uprightness 

Kick.  4. 6. 1  have  appointed  thee  e.  day  for  a  year 
/.uAel3.15.dolh  notcon  sabbath  loose  bis  ox  or  ass 
Jleta  2.  3.  cloven  tongues  sat  upon  c  of  them 
PAi/.  2.3.  let  c  esteem  other  better  than  himself 
2  Thcss.  I  3.  charity  toward  e.  other  ahoundelh 
liev.  4.  8.  the  four  beasts  had  e.  of  them  six  wings 

EAfJLE 
Is  a  bird  of  yreyjWhrrc.uf  there  is  frequent  men- 
tion in  scripture.  It  is  declared,  in  Lev.  11. 13. 
to  be  unclean,  as  are  all  other  birds  of  its 
sjtrcies;  as  the  sea-engle,  and  the  eagle  named 
<)ssifrage,A«aMae  itbreaks  the  bone.''  in  order  to 
extract  the  marroa.  TheHawk  andVulturomay 
also  be  reckoned  as  different  sjiccies  o/eagle.s. 
ll  is  said  that  when  an  eagle  sees  its  young  ones 
so  well-grown,  as  to  venture  upon  flying,  it 
hovers  over  their  nest,  flutters  with  its  wings, 
and  excites  them  to  imitate  it,  and  take  their 
flight;  and  when  it  sees  them  weary  or  fearful, 
it  takes  them  upon  its  hack,  and  carries  them 
so,  that  the  fowlers  cannot  hurt  the  young  with- 
out piercing  through  the  body  of  the  old  one 
In  allusion  to  this,  it  is  said,  Exod.  19.  4 
'/'hat  God  delivered  his  people  out  of  Egypt, 
and  bore  them  upon  eagles'  wings  ;  and  in  Dout. 
32.  11.  That  the  Lord  took  upon  himself  the 
care  of  his  people  ;  that  he  led  them  out  of 
Egypt,  and  set  them  at  liberty  ;  as  an  eagji 
takes  its  young  out  of  the  nest,  to  teach  than 
how  to  fly,  by  gently  fluttering  about  them. 
It  is  of  ^reat  courane,  so  as  to  set  on  harts  and 
great  beasts.  Jind  has  no  less  snhlilty  in  taking 
litem;  forhavingfilled  its  wings  with  sand  and 
dust,  it  sitteth  on  their  horns,  and  bij  its  wings 
thakcth  it  in  their  eyes,  whereby  they  become 
an  easy  prey.  It  flietk  very  Ai>A,«l'rov.  30.  19. 
yet,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  seizelh  on  its 
prey,  whether  on  the  earth,  or  in  the  sea.  It 
buildrlh  its  nest  very  high  in  the  tops  of  rocks. 
Job  30.  27.  It  gnrth  forth  to  prey  about  noon, 
when  mm  ore  gone  ko'ae  out  of  the  fields. 
n  hath  a  little  eye,  but  a  very  quick  sight,  and 
di.icerns  its  prey  afar  off,  and  beholds  the  sun 
Kith  open  eye.!.  Sjieh  of  her  young  us  through 
leeaknrss  of  sight  cannot  behold  the  s>in,it  re- 
jects (IJ  unnatural.  It  liveth  long,  nor  dieth  of 
age  or  sickness,  say  some,  but  of  hunger  ;  for 
by  age,  its  bill  grows  so  hnokrif,  that  it  cannot 
feed.  It  prrys  not  on  small  birds,  but  on  geese, 
hares,  harts,  serpents,  ami  dead  carcases.  It 
IS  eaiel,  that  it  preserves  its  nest  from  poison, 
hy  having  therein  a  precious  stime,7iamed  ,Aoli- 
tfyi,(  without  whichil  is  thought  the  t:az\<-  cannot 
lay  her  eggs,  and  which  some  use  to  prrrrni 
abortion,  and  h'lps  delivmj  in  women,  by  tying 
It  above  or  below  the  navel)  and  keepelh  it  clean 
by  the  frequent  use  of  the  herb  mnidiiii-liair. 
Unlets  it  be  very  h'lnirrii,  it  devoureth  not  the 
152' 


EAR 

whole  prey^  but  leaveth  part  of  it  for  other 
birds,  which  follow.  Its  feathers  or  guills  art 
said  to  consume  other  quills  that  lie  near  them. 
Between  the  eagle  and  dragon  tliere  is  constant 
enmity,  the  eagle  seeking  to  kill  it,  and  the 
dragon  breaks  all  the  eagle's  eggs  it  can  find; 
and  hearing  the  noise  of  the  eagie  in  the  air, 
speedclh  to  its  den,  and  there  hides  himself. 
To  pro  coke  its  young  ones  to  fly,  it  flutters 
over  them  and  takes  them  on  Us  wings,  Deut. 
32.  11.  Isa-  40.  31.  and  if  they  attcnqit  not  to 
fly.  It  beats  them  with  its  bill,  and  gives  them 
no  food.  Being  exceedingly  hot  and  dry,  it 
soon  waxeth  angry,  nur  kerpcth,  but  shuns  so- 
ciety with  others.  Some  vaglus prey  in  the  air, 
some  in  the  sea,  wherein  they  can  from  on  high 
perceive  the  smallest  fish,  and  some  on  the  land. 
The  eagle  vioulters  and  loses  its  feathers 
yearly,  at  which  seasons  it  is  very  feeble.  It 
is  said,  Psal.  103.  5,  'I'hy  youth  is  renewed  like 
the  eagle's ;  that  is,  thy  bodily  health  and 
strength  continue  vigorous  and  lively,  as  the 
eagle's  doth,  even  till  old  age. 

In  Micah  1.  Iti.  it  is  said.  Enlarge  thy  baldness 
as  the  eagle  :  This  signifies,  that  they  tu  whom 
the  prophet  addresses  himself,  should  cut  off 
their  hair  in  time  of  mourning,  should  be 
naked  and  stripped  like  an  eagle  when  it 
moults  its  feathers.  It  is  said,  that  the  eagle 
at  that  season  casts  almost  all  his  feathers, 
and  falls  into  a  languishing  condition,  so  as 
neither  to  be  able  to  hunt  after  prey  as  usual, 
nor  create  terror  in  other  birds. 

Our  Saviour,  in  Mat.  2-1.  28.  says,  Wlieresoevcr 
the  carcase  is,  there  will  the  eagles  be  gathered 
together.  Job  says  of  the  eagle,  chap.  39.  ;J0, 
Where  the  slam  are,  there  is  she.  J\^aturali6ts 
observe,  that  the  common  sort  u/ eagles  eat  no 
carrion,  but  that  there  is  a  particular  specie, 
which  does :  that  there  is  nut  one  of  any  kind 
but  what  cats  rawflesh,though  not  indifferently 
of  all  sorts,  nor  that  of  any  creature  which  die 
of  itself,  but  such  only  as  is  fresh  and  lately 
killed.  If  hat  Job  says  concerning  the  eagi 
is  to  be  understood  in  a  literal  si  nse:  but  our 
Saviourmakes  an  allegory  of  it,  and  suy.-',thut 
wherever  there  are  Jews,  who  deal  unfaithfully 
with  (lod,  there  will  be  also  Uomans,  who  bore 
the  eaglv-  in  their  standards,  to  execute  Ciod 
vengeance  upon  them. 

J3s  the  caglcgene.rally  flies  innstswiftly,espcciaUy 
when  hunger  and  the  sight  of  prey  quicken  it. 
motion  :  in  this  sense  the  days  of  men  are  com- 
pared to  it.  Job  9.  2t),  My  days  are  passed 
away  as  the  eagle,  that  basteth  to  the  prey. 
.So  are  richer  ;  Prov.  23.  5,  Kiches  certainly 
make  themselves  wings,  they  fly  away  as  an 
eagle  toward  heaven.  ^1s  also  the  persecutor, 
of  the  church ;  Lam.  4.  19,  Our  persecutors 
are  swifter  than  the  eagles  of  the  heaven.  The 
kings  of  Babylon  and  Egypt  are  also  com- 
pared to  an  eagle,  F.zek.  17.  3,  7. 

/-<•!). 11. 13.  the  c  have  in  abomination, 7)fj'«.14. 12 

Deut.  28.  49.  a  nation  as  swift  as  the  c  flieth 
32.  11.  as  an  cstirrolb  up  her  nest,  flutterelh  over 

.lob  9.  2!>.  as  the  e.  thnt  basteth  to  the  prey 
39.  27.  doth  the  e.  mount  up  at  thy  command? 

Prov.  23. 5.  riches  fly  aw  ay  as  an  e.  toward  heaven 
30.  19.  the  way  of  an  e.  in  the  air  is  wonderful 

.ler.  48.  40.  behold,  he  shall  fly  as  an  c  over  Moab 
49.10.  tho'  thou  shouldest  make  thy  nest  high  ns  e. 

fJzf/i. l.lO.ibey  four  also  had  the  face  of  an  cl0.14. 
17.  3.  a  ;rreat  e.  with  great  wings  came, 7. 

Dan.  4.  33.  his  hairs  were  grown  like  e.  feathers 
7. 4. the  first  beast  was  like  a  lion,  and  bad  c  wings 

Hos.  H.  1.  as  nn  e.  against  the  house  of  the  Lord 

f)bad.4.lh(i'  thou  exalt  Ihywif  as  e.  bring  thee  down 

jVic.  1.  It),  enlarge  thy  baldness  as  the  r. 

Ifah.  1.  8.  the  Chalrleans  shall  Hy  as  the  e. 

Iter.  4.  7.  the  fourth  beast  was  like  «  flying  e. 
12.14.  to  the  woman  were:;iven  wings  of «  great  f. 
EAULE.S. 

F.xod.K.i.  ye  have  seen  how  I  bare  yon  on  e.  wings 

2  .S'(jm.l.2l.  were  swifter  than  r.  stronger  lb. in  bwiis 

I'sal.  103.  5.  thy  youth  is  renewed  likf  the  c. 

Prov.  3t).  )7.  and  the  young  e.  shall  eat  it 

Isa.  40.  31.  thev  shall  mount  up  with  wings  ns  c 

.Irr-  4.  13.  his  horios  are  swilter  than  e. 

I. am.  4.  19.  oiir  persccnlurs  are  swifter  than  the  r. 

Mat.  24.  2fi.  there  will  e.  be  gathered,  J.uke  17.  37. 
R.AR. 

7'Ae  ear  is  the  instrument  or  organ  of  hearing, 
Ecel.  1.  H.  The  Lord  says  to  Isaiah,  Make  the 
lionrts  of  this  people  fnt,  and  make  their  ears 
heavy,  Isa.  0.  10.;  that  is,  tell  them  that  I  will 
.tuffer  them  to  harden  thr.r  hearts,  and  flop 
their  ears  against  my  word.  The  scripture 
sometimes  says  that  the  proph'ts  do  what  thrii 
foretell  only.  The  same  prophet,  speaking  of 
himself.  5ajrj(,'I'lic  Lord  hath  opened  mine  eat, 


EAR 

and  I  was  not  rebellious,  Isa.  50.  5.  He  \ai 
given  me  his  orders,  and  I  obey  without  cojir 
traaiction.  Jind  speaking  to  the  .lews,  Thou 
heardest  not,  yea,  ibou  knuwcst  not,  yea,  from 
tliat  time  that  thine  ear  was  not  opened,  Isa. 
4H.  8.  Thou  hast  jiever  heard  any  iticntion 
made  of  what  I  am  going  to  tell  thee.  Uucir- 
cumcised  ears,  Jer.  0.  10.  are  ears  deaf  to  tht 
word  of  God:  Their  ear  is  uncircuincised; 
overgrown,  as  it  were,  with  a  thick  skin;  their 
hearts  are  filled  with  ob:!tinacy  and  inipenr 
lency,  which  make  them  incapable  of  ejiter- 
taiuing  any  good  counsel.  What  ye  bear  ia 
tho  ear,  thai  preach  ye  upon  the  house-tops, 
Mat.  10.  27.  iJeclarc  that  every  where,  and 
publicly,  which  I  have  revealed  to  you  in  pit- 
vate.  lie  that  hath  ears  lo  hear,  let  him  bear, 
.Mat.  II.  15.  He  that  hath  his  ears  opened, 
that  hath  a  mind  enabled  by  Cod  to  belitvt 
what  I  say,  lit  him  make  use  of  these  abililica 
to  understand  and  consider  it.  Ear  is  figura- 
tively, and  after  the  manner  of  men,  applied 
to  God,  denoting  his  readiness  to  hear  and 
answer  the  prayers  of  his  people,  Psal.  34.  15. 
I  110.  2.  His  eaiB  are  open  unio  their  cry.  Bo- 
cause  he  halh  inclined  his  ear  unto  me,  there- 
fore will  1  call  upon  bim  as  Icng  as  I  live. 
To  uncover  the  ear  is  a  Hebraism,  whereby  is 
vieant,to  show,  or  reveal  something  to  a  person. 
1  Sain.  2(1.  t  2,  My  father  will  do  nothing  either 
gieat  or  small,  but  that  he  will  uncover  mine 
car  ;  that  is,  he  will  shew  it  me.  The  servant 
who  renounced  the  privihgc  of  being  freed 
from  strvitiule  in  the  sa:batical  year,  had  his 
OM  pierced  with  an  awl :  this  was  performed 
in  the  presence  of  the  judges, ih  A  it  might  ap' 
pear  that  this  was  his  own  free  choice,  and  that 
he  was  nut  overawed,  or  compelled  thereto  by 
his  master;  and  likewise  that  the  agreement 
being  so  publicly  and  solemnly  confirmed, 
might  be  irrevocable  :  IJis  ear  was  bored  tt 
his  master^s  door;  which  was  a  mark  of  ser- 
vitude and  bondage,  and  did  represent  his  set- 
tled and  perpetual  obligation  to  abide  in  that 
house,  and  there  to  hear  and  obey  his  master's 
commands,  Exod.  21.  6.     Deul.  15.  lb,  17. 

7'Ae  Psalmist  speaking  in  the  person  of  the  Mes- 
siah, says  to  God,  Sacrifice  and  oHering  Ihou 
didst  not  desire,  mine  ears  hast  thou  opened. 
7'Ac  Hebrew  rtai/s,  Mine  eats  hast  thou  digged; 
thou  hast  opened  them  and  made  them  atten- 
tive ;  thou  hast  given  me  cars  to  hear,  and 
obey  thy  precepts  :  Or,  otherwise,  thou  hast 
pierced  them,  as  those  servants  were  used,icho 
chose  to  remain  with  their  masters  after  Vie 
sabbatical  year;  thou  hast  fitted,  inclined, 
and  obliged  me  to  thy  sercice.  The  Srptua- 
gint,  which  the  Jlpostle  follows,  Heb.  10.  5. 
readsthis  passage,  A  body  hast  tliou  prepared 
ine:  Ji'hrrein,  though  the  words  differ,  the 
senss  is  the  same.  I'hat  Christ  might  become 
God's  servant  for  erer,  which  was  signified 
by  boring  of  the  ear,  God  the  Father  by  his 
Spirit  did  furnish  him  with  a  human  nature, 
that  so  he  might  perform  that  piece  of  service 
which  God  required,  namely,  the  offering  up 
himself  a  bloody  sacrifice  for  sin,  to  which  ha 
was  obedient.  Phil.  2.  8,  Being  found  in  fashion 
as  a  man,  he  became  obedient  unto  death,  even 
the  death  of  the  cross.  Thus  were  his  ears 
bored,  which  could  not  be,  if  he  had  not  been 
clothed  with  a  body. 

Kjorf.2].6.his  ma.«ter  shall  bore  his  c  Deut.  15. 17. 

1  Sam.  0.  1.5.  the  Lord  had  told  Snmnel  in  hii  e. 
20.  t  2.  but  that  he  will  uncover  mine  e. 

t  12.  if  I  send  not  to  thee  and  uncover  thine  «. 
?J.  t  8.  there  is  none  that  uncoverelh  minfi  «. 

2  Sam.  7.  t  27.  thou,  O  Lord,  hast  opened  the  e. 
gKiiigs  19.  Hi.  bowdownlbinec  />.?.:«.  2.  186.1. 
llChr.  17.  )  25.  hast  revealed  the  c.  of  thy  si!rvfint 
jVcA.l.H.  let  ihinor.  beotientrTe,  and  eyes  open,  H. 
.lid)  4.  12.  nnil  uLitic  c  received  a  little  ihsreof 

12.  II.  dotli  not  the  e.  try  words?  34.  3. 
1.1.  1.  mine  e.  hath  heard  ami  understood  it 
29.  11.  when  the  c  heard  me,  then  it  blessed  me 
21.  to  me  men  gave  r.  wailed,  and  kept  silence 
32.  IJ.  behold,  I  gave  e.  lo  your  reiisnns 
3().  10.  he  openelh  also  their  r.  to  difciplino 
42.  5.  I  hiivi-  hcnrdof  ihec  by  the  hciring  of  the  8. 

Psal.  10,  17.  Iliou  will  cause  tbini-  r.  to  hear 
18.  t  44.  Ill  the  hi'iiring  of  the  e.  they  shall  oboT 
31.2.  biiwiliiwn  thine  cto  me,  deliver  tnespeediJj 
."■'H.  4.  like  tho  deaf  adder,  that  stnpprth  her  e. 
77.  1.  I  cried  unto  God,  and  he  gave  e.  uniome 
94.  9.  he  that  planted  the  r.  shall  ho  not  heart 
llfi.  2.  hecttiui!  he  bath  inclined  h  s  c.  imto  me 

Prov.  5.  I.  and  bow  thine  <•.  lo  my  imdrrslandinf 
13.  nor  inclined  my  «•.  to  them  that  instructed  ms 
15.  31.  the  e.  that  henrnlh  the  reproof  of  life 
17.  4.  and  o  liar  givetk  r.  tu  a  nuu);hty  tongue 


EAR 

rroc.  18. 15.  the  e.  of  llie  wiseacckcthknowicvlge 
iW.liJ.tlie  hearing  c  tlie  seeing  eye,  Ld.  made  hotli 
ii-2. 17.  bow  thine  e.  hear  the  words  of  tlio  wise 
ii.5.  Vi.  so  is  a  wise  reprover  on  an  obedient  e. 
its.  9.  lie  lliat  tuinelh  away  his  e.  from  liearing 
Eccl.  1.  8.  niir  is  the  e.  filled  witli  hearing 
/sa.  48.  8.  from  that  time  thine  c.  was  not  opened 
SO.  4.  he  wakenelh  my  e.  to  hear  as  the  learned 
5.  Lord  liath  opened  mine  e.  and  I  wa.s  not  re- 
bellious 
59.  T.  nor  is  his  c.  heavy  that  it  cannot  hear 
64. 4.  men  have  not  heard,  nor  perceived  by  tlie  e. 
Jcr.  6.  10.  behold,  tlieir  c.ia  uncircumcised 
7  24.  they  hearkened  not,  nor  inclined  their  e.  20. 
I  a.  8. 1  17.  23. 1  25.  4.  [  34.  14.  |  44.  5. 
9.  20.  let  your  e.  receive  tlic  word  of  the  Lord 
35.  15.  but  ye  have  not  inclined  your  c. 
Lam.  3.  5(5.  hide  not  thine  c.  at  my  breathing 
Jlmos  3.  12.  taketh  from  the  lion  a  piece  of  an  e. 
Mat.  10.  27.  what  ye  hear  in  the  c.  that  preach 
26.  51.  and  smote  olf  his  c.  Mark  14.  47. 
J^uke  12.  3.  that  which  ye  have  spoken  in  the  c. 
22.  51.  and  he  touched  his  e.  and  healed  him 
John  18.  26.  the  servant,  whose  e.  Peter  cut  off 
1  C[7r.2.9.i3  written,  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  e.  heard 
12. 16.  if  thee,  shall  say,  because  I  am  not  the  eye 
licv.  'i.l.  he  that  hath  an  c.  let  him  hear  what  Spirit 
saith  to  churches,  11, 17,  23.  |  3.6,  13, 22.  \  13.9. 
Incline  EAR. 
Ps.VI.fS.  O  God,  !«fi(«e  thine  e.tomc,  and  hear  my 
speech,  71.  2.  |  68.  2.  Isa.  37. 17.  Dan.  9. 18. 
45.  10.  O  daughter,  consider,  and  incline  thine  c. 
49.  4.  I  will  incline  mine  c.  to  a  parable 
Prov.  2.  2.  so  that  thou  incline  thine  c.  to  wisdom 
4.  20.  my  son,  incline  thine  c.  to  my  sayings 
Isa.  55.  3.  incline  your  c.  and  come  unto  me 

Giuc  EAR. 
Eiod.  15.26.  if  wilt  g-inc  e.  to  his  commandments 
Deut.  1.  45.  but  the  Lord  would  not  hearken  nor 
g'iDe  e.  to  your  voice,  2  C/ir. 24. 19.  JW,'A.9.30. 
32.  1.  give  e.  O  heavens,  and  I  will  speak 
Judir.  5.  3.  hear,  O  ye  kings,  give  c.  O  ye  princes 
Job  34.  2.  give  e.  to  me,  ye  that  have  knowledge 
Vsal.  5.  1.  give  c.  to  ray  words,  O  Lord,  54.  2. 
17.  1.  give  e.  unto  my  prayer,  55.  1.  |  86.  0. 
31).  12.  hear  my  prayer,  give  e.  to  my  cry,  14 1.  I. 
49.  1.  give  c.  all  ye  inhabitants  of  the  world 
78.  \.  give  c.  O  my  jieople  ||  80.  \.  givec.  shephesd 
84.  8.  hear  m^jirayer,  give  e.  O  God  of  Jacob 
143.  1.  O  Lord,  iTujc  c.  to  ray  supplications 
Isa.  1.  2.  give  e.  O  earth,  for  the  Lord  hath  spoken 

10.  give  e.  to  the  law  of  our  God,  ye  people 
8.9.  givce.  all  ye  of  far  countries,  gird  yourselves 
28.  23.  give  ye  e.  and  hear  my  voice,  hearken 
32.  9.  ye  careless  daughters,  give  e.  to  my  speech 
42.  23.  who  among  you  will  give e.  to  this? 
51.  4.  hearken  and  give  e.  to  me,  O  my  nation 
Jer.Vi.\o.give  c.  be  not  proud,  the  L.  hath  spoken 
Hos.  5.  1.  and  give  e.  O  house  of  the  king 
Joel  1.  2.  give  e.  all  ye  inhabitanta  of  the  land 

Higkt  EAR. 
Ezod.  29.  20.  upon  the  tip  of  the  right  e.  of  hie 
Eons,  Lev.  8.  2;i,  24.  |  14.  14,  17,  25,  28. 
Luke  22.  50.  one  cut  offhis  right  e.  John  18.  10. 

EAR. 
Erorf.9.31.  for  barley  was  in  the  e.  and  fla.x  boiled 
Mark  4.  28.  then  the  c.  the  full  corn  in  the  e. 
EAR. 

1  Sam.  8. 12.  the  king  will  set  them  to  c.  the  ground 
/^a.  30. 24.  the  oxen  that  e.  the  ground  shall  eat 

EARED. 
Dcut.  21. 4.  to  a  rough  vallev  neither  e.  nor  sown 

EARING. 
Cien.  45. 6.  in  wliich  shall  be  neither  e.  nor  harvest 
Exod.  34.  21.  in  e.  time  and  harvest  thou  shalt  rest 

EARLY. 
G(n.  19.  2.  ye  shall  rise  e.  and  go  on  your  way 
Judg.  7.  3.  whoso  is  fearful,  let  him  depart  e. 
19.  9.  and  to-morrow  get  you  e.  on  your  way 

2  KingsG.  15.  servant  of  the  man  of  G.  was  risen  c. 
Psal.  46.  5.  God  shall  hel|i  her,  and  that  right  c. 

57.8.  awake  u)),  I  myself  will  awake  c.  108.  2. 
63.  1.  thou  art  my  God,  c.  will  I  seek  thee 
78.  34.  they  returned  and  enquired  e.  after  God 
90.  14.  O  satisfy  us  f.  with  I hy  mercy  that  we  may 
101.8.  I  will  c' destroy  all  the  wicked  of  the  land 
Prov.  1.  28.  they  shall  seek  me  e.  but  not  find  me 
8.  17.  those  that  seek  me  e.  shall  find  me 
Can'..  7.  12.  let  us  get  up  e.  to  the  vineyards 
Isa.  26.  9.  with  my  spirit  will  I  seek  thee  e. 
Hos.  5.  15.  in  their  affliction  they  will  seek  me  e. 
6.  4.  and  as  the  e.  dew  it  goeth  away,  13.  3. 
lMke'2^.  22.  women  who  were  c.  at  the  sepulchre 
John  18. 23.  they  led  Jesus  to  the  hall,  and  it  was  e. 
20. 1.  the  first  day  cometh  Mary  Magdalene  e. 
Jam.  .5.  7.  till  he  receive  the  e.  .ind  latter  rain 
See  Arose,  Risk,  Risen,  Rising,  Rose,  Morn- 
ing. 

EAR-RING. 
Qen.  24.  22.  that  the  man  look  a  golden  e. 
153 


EAR 

Gen.  24.  30.  when  Laban  saw  c.  and  bracelets  on 

his  sister's  hands 

47.  I  put  the  e.  upon  her  face,  and  the  bracelets 

Jvb.  42.  11.  every  one  gave  Job  an  c.  of  gold 

Prov.  25. 12.  as  an  e.  of  gold,  so  is  a  wise  reprover 

EAR-RLNGS. 
Gen.  35.  4.  they  gave  to  Jacob  all  their  e. 
Ezod.  32. 2.  break  off  the  golden  c.  and  bring  to  me 

35.  22.  they  brought  c.  for  their  otierings 
JV*um.31.50.we  have  brought  e.to  make  atonement 
Judg.  8.  24.  give  every  man  the  c.  of  his  prey 
Isa.  3.  20.  the  Lord  will  take  away  the  e. 
Eick.  16.  12.  and  I  put  e.  in  thine  eare 
Hos.  2.  13.  and  she  decked  herself  with  her  e. 

EARS. 
Gen.  23.110.  Ephron  answered  in  the  c.  of  children 

44.  18.  let  me  speak  a  word  in  my  lord's  e. 

50.  4.  speak,  I  pray  you  in  the  e.  of  Pharaoh 
Exod.  10. 2.  thoumayest  tell  it  in  the  e.  of  thy  son 

17.  14.  and  rehearse  it  in  the  e.  of  Joshua 
JVam.  11.  t  1.  it  was  evil  in  the  c.  of  the  Lord 
18.  for  you  have  wept  in  the  e.  of  the  Lord 
Deut.  31.  30.  Moses  spake  in  thee,  of  congregation 
Josh.  20.  4.  declare  his  cause  in  the  c.  of  the  elders 
.Judg.  9.  2.  in  the  e.  of  the  men  of  Shechem,  3. 

1  Sam.  3.  11.  at  which  both  the  e.  of  every  one  that 
hcareth  it  shall  tingle,  2  Kings  21.  12   Jer.  19.3. 

8.  21.  he  rehearsed  them  in  the  e  of  the  Lord 

25.  t24.  let  thine  handmaid  speak  in  thine  e. 

2  Sam.  7.  22.  nor  any  gud  beside  th?e  according  to 
all  that  wc  have  heard  with  our  e  lC/tr.17.20. 

22.  7.  and  my  cry  did  enter  into  his  e. 
Job  15.21.  a  dreadful  sound  is  in  his  e.  in  prosperity 

28.  22.  we  have  heard  the  fam3  thereof  with  our  ( . 
33. 16.  then  he  opcncth  the  e.  of  men,  and  sealeth 

Psal.  16.  6.  and  my  cry  came  even  into  his  e. 
34.  15.  and  his  c.  are  opened  to  their  cry 
44.  1.  we  have  heard  with  our  e.  O  God 
115.  6.  they  have  c.  but  hear  not,  135.  17. 

Prot).21. 13. whoso  stoppeth  his  e.  at  cry  of  the  poor 

23.  9.  speak  not  in  thee,  of  a  fool,  he  will  despise 

26.  17.  like  one  that  taketh  a  dog  by  the  e. 
Isa.  11.  3.  nor  reprove  after  the  hearing  of  his  e. 

32.3.  the  e.  of  them  that  hear  shall  hearken 
33. 15.  that  stoppeth  his  c.  from  hearing  of  blood 
3.).  5.  and  the  e.  of  the  deaf  shall  be  unstopjied 

42.  20.  opening  the  e.  but  he  heareth  not 

43.  8.  bring  forth  the  blind  and  deaf  that  have  e. 
Jer.  2.  2.  go,  and  cry  in  the  c.  of  Jerusalem 

5.21.  O  people,  which  have  e.  and  hear  not 

29.  29.  Zephaniah  read  in  the  e.  of  Jeremiah 

36.  15.  sit  down  now  and  read  it  in  our  e. 
21.  Jidiudi  read  it  in  the  e.  ofthe  king  and  princes 

Mat.  28.  14.  if  this  come  to  the  governor's  e. 
Mark  7.  33.  he  put  his  fingers  into  his  e.  and  spit 
35.  and  straightway  his  e.  were  opened 
8. 18.  having  e.  hear  ye  not  ?  do  ye  not  remember  ? 
Jlclsl.  51.  ye  uncircumcised  in  heart  and  e.  resist 
11.22.  tidings  came  to  the  c.  ofthe  church 
17.  20.  thou  bringest  strange  things  to  our  e. 
Rom.W.  8.  hath  given  c.  that  they  should  not  hear 
2  Tim.  4. 3.  they  heap  teachers,  having  itching  c. 
./am.  5. 4.  are  entered  into  c.  ofthe  Lord  ofsabaoth 
1  Pet.  3.  12.  and  his  c.  are  open  to  their  jiraycrs 

EARS  to  hear. 
Deut.  20.  4.  the  Lord  hath  not  given  you  c.  to  hfar 
Ezck.  12.  2.  they  have  c.  to  hear,  and  hear  not 
Mat.  11.  15.  he  that  hath  c.  to  hear,  let  him  liear 
13.  9,  43.  Mark  4.  9,  23.  I  7.  16.  Luke  8 
8.  I  14.  35. 

Mine  EARS. 
JVum.  14.28.  as  ye  have  spoken  in  mined  will  do 
Judg.  17.  2.  the  silver  thou  speakest  of  in  mine  e. 

1  .Sam.  15.  14.  this  bleating  of  sheep  in  mince.? 
~Kings  19.28.  tumult  come  into  mine  c.  /sa. 37. 29. 

2  Chron.  7.  15.  and  mine  e.  attent  to  the  prayer 
./oh  33.  t  8.  surely  thou  hast  spoken  in  mine  c. 
Ps.  40.  6.  mine  e.  hast  thou  opened,  burnt-otfering 

92. 11.  mine  e.  shall  hear  my  desire  of  the  wicked 
Isa.  5.  9.  in  7nine  c.  said  the  Lord  of  hosts 

22.  14.  it  was  revealed  in  mine  e.  by  the  Lord 
Ezck.  8.18.  tho'  they  cry  in  mine  e.  with  loud  voice 

9. 1.  he  cried  also  in  mine  e.  with  a  loud  voice 
Luke  L  44.  thy  salutation  sounded  in  inine  c. 

EARS  of  the  people. 
Exod.  11.  2.  speak  now  in  the  c.  of  the  people 
J9eul.32. 44.  Moses  spake  in  the  c.  of  the  people 
Judg.  7.  3.  go  to,  proclaim  in  the  e.nf  thepenple 
1  Sam.  11.  4.  told  the  tidings  in  the  e.  oftheprnplc 
2A'n(£r.<l8.20.  talk  no' in  the  e.  o/peop/e,  /a-a.36.11. 
J^eh.  8.  3.  e.  of  people  were  attentive  to  the  law 

13.  t  L  on   that  day  they  read   in  the  e.  of  the 
people,  .Jer.  28.  7.  |  36.  6,  10,  13, 14. 
TAeiVEARS. 
Gen.  20.  8.  Ahimelech  told  these  things  in  their  c. 

35.  4.  pave  Jacob  ear-rings  which  were  in  their  e. 
/;iod.32.3  people  brake  otfthe  ear-rings  in  their  e. 
Deut.  31.  28.  I  may  speak  these  wortls  \n  their  e. 
2A7n«-s23.2.reiidin  «AaVe.  2  C?jr.34.30.  .^t.36.J5. 
Job  36.  15.  be  openeth  their  e.  in  oppression 


EAR 

Isa.  6. 10.  make  heart  fat,  their  c.  heavy,  lest  they 
hear  with  their  e.  Mat.  13.  15.  Jicts  28.  27. 
Mic.7.Hi.ti\e  nations  shall  sue,  their  e.sha\l  bo  deaf 
Zech.  7.  11.  but  they  stopped  their  e.  Jlcts  7.  57 
2  Tim.  4.  4.  they  shall  turn  away  their  c.  from  truth 

Thine  EARS. 
lSaHi.25.  t  24.  let  thine  handmaid  speak  in  t/iine  e. 
2  Chr.  6.  40.  let  thine  e.  be  attent  to  the  prayer 
Psal.  10.  17.  thou  wilt  cause  thine  c.  t'«  lea'r 

130.  2.  let  thine  e.  be  attentive  to  the  voice 
Proi). 23.12.  apply  thine  e.  to  words  of  knowledge 
Isa.  30.  21.  thine  e.  shall  hi'nr  a  word  behind  thee 

49.  20.  the  children  shall  say  again  in  thine c. 
Jer.  23.  7.  hear  this  word  that  1  sjieak  in  thine  e. 
Ezek.  3.  10.  and  hear  with  thine  c.  40.  4.  |  44.  5. 

IG.  12.  I  put  ear-rings  in  thine  e.  and  a  crown 

23.  25.  they  shall  take  away  tliy  nose  and  thine  e. 

24.  26.  to  cause  thee  to  hear  with  thine  c. 
Your  EARS. 

Dcu<..5.1.hear  the  statutes  which!  speak  myour  e. 
Job  13.  17.  hear  my  declaration  with  your  e. 
Ps.lS.  1.  incline  j/oKrc.  to  the  words  of  my  mouth 
.Jer.  26.  11.  as  ye  have  heard  with  your  c. 

15.  Lord  sent  me  to  speak  these  words  in  your  e. 
Mat.  13.  16.  but  blessed  are  your  e.  for  they  hear 
Luke  4.  21.  this  scripture  is  fulfilled  in  your  e. 
9.  44.  let  these  sayings  sink  down  in  your  e. 

EARa 
Gen.  41.  5.  behold,  seven  e.  of  corn  came  up,  22. 
/>pi!.  2.  14.  shalt  olfer  for  a  meat-offering  green  e. 
2;).  14.  not  eat  green  e.  till  ye  bring  an  otiering 
Deut.  23.  25.  mayest  pluck  the  e.  with  thine  hand 
Ruth2.2.  let  me  go  and  glean  e.  of  corn  after  him 
2  Kings  4.42.  brought  the  man  of  G.  full  e.  of  corn 
Job  24.24.  the  wicked  cut  oft  as  tops  of  e.  of  corn 
/.'!a.l7.5.the  glory  of  Jacob,  as  when  one  reapeth  e. 
Mat.  12.1.  his  disciples  were  a  hungered,  and  began 
tojiluck  the  e.  of  corn,  JV/arA 2. 23.  Luke's.  1. 
See  Seven. 
EARNEST. 
The  apostle  Paul  speaks  of  the  earnest  of  the 
Spirit,  2  Cftr.  1.  22.  tho  first-fruils  ofthe  S|iirit, 
Rom.  8.  23.  and  o/ being  sealed  by  the  Spirit, 
Eph.  1.  13.    These  phrases  signify  the  assur- 
ance which  the  Spirit  of  adoption  does  give 
believers  of  their  inheritance  in  heaven,     for  / 
as  the  first  fruits  urere  pledges  to  the  Jews  of 
the  ensuing  crop  ;  and  as  he  that  receives  the 
earnest,  is  sure  to  have  the  full  sum  paid  him, 
or  the  full  bargain  made  good,  ichcn  the  per- 
son that  gives  it  is  honest  and  faithful :  So 
the  graces  icrought  in  the  soul  by  the  -Spirit  of 
God,  such  as  love,  joy,  peace,  &c.  arc  pledges 
of  that  abundance  and  fulness  of  joy  and  fe- 
licity, which  believers  partake  of  in  heaven. 
Yet  these  graces  and  comforts  which  the  god- 
ly enjoy  hire,  are  but  first-fruils  in  regard  of 
their  order ;  thnj  precede  the  full  harvest :  And 
in  regard  of  their    quantity,  they  are  but  a 
handful  in  comparison  of  the  whole  seal  and 
earnest:  though  they  both  imply  assurance,  yet 
they  differ  thus  ;  sealing  especially  refers  to 
the  understanding ;  earnest  to  the  affections. 
Though  the  sea!  assures  7ts,  yet  it  is  not  part 
of  the  inheritance  ;  but  the  e:iT>\ps\  so  assures 
us,  that  it  gives  a  part  of  the  inheritance  ; 
It  works  that  joy  in  the  heart,  which  is  a  fore- 
taste of  heaven,  and  which  the  saints  are  filled 
with  thfre. 
2  Cor.  1.22.  hath  given  the  c.  ofthe  Spirit,  5.  5. 
F^yh.  1. 14.  which  is  the  e.  of  our  inheritance 

EARNEST. 
Vrov.  27.  t  6.  but  the  kisses  of  an  enemy  are  e. 
.lets  12. 1 5.  e.  prayer  was  made  to  God  for  him 
/i!()m.8.19.thee. expectation  ofthe  creature  waitetfi 
2  Cor.  7.  7.  when  he  told  us  your  c.  desire 
8.  10.  which  put  tho  same  e.  care  into  Titus 
rA;7.1.20.accordingtomy  e.  expeclalion  and  hope 
//f6.2.1.wc  oughttogive  the  moree.  heed  to  tilings 

EARNESTLY. 
JVMm.  22. 37.  did  1  not  e.  send  to  thee  to  call  tlieol 
1  f^am.  20.  6.  David  e.  asked  leave  of  me,  28. 
A'cA.  3.  20.  Baruch  e.  repaired  the  other  piece 
13.  t  6.  and  after  certain  days  I  e.  requealed 
htb  7.  2.  as  a  S'>rvant  e.  desirelh  the  sharlow 
Jer.  11.  7.  for  I  r.  protested  to  your  fa^here 

31.  20.  1  do  e.  remember  him  still 

Mk.  7.  3.  they  may  do  evil  with  both  hniids  e, 

/.uAf  22.  41. being  in  an  agony  he  prayed  moree. 

:i%.  but  a  certain  maid  e,  looked  upon  Paler 

AetsZ  12.inenof  Israel, why  look  yesoe.onusi 

23.  1.  Paul  e.  beholdingcouncil,  said,  1  hove 

1  Cor.  12.  31.  but  r.ovet  e.  the  best  sifts 

2  Cor.  5.  2.  in  this  we  groan,  e.  desiring  to  he 
Jam.  5.  17.  Elias  prayed  e.  that  it  miglit  not 
Jude  3,  that  ye  should  e.  roniend  i'or  the  taitb 

EARNETII. 
Ha".  1.  6.  he  that  e.  wages,  e.  to  put  it  in  a  bag 

EARTH, 
Is  taken  (1)  For  that  gross  and  terrestrial  «te- 


EAR 

Wient  v:liich  svstains  and  nourishes  us,  Gen.  1. 
10,  God  callcil  the  dry  lundeartii.  Jn  this  sense 
it  is  taken  in  those  passages,  ichere  the  earlli 
is  sai'^  ii>  yield  fruit,  to  be  barren,  watered, 
tc.  (-)  fur  all  that  rude  matter  which  was 
criattd  in  the  beginning.  Gtn.  1.  1,  God  crt- 
att'd  llie  heaven  uiid  tlieeartli ;  that  is,  the  mat- 
ter uf  all  sensible  beings.  (3)  By  the  enrtli  la- 
meant  the  terraqueous  globe.  Die  earth  and  all 
thdt  it  contains,  /nen,  animals, plants,  metals, 
icatirs,  Jish,  &c.  Psiil.24. 1,  The  eailh  is  the 
Lord's,  uiid  tlic  fuhiesa  thereof.  (4)  The  earth 
is  often  taken  fur  those  who  inhabit  it.  Gen.  6. 

13.  1 11.  I.  The  earth  is  fdled  witlj  viulonce.  Tiie 
whole  earth  was  of  one  language.  Fsal.  9G.  1, 
Sing  unto  the  Lord,  all  the  earth.  (5)  Some- 
times tlie  whole  earth,  or  all  the  kingdoms  of 
the  Ciirlh,signifes  no  mure  than  the  whole  em- 
pire of  Chaldea  aiid  Assyria.  Ezra  1.  2,  The 
Lord  Gild  of  heaven  hath  given  me  all  the  king 
(loRis  of  the  earth.  Earth  is  tajfcnfor  Canaan, 
ur  tlifi  land  of  the  Jews  ;  Rom.  9.  23,  A  short 
work  will  the  Lord  make  upon  the  earth.  J{e 
will  bring  a  sudden  destruction  upon  that  land 
and  people.  And  in  Mat.  9.  26.  Mark  15.  33. 
Luke  4.  25.  the  word  which  is  translated  land, 
7*  Ml  the  Greek,  earth. 

t  man  of  the  eartli,  Ocn.  9.  j  20,  Noah  was  a  man 
of  the  earth,  a  hushandma^i,  or  one  who  tilled 
the  ground.  In.  Psal.  10. 18,  llie  man  of  the  earth 
signifies  a  mortal,  earthly-minded  man,  who 
teas  made  of  the  dust,  and  must  return  to  the 
dust.  Earth,  in  the  moral  sense  of  it,  is  set  in 
opposition  to  heaven ;  things  earthly  and  car- 
nal, to  things  heavenly  and  spiritual.    John  3. 

31,  He  that  is  of  tlic  earth  is  earthly,  and  speak- 
eth  of  the  earth  :  lie  that  coineth  from  heaven 
IS  above  all.  Col.  3.  1,  2,  If  ye  then  be  risen 
with  Christ,  sock  those  things  which  are  above, 
and  set  not  your  alVections  on  things  on  thi 
earth.  7'hc  terrestrial  man  is  set  in  opposi 
lion  to  the  heavenly,  1  Cor.  1.5.  47,48,  The  first 
man  is  of  the  earth,  earthy,  the  second  man  is 
the  Lord  from  liiaven.  Adam,  thcf.rst  public 
person  and  head  uf  the  old  covenant,  was 
formed  of  the  earth  ;  he  was  mortal  and  cor- 
ruptible: lint  Chrhl,  the  secund public  person 
and  head  of  the  new  covenant,  is  of  a  hi  avcniy 
disccnt,  and  has  a  divine,  as  will  as  a  human 
nature.  In  lilie  manner  the  earthly  hov.ie  is  set 
in  opposition  to  the  heavenly  ;  2  Cor.  5. 1,  If  our 
earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle  were  dissolved, 
we  have  a  building  of  God,  a  house  not  made 
with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens.  If  this 
iodily  frame  of  nature  were  taken  to  pieces  by 
icath,  there  is  a  state  of  glory  provided  by 
God  fur  the  separate  soul  to  pass  unto. 

Oen.  1.  2.  and  the  c.  was  without  form  and  void 
10.  and  God  called  the  dry  land  e. 
n.  and  God  said,  let  thee. bring  forth  grass,  24. 

32.  and  the  c.  brouglit  forth  crass  and  herb 
28.  be  fruitful,  replenish  e.  and  subdue  if,  9.  1. 

C.  11.  the  e.  also  was  corrupt  before  God 
7.  17.  and  the  ark  was  lifted  up  above  the  c. 
B.  14.  in  the  second  month  was  the  c.  dried 

22.  while  e.  remaineth,  seed-time  shall  not  cease 
0. 13.  for  a  token  of  a  covenant  between  me  and  e. 
10.  2.').  in  his  ilays  was  the  e.  divided,  1  Chr.  1.  19. 
J  3  13.  and  all  the  nations  of  the  «.  shall  be  blcs?- 

cd  in  him,  22.  18.  |  20.  4.  |  28.  14. 
27.  2?.  God  give  thoo  of  the  fatness  of  the  e. 
41.47.  in  plomeoua  years  e.  brought  forth  handfuls 
Tzo'/.  8. 22.  lam  I  he  Lord  inthemi'lst  of  the  e. 

9.  29.  that  thou  mnyest  know  that  the  e.  is  the 
Lord's,  /)cut.  10.  14.  Psal.'i-i.  1.  1  Cor.  10.20. 

10.  .')   thai  one  cannot  be  able  to  see  the  e. 
l").  12.  stretchftsl  thy  hand,  c  swallowed  them 
20.  21.  nn  nhar  of  e,  thou  shall  nmke  unto  mo 

^'wr,.  10. 30.  If  the  r.  open  her  mouth  and  swallow 

32.  and  the  e.  opened  her  mouth  and  swallowed 
them  up  and  their  lioiiBcs,  20.  10.  Ps.  100.  17. 

34.  they  said,  lest  the  c.  swallow  us  up  also 
Diru<.2H.l.Liird  will  set  thee  above  all  nations  of  C. 

23.  the  e.  that  is  under  then  shall  be  iron 
32.  1.  and  hear,  O  e.  the  words  of  my  mouth 

13.hemade  him  ride  on  the  high  pbices  of  I  be  e. 
22.  a  fire  shall  consume  the/?,  with  her  increase 
1  Sam.  2. 8.  for  the  pillars  of  the  e.  are  the  Lord's 
4.  5.  Israel  shouted,  bo  that  the  r.  rang  again 

14.  l.").  they  also  irembhil,  and  llie  r.  cpiaked 
S.S'a)n.1.2.  n  man  come  with  e.  cm  bis  head,  lit.  32. 

22.6.  (hen  the  e.  ghook  and  trembled,  Psal.  18.  7. 

1  Kinas  1.  40.I1O  that  the  r.  ;.:nt  with  tlio  sound 

2  Kings  ."i.n.lo  thvservnnt  two  mules'  bi:rden  ofr. 
Ckron.  10.  31.  mid  let  the  r.  r^'joico,  Psal.  00.  11. 

33.  at  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  hcrauRc  God 

r<.mrth  to  judge  the  e.  Psal.  00. 13.  lOH.  9. 
Eirn  5.1 1.  the  servants  of  iho  God  of  lienvi-n  anof. 
A"r*.9.  n.  tiiou  hast  made  the  e.  ha.  4.5.  12. 
>ob  3  30.  and  thy  ofTsprlng  ns  the  groit  uf  the  e. 
154 


EAR 

Job  9.  6.  which  shaketh  the  e.  out  of  her  place 
24.  the  c.  is  given  into  the  hand  of  the  wicked 

11.  9.  the  measure  thereof  is  longer  than  the  e. 

12.  1.5.  he  sendeth  waters  and  they  overturn  the  e. 
15.  19.  to  whom  alone  the  e.  waa  given 

10. 18. 0  e.  cover  not  thou  my  blood,  let  my  cry 
18.  4.  shall  the  c.  be  forsaken  for  thee  ■! 
20.  27.  aud  tlie  e.  shall  rise  up  against  him 
22.  8.  but  as  for  the  miglily  man,  he  bad  the  e. 

24.  4.  the  poor  of  the  c.  hide  themselves 
2b.  7.  he  hangctli  the  c.  upon  nothing 

30.  6.  to  dwell  in  tlie  ca\esof  thee,  and  in  rocks 
S.cbildren  of  base  men, they  were  viler  than  the  e. 

3-1. 13.  wlio  hath  given  him  a  charge  over  the  c? 

37.  17.  when  he  ijuieteth  the  c.  by  the  south-wind 

38. 4.  when  I  laid  the  foundations  of  the  e. 

18.  bast  thou  perceived  the  breadth  of  the  e.? 
Psal.  2. 8.  give  thee  the  uttermost  parts  ol'lhc  e. 
10.  be  instructed,  ye  judges  of  the  e. 

10. 18.  that  the  man  of  the  e.  may  no  more  opjiress 

12.  G.  pure  words,  as  silver  tried  in  a  furnace  of  c. 

25.  13.  and  iiis  seed  bhall  inherit  the  e. 

33.  5.  the  e.  is  full  of  the  goodness  of  the  Lord 
14.  he  lookelh  on  all  tlie  inhabitants  of '.he  e. 
37. 9.  that  wait  on  Lord  shall  inherit  the  e.  1 1. 22. 

46.  2.  wc  will  not  fear  though  the  c.  be  removed 
6.  he  uttered  bis  voice,  the  e.  melted 

47.  9.  for  the  shields  of  the  e.  belong  unto  God 

48.  2.  the  joy  of  the  whole  e.  is  mount  Zion 
60.  2.  thou  hast  made  the  e.  to  tremble 

63.  9.  shall  go  into  the  lower  parts  of  the  c. 
65.  8.  that  dwell  in  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  e. 
9.  thou  visitcst  the  e.  and  waterest  it 

67.  6.  then  shall  e.  yield  her  increase,  i^irA.  34.27. 

68.  8.  the  e.  shook,  the  heavens  also  dropped 
32.  sing  unto  God,  ye  kingdoms  of  the  e. 

71.  20.  shalt  bring  ine  up  from  the  depths  of  the  e. 
72.6.shall  come  down  as  showers  that  water  the  e. 
73.  9.  and  their  tongue  walketh  through  the  c. 
75.  3.  the  e.  and  all  the  inhabitants  tiiereof  are 
dissolved,  I  bear  up  its  pillars,  Jsa.  21. 19. 

8.  the  wicked  of  the  e.  shall  wring  them  out 
70.  8.  thee,  feared  II  77. 18.  the  f.  trembled, 97.  4. 

9.  when  God  arose  to  save  the  meek  of  the  e. 
78.  69.  like  the  c.  which  he  liath  eslahlisli.  for  ever 

82. 3.  arise,  O  God,  judge  the  e.  thou  shall  inherit 
90.  2.  or  ever  thou  hadst  formed  the  e. 

97.  1.  the  Lord  leignelh,  let  the  e.  rejoice 
99.  1.  the  Lord  reigneth,  let  the  e.  be  moved 
102.  25.  of  old  hast  thou  laid  the  foundation  of 
the  e.  104.  5.  Prov.  8.29.  Jsa.  48.  13. 
104. 13. the  e.  is  satisfied  with  the  fruit  of  thy  works 

21.  O  Lord,  the  c.  is  full  of  thy  riches 
114.7.  treinble,C)f.  at  ilie  jiresence  of  the  Lord 
115. 16.  thee,  hath  he  given  to  the  children  of  men 
110.  64.  the  e.  O  Lord,  is  full  of  thy  mercy 

90.  thou  hast  established  the  e.  and  it  abideth 

147.  8.  who  prejiareth  rain  for  the  e. 

148.  13.  his  glory  is  above  the  e.  ahd  heaven 
Pruv.3. 19.  the  Ld.  bath  founded  the  e.  Jsa.  24. 1. 

8.  23. 1  was  set  up  from  everlasting,  or  ever  e.  was 
20  as  yet  he  had  not  made  the  e.  nor  fields 
25.3.C. for  depth  and  heart  uf  kings  is  unsearchable 
30.  16  the  e.  that  is  not  filled  with  water 

21.  for  three  things  the  c.  is  disquieted,  for  four 
Keel.  1.  4.  but  the  e.  abideth  for  ever 

5.  9.  moreover,  the  profit  of  the  e.  is  for  all 
fsa.  4.  2.  the  fruit  of  the  c.  shall  be  excellent 

11.4.  that  smileth  thee,  with  the  rod  of  his  mouth 

9.  e.  shall  be  full  uf  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord 

13.  13   the  e.  shall  remove  out  of  her  place 

14.  10.  is  this  the  man  that  made  tboc.  to  tremble? 
24.  4.  the  c.  mourneth  anil  fadelh  away,  33.  9. 

5.  the  e.  is  defiled  under  the  inhabitants  thereof 

19.  e.  is  utterly  broken  dowrf,  the  e.  is  dissolved 

20.  e.  shall  reel  |1  26. 19.  c.  shall  cast  out  the  dead 
20.  21.  the  e.  also  shall  disclose  her  Dlood 

34.  1.  let  the  c.  hear,  and  all  that  is  therein 
40.  22.  it  is  he  that  sitteth  on  the  circle  of  the  e. 
28.  the  Creator  of  'he  ends  of  the  e.  faintelh  not 

44.  24.  that  spretid  abroad  the  e.  by  myself 

45.  8.  let  the  e.  open  ||  12.  I  have  made  the  e. 

22.  look  to  me  ami  be  yo  saved  all  ends  of  the  c. 
49.  13.  sing,  O  Ik  avons,  and  be  joyful,  O  c. 

51.  n.  look  on  the  c.  the  c.  shall  wax  old 

0)0. 1.  thus  sailh  tin'  Lord,  the  e.  is  my  footstool 

8.  shall  the  e.  bo  made  to  bring  forth  in  one  day  7 
Jer.  4.  23.  I  beheld  the  e.  it  was  without  form 

28.  for  this  shall  ihi'  c.  mourn,  heavens  be  black 
0,  19.  hear,  ()  e.  1  "ilbriri';  evil  on  this  people 

10.  10.  at  ilia  wrath  the  e.  shall  tremble 

22.  29.'0  «.  «.  e.  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  write 
ye  this  man  cbildli'sa,  Mie.  I.  2. 
40.  8.  Egypt  saith,  I  will  go  up  and  cover  the  e. 
49.  21.  the  e.  is  moved  at  the  noise,  50.  4G. 
51.  15  ho  hath  made  the  e.  bv  his  power 
F.zek.l.  21.  I  will  give  it  to  ihe  wicked  of  the  <•. 
9.  9.  they  »:iy,  the  Lord  bath  lorsaken  the  c. 
43.  2.  and  the  r.  phini'd  with  his  glory 
IIos.  2. 22.  the  c.  bIioII  hear  the  corn  and  Ibe  wine 


EAR 

.Joel  2.  10.  the  e.  shall  quake  before  Oiera 
jjmos  6.  9.  1  will  darken  the  e.  in  the  clear  day 
Jonah  2.  6.  liie  e.  with  her  bars  was  about  me 
Mic.  6.  2.  hear,  ye  strong  foundations  of  the  e. 

7.  17.  they  shall  move  out  like  worms  of  tlie  e. 
jVuA.  1.  5.  the  e.  is  burnt  up  at  his  jiresenca 
JJab.  2.  14.  the  e.  filled  with  knowledge  of  the  h 

3.  3.  and  the  e.  was  full  of  his  praise 
9.  thou  didst  cleave  the  e.  with  rivers 
JIng.  1.  10.  the  c.  is  stayed  from  her  fruit 
/.eck.  1. 10.  sent  to  walk  to  and  fro  thro'  the  c  6. 7 

4.10.  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  which  run  thro'  thee 
jMiil.  4.  6.  lest  I  smite  the  e.  with  a  curse 
Jilat.  5.5.  blessed  are  meek,  for  they  shall  inherit  «. 
35.  swear  not  by  the  e.  lor  it  is  God's  lootstool 

13.  5.  where  they  haclinol  much  e.  Mark  4.  5. 
Jilark  4. 28.  for  the  e.  bringeth  forth  fruit  of  herself 
,/ohn  3.31. he  that  is  of  the  c.is  earthly,and  speakelli 
of  the  e.  he  that  conieth  from  heaven  is  above  all 

1  Cor.  15.  47.  the  first  man  is  of  the  c.  earthy 

2  'I'im.  2.  20.  but  also  vessels  of  wood  and  of  c. 
Neb.  6.  7.  the  e.  which  drinketb  in  the  rain 

12.  20.  whose  voice  then  shook  the  e.  but  now 
Jam.  a.  7.  waiteth  for  the  jnecious  fruit  of  the  e. 

18.  and  the  e.  brought  forth  her  fruit 
2P<£.3.10.the  e.and  works  therein  shall  be  burnt  up 
Hev.  7.  3.  hurt  not  the  e.  nor  sea,  nor  the  trees 

11.4.  olive  trees  standing  before  the  God  of  thee. 

6.  have  power  to  smite  the  e.  with  all  plagues 

12.  16.  the  c.  opened  and  swallowed  up  the  flood 

13.  12.  causeth  the  c.  to  worshij)  the  first  beast 

18.  1.  and  the  e.  was  lightened  with  his  glory 

19.  2.  the  great  whore,  which  did  corrupt  the  e. 

20.  11.  from  whose  face  the  e.  fled  away 

See  Bkasts,  DtisT,  E.nds,  Fack,  Kl^cs,  Uba 
VK.N,  Peoi'Lic,  Whole. 

Jill  the  EARTH. 
<7c7i.  L26.  let  them  have  dominion  over  all  the  e. 
7.  3.  to  keep  seed  alive  on  the  face  of  all  the  c. 

11.9.  there  confound  the  language  o(  all  the  e. 
18. 25.  shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  c.  do  right  1 
19. 31.  to  come  in  to  us  after  manner  of  n.'/  the  o. 

Eiod.  9.  14.  there  is  none  like  me  in  all  the  e. 
10.  my  name  declared  thro'  all  the  e.  Hum.  9.  17. 
19.  5.  a  jieculiar  treasure  ;  for  all  the  e.  is  mine 

34. 10.  such  as  have  nut  been  done  in  all  the  c 
JVwm.  14.  21.  all  the  e.  shall  he  filled  with  glory 
.Josh.  3.  11.  the  Lord  ui  all  the  e.  13.  Zech.  6.  .5. 

23.14.1  am  going  the  way  o\'aU  the  e.  1  Kings  2.2. 
Judg.  0.  37.  and  if  it  be  ilry  on  all  t!ie  e.  beside 
I  i~a)H. 17.46.  that  all  the  e.  may  know  there  is  a  G. 

1  Kings  10. 24.  all  the  c. sought  to  Solomon  to  boa/ 

2  Kings  5.  15.  no  God  in  all  the  e.  but  in  Israel 

1  Chr.  16. 14.  his  judgm.  are  in  all  the  e.  Ps.  105. 7. 
23.  sing  to  the  Lord,  all  thee.  Psal.  96.  1. 
30.  fear  before  him  all  the  e.  Psal.  33.  8.  |  00.  9 
Psal.  8.  1.  excellent  is  thy  name  in  all  the  i .  9. 
45. 16. whom  thou  mayisl  make  piincesina/^rAe* 
47.2.  L.is  a  great  king  over  all  the  e.  7.  Zrch.  14.'J. 
57.  5.  let  thy  glory  be  above  all  the  «.  11.  |  108.5. 
60.tl.make  a  joyful  noise  all  the  e.  98.  4.  |  )IX).  1 1- 
4.  all  the  r.  shall  worship  thee,  and  sing  to  thee 
8.3.18.  that  thou  art  most  high  over  aH  fAc  c.  97.  9 
/sa.  10. 14.  so  have  I  gathered  nil  thee,  none  moved 
12. 5.  done  o.vcellent  thimrs,  this  is  known  in  all  e 
25.  8.  take  the  rebuke  of  his  people,  from  all  the  e 
./(■r.20.  6. 1  will  make  this  city  a  curse  to  all  the  e. 

33.  9.  it  shall  be  an  honour  before  all  the  earth 
51.  7.  a  goMiu  I  up  that  made  all  the  e.  drunken 

25.  O  mountain,  which  di  stmyest  all  the  e. 
49.  so  at  liabyhm  shall  fall  the  slain  of  a// /Ac  e 
7)an.2.  39.  a  kingdom  shall  bear  rule  over  all  the  < 
llab.  2.  20.  let  all  the  e.  keep  sileme  before  him 
7.rph.  3.  8.  all  Oie  e.  shall  be  devoured  with  fire 
7.ecU.  1. 11.  (///  the  e.  sitleih  still  and  is  at  rest 
I.uke'iW.  44.  there  was  a  darkness  over  all  the 
Horn.  10.  18.  their  sound  went  into  alt  tlic  t. 
Jtcv.  5.  6.  seven  Spirits  of  God  sent  forlli  into  all* 

h\om  the  EARTH. 
Gen.  2.  6.  but  there  went  up  a  ni\si  from  the  * 
4.  11.  and  now  art  thou  curscd/rom  the  e. 
0.  t  13.  behold,  I  will  destroy  them /mm  the  e. 

7.  23.  and  they  were  destroyed /rem  the  e. 

8. 11.  Noah  knew  waters  were  abated /rnm  thee 

y.xod.SS.  15.  thou  shalt  be  cut  off /row  Mr  e.  .losh 

7.  9.  PsnI.  109.  15.  Prov.  2.  22.  Jfnh.  2.  13 

1  Sam..  28. 23.  Saul  arose /row  the  e.  and  sal  on  bed 

2.SrtHi.4.11.  shall  I  not  take  you  nway/rom  the  «. 

12.  17.  the  eldore  went  to  raise  him  from  the  e. 

20.  David  arose /rom  thee,  and  washed  himsell 

.Job  18.17. his  remembrance  shall  perish/r»m  tJtce, 

Psal.  21.  10.  shall  destroy  tlicir  fruit/roin  thee. 

34.  16.  cut  off  rcmcmhranco  of  llicm  from  the  e. 
148. 7.  praise  I,,  from  the  e.  yo  dragons  and  dce|i« 

Prov.  30.  14.  as  knives  to  devour  poor  from  tlie  e 
Jrr.  10.  II.  even  they  shall  perish /rnni  the  c. 
I'.i'k.  1.19.  livins  creatures  wore  lift  iip/r/)mc.21. 
/>nTi.  7.  4.  and  it  was  lilVd  up /rem  the  e. 
.Ovws  3.  5.  fhall  one  take  up  a  snare  from  the  I 
John  12.  32.  and  I,  il  I  be  lifted  up  from  the  c 


EAR 

^cts  8.  33.  for  Iiis  lifo  is  taken  from  the  e. 

y.  rf.  tfiiul  mcosufruM  the  c.  and  lio  saw  no  man 

22. 2'J. sdid,  away  with  such  a  (eiiosv  front  thee. 
ft(;u.0.4.iiowergivBnhim  totake  pcacu/ro/n  the  c. 

14.J.ljul  144,000  which  wure  ledeemeJ/rffHi  the  e. 

In  the  EARTH. 
Gen.  1.  22.  and  lul  fowl  multiply  in  the  e. 

4.  10.  a  vagabond  shall  thou  be  in  the  c,  14. 

G.  5.  the  wieki'dncss  of  man  was  great  i)t  thee. 

1(1.  S.  Nimrod  began  to  be  a  mighty  one  iti  the  e. 

I'.l.  .'il.  not  a  man  in  the  c.  to  come  in  unto  us 

4,1.  7.  sent  me,  to  preserve  you  a  posterity  in  the  e. 
Exo;l.  'JO.  4.  or  that  is  in  Uie  e.  beneath,  or  water 
Josh.  7.  'il.  and  bi'liold  ihey  are  hid  in  the  c. 
Jadg.  16. 10.  no  want  of  any  thing  that  is  in  thee. 
2i!>'u;n.7.  9.  a  groat  name,  like  to  the  name  of  the 
great  men  that  arc  in  the  e.  1  Ckron.  17.8. 
23.  what  nation  in  e.  like  Israel  ■?  1  Chr.  17.  21. 

14.  20.  to  know  all  things  that  are  in.  the  e. 

1  Chron.  2iJ.  11.  for  all  tlial  is  in  the  e.  is  thine 

2  Chron.  6.  14.  there  is  no  God  like  thee  in  the  e. 
Jolt  1  7.  from  going  to  and  fro  in  the  c.  2.  2. 

S.  that  there  is  none  like  him  in  the  c.  2.  3. 
14.  6.  though  the  root  thereof  wax  old  in  the  e. 
"i.  IS.  their  portion  is  curried  in  the  e. 
ii'.l.  14.  ostrich,  which  Icaveth  her  eggs  in  the  e. 
P.iuL  16.  3.  but  to  the  saints  that  are  in  the  e. 
4t).  8.  what  desolations  he  hath  made  in  the  e. 

10.  be  still,  I  will  be  e.valtud  in  the  e. 
58.  II.  verily  he  is  a  God  that  judgeth  in  the  e. 
'li.  1().  there  shall  be  a  handful  of  corn  in  the  e. 
1 1'.),  lit.  I  am  a  stranger  in  the  c.  hide  not  thy  com. 
1-JO.  11.  let  not  an  evil  speaker  be  established  in  c. 
Pruo.  11. 31.  the  righteous  be  recompensed  in  thee. 
Isa.  20.  9.  for  when  thy  judgments  are  in  the  e. 
18.  we  have  not  wrought  deliverance  in  the  e. 

40.  24.  their  stock  shall  not  take  root  in  the  e. 
42.  4.  till  he  have  set  judgment  in  the  e. 

C\i.  7.  till  he  make  Jerusalem  a  praise  tn  the  e. 
Cj.  16.  shall  bless  in  God  of  truth,  who  blesseth 
iiimsclf  in  the  e.  and  he  that  sweareth  in  thee. 
't:r.  n.  13.  that  forsake  thee,  be  written  in  the  c. 
31.  22.  the  Lord  hath  created  a  new  thing  in  the  e. 
Hos. '.?.  23.  and  I  will  sow  her  unto  rae  in  the  e. 
Jiiil  2.  30.  and  I  will  shew  wonders  in  the  c. 
jimo.'!  5. 7.  ye  who  leave  off  righteousness  in  the  c. 
Jlhil.  25.  18.  he  went  and  digged  in  the  c.  and  hid 

2.5.  I  was  afraid,  and  hid  tliy  talent  in  the  e. 
•J/;i/-A  4. 31.  it  is  like  a  grain  of  mustard  seed,  when 
it  is  sown  in  the  c.  is  less  than  all  seeds  in  the  e. 
IJohn  5.8.lhcre  are  three  that  bear  witness  in  the  e. 

On,  or,  vpon  the  EARTH. 
Om.  6.  G.  repented  that  he  had  made  man  on  the  e. 
12.  God  looked  «;7on  thee,  behold  it  was  corrupt 

7.  4.  [  will  cause  it  to  rain  upon  the  c.  forty  days 
12.  ihe  rain  was  npo7i  the  e.  forty  days,  17. 

8.  17.  be  fruitful  and  multiply  upoii.  the  e. 
l'.l.23.  sun  was  risen  upon  thee,  when  Lot  entered 
2s.  12.  and  behold  a  ladder  set  upon  thee. 

Ejod.  10.  6.  since  the  day  they  were  upon  the  e. 
Leu.  11. 29.  things  that  creep  upon  the  c.  42,  44. 
Deut.4.  10.  all  days  they  Wvp  upon  the  c.  12. 1,19. 
3n.  upon  the  e.  he  shewed  thee  his  great  fire 

12.  16.  ve  shall  pour  it  upoii  the  e.  as  water,  24. 
2  Sam.  12.  10.  David  lay  all  night  upon  the  e. 

14.  7.  not  leave  name  nor  remainder  7ipnn  the  e. 
1  A7jixr.«8.27.  but  will  God  indeed  dwell  on  the  r.7 
heaven  cannot  contain  thee,  2  Chron.  6.  18. 

17. 14.  till  the  day  the  Lord  sends  rain  upon  the  c. 
I  C//r. 29. 1.5.  our  days  one.  as  a  shadow,  Job  8.  9. 
^'/'/i7;l.is  there  not  an  appointed  time  to  man  on  c.? 

19. 2.5.  he  shall  stand  at  the  latter  day  upon  the  c. 

20.  4.  knowesi  not  since  man  was  [ilaccd  on  thee. 

3~.  (i.  for  he  Kai'h  to  the  snow,  be  thou  on  the  e. 

41.  33.  on  e.  there  is  not  liis  like,  leviathan  made 
P--n7.7..5.1et  the  enemy  tread  down  my  life  ore  thee. 

41.  2.  and  he  shall  hi;  blessed  upon  the  e. 

Cu.  2.  that  thv  way  may  be  known  upon  the  r. 

73.  2.5.  there  is  none  upon  e.  I  desire  besides  thee 

112.2.  hi?  se"d  shall  be  niiglity  upon  thee. 
AVow.;!0.24.  four  things  that  arc  little  upon  the  e. 
F.crt.7.  20.  for  iluro  is  not  a  just  man  upon  e. 

10.7.  and  princes  walking  as  .servants  upon  the  e. 

11.2.  kno'.vest  not  what  evil  shall  be  done  upon  c. 
3.  the  clouds  empty  themselves  upon  the  c. 
Cant.  2. 12.  flowers  appear  on  thee,  lime  of  singing 
T.i'i.  28.22.  a  consumption  determined  upon  the  c. 

51.  fi.  lifl  up  yonr  eyes,  and  look  vpnn  the  e. 
Ji^r.  9.3.  are  not  valiant  for  the  truth  upon  the  e. 
Lam.^.  II.  eyes  fail,  my  liver  is  poured  upon  thee. 
Dan.l.W.  not  a  man  on  Ike  c.  can  shew  the  matter 
Jimns  3.  5.  can  a  b'rd  fnll  in  a  snare  upon  the  e. 

9  9.  yet  shall  not  the  least  grain  fall  upon  the  e. 
Mat.  6.  19.  lay  not  up  for  vcmrs.  treasures  upon  e. 

9.  6.  may  know  that  the  Son  of  man  hath  power 

on  e.  to  forgive  sins,  Mark  2  10.  J.nkc^.'H. 

10.  34.  th'nk  not  I  am  come  to  send  peace  on  c. 
K'.  19.  wliatsoever  thou  shall  bind  one.  18.  18. 
H.  19.  Fsav,tlialif  two  of  yon  «hall  agree  on  e. 
'23.  9.  and  call  no  man  vnur  fa'her  upon  the  e. 

155 


EAR 

JI/a£.  23.35.  all  the  righteous  blood  shed  upon  the  e. 
Mark  9.  3.  so  as  no  fuller  on  e.  can  white  them 
/^«/£e2. 14.  glorytoGod  in  the  highest,  on  c.  peace 

6.  49.  like  a  man  that  built  a  house  ji//on  thee. 
12.  49.  I  am  come  to  send  lire  on  the  e. 

51.suppose  ye  that  I  am  come  to  give  jieace  on  e.? 
18.  8.  the  Son  cometh,  shall  he  (iiid  faith  on  e.7 
21.20.  for  the  things  which  are  coming  on  the  e.7 
.John  17.  4.  I  have  glorified  thee  on  Uie  c. 
Root.  9. 28.  a  short  work  will  the  Lord  make  on  e. 
Col.  3. 2.  set  your  airection  not  on  things  on  the  e. 

5.  mortify  your  members  which  are  upon  the  e. 
//(■i.8.4.if  hewerc  on  the  c.he  should  not  be  a  priest 
11.13.  and  confessed  they  were  strangers  on  the  e. 

12.  25.  who  refused  him  that  spake  o7i  e. 
Jam.  0.  5.  ye  haye  lived  in  pleasure  on  the  e. 

17.  il  rained  not  on  the  e.  for  three  years 
Rev.  3.  10.  to  try  them  that  dwell  upon  the  e. 
S.lO.made  us  kings  and  priests,  we  shall  reign  on  e. 
O.lO.avenge  our  blood  on  them  that  dwell  on  the  e. 

7.  1.  that  the  wind  should  not  blow  on  the  e. 

8.  7.  hail,  and  fire,  and  they  were  cast  upon  the  e. 
10. 8.  in  hand  of  angel  which  standetb  upon  the  e. 

11.  10.  dwell  on  the  e.  |  13.  8,  14.  |  14.  0.  |  17.  8. 
14.  16.  and  he  thrust  in  his  sickle  on  the  e. 

16.  2.  the  first  poured  out  his  vial  upon  the  e. 
18.  24.  the  blood  of  all  that  were  slain  upon  the  e. 

Out  of  the  EARTH. 

1  .^am.  28.  13.  I  saw  gods  ascending  out  of  the  e. 

2  .Sam.  23.  4.  as  tender  grass  springing  out  of  the  e. 
Job  8.  19.  and  out  cf  the  e.  shall  others  grow 

28.  2  iron  is  taken  ovl  of  thee,  and  brass  molten 
5.  as  for  the  e.  out  of  it  cometh  bread 
Psal.  85   11.  truth  shall  spring  out  oj^the  c. 

104.  14.  that  he  may  bring  food  out  of  the  e. 
35.  let  the  sinners  bo  consumed  out  of  the  e. 
Dan.l.n.fom  kings,  which  shall  arise  out  of  thee. 
Hos.  2.  18.  I  will  break  the  battle  out  of  the  e. 
Mic.  7. 2.  the  good  man  is  perished  out  of  the  e. 
Hku.  13. 11.  another  beast  coming  up  out  of  the  e. 

To,  or,  unto  the  EARTH. 
r?cn.24.52.he  worshipped,  bowing  himself  to  the  e. 

37.  10.  to  bow  down  ourselves  to  thee,  to  thee. 

42.  6.  they  bowed  themselves  to  the  e.  43.  26. 

48.  12.  lie  bowed  himself  with  his  fare  to  the  e. 
■losh.  5.  14.  Joshua  fell  on  his  face  to  the  c.  7.  6. 

1  San.  5.  3.  Dagon  was  fallen  on  his  face  to  the  e. 

17.  49.  Goliath  fell  on  his  face  to  the  e. 
21.  8.  David  stooped  with  his  face  to  thee. 

2.J.  41.  she  bowed  herself  <o  thee.l  Kings  1.31. 
26.  8.  let  me  smite  him,  I  pray  thee,  to  the  e. 
20.  therefore  let  not  my  blood  fall  to  the  c. 

2  Sam.  1.2.  when  he  came  to  David  he  fell  to  the  f. 
14. 11. not  one  hair  shall  fall  to  the  e.  1  Kings  1.  52. 

2  A'/Ti  o-i-lO.lO.fall  to  the  c.  nothing  of  the  word  of  L. 

iChrnn.  20.  24.  were  dead  bodies  fallen  to  the  c. 

.fob  12.  8.  or  speak  to  the  e.  it  shall  teach  thee 

Psal.  17. 11.  set  their  eves,  bowing  down  to  the  e. 
44.  25.  for  our  belly  cleaveth  unto  the  e. 
50.  4.  he  shall  call  to  the  e.  that  he  may  judge 
146.4. his  breath  goelh  forth,  hercturneth  to  the  e. 

Ecd.'i.  21.  the  spirit  of  beast  thai  goeth  to  the  e. 

12.  7.  then  shall  the  dust  return  to  the  e. 
Isa.  8.  22.  and  they  shall  look  unto  thee. 

63.  6. 1  will  bring  down  their  strength  to  the  e. 
.Ter.  15(  10.  a  man  of  contention  to  the  whole  e. 
Hos.  6.  3.  as  the  latter  and  former  rain  to  thee. 
Lukell.  5.  and  bowed  down  their  faces  to  the  e. 
.^cts  9.  4.  Saul  fell  to  the  e.  and  heard  a  voice 

10.  11.  as  a  great  sheet,  and  let  down  to  the  e. 
26.  14.  and  when  we  were  all  fallen  to  the  e. 

Rrv.  6.  13.  and  the  stars  of  heaven  fell  to  the  c. 
12.4. drew  the  stars,  and  did  not  cast  them  to  the  e. 

13.  when  the  dragon  sn  w  he  was  capt  unto  the  e. 

EARTH  Ex\. 
Lev.  fi.  28.  the  r.  vessel  wherein  it  was  sodden 

1 1.  33.  the  e.  vessel  whercunto  any  of  them  falleth 
14.  5.  one  of  the  birds  killed  in  an  c.  vessel,  50. 

JV«n(.  5. 17.  priest  shall  take  holy  water  in  e.  vessel 
2  Sam.  17.  28.  brought  beds,  basins,  and  e.  vessels 
,/rr.  19.  1.  go  and  get  a  pottor's  e.  bottle 
:i2.  14.  put  these  evidences  in  an  e.  vessel 
r.nni.  4.  2.  how  are  Ihey  esteemed  as  e.  pitchera 
2 Cor.  4.  7.  we  have  this  treasure  in  c.  vessels 

EARTHLY. 
./oAn3. 12.  if  I  have  told  you  c.  things,  believe  not 

31.  he  that  is  of  the  earth  is  e.  speaks  of  earth 
2Cor.  .5. 1.  ifoiirc.  house  of  tnhern.  were  dissolved 
Ph/l.  3.  19.  many  walk,  who  mind  e.  things 
.Tarn.  3.  15.  this  wisdom  is  e.  sensual,  devilish 

E.ARTIIY. 
1  Cor.  1.5.  47.  the  first  man  is  of  the  earth,  f. 

48.  ns  is  the  f.  such  are  they  also  that  are  e. 

49.  and  as  we  have  borne  the  image  of  the  e. 

EARTnaUAKE. 
The  arripture  spenk.9  of  srreral  nnturaf  earlh- 
f]n-  kes.  One  of  the  jDott  rrmarknble,  is  that 
whieh  ""I.'  in  the  twrntii-srrrnth  yarofVT.-l 
ziah,  king  o/JuHah.  Th'rr  is  tnrntinn  of  thisl 
earthquake  in  Amos  1. 1.  and  in  Zech.  14.  5.  Jo-i 


EAS 

scphus  says,  that  this  earthquake  leas  so  vio- 
lent, as  to  divide  a  mountain  in  halves,  which 
lay  to  the  west  of  Jerusalem,  and  moved  one 
part  of  it  from  its  place  four  furlongs,  or  fee 
hundred  paces. 

.Another  very  memorable  earthr{uake,  was  that  at 
the  time  of  our  Saviour's  crucifixion.  Mat.  27. 
51.  Many  have  been  of  opinion,  that  this  mo- 
tion was  perceived  by  all  the  world.  Others 
maintain,  tkat  it  was  sensible  only  in  Judea, 
or  even  in  the  temple,  the  gates  vihertof  wen 
shaken,  and  the  vail  rent  asunder.  It  must 
have  been,  attended  with  very  terrible  circum- 
stances, since  the  centurion,  and  they  mho  were 
with  him,  were  so  affected  with  it,  and  were  in- 
duced by  it  to  acknowledge  the  injustice  of  our 
Saviour's  condemnation,  Mat.  27.  54. 

J3n  Earthquake  is  a  great  shaking,  or  trembling 
of  the  earth,  or  of  some  parts  of  it,  Amos  1.  1. 
Oreat  alterations  and  changes  are  eiprcsscU 
in  scripture  by  a  shaking  of  the  earth,  Heb. 
12.  26.  The  delivering  of  the  Israelites  out  of 
Egypt  is  called  a  moving,  or  shaking,  of  the 
earth,  Psal.  68.  8.  Jlnd  an  extraordinary  and 
uneipccted  alteration  in  the  state  of  ajj'airs, 
civil  or  ecclesiastical,  is  represented  by  a  great 
earthquake,  Rev.  6.  12.  and  16.  18. 

1  Kings  19. 11.  after  the  wind,  an  e.L.was  not  in  e. 
12.  after  the  c.  afire,  the  Lord  was  not  in  the  tiro 

Isa.  29. 6.  thou  shall  be  visited  of  the  Lord  with  e. 
.imos  1.  1.  which  he  saw  two  years  before  the  e. 
Zech.  14.  5.  like  as  ye  lied  from  before  the  <■. 
Mat.  27.  54.  now  when  the  centurion  saw  the  c. 
28. 2.  behold,  there  was  a  great  e.  the  angel  of  the 
Lord  came,  ^c£4-16.26.  Rev.^i.  12.  1 11. 13. 
Rev.  8.  5.  there  were  thunderings  and  an  e.  1 1.  19. 
16.  18.  a  great  e.  so  mighty  an  e.  and  so  great 

EARTHQUAKES. 
Mat.'i.K.  7.  there  shall  be  famines,  pestilences,  and 
e.  in  divers  places,  Mark  13.8.  LukelX.  11. 
EASE. 
Tieut.  28. 65.  among  rations  shall  thou  find  no  e. 
Judg.  20.43.  they  trod  the  Benjamites  down  with  c. 
Job  12.  5.  in  the  thought  of  him  that  is  at  e. 
16. 12. 1  was  at  e.  ||  21. 23.  dieth,  being  wholly  at  e. 
Ps.  25. 13.  his  soul  shall  dwell  at  e.  his  seed  inherit 
123.  4.  with  the  scorning  of  those  that  are  at  c. 
Prnv.  1. 1  32.  the  e.  of  the  simple  shall  slay  them 
Isa.  32.  9.  rise  up,  ye  women  that  are  at  e. 

11.  tremble,  ye  women  thai  are  at  e.  be  troubled 
Jer.  46. 27.  Jacob  shall  return,  and  be  in  rest,  ate 

48.  11.  Moab  hath  been  at  e.  from  his  youth 

49.  t31.  get  you  up  to  the  nation  thai  is  at  e. 
Eick.  23.  42.  a  voice  of  a  multitude  being  at  e. 
Amos  6.  1.  woe  to  them  that  are  at  e.  in  Zion 
Zech.  1. 15. 1  am  sore  displeased  with  heathen  at  «, 
I.uke  12. 19.  take  thine  e.  eat,  drink,  and  be  merry 

EASE. 
Dnit.  23. 13.  when  thou  wilt  e.  thyself  abroad 

2  Chron.  10.  4.  e.  thou  somewhat  the  yoke,  9. 
Job  7.  13.  my  couch  shall  e.  my  complaint 
Isa.  1.  24.  ah,  I  will  e.  me  of  mine  adversaries 

38.  j  14.  O  Lord,  I  am  oppressed,  e.  me 

EASED. 
.Job  16.  6.  and  though  I  forbear,  what  am  I  e.7 
2  Cor.  8. 13.  that  other  men  he  c.  and  ye  burthencd 

EASEMENT. 
./«f/^.  3.^24.  hedoeth  his  e.  in  hissummcr-chainbci 

EASIER. 
Eiod.  13.22.  so  shall  it  be  c.  for  thyself,  shall  bear 
Mat.  0. 5.  whether  is  e.  to  say,  ihy  sins  be  forgiven 
thee,  or  to  say,  arise,  Mark  2.  9.  Euke  T>.  23. 
19.24.  it  is  c. fora  camel  logo  Ihro'  the  eye  of  ni'i,-- 
dle,  than  a  rich  man,  Jl/ari  10. 2.5.  /-«Ael8. 25. 
7>uicl6.17.it  is  c.  for  heaven  and  earth  to  pass, than 

EASILY. 
1  Cor.13.5.  charily  is  not  c.prnvoked,  thinks  no  evil 
f/efc.12.1.  lay  aside  the  sin  which  doth  so  e.beset  us 

EAST. 
The  Hebrews  express  the  east,  west,  north,  avd 
south,  by  words  which  signify,  before,  behind, 
left,  and  right,  according  to  the  situation  of  a 
man,  with  his  face  turned  io^i-nrds  theea^f.  By 
the  east,  thry  describe  frrqurntly  not  only  Ara- 
bia Deperta,on  1  the  hinds  of  Muab  and .\mmon, 
which  lay  to  the  ea.^-t  o/ Palestine;  but  Assyria 
?i7re7<!f.«'-,Mesopotamia,Babylonia,  and  Chn^i'.en, 
which  lie  rather  to  the  north  than  tn  ihe  em-t  i:f 
Judoa.  It  is  said, in  Gen.  11.1,2.  that  the  fons 
of  Noah  having  hut  one  language,  ilepartpd 
from  Ihe  east,  and  crime  into  the  Innil  of  ^Ai'mir 
Hcrrnpon  some  difficulties  hare  been  rni.ied  ; 
for  the  land  of  Shinar  !.s'  not  to  the  west  of  Ar- 
menia, where  the  ark  rested;  and  Armenia 
does  not  lie  to  the  east  ofB!\hy}oi)\n,7v!ierethe 
land  of  Shinar  ipas.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  to 
the  north  of  this  country,  fnterprelersaad 
Commentators,  to  disengage  themsrtres  out  rf 
thfse  prrplexitirs.hare  imngiitcd  different  ex- 
planations of  this  passnge. 


EAS 

."omc,  by  the  Hebrew  word  Kedem,  or,  East,Aa»f 
uiiUcrdtuoU  the  country  wliicll  teas  afterwards 
^copied  by  Kudeiiiali,  lite  yoangi.it  sun  of  Isli- 
iii;iel.  Olliers,  that  Kedem  was  used  fur,  At  llie 
beginning  ;  and  that  Moses  inttndtd  lu  describe 
the  particular  linie  at  which  the  first  men  de- 
parted after  the  deluge,  in  order  to  spread 
■  Ikemselaes  into  different  countries.  Others 
that  Muses  spoke  according  to  the  custom  of 
the  Assyrians,  who  called  ail  the  provinces  of 
their  empire  which  were  situated  beyond  the  Ti- 
ijiis,  Kedem,  or  East;  and  those  on  this  side  the 
same  river,  the  West,  or  Arab.  Others,  instead 
of,  they  departed  or  journeyed  from  the  east, 
translate,  tliey  departed  to  go  towards  the  east 

Calmel  says,  that  it  appears  to  him  front  a  great 
number  of  places  in  the  Old  and  enen  in  the 
A'eto  Testament,  that  the  sacred  iVr iters  call 
id  the  provinces  which  were  beyond  the  Tigris 
and  Kujjhratei,  even  Mesopotamia,  Ariiieniii, 
and  I'ersia,  Kedem,  or  the  East.  Moses,  who 
had  been  bred  up  in  Egypt,  and  lived  long  in 
Arabia,  itt  this  likewise  might  probably  follow 
the  custom  of  the  country.  It  is  certain,  says 
he,  that  Babylonia,  Chaldea,  Susiana,  Persia, 
and  a  part  of  Mesopotamia,  as  well  as  the  ri- 
vers of  Eiii)lirates  a7td  Tigris, /or  t/ic  greatest 
part  of  their  course  areto  the  east  of  P^iesline, 
Egypt,  and  Arabia. 

J{e  aJtU,  that  it  is  further  certain,  that  the  peo- 
ple who  came  from  Armenia,  Syria,  Media,  and 
Upper  Mesopotamia,  entered  Palestine  and 
Egy|)t/ronj  the  east-side,  which  was  sufficient 
for  the  Hebrews  to  say,  that  these  people  lay 
to  the  east,  with  respect  to  them.  He  proves 
by  the  following  passages,  that  these  countries 
were  known  among  the  Hebrews  by  the  name 
of  East,  fn  Num.  'il.  7.  Balaam  says,  that 
Balak,  king  of  Moab,  had  brought  him  from 
tiie  mountains  of  the  east;  that  is,  from  Vt;thor 
upon  the  Euphrates.  Isaiah  says,  ch.  41.  ii. 
that  .Jbraham  came  from  the  east  into  the  land 
of  Canaan :  And  it  is  known  that  he  came 
from  Mesopotamia  and  Chaldea.  The  same 
prophet  says,  that  Cyrus  should  come  from  the 
cast  against  Babylon,  Isa.  4*5.  11.  He  places 
Syria  to  the  east  o/ Judea.  St.  Matthew  says, 
that  the  wise  men,  who  came  to  worship  Christ, 
.-■et  out  from  the  east,  Mat.  2.  1. 

All  this,  says  he,  demonstrates,  that  in  the  scrip- 
ture style,  the  East  is  often  used  for  the  pro- 
rinccs  which  lie  to  the  JVortA  of  Judea  and 
K^ypt,  from  whence,  however, people  generally 
enter  Palestine  by  the  way  only  of  Damascus, 
which  is  to  the  north-east  of  this  country. 

The  East  is  the  first  of  the  four  cardinal  points 
of  the  horizon,  where  the  sun  is  seen  to  rise 
7ohen  in  the  equinoctial. 

fre(t.3.24.God  placed  at  thee.of  the  garden  of  Eden 

12.  8.  Abraham  removed  to  a  mountain  on  the  c. 

13.  U.  Lot  chose  the  plain,  and  journeyed  e. 
2S.  14.  thou  shalt  spread  abroad  to  the  west  and  c. 
29.  1.  came  into  the  land  of  the  people  of  Iho  e. 

Kum.  X  ^.  but  those  that  encamp  toward  the  e. 

23.  7.  Balak  hath  brought  me  out  of  the  e. 
Judg.  6.  3.  the  children  of  the  e.  came  up  against 

them,  33.  |  7.  12.  1  8.  10.  1  Kings  4.  30. 

1  Kings  7.2.1ihree  looking  toward  the  e.  2  Ckr.  4.4. 

1  Chron.  9.  24.  the  porters  toward  the  c  west, 

north,  and  south 

12.  1.5.  they  put  to  flight  them  toward  the  e. 
Job  1.3.  the  greatest  of  all  the  men  of  ihe  e. 
Psal.  7.5.  6.  promotion  comoth  not  from  e.  nor  west 

103.  12.  as  far  as  the  e.  is  from  the  west 

107.  3.  he  gathered  them  from  the  e.  and  west 
/ita.2.  0.  because  Ihey  bo  re|>lenishod  from  the  e. 

11.14.  they  shall  spoil  them  of  the  e.  .Jer.  40.  28. 

41.2.  who  raised  up  the  righteous  man  from  thee. 

43.  .5.  I  will  bring  thy  seed  from  the  e.  7.rr.h.  8.  7. 

4').  11.  calling  a  ravenous  bird  from  thee,  the  man 
f'zek.K  16.  men  2.5,  with  their  faces  toward  thef. 

2.5.  4. 1  will  deliver  Ihi-e  to  the  men  of  the  e.  10. 

40.  6.  then  cnme  he  to  the  gate  which  lookclh 
toward  the  c.  22.  |  43.  t.  \  44.  1. 140.  1,  12. 

43.2.  the  glory  of  (Jod  came  from  the  way  of  Ihe  e. 

47.  8.  these  waters  issue  out  toward  the  e.  country 

48.  10.  toward  the  e.  ton  thousand  in  breadth 
17.  tlic  Btiburbsof  the  city  toward  tho'c.  2.50. 

Dan.  8.  9.  the  horn  waxed  great  toward  the  e. 

11.  44.  tidings  out  of  the  e.  shall  trouble  liiin 
.7oel  2.  20.  I  will  drive  him  toward  the  c.  sea 
Amos  8  12.  they  ihall  wander  from  norlli  to  c. 
y.eeh.  14.  4.  the  mount  shall  cleave  toward  the  c. 
Mat.  2.  1.  there  came  wise  men  from  the  e. 
2.  for  we  have  scon  his  star  in  the  e.  0. 

R.  II.  many  come  from  c.  and  west,  AwA-c  13.  20. 

24.  27.  ns  lightning  com«>lli  out  of  the  e. 
Rrr.  7.  2.  another  angel  asrendiii;:  from  the  e. 

Ifi.  12.  the  way  of  kings  of«.  might  be  prcprired 

21.  13.  on  the  e.  '.hrcc  gates,  on  the  north  lhre« 

ISG 


EAT 

EAST-BORDER. 

A'um.  34. 10.  and  ye  shall  point  out  your  e.-border 
Josh.  4.  ly.  eucaniped  in  the  e.-border  of  Jericho 
IS.o.the  e.-i«r(/crwasthesalt  scaloend  of  Jordan 
Ezek.  4j.  7.  from  the  west-border  to  the  e.-border 
48. 21.  of  the  oblation  toward  the  e.-border 

EAdTER. 
Acts  12.  4.  intending  after  e.  to  bring  him  forth 

EAST-GATE. 
JVeh.  3.  29.  Shemaiah,  the  keeper  of  Ihe  e.-gate 
Jer.  19.  2.  which  is  by  the  entry  of  the  e.-gate 
Kzek.  10.19.  every  one  stood  at  the  door  ot  the  e.-g. 
11.  1.  the  Spirit  brought  me  unto  the  e.-gate 

EAST-SIDE. 
Kzod.  27.13.  tlie  breadth  of  the  court  on  the  e.-side 
JVum.  2.  3.  and  on  llie  e.-side  shall  Judah  pitch 
Josh.  7.  2.  to  Ai,  which  is  on  the  e.-side  of  Bethel 
10.  5.  the  border  of  their  inheritance  on  the  e.-side 
.Tudg.  11.  18.  came  by  e.-side  of  the  land  of  Moab 
Ezek.  11.23.  the  mountain  on  the  e.-si(^f  of  thecity 
42.  16.  he  measured  the  e.-side  with  the  reed 
48.  2.  from  the  e.-side  even  the  wcet-side,  3,  4, 
.5,0,7,8,23,24,25,26,27. 
Jonah  4.  5.  Jonah  sat  on  tiie  e.-side  of  the  city 

EASTWARD. 
Oe>i.l3.14.  lift  up  thine  eyese.and  look,  i)fuf. 3.27. 
-Kings  13.17. open  the  window  cand  he  ojiened  it 
1  Chr.  26. 17.  e.  were  si.M  Levites,  northward  four 
Ezek.  47.  3.  the  man  with  the  line  went  forth  c. 

EAST-WIND. 
/? en .41.6.  thin  cars,  blasted  with  the  e.-!Ci7i(/ ,23,27. 
Eiod.  10. 13.  the  Lord  brought  an  e.-wind,  14.  21 
.fob  15.  2.  and  till  his  belly  with  the  e   wind 
27.  21.  c.-wiiid  carrieth  him  away,  he  departeth 
38.24.  whicll^cattereth  the  c.-wind  upon  the  earth 
Psal.  48.7.  thou  breakest  the  ships  withanc.-icun/ 
78.  26.  he  caused  an  e.  wind  to  blow  in  heaven 
Isa.  27.  8.  he  stayeth  his  rough  wind  in  day  of  c.-to. 
.fer.  18.  17.  I  will  scatt(!r  them  as  with  an  e.-wind 
Ezek.  17. 10.  wither,  when  the  e.-wind  toucheth  it 
19.  12.  and  the  c.-wind  dricth  up  her  fruit 
27.  26.  the  c.-wind  hath  broken  thee  in  the  seas 
Hos.  12.  1.  Ephraim  foUoweth  after  the  e.-wind 
13.15.though  he  be  fruitful,  an  e.-!aind  shall  come 
.Jonah  4.  8.  God  prepared  a  vehement  e.-wind 
Hab.  1.  9.  their  faces  shall  sup  up  as  the  e.-wind 

EASY. 
Prov.li.  6. knowledge  ise.  to  him  that  understands 
Mat.  11.  30.  my  yoke  is  c.  my  burden  is  light 
1  Cc'r.l4.9.e.\cept  ye  utter  words  e.  to  be  understood 
Jam.  3.  17.  wisdom  from  above  ise.  to  be  inlreated 

EAT. 
To  eat  signifies,  [I]  To  chew  meat  with  the  teeth, 
to  make  it  fit  to  enter  the  stomach,  Gen.  27.  4. 
[2]  To  enjoy,  Isa.  1.  19.  [3J  To  waste,  or  con- 
sume, T,ci^\.  5.  II.  [4]  To  oppress  and  undo, 
Psal.  14.  4.  [5]  To  believe,  John  6.  56.  [6] 
To  have  fellowship  with,  1  Cor.  .5.  11.  [7]  To 
feed  on  God's  word,  Isa.  55.  1.  [8]  To  feast, 
Isa.  22.  13.  [9]  To  do  the  will  of  God  with 
delight,  John  4.  32.  /(  is  said  in  Ezek.  3.  1, 
Son  of  man,  eat  that  thou  findest,  eat  this  roll. 
Read  attentivcly,meditale  thoroughly,  impress 
the  thintrs  upon  thy  soul  deeply.  So  in  Jer. 
15.  16,  Thy  words  were  found,  and  1  did  eat 
Ihem. 
In  John  6.  53,  56.  our  Saviour  says.  Except  ye 
eat  the  flesh  of  the  Son  of  Man  and  drink  his 
blood,  ye  have  no  life  in  you.  Except  ye  par- 
takr  of  those  benefits  which  f  purchased  by  my 
sufferings  in  my  human  nnture,  ye  have  ixo 
spiritual  life,  nor  communion  with  God,  but 
continue  in  your  sins,  and  shall  not  partake  of 
eternal  life.  Again  :  He  that  ealelh  my  flesh, 
and  driuKeth  my  blood,  dwellelh  in  me,  and  I 
ill  him.  There  is  an  intimate  union  and  cum- 
miaiion  between  us,  he  having  a  constant  dr- 
pendance  upon  me  for  life,  which  is  his  dwell- 
ing in  me;  nttd  I  giving  out  a  constant  influ- 
ence and  quickening  virtue  to  make  him  live, 
which  is  my  dwelling  in  him.  And  in  John 
4.  32.  Ac  says,  I  liave  meat  to  eat  which  ye 
know  not  of.  I  hare  something  to  do  which  I 
prefer  before  bodily  food,  namely,  to  bring 
these  Samaritans  to  belirnc  in  and  own  me  far 
the  true  Messiah. 
The  Psiilmist  says,  Psal.  69.0,  The  zeal  of  thine 
house  hnth  eaten  me  up  :  That  fervent  passion 
which  f  have  fur  thy  house,  and  service,  anil 
glorii,  and  people,  hath  exhausted  my  natural 
vuiislurc  and  rilnl  spirits.  The  Apostle 
charges  the  ('orinthians  not  to  cut  with  a  hro- 
Ih'T  that  is  a  fornicator,  or  covetous,  or  an 
idolater  ;  not  to  entertain  any  unnecessary  fa- 
miliarity with  him,  K'or.  5.  11.  Wwen  speak- 
ing of  the  priests,  says.  They  oat  up  the  sin 
of  my  [loiiple,  Hos.  4.  A.  Thiy  feast  upon,  and 
pamper  themselves  with  those  siirrifirrs  which 
my  people  offer  for  their  sins,  and  are  greedy 
after  them,  and  do  neither  desire  nor  endeavour 


EAT 

to  reclaim  the  people,  lest  thereby  their  gaw 
should  be  diminished. 

The  ancient  Hebrews  did  not  eat  indifferently 
with  all  sorts  of  persons ;  they  would  have  pol 
luted  and  dishonoured  thcmsiires  in  thiir  own 
opinion,  if  they  had  eaten  with  people  of  an 
other  religion,  or  of  a  profession  that  wot 
odious  and  in  disrepute.  In  Ihe  patriarch  Jo 
seph's  time  they  neither  ate  with  the  Egyptians, 
nor  the  Egyptians  with  them,  Gen.43.32.  In  our 
Saviour''s  time  they  did  not  eat  with  the  Sama- 
ritans: For  the  .hws  have  no  dealings  with  the 
Samaritans,  John  4.  9.  And  the  Jews  were 
very  much  scandalized  to  see  that  Christ  made 
no  scruple  of  eating  with  publicans  and  sin- 
ners:  Why  eateth  your  Master  with  publicani 
and  sinners'!  Mat.  9.  11.  As  there  were  seve- 
ral sorts  of  meals,  the  i/se  whereof  was  not  al- 
lowed them,  they  could  not  conveniently  eat 
with  those  who  partook  of  them,  for  fear  of 
contracting  some  pollution  by  touching  them, 
or  lest  by  accident  any  part  of  them  should 
fall  upon  them.  Before  they  sit  down  to  table, 
they  are  very  careful  to  wash  their  hands  . 
they  speak  of  this  practice  as  a  ceremony  that 
is  essential  and  strictly  obliging. 
Gen.  2.  16.  of  every  tree  thou  niayest  freely  e. 

3.  5.  in  the  day  ye  e.  your  eyes  shall  be  opened 
6.  Kve  took  and  did  c.  ||  12.  and  I  did  c.  13. 
14.  and  dust  shall  thou  e.  all  the  days  of  thy  life 

17.  in  sorrow  shall  thou  c.  of  it  all  days  of  thy  life 
18. 8.  he  stood  by  the  angels,  and  they  did  e.  19.3. 

27.  4.  savoury  meat,  bring  it  to  me,  thai  I  may  e 
31.  46.  and  they  did  e.  there  upon  the  heap 
40.  17.  the  birds  did  c.  them  out  of  the  basket 

43.  t  16.  the.se  men  shall  e.  with  nic  at  noon 
32.  for  the  Egyptians  did  e.  by  themselves 

ETod.\0.5.  the  locusts  shall  e.  every  tree  that  grow 

12.  the  locusts  may  e.  every  herb  of  the  land 
12.8.roast  with  fire, with  bitter  herbs  they  shall  e.il 

16.  no  work  done,  save  that  wlii(;h  every  man  e 

43.  no  stranger  shall  c.  thereof,  48.  Lev.  22. 1.3. 

44.  when  circumcised,  then  shall  he  e.  thereof 
16. 25.  e.  that  to-day,  for  to-day  is  a  sabbath  to  L 

35.  the  children  of  Isr.  did  e.  manna  forty  years 
till  name  to  borders  of  Canaan,  ./«A7i  C.3i,49,5d 

23.  11.  that  the  poor  of  thy  people  may  e. 
29. 32.  Aaron  and  sons  shall  e.  J.ev.  6. 16.  |  8.  31 
.34.  15.  one  call  thee,  and  thou  e.  of  his  sacrifice 

Lev.  6.  18.  males  ?hall  e.  it,  2!).  |  7. 6.  .Vitm.  18. 10. 
26.  the  priest  that  offereth  it  for  sin  shall  e.  it 
7.19.  all  that  be  clean  shall  e.  thereof,  A'u;n.  18.11 
24.  any  other  use,  but  ye  shall  in  no  wise  e.  of  it 

10.  12.  e.  it  without  leaven  beside  the  altiir 

11.  21.  yet  these  ye  may  e.  22.  Deut.  14.  20. 

24.  9.  Aaron  and  his  sons  shall  e.  in  ihciholy  place 

25.  20.  if  ye  say,  what  shall  we  c.  the  seventh  year 

26.  16.  shall  sow  in  vain,  your  enemies  shall  e.  it 
J^m.  11.5.  wc  remember  the  fish  wo  did  e.  freely 

13.  weep,  saying,  give  us  ticsh,  that  we  may  r. 
23.24.  he  shall  not  lie  down  till  ho  e.  of  Ihe  prey 
25.  2.  the  peo.  did  e.  of  their  sacrifices,  and  bowed 

Deut.  2. 6.  ye  shall  buy  meat  of  them  thiit  vc  may  e 

12.  15.  e.  in  thy  gates,  21.  |  15.  22.  |  26.  12. 
1.5.  the  unclean  and  clean  may  e.  22.  |  1.5.  22. 

18.  thou  must  e.  before  the  Lord,  14. 26.  |  15.  20 
20.  shalt  say,  t  will  e.  flesh,  thou  mayest  e.  flesh 

14.  21.  give  i'l  to  the  stranger  that  hc'may  e. 
20.  6.  lest  he  die,  and  annthcr  m;in  r.  of  it 

23.  24.  then  thou  mayest  e.  grapes  thv  fill 

28.  39.  not  gather  grapes,  for  worms  shall  e.  them 
.53.  -ihall  r.  fruit  of  thine  own  body.  Lam.  2. 20. 

.32.  38.  which  did  e.  the  fiit  of  their  sncrificcs 
./osh.  5. 11.  they  did  c.  of  the  old  corn  of  the  land 

24.  13.  of  Ihe  vineyards  ve  phin'ed  not  do  ye  e. 
.Tudg.  19.8.  Ij.ey  tarried,  and  did  e.  both  of  them 

1  Xam.  1. 18.  Hannah  did  c.  ami  wns  no  more  sad 
9.  13.  and  aflerwards  Ihey  e.  that  he  bidden 
14.  34.  and  e.  and  sin  not  against  the  Lord 
20.  .34.  Jonathan  did  r.  no  meat  Ihe  second  day 
28.  22.  and  e.  that  thou  mavcst  have  sirenpih 

2  Sam.  9. 1 1 .  he  shall  e.  at  inyliible,  1  Kings  2.  7. 

1  Kings  14.  U.  him  that  dieih  of  Joioboam  shal. 
the  doss  e.  16.  4.  |  21.  23.  2  Kings  9.  10,  3fi. 

17. 12.  for  me  and  invson,  that  wc  niayr.  and  die 
19.  5.  the  angel  said,  arise  and  e.  Acts  10.  13. 

111.7. 

2  Kings  4.  43.  they  shall  r.  nnd  leave  thereof 

44.  Ihey  ilid  cand  left  thereof,  nccordins  to  word 
6.28.  this  woman  said,  give  thy  son  that  wo  niaye. 

him  to-day,  nnd  wc  will  c.  my  son  lo-morrow 
20.  so  we  boiled  my  son,  and  did  r.  him 

18.  31.  ye  r.overy  man  of  his  own  vine,  Isn.  .36.16. 
2  Chron.  30.  IH.  yet  did  they  e.  Iho  pnssovcr 
F.:rn  6.  21.  and  the  children  of  Israel  did  e. 
.Veh.  5.  2.  take  up  corn,  that  we  mav  r.  nnd  livo 

9.  25.  so  thevdid  e.  luid  «ere  m-\.  r.vai.  78.  29  ' 
./<>'■.  3.  24.  fur  my  I'igliii'K  iNiuK'th  hifnro  I  e. 

31.  8.  Ilwn  let  liv  sow,  nnd  lei  noolher  r. 
I'sai.  22. 20.  the  meek  :>hull  e.  and  bu  satisfied 


EAT 

Psal.  22.  29.  all  they  that  be  fat  on  earth  shall  c 

50.  13.  will  I  e.  the  Uesli  of  bulls,  or  ilruik  blood 
7d.  25.  man  did  e.  uiigela'  food,  he  sent  tlieni  meat 
^•JS.  2.  thou  shall  e.  the  labour  of  thine  hands 

rrov.  1.31.  e.  the  fruit  of  their  own  way,  Isa.'S.  10. 

13.  2.  but  the  soul  of  transgressors  shall  e.  violence 
Id.  21.  and  they  tliut  love  it  shall  e.  the  fruit 

24.  13.  my  son  e.  thou  honey,  because  it  is  good 
27.  Iti.  who.sokeepeth  fig-tree  shall  c.  fruit  thereof 
31).  17.  the  eye,  and  the  young  eagles  shall  e.  it 
Eccl.  2.  25.  for  who  can  c.  or  hasten  more  than  I  ? 
jj.ll.goods  increase  ihey  are  increased  that  e.thcni 

12.  sleep  is  sweet,  whether  he  e.  little  or  much 

10.  llj.  and  thy  princes  e.  in.  the  morning 

17.  blessed,  when  thy  princes  e.  m  due  season 
Cant.  4. 1 1.  as  a  Hock  of  goals  that  e.  of  Giload 

lU.come  into  hi.-i  garden  and  f.his  pleasant  fruits 

[sa.  4.  1.  we  will  c.  our  own  bread,  and  wear  our 

own  apparel 

7. 15.  butter  and  honey  shall  c  that  he  may  know 

22.  butter  and  honey  shall  every  one  e.  that  is  left 

y.  20.  e.  on  the  left  hand,  e.  tlie  flesh  of  his  arm 

11.  7.  the  lion  shall  e.  straw  like  the  o.x,  G5.  25. 
30.  24.  oxen  and  asses  shall  e.  clean  provender 
37.  30.  sow  ye  and  reap,  plant  vineyards,  and  e. 

the  fruit  thereof,  tj.').  21.  Jer.  2'J.  5,  28. 

51.  8.  and  the  worm  shall  c.  them  like  wool 
55.  1.  come  ye,  buy  and  e.  yea,  come,  buy  wine 

2.  hearken  to  me,  and  c.  that  which  is  good 
C2.  9.  they  that  have  gathered  it  shall  c.  it 
G5.  4.  a  people  which  c.  swine's  flesh  and  broth 

13.  my  servants  shall  c.  but  ye  shall  be  hungry 

22.  they  shall  not|)lant  and  another  e. 
Jer.l5.  IG.  tiiy  words  were  found,  and  I  did  e.  them 

19.  9.  shall  e.  every  one  the  flesh  of  his  friend  in 

the  siege  and  straitness 

Kick.  2.  8.  open  thy  mouth  and  e.  that  I  give  thee 

3.  1.  son  of  man,  e.  that  thou  findest,  e.  this  roll 

4.  10.  e.  by  weight  ||  5.  10.  fathers  shall  c.  sons 
IG.  13.  thou  didst  c.  tine  flour,  and  honey,  and  oil 
22.  y.  and  in  thee  they  e.  upon  the  mountains 
34. 3.  ye  e.  the  fat,  and  clothe  you  with  the  w  ool 

Dan.  4.  33.  Nebuchadnezzar  did  c.  grass  as  o.ven 

Hos.  4. 10.  for  they  shall  c.  and  not  have  enough, 

they  shall  not  increase,  Mk.  (i.  14.  Hag.  1.  6. 

9.  3.  they  shall  e.  unclean  things  in  Assyria 
4.  all  that  e.  thereof  shall  be  imlluted 

Amos  6.  4.  thate.  the  lambs  out  of  the  flock 
Mic.  3.  3.  who  also  c.  the  flesh  of  my  people 
Z.rck.  ll.y.  let  the  rest  e.  every  one  flesh  of  another 

It),  but  he  shall  e.  the  flesh  of  the  fat  and  tear 
J\!at.  12.  4.  how  David  did  e.  the  shew-bread 

14.  2U.  did  all  e.  and  were  filled,  took  up  frag- 
ments, 15.  37.  Mark  6.  42.  |  8.  8.  TAikc  9.  17. 

15. 27.  yet  the  dogs  f,  of  the  crumbs,  Mark  7.  28. 
38.  they  that  did  e.  were  4000,  besides  women 

2G.  21.  and  as  they  did  e.  he  said,  Mark  14.  18, 22. 

2t).  Jeeus  took  bread,  brake  it,  and  said,  takee. 

this  is  my  body,  Mark  14.  22.  1  Cor.  11.  24. 

Mark  2.  16.  when  they  saw  him  e.  with  publicans 

6.  44.  they  that  did  e.  were  above  5000  men 

11.  14.  no  man  e.  fruit  of  thee  hereafter  for  ever 

14.12.  where  go  and  prepare  that  thou  mavest  e. 

thepassover?  14.  y.ute22.  8, 11.  ./o/tn  18.  28. 

J,vke  ti.  1.  and  did  e.  rubbing  them  in  their  hands 

7.  3().  one  desireil  him  that  he  would  e.  with  him 

10.  8.  <T.  such  things  as  are  set  before  you 

l.V  23.  killed  fatied  calf,  let  us  e.  and  be  merry 
24.  43.  he  took  it,  and  did  c.  before  them 
John  4.31.  disciples  prayed  him,  saying,  Master  e. 
6.  2*5.  because  ye  did  c  of  loaves  and  wore  filled 
50.  that  a  man  may  c.  thereof  and  not  die 
53.  e.vci  [It  ye  e.  the  flesh  of  the  Son  of  Man 
Acts  2.  46.  they  did  e.  their  meat  with  gladness 

11.  X  thou  wentest  in  and  didst  e.  with  them 
23. 14.  we  will  e.  nothing  till  we  have  slain  Paul 

Horn.  14.2.  one  believeth  he  may  f.  all  things 

23.  he  that  doubteth  is  damned  if  he  e. 

1  Cor.  8.7.  for  some  e.  it  as  a  thing  offered  to  an  idol 

8.  neither  if  we  e.  are  we  the  better,  if  we  e.  not 
13.  I  will  e.  no  flesh  while  the  world  standelh 
10.  3.  and  did  all  e.  the  same  spiritual  meat 

18.  who  f.  of  the  sacrifices,  partakers  of  the  altar 
2.^.  whatsoever  is  sold  in  the  shambles,  that  e. 
27.  e.  asking  no  question  for  conscience  sake 

11.34  if  any  man  hunger,  let  him  e.  at  home 
ZThcss.3. 10.  if  any  work  not,  neither  should  hee. 

2  Tim.  2.  17.  iheir  word  will  e.  as  doth  a  canker 
Jam.  .5.  3.  and  shall  c.  your  flesh  as  it  were  fire 
Jiev.  17. 16.  shall  c.  her  flesh,  and  burn  her  with  fire 

19. 18.  that  ye  may  c.  flesh  of  kings  and  captains 

See  Blood,  Bbkad,  Fat. 

E.-\T  7iiitli  drink. 

Gen.  24.  54.  and  they  did  e.  and  drink,  26.  30. 

Kxod'.'ii.  11.  Judg.  9.  27.  |  19.  4 

Kxod.  32.  6.  sat  down  to  e.  and  drink,  1  Cor.  10. 7. 

34.28.  nor  c.  bread,  nor  drink  water,  Detit.  9.9,18 
lSam.30.11.Egyptiiinsdidc. bread  and  rfrini  water 
2-S<im.ll.lI.  shiill  I  go  to  my  house  to  e.  and  drink? 

12.  3.  it  did  e.  of  h.s  meat  and  drijJc  of  his  cup 

157 


EAT 

2  Sam.  19. 35.  can  thy  servant  taste  what  I  e-  or  d.? 

1  Kinffs  1.  25.  they  e.  and  drink  before  .\donijah 
13.  8. 1  will  not  e.  bread  nor  drink  water,  9, 17, 22. 

10.  neither  will  I  e.  bread  nor  drink  water 

18.  41.  Elijah  said,  get  thee  up,  e.  and  drink 

2  Kings  6.22.  set  bread,  that  they  may  e.  and  drink 

7.  8.  they  went  into  one  tent  and  did  e.  and  drink 
18. 27.  e.  own  dung  and  drink  piss,  Isa.  36.  12. 

1  Chr.  29. 22.  and  did  e.  and  drink  belbre  the  Lord 

2  C/iron.  28.  15.  and  gave  them  to  e.  and  to  drink 
Ezra  10.  6.  Ezra  did  e.  no  bread  nor  drink  water 
JV('A.8. 10,go  your  way,  e.  the  (Jit  and  drink  sweet 
Estk.  4. 16.  fast  for  me,  nor  c.  nor  drink  three  days 
/ob  1.  4.  called  sisters  to  c.  and  drink  with  thera 
Prov.  23.  7.  so  is  he,  c.  and  drink,  saith  he  to  thee 
Eccl.  2.  24.  there  is  nothing  better  than  that  he 

should  e.  and  drink,  3.  13.  |  5.  18.  |  8.  15. 
Cant.  5.  1.  e.  O  friends,  yea,  drink  abundantly 
/.>'a.  21.5.  e.  drink,  ye  princes,  anoint  the  shield 
22.  13.  behold  joy  and  gladness,  let  us  e.  and 
drink,  for  to-morrow  we  shall  die,  1  Cor.15.32. 
Jer.  22.  15.  did  not  thy  father  e.  and  drink  ? 
Ezek.  25.  4.  shall  e.  thy  fruit  and  drink  thy  milk 
39.  17.  that  ye  may  e.  flesh  and  drink  blood 
Dan.  1. 12.  give  us  pulse  to  c.  and  water  to  drink 
Zcck.  7.  6.  when  ye  did  e.  and  when  ye  AuXdrink 
Mat.  6.25.  what  ye  shall  e.  or  d.  31.  Z-i/te  12.  29. 
24.49.  to  e.  and  drink  with  drunken,  Luke  12.  45. 
J^ikc  5.  30.  why  do  ye  c.  and  d.  with  publicans  7 
33.  John's  disciples  fast,  but  thy  disciples  e.and  d. 
12.  19.  take  thine  ease,  e.  drink,  and  be  merry 
17.  8.  and  afterward  thou  shall  e.  and  drink 
27.  they  did  e.  they  drank,  they  married,  28. 

22.  30.  that  ye  may  e.  and  drink  at  my  table 
ids  9. 9.  Saul  three  days  did  neither  e.  nor  drink 

23.  12.  e.  nor  drink  till  they  had  killed  Paul,  21. 
Rom.  14.  21.  neither  to  e.  flesh  nov  drink  wine 

1  Cor.  9.  4.  have  we  not  power  to  c.  and  to  drink? 
10.31.  whether  therefore  ye  e.or  drink,or  whatever 

11.  22.  have  ye  not  houses  to  p.  and  drink  in  1 

26.  as  oft  as'  ye  e.  this  bread  and  drink  this  cup 

27.  whosoever  shall  c.  and  drink  unworthily 

28.  and  so  let  him  e.  and  drink  of  that  cup 

He  did  EAT. 
den.  3.  6.  Eve  gave  to  her  husband,  and  he  did  c. 
25  28.1oved  Esau,  because  /ic  did  e.  ofhis  venison 

27.  25.  he  brought  it  near  to  Isaac,  and  he  did  e. 
39.  6.  he  knew  not  ought,  save  the  bread  he  did  e. 

l.Sinn.30.11.gave  the  Egyptians  bread, and  Ap  rf/iZc. 

2  .Sam.  9.  13.  he  did  e.  continually  at  his  table 

12.  20.  they  set  bread  before  him,  and  he  did  e. 
Mark  1.  6.  John  did  e.  locusts  and  wild  honey 
/>«ie  4.  2.  and  in  those  days  he  did  e.  nothing 
Oal.  2.  12.  for  before  hr.  did  e.  with  the  Gentiles 

E.-VT  not. 
Gen.  2.  17.  but  of  the  tree  of  the  knowledge  of 
good  and  evil,  (hou  shall  not  e.  of  it,  3.  1,  3. 
3.  11.  whereof  I  commanded  thee  not  to  e.  17. 

9.  4.  the  blood  thereof  shall  you  note.  /.ec.  19.26. 

Dent.  12.  16,  23,  24,  25.  |  1.5.  23. 

24.  33.  I  will  not  e.  till  I  have  told  my  errand 
32.  32.  the  children  of  Israel  e.  not  ot  the  sinew 
43.32.theEgyplians  might  not  e.  with  the  Hebrews 

Eiod.  12.  9.  e.  not  of  it  raw,  nor  sodden  at  all 

45.  a  foreigner  shall  not  e.  thereof,  29.  33. 
Lev.  11. -1   these  shall  ye  not  c.  Deut.  14.  3,  7. 
22.  4.  a  leper  not  e.  of  the  holy  things,  6,  10, 12. 

8.  that  torn  he  shall  not  e.  to  defile  himself 
.Vwrn.  11. 19.  ye  shall  not  e.  one  day,  or  two  days 
Deut.  14.  21.  ye  shall  not  e.  of  any  thing  that  dieth 

of  itself,  shall  give  it  to  stranger,  i^jet.  44. 31 

28.  31.  ox  be  slain,  and  thou  shall  not  c.  thereof 
Judg.  13.  4.  and  e.  not  any  unclean  thing,  7,  14. 

1  Sam.  1.  7.  therefore  she  wept  and  did  not  e. 
9. 13.  for  the  people  will  not  e.  till  he  come 
28.  23.  Saul  refused,  and  said,  I  will  not  e. 

2  Kingx  4.  40.  and  they  could  not  e.  thereof 

7.2.  shall  see  it  with  thy  eyes,  but  not  e.thereof,  19. 
Evra  2. 63.  not  e.  of  most  holy  things,  Kch.  7.  65. 
Vsal.  141.  4.  and  let  me  not  e.  of  their  dainties 
Prov.  23.6.  e.  nnt  bread  of  him  that  hath  an  evil  eye 
Ezrk.  24.17.  cover  not  lips,  and  e.  not  bread  of  men 
Mark  7.  3.  .Tews,  except  they  wash,  they  e.  no/,  4. 
Luke  22.  16.  I  will  not  e.  thereof,  until  fulfilled 
1  Cor.  5.  11.  with  such  a  one  no  not  to  e. 

8.  8.  neither  if  we  e.  not  are  we  the  »vorse 

10.  28.  e.  not  for  his  sake  that  shewed  it 

Shall  ve  EAT. 
Frnd.  12. 11.  thus  shnU  ye  e.  it,  with  loins  girded 
15.  seven  days  shall  ye  e.  unleavened  bread,  20. 
22.  31.  nor  shall  ye  e.'flesh  torn  of  beasts 
Lev.  10. 14.  wave-breast  shall  ye  e.  in  a  clean  place 
11.3.cheweth  the  cud,that  shall  yee.  DchM4.4,6. 

9.  these  shall  ye  e.  of  all  ihat  are  in  the  waters 

19.  25.  in  the  fifth  year  shall  ye  e.  of  the  fruit 
26.  29.  the  flesh  of  your  daughters  shall  ye  e. 

Deut.  14.  9.  all  that  liave  fins  and  scales  shall  ye  e 

Ye  shall  EAT. 
Gen.  45.  18.  and  ye  shall  r.  the  fat  of  the  land 
Eioi.Vl.W.  ye  shall  e.  it  in  haste,  Lord's  pasiiovcr 


EAT 

Eror/.12.18.first  month  at  even  y.s.e.  unleav.  breat* 
lti.l2.saying,  at  even  ye  shall  e.  flesh, and  in  nioriL 
Z,cu.  7.23.  ye  shalle.  no  manner  of  fat,  24. 
26.  ye  shall  c.  no  manner  of  blood,  17.  14. 
10.  13.  and  ye  shall  e.  it  in  tlie  holy  place 
23.  H.yc  shalle.  neither  bread  nor  parched  corn 
25.12.1/e  5Ao//e.the  increase  thercofout  of  the  field 
19.  ye  shall  c.  your  fill,  and  dwell  in  safety 
22.  ye  shall  e.  of  the  old  store,  26.  10. 
26.  26.  and  ye  shall  c.  and  not  be  satisfied 
29.  ye  shall  c.  the  flesh  of  your  sons  and  daugh 
JVum.  11. 18.  the  L.  will  give  flesh,  and  ye  shall  c. 
18.31.s.nd  ye  shall  e.\ne\ery  place,and  households 
Deut.  12.  7.  there  ye  shall  c.  before  Lord  your  God 
14.  11.  of  all  clean  birds  ye  shall  e. 

1  Sam.  9. 19.  go  up,  for  ye  shall  e.  with  me  to-day 

2  Kings  19. 29.  this  shall  be  a  sign,  ye  shall  e.  this 

year  such  things  as  grow  themselves,  Isa.  37.30. 
/s«.1.19.  ifobcdicnt  ye  shall  e.  the  good  of  the  land 

iil.G.yeshall  e.the  riches  oftlie  Gent.in  their  glory 
Ezek.  39.  19.  ye  shall  e.  fat  till  ye  be  full 
Joel  2.  26.  ye  shall  e.  in  plenty,  and  be  satisfied 
Z/U/tel2.22.take  no  thought  whaiye  shall  e.noi  ^lul 

To  EAT. 
Eiod.lG.S.Liord  shall  give  you  in  evening  flesh  to  e. 
JVum.  11.  4.  said,  who  shall  give  us  flesh  to  e.?  18. 
Deut.  12. 20.  because  thy  soul  longeth  to  e.  flesh 

18.  8.  they  shall  have  like  portions  to  c. 

1  Sam.  9. 13.  before  he  go  to  the  high  place  to  e. 
20.  24.  the  king  sat  hira  down  to  e.  meat 

2  .Sam.  3.35.  the  people  came  to  cause  David  to  e. 
9. 10.  that  thy  master's  son  may  have  food  to  c. 

13.  9.  poured  before  him,  but  he  refused  to  e. 

16.  2.  and  summer-fruit  for  the  young  men  to  e. 

17.  29.  for  the  people  thai  were  with  him  to  c. 

2  Kings  4.  40.  so  they  poured  out  for  the  men  to  r. 
2  CAroji.  33.  10.  we  have  had  enough  to  e.  and  left 
JVeh.  9.  36.  land  thou  gavest,  to  e.  the  fruit  thereof 
Psal.  78.  24.  and  had  rained  manna  on  them  to  e. 
Prov.  23. 1.  when  thousittcst  to  e.  with  a  ruler 

25.  27.  it  is  not  good  to  c.  much  honey 

Eccl.  5.  19.  hath  given  him  power  to  e.  thereof 
6. 2.  yet  God  giveth  him  not  power  to  e.  thereof 
/sa.  23. 18.  shall  be  for  them  to  e.  sufficiently 
Jer.  19. 9.  cause  them  to  e.  the  flesh  of  their  sons 
Ezek.  3.  2.  and  he  caused  rne  to  e.  that  roll 

3.  he  said,  son  of  man,  cause  thy  belly  to  e. 
Dan.  4.  25.  they  shall  make  thee  to  e.  grass,  32. 
Mic.  7.  1.  woe  is  me,  there  is  no  cluster  to  e. 
Hab.  1.8.  they  shall  flee  as  eagle  that  hastethiop 
J/aM2.1.they  began  to  pluck  ears  ofcorn  and  to  e 

4.  not  lawful  for  him  to  e.  Mark  2.  26.  J^uke  6. 4 

14.  16.  give  ye  them  to  e.  MarkG.'i'.  I.uke^.Vi. 
1.5.  20.  to  e.  with  unwashen  hands  defileth  not 

32.the  multitude  have  nothing  to  e.  Mark  8.1, 2. 

26.  17.  where  wilt  that  we  prepare  to  e.  piissover  ! 
Mark  .5.43.lhat  somcthingshould  be  given  her  toe. 

6.31.  and  they  had  no  leisure  so  much  as  to  c. 
Liikc  22.  15.  I  have  desired  to  e.  this  passover 
John  4.  32.  I  have  meat  to  e.  thai  j'e  know  not  of 

33.  hath  any  man  brought  him  ought  to  e? 
6.  .52.  how  can  this  man  give  us  his  flesh  to  e.7 
Acts  27.  3.5.  when  he  had  broken  it,  he  began  to  e. 
1  Cor.  8.10.  emboldened  to  e.  things  oflVred  to  idols 
11.20.whenyecome,  this  is  not  (oe.Loid's  supper 
33.  brethren,  when  ye  come  together  to  e. 
f/ci.lS.IO.an  altar  whereof  they  have  no  rightto?. 
Rev.  2.  7.  will  I  give  to  e.  ofthe  tree  of  life  in  midst 
14.  to  K  things  sacrificed  unto  idols,  20. 
17.1  will  "ive  to  e.of  hidden  manna, a  white  stone 
EAT  up. 
Gen.  41.  4.  the  lean  did  e.  up  the  seven  fat  kine,  20. 
Jjcv.  26.  38.  land  of  your  enemies  shall  e.  you  up 
J^am.  24.8.  he  shall  e.  up  the  nations  his  enemies 
Dent.  28.  33.  a  nation  thou  knowest  not  shall  e.  up 
P.i.  27. 2.  mv  enemies  came  on  me  to  e.  up  my  flesh 
105.  35.  did  e.  up  all  the  herbs  in  their  land 
fsa.  .50.  9.  the  moth  shall  e.  them  up,  51.  8. 
./cr.  .5. 17.  they  shall  e.  up  thine  harvest  and  thy 
brend,f.«p  thy  flocks,e.«p  thy  vines  and  fig-lrcei 
22.  22.  the  wind  shall  e.  vp  all  thy  pastures 
Hos.  4.  8.  they  c.  vp  the  sin  of  my  people 
Amos  7.4.  ildevoured  ihe  deep,  and  did  e.  up  apart 
Mic.  5.  t  6.  they  shall  e.  up  the  land  of  Assyria 
JVah.  3.  15.  it  shnll  e.  thee  up  like  the  canker-worm 
Ren.  10.  9.  angel  said  to  me,  lake  it,  and  e.  it  up 

EATEN. 
<7en .3.11. hast  thou  c.of  tree  whereof  shouldest  not? 
14.  24.  save  that  which  the  young  men  have  e. 
31.  38.  the  rams  of  thy  flock  have  I  not  e. 
41.  21.  when  they  had  «.  them  up,  it  could  not  be 
known  that  they  had  e.  them 
Ezod.  12.  46.  in  one  house  shall  it  he  e. 
13.  3.  there  shall  no  leavened  bread  be  e.  7. 
21.23  ox  shall  be  stoned,  his  flesh  shall  not  be  e. 
22.  5.  if  a  man  cause  a  field  or  vineyard  to  be  e. 
29.  34.  it  shall  not  be  e.  because  it  is  holv 
Lrv.  6. 16.  it  shall  be  r.  in  Ihe  holv  place,  26.  |  7.  6 
23.  it  shall  be  wliollv  burnt,  it  shall  not  be«.7.19. 
30.  no  sin-offerina  shall  bo  e.  it  shall  be  burnt 


EAT 

Z.to.7. 15.  shall  be  s.  the  same  day  it  19  offbred,  16. 
Id.  if  the  sacritict!  ol'peaco-ollering  be  e. 

10.  17.  w'liy  liave  ye  nol  e.  ihusin-olt'ering  ? 

Jc'.  ye  sliould  indeed  liave  e.  it  iji  the  liuly  i)lace 
1".).  ifl  had  e.  the  sin-otiering  to-day 

11.  13.  they  shall  not  bo  e.  41.  Lieut.  14.  10. 

19.  (i.  it  shall  be  e.  the  same  day  ye  oiler,  -2.  30. 
7.  and  if  it  be  e.  at  all  on  the  third  day 

^"11111.  2^.  17.  unleavened  bread  bee.  Kzek.  45.21. 

JJcut.  a.  11.  to  give  vineyards  thou  plantedst  not, 

when  thou  slialt  have  e.  and  be  lull,  H.  JO,  lii. 

12.  ••'•J.  even  as  the  roe-buck  and  the  hiirt  is  c. 
20.(5.  hath  planted  a  vineyard,  and  hath  not  f .  of  it 
2tj.  14.  I  have  nol  c.  ihereot'in  my  mourning 

2'J.  t).  ye  have  not  e.  btead  nor  drunk  wine 
31.  20.  when  they  shall  have  e.  and  be  lilled 
JojA.  5.  12.  alter  they  had  c.  of  the  old  corn 
Huth  3.  7.  when  Boaz  had  e.  and  drunk,  he  went 

1  tiam.  14.  30.  i!' haply  the  pijople  had  c.  freely 
2d.  20.  for  he  had  e.  no  bread  all  the  day 

30.  12.  when  he  had  e.  his  spirit  came  again 

2  Ham.  19.  42.  have  we  e.  at  all  of  the  king's  cost  ? 
\  Kings  13.22.  but  earnest  back,  and  hast  e.  bread 

2.':<.tlie  lion  had  not  e.the  carcase,  nor  torn  the  ass 
JVe/i.  5.  14.  have  not  e.  the  bread  of  the  governor 
Job  6.  G.  that  is  unsavoury  be  e.  without  salt 

31.  17.  or  have  e.  my  morsel  myself  alono 

39.  I  have  e.  the  fruits  thereof  without  money 
Ps.  1)9. 9.  for  the  zeal  of  thine  bouse  hath  e.me  up, 
and  repro.tches  are  fallen  upon  me,  J«Ak  2.17. 

102.9.1  have  e.  ashes  like  bread, mingled  my  drink 
Pruv.  9.  17.  and  bread  e.  in  secret  is  pleasant 

23.  S.  the  morsel  thatthouhast  e.  shait  thou  vomit 
Canl.5.1.\  have  e.  my  honey-comb  with  my  honey 
ya-a.3.14.for  ye  have  cup  the  vineyard  spoil  of  poor 
v/tr.l0.25.they  have  cup  Jacob,  and  devoured  him 

24.  2.  ti^s  which  could  not  he  e.  3,  8.  |  29.  17. 
31.  29.  fathers  have  c  sour  grapes,  F-zck.  18.  2. 

Kiek.  4.  14. 1  have  not  c.  that  which  dieth  of  itself 
Id.  tj.  and  hath  not  c  upon  the  mountains,  15. 
11.  but  even  hath  e.  upon  the  mountains 

Nos.  10.  13.  ye  have  c.  the  fruit  of  lies 

Jucl  1.4. that  locusts  hath  left,  canker-worm  c2.25. 

Mat.  14.  21.  and  they  that  had  e.  Mark  8.  i». 

J^uke  13.26.  we  liave  e.  and  drunk  in  thy  presence 
17.  H.  till  I  have  e.  afterwards  thou  shall  eat 

Jukn  6.  13.  which  remained  to  them  that  had  c 

^ct.i  10.  10.  he  became  hungry,  and  would  have  e. 

14.  Lord,  1  have  never  c  any  thing  coninioji 

12.  23.  ho  was  c  of  worms,  and  gave  up  the  ghost 

20.  11.  when  he  had  broken  bread  and  c.  departed 
27.  38.  when  they  bad  e.  enough  they  lightened 

Jicv.  10.  10.  as  soon  as  I  had  c  it,  iny  belly  was 
E.\TER.  [hitler 

Judff.  14. 14.  he  said,  out  of  thee  came  forth  meat 
fsa.  55. 10.  that  it  may  give  bread  to  the  e. 
JVa/t.  3. 12.  they  shall  fall  into  the  mouth  of  the  e. 

E.\TEUS. 
Prov.  23.  20.  be  not  among  riotous  e.  of  flesh 

EATESl'. 
Gen.  2.  17.  in  the  day  thou  c  thou  shall  surely  die 
1  .Slim.  1.  8.  then  said  Elkaiiah,  why  e.  thou  nol  ? 
1  Kino's  21.  5.  why  spirit  so  sad  that  thou  e.  no 

E.\TETH.  [bread  ? 

Kzod.  12. 15.  who  c  leavened  bread  be  cut  off,  19. 
/xB.  7.  18.  the  soul  that  e.  20, 2.'>,  27.  |  17. 10,  15. 

19.  8.  every  one  that  c  shall  bear  his  iniipiily 
JV'um.  13.  32.  a  land  I  hat  c  up  the  inhabitants 
1  .Sam.  14.  24.  cursc^d  he  the  man  that  c  28. 
Job  5.  5.  whoso  harvest  the  hungry  c.  up 

21.  2.).  and  another  never  e.  with  pleasure 
40.15.b'<heinoth  which  I  made,  he  e.grass  as  an  ct 

Psal.  lOli.  20.  the  similitude  of  an  ox  that  c  grass 
/Voi).13.25.  the  righteous  c  to  satisfying  of  his  soul 
30.  00.  she  e.  and  wipeth  her  mouth,  and  saith 
3J.  27.  and  she  e.  not  the  bread  of  idionoss 
Hccl.i.Tt.  the  fool  Ibldeth  hands  and  e.  his  own  tlesh 
5.  17.  all  his  days  also  he  e.  in  darkness 
G.  3  but  a.  Btrangi'r  e..  it,  this  is  vanity,  evil  disease 
Jsa.  ""<.  4.  while  it  is  yet  in  bis  hand  he  e.  it  up 
29.  8.  heholil,  ho  c  but  awaketh,  and  is  hungry 
44.  Hi.  and  with  part  lher(!of  he  e.  tlcsh,  roasteth 
59.  5.  he  that  c.  oftheir  eggs  dieth 
Jrr.  31.  30.  every  man  that  e.  the  sour  grape 
Mai.  9.  11.  Pharisees  said,  why  e.  your  master  with 
publicans  and  sinners  1  JW<trA- 2.  Ifi.  AuA'cl.').  2. 
Mark  11. 18.  Jesus  said,  verily,  one  of  you  who  e. 
with  mo,  shall  betray  me,  .liihn  13.  18. 
John  f).  54.  whoso  r.  my  flesh  hath  eterniil  life 
50.  ho  that  e.  my  flesh  dwcllelh  in  me,  I  in  him 
.'57.  HO  he  that  e.  mo,  even  he  shall  live  by  mo 
58.  hi'  that  c.  of  this  bread,  shall  live  for  ever 
J{iim.  14.  2.  anoth(-r  who  is  weak  e.  herbs 
3.  let  nol  him  that  e.  despise  him  that/!,  not 
6.  that  K.  to  tho  Ld.,  that  c.  not,  to  the  \A.  e.  not 
20.  it  is  evil  for  that  man  who  r.  with  olTenro 
2:1.  dninned  if  he  eat,  beraiHe  ho  r..  not  of  faith 
1  Cur.  9.  7.  who  planteth  a  vineyard,  and  <-.  not  of 
friiHlhereofl  aiirl  cnot  of  the  milk  ofthc  flock 
11.29.  he  tliat  e.  unworthily,  e.  damnation  to  hiins. 


#  EFP 

EATING. 

frC»i.2.tlC.of  every  tree  c  thou  shall  eat,  but  of  tree 
Kxod.l'i.i.  lake  a  lamb  according  to  the  numbur  ot 
souls,  every  man  according  to  his  a.  10. 10,  18,21. 
Jv.d<r.  14.  9.  ISamson  took  llieruof,  and  went  on  c. 
1  .Sufn.14.34.  sill  not  against  the  L.  in  e.  with  blood 
SO.lO.they  were  spread  abroad  on  all  the  earth  c 

1  Kings  1.  41.  Adonijah's  guests  made  an  end  of  i;. 

2  Kings  4.  40.  as  they  were  e.  of  pottage,  cried  out 
Job  20.23.  and  shall  rain  it  upon  him  while  he  is  c 
Isa.  60.  17.  e.  swine's  flesh,  and  the  abomination 
Aiiws  7.  2.  when  they  had  maile  an  end  of  e.  grass 
Mat.  20.  20.  as  they  were  e.  Jesus  took  bread 
^cts  1.14.  and  e.  with  them,  commanded  them 
1  C<(r.8.4.  concerning  c  of  things  sacriliced  to  idols 

11.  21.  in  c.  every  one  takelli  his  own  supper 
Hec  Drinkino. 
ECHO. 
Ezek.  7.  t  7.  and  nol  the  c  of  the  mountains 

EDGE. 
Exod.  13.20.  Etharn  in  e.  of  wilderness,  A'um.33.6. 
20.  10.  make  fifty  loops  in  the  c.  of  one  curtain 
Eccl.  10.  10.  be  blunt,  and  he  do  nol  whet  the  e. 
LiUke  4.  t  29.  they  led  Jesus  to  the  c  ofthc  hill 
.See  Tketh. 
EDGE  of  the  sword. 
fi'eK.34.2fi.  and  they  slew  llamor  withe  of  sword 
Exod.  17.13.  discomfited  Anialek  with  thije.  ofsw. 
jVuH/. 21. 24. and  Isr.  smote  tiihon  with  e.  of  sicuru 
Jo47i.fi.21.they  utterly  destroyed  all  with  e.vf  sword 

8.  24.  the  Israelites  smote  Ai  with  the  c.  of  sword 
Jur/o-.4.15.Sisera  withe.  o/6-.||21.10.  Jabesh-gilead 
.fob  J.  15.  Joab's servants  slam  with  e.  of  swurd,n. 
Fsal.  89.  43.  thou  hast  also  turned  the  c.  of  sword 
Jer.  21.7.  Nebuchadnezzar  smite  them  with  e.  of  s. 
lAike  21.  24.  the  Jews  shall  fall  by  the  e.  of  sword 
Heb.  11.34.  who  thro'  faith  escaped  the  e.  of  sword 

EDGED. 
Psal.  149.  6.  and  a  two-c.  sword  in  Iheir  hand 
Prov.  5.  4.  but  her  end  is  sharp  as  a  two-e.  sword 
i/ci.4.12.word  of  God  sharper  than  a  two-e.  sword 
Rev.  1. 16.  out  of  mouili  went  a  sharp  two-e.  sword 

EDGES. 
Exod.  28.  7.  joined  at  the  two  e.  thereof,  39.  4. 
Judg.'.L\6.  Ehud's  dagger  had  two  e.  length  a  cubit 
Hev.  2. 12.  who  hath  the  sharp  sword  with  two  c 

EDIFICATION. 
Rom.  15.  2.  let  every  one  please  his  neighbour  to  r. 

1  Cor.  14.  3.  that  prophesieih  speakelh  to  men  to  c 

2  C^lr.  10.  6.  which  the  Lord  lialh  given  us  for  e. 
13. 10.  pov\'cr  which  the  Lord  hath  given  me  to  c. 

EDIFY. 
Rom.  14. 19.  things  wherewith  one  may  e.  another 
1  Cor.  10.  23.  all  things  are  lawful,  but  e.  not 
F.ph.A.  t  29.  that  which  is  good  to  e.  profitably 
1  Thcss.  5.  11.  t.  one  another,  even  as  also  ye  do 

EDIFIED. 
Acts  9.  31.  the  churches  had  rest,  and  were  e. 
1  Cur. 8. 1 10.  conscience  of  him  thai  is  weak  be  e. 
14.  17.  givesl  thanks  well,  hut  the  other  is  not  e. 
EDIFIETH. 
1  Cor.  8.  L  knowledge  pufieth  up,  but  charity  e. 
14.  4.  he  that  speaks  in  an  unknown  tongue  r. 
himself;  but  be  that  propliesieth  e.  the  cliurch 
EDIFYING. 

1  Cor.  14.  5.  that  the  church  may  receive  c. 
12.  seek  that  ye  may  excel  to  the  c  ofthc  church 

14.  20.  let  all  things  be  done  to  c 

2  Cor.  12.  19.  but  we  do  all  Ihings  for  your  e. 
Eph.  4.  12.  for  thee,  ofthc  body  of  Christ 

10.  increase  of  the  body,  to  the  c  of  itself  in  love 
29.  but  that  which  is  good  to  the  use  of  e. 

1  Tim.  1.  4.  which  minister  ([uestions  rather  than  c 
EFFECT,  Substantive. 

JVHm.30.8.her  htishand  shall  make  her  vow  of  no  e. 

2  CVir.Dt.  34.  22.  ami  they  spake  to  her  to  that  e. 
fiui.33.  10.  makes  the  devices  ofpeople  of  nonce. 
Isa.  32.  17.  the  e.  of  righteousn'.'ss,  (|uiclness 
7i;zeA.12.23.days  are  at  hand,  and  e.  of  every  vision 
Mat.  15.  0.  make  commandment  of  (lod  of  none  e. 
Mark  7.  lit.  making  the  word  of  God  of  none  e. 
/io7n.3.3.unbehef  nuike  the  faith  of  Gd.  wiibont  e.? 

4.  14.  the  promise  made  of  none  c.  <lal.  3.  17. 

9.  0.  not  as  though  the  word  hath  taken  none  c. 

1  Cor.  1.  17.  lest  the  cross  ofC'hrist  be  of  none  e. 
Gal.  5.  4.  Christ  is  hicomiMif  no  c.  to  you,  who  are 

EFFECT,  Verb. 

7er.48.30.  it  shall  not  be  so,  his  lies  shall  nol  so  e.  it 

EFFECTED. 

2  CAron.  7.  II.  Solomrm  prospcrouslv  e.  all  in  his 
EFFECTUAL.      '  fheort 

1  Cor.  16. 9.  for  a  great  door  and  e.is  opened  to  mo 

2  Cor.  1.  0.  which  is  e.  in  enduring  the  same  suf- 
ferings 

Eph.X  7.  by  thee.workinif  of  his  power  given  me 
4.  10.  according  to  tho  r.  working  in  tho  measure 
I'Ai/.n.tliat  thy  faith  may  bcrome  r.  by  good  things 
./um.S.lO.the  c  praver  of  ii  rirhieous  man  availoih 

EFFF.CTIALLV. 
aal.%8.(ot  ho  that  Wrought  c.iu  I'etcr,  same  in  mu 


ELD 

1  T7ics«.3.13.tho  worde.worketh  in  you  that  bclieva 

EFFE.MINATE. 
I  Cor.  6. 9.  not  c.  shall  inlurit  the  kingdom  of  God 

EGG. 
./ob  6.  6.  is  there  any  taste  in  the  while  of  an  e.7 
y^uie  11.12.if  he  ask  an  e.will  offer  him  a  scorpion'? 

EGGS. 
Dent.  22. 6.  whether  young  ones  or  c  and  the  dam 
silting  on  the  young  or  e.  shall  nol  take  the  dam 
Job  39. 14.  the  ostrich  leaveth  her  e.  in  the  earth 
ha.  10. 14.  onegathereth  c  that  are  left,  I  gathered 
59.  5.  they  hatch  cockatrice  c.  he  that  eateth  e. 
Jer.  17. 11.  as  partridge  sitteth  on  e.  and  halchelh 

EIGHT. 
Gen.  17. 12.  he  that  is  e.  days  old  shall  bo  circum- 
cised, every  man  child,  21.  4.  J.uke  2.  21 
22.  23.  these  e.  Milcah  did  bear  to  Nahor 
/■;j(;(/.20.2.').theysliall  becboards,and  sockets  silver 
^UHi.  7.8.Moses  gave  4  waggons, e.  o.xeii  to  Merari 
29.  29.  on  the  si.vth  day  e.  bullocks,  two  rams 
Judg.  3.  8.  Israel  served  Chushan-rishathaim  c. 

years 
12.14.Abdon,  the  son  of  Hillel,  judged  Isr.  c  years 
1  Sam.  17.  12.  Jesse  the  Ephrathile  had  c.  sons 
1  Kings  7. 10.  foundation  was  ofstones  of  e.  cubits 
2KiHgs  8.17. Jehoram  reigned  e.years  in  Jerusalem 
22. 1.  Josiah  was  c.  years  old  when  he  began  to 
reign,  and  reigned  thirty-one,  2  C/iron.  34.  1. 

1  Chruii.  24.  4.  c  among  the  sons  of  Ilhainar 

2  CAr.  29.  17.  they  sanctified  house  of  L.  in  c  days 
Eccl.  11.  2.  give  a  portion  to  seven,  and  also  to  e. 
Jer.  41.  15.  but  Ishmael  escaped  with  e.  men 
F.irk.  40.  31.  the  going  up  had  e.  slejis,  34,  37. 

41.  e.  tables,  whereon  they  slew  their  sacrifices 
Mie.  .5.5.  raise  ag.him  7  shepherds,  e.  principal  men 
LukcSi.  28.  about  c  days  after  these  sayings,  I'eter 
Jokn  20.20.  after  e.  days  his  disciples  were  within 
Acts  9.  ,33.  Eneas,  who  had  kept  his  bed  e.  years 
1  Pet.  3.  20.  wherein  c.  suuls  were  saved  by  wat^r 

EIGHTH. 
J^ev.  2.5.  22.  and  ye  shall  sow  the  e.  year  and  eat 
lA'(H/r»'f>.38.in  IJul, which  ise. month, house  finished 
12.  32.  Jeroboam  ordained  a  feast  in  the  c  month 

1  Chrnii.  24.  10.  the  c  lot  came  forth  to  Abijah 
2.5.  15.  the  e.  to  Jeshaiah  {|  20.  5.  Peulihai  the  e. 
27.  U.  the  e.  cajitain  for  the  c.  inonlh,  Slbbecal 

Zec/i.  1.  l.in  e.  month  the  word  came  toZechariah 

2  r(£.2.5.hut  saved  Noah  the  e.  person,  a  preacher 
Rev.  11. 11.  beast  that  was,  is  not,  even  he  is  tlie  e. 

21. 20.  the  f .  foundation  was  a  bervl, ninth  a  tojiaz 
.SY.;  Day,  Days.  " 
EIGHT  hundred.  _ 
<7f7(.5  4. Adam  lived  after  he  begat  Sell),  e.k.  years 
5.  lO.Jared  lived  after  he  begat  Enoch  «.  A.  years 
2  Sam.  23. 8.  Adino  slew  e.  hundred  at  one  time 
2  Chr.  13.  3.  Jeroboam  set  in  arrav  e.  A.  thousand 

EIGHTEEN. 

./i/r/a-.3.14.  Isr.  served  Eglon  king  of  Moah  e.  years 

10. 8.  Amnion  vexed  and  oppressed  Israel /'.years 

1  Kings  7.  1.5.  for  he   cast  two  pillars  of  brass  r. 

cubits  high  npieco,  iKings'i^.  17.  7er.52.21. 

1  Chr.  20.9.  Meslielemiah  had  sons  and  brethren  c. 

2  Chron.  11.  21.  for  Uelioboam  took  e.  « ives 
Luke  13.4.or  those  e .on  w  horn  lower  in  Pilonm  fell 

10.  whom  Satan  lialli  hound,  lo,  these  e.  years 
EIGHTEEN  thousand. 
.7iir/;j-.20.25  Benjiimin  destroyed  of  I^rapl  e.tUnus. 
44.  there  fell  of  Benjamin  f.  <Aous.  men  of  valour 
1  (7ir.  12.31.oflbelialftribeof  Mauasfioh.c  thou. 
18.  12.  Abisliai  fclcw  of  ihe  Edomitese.  thov.^and 
29.7.  iho  princes  gave  of  bras.'*  c.  thousand  talents 
F.iek.^.  35.  the  rily  round  wtw  e.  thou,  measures 
EIGHTEENTH. 

1  Kings  1.5. 1.  in  f.  year  of  Jeroboam,  2  CAr.  13. 1. 

2  Kings  3.1.Jehorain  reigned  ihe  f.year  of-fihosli. 
22.  3.  in  the  e.  year  of  king  Jn.siah,  the  king  sent 

Shaiiluin,  23.  23.  2  CAroji.  34.  8.  |  35.  19. 
1  Chron.  24.  15.  the  e.  lot  came  forth  lo  Aphscs 
2.5.  2.5.  the  e.  to  Haimni,  ho,  his  sons,  and  biClhren 
./er.  32. 1.  was  c  year  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  52. 29 

EITHER. 

Oen.  31.  24.  speak  not  to  Jacob  e.  goodor  IibH,29. 

J^er.  10.  1.  Nadab  and  Abihu  took  e.  of  them  h'.n 

censer,  and  offered  strange  fire  before  the  Lord 

Diut.  17. 3. hath  worship,  other  gods,f.snn  or  moon 

2,-f.  51.  a  notion  shall  not  leave  thee  e.  corn  or  wine 

I  Kings  18.  27.  c  he  is  talking,  or  purening,  or  in 

F.eel.  11.  0.  whelher  shall  prosper.r.  Ihisor  that 

/.«rt.7.Il.  ask  a  sign  e.  in  Ihe  depth  or  heght  nhov» 

Mat.  0.24.  no  man  can  serve  two  musters,  for  e.  Iiu 

will  hate  the  one,  and  love  Ibo  other,  /.HirlR.I3 

12.  33.  r.  make  the  tree  good,  and  his  frnt  sond 

I.uhr  0.  42.  e.  how  canst  Ihou  say  lo  thy  lirnlher 

15.  8.  r.  what  woman  having  ten  pieces  of  silver 

.Tohn  19.18.  rrucified,  on  c.  side  one,  Jesus  in  midst 

1  Cor.  14.6.  except  I  speak  to  voii  e.  by  revelation 

.tarn.  3.  12.  e.  ran  a  vine,  mv  brelbrnn,  bear  fig«? 

Rev.  22.  2.  of  e.  side  the  river  there  was  tree  ot 

ELDER.  (lifo 

The  Elders  among  the  Hebrews  ucre  the  viagis- 


ELD 

tratrs,  heads,  or  rulers  of  the  people.  Kven 
lehile  they  were  slaves  to  the  Kgyjjliaiie,  they 
had  amung  themselves  some  order  and  guverit- 
vieiU,  and  had  doubtless  some  whoiii  they  own- 
ed as  their  teachers  and  rulers,  as  heads  of 
tribes  andfamilies ;  hence,  when  the  Lord  sent 
Moses  to  bring  the  children  of  Jsruol  oat  uf 
Eg'ypt,  he  says,  Exod.  3.  10,  Uo  and  gather  the 
elders  of  Israel  together,  and  say  unto  them, 
the  Lord  lialh  visited  you,  and  seen  what  is  done 
to  you  in  Egypt.  These  elders  were  mt?t  of  cz- 
periencc,  wisdom,  and  gravity,  and  of  autho- 
rity among  the  people. 

But  the  first  institution  of  courts  of  judicature, 
was  in  the  wildcrjiess ;  when  Jethro  brought 
back  Zipporah  to  Moses,  who  icas  then  encamp- 
ed at  the  fool  of  mount  Sinai.  Moses  having  re- 
lated all  that  the  J.urd  had  done  for  the  Israel- 
ites, Jelhro  blessed  Godfur  it,  offered  burnt-of- 
ferings, and  peace-offerings,  and  did  eat  with 
Moses,  Aaron,  and  the  elders  ojf"  Israel,  before  the 
J^ord.  The  next  day,  Moses  taking  his  seat  in 
order  to  judge  Israel,  continued  from  morning 
to  evening  employed  in  this  manner.  Jelhro 
remonstrated  to  him,  that  this  was  a  fatigue 
above  his  strength  to  undergo,  and  would  be 
tiresome  both  to  himself  and  the  people;  that 
therefore  he  should  chouse  some  nun  of  firm- 
ness and  fortitude,  who  feared  God,  and  hated 
coveto^isncss,  thai  they  might  share  with  him 
in  the  weight  of  government ;  that  the  cogni 
lance  of  lesser  affairs  should  be  referred  to 
them;  and  those  of  more  consequence  should 
be  reserved  to  himself.  Moses  submitted  to 
this  advice,  and  chose  certain  men  of  merit  out 
of  all  Israel,  irhom  he  appointed  to  have  rule 
over  the  people  ;  some  over  a  thousand,  others 
over  an  hundred,  fifty,  and  ten.  They  admi- 
nistered justice  to  the  people ;  and  when  any 
thing  of  greater  difficulty  than  ordinary  oc- 
curred, they  referred  it  to  Moses,  Exod.  16.  1, 
2,  3,  &c.  The  commission  given  to  these  judges 
is  recorded  in  Dent.  1.  10,  17. 

Afterwards,  we  have  the  particular  appointment 
of  God  concerning  this.  Num.  U.  11,  12,  13, 
&c.  Mosfs,  being  discouraged  by  the  continual 
murmurings  of  the  Israelites,  addressed  him 
srlf  to  God,  and  desired  to  be  relieved  from 
some  part  of  the  burden  of  government.  Then 
the  Lordsaid  to  him,  Gather  unto  mo  seventy 
men,  of  the  elders  of  Israel,  whom  tliou  know 
est  to  he  the  elders  of  the  people,  and  officer 
over  them  ;  and  bring  them  to  the  tabernacle  of 
the  congresation,  that  they  may  stand  there  with 
thee.  And  I  will  come  down  and  talk  wiih  thee 
there;  and  I  will  take  of  the  spirit  which  is 
upon  thee,  and  will  put  it  upon  them ;  and  ihey 
shall  bear  the  burden  of  the  people  with  thee, 
that  thou  bear  it  not  thyself  alone.  These  el 
dcrs,  which  composed  the  Senate  belonging  to 
all  the  tribes  in  general,  sat  with  the  Leader, 
Judge,  or  King,  who  presided  in  this  court 
Thus  we  read,  Deut.  27.  1,  Moses,  with  tin 
elders  of  Israel,  commanded  the  people,  say- 
ing, <5-c.  Jind,  afterwards,  the  elders  of  the  con 
gregation,  consult  how  tosupply  the  remaindi:i 
vf  the  Benjarnites  with  wives,  Judg.  21.  IC. 
Jind  the  elders  of  Israel  gatln'red  themselves 
together,  and  came  to  Samuel  to  liamak,  1 
Sam.  8.  4.  We  read  of  these  elders  continunl/y, 
to  the  time  of  the  captivity  :  Jlnd  we  find  them 
again  after  the  return,  Ezra  10.  7,  8,  A  procla- 
mation was  made  throughout  .Judah  ami  .Jeru- 
salem, unto  all  the  children  of  the  captivity,  ac- 
cording to  the  counsel  of  the  princes  and  elders. 

Besides  these,  there  were  likewise  elders  belong- 
ing to  every  several  city.  These  elders  are  men- 
tioned by  Moses  in  the  law;  where  several 
thuf's  are  required  to  be  done  by  the  elders  of 
tlie  city,  /)r«t.l9.12.  |  21.3,19.  Boaz  appealed  to 
ten  men  of  the  elders  of  the  city  o^ Deth-lrhem- 
jvdah,  Ruth  4. 2.  Jlnd  we  read,  after  the  capti- 
vity, «/the  cMers  of  every  city,  Ezra  10.  14. 

The  Ralihins  and  interpreters  give  the  following 
account  of  courts  of  judicature  among  the  Jewa. 

d)  There  were  three  judges  in  every  city,  who 
had  the  cognizance  of  lesser  faults :  Matters 
concerning  loss,  gain,  and  restiiution,  were 
pleaded,  before  them.  These  three  judges  had 
a  right  only  to  condemn  criminals  to  bcwhipt: 
The  parties  named  their  judges  :  one  of  the 
parties  chose  his  judge  ;  the  other  named  a  se- 
cond; and  these  two  judges  took  a  third,  with 
whom  they  decided  causes.  This  tribunal  was 
consulted  about  the  intercalation  of  months. 
JI)  There  teas  another  court  composed  of  three 
and  twenty  judges,  who  decided  matters  of  im- 
portance, and  of  a  more  criminal  nature,  and 
their  sentences  were  such  as  generally  nffrrted 
the  lives  of  persons;  no  causes  being  brought 
ISO 


ELD 

before  them,  but  such  as  deserved  the  penalty 
of  death.  Home  say,  that  they  could  only  sen- 
tence to  death  by  the  sword. 

(Ill)  Their  great  council,  or  Sanhedrim,  which 
consisted  of  seventy  senators,  and  which  had 
the  tognizance  of  the  most  important  affairs  of 
state  and  religion,  and  of  those  which  concern- 
ed the  king,  or  high-priest.  It  was  intended 
as  a  court  of  appeal,  if  there  should  be  occa- 
sion, from  any  of  the  inferior  courts.  Some 
think  that  our  Saviour  alludes  to  these  two 
last  courts,  when  he  says.  Mat.  5.  22,  Whoso- 
ever is  angry  with  his  brother,  without  a  cau.se, 
shall  be  in  danger  of  the  judgment;  and  who- 
soever shall  say  to  his  brother,  Raca,  shall  be 
in  danger  of  the  council ;  but  whosoever  shall 
say.  Thou  fool,  shall  be  in  danger  of  hell-lire, 
ionic  interpreters  suppose  that  our  jMrd  pro- 
portions the  punishments  in  the  next  world, 
according  to  the  different  sentences  which  were 
usual  in  the  different  courts  of  judicature  at 
Jerusalem.  Therefore  they  say,  the  judgment 
means  that  court  where  the  judges  were  three 
and  twenty,  and  who  could  only  sentence  to 
death  by  the  sword  :  The  council  alludes  to  the 
court  where  the  seventy  elders  sat,  which  was 
the  great  Sanhedrim,  and  could  punish  by 
stoning  to  death :  And  that,  by  hell-tire,  tli 
burning  of  the  greatest  malefactors  in  the  val- 
ley of  Hinnom,  is  implied. 

As  to  the  Sanhedrim,  it  icas  limited  to  the  place 
where  the  ark  of  God  stood.  The  Jews  say, 
that  in  the  time  of  Moses  this  council  was  held 
at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  testimony 
As  S0071  as  the  people  were  iji  possession  of  tht 
land  of  promise,  the  Sanhedrim  followed  the 
tabernacle.  It  was  kept  successively  at  Gilgal, 
at  Shiloh,  at  Kirjath-jearim,  at  Nob,  at  Gibeon, 
in  the  house  of  Obed-cdom  ;  and  lastly,  it  was 
settled  at  Jerusalem,  till  the  Babylonish  capti- 
vity. During  the  captivity  it  was  kept  up  at 
Babylon.  After  the  return  from  Babylon,  it 
continued  at  Jerusalem,  to  the  time  of  the  Si- 
carii,  or  Assassins  ;  these  were  certain  robbers, 
who  appeared  in  Judea  some  time  before  the 
war  of  the  Jews  against  the  Romans.  They 
were  called  Sicarii,  from  Sica,  a  dagger ;  be- 
cause they  carried  daggers  secretly  about 
them,  so  as  not  to  be  perceived,  and  mixing 
themselves  with  the  multitude  of  people  that 
came  to  the  great  feasts  at  Jerusalem,  they 
stabbed  whom  they  thought  fit ;  and  then  icerc 
commonly  the  first  to  cry  out  murder,  as  Jose- 
phus  relates.  The  Jews,  finding  that  thesepro- 
fii gate  wretches,  whose  number  increased  every 
day,  sometimes  escaped  punishment  by  the  fa- 
vour of  the  president,  or  judges,  removed  the 
Sanhedrim  to  Ilanoth,  vyhich  were  certain 
abodes  situated,  as  the  Rabbins  say,  upon  the 
mountain  of  the  temple.  Afterwards  they  re- 
moved to  Jamnia;  thence  to  Jericho,  to  Uzzah, 
to  Sepharvaim,  to  Bethsanim,  to  Se])horis,  last 
of  all  to  Tiberias,  where  they  continued  to  the 
time  of  their  utter  extinction.  This  is  the  ac- 
count the  Jews  give  of  the  Sanhedrim. 
IVhat  the  scripture  says  of  this  court  is  found  in 
Deut.  17.  8,  9,  10,  11,  12,  13.  If  there  arise  a 
matter  too  hard  for  thee  in  judgment  {speaking 
to  the  inferior  magistrates)  between  blood 
and  Dlood,  between  plea  and  plea,  and  between 
sirnke  and  stroke,  being  matters  of  controversy 
wiihin  thy  gates  ;  then  shalt  thou  arise,  and  get 
thee  up  into  the  |]Iace  which  the  Lord  thy  God 
shall  choose.  And  thou  shalt  come  unto  the 
Priests,  the  Leviles,  and  unto  the  judgn  tbnt 
shall  be  in  those  days,  and  t;n(]uire;  and  they 
shall  shew  thee  the  sentence  of  judgment.  And 
thou  shiilt  do  according  to  the  sentence,  which 
thevof  that  place,  which  the  Lord  shall  chnose, 
shall  shew  thee,  Src.  By  this  it  appears  that 
the  chief  Conductor,  Judge,  King,  High-priest, 
or  whoever  was  at  the  head  of  their  affairs, 
was  to  be  the  president  of  this  court.  Th' 
rest  nf  the  judges  seem  to  have  consisted  ehirf- 
Iv  of  the  Priests  and  Eevites,  though  there 
were  among  them  wise  and  learned  men  of 
othir  tribes,  as  is  acknowledged  by  the  Jewish 
and  most  other  writers. 
In  process  of  time,  as  their  kings  came  to  be  idol- 
atrous, this  ordinance,  among  others,  was  ne- 
glected. For  we  find  Jehoshaphat  restoring 
it,  at  the  same  time  as  he  did  the  courts  in 
every  city,  2Chron.  10.  8,9,  10,  11.  In  this 
passage  we  find,  that,  if  the  cause  was  of  a 
6|iirilual,  or  ecclesiastical  nature,  the  Iligh- 
priesl  was  the  chief  judrre ;  if  otherwise,  a  chief 
justice,  who  sat  in  bihalf  of  the  king :  And  be- 
hold, Amariah,  the  chief-priest,  is  over  you  in  all 
matters  of  ihe  Lord  ;  and  Zrbadiah,  the  nderof 
the  house  of  Judah,  for  all  the  king's  matterg. 


ELD 

Some  think  it  probable,  that  in  causcsecclesiasli. 
cal,  the  court  was  made  up  of  the  High-priest, 
and  the  Chief-priests,  or  Heads  of  the  four  and 
twenty   courses   only ;    and    that    in  matters 

purely  temporal,  the  supreme  magistrate,  with 
the  princes,  elders,  and  scribes,  who  were  doc- 
tors of  the  law,  either  by  himself,  or  his  de- 
puty, took  cognizance.  And  that,  where  any 
one  was  accused  of  crimes  relating  to  religion 
and  state  both,  the  Judges,  in  each  of  these  fir 
cutties,  sat  to  hear  the  cause.  So,  at  the  Iria, 
of  our  blessed  J,ord,  Josepli  of  Arimatheu,  a 
rich  man  and  a  counsellor,  probably  one  of  the 
seventy  ciders,  was  one  of  them  who  sat  as 
.Judges ;  but  did  not  join  in  the  sentence  of 
condemnation  ;  He  consented  not  to  the  coun- 
sel and  deed  of  them,  J^ukc  23.  51. 

This  counsel,  at  their  return  from  Ihe  captivity 
was  restored,  with  the  rest  of  their  common- 
wealth, as  the  prophet  E/.ekiel  foretold  it 
should,  Ezek.  44.  23,  24,  The  Priests,  the  Le 
vites,  shall  teach  my  people  the  difference  be- 
tween the  unclean  and  the  clean.  And,  in  con- 
troversy, they  shall  stand  in  judgment ;  and 
they  shall  judge  it  according  to  my  judgments. 
Some  are  of  opinion,  that  the  origin  of  the  San- 
hedrim is  by  no  means  to  be  depended  upon; 
for  the  council  of  the  seventy  elders  establish- 
ed by  Moses,  was  not  what  the  Jews  under- 
stood by  the  name  o/ Sanhedrim.  Besides,  say 
they,  we  cannot  perceive  that  this  estailisA- 
ment  subsisted  either  iinder  3oihun,the  Judges, 
or  the  Kings.  IVe  find  nothing  of  it  after  the 
captivity,  till  the  time  of  the  ftlaceabees.  Only 
we  are  certain,  that  this  Senate  leas  in  being 
in  the  time  of  our  Saviour,  and  when  the  Evan- 
gelists wrote  their  gospels,  since  thnj  are 
mentioned  in  their  writings  :  But  then  their 
authority  was  much  lessened ;  for  after  the 
banishment  of  Axri.\ia\a.vi3,  the  Romans,  having 
reduced  Judea  into  a  province,  assumed  the 
power  of  life  and  death  to  themselves  alone  • 
So  that  this  council  could  proceed  no  further 
than  to  condemnation.  Vor  execution,  they 
were  to  apply  to  the  Roman  Governor. 

The  places  where  the  Hebrews  held  their  courts 
of  judicature  were,  generally,  one  of  the  gates 
of  the  city.  See  Gate.  As  the  merits  of 
every  cause  were  to  turn  upon  the  evidence 
given ;  see  what  rules  the  law  IlKfs  down  in 
reference  thereunto  in  Deut.  17.  6.  [19.  15.  and 
what  is  said  in  relation  to  false  witnesses, 
Deut.  19.  16,  17,  18,  19.  It  was  likewise  a  part 
of  their  law,  that  no  man  should  be  condemned 
wilhoiit  being  brought  to  a  fair  trial,  and 
hearing  what  he  had  to  say  for  himself.  And 
therefore  Nicodenius  says  to  the  Chief-priests 
and  Pharisees,  Doth  our  law  judge  any  man 
before  it  hear  him,  and  know  what  he  docthl 
.rohn~.5i. 

The  method  of  proceeding  in  the  Sanhedrim  is 
said  to  be  this:  They  who  had  a  mind  to  im- 
plead any  one,  applied  cither  to  the  king,  or 
the  high-prie.st,  or  whoever  filled  the  post  of 
Chief  Justice,  and  informed  against  him. 
Upon  this,  proper  officers  were  sent  to  take 
him  up ;  and  if  occasion  required,  a  detach- 
ment from  the  trmple-guard  went  along  with 
them,  '/'he  person  thus  taken  v:as  ixamined 
by  the  .Justice,  and  then  committed,  either  to 
prison,  or  to  the  custody  of  the  officer  of  the 
guard,  till  his  trial  came  on. 

IVhen  the  court  sat,  those  who  brought  the  infor- 
mation against  the  criminal,  did  it  in  these 
words.  This  man,  having  done  so  or  so,  is 
worthy  to  die.  And  they  who  were  to  defend 
him,  answered.  This  man  is  not  worthy  to  die ; 
for  he  has  only  done  so  or  so.  And  when  the 
pleadings  on  both  sides  were  finished,  the 
.Judges  gave  their  opinions  singly,  whether  he 
was  guilty  or  not :  And  according  to  the  ma- 
jority of  votes,  one  way  or  the  other,  the  cul- 
prit was  acquitted  or  condemned. 

Of  the  manner  of  laying  the  indictment,  and  giv- 
ing in  the  answer,  we  have  an  instance  in  the 
rase  of  Jeremiah  ;  who  was  informed  nirainst 
for  prophesying  the  destruction  of  both  the  city 
and  temple  o/ Jerusalem,  in  case  the  Jews  eoTt- 
iinueil  to  neglect  the  observance  nf  God's  law, 
Jer.  20.  8,  9,10,  &c.  See  the  form  of  condem- 
nation in  Mat.  20.  O.'i,  00. 

Elder  in  the  JVew  Testament,  is  a  general  name^ 
comprehending  under  it  all  such  as  have  any 
ecclesiastical  function,  as  apostles,  pastors, 
teachers,  or  other  church  officers,  1  Tim.  5. 17. 
Tit.  1.  ^.  The  apostle  Peter  calls  hiinselfan 
elder.  The  elders  that  are  among  you  I  exhort, 
who  also  am  an  elder,  1  Pet. .').  1. 

Gm.  10.  21.  Shem  the  brother  of  J.iphet  Ihe  e. 

25.  23.  the  e.  shall  serve  the  younger,  Rom.  9. 12. 


ELD 

Sam.  18.  !7.  behoUl,  my  c.  daughter  Mcrab 
i/Cinirs  •2.'2'J.ask  lliu  kingdom,  liu  ib  mine  e.  brotlier 
Jub  15.  lU.  very  aged  men.  much  e.  thun  thy  lather 

;t!.  4.  Ehliu  wailed,  because  they  were  e.  tlian  he 
Ezck  lfi.4tj.thy  c.  sister  is  Samaria,  younger  Sodom 

23.  4.  the  names  of  them  were  Aholah  ihe  e. 
J.ukt  15.  20.  his  e.  son  was  in  the  held,  heard  music 
1  Tim.  5.  2.  intreat  the  e.  women  as  mothers 
1  Fct.  5.  5.  ye  youiiser,  submit  yourselves  to  the  e. 

ELIiEK  tor  ruLer. 
1  yi'm.S.l. rebuke  not  an  e.  but  intreat  him  as  father 
ly.against  an  e. receive  not  an  accusat.but  before 
1  I'et.  5.  1.  the  elders  1  exhort,  who  am  also  an  e. 
•2.luhn  1.  the  e.  to  the  elect  lady  and  her  children 
3  John  1.  the  e.  unto  well-beloved  Gaius  whom  I 
ELDERS.  [love 

Gen.  50.  7.  Ihe  e.  of  his  house  went  up  with  hiin 
y>fp.  4.  15.  the  e.  of  congreg.  shall  lay  their  hands 
.Vum.  1 1.  2.5.  L.  gave  of  the  Spirit  to  the  seventy  e. 
J)eul.  25.  7.  go  lip  t^the  gate  to  the  e.  and  say 

29.  lU.  ye  stand  before  the  L.  your  e.  and  othcers 
31.28.i;ather  to  me  all  e.  of  your  tribes  and  officers 
32.  7.  ask  thy  father  and  e.  and  they  will  tell  thee 

Josh.  24.  31.  Israel  served  the  Lord  all  the  days  of 

Joshua  and  of  e.  that  overlived  Joshua,./«i/o'.2.7. 

Judg.  f.  14.  he  described  to  him  the  c.  of  Succoth 

1  Sam.  lf).4.  c.  of  the  town  trembled  at  his  coming 

30.  20.  he  sent  of  the  spoil  to  the  e.  of  Judah 

1  Kings  20.  H.  all  the  e.  said  to  him,  hearken  not 

21.  ll.  the  c.  did  as  Jezebel  had  sent  to  them 
2A'iH^.«C.32.Elislia  sat  in  hou.se,  and  e.sat  with  him 

10.  I.Jehu  wrote  letters  and  sent  to  c.  of  .lezreel 

19.  2.  Hezekiah  sent  the  e.  of  the  priests  covered 
with  sackcloth  to  Isaiah  the  prophet,  Isa.  37. 2. 

Ezra  5.  5.  the  eye  of  their  God  was  upon  the  e. 
6.  14.  the  e.  of  the  Jews  builded  and  prosjiered 
lU.8.according  to  the  counsel  of  the  princes  and  e. 

Psal.  107.  32.  praise  him  in  the  assembly  of  the  e. 

Prov.  31.  2:!.  her  husband  is  known  among  the  c. 

/,am. l.lO.my  priests  and  p.gave  up  the  ghost  in  city 
2.10.i?.ofZion  sit  upon  the  ground  and  keepsilence 

4.  16.  respected  not  priests,  favoured  not  e.  5. 12. 
S.H.e.haveceased  from  gate, young  m.from  music 

Kzek.  8.  1.  and  the  e.  of  3  idaii  sat  before  me 
fuel  1.  14.  sanctify  a  fast,  gather  the  e.  2.  10. 
Mat.  15.2.  why  transgress  the  tradition  of  Ihe  c? 

10.  21.  must  suffer  many  things  of  the  «;.  27.  12. 

20.  .5'.).  the  e.  sought  false  witness  against  Jesus 
27.20. chief  prie=t«  and  e.  persuaded  the  multitude 

41.  the  cHief prie.st3  mocking  with  thee,  said 
iW.  12.  and  when  they  were  a.sscmbled  w  ith  the  e. 
Mark'. 2. the  Jews  holding  the  tradition  of  thee. 
8. 31. must  suffer  and  be  rejected  of  the  c .  /,u.  9.22. 

14.  43.  with  Judas  a  great  multitude  from  the  e. 

15.  1.  chief  priests  heUI  aconsu!tati(m  with  the  c. 
Luke  22.  .52.  Je^ius  said  unto  the  captains  and  e. 
Art.ii.a.  their  rulers  and  c.  weregathered  logelher 

23.  they  reported  all  that  the  f .  had  said  to  them 
6.  12.  tliey  stirred  up  the  people  and  the  e. 

11.  30.  sent  it  to  the  e.  by  Barnabas  and  Saul 
14.  2:1.  when  they  ordained  e.  in  every  church 
J5.4.they  were  received  of  the  church  and  of  the  c. 

6.  the  apostles  and  c.  came  together  to  consider 
23.  the  apostles,  c.  and  brethren,  send  greeting 

16.4. Ilipv  delivered  the  decrees  ordained  of  the  c. 

20.  17.  he  sent  and  called  the  e.  of  the  church 

22.  5.  nil  the  estate  of  the  c.  bear  me  witness 
24. 1.  Ananias  the  priest  descended  with  the  e. 
2.5.  15.  about  whom  the  e.  of  Jews  informed  mc 

I  Tim.  5.  17.  let  c.  that  rule  well  be  counted  worthy 
Tit.  1.5.  that  thou  shouldcst  ordain  c.  in  every  city 
ffrb.  11.  2.  by  faiih  the  e.  obtained  a  good  report 
Jam.  5.  14.  let  him  call  for  the  e.  of  the  church 
1  Pel.  .5. 1.  the  e.  which  arc  among  you,  I  exhort 
/Jrr.4.4.  upon  Ihe  seats  I  saw 24  f.sil tins,  clothed 
10.  the 24  f.  fall  before  him,  5.  (^,11.  |  1 1.lO.j  HI.4. 

5.  5.  and  one  of  the  c.  saith  unio  mi-,  weep  not 
6.  nnd  lo,  in  the  midst  of  the  c.  stood  a  lamb 
11. 1  heard  the  voice  of  many  angels  about  the  r. 

7. 11.  all  aneels  stood  about  the  e.  and  four  bensts 
13.  one  of  c.  nns.  saying  to  me,  what  are  these? 
14.3. thev  sung  a  new  pong  before  ihe  throne  and  c. 

F,I,nKnS  with  rilii. 
/)f«e. 10.12.  thee,  of  his  n7v  shall  fetch  him  thence 
21.3.  c.  of  that  cir?/ shall  liiki-  iinil  bring  the  heifer 
e.c.oflhat  ri/t/ shall  wash  their  hanils  over  heifer 
19.  shall  bring  their  eon  to  the  e.  of  his  rily 
522. 15.  bring  tokens  of  virginity  to  the  c  ofthoriVj/ 
25.  8.  the  r.  of  his  rili/  shall  call  and  speak  In  hiin 
Jo»A.20.  4.  shall  declare  hisraiise  loc.  of  thai  ritii 
Judg.  8.  Ifi.  ho  took  the  e.  of  the  rittj  nnd  thorns 
tiuth  4.2.  Boaz  took  ten  men  of  the  r .  of  the  ri(»^ 
Ezra  10.  14.  and  wiih  them  the  /.  of  every  cilij 

FAAiF.RS  of  hrnrl. 
F.znd.  3.  If),  go  and  cat  her  the  r.  n/  Isrnd  tojrether 

12.  21.  Moses  called  for  all  the  i.  of  Isrml 
17.  5.  and  lake  w.th  Ihee  o'^lhe  r.  I'f  hrnrl 
18. 12.  the  e.  nf  hrncl  came  lo  <  at  wlh  Jethro 
24.1.»eventv'ofthei'.o/  hrnrl,'.).  JV«m.  11.  10. 

Vcut.  27. 1.  tiie  e.  of  hrad  coinmamled  the  people 
160 


ELE 

/)cut.31.9.MoscB  delivered  this  law  to  the  e.  oflir. 

Josh.  7. 0.  the  e.  of  Israel  put  dust  on  their  heads 

2  Ham.  5.  3.  so  all  the  e.  of  Israel  came  to  the  king 

at  Hebron,  1  Kings  H.  3.  2  Chron.  5.  4. 

17.  4.  the  saying  pleased  all  the  e.  of  Israel 
15.  thus  did  Ahithophel  counsel  the  e.  of  Israel 
1  Chr.  11. 3.  c.  of  Israel  coma  to  the  king  to  Hebron 

21. 16.  David  and  e.  of  Israel  fell  upon  their  faces 
Ezek.  14.  1.  then  came  the  c.  of  Israel  unto  mc 

20. 1.  the  e.  of  Israel  came  to  intjuire  of  the  Lord 
Jlcts  4.  8.  ye  rulers  of  the  peojile  and  c.  of  Israel 

ELDEllS  with  people. 
F.xod.  19.  7.  Moses  called  for  the  e.  of  the  people 
jV«;n.ll.l6.whoni  thou  knowest  to  bec.of  the/)fo. 
24.  Moses  gathered  70  men  of  the  e.  of  the  peo. 
Huth  4.  4.  buy  it  before  Ihe  e.  oi my  people 
1  .SuHi.  15.  30.honour  mc  before  the  e.  oi  my  people 
jUa^  21. 23.  the  e.  o{  Iho people  came,  Lukc'-H.  66. 

20.  47.  with  a  multitude  from  e.  ol  the  people 

27.  1.  e.  of  the  projitc  took  couns<;l  against  Jesus 
.icts  6.  12.  they  stirred  up  ihe  people  and  the  e. 

ELDEST. 
f?f7i.24.2.  Abraham  said  to  his  e.  serv.  of  his  house 

27.1.  Isaac  called  Esau  his  c. son,  and  said,  my  son 

44.  12.  and  he  searched,  and  began  at  the  e. 
Mum.  1.  20.  Reuben,  Israel's  e.  son,  26.  5. 

1  Ham.  17.13.  the  three  e.sons  of  Jesse  followed,  14. 
28.  Eliab  his  c.  brother  heard  David  speak 

2  Kings  3.  27.  he  took  his  e.  son  and  offered  him 
2  Chr.^Xi.  1.  for  the  band  of  men  had  slain  all  the  c. 

lob  1.  13.  drinking  in  their  c.  brother's  liouse,  18. 

John  8.  y.  they  went  out  one  by  one,  beginning  at  e. 
ELECT, 

Or  Chosen,  is  spokeji,  [1]  Of  Christ,  who  was 
chosen  and  set  apart  from  eternity  by  (iod  the 
Father  to  the  great  work  of  redemption  and 
mediation,  Ua.  42. 1.  Mat.  12.  18.  [2]  Of  good 
angels,  whom  God  chose  from  among  the  rest 
tn  eternal  life  and  happiness  :  I  char.<^e  thee 
before  the  elect  angels,  1  Tim.  5.  21.  [3]  Of  the 
Israelites,  who  were  God's  chosen  and  peculiar 
people,  Isa.  05.  9,  22.  [4]  Of  such  as  are  cho- 
sen by  God  in  Christ  to  eternal  life  and  sal- 
vation out  of  all  the  nations  upon  earth,  Tit. 
1.  1.  This  election  is,  [1]  An  act  of  distin- 
guishing love,  Deut.  7.  8.  [2]  Of  divine  sove- 
reirrnty  irrespective  of  any  goodness  in  the  ob- 
jects of  it,  Kom.  9.  11,  ri,  16.  [3]  F.temal, 
Eph.  1.  4.  2  Thess.  2.  13.  [4]  Mbsvlute,  and 
irrevocable,  Rom.  9.  11.  2 Tim.  2.  19.  [5]  Per- 
sonal, that  is.  of  a  certain  nvmber  of  persons. 
Mat.  20.  23.  2  Tim.  2.  19.  [lij  Of  some  of  the 
chief  of  sinners,  1  Tim.  1.  1.5.  [7]  It  is  in 
Christ,  Eph.  1.  4.  [6]  It  is  to  snnetif  cation 
and  holiness  as  the  means,  and  eternal  glory 
has  the  end,  Eph.  1.  4.  1  Thess.  5. 9. 

/."a. 42.1. behold  mine  f.in  whom  my  soul  dclighteth 
45.4.  Israel  mine  e.  I  have  called  thee  by  I  by  nam 
65.  9.  mine  e.  shall  inherit  it,  and  my  servants 
22.  miiie  e.  shall  long  enjoy  work  of  their  hands 

Mat.  24.22.  no  flesh  should  be  saved,  but  for  the  e. 
sake  those  days  shall  be  shortened,  Murk  13.20. 
24.  if  possible  deceive  the  very  c.  Mark  13.  22. 
31.  shall  send  his  angels,  and  they  shall  gather 
together  his  e.  from  the  four  winds.  Mark  13.  27. 

I^vke  18.  7.  and  shiil!  not  God  avenge  his  own  e.? 

Horn.  8.  33.  who  shall  lay  any  thing  to  the  charge 
of  God's  e.? 

Col.  3. 12.  put  on  as  thef.of  G.  boweh-  of  mercies 

1  7V7n.5.21.  I  charge  thee  before  the  r.  angels 

2  Tim.  2.  10.  I  endure  all  ihiiigs  for  the  e  sake 
Tit.  1. 1.  an  apostle  ticcordiiig  to  Ihe  faith  of  G's.  e. 
1  Pet.  1.  2.  e.  according  lo  foreknowledge  of  God 

2. 6.  I  lay  in  Sion  a  chief  corner-stone,  e.  precious 

iJohn  1.  the  elder  lo  thee,  lady,  nnd  her  children 

13.  the  children  of  thy  e.  si-ter  greet  thee 

ELECTED. 

1  Pct.5. 13.  church  at  Babylon  e.  together  with  you 

F.LKC'i'lO.N. 

/?om.9.11.purpo-e(d'(J.  according  to  c.miphi  stand 

ll.S.there  isn  remnant  accordins  tothe  c.ofgrace 

7.  the  r.  hath  obtained  il,  Ihe  rest  were  blinded 

28.  but  MB  touching  the  c.  they  nrn  beloved 

1  Thess.  1.  4.  knowing  brethren,  your  c.  of  God 
iPet.  1. 10.  all  diliijence  lo  m'lke  your  calling  and 

ELE(.'ANTLY.  [csurc 

Isa.  32.14.  the  tongue  of  BtammercrH  shall  speak  e. 

ELEMENTS. 

Gnt.  4.3.  we  were  in  bondage  un<'rTC.  of  the  world 

9.  how  turn  ye  again  to  Ihe  wiak  and  beggnrly  c 

Co/.2.t8.  nflerthce.  of  the  worlrl.not  after  Christ 

t  20.  dead  with  Christ  from  the  r.  of  the  world 

2  Pet.  3.  10.  the  e.  shall  melt  with  fervent  heal,  12 

ELEPHANT. 
The  elephant  M  the  InrgrsI  nf  nil  fnur-fontrd 
beasts.  They  who  hare  studied  Ihe  nature  nf 
Ihe  elephant  with  most  ncrurnry.  Irll  mow  rj 
traordinnry  thinn-s  of  Ih  sngnrilv,  faithful 
ness,  -prudrnce,  and  errn  uviliTstnniling  nf 
this  creature.     Pliny  says  of  this  animal : 


ELE 

Maximum  animal  est  ^lephas,  proximumque, 
bumanis  sensibus:  quij>|ic  intellectus  illis  scr- 
monis  patrii,  &c.  Hist.  jVat.  lib  8.  It  has  been 
often  observed  to  do  such  things  as  are  much 
above  the  capacity  of  other  beasts.  Tlie  He- 
hicwa  seem  generally  to  have  described  it  mider 
the  name  of  Behemolh,  which  sigjiijies  in  gene- 
ral, beasts  of  service.  The  word  Elephas  may 
be  derived  from  Alejih,  which  signijies,  fo  in- 
struct, by  reason  of  the  docility  of  the  animal ; 
or  from  Elejih,  which  signijies  a  head,  or  cap- 
tain ;  because  the  Elephant  is,  as  it  were,  the 
head  of  all  other  terrestrial  animals. 

The  Lord,  speaking  to  Job,  describes  the  Ele- 
))hant  or  Behemolh,  Job  40.  from  verse  15.  to 
the  end  of  the  chapter.  It  is  there  said,  that 
he  eateth  grass  as  an  ox.  This  agrees  well 
with  what  historiaiis  relate  of  the  elephant. 
}Ie  does  not  feed  upon  carrion,  and  is  not  at 
all  wild ;  hay,  herbs,  and  Irgumens,  are  his 
nourishment,  as  they  are  of  our  tame  beasts. 

His  bones  are  as  strong  pieces  of  brass,  and  hia 
small  bones  like  bars  of  iron.  These  hyper- 
bolical eipressious  shew  the  extraordinary 
strength  of  the  elephant ;  with  one  stroke  of 
his  trunk  he  kills  a  camel  or  a  horse.  Jin  ele- 
phant, it  is  said,  has  been  seen  to  draw  two 
cast  cannons  Jive  hundred  paces  with  his  teeth; 
they  icere  fastened  together  with  cables,  and 
weighed  each  three  thousand  pounds.  ,^nd 
there  is  mention  in  the  Maccabees  of  an  ele- 
])hant  in  Antiochus"  army,  which  carried  two 
and  thirty  armed  men.  They  were  all  in  a 
tower  made  of  veni  solid  wood,  vpon  the  e}c- 
jihant'e  back,  and  the  tower  waj>  bound  with  a 
very  strong  chain  under  the  elephant's  belly. 

He  is'the  chief  of  the  ways  of  Cmd.  He  is  a  re- 
markable piece  of  the  creation  among  four- 
footed  beasts.  lie  exceeds  all  others  in  site, 
strength,  docility,  address,  fidelity,  agility, 
long  life,  mcidesty  oTirf  ]iudicity  \for,  it  issaid, 
that  he  never  covers  the  female  as  long  as  any 
one  appears  in  sight.  Thcscriplure  adds,  Ihnt 
God,  who  made  him,  can  make  his  sword  to 
approach  unto  him.  Though  he  be  so  strong 
and  terrible,  yet  God  can  easily  subdue  and 
destroy  him  :  or,  God  hath  put  his  sword  into 
his  hands,  hath  trusted  him  with  his  arms; 
the  elephant  is  terrible  when  provoked.  His 
arms  are  his  trunk  and  his  leeth.  His  teeth 
are  the  ivory,  so  well  known  in  Europe. 

Surely  the  mountains  bring  him  forth  gra.«s,  where 
all  the  hiasls  of  the  field  play.  loiephant.s  are 
the  gentlest  of  animals  ;  they  never  use  their 
strength  but  when  they  are  compelled  to  it. 
They  are  not  nf  that  sort  of  animal.--  which 
create  terror  in  others  :  If  he  passes  through 
a  herd  of  other  beasts,  he  puts  them  gently  out 
of  his  way  with  his  trunk  to  make  room  for 
him;  he  feeds  in  the  fields  and  meadows,  and 
the  weakest  and  tatnest  animals  play  with  im- 
punitv  before  him. 

He  licth  under  the  shady  trees,  in  the  covert  of 
the  reeds  and  fens.  This  nl.'O  agrees  well  with 
the  elephant,  according  to  the  account  that  his- 
torians give  of  hiin.  yF.lian  says,  that  he  may 
be  called  an  animal  of  the  marshes,  because  he 
lives  among  waters,  and  in  moist  places.  He 
sometimes  plunges  himself  into  rieers  in  such 
a  manner,  that  no  more  of  him  is  to  be  s«ti 
than  the  end  of  his  trunk :  in  the  summer 
time,  he  covers  himself  with  mud,  to  avoid  the 
heat. 

He  drinketh  up  n  river,  nnd  hasteth  not :  he  truRt- 
eth  that  lie  can  draw  up  Jordan  into  his  mouth. 
This  also  may  be  filly  njijilied  to  the  elephant ; 
he  drinks  a  grriil  deal,  and  larire  draughts, 
as  if  he  were  to  swallow  vp  a  river,  nnd  as  if 
Jordan  were  scarcely  sufKeieut  to  snii.ify  his 
thir.st  :  he  is  not  afraid  when  he  drinks,  but 
does  it  hisvrilti,  and  takes  time  tn  di.iturb  the 
water  which  he  drinketh.  The  scripture  adds, 
Ho  takilh  it  with  his  eyis,  his  nose  pierceth 
through  snares.  If'hen  he  .lees  the  waters  of  a 
f«rcr,  he  truslelh  that  he  can  drink  them  nil 
up  ■  his  eve  is  bi'j^er  than  his  b'lly,  as  com- 
monly said.  He  Ihrustelh  his  snout  also  into 
the  river,  and  if  there  he  any  snares  laid  fnr 
other  creatures,  he  breaks  Ihem  In  pirces.  Put 
others  translate  this  verse.  Can  any  inan  take 
him  in  his  eyes,  or  pierce  his  no-io  with  snareR 
nnd  sins?  Can  h'  he  taken  openly  and  by 
force  J  .Surely  no.  His  force  or  strength  is  too 
great  for  man  to  resi."!  or  overcome.  Others 
thus,  ile  is  taken  bv  Ihe  evei  as  a  fish  is  taken 
by  a  hook.  Serpents  nllnrk  rlephnn's  prin 
cipaUa  in  the  eyes,  as  P!  ny  nhsemrs.  Tilt 
same  author  says,  that  there  are  serpents  tn 
Ih'  (tnuftov.sijty  yards  Invrr.  who  ^•A•relephBnts 
by  the  trunk  as  they  are  drinking ,  drag  them 


EMB 

along,  and  drown  them  in  the  waters,  Plin. 
lib.  8.  cap.  12. 
Seme  understand  Jy  Behemoth,  a  creature  called 
Hippopotamus,  or  the  Sea-horse ;  which  is  an 
amphibious  creature,  and  lives  and  preys  both 
in  the  water  and  on  land.  This  animal,  say 
they,  was  well  known  to  Job  and  his  friends 
as  being  frequent  in  the  adjacent  parts :  and 
the  description  here  given  of  the  Behemoth,  is 
very  applicable  to  the  Hippopotamus. 

1  Kings  lO.f  22.  navy  bringing  c.  teetli,  2  CAr.9.21. 
Job  40.  1 15.  behold  the  e.  which  I  have  made 

ELEVATION. 

Jttdg. ii0.\38.lhey  should  make  great  e.  with  smoke 

ELEVEN. 

^  Oen.  32. 22.  Jacob  took  his  e.  sons  and  passed  over 

37.9.  sun, moon, and  e.  stars  made  obeisance  to  me 

£iod.26.7.curtain8  ofgoats'  hair,c.curt.shalt  make 

8.  the  e.  curtains  shall  be  all  of  one  measure 
3G.  14.  e.  curtains  he  made  ||  15.  c.  of  one  size 

JVum.  29.  20.  on  tlie  third  day  e.  bullocks,  two  rams 
T)eut.  1.  2.  there  are  e.  days' journey  from  Horeb 
Josh.  15.  51.  e.  cities  with  tlieir  villages 
yua!^.16.5.we  will  give  tliee  e.  hund.pieces  of  silver 
17. 2.  I  took  the  e.  hundred  shekels  of  silver 
3.  when  he  restored  c.hund.shekels  to  his  mother 

2  Kings  23.36.  Jehoiakim  twenty-tive  years  old,  he 

reigned  e.  years  in  Jerusalem,  2  Chr.  3t).  5. 
24. 18.  Zedekiah  e.  years,  2  Chr.  36. 11.  Jcr.  52. 1. 
J>/aJ.28.16.then  the  c.disciples  went  away  toGalUee 
JVark  16.  14.  afterwards  he  appeared  to  the  e. 
Luke  24.9.they  told  all  these  things  to  the  e.and  rest 

33.  and  they  found  the  e.  gathered  together 

.ids  1.26.and  he  was  numbered  with  tliee.apostles 

2.14.but  Peter  standing  up  with  the  e.  said  to  them 

ELEVENTH. 

1  Kings  6. 38.  in  the  e.  year  was  the  house  finished 

iKings 9.29.in  the  e.year  of  Joram  began  Ahaziah 

25.  2.  the  city  of  Jerusalem  was  besieged  to  the  e. 

year  of  king  Zedekiah,  Jer.  52.  5. 

1  Chron.  24. 12.  the  e.  lot  came  forth  to  Eliashib 
25. 18.  the  e.  to  Azareel,  he,  his  sons,  and  brethren 
27.  14.  the  e.  captain  for  the  e.  month,  Benaiah 

•ler.1.3.  Jeremiah  prophesied  in  e.year  of  Zedekiah 
39.  2.  in  the  e.  year  the  city  was  broken  up 
£z<;A-.26.1.word  of  the  Lord  came  to  Ezekiel  in  the 
e.  year,  in  the  first  day  of  tlie  month,  30.20. 1 31.1. 
Mat.  20.  6.  and  about  the  e.  hour  he  went  out 

9.  they  came  that  were  hired  about  the  e.  hour 
Rev.  21. 2(?  e.  foundation  of  the  city  was  a  jacinth 

ELOaUENT. 
Exod.  4.  10.  Moses  said,  O  my  Lord,  I  am  not  e. 
Pro».l.t6.to  understand  a  proverb  and  an  c.speech 
Isa.  3.  3.  the  Lord  doth  take  away  the  c.  orator 
Acts  18.24.a  certain  Jew  named  Apollos,  an  e.  man 

ELSE. 

Oen.  30.  1.  she  said,  give  me  children  or  e.  I  die 

Vara.  20.  19.  I  will  witliout  doing  any  thing  e.  go 

Deut.  4.  35  thou  mightest  know  that  the  Lord  he 

is  God,  there  is  none  c.  39.  1  Kings  8.  60.  Isa. 

45.  5,  6,  14,  16,  21,  22.  |  46.  9.  Joel  2.  27. 

'     t      •7osA.23.12.e.ifyedoinanywisegobackand  cleave 

Judg.  7.14.1his  is  nothing  e.  save  sword  of  Gideon 

2  Sam.  3.  35.  if  I  taste  ought  e.  till  the  sun  be  down 

1  Chr.  21.  12.  or  e.  three  days  sword  of  the  Lord 

2  CAr.23.7.whoso  e.cometh  in,  shall  be  put  to  death 
•TWA.  2.  2.  this  is  nothing  e.  but  sorrow  of  heart 
Psal.  51.16.  desirest  not  sacrifice,  e.  would  I  give  it 
JEcc/.2.25.who  e.can  hasten  here  unto  more  than  I? 
Jsa.  47.  8.  thatsayest,  I  am,  none  e.  besides  me,  10. 
John  14.  11.  or  e.  believe  me  for  the  work's  sake 
Acts  17. 21.  spent  time  in  nothing  c.  but  tell  or  hear 
Rom.  2.  15.  accusing,  or  c.  excusing  one  another 
lCor.7.l4.«.were  your  child,  unclean, but  now  holy 

14.  16.  e.  when  thou  shalt  bless  with  the  Spirit 
ii<;o.2.5.repent.or  e.  I  will  come  to  thee  quickly,16. 

EMBALM. 
Gen.  50.2.  Joseph  comm.  physicians  to  e.  his  father 

EMBALMED. 
Gen.  50.  2.  and  the  physicians  e.  Israel 
3.  for  BO  are  fulfiUed  the  days  of  those  that  are  e. 
26.  they  e.  Joseph,  put  him  in  a  coHin  in  Egypt 
EMBOLDENED. 
1  Cur.  8.10.  the  conscience  of  him  that  is  weak  bee. 

EMBOLDENETH. 
Job  16.  3.  what  e.  thee  that  thou  answerest  1 

EMBRACE. 
S  Kings  4. 16.  about  this  season  thou  shalt  e.  a  son 
Job  24.  8.  they  e.  the  rock  for  want  of  a  shelter 
l'roD.4.8.3hall  bring  to  honour,when  thou  doste.her 
5.  20.  why  wilt  thou  e.  the  bosom  of  a  stranger? 
Keel.  3. 5.  a  time  to  c.  and  refrain  from  embracing 
Cant.  2.  6.  and  his  right  hand  doth  e.  me,  8.  3. 
Lam.  4.  .5.  that  were  brought  up  in  scarlet  e.  dung- 
EMBRACED.  [hUls 

Oen.  29. 13.  Laban  e.  Jacob  and  kissed  him 
33.  4.  Esau  ran  and  c.  Jacob  and  kissed  him 
48.  10.  Jacob  kissed  and  e.  Joseph's  sons 
^ct«20.].  Paul  e.  disciples  and  departed  to  Maced. 
Utb.  11.  13.  having  seen  and  e,  the  ptomiaua 
161 


^     EMP 

EMBRACING. 
Eccl.'i.5.  a  time  to  embrace  and  a  time  to  refrain  c. 
./Sets  20.10.Paule.Eutychu3,said,troubie  not  yours. 

EMBROIDER. 
Ezod.  28.  39.  thou  shalt  e.  the  coat  of  fine  linen 

EMBROIDERER. 
Exod.  35. 35.  to  work  all  manner  of  work  of  the  e. 
38.  23.  with  him  was  Aholiab,  an  e.  in  blue 

EMERALD,  S. 
Exod.  28.  18.  the  second  row  shall  be  an  e.  39. 11. 
Eiek.  27.  16.  Syria  occupied  in  thy  fairs  with  e. 
23.  13.  every  precious  stone  thy  covering,  the  e. 
/Jeu.4.3.there  was  a  rainbow  in  sight  like  unto  an  e. 
21. 19.  the  fourth  foundation  of  the  city  was  an  e 

EMERODS. 
Deut.  28.  27.  the  Lord  will  smite  thee  with  the  e. 
1  Sam.  5.6.  Lord  smote  them  of  Ashdod  with  thee. 
9.  men  of  the  city  had  c.  in  their  secret  parts 
12.  the  men  that  died  not  were  smitten  with  e. 
6.4.they  answered,  five  golden  e.  and  five  mice,  17. 
5.  shall  make  images  of  your  c.and  your  mice,  11. 
EMINENT. 
Job  22.  t  8.  and  the  e.  man  dwelt  in  the  earth 
Isa.  3.  t  3.  doth  take  away  the  e.  in  countenance 
Ezck.  16. 24.  thou  hast  built  to  thee  an  e.  place,  3] 
39.  they  shall  throw  down  thme  c.  place 
17.  22.  I  will  plant  it  on  a  high  and  e.  mountain 
1  T'm.2.t2.pray  for  kings  and  all  that  are  in  e.  place 

EMMANUEL, 
Or  Immanuel,  is  a  Hebrew  word,  which  signifies 
God  with  us.  Isaiah,  in  that  prophecy,  wherein 
he  declares  to  Ahaz  the  birth  of  the  Messiah, 
who  joas  to  be  born  of  a  virgin,  says,  This 
child  shall  be  called,  and  really  be,  Emmanuel, 
that  is,  God  with  us,  Isa.  7.  ]4.  He  repeats 
the  same  thing  vihile  he  is  speaking  of  the 
enemy's  army,  which,  like  a  torrent,  was  to 
overjlow  Judea,  i?t  which  Christ  was  to  be  bom, 
to  live  and  die;  The  stretchingoutof  his  wings 
shall  fill  the  breadth  of  thy  land,  O  Emmanuel, 
Isa.  8.  8.  Matthew  says,  that  this  proplieey 
was  accomplished  in  the  birth  of  Christ,  born 
of  the  virgin  Mary,  in  whom  the  two  natures, 
divine  and  human,  were  united;  and  so  in  this 
sense  he  was  really  Emmanuel,  or,  God  with 
us.  Mat.  1.  23. 
Isa.  7. 14.  and  shall  call  his  name  Em.  Mat.  1.  23. 
8.  8.  he  shall  till  the  breadth  of  thy  land,  O  Em. 

EMPIRE. 
Esth.  1. 20.  shall  be  published  throughout  all  his  e. 

EMPLOY. 
Deut.  20. 19.  for  the  tree  is  man's  life,  to  e.  in  siege 

EMPLOYED. 
Deut.^O.]  19.  O  man,  the  tree  is  to  be  e.  in  the  siege 
1  Chron.  9.  33.  these  singers  were  e.  day  and  night 
Ezra  10.15.Jonat.andJahaziah  e.about  this  matter 

EMPLOYMENT. 
Eiek.  39.  14.  shall  sever  out  men  of  continual  e. 

EMPTY. 
Gen.  31.42.  surely  thouhadst  sent  me  away  now  e. 
37.  24.  the  pit  was  e.  there  was  no  water  in  it 
41.27.  the  seven  e.  ears  blasted  with  the  east-wind 
Exod.  3.  21.  that  when  ye  go,  ye  shall  not  go  e. 
23.  15.  in  month  A  bib  earnest  from  Egypt,  none 
shall  appear  before  mc  e.  34.  20.  Deut.  16.  16. 
Deut.  15.  13.  thou  shalt  not  let  him  go  away  e. 
Judg.  7. 16.  he  put  in  every  man's  hand  e.  pitchers 
Ruth  1.  21.  the  Lord  hath  brought  me  home  e. 
3.  17.  for  he  said,  go  not  e.  to  thy  mother-in-law 

1  Sam.  6.  3.  they  said,  send  not  the  ark  away  e. 
20.18.  be  missed,  because  thy  seat  will  be  e.  25,27. 

2  Sam.  1.  22.  the  sword  of  Saul  returned  not  e. 

2  Kings  4.  3.  go,  borrow  thee  e.  vessels,  not  a  few 
JVeA.  5.  t  13.  even  thus  be  he  shaken  out  and  e. 
.lob  11.112.  for  e.  man  would  be  wise,tho'  born  like 

22.  9.  thou  hast  sent  widows  away  e.  and  the  arms 

26.  7.  he  stretcheth  out  the  north  over  the  e.  place 
Isa.  24.  l.the  Lordmakelh  the  earth  e.  and  waste 

29.  8.  a  hungry  man  awaketh,  and  his  soul  is  e. 

32.  6.  to  make  e.  the  soul  of  the  hungry 
Jer.  14.  3.  they  returned  with  their  vessels  e. 

51.34.  the  king  of  Babylon  made  me  an  e.  vessel 
Ezek.  24.  11.  then  set  it  e.  upon  the  coals  thereof 
Hos.  10. 1.  Isr.  is  an  e.  vine,  he  bringeth  forth  fruit 
JV«A.  2.  10.  Nineveh  is  e.  and  void,  and  waste 
Mat.  12.  44.  and  when  he  is  come,  he  Hndeth  it  e. 
Mark  12.  3.  they  caught  him  and  beat  him,  and 
sent  him  away  e.  Luke  20.  10, 11. 
Luke  1.  53.  and  the  rich  he  hath  sent  e.  away 

EMPTY,  Verb. 
J^ev.  14.  36.  priest  command  that  they  e.  the  house 
Eccl.  11.  3.  the  clouds  e.  themselves  on  the  earth 
Jer.  48. 12.  and  send  wanderers  shall  c.  his  vessels 

51.2.  fanners  that  shall  fan  her  and  e.  her  land 
ffab.l.ll.  shall  they  therefore  e.  their  net,  not  spare 
ZccA.  4.12.  which  e.  the  golden  oil  outof  themselv. 
Mai.  3.  t  10.  if  I  will  not  e.  you  out  a  blessing 

EMPTIED. 
Gen.  24.  20.  Rebekah  hasted  and  e.  her  pitcher 

42.  35.  it  came  to  pass  as  they  e.  their  sacks 


END 

2CAron.  24.  11.  the  high  priest's  officer  e.  the  chcft 
JVeA.  5.  13.  even  thus  be  ho  shaken  out  and  e. 
Isa.  3.  t  26.  she  being  e.  shall  sit  on  the  groimd 
19.t3.6pirit  of  Egy.  shall  be  e.  in  the  midst  thereof 
6.  and  the  brooks  of  defence  shall  be  e. 
24.  3.  llie  land  shall  be  utterly  e.  and  spoiled 
Jer.  48. 11.  Moab  not  been  e.  from  vessel  to  vessel 
JVah.  2.  2.  for  the  emptiers  have  e.  them  out 

EMPTIERS. 
JVoA.  2.  2.  for  the  e.  have  emptied  them  out 

EMPTINESS. 
/sa.34.11.he  shall  stretch  out  upon  it  the  stones  of*. 

EMPTYING. 
Hos.  10.  1 1.  a  vino  e.  the  fruit  which  it  giveth 

EMULATION. 
Rom.  11.  14.  if  I  may  provoke  to  e.  my  brethren 

EMULATIONS. 
Oal.  5.i0.  the  works  of  the  f^esh  are  e.  wrath,  strife 
'  ENABLED. 

1  Tim.  1.  12.1  thank  Christ  Jesus  who  hath  e.  me 

ENCAMP. 
Exod.  14.  2.  that  they  e.  before  Pi-hahiroth 
JV«»n.l.50.the  Levites  shall  e.  about  the  tabernacle 

2.  17.  as  they  e.  so  shall  they  set  forward 

3.  38.  but  those  that  e.  before  the  tabernacle 
10.31. thou  knowest  how  we  are  to  c.in  wilderness 

2  .Sam.  12.  28.  e.  against  Rabbah,  and  take  it 
Job  19.  12.  his  troops  come  and  e.  about  my  ta- 
bernacle 

Psal.  27.  3.  though  a  host  should  e.  against  me 
Zech.  y.  8. 1  will  e.  about  mine  house  for  the  army 

ENCAMPED. 
Exod.  13.  20.  c.  in  Etham||15.  27.  e.  by  the  waters 

18.  5.  where  Moses  e.  at  the  mount  of  God 
JVum.  33.  10.  from  Elim  they  c.  by  the  Red-sea 

11.  from  Red-sea,  and  e.  in  the  wilderness  of  Sin 
Josh.  4.  19.  people  came  up  and  e.  in  Gilgal,  .5. 10. 

10.  5.  the  kings  of  the  Amorites  e.  before  Gideon 
Judg.  6.  4.  the  Midianites  c.  against  Israel 

9.  50.  Abimelech  c.  against  Thebez  and  took  it 

10.  17.  the  children  of  Ammon  e.  in  Gilead,  and 
Israel  assembled  themselves  and  e.  at  Mizpeh 

1  Sam.  11.  1.  Nahash  e.  against  Jabesh-Gilead 
13.  16.  but  the  Philistines  e.  in  Michmash 

2  Sam.  11.  11.  the  servants  are  e.  in  the  open  fields 
IKings  16. 15.  the  people  e.  against  Gibbcthon,  16. 

1  Chron.  11.  15.  the  Philistines  e.  in  the  valley 
2CAr.  32. 1.  Sennacherib  e.  against  the  fenced  citigs 

ENCAMPETH. 
Psal.  34.  7.  angel  of  the  Lord  e.  round  about  them 
53.5.  hath  scattered  bones  of  him  that  e.  agst.  thco 

ENCAMPING. 
Exod.  14. 9.  Egyptians  overtook  them  e.  by  ?he  sea 

2  Kings  6.t8.  saying,  in  such  a  place  shall  be  my  e. 
Encunk,  Enclose;  see  Incline,  Inclose. 

ENCOUNTERED. 
.^cts  17.  18.  then  certain  philosophers  e.  him 

ENCOURAGE. 

Deut.  1.38.C.  him,  he  shall  cause  to  inheritit,  3.28. 

2  Sam.  11.25.  thus  say  to  Joab,  and  c.  thou  him 

Psal.  64.  5.  they  e.  themselves  in  an  evil  matter 

ENCOURAGED. 

1  Sam.  30.  6.  David  e.  himself  in  the  Lord  his  God 

2  CAr.  17.  t  6.  his  heart  was  e.  in  ways  of  the  Lord 
31.  4.  that  the  priests  and  Levites  might  be  e. 
35.  2.  Josiah  e.  them  to  the  service  of  the  Lord 

Isa.  41.  7.  so  the  carpenter  e.  the  goldsmith 
END. 

The  end  signifies  the  extremity  or  utmost  part 
of  a  thing,  as  the  end  of  a  rod,  1  Sam.  14.  27. 
The  end  of  a  heap  of  corn,  Ruth  3.  7.  The 
ends  of  the  earth,  that,  is,  The  extremities,  or 
most  remote  parts  of  the  world,  Job  37.  3.  1 38. 
13.  or  the  people  inhabiting  those  parts,  1  Sam. 
2.  10,  The  Lord  shall  judge  the  ends  of  the 
earth.  He  shall  condemn  and  punish  the  Phi- 
listines, who  dwelt  in  the  utmost  borders  of  the 
land  of  Canaan,  vpon  the  sea-coast.  And  in 
Psalm  98.  3,  All  the  ends  of  the  earth  have 
seen  the  salvation  of  our  God;  that  is,  Ml  the 
inhabitants  of  the  earth  from  one  end  to  the 
other.  End  is  taken  for  the  conclusion,  the  sum 
or  substance  of  a  discourse,  Eccl.  12. 1 13,  Let 
us  hear  the  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter;  or, 
the  end  of  the  matter.  It  is  also  taken  for 
destruction,  Gen.  6.  13,  The  end  of  all  flesh 
is  come  before  me.  /  am  resolved  to  destroy 
nan  and  bust.  And  in  Amos  8.  2,  The  end 
is  come  upjn  my  people  of  Israel:  The  time 
nf  their  utter  and  final  overthrow.  And  in 
Mat.  24.  6,  our  Saviour  prophesying  of  the 
destruction  of  Jerusalem,  and  of  the  temple, 
says  to  his  disciples,  Ye  shall  hear  of  wars, 
and  rumours  of  wars,  see  that  ye  be  not  trou- 

,  bled,  for  all  these  things  must  come  to  pass, 
but  the  end  is  not  yet.  TAe  destruction  ofJe- 
rusalem  is  not  presently:  Or,  though  Ood 
shall  bring  remarkable  judgments  vpon  that 
place  and  people,  yet  he  will  not  utterly  destroy 
them.     Or  by  end,  here  may  b»  understood,  tii« 


END 

day  of  judgment,  or  the  time  0/ Christ's  second 
coming. 

In  Kev.  i!l.  6.  Christ  says,  T  am  the  beginning  and 
the  end:  /  made  all  things  at  first,  and  J  will 
bring  all  to  that  perfection  and  happiness  J 
have  promised.  ./Jnd  it  is  said,  Horn.  10.  4, 
Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness  to 
every  one  that  hehevetli ;  that  is.  The  law  was 
given  for  this  end,  that  sinners  being  thereby 
brought  to  the  knowledge  of  t/irir  sins,  arid 
Uieir  lost  and  undone  estate,  by  reason  thereof, 
should  fiy  to  Clirist  and  his  righteousness  for 
refuge.  Or,  Clirist  is  the  perfection  and  con- 
summation of  the  law.  JJc perfected  the  cere- 
nionial  law,  as  he  was  the  Hubstance,  whereof 
ail  the  ceremonies  of  tlie  law  were  shadows  ; 
they  all  referred  to  him  as  their  scope  and  end. 
He  perfected  also  the  moral  law,  both  by  his 
active  obedience,  fulfilling  all  the  righteous- 
ness thereof ;  and  by  his  passive  obedience, 
bearing  the  curse  and  punishment  of  the  law, 
which  was  due  to  us. 
The  end  of  llie  commandment  is  charity,  or  love, 
J  'J'im  1.  5.  IVe  truly  accomplish  the  law  by 
fulfilling  the  precept  of  love ;  for  love  i»  tlie 
fultilling  of  the  law,  Horn.  13.  10.  The  main 
scope  and  design  both  of  law  and  gospel,  is  to 
produce  a  pure,  ardent  love  of  God,  and  of 
men,  for  his  sake.  There  is  also  mention  of 
the  end  of  faith,  1  Pet.  1.  9,  Receiving  the  end 
of  your  faith,  even  the  salvation  of  your  souls 
that  is,  receiving  that  which  is  the  scope,  or 
mark  to  which  faith  tends,  or  which  is  the  re 
ward  of  faith,  namely,  the  assurance  of  the 
salvation  of  your  Souls.  To  endure  to  the 
end.  Mat.  10.  a2.  is  to  fight  against  sin  and 
temptations  as  long  as  one  Uoes,  and  con- 
stantly to  adhere  to  Christ,  in  spite  of  all  per- 
secutions for  his  sake.  End  is  also  taken  for 
reward  or  ^vages,  Horn.  G.  21,  For  the  end  of 
those  things  is  death.  Eternal  death  is  the 
reward  or  wages  of  sin. 
(fen.  (i.  13.  the  e.  of  all  flesh  is  Come  before  me 

47.  21.  from  one  e.  of  Egypt  even  to  the  other  e. 

Exod.  23.  Hi.  the  feast  of  in-gathering  which  is  in 

the  e.  of  year,  when  gathered  out  of  field,  34. 22. 

25.19.niake  one  cherub  on  the  one  e.  and  the  other 

cherub  on  the  other  e.  even  of  mercy-seat 

i>f7(<.  28.  04.  Lord  scatter  from  one  c.  of  the  eartli 

32.  20.  Lord  said,  X  will  see  what  their  e.  shall  be 
Judg.  0.  21.  (he  angel  put  forth  the  e.  of  his  staft" 

19.  9.  behold,  the  day  groweth  to  an  e.  lodge  here 

1  Ham.  14. 27.  Jonatlian  put  forth  the  c.  of  the  rod 
2KingsW.-2Hhi:  house  of  Baal  was  full  from  one  f . 

21.  16.  tilled  Jerusalem  with  blood  from  one  e. 

2  Chron.  21.19.  at\er  the  f.  oi'two  years,  liis  bowels 
/^zraO.l  Milled  with  unclean. from  one  f.to  another 
Job  6.1  l.what  is  my c.that  I  should  jnolong  my  life'! 

16.3.  shall  vain  words  have  e.?  or  what  emboldens 
26.  10.  till  the  day  and  night  come  to  an  e. 

28.  3.  he  setteth  an  e.  to  darkness,  and  searchcth 
J's.1.9.  the  wickedness  of  the  wicked  come  to  an  c. 

9.  6.  destructions  are  come  to  a  perpetual  e. 
19.  G.  his  going  forth  is  from  the  e.  of  heaven 
37.37.  upright  man,  for  the  e.  of  that  man  isjjeace 

3c).  the  e.  of  the  wicked  shall  be  cut  otT 

39.4.  make  me  know  (:.||73.17. 1  understood  their  e. 
01.2.  from  the  e.  of  the  earth  will  I  cry  to  thee 
l()2.27.thou  art  the  same,  and  thy  years  liave  no  c. 
119.  96.  I  have  seen  an  c.  of  all  perfection 

J'rov.  5.  4.  her  e.  is  bitter  ||  23.  18.  there  is  an  e. 
14.  12.  but  the  e.  thereof  are  the  ways  of  death 
25.  8.  lest  thou  know  not  what  to  do  in  the  c. 

Eccl.  4.  8.  yet  there  is  no  e.  of  all  his  labour 

IG.  there  is  no  e.  of  all  the  people  before  them 
7. 2.  the  c.  of  all  men  |{  8.  better  is  the  e.  of  a  thing 

10.  13.  the  e.  of  liis  talk  is  mischievous  madness 
.  12.  12.  of  making  many  books  thorn  is  no  e. 

1 13.  let  us  hear  the  e.  of  the  whole  matter 
/ja.2.7.  land  full  of  gold,  nor  is  there  any  e.  r>f  their 
treasures,  nor  is  tliere  any  c.  of  tlieir  chariots 
9.  7.  of  his  government  there  shall  be  no  <■. 
13.  5.  thoy  come  from  the  e.  of  heaven  to  destroy 
16. 4.  for  the  c.^tortioncr  is  at  an  e.  spoiler  ceaseth 
23.  15.  after  e.  of  70  years  Tyre  shall  sing,  17. 
42.  111.  sing  his  praise  from  the  c.  of  ti'e  earth 
45.  17.  hhall  not  be  confoimiled  world  without  c. 
40.  10.  declaring  the  e.  from  the  bogiiming 
.Jer.  5.  31.  what  will  ye  do  in  the  c.  thereof? 
12.  12.  for  the  sworrl  of  the  Lord  shall  devour 
from  one  e.  to  the  oilier  c.  of  the  land,  25. 3,'!. 
17. 11.  gels  riches,  and  at  his  c.  he  shall  he  a  fool 

29.  11.  I  think  to  give  you  an  expected  e. 
31.  17    there  is  hope  in  thine  i>  saith  the  Lord 
44.  27.  be  consumed,  till  there  he  an  e.  of  liiem 
.'•0.  t*6.  came  against  Babylon  from  the  c. 
51.  13.  0  ihoii  tiiat  dwellest,  thine  e.  is  corno 

31 .  to  shew  that  his  city  is  taken  at  one  e. 
J.am.  4.  IH.  our  r.  is  near,  for  our  r.  is  come 
Kick.  7.  2.  an  e.  Iho  r.  is  come  on  the  land,  3,  6. 


END 

Ezek.  21.  25.  when  inicju.  shall  have  an  e.  29. 1 35.5. 
Dan.  7.  28.  hitherto  is  tiio  e.  of  the  matter 

8.  17.  at  the  time  of  e.  shall  be  the  vision 
19.  at  the  time  appointed  the  e.  shall  be,  11.  27. 

9.  26.  the  e.  thereof  shall  be  with  a  Hood,  and  to  e. 

11.  6.  and  in  the  e.  of  years  tliey  shall  join 
35.  to  purge  them  even  to  tiie  lime  of  the  e. 
40.  at  time  of  the  e.  king  of  south  shall  push  him 
45.  yet  he  shall  come  to  his  e.  and  none  help 

12.  4.  seal  the  book  even  to  the  time  of  the  e. 
S.  O  Lord,  what  shall  be  the  e.  of  these  things  1 

9.  words  are  closed  up,  till  the  time  of  the  e. 

13.  but  go  thou  thy  w  ay  till  the  e.  be,  shalt  rest 
Jjmos  3.  15.  the  great  houses  shall  have  an  e. 

5.  18.  to  what  e.  is  it  for  you  to  desire  tiie  dayl 

8.  2.  the  e.  is  come  upon  my  people  of  Israel 

10.  I  will  make  the  e.  thereof  as  a  bitter  day 
JVuA.  2.  9.  for  there  is  none  c.  of  the  store 

3.  3.  and  tliere  is  none  e.  of  their  corpses 
JiJat.  13.  39.  the  harvest  is  the  e.  of  the  world 
24.  3.  what  shall  be  the  sign  of  the  e.  of  the  world? 

14.  the  gospel  be  preached,  then  shall  the  e.  come 
31.  gather  tVom  one  e.  of  heaven  to  the  other 

26.  58.  but  Peter  went  in  and  sat  to  see  the  e. 

28.  1.  in  the  e.  of  the  sabbath  came  Alary  to  see 
Mark  3.  26.  he  cannot  stand,  but  hath  an  e. 
Luke  1.  33.  of  his  kingdom  there  shall  be  no  e. 

18.  1.  he  spake  a  parable  to  them,  to  this  e. 

22.  37.  the  things  concerning  me  have  an  e. 
John  18.37.  sayest  lam  a  king,  to  this  c.  was  I  born 
Horn.  6.  21.  for  the  e.  of  those  things  is  death 
22.  ye  have  fruit  to  holiness,  c.  everlasting  life 

10.  4.  Christ  is  the  e.  of  the  law  for  righteousness 
14.  9.  to  tills  f.  Christ  both  died,  rose,  and  revived 

2  Cor.  2.  9.  for  to  tliis  e.  also  did  I  write  to  know 
11. 15.  whose  e.  shall  be  according  to  their  works 
Eph.  3.21.  to  hiin  be  glory  worlu  without  e. 
Phil.  3.  19.  many  walk,  whose  e.  is  destruction 
1  Tim.  1.  5.  the  e.  of  the  commandment  is  charity 
Ilcb.  6. 8.  nigh  to  cursing,  whose  e.  is  to  be  burned 
16.  and  an  oath  is  to  them  an  e.  of  all  strife 

7.  3.  having  neither  beginning  nor  «.  of  life 

9.  26.  but  now  once  in  the  e.  hath  he  appeared 

13.  7.  considering  the  e.  of  their  conversation 
■/am.  5.  11.  and  ye  have  seen  the  e.  of  the  Lord 
1  Pet.  1.9.  receiving  e.  of  your  faith,  even  salvation 

4. 17.  what  shall  be  the  e.  of  them  obey  not  gospel? 

Rev.  21.  6.  I  am  Alpha  and  Omega,  the  beginning 

and  the  e.  will  give  to  him  athirst,  22.  13. 

JH  the  END. 

Oen.  4.  t  3.  at  the  e.  of  days  Cain  brought  offering 

8.  6.  at  the  e.  of  forty  days  Noah  opened  window 
41.  1.  at  the  e.  of  two  years  Pharaoh  dreamed 

Exod.1^.41.  at  the  c.of  430  years.  Lord's  host  went 
Lev.  8.  33.  the  days  of  consecration  be  at  an  e. 
Dcut.  9.  11.  at  the  e.  of  40  days  and  40  nights 

14.  28.  at  the  e.  of  three  years  bring  the  tithe 
1.'5.  1.  at  the  e.  of  every  seventh  year  a  release 
31.10.  at  the  e.  of  every  seventh  year  read  this  law 

.fosh.  9. 16.  at  the  c.  of  three  days  after  the  league 
Judg.  11.  39.  at  the  c,  of  two  months  she  relumed 
Jiuth  3.  7.  Boaz  lay  down  at  the  e.  of  the  hcaj) 
2.Vff77(.  14.26.  at  the  e.  of  every  year  he  polled  it 

24.8.  Joab  came  to  .lerus.  at  the  e.  of  nine  months 
1  A'inn-.s-2.39.  at  the  cof  3  years  two  of  Sliimei's  ser. 

17.  f  7.  at  the  e.  of  days  the  brook  dried  up 
HKings  8.3.  at  the  e.  of  7  years  the  woman  returned 

18. 10.  at  the  c.  of  throe  years  they  took  Samaria 
2CA;"07i.J8.  t2.  at  thee. ot  years  Jeliosliaphat  went 

20.  16.  ye  shall  lind  them  at  the  cof  the  brook 

24.  23.  at  the  v.  of  the  year  the  host  of  Syria  came 
JW//.  J3.  t  6.  1'  the  e.  of  days  I  obtained  leave 
Psal.  107. 27.  they  stagger,  and  are  at  their  wits'  c. 
Isa.  7.3.  go  to  meet  Ahaz  at  the  e.  of  the  conduit 
Jer.  34.14.  at  the  cof  seven  years  let  go  every  serv. 
Kiek.',i.\fi.  at  the  c.  of  seven  days  word  of  L.  came 
Dan.  1.5.  at  the  c.  they  miglit  stand  before  the  king 

4.29.  at  the  e.  of  12  months  he  walked  in  palace 

11.  tI3.  at  the  r.  of  times  shall  come  with  an  army 

12.  13.  thou  shalt  stand  in  the  lot  at  the  c.  of  days 
Hab.  2.  3.  but  at  the  e.  it  shall  speak  and  not  lie 
Mat.  13. 40.  so  shall  it  be  in  the  e.  of  this  world 

But  the  END. 
Prov.  14. 12.  n  way  that  seems  right  to  a  man,  but 
the  e.  thereof  are  the  ways  of  death,  16.25. 
20.  21.  but  the  e.  thereof  shall  not  ho  blessed 
Mat.ii-l.r>.but  Ihec.iB  not  yet,^V/«ril3.7.  y<u*e21.9. 

1  I'et.  4.  7.  but  the  c.  of  all  things  is  at  hand 
Last  END. 

JViim.  23.  10.  and  let  my  last  e.  be  like  his 
■  fer.  12.  4.  tlicy  said,  he  shall  not  see  our  last  e. 
Lam.  1.  9.  she  rcmemhereth  not  her  last  c. 
Dan.  8.  19.  make  thee  know  what  shall  be  in  tlio 
Latter  END.  [la.'it  c. 

jVum.  24.  20.  Win  latter  e.  shall  be  that  he  perish 
Deut.  8.  16.  to  do  thee  good  at  thy  latter  e. 
32.  29.  that  thi'y  would  consider  their  latter  e. 
Huth  3.  10.  shewed  more  kiiidncsH  in  the  latter  c. 

2  Sum.  2.  26.  il  will  be  bitlrrih  ss  in  the  latter  e. 
Job  8.  7.  yol  thy  latter  e.  should  jjroatly  iiicrcaso 


END 

'  Job  42.12.  the  Lord  blessed  the  latter  e.  of  Job  more 
/'roc.W.aO.that  thou  mayest  be  wise  in  thy  latter  e 
Isa.il.  22.  consider  them,  and  know  the  latter  e 

47.  7.  neither  didst  remember  the  latter  e.  of  it 
2  Pet.2.20.  the  latter  e.  is  worse  than  the  beginning 

Made  an  END. 
Gen.  27.  30.  as  Isaac  had  made  an  e.  of  blessing 

49.  33.  Jacob  made  an  e.  of  commanding  his  BOiis 
//£«. 16.20.  made  an  e.  of  reconciling  the  lioly  plac« 
JVuni.4. 15.  made  an  e.  of  covering  the  sanctuary 

16.  31.  had  made  an  e.  of  speaking,  Deut.  20.  9. 
Deut.  26.  12.  hast  made  an  e.  of  tithing  tlie  tithe* 

31.  24.  when  Moses  had  made  an  e.  of  writing 

32.  45.  made  an  e.  of  speaking,  Judg.  15.  17. 

1  Ham.  18.  1.  I  24.  16.  2  Sam.  13.  36. 
1  Kings  1.  41.  1  3. 1.  Jer.  26. 8.  I  43. 1.  < 
I  51.  63. 
.Tosh.  5.  fS-  they  had  made  an  e.  of  circumcising 
8.  24.  Israel  had  made  an  e.  of  slaying,  10.  20. 
19.  49.  they  made  an  e.  of  dividing  tlie  land,  51. 
.hidg.S.iS.  he  had  made  an  c.  to  otter,  1  5a/n. 13.10. 

1  Sam.  10.  13.  he  had  made  an  e.  of  prophesying 

2  .Sam.  11. 19.  when  thou  hast  •made  a?i  e.  of  telling 

1  Kings  7.  40.  Hiram  made  an  c.  of  doing  the  work 

8.  .54.  Solomon  made  an  e.  of  praying,  2  Chr.  7. 1. 

2  Kings  10.  25.  as  soon  as  he  had  made  an  e.  of 

otlbring,  1  Chron.  16.  2.  2  Chron.  29.  29. 
2  Chr.  20.  23.  made  an  e.  of  the  inhabitants  of  Seir 
24. 10.  cast  into  the  chest,  till  they  had  made  an  e. 
EzralO.l~.made  an  c.wilhall  thathad  strangewiveg 
Ezek.4'2. 15.  made  an  e.  of  measuring  inner  house 
43.  23.  when  thou  hast  made  an  e.  of  cleansing  it 
Jimos  7.  2.  they  made  an  e.  of  eating  the  grass 
Mat.  11. 1.  made  ane.  ofcommanding  his  disciples 
Make  an  END. 

1  Sam.  3. 12.  when  I  begin,  I  will  also  mate  an  e. 

2  Chr.  31. 1 1.  brake  the  images,  until  to  make  an  e. 
JVcA.  4.2.  feeble  Jews,  will  they  maAc  an  c.in  a  day 
.Job  18. 2.  how  long  ere  you  make  an  e.  of  words  ? 
/,sa.33.1.thou  shall  make  mi  e.to  deal  treacherously 

38.  12.  to-night  wilt  thou  make  an  e.  of  me,  13. 
J?zei.20.17.eye  spared, nor  did  I  maAc  an  cof  them 
2Jan.  9.  24.  seventy  weeks,  to  make  an  c.  of  sins 
JV'aA.  1.  8.  he  will  maA-c  an  utter  e.  of  the  place,  9. 
Zcph.  1. 1  2.  by  taking  away,  I  will  maAe  an  e.  ? 

Make  a  full  END. 
Jer.  4.  27.  the  whole  land  shall  be  desolate,  yet  will 
I  not  make  a  full  c.  5.  18.  |  M.  11.  "|  46. 28. 

5. 10.  go  ye  up  and  destroy,  but  make  not  a  full  e. 
Ezek.  11.  13.  ah.  Lord,  wilt  thou  make  a  full  e.  ? 

To  the  END. 
Exod.S.^.l  will  sever  land  of  Goshen, fo  the  cfhou 
mayest  know  that  I  am  the  Lord,  Ezek.  20. 26. 
Lev.  17.  5.  to  the  e.  Israel  may  bring  sacrifices 
Deut.  15.  t4.  to  the  e.  there  be  no  poor  among  you 

17.  16.  to  the  e.  that  he  should  multiply  horses 
20.  to  the  e.  that  he  may  prolong  his  days 
Psal.  19.  4.  their  words  to  the  e.  of  the  world 

30.  12.  to  the  e.  my  glory  may  sing  praise  to  thee 

119.  112.  to  perform  thy  statutes  even  to  the  t. 
Eccl.  3.  11.  can  find  out  t'rom  beginning  to  the  e. 

7.  14.  to  the  e.  man  should  find  nothing  allcr  him 
Isa.  48.  20.  utter  it  even  to  the  e.  of  the  earth 

49.  6.  mayest  be  my  salvation  to  the  e.  of  the  earth 
.Ter.  3.  .5.  his  anger,  will  he  keep  it  to  the  c.  ? 
Ezek.  31. 14.  to  the  c.  that  none  of  the  trees  exalt 
Dan.  4. 11.  sight  thereof  to  the  e.  of  all  the  earth 
22.  thy  dominion  reachclh  to  the  c.  of  the  earth 

12.().  how  long  shall  be  to  the  e.  of  these  wonders'? 
Ohad.  9.  to  the  e.  that  every  one  may  be  cut  off 
Mat.  10.  22.  but  he  that  enduroth  to  the  e.  shall  be 
saved,  24.  13.  Mark  13.  13. 
Jlcts  7.  19.  cast  out,  to  the  e.  lliey  might  not  live 
Hom.  1.  11.  to  the  e.  you  may  be  established 

4.  16.  to  the  c.  the  promise  might  be  sure  to  seed 
2  Cor.  1. 13.  Iitrust  you  shall  acknowledge  to  the  e.' 

3.  13.  look  to  the  c.  of  that  which  is  abolished 
1  Thess.  3.13.  to  the  c.  he  may  establish  your  hearts 
1  Pet.  1. 13.  w  horefore  be  sober,  and  hope  to  the  e. 

Into  the  END. 
Deut.  11. 12.  from  beginning  «7i?o  thee,  of  the  year 
.7(>xA.1.5.5.the  east-border  was  unto  the  e.  of  Jordan 
Jiuth  2.  2;).  10  jdcon  unto  the  e.  of  barley-harvts'. 
./«/)  34.36.  my  denTre  is  Job  may  be  tried  vnto  the  r. 
/'.•■•o;.46.9.iniikelh  wars  to  cease  unto  fAe  cof  eaiih 

119.  33.  leach  me,  and  I  shall  keep  it  unto  the  r. 
Isa.  62. 11.  L.  hath  proclaimed  vnto  the  e.  of  earth 
.fer.  1.  3.  it  come  unto  the  e.  of  the  eleventh  year 
Dan.  6.  26.  his  dominion  sholl  be  even  unto  the  e. 

7.  21).  to  destroy  his  dominion  unto  the  c 

9.  26.  and  unto  the  e.  of  the  war  desolations 
.Mat.  28.20. 1  am  with  you  alway.even  unto  the  e. 
.John  13.  1.  having  loved,  he  loved  them  unto  the  e 
1  Cor.  1.8.  who  shall  also  rontirm  you  vnto  th»  e. 
Ilih.'.i.f).  if  wc  hold  fast  iheconlidf'iice  unto  the  e. 

14.  if  we  hold  the  beginning  stcdfast  unto  thee. 
6.  II., to  the  full  assurance  of  hope  «n/o  the  e. 
Her.  2.  26.  ho  thnt  koejx'lh  my  works  unto  the  ». 

END. 
Mat.  10. 1 33.  ye  shuU  not  c.  the  cities  of  Ifvaai 


END 

ENDAMAGE. 
Ezra  4  13.  so  thou  sbalt  e.  the  revenue  of  kings 

EMDANGER. 
Dan.  1  10.  ye  shall  make  me  e.  my  head  to  the  kin: 

ENDANGERED. 
£cc2.10.9.he  thatcleaveth  wood  shall  bee.thereby 

ENDED. 
Oen.  2.  2.  on  the  eeventli  day  God  e.  his  work 
41.  53.  the  seven  yearsof  plenteousness  were  e. 
Deut.  31.  30.  he  spake  the  words  till  they  were  e. 
34.  8.  the  days  ot'mourning  for  Moses  were  e. 
2  Sa/ii. 20  18.  ask  counsel,  and  so  they  c.  the  matter 
Esth.  9.  t  23.  nor  memorial  be  c.  from  their  seed 
Job  31.  40.  the  words  of  Job  are  e. 
Ps.  72.  20.  prayers  of  David,  the  son  of  Jesse  are  e. 
Isa.  60.  20.  the  days  of  thy  mourning  shall  be  e. 
Jer.  8.  20.  the  harvest  is  past,  tlie  summer  is  e. 
Mat.  7.  2?.  when  Jesus  had  e.  these  sayings 
ZiUke  4.  2  when  forty  days  were  e.  he  hungered 

13.  when  the  devil  had  e.  all  the  temptation 
^oA»13-2.  supper  being  e.  the  devil  havingnow  put 

ENDETH. 
Isa.  24.  8.  the  noise  of  them  that  rejoice  e. 

ENDING. 
1  Sam.  3.  t  12. 1  will  perform  beginning  and  e. 
Rev.  1.  8. 1  am  the  beginning  and  e.  saith  the  L. 
ENDLESS. 

1  Tim.  1.  4.  neither  give  heed  to  e.  genealogies 
Heb.  7. 16.  who  is  made  after  the  power  of  an  e.  life 

ENDEAVOUR. 

2  Cior.  5. 1 9-  we  e.  that  we  may  be  accepted  of  him 
2  Pet.  1.  15.  I  will  e.  that  you  may  be  able  after 

ENDE.WOURED. 
■^cts  16.  10.  we  e.  to  go  into  Macedonia,  gathering 
1  T'Aes5.2.17.we  e.to  see  your  face  with  greatdesire 

ENDEAVOURING. 
Eph,  4.  3.  e.  to  keep  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  bond 

ENDEAVOURS. 
Psal.  28.  4.  according  to  the  wickedness  of  their  e. 

ENDOW. 
Exod.  22. 16.  he  shall  surely  e.  her  to  be  his  wife 

ENDS. 
Deut.  33. 17.  shall  push  the  people  toe.  of  the  earth 
1  Sam.  2.  10.  the  \i.  shall  judge  the  e.  of  the  earth 

1  Kings  8.  8.  the  e.  of  staves  were  seen,  2CAr.  5. 9. 

2  Kings  10.  t  32.  L.  began  to  cut  off  the  c.  of  Isr. 
Job  28.  24.  for  he  looketh  to  the  e.  of  the  earth 

37.  3.  he  directcth  his  lightning  to  e.  of  the  earth 

38.  13.  it  might  take  hold  of  the  e.  of  tlie  earth 
Psal.  19.  6.  and  his  circuit  to  the  e.  of  it 

22. 27.  all  the  e.  of  the  world  shall  remember 
48.  10.  so  is  thy  praise  to  the  c.  of  the  earth 
59  13.  God  ruleth  in  Jacob  to  the  e.  of  the  earth 
65.  5.  the  confidence  of  all  the  e.  of  the  earth 
67  7.  all  the  c.  of  the  earth  shall  fear  hira 
98.3.  the  e.  of  earth  have  seen  the  salvation  of  G. 
135.7.theLord  causeth  the  vapours  to  ascend  from 
the  e.  of  the  earth,  Jcr.  10.  13.  |  51.  16. 
Prer.  17. 24.  eyes  of  a  foot  are  in  the  e.  of  the  earth 

30.  4.  who  hath  established  all  the  e.  of  the  earth? 
Isa.  40.  28.  the  Lord,  the  creator  of  the  e.  of  earth 

41.  5.  the  e.  of  the  earth  were  afraid,  drew  near 

9.  whom  I  have  taken  from  the  e.  of  the  earth 
43.  6.  bring  my  daughters  from  the  e.  of  the  earth 
45. 22.  look  to  me  and  be  saved,  all  e.  of  the  earth 
52.  10.  all  the  e.  shall  see  the  salvation  of  God 

Jer.  16.  19.  Gentiles  shall  come  from  e.  of  the  earth 
25.  31.  a  noise  shall  come  to  the  e.  of  the  earth 
Kzck.  15.  4.  the  fire  devoureth  both  the  e.  of  it 
Mic.  5.  4.  now  shall  he  be  great  to  e.  of  the  earth 
T.eck.  9.  10.  his  dominion  to  tlie  e.  of  the  earth 
Acts  13.  47.  thou  be  for  salvation  toe.  of  the  earth 
Horn.  10.  18.  and  their  words  to  the  e.  of  the  world 
ICor.  10.  11.  on  whom  the  e.  of  the  world  are  come 

ENDUED. 
Oen.  30.  20.  God  hath  e.  me  with  a  good  dowry 
ZCkron.  2. 12.  to  David  a  wise  son,  c.  with  prudence 
13.have  sent  a  cunning  man,c.with  understanding 
2,«Ac24.  49.  till  ye  be  c.  with  power  from  on  high 
Jam.  3.  13.  who  is  wise  and  e.  with  knowledge  ? 

ENDURE. 
Oen.  33.  14.  and  as  the  children  be  able  to  e. 
Exod.  18.  23.  then  thou  shalt  be  able  to  e. 
Esth.  8.  6.  for  how  can  I  e.  to  sen  evil  and  dcstruct 
Job  8.  15.  he  shall  hold  it  fast,  but  it  shall  not  e. 

31.  23.  by  reason  of  his  highness  I  could  not  e. 
Psal.  9.  T.  the  L. shall  e.  for  ever,  he  halh  prepared 

his  throne  for  judgment,  102.  12,2(i.  1 10*.  31. 

30.  5.  weeping  may  e.  for  a  night,  but  joy  corneth 

72..5.they  shall  fear  thee  as  long  as  sun  and  moone. 

17.  his  name  shall  r.  for  ever,  as  long  as  the  sun 

89.  29.  his  seed  will  I  make  to  c.  for  ever,  36. 

PrrtC.  27.24.  doth  th(>  crown  r.  to  every  generation? 

JEzeA.22.H.ran  thy  heart  r.  or  thy  hands  be  strong? 

Mat.  24.  la  he  that  shall  c.  to  the  end,  Mark  13. 13. 

Mark  4.  17.  have  no  root,  and  so  e.  but  for  a  time 

2  Th'ss.  1.  4.  in  all  your  tribulations  that  ye  e. 

i  Tim.'i.  3.  tliou  therefore  e.  hardness  as  a  soldier 

10.  therefore  I  e.  all  things  for  the  electa'  soke 
A.  3.  wiien  they  will  not  e.  sound  doctrine 

163 


ENE 

2  T;m.4.5.but  watcli  thou  in  all  things, c.afflictions 
Ucb.  12.  7.  if  ye  e.  chastening,  G.  dealeth  with  you 

20.  they  could  note,  what  was  commanded 
Jam.  5.  11.  behold,  we  count  them  hap))y  who  e. 

1  Pet.  2.  19.  if  a  man  for  conscience  e.  grief 

ENDURED. 
Psal.  81.  15.  their  time  should  have  e.  for  ever 
Rom.  9.  22.  if  God  e.  with  much  long-sufl^ering 

2  Tim.  3.  11.  hast  known  what  persecutions  I  c. 
Heb.&.  15.  after  he  had  patiently  e.he  obtained  pro 

10.  32.  ^e  c  a  great  fight  of  afflictions 

11.  27.  for  Moses  e.  as  seeing  him  who  isinvisible 

12.  2.  he  e.  the  cross  ||  3.  he  e.  such  contradiction 

ENDURETH. 
Psal.  15-13.  nor  c.  reproach  against  his  neighbour 
30.  5.  for  his  anger  e.  but  a  moment,  favour  is  life 
52.  1.  the  goodness  of  God  e.  continually 
72.  7.  abundance  of  peace  so  long  as  the  moon  e 
100.  5.  and  his  truth  e.  to  all  generations 
145.  13.  thy  dominion  e.  through  all  generations 
Mat.  10.  22.  he  that  e.  to  the  end  shall  be  saved 
John  6.  27.  but  for  that  meat  which  e.  unto  life 
1  Cor.  13.  7.  charity  hopeth  all  things,  e.  all  things 
Jam.  1.  12.  blessed  is  the  man  that  e.  temptation 

ENDURETH /or  ctjcr. 

1  Chron.  16.  34.  for  his  mercy  e.  for  ever,  41. 

2  Chron.  5.  13.  |  7.  3,  6.  |  20. 21.  Ezra  3. 11. 

Psal.  106.  1.  I  107.  1.  1  118.  1,  2,  3,  4.  I  136. 

1,  2,3,  ^c.  I  138.  8.  Jer.  33.  11. 

Psal.  111.  3.1iis  righteousness  e.for  ever,  112.  3,9. 

111.  10.  his  praise  e.for  ever  \\  117.2.  his  truth  c. 

119. 160.  every  one  of  thy  judgments  e.  for  ever 

135.  13.  thy  name,  O  Lord,  c.  for  ever,  thy  mem. 

1  Pet.  1.  25.  but  the  word  of  the  Lord  e.  for  ever 

ENDURING. 
P.saM9.9.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  clean,  e.  for  ever 

2  Cor.  1.  6.  is  effectual  in  c.  the  same  sufferings 
Heb.10.34.  have  in  heaven  a  better  and  e.substance 

ENEMY. 
Exod.  15.  6.  thy  right  hand  hath  dashed  in  pieces  e. 

9.  the  e.  said,  1  will  pursue,  I  will  overtake 
2-3.  22.  then  I  will  be  an  e.  to  thine  enemies 

JVum.  10.  9.  and  if  you  go  to  war  against  the  e. 
35.  23.  and  was  not  his  c.  nor  sought  his  harm 
Deut.  32.27.  were  it  not  I  feared  the  wrath  of  the  e. 
42.  from  the  beginning  of  revenges  upon  the  e. 
33.  27.  he  shall  thrust  out  the  e.  before  thee 
■Judg.  16.23.  ourgod  hath  delivered  our  e.  into,  24. 
1  Sam.  2.  32.  thou  shalt  see  an  e.  in  my  habitation 
18.  29.  Saul  became  David's  c.  continually 
24.  19.  if  a  man  find  his  e.  will  he  let  him  go? 
\Kings8.2'i.  when  thypeople  he  smitten  down  be- 
fore e.  because  sinned  ag.  thee,  2Chron.  6.  24. 
46.  if  they  sin,  and  thou  deliver  them  to  the  c. 
2Chron.  25.  8.  G.  shall  make  thee  fall  before  the  e. 
Esth.  7.  4.  the  e.  could  not  countervail  the  damage 

6.  Esther  said,  the  e.  is  this  wicked  Hamau 
Job  33.  10.  behold,  he  counteth  me  for  his  c. 
Psal.  7.  5.  let  the  e.  persecute  my  soul  and  take  it 

8.  2.  thou  mightest  still  llie  e.  and  the  avenger 

9.  6.  O  thou  e.  destructions  are  come  to  an  end 
42. 9.  why  go  I  mourning  because  of  the  c.l  43.  2. 
44.  10.  thou  makcst  us  to  turn  back  from  the  c. 
55.  3.  I  mourn,  because  of  the  voice  of  the  f. 

12.  for  it  was  not  an  e.  that  reproached  me 
61.  3.  thou  hast  been  a  strong  tower  from  iJie  e. 
64.  1.  preserve  my  life  from  fear  of  the  e. 
74.  3.  even  all  that  the  e.  halh  done  wickedly 

10.  shall  the  c.  blaspheme  thy  name  for  ever? 
18.  remember  the  e.  hath  reproached,  O  Lord 

78.  42.  remember  not  when  he  delivered  from  e. 

89.  22.  the  e.  shall  not  exact  upon  him 

143.  3.  for  the  c.  halh  persecuted  my  soul 
Prov.  27.  6.  but  the  kisses  of  an  e.  are  deceitful 
Isa.  59.  19.  when  the  c.  shall  come  in  like  a  tiood 

63.  10.  therefore  he  was  turned  to  be  their  e. 
.Ter.  6.  2.).  the  aword  of  the  e.  is  on  every  side 

15.  11.  I  will  cause  the  c.  to  entreat  thee  well 

18.17. 1  will  scatter  them  with  cast-wind  before  e. 

30.  14.  I  have  wounded  thee  with  wound  of  an  e. 
I. am.  1.  5.  are  gone  into  captivity  before  Ihe  e. 
9.  behold,  for  the  c.  hath  magnified  himself 
16.  my  children  are  desolatc,becausec.prevai!ed 

2.  3.  he  hath  drawn  back  his  hand  before  the  e. 

4.  he  hath  bent  his  bow  like  an  e.  he  stood 

5.  the  l/Ord  was  an  e.  he  hath  swallowed  up 
4.  12.  that  the  e.  should  have  entered  the  gates 

F.ick.  36.2.  because  (he  chad  said  against  you,  aha 

Hos.  8.  3.  Israel,  the  c.  shall  pursue  him 

.W!V;.2.8.  even  of  late  my  people  is  risen  upas  an  c. 

JsTafi.  3.  11.  thou  shalt  seek  strength  because  of  e. 

Jlff(M3.25.his  B.  came,  sowed  tares,  went  his  way 
28.  he  said  unto  them  an  e.  hath  done  this 
30.  the  c.  that  sowed  tiiem  is  the  devil 

Ijuke  10.  19.  to  tread  over  all  the  power  of  the  e. 

Jtrts  13. 10.  child  of  devil,  thou  c.  of  all  rightcousn. 

1  Cor.  1.").  26.  the  last  e.  to  be  destroyed  is  death 
Oal.  4.16.  am  I  become  your  e.because  I  tell  truth? 

2  Thess.  3. 15.  count  him  not  as  an  c.  but  admonish 
Jam.  4.  4  a  friend  of  the  world  is  the  e.  of  God 


ENE 

Hand  of  the  ENEMY. 
Z.£D.26  25.1  will  send  the  pestilence,  and  ye  shall 
be  delivered  into  tiie  hand  of  the  e.  JVch.  9. 27 
Ezra8.31.  hedehvered  us  from  the  hand  of  the  e. 
Psal.'il.d:.  hast  not  shut  nieuj)  into  Aaniio/tAc  e. 
78.  61.  he  delivered  his  glory  into  the  hand  of  e. 
106. 10.  redeemed  from  tJie  hand  of  the  e.  107.  2. 
Lain.  1.  7.  her  people  fell  into  the  haiid  of  the  e. 
2.  7.  hath  given  into  the  hand  of  the  e.  the  walU 

Mine  ENEMY. 
1  Sam.  19.  17.  why  hast  thou  sent  away  mine  e  ? 
2SaTn.22.18.  delivered  me  from  mmc  e.  Psal.l8.}7 
1  Kings  21.  2a  hast  thou  found  me,  O  7)iine  e  7 
Jou  16.  9.  mint  e.  sharpenetli  his  eyes  upon  mo 

27.  7.  let  ndne  e.  be  as  wicked,  and  he  that  riseta 
Psal.  7.  4.  yea,  I  delivered  him  that  is  mine  e. 

13.  2.  how  long  shall  mine  e.  be  exalted  over  me  ? 

4.  lest  mine  c.  say,  I  have  prevailed  against  him 
41.11.  because  mine  e.  doth  not  triumph  over  me 

/.um.2.22.those  1  swaddled  halh  wive  e.  consumed 
Mic.  7.  8.  rejoice  not  against  me,  O  mine  c. 

10.  then  she  that  is  mine  e.  shall  see  it,  and  shame 

Thive  ENEMY. 
Ezod.  23.  4.  if  thou  meet  thine  e.  o.t  or  bis  ass 
Dent.  28.  57.  thine  c.  shall  distress  thee  in  thy  gates 

1  Sam.  24.  4.  deliver  ihinc  e.  into  Ihy  hand,  26.  8. 

28.  16.  seeing  the  Lord  is  become  ihinc  e. 

2  !Sam.  4.8.  behold  the  head  of  Ish-boshelh  thine  c. 
■  fob  13.  24.  wherefore  boldest  thou  me  for  thiiie  e.  ? 
Prov.  24.  17.  rejoice  not  when  thine  e.  falleth 

25. 21.  if  thine  e.  hunger,  give  bread,  Rom  12. 20. 
/^aH(.2.17.  hath  caused  thine  e.  to  rejoice  over  thee 
Zcph.  3.  15.  the  Lord  hath  cast  out  thine  e. 
jUuJ.5.43.  it  hath  been  said,lhou  shalt  hate  tliine  e. 
ENEMIES. 

1  Sam.  18.  25.  to  be  avenged  of  the  king's  e. 

20. 15.  when  the  Lord  hath  cut  off  the  e.  of  David 
16.  the  Lord  require  it  at  the  hand  of  David's  e 
25.  22.  so  and  more  do  God  to  the  c.  of  David 
30. 26.  behold  a  present  of  the  spoil  of  e.  of  Lord 

2  Sam.  12.  14.  given  occasion  to  c.  to  blaspheme 
18.  32.  the  c.  of  my  Lord  be  as  that  young  man  is 

2  Chr.  20.  29.  Lord  fought  against  the  e.  of  Israel 
Esth.  9. 1.  the  e.  of  the  Jews  hoped  to  have  power 
./ob  6.  23.  or  deliver  me  from  the  c.  hand  ? 
Psal.n.9.  hide  me  from  my  deadly  c.who  compass 
37.  20.  the  e.  of  the  Lord  shall  be  as  fat  of  lambs 
45.  5.  thine  arrows  are  sharp  in  heart  of  king's  e 
78.  61.  he  delivered  his  glory  into  the  e.  hand 
127.  5.  they  shall  speak  with  the  e.  in  the  "ate 
Jcr.  12.  7.  have  given  beloved  into  hands  of  her  e- 
48.  5.  the  e.  have  heard  a  cry  of  destruction 
L,am.  L  2.  all  her  friends  are  become  her  e. 

5.  her  adversaries  are  Ihe  chief,  her  c.  prosper 
Mic.  7.  6.  a  man's  e.  are  the  men  of  his  own  house 
Rom.  5. 10.  if  when  we  were  e.  we  were  reconciled 

11.  28.  as  concerning  Ihe  gospel,  they  are  e. 

1  Cor.  15.  25.  till  he  halh  put  all  e.  under  his  feet 
Phil.  3.  18.  they  are  the  e.  of  the  cross  of  Christ 
Col.  1.  21.  were  e.  in  your  mind  by  wicked  work 

His  ENEMIES, 
(reji. 22.17.  thy  seed  shall  possess  the  gale  of  Ais  e. 
JVum.  24.  8.  lie  s^hall  eat  up  the  nations  his  e. 
32.  21.  till  he  hath  driven  out  his  c.  before  him 
Deut.  33.  7.  be  thou  a  help  to  him  from  his  e. 

2  Sam.7.1.  the  Lord  hath  given  him  restfrom  his  e, 
18.  19.  how  Ihe  Lord  halh  avenged  him  of  Ai's  e, 

22. 1.  hast  delivered  him  out  of  hand  of  all  his  e. 
1  Chron.  22.  9. 1  will  give  him  rest  from  all  his  e. 
Job  19. 11.  he  couiileth  me  as  one  of  his  e. 
Psal.  10.  5.  as  for  all  his  c.  he  puffeth  at  them 

41. 2.  thou  wilt  not  deliver  him  to  the  will  ofhis  e. 
CS.  1.  let  God  arise,  let  his  e.  be  scattered 

21.  but  God  shall  wound  the  head  of  his  e. 
72.  9.  and  Ms  e.  shall  lick  the  dust 
78.  66.  and  he  smote  his  e.  in  the  hinder  parts 
89.  42.  thou  hast  made  all  his  c.  to  rejoice 
97.  3.  a  fire  burneth  up  his  e.  round  about 
112.  8.  until  he  see  his  desire  upon  his  e. 
132.  18.  his  e.  will  I  clothe  with  shame 

Proc. ]6.7.he  makefh  his  c.to  be  at  jieace  with  bim 

fsa.  9.  11.  the  Lord  shall  join  his  c.  together 
42. 13.  he  shall  cry,  he  shall  prevail  against  his  e. 
59.  18.  he  will  repay  recompence  to  his  e. 
66. 6.  a  voice  that  rendereth  recompence  to  his  e 
14.  his  indignafion  be  known  toward  his  e. 

Jrr.  44.  30.  will  give  Pharaoh  into  hand  oihis  e. 

Jfah.  1.  2.  and  he  rescrveth  wralh  for  his  e. 
8.  and  darkness  shall  pursue  his  c. 

//eft.lO.lS.expecting  till  Ai.s  e.be  made  his  footstool 
Mine  ENEMIES. 

J\''vm.  23.  11   I  took  Ihec  to  curse  mine  c.  24.  1ft 

Deut.  32.  41.  I  will  render  vengeance  to  mine  o- 

1  Sam.  2.  1.  my  mouth  is  enlarged  over  mine  e. 
14.  24   that  I  may  be  avenged  on  7ninc  e. 

2  Sam.  5.20.  the  Lord  halh  broken  forth  upon  mini 

e.  as  Ihe  breach  of  waters,  1  C/ir.  14.  11. 

22.  4.  so  shall  I  bo  saved  from  mine  c.  Pi.  18.  .3. 

2  Sam.  22.  .38. 1  have  pursued  mine  e.  Psal.  J8.  .37 

41.  hast  given  me  the  necks  of  mine  e.  Pi.  1S.40 


,ENE 


S  Sam.  22. 49.  and  that  bringeth  mc  forth  from  m.  c. 
JC'Ar.  12.  IT.  if  JL'  be  coiiii;  tu  biUiiy  im;  to  mine  v. 
J'sal.  3.  7. s;iveine,  lotlhoii  haHlBtiiiUon  aWininc  c. 

5.  8.  load  roe,  O  Lord,  buciiuse  of  7nine  e. 
G.  7.  mine  eyt-s  waxelh  old  because  of  all  inine  e. 

10.  let  all  mine  e.  be  ashamed  and  sore  vexed 
7.  6.  arise,  O  Lord,  because  of  the  rage  of  mine  c. 
9.  3.  when  mine  c.  are  turned,  they  sliall  fall 
18.  48.  he  dcliverelh  nic  from  mini'  e. 
23. 5.  thou  prepares!  a  table  in  presence  of  mine  e, 
25.  2.  let  not  mine  e.  triumph  over  mc,  35. 19. 

19.  consider  mine  e.  for  they  are  many 
27.2.  whenTninc  e.  came  upon  me  to  cat  my  flesh 
6.no\v  sliall  mine  head  be  lifted  up  above  mine  e. 

11.  lead  me  ina  plain  path,  because  ofminee. 

12.  deliver  me  not  over  to  the  will  of  mine  e. 
31.  11. 1  was  a  reproach  among  all  7nine  e. 

15.  deliver  me  from  the  hand  of  mine  c. 
38.  19.  but  mine  e.  are  lively,  and  they  are  strong 
41. 5.  mine  c.  speak  evil  of  me ;  when  shall  he  die 
42.  10.  7ninc  e.  reproach  mc  all  the  day,  102. 8. 
54.  5.  he  shall  reward  evil  to  minec.  cut  them  off 

7.  eye  bath  seen  his  desire  upon  mine  e.  .59. 10. 
56.2.  mine  e.  would  swallow  rae  up,  they  be  many 

9.  when  I  cry,  then  shall  mine  e.  turn  back 
89. 1.  deliver  me  from  mine  e.  O  my  God,  143.  9. 
C9.  4.  they  being  mine  e.  wrongfully  are  mighty 

18.  draw  nigh,  deliver  me  because  of  mine  e. 
71.  10.  mine  e.  speak  against  me,  they  lay  wait 
92.  11.  mine  eye  shall  see  my  desire  on  mine  c. 
119. 9H.  thou  hast  made  me  wiser  than  mine  e. 

139.  because  7ninc  c.  have  forgotten  thy  word 
157.  many  are  7nmc  e.  yet  do  I  not  dechne 

138.  7.  stretch  forth  thy  hand  agahist  mine  e. 

139.  22. 1  hale  them,  I  count  them  mine  e. 
143.  12.  of  thy  mercy  cut  off  mine  e.  and  destroy 

7«a.l.24.saith  the  Lord,  I  will  avenge  me  of  7ninc  e. 
J^am.  1.  21.  all  mine  e.  have  heard  of  my  trouble 
3.  52.  mine  e.  chased  me  sore  like  a  bird  without 
/vitA:el9.27.those  7«ine  e.bring  hither  and  slay  them 

Our  ENEMIES. 
F.zod.  1.  10.  they  join  also  to  our  e.  and  fight 
J)cut.  32.  31.  our  e.  themselves  being  judges 

1  Sam^  4.  3.  it  may  save  us  out  of  hand  of  oar  e. 
12.  10.  but  deliver  us  out  of  the  hand  of  our  e. 

2Sam.  19.  9.  saved  us  out  of  hand  ufiiur  c.  PsAi.1. 
.VeA.  5.  9.  because  of  the  reproach  of  our  e. 

6.  1.  when  rest  of  our  e.  heard  1  had  builded,  IC. 
Psal.  44.  5.  through  thee  will  we  jjush  down  oure. 

60. 12.  he  it  is  shall  tread  down  our  c.  108.  13. 
80;  6.  and  uur  e.  laugh  among  themselves 
136.  24.  and  hath  redeemed  us  from  our  e. 
Lam..  3.  46.  our  e.  have  o|)ened  their  mouths 
LukeX.  71.  that  Weshould  be  caved  from  our  c. 
74.  being  delivered  out  of  the  hands  of  our  e. 
rA«r  ENEMIES. 
Kxod.  32.25.had  made  them  naked  amongst  tAcir  c. 
lA-n.  26.  36.  send  faintness  in  the  land  of  llicir  e, 

44.  yet,  when  they  be  in  the  land  of  their  c. 
Josk.l.  8. Israel  tumeth  back  before  thiir  c.  12. 
21. 44.lhere stood  not  a  manof(Atir  c.beforethem 
the  Lord  delivered  all  their  e.  into  tlvoirhand 
23. 1.  had  given  rest  from  their  e.  Eslh.  9. 16. 
Juilg.  2. 14.  sold  them  into  the  hand  of  their  c. 

18.  delivereil  them  out  of  hand  of  their  e.  8.  34. 

2  A"»n«'«21.14.deliverthem  into  the  hand  of  their  e. 

and  be  a  prey,  2C:4r.  6.  36. 1 25. 20.  JVVA.  9. 27. 
Faal.  78.  53.  but  the  sea  overwhelmed  £Acir  e. 
81.  14.  1  should  soon  have  subdued  their  e. 
105.  24.  and  made  them  stronger  than  their  e. 
J06.)l.thc  waterscovered  iAcir  e.  not  one  was  left 

42.  th'.ir  e.  oppressed  them,  he  delivered  them 
Jcr.  15.9. 1  will  deliver  to  the  sword  before  (Acir  e. 

19.  7.  to  fall  by  the  sword  before  their  e.  20.  4. 
9.  wherewith  their  c.  shall  straiten  them 

20.  .Vail  treason's  of  kings  of  Judah  will  give  into 
handj  of  MriVf. 34.20,21. 12 1.7.  /TzcA.  39.23. 

F.iek.  39.  27.  gathered  them  out  of  their  c.  lands 
.9nos  9.4.  tho'  they  go  into  captivity  before  ik'ir  e. 
Zech.  10. .').  mighty  men,  which  tread  down  their  c. 
Kev.  11.  a.  if  any  hurt,  firedevourelh  their  e. 
12.  they  ascendetl,  and  their  e.  beheld  them 
Thine  E.NEMIES. 
iJen.  14. 20.  who  delivered  thine  e.  into  thy  hand 

49.  8.  thy  hiind  shall  be  in  the  nei:k  of  thine  c. 
Kxod.  23.  22.  then  I  will  be  an  enemy  to  thine  e. 

27. 1  will  make  thine  e.  to  turn  their  backs  to  thee 
JWn:.  10  S.*).  rise,  Lord,  IcttAinec.  be  scattered 
JOeut.G.  19.  locust  out  all  tliinee  from  before  (hec 

30.  1.  when  thou  goest  against  (Ainc  f.21.  10. 

28..'')3.  where  with  (Aincc.  shall  distress  thee,  55,57. 

33.  20.  thine  e.  shall  bo  fouml  liars  to  Ihoo 

Josh-  1  13.  thou  canst  not  stand  liefiire  thine  e. 
JudfT.  ."i.  31.  so  let  all  thine  e.  perish,  O  Lord 

II.  :it"i.  h:Llh  taken  vengeance  for  ihec  of  thine  e. 
i  Sam.  25.  20.  now  lol  tAirur  e.  lie  as  Nabal 
2^t.  thesoulH  of  thine  c.  shall  he  sling  out 
8  Sam."!.  9.  I  have  cut  off  all  thine  c.  1  CAr.  17.  R. 

19.  fi.  in  that  lovcat  thine  e.  and  liatisl  thy  frieods 
24. 13.  ut  lee  three  inontlm  before  tJiine  e. 

164 


ENL 

MCings  3. 11.  nor  asked  hfeoftAinfe.  2CAr.  1.11. 
1  CAr. 21.  12.  while  the  sword  itflhmee.  overtaketli 
I'nal.H.'i.Uail  ordained  strength  because  of  tAine  e. 

21.  8.  thine  hand  shall  find  out  nil  thiiu  e. 
66.  3.  through  thy  power  shall  (Aine  e.  submit 
ti8.  23.  thy  loot  may  be  dipped  in  blood  of  thine  e. 
74.  4.  thinee.  roar  |{  83. 2.  tAinc  e.  make  a  tumult 

23.  forget  not  the  voice  of  thine  e.  the  tumult 
89.  10.  thou  hast  scattered  thinee.  with  thy  arm 
51.  wherewith  tAi'ne  e.  have  reproached,  U  Lord 
92.9.  lo,  thine  e.  O  Lord,  tAjn«  e.  shall  perish 
llO.l.till  I  make  thine  c.tby  footstool,  .Wu£. 22.44. 
Jilarlc  12.  36.   J.ukc  20.  43.    JJeb.  I.  13. 
2.  rule  thou  in  the  midst  of  tAinc  c. 
139.  20.  and  thinee.  take  thy  name  in  vain 
isa.  26.  II.  the  fire  of  thine  f.  shall  devour  them 
62. 8.  no  more  give  thy  corn  to  be  meat  for  thine  c. 
Jer.  15. 14.  I  wUl  make  thee  to  pass  with  thine  e. 
ham.  2.  16.  thine  e.  have  opened  their  mouth 
Dan.i.  19.  and  tho  interpretation  be  to  thinee. 
jMic.  4.  10.  Lord  shall  redeem  thee  from  thine  c. 
.  9.  and  all  thine  c.  shall  be  cut  off 
1 14.  pluck  up  groves,  so  will  I  destroy  thine  e. 
Kah.  3.  13.  thy  gale  shall  be  set  open  to  thine  e. 
Luke  19.  43.  thine  e.  shall  east  a  trench  about  tjiee 

lour  ENEMIES. 
Lev.  26.  7.  ye  shall  chase  your  e.  they  shall  fall 
8.  your  e.  shall  fall  before  you  by  the  sword 

16.  ye  shall  sow  in  vain,  for  your  e.  shall  eat  it 

17.  and  ye  shall  be  slain  before  your  e. 
37.  shall  have  no  power  to  stand  before  your  e. 

.Vum.  10.  9.  ye  shall  be  saved  from  your  e. 

14.  42.  be  not  smitten  before  your  e.  Deut.  1.  42. 
Deut.  12. 10.  he  giveth  you  rest  from  all  your  e. 

20.3.  ye  apjjrouch  to  battle  against  your  e. 
4.  the  Lord  goelh  to  fight  for  you  against  your  e 

28.  68.  and  there  ye  shall  be  sold  to  your  e. 
.Josh.  10.  25.  thus  shall  the  Lord  do  to  all  your  e. 

22.  8.  divide  the  spoil  of  your  e.with  your  brethren 

1  Sam.  12.  11.  the  Lord  delivere<l  you  out  of  hand 
of  your  e.  and  ye  dwelled  safe,  HKings  17.  39. 

Mat.  5.  -14.  but  I  say,  love  your  e.  Luke  0.  27,  35. 

Enflame;  see  Inflame. 

I  ENGAGED. 

Jer.  30. 21.  who  is  this  that  e,  his  heart  to  approacli'? 

ENGINE,  S. 

2  Chron.  20.  1.5.  Uzziah  made  in  Jerusalem  e. 
Jer.  6.  t  6.  pour  out  the  e.  of  shot,  Kiek.  26.  t8. 

32.  t  24.  behold  the  e.  of  shot,  they  are  come 
Kzek.  26.  9.  he  shallsete.  of  war  against  thy  walls 

ENGRAFTED. 
./am.  1.  21.  receive  with  meekness  the  e.  word 

ENGRAVE. 
Kxod.  28.  11.  like  a  signet  shalt  e.  the  two  stones 


Zech.  3.  9.  behold,  I  will  c.  the  graving  thereof 

ENGRAVEN. 
2  Cur.  3.  7.  the  ministration  of  death  e.  in  stones 

ENGRAVER. 
Exed-  28.  11.  with  the  work  of  an  e.  in  stone 
35.  :13.  to  work  all  manner  of  work  of  the  e. 
38.  23.  Aholiab,  of  the  tribe  of  Dan,  an  e. 

ENGRAVINGS. 
Ezod.  28.11.  hkc  c.of  a  .signet,  21.  36.  1  39.14,30. 

ENJOY. 
Lev.  20.  34.  the  land  shall  e.  her  sabbaths,  43. 
JVum..'10.6.  that  Israel  may  e.  inheritance  of  lathers 
/;cu£.  28.  41.  thou  shalt  beget  sons,  but  not «.  them 
Josh.  1.  15.  then  shall  return  to  the  land  and  c.  it 
Job  7.  t  7.  mine  eye  shalt  no  more  e.  good 
Ec<l.i.  1.  e.  pleasure,  behold  this  also  is  vanity 
24.  he  should  make  his  soul  c.  good,  3. 13.  1 5. 18. 
9.  t  9.  e.  life  with  tlie  wife  whom  thou  love.st 
/.•5U.  65.  22.  mine  eUct  shall  long  e.  work  of  hands 
.'ids  2'1. 2.  seeing  by  thee  we  c.  great  quietness 
i  Ti"^.  6.  17.  God,  who  giveth  us  all  things  to  r. 
Hcb.  11. 25.  than  e.  the  pleasures  of  sin  for  a  season 

ENJOYED. 
2  Chron.  30.  21.  till  the  land  e.  hor  (abbaths 

ENJOIN. 
Philem.  8.  to  e.  thee  that  which  is  convenient 

ENJOINED. 
K.?tA.9.31.  to  confirm  dnys  of  Purim  as  Esth.  had  e. 
.fob  36.  2:1.  who  hiilh  e.  him  his  ways? 
Heb.  9.  20.  blood  of  testament  God  hath  e.  to  you 

ENLARGE. 
This  word  principally  sifrnifirs  the  dilatation,  or 
ejpavdivu  ofihr  hi  art,  which  happens  on  occa- 
sions ofprospi-rity  and  joy , opposite  to  that  con- 
traction and  oppression  of  the  heart  which  hap- 
pens in  adversity.  I'sal.  4.  1,  Thou  hast 
enlarged  me  when  I  was  in  distrias.  2  Cor.  6. 
11,  O  ye  CorinJhians,  our  mouth  is  open  unto 
you,  our  heart  is  enlarged.  Our  mouth  is  open 
to  speak  freely  to  yii",  and  to  cnmtnuyiicate  to 
ynu  the  whole  will  and  counsel  uf  (}od:  Our 
heart  is  enlarged  both  hy  the  love  thaturhave 
towards  you,  and  by  the  n  juicing thntvic have 
in  you.  To  nilargc  is  used  likewise  for  extend- 
ing one's  limits,  and  carrying  one's  conauestt 
into  a  foreign  country.     Gen.  9.  S7,  Gou  ahull 


ENO 

enlarge  Japhet.  God  shall  gine  him  a  largt 
inheritance,  and  increase  his  posterity.  Or 
otherwise:  God  shall  persuade  ./u;)Aef,  namely 
to  dwell  in  the  tents  of  Shem,  where  God 
dweUctk ;  he  shall  bring  him  to  faith  and  obe- 
dience ;  so  that  this  may  be  a  prophecy  of  tht 
calling  of  the  Gentiles,  the  posterity  o/ Japhet. 
JIleo  in  Exod.  34.  24,  For  I  will  cast  out  th6 
nations  before  thee,  and  enlarge  thy  borders. 
My  mouth  is  enlarged,  says  Hannah,  1  ^VaTTi.  2. 

1.  Jt  is  opened  wide  to  pour  forth  abundant 
praises  to  God;  and  to  give  a  full  answer  to  ail 
the  reproaches  of  my  adversaries;  whereas  be- 
fore it  was  shut  through  grief  and  confusion. 
Thou  hast  enlarged  thy  bed,  /su.  57.  8.  Thou 
hast  multiplied  thine  idols  and  altars.  The 
same  prophet  says,  chap.  5.  14,  Hell  hath  en- 
larged herself,  and  opened  her  mouth  without 
measure.  The  grave  hath  opened  its  mouth;  it  is 
ready  to  swalloio  up  a  vast  number  of  the  dead; 
it  desires  no  more  than  to  divour,  and  absorb 
such  as  shall  die  by  this  famine,  or  otherwise. 

Enlargement,   Hcb.    Respiration,     Esth.   4.   14, 
Then  shall  there  enlargement  arise  to  ihe  Jews 
from  another  place.     They  were  so  filled  with 
grief  and  terror  arising  from  theirpresent  dan- 
ger, as  that  they  cuuld  scarce  breathe,  as  Job 
speaks,  Job  9.  18.  but  their  grief  and  sorroib 
should  be  removed,  and  then  should  they  have  a 
breathing-time,  a  time  of  siceet  refreshment. 
fTen.9.27.  G.  shall  c.  Japhet,  he  shall  dwell  in  tenta 
Kxod.34.^.  I  will  cast  out  nations  ande.  borders 
iJeut.  12.  20.  when  the  Lord  shall  e.  thy  border 
19.  8.  if  the  Lord  e.  thy  coast  as  he  hath  sworn 
1  CAr.  4. 10.  O  that  wouldest  bless  nie,  and  e.  coast 
Psal.  119.  ;^2.  when  thou  shalt  c.  my  heart 
Isa.  54. 2.  e.  the  place  of  thy  tent  and  stretch  forth 
Jimos  1.  13.  that  they  might  e.  their  border 
JUic.  1.  16.  make  bald,  e.  thy  baldness  as  the  eagU 
Mat.  23.  5.  and  e.  the  borders  of  their  garment* 
ENLARGED. 

1  Sam.  2.  1.  my  mouth  is  c.  over  mine  enemies 

2  Sa7n.  22.  37.  thou  hast  e.  my  steps,  Psal.  18.  3ft 
Psal.  4. 1.  thou  hast  e.  me  when  I  was  in  distresB 

5. 17.  Ihe  troubles  of  my  heart  are  e.  O  bring  m* 
Isa.  5.  14.  therefore  hell  hath  e.  hers,  opened  mouth 
57.  8.  thou  hast  e.  thy  bed,  and  made  a  covenaot 
60.  5.  and  thine  heart  shall  fear  and  be  e. 

2  Cor.  6.  11.  O  ye  Corinthians,  our  heart  ise. 
13.  for  a  recompence  in  the  same,  be  ye  also  e. 

10.  15.  having  hope,  that  we  shall  be  e.  by  you 

ENLARGETH. 
Deut.  33.  20.  he  said,  blessed  be  he  that  e.  Gad 
Job  12.  2.3.  he  e.  the  nations,  and  straitonelh  them 
Hab.  2.5.  whoe.  his  desire  as  hell,  and  is  as  death 

ENLARGEMENT. 
Esth.  4.  14.  then  e.  shall  arise  from  anolJicr  place 

ENLARGING. 
EicJt.  41.  7.  and  there  was  an  e.  and  a  winding 

ENLIGHTEiX. 

Psal.  18.  23.  tlie  Lord  mv  God  will  e.  my  darkncH 

ENLIGHTENED. 

1  Sam.  14.  27.  mid  Jonathan's  eyes  were  e.  29. 
.lob  33. 30.  to  be  e.  with  the  light  of  the  living 
/'.5a/.  97.4.  his  liglilnings  c.  the  world,  earth  saw 
Isa.  GO.  1 1.  arise,  be  e.  for  thy  light  cometh 
Eph.  1.  18.  the  eyes  of  your  understanding  being  e. 
Wct.0.4.  it  is  impossible  for  those  who  were  once  e. 

ENLKillTI'.NlNG. 
/'aaM9.8.  commandiiH'iit  of  Ld.  is  pure,  e.theeyei 

ENMITY. 
Gen.  3.15J  vi\\\  put  c.belween  thee  and  the  womaa 
Jifum.  35. 21.  or  in  e.  smite  liim  with  his  hand 
22.  biitil'he  thrust  him  suddenly  withoulf. 
Luke  23.  12.  for  before  they  were  ut  e.  bctw.  thenuk 
/join.  8.  7.  (he  carnal  mind  is  e.  against  God 
Eph.  2. 15.  having  abolished  in  his  flesh  the  e. 
16.  by  tho  cross,  having  slain  the  e.  thereby 
Jam.  4.  4.  the  friendship  ofthe  world  ii  e.  with  G. 

ENOUGH. 
Gen.  24.  25.  wo  have  straw  and  proverMk-r  *. 
33.  9.  and  Esau  said,  I  have  r.  my  brother 

11.  take,  I  pray,  my  blessing,  because  I  have  t. 
34. 21.  tho  land,  behold,  it  is  large  e.  fur  them 
4.5.  28.  Israel  said,  it  is  e.  Josepli  is  yot  alive 
Ezod.  9.  28.  entreat  ihe  Lord,  for  it  is  f.  that 
36.  5.  Ihcpeojile  bring  much  more  than  c.for  work 
Deut.  1  6.  ye  have  dwelt  long  e.  in  this  mount 

2.  3.  ye  have  compassed  this  mountain  long  e. 
.Josh.  17. 16.  thoy  said,  the  hill  is  not  e.  for  us 

3  .Sam.  24.  16.  it  is  e.  slay  ll.iiie  hand,  1  Kingsl^.i. 
1  CAron.  21. 1.5.  JIfnrA  14.41.  y,i/A«22.38. 

2  Chr.  31.  10.  we  have  had  e.  loent  and  have  left 
rroD.Tl.'Xl.  thou  shall  have  goats'  milk  c.for  food 

28. 19.  hetlmttillelh  land  have  plenty,  but  he  thai 
ftdloweth  after  vain  persons  have  poverty  ik 
30.  1,5.  yoa,  four  things  say  not,  it  is  «. 
16.  and  the  fire  that  sailh  not,  it  is  e. 
Isa.  .56.  11.  greedy  dogs,  which  ran  never  haTB  t, 
Jer.  43. 9.  llicy  will  dcstioj  lUI  tliey  have  c 


ENQ 

Ifos.  4.  10.  for  t)icy  sliall  eat,  and  not  have  e. 
VOad.  5.  would  thuy  not  have  stolen  till  thoy  had  c. 
J^'ali.  2.  12.  the  lion  did  tear  e.  lor  his  whelps 
Hag.  1.6.  yeeat,butyehave  not  eye  drink,  but  not 
Mai.  i.  10.  there  shall  not  be  room  e.  to  receive  il 
^iat.l0.2o.  it  13  e.fbr  the  disciple  to  be  as  his  master 
23.  9.  not  80,  lest  there  be  not  e.  tor  us  and  you 
i>uAel5.17.hired  servants  have  breade.and  to  spare 
.4<t327.38. when  Uiey  had  eaten  c.lightened  the  ship 

ENaUlRE. 
Tt  enquire  signifies  to  asic,  Acts  9.  11,  Enquire 
in  the  house  of  Judas  for  one  ISaul  of  Tarsus. 
And  Gen.  24.  57,  We  will  call  the  damsel, 
and  enquire  at  her  mouth :  We  will  ask  her 
whether  she  be  willing  to  depart  so  very  soon, 
and  understand  her  mind  by  her  words  or  an- 
swer. Sometimes  it  signifies  to  pray,  E?.ck. 
36.  37.  Mnd  also  to  examine,  or  search  nar- 
rowly into  a  thing.  Deut.  17.  4,  And  if  thou 
hast  enquired  diligently,  and  behold  it  be  true. 
Sometimes  it  is  taken  for  saluting  a  person, 
and  aski7ig  him  of  his  welfare,  1  Chron.  18. 10. 
Tou  sent  Hadoram  his  son  to  salute  king 
David,  to  ask  of  his  welfare.  But  this  word 
is  most  commonly  usedfoi-  asking  counsel  and 
direction  from  Ood.  Rubekah,  finding  the  two 
children  with  which  she  was  big  struggling 
tojrether  in  her  womb,  and  giving  her  some  un- 
easiness. Went  to  enquire  of  the  Lord,  Oen.  25. 
22.  Either  she  put  up  ardent  prayers  imme- 
diately to  Ood,  that  he  would  reveal  his  mind 
lo  her  herein :  Or  she  consulted  God  immedi- 
ately by  her  father  Abraham,  or  by  some  other 
godly  patriarch  yet  surviving,  by  whom  God 
used  to  manifest  his  mind  and  will  to  others, 
when  ie  thought  fit.  Jis  to  the  different  ways 
of  consulting  God  under  the  Old  Testament, 
see  the  word  Oracle. 
Gen.  24. 57.  we  will  call  the  damsel,  and  e.  at  her 
25.  22.  Rebekah  went  to  e.  of  the  Lord 
Exod.  18. 15.  the  people  come  to  me  to  e.  of  God 
Deut.  12.  30.  and  that  thou  e.  not  after  their  gods 
13.  14.  then  shalt  thou  e.  and  make  search 

17.  9.  thou  shalt  come  unto  the  judge  and  e. 
Judg.i.'iO.  when  any  man  doth  come  and  e.  of  thee 
JSa»t.9.9.beforetime  when  a  man  went  to  c.of  God 

22.  15.  did  I  then  begin  to  e.  of  God  for  him  1 
28.  7.  seek  me  a  woman,  that  I  may  e.  of  her 

1  Kings  22.  5.  Jehoshaphat  said,  e.  1  pray  thee,  at 

the  word  of  the  Lord  to-day,  2  Chron.  18.  4. 
7.  none  besides,  that  we  may  e.  of,  2  Chron.  18.0. 

2  Kings  1.2.  go,  e.  of  Baal-zebub  the  god  of  Ekron 
3.  11.  is  there  not  here  a  prophet  lo  e.  by  him'? 
8.  8.  go  meet  the  man,  and  e.  of  the  Lord  by  him 
10.  15.  the  brazen  altar  shall  be  for  me  to  e.  by 
22. 13.  go  ye,  e.  of  the  Lord  for  me,  2  Chr.  34. 21. 

18.  the  king  which  sent  you  to  e.  2  Chr.  34.  26. 
1  Chron.  10. 13.  that  had  a  familiar  spirit,  to  e.  of  it 

18.  10.  Tou  sent  to  David  toe.  of  his  welfare 

21.  30.  Uavid  could  not  go  before  it  to  c.  of  God 
Ezra  7.14.  are  sent  to  e.  concerning  Jud. and  Jerus. 
Job  8.  8.  for  e.  I  pray  thee  of  the  former  age 
Psal.  27.  4.  beauty  of  the  L.  and  to  e.  in  his  temple 
Keel.  7. 10.  thou  dost  not  e.  wisely  concerning  this 
Jsa.  21.  12.  if  ye  will  e.  e.  ye;  return,  come 

Jer.  21.  2.  e.  I  pray  thee,  of  the  Lord  for  us 
37.  7.  the  king  of  Judah  that  sent  you  to  e.  of  me 

Kzek.  14.  7.  and  cometh  to  a  prophet  to  e.  of  him 
20. 1.  the  el'lers  of  Israel  came  to  e.  of  the  Lord 
3.  thus  sailh  the  Lord,  are  ye  come  to  e.  of  me? 

Mat.  iO.  II.  e.  who  in  it  is  worthy,  and  there  abide 

J^uke  22.  23.  to  e.  among  themselves,  John  16.  19. 

Acts  9. 11.  c.  for  Saul  ||  25.  f  20.  doubtful  how  to  e. 
v.).  39.  but  if  ye  e.  concerning  other  matters 

23.  15.  as  though  ye  would  e.  something  more, 20. 
S  Cor.  8.  23.  whether  any  do  e.  of  Titus  my  partner 

ENQUIRED. 
Deut.  17.4.  thou  hast  heard  of  it,  and  e.  diligently 
Judg.  20.  27.  the  children  of  Israel  e.  of  the  Lord 

1  Sam.  10.  22.  therefore  they  e.  of  the  L.  further 

22.  10  and  he  e.  of  tho  Lord  for  him,  13. 

23.  2.  therefore  David  e.  of  the  Loid,  4.  ]  30.  8. 
2  Sam.  2.  1.  |  .5. 19,  23.  ]  21. 1.  1  Chr.  14. 10,  14. 

28,  6.  when  Saul  e.  the  Lord  answered  him  not 

2  Sam.  11.  3.  David  sent  and  e.  after  the  woman 
16.  23.  as  if  a  man  iiad  e.  at  the  oracle  of  God 

1  Chron.  10. 14.  Saul  e.  not  of  the  L.  he  slew  him 
13. 3.  for  we  e.  not  at  the  ark  in  the  days  of  Saul 
Psai.  78.  34.  they  returned  and  e.  early  after  God 
Kzek.  14.  3.  should  I  be  e.  of  at  all  by  them  7 
20.  3.  as  I  live,  saith  L.  I  will  not  be  e.  of  by  you 
31.  shall  I  be  e.  of  by  yon,  O  house  of  Israel  ?  as 
I  live,  saith  Lord  God,  I  will  not  be  e.  of  by  you 
36.  37.  I  will  yet  for  this  be  e.  of  by  Israel 
Dan.  1.20.  in  all  maf  ers  that  the  king  e.  of  them 
Zrph.  1  0.  those  that  nave  not  c.  for  the  Lori' 
^flt.  2. 7.  Herod  e.  of  the  wise  men  diligently  16. 
John  4. 52.  then  e.  he  the  hour  he  began  to  amend 
9  Cor  8  23.  or  our  brethren  be  e.  of,  are  messengers 
I  Pet  I  10  of  which  salvation  the  prophets  e. 


ENT? 


ENQUIREST. 
Job  10. 6.  that  thou  e.  after  my  iniquity  atad  sin 
ENUUIRY. 

Prov.  20.  25.  and  after  vows  to  make  c. 

Acts  10.17.  the  men  had  made  c.  for  Simon's  house 

ENRAGED. 
Prov.  26. 1 17.  is  e.  with  strife  belonging  not  to  him 

ENRICH. 
1  Sam.  17. 25.  the  king  will  c.  him  with  great  riches 
Eiek.  27.33.  thou  didst  e.  the  kings  of  the  earth 

ENRICHED. 

1  Cor.  1.  5.  that  in  every  tiling  yo  are  e.  by  him 
2Cor.9.11.beinge.in  every  thing  to  all  bountifulness 

ENRlCHEhT. 
Psal.  65.  9.  thou  greatly  c'.  it  with  the  river  of  God 

.  ENROLLED. 
Luke'i.  fl-  a  decree  tliatall  the  world  should  be  e. 
Heb.  12.  t23.  church  of  the  first-born  e.  in  heaven 

ENSAMPLE. 
Phil.  3.  17.  be  followers,  as  yo  have  us  for  an  e. 

2  Thess.  3.  9.  but  to  make  ourselves  an  e.  to  you 
2  Pet.  2.  6.  an  e.  to  those  that  should  live  ungodly 

ENSAMPLES. 

1  Cor.  10. 11.  these  things  happened  to  them  fore. 

1  Thess.  1.  7.  so  that  yc  were  c.  to  all  that  believe 

1  Pet.  5. 3.  not  as  lords,  but  being  e.  to  the  Hock 
ENSIGN. 

Ensigns  arewarlike  banners,  monuments,  or  tro- 
phies of  victory.  Psal.  74.  4,  Thine  enemies 
set  up  their  ensigns  for  signs  And  the  prophet 
Isaiah,  threatening  the  Israelites  with  an  inva- 
sion, tells  them.  That  God  would  lift  up  an  en- 
sign to  the  nations  from  far,  Isa.  5.  20.  He 
would,  by  his  providence,  bring  the  Assyrians 
or  the  Clialdffens  against  tAe  Jews  ;  he  would, 
as  it  were,  invite  them  to  list  themselves  under 
his  colours,  as  generals  use  to  lift  up  their 
standards  for  the  raising  of  armies.  The 
same  prophet  says.  That  there  shall  be  a  root 
of  .Jesse,  which  shall  stand  for  an  ensign  of  the 
people,  and  to  it  shall  the  Gentiles  seek,  Isa. 

11.  10.  that  is.  That  Christ  the  Messiah  grow- 
ing upon  the  root  of  Jesse,  should  mount  up, 
and  be  advanced,  by  the  preaching  of  the  gos- 
pel, to  a  great  height,  so  as  to  become  a  visi- 
ble and  eminent  ensign,  which  the  Gentiles,  as 
well  as  the  Jews,  may  discern  ;  to  whom  they 
should  repair  by  faith,  and  in  whom  they 
should  put  their  trust. 

Isa.  5.26.  he  will  lift  up  an  c.  to  the  nations  from  far 
11.  10.  which  shall  stand  for  an  e.  to  the  people 

12.  and  he  shall  set  up  an  e.  for  the  nations 

18.  3.  dwellers,  see  ye,  when  he  lifteth  up  an  e. 

30.  17.  till  yc  be  left  as  an  e.  on  a  hill 

31.  9.  his  princes  shfill  be  afraid  of  tlie  e.  sailh  L. 
Zech.  9. 16.  as  the  stones  of  a  crown  lifted  as  an  e. 

ENSIGNS. 
Psal.  74.  4.  they  set  up  their  c.  for  signs 

ENSNARE. 
Psal.  12.  f  5.  I  will  set  in  safety  from  him  would  e. 

ENSNARED. 

./ob  34.30.  hypocrites  reign  not,  lest  the  people  bee. 

ENSUE. 

1  Pet.  3.  11.  let  him  do  good,  seek  peace,  and  e.  it 

Entangle  ;  see  Intangle. 

ENTER. 

.Tudg.  18. 9.  Dot  slothful  to  e.  to  possess  tho  land 

Kick.  44.  3.  prince  shall  e.  by  the  porch,  46.  2,  8. 

/.'<in.ll.l7.  shall  also  set  hisface  to  e.with  strength 

24.  he  shall  e.  peaceably  on  the  fattest  places 
Heb.  4.  6.  it  remaineth  that  some  must  e.  tiierein 

ENTER  in  or  into. 
Gen.Vi.  11.  Abr.im  was  come  near  toe.  ?»<o  Egypt 
F.xod.  40.  35.  Moses  was  not  able  to  c.  into  the  tent 
J^um.  4.  23.  all  that  e.  iti  to  perform  the  service 
5.24.  the  water  that  causeth  the  curse  shall  e.into 
the  woman,  and  become  bitter,  27. 
Deut.  23.  8.  children  shall  e.  into  the  congregation 
29.12.ihat  thou  shouldeste.rnto  covenant  with  L. 
Josh.  10.  19.  sutler  them  not  to  e.  into  their  cities 

2  .Sam.  22.  7.  and  my  cry  did  e.  into  his  ears 

1  Kings  14. 12.  when  thy  feet  e.into  city,  child  die 
22.  30. 1  will  disguise  myself  and  c.  into  the  battle 

2  Kings  7.  4.  if  we  e.  into  the  city,  then  the  famine 
11.5.  a  third  partof  y<m  that  e.  in  on  sabbath 

19.  23.  and  I  will  e.  into  lodgings  of  his  borders, 

and  into  the  forest  of  Carmel,  Isa.  37.  24. 
2  Chron.  23.  19.  that  none  unclean  should  c.  in 
30.  8.  e.  into  his  sanctuary,  which  he  sanctified 
JVf  A.  2.  8.  and  for  the  house  that  I  shall  e.  into 
Kslh.  4.  2.  for  none  might  e.  into  the  king's  gate 
./oh  22.  4.  will  he  e.  with  thee  into  judgment  ■? 
34.23.  that  he  should  c.  in(«  judgment  with  God 
Ps.  37. 15.  their  sword  shall  c.  into  their  own  heart 
45. 15.  they  shall  e.  into  the  king's  pa4nco 
100.  4.  e.  into  his  gates  with  thanksgiving 
118  20.  the  gate  into  which  the  righteous  shall  e. 
Prov.  18.  6.  a  fool's  lips  e.  into  contention 
Isc.  2. 10.  e.  into  the  rock,  and  hide  thee  in  the  dust 
3. 14.  the  L.  will  e.  into  judgment  with  ancieiits 


ENt 

Isa.  26.  2.  that  the  riglitcous  nation  may  t.  in 

20.  come,  my  peopfe,  e.  thou  into  thy  chtiml>««f« 
57.  2.  he  shall  e.  into  pe.ace,  they  shall  rest  in  Ixyti 

Jer.  7.2.  that  e.  in  at  these  gates,  17.20.  |  22.  S. 

8.  14.  and  let  us  c.  into  the  defenced  cities 
14.  18.  if  I  e.  into  the  city,  behold  famine 

17.  25.  there  shall  e.  into  the  gates  kings,  22.  A. 
21. 13.  or  who  shall  e.  into  our  habitations  ? 

Jer.  41.  17.  they  departed  logo  to  c.  into  Egypt 
42.  15.  if  ye  set  your  faces  to  e.  into  Egypt 
I-am.  3. 13.  hath  caused  arrows  to  e.  into  my  reir* 
Ezek.  7.  22.  robbers  shall  e.  into  it  and  defile  it 

13.  9.  nor  shall  they  e.  into  the  land  of  Israel 

26.  10.  when  he  shall  e.  into  thy  gates,  as  men 

e.  into  a  city  wherein  is  made  a  breach 
37.  5.  behold,  I  will  cause  breath  to  e.  into  you 

42.  11.  when  the  priest.s  e.  therein,  then  not  go  out 
44.  2.  this  gate  be  shut,  no  man  shall  e.  in  by  it 

16.  theyshalle.27!Yomysanctuary,and  comeneaf 

17.  when  they  e.  in  at  the  gates  of  the  inner  court 
Dan.  11.7.  shall  e.  into  t.he  Ibrtrcss  of  king  of  north 

40.  he  shall  c.  into  the  countries  and  overflow 

41.  he  shall  e.  also  into  the  glorious  land 

./oel  2. 9.  like  a  thief  they  shall  e.  in.  at  the  windows 
Amos  5.  5.  seek  not  Bcth-el,  nor  e.  into  Gilgal 
Jonah  :i.  4.  and  Jonah  began  to  e.  into  the  city 
ZetA.  5.  4.  flying  roll  shall  e.into  the  house  of  thief 
Mat.  5.  20.  in  no  case  c.  into  kingdom  of  heaven 
C.  6.  when  thou  prayest,  e.  into  thy  closet 
7.  13.  e.  271  at  the  strait  gate,  l^uke  13.  24. 

21.  not  every  one  that  saith,  Lord,  shall  e.  in 
10.  ll._(7!(o  what  city  ye  shall  e.  Luke  10.  8,  10. 
12.  29.  e.  into  a  strong  man's  house,  Mark  3.  27. 

45.  and  they  e.  in  and  dwell  there,  Luke  11.26. 

18.  8.  it  is  better  for  thee  to  e.  into  life  halt  or 
maimed,  rather  than  be  cast  into  everlastuig 
fire,  Mark  9.  43,  45,  47. 

19.17.  if  thou  wilt  c.  wtn  life, keep  the  commandm 

23.  a  rich  man  shall  hardly  c.  into  the  kingdom 

24.  than  for  a  rich  man  to  e.  into  the  kingdom 

of  God,  Mark  10.  25.  Luke  18.  25. 
25.  21.  well  done,  c.  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord 
Mark  1.  45.  could  no  more  openly  e.  into  the  city 
5. 12.  that  we  may  e.  into  the  swine,  Luke  8. 32. 
6.  10.  what  house  ye  c.  into,  Luke  9.  4.  ]  10.  5. 

9.  25.  come  out  of  him,  and  e.  no  more  into  him 

14.  38.  lest  ye  e.  into  temptation,  /yj/Ae  22.  46. 
Lvke  8.  16.  that  they  which  e.  in  may  see  light 

13.24.  many  will  seek  toe.  in  and  shall  not  be  able 
24.  26.  to  have  suft'ered,  and  to  e.  into  his  glory? 
John  3.  4.  can  he  e.  into  his  mother's  womb  agAinl 
5.  he  cannot  e.  into  the  kingdom  of  God 

10.  9.  by  me,  if  any  man  e.  in  he  shall  be  saved 
Acts  14.22.  through  tribulation  e.  into  the  kingdom 

20.  29.  grievous  wolves  shall  e.  in  among  you 

Heb.  4.  3.  do  c.  intoxesi,  if  they  shall  e.  into  rest,  5. 

11.  let  us  labour  therefore  to  e.  into  that  rest 

10. 19.  boldness  to  e.  into  holiest  by  blood  of  Jesus 
Rev.  15.8.  no  man  was  able  to  c.  into  the  temple 

21. 27.  in  no  wise  e.  into  it  any  thing  that  defilefh 

22.  14.  may  e.  in  through  the  gates  iilto  the  city 

ENTER  not. 
Psal.  143.2.  e.7?ot  into  judgment  with  thy  scrrant 
Prov.  4.  14.  e.  not  into  the  path  of  the  wicked 

23.  10.  e.  not  into  the  fields  of  the  fatherless 
Jer.  16.  5.  e.  not  into  the  house  of  mourning 
Mat.  10.  5.  into  any  city  of  the  Samaritans  e.  not 

20. 41.  that  ye  e.  not  into  temptation,  Luke  22.40. 

Xot  ENTER. 
J^uni.  20.  24.  for  Aaron  shall  not  e.  into  the  land 
Deut.  23. 1.  shall  not  e.  into  the  congregation,  2, 3. 
2  Chron.!. 2.  the  priests  could  not  e.  into  the  house 
Psal.  95.  11.  that  they  should  not  e.  into  my  rest 
Isa.  59.  14.  truth  is  fallen,  and  equity  cannot  e. 
Lam.  1.10.  they  should  not  c.  into  thy  congregation 
Kzek.  20.  38.  they  shall  not  e.  into  the  land 
44.  9.  nor  uncircumcised  e.  into  my  sanctuary 
Has.  11.  9.  and  I  will  not  e.  into  the  city 
Mat.  18.  3.  ye  shall  not  c.  into  kingdom  of  heaven 
Mark  10.  15.  he  shall  not  e.  therein,  I^ukc  18.  17. 
Heb.  3.  11.  they  shall  not  e.  into  my  rest,  18. 
19.  we  see  they  could  not  (.because  of  unbelief 
Sec  KiNGnoM. 
ENTERED. 
Oen.  7. 13.  the  self-same  day  e.  Noah  and  his  son* 

19.  3.  the  angels  turned  in,  and  e.  into  his  house 
2.3.  the  sun  was  risen  when  Lot  e.  into  Zoar 

43.  30.  Joseph  e.  into  his  chamber  and  wept  thoia 
F.xod.  33.  9.  as  Moses  e/into  the  tabernacle 
./osh.  2.  3.  bring  the  men  that  are  e.  into  thy  house 
Judg.  6.  5.  and  they  e.  into  the  land  to  destroy  it 

9.  40.  they  e.  into  a  hold  of  the  gnd  Berith 

1  Kings  1.  1 1.  now  king  David  was  e.  into  dayi 

2  Kings'.  8.  c.  into  another  tent,  and  took  thenM 
9.  31.  as  Jehu  e.  in  at  the  gale,  Jezebel  said 

2  Chron.  12. 11.  when  the  king  e.  into  the  house 

15.  12.  they  e.  into  a  covenant  to  seek  the  Lot^ 

27.  2.  Jotham  c.  not  into  the  temple  of  tho  Lord 
JWA.  10.  29.  they  e.  into  a  curse,  and  into  no  'm'\ 
Job  38. 16.  hast  thou  e.  into  the  springs  of  the  aesl 


ENT 

Tob  38. 22.  linst  thou  e.  into  tJie  trensures  of  snow? 

Jer.  2.  7.  but  when  ye  c-  ye  dc-filud  my  land 
d.  21.  fur  leutii  i»e.  into  our  windows  and  palaces 
34.  lU.  th  :  people  which  had  e.  into  covenant 
37.  16.  when  Jeremiah  was  e.  into  the  dungeon 

Lam.  1.  10.  the  heathen  e.  into  her  sanctuary 
4.  12.  that  the  enemy  should  have  c.  the  gates 

Eiek.  2.  2.  spirit  e.  into  me  when  he  spake,  3. 24. 
16.8.  yea,  Isware  ande.  into  a  covenant  with  thee 
36.  20.  and  when  they  e.  unto  the  heatiien 
44.  2.  because  the  God  of  Israel  hath  e.  in  by  it 

06ad.ll.  in  the  day  that  foreigners  e.  into  his  gates 
13.  Ihou  shouldesl  not  have  e.  into  the  gate 

Hob.  3.  16.  rottenness  e.  into  my  bones,  I  trembled 

Mat.  8.  5.  when  Jesus  was  e.  into  Capernaum 
9.  1.  and  he  e.  into  a  ship  and  passed  over 
12.  4.  how  he  e.  into  the  house  of  God  and  did  eat 

24.  38.  day  that  Noah  e.  into  tlie  ark,  Litkc  17.27. 
Mark  5. 13.  the  unclean  spirits  went  out  and  e.  into 

Uic  swine,  and  were  choked  in  the  sea, 
J.uke  6.  33. 

6.  56.  whithersoever  he  e.  they  laid  the  sick 
Ltike  1.  40.  Mary  e.  into  the  house  of  Zacharias 

7.  44.  I  e.  lliine  liouse,  thou  gavest  me  no  water 
9.  34.  and  they  feared  as  they  e.  into  the  cloud 
11.  52.  woe  to  lawyers,  ye  e.  not  in  yourselves 

22.  3.  then  e.  Satan  into  Judas,  .Jvkn  13.  27. 

10.  when  ye  are  c.  the  city,  there  shall  meet  you 
John  4.  ;t8.  and  ye  are  c.  into  their  labours 
li^.  1.  where  was  a  garden,  into  tiie  which  he  e. 
33.  then  Pdate  e.  into  the  judgment-hall 
^cts  9. 17.  .\nanias  e.and  putting  his  hands  on  Saul 
11.  8.  nothing  unclean  hath  e.  into  my  moutii 

23.  Ifi.  hee.  into  the  castle  and  told  Paul,  went  and 

25.  23.  Agrippa  was  e.  into  the  place  of  hearing 

28. 8.  to  whom  Paul  e.  in,  and  prayed,  and  healed 
Ram.  5.  12.  sin  e.  into  the  world  ||  20.  the  law  e. 

1  Cor.  2.  y.  neither  have  e.  into  the  heart  of  man 
Heb.  4.  0.  they  e.  not  in  because  of  unbelief 

10.  for  he  that  is  e.  into  his  rest,  hath  ceased 
6.20.  whither  the  forerunner  is  for  us  e.  even  Jesus 
9. 12.  he  e.  in  once  into  the  holy  place,  24. 
Jam.  5.  4.  are  e.  into  the  ears  of  the  L.  of  sabaoth 

2  .fokn  7.  many  deceivers  are  e.  into  the  world 
Rev.  11.  11.  Spirit  of  life  from  God  e.  into  them 

ENTERKTII. 
Jfum.  4.  30.  number  every  one  that  e.  into  the  ser- 
vice to  do  work  of  the  tabernacle,  35,  39, 43. 
2  Chr.  31;  16.  to  every  one  that  c.  liouse  of  the  h. 
Prcnt.  2.  10.  when  wisdom  e.  into  tliine  heart 

17.  )0.  a  reproof  e.  more  into  a  wise  man  than 
Kiek.  21.14.  the  sword  e.  into  their  privy  chambers 

46.9.  he  thatc.  in  by  the  way  of  the  north  gate 
Mat.  15.  17.  whatsoever  e.  in  at  the  mouth,  goelh 

into  the  belly,  and  is  cast  out,  Mark  7.  18. 
Mark  5.  40.  and  e.  in  where  the  damsel  was  lying 
jAike  22.  10.  follow  him  into  houne  where  he  e.  in 
John  10.  1.  f.  not  by  the  door  into  the  sheepfold 

2.  he  that  e.  in  by  the  door,  is  the  shepherd 
Heb.  6-  19.  and  which  e.  into  that  within  the  vail  . 
9.  25.  as  the  high-priest  e.  every  year  with  blood 

ENTERING. 
Josh.  8.  29.  cast  it  at  the  e.  of  the  gate  of  Ihe  city 
20.  4.  shall  stand  at  the  c.  of  the  gate  of  the  city 
Jud^.  9.  35.  Gaal  stood  in  the  e.  ol  the  gate  of  city 
44.  Abimelech  stood  in  the  e.  of  Ihe  gate  of  city 
18. 16.1  he  600  men  of  Uan  stood  by  the  c.of  the  gate 
17.  and  the  priest  stood  in  the  e.  of  the  gate 

1  Sam.  23. 7.  by  c.  into  a  town  that  hath  gates,  bars 

2  Sam.  10.8.  put  the  buttle  in  array  nt  c.  in  of  gate 

1  Kings  fi.  31.  forthce.  of  the  oracle  he  made  doors 
19.  13.  Elijah  stood  in  the  e.  in  of  the  cavo 

2  Kini.'s  7.  3.  four  leprous  men  at  the  c.  of  the  gate 
10.8.  I;iy  Ihe  heads  in  two  heaps  at  e.  of  the  gate 
23.  8.  that  were  in  the  e.  of  the  gate  of  Joshua 

2  Chr.  IH.  9.  kings  sat  at  e.  of  the  gate  of  Samaria 
Jsa.  2.3.  I.  BO  that  llicre  is  no  house,  no  e.  in 
Jer.  1.  15.  set  thrones  at  the  «.  of  the  gates,  17.27. 
Eiek.  44.  5.  mark  well  the  e.  in  of  the  house 
.Vat.  2^1.13.  for  ye  neither  go  in  yourselves,  nor  suf- 
fer ye  them  that  arc  e.  to  go  in,  Luke  11.  52. 
Mark  4.  19.  the  lusts  of  other  things  e.  in  rhoko 
7.  15.  nothing  without  c.  into  him  can  defile  him 
16.  5.  c.  into  the  sepulchre  they  saw  a  young  man 
L,%ikr  19.  30.  at  your  <;.  ye  shall  find  a  colt  lied 
JtcU  8.  3.  Saul  c  into  every  house,  and  haling  men 
1  Thr.ia.  1.  9.  what  manner  of  e.  in  we  had  to  you 
Ueb.  4.  I.  a  promise  left  us  of  e.  into  his  rest 
Sie  IIamatii. 
KNTKIUNGS. 
jEmA.  26. 1 10.  acrordii'p  tn  the  r.  of  a  city  broken 

ENTTRPRISI-. 
Job  5.  12.  their  hands  (  annol  ii  rform  their  t. 

ENTERTAIN. 
y/ei.  13.  2.  be  not  forg'tfnl  to  e.  strnngers 

ENTERTAINER. 
Bth.  13.  2.  for  thereby  some  have  t.  angels 

ENTICE 
Sifoifief,  [II  To  persuailr,  or  allure,  Juilg.  14.15. 
1  10  5.  2  Cl.ron.  18.  20.     [2]  To  deceive,  Jer. 
166 


ENV 

20.  10.  Jam.  1.  14.  It  is  referred  (1)  To  Satan 
seducing-  false  prophets,  by  inspiring  them 
with  lies,  2Chron.  Id.  20.  (2)  'Jo  a  man  cun- 
ningly insinuating  himself  into  a  maid's  af- 
fections, i?i  order  to  gain  her  consent  to  lie 
with  him,  either  by  his  persuasions,  promise 
of  marriage,  or  reward,  Exod.  iW.  16. 
^3)  To  notorious  sinners,  such  as  thieves,  robbers, 
murderers,  or  oppressors,  who  endeavour  to 
allure  others  by  fair  pretences  to  associate 
themselves  with  them,  Prov.  1.  10.  |  10.  29. 

(4)  'J'o  a  man's  own  lust  and  concupiscence, 
which  may  promise  him  pleasure  in  sin,  and 
may  thus  allure  him  to  the  commission  of  it, 
vwre  than  any  temptation  which  he  may  have 
from  without.  Jam.  1.  14. 

(5)  To  false  and  treacherous  friends,  the  enemies 
of  God's  people,  who  watch  fur  an  advantage 
against  the  godly;  thus  Jeremiah  complains, 
chap.  20.  10,  All  my  familiars  watched  for 
my  halting,  saying,  peradventure  he  will  be 
enticed  ;  namely,  to  utter  something  which  we 
may  lay  hold  on  to  accuse  him  for. 

(6)  'J'o  the  heart  allured  with  the  sight  of  out- 
ward objects.  Job  31.  2G,  27,  If  I  beheld  tlie 
sun  when  it  shined,  and  my  heart  hath  been 
secretly  enticed;  that  is,  inwardly  moved  to 
esteem  either  the  sun  or  vwon  as  deities,  or 
secretly  to  adore  or  worship  them. 

(7)  To  false  teachers,  who  are  said  to  deceive  and 
seduce  others,  by  enticing  words,  by  erroneous 
philosaghical  notions  and  fancies  mingled 
with  the  gospel,  1  Cor.  2.  4.  Col.  2.  4. 

(8)  'J'o  unfaithtul  \v\ves,Jlattcring  their  husbands 
with  a  purpose  to  deceive,  Judg.  14.  15.  |  16.  5. 

Ezod.  22.  16.  if  a  man  e.  a  maid  not  betrothed 
JJeut.  13.  6.  if  thy  wife  e.  thee  secretly,  saying 
Judg.  14.15.  e.  husband,  that  he  may  declare  riddle 
16.  5.  the  lords  said  to  Delilah,  e.  him  and  see 
2  Chron.  18. 19.  the  Lord  said,  who  shall  e.  Ahab? 
20. 1  will  e.  him  ||  21.  thou  shalt  e.hini  andprevai 
Prov.  1.  10.  if  sinners  c.  thee,  consent  thou  not 

ENTICED. 
Job  31.  27.  if  my  heart  hath  been  secretly  e. 
Jer.  20.  t  7.  thou  hast  deceived  me,  and  1  was  c. 
10.  jjcradventure  he  will  be  e.  we  shall  prevail 
Jayn.  1.  14.  is  tcm|)tcd  when  drawn  away  and  e. 

ENTICETH. 
Prov.  16.  29.  a  violent  man  e.  his  neighbour 
20.  1 19.  meddle  not  with  him  that  e.  with  lips 

ENTICING. 
1  Cor.  2.  4.  my  preaching  was  not  with  e.  words 
Col.  2.  4.  lest  any  man  beguile  you  with  e.  words 

ENTIRE. 
Jlmos  1.  t6.  carried  them  with  an  e.  captivity 
.7am.  1.  4.  that  ye  be  perfect  and  e.  wanting  nothing 

ENTRANCE. 

Judg.  1.  24.  they  said,  shew  us  the  e.  into  the  city 

2.'i.  when  he  shewed  them  the  e.  Iliey  smote  it 

1  Kings  18.  46.  he  ran  before  Ahab  to  e.  of  Jezreel 
22.  10.  the  two  kings  sal  in  the  e.  of  Samaria 

2  Chron.  12.  10.  that  kept  the  e.  of  the  king's  house 
Psal.  119.  130.  the  c.  of  thy  words  givcth  light 

1  'J'hess.  2.  1.  yourselves  know  our  e.  in  unto  you 

2  Pet.  1.  11.  80  an  e.  shall  be  ministered  to  you 

ENTRY. 
2Kings  16.18.  k.'s  e.  without  turned  he  from  house 

1  Chron.  9.  19.  their  fathers  were  keepers  of  the  c. 

2  Chr.  4.  22.  doors  of  e.  of  the  house  were  of  gold 
/'roK. 8. 3.wisdom  crielh  at  the  gates,  at  c.of  the  city 
Jcr.38.14.Zedekiah  took  Jeremiah  into  the  third  c. 

43.  9.  hide  the  stones  at  the  e.  of  Pharaoh's  house 

Kick.  8.  5.  this  image  of  jealousy  in  the  e. 
ENTRIES. 

Kick.  40.  38.  the  chambers  and  c.  were  by  the  posts 
ENVY 

Is  an  evil  affection  of  the  heart,  which  makes  men 
grieve  and  fret  at  the  good  and  pro.iperity  of 
othcTK.  Psal.  73.  3.  Rachel  envied  Leah,  be- 
cause of  her frititfulnrss.  Gin.  30.  1.  Josepli 
was  envied  if  his  brethren,  because  his  father 
loved  him,  Gen.  37.11.  'J'he  Jews  envied  Paul 
and  Karnabus,  because  they  preached  Christ, 
Acta  13.  45.  Envy  at  the  good  of  others,  and 
maiics,  wishing  thrm  evil,  as  one  oliscrvcs,  is  a 
deep  pollution  of  spirit.  This  ahsolutily  alien 
ales  mim  from  the  nature  and  life  of  (iod:  for 
the  r.lrarrat  contrplion  we  have  of  the  Deity  is, 
that  he  is  good,  and  dors  good.  'I'his  is  not  only 
contrary  to  superviitural grace, but  to  natural 
conscimcr,  and  turns  a  man  into  a  devil.  This 
vice  is  immediately  attrndrd  with  its  punish 
mint:  The  rnrious  man  is  his  mm  tormentor. 
Envy  sliiyelh  Ihe  sillv  one,  .loh  5.  2.  Envy  \> 
the  tollenncss  of  the  bones,  I'rov.  14.  30.  Jlc- 
siilr.t,  this  stops  the  descent  ofdirinr  blessings, 
and  turns  the  petilion.i  of  the  envious  into 
imprrentians  against  thrvisclvrs. 

The  spirit  that  dwollelh  in  us  liislclh  to  envy, 
Jam.  4.  5.     According  as  spirit  is  taken,  either 


EPH 

for  the  Spirit  of  God,  or  for  the  human  spirit, 
or  naturalcorruptwn;  the  sense  of  these  word* 
may  be,  either,  (1)  The  Spirit  of  God  that 
dwcUeth  in  us,  teacheth  us  better  things  tAon 
strife  and  envy;  for  it  lusteth  against  envy, 
that  is,  makes  us  lust  against  it,  carries  out 
our  hearts  to  hate  and  resist  it:  'J'lie  Greek 
preposition  vpcf,  here  Englisied  'o.  often  sig- 
nijics  against,  as  in  Luke  20  19  Eph.  6.  11. 
Or,  (2)  Our  natural  corruption  excited  and 
inflamed  by  the  devil,  strongly  inclines  us  to 
envy,  and  consequently  to  other  wickedness. 
Job  5.  2.  wrath  killeth,  and  e.  slayeth  the  silly  ono 
J'rov.  14.  30.  e.  is  the  rottenness  of  Ihe  bones 

27.  4.  but  who  is  able  to  stand  before  e.  ? 
Eccl.  4.  t  4.  this  the  e.  of  man  from  his  neighbour 

9.  6.  tiieir  love,  their  hatred,  and  e.  is  now  perished 
fsa.  11.  13.  Ihe  c.  also  of  Ephraim  shall  depart 

26.  11.  they  shall  see  and  be  ashamed  for  their  e. 
Ezek.  35.  11.  I  will  even  do  according  to  tliine  e. 
Mat.  27.  18,  for  e.  they  delivered  him,  Mark  15.10. 
Jicts  5.  1 17.  rose  up,  and  were  filled  with  e. 

7.  9.  the  patriarchs  moved  with  e.  sold  Joseph 
13.45.Jews  filled  with  e.  spake  against  those  things 
17.  5.  the  Jews  which  believed  not,  moved  with  (. 

Jiom.  1.  29.  full  of  e.  murder,  debate,  deceit 
J^hil.  1.  15.  some  indeed  preach  Christ  even  of  e. 
1  'J'im.  6.  4.  whereof  comelh  c.  strife,  railings 
'J'it.  3.  3.  wo  were  foolish,  living  in  malice  and  e. 
Jam.  4. 5.  the  spirit  that  dwellclh  in  us  lusteth  to  « 

ENVY. 
P)-ou.3.31.e.lhou  not  o)ipre6sor,choose  not  his  ways 
23. 17.  let  not  thine  heart  c.  sinners,  be  in  fear  of  L. 
Isa.  11.  13.  Ephraim  not  e.  Judah,  Judah  notvo.x 

ENVIED. 
Gen.  26. 14.  and  the  Philistines  e.  Isaac 
30.  1.  Rachel  e.  her  sister,  and  said  unto  Jacob 
37. 11.  Joseph's  breth.  c.  him,  his  father  observed 
Psal.  106. 16.  they  e.  Moses  also  in  the  camp 
Eccl.  4.  4.  for  this  man  is  e.  of  his  neighbour 
Eiek.  31.  9.  the  trees  in  the  garden  of  God  e.  him 

ENVIES. 
I  Pet.  2.  1.  laying  aside  all  malice,  guile,  and  e. 

ENVIEST. 
J^um.  11.  29.  Moses  said,  c.  thou  for  my  sake  1 

ENVIETH. 
1  Cor.  13.  4.  charity  sufferelh  long,  and  e.  not 

ENVYING, 
/iom. 13.13.  let  us  walk  honestly,  not  in  strife  ande. 

1  Cor.  3.3.  whereas  there  is  among  you  e.  and  strife 
Gal.  5. 2f).  provoking  one  another,  e.  one  anotlier 
Jam.  3.14.  but  ifye  have  bitter  e.  and  strife  in  hearta 

16.  where  e.  is,there  is  confusion,  every  evil  work 
ENVYINGS. 

2  Cor.  12.  20. 1  fear  lest  there  be  debates,  e.  wratht 
Gal.  5.  21.  the  works  of  the  flesh  aic  c.  murders 

ENVIOUS. 
Psal.  37.1.  nor  bee.  against  the  workers  of  iniquity 
73.  3.  for  I  was  c.  at  Ihe  foolish,  when  I  saw 
Prov.  24.  1.  be  not  thou  e.  against  evil  men 
19.  fret  not,  neither  be  thou  e.  at  the  wicked 
ENVIRON. 
JosA.7.9.theCanaanitcs  shall  hear  and  e.  us  round 

EPH  A II 
Is  a  Hebrew  measure  of  the  same  capacity  Kith 
the  Bath,  containing  ten  hornets.     See  Batb, 
and  HoMKR. 
Exod.  16.  36.  a  homer  is  the  tenth  part  of  an  e. 
J.ev.  5.  11.  the  tenth  part  of  an  c.  of  flour,  6.  20. 
19.  36.  ye  shall  have  a  just  r.  Ezek.  45.  10. 
Jfum.  5. 15.  the  tenth  part  of  an  c.  of  barley-meal 
Judg.fi.l9.  made  unleavenedcakcsofane.  of  flour 
l{uth  2.  17.  and  it  was  about  an  e.  of  barley 
1  .Sam.  17. 17.  take  now  an  c.  of  this  parched  corn 
Isa.  5.  10.  tlie  seed  of  a  homer  shall  yield  an  e. 
Ezek.  45. 11.  the  e.  and  baths  shall  be  one  measure 
46.  .5.  and  a  bin  of  oil  to  an  e.  7,  11. 
JImos  8..5.  making  the  c.  small,  and  theshekcl  great 
7.ech.  .■>.  6.  he  said,  this  is  an  e.  that  goeth  forth 

8.  and  he  cast  it  into  the  midst  of  the  e. 

See  Part. 
EPIIOD 
IVa.^  a  sort  of  orjiament,  or  upper  garment,  worn 
by  the  Hebrew  priests.  There  were  two  sorts 
of  epiiods,  one  of  plain  linen  for  the  priests, 
and  anothi-r  embroidered  for  the  high-prirst. 
That  for  the  high-priest  was  composed  nfgold, 
blue,  purple,  crimson,  and  twisted  cotton;  tjtat 
is,  it  wos  a  very  rich  composition  of  different 
colours.  Vpon  that  part  of  the  rpluid,  which 
came  upon  the  two  shoulders  of  the  high-priest, 
were  two  large  precious  stones,  upon  which 
were  engraven  the  names  of  the  twelve  Iribtt 
of  Isnicl,  upon  each  stone  six  names,  Exod. 

28.  4,  5.  6,  &.C. 

Thirr,  where  the  ephod  crossed  the  high-prie.st'» 
breiist,was  asguartomament,entled  thebrciLBi- 
[ilale,  wherein  twelve  precious  stones  were  set. 
with  the  names  of  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israo 
engravcdon  them,one  on  each  statu.   Thevppit 


EPI 


tide  of  the  breast-plate  was  fastened  b7j  chains 
of  gold  to  that  part  of  the  ephod  ichich  was  on 
tlie  shoulder  ;  and  the  lower  side  of  it-,  by  blue 
laces,  to  the  girdle  of  the  ephod  ;  for  which 
purpose  it  had  four  rings  of  gold,  at  the  four 
corners;  thai  being  all  fitly  joined  together, 
it  might  appear  like  o7ie  entire  garment,  Exod. 
39.  21.  and  accordingly,  the  whole  was  some- 
times called  and  understood  by  the  single  word 
Ephod,  1  Sam.  30.  7.  Hos.  3.  4. 
I'he  Epiiod  worn  by  common  priests,  which  was 
of  linen  only,  was  of  the  same  extent  and  «-se, 
but  neither  so  rich,  nor  so  much  adorned.  This 
garment  was  worn  sometimes  by  those  who, 
strictly  speaking,  were  not  priests;  as  by 
Samuel  in  the  tabernacle,  when  he  was  but  a 
child,  1  Sam.  2.  18.  and  by  David  when  he 
brought  the  ark  from  the  house  o/ Obfd-edoii 
to  Jerusalem,  2  Sam.  6.  14.  But,  as  both  these 
vere  holy  occasions,it  isprobable  IheFfphudwas 
properly  a  holy  robe;  and  never  worn  by  any, 
but  those  who  served  in  some  holy  employment. 

Some  affirm,  that  the  Jewish  kings  had  a  right  to 
wear  the  Ejihod,  and  to  consult  the  J^ord  by 
Urim  and  Thummim.  They  ground  their 
opinion  principally  on  what  is  said  concern- 
ing David,  1  Sam.  30.  7.  when  he  came  to  Zik- 
lag,  and  found  that  the  Amalekites  had  pil- 

'  laged  the  city,  and  carried  away  his  and  his 
people's  wives,  he  said  to  Abiathar  the  high- 
priest,  Bring  me  hither  the  Ephod,  and  Jibia- 
thar  brought  thither  the  Ephod  to  David. 
IVhat follows  verseS.favours  this  opinion.  And 
David  enquired  at  the  Lord,  saying,  shall  Ipur- 
sue  after  this  troo))'?  And  heanswered  liim,Pursue. 

But  the  generality  of  Commentators  are  of  opi- 
nion, that  neither  David,  Saul,  nor  Joshua,  nor 
any  other  prince  of  Israel,  dressed  themselves 
in  the  high-priest' s  Ephod,  in  order  to  consult 
God  of  themselves,  and  that  the  passage  now 
related  signifies  no  more  than.  Put  on  the 
Ephod,  and  consult  the  Lord  lor  me.  Grotius 
believes,  the  high-priest  turned  the  Ephod,  or 
breast-plate,  towards  David,  that  he  might  see 
with  his  own  eyes,  what  God  should  answer 
to  him  by  the  stones  upon  the  breast-plate. 

Exod.  25.  7.  stones  to  be  set  in  the  e.  35.  9,  27. 
28.  4.  Uiey  shall  make  an  e.  and  a  robe,  6. 

8.  curious  girdle  of  c.  27,  28.  |  39. 5,  20.  J.ev.  * 
32.  put  them  on  the  shoulders  of  the  e.  2.5. 
15.  make  it  after  the  work  of  the  e.  39.  8. 
31.  Shalt  make  the  robe  of  the  e.  of  blue,  39.  22. 

39.  2.  he  made  the  e.  of  gold,  blue,  and  purple 
I^ev.  8.  7.  he  put  the  f.  upon  him,  and  girded  him 
Judg.  8.  27.  and  Gideon  made  an  e.  thereof 
17.  5.  the  mjn  Micali  made  an  e.  and  teraphim 
18. 14. that  there  is  in  these  houses  an  e.  and  teraph. 

1  Sam.  2.  18.  Samuel  was  girded  with  a  linen  c. 
28.  did  I  choose  him  to  wear  an  e.  before  me? 

14.  3.  And  Ahiah  the  Lord's  priest  wearing  an  e. 

21.  9.  the  ssvord  is  wrapt  in  a  cloth  behind  the  c. 

22.  18.  Doeg  slew  85  persons  that  did  wear  an  e. 

23.  6.  Abimelech  fled  with  an  e.  in  his  hand 

9.  David  said,  bring  hither  the  e.  30.  7. 

2  Sam.  6.  14.  David  danced  before  the  Lord,  and 

was  girded  with  a  linen  e.  1  Citron.  15.  27. 

Jios.'i.^.  Israel  shall  abide  many  days  without  an  c. 
EPISTLE 

la  a  letter  or  writing,  whereby  one  person  com- 
municates his  mind  to  another  at  a  distance ; 
thus  David  communicated  his  mind  to  Joiib  in 
a  letter  which  he  snit  by  the  hand  of  Uriah, 
2  Sam.  11. 14.  The  holy  Jlpostles  likewise  com- 
municated to  the  church  by  epistles  the  mind 
and  will  of  God,  according  as  the  Holy  Spirit 
inspired  and  directed  them  ;  which  inspirrd 
epi.'itles  make  a  part  of  the  Canon  of  the  holy 
scriptures.  J)nd  the  whole  word  of  God  may  be 
called  his  epistle,  because,  therein  he  has  declar- 
ed and  revealed  his  mind  and  will  to  mankind. 

The  apostleVim\ writing  to  ?Ac Corinthians  says, 
Ye  are  our  epistle  written  in  our  hearts,  known 
and  read  of  all  men.  Forasmuch  as  ye  are 
manifestly  declared  to  be  the  epistle  of  Chri.st 
ministered  by  us,  written  not  with  ink,  but  with 
the  Spirit  of  the  living  God,  not  in  tables  of 
stone,  but  in  fleshly  tables  of  the  heart,  2  Cor. 
3.  2,  3.  that  is,  You  are  my  epistle  of  commen- 
dation;  your  conversion  to  Christianity  is  a 
real  commendation  of  my  ministi^,  and  a  de- 
monstration of  its  efficacy :  You  are  written 
in  my  heart;  I  have  d  hearty  affection  for 
fou :  JVor  are  you  only  taken  notice  of  by  me 
as  a  famous  church,  but  all  Christian's  look 
upon  you  as  a  church,  to  the  planting  and  wa- 
tering of  which  God  hath  bcessed  my  labours, 
^nd  it  appears  that  yc  are  nur  epistle  in  that 
it  is  evident  that  Christ  has  wriltrn  his  law  in 
four  hearts,  by  my  ministry,  which  was  made 
effectual  to  this  end  bv  the  Holy  Ghost. 
187 


ERR 

.acts  15.  30.  they  delivered  the  e.  23.  33. 

Rom.  16. 22. 1  Tertius  who  wrote  this  e.  salute  you 

1  Cor.  5.  9. 1  wrote  to  you  in  an  e.  not  to  company 

2  Cor.  3.  2.  ye  are  our  e.  written  in  our  hearts 
3.  as  ye  are  declared  to  be  the  c.  of  Christ 

7.  8.  I  perceive  that  the  same  e.  made  you  sorry 
Col.  4.  16.  when  this  e.  is  read  amongst  you,  like- 
wise read  the  e.  from  Laodicea 

1  Thess.  5.27.  this  e.  be  read  to  all  the  brethren 

2  7'Aes»-.2.15.been  taught  whether  by  word  or  our  c. 
3.  14.  if  any  man  obey  not  our  word  by  this  e. 

17.  which  is  the  token  in  every  e.  so  I  write 
2  Pet.  3.  1.  this  second  e.  I  now  write  unto  you 

EPISTLES. 
2  Cor.  3. 1.  or  need  we  e.  of  commendation  to  you 
2  Pet.  3. 16.  as  also  in  all  his  e.  speaking  in  them 

EaUAL. 
Esth.  3. 1 8.  it  is  not  e.  for  the  king  to  suffer  them 
Psal.  17.  2.  thine  eyes  behold  the  things  that  are  e. 
55. 13.  but  it  was  thou,  a  man,  mine  e.  my  guide 
Prov.  26.  7.  the  legs  of  the  lame  are  not  e." 
fsa.  40.  25.  to  whom  then  shall  I  be  c.  ?  46.  5. 
/yam.2.13.whatshall  le.  to  thee,  O  virgin  daughter 
Ezek.  18.25.  yet  ye  say,  the  way  of  the  Lord  is  not 
e.  hear,  is  not  my  way  e.  ?  29.  |  33. 17,  20. 
18.  29.  O  house  of  Israel,  are  not  my  ways  e.  ? 
33. 17.  but  as  for  them,  their  way  is  not  e. 
Dan.  5.  t21.  he  made  his  heart  e.  with  the  beast 
Jilat.  20. 12.  and  thou  hast  made  them  e.  to  us 
Luke  20.36.  for  they  are  e.  to  angels,childr.  of  God 
.lohn  5.  18.  making  himself  e.  with  God 
Phil.2.6.he  thought  it  not  robbery  to  be  f.with  God 
Col.  4.  1.  masters,  give  your  servants  what  is  e. 
Jiev.21.l(i.  the  breadth  and  height  of  the  city  are  e. 

EQUAL. 

Job  28.  17.  the  gold  and  the  crystal  cannot  e.  it 

19.  the  topaz  of  Ethiopia  shall  not  e.  it 

EQUALITY. 

2  Cor.  8.  14.  but  by  an  e.  that  there  may  be  an  e. 

EQUALLETH. 
2  Sam.  22. 134.  he  e.  my  feet  with  hinds'  feet 

EQUALLY. 
Ezod.  36. 22.  one  board  had  two  tenons  e.  distant 

EQUALS. 
Gal.X.li.  I  profited  above  mariy  my  e.in  my  nation 

EQUITY. 
Psal.  98.  9.  he  shall  judge  the  people  with  e 
99.4.tliou  dost  establish  e.thou  e.\ecutest  judgment 
Prov.}.3.lo  receive  the  instruction  of  wisdom  ande. 
2.9.  then  shalt  thou  understand  judgment  and  e. 
17.  26.  it  is  not  good  to  strike  princes  for  e. 
Eccl.  2.21.  there  is  a  man  whose  labour  is  in  e. 
Isa.  11.  4.  reprove  with  e.  for  the  meek  of  the  earth 
.56.  t  L  thussaith  the  Lord,  keep  e.  and  do  justice 
59.14.  truth  is  fallen  in  streets,  and  e.  cannot  enter 
JUic.  3.  9.  hear  this,  ye  that  pervert  all  e. 
Mai.  2.  6.  he  walked  with  me  in  peace  and  e. 

ERE. 
i7ro(i.l.l9.they  are  delivered  e.the  midwives  come 
J^um.  14.11.  how  long  will  it  be  e.  they  believe  me? 
■fob  18. 2.  how  long  f .  you  make  an  end  of  words'! 
./er.  47.  6.  O  sword,  how  long  e-  thou  be  quiet  ? 
Hos.  8. 5.  how  long  e.  they  attain  to  innocency? 
.John  4.  49.  Sir,  come  down  e.  my  child  die 

ERECTED. 
Gc7!.33.20.  Jacob  e.  there  an  altar,  El-Elohe  Israel 

ERRAND. 
Gen.  a.  33. 1  will  not  eat  till  I  have  told  mine  e. 
.Judg. ;).  19.  I  have  a  secret  c.  unto  thee,  O  king 
2  Kings  9.  5.  he  said,  I  have  an  t.  to  thee,  O  caj)!. 

ERR. 
2C/ir.  33.  9.  so  Manasseh  made  Judah  to  e. 
■lob  .5.  t24.  thou  shalt  visit  thy  habitation  and  not  c. 
Psal.  95.  10.  a  people  that  do  e.  in  their  heart 
119.  21.  which  do  e.  from  thy  commandments 
118.  Iiast  trodden  tlitm  that  e.  from  thy  statutes 
Prnv.  5.  t  ]9.  and  e.  thou  always  in  her  love 
10.  f  17.  he  that  rcfuseth  reproof,  causeth  lo  e. 
14.  22.  do  they  not  e.  that  devise  evil  ? 
19.  27.  cease  to  hear  instruction  that  causeth  to  e. 
/sa.  3.12.  O  my  people,  they  which  lead  thee  cause 
thee  to  e.  and  destroy  thy  paths,  9.  16. 
19. 14.  and  they  have  caused  Egypt  to  e. 
28.  7.  they  c.  in  vision,  they  stumble  in  judgment 
.30.  28.  there  shall  be  a  bridle  causing  them  lo  e. 
35.  8.  the  wayfaring  men  shall  not  e.  therein 
03.17.  why  hast  thou  made  us  to  c.from  thy  ways? 
.ier.  23.  13.  the  prophets  prophesied  in  Baal,  and 
caused  my  people  Israel  to  c.  Mic.  3.  5. 
//oi-.4.12.spiritofwl:oredom  hath  caused  them  toe. 
.Imos  2.  4.  and  their  lies  caused  them  to  e. 
Mat.  22.  29.  Jesus  said,  ye  do  e.  not  knowing  the 
scriptures  nor  power  of  God,  Mark  12.  24, 27. 
Heb.  3.  10.  they  do  always  e.  in  their  hearU 
.lam.  ].  16.  do  not  e.  my  beloved  brethren 
5.  19.  brethren,  if  anv  of  vou  do  e.  from  the  truth 

ERRED. 
/,('?!.  5.  18.  concerning  ignorance  wherein  he  e. 
A^«7n.l5.22.ve  have  e.  and  not  observed  lliese  com. 
1  Sam.  26.  21.  behold,  I  have  e.  exceedingly 


ESC 

Job  6.24.  cause  me  to  understand  wherfiin  I  have  e. 
19.4.be  it  indeed  that  I  have  e.mine  err.  remaineth 
Psal.  119.  110.  yet  I  e.  not  from  thy  precepts 
Isa.  28.7.  but  they  also  have  e.thro'  wine  and  thro' 
strong  drink,  the  priest  and  the  prophet  have  e. 
29.  24.  they  also  tiiat  e.  in  spirit  shall  come 
1  Tim. G.lO.some  coveted  they  have  c.from  the  faith 
21.  some  professing  have  e.  concerning  the  faith 
27  m.  2. 18.  who  concerning  the  truth  have  e. 

ERRETH. 
Prov.  10.  17.  but  he  that  refuseth  reproof  c. 
Eiek.  45.  20.  so  shalt  thou  do  for  every  one  that  e. 

ERROR 
Signifies,  [1]  ./?  mistake  or  oversight,  Eccl.  5.  6 
[2]  False  doctrine,which  is  not  agreeable  to  the 
word  of  Ood,  1  John  4.  6.    [3]  Sins  of  all  sorts, 
Psal.  19.  12.  Heb.  9.  7.     [4]  Idols,  Jer.  10.  15. 
[5]  Sins  against  nature,  Rom.  1.  27.    [6]  Un 
faithfulness  in  an  office,  Dan.  6.  4. 
The  error  of  Balaam,  Jude  11.  is  covetousness,  to 
which  the  persons,  of  whom  the  apostle  speaks, 
were  excessively  addicted,  and,  for  the  sake  of 
filthy  lucre,  did  corrupt  the  doctrine  of  Christ ; 
as  Balaam,  /or  the  sake  of  gain,  taught  Balak 
to  entice  the  children  of  Israel  to  commit  forni- 
cation, and  to  eat  things  sacrificed  unto  idols. 
Job,  speaking  to  his  friends,  says.  Be  it  indeed 
that  I  have  erred,  mine  error  remaineth  with 
myself,  .Ub  19.4.     Jf  my  opinion  in  this  point 
be  faulty  and  erroneous,  as  you  pretend  it  is, 
it  is  likely  to  continue ;  I  see  no  cause  from 
your  reasons  to  change  my  judgment.    Or,  if 
I  ha^e  sinned,  you  see  J  suffer  deeply  for  my 
sins,  and  therefore  deserve  your  pity  and  help, 
rather  than  your  reproaches,  whereby  you  add 
affiiction  to  the  afflicted, 
^um.  35.  1 11.  the  slayer  that  killelh  any  by  e. 
2  Sam.&.l.  anger  kindled,  G.  smote  Uzzah  for  his  e. 
Job  19.  4.  if  erred  mine  e.  remaineth  with  myself 
Eccl.  5.  6.  neither  say  thou  that  it  was  an  e. 
10.  5.  there  is  an  evil  which  I  have  seen  as  an  e. 
Isa.  32.  6.  and  to  utter  e.  against  the  Lord 
Dan.  3.t29.  who  speak  e.  against  God  of  Shadrach 
4.  127.  if  it  may  be  a  healing  of  thine  e. 
6.  4.  neither  was  there  any  e.  found  in  him 
Mat.  27. 64.  the  last  e.  shall  be  worse  than  the  first 
Rom.  1.  27.  receiving  that  recompense  of  their  e. 
Jam.  5. 20.  converteth  the  sinner  from  e.  of  his  way 
2  Pet.  2.  18.  were  escaped  from  them  who  live  in  e. 
3. 17.  ye  being  led  away  with  the  e.  of  the  wicked 
1  .John  4.  6.  hereby  know  we  the  spirit  of  e. 
.Jude  11.  they  have  ran  greedily  after  e.  of  Balaam 

ERRORS. 
P«.19. 12.  who  can  understand  his  e.  7  cleanse  me 
Jer.  JO.  15.  they  are  vanity,  the  work  of  e.  51. 18. 
Heb.  9.  7.  which  he  offered  for  the  e.  of  the  people 

ESCAPE. 
Oen.  19.  17.  e.  for  thy  life,  e.  to  the  mountain 

20.  O  let  me  e.  ||  22.  haste  thee,  e.  thither 
32.  8.  the  other  company  which  is  left  shall  e. 
Josh.  8.22.  they  let  none  of  them  remain  or  e. 

1  Sam.  27.  1.  e.  into  the  land  of  the  Philistines 

2  Sam.  15.  14.  let  us  flee,  for  we  shall  not  else  e. 
20.  6.  lest  Sheba  get  him  fenced  cities  and  e.  us 

1  Kings  18. 40.  let  none  of  them  e.  2  Kings  9. 15 

2  Kings  10.  24.  if  any  of  the  men  I  have  brought  «• 
19. 31.  they  that.«.  out  of  mount  Zi<m,  Isa.  37.  32. 
23. 1 18.  they  let  his  bones  e.with  bones  of  prophet 

£jrff9.8.grace  been  shewn  to  leave  us  a  rCmn.to  e. 
Eslh.  4. 13.  think  not  thou  .shalt  e.  in  king's  house 
.Tob  11.20. but  the  wicked  shall  not  e.  their  hope  fail 
Ps.5r^.7.  shall  they  c.  by  iniquity?  cast  down  people 

71.  2.  deliver  me  in  thy  right,  and  cause  me  to  e. 

141.  10.  let  the  wicked  fall,  whilst  I  withal  e. 
Prov.  19.  5.  he  that  speaketh  lies  shall  not  e. 
Eccl.  7.  26.  whoso  pleaseth  God  shall  e.  from  her 
Isa.  20.  6.  we  flee  for  help,  and  how  shall  we  e. 

66. 19.  I  will  send  those  that  c.  to  the  nations 
.fer.  11. 11.  bring  evil  on  them  shall  not  be  able  toe. 

25.  35.  nor  ihe  principal  of  the  flock  to  e. 

32.  4.  Zedekinh  shall  not  r.  34.  3.  |  38.  18,  23. 

42.  17.  none  that  go  into  Egypt  shall  e.  44.  14. 

44.  14.  none  shall  return  but  such  as  shall  e. 

28.  yet  a  small  number  that  e.  the  sword 
46.  6.  let  not  the  swift  flee,  nor  mighty  man  e. 
48.  8.  the  spoiler  shall  come,  no  city  shall  e. 
50.28.  voice  of  Ihcm  that  flee  and  c.out  of  Babylon 

29.  let  none  thereof  c.  recompense  her  according 
Ezek.  6.  8.  may  have  some  that  shall  e.  the  sword 

9.  and  they  that  e.  of  you  shall  remember  me 
7.  16.  they  that  e.  shall  c.  and  be  like  doves 
17.  1.5.  shall  he  e.  that  doeth  such  things? 

18.  hath  done  all  these  things,  he  shall  not  e 
Dan.  11.  41.  but  these  shall  e.  out  of  his  hand 

42.  and  the  land  of  Egypt  shall  not  e.  ^ 

.Joel  2.  3.  yea,  and  nothing  shall  e.  them  ■  ' 

Ohad.  14.  "to  cut  off'lhose  of  his  that  did  e. 

1 17.  but  on  mount  Zion  shall  be  they  that  e. 
Jl/a«.23.  33.  howcan  ye  e.the  damnation  of  hell? 
/.u*«  21,36.  be  accounted  worthy  to  e.  these  thing! 


ESP 

^ela  27. 42.  counsel  to  kill  Uie  prisoners,  lest  any  e. 
Horn.  2.  3.  that  thou  slialt  e.  the  judginunt  of  God ! 
1  Cor.  10.  13.  hut  will  also  make  a  way  to  e. 
I  Thesd  5.3.8udden  destruction,and  they  shalJ  note, 
//eiy  2.3.  how  Bhailwo  e.ifwe  neglect  so  great  salv. 

iS.'Ho.  much  mure  shall  not  wo  e.  if  we  turn  away 

ESCAPE. 

fisal.  53k  8. 1  would  hasten  my  e.  from  the  storm 

ESCAI'EJ). 
Gen.  14.  13.  there  came  one  that  had  e.  and  told 
Kxod.  10.  5.  the  locust  eat  llie  residue  of  what  is  e. 
JV"«jH.21.2'J.hath  given  his  sons  that  e.into  captivity 
Deut.  23.  lo.  not  deliver  servant  e.  from  his  muster 
Judg.  3.26.  and  Ehud  e.  while  they  tarried 
29.  there  e.  not  a  man  of  them,  1  Sam.  30.  17. 

21.  17.  must  be  an  inheritance  for  them  that  be  e. 

1  Sam.  14.  4 1.  Saul  and  Jonath.  taken,  but  people  e. 
19.  10.  David  fled  and  e.  that  night,  12,  13. 

2  Sam.  1.  3.  out  of  the  camp  of  Israel  am  I  e. 
4.  6.  and  Rachab  and  Baajiah  liis  brotlier  c. 

1  Kings  20.  20.  13en-hadad  the  king  e.  on  a  horse 

2  Kings  ly.  30.  the  remnant  that  is  c.  of  Judali 

shall  take  root  and  bear  fruit,  Isa.  37.  31. 

1  Chron.  4.  43.  they  smote  the  rest  that  weree. 
2CA7-W7J.  Itj.  7.  therefore  is  the  host  of  Syria  e. 

30.  (J.  and  he  will  return  to  you  that  arc  c. 
Ezra  9.  lo.  for  we  remain  yet  e.  as  it  is  this  day 
JV"eA.  1.  2.  I  asked  concernin;;  the  Jews  that  had  e. 
J.ib  1.  15.  I  only  am  c.  to  tell  thee,  16,  17,  19. 

19.  20.  and  I  am  c.  with  the  skin  of  my  teeth 
hsal.  124.  7.  our  soul  is  £.  as  a  bird  out  of  the  snare 
of  the  fowlers,  the  sjiare  is  broken  and  we  are  e. 
Isa.  4.2.  shall  becomely  for  them  that  are  e.  of  Isr. 

10.  20.  the  remnant  and  such  as  are  e.  of  Jacob 

45.  20.  draw  near,  ye  that  are  e.  of  the  nations 
Xer.  41. 15.  but  Ishmael  the  son  of  Nethaniah  e. 

51.  .50.  ye  that  have  e.  remember  the  Lord  afar  off 
Ijam.  2.  22. so  that  none  in  that  day  c.  nor  remained 
Ezek.  24. 27.  thy  mouth  be  opened  to  him  that  is  e. 

33.  21.  that  one  that  had  c.  came  unto  me,  22. 
John  10.  39.  but  he  e.  out  of  their  hands 
j?cfs27.44.3o  it  came  to  pass,  they  all  c.safe  to  land 

23.4. though  he  e.the  8ea,yet  vengeance  suffers  not 

2  Cor.  11.33.  1  was  let  down  and  e.  his  hands 
J/eb.  11.  34.  through  faith  e.  the  edge  of  the  sword 

12.  25.  if  they  e.  not  who  refused  him  that  spake 

2  Pet.  1.  4.  c.  the  corruption  that  is  in  the  world 

2.18.allurc  thro'lustsof  flesh  those  thatvveiecleani;. 

20,  after  they  have  c.  the  pollutions  of  the  world 

,  ESCAPEE. 

2  Kings  9.  t  15.  let  no  i?.  go  out  of  the  city  to  tell 

7  ESCAPETH. 

IKingsl').  17.him  that c.the sword  of  Ilnzael shall 
Jehu  slay;  him  that  c.  Jehu  shall  Eli.sha  slay 
Jsa.  15.  9.  bring  lions  upon  him  that  e.  of  Moab 
Jer.  48.  19.  ask  her  that  e.  and  say,  what  is  done  1 
Kick.  24.26.  he  that  c.in  thatday  shall  <;ome  to  thee 
Jimos  9.  1.  he  that  e.  of  them  shall  not  be  delivered 

ESCAPING. 
2  Kings  19.  t  -W.  the  e.  of  the  house  of  Judah  that 
remaineth  shall  again  take  root,  Isa.  37.  f  31. 
2  CAr.  20.  t  24.  they  were  dead,  there  was  not  an  e. 
Ezra  9. 14. so  that  there  should  be  no  remnant  nor  c. 
Isa.  4.  t  2.  the  branch  be  comely  for  the  e.  of  Isr. 
37.  t  32.  the  r.  shall  go  forLli  out  of  mount  Zion 
Jer.  25.  t  35.  and  e.  fron)  the  princiiml  of  the  flock 

ESCHEW. 
1  Pet.  3. 11.  let  him  e.  evil  and  do  good,  seek  peace 

ESCHEWED,  ETII. 
Job  1.  1.  one  that  feared  God  and  e.  evil,  8.  ]  2.  3 

ESPECIALLY  and  SPECIALLY. 
Z)euC.  4.10.5. the  day  thou  stoodest  before  the  Lord 
Psal.  31. 11.  n  reproach  e.  among  my  neighbours 
Jicts  2>.  26.  and  s.  before  thee,  O  king  .Agrippa 
26.  3.  r.  because  I  know  thee  to  bo  expert 
nal.  6.  10.  c.  to  them  of  the  household  of  faith 

1  Tim.  4  10.  tlie  Saviour,  s.  of  tliose  that  believe 
5.8.  provide,  s.  for  them  of  his  own  house 

17.  e.  they  who  labour  in  word  and  doctrine 

2  Tim.  4.  13.  the  cloko  bring,  hut  c.the  parchments 
Ti<.  1.  10,  deceivers,  s.  they  of  the  circumcision 
i'At/em.lU.abovo  a  servant, l)rotherbelovoJ,i>'.to  mo 

ESPY. 
Josh.  14.  7.  Mo9C9  sent  me  to  e.  out  the  land 
Jer.  48.19.  stand  by  wav,  and  c.  ask  liim  that  fleeth 

ESPIED. 
Oen.  42. 27.  he  e.  his  moncv  in  his  sack's  moutli 
Eiek.  20.  U.  into  a  land  thai  I  had  c.  for  them 
Sfe  Spv,  Spied. 
ESPOl  J.SALS. 
Caul.  3. 11.  hiB  mother  crowned  him  in  day  ofliiBC. 
Jer.  2.  2.  I  remember  thee,  the  love  of  thine  e. 

ESPOUSED. 
Espousing,  nr  botrotiiing,  was  a  promise,  nf  mar- 

«riagr  made  by  two  persons  each  to  other,  nt 
such  a  distance  of  lime  nfterieards.  This  was 
done  either  hij  aj'ormalirritini',  or  contract  in 
presence  of  iritnessrs.  Or  without  icriling,  by 
the  man's  giving , a  piece  of  silver  to  Ihr  bride 
before  witnesses,  and  suymg  to  her,  Recuivc 
1G8 


EST 

this  piece  of  silver  as  a  pledge  tliat  at  such  a 
tune  you  shrill  become  my  spouse,  jifter  tie 
marriage  was  thus  contracted,tlie  young pttpU 
had  the  liberty  uf  seeing  each  other,  which  was 
nut  allowed  them  before. 

IVe  read,  Mat.  1.  18,  that  when  Mary  was  es- 
poused to  Joseph,  before  they  came  together, 
she  was  found  with  child  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
God  would  have  his  son  to  be  born  of  a  betrothed 
virgin,  (1)  That  he  might  not  be  under  the 
reproach  of  iUegitiniacy.  (2)  That  his  mother 
might  not  be  subjected  to  the  punishment  of 
the  judicial  law.  (3)  That  bi/  the  genealogy 
of  Joseph,  of  whose  kindred  Mary  wa.i,  her 
pedigree  might  also  be  shewed.  (4)  That  Christ 
might  have  a  guardian  in  his  infancy. 

The  union  of  believers  with  Christ  ji  expressed 
under  the  notion  of  a  marriage,  lea.  .54.  5. 
Hence  the  apostle  tells  the  Cormthiaus,  1  have 
espoused  you  to  one  husband,  that  1  may 
present  you  a  chaste  virgin  to  Christ,  2  Cor. 
11.  2.  The  husband  is  Christ,  Mat.  25.  0. 
The  virgin  bride  are  all  true  believers.  The 
contract,  or  marriage-covenant,  is  madein  this 
life,  in  making  of  which  faithful  ministers  are 
instrumental ;  I  have  espoused  you,  says  the 
apostle.  But  the  marriage  is  celebrated  in  the 
other  world,  where  believers  have  uninterrupt- 
ed communion  with  Ood  in  Christ,  Hev.  19.  7. 

2  Sam.  3. 14.  deliver  me  my  wife  Michal  whom  I  e. 

J)Iat.  1. 18.  when  his  mother  Mary  was  f.to  Joseph 

I^uke  1.  27.  to  a  virgin  e.  to  a  man  named  Joseph 
2.5.  Joseph  went  to  be  taxed  with  Mary  his  c.  wife 

2  Cor.  11.  2.  for  I  have  c.  you  to  one  husband 
ESTABLISH  and  STADLISH. 

Signifies,  [1]  To  jix,  or  settle,  1  Kings  9.  5.  [2] 
To  confirm,  Num.  30.  13.  Rom.  1.  11.  [3] 
To  perform,  or  make  good,  Psal.  119.  38.  [4] 
To  ordain,  ur  appoint,  Hal>.  1.  12.  [5]  To  ac- 
complish and  bring  to  a  good  issue,  Prov.  20. 
18.  [6]  To  set  up  one  thing  in  the  room  of 
another,  Kom.  10.  3.  [71  To  ratify,  Heb. 
10.9.  I  }  JJ, 

The  Lord  shall  establish  thee  a  holy  people 
unto  himself,  Deut.  28.  9.  He  shall  confirm 
and  establish  his  covenant  with  thee,  by  which 
he  separated  thee  to  himself  as  a  holy  and 
peculiar  people,  and  shall  publicly  own  thee 
for  such. 

Establish  thou  the  work  of  our  hands,  Psal. 
90.  17.  that  is.  Direct  us  in,  and  give  success 
lo  all  our  undertakings  and  endeavours;  carry 
them  on,  by  thy  continual  aid  and  blessing, 
unto  perfection. 

Oen.  C.  18.  but  with  thee  will  I  e.  mv  covenant, 
9.  9.  1 17.  7.    J.ev.  26.  9.     Ezek.  16. 62. 

17.  19.  I  will  e.  my  covenant  with  liim,  21. 
JVu7n.  30.  13.  every  vow,  her  husband  may  e.  it 
IJeut.  8.  18.  that  he  may  e.  his  covenant  he  sware 

28.  9.  the  L.  shall  e.  thee  a  holy  people  to  himself 

29.  13.  that  he  may  c.  thee  to-day  for  a  peojjle 

1  Sam.  1.  23.  only  the  L.  e.  his  word,  2  Ham.  7.  25. 

iSam.  7. 12. 1  will  set  up  thy  seed  after  ihee,  I  will 

e.  his  kingdom,  13. 1  Clir.  17.  1 ! .  1  22.10.  |  28.  7. 

\  Kings  7.t2l.he3et  up  and  called  the  name  of  the 

right  pillar,  ho  shall  e.  2  Chron.  3.  t  17. 

9.  .5.  I  will  e.  tlie  throne  of  Ihy  kingdom 

15.4. to  set  up  his  son  after  him,and  toe.Jcrusalcra 

1  Chron.  17.  12.  and  I  will  s.  his  throne  for  ever 

18.  3.  as  he  went  to  s.  his  dominion  by  Euphrates 
29.  t  18.  O  Lord  God,  .«.  their  heart  unto  thee 

2CAron.  7. 18.  then  will  I  s.  throne  of  thy  kingdom 

9.  8.  because  God  loved  Israel  to  c.  them  for  ever 
F.sth.  9.  21.  to  s.  among  them  the  days  of  Purim 
.Job  36.  7.  yea  he  doth  e'.  them  for  ever,  are  e.valted 
Psal.  7.  9.  but  e.  the  just  ||  48.  8.  God  will  c.  it 

10.  t  17.  thou  wilt  c.  the  heart  of  the  humble 
87.  .5.  and  the  Highest  himself  shall  e.  her 

89.  2.  thy  faithfulness  shall  Ihou  e.  in  the  heavens 
4.  thy  seed  will  I  e.  for  ever,  and  build  thy  throne 

90.  17.  e.  thou  the  work  ofour  handu,  e,  thou  it 
99.  4.  thou  dost  c.e()uity,thou  c.\ecutest  judgment 
119.38.  J!.  Ihy  word  to  thy  servant,  who  is  devoted 

Prov.  15.  25.  ho  will  e.  the  border  of  the  widow 
Isa.  9.  7.  to  e.  it  wiih  judgment  and  witli  justice 
49.  8.  give  thee  for  n  covenant  lo  e.  the  earth 

02.  7.  till  ho  e.  anil  make  Jerusalem  a  praise 
./cr.33.  2.  Ihc  Lord  that  formi'd  it,  to  c.  it 
Kick.  If).  60.  I  will  c.  an  everlasting  covenant 
Dan.  6.  7.  have  consulted  to  r.  a  royal  statute 

8.  O  king,  c.  the  decree,  and  sign  the  writing 

11.  14.  shall e.xalt  Ihi-uiseUc •»  lo  r.  the  vision 
^;/io.«5.15.1ovo  the  good, and /-.judgment  in  tlie  gale 
Horn.  3.  31.  do  wo  make  void  ?  yea,  wc  e.  the  law 

10.  a.  going  about  to  e.  Iheir  own  righleoiisncss 
16.  25.  now  to  him  that  is  of  power  to  ».  you 

1  Thcss.  3.2.  we  sent  Timothy  mir  brother  to  «.  you 

13.  to  the  end  he  may  «.  your  hearts  unblameabl 

2  Thess.  2. 17.  s.  you  m  every  good  word  and  work 

3.  3.  the  Lord  almll  s.  yuu,  and  keep  you  from  evil 


EST 

lleb  10  9  takes  auay  first,  that  he  may  e.  second 
Jam  5.  S.  ue  ye  ilso  patienl,  s.  your  hearts 
1  Pet.  5.  JO.  the  God  of  all  grace  s.  settle  you 

ESTABLISHED,  STABLISHED. 
Gen.9.17.tlie  token  of  the  covenant  which  I  have  e. 
41.  32.  it  is  because  the  thing  is  e.  by  God 
Exod.  6.  4.  I  have  also  e.  my  covenant  with  them 

15.  17.  in  the  sanctuary  which  thy  hands  have  e. 
Deut.  32.  6.  hath  he  not  made  thee,  and  e.  thee? 
1  Sam.  3.  20.  Samuel  was  e.  a  prophet  of  tlie  Lord 

13.  13.  now  would  tlie  Lord  have  e.  thy  kingdom 
20.  31.  thou  shall  not  be  e.  nor  tliy  kingdom 
iSam.  5.12.  David  perceived  that  the  L.hud  e.  him 

7.  26.  Lord  is  God  over  Israel,  let  the  house  of  thy 

servant  David  be  e.  for  ever,  lCAro7i.l7. 24. 
1  Kings  2.  12.  and  his  kingdom  was  e.  greatly 
24.  as  the  Lord  livetli,  which  hath  t.  ine 
46.  the  kingdom  was  e.  in  the  hand  of  Solomon 

1  Chron.  17.  23.  let  the  thing  be  e.  for  ever,  24. 
2CArOTi.  1.9.  now, O Lord  God,lettliy  promise  bee. 

12.  1.  when  Rehoboam  had  e.  the  kingdom 
17.  5.  the  Lord  i.  the  kingdom  in  his  hand 
25.  3.  when  the  kingdom  was  e.  to  him,  he  slew 
27.  t  G.  Jutliain  c-  his  ways  before  the  Lord 
30.  5.  BO  they  e.  a  decree  to  keep  the  passover 

Job  21.  8.  their  seed  is  c.  in  tlieir  sight  with  tliem 
38. 1 10.  when  I  e.  my  decree  upon  it,  and  set  bars 

Psal.  24.  2.  for  he  hath  e.  it  upon  the  floods 
37.t23.  the  steps  of  a  good  man  are  c.  by  the  Lord 
40.  2.  he  set  my  feet  on  a  rock,  and  e.  my  goings 
78. 5.  he  e.  a  testimony  in  Jacob,  and  law  in  Israel 
69.  the  earth  he  hath  e.  for  ever,  119.  90. 
93.  1.  the  world  is  e.  ||  2.  thy  throne  is  e.  ofoU 

101.  t  7.  he  that  telleth  lies  shall  not  be  e. 

111.  t  8.  his  commandments  are  s.  for  ever 

112.  8.  his  heart  is  c.  he  shall  not  be  afraid  ' 
140.  11.  let  not  an  evil  speaker  be  c.  in  the  earth 
148.  C.  he  hath  e.  llie  waters  for  ever  and  ever 

Proc.3.19.Lord,by  understand,  hatli  e.the  heavens 
4.  26.  ponder  thy  paths,  and  let  all  thy  ways  be  e. 

8.  28.  when  he  e.  the  clouds  above,  when  he 

12.  3.  man  shall  not  be  c.  by  wickedness 

1.5.  22.  in  nmltitude  of  counsellors  they  are  e. 

16.  12.  for  the  throne  is  e.  by  righteousness 

20. 18.  every  purpose  is  e.  by  counsel,  with  advice 

24.  3.  and  by  understanding  is  a  house  e. 
30.  4.  who  hath  e.  all  the  ends  of  the  earth 

Isa.  7.  9.  if  ye  will  not  believe,  ye  shall  not  be  e. 

16. 5.  and  in  mercy  shall  the  throne  be  e. 

45.  18.  God  that  made  the  carlh,  hchathe.it 
.Ter.  10. 12.  he  e.  the  world  by  his  wisdom,  51. 15. 
Dan.  4.  36.  I  was  e.  in  my  kingdom,  and  majesty 
Hab.  1. 12.  O  mighty  God,  ihoue.  tliem  for  correct, 
wl/ar. 18. 16. moutli  of  two  witnesses  every  word  bef. 
.Jets  16.  5.  so  were  the  churches  e.  in  the  faith 
Rom.  1.  11.  impart  some  gltl,  to  end  you  may  be  e. 
Col.  2.  7.  Kuilt  up  in  him,  and  .<t.  in  the  faith 
Heb.  8.6.  which  was  c.  upon  better  promises 

13.  9.  it  is  good  that  the  heart  be  e.  with  grsce 

2  Pet.  1.  12.  though  ve  be  c.  in  the  present  truth 

Shall  be  ESTABLISHED. 
Lev.  2.5. 30.  house  shall  be  e.  for  ever,  2  Sam.  7. 16. 
Z>cu£.19.15.  at  the  mouth  of  two  or  tliree  witnesses 
shall  the  matter  be  e:  2  Cor.  13. 1. 

1  .Sam.24.  20.  the  kingdom  »Ao/ZAee.  in  thine  hand 

2  .Sam.  7.  16.  thine  house,  thy  kingilom,  and  thy 

throne,  shall  be  e.  for  ever,  1  Kings  2.  45. 

1  Clir.  17.  14.  I  will  settle  him  in  my  kingdom,  and 

his  throne  shall  be  e.  for  evermore,  Psal.  89. 37. 

2  CAr.  20.  20.  believe  in  Lord  God,  so  shall  yebe  «. 
Job  22.  28.  thou  shall  decree,  and  it  shall  be  e. 
Psal.  89.  21.  with  whom  my  hand  shall  be  e. 

96.  10.  the  world  shall  be  e.  before  thee 

102.  28.  and  their  seed  shall  be  e.  before  the« 
Prov.  12.  19.  the  lip  of  truth  shall  be  e.  for  ever 

16.  3.  commit  thy  works,  thy  thoughts  «Aa/{ie  < 

25.  5.  his  throne  shall  be  e.  for  ever,  29.  14. 
Isn.  2.  2.  mountain  of  the  Lord's  house  shall  be  «. 

in.  5.  and  in  mercy  shall  the  throne  bee. 
32.  t  8.  and  by  liberal  things  shall  \k  be  e. 
54.  14.  in  righteousness  shall  thou  be  e. 
Jer.  30.20.  their  congregation  shall  be  e.  before  mo 
..ViV.  4.  1.  mountain  of  house  of  the  Lord  shall  be  e. 
Zcch.  5. 11.  lo  build  ii  n  house,  and  it  shall  be  c. 

ESTABLISHETH. 
jViim.  30. 14.  he  e.  all  her  vows,  or  all  her  bond.i 
I'ror.  211.  4.  the  king  bv  judgment,  ».  the  land 
Dan.  6.  15.  no  decree  tV.o  king  e.  may  bo  changed 
Hab.  2.  12.  woe  lo  him  that  r.  a  city  by  ininuity 
2  C4)r.  1.  21.  now  he  which  e.  us  with  you  in  Christ 

ESTABLISHMENT. 
2  Chron.  32.  1.  after  the  c.  Sennacherib  rnme 
Psal.  89. tl4.  justice  nnd  juilgmeni  aro  the  e.  of  thy 
throne,  mercv  and  truth  before  thee,  97.t9. 
EST.\TK,  STATE. 
Crn.  43.  7.  the  man  asked  us  strailly  ofour  «. 

1  Chron.  17.  17.  lo  the  e.  of  a  man  «f  high  de^cs 

2  Chron.  24.  13.  they  sol  Iho  house  of  (lod  in  hiss, 
Ksth.  1.  7.  according  to  the  .«.  of  the  king 

19.  lat  the  king  givu  her  royal  e.  to  another 


ETE 

Ks/A.2. 18.  gave  gifts  according  to  the  s.  of  the  king 
Job  2'i.  I  20.  whereajs  our  c.  is  not  cut  down 
Fsal.3\).5.evety  man  at  Ins  best  s.aitogetlicr  vanity 
I'M.  '2'3.  wlio  remembered  us  in  our  low  e. 
Prcv.  '27.  '23.  bo  diligent  to  liiiow  the  s.  of  thy  flocks 
'28.  '2.  by  a  man  of  knowledge  s.  shall  be  prolonged 
Keel.  1.  IG.  saying,  lo,  I  am  come  to  great  e. 
'i.  IS.  concerning  the  e.  of  the  eons  of  men 
Isa.  '■a.  19.  from  thy  s.  shall  he  pull  thee  down 
Ezck.  16.  55.  Samaria  shall  return  to  her  former  e. 
Dan.  II.  7.  one  shall  stand  uj)  in  iiis  e.  21. 
20.  then  shall  stand  up  in  his  c.  a  raiser  of  taxes 
3cl.  but  in  his  e.  shall  he  honour  the  God  of  forces 
Mdt.  12.  45.  seven  other  spirits  enter,  the  last  s.  of 
that  man  is  worse  than  tlie  tirst,  l^uke  11.  26. 
Luke  1.48.  hatli  regarded  low  e.  of  his  handmaiden 
Jicls  22.  5.  all  the  e.  of  the  elders  cloth  bear  witness 
horn.  12.  16.  but  condescend  to  men  of  low  e. 
PAi7.2.19. 1  may  beof  comfort  when  I  know  your  s. 
20.  like-minded,  will  naturally  care  for  your  s. 
4. 11.  learned  in  whatsoever  5. 1  am  to  be  content 
Col.  4.  7.  all  my  s.  shall  Tychicus  declare  to  you 

8.  whom  I  sent,  that  he  might  know  your  e. 
Jude  6.  the  angels  wliich  kept  not  their  first  e. 

ESTATES. 
Kzck.  3G.  11.  I  will  settle  you  after  your  old  e. 
Mark  6.  21.  Herod  made  a  supper  to  his  chief  e. 

ESTEEM. 
Job  36.  19.  will  he  e.  thy  riches  ?  no  not  gold 
Psal.  119.  128.  I  e.  all  thy  precepts  to  be  right 
Isa.  53.  4.  we  did  e.  him  smitten  of  God,  afflicted 
Phil.  2.  3.  let  each  e.  other  better  than  themselves 
1  T/iess.5.l3.  to  e.  (hem  highly  for  their  work's  sake 
1  Pet.  '2.  t  !"•  e.  all  men,  love  the  brotherhood 

ESTEEMED. 
Deut.32. 15.  and  lightly  e.  the  rock  of  his  salvation 
1  Sam.  2.  30.  they  that  despise  me  shall  be  lightly  e. 
18.  23.  seeing  I  am  a  poor  man  and  lightly  e. 
Job  23.  12.  I  have  e.  the  words  of  his  mouth  more 
/'roi;.17.'28.6huttethhislip6,is(;.anianof  understao. 
/sa.29.16.your  turning  shall  be  e.as  tlic  potter's  clay 

17.  the  fruitful  field  shall  be  e.  as  a  forest 
53.  3.  he  was  despised,  and  we  c.  him  not 
Lam.  4.  2.  how  are  they  e.  as  earthen  pitchers 
/.uif  10.15.  highly  f.  among  men,  abominable  loG. 

1  Cor.  6.  4-.  set  them  to  jiulgo  who  are  least  e. 

ESTEEMETH. 

Tob  41. 27.  he  e.  iron  as  straw,  brass  as  rotten  wood 

Kom.  14.  5.  one  e.  one  day  above  another ;  another 

e.  every  day  alike 

14.  but  to  him  that  f.  any  thing  to  be  unclean 

ESTEEMING. 

Ileb.  11.  26.  e.  the  reproach  of  Christ  greater  riches 

ESTIMATE. 

Lev  27. 14.  the  priest  shall  e.  it  whether  it  be  good 

or  bad,  as  the  priest  ^hall  e.  it,  so  siiail  it  stand 

ESTIMATION. 

/.«r.5.15.bringaram  withthy  e.  by  shekels  of  silver 

27.  2.  the  persons  shall  be  for  the  Lord,  by  thy  c. 

3.  thy  e.  shall  be  of  the  male  from  20  years,  5. 

TJtis  word  found  often  in  this  Chapter. 

Jfum.  18. 16.  from  a  month  old,  according  to  thy  e. 

2  Lings  12.  t  4.  the  money  of  the  souls  of  his  e. 

ESTIMATIONS. 

Lev.  27.  25.  all  thy  e.  according  to  the  shekel 
ESTRANGED. 

Job  19.  13.  mine  acciuaintance  I'.re  e.  from  me 

Psal.  53.  3.  the  wicked  are  e.  from  the  womb 
78.  30.  they  were  not  c.  from  their  lust 

.Ter.  19.4.  because  they  have  c.  this  place,  and  burnt 

f?zeA.14.5.becauso  they  are  all  e  from  me  thro'  idols 
ETERNAL. 

The  words  eternal,  everlasting,  for  ever,  are 
sometimes  taken  for  a  lon/r  time,  and  arc  not 
always  to  be  understood  strictly ;  fur  example, 
it  is  said,  Gen.  17.  8,  I  will  give  to  thee  and 
to  thy  seed  tlie  land  of  Canaan,  for  an  ever- 
lasting possession.  Jind  in  chap.  13.  15,  I 
will  give  it  to  thee,  and  to  thy  seed  for  ever; 
that  is,  fur  a  long  space  of  time.  Jind  in 
Gen.  49.  26.  we  find  everlasting  hills,  so  called 
to  denote  their  antiquity,  stability,  and  dura- 
tion; and  this  expression  is  used  to  shew  the 
long  continuance  and  durablencss  o/ Joseph's 
blessing.  God  promises  a  tlirone  to  David, 
an  eternal  kingdom,  a  posterity  that  will  never 
be  extinguished;  that  is,  that  his  and  his  sons' 
empire  will  be  of  a  very  long  duration,  OSam. 
7.  16.  1  Chron.  17.  14.  that  it  will  be  even 
eternal,  if  hereby  the  kingdom  uf  the  Messiah 
be  understood.  Thus,  Thoa  siialt  be  our  guide 
from  this  time  forth  even  for  ever,  that  is, 
during  our  whole  life.  Jind  in  many  other 
places  nf  scripture,  and  in  particular,  when 
the  word  for  ever  is  applied  to  the  X<ivi\a\\  rites 
and  privileges,  li  commonly  siirnifies  no  more 
than  during  the  standing  of  that  rnmmon- 
we.alth,  or  until  the  coming  vf  the  Messiah, 
F.xod.  12.  14,  17.  ^'•um.  10.  8. 

Eternity,  when  God  is  the  subject  in  question, 
169 


EVE 

always  denotes  a  real  eternity.  Exod.  15.  18, 
The  Lord  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever.  L)cut. 
32.  40,  1  lilt  uj)  my  hand  to  heaven,  and  say,  I 
live  for  ever.  JJeul.  33.  27,  The  eternal  God  is 
tliy  refuge.  The  blessed  will  enjoy  eternal  life 
and  happiness,  and  reprobates  be  cast  into 
eternal  Jire ;  the  happiness  of  the  one,  and 
misery  of  the  other,  will  never  have  an  end. 
Mat.  '25.  46.  7'Ac  i'orj  of  God  is  eternal  in 
the  highest  sense,  withovl  beginning,  without 
end,  1  Tim.  1.  17.  He  is  called  a  priest  for 
ever  after  the  order  of  Melchiiedek,  Psal.  110. 4. 
His  gospel,  the  everlasting  gospel,  Rev.  14.  6. 
The  samegospel  that  was  from  the  beginning, 
and  besides  which,  there  neither  is,  nor  ever 
shall  be,  any  other  doctrine  of  salvation  re- 
vealed, while  the  world  endurcth.  The  re- 
demption which  he  has  procured  for  us,  is  an 
eternal  redemption,  Heb.  9.  12.  Jts  virtue  is 
of  perpetual  continuance;  such  as  are  redeemed 
from  the  guilt  and  punishment  of  sin,  are  so 
for  ever.  The  Covenant,  or  JVew  Testament, 
which  he  confirmed  by  his  blood,  is  an  everlast- 
ing covenant,  Heb.  13.  20.  It  is  a  covenant 
never  to  be  changed,  as  the  former  was : 
Everlasting  life  is  promised  in  it ;  and  it  is 
of  eternal  ejfficacy.  The  glory  and  reward 
which  he  hath  merited  for  us,  is  an  eternal 
weight  of  glory,  2  Cor.  4.  17.  Everlasting  habi- 
tations, or  tents,  Luke  16. 9.  are  the  habitations 
appointed  by  God  in  heaven  for  the  predesti- 
nated, those  chosen  to  salvation  through  sanc- 
tification  of  the  Spirit,  and  belief  of  the  truth. 
Dent.  33.'27.  the  c.G.  is  thy  refuge,  and  underneath 
Isa.  CO.  15.  I  will  make  thee  an  e.  excellency 
Mark  3.  29.  but  is  in  danger  of  e.  damnation 
Rom.  1.  20.  that  are  made,  even  his  e.  power  and 
Godhead 
2  Cor.  4.  17.  worketh  for  us  an  e.  weight  of  glory 
18.  but  the  things  which  are  not  seen  are  e. 

5.  1.  we  have  a  house  e.  in  the  heavens 
Eph.  3.  11.  according  to  the  e.  purpose  in  Christ 

1  Tim.  1.  17.  unto  the  king  e.  be  honour  and  glory 

2  Ti7n.'2.10.  they  may  obtain  salvation  with  e. glory 
Heb.  5.  9.  he  became  the  author  of  e.  salvation 

6.  2.  the  doctrine  of  baptisms,  and  of  e.  judgment 

9.  12.  having  obtained  e.  redemption  for  us 

14.  who  through  the  e.Spiiit  offered  himself  to  G. 

15.  might  receive  the  promise  of  e.  inheritance 
IPef.  5. 10.  G.  called  us  unto  his  e.  glory  by  Ch.  Jcs. 
Jude  7.an  example, sutlering  the  vengeance  of  e.  fire 

ETERNAL  life. 
J>/a£.  19.16.  what  shall  I  do  that  I  may  have  e.  life! 
25.  46.  but  the  righteous  shall  go  into  life  e. 
Mark  10. 17.  good  Master,  what  shall  I  do,  that  I 
may  inherit  e.  life  ?  Luke  10.  '25.  |  18.  18. 
30.  he  shall  receive  in  the  world  to  come  e.  life 
John  3.  15.  believeth  in  him  should  have  e.  life 

4.  36.  and  gathereth  fruit  unto  life  c. 

5.  39.  searcli  scriptures,  for  in  them  ye  have  c.  life 

6.  54.  whoso  drinketh  my  blood  hath  e.  life. 
C8.to  whom  shall  we  go?  thou  hast  words  oCe.lifc 

10.  '28.  I  give  unto  my  sheep  e.  life,  never  perish 
12.  25.  that  hatelh  his  life,  shall  keep  it  to  e.  life 
17.2.  he  should  give  e./i/e  to  as  many  as  given  hira 

3.  this  is  ii/e  c.that  they  might  know  thee  and  Son 
Jlcts  13. 4S. many  as  were  ordained  to  e.life  believed 
Rom.  2.  7.  to  them  who  seek  for  glory,  e.  life 

5.  '21.  even  so  might  grace  reign  to  c.  life  by  Jesus 

6.  23.  but  tlie  gift  of  G.  is  e.  life  thro'  Jesus  Christ 
1  Tim.  6. 12.  O  man  of  God,  lay  hold  on  e.  life,  19. 
Tit.  1.  2.  in  hope  of  e.  life,  which  God  promised 

3.  7.  be  made  heirs  according  to  the  hojie  of  e.  life 
1  John  1.  2.  e.  life  which  was  with  the  Father 

2.  25.  this  is  the  promise  he  promised,  even  e.  life 

3.  15.  no  murderer  hath  e.  life  abiding  in  him 
5.  11.  the  record  that  God  hath  given  to  us  e.  life 

13.  that  ye  may  know  that  ye  have  e.  life 
20.  this  is  the  true  God,  and  e.  life 
Jude  21.  looking  for  the  morcv  of  Lord  unto  e.  life 
ETERNITY. 

1  Sam.  15.  t  20.  also  the  e.  of  Israel  will  not  lie 
Isa.  57.1.5.  the  high  and  lofty  One  that  inhabitclhe. 
.ler.  10.  1 10.  the  Lord  is  the  true  God,  King  of  e. 
Mic.5.  t  2.  whose  goings  have  been  froln  days  of  e. 

EVANGELIST. 
J)cts  '2^  .S.we  entered  into  the  house  of  Philip  the  c. 

2  Tim.  4. 5.  but  watch  thou,  do  the  work  of  an  «. 
EVANGELISTS. 

Eph.  4.  11.  he  gave  some  apostles  and  some  e. 

EVEN. 
Gen.  19. 1.  there  came  two  angels  to  Sodom  at  e. 
Exod.  12. 18.  on  fourteenth  day  of  the  month  at  e. 
Ifi.C.Moscs  said,ate.  then  shall  ye  know  that  Lord 

12.  at  e.  eat  flesh  ||  13.  at  e.  the  quails  came 
18. 14.  the  people  stand  by  thee  from  morning  to  e. 
30.  8.  and  when  Aaron  lightelh  the  lamps  at  c. 
Lev.  11.  21.  shall  be  unclean  until  c.  25, 27,  28,  31, 
39,  -10.  I  14.  46.  I  15.  5,  6,  7,  &c.  |  17.  15.  | 
22.  6.  1  JVum.  19.  7,  8,  10,  21,  22.  , 

2  A 


EVE 

Lev.23.5.  the  fourteenth  day  of  first  month,  at «.  i» 
the  Lord's  passover,  J^m.  9.  3.  JJeut.  16.  6. 
JVwm.  9. 11.  the  14th  day  of  The  second  month  ate, 
21.  when  the  cloud  abode  from  e.  to  morning 
19. 19.  bathe  himself  in  water,  shall  be  clean  at  e. 
Deut.W.  67.  thou  shalt  say,  would  God  it  were  e, 
Judg.  20.  23.  they  wept  before  the  Lord  till  e. 
26.  they  wept  and  fasted  till  e.  2  Sam.  1.  12. 
21. 2.  the  people  abode  till  c.  before  God  and  w«pt 
Ruth  2.  17.  so  Ruth  gleaned  in  the  field  until  e. 
1  Sam.  20. 5. 1  may  hide  myself  unto  third  day  at  e. 
1  Kings  22.  35.  Ahab  died  at  e.  2  CAroji.  18.  34. 
1  CAr.  23.  30.  praise  the  Lord  every  morning  and  e. 
Ezek.  12.  4.  thou  shalt  go  forth  at  e.  in  their  sight 

7.  in  the  e.I  digged  through  the  w  all  with  my  hand 
24.  18.  I  spake  to  people,  and  at  e.  my  wife  died 

Mat.  8. 16.  when  the  e.  was  come,  20.  8.  |  26.  20. 

I  27.  57.  Mark  4. 35.  |  6.  47.  |  11.  19.  |  15.  42 

Mark  1.32.  at  e.  they  brought  to  him  the  diseased 

13.  35.  at  e.  at  midnight,  or  at  cock-crowing 
.Juhn  6. 16.  when  e.  was  come,  disciples  went  dowa 

EVEN. 
1  Kings  1.48.Bit  on  my  throne,  mine  eyes  e.  seeing  it 
Prov.  22.  19.  I  made  known  lo  thee,  e.  to  thee 
Isa.  44.  28.  e.  saying  to  Jerusa.  thou  shalt  be  built 

56.  5.  e.  to  them  will  I  give  a  name  better  than 
Ezck.  20.  11.  which  if  a  man  do,  he  shall  e.  live 

21.  13.  what  if  the  sword  contemn  e.  the  rod 
Rom.  8.23.  e.  we  ourselves  groan  within  ourselves 
1  Cor.  11.  14.  doth  not  e.  nature  itself  teach  you '' 

15.  24.  deliver,  up  the  kingd.  to  God,  e.  the  Father 
2Cor.l.3.  blessed  be  God,f.  the  Father  of  our  Lord 

10.13.  hath  distributed  a  measure  to  reach  e.to  you 
Phil.".8.  obedient  to  death,  e.  the  death  of  the  crosa 

EVEN. 
Exod.  27.  5.  that  the  net  may  be  e.  to  midst  of  altar 
.Job  31.  6.  let  me  be  weighed  in  an  e.  balance 
Psal.  26.  12.  my  foot  standeth  in  an  e.  place 
CaKt.4.2.  teeth  like  a  flock  of  sheep  that  are  e.shorn 
Luke  19.44.enemies  shall  laythec  c.with  tlie  ground 

EVENING. 
Gen.  8.  11.  and  the  dove  came  in  to  him  in  the  e. 

30.  16.  Jacob  came  out  of  the  field  in  the  e. 
Exod.  12.  6.  assembly  of  Israel  shall  kill  it  in  the  e. 
Dcut.  '23. 11.  but  when  e.  conieth,  shall  wash  hims. 
Josh.  10.26.  they  were  hanging  on  the  trees  until  e. 
Judg.  19.  9.  now  the  day  draweth  toward  e. 
1  Sam.  14.24.  cursed  be  the  man  that  eatelh  till  e. 

.30. 17.  David  smote  them  to  the  e.  of  the  next  day 
Eslh.  2. 14.  in  the  e.  she  went,  and  on  the  morrow 
Job  7.  t4.  when  shall  I  rise,  and  the  e.  be  measured? 
Psal.  59.  6.  they  return  at  e.  they  make  a  noise 
14.  at  e.  let  them  return  and  make  a  noise 

90.  6.  in  the  e.  it  is  cut  down  and  witherelh 

104.  23.  man  goeth  forth  to  his  labour  until  the  e. 
Prov.  7.  9.  he  went  the  way  to  her  house  in  the  e. 
Eccl.  11.  6.  in  the  e.  withhold  not  thine  hand 
.Ter.  6.  4.  the  shadows  of  the  e.  are  stretched  out 
Ezck.  33.  22.  the  hand  of  Lord  was  on  me  in  the  e. 

46.  2.  but  the  gate  shall  not  be  shut  till  the  c. 
Zeph.  2.  7.  in  Ashkelon  shall  they  lie  down  in 

thee. 
Jilat.  14. 23.  when  e.  was  come,  he  was  there  alone 

16.  2.  when  it  is  e.  ye  say,  it  will  be  fair  weather 
Mark  14.  17.  in  the  e.  cometh  with  the  twelve 
Lnkc  '24.  29.  abide  with  us,  for  it  is  toward  e. 
.John  20.19.  the  same  day  at  e.came  Jesus  and  stood 

EVENING  with  morning. 
Gen.  1.  5.  the  e.  and  morning  were  the  first  day 

8.  tlie  second  day  |{  13.  third  day  ||  19.  fourth  day 
23.  the  fifth  day  ||  31.  were  the  sixth  day 

/;TO(i.l8.13.  people  stood  by  Moses  from  mom.toe. 
27.  21.  shall  order  it  from  e.  to  morn.  Lev.  24.  3. 
1  Sam.  17.  16.  Philistine  drew  near  morning  and  e. 
1  Kings  17.  6.  brought  him  bread  morning  and  e, 
1  Chr.  16. 40.  to  offer  burnt-olVerings  morning  and 
e.  2  CAr.  2.  4.  |  13.  11.  |  31.  3.  Ezra  3. 3 
Job  4.  20.  they  are  destroyed  from  morning  to  e. 
Psal.  30.  t  5.  weeping  in  the  c.  joy  in  the  morning 
55.  17.  e.  and  morning,  and  at  noon,  will  I  pray 
65.8.  the  outgoings  of  morning  and  e.  to  rejoice 
I'cin.  8.  t  H-  to  2,300  e.  morning  sanctuary  cleans. 

26.  the  vision  of  the  e.  and  murving  is  true 
Acts  28.  23.  persuading  them  from  morning  to  e. . 
EVENING,  Adjective. 

1  Kings  18.  29.  they  prophesied  till  e.  sacrifice 
^G.  at  the  time  of  the  offering  of  the  e.  sacrifice 

2  Kings  16. 15.  on  great  allar  burn  e.  meat-offering- 
Ezra  9.  4.  I  sat  astonished  until  the  e.  sacrifice 

5.  at  e.  sacrifice  I  arose  from  my  heaviness 
Psal.  141.  2.  let  my  prayer  be  as  the  e.  sacrifice 
/> (771.9.21.  touched  me  about  the  time  of  e.  oblation  ■ 
Hab.  1.  8.  and  are  more  fierce  than  the  e.  wolvei 
Zeph.  3. 3.  her  judges  are  e.  wolves,  they  gnaw  not 
ZccA.14.7.  come  lo  pass,lhat  at  e.  time  shall  be  liglit  •  ' 

EVENINGS. 
Erod.  12.  t6.  shall  kill  it  between  the  two  «. 
JV*U77;.  9. 1 3.  keep  the  passover  between  the  two  a, 
28.  t  4.  offer  the  other  lamb  between  the  two  ik 
Jcr.  5.  6.  and  a  wolf  of  the  t.  shall  spoil  then 


EVE 


EVENT. 
Eccl.  2. 14.  one  c.  happcneiii  to  lliem  all,  9. 3. 

K.  2.  there  is  ono  e.  to  the  righteous  aiiit  wicked 

EVEN-TIDE,  or  EVENLNG-TIDE. 
Ocn.  Hi.  03.  Isaac  went  out  to  meditate  at  the  c. 
Josh.  7.  6.  Joeliua  fell  on  hi«  face  till  the  c. 

8.-9.  and  tlio  king  of  Ai  he  hanged  on  a  tree  till  e. 
2  Sam.  11.  2.  in  an  e.  David  walked  on  tiio  top 
/sa.  17.  14.  behold  at  e.-tide  trouhle,  and  before 
Mark  IJ.  11.  now  the  e.  was  come,  Jesus  went  out 
Jicts  4. 3.  they  put  thcjrn  in  hold,  for  it  was  now  e. 

EVER. 
Lev.  6. 13.  the  fire  shall  c.  be  burning  on  the  altar 
J\ram.  22.  30.  hast  ridden  on,  e.  since  I  was  thine 
JJeut.  4.  33.  did  e.  iieople  hear  the  voice  of  God? 

19.  y.  to  love  Uod,  and  to  walk  e.  in  his  ways 
Jadg.  11.  25.  did  he  c.  fight  against  IsraeH 
1  Kingn  a.  1.  for  Hiram  was  e.  a  lover  of  David 
Job  4.7.reniember,who  e.  perishcd,being  innocent? 
Ps.  5.  11.  tliose  that  trust,  let  them  e.  shout  for  joy 

25.  0.  thy  lender  mercies  have  been  e.  of  old 
15.  mine  eyes  are  f.  towards  Lord,  shall  jiluck 

37.26.  he  is  e.  merciful,  and  lendeth,  seed  blessed 

51. 3.  my  trant^gressions  and  my  sin  is  e.  before  me 

90. 2.  or  e.  thou  hadst  formed  earth,  Prov.  8.  23. 

111.  5.  he  will  c.  be  mindful  of  Ids  covenant 

119.  93.  thy  commandments  are  e.  with  me 
Ciint.6.12.  or  e.  I  was  aware,  my  soul  made  me  like 
Jsa.  28.  28.  because  he  v.ili  not  e.  be  threshing  it 

:13.  20.  not  one  of  the  stakes  shall  c.  be  ftmoved 
i.)an.  6.24.  ore.  they  came  at  the  bottom  of  the  den 
Joel  2.  2.  hath  not  been  e.  the  like  nor  any  more 
Mat.  24.  21.  such  as  was  not,  no,  nor  c.  shall  be 
Mark  15.  8.  to  desire  him  to  do  as  he  had  c.  done 
J.uke  \'>.  31.  and  he  said,  son,  thuii  art  e.  with  me 
Jo^n4.'ii).  a  man  told  me  all  things  that  c.  1  did,  3'J. 

8  35.  servant  abideth  not,  but  the  Son  abideth  e. 

10.  8.  all  that  c.  came  before  me  are  thieves 

18.  20.  I  e.  taught  m  the  synagogue  and  temple 
..Acts  21$.  15.  we,  or  e.  he  come  are  ready  to  kill  him 
Sph.  5.  29.  for  no  man  e.  yet  hated  his'own  flesh 
1  T/icss.  4.  17.  and  so  shall  we  c.  be  with  the  Lord 

5.  15.  but  V.  follow  that  which  is  gootl 
2Tim.  3.  7.  e.  learning,  and  never  able  to  come 
IleL'.  7.  24.  but  this  man,  because  he  continuelh  c. 
25.  seeing  c.  liveth  to  make  interces.sion  for  them 
Jade  25.  to  God  our  Saviour  be  glory,  now  and  e. 
See  Enduretu. 
For  EVER. 
See  Signiftr.dtion  on  Eternal. 

Ocn.  13. 15.  to  iheu  will  I  give  it  and  thy  secd/nre 

43.  9.  then  let  rne  bear  the  blame /ur  c.  44.  32. 

Eutd.'i.ih.  this  is  my  n.ime/ur  c.and  my  memorial 

12.  14.  keep  it  a  feast  by  an  ordinance  for  c.  V 
34.  an  ordinance  to  thee,  and  to  thy  sons/ur  e. 

14.  13.  ye  shall  see  them  again  no  more /ur  c. 
IV).  9.  that  the  people  may  believe  thee/ur  e. 
21.  fi.  bore  his  ear,  and  he  shall  serve  him  fur  e. 
31.  17.  it  is  a  sign  between  me  and  Uta.e.\  for  c. 
32.13.  give  this  land,and  they  shall  inherit  it  for  e. 

Lev.  25.  m.  the  land  shall  not  be  sold  for  e.  i.s  mine 
30.  the  house  shall  be  cstablisheri  f.r  c.  to  him 
46.  they  shall  be  your  bondmen /or  e. 
J^um.  10.  8.  for  an  ordinance /or  t'.  15. 15. 1 18.  8. 
18.  19.  it  is  a  covenant  of  salt /or  e.  unto  thee 
24.  20.  ho  said,  Amalek  shall  jierish/or  e. 

S'l.  shall  afflict  Eber,  he  also  shall  perish  for  c. 
Tieiil.  4. 40.  tho  earth  which  God  giveth  thec/or  c. 
5.  29.  it  might  be  well  with  them  for  e.  12.  28. 

13.  16.  it  shall  be  a  heap  for  e.  not  built  again 

15.  17.  take  an  awl,  he  shall  be  thy  servant /ore. 
18.5.  for  God  hath  chosen  him  and  his  sons /ore. 
23.  0.  thou  shalt  not  seek  their  peace /or  e. 
28.  46.  they  shall  be  upon  thee  for  a  sign  fur  e. 
23.  29.  those  things  revealed  belong  to  ns  for  e. 

Josh.i.1.  these  stones  shall  be  for  a  memorial  /or  c. 

24.  that  ye  might  fear  the  Lord  your  God  fur  c. 

8. 28.  Joshua  burnt  Ai,  and  made  it  a  heap/ore. 

14.9.  the  lan<l  shall  be  thine  inheritance /or  c. 

I  Sam. 1.22.appear  before  the  Eord  and  aliide/or  e. 

2.tM.I  sttid,thy  hoviso  should  walk  lM)fort;  mo/or  c. 

32.  there  shall  not  be  an  old  man  in  house /or  c. 

35.  he  shall  walk  before  mine  Anointed /or  e. 
3.13.  that  I  will  judge  his  house /or  e.  for  iniiiuily 

14.  iniquity  of  Kh's  house  shall  not  be  purged /.c. 
20.  15.  thou  shall  not  cut  off  thy  kindness /or  e. 

23.  the  Lord  be  between  thoo  and  me  for  e.  42. 
5J7.  12.  Iherrforo  ho  shall  bo  my  servant /or  c. 
28.2.1  will  make  thee  keeper  of  mine  head /or /■. 
2Sani.2.26.Abner  said,shall  the  sword  devour/.r.? 
3.28.  I  and  my  kingd.  are  giiiltltws  b(-fiiro  L./o/ 
7.  24.  thou  hast  confirmed  Israel  to  thco /or  e. 

26.  and  let  thy  name  be  magnified  for  e. 

29.  that  his  house  may  continue/or  cbefore  thee 
JKinff>lKV^■  settled  place  for  thee  to  abide  in/ore. 
9.  3.  this  house  built,  to  put  my  name  there /or  c. 

10.9. because  the  Lord  loved  Israel /or  (.therefore 

11.  39.  I  wdl  alTlicl  David's  seed,  iiut  nol/,r  c. 

12.  7.  Ihey  will  he  thy  servants /or  «.  2CAr.  10.  7. 
2  A'in"*  5^27.  leprosy  cleave  to  tlico  and  i»iL<\for  c. 

170 


EVE 

1  Chron.  17.22.  didst  thou  make  thine  own /or  e. 
23. 13.  he  and  sons/or  c.  to  burn  incense  before  L. 

28.  y.  if  forsake  him,  he  will  cast  thee  off  J'ore. 

29.  18.  O  Lord  God  of  Israel,  keep  this  fur  e. 

2  Chron.  7.  16.  that  my  name  may  be  there /or  e. 

21. 7.  he  promised  to  give  a  light  to  his  sum  fur  c. 

30.8.  his  sanctuary  which  he  liath  sanctitied  for  c. 
33.  4.  in  Jerusalem  shall  my  name  be /or  e. 

.'V<  A.13.1.  not  come  into  congregation  of  God/or  c. 

Job  4.20.  theyperish/ore.without  any  regarding  it 
J4.20.thou  pievailest /or  c.ag.him,  and  he  passelh 
19. 24.  graven  on  with  iron  pen  in  the  rock /ore. 

20.  7.  yet  bo  shall  perish /or  c.  like  his  own  dung 
23.  7.  so  should  1  be  delivered/or  c.  from  my  judge 

36.  7.  yea  he  doth  establish  them /or  e. 
Psal.  9.  7.  but  the  Lord  shall  endure /or  e. 

18.  tlie  expectation  of  poor  shall  not  perish /or  e. 

12.  7.  O  Lord,  thou  shalt  j)reoerve  them /or  c. 

13.  1.  how  long  wilt  thou  forget  mo,  O  h.  fur  eJ 

19. 9.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  clean,  enduring  for  c. 

21.  6.  thou  hast  made  him  most  blessed /or  c. 
23. 6.  I  will  dwell  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  fur  c. 

28.  9.  feed  them  also,  and  lift  tliem  up /or  e. 

29.  10.  yea  the  Lord  sitleth  king /or  c. 

30.  12.  1  will  give  thanks  to  thee /or  e.  79.  13. 
33.  11.  the  counsel  of  the  Lord  standetli/o»-  e. 

37.  18.  and  their  inheritance  shall  be /or  e. 

28.  and  his  saints  are  preserved /or  e. 

29.  the  righteous  shall  dwell  in  the  land /or  e. 
41. 12.  thou  settest  me  before  thy  face /or  e. 

44.  8.  and  we  praise  thy  name /or  e.  Selah 
23.  awake,  O  Lord,  arise,  cast  us  not  oft" /or  e. 

45.  2.  therefore  God  halh  blessed  thee /or  c 
49.8.for  the  redemption  of  their  soul  ceasclh/orc. 

11.  thought  is,  that  thetr  houses  continue  for  e. 
Si.  5.  God  shall  hkewise  destroy  thee  for  c 

9. 1  will  praise  thce/or  e.  I  will  wait  on  thy  name 
01.  4.  I  will  abide  in  thy  tabernacle /or  e. 

7.  he  shall  abide  before  God /or  e.  prepare  mercy 

8.  1  will  sing  praise  unto  thy  name /or  c. 
60.  7.  he  rulelh  by  his  power /or  c. 
68.  16.  yea  the  Lord  will  dwell  in  ii  for  e. 

72.  17.  ills  name  shall  endure /or  e.  be  continued 

19.  and  blessed  be  his  glorious  name /or  e. 

73.  20.  hut  God  is  my  strength  and  portion  fur  e. 

74.  1.  O  God,  why  hast  thou  cast  us  oil'  fur  e.7 
10.  shall  the  enemy  blaspheme  thy  name /or  c.  ? 
19.  forgot  not  the  eorigregiitionof  thy  poor /ore. 

75.  y.  I  will  declare/ore.  1  will  sing  praises  to  God 
77.  7.  will  L.  cast  oft" /or  e.?  favourable  no  more? 

8.  is  mercy  clean  gone/or  c.?  doth  promise  fnil  ? 
79. 5.  how  long.  Lord,  wilt  thou  be  angry  1  for  e.7 
81.  J.),  but  their  time  should  have. endured /or  c 
83.  17.  let  them  be  confounded  and  troubled/or  c. 
85.  5.  wilt  thou  be  angry  with  us /or  c.  ? 
89. 1.  I  will  sing  of  the  mercies  of  the  Lord  for  c. 

2.  I  have  said,  mercy  shall  be  built  up /or  e. 

29.  his  seed  also  will  I  make  to  endure /or  e.  36, 

46.  how  long  wilt  thou  hide  ihysell?  for  c.? 
92.  7.  it  is  that  they  shall  be  destroyed  for  e. 
9:t.5.  holiness  bocometh  thine  house,  O  L./or  c 
J0.3.  9.  neither  will  he  keep  his  anger /or  c. 
105.  8.  he  hath  remembered  his  covenant/or  e. 
ilO.  4.  thou  ait  a  priest  for  e.  after  the  order  of 
Mclchizedek,  Hcb.  5.  6.  |  6.  20.  ]  7.  17,  21. 
111.9.  he  hath  commanded  his  covenant /or  e. 
J 12.  6.  surely  he  shall  not  be  moved /or  c. 
1 19.  Wt./or  e.  O  Lord,lliy  word  is  scuttled  in  heaven 
12.'>.2.  from  henceforth  even/or  c.  131. 3.  Isa.  9.7. 
i;>2.  14.  this  is  my  rest  for  e.  here  will  I  dwell 
146.  6.  the  Lord  who  keepeth  truth /or  e. 

10.  the  Lord  shall  reign  jfor  r.  even  thy  God 
Prov.  27.  24.  for  riches  are  not /or  e. 
Keel.  2.16. no  remernbr.of  wisemoretlian  fool/ore. 
3.  14.  w  hatsoever  God  doth,  it  shall  ho  for  r. 
9.6.nor  have  they  more  a  portion  for«.iii  any  thing 
Isn.  26.  4.  trust  ye  in  Lord /ore.  fi)r  in  L.  Jehoviii 
32. n.ofriglileousn.cpiietness, and  assurance/ore. 
34.  10.  the  smoke  thereof  shall  go  up /or  e. 

17.  shall  possess  it/or  e.from  generation  togener. 
40.  8.  but  the  woril  of  our  God  shall  stand /ore. 
47.  7.  and  thou  saidst,  I  shall  bo  a  lady /or  e. 
51. fi.but  my  salvation  shall  be/ore.  and  righteous 

8.  bill  111  v'ri;;lileoiisi)ess  shall  be /ore.  andsnlval. 
57. 16.  will  not  contend/or  e.  nor  be  always  wroth 
.59.  21.  and  my  words  shall  not  depart /or  e. 
60.  21.  thy  people  shall  inherit  the  land  for  r. 
64.  9.  be  not  wroth  nor  remember  iniipiily/or  e 
65. 18.  be  glad  and  rejoice /or  e.  in  what  I  create 
Jer.  3.  5.  will  ho  reserve  his  anger /or  e.l 

12.  I  am  merciful,  I  will  not  keep  aiigiT/or  e. 

17.  4.  yo  kindle  a  fire  which  shall  burn  for  r. 

25.  Jerusalem  and  this  city  shall  remain /or  e. 

31.  40.  it  shall  not  be  plucked  up  anv  more /ore 

32.  :!9.  give  ono  heart  tlml  they  may  tear  me/ore. 
35.  6.  Jonadab  said,  yo  shall  drink  no  wine /or  t. 

19. Jonadab  shall  not  want  a  man  before  me/ore. 
49.:t3.IIuzorbe  fordriigoiis  and  n  desolnlion/orr. 
.50. :«).  shall  bo  no  more  inhiibiled ./"or  e.  51. 26, 62 
Lam.  3.  31.  for  the  Lord  will  not  cast  ofl"/or  e. 


EVE 

Lam.  5. 19.  thou,  OL.  remainost  for  e.  thy  throDf 

20.  wherefore  dost  thou  forget  us/or  e..' 
Ezek.  37.25.  they  and  iheir  cbildr.  shall  dwell /or  t 

and  ray  servant  David  shall  be  their  prince/or  < 
43.  7.  1  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  Israel  Jor  e.  U 

Dan.  2.  44.  but  his  kingdom  shall  stand /or  e. 
4.:?4. 1  praised  and  honoured  him  that  liveth/or  e 
6.26.  G.of  Daniel, he  is  living  CJ.and  sledfast/or  e 
7.18.  saints  of  most  High  shall  possess  kingd./ors. 
12. 7.  and  sware  by  him  that  livelh  for  e. 

//o«.2.19.I  w  ill  betroth  thee  unto  me  for  e.  in  right. 

Joci  3.20.  but  Jud.  shall  dwell/ore.  and  Jerusalem 

Jlmos  l.ll.Edomcastoif  pity  and  kept  wrath/ore. 

Obad.  10.  Edoin,  thou  shalt  be  cut  off/or  c. 

.lonak  2.6.  earth  with  her  bars  was  about  me  for  e. 

Mic.  2.  9.  ye  have  taken  away  my  glory  for  e. 
4.  7.  and  the  Lord  shall  reign  over  them /or  c. 
7. 18.  retaiiieth  not  anger /or  c.  delights  in  mercy 

JUal.  1.  4.  against  w  hom  L.  hath  indignation/or  e. 

Mat.  0. 13.  lor  thine  is  the  power  and  glory /or  e. 
21. 19.  no  fruit  grow  on  thee /or  e.  Mark  11.  14 

Luke  1.  33.  and  he  shall  reign  over  Jacob /or  c. 
55.  ns  he  spake  to  Abraham  and  his  seed  for  e 

John  8.  35.  servant  abideth  not  in  the  house /or  » 

12.  34.  we  have  heard  that  Christ  abideth  for  e. 
14.  16.  tlie  Comforter  may  abide  with  you /or  e. 

Rom.  1.25.  more  than  Creator,  who  is  blessed /or  e. 

9.  5.  Clirist,  w  ho  is  over  all,  God  blessed  fur  c. 

11.  36.  to  whom  be  glory /o?'  e.  amen,  16.  27. 
2  Cor.  9.  9.  his  righteousness  remaineth/or  c. 
Philem.  15.  that  thou sliouldest  receive  him/or  c 
Uch.  10.  12./or  e.  sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  G. 
14.  he  perfected /or  c.  them  that  are  sanctified 

13.  8.  Jesus  Christ,  the  same  to-day  and /or  c. 

1  Pet.  1.  23.  the  word  of  God,  which  liveth /or  e. 
2).  but  the  word  of  the  Lord  cndureth /or  e. 

2  Pet.  2.  17.  are  clouds  carried  with  a  tempest,  to 
whom  mist ofdarknessisreserved /ore.  JudeXi. 

2,/oA;i2.for  truth's  sake  which  shall  be  with  ue/ore. 
i'ec  Establish,  Estaclished. 
Live  for  EVER. 
f?e7(.  3.  22.  lest  he  eat  of  tree  of  life  and  live  for  e. 
Dcvt.  32.40. 1  lift  up  my  hand  and  say,  1  lice  for  e 
\  Kings  1.31.said,lelmy  lord  king  David  lice  for  e. 
jVcA.  2.  3.  1  said  to  the  king,  let  the  king  lice  for  e. 
/'s.22.26.  praise  the  L.  your  hearts  shall  lice  fore 
49.  9.  that  he  should  still  live  for  c.  not  see 
Van.  2.  4.  O  king,  live  for  e.  3.  9.  |  5. 10.  ]  6.  6,21. 
Zech.  1.  5.  and  the  prophets,  do  they  live  for  e.  ' 
John  6.51. 1  am  the  living  bread  from  heaven,  if  any 
man  eat  of  this  bread  he  shall  live  fur  e.  58. 
For  EVER  and  EVER. 
F.xod.  15.  18.  the  Lord  shall  reign /or  e.  and  c. 
1  Chron.  16.  36.  blessefl  be  God/or  c.  and  e.  peop'o 
said  amen,  and  praised  Lord,  29. 10.  Dan.  2.  20 
JVeA.  9.  .5.  bless  the  Lord  your  God  fur  e.  and  e. 
Psal.  9..5.  thou  hiist  put  out  their  name/ore.  andc 
M).  16.  the  Lord  is  king /or  e.  and  c.  the  healhcu 

21.  4.  thou  gavesthim  length  of  days /ore.  and  e. 
45.  6.  thy  throne,  O  God,  is /or  c.  and  e. 

17.  Ihe  people  shall  pr.iise  thee /or  e.  and  e. 

4S.  14.  for  this  God  is  our  God  for  c.  and  e. 

.52.  8.  I  trust  in  the  mercy  of  God /or  e.  avd  e 

n  1.8.  they  sland  fust  fur  c.  avd  e.  are  done  in  truth 

119.  44.  so  shall  I  keep  thy  law /or  e.  and  e. 

145.  1.  and  I  will  bless  thy  name /or  c.  and  r. 
2.  and  I  will  praise  thy  name /or  e.  and  c.  21. 

148.  6.  he  halh  also  i^slalilislied  them  for  c.  aiiU  e. 
lsa.30.S.lhatitmay  bcfor  tiinetorome,/orr.i2ndc. 

;{4.  10.  none  shall  pass  through  it  for  e.  and  e. 
Jer.  7.  7.  dwell  in  the  land  that  I  gave/or  c.  and  e. 

25.5.  L.  given  to  you  and  your  fai  hers /ore.  andc. 
Dan.  7.  18.  shall  possess  the  kingdom /or  e.  and  e. 

12. 3.  they  shall  shine  ns  the  stars, for  e.  and  e. 
Mic.  4.5.  will  walk  in  the  name  of  G.  for  e.  and  e. 
Oal.  1.  5.  of  God,  to  whom  be  glorv /or  c.  and  c. 
Phil.  4.20.  1  Tim.  1 .  17.  2  7'im:  4.  iS.  Hrb.  13.21. 
//eA.1.8.  he  saitli,thy  throne, ()  God,  is  for  e.  ande. 
Rev.  4. 9.  to  him  that  sat  on  tho  thronif,  who  liveth 
for  c.  and  c.  10.  |  5.  14.  |  10.  6.  )  1.5.  7. 

5.  13.  and  honour  be  to  the  Lamb/or  r.  and  e. 

7.  12.  and  power  be  unto  our  (Jod/or  e.  and  e. 

11.  15.  and  Christ  shall  reign /or  f.  and  e. 

14.  11.  the  smoke  aseendi'lh /or  e.  ande.  10.  3. 

20.10.  shall  he  torment,  day  and  night/or  e.andc. 

22.  5.  and  Ihey  shall  reign  for  r.  and  e. 
Statute  for  EVER. 

F.xod.  27. 21.  it  shall  be  a  .otatutc  for  e.28.  43.  |  30 
21.  y.ri'.  6. 18.  I  10.  9.  I  17.  7.  I  23.  14,  21,  31, 
41.  I  24.3.  JViini.  18.23. 
29.  28.  It  shall  be  a  .statute  for  e.  Lev.  7.  34,  36. 
I  10.  1.5.  I  16.31.  A-fim.  18.11,10 
/.er.  0.  22.  it  is  a  utalute  for  r.  unto  the  Lord 
JVum.  19.  10.  to  the  slrnnper  for  n  statute  for  e 
EVERLASTING. 
See  Sigvilictttion  on  Etkrnal. 
Ocn.  17.8.  land  of  Ciinaiin  for  an  e.  possess.  48. 4 

21.  33.  the  e.  God,  fsn.  40.  28.  Rom.  16.  26. 
■19.  26.  lo  the  utmost  hound  of  the  e.  hills 

Ezod.  40.  15.  an  e.  priesthood,  A''«jn.  25.  13. 


EVE 

Lev.  16. 34.  be  an  e.  statute  ||  Dcut.  33.  Si7.  e.  arms 
P«.24.  7.  be  lift  up,  ye  e.  doors,  9.  ||  100. 5.  mercy  e. 
H2.  6.  the  righieous  shalJ  be  in  e.  remembrance 
119. 142.  thy  righteousness  is  an  c.  righteous.  144. 
139.  24.  searcli  me,  O  God,  and  lead  me  in  way  e. 
lia.  13.  thy  kingdom  is  an  e.  kingdom,  dominion 
thro'  all  general.  Dan.  4.  3.  J  7.  27.  2  Pet.  1. 11'. 
Prov.  10.25.  but  the  righteous  is  an  e.  foundation 
Jsa.  9.  6.  his  name  shall  be  called,  the  e.  Father 
26  4.  in  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  e.  strength 
33  14  wno  among  us  shall  dwell  with  e.  burnings'? 
35.  10.  thevshal'  come  with  e.  joy,  51.  11.  |  61.7. 
45.17.  wifn  an  e.  salvation  ||  54.8.  with  e.  kindness 
55.  13.  for  an  e.  sisn  {|  56.  5.  an  e.  name,  63.  12. 
60.  19.  the  L.  shall' be  unto  thee  an  e.  light,  20. 
Jcr.  10. 10.  God  is  an  e.  King  ||  20. 11.  e.  confusion 
23.  40.  I  will  bring  an  e.  reproach  upon  you 
31.  3.  yea  I  have  loved  thee  with  an  e.  love 
51.  126.  but  thou  shall  be  e.  desolations 
Dan.  4.  34.  whose  dominion  is  an  e.  domin.  7. 14. 
Mab.  3.  6.  the  e.  mountains  were  scattered 
JUat.  18.  8.  to  be  cast  into  e.  fire,  25,  41. 
25.  46.  these  shall  go  away  into  e.  punishment 
Lulce  16.9.  they  may  receive  you  into  c.habitations 
"  T/tess.  1.  9.  who  shall  be  punish,  with  e.  destruct. 
2.  16.  loved  us,  and  hath  given  us  e.  consolation 
1  Tim.  6.  16.  to  whom  be  honour  and  power  e. 
Jude  6.  the  angels  he  hath  reserved  in  e.  chains 
Rev.  14.  6.  having  the  e.  gospel  to  preach  to  them 
.See  Covenant. 
From  EVERLASTING. 
Ps.  41.13.  blessed  be  G.from  e.  to  everlast.  106.  48. 
90.  2.  even/rom  e.  to  everlasting  thou  art  God 
93.  2.  thy  throne  is  of  old,  thou  a.rt  from  e. 
103.17.  but  the  mercy  of  the  Ld.  lafrom  e.  to  ever. 
Prov.8.i3.l  was  set  up  from  e.or  ever  the  earth  was 
Isa.  63.  16.  O  Lord,  thy  name  \3fr0m  e. 
Mic.  5.  2.  whose  goings  forth  have  been  from  e. 
Hah.  1. 12.  art  thou  not  from  e.  O  Lord  my  God? 

EVERLASTING  life. 
Z)o7i.l2.2.awake,some  to  e.life,some  to  everlasting 
Mat.  19.  29.  and  shall  inherit  e.  life  [shame 

Lake  18.  30.  and  in  the  world  to  come  c.  life 
John  3. 16.  whoso  believeth  should  have  e.  life,  36. 
4. 14.  in  him  a  well  of  Water  springing  up  to  e.  life 
5.  24.  he  that  heareth  my  words  hath  e.  life 
6.27.  labour  for  the  meat  which  enduieth  to  e.  life 
40.  every  one  who  seeth  the  Son  may  have  e.  life 
47.  he  that  believeth  on  me  hath  e.  life 

12.  50. 1  know  that  his  commandment  is  life  e. 
.ffcts  13.  46.  judge  yourselves  unworthy  of  c.  life 
7iom.6.22.being  free  from  sin,ye  have  the  end  e.  life 
Oal.6.S.  soweth  to  Spirit,  shall  of  Spirit  reap  life  e. 

1  7'm.l.l6.Ehould  hereafter  believe  on  him  to /i/ee. 

EVERMORE. 
Deut.  28.29.  thou  shall  be  oppressed  and  spoiled  c. 

2  Sam.  22.  51.  he  sheweth  mercy  unto  David  e. 
2  Kings  17.  37.  ye  shall  observe  to  do  for  e. 

1  Chr.  17. 14.  his  throne  shall  be  established  for  e. 
Ps.  16.11.  at  right  hand  there  are  pleasures  for  e. 

13.  50.  sheweth  mercy  to  David  and  his  seed  for  e. 
37.27.  depart  from  evil,  do  good,  and  dwell  for  e. 
77.  8.  is  mercy  gone  1  doth  his  promise  fail  for  e.? 
86.  12.  I  will  praise  and  glorify  thy  name  for  e. 
89.  28.  my  mercy  will  I  keep  for  him  for  e. 

52.  blessed  be  the  Lord  for  e.  amen  and  amen 

92.  8.  but  thou.  Lord,  art  most  high  for  c. 

105.  4.  seek  the  Lord,  seek  his  face  c. 

108.  31.  was  counted  to  him  for  righteousn.  for  e. 

113.  2.  blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord  for  e. 

115.  18.  but  we  will  bless  the  Lord  for  e. 

121.  8.  L.  preserve  thy  going  out  and  coming  in  e. 

132. 12.  their  children  shall  sit  upon  throne  for  e. 

133.  3.  Lord  commanded  the  blessing,  life  for  e. 

Ezek.  37.  26.  I  will  make  a  covenant  and  will  set 

my  sanctuary  in  the  midst  of  them  for  c.  28. 

JohnG.^i-  said  to.Iesus,  Lord,  e.  give  us  this  bread 

2  Cor.  11.31.  the  Father  of  our  Lord  blessed  fore. 
1  Thess.  5.  16.  rejoice  e.  pray  without  ceasing 
tfeb.  7.  1 25.  he  is  able  also  to  save  them  e. 

28.  maketh  the  Son,  who  is  consecrated  for  e. 
Rev.  1.  18.  was  dead,  behold,  I  am  alive  for  e. 

EVERY. 
Gen.  6.  5.  e.  imagination  of  his  heart  was  evil 
17.  10.  e.  man-child  shall  be  circumcised 
Lev.  19.10.  nor  shall  gather  e.  grape  of  thy  vineyard 
J^Tum.  5. 2.  that  they  put  out  of  the  camp  e.  leper 
1  Sam.  3. 18.  Samuel  told  him  e.  whit,  hid  nothing 
Psal.  119.  101.  I  have  refrained  from  e.  evil  way 

104.  therefore  I  hate  e.  false  way,  128. 
Prov.  2. 9.  then  shall  tliou  understand  e.  good  path 
7. 12.  now  in  streets,  she  lieth  in  wait  at  e.  corner 
1415  the  simple  believeth  e.  word, but  prudent  man 
15.  3.  the  eyes  of  the  Ld.  are  in  e.  place,  beholding 
20. 3.  cease  from  strife,but  e.fool  will  be  meddling 
30.  5.  e.  word  of  God  is  pure,  he  is  a  shield 
Jsa  45. 23.  e.  knee  shall  bow,  e.  tongue  shall  swear 
Jcr.  51.29.  e.  purpose  of  the  Ld.  shall  be  performed 
JEiet.12.23.  days  at  hand,  and  the  effect  off.  vision 
Dan.  11.  36.  and  magnify  himself  above  e.  god 
171 


EVI 

ZecA.  12. 12.  the  land  shall  mourn,  e.  family  apart 
Mai.  1.11.  in  e.  place  incense  be  ottered  to  my  name 
JHa(.4.4.  but  by  e.  word  that  proceedeth  from  God 

19.  3.  for  a  man  to  put  away  his  wife  for  «.  cause 
Mark  1.  45.  they  came  to  him  from  c.  quarter 
Luke  4.  'Si.  the  fame  of  him  went  into  e.  place 

6.  44.  for  e.  tree  is  known  by  his  own  fruit 
yJcts  2.43.and  fear  came  upon  e. soul, wonders  done 

15.  21.  Moses  hath  in  c.  city  them  that  preach  him 
Rom.li.ll.  c.knee  shall  bow,e.tongue  shall  confess 

1  Cor.  4.  17.  as  I  teach  e.  where  in  e.  church 

2  Cor.  10.  5.  bringing  into  captivity  e.  thought 
Eph.  1.21.  far  above  e.  name  named,  Phil.  2.  9. 

4. 16.  e.  joint  suppUeth,  in  the  measure  of  e.  part 
Phil.  4.  21.  salute  e.  saint  in  Christ  Jesus 

1  Tim.  4.4.  for  e.  creature  of  God  is  good  if  received 

2  Tim.  2.  21.  and  prepared  unto  c.  good  work 
Heb.  12.  1.  let  us  lay  aside  e.  weight,  and  the  sin 
.Tarn.  1.  17.  e.  good  and  perfect  gilt  is  from  above 
1  Pet.  2.  13.  submit  to  e.  ordinance  of  man  for  Lord 
1  John 4.1.  beloved, beUeve  not  e.  spiril,but  try  spir. 
See  Beast,  City,  Day,  Man,  Morning,  Way, 

Side,  Thing. 

EVERY  one. 
Gen.  4. 14.  that  e.  one  that  findeth  me  shall  slay  me 
27.  29.  cursed  be  e.  one  tliat  curseth  thee,  blessed 
JV"itm.l6.3.all  congregation  are  holy,  e.  one  of  them 
Deut.  4.  4.  ye  are  aUve  e.  one  of  you  this  day 

1  Kings  22.  28.  hearken,  O  people,  c.  one  of  you 

2  Kings  18. 31.  and  then  eat  ye  e.  oneof  his  fig-tree 
2  Chron.  30. 18.  saying,  the  good  Lord  pardon  cone 
Ezra  3.5.  of  e.  one  that  willingly  oftered  an  otferint 

9.  4.  were  assembled  to  me  c.  one  that  trembled 
JbJ  40.11. behold  e.  one  that  is  proud,and  abase  him 
12. look  one.  07ie  that  is  proud,  and  bring  him  low 
Psal.  29.  9.  in  temple  e.  one  doth  speak  of  his  glory 
32.  6.  for  this  shall  e.  one  that  is  godly  pray 
49.  1 14.  grave  a  habitation  for  e.  one  of  them 
63.  11.  e.  one  that  sweareth  by  him  shall  glory     I 
68.  30.  till  e.  one  submit  himself  with  silver 
71.  18.  and  thy  power  to  e.  one  that  is  to  come 
115.8.  so  js  e.  one  that  trusleth  in  them,  135.  18. 
119.160.  e!o;(eof  thy  judgments  endureth  for  ever 
128.  1.  blessed  is  e.  one  that  feareth  the  Lord 
Keel.  10.  3.  he  saith  to  e.  one  that  he  is  a  fool 
Cant.  4.  2.  whereof  c.  one  beareth  twins,  6.  6. 
/5a.7.22.  honey  shall  e.  one  eat  that  is  left  in  the  land 

9. 17.  for  e.  one  is  a  hypocrite  and  an  evil  doer 
34. 15.  vultures  be  gathered,  c.  one  with  herniate 
43.  7.  even  e.  one  that  is  called  by  my  name 
55. 1.  ho,  c.  one  that  thirstcth,  come  to  the  waters 

.Jer.  5.6.  e.  one  that  goeth  out  shall  be  torn  in  pieces 
8.  e.  one  neighed  after  his  neighbour's  wife 
6.  13.  for  e.  one  is  given  to  covetousness 

20.  7.  I  am  in  derision  daily,  e.  one  mocketh  me 
25.  5.  turn  ye  now  e.  one  from  his  evil  way 

EzeA-.7.16.  all  of  them  mourning,  e.  one  for  iniquity 
16.25.  hast  opened  thy  feet  to  e.  owe  that  passed  by 
22.  6.  behold  e.  one  were  in  thee  to  shed  blood 
Dan.  12. 1.  e.  one  that  be  found  written  in  the  book 
Joel  2.  7.  they  shall  march  e.  one  on  his  ways 
Zech.  5.  3.  for  e.  one  that  stealeth  shall  be  cut  off 
Mat.l.B.  e.  one  that  asketh,  receivelli,  /.w/ce  11.10. 
JV/ar/£  7.14.said  to  them,liearken  to  me,e.o?(£  of  you 
Luke  19.  26.  to  e.  one  which  hath,  shall  be  given 
John  3.  8.  so  is  e.  one  that  is  born  of  the  Spirit 
18.37.  c.  one  that  is  of  the  truth  heareth  my  voice 
Jlcts  2.  38.  repent,  and  be  baptized  e.  one  of  you 
17.  27.  though  he  be  not  far  from  e.  one  of  us 
20.  31. 1  ceased  not  to  warn  e.  o?ie  night  and  day 
Rom.l4.12.e.or!e  shall  give  account  of  himself  to  G. 
1  Cor.  7. 17.  as  ihe  Lord  hath  called  e.  one,  so  walk 
Gnl.  3.  10.  cursed  is  c.  one  that  continuetli  not 
2Tim.2. 19.  e.  onethat  nameih  the  name  of  Christ 
1  'Tohn  4.  7.  e.  one  that  lovelh  is  born  of  God 
Tiev.  6.11.  white  robes  were  given  to  e.  one  of  them 

EVERY  where. 
1  Chr.  13.  2.  send  abroad  to  our  brethren  e.  where 
Mark  16.20.  they  went  forth  and  preached  c.  where 
lAike  9. 6.  preaching  the  gospel  e.  where,  .^cls  8.4 
Mcts  17.30.  commanding  all  men  c.  where  to  repent 
28.  22.  we  know  it  is  e.  where  spoken  against 
1  Cor.  4. 17.  as  I  teach  e.  where  in  every  church 
Phil.  4.  12.  e.  where,  and  in  all  things  instructed 
\Tim.  2.  8. 1  will  therefore  that  men  pray  e.  where 

EVIDENCE. 
Jer.  32.  10.  I  subscribed  the  c.  and  sealed  it 
]  1.  so  I  took  the  e.  ||  12. 1  gave  the  c.  to  Baruch 

14.  this  e.  both  which  is  sealed,  and  this  e.  open 
16.  when  I  delivered  Ihe  c.  of  the  purchase 

Heb.  11.  1.  faith  is  the  e.  of  Ihinss  not  seen 

EVIDENCES." 
Jcr.  32.  14.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  take  these  e. 
44. men  shall  buy  fields  for  money  and  subscribe  e. 
EVIDENT. 
.Toh  6.  2f .  look  upon  me,  for  it  is  e.  to  you  if  I  lie 
(7(7;.3. 11.  thatno  man  is  justified  by  the  law  is  e. 
PA17.1.28.  which  is  to  them  an  e.  token  of  perdition 
Hch.  7.  14.  it  is  e.  our  Lord  sprung  out  of  Judah 

15.  aud  it  is  yet  far  more  e.  for  that  after  Melchis 


EVI 

EVIDENTLY. 

Jlcts  10.  3.  Cornelius  saw  in  a  vision  e.  an  ang*;! 
Gai.3.1.Je3us  Christ  hath  been  c.set  forth  crucified 

EVIL. 
Evil  is  taken  for  sin  and  wickedness  :  thus  it  is 
said  of  the  wicked  kings  of  Israel,  that  thejf 
did  evil  in  the  sight  ol  the  Lord,  they  trans- 
gressed his  taw,  1  Kings  16.  25,  30.  ^nd  in 
Eccl.  9.  3,  The  heart  of  the  sons  of  men  is 
full  of  evil.  This  is  criminal  or  moral  evil. 
/(  is  likeioise  taken  for  afflictions  or  punish- 
ments which  God  ivjiicts  upon  a  person  or 
people,  ilpb  2.  10,  Shall  we  receive  good  at 
tlie  handij^God,  and  shall  we  not  receive  evil? 
Isa.  45.  '7,  I  make  peace  and  create  evil. 
.'Imos  3.  6,  Shall  there  bo  evil  in  a  city,  and 
the  Lord  hath  not  done  if?  This  is  the  evil 
of  punishment,  or  penal  evil.  It  is  also  taken 
for  injuries  or  wrongs  done  by  one  man  to 
another.  Prov.  17.  13,  Wlioso  rewardeth  evil 
for  good,  evil  shall  not  depart  from  his  house. 
Mat.  5.  39,  But  I  say  unto  you  that  ye  resist 
not  evil.  It  is  put  for  dangers  or  calamities, 
Prov.  22.  3,  A  prudent  man  foiesecth  the  evil, 
and  hidctli  himself.  He  sees  public  calamities 
approaching,  and  uses  all  lawful  means  to 
secure  himself.  It  is  taken  both  for  corporeal 
and  spiritual  evil,  of  sin  and  suffering.  Mat. 
6.  13,  Deliver  us  from  evil. 
It  is  said,  Mat.  5. 37,  Let  vour  communication  be 
yea,  yea;  nay,  nay;  for  whatsoever  is  more 
than  these  cometh  of  evil ;  that  is,  Let  your 
discourse  be  confirmed  with  a  bare  affirmation 
or  denial  only ;  for  whatsoever  is  more  than 
these  proceedeth  from  an  evil  habit,  or  some 
such  principle;  and  most  commonly  from  the 
devil,  that  wicked  one,  who  is  evil  in  the  high- 
est degree;  who  commits  evil  without  ceasing; 
and  who  practises  all  sorts  and  degrees  of  it 
by  himself  and  his  ministers. 
Tl^  evil  of  sin.  The  internal  malignity  of  sin, 
abstracted  from  its  dreadful  effects,  renders  it 
most  worthy  of  our  hatred  ;  for  it  is  in  its  own 
nature  direct  enmity  against  God,and  obscures 
the  glory  of  all  his  attributes :  It  is  the  viola- 
tion of  his  majesty,  who  is  the  universal  Sove- 
reign of  heaven  and  earth;  a  contrariety  to  his 
holiness,  which  shines  forth  in  his  law;  a  de- 
spising his  goodness,  the  attractive  to  obedi- 
ence; the  contempt  of  his  omniscience,  which 
sees  every  sin  when  it  is  committed;  the  slight- 
ing of  his  terrible  justice  and  power,  as  if  the 
sinner  could  secure  himself  from  his  indigna- 
tion; a  denial  of  his  truth,  as  if  ihe  thrcaten- 
ings  were  a  vain  terror  to  scare  men  from 
their  sin.  Jldd  to  this  the  dreadful  judgments 
and  punishments  uhich  God  inflicts  upon  sin- 
ners for  sin,  sometimes  in  this  life,  but  espe- 
cially the  torments  of  hell,  which  are  the  just 
and  full  recompense  of  sin. 
Evil  eye.  Prov.  23.6,  Eatnot  the  bread  of  him  that 
hath  an  evil  eye  ;  that  is,  of  the  envious  or  covet- 
ous man;  who  secretly  grudgcth  thee  the  meat 
which  he  sets  before  thee.  In  the  same  sense 
this  phrase  is  used.  Mat.  20. 15,  Is  thine  eye  evil 
because  I  am  good  1  Art  thou  envious,  because 
I  dispense  my  grace  to  others  besides  thyself? 
Evil  day  or  days.  Prov.  15.  15,  All  the  days  of 
the  afflicted  are  evil ;  that  is,  they  are  tedious 
and  uncomfortable ;  he  takes  no  content  in 
any  time  or  tiling.  Eccl.  12.  1,  When  the  evil 
days  come  not ;  that  is,  the  time  of  old  age, 
which  is  burdensome  and  calamitous  in  itself ; 
and  far  more  grievous  and  more  terriblcwken 
it  is  loaded  with  the  sad  remembrance  of  a 
man's  youth ful  follies  and  lusts,  and  with  the 
dreadful  prospect  of  approaching  death  and 
judgment.  And  in  Amos  6.  3,  Ye  that  put  far 
away  the  evil  day;  that  is,  ye  that  drive  all 
thoughts  of  approaching  death  and  judgment 
out  of  your  heads;  or  else  flatter  yourselves 
as  if  it  would  never  come,  or  at  least  not  for 
a  great  while  hence. 
Gen.  19.  19.  lest  some  c.  take  me  and  I  die 
28.  t8,  daughters  of  Canaan  c.  in  eyes  of  Isaac 
44.  5.  ye  have  done  e.  in  so  doing 
.34.  lest  I  see  the  e.  that  shall  come  on  my  father 
50.  20.  as  for  you,  ye  thought  e.  against  me 
Exod.  5. 23.  since  I  came,  he  hath  done  e.  to  people 
10.  10.  look  to  it,  for  e.  is  before  you 

21.  t8.  if  she  be  e.  in  the  eyes  of  her  master 
32. 14.  the  Lord  repented  of  Ihe  e.  he  thought  to  do 

to  his  people,  2  Sam.  24. 10.  1  Chron.  21.  15. 
JWm.  11.  fl.  it  was  e.  in  the  cars  of  the  Lord, 

22.  t  34.  if  it  be  p.  in  thine  eyes,  I  will  get  back 
Dent.  19.  20.  commit  no  more  such  c.  among  you 

29. 21.  the  L.  shall  separate  him  to  c.  out  of  tribes 

30.  15.  see,  1  have  set  before  thee  death  and  e. 

31.  29.  and  e.  will  befall  you  in  the  latter  days 
Josh.  24. 15.  if  it  seem  e.  lb  you  to  serve  tho  Lord 


EVI 

Jvig.  2. 15.  the  hand  of  tlie  Ld.  dgainst  them  for  e. 
11.57.  tlie  e.  oltlit;  men  ofSliecheui  did  God  render 

20.  34.  but  liiey  knew  not  that  e.  was  near  them 

1  .Sunt.  20.  7.  be  sure  that  e.  in  determined  by  hmi 
y.  if  1  kiiow  certainly  that  e.  were  deterimned 

24.  11.  nor  is  e.  nor  transgression  in  mine  hand 
17.  me  good,  whereas  I  have  rewarded  thee  e. 

25.  17.  for  e.  is  determined  against  our  master 

26.  tliey  that  seek  e.  to  my  lord,  be  as  iVabal 
28.  c.  hatli  not  been  found  in  tliee  all  thy  days 

20. 18.  what  iiave  I  dune  7  what  e.  is  in  my  hand  ^ 
•Z'i.  6. 1  have  not  found  e.  in  thee  since  thy  coming 

2  Ham.  i.  'i'S.  the  Lord  shall  reward  Uie  doer  of  e. 
12.  11.  behold  I  will  raise  up  e.  against  thee 

lb.  t  8.  behold  thee  in  thy  e.  tliou  bfoody  man 
19.7.  will  be  worse  than  all  the  e.  tliat  befel  Uiee 

\Kings  14.'.».  but  hast  done  e.  above  all  before  lliee 

lli.  25.  Diiiri  wrought  e.  in  tiie  eyes  of  the  Lord 

22. 2J.  a  lying  spirit  in  thy  prophets,  and  the  Lord 

hath  spoken  e.  concerning  tliee,2  Chron.  18.22. 

2  Kings  21. 2. 1  am  bringing  such  e.  on  Jerusalem 

22. 20.  thine  eyes  shall  not  see  all  e.  on  this  jjlace 

1  Chron.  21.  t  "•  i'  "t*  c.  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord 
17.  it  is  I  that  have  sinned  and  done  e.  indeed    ' 

2  Chron.  20.9.  if  when  e.cometh  on  us, as  the  sword 
£s/A.  7.  7.  he  saw  tliere  was  e.  determined 

8.  6.  for  how  can  I  endure  to  sec  e.  to  my  people  ? 

Job  1.1. one  that  feared  God  and  eschewed  f.8. 1 2.3. 
5. 19.  yea,  in  seven  there  shall  no  e.  touch  thee 
31.  2a.  or  lift  up  myself  when  e.  found  him 
42.  11.  they  comforted  him  over  all  the  c.  ou  him 

Piol.  5.  4.  neillier  shall  c.  dwell  with  thee 
7.4.  if  I  liave  rewarded  e.  to  him  that  was  at  peace 
15.3.  nor  doeth  e.  to  his  neighbour,  nor  taketh  up  1 

21.  11.  for  they  intended  c.  against  tJiee  I 

23.  4.  I  will  fear  no  c.  for  thou  art  with  -me 

34.  21.  e.  shall  slay  wicked,  those  hate  righteous 
30.  4.  he  deviseth  mischief,  he  abhorreth  note. 
40. 14.  let  tliem  be  put  to  shame  that  wish  me  c. 
41.  t  1.  the  Lord  will  deliver  him  in  the  day  of  c. 
5.  mine  enemies  speak  e.  of  ine  ||  t  7.  devise  e. 

49.  5.  wherefore  should  I  fear  in  the  days  of  e.  1 

50.  19.  thou  givest  thy  mouth  to  e.  and  thy  tongue 
f>i.  5.  he  shall  reward  e.  unto  mine  enemies 

5ti.  5.  all  their  thoughts  are  against  me  for  c. 

90.  15.  and  the  years  wherein  we  have  seen  e. 

91.  10.  there  shall  no  e.  befall  thee,  Jer.23. 17. 
97.  10.  ye  that  love  the  Lord,  hate  c. 

109.  20.  and  of  them  that  speak  c.  againet  my  soul 
140.11 .  e.  shall  hunt  violent  man  to  overthrow  him 
Prov.  1.  IC.  for  their  feet  run  to  e.  Isa.  59.  7. 
33.  dwell  safely,  and  shall  be  quiet  from  fear  of  e. 
3.  29.  devise  not  c.  against  thy  neighbour 
5.14. 1  was  almost  in  all  c.iiimidstof  congregation 
11. 19.  he  that  pursueth  c.  |)Ursueth  it  to  his  death 

12.  20.  deceit  in  the  heart  of  them  that  imagine  e. 
21.  there  shall  no  e.  happen  to  the  just 

13. 21.  c.  pursueth  sinners  ||  14.  22.  that  devise  e. 
It).  4.  yea,  even  the  wicked  for  the  day  of  e. 

27.  an  ungodly  man  diggeth  up  «.  fire  in  his  lips 
30.  movin"  his  lips  he  bringeth  e.  to  pass 

19.  23.  he  shall  not  be  visited  with  e. 

20.  8.  a  king  scattereth  away  all  e.  with  his  eyes 
22.say  not  thou,  I  will  recompense  c.wait  oiiLord 

21.  10.  the  soul  of  the  wicked  desireth  e. 

22.  3.  a  prudent  man  forcseeth  the  e.  27.  12. 

24.  t  18.  lest  it  he  e.  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord 
30.  32.  if  thou  hast  thought  e.  lay  thine  hand 

Ecd.  2.  21.  this  also  is  vanity,  and  a  great  c. 

o.  13.  there  is  a  sore  e.  which  I  have  seen  Ifi 

(5. 1.  an  c.  which  I  have  seen  under  the  sun,  10. 5. 

9.  3.  this  is  an  e.  among  things  that  are  done  under 
the  sun,  the  heart  of  sons  of  men  is  full  of  e. 

II.  2.  thou  knowest  not  what  e.  shall  be  on  earth 
Isa.  3.  9.  for  they  have  rewarded  e.  to  themselves 

13.  II.  I  will  punish  the  world  for  their  c. 
33.  15.  and  shutteth  his  eyes  from  seeing  c. 

45. 7.  I  make  peace  and  create  c.  I  do  these  things 
47.  II.  therefore  shall  ii.  conio  upon  thee 
56.  2.  and  keepeth  his  hand  from  doing  any  e. 
57. 1.  that  the  righteous  is  taken  away  from  the  e. 
Jer.  1.  14.  out  of  the  north  an  e.  break  forth,  6.  I. 
2.  3.  e.  shall  come  upon  them,  saith  the  Lord 
1 28.  if  they  can  save  thee  in  tlie  time  of  e. 

4.  4.  lest  my  fury  come  forth  like  fire,  because  of 

the  «.  of  vour  doings,  23.  2. 1  20.  3.  |  44. 22. 

5.  12.  it  is  not  he,  neither  shall  e.  come  upon  us 
7.  30.  children  of  Judah  have  done  e.  in  my  sight 
11.  t  12-  shall  not  save  thoin  in  the  time  of  c. 

t  14.  I  will  not  hear  when  they  cry  for  their  e. 
15.  when  thou  dost  «.  then  thou  rejoicest 

17.  hath  pronoiinasd  e.against  thee  for  f. of  Israel 
1.5. 11.  will  cause  to  entreat  thee  well  in  lime  of  e. 

17.  17.  thou  art  my  hope  in  the  day  off. 

18.  bring  on  them  the  day  of  e.  and  destroy  them 

18.  8.  if  that  nation  turn  from  their  e.  I  will  re- 
pent of  the  r.  I  thought  to  do,  26.3,13,19.  |  42. 10. 
II.  behold,  I  frame  c  against  von  ami  ilevise 

19.  1.5.  I  will  bring  all  f.  that  t  have  pronounced 
21.  10.  I  set  my  face  against  this  city  for  e. 

178 


EVI 

Jer.  25.  .32.  e.  shall  go  forth  from  nation  to  nation 
28.  8.  the  prophets  proiihesied  of  war  and  of  e. 
29   11.  I  think  thoughts  of  peace  and  not  of  e. 
32.  30.  the  children  of  Juduh  have  only  done  e. 

32.  because  of  all  the  e.  of  the  children  of  Israel 
35.17. 1  will  bring  on  Judah  and  Jerusalem  all  tiie 

e.  that  1  have  pronounced  agauist  them,  36.  31. 
38.9.  these  men  have  done  e.  in  all  they  have  done 
44. 11.  [  will  set  my  face  ag.  you  for  e.  and  cut  ofi' 

17.  we  had  plenty,  and  were  well,  and  saw  no  e. 
27. 1  will  watch  over  them  (ore.  and  not  for  good 
29.  my  words  shall  stand  against  you  for  e. 

48.  2.  in  lleshbon  they  have  devised  e.  against  it 

51. 24. 1  will  render  to  Babylon  all  e.  done  in  i^ion 
60.  wrote  all  the  e.  that  should  come  on  Babylon 
Ezek.  7.  5.  an  c.  an  only  e.  behold  it  is  come 

14.  22.  ye  shall  be  comforted  concerning  the  e. 
Dan.  9. 14.  the  Lord  hath  watched  upon  the  e. 
Joel  2.13.the  Lord  your  God  repenteth  him  of  the  e. 
Jiinos'i.  6.  shall  there  bee.  in  a  city,  L.  not  done  it7 

9.10.  who  say,  c.  shall  not  overtake  nor  prevent  us 
Jonah'i.  10.  and  God  repented  of  the  e.  he  said,  4.2. 
J/(c. 1.12. but  c.came  down  from  Lord  to  Jerusalem 

2.  1.  woe  to  them  that  work  e.  ujion  their  beds 
3.  behold,  against  this  family  do  I  devise  an  e. 

3.  II.  is  not  tlie  Lord  among  usl  no  e.  can  come 
jVuA.  1.  11.  that  iniagineth  e.  against  the  Lord 
Uab.  1. 13.  thou  art  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  e. 

2.  9.  he  may  be  delivered  from  the  power  of  c. 
Zcp/i.  3.  15.  thou  shalt  not  see  e.  any  more 
Zcch.  7.  10.  let  none  of  you  imagine  e.  8.  17. 
Jilal.  1.8.  ye  oiler  the  lame  and  sick,  is  it  not  e.? 

2. 17.  when  ye  say,  every  one  that  doeth  e.  is  good 
J\Iat.  5.  11.  shall  say  all  manner  of  e.  against  you 
37.  whatsoever  is  more  than  these,  cometh  of  c. 
39.  but  1  say  unlo  you,  that  ye  resist  not  c. 

0.  34.  sutlicient  unto  the  day  is  the  e.  thereof 

9.  4.  wherefore  lliink  ye  e.  in  your  hearts? 

27.  23.  Pilate  said  to  tliem,  whv,  what  e.  hath  he 
done  ?  Mark  15.  14.  J.iike  23.22. 
Marli  9.  39.  that  can  lightly  speak  c.  of  me 
Luke  0.  45.  an  e.  man  bringeth  forth  what  is  e. 
John  3. 20.  every  one  that  doeth  e.  hateth  the  light 

5.  29.  they  thai  have  done  e.  to  the  resurrection  of 

18.  23.  if  I  have  spoken  c.  bear  witness  of  the  e. 
Acts  9. 13.  how  much  c.  he  hath  done  to  thy  saints 

2;i.9.  a  great  cry,  saying,  we  find  no  e.  in  this  man 
iio/«.2.9.anguisli  on  every  soul  of  man  ihatdoeth  e. 
7.  19.  but  the  e.  which  1  would  not,  tiiat  I  do 
12.  9.  abhor  that  whichi.sc.  cleave  to  what  is  good 
17.  recompense  to  no  man  e.  for  c.  provide  things 

21.  be  not  overcome  of  e.  overcome  e.  with  good 
13. 4.  a  revenger  to  e.vecute  wrath  on  him  doeth  e. 
14.  20.  it  is  c.for  that  man  who  eateth  with  ofi'ence 

16.  19.  I  would  have  you  simple  concerning  e. 

1  C»r.  13.  5.  charity  not  provoked,  thinketh  no  e. 
1  Thess.  5.  15.  see  that  none  render  e.  for  e.  to  any 

22.  abstain  from  all  appearance  of  e. 

ITim.  6. 10.  the  love  of  money  is  tlie  root  of  all  c. 
Tit.  3.  2.  put  them  in  mind  to  speak  e.  of  no  man 
Jam.  3.  8.  the  tongue  is  an  unruly  c.  full  of  poison 

1  iVt.3.9.  not  rendering  r..  for  c.  or  railing,  but  bless. 
3  John  11.  he  that  doeth  e.  hath  not  seen  God 

liriit^,  Brought  KVIL. 
./i9sA.23.15.the  Lord  shall  bring  on  you  all  e.things 

2  .Sam.  15.  M.  lest  he  overtake  and  bring  e.  on  us 
17.14.  that  the  Lord  might  bring  c.upon  Absalom 

\  Kings  11.10. 1  wiWhring  con  llie  house  of  Jerob. 

17.  21).  he  said,  hast  thou  also  b.  e.  on  widow  ? 
21.  21.  behold,  I  will  bring  e.  upon  thee 

29.  not  bring  e.  in  his  days,  but  in  his  son's  days 
2  Kings  22.  10.  thus  saith  tiie  Lord,  behold,  I 
will  bring  e.  upon  this  place,  2  Chr.  34.  24. 
2  Chr.  34.  28.  nor  eyes  see  all  the  «.  I  will  Ai  iw^ 
/«a. 31.2. 1  will  inline,  and  notcnil  back  his  word 
Jer.  4.  6.  for  I  will  bring  c.  from  tlic  north 

6.  19.  behold,  I  will  bring  c.  upon  this  people 
11.  II.  b.holil,  I  will  irin^r  c.  upon  them 

23.  I  will  bring  c.  upon  the  men  of  Analhoth 

19.  3.  behold,  I  will  tnii^  e.  on  this  place,  15. 
23. 12. 1  will  bring  f.even  year  of  their  visitation 
25.  29.  for.  lo,  I  begin  to  bring  c.  on  the  city 
35.17. 1  will  bring  on  Judah  r.  pronounced,  36.31. 
39.  16.  I  will  bring  my  words  on  this  city  for  c. 
45.  5. 1  will  bring  e.  upon  all  flesh,  saitii  tJie  Lord 

Sec  Did,  Do. 
EVIL  joined  w'lih  gouil. 
Clen.  2. 9.  the  tree  ol  knowledge  of  good  and  c.  17. 
3.  S.  ye  shall  he  as  gods  knowing /r«u(f  and  c.  22. 
44.  4.  wherefore  have  ye  rcwanied  r.  {in  good? 
Drut.i.'.iO.  had  no  knowledge  hulKtvugood  and  e. 

1  Sam.  2.5.  21.  he  hath  reipiitcd  me  r.  for  good 

2  .Sam.  19.  35.  can  I  discern  between  good  and  c? 
\  Kings  22.f^.  not  prophesy^,  roncern.  mc,bul<;.18. 
2  Chron.  18.7.  never  prophesieth^rnn,/ to  me  but  r. 

17.  he  would  not  prophesy  goad  to  me  but  c. 


EVI 

P».  52. 3.  thou  loveet  e.  more  than  good,  and  lying 
Proc.lo.'i.  eyes  of  L.  beholding  the  e.  and  Ihegooi 

17.13.  whoso  rewardelhf.  for  n'ouJiOvd  nut  depart 

31. 12.  she  will  do  him  good  and  nut  e.  all  her  dayi 
/Aa.5.20.  woe  to  them  tliat  call  e.  guod,  and  good  e. 

7. 15.  may  know  to  refuse  e.  and  choose  goad,  16. 
Jer.  18.  20.  shall  c.  be  recompensed  for  good  7 

42.  6.  whether  it  be^ood  or  e.  we  will  obey  Lord 
Lam.  3.  38.  of  most  High  proceedeth  not  e.  and  j-. 
Jlmus  5. 14.  seek  |r«o(i  and  not  e.  that  ye  may  live 

9.4. 1  will  set  mine  eyes  un  them  for  c.not  for  ^ou<i 
Mic.  3.  2.  who  hate  the  good,  and  love  the  e. 
Hum.  1 .21. wlien  1  would  do  g'oo</,c. present  with  me 

9.  11.  not  born,  neither  having  done  good  or  e. 
//ci.5.14.  their  senses  e.\ercised  to  discern  g-.aiid  e. 
3  John  11.  follow  nut  what  is  c.  but  what  is  good 

.Ste'GRKAT. 

From  EVIL. 
<7fn.48.10.the  Angel  who  redeemed  me/romall  e. 
1  Sam.  25.  39.  and  hath  kept  his  servant /rom  c. 

1  Chron.  4. 10.  that  tlum  wuuldest  keep  me  from  e 
.fob  28.  28.  and  to  depart  from  e.  is  understanding 
i'j.a/.34.I3.  keeii  thy  tongue/rofrt  c.  lips  from  guile 

14.  depart/rom  e.  do  good,  37.  27.  Prov.  3.  7. 
121.  7.  the  Lord  shall  preserve  ihee  from  all  e. 
Prov.  4.  27.  turn  not,  remove  thy  fool  from  e. 

13.  19.  it  is  abomination  to  fools  to  riepurt/rom  e 

14.  16.  a  wise  man  feareth,  and  departcth  from  e. 
10. 6.  by  the  fear  of  the  Lord  men  depart /rom  e. 

17.  the  highway  of  upright  is  to  depart  from  e 
Jsa.  59. 15.  that  departetli  /.  e.  makes  hims.  u  prey 
Jer.  9. 3.  they  proceed/,  a.  to  e.  and  know  not  me 
23.  22.  then  they  should  have  turned  them  from 
their  e.  way,  and /ro?n  the  e.  of  their  doinga 
51.  64.  Babylon  not  rise /rom  e.  I  will  Oring  on  her 
jMat.  6.  13.  but  deliver  us /ro)n  e.  J^ukc  11.  4. 
John  17.  15.  but  that  ihon  shouldest  keep  lliein/.  e. 

2  Thess.  3.  3.  shall  stablish  you,  and  keep  you  /.  e. 
1  Pet.  3.  10.  let  him  refrain  his  tongue /mm  e. 

Pvt  utcay  EVIL. 
Deut.  13.  5.  put  the  e.  away  from  the  midst  of  thee 
17.  7.  so  thou  shall  pi/t  the  e.  away  from  among 
you,  19.  19.  1  21.  21.  (  22.  21,  24.  |  24.  7. 
a.  put  c.  away  from  Israel,  21.  21.. /«</§■. 20. 13. 
Eccl.  II.  10.  anci  jiut  away  c.  from  thy  flesh 
Isa.  1.  16.  wash  ye, put  away  the  e.  of  your  doings 

EVIL  ill  the  sight  of  the  Lord. 
JVum.  32.13.  had  done  e.  in  sight  of  J..  .Jvdg.  3.12. 
Judg.  2.  11.  Israel  did  e.  in  the  sight  of  the  J.ord, 
3.  7,  12.  I  4.  1.  I  6.  1.  I  10.  0.  T  13.  1.  1  Kings 
11.  0.  I  14.  22.  I  15.  26,  34.  |  16.  7,  30.  |  22.  52. 
2  Kings  8.  18,  27.  ]  13.  2,  11.  |  14.  24.  \  1.5.  9, 18, 
24,  28.  I  17.  2.  I  21.  2,  20.  2  Chron.  ^.  4.  |  33. 2, 

22.  I  30.  5,  9,  12. 

1  Sam.  15.19.  thou  didst  e.  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 

1  Kings  16. 19.  in  doing  e.  in  the  sight  of  tic  J.ord 
21.  20.  sold  to  work  e.  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 

2  Kings  3.2.  he  wrought  c  in  the  sight  of  the  J.ord 
17. 17.  sold  themselves  to  do  e.  in  the  sight  of  L. 

21.  16.  to  sin,  in  doing  that  which  was  e.  in  the 

sight  of  the  J^ord,  2:1.  32,  37.  |  24.  9,  19. 

1  Chron.  2.  3.  Er  w  as  e.  in  the  sight  of  the  J.ord 

2  Chr.  33.  0.  he  w  ronght  much  e.  in  the  sight  of  L 

This  EVIL. 
Kind.'Xi.M.  and  repent  of  this  r.ngainst  thy  people 

1  Sum.  6.  9.  then  he  hath  done  us  (Ais  great  e. 
12.  19.  we  have  added  this  e.  to  ask  a  king 

2  Sam.  13. 16.  this  e.  in  Bending  me  away  is  greater 

1  KingsH.  9.  the  Lord  brought  on  thein  all  this  c. 

2  Kings  ^.Xi.  he  said,  behold, /Ai.?  f.  is  of  the  Lord 
2  Chron.  7.22.  iherelore  he  brought  thise.  on  them 
JV(  A.  13. 18.  did  not  our  God  brinjall  this  r.  on  us? 

27.shall  we  hearken  to  you  to  do  all  tA  is  great  c? 
.fob  2. 11.  when  Job's  three  friends  heard  u(  this  c. 
Psal.  51.  4.  I  have  done  «Ai.»  e.  in  thy  sight 
Jer.  16. 10.  the  L.  pronounced  all  this  c.  against  us 

32.  23.  therefore  thou  hast  caused  all  t.  e.  on  them 
42.  like  ax  1  have  briuight  all  this  con  this  people 

40.  2.  God  hatli  piuiioiinced  this  e.  on  this  place 
44.  7.  why  commit  ye  this  great  r.  ag.  yoursoulg  t 

23.  theret'ure  this  e.  is  happened  unto  you 
/Jan.  9. 13.  it  is  written,  all  this  e.  is  como  upon  us 
Jonah  I.  7.  know  for  whose  cause  this  e.  is  on  ub,8. 

KVIL,  .ddjettire. 
Gen.  0.5.  thoughts  of  his  heart  were  only  «.8.21 
37.  20.  some  c.  beast  hath  devoured  him,  33. 
Kxod.  5.  19.  Israel  did  see  that  they  were  in  c.  case 

33.  4.  people  heard  these  e.  tidings,  they  mourned 
Xum.  14.27.  how  long  bear  this  «.  congregation  1 

20.  5,  Id  bring  us  in  unlo  this  c.  place 
Deut.  1.35.  not  one  of  this  f.genertt.  shall  see  land 
6. 1 22.  the  L.  shewed  signs,  groat  and  e.  on  Egypt 

22.  14.  and  bring  up  an  e.  name  upon  her,  19. 
28.  .54.  Ins  eye  shall  be  e.  toward  his  brother 

56.  her  eye  shall  bo  «.  toward  her  husband 
I  Sam.  2.  2Jl.  for  I  hear  of  your  r.  dealings 


.fob  2.10.  shall  we  roreive  good,  and  not  receive  <.?  I  Kings  .5.4.  there  is  neillier  advers. nor  e.  occurren 
30.  26.  I  looked  for  good,  then  r.  came  unto  me  i  Fzra  9.  13.  ufler  all  that  is  come  on  us  lore,  deeds 

Psnl.  :i5.  12.  they  ri'Warded  me  e.  for  good,  109.  5.  Psal.  41.  8.  an  e.  disease  cleaveth  fast  unto  him 
38.  20.  that  render  e.  for  good  are  my  udversuries  |    04.  5.  Uiey  encourage  themselves  in  an  c.  matter 


EVI 

P«.78-t9.  trouble  by  sending  «.  angels  among  them 
112. 7. he  shall  not  bu  afraid  ofe.tuli  ngs, heart  tixed 
140. 11.  let  not  an  c.  speaker  be  establish,  in  earth 

Pruv.  6.  C4.  to  keep  lliee  from  the  e.  woman 
14.  19.  the  e.  bow  before  the  good,  the  wicked 

Keel.  5.  14.  but  those  riches  perish  by  e.  travel 
6.  2.  this  is  vanity,  and  it  is  an  e.  disease 
y.  i'i.  as  the  tishes  that  are  taken  in  an  c.  net 

Isa.T.5.  Ephraim  have  taken  e.  counsel  ag.  thee 
32.  7.  the  instruments  also  of  ihe  churl  are  e. 

Jer.  8.  3.  by  them  that  remain  of  this  e.  family 
]'2.  14.  thus  saith  against  all  mine  e..  neighbours 

13.  10.  this  c.  people  refuse  to  hear  my  words 

23.  10.  their  course  is  e.  their  force  not  right 
34.  3.  e.  tigs,  very  e.  they  are  so  e.  S.  |  29.  17. 
49.23.  for  they  have  heard  c.  tidings,  fanil-hearted 

Ezek.5. 10. 1  will  send  on  Ihem  e.  arrows  of  famine 

17.  so  will  I  send  on  you  famine  and  e.  beasts 

6.  11.  alas,  for  all  the  e.  abominations  of  Israel 
34.25. 1  will  cause  the  e.  beasts  to  cease  from  land 
38.  10.  and  thou  shalt  think  an  e.  thought 

tfab.  2.9.  woe  to  him  that  covetelh  an  e.  covetou 
Mat.  5.45.  he  maketh  his  sun  to  rise  on  e.  and  good 

7.  11.  if  ye  then  being  e.  Kuke  11.  13. 

18.  a  good  tree  cannot  bring  forth  e.  fruit 
12.  34.  how  can  ye  being  e.  speak  good  things  ? 

39.  an  e.  generation  seeketh  a  sign,  iMke  11.  29. 

15.  19.  for  out  of  the  heart  proceed  e.  thoughts, 

murders,  adulteries,  fornications,  Mark  7.  21. 

24.  48.  if  that  e.  servant  shall  say  in  his  heart 
Lake  6.  22.  and  shall  cast  out  your  name  as  e. 

35.  he  is  kind  to  the  unthankful  and  to  the  c. 
John  3. 19.  loved  darkness,  for  their  deeds  were  c. 
.Mets  24.  20.  if  they  have  found  any  e.  doing  in  me 
1  Cor.15.33.  e.  conimunicat.  corrupt  good  manners 
Gal.l.i.  that  he  might  deliver  us  from  this  e.  world 
Eph.  4.  31.  let  e.  speaking  be  put  away  from  you 
Pkil.  3.  2.  beware  of  dogs,  beware  of  e.  workers 
Col.  3.  5.  mortify  therelorc  e.  concu|)iscence 
1  Tim.  6.  4.  whereof  conieth  c.  surmisings 
Tit.  1.  12.  the  Cretians  are  e.  beasts,  slow  bellies 
//«6.10.22.your  hearts  sprinkled  from  t.  conscience 
Jam.  2.  4.  and  are  become  judges  of  e.  thoughts 
4.16.  ye  rejoice  in  boastings, all  such  rejoicing  is  e. 
1  Pet.  2. 1.  laying  aside  all  malice  and  e.  speakings 
Hcv.  2. 2.  how  thou  canst  not  bear  them  who  are  e. 

EVIL  day  or  days. 
<ren.  47.9.  few  and  e.  have  \\\i;days  of  my  life  been 
Pron.  15.  15.  all  Ihe  days  of  the  alHicted  are  e. 
Ecet.  12.  1.  in  youth,  while  the  e.  days  come  not 
.^mos  6.  3.  ye  that  put  far  away  the  e.  day 
Eph.  5.16.  redeeming  the  time,  because  days  are  e. 
6.13. that  ye  maybe  able  to  withstand  in  the  e.  day 
Day  of  Emi.  ;  sec  Evil,  -Substantioe. 
EVIL  doer  or  doers. 
Job  8.  00.  neither  will  he  help  the  e.  doers 
Psal.  26.  5.  I  hated  the  congregation  of  e.  doers 
37.  1.  fret  not  thyself  because  of  c.  doers 
O.e.doers  shall  be  cut  otf,but  those  that  wait  on  L 
94.16.  who  will  rise  up  for  me  against  the  c.  doers.' 
119. 113.  depart  from  me,  ye  e.  doers,  I  will  keep 
Isa.  1.  4.  ah,  sinful  nation,  a  seed  of  e.  doers 
9.  17.  every  one  is  a  hypocrite,  and  an  e.  doer 
14.20.  the  seed  ofc.  rfoer«sliall  never  be  renowned 
31.  2.  but  will  arise  against  the  house  of  e.  doers 
.7er.20. 13.  hath  delivered  soul  of  poor  from  e.  doers 

23.  14.  they  strengthen  the  hands  of  e.  doers 
2Tim.  2.  9.  whereu)  [  suffer  trouble  as  an  e.  doer 

1  Pet.  2. 12.  whereas  they  speak  ag.  you  as  e.  ducrs 

14.  are  sent  by  him  for  the  punishment  of  e.  duer, 
3.16.  whereas  they  speak  evil  of  you  asofe.  doen 
4. 15.  let  none  of  you  suffer  as  a  thief  or  an  c.  doer 

See  DoiNos,  Eye. 

EVIL  heart. 

Gen.  8. 21.  imagina.  of  man's  heart  is  e.  from  youth 

Jer. 3.n.  not  walk  after  the  imagination  of  e.  heart 

7.  24.  walked  in  the  imagination  of  their  e.  Acart 

H.  8.  every  one  in  imagination  of  his  e.  heart 

16.  12.  every  one  after  imagination  of  his  c.  heart 
18.12.  every  one  do  the  imagination  of  his  e.  heart 

Heb.3.12.  lest  there  be  in  any  an  c.  heart  of  unbeliel 
EVIL  man  or  men. 

Job  35. 12.  none  answer  because  of  pride  of  e.  meri 

Psal.  10.  1.5.  break  thou  the  arm  of  the  e.  man 
140.  1.  deliver  me,  O  Lord,  from  the  e.  man 

Pron.  2. 12.  to  deliver  thee  from  way  of  the  e.  man 
4.  14.  and  go  not  in  the  way  of  e.  men 
12.  12.  the  wicked  desifcth  the  net  of  c.  men 

17.  11.  an  e.  man  seeketh  only  rebellion 

24.  1.  be  not  thou  envious  against  e.  men 

19.  fret  not  thyself  because  of  c.  men 

20.  for  there  shall  be  no  reward  to  the  e.man 

28.  5.  r.men  understand  not  judgment 

29.  fi.  in  transgression  of  an  r.  man  there  is  a  snare 
Mat.  12.  35.  and  an  e.  man  out  of  the  evil  treasure 

bringeth  forth  evil  things,  Luke  6.  45. 

2  Tim.  3. 13.  but  e.  men  shall  wax  worse  and  worse 

See  Rkport. 

EVIIj  spirit  or  spirits. 

Judff.  9. 33.  sent  e.  so.bet ween  Abiinelcch  and  men 

173 


EUN 

1  Sam.  16.14.  an  «.  sp.  from  the  L.  troubled  him,  35. 
16.  when  tho  e.  spirit  from  God  is  upon  thee 
23.  and  the  e.  spirit  departed  from  him 
18. 10.  the  e.  spirit  from  God  came  on  Saul,  19.  9. 
Luke  7.  21.  that  hour  he  cured  many  of  c.  spirits 
8.  2.  a  woman  which  had  been  healed  of  e.  spirits 
Acta  19.  12.  and  the  e.  spirits  went  out  of  them 
13.  to  call  over  them  which  had  e.  spirits 

15.  the  e.  spirit  said,  Jesus  1  know,  Paul  1  know 

16.  the  man  in  whom  the  e.  spirit  was,  leaped 
EVIL  thing. 

<r6/i.38.tl0.  the  thing  he  did  was  e.  in  eyes  of  Lord 
'2  Kings  4.  t41.  there  was  no  e.  thing  in  the  jiot 
JVcA.  13.  17.  what  e.  thing  is  this  that  ye  do  1 
Psal.  141.  4.  inchne  not  my  heart  to  any  e.  thing 
£ct7.8.3.stand  not  in  an  e.  thing,(iol\\  what  pleases 
5.  keepeth  commandment,  shall  feel  no  e.  thing 
12. 14.  every  secret  thing,  whether  it  be  good  or  c. 
.Jer.  2.  19.  know  that  it  is  an  e.  thing  and  bitter 
Tit.  2.  8.  having  no  e.  thing  to  say  of  you 

EVIL  things. 
Jbs/j.23.15.theLord  shall  bring  on  you  all  c.things 
/'ruK.15.28.  mouth  of  wicked  poureth  out  c.  things 
.Jer.  3.  5.  thou  hast  done  e.  things  as  thou  couldest 
Mat.  12.  35.  an  evil  man  bringeth  forth  e.  things 
Alark  7.  23.  all  these  e.  things  come  from  within 
Luke  16.  25.  and  likewise  Lazarus  e.  tilings 
Rom.  1.  30.  proud,  boasters,  inventors  of  e.  things 
1  Cor.  10.  6.  we  should  not  lust  after  e.  things 

EVIL  time. 
Psal.'il.Vi.  they  shall  not  be  ashamed  in  the  e.  time 
Eecl.'i).\'i.so  the  sons  of  men  are  snared  \na.n  e.tinic 
.finios  5. 13.  prudent  keep  silence,  for  it  is  an  e.  time 
Mie.  2.  3.  nor  shall  go  haughtily,  for  this  time  is  e. 
EVIL  way. 

1  Kings  13. 33.  .Icroboam  returned  not  from  e.way 
Psal.  119.  101. 1  refrained  my  feet  from  every  e.  id. 
Prov.a.Vi.  thefear  of  theLordistohate  thee. May 

28.10.  who  causeth  righteous  togoastray  ine.tca)/ 

Jer.  18. 11.  return  ye  now  every  one  from  his  e.way 

25.  5.  I  26.  3.  I  35.  1.5.  |  36.  3,  7. 

23.22.  should  have  turned  them  from  their  e.  way 

Jonah  3. 8.  let  them  turn  every  one  from  his  e.  way 

10.  and  saw  that  they  turned  from  their  e.  way 

EVIL  loays. 

2Kings  17.13.  turn  from  your  e.  ways,  jEzet. 33.11. 

Ezek.'M.'.il.  then  shall  ye  remember  your  own  e.  w. 

ZtcA.  1. 4.turii  ye  now  from  your  c.ways  and  doings 

EVIL  work  or  works. 
Eccl.  4. 3.  who  hath  not  seen  e.  work  that  is  done 
8.  11.  because  sentence  against  an  e.  work  is  not 
John  7.  7.  I  testify  that  the  works  thereof  are  e. 
Honi.  13.  3.  are  not  a  terror  to  good  works  but  e. 

2  Tun.  4. 18.  L.  shall  deliver  me  from  every  e.  work 
Jam.  3.  16.  there  is  confusion,  and  every  c.work 
1  John  3.  12.  because  his  own  works  were  e. 

EVIL,  .Idverb. 
Exod.  5.  22.  why  hast  thou  so  c.  entreated  peojilc  ? 
IJrut.  26.  6.  and  the  Egyptians  e.  entreated  us 
1  Chron.  7.  23.  because  it  went  e.  with  his  house 
.Job  24. 21.  he  e.  entreateth  barren  that  beareth  not 
.John  18.  23.  if  I  have  spoken  e.  bear  witness 
Jiets  7.  6.  they  should  entreat  them  e.  400  years 
19.  the  same  e.  entreated  our  fathers 
14.2.  their  minds  e.  alfected  against  the  brethren 
19.9.but  spake  c.  of  that  way  before  the  multitude 
23.  5.  shall  not  speak  e.  of  the  ruler  of  thy  people 
Rom.  14.  16.  let  not  your  good  be  e.  spoken  of 
1  Cor.  10.  30.  why  am  I  e.  spoken  of  for  that 
.Jam.  4.  11.  speak  not  e.  one  of  another,  brethren, 
he  that  speaks  e.  of  his  brother,  speaks  e.  of  law 

1  Pet.  3. 16.  that  whereas  they  speak  e.  of  you 

17.  betteryesuffer  for  well-doing  than  fore. doing 
4.  4.  they  tliink  it  strange,  speaking  e.  of  you 

14.  tlieir  part  he  is  e.  spoken  of,  bill  on  your  part 

2  Pet.  2.  2.  the  way  of  truth  shall  be  e.  spoken  of 
10.  are  not  afraid  to  speak  e.  of  dignities,  JudeS. 
12.  these,  as  natural  bi  ute  beasts,  speak  e.  of  the 

things  that  thev  understand  not,  Jude  10. 
EVILS. 
Dfu?.31.I7.  many  e.  and  troubles  shall  befall  them, 
they  will  say,  are  not  these  e.  come  upon  us 

18.  for  all  the  c.  which  they  shall  have  wrought 
21.  when  many  e.  and  troubles  are  befallen  them 

P.'.-u/.40.12.innumerablec.have  compassed  nieabt. 

.Jer.  2. 13.  for  my  people  have  committed  two  e. 

Ezek.  6.9.  shall  lothe  themselves  for  the  f .  commit. 
20.  43.  lothe  yourselves  in  your  sight  for  all  yi>Hr  c. 

Has.  7.  t  1-  the  e.  of  Samaria  were  discovered 

Luke  3.  10.  for  all  the  e.  which  Herod  had  done 

Jam.  1.  t  13-  God  cannot  he  tempted  with  e. 
EUNUCH 

Comes  from  the  Greek,  Eunouchos,  which  signi 
fns  one  who  guards  the  bed;  because  generally 
in  the,  courts  of  the  eastern  kings  the  care  of 
Ihe  beds  and  apartments  belonging  to  princes 
and  princesses  teas  committed  to  them  ;  but 
chief  y  nf  theprincesses,irho  tired  in  great  con- 
fnemrnt,  rrmnte  from  the  sight  and  company 
of  men.  The  Hebrew  icord  Sa.tis,signijies  a  real 


EXA 

eunuch, or  one  deprived  of  his  genitals:  whether 
he  be  naturally  born  such,  or  made  an  eunuch 
by  manual  operation.  But  this  word,  us  well 
as  the  Greek  Eunouchos,  is  in  scripture  taken 
for  an  officer  belonging  to  some  prince  attend- 
ing at  his  court,  and  employed  in  the  inner 
palace,  whether  he  be  really  an  eunuch  cr  not. 
Potiphar,  Pharaoh's  eunuch,  nwi/ Joseph's  miis- 
ter,  had  a  wife,  Gen.  39.  1,  7.  and  a  chila  too, 
if . \sena.lh  was  daughter  to  J<iEeph's  master, 
as  same  think,  though  the  generality  of  Coin- 
mentalors  be  of  the  cnhtrary  opinion. 
God  forbad  his  people  to  make  eunuchs,  Deut 
23.  1.  He  that  has  that  part  wounded  or  cut  off, 
which  is  intended  for  the  preservation  of  the 
species,  shall  not  enter  into  the  ccjngregation  of 
the  Iiord.  H'hich  words  arc  differently  explain- 
ed. Some  think  that  (w  od  here  forbids  eunucht 
to  marry  with  Israelites  :  others,  that  God  for- 
bids them  to  enter  into  his  temple;  others,  that 
he  excludes  them  from  all  offices  of  the  magis- 
tracy; and  others,  that  God  debars  them  sim- 
ply the  possession  of  some  outward  privileges 
belonging  to  the  Israelites  and  people  of  the 
Lord.  They  were  looked  upon  in  the  common- 
wealth as  dry  and  useless  wood.  Isa.  56.  3, 
Behold  I  am  a  dry  tree.  Sec  Dry. 
There  were  Eunuchs  in  the  courts  of  the  kings 
o/ Judali  and  Israel,  officers  called  Sarism,  eu- 
nuchs. Samuel,  describing  to  the  people  the 
manner  of  their  king,  tells  them,  1  Sam.  8. 15, 
He  will  take  the  tenth  of  your  seed,  and  give 
to  his  officers,  or  eunuchs.  Some  understand 
this  properly,  that  he  should  against  the  com- 
mand of  God  make  some  of  his  people  eu- 
nuchs. But  others  think  that  these  eunuchs, 
in  all  probability,  were  slaves  taken  from 
some  foreign  people :  or  if  they  mere  Hebrews, 
the  name  of  eunuchs,  which  is  given  them, 
shews  no  more  than  their  office  and  dignity. 
See  also,  1  Kings  22.  9.  2  Kings  9.  32.  I  24.  12, 
15.  1  Chron.  28.  1. 
Our  Saviour  in  Mat.  19.  12,  speaks  nf  a  sort  of 
eunuchs,  diffident  front  thtse  mentioned  per- 
sons, who  have  made  themselves  eunuchs  for 
the  kingdom  of  heaven's  sake ;  that  is,  who, 
upon  some  religious  motive,  do  abstain  from 
marriage,  and  the  use  of  all  carnal  pleasures; 
that  they  may  be  less  encumbered  with  the 
cares  of  the  world,  and  may  derate  themsilves 
more  closely  to  the  service  of  God. 
Gen.  37.  f  36.  to  Potijjhar  an  c.  of  Pharaoh's 
2  Kings  8. 1 6.  the  king  appointed  an  e.  to  restore 

23.  1 11.  the  chamber  of  Nathan-melech  the  e. 
25.  1 19.  out  of  the  city  he  took  an  c.  .7cr.  52. 25. 

/.•>■«.  56.  3.  neither  let  the  c.  say,  I  am  a  dry  tree 
Jlcts  8.27.  an  e.  had  come  to  Jerusalem  to  worship 

34.  e.  said,  of  whom  speaks  the  jirophet  this? 

36.  e.  said,  what  doth  hinder  me  to  be  baptizetl? 

39.  Siiirilcaught  Philip,  that  e.  saw  him  no  more 
EUA'UCHS. 

1  Sam.  8. 1 15.  will  give  tenth  of  your  seed  to  his  e. 

2  Kings  9.  32.  there  looked  out  two  or  three  e. 

20. 18.  thy  sons  take  away,  and  ihey  shall  be  e.  in 
the  pnlace  of  the  king  of  P.abylon,  Jsa  39.  7. 

24.  1 12.  Jehoiachin  went  out,  he  and  his  e. 

1  Chron.  28.  t  1-  and  David  aKsembled  the  c. 

2  Chron.  18.  8.  Ahab  called  for  one  of  his  f. 
iC«?/(.l.tl2.Vashti  refused  to  come  by  handof  hise. 

4.  t4.  Esther's  maids  and  e.  came  and  told  it  her 
/sa..56.4. saith  the  L.to  thee,  (hat  keep  my  sabbath 
./er.2y.2.afler  that  the  e.  were  departed  from  Jems. 

34.19.  ('.which  passed  between  the  parts  of  the  calf 
38.  7.  when  Ebcd-melech  one  of  the  e.  heard 

41. 16.  the  e.  whom  he  had  brought  from  Gibeon 
Dan.  1.  3.  the  king  spake  to  the  master  of  hie  c. 

7.  to  whom  Ihe  prince  of  the  c.  gave  names 

8.  Daniel  reipiested  of  the  prince  of  the  e. 

9.  Daniel  brought  into  favour  with  prince  of  e. 
18.  then  the  prince  of  the  c.  brought  them  in 

J7(iM9.12.  some  are  c.  who  were  so  horn,  some  are 
made  e.  of  men,  some  have  made  themselves  t. 
EUROCLYDON 

Is  a  wind  jchich  blows  between  the  east  and 
north.  It  is  very  dangerous,  of  the  nature  of 
a  whirlwind,  which  falls  on  a  sudden  upon 
ships,  makes  them  tnck  about,  and  sometimes 
causes  them  to  founder,  as  Pliny  observes. 

.^cts  27. 14.  there  arose  a  tempestu.  wind,  called  e. 
EWE  or  EWES. 

(7fJi.21.28.  Abraham  set  seven  e.  Inmhs  by  thcma. 
29.  he  said,  what  mean  these  seven  e.  lambs  7 

31.  38.  e.  and  shegoats  have  not  cast  their  young 

32.  14.  two  hundred  e.  and  twenty  rams  for  Esaa 
Lev.  14.  10.  take  one  e.  lamb  of  the  first  year 

22.  28.  whether  cow  or  e.  ye  fh;ill  not  kill  it 
2  .<fnm.l2.3.  poor  man  had  nothing  save  oner,  lam  J 
Psal.  78.  71.  he  took  him  from  following  the  e. 

EXACT. 
Deut.lS.i.  shall  not  e.  it  of  his  neiglibour  or  brot-^ur 


£XA 

Pent.  15.  3.  of  n  foreigner  thou  mayest  e.  it  again 
V(A.  5.7.  you  c.  usury  every  one  ot  Ins  brDtlier 

10.  I  likewise  iiuglit  e.  of  them  inuiicy  and  corn 
11. restore  liundrudih  part  of  money  ye  e.  of  them 

Psal  all.  ;!-'.  the  enemy  shall  not  c.  ujioii  him 
Jsa.x^  3.  Ijeliold,  in  your  fasts  ye  e.  all  your  labours 
/.u/c(:3.l3.he  said, ('.no  more  tlianwhat  isappoinled 

KXACTKO. 

2  Kings  15.  20.  Men;ihem  c  the  money  of  Israel 

2J.  35.  Jeboiakim  e.  the  sdvcr  and  tlit;  gold 

EXAt'TETll. 

Job  11.6.  G.c.ofthee lis* than  thine  iniq.  deservoth 

EXACTION. 
JWA.  10.  31.  we  would  leave  the  e.  of  every  debt 

KXACTlOXri. 
Ezek.  45.  9.  take  away  your  c.  from  my  people 

EXACTOR. 
Job  39.  1 7.  nor  regardeth  be  the  crying  of  the  e. 

EXACTORS. 
ha.GO.  17. 1  will  also  make  thine  e. righteoueness 

EXALT. 
Ezod.  15.2.  he  is  my  fatlicr's  God,  and  I  will  e.  him 

1  .bum.  2.  10.  he  shall  e.  the  horn  of  his  anointed 
Jo!/  17.  4.  therefore  Shalt  thou  not  c.  them 
Hsal.  34.  3.  and  let  us  e.  his  name  togellier 

37.  34.  he  shall  c.  thee  to  inherit  the  land 

6Ci.  7.  let  not  the  rebellious  e.  themselves 

92.  10.  but  my  horn  shalt  thou  c.  like  the  horn 

119.  5.  e.  ye  the  Lord  our  God,  and  worshiji,  9. 

107.  32.  let  ihem  c.  him  in  the  congregation 

lid  28.  thou  art  my  God,  I  will  e.  tliee 

140.  0.  further  not,  lest  the  wicked  e.  themselves 

Pruv.  4.  8.  c.  her,  and  she  shall  promote  thee 

Isa.  13.  2.  e.  the  voice  unto  them,  shake  the  hand 
K.  13.  I  will  c.  my  throne  above  the  stars  of  God 
25.  1.  O  Lord,  thou  art  my  God,  I  will  c.  thee 

Kzek.  21.  2ii.  e.  him  that  is  low,  abase  the  high 
29. 15.  nor  shall  it  e.  itself  any  more  above  nations 
31.  14.  to  the  end  none  of  the  trees  e.  themselves 

2>a«.11.14.  robbers  of  thy  peoplcshall  c.themeelves 
3(j.  the  king  shall  c.  Inmself  above  every  god 

Hus.ll.'.  Ihu'  they  called,  none  at  all  would  e.  him 
Obiid.  4.  though  thou  e.  thyself  as  the  eagle 

Mat.  23. 12.  whoso  shall  c.  himself,  shall  be  abased 

2  Cur.  11.2U.  if  a  man  e.  himself,  if  a  man  smite  you 
1  Pei.j.G.humble  yoursel.  that  he  may  c.in  duo  time 

EXALTED. 
JVum.  24.  7.  and  his  kingdom  shall  bo  c. 
1  ■'Sam.  2.  1.  she  said,  mine  horn  is  c.  in  the  Lbrd 
i.V.tni.5. 12.  perceived  that  Lord  hade,  his  kingdom 

22.  47.  the  Lord  livetli,  and  c.  be  the  God  of  the 
rock  of  my  salvation,  J'nul.  18.  4(3. 
1  Kings  1.5.  then  Adonijah  c.  himself,  saying 

14.  7.  I  c.  lliee  from  among  the  people,  IG.  2. 
C  Kings  in.22.against  whom  ha.<t  thou  e.  thy  voice 
and  lift  up  thine  eyes  on  highl  Ua.  37.  23. 
I  Chr.  29.  11.  and  thou  art  e.  as  head  above  all 
JVt./i.  9. 5.  which  is  e.  above  all  blessing  and  praise 
Job  5. 11.  that  those  who  mourn  may  be  c.  to  safely 

24.  24.  they  are  e.  for  a  little  w  liili',  but  are  gone 

30. 7.  he  doth  establish  them  for  ever,  they  are  c. 
Psal.  12. 8.  wickcil  walk  when  the  vilest  men  are  e. 

13.  2.  how  long  shall  my  enemy  be  e.  over  me'? 

21.  1.3.  be  thou  c.  Lord,  in  thine  own  strength 

46.  10.  he  still  and  know  I  am  God,  I  will  be  e. 

among  the  heathen,  I  will  be  e.  in  the  earth 

47.  9.  shields  of  earth  belong  toG.  he  is  greatly  c. 
57.  5.  be  thou  c.  O  God,  above  the  heavens,  11. 
75. 10.  but  the  horns  of  the  righteous  shall  be  e. 
69.  10.  in  thy  righteousness  shall  they  be  c. 

17.  and  in  thy  favour  our  horn  shall  be  e. 
19.  I  have  e.  one  chosen  out  of  the  people 
2).  and  in  my  name  shall  iiis  horn  be  e. 
67  9.  thou,  Lord,  art  e.  far  above  all  gods 
103.  .').  be  thou  c.  O  God,  above  t|)e  heavens 
I         112.  9.  his  horn  shall  be  e.  with  honour 
118.  li'..  the  right  hand  of  the  Lord  is  c. 
140.  t8.  further  not,  let  not  the  wicked  bo  e. 
Prov.  11. 11.  by  the  blessing  of  the  upright  city  isc. 
faa.  2.  2.  Ihe  moimlain  of  the  Lord's  house  shall 
be  e.  above  the  hilis,  all  nations  How  tu  it. 
Mid.  1. 

11.  the  Lord  shall  be  e.  in  that  day,  17.  |  5. 16. 

-  12. 4.  pruise  Ld.  make  mention  that  his  name  is  e. 
30. 18.  will  bo  e.  that  he  may  have  mercy  on  you 
33.  5.  the  Lonl  is  e.  ||  10.  now  will  I  be  c. 
40.4.  every  valley  uliall  be  c.  every  mountain  low 
49.  11.  and  my  highways  Khali  be  e. 
53.  13.  behold  my  servant  shall  be  c.  and  extolled 
Eick.  17.  24.  that  I  the  Jiord  have  e.  the  low  tree 
19.1  Land  herslature  wase.  ainonghr>uicheB,31.5. 
Hos.  11.  t7.  togelhrr  they  e.  not  him 
13.  L  Ephraim  spake,  he  r..  himself  in  Israel 
fi.  Ihcy  were  fdled,  and  Ihoir  heart  was  c. 
Mat.  \  1.23.  Capernaum  e.  to  heaven,  l.uke  10. 15 
,23.12.  c.  himself  be  abased,  that  shall  Immhli 
himself  shall  be  e.  J.ukc  14. 11.  |  18.  14 
Au&«  1.  52.  and  he  hnth  e.  them  of  low  degreo 
/lets  2.  33.  heini?  by  the  right-hand  of  God  e. 
5.  31.  him  hath  God  e.  with  his  right-liaiid 
174 


EXA 

jScii  13.17.  the  God  of  Israel  c.  the  people  in  Egypt 

i  Cor.  11.  7.  abasing  myself  that  you  might  be  e. 
12.  7.  lest  1  should  be  e.  above  measure,  7. 

PUil.  2.  9.  wherelore  God  hath  highly  e.  him 

Jam.  1.  y.  let  tlie  brotlier  rejoice  lliat  he  is  e. 
EXALTLST. 

Eiod.'i.Yl.  as  yet  e.  thou  thyself  against  my  i)eoplfc 
EXALTETll. 

Job  30.  22.  behold,  God  e.  by  his  power 

Psal.  )13.  t  5.  Lord  our  God, who  t.  hinis.  to  dwell 
148. 14.  he  also  e.  the  horn  of  his  people 

Prov.  3. 1 35.  wise  inherit  glory,  but  shame  e.  fools 
14.  29.  he  that  is  hasty  of  spirit  c.  folly 
34. righteousness  e.  a  nation,  but  sin  is  a  re.uroach 
17.  19.  he  that  e.  his  gate  seekelh  destruction 

Luke  14. 11.  he  that  e.  hims.  shall  be  abased,  18.14. 

2  Cor.  10.  5.  casting  donji  every  tlimg  that  e.  itself 

'  Thcss.'i.i.  who  c.  hims.  above  all  that  is  called  G. 
EXAMINATION 

.4cf£25. 26.  that  after  c.  had,  I  might  have  to  write 
EXAMINE, 

IVhen  applied  to  God.,  denotes  the  particular 
strict  notice  he  takes  of  his  creatures.  Psal. 
20.  2,  Examine  me,  O  Lord,  and  prove  me ;  try 
my  reins  and  my  heart.  As  if  the  I'sahnist  had 
said,  Because  J  may  be  mistaken,  or  be  partial 
in  my  own  cause,  therefore  I  appeal  to  thee, 
and  ujf't-r  myself  to  thy  trial  concerning  what 
my  enemies  charge  vie  with. 

Hf'hen  applied  to  man,  examination  2«  either  pri- 
vate or  public.  Private,  when  a  Christian 
tries  hinmelf  by  the  word  of  God,  and  by  what 
Christ  has  wrought  by  his  Hpirtt  within  him, 
whether  he  be  a  true  believer  in  .hsus,  and  has 
any  ground  to  hope  for  salvation  through  his 
blood  and  righteousness.  2  ('or.  13.  5,  K\- 
amiiie  yourselves,  whether  ye  be  in  the  faith, 
prove  your  own  selves.  Jind  this  duty  is  es- 
pecially to  be  performed  before  persons  par- 
take of  the  Lord's  supper.  1  Cor.  11.  28,  But 
let  a  man  examine  himself,  and  so  let  him  eat  of 
that  bread,  and  drink  of  that  cup.  J^et  him 
compare  his  heart  and  life  by  the  word,  to  see 
ichithrr  he  be  duly  qualified  to  partake  of  this 
ordinance,  in  regard  of  his  knowledge,  faith, 
repentance,  love,  and  new  obedience. 

Public  examination  is,  when  rulers  and  govern- 
ors, whether  civil,  or  ecclesiastical,  bring  such 
as  are  suspected  of  unsound  principles,  or 
detected  of  enormities,  to  a  trial  for  the  same. 
Thus  it  is  said  of  the  angel  of  the  church  of 
Eidiesus,  Hev.  2.  2,  Thou  hast  tried  them 
which  .«ay  they  are  apostles,  and  are  not ;  iind 
hast  found  them  liars.  Jlnd  our  Saviour  was 
examined  by  I'ilate,  though  he  was  innocent, 
and  the  things  laid  to  his  charge  were  unjust, 
Luke  23.  13,  14.  And  the  apostle  Paul  was 
ordered  to  be  examined  by  scourging,  Acts 
22.  24.  As  to  the  manner  of  examining  by 
scourging,  or  putting  one  to  the  question,  Sec 

on  Ul'ESTION. 

F.zra  10. 16.  sat  dov\'n  the  first  day  to  e.  the  matter 
f.fu/.  20. 2.  e.  me,  O  Lord.iirove  me,  try  my  reins 

1  Cor.  9.3.  mine  answer  lo  them  that  e.  me,  is  this 
11.  28.  let  a  man  c.  himself,  and  so  let  him  eat  of 

2  Cnr.  13.  5.  c.  yourselves,  prove  your  own  selves 

EXAMINED. 

Luke  23.  14.  behold,  I  have  e.  him  before  you 
Acts  4.  9.  if  we  this  day  be  c.  of  the  good  deed 

12.19.  Herod  c.  keepers,  and  commanded  to  death 

22.  24.  brought,  that  he  should  be  e.  by  scourging 
29.they  depart,  from  him, who  should  have  t. him 

28. 18.  when  lliev  had  e.  mo  would  have  let  me  go 

EXAMINING. 
Acts  24.  8.  by  e.  of  whom  thou  mayest  takeknowl. 
EXAMPLE  I 

\itaken  cither  for  a  type,  instance,  or  precedent, 
for  our  admonition,  that  we  may  be  cautioned 
aifainst  the  sins  which  others  hicecounnitted, 
by  the  judgments  which  (/oil  injlicted  on  thi  m,  \ 
1  Cor.  10.  11,  .\ll  these  things  happened  unto 
Ihem  for  ensumples.  Or  example  is  taken  for 
a  pattern  for  onr  imitation,  a  moiUl  for  us  tu 
copy  after.  John  13.  15,  I  have  given  you  an  | 
example,  that  ye  shonld  do  ns  I  have  done  lo  ^ 
you.  And  in  1  Pet.  2.  21,  Christ  sufiered  fori 
us,  leaving  us  un  example,  that  we  should  fol- 1 
low  his  steps.  'J'his  is  one  of  the  means  by 
which  our  liedeeincr  restores  his  people  to  | 
holiness,  namely,  by  exhibiting  a  completcl 
paltern  of  it  in  his  life  upon  earth. 

That  oxani|ile8  have  a  peculiar  power  above  lhr\ 
naked  precept,  to  dispose  us  to  the  practice  of 
holiness,  may  appear  by  considering,  (1)  That 
they  most  clearly  express  to  us  the  nature  of 
our  duties  intheir  suljerts  anil  sensible  effects,  j 
Geniralprccepts  form  abstract  ideas  of  virtue,  ■ 
but  in  examples^  virtues  are  made  visible  in  all 
thi  ir  circumstanres.  (2)  I'rrcrpts  inftruet  us\ 
what  things  are  our  (iu<y,(ut  examples  assure  \ 


EXC 

us  that  they  are  possible.     IVhen  wt  see  men 
like  ourselves,  who  are  united  to  frail  Jleah, 
and  ill  the  same  condition  with  us,  to  command 
their  passions,  to  overcome  the  greatest  and 
most  glittering  temptations,we  are  encouraged 
in  our  spiritual  warfare.    (3j  Examples,  by  a 
secret  and  lively  incentive,  urge  us  to  i7nita- 
tion.     H'e  are  touched  in  another  manner  by 
the  visible  practice  of  saints,  which  reproaches 
oar  dtfccts,  and  obliges  us  to  the  same  leal, 
than  by  laws,  though  holy  and  good. 
The  example  of  Clirisl  ii  most  proper  to  form  us 
to  holiness,  it  being  absolutely  perfect,  and 
accommodated  to  our  present  state.   There  is  no 
example  of  a  mere  man,  that  is  to  be  followed 
without  limitation.     Be  ye  followers  of  me,  as 
I  am  of  Christ,  says  the  great  Apostle,  1  Cor. 
11. 1.     But  the  examjile  of  Christ  is  absolutely 
perfect.     JJis  conversation  was  a  living  law. 
He  was  holy,  harmless,  undellkd,  and  separate 
from  sinners,  Heb.  7.  26.     His  example  is  also 
most  accommodated  to  our  present  state.    The 
divine  nature  is  the  supreme  rule  of  moral 
perfection ;  for  we  are  commanded  to  be  holy, 
as  God  is  holy.     But  such  is  the  obscurity  of 
our  minds,  and  the  weakness  of  our  natures, 
that  the  pattern  was  too  high  and  glorious  to 
be  expressed  by  us.    And  though  we  had  not 
strength  to  ascend  to  hi  in,  yet  he  had  goodness 
to  descend  to  us ;  and  in  this  present  state, 
and  in  our  nature,  to  set  before  us  a  pattern 
more  jittcd  to  our  capacity :  So  that  the  divine 
attributes  are  sweetened  in  the  Son  of   God 
incarnate ;  and  being  united  with  the  graces 
proper  for  the  human  nature,  are  more  per- 
ceptible to  our  minds,  and  more  imitable  buus. 
jl/at. 1.19.  Joseph  not  willing  to  make  her  a  public  e. 
John  13.  15.  for  I  have  given  you  an  c.  that  ye  do 
Horn.  15. 15.  be  like  miiuled  atler  the  e.  of  Christ 
1  Tim.  4. 12.  but  be  thou  an  e.  of  tlie  believers 
Ucb.  4.  11.  lest  any  man  fall  after  the  same  e. 
8.  5.  who  serve  unto  the  c.  of  heavenly  things 
.Jam.  5.  10.  take  the  jirophcts  for  an  c.  of  suffering 
1  Pet.  2. 21 .  Christ  suffered  for  us,  leaving  us  an  e. 
.Jade  7.  set  forth  for  an  c.  suffering  the  vengeance 
EXAMPLES. 

1  Cor.  10.  6.  now  the>e  things  were  oure.  not  to  lust 

Sec  Ensample,  s. 

EXCEED. 

Deut.  25.3.  forty  stripes  he  may  give,  and  not  c.  lest 

if  he  should  e.  thy  brother  seem  vile  to  thee 

Mat.  5.20.  except  your  righteousness  f.  the  scribes 

2  Co?-.3.9.ministralion  of  rightcousn.dolhe.inglory 

EXCEEDED. 

1  Sam.  20.  41.  and  they  wept,  till  David  c. 
IKings  10.23.Solom.  e.  all  kingsof  earth  for  riches 
Job  36.  9.  sheweth  their  transgressions  that  they  c. 

EXCEEDEST. 

2  Chron.  9.  6.  for  thou  e.  the  fame  that  I  heard 

EXCEEDETH. 
1  Kings  10.  7.  thv  wisdom  e.  the  fame  that  I  heard 

EXCEEDING. 
Oev.  15. 1.  I  am  thyshield,  and  thy  e.  great  reward 
17.  6.  I  will  make  thee  e.  fruitful,  make  nations 
27.  34.  and  Esau  cried  with  an  c.  bitter  cry 
F.xod.  1.  7.  the  children  of  Israel  waxed  e.  mighty 
19.  16.  and  the  voice  of  the  trumpet  e.  loud 
JV«»H.  14.  7.  Ihe  land  we  pa».-.ed  through  is  c.  good 

1  Sam.  2.  3.  talk  no  more  so  e.  proudly 

2  Sam.  8.  8.  king  David  took  e.  much  brass 

12.  2.  the  rich  man  had  e.  many  Hocks  and  herds 
1  Kings  4.  29.  God  gave  Solomon  wisdom  e.  much 
7.  47.  left  vess(ds  unweighed,  Ihoy  were  e.  many 

1  CAr.  20.2.  he  bionght  c.  much  spoil  out  of  the  city 

22.  5.  and  Ihe  house  must  be  e.  magnifical 

2  Chron.  11.  12.  and  he  made  the  cilics  e.  strong 
14.  14.  for  there  was  e.  much  spoil  in  them 
16.12.  Asadiseased,  until  his  disease  was  c. great 
32.27.  llezokiah  had  r.  much  riches  and  honour 

f  .ta/.21.6.tliou  hast  made  him  f  .glad  wilh  lliy  coun. 
43M.  then  will  I  go  unto  God  my  f.  joy 
1 19.  96.  hut  thy  commandment  is  c  broad 
/'ror.  30.  24.  there  be  four  things  which  are  «.  wiso 
/.■ft7.7.24.ihnt  whichis  c.(lee|i,wliocan  tinditoni? 
./cr.48.29.  we  heard  the  pride  ofMoiib,  he  is  r.prouj 
F.iek.  9.  9.  Ihe  ini(|uity  of  Isr.tol  is  e.  great 
16.  13.  thou  didst  eat  oil,  and  wasi  c  bcautiRil 

23.  15.  c  in  dyed  attire  upon  Iheir  heads 

37.  10.  stood  up  upon  their  feet  an  c.  groat  arncy 
47.  10.  as  Ihe  fish  of  the  great  sea,  e.  many 
I>an.  3.  22.  because  Ihe  furnaco  was  <•.  hot 

6.  23.  then  was  Ihe  king  c  glad  for  him 

7.  19.  Ihe  fourth  beast  which  was  r.  dreadful 

8. 9.  ciiine  forth  n  little  horn  which  waxed  r.  great 
.lonah  3.  3.  now  Nineveh  was  an  r.  great  city 

4.  6.  so  Jonah  was  e.  glad  of  llic  gourd 
Jl/rt/.2.  10.  saw  star,  Ihoy  rejoiced  with  r.  great  joy 
16.  Herod,  when  ho  was  mocked,  was  r.  wroth 

4.  R.  lakelh  him  up  into  an  e.  high  mountain 

5. 12.  rojuiceonJ  be  «.  glad,  great  is  your  toward 


EXC 

tTat..  8. 28.  met  Iiim  two  poss.  with  (levlls,  e>  fierce 
17.  23.  they  shall  kill  him  ;  they  were  e.  sorry 
20.  22.  they  were  e.  sorrowful  and  began  to  say 

38.  my  eoul  is  e.  sorrowful,  Mark  14.  34. 
Jilaik  6.  2(3.  the  king  was  e.  sorry,  yet  for  the  oath 
U.  3.  his  raiment  became  e.  white  as  snow 
I.uke  23. 8.  when  Herod  saw  Jesus,  he  was  e.  glad 
Mcts  7.  20.  Moses  was  born,  and  was  e.  fair. 
Horn.  7.  13.  that  sin  might  become  e.  sinful 
B  Cor.  4. 17.  worketh  for  us  an  e.  weight  of  glory 
7.  4.  I  am  e.  joyful  in  all  our  tribulation 
9. 14. who  long  after  you,  fore,  grace  of  God  in  you 
Eph.  1.  19.  what  is  the  e.  greatness  of  his  power 

2.  7.  he  might  shew  the  e.  riches  of  his  grace 

3.  20.  to  him  that  is  able  to  do  c.  abundantly 

1  Tim.  1. 14.  the  grace  of  our  Lord  was  f  .abundant 
1  Pet.  4.  13.  that  ye  may  be  glad  also  with  e.  joy 
S  /'<:t.l.4.given  to  us  e.  great  and  precious  promises 
.fade  24.  able  to  present  you  faultless  with  e.  joy 
Rev.  16.  21.  for  the  plague  thereof  was  e.  great 

EXCEEDINGLY. 
Gen.  7.  19.  the  waters  prevailed  f.  on  the  earth 

13.  13.  but  the  men  of  Sodom  were  sinners  c. 

IC.  10.  the  angel  said,  I  will  multiply  thy  seed  e. 

17.  2. 1  will  make  my  coven,  and  multiply  thee  e. 
20.  I  will  multiply  Ishmael  c.  a  great  nation 

27.  33.  and  Isaac  trembled  very  e.  and  said 

30.  43.  and  Jacob  increased  e.  47.  27. 

1  Sam.  20.  21. 1  have  played  the  fool  and  erred  e. 

2  Sam.  13. 15.  then  Amnon  hated  her  e.  and  said 
2  Kings  10.  4.  the  elders  of  Samaria  were  e.  afraid 

1  Chr.  29. 25.  Ld.  magnified  Solom.  e.  2  Chr.  1.  1. 

2  Chr.  17.  12.  Jelioshaphat  waxed  great  e. 

26.  8.  Uzziah  strengthened  himself  e. 

JVtA.  2.  10.  they  heard  of  it,  it  grieved  them,  e. 
F.sth.i.A.\\\e  queen  was  e.  grieved, and  sent  raiment 
Job  3.  22.  rejoice  e.  when  they  can  find  the  grave 
Psal.  C3.  3.  yea,  let  the  righteous  e.  rejoice 

106. 14.  lusted  c.  in  the  wilderness,  and  tempted  G. 

119.  167.  kept  thy  testimonies,  I  love  them,  e. 

123. 3.  for  we  are  e.  filled  with  contempt,  4. 
Jsa.  24. 19.  the  earth  is  dissolved,  earth  is  moved  e. 
Dan.  7.  7.  and  behold,  a  fourth  beast  strong  «.■ 
Jonah  1. 10.  men  were  e.  afraid,  and  said  to  him 
16.  then  the  men  feared  the  Lord  e.  and  offered 

4.  1.  but  it  dis[ileased  Jonah  e.  and  he  was  angry 
Mjit.  19.25.  heard  it,  they  were  e.  amazed,  sayin, 
Jifark  4.  41.  they  feared  n.  and  said  one  to  another 

15.  14.  they  cried  out  the  more  e.  crucify  him 
^cts  16.  20.  these  men  do  e.  trouble  our  city 
2G.  11.  being  n.  mad  against  them,  I  persecuted 

27.  18.  and  we  being  e.  tossed  with  a  tempest 

2  Cor.  7. 13.  yea,and  c.  the  more  joyed  we  for  Titus 
Gal.  1. 14.  being  moree.  zealous  of  the  traditions 

1  Thess.  3.  10.  night  and  day  praying  c.  to  see  you 

2  TAess.  1.  3.  because  that  your  faith  groweth  e. 
Ileb-  12.  21.  Moses  said,  I  c.  fear  and  quake 

EXCEL. 
Gen.  49.  4.  unstable  as  water,  thou  shalt  not  e. 
1  Chron.  15.  21.  with  harps  on  the  Sheminith  to  e 
Psal.  103.  20.  ye  his  angels,  that  e.  in  strength 
[sa.  10.  10.  and  wliose  graven  images  did  c.  them 
1  Cor.  14.  12.  seek  that  ve  mav  e.  to  edifyin; 

EXCELLED. 
I  £itnffs4.30.SoIomon'Bwi6dom  c.wisdom  of  Egypt 

EXCELLEST. 
Prov.  31.  29.  done  virtuouslv,  but  thou  e.  them  all 

EXCELLETH. 
F.ccl.  2. 13.  wisdom  e.  folly,  as  far  as  light  e.  dark. 
S  Cor.  3.  10.  by  reason  of  the  glory  that  e. 

EXCELLENCY. 
Gcn~  4.  t  7.  doest  well,  shalt  thou  not  have  the  e.  1 

49.  3.  the  c.  of  dignity,  and  the  e.  of  power 
Ezod.  15.  7.  and  in  the  greatness  of  thine  e. 
Vent.  33.  23.  who  ridelh  in  his  e.  on  the  sky 

29.  shield  of  help,  and  who  is  the  sword  of  thy  e. 
Jab  4.  21.  dolh  not  their  c.  go  away  1  they  die 

13.  11.  shall  not  his  e.  make  you  afraid  ? 

20.  6.  though  his  e.  mount  up  to  the  heavens 

22.  t  20.  but  their  e.  the  fire  consumeth 

37.  4.  he  thundereth  with  the  voice  of  his  e. 

40.  10.  deck  thyself  now  with  majesty  and  e. 
Psal.  47.  4.  the  r..  of  Jacob  whom  he  loved 

C2.  4.  they  consult  to  cast  him  down  from  his  e. 

68.  34.  his  e.  is  over  Israel,  and  his  strength 
Prov.  17.  t  7.  a  lip  of  e.  becometh  not  a  fool 
Eccl.  2.  t  W.  I  saw  that  there  is  an  e.  in  wisdom 

7. 12.  tlie  c.  of  knowledge  is,  that  wisdom  gives  life 
Tsa.  13. 19.  Babylon  the  beauty  of  the  Chaldees'  e. 

35. 2.  e.  of  Carmel,  Sharon;  and  the  e.  of  our  G. 

60.  15.  I  will  make  thee  an  eternal  e.  a  joy 
Ezek.  16.  t  56.  Sodom  not  mentioned  in  day  of  e. 

24.  21.  my  sanctuary,  the  e.  of  your  strength 
..iinos  6.  8.  saith  the  Lord,  I  abhor  the  e.  of  Jacob 

8.  7.  the  Lord  liath  sworn  by  the  e.  of  Jacob 
JVaA.  2.  2.  for  the  Lord  hath  turned  away  the  k.  of 
Jacob,  as  the  n.  of  Israel,  emptiers  eniptiej  them 

Mai.  2.  t  15.  yet  had  he  the  c.  of  the  Spirit 

1  Cor.  2.  1.  I  came  not  to  you  with  f.  of  speech 

2  Cor.  4.  7.  thai  the  e.  of  the  power  may  be  of  God 

J  75 


EXC 

Phil.  3.  8.  I  count  nil  things  loss  for  the  e.  of  Chr. 

EXCELLENT. 
Esth.  1.  4.  Ahasuerus  slicwed  his  e.  majesty 
./oi  .37.  23.  the  Almighty  is  e.  in  power 
Psal.  8.  1.  how  e.  is  thy  name  in  all  the  earth  !  9. 
Hi.  3.  and  to  the  e.  in  whom  is  all  my  delight 
36.  7.  how  e.  is  thy  loving-kindness,  O  God  I 
76. 4.  thou  art  more  e.  than  ihe  mountains  of  prey 
141.  .5.  let  him  reprove  me,  it  shall  be  an  e.  oil 
148.  13.  praise  the  Lord,  his  name  alone  is  e. 
150.  2.  praise  him  according  to  his  e.  greatness 
Prov.  8.  6.  hear,  for  I  will  si)eak  of  «.  things 
12.  20.  the  righteous  is  more  e.  than  his  neighbour 
17.  7.  e.  speech  becometh  not  a  fool 
27.  a  man  of  understanding  is  of  an  e.  spirit 
22.  20.  have  I  not  written  to  thee  e.  things? 
Cant.  5. 15.  his  countenance  c.  as  the  cedars 
Isa.  4.  2.  and  the  fruit  of  the  earth  shall  be  e. 
12.  5.  sing  to  the  Lord,  he  hath  done  e.  things 
22. 1 17.  Lord  covered  thee  with  an  e.  covering 
28.  29.  the  Lord  of  hosts  is  e.  in  working 
Ezck.  16.  7.  and  thou  art  come  to  e.  ornamenta 
27.124.  these  were  thy  mercharfts  in  e.  things 
Dan.  2.  31.  this  image,  whose  brightness  was  e. 

4.  30.  an  e.  majesty  was  added  unto  me 

5.  12.  an  e.  spirit  was  found  in  Daniel,  6.3. 

14.  I  heard  that  e.  wisdom  is  found  in  thee 
Luke  1.  3.  to  write  to  thee,  most  e.  Theoidiilus 
.rirts  23.  2t).  Claudius,  to  Ihe  e.  governor  Felix 
Kom.".]8.  and  approvcst  things  more  e.  Phil.  1. 10. 

1  Cor.  12.  31.  yet  shew  I  unto  you  a  more  e.  way 
Ileb.  1.  4.  he  obtained  a  more  e.  name  than  they 

8.  6.  but  now  hath  he  obtained  a  more  e.  ministry 

11.  4.  Abel  offered  to  God  a  more  e.  sacrifice 

2  Pet.  1.  17.  there  came  a  voice  from  the  e.  glory 

EXCEPT. 
Gen  .3]  .42.  c.  the  G.  of  my  father  had  been  with  me 
.32.  26.  I  will  not  let  lliee  go,  e.  thou  bless  me 

42.  15.  e.  your  youneest  brother  come,  43.  3,  5. 

43.  10.  e.  we  had  lingered,  we  had  now  returned 
47.  20.  fifth  part,  c.  the  land  of  the  priests  only 

JVum.  16.  13.  e.  thou  make  thyself  a  prince  over  us 
Deut.  32.  .30.  e.  their  Rock  had  sold  them 
.Tosh.l.i'i.e.  you  destroy  accursed  from  among  you 

1  Sam.  25.  34.  e.  thou  hadst  hasted  to  meet  me 

2  Sam.  3.  9.  c.  as  the  Lord  hath  sworn  to  David 
13.  e.  thou  first  bring  Michal,  Saul's  daughter 

5.  6.  e.  thou  take  away  the  blind  and  the  lame 
2  Kin/rs  4.  24.  slack  not  thy  riding,  e.  I  bid  thee 
Esth.%  14.  e.  the  king  delighted  in  her  and  called 

4. 11.  c.  the  king  shall  hold  out  Ihe  golden  sceptre 
Psal.  127.1.e.  the  Lord  build  ihe  house,  e.  the  Lord 
kecplhecity,  the  watchmen  watch  but  in  vain 
Prov.  4.  10.  sleep  not,  e.  they  have  done  mischief 
Isa.  1.9.  e.  the  Lord  hath  left' a  remnant, flojn. 9.29. 
Dan.  2.  11.  none  other  can  shew  it,  c.  the  gods 

3.  23.  nor  worship  any  god,  e.  their  own  God 

6.  5.  e.  we  find  it  concerning  the  law  of  his  God 
Jimos  3.3.  can  two  walk  together,c.lhey  be  agreed? 
.1/a«.5.20.c.  your  righteousn.  e.vceed  that  of  scribes 

12.  29.  c.  he  first  bind  the  strongman,  Mark  3.  27. 
18. 3. 1  say  to  you,  c.  ye  be  converted  and  become 
19.  9.  put  away  his  wife,  c.  it  be  for  fornication 
24.  22.  and  e.'  those  days  should  be  shortened 

there  should  no  flesh  be  saved,  .Mark  13.  20. 
2fi.42.ifthis  cup  may  not  pass,  e.  I  drink  it,thy  will 
Mark  7.  3.  the  Pharisees,  e.  they  wash  oft,  eat  not 
Luke  9. 13.  c.  we  go  and  buy  meat  for  this  people 

13.  3.  e.  ye  repent,  ye  shallall  likewise  perish,  5. 
.Inhn  3. 2.  can  do  these  miracles,  e.  G.  be  with  him 

.3.e.a  man  be  horn  again.he  cannot  see  the  kingd. 
5.  e.  a  man  be  born  of  water  and  of  the  Spirit 
27.can  receive  nothing,-',  it  be  given  from  heaven 

4.  48.  e.  ye  see  signs  and  wonders,  ye  will  not  bel. 
G.  44.  e.'the  Father  who  hath  sent  me,  draw  him 

.53.  e.  ve  eat  the  flesh  of  the  Son  of  man 

05.  e.  it  were  given  unto  him  of  my  Father 

12.  24.  c.  a  corn  of  wheat  fall  into  the  ground 

15.  4.  ye  cannot  bear  fruit,  e.  ye  abide  in  me 

19.  ll.no  power, c.  it  were  given  thee  from  above 

20.  25.  e.  I  shall  seethe  prints  of  the  nails 
Acts  8.  1.  they  were  all  scattered,  e.  the  apostles 

3L  how  can  I,  e.  some  man  should  guide  me? 
15.  1.  e.  ye  be  circumcised,  ye  cannot  be  saved 
24.  21.  e.  it  be  for  this  one  voice,  that  I  cried 

26.  29.  all  were  such  as  I  am,  e.  these  bonds 

27.  31.  Paul  said,  e.  these  abide  in  ship,  ye  cannot 
lUtm.  7. 7. 1  had  not  known  lust,  f .  the  law  had  said 

10.  15.  how  shall  they  preach,  e.  tliey  be  sent"! 

1  Cr7r.7..5.defraud  not  one  anoth.f.  it  bo  with  consent 

14.  5.  that  speaketh  with  tongues,  f.  he  interpret 

6.  e.  I  shall  speak  to  you  either  by  revelation 

7.  e.  they  give  a  distinction  in  the  sounds 
9.  e.  ye  utter  words  easy  to  bo  understood 

15.36.  that  thou  sowest  is  not  quickened,  c.  it  die 

2  Cur.  12.  13.  r.  it  be  that  I  was  not  burdensome 

13.  ').  lliat  Christ  is  in  you,  c.  ye  be  reprobates? 
2  Thess.  2.  3.  n.  there  come  a  faUing  awny  first 

2  Tim.  2.  5.  he  is  not  crowned,  e.  he  strive  lawfully 
ftcv.2.5.will  remove  thy  candlestick,  f.thou  rerent 


EXE 

/Zer.2.22.  into  tribulation,  e.  they  repenttheir  deeds 

KXCKl'TED. 
lCer.15.27.  he  is  c.  v.  ho  did  put  all  things  under  him 

EXCESS. 
Mat.  23.  25.  wilhin  are  full  of  e.xtortion  and  e. 
Eph.  5.  18.  be  not  drunk  with  wine,  wherein  is  «. 
I  Pet.  4.  3.  when  we  walked  in  lusts,  e.  of  wine 

4.  that  ye  run  not  wilh  ihcm  to  the  same  e. 

EXCHANGE. 
Oen. 47.17.  Joseph  gave  them  bread  in  e.  for  horsea 
E(V.  27. 10.  then  it  and  the  e.  thereof  shall  be  holy 
,lob  20.  f  18.  according  to  the  substance  of  his  e. 
28.  17.  and  the  c.  of  it  shall  not  he  for  jewels 
Mat.  16.  26.  if  gain  world  and  lose  his  soul,  what 
shall  a  man  give  in  e.  for  his  soul.'  Mark  8.  37 
EXCHANGE. 
£zci.48.14.  they  shall  not  sell  of  it,nor  e.  first- fruitj 

EXCHANGERS. 
Mat.  25.  27.  oughtest  to  have  put  my  money  to  c 

j:xclude. 

Gal.  4. 17.  tliey  would  e.  you,  that  you  might  affect 
EXCLUDED. 

Rom.  3.  27.  where  is  boasting  then?  it  is  e. 
EXCOMMUNICATED. 

Excommunication  is  an  ecclesiastical  censurt 
u/urcby  they  who  incur  the  guilt  of  any  hi  inova 
sill,  arc  separated  from  the  communion  of  the 
church,  and  deprived  of  spiritual  advantagis; 
that  they  may  be  brought  to  repentance,  and 
others,  by  their  example,  kept  from  t/ic  like 
enormities.     Mat.  18.  15,  16,  17.     1  Cor.  5.  5, 

7.  2  Tiiess.  3.  14,  15. 

There  arc  generally  threesorls  o/Excommunica- 
tion,  distinguished  among  tAe  Jews.  The  first 
is  called  Niddui,  that  is,  separation.  This  is 
the  lesser  Excommunication.  It  lasted  thirty 
days,  and  separated  the  excommunicated  pir- 
sons  from  the  use  of  things  holy.  The  S(tond 
was  called  Cherim,  that  is  Anathema;  this  was 
an.  aggravation  ofthefirst,andansicer.-<  ahiiost 
to  owr^reutfr  excommunication.  It  iietvdcd a 
man  from  the  synagogue,  and  diprived  him  of 
all  civil  commerce.  The  third  sort  o/Excom- 
munication  is  called  Scammatha,  and  was  of  a 
higher  nature  than  the  greater  excommunica- 
tion. It  was  published,  as  they  say,  by  sound 
of  four  hundred  trumpets,  and  removed  all 
hope  of  returning  to  the  synagngue.  Some  af- 
firm, that  the  penalty  of  death  was  annexed  to 
it.  But  Selden  maintains,  that  these  three 
terms,  Niddui,  Cherim,  and  Scammatha,  are 
oftentimes  synunymovs,  and  that  the  Jews  ne- 
ver had,  properly  speaking,  more  than  two 
sorts  of  excommunication ;  one  greater,  the 
other  less.  Selden  de  synedriis  vetcrum  He 
br<Torum,  lib.  1.  cap.  7,  et  8. 

.Tohn  9.  t34.  dost  thou  teach  us?  and  they  c.  him 
EXCUSE. 

I.uke  ]4.18.theywilh  one  consent  began  to  make  e 

.John  15.  t  22.  now  have  they  no  e.  for  their  sin 

Rom.  1.  20.  clearly  seen,  so  that  they  are  without* 
EXCUSE. 

2  Cor.  12. 19.  think  yon  ili;it  we  e.  ourselves  to  vovrt 
EXCUSED. 

I^uke  14.  18.  I  prav  thee  have  me  e.  19. 
EXCUSING. 

Rom.  2.15.their  thoughls  nreuslng  or  else  e.  one  an 
EXECRATION. 

.Trr.  42.  18.  and  ye  shall  be  an  e.  and  a  curse 

44.  12.  and  they  shall  be  an  e.  and  a  reproach 
jJcts  23. 1 12.  bound  themselves  with  an  oath  of  c. 

EXECUTE. 
Krerf.l2.12.Iwill  e.  judgment  on  the  gods  of  Egyp' 
JyTum.  5.  30.  the  priest  shall  e.  upon  her  all  this  law 

5.  11.  that  they  may  c.  the  service  of  the  Lord 
Deut. 10.  IS.  he  doth  e.  thejudgment  of  the  widow 
1  Kings  0.  12.  if  thou  wilt  c.  myjuilgmcnts 
PsaM  19.84. when  wilt  thou  c.judgm.  on  thcrathaf 

149.  7.  to  e.  vengeance  upon  the  heathen 

9.  to  e.  upon  them  the  judgment  written 
Isa.  10. 3.  take  counsel,  e.  judgment,  hide  outcasti 
yrr.  7. 5.  e.  judgm.  between  a  man  and  his  neighb. 
21. 12.  c.  judgment  in  the  morning,  and  deliver 
22.  3.  e.  judgm.  and  righteousness,  deliver  spoiled 
2.3.  5.  branch  shall  e.  judgm.  and  justice,  33.  15 
Eielc.  5.  8.  I  will  e.  judgments  in  thee,  10. 

1.5.  when  I  shall  e.  judgments  in  thee  in  fury 
11.  9.  and  I  will  c.  judgments  among  you 
10.  41.  they  shall  e.  judgments  upon  thee 
25.  n.  and  I  will  e.  judgments  upon  Moab 

17.  and  I  will  p.  great  vengeance  upon  theni 
30. 14.  I  set  fire  in  Zoan,  and  e.  judgments  in  No 

19.  thus  will  I.  f.  judgments  in  Egypt 

45.  9.  remove  violence,  e.  judgment  and  justice 
Has.  11.  9. 1  will  not  e.  the  fierceness  of  mine  anger 
Mic.  5.  15.  and  I  will  e.  vengeance  in  nnger 

7. 9.  til!  he  plead  my  cause,  and  e.  judgm.  for  m» 
Zech.  7.  9.  e.  true  judgment  and  shew  mercy 

8.  16.  r.  thejudgment  of  truth  and  peace 
John  5.2T.  hath  given  him  authority  to  e.  judgment 


EXH 

Rom.  13.  4.  lio  is  the  minister  of  God  to  e.  wrath 
Jude  15.  to  c.  judcmeiil  on  nil,  and  to  convince 

EXECUTKI). 
A'ujn.  33.  4.  on  their  gods  tlie  Lord  e.  judgments 
J)eut.  33.  21.  he  e.  the  justice  of  the  Lord 
S  ijnm.  S.  15.  David  e.  judgment,  1  Chron.  18.  14- 
.'  Chron.  6.  10.  ho  it  is  that  e.  the  priest's  office 

24.  -i.  Eleaznr  and  Ithamar  e.  tiie  priest's  office 
2  Chron.  24.  24.  thoy  e.  judgment  against  Joash 
Ezra  7.  2f).  let  judgment  lie  e.  speedily  on  him 
Ps.  lOtj.IW.lhen'stood  up  Pliirudi:is,anil  c  Jiidijuient 
Keel.  6.  II.  hecauso  sentence  is  not  e.  speeildy 
JpT.  23.20.  anger  of  L. shall  not  return  till  he  have  f. 
Ezek.  11.  12.  neither  e.  my  judgments,  20.  24. 

lH.8.hath  e.  truejudgm.  hetween  man  and  man,]". 

23.  10.  for  thev  had  e.  judgment  upon  her 

28.  22.  when  I  shall  have  c.  judgments,  26. 

3!).  21.  heathen  shall  see  my  judgni.  that  1  have  e. 
Luke  1.  8.  while  Zaclutrias  e.  the  priest's  office 
EXF-CrjTEDST. 

1  Sam.  28.  18.  nor  c.  his  tierce  wrath  on  Amalek 

EXECUTES!'. 
Pi.OO.  4.  thouf.judzm.  and  rishteousnessin  Jacoh 

EXECUTETH. 
Psal.  9.  16.  Lord  is  known  by  the  judgment  he  e. 
•103.  G.  the  lAird  e.  righteousness  and  judgment 
140.  7.  the  Lord  c.  judgment  for  the  oppressed 
Isn.  46.  11.  the  man  that  e.  my  counsel  from  afar 
Jer.  5.  1.  if  any  e.  judgment,  I  will  pardon  it 
Joel  2.  11.  for  he  is  stronj  that  e.  his  word 

EXECUTING. 

2  Kintrs  10.  30.  thou  hast  done  well  in  e.  on  Ahab 
2  Ckr'.W.  14.  Jeroboam  had  cast  them  oH'from  e. 

22.''.wlien  Jehu  was*",  judstneiiton  Aliab's  house 

EXECUTION. 
F,sth.  9.  1.  his  decree  drew  near  to  be  put  in  e. 

EXECUTIONER. 
Mark  6.  27.  the  king  sent  an  e.  and  commanded 

EXECUTIONERS. 
fVcn.  37.  t  36.  sold  him  toPotiphar,  chief  of  the  p. 
Jer.  39.  t  9.  Nebuzar-adan  chief  of  the  c.  52.  f  12. 
Dan.  2.  1 14-  to  Arioch  the  chief  of  the  c. 

EXEMPTED. 
1  h'inrrs  15.22.Asa  made procl>imation,none  was  e. 

EXEItCISE. 
17'im.4. 8. bodily  c.  piofiteibliiilc,  godliness  profit. 

EXERCISE. 
P.tal.  131. 1.  nor  do  I  c.  myself  in  things  too  high 
Jfr.  9.24. 1  nm  the  Lord  which  e.  loving-kindness 
Mat.'iO.  2.").  ye  know  that  i)rinces  of  the  Gen- 
tiles e.  dominion  over  them,  and  they  that 
are  great  e.  authority  upon  them,  Mark  10. 
42.    /.like  22.  25. 
^ff.«  21. Ifi.hcrein  do  I  c.mvself  to  have  a  conscience 

1  Tim.i.  7.  and  e.  thvself  rather  unto  godliness 

EXERCISED. 
F.rcl.  1.  13.  sore  travail,  to  be  c.  therewith,  3.  10. 
F.:>'k.  22.  29.  the  people  of  the  land  have  p.  robbery 
Ifrb.  5. 14.  senses  r.  to  discern  both  good  and  evil 
12.  11.  fruit  of  right,  to  them  who  are  c.  thereby 
2/'et.  2.  14.  an  heart  r.  with  covetous  practices 

EXERCISETH. 
Rev.  13.  12.  he  e.  all  Ihe  power  of  the  first  beast 

EXHORT. 
.flrfx  2.  40.  with  many  words  did  he  testify  and  e. 
27.  22.  and  now  I  e.  you  to  be  of  good  cheer 

2  Cnr.  9.  5.  thergfore  I  thought  it  necessary  to  e. 

1  Thr.^i.  4. 1.  we  beseech  yon,  brethren,  and  e.  yon 

tlH.  wherefore  e.  one  another  with  thoso  worus 
5.  t  1'.  wherefore  c.  yourselves  together  eility 
14.  now  we  e.  you,  warn  them  that  are  unruly 

2  Th'n/i.  3. 12.  such  we  command,  and  r.  hv  Christ 
1  Tim.  2. 1. 1  f.  thai  first  of  all,  pray,  be  made  for  all 

n.  2.  these  thines  leach  and  c. 
8  Tim.  4.  2.  f.  with  all  long-suffering  and  doctrine 
Tit.^S>■  may  be  able  to  c.  and  convince  guinsnvers 

2.  6.  young  men  likewi;*  r^.  to  be  sober-minded 
H.  f.  servants  to  be  obedient  to  their  masters 
l.").  speak,  c.  and  rebuke  with  all  authority 
ffeb.X  13.  cone  another  daily  while  it  is  culled 
1  Pi»f.  5.  1.  the  elders  who  are  among  yon,  I  e. 
Jude  3.  it  was  nceilfnl  for  mi'  to  write  and  e.  vou 

EXHORTATION. 
/,tiJlfc3.  18.  manv  other  things  in  his  c  preached  he 
yjct.i  13.  15.  if  ye  have  any  word  of  c.  say  on 

15.  t31.  when  they  read,  iliey  rejoiced  for  the  e. 

20.  2.  and  when  Paid  had  given  Ihi'm  much  r. 
Pom.  12.  8.  he  that  exhorlelh,  let  him  wait  on  c. 

1  Cor.  14.  3.  speaketh  unto  men  to  e.  and  comfort 

2  Cor  S.  17.  for  indeed  he  accepted  the  e. 

]  TA»,«.«.2. 3.  lor  our  r.  was  not  of  deceit  nor  guile 
I  Tim.  4.  13.  till  I  come,  give  attendance  to  f. 
Ifeb.  12.  5.  y  have  forgotten  Ihe  r.  which  speaketh 
13  22  and  I  beseech  von.  siifTer  the  word  of  e. 
EXIIOIiTKD. 
,/Jcf«  11.23.  narnnhns*!.  them  to  cleave  to  the  Lord 

IT).  32.  they  r.  the  brethren  with  many  wonls 
1  7'Acs.?.2.ll.as  vou  know  how  we  c.  and  comforted 

■  EXHORTING. 

Act$  14.  22.  and  e.  them  to  continue  in  the  faith 

176 


EXP 

.ficts  18.  27.  brethren  wrote,  e.  disc,  to  receive  him 
Hih.  10. 25.  but  e.  one  another,  and  so  mudi  more 

1  Pet.  5.  12.  by  Silvanus  I  have  written  briefly,  e. 
EXILE. 

2  Sam.  15.  19.  for  thou  art  a  stranger  and  also  an  e. 
Isa.  51.  14.  the  captives,  hastenelh  to  be  loosed 

EXORCISTS.      , 

This  ward  comes  from  the  Greek  E^cpxl^tm, 
T'iSOiciiie'm.iWhich si/^nijies  /» adjure, <u  conjure, 
to  use  the  name  of  Ciod,icith  a  desii^n  to  ca.slde- 
vils  out  of  the  bodies  whir/i  thn/possis.t.  H'hiii 
our  ISarionrsent  out  his  disciples  to  preach  the 
gospel, he  j^avr  thrm  power  oi!e7-uncl(unspirits, 
to  ca.it  them  uu/, Ma'. 10.1.  .f/ndwhenthe  seven- 
ty returned,  they  told  our  Hariour,  Luke  10. 17, 
Lord,  even  the  devils  are  subject  to  us, 
through  thy  name,  liij  this  gift,  theij  gained 
repute  among  the  people,  confirming  them  that 
they  tcere  sent  of  (rod.  St.  Paul,  in  Acts  16. 
18.  cast  out  a  devil,  in  the  name  of  Christ;  I 
command  thee,  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  to 
como  out  of  her:  and  he  came  out  the  same 
hour.  This  gift  continued  in  the  church,  after 
the  death  of  the  apostles, as  some  say,  for  about 
two  hundred  years,  and  ceased  by  degrees. 

Tho.^e  Jewish  e.\orcists,  mentioned  Acts  If).  13. 
were  such  as  usurped  and  counterfeiled  this 
gift,  though  they  had  it  not:  but  what  they  did 
wuq  only  by  witchcraft,  and  compact  with  the 
devil. 

Josephus  relates  strmtge  storien  concerning  these 
exorcists.  He  says,  that  07te  Eleazar,  a  Jew, 
cured  the  possessed  with  the  help  of  a  ring,  in 
which  a  root  icas  set,  said  by  some  to  hnvebeen 
discovered  by  Solomon.  The  smell  of  this  root, 
put  uvdcrtheno.ieof  the  possessed  person, made 
hint  fall  on  the  ground;  and  the  exorcist  con- 
jured the  devil,  forbidding  him  to  return  into 
that  body  ;  Joseph.  Jintiq.  lib.  8.  cap.  2.  Jus- 
tin, Origun,  and  Tertullian,  speak  e/ Jews,  who 
boasted  of  a  power  to  cast  out  devils,  and,  it  is 
said,  that  sometimes  in  reality  they  did  so,  by 
calling  upon  the  God  of  .Abraham. 

.^cts  19.  13.  then  certain  of  the  vagabond  Jews,  e. 
EXPANSION. 

Gen.  1. 1 6.  let  there  be  an  e.  in  midst  of  the  waters 
EXPECTATION. 

1  CAron.  29.  f  1.5.  days  as  a  shadow,  there  is  no  e. 

.Job  6.  1 8.  O  that  God  would  grant  me  mine  e. 

Ps.9.  18.  thee,  of  the  poor  shall  not  perish  forever 
62.  5.  wait  thou  on  God,  for  my  e.  is  from  him 

Prov.  10.28.  the  e.  of  the  wicked  shall  perish,  11.  7. 

11.  23.  but  the  e.  of  the  wicked  i.s  wrath 
23.  18.  thine  e.  shall  not  bo  cut  ort',  24.  14. 

[.ia.  20.  5.  they  shall  be  ashamed  of  their  e. 
6.  the  inhabitants  shall  say,  behold,  such  is  oure. 
.Ter.  29.  t  H.  I  think  to  give  you  an  end  and  e. 
y.ech.  9.  5.  Ekron  for  her  e.  shall  be  ashamed 
l.uke'A.  15.  and  as  the  people  were  in  e.  John  said 
flcts  12.11.  Lord  liath  delivered  me  from  c.  of  Jews 
Uom.  8.  19.  for  the  e.  of  the  creature  waiteth  for 
Phd.  1.  20.  according  to  mv  earnest  e.  and  hope 

EXPE('tEI). 
fob  32.  t  4.  Elihii  bad  c.  till  Job  had  spoken 
Jer.  29.  11.  for  I  think  to  give  you  an  e.  end 

EXPECTING. 
.lets  3.  5.  e.  to  receive  something  of  them 
Hcb  10  13  e  till  his  enemies  be  made  his  foot.stooi 

KAPEDIENT. 
.Jtxn  11.  .50.  that  it  is  e.  for  us  that  one  man  die 
16.  7.  I  tell  you,  it  is  e.  for  you  that  I  go  away 
in.  14.  it  was  e.  that  one  man  die  for  the  people 

1  Ciir.  6. 12.  but  all  things  are  not  e.  10.  23. 

2  <  'or.  8. 10.1  his  is  f. for  you  who  have  begun  before 

12.  1.  it  is  not  e.  for  me  doubtless  to  glory 

EXPEL. 
Tosh.  23.  5.  God  shall  e.  them  from  before  you 
Judtr.  11.7.  did  not  vehnteme,  c.  me  out  of  house? 

EXPELLED. 
/bsA. 13.13. Isr.  e.  not  Geshiiritcs,  nor  Maachnlhites 
hidg.  1.  2<t.  he  e.  thence  the  three  sons  of  Anak 
2  SVim.  14.  14.  that  his  banished  be  not  e.  from  him 
Jicts  13.  50.  they  e.  them  out  of  their  coasta 

EXPENSES. 
Kirn  6. 4.  let  the  r.  be  given  out  of  the  king's  house 
8.1  decree  that  e.  forthwith  be  eiven  to  these  men 
EXPERIENCE. 
Clev.  30.  27.  by  e.  that  the  Lord  hnth  Idesscd  me 
Feel.  1.  16.  mv  heart  had  ;ri'at  c  of  wisdom 
Horn.  5.  4.  and  patience  worketh  c.  and  c  hope 
Heb.  St  13.  that  uocih  milk  halh  no  e.  in  the  word 

EXPERIMENT. 
2  Cor.  9.  13.  whiles  bv  thi-  r.  of  this  ministration 

EXPEH'I". 
1  Chron.  12. 33.  of '/ebidiin  llftv  thousand  e.  in  Avar 

:r..  of  Danites  ".S.fiOO  ||  36.  of  Asher  40,000  e. 
Cant,  3.  8.  they  all  liidd  swords,  b.ine  e.  in  war 
.Jer.  .10.  0.  their  arrows  shall  be  ns  of  an  r.  man 
.lets  26.  3.  I  know  tbeo  to  be  e.  in  ull  customs 


EYE 

EXPIATION. 

JVi/m.35.  t33.  and  there  can  be  no  e.  for  tlie  lantf 

EXPIRED. 

1  Savi.  18.  26.  and  the  days  were  pot  e. 

2  Ham.  11.  1.  after  the  year  was  e.  1  Chron.  20.  1 

1  Chron.  17. 11.  shall  come  to  pass  when  days  bee 

2  Chron.  36. 10.  when  year  e.  Nebuchadnezzar  set 
F.sth.  1.  5.  when  these  days  werec.  the  king  made 
F.ick.  43. 27.  when  these  days  are  e.  it  shall  be  that 
.^cts  7.  30.  and  when  forty  years  were  e. 

fito.  20.7.  when  1000  vears  are  c.  Satan  bo  loosed 

EXPLOITS. 

Dan.  11.28.  to  his  land  he  shall  do  e.  and  return 

32.  but  the  peojilo  shall  he  strong  and  do  c. 

EXPOSED. 

Judg.5.  flS.  Zebulun  and  Naphtali  a  people  e. 

EXPOUND. 
Lev.  24. 1 12.  put  him  in  ward,  to  e.  mind  of  God 
Jud".  14. 14.  they  could  not  in  tliree  days  e.  riddle 

EXPOUNDED. 
.Tvdg.  14. 19.  garments  to  them  who  e.  tho  riddle 
Mark.  4. 34.  when  they  were  alone,  be  e.  all  things 
J.uke  24.  27.  he  e.  to  iheni  in  all  the  scrijituree 
.'?f^«  11.  4.  but  Peter  e.  it  by  order  unto  them 
18. 26.  Aquilaand  Priscillaf.  to  him  way  of  God 
28.  23.  Paul  e.  and  testified  the  kingdom  of  God 

EXPRESS. 
Hcb.  1.  3.  who  being  the  e.  image  of  his  person 

EXPRE.Sa,  ED. 
yum.  1. 17.  took  men  which  arc  e.  bv  iheirnamcs 

1  CAr.  12.  31.  and  of  Manasseh  18,0C'l0,  e.  by  nam* 
16.41.  who  were  c.  by  name,  to  give  thanks  to  I^ 

2  Chron.  28.15.men  e.  took  captives,  clothed  naked 
31.  19.  men  e.  to  give  portions  to  all  Ihe  males 

Ezra  8.  20.  the  Nethinims  were  c.  by  name 
Job  6.  t3.  therefore  I  want  words  to  e.  mv  grief 

EXPRESSLY. 
1  Sam.  20.  21.  if  1  e.  say  to  the  Ind,  behold  arrows 
Ezek.  1.  3.  the  word  came  e.  to  Ezckiel  the  priest 
1  Tim.i.  1.  now  the  Spirit  speaketh  c.  some  depart 

EXPULSIONS. 
Ezek.  45.  t  9.  take  away  vour  e.  from  my  pcopio 

EXTEND. 
Psal.  109.  12.  let  there  be  none  to  e.  mercy  to  him 
fsa.  66. 12.  behold,  I  will  e.  peace  to  her  like  a  river 

EXTENDED. 
Gen.  39.  t  21.  bnt  the  Lord  c.  kindness  to  Jose-.-h 
Ezra  7.  28.  e.  mercy  to  me  ||  9.  9.  c.  mercy  to  us 
Jer.  31.  t  3.  I  have  e.  loving-kindness  to  theo 

EXTENDETII. 
Psal.  16.  2.  my  Lord,  mv  goodness  e.  not  to  the« 

EXTINCT. 
.Tob  17.1.my  days  arc  p.the  graves  arc  ready  for  me 
fsa.  43.  17!  thev  are  e.  they  are  (|uenchcd  as  tow 

■  EXTINGUISH. 
Ezek.  32.1  7.wben  I  shall  e.  thee,  I  will  cover  hcav. 

EXTINGUISHED. 
./ob  6.  1 17.  when  it  is  hot,  ihcy  are  e.  out  of  place 

EXTOL. 
Psa/.  30. 1. 1  will  r.  thee,  O  Lord,  hast  lifted  me  up 
68.  4.  e.  him  that  ridclli  upon  the  heavens 
145. 1. 1  will  e.  thee,  my  God,  O  King,  and  bless 
Dan.  4.  37. 1  Nebnchndne/.  e.  ihe  King  of  heaven 

EXTOLLED. 
Psal.  66.  17.  and  he  was  e.  with  my  tongue 
Isa.  52.  13.  behold,  mv  servant  shall  be  e. 

EXTORTION. 
Ezek.  22.  12.  thou  hast  greedily  gained  by  e. 
Mat.  23.  25.  but  within  thev  are  full  of  e. 

EXTOKTIONEl!. 
Psai.  109.  '.■..  fet  the  e.  catch  all  that  he  hath 
/.«a.  16.  4.  Ihe  f.  is  at  an  end,  the  spoih'r  ccasetli 
1  C.or.  5.  11.  if  anv  man  he  ii  drunkard,  an  e. 

EXTORTIONERS. 
T.vke  18.  11.  that  I  am  not  as  other  men  are,  e. 
1  Ciir.  5.  10.  vet  not  altogether  wilh  r.  for  Ihcn 
6.  10.  nor  c.  inherit  the  klnirdom  of  God. 

EXTREME. 
/)cuf.  28.22.  the  L.  shall  •■mite  thee  with  e.  burning 

EXTRKAUTY. 
.7ob  :15.  1.5.  yet  he  knowelh  it  not  in  great  e. 

EYE, 
The  organ  of  sight,  by  which  risible  o.'jVrf.t  are 
discerned.  I'.ve  or  eyes,  in  scripture,  are 
figvrativrlv  applied  to  God  after  the  marnir 
of  man.  Prov.  15.  3,  The  eyes  of  Ihe  Lord 
are  in  every  place;  that  is,  his  infinite  know- 
ledae  and  providence.  .Ind  ns  in  wen  the  lye 
is  the  organ  which  shews  rompassion  or  fury, 
rergennee  or  pardon, gentleness  or  sernily;  »n 
these  senses  eye  is  referred  to  God ;  Psal.  34. 
1.5,  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  U|!ein  Ihe  righ 
Icons:  I/e favours  lhem,and  heaps  Ides.^ings  on 
them.  1  Kings  8.  29,  That  Ibiiie  eyes  maybe 
opened  toward  Ibis  hou«e  iiirhl  and  day  ;  tktlt 
I.--,  that  thou  vinye.ft  behold  it  with  an  eye  of 
favour  and  compassion.  So  likneise  in  Jer 
24.  6,  I  will  set  mine  eyes  npim  them  for 
good.  On  Ihe  contrary  it  is  said,  Amos  9.  8, 
Behold,  the  eyes  of  the   Lord   are  upon  th« 


EYE 

•infill  kingdom,  that  is,  in  a  way  0/  severity 
and  judgment.  Jllso  Ezok.  5.  11,  Neither 
Bliall  mine  eyua  spare,  neither  >vilJ  1  have  any 

„  pity- 
Eye,  when  referred  to  man,  is  not  only  taken  for 
the  organ  of  sight,  but  also  for  the  understand- 
ing or  judgment.  Deut.  16.  19,  A  gift  doth 
blind  tile  eyes  of  the  wise  :  It  corrupteth  and 
perverlcth  his  mind,  that  as  he  will  not,  so 
oftcntimeshe  cannot  discern  between  right  and 
wrong.  So  in  Acts  26.  18,  I  send  thee  to  the 
Gentiles  to  open  their  eyes ;  that  is,  To  preach 
the  gospel  unto  them,  v hereby  they  may  attain 
unto  a  spiritual  understanding  of  their  duty. 
lAkewise  in  Gen.  \i.  7,  The  eyes  of  them  both 
were  opened.  Their  consciences  were  touched 
with  a  sense  of  the  hcinousncss  of  t/ieir  sin, 
whereby  they  had  defiled  their  souls ;  and  of 
the  greatness  of  the  misery  they  had  brought 
upon  themsclccs  and  their  posterity. 

The  Hebrews  call  colours,  eyes,  JVum.  11.  7 
And  the  eye,  or  colour  of  tlie  manna,  was  as 
the  eye,  or  colour  of  bdellium.  To  set  one's 
eyes  upon  any  one,  is  to  do  him  service, 
favour  him  greatly;  or  barely  to  see  him  with 
friendship.  Gen.  44.  21,  Thou  saidsf,  bring 
Benjamin  unto  me,  that  I  may  set  mine  eyes 
upon  him.  And  Nebuchadnezzar  recommends 
it  to  Nebuzar-adan,  that  he  would  set  his  eyes 
upon  Jeremiah,  and  permit  him  to  go  where  he 
pleased,  Jer.  39.  1 12.  |  40.  f  4.  To  find  grace 
in  one's  eyes,  is  to  win  his  favour  and  friend 
ship,  RulJi  2.  10.  Job  says,  I  was  eyes  to  the 
blind,  Job  29. 15.  that  is,  I  instructed,  directed, 
and  assisted  such  as  knew  not  how  to  manage 
their  own  affairs. 

To  have  the  eyes  towards,  or  upon  one,  denotes 
that  the  person  ezpects,  or  waits  for  some- 
thing from  him  on  whom  the  eyes  are  placed. 
Thus  when  Adoiiijah,  without  his  father's 
knowledge,  had  usurped  the  kingdom,  Bath- 
sheba  told  king  David,  1  Kings  1.  20,  The 
eyes  of  all  Israel  are  upon  thee,  that  thou 
shouldest  tell  them  who  shall  sit  upon  the 
throne  of  my  lord  the  king  after  him;  that  is. 
The  generalUy  of  the  people  are  in  suspense 
whether  Adonijah's  practices  be  with  thy  con- 
sent, or  no,  and  wait  for  thy  sentence  concern- 
ing thy  successor,  which  they  tcill  readily  em- 
brace. Also  in  Psal.  2.5.  1.5,  Mine  eyes  are 
ever  towards  the  Lord  ;  that  is,  my  expectation 
vf  help  is  only  from  him.  And  Psal.  123.  2, 
As  the  eyes  of  servants  look  unto  the  hand 
of  their  masters;  either  for  the  supply  of 
their  wants,  which  come.s  from  their  master's 
hand:  or,  for  help  and  defence  against  their 
oppressors. 

Solomon  says,  that  the  wise  man's  eyes  are  in 
his  head,  F.ccl.  2.  14.  Ne  knows  where  he 
goes,  and  what  he  has  to  do ;  he  does  not  act 
ignorantly,  rashly,  or  foolishly.  He  says  like- 
wise, that  the  eye  is  not  satisfied  with  riches, 
Eccl.  4.  8.  The  covetous  mind,  or  desire,  is 
insatiable.  Eye  is  sometimes  taken  for  some- 
thing that  is  most  delightful  and  dear  to  a 
person.  Mat.  5.  29,  It  tliy  right  eye  offend 
thee,  pluck  it  out.  Gal.  4.  15,  You  would 
have  plucked  out  your  own  eyes,  and  have 
given  them  to  me.  It  is  Uknoise  taken  for 
opinion,  or  conceit.  Piov.  3.  7,  Be  not  wise  in 
thine  own  eyes.  And  for  a  diligent  and  care 
ful  inspection  into  affairs.  Prov.  20.  8,  A 
king  scatlereth  away  all  evil  with  his  eyes. 
Evil  eye ;  see  on  Evil. 

Oen.  45.  t  20.  let  not  your  e.  spars  your  stuff 

Ezod.  10.  t  5.  the  locusts  cover  the  e.  of  the  earth 
21. 24.  e.  for  e.  Lev.  24.20.  IJi-ut.  19.21.  Mat.  .5.38. 
25.  if  a  man  smite  the  c.  of  hia  sttrvanl,  or  the  e. 

l,ev.  21.  20.  or  that  hath  a  ble/ish  in  his  e. 

JVum.n.fV.the  e.ofmanna  wasasthe  e.ofbdoUium 

Deut.  28. 54.  his  e.  shall  be  evil  toward  his  brother 
.5*1.  her  e.  shall  be  evil  toward  her  husband 
32.  10.  ho  kept  him  as  the  apple  of  his  e. 

34.  7.  his  e.  was  not  d-im,  nor  his  force  abated 
Ezra  5.  5.  the  «.  of  their  God  was  on  the  elders 
Job  7. 8.  e.  that  hath  seen  mo,  shall  see  me  no  more 

10. 18.  given  up  the  ghost,  and  no  e.  had  seen  ma 
20. 9.  the  e.  which  saw  him  shall  see  him  no  more 
24. 15.  the  e.  of  the  adulterer  waileth  for  twilight 
saying,  no  e.  shall  see  me,  and  disgiiiseth  his  face 
28. 7.  a  path  which  the  vulture's  e.  nath  not  seen 

10.  and  his  e.  sceth  every  precious  thing 
29. 11.  when  the  «.  saw  me,  it  gave  witness  to  me 
Psal.  33. 18.  e.  of  the  L.  is  on  them  that  fear  him 

35.  19.  neither  let  them  wink  with  the  e. 
21.  they  said,  aha,  aha,  our  e.  hath  seen  it 

94.  9.  he  that  formed  the  e.  shall  he  not  see? 
ProD.lO.lO.that  winketh  with  the  e.  causeth  sorrow 
20.  VI.  the  seeing  c.  hearing  ear.  Lord  hath  made 
a.  9.  be  that  hath  a  bountiful  e.  shall  be  blewed 
177 


EYE 

Prov.  30.  17.  the  ».  that  mocketh  at  his  father 
Keel.  1.  8.  the  e.  is  not  satislied  with  seeing 

4.  8.  neither  is  his  e.  satislied  with  riches 
Isa.  13.  18.  their  c.  shall  not  spare  children 

52. 8.  thy  watchmen  sing,  lor  they  shall  see  e.  to  e. 

04.  4.  neither  hath  the  e.  seen,  1  Cor.  2.  9. 
L,am.  2. 4.  and  slew  ah  that  were  pleasant  to  the  e. 
Kick.  9.  5.  let  not  your  e.  spare,  neither  have  pity 

16. 5.  none  e.  pitied,  to  do  any  of  these  to  thee 

Mic.  4.  11.  be  defiled,  and  let  our  e.  look  on  Zion 

^Wu<.6.22.the  light  of  the  body  is  the  e.  Kuke  11.34. 

7.3.thou  bcholdeet  the  mote  in  thy  brother's  c.and 

not  the  beam  in  thine  own  e.  y^u/icb. 41,42. 

18.  9.  if  thine  e.  offend  thee,  pluck  it  out 

19.24.ea8ier  for  a  camel  to  go  through  e.of  a  needle 

than  a  rich  man,  Mark  10.  25.  Luke  18.  25. 

lCor.l2.16.becau8elainnotlhe  e.I  am  not  of  body 

17.if  the  whole  body  were  an  e.||  21.  e.  cannot  say 

15.  52.  in  twinkling  of  an  e.  at  tlie  last  trump 
Rev.  1.  7.  he  comelh,  and  every  e.  shall  see  him 

Evil  EYE. 
Prov.  23.  6.  the  bread  of  him  that  hath  an  evil  e. 
28.  22.  he  that  hasteth  to  be  rich  hath  an  evil  e. 
Mat.  6.  23.  but  if  thine  e.  be  evil,  Luke  11.  34. 
20.  15.  is  thine  e.  evil  because  I  am  good  1 
Mark  7. 22.  out  of  the  lieart  proceedeth  an  evil  e. 
Mine  EYE. 

1  Som.24.10.  bade  kill  thee,  but  mine  e.  spared  thee 
Job  7.  7.  mine  e.  shall  no  more  see  good 

13.  1.  mine  e.  hath  seen  all  this,  mine  ear  heard 

16.  20.  but  mine  e.  poureth  out  tears  to  God 

17.  2.  doth  mine  e.  continue  in  tlieir  provocation? 
7.  mine  e.  also  is  dim  by  reason  of  sorrow 

42.  5.  heard  of  thee,  but  now  mine  e.  seeth  thee 
Psal.  6.  7.  mine  e.  is  consumed  with  grief,  31.  9. 
32.  8.  instruct  thee,  I  will  guide  thee  with  mine  e. 
54.7.  mine  e.  hath  seen  his  desire  on  mine  enemies 
88.  9.  mine  e.  mourneth  by  reason  of  atSiclion 
92.11.  mine  e.  shall  see  my  desire  on  mine  enemies 
Je:r.40.t4.come  to  Babylon  1  will  set  mine  e.  on  thee 
Lam.  1.  16.  mine  e.  mine  e.  runneth  down,  3.  48. 
3.  49.  mine  e.  trickleth  down  and  ceaseth  not 
51.  mine  e.  afl'eetelh  my  heart,  because  of  daugh 
Eiek.  5.  11.  neither  shall  mine  e.  spare,  nor  will  I 
have  any  pity,  7.  4,  9.  |  8. 18.  |  9. 10. 
20.  17.  nevertheless  mine  e.  spared  them 

Thine  EYE. 

Deut.  7.  16.  thine  e.  shall  not  pity,  nor  shall  thou 

serve  their  gods,  13.  8.  |  19.  13,  21.  |  25.  12. 

15.  9.  and  thine  e.  be  evil  against  thy  poor  brother 
Mat.  6.  22.  it  thine  e.  be  single,  Luke  11.  34. 

7  3.  the  beam  that  is  in  thine  own  e.  Luke  &.  41. 

18.9.if(A!nec.olfei)dthee,pluckitout,  Mark9.i7. 

See  Apple. 

EYE-BROWS. 

Lcv.14.9.  he  shall  shave  all  his  hair  ofThis  e.-brows 

EYE-LIDS. 
Job  3.  t  9.  nor  let  it  see  the  e.  of  the  morning 

16.  16.  and  on  mine  e.  is  the  shadow  of  death 
41.  18.  his  eyes  are  like  the  e.  of  the  morning 

Psal.  11.  4.  his  e.  try  the  children  of  men 
132.  4.  sleep  to  mine  eyes  or  slumber  to  mine  c. 
Prov.  4.  25.  let  thine  e.  look  straight  before  thee 
6.  4,  sleep  to  thine  eyes,  or  slumber  to  thine  e. 
25.  neither  let  her  take  thee  with  her  e. 
30.  13.  how  lofty  their  eyes,  their  e.  are  lifted  up 
Jer.  9.  18.  that  our  e.  may  gush  out  with  waters 

Right  EYE. 
Zech.  11. 17.  the  sword  shall  be  on  his  arm  and  on 
his  right e.  hiaright  e.  shall  be  utterly  darkened 
Mat.  5. 29.  if  thy  right  e.  offend  thee,  pluck  it  out 

EYE-SALVE. 
Rev.  3. 18.  anoint  thine  eves  with  e.-salve  to  see 

EYE-SERVICE. 
Eph.  6. 6.  not  with  e.-service  as  men-pleasers,  but 
as  the  servants  of  Christ,  Col.  3.  22. 
EYE-SIGHT. 

2  Sam.22.25.the  Ld.  hath  recompensed  me  accord- 

ing to  my  cleanness  in  his  e.-sight,  Psal.Vd.^i. 
EYE-WITNESSES. 
Luke  1. 2.  who  from  beginning  were  e.-witnesses 
2  Pet.  1.  16.  but  were  e.-witnesses  of  his  majesty 

EYED. 
1  Sam.  18.  9.  and  Saul  e.  David  from  that  day 

Tender-EYED. 
Oen.  29.  17.  Leah  was  tender-e.  Rachel  beautiful 

EYES. 
Qen.  3.6.  was  good  for  food  and  pleasant  to  the  e. 
7.  and  the  e.  of  them  both  were  opened 
16.  4.  her  mistress  was  despised  in  her  e. 

5.  she  had  conceived,  I  was  despised  in  her  e. 

20.  16.  behold,  he  is  to  thee  a  covering  of  the  e. 

21.  19.  God  opened  Hagar's  e.  she  saw  a  well 
28.  t8.  the  daughters  of  Canaan  evil  in  c  of  Isaac 
30.41.  Jacob  laid  the  rods  before  the  e.of  the  cattle 
39.  7.  his  master's  wife  cast  her  e.  on  Joseph 
41.  37.  was  good  in  the  e.  of  Pharaoh,  45.  f  16. 
48.  10.  now  the  e.  of  Israel  were  dim  for  age 

Exod.  5.  21.  to  be  abhorred  in  the  e.  of  Pharaoh 
21  1 8.  if  she  be  evil  in  the  «.  of  her  master 
SB 


EYE 

Exod.ii.  17.  glory  of  Lord  was  likefire  in  e.  offer. 

Lev.4.13.  if  sin  through  ignorance, and  the  thing  b« 

hid  from  the  e.  of  the  assembly,  JVum.  15.  t24 

26.  16.  the  burning-ague  shall  consume  the  e. 
JVum.  5.  13.  bo  hid  from  the  e.  of  her  husband 

10.  31.  and  thou  mayest  be  to  us  inslead  of  e. 
16.  14.  wilt  thou  put  out  the  c.  of  these  men? 
20.  12.  to  sanctify  me  in  the  e.  of  Israel 

22.  31.  then  the  Lord  opened  the  e.  of  Balaam 
24.  3.  the  man  whose  e.  arc  open  hath  said,  15. 
Deut.  16.  19.  a  gift  doth  blind  the  e.  of  the  v/iae 

28.  65.  the  Lord  shall  give  thee  failing  of  e 

29.  4.  the  Lord  hath  not  given  you  e.  to  see 
Judg.  16. 28.  that  1  may  be  avanged  tor  my  two  e. 

1  Sam.  8.  t  6.  the  thing  was  ovil  in  the  e.  of  Samuel 

16.  t  7.  man  looketh  on  the  e.  the  Lord  on  the  heart 
t  12  David  was  ruddy,  and  witlial  fair  of  e. 

18.  t  8.  the  saying  was  evil  in  the  e.  of  Saul 
29.  t  6.  thou  art  not  good  in  the  «.  of  the  lords 

1 7.  that  thou  do  not  evil  in  the  e.  of  the  lords 

2  Sam.  6.20.  who  uncovered  himself  in  e.  of  handm. 

17.  t  4.  the  saying  was  right  in  the  e.  of  Absalom 

24.  J.  that  the  e.  of  my  lord  the  king  may  see  it 

1  Kings  1.  20.  the  e.  of  all  Israel  are  upon  thee 

2  Kings  6.17.  Lord  ojwned  the  e.  of  the  young  man 
20.  Elisha  said,  Lord,  open  the  «.  of  these  men 

9.  1 30.  Jezebel  heard  of  it,  put  her  e.  in  painting 

25.  7.  put  out  e.  of  Zedekiah,  Jer.  39.  7.  |  52.  11. 

1  Chron.  13.  4.  was  right  in  the  e.  of  all  the  people 

2  CAro7[.  30. 1 4.  the  thing  was  right  in  the  e.of  the 

king  and  all  the  congregation,  Esth.  1.  t21. 
JWA.S.fS.  Ezra  opened  the  book  in  c.  of  the  people 
Job  10.4.hastthou  e.of  flesh?  orsecst  as  man  seeth? 

11.  20.  but  the  e.  of  the  wicked  shall  fail 
17.  5.  even  the  e.  of  his  children  shall  fail 

22.  t  29.  he  shall  save  him  that  hath  low  e. 
28.  21.  seeing  it  is  hid  from  the  e.  of  all  living 

29. 15.  I  was  e  to  the  blind,  and  feet  to  the  lame 

31. 16.  or  have  caused  tho  e.  of  the  widow  to  fail 
39.  29.  seeketh  prey,  and  her  e.  behold  afar  off 

Psal.  15.  4.  in  whose  e.  a  vile  person  is  contemned 

19.  8.  commandment  is  pure,  enlightening  the  e. 
115.  5.  e.  have  they,  but  they  see  not,  135.  16. 
123.  2.  as  the  e.  of  servants,  the  eye  of  a  maiden 

145.  15.  the  e.  of  all  wait  upon  thee,  thou  givost 

146.  8.  the  Lord  openeth  the  e.  of  the  blind 
Proc. I.fl7.  in  vain  the  net  is  spread  in  the  e.ofbird 

6.  1 17.  haughty  e.  are  abomination  to  the  I..ord 

10.  26.  as  smoke  to  the  e.  so  is  the  sluggard 
15.  30.  the  light  of  tho  e.  rejoiceth  the  heart 

17. 8.  a  gift  is  as  a  precious  stone  in  the  e.  of  him 
24.  the  e.  of  a  fool  are  in  the  ends  of  the  earth 
23.29.  who  hath  wounds?  who  hath  ledness  of  e.? 

27.  20.  so  the  e.  of  man  are  never  satisfied 
Eccl.  2.  14.  the  wise  man's  e.  are  in  his  head 

6.  9.  better  the  sight  of  e.  than  wandering  of  desire 

11.  7.  it  is  pleasant  for  the  c.  to  behold  the  sun 
Cant.  1.  15.  thou  art  fair,  thou  hast  dove's  e.  4.  1. 
/.ta.3.8.  against  Lord,  to  provoke  the  e.  of  his  glory 

16.  the  daughters  of  Zion  walk  with  wanton  e. 
5.  15.  the  e.  of  the  lofty  shall  be  humbled 
29. 18.  the  e.  of  the  blind  shall  see  out  of  obscurity 
32.  3.  the  e.  of  them  that  see  shall  not  be  dim 
35.  5.  then  the  e.  of  the  blind  shall  be  opened 
42.7.  to  open  the  blind  e.  to  bring  out  the  prisoners 
43.  8.  bring  forth  the  blind  people  that  have  e. 
52. 10.  Lord  made  bare  his  arm  in  e.  of  all  nations 
59. 10.  like  the  blind  we  grope  as  if  we  had  no  e. 

Jer.  4.  t30.  thou  rentcst  thine  e.  with  painting 
5.  21.  which  have  e.  and  see  not,  Ezck.  12.  2. 

Ezek.  1.  18.  and  their  rings  were  full  of  e. 
10.  12.  the  wheels  were  full  of  e.  round  about 

23.  16.  and  as  soon  as  she  saw  them  with  her  e. 
38.  23.  I  will  be  known  in  tl.e  e.  of  many  nations 

Dan.  7.  8.  in  this  horn  were  e.  like  the  e.  of  man 

20.  even  of  that  horn  that  had  e.  and  a  mouth 
Hab.  1. 13.  thou  art  of  purer  e.  than  to  behold  evil 
Zech.  3.  9.  upon  one  stone  shall  be  seven  e. 
8.  6.  if  it  be  marvellous  in  the  e.  of  the  remnant 
9.1.  when  the  e.  of  man  shall  be  towards  the  Lord 
Mat.  18,9.  better  to  enter  with  one  eye,  rather  than 
having  tw  o  e.  to  be  cast  into  hell-fire,  Mark  9.47. 
JlfarAr8.18.haviiige.  seeyc  not?  and  ears,  hear  no;? 
Luke  4. 20.  and  the  e.  of  all  were  fastened  on  him 
10.  23.  blessed  are  the  e.  which  see  the  things 
./ohn  9.  6.  he  anointed  the  e.  of  the  blind  man 
32.that  any  opened  e.  of  one  that  was  born  bliodl 

10.  21.  can  a  devil  open  the  e.  of  the  blind? 

11.  37.  roiild  not  this  man,  which  opened  the  e.? 
Acts  9.  40.  Dorcas  opened  her  e.  and  sat  up 
Rom.  11. 8.  hath  given  them  e.  they  should  not  set 
Gal.  3. 1.  before  whose  e.  Christ  been  set  crucified 
Eph.i.iS.  the  e.  of  your  understanding  enlightened 
Ileb.  4.  13.  but  all  things  are  naked  and  open  to 

the  e.  of  him  with  whom  we  have  to  do 

2  Pet.  2. 14.  having  e.  full  of  aaultcry,  not  cea.se  sin 

1  John  2.  16.  the  lust  of  the  e.  and  pride  of  life 

Rev.4.G.\n  tho  midst  of  throne  four  beasts  full  of «. 

8.  bad  each  six  wings,  and  were  full  of  e.  withio 

5. 6.  a  Lamb,  as  it  had  been  slain,  having  seveu  e. 


EYE 

His  EYES. 
Oen.  27.  1.  Isaac  was  old,  and  Am  e.  were  dim 
49.12.  his  «.  shall  be  red  witli  wine,  leeth  white 
■N'um.  24.  4.  into  a  trance,  having  his  e.  open,  10. 
Drut.  24.  1.  that  if  she  tind  no  favour  in  his  e. 
Judg.  1G.21.  Philistines  took  him  and  put  out /it's  e. 

1  Sam.  3.  2  Eli,  his  e.  began  to  wax  dim,  4.  15. 
14.  27  he  tasted,  and  his  e.  were  enlightened 
18.  t20.  and  the  thing  was  right  in  his  e. 

2  Sam.  19.  1  13.  and  to  do  the  good  in  his  e. 
22.  1 25.  according  to  my  cleanness  before  his  e. 

1  Kings  9.  1 12.  and  they  were  not  right  in  his  e. 
14.  4.  Ahijah  could  not  see,  for  his  e.  were  set 

2  Kings  4.34.  he  lay  on  child  and  put  his  e.  on  his  e. 
35.the  child  sneescd  seven  times  and  opened  his  e. 

6.  17.  I  pray  thee,  open  his  e.  that  he  may  see 
25.  7.  they  slew  the  sons  of  Zedekiah  before  his  e. 
andputouteyesofZeilekiah,  Jer.  39.  6.  j  52. 10. 

lCAron.21.23.  let  the  king  do  what  is  good  in  his  e. 

Esth.S.J.  if  thing  seein  right, and  I  pleasing  in  his  e. 

Job  16.  9.  mine  enemy  sharpenuih  his  e.  on  me 
21.  20.  his  e.  shall  see  his  destruction,  and  drink 
24.  23.  he  resteth,  yet  his  e.  are  on  their  ways 
27.  19.  the  rich  man  openeth  his  e.  and  he  is  not 
'M.  21.  his  e.  are  on  the  ways  of  man,  and  he  seelii 
36.7.  he  withdraweih  not  his  e.  from  the  righteous 

40.  24.  he  takelh  it  with  Ms  e.  his  nose  pierceth 

41.  16.  his  e.  are  like  the  eye-lids  of  the  morning 
Ptal.  10.  8.  his  e.  are  privily  set  against  the  poor 

11.  4.  his  e.  behold  the  children  of  men 
36.  1.  that  there  is  no  fear  of  God  before  his  e. 
66.7.  he  rulelh  by  power,  his  e.  behold  the  nations 
Prov.  6.  13.  he  winkcth  witii  his  e.  he  speukelh 
lf\.  30.  he  shutteth  his  e.  to  devise  froward  thing.- 

20.  6.  a  king  scattereth  away  all  evil  with  his  e. 

21.  10.  his  neighbour  tindeth  no  favour  in  his  c. 
24.  1 18.  lest  Lord  see  it,  and  it  be  evil  in  his  e. 
'■2-i.  1 11.  the  rich  man  is  wise  in  his  own  e. 

27.  he  that  hidelh  his  e.  shall  have  many  a  curse 
Kce/.  8. 16.  nor  day  nor  night  sleepcth  with  his  e. 
Cant.  5.  12.  his  e.  are  as  the  eyes  of  doves 
R  10.  r  wa.s  in  his  e.  as  one  that  found  favour 
/<i.  11.3.  he  shall  not  judge  after  the  sight  of /i!>  e. 
17.  7.  his  e.  shall  have  respect  to  the  holy  One 
33.  15.  and  shutteth  his  e.  from  seeing  evil 
51. 1 15.  evil  in  his  e.  that  there  was  no  judgment 
.ftr.  32.  4.  and  his  e.  shall  behold  his  c. 
F.ttk.  12. 12.  that  he  sec  not  the  ground  with  his  e. 
20.  7.  cast  ye  away  the  abomination  of  his  e. 
Dan.  8.  5.  had  a  notable  horn  between  his  e.  21. 
10.  6.  and  his  e.  were  as  lamps  uf  lire 
.Afirt  8.23.  when  he  had  spit  on  his  c.and  put  hands 

25.  after  that  he  put  his  hands  again  on  his  e. 
John  9.14.when.Ie«U8  made  clay,andoi)ened  Ais  e. 

21.  or  who  hath  opened  A;*  e.  we  know  not 
.^cts  3.  4.  Peter  f;istening  Ai*  e.  upon  him,  said 
9.  ^.  and  when  his  c.  were  openo.1  he  saw  no  man 
H.  tliore  fell  tVoin  Ai.5  e.  as  it  had  been  scales 
13.  9.  then  Saul  set  A).?  e.  on  him,  and  said 
I  John  2.  U.  because  darkness  hath  blinded  his  e. 
Hct.l  li.his  e.wcrc  as  a  flame  of  fire,  2.18.  ]  19.12. 

JJft  or  lifted  up  EYES. 
Om.  13. 10.  Lot  lifted  up  hi."  e.  and  beheld  Jordan 
14.  lift  up  now  thine  f.  and  kiok,  31.  12.  iJeut 
3.  27.  2  Kings  19.  22.  ha.  49.  18.  |  60.  4 
Jer.  3.  2.  Eiek.  8.  5.  7.ech.  5.5. 
13.  2.  and  Abraham  lift  up  his  f.  22.  4,  13. 
24.63.  Fsaac  ||  64.  Rebekah  lift  up  her  c. 
.11.  10.  .T:ic<)b,33.  1.  II  43.  2'J.  JoKepli  lift  up  his  e. 
/■iod.14.10.  lift  up  their  e.  the  Egyptians  marched 
JTam.  21.  2.  Balaam  lift  up  his  f.  and  saw  Israel 
J)nt.  4.  19.  lest  thou  lift  vp  thine  c.  \into  heaven 
.hsh.  '>■  13.  Joshua  lifted  up  his  e.  and  looked 
./kd(f.l9.I7.lheold  man  lift  uphisf.andsawR  man 
1  .Sam.  6.  13.  lifted  vp  their  e.  and  saw  the  ark 
8  .Sam.  13.  34.  the  watchman  lift  vp  his  e.  18.  24 
1  C*r.21.16.  David /(/tup  his  e.  and  saw  the  angel 
Job  2.  12.  thev  lift  up  their  e.  and  knew  him  not 
Pnal.  121.  1.  i  will  lift  up  mine  e.  to  the  hills 

14:1.  1.  to  thee  lift  I  up  mine  r.  thou  that  dwellest 
/i<a.37.23.  against  whom  host  thou  lifted  up  thy  c? 
51.  6.  lift  up  your  e.  F.zek.  33.  25.  .Uhn  4.  35. 
Rtrk.  18.  6.  nor  hath  lift  up  his  e.  to  idols,  15. 

13.  hath  spoiled,  hath  lift  up  his  e.  to  idols 
23.  27.  !<n  that  thou  fhall  licit  lift  vp  thine  e. 
Dan.  4.  M.  I  Nebuchadnezzar  lift  up  mine  e. 
8.  3.  then   !  lift'd  up  mine  r.  ami  naw,  and  be- 
hold, 10.  .5.  Zech.  1.  18.  I  2.1. 1  .5.  !,.■>,  9. 1  6.  I. 
Mni.  17.8.  had  lift  up  their  n.  they  saw  no  man 
/.«t(!6.2n.Je«tis/.  iiphisf.  ./oAn6.5. 1  11.41.  |  17.1. 
16.23.  in  hill  he  lift  up  his  «.  being  in  torments 
J8J3. would  n<it  lift  np  so  much  as  his  e.to  heaven 

EV  KS  uf  the  I.orfl. 

Oen.  6. 8.  Noah  found  grace  in  tlio  <•.  of  the  Lord 

38.  t  10.  the  thing  was  evil  in  the  e.  «/  the  Lord 

Deut.  11.  12.  the  e.  of  the  Lnrd  are  always  on  il 

13.  18.  10  do  what  is  right  in  the  e.  of  the  Lord 

1  Sam.  26.24.  n>y  life  much  set  by  in  \\v:e.ofthe  L 

%Sam.  11.  127.  but  the  thing  that  David  did  wn 

•vil  in  the  I.  of  the  Lord.  1  Chron.  21.  t  7 

178 


EYE 

2  5nm.l5.  25.  if  I  find  favour  in  the  t.  of  the  Lord 

1  Kings  15. 5.  because  David  did  what  was  right  in 
the  e.  of  the  Lord,  11.  |  22.  43.  2  Chron.  14. 2. 

2  Chron.  16.  9.  the  e.  of  the  iMrd  run  to  and  fro 
through  the  whole  earth,  ZccA.  4.  10. 

Psal.  34.15.  the  e.  of  the  I.,  are  upon  the  righteous, 
and  his  ears  are  o|)en  to  their  cry,  1  Pet.  3. 12. 

Prov.  5. 21.  ways  of  man  are  before  the  e.  of  the  />. 
1.5.  3.  the  t.  of  the  l^ord  are  in  every  place 
22.  12.  the  e.  of  the  Lord  preserve  knowledge 

/.sa.49.5.yet  shall  1  be  glorious  in  the  e.  of  the  Lord 

Amos'JJi.x)\e  e.  of  the  L.  are  on  the  sinful  kingdom 
Mine  EYES. 

Gen.  31.  40.  and  my  sleep  departed  from  mine  e. 
44.  21.  bring  him,  that  1  may  set  mine  e.  upon  him 

Judg.  14.  t3.  get  her  for  me,  she  is  right  in  mine  e. 

1  .Sam.  12.  3.  or  received  any  bribe  to  blind  mine  e. 
14.  29.  see  how  mine  e.  have  been  enlightened 
26.  24.  thy  life  much  set  by  this  day  in  mine  e. 

1  Kings  1.48.  hathgiven  one  ti^sil, mine  e. seeing  it 

9.  3.  have  hallowed  this  house,  mine  e.  and  mine 
heart  shall  be  there  perpetually,  2  Chron.  7.  16. 

10.  7.  until  mine  e.  had  seen  it,  2  Chron.  9.  6. 

11.  33.  have  not  walked  in  my  ways,  to  do  that 
which  is  right  in  mine  c.  14.  8.  2  Kings  10.  .30. 

2  CAron.7.15.  now  mine  e.  shall  be  open, ears  atlent 
Job  3.  10.  because  it  hid  not  sorrow  from  mine  c. 

4.  16.  it  stood  still,  an  image  was  before  mine  e. 
19.  27.  mine  e.  shall  behold,  and  not  another 
31. 1.  1  made  a  covenant  with  7ni«e  e.  why  then 

7.  and  mine  heart  walked  after  mine  e. 
R?. 13. 3. lighten  mine  e. lest  I  sleep  the  sleep  of  death 
2.i.  15.  mine  e.  are  ever  toward  the  Lord 
26.  3.  for  thy  loving-kindness  is  before  mine  e. 
38.  10.  as  for  the  lightof  mine  e.  it  is  gone  from  me 
69.  3.  mine  e.  fail,  whilst  I  wait  for  my  God 
73.  t  Hi.  to  know  that  it  was  labour  in  mine  e. 
77. 4.  thou  boldest  7nin«  e.  waking,  I  am  troubled 
101.  3.  I  will  set  no  evil  thing  before  7ni;ie  e. 

6.  7»i;ie  e.  shall  be  on  the  faithlul  of  the  land 
116.  b.  thou  hast  delivered  7rtine  c.  from  tears 
119.  18.  open  mine  e.  \\  37.  turn  away  mi7ie  e. 

KJ.  7nine  e.  fail  for  thy  word,  saying,  comfort  me 

123.7niiiee.fail  for  thy  salvation, and  for  the  wu/d 

136.  rivers  of  waters  run  down  mine  e. 

148.  mine  e.  prevent  the  night-watches 
131. 1.  mine  heart  is  not  haughty,  nor  mine  e.  lofty 
132.4. 1  will  not  give  sleep  to  rni7(e  e.  or  slumber 
141.  8.  but  mine  e.  are  unto  thee,  OGod,  the  Lord 
Eccl.  2. 10.  whatsoever  mi7ie  e.  desired,  I  kept  not 
Jsa.  1.  15.  I  will  hide  mine  e.  from  you 

16.  put  away  the  evil  doing.s  from  before  mine  c. 
6.5. 7nine  e.  have  seen  the  King,  the  Lord  of  hosts 
.3d.  14.  mirte  e.  fail  with  looking  upward 
65.  12.  but  did  evil  before  ?ni7ie  e.  66.  4. 

II).  and  because  they  are  hid  from  mine  e. 
Jer.  9.  1.  O  that  jnine  c.  were  a  fountain  of  tears 

13.  17.  mine  e.  shall  weep  sorr,  and  run  down 

14.  17.  shall  say,  let  Tnine  e.  run  down  with  tears 
16.  17.  mine  e.  are  on  their  ways,  they  are  not  hid 

from  me,  nor  is  their  iniquity  hid  from  mine  e. 

24.  6.  I  will  set  mine  e.  upon  thera  for  good 
/,n7n.  2.  11.  mine  e.  do  fail  with  tears,  my  bowels 
Has.  13.  14.  repentance  shall  be  hid  from  7Hin^  e 
.linos  9.  4.  I  will  set  viinc  c.  on  them  for  evil 
jV(C.7.10.minee.  shall  behold  her,  be  trodden  down 
Zcch.  8.  6.  should  it  also  be  marvellous  in  mine  e. 

9.  8.  for  now  have  I  seen  with  Tnine  e. 

12.  4.  I  will  open  jnine  e.  on  the  house  of  Judah 
Au/te  2.  30.  for  Tnine  e.  have  seen  thy  sanation 
.7oAn9.11.Je8usmadeclay,and  anointed  mine  e.l5. 

30.  whence  he  is,  yet  he  hath  opened  Tnine  e. 
./?c£ill.6.on  the  which  when  I  had  fastened  mince. 

Our  EYES. 
JVuTn.  11.  6.  nothing  but  this  manna  before  our  e. 
Deut.  6.  22.  the  Lord  shewed  signs  before  our  i; 

21.7.  not  shed  ihis  blood,  nor  have  our  e.  sreii  it 
2  .Sain.20.  t6.  lest  Sheba  deliver  himself  from  our  e. 
2  Chron.  20.  12.  but,  O  God,  eur  e.  ore  upon  thee 
Ezra  9. 8.  that  our  God  may  lighten  our  e. 
l*ital.  UH.  23.  this  is  the  I..ord'8  doing,  it  is  mar- 
vellous in  vur  e.  Mat.  21.  42.  Mark  12. 11. 

123.  2.  so  our  c.  wait  upon  the  Lord  our  God 
.Ter.  9. 18.  thai  our  c.  may  run  down  with  tears 
7,(1771.  4.  17.  OUT  e.  as  yet  failed  for  our  vain  help 

5. 17.  heart  is  faint,  for  these  tilings  cure,  are  dim 
./ocl  1.  16.  is  not  the  inrat  cut  olf  before  our  e. 
Mat.  20.  33.  Lord,  that  our  c.  may  bo  opened 
!  John  1.  1.  that  which  we  have  seen  with  our  e. 

(hen  EYES. 
JVuTTt.  15.  39.  that  ye  seek  not  after  your  own  e. 
Deut.  12.  8.  ye  shall  not  do,  every  m:in  whatso- 
ever is  right  in  his  own  e.  .lud).'.  17.  6.  |  21.  25. 
2  .fam.  4. 1 10.  was  in  his  own  r.  a  liringer  of  good 
JW  A.  6.16.  enemies  much  rajl  down  in  their  oien  r. 
.fob  32.  1.  beraiiFe  he  was  rightiKiiis  in  his  own  t. 
Psal.  36.  2.  he  flattereth  himself  in  his  awn  r. 
Pron.  3.  7.  be  not  wise  in  thine  oicn  e.  fear  God 

12.  15.  the  way  of  a  fool  ia  right  in  his  nion  r. 

IG.  2.  all  the  ways  of  ruao  ore  clean  in  bis  oicn  e. 


EYE 

Prov.  21. 2.  every  way  of  man  is  right  in  his  own  t 

26.  t  .5.  answer  a  fool,  lest  he  be  wise  in  his  own  t 
30. 12.  a  generation  that  are  pure  in  their  own  o 

Isa.  5. 21.  woe  to  them  that  are  wi3i>  in  their  own  a. 
Gal.  4. 15.  ye  would  have  plucked  out  youroicTt* 

77ieir  EYES. 
Oen. 42.24. he  took  and  boundSimron  beforetAeir  e 
£i(7(i.8.26.abominationofEgy[liansbei"orelAeir« 
y,e7).  20.  4.  do  any  ways  hide  their  e.  from  the  maa 
J^um.  20.  8.  speak  to  the  rock  before  their  e. 

27.  14.  to  sanctify  me  at  the  water  before  their  t 
.loth.  22.  t  30.  il  was  good  in  their  e.  2  Sam.  3.  t36 
2  A'in^s6.20.the  Lord  opened  rteire.and  they  saw 
Eira  3.  12.  foundation  was  iaid  before  tAtir  e. 
Esth.l.  17.  they  shall  despise  their  husbands  in  t.* 
Job  21.  8.  and  their  offspring  before  their  e. 
Psal.  17.  11.  they  have  set  rAeir  e.  bowing  down 

69.  23.  let  their  e.  be  darkened,  that  they  see  not 
73.  7.  tAeir  e.  stand  out  with  fatness,  have  mors 
Prov.  29.  13.  the  Lord  lighteneth  both  their  e. 
30.  13.  a  generation,  O  how  lofty  are  their  e. 
Eecl.5. 11.  saving  the  beholding  them  with  their  t 
Isa.  a.  10.  make  their  ears  heavy,  shut  JAeire.  lert 
they  see  with  tAeire.  Mat.  13.  15.  jJcte  28.27 
13. 16.  children  be  dashed  to  pieces  before  £Acir  e 
44. 18.  for  he  hath  shut  their  e.  they  cannot  see 
Jer.l4.6.tA<'ir  e.did  fail,because  th'^re  was  no  grass 
Ezek.  6.  9.  and  with  their  e.  which  go  a  whoring 
20. 8.  not  cast  away  the  abominations  of  £Aeir  e. 
24.  and  their  e.  were  after  their  father's  idols 

21.  6.  and  with  bitterness  sigh  before  «Aeir  e. 

22.  26.  and  have  hid  their  e.  from  my  sabbaths 
24.25.  when  I  take  from  them  Ihedesireof  £Aeir  e 

36.  23.  I  shall  be  sanctified  in  you  before  £Aeir  « 

37.  20.  slicks  shall  be  in  thy  hand  before  their  e. 

38.  16.  sanctified  in  thee,  ()  Gog,  before  tAeir  e 
Zech.  14.  12.  and  their  e.  shall  consume  away 
Mat.  9.  29.  then  touched  he  tAfir  e.  saying 

30.  their  e.were  opened,  and  Jesus  charged  them 
13.  15.  fAeir  e.  they  have  closed,  lest  at  any  time 
20.34 .Jesus  touched  their  e.  tAeire. received  sight 

26.  43.  for  tlif.ir  e.  were  heavy,  Mark  14.  40. 
Luke  24.  16.  but  their  e.  were  holdcn,  that  they 

31.  thfir  e.  were  opened,  and  they  knew  him 
.John  12.  40.  he  hath  blinded  their  r.  and  hardened 
Wc£5  26.  18.  to  open  fAf ir  e.  and  to  turn  them 
Horn.  3. 18.  there  is  no  fear  of  God  before  tAeir  e. 

11.  10.  let  their  e.  be  darkened,  that  they  see  not 
Rev.  7.  17.  the  Lamb  shall  feed  them,  and  God 
shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  (A(ir  e.  21.  4. 
TAine  EYES. 
Oen.  16.  t  6.  do  to  her  that  which  isgood  \nthinee. 
20.tl.5.Abimelrcli  said,dwell  as  isgood  intAine  e 
30.  27.  if  I  have  found  favour  in  tAine  e.  tarry 

46.  4.  Joseph  shall  put  his  hand  on  rAine  e. 

47.  19.  wherefore  shall  we  die  before  thine  e.  f 
Eiod.  13.  9.  for  a  memorial  between  fAiTi*  e. 

16.  for  frontlets  between  <Aine  e.  Unit.  6.  8. 
JVuTn.  22. 1 34.  if  it  be  evil  in  lAine  e.  I  will  go  back 
Deut.'S.il.  thine  e.  have  seen  all  that  the  Lord 

27.  lift  up  thine  e.  behold  It  with  thine  e. 
4.  9.  forget  the  things  which  thine  e.  have  seen 
7.  19.  the  great  temptations  thive  e.  siiw,  29.  3 

10.  21.  terrible  things  which  fAiTie  e.  have  seen 

28.  31.  thine  ox  shall  be  sluin  before  thine  e. 

32.  thine  e.  shall  look,  and  fail  with  longing 
34.  thou  ehalt  be  mad  for  the  sight  of  Ihine  e.  67. 

34.  4.  I  have  caused  thee  to  see  it  with  thint  e. 
Judg.  10. 1 15.  Israel  said, we  have  sinned,  do  to  ill 
whatsoever  Is  good  in  thine  e.  2  Kings  10.  5. 
liuth  2.  9.  let  thine  e.  be  on  the  field  they  reap 
10.  she  said,  why  have  I  found  grace  in  thine  t.  ? 

1  .Som.  2.  Xi.  shall  be  to  consume  fAiTif  e. 

20.  3.  knowcth  Ihat  I  have  found  grace  in  fAinee. 
29.  and  now  if  I  have  found  favour  in  thine  «, 
24.  10.  thine  e.  have  seen  how  the  Lord  delivered 
25. 8.  let  the  young  men  find  favour  in  thine  e. 
26. 21.  my  soul  w.ag  precious  in  thine  e.  tJiis  day 

27.  5.  if  I  have  found  grace  in  thine  r.  give  me 

2  Slim.  10. 13.  the  princes  said  to  Iliinun,  in  thin'  e. 

doth  David  honour  thy  father,  1  Cftron.  19.  T3 

11.  t  25.  let  not  this  thing  be  evil  in  (Aine  e, 

12.  II.  I  will  take  thy  wives  before  thine  «. 
10.  27.  do  therefore  what  is  good  in  Mine  e. 

22.  2.S.  tAine  e.  are  on  ihc  nauphly  In  bring  dowq 

1  A'i7i^<  8.  29.  that  tAinc  e.  may  tie  o|ion  lowprd 

this  house  night  and  day,  .'i2.  2  TAron.  6. 20,40 
20.  6.  whatsoever  is  pleasant  in  fAine  e. 
21. t2.  if  il  ho  good  in  lAinr  r.  I  will  pive  the  wr/tk 

2  A'in^-ji  7.  2.  behold,  thou  shall  sec  it  willi  thine  «. 
19.  16.  o|)cn.  Lord,  thine  r.  and  seo,  Isa.  37.  17. 
22.  20.  find  Ihine  e.  shall  not  fOr  nil  the  evil 

1  f'hran.  17.  17.  this  was  •»  smiill  thing  in  :Aine  «, 
2<"Arnn.  34.  08.  nor  shal!  tnine  e.  we  nil  the  fft 
.ViA.I.fi.lcl  thine  ear  be  Blleniivo, and  (Ain'e.op«n 
.Inb  7.  8.  Mine  e.  nro  upon  me,  and  1  sm  not 
n.  4.  inv  doctrine  is  piir°.  I  am  clean  in  Mi»i«  < 

14.  3.  dost  thou  opin  ihine  e.  upon  such  a  0D«1 

15.  12.  and  what  do  thine  e.  wink  all 
PsalXi.\^.  the  foof  sh  shall  no!  Bland  l>eforo  lAMf  •, 


FAC 

Fs.  31. 22. 1  said,  1  am  cut  off  from  before  thine  e. 
50.  21.  und  set  them  in  order  before  thine  e. 
91. 8.  only  with  thine  e.  shalt  thou  behold  and  see 
139.  16.  thine  e.  did  see  my  substance  imperfect 

Prov.  3. 21.  let  them  not  depart  from  thine  e.  4.21. 
4.  25.  let  thine  e.  look-right  on,  and  thine  eye-lids 
6.  4.  give  not  sleep  to  t.  e.  nor  slumber  to  eye-lids 
20.  13.  open  thine  e.  and  thou  shalt  be  satisfied 
S?  5.  wilt  thou  set  thine  e.  on  that  which  is  not  ? 
l:6.give  me  thy  heart,lct  thine  e.observe  my  ways 
33.  thine  e.  shall  behold  strange  women 
5>5.  7.  of  the  prince  whom  thine  e.  have  seen 

£6ci.ll.9.0  young  man,  walk  in  the  sight  of  iAince. 

CtiUt.  4.  9.  hast  ravished  my  heart  with  thine  e. 
6.  5.  turn  away  thine  e.  from  me,  they  overcome 
7  4.  thine  e.  like  the  fish-puols  in  Heshbon 

/»4.  30.  20.  but  thine  c.  shall  see  thy  teachers 
2!i.  17.  thine  e.  shall  see  the  king  in  his  beauty 
20.  thine  e.  see  Jerusalem  a  quiet  habitation 

Je.'.  5.  3.  O  Lord,  are  not  thine  e.  upon  the  truth  7 
2(1.  4.  fall  by  the  sword,  thine  e.  shall  behold  it 
22. 17.  thine  e.  are  not  but  for  thy  covetousness 

31.  16.  refrain  weeping,  and  thine  e.  from  tears 

32.  19.  thine  e.  are  open  on  all  the  ways  of  men 
34.  3.  thine  c.  shall  behold  the  king  of  Babylon 
39. 1 12.  take  Jeremiah,  and  set  thine  e.  on  him 
42.  2.  we  are  bat  few,  as  tliine  e.  do  behold  us 

Lam.  2.  18.  let  not  the  apple  of  thine  e.  cease 
Ezek.  23.  40.  for  whom  thou  paintedst  thine  e. 
24.  16.  I  take  from  thee  the  desire  of  thine  e. 
40.  4.  son  of  man,  behold  with  thine  e.  44.  5. 
Dan.  9. 18.  open  thine  e.  and  behold  our  desolation 
Luke  19.  42.  but  now  they  are  hid  from  thine  e. 
John  9.10.said  to  him,how  were  thine  e.opened726. 

17.  sayest  thou  that  he  hath  opened  thine  e.  ? 
Rev.  3.  18.  and  anoint  thine  e.  with  eye-salve 

Your  EYES. 
Oen.  3.  5.  in  the  day  ye  eat  your  e.  shall  be  opened 
19.  8.  do  ye  to  them  as  is  good  in  your  e. 
34. 11.  Shechem  said,  let  me  find  grace  in  your  e. 
45.  1 5-  neither  let  there  be  anger  in  your  e. 

12.  your  e.  und  the  eyes  of  my  brother  Benjamin 
50.  4.  if  now  I  have  found  grace  in  your  e. 
t^'um.  33.  55.  those  which  ye  let  remain  shall  be 
pricks  in  your  e.  thorns  in  sides,  Josh.  23. 13. 
Oeut.  1.  30.  that  he  did  before  your  e.  4.  34.  ]  29. 2. 
4.  3.  your  e.  have  seen  what  the  Lord  did  because 
of  Baal-peor,  11.  7.  Josh.  24.  7. 
9.  17.  I  brake  the  two  tables  before  your  e. 
IL  18.  they  may  be  as  frontlets  between  your  e. 
14.  1.  not  make  any  baldness  between  your  e. 

1  Sam.  12. 16.  what  the  Lord  will  do  before  your  e. 

2  Chron.  29. 8.  and  to  his3ing,a3  ye  see  with  your  e. 
fsa.  29.  10.  for  the  Lord  hath  closed  your  c. 

40  26.  lift  up  your  e.  on  high,  .hr.  13.  20. 

Jer.  7. 11.  is  this  house  a  den  of  robbers  in  your  e. 

16.  9.  cause  to  cease  out  of  this  place  in  your  e. 

29.  21.  and  he  shall  slay  them  before  your  e. 
K2eA.24.2i.  the  desire  of  your  e.  and  what  you  pity 
Zy)A.3.20.when  I  turn  your  captivity  before  t/«!nc. 
Hag.  2.  3.  in  your  e.  in  comparison  is  nothing 
Zech.  11. 1 12.  if  good  in  your  c.  give  me  my  price 
Mai.  1.5.  youre.  shall  see,  the  L.  will  be  magnified 
.Vat.  13.  16.  but  blessed  are  your  e.  for  they  see 

Ri^ht  EYES. 
1  Sam.  11.2.  that  1  may  thrust  out  all  your  right  e. 


F. 


FABLES. 

ITYm.  1.  4.  nor  give  heed  to/,  and  genealogies 
4.  7.  but  refuse  profane  and  old  wives'/. 

2 Tint.  4.  4.  and  they  shall  be  turned  unto/. 

Ti£.1.14.  not  giving  heed  to  Jewish/,  and  comm.of 

2  Pet- 1.  IG.  have  not  followed  cunningly  devised/. 
FACE, 

Countenance,  or  visage,  is  a  part  of  the  body  well 
known  :  It  is  thereby  that  our  inward  motions 
are  made  known  to  othrrs:  Love,hatrrd,desire, 
dislike,  joy,  l^rirf,  confidence,  dcspair,courage, 
cowardice, admiration, eontempt,pririr,niodesty, 
cruelty,  compassion,  and  the  rest  of  the  affec- 
tions, are  discovered  by  their  proper  aspects. 
The  countcnance,a5  one  phrases  it,is  a  crystal, 
wherein  the  thoughts  and  affections,  otherjcise 
inmsihle,appcar;  and  is  a  natural  sign,known 
to  alt.  It  is  by  th«  (nee,  also,  that  one  man  is 
known  and  distinguished  from  another:  Jind  it 
is  matter  of  admiration,  that  so  few  parts  com- 
posing it,  and  in  so  small  a  compass,  and  al- 
ways in  the  same  situation,  yet  there  is  such  a 
diversity  of  figures  as  of  faces  in  the  world  : 
These  innumerable  differer.t  characters  in  the 
faces  of  men,  is  the  counsel  of  most  wise  pro 
vidence,  for  the  universal  benefit  of  the  world: 
For  human  societies  cannot  be  preserved  wilh- 
tut  union  and  distinction  :  the  one  prevents 
division,  the  other  confusion;  and  this  distinc- 
tion is  caused  by  the  variety  of  countenances. 
179 


FAC 

T%e  Face  of  a  man  is  also  taken  for  tfie  man 
himself:  1  had  not  thought  to  see  thy  face; 
that  is,  thy  person,  sa^s  Jacob  to  his  son  Jo- 
Bei)h,  Oen.  4(5.  11.  Before  one's  face;  that  is, 
in  his  sight  or  presence,  Num.  19.  3.  To  with- 
stand a  person  to  the  lace,  is  to  reprove  him 
boldly,  Gal.  2.  11.  The  pride  of  Israel  doth 
testily  to  his  face,  Has.  5.  5.  It  is  so  full 
and  evident  a  witness  against  Israel,  that  no 
other  testimony  need  be  produced,  to  convince 
the  most  impudent  and  shameless  among  them. 
To  fall  to  the  earth  upon  one's  face,  was  a 
posture  of  adoration.  Josh.  7.  6,  Joshua  fell 
to  the  earth  ujion  his  face,  in  deep  humiUutiun 
and  fervent  supplication.  To  accept  one's  face, 
is  to  shew  one  a  favour,  and  grant  his  request. 
Gen.  19.  f  21,  I'eradventure  he  will  accept  of 
my  face;  he  will  be  reconciled  with  me,  and 
accept  of  my  person.  To  spit  in  one's  face,  is 
a  sign  of  the  utmost  contempt.  The  woman, 
whose  husband  died  without  children,  if  her 
husbayid^s  brother  refused  to  marry  her,  spit 
in  his  face,  Dcut.  25.  9. 
Face  is  likewise  referred  to  God,  and  denotes 
sometimes  his  anger.  Psal.  34. 10,  The  face  of 
the  Lord  is  against  them  that  do  evil.     Kev.  6. 

16,  Hide  us  from  the  face  of  him  that  sittelh 
on  the  throne.  Jit  other  times,  it  denotes  his 
love  and  favour,  Psal.  31.  16.  [  80.  7,  Make 
thy  face  to  shine  upon  thy  servant.  Cause  thy 
face  to  shine  and  we  shall  be  saved.     Dan.  9. 

17,  Cause  thy  face  to  shine  upon  thy  sanctuary 
which  is  desolate.  It  is  also  taken  for  his 
omniscie7uc,  1  Sam.  26.  20,  Let  not  my  blood 
fall  to  the  earth  before  the  face  of  the  Lord ; 
that  is,  if  thou  dost  shed  my  blood,  remember 
that  God,  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth,  secth  it, 
and  will  avenge  it. 

The  Lord  projuiscs  Moses,  that  his  face  shall  go 
before  the  Israelites,  Ezod.  33.  14,  My  pre- 
sence, in  Hebrew,  my  face  shall  go  with  thee  ; 
that  is,  I  myself  will  go  with  thee.  The  Jingcl 
of  my  presence,  namely,  the  Messiah,  Isa.  63.  9. 
who  is  always  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  and 
continually  making  intercession  for  his  peo- 
ple;  and  likewise  the  pledge  of  my  presence 
shall  go  with  thee,  namely,  the  cloudy  pillar. 
Moses,  in  the  same  chapter,  begs  of  God  to 
shew  him  his  glory.  God  replies  to  him,  I  will 
make  ail  my  goodness  pass  before  thee,  or,  all 
my  glory  ;  thou  shalt  have  a  sudden  transient 
view  of  it;  and  I  will  proclaim  my  name, 
which  I  will  give  thee  as  a  sigital  of  my  pre 
scnce,  that  thou  maycst  attend  :  but  fur  my 
face,  thou  canst  not  see  it;  for  there  shall  no 
man  see  it  and  live:  Thou  canst  not  see  th 
majesty  and  glory  attending  that  external 
shape  I  have  now  assumed;  nor  those  mani 
festations  of  my  glory  which  the  saints  are 
favoured  with  in  another  life ;  for  such  is  the 
weakness  of  man  in  this  life,  that  if  I  should 
display  all  the  beatns  of  my  glory  to  him,  it 
would  certainly  astonish,  overwhilm,  and  de- 
stroy him.  It  was  a  certain  persuasion,  and 
very  prevalent  in  the  world,  that  no  man  could 
support  the  sight  of  God  without  expiring. 
See  Gen.  16.  13.  |  32.  30.  E.\od.  20.  19.  I  24.  11. 
Judg.  6.  22,  23.  I  13.  22. 

J\revertheless,  it  is  said  in  Num.  12.  8,  With 
Moses  will  I  speak  mouth  to  mouth,  even 
apparently,  and  not  in  dark  speeches,  -jdud  in 
chap.  14.  14,  The  Canaanites  have  heard  that 
thou  art  among  this  people,  and  that  thou  art 
seen  face  to  face.  Jlnd  in  Deut.  5.  4,  it  is  said 
that  God  talked  with  the  Israelites  face  to 
face,  out  of  the  midst  of  the  fire:  But  in  all 
these  places,  face  to  face  is  to  be  understood 
simply,  as  if  he  had  said,  that  God  manifested 
himself  to  the  Israelites,  that  he  made  them 
hear  his  voice  in  a  manner  as  distinct  as  if  he 
had  appeared  to  them  face  to  face :  That  he 
spake  to  them  personally  and  immediately,  and 
not  by  an  interpreter ;  and  familiarly,  so  as 
not  to  overwhelm  and  coiifound  them.  The 
apostle,  speaking  of  the  difference bttween  our 
knowledge  here  and  in  heaven,  says.  Now,  we 
see  through  a  glass  darkly ;  but  then  face  to 
face,  1  Cor.  13.  12.  that  is,  There  is  as  much 
difference  between  our  knowledge  here  and  in 
heaven,  as  between  looking  through  a  per- 
spective glass  upon  a  thing  a  great  way  off, 
and  covered  with  many  obscurities ;  and  look- 
ing immediately,  with  the  naked  eye,  upon  the 
naked  object  nigh  at  hand. 

The  bread  of  faces,  the  shew-broad,  which  was 
abcays  in  the  presence  of  God.     See  Brkad. 

Gen.  1.  t  20.  fowls  may  fly  in/,  of  the  firmament 
3.  10.  in  the  sweat  of  ihy/.  shalt  thou  eat  bread 
16.  8.  I  tloe  t>om  the/,  of  my  mistress  Sarai 
19.  t21.  I  have  accepted  thy/,  concerning  this 


FAC 

Gen.  24.  47.  and  I  put  the  ear-rings  upon  her/. 
32.  t-.^0.  peradventure  he  will  accept  my/. 
t30.  Jacob  called  the  place,  the/,  of  God 

35.  1.  when  thou  tieddest  from  tlie^.  of  Esau,  7. 

36.  6.  Esau  went  from  the/,  of  his  brother  Jacob 
46.28.  hesentto  Joseph  to  direct  his/,  to  Goshen 
46.  12.  Joseph  bowed  with  his/,  to  llie  earth 

Ezod.  2.  15.  Moses  fled  from  the  /.  of  Pharaoh 
14.  25.  said,  let  us  ttee  from  the  /.  of  Israel 
25.  t  37.  may  give  hght  against  the/,  of  it 
34.  29.  the  skin  of  his  /.  shone,  30,  .i5. 

33.till  he  had  done  speaking, he  put  a  vail  on  his/. 
Lev.  13.  41.  that  hath  his  hair   fallen  towarrts 

hia/. 
19.  32.  thou  shalt  honour  the/,  of  the  old  raau 
J'>''um.  12.  14.  if  her  father  had  but  spit  in  her/. 
19.  3.  one  shall  slay  the  red  heifer  before  his/. 
Deut.  1. 17.  ye  shall  not  be  afraid  of  the/,  of  man 
7.  JO.  and  repayeth  them  that  hate  him  to  their/. 
t  23.  the  Lord  shall  deliver  them  before  thy/, 
and  shall  destroy  them,  9.  3.  |  28.  7. 
8.20.  the  nations  the  Ld.  destroycth  before  your/. 
25.2.  cause  the  wicked  man  be  beaten  before  his/. 
9.  shall  loose  his  shoe,  and  spit  in  his/,  and  say 
28.  31.  thine  ass  shall  be  taken  before  thy/. 

1 50.  a  nation  strong  of/,  which  shall  not  regard 
31.  5.  the  Lord  shall  give  them  up  before  your/. 
./osh.  7.  10.  wherefore  liest  thou  upon  thy/.  .' 
Judg.  11. 1 3.  Jephthah  tied  from  /.  of  his  brethren 

1  Sam.  5.  3.  behold,  Dagon  was  fallen  on  his/.  4. 
17.  t24.tliey  fled  from  Goliath's/.and  were  afraid 
19.  fS.  and  the  Philistines  fled  from  his/. 

24.  8.  David  stooped  with  his/,  to  the  earth 

25.  41.  Abigail  bowed  on  her/,  and  said 

28.  14.  Saul  stooped  with  his/,  to  the  ground 

2  Sam.  2.  22.  how  should  I  hold  up  my/,  to  Joab  t 

7.  t9.  I  have  cut  off  thine  enemies  Irom  thy/. 
]4.  33.  Absalom  bowed  on  his/,  to  the  ground 

17.  1 11.  that  thy/,  or  presence  go  to  battle 

24. 20.  and  Araunah  ^^ent  out  and  bowed  himself 
before  the  king  on  his/.  1  Chron.  21.  21. 

1  Kings  1.  23.  Nathan  bowed  himself  with  his/. 
31.  Balh-sheba  bowed  with  her/,  to  the  earth 

2.  1 16.  I  ask  one  petition,  turn  not  away  my/. 
8. 14.  the  king  turned  his/,  about,  2  Chron.  6.  3. 

10.  t  24.  all  the  earth  sought  the/,  of  Solomon 

18.  42.  Elijah  put  his/,  between  his  knees 

19.  13.  that  he  wrapped  his/,  in  his  mantle 
20.38.  prophet  disguised  hims.  with  ashes  on  his/. 
21.  4.  Ahab  turned  away  his/,  and  would  not  cat 

2  Kings  4. 29.  lay  my  staff  upon  the  /.  of  the  child 

31.  Gehazi  laid  his  staff  on  the/,  of  the  child 

8.  15.  Ilazael  spread  it  on  his/,  so  that  he  died 

9.  30.  Jezebel  painted  her/,  and  tied  her  head 

32.  Jehu  lift  up  his/,  to  the  window,  and  said 
13.14.  Joash  wept  over  his/.and  said,0  my  father 

t2:).  neiiher  cast  he  them  from  his/,  as  yet 
18.24.  how  wilt  thou  turn  awav/.of  one,  Isa-36.9. 
20.2.  Hezekiah  turned  his/,  to  the  wall,  /sa.38.  2. 
2] .  1 13.  he  wipeth  and  turneth  it  on  the  /.  thereof 

25.  1 19.  five  men  that  saw  king's/.  .Jer.  ,52.  t25. 
2  Chr-  6.  42.  O  Lord  God,  turn  not  away  the/,  of 

thine  anointed,  Psal-  132. 10. 
30.9.  the  Lord  will  not  turn  away  his/,  from  you 
32. 1 2.  when  Hezekiah  saw  that  his /.whs  to  war 
21.  he  returned  with  shame  of/,  to  his  own  land 

34.  t4.  and  strowed  it  upon  the/,  of  the  graves 

35.  22.  Josiah  would  not  turn  his/,  from  him 
Ezra  9.  G.  I  blush  to  lift  u]>  my/,  to  thee,  my  God 

7.  to  confusion  of/,  as  it  is  this  day,  Dan.  9.  8. 
.Tob  1.  11.  and  he  will  curse  thee  to  thy/.  2.  5. 
4.  15.  then  a  spirit  passed  before  my/. 

6.  1 28.  for  it  is  before  your  /.  if  I  lie 

11.  15.  then  shalt  thou  lift  up  thy/,  without  spot 
1 19.  yea,  many  shall  entreat  Ihy  /. 

16.  8.  my  leanness  beareth  witness  to  my/. 

16.  my/,  is  foul  with  weeping,  on  my  eye-lids 

21.  31.  who  shall  declare  his  way  to  his/.  ? 

22.  26.  and  thou  shalt  lift  up  thy/,  unto  God 
24.  15.  no  eye  shall  see  me;  and  disguiseth  his/. 

26.  9.  he  holrlcth  back  the/,  of  his  throne 
30.  10.  and  they  spare  not  to  spit  in  my/. 

41.  13.  who  can  discover  the/,  of  his  garment  t 

14.  who  can  open  the  doors  of  his/.  ■? 

42.  t8.  Job  shall  pray,  for  his/,  will  I  accept 
19.  the  Lord  also  accepted  the/,  of  Job 

Psal.  5.  8.  make  thy  way  straight  before  my/. 

17.  1)3.  O  Lord,  prevent  his/,  cast  him  dowa 

15.  I  will  behold  thy/,  in  righteousness 

21. 12.  make  ready  arrows  against  the/,  of  them 
41. 12.  thou  seltest  me  before  tliy/.  for  ever 
4.5.  1 12.  even  the  rich  shall  entreat  thy/. 
68.  1 1.  let  them  that  hate  him  flee  from  his/. 
84.  9.  and  look  upon  the/,  of  thine  anointed 
89.  14.  mercy  and  truth  shall  go  before  thy/. 
23.  I  will  beat  down  his  foes  before  his/. 
119.  t  58. 1  entreated  thy/,  with  my  whole  heart 
Prov.  6. 1 35.  he  will  not  accept  the  /.  of  a  ransom 

7.  ]3.  and  with  an  impudent/,  said  unto  him 
21.  29.  a  wicked  man  hardenetJi  hi»/. 


PAC 

Stcl.  8.  1.  the  boldness  of  his/,  shall  be  changed 
Jaa.  5.  t  21.  woe  to  the  prudeiii  bel'ure  their/. 
16.  4.  be  a  covert  from  the/,  ot'llie  epoiler 
21. 1 15.  for  they  fled  from  the/,  of  the  sword 

24.  t  1.  the  Lord  pervertelh  tiie/.  of  the  earth 

25.  7.  he  will  destroy  the/,  of  liie  covering 

28.  2.5.  when  he  hath  made  plain  the/  thereof 

29.  2:.'.  neither  shall  his/,  now  wax  pale 

49.  23.  they  shall  bow  down  to  thee  with  tlieir/ 
65.  3.  that  provoked  me  continually  to  my/. 
Jer.  1. 1 13./.  thereof  was  from  the/,  of  tlie  north 
2.  27.  turned  their  back,  and  not  the/.  3J.  33 
4.  30.  though  thou  rentest  thy/,  with  paintinj^ 
13.26.  therelbro  will  1  discover  thy  skirts  ujion  thy 
/.  that  tliy  shame  may  appear,  JVuA.  3.  5. 
18. 17.  I  will  shew  them  the  back,  and  not  the/. 
22. 525.  from  hand  of  them  whose  /.  thou  fearest 

32.  31.  I  should  remove  it  from  before  my/. 
Lam.  3.  35.  the  right  of  man  before/,  of  most  High 
Eiek.  1. 10.  they  four  liad  the/,  of  a  man,  the/,  of 

a  lion,  /.  of  an  ox,  the  /.  of  an  eagle 

2.  t4.  they  are  hard  of/,  and  stitt-hearted 

3.  8.  I  made  thy  /.  strong  against  their  faces 
7.  22.  my/,  will  I  also  turn  from  them 
10.14./.  of  a  man, /of  a  lion,/,  of  an  eagle,  41.19. 
14.  3.  put  stumbling-block  before  their/. 

38.  18.  that  my  fury  shall  come  up  in  my/. 
Dan.  8.  18.  I  was  in  a  deep  sleep  on  my/.  10.  9. 

10.  6.  his/,  as  the  appearance  of  lightning 

11.  18.  he  shall  turn  his/,  unto  the  isles 

Jlos.  5.  5.  the  pride  of  Israel  testifieth  to  his/.  7.10. 

7. 2.  now  their  own  doings,  they  are  before  my  /. 
Joel  2.  6.  before  their/,  people  be  much  paineil 

20.  will  drive  him  with  his/,  toward  the  east  sea 
.VaA.2.1.  thatdashelli  in  pieces,  come  before  thy/. 
Zeyk.  1. 1 2. 1  will  consume  from  the/,  of  the  laiiU 
Mai.  1. 19.  now,  I  pray  you,  beseech  the/',  of  God 
Mat.  6.  17.  anoint  thine  head,  and  wash  thy/. 

11. 10.  behold,  I  send  my  messenger  before  thy/, 
to  prepare  thy  way,  Mark  1.  2.  Luke.  7.  27.  i 

18.  10.  their  angels  behold  the/,  of  my  Father 

2(1.  67.  then  did  they  spit  in  his/,  and  butfeted 
/.u&e  2.31. thou  hast  prepared  befoie/of  all  people 

9.  52.  he  sent  messengers  before  his/.  10.  1. 

53.  his /.was  as  though  he  would  go  to  Jerusalem 

22.  64.  they  struck  him  on  the/,  and  asked  him 
John  11.44.  his/,  was  bound  about  with  a  napkin 
Acts  2. 25.  r  foresaw  the  Lord  always  before  niy/. 

7.  45.  God  drave  out  before  the/,  of  our  fathers 

1  Cor.  14. 25.  so  falling  down  on  his/,  will  worship 
2C»r.3.7.could  notstedfastly  behold  the/,  of  Moses 

13.  not  as  Moses,  who  put  a  vail  over  his/. 

18.  but  we  all  witli  open/,  beholding  the  glory 
4.6.  the  glory  of  God,  in  the/,  of  Jesus  Christ 
5. 1 12.  which  glory  in  the/,  and  not  in  the  heart 

11.  20.  ye  suffer,  if  a  man  smite  you  on  the/. 
Gal.  1.  22.  I  was  unknown  by/,  to  the  churches 

2.  11.  I  withstood  him  to  the/,  because  he  was 
Jam.  1.  23.  beholding  his  natural/,  in  a  glass 
Rtv.  4.  7.  the  third  beast  had  a/,  as  a  man 

10.  1.  and  his/,  was  as  it  were  the  sun 

12.  14.  were  nourished  from  the/,  of  the  sorpent 
20.  11.  from  whose/,  the  earth  and  heaven  fled 

See  Skek,  Set,  Shink,  Sky,  Waters,  Wilder- 
ness, World. 
FACE  with  cover.,  or  covered. 
Gen.  ^..  15.  a  harlot,  because  she  covered  her/. 
/;iod.I()..5.lo(Usts  shall  cover  the/,  of  ihe  earth, 15. 
J'ftim.  22.  5.  behold,  they  cover  the/,  of  the  earth 

2  Sam.  19.  4.  the  king  covered  his/,  and  cried 
F.ath.  7. 3.  word  went  out,ihoy  covered  Hainan's/. 
Job  15.  27.  he  covere.th  his/,  with  his  fatness 

23.  17.  nor  hath  he  covered  darkness  from  my/. 
P.^al.  44.  I.l.  the  shame  of  my /.  hath  covered  me 

69.  7.  for  thy  sake  shame  hath  covered  my/. 
Prov.  24.  31.  nettles  had  covered  ihe/.  thereof 
laa.fi.  2.  with  twain  he  covered  his/,  and  his  foct 
EieA.12.6.  thou  shalt  cover  thy/,  that  thou  see  not 
12.  the  prince  shall  cover  his/,  that  he  see  not 
Mark  14.  6-5.  began  to  K|iit  on  him,  and  cuoer  his/. 

Face  of  ike  country. 
'i  Sam.  18.8.  battle  was  scatlcred  over/,  of  country 

FACE  of  the  deep. 
.7en.  1.  2.  darkness  was  upon  the/,  of  the  deep 
Job  38.  .30.  and  the  /.  of  the  deep  is  frozen 
Prov.  8.  27.  he  set  acoinpasson  ihof.oftUe  depth 

F.\C,Eofthe  earth. 
Gen.  1.  29.  every  herb  upon  the/,  of  the  earth 
A.  14.  thou  hast  driven  me  from  the  /.  of  the  earth 
6. 1.  men  began  to  multiply  on  the/,  of  llie  earth 

7.  3.  to  keep  seed  alive  on  the/.  «/«ll  the  earth 
4.  I  will  destroy  from  oil"  the  /.  nf  the  earth, 

Deut.  6.  1.5.  1  Kin/ra  13.  .34.  Jimo.i  9.  H. 

8.  n.  the  waters  were  on  the  /.  of  the  whole  earth 
11  4.  lest  we  be  scatto-ed  on  the/,  of  Ihe  larlh 
41  .56.  the  famine  was  over  all  the  /.  o/  the  enrlh 

Ezod.  32.  12.  to  consume  them  from  /.  nflhe  earth 

33.  16.  from  all  people  upon  the  /.  of  the  earth 
^am.  12.  3.  meek  above  all  men  on  /.  nf  the  earth 


FAC 

1  Sam.  20,15.  cutofTevcry  one  from/,  of  the  earth 
'i  fiam.  14.  17.  nor  remainder  on  the  7'.  of  the  earth 
I'sal.  104.  30.  thou  renewest  the/,  of  the  earth 
ha.  23. 17.  With  all  kingdoms  on  the/,  of  the  earth 
Jtr.  6. 2.  be  for  dung  on  the/,  of  the  earth,  16.  4. 
2rf.  16.  1  will  cast  tJiee  from  the/,  of  the  earth 
Liek.  3«.  20.  all  men  on  the/,  of  the  earth  shake 
Dan.  8. 5.  a  he-gout  came  on  the/,  of  the  earth 
Jtmus5.S.  pouieth  them  on  Ihuf.  of  the  earth,  {).(>. 
Zech.  5.  3.  curse  Uiatgocthover  the/,  of  the  earth 
Luke  12.  50.  ye  can  discern  the/,  of  the  earth 

21.  35.  that  dwell  on  the/,  of  the  whole  earth 
Acts  17.  26.  to  dwell  on  all  the  /.  of  the  earth 

FACE  to  FACE. 
Gen.  32.  30.  Peniel;  for  I  have  seen  God  /.  to  f. 
Exod.  33. 11.  and  the  Lord  spake  to  Moses  /.  to  f. 
J^um.  14.  14.  tiiat  thou,  Lord,  art  seen/  to  f. 
Diut.  5.  4.  the  Lord  talked  with  you/,  tof. 
34.  10.  like  Moses,  whom  the  Lord  knew/,  to  f. 
Judg.  6.  22.  because  I  have  seen  an  angel/,  to  f. 
Prov.  27.  19.  as  in  water/,  answereth  tof. 
Eiek.  20.  35.  there  I  will  plead  witli  you/,  tof. 
Acts  25.  16.  before  he  have  the  accusers/,  tof. 

1  Cor.  13. 12.  we  see  thro'  a  glass,  but  then  /.  to  f. 

2  John  12. 1  trust  to  come  to  you,  and  speak/,  tof. 

3  John  14.  I  trust  to  see  thee  and  speak  /.  to  /. 
Fell  on  FACE  or  FACES. 

Gen.  17.  t  3.  Abram/(7/onhis/.  and  laughed,  17. 

50.  1.  Joseph  fell  on  his  father's/,  and  wept 
18.  his  bruthren  fell  down  before  his/. 

/yf  u.9.24.  when  the  people  saw,  they/fZ/  on  their/. 
jVum.  14.  5.  Moses  and  .Varon  fell  on  f.  16. 22,  45. 

16.  4.  Moses  ||  22.  31.  Balaam /e«  flat  on  his/. 
Josh.  5.  14.  Joshua  fell  on  his/,  to  the  earth,  7.  6. 
.Judo-.  13.20.  Manoah  and  his  with  felt  on  their/. 
Ruth  2.  10.  then  she/t//  on  her/,  to  the  ground 

1  .Sam.  17.  49.  Goliath  ||  20.  41.  David /c//  on  his/. 
25. 23.  Abigail  ||  2  tiam.  9.  6.  Mcphibosh./f Z/  onf. 

2  Sam.  14.  4.  the  woman  of  Tekoah/cZZ  on  her/. 
22.  Joab  II  IS.  28.  Ahimaaz/<,«  on  his/. 

1  Kings  IH.  7.  Obadiah  ||  39.  peoi)le  fell  on  their/. 

1  Chrun.  21.  16.  David  and  elders /c//  071  their/. 
Ezek.  1.  28.  when  I  saw  it  I  fell  upon  my/.  3.  23. 

9.  8.  I  11.  13.  I  43.  3.  I  44.  4.  Dan.  8.  17. 
Dan.  2.  46.  Nebuchadnezzar /dZ  upon  his/. 
Mat.  17.  6.  disciples  ||  26.  39.  Jesus /<•//  071  his/. 
Luke  .5.  12.  leper  ||  17. 16.  Samaritan /fZZ  on  his/. 
Rev.  11.  16.  the  twenty-four  elders /eW  on  their/. 

FACE  of  the  field. 
Lev.  14.  t7.  living  bird  loose  on  the/,  of  the  field 

2  Kings  9.  37.  Jezebel  as  dung  on  the/,  of  the  field 
Ezek.  29.  t  5.  thou  shalt  fall  on  the/,  of  the  field 

39.  t  5.  Gog  shall  fall  on  the  /.  of  the  field 

'     FACE  of  the  gate. 
Ezek.  40. 15.  from  the/,  of  the  gate  of  the  entrance 

FACE  of  the  ground. 
Gen.i.G.  a  mist  watered  the  whole/,  of  the  ground 

7.  2.3.  destroyed,  that  was  on  the  /.  of  the  ground 

8.  H.  were  abated  from  off  the/,  of  the  ground 
13.  and  behold,  the/,  of  the  ground  was  dry 

Hide,  hideth,  or  hid  FACE. 
Gen.  4.  14.  and  from  thy/,  shall  I  be  hid 
Exod.  3.  6.  and  Moses  hid  his  /.  for  ho  was  afraid 
Deut.  31.  17.  will  hide  my/,  from  them.  Id.  I  32.20. 
/oil  13.24.  wherefore  hidest  thou  Ihv/.  and  iioldest 
me  for  thine  enemy  1  Psul.  44.  24.  |  88. 14. 
.34.  29.  when  be  hideth  his/,  who  can  behold? 
Psal.  10.  II.  he  hideth  his/,  he  will  never  see  it 
1.3.  1.  how  long  wilt  thou  hide  thy/,  from  me? 

22.  24.  neither  halh  he  hid  his/,  from  him 
27.  9.  hide  not  thy/.  09.  17.  )  102.  2.  |  143.  7. 
30.  7.  hast  maile  my  mountain  strong,  thou  didst 

hide  thy/,  and  I  was  troubled,  104.  29. 

51.  9.  hiilc  thy/,  from  my  sins,  and  blot  out  all 
/.••■a.  8.  17.  hidith  his/,  from  the  house  of  Jacob 

.50.  6.  I  hid  not  my  /.  from  shame  and  spitting 
54.  8.  in  a  little  wrath  1  hid  niy/.  from  thoo 
59.  2.  your  sins  have  hid  his/,  from  you 
64.  7.  thou  hast  hid  thy/,  from  us  and  consumed 
Jer.  16.  17.  thy  ways  are  not  hid  from  my/. 
33.  .5.  I  have  hid  my  /.  from  this  city 
Kz«A.39.  2:1.  therefore  hid  I  my/,  fioin  thorn,  24. 

29.  nor  will  I  hide  my  f.  any  more  from  Ihoin 
JJ/ic.  3.  4.  he  will  oven  Aiiic  his/,  at  that  time 
Rev.  6.  16.  hide  us  from  the/,  of  him  that  sitteth 

FACEo//Ae/ic»«.«. 
Ezek.  41.  14.  the  hrea.lth  of  the/,  of  the  house 

FACE  of  the  Lord. 
Gen.  19. 13.  the  cry  great  before  ihe  /.  of  the  Lord 
Krorf.  32. 1 11.  Moses  enlroateil  the/,  of  Ihe  Lord 
1  .S«m.2(i.20.  let  not  my  blood  full  hcfori- f.  of  Lord 
1  Kings  13.  6.  entreat  now  the/,  of  the  Lord 
Psal.  34. 16.  the/  of  the  Lord  is  ag.iinsl  Ihem  thot 
doevil,  to  col  oflTfrom  the  earth,  1  /Vt.  3. 12. 
Jer.  26.  t  19.  HezekinJi  besouchl  Ihe/.  of  Ihe  Lord 
f.aw.  2.19.  |iour  out  thy  heart  before  f.  of  Ihe  Lord 
4.  t  16.  li.e  f.  of  Ihe  /'.ord  hath  d.vi.l,-,!  ijiom 
f.uke  1.  76.  Ihoii  shalt  go  befure  the/,  of  the  Laid 
F .\CR  of  thr  porch. 


Vevt.  7.  6.  above  all  people  on  the/,  of  tin  earth]  Ezek.  40.  15.  to  the/,  o/f  Ac  ^lorrA  were  fiAy  cubits 


PAC 

Ezek.  41.^5.  were  thick  planks  on  the/,  of  the p 
FACE  joined  with  look,  looked,  see,  siJtc,secn 
Gen.  32.  20.  and  afterward  1  will  see  his  /. 
33.  10.  for  therefore  have  I  seen  thy  /.  as  though 

43.  3.  ye  shall  not  see  my  /.  excejit,  5.  |  44.  23. 

44.  26.  for  we  may  not  see  the  man's/,  except 
46.  30.  now  let  me  die,  since  I  have  seen  thy  /. 
48.  11.  1  had  not  thought  to  sec  thy/,  and  lo 

£a:orf.l0.28.Pharaoh  said  to  him,  see  my/.no  mor« 
29.  Moses  said,  I  will  see  thy/,  again  no  more 

33.  20.  and  he  said,  thou  canst  not  see  my  f. 
23.  see  back  parts,  but  my/,  shall  not  be  seen 

34.  35.  cliildren  of  Israel  saw  the/,  of  Moses 

2  4'am.3.13.  not  see  my  /.  except  thou  bring  Micha 

14.  24.  the  king  said,  let  him  not  see  my  /. 

28.  Absalom  d  welt  two  years  and  £a2£noi  king's/ 
32.  now  therefore  let  me  see  the  king's/. 
2  Kings  14.  8.  sent  messengers  saying,  come,  let  ui 
look  one  another  in  the/.  2  (Jhron.  25.  17. 
11.  and  they  looked  one  another  in  the/. 
Esth.  1.14.  the  seven  princes  who  saw  the  king's/. 
.fob  33.  26.  and  he  shall  see  his  /.  with  joy 
Acts  6. 15.  saw  his/,  as  it  had  been/,  of  an  angel 
20.  25. 1  know  that  ye  shall  see  my/,  no  more,  38 
C'cZ.  2.1.  as  many  as  havenot  iee7imy/.  in  the  Uesb 
1 7'Ae«5.2.17.endeavoured  to  see  your  f.  withdesiie 
3.  10.  praying,  that  we  might  see  your  f. 
Rev.  22.  4.  and  they  shall  see  his/,  and  his  name 
Seek  FACE. 

1  CAr.  16. 11.  seek  his/,  continually,  Psal.  105.  4. 

2  CAr.  7.  14.  if  iny  people  shall  pray  and  seek  my/. 
Psal.  24. 6.  a  generation  that  seek  thy  /.  O  Jacob 

27.  8.  when  thou  saidst,  seek  ye  my/,  my  heart 
said  unto  thee,  thy  /.  Lord  viill  I  seek 
Prov.  7.  15.  I  came  diligently  to  seek  thy/. 

29.  t  2(i.  many  seek  the/,  of  a  ruler 
Has.  5.  15.  return  to  my  place,  till  they  seek  my  /. 

Set  FACE. 
Gc?!.  31.21.  Jacob  set  his/,  toward  mount  G Head 
I^ev.  17.  10. 1  will  set  my  /.  against  that  soul,  20.6. 

20.  3.  set  my  f.  against  that  man,  5.  Ezek.  14.8. 

26.  17.  1  will  set  my/,  against  you,  .Jer.  44.  11. 
J^um.  24.  1.  Balaam  set  his/,  toward  wilderness 
2  Kings  12.  17.  Hazael  set  his/,  to  Jerusalem 

1  CAron.l9.tlO.  when  Joab  saw/,  of  battle  was  set 

2  Chron.  20.  j  3.  Jehoshaphat  set  his  /.  to  seek 

the  Lord 

/sa.50.7. 1  havesctmy/.likeaflint,notbe  ashamed 

Jer.  21.  10.  I  have  set  my  f.  against  this  city 

Ezek.  4.  3.  set  thy/,  against  it,  it  shall  be  besieged 

7.  thou  shalt  set  thy/,  toward  the  siege  at  Jeius. 

6.  2.  Sit  thy  f.  toward  the  mountains  of  Israel 
13.17.  set  thy/,  against  the  daughters  of  my  peop 

15.  7.  and  1  will  set  my/,  against  them 

20.  40.  son  of  man,  set  thy/,  toward  the  south 

21.  2.  son  of  man,  set  thy/,  toward  Jerusalem 
16.  go  thee  whithersoever  thy/,  is  set 

25.2.  son  of  nian,S(;t  'by/,  against  the  Ammonites 
28. 21./.  against  Zidon  ||  29.  2./.  against  Pharaoh 

35.  2./.  against  mount  Seir  ||  38. 2./.  against  Gog 
Dan.  9.  3.  and  I  set  my  f.  unto  the  Lord  God 

10.15.1  set  my/.toward  ground  and  became  dumb 
11. 17.  he  shall  set  his/,  to  enter  with  strength 
LukeO.  51.  he  stedfasily  «cihis/.  togo  to  Jerusai. 

FACE  shine. 

JVujn.fi.25.  the  Lord  make  his/.to  shincupon  thee 

Psal.  31.  16.  make  thy/,  to  shine  on  thy  servant, 

save  nie  for  thy  mercies'  sake,  119.  135. 

67. 1.  God  bless  us,  and  cause  his/,  to  skine  on  ui 

80.3.  cause  ihy/.io  shine,  we  shall  be  saved,  7,19. 
104.  15.  and  oil  to  make  his  /.  to  shiiic 

F.ccl.  8. 1.  a  man's  wisdom  maketh  his/,  to  5Ain« 
Dan.  9. 17.  cause  Ihy  /.  to  shine  on  thy  sanctuary 
Mat.  17.  2.  and  his/,  did  .sAinc  as  Ihe  sun 

FAl'E»/£AcsA-2^. 

Jl/uf.16.3.  Oye  hypocrites,  ye  can  discern  the/.  0/ 

the  sky,  but  can  ye  not  the  times  ?  lAtke  12. 56 

FACE  of  Ihe  waters. 

<7cn.l.2.Spiril  of  God  iiioveil  on  ihcf.oflhc  water* 

7.  18.  the  ark  went  upon  the/,  of  the  waters 
Feel.  11.  t  1.  cast  lliy  bread  on  the/,  of  the  water.* 
Hos.lO.  t7.  her  king  cut  olVas  foam on/.o/ muter* 

F.\t;E  of  the  wilderness. 
Exod.  16.14.  on  the/,  of  Ihe  wilderness  lay  manna 

FACE  of  the  world. 
.Job  37.  12.  do  what  he  commandetli  on  /.  of  world 
Isn.  14.  21.  nor  (ill  the/,  of  Ihe  world  willi  cilics 

27.6.  l.srael  shall  fill  the/.  o/tAc  tcorW  with  fruit 

FACES. 
Grn.  9.  23.  their/,  were  backward,  they  saw  not 

30.40.  set/,  of  the  flocks  toward  ilio  riii!;-8lraked 

40.  t  7.  wherefore  are  yuur/.  evil  to-day  ? 

42.  6.  tbnv  bowed  with  their/,  to  the  earth 
Exod.  l9.7.M(ise8  laid  before  Iheir/.all  these  wordi 

20.  20.  that  his  fear  may  bo  before  your/. 

25.  20.  and  their/,  shall  look  niio  10  another 

.37.9.  to  iho  mcrcv-seal-ward  were/,  of  cherubimi 
Deut.  1. 1 17.  shall  not  acknowledge/,  in  judgment 
.ludg.  18.23.  turned  their/,  and  said,  what  ailelh 
2  Sam.  19.S,  thou bostshainod  ili(  /.of  Ihy  servaott 


1  Kings  2.  15.  that  all  Israel  8et  tlietr/.  on  me 

1  Clirun.  12.  8.  whose/,  were  like  the/,  of  lions 

2  Chron.  3.  13.  and  their/,  were  inward 

29.  6.  our  fathers  have  turned  away  their/. 
JVeA.8.6.thcy  worshipped  with  their/.lo  llieground 
Job  9.  24.  he  covcreth  the/,  of  the  judges 

40.  13.  hide  in  dust,  and  bind  their/,  in  secret 
Psal.  34.  5.  and  their/,  were  not  ashamed 

83.  16.  fill  their/,  with  siiame,  O  Lord 
Jsa.  3.  15.  and  that  ye  grind  the/,  of  the  poor 

13.  8.  shall  be  amazed,  (heir/,  shall  be  as  flames 
25.  8.  God  will  wipe  away  tears  from  off  all/. 
53.  3.  and  we  hid  as  it  were  our/,  from  him 

Jor.  1.  8.  be  not  afraid  of  their/.  I  am  with  thee 
17.  be  not  dismay,  at  their/,  lest  I  confound  thee 
5.  3.  they  have  made  their  /.  harder  than  a  rock 
7.  19.  provoke  to  the  confusion  of  their  own/. 

30.  (j.  and  all  /.  are  turned  into  paleness 

42.  la.  if  ye  set  their/,  to  enter  Egypt,  17.  |  44.  12. 
50.  5.  tlie  way  to  Zion,  with  their/,  thitherward 
51.51.  are  confounded,  shame  hath  covered  our/. 
Lam.  5. 12.  the/,  of  the  elders  were  not  honoured 
Eiek.  1.  6.  and  every  one  had  four/.  JO,  11,  15. 
3  8.  I  made  thy  face  strong  against  their/. 
7.  18.  shame  shall  be  on  their/,  and  baldness 
8.16.twenty-five  men, with  their/toward  the  east 

14.  6.  turn  away  your/,  from  all  abominations 
20.  47.  and  all/,  shall  be  burnt  therein 

41.  18.  and  every  cherub  had  two/. 

Dan.  1. 10.  for  why  should  he  see  your/,  worse 

9.  7.  but  unto  us  confusion  of/,  ag  at  this  day 
Joe/ 2.6.  be  much  pained,  all/shall  gather  blackn. 
JVaA.  2.  10.  the/,  of  them  all  gather  blackness 
Hab.  1.  9.  their/,  shall  sup  up  as  the  east-wind 
JUal.  2.  3.  behold,  I  will  spread  dung  on  your/". 

t  9.  but  ye  have  accepted/,  in  the  law 
Mat.  6.  16.  the  hypocrites  disfigure  their/. 
L-ake  24.  5.  as  they  bowed  down  their/,  to  earth 
Rev.  7.  11.  fell  before  the  throne  on  their/. 

9.  7.  the/,  of  the  locusts  were  as  the/,  of  men 
See  Fell  on  Face,  or  Faces. 
FACTIONS. 
1  Cor.  3.  1 3.  for  whereas  there  is  among  you  /. 

FADE. 
Kxod.  18.  1 18.  surely  fading  thou  wilt/,  away 
^Sam.  22.  46.  strangers  shall  /.  away,  Psal.  18. 45. 
Psal.  1. 13.  his  leaf  also  shall  not/,  shall  prosper 
Isa.  64.  0.  are  all  unclean,  and  we  all/,  as  a  leaf 
Jer.  8.13.  I  will  consume  them,  and  the  leaf  shall/ 
Ezck.  47. 12.  trees  for  meat,  whose  leaf  shall  not/. 
yam. 1.11.  so  the  rich  man  shall/,  away  in  his  ways 

FADETH. 
Job  14.  tl8.  surely  the  mountain  falling/. 
Isa.  1.  30.  ye  shall  be  as  an  oak,  whose  leaf/. 

24.  4.  the  earth  mourneth  and/,  the  world/. 

40.  7.  the  grass  withereth,  the  flower/.  8. 
1  Pet.  1.  4.  to  an  inheritance  that/,  not  away 

5.4.  shall  receive  a  crown  of  glory  that/not  away 

FADING. 
Isa.  28.  1.  whose  glorious  beauty  is  a/,  flower 

4.  the  glorious  beauty  shall  be  a/,  flower 

FAIL. 
Josh.  3.  10.  will  without/,  drive  out  Canaanites 
Jadg.  11.  30.  if  thou  without/,  deliver  Amnion 
l.Sam.30.8.  pursue,  thou  shall  without/recover  all 
Ezra  6.  9.  let  it  be  given  day  by  day  without/. 

FAIL,  rcTb. 

Gev.  47.  16.  Jos.  said,  give  your  cattle,  if  money /. 

/?eu(.28.32.thine  eyes  shall/.with  longing  for  them 

31.  6.  Lord  doth  go  with  thee,  he  will  not/,  thee 

nor  forsake  thee,  8.  Josh.  1.  5.  1  Chron.  28. 20. 

1  Sam.  2.  16.  let  Ihera  not/,  to  burn  fat  presently 
17.  32.  David  said,  let  no  man's  heart/,  him 

20.5.  I  should  not/,  to  sit  with  the  king  at  meat 

2  .Sam.  3. 29.  let  there  not/,  from  the  house  of  Juab 
1  Kings  2.  4.  there  shall  not  /.  thee  a  man  on  the 

throne  of  Israel,  8.25.  (9.  5.  2  Chron.  6.  16. 

17.  14.  neither  shall  the  cruse  of  oil/.  16. 
Ezra  4.  22.  take  heed  that  ye/,  not  to  do  this 
Esth.  6.  10.  let  nothing/,  of  all  thou  hast  spoken 

9.  27.  not/,  to  keep  these  days  of  Purim,  23. 
Job  11.  20.  but  the  eyes  of  the'  wicked  shall/. 

14. 11. as  waters/,  from  the  sea, and  flood  drieth  up 

17.  5.  even  the  eyes  of  his  children  shall/. 

31.  16.  or  caused  the  eyes  of  the  widow  to/. 
Psal.  12.  1.  for  the  faithful  /.  from  among  meii 

69.  3.  mine  eyes/,  while  I  wait  for  my  God 
77.  8.  doth  his  promise/,  for  evermore  ? 
89.  33.  nor  will  I  suffer  my  faithfulness  to/. 
119.  82.  mine  eyes/,  for  thy  word,  saying 

123.  mine  eyes/,  for  thy  salvation  and  for  word 

Prow.  22.  8.  and  the  rod  of  his  anger  shall/. 

Eccl.  12.t  3.  the  grinders/.becauso  they  grind  little 

5.  desire  shall  /.because  mangneth  to  long  home 

ha.  19.3.  the  spirit  olEgv.  shall/,  in  midst  thereof 

5.  waters  shall /.  ||  21 .16.  glory  of  Kedar/. 
31.  3.  and  they  all  shall/,  together 

38.6.  he  will  cause  the  drink  of  the  thirsty  to/. 
10,  yo  shall  be  troubled,  for  the  vintage  shall/. 

34. 16.  no  one  of  these  shall  /.  nor  want  her  mate 
181 


FAI 

Isa.  38. 14.  mine  eyes/,  with  looking  upward 

42.  4.  he  shall  not/,  nor  be  discouraged 

51.  14.  hastenoih  that  his  bread  should  not/. 

57.  16.  for  the  spirit  should/,  before  mo 

56.  11.  and  like  a  spring  whose  waters/,  not 
Jcr.l4.6.their  eyes  did/,  because  there  was  no  grass 

15.  18.  wilt  ihou  be  unto  ine  as  waters  that/.? 

48. 33. 1  caused  wine  to/,  from  presses,  Has.  9.  2. 
Lam.  2. 11.  mine  eyes  du/.  with  tears,  my  bowels 

3.22.not  consumed, because  his  comp.issiuns/.nol 
jJmos8. 4.  even  to  make  the  pour  of  the  land  to/. 
Nab.  3. 17.  although  the  labour  of  the  olive  shall/. 
Luke  16.  9.  that  when  ye/,  they  may  receive  you 
17.  earth  to  pass,  lliaii  one  tittle  ol  the  law  to  /. 

22.  32.  I  have  prayed  that  thy  faith  /.  not 
1  Cor.  13.  8.  whether  prophecies  they  shall  /. 
Heb.  1. 12.  thou  art  the  same,  thy  years  shall  not/. 

11.  32.  the  time  would  /.  mo  to  tell  of  Gideon 

12. 15.  looking  lest  any  man/,  of  tiie  grace  of  God 

FAILED. 
Ocn.  42.  23.  their  heart/,  them,  they  were  afraid 

47.  15.  and  when  money/,  in  the  land  of  Egypt 
Josh.  3.  16.  the  waters  /.  and  w  ere  cut  off 

21.  45.  there/,  not  any  good  thing  which  the  Lord 
promised  to  Israel,  23.  14.  1  Kings  8.  56 
Job  19.  14.  my  kinstiilk  have/,  and  my  friends 
Psal.  142.4.  refuge /.me,  no  man  cared  for  my  soul 
Cant.  5.  6.  my  soul/,  when  he  spake,  I  sought  hi 
Jer.  51.  30.  their  might/,  they  became  as  svoinen 
Lam.  i.  17.  our  eves  as  yet_/'.  for  our  vain  help 

FAILETH. 
Gen.  47.  15.  why  should  we  die  1  for  money  /. 
Lev.  25.  t  35.  if  thy  brother's  hand  /.  relieve  him 
Job  21.  10.  their  bull  geiiderelh  and/,  not 
Psal.  31.  10.  my  strength/,  me,  36.  10. 

40.  12.  therefore  my  heart/,  me,  73.  26. 

71.  9.  forsake  me  not  when  my  strength/. 

109.  24.  my  knees  are  weak,  my  flesh  /.  ot  fatness 

143.  7.  hear  me  speedily,  O  Lord,  my  spirit/. 
Eccl.  10.  3.  when  he  wulketh,  his  wisdom  /.  hiin 
Isa.  15.  6.  the  grass/,  there  is  no  green  thing 

40.  26.  for  that  he  is  strong  in  power,  not  one/. 

41.  17.  poor  seek  water,  their  tongue/,  for  thirst 
44.  12.  yea,  he  is  hungry  and  his  strength/. 

59.  15.  truth/,  and  he  that  dcparteth  trom  evil 
i^ze/r.12.22.  days  are  prolonged  and  every  vision/. 
Zcph.  3.  5.  bring  his  judgment  to  light,  he/,  not 
Luke  12.  33.  a  treasure  in  the  heavens  that/,  not 
1  Cor.  13.  8.  charity  never/  but  prophecies  fail 

FAILING. 
Deut.  28.  65.  the  Lord  shall  give  thee/,  of  eyes 
Luke  21.  26.  men's  heaits/.  them  for  fear 

FAIN. 
Job  27.  22.  he  would/,  flee  out  of  his  hand 
Lake  15.16.  would /.have  filled  his  belly  with  husks 

FAINT. 

Gcn.25.29.Esau  came  from  field,  and  he  was/.  30. 

VJe«£. 25.18. smote  theewhen  thou  wast/.and  weary 

Judg.S.i.  passed  over  Jordan, /.yet  pursuing  them 

5.  give  loaves  of  bread  to  the  peoi)le,l'or  they  be/. 

1  Sam.  14.  28.  and  the  people  were  very/.  31. 
30.  10.  so/,  that  they  could  not  go  over,  21. 

2  Sam.  16. 2.  the  wine,  that  such  as  be/,  may  drink 
21.  15.  David  fought  and  wa.xed  /. 

/sa.l.5.the  whole  head  is  sick,  the  whole  heart  is/. 
13.7.  therefore  shall  all  hands  be/,  heart  melt 
29.  8.  but  he  awakelh,  and  behold  he  is/. 
40.  29.  he  giveth  power  to  the/,  and  incrcaseth 
44.  12.  he  drinketh  no  water,  and  is/. 

Jer.  8.  18.  I  would  comfort  myself,  my  heart  is/. 

I^am.  1.  22.  for  my  sighs  are  many,  my  heart  is/. 
5.  17.  for  this  our  heart  is/,  our  eyes  are  dim 

Zeph.  3. 1 16.  and  to  Ziim,  let  not  thine  hands  be  /. 
FAINT,  y,'rb. 

Deut.  20.  3.  let  not  your  hearts/,  foar  not 
8.  lest  his  brethren's  heart/,  as  well  as  his  heart 

.Tosh.  2.9.  the  inhabitants  of  land/,  because  of  you 
24.  all  the  inhabitants  of  country/,  because  ofus 

Prov.  24.  10.  if  thou/,  in  the  day  of  adversity 

ha.  40.  30.  even  the  youths  shall/.  Jimos  8.  13. 
31.  shall  run  and  not  be  weary,  walk  and  not/ 

.7cr.  51.  46.  and  lest  your  hearts/,  and  ye  li^ar 

I^nm.  1.  13.  he  hath  made  me/,  all  the  day 
2. 1 11.  the  sucklings/.  ||  19.  young  children/. 

Ezrk.^l.l.  every  spirit  shall/,  knees  shall  be  weak 

15.  their  heart  may/,  and  ruins  be  multiplied 
Mat.  15.32.  not  send  them  away  fasting  lest  they/. 
JI/ari8.  3.  if  I  send  them  away  fasting,  they  will/. 
Luke  18.1.  that  men  ought  always  to  pray, not  to/. 
2  Cor.  4.  1.  as  we  have  received  mercy  we/,  not 

16.  for  which  cause  we/,  not,  tho'  outward  man 
Gal.  6.  9.  in  due  season  we  shall  reap,  if  we  /.  not 
Fph.3.  13.  that  yc/.  not  at  my  tribulations  for  you 
IThess.  3.  1 13.  brethren,/,  not  in  well-doing 
Heb.  12. 3.  lest  ye  be  wearied  and  /.  in  your  minds 

5.  nor/,  when  thou  art  rebuked  of  him 

FAINTED. 

Gen.  45.  26.  Jacob's  heart/,  for  he  believed  not 

47.13. all  the  land  ofCanaan/.by  reason  of  famine 

Psal.  27.  13.  I  had  /.  unless  1  had  believed  to  see 


FAI 

Psal.  107.  5.  hungry  and  thirsty,  soul/.  In  th*« 
Isa.  51.  20.  thy  sous/,  they  he  at  he;,d  of  all  strati 
Jer.  45.  3.  1/.  in  my  sighing,  I  find  no  rest 
Kick.  31.  15.  the  trees  of  the  field/,  lor  him 
Dan.  8.  27.  I  Daniel  /.  and  wi.s  sick  certain  days 
Jonah  2.7.W  hen  my  soul/.  I  remembered  the  Lord 

4.  8.  that  he/,  and  wished  in  himself  to  die 
Jl/ai.9.36.wilh  compassion  on  them, because  they/ 
Rev.  2.  3.  thou  hast  laboured  and  iiast  not  /. 

FAINTEST. 
Job  4.  5.  now  it  is  come  upon  thee,  and  thou/. 

FAINTETH. 
Psai.  84.2.  my  soul/,  for  the  courts  of  the  Lord 

119.  81.  my  soul/,  lor  thy  salvation 
/sa. 10.18.tliey  shall  be  aswhen  a  standard-bearer/. 

40.28.  the  Creator  of  the  ends  of  the  earth/,  not 

FAINT-HEARTED. 
Deut.  20.  8.  who  is  fearful  and/,  let  him  return 
Isa.  7.  4.  fear  not,  nor  be  /.  for  the  two  tails 
Jer.  49.  23.  Hamath  and  Arpad  are/. 

FAINTNESS. 
Lev.  26.  36.  I  will  send  a/,  into  their  hearts 

FAIR. 
Gen.  6.  2.  saw  that  the  daughters  of  men  were/. 

12.11.  Sarah  was/.  14.  ||  24. 16.  Rebokah/.  26.  7. 

1  Sam.  16. 1 12.  David  was/,  of  eyes,  17.  42. 

2  .Sam.  13. 1.  Tamar  Absalom's  sister  was/.  14  27. 
1  Kings  1.  4.  Abishag  a/,  damsel  cherished  David 
Ksth.  1.  11.  Vashti  the  queen  /.  ||  2.  7.  Esther/. 

2.  2.  let/,  young  virgins  be  sought  for  the  king 

3.  that  they  may  gather  the/,  young  virgins 
.Tub  37.  22./.  weather  cometli  out  ol  ilie  north 

42.  15.  no  women  found  so/,  as  Job's  daughters 
Prov.  7.  21.  with  /.  sjieech  she  caused  him  lo  yield 

11.  22.  so  is  a/,  woman  without  discretion 

26.  25.  when  he  speaketh/.  believe  him  not 
Cant.  1.  15.  behold,  thou  art/.  16.  |  4.  1,  7. 

2.  10.  rise  up,  my  love,  niy/.  one,  conie  awHV,  13. 

4.  10.  how/,  is  thy  love,  my  sister,  my  S|  oiise  I 

6.  10./.  as  the  moon  ||  7. 6.  how/.art  thou,  O  love 
/.<;«.5.9.niany  houses  great  and/,  without  iiiliubilani 

54.  11.  I  will  lay  thy  stones  with/,  colours 
.Tir.  4.  30.  in  vain  shalt  thou  make  thyself/. 

11.  16.  and  olive-tiee/.  and  of  a  goodly  fruit 

12.  6.  though  they  speak/,  words  unto  thee 

46.  20.  Egypt  is  like  a  very  /.  heilci ,  destruction 

comes 
F.zek.  16.  17.  thou  hast  alsotakoii  thv/.  jewels 
.39.  and  they  shall  lake  thy  /.  jewels,  23.  26. 
31.  3.  was  a  cedar  in  Lebanon  with/,  branches 
7.  thus  was  he/,  in  his  greatness,  in  brunches 
9.1  have  made  hini/.by  multitude  of  his  branches 
Dan.  4.  12.  leavts  thereof  were/,  fruit  much,  21 
Hos.  10.  11.  but  I  passed  over  upon  her/,  neck 
JJmos  8.'13.  the/,  virgins  shall  faint  for  thirst 
Zech.  3.  5.  let  them  set  a/,  mitre  upon  his  head 
Mat.  l(i.2.  it  will  be/,  weather  for  the  sky  is  red 
Jlcts  7.20.  Moses  was  born,  and  was  e.\cerding/. 
Rom.  16.  18.  by/,  speeches  deceive  the  simple 
Gal.  6. 12.  a  desire  to  make  a  /.  shew  in  the  flesh 

FAIR  havens. 
JJctsil.B.  we  came  tna  place  called  the  f.  havens 

FAIRLY. 
Mic.  1.  t  IL  pass  ye  awav,  thou  that  dwellpRi  /. 

FAIRER. 
.Tudg.  15.  2.  is  not  her  younger  sister/,  than  shel 
Psal.  45.  2.  thou  art/,  than  the  children  of  men 
Dan.  1.  15.  their  coiintmances  appeared/. 

FAIREST. 
Cajit.  1.  8.  O  thou/,  among  women,  5.  9.  |  6.  1 

FAIRS. 
F.zrk.  27. 12.  they  traded  in  thy/.  14,  16,  19,  22. 
27.  thy  riches  and  thv/.  shall  fall  into  the  seas 
F.AITH. 
Faith  is  a  dependence  nn  the  rrrncitij  of  another  : 
Thus  trust  is  called  faith;  bccnuse  it  ri-lirs  upon 
the  truth  of  a  promise  :  J)nd  one  is  snid  to  keep 
his  faith  inviolate,  when  he  performs  the  pro- 
mise that  another  relied  on.  Faith,  in  the  pro- 
priety of  repression,  is  an  assent  on  account  of 
the  veracity  of  the  speaker.  ..ficcoriingly,divine 
faith  is  a  firm  assent  of  the  mind  to  thing.*, 
upon  the  authority  of  divine  revelation.  Faith 
by  Divines  is  generally  distingvished  into  four 
kinds,  namely,  historical,  temporary,  the  faith 
of  miracles,  nrirf  justifying,  or  saving  faith. 
I.  Historical  faith  is  a  speculative  kvotcledge  of, 
and  bare  assent  to  the  truths  revealed  in  the 
scripture:  Of  this  kind  of  faith  the  apostle 
James  speaks,  Jam.  2.  17,  24,  Faith,  if  it  have 
not  works,  is  di^ad.  Ye  see  how  that  bv  works 
a  man  is  justified,  and  not  by  faith  only;  that 
is.  not  by  a  mere  profession  of  faith,  or  a  bare 
assent  to  the  truth,  vithont  good  icnrks,  inhirh 
proceed  from  faith,  and  shew  if  to  tie  of  th» 
right  kind.  This  kind  of  fo'th  the  devih  them- 
selves have.  Jam.  2.  19,  Thou  bolievest  that 
there  is  one  God  ;  the  devils  alfo  iK-Iicvc,  and 
tremble.  They  are  fully  persuaded  that  there 
is  a  God,  and  tAai  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God 


FAI 

and  shall  be  their  judge,  as  they  acknowledge, 
Mat.  8.  i!'J. 
Q.  Ttiii|)ui  aiy  faith,  together  with  the  knowledge 
of,  and  assent  to  revealed  truths,  has  likewise 
in  it,  an  apprubatiun  of,  and  joy  in,  receiving 
and  hearing  these  truths ;  but  this  joy  arising 
from  some  icvrldly  considcrat!on,soon  vanishes 
and  comes  to  nothing  :  Of  this  kind  of  fuitli  our 
Saviour  speaks  in  the  parable  uf  the  sower. 
Mat.   13.  20,   He   tlial  rtccived  Iho  seed  into 
stony  places,  receives  it  with  joy  ;  he  under- 
stands it,  assents  to  it,  he  hears  it   gladly, 
considers,and  approves  of  it;  and  it  springs  up 
in  an  outward  profession  and  reformation  : 
Yethalh  lie  not  root  in  himself,  but  durethVor  a 
while ;  he  has  no  sujjlcient  or  considerable  rout, 
because  it  wants  the  soilof  a  sincere  heart,  and 
true  affections, Jirni  andjixcd  resolutions,  and 
habitual  dispositions  of  grace :  He.  has  some 
good  purposes  and  desiris,  but  they  arc  soon 
ovcrpuieii.red  by  unmortificd  corruption, and  the 
force  of  temptation :  for  when  tribulation  or 
persecution  ariseth  because  of  the  word,  by  and 
by  he  is  olfeiided  ;   /Je  stumbles,  and  falls  ojf' 
from  all  his  former  profession  of  religion. 
III.  The  faith  of  miracles  is  a  firm  assent  of  the 
mind  to  some  particular  promise  concerning 
any  miraculous  event,  which,  if  performed  by 
us,  is  called  an  active  miraculous   faith;   of 
which  our  Haviour  and  the  apostle  Paul  speak. 
Mat.  17.  20.  1  Cor.  13.2.  But  if  it  be  wrought 
upon    us,  it  is   called    a    passive   miraculous 
faitli ;  tlius  the  lame  man  at  Lystra  had  a  firm 
persuasion  that  Paul  and  Barnabas  were  able 
to  cure  him.  Acts  li.  9. 
FV.  Justifying  faith  is  a  saving  grace  wrought  in 
the  soul  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  whereby  we  re- 
ceive Clirist  as  he  is  revealed  in  the  gospel,  to 
be  our  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King,  trust  in  and 
rely  upon  him  and  his  righteousness  alone  for 
justification  and  salvation.    This  faith  begets 
a  sincere  obedience  in  the  life  and  conversa- 
tion.     The  apostle  to  the  Hebrews  calls  faith, 
the  substance  of  things  hoped  for,  the  evidence 
of  things  not  seen,  Htb.  11.  1.     It  assures  us 
of  the  reality  and  worth  of  eternal  invisible 
things,  and  produces  a  satisfaction  and  as 
sured  confidence,  that  God  will  infallibly  per 
form  what  he.  has  pro  inised,u- hereby  the  belieot.r 
is  as  confident  of  them,  as  if  they  were  before 
his  eyes,  and  in  his  actual  posses.'iion.     The 
object  uf  faith  is  the  word  of  God  in  general, 
and  especially  the  doctrines  and  promises  that 
respect  the  salvation  of  men  through  Christ, 
which  reason  cannot  discover  by  its  own  light, 
nor  perfectly  understand  when  revealed.    Th 
firm  foundation  o/fiiiili  ii-  the  essential  supreme 
perfections  of  God;  his  unerring  knowledge, 
immutable  truth,  infinite  goodness,   and  al 
mighty  power.     Faitli  has  a  prevailing  infia- 
ence  upon  the  icill,  it  draws  the  affections,  and 
renders  the  whole  man  obsequious  to  the  gospel. 
liy  this  faith,  7oe  arc  said  to  be  jusiificd,  liom. 
5.  1.     fVe  are  justified  by  faith,  7tot  formally, 
as  if  it  were  our  righteousness,  or  the  merito- 
rious cause  of  our  justification  before  God  ; 
I.  but  instrumentully  and  rclativtly,  as  it  appre- 
hends and  applies  to  us  the  righteousness  and 
blood  of  Christ,  which  is  the  object  of  failli,  and 
which  alone  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin  and  ren- 
ders us  acceptable  to   God.     It  is  called  the 
faith  ihronsjh  which  wu  are  saved,  Eph.  3.  8. 
Faith  is,  as  it  were,  a  condition  on  our  part, 
whereby  loe  come  to  be  partakers  of  the  bless- 
ings of  the  new  covenant.     It  is  a  faith  wliicli 
workith  by  love,  (ral.  5.  G.     It  is  not  an  idle, 
unactire,  and  inoperative  grace,  but    shews 
itself  by  producing  in  us  love  to  God  and  our 
neighbour.     It  purifies  the  heart,  Jlets  l.'j.  9. 
/t  is  called  iho  faiih  of  (iod's  elect.  Tit.  1.  I, 
because  it  is  bestoirrd  only  upon  those.     This 
grace  increasrth  from  one  degree  to  aiiothe.r, 
Rom.  1.   )7.  being  in  some  strong  and  firm. 
Mat.  8.  10.  in  others  weak  and  languishing. 
Mat.  14.  31.     Lastly,  this  grace  is  the  special 
gift  of  God,  Eph.  2.  8,  Hy  grace  ye  are  saved 
tbroueh  faith;  and  that  not  of  yourselves,  it  is 
the  gift  of  Gild  ;  that  is.  That  you  believe,  is 
not  by  any  ability  of  your  own  ;  and  that  you 
are  saved,  is  vol  for  any  worth  in  yourselves 
Likewise  in  Phil.  1.29,  Unto  you  it  is  given  to 
believe  on  Christ. 
Faith,  ?7i  scripture,  is  taken  for  the  truth  and 
faithfulness  of  God,    Rnm.  3.  .1,   Shall  their 
unbelief  make  the  fiiith  of  Hod  withi.ul  cfiect? 
Shall  their  unbelief  make  the  faithful  promises 
of  God,  of  sending  Ike  yicss'mh,  and  of  redemp- 
tion by  him,  not  to  be  accomplished  ?   Il  is  also 
taken  for  a  per.'.uasion  of  the  lawfulness  of 
things  indifferent,  Rom.   14.  22,  23.     Hast 


FAI 

thou  faith!  have  it  to  thyself  before  God. 
For  whatsiiever  is  not  of  faith  is  sin  ;  that  is, 
Hast  thou  a  persuasion  of  the  lawfulness  of 
such  and  such  meats,  then  keep  it  to  thyself, 
without  making  an  unseasonable  discovery  of 
it,  to  the  offence  of  others:  For  whatever  a  man 
doeth  with  a  wavering  mind,  without  being 
persuaded  that  it  is  pleasing  to  God,  and  war- 
ranted by  his  word,  he  sinneth  in  the  doing  of 
it.  Faith  is  also  put  for  the  doctrine  of  the 
gos])el,  which  is  the  object  of  faith,  Jlcts  24. 24, 
Feliz  heard  Paul  concerning  the  faith  in  Christ. 
Gal.  1.  23,  He  preachoth  the  faith  which  once 
he  destroyed.  Jlnd  faith  (S  taken  for  Christ, 
ayid  kis  righteousness  ;  that  is,liis  active  and 
passive  obedience,  which  are  apprehended  by 
faith,  and  are  the  objects  of  it,  in  all  those 
passages  where  we  arc  said  to  be  justified  by 
faith.  It  is  put  for  a  belief  and  profession  of 
the  gospel,  Rom.  1.  8,  Your  faith,  is  spoken  of 
throughout  the  whole  world.  Jlnd  for  fidelity 
in  performing  of  promises,  Deut.  32.  20,  Chil- 
dren in  whom  is  no  faith";  that  is.  They  nei- 
ther believe  tchut  I  say,  nor  perform  what  them- 
selves promise. 
Deut.  32.  20.  they  are  children  in  whom  is  no/. 
J\]at.  6.  30.  O  ye  of  little  /.  therefore  take  no 
thought,  B.  26.  I  14.  31.  I  10.  8.  Luke  12.28. 
8. 10.  found  so  great/,  no  not  in  Israel,  Luke  7.  9. 
17.  20.  if  ye  have/,  as  a  grain  of  mustard-seed 
21.  21.  if  ye  have/,  ye  shall  not  only  do  this 

23.  23.  and  have  omitted  judgment,  mercy,  and/. 
jUarA4.40.he  said  to  thern,liow  is  it  ye  have  no/..' 

11.  22.  Jesus  saith  unto  them,  have/,  in  God 
Luke  17.5.the  apostles  said  to  the  L. increase  our/. 

6.  if  ye  had/,  ye  might  say  to  this  sycamine-tree 
18.8.when  the  Son  of  man  cometh,8hall  h*  find/..' 

Jlcts  3.  10.  the/,  which  is  by  him,  hath  given  him 

this  perfect  soundness  in  presence  of  you  all 

6.  5.  and  they  chose  Stephen,  a  man  full  of/.  8. 

7.a  great  company  of  priests  were  obedi.  to  the/. 

11.  24.  liarnabas  was  a  good  man,  full  of/. 

13.  8.  seeking  to  turn  the  deputy  from  the/. 

14.  9.  who  perceiving  that  he  had/  to  be  healed 

22.  and  exhorting  them  to  continue  in  the/. 
27.  huvv  he  had  opened  the  door  of/,  to  Gentiles 

10.  5.  the  churches  were  established  in  the/. 
17.  t^l'  whereof  he  hath  offered/,  to  all  men 
20.  21.  and/,  toward  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

24.  24.  Feli.x  heard  Paul  concerning  the/. 
A'om.l.5.wehave  received  grace  for  obedience  to/. 

n.the  righteousness  of  God  revealed  from/.lo/. 
3.3.  unbelief  make  the/,  of  God  without  effect? 
27.  where  boasting  ?  It  is  excluded  by  law  of/. 

4.  5.  his/,  is  counted  fur  righteousness,  9. 

11.  circumcision  a  seal  of  the  righteousness  of/. 

12.  but  also  walk  in  steps  of  that/,  of  Abraham 

13.  but  was  through  the  righteousness  of/. 

14.  if  they  of  the  law  be  heirs,/,  is  made  void 
)G.  it  is  of/,  which  is  of  the/,  of  Abraham 

9.  30.  even  tlie  rigliteousness,  which  is  of/.  10.  0. 

10.  8.  that  is  the  word  of/,  which  we  preach 
17./.  cojneth  by  hearing,hearingby  word  of  God 

12.  3.  accord,  as  God  halh  dealt  the  measure  of/. 
0.  prophesy  according  to  the  proportion  of/. 

14.22.  hast  thou/.?  have  it  to  thyself  before  God 

23.  he  eateth  not  of/,  what  is  not  of/,  is  sin 
10.  26.  to  all  nations  tor  the  obedience  of/. 

1  Cor.  12.  9.  to  another/,  by  the  same  Spirit 

13.  2.  though  I  have  all/,  and  have  no  charity 
13.  now  abideth/.  hope,  charity,  these  three 

2  Cor.  4.  13.  we  having  the  same  Spirit  of/.     . 
<';a/.1.23.now  preached /.which  once  he  destroyed 

3. 2.  by  the  works  of  law,  or  by  the  hearing  of/.  5. 

7.  know  ye,  that  they  which  are  of/.  9. 

12.  law  is  not  of/,  but  the  man  that  doeth  them 
23.  before/,  came  ||  2.'i.  after  that/,  is  come 

5.  0.  but  /.  which  workcth  by  love 

22.  but  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  /. 
0.  10.  unto  them  who  are  of  the  houseliold  of/. 

F.ph.  4.5.  one  Lord,  one  /.  one  biipti.sin 

13.  till  we  all  come  in  the  unity  of  the/. 

6.  16.  above  all,  taking  the  shield  of/. 

23.  peace  be  to  the  brethren,  with/,  from  God 
Phil.  1.  2.5.  for  your  furtherance  and  joy  of/. 

27.  striving  together  fur  the/,  of  the  gospel 
\Thess.  1.  3.  remembering  your  work  of/. 
.1.8.  pulling  on  the  bieast-plate  of/,  and  love 
^Thess.  1.  4.  we  glory  for  your  patience  and/. 
11.  would  fulfil  Iho  work  of/,  with  power 
3.  2.  we  may  be  delivered,  for  all  men  have  not  /. 
ITim.  1.5./.  unfeigned  ||  5. 8.  he  halh  denied  the/. 
14.graceof  our  Lord  exceeding  abundant  with/. 
19.holding/.and  a  good  conscience,  which  snmo 
put  away,  concerning/,  have  made  shipwreck 

3.  t  6.  not  one  newly  come  to  the/. 
9.  holiliiig  the  royflory  of/,  in  n  pure  concrience 

4.  1.  in  latter  times, some  shall  depart  from  the/, 
fi.  nourished  up  in  words  of/,  and  good  doctrine 

3.  12.  bocauio  they  have  cavt  off  their  first  /. 


FAI 

ITtm.  6.  10.  they  have  erred  from  the/.  21. 
11.  follow/.  11  12.  fight  the  good  fight  of/ 
2Tim.  1.  5.  the  unfeigned/,  that  is  in  thee 

2.  18.  and  overthrow  the/,  of  some 

22.  follow/.  11  3.8.  reprobate  concerning  the/. 

3.  10.  but  thou  hast  fully  known  my/,  charity 

4.  7. 1  have  finished  my  course,  I  have  kept  the  / 
Tit.  1.  1.  according  to  the/,  of  God's  elect 

4.  to  Titus  mine  own  son,  after  the  common/. 
Philcm.  5.  hearing  of  thy  /.  toward  the  Lord  Jesiu 
//ei.4.2.  word  did  not  profit, not  being  mixed  with/ 

6.  1.  not  laying  again  the  foundation  of/. 

10.  22.  with  a  true  heart  in  full  assurance  of/. 

23.  let  us  hold  fast  the  profession  of  our/. 

11.  I./,  is  the  substance  of  things  hoped  for 
6.  without/,  it  is  impossible  to  please  God 

12.  2.  Jesus,  the  author  and  finisher  of  our/. 

13.  7.  whose/,  follow,  considering  the  end 
Jam.  2.  1.  have  not  the/,  with  respect  of  persooi 

14.  though  a  man  say  he  hath/,  can/,  save  himl 

17.  even  so/,  without  works  is  dead,  20,  26. 

18.  a  man  may  say,  thou  hast /.and  I  have  worki 

22.  seest  thou  how  /.  wrought  with  his  works, . 
and  by  works  was/,  made  perfect 

5. 15.  and  the  prayer  of/,  shall  save  the  sick 
2  Pet.  1.  1.  that  have  obtained  like  precious/. 

1  John  5.  4.  that  overcomelh  the  world, even  our/. 
Jude  3.  ye  should  earnestly  contend  for  the/. 

20.  building  up  yourselves  on  your  most  holy/. 
iieu.2.13.thou  boldest  fast  and  hast  not  denied  my/. 

19.  I  know  thy  works,  and/,  and  thy  patience 
13. 10.  here  is  the  patience  and  the/,  of  the  sainta 

14.  12.  liere  are  they  that  keep  the/,  of  Jesus 
£y  FAITH. 

Hab.  2.  4.  but  the  just  shall  live  bv  his/.  Rom.  1. 
17.  Gal.X'U.  Heb.  10.38. 
.^cts  15.  9.  purifying  their  hearts  by  f. 

26.  18.  who  are  sanctifieil  by  f.  that  is  in  me 
Rom.  1.  12.  may  be  comforted  by  the  mutual/. 

3.  22.  the  righteousness  of  God  byf.  of  Jesus  Chr. 

28.  a  man  is  justified  byf.  5. 1.  Gal.  2. 16.  |  3. 24. 
.30.  which  shall  justify  the  circumcision  byf. 

5.  2.  by  wliom  we  have  access  by  f.  to  this  grace 
9.  32.  because  they  sought  it  not  by  f. 
11.  20.  thou  standest  byf.  2  Cor.  1.  24. 

2  Cor.  5.  7.  for  we  walk  by  f.  not  by  sight 
C^al.  2.  20.  I  live  by  the/,  of  the  Son  of  God 

3.  22.  that  the  promise  by  f.  might  be  given  ' 
26.  ye  are  the  children  of  God  byf.  in  Christ  Jes. 

5.  5.  we  wait  for  the  hope  of  righteousness  byf. 
Eph.  3.  12.  in  whom  we  have  access  ii//.  of  hirn 

17.  that  Christ  may  dwell  in  your  hearts  byf. 
Phil.3.9.  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God  byf 
Heb.  4.  t  2.  because  they  were  not  united  by  f- 
fl.4.  *»//.  Abel||5.  i?//.  Enoch  \\1.bvf.  N'oah 

8.  byf.  Abrah.  9,  n.||20.  byf.  Isaac  blessed  J.ic. 

21.  byf.  Jacob  ||  22.  by  f.  Joseph  made  meutioo 

23.  byf.  Moses,  24,  27.  ||  31.  byf.  Rahab 

29.  byf.  they  passed  through  the  Red  sea 

30.  b'y.f.  the  walls  of  Jericho  fell  down 
Jam.  2.  24.  you  see  then  how  that  by  works  a  man 

is  justified,  not  by  f.  only 

In  FAiru. 

Rom.  4. 19.  being  not  weak  inf.  he  considered  not 

20.  he  stiiggered  not,  but  was  strong  inf. 
14.  1.  him  that  is  weak  in  the/,  receive  you 

1  Cor.  16.  13.  watch,  stand  fast  in  the/,  be  strong 

2  Cor.  8.  7.  as  ye  abound  in  f.  and  utterance 
13. 5.  examine  yourselves  whether  ye  be  in  the/. 

Col.  1.  23.  if  ye  continue  in  the/,  grounded 
2.  7.  rooted  in  him,  and  stabhshed  in  the/. 
I  Tim.  1.  2.  unto  Timothy  my  own  son  in  the/. 
4.  rather  than  godly  edifying  which  is  inf. 

2.  7.  a  teacher  of  the  Gentiles  in  f.  and  verity 
15.  be  saved,  if  they  continue  inf.  and  charity 

3.  13.  they  purchase  great  boldness  in  the/. 

4.  12.  be  lliou  an  example  of  believers  inf. 
ZTim.  1.  13.  hold  fiist  the  form  inf.  and  love 
Tit.  I.  13.  that  they  may  be  found  in  the/.  2.  2. 

3.  15.  greet  rhem  iliat  love  us  in  the/,  grace  be 
Heb.  1 1.  13.  Ihese  all  died  in  /.  not  having  receivefl 
Jam.  1.  6.  but  let  them  ask  in  f.  not  wavering 

2.  5.  God  chosen  the  poor  of  this  world,  rich  inf. 
1  Pet.  5.  9.  whom  resist,  Btedfast  in  the/. 

7'Afir  FAITH. 
Mat.  9.2.  Jes.  seeing  their f.  Mark  2.5.  Lukt  5.00. 

Through  FAITH. 
.■9r/«  3.  Ifi.  through  f.  in  his  name  this  man  strong 
Rom.  3.  25.  n  propitiation  through  f.  in  his  blood 

30.  who  shall  justify  tlie  uncircunicision  thro'f. 

31.  do  we  make  void  the  law  thro'  f.?  God  forbid 
(?o/.3.8.  God  would  justify  the  heal  hen  through/. 

14.  might  receive  the  promiflcoftheSpiril  thro'f, 
Fph.  2.  8.  for  by  grace  arc  ye  saved  through  f. 
Phil.  3.  9.  but  that  righleousness  which  is  thro'  f. 
Col.  2. 12.  risen  thro'  the/,  of  the  operation  of  God 
2 'Am.  3.  15.  make  tliee  wise  to  salvation  thro'  f. 
Heb.  C.  12.  who  through  f.  inherit  the  puimisni 
11.3.  fAroi/nA/.we  undersland  the  worlds  framed 
W.tkTouskf.  Sara  received  strength  to  conceiv* 


FAX 

Ihb.ll.lH.thro'  f.he  kept  tlio  pafifiover,aniI  Mprlnk. 
33.wlio  /Ari/'/.Hubduud  kiiigili)mii,wr«U(;lil  rijjhl. 
3y.  having  oiiiuiiicd  a  good  TKjM>n  thmu/f/t  f. 

1  Pet.  1. 5.  kept  by  povvur  of  G.  thro'  f.  to  mtlvalion 

Thy  FAITH. 
Mat.  9.  22.  thy  f.  Iiulli  mud?!  llioo  wlirdo,  Mark 
5.  31.  I  10.  5ii.  J.ukc  8.  4«.  (  17.  I'J. 
15.  %.  JeHUii  naid,  O  wuiiiaij,  great  is  thy  f. 
LukeT.50.thyf.haih  Kiivcd  thee, go  in  peace,  18.42. 
22.  32.  1  prayed  lor  tlicc,  tlial  thy  f.  (ail  not 
PhiUm.  li.  tlie  cornmuniKation  of  thy  f.  etiectual 
Jam.  2.  18.  uliew  me  thy  f.  without  thy  works 

Your  FAITH. 
Mat.  9.  29.  according  to  your  f.  be  it  unto  you 
Luke  8.  25.  ho  said  unto  thoin,  where  in  your  f  ? 
Rom.  1.8.  your  f.  in  spoken  of  through  the  world 
ICffr.2.5.yvur/.Hliould  uot  stand  in  wisdom  of  men 

15.  14.  and  yuur  f.  is  also  vain,  17. 

2  Cor.  I.  21.  not  have  dominion  over  your  f. 
10.  15.  Iiaviiig  hope  when  your  f.  is  increased 

Kph.  1.  15.  afier  I  heard  lA' your  f.  in  the  Lord 
Phil. '2.  17.  if  1  bo  offered  on  the  service  of  your/. 
Col.  1.  4.  since  we  heard  of  your  f.  in  Christ  Jesus 
2. 5.  beiiolding  (he  sledfajttness  of  your  f.  in  ChrisI 

1  Thexg.  1.  H.  yourf.  to  God- ward  is  spread  abroad 
3.  2.  and  to  comfort  you  concerning  your  f. 

5.  I  sent  lo  know  yourf.  lest  the  tijmpter 

6.  Timothy  brought  us  good  tidings  of  your  f. 

7.  we  were  comforted  over  you  by  your  f. 

10.  and  might  perfect  what  is  lacking  in  j^vur/. 

2  Phesi.  1.  3.  that  your  f.  groweth  exceedingly 
./am.  1.  3.  tlie  trying  of  your  f.  workeih  patience 

1  Ph.  1.  7.  the  trial  of  your  f.  being  more  precious 
9.  receiving  the  end  of  your  f.  even  salvation 
21.  that  your  f.  and  hope  might  be  in  God 

2  Pel.  1. 5.  add  to  «««?• /.virtue, to  virtue  knowledge 

FAITHFUL. 
Jfum.  12.  7.  Moses  is/,  in  mine  house,  Heh.  3.  2,  5. 
Deut.  7.  !l.  the/.  God  who  keepeth  covenant 

1  Sam.  2.  35.  I  will  raise  me  up  a  /.  priest 

3.  t  20.  Samuel  was/,  to  be  a  prophet  of  the  Lord 
22.  14.  Ahiinelech  said,  who  is  so/,  as  David  ? 

2  Sam.  20.  I'J.  F  am  one  of  them  that  are /.in  Israel 
J^eh.  7.2.  Ilananiah  was  a/,  man  and  (eared  God 

9.  8.  and  foundcst  his  heart/,  before  thee 
13.  13.  for  they  were  counted/,  to  distribute 

Job  12.  120.  he  removeth  llie  lip  of  the/. 

Paal,  12.  I.  for  the/,  fail  from  among  men 
31.23.  O  love  the  Lord,  for  Lord  prescrvcth  tlic/. 
89.  37.  and  as  a/,  witness  in  heaven 
101.  0.  mine  eyes  shall  be  on  the/,  of  the  land 
ll'.t.  80.  all  thy  commandmcnlii  are/. 
1.38.  thy  testimonies  arc  righieous  and  very/. 

Prov.  11.  13.  a/,  spirit  concealeth  the  matter 

13.  17.  but  a/,  ambassador  is  health 

14.  5.  a/,  witness  will  not  lie,  but  a  false  utter  lien 
20.  (5.  bui  a  /.  man  who  can  find  1 

25.  13.  as  snow  in  harvest,  so  is  a/,  messenger 

27.  fi.  /.  arc  the  wounds  of  a  friend,  but  the  kisses 

28.  20.  a/,  man  shall  abound  with  blessings 
/*a,  1   21.  how  is  the/,  city  become  a  harlot ! 

2').  afterward  thou  shilt  be  called  the/  city 
8.  2.  I  took  unto  mo/,  wilnesnes  to  record 
49.7.  kings  shall  see,  because  of  the  Lord  that  is/. 
Jrr.  42.  5.  the  Lord  be  a  /.  witness  between  us 
Dan.  0.  4.  could  find  none,  forasmuch  as  he  was/. 
Ifof.  II.  12.  but  Judah  is/,  with  the  saints 
.Vfaf.  21.  45.  who  then  ia  a/,  and  wise  servant? 
25.  21.  well  d'lne,  tliou  good  and/.  s<!rvatit 

23.  thou  hast  been/in  afew  things,  //U/cc  19.17. 
I.ulff  12.  42.  who  then  is  that/,  and  wise  steward  7 

16.  10.  he  that  is/,  in  the  least  is/,  also  in  much 

11.  have  not  been/,  in  the  unrighinous  mammon 

12.  have  no'  been/,  in  what  is  another  man's 
Seta  \fi.  15.  if  ye  have  judged  rne/.  to  the  Lord 

Cnr.  1.9.  Gol  is/.by  whom  ye  were  called,  10.13. 

4.  2.  it  is  re'iuired  in  stewards,  that  a  man  be/. 
17.  I  have  sent  you  Timothy/,  m  the  Lord 

7.2».that  haih  obtained  merc^  of  the  Lord  lo  be/. 
Clal.  3.  9.  they  are  bl'.-ssed  with/.  Abraham 
Kph.  ).  1.  to  t!ie  faints  and/,  in  Christ  Jcsut 

C.  21.  Tycfiicijs  a/,  minister  in  the  Lord 
CSi>(.  1.  2.  to  the  raints  and/,  brethren  in  Christ 
7.  Epaphrr.s,  wlio  is  for  you  a/,  minister,  4.7. 

4.  9.  OnesitnTi",  a/,  brother,  who  it  one  of  you 

1  TA'»».5  2). /.is  he  that  calleth  you.who  will  do  it 
iThetf.  3.  3.  the  Lord  i>/.  who  shall  stablish  you 
ITim.  1.  12.  Ithank  Christ,  tdat  he  <-x>unted  me/. 

15.  this  is  a  /.  saying,  4.  9.   Tit.  3.  8. 
3.11.  their  wives  must  be  sober,  and/,  in  all  things 
(J.  2.  rather  do  them  service  because  they  are/. 

2  Tim.  2.  2.  t'le  »a'rip  commit  thou  to  f.  men 

11.  it  is  a/,  saving  ||  13.  yet  he  abideth/. 
7\t.  1.  fl.  if  any  be  blameleni,  having/,  children 
9.  hoT^ing  fast  the  f.  word,  as  he  was  taught 
Htb.  2.  17.  that  he  might  be  a/,  high-prient 
3  2.  who  •A.a.if.  to  'lirn  that  appointed  him 

10.  23.  for  he  is/,  tliit  promised,  11.  11. 

)Pet.  1  P.  CO  nm'i  the-ri^oulj,  ssunto  «/.  Creator 

5.  U.  I  have  written  bv  Silvanus  a/,  brollier 

183 


FAL 

1  .Mm  1.  9.  if  we  conless,  ho  is/,  lo  forgive  lit 
Hev.  1.  5  Clirisl  who  is  Ihi;/.  witness,  3.  14. 

2. 10.  be/,  to  death,  1  will  give  thee  a  crown  uf  life 
13.  those  days  wherein  Aiitipas  was  my /.martyr 
17.  14.  they  that  are  with  him,  are  called,  and/. 
19.  11.  and  he  that  sat  upon  him  wiui  called/. 
21.  5.  tiiese  words  are  true  and/.  22.  0. 
FArilU'ULLV. 

2  Kings  12.  15.  for  they  dealt/.  22.  7. 

2  Chron.  19.  9.  thus  do  in  the  fear  of  the  I^ord/. 
31.  12.  and  they  hn^iiglit  in  the  odbriiigs/. 

34.  12.  and  the  men  did  the  work  /. 
Prov.  29.  14.  the  king  that/,  judgelh  the  poor 
./e».  23.28.  hath  my  word,  let  hiin  speak  my  word/. 

3  John  5.  thou  doest  /.  whatsoever  thou  doest  to 

FA1THFI;LM1;K.S.  [brethren 

1  .Sam.  20.  23.  the  Lord  render  to  every  man  his/. 
Paal.  5.  9.  for  tliere  is  no/,  in  their  mouth 
3f).  5.  and  thy/,  reacheth  unto  the  clouds 
40.  10.  I  ha^j  declared  lliy/.  and  thy  salvation 
88.  11.  or  shall  thy/,  bo  declared  in  (lestructioii  7 
89. 1. 1  will  make  known  thy  /.  lo  all  generations 
2.  thy  /.  shall  thou  establish  in  tlie  heavens 
5.  thy/,  also  in  tlie  congregation  of  the  saints 
8.  who  is  like  to  thee, or  to  tiiy/.round  about  thee? 
24.  but  my/,  and  my  mercy  shall  bo  with  him 
33.  nor  will  I  suflijr  my/,  to  fail 
92.  2.  it  is  good  to  shew  forth  ihy/.  every  night 
119.  75.  and  that  thou  in/,  hast  alllicted  uie 
t8fi.  all  Ihy  commandments  are/. 
90.  thy/,  is  unto  all  generations 
t  l.'W.  thy  testimonies  are  righteous  and  very/. 
143.  1.  hear  my  prayer;  in  thy/,  answer  me 
/«a.  II.  5.  and/,  shall  be  the  girdle  of  his  reins 
25.  1.  thy  counsels  of  old  are/,  and  truth 
/.am.  3.  23.  thy  mercies  are  new,  great  is  thy/. 
Hos.  2.  20.  I  will  betroth  thee  unto  me  in  /. 

FAITHLESri. 
J1/«M7.]7.0/. generation,  Mark'.UO.  Au/re9.41. 
./ohn  20.  27.  and  be  not/,  but  believing 

FALL. 
The  fall  of  man.  Man's  ^rr.nlcet  ezciiUency  ai. 
fir.it  was  a  perfect  conjorviily  lo  the  dtiiini: 
pallern.  God  created  man  in  his  own  image, 
in  the  image  of  God  created  he  him,  (Jen.  1.27. 
This  inclu'les, 

I.  Thr  similitude  of  God  in  the  suhetanr.e  of  the 
soul,  as  it  is  an  intelligent,  free,  spiritual, 
and  immortal  being.  This  is  assigned  to  be 
the  reason  of  the  law,  that  whoso  sheds  man's 
blood,  by  man  shall  his  blood  be  shed;  for  in 
the  image  of  God  made  he  man,  fjirn.  9.  (i. 

II.  ^  moral  resemblance  in  Us  r/ualities  and 
perfections.  Man  was  crmformed  to  (Jod  in 
holiness ;  this  the  apostle  insinuaUs,  when 
he  sets  forth  the  sanciification  of  corrupt  man, 
by  the  expression  of  renewing  him  in  know- 
ledge, right<;ou«ness,  and  lioliness,  a(U!r  the 
image  of  the  Creator,  Kph.  4. 23,  24.  Col.  .3.  10. 
The  renovation  of  things,  being  a  restoring  of 
them  to  Iheir  prirnitive  slate;  and  is  more  or 
I'SS  perfect,  by  its  proportion  to,  or  distance 
from  the  original.  Man's  understanding  was 
enriched  with  -knowledge,  which  was  neither 
aci/uired  by  study,  nor  confined  to  that  or  the 
other  particular  creature,  but  readied  through 
the  whole  compass  of  the  creation,  /lesides, 
he  hud  such  a  knowledge  of  tlie  /Jeity,  as  was 
siifHeient  for  ki.i  duty  and  felicity,  /le  difco 
vered  almighty  power,  admirable  wisdom,  and 
infinite  goodness,  from  their  effects  in  creating 
the  worlel,  '/'he  image  of  <lod  was  likewise 
renjilmdenl  in  man's  conscience,  the  seat  of 
proelicnl  knowledge,  and  treasury  of  moral 
principles.  The  directive  faculty  was  sinrere 
and  uncorrupt ;  it  was  clear  from  all  preju- 
dices, which  might  render  it  an  incompetent 
judge  of  good  and  evil.  There  was  also  a  di 
vine  impression  on  the  will.  Spiritual  reason 
ke-pt  the  throw,  and  the  inferior  forullies 
observed  an  easy  and  regular  subordination 
to  its  dictates. 

III.  The  image  of  Ood  consisted,  though  in  an 
infer  lejr  degree,in  the  happy  state  i}f  man. which 
was  the  eonserjuent  and  acceasion  lo  his  Ikili 
ness  :  Jlnd  herein  he  resembled  that  infinitely 
blessed  Heing,  as  he  it  perfectly  exempt  from 
all  evils  which  might  oUay  and  less  en  his  feli- 
city, and  enjoy  those  pleasures  which  are  wor- 
thy of  his  pure  nature  and  glorious  state. 
This  h'ippincss  hail  rrleition  lo  the  two  natures, 
which  enter  into  man's  composition,  l\)  The 
animal  and  sensitive,  and  this  consisteil  both 
in  the  excellent  disposition  of  his  organs,  and 
in  the  enjoyment  of  convenient  objects.  His 
body  being  ftrrmed  immediately  by  (lod,  mas 
not  liable  to  those  defects  which  proceed  frum 
the  weakness  of  seconel  causes  :  J^o  blemish 
or  disease,  which  are  the  effects  and  foitsteps 
of  (in,  were  to  be  found  in  him  :  jQll  his  ten$e*  ] 


FAL 

letre  guiek  and  lively,  able  to  perform  KttK 
facility,  vigour,  and  delighl,  iMiir  operalwns. 
JVut  only  were  his  organs  cxceUuUiy  disposed, 
but  them  were  also  convenient  objects  to  enter- 
tain  his  sensitive  facuUies  :  He  eiijoyednaturt 
in  its  original  purity,  i.rowned  uith  the  bene- 
diction of  (Jod,  before  it  was  blasted  with  the 
curse.  The  world  was  nil  harmony  and  beauty, 
becoming  the  goodness  of  the  Creator ;  and  not 
as  it  is  since  the  fall,  disordered  and  deformed 
in  many  parts,  the  effect  of  his  justice.  The 
earth  was  liberal  to  Adatn  of  all  its  treasures  ; 
the  heavens  of  their  light  and  smeeiem  ijijlu- 
encet.  Jlnd  he  wa.i  seated  tn  Kdeii,  a  place  'if 
great  beauty  and  delight.  Hut  (2;  /lis  chief 
happiness  consisted  in  the  exercise  of  his  most 
noble  faculties  on  their  proper  objects.  The 
highest  faculties  in  man  are  the  understand- 
ing and  will :  and  their  happiness  consists  in 
union  uiilh  (Jod  by  knowledge  and  luve.  //e 
saw  the  admirable  beauty  of  the  Creator 
throuuh  the  transparent  veil  of  the  creatures  : 
Jind  J  rom  hence  there  arose  in  the  soul  a  plea- 
sure pure,  solid,  and  satisfying. 

IV.  Therewas  inman's  dominion  and  power  over 
the  creatures  a  shining  part  of  (lod's  image. 
(Jodgavehim  the  solemn  investiture  of  his  dig- 
nity, when  he  brought  the  creatures  lo  receive 
their  names  from  him,irhieh  masa  mark  of  their 
homage,  and  a  token  of  his  empire  to  command 
them  by  their  names,  I'sii I.  8.  (1,  7,  8,  'I'htis  half 
and  blessed  was  Adam  ire  his  primitive  stale. 

Man  only  of  all  creatures  on  earth  was  in  a  slate 
of  moral  dependence,  and  capable  of  a  law. 
For,  a  law  being  the  declaration  of  the  Supe- 
rir/r'swiUreijuiringobrdience,n7iU  threatening 
punishment  on  the  failure  thereof,  there  must 
be  a  principle  of  reason  and  choice  in  that  na- 
ture which  is  governed  by  it ;  both  to  discover 
the  authority  that  enjoins  it;  lo  discern  the 
matter  of  the  law  ;  and  to  determine  itself,  out 
ofjuelgment  and  election,  to  obedience,  as  most 
excellent  in  itself,  and  aavantogeous  to  the 
performer.  Jl>  therefore  reason  viaiU  mam 
capable  of  a  law,  so  it  was  mipossible  he  should 
be  exempt  from  a  lam ;  for  as  the  notion  of  a 
(Jod,  that  is,  of  the  first  and  supreme  /leing, 
excludes  al!  possibility  of  obligation  to  another, 
and  of  sulijection  lo  a  law  ;  so  the  qualily  of 
a  creature  includes  the  relation  of  d/peniUnoe 
and  natural  subjection  to  the  will  of  (Jod. 

The  law  of  nalare,t.o  whichman  was  subject  upon 
his  creation,  contains  those  moral  priiieiplei 
concerning  good  and  evil,  which  have  an  essen- 
tial ei/nily  in  them,  and  are  the  measures  of 
his  duty  to  (Jod,  lo  himself,  and  tv  his  fcllotf 
creatures.  This  law  was  published  by  the  vniu 
of  reason,  and  is  holy,  just,  and  good ;  and  Ikt 
obligation  lo  it  is  iternal;  it  bring  the  un- 
changeable will  of  (Jod, grounded  on  the  natu- 
ral and  invariable  rrlatiims  bclweim  (Jod  and 
man,  and  between  man  and  the  creatures,  fir- 
si'les  the  particular  directions  of  the  law  of 
nature,  this  general  principle  was  planted  in 
the  reoHonable  siiul,to  obey  (Jod  in  any  instance 
wherein  he  did  pri  serihe  his  pleasure.  Jlceord- 
ivgly,  to  declare  hie  simereign  right  in  allt 
things,  and  lo  make  trial  of  man's  nbidienee 
(Jod  entered  into  rovendnt  with  man  ;  he  for- 
bids him  Ut  eat  of  the  trie  of  knowledge  of  irood 
and  evil,  for  in  the  day  thou  eatest  thereof  thou 
shall  surely  die.  This  eslahlmhed  an  insepa- 
rable connection  between  duly  and  felicity,  dis- 
obedience and  misery.  In  this  Ihr'atening  of 
death  upon  disobedience,  the  promise  of  life 
upon  his  obedience  was  implied,  and  easily 
suggested  itself  to  the  rational  mind. 

Man  was  created  perfectly  holy,  but  in  avatural, 
therefore  mutable  stale,  /le  was  invested  with 
power  to  prevent  his  fulling,  yet  under  a  pos- 
sibility of  it :  I/e  was  complete  in  his  own 
oriler,  but  receptive  of  sinful  impressions 
Being  therefore  set  upon  by  the  7no.il  subtiU 
of  those  rebellious  spirits,  vhei  had  fallrn 
from  their  obedience  and  glory,  he  was  cnr- 
Tupled  and  seduced  bij  him,  ami  involved  bolk 
himself  and  his  posle,rity  in  sin  and  misery. 
Jls  to  the  manner  in  which  Ihe  devil  seduted 
our  first  parents,  see  on  DKvir,. 

T/ie  honour  nnel  tnajeily  of  the  whole  law  wa» 
violated,  in  the  breach  of  that  symbolical  pre- 
cept:  for  in  that  grar^d  apostasy  many  sins 
were  tnelu'lid;  as,  1.  Infidelity  anrf  unbelief: 
(Jod  had  said,  ()(  the  tree  of  knowhdee  of 
good  and  evil,  thou  hhalt  not  eat  of  it ;  for  ia 
the  dsy  Ihou  ealest  tli<:reof,  thou  Kh-.ilt  surely 
Hi''.  7'Ai»  was  the  first  si'p  tii  ruin,  as  nppeart 
by  the  order  of  the  ti-mplnlion  :  It  was  first 
said  by  th'  d^vil,  Ve  shall  not  die,  to  weaken 
their  faith  ;    then.    Ye   shall    ^e    a*  C"<'«)  •• 


FAL 

flatter  their  ambition.  This  infidelity  is  greatly 
aggraoated^as  it  implii  s  an  accusuliun  uJ'Gva 
{!)  Uf  etivy  ;  as  tj'  he  had  denied  them  the 
perfections  becoming  the  human  nature,  and 
they  might  ascend  to  a  higher  orb  than  that 
tchcrctn  they  were  placed,  by  eating  the  forbid- 
den fruit,  ii)  Of  liilseliood ;  as  if  God  had 
threatened  to  iiijlict  a  punishment  upon  man's 
disobedience  which  he  had  no  design  to  do ; 
and  what  heightens  this  is,  that  lohen  he  dis- 
trusted the  huantain  of  truth,  he  gave  credit 
to  the  Father  of  lies ;  as  appears  by  his  com- 
pliance, the  real  evidence  of  his  faith. 
U.  This  sin  included  in  it  procJigious  pride:  Me 
was  scarcely  out  of  the  state  of  nothing,  no 
sooner  created  but  he  aspired  to  be  as  G-od. 
JVot  content  tcith  his  image,  he  agectcd  an 
equality,  to  be  Like  him  in  his  inimitable  attri- 
butes. He  icould  rob  God  of  his  eternity,  to 
live  without  end,  to  enjoy  an  immortality,  not 
depending  on  God's  will,  but  absolute,  which 
is  proper  to  God  alone  ;  of  his  sovereignty,  to 
command  without  dependence ;  and  of  his  wis- 
dom, to  know  all  things  without  reserve. 

III.  Horrid  ingratitude  :  Ne  was  appointed  heir 
apparent  of  all  things ;  yet  undervaluing  his 
present  portion,  he  entertains  a  project  of 
improving  his  happiness.  The  excellent  state 
neicly  conferred  upon  him,  was  a  strong  obli- 
gation to  pay  so  small  an  acknowledgment  lo 
the  Lord.  The  use  of  all  the  garden  was  al- 
lowed him,  only  a  tree  excrptcd.  JVow  in  the 
midst  of  such  variety  and  plenty,  to  be  in- 
flamed with  the  intemperate  appetite  of  the 
forbidden  fruit,  and  to  break  a  command  so 
equal  and  easy,  what  is  it  but  a  despising  the 
rich  goodness  of  his  great  Benefactor  ? 

IV.  A  bloody  cruelly  to  hi'ms.ell',  and  to  all  his 
poslerily.  IVhen  God  had  made  him  a  depo- 
sitory in  a  matter  of  infinite  moment ;  that  is, 
of  his  own  happiness,  and  all  mankind's,  this 
should  have  been  a  powerful  motive  to  have 
kept  him  vigilant:  But  gieing  a  ready  ear  to 
the  tempter,  he  betrayed  his  trust,  and  at  once 
breaks  both  the  tables  uf  the  law,  and  becomes 
the  greatest  sinner,  being  guilty  of  the  highest 
impiety  and  cruelty. 

By  voluntary  disobedience  our  first  parents  fell 
from  and  lost  their  original  rectitude  and 
perfection  of  nature  ;  which  consisted  in 
knowledge,  holiness,  and  perfect  happiness 
Gen.  1.  26.  Col.  3.  10.  Kpli.  4.  -M. 
By  the  fall  of  man  alt  the  powers  of  nature  were 
depraved,  polluted,  and  corrupted:  [1]  The 
understandin  ir  was  darkened,  Eph.  4.  18.  [2" 
The  conscience  defiled.  Hub.  10.  22.  [3]  Th, 
tcill  obstinate  and  rebellious,  Isa.  28. 14.  Rom 
8.  7.  [4J  The  affections  carnal  and  sensual, 
Eph.  2.  3.  ['>]  Ml  the  thoughts  uninterrupt- 
edly evil.  Gen.  6.  5.  arid  the  whole  mind,  or 
heart,  a  nest  of  all  manner  of  abominations, 
Jer.  17.  9.  Mat.  15. 19. 

F.-\LL,  .Substantiee. 
Prov.  16.  18.  and  a  hauglity  spirit  before  a/. 
29.  16.  but  the  righteous  shall  see  thr.ir  f. 
Jer.  4!l.  21.  earlh  is  moved  at  the  noise  of  their/. 
£zcft.2b.  15.  the  isles  shakeat  the  sound  of  their/. 

18.  the  isles  shall  tremble  in  the  day  of  tliy/. 
31.  16.  the  nations  to  shake  at  the  sound  of  his/. 
32. 10.  every  man  for  his  life  in  the  day  of  thy/. 
Mat.  7. 27.  the  house  fell,  and  great  was  ihe/.  of  it 
/,uke  2.  :}4.  child  is  set  for  the/,  and  rising  of  many 
Rom.  11.  11.  but  through   their  /.   salvation  is 
come  unto  the  Gentiles 
12.  if  the/,  of  them  be  the  riches  of  the  world 
F.\LL,  Ferb. 
Gen.2.21. God  caused  a  deep  sleep  to/.upon  Adam 
43.18.he  may  seek  occasion  against  us, and  /.on  us 
45.  24.  he  said,  i.ee  that  ye/,  not  out  hy  the  way 
49.  17.  so  that  his  rider  shall  /.  backward 
F.xod.  15.  10.  fear  and  dread  shall/,  upon  them 
21.33.  if  a  man  dig  a  pit,  and  an  o\  »r  ass/therein 
Liev.  11.  32.  on  wnatsocver  any  of  them  doth/. 
37.  if  their  carcase/,  on  any  sowing-seed,  M. 
19.29.lestland/.lo  whoredom  and  become  wicked 
28.  7.  they  shall/,  before  you  by  the  sword,  8. 
.36.  anil  they  shall  /.  when  none  pursuclh 
37.  and  they  shall/,  one  upon  annther 
/fum.  5.  121.  the  Lord  doth  inaki,'  thy  thigh  to/. 
6.  1 12.  but  Ihe  days  that  ^vcre  before  shall/. 
II.  31.  and  let  them/,  by  ihe  camp  round  aboul 
14. 29.  your  carcases  shall/,  in  the  wilderness,  32. 
34.  2.  this  is  the  land  that  shall/,  to  you 
Deut.  22.  8.  if  any  man^.  from  thence 
Judg.  8.  21.  they  laid,  rise  thou,  and/,  upon  us 
15.  12.  Samson  saiil,  swear  ye  will  not/  upon  me 

18.  and/,  into  Ihe  hand  of  the  uneircumiised 
Ru(//2.  If),  let/,  some  handfuls  of  purpose  fur  her 

t22.  that  they/,  not  on  thee  in  anulhcr  fi.ld 
S.  18.  until  thou  know  how  the  matter  will/. 
1S4 


FAL 

'  1  Sam.  3. 19.  let  none  of  his  words  /.  to  the  ground 

14.45.  tliereshailnotonehair  of  hishtad/.  to  the 

ground,  2  Ham.  14.11.  1  Kings  1.52.  Acts  27.34. 

18.25.  Saul  sought  to  make  Uavid/.  by  Fluhstines 

22.  17.  would  not/,  on  the  priests  of  ihe  Lord 

IS.  the  king  said,  tuin  thou,  and  /.  on  the  priests 

26.  20.  therelore  let  uot  my  blood/,  to  the  earlh 

iaam.  1.15.  go  near  and/,  on  him,  IKings  2.29,31. 

24.  14.  lei  us/,  into  the  hand  of  God,  let  me  not 

/.  into  the  hand  of  man,  1  Chron.  21.  13. 

1  Kings  22.  20.  who  shall  persuade  Ahab  to  go  up 

and  /.  at  Ramoth-gilead  ?  2  Chron.  18.  19. 

2  Kings  7. 4.  let  us  /.  unto  the  host  of  tlie  Syrians 
10.  10.  shall/,  iioliiing  of  the  word  of  the  Lord 
14.10.  why  shouldsl  meddle, that  thou  shouldst/.? 

1  Chron.  12.  19.  he  will  /.  to  his  master  Saul 

2  Chron.  21. 15.  have  sickness,  till  thy  bowels /.out 
25.8.  God  shall  make  thee/,  before  the  enemy 

19.  that  thou  shouldesl  /.  and  Judah  with  thee 
Eslk.  6.  1 10.  suller  not  a  whit  to/,  of  all  that 

13.beforewhom  thou  hast  begun  to/.shall  notpre- 

vail  against  him,  but  shall  surely/,  before  liim 

.fob  C.  t27.  yea,  ye  cause  to/,  upon  the  fatherless 

12.  13.  1/  not  lower  than  you 

13.  11.  and  shall  not  his  dread/,  upon  you  1 
31.  22.  let  mine  arm  /.  from  my  shoulder-blade 

Psal.  5.  10.  let  them/,  by  their  own  counsels 
9.3.mine enemies  sliall/.andperisiiat  thypresence 
10.  10.  that  the  poor  may/,  by  his  strong  ones 
35.  8.  into  that  very  destruction  let  him/. 
37. 24.  tho'  he  /.  he  shall  not  be  utterly  cast  down 

45.  5.  arrows,  whereby  the  people/,  under  thee 
64.  8.  make  their  tongue  to/,  on  themselves 
78.  28.  and  he  let  it/,  in  the  midst  of  their  camp 
82.  7.  but  ye  shall/,  like  one  of  the  princes 
91.  7.  a  thousand  shall  /.  at  thy  side,  and  10,000 
106.  t  27.  make  their  seed/,  among  the  nations 
118.  13.  thou  hast  thrust  at  ine  that  1  might/. 

140.  10.  let  burning  coals/,  upon  them 

141.  10.  let  the  wicked/,  into  their  own  nets 
145.  14.  the  Lord  upholdeth  all  that/. 

ProiK  4.  16.  unless  they  cause  some  to/. 

10.  8.  but  a  prating  fool  shall/.  10. 

11.  5.  the  wicked  shall/,  by  his  own  wickedness 
14.  where  no  counsel  is  the  people/. 
28.  he  that  trusteth  in  his  riches  shall/. 

22.14.  he  that  is  abhorred  of  the  Ld.  shall/therein 
24.  16.  but  the  wicked  shall/,  into  mischief 
26.  27.  whoso  diggeth  a  pit  shall /.therein,  he  who 
rolleth  a  stone  it  will  return  on  him,  Ecci.  10.8. 

28.10.  causeth  to  goastray^hall/.into  his  own  pit 
14.  but  he  that  hardcneth  his  heart  shall/. 

18.  but  he  that  is  perverse  shall/,  at  once 
Eccl.  4.  10.  if  they /.  one  will  lift  up  his  fellow 

11.  3.  if  the  tree/,  toward  the  south  or  north 
Isa.  8.  15.  many  among  them  shall  stumble  and/. 
10.  4.  and  they  shall/,  under  the  slain 
34.  and  Lebanon  shall/,  by  a  mighty  one 

22.  2.5.  nail  fastened  in  the  ^>ure  place  shall/. 

24.  18.  who  fleelh  from  fear  shall/,  into  tho  pit 

20.  the  earth  shall/,  and  not  rise  again 
28.  13.  that  they  might  go  and  /.  backward 
30.  13.  iniquity  shall  be  as  a  breach  ready  to/. 

25.  in  the  day  of  slaughter,  when  the  towers/. 
40.  30.  and  the  young  men  shall  utterly /. 

47.  11.  therefore  mischiefs  shall/,  upon  thee 
54.  15.  whoso  shall  gather/,  for  thy  sake 

Jer.  3. 12. 1  will  not  cause  mine  anger  to/,  on  you 
6.  15.  they  shall/,  among  Ihcm  that/.  8.  12. 

21.  the  liilhers  and  sons  shall/,  upon  them 

8.  4.  saith  the  Lord,  shall  they  /.  and  not  arise  ? 

9.  22.  even  the  carcases  of  men  shall/,  as  dung 
15.  8.  I  have  caused  him  to/,  upon  it  suddenly 

23.  12.  they  shall  be  driven  on  and/,  therein 

19.  a  whirlwind/,  on  the  head  of  wicked,  30.  23. 

25.  27.  drink  ye,  and  be  drunken,  and  spue,  and/. 
34.  and  ye  shall  /.  like  a  pleasant  vessel 

37.  14.  it  is  false,  I  /.  not  away  to  the  Chaldeans 

t20.  let  my  supplieatiun/.  before  thee 
42  t2.  let  our  supplicaiion  /.  before  thee 
44.  12.  they  shall  all/  in  the  land  of  Egypt 

46.  6.  they  shall  stumble  and/,  toward  the  north 
16.  he  made  many  to/,  yea  one  fell  on  another 

48.  44.  ho  that  fleelh  shall/,  inio  Ihe  i)it 

49.  26.  her  young  men/  in  her  streets,  .50.  30. 

50.  32.  and  the  most  proud  shall  stumble  and/. 
51.4.  the  slain  shall/,  in  land  of  Chaldeans,  47,49. 

44.  yea,  the  wall  of  Itahylon  shall/. 

49.  as  Babylon  caused  the  slain  ot  Israel  to/. 
f.am.  1.  14.  ho  hath  made  my  strength  to/. 
f'.irk  6.  7.  the  slain  shall/,  in  the  midst  of  you 

13.11.  say  un!o  them  that  il  shall /.and  ye,0  great 
hailstones,  shall/,  and  a  stormy  wind  rent  il 

14.  foundation  shall  bediscovcfcd,  and  it  shall/ 

24.  fi.  brim;  it  out  piece  by  piece,  let  no  lot/,  on  il 
27.27.  all  Ihy  company  shall/,  iiilo  the  seas,  34. 
21.  .5.  thou  shalt/.  upon  the  open  fields,  39.  5. 
30.  4.  great  pain,  when  ihe  dlain  shall/,  in  Egypt 

G.  they  also  that  uphold  Egypt  shall/. 

22.  I  will  cause  the  sword  to/,  out  of  hit  band 


FAL 

Kick.  32. 12.  by  swords  will  I  cause  multitude  to/ 
33. 12.  not/,  thereby  in  the  day  that  he  turneth 

35.  8.  and  in  all  thy  rivers  shall  they  /. 

36.  1 14.  nor  cause  to/  thy  nations  any  more 

38.  20.  the  steep  places  shall/,  every  wall  shall/. 

39.  3.  arrows  to/.  ||  4.  shalt/.  on  the  mountaiiia 

44.  12.  they  caused  Israel  to  /.  into  iniquity 

45.  1 1.  when  ye  cause  the  land  to  /.  by  lot 
47.  14.  this  land  shall/,  to  you  for  inheritance 

Dan.  9.  tl8.  we  cause  uot  our  supplications  to/. 

11.  14.  also  the  robbers  of  thy  people  shall/. 
19.  but  he  shall  stumble  and/,  and  not  be  found 
34.  when  they  shall/.  ||  35.  some/,  to  try  them 

Has.  4.  5.  therefore  shalt  thou  /.  in  tlic  day,  the 

prophet  also  shall  /.  with  thee  in  the  night 

14.  tlie  people  that  doth  not  understand  sliall/. 

5.  5.  Israel  and  Ephraim  shall/.  Judah  shall/. 
10.  8.  BKid  they  shall  say  to  the  hills,/,  on  us 

14.  9.  but  the  transgressors  ihall/.  therein 
Jlmos3.  5.  can  a  bird/,  in  a  snare  where  no  gin  is? 

14.  Uie  horns  of  the  altar  shall  /.  to  the  ground 

8.  14.  even  they  shall/,  and  never  rise  again 

9.  9.  yet  shall  not  the  least  grain/,  to  the  earth 
Mic.  7.  8.  rejoice  not,  O  mine  enemy,  when  I  /. 
JVaA.  3.  12.  they  shall/,  into  the  mouth  of  the  eater 
JUal.2.  t8.  ye  have  caused  many  to/,  in  the  law 
JUat.  10.  29.  not  one  sparrow  /.  to  ground  without 

12.  11.  if  it/,  into  a  pit  on  the  sabbath-day 

15.  14.  both  shall/,  into  the  ditch,  Luke  6.  39. 
27.  eat  crumbs  which/,  from  masters'  table 

21.44.whoso/.on  this  stone  be  broken,on  whom  it 

shall/,  it  will  grind  him  to  powder,  jLuic  20.18. 

24.  29.  the  sun  shall  be  darkened,  and  the  stars 

shall/,  from  heaven,  Mark  13.  25. 

Luke  10.18. 1  beheld  Satan  as  lightn  /.  from  heav. 

23.30.  shall  begin  to  say  to  the  niountain3,/.on  us 

John  12.24.  except  a  corn /.into  the  ground  and  die 

Mcts  27. 17.  fearing  lest  they  should  /.  into  quicks. 

32. then  the  soldiers  cut  the  ropes  and  let  her/.off 

34.  shall  not  a  hair/.from  the  head  of  any  of  you 

Rom.  11.11.  have  they  stumbled  that  they  should/. 

14.  13.  put  an  occasion  to/,  in  his  brother's  wav 

1  Cor.  10. 12.  him  that  standeth  take  heed  lest  he/. 

1  Tim.  3.6.  he/,  into  the  condemnation  of  the  devil 
7.  have  a  good  rijport,  lest  he/,  into  reproach 

6.  9.  they  that  will  be  rich/,  into  temptation 
f{eb.  4.  11.  lest  any/,  after  the  same  example 

10.  31.  it  is  fearful  to/,  into  hands  of  living  God 
./am.  1. 2.  count  it  joy,  when  ye  /.  into  temptation 

5.  12.  swear  not,  lest  ye/,  into  condemnation 

2  Pet.  1. 10.  if  ye  do  these  things  ye  shall  never/. 
3.  17.  beware  lest  ye/,  from  your  sted fastness 

Rev.  6.16.  said  to  the  mountains  and  rocks,/.on  lu 
9. 1. 1  saw  a  star  /.  from  heaven  unto  the  earth 

FALL  away. 
LukeS.  13.  and  in  the  time  of  temptation/,  awaf 
Heb.  6.  6.  if  they/,  away  to  renew  them  again 

FALL  down. 
Det<«.22.4.see  thy  brother's  ass/,  down  by  the  way 
Josh.  6.  5.  ttie  wall  of  the  city  shall/,  down  flat 
1  Sam.  21.  13.  David  lei  his  spittle/,  down 
Psal.  72.  11.  all  kings  shall/,  down  before  him 
Isa.  13.  f  7.  therefore  shall  all  hands/,  down 
31.  3.  and  he  that  is  holpen  shall/,  down 
.'14.  4  their  host  shall/,  down  as  the  Icaffalleth 
44.  19.  shall  I/,  down  lo  the  stock  of  a  tree? 
4.5.  14.  Ihe  Sabeans  shall  /.  down  unto  thee 
46.  6.  they/,  down,  yea,  they  worship 
Eiek.  30.2S.  and  the  arms  of  Pharaoh  shall/,  dowrn 
IJan.  3.  5.  ye/,  down  and  worship  the  image,  10. 
15.  if  ye/,  down  and  worship  the  imago,  well 

11.  2'i.  and  many  shall/,  down  slain 
Mat.  4.  9.  all  these  things  will  I  give  thee,  if  thou 

wilt/,  down  and  worship  me,  I.ukei.  7 
flet>.4.10.the  Iwenty-fourelders/  (/oicn  before  him 

FALL,  joined  with  sword. 
Erod.5.X  lest  he/,  on  us  \Nith  pestilence  or  sicord 
JVum.  14.  3.  brought  us  to  ihis  land  to  /.  by  sword 

43.  and  ye  shall/,  by  Ihe  sword 
2  A'lnn'*  19. 7.  Sennacherib  /.  by  s.  2  Chr.  32. 1 21 
Psal.  63.  10.  they  shall  /.  by  the  .tword,  Eiek.6.1l 
Isa.  3.  25.  thv  men  shall/,  by  Ihe  sword 
13.  15.  and  every  one  shall/,  by  the  sword 
31.  8.  then  shall'the  Assyrian  /.  with  the  swort 
37.  7.    behold,  I  will   cause    him  lo  /.  by  the 
sword  in  his  own  land,  .frr.  19.  7. 
.Irr.  20.  4.  Pnshur'a  friends  shall/,  by  the  sword 
39.  18.  and  Ihou  shall  not/,  by  ihe  sword 
Eirk.  5.  12.  a  third  part  shall/,  by  the  sword 
6.  12.  and  ho  that  is  near  shall/  by  ihe  twnrd 
11.  10.  ye  shall/,  by  Ihe  swnrd,  I  will  judge  you 
17.  21.  his  fugitives  shall/  by  the  sword 
2:t.  2.5.  anri  Ihy  remnant  shall/,  hy  the  sword 
2t.  21.  your  sons  and  daughters  shall /.  by  *u>ord 
25.  13.  and  ihey  of  Ped.in  Rhnll  f.  hy  the  sword 
30.  5.  Ihe  men  in  Ihe  leacuc  shall  /  hy  Ihe  strord 

6,  from  the  lower  of  Syene,  shall  /  by  the  sward 
17.  Ihe  voting  men  shall/,  by  the  sword 
22.  I  will  cause  ihe  award  to/  o.it  of  his  hand 

33.  27.  thoy  in  the  wastes  shall/,  by  the  stBord 


FAL 

Dan.  tl.33.  they  that  understand  shall/,  by  sword 
ilti  7.  J(j.  their  princes  shall/,  by  tlie  sword 
I  i;).  16.  Baiiiaiia  shall/,  by  the  sioord 

■  Joel  'i.S.wheii  they /.on  tlie  sword  not  be  wounded 
Jlmos'l.  17.  thy  80I18  anddaughteie/.  hy  the Sioort/ 
Luke  21. 24.  they  shall  /.  by  the  edge  of  the  sword 

FALLEN. 
Oen.4.6.L.said  to  Cain,  why  is  thy  countenance/.? 
L,ev.  li.  41.  that  halh  his  hair/,  otf  from  his  head 

25.  35.  if  thy  brother  be/,  in  decay  with  thee 
Josh.S.  24.  all  Ai  were/,  on  the  edge  of  the  sword 
Judg.  'i.  25.  behold,  their  lord  was/,  down  dead 

lU.  1.  their  inheritance  had  not/,  unto  ihem 
IS).  27.  behold  the  woman  was/,  at  the  door 

1  Ham.  5.  3.  Uagon  was/  {{  26. 12.  a  deep  sleep/. 
31.  8.  they  found  Saul  and  his  sons/.  1  Clir.  10.  d. 

2  Sam.  1.  10. sure  he  could  not  live  afierhe  was/. 
12.  and  ihey  mourned,  because  they  were/' 

3.  3H.  there  is  a  great  man/,  this  day  in  Israel 
17.  1 9-  when  some  of  them  be  /.  at  tlie  first 

1  Kings  8. 1 50.  hath  not/,  one  word  of  his  promise 

20.  t25.  number  an  army  like  army  that  was/. 

3  Kings  13.14.  nowKlisha  was/,  sick  of  hissickn. 
25.t  11.  the  /.  away  did  the  captain  carry  away 

2  Citron.  20.  24.  were  dead  bodies/,  to  the  earth 
i'i.  9.  for  lo,  our  fathers  have/,  by  the  sword 

Eftli.  7. 8.  Haman  was/,  on  bed  where  Esther  was 
Psal.  20.  8.  they  are  brought  down  and  /. 
36.  12.  there  are  the  workers  of  iniquity/. 
Isa.  14.12.  how  art  thou/,  from  heaven,  O  Lucifer! 

26.  18.  nor  have  the  inhabitants  of  the  world/. 
Eiek.  32.22.  all  of  them/,  by  the  sword,  23,  24. 
Hos.  14.  1.  for  thou  hast/,  by  thine  iniquity 
Zech.  12. 1 8.  he  that  is  /.  at  that  day  be  as  David 
//uAel4.5.which  of  you  shall  have  an  o.\/.into  a  pit 
.icts  8.  i6.  the  Holy  Ghost  was/,  on  none  of  iheni 

20.9.Eutychus  being/,  into  a  deep  sleep  fell  down 
26.  14.  when  we  were  all/.  I  heard  a  voice 
27.29.  fearing,  lest  they  should  have/,  on  rocks 
28.6.  looked  when  Paul  should  have/,  down  dead 
PMl.  1.  J2. /.  out  to  the  furtherance  of  the  gospel 
Rev.  2.  5.  remember  from  whence  thou  art/. 

^re  FALLEN. 
2Sam.  i.  4.  many  of  the  people  are  f.  and  dead 
19.  how  are  the  mighty  /. .'  25,  27. 
22.  39.  they  are/,  under  my  feet,  Psal.  18.  38. 
Psal.  16.  G.  the  lines  are/,  tome  in  pleasant  places 
55.  4.  the  terrors  of  death  aref.  upon  me 
57.  6.  into  the  midst  whereof  they  aref.  themselv. 
69.  9.  the  reproaches  of  them  aref.  upon  me 
Isa.  9.  10.  the  bricks  aref.  down,  but  we  will  build 
Jer.  38.  19.  the  Jews  that  aref.  lo  the  Chaldeans 
46. 12.  the  mighty  men,  they  aref.  both  together 

50.  15.  Babylon's  foundations  aref.  walls  down 
Lam.  2.  21.  my  virgins  aref.  by  the  swurd 
Eiek.  31. 12.  his  branches  aref.  his  boughs  broken 

32.27.  they  shall  not  lie  with  the  mighty  that  aref. 
Hos.  7.  7.  all  their  kings  arc  f.  none  calleth  to  me 
1  Cor.  15.  fi.  part  remain,  some  are  f.  asleep,  18. 
Oal.  5.  4.  justified  by  the  law,  ye  are  f.  from  grace 
Rev.  17. 10.  are  seven  kings,  five  are /.and  one  is 

Is  FALLEN. 
Lev.  13.40.  the  man  whose  hair  is  f.  off  his  head 
Jfum.  32.  19.  our  lot  is  f.  on  this  side  Jordan 
■Xosh.  2.  9.  I  know  that  your  terror  is  f.  upon  us 
Job  1.  16.  the  fire  of  God  is  f.  from  heaven 
Psal.  7. 1.5.  and  is  f.  into  thediich  which  he  made 
Isa.  3.  8.  Jerusalem  is  ruined,  and  Judah  is  f. 

16.  9.  the  shouting  for  thy  summer-fruits  is  f. 

21.  9.  Babylon  is  f.  is  f.'  Rev.  14.  8.  |  18.  2. 

59.  14.  for  truth  i«/.  in  the  streets,  equity  cannot 
Jn-.  48.  32.  the  spoiler  i.<t/.  on  ihy  summer-fruits 

51.  8.  Babylon  is  suddenly/,  ind  destroyed 
/jOm.S.lO.the  crown  is/,  from  our  heads, woe  to  ns 
f;ieA:.13.12.1o,when  the  wall*s/.shall  it  not  be  said 
Amos  5.  2.  the  virgin  of  Isr.  isf.  shall  no  more  rise 

9.  11.  I  will  raise  up  the  tabernacle  that  is  f. 
Zech.  11.  2.  howl  fir-tree,  for  the  cedar  is  f. 
Acts  15.  16.  build  tnhernacle  of  David  which  is  f. 

FALLER. 
J(!r.40.t  16.  he  multiplied  the  f.onofellon  another 

FALLESt. 
Jhr.  37. 13.  saying,  thou  ft  away  to  the  Chaldeans 

FALLETH. 
F.xod.  1.  10.  when  there/,  out  any  war,  they  join 
/,«).  11.33.  every  vessel  whcreinto  any  of  them/. 

35.  every  thing  whereupon  their  carcase/. 
^um.  33.54.  inheritance  shall  be  where  his  lot/. 
8  Sam.  3.  29.  not  fail  one  that/,  on  the  sword 

34.  as  a  man /.before  wicked  men,sofellest  thou 
,17.  12.  will  light  on  him  as  dew/. on  the  ground 
Job  4.  13.  when  deep  sleep/,  on  men,  33.  15. 
Prov.  13.  17  a  wicked  messenger/,  into  mischief 

17.  20.  a  perverse  tongue/,  into  mischief 

24. 16.  a  just  man/,  seven  limes,  riseth  up  again 

17.  rejoice  not  when  thine  enemy/. 
Eccl.  4.  10.  woe  to  him  that  is  alone  when  he/. 
9.  12.  sons  of  men  are  snared  when  it/,  on  them 
11.  3.  where  the  tree  /.  there  shall  it  be 
tea-  34,  4.  as  the  leaf/,  off  from  the  vine 
183 


FAL 

Tsa.  44.15  makcth  image,  and/,  down  thereto,  17, 
Jer.  21.  9.  lie  ihat/.  to  Chaldeans  :^ll  live 
J}an.  3.0.  whoso/,  not  down  and  worsliiiipeth,  11. 
JUat.  17.  15.  for  oft-times  he/,  into  the  lire 
Jyukc  11.  17.  a  house  divided  against  a  liouse/. 

15. 12.  give  me  tlie  portion  of  goods  ih.il/.  to  me 
Rom.  14.  4.  to  his  own  master  lie  standelli  or/. 
Jam.  I.  IL  the  flower  thereof/.  1  i'tt.  1.  24. 

FALLING. 
jVw/n.  24.  4./.  into  a  trance,  but  his  eyes  ojien,  16. 
JJeut.  jy.  1 16.  to  teslify  against  him/,  away 
Job  4.  4.  thy  words  have  upholden  hiin  thai  was/. 

14.  IB.  the  mountain/,  cometh  to  nought 
Psal.  5ti.  13.  wilt  not  deliver  my  feel  from/.  116.8. 
Fruv.  25. 26.  a  righteous  man  /.  bel'ore  the  wicked 
/sa.  34.  4.  and  as  a/,  fig  from  the  tig-tree 
X,uAe8.47.canie  Irembliiigaud/  .down  before  him 

22.  44.  as  it  were  great  drops  of  blood  /.  down 
Acts  1.  16.  and  Judas/,  headlong  burst  asunder 

27.  41.  and/,  into  a  place*vhere  two  seas  met 

1  Cor.  14.25.  and  so/,  down,  he  will  worslii])  God 
•2Tkess.  2.  3.  o.vcept  there  come  a/,  away  tirst 
Jude  24.  to  him  that  is  able  to  keep  you  from/. 

FALLINGS. 
Job  41.  123.  the/,  of  his  llesh  are  joined  together 

FALLOW. 

Jer.  4.  3.  break  up  your/  ground,  Hos.  10.  12. 

See  Dker. 

FALSE. 

Exod.  23.  1.  thou  shall  not  raise  a/,  report 

7.  keep  thee  far  from  a  /.  matter 

2  Kings  9.  12.  and  they  said,  it  is/,  tell  us  now 
■lob  36.  4.  for  truly  my  words  shall  not  be/. 
Psul.  119. 104.  therefore  I  hate  every/,  way,  128. 

120.  3.  what  shall  be  done  to  thee  thou/,  tongue? 
Prov.li.X.  a/,  balance  is  an  abomination  to  the  L. 
17.  4.  a  wicked  doer  giveth  heed  to/,  lips 

20.  23.  and  a/,  balance  is  not  good 

25.'14.  whoso  boasleth  of  a/,  gift,  is  like  wind 
Jer.8.t8.the/.  pen  of  scribes  worketh  for  falsehood 
14.  14.  they  prophesy  unto  you  a/,  vision 
23.32. 1  am  against  them  that  prophesy/,  dreams 
37. 14.  then  said  Jeremiah,  it  is/.  I  fall  not  away 
Jmvi.  2.  14.  but  have  seen  for  thee/,  burdens 
EieA.  21.23.  it  shall  be  to  them  as  a/,  divination 
Zech.  8.  17.  let  none  imagine  evil,  love  no/,  oath 
10.  2.  and  the'diviners  have  told/,  dreams 
Mal.'i.a.  I  will  be  swift  witness  against/,  swearers 
Jl/uf.24.24.for  there  shall  arise/Christs  and  /.  pro- 
phets, and  shall  shew  wonders,  Mark  13.  22 
I.nkc  19.  8.  have  taken  any  thing  by  /.  accusation 
2  Cor.  11.  13.  for  such  are/,  apostles,  deceitful 

26.  I  have  been  in  perils  among/,  brethren 
^a/.2.4.because  of/brethren  unawares  brought  in 
2  T'im. 3.  3.  without  natural  affection,/ accusers 
Tit.  2.  3.  aged  women,  that  they  be  not/,  accusers 
2  Pet.  2.  1.  there  shall  be/,  teachers  among  you 
See  Prophet. 
FALSE  prophets. 
Mat .7.15.  beware  of/,  prophets  in  sheeps'  clothing 

24.  11.  and  many  f.  prophets  shall  rise,  24. 
Mark  13.  22.  /.  prophets  shall  rise  and  shew  signs 
I^ukc  6.26.  so  did  their  fathers  to  ihc  f.  prophi  ts 
2  /'ej.2.1.  there  were  f.  prophets  among  the  people 
1  John  4.  \.f.  prophi  ts  are  gone  out  into  the  world 

Y.Wj'B^  witness. 
Exod.  20.  16.  thou  shalt  not  bear/,  witness  against 
thy  neighbour,  Dcut.  5.  20.  Mat.  19.  18. 
Deut.lQ.Ui.  if  a/,  witness  rise  upagainst  any  man 

18.  and  behold,  if  the  witness  be  a/,  icitncss 
Prov.  6. 19.  a/,  witiiess  that  speaketh  lies 

12.  17.  a/,  witness  sheweth  forth  deceit,  14.  5. 
19.  5.  a/,  wityiess  shall  not  be  unpunished,  9. 

21.  28.  a/,  witness  shall  perish 

25.  18.  a  man  that  beareth/.  witness  is  a  mnul 
Mat.  15. 19.  for  out  of  the  heart  proceed/,  witness 

26.59.  the  elders  sought/,  witness  against  Jesus 
Mark  14. .56.  many  bare/.  7citness  against  him,  57. 

FALSE  ivitnesscs. 

Psal.  27. 12.  /.  witn''sses  arc  risen  up  against  me 

35.i\f.  ipitnesses  did  rise,  they  laid  to  my  charge 

■Jl/aJ.26.60.  tho'  mai^yf. witnesses  came,  yet  found 

they  none,  at  the  last  came  two  /.  witnesses 

Acts  6.  13.  and  set  tip/,  witnesses,  who  said 

1  Cor.  15.1.5.  and  wo  are  found  /".  witnesses  of  God 

FALSEHOOD. 

2  .Sa»n.l8.13.should  have  wrought/against  my  life 
.fob  21.  34.  in  your  answers  there  reniaincth/. 
Psal.  7.  14.  behold,  he  hath  brought  forth/. 

119. 118.  hast  trodden  them  down,  for  deceit  ig/. 

144.  8.  their  hand  is  a  right  hand  of/.  11. 
Pruv.  20.  t  I'?,  bread  of/,  is  sweet  to  a  man 

25.  t  14.  whoso  boasteth  himself  in  n  gift  of/. 
Isn.  28.  15.  and  under/,  have  we  hid  ourselves 

57.  4.  are  ye  not  a  seed  off.  ?  ||  59. 13.  words  off. 
Jer.  3.  1 10.  she  hath  turned  lo  me  but  in/. 

8.  t8.  the  false  pen  of  scribes  worketh  for/. 

10.  14.  for  his  n,olten  image  is/.  51.  17. 

13.  25.  thnu  hast  forgotten  me,  and  trusted  in/. 
37.  1 14.  then  said  Jeremiah  it  is  a/. 

^C 


FAM 

Jhs.7.1,  ior  thcv  commit/,  and  the  thief  ct  mcth  ia 
Mic.  2.  11.  if  a  man  walking  in  tlie  spirit  and/. 

FALSELY, 
(ren.  21.23.  swear  to  me  that  thou  wilt  not  deal/. 
/.c».6.3.have  found  what  was  lost,  and  sweareth/. 
5.  or  all  that  about  which  he  hath  sworn/. 
19.  11.  neither  deal/,  nor  lie  one  to  another 
12.  and  ye  shall  not  swear  by  my  name/. 
Dent.  19.  18.  if  the  witness  have  teslilied/. 
J'sal.  35.  1 19.  let  not  mine  enemies  /.  rejoice 
44.  17.  jior  have  we  dealt/,  in  thy  covenant 
./tr.  5.2.  tho' they  say,  iheLd.  liveth,  they  swear/. 
31.  the  projihets  prophesy/,  unto  you,  29.  9. 

6.  13.  projihct,  jiriesi,  every  one  dealelli  /.  8.  10 

7.  9.  will  ye  steal,  murder,  and  swear/.  .7 
40.  16.  for  thou  speakest/.  of  Ishmael 

43.2.  thou  sjieakest/.  the  L6rd  liath  not  sent  ihee 
/fas.  II).  4.  swearing/,  in  making  a  cuvenant 
Mic.  2.  f  11.  if  a  man  walk  with  the  wind  and  lie/ 
Zc(;A.5.4.the  curse  enter  his  house  that  swcarelh/ 
Mat.  5.  11.  say  evil  against  yon  /.  for  my  sake 
Luke'S.H.  nor  accuse  any/he  contont  with  wages 
1  Tim.  6.  20.  oppositions  of  science,/,  so  called 
IPet.  3. 16./.  accuse  your  good  conversa.  in  Christ 

FALSIFYING. 
Amos  8.  5.  and  /.  the  bahinccs  by  deceit 

FAME. 
(ien.  45.  10.  the/,  was  heard  in  Pharaoh's  house 
JVum.  14. 15.  nations  that  have  heard  the/,  of  thee 
./osA.6.27.  Joshua's/,  was  noised  thro'  the  country 

9.9.  we  heard  the/,  of  God,  what  he  did  in  Egypt 
1  KiiigsA.  31.  his/,  was  in  all  nations  round  about 

10. 1.  the  queen  heard  /.  of  Solomon,  2  Ch.r.  9. 1. 

7.  thy  wisdom  exceedoth  the  /.  3  Chran.  9.  6. 

1  Chron.  14.  17.  the/,  of  David  went  to  all  lands 

22.  5.  anil  the  house  must  be  of/,  and  of  glory 
Esth.9.4.  Mordecai's/.went  through  the  provinces 
■fob  28.  22.  we  have  heard  the/,  with  our  ears 
/sa.  61).  19.  to  tho  isles  that  have  not  heard  my/. 
Jer.  3.  t  9.  thro'  the/,  of  her  whoredom  she  defileil 

6.  24.  we  have  heard  the/,  our  hands  wax  feeble 
Zi:ph.  3.  19.  and  I  will  g.t  them  /.  in  every  land 
A/at.  4.  24.  l:ie  f.  of  Jesus  went  abroad,  Mark  1. 
28.  I.\ke  4.  14,  37.  ]  5.  15. 
9.  26.  the/,  thereof  went  abroad  into  all  that  land 

31.  they,  when  departed,  spread  abroad  his/. 
14. 1.  Htrdd  the  tetrarch  heard  of  the/,  of  Jesus 

FAMILIAR. 
■Job  19.  14.  my/,  friends  have  forgotten  me 
Psul.4i.9.myf.  friend  hath  lified  up  his  heel  ag.me 

^FAMILIAlt  spirit. 
7>e?i.20.27.mnn  or  woman  of  a  f  .spirit  put  to  death 
1  Sam.  28. 7.  seek  me  a  woman  that  hath  a  f.. ■spirit 
to  enquire  of  her ;  a/,  .'spirit  at  Endor 

8.  divine  to  me  by  ilio/.  spirit  and  bring  him  up 

1  Chr.  10.13.  Saul  enquired  of  one  that  had  a  /.  -ip. 

2  Chron.  33.  6.  Mana.=seh  dealt  with  a/,  spirit 
/sa.W.  4.  thy  v;)ice  as  of  one  that  hath  a  f.  spirit 

FAMILIAR  spirits. 
Lev.  19.  31.  regard  not  them  that  have/,  spirits 
20.6.  against  that  soul  that  turneth  a\ifrf.  spirits 
Dcut.  18.  11.  nor  a  consulter  with/,  spirits 
lS«m.28.3.  Saul  put  away  those  that  had  f. spirits 

9.  how  he  hnth  cut  off  those  that  have/,  spirits 
2  Kings  21.  6.  Mnna.«seli  dealt  with/  spirits 

23.  24.  workers  with  /.  spirits  Josiah  put  away 
Isa.  8.  19.  v.'heii  they  say  to  you,  seek/,  .'pirits 

19.  3.  they  sliaJl  seek  to  them  that  have/,  siiirits 
FAMILIARS. 
Jer.  20.  10.  all  my/,  watched  for  my  hallinz 

FAMILY. 
Lev.  20.  5.  I  will  set  my  face  nga'nsi  his/. 

25.  10.  ye  shall  return  every  man  to  his/.  41. 
47.  tell  himself  to  thes'ock  of  the  stranger's/. 
49.  his  uncle  or  any  ofliis/.  may  redeem  him 

A'ww.3.  21.  of  Gcrshon  was  the/,  of  the  L  hniics 
27.  of  Koliath  was  the/,  of  the  Amramitcs 

26.  5.  the /.of  the  Hanochites,/.  of  the  Palluilcs 
Family  mentioned  often  to  the  50th  verse. 

27.  4.  why  our  father's  "name  done  nwnv  from  /.  f 
11.  give  his  inheiiiancc  to  the  next  ofh's/. 

36.  6.  marry  to/,  of  their  father's  tribe,  8,  12. 
/)(■  u«.29.18;  lest  a/,  turn  away  from  Lord  onr  God 
./o.«ft.7.14.  the/,  which  the  Lord  takelh  shall  come 

17.  and  he  look  the/,  of  the  Zarhiles 
.TwIiT.  1.25.  hut  they  let  go  the  man  and  all  his/. 
6.  15.  behold,  my/,  is  poor  in  Manasseh 
9. 1.  communed  with  the  /.  of  h's  mother's  fathei 
13.  2.  Manoah  a  man  of  the/,  oflhe  Danites 
]7.7.a  young  man,  a  Levite  of  the/  of  Jutlah 
18.2.  lK^  Danites  sent  of  th'^^ir/.  five  nun  to  spy 
19.  or  that  thou  be  n  priest  'o  a/,  in  Israel 
21.  24.  Israel  departed,  every  man  lo  his/. 
RuthZ.  I.  she  had  a  kinsman  of  the/.  ofKlimelecTi 
I,S'«m.9.2I.  mv/.  the  least  of  the  iiihe  of  Benjamin 
10.  21./.  of  Matri  was  taken,  and  Saul  was  taken 
18. 18.  what  is  my  lite,  or  my  father's/,  in  Israel? 
20.6.  a  yearly  sacrifice  there  for  nil  the/  29. 
2.9am. 14.7.whole/.  is  risen  against  Uuie  handmaid 
16.  5.  a  man  of  tl>e/.  of  Saul.  hi^Hlmo  Shimei 


FAM 


ICkron.  4.  37.  neither  did  all  tlieir/.  multiply 

6.  (ji.  to  the/  ol'Kohath  were  cities  given,  70. 
13. 14.  tlie  atk  leinaliied  with  tlie/.  ot"l)bfd-edom 

Esth.  'J.  28.  iliese  days  of  Purini  kept  by  every  /. 
Jer.  3. 14. 1  will  lake  one  of  a  city,  and  two  ot  a/. 
8  3.  death  ghall  be  chosen  by  residue  of  this  evijy'. 
Jimos  3.  1.  against  the/.  1  hrouglit  odt  of  Kgypl 
iLeckfVi.  12.  every/,  shall  mourn  apart,  13,  14. 

14. 16.  if  the/,  of  Kgypt  go  not  ui>,  and  come  not 
Eph.  3. 15.  whole/,  in  lieavon  and  earth  is  named 

FAMILIES. 
Oen.  8.  f  19.  creeimlli  on  the  earth,  after  their/. 
10.  5.  the  isles  of  Uenlilcii  divided  after  their/. 
13.  were  the  /.  of  the  Caiiaanites  spread  abro;id 
20.  the  sons  of  iiain  after  their/.  {|  31./.  of  Shem 
12. 3.  in  thee  all  the/,  of  earth  bo  blessed,  2d.  14. 
36.  40.  the  dukes  of  Esau  according  to  their/. 
47. 12.  Joseph  nourished  his  brethren  with  their/. 
£zod.().14.  these  be  the/,  of  Reuben,  the  lirsl-born 
of  Israel,  jVuHi.  2ti.  7.  Josh.  13.  15,  23. 
15.  iJiese  are  the/,  of  Simeon,  J^um.  2G.  12,  14. 
Josh.  19.  1,  8. 
n.the/.ofGershon,  JVum.  3. 18,21.  |4.  22,24, 
38,  40,  41.  Josh.  21.  3;). 

19.  these  are  the  /.  of  Levi,  25.  J^um.  4.  46.  | 

26.  57,  58.  Josh.  21.  27.  1  Chron.  6.  19. 

12.  21.  take  you  a  lamb  according  to  your/. 
Lev.  25.  45.  of  the/,  of  strangers  siiall  ye  buy 
A'um.  1.  2.  take  the  sum  of  Israel  after  their/. 

3.  19.  and  the  sons  of  Kohath  by  their/.  27,  29, 

30. 1  4.  37.  JoiA.  21.  4,  10. 

20.  the  sons  of  Merari,  by  their/.  .33,  35.  |  4.  33, 

42,  44,  45.  .losh.  21.  34,  40.  1  Chron.  6.  03. 
4. 18.  cut  not  otf  the  tribe  of  tlie/.  of  Kohathitos 
11. 10.  Moses  heard  them  weep  through  their/. 
26.  15.  the/,  of  Gad,  18.  .Tosh.  13.  24,  28. 
20.  the/,  of  Judah,  22.  Josh.  15.  1, 12,20. 
23.  the  sons  of  Issachar  after  their  /.  25.  .Josh. 
19.  17,  23. 1  21.  6.  1  Chron.  6.  ti2.  |  7.  5. 

20.  the/,  of  Zebuluii,  27.  Josh.  19.  10, 16. 
28.  the  sons  of  Joseph  after  their/.  36.  1. 

34.  the/,  of  Manasseh,  30. 12.  Josh.  13.29. 1 17.2. 

35.  these  are  sons  of  Ephraiin  after  their/.  37. 

Josh  16.  5.  8. 1  21.  5, 20.  1  Chron.  0.  06. 
38.  the  sons  of  Ilenjamin  after  their/.  41.  Josh. 
18.  11,20,21.  I.Sam.  10.  21. 
42.  the  sons  of  Dan  after  their/.  Josh.  19.  40,  48. 
44.  sons  of  ,\shcr  after  their/.  .Tosh.  19.  24,  31. 
48.  aonsof  Naphtali  after  their/.  50.  ./«aA.19.32. 
S7.  1.  daughters  of  Zelophehud  of  Manasseh's/. 
33.  54.  divide  your  land  by  lot  among  your/. 
36.  1.  the  chief  fathers  of  the/,  of  Gilead 
Josh.  6.  123.  briiught  out  Kahab  and  all  her/. 

7.  14.  tribe  the  Lord  taketh  come  according  to/. 

13.  31.  to  half  childrcirof  Machir,  by  their/. 
10.  40.  the  liibe  of  Dan  according  to  their/.  48. 

1  Sam.  9.  21.  the  least  of  all  the  /.  of  Benjamin 
1  C/ir.2.  53.  the/,  of  Kirjath-jearim,  the  I'uhites 
55.  the/,  of  the  scribes  which  dwelt  at  Jaboz 

4.  2.  these  arc  the/,  of  the  Zoralhites 

21.  the/,  of  them  that  wrought  fine  linen 
38.  these  mentionoxl  were  princes  in  their/. 

S  Chron.   35.  5.    according   to    the   divisions   of 
the  /.  12. 
JW.A.  4.  13.  I  RCt  the  people  after  their  /. 
Job  31.  34.  did  the  contempt  of/,  terrify  mc7 
Pgal.  68.  6.  God  setteth  the  solitary  in/. 
107.  41.  and  niaketli  him  /.  like  allock 
Jrr.  1.  15.  I  will  call  all  the/,  of  tlie  north 
2.  4.  hear,  all  yq/.  of  the  house  of  Israel 
10.  2'>.  fury  on  the/,  that  call  not  on  ihy  name 
15.  t  •!■  nnd  1  will  ft|)pi)iiil  over  them  four/. 
W.  9.  behoM,  I  will  take  all  the/,  of  the  north 
31.  J.  I  will  be  the  God  of  all  the/,  of  Israel 
33.  24.  the  two/,  which  the  Lord  hath  chosen 
Eiek.  20.  32.  we  will  bn  as  the/,  of  the  countries 
Jlmnf  3.  2.  you  have  I  known  of  all  /.  of  the  earth 
JVaA  3.  4.  that  B'  lleth/.  through  her  witchcrafts 
Zeck.  12.  f  12.  and  the  land  shall  mourn,//. 
14.  all  the/,  tiiat  remain,  every  farniiy  apart 

14.  17.  whoso  will  not  come  up  of  all  the/. 

FAMINE. 

The  acrijitarr,  fpea/.s  of  srvcral  faruines  which 
kaee  been  in  Palexlinr,  ami  in  Ihr.  nciirhbou 
eount'ifs  :  a*  t/iat  in  Ihr.  time  of  Abraham, 
and  ngain  in  the  time  of  Isaac,  Gen.  12.  10 
I  20.  I.  Hut  the  must  remarkable  whereof  toe 
kavc  any  necnunt,  iw  that  of  scnen  years,  which 
jell  out  in  Tgypl,  while  Joseph  abode  there, 
Gen.  41.  2".  Il  is  consiJcrahle  far  the  eon 
tinuaver,  rrlrnt,  and  /rrcatnrss  of  il ;  and  in 
this  ii'irliriilur  the  more  .10,  that  Esypl  i.<  a 
country  Irist  subject  to  these  calamities,  by 
reason  of  its  extreme  fmitfulness. 

Famine  is  somrtimfs  a  natural  effect,  a.i  vihen 
the  Nile  does  not  onrrjtoir  in  E;;ypl ;  or  the 
rains  do  mil  fall  in  Juilen,  at  the  customary 
times,  that  is,  in  spring  or  autumn;  or  whrn 
the  cateruUlars  and  I'icusts  swarm  in  the 
airy,  MU  dctlrov  ike  fruits  af  it.     The 


ttutUry. 


FAM 

prophets,  in  several  places,  take  notice  of  these 
last  causes^ftf  famine,  Joel  1.  3,  4,  <.">  c. 

Famine  was  also  often  the  ejfect  of  (lod's  anger 
against  his  people.  For  example ;  the  J-urd 
sent  the  prophet  Gad  to  Uavid,  to  tell  him, 
that  as  a  punishment  of  his  vanity,  whtreby 
he  had  been  induced  to  number  his  people, 
God  gave  him  the  option  of  seven  years' 
famine,  or  of  being  for  three  months  pursued 
by  his  enemies,  or  of  seeing  the  plague  raging 
for  three  days  in  his  country,  2.Saiii.  24. 12, 13. 
jlnd  in  the  reign  of  AImb,  The  Lord  tailed 
for  a  famine,  and  it  came  upon  the  land  seven 
years,  2  Kings  8.  1,  2.  Amos  threatens  the 
people  of  God  with  another  sort  of  famine, 
want  of  heavenly  bread,  which  was  that  oi 
hearing  the  word  of  God,  Jimos  S.  11.  The 
Israelites  now  despise  a  prophet's  counsel,  then 
they  shall  seek  for  it,  but  not  have  a  prophet 
to  give  them  counseL 

Gen.  12.  10.  for  the/,  was  grievous  in  the  land 

26. 1.  there  was  a/,  in  the  land,  besides  the  first/. 

41.  27.  seven  empty  ears  shall  be  seven  years  of/. 

30.  and  the/,  shall  consume  the  land 

31.  the  iilenty  shall  not  be  known  by  reason  of/. 
.50.  to  Joseph  were  born  two  sons  before  the/. 
56.  the  /.  was  over  all  the  face  of  the  earth 

'    47. 13.  the  land  fainted  by  reason  of  the/. 
Ruth  1.  1.  when  the  judgeji  ruled,  there  was  a/. 
2  i'am.  21.  1.  there  was  a/,  in  the  days  of  David 
24.13.  shall  seven  years  ot/.  come  to  thee  in  land? 

1  Kings  8.  37.  if  there  be  in  the  land/.  2  Chr.  2U.  9 

18.2.  there  was  a  sore/.iii  Samaria,  2  Kings  6.25. 

2  Kings  7.  4.  then  the/,  is  in  the  city,  we  shall  die 
8. 1.  the  Lord  hath  called  for  a/,  it  shall  come 
25.  3.  the/,  prevaikd  in  Jerusiilcni,  no  bread 

2  Chr.  32.11.  llezekiah  persuadelhyou  to  die  by/. 

Job  5.  20.  in  /.  he  shall  redeem  thee  from  dcatii 
22.  at  destruction  and/,  thou  shalt  laugh 
30.  3.  for  want  and  /.  they  were  solitary 

Psal.  33.  19.  and  to  keep  them  alive  in/. 
37.  19.  in  the  days  of/,  they  shall  be  satisfied 
105.  16.  moreover,  ho  called  for  a/,  on  the  land 

Isa.  5.  1 13.  and  their  glory  are  men  of/. 

14.  30.  and  I  will  kill  thy  rout  with/. 
51.19.  destruction,/,  and  sword, are  come  on  thee 

Jer.  5. 12.  nor  shall  we  see  sword,  nor  /.  14.  13,  15 
14.15.  by  sword  and/,  shall  jirophetsbe  consumed 
16.  the  peojile  shall  be  cast  out,  because  of  the/. 
18.  then  behold  them  that  are  sick  with/. 

15.  2.  and  such  as  are  for  the/,  to  the/. 
18.  21.  deliver  up  their  children  to  the/. 
21.  7.  deliver  from  the/,  to  Nebuchadnezzar 
24.  10.  I  will  send  the/,  among  them,  29.  17. 
27.  8.  that  nation  will  I  punish  with  the/. 
29.  18.  I  will  persecute  with  the  sword  and  /. 
32.  24.  the  city  is  given  to  Chaldeans  because  of/. 
34.  17.  I  proclaim  a  liberty  for  you  to  the/. 

42.  16.  the/,  shall  follow  close  after  you 
52.6.  the/was  sore  in  the  city,  there  was  no  bread 

I^am.  5.  10.  our  skin  was  black,  because  of  the/. 
Kick.  5.  12.  a  third  part  shall  be  consumed  with/. 

16.  when  I  send  on  them  the  evil  arrows  of/. 

17.  so  will  I  send  on  you/.  14.  13. 
7.  15./.  within,  /.  and  pestilence  shall  devour 
12.  10.  but  I  will  leave  a  few  men  from  the/. 
36.  29.  and  I  will  lay  no/,  upon  you 

31).  ye  shall  receive  no  more  reproach  of/. 
Jlmos  8.11.1  will  send  a/,  not  of  bread, but  of  word 
J.uke  4.  25.  when  great/,  was  through  all  the  land 

15.  14.  there  arose  a  mighty/,  in  that  land 
/iom.H.  35.  shall/,  separate  us  from  love  of  Christ? 
liev.  18.  8.  her  plagues  come  in  one  day,  death,/. 

liy  the  FAMINE. 
Jer.  11.22.  their  ions  and  daught.  shall  die  by  thef. 
14.  12.  but  I  will  consume  them  by  thef.  15. 

16.  4.  they  shall  be  consumed  byf.  44. 12,  18, 27. 
21.9.  he  Ihatabideth  in  thecity  shall  die  by  thef. 
27.  13.  whv  will  vo  die  by  thef.  and  pestilence? 
32.3(i.be  delivered  to  the  king  of  Habyli>n  by  thef. 
38.2.  remaincth  in  oily  shall  die  Ay/.  Kiek.d.  12. 
42.  17.  they  shall  die  by  thef.  and  pestilence 

22.  know  certainly  that  ye  shall  <lic  by  thef. 
44. 13.  as  I  have  punished  Jerusalem  by  the  f. 
Kiek.  6.  11.  they  shall  full  by  thef.  and  pestilence 

FAMINES. 
J/a(.  24. 7.  there  shall  bo/,  pestilences, and  earth- 
quakes in  divers  places,  Jlfark  13.8.  J.ukeil.ll. 
FAMISH  and  FAMISHED. 
Gen.  41.  .'>5.  when  nil  the  land  of  Egypt  was/. 
Pron.  10.3.  the  !<.  will  not  sulfcT  thi'  righteous  to/. 
fsa.  5. 13.  and  their  hon<nir:ilile  men  are/. 
Zn>A.  2. 11. for  he  will/,  all  the  godaof  Iho  oartJi 

FAMtHJS. 
J^um.  16  2.  princes/,  in  iho  congrrgalion,  26.  9. 
riiith  4.  II.  and  be  lliou/.  in  lieth-leliem 

11.  tlial  his  name  mav  hi'/,  in  Israel 
I  Chrnn.  5.24.  and  llici'e  were/,  men,  12.30. 
Psal.  74.  5.  a  man  was/  as  he  had  liflid  up  axes 
130. 18.  give  tbaiilu  to  him  who  (lew  /.  k>ni;i 


FAR 

F.iek.  23. 10.  and  she  became  /.  among  wontca 
32. 18.  and  the  daughters  of  Uic  /.  nations 

FAN,  Substantive. 
Isa.  30. 24.  clean  provender  winnowed  with  the/. 
.Jer.  15.7.  I  will  fan  them  willi  a/,  in  the  gates 
iMat.  3.  12.  whose/,  is  iu  his  hand,  Luke  3.  17. 

FAN,  Verb. 
/.»a.41.16.shalt/.lhem,wind  shall  curry  them  away 
Jer.  4. 11.  a  dry  wind  not  to/,  nor  to  cleansi. 
15.  7.  I  will/,  them  with  a  fun  in  the  galea 
51.  2. 1  will  send  fanners  that  shall/,  her 

FAR. 
Gen.  18. 25.  that  be/,  from  thee  to  slay  righteout 
Exod.  8.  28.  only  you  shall  not  go  very/,  away 

23.  7.  keep  thee/,  from  a  false  matter 

I)eut.  12. 21.  if  ilie  place  be  too/,  from  thcc,  14.  24 
29.  22.  llic  stranger  that  shall  come  from  a/,  land 

Josh.  3.  16.  waters  stood  very  /.  from  Uie  city 

Adam 
8.  4.  go  not  \cxyf.  from  the  city,  but  be  ready 
9. 22.  saying,  we  are/,  from  you,  when  ye  dwell 

Judg.  9. 17.  my  father  adventured  his  life  /. 

18.  7.  they  were/,  from  the  Zidoniuns,  28. 

19. 11.  they  were  by  Jebus,  day  was/,  spent 
1  A'am. 20.  9.  Jonathan  said,/,  be  it  from  thee 

1  Kings  8.46.  that  they  carry  ihem  away/,  or  neat 

2  CAr.  26.  15.  and  his  name  was  spread/,  abroad 
Ezra  6.  6.  now  therefore  be  ye/,  from  thence 
JVfA.4. 19.  we  are  separated  one/,  from  anothci 
Esth.  9. 20.  to  all  the  Jews  both  nigh  and  /. 

Job  5.  4.  his  children  are/,  from  safety 

11. 14.  put  iniquity  /.  away,  22.  23. 

34. 10./.  be  it  from  God  to  do  wickedness 
Psal.  10.  5.  thy  judgments  are  /.  out  of  sight 
22. 1.  why  art  thou  so/,  from  helping  me  ? 
73.  27. 1  hey  that  are/,  from  thee  shall  perish 

97.9.  Lord,  thou  art  exalted/,  above  all  gods 
103.  12.  as  /.  as  the  east  is  from  the  west,  so/". 

hath  he  removed  our  transgressions  from  ua 
109.  17.  so  let  blessing  be/.  iVom  him 
119.  150.  that  follow  mischief  arc/,  from  thy  law 

155.  salvation  is/,  from  the  wicked 
Prou.  4.24.  and  perverse  li|>s  put/,  from  thee 
5.8.reniove  thy  way /.from  her,  come  not  nigh  her 
15.29.  the  Lord  is/,  from  the  wicked 

19.  7.  much  more  do  his  friends  go/,  from  him 
22.  5.  doth  keep  his  soul,  shall  be/,  from  thcni 

15.  the  rod  of  correction  shall  drive  it/.from  him 

31. 10.  for  her  price  is/,  above  rubies 
Eccl.  2. 13.  as/,  as  light  e.\celleth  darkness 

3.  t  5.  and  a  time  to  be/,  from  embracing 

Isa.  6.12.  and  the  Lord  have  removed  men/away 
19.  6.  and  they  shall  turn  the  rivers/,  away 

26. 15.  thou  hast  removed  the  nations/. 

46. 12.  hear  ye  that  are/,  from  righteousness 
49. 19.  that  swallowed  thee  shall  be/,  away 

54. 14.  thou  shalt  be  /.  from  oppression 

59.9.  therefore  is  judgment/,  from  us 
Jer.  12.2.  thou  art/,  from  their  reins 

2.5.  21).  all  the  kings  of  the  north/,  and  near 
27.  10.  prophesy,  to  remove  you  /.  from  your  laml 
48.  24.  upon  all  the  cities  of  Moah  /.  or  near 
47.  thus/,  is  the  judgment  of  Moab 
51.  64.  thus/,  are  the  words  of  Jeremiah     , 
/,(ini.3.17.thou  hast  removed  my  soul/from  pcac* 
Eiek.l.^Q.  therefore  have  I  set  it/,  from  them 

11. 15.  they  have  said,  get  ye/,  t'roni  the  Lord 
Dan.  11.2.llie  fourth  king/,  richer  than  they  all 
.lurl  3.6.  that  ye  might  re  move  them/,  from  border 
.'Jmo.f  6.  3.  ye  that  put/,  awiiy  the  evil  day 
Mic.  7.  11.  in  that  day  shall  decree  bo/,  removed 
Mat.  16.22.  Teter  said,  he  it/,  from  thee.  Lord 
Mark  6.35.  and  when  the  day  was  now/.  Bp«m 

12.34.  thou  nrt  not/,  from  the  ki(ig(lo%i  of  God 
13.  34.  Son  of  man  is  as  a  man  taking  a/,  jdurnoy 
I.uke  7.6.  when  he  was  not/,  from  the  house 
22.  51.  Jesus  snid,Biifrer  ye  thus/,  he  healed  him 

24.  29.  abide  with  us,  for  the  day  is/.  Kpcnt 
."iO.  and  he  led  them  out  as/,  as  to  Beliiany 

.John  21.  8.  for  they  were  not/,  from  land 
Jlcts  11. 19.  ihey  travelled  as/,  as  Phcnicc 
'     22.  that  Ilarnabas  shouhl  eo  as/,  as  Antioch 
17.  27.  though  he  be  not/,  from  every  one  of  us 
22.21.  I  will'  ^end  theo/.  hi  nee  lo  the  Gentiliii 
an.  15.  they  came  to  meet  us  as/,  as  Appii-forum 
Horn.  13.  12.  the  night  is/,  spent,  the  day  is  at  hand 
2  Cor.  4.17.  worketh  a/,  more  exc.  weight  of  glory 
10. 14.  for  we  arc  come  as/,  as  to  you  also 
Ei'h.  1.21./.  above  all  principality  and  power 

4.  10.  that  ascended  up/,  above  nil  heavens  ' 
Vhd.  I.  2.3.  10  be  wilh  Christ,  which  is/,  better 
//c4.7. 15.il  is  yei  /.more  evident.aftir  Melchisedec 

See  Country,  CouNTiiitH. 
FAR  from  me. 
1  .fam.S.  30.  but  now  the  Lord  saith.be  itf.fr»m 
me,  22.  1.5.  2  Sam.  20.  20.  |  23.  17. 
.Job  13.  21.  withdraw  thine  linnil /./rom  we 
19.  13.  hn  haih  put  my  brethren/  from  me 
21.  10.  the  counici  ofwitked  '.t,f.from  m?,02.  Ill 

30. 10.  they  flee /./rem  vie,  and  uparo  not  lo  spii 


FAS 

P3al.i2. 11.  O  Lord,  bo  not  f.  from  me,  for  trou- 
ble is  near,  19.  |  3,i.2-J.  ]  :18.  i>l.  |  71.  ii. 
27  9.  hide  not  thy  (ace  f.  from  me,  leiivu  inc  not 
HS.  8.  thou  bust  put  mine  iicquaintaucu/./j-om  me 

18.  lover  and  I'ricnd  bast  thou  put  f.  from  me 
Prov.  30.  8.  remove/,  frum  vie  vanity  und  lies 
Keel.  7.  23.  I  will  be  wise,  but  it  was  f.  frum  me 
y«o.29.13.  but  have  removed  their  heart/. /rom  me 
Jcr  2.5.tbey  are  gunef.from  me,  and  become  vain 
L,am.  1.  16.  because  the  comt'ortcr  is  f.  from  me 
F.zek.  43.  9.  the  carcases  of  thuir  kiiig.s/. /rom  me 
41.  JO.  the  Levitts  that  are  gone/. /rom  me 
Mat  15.  8.  their  heart  la  f.  from  mc,  Mark  7.  0. 

From  FAR. 
i)e««. 28.40.  a  nation  against  tbee/rom/.  .7i;r.5.15. 
Job  36.3.  I  will  letch  my  know  ledge //-oHi/. 
/s'a.5. 26.  he  will  lift  up  an  ensign  fruvi  f. 
lU.  3.  desolation  wbicli  shall  come  from  f. 
22.  3.  they  arc  bound  which  are  fled /rom/. 
30.27.  the  name  ol"  the  Lord  cometh /rom/. 
43.  C.  bring  my  sons/rom/.  and  daugliters,  60.  9. 
4!).  1.  listen,  O  isles,  hearken,  ye  people, /ro?«/. 

12.  behold,  these  shall  come  from  f. 
60.  4.  thy  sons  shall  come  from  f.  and  daughters 
Jer.  30.10.  tor  lo,  I  will  save  thee  from  f. 
y.zck.  2it.  '10.  that  ye  sent  tor  men  to  come /rom/. 
Hal).  1.  H.  and  their  horsemen  shall  come  from  f. 
Mark  8.  3.  for  divers  of  them  camo  from  f. 
.See  Afar. 
FAR  off. 
(7en.44. 4.  when  they  were  gone,  and  not  yet/,  off 
JVM7H.2.2.they  shall  pitch/.ojf  about  ihetabernaoK' 
l)eut.l'3.~.  not  consent  to  serve  gods  of  people/.ojf 
20.  15.  thus  do  to  all  the  cities  very  /.  off 
30.  11.  neither  is  the  commandment/,  off 
9  i"am.j^5.  17.  the  king  tarried  in  a  place/,  off' 
2  CliTon.  6. 36.  carry  their  captives  to  a  land/,  off 
Psal.  S.").  7.  lo,  then  I  would  wander/,  off 
ProM.  27.  10.  is  better  than  a  brother/,  off 
F.ccl.T.H.  that  which  is/,  ojf  who  can  lind  ouf! 
Isa.  17.  13.  they  shall  (lee/,  ojf  and  be  cha?ed 
33. 13.  hear,  ye  that  are/,  off'  what  1  have  dune 

17.  they  shall  behold  the  hind  Ihat  is/,  off 
411. 13.  my  righteousness  shall  not  bo  /.  off 
R"^.  9.  and  thou  didst  send  thy  messengBrs/.  off 
19.  peace  to  himthat  is/,  o^and  him  that  is  near 
.59.  U.  we  look  for  salvation,  but  it  is/,  off 
>,":rA.6.12,hc  that  is/.  p_^Bhall  die  of  the  pestilence 
8.  6.  that  I  should  go  /.  off  from  my  sanctuary 
11. 16.  although  I  have  cast  them/,  off 
12.  27.  he  prophesieth  of  times  that  are/,  off 
2-i.  5.  those  that  be/.  o_^from  thee  siiall  mock 
7.'a7i.9.7iconfusion  to  Israel  that  are  near  and/,  off 
Joel  2.  20. 1  will  remove  /.  off  the  northern  army 
f  3.  8.  they  shall  sell  them  to  the  Sabeans/.  off 

Mic.  4.  7.  make  her  that  was  cast/,  off  a  nation 
iJfcA.5.15.they/.o^3liall  come  and  build  in  temple 
£ph.  2.  13.  ye  who  were/,  off  made  nigh  by  Christ 
FARTHER  ;  see  Further. 
,  FARE. 

1  Sam.  17.  18.  and  look  how  thy  brethren/. 

FARE. 
Jonah  1.3.  so  he  paid  the/thereof,  and  went  into  it 

FARED. 
Z.«A"«16.19.therich  man/,  sumptuously  everyday 

FAREWELL. 
I^uke  9.  61.  let  me  first  go  bid  them  /.  at  home 
Jlct.i  15.  29.  if  ye  keep  yourselves,  ye  do  well,/. 
18.  21.  Paul  bade  them/,  saying,  1  must  keep 
23.  30.  lo  say  what  they  had  against  him,/. 

2  Cor.  13. 11.  finally,  hrertiren,/.  be  perfect 

FARM. 
Mat.  22.  5.  they  went  their  wavfl,  one  to  his/. 

FARTHING,  "S. 
Mat.  5.  26.  till  thou  hast  paid  the  uttermost/. 

10.  29.  are  not  two  sparrows  sold  for  a  /.  ? 
^arA12.42.she  threw  in  two  mites  which  make  a/. 
L,uke  12.  0.  are  not  five  sparrows  sold  for  two/.  .' 

FASHION. 
Gen.  6.  15.  this  is  the/,  thou  shall  make  the  ark  of 
Kzori.'ifi.'M.  the/,  of  the  tabernacle  as  was  shewed 

37.  19.  bowls  made  he  after  the/,  of  almonds 
1  fCin^s  6.  38.  according  to  all  the/,  of  the  house 
55  Kings  16.  10.  Abaz  sent  the/,  of  the  altar 
Ezek.4'S.  11.  shew  them  the  form  and/,  thereof 
Hab.  2. 1 18  the  fashioner  of  his/.  Irusteth 
Mark  2.  12.  saying,  we  never  saw  it  on  this/. 
L.nke  0.  29.  the/,  of  his  countenance  was  altered 
J^r.lsl.Ai.  make  the  tabernacle  according 'o/.seen 
1  Or.  7.  31   for  the/,  of  this  world  passeth  away 
/'Ail.2.8.  being  found  in/,  as  a  man,  humbled  hinis. 
Jam.  1.11.  and  the  grace  of  the/,  of  it  perisheth 

FASHION. 
Job  31  15.  and  did  not  one  /.  us  in  the  womb  ? 

FASHIONED. 
.Ero<i.  32.  4.  .Aaron/,  the  calf  with  a  graving-tool 
I  King'B  7.  t  1.5.  for  he/,  two  pillars  of  brass 
Job  10.8.  thine  hands  have/,  me,  Psnl.  119.73. 
Psal.  i:i9.  16.  which  in  continuance  were/. 
/so.  22. 11.  neither  had  resiwcl  to  him  that/,  it 
167 


FAS 

Ezeh.  1G.7.  thy  breasts  are/,  thine  hair  m  grown 

P/iii.  3.  21.  that  it  may  be/,  like  bin  glorious  body 
FASIUUNETH. 

P.v(ii.33.15.  he/,  their  hearts  ahke, considers  works 

Isa.  44.  12.  the  smith /..it  with  hammers 
45.9.  clay  say  to  him  iKii/.  it,  what  inakest  thou? 
FASHIONING. 

1  Pet.  1. 14.  not/,  yourselves  to  the  former  lusts 
FAtJHlONS. 

Ezek.  42. 11.  their  goings  were  according  to  their/. 
FAST. 

Ezra  5. 8.  this  work  goeth  /.  on,  and  prospereth 
FAST. 

Octt.  20. 18.  the  Lord  had  /.  closed  up  the  wombs 

Judo-.  4.  21.  Sisera  was,/',  asleep  und  weary 
15.  13.  but  wc  will  bind  thee/,  and  ileliver  thee 
16. 11.  he  said,  if  lliey  bind  me/,  with  new  ropes 

Jiutk  2. 8.  Boaz  said,  abide  here  /.  by  my  maidens 
21.  Uoaz  said  to  me,  keep/,  by  my  young  men 

.Job  38.  3d.  when  the  clods  cleave  /.  t05;etlier 

Psal.  65.  6.  his  strength  setteth/.  the  mountains 
33.  9.  he  commanded  and  it  stood/. 

Prov.  4.  13.  take/,  hold  of  instruction,  keep  her 

Jer.  48. 16.  the  alHiction  of  Moab  hastetli/. 
.50.  33.  all  that  look  them  captives  held  them/. 

Junali  1.  5.  he  lay  in  the  ship,  and  was/,  asleep 

Mcls  16.24.  who  made  their  leet/.  in  tile  slocks 

27.  41.  the  forepart  stuck/,  remained  unmoveable 

FAST. 

Fasting  has,  in  all  ages,  and  among  all  nations, 
been  an  ei-crcisc  much  in  use  in  times  uf  mourn- 
ing, sorrow,  and  afflictions.  The  sense  of  it  is 
in  some  sort  inspired  by  nature,  which,  in  these 
circumstances,  denies  itself  nourishment,  and 
takes  off  the  edge  of  hunger.  There  is  no  ex- 
ample of  fasting,  pr-perly  so  called,  to  be  seen 
before  Moses;  yet  tt  is  presunicabU  that  the 
patriarchs  fasted,  since  we  see  that  there  were 
very  great  viournings  among  them,  and  those 
too  very  particularly  decribed,  such  as  that  of 
Abraham  for  Sarali,  Gen.  23.  2.  and  that  of 
Jacob  for  his  sun  .losepli.  Gen.  37.  34. 

Moses  enjoins  no  particular  (asl  in  his  Jive  books, 
excepting  that  upon  Ike  solemn  day  of  expia- 
tion, which  was  gem-rally  and  strictly  observ- 
ed. Lev.  23.  27," 29,  t^n  the  tenth  day  of  this 
seventh  month,  ye  shall  alHict  your  souls;  thai 
is,  Ve  shall  humble  yourselves  deeply  before 
(Jod,  both  inwardly  by  godly  sorroic,  judging 
and  loathing  yourselves;  and  outwardly,  by 
fasting  and  abstinence  from  all  carnal  com- 
forts anil  delights,  ^incs  the  time  of  Moses, 
examples  of  fasting  have  been  very  common 
among  the  Jews.  Joshua  and  the  elders  of  Is- 
rael remained  prostrate  before  the  ark  from 
morning  until  evening,  without  eating,  after 
the  Israelites  were  defeated  by  the  men  of  Ai, 
^osh.  7.  6.  The  eleven  tribes  which  had  taken 
arms  against  that  of  Benjamin,  seeing  they 
could  not  hold  out  against  the  inhabitants  of 
Gibeah,  fell  down  before  the  ark  upon  their 
faces,  and  so  continued  till  the  evening  with- 
out eating,  Judg.  20.  2(>.  The  Israelites  per- 
ceiving themselves  to  be  premised  by  the  Philis- 
tines, assembled  before  the  J.ord  at  Mizpeh. 
and  fasted  in  his  presence  till  the  evening, 
1  Sam.  7.  6.  Mnd  l):i\'ul  fasted  while  thefrst 
child  he  had  by  Batb-sheba,  the  wife  of  Uriah, 
icas  sick,  2  Sam.  12.  10. 

Moaea  fasted  forty  days  on  mount  Horeb,  Eiod. 
34.  28.  Elijah  passed  as  many  dims  without 
eating  any  thing,  1  Kings  19.  8.  ./ind  our 
Saviourfasted.inthc  wildvm^s  forty  day  s  and 
forty  nights,  Mat.  4.2.  These  fasts  were  mira- 
culous, and  out  of  the  common  rules  of  nature. 

The  very  heathens,  themselves,  sometimes  fasted; 
and  the  king  of  Nineveh,  terrified  by  Jonah's 
preaching,  made  an  order,  that  not  only  men, 
but  beasts  also,  should  continue  without  eating 
or  drinking ;  that  both  men  and  beasts  should 
be  covered  with  sackcloth,  and  each  after  their 
manner  should  cry  unto  the  J.ord,  Jon.  3.  6, 7,8. 
The  Jews,  in  times  of  public  calamity,  made 
even  the  children  at  the  breast  fast,  Joel  2. 16. 

It  docs  net  appear  by  our  .Saviour's  own  practice, 
or  any  commands  that  he  gave  to  his  disciples, 
that  he  instituted  any  particular  fasts,  or  en- 
joined any  to  be  kept  out  of  pure  devotion.  Hut 
when  the  Pharisees  in  the  way  nf  reproach  told 
him,  that  his  disciples  did  not  fast  so  often  as 
their's,  or  John  the  Baptist's,  he  replied,  Can 
ye  make  the  children  of  the  bride-chamber 
fast,  while  the  bridegroom  is  with  them  ?  but 
the  days  will  rome,  when  the  bridegroom  shall 
he  taken  away  from  iliom,  and  then  shall  they 
fast  in  those  days,  I.ukr  5.  33,  34,  35.  that  i.->. 
Fasting  is  a  duty  fitted  lo  a  day  of  mourning 
and  affiction:  it  is  not  yet  a  time  of  mourning 
to  my  disciples. -while  I  nm  bodily  present  with 
them;  yc<  the  time  shall  come  when  I  shall  be 


FAS 

taken  from  them,  as  to  my  bodily  presence;  and 
wlien  they  shall  meet  with  many  troubles  und 
calamities,  then  it  will  be  seasonable  fur  them 
to  perform  this  duty  of  iasUns-  Jlccordingly 
the  life  of  the  apostles  and  first  believers  was  a 
life  of  self-denial,  if  sufferings,  austerities, 
and  fasting,  as  appears  from  the  life  of  the 
apostle  Paul,  2  Cor.  6.  4,5.  111.27.  p'asting  i> 
likewise  confirmed  by  our  Saviour's  discxiursd 
on  the  mount,  though  not  as  a  stated,  yet  us  an 
occasional  duty  of  Christians,  in  ordir  to,  and 
as  an  indication  of,  their  humbling  their  souJt 
for  their  sins,  or  under  the  afflicting  hand  of 
(rod.  Mat.  6. 16.  Where  our  .Saviour  requires 
that  this  duty  be  performed  in  sincerity,  and 
not  in  hypocrisy ;  for  the  glory  of  (lod,  not 
for  ostentation  and  appearance  unto  men. 
2  .Sam.  12.  f  16.  David  fasted  a/,  and  lay  on  earth 

1  Kings  21.9.  proclaim  a/,  and  set  Nabolh  on  high 

12.  they  jiroclaimcd  a/,  and  set  Naboth  on  high 
'iChron.  2U.  3.  Jelioshaphat  proclaimed  a/. 
F.zra  8.21.  Ezra  proclaimed  a/,  at  the  river  Ahava 
Isa.  58.  3.  in  the  day  of  your/,  you  find  pleasure 

5.  isit  such/.  I  have  chosen?  wilt  thou  call  this/. 

6.  is  not  this  the/,  that  I  have  chosen  7 

•/(.-.  36.  9.  they  proclaimed  a/,  before  the  Lord 
Jul  I  1.  14.  sanctify  a/,  call  an  assemblVj  2.  15. 
Jonah  3.  .5.  the  people  of  Nineveh  preclaimcd  a  /. 
Zech.  8. 19.  the  /.  of  the  fourth  month,  of  the  fiftli, 
seventh,  and  tenth  months,  be  joy  and  gladne«i 
.Ids  27.  9.  because  the/,  was  now  already  past 
FAST,  Verb. 

2  Sam.  12.  21.  thou  didst/,  and  weep  for  the  child 
23.  but  now  he  is  dead,  wherefore  should  I  /.  ? 

F.sth.  4.  16./.  ye  for  me,  I  and  my  maidens  will  /. 
Isa.  53.4.  ye/,  for  strife,  ye  shall  not/,  as  ye  do 
Jer.  14. 12.  when  they/.  I  will  not  hear  their  cry 
'/.eck.  7.  5.  did  ye  at  nil  /.  unto  me,  even  to  me  ? 
Aliit.  6. 16.  when  ye/,  he  not  as  hypocrite.^  of  a  sad 
Countenance,  that  they  may  appear  to  men  to/. 

18.  thou  appear  not  to  men  lo/Jbut  to  thy  Father 
9.  14.  why  do  we/,  disciples/'  not,  Mark  2. 18. 

15.  then  shall  they/.  Mark  2.  20.  Luke  5.  35. 
Mark  2.  18.  the  disciples  of  John  used  to/. 

19.  can  children  of  the  bride-cliainber  /.  while 
bridegroom  with  them?  they  cannot/.  Luke5.25. 

I.vke  5.33.  why  do  the  disciples  of  John/,  often  1 
18.  12. 1  /.  twice  in  the  week,  I  give  tithes  of  uU 
FASTED. 
.Judg.  20.  26.  the  people/,  that  day  until  even 

1  Sam.l.  0.  they  drew  water,  and/,  on  that  dav 
31. 13.  buried  them,  and/seven  days,  lCAr.lO.'l2. 

2  Sam.  1. 12.  and  they  mourned  and  /.  for  Saul 
12.  16.  David/.  II  22.  while  the  child  wasalivel/. 

I  Kings  21.  27.  Ahab/.  |1  Ezra  8.  2.3.  so  wc/. 
JVVA.  1.  4.  Nehemiah/.  and  prayed  before  God 
Isa.  58.  3.  why  have  we/,  say  they,  and  secst  not  ? 
Z^cA.7..5.when  ye/,  in  the  fifth  and  seventh  month 
Mat.  A.  2.  Jesus/,  forty  days  arni  forty  nights 
.lets  13.  2.  as  they  ministered  to  the  Lord  and  /. 
3.  when  they  had/,  thrv  laid  their  bands  on  them 
FASTEST. 
..1/at. 6.17.  when  thou/,  anoint  thy  bead,  wash  face 

FASTING. 
Meh.  9. 1.  were  assembled  with/,  and  eackclothes 
F.sth.  4.  3.  whore  the  decree  came,  there  wa.»  f. 
Psal.  35. 13. 1  humbled  my  soul  with/,  and  prayer 

69.10.  when  I  wept  and  chastened  my  soul  with/. 

109.  24.  my  knees  are  weak  thro'/,  my  flesh  fails 
ypr.  36.  0.  read  the  words  of  the  Lord  on  the/,  day 
Don.  6.  18.  then  the  king  passed  the  night  /. 

9.  3.  Daniel  set  himself  lo  seek  by  prayer  and/. 
Jnel  2. 12.  turn  ye  with  /.  weeping,  and  mourning 
Mat.  15.  32.  and  I  will  not  send  them  awav/. 

17.  21.  this  goeth  not  out  but  by  /.  Mark  9.  29. 
.Mark  8.  3.  if  I  send  them  away/,  they  will  faiiit 
./lets  10.  30.  four  days  ago  I  was/,  till  tbisijfciur 

14.23.  had  ordained  elders,  and  had  prayed  with/. 

27.  .33.  this  is  the  fourteenth  day  ye  continued  /. 

1  Cor.  7.  5.  ye  may  give  yourselves  to/,  and  prayer 

FASTINGS. 
F.sth.  9.  31.  the  matters  of  the/,  and  their  cry 
J.uke  2.  37.  Anna  served  God  with/,  and  prayers 

2  Cor.  6.  5.  approving  ourselves  in  stripes,  in/. 
11.  27.  in/,  often,  in  cold  and  nakedness 

FASTEN. 
F.zod.  28.  14.  shall  /.  the  chains  to  the  oucliep,  2.5. 

39.  31.  to/,  the  jilato  on  high  upon  llie  mitre 
Isa.  W.  23.  I  will  /.  him  as  a  nail  in  a  sure  piac« 
Jcr.  10.  4.  they/,  it  with  nails  and  with  l.ammeri 

FASTENED. 
F.zod.  10. 1 19.  and/,  the  locusts  into  the  Red  sea 
39. 18.  the  ends  of  chains  they/,  in  the  two  ouches 

40.  18.  Moses/,  his  sockets,  set  up  the  boards 
.Jttig.  4.  21.  Jael/.  the  nail  into  the  ground 

16.  14.  Delilah/,  it  with  a  pin,  ami  said  to  him 

1  Sam.  31.  10.  they/.  Saul's  body  to  the  wall 

2  Sam.  20. 8.  with  a  sword  /.  upon  his  loins  i  n  sheath 
1  Kings  6.  6.  that  tiic  beams  should  not  be/. 

1  Chron.  10. 10.  /.  his  head  in  the  temple  of  Dagon 


FAT 

"  Chron.  9.  '8.  six  steps  were/,  to  the  ihroriE 
Eit/i.  1.  tJ.  Iiangiiigs/.  with  corils  olline  Imeii 
Job  3d.  Ij.  nhur^ui)on  are  the  fouiidaiioiis/. 
i'.ccl.  lO.ll.  as  nails/,  by  the  iimsters  of  assemblies 
Jsa.  "ii.  ■-'>.  the  nail  that  is/,  in  the  sure  place 
41.7./.  it  wiiji  nails  that  it  should  not  be  moved 
K:ck.  40.43.  and  within  were  hooks/,  round  about 
J.ukc  4.  'JU.  and  the  eyes  of  all  were/,  on  him 
yicl.i  H.  0.  upon  the  which  when  1  had/,  mine  eyes 
■-3.  3.  came  a  viper  out  ol" heat  and/,  on  his  hand 

FASTEN  UN  G. 
Hab.  2.  til.  the/,  of  the  timber  shall  answer  it 
Mcts  3.4.Peter/.his  eyes  upon  hini,saiil,  look  on  us 

FAT. 
God  forbade  the  Hebrews  to  eat  tlicfat  of  beasts, 
Lev.  3.  1(5,  17,  All  the  lat  i=  tln»  Lord's.     It 
aliall  be  a  perpetual  statute  for  your   genera- 
tions throughout  ail  your  dwellings,  that  ye  eat 
neither  fat  nor  blood.     Some  interpreters  take 
thist  words  in  all  the  rigour  of  the  Utter,  and 
suppose  the  use  of  fat  as  well  as  blood  to  be 
entirely  forbidden  the  Jews.     Joseplius  says, 
that  iiloMS  forbids  only  the  fat  of  oten,  goats, 
sheep,  and  of  their  species,  which  agrees  with 
the  law  in  Lev.  7.  23,  Ye  shall  eat  no  manner 
of  fatof  o.'i,  or  of  sheep,  or  of  goat.  The  modern 
Jews  observe  this  custom ;  and  with  respect  to 
the  fat  of  every  other  sort  of  clean  creature, 
they  think  it  is  allowed  t.hein,eaen  that  of  beasts 
'which  haoe  died  of  themselves ;  this  is  con- 
formable to  that  other  law.  Lev.  7. 24,  And  the 
fat  of  the  beast  that  dieth  of  itself,  and  the  fat 
of  that  wliich  is  torn  with  beasts,  may  be  used 
in  any  other  use. 
But  other  interpreters  maintain,  that  the  law 
which  seems  to  forbid  generally  the  use  o/fat, 
IS  to  be  restrained  to  fat  separated  from  the 
flesh,  such  as  that  wliich  covers  the  kidneys 
and  intestines ;  and  thiii  only  in  the  case  of 
its  being  actually  offered  in  sacrifice;  which 
i.t  confirmed  bf  this  passage  in    Lev.  7.  25, 
Who.-oever  eateth  of  the  fat  of  the  beast,  of 
which  men  offer  an  offering  made  by  fire  un;o 
the  Lord,  even  the  soul  that  catelli  it,  shall  be 
cut  olf  fiom  his  people. 
The  word  fat  in  the  Hebrew  style  signifies  not 
only  Uiat  of  beasts,  but  every  thing  likewise 
vhich  1  dates  to  it  in  other  things,  as  in  Psal. 
147.14,  He  tilleth  thee  with  the  linest  of  the 
wheat,  in  Hebrew,  with  the  fat  of  wheat.  Jind 
in  Psal.  HI.  16,  He  should  have  fed  thoin  with 
the  fat  of  wheat.     Fat  is  also  used  sometimes 
for  the  source  or  cause  of  compassion  or  mercy. 
Jis  the  biiwls  are  stirred  at  the  recital  of  any 
great  colmnity ;  oral  the  view  of  some  melan- 
choly and  afflicted  object,  it  hjs  been  thought 
that  fenstbtUty  resided  principally  in  the  bow- 
els, which  are  commonly  loaded  with  fat.    Thr 
Psahnist  upbraids   the   wicked  with  being  n 
closiid  in  their  fat,  with  having  shut  up  their 
bowels  against  him,  with  being  in  no  sort  af^ 
feclcd  with  compassion  at  the  sight  of  his  ex- 
treme, grief.    Psal.  17.  10,  Mine  enemies  com- 
pass me  about,  they  are  inclosed  in  their  own 
fat.     .4nd  III  Psal.  ll!l.  71),  Their  heart  is  as  fat 
(9greagc.      Thry  are  stupid,  and  insensible, 
and  past  feeling;  they  are  not  affected  eithe. 
with  the  terrors  or  comforts  of  (rod. 
Fat  denotes  abundance  of  spiritual  blessings, 
Jer.31.  14,  I  willsatiate  Ihesouls  of  Ihc.  prwsfs 
with  f:itne.«.      Psal.  63.  5,  My  fioul  shall  hi' 
«  itisficd  as  with  marrow  and  fatness.     The  fat 
of  the  earth  implies  the  fruitfulness  of  it,  Hen. 
il7.  28,  God  give  thee  of  the  dew  of  heaven, 
and  the  fatness  of  the  earth,  and  plenty  of  corn 
aniterine. 
nen.4.4.  Abel  al-to  brought  of  the/,  of  his  floek 
Ezod.^\.  IH.  nor  shall  the/,  of  my  sacrifice  remain 
89.  13.  thou  shall  take  the  /.  that  coverolh  thr 
inwards,  and  the  /.  upon  the  kidneys,  2-i. 
/,<•(>.  3.  3,  4,  9,  10,  14,  1.5.  I  4.  8.  I  7.  3,  4. 
/,«».  1.8.  priests  shall  lay  head  and  /.  in  order,  12. 
3. 16.  offering  for  a  «wcet  savour,  the/,  is  Lord's 
48.  hesh  ill  take  off  the/,  of  the  bollock,  31,. T). 
2ft.  burn  liis/.fi.  12.  |  7.3,31.  |  17.  tJ,  .Vum. 18.17. 
T  24./.  of  beast  dieth  ofitself.or  is  torn  to  be  used 
itn.  the  f.  with  the  breast,  it  ehill  hn  bring 
33. hn  that  offerelh/.shall  have  the  right  shoulder 
8. 20.  Moses  burnt  lh«  head  and  Ihn/.ofthe  ram 

2fi.  he  took  one  wafer  and  put  Ihem  on  the/. 
9.  10.  but  the  f.  lie  burnt  upon  the  nllar,  20. 
24.  and  fire  from  the  Lord  consnineil  the/, 
in.  2.5.  the/,  of  sin-offering  shall  burn  on  altnr 
Xum.  H.  t  12.  the  f.  of  the  oil  have  I  given  thee 
t2!).  a  hoave  offering  In  the  Lord  of  all  the/. 
/);u«.*2.14./.  of  lamln  with/  ofkidneynofwheat 
Judg.  3.  22.  and  the/.  clo:<eil  upon  the  blade 

+  20.  they  slew  of  Moab  about  10,000  men  nil/. 
1  .'Sam.2.15.  before  they  burnt/,  |>rie*t's«erv.  came 
16.  lot  them  not  fail  to  burn  tlic/.  priwenlly 
1  188 


FAT 

1  .?aHi.l5.22.  to  hearken  is  better  than  the/,  of  rams 
•J  .Slim.  I.  -2.  from/.of  the  mighty,  bow  turned  not 

1  Kings  8.  G4.  altar  was  too  little  to  receive  the  J'. 

2  Chr.  7. 7.  offered  Uie  /.  of  peace-offering,  2'J.  30. 
3J.  14.  priest  busied  in  a|fering  the  /.  until  ni^ht 

Job  1.5.  2?.  he  inaketh  cullops  of  /.  on  his  ttanks 
I'sal.  17.  10.  they  are  inclosed  in  their  own/. 
20.  t3.  the  Lord  make  J',  thy  burnl-sacrilice 
23.  i  3.  tliou  makest/.  iiiy  head  uilli  oil 
73.  t  4.  but  their  strcngtli  is/,  no  bands  in  death 
81. 1 10.  he  should  have  fed  llieiii  also  with  tin/. 
of  wl^eat,  with  honey  out  of  rock,  147.  j  l-l- 
Jsa.  1.  II.  I  uiii  full  of  the/,  of  It'd  beasts 
34.  0.  made/,  with  the/,  of  the  kidneys  of  rams 
43.24.  nor  bast  filled  me  with/,  of  thy  sacrilict-s 
Ezek.  44.  7.  when  ye  offer  the/,  and  the  blood 
10.  shall  stand  to  otVer  to  me  the  /.  and  the  blood 
Kat  FAT. 
Gen.  45.  18.  and  ye  shall  eat  the/,  of  the  land 
y^ei;.3.17. a  statute  thatyo  cat  no/,  nor  blood,  7.2;i. 
7.25.  whosocutttA/.  of  the  beast  shall  be  cut  off 
J)eut.  32.  38.  which  did  eat  the/,  of  their  sacrifices 
A'eh.  6. 10.  go  your  way,  eat  the/,  and  drink  sweet 
Kzek.  34.  3.  ye  eatf.  and  clothe  you  with  the  wool 
39.  IS),  ye  shall  cat  f.  till  ye  be  full  and  drink 

blood 
Zcch.  11.  16.  but  he  shall  eat  the  flesh  of  the/. 

FAT. 
Ocn.  41.  2.  there  came  up  seven  kine/.  fleshed 
4.  and  they  did  eat  up  the  seven/,  kine,  20. 
t  5.  seven  earsof  corn  came  uj)/.  and  good,  t7. 
4'J.  20.  out  of  As;her  his  bread  shall  be/. 
JVu)«.  13.  20.  wliiit  the  land  is,  whether/,  or  lean 
/Jeut.'il.  20.  wa.\eii/.  then  tlic^  turn  to  other  gods 
32.15.Jeshurun  waxed/  and  kieked,lliou  wa.\eii/. 
Judg.  3.  17.  and  Eglon  was  a  very/,  man 
1  .Sam.  2.  2'.).  to  make  you  /.  with  the  offerings 
28.24.  the  woman  had  a/,  calf  in  the  house 
1  Kings  1.  9.  Adonijah  slew  sheep,/,  cattle,  19,  25. 
4.  23.  his  provision  for  one  day  was  ten/.  o.\en 
1  CA?-o«.  4.40.  and  tln^y  found/,  pasture  and  good 
jWA.  9.  25.  they  took  a/,  land  and  became/. 

35.  have  not  served  thee  in  the  la  go  and  /.  land 
/'«u/.22.29.that  bo/,  on  earth  shall  eat  and  worship 
37.  20.  the  enemies  of  the  Lord  as  the  /.  of  lambs 
92.  14.  they  shall  be/,  and  fionrisbin," 
1 19.  70.  their  heart  as/,  as  grease,  1  delight  in  law 
Prov.  11.  25.  the  liberal  soul  shall  be  made/. 
13.  4.  the  soul  <d"the  diligent  shall  be  made/. 
15.  30.  a  good  report  makeili  the  bones/. 
28.2.5.  helhattrusleib  in  the  Lord  shall  be  made/. 
/su.5.17.  waste  places  of/,  ones  shall  strangers  eat 
6. 10.  make  the  heart  of  this  people/,  ears  heavy 
10.  l(j.  Lord  shall  send  among  his/,  ones  leanness 
25.  <i.  make  a  feast  of/,  things  full  of  marrow 
28.  1.  which  arc  on  the  head  of  the/,  valleys 
4.  the  beauty  which  is  on  the  head  of  the/,  valley 
,30.  23.  and  bread  shall  be/,  and  plenteous 
34.0.  the  sword  of  the  Lord  is  made /.with  fatness 
7.  and  their  dust  shall  be  made/,  with  fatness 
58.  11.  and  the  Lord  shall  make/,  thy  bones 
./(•r.  ,5.  28.  they  are  wa.ten/.  they  shine 
.50.  II.  ye  are  grown/,  as  the  heifer  at  grass 
£2e/i.34.14.  in  a/,  jiasture  sliall  they  feed,  in  Israel 
10.  but  I  will  destroy  the/,  and  the  strong 
20.  I  will  judge  between  llie/.catllc  and  the  loan 
45.  15.  one  lamb  out  of  the/,  pastures  of  Israel 
.^mos  5.22.  nor  will  I  regard  the  offering  of/.beasts 
Hab.  1.  IG.  because  by  them  their  portion  is/. 

FATHEll. 
This  word,  besides  the  common  acceptation  of  it 
for  an  immediate  father, is  likewise  taken  iii  the 
scripture  stylefor  firaud-fathcr,great(iriind- 
father,  or,  the  very  author  and  first  father  of 
a  family,  how  remote  soever  he  may  be  from 
those  who  speak.  For  ciamplc,  the  Jews  i» 
our  Saviour's  lime,  and  Uieir  descendants  of 
this  present  generation,  call  themselves  sons 
of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob.  .4;i<Z  Nebu- 
chadnezzar is  termed  llelsha/.zar's /utAcr,  tho' 
ISelshazzar  was  his  grand-son. 
By  Father  ii  likewise  Understand  the  inventor, 
the  master  oT  those  who  are  of  a  certain  pro- 
fession. Gen.  4.  20,  21,  22.  ./n/xii  was  the  fa- 
ther of  such  ns  dwell  in  tents,  and  such  as  have 
cattle.  Jubat  was  the  father  of  all  such  as  bun- 
dle the  harp  and  organ.  Thr  fninoiis  foundir 
o/Tyrc,  Hiiram,  is  called  r/ic  father  o/  the  king 
of  Tyre,  ^  Chron.  2.  13.  and  even  o/S<domoii, 
2  Chron.  4.  Ifi.  because  hr  was  thrir  principal 
workman,  and  the  chief  director  of  their  under 
takings.  Thr  principal,  the  ildest  of  thr  pro- 
phets, were  considrrrd  as  the  masters  and 
fathers  of  the  rest,  who  were  Ihrir  itisriplts  ; 
for  this  reason  the  young  prophris  are  railed 
the  sons  of  tho  propiiets,  and  these  style  thr 
eldest,  fathers.  My  father,  mv  faihcr,  J»<ir'/ 
Elishii  to  Elijah,  the'  chariot  tif  Israrl,  and  the 
horseiiicn  thi'reof,  2  King>i  2.  12. 
Father  ix  a  term  of  respect  which  inferiors  often 


FAT 

give  to  their  sitperiurs,  and  scivants  to  their 
masters;  My  I'atlior,  sj/ii  Naamuii's  servants 
to  their  master,  2  kii.gs  5.  13.  'J'he  king  of 
Israel, !»(  like  manner  called  the  prop  hit  EUsUi^ 
his  father,  2  Kings  6.  21,  My  fathir,  shall  I 
smite  them  1  jivd  the  sameproplul  being  upon 
his  death-bed,  iiiixiU  cane  to  see  him,  and  said, 
O  my  father,  my  lather,  the  chariot  ol'  Israel, 
and  the  horsemen  thereof,  2  Kings  13.  14. 
.1  man  is  said  to  be  a  father  to  the  poor  and  or- 
phans, when  he  takes  care  to  supply  their  ne- 
cessities, is  affected  with  their  misiriis,  and 
provides  for  their  wants ;  I  w  us  a  fullier  to  the 
j)Oor,  .Job  29.  16.  Cod  declares  hiniSilf  to  b« 
a  Father  of  the  fatherless,  and  a  Judge  of  the 
widow,  Psal.  G8.  5. 

O'ad  is  frequently  called  heavenly  Father,  and 
simply  Father.  JUe  is  truly  and  emintnlly  the 
Father,  Creator,  Preserver,  and  Protector,  of 
all  creatures,  and  principally  of  those  who  call 
upon  him,  who  know  and  serve  him.  Is  lie  not 
thy  Father  that  bought  thee?  i^ifut.  32. 6.  Hath 
he  not  made  thee,  and  established  thee  ?  Jlnd 
through  Christ,  who  has  merited  adoption  and 
filiation  for  his  people,  every  believer  has  a 
right  to  cull  God  Father,  Pom.  8.  15,  16. 

Job  euiillcs  (rod  the  Father  of  rain,  Job  38.  28. 
He  produces  it,  he  makes  it  to  fall,  jind  in 
chap.  17.  14,  I  have  said  to  corruption,  Thou 
art  iny  father.  /  acknowledge  that  I  am  sprung 
out  of  corruption,  and  shall  rctui-n  to  llie  pu- 
trefaction of  the  grave ;  or,  in  the  condition 
which  I  am  reduced  to,  J  look  upon  worms  and 
piitrefaetion  as  my  friends  and  relations. 

Josejih  says,  that  God  had  made  him  a  father  to 
Pharaoli,  Gen.  45.  8.  that  he  had  given  him 
very  great  authority  in  this  prince's  kingdom, 
and  that  Pharaoh  looked  upon  him  as  his  fa- 
ther, and  had  so  much  confidence  in  him,  and 
consideration  for  his  person,  that  he  gave  him 
the  government  of  his  house  and  of  all  his 
dominions. 

The  Devil  is  called  the  father  of  the  wicked;  Ye 
are  of  your  faihcr  the  devil,  says  our  Saviour, 
John  6.  44.  Ye  would  imitate  the  desires  of 
your  fathir ;  he  was  a  murderer  from  the  be- 
ginning, he  abode  not  in  the  truth.  He  is  a 
liar,  and  the  father  of  it;  he  u  a  falsifier,  a 
deceiver,  a  seducer.  He  deceived  E\e  and 
Adam;  he  introduced  sin  and  falsehood  into 
the  world:  He  inspires  his  follotci-rs  with  his 
spirit  and  sentiments ;  he  kieps  the  school  of 
fraud  and  deceit;  his  only  business  is  to 
tempt  and  ensnare  mankind.  f 

To  be  guthercd  unto  their  fathers  ;  To  sleep  with 
their  fathers;  To  go  to  their  fathers,  are  com- 
vibn  expressions,  to  signify  death.  Jn  these 
passages,  the  fathers  signify  those  who  lived 
before  us,  and  whom  we  arc  going  to  meet 
again  in  another  world. 

God  is  called  the  Father  of  spirits,  Jfeb.  12.  0. 
Our  fathers  are  the  fatlirrs  of  our  bodies  only, 
but  God  is  the  father  of  our  .vpirils  ;  he  not 
only  creates  them,  but  he  justifies  them  like- 
wise, glorifies,  and  makes  them  happy.  Our 
Saviour,  in  Mat.  23.  9,  forbids  us  to  give  any 
man  the  name  of  faihcr,  because  we  have  one 
only  who  is  in  heaven.  J^''ot  that  we  should 
abandon  or  di  spise  our  earthly  fathers;  God 
requires  us  to  honour  them,  and  give  them  all 
necessary  assi.^lance  ;  but  when  the  interests 
of  God  are  at  stake,  his  glory,  or  our  own 
salvation,  if  onr  fathers  and  wothirs  are  on 
obstacle  to  them,  we  should  say  to  them.  We 
know  you  not:  For  what  our  parents  hare 
done  for  us,  in  comparison  of  nhal  we  owe  to 
God,  is  so  inconsiderable,  that  we  may  soy, 
our  fathers  are  nothing  to  us,  and  that  God 
alone  deserves  the  title  of  our  Fiillier. 

(?cn.  4.  20.  Jabal  was/,  of  such  ns  dwell  in  tenti 
21.  Jiibal  was  the/,  of  all  such  as  hiindlc  hnip 
9.18.  went  out  of  ark,  and  Ham  is  llio/of  Canaan 
17.  4.1)0  the/,  of  many  nnlionn,  5.  Horn.  4.  17,18. 
44.19.  have  ye  a/.?||  20.  and  wegnid,  we  have  a/ 
45.8. (Jod  niaile  nie/.to  Plinrnoii,  lord  of  his  hou^e 

/,/•»'.  24. 10.  wiiiise/.wns  nn  Egvi'l'"".  he  went  nut 

A'um.  11.  12.  as  a  iiiirsing/.  beaieth  sucking  child 
30.  10.  are  staliiles  between/,  and  his  dniightcr 

I)rnl.  22.  15./.  shall  briiis  forth  tokens  of  virginity 
20.1  be  nmnshalIgivolliednniser«/.  fiflynhekols 

./Mf/i'.O.l.  the  fnmily  oftlip  house  of  his  mother's/. 
I7.10.dwell  with  mc,  nnd  be  to  nie  n/.iind  a  priest 
18. 19.  go  with  us,  ond  lir  to  us  n  f.  nnd  n  priest 
19.  3.  the  /'.  of  ihc  dnnisel  saw  liiin,  he  rejoiced 
4.  damsel's/,  retninod  him,  he  abode  Ihrei-  dnyt 

1  Snm.  9.  .3.  nnil  Kish  wns  the  f.  of  Paul,  14.  51 

I  Chron.  2.  51.  Palem  the/,  of  Petb-leh.Mn 

.55.  of  Hemiilh,  the/,  of  the  house  of  Rerh&» 
4.  14.  Joiil)  the/,  of  the  valley  ol  Clintnshim 
8.  21).  ut  Gibcon  dwelt  tho/.  of  Gibeon,  9.  3^ 


FAT 

Esth.  2  7.  Esther  hnJ  neither/,  nor  motner 
Job  "J.  ]6. 1  was  a/,  to  the  poor,  und  searched  out 

31.  Id.  hi>  was  brouglit  up  with  uie,  33  with  a/. 

aS.Sci.  hath  the  rain  a/.  ?  or  who  begat  the  dew  ? 
Ps.Crf.S./.  ol  latherleas,  and  judge  of  widows,  is  G. 

103. 13.  as  a/,  pitieth  his  children,  so  Lord  pities 
Pruu.'i.li.  the  Lord  correcteth,  even  as  a/,  tlie  son 

4.  1.  hear,  ye  cliildren,  the  instruction  of  a/. 

10   1.  a  wise  son  maketh  a  glad/.  15.  20. 

17.  'i\.  and  the/,  of  a  fool  h.ith  no  joy 

23  24  the/,  o!  the  righteous  shall  rejoice 
Isa.  9  <).  his  name  .shall  be  called  the  everlasting  F. 

iW.21  .Eliakim  shall  be  a/.to  inh^)itaiit3  of  Jerus. 

3a.  19.  the/,  to  child,  shall  niakeknown  thy  truth 
Jer.  ;)1.  9.  1  will  lead  them,  for  I  am  a/,  to  Israel 
Ezclc.lSA.  as  the  soul  of  ihe/.soof  iheson,  is  mine 

19.  doth  not  the  son  bear  the  ini<|uity  of  the/  ? 

20.  the  eon  shall  not  bear  the  inicjuity  of  the/. 
2-2.  7.  in  thee  they  set  light  by/,  ami  mother 
44. 2.5.  for/,  or  mother  they  may  defile  themselves 

Mic.  7.  6.  for  the  son  dishonoureth  the/. 

Mai.  1.6.  if  1  then  be  a/,  where  is  mine  honour? 

2. 10.  have  we  not  all  one/.  ?  one  God  created  us  1 

Mat.  10.  21./  deliver  up  the  child,  Mark  13.  12. 

37.  he  that  lovelh/.  or  mother  more  than  me 

11.25.  Jesus  said,  1  thank  thee,  O  i^Lord  ofhcav. 

25.  so  F.  itseemed good,  jMke  10.21.  John  11.41. 
27.  and  no  man  knoweth  the  Son  hut  the  F. 

15.  4.  he  that  curseth  /.  let  him  die,  Mark  7.  10. 
19.  5.  leave/,  and  mother,  and  cleave  to  his  wife 

29.  every  one  that  hath  forsaken  /.  mother,  or 

wife,  for  my  name's  sake,  Mark  10.  20. 
28.  19.  baptizing  them  in  the  name  of  the  F. 
Mark  b.  40.  he  taketh/.  of  the  damsel,  /yiikcS.  51. 
9.  24.  the/,  of  the  child  cried.  Lord,  1  believe 
13.  32.  of  that  day  knoweth  no  man,  but  the  F. 
14.36.  Abba,  F.  all  things  are  possible  to  thee 
15.  21.  Simon,/,  of  Alexander,  to  bear  his  cross 
Luke  IU.22.no  man  knows  who  the  Kisbut  the  Son 
11. 11.  if  a  son  shall  ask-tread  of  any  tliat  is  a/. 
12.53.  the/  shall  be  divided  against  the  son,  and 
the  son  against  the/,  mother  against  daughter 

15.  21.  sun  said,/.  I  have  sinned  against  heaven 

22.  the/,  said,  bring  forth  the  best  robe 

16.  27.  I  pray  thee,  /.  send  to  my  father's  house 
22. 42.  F.  if  thou  bo  willing,  remove  this  cup  from 
23.  34.  F.  forgive  them,  for  they  know  not 

46.  F.  into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit 
Jo/in  1.14.thegloiy  asof theonlybegotten  oftliei''. 
lb.  the  Son  which  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  F. 
35.  the  F.  loveth  the  Son,  and  hath  given,  5.  20. 

4.  21.  nor  yet  at  Jerusalem  worship  the  F. 

23.  shall  worship  the  F.  in  spirit  and  in  truth 
53.  the/,  knew  that  it  was  at  thfe  same  hour 

5.  19.  do  nothing  but  what  he  seeth  the  F.  do 

21.  for  as  the  F.  raiseth  up  the  dead,  so  the  Son 

22.  F.  judgeth  no  man,  but  hath  committed  all 

'     23.  honour  the  Son,even  as  they  honour  the  F.  he 
that  honours  not  the  Son,  honours  not  the  F. 

26.  for  as  the  F.  hath  life  in  himsclf,si)  hath  given 

30.  I  seek  not  mine  own,  hut  the  will  of  the  F. 

36.  for  the  works  which  the  F.  hath  given  me 

bear  witness  that  the  F.  hath  sent  me 

37.  the  f. which  hath  sent  me, hath  borne  witness 

of  me,  9.  16.  \  12.  49.  |  14.  24.  1  .Ufin  4.  14. 
4").  think  not  ihat  I  will  accuse  vou  to  the  F. 

6.  27.  for  him  hath  God  the  F.  sealed 

37.  all  that  the  F.  giveth  me  shall  come  to  me 
39.  and  this  is  the  K's  will,  that  I  lose  nothing 
42.is  notthis  Jesiis,whose/.and  mother  we  know 
44.  no  man  can  come,  except  the  F.  draw  him 
4.1.  that  hath  learned  of  the  F.  cometh  to  me 
46.  not  that  any  hath  seen  the  F.  he  halhseen  F. 
HT.  as  the  F.  hath  sent  me,  and  I  live  by  the  F. 

8.  16.  I  am  not  alone,  but  I  and  the  ii'.  that  sent  me 

15.  the  F.  that  sent  me  beareth  witness  of  me 

27.  thev  understood  not  he  spake  to  them  of  F. 
29.  F.  hnih  not  left  me  alone,  I  do  those  things 
41.  then  said  they,  we  have  one  F.  even  God 
44.  the  devil  is  a  liar,  and  the/,  of  it 

10.15.  as  the  F.  knoweth  me,even  so  know  I  the  F. 
36.  say  ye  of  him  whom  the  F.  hath  sanctified 

38.  believe  that  the  F.  is  in  me,  and  ?  in  him 
12.27.  what  shall  I  say?  F  save,  me  from  this  hour 

28.  F.  glorify  thy  name ;  then  came  there  a  voice 
."iO.  even  as  the  F.  said  niito  mo,  so  I  speak 

13.1.Jesus  knew  that  he  should  depart  unto  the  F. 
X  knowing  that  the  F.  had  given  all  things 
14. 6.  Jesus  sailh  to  him,  [  am  the  way,  truth,  and 
life,  no  man  cometh  to  the  F.  hut  by  me 

8.  Lord,  shew  us  the  F.  and  it  sufficeth  us 

9.  Philip,  he  Ihat  hath  seen  me,  hath  seen  the  F. 
11.  that  I  am  in  the  F.  and  the  F.  in  me,  17.  21. 
13.  that  the  F.  may  be  glorified  In  the  Son 

16.  and  [  will  pray  the  F.  for  you,  16.  26. 
26.  but  the  Comforter  whom  the  F.  will  send 
31. 1  love  the  F.asthe  F.  gave  ine  commandment 
.*).  9.  asthe  F.  hath  loved  me,  so  have  I  loved  you" 
'C.  tliat  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  of  the  F.  in  my 

Dame,  he  may  give  it  you,  16.  23. 
189 


FAT 

John  15.  26.  the  Comforter  whom  I  will  send  you 
fr.  the  F.  the  Spirit  who  proceedeth  from  the  F. 

16.  3.  because  they  have  not  known  the  F.  uor  me 

15.  all  things  that  the  F.  hatir,  are  mine 

16.  ye  shall  see  me,  because  I  go  to  the  F.  17.; 
25.  but  I  shall  shew  you  plainly  of  the  F. 

27.  the  F.  loveth  you,  because  ye  have  loved  me 

23.  I  came  forth  from  the  F.  and  go  to  the  F. 
32.  I  am  not  alone,  because  the  F.  is  with  me 

17.  1.  F.  the  hour  is  come,  glorify  thy  Son 

5.  O  F.  glorify  thou  me  with  thine  own  self 

11.  Holy  /'.  keep  those  whom  thou  hastgiven  me 

24.  F.  1  will  that  they  given  me  be  where  I  am 

25.  O  righteous  F.the  world  hath  not  known  thee 
jJcts  1.  4.  but  wait  for  the  promise  of  the  F. 

7.  the  seasons,  the  F.  hath  put  in  his  own  power 

2.33.receivcd  of  the  /'.the  promise  of  the  H.  Ghost 

Rom.  4. 11.  he  might  be/,  of  all  then)  that  believe 

12. and  the/.of  circumcision  to  them  who  are  not 

16.  the  faith  of  Abraham,  who  is  the/,  of  us  all 

6.  4.  as  Christ  was  raised  from  the  dead  by  the  F. 
8.15.  Spirit  of  adoption,  whereby  we  cry,  Abba,F. 
11.28.  as  to  election,  are  beloved  for  F.'s  sake 
15.  6.  may  glorify  God  the  F.  of  our  Lord  Jesus 

Christ,  2  Co?-.  1.  3. 1  11.31.  £;)A.  1.3.  lf'fM.3. 

1  Cor.  8.  6.  but  to  us  there  is  but  one  God,  the  F. 
15  24. have  delivered  up  the  kingdom  to  God  theF. 

2  Cor.  1.  3.  F.  of  mercies,  thj^God  of  all  comfort 
6. 18.  I  will  be  a  F.  unto  you,  ye  shall  be  my  sons 

Gal.  1.  1.  Paul  an  apostle  by  Jes.  C.  and  G.  the  F. 

3.  and  peace  from  G.  the /•'.  2'rim.  1.2.  7'iM.4. 

4.  according  to  the  will  of  God  and  our  F. 
4.  2.  until  the  time  appointed  of  the  F 

6.  sent  Spirit  into  your  hearts,  crying,  Abba  F. 
Eph.  1. 17.  the  God  of  our  L.  Jesus  the  F.  of  glory 

2. 18.  by  him  have  access  by  one  Spirit  to  the  F. 

3.  14.  for  this  cause  I  bow  my  knees  unto  the  F. 

4.  6.  one  God  and  F.  of  all,  who  is  above  all 
5.20.  giving  thanks  to  the  F.  Col.  1.3,  12.  ]  3. 17. 
6. 23.  and  love  with  faith  from  God  the  F.and  Jes. 

Phil.  2.  11.  that  Jisus  is  Lord  to  the  glory  of  the  F. 
22.  as  a  son  with  the/,  he  hath  served  with  nie 
Col:  1.  19.  itjileased  F.  that  in  him  all  fulness  dwell 
2.  2.  the  acknowledgment  of  the  mystery  of  the  F. 
1  TItess. l.l.  unto  thechurch  which  is  in  God  the  F. 

2.  11.  we  charged  you,  as  a/,  doth  his  children 
1  Tim.  5.  1.  rebuke  not  an  elder,  entreat  him  as  a/. 
Hcb.1.5.  will  be  to  him  a  F.  he  shall  be  to  me  a  Son 

7.  3.  Melchisedec  without/,  without  mother 
12.  7.  what  son  is  he  whom  the  F.  chastenelh  not? 

9.  be  in  subjection  to  the  F.  of  spirits  and  live 

Jam.  1. 17.  every  "pod  gift  cometh  from  F.  of  lights 

27.  pure  and  unoelileil  religion  before  God  and  F. 

3.  9.  therewith  bless  we  God,  even  the  F. 

1  Pet.  1.  2.  to  the  foreknowledge  of  God  the  F. 

17.  if  ye  call  on  the  F.  who  judgeth  man's  work 

2  Pet.  1.  17.  he  received  from  God  the  F.  honour 

1  .fohn  1. 2.  we  shew  eternal  hfe, which  was  with  F. 

3.  our  fellowship  is  with  the  F.  and  his  Son 
2.1.  we  have  an  Advocate  with  the  F.Jesus  Christ 

13.  I  write  to  you,  because  ye  have  known  the  F. 

15.  if  any  love  world,  the  love  of  F.  is  not  in  him 

16.  pride  of  life  is  not  of  the  F.  but  of  the  world 

22.  he  is  antichrist  that  denieih  the  F.  and  Son 

23.  whoso  denieth  the  Sun,  hath  not  the  F.he  that 

acknowledgeth  the  Son  hath  the  F.  also 

24.  ye  shall  continue  in  the  Son  and  in  the  F. 
3. 1.  what  manner  of  love  F.  hath  bestowed  on  us 
5.7.  three  bear  record,  the  F.  Word,  and  Spirit 

2  .Tohn  3.  mercy  and  peace  from  God  the  F.  and 

from  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  the  Son  of  the  F. 

4.  as  we  received  a  commandment  from  the  F. 
9.  he  that  ubideth  in  Ciirist  hath  the  F.  and  Son 

Jude  1.  to  them  that  are  sanctified  by  God  the  F. 

See  Abraham. 

Her  FATHER. 

<?en.l9.33.the  first-born  went  in  and  lay  with  herf. 

29.9,Rachel  came  with  A./.'s  sheop,she  kept  them 

12.  he  was  herf.'a  brolher,she  ran  and  told  herf. 
31. 19.  Rachel  had  stolen  images  that  were  Acr/.'s 
38.  11.  Tamar  went  and  dwelt  in  her  f.'s  house 

F.zod.  22.  17.  if  hr.r  f.  utterly  refuse  to  give  her' 
/.en.  21.  9.  she  profancth  her  f.  she  shall  be  burnt 

22.  13.  if  she  is  returned  to  her  f.'s  house,  as  in 
Iter  youth,  she  shall  eat  of  her  f.'s  meat 
J^iim.  12.  14.  if  her  f.  had  but  spit  in  her  face 

30.  3.  if  a  woman  vow  a  vow  in  herf.'a  house 

4.  and  herf.  hear  her,  and  shall  hold  his  peace 

5.  \{ her  f.  disallow  her  in  the  day  he  beareth 
16.  being  yet  in  her  youth,  in  her  f.'s  house 

36.  8.  shall  be  wife  to  one  of  the  tribe  of  Acr/. 
/>fHi.  21.13.  and  bewail  Ar?r/.  and  mother  a  monlh 

22.21.  bring  to  door  of  Acr/.'s  house,  because  she 

wrought  folly,to  play  the  whore  inker f. 'a  house 

./o.«A.  R.  23.  the  spies  brought  out  Rahtib  and  herf. 

25.  he  saved  her  f.'s  household  and  all  she  had 
15.  18.  to  ask  of  her  f.  a  field,  ./«'/«■.  1. 14. 

.riirljr.  11.  39.  in  two  months  she  returned  to  lirr  f. 
15.  1.  but  her  f.  would  not  suffer  him  to  go  in 
0.  tlie  Philistiiios  burnt  hor  and  herf.  with  fire  [ 


FAT 

Judg.  19.  3.  she  brought  him  into  herf.'a  house 
Esth.  2.  7.  when  herf.  and  mother  were  dead 

His  FATHER. 
Gcn.2.24.thereforeshalla  man  leave  AiS /.and  mv 
Iher,  and  cleave  to  wife,  Mark  10.7.  Eph.5.il. 
0.  22.  Ham  saw  the  nakedness  of  his  f.  and  told 
II.  28.  and  Haraii  died  before  Ai«/.  Terah 
27.  41.  the  blessing  wherewith  his  f.  blessed  hini 
28.7.  Jacob  obeyed  his  f.  and  mother,  was  gone 
31.  53.  Jacob  sware  by  the  fear  of  his  f.  Isaau 
37.  1.  in  the  land  wherein  his  f.  was  a  stranger 
2.  Joseph  brought  to  his  f.  their  evil  report 

10.  he  told  the  dream  to  hisf.  hisf.  rebuked  him 
11. brethren  envied,  but  Ajs/.observcd  the  saying 
22.  he  might  rid  him,  to  deliver  him  to  his  f. 

44.  22.  and  we  said,  the  lad  cannot  leave  his  f. 

46.  1.  he  ottered  sacrifices  to  the  God  of  his  f. 
20.  and  Joseph  went  up  to  meet  Israel  his  f. 

47.  12.  Joseph  nourished  his  f.  and  brethren 

.'50.  10.  he  made  a  mourning  for  A;*/,  seven  days 
Exod.  6.20.  and  Amrain  took  A?j/.'s  sister  to  wife 
21. 15.  he  thatsmiteth  Ai's/.  shall  be  put  to  death 

17.  he  that  curseth  his  f.  shall  die.  Lev.  20-  9. 
/.f  t).19.3.sliall  lijar  every  man  his  mother  and  hisf. 
20. 11.  man  that  lieth  with  his  f.'s  wife,  both  die 
17.  if  a  man  take  Ai's/.'sdaughter,  they  shall  die 
21.  2.  a  son  of  Aaron  may  be  defiled  for  his  f. 

11.  the  high-priest  not  defile  himself  for  his  f. 
Mum. ^,1.0.  Nazarite  not  make  unclean  for  hisf. 

27.  10.  shall  give  inheritance  to  his  f.'s  brethren 

11.  if  his  f.  have  no  brethren,  to  his  kinsman 
Deut.  21.  18.  which  will  not  obey  A/s /.and  mother 

19.  then  shall  his  f.  bring  him  to  the  elders 
22.30.  a  man  shall  not  take  his  f.'a  wife 

27.  16.  cursed  be  he  that  setteth  light  by  hisf. 
22.  cursed  be  he  that  lieth  with  daughter  of  his  f. 
33.  9.  who  said  to  his  f.  I  have  not  seen  him 
Judg^.  6.  27.  Gideon  feared  his  f.'a  household 

8.  32.  Gideon  was  buried  in  the  sepulchre  of  his  f. 
9. 56.  God  rendered  the  wickedness  he  did  tohisf. 

14.  4.  his  f.  knew  not  that  it  was  of  the  Lord 

1  .Sam.  14.  1.  but  Jonathan  told  not  his  f. 

27.  heard  not  when  his  f.  charged  the  people 

19.  4.  Jonathan  spake  good  of  David  to  A/5/. 

20.  33.  it  was  determined  of  Ats  /.  to  slay  David 
34.  because  his  f.  had  done  him  shame 

2  Suvi.  2.  32.  Asahel  buried  in  sepulchre  of  his  f. 
7.  14.  I  will  be  his  f.  and  he  shall  be  my  son 
10.2.  as  hisf.  shewed  kindness  to  me,  1  Chr.l9.'i. 

16.  22.  Absalom  went  in  to  his  f.'a  concubines 
17.23.  Ahiihophel  buried  in  the  sepulchre  of  hinf. 

21.  14.  Saul  buried  in  the  sepulchre  of  Kish  his  f. 

1  Kivff^s  7. 14.  hisf.  was  a  man  of  Tyre,  2  CAr.  2.14. 

Sl.which  Ais/.had  dedicated,  15.1.5. 2CAr.l5.18. 
11.  4.  not  perfect,  as  the  heart  of  David  hisf. 
6.  Solomon  went  not  fullv  after  the  Lord,  us  dio 
David  A(.*/.  15.  n.''2  Kings  18.  3.  2  CAr 
28.  1. 1  29. 2. 
33.  not  as  did  David  hisf.  2  Kings  14.  3.  ( 16. 2. 
1.5.  3.  and  he  walked  in  all  the  sins  of  his  f. 

20.  Nadab  did  evil  and  walked  in  the  way  of 

hisf.  '22. 43,  52.  2  King.i  21.  21. 

2  Kings  3.2.  Jehoram  did  evil,  but  not  like  Ms  f. 

9.  25.  1  and  thou  rode  together  after  Ahab  his  f 
13.25.  the  cities  taken  out  of  the  hand  of  his  f. 
14.5..\ma7,iah,  the  son  of  Joash,  slew  the  servanrs 

*who  had  slain  the  king  his  f.  2  CAron.  25.  3. 

21.  him  king  instead  of  his  f.  23.30,34. 
lC/ir.5.1.Reub.defiled  Ai's /.'s bed, birth-right  given 

17.  13.  I  will  be  hisf.  he  shall  be  my  son,  28.  6. 
2li.  10.  not  first-born,  yet  A(s/.  made  him  the  chief 

2  Chron.  3.  1.  the  Lord  appeared  to  David  hisf. 
S.  14.  according  to  the  order  of  David  his  f. 
17.  .3.  he  walked  in  the  first  ways  of  his  f.  David 
4.  Jehoshaphat  sought  the  Lord  God  of  his  f. 
20.  32.  he  walked  in  the  way  of  Asa  A?.«/. 

22.  4.  his  counsellors  after  the  death  of  his  f. 
.34.  2.  he  walked  in  the  ways  of  David  his  f.  3. 

Psal.  72. 1 17.  as  a  son  to  continue  his  f.'s  name 
Prnv.  13. 1.  a  wise  son  beareth  instruction  of  his  f. 

15.  5.  a  fool  despiseth  his  f.'a  instruction 
17.  25.  a  foolish  son  is  a  grief  to  hisf. 

10.  13.  a  foolish  son  is  the  calamity  of  his  f 

20.  he  that  wasteth  his  f.  is  a  son  causeth  ehame 
20.20.  whoso  curseth  Ais/.his  lamp  shall  bo  put  out 
2''.  7.  a  companion  of  riotous  men  shameth  hisf. 
24.  whoso  robbeth  his  f.  or  mother,  and  snith 
20.  3.  whoso  loveth  wisdom,  rejoiceth  his  f. 
30.17.  the  ravens  pick  out  eye  that  mockelh  hisf. 
/.•(a.45.10.woe  to  him  that  saith  toAis/.what  begets 
Ezek.  18.  14.  beget  a  son  that  seeth  all  his  f.'a  sins 

17.  he  shall  not  die  for  the  iau^'uity  of  hisf. 

18.  as  for  his  f.  because  he  crnellv  oppressed  , 
/)an.5.2.to  bring  the  golden  vessels  A/.* /.had  taken 
J}mos  2.  7.  a  man  and  his  f.  go  in  to  the  same  maid 
Zeeh.  13.3.  hisf.  and  mother  shall  thru.st  him  thro' 
Mai.  1.  6.  a  son  honours  hisf.  a  servant  his  master 
.Afat.  10.  35.  to  set  a  man  at  variance  against  hisf. 

15.5. whoso  shall  say  to  Aw/.it  is  a  <i\f\.,Mttrkl.\\. 
O.and  honour  not  Ai'j /or mother  heshallbo  frco 


FAT 

JUat.  10.  27.  tlje  Son  of  man  shall  come  in  glory  of 
kill  F.  witii  Ills  aiiguls,  jMarkS.  'iS.  J.aii.c  il.  2(j. 
yi.  3J.  whether  of  Ihtrn  did  tlie  will  oi his  f.  ? 
Mark  it.  21.  bu  askud  hU/.  how  long  ago  it  iasince 
I^uke  1.3'i.  Lord  shall  give  him  the  ihruiie  of  Aiji/. 
oU.  lliey  called  him  after  tlie  name  of  his  f. 
b-1.  they  made  signs  unto  his  f.  how  to  call  him 
07.  his  f.  Zachurias  was  tilled  with  the  11.  Ghost 
9.  42.  Jesus  delivered  him  again  to  his  f. 
14. 20.  if  any  man  come  to  me,  and  hate  not  his  f. 
J5.  12.  and  the  younger  of  them  said  to  his  f. 
20.aro«e  and  came  to  hisf.hisf.seiW  him,and  ran 
•a.  therefore  came  his  f.  and  enirouted  him 
John  5.  18.  because  he  said,  that  God  was  his  f. 
^cts  It).  1.  son  of  a  Jewess,  but  his  f.  was  a  Greek 
J  Cur.  5.  1.  that  one  should  have  his  J'.' a  wife 
//fi.  7.  10.  lor  he  was  yet  in  the  loins  of  his  f. 
/in'.l.ti.made  us  kings  and  priests  to  G.  and  his  F. 
14.  1.  his  F.'a  name  written  in  their  foreheads 
Hee  HousK. 
FATHKU-IN-LAW. 
(Ir-n.oS.V..  behohi,  thy/.-i)i-<.i(Cgocili  to  Timnath 
ii.  when  brought  forth,slie  went  to  her  f.-in-Caw 
F.xod.'i.i.  the  flock  of  Jethro  his/.-i;i-/uic,4.  Id. 
18.  1.  Piloses'/. -in  I'lic,  8,14,17.  Judg.l.lii.  \  4.11. 
27.  MoBfts  let  his /.-(«-/((«!  depart,  ajjd  he  went 
;\*i;Hi.l0.2'J.Raguel  the  Midianile,MosesV--'«-'«"' 
Jii(in'.19.4.  his/.-i>i-/'iic  retained  him, and  he  abode 
7.w1ien  he  rose  to  depart,his/.-jn-iuui  urged  him 
14'am.4.1'.).  when  she  liunTdf.-in-law  was  deud,21. 
John  18.  13.  Annas  wt\3  f.-inlaw  to  C'aiapha* 

My  FATHER. 
tren.  19.  34.  behold,  1  lay  yesternight  with  my  f. 
20. 12.  she  is  daughter  of  my  f.  not  of  my  mother 
27.  12.  mi/  f.  peradventurc  will  feel  me,  I  shall 

34.  Esau  cried,  bless  me,  even  me  also,  O  my  f. 
31.  5.  tlie  God  of  my /.  42.  |  32.  9.  F.xod.  18.  4. 
44.  24.  when  we  came  to  thy  servant  my  f.  27, 30. 

32.  for  I  became  surety  for  tlie  lad  to  myf. 
4.5.3.doih  jnyf.  yet  Iive1||9.  haste  to  go  up  lo  myf. 
13.  tell  viijf.  II  47.1.  wi//.  and  brethren  are  come 
48.  18.  not  so,  myf.  for  this  is  the  lirst-born 
Deut.  2ii.  5.  a  Syrian  ready  to  perish  was  myf. 
Jos\.  2.  13.  ye  will  save  alive  myf.  and  mother 
Judg.'i.V!.  wyf.  fought  for  you,  and  delivered  you 
ll.llS.  my  f.  if  thou  hast  opened  thy  mouth 
14.  16.  I  have  not  told  it  myf.  nor  my  motln^r 
1  Sam.  0. 5.  lest  my  /.  leave  curing  for  the  assee 
14.  29.  Jonathan  said,  myf.  troubled  the  laud 

18.  16.  who  am  I,  and  what  is  mijf.'f  family? 
I'.l.  2.  saying,  Saul  myf.  seekelh  to  kill  thee 

X  and  I  will  commune  with  myf.  oftliee 
2(1.  2.  muf.  will  do  nothing,  but  he  will  shew  it  me 

13.  Lord  be  with  thee, as  he  hath  been  with  myf. 
22.  .3.  let  myf.  and  my  mother  be  will)  you 
23. 17.  the  hand  of  Saul  viy  f.  shall  not  find  thee 

2. Sam.  IC.  3.  restore  me  the  kingdom  oi  my  f. 

19.  37.  that  1  may  be  buried  by  the  grave  of  myf. 
1  A':nn'«2.2ti.thou  barest  the  ark  of  the  Lord  befoie 

David  myf.  in  all  wherein  my  f.  was  alliicted 

32.  my  f.  Uavid  not  knowing  thereof 

44.  the  wickedness  that  thou  didst  lo  David  myf. 
3. 0.  thou  hast  shewed  to  David  myf.  great  mercy 

7.  hast  made  thy  servant  king  instead  of  my  f. 
5.  3.  David  myf.  could  not  build  n  house 

.5.  a<  the  Lord  spake  lo  David  myf.  sayir." 
8. 17.  it  was  in  the  heart  of  David  myf.  to  bliild 

24.  who  hast  kept  with  thy  servant  David  myf. 

26.  let  my  word  be  verified  to  myf.  2  Chr.  G.  Vt. 

12.  10.  thus  Lilou  shttlt  Muy,  my  little  lin-cer  shall 

be  thicker  than  myf.'s  loinB,  2  C/inni.  HI.  1(1. 

]  l.my/.lade  you  with  n  heavy  yoke,  iChr.W.  1 1. 

14.  myf.  chastised  you  with  whips,  2  Chr.  10.14. 
1.>.19.  luajjue  between  myf.  and  thy  f.  2  Chr.  lt>.3. 
1!>.  20.  let  me,  1  pray  thee,  kiss  m?//.  ami  mother 

20.  34.  the  cities  myf.  took  1  will  rc^store 
'iKinifj'i.M.  Elislm  saw  it.and  he  cried, /»»//.  myf. 

6.21.  Hiy/.  shall  I  smite  them?  shall  I  smite  them? 
13.l4.Kli-ihaHftid,my/.  my/,  the  chariot  of  Israel 

1  Chr.  •i'*.  4.  Lord  chose  me  before  all  the  house  of 

myf.  and  among  the  sons  of  my/,  he  liked  ine 

2  Ckr.  i.  3.  as  thou  ilidst  deal  with  myf.  so  deal 
JVVA.2.3.  the  place  ofmy /.s'  sepulchres  lielh  waslo 

r>.  send  me  to  the  city  ofmyf.n'  sipulchres 
Jnb  17.  14.  1  saiil  to  roiruption,  thr.u  art  mi//. 
:M.  t3fi.  viyf.  let  Job  lietriMl  to  the  end 
I'sat.'Si.  10.  when  wiy/.lind  my  mother  forsake  me 
89. 20.  he  shall  cry  unto  mo,  thou  art  my  F.  my  G. 
/'r(ir.4.3.  for  I  wax  myf.'n  son,  tender  and  beloved 
J.ia.  H.  4.  the  child  have  knowlndge  lo  cry,  myf. 
Jrr.  2.  27.  saying  to  a  slock,  thou  art  mtj  f. 
3.  4.  wilt  tliou  .lot  cry  unto  ine,  my  F.  ?  19. 
20  1.5.  curved  be  man  who  brought  tidings  to  myf. 
Han.  .5.  1.3.  whom  viy  f.  broutlit  out  of  J'-wry 
Mat.  7.  21.  he  thatdoeih  the  w  ill  of  my  F.  12.  .10. 
8.21.  sulTer  me  to  0:0  and  bury  myf.  J.vk-'i  59. 
0.*2.  him  will  I  conffhs  before  my  F.  in  heaven 
33.  him  will  I  also  deny  before  my  F.  in  heaven 
1 1. 27.  lire  delivered  to  me  of  wiy  F.  I.vkr  10.  22. 
15.  13.  pla.it  my  heavenly  F.  hath  not  iilsnled 
I'JO 


PAT 

Mai.  16. 17.  but  my  F.  who  \i  in  heaven  revealed  it 
16.  10.  their  angels  behold  tlie  face  of  my  F. 

19.  It  shall  be  done  of  my  F.  who  is  in  heaven 
35.  so  shall  my  heavenly  F.  also  do  unto  you 

20.  23.  for  whom  it  is  prepared  of  my  F. 

24.  3tj.  that  day  knowelh  no  man  but  my  F.  only 

25. 34.  the  king  shall  Bay,conie  ye  blessed  of  my  F. 

20.  29. 1  drink  it  new  with  you  in  my  J''.'s  kingdom 
39.  O  my /•'.  if  It  be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass  me 
42.  my/'.if  this  cup  may  iiutpai»,tliy  will  bedone 

53.  thmkest  thou  that  1  caiiiiul  pray  to  ,iiy  F.  ? 
Luke  2.  49.  that  I  must  be  about  my  i-'.'s  business 

15.17.  how  many  hired  serv.of  my/,  have  bread  1 

18.  I  will  arise,  and  go  to  my  f.  and  will  say,  t". 
10.  27.  I  pray  thee,  SL:iid  him  to  myf.'s  house 
22.  29.  as  my  F.  hath  appointed  unto  me 
24.  49.  1  send  the  laomise  of  my  F.  upon  you 
John  5.  17.  my  F.  workelh  liitherlo,  and  1  work 

30.  I  seek  not  my  own,  but  the  will  of  my  /'. 

43. 1  am  come  in  myF.  s  name,yo  receive  nie  not 
6.  32.  but  ihy  F.  giveth  you  the  true  bread 

05.  none  come  to  me,  e.vcijit  it  be  given  of  my  F. 
8. 19.  Jesus  said,  ye  neither  know  me,  nor  my  F. 

28.  as  my  F.  halh  luuglil  me,  I  s)ieak  llieae  thmgs 
38.  I  speak  that  which  I  have  seen  with  my  F. 
49.  but  I  honour  my  F.  and  ye  dishonour  me 

54.  It  is  (nyi-.  that  honoureth  me,  of  whom  ye  say 
10.  17.  therefore  dolh  my  F.  love  me,  because 

18.  this  commandment  have  1  received  of  my  F. 
25.  works  I  do  in  my  F.'a  name  bear  witness  ol  me 

29.  my  F.  who  gave  tlieni  me,  isgiealer  than  all, 
none  is  able  10  pluck  them  out  of  my  F.'s  hand 

30.  1  and  my  F.  are  one 

32.  many  good  work%  have  I  shewed  from  my  /'. 
37.  if  1  do  not  the  works  of  my  F.  believe  me  not 

12.  20.  if  any  serve  me,  him  will  my  F.  honour 

14.7.  if  known  me,  should  have  known  my  Kalso 

12.  greater  works,  because  1  go  lo  my  F.  10. 10. 

20.  at  that  day  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  in  my  F. 

21.  he  that  loveth  me,  shall  be  loved  ofmy  F.  23. 
28.  I  go  to  the  Father,  my  F.  is  greater  than  I 

15.  1.  1  am  the  vine,  wiy  F.  is  the  husbandman 
8.  herein  is  my  F.  glorilied,  that  ye  bear  fruit 
10.  even  as  I  have  ke)>t  my  F.'s  commandments 
15.  all  that  1  heard  of /«y  F.  I  have  made  known 
23.  he  that  hatetli  me,  lialeth  my  F.  also,  24 
l.S.ll.  the  cup  myF.halh  given,shall  I  not  drink  if! 
20.17.toucli  ni>i,l<jr  1  am  not  yet  ascended  to  myF. 
say  to  them,  I  ascend  to  my  F.  and  your  Father 
21.  as  my  F.  hath  sent  me,  even  so  send  I  you 
Hen.  2.  27.  even  as  I  received  ot  my  F. 
3.5.1  will  confess  his  name  be(i|re  myF.ani  angel: 

(^ur  FATHER. 
<VfH. 19.31.  ourf.  is  old||32.  make  ourf.(h'mk  wine 
31.  I.Jacob  hath  taken  away  all  thtilis  our  f.  10. 

42.  13.  the  youngest  is  this  day  with  ourf.  32. 

43.  28.  thy  servant  our  f.  is  in  good  health 

44.  31.  bring  ourf.  with  sorrow  10  the  grave 
J\^«;n.27. 3. o«r /.died  in  the  wilderiies,»,hnd  no  sons 


FAT 

3  Chron.  21.  3.  their  f.  gave  them  great  gifU 
./vli  42.  15.  their  f.  gave  them  inheritance 
fri;B.30.11.  there  is  a  generation  thai  curseth  tA./ 
Jer.  10.  7.  cup  of  consolation  to  drink  for  their  f. 

35. 14.  Jonudab's  sons  obeyed  (  f.'s  cummand.ltt. 
Ezck.  22.  10.  they  d:scovered  their  f.'s  nakedness 
Mat.  4.  21.  in  a  ship  with  Zebedee  their  f. 
22.  they  left  ship  and  their  f.  and  followed  him 

13.  43.  righteous  shall  shine  in  kingdom  otthnrf 

'J%y  FATHER. 
Ccn.  12. 1.  Lord  uaid,  get  thee  IVom  t/ij  f.'a  houM 

27.6.  I  heard  thy  f.  speak  to  Esau  thy  brother 
10.  lliou  shall,  bring  ''  •<>  tAy/.  that  he  eat 

38.1 1. J  ndah  said, remain  a  widow  at  thy  f.'s  house 

40. 3. 1  iim  the  God  of  thy  f.  fear  not  to  go  down 

49.  2.').  by  the  God  of  thy  f.  who  shall  help  thee 
2().  tlie  blessings  of  thy  f.  have  prevailed  above 

50.  16.  thy  f.  commanded  before  he  died,  saying 
17.  forgive  the  servants  of  the  God  of  thy  f. 

F.ioil.  20.12.  honour  thyf.  and  thy  niolher  that  thy 
days  may  be  long,  ivcuf  .5.10.  LWa(.15.4. 1 19.19. 
JVum.  18. 2.  thy  brelliren  of  the  tribe  of  thy  f.  bring 
Dent.  fi.  3.  us  the  God  of  thy  f.  promised  thee 
32.  0.  is  not  he  thy  f.  that  bought  thee  ? 

7.  usk  thy  f.  and  he  will  shew  thee,  thy  elders 
Ruth  2.  1 1.  how  thou  hast  left  thy  f.  and  mother 

1  .Saw.  20.  1.  and  what  is  my  sin  before  thyf.? 
0.  if  thyf.  at  all  miss  me,  then  say,  David  asked 

2  .Sum.fi.2i.  the  Lord  which  cho.se  me  before  thyf. 
10.  3.  thinkest  thou  that  David  doth  honour  thyf. 

that  he  sent  comforters  to  thee  7  1  Chron.  19.  3 
10.  19.  as  I  have  served  in  thi/  f.'s  presence 

1  Kings  11.12.1  will  not  do  it  for  David  thyf.'e  sake 
12.4.  thyf.  made  yoke  grievous,  10.  2  C'Aron.10.4. 
15.19.  there  is  a  league  belw.  my  father  and  tJiyf. 
20.  34.  the  cities  which  my  father  took  from  thyf. 

2  Kings  3.  13.  get  thee  to  the  prophets  of  thy  f. 
20.  5.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  God  of  David  thyf 

2C7!ron.  21.  12.  Isa.^.5 

1  CAr.28.9.  my  son,  know  ihou  the  God  of  thy  f. 

2  Chr.  7. 17.  if  thoi.  wilt  walk  before  me  as  thy  f. 
.fob  15.  10.  are  aged  men  much  elder  than  thy  f. 
Prov.  1.  8.  hear  the  instruction  of  thy  f.  23.  22. 

0.  20.  my  son,  keep  thy  f.'s  commandment 

23. 25.  thyf.  and  mother  shall  be  glad,  she  rejoice 

27. 10.  thine  own  and  My /.'s  friend  forsake  not 

I.-ia.  43.  27.  thy  first  /.  hath  sinned  against  me 
58.  14.  feed  thee  with  the  heritage  of  Jacob /Ay/. 

./fr.l2.0.houseof<./.  dealt  treacherously  with  thee 
22.  15.  did  not  <Ay/.  eat,  drink,  and  do  judgmeni? 

F.zik.\6.'.i.  thyf.  was  an  Amorite,  mother  a  HiltitB 

7>'<(n.5.1 1.  in  the  days  of /Ay/,  the  king,  I  say  ihyf 
18.  God  gave  thyf.  a  kingdcun  and  glory 

Mat.  0.  4.  thy  F.  which  seeth  in  secret,  6,  18. 
H.  shut  thy  door,  pray  to  thy-  F.  who  is  in  secret 

Mark  7.  10.  for  Moses  said,  honour  thy  f.  nrd 
mother,  10.  19.  J.vke  18.  20.  f>A.  Ci.  2. 

I.ukf  2.  48.  /Ay/,  and  I  sought  thee  sorrowing 
15.  27.  and  thyf.  hath  killed  the  fatted  cnlf 


4.  why  should  the  name  of  oirr /.  be  done  away?  |  .fohn  8.19.  then  said  ihcv  unto  him,  where  is  thyf  ? 
1  Chr.  2;).  10.  blessed  be  thou,  L.  God  of  Isr.  our  f.  Yovr  FATH  ER. 


/,sa.0.3.10.doabtless,thou  art  «j(ri'".Abrah. ignorant 
04. 8.  O  Lord,  thou  art  our  F.  we  are  the  clay 
.Jer.  :}5.  6.  our  f.  commanded  us  drink  no  wine 

8.  we  have  obeyed  the  voice  of  our  f.  10. 
Mat.0. 9.  our  F.  which  art  in  heaven,  I.ukr  11.2. 
Mark  1 1.10.  hie.ssed  be  the  kingdom  of  oi/r/.David 
J.uke  1.73.theoath  which  heswaretoour/.Abrah. 
3.  8.  begin  not  losay,  we  have  Abraham  to  ourf. 
.John  4.  12.  art  thou  greater  than  our  f.  ?  8.  53. 
jlcts  7.2.  the  God  of  glory  appeared  to  ourf. 
A'om.  1.7.  grace  to  you,  and  peace  from  God  our  F. 
and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  1  Cor.  1.  3.  2  Cor. 
1. 2.  2'Fhess.  1.  2.  1  Tim.  1.2.  Hhilnn.  3. 

9.  10.  conceived  by  one,  even  by  ourf.  Isaac 
Oal.  1.  4.  according'  to  the  will  ofGoil,  anil  our  F. 
Euh.1.2.  grace  be  to  you,  and  pence  from  G.oitr  F. 

ami  L.  Jes.  Ch.  Hiil.  1.2.  Col.  1.2.  1 1'hcss.  1.1. 
rA/7.4.20.  unto  God  our  F.  be  glory  for  ever,  amen 
1  Thess.  1.  3.  in  the  sight  of  (Jori  and  our  F. 
3.  11.  now  God  oar  F.  direct  our  way  unto  you 
l.'i.  may  siahli.Hli  you  in  holiness  before  G.  our  F. 
27'Ar.vs.  1.  1.  Pnulunto  iho  church  in  God  our  F. 
2. 10.  now  God,  even  our  F.  coml'ort  your  hearts 

7  Arir  FATHER. 
r;rn.0.23.Slirm  and  Japhet  coveri-ri  the  nakedness 
of  their  f.AiHl  saw  not  the  nakedness  of  thtirf. 

10.  .33.  thev  made  tkiir  f.  drink  wim-  that  night 
3fi.  both  Lot's  daughters  with  child  by  thrirf. 

37.  12.  his  brethren  went  to  feed  thrir'f.'s  flock 
y.zod.^.  16.  filled  troughs  to  water  their  f.'s  f\or,k 

40.  15.  anoint  them  as  tlir>n  didst  anoint  their  f. 
jVum.  30. 6.  to  the  trdie  of  their  f.  shall  they  marry 
.^.?A.  19.47.  nOer  Dan  tA'?>/.  Judp.  18.  29. 
1  .Srt;n.  2.2.5.  ihey  hearkened  not  lo  voice  of  their  f 

10.  12.  one  of  the  same  plan- said,  who  is /AfiV/.? 
1  Kin/T^  13.  11.  the  prophet's  sons  loM  their  f. 
1  Chr.  7.22.  Ephrnini  their  f.  mourned  many  days 

21.  2.  Nadab  and  Abilin  died  before  Ihifr  f. 

25.  3.  under  the  bonds  of  their  f.  Jedulliun,  6. 


frP7i.3!.6.  with  all  my  power  I  have  served  yovrf. 
7.yowr/.hatli  deceived  me,and  changed  my  wages 

43.  7.  is  ynurf.  alive?  have  ye  another  brother  ? 

44.  17.  as  for  you,  get  you  up  in  peace  lo  your  f. 
4.5. 19.  take  you  wagons,  bring  your  f.  and  come 
49.  2.  sons  of  Jacob,  hearken  unto  Israel  yo«r/. 

Jer.  35.  18.  because  ye  obeyed  Jonadab  your  f. 

F.iek.  10.  4.5.  mother  n  Hittile, yoi/r/.  an  Amorite 

Mat.  5. 16.  may  glorify  your  F.  who  is  in  heaven 

4.5.  may  be  the  children  of  your  F.  in  heaven 

48.  be  ye  pcili^cl,  nsyni/r  F.  in  heaven  is  perfect 

6.  1.  otherwise  ye  have  no  reward  of  your  F. 

8.  your  F.  knowelh  what  thinffs  ye  have  need 

of  before  ye  ask  them,  :«.  I.vke  12.  :*. 

14.if  ve  forgive, i/oiir  heavenly  F. will  forgive  you 

15.  if  yc  forgive  not,  neither  will  your  F.  forgive 

your  trespasses,  Mark  11.  25,  96. 

10.  29.  not  one  sparrow  shrill  fall  without  yr>ur  F. 

18.  14.il  is  not  Ih"  will  of  your  F.  ihntone  perish 

23.  9.  call  no  man  your  f.  upon  the  earth,  for 

one  is  t/oiir  F.  which  is  in  heaven 

/,iiArfi.3ri.be  ye  nierciAil,ttsyn«rF.nl-'o  jamerrifnl 

12.32.  it  is  your  F.'s  pleasure  to  give  yon  kingdom 

./ohn  8.  ,38.  ve  do  what  ye  have  seen  with  your  f. 

4 1  .ve  do  the  deeds  of  your/then  said  I  hey  to  him 

42.JeB.snid, if  God  were  yoiirF.yo  would  love  mo 

44.  ye  are  of  your  f.  the  devil,  and  the  lusts  of 

your  f.  yo  will  do,  be  was  a  murdei-rr 

20. 17.  I  a.<cend  lo'mv  F.  nnd  vour  F.  to  ni)  God 

FATHERS. 

F/0'/.0.14.these  are  the  bends  of  their/  houses,  S^. 

.Josh.  14.  1. 1  19.  51.  I  21.  1.  1  Chr.  8.  10,  13,  2H. 

10.6.  neither  thy  father,  nor  ihv/.father  hove  seen 

20.  5.  visiting  the  iniipi  iv  of^  the  /.  upon  the 

chil.lren,  34.  7.  M/m.  14.  18.  T>nit.  .5.  9. 

/>f«t.24. 10.  the/,  shall  not  be  put  to  death  for  Iho 

children,  nor  children  for/.  2  Kings  14.  6. 

.Ml  30  1.  who-e/.  I  would  have  disdained  lo  sot 

Prov.  19.  14.  house  and  riches  are  inheritance  off. 


FAT 

fco.  49.23.  kingE  shall  be  thy  aurelng/.  and  queens 
Jtr.  6.  21./.  and  sons  aliall  fall  on  thoin,  13.  14. 
7.  18.  children  gather  wood,/,  kindle  the  lire 
31.  29./.  have  eaten  sour  grapeii,  Kick.  18.  2. 

32. 18.  reconipenueat  iaiqniiy  of  the  /.  on  children 
47.  3.  the/,  shall  not  look  hack  to  their  children 

t^itk.i.  Vi.  the/,  shall  eat  the  sons  in  midst  ol'tliee 

Mai.  4.  6.  he  shall  turn  the  heart  of  the  /.  to  the 

children,  and  children  to  their/.  I.akc  1.  17. 

/(•An  7. 2-2.  not  because  it  isof  Moses,  but  of  the/. 

ticts  7.  2.  men,  brethren,  and/,  hearken,  22.  1. 

13.  32.  (he  promise  which  was  made  unto  the/. 

SK.  3.  the  perfect  manner  of  the  law  of  the/. 

Horn.  9.  5.  whose  are  the/,  of  whom  Christ  came 

1  Cur. 4. 15. though  instructors,  yet  have  not  many/. 

Kyh.  6.  4./.  provoke  not  your  children,  Col.  3.  21. 

■iHeb.  1.  1.  God  who  spake  in  times  past  to  the/. 

12.  9.  we  had/,  of  our  tlesh  who  correcled  us 

iPet.3.i.  since  the/,  fell  asleep,  all  things  continue 

IJo/iH  2.13. 1  write  unto  you/,  ye  have  known,  14. 

Jicc  BcRiKD,  Chief. 

His  F.VTHERS. 

1  Kings  13.  12.  he  removed  the  idols  his  f.  made 

2  Kings  12. 18.  took  the  thnigs  hisf.  had  dedicated 

15.  y.  he  did  what  was  evil  as  his  f.  h.ad  done 
21. 22.  he  forsookl,.  God  of  hisf.  2  C/iron.  21. 10. 
23. 32.  according  to  all  kisf.  had  done,  37.  |  24.  9. 

2  Chio7t.'2l.li>.  no  burning  like  the  burning  ol'hisf. 

28.  25.  Ahaz  provoked  tlie  Lord  God  oi' his  f. 

30.19.  propareth  his  heart  to  seek  the  God  of  his  f. 
33. 12.  he  humbled  himself  before  God  of  his  f. 

P.-ijl.  49. 19.  he  shall  go  to  the  generation  oi  his  f. 
109.  14.  let  the  iniijuity  of  Ais/.  be  remembered 
Dan.  11.  24.  shall  do  what  his  f.  have  not  done 

37.  neither  shall  he  regard  the  God  of  his  f. 

38.  and  a  god  whom  hisf.  knew  not  sliall  honour 
^cts  13.3t>.David  was  laid  to  hisf.  saw  corruption 

Mij  FATHERS. 
Gen.  il.  9.  not  attained  to  the  years  of  my  f. 
30.  I  will  lie  with  my  f.  carry  me  out  of  Egypt 

48. 16.  and  the  name  of  my  f.  be  named  ou  them 
49.  29.  bury  me  with  my  f.  in  the  cave  in  tield 

Kxod.  15.  2.  he  is  my  f.  God,  I  will  exalt  him 

1  Kings  19.  4.  for  I  am  no  better  than  my  f. 
21.  3.  give  the  inheritance  of  my  f.  to  thee,  4. 

2  Kings  19. 12.  have  gods  of  the  nritions  delivered 

Ihem  Wi^/.  destroyed  ?  ^IChr.  :12. 14.  /*■  (1.37.12. 
2  Chron.'H.  13. know  not  what  I  and  /iiy/.havedone 
Psal.  39.  12.  for  I  am  a  sojourner  as  all  myf.  were 
/Jan.  2. 23.  I  thank  and  praise  ihee,  O  Godof  7ny/. 
Acts  24.  14.  so  worship  I  the  God  of  my  f.  ' 
Oal.  1. 14.  being  zealous  of  tlie  traditions  of  my  f. 

Our  F.VTHERS. 
Gen.  46.  34.  till  now  both  we  and  also  our  f.  47.  3. 
A'um.  20.  15.  how  our  f.  wont  down  into  Egypt 
iJeut.s.X  Lord  made  not  (his  covenant  wiih  ourf. 

ft.  2.3.  land  which  he  sware  to  our  f.  26.  3,  15. 

26.  7.  cried  to  the  God  of  our  f.  t.'ie  Lord  heard 
Josh.  22.  28.  the  pattern  of  the  altar  our  f.  made 

24.  17.  brought  ourf.  out  of  the  l:ind  of  Egypt 
.^u.(/i'-.G.13.  where  be  miracles  whicli  ourf.loUi  of? 
IKiiigs  8.57.God  be  with  us,  as  he  was  with  narf. 

58.  his  statutes,  which  he  commanded  our  f. 
2  Kings  ^23.  13.  because  o«r/.  have  not  hearkened 

1  CAro7i.12.17.  the  God  of  ourf.  look  and  rolmlie  if 

29.  13.  for  we  are  sojourners,  as  were  all  our  f. 
18.  O  Lord  God  of  our  f.  keep  for  ever  in  the 

thoughts  of  the  heart  ol'thy  neopie,  2  CAr.  20.fi. 

2  Oiron.^.  31.  which  thou  gavest  our/.  Meh.^.'X,. 
2.t.  6.  for  ourf.  have  trespassed  and  done  evil 

9.  for  lo,  our  f.  have  fallen  by  the  sword 
34  21.oi/r/.  have  not  kept  the  word  of  the  Lord 
Kzra  5.  12.  but  after  our  f.  had  provoked  God 
7.  27.  blessed  be  the  Lord  God  of  our  f. 
9.  7.  since  liie  days  of  our  f.  in  a  great  trespass 
VeA.  9.  9.  didst  see  the  affliction  of  nurf.  in  Egypt 
16.0Kr/.de,ilt  proudly,  and  hardened  their  necks 
"saLii.  4.  ourf.  trusted  in  thee,  they  Irnstrd 
44.  1.  ourf.  have  tolJ  us  what  thou  didst,  78.  3. 
106.  6.  we  have  sinned  wiA  aurf.  and  coiiiniilled 
7.  oar  f.  understood  not  thy  won<lers  in  Egypt 
Jsa.  64.  11.  house,  where  our  f.  praised  thee 
/f?)'.3.24.  shame  hath  devoured  the  Sb  >iirof  «Hr/. 
25.  we  and  oar  f.  have  not  obcyoil  the  voice 

16.  19.  surely  our  f.  have  inherited  lies,  v.anitics 

44. 17.  as  we  have  done,  we  and  our  f.  oar  kings 
/,ani..3.7.<i«7/.havo  sinnpd,and  are  not, have  borne 
Pan.  9.  8.  confusion  efface  be!ongeth  lo  our  f. 

16.  for  our  sins  and  the  iniquities  of  our  f. 
Mic.  7.  20.  sworn  to  oitr  /.  from  the  days  of  o'd 
Mul.  2.  10.  by  profaning  llie  covenant  of  onr  f. 
JH.it.  23.  30.  if  we  h.id  been  in  the  days  of  our  f. 
Luke  1.  55.  as  he  3|)ake  lo  our  f.  to  Abraham 

Ti.  to  perform  the  mercy  promised  to  our  f. 
John  4.  20.  our  f.  worsliippcd  in  this  mountain 

6.  31.  our  f.  did  eat  mannr  in  the  de-erl 
4<;<s3.13.God  ofour/.haih  g'urified  hii  j'nn  Jesus 

2.3.  of  the  covenant  which  God  made  with  our/. 
5.30.  God  of  our  f.  raised  up  Jlsus,  whom  yo  slew 

7.  11.  came  dearth,  our  f,  found  no  Bustcaance 

191 


FAT 

.^cts  7.  15.  Jacob  went  down  and  died,  att^  ourf. 
19.  andevil  entreated  oitr/und  cast  out  children 
38. this  is  he  which  spukc  m  Sinai  and  with  vurf. 
39.  to  whom  our  f.  would  not  obey,  but  thrust 
44.»ur/.had  the  tabernacle  of  witness  in  wilder. 

13.  17.  God  of  this  people  of  Israel  chose  ourf. 
15.10.ayoke  which  uur/.nor  we  were  able  to  bear 
26.  6.  for  the  hope  of  the  promise  made  to  our  f. 
28.  25.  well  spake  Holy  Ghost  by  JCsaias  to  ourf. 

1  Cur.  10.  1.  ttil  ourf.  were  under  the  cloud 
alcfii  Willi  F.VTHERS. 

1  Kings  2.  10.  so  David  sUpt  with  his/.  II.  21. 
4.S.  Solomon  slept  with  his/.  2  Chron.  9.  HI. 

14.  20.  Jeroboam  slept  with  his/.  2  Kings  14.  29. 
31.  Rehoboam  sii-.pt  with  his/.  2  Chrun.  12.  10. 

.  15.  8.  Abijam  sUpt  with  his/.  2  Chron.  14.  1. 
24.  and  Asa.  slept  with  his/.  2  Chron.  IG.  13. 

16.6.soI5aashaoi'/e/;«  withf.\i:iS.Onui  slept  withf. 

22.40.Ahab  si.  7o./.|150.  Jehoshaphat,  2  CAr.21.1. 
■iKiiigs  8.  24.  Joram  slept  with  his/.  |{  10. 35.  Jehu 

13.9.  Jehoahaz5^(;;/«(C(iA  his/.  ||  13.  Joash,14.16. 

14.22.  after  that  the  king  slept  withf.  2  CAr.  26.2. 

15.  7.  Azariah  slept  with  his/.  ||  22.  Meimhem 
38.  Jotham  slept  with  his/.  2  Chron.  27.  9. 

16.  20.  .-Vhaz  slept  with  his/.  2  Chron.  28.  27. 
20.21.  Hezekiah  slept  with  liis/.  2  CA/-uk.32.  33. 
21. 18.  Maim^Siihsltpt  with  his/.  2CAru7(.  33.20. 

21.  G.  Jehoiakim  slept  with  his/. 

2  Chron.  26.  2J.  Uzzmh  .H'pt  -with  his/. 

7'Atir  FATHERS. 

Kzoil.  4.  5.  that  the  God  of  iAci'r/.  hath  appeared 

6.  14.  heads  of  their  f.  25.  .fosh.  14.  1.  1  i'.t.  51.  1 

21.  1.  1  Chr.  5.  24.  |  7.  2,  7.  |  8.  6.  |  9.  9,  13. 

Lcc.  26.  3:).  ill  iniquity  of  their  f.  shall  pine  away 

40.  if  they  confess  the  iniquity  of  <A('<r/. 
JVuHj.ll.l2.lhe  land  tliousivarest  to  give  totheirf. 
14.  23.  Deut.  10.  11.  |  31.  20.  Josh.  1.  C. 
I  5.  6.  i  21.  43,  44.  Jer.  32.  22. 
Deal.  29.25.  have  forsaken  the  covenant  of  their  f. 
.Josh.  4.  6.  when  your  cliildreu  usk  their  f.  21. 

22.  14.  each  one  a  head  ul' the  house  of  tluir  f. 
Ju(in^.2.10.tliat  generation  were  gathered  lot/icirf. 

12.  they  forsook  the  Lord  God  of  their  f. 

17.  they  turned  out  of  the  way  their  f.  walked  in 

19.  tliey  corrupted  themselves  more  than  their  f. 

20.  my  covenant  which  I  commanded  their  f. 
22.  if  they  keep  way  of  Lord,  us  thir  f.  kept  il 

3.  4.  which  he  commanded  their  f.  by  Moses 
i  Kings  8.  34.  and  bring  them  again  to  the  land 
thou  gavcst  to  their  f.  48.  2  Chrun.  6.  25,  36. 
9.  9.  who  brought  forth  their  f.  out  of  Egypt 
14.  1.5.  out  of  the  land  which  he  gave  to  their  f. 
2  Kings  21.8.  ./er.  1(3.  15.  |  24.  10. 
22.  provoked  above  all  that  their  f.  had  done 
2  in'no-^21.15.  since  day  their  f.ca.mc  out  of  Egypt 

1  CAr.  4.  38.  the  house  of  <Af/r/.  iiicreased  greatly 
5.  2.3.  transgressed  against  the  God  of  their  f. 
29.20.  blessed  the  (Sod  ofiAci'r/.aiid  howid  down 

2  CAr.  7.  22.  forsook  God  of  their  f.  24.  24.  |  28. 6. 
11.  16.  came  to  sacrifice  to  the  God  of  their  f. 

13.  18.  tliey  relied  on  the  Lord  God  of  their  f. 

14.  4.  commanded  to  seek  tiod  of  their  f.  1.3.  12. 
19.  4.  brought  them  back  to  the  God  of  their  f. 
2').  3.1.  not  prepared  their  hearts  to  God  of  their  f. 
30.  7.  which  trespassed  ;lgainst  the  God  of  their  f. 

22.  making  confessi<m  to  the  God  of  their  f. 
34.32.  according  to  the  covenantofGod  of  their  f. 

.33.  from  following  the  I<ord  the  God  of  their  f. 
36.  1.5.  God  of  their  f.  sent  by  his  messengers 
.VcA.  9.  2.  confessed  sins  and  iniquities  of  their  f. 

23.  into  the  land  thou  proniisedst  to  their  f. 
.f.ih  8.  8.  prepare  thyself  to  the  search  of  their  f. 

1.3.  13.  which  wise  men  have  told  from  their  f. 
Psal.  78.  8.  and  iniglit  not  be  as  their  f.  a  stubborn 
12.  marvellous  things  did  he  in  sight  of  their  f. 
■37.  th"y  deiilt  unfaithfuily  like  their  f. 
Pror.  17.  fi.  and  the  glory  of  children  arc  their  f. 
fsa.  14.  21.  slanihter  for  the  iniquity  of  their  f. 
.ler.  7.  26.  they  did  worse  than  their  f. 
9.  14.  af  er  Baaliin,  which  their  f.  taurht  them 
16.  whom  they  nor  their  f.  have  known,  19.4. 
2."?.  27.  as  their  f.  have  forgotten  my  name 
31.. ?2. 1  will  make  a  now  covenant,  not  accord,  to 
covenant  1  made  with  their f.  1 1.  10.  N'-h.  8. 9. 
.30.7.h-ive  sinned  against  Lord, the  hope  of  their  f. 
F.iek.  2.  3.  (hey  and  their  f.  have  transgres-ed 
5. 10. the  fath'^rs  shall  eat  sons,and  sons  mt  their f. 
20.4.cau<e  them  lo  know  abomination?  of  tAfi'r/. 

24.  their  eyes  were  after  their  f.  idols 

Jlinns  2.  4.  their  lies,  sfler  whiili  their  f.  walked 
.V(j./.4.6.  turn  the  heart  of  the  children  to  their  f. 
I.Mkc  G.  23.  for  in  like  manner  did  their  f. 
2t>.  for  so  did  their  f.  to  the  false  projiheU 
Thy  FATHKRS. 
Gen.  \3.  15.  thou  shall  go  to  .««/.  in  peace 
49.  8.  thy  f  children  shall  bow  down  before  thee 
Kxod.  l.'l"5  into  I:ind  which  he  pware  to  thv  f  11. 
Dev.   6.  10,  18.  I  7.  12,  \X  |  8.  18.  |  !l.  5.  | 
\X  17  '  19.  8.  I  38.  11.  I  29.  13.  |  ?0.  20. 
DtMt.  1. 21.  JO  jp,  poas'  s8  it,  as  God  of  Iky  f.  said 


FAT 

Deut.  4. 31.  nor  forgot  covenant  of  thy  f.  he  awai« 

37.  and  because  lie  loved  thy  f.  10. 15. 
8.3.  humbled  thee  and  fed  thee  with  manna  which 
thou  knewest  not,  neither  did  thy  f.  know,  16. 
10.  22.  thyf.  went  into  Egy.  with  seventy  jiersona 

12.  1.  land  which  the  God  of  thy  f.  givetli  thee 

13.  6.  other  gods  thou  nor  thy  f.  known,  28.  M. 
19. 8.  give  the  land  which  hepiomisud  tAy/.a?.  1 
28.  36.  to  a  nation  thou  nor  tliyf.  have  known, 
30.  5.  do  thee  good  and  muliiply  thee  above  thyf 

9.  rejoice  over  thee,  as  he  rejoiced  over  thyf. 

31. 16.  thou  slialt  sleep  with  thyf.  2  SaJ7i.  7.  12. 

1  Kings  13.22.  shall  not  come  to  sepulchre  of  thy  f. 

2  Kings  20.17.  what  thyf.  laid  up  be  carried  away 
22.  20.  I  will  gather  thee  to  thyf.  2  Chr.  34.  2«. 

1  CArow.  17.  II.  thou  must  go  to  be  with  thy  f. 
Ezra  4. 15.  search  the  book  of  the  records  of  thy  f. 
Psal.  45.  16.  instead  of  (Ay /.shall  be  (hy  children 
I'rov.  22.  28.  remove  not  the  land-mark  thy  f.  set 
./er.  34.  5.  burned  with  the  burnings  of  thy  f. 
jlcts  7.  32.  I  am  God  of  thi/  f.  iheG.  of  Abraham 

lour  F.Vl'HERS. 
Gen.  48.  21.  shull  bring  you  to  the  land  of  your  f. 
Kzod.  3. 13.  the  God  ol  yuurf.  hath  sent  me,  fjcut. 
1. 1 1. 1  4. 1.  Josh.  18.  3.  2  CAro;i. 28.  9.  |  29. 5. 
.V«/fl.  32.  8.  thus  did  yuur  f.  .Vth.  13.  18. 

14.  behold  ye  are  risen  up  in  your  f.  stead 
Deut.  1. 8.  possess  the  hind  the  Lord  sware  to  your 
f.  35.  1  7.  8.  I  8.  1.  I  1 1.  !l,  21.  Judk.  2.  1. 

32. 17.  sacrificed  to  gods  whom  yourf.  feaied  not 
./<7.sA.  24.2.  yourf.  dwelt  on  the  other  side  the  flood 

6. 1  brought  y»«r/.  out  ol  Egypt,  Egvjit  pursued 

14.  put  away  (he  gods  w  hicli  your  f.  served 

15.  whether  the  gods  which  yovr  f.  served 

1  .Sam.  12.  7.  acts  the  Lord  did  to  you  and  your  f. 

8.  ynnrf.  cried,  the  Lord  brought  fortii  yuur  f. 
15.  the  hand  of  the  Ld.  against  you  as  ag.  yourf. 

'iliitigs  17.13.  the  law  which  I  commanded  yourf. 

2  Chron.  13.  12.  fight  ye  not  ag.  the  God  of  y<urf. 
30.  7.  be  not  like  your/,  and  brelhren,8.  '/.eeh.H. 
3;1.8.  remove  out  of  the  land  appointed  fur  yourf. 

Ezra  8.28,  free-will  olForing  to  the  God  of  your  f. 

10.  11.  make  confession  lo  the  God  of  your  f. 
PsilI.  9.3.  9.  when  yourf.  tempted  me.  Neb.  3.  9. 
/»a.ti5.7.  your  and  the  iniquities  of  yourf.  together 
./er.  2. 5.  what  iniquity  have  yourf.  found  iu  mo  1 

3.18.shall  come  to  the  land  I  have  given  to  yourf. 

7.7.  dwell  in  the  land  I  gave  to  your  f.  14.  !'23.39. 

I  25.  5.  I  35.  15.  Eiek.  20.  42.  |  36.  28.  |  47.  14 

22.1  spake  not  to  yourf  in  the  day  I  brought  them 

25.  since  the  day  yourf.  came  fortli  outofEgyiH 

11.  4.  which  I  coinniamleil  your  f.  17.  22. 
7.  for  I  earnestly  proxsted  unto  ynurf. 

16.  11.  because  your  f.  have  forsaken  me 
12.  done  worse  than  yourf.  ||  13.  ye  nor  your  / 

•H.  13. 1  made  a  covenant  with  your  f.  in  the  day 
14.  b\ii  your  f.  hearkened  not  unto  me 

44.3.whoin  tliey  kiiesy  not,ntiih"rtliey  nor  your  f 

9.  have  ye  forgotten  the  wickedness  of  your  f.  ? 

10.  in  my  statutes  I  set  before  yrm  and  your  f. 
21.  the  incense  ye,  your  f.  and  kings  burn 

EzcA.  20. 18.  walk  ye  not  iirlhestatutcsof  your/. 

27.  in  this  yourf.  have  blasphemed  me 

30.  are  ye  polluted  after  (he  manner  of  your  f.  7 

36.  like  as  I  ple.ided  w  ith  7,'o«r  f.  ^o  with  vou 
37.25.shall  dw.  11  in  the  landwherein  yor/r/.dwch 
Hos.  9.  10. 1  saw  your  f.  as  (lie  first  ri|)C  of  fig-tre« 
.fncl  1.  2.  hath  this  been  in  the  days  of  your  f.  ? 
ZecA.1.2.  theLd.  hath  been  displeased  with  i/oiir/ 

4.  be  not  as  your  f.  ||  5.  your  f.  where  are  they  t 

6.  did  not  my  words  take  hold  of  your  f. .' 
8.  14.  when  your  f.  provoked  me  to  wrath 
Med.  3.  7.  from  days  of  your  f.  ye  are  gone  away 
J\(u.t.  23.  32.  fill  ye  np  then  the  measure  of  your  f. 
Lnkc  II.  47.  of  prophets,  mid  your  f.  killed  lliein 

48.  ye  witncis  tha(  yc  allow  (he  deeds  of  yourf. 
.John  6.  49.  your  f.  did  eat  mmina,  and  ^re  dead 

■38.  not  ns  your  f.  did  eat  innnnn,and  are  dcnil 
.4rr.?7.51.ye  rcsift  HolyGliosI  as  t^oKr/.diil,  so  y» 

■32.who  of  the  priipli.Iiavc  notyoj/r/.persecufcdl 
1  Pet.  1.  18.  received  bv  tra-litimi  from  your  f. 

FATHERLESS. 
Kiod.  22.  22.  yc  shall  not  afflict  any/,  child 

24.  your  wives  shall  be  widows,  tind  children  f. 
Deut.  10. 18.  he  do'h  execute  the  judgment  of  (h» 
/.  and  widow,  P.<!(U.  82.  3   Isn.  1.  17 
Job  0.  97.  ye  overwhelm  tfie/.  and  di?  a  pit 
22.  9.  trie  arms  of  the/,  have  be<m  broken 
24.  3.  (hey  drive  away  the  ass  of  (he/ 

9.  they  pluck  the/,  from  the  breast 
2*'.  12.  bi'cause  I  delivered  the  poor  and  the/. 
31    17.  eaten  alone,  and  /.  have  not  eaten  thereof 

21.  if  I  have  lifted  tip  my  hnnd  .njainst  (he/. 
Psal.  10.  14.  thou  «r(  the  helper  of  the/. 

18.  to  judge  the/,  and  the  oppress'-d 
68.  5.  a  father  of  the/,  a  judge  of  the  widows 
109.  9.  lot  his  children  \i"'f.  h  s  wife  a  widow 

12.  nor  let  any  favour  his/,  children 
Prop.  23.  10.  etiier  not  mto  the  fields  of  the/. 
/»a.  1.  23.  thoy  judge  not  the/.  Jer.  5.  28 


FAV 

fsa.  9. 17.  the  Lord  shall  not  have  mercy  on  their/. 
HI.  ti.  widows  their  prey,  thai  tliey  may  rob  tlio/. 
Jer.  49  II.  leave  tliy/.  children,  I  will  prextrve 
/>/im.5.3.weareorpliaiisand/.ourmolher»widuWB 
Mlzek.'i'i.l.m  thee  have  tliey  vexed  ihe/.aiid  widow 
Hus.  14.  3.  for  in  thee  the/,  tiiideth  mercy 
jVu/.3.5.  a  witness  against  iho»e  that  oppress  the/. 
Ja;/i.l.27.pure  religion  is  to  visit  the/,  and  widows 

FATUEKLESS  with  stranger. 

X'««M4.29.the  stranger,  and  the/and  the  widow 

shall  come  and  eat,  iJ4.  I'J,  -JU,  -il.  \  au.  I'i,  13. 

16. 11.  the  stranger  and/,  rejoice  with  thee,  14. 

"4.  17.  nor  pervert  judgment  o<  stranger  nor./. 

^T.iy.cursed  that  perverts  judg.ol'sfraji^'er  and/. 

Pioi.yi.ti.they  slay  the  stranger  and  murder  the/. 

l46.  9.  the  Lord  preservelh  the  stranger  and  /. 

Jer.  7.  6.  if  ye  opi)res3ed  not  the  stranger,  the/. 

and  the  widow,  2-2.  3.  Zeck.  7.  10. 

FATHOMS. 

Jlcls  27. 28.  they  found  it  twenty/,  again  fifteen  /. 

FATLING. 
/jfa.ll.G.the  calf,  the  young  lion,and  the /.together 

FAILINGS. 
r.Sa/n.15.9.  Saul  spared  Agag  and  the  best  of  the/. 
2  6'ain.  ti.  13.  Uavid  sacriHced  oxen  and/. 
Ps.  06. 15. 1  will  otier  to  thee  burnt-sacritices  of/. 
F.-.ek.  39.  18.  all  of  them  /.  of  Bashan 
^/a£.22. 4.  my  oxen  and  iny/.  are  killed,  all  ready 

FATNESS. 
Gen.  27.  28.  God  give  thee  of  the  /.  of  the  earth 

39.  thy  dwelling  shall  be  the/,  of  the  earth 
Deut.  ii.  15.  thou  art  thick  and  covered  with/. 
./udg.i).{).  the  olive-tree  said,  should  I  leave  my  f-? 
Job  15. 27.  because  he  covereth  his  face  with  his/. 
36.  16.  that  set  on  thy  table  should  be  full  of/. 
/**.  36.8.  shall  be  satisKod  with  the/,  of  thy  house 
03.  5.  my  soul  be  satisfied  as  with  marrow  and  /. 
65. 11.  thou  crownest  year,  all  thy  paths  drop/. 
73.  7.  eyes  stand  out  with/,  have  more  than  wish 
109.  24.  knees  are  weak,  rny  flesh  faileth  of/. 
Isa.  17.  4.  once  the/,  of  his  Hesh  shall  wax  lean 
34.  6.  the  sword  of  the  Lord  is  made  fat  with/. 

7.  their  dust  shall  be  made  fat  with/. 
5,5.  2.  and  let  your  soul  delight  itself  in/. 
Jer.  31    14. 1  will  satiate  the  soul  of  priests  with  /. 
iionj.  11.17.  with  them  partakestof/.  of  the  olive 

FATS. 
Joel  2. 24.  the/,  shall  overflow  with  wine  and  oil 
3.  13.  for  the  press  is  full,  the/,  overllow 

FATTED. 

1  Kings  4.  23.  ten  oxen,  beside  harts,  and  /.  fowl 

Jer.  46.  21.  her  hired  men  are  like/,  bullocks 

See  Calf. 

FATTER,  see  Countenances. 

FATTEST. 

PsaLlH.  31.  the  wrath  of  God  slew  the/,  of  them 

Dan.  11.24.  shall  enter  on/,  places  of  the  province 

FAULT,  S. 
Oen.i\.  9.  butler  said,  i  remember  my/,  this  day 
Kzod.  5.  16.  but  the/,  is  in  thine  own  pi-ople 
iJeut.  25.  2.  cause  to  b>;  beaten  according  to  his/. 

1  .Sum.  29.  3.  and  I  have  found  no/,  in  him 

2  Ham.  3.  8.  thou  chargest  me  this  day  with  a/. 
Psal.  19.  12.  cleanse  thou  Bie  from  seen  t/. 

59.  4.  they  run  and  prepare  without  my/. 
V.'nn.  6.  4.  they  could  find  no  occasion  or/,  in  him 
Mat.  18.  15.  if  thy  brother  trespass,  tell  him  his/. 
Mark'i.'i.  eat  with  unwashen  hands,  they  found/. 
Jjuke'i'i.  4.  Pilate  said,  chief  priests  and  people,  I 
find  no/,  in  this  man,  14.  .lohn  IP.  38.  |  19. 4,  6. 
Jinm.'J.  19.  thou  wilt  say,  why  doth  he  y<^t  find/.  ? 
]  Cor.  0.  7.  now  there  is  utterly  a  /.  among  you 
Oal.d.  1.  if  a  man  be  overtaken  in  a/,  restore  him 
Jicb.H.H.  for,  finding/  with  ihein,  he  saitli,  behold 

9.  tH.  who  offered  himself  without/  to  God 
Jam.  5.  Its.  confess  your/,  one  to  another,  pray  one 
1  Pet.  2.  20.  if  when  ye  be  buflelcd  for  your/. 
Kev.  14.  5.  are  without  f.  before  the  throne  of  God 

FAULTLESS. 
ffeb.  0.  7.  if  the  first  covenant  had  been/,  then 
Jude24.  him  that  is  able  to  present  you  /.  with  joy 

FAULTY. 
JVum.S.'i. t31.no  satisfaction  for  a  murderer/,  to  die 
2.^'am.  14. 13.  the  king  doth  speak  ns  one  which  is/. 
I£o3.l0.'i.  heart  divided,  now  shall  they  be  found/. 

FAVOUR. 
^(^.39.21.  gave  Joseph/,  in  the  sight  of  the  keeper 
£xod.  3.  21.  I  will  give  this  peuple/.  insight  of  the 
Egyptians,  sliull  not  go  empty,  II.  3.  |  12. -3(1. 
75eut.28.  54).  which  shall  not  shew  ;'.  to  th«  young 
33.  23.  he  said,  O  Naphlali,  sHiisfied  with  /. 
JVmA.  11.  20.  and  that  they  mijrhi  hnve  no/. 
1  .Sam.  2.  26.  Samuel  was  in  f.  with  Tiord  and  men 
Job  10.  12.  thou  hast  granted  me  life  and  /. 
P.»a/.5.12.wilh/.wilt  compass  him  as  with  a  shield 
30.  5.  his/,  is  life,  weepinir  may  endure  (or  a  night 
7.  by  Ihy/.thoii  hiistmndc  my  mounlain  to  stand 

44.  3.  because  thou  h.idRl  a/,  unto  them 

45.  12.  even  the  rich  shall  en'rcnt  thy/. 
8*1.  17.  ill  lliy/.  our  horn  shall  bo  exalted 

192 


FEA 

Pja/.106.4.reraem.me  with  the/thou  bearcst  thine 
112.  5.  a  good  man  sliuwetli/.  and  lendeth 
119.  5d.  1  entreated  thy/,  with  iiiy  whole  heart 

Frov.  11.  27.  lie  that  seeketh  good  jirocurelh/. 

13.  15.  good  understanding  giveth/. 

14.  y.  but  among  the  righteous  there  is/. 
35.  the  king's/,  is  toward  a  wise  servant 

16.  15.  his/,  is  as  a  cloud  of  the  latter  rain 

19.  6.  many  will  entieat  the/,  of  the  prince 

12.  the  king's/,  is  as  dew  upon  the  grass 

21.  10.  his  neighbour  findeth  no/,  in  Ins  eyes 

22.  1.  loving/,  rather  to  be  chosen  than  silver 
29.  26.  many  seek  tlie  ruler's/. 

31.  30./.  is  deceitful,  and  btauty  is  vain 
Keel.  9. 11.  race  not  to  swirt,  nor/,  to  men  of  skill 
Jsa.  26.  10.  let/,  be  shewed  to  the  wicked 

27.  11.  he  who  formed  them  will  shew  them  no/. 

60.  10.  but  in  my/,  have  1  had  mercy  on  lliee 
Jer.  16.  13.  a  land,  where  1  will  nut  shew  you/. 

31.  19.  and  with/,  will  1  lead  them 
Van.  1.9.  God  had  brought  Daniel  into/,  and  love 
J^uke  2.52.  Jesus  increased  in/,  with  God  and  men 
jlcts  2.  47.  praising  God,  having/,  with  all  people 

7.  10.  God  gave  Moses/,  in  siglit  of  fharaoh 

25.  3.  the  high-priest  desired/,  against  him 

Find,  or  found  FAVOUR. 
Gen.  18.  3.  if  now  1  have  found  f.  in  thy  sight, 
30.  27.  J\rum.  11.  15.  1  Sam.  20.  29. 
JVcA.  2.  5.  Ksth.  5.  8.  |  7.  3.  |  8.  5. 
JVum.  11.  11.  and  wherefore  have  I  ttol  found  f. J 
Deut.  24.1.  it  come  to  pass  she  find  no/,  in  his  eyes 
Hnth  2.  13.  let  me  find  f.  in  thy  sight,  my  lord 

1  Nam.  16.  22.  David  Uii{h  found  f.  in  my  sight 
25.  8.  let  the  young  men /«<//.  in  thy  sight 

2  .Sa?7i.  15.  25.  if  1  shall /n(//.  in  eyes  of  llie  Lord 
1  Kings  11.  19.  Hadad /«!(«<//.  in  sight  of  Pharaoh 
Prov.  3.  4.  so  shall  thou  find  f.  in  the  sight  of  God 

2i.  23.  shall /)Ki  more/,  than  he  that  flattereth 
Cant.  8.  10.  1  was  in  his  eyes  as  one  thai  found  f. 
J^uke  1.  30.  fear  not,  for  thou  hasX. found}',  with  G. 
Jlcts  7.  4t).  David/ouH///.  before  God,  and  desired 

Obtain,  or  obtained  FAVOUR. 
Eslh.  2.  15.  now  Esther  obtained  f.  17.  1  5.  2. 
/'rojj  .8.35.  whoso  findeth  iiie,sliall  o4(ain/.  of  Lord 
12.  2.  a  good  man  obtaineth  f.  of  the  Ijord 
18.22.  whoso  fiiulclh  a  wile,  obtaineth  f.oiljotii 
FAVOUR. 
I  Sam.  29.  6.  nevertheless,  the  lords  /.  thee  not 
Psal.  35.  27.  be  glad,  that/,  my  righteous  cause 
102.  13.  the  time,  the  set  time  to/,  her  is  come 
14.  for  thy  servants/,  the  dust  thereof 
109.  12.  iior  let  any  to/,  his  fatherless  children 
FAVOURABLE. 
.Judg.  21.  22.  be/,  unto  them  for  our  sakes 
./o4  33. 26. shall  pray,  and  God  will  be/,  unto  him 
Psal.  11. 1.  will  the  L.  cast  off,  and  be/,  no  more  7 
85.  1.  Lord,  thou  bast  been/,  to  thy  land 

FAVOURED. 
Oen.  2'.).  17.  Rachel  was  beautiful  and  well-/. 
39.  6.  Joseph  was  well/.  ||  41.2.  kine  well-/.  18. 
41.  3.  out  of  the  river  ill-/,  kine,  4,  19,  21,  27. 
Prov.  21.  t  10.  his  neighbour  is  not/,  in  his  eyes 
Aam.4.16.Lord  divided  them,  they/,  not  the  elders 
l)an.  1.4.  children  well-/,  and  skilful  in  all  wisdom 
JVa/i.  3.  4.  the  whoredoms  of  the  well-/,  hailot 
Aute  1.  2-<.  hnil,lhou  art  highly/.  Lord  with  thee 

Kvil  FAVOUREDNESS. 
Deut.  17.  1.  any  bullock  wherein  is  any  evil  f. 

FAVOUREST. 

Psnl.  41.  11.  by  this  I  know  that  thou  /.  me 

86.t2.)ireserve  my  soul, for  I  am  one  w  horn  thou/. 

FAVOURETII. 

2.Snm.20. 11.  he  that/.  Joab,  let  him  go  after  Joab 

FEAR. 

Fear  is  a  pns.iion,  implanted  in  nature,  that 
'causes  a  flight  from  an  approaching  evil,eilhir 
real  or  imaginary.  The  fear  of  (!od  is  either 
filial  or  servile.  I'he  filial  fear  of  (lad is  a  huly 
affection, or  gracious  habit  wrought  in  the  soul 
by  fiod,  Jer.  32.  40.  inhereby  it  is  inclined  and 
enabled  to  obey  all  Clod's  comwnndmertt.i,  nen 
the  most  difTir'ult,  Gen.  22. 12.  Eccl.  12. 13.  and 
to  hate  and  avoid  evil,  Neh.  5.  15.  Prov.  8.  13. 
I  16.6.  Sliivii-h  fnnris  Ihr  consri/urmeofguilt; 
it  is  njndirinl  impression  from  thr  sad  thoughts 
of  the  proviiktd  Majesty  of  hrnven  ;  it  is  an 
alarm  within,  that  disturbs  thf  rest  of  a  sin- 
ner; thus  ViVix  fenrril^  .Acts  24.  2  >.  Though 
this  fear  be  in  mirkrd  mm,  yet,  through  the 
merry  and  grace  of  fj'od,  it  oflrn  proves  a  pre- 
pnrn'tire  to  faith,  Arl«  2.  37.  Rom.  8.  15. 
Fear  is  likeinisr  used  for  thr  object  nf  fear.  Thus 
it  is  said,  the  Fear  of  Isaac,  to  describe  the 
flod  whom  iKaac  feared.  Gen.  31.  42,  Except 
the  fcnr  of  Isaac  had  been  with  ni",  surely  thou 
hedst  sent  mo  nway  now  empty.  .^nrfinProv. 
I.  26,1  will  mock  when  yoor  fear  cometh;  that 
is,  the  calamity  you  fiarrd.  Ovd  says,  that  he 
Kill  send  his  fear  brfurr  his  prr^h  ;  that  is, 
a  tirroT  icrovght  by  him,  in  order  to  terrify 


FEA 

and  destroy  the  inhabita/its  of  Canaan,  Eztd 
23.  27. 

Fear  is  put  for  me  whole  worship  of  God,  in 
Psal.  34.  11,  1  will*  teach  you  Iho  lear  of  the 
Lord.  /  villi  leach  you  the  true  and  principal 
way  of  worshipping  and  serving  Cud  with  his 
acceptation,  and  to  yuur  own  salvation.  It  is 
likewise  put  for  the  Ifiw  and  word  of  God, 
Psal.  19.  9,  Tlie  fear  of  the  Lord  is  cic-an,  en- 
during for  ever.  'J'he  law  is  so  called,  becausa 
it  is  the  object,  the  cause,  and  tlie  rule,  of  the 
grace  of  holy  tear. 

Gen.  9.  2.  the/,  of  you  shall  be  on  every  "beast 
31.  42.  except  the/,  of  Isaac  had  been  with  mo 
53.  Jacob  sware  by  the/,  of  his  lallier  Isaac 

Kzod.  15.  16./.  and  dread  shall  tall  upon  them 

23.  27.  1  will  send  my  /.  before  thee,  and  destroy 
Deut.  2. 25.  I  will  jml  the  /.  of  thee  on  the  nations 

11.  25.  the  Lord  shall  lay  the/,  ol'you  on  the  land 
1  Chron.  14. 17.  Lord  brought/,  of  hiin  on  nations 
F.ira  3.  3./.  was  on  them  because  of  the  people 
JV'cA.  6.  14.  think  on  them  that  put  me  in/.  19. 
EsUi.  8. 17.  the  /.  of  the  Jews  fell  upon  them,  9.  2. 
9.  3.  because  the/,  of  Mordecai  fell  on  them 
,lob  3.  1 25.  I  feared  a  /.  and  it  came  upon  me 
4.  6.  is  not  this  thy/,  thy  confidence,  thy  hope? 

14./.  came  upon  me  and  tienibling 
6.  14.  ho  torsakelh  the/,  of  the  Almighty 
9.  34.  and  let  not  his/,  terrify  me 
1.5.4.  yea,  thou  easiest  ott'/.  and  restraincst  prayer 
21.  9.  iiouses  safe  from  /.  nor  rod  of  God  on  them 
22.10.snares  round  about,  sudden/.tioubleth  thee 
25.  2.  dominion  and  /.  are  with  him,  makes  peace 
39.  22.  he  mockelh  at/  and  is  not  afi'righted 
Psal.5.1.  in  thy/,  will  1  worship  toward  thy  temple 
9.20.puttlieni  in/.Oijord,ihat  nationsmnyknow 
14.  5.  there  were  they  in  great /.God  is  in  general. 

31.  11.  and  I  was  a/,  to  mine  acquaintance 
13./.wa3  on  every  side,  they  look  counsel  ag.  me 

48.  6./.  took  hold  ujioii  them  there,  and  pain 
53.  5.  there  were  they  inf.  where  no/,  was 
64.  1.  jirescrve  my  life  from/,  of  the  enemy 
BO.  11.  according  to  thy/,  so  is  thy  wrath 
10.5.  '.iS.  for  the/,  of  them  fell  upon  them 
119.  .IH.  thy  servant,  who  is  devoted  to  thy/. 

Prov.  1.  26.  I  will  mock  when  )«<ir/.  comeih 
27.wheu  your/.cometh  asdesolation  and  destruc- 
33.  and  shall  be  quiet  fiom/.  of  evil 
3.  25.  be  not  afraid  of  sudden  /.  nor  desolation 
10.24.  the/,  of  the  wicked  shall  come  upon  him 

20.  2.  the/,  of  a  king  is  as  the  roaring  of  a  lion 
2it.  2,5.  the./,  of  mull  biingeth  a  snare 

Cant.  3.8.  hath  his  sword  becaiiseof/.  in  the  night 
Isa.  7.  25.  there  shall  not  come  the/,  of  briers 

8.  12.  neither/,  ye  their/,  nor  be  afraid 
13.  the  Lord,  lei  him  be  your/,  and  your  dread 

14.  3.  the  Lord  shuli  give  thee  rest  from  ihy  /. 

21.  4.  the  night  of  pleasure  hetnrned  into/  to  mo 

24.  17./.  and  the  pit,  and  the  snare  arc  upon  theo 
18.  that  fleeth  from/,  shall  fall,  .ler.  48.  44. 

29.  13.  their/,  toward  me  is  laucht  by  nun 
63.  17.  and  hardened  our  heart  from  thy/. 

Jer.  2.  19.  an  evil  thing,  that  my/,  is  not  in  thfe 
6.  25     he  sword  and  /.  is  on  every  side,  20.  10. 
20. '  J.  Lord  hath  called  thy  name/,  round  about 

30.  5.  we  have  heard  a  voice  of/,  not  of  peace 

32.  40.  but  I  will  jint  my/,  in  their  hcart.i 

4?.  43.  /.  and  the  pit  shall  be  upon  thee,  O  Moab 

49.  5.  behold,  I  will  bring  a  /.  upon  thee,  saih  L. 
24./.hath  seized  on  Dnnmscns,  anguish  and  sorr. 
29.  they  sjiall  cry  to  them,/,  is  on  every  side 

J, am.  3.  41.  f.  and  a  snare  is  come  upon  us 
F.zrk.  21. 1 15.  /.  of  the  sword  against  their  gate* 
,30.  t  4.  great/,  shall  he  in  Elhio|>ia 

13.  I  will  nut  a/,  in  the  land  of  Bgypt 
Mai.  1.  6.  if !  he  a  master,  where  is  my/.? 
AaAf  1.12. whenZarharias  saw  him, /.fell  upon  him 
dH.  frame  on  nil  that  dwelt  round  about  them,  7 
16.  Jlcts  2.  43.  I  5.  .5,  II.  I  19.  17.  Hev.U.  11 
3.  t  14.  he  s.nd  to  the  soldiers,  put  no  man  in/. 
li'nm.  13.  7.  render/,  to  whom/,  in  due 

1  Cor.  2.  3.  I  was  with  you  in  weakness  and  in/. 
2r,;r.  7.  11.  what,/"..'  what  Tehement  de»iref 

2  7Vm.  1.7.  God  hiith  not  given  us  the  spirit  of/ 
Col. 2.  t  1.  ye  knew  what  great/.  I  have  fnr  you 
Ilrh.i.  15.  and  deliver  them  who  thro'/-  of  death 

12  28.  may  serve  God  wiih  reverence  and  godly/. 
I  Pet.  1. 17.  pass  the  lime  of  your  sojourn,  herein/. 

3.  15.  give  an  answer  with  meekness  iind/. 
1  John  4.  18.  no/,  in  love,  hut  love  castelh  out/. 

For  FEAR. 
/>r»/f .  2P.  67.  /or  Iho  .r.  wlicri'wiih  Ibou  shnlt  fear 
Josh.  22. 24.  hiivo  noi  rather  done  it  for  f  of  thing 
./k(/;t.  9.21.  dwelt /or/,  of  Ahimelech  his  brother 
l.fnm.21.10.  Dav.  arose,  fled  that  i\ay  for  f.  of  Saul 

23  26.r><ivid  made  hnsle  to  get  nway /or /.orSuuJ 
.lob  22.  4.  will  he  reprove  thee  for  f.  of  thee  1 
Isa.  31.  t8.  thev  shall  flee  for  f.  of  the  sword 

0.  he  shall  pass  over  to  liis  Klmi-g  h<dd   for  f. 
Jer.  35.  W.forf.  of  the  army  of  ihu  Ciiatdeaiw 


FEA       • 

/cj-.S?.!!.  army  broken  up/cr/.of  Pharaoh's  army 
41.  9.  which  Asa  had  madv.  fur  f.  of  Baiisha 
46.  5.farf.  was  roaiid  about,  suith  tlie  Lord 
50.  16.  for  f.  of  ihc  oppressing  sword  lliey  return 
Mai.  -.  5.  fur  the/,  wherewith  lie  feared  me 
»Mat.  14.  »0.  the  disciples  cnod  out  for  f. 
iri.  i.furf.  of  him  the  keepers  did  shake 
J^uke  21.  2t5.  men's  hearts  faihng  them/o»-/. 
Johnl.  13.  noinan  spake  openly /«r/.  of  the  Jews 
19.3a.  a  disciple,  but  iecretly /ur/.  of  the  Jews 
20.  19.  disciples  wore  assciiUilod/or/.  of  the  Jews 
kev.  18.  10.  afar  off  for  f.  of  lier  torment,  15. 

FEAK  of  Uod. 
(tcn.^Q.  11.  surely  the/,  of  God  is  not  in  this  place 
2  iiam.  33.  3.  must  be  just,  ruling  in  the/,  of  God 
2  CVir.2U.29.  the/,  of  God  was  on  all  kingdoms 
jVeA.  5.  9.  ought  ye  not  to  walk  in  the/,  of  Gudi 

15.  but  so  did  not  I,  because  of  the/,  of  God 
Psal.  31).  1.  there  is  no/,  of  God  before  his  eyes 
Hom.3.  IS.  there  is  no/,  of  God  before  their  eyes 
2  Cor.  7.  1.  perfecting  holiness  in  the/,  of  God 
Eph.  5.  21.  submitting  one  to  another  in  /.  of  God 
FEAR  of  the  Lord. 

1  Sam.  11.  7./.  (./  Lord  fell  on  i)eople,  2  C/ir.17.10. 
i  Chr.  14.  14.  the/,  of  the  Lord  came  ujwn  them 

19. 7.  let  the  f. of  the  Lord  be  upon  you, lake  heed 
9.  thus  shall  ye  do,  in  the  f. of  the  i-yrii, faithfully 
/o6  28. 28.  toman  he  said,  Ihef.ofLordia  wisdom 
Ps.  19.  9.  the  /.  of  Lord  is  clean,  enduring  for  ever 
34.11.  children,  I  will  teach  you  Xhnf.ofthc  Lord 
111.  10./.  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom 
Prov.  1.  7./.  of  Ld.  beginning  of  knowledge,  9.  10. 

29.  and  did  not  choose  the  /.  of  the  Jjord 
2.  5.  then  shalt  thou  understand  the/,  of  the  Lord 
8.  13.  the  /.  of  the  Lord  i%  to  hate  evil 
10.  27.  the/,  of  the  Lord  prolongoth  days 
■  14.  20.  in  the/,  of  the  Lord  is  strong  confidence 
27.  the/  of  the  Lord  is  a  fountain  of  life 

15.  16.  better  is  a  little  with  the/,  of  the  Lord 
33.  the  f -of  the  Lord  is  the  instruction  of  wisdom 

16.  6.  by  tlie  /.  of  the  Lord  men  depart  from  evil 
19.  23.  the/,  of  Ike  Lord  tendeth  to  life 

22.  4»by  the/,  of  the  Lord  are  riches  and  honour 

23.  17.  be  thou  in  the  /.  of  the  Lord  all  day  long 
Ua.  2. 10.  hide  thee  in  the  dust  for  /.  of  the  J^ord 

19.  they  shall  go  into  caves  for/  of  the  J.ord 

21.  to  go  into  clefts  of  rocks  for/,  of  the  Lord 

11.2.  spirit  of  knowledge,  and  ot  the/,  ufthe  Ld. 

3.  of  quick  understanding  in  the/,  of  the  Lord 

33.  6.  the/,  of  the  Lord  is  his  treasure 

.icia  9. 31.  walking  in  /.  nf  the  Lord  and  comfort 

IVith  FEAR. 
Psal.  2.  11.  serve  the  Lord  withf.  and  rejoice 
Jonah  1.  t  10-  then  were  the  men  with  great/. 
Mat.  28.  8.  they  departed  with  f.  and  great  joy 
Luke  5.  26.  and  they  were  all  filled  roit.'j/. 
8.  37.  the  Gadarenes  were  taken  icith  great/. 

2  Cor.  7.  J5.  how  with  f.  you  received  him 
iopA.6.5.  obedient  to  masters  withf.  and  trembling 
Phil.".\2.v/ork  outsalvalion  withf.  and  trembling 
L/eb.  11.  7.  Noah  moved  withf.  prepared  an  ark 
1  Pet.  2.  18.  servants,  be  subject  to  masters  withf. 

3.2.  behold  your  chaste  conversat.  coupled  withf. 
Jude  23.  and  otheis  save  with  f.puWing  them  out 

(VithoiU  FEAR. 
Job  39.  16.  her  labour  is  in  vain  without  f. 
41.  33.  there  is  not  his  like,  who  is  made  without  f. 
Luke  1.  74.  that  we  might  serve  him  without  f. 
1  Cor.  16.  10.  that  he  may  be  with  you  witho'ut  f. 
Phil.  1.  14.  are  bolrl  to  speak  the  word  without  f. 
Jude  12.  they  feast,  feeding  themselves  without  f. 

FEARS. 
.Toi  15.  t  21.  a  sound  of/,  is  in  his  cars 
Psal.  34.  4.  the  Lord  delivered  me  from  all  my  /. 
Kcct.  12.  5.  anil  when/,  shall  be  in  the  way 
/ifl.  66.  4.  and  I  will  bring  their/,  upon  them 
ZCor.  7.5.  wiihout  were  fightings,  within  were/. 

FEAK,  yerb. 
/>W.19.3.ye  ahall/.every  man  his  mother  and  fatli. 
J^um.  14.  9.  neither/,  yo  the  people  of  the  land 
I>eut.  4.  10.  hear,  that  they  may  learn  to/,  me 
5.29.0  that  tlicy  would/,  mo,  keep  my  command. 
28.  58./.  this  glorious  name,  the  Lord  thy  God 
<56.tliou  phalt/.day  and  night,  have  no  assurance 
67.  for  the  fear  of  heart  wherewith  thou  shall/. 
.Tud^.l.  10.  if  Ihou/.  to  go  down,  go  wiihPhnrah 

1  Kings  8.  40.  that  they  may/,  thee,  2  Chron.  6.31. 
43.  may  know  thy  name  lo/.  thee,  2  Chr.  6.  33. 

2  Kings  17.  '.l8.  neither  shall  ye/,  olhor  gods 
39.  but  Lord  your  God  ye  shall/,  and  he  deliver 

1  Chron.  16.  30./.  before  him  all  earth,  Psal.  96.  9. 
J^ek.  1.  11.  ihv servants  who  desire  to/,  thy  name 
Job  31.  34.  did  I/,  a  great  multitude  f 
Psal.  23.  4.  I  will  /.  no  evil,  for  thou  art  with  mn 

S7.  1.  the  Lord  is  my  salvation,  wiiom  shall  I/.  ? 

31. 19.  tliy  goodness  laid  up  for  iliem  that/,  thee 

40. 3.  many  shall  see  it,  and/,  and  ehall  trust  irvL. 
49.  5.  wherefore  should  I/,  in  the  davs  of  evil  ? 
52.6.  the  righteous  also  shall  see,  and /.laugh  at  h. 

60.4.  thou  bast  given  a  banner  to  them  thai/,  thee 

193 


FEA 

PidZ.  61.5.  the  heritage  of  those  that/,  thy  name 
64.  9.  all  shall/,  and  declare  the  work,  ol  God 
72.5.  they  shall/,  thee  as  long  as  the  sun  endureth 
81).  II.  unite  my  heart  to/,  thy  name 

102.  15.  so  the  heathen  shall  /.  thy  name 
119.  39.  turn  away  my  reproach  which  I/. 

63.  I  am  a  companion  of  all  them  that/,  thee 

74.  they  that/thee  will  be  glad  when  they  see  me 

79.  let  those  that/,  thee  turn  unto  me 

Ecel.  3. 14.  Goddoeth  it,  men  should/,  before  him 

Isa.  8.  12.  neither/,  ye  their  fear,  nor  be  afraid 

19.  16.  Egypt  like  to  women,  shall  be  afraid  and/. 

25.3.  the  city  of  the  terrible  nations  shall/,  thee 
44.  11.  the  workmen  shall/,  and  be  ashamed 

59.  19.  so  shall  they/,  the  name  of  the  Lord 

60.  5.  thine  heart  shall  /.  and  be  enlarged 
Jcr.lQ.l.  who  would  not/.thee,  O  King  of  nations? 

23.4.  and  they  shall/. no  more,  nor  be  dismayed 

32.  39.  will  give  them  one  heart  that  may/,  ine 

33.  9.  they  shall/,  and  tremble  for  all  the  goodness 
51.46.  lest  your  heart  faint,  and  ye/,  for  rumour 

Dan.  1.  10.  the  prince  said,  I/,  my  lord  the  king 
6.  26.  that  men/,  before  the  God  of  Daniel 
Hos.  10.  5.  the  inhabitants  of  Samaria  shall/. 
Mie.  7. 17.  move  as  worms,  and  /.  because  of  thee 
Zcph.  3.  7.  I  said,  surely  thou  wilt/,  me 
Llug.  1.  12.  and  the  people  did/,  before  the  Lord 
Zcch.Q.5.  Ashkclon  shall  see  it  and/.Gaza  also  sue 
Mul.  4.  2.  to  you  that/.my  name  shall  sun  of  right. 
Jl/at.21.26.  if  we  shall  say,  of  men,  we/,  the  peojde 
J^uke  12.  5. 1  will  forewarn  you  whom  ye  shall/. 
/i!o«i.S. 15.  not  received  spiritof  bondage  again  to/. 

11.  20.  be  not  high-minded,  but/. 

2  Cor.  11.  3.  I/,  lest  as  the  serpent  beguiled  Eve 
12. 20.  If.  lesl  I  shall  not  find  you  such  as  I  would 
ITim.  5.20.  rebuke  before  all,  that  others  may/, 
i/ei. 4.1. let  us/.lest  promise  being  lell  us  of  entering 

12.  21.  Moses  said,  I  exceedingly/,  and  quake 
Kev.  2.  10./.  none  of  those  things  thou  shalt  suffer 

11.  13;  give  reward  to  them  that/,  thy  name 

FEAR  God. 
Gen.  42. 18.  he  said,  this  do,  and  live,  for  I  /.  God 
F.zod.  18.  21.  provide  able  men,  such  as/.  God 
/>f7>. 19.14.  but  shalt/.  thy  God,  I  am  the  Lord,  32. 

25.  17.  but  thou  shalt  /.  thy  God,  36,  43. 
.Job  1.  9.  Satan  said,  doth  Job/.  God  for  nought  ? 
Psal.  66.  16.  come  and  hear,  all  ye  that/.  God 
Keel.  .5.  7.  in  words  are  vanities,  but  /.  thou  God 

8.  12.  it  shall  be  well  with  them  that/.  God 

12.  13./.  Gpd,  and  keep  his  commandments 
Isa.  29.  23.  and  they  shall/,  the  God  of  Israel 
Luke  23. 40.  rebuked  him,  saying,  dost  not/.  God? 
.lets  13.  16.  and  ye  that/.  God  give  audience 

1  Pet.  2. 17.  honour  men,  /.  God,  honour  the  king 
Rev.  14.7.  saying,  f.  Gad,  and  give  glory  to  him 

Hear  ,ind  FEAR. 
Deut.  13.  11.  a*  Israel  shall  hear  andf.  21.  21. 
17.  13.  and  all  the  people  shall  hear  andf. 
19.20.  those  which  remain  shall  hear  andf, 

FEAR  him. 
Gen.  32.  11.  deliver  me  from  Esau,  for  I/.  Am 
Deut.  13.  4.  ye  shall  walk  after  God,  and/.  Aim 

2  Kings  17.  36.  him  shall  ye/,  him  shall  ye  worship 
./ob  37.  24.  men  therefore  /.  him,  he  respecteth  not 
Psal.  22.  23.  and/.  Aim  all  yo  the  seed  of  Israel 

25.  I  will  pay  my  vows  bffore  them  that/,  him 
25.  14.  secret  of  the  Lord  iswith  them  thai  f. him 
33. 18.  the  oye  of  the  Lord  is  on  them  that/,  him 

34.  7.  angel  encampelh  about  them  that/,  him 
9.  for  there  is  no  want  to  them  that/.  Am 

67.  7.  all  ilie  ends  of  the  earth  shall/,  kim 

85.  9.  surely  his  salvation  is  nigh  them  that/.  Aim 

103.  11.  great  is  his  mercy  to  them  that/.  Aim 
13.  so  the  Lord  pitieth  them  that/,  hint 

17.  the  mercy  of  the  Lord  is  on  them  that  /.  him 
111.  5.  he  hath  given  meat  to  them  that/.  Am 
145. 19.  he  will  fulfil  the  desire  of  thrm  that/.  Am 
147. 11.  Lord  taketh  pleasure  in  thom  that  /.  him 
Jl/ttf.l0.28././iim  who  is  able  to  destroy,  Luke  12.5. 
I^uke  1.  50.  his  mercy  is  on  them  that/,  him 
iicB. 19.5.praiso  God,  ve  that/.Ann, small  and  great 

FEAR  the  Lord. 
Dent.  6.  2.  that  thou  mightcst/.  the  Lord  thy  God 
13.  thou  shall/.  A.  thy  God,  10.20.  'iKivgs  17.39. 
24.  to/,  the  Lord  our  God  for  our  good  always 
10.  12./.  the  Lord, Vfa\k  in  his  ways,  and  lovo  him 
14.  23.  learn  to/,  the  Lord,  17.  19.  |  31.  12,  13. 
.Tosh.  4.  24.  that  ye  might/,  the  J^nrd  your  God 
24.  14.  now  therefore/,  the  Lord,  and  serve  him 
1  .Snni.  12. 14.  if  ye  will/,  the  J,ord,  and  serve  him 
24.  only/,  the  Lord  and  serve  him  in  truth 

1  Kings  18.  12. 1  thv  servant/,  the  L.  2  Kings  4.1 . 

2  Kings  17.28.  taught  them  how  they  should/.  L. 
Psal.  15.  4.  he  honnure  h  them  that/,  the  Lord 

22.  23.  ye  that/,  the  Lord,  praise  him 
33.8.  If  t  all  ihe  eanh/.  the  Lord,  and  stnnd  in  awe 
.34.  9.  Of.  the  Lord  ye  his  saints,  there  is  no  want 
115.  11.  ye  that/,  the  Lord  trust  in  the  Lord 

13.  he  will  bless  them  that/,  the  Lord 
118.  4.  that/,  the  Lord,  say,  his  mercy  endureth 
8D 


FEA 

Psal.  135.  20.  ye  that/,  the  Lord,  Wnsj  the  Lord 
Prov.  3.  7./.  the  J.ord,  and  depart  from  evil 
24.  21.  my  son,/,  thou  the  Lorn,  and  the  king 
ler.  5.  24.  neither  say  they,  let  us/,  tae  Lord 
26.  19.  did  he  not/,  the  Lord,  and  besought  Lordt 
Hos.  3.  5.  afterward  shall  Israel/,  the  L/id 
Jonah  1.  9.  and  1/  the  J.ord,  the  God  of  heaven 

FK.Mi  not. 
<?cji.l5.1./.no!,Abrain,I  am  thy  shield  and  rewbrd 
21. 17./.  ?tot,  God  hath  heard  the  voice  of  the  iad 
26.  24./.  not,  I  am  with  thee,  and  will  bless  thee 
3.5.  17.  the  midwife  said  to  Rachel,/,  not 

43.  23.  and  he  said,  peace  be  to  you,/,  not 
46.  3.  he  said,/.  7iot  to  go  down  into  Egypt 

50.19.  Jofiuph  said,/,  not,  forain  I  in  place  of  God 
21./.  not,  1  will  nourish  you  and  your  little  ones 

F.jod.\i.yi.f.  not,  stand  and  see  sulvalion  of  Lord 

20.20.  Moses  said,/,  not,  God  is  come  lo  prove 
JV'itHi.  14.  9.  the  Lord  is  with  us,/,  them  not 

21.34.  the  Lord  said  to  Moses,/,  him  not 
J)eut.  1   21.  go  lip  and  jMissess  Ihe  land,/,  not 
3.  2  /.  not  Og,  22.  ||20.  3./.  not  your  enemies 

31.  6./.  not  tlie  Gaimaiiites,  Josh.  10.  8,  25. 

8.  the  Lord  will  go  before  thee,  he  will  not  foi^ 
sake  thee,/,  nut,  .losh.  8.  1.  1  Chron.  28.20. 
.Tudg.  4.  18.  turn  in,  my  lord,  turn  in  to  me,/,  not 
6.  JO.  I  said,/,  not  the  gods  of  the  Amorites 
2:1.  peace  be  to  then,  f'  not,  thou  shalt  not  die 
liuth  3.  II.  and  now,  my  duughier,/.  7iot 

1  6'a»H.4.20.  women  t'.ral  stood  by  said  to  her,/,  not 

12.  20.  and  Samuel  said  to  the  people,/,  not 

22.  23.  abide  thou  wiih  me,/,  vol,  he  that  seeketh 

23.  17.  Jonathan  said  unto  David,/,  not 

2  Sam.  9.  7.  David  said  to  Mciihibusheth,  /.  not 

13.  28.  he  said  to  his  servanis,  kill  .Amnon,/.  not 

1  Kings  17.  13.  Elijah  said  to  the  widow,  /.  not 

2  Kings  6.  IG.f  nut,  more  with  us  than  with  them 
17.  :14.  unto  this  day,  ihey/.  not  the  Lord 

2.).  24./.  not  to  serve  the  Chaldccs,  .kr.  40.  9. 
2  CAron.  20.  17.  the  Lord  will  be  wiih  you,  f.not 
Psal.  .55.  19.  no  changes,  therefore  they/,  nut  God 

64.  4.  suddenly  do  they  shoot  at  him,  and  /.  nut 
Isa.  7.  4./.  not  the  tails  of  smoking  firebrands 

35.  4.  say  to  them  that  ore  of  a  fearful  heart,/,  not 

41.  10./.  thou  nuttfU^n  I  am  with  thee,  43.  .5. 

13.  for  1  the  Lord   thy  God  will  hold  lliy  right 
hand,  saying  to  thee,/,  not,  I  will  help  thee 

14.  /.  710/,  thou  worm  Jacob,  and  ye  men  of  Isr. 

43. 1.  /.  n(/t,  I  have  redeemed  thee,  thou  art  minff 

44.  2./.  nut,  O  Jacob  my  servant,  nnd  Jishurun 

whom  I  have  chosen,  .kr.  30. 10.  |  46.27,28. 
8.  f.  ye  710/,  nor  be  afraid,  have  not  I  told  ihie'? 
51.  7.  hearken  to  me,/,  not  the  reproach  of  men 
54.  4./.  not,  for  Ihou  shalt  not  be  ashamed 
.kr.  5.  22./.  ye  nnt  me?  saith  Ihc  Lord 
Lam.  3.  57.  thou  drewcdst  near,  thou  saidst,/.  not 
Iliek.  3.  9.  /.  not,  nor  be  dismayed  at  their  looki 
Dan.  in.  12.  then  said  he  to  me,  /.  not,  Daniel,  19. 
.fnel  2.  21./.  7io<,  O  land,  be  glad  and  rejoice 
7.rj)h.  3.  16.  it  shall  be  said  to  Jerusalem,/,  not , 
Hag.  2.  5.  my  Spirit  remaineth  among  you,/,  not 
Xeeh.  8.  13.  and  vo  shall  be  a  blessing,/.  710/ 

15.  again  I  will  do  well  to  Judah,/.  ye  not 
Mat.  3.  5.  a  swift  witness  ng.  them  that  /.  not  me 
Mat.  1.  20./.  not  to  take  to"  thee  Mary  thy  wife 

10.  26./.  them  7!»(,  there  is  nothing  covered 
28.  and/,  not  Ihcm  which  kill  the  body 
31./.  710/,  ye  are  of  more  value,  Luke  12.  7. 
28.  5.  (he  angel  said  lo  Ihe  women,/,  not 
l.uke  1.  13.  f.  not  Zacharins  ||  30./.  710/  Mnry 
2. 10.  to  ihc'Rhcpherds,  f.  not  \\  5.  10.  Simon, /.'rot 
8.  50.  Jairns,/.  not  ||  12.  32./.  not,  little  flock 
IS.  4.  though  If.  not  God,  iror  regard  man 
.John  12.  15./.  nnt,  daughter  of  Sior,  behold 
Jlcts  il.  24./.  not,  Paul,  thou  must  be  befon  Cogoi 
Rev.  1.  17./.  not,  I  am  the  first  and  the  last 

.,Vot  FEAR. 
F.Tod.  9.  30.  T  know  ye  will  7!f-<  yet/,  the  Ixitd 
2  Kings  17.  3.5.  ye  i-hall  not  f.  other  gods,  37. 
Job  9.  35.  then  would  I  speak,  and  not  f.  him 
11. 15.  pul  iniquity  far  away,  then  thou  shalt  7?o</. 
P sal.^1. 2. tho'  a  host  encamp,  my  heart  shall  votf. 

46. 2.  we  will  7io(  f.  though  the  cnrlh  be  removed 
.56.  4.  I  will  not  f.  what  flesh  can  do,  118.  6. 

ha.  54.  14.  far  from  oppression,  tbou  shnlt  not/. 
.7i"r.l0.7.who  would  710/ f.  thee,  O  Kins  ©'"nations? 
.Imns  3.  8.  the  lion  hath  roared,  who  will  notf.7 
t.uke  23.  40.  the  other  said,  dost  710/  thou/.  Gnd? 
Heb.  13.  6.  I  will  r.vt  f.  what  mnn  shall  do  to  me 
/i«D.  15.%.  who  shall  7!o/  f.  thee,  O  L.ond  glorify? 

FEARED. 
/7i'7i.l9.30.  Lot  f.  to  dwell  in  Zoar,  dwelt  in  a  ra\-e 

26.  7.  Isaac/,  to  say  of  Rehekah,  she  is  my  wife 
F.Tod.Z.  14.  Mose!'/.  and  said,  this  thing  is  known 

9. 20.  he  that/,  the  word  of  the  \A.  made  servants 
Dntt.  35.  18.  Amalek  smote  thee,  and/,  not  God 

32.  17.  to  new  gods  whom  your  falhcrs/.  not 
27.  were  it  not  that  1  /.  the  wrath  of  ihe  enemy 

.7osh.  4.  14.  thov/.  Joslnirf  ns  they  did  Mo<es 
Judg.6.V7.  Gideon/.  ||  S.  20.  Jethcr/.  to  slay  them 


FEA 

1  Sam.  3.  15.  Samuel/,  lo  shew  Ell  the  vision 
14.20.  the  hoiiuj  ilroiiped,  for  the  peop./.  the  outh 
1.^.  -i-i.  because  I/,  the  people  ami  obeywl  tliem 

'2  Sam.  '3. 11.  Ish-buithctli  not  answer,  he/.  Abiier 

10.  111.  the  Syrians/,  lo  help  Animon  any  more 
Vi.  W.  Oavid's  Herv.  r".  lotell  him  child  was  dead 

1  A'l'n^r*  1.  50.  .\donijuli/.  because  of  Solomon 
3.  2-5° all  Isr.  heard  the  judgmem,  and/,  the  king 

2  King;)  17.  7./.  other  yods  ||  i.j.  lliey/.  not  the  L. 

1  Chron.  11).  2.^).  to  be/,  above  all  gods,  Psal.'JO.i. 

2  C/troii.  2J.  :l.  Jeliiishapliat/.  and  proclaim,  a  »kst 
Job  3i.  ttJ.  Klihu  said,  I/,  lo  shew  mine  opinion 
tsat.  14.  t  -■>.  there  they/,  a  great  fear,  5.1.  f  •>■ 

7<j.  7.  tliiiu,  e»iii  thou,  art  lo  be/.  ||  8.  the  earth/. 

11.  taring'  pre.Hents  to  him  that  ouglit  to  be/. 
't6  5.1.  he  led  them  safely,  no  that  they/,  not 
KKJ.  t.  there  is  forgiveness,  tlial  Ihou  muyest  be/. 
/>a.4 1.5.  the  isles  saw  it  ami/,  the  ends  of  the  earth 
51.  13.  and  hast/,  o'ontinually  every  day 
57.  II.  whom  hast  thou/,  that  thou  hast  lied 
Jer.  X  6.  h(,'r  treacherous  sister  Judah/.  not 
42. 16.  the  sword  which  ye/,  shall  overtake  you 
44.  10.  th.y  lire  not  humbled,  nor  have  they/. 
Ezck.  11.  d  yu  have/,  the  sword,  I  will  briii^  it 
Ditn.  5.  1'.).  all  people  and  nations/,  before  hmi 
.Mai.  2.  5.  for  the  feur  wherewith  he/,  me 
Mai.  14.  5.  Herod/,  the  multitude,  21.  40. 
J^tark  4.  41.  and  they/,  exceedmgly,  and  said 
6.  20.  Herod  /.  John,  knowing  ho  was  a  just  man 

11.  18.  the  scfibes  and  the  chief  priests  f-  Jesus 
32.  if  we  shall  say,  of  men,  they/,  the  people, 

12.  12.  Luke  20.  I'J.  [  22.  2.  Wc«>-  5.  2(1. 
Z,ute".)-34.and  they /.as  they  entered  into  the  cloud 
45.  and  they/,  to  ask  him  of  that  saying 
18.2.  there  was  in  a  city  a  judge  which/,  not  God 
I'J.  21.  If.  thee  becaus"e  thou  art  an  austere  man 
John'.t.  22.  spake  thus,  because  they/,  the  Jews 
j?ctjj  Ifi.  33.  the  magistrates/,  when  they  heard 
Heb.  5.  7.  Christ  was  heard  in  that  he/. 

FE.ARED  God. 
JEiod.l.n.but  the  midwives/.<rO(i, saved  children 
21.  because  they/.  (Hod,  he  made  them  houses 
JV'eA.  7.  2.  he  was  faithful,  and/.  God  above  many 
Job  1.1. Job  was  one  that/.ftoii, and  eschewed  evil 
.Acts  10.2.  Cornelius  was  oue^God  with  his  house 

FEARED  ^rrat/i/. 
Josh.  10.  2.  the  Canaanites/.  greatly 
1  Sam.  12.  H.  all  the  people  greatly  f.  the  Lord 

1  King.i  la.  3.  now  01)adiah/.  the  Lord  greatly 
Jab  3.  25.  the  thing  I  greatly  f.  is  come  upon  me 
P.ial.  8!l.  7.  God  is  greatly  to  be  /.  in  the  assembly 
Jtfae.  27.54.  centurion  and  they  with  h\m /.greatly 

FEARED  the  Lord. 
Krorf.  14.31.  the  pcojile/.tAe  />.and  believed  Moses 

2  Kip;r.,  17.  :^2.  so  they/,  the  Lord,  33,  41. 
Has.  To.  3.  no  king,  because  we  /.  not  the  Lord 
Jonah  I.  10.  the  men/,  the  Lord  ex(;eedingly 
•Mat.  3.16.  they  that/.  /..  spake  ofi  one  to  another, 

a  book  of  remembrance  for  them  that/tAe  Aord 
FEAREST. 
Oen.  22.  12.  for  now  I  know  that  thou/.  God 
ha.  57.  11.  of  whom  afraid  or  feared,  have  not  I 
held  my  peace  even  of  old,  and  ihoii/.  me  not? 
Jcr.  22.  25.  give  thee  into  hand  of  them  thou/. 

FEAKETH. 
1  King.<i  1.  51.  behold,  Adonijah/.  king  Solomon 
.rob  ].8.Job,  one  that/.  G.  and  eschcweth  evil,  2.3. 
Peal.  25.  12.  what  man  is  he  that/,  the  Lordl 
112.  1.  blessed  i»  the  man  that/,  the  Lord 
12d.  1.  blessed  is  every  one  that/,  the  Lord 
4.  thus  phall  tlic  man  be  blessed  that/  the  Lord 
P.-op. 13.13.  that/,  the  commandment  he  rewarded 
14.  2.  he  that  wa!k<jtli  in  his  uprightness/.  Lord 

10.  a  wirio  man/,  and  departelh  from  evil 
28.  14.  happy  is  the  man  that/,  always 
31.  30.  woman  that/,  the  Lord  shall  be  praised 
Eccl.T.  18.  that/.  God  shall  come  forth  of  ihem  all 

8.  13.  because  the  wicked/,  not  before  God 

9.  2.  ho  thai  sweareth,  as  he  that  /.  an  oaih 
Jsa.  50.  10.  who  is  among  you  that/,  the  Lord  1 
Jicts  10.  22.  Cornelius  just,  and  one  that/.  God 

35.  he  llml  /.  him,  is  accepted  with  him 
13.  20.  and  whosoever  among  you/.  God 
1  John  4.  18.  he  that  /".  is  not  perfect  ill  love 

FEARING. 
Jink.  22.  2.1.  our  children  ccaso  from  /.  the  Lord 
Mark  5.  33.  the  woman/,  and  Iremhling  came 
jj£tj23.  10.  Iho  chief  captain /.lest  Paul  he  pulled 
27.  17.  /.  l.st  tluy  fall  into  the  miicksands,  20. 
Gal.".  12./.  them  which  were  of  the  circiuncision 
Col.  3.  22.  Iiiit  in  flin'.'lenc»»  of  heart/.  Gorl 
JbrcA.  U.27.  forsook  Egv|il,  not/,  wrath  of  the  kin, 

FF.AUFITI,. 
F.xod.  I.'.  11.  OT-'jrd,  who  is  like  thee,/,  in  praises 
/)e«f.20.8.  what  man  is/,  let  him  return,  .lulg.7.^. 
28.5".  inavoft  (rnr  this/  name,  ihc  Lord  ihv  God 
Isa.  3ri.  4.  say  to  them  of  a/,  heart,  b<!  strong 
.Vat.  8.  2'i.  why  are  yc  /.  O  ye  of  liule  fai  h  J 
Mark  4.  10.  ho  Slid  to  Ihfm,  why  are  ye  so/.  ? 
Lttke2l.  11./.  lishlii  shall  he  in  divers  places 
IM 


FEA 

Heb.  10.  27.  a  certain/,  looking  for  of  judgment 
31.  /.  to  full  into  tile  hands  of  tiie  living  God 

Keo.  vll.  d.  the/,  shall  have  their  part  in  tliu  lake 
FEAKFULNESri. 

Pdal.  55.  5.  /.  and  trembling  are  come  upon  me 

Jia.  21.  4.  my  heart  panted,/,  ali'righted  me 
33.  14./.  hath  surprised  the  hypocrites 
FEAKFO'LLV. 

Psal.  139.  14.  I  am/,  and  wondeiluUy  made 
FEAST. 

God  out  of  hie  great  wisdom  appointed  several 
festivals  amvug  the  Jews  for  many  reasons. 
1.  V'o  perpetuate  the  memory  of  tliose  great 
events  and  icunders  which  he  had  wrought  m 
favour  of  his  people:  'J'he  Sabbath  brought  to 
reineiiU/ranee  the  creation  of  the  worlds  the 
Passover,  the  departure  out  of  Egypt;  the  I'en- 
tecosl,  the  laic  given  at  Siiiai,  Ac.  2.  'J'o  keep 
them  firm  lo  their  religion ;  with  the  view  of 
ccremonits  and  the  majesty  of  divine  service. 
3.  'J'o  give  them  instruction ;  for  in  their  reli- 
gious assemblies  the  taw  of  God  was  read  and 
explained.  4.  To  renew  the  aci/uaintance^cor- 
respondmee^andfriendship  of  their  tribes  and 
families  with  one  another,  by  coming  from  the 
several  towns  in  the  country,  and  meeting 
three  times  a  year  in  the  holy  city. 

The  Hebrews  had  a  great  number  of  feasts.  The 
first,  and  most  ancient  of  all,  was  the  sabbath, 
or  the  seventh  day  of  tlie  week,  instituted  lo 
preserve  the  memory  of  the  world's  creation. 
Gen.  2.  3,  And  God  blessed  the  seventh  day,  and 
sunctilied  it,  because  in  it  he  had  rested  from  all 
his  work.  Commentators  are  not  agreed  about 
the  first  institution  of  the  sabbath  :  JIany  are 
of  opinion  that  the  sabbath  hath  been  observed 
among  the  righteous  from  the  beginning  of  the 
world:  that  the  ancients  having  pres^ved  the 
memory  of  the  creation,  observed  the  sabbath 
also,  in  consequence  of  the  natural  law  which 
obliged  them  thereto.  Some  are  of  opinion, 
thai  people  did  not  begin  lo  cease  from  work 
upon  that  day,  till  after  the  command  which 
God  gave  the  Israelites  lo  that  purpose,  some 
time  after  the  coming  out  of  Egypt,  when  they 
were  encamped  at  Marah. 
The  Sabbatical  Yea  r,  which  returned  every  seven 
years,  and  was  entirely  set  apart  for  rest :  and 
Jubilee  year,  which  was  at  the  end  of  seven 
times  seven  years,  or  of  the  forty-ninth  year 
were  sorts  of  feasts  loo,  and  may  be  considered 
as  consequences  of  the  sabbath. 
The  Passover  teas  celebrated  on  the  fourteenth, 
or  rather  fifteenth  day  of  the  first  month  in  the 
eccle.iiastical  year,  which  was  the  seventh  of 
the  civil  year.  The  feast  began  after  noon  on 
the  fourteenth,  and  was  celebrated  properly  on 
the  fifteenth  of  Kisan;  it  lasted  seven  days. 
But  the  first  and  last  days  only  of  the  octave 
were  days  of  rest,  Exod.  12.  14,  ■Src,  See 
Passover. 

The  feast  of  Pentecost  was  celebrated  on  the  fif- 
tieth day  after  the  Passover,  in  memory  of  the 
law's  being  given  to  Moses  on  mount  Sinai 
fifty  days,  or  seven  weeks  after  the  departure 
out  of  Egypt.     See  Pentecost. 

The  feasi  of  Trumpets  was  celebrated  at  the  be- 
ginning, or  on  the  first  day  of  the  civil  year, 
upon  which  a  trumpet  was  sounded,  proclaim- 
ing the  beginning  of  the  year,  which  was  in  the 
month  Tisi  i,  answering  lo  our  September.  This 
day  was  kept  solemn ;  all  servile  business  was 
forbid  to  be  done  upon  it ;  and  particular  sa- 
crifices were  offered.  Lev.  23. 24,  25.  The  scrip- 
ture dors  not  acquaint  us  with  the  occasion  of 
appointing  this  feast.  Theodorct  believes,  it 
wis  in  memory  of  the  thunder  and  lightning 
upon  mount  Sinai, loAcn  Ood  gave  his  law  from 
thence.  The  Rabbins  will  have  it,  that  it  wwi 
in  remembrance  of  the  deliverance  of  Isaac,  in 
whose  stead  a  ram  was  sacrificed  by  Abraham. 
Othr-rs  say,  that  as  the  seventh  day  of  every 
vterk  was  a  sabbath,  and  evcTy  seventh  year 
wa.t  to  be  kept  as  a  holy  sabbaliral  year,  so  the 
teiicnlh  month  was  to  be  holy  in  some  singular 
manner  aliive  the  rest  of  the  months,  for  the 
many  sabbaths  and  solemn  feasts  that  were  to 
be  observed  in  this  more  than  any  other  month ; 
such  as  the  feast  of  Expiation,  and  of  Taber- 
nacles. 
The  new  moons,  or  first  days  of  every  month, 
w^rr  in  some  sort  a  consequence  of  the  feast  of 
Triimpits.  Jlnd  though  thrsr  wrrrnot  reckoned 
among  the  solcihn  feasts  in  l>ev.  23.  yet  were 
crlebrnti-d  as  such,  by  the  sound  of  trump'ts, 
Num.  10.  10  hy  ntrnordinnni  sarrfires.  Num. 
2-<.  11,12,  Ac.  by  abstaining  from  si  rvite  icotk.i, 
AniosH..').  ami  by  attendance  upon  theministnj 
of  GniCs  iror./,  2 Kings  4.23.  I'pon  thisedays 
alto  tame  tort  of  mtertainjacnLM  vere  made, 


FEA 

1  Sam.  2a  5,  1&  .4nd  God  ordahied  it  Uus, 
that  by  giving  him  the  first-fruits  of  every 
month  they  should  acknowledge  him  as  tht 
Lord  of  all  their  time,  and  own  his  providence, 
by  which  all  times  and  seasons  are  ordered. 

The  feast  of  Expiation,  or  Aloneinent,  was  kept 
upon  the  tenth  day  of  the  month  Tisri,  vr 
September.  'J'he  Hebrews  call  it  Kijipur,  vr 
Chippur,  that  is,  pardon  or  expiation,  becaust 
it  was  instituted  for  the  expiation  of  alt  tht 
sins,  irreverences,  and  pollutions  of  a, I  Uu 
Israelites, /rom  the  high-priest  to  the  lowist  of 
the  people,  committed  by  them^  throughout  the 
whole  year.  Upon  this  day  they  fasted  strictly, 
and  offered  several  sacrifices.  'J'he  high-priest, 
after  he  had  washed  not  only  his  hands  and 
his  feet,  as  usual  in  common  sacrifices,  but  his 
whole  body,  dressed  himself  in  plain  linen,  likt 
the  rest  of  the  priests.  He  then  neither  wore 
his  purple  robe,  nor  the  ep hod,  nor  the  breast- 
plate,because  he  was  going  to  eipiale  his  own 
and  the  people's  sins.  JJe  first  of  all  offered  • 
bullock  and  a  ram  fur  his  own  sins,  and  those 
of  all  the  other  priests.  Ne  put  his  hands  upon 
the  heads  of  these  victims,  and  confessed  kit 
own  sins,  and  the  sins  of  his  house  :  then  ke 
received  from  the  princes  of  the  people  two 
goats  for  a  siH-offering,  and  a  ram  for  a 
burnt-offering,  to  be  offered  in  the  name  of  all 
the  multitude.  Lev.  10.  2,  3,  &.c.  JJs  to  the 
ceremonies  used  with  the  goats,  sec  Offering. 

The  feast  of  Tents  or  Tabernacles,  See  Taber- 
nacle. 

Besides  these  feasts  mentioned  iy  Moses,  we  find 
the  feast  of  lots,  orPurim,  which  was  celebrated 
among  the  Jews  of  Shushan,  on  the  fourteenth 
day  of  Adar;  and  among  the  other  people  of 
the  Persian  exiipire  on  the  fifteenth  of  the  same 
month,  which  answers  to  our  February,  Estli. 
9.  21.  The  Jews  observe  the  first  of  these  days 
with  fasting  andcrying,  and  other  eipressiont 
of  vehement  grief  and  fear;  and  the  latter 
with  thanksgiving,  and  all  demonstrations  of 
joy  and  triumph.     See  Puri.m. 

The  feast  of  the  dedication  of  the  temple,  or  ra- 
ther of  the  restoration  of  Ike  temple,  which  had 
been  profaned  by  Antiochus  Epiphanes,  which 
is  thought  to  be  the  feast  mentioned  in  the  gos- 
pel, John  10.  22.  was  celebrated  in  the  winter. 
Josephus  says,  it  was  called  I  he  feast  of  lights; 
probably  this  happiness  befell  them  when  tkey 
least  expected  it ;  and  they  looked  upon  it  as  a 
new  light  that  had  risen  upon  them,  Joseph 
Anti<i.  hb.  12.  cap.  11.  There  is  an  account 
of  this  dedication  in  1  Maccab.  4.  .52,  54,  55, 
&c.  where  it  is  related,  that  Jndiis  Maccabeui 
and  his  brethren  having  defeated  the  army  of 
(Jorgias,  they  went  directly  to  the  temple  of 
Jerusalem,  which  they  found  forsaken  and 
profaned,  so  that  the  courts  were  full  of  thick 
bushts  and  brambles,  the  doors  were  burnt,  the 
altar  profaned,  and  the  buildings  m  ruin*. 
After  having  .ihed  abundance  of  tears  on  this 
occasion,  they  began  to  clean  every  thing,  and 
employed  the  priests  in  demolishing  the  altar 
which  had  been  polluted;  and  erected  another 
of  rough  stone.  They  refitted  the  holy  place 
and  the  sanctuary,  and  placed  therein  the  cao- 
dlestick,  the  table  of  shew-bread,  and  the  altar 
of  perfumes.  'I'hry  kindled  the  lamps,  put  the 
loaves  upon  the  sncred  table,  set  the  incense  on 
fire,  offered  sacrifices  and  bumt-offcrinas,  and 
prrfurmed  the  dedication  of  the  templein  eight 
days,  with  all  the  solemnity  that  circumstancct 
would  allow  of.  Jlfter.which  Judas  Maccabeus 
made  it  a  law,  that  the  feast  should  he  kept 
yearly  for  riirht  days,  m  mcmwy  of  that  mercy 
which  God  had  skewed  them.  It  is  grnerally 
agreed  that  it  was  during  this  feast  our  Sa- 
viour WHS  at  Jeriifalcm :  Jt  was  celebrated  ■ 
upon  the  twenty- fifth  and  following  days  of 
the  month  Ciisleu,  which  answers  to  our  No- 
vember and  December,  and  it  is  therefore  said, 
thai  It  wiis  winter. 

Love-fc-nRls,  or  feasts  of  charity,  were  used  among 
the  primitive  Christians  in  the  public  meetings 
of  the  church,  to  shew  their  unity  among  them- 
srlrrs,  to  promote  and  maintain  vnitual  cha- 
rity, and  for  the  relief  of  the  poor  nnnvg  them, 
at  the  close  irhrreof  they  odministi-red  the 
lord's  supper.  Judo  12.  Hut  these  feasts 
bring  abused,  some  think  that  the  npostle  Paul 
ahidishrd  them.  1  Cor.  11.21,  22,  34. 
In  the  Chri-lian  church  we  have  no  festirnlJhM 
appears c.lrarlii  to  have  been  instituted  byChrM 
Jc^us.  or  his  apostle*,  ^'rvcrthrless,  as  some 
say,  our  Saviour  srrms  to  have  ivstitutrd  a 
ft  a^t,  in  a  prrprlual  memory  of  hi.'  passion 
and  death,  whrn  he  instituted  the  sncrnmmt 
of  bread  and  wine  (t»  symbols  of  his  body  ana 


Mood,  and  pledges  of  spiritual  blessings. 
Christians  have  always  celebrated  the  memory 
of  Christ's  resurrection,  and  keep  this  least 
on  every  first  day  of  the  week ;  which  day 
was  called  the  Lord's  day,  even  so  early  as  in 
St.  John's  time;  Rev.  1.  10,  I  was  in  the  Spirit 
on  the  JLord's-day. 
Oen.VJ.'J.Lot  made  a/.  {{  21.8.Abrabain  made  a/. 

2S.  30.  Isaac  made  a/.  ||  29.  22.  Laban  made  a/. 

411.  20.  Pharaoii  made  a/,  to  all  his  servants 
Exod.  5.  1.  that  they  may  hold  a/,  unto  me,  10.  9. 

i-i.  14.  you  shall  keep  it  a/.  J.ev.  23.  39,  41. 

13.6.  the  seventh  day  shall  be  a/,  to  the  Lord 

23. 14.  three  times  thou  shalt  keep  a/,  in  the  year 

16.  the/,  of  harvest,  the  first-fruits  of  thy  labours 
32.  5.  Aaron  said,  to-morrow  is  a/,  to  the  Lord 

AV;n.28.17.  the  fifteenth  day  of  this  month  is  the/. 
2jl  12.  ye  shall  keep  a/,  to  the  Lord  seven  days 
Dent.  16.  14.  and  thou  shalt  rejoice  in  thy/. 
Judg.  14.  10.  and  Samson  mnde  there  a/. 
12.  declare  it  within  the  seven  days  of  the/. 

17.  and  she  wept  before  him  while  their/,  lasted 
1  Sam.  9. 1 12.  there  is  a  /.  to-day  in  the  high-place 

20.  t  6.  there  is  a  yearly/,  for  all  the  family 
25.  3G.  Nabal  held  a/,  in  his  house  like  a  king 
2 Sam.  3.  20.  David  made  Abner  and  Iris  men  a/. 

1  Kings'J.  15.  Solomon  made  a/,  to  his  serv.  8.  05. 
8.  2.  all  the  men  of  Israel  assembled  at  the/. 
12.  32.  Jeroboam  ordained  a  /.  like  to  the  /.  that 

is  in  Judah,  and  he  otiered  upon  the  altar 
33.  he  ordained  a/,  to  the  children  of  Israel 

2  CVir.  5.  3.  the  /.  in  the  seventh  month,  JVeh.  8. 14. 
7.  8.  Solomon  kept  Ihe/.seven  days,  and  all  Israel 

with  him,  9.  |  30.^2.  JVcA.  8.  18.  Ezek.  45.  25. 

Esth.  1.  3.  Ahasuerus  made  a/.  5.  |  2.  18. 
9.  Vashti  made  a/.  ||  8.  17.  the  Jews  had  a/. 

Prov.  15.  15.  a  merry  heart  hath  a  continual/. 

/,'cc/. 10. 19 /.ismade  for  laughter,  wine  makes  merry 

Jsa.  25.  6.  the  Lord  shall  make  to  all  people  a/. 

Jcr.  16. 15.  enter  not  the  house  of  mourning/. 

E2e4.45. 23.  seven  days  of  the/,  be  shall  prepare 

Dan,  5.  1.  Belshazzar  the  king  made  a  great/. 

Mat.  27.  15.  at  that  /.  the  governor  was  wont  to 
release  to  the  people  a  prisoner,  Mark  15.  6. 

/.uAe2. 42.  they  went  up  after  the  custom  of  the/. 
5.  29.  Levi  made  him  a  great/,  in  his  house 
14.  13.  but  when  thou  makest  a/,  call  the  poor 
23. 17. he  must  release  one  unto  them  at  the/. 
/oAn  2. 8.  draw,  and  bear  to  the  governor  of  the/. 

9.  when  the  ruler  of  the/,  tasted  the  water 

4.  45.  the  Galileans  having  seen  all  that  he  did  at 

the/,  at  Jerusalem,  for  they  also  went  to  the/. 

5.  1.  after  this  there  was  a/,  of  the  Jews 
C.  4.  the  passover,  a  /.  of  the  Jews,  was  nigh 
7.  8.  go  ye  up  to  this/.  I  go  not  up  yet  to  this/. 

10.  then  went  he  also  up  to  the/,  not  openly 

11.  then  the  Jews  sought  him  at  the  /.  and  said 
14.  now  about  the  midst  of  the/.  Jesus  taught 
37.  in  the  last  day,  that  great  day  of  the/. 

10.  iH.  it  was  at  Jerusalem  the/,  of  dedication 

11.  56.  what  think  ye,  that  he  will  not  come  to/.? 
12. 12.  next  day  much  people  that  were  come  to/. 

20.  certain  Greeks  among  them  that  came  to/. 
13.  29.  buy  what  we  have  need  of  against  the/. 
jicts  18.  21.  I  must  by  all  means  keep  this  /. 

1  Cor.  5.  8.  let  us  keep  the  /.  not  with  old  leaven 
10.  27.  if  any  that  believe  not  bid  you  to  a/. 

FEAST-DAY,  day's. 
^fos.i.i^■  I  will  also  cause  her  f. -days  to  cease 
9.5.  what  will  ye  do  in  day  of  the/,  of  the  Lord  1 
Jimos  5.  2).  I  hate,  I  despise  your  f. -days 
Mat.  26.  5.  they  said,  not  on  the  f.  day,  Mark  14.2, 
John2.23.  \nthcf.-day  many  believed  inliis  name 

FEAST  of  the  passover. 
Eiou.34.25.nor  the  sacrifice  off. of  passover  he  left 
Mat.  26.  2.  after  two  days  is  /.  of  pass.  Murk  14.1. 
/..uAf  2.41.evcry  year  atf.ofpass.his  parents  went 
John  13.1.before/.o/'pa.9soD(?rJesu3  knew  his  hour 

FEAST  of  tabernacles. 

Lev.  23.  34.  the  fifteenth  day  shall  be/,  of  taber. 

Deut.i6.i'i.  thou  shalt  observe/.o/ tot.  seven  days 

16.  three  times  appear  in  /.  of  tabernacles,  31 . 

10.  2  Ch'ron.  8.  13. 

Ezra  3. 4.  they  kept  /.  of  tabemac.  as  it  is  wri«en 

Zrch.li.lfi.  shall  even  go  up  to  keep  f. of  tabemac. 

18.  heathen  that  come  not  to  keep/,  of  labor.  19. 

^0^717.2.  now  the  Jcws'/o/taJfrnacwas  at  hand 

FEAST  of  unleavened  bread. 
Ejod.12.17.  ye  shall  obs./.o/jfn/.ir.  23.15. 1  34.18. 
JjCv.  23.  6.  and  on  fifteenth  day  is/,  ofunlcav.  br. 
Deul.  16.  16.  appear  in/,  of  xtnl  br.  2  CAr.8. 13. 

2  C/ir.30.13.  people  assembled  to  keep/,  o/uni.  br. 
01.  children  of  Isr.  kept  /.  of  unl.  br.  seven  days 

3.'i.l7./.ff/H7i.i.sev.days,  Ezra  6.22.  Ezei.45.21. 
Mat.W.}7.  first  day  off.  of  unl.  br.  disciples  came 
^arA14. 1. after  t  wo  davs  was /.orK".*''./,utc22.1. 

FEAST  of  weeks. 

F.xod.  34.22.  thou  shalt  obs./.  ofw.  Deut.  16. 10. 

Deut.  16,  16.  all  thy  males  appear  in  the  f. of  weeks 

2  CAr.8. 13.  Solomon  offered  burnt-offer,  in/,  of  w. 

195 


PEE 

FEAST,  ED. 

.Tob  1.  4.  his  sons  went  and/,  in  their  houses 
2f6«.  2.  13.  sporting,  while  they/,  with  you 
Jude  12.  these  ure  spots,  when  they/,  with  you 

FEASTING. 
Esth.  9.  17.  made  it  a  day  of/,  and  gladness,  18. 

22.  tiiey  should  make  them  days  ol  /.  and  joy 
.Job  1.  5.  when  the  days  of  their/,  were  gone 
Kccl.1.2.  of  mourning,  than  to  go  to  the  house  off. 
Jer.  16.  8.  thou  shalt  not  go  into  the  bouse  of/. 

FEASTS. 
Lev.  23.  2.  even  these  are  my/.  4,  37,  44. 
Psal.  35.  16.  with  hypocritical  mockers  in/. 
Jsa.  5.  12.  the  harp,  pipe,  and  wine  are  in  their/. 
Jer.  51.  39.  in  their  heat  1  will  make  their/. 
Ezek.  45. 17.  the  prince's  part  to  give  ott'eiings  in/. 
46.  11.  in/,  the  meat-ottering  shall  be  an  ephuh 
Jimos  8.  10.  1  will  turn  your/,  into  mourning 
Zech.8.  19.  shall  be  joy,  gladness,  and  cheerful/. 
.I/a<.23. 6.  they  love  the  uppermost  rooms  at/,  and 
chiefseals  insynagog.  Mark  12.3'J.  y^uAc2U.46. 
Jude  12.  these  are  spots  in  your/,  of  charity 

JJppointed  FEAS'l'S. 
Jsa.  1.14.  your  upp.f.  my  soul  haleth,  a  trouble 

Set  FEASTS. 
JVuOT.  29.  39.  these  things  ye  shall  do  in  your  sctf. 

1  Chron.  23.  31.  to  offer  on  the  setf.  Ezra  3.  5. 

2  Chron.  31.  3.  the  king's  portion  for  the  setf. 
JVcA.  10. 33.  we  charged  for  offerings  for  the  setf. 

Solemn  FEAST. 
Deut.  16. 15.  seven  days  shalt  thou  keep  asolemnf. 
Psal.  81. 3.  blow  the  trumpet  on  our  solcimif. -day 
Lam.  2.  7.  made  a  noise  as  in  the  solemn  f. -day 

Solemn  FEASTS. 
JVum.  15.  3.  when  you  make  offer,  in  your  sol.  f. 
2  CAr.  2.  4.  build  a  house  for  offering  on  solemn  f. 
8.  13.  offering  on  solemn  f.  three  times  in  a  year 
Lam.  1.  4.  because  none  come  to  the  solemtif. 
2.  6.  he  hath  caused  the  solemn  f.  to  be  forgotten 
Ezek.  36.  38.  as  the  flock  of  Jerusalem  in  solemn  f. 
46.9.  when  people  come  before  the  Lord  in  sol.f. 
Hos.  2.  11.  I  will  cause  to  cease  her  solemn  f. 
12.  9.  make  thee  dwell  as  in  the  days  of  solemn  f. 
JVaA.  1. 15.  O  Judali,  keep  thy  sol.f.  perform  vows 
Mai.  2.  3.  even  the  dung  of  your  solemn  f. 
Feathered,  see  Fowl. 
FEATHERS. 
IjCV.  1.  16.  shall  pluck  away  his  crop  with  his/. 
.Job  39.  13.  gavest  thou  the  goodly  wings  to  the 
peacocks?  or  wings  and/,  to  the  ostrich  ? 
Psat.  68. 13.  and  her/,  covered  with  yeHow  gold 
91.  4.  shall  cover  thee  with  his/,  under  his  wings 
Ezek.  17.  3.  an  eagle  long- winged,  full  of/.  7. 
Dan.  4.  33.  his  liairs  were  grown  like  eagles'/. 

FED. 
Oen.  30.  36.  Jacob/,  the  rest  of  Laban's  flock 
36.  24.  as  be/,  the  asses  of  Zibeon  his  father 
41.  2.  and  the  seven  kine/.  in  a  meadow,  18. 

47.  17.  he/,  them  with  bread  for  their  cattle 

48.  15.  the  God  who/,  me  all  my  life  long 
Exod.  16.  32.  the  bread  wherewith  I  have  /.  you 
Deut.8.  3.  he /.thee  with  n.anna,  thou  knewest  not 

16.  who/,  thee  in  the  wilderness  with  manna 
2  Sam. 20. 3.  put  the  concubines  inward,  and/.them 
\Kings  18.  4.  he/,  them  with  bread  and  water,  13. 
1  Chron.  27.29.  over  the  herds  that/,  in  Sharon 
Psal.  37.3.  trust  in  the  Lord,  verily  thou  shalt  be/. 
78.  72.  so  he/  them,  according  to  his  integrity 
81. 16.  he  should  have/,  them  with  finest  of  wheat 
Isa.  1.  11.  I  am  full  of  the  fat  of/,  beasts 
Jcr.  5. 7.  when  I  had /.them  to  the  full,  they  comm. 

8.  they  were  as/,  horses  in  the  morning 
Ezek.  16.  19.  and  my  honey  wherewith  I/,  thee 

34.  3.  ye  eat  the  fat,  and  kill  them  that  are/. 
8.  the  shepherds/themselves, and /.not  my  flock 

Dan.  4.  12.  and  all  flesh  was/,  with  it 
5.21.  they/Nebuchadnezzar  with  grass, like  oxen 
7,ech.  11.  7.  I  took  two  staves,  and  If.  the  flock 
Mat.l^.^l  .vihen  saw  we  thee  hungered, and /.thee? 
Mark  5. 14.  they  that  /.  the  swine  fled,  lAike  8.  34. 
AkAc16.  21.  desiring  to  be/,  with  crumbs  that  fell 
1  Cor.  3. 2. 1  have/,  you  with  milk,  not  with  meat 

FEE. 
Dan.  2.  f  6.  ye  shall  receive  of  me,  gifts  and/. 
5.  t  17.  give  thy  /.  to  another,  yet  I  will  read 

FEEBLE. 
(ien.  30. 42.  when  cattle  were/,  he  put  them  not  in 
Deut.  25.18.  the  Amalekites  ."imote  all  that  were/. 

1  Sam.  2.  5.  that  hath  many  children,  is  waxen/. 

2  .Sam.4.1  Abner  dead,  Isli-boshcth's  hiinds  were/. 
2  CAron.23. 15.  carried  nil  the/  of  them  on  asses 
jVfA.  4.  2.  and  he  said,  what  do  these/.  Jews  ? 
.lobi.  4.  and  thou  hast  strengthened  the/  knees 
Psnl.  38. 8. 1  am  /.  and  sore  broken,  I  have  roared 

105.  37.  was  not  one/,  person  among  their  tribes 
Prov.  30.  26.  the  conies  are  but  a  /.  folk,  yet  make 
ha.  16. 14.  the  remnant  shall  be  very  small  and/. 

35.  3.  strengthen  the  weak  hands,  confirm/,  knees 
/cr.6.24.we  have  heard  the  fRme,our  hands  wax/ 
49.24.  Damascus  is  waxed/,  and  turneth  to  flee 


FEE 

.Ter.  50.  43.  the  king  of  Babylon's  hands  waxeil/ 

Ezek.  7.  17.  all  hands  shall  he/.  21.  7. 

Zech.  12.8.  and  he  that  is/,  shall  be  as  David 

1  Cor.  12. 22.  the  members  which  seem  to  be  mortf. 

IThess.  5.  14   brethren,  comfort  the /.-minded 

Hcb.  12.  12.  lift  up  the  hands  and  tlie/.  knees 
FEEBLER. 

Gen.30.42.so  the/,  were  Laban's,  stronger  Jacob's 
FEEBLENESS. 

Jer.  47.  3.  the  fathers  shall  not  look  back  for/. 
FEED. 

To  feed  signifies  to  eat,  to  take  meal  or  nourish- 
ment for  the  body,  and  this  is  cuwmun  to  viun 
with  the  beasts.  Jude  12,  Feeding  thcniselwjs 
without  fear.  Jsa.  27.  10,  There  shall  thu 
calf  leed,  and  there  shall  he  lie  down.  Jt  also 
signifies  to  furnish  or  supply  others  with  food; 
thus  Joseph  fed  the  Egyptians  for  their  cattle  : 
that  is,  he  gave  them  food  and  provision  for 
one  year,  for  which  they  gave  him  their  cattle, 
(Jen.  47. 17.  .ind  Agar  prays  that  (iod  would 
feed  liim  with  food  convenient  for  him  ;  that 
he  would  furnish  him  with  food  .luitable  to  his 
necessities  and  occasions,  Prov.  30.  8. 

But  feeding,  generally  in  Scripture,  is  taken  for 
the  business  and  calling  of  a  shipherd,  and 
comprehends  all  the  duties  belonging  to  that 
offi.cc  :  not  only  that  of  feeding,  or  providing 
pasture  for  his  flock,  but  also  of  guiding,  ob- 
serving, and  defending  them.  In  this  sense, 
feeding  is  applied,  I.  To  God,  and  that  (1)  In 
respect  of  his  church,  which  he  rules,  defends, 
directs,  siistai»s,and  nourishes, both  inwardly, 
by  the  gifts  and  graces  of  his  Spirit ;  and  out- 
wardly, by  his  power  and  providence.  Gen. 
48.  15,  The  God  which  fed  me  all  my  life  long 
unto  this  day.  .9nd  the  Psalmist,  Feed  Ihcm 
also,  and  lift  them  up  for  ever,  Psal.  28.  9, 
Hence  Ood  is  called  a  Shepherd,  Psal.  23.  1, 
The  Lord  is  my  Shepherd:  He  provides  for 
me,  he  bririgs  me  out  of  the  wrong  way,  aiid 
guides  me  in  the  right.  (2)  In  respect  of  the 
ungodly,  iipon  whom  he  exccuti  s  his  judgments . 
Ezek.  34.  16,  I  will  feed  them  with  Judgment. 
Jlnd  in  Hos.  4.  16,  The  Lord  will  feed  them  as 
a  lamb  in  a  large  place;  He  will  make  them  to 
■wander,  like  a  lost  lamb  in  a  wilderness,  and 
scatter  them  into  Assyria.  (3)  In  respect  of 
the  creatures  which  receive  their  supplies 
wholly  from  Cod.  Psal.  14.5.  15,  The  eyes  ol'  all 
wait  upon  ihee,  and  thou  givest  them  their  meat 
in  due  season.  Mat.  6.  26,  The  fowls  of  the 
nir  neither  sow  nor  reap,  yet  your  heavenly 
F:itlier  feedoth  them. 

II.  To  Christ.  Isa.  40.  11,  He  shall  feed  his 
flock  like  a  shepherd.  ,1nd  our  Saviour  says 
of  himself,  I  am  the  good  Shepherd,  .John  10. 
11.  Christ  Jesus  performs  all  the  offices  ef  a 
tender  and  faithful  .Shepherd,  toward  his  peo- 
ple, carrying  hitiisclf  teith  great  wisdom,  and 
condescension,  and  compassion,  to  every  one 
of  them,  according  to  their  several  capacities 
and  infirmities  :  He  feeds  them  by  his  word, 
Spirit,  grace,  fulness,  redemption,  ordinances 
and  providences. 

III.  To  Man.  Jlnd  then  besides  the  common  ac- 
ceptation of  the  word,  for  feeding  cattle,  it  is 
taken,  (1)  For  instructing  and  teaching  others 
by  wholesome  doctrine;  for  ruling  and  cen- 
suring by  ecclesiastical  discipline.  .John  21. 
15,  16,  Feed  my  Iambs  :  Feed  my  sheep.  .4?i(i 
in  Jer.  ,3.  ].'>,  I  w*ill  give  you  pastors  according 
to  mine  heart,  which  shall  feed  you  with 
knowledge  and  understanding.  (2)  For  ruling 
and  governing  politically.  Thus  kings  and 
magistrates  are  compared  to  shepherds,  2  Sam. 
5.  2,  Thon  shalt  feed  my  people  Jsrail.  Psal. 
78.  71,  He  brought  David  to  feed  Jacob  his 
people. 

IV.  To  the  enemies  of  the  church,  whom  God 
sometimes  makes  use  of  for  the  chastisement 
of  his  people.  Jer.  6.  3,  The  Babvlonian 
princes,  with  their  armies,  fhnW  feed  every 
one  in  his  place :  They  shall  take  up  their 
quarters  in  the  places  assigned  them,  and 
make  spoil  of  all  they  can  find  there. 

V.  To  such  as  flatter  themselves  with  vain  hopes 
of  help  and  assistance.  Hos.  12.  1,  Ephraim 
feedeth  on  wind;  The  ten  tribes  flatter  them- 
selves with  hopes  of  help  from  the  Egyptians 
and  Assyrians,  but  they  are  supporting  them- 
selves with  hopes  as  unfit  to  sustain  them,  as 
the  wind  is  to  feed  the  body  and  nourish  it: 
They  made  new  alliances  and  friendships,  but 
all  of  them  will  prove  lies  to  them  at  tast,like 
the  wind  they  feed  upon. 

VI  Torulers,  Jo(A political  (7nrfecctesiastical,«>Ai> 
contrive  their  own  ease,  advantnge,honour,and 
ambitious  projects ;  but  feed  not  thrir  flockx  ; 
take  no  care  to  support  them,  tiVtcr  teith  wkttle- 


FEE 

Ijme  counsel,  or  necessary  relief,  as  they  ought 
to  do,  according  to  their  respective  ojjices. 
Kzek.  'A\.  -^,.3,  Woa  to  tlie  shepliurds  llmt  do 
feed  lliemsclvea ;  should  not  tlie  slicjihords  feed 
the  flocks?  Yi!  kill  tliera  that  are  led;  but  ye 
feed  not  the  flock. 
Oen.  .H7.  12.  liU  brelh.  went  to/,  their  father's  flock 

llj.  tell  ine,  I  pray,  where  liiey/.  their  Hocks 
46.  32.  lor  their  trade  hath  been  to/,  cattle 
E%ud.  '■a.  5.  and  shall/,  in  another  man's  Held 
34.  3.  neither  let  Hocks/.  bi;l".ire  that  mount 
2  Sam.  5.  2.  thou  shall/,  my  people  Israel 

7. 7.  whonl  Icominanded  lo/.  Israel,  ICVir.  17. 0. 
1  Kings  17.4.  have  commanded  the  ravens  to/,  thee 
Job  24.  2.  they  take  away  Hocks  and/,  thereof 

20.  the  vv-oinis  >hall /.  sweetly  on  hiin 
P«ii.  2cl.  y. /.  them,  and  lift  them  up  for  ever 
4'J.  14.  laid  in  the  grave,  death  shall  /.  on  them 
78.  71.  h.'  bionght  David  to/.  Jacob  his  people 
Prov.  10.  21.  the  lips  of  the  righteous/,  many 
Cant.  4.  5.  like  two  roes  wliieli  /.  amung  the  lilies 
6.  2.  my  beloved  is  gone  to/,  in  the  gardens 
Jsa.  5.  17.  the  lambs  shall/,  afier  iheir  manner 

11.  7.  and  the  cow  and  the  bear  shall/. 

14.  :«l.  and  the  fiisl-born  of  the  poor  shall/. 
27.  10.  Iherc  shall  the  c:ilf/.  and  shall  lie  down 
30.  23.  thy  calile  shall/,  in  large  pastures 
40.  II.  he  shall/,  his  flock  as  a  shepherd 
41).  9.  they  shall/,  in  the  ways  and  high  places 
61.5.  and  strangers  shall  stand  and/,  your  flocks 
65.25.  the  wolf  and  the  lamb  shall/.  togi:iher 
Jer.  2.  t  "'.  'he  children  of  Noph/.  on  thy  crown 
3.  15.  pastors  who  shall  /.  you  wilh  knov\ledge 
6.  3.  they  shall  /.  every  one  in  his  place 
23.  2.  against  the  pastors  that/,  my  people 
4.  I  will  set  up  shepherds  which  shall/,  them 
50.  19.  Israel  shall/,  on  Carmel  and  Bashan 
J.,ani.  4.  5.  they  that/,  delicately  are  ilesolate 
Kick.  34.  2.  woe  to  tlie  shepherds  that  do  /.  thems. 
3.  ye  eat  the  fal,  hut  ye/,  not  the  flock 
10.  neither  shall  the  shepherds/,  themselves 
23.  even  my  servant  David  shall/,  them 
Dan.  11.  20.  they  that/,  of  his  meat  destroy  him 
Hos.i.  1(5.  now  the  Lord  will/,  them  as  a  lamb 
9.  2.  the  Hour  and  the  wine-press  shall  not/,  them 
^        Jonah  3.  7.  let  them  not/,  nor  drink  water 
W         Mic.  5.  4.  he  shall/  in  ihc  sirengih  4if  the  Lord 
Z(!pA.  2.  7.  they  shall/,  thereupon,  God  shall  visit 
3.  13.  they  sliall/.  none  shall  make  them  afraid 
iJccA.  11.  *J.  then  said  I,  I  will  not/,  you 

IClhe  shepherd  shall  not  /.  that  thatstandeth  still 
JU^it.  2.  tfi.  out  of  thoe  a  Governor  that  shall/. 
J.uke  15.  15.  ho  sent  him  lo  his  fields  to/,  swine 
^cts  20.  28.  lake  heed  to/,  the  church  of  God 
]  Cor.  y.  1 13.  they/,  of  the  things  of  the  temple 
13.  3.  though  I  give  all  mv  goods  lo/.  the  poor 
Rev.7. 17.  for  the  I,amb  Blia'll  /.  them  and  lead  them 

12.  6.  that  they  ghould/.  her  there  12f)0  days 

FEED,  ImpcraUvely. 
Oen.  25.  30  /.  ino  with  th.it  same  red  pottage 
2!).  7.  water  ye  the  sheeii,  and  go  and/,  them 
1 /finn'.«22.'.'7./.  him  wiili  bread  and  water  olafflic- 
lion,  until  I  come  in  peace,  2  Chr.  18. 2(5. 
Prov.  30.  8./  me  with  food  convenient  for  mo 
Cant.  1.8./.  Ihy  kids  beside  the  shepherds'  tents 
Mic.  7.  14./.  thy  people  with  thy  rod,  the  flock 
Zech.  11.4.  saitii  Lord,/,  the  flock  of  the  slaughter 
.lohn  21.  15./.  my  lambs  ||  Ifi./.  my  pheep,  17. 
Rom    12.  2(1.  if  thine  enemy  hunger,/,  him 

1  Pet.5.^.f.  the  flock  of  God  wliich  is  among  vou 

/iri«FEED. 
Hen.  30.  31.  f  will  again/,  and  keep  thy  flock 

2  .Slam.  10.  33.  /  irillf.  thee  with  me  in  .leruolem 
Jsa.  40.  2fi.  I  trill  f.  \\vm  that  oppress  thee 

58.  14.  /  will  f.  thee  with  the  heritage  of  Jacob 

Jcr.  9.  15.  /  will  f.  them  with  wormwood,  23.  15. 

£zcA:.34.n. /jrin/.lhemuponthe  mimntaiiisof  Isr. 

14. 1  mill  f.\\icm  in  a  gooil  pasiure,on  mountains 

T5   fiplltf.  my  flock,  and  cause  them  to  lie  down 

10.  I  will  f.  the  flit  and  the  strong  with  jiidgnient 

Zech.  1 1.7.  I  will  f.  Iheflnek  of  slaughter,  the  poor 

FEEDER. 
Oen.4.  t2.Ahel  wan /.of  »heep,(;ain  tiller  ofground 

FEED EST. 
P.tat.  PO.  5.  thou/,  them  with  the  broad  of  tears 
Cant.  I.  7.  tell  me  whirn  thou/,  thy  flock 

FEEDETH. 
Prov.  15.  14.  the  mouth  of  fools/  on  foolishness 
28.  f.  he  that/.  gliitlon«,  shamelh  Wn  father 
Cant.  2.  Hi.  my  beloved  /.  among  the  lilies,  6.  3. 
/xrt.44  20.he/'.on  nshes.B  decoivod  heart  turnod  him 
//m.12.1.  F.phrsim/.on  wind,  fnlloweth  east-wind 
Mat.  fi.  211.  V'l  your  heavenly  Fathr^r/  them 
J.uke  12.  21,  the  ravena  sow  nol,  yet  God/,  them 
1  Or.  9.  7.  who/,  n  fliirU,nnH  eatoth  not  the  milk 

FEEDING. 
O'n.Tl.'i.  Jooeph  was/.  hi«  flock  with  his  brethren 
Job  1. 14.  the  o^tPn  were  plowing,  the  asH"ii/.  by 
Kzek.  3-1. 10.  cniise  them  to  cease  from  /.  the  flock 
JVoA  2.  11.  where  is  the  f.  place  ofvoun;  lions? 
190 


FEE 

Mat.SMO.a  herd  of  swine/.  Jilark  5.11.  LukeS.  32. 
J.uke  J7.  7.  which  of  you  having  a  servant/,  cattle 
.lude  12/.theui8.without  fear,clouds  without  water 

FEEL. 
Oen.  27.  12.  my  father  peradvonturo  will/,  me 

21.  come  near,  that  I  may/,  thee,  my  son 
.fudg.  10.  20.  sutler  me  that  1  may/,  the  pillars 
./ob  20.  20.  surely  he  shall  not/,  quietness 
I'sal.  58.  9.  before  your  pots  can/,  the  thorns 
A'cf^H.S. whoso  keepeth  conimaiidui.shall/.no  evil 
yicls  17. 27.  seek  the  L.  if  Imply  they  might  /.  after 

FEELING. 
F.ph.  4.19.  who  being  past/,  have  given  themselves 
JJeb.  4.  15.  touched  with  the/,  of  our  infirmities 

FEET. 
Gen.  29.  fL  then  Jacob  lift  up  his/,  and  came 

49.  10.  nor  a  lawgiver  from  between  his/,  till 

33.  Jacob  gathered  up/,  in  the  bed,  yielded  ghost 
Kxod.  3  5.  put  thy  shoes  from  oil"  thy  /.  jicti  7.  33. 

11.  18.  get  out,  and  the  people  that  is  at  thy/. 

12. 1 1.  shall  eat  the  paseovcr  with  shoes  on  your  /. 
J.ev.  11.  21.  have  legs  above  their/,  ye  may  cat 
JJrut.  2.  28.  only  I  will  pass  through  on  my  /. 

11.  to.  all  the  substance  which  was  at  their/. 

'J8. 57.  young  one  that  comelh  from  between  her/. 

33.  3.  and  they  sat  down  at  thy/  every  one 
./oa/i.3.15.the/.ofthc  priests  were  dipped  in  Jordan 

9.  5.  old  shoes,  and  clouted  upon  their/. 

10.  24.  put  your/,  on  the  necks  of  these  kings 
14.  y.  the  land  whereon  thy/,  have  trodden 

Judg.  1.  t  7.  having  thumbs  of  hands  and  /.  cut  ofl' 

3.  .!4.  surely  he  covereth  his/,  in  his  chamber 

4.  15.  .so  that  Sisera  fled  away  on  his/.  17. 

5   f  15.  Barak  was  sent  on  his/,  into  the  valley 

27.  at  her/,  ho  bowed,  at  her/,  be  fell  down  dead 
Rulk2.  4.  go  in,  uncover  his/,  and  lay  thee  down 

8.  he  turned,  and  behold  a  woman  lay  at  his/. 

1  .Sam.  2.  9.  he  will  keep  the/,  of  his  saints 
14.  13.  Jonathan  climbed  on  his  hands  and/. 

24.  3.  and  Saul  went  in  to  rover  his/. 

25.  t27.  young  men  that  walk  at  the/,  of  my  lord 
42.  Abigail  rode  with  five  damsels  at  her/. 

2  .Sum.  2.  1 18.  Asahel  was  light  of  his/,  as  a  roe 

3.  34.  hand.<  not  bound,  nor  thy/,  put  into  fetters 

4.  4.  Jonathan's  son  was  lame  of  his/.  9.  3,  13. 
12.  they  cut  oft' their  hands  and  their/. 

19.  24.  Mephibosheth  had  not  dressed  his/. 
22. 34.  he  maketh  my  f.  like  hinds'/,  and  settelh 
me  upon  high  places,  Psal.  18.  33.  Hub.  3  19. 
37.  so  that  my/,  did  not  slip,  Psal.  18.  30. 

1  King  si.  5.  |iut  the  blood  of  war  in  shoes  on  his/. 
14.  0.  when  Ahijah  heard  the  sound  of  her/. 

12.  when  thy /.enter  the  city,  the  chilfl  shall  die 
15.23.  Asa  was  diseased  in  his/.  2  Chron.  10. 12. 

2  Kings  3.  fO-  no  water  for  the  cattle  at  their/. 
4.27.  when  she  came,  she  caught  him  by  the/. 
ti.32.  is  not  the  sound  of  his  master's/,  behind  him? 
y.  35.  but  they  found  no  more  of  her  than  the/. 
13.  21.  dead  man  revived,  and  stood  upon  his/. 

18.  1 27.  that  they  may  drink  the  water  of  their  /. 
21.  8.  nor  make  the/,  of  Israel  move  any  more 

1  Chr.  28.  2.  then  David  the  king  stood  oil  his/. 
JVrA.9.21. clothes  waxed  not  old,  their /.swelled  not 
./lib  12.  5.  he  that  is  ready  to  slip  with  his/. 
13.27.  thou  pulteat  my/,  in  the  stocks,  33. 11.  thou 
seltest  a  print  upon  the  heels  of  my/. 
%.  8.  for  he  is  cast  into  a  net  by  his  own/. 

11.  ti-rrors  make  afraid,  and  drive  him  to  his/. 
20. 15. 1  was  eyes  to  the  blind,/,  was  I  to  the  lame 

30.  12.  the  youth  rise,  they  push  away  my/. 
39.  t21.  his/,  dig  in  the  valley,  he  rejoiceth 

Psul.  22.  16.  they  pierced  my  hands  and  my/. 
25.  15.  for  he  shall  pluck  my/,  out  of  the  net 

31.  8.  thou  hast  het  my/,  in  a  large  room 
40.2.heset  my/on  rock, and  ehlablished  my  goings 
.Vi.  13.  wilt  thou  not  deliver  my/,  from  falling? 
fxi.  9.  and  suflereth  not  our/,  to  be  moved 

73.  2.  bill  as  for  me,  my/,  were  almost  gone 
74   3.  lift  lip  Ihy/.  lo  liio  perpetual  desolations 
105.  18.  whose/,  they  hurt  with  fetters 
1 15.  7.  /.  have  they,  but  lliey  walk  not,  nor  spoak 
110.  8   thou  hast  delivered  my/,  from  fulling 
110.  .50.  I  turned  my/,  unto  thy  testimonies 
101.  I  refrained  my/,  from  every  evil  way 
105. thy  word  is  a  lainpio  my/,  a  light  lo  my  path 
122.  2.  our/,  shall  stand  within  thy  pates 
Prtiv.  1.  10.  their/  run  to  evil   6.  18.7.<a.  50.  7. 
4.20.  ponder  the  |iath  ofthy/.  w  ays  be  oslabliihed 
5.5.  her/,  go  down  to  death.  Heps  take  hold  on  hell 
ft.  13.  llio  wicked  man  spi'uketh  with  his/. 

28.  ran  one  go  on  coals  and  his/,  not  bi- burnt? 
7.  II,  she  is  loud,  her/,  abide  not  in  her  house 

19.  2.  and  he  that  Imsietli  with  his/,  sinnelh 

20.  0.  riitloth  ofl'tho/.  niirl  drink,  ih  damage 
20.  .5.  a  flatterer  spreadeth  a  net  lor  his  / 

Cant.  7.  1.  how  heauliful  are  thy/,  with  shoes  I 
l.ia.  3.  10.  and  making  a  tinkling  with  their/. 

18.  Lord  take  away  Ihc  ornann'iits  about  their/. 
0.2.  with  twain  he  covered  his/,  with  twain  did  fly 
7.  20.  tho  Lord  shall  shave  the  buit  of  the/. 


FEE 

/.va.  23.  7.  her  own  /.  shall  carry  ncr  afar  off  to  toj 
20.  0.  the/,  of  the  poor  shall  tread  it  down 
32.  20.  that  send  forth  the/,  of  the  ox  and  asa 
41.  3.  by  the  way  that  he  had  not  gone  with  his/ 
40.  23.  they  shall  lick  up  the  dust  ofthy/. 
52.  7.  the/,  of  him  that  bringeth  good  tidings 
00.  13.  I  will  make  the  place  of  my/.  gloriouH 

./<;r.l3.  l(i.  before  your /.stumble  on  the  moiintaini 
14. 10.  loved  to  wander,  have  not  refrained  ihcir/ 
18.  22.  they  digged  a  pit,  and  hid  snares  for  my/. 
38.  22.  thy  /.  are  sunk  in  the  mire,  and  are  turoed 

Lam.  I.  13.  he  hath  spread  a  net  lor  my/. 

F.zek.  1.  7.  and  their/,  were  straight/. 
2.  1.  he  said  to  nie,  son  of  man,  staml  upon  (hy/. 
2.  and  the  Spirit  set  me  upon  my/.  3.  24. 
10.25.hast  opened  thy/.to  every  one  that  passed  by 

24.  17.  and  put  on  thy  shoes  upon  thy/. 

23.  tires  shall  be  on  your  heads,  shoes  on  your/. 

25.  6.  because  thou  hast  stumped  with  the/. 
32.  '.!.  thou  Iruublest  the  waters  with  thy/. 

34.  18.  but  ye  must  foul  the  residue  with  your  /. 
19.  what  ye  have  trodden  and  fouled  with  your  /. 
37.  10.  they  lived  and  stood  up  upon  their/. 
Dan.'i.  33.  his/,  part  of  iron,  and  pait  clay,  42. 
34.  a  stone  smote  the  image  upon  his/. 
41.  thou  sawest  the/,  and  toes  part  ofclay 
7.  7.  and  stamped  the  residue  with  the  /.  of  it,  19 
10.0.  his/,  like  polished  brass,  Ucv.  1.  15.  j  2. 18. 
JV'iA.  1.  3.  and  the  clouds  are  the  dust  of  his/. 

15.  the/,  of  him  that  bringeth  good  tidinus 

'/.rch.  14.  4.  his/,  shall  stand  upon  mount  of  Olives 

jl/rtMO.  14.  when  ye  depart  out  of  I  hat  house  or  city, 

shakeolTihedustofyour/.  ^/arAC.ll./,«A-e9.5 

15.  30.  cast  the  lame  and  blind  down  at  Jesus'  / 

18.  8.  rather  than  having  two/,  to  be  cast  into  fir* 
28.9.  they  held  him  hy  the/,  and  worshipped  him 

J.uke,  I.  79.  lo  guide  our/,  into  the  way  of  peac« 

7.  38.  she  kissed  his/,  and  anointed  them 

45.  this  woman  hath  not  censed  to  kiss  my/. 

8.  35.  (hey  found  the  man  sitting  at  the/,  of  Jesua 
41.  Jairiis  fell  down  at  Jesus'/,  and  besought  him 

10.  39.  Mary,  who  sat  at  Jesus/,  heard  his  word 

15.  22.  put  a  ring  on  his  hand,  and  shoes  on  Wmf. 
24.  39.  behold  my  hands  and  my/,  that  it  is  I 

40.  he  shewed  them  his  hands  and  his/. 
.folin  11.  2.  and  wiped  his/,  with  her  hair,  12.  3. 

12.  3.  and  Mary  anointed  the/  of  Jesus 

20.  12.  one  angel  at  the  head,  the  other  at  the  /. 
^?(<.s-3.  7.  and  immediately  his/,  received  strength 

4.  35.  laid  (hem  down  at  the  apostles'/.  37.  |  5.2. 

5.  9.  the/,  of  them  who  have  buried  thy  husband 
7.  58.  they  laid  their  clothes  at  a  young  man's/. 

13.  25.  shoes  of  his/.  I  am  not  worthy  to  loose 
51. they  shook  otftlie  dust  of  their/,  against  ihem 

14.  8.  there  sat  at  Lystra  a  man  impotent  in  his/. 
10.  Paul  said,  stand  upright  on  Ihy/  he  leaped 

16.  24.  who  made  their/,  fast  in  the  stocks 

21.  11.  Agabus  bound  his  own  hands  and/. 

22.  3.  yet  brought  up  at  the/,  of  Gamaliel 
20.  16.  but  rise,  and  stand  upon  thy/. 

linm.  3.  15.  their/,  are  swift  to  shed  blood 
10.  15.  the/,  of  them  that  preach  the  gospel 
I  Cut.  12.21.  nor  head  to  the/.  I  have  no  need  of  you 
^'pA.6.15.vour/.shodwith  (he  preparation  ofgos|>el 
Hrh.  12.  13.  and  make  straight  paths  for  your/. 
/»'ii!.3  9.  make  them  come  and  worship  before  thy/. 

10.  1.  another  mighty  nngel,  his/,  as  pillars  of  fire 

11.  11.  the  two  witnisses  stood  upon  their/. 

13.  2.  his/,  were  as/,  of  a  bear,  mouth  of  a  lion 
22.  8.  I  fell  down  to  worship  before  his/. 
y) I  his  FV.KT. 

F.iod.  4.  i-l.  Zipporah  cast  the  foreskin  at  his  f. 

.ludg.  4. 10.  Bar;ik  went  with  ten  thousand  at  hisf. 

Ilulh  3.  14.  she  lay  at  his  f.  until  Ihc  morning 

1  f<am.  25.  24.  Abieail  0-11  at  hisf.  and  said 

2  A'injrs4.37.  the  wonian  ofi'huneni  fijll  at  hisf. 
K»rA.8.3.Esth.  fell  down  at  hisf.  and  besoiighi  him 
J/itb.  3.  5.  and  burning  coals  went  forlh  at  his  f. 
Mat.  18.  29.  his  fellow-sorvanl  fell  down  at  hi.' f. 
Mark  5. 22.  Jairiis,  when  he  saw  him,  fell  at  his  f. 

7.25.SyrophcniciHn  woman  came.nnd  fell  at  hisf. 
f.ukei.  38.  she  stood  at  his  f.  behind  him,  weeping 
.^riAn  11.  .■*!.  Mary  fell  down  at  his  f.  saying 
.IrrO.lfl.SiipphirafellutAi's/.Mr.d  yielded  up  ghost 

10.  25.  rornelius  met  him,  and  fell  down  nt  his  f. 
Iter.  I.  17.  when  I  saw  him,  I  fell  at  AiV/  as  dead 

19.  10.  and  I  Oil  at  Ai»/.  lo  worship  him 

FEl'/r  joined  »  ilh  sole  or  .'^oles. 
Jieut.  11.  24.  toies  of  your/,  tread  shiill  he  yours 
./,i.A.  3.  13.  as  soon  an  soles  of  the  priests'/.  4. 18. 

1  /iVnrr.«.V3.till  L.  put  them  under  \Ur  .^-iilrs  ofhis/. 
2 Kings  19.  21.  s.  ofmv/.  have  dried,  ha.  37.  25, 
fsn.  (i'O.  14.  shall  bow  Hown  at  the  sofrs  nflhv/. 
/•::r<-.  1.7.  the  sole  of  their/,  was  like  a  calf's  font 

43.7.  tho  place  of  snlrs  of  my/,  no  more  defiled 
Mai.  4.  3.  wicked  shall  he  ashes  under  s.  of  your/. 

Under  FEET. 
/^rncf.24.10.  under  his/,  as  it  were  a  sn|\[ihire-ston» 

2  .Vim.  2-2. 10.  darkno-"  was  under  his/.  Psal.  18 
30.  yo.i,  thuy  are  fallen  under  ni)  /. 


PEL 

Psal.  8.  6.  thou  hast  put  all  things  under  his  /. 
1  C«r.  15.  27.  Eph.  1.  2J. 

47  3.  he  shall  subdue  the  iiiitions  under  our/. 

91    111.  Iho  dragon  shall  ihou  tramjilo  under  f. 
Jsa  14.  19.  as  a  carcase  trodden  under  f. 

28.3.druii!;ards  orEphraini  shall  bf  lrodd.un(Z«r/. 
J^ain.  3.  34.  to  crush  under  his/,  all  prisoners 
JUat.  7.  (i.  lest  they  trample  them  under  their/. 
Horn.  16.20.  God  shall  bruise  Satan  under  yoat  f.- 
lGor.l.'i.2o.  till  he  halh  put  all  enemies  u/Ji/o- his/. 
Heb.  2.  8.  for  he  put  all  m  subjection  under-\i\a  /. 
Hev.  12. 1.  clothed  with  ihe  sun,  moon  under  her/. 

FEET  with  wash,  or  washed. 
Gen.18.  4.  let  water  bo  I'etched,  and  wash  youT  f. 

19.  2.  turn  in,  tarry  all  night,  and  wash  your/. 

24.  32.  and  Laban  gave  water  to  wash  his/. 

43.  24.  gave  them  water,  and  they  washed  their/. 

Exod.  3U.  19.  Aaron  and  his  sons  shall  t^a^'/i  their 

hands  and  theit/.  thereat,  2).  |  40.  31. 

Judg.iy.  21.  Leviie  and  concubine  loashed  their/. 

1  Sam.  25. 41.  to  wash  the/  of  servants  of  my  lor-d 
2 Sam.  11.  8.  Uriah, go  to  I hy house,  wash  thy/. 
Psa/.58.10.  shall  wash  his/,  in  blood  of  (he  wicked 
Cant.S.'.i.havnicashed  my/.how  sliall  I  dofile  tlieml 
J^uke  7.  3d.  she  began  to  wash  his/,  with  tears 

44.  but  ^he  hath  washed  my/,  with  tears 
John  13.  .5.  he  began  to  wash  the  disciples'/. 
6.  Peter  saith  to  him, Lord  dost  thou  wash  my/..' 

8.  Petor  saith  to  him,  thouslialt  never  washmy  f. 
10.  needcth  not  save  to  wash  his/,  but  is  clean 
12.  so  after  he  had  washed  tlieir/.hesaid  to  thein 
14.  if  I  yourLil.  and  Master  have  washed  y our  f. 

ITirn.  5.  10.  if  she  have  washed  the  saints'/. 
FEIGN. 

2  Sam.  14.  2.  I  pray/,  thyself  to  be  a  mourner 
'iKings  14.5.she  shall /.herself  to  bo  another  worn. 
//nAe'iO.  20.  which  should/.  themsclveB  just  men 

FEIGNEH. 

1  Sam.  21. 13.  David  /.  himself  mnd  in  their  hands 

2  Sam.  22.t'15.  strangers  shall  yield  /.  obedience 

unto  me,  Psal.  18.  t  44. 
Psal.ll.\.  to  my  prayer  that  goeth  not  out  of/  Ups 
6S.  13.  thine  enemies  shall  yield/,  obedience 
Sl.flo.  the  hatersofthe  Lord  yielded/. obedience 
2  Pet.  2.  3.  with/,  words  make  merchandise  of  you 

FEIGNEST. 
1  Kings  !4.  6.  why/,  thou  thyself  to  be  another  ? 
•VcA.  6.  8.  but  thou  /.  them  out  of  thine  own  heart 

FEIGNEDLY. 
Jcr.  3. 10.  hath  turned  to  me  hut/,  saith  the  Lord 

FELL. 
Oen.  4.  5.  Cain  was  wroth,  and  his  countenance/. 
14.  10.  the  kings  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah/. 
15. 12.  a  deep  sleep/,  on  Abram,  and  lo,  a  horror 

25.1 18.  Ishmael/.  in  the  presence  of  his  brethren 
33.  4.  Esau  ran,  and/,  on  his  brother's  neck 

44.  H.Joseph's  brethren/,  before  him  on>ground 

45.  14.  Joseph/,  on  Benjamin's  neck  and  wept 
40.  29.  Jacob/,  on  Joseph's  neck  and  wept 

Kxod.  32.  28.  there /.of  the  people  3000  men 
J,ev.  16.9.  the  goat  on  which  the  Lord's  It.t/.  10. 
J^um.  11.  4.  the  mi.^ed  multitude/,  a  lusting 

9.  the  dew/,  on  the  camp,  the  manna/.  u[ion  it 
14.  5.  Moses  and  Aaron  /.  16.  22,  45.  |  20.  C. 

Josh.  8.  25.  that  all  that/,  that  day,  were  12,000 

11.  7.  so  Joshua  came  and/?  upon  them 
22.  20.  and  wrath/,  on  all  the  congregation 

Jud<r.i.l6.  Sisera's  host/,  on  the  edge  of  the  sword 
5.27.  Sisera/.JI  8.  10.  for  there/.  120,000  men 
7. 13.  a  cake  of  bread  smote  the  tent  that  it/. 

12.  6.  there/,  of  Ephraimites  at  that  time  42,000 

16.  30.  ihc;  house/,  on  the  lords  and  on  the  people 
20.  44.  and  there  /.  of  Benjamin  18,000  men 

1  S,im.4.  10.  there/,  of  I.siael  30,000  footmen 
18.  Eli/,  from  his  seat  backward  by  the  gate 
11.7.  the  fear  of  the  Lord/,  on  the  people 
14.  13.  the  Pliilisliiies/.  before  Jonathan 

19.  t24.  Saul  prophesied,  and/,  down  that  day 
22.  18.  Doeg  turned,  and/,  upon  the  prie.'^is 
2.5.  24.  Abigail/,  at  David's  feet,  and  said 

28.  20.  Saul/,  straightway  along  on  the  earth 

29.  3.  I  found  no  fault  in  him  since  he/,  on  me 

30.  13.  because  three  days  agone  I  /.  sick 

31.  4.  therefore  Saul  look  a  sword  and  /.  upon  it 
5.  his  armour-bearer/,  likewise,  1  Chr.  10.  4,  5. 

2.Sa7».  4.  4.  Mi'phiboshelh  /.  and  became  lame 
II.  17.  there/,  some  of  the  people  of  David 

13.  2.  Amnon/.  siik  for  his  sister  Tamar 

20.  8.  Joab's  sword/,  out,  as  he  went  forth 

21.  9.  thcv/-  all  seven  together  in  davs  of  harvest 
22.  they '/.  hy  the  hand  of  David,  1  Chron.  20.  8. 

1  Kings  ^.^.  Benaiah/.  on  Adonijah  that  he  died 
32.  who/,  upon  two  men  more  righteous  than  he 
34.  Benaiah/.  on  Joab||46.  Benaiah/on  Shimci 

12. 1 19.  BO  Israel/,  from  the  house  of  David 

14.  1.  Abijah  the  son  of  Jeroboam/,  sick 

17.  17.  the  son  of  the  wonian  /.sick,  it  was  so  gore 

18.  38.  fire  of  Lord/,  and  consumed  the  sacrifice 
20.30.  a  wall/,  on  27,000  men  that  were  left 

5  Kings  I.13.third  captain/.on  knees  before  Elijah 
107 


PEL 

ZKings 'i.lJ.took  mantle  of  Elijah  that /.from  him 

4.  8.  it/,  on  a  day  Elisha  passed  to  Shunem,  11. 

18.  it/,  on  a  day  the  clnld  went  lo  the  reapers 
37.  Shunemite/.  at  his  lect  and  bowed  herself 

6.  5.  the  a.\e-head/.  into  the  water,  and  he  cried 
6.  and  the  man  of  God  said,  where/,  it  1 

7.  20.  so  it/,  out  to  him,  the  people  irodo  on  him 
25.  11.  the  fugitives  that/,  away  to  the  king 

1  Chr.  12.  lU.  tliere/.  some  ol  Manasseh  lo  David 
21.  14.  and  there  j'.  of  Israel  70,000  men 
27.  24.  because  there/,  wrath  for  il  against  Israel 

2  Chron.  15.  9.  for  they/,  to  David  out  of  Israel 
17.  10.  the  fear  of  Lord/,  on  all  kingdoms  of  lands 
20. 18.  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem/before  Lord 
21.  19.  his  bowels/,  out  by  reason  of  sickness 
25.  13.  the  soldiers  of  Israel/,  on  cities  of  Judah 

Ezra  9.  5.  If.  on  my  knees  and  spread  my  hands 
Eslh.  8.  17.  for  the  fear  of  the  Jews/,  on  them,  9.2. 

9.  3.  because  the  fear  of  Mordecai/.  upon  them 
Job  1.15.the  Sabeans/.on  the  asses,  and  took  them 
.   17.Chaldcans/.on  cameis,and  carried  themaway 

19.  the  house/,  on  young  men, and  they  are  dead 
Psal.  27. 2.  wicked  came  to  eat  uji  my  tlesh,  they/. 

78.64.  their  priests/,  by  sword, widows  not  lament 

105.  38.  for  the  fear  of  Israel  _/'.  on  Egypt 
■/er.  39.  9.  those  that/,  away,  that/,  to  tiim,  52. 15. 

46.  16.  one/,  upon  another,  and  they  said,  arise 
Lam.  1.  7.  her  people  /.  into  the  hand  of  the  enemy 

5.  13.  and  the  children/,  under  the  wood 
Ey.eU.  8.  1.  the  hand  of  the  Lord  /.  upon  me,  11.  5. 

39.  23.  bo/,  they  all  by  the  sword 
Dan.  4.31.  there/,  a  voice  from  heaven,  saying 

7.  20.  other  which  came  up,  before  whom  three/. 

10.  7.  but  a  great  quaking/,  upon  Ihem 
Junah  1.7.  they  ca»l  lots,  and  the  lot/,  on  Jonah 
Mat.  7. 25.  the  house/,  not  ||  27.  it/.  Luke  0.  49. 

13.4.  seed/,  by  the  way-side,  Mark i.  A.  Luke 8.3. 

S.soino/.upon  stony  places,  Mark i  a.  Luke^.6. 

7.and  sonic/.among  thorns,  ^Ua;-A4.7.  Luke8.7. 

8.oiher/.  into  good  ground,  MurkA.S.  LukeS.S. 
Mark  5.  22.  Jairus  when  he  saw  him,  /.  at  his  feet 
7.-J5.Syroi)henician  woman  came,and/.  at  his  feet 
9.20.  he/,  on  the  ground  and  wallowed  foaming 

14.  35.  Jesus/,  on  the  ground  and  prayed 
Luke  1.  12.  and  fear/,  upon  Zacharias 

8.  23.  but  as  they  sailed,  Jesus/,  asleep 
10.  30.  a  certain  man/,  among  thieves,  36. 
13.  4.  upon  whom  the  lower  in  Siloam/. 

15.  20.  his  father/,  on  his  neck  and  kissed  him 

16.  21.  crumbs  which  /.  from  the  rich  man's  table 
John  18.  6.  went  backward  and  /.  to  the  ground 
~^els  1.  25.  from  which  Judas  by  transgression/. 

26.  gave  forth  lots,  and  the  lot/,  upon  Matthias 
7.60.  and  when  he  had  said  this,  he/.  aAleep 

9.  4.  Saul/,  to  Ihe  earth  and  heard  a  voice 
IS.  there/,  from  his  eyes  as  it  had  been  scales 

10.  10.  Peter  became  hungry,  and/,  into  a  trance 
44.  the  Holy  Ghost/,  on  them  all,  11.  15. 

12.  7.  the  chains/  otf  from  Peter'^  hands 

13.  11.  there/,  on  hiin  a  mist  and  a  darkness 
3o.  David/,  on  sleep  and  saw  corruption 

19.  17.  and  fear/,  on  all  the  Jews  at  Ephesus 

20.  10.  Paul  went  down,  and  /.  on  Eutychus 
37.  they  all/,  on  Paul's  neck,  and  kissed  him 

22.  7.  I/,  unio  the  ground,  and  heard  a  voice 
Rom.  11.  22.  on  them  which/,  severity 

15.3.  reproaches  of  them  reproached  thee /.on  me 

1  Cor.10.8.  aiid/.in  one  day  twenty-three  ihousand 
f/eb.  3.  17.  whose  carcases/,  in  the  wilderness 

2  Pet.^.  4.  since  fathers/,  asleep  all  thiiigsconlinue 
Jiev.  1.  17.  when  1  saw  him  If.  at  his  feet  as  dead 

6.  13.  and  the  stars  of  heaven/,  unto  iho  earth 
S.  10.  and  there  /.  a  great  star  from  heaven 

11.  II.  and  great  fear/,  on  them  who  saw  them 
13.  Ihe  tenth  part  of  the  city/,  by  earthquake 

16.  2.  and  there/,  a  noisome  and  grievous  sore 
19.  the  city  was  divided,  and  cities  of  nations/. 
21.  there/,  on  men  great  hail  out  of  heaven 
19.  10.  and  I/,  at  his  feet  to  worship  him 
See  Face,  F.'lCes. 
FELL  down. 
J\rinn.  22. 27.  when  the  ass  saw  the  angel,  she  /.  d. 
Dent.  9.  18.  and  I/.  d{iwn  before  the  Lord,  25. 
./tt.'.-A.G.20.  the  peo|)le  shouted,  the  wall/,  d.  flat 
■  fu'lir.  5.  27.  where  he  bowi  il  there  he/,  down  dead 
19.  26.  the  concubine/,  down  at  door  of  the  house 

1  Sam.  17.  52.  the  Philistines/,  down  by  the  way 
31. 1.  men  of  Israel/,  down  in  Gilhoa,  1  CAr.lO.l. 

2  Satn.  2.  16.  so  they  /.  down  together 
23.  Asahel/.  down  there,  and  died  in  the  place 

18.  28.  AWimaaz  f.  down  ||  19.  18.  Shirnoi/.  down 
2  Kings  1.2  and  A haziah/.rfoz/'n  through  a  lattice 
I  Chr.  5.  22.  there/,  d.  many  slain,  war  was  of  God 
■2  Chr.  13.  17.  there/,  dojcn  of  Isr.arl  500,000  men 
Esth.  8.  3.  Esther/,  down  at  Ahasuerus'  ("pet 
.fob  1.20.  Job/. rf.  on  the  ground  and  worshipped 
Psal.  107.  12.  they  /.  down,  there  was  none  to  help 
Don.  3.7.  all  nations/,  d.  and  wori-hippcd  image 

23.  the?e  three/,  down  bound  in  Ihe  furnace 
Mat.  2. 11.  wiee  men  /.  down  and  worshipped  him  I     18.  that  Daniel  and  his  /.  fhould  not  perish 


PEL 

Mat.  18.  26.  the  serv.  therefore/,  down,  saying,  29 
Mark  3.  II.  and  unclean  s|iirits/.do?/;n  beiore  him 

5.  3.3.  the  woman  with  the  issue  of  blood/,  dovin 
Luke  5.  8.  Simon  Peter/,  down  at  Je8us'"knee3 

8. 28.  man  which  had  devils/,  down  before  Jesus 
41.  Jairus/.  down  ||  17.  Hi.  the  Samaritan/,  d. 
.John  11.  32.  Mary/,  down  at  his  feet,  saying 
^cis5.  5.  Ananias/.  </oi£n  ||  10.  Sapphira/.  down 

10.  25.  Cornelius,/',  down  ||  16.  29.  jailer/,  down 

19.  35.  th6  image  which/,  down  from  Jupiter 

20.  9.  Eutychus/.  down  from  the  third  loft 
lieb.  11.  30.  by  faith  the  walls  of  Jericho/,  down 
Rev.  5.  8.  elders/,  d.  before  the  Lamb,  1-i.  |  19  5. 

22.  8.  John  /.  down  to  worship  belbre  the  angel 

FELL. 
2  Kings  3.  19.  and  ye  shall  /.  every  good  tree 

FELLED. 
2 Kings  3.  25.  and  they/,  all  the  good  trees 

FELLEK. 
fsa.  14.  8.  saying,  no/,  is  come  up  against  us 

FELLEST. 
2  .Sam.  3. 34.  as  a  man  before  wicked  men  so/.thou 

FELLING. 
2  Kings  6.5.  as  one  wos/.a  beam,  the  axe-head  fell 

FELLOES. 
1  Kings  7. 33.  their/and  their  spokes  were  molten 

FELLOW. 
Gen.  19.  9.  they  said,  this  one/,  came  in  to  sojourn 
Ezod.  2.  13.  wherefore  smitest  thou  thy/..' 
18. 1 16.  and  I  judge  between  a  man  and  h.s  f. 
Judg.  7. 13.  there  was  a  man  told  a  dream  to  his/. 
22.  the  Lord  set  evi^ry  man's  sword  against  his 
/.  through  all  the  host,  1  Sam.  14.  20 

1  Sam. 21. 1.5.  that  ye  have  brought  this/,  to  play 
the  madman  ;  shall  this/.coine  into  my  house? 

25.  21.  in  vain  have  I  kejit  all  that  this/,  hath 
29. 4.  make  this  /.  return,  he  may  go  to  his  place 

2  Sam.  2.  16.  caught  everv  one  his  /.  by  the  head 

1  Kings^.  27.  put  this/,  in  prison,  2  C/;ro7i.  18. 26 

2  Kings9. 11.  wherefore  came  this  mad/,  to  thee'? 
Eccl.  -i.  10.  if  they  full,  one  will  lift  up  bis/. 
Isa.  34.  14.  the  satyr  shall  cry  to  his/. 
.fonah  1.  7.  they  said  every  one  to  his/,  cast  lots 
7^ech.  11.  t9.  eat  every  one  the  flesh  of  his/. 

13.  7.  awake,  O  sword,  against  my  Shepherd,  and 

against  the  man  that  is  my/.saith  Lord  of  hosts 

Mat.  12.  24.  this/,  doth  not  cast  out  devils  but  by 

26.  61.  this/,  said,  I  am  able  to  destroy  the  temple 
71.  this/,  was  also  with  Jesus,  Luke  22.  59. 

/-uA-e23.  2.  we  found  this/,  perverting  the  nation 
.Tnkn  9.  29.  as  for  this/,  we  know  not  whence  he  is 

11.  16.  Didymus  said  to  his/,  disciples,  let  us  go 
~^cts  17.118.  some  said,  what  will  this  base/,  say  ? 

18. 13.  this  /.  persuadeth  men  to  wor.«hip  God 
22.  22.  away  with  such  a/,  from  the  earth 
24.  5.  we  have  found  this  man  a  pestilent/. 

FELLOW-CITIZENS. 
E]>h.i.V3.h\i\.f.-eitiiens  with  saints  and  household 

FELLOW-HEIRS. 
Eph.  3.  6.  that  the  Gentiles  should  he  f. -heirs 
FELLOW-HELPER. 

2  Cor.  8.  23.  Titus  my  f. -helper  concerning  yoii 
FELLOW-HELPERS. 

3  .John  8.  that  we  might  he  f. -helpers  to  Ihe  truth 
FELLOW-LABOURER. 

1  Thess.  3.  2.  we  sent  Timothens  our  f. -labourer 
Philem.  1.  Paul  to  Philemon  anx  f. -labourer 

FKLLOW-LAbOURERS. 
Phil.  4.  3.  Clement,  with  other  my  f. -labourers 
PA!'Je7«.24. Marcus,  r)emas,liucas,my /.-/a  Aoarers 

FELLOW-PR  lSOi\ER. 
C0/.4. 10.  Aristarchus  my  f. -prisoner  saUiteth  you 
Philem.  23.  Epaphrns  my  f.  prisoner  in  Christ 

__  FELLOW-PRISONERS. 
Rom.  16.  7.  .Xiidronicus  and  Juniamy/.-jpTisoTtcr* 

FELLOW-SERVANT,  or  servants. 
JlfnM8.28.  found  oneof  his/.-ssrc.  who  owed  him 
29.  lusf. -servant  fell  down  at  his  feet,  saying 
31.  so  when  hh  f-servants  saw  what  was  done 
33.  have  had  compassion  on  f.-srrr.  as  I  on  thee 
24.  49.  and  shall  begin  to  smite  h\a  f. -servants 
Col.  1.  7.  ye  learned  of  Epaphras  o\\r  f. -servant 
4.  7.  Tychicus,  who  is  a  f. -servant  in  the  Lord 
Rer.Ct.  II.  till  their/,  scrvmits  shou]d  be 'ulfiUcd 
19.10.  see  thou  do  it  not,  1  am  thy  f.-servant,22.9. 

FELLOW-SOLDIER. 
Phil.  2.  25.  to  send  Ep.Tphroiliius  my  f. -soldier 
Philem.  2.  Paul  to  Arrhip[nis  our  f'.-soldier 

FELLOW-WORKERS. 
C0Z.4. 11.  these  oniv  are  mv  f. -workers  Id  kingdom 

FELLOWs. 
.Tudg.  11.  37.  bewail  my  virginity,  t  and  my/. 
18. 25.  lest  angiy  /.  run  on  thee,  and  thou  lose  lifti 
20.  t  II.  all  Israel  were  gathered/,  as  one  man 
2.S'am.6.20.as  one  of  the  vain/,  uiirovercth  himseU 
Psal.  45.7.  with  oil  of  gladness  above  f.  Neb.  1.  9. 
Isa.  44.  n.  b.-hoUI  all  his/,  shall  he  nshamrd 
F:ck.  37. 19. 1  will  take  thr  tribes  of  Israel  his  /■ 
Dan.i.  13.  iliey  sought  Daniel  and  his/,  to  heslaia 


FER 

Dan.  7. 30.  wbosu  look  was  more  stout  than  hi</. 
Z.ech  'X  f.  Uiou  and  lliv/.  thai  set  bol'ore  lliee 
<Uu(.  11.  16.  like  to  cliilUrcii  culling  tu  their/. 
jJcti  I".  5.  Jews  took  lc\Vd  /.  of  llie  baser  sort 

FEIJ-OWdUlP. 

J,ec.  6.  '2.  which  wiis  ilelivereil  liitn  to  keep,  or  in/. 

I's.'M.-iO.  shall  the  ibruiie  oliiiiq.  have/.w  ith  Lliec? 

.IcU  -.  42.  they  contin.  in  apostles'  docirinc  and  /. 

'  1  Cor.  1.  !•.  ye  were  called  to  the/,  ol'  his  son 

10.  'JO.  not  that  ye  should  have/,  with  devils 
2  Cor.(j.U.  what/,  hath  rijjhloousncss  with  unrigh- 
teousness? whuiconiinuniun  lij^ht  witlidarkn.? 

8.  4.  take  on  us  llio/.  ol"  minisienng  to  the  saints 
Oal.  2,  "J.  Ihey  gave  to  ine  the  right  hand  of/. 
J-'.ph.'i.'X  to  make  men  see  what  is  the/,  ol'myslcry 

o.  II.  have  no/.wilh  unfruiilul  works  ol'darkness 
Pkil.  1.  5.  lor  your/,  in  ihe  gospel  till  now 

2.  1.  if  there  be  any/,  of  the  spirit,  if  any  bowels 

3.  10.  tiiat  I  may  know  the/,  of  bis  suflerings 
IJohn  l.X  tiiat  ye  also  may  have/,  with  us,  and 

truly  our/,  is  with  rather,  ami  with  Son  J.  C 

6.  if  we  say  that  we  have/.wiih  him, and  walk  in 

7.  if  wc  walk  in  lishi,we  have/one  witJi  another 

FELT. 
Ofn.  27.  2i  Jacob  went  near,  and  Isaac/,  him 
.11.  t  •'•'.  Laban  /.  all  the  tent,  but  found  them  not 
>;xo(/.10.21.over  l3nd,even  darkness  that  may  be/ 
Ptov.  23.  ;{o.  they  have  beaten  me,  and  I/,  it  not 
Mark  5.  '29.  she/,  she  was  healed  of  that  plagu 
^cts  2S.  5.  he  shook  otfllie  beast  and/,  no  harm 

FE.M.VLE. 
Oen.  1.  27.  male  and/,  created  he  them,  5.  2. 
6.  19.  two  of  every  sort,  they  shall  be  male  and/. 
7.2.  take  to  thee  by  sevens,  the  male  and  the/.  J. 
9.  there  went  in  two  and  two,  llie  male  and  the/. 
16.  they  that  went  in.  went  in  male  and/. 
I^r.  3.  1.  if  he  offer  it,  whether  it  be  male  or/. 
6.  if  his  olTer-ng  be  of  the  Hock,  male  or/. 

4.  2:*.  offering  a/,  without  blemish,  32.  |  5.  C. 
12.  7.  law  for  her  that  halh  born  a  male  or/. 
27.  4.  if  it  be  a/,  thy  estimation  shall  be  30  shekels 

.■>.  thy  estimation  for  the  /.  ten  shekels,  7. 
6.  tor  the/,  from  a  month  old,  three  shekels 
J/'vm.  5.  3.  both  male  and/,  shall  ye  put  out 
/Jfaf.4. 10. graven  image,  the  likenessof  male  or/. 
7. 14.  shall  not  be  a  male  or/,  barren  among  you 
Mat.  19.  4.  made  them  male  and/.  .Mark  10.  fi. 
Oal.  3.  28.  in  Christ  there  is  neither  male  nor/. 

FENCE. 
Fs.  62. 3.  ye  be  03  a  bowing  wall  and  a  tottering/. 

FEiNCED. 

Job  10.  11.  he  hath/,  me  with  bones  and  sinews 

!'.t.  8.  he  hath/,  up  my  way  that  1  cannot  pass 

ha.  5.  2.  my  beloved  hath  a  Tineyard,  and  he/,  it 

FENCED. 
Jievt.  2S,  52.  till  thy  hi°h  and  /.  walls  come  down 
iSam.Zi.  7.  man  that  shall  touch  ihera  must  be/. 
2  Kinirs  3.  19.  and  ye  shall  smite  every/,  city 
10.  2.  there  are  with  you  a/,  city  and  armour 
17.  9.  from  the  tower  to  the/,  city,  18.  8. 
19.  t  24.  I  have  dried  up  the  rivers  of/,  places 
with  tlie  sole  of  my  feet,  ha.  37.  1 2o. 
Isa.  2.  l.";.  the  day  of  the  Lord  on  every/,  wall 
Jer.  15.  20.  I  will  make  thee  a/,  brazen  wall 
Kzek.  36. 3.5.  waste  and  rumed  cities  are  become/. 
Hob.  2.  1 1.  I  will  set  me  upon  the/,  place 

FENCED  citiet 
JVum.  32. 17.  our  little  ones  shall  dwell  in  /.  cities 
Deut.  3.  5.  all  those  cities  were  /.  with  walls 
9.  1.  to  posiMSS  cities  great  and  /.  up  to  heaven 
Josh.  10.  20.  the  rest  of  them  entered  into/,  cities 
14.  12.  and  that  the  cities  were  great  and/. 
1. Vam.fi. IH.golden  raice,iccord.to  numb.of/.  cities 
2  .Sam. 20. 6.  pursue,  lest  beget/.  citi«and  CjcajK- 
QA'iji/Tj-  18.13.Scnnachprib  came  up  against  all  the 
/.  citi's  of  Judah  and  look  them,  2  Chr.  12.  4. 
19.  25.  thou  slioiildcst  be  to  lay  waste/.  fi(i>» 
SCAron.  8.  5.  Solomon  built/,  cities  with  walls 
12,  4.  Shishak  took  the/,  cities  of  Judah 
14.  6.  .Xsa  built  /.  f  ifi«  in  Judah,  land  had  rest 
17.2.  Jchoshapliat  placed  forces  in  thc/.cif  i>.«,  19. 
19.5.  he  set  Judscs  throughout  all/,  cities  ofJiid. 
31.  3.  Jehiisliapliat  gave  ihem/.  cities  in  Juduh 
33. 14.  Maiiasseli  put  captains  of  war  in/,  cities 
JfT.  5.  17.  they  slinll  impoverish  thy/,  cities 
Dan.  11.  l.'i.  kmgof  north  shall  lake  most/,  cititj 
Hot.  H.  14.  Judah  huth  multiplied/,  cities 
Z^sA.l.lG.div  of  alarm  a»ain.Ht/.crtiM  and  towers 

FENS. 
Job  40.21.  Behemoth  li'lh  in  covert  of  reed  and/. 
*  FERRF.T. 

Iav.  11.30.  the/,  rhamelcon  and  lizard  unclean 

FERRY  BO.XT. 
2.Sa>ii.l9.18.  there  went  s/.-ftoa»foi  king's  househ. 

FERVENT. 
.lets  IS.  2.V  .^ polios,  being/,  in  spirit,  taught 
horn.  12.  11./.  in  spirit,  sf-rving  the  Lord 
2G>r.  7.  7.  he  told  \\i  your/,  mind  toward  mo 
y^m.-Vlfi./  prayer  of  a  rijhleou-  man  avails  niurli 
I  /'if.  4.  8.  above  all  ihin»»  have/,  charity 
IM 


FEW 

3  P«t  3. 10  elements  shall  melt  with/,  heal,  13. 

FERVENTLY. 
Col.  4. 12.  Epnphras  labouring/,  for  you  in  prayers 
1  i'et.  1.  22.  SCO  that  ve  love  one  another  with 

FETCH.  [pure  heart/. 

Gen.  18.  5.  I  will  /.  a  morsel  of  bread,  and  comfoi  i 

27.  U.  go,/,  mc  two  good  kids  of  the  goats,  13. 

4j.  then  1  will  send  and/,  thee  I'roni  tlieneo 

V.xod.  2.  5.  when  saw  the  ark,  she  sent  maul  to/,  ii 

.\'«m.  20.  10.  must  we/,  waier  out  of  this  rock  ? 

Deut.  lU.  12.  the  elders  shall  send  and/.  Iiini 

24.  10.  thou  slialt  not  go  to/,  his  pledge,  19. 

30.  4.  from  whence  will  the  Lord  thy  Guil/.  thee 
Judg.  11.  5.  cldeis  of  Gilead  went  to/.  Jeplitliah 

20.  10.  take  men  to/,  victuals  lor  the  people 

1  Sam.  4.  3.  let  us/,  the  ark  of  the  covenant 

0.  21.  saying,  come  ye  down,  and/,  it  up  to  you 
10. 11.  Samuel  said  to  Jesse,  send,/.  Saul,  2tt.'31. 
2t).  22.  let  us  come  over  and/,  the  spear 

2  Sam.  3.  2.1.  but/,  a  compass  behind  ihem 

14.  13.  the  king  dutli  not/,  home  Ins  banished 
20.  to/  about  this  I'orm  ofspeecli  Joabdone  ihis 

1  Kings  17.  10./.  me,  1  pray  ihec,  a  little  water 
11.  MS  she  WHS  going  to/,  it,  lie  called  her 

2  Kings  6. 13.  go  spy  w  here  he  is,  that  1  may/,  hiin 
2  Chron.  It",  t*.  /.  quickly  Micaiuh  the  son  of  Imla 
jVi/i.  8.  13./.  olive-branches,  pine  and  myrtle 
Joi  36.  3.  I  will/,  my  knowledge  from  afar 

ha.  56.  12.  come  ye,  say  they,  1  will/,  wino 
Jcr.  36.  21.  the  king  sent  Jehudi  to/,  the  roll 
.ids  16. 37.  let  liiein  come  themselves  and/,  us  out 

FE'rCHEU. 
Gen.  18.  4.  let  a  little  water,  I  pray  you,  be/. 

7.  Abraliain/.  a  calf  tender  and  good 
27.  14.  Jacob  went  and/,  the  kids  to  his  mother 
Judg.  18.  18.  they/,  the  carved  image,  the  ephod 
l^am.  7. 1.  men  came  and/,  up  the  ark  of  the  Lord 

10.  23.  and  they  ran.  and/.  Saul  thence 

2  .Sam.  4.  6.  as  though  they  would  have  /.  wheat 
9.  5.  king  David  sent  and/.  Mephiboshetli 

11.  27.  David  sent  and  /.  Bath-sheba  to  his  house 
14.  2.  Joab/.  from  Tekoah  a  wise  woman 

1  Kings  7. 13.  king  Solomon/.  Hiram  out  of  Tyre 
9.  iS.  Uiey/.  from  Ophir  gold,  420  talents 

2  Kings  3.  9.  /.  a  compass  of  seven  days'  joHrney 

11.  4.  Jchoiuda  sent  and/,  rulers  over  hundreds 
2  Chron.  1.  17./.  from  Egypt  a  chariot  and  horse 

12.  II.  the  guard  came  and/,  the  shields 

Jcr.  26.  23.  and  they/,  forth  Urijali  out  of  Egvpt 
.icts  28.  13.  and  from  thence  we/,  a  compass 

FETCH ETH. 
Deut.  19.  5.  and  his  hand  /.  a  stroke  with  the  a.\e 

FETTKKS. 

.Tudg.  16.  21.  they  bound  Samson  with/,  of  brass 

2  Sam.  3.  34.  thy  hands  were  not  bound,  nor  thy 

feet  put  into/. 

2A'iHffs25.7.they  putout  thecycsof  Zedekiah,und 

bound  him  with/,  of  brass,  ,/cr.  39.  f".  |  52.111. 

2  Chron.  33.  11.  Manasseh  was  bound  with/. 

36.6.  Jehoiakim  bound  with /.to  carry  to  llnbylon 

Psal.  105.  18.  whose  feet  they  hurt  with/. 

149.  8.  to  bind  their  nobles  with/,  of  iron 

.Mark  5.  4.  being  often  bound  wiUi/.  /,aie8. 29. 

FEVER. 
Deut.  28.  22.  the  Lord  shall  smite  thee  with  a/. 
.\[at.  8.  14.  Jesus  w.is  come,  he  saw  Peter's  wile's 
mother  sick  of  a/.  Mark  1.  30.  J.iike  4.  a''* 
John  4.  52.  yesterday  ut  tlie7tli  hour  the/,  left  him 
.lets  28.  8.  the  father  of  Piiblius  lay  sick  of  a/. 

FEW. 
^fn.  24.55.  let  the  damsel  abide  with  us  a/,  days 
27. 44.  tarry  a  /.  days  till  thy  brother's  fury  turn 
34.  30.  I  biMug/.  ill  number,  they  will  slay  me 
47.  9./.  and  evil  have  the  days  of  my  life  been 
/.rv.  '26.  22. 1  will  make  you/.  Deut.  4.  27.  |  28. 62. 
•Viim.  9.  20.  the  cloud  was  uj.  days  on  the  tabcrn. 

13.  18.  see  the  people  whellier  llicy  be/. or  many 
26.  54.  to/,  shall  give  the  less  inheritance,  35.  8. 

56.poi8essiuu  shall  be  divM. between  many  and/. 
Deut.  '20.  r>.  my  father  sojourned  there  with  a/ 
33.  0.  let  Reuben  live,  let  not  his  men  be/. 

1  .Sam.  14.  6.  no  restraint,  lo  save  by  many  or/. 
17.  23.  with  whom  hast  thou  left  those/,  sheep  ? 

2  Chron.  29.  34.  but  the  priests  were  too/. 
jVeh.  2.  Vi.  I  .trose,  I  and  some/,  men  with  me 

7.  4.  the  city  large, buwthe  jicople  were/,  theriin 
,fof>  10. '20.  are  not  my  days/.?  cense  then,  iet  alone 

14.  1.  man  is  of/,  days,  and  full  oftrnuble 

16.  22.  when  a/,  years  arc  cumc,  thi-n  I  shall  go 
32.  to.  '  am/,  ofilays,  ond  ye  are  very  old 

Fsal.  109.  8.  let  his  days  be/,  iind  let  another  take 

F.cel.5S.  God  is  in  heaven,  therelbre  let  words  bo/. 
9.  14.  there  whs  a  little  city,  and/,  men  in  it 
12.  3.  the  grinders  ce«»o,  because  they  are/. 

Isa.  10.  19.tho  rest  of  the  trees  of  Ibresi  shall  bo/. 
24.  6.  the  inhabitants  are  burned,  and  /.  men  left 
41.  1 14.  fear  not  Jacob,  ye/,  men  of  Israel 

y.zrl:.  ,5.  3.  thou  shiilt  also  take  n/.  i;i  nnml>or 
12.  10.  I  will  leave  a  /.  men  from  the  sword 

/>aii.  11.  20.  within  /.  day.»  he  shall  be  det'royedl 


FIE 

.Vat.  7. 14.  itrait  is  gate,  and/,  there  be  that  find  it 

9.  37.  but  Uie  labourers  are/.  J.ukc  10  2. 

15.  34.  seven,  and  a/  little  fishes,  Mark  8.  7 
'A).  Hi.  many  bo  culled,  but/,  are  chosen,  '22.  14. 
2.').  21.  thou  hast  been  faithful  in  a/,  iliiiigs,  23. 

.Mark  6.  5.  laid  hands  on  a/,  sick  folk,  healed  them 
J.uke  1'2.  48.  shall  be  beaten  wiih/.  stripes 
13.  '23.  one  said,  Lord,  are  there  /.  that  be  saved  1    m 
.ids  24.  4.  that  thou  wouldest  hear  us  a/,  worda    " 
t'lih.  3.  3.  the  mystery  as  1  wrote  aliire  in/,  words 
/yW;.  12.10.  for  they  verily  for  a/.days  cliut^tened  ua 

13.  '22.  for  i  have  wrillvu  unto  you  iuy.  words 

1  /'((.:i.2il.wherein/  that  is,  eight  souls  were  savej 
Hen.  2.  14.  I  have  u/.  things  against  thee,  '20. 
3.  4.  tliuu  hast  a/,  names  even  in  Sanlis 

But  a  FEW. 
GcH.  29.  20.  they  seemed  to  him  but  af  days 
J.ce.  '25.  .V2.  if  there  remain  but  f.  yeais  to  Jubilee 
./i/.>7i.  7.  3.  ihe  men  of  Ai  are  but  J. 

1  CkruH.  Hi.  19.  when  ye  were  but/.  Psal.  105. 12 
./cr.  42.  '2.  for  we  are  left  but  af.  of  many 

J\'vt  a  FEW. 

2  A'in^.<  4.3.  borrow  empty  vessels,  borrow  not  af 
Isa.  Kl.  7.  lo  dc-iroy,  and  cut  otf  nations  not  af. 
.ler.  30.  19.  multiply  them,  and  they  shall  not  btf. 
Ads  17.4.  chief  wuineii  ii«t  af  |i  l'2.ofnitn  nutaf. 

FEWER. 
J^'um.  33.  54.  to/,  ye  shall  give  the  less  inheritance 
.lob  30.  t  1.  but  thev  thai  are  of/,  davs  than  I 

FEWEST. 
Deut.  7.  7.  for  ye  were  tlie^'.  of  all  people 

FEWNESS. 
/<£(!.  25.  16.  according  to  /.  oi  vears  diminish  price 

FIUELITV. 
Tit."  10.  scrvanlsnot  purloining,  shewing  good/. 

FIELD. 

Gen.  23.  1 1.  the/,  give  I  tliee,  and  the  cave  therein 

20.  the  /.  and  cave  were  made  sure  lo  Abraham 

27.  27.  the  smell  of  my  son  is  as  the  smell  of  a/. 

31.  4.  Jacob  called  R.'ichel  and  Leah  lo  the/. 

49.  30.  in  the/,  which  Abraham  bought,  50.  13. 

Ezud.  'H.  5.  if  a- man  shall  cause  a/,  lo  be  cateo 

6.  so  I  hat  the  corn  or/,  be  consumed  therewith 

7,(11.  19.  19.  shall  not  sow  thy/,  with  mingled  seed 

25.3.  si.\  years  shall  sow  thy/,  and  pi  une  vineyard 

4.  in  the  seventh  year  tliuu  shall  not  sow  thy/. 

27.  IT.  if  he  sanctify  his/,  from  year  of  jubilee,  18. 

20.  if  he  will  not  redeem  the/,  or  if  be  sold  the/. 

Deut.  5.  21.  nor  shalt  thou  covet  thy  neigl^bour's/. 

Jash.  15.  18.  to  ask  of  her  father  a'/.  Judg.  1.  14. 

Ruth  '2.  8.  go  not  lo  glean  in  another/,  but  abide 

4. 5.  llonz  said,  what  day  iliou  bu)esi/.uf  Naomi 

2Snm.2.  t  16.  place  was  called  tlie/.of  strong  men 

14.  30.  Joab's/.  is  near  mine,  and  he  halh  barley 
31.  why  have  thy  servants  set  niy /.  on  fire  ? 

2  Kings  18. 17.  they  stood  by  upper  pool,  which  is 
m  highway  of  the  fuller's  /.  Isa.  7.  3.  |  36. 2. 
A>A.  13.  10.  the'Levites  fled  every  one  lo  his/. 
Psal.  96.  12.  let  the/,  be  joyful  ami  all  therein 
Pnw.  24.  30.  1  went  by  the/,  of  the  slothful 
27.26.  lambs  for  clothing,  and  gnats  the  prife  of/. 

31.  16.  she  considereth  u/.  and  buyeth  it 
F.crl.  5.  9.  the  king  him.-iclf  is  served  by  the/. 
Asa.  .5.  8.  woe  to  them  that  lay  /.  to/,  till  no  place 

16.  10.  and  joy  is  taken  out  of  the  pl^'otifnl/. 
Jcr.  12.4. how  long  shall  herbs  of  eveiy  /".  wither? 

'26.  18.  Zion  shall  be  plowed  like  a/.  .'l/i>.  3.  12. 
:)2.7.  buy  ihec  my/,  that  is  in  .'\iiathoth,  8.  35. 
3.5.  9.  neither  have  we  vineyHrtl^iior/.  nor  seed 
48.  33.  joy  and  sladness  is  taken  from  plentiful/. 
/ricA-.17.f8. was  planted  in  agood/.  bygreHi  w.-.lers 
Jorl  I.  10.  the/,  is  wasted,  tlie  land  mnurneth 
.Mat.  13.  24.  that  sowi>ih  good  seed  in  bis/.  31. 
38.  the/,  is  the  wiirld,go..d  seeil  rhildr.  of  kingJ. 
44.again  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  lo  treasure 
hid  in  a  /.  he  si'lleth  all,  and  buyeth  thai  /. 
27.  7.  thev  boucht  with  iheni  ihc  poller's/.  10. 
8.  the /.'was  called  the/,  of  blooil,  Jiels  1.  19. 
l.iikr  17. 7.  w  ill  say  lo  him,  when  come  from  the/. 
.lets  I.  18.  this  man  piirchH.oed  a  f.  with  reward  of 

f>iiit/»/FIFLr). 
2  Kings  19.  +  2.3.  I  will  enter  h  »/./.  Isa.  37.  t  '24. 
/.«n.1(l.l8.  shall  consume  t he  ploryofhis/miV/ii//. 
29. 17.  Lebiinon  sli.ill  be  Inrned  into  afruilfulf. 

32.  15.  till  Spirit  bo  poured  out,  and  the  wilder- 

ness he  n  fruitful  f.  and  Ihc  fruitful  f.  be 
riiiinliil  a  forest 
ir>.  rind  tighte«>usnegs  in  the  fruitful  f. 
¥.-.(k.  17.  5.  he  planted  Ihe  S'-od  in  a  fruitful  f. 

In  the  FIELD.  ( 

Gm.  4.  8,  it  came  to  pass  when  thev  were  in  tht  f 
24.  63.  iBaBC  went  out  to  niedila'e  >«  Ihr  f. 
•29.  2    he  looked,  nnil  lM-h<.lil  n  w.li  in  the f. 
37.  1.5.  behold,  Josoph  »n»  wniiil.ring  in  the  f. 
f"7<irf.9.  19.  smdandgTitherairilioii  hist  in  the  f. 
'2."i.  the  hail  smote  in  Keypi  all  'lint  was  in  iki  f. 
U>.  '25.  to-dav  ye  shall  not  find  it  in  the  f. 
Prut.  21.  1.  if  one  he  fonml  slain,  lying  i»  the  f. 
2*2.  '2.5.  if  a  man  find  «  betrollieil  diiinsri  in  Ihe  f 
SIA  ^  KiKmml  <I<»U  thou  be  ml  ho  citv  *nd  in  th/f 


i7eM.28.lG.  cursed  shaliahou  be  in  city  and  in  the/. 
Judg.Vi.'J.n\gi:\  cunio  to  woman  an  she  vat  in  thef. 
1  SamA.  i6.  wliiuli  ulune  remainelli  inf.  ot  Joatiua 

19.  3.  I  will  aland  besidu  my  I'allier  en  the  f. 

30l  11.  and  ihey  luund  an  Kgyptiun  in  the  f. 
..S'ain.  14.  b.  twu  Mint,  and  llity  two  strove  in  tkef. 
1  Kings  1 1.  iJ.  and  lliey  two  were  alone  m  the  f. 

14.  11.  him  that  dieth  ofJeroboain  in  Lhef. 

'il.  24.  hiin  that  dieth  of  Ahuh  in  Lhef.  (i>w\»  eat 
I  Chron.  I'J.  9.  liniga  were  by  IhemseKea  in  thef. 

ST.  2(3.  over  them  that  did  the  work  tn  Vie  f. 
Job  24.  6.  they  reap  every  one  h\»  corn  in  ike  f. 
/'£<i^.78.12.nmrvelluus  things  in  lhef.  ofZoan,  43. 
Pruv.  24.  27.  make  it  til  lor  thyseK  in  thef. 
Jer.  14.  5.  yea,  the  hind  calved  in  the  f. 

17.  .3.  O  my  mountain  in  the  f.  I  will  give  to  S|)oil 

41.  8.  for  we  have  trcaijurea  in  the  f.  of  wheat 
F.zek.~.\i.  he  that  is  in  £Ae/.«hall  die  by  the  sword 

26.  6.  he  shall  slny  thy  daughters  in  lhef.  d. 
Mic.  4.  lU.  thou  shalldkvell  in  thef.  and  go  to  Bab. 
ZccA.  10.  1.  shall  give  to  everyone  grass  in  the  f. 
Mai. 3.  II.  nor  shall  your  vine  cast  her  fruit  in  thef. 
Mat.^.lS.  neither  let  him  who  is  in  thef.  return  to 

take  his  dailies,  Atark  13.  Iti.  Luke  17.  31. 

40.  then  shall  two  be  in  thef.  Luke  17.  :«). 

I,uke2.  8.  there  were  shepherds  abiding  in  l/ie  f. 

12. 23.  clothe  the  grass  which  is  tu-day  in  the  f. 

.  1j.  25.  now  his  elder  son  was  in  tftc /.heard  music 

Into  the  FIELD. 
Vum.  22.  23.  ass  turned  aside,  and  went  into  lhef. 
Jndg.  y.  42.  the  people  went  out  iii^o  the  f. 

1  .Va;n.6.  14.  the  carl  came  into  the  f.  of  Joshua 
2U.  11.  Jonathan  said,  come  let  us  go  into  the  f. 

"Sam.  11.  23.  the  men  came  out  unto  us  into  thef. 
20.  12.  removed  .■Vinasa  out  of  the  way  into  the  f. 

2  Kings  4.39.  one  went  into/.and  gathered  gourds 
Cant.  1  11.  my  beloved,  let  us  go  forth  into  the  f. 
Jer.  6. 2.">.  go  not  forth  I'ntu  /.  nor  walk  by  the  way 

14.  18.  if  I  go  fortli  into  tkef.  behold  the  slain 

Of  the  FIELD. 

Oen.  2. 5.  God  made  every  plant  and  herb  of  thef. 

34.  7.  and  the  sons  of  Jacob  caine  out  of  the  f. 

47.  21.  four  jiart.^  your  ov\-n,  for  seed  of  the  f. 
Lev.  20.  4.  the  trees  of  the  f.  yield  fruit 

27.  2B.  no  devoted  thing  of  thef.  shall  be  sold 
Jirxit.  20.  \i1.  for  the  tree  of  the  f.  is  man's  lite 
Judg.  .5.  4.  when  thou  marcliedst  out  of  the  f. 

19.  Hi.  came  an  old  man  from  his  work  out  o/t/je/. 

Hulh  2.  3.  on  a  part  of  the  f.  belonging  to  Boaz 
1  Sam.  II.  .*>.  Saul  c:iine  after  the  herd  out  of  the  f. 
2A'i7i^j-9  So.casi  him  in  portion  o/f4«/.  of  Nabotli 
37.<:.trcasc  shall  be  as  dung  upon  the  (iice  of  the  f. 
Jiib  .3.23.  shall  be  in  league  with  the  stones  nfthef. 

P.iai.  103.  1.5.  as  a  flower  of  the  f.  he  Hoiirisheth 
Cant,  2.  7.  I  charge  you  by  llie  roes  of  thef.  3.  5. 
Isa.  37.  27  the  inhabitants  were  as  grass  of  thef. 

40.*).  all  flesh  is  grass,  and  as  the  flower  of  thef. 

43.  20.  the  beast  of  the  f.  shall  honour  nie 

5.1.  12.  all  the  trees  of  the  f.  shall  clap  their  hands 
Jer.  4jJ7.  as  keepers  of  the  f.  are  they  against  her 

li?.l4ilhc  snow  of  L''baiion  from  the  rock  of  thef. 
/.am.  4. 9.  strffeen  for  want  of  the  fruits  of  the  f. 
Kiek.  16.7.  caused  thee  to  multiply  as  bw\ofthef. 

17.24.  all  trees  of  the  f.  shall  know  that  I  Lord 

34.  27.  the  tree  of  thef.  shall  yield  her  fruit 

36.  30.  I  will  multiply  the  increase  of  the  f. 

39.  10.  90  they  shall  take  no  wood  out  of  thef. 
/>an.4.l5.in  tender  grass  »/t/ic/.and  wet  with  dew 
Mos.  10.  4.  lis  hemlock  in  the  furrows  of  the  f. 

12.  II.  their  altars  as  heaps  in  furrows  of  the  f. 
Joel  1.11.  because  the  harvest  of  the  f.  is  perished 

J2.  even  all  the  trees  of  the  f.  are  withered 
19.  and  the  flimehath  burnt  all  the  trees  of  thef. 

Mic.  1.  G.  I  will  make  Samaria  as  a  heap  of  the  f. 

Mat.fi.^.  consider  the  lilies  of  the  f. how  they  grow 
30.  wherefore,  ifGod  so  clothe  the  grass  of  thef. 

13.  36.  declare  the  parable  of  the  tares  of  the  f. 

See  Bkast,  Beasts. 
Open  FIELD. 
/y«».  14. 7.  shall  let  living  bird  loose  into  the  openf. 
17.!i. bring  sacrifices  which  tlieyofrT  in  ihfoper.f. 
Jer.  9.  22.  mrn's  carcases  as  dur.g  upon  the  openf. 
F.iek.  16.  5.  but  thou  wast  cast  out  in  the  openf. 
.12.  4.  I  will  cast  thee  forth  upon  the  openf. 
33.27. him  that  is  in  the  openf.  I  will  give  to  beasts 
39. 5.  thou  ghalt  fall  upon  the  open /.sailh  Lord  G. 

FIF.LDS. 
Kxod.  S.  13.  the  frogs  died  out  of  the  houses  and/. 
/yT.2.).3I.  shall  be  counted  as  the/. ofthccountry 
27.  22.  wliich  is  not  of  the/,  of  his  possession 
A'um. 16.14.  thou  hast  not  given  us  inheritance  of/. 
20.  17.  we  will  not  pass  tlirough  the/,  or  throujh 
the  vineyards,  21.  22. 
Deut.  11.  15.  and  I  will  send  grass  into  ihy/. 
32.  13.  that  lie  might  eat  the  increase  of  the/. 

32.  their  vine  is  a.9  the  vine  of  the/,  of  Gomorrah 
./o«A.21.12.but  the /.an  I  villages  gave  they  toCaleb 
1  Sam.  8.  14.  he  will  take  your/,  and  vineyards 
!S.  7.  will  the  son  of  Jc-ssegivr  each  of  you/.? 
25. 15.  they  were  a  wall  to  us  when  we  were  u  /. 
139 


riF 

\Klngs  2. 26.  get  thee  to  Anatlioth,  to  thine  own/. 

16.  4.  him  that  dieth  of  liaasha  in  the/,  thall  the 
Ibivie  of  the  air  eat 

1  Chron.  10.32.  let  the/,  rejoice,  and  all  therein 
27. 25.  and  over  the  storehouses  in  the  /.  in  cities 

2  Chron.  26.  1 10.  had  vinedreseers  in  fruitful/. 
Job  5.  10.  and  who  sendeth  waters  upon  the/. 
Paal.  107.  37.  and  bow  tliee/.  and  plant  vineyards 

132.  0.  we  found  it  in  the/,  of  the  wood 
Prov.  n.  26.  while  ue  yet  he  had  not  made  the/. 

23.  10.  and  enter  not  into  the/,  of  the  fatherless 
/j(a.l6.8.for/.ofHebhlion  languish  and  vine  of  Sib. 

32.  12.  they  shall  lament  for  teats,  the  pleasant/ 
Jer.a.  12.  their/,  shall  be  turned  toothers,  B.  10. 

13.  27.  1  hcve  seen  thine  abominations  in  the/. 

32.  15./.  shall  be  possessed  again  in  this  land 
43./.  bought  II  44.  men  shall  buy  /.  for  money 

3y.lO.Nebuzar-adangavelhein/.at  the  Kaine  time 

40.7.  the  captains  of  forces  which  were  In  the/.13, 
Obad.  19.  they  shall  possess  the/,  of  Ephraim 
Mic.  2.  2.  they  covet/,  and  lake  Uiem  by  violence 

4.  turning  away,  he  hath  divided  our  f. 
Hab.  3.  17.  although  the  /.  shall  yield  no  meat 
Mark  2.  23.  he  vveiit  through  the  corn/.  J^uke  6. 1. 
John  4.  35.  lift  up  your  eyes,  and  look  on  the/, 
yam. 5.4.  the  labourers,  which  reajied  down  your/. 

Open  FIELDS. 
Aeu.l4.53.he  shall  let  go  the  living  bird  into  openf. 
JVum  19.  16.  one  slain  with  a  sword  in  the  open  f. 
2  .Sum.  11.  11.  servants  are  encamped  in  thec;pe7j/. 
Ezek.  29.  5.  thou  shall  fall  upon  the  openf. 

FIEKCE. 
Oen.  49.  7.  cursed  be  their  anger,  for  it  was  /. 
Veat.^.oO.  L.  bring  a  nation  of  a/,  countenance 
Job  4. 10.  the  voice  of/,  lion  and  teulh  are  broken 

10.  16.  thou  huntest  me  as  a/,  lion,  thou  shewcst 

28.  8.  nor  hath  the/,  lion  passed  by  it 

41.  10.  none  is  so/,  that  dare  stir  him  up 
/Aa.l9.4.and  a/.kiiig  shall  rule  over  them,  eaith  Ld. 

3.3.19.ihou  shall  not  see/.pcople,  of  deeper  speed, 

Dan.  8.  23.  a  king  of/,  countenance  shall  stand  up 

Ncb.l.B.  horses  are  more /.than  the  evening  wolves 

Mat.  8.28.  two  possessed  with  devils,  exceeding/. 

I.uke  23.5.  and  they  were  niore/.saying,he  stirrelh 

2'A>rt.3.3.  for  men  shall  be  incontinent,/,  despise/s 

Jam.  3.  4.  the  ships  which  are  driven  ol'/.  winds 

See  Anger,  Wrath. 

FIERCENESS. 

./o639.24.he8walloweth  Iheground  with/.andrage 

Jer.  25. 38.  land  desolate  for  the  /.  of  the  oppressor 

See  Anoer,  Wrath. 

FIERCER. 

2  .Sam.  19.  43.  words  of  Judah  were/,  than  of  Isr. 

FIERY. 
jVum.  21. 6.  the  Ld.  sent/,  serpents  among  people 

8.  make  thee  a/,  serpent,  and  set  it  upon  ajiole 
Ucitt.S.  15.  wherein  were/,  serpents  and  scorpions 
33.  2.  from  his  right-hand  went  a/,  law  for  them 
Ps.  21. 9.  shall  make  them  as  a/,  oven  in  thy  anger 
Isa.  14.  29.  and  his  fruit  shai;  be  a  /.  flying  serpent 
Dan.  3.  6.  into  the  midst  of  a/,  furnace,  11, 15,  21. 

17.  if  our  G.  is  able  to  deliver  us  from/,  furnace 
2.3.  three  men  fell  down  into  midst  off.  furnace 
26.  came  near  to  the  mouih  of  the  /.  furnace 

7.9.  his  liirone  was  like  the/.flame  and  his  wheels 
10.  a/,  stream  issued  and  came  forth  from  him 

^oA. 2.  t3.  the  chariots  shall  be  with/,  torches 
fipA.6.16.  able  to  quench  the/.  dart.s  of  the  wicked 
J/eb.  10.  27.  a  certain  fearful  looking  tor  of  judg- 
ment, and/,  indignation 

1  Pet.  4.  12.  think  it  not  strange  concerning/,  trial 
FIFTH. 

Ge7i.  30.  17.  Leah  bare  Jacob  the  /.  son,  Iss.ichar 
.fosh.  19.  24.  and  the/,  lot  came  out  for  Asher 

2  .Sam. 2. 23.  Abner  emote  Asahel  under  the/,  rib 
3.  27.  .^biier  under  the/,  rib  {|  4.  6.  Ish-bosheth 

20.  10.  Joab  smote  Amiisa  in  the/,  rib,  he  died 
.Ych.  6.  5.  Sanballat  sent  the/,  time  to  \ehemiah 
Rev. 6.9.  when  he  had  opened  the/seal  I  saw  souls 

9.  1.  the/,  angel  sounded,  an<l  I  saw  a  st.nr  fill 
16.  10./.  angel  poured  out  his  vial  on  seat  of  beast 

21.  20.  the/,  a  pardonyx;  the  sixth,  a  sardius 
See  Dav,  Part. 
FIFTH  month. 

A'um.  33.  3S.  Aaron  died  the  first  day  of  the/  m. 
2  Kings  25.  8./.  m.  came  IJebuzaradan,  ./fr.52.12. 
1  Chron.  27.  8.  the  fifth  captain  for  the/,  month 
F.2ra7.  8.  Ezra  came  to  Jeru.salem  in  the/,  m.  9. 
.//T.  1.3.  carrying  Jerus.ilem  captive  in  the/,  m. 
2*.  1.  in  the/,  month  Hananiah  spake  unto  me 
EzeAr.20.  1.  in  lhef.  month  the  elders  sat  before  me 
Z.ech.1.2.  saying, should  I  weep  in  Ihe  f.month? 
5.  when  ye  fasted  and  mourned  in  the/,  month 

8. 10.  fas'  of  fourth  and  of/,  m.  be  joy  and  gladn. 
FIFTH  year. 

Lev.  19.  25.  In  the/,  y.  ye  shall  eat  the  fruit  thereof 
1  Kings  14.  25.  in  the/,  year  of  king  R<?hobonm, 
Shishnk  came  up  ag.  Jerusalem,  2  CAron.  12.2. 
2/ri7i/Ts8.16.  in  the/.  1/.  of  Joram,  Jehoram  began 
Jer.  36.9.  io/.  y.  of  Jeboiakim,  proclaimed  afast 


FIF 


Eick.l.i.  wa«  the/,  j/car  of  Jchoiadihrj captivity 

FIFTEEN. 
Oen.  7.  20./.  cubiti  upward  did  the  waters  prevail 
fi»(/.27.14.  the  hangings  to  Ik: /.cubits.  15.  |  :W.14 
Ub.  27.  7.  then  lliy  eslimalKm  fliali  be/,  shekels 
2  Sam^i.^  10.  now  Zihn  had/,  soof,  and  20  MrrvanU 

19.  17.  Ziba  and  his/,  sons  went  over  Jordan 
1  Kings  7.  3.  that  lay  on  45  pillars,/,  in  a  row 
•iKin^s  14.17.Amaziali  lived  after  Jeli«asli/.yuars 

20.  b.  I  will  add  to  thy  days/,  years,  and  deliver 
thee  from  Assyria,  2  Chr.  25.  25.  lea.  .'IS.  5 

Eick.  45.  12./.  shekels  shall  he  your  louneh 
Hos.'A.".  I  bought  her  to  inn  for/,  piece*  of  silver 
.lohn  11.18.  llctJiuny  was  /.  furlong:-  ofl'Je.rusalMin 
Wct<27.28.  they  souiiderl,  and  found  it/,  fathoms 
G'izM.18.1  went  to  Jerus.  I  abode  with  Peter/.da\» 

FlFTEENiH. 
"Kings  14.23.in/.yeur  of  Aniaziah,  Jerobo.  l»egan 

1  Chi:  24.  14./.  lo  IlilgaJill  25.  22./.  to  Jeriinoth 

2  Chr.  15. 10.  gathered  lo  Jerusalem  in  the/,  year 
Luke  3.1.  in/,  year  of  the  reign  of  Tiberiuo  Cesar 

FIFTEENTH  day. 

F.iod.16. 1.  camo  lo  Sm,  on/.  </«y  of  second  monlli 

Lev.  23.  6.  on  the  /.  day  of  the  same  month  is  feast 

of  unleavened  bread  to  L.  A'um.  28. 17.  |  33.3. 

3i.  thef.  dayuflhis  seventh  moiiUi  shall  be  the 

feast  of  tabernacles  to  Lord,  IVJ.  A'uni.  29.  12. 

1  Kings  12.  32.  on  the/,  d.  of  ilieeighth  month  was 
Jeroboam's  feast,  he  oflcred  on  ihe  altar,  :J3. 

EsUi.  9.  18.  on  the/,  day  tiiey  rested  yearly,  21. 
Fiek.  32.  17./.  day  of  twelfth  year  came  the  word 
45.  25.  in/,  (^ay  shall  do  like  in  feast  of  seven  dan 

FIFTY. 

Oen.  0.  15.  the  breadth  of  Ihe  ark  shnll  be/,  cubiu 

18.  24.  not  spare  the  place  for/,  righteous  ?  2(). 

Ezod.26.5./.  loops  shall  thou  inake,l0.  |  ;iC.  12,17. 

0.  shall  make/,  laches  of  gold,  II.  |  .Ui.  13,  1?. 

27.  12.  shall  be  hangings  off.  cubits,  38.  12. 

30.  23.  of  cinnamon  two  hundred  and  /.  shekels, 

of  sweet  calamus  two  hundred  and/,  shekels 

/^.  23. 16.  after  the  7th  sabbath,  numlwr/.  dayd 

27.  3.  of  males  thy  estimation/,  shekels  of  silver 

10.  a  homer  of  barley  seed  be  valued  at /.shekels 

JVu/n.  4. 3.  from  thirty  years  old  and  upward,  even 

to/,  years  old,  23,  30,  :i5,  39. 

8.  2.1  from  the  age  off.  they  shall  serve  no  more 

16.  2.  two  hundred  and/,  princes  of  the  assembly 

17.  and  bring  two  hundred  and  /.  cense.'s 
20. 10.  the  fire  devoured  two  hundred  and  /.  men 
31.30.  thou  shall  take  one  portion  off.  for  Levites 
47.Mo>^es  took  one  portion  o(/.of  man  and  beaux 
Deut  22. 29.  shall  give  to  damsel's  father/,  shekels 
.Josh.  7.  21.  I  took  a  wedge  of  gold  of/,  shekels 

2  Sam. 15.1.  Absalom  had/,  men  to  run  before  him 
lA'in^sl.5.  .Adonijah  had/men  to  run  beftrehim 

7.  2.  breadth  of  the  house  of  the  forest  /.  cubits 
18.  4.  hid  them  by/,  in  a  cave,  and  fed  them.  13. 
'iKings  1.  9.  a  captain  off.  with  his/.  II,  1.3. 

10.  then  let  tire  consume  thee  and  thv/.  12. 
2.  7./.  men  of  sons  of  (he  prophets  stood  loview 

17.  they  sent  therefore/,  men  to  seek  Elijah 
13.  7.  he  left  to  Jehoahaz  but/,  horsemen 

15.  20.  Menahem  exacted  of  each/,  shekels 
25.  but  Pekah  slew/,  men  of  the  Gileadites 

2  CAr.3.9.  the  weight  of  n.iils  w  as/,  shekels  of  gold 
/C2ra8.H.Ebed  s"nof.Ionath.went  up  with/males 
jV<-A.  7. 70.  the  Tirshatha  save  to  treasure/,  basing 
Ksth.^.H.  let  a  galiows  be  made/,  cubits  high,  7.9 
I  fa.  3.  3.  the  Lord  will  take  awn  y  the  captain  off. 
F.ick.  40. 15.  to  the  fiicp  of  the  porch  were/,  cubits 

21.  the  length/,  cubits,  25,  29,  33,  36.  |  42.  7. 
42.  2.  the  breRdlhoflbe  north  door  was/,  cubits 

Hag.  2.  ll>.  when  one  came  to  draw  out  /.  ves:;els 
Luke  7.  41.  the  one  owed  .500  peace,  the  other/. 

16.  6.  he  said,  sit  down  quickly,  and  write/. 
./oAn  8.  57.  thou  art  not  f  yea^s  old,  hast  Ihou^o 

PIFTY-tWO. 
2  Kings  15.  2.  Aznriah  reisned /.-tioo  years 
F.ira  2. 29.  the  childieO  of  Nebo/.-firo,  AVA.7  33. 
AVA.  6.  15.  the  wall  wns  finished  in/.-(ifo  davs 

FIFTY-SIX. 
Ezra  2.  22.  the  men  of  Ne'onhah,  f.  and  siz 

FIFTY-THOUSAND. 

1  Sam.  6.  19.  lie  smote  of  the  people /.-fAoiijanrf 

1  '"Ar.  5. 21.  they  look  of  their  cnme-h  f. -thousand 

12.  33.  of  7.f:h\x\un  f.thuxis and  could  keep  rank 

Acts  19.19.price  o'^books  burnt  f.-t.pieceg  of  silver 

FIFTY-THREE  THOUSAND. 

J^um.  1.  43.  of  Naphlali  were  numbered  f.-thru 

thovsand  Iniir  hundred,  2,  30.  |  26.  47 

FIFTY-FOUR  THOTTSAND. 

.V-um.l.29.of  Ts«afhar/.-f'.7/rfA.roiir  h'lndred,  2.8. 

FIFTY-SEVEN  THOTTSAND. 
VuTn.l.3'.of7ebiilnn  f-sn^rv  rA.fonrhundred.S.ft 

FIFTY-NINE  THOUSAND. 
wVum.l.23.of Simeon  nii"-bered/.-n.tA.threehund. 

FIFTIF^. 
Prod.lS  21. place  such  be  rulers  of/ 2.5. /:>n/M. 13. 

1  Sam.  8. 12.  the  kins  sppnint  him  raplBirs  over/. 

2  Kings  I.  14.  fire  burnt  up  'he  two  captains  off 
Mark  6.  40.  and  ihey  sat  clown  by  /.  LuMe  0. 14 


FIG 

FIFTIETH. 

Lev.  25.  TO.  and  yo  shall  hallow  llie/.  year 
11.  a  jubilee  slull  tliat /.  year  be  lo  you,  not  sow 

iKingalb.'i'i.xa  ihe/.year  ol' Azariah  king  ol'J uilah 
FIG,  d. 

The  fig-tree  and  its  fruit  are  well  known  :  they 
were  very  coimiwn  in  Palesline,  and  there  ts 
mention  often  made  of  them  in  scripture.  Our 
first  parents  covered  their  nakedness  with  tig- 
ieaves,  Hen.  '.i.  7.  gathered  either  from  common 
fig-trees,  or  from  some  of  another  kind,  the 
li'aves  whereof  are  much  largir.  This  tree 
hath  in  it  a  milky  or  fat  oily  liquor;  it  is  very 
fruitful.  M.  Tourueroil  sayti,  that  in  the 
islands  of  the  Archipelago,  one  of  their  fig- 
Ivees  jrenrrally  produces  two  hundred  and 
four-score  pound-weight  of  ligii.  It  becomes 
barren,  either  through  the  defect  of  the  above- 
mentioned  liquor,  -which  the  husbandman  cures 
by  dung  and  sicect  water;  or  through  abun- 
dance thereof,  which  is  remedied  by  causing 
the  superfluous  juice  to  exlracasate.  The  pro- 
phet Isaiah  gave  orders  lo  apply  a  lump  of  tigs 
to  Hezekiah's  boil;  and  immediately  after  he 
was  cured,  2  Kings  -•<).  7.  Physicians  agree, 
that  figs  are  employed  with  good  success  in 
bringing  imposthumcs  to  a  ripeness,  in  heal- 
ing ulcers,  quinsies,  and  sore  throats :  and  it 
is  presumable  that  Ilczekiah  had  some  such 
disease,  though  the  scripture  makes  nu  par- 
ticular mention  of  it. 

It  is  said,  in  Mat.  21. 1'J.  that  Jesus  coming  from 
Betliany  early  in  the  morning,  and  finding  him- 
self to  he  hungry,  drew  near  to  a  lig-tree,  with 
a  design  of  gathering  some  ligs  ;  and  seeing 
nothing  but  leaves  upon  it,  ho  cursed  it,  and 
immediately  it  withered  to  the  root.  The  gene- 
rality both  of  the  ancient  and  modern  inter- 
preters have  looked  upon  this  action  of  our 
Saviour's,  as  a  figure  of  the  rejection  of  the 
Jews.  But  a  dijjictilty  arises,  from  a  passage 
irhich  i>t.  Marli  adds  lo  this  history,  that  this 
•was  not  a  lime  for  ligs,  .Mark  11.  13.  The  earli- 
tst  tjgs  are  in  the  months  of  July  and  August, 
end  the  latest  in  September  and  October.  But 
what  is  related  in  the  gospel  came  to  pass  four 
ur  five  daifs  before  the  passover,  and  conse- 
quently before  the  fifteenth  day  from  the  moon 
in  March.  This  season  therefore  was  not  a 
time  to  erpect  tigs  :  why  then  doth  our  Haviour 
curse  this  tree  7 

To  solve  this  difficulty,  some  interpreters  have 
translated  this  passage.  For  this  was  not  a 
year  tor  figx;  they  had' failed  this  year.  Bui 
this  rather  increases  thanlessens  tkedifficulty; 
for  why  should  our  .Saviour  curse  it,  for  hav- 
ing no  tigs,  when  this  was  not  a  seasonable  year 
for  tigs,  when  tigs  had  failed  this  year?  Others 
translate  it  thus.  For  there  wliere  he  was,  it 
was  a  season  for  tigs.  To  support  this  version, 
both  the  pointing  and  the  common  accents  of 
the  tezt  must  be  changed,  and  the  Evangelist 
made  to  speak  in  too  concise  a  manner,  too  dif- 
ferent from  the  general  style  of  St.  Mark. 

Tint  others  say,  that  though  this  was  not  the 
time  of  figs,  as  is  evident  from  St.  Mark,  yet 
there  might  be  some  of  the  forward  kind,  and 
our  Saviour  might  presume  so,  .teeing  the  tree 
full  of  leaves.  It  is  certain  that  there  are 
forward  figs :  Isaiah  compares  the  beauty  of 
Samaria    to   these    early  fig.',    which   people 

fathered,  and  ate  as  soon  as  thnj  found  them 
sa.  28.  4,  .As  the  hasty  IViiit  before  the 
Slimmer,  which  when  he  that  lookelh  upon  it, 
seelh  it,  while  it  is  yet  in  his  hand  ho  ejupth 
it  np.  .9nd  Hos.-a  says,  that  the  Lord  fouii(< 
Israel  in  the  wilderness  na  the  fntit  ripe 
the  fig-trco  at  her  first  time,  Hos.  9.  10.  Jlnd 
Jerocniah  describes  them  'is  excellent  t\gi.  Jer. 
2».  2,  One  basket  had  very  good  figs,  eien 
like  the  figs  th:\t  are  first  ripe.  Pliny  acknow- 
ledges, that  there  is  a  sort  of  fig-tree  always 
great,  and  always  with  fruit  upon  it ;  enme 
ripe,  or  very  far  advanced,  according  to  the 
season;  and  others  in  blossom  or  buds,  I'lin. 
lib.  13.  cap.v8.  and  lib.  15.  cap.  18.  In  I'ales- 
tine,  where  the  winter  is  very  mild,  there 
might  easily/  be  forward  figs  in  March  ;  where- 
fore our  .Saviour  might  look  for  figs  at  this 
St'ason  upon  a  fig-ireo  that  had  leaves  nn  ;  and 
Ms  cursing  the  barren  fig-tree  upon  this  oc- 
casion, i»  an  eiaet  figvre  of  th'  rrj-etion  of 
fA<  Jews.  TAefie-irce  had  only  havs  upon 
it;  herein  it  resembled  (A/- Jews,  who  had  only 
the  appearance  of  piity  and  rrligion.  The 
fig-tree  may  be  said  to  be  culpable  for  not 
bearing  fruit  at  a  rime  when,  according  lo  its 
kiwi,  fruit  might  have  bent  erpected  from  it  : 
sn  the  JowB  were  criminal  for  not  brivginc 
furth  the  fruits  of  rightcovsnest,  when  eur 
300 


FIG 

Savionr  appeared  among  them.    He  cursed 
IJie  barren  hg-tie«,   to    shew    the   malediction 
which  was  ready  lo  fall  upon  the  i/icreduious 
ahd  inipcnilcnt  Jews. 
To  dwell  under  one's  own  vine,  or  ft^-Uev,  repre- 
sents in  scripture  a  time  of  happiness  and 
prosperity,  safety  and  security,  i  Kings  4.  25. 
firrii.  3.  7.  they  sewed/,  leaves  together  for  aprons 
A'um.  lU.  23.  they  brought  of  the  jiomcgran.  and  /. 

20.  5.  it  is  no  plaeo  of  seed,  or  of/,  or  vines 

1  Ham.  2,>.  IB.  Abigail  took  2U0  cakes  of/. 
30.  12.  they  gave  the  Egyptian  a  cake  of/. 

2  KingsiiO.  7.  he  said,  take  a  lumji  off-  Isa.  38.21, 
1  Chron.  12.  40.  they  that  were  iiigli  brought/. 
J^'eh.  13.  1.7.  on  the  sabbath  some  bioughi/. 
Cant.  2.  13.  the  tig-tree  )>utieth  forth  her  green  /. 
Isa.  34.  4.  as  a  falling/,  from  the  fig-tree 
Jer.  8.  13.  there  shall  be  no/,  on  the  hg-tree 

24.  1.  two  baskets  of/,  one  had  very  good/.  2,  3. 
8.  as  the  evil/,  that  cannot  bo  eaten,  so  evil 

2y.l7. 1  will  make  tliem  like  vilej'.  not  to  be  eaten 
.6ino3  7.  1 14.  but  1  was  a  gatherer  of  wild/. 
A"uA.  3. 12.  shall  be  like  tig-trees  with  first  ripe/. 
Mat.  7.  IG.  do  men  gather/,  of  thistles  7  Luke  t>.44. 
./u«i.3.12.  can  the  lig-tree  hear  berries,  or  a  vine^'.? 
Rev.  ti.  J3.  as  a  lig-iree  castelh  her  unliniely /. 

FIG-TKEE. 
■hidg.9.  10.  the  trees  said  to  the/,  come,  reign,  11. 

1  Kings  4.25.  dwelt  safely  under  his/.  Mic.  4.  4. 

2  Kings  13.31.  eat  every  one  of  his/,  /sa.  3(5.  Iti. 
Prov.-M.  18.  whooo  keepeih/.  shall  eat  the  fruit 
Hos.9.10.  i  saw  fathers  as  first-ripe  in  the/.thereof 
Joel  1.  7.  he  hath  barked  my/,  and  made  it  bare 

12.  the  vine  is  dried,  and  the/,  languisbetb 
2.  22.  the/,  and  vine  do  yield  their  strength 
Nab.  3.  17.  alihougii  the/,  shall  not  blossom 
Hag.  2.  li).  as  yel  the/,  hath  not  brought  fiirth 
Zech.  3.  10.  ye  shall  call  every  man  under  the/. 
jyiat.  21.  19.  when  he  saw  a/,  in  way,  Mark  11.13. 
20.  how  soon  is  the/,  wilhered  I  Mark  11.  20, 21. 
24.  32.  learn  a  parable  of  the/.  Mark  13.  28. 
Luke  13.6.  a  man  had  a/,  iilanied  in  his  vineyard 
7.  behold,  I  comP,  seeking  fruit  on  this/. 

21.  211.  beiiold  the/,  and  ad  the  trees 
John  1.  48.  when  wast  under  the  /.  1  saw  thee,  50. 

FIU-'J'RKKS. 
Deut.  8.  8.  a  land  of  wheat,  barley,  vines,  and/. 
f'sal.  105.  33.  he  b.:.ote  their  vines  also  and/. 
Jer.  5.  17.  they  shall  eat  up  thy  vines  and/. 
IIos.  2.  12.  i  will  destroy  her  vines  and  her/. 
Jimos  4.  9.  when  your  gardens  and/,  increased 
JV'uA.  3.  12.  thy  strong  holds  shall  be  hke/. 

FIGHT,  ."iubstantire. 
1  Sam.  17.20.  as  the  host  was  going  forth  to  the/. 

1  Tim.  6.  12.  fight  the  good/,  of  faith,  lay  hold  on 

2  Tim.  4.  7. 1  have  fought  a  good  /.  I  have  finiohed 
Heb.  10.  32.  ye  endured  a  great/,  of  afflictions 

11.  34.  were  made  strong,  waxed  valiant  in/. 

FIGHT,  rerb. 

Deut.  1.  41.  then  ye  said,  we  will  go  up  avd/. 

42.  go  not  up,  nor/,  for  1  ain  not  among  yc.u 

2.  32.  dihon  and  his  people  came  to/,  at  Jahaz 

./udg.  11.  12.  thou  art  come  ag.  me  to/,  in  my  land 

1  Sam.  4.  9.  quit  yourselves  like  men,  and  /. 
17.  10.  give  me  a  man  that  we  may/,  together 

2  Sum.  11.20.  why  went  ye  so  nigh  when  ye  did/.? 

1  King.t-Zi.  31./.  noi  small  nor  groat,  2  Chr.  18.30. 

2  Chr.  18.  31.  compassed  about  Jehoshaphnt  to/. 
20.  17.  yt-  shall  not  need  to/,  in  this  battle 

Psal.  144.  1.  which  teachcth  my  fingers  to/. 
Jer.  51.  30.  the  mighty  men  have  forborne  lo/. 
y.ech.  10.  5.  shall  /.  bicause  the  Lord  is  with  llieni 

14.  14.  and  Jnd:ih  also  shall/,  al  Jerusalem 
John  18.  3!i.  if  kingdom,  then  would  my  servnnt>>/. 
I  C»r.  9. 21).  BO /.  i,iiot  as  one  that  beateth  the  air 
1  Tim.  6.  It.  f.  the  good  fight  of  faith,  lay  hold  on 
Jam.  4.  2.  yo  kill,  y^  f.  and  war,  yet  ye  have  not 
See  IUttles. 
FIGHT  against. 
F.ioi.  1. 10.  lest  they  join  our  enemies  and/.  ag.\t» 
Deut.  20.  10.  when  come  nigh  to  a  city  to/,  ag.  it 
.hsh.  10. 25.  so  do  lo  enemies  against  w  horn  ye  /. 

11.5.  tl.cy  came  and  pitched  to/,  against  Israel 

19.  47.  the  Danilo*  wont  np  to/  against  I.eshem 
Judg.  1.1.  who  sliull  go  np  first  \uf.iigninst  thcmT 

3.  that  wo  may/,  against  the  Cnnaaniles 
10.9.  Ammnn  paswil  over  Jordan  to/,  n^.  Judah 

11.  8.  Jtphlhah  to/,  against  .'\minon,  9. 
2.5.  did  he  ever  strive  ag.  Israel,  or/,  ag.  them  7 

12.  X  why  coniH  ve  ih.M  day  to/,  against  me'! 
20.20.  Ismel  BMt  theinselviis  lo/.  ag.  Benjamin 

1  Sam.  15.  UV/.  against  Anialekites  till  correumid 
2;!.  1.  behuld,  iho  riiili.<iino.s/.  against  Kcihih 
29.  H.  that  I  may  mil  /.  against  rneiiiies  of  king 
I  A'ijti'-sl2.21.  Kehoboam  aSHcnibled  nil  Jndah  with 
Rcnjamin  to/,  against  I.^riel,  2  Chron.  HI. 
24.  ye  "shall  nol/.  njr.  your  hri-llirin,  2  CAr.  11.4. 

20.  2.3.  but  let  ns/.  against  ihrn\,jn  the  plain,  2.1. 
22.  32.  thev  turned  to/,  against  Jehoshaphnt 

i  Kinga  3. 21.  Ibo  kings  wuro  come  to  /.  ag-  tbem 


Flli 

2  Kings  19.  9.  behold,  ho  is  come  out  to  /.  ag.  tlios 
2  Chron.  13.  12.  O  Israel,/,  ye  not  ag.  IheXord 

32.2.  Sennacherib  pui posed  to/,  ag.  Jerusalem 

3.5.  20.  Nccho  came  to/,  against  t'archeniiah 
JVVA.  4. 8.  conspired  to  come  and  /.  ag.  Jerusalem 
Fsal.  35.  1./.  against  them  that/,  against  me 

5ti.  2.  they  be  many  that/,  ag.  me,  O  most  High 
/»-a. 111.2.  they  shall/,  ever);  one  aj^aijmt  his  brothel 

29.  7.  all  the  nations  that/,  against  -Aiiel 
8.  the  nations  that/,  against  mount  Z;on 
.ler.  1.19.  shall /.fl^.  thee,  but  not  jirevail,  15;2a 

21.  4.  wherewith  ye/,  ag.  the  king  of  Kabylon 
5.  I  myself  will/,  against  you  with  strong  arm 

32.  24.  behold,  the  cily  is  given  into  the  hand  of 
Chaldeans  that  /.  against  il,  29.  1  34.  22.  |  37.8. 

37. 10.  had  smitten  Chaldeans  Ihat/.a^uiimt  you 
Zech.  14.  3.  the  Lord  sh-j.\\f.against  those  nation!* 
.lets  5.  39.  lest  ye  be  found  to/,  against  God 

23.9.  if  angel  hath  spoken,  let  us  not/,  ag.  God 
Hev.  2.  lb./,  ag,  Ihoiii  with  ihesword  of  mv  mouth 

FIGHT  for. 
Exod.U.U.  h.f.for  you,  Leut.t.m.  \  3.22.  |  20.4. 
2  Kings  10.  3.  and/. /or  your  master's  house 
J\'eh.  4.  H.f.for  your  brethren,  sons,  and  wives 
2U.  resort  ye  thither  to  us,  our  God  shall/. /ur  U9 
Isa.'i\.4.  the  L<nd  shall  come  \nf.for  iiiounl  ZioD 

FIGHT  with. 
Exod.  17.  9.  choose  men,  go  out,/,  with  Anialeh 
Josh.  9.  2.  Canaanites  galhcred  to/,  with  Ji  shua 
.ludg.  8.  I.  when  wentest  to/,  with  Midianitts 
y.  38.  go  out  now  and/,  with  Abimelech 
11.  (i.  thai  we  may/,  leith  the  children  of  Ainmon 
\Sam.\7..b.  Philist'.  gathered  to/,  with  Isnu!,  28. 1. 

17.  9.  if  he  he  able  to/,  with  me,  and  to  kdl  m9 
32.  thy  servant  will  go  and  /.  with  this  Philistine 

2  CAroH. 35. 22.  Josiah  d;^guised  hinis.  to/,  w.  him 
Isa.  30.  32.  in  battles  of  shaking  will  he/,  willi  it 
Jer. :j2. 5.  though  ye/,  with  Chaldeans,  not  prosi>er 

33,  5.  they  came  to/,  with  the  Chaldeans 

41. 12.  they  took  men,  and  went  iof.with  Ishmael 
Dan.  10. 20. 1  will  return  to/,  with  prince  of  Persia 

11. 11.  the  kingof  Ihi-  south  come  and/,  with  him 

FIGHTETII. 
Exod.  14.  2.5,  the  Ed./,  for  them  against  Egyptians 
.hish.  23.  10.  the  Lord  God,  he  it  is  thai  /.  for  you 
1  *ii7».  25.  23.  niv  lord  f.  the  buttles  of  the  Lord 

■  FIGHTING. 
J^um.  22.  1 11.  peradvenluie  1  shall  prevail  in/. 

1  Sam.  17.  19.  Israel  were/,  with  the  Pfiilslines 

2  Chron.  2(),  11.  L'zziah  hnd  a  host  of/,  nun 
Fsal.5t).l,  he  merciful,  O  Cod,  lie/,  ojipresseth  mo 

FIGJIThNGS. 
2  Cor.  7.  5.  witliout  were/,  within  were  fears 
Ja7n.4.1.from  whence  come  wais  and/.among  yon 

FIGURE. 
Deut.  4.  16.  lest  ye  make  the  similitude  of  any/. 
Isa.  44.  13.  he  inaketh  it  after  the/,  of  a  man 
Hum.  5. 14.  who  is  the/,  of  him  that  was  to  como 
1  Cor.A.Ci.  these  1  have  in  a/,  transferred  tc.  myself 
I/eb.  9.  9.  which  was  a/,  of  the  time  then  [irescnt 
11.  19.  frOTn  whence  also  he  received  liim  (fa/. 
1  Pet.  3,  21.  the  like/  whereiinlo  even  baptism 

FIGURES. 
lA'jw;^*G.29,lie  carved  with  carved /.ofcheriibima 
.Ids  7.  43./.  which  he  made  to  worship  them 
I  Cor.  10.  t  'i-  now  these  things  were  our/. 
Ileb.  9.  24.  holy  places,  which  arc  the/,  of  the  true 

FIGlinED. 
I.cT.  2C.  t  L  neither  shall  ye  set  up  any  /.  stone 

FILE. 
1  Sam.  13,  21.  vet  thcv  had  a  /.  for  the  mattocka 

ri'L^.,'Substanti7<e. 
Lev.  25.  10.  and  ye  shnll  eat  your/,  in  fafcty 
Deut.  2:1.  24.  then  Ihiiii  mayist  eal  grapec  thy/. 
Prov.  7.  18.  come,  let  us  take  our/,  of  love 

FILL,  yerb. 
Ccv.  1.  22.  mnlliply,  and  /.  the  waters  in  the  otm 
42.25.  Joseph  commanded  to/,  their  sacks,  44.  I. 
Exod.  10.  t).  the  lorii.-ts  shall/,  thy  houses 
Hi.  32.  Moses  said,/,  a  homer  of  "it  to  bo  kept 
32. 1 29.  Moses  said,  f.  ynut  h mds  fo-dey  to  the  L- 
/.ev.  It^.  t32.  the  pri'esi,  he  shall/,  his  fiaiid 
I  .v,im. Ifi.I.  ,'■.  thine  horn  with  oil,  and  goto  Je.wft 
1  Kings  1. 1  il.  I  will  come  in  luid/.  uiitliy  vionU 

18.  33.  f.  fimr  bnrrels  with  water,  and  pour  il  on 
I  CAr.  2<.t.  t  5.  w  ho  I  hi  n  is  willing  lo/.  his  hand  T 
2CAr.  13.  to.  who.^n.-ver  Cometh  to/,  his  hand 
.lob  8.21.  till  he/.lhv  month  with  laugh  ng, and  lipf 

l5.2.slionld»  wiseninn/.hii«hi'Hy\ii'hiast-windT 
2t).23.whenheisabonlfo/.h;Bbe!'y,G.  dcnslfury 
2;t.  4.  I  would/,  my  mouth  with  aigumcn's 
38.  39.  or/,  the  ap'pelitc  of  the  ynen^'  I  ons 
41.  7.  cniisl  thiiii/.  his  skin  with  barhed  irons? 

r.'.n/.81.  10.  open  (hv  month  wide.ar.rf  I  will/,  it 
83.  Hi.  f.  their  faces  'with  shnme  lo  .«ock  then,  O  L. 
1 10.  fi.'he  nhall/.  the  placci!  with  the  dead  hodiM 

I'rov.  1.  13.  we  shall  /.  our  hnuscs  with  spoil 
8.21.  to  inherit  snhsinncf,  I  will/,  iheir  tre»s«ro« 

fsa.  P.  8.  his  wings  shall  /.  tlie  breadth  of  thy  land 
14.  21.  uor/.  the  face  of  lb«  wo: Id  with  ciiieo 


PIL 

/sffl.27.i5.Tai .  shall /.the  face  of  the  world  with  fruit 
58.12.they  say, we  will/.oumelv.with  strong  drink 

Jer.  13.  13.  1  will/,  inhubilants  with  drunkenness 
23. 24.  do  not  I/,  heaven  and  earth  7  saith  llie  Ld. 
;!3.  5.  it  is  to/,  them  with  the  dead  bodies  of  men 
51.14.  surely  I  will /.thee  with  men  as  caterpillars 

Ezek.  3. 3.  sou  of  man,  /.  thy  bowels  with  this  roll 
7. 19.  shall  not  satisfy  their  souls  uor/.their  bowels 
0.  7.  /.  the  courts  with  the  slain,  go  ye  forth 

10.  2.  go  in,  /.  thine  hand  with  coals  of  fire 
24.  4.  gather  the  pieces,/.it  with  the  choice  bones 
30.  11.  they  shall/,  the  land  with  the  slain 
32.4. t  will/the  beasts  of  the  whole  earth  with  thee 

5.  I  will/,  the  valleys  with  thy  height 

35.  8.  I  will/,  his  mountains  with  the  slain 
43. 1 2G.  they  shall  purge  altar,  and  /.  their  hands 

Zepli.1.9.  who/.llicir  masters'  hiiuse  with  violence 
7/ao'.2. 7. 1  will/,  this  house  with  glory,  saith  Lord 
Zech.  9.  1 15.  and  they  shall/,  both  the  bowls 
Jilat.  9.  16.  fur  that  which  is  put  in  to/,  it  up 

15.  83.  whence  have  bread  lo/.  such  a  multitude'? 

23.  32.  /.  ye  up  then  the  measure  of  your  fathers 
John  2.  7.  /.  the  water-pots  with  water 
Aum.  15.13.  G.ofhope/.you  with  all  joy  and  peace 
Epk.  4. 10.  he  ascended,  that  he  might  /.  all  things 
Co^.l.24./.up  what  is  behind  of  suti'erings  of  Christ 
1  T/ie3s.  2.  16.  the  Jews,  to  /.  up  their  sins  alway 
Hev.  18.  6.  the  cup  she  hath  filled,/,  her  double 

FILLED. 
Oe7i.6.13.  the  earth  is/.wiih  violence  through  men 
21.  19.  Hagar  went  and/,  the  bottle  with  water 

24.  16.  Rebekah  /.  her  pitcher  and  came  up 
26. 15.  the  Philistines  had  /.  the  wells  with  earth 

Exod.  1.  7.  the  children  of  Israel/,  the  land 
2.  16.  they/,  the  troughs  to  water  their  flock 
28.  3.  whom  I  have/  with  wisdom,  35.  35. 
31.3.  I  have/,  him  with  the  Spirit  of  God,  35.31. 
40.  34.  the  glory  of  the  Lord  /.  the  tabernacle,  35. 

/>fuf. 26.12. they  may  eat  within  thy  gates  and  be/. 
31.20.  when  they  have  eaten  and/,  themselves 

JbsA.9.13.the3e  bottles  we/. were  new  and  are  rent 

1  Kings  8. 10.  the  cloud  /.  the  house  of  the  Lord 

11.  glory  of  L./.  the  house,  2  Chr.  5. 14.  |  7. 1, 2. 
18.  35.  and  he/,  the  trench  also  with  water 

20.  27.  but  the  Syrians/,  the  country 
2/r!>i^s3.25.  they  cast  every  man  his  stone  and/,  it 

21.  16.  Manasseh/.  Jerusalem  with  blood,  24.  4. 
23.14.  Josiah/.  their  places  with  the  bones  of  men 

/^iraO.ll.which  have/,  it  from  one  end  to  another 
Job  3.15.  with  princes  who /.their  houses  with  silv. 

16.  8.  and  thou  hast/,  me  with  wrinkles 

22.  18.  yet  he  /.  their  houses  with  good  things 
jPsa2.38.7.for  my  loins  are/,  with  loathsome  disease 

71.8.  let  my  mouth  be/.with  thy  prai.se  and  honour 
72.  19.  let  tho  whole  earth  be/  with  his  glory 

50.  9.  didst  cause  it  to  take  dee|)  root,  it/,  the  land 
104. 28.  thou  openest thine  hand,  are/,  with  good 
123.  3.  for  we  are  exceedingly/,  with  contempt 

4.  our  soul  is  exceedingly  /.  with  scorning 
ProTj.  5.  10.  lest  strangers  be/,  with  thy  wealth 

25.  16:  lest  thou  be/,  with  honey,  and  vomit  it 
30.  16.  the  earth  that  is  not/,  with  water 

22.  and  for  a  fool  when  he  is/,  with  meat 
Eccl.  1.  8.  nor  is  the  ear/,  with  hearing 
6.  3.  and  his  soul  be  not/,  with  good 
7.  and  yet  the  appetite  is  not/. 
Cint.  5.  2.  open  to  ine,  my  head  is/,  with  dew 
/.5a.C.l.high  and  lifted  up, and  his  train/.lhe  temple 
21.  3.  therefore  are  my  loins/,  with  pain 

33.  5.  the  Lord  hath/.  Zion  with  judgment 

34.  6.  the  sword  of  the  Lord  is/,  with  blood 
43.  24.  nor/,  me  with  the  fat  of  thy  sacrifices 
C.5.  20.  nor  an  old  man  that  hath  not/,  his  days 

Jfr.  15.  17.  for  thou  hnst  /.  me  with  indignation 
16.  IS.  thoy/.  mine  inheritance  with  carcases 
19  4. they  have/this  place  with  blood  of  innocents 

41.9.  Ishniael  /.  the  pit  with  them  that  were  slain 
46.  12.  and  thy  cry  hath/,  the  land 

51.  34.  he  hatii  /.  his  belly  with  my  delicates 
Lam.  3.  15.  he  hath  /.  me  with  bitterness 

30.  he  is/,  full  with  reproach 
Eiek.  8.  17.  they  have/,  the  land  wilh  violence 

10.  3.  and  the  cloud  /.  the  inner  court 

11.  6.  ye  have/,  the  streets  with  the  slain 
28.  16.  they/,  the  mid.-!t  of  thee  wilh  violence 

36.  38.  waste  cities  shall  be  /.  with  flocks  of  men 
43.  5.  the  glory  of'the  Lord/,  the  house,  44.  4. 

I') an.  2.  35.  the  stone  cut  out/,  the  whole  earth 
JV/tA.  2.  12.  the  lion/,  his  holes  with  prey 
Hah.  2.  16.  thou  art/,  with  shame  for  glory 
Hair.  1.  6.  ye  drink,  but  ye  arc  not/,  with  drink 
Z«cA.  9.  1.3.  I  have/,  the  bow  wilh  Ephraim 
Mat.  27. 48.  one  of  them  ran,  and  /.  a  sponge  with 
vinegar,  Mark  15.  3R.  Juhn  19.  29. 
jalark  2.  21.  new  piece  that  /.  it  up  taketh  from  old 
7  27.  Jesus  said,  let  the  children  first  be/. 
7>i/fee  1.  53.  he  hath  /.  the  hungry  with  good  things 
2. 40.  JoBus  waxed  strong  in  spirit,/,  with  wisdom 
5.  7.  and  they  came  and  /.  both  the  ships 
14. 23.  compel  them  to  come,  that  my  house  be  /. 
201 


PIL 

L'uke  15.16.  would  fain  have /.his  belly  with  husks 
Jokn  2.  7.  and  they/,  them  up  to  the  brim 
6.  13.  they/,  twelve  baskets  with  fragments 
16.6. 1  said  these  things,  borrow  hath/  your  heart 
Jicts  2.  2.  as  of  a  rushing  mighty  wind,/,  ihe  house 
4.  8.  then  Peter,/,  witii  the  Holy  Gliost,  said 
5.3.  why  hath  Satan/,  thine  heart  to  lie  lo  H.Ghost 
28.  ye  have/.  Jerusalem  with  your  doctrine 
9.17.  that  thou  mightest  be/,  with  Iho  Holy  Ghost 
13.  9.  Paul,/,  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  set  his  eyes 
Rom.  1.  29.  being/,  with  all  unrighteousness 
15.  14.  that  ye  also  are/,  with  all  knowledge 
24.  if  first  1  be  somewhat/,  with  your  company 
2  Cor.  7.  4.  I  am  /.  with  comfort,  I  am  joyful 
Eph.  3. 19.  might  be/,  wilh  all  the  fulness  of  God 
5.18.be  not  drunk  with  wine,  but/,  with  the  Spirit 
Phil.  1.  11.  being/,  with  the  fruits  of  righteousness 
Col.  1.  9.  might  be/.with  the  knowledge  of  his  will 
2  Tim.  1,  4.  that  1  may  be/,  with  joy 
Jam.  2.  16.  depart  in  peace,  be  ye  warmed  and  /. 
iie».8.5.  angel/,  the  censer  with  the  fire  of  the  altar 
15,  1.  for  in  them  is/,  up  the  wrath  of  God 
18. 6.  in  the  cup  which  she  hath/,  till  to  her  double 

Shall  be  FILLED. 
Exod.  16. 12.  in  morning  ye  shall  bef.  with  bread 
JVum.  14. 21.  the  earth  shall  bef.  with  glory  of  Ld. 
2  Kings  3.  17.  that  valley  shall  bef.  with  water 
Prov.  1.  31.  ihey  shall  be  f.  witli  their  own  devices 
3.  10.  so  shall  thy  barns  bef.  with  plenty 

12.  21.  but  the  wicked  shall  be  f.  with  mischief 
14.14.the  backslider  shall  bef. wilh  his  own  ways 
18.  20.  with  the  increase  of  his  lips  shall  he  be  f, 
20  17.  afterward  his  mouth  shall  be  f.  with  gravel 
24.  4.  and  by  knowledge  shall  the  chambers  be  f. 

Jer.  13.  12.  every  botlle  shall  bef.  with  wine,  12. 

Ezek.  23.  33.  thou  shall  bef.  wilh  drunkenness 
39.  20.  thus  ye  shall  bef.  at  my  table  wilh  horses 

//oA.2. 14.  earth  shall  be  f. with  knowledge  of  Lord 

Zech.  9.  15.  and  they  shall  bef.  like  howls 

Jl/at5.6.blessed  are  theylhal  hunger ,lheyshiill be f. 

Luke  1.  15.  John  shall  bef.  with  the  Holy  Ghost 

3.5.  every  valley  shall  bef.  mountain  brought  low 

6.  21.  blessed  ye  that  hunger  now,  ye  shall  be  f. 

fVas  FILLED. 

Oen.  6.  11.  and  the  earth  was  f.  with  violence 

1  Kings  7.  14.  and  Hiram  was  f.  with  wisdom 

2  Kings  3.  20.  and  the  country  was  f.  with  water 
2  Chron.  5. 13.  then  the  house  was  f.  with  a  cloud 

16. 14.  the  bed  which  was  f.  with  sweet  odours 
Psal.  126.  2.  then  our  mouth  was  f.  with  laughter 
Isa.  6.  4.  and  the  house  was  f.  with  smoke 
J('r.5l.5.tho'  their  land  was  f. wilh  sin  ug.HoIyOne 
Ezek.  10.  4.  and  Ihe  house  was  f.  wilh  the  cloud 
Luke  1.  41.  Elisabeth  was  f.  with  the  Holy  Ghost 

67.  Zacharias  was  f.  with  the  Holy  Ghost 
.Tohn  12.  3.  house  was  f. wilh  the  odour  of  ointment 
./lets  19.29.  the  whole  city  wasf.  wilh  confusion 
Hev.  15.  8.  and  the  temple  was  f.  with  smoke 

Jf'trc  FILLED. 
Mos.  13.6.  according  to  their  pasture  so  were  they 
/.  they  weref.  and  their  heart  was  e.xalted 
/,?j/i:c4.28.when  they  heard, they  were/. wilh  wrath 
5.  26.  Ihey  glorified  God,  and  iceref.  with  fear 
6. 11.  they  weref.  with  madness,  and  communed 
8.  23.  they  were  f.  with  water,  and  in  jeopardy 
John  0.  12.  when  Ihey  weref.  he  said,  gather  up 
20.  because  ye  did  eat  of  the  loaves,  and  were  f. 
.^cts2.4.  they  were  all/. wilh  the  Holy  Ghost,  4.31. 
3.  10.  Ihey  were  f.  with  wonder  and  amazement 
5.  17.  rose  up,  and  weref.  with  indignation 

13.  45.  the  Jews  weref.  with  envy,  and  spake 
52.  disciples  were/,  with  joy, and  the  Holy  Ghost 

Rev.  19.21.  all  the  fowls  were  f.  with  their  flesh 

.Sfc  Eat. 

FILLEDST. 

Dent.  6.  11.  and  houses  full,  which  thou  /.  not 

£|2£A.27.33.  when  wares  went  forth, /.many  people 

FILLEST. 
Ps\~.  14.  whose  belly  thou  {.  with  thy  hid  treasure 

FILLETH. 
Job  9.  18.  but  he/,  me  wilh  bitterness 
Psal.  84.  6.  the  rain  also/,  the  pools 
107.  9.  he/,  the  hungry  soul  wilh  goodness 
129.  7.  wherewith  the  mower/,  not  his  hand 
147.  14.  he/,  thee  wilh  the  finest  of  the  wheat 
E-ph.  1.  23.  the  fulness  of  him  that/,  all  in  all 

FILLET. 
Jer.  52.  21.  a  /.  of  twelve  cubits  did  compass  it 

FILLETS. 
Exod.  27. 10.  the  hooks  of  the  pillars,  and  their/, 
shall  be  of  silver,  11.  |  38.  10, 11,  12, 17,  19. 
36.  38.  he  overlaid  their  chapiters  and  /.  wilh  gold 

FILLETED. 
Exod.  27.  17.  all  shall  be/,  with  silver,  38.  17. 
38.  28.  he  overlaid  their  chapiters  and  /.  them 

FILLL\G. 
J}cts  14.  17./.  our  hearts  wilh  food  and  gladness 

FILTH. 

Lev.  1.  1 16.  pluck  away  his  crop  with  /.  thereof 

/sa.4.4.  when  the  Lord  washed  away  the/.of  Zion 

3E 


PIN 

J^^ah.  3.  6. 1  will  cast  abominable  /.  upon  theo 
1  Cor.  4.  13.  we  are  made  as  the/,  of  the  worW 
1  Pet.  3.  21.  not  putting  away  ihe/.  of  the  flesh 

FILTHY. 
Job  15.16.  1k)w  much  more  abomina.  and /.is  man? 
I'sal.  14.  3.  they  are  altogether  become  /.  53.  3. 
Isa.  64.  6.  all  our  righteousnesses  are  as/,  rags 
Zcph.  3.  1.  woe  to  her  that  is/,  and  polluted 
Zech.  3.  3.  Joshua  was  clothed  with/,  garments 

4.  take  away  the/,  garments  from  him 
Co^3.8.you  also  putoft/.communicat.from  mouth 

1  Tim.'i.  3.  no  striker,  nor  greedy  of/,  lucre,  8. 
Tit.  1.  7.  not  soon  angry,  not  given  to/,  lucre 

11.  teaching  things  lor/,  lucre's  sake,  1  Pet. 5.2. 

2  Pet.'i.l.  Lolve.xed  with /.conversation  of  wicked 
.lude  8.  likewise  these/,  dreamers  defile  the  flesh 
Rev.  22.  11.  he  that  is/,  let  him  be/,  still 

FILTHINESS. 
2  Chron.  29. 5.  carry  out  the/out  of  the  holy  place 
Ezra  6.21.  had  separated  from  the/.of  the  heathen 
9. 11.  an  unclean  land  wilh  the/,  of  the  people 
Prov.  30. 12.  and  yet  is  hot  washed  from  their/. 
Isa.  28.  8.  for  all  tables  are  full  of  vomit  and/. 
./fr.S.  [30. astonishment  and/,  is  committed  in  land 
23.tl4. 1  have  seen /.in  the  prophets  of  Jerusalem 
Lam.i.9.  her/.is  in  her  skirts,  rememb.  not  her  entJ 
Ezek.  16.  36.  because  thy  /.  was  poured  out 
22.  15.  and  I  will  consume  thy/,  out  of  thee 
24.  11.  that  the/,  of  it  may  be  molten  in  it 
13.  in  thy  /.  is  lewdness ;  because  I  have  purged 
thee,  and  thou  wast  not  purged,  thou  sbaU 
not  be  purged  from  thy  /. 
36.  25.  from  all  your/,  will  I  cleanse  you 
2  Cor.7. 1.  let  us  cleanse  ourselv.  from  all/,  of  flesh 
Eph.  5.  4.  nor  let/,  bo  once  named  among  you 
./a?n. 1.21.  wherefore  lay  apart  all/receive  the  word 
Rev.  17.  4.  cup  full  of  abominat.  and/,  of  fornicut. 

FINALLY. 
2  Cor.  13.  11.  /.  brethren,  farewell,  Eph.  6.  10. 
Phil.  3.  1.  I  4.  8.  2  Thess.  3.  1.  1  Pet.  3.8. 
FIND 
Signifies,  [1]  To  convert,  or  recover  a  thing  that 
was  lost,  Luke  15.  8,  9,  32.     [2]  To  invent,  o^ 
discover,  2  Chron.  2.  14.     [3]  To  know  expert 
mentally,  Rom.  4.1.  Hev.  2.  2.    [4]  To  obtam 
what  we  want  and  desire  of  God,  Mat.  7.  7 
[5]  To  come  to.  Job  3.  22.    [6]  To  understand 
thoroughly,  ioh  W.l.    [7]  To  do ,  or  perform, 
Isa.  58.  13.     [8]  To  seek,  Job  33.  10.     [9]  To 
happen  upon  without   seeking.   Gen.  37.  15. 
[10]  To  choose  and  appoint.  Acts  13.  22.     [11] 
To  turn  to,  or  light  on,  Luke  4.  17.    [12]  Te 
observe.  Mat.  8.  10. 
To  find,  is  used  sometimes  for  to  attack,  to  sur- 
prise one's  enemies,  to  discover  their  ambushes. 
It  is  understood  171  this  sense,  Judg.  1. 5,  They 
found  Jidoni-bezek  in  Bezek.     Thcp  attacked 
him  there.    Jlnd,  1  Sam.  31.  3.  according  to 
the  Hebrew,  the  archers  belonging  to  the  Phi- 
listines found  Saul,  tliey  attacked  Aim.    In  thi'a 
.lense  some  explain  that  passage  in  Gen.  36. 
24,  This  was  that  ^Snah  that  found  the  mules 
in  Ihe  wilderness.     In  the  Hebrew,  he  found 
the  Emims.     The.ie  Eminis  are  believed  to  ba 
powerf  ul  people ;  Dent.  2.  10,  11,  The  Emims 
dwelt  therein  in  times  past,  a  people  great,  and 
many,  and  tall,  as  the  ./Inakims,  &c.  who  alsa 
were  neighbours  to  thelloritaB  here  spoken  of, 
as  appears  from  Gen.  14.  5,  fi.     Anah  there- 
fore found  a  troop  of  these  people;   he  sur- 
prised, attacked,  and  defeated  them.     Others 
render  the  Hebrew  word  Jcmim,  which  is  no 
where  else  used,  by  waters  ;  that  he  found  out 
smne  springs  of  water,   which  in  those  htU 
countries  were  rare  and  precious  ;  or,  hot  wa- 
ters, some  hot  and  medicinal  springs.    Others 
again  mules,  as  in  our  translation  ;  that  he 
found  out  the  way  of  the  generation  o/  mules, 
by  the  copulation  cf  an  ass  and  a  mare. 
Orn.  19. 11.  they  wearied  themselves  to/,  thedocr 
32. 19.  you  shall  speak  to  Esau,  when  you/,  him 
JVum.  32.  23.  be  sure  your  sin  shall/,  you  out 
.35. 27.  the  revenger  of  blood/,  him  without  city 
/.'rH^22.25.  a  man/,  a  damsel  and  lie  with  hcr,28. 
■ludg.  17.8.  to  sojourn  where  ho  could/,  a  place,9. 
Ruth  1.  9.  the  Ld.  grant  ye  may/,  rest,  each  of  you 

1  ftam.  20.  21.  saying,  go,/,  out  the  arrows,  36. 
24.  19.  if  a  man/,  his  enemy,  will  he  let  him  go 

l/wn  »•«  ]8.5.peradv.  we  may /.grass  to  save  horses 

2  Chron.  2.  14.  to  /.  out  every  device  be  put  to  him 
32  4.  why  should  Assyria  come  and /.much  water 

.fob  23.  3.  O  that  I  knew  where  I  might/,  him 
34. 11.  cause  every  man  to/.according  to  his  ways 
Psal.  10. 15.  seekouthis  wickedn.  till  ihou/.  none 
Prov.  2.  5.  thou  shall/,  the  knowl.dgc  of  God 
4.  22.  my  words  are  life  to  those  that/,  ihera 
6.  9.  they  are  right  to  them  that/,  knowledgn 

12.  I  /.  out  knowledge  of  willy  inventinne 
Ecrl.  7.  14.  a  man  should/,  nothing  for  him 
27.  counting  one  by  one,  to/,  out  tho  account 


FIN 

Eccl.  12. 10.  he  sought  to  /.  out  acceptable  words 

Cant.5.8.  \(f.  ray  beloved,  tell  him  I  am  sick  of  love 
Jsa.Zi.  14.  the  screech-owl  shall/,  a  place  of  rest 

58.  3.  ill  the  day  of  your  fast  you/,  pleasure 
Jer.  10. 18.  will  distress  them,  that  they  may/,  it  so 
J^am.  1. 6.  ore  become  like  harts  that'/,  no  pasture 

2.  9.  her  prophets  also/,  no  vision  from  God 

Dan.  6. 4.  the  princes  sought  to  /.occasion  against 

Daniel, but  could/,  none  occasion  nor  fault 

5.  shall  not/.  c.\ce|)t  we/,  it  concerning  law  of  G. 

Mat.  7. 14.  strait  is  gate,  and  few  there  bo  that/,  it 

18. 13.  and  if  so  be  that  he/  h,  he  rejoiceth  more 
Mark  11. 13.  if  haply  he  might/,  any  thing  thereon 

13.36.  lest  coming  suddenly,  he/,  you  sleeping 
LukeK.l.  that  they  might/,  an  accusation  ag.  him 

12.  38.  and  /.  them  so,  blessed  are  those  servants 

13.  7.  he  said,  I  come  seeking  fruit  and/,  none 
15.  4.  and  go  after  that  which  is  lost,  till  he  /.  it 

8.  doth  she  not  seek  diligently  till  she/,  it? 
.John  10.  9.  he  shall  go  in  and  out  and  /.  pasture 
Jlcts  7.4G.  desired  to?,  a  tabernacle  for  G.  of  Jacob 
17.  27.  they  might  feel  after  him  and/,  him 
23.  9.  scribes,  saying,  we/,  no  evil  in  this  man 
Rom.9.  19.  thou  wilt  say,  why  doth  he  yet/,  fault? 
2Cor.9.4.they  come  with  me, and/,  you  unprepared 
2  7'iOT.1.18.he  may/,  mercy  of  the  Lord  in  thatday 
See  Favour. 
Can  or  canst  FIND. 
<7('n.41.38  Phar.said,can  we/such  a  one  as  thisis? 
F.zod.  5.  11.  go,  get  you  straw  where  you  can  f.  it 
Ezra  7.  16.  all  the  silver  and  gold  thou  canst  f. 
.7o6  3. 22.  and  are  glad  when  they  can/,  the  grave 
11.  7.  canst  thou  by  searching  /.  out  God  ?  canst 
thou  /.  out  the  Almighty  unto  perfection  ? 
Prm.  20.  6.  but  a  faithful  man  who  can/.? 
31.10. who  canf.a.  virt. woman?  price  above  rubies 
Kccl.'i.ll.  no  man  ca)(/.  out  the  work  God  niaketh 
7.24.  that  which  is  exceeding  deep,  who  can/,  it? 
Jer.  5.  1.  if  ye  ca7t/.  a  man  that  seekAh  truth 

Cannot  FIND. 
Gen.  38. 22.  he  returned,  and  said,  I  cannot  f.  her 
1  Kings  18. 12.  if  he  connwt/.  thee,  he  will  slay  me 
Job  17. 10.  I  cannot  f.  one  wise  man  among  you 
37. 23.  touching  Almighty,  we  cannot  f.  him  out 
Eccl.B.  17.  a  man  cannotf.  out  the  work  under  sun 

FIND  grace. 
Ocn.32. 5.  Imay /.grace  in  thy  sight,  Exod.'i^.Vi. 
33.8.  these  are  to /.grace  in  the  sight  of  my  lord 
15.  let  me/.gr.  \\  34. IJ.  let  me/gr.  in  your  eyes 
47.  25.  let  us/,  grace  in  the  sight  of  my  lord 
Ruth  2.  2.  in  whose  sight  I  shall/,  "race 

1  .Sam.  1. 18.  let  thy  handmaid/,  grace  in  thy  sight 

2  Sa;n. lfi.4.that  I  may/,  grace  in  thy  sight,  O  king 
Meb.i.K.lhat  we  may/,  ^r.to  help  in  time  of  need 

/  FIND. 
Gen.  38.  26.  if  //.  in  Sodom  fifty  righteous  in  city 
28.  if  //.  there  forty-five  ||  30.  if  //.  thirty  there 
Psal.  132.  5.  till  //.  out  a  place  for  the  Lord 
^cc/.7.26.  and  //.  more  bitter  than  death  the  worn. 
Cant.  8.1.  when  /should/,  thee,  I  would  kiss  thee 
Jer.  45.3. 1  fainted  in  my  sighing,  and  //.  no  rest 
//U/iC  23.  4.  Pilate  said  to  the  chief  priests,  //.  no 
fault  in  this  man,  John  18.  38.  |  19.  4,  6. 
Rom.  7. 18.  to  perform  that  which  is  good,  //.  not 
21.  //.  then  a  law,  that  when  I  would  do  good 
JVot  FIND,  or  FIND  not. 
Ezod.  16.  2.5.  to-day  ye  shall  not/,  it  in  the  field 
Ijn.  12.  t8.  if  her  hand  /.  not  sufficiently 

1  Sam.  n.  17.  Saul  my  father  shall  not/,  thee 
2Soni.  17.  20.  had  sought,  and  could  not/,  them 
Prov.  1.  23.  they  shall  seek  me  early,  but  they  shall 

not/,  me,  Has.  5.  6.  John  7.  34,  3ti. 
Eccl.  7.  28.  which  my  soul  sceketh,  but  I  /.  not 
Cant.  5.  6. 1  sought  him,  but  I  could  not/,  him 
/sa.41.12.8eek  them,  but  shalt  no«/.them,  Hos.i.l. 
Z)an.6.5.weBhallno</.any  occasion  agninstDaniel 
.ffo.i.S.fi.makc  a  wall,  that  she  shall  not/,  her  pallis 
Amosi^.  12.  shall  run  to  seek  the  word,  and  not/,  il 
J. like  5. 19.  not/,  what  way  they  might  bring  him 
19.  48.  could  not/,  what  they  might  do  to  Jesus 
Jahn  7.  3.5.  whither  go,  that  we  shall  not/,  him  ? 
Rom.  7. 18.  how  to  do  that  which  is  good,  I/,  not 

2  Cor.  12.  20. 1  shall  not/,  you  such  iis  I  would 
AfT. 9.  0.  shall  men  seek  death,  and  shall  not/,  it 

Shall,  M  Shalt  FIND. 
Woi.44.t34.  lest  I  see  the  evil  that  shall/.my  father 
Jifut.i.  29-  if  thence  tlinu  seek  li.  thou  .ihnlt/.\\\m 
28.65.  thou  shall/,  no  ease  among  these  nations 
Ju(/^.9.33.  then  mnyestdo  iisthou.s/in/t/.occasion 

1  Sam.  9.  \'3.ye  shall /.  him  before  he  go  up  to  eat 
10.2.  thcreoAnM/lwoinen  by  Rni  hel's  sepulchre 

t7.  thou  shaft  do  as  thy  hand  shall  /. 

2  Kinns  7.  t9.  if  we  tarry,  vn,  shall  /.  piinisliment 
2  Chron.  20. 16.  ye  shall /Xhfm  at  end  of  the  broi>k 

30.9.  yourbrethron  and  (•liildr.»Anf//.<'ompassion 
Ezra  4.  15.  thou  shall/,  in  the  Imok  of  rernrds 
Psal.V!.  3.  thou  hast  tried  me,  and  .ihalt/.  nothing 

21.  8.  thy  hand  shall  /.  out  all  thine  enemies 
Pror.  1.  13.  wo  shall/,  all  precioii'i  substanco 

e.l7.tlicy  Uiat  seek  mo  early  thall/.tm.;  JtT.29  13. 
303 


FIN 

Prov.  16.20.  that  handleth  matter  wisely,  »./.  good 
19.  8.  he  that  keepeth  understanding  shall /.good 
F.ccl.  11.  1.  for  thou  shalt/.  it  after  many  days 
Jer.  2.  24.  in  her  mouth  they  shall/,  her 
6. 16.  ye  shall /.  rest  to  your  souls.  Mat.  11.  29. 
A/oa.12.8.  in  labours  they  shall /.none  iniquityiu  me 
Mat.  7.  7.  seek  and  ye  shall/.  Luke  11.  9. 
10.  39.  he  that  loseth  his  life  for  my  sake  shall/,  it 
17.  27.  thou  shalt  /.  a  piece  of  money,  that  take 

21.  2.  ye  shall /.an  ass  lied,  and  a  colt,  Mark  11.2. 

22.  9.  as  many  as  ye  shall  /.  bid  to  the  marriage 
24.  46.  when  cometh,s./.  so  doing,  Luke  12.37,43. 

Luke'i.l-.yo shall /■  babe  wrapt  inswaddl. clothes 

18.8.  Son  of  man  cometh  shall  he/,  faith  on  earth? 

John'2l.G.  cast  the  net  on  the  right  side,  ye  shall/. 

Rev.  18. 14.  and  thou  shalt  /.  them  no  more  at  all 

FINDEST. 
Gen.  31.  32.  with  whomsoever  thou/,  thy  gods 
E2cA.3.1.  eat  that  thou  f.  eat  this  roll,  and  go  speak 

FlNDF/ril. 
Gen.  4.  14.  every  one  that/,  me  shall  slay  me 
Deut.  19.  t5-  the  head  slippcth  and/,  bis  neighbour 
.fob  33. 10.  behold,  he/,  occasions  against  me 
Psal.  119. 162. 1  rejoice  at  word,  as  one  that/,  spoil 
Prov.  3.  13.  happy  is  the  man  that/,  wisdom 
8.35.  whoso/,  me,/.  Iife,shall  obtain  favour  of  Ld. 
14.  6.  a  Bcorner  seekcth  wisdom,  and/,  it  not 
17.  20.  he  that  hath  a  froward  heart, /.  no  ^ood 
18.22.whoso/.awife/.  agood  thing,obtains  favour 
21.  10.  his  neighbour/,  no  favour  in  his  eyes 
21.  he  that  followeth  aft.  mercy/,  life  and  honour 
Eccl.  9.  10.  whatsoever  thy  hand/,  to  do,  do  it 
Lam.  1.3.  shedwells  among  heathen,  she/,  no  rest 
//o.f.  14.  3.  for  in  thee  the  fatherless/,  mercy 
Mat.  7.  8.  and  he  that  seeketh/.  Luke  11.  10. 
10.  39.  he  that/,  his  life  shall  lose  it 
12.43.walketh  thro' dry  places,seekingrestJ".none 
44./.  it  empty,  swept  and  garnished, />uAe  11.25. 
26.  40.  he  /.  his  disciples  asleep,  Mark  14.  37, 
John  1.  41.  he  first  /.  his  own  brother  Simon 
43.  Jesus/.  Philip  ||  45.  Philip/.  Natbanael 
5  14.  afterward  Jesus/,  him  in  the  temple 

FINDING. 
Gen.  4.  15.  lest  any/.  Cain  should  kill  him 
./ui/9.  10.  whodoelh  things  past/.out  and  wonders 
Psal.  32.  1  6.  every  one  shall  pray  in  a  time  of/ 
Isa.  58.  13.  /.  thine  own  pleas,  nor  speaking  words 
Luke  11.24.  unclean  spirit  seeking  rest,  and /.none 
.ficts  4.  21.  /.  nothing  bow  tliey  might  punish  them 
19.  1.  Paul  came,  and/,  certain  disciples,  21.  4. 
21.2./.sliip  sailing  over  toPhenicia,wewent  aboard 
Rom.  11. 33.  unsearchable,  and  his  ways  past/.out 
Hcb.  8.  8.  for,/,  fault  with  them,  lie  saith,  befiold 

FINK. 
Job  28. 1.  there  is  a  place  for  gold  where  they/,  it 

FINE. 
Ezra  8.  27.  and  two  vessels  of/,  copper,  as  gold 
Job  28.  t  15. /.gold  shall  not  be  given  for  wisdom 
Isa.  19.9.  they  that  work  in/.  fia.\  be  confounded 
Rev.  1.  15.  his  feet  like  unto/,  brass,  2.  18. 

YXHKjlour. 
Lev.  2.  1.  his  offering  shall  be  of  /./lour,  24.5. 
4.  cakes  of/,  flour  mingled  with  oil,  5.  7.  |  7.  12. 
I  14.  10,  21.  I  23.  13.  JVu7n.  6.  15.  |  7. 13, 19, 
25,  31,  37,43,49,  55,  61.  ]  8.8. 
5. 11.  the  tenth  part  of  an  eplijh  of/,  yiour,  6.  20. 

1  Kings  4. 22.  thirty  measures  of /.flour  in  one  day 

2  Kings  7.1. measure/. ^o«r  sold  for  shekel,  16,1.^. 

1  CVir.9.29.were  appointed  to  oversee/. j!o«»", 23.29. 
Eiek.  16. 13.  thou  didst  eat/,  flour,  honey  and  oil 

19.  I  gave  iher: /.flour,  and  oil,  and  honey 
46.  14.  a  bin  of  oil  to  temper  with  the/,  flour 
/tet). 18.13.  none  buyeth  her  nierchuiidiseof/.yiour 
FIN  F.  gold. 

2  Chr.  3.  5.  ceiling,  which  he  overlaid  with  /.gold 
8.  the  most  holy  he  overlaid  \\\\\\  /■  ^old 

.Job  2^.  t  IS-  /•  gold  shall  not  be  given  for  wisdom 
17.exchaiige  of  it  shall  not  be  for  jewels  of /.gold 
31.24.  or  said  to/gold,  thou  art  my  conliilence 
Ps:il.  I9.10.aro  nioro  to  be  desired  lluiii  iniicli//T»W 
119.  127.  I  love  thy  coinmundnicnts  above/. ^oW 
Prov.  .3.  14.  and  the  gain  of  wisdom  than  /.  gold 
8.  19.  my  fruit  is  better  than  golil,  than/,  gold 
2.").  12.  as  an  ornaiiient  of/,  gold,  so  is  a  reprover 
C'fint.5.11.  his  bend  is  a.s  the  umM/.g.  lockit  bushy 
15.  his  legs  are  ns  pillars  set  on  sockets  of /.;?«W 
/.«a.  13. 12.  will  miiken  man  more  precious  than/.  ^. 
J, am.  4.  1.  how  is  the  most/,  gold  changed! 

2.  the  precious  sons  of  Ziniicompiirnbleto/.^oW 
/?nn.2.'.t2.this  image's  head/,  gold,  breast  of  silver 
10..5.whose  loins  wemirded  willi/.^oMoflfphaz 
ZccA.9.3.Tyrus  heii|ii'd  f  gnlda-t  mire  of  the  street* 

FINF.  /lHr,i. 
t7cn.41. 42. Pharaoh  iirrund  bini  in  vest.  of/,  limn 
Krorf.25.4.  this  is  the  offering  ye  shall  lake,/,  linen 
26.  1.  with  ten  riirlnins  of/,  twined  Jin'-n 
31.  the  vail  of/,  linen,  :«>.  35.  2  Chron.  3.  14. 
36.  thou  shall  make  n  liangingi.f/.  twined  linrn, 
27.  9,  16,  1H.  I  :ic,.  37.  I  38.  0,  Ifi,  IH. 
28.  5.  take  gold  and  /.  tinen  to  nioko  gormcnUi 


FIN 

Ezod.^S.a.  (hall  make  the  ephodof/.  W7»en,39.2. 
8.girdle/. /inen,  39.5,29.  II  15.  breast-plate,  39. 8. 
39.  thou  shalt  embroider  the  coat  of/,  linen,  and 
thou  shalt  make  the  mitre  of/,  linen 
35.  6.  let  him  bring  an  offering  of/,  linfn 
23.  every  man  with  whom  was  found/,  linen 
25.  the  women  brought  of  scarlet  and/,  linen 
35.  them  hath  he  filled  with  wisdom  to  work  all 
manner  of  work  and/.  />n<:n,38. 23. 
2  Chron.  2.  14. 
36.8.  that  wrought  curtains  of/,  linen  and  blue 
39.  27.  they  made  coats  of/,  linen  for  Aaron 
2^.made  a  mitre  of/./incn,and  bonnets  of/,  linen 
1  Chr.  4.21.  families  of  them  that  wrought/,  linen 
15.27.  David  was  clothed  with  a  rol>e  of/,  linen 
F^^th.l.fi.  were  hangings  fasten,  with  cordsof/.  tin. 
8.  1.5.  Mordecai  wont  with  a  garment  of/,  linen 
Prov.  7. 16.  I  have  decked  my  bed  with/,  linen 
31.  24.  she  maketh/.  linen,  and  selleth  it 
ha.  3.  2).  the  Lord  will  take  away  the/,  linen 
Ezek.  16.  10.  I  girded  thee  about  witlj/.  linen 

13.  thy  raiment  was  of/,  linen  and  silk 
27.  7.  /.  linen  from  Kgypt  was  to  be  thy  sail 

16.  Syria  occupied  in  thy  fairs  with/,  linen 
Mark  15.  46.  Joseph  bought/. /incn  and  wrapped 
Luke  16.19.rich  man  clothed  in  purple  and/,  linen 
fier  .18.12.merchandi8e  of /.linen  depart,  from  thee 

16.  that  city  clothed  in/,  linen  is  come  to  nought 

19.  8.  to  her  was  granted  to  be  arrayed  in  /.  tinen 

14.  the  armies  in  heaven  were  clothed  in  /.  2ineit 

FINU  meal. 
Gen.  18.6.  make  ready  three  measures  of/,  meal 

FINER. 
Prov.  25. 4.  there  shall  coino  forth  a  vessel  for  the/. 

FINEST. 
Psal.  81. 16.  have  fed  thee  with  the/,  of  the  wheat 
147.  14.  he  filleth  thee  with  the/,  of  the  wheat 

FINING. 
Prov.17.3./.  pot  is  for  silv.  furnace  for  gold,  27.31. 

FINGER. 
The  finger  of  God  signifies  his  power,  his  opera- 
tion.   Pharaoh's  magicians  discuvcrcd  the  fin- 
ger ofGod  in  themiracleswhichJiioMS  wrought, 
Exod.  8.  19.     This  Legislator  gave  the  law 
written  with  the  finger  o/  God  to  the  Hebrews, 
Exod.  31.  18.     It  was  written  iinviediutely  if 
the  power  or  Spirit  o/  God,  and  not  by  any  art 
o/  man.    Our  Saviour  says,  he  cost  out  devilt 
by  the  finger,  or  Spirit  o/  God,  which  he  inti- 
mates was  a  sign  that  the  kingdom  o/  C/oa 
was  come;  that  God's  spiritual  government 
o/  his  church  was  begun  to  be  ezircised  among 
the  Jews  by  the  Messiah,  Luke  11.20. 
To  put  forth  one's  finger  is  a  bantering,  insult 
ing,  gesture.     Isa.  58.  9,  If  thou  taKe  away 
from  the  midst  of  thee  the  yoke,  and  the  putting 
out  of  the  finger.     //  tAwu  take  oway  /rom  the 
midst  o/  thee  the  chain  or  yoke  when  with  thou 
ovrrirheliiicst  thy  debtors,  and  /orbrnr  point- 
ing at  them,  and  using  jtering  and  insulting 
gestures.     Some  take  this  /or  a  menacing  or 
threatening  gesture. 
Exod.H.ld.  the  magicians  said,  this  is  the/,  of  God 
29.  12.  put  of  the  blood  on  the  altar  with  thy/. 
31. IS.tables  written  with  Ihe/.nf  God,  Deut.^.lO 
Lev.  4.  6.  prie.st  shall  dip  his  /.  in  the  blnod,  and 
sprinkle  it,  17,  25,  30,  34. 1 8.  15.  |  9. 9.  1 16. 
14,  19. 
14.16.  the  priest  shall  dip  his  righi/.in  the  oil,  and 
sprinkle  of  the  oil  with  his/,  seven  times,  27. 
JV"«in.iy.4.  priest  shall  take  of  her  hlooil  with  his/. 

1  Kings  12. 10.  my  little/,  thicker,  2  CAron.  10.  10. 
Isii.  .58.9.  if  take  awnv  the  putting  forth  of  the/. 
AmAi!  11.20.  if  I  with  the/,  of  God  cast  out  devils 

111.  24.  that  he  may  dip  the  lip  of  his/  in  water 
.Mm  8.  6.  and  with  his/,  wrote  on  the  ground 

20.  25.  iinil  pill  my  /.  into  the  print  of  the  nnils 
27.  reach  hither  ihv  /.  and  behold  my  hands 

FiNGERS. 

2  Sam.  21.  W.  on  every  liiind  six/.  1  Chr.  20.  6. 
P.s-ijt.8.3.  when  consider  thy  heavens, work  ol'tliy/ 

144.  1.  the  Lord,  who  leaoheth  my/,  'o  fight 
Pror.  6.  13.  a  wicked  man  lencheih  wiih  h\r /. 
7. 3.  bind  ihiin  on  thy  /.  write  lliem  on  thy  heart 
Cant.  5.  5.  and  my/,  with  sweel-smelli.-g  myrrh 
ha.  2.  8  thai  which  ibi'ir  own/,  hn^e  maile,  17.  8. 
59.3. hands  difiled  with  blrwid,  and/,  with  iniquity 
.fer.  K.  21.  the  thicknei's  of  one  pil'iir  '"iir/. 
Dnn.'i.  5.  came  forth/.ofa  man's  hand,  iied  wrota 
.Wnt.  2:1.4.  they  hind  heavy  burdens,  hut  ihey  wifl 
not  move  ifiem  with  one  of  their/.  I.uki  1 1.46. 
.Mark  7.:).3.and  he  piil  h's  T  into  Ins  ears  and  he  spit 

FINifll, 
To  bring  to  pass,  /iilfil.  prr/,rt.  Our  blessed 
Lord  said  on  the  cross,  It  is  fniished,./»An  19.30. 
Our  great  Pedervier,  by  what  he  did  and  .lu/- 
/rrrd,  performed  th'-iriil o/  G,.d,  nrd  the  whole 
work  which  the  Father  gan  him  to  do  ;  which 
was  In  ohtaiv  eternal  mlrmpfion.  lie  was  the 
tubstance  and  eitd  o/ all  the  types, and  the  legal 


FIR 

dtspensalian.  He  completed  andfiniskedright- 
euusness,  removed  the  curse,and  radically  com- 
pleted our  salvation. 
Oen.  (J.  IB.  and  in  a  cubit  shall  thou/,  it  above 
JDan.  9.24.  to/,  transgression,  and  mal<eend  ol'sin 
Zecli.  4.  y.  Zerubbabel's  hands  shall  also/,  it 
Mat.  10.  t  i!3.  ye  shall  not/,  the  cities  of  Israel 
Cuke  14.  28.  whether  he  have  sufficient  to/,  it 
iiO.  after  laid  the  foundation,  and  is  not  able  to/it 
30.  this  man  began  to  build,  was  not  able  to/. 
Jo/tn4.2'l.  my  meat  is  to  do  his  will,  and/,  his  work 
5.  36.  works  which  the  Father  hath  given  me  to  /. 
.^cts  20.  24.  that  I  might/,  my  course  with  joy 
Rom.  9.  28.  for  he  will/,  the  work,  and  cut  short 
2  Cor.S.ii.  so  he  would  also/,  in  you  the  same  grace 
Fhil.  1.  fC.  he  that  hath  begun,  will  also/,  it 

FINISHED. 
Oen.  2.  1.  thus  the  heavens  and  the  earth  were/. 
£i,>(i.  39.  32.  thus  was  all  the  work/.  40.  33. 
JDeut.  31.  24.  an  end  of  writing,  till  they  were/. 
Josk.  4. 10.  the  priests  stood,  till  every  thing  was/. 
Jiut/i'S.i8.  the  man  not  rest,  till  he  have/,  the  thing 
1  Kings  6.  9.  Solomon  built  the  house  and  /.  it, 
14,  22,  38.  2  Ckron.  5.  1.  |  7.  11. 
7. 1.  Solomon/  all  his  house,  9. 1,  25.  2  Chr.  8. 16. 

22.  so  was  the  work  of  the  pillars/. 
1  Chr.  27.  24.  Joab  began  to  number,  but  he  /.  not 
28. 20.  Lord  not  fail  thee,  till  thou  hast/  the  work 
S  Chr.  24. 14.  and  when  they  had  /.  the  repairing 
29.28.  the  singers  sang,  till  burnt-offering  was /. 
31.  7.  they/,  the  heaps  in  the  seventh  month 
Eira  4.  tl2.  the  Jews  have/,  the  walls 

5.  16.  hath  it  been  in  building, and  yet  it  is  not/. 

6.  14.  the  elders  of  the  Jews  built  and/,  it,  15. 
JVeh.  6.  15.  so  the  wall  was/,  in  tifty-two  days 
Dan.  5. 26.  God  hath  numbered  thy  kingd.  and/,  it 

12.  7.  all  these  things  shall  be/ 
Mat.  13.  .53.  when  Jesus  had  /.  these  parables 

19.  1.  when  Jesus  had/,  these  sayings,  26.  1. 
Joh7i  17.4. 1  have/,  the  work  thou  gavest  me  to  do 

19.  30.  he  said,  it  is/,  and  he  bowed  his  head 
^ct«  21.  7.  when  we  had/,  our  course  from  Tyre 
2T'/m.4.7. 1  have/,  my  course,  I  have  kept  the  faith 
Jieb.  4.  3.  the  works  were  /.  from  the  foundation 
Jatn.  1. 15.  sin,  when  it  is/,  bringelh  forth  death 
Hev.  10.  7.  the  mystery  of  God  should  be/. 

11.  7.  when  witnesses  shall  have/  their  testimony 

20.  5.  lived  not,  till  the  thousand  years  were/. 

FINISHER. 

.Visft.l2.2.1ooking  to  Jesus,  author  and/.of  our  faith 
FINS. 

Z.ct'.11.9.whateverhath/.and  scales  eat, Z)ctt<. 14.9. 

10.  that  hath  not/,  shall  be  an  abomination,  12. 

FIRE 

Is  one  of  the  four  elements,  which  not  only  af- 
fords light  and  heat,  but  whereby  likewise  we 
try  and  purge  metals.  God  hath  often  ap 
peared  in  fire,  and  encompassed  with  fire  ;  as 
when  he  shewed  himself  in  the  burning  bush, 
and  descended  on  mount  Sinai  in  the  midst  of 
flames,  thunderings  and  lightning,  Exod.  3.2 
1 19.  18.  Fire  is  a  symbol  of  the  holiness  and 
justice  of  God :  The  Lord  thy  God  is  a  con 
suming  fire,  Deut.  4.  24.  He  shewed  himself 
to  his  Prophets,  Isaiah,  Ezekiel,  and  St.  John, 
in  the  midst  o/fire,  Isa.  6.  4.  Ezek.  1.  4.  Rfv. 
1.  14.  The  Psalmist  describes  the  chariot  of 
Ood  as  all  in  a  flame,  Psal.  18.  12,  13,  14. 
j3nd  it  is  said  that  God  will  appear  in  the 
midst  of  fire  at  his  second  coming,  2  Thess. 
1.  8.  Daniel  says,  that  a  fiery  stream  issued, 
and  came  forth  from  before  him ;  noting  the 
speedy  executing  of  his  judgments,  far  the 
terror  of  the  wicked  and  comfort  of  the  godly, 
Dan.  7.  10.  The  wrath  of  God  is  compared 
to  fire,  Psal.  18.  8.  and  the  effects  of  his  wrath, 
which  are  war,  famine,  and  other  scourges, 
are  described  under  the  same  idea,  Psal.  C6.  12. 
Jer.  48.  45. 

Our  Saviour  is  compared  to  fire.  Mai.  3.  2,  He 
is  like  a  refiner's  fire,  and  like  fuller's  soap. 
He  shall  consume  the  wicked  by  his  judgments, 
and  purify  those  who  are  sincere  by  his  doc- 
trine. The  Holy  Ghost  is  likewise  compared 
to  fire.  Mat.  3.  11,  He  shall  baptize  you  with 
the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  fire.  To  verify  this 
prediction,  Jisus  sent  the  Holy  Ghost,  who 
descended  upon  his  disciples  in  the  form  of 
tongues,  or  like-sparks  of  fire,  JJcls  2.  3.  It  is 
the  work  of  the  HolySpiril  to  enlighten,purify, 
and  sanctify  the  soul,  and  tn  inflame  it  with 
loveto  God, and  zeal  for  his  glory.  The  angels 
themselves,  as  the  ministers  of  God,  are  com- 
pared to  a  burning  fire,  speedy  and  irresistible 
in  the  execution  of  his  cummands,  Psal.  104.4. 
The  Lord,  or  his  angel,  led  the  Israelites  in 
their  journey  through  the  wilderness,  under 
the  form  of  a  pillar  of  fire,  Exod.  13.  21. 

F\ie  from  heaven  fell  frequently  on  the  victims 

tacrificed  to  the  Lord,  />.?  a  mark  ofhispresenct 

203 


FIR 

and  approbation.  It  is  thought  that  Ood  in 
this  manner  expressed  his  acceptance  of  Abel's 
sacrifices.  Gen.  4.  4.  tVhen  the  Lord  made  a 
covenant  with  Abraham,  afire,  like  that  of  a 
furnace,  passed  through  the  divided  pieces  of 
the  sacrifices,  and  consumed  them,  Gen.  15.  17. 
Fire  fell  upon  the  sacrifices  which  Moses  offered 
at  the  dedication  of  the  tabernacle.  Lev.  9.  24. 
.And  upon  those  of  Manoah,  Samson's /a£/ter, 
Judg.  13. 19,  20.  Upon  Solomon's,  at  the  dedi- 
cation of  the  temple,  2  Chron.  7.  1.  Jlnd  upon 
Elijah's,  at  mount  Carmel,  1  Kings  18.  38. 
The  torments  of  hell  are  described  by  fire,  both  in 
the  Old  and  JVtw  Testament.  Moses  inveigh- 
ing against  the  Israelites,  who  rebelled  against 
the  Lord,  says  to  them;  A  fire  is  kindled  in 
mine  anger,  and  shall  burn  unto  the  lowest  hell, 
Deut.  32.  22.  Isaiah  is  still  more  express. 
Who  among  us  shall  dwell  with  the  devouring 
fire  7  who  among  us  shall  dwell  with  everlast- 
ing burnings  1  Isa.  33.  14.     Jind  in  chap.  66. 

24,  Their  worm  shall  not  die,  neither  shall  their 
fire  be  quenched.  Our  Saviour  makes  use  of 
the  same  similitude,  to  represent  the  punish- 
ment of  the  damned,  Mark  9.  44.  He  likewise 
speaks  frequently  of  the  eternal  fire  prepared 
for  the  devil,  his  angels,  and  reprobates.  Mat. 

25.  41.  The  sting  and  remorse  of  conscience 
is  the  worm  that  will  never  die  ;  and  the  wrath 
of  Ood  upon  their  souls  and  bodies,  the  fire 
that  shall  never  go  out.  There  are  likewise 
who  maintain  that  by  worm  is  to  be  under- 
stood a  common,  living,  and  material,  not  an 
allegorical  and  figurative  worm  ;  and  by  fire, 
a  real,  elementary,  and  material  fire.  Jlmon^ 
the  maintainers  of  this  opinion  are  Austin, 
Cyprian,  Chrysostom,  Jerome,  &c 

Tlie  word  of  Ood  is  compared  to  fire,  Jer.  23. 29, 
Is  not  my  word  like  a  fire  1  It  is  full  of  life 
and  efficacy  ;  like  a  fire,  it  warms,  melts,  and 
heals  my  people,  and  is  powerful  to  consume 
the  dross,  and  burn  up  the  chaff  and  stubble. 
Jind  the  Apostle  says,  that  every  man's  doc- 
trine should  be  tried  by  fire,  that  is,  by  the 
light  of  the  word,  of  what  nature  it  is,  whether 
it  be  true  or  false,  sound  and  solid,  or  cor- 
rupt and  frothy,  1  Cor.  3. 13.  Fire  is  likewise 
taken  for  persecution,  dissension  and  division. 
Luke  12.  49,  I  am  come  to  send  fire  on  the 
earth  ;  that  is.  Upon  my  coming  and  publish- 
ing the  gospel,  there  will  follow  through  the 
deviVs  malice,  and  the  corruption  of  men,  much 
persecution  to  the  professors  thereof , and  mani- 
fold divisions  in  the  world,  whereby  men  will 
be  tried  whether  they  be  faithful  or  not.  The 
church  of  Ood  is  compared  to  a  fire.  Obad.  18, 
The  house  of  JacoJ  shall  bea_^re;  The  church 
shall  subdue  all  her  enemies.  Carnal  vain 
shifts  of  men's  own  devising,  tohereby  they 
seek  to  support,  relieve,and  comfort  themselves 
against  thejudgments  denounced  against  them, 
are  likewise  compared  to  fire,  Isa.  50.  11.  As 
are  also  the  lies,  slanders,  and  other  provoking 
speeches  of  ungodly  men ;  Prov.  16.  27,  And  in 
his  lips  there  is  as  a  burning  fire. 

Gen.  15. 1 17.  a  lamp  of/passed  betw.  those  pieces 

22.  6.  Abraham  took  /  in  his  hand,  and  a  knife 
7.my  father,behold  the/.and  the  wood, but  where 

Exod.  3.  2.  and  behold,  the  bush  burned  with/. 

9.23.  Lord  sent  hail  and  the/,  along  on  ground 
24.  there  was  hail,  and/,  mingled  with  the  hail 

12.8.shalleatthe  flesh  in  that  night  roast  with/.  9. 

19. 18.  the  Lord  descended  upon  mount  Sinai  in/. 

22.  6.  if/,  break  out,  and  catch  in  thorns 

32.  24.  then  I  cast  gold  into/,  and  came  this  calf 

40.  38.  and/,  was  on  the  tabernacle  by  night  thro' 

all  their  journey,  J^Tum.  9.  16.  Deut.  1.  33. 

Lev.  1.  7.  the  sons  of  the  priest  shall  put/,  on  the 

altar,  and  lay  wood  in  order  upon  the/. 

8.  npon  the  wood  that  is  in  the/.  12,  17.  |  3.  5. 

2. 14.  shalt  offer  green  ears  of  corn  dried  by  the/. 

6.  9.  the/,  of  the  altar  be  burning  in  it,  10, 12, 13. 

9.  24.  there  came  a  /.  out  from  before  the  Lord 

10.  1.  the  sons  of  Aaron  put/,  in  their  censers 
2.  there  went  out/,  from  Ld.  and  devoured  them 

16.  13.  he  shall  put  the  incense  upon  the/. 
18.21.  thou  shalt  not  let  any  of  thy  seed  pass  thro'/, 
to  Molech,  Deut.  18.  10.  2  Kings  17. 17. 1 23. 10. 
JVum.  6. 18.  shall  take  the  hair,  and  put  it  in  the/ 

11.  2.  when  Moses  prayed,  the/,  was  quenched 
16.  7.  take  ye  censors,  and  put/,  therein,  18. 

37.  that  he  take  the  censers,  and  scutter/.yonder 
46.  take  a  censer,  and  put/therein  from  off  abar 
18.  9.  be  thine  of  most  holy  things  reserved  from/ 
21.  28.  for  there  is  a/,  gone  out  from  Heshbon 
31. 23.  every  thing  that  may  abide/,  go  thro'  the/. 
i)e««.  4.  ll.and  the  mountain  burnt  with/.  9.  15. 
30.  and  upon  earth  he  shewed  thee  his  great/. 
5.  5.  for  ye  were  afraid  by  reason  of  the/. 


FIR 

Deut.  33. 1 2.  from  his  right  hand  went  a  /.  of  law 
Josh.  7.  25.  all  Israel  burned  Achan  with/. 
./udg.  6.  21.  and  there  rose  up  /.  out  of  the  rock 
9.15.  let/.comeout  of  bramble  and  devour  cedars 

16.  9.  as  a  thread  of  tow  when  it  toucheth  the/. 

1  Kings  18.23.  lay  it  on  wood,  put  no/,  under,  25. 
24.  the  God  that  answereth  by/  let  him  be  God 
38.  Ihen  the/,  of  the  Lord  fell,  2  Chron.  7.  1,3. 

19. 12.  after  the  earthquake  a  /.  but  the  Lord  was 
not  in  the/,  after  the/,  a  still  small  voice 

2  Kings  1. 10.  then  let/,  come  down  from  heaven 
12.  and  the/,  of  God  came  down  from  heaven 

2. 11.  there  appeared  a  chariot  and  horses  off 

6.  17.  the  mountain  was  full  of  chariots  of/. 
16.  3.  Ahaz  made  his  son  to  pass  ihrough  the/. 
19.  18.  and  have  cast  their  gods  into  the/. 
21. 6.  Manasseh  madeson  pass  thro'/.  2  Chr.  33.6. 
23. 10  no  man  might  make  his  son  pass  thro'  the/. 

1  Chr.  21.  26.  Ld.answered  him  from  heaven  by/. 

2  Chr.  35.  13.  they  roasted  the  passover  with/. 
JVt7t.2.3.  the  gates  thereof  are  consumed  with/.  13. 
Job  1.  16.  the/,  of  God  is  fallen  from  heaven 

18.  5.  and  the  spark  of  his/,  shall  not  shioe 
28.  5.  and  under  it  is  turned  up  as  it  were/. 
41.  19.  burning  lamps,  and  sparks  of/,  leap  out 
Psal.  39.  3.  while  I  was  musing  the/,  burned 
46.  9.  he  burneth  the  chariot  in  the/. 
66.  12.  we  went  through/,  and  through  water 

68. 2.  as  wax  melteth  before /.so  let  wicked  perish 
74.  7.  they  have  cast/,  into  thy  sanctuary 
78.  14.  all  the  night  with  a  light  of/  105.  39. 
83.14.  as  the/burneth  the  wood,  and  as  the  flame 

97.3.  a/,  goeth  before  him  and  burneth  up  cnemiea 
10.5.  .32.  he  gave  hail  and  flaming/,  in  their  land 
118.  12.  they  are  quenched  as  the/,  of  thorns 
140. 10. let  them  be  cast  into  the/,  into  deep  pita 
148. 8./.  and  hail,  stormy  wind,  fulfilling  his  wotd 

Prov.  6.  27.  can  a  man  take/,  in  his  bosom 
16.  27.  and  in  his  lips  there  is  as  a  burning/. 
26.  20.  where  no  wood  is,  there  the/,  goeth  out 
21.  as  woodis  to/.soiscontentioustnanto  kindle 
30. 16.  the  grave  and  the  /.  saith  not,  it  is  enough 

Isa.  9.  5.  this  shall  be  with  burning  and  fuel  of/ 

18.  for  wickedness  burneth  as  the/. 

19.  the  people  shall  be  as  the  fuel  of  the/. 
10.  16.  shall  kindle  a  burning  like  burning  of  a/. 

17.  and  the  light  of  Israel  shall  be  for  a/. 
30. 14.  not  be  found  a  sherd  to  take/  from  hearth 

33.  the  pile  thereof  is/,  and  much  wood 
31.  9.  saith  the  Lord,  whose/,  is  in  Zion 
37.19.  kings  of  Assyria  have  cast  their  gods  into/. 
43.2.  when  thou  walkest  through/,  not  be  burnt 
44. 16.  he  burneth  part  thereof  in  the/  he  warm- 
eth  himself,  and  saith,  aha,  I  have  seen  the/. 
47.14.they  shall  be  as  stubble,the/.shall  burn  them 

50.  11.  walk  in  light  of  your/,  and  in  the  sparks 

64.  2.  as  when  the  melting/,  burneth,  the/,  caus- 
eth  the  waters  to  boil  to  make  thy  name  known 

65.  5.  these  are  a/  that  burneth  all  the  day 

66.  15.  for  behold,  the  Lord  will  come  with/. 
16.  for  by/  will  the  Lord  plead  with  all  flesh 
24.  worm  not  die,  neither  their  /.  be  quenched 

Jer.  4.  4.  lest  my  fury  come  forth  like/,  and  burn 
5.  14.  I  will  make  my  words  in  thy  mouth/. 

20.  9.  his  word  was  as  a/  shut  up  in  my  bones 
21.12.  lest  my  fury  go  out  like/and  burn,that  none 
22.  7. shall  cut  down  cast  choice  cedars  in  the/. 
29.  22.  whom  the  king  of  Babylon  roasted  in  the/ 
32.35.high  places,  to  cause  their  sons  to  pass  thro 

the/,  to  Molech,  Ezek.  16.  21.  [  20.  26,  31. 
36.  22.  and  there  was  a/,  on  the  hearth  burning 
23.  Jehudi  cut  the  roll,  and  cast  it  into  the/. 
48.  45.  but  a/,  shall  come  fbrth  out  of  Heshbon 

51.  .58.  the  folk  shall  labour  in  vain  and  in  the/. 
Z,a;n.2.3.  he  burned  against  Jacob  like  a  flaming/. 

4.  he  bent  his  bow,  he  poured  out  his  fury  like  /. 
Ezek.  1.  4.  I  looked,  behold,  a/,  infolding  itself 
13.  the/,  was  bright,  and  out  of  the/,  lightning 
10.  6.  saying,  take/,  from  between  the  wheels 

7.  one  cherub  stretched  forth  his  hand  to  the/. 

21.  31.  I  will  blow  against  thee  in  the/  22.  21. 
32. thou  shalt  be  for  fuel  to/.-no  more  remembered. 

22.  20.  to  blow  /.  upon  it,  to  melt  it,  so  gather  you 
24.  9.  saith  Lord,  I  will  even  make  pile  for/,  great 

12.  her  scum  shallbein/ infilthiness  is  lewdness 
28.  18.  will  bring  forth  a/,  from  the  midst  of  thee 

36.5.  in  the/,  of  my  jealousy  have  I  spoken,  38.19. 
Da;i.3. 27.  upon  whose  bodies  the/,  had  no  power, 

nor  the  smell  of/,  had  passed  on  them 
7.  9.  his  throne  like  flames,  wheels  like  burning/. 

10. 6.  his  face  as  lightning,  his  eyes  as  lamps  off 
Hos.l.  O.in  the  morning  it  burneth  asaflaming/. 
JoeVi.  30.  blood,/.and  pillars  of  smoke,  Jirts'2..\9. 
Amos  5.6.1est  he  break  out  like/.in  house  of  Joseph 

7.  4.  behold,  the  Lord  God  called  tn  contend  by/. 
Obad.  18.  and  the  house  of  Jacob  shall  be  a/. 
Jf(V. 1.4.  shall  be  molten  under  him  as  wax  before/. 
JVaA.1.6.  fury  poured  out  Iik<j/.rocksthrown  down 
Hah.  2. 13.  the  peoi)le  shall  labour  in  the  very/ 


18.  16.  nor  let  me  see  this  great  /.  any  more        |  Z€ch.  2. 5.  will  be  unto  her  a  wall  of /.round  about 


FIR 

Ztek.  3-  3.  Ib  not  this  a  brand  plucked  out  of  the/.? 

12.  6.  goveiuors  ul' Judab  like  a  hearth  of/,  and 

like  a  torch  off.  in  a  sheal 

13.  9.  I  will  bring  lh«  third  part  through  the  /. 
JUal.'i.  2.  he  is  like  a  refiner's/,  and  I'uller's  soap 
JUat.X  10.  every  tree  that  bringcth  not  forth  good 

fruit  is  cast  into/.  7. 19.  /,uAe3. 9.  Jonn  15.  (i. 

11.  baptize  with  Holy  Ghost,  and/.  Luke^.  It). 
i:i.  42.  and  shall  cast  tliem  into  a  furnace  ot  /.  .50. 

17.  15.  ofttimcB  he  falleth  into  the/.  jWurA  9. 22. 

18.  8.  rather  than  having  two  hands  or  two  feut,  to 

bo  cast  into  everlasting/.  Mark  9.  411,  40. 
25.  41.  depart  from  me,  ye  cursed,  into  everlast./. 
Mark  9.  44.  where  the/,  is  not  quenched,  45. 

14.  54.  and  Peter  warmed  himself  at  the/. 
/.u^e9.54.  wilt  thou  tliat  we  command/,  to  come? 

17.  29.  the  same  day  it  rained/,  and  brimstone 
22.  56.  a  maid  beheld  him  as  he  sat  by  the/. 

^ct4  2.3.uppeared  to  them  cloven  tongues, like  as/. 
28.  3.  when  Paul  had  laid  sticks  on  the  /. 

5.  he  shook  off  the  beast  into  the/,  felt  no  harm 

1  Cor.  3.  13.  it  shall  be  revealed  by/,  and  the  / 

shall  try  every  man's  work,  of  what  sort  it  is 
15.  he  himself  sliall  be  saved,  yet  so  as  by/. 

2  ThessA.S.  in  flaming/  taking  vengeance  on  them 
Heb.  1.  7.  who  maketh  his  ministers  a  flame  of/ 

11.  34.  who  thro'  faith  quenched  the  violence  of/. 

12. 18.  are  not  come  to  mount  that  burned  with/. 

Jam.  3. 5.  how  great  a  matter  a  little/,  kindleth  I 

6.  and  the  tongue  is  a/  a  world  of  iniquity 
5.  3.  and  shall  eat  your  flush  as  it  were  /. 

1  Pet.  1.  7.  than  of  gold,  though  it  be  tried  with/ 
ZPet.S.  7.  reserved  unto/  against  day  of  judgment 

12.  the  heavens  being  on/,  shall  be  dissolved 
Jude  7.  sutiering  the  vengeance  of  eternal/. 

23.  others  save  pulling  them  out  of  the/. 
Rev.  3.  18.  thee  to  buy  of  me  gold  tried  in  the/. 
4.  5.  seven  lamps  of/,  burning  before  the  throne 

8.  5.  the  angel  filled  the  censer  with/,  of  the  aliar 

7.  there  followed  hail  and  /.  mingled  with  blood 

8.  as  it  were  a  great  mountain  burning  with  /. 

9.  17.  and  out  of  their  mouths  issued/.  11.  5. 

18.  the  third  part  of  men  was  killed  by  the/. 

13.  13.  he  maketh/  come  down  from  heaven 

14.  18.  another  angel  which  had  power  over  the/. 
15.2. 1  saw  as  it  were  a  6i;a  of  glass  mingted  with/. 

16.  8.  power  was  given  him  to  scorch  men  with  /. 

20.  9.  and/,  came  down  from  God  out  of  heaven 
lO.lhe  devil  was  cast  into  lake  of/and  brimstone 

14.  death  and  hell  were  cast  into  the  lake  of/. 

15.  whoso  not  written  in  book  of  life,  cast  into/. 

21.  8.  have  part  in  the  lake  which  burnetii  witli  /. 
See  Brimstone,  Burn  or  Burnt,  Coai.s,  Con- 
sume, CoN.suMiNO,  Devour,  Devoured,  De- 
vouRisa,  Flame,  Hei.l,  Miost. 

Kindle,  or  kindlcil  FIRE. 

F.Tod.  22.  G.  he  that  kindled  the/  make  restitution 

35.  3.  ye  shall  kindle  no/,  on  the  sabbath  day 

Deut.  32.  22.  for  a/,  is  kindled  in  my  angcT,  and 

shall  burn  to  lowest  hell,  Jer.  15.  14.  |  IT.  4. 

2  Sam.  22. 13.  before  him  were  coals  of/,  kindled 
I'sal.  78.  21.  so  a/,  was  kindled  against  Jacob 

106.  18.  a/,  was  kindled  in  their  company 
Isa.  10.  16.  he  shall  kindle  a  burning  like  a/. 

50. 11.  behold,  all  ye  that  kindle  a  /.  that  compass 
Jer.7.18.childrcngalli(red  wood, fathers  kindltdf. 

11.  16.  he  hath  kindled  f.  on  the  green  olive 

17.  27.  then  will  1  kindlea./.  in  the  gates  thereof 

21.  14.  I  will  kindle  a/,  in  the  forest  thereof 

43.12.  IwWlkindle  a/in  the  housesofthe  gods 
49. 27.  I  will  kindle  a  /  in  the  wall  of  Damascus 
50.  32.  and  [  will  kindle  a./  in  his  cities 

/yam.  4.  11.  and  the  Lord  hath  AinrfZeda/.  in  Zion 
F.iek.  20.  47.  I  will  kindle  a/,  in  the  forest 
24.10.heap  on  wood, ArinrfZc  the/consume  the  flesh 
Amos  1. 14. 1  will  kindle  a/,  in  the  wall  of  Kabb.ih 
.VaM.lO.nor  do  ye  kindle f. on  my  altar  for  nought 
I^uke  12.  49.  I  am  come  to  send  /.  on  the  earth, 
and  what  will  [,  if  it  be  already  kindled? 

22.  .M.  when  llioy  hnd  kindled  a/,  in  the  hall 
.4cti28.2.thcbarbarianKAin</Zfrfa/.and  received  us 

Made  by  FIRE. 
ElO'i.  29.  18.  an  nKvnns  made  bii  f.  unto  the  Lord, 
2.?,  41.  r.en.  1.  9,  13,  17.  I  2.  2,9,  IR.  |  3.  3,  .'i, 

9,  II,  14,  10.  I  7.  .5,25.  |8.  21,  2H.  101.6.  122. 
27.  I  23.  8,  13,  18  25, 27,  36,  37.  I  24. 7.  ^Tum. 
l.V  3,  10,  13,  14.  j  IH.  17.  I  28.  3. 

Lev.  2.  3.  the  ofr.ring^  of  th.^  I,ord  made  hy  f. 

10.  I  4.  35.  I  .5.  12.  I  6.  17,  18.  I  7.  30,  l5.  I 
10.  12,  1.5.  I  21.  21.,  1  24.  9.  Deul.  18.  1. 
1  Sam.  2.  28. 

10.13.»nrrificcamn'/cfti//.JW'n.Q8.0.  .7o.9/i.13  14 

J^um.  15  25.  bring  thiMr  Kurrifire  made  h'l  f.  iinlo 

the  Lord,  28.  fi,  8,  13,  19,  24.  |  20.  6,  13,  36. 

Pillar  of  FIRK. 

F.Tod.  14.  24.  the  Lord  looked  ihro'  IhopWar  off. 

yJco.lO.l.faceaslhesiin.nnd  his  feet  aspiHuri  off. 

See,  Hy  NioiiT. 

Send,  OT  sent  FIRR. 

Lam.  1.  13.  from  above  h^  sent  f.  into  my  bone«  | 

204 


FIR 

Eiek.  39.  6.  and  I  will  send  a/,  on  Magog 

/Jos.  8.  14.  but  I  will  send  a/,  upon  his  cities 

Jiinos  1.  4. 1  will  send  a/,  into  the  house  of  iiazael 
7.  1  will  send  a/,  on  the  wall  ol  Gu/.a 
10. 1  will  send  a  f. on  wall  of  Tyrus||  12.ori  Teman 
2.2.1  will»c7((ia/.onMoab  ||  5.  6t«(//.on  Judah 

L,uke  12.  49.  I  aiu  come  to  sendf.  on  iliu  earth 
Set  FIKE. 

Deut.  32.  22.  set  on/,  foundations  of  mountains 

Josh.  b.  8.  ye  shall  set  the  city  of  Ai  on/. 
19.  and  they  hasted,  and  set  the  city  on  /. 

Judg.  1.  8.  now  Judah  had  set  Jerusalem  on/. 
9.  49.  the  jieople  set  the  hold  on  /.  upon  them 
15.5.  had  j>'ct  the  brands  on/,  and  burnt  the  corn 
20.48.  they  set  on/,  all  the  cities  of  Beiijaiiiiii 

2  Sam.  14.  30.  servants  set  Joab's  field  on/. 
31.  why  have  thy  serva'nts  set  my  field  on/.? 

2  Kings  8.  12.  Hazael  will  set  strong  holds  on/. 

Psal.  57.  4.  I  lie  among  them  that  aie  set  ou/. 

Prov.  29.  t  8.  scornful  men  set  a  city  on/. 

Isa.  27.  11.  the  women  come  and  set  tlieni  on/. 
42.  25.  he  hath  set  him  on  /.  round  about 

Jer.  6.  1.  set  uj)  a  sign  of/,  in  Beth-hacccreni 
32.  29.  the  Chaldeans  shall  set  on/,  this  city 

Ezek.  30.  8.  when  I  have  set  a/,  in  Egypt 

14.  I  will  setf.  in  Zoan  ||  16.  self,  in  Egypt 
39.  9.  set  on/,  and  burn  the  weapons  of  Gog 

Jam.  3.  6.  the  tongue  is  a  fire,  and  scltith  on  /.  the 
course  of  nature,  and  it  is  set  on/,  of  hell 
Strange  FIRE. 

Lev-  10.  1.  Nadab  and  Abiliu  oftered  strange  f. 

M'um.'S.i.  died  «  hen  they  otiered  strange f.  26.61. 
FIREBRAND,  S. 

Jndg.  7.  1 16.  and  he  J'ut/.  within  the  pitchers 
15.  4.  Samson  took/,  and  put  a/,  in  the  midst 

Prov.  26.  18.  as  a  mad  man  who  casteih  /. 

Isa.  7.  4.  for  the  two  tails  of  these  smoking/. 

Mmos  4. 11.  ye  were  as  a  /.  plucked  out  of  burning 
FIRE  PANS. 

Kxod.  27.3.  thou  shalt  make  basins  tii\i\  f.-pans 
38.3.  he  made  the /.-^uns  and  all  vessels  of  brass 

2  Kings'Z5.15.f.-pavs  carried  he  away,  Jcr.52.19. 
FIRES. 

Isa.  24. 15.  wherefore  glorify  ye  the  Lord  in  the  /. 
FIRKINS. 

./oA?^  2. 6.  six  water-pots  containing  two  or  three/. 
FIRM. 

Josh.  3.  17.  the  priests  stood  /.  on  dry  ground 
4.  3.  the  place  where  priests'  feet  stood/. 

./ob  4J.23.  are/,  in  themselves,  cannot  be  moved 
24.  Iiis  heart  is  as/,  as  a  stone,  yea,  as  hard 

Psal.~'.i.i.  no  bands  in  death,  but  their  strength  is/. 

/Jan.  6.  7.  they  coiisiilicd  to  make  a/,  decree 

Ileb.  3.  6.  the  njniiing  of  Ihe  hope/,  to  the  end 
FIRMAMENT. 

It  is  said,  Gen.  1.  7.  that  God  made  the  firma- 
ment in  the  midst  of  the  waters,  in  order  to 
separate  the  inferior  from  the  superior  wa- 
ters. The  word  there  used  is  rakiah,  which  is 
translated  cx[ta.i\a\on, something  expanded;  or 
firmament,  something  firm  and  solid.  The  verb 
rakah,  from  whence  rakiah  is  dirived,  signi- 
fies to  spread  metal  with  the  hammer,  to  make 
fiat,  to  crvsh  to  pieces,  to  beat.  Moses  uses 
this  word  to  describe  the  gold,  which  was 
beaten  in  order  to  cover  the  ark  and  the  tattle.-- 
of  the  Holy  with  it,  Exod.  39.  3.  Num.  16.  38, 
39.  Isaiah,  to  denote  the  plates  of  gold  where- 
with the  idols  were  covered,  Isa.  40.  19.  and 
the  Slime  prophet,  and  the  Psalmist,  to  express 
the  spreading  forth  of  the  earth,  and  its 
fioiiting  on  the  waters,  for  this  was  the  eon 
ception  which  t/ie  Hebrews  had  of  it,  Isa.  42. 
.5.  Psal.  136.  6. 

This  intimates,  that  hy  the  word  firmament,  rn- 
ki:ih,  the  Hebrews  iindirstood  Ihe  hratuns, 
which,  tike  a  solid  and  immense  arch  {though 
it  be  soft  and  liquid)  served  as  a  bonk  and 
barrier  between  the  upper  and  lower  waters  ; 
and  that  the  stars  are  set  in  this  arch,  like  so 
many  precious  .stones  in  gold  and  sitrer,  Gen. 
1. 17.  IVhen  firmament  is  taken  for  the  starry 
heaven,  then  hy  upper  waters  is  meant,  that 
sea  or  cnlt'ction  of  waters  placed  by  God 
above  all  the  visible  heavens,  and  tliere  re- 
served for  ends  known  to  himself.  If  hy  fir- 
maineni,  we  understand  the  air.  railed  the  ex- 
|)an8ion,  because  it  is  citrnded  far  and  wide; 
and  the  firmament,  because  it  is  fixed  in  its 
proper  place,  from  irhmre  it  cannot  he  moved, 
unless  by  force ;  thin  hy  the  superior  waters 
are  to  he  understood  the  waters  in  the  clouds : 
JInd  these  may  he  said  to  he  nhnve  the  firma- 
ment or  air,  because  they  are  above  a  considir- 
nble  part  of  it. 

Gev.  1.  6.  let  there  be  a/,  in  midst  of  tlio  water* 

7.  God  made  the/,  waters  under  and  above/. 

8.  nn<l  God  called  the/.  Heaven 

14.  God  said,  let  there  bi-  lighu  in  the/.  15. 
17.  and  God  set  tlicm  in  tlic/.  of  heaven  | 


FIR 

Gen. 1.20.  and  fowl  that  may  fly  above  the  open/. 
I'sal.  19.  1.  and  the/,  sheweth  his  handy  work 
150.  1.  praise  him  in  the/,  of  his  power 
Kzek.  1.  22.  llie  likeness  of  the/,  was  as  crystal 

25.  there  was  a  voice  from  the/,  over  their  headt 

26.  above  the/,  was  the  likeness  of  a  throne 
10.  1.  in  the/,  that  was  above  the  cheiubims 

Dan.  12.3.  wise  shall  shine  as  the  brightness  off 

FIR. 

1  kings  5.  8.  I  will  do  all  concerning  timber  of/ 

6.  15.  he  covered  the  floor  with  planks  of/. 

Cant.  1. 17.  our  beams  are  cedar,  our  raftera  of/ 

FIR-TREE. 

1  Kings  6.  34.  and  the  two  doors  were  of/. 

2  Chron.  3.  5.  the  greater  house  he  ceiled  with/. 
/sa.41. 19. 1  will  set  in  the  desert  the/,  and  the  pine 

55.  13.  instead  of  tlie  thorn  shall  come  up  the/. 
60.  13.  the/,  the  pine-tree,  and  box  together 
//o».14.8. 1  am  like  a  green/.  ||  Zec/i.IlJJ.  howl,/. 
FIR-'IRLES. 

1  Kings  5.  10.  so  Hirain  gave  Solomon/.  9.  11. 

'i Kings  19.  23.  I  will  cut  down  tall/.  Isa.  37.24. 

2  Chron.  2.  8.  send  ine  /.  ||  Isa.  14.  8.  the  /.  rejoice 
Psal.  104.  17.  as  for  the  stork  the  /.  are  her  house 
/;:</i-.27.5.  they  made  thy  ship-boards  of/.  ofSenir 

31.  6.  the/,  were  not  like  his  boughs 
JVaA.  2.  3.  and  the/,  shall  be  terribly  shaken 

FIR-WOOD. 
2  Sam.  6.  S.Israclplaved  on  instruments  made  of/. 

FIRST. 
This  word  signifies,  I.  That  which  is  before  ano- 
ther in  resptct  of  time ;  and  then  it  ts  a  word 
of  order,  and  hath  a  reference  to  the  second, 
third,  fourth,  &c.  Mat.  10.  2,  The  first  is 
Simon  called  Peter  ;  that  is,  he  was  first  caUed 
to  be  an  apostle.  Jlnd  in  1  Cor.  15.  47,  The 
first  man  is  of  the  earth,  the  second  is  from 
heaven.  II.  That  which  is  chief ,  or  most  ex- 
cellent. Rom.  3.  2,  Chiefly,  because  unto  them 
were  committed  the  oracles  of  God.  Chiefly, 
in  the  original,  is  first,  and  shews  the  quality 
and  crcellence  of  the  privilege  here  mentioned. 
So  also  in  Luke  15.  22,  Bring  forth  the  best, 
in  Greek,  the  first  robe.  A  thing  or  person 
may  be  said  to  be  first,  (1)  In  number.  Gen.  8. 
5,  13.  (2)  In  order,  Mat.  28.  1.  (3)  By  cre- 
ation, 1  Cor.  15.  47.  (4)  By  generation,  Deut. 
21.17.  {5)  In  dignity,  Hw.&.i.  [6)  Jn  time, 
Heb.  9.  1. 
FiKsT-BoRN.  This  word  is  not  always  to  b$ 
understiiod  strictly  according  to  the  Utter  ;  it 
is  sometimes  taken  for  that  which  is  first,  most 
eicellcnt,  most  distinguished  in  any  thing. 
Thus  it  is  said  of  Christ,  Col.  1.  15,  That  he 
is  the  first-born  of  every  creature.  Jlnd  in 
Rev.  1.  5.  he  is  called,  The  first-begotten  of 
the  dead  ;  that  is,  begotten  of  tlie  Father  be- 
fore any  cnature  was  produced;  and  the 
first  who  rose  from  the  dead  hyhis  own  power. 
The  first-born  of  the  poor,  Isa.  14.  30.  signi- 
fiis,  the  most  miserable  of  all  the  poor;  and 
in  .lob  18.  13,  The  first-horn  of  dealli ;  that  is, 
tlie  most  terrible  of  all  deaths. 
The  fir^t•born  among  the  lit  brews,  as  veil  as 
among  all  other  nations,  enjoyed  particular 
privileges :  and  as  polygamy  was  in  use  witii 
them,ii  was  h  iglihj  neci  ssary  to  fix  theserights. 
Mos(  s  regulati.-'  this  particular  in  Deut.  21.15, 
16,17.  The  pri cilrges  of  the  dtil-horn  consisted, 
(I)  In  a  right  to  the  priesthood,  which,  before 
the  law,  was  fixed  to  the  eldest  of  the  family. 
This  light  continued  in  force  only  while  brc- 
thren  dwelt  together  in  the  same  place  and  fa 
mily;  for  as  sotiti  as  they  were  separated,  and 
made  a  family  apart,  every  one  became  tha 
priist  and  hiad  iif  his  ownhouse.  (2)  7'Af  first- 
born hnd  a  double  portion  among  his  brethren. 
This  is  eiplained  two  ways:  Some  hel ieve  that 
half  of  the  whole  inheritance  was  given  to  tAs 
eldrrbrother,and  thatthcother  half  was  shared 
in  equal  parts  among  the  rest.  But  the  Rabbin* 
say,  on  the  contrary,  that  the  first-born /or  his 
share  took  twice  as  muth  as  any  one  of  his 
brothers.  If  a  father  lift  sir  sons,  they  made 
a  division  into  seven  equal  parts  ;  whereof  the 
eUirt  had  two,  and  each  of  Ike  others  one.  If 
the  eldest  was  dead,  and  had  left  children,  hi.i 
right  devolved  upon  his  children  and  his  heirs.  ^ 

lyhen  Gnd  hy  the  sword  of  the  destroying  nngrl 
hnd  killed  all  the  first- born  o/  (/if  Kgyplianii, 
Fiod.  12.  29.  he  ordained,  that  all  ihe  first- 
born, both  of  men  and  tame  beasts  for  service, 
should  he  consecrated  to  him.  The  mole-chil- 
drrn  only  irrre  subject  to  this  law.  The  chil 
dren  were  ofi^-ed  in  the  temple,  and  their  relet 
tions  redeemed  them,  for  thesum  offiveshekcls, 
Exod.  13.  12,  13.  Num.  18.  16. 
ff  it  were  a  clean  beast,  as  a  calf,  f  lamb,  or  a 
kid,  it  was  In  he  ofl'ired  at  'Ac  temple.  II  was 
not  to  bt  redeemed,  but  it  was  killed;  the  ileud 


FIR 

of  it  was  sprinkled  about  the  altar,  the  fat  nas 
burnt  i/i  Uie  fire  upon  Ike  altar,  and  the  Jiesh 
was  for  tiie priest,  Num.  18.  17,  18,  19.  Jf  it 
were  an  unclean  beast,and  such  as  they  were  not 
allowed  to  eat,  such  as  a  horse,  an  ass,  or  a 
camel,  it  was  either  redeemed,  or  somcthinir  else 
was  giocn  in  ezchange  for  il.  The  firstling  of 
an  ass  was  redeemed  by  giving  a  lamb  ;  if  it 
were  not  redeemed,  it  icas  to  be  killed,  E.x.  13.13. 

First-Fruits.  The  presents  were  so  called 
which  the  Hebrews  made  to  Qod,  consisting  of 
part  of  the  fruits  of  their  harvest,  to  express 
their  submission  and  dependence,  and  to  ac- 
knowledge the  sovereign  dominion  of  God  the 
author  of  allhuppiness.  Theday  after  the  feast 
of  the  Passover  tkry  brought  a  sheaf  into  the 
temple,  as  the  tiret-t'riiils  of  the  barley-harvest. 
The  sheaf  was  threshed  in  the  court ;  and  of  the 
grain  that  came  out  they  took  a  full  homer;  that 
is,  about  three  pints.  Jifter  it  had  been  well 
winnowed, parchcd,and  bruised,  they  sprinkled 
over  it  a  log  of  oil ;  that  is,  near  a  pint.  They 
added  to  it  a  handful  of  i7icense ;  and  the  priest 
that  received  this  offering  shook  it  before  the 
Lord  towards  the  four  quarters  of  the  world ; 
he  cast  part  of  it  upon  the  altar,  and  the  rest 
was  his  own.  J]fter  this,  every  one  might  begin 
their  harvest,  Lev.  23.  10,  11,  &c.  This  was 
offered  in  the  name  of  the  whole  nation,  and  by 
this  the  whole  harvest  was  sanctified  unto  them. 

JVhen  the  wheat  harvest  was  over,  that  is,  the 
day  of  Pentecost,  they  offered  again  tirst-IVuits 
ef  another  kind  in  the  name  of  all  the  nation, 
which  consisted  of  two  loaves  of  two  tenth- 
deals;  that  is,  of  about  three  pints  of  flour  each. 
These  loaves  were  made  of  leavened  dough. 
First-fruits  of  the  Spirit,  see  Earnest. 

Oen.  25.  25.  the  /.  came  out  red  all  over 
2t).  1.  there  was  a  famine  beside  the/,  famine 
38.  28.  the  midwife  said,  this  came  out/. 

Exod.  4.  8.  if  they  will  not  hearken  to  the  /.  sign 

23. 19.  the/,  of  the  first-fruits  bring  to  the  Lord 
28.  17.  the/,  row  shall  be  a  sardius,  39.  10. 

34.  1.  two  tables  like  to  the/.  4.  Deut.  10.  1,  3. 
J^ev.  5.  8.  shall  otfer  what  is  for  the  sin-otl'eriiig/. 
JtTam.  2.  9.  camp  of  Judah,  these  shall/,  set  forth 

10.  13.  and  they  /.  took  their  journey 

13.  20.  it  was  the  time  of  the/,  ripe  grapes 

15.  20.  ye  shall  otfer  up  a  cake  of  the  /.  of  your 
dough  for  a  heave-offering,  21.  Kzek.  44.  30. 

18.  13.  whatsoever  is/,  ripe  shall  be  thine 
24.  20.  Amaiek  was  the/,  of  the  nations 
Deut.  10.  10.  according  to  the  /.  time,  forty-days 

11.  14.  I  will  give  thee/,  rain,  and  latter  rain 
13.  9.  thine  hand  shall  be/,  upon  him 

17. 7.  the  hands  of  witnesses  shall  be/,  upon  him 
18.  4.  the/  of  the  fleece  of  thy  sheep  give  him 
33.  21.  he  provided  the/,  part  for  himself 

Jo.^h.-2l.  10.  theirs  was/,  lot,  1  Chr.  24.  7.  |  25.  9. 

Jtidg.  1.  1.  who  shall  go  up/,  to  fight,  20.  18. 
20.  39.  Israel  are  smitten  as  in  the  /.  battle 

1  Sam.  14.  14.  that/,  slaughter  was  twenty  men 
35.  the  same  was  the  /.  altar  Saul  built  to  Lord 

25a7rt.3.13.exceptlhou/.bringMichalSaul'sdaugh. 

19. 20.  I  am  come  the/,  this  day  to  meet  my  lord 
43.  that  advice  should  not  be/,  had  in  bringing 

23. 19.  he  was  their  captain,  howbeit  he  attained 

not  unto  the/,  three,  23.  1  Chron.  11.  21,  25. 

1  Kings  17.  13.  but  make  thereof  a  little  cake/. 

18.  25.  and  dress  it/,  for  ye  are  many 

20.  17.  the  young  men  of  the  princes  went  out/. 

1  Chron.  9.  2.  now  the/,  inhabitants  that  dwelt 

11.  6.  whosoever  smiteth  the  Jebusltes/. 
IB.  7.  that  day  David  delivered/,  this  psalm 

2  Chron.  ^.  3.  length  by  cubits  after  the/,  measure 
F.zra  3. 12.  that  had  seen  the  glory  of  the  /  house 
Ksth.  1.  14.  which  sat  the/,  in  the  kingdom 

Job  15.  7.  art  thou  the/,  man  that  was  born? 

Prou. 18.17.  that  ia/.  in  his  own  cause  eeemeth  just 

Isa.  41.  27.  the/,  shall  say  to  Zion,  behold  them 
43.  27.  thy/,  father  hath  sinned  against  me 
60.  9.  the  ships  of  Tarshish  /.  to  bring  thy  sons 

Jer.  4.  31.  her  that  bringeth  forth  her/,  child 

16.  18./.  I  will  recompense  their  iniquity 
24.2.  good  figs,  even  like  the  figs  that  are/,  ripe 
36.  28.  write  the  words  that  were  in  the/,  roll 
50. 17./.  the  king  of  .Assyria  hath  devoured  him 

Dan.6.  2.  Dan.  was/  president,  of  an  excellent  sp. 

7.  4.  the  /.  beast  was  like  a  lion.  Rev.  4.  7. 
24.  and  anutiici  shall  be  diverse  from  the/. 

8.2).  the  great  horn  between  his  eyes  is  the/,  king 

10.  1 13.  but  Irt,  Michael  the/,  came  to  help  me 
Jfos.  2.  7.  I  will  go  and  return  to  my/,  husband 

9,  10.  the/,  ripe  in  the  fig-tree  at  her/,  time 
.  /Imos  6.  7.  shall  go  captive  with  the/,  that  go  capt. 
Jtfic.  4.  8.  to  Ihee  shall  come  the/,  dominion 
JVaA.  3.  12.  ike  fig-trees  with  the/,  ripe  figs 
Niig.^.Z.  who  is  left  that  saw  house  in  her/,  glory? 
7.eeh.  6.  2.  in  the/,  chariot  were  red  horses 

12.  7.  tlie  Lord  shall  save  the  tents  of  Judah/. 

203 


FIR 

J»fa<.5.24./.be  reconciled  to  thy  brother,  and  come 
G.  33.  seek  ye/,  the  kingdom  of  G.  and  righteous. 
7.5./.ca6toutthe  beam  out  of  thine  eyo,yyU/te<i.42. 

8.  21.  me/,  to  go  and  bury  my  father,  Luke  9.  59. 
12.29.except  he/.bind  the  strong  man,  Mark'i.T.. 

45.  latter  state  worse  than  the/,  l.uke  11.  20. 
13.  30.  gather  ye  together/,  tlie  tares,  bind  them 
17.  10.  that  Elias  must/,  come,  11.  Mark  9.  12. 

27.  and  take  up  the  fish  that/,  coineth  up 

20.  10.  but  when  the  /.  came,  they  supposed 

21.  28.  he  came  to  the/,  and  said,  son,  go  work 
31.  who  of  the  twain  1  they  say  unto  bun,  the/. 
36.  he  sent  other  servants  more  than  the  /. 

22.25./.  when  married,  Mark  12. 20.  l^uke  -JO.  29. 

38.  this  is  /.  commandment,  Mark  12.  28,  29, 30. 

23.  2ti.  Pharisee,  cleanse/,  that  which  is  within 

Jl/art  4.28. /.the  blade, then  the  ear,after  that  corn 

7.  27.  Jesus  said  to  her,  let  the  children  /.  be  filled 

9.  35.  if  any  desire  to  be/,  he  shall  be  last 

13.  10.  and  the  gos|iel  must/,  be  ])ublished 

16.  9.  he  appeared/,  to  Mary  Magdalene 
Lv.ke  1.  3.  had  perfect  understanding  from  the/. 

2.  2.  was/,  made  when  Cyrenius  was  governor 

6.  1.  on  the  second  sabbath  after  the/,  he  went 

10.  5.  /.  say,  peace  be  to  this  house 

11.  38.  that  he  had  not/,  washed  before  dinner 

14.  28.  sittelh  not  down/,  and  counleth  the  cost 

17.  25.  but/,  must  he  sutler  many  things 
21.  9.  for  tliese  things  must/,  come  to  pass 

John  1.  41.  he/,  fiudeth  his  brother  Snnon 

5.  4.  whosoever/.  slep])cd  in,  was  made  whole 

8.  7.  without  sin,  let  him  /.  cast  a  stone  at  lier 

10.  40.  into  the  place  where  John  at/,  baptized 

18.  13.  and  led  him  away  to  Annas/. 

19.  32.  soldiers  came,  and  brake  the  legs  of  the/. 

20.  4.  the  djsciple  came/,  to  the  sepulchre,  8. 
Acts  'i.  26.  to  you/. God  sent  him  to  bicts  you  in 

7.  12.  Jacob  sent  out  our  fathers/. 
11.26.discip.  were  called  Christians/,  at  Antioch 

12.  10.  they  were  past  the/,  and  second  ward 

13.  24.  when  John  had/,  preached  baptism 

46.  necessary  it  should  /.have  been  spoken  to  you 
16.  1 12.  Philippi  the/,  city  of  Macedonia 

26.  20.  but  shewed/,  unto  them  of  Damascus 
23.  Christ  should  be/,  that  should  rise  from  dead 

27.  43.  should  cast  themselves/,  into  the  sea 
Rom.  1.  8.  /.  I  thank  iny  God  through  Jesus  Christ 

2.  9.  of  the  Jew/,  and  also  of  the  Gentile,  10. 

11.  35.  or  who  hath/,  given  to  him? 

15.  24.  if/.  I  be  somewhat  filled  with  company 

1  Cor.  12.  28./.  apostles,  secondarily,  prophets 

14.  30.  let  the/,  hold  his  peace 

15.  3.  for  I  delivered/,  of  all  that  which  I  received 

45.  the/,  man  Adam  was  made  a  living  soul 

46.  howbeit  that  was  not/,  which  is  spiritual 

47.  the/,  man  is  of  the  earth,  earthy 

2  Cor.  8.  5.  /.  gave  their  own  selves  to  the  Lord 
12.  for  if  there  be/,  a  willing  mind,  it  is  accepted 

F.ph.  1.  12.  who/,  trusted  in  Christ 

4.  9.  descended  /.  into  the  lower  parts  of  the  earth 

6.  2.  which  is  the/,  commandment  with  promise 

1  Thess.  4.  16.  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise  /. 

2  Thess. 2.  3.  except  there  come  a  falling  away/. 

1  Tim.  1. 16.  that  in  me  /.  Christ  Jesus  might  shew 
2.  13.  for  Adam  was/,  formed,  then  Eve 

3. 10.  let  these  also/,  be  proved,  then  let  them  use 

5.  4.  let  them  learn/,  to  shew  piety  at  home 
12.  because  they  have  cast. oil' their/,  faith 

2  Tm.  1.5.  faith  dwelt/,  in  thy  grandmother  Lois 
2.  6.  husbandman  must  be/  partaker  of  the  fruits 

4.  16.  at  my/,  answer  no  man  stood  with  me 
Tit.  3.  10.  after  /.  and  second  admonition,  reject 
Heb.  4.  6.  to  whom  it  was  /.  preached,  entered  not 

5.  12.  one  teach  you  which  be  the/,  principles 
7.2./.  being  by  interpretation,  king  of  righteousn. 

27.  offer  /.  for  his  own  sins,  then  fur  the  people's 

8.  7.  the/  covenant,  13.  |  9.  1,  15,  18. 

9.  2./.  tabernacle,  wherein  was  shew-bread,  6,8. 

10.  9.  he  takelh  away  the  /.  that  he  may  establish 
.Ta/n.  3.  17.  wisdom  that  is  from  above,  is  /.  pure 

1  Pet.  4.  17.  if  judgment  /.  begin  at  us,  what  end 

2  Pet.  1.20.  knowing  this/,  that  no  prophecy,  3.  3. 
1  John  4.  19.  we  love  him,  because  he/,  loved  us 
,7udc  6.  the  angels  who  kept  not  their/,  estate 
Rev.  2.  4.  because  thou  hast  left  thy/,  love 

5.  repent,  and  do  the/,  works,  else  I  will  come 
13. 12.  he  exerciseth  all  the  power  of  the/,  beast 
20.  5.  this  is  the/,  resurrection 

21.1.  tKe/.  heaven  and/,  earth  were  passed  away 

19.  the/,  foundation  was  jasper,  second  sapphire 

See  Dav,  La.^t. 

At  the  FIRST. 

Gen.  13.4.  where  Abram  made  the  altnr  at  thcf. 

28.  19.  the  city  was  called  Liiz  at  the  f. 

43.  IS.  because  of  the  money  relumed  at  thcf. 

20.  we  came  down  indeed  at  the  f.  to  buy  food 
Deut.  9. 18. 1  fell  down  before  Lord  as  at  the  f.<25. 
Josh.  8.  5.  when  they  come  against  us  as  at  the  f. 

6.  they  will  say,  they  flee  before  us  as  at  the  f. 
Judg.  18. 29.  name  of  the  city  was  Laish  at  thef. 


FIR 

Judg.^.  32.  are  smitten  down  before  us  as  at  thif 
2  A'uvrt.  17.9.  someof  thwm  be  overthrown  at  thef 
1  Kings  20.9.  all  thou  didst  send  for  to  thy  eerv.  aif 
1  Chron.  15.  13.  because  ye  did  it  not  at  thef 
JVeA.  7. 5.  a  register  ol'lhem  which  came  up  at  thef. 
Isa.  1.  26.  1  will  restore  thy  judges  as  at  thef. 
9.  1.  when  at  thef.  he  liglitly  atilicted  the  land 
Jer.  7. 12.  my  place  where  I  set  my  name  at  thef 

33.  7.  «nd  1  will  build  them  as  at  tlie  f. 

11.  return  the  captivity  of  the  land,  as  at  thef 

Dan.  8. 1.  after  that  which  appeared  to  me  at  thef 

John  12.  16.  Ills  disciples  understood  not  at  thef. 

19.  39.  which  at  thef.  came  to  Jesus  by  night 

Jlcts  15.  14.  God  at  thef.  did  visit  the  Gentiles 

26.  4.  which  was  at  thef.  among  mine  own  nation 
(rul.i.  13. 1  preached  tlie  go.«iiel  unto  you,  at  thef. 
Heb.2. 3.  which  at  thef.  began  to  be  spoken  by  Ld 

FIRST- liURN. 
Gen.  19.  31.  the/,  said  to  the  younger,  34. 
33.  the/,  went  in,  and  lay  with  her  father 
37.  the/,  bare  a  son,  and  called  his  name  Moab 

27.  19.  and  Jacob  said,  I  am  Esau,  thy  /.  32. 
29.2(1.  not  done  to  give  the  younger  before  the/. 
43.  33.  the/,  according  to  his  birth-right 

48.  18.  not  BO  iny  father,  for  this  is  the/. 
Exod.i.^22.  sailh  Lord,  Israel  is  my  son,  even  my/. 
23.  behold,  I  will  slay  thy  son,  even  Ihy/. 

11.  5.  all  the  /.  in  the  land  of  Egypt  shall  die 

12.  12.  and  1  will  smite  all  the/,  in  the  land 
29.  the  Lord  smote  all  the/,  in  Egypt,  13.  15. 

13.  2.  sanctify  unto  me  all  the/,  it  is  mine 

22.  29.  the/,  of  thy  sons  shalt  thou  give  to  me 

34.  20.  /.  of  thy  sons  shalt  redeem,  A''uvi.  18.  15 
Lev.  27.  t  26.  /.  of  beasts  no  man  shall  sanctify  it 
JV«m.  3. 12.  instead  of  all  the/.  41,  45.  \  8.  17,  18. 

13.  because  all  the  /.  of  Israel  are  mine,  I  hal- 

lowed to  me  all  the/,  of  Israel 
40.  number  all  the/,  of  the  males  of  Israel 
42.  Moses  numbered  all  the/  of  Israel 
50.  of  the/,  of  Israel  took  he  the  money 
33.  4.  for  the  Egyptians  buried  all  their/. 
Deut.  21.  15.  if  the/,  son  be  her's  ihatwas  hated 

17.  beginning  of  strength,  for  the  right  of/,  is  his 
2.5.  6./.  which  she  beareth,  succeed  in  name 

Josh.  6.  26.  shall  lay  the  foundation  in  his/. 
1  Kings  16.  34.  laid  foundation  in  Abiram  his/. 

1  Chr.  5. 1.  sons  of  Reuben  the  /  for  he  was  the/ 
26.  10.  though  he  was  not  the/,  yet  his  father 

2  Chron.  21.  3.  Jehoram,  because  he  was  the/. 
J^eh.  10.  36.  to  bring  the/,  to  the  house  of  God 
Job  18.  13.  the  /.  of  death  shall  devour  his  strength 
PsaZ.78.51.he  smoteall  the/,  in  Egvpt,  the  chief  of 

their  strength,  105.  36.  [  135.  8.  |  136. 10. 
89.27.  will  make  him  my/,  higher  than  kings 
Isa.  14.  30.  and  the/,  of  the  poor  shall  feed 
Jer.  .SI.  9. 1  am  a  father  to  Israel,  Ejilnaim  is  my/. 
Alic.  6.  7.  shall  I  give  my  /.  fur  my  tran.--gression  1 
Zech.  12.  10.  as  one  in  bitterness  for  his/. 
Mat.  1.25.  Mary  broughtfortli  her/,  son,  Luke^.l. 
Horn.  8.  29.  might  be  the/,  among  many  brethren 
Col.  1.  15.  who  is  the/,  of  every  creature 

18.  who  is  the  beginning,  the/,  from  the  dead 
//e4.11.28.  lesthe  that  destroyed  the/,  touch  them 

12.  23.  ye  are  come  to  the  church  of  the/. 

FIRST-FRUIT,  or  fruits. 
F.xod.  22.  29.  not  delay  to  offer  the/,  ripe  fruits 
23. 16.  the  f. -fruits  of  thy  labour  thou  hast  sown 

19.  first  of/. -/rKiti  of  thy  land,  34.26. /JciiJ.26.2. 
34.22.  the  least  of  the /.-/ru?7s  of  wheat-harvest 

Lev.  2.  12.  oblation  of  the  f. -fruits  ye  shall  offer 

14.  the  meat-oflTering  of  f. -fruits,  green  ears 

23.  JO.  bring  a  sheaf  of  the  f. -fruits  of  harvest 

17.  they  are  the  f. -fruits  unto  the  Lord 

20.  wave  them  with  the  bread  o(  ihe  f. -fruits 
J^um.lB.  Vi.f.fr.  ofoil,  wine,  wheat,  I  have  given 

28.  26.  in  the  day  of f. -fruits  when  ye  oflTer  to  Ld. 
Deut.  18.  4.  l]ic  f. -fruits  of  thy  corn,  wine,  and  oil 

26.  10.  I  have  brought  ihe  f.-frvits  of  Ihe  land 
2  Kings  ^.42.  and  brought  i he  manofGod/.-/ru(7s 
2  Chron.  31.  5.  brought  in  abundance  Ihcf.-fruits 
JVrh.  10.35.  bring /.-/ru!(s  of  our  ground,  or  trees 
37.  we  should  bring  Iho  f. -fruits  of  our  dough 
12.44.appointed  over  chambers  for/.-/rM(7s,13.31, 
Prov.  3.  9.  honour  Ihe  Lord  with  ihe  f .-fruits 
Jer.  2.  3.  Israel  was  the  f. -fruits  of  his  increase 
F.iek.  20.  40.  there  will  I  require  Ihe  f. -fruits 
44  30.  the  first  of  all  thcf.-fruits  of  all  things 
48.  14.  nor  exchange  the  f.- fruits  of  the  land 
Amos  6.  t  !•  named  the  f. -fruits  of  the  nations 
Mic.  7.  1.  my  soul  desired  the/,  ripe  fruit 
Rom.  8.23.  which  have  the/.-/7-«i7.s  of  the  Spirit 
11.  16.  if  the  f .-fruit  he  holy,  the  lump  is  holy 
16. 5.  who  is  the  f. -fruits  of  Acliaia,  1  Cor.  16. 15. 
Z  Cor.  15. 20.  Christ/.-/r?(((,«  of  them  thiit  jkpt,  23 
Jam.  1.  18.  a  kind  of  f. -fruits  of  his  creatures 
Rev.  14.  4.  being  ihcf.frnits  unto  God  and  Lamb 

FIRST  month. 
<7cn.8. 13.  in  the/.  montA,  the /.day  of  the  monf  A 
ET,orf.]2.2.  shall  be  the/,  month  of  the  year  to  you 

18.  inf.  month  eat  unleavened  bread,  Lev.  23. 5 


FIS 

Exod.  40. 2.  first  day  of/,  month  set  up  taoem.  17. 

Ji"u,m.  9. 1.  in  yhaf. month  keep  tho  passover,  'Jd-IG. 
iJ  Chrun.  35.  1.  Ezra  6.  19.  ^zeA.  45.  iX. 
20. 1.  came  into  tlie  desert  of  Zin  in  the/,  month 
33.  3.  dei)arted  from  Rameses  in  the  /.  month 

Josh.  4.  19.  people  came  out  of  Jordan  in/,  month 

1  Chron.  li.  15.  these  went  over  Jordan  in /.month 
27.  2.  the  captain  that  served  the/,  month,  3. 

2  CAron.  29.  3.  in  the  /.  month  opened  ilie  doors 

of  tlie  house  of  the  Lord 

17.  they  began  on  first  day  of/,  month  to  sanctify, 
and  in  the  lOtli  day  of/  mo7Uh  made  an  end 

Ezra  7.  9.  /.  mon^A  began  he  to  go  from  Babylon 
8.  31.-tiie/.  month  we  departed  from  Ahava 
10. 17.  they  made  an  end  with  tliem  by/,  month 
Esth.  3.  7.  in  tlie  /.  month  they  cast  Pur,  on  the 
thirteenth  day  of  the/,  month 
Ezek.45. 18.  inthe/.  mon<Atake  a  young  bullock 
Joel  2. 23.  cause  former  and  latter  rain  in  /.  montk 

FIRST  year. 

Eiod.  12.5.  your  lambs  shall  be  male  of  the/.i/ear 

29.  38.  orter  two  lambs  of  the/,  year,  day  by  day 

continually,  J.ev.  23. 19.  J^um.  28.  3,  9. 

Lev.  9. 3.  take  a  kid  of  the/,  year  without  blemish 

12.  6.  he  shall  bring  a  lamb  of  the/.  year,M'um. 

6.  12.  1  7.  15,  21,  27,  33,  39,  45,  51,  57,  b3, 

69,  75,  81.  Eiek.  46.  13. 

14. 10.  take  a  ewe-lamb  of  the/,  year,  JVum.  6.14. 

23. 12.  offer  a  he  iamb  of  the  /.  year,  JVum.  6. 14. 

18.  ye  shall  offer  seven  lambs  of  the/,  j/.  without 

blemish,  J\rum.  28.  11,  19,  27.  |  29.  2,  8,30. 

JViim.  7. 17.  for  a  peace-offering  five  lambs  of  the 

/.  year,  23,  29,  35,  41,  47,  53,  59. 

87.  the  lambs  of  the/,  year  twelve  for  burnt-oiler. 

88.  the  lambs  of  the/year  si.\ty  for  a  peace-offer. 
15. 27.  then  he  shall  bring  a  she-goat  of  the/  year 
29.  13.  offer  a  burnt-offering,  fourteen  lambs  of 

the/,  year,  17,  20,  23,  26,  29,  32. 
2CAr.  29.  3.  Hezekiah  in  the/,  year  of  his  reign 

36.22.  in/,  year  of  Cyrus,  Ezral.  1.  1  5. 13.  |  6.  3. 
Jcr.  25.  1.  that  was  the/ j^car  of  Nebuchadnezzar 

52. 31.  in  the/ 7/earof  thereignof  Evil-merodach 

X)an.l.21.  Daniel  continued  to  the/,  year  of  Cyrus 

7. 1.  in  the  /.  year  of  Belshazzar  Daniel  dreamed 

9.1.  in /year  of  Darius  I  understood  by  books,  2. 

11.  1.  in  the/,  year  of  Darius  I  stood  to  confirm 

FIRSTLING. 

Ezod.  13. 12.  slialt  set  apart  every  /.  that  cometh  of 

a  beast,  the  males  shall  be  the  Lord's,  34. 19. 

13.  every/  of  an  ass  thou  shalt  redeem,  34.  20. 

J^ev.  27.  26.  the  Lord's/  no  man  shall  sanctify  it 

JVum.  18. 15.  the/  of  unclean  beasts  shalt  redeem 

17.  the/,  of  a  cow,  sheep,  or  goat,  not  redeem 
Deut.  15.  19.  all  the/  males  sanctify  to  the  Lord 
33.  17.  Joseph's  glorv  is  like  the/,  of  a  bullock 

FIRSTLINGS. 

Clen.  4.  4.  Abel  brought  of  the/,  of  his  flock 

JVum.  3.  41.  instead  of  all  the/,  among  the  cattle 

/)cu£. 12. 6.  ye  shall  bring/of  your  herds  and  Hocks 

17.  thou  mayest  not  eat  within  thy  gates  the/ 

14.23.  eat  the/,  in  the  place  the  Lord  shall  choose 
JVcA.10.36. /.of  our  herds  bring  to  the  house  of  God 

FISH. 
f7en.l.26.1et  them  have  dominion  ovcr/.of  sea,  28. 
Ezod.  7.  18.  the/,  in  the  river  shall  die,  21. 
J^um.  11. 5.  we  rememb.  the  /.  we  did  eat  in  Egypt 
22.  shall  all  the/,  of  the  eca  be  gathered  together 
Dmt.  4.  18.  nor  likeness  of  any/  in  tho  water 
JVcA.  13.  16.  men  of  Tyre  also,  which  brought/ 
Psal  8.  8.  thou  hast  put  the/  under  his  feet 
105. 20,  turned  waters  into  blood,  and  slew  their/ 
Isa.  19.  10.  all  that  make  sluices  and  ponds  for/ 
50.  2.  their/,  stinkoth  because  there  is  no  water 
Ezek.  29.  4. 1  will  cause  the/  to  stick  to  thy  scales 
5.  I  will  leave  thee,  and  all  the/,  of  thy  rivers 
47.9.and  there  shall  be  a  very  great  multitude  of/ 

10.  their/,  shall  be  as  tho/  of  the  great  sea 
Jonah  1.17.  the  Ld.  had  prepared  a  great/,  to  swal- 
low up  Jonah,  he  was  in  belly  of/  three  days 
2. 1.  Jonah  prayed  to  the  Lord  out  of  tho/.'s  belly 
10.  Lord  spake  to  the/and  it  vomited  out  Jonah 
Mat."}.  10.  if  he  ask  a/,  will  he  give  him  a  serpent? 
17. 27.  cast  a  hook,  take  up  the/that  first  cometh 
ZiUic  24.  42.  they  gave  him  a  piece  of  a  broiled/. 
John  21.  9.  they  saw/,  laid  thereon,  and  bread 
10.  bring  of  the/,  which  ye  have  now  caught 
13.  Jc»ua  taketh  bread,  and  givoth  them,  and/ 
PISH. 
Jer.  16. 16.  will  selid  fishers,  and  they  shall/,  them 

FISH-GATE. 
2C%r.33. 14.  MBnacsehbiiill  on  entering of/.-/!'nf>! 
JVeA.3.  3.  ihe/.-/fn<''did  sons  of  Hassenaah  build 

12.  39.  and  I  after  them  from  above  tho  f.-frate 
Zepk.  1.  10.  the  noise  of  a  cry  from  the  f.-gate 

FISH-HOOKS. 
JimoB  4. 2. 1  will  take  voiir  posterity  with  f. -hooks 

FISH-POOLS. 
Ctnt.T.  4.  thine  eves  like  the  f.-poola  of  Heshbon 

FISH-SPR.VRS. 

Job  41.  7.  canst  thou  fill  his  head  with  f. -spears? 

206 


Fnr 

FISHERMEN. 
L,uke  5.  2.  but  the/,  were  gone  out  of  them 

FISHERS. 
Isa.  19.  8.  the/,  also  shall  mourn  and  lament 
Jer.m.m.  behold,  I  will  send  for  niany/.saith  Lord 
Ezek.  47.  10.  that  the/,  shall  stand  upon  it 
JUat.i.  18.  net  into  sea,  for  they  were/.  Mark  1.16. 

19.  I  will  make  you/,  of  men,  Mark  1.  17. 
JoAn21.7.  Peter  girt/coat  to  him,  for  he  was  nuked 

FISHES. 
Oen.9. 2.  the  fear  of  you  shall  be  on  all/,  of  the  sea 
48.  1 16.  let  the  lads  grow  as/,  do  increase 
1  Kings  4.  33.  he  spake  of  creeping  things  and  /. 
.lob  12.  8.  the/  of  the  sea  shall  declare  unto  thee 
Eccl.  9.  12.  the/,  that  are  taken  in  an  evil  net 
Ezek.  38.  20.  so  that  the/,  of  the  sea  shall  shake 
Hos.  4.  3.  the  /  of  the  sea  shall  be  taken  away 
Hab.  1.  14.  and  makest  men  as  the/,  of  the  sea 
jCeph.  1.  3.  I  will  consume  the/,  of  the  sea 
Mat.  14.  17.  we  have  here  but  five  loaves  and 
two/.  Mark  6.  38.  Luke  9.  13.  John  6.  9. 
15.  34.  seven  loaves  and  a  few  httle/  Mark  8.  7. 
Luke  5.  6.  they  inclosed  a  great  multitude  of/. 

9.  for  he  was  astonished  at  the  draught  of/. 
John  21.6.  not  able  to  draw  it  for  multitude  of/ 
11.  Simon  Peter  drew  net  to  land  full  of  great/. 
1  Cor.  15.  39.  one  flesh  of  beasts,  another  ol  /. 

FISHING. 
John  21.3.  Simon  Peter  sailh  unto  them,  I  go  a/. 

FISHV. 
1  Sam.  5.  t4.  the/,  part  of  Dagon  was  left  to  him 

FIST,  S. 
Exod.  21.  18.  and  one  smite  another  with  his/. 
Prov.  30.  4.  who  hath  gathered  the  wind  in  bis/? 
Isa.  58.  4.  and  to  smite  with  the/,  of  wickedness 
Mark  7.  t3.  they  wash  their  hands  with  the/. 

FIT. 
Lev.  16.21.  send  him  away  by  the  hand  of  a/,  man 
1  C'Ar«n.7. 11./  to  go  oulto  war  and  battle,  12.8. 
.lob  34. 18.  is  it/,  to  say  to  a  king,  thou  art  wicked? 
Prov-  24.  27.  make  it/,  for  thyself  in  the  field 
Ezek.  15.  5.  the  vine  was  made/  for  no  work 
/,u/ic9. 62.  looking  back,  is/,  for  kingdom  of  God 

14.  35.  it  is  not/,  fur  the  land  nor  dunghill 
Jlcts  22.  22.  it  is  not/  that  he  should  live 
Col.  3.  18.  wives,  submit  as  it  is/,  in  tlie  Lord 

FITCHES. 
Isa.  28.  25.  doth  he  not  cast  abroad  the/? 

27.  the/  are  not  threshed,/  are  beaten  out 
Ezek.  4.  9.  take  thou  wheat,  barley,  millet,  and  /. 

FITTED. 
1  Kings  6.  35.  with  gold  /  upon  the  carved  work 
Prov.  22.  18.  they  shall  withal  be/,  in  thy  lips 
Rom.  9.  22.  the  vessels  of  wrath/,  to  destruction 
Heb.  10.  1 5.  but  a  body  hast  thou/,  me 

FITTETH. 
Isa.  44.  13.  the  carpenter/,  it  with  planes 

FITLY. 
Prov.^.  11.  a  word /.spoken  is  like  apples  of  gold 
in  pictures  of  silver 
Cant.  5. 12.  his  eyes  washed  with  milk,  and  /  set 
Eph.  2.  21.  in  whom  all  building/,  framed  together 
4.  16.  from  whom  whole  body  /  joined  togethor 

FIVE, 
f? en. 14. 0.battle  in  valeofSiddiin, four  kings  with/. 
18.  28.  wilt  thou  destroy  all  for  lack  of/.? 
43.  34.  Ilenjaniin's  mess  was/,  times  so  much 
4.5.  6./.  years  in  which  no  earing  o.  harvest,  11. 
22.  to  Benjamin  he  gave/  changes  of  raiment 
47.  2.  he  presented/  of  his  brethren  to  Pharaoh 
Eiod.  13.  t  18.  but  Israel  went  up/  in  a  rank 
22.  1.  the  thief  shall  restore/  oxen  for  an  ox 

26.  3.  other/  curtains  coupled,  9.  |  36.  10,  16. 
26.  make  /.  bars  for  the  boards,  27.'  |  30.  31, 32. 
37./  pillars,  30.  38.  ||  36.  38./  sockets  of  brass 

27.  1.  an  altar/  cubits  long,/  cubits  broad 
18.  tho  height  of  the  hangings/  cubits,  38.  18. 

38.  1./  cubits  tho  breadth,  and/  the  length 
Lev.  26.  8./.  of  you  shall  chase  a  bundled 
27.  5.  if  thy  estimation  be  from/,  years  old 
6.  if  it  be  from  a  month  old  to/,  years  old 
JVum.  3.  47.  even  take/  shekels  apiece,  18.  16. 
7.  17.  for  a  sacrifice  of  peace-offerings,  /.  rams, 
/.  goats,  /.  lambs,  2;),  2<.t,  15,  41,  47,  53. 
31.8.  slew/.  kingsofMidian,  Balaam  son  of  llcor 
Josh.  1.  t  14.  ye  shall  pass  marshalled  by/. 
10.  5./.  kings  of  Amorites  went  ngairrst  Gibcon 
16.  these/,  kings  fled  and  hid  themselves 
17./.  kings  hid  ||  22.  bring  out  the/,  kings 
2.3.  they  brought  out  these/,  kings  unto  him 
26.  he  slew  them  and  hanged  them  on/,  trees 
13.  3./.  lords  of  the  Philistines,  Jnilg.  3.  3. 
Judg.  7.  t  II.  he  went  to  outsirle  of  ranks  by/. 

18.  2.  the  children  of  Dan  sent/,  men  from  coasts 
1  ■'^am.  6.  4./.  golden  emcrr>ds,/.  gciMen  mice 
16.  when  the/  lords  of  the  Philistines  had  seen  it 
17.  40.  David  chose  him  /.  smooth  stones 
21.  3.  give  mo/,  loaves  of  bread  in  my  hand 
25.  IH.  she  brought/,  sheep,/,  measures  of  corn 
42.  Abigail  rode  on  an  ass  with/,  dainscls 


FLA 

2  .Sam.  4.  4.  Mephibosheth  was  /.  years  old  whet 
tidings  came  of  Saul's  and  Jonathan's  dealb 
21.  8.  but  David  took  the/  sons  of  Michal 
\  Kings'. Jli.f.  bases  on  the  right,/,  on  the  leftside 
49.  candlesticks  of  pure  gold,  /.  on  the  right 
Bide,  and  /.  on  the  left,  2  Chron.  4.  7. 
2A''in^s6.25.partofcab  of  dove's  dung  sold/.piece« 
7. 13.  let  some  take/,  of  the  horses  that  remain 
13.  19.  thou  shouldest  have  smitten  /  or  six  times 
25.  19./  men  that  were  in  the  king's  priAence 

1  Chron.  2.  6.  the  sons  of  Zera,/.  of  them  in  all 
11.  23.  Benaiah  slew  an  Egyptian  /  cubits  high 

Isa.  17.  0.  four  or/  in  the  utmost  fruitful  branches 
19. 18. /.cities  in  Egypt  speak  language  of  Canaan 
30.  17.  at  the  rebuke  of/,  shall  ye  tiee 
Mat.  14. 17.  they  said  to  him,  we  have  here  but/. 
loaves  and  two  fishes,  Mark  6.  38.  Luke  9. 13. 
Ki.  9.  the/,  loaves  of  the/,  thousand,  Mark8. 19. 
25.  2./  of  them  were  wise,  and/,  were  foolish 

15.  and  unto  one  he  gave/  talents,  16. 
Luke  12.0.  are  not/.sparrows  sold  for  two  farthings 
52.  there  shall  be/,  in  one  house  divided 
14. 19.  another  said,  I  have  bought/yoke  of  oxen 
10. 28. send  him  to  my  father's,  I  have/,  brethren 

19.  18.  Lord,  thy  pound  hath  gained/,  pounds 
19.  be  thou  also  over  /.  cities 

.John  4.  18.  for  thou  hast  had  /  husbands 

5.  2.  there  is  a  pool  Betbesda  having/  porches 

6.  9.  there  is  a  lad  which  hath/,  bailey  loaves 
13.  with  the  fragments  of  the/,  barley-loaves 

lCor.14.19. 1  had  rather  speak/words  with  underg. 

2  Cor.  11.  24./.  times  received  I  forty  stripes 
Rev.  17.  10.  there  are  seven  kings,/  are  fallen 

FIVE-SQUARE. 

1  Kinirs  6.t31.  hntel  and  side-posts  were/.-s-juars 

FIXED. 

2  Chron.  12.  t  14.  Rehoboam/.  not  his  heart 
Pia/.  57.7. 0  God,  thy  heart  is /.I  will  sing,  108.1. 

112.  7.  his  heart  is/,  trusting  in  the  Lord 
Luke  16. 26.  between  us  and  you  there  is  a  gulf/. 

FLAG,  S. 
Ezod.  2.  3.  she  laid  the  ark  in  the/,  by  the  river 

5.  and  when  she  saw  the  ark  among  the/. 
.Job  8.  11.  can  the  /  grow  without  water  ? 
Isa.  19.  6.  the  reeds  and/  shall  wither 

P'L.WON. 
2  Sam.  6.  19.  to  each  a/,  of  wine,  1  Chron.  16.  3. 

FLAGONS. 
Cant.  2.  5.  stay  me  with  /.  comfort  me  with  applet 
Isa.  22. 24.  from  cups,  even  to  all  the  vessels  of/. 
Hos.  3.  1.  who  look  to  other  gods,  love/,  of  wine 

FLAKES. 
Job  41.  23.  the/,  of  his  flesh  are  joined  together 

FLAME. 
Exod.  3.2.  angel  appeared  in  a/,  of  fire,  j?cfs7.  30. 
.A'um.  21. 28.  a/  from  the  city  of  Sihon,  -ler.  48.45. 
Judg.  13. 2U.  when  /.  went  up,  angel  went  in  the/ 

20.  38.  that  they  should  make  a  great/,  to  rise 
40.  the/,  of  the  city  ascended  up  to  heaven 

./oh  15.  30.  the/,  shall  dry  up  his  branches 
41.  21.  and  a  /  goeth  out  of  his  mouth 
Psiil.  83. 14.  as  the  /.  setteth  the  mountains  on  fire 
106.  18.  the  /  burnt  up  the  wicked 
Cant.  8.  6.  coals  of  fire,  which  hath  a  vehement/. 
Isa.  5.  24.  and  as  the/  consunietb  the  chaff 
10.  17.  and  his  Holy  One  shall  be  for  a  /. 
29.6.  shalt  be  visited  with  the/  of  devouring  fire 
30. 1 27.  name  of  L.  comes  with  grievousness  of/. 
30.  the  Lord  shall  shew  his  arm  with  the  /. 
43.  2.  neither  shall  the/  kindle  upon  thee 
47.  14.  they  shall  not  deliver  themselves  from/. 
Ezek.  20.  47.  tho  flaming/,  shall  not  be  quenched 
/^«n.3.22./.  slew  those  men  that  look  upSlmdrach 
7.9.  his  throne  was  like  the  fiery/  and  his  wheels 

11.  till  his  body  was  given  to  the  burning/. 
11.33.  yet  they  shall  fiill  by  the  sword  and  by/. 
.loel  1. 19.  the/  hath  burnt  all  the  trees  of  the  field 
2.  3.  a  fire  devours,  and  behind  them  a/. burnetii 

5.  like  the  imise  of  a/,  of  fire  that  devoureth 
ObaJ.  18.  and  the  house  of  Joseph  shall  be  a/. 
JVaA.  3.  t  3.  the  horseman  lifieth  up  the/,  of  sword 
Luke  16.  24.  for  I  am  tormented  in  this/. 
/Icb.  1.  7.  who  makelh  his  ministers  n/.  of  fire 
Hcv.  1.  14.  eyes  were  as  a  f.  of  fire,  2.  18.  |  19. 12. 

FLAMES. 
r.«n/.29. 7.  the  voice  of  Loid  dividelh  the  /.  of  fire 
Troi)  2fi. 1 18.  as  a  madman  who  ciistetb/and  death 
A.«(i.  13.8.  shall  be  amazed,  their  faces  shall  Leas/ 
60.  15.  Lord  come  to  render  rebuke  with  7".  of  fire 

FLAMING. 
dm.  3.  24.  he  placed  at  garden  of  Eden  a/  swore 
Ezrk.  20.  47.  the/  flame  shall  not  be  (|Ucnched 
JVuA.  2.  3.  the  chariots  shall  be  with/,  torches 
See  Fire. 
FLANKS. 
Lev  3. 4.  tho  fat  thnt  is  on  them,  which  is  hv  the/, 
it  shall  ho  take  away,  10,  l.i.  |  4.  9.  |  7.  4. 
.fob  15.  27.  he  makeih  colh>ps  of  fat  on  his/. 

FLASH. 
Ezek.  1. 14.  as  the  appearance  of  a  /.  of  lightning 


FLE 

FLAT. 

Leo.  2  1 5.  an  offering  baken  on  a/,  plate,  7.  \  9. 
21.  18.  he  tliat  hath  a  /.  nose  shall  not  approach 
J\'um.  22.  31.  Balaam  bowed,  and  I'ell  /.on  his  lace 
Josh.  6.  5.  the  wall  of  the  city  shall  lull  down/. 
20.  the  people  shouted,  the  wall  tell  down/. 
FLATTER. 
Psal.  5.  9.  no  faithfulness,  they /.with  their  tongue 
78.  36.  they  did  /.  him  with  their  mouth,  and  lied 

FLATTERETH. 
Psal.  36.  2.  for  he/,  himself  in  his  own  eyes 
Prov.'i.  10. from  stranger  who/.with  her  words,  7. 5. 
20.  19.  meddle  not  with  him  that/,  with  his  lips 

28.  23.  shall  find  more  favour  than  he  that/. 

29.  5.  a  man  that/,  spreadeth  a  net  for  hie  feet 

FLATTERING. 
Job  32.  21.  neither  let  me  give/,  titles  to  man 

22.  for  I  know  not  to  give/,  titles 
Psal.  12.2.  with/,  lips  and  double  heart  do  speak 

3.  the  Lord  shall  cut  otT  all/,  lips,  and  the  tongue 
Prov.  7.  21.  with  the/,  of  her  lips  she  forced  him 

26.  28.  and  a/,  mouth  worketh  ruin 
Ezek.  12.24.  there  shall  be  no  more/,  divination 

1  Thess.  2.  5.  neither  used  we  at  any  time/,  words 

FLATTERY. 
Job  17.  5.  he  that  speaketh/.  to  his  friends 
Prov.  6. 24.  to  keep  from  the/,  of  a  strange  woman 

FLATTERIES. 
Dan.  11. 21.  but  he  shall  obtain  the  kingdom  by/. 
32.  such  as  do  wickedly  shall  he  corrupt  by/. 
34.  but  many  shall  cleave  to  them  with/. 
FLAX. 
JEiorf.9.31./.  and  barley  was  smitten,/,  was  boiled 
.Tosh.  2.  6.  she  hid  them  with  the  stalks  of  /. 
Judg.  15.  14.  cords  became  as/,  that  was  burnt 
Prov.  31.  13.  she  seeks  wool  and  /.  and  worketh 
Isa.  19.  9.  they  that  work  in  fine/,  confounded 
42. 3.  smoking/,  shall  he  not  quench.  Mat.  12. 20. 
Kzek.  40.  3.  a  man  with  a  line  of/,  in  his  hand 
Hos.2.  5. 1  will  go  after  my  lovers  that  give  me/. 
9.  and  I  will  recover  my  wool  and  my/. 
FLAY. 
JIfjc.  3. 3.  /.  their  skins  from  off  them,  break  bones 
FLAYED. 

2  Chr.  35. 11.  sprinkled  blood,  the  Levites/.  them 

FLEA. 
1  Sam.  24. 14.  is  the  king  come  after  a/.?  26. 20. 

FLED. 
Oen.  14. 10.  the  kings  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah/. 

16.  6.  Hagar/.  ||  31.  22.  Jacob/.  Hus.  12.  12. 
Ezod.  2. 15.  Moses/.from  Pharaoh,  4.  3.  .4c«4-7.29. 

14.  5.  it  was  told  king  of  Egypt  that  the  people/. 

27.  and  the  Egyi)tians  /.  against  the  sea 
JVjtni.  16.  34.  Isr.  round  about/,  at  the  cry  of  them 
Deut.  34.  t  7.  nor  was  his  natural  force/. 
Josh.  8.  15.  Israel  /.  by  the  way  of  the  wilderness 

10.  16.  these  five  kings/,  and  hid  themselves 
Judg.  1.  6.  Adoni-bezek /.  ||  4. 15.  Sisera/.  away 

7.  21.  all  the  host  ran  and  cried,  and/.  22. 

8.  12.  Zalmunna/.  ||  9.  21.  Jotham  ran  and/. 

9.  51.  to  the  tower/,  all  the  men  and  women 

11.  3.  Jephthah/.  ||  20.  45.  the  Benjamites/.  47. 

1  .Sam.  4.  IG.  and  I/,  to-day  out  of  the  army 
14.  22.  when  they  heard  that  the  Philistines/. 

17.  24-.  the  men  of  Israel/,  from  Goliath 

19. 10.  David/,  and  escaped,  12,18.  |  20.1.  |  21. 10. 
22.20.  Abiathar  escaped  and/,  after  David,  23. 6. 

30.  17.  save  four  hundred  which  rode  and/. 

31. 1.  Israel/,  from  the  Philistines,  7.  2  Sam.  19. 8. 

2  Saw.  4.  3.  Beerothites/.toGittaim  and  sojourned 

4.  and  his  nurse/.  |{  10.  14.  the  Syrians/.  18. 
13.29.  Absalom  and  the  king's  sons/.  34,  37,  38. 

18.  17.  all  Israel/,  every  one  to  his  tent 

1  Kings  2.  7.  for  so  they  came  to  me  when  I/. 

28.  Joah/.to  the  tabernacle, 29.||  11.17.  Hadad/. 
11.  23.  Rezon/.  from  his  lord  {{  40.  Jeroboam/. 
20.  20.  the  Syrians/.  1  Chr.  19.  18.  2  A'm«-s  7.  7. 

S  Kings  8.  21.  and  the  people/,  to  their  tents 
9.10.  the  prophet  opened  door  and/.  ||23.  Joram/. 

25.  4.  all  the  men  of  war/,  by  night,  ,Jer.  ."52.  7. 

1  Chr.  10.  1.  the  men  of  Isr.  /.  11. 13.  2  Chr.  13.  16. 

2  Chr.  14.  12.  Lord  smote  Ethiopians  and  they  /. 
JVfiA.  13.  10.  the  Levites/.  every  one  to  his  field 
Ksth.  6.  1 1.  king  Ahasuerus'  sleep/,  away 
Psal.  31.  11.  they  that  did  see  me/,  from  me 

114.  3.  the  sea  saw  it  and/.  Jordan  was  driven 
/5a. 21. 14.  they  prevented  with  bread  him  that/. 
22. 3.  all  thy  rulor.^  are  /.  together,  they  are  bound 
33.  3.  at  the  noise  of  the  tumult  the  people/. 
Jirr.  4.  25.  all  the  birds  of  the  heavens  were/. 
9.  10.  the  fowl  and  beast  are/,  they  are  gone 
26  21.Urijah  heardand/.||  40.  ."i. Egyptians  are/. 
46.  21.  also  her  hired  men  are/,  away  together 
.Jonah  4  2.  therefore  I/,  before  to  Tarshish 
Zech.M  5.  shall  flee  as  ye/,  before  the  earthquake 
Mat. 8.  33.  Ihey  that  kept  them/,  nnd  went  away 

26.  56.  disv;iples  forsook  him  and  /.  Mark  14.  50. 
Mark  16.8.  they  went  out  and /.from  the  .sepulchre 
.^cls  16.  27.  supposing  the  prisoners  had  been/. 

Heb.  0.  18  /.  for  refuge  to  lay  hold  on  the  hope 

207 


FLE 

i?eu.l2.6.  the  wonjan/.||16.20.  every  island/.away 
20. 11.  from  whose  face  earth  and  heaven/,  away 

JJe  FLED. 
Oen.  31.  20.  in  that  he  told  him  not  that  hef. 
21.  so  hef.  II  35.  7.  when  hef.  from  his  brother 
39.  12.  he  left  his  garment  and  /.  13,  15,  18. 
Josh.  20.  6.  then  the  slayer  shall  come  to  his  own 
house,  to  the  city  from  whence  hef.  JVtt;n.35.25. 
.Judg.  9.  40.  Abimolech  chased  Gaal,  and  hef. 

1  Sam.  22.  17.  because  they  knew  when  lie  f. 

2  Kings9.  27.  Ahaziah  fled,  and  hef.  to  Megiddo 

14.  19.  and  hef.  to  Lachish,  2  Chron.  25.  27. 
Jonah  1. 10.  and  Ae/.from  the  presence  of  the  Lord 
Mark  14.  52.  he  left  the  linen  cloth,  and/,  naked 

Is  FLED. 
JVam.  35. 32.  take  no  satisfaction  for  him  that  isf. 

1  Sam.  4.  17.  Israel  is  f.  before  the  Philistines 

2  Sain.  19.  9.  Dav.es/.  out  of  the  land  for  Absalom 
Jsa.  10.  29.  Raraah  is  afraid,  Gibeah  of  Saul  is  f. 

They  FLED. 
Gen.  14. 10.  they  lha.t  remained/,  to  the  mountains 
Josh.  7.  4.  they  f.  from  before  the  men  of  Ai 
10. 11.  as  they  f.  the  Lord  cast  down  great  stones 

1  Sam.  4. 10.  Philistines  fought,  Israel  was  smitten, 

and  they  f. every  man  to  his  tent,  2  Kings  14.12. 
17.  51.  when  saw  their  champion  was  dead  theyf. 
19.  S.David  slew  Philistines,  and  theyf.  from  him 

2  Sam.  10. 13.  Joab  drew  nigh,  theyf.  I  Chr.  19. 14. 
2  KingsZ.  24.  smote  Moabiles,  theyf.  before  them 
1  Chron.  10.  7.  when  all  Israel  saw  that  they  f. 
Psal.Wi.  7.  at  thy  rebuke  tAej//.  they  hasted  away 
/sa.21. 15.  for  tAej//.from  the  swords,  and  bent  bow 
.Jer.  39.  4.  then  they  f.  and  went  forth  of  the  city 
L,am.  4.  15.  when  they  f.  away,  and  wandered 
Dan.  10.  7.  so  that  they  f.  to  save  themselves 
Hos.l.  13.  woe  unto  them,  for  tAfy  have/,  from  me 
J^uke  8.  34.  when  they  saw  what  was  done,  they  f. 
jic£sl9.16.so  that  they  f. oat  of  that  house  wounded 

FLEDDEST. 
Gen.  35.  1.  when  thou  /.  from  the  face  of  Esau 
Fsa/.  114. 5.  what  ailed  thee,  O  sea,  that  thou/..' 

FLEECE. 
Deut.  18.  4.  the  first  of  tlie/.  of  sheep  give  Levites 
Judg.  6.  37. 1  will  put  a  /.  of  wool  in  the  floor 

38.  Gideon  wringed  the  dew  out  of  the/. 

39.  let  it  now  be  dry  only  U])on  the/. 

Job  31.  20.  if  not  warmed  with  the/,  of  my  sheep 
FLEE. 

Gen.  16.  8. 1  /.  from  the  fiace  of  my  mistress  Sarai 
19.  20.  behold  this  city  is  near  to/,  unto 
27.  43.  arise,  /.  to  Laban  my  brother  to  Haran 

Kxod.  14.  25.  let  us  /.  from  the  face  of  Israel 
21. 13.  appoint  a  place  whither  he  shall/. 

jf,eu.  26.  17.  ye  shall/,  when  none  pursueth,  36. 

JV«»n. 10.35.  that  hate  thee/.before  thee,  PAai.68.]. 

24.  11.  therefore  now/,  thou  to  thy  place 

35.  G.  six  cities,  that  the  man-slayer  may/,  thither, 
11,15.  Deut.  4. 42. 1 19.  3,  4,  5.  Josh.  20.  3,  4,  9. 
Dent.  28.  7.  and  /.  before  thee  seven  ways,  25. 
Josh.  8.  5.  as  at  first  we  will/,  before  them,  6. 
20.  had  no  power  to/,  this  way  or  that  way 
.Judg.W.  32.  let  us/,  and  draw  them  from  the  city 

1  Sam.  15.19.  but  didst /.on  the  spoil,  and  didst  evil 

2  Sam.  4.  4.  as  his  nurse  made  hasts  to  /.  she  fell 

15.  14./.  else  we  shall  not  escape  from  Absalom 

19.  3.  as  men  steal  away  when  they/,  in  battle 
24. 13.  wilt  thou/,  three  months  before  enemies? 

1  Kings  12.  13.  Rehoboam  made  speed  to  get  to 

his  chariot,  and  /.  to  Jerusalem,  2  Chr.  10. 18 

2  Kings  9.  3.  then  open  the  door,  and/,  tarry  not 
JVeA.  6.  11.  I  said,  should  such  a  man  as  If.? 
Job  20.  24.  he  shall  /.  from  the  iron  weapon 

27.  22.  he  would  fain/,  out  of  his  hand 
30.  10.  they  abhor  me,  they  /.  far  from  me 
41.  28.  the  arrow  cannot  make  him/. 

Psal.^  1.1.  how  say  ye,/,  as  bird  to  your  mountain  ? 
68.  12.  kings  of  armies  /.  apace,  she  that  tarried 
139.  7.  or  whither  shall  If  from  thy  presence? 
143.9.  deliver  me,  O  Lord,  I/,  to  thee  to  hide  me 

Prov.  28.  1.  the  wicked/,  when  no  man  pursueth 
17.  he  shall/,  to  the  pit,  let  no  man  slay  him 

fsa.  10.  3.  to  whom  will  ye/,  for  help  1 
13.  14.  and/,  every  one  into  his  own  land 
15.  5.  his  fugitives  shall  /.  unto  Zoar 
17.  13.  they  shall/,  far  off,  and  shall  be  chased 

20.  6.  such  our  expectation  whither  wo/,  for  help 
30.  16,  hut  ye  said  no,  for  we  will/,  on  horses 

17.  at  the  rebuke  of  five  shall  ye/. 

48.  20.  go  fromJBahylon,/.  ye  from  the  Chaldeans 
Jer.  4. 29.  the  city  shall/,  for  the  noise  of  horsemen 

6.  1.  gather  yourselves  to/,  out  of  .Jerusalem 

25.  3.5.  the  shepherds  shall  have  no  way  to/. 
43.  6./.  save  your  lives,  and  be  like  the  heath 

9.give  wings  to  Moab,tliat  it  may/.and  get  away 

49.  8.  Edom  shall/.  ||  24.  Damascus  turneth  to/. 
30./.  dwell  deep,  O  ye  inhabitants  of  Hazor 

50.  16.  they  shall/,  every  one  to  his  own  land 
28.  voice  of  them  that/and  escape  from  Babvlon 

51.  6.  /.  out  of  the  midst  of  Babylon,  Zech.  2.  6. 
.^mos  5. 19.  as  if  a  man  did  /.  from  a  lion,  and  bear 


FLE 

Jonah  1.  3.  Jonah  rose  up  to/,  to  Tarshiih 
JVaA.3.  7.  all  they  that  look  on,  shall/,  from  tLes 
Mat.  2.  13.  arise,  take  the  young  child  and/. 
3. 7.  hath  warned  you  /.  from  wrath  7  J.uke  3.  7. 
10.  23.  when  persecute  you  in  city/,  to  another 
24. 10.  then  let  them  which  be  in  Judea/.  to  the 
mountains,  Mark  13.  14.  T-aAe  21.21. 
.John  10.  5.  a  stranger  will  not  follow,  but/,  from 
Jicts  27.  30.  as  the  shipmen  were  about  to  / 
1  Cor. 6. 18./.  fornication  ||  10. 14. /.from  idolatry 

1  Tim.6.11.  but  thou,  O  man  of  God,/,  these  things 

2  Tim.  2.  22./.  also  youthful  lusts,  tbllovv  faith 
Jam.  4.  7.  resist  the  devil,  and  he  will/,  from  you 
Rev.  9.  6.  in  those  days  death  shall/,  from  them 

12.  14.  that  the  woman  might/,  into  wilderness 
See  Flv. 
FLEE  away. 
f?en.  31.27.  wherefore  didst  thou/.  awaysectcl\y1 
2  Sam.  18.  3.  \twef.away,  they  will  not  care  for  us 
•hb  9.  25.  my  days/,  away,  they  see  no  good 
20.  8./.  away  as  a  dream,  and  shall  not  be  found 
Psal.  64.  8.  all  that  see  them,  shall/,  away 
CaB£.2.17.  till  daybreak,  and  shadows/,  aroay,  4.6. 
/sa.  35. 10.  sorrow  and  sighingshall/.auia^,  51.11. 
,/er.  46.  6.  let  not  the  swift  /.  away,  nor  escape 
Jjmos  2.  16.  he  that  is  courageous  shall/,  away 
7.12. 0  thouseer,  go /.atcay  into  the  land  of  Judah 
9.  1.  he  that  fleeth  of  them,  shall  not/,  away 
J^ah.  2.  8.  Nineveh  shall/,  away,  they  shall  cry 
3.17.  as  great  grasshoppers  in  hedges  they/,  atcay 

FLEEING. 
Lev.  26.  36.  they  shall  flee  as  /.  from  a  sword 
/^euf  .4.42.that/.to  one  of  these  cities  he  might  live 
.Job  27.  t22.  in/,  he  would  flee  out  of  his  hand 
30.  3.  for  want  and  famine/,  to  the  wilderness 

FLEETH. 
/?euM^.ll.  smite  him  mortally,/,  into  one  of  cities 
Job  14.  2.  he/,  as  a  shadow  and  continueth  not 
Isa.  24.  18.  that  he  who/,  from  the  noise  of  fear 
Jer.  48.  19.  ask  him  that/,  and  her  that  escapelh 
44.  he  that  /.  from  the  (ear,  shall  fall  into  the  pit 
Amos  9.  1.  he  that/,  of  Ihem  shall  not  flee  away 
John  10.  12.  but  be  that  is  a  hireling/.  13. 

FLESH. 
Flesh  is  understood  different  ways,  as,  (1)  For 
the  flesh  which  is  the  matter  of  bodies,  whether 
of  men  or  animals.  Lev.  13.  10.  Num.  11.  33. 
(2)  For  living  men,  and  even  all  animals  in 
general.  Gen.  6. 13,  The  end  of  all  flesh  is  come 
before  me:  I  am  resolved  to  destroy  every  thing 
that  hath  life;  Gen.  7.  15,  Ki,  They  went  in 
two  and  two  of  all  flesh,  that  is,  animals  of  all 
species.  (3)  Flesh  is  taken  for  a  relation,  one 
of  the  same  stock  or  kindred,  Gen.  37.  27,  Let 
not  our  hand  be  upon  him,  fur  he  is  our  flesh, 
he  is  our  brother.  Jlnd  in  2  Sam.  19.  12,  13, 
Ye  are  my  bones  and  my  flc^h.  Art  thou  not 
of  my  bone,  and  of  my  flesh  ?  (4)  For  every 
man  who  is  of  the  same  nature  with  ourselves, 
and  where  we  maij  contemplate  our  own  flesh : 
In  this  latitude  it  is  taken  in  Isa.  58.  7,  And 
that  thou  hide  not  thyself  from  thine  own  flesh  ; 
from  thy  neighbour,  from  any  one  of  thine  own 
nature,  to  whom  thou  hast  an  opportunity  of 
doing  good.  (5)  For  mankind,  considered  as 
impotent  and  feeble,  vnable  to  help  either  him- 
self or  others,  Jer.  17.  5,  Cursed  be  the  man 
that  maketh  flesh  his  arm  ;  that  depends  upon 
any  human  power  for  help.  (6)  For  the  quality 
of  corruption,  which  is  not  sinful,  but  the  ef- 
fect of  sin,  to  which  our  bodies  ore  subject  in 
this  life.  1  Cor.  15.  50,  Flesh  and  blood  cannot 
inherit  the  kingdom  of  God;  that  is,  our  frail 
corruptible  bodies  cannot  come  to  heaven : 
That  icliich  shall  inherit  heaven  must  be  as 
incorrupt  flesh,  a  body  without  corruption, 
(7)  For  the  estate  of  this  present  life.  Phil.  1 
24,  To  abide  in  the  flesh  is  more  needful  fof 
you.  (8)  For  that  which  is  according  to  the 
ordinary  course  of  nature.  Gal.  4.  23,  He 
who  was  of  the  bond-woman,  was  born  after 
the  flesh.  Ishmael  was  bom  after  the  manner 
of  other  men,  by  the  mere  and  sole  efficacy  of 
nature,  not  by  promise,  as  was  Isaac,  when  hi.i 
mother  was  naturally  past  cmiceptinn.  (9) 
Flesh  is  taken  for  whatsoever  in  man  is  reputed 
most  excellent  and  glorioi/s  without  the  grace 
o/Christ ;  as  nobility,  visdnm,  undirstanding, 
or  reason.  Mat.  10.  17,  Flesh  and  blood  hath 
not  revealed  it  unto  thee:  nothing  of  nature 
has  done  it.  And  in  John  1.  13,  Porn  not  of 
blood,  nor  of  the  will  of  the  flesh:  that  is, 
neither  by  their  descent  from  .''ueh  and  such 
ancestors,  nor  by  the  power  of  their  own  free- 
will. (10)  For  all  that  in  religion  which  is 
outward,  and  to  be  seen  with  the  eye,  a.^  moral 
works  or  ceremonies,  Bom.  4.  I,  What  hath 
Abraham  found  as  pertaining  to  I  he  flesh  ?  The 
word  flesh  in  the  following  verse,  is  explained 
to  be  the  works  o/  Abraham,  which  did  not  jits- 


FLE 

tify  him  before  God.  Thus  Beza,  Piscator,  and 
ethers  interpret  the  place.  Mnd  in  this  sense 
flesh  is  taken,  (iai.  3.  3,  Are  ye  now  iiiadB  pur- 
fect  by  Uie  tiusli  1  that  is,  by  wurks,  and  the  car- 
nal ceremonies  of  the  law.  (11)  For  the  whole 
nature  of  man,  as  it  cometli  into  the  world, 
corrupt,  vile,  and  infected  with  sin,  Horn.  7.  5. 
I  8.  8.  Whoa  we  were  in  the  tlesh.  They  that 
are  in  the  flesh  ;  that  is,  in  a  carnal,  corrupt 
state;  such  cannot  please  God,  namely,  while 
they  continue  so,  and  till  they  be  converted. 
Likewise  in  all  other  places,  where  the  word 
flesh  is  apjjlied  to  men  unregcneraled,  it  signi- 
fies the  whole  corruption  and  depravity  of  our 
7iature,  ra^'ing  and  reigning  both  in  the  under- 
standing anu'aill:  But  inthuse  places  of  scrip- 
ture, where  tlesh  i*  attributed  to  persons  that 
are  concerted,  and  is  set  in  opposition  to  the 
Spirit,  it  signifies  the  remainder  of  natural 
corruption,  even  so  much  of  thatvicious  quality 
of  sin,  as  is  still  unmortified  in  regenerated 
persons.  6m  Kom.  7.  18,  "25.  Gal.  5.  17,  24. 
To  be  one  flesh,  devotes  a  most  inseparable  union, 
and  an  intimate  communion,  as  if  the  two  were 
but  one  person  or  one  body.  Gen.  2.  y-1,  And 
they  shall  be  one  Hesh.  This  phrase  is  used  by 
the  Apostle  to  shew  the  union  and  communion 
that  is  between  Christ  and  believers,  Eph.  5. 

30,  31.  Flesh  also  signifes  the  human  nature 
of  Christ.  Heb.  10.  iiO,  Through  the  vail,  that 
is  to  say,  his  flesh.  It  is  called  flesh,  because 
it  was  subject  to  sinless  weaknesses  and  in- 
Jirmitiea,  and  whereby  his  divine  nature  was 
veiled  and  covered  over;  even  as  the  ark  of 
the  covenant,  the  mercy-seat,  and  the  most  holy 
place,  were  by  the  vail.  The  flesh  of  Christ 
signifies  whole  Christ,  both  God  and  Man  in 
one  person.  John  6.  5.5,  My  Hesh  is  meat  in- 
deed, that  is,  I  myself,  with  all  my  benefits, 
being  received  and  applied  by  faith.  A  heart 
of  flesh  denotes  a  tender,  tractable  temper  and 
disposition  of  suul,  Ezek.  36.  26.  Flesh  !«  also 
taken  for  the  outward  appearance.  John  8. 15, 
Ye  judge  after  the  flesh. 

Gen.  •!.  21.  God  closed  up  the/,  instead  thereof 
24.  shall  cleave  to  his  wife,and  they  shall  be  one/. 
6.  3.  shall  not  strive  with  man,  for  that  he  is/. 

17.  11.  ye  shall  circumcise  the/  of  your  foreskin 

14.  whose  /.  is  not  circumcised  shall  be  cut  oft" 
23.  Abraham  circumcised  the/,  of  their  foreskin 

37.  27.  for  he  is  our  brother  and  our/. 
i=;/;o(i.4.7. his  hand  was  turned  again  as  his  other/. 

28.  142.  make  linen  breeches  to  cover  the/. 

29.  14.  burn  the/.  Ae«.9.  ll.|  16. 27.  JVum.  19. 5. 

30.  32.  upon  man's/,  shall  it  not  be  poured 
/>(M).C.27.  whpit  shall  touch/,  thereof  shall  be  holy 

7. 19.  as  for/,  all  that  are  clean  shall  eat  thereof 
8.  31.  boil  the/,  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle 
13.  10.  if  there  be  quick  raw/.  14,  15,  16,  24. 

38.  if  in  the  skin  of  their/,  have  bright  spots,  39. 
15. 7.  that  toucheth  the/,  of  him  that  hath  an  issue 

19.  if  her  issue  in  her  /.  be  blood  she  is  put  apart 
21.  5.  nor  shall  make  any  cuttings  in  their/. 
J<'am.  11.33.  while  the/,  was  between  their  tectl 
12.  12.  as  dead,  of  whom  the/,  is  half  consumed 

18.  18.  and  the/,  of  them  shall  be  thine 
Deut.  32.  42.  and  my  sword  shall  devour/. 
Judg.  6.  20.  take  the/,  and  the  unleavened  cakes 

21.  there  rose  up  fire  outof  rock, and  consumed/. 

1  Sam.2. 13.  servant  came,  while/,  was  in  seething 

15.  he  said,  give/,  to  roast  for  the  priest 

2  Sam.  6.  19.  Uavid  dealt  to  each/.  1  Chr.  16.  3. 

1  Kings  17.  6.  the  ravens  brought  him  bread  and/. 

in  the  morning,  and  bread  and/,  in  the  evening 

19.  21.  boiled  their/,  with  the  instruments  of  o.xcn 

2  Kings  4.  34.  and  the  /.  of  the  chdd  waxed  warm 
2CAr."32.8.  with  him  in  an  arm  of/,  with  us  is  God 
Jfeh.  5.  5.  ycl  our/,  is  as  the/,  of  our  brethren 
Job  ]0.4.ha8tthoueyesof/.?  orsecstas  manseeth'! 

II.  thou  hast  clothed  me  with  skin  and/. 
Psal.  56.  4. 1  will  not  fear  what  /.  can  do  unto  me 
78.  20.  can  he  provide  /.  for  his  people  1 
27.  he  rained  /.  also  upon  them  as  dust 

39.  for  ho  remembered  that  they  were  hut/. 
79.2.  the/,  of  thy  saints  given  lo  boasts  of  earth 

Prov.  4.  22.  my  sayings  are  heallh  to  their/. 
23.  20.  bo  not  among  riotous  eaters  of/. 
Jsa.  10.  t  If*.  conKUme  the  glory  from  sotd  to  the/. 

31.  3.  and  their  horses  arc^/.  and  not  spirit 
49.  26.  I  will  feed  Ihcm  with  their  own/. 

.7er.  11.  15.  and  the  holy/,  is  passed  from  thee 
12.12.  thespoilerfl  are  come,  no/.»ha!lhave  pence 
17.  5.  cursed  be  the  man  that  maketh  /.  his  arm 

F-zek.i.  14.  nor  camo  abominable/,  into  my  month 

10.  1 12.  their/,  backs,  wings,  were  full  of  eyes 

11.  3.  this  city  is  the  caldron,  ond  wo  bo  the/. 
*•   7.  your  slain  in  midst  of  it,  they  are  the/. 

11.  nor  shall  ye  be  the  /.  in  the  midst  thereof 

19.  and  I  will  give  lliem  n  heart  of/.  .36.  2(). 

lG.26.gToatof/.and  hast  increased  thy  whoicdornB 


FLE 

Ezei.  23. 20.  paramours,  whose/,  is  as/,  of  asses 

24. 10.  heap  on  wood,  consume  the/,  spice  it  well 

37.  6.  and  1  will  bring  up/,  upon  you,  8. 
JJan.  2. 11.  the  gods,  whose  dsvelling  is  not  with/. 

7.  5.  they  said  to  it,  arise,  devour  much/. 

10.  3.  neither  came/,  nor  wine  in  my  mouth 
Hos.S.Vi.  they  sacrifice/,  for  sacrifices  of  ofl'erings 
Mic.  3.  2.  who  pluck  the/,  from  off  their  bones 
Z.eph.  1.  17.  their/,  shall  be  poured  out  as  dung 
//UU-.2.12.  if  one  bear  holy/,  in  skirt  of  bis  gurnienl 
Zcch.  14.  12.  their/,  shall  consume  away 
Mat.K.  17./.  and  blood  hath  not  revealed  it  to  thee 

19.  5.  shall  cleave  to  his  wife, and  they  twani  shall 
he  one/.  6.  Mark  10.8. 1  Cor.  6. 16.  Eph.  5.  31. 

24.  22.  there  should  no  /.  be  saved,  Mark  13.  20. 

26.  41.  spirit  willing,  but/,  is  weak,  Mark  14.  3d. 
i.uAe24. 39. spirit  hath  not /.and  bones, as  yesee  me 
./ohn  1.  14.  the  word  was  made/,  and  dwelt 

6.63.  the  Spiritquickeneth,  the/.profiteth  nothing 
Jicts^.'M  theseedofDav.  according  to/.  Aom. 1.3. 
Horn.  3. 20.  there  shall  no  /.  be  justified  in  his  sight 

4.  1.  that  Abraham  as  pertaining  to  the  /.  found 

7.  25.  but  with  the/.  I  serve  the  law  of  sin 

8.  3.  in  that  the  law  was  weak  through  the/.  God 

sent  his  own  Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful/. 
9. 3.  for  my  brethren  and  kinsmen  according  to  /. 
5.  of  whom  as  concerning  the/.  Christ  came 
13.  14.  make  not  provision  for  the/,  to  fulfil 

1  Cor.  1.  29.  that  no  /.  should  glory  in  his  presence 
1.5.39.  there  is  one/,  of  men,  and  another  of  beasts 

50.  /.  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  kingd.  of  God 

2  Cor.  1.  17.  do  I  purpose  according  lo  the/.? 

4.  11.  that  life  of  Jesus  be  made  manifest  in  our/. 
7.  5.  our/,  had  no  rest,  but  we  we.'e  troubled 
10.  2.  as  if  we  walked  according  to  the/. 

Gal.  1.  16.  I  conferred  not  with  /.  and  blood 

2.  16.  by  works  of  the  law  shall  no/,  be  justified 

3.  3.  are  ye  now  made  perfect  by  the/..' 

5.  13.  use  not  liberty  for  an  occasion  to  the/. 
17. /.  lustcth  against  the  Spirit,  Spirit  against/. 
24.  they  that  are  Christ's  have  crucified  the/. 

E/)A.2.3.  we  all  had  our  conversat.  in  luslsofour/. 

6.  5.  your  masters  according  to  the/.  Col.  3.  22. 
12.  for  we  wrestle  not  against/,  and  blood 

//ri.2.14.  the  children  are  jmrtakers  of/,  and  blood 
12.  9.  we  had  fathers  of  our/,  who  corrected  us 
.Judel.  and  going  alter  strange/,  are  an  example 
8.  likewise  these  filthy  dreamers  defile  the/. 

23.  hating  even  the  gnrment  spotted  by  the/. 
Rev.V).  18.  may  eat/,  of  captains,/,  of  mighty  men 

21.  and  all  the  fowls  were  filled"  with  their/. 

See  F,AT,  Eatetii. 

Jifter  the  Vh^»H. 

.Tohn  8.  15.  ye  judge  after  thef.  I  judge  no  man 

/?om.8.  l.are  in  Christ,  who  walk  not  after  the f.i. 

5.  they  that  are  after  the  f.  mind  things  of  the  /. 

12.  not  debtors  to  the  flesh  to  live  after  thef. 

13.  for  if  ye  live  after  the  f.  ye  shall  die 

1  Cor.l.26.not  many  wise  men  after  thef. are  called 
10.  18.  behold  Israel  after  thef. 

2  Cor.5.16.we  know  no  man  after  thef.  though  we 

have  known  Chr. (i/Zcr/.  yet  know  him  no  more 

10.  3.  tho'  walk  in  flesh, we  do  not  war  a/ter  </(c/. 

11.  18.  seeing  that  mnnv  glory  after  thef.  I  also 
Gal.  4.  23.  Ishrnael  was' horn  after  thef.  29. 

2  Pet.  2.  10.  chiefly  them  that  walk  after  thef. 

Ml  FLESH. 

fVfTi.O.lS.  for  allf.  had  corrupted  his  way  on  earth 

13.  God  said,  tho  ciidof  aZ//.  is  come  before  me 

19.  of  all  f.  two  of  every  sort  shall  thou  bring 

into  the  ark,  to  keep  them  alive,  7.  15. 

7.  21.  all  f.  died  that  moved  upon  tho  earlh 

8.  17.  bring  forth  of  nH/.  bolh  of  fowl  and  cattle 

9.  11.  nor  shall  allf.  bo  cut  off  any  more,  1.5. 
16.  covenant  between  me  and  all  f.  on  earih,  17. 

r,cn.  17.  14.  for  the  life  ofoH/  is  the  blood 
A*um.8.7.letthem  shnven/Ziheir/aiid  wash  clothes 

10.  22.  the  God  of  the  spirits  o\' all  f.  27.  16. 

18. 15.  every  thing  that  openeth  the  mat  rix  of  n?//. 
Drut.  5.  26.  w  ho  of  allf.  heard  the  word  of  (Jod 
.Job  12.tl0.  in  whose  hand  is  breath  of  allf.  of  man 

34.15.  flft/.  shall  perish  together,  mnn  turn  to  dust 
7'j».fi5.2.thoulienre»tpraver,iothcci  shall  o/Z/.comc 

130.25.  whogivelh  food  to  allf.  his  mercy  forever 

14.).  21.  let  all  f.  bless  his  hidv  name  for  ever 
Isa.  40.  5.  and  allf.  shall  sec  it  together 

6.  nllf.  is  grn-is,  iis  flower  of  the  field,  1  Pet.  1.04. 
40.26.  allf.  shall  know  I  am  thy  Sav.  Kzfft.21.5. 
66.  16.  for  by  fire  will  tho  Eord'plpad  with  allf. 

23.aJ//.shallcoinnto  worshi|) before  me,sailhL. 

24.  they  shall  be  an  abhorring  lo  ail  f. 
.7rr.25.  3il.liewill  plead  with  all  f.milh  the  Lord 

.32.  27.  behold,  I  am  the  Lord  the  God  iif  all  f. 

45.  5.  for  behoM,  I  will  bring  >vil  on  nllf.  sailh  L. 
KzfA.aO.  48.  ««/.  shall  see  that  I  have  kimlled  it 

21.  4.  shall  mysword  go  forth  a^'.  allf.  from  Bonlli 
Dan.  4.  12.  fowls  dwelt,  and  all  f.  w.ts  fed  of  it 
./OT/2.28.willponroutn)vSpiriionn///..;^<:(»2.17. 
y.rrh.  2   13.  be  B  lent,  O  allf.  b-fori'  the  Lord 
Luke  3.  6.  and  all  f.  shall  see  the  salvation  of  God 


FLE 

John  17. 2.  thou  hast  given  him  power  over  allf 
1  Cor.  15.  39.  allf.  is  not  same  flesh,  one  of  meu 

His  FLESH. 
Exod.  21.  28.  and  his  f.  shall  not  be  eaten 

29.  31.  and  seethe  his  f.  in  the  holy  i)lace 
Lev.  4.  11.  burn  all  his  f.  with  his  head,  8.  17. 

6.  10.  he  shall  put  linen  breeches  on  his  f.  16.  4. 

13.  2.  shall  have  a  rising  in  the  skin  of  hisf. 

3.  priest  look  on  the  plague  in  the  skin  of  his  f. 

4.  if  bright  spot  be  white  in  the  skin  of  his  f. 

11.  it  is  an  old  leprosy  in  the  skin  of  his  f.  13. 

14.  9.  he  shall  wash  his  clothes,  also  wash  his  f. 

in  water,  15.  16.  |  16.  24,  28.  JVum.  19.  7. 
15.2.  any  man  hath  a  running  issue  out  of  his  f 
3.  w  heiiier  hisf.  run  with  his  issue,  or  be  stopped 
17.  16.  but  if  he  wash  them  not,  nor  bathe  his  f. 
22.  6.  be  unclean,  unless  he  w  ash  Ai*/.with  water 
1  Kings  21.  27.  Aliab  put  sackcloth  on  his  f. 
i  Kings  5.  14.  his  f.  came  again,  and  he  was  clean 

6.  30.  behold  Joram  had  sackcloth  on  his  f. 
Job  2.5.  touch  his  bone  and  hisf.  he  will  curse  thee 

14.  22.  but  his  f.  upon  him  shall  have  pain 
31.  31.  if  men  said  not,  O  that  we  had  of  his  f, 
33.  21.  his  f.  is  consumed  away,  it  cannot  be  seen 

25.  his  f.  shall  be  fiesher  than  a  child's 
41.  23.  the  flakes  of  his  f.  are  joined  together 
Prov.  11.  17.  he  that  is  cruel  troubleth  hisf 
Kccl.4.5.the  fool  foldeth  his  hands, and  eateth  h>sf. 
Isa.  17.  4.  the  fatness  of  his  f.  shall  wax  lean 
./ohn  6.  52.  can  this  man  give  us  hisf.  to  eaf? 
Jlcts  2.  31.  neither  his  f.  did  see  corruption 
Gal.G.S.  helhatsoweih  loA(s/.shall  reapcorrup. 
Eph.  2.  15.  having  abolished  in  his  f.  the  enmity 

5.  29.  no  man  ever  yet  hated  his  own/. 

30.  for  we  are  members  of  his  body,  ofkisf. 
Col.  1.  22.  now  hath  reconciled  in  the  body  of  his  f. 
Hcb.5.'.  who  in  days  of  hisf. when  offered  prayer? 
10. 20.  consecrated  thro'  vail,  that  is  to  say,  hisf. 

In  the  FLESH,  or  in  FLESH. 
Gen.  17.  24.  Abraham  was  circumcised  in  thef. 

25.  Ishmael  circumcised  in  the  f.  of  his  foreskin 
Ezek.  44.  7.  brought  in  uncircunicised  inf. 

9.  uncircumcised  inf.  not  enter  the  sanctuary 
/Jan. 1.15.  counten.  appeared  fairer  and  fatter  inf. 
Kom.'i.'ic.  circumcision  which  is  outward  in  the  f. 

7.  5.  for  when  we  were  in  thef.  the  motions  of  sia 

8.  3.  and  for  sin  condemned  sin  in  thef. 

8.  I  hey  that  are  in  thef.  cannot  please  God 

9.  but  ye  are  not  in  thef.  but  in  the  Spirit 
1  Cor.  7.  28.  such  shall  have  trouble  in  the  f. 
%Cor.  10.  3.  tho'  we  walk  in  the  f.  not  v/nr  after  /. 

12.  7.  there  was  given  to  me  a  thorn  in  thef. 
Gal.  2.  20.  life  which  I  now  live  i)i  thef.  is  by  faith 

6.  12.  as  desire  to  make  a  fair  shew  i?i  thef. 
Eph.  2.  11.  in  time  past  Gentiles  in  the  f.  called 

the  circumcision  in  thef.  made  by  hiinris 
Phil.  1.22.  if  Hive  in  Me/,  this  is  the  fruit  of  labour 
24.  to  abide  in  thef  is  more  needful  for  you 
3.  3.  and  have  no  confidence  in  thef. 

4.  though  I  might  have  confidence  in  thef. 
C0/.2. 1 .  as  many  as  have  not  seen  my  face  in  thef. 

5.  tho'  I  be  absent  in  thef.  I  am  with  you  in  spirit 
1  T'im.  3.  16.  God  was  manifest  in  Ihef.  justified 
Philem.  16.  how  much  more  to  thee,  both  in  thef. 
1  Ptt.  3.  18.  Christ  being  put  to  dentli  in  thef. 

4. 1.  Christ  hath  suflered  for  us  in  Ihef.  for  he  that 
hath  suffered  in  thef.  hath  ceased  from  sin 
2.  no  longer  live  the  rest  of  his  time  in  the  f. 

6.  might  be  judged  according  to  men  in  thef. 

1  John  4.2.  denieth  that  Christ  is  come  in  thef.X 
•iJohn  7.  confess  not  that  Christ  is  come  in  thef. 

My  FLFSH. 
1  .Saw.  25. 11.  shall  I  then  take  my  bread  and  myf.? 
Jiib  4.  1.5.  the  hair  of  7ny/.  stood  up 

6.  12.  is  iny  strength  of  .-iioncs  ?  or  is  my  f.  braes  1 

7.  5.  myf'is  cloibed  with  worms  and  dust 

13.  14.  wherefore  do  I  t.ike  viy  f.  in  my  teeth? 
19.  20.  my  bone  cicavelh  lo  my  skin  and  myf. 

22.  why  jiersecule,  and  not  satisfied  wilh  niyf-t 
21).  worms  destroy  body,  yet  in  7n^//.^hall  faoeG. 
21.  6.  and  trembling  takeih  hold  of  my  f. 
Psal.  16.  9.  myf.  shall  rest  in  hope,  JicU  i.  26. 
38.  3.  there  is  no  soundness  in  viy  f.  7. 
63.  1.  mv/.  longelh  for  thee  in  a  dry  thirsty  land 
73. 26.  mv  f.  failclh,  but  G.  is  my  portion  for  ever 
81.  2.  mv  heart  and  my  f.  erieth  out  for  God 
102.  t  5.'bv  groaning  mv  bones  cie^ive  to  viy  f. 
10!>.24.myknces  are  weak,  my/,  failclh  offulncit 
119.  120.  »ni//.  trcmbleth  for  fenr  of  ibeo 
Feci  2.  t  3.  I  soughl  to  draw  myf.  willt  wine 
Jer.  51.  3.5.  the  violence  done  lo  me,  and  lo  myf 
J. am.  3.  4.  myf.  and  mv  skin  linlli  he  made  old 
John  6.  51.  the  bread  that  I  will  ;   ve.is  myf. 
54    whoso  catelh  myf.  haih  etenvil  lifenSfi. 
.55.  my  f.  is  meiit  inilced,  my  bloo  I  ilrink  indeed 
Worn.  7.  18.  in  myf.  dwellc'h  no  -nod  thing 

II.  14.  if  I  may  provoke  them  wliirli  aro  nf  f 
Gnl.  4.  14   my  temptntion  wliirli  w.ts  in  myf. 
Cul.  1.  24.  of  the  aflli'lions  of  Christ  in  my/ 
See  DoNK. 


FLO 

Of  the  FLESH. 
Exod.  12.  46.  shall  not  carry  forth  ought  of  tlief. 
29.  34.  if  ought  of  the  f.  remain  unto  morning 
JDeut.  28.  55.  nor  give  of  the  f.  of  his  children 
Prov.  14.  30.  a  sound  heart  is  the  life  of  the  f. 
JEecl.  12. 12.  much  study  is  a  weariness  of  the  f. 
John  1. 13.  born,  notof  the  will  of  the  f.  butof  God 
3.  6.  that  which  is  born  of  the  f.  is  flesh 
Rom.8.5.  that  after  flesh  do  mind  ihe  things  of  the  f. 
t6.  for  the  minding  of  thef.  is  death 
t  7.  the  minding  of  the  f.  is  enmity  against  God 
9. 8.  that  is,  they  wliich  are  the  children  of  thef. 

1  Cor.  5.  5.  to  Satan  for  the  destruction  of  thef. 

2  Cor.  7.  ].  let  us  cleanse  from  all  filthiness  of  thef. 
Oal.  4.  13.  through  infirmity  of  thef.  I  preached 

5.  16.  ye  shall  not  fulfil  the  lusts  of  thef. 

19.  now  the  works  of  thef.  are  manifest,  adultery 
6. 8.  that  so  weth  to  f.  shall  of  thef.  reap  corruption 
Eph.  2. 3.  walked  in  lusts  of  thef.  desires  of  thef. 
Col.  2.  11.  putting  off  the  body  of  sins  of  thef. 

23.  not  in  honour  to  the  satisfying  of  thef. 
Heb.  9.  13.  sanctifieth  to  the  purging  of  the  f. 

1  Pet.  3. 21.  not  the  putting  away  the  filth  of  thef. 

2  Pet.  2.  18.  they  allure  through  the  lusts  of  thef. 
IJohn  2. 16.  the  lust  of  thef.  the  lust  of  the  eyes 

Thy  FLESH. 
Oen.  40. 19.  the  birds  shall  eat  thijf.  from  off  thee 

1  Sam.  17.  44. 1  will  give  (Ay/,  unto  fowls  of  the  air 

2  Sam.  5. 1.  we  are  thy  bone  and  thyf.  1  Chr.  11. 1. 
2  Kings  5.  10.  wash,  and  thyf.  shall  come  again 
Pro».5. 11.  mourn  at  last,  when  (Ay/,  is  consumed 
JEecZ.5. 6.  suffer  not  thy  mouth  to  cau&o  thyf.  to  sin 

11.  10.  therefore  put  away  evil  from  thyf. 
Isa.58.7.  that  thou  hide  not  thyself  from  thy  own/. 
Ezek.  32.  5. 1  will  lay  thy  f.  on  the  mountains 

Your  FLESH. 
Lev.  19. 28.  ye  shall  not  make  cuttings  in  your  f. 
Judg.  8.  7.  then  I  will  tear  your  f.  with  the  thorns 
Ezek.  36.  26. 1  will  take  stony  heart  out  oTyourf. 
Rom.  6. 19.  because  of  the  infirmity  of  your  f. 
Gal.  6.  13.  that  they  may  glory  in  your  f. 
Col.  2. 13.  being  dead  in  uncircumcision  oiyourf. 
Jam.  5.  3.  rust  shall  eat  your  f.  as  it  were  fire 
Fleshed,  see  Fat,  Lean. 
FLESH-HOOK. 
ISam.2.13.  the  priest's  servant  came  with  a/.- Aoo  A 
14.  all  that  {.he  f. -hook  brought  up,  the  priest  took 
FLESH-HOOKS. 
.Eio(f.27.3.shalt  make  his  f. -hooks  and  his  fire-pans 
38.  3.  he  made  all  the  vessels  and  the  f.-hooks 
Jfum.  4. 14.  put  upon  the  purple  cloth  the  f. -hooks 

1  Chr.  28.17.  David  gave  pure  gold  for  thef.-hooks 

2  CAr.4. 16.  he  made  also  the  pots  and  thef. -hooks 

FLESHLY. 

2  Cor.  1. 12.  that  in  simplicity,  not  with  /.  wisdom 

3.  3.  not  in  stone,  but  in/,  tables  of  the  heart 

Col.  2.  18.  vainly  puffed  up  by  his/,  mind 

1  Pet.  2. 11.  beloved,  abstain  from  /.  lusts  that  war 

FLESH-POTS. 
Exod.  16. 3.  when  we  sat  bv  Ihe f. -pots  and  did  eat 

FLEW. 
1  Sam.  14.  32.  and  the  people  /.  upon  the  spoil 
25.  tl4.  and  our  master/,  upon  them 
Ita.  6.  6.  then/,  one  of  the  seraphims  unto  me 

FLIES. 
Exod.  8.  21. 1  will  send  swarms  of/,  upon  thee 

31.  he  removed  the  swarms  of/,  from  Pharaoh 
Psal-  78. 45.  he  sent  divers  sorts  of/,  among  them 

105.  31.  and  there  came  divers  sorts  of/. 
EcU.  10. 1.  dead/.cause  the  ointment  to  send  forth 

FLIETH. 
Dent.  4. 17.  the  likeness  of  any  winged  fowl  that/. 
14.  19.  every  creeping  thing  that/,  is  unclean 
28.49.  shall  bring  a  nation  as  swift  as  the  eagle/. 
Psal.  91.  5.  nor  for  the  arrow  that/,  by  day 
J^ah.  3.  16.  the  cankerworm  spoileth  and/,  away 

FLIGHT. 
Job  II.  t20.  and/,  shall  perish  from  the  wicked 
Isa.  52. 12.  shall  not  go  out  with  haste  nor  go  by/. 
Jer.  46.  fS.  their  mi^hly  ones  are  fled  a/. 
Dan.  9.  t21.  Gabriel  was  caused  to  fly  with/. 
Amos  2.  14.  the  /.  shall  perish  from  the  swift 
Mat.  24. 20.  pray  /.  be  not  in  winter,  Mark  13. 18. 
Heb.  11.  34.  turned  to/,  the  armies  of  the  aliens 
^ee  Put. 
FLINT. 
Deut.  8.  1.5.  brought  water  out  of  the  rock  of/. 
Job  28.  t  9.  he  putteth  forth  his  hand  on  the  /. 
PsaM14.8.  turning  the/,  into  a  fountain  of  waters 
/.«a.5. 28.  their  horses'  hoofs  shall  be  counted  like/. 
50.  7.  therefore  have  I  set  my  face  like  a/. 
Eiek.'i.^.  harder  than/,  have  Imade  thy  forehead 

FLINTy. 
Z>eu(.32.13.  make  him  to  suck  oil  out  of  the/,  rock 

FLIT. 
Jcr.  49. 1 30.  flee,/,  greativ,  O  inhabitants  of  Hazor 

FLOCK. 

Gen.  4.  4.  Abel  brought  of  the  firstlings  of  his/. 

21.28. Abraham  set  ewe-lambs  of/,  by  themselves 

S7.  9  go  now  to  the/,  and  fetch  two  good  kidi 

209 


FLO 

Oen.  29. 10.  Jacob  watered  the/,  of  Laban 

30.  31.  I  will  again  feed  and  keep  thy/. 
32.  1  will  pass  through  all  thy/,  to-day 
36.  and  Jacob  fed  the  rest  of  Laban's/. 
40.  Jacob  did  separate  all  the  brown  in  the/. 

31.  4.  Jacob  called  Rachel  and  Leah  to  his/. 
38.  the  rams  of  thy  /.  have  I  not  eaten 

33.  13.  if  men  overdrive  them,  the/,  will  die 
37. 2.  Joseph  was  feeding  the  /.  with  his  brethren 
12.  his  brethren  went  to  feed  their/.  13. 

38.  17.  I  will  send  thee  a  kid  from  the/. 
Exod.  2.  16.  the  troughs  to  water  their  father's/. 

17.  Moses  helped,  and  watered  their/.  19. 
3. 1.  Moses  led  the/,  to  the  backside  of  the  desert 

Lev.  1.  2.  bring  your  offering  of  the  herd  and  /. 
5.  6.  he  shall  bring  a  female  from  the/. 

18.  he  shall  bring  a  ram  without  blemish  out  of 
the/.  6.  6.  Ezra  10.  19.  Ezek.  43.  23,25. 

27. 32.  concerning  the  tithe  of  the  herd  or  of  the/. 
JVum.  15.  3.  make  a  sweet  savour  of  the  herd  or/. 
Deut.  12. 21.  then  thou  shalt  kill  of  thy  herd  and  /. 

15. 14.  thou  shalt  furnish  him  liberally  out  of  thy/. 

19.  all  the  firstling  males  of  ihy/.  shalt  sanctify 

16.  2.  shalt  sacrifice  to  the  Lord  thy  God  of  the/. 

1  Sam.  17.  34.  a  lion  took  a  lamb  out  of  the/. 

2  .Sam.  12.  4.  he  spared  to  take  of  his  own/. 
2Chron.  35.  7.  Josiah  gave  to  the  people  of  the/. 
Job  30. 1. 1  disdained  to  set  with  the  dugs  of  my/. 
Cant.  1.7.  where  thou  makest  thy/,  to  rest  at  noon 

8.  go  thy  way  forth  by  Ihe  footsteps  of  the/. 
4.  1.  thy  hair  is  as  a/,  of  goats,  6.  5. 

2.  thy  teeth  are  like  a/,  of  sheep,  6.  6. 
Isa.  40.  11.  he  shall  feed  his/,  like  a  shepherd 

63.  11.  brought  them  with  the  shepherd  of  his/. 
Jer.  13. 17.  because  the  Lord's  /.  is  carried  captive 

20.  where  is  the/.was  given  thee,thy  beautiful/.? 
23.  2.  ye  have  scattered  my/,  and  driven  them 

3.  I  will  gather  the  remnant  of  my/. 
25.  34.  cry  and  wallow,  ye  principal  of  the/. 

35.  nor  the  principal  of  the/,  to  escape 

36.  a  howling  of  the  principal  of  the/,  be  heard 
31.  10.  and  keep  him  as  a  shepherd  doth  his/. 

12.  they  shall  sing  for  the  young  of  the/. 
49. 20.  least  of  the  /.  shall  draw  them  out,  50.  45. 
51.23.  will  break  in  pieces  the  shepherd  and  his/. 
Ezek.  24. 5.  take  the  choice  of  the/,  burn  the  bones 
34.  3.  ye  eat  the  fat,  but  ye  feed  not  the  /. 

6.  my  /.  was  scattered  on  the  face  of  the  earth 
S.surelybecausemy/.becamea  prey,  my /meal 
10.  I  will  require  my/.  I  will  deliver  my/. 
12.  as  a  shepherd  seeketh  out  his/,  in  the  day 
15.  I  will  feed  my/.  ||  17.  as  for  you,  O  my/. 
22.  therefore  will  I  save  my/,  no  more  a  jirey 
31.  ye  my/,  the/,  of  my  pasture,  are  men 

36.  38.  as  the  holy/,  as  the/,  of  Jerusalem 

45.  15.  ye  shall  offer  one  lamb  out  of  the/. 
Jimos  6.  4.  and  eat  the  lambs  out  of  the/. 

7.  15.  the  Lord  took  me  as  I  followed  the/. 
.Tonah  3.  7.  let  not  herd  nor  /.  taste  any  thing 
Mic.  2.  12.  as  the/,  in  the  midst  of  their  fold 

4.  8.  thou,  O  tower  of  the/,  the  strong  hold 

7.  14.  feed  thy  people,  the/,  of  thine  heritage 
Hab.  3. 17.  tho'  the  /.  shall  be  cut  oft'  from  the  fold 
Zech.  9.  16.  save  them  as  the/  of  his  people 

10.  2.  therefore  they  went  their  way  as  a/. 
3. for  tho  Lord  of  hosts  hath  visited  his/. 

11. 4.  saith  Ihe  Lord,  will  feed  the /.of  slaughter,  7. 

7.  the  poor  of  the/,  that  waited  on  me,  11. 

17.  woe  to  Ihe  idol  shepherd, that  loaveth  the/. 
Mai.  1.  14.  deceiver  which  hath  in  his/,  a  male 
Mat.  26.  31.  the  sheep  of  the/,  shall  be  scattered 
Luke  2.  8.  keeping  watch  over  their/,  by  night 

12.  32.  fear  not  little  /.  it  is  your  Father's  pleasure 
J]ctB  20.  28.  take  heed  therefore  to  all  the/. 

29.  grievous  wolves  shall  enter,  not  sparing  the/. 
1  Cor.9. 7.  who  feedeth  a/,  and  eateth  not  of  milk? 
\Pet.  5.  2.  feed  the/,  of  God  which  is  among  you 
3.  not  as  being  lords,  but  being  ensamples  to  the/. 
Like  a  FLOCK. 
Job  21.  II.  send  forth  their  little  ones  like  a  f. 
Psal.  77.  20.  thou  leddust  thy  people  like  af. 
78.  52.  he  guided  them  in  the  wilderness  like  af. 
80.  1.  thou  that  leadest  Joseph  like  a  f. 
107.  41.  and  maketh  him  families  like  af. 
Ezek.36. 37. 1  will  increase  them  with  men  like  af. 

FLOCKS. 
Oen.  29.  2.  and  lo,  three  /.  of  sheep  lying  by  the 
well,  for  out  of  that  they  watered  the/. 
3.  and  thither  were  all  the/,  gathered 

8.  we  cannot,  till  all  the/,  be  galherod  together 
30.  38.  Jacob  set  the  rods  he  pilled  before  the/.' 

39.  and  the/,  conceived  before  the  rods 

40.  Jacob  set  the  faces  of  the/,  toward  thering- 
straked,  he  put  his  own/,  by  themselves 

32.  5.  I  have  oxen,  asses,  /.  and  men-servants 
7.  he  divided  the/,  and  herds,  and  camels 

37.  14.  go,  see  whether  it  be  well  with  the/. 
Ifi.  tell  me,  I  pray  thee,  where  Ihey  feed  their/. 

47.  4.  thy  servants  have  no  pasture  for  their/. 
17.  Joseph  gave  biead  in  exch.  for  horses  and/. 


FLO 

Lev.  1.  10.  if  his  offering  be  of  the  f.  of  tho  sheep 
5.  15.  bring  a  ram  v/ithout  blemish  out  of  the/. 
JVum.31.9.  Israel  took  spoil  of  all  their/,  and  goods 

31.  30.  thou  shalt  take  one  portion  of  the/. 

32.  26.  our  wives,  our/,  and  cattle,  shall  be  there 
Deut.  7.  13.  he  wjll  also  bless  the/,  of  thy  sheep 

28.  4.  blessed  shall  bo  the/,  of  thy  sheep 
18.  cursed  shall  be  the/,  of  thy  sheep 
51.  who  shall  not  leave  the/,  of  thy  sheep 
Judg.  5.  16.  to  hear  the  bleatings  of  the/. 
1  Kings  20.  27.  pitched  like  two  little/,  of  kids 
1  Chron.i.  39.  they  went  to  seek  pasture  for  their/ 
41.  because  there  was  pasture  for  their/. 

27.  31.  and  over  the/,  was  Jaziz  the  Hagarite 
2CAron.  17.  11.  the  Arabians  brought  him/. 
Job  24.  2.  violently  take  away/,  and  feed  thereof 
PsaZ.  8.  t  7.  /.  and  o.\en  all  under  his  feet 

65.  13.  the  pastures  are  clothed  with/. 

78.  48.  he  gave  their/,  to  hot  thunderbolta 
Cant.  1.  7.  turn  aside  by  thef.  of  thy  companions 
/sa.17.2.  cities  of  Aroer  are  forsaken,  shall  be  for/. 

32.  14.  the  palaces  shall  be  a  pasture  of/. 
60.7.all  the/.ofKedar  shall  be  gathered  together 
61.  5.  and  strangers  shall  stand  and  feed  your/. 
65. 10.  Sharon  shall  be  a  told  for/,  valley  of  Achor 

./er.6.3.the  shepherds  with  Iheir/.shall  come  to  her 
10.  21.  shall  not  prosper,  all/,  shall  be  scattered 

31.  24.  dwell  in  Judah  they  that  go  forth  with/. 

33.  12.  shepherds  causing  their/,  to  lie  down 
13.  the/,  shall  pass  again  under  the  rod 

49.  29.  their  tents  and  /.  shall  they  take  awaT 

50.  8.  and  be  as  the  he-goats  before  the  /. 
Ezek.  25.  5.  Ammonites  a  couching-place  for/ 

34.  2.  should  not  the  shepherds  feed  the/..' 
36.38.  the  waste  cities  shall  be  filled  with /.of  men 

Joel  1.  18.  the/,  of  sheep  are  made  desolate 
./V/zc.l. til. inhabitant  of  countryof/.camenotforth 
5.  8.  as  a  young  lion  among  the/,  of  sheep 
Zeph.  2.  6.  and  the  sea-coast  shall  be  folds  for/. 
14./.  shall  lie  down  in  the  midst  of  Nineveh 
FLOCKS  with  herds. 
Gen.  13.  5.  Lot  also  had/,  and  herds,  and  tents 
24.  35.  the  Lord  hath  given  Abraham/.and  herds 
26.  14.  Isaac  had  possession  of/,  and  herds 

32.  7.  Jacob  divided  /.  and  herds  into  two  bands 

33.  13.  the  /.  and  herds  with  young  are  with  me 
45. 10.  thou  shalt  be  near  me,  thou,  thy/.andAer(i» 
47.  1.  my  brethren,  their/,  and  herds  are  come 
50.8.  their/,  and  herds  left  they  in  land  of  Goshen 

Exod.  10.  9.  we  will  go  with  our/,  and  our  herde 
24.  only  let  your  /  and  your  herds  be  stayed 
12.32.  also  take  your/and  your  A(;Trf.s,.Tnd  begone 
34.3.  neither  \eif.  nor  herds  feed  before  the  mount 
JVura.  11.22.  shall  the/,  and  Acr(/.s  be  slain  for  them 
Deut.  8.  13.  when  thy  herds  and  ihy/.  multiply 
12.6.firstlingsofA.and/.17.  |  14.23.  JVrA.  10.  36. 

1  Sam.  30.  20.  David  took  all  the/,  and  the  herds 
2Sam.l2.2.  rich  man  had  exceeding  many/,  and  A. 

2  CAron.32.29.  provided  possessions  of/.and  hcrda 
Prov.  27.  23.  know  thy  /.  look  well  to  thy  herds 
Jer.  3. 24.  shame  hath  devoured  their/,  and  herds 

5.  17.  an  ancient  nation  shall  eat  thy/,  and  herds 
//os.5.6.  they  shall  go  with/,  and  herds  lo  seek  Ld. 

FLOOD. 
Not  only  that  terrible  inundation  is  in  scripture 
called  flood,  whereby  God  destroyed  all  man- 
kind, and  alt  the  animals  of  the  earth  and  air, 
which  were  not  in  the  ark  bvilt  by  Noah  ;  but 
likewise  all  sorts  of  inundations  or  extraordi- 
nary col'cctions  of  waters.  Thus  the  Psalmist 
spcakivg  of  the  waters  of  the  sea,  or  of  a  river, 
expresses  it  by  the  t^prd  flood.  Psal.  66.  6, 
They  went  through  the  flood  on  foot.  The  same 
Psalmist  sets  forth  extreme  dangers  under  the 
notion  of  a  flood.  Psal.  69.  15,  Let  not  the 
water-flood  overflow  me.  .^nd  the  violent  as- 
saulis  and  sudden  incursions  of  the  devil  and 
his  instruments  against  the  church  are  eom- 
pared  to  a  flood.  Isa.  59. 19,  When  tho  enemy 
shall  come  in  like  a  flood.  By  floods  are  also 
signified  great  plenty  and  abundance  of  spi- 
ritual and  temporal  blessings.  Isa.  44.  3,  I 
will  ponr  floods  upon  the  dry  ground. 
Gen.fS.  17.1,  even  I,  bring  a/,  of  water  on  the  earth 
7.  6.  when  the/,  of  waters  was  upon  the  earth 
7.  Noah  went  in,  because  of  the  waters  of  the/ 
10.  after  seven  days  Ihe/.  was  on  the  earth 
17.  the/,  was  forty  days  on  the  earth 

9.  n.  nor  shall  be  any  more  a /.to  destroy  the  earth 

28.  Noah  lived  after  the/.  350  ye.irs 

10.  1.  to  thert  were  sons  horn  after  the/. 
32.  the  nations  were  divided  in  the  enrth  after/. 

.Tosh  24.  2.  your  fathers  on  other  side  of/.  3, 14, 15. 

.Toh  14.  11.  as  the/,  decayeth  and  drielh  up 
22.16.  whose  foundulion  was  overthrown  with  a/. 
28.  4.  the/,  breaketh  nut  fiom  Ihe  inhabitant 

Psnl.  29. 10  the  Lord  siltc|h  upon  the/,  he  is  Kin^ 
66.  6.  they  went  thro'  the  /.  on  foot,  we  rejoiced 
69.  15.  let  not  Ihe  water-/,  overflow  me 
74, 15,  thou  didst  cleave  the  fountain  and  the  / 


FLO 

Ptal.  90. 5.  thou  carriest  them  away  as  with  a/. 
/«</.28."2.  a  sirong  one,  which  as  a/.sliall  cast  down 
5U.  19.  tlie  enemy  simll  come  in  like  a/. 
Jcr.  40.  7.  wlio  is  this  that  comolh  up  ax  a/.? 

8.  Kjfypt  risiith  up  like  a/,  waters  are  moved 
47.  2.  behold,  waters  shall  be  an  overHowing/. 
Dan.  'J.  ~f).  the  end  thereol" shall  bo  with  a/. 
11.22.  with  the  arms  ofa/.shall  tliey  be  overdown 
Jimos  8.  8.  it  shall  rise  uji  wholly  as  a/.  U.  5. 
9.  5.  and  shall  be  drowned  as  by  the/.  oCKgypt 
JVaA.  1.  n.  with  an  overrunning/,  make  an  eud 
Mai.  24.  33.  in  days  before  tlie  /.  they  were  eating 
;<!).  and  knew  not  till  the/,  came,  Luke  17.  27, 
Jmke  6.  48.  when  the/,  arose  the  stream  beat 
2  Fct.  2.  5.  bringing  in  the/,  on  world  of  ungodly 
Hev.  12.  15.  the  dragon  jioured  out  water  as  a/. 
16.  the  eurlh  heli)ed,  and  swallowed  up  the/. 
FLOOD-GATES. 
Oen.  7.  1 11.  Ihef.-frates  of  heaven  were  opened 

FLOODS. 
Krod.  15.  8.  the  /.  stood  u|)right  as  a  heap 
"■Sam.  22.  5./.  of  ungodly  made  me  afraid,  Fs.  18.4 
Jul)  21).  17.  he  shall  not  see  the  rivers  and  the/. 
28.  11.  he  bindelh  the/,  from  overflowing 
Psal.  24.  2.  he  hath  established  it  upon  the/ 
^2. 6.  surely  in  the/,  of  great  waters  not  come  nigh 
6'J.  2.  into  deep  waters,  where  the  /.  overflow  me 
78.  44.  and  had  turned  their/,  into  blood 
ii:i.3.lhc/.haveliftedui),0  Lord,/,  have  lifted  up 
98.  8.  let  the/,  clap  their  hands,  let  hills  be  joyful 
Cant.  8.  7.  iieiihor  can  the/,  drown  love 
/.-a.  44.  3.  for  I  will  pour/,  upon  the  dry  ground 
Kzek.'M.la.  I  restrained  the/thereof,  waters  stayed 
JtmaJi  2. 3.  the/,  compassed  me  about,  thy  billows 
Mat.  7.  25.  the/,  came,  winds  blew,  and  beat,  27. 

FLOOR,  Verb. 
iChron.  34.  11.  and  for  timber  to  /.  the  houses 

FLOOR,  Substantive. 
Oev.  50. 10.  tliey  came  to  the  threshing/,  of  Atad 

11.  when  inhabitants  saw  mourning  in/,  of  Atnd 
JV«»/i.  5. 17.  the  priests  shall  take  dust  tliat  is  in/. 

15. 20.  as  ye  do  the  heave-offering  of  threshing/. 

18.  27.  as  tho'  it  were  the  corn  of  the  thieshing/. 

30.  be  counted  as  the  incrcaseof  the  threshing/. 

Veut.  15.  14.  thou  shall  furnish  him  out  of  thy/. 

Iti.  1 13.  after  thou  hast  gathered  in  thy/. 
.Tudg.  G.  37.  I  will  put  a  fleece  of  wool  m  ilie/. 
Jluth  3.  2.  he  winnoweth  in  the  threshing/. 
2  Sam. 6.  C.  came  to  Nachon's  thresh./.  1  CAr.13.9. 

21. 18.  rear  an  altar  in  the  threshing/,  of  Araunah 
21.  David  said,  to  buy  the  threshuig/.  of  thee 

1  MVno-sfi.  30.  he  overlaid  the/,  of  house  wiih  pold 
7.7.  with  cedar  from  one  side  of  the/,  to  ihe  other 

2  Kings  (>.  27.  out  of  the  barn-/,  or  the  wine  j>res3? 
J  CAro;(.2I.28.  L.had  answered  in  the  threshing/. 
2  Chron.  3.  1.  prepared  in  threshing/,  of  Oman 

18.  t'J.  they  sat  in  a/,  at  the  entering  of  the  gate 
/..vi.21.  10.  O  my  threshing,  and  the  corn  of  my/. 
.//T.  51.  33.  daughter  of  Uab.  is  like  a  threshing/. 
t{os.'i.\.  thou  hast  loved  a  rewiird  on  every  corn/. 
2.  the/,  and  wine-press  shall  not  feed  them 
1!.  3.  as  the  clmlf  that  is  driven  out  of  the/. 
Mic.  4. 12.  shall  gather  them  as  sheaves  into  the/. 
Mat.Z.Xi.ha  will  thoroughlv  purge  his/.  LukeXll. 

FLOORS. 
1  Sam.  23.  1.  and  tliey  rob  the  threshing/. 
Dan.  2.  "XS.  like  chaft'of  the  summer  threshing/. 
Joel  2.  24.  and  the/,  shall  be  lull  of  wheat 

FLOTES,  or  FLOATS. 
1  Kings  .5.  9.  and  I  will  convey  them  by  sea  in/,  to 
the  place  thou  Hli.ilt  nppoint  me,  2  Chr.  2.  IG. 
FLOURISH. 
Psal.  72.  7.  in  his  days  shall  the  righteous/. 
10.  and  they  of  the  city  shall  /.  like  grass  of 
the  earth 
92.  7.  when  all  the  workers  of  iniquity/. 

12.  the  righteous  shall/,  like  the  palm-tree 

13.  tliey  shall/,  in  the  courts  of  our  God 
i:t2.  \H.  but  upon  himself  shall  his  crown/. 

I'ruv.  II.  28.  Ihe  righteous  shall/,  as  a  hninch 

14.  II.  the  tabernacle  of  tho  upright  shall/. 
Keel.  12.  5.  when  the  almond-tree  shall/. 
Cant.  7.  12.  let  us  get  up,  let  us  see  if  the  vine/. 
/s  (1. 17.  II.  in  morning  thou  slialt  make  thy  seed  to/. 
W.  14.  your  bone«  Khali/,  like  an  herb 
K-.ck.  17.  24. 1  the  \,'\.  have  made  the  dry  treo  to/. 

FLOIIRISHRI). 
r'/nA.fi.  1L  I  went  down  to  si^e  whether  the  vine/ 
I'liil.  4.  10.  vour  care  of  me  hiilli/.  again 

"     FLOURISIIETII. 
I'k-al.  90.  G.  in  the  morning  il  /.  and  grnwcth  up 
103.  15.  an  a  (lower  of  the  field,  so  he/. 
FLOURISH  INC. 
r^al.  92. 14.  in  old  age,  they  shall  ho  fnl  and  /. 
Cant.  2  1 9.  he  lookelh  forth,/,  through  tho  I'ltlicc 
Dan.  4.  4.  I  was  at  rest,  and/,  in  my  palaco 

FLOW. 

./oA 20  2H.hifl  goods slmll/.a way  indny  ofhis  wrath 

;'«.l  17. 18.  hecauHelhthe  wind  hjow,  and  waters/. 

Vint.  4.  JI5.  that  the  apices  thereof  may/,  out 

210 


FLY 

tsii.  2.  2.  and  all  nations  shall/,  unto  it 

48.  21.  he  caused  waters  to/,  out  of  the  rock 
OU.  5.  then  thou  shult  see  aniij.  together 

04.  1.  mountains  might/,  down  at  ihy  presence 
Jer.  31.  12.  shall/,  to  the  goodness  of  the  Lord 

51.44.  nations  shall  nol/.togetlier  any  more  to  hini 
Joel  3.  18.  in  that  day  ihe  hills  shall/,  with  milk 
and  the  rivers  of  Judah  shall/,  with  waters 
Mie.i.  1.  the  people  shall/,  to  Uie  mountain  of  Ld. 
.foAn  7.  3d.  out  of  his  belly  shall/,  living  water 

FLOVVED. 
Jos!i.  4.  18.  Jordan/,  over  all  his  banks 
Judg.  5.  1  5.  the  mountains/,  before  the  Lord 
Isa.  M.  3.  the  mountains/,  down  at  thy  presence 
L,ain.'3.M.  the  waters/,  over  mine  head,  then  I  said 

FLOWETIl. 
Lev.  20.  24.  a  land  that  /.  with  milk  and  honey, 
JVum.  13.  27.  I  14.  8.  |  10.  13,  14.  Veut.  0.  3. 
I  11.  9.  1  20.  9,  15.  I  27.  3.  I  31.  20.  Josh.  5. 0. 
FLOWING. 
Exod.  3.  8.  to  bring  them  to  a  land  /.  with  milk 
and  honey,  17.  |  13.  5.  |  33.  3.  Jer.  11.  5.  I  32. 
22.  Ezek.  20.  6,  15. 
Prov.  18.  4.  the  well-sjiring  of  wisdom  as  a/.brook 
fsa.G\i.  12.  the  glory  of  the  Gentiles  like  a/.stream 
.hr.  18. 14.  or  shall  the  cold  /.  waters  be  forsaken? 

49.  4.  wherefore  gloriest  tliou  in  thy/,  valley  1 

FLOUR. 

Ezod.  29.  2.  of  wheaten/.  shall  thou  make  them 

/.«(,'.  2.  2.  he  shall  lake  his  handful  of  the/.  C.  15. 

J^mn.  28.  5.  and  a  tenth  part  of  an  ephah  of/,  for 

a  meal-ottering,  20,  28.  |  29.  3,  9,  14. 

.Judg.  6.  19.  cakes  of  an  ephah  of/.  1  Sam.  1.  24. 

liia/«.28. 24.  she  took/and  kneaded  it,  2  4am.  13.8. 

2  Sam.  17.  28.  brought/,  parched  corn  and  beans 

See  De.^l,  Fi.nk. 

FLOWER. 

1  Sam.  2. 33.  the  increase  shall  die  in  /.  of  their  age 

1  C'or.7.30.  ifshepass/.of  her  age  and  need  require 

FLOW  ER. 
/^i:orf.25.33.  with  knop  anil/,  in  one  branch,  37.19. 
Job  14.  2.  he  Cometh  forth  as  a/,  and  is  cut  down 
15.  33.  he  shall  cast  off  his/,  as  the  olive 
I'sal.  103.  15.  as  a/,  of  field,  so  he  tiourisheth 
Isa.  18.  5.  and  the  sour  grape  is  ripening  in  the/. 
28.  1.  whose  glorious  beauty  is  a  fading/.  4. 
40.  G.  thcgoodliness  thereof  is  as  the/,  ollhe  field 
7./.  fadeih,  8.  J^th.  1.4.  Jam.  1.10,11. 1  Pet.  1.24. 
FLOWERS. 
Exod  25.  31.  his/,  shall  be  of  the  same,  37.  17. 
37.  20.  made  like  almonds,  his  knops  and  his/. 
JVtim.  8.  4.  to  the/,  thereof  was  beaten  work 
IKings  (].  18.  cedar  ofthe  house  within  was  carved 
with  knops  and  open  /.  29,  32, :«.  |  7.  20,  49. 

2  Chr.  4.  5.  like  the  brim  of  a  cup  with/,  of  lilies 
21.  the/,  lamps,  and  tongs  made  he  of  gold 

Oi)i(.  2.  12.  the/,  appear  on  earth,  time  of  singing 

5.  13.  his  cheeks  are  as  a  bed  of  spices,  as  sweet/. 

FLOWERS. 

Lr?). 15.24.  if  her/.be  upon  him, he  shall  be  unclean 

33.  of  her  that  is  sick  of  her  /.  of  hiin  with  issue 

FLUTE,  S. 

IKings  1. 140.  all  people  piped  with /.and  rejoiced 
/>>a'(.3. 3.  when  ye  hearthe sound  ofthe/.  7,10,15. 

FLUTTERETH. 
Deui.  32.  11.  as  an  eagle/,  over  her  young 

FLUX. 
Jlcts  28.  8.  the  father  of  Publius  lay  sick  of  a/. 

FLY. 
[sa.  7.  18.  tlio  Lord  shall  hiss  for  the/,  in  Egypt 

FLY,  yerb. 
Gen.  1.  20.  and  fowl  that  may/,  above  the  oaitl 
2  Sam.'ii.  1] .  he  rode  upon  a  cherub,  and  did/,  and 
WHS  seen  on  winps  ofthe  wind,  Psal.  18.  10 
.TohZ.l.  man  born  to  trouble  as  sparks/,  upward 
39.  2r>.  doth  the  hawk  /.  by  thy  wisdom  ? 
Psnl.  18.  10.  he  did  /.  upon  the  wings  of  the  wind 
55.  0.  for  then  would  I/,  away,  and  be  at  rest 
90.  10.  for  it  is  soon  cut  off,  and  we/,  away 
Proii.  2.3.5.  riches/,  away  as  an  eagle  to.hoiivon 
/«(i.G.2.each  had  si.\  wings, and  with  twain  he  did/. 
11.14.  but  they  shall/,  upon  shoulders  of  Philist. 
00.  8.  will"  are  these  that /.(IS  a  cloud,  and  as  doves 
.At.  48.  40.  behold,  ho  shall/,  as  an  eagle 
F.iek.  13.  20.  ye  hunt  the  souls  to  make  tliom/. 
/>an.9.21.Gab.  hoiiigcau'ied /.swiftly, touched  me 
Ifon.  9.  11.  their  glory  shall/,  away  like  a  bird 
//«A.1.8.  theyshall/.as  tlieoaglellm't  hasleth  loeiit 
/((•)>. 14. G.  Isaw  nnothdr  angel/,  in  midst  of  heaven 
19. 17.  toalllhefowlsthal/.iri  tho  midst  of  heaven 
See  Fi.EK,  Fmkth. 
FLYIi\(;. 
/,r?'.11.21.(heBo  may  yo  eat  ofev./.  creeping  thing 
23.hiit  allothrr/.creepingthingsan  abominiilion 
Psal.  148.  10.  all  cnttio  and/,  fowl,  praiso  the  Lord 
A'ri/r.2fl.2.BS  the  swallow  hy/.Hii  thociir.secaiiBeli'sB 
/«a.  14.29.  anil  bin  fruit  shall  be  a  fiery/,  srrpenl 
311.  n.  from  wlienco  come  viper  nnd  fiery/,  serpent 
31.  .1.  n»  birds/.so  will  the  Tiord  defrnd  Ji'riisaleni 
Zcch.  5.  1.  I  looked,  and  behold,  a/,  roll,  2. 


FOL 

Rev.  4.  7.  the  fourth  beast  was  like  a/,  eagle 
8. 13.  heard  an  angel/,  thro'  the  midst  of  heaven 
FOAL,  S. 

G'en.32.15.  Jacob  took  ten  bulls,  twenty  asseSjten/. 
49.  11.  binding  his/,  to  Ihe  vine,  and  his  ass's  colt 

Zcch.  9. 9.  upon  a  colt  the  /.  of  an  ass,  Mat.  21. 5 
FOAM. 

Hos.  10.  7.  the  king  of  Samaria  is  cut  off  a«/ 
FOAMETH. 

JV/arA9.18./.andgnasheth  with  his  teeth, Z,ui«9.39. 
FOAMING. 

Mark  9.  20.  he  fell  on  the  ground  and  wallowed,/. 

Judc  13.raging  waves  of  sea,/.out  their  own  shanio 
FODDER. 

.Job  6.  5.  or  loweth  the  ox  over  his/. 
FOES. 

1  Chron.  21.  12.  or  to  be  destroyed  before  thy/. 

Esth.  9.  10.  the  Jews  slew  of  their/.  75,000 

Psal.  27.  2.  mine  enemies  and/,  came  upon  me 
30. 1.  thou  hast  not  made  my/,  to  rejoice  over  me 
89.  23.  I  will  beat  down  his/,  before  his  face 

Jl/(iM0.3li.  a  man's/,  shall  be  ihey  ofhis  household 

./icts  2.  35.  until  1  make  thy/,  thy  footstool 
FOLD. 

Heb.  1.  12.  as  a  vesture  shall  thou/,  tliem  up 
FOLD. 

Isa.  13. 20.  shall  the  shepherds  make  their/,  there 
65.  lO.Sharoii  shall  be/,  for  flocks,  valley  of  Aclior 

Eiek.  34.  14.  on  the  mountains  shall  their/,  be 

Mie.  2.  12.  as  the  flock  in  the  midst  of  their/. 

Nab.  3.  17.  the  flock  shall  be  cut  offfrom  the/. 

Mat.  13.  8.  brought  forth  fruit,  some  a  hundred, 

some  si.xty,  some  thirty/.  23.  Mark  4.  8,  20. 

19.  29.  hath  forsaken  bouses,  shall  receive  100/. 

,/ohn  lO.lO.and  other  sheep  I  have, which  are  not  Oi 
this/,  and  there  shall  be  one/,  and  one  shepherd 
FOLDS. 

J^inn.  32.  24.  build  ye/,  lor  your  sheep,  36. 

Psal.  50.  9.  I  will  take  no  he-goats  out  of  iby/. 

.Ur.  23.  3.  I  will  bring  them  again  to  their/. 

Zeph.  2.  0.  the  sea-coast  shall  bef.  for  flocks 
FOLDEN. 

JVuA.  1.  10.  while  they  be  /.  together  as  thorns 
FdLDETH. 

Eccl.  4.  5.  the  fool/  his  hands  together  and  eateth 
FOLDING. 

I  Kings  6.  34.  the  two  leaves  of  one  door  were/. 

Prov.  0. 10.  a  little/,  of  the  hands  to  sleep,  24.  3i3. 
FOLK. 

(7f7;.33.]5.1etmenow  leave  with  thee  someof  the/, 

Proo.  30. 20.  the  conies  are  but  a  feeble/,  yet  make 

./nr.ai.  .>8.  the/,  shall  labour  in  fire  and  bo  weary 

Mnk  6.  5.  he  laid  his  hands  upon  a  Itjw  sick/. 

./uA>i  5.  3.  in  these  lay  a  multitude  of  impotent/. 

•'ic£s5.16.a  multitude  roiiiid  about,  bringing  sick/ 
FOLLOW 

Signifies,  [1]  To  come  after  one  that  goeth  before, 
as  servaiils  come  after  their  7nuslcrs,  1  Sam. 
25.  27,  Let  it  bo  given  to  the  young  nieo 
that  follow  my  lord.  [2]  To  imitate,  or  do  as 
aniither  gives  us  an  example.  Mat.  10.  24,  Let 
him  take  up  his  cross,  and  follow  me.  1  Cor. 
11.  I,  Be  ye  followers  of  me,  even  as  I  am  of 
Clirist.  [31  To  believe  and  obey.  John  10.  27, 
My  sheep  hear  my  voice,  and  ihey  follow  me. 
j?»i/  i»  all  passages  where  men  are  said  to 
follow  strange  gods,  it  signifies,  to  put  trust 
in  them,  to  rely  upon  them,  and  yielil  them 
service.  1  Kims  18.  21,  If  liaal  bo  God,  then 
foMow  him.  Judg.  2.  12,  They  forsook  the 
Lord,  and  followed  other  gods.  [4]  To  side, 
or  take  part  with,  2  Sam.  2.  10.  2  Kings  11. 
l.'>.  [51  To  cndeaviiur  after,  and  pursue  with 
great  desire  and  diliijencc.  Phil.  3.  12,  But  I 
follow  after,  if  that  f  may  apprehend  that  for 
wliirh  I  am  appreliendi'd  of  Christ  Jesus.  [6J 
To  die  icith  one.  John  13.  30,  Thou  canst  not 
follow  me  now,  that  is,  bear  me  company  in 
my  sufferings,  and  die  with  me.  To  follow 
the  Lamb,  Hit.  14.  4,  These  are  they  that  fol- 
low the  Lamb;  7'Aar  keep  close  to  Christ  in 
all  his  ordinances  :  are  led  by  his  icord  and 
Spirit,  and  depend  upon  the  virtue  and  merit 
of  his  saeritice  alone  fur  pardon  and  accept- 
once,  and  not  on  saints,  ur  their  own  merits, 
as  the  fidhiwers  of  Jlntichrist  do. 

Oen  24.8.  ifihe  woman  will  not  be  willing  to/.thee 

41.  4.  Joseph  said,  up,/,  after  the  iin'ii 

Exod.  11.  8.  get  thee  out,  and  pooplo  that  /.  thee 
14.  4.  I  will  harden  Pharaoh  that  ho  shall  /.  thera 
17.  and  Ihe  Egyptians  shall/.  Ilieiii 

21.  22.  if  hurl  a  woman,  nud  yet  no  mischief/. 
23.  nnd  if  nny  mischief/.  Ihen  life  for  life 

23.  2.  Ihoii  shall  nol  /  a  mulliliide  to  ilo  evil 

Iteut.  10.  20.  what  is  allogrther  just  shall  thou/ 

18.  22.  if  the  thing/,  not,  nor  ninie  to  pass 

liidg.  9.  3.  their  hearlii  inclined  to/.  Abimolech 

1  Sam.  25. 27.  be  given  young  men,  who  f.  mv  lord 
30.  21.  so  faint  thai  lliey  ei.iild  nol  /  Diivid 

2  Sam.  17.  B.  among  tho  people  that/,  .'\b^aloln 


FOL 

,  Kings  19.  20.  let  me  kiss  father,  then  I  will/,  thee 
i^sal.  38.  20.  because  I/,  the  thing  that  good  ia 

45.  14.  the  virgins  her  companions  that/,  het 

94.  15.  all  the  upright  in  heart  shall/,  it 

119.  150.  they  draw  nigh  that/,  after  mischief 
Isa.  5.  11.  that  they  may/,  strong  drink 

51.  1.  hearken,. ye  that/,  after  righteousness 
Jer.M.  16. 1  hastened  from  being  a  pastor  lo/.  thee 

42.  16.  the  famine  shall/,  close  after  you 
Eick  13.  3.  the  prophets  that/,  their  own  spirit 
Nos.  2.  7.  and  she  shall  /.  after  her  lovers 

C.  3.  we  shall  know,  if  we/,  on  to  know  the  Lord 
Mat.  8.  19.  Master,  I  will/,  thee,  Luke  9.  57, 01. 
Mark  16.  17.  these  signs/,  them  that  believe 
J.uke  17.  23.  go  not  after  them,  nor  /.  them 

22.  49.  when  they  about  him  saw  what  would/. 
John  10.  5.  and  a  stranger  will  they  not/. 

13.37.  Peter  said,  Lord  why  cannot  I/,  thee  now? 
^cts  3.24.  all  the  prophets  from  Samuel,  and  that/. 
Horn.  14.  19.  lot  us/,  things  that  make  for  peace 
1  Cor.  14.  1./.  after  charity,  desire  spiritual  gifts 
Phil.  3. 12.  but  I  /.  after,  if  that  I  may  apprehend 
I  T/iess.  5.  15.  but  ever/,  that  which  is  good 
27'Aess.3.7.  foryoureel.  know  how  ye  ought  to/,  us 
9.  to  make  ourselves  an  ensample  to  you  to/,  us 
1  Tim.  5.  24.  and  some  men  they  /.  after 

6. 11.  O  man  of  God,/,  righteousness,  2  Tim.2. 22. 
J/ib.  12.  14./.  peace  with  all  men,  and  holiness 

13.  7.  whose  faith  /.  considering  the  end 

1  Pet.  1.  II.  when  it  testified  the  glory  that  should/. 

2.  21.  an  example,  that  ye  should/,  his  steps 

2  Pet.  2.  2.  many  shall/,  their  pernicious  ways 

3  John  11. /.not  that  which  is  evil,  but  what  is  good 
Kev.  14.  4.  these  are  they  that/,  the  Lamb 

13.  blessed  are  dead  in  Lord,  that  they  may  rest 
from  their  labours,  and  their  works  do/,  them 
FOLLOW  him. 
1  Kings  18.  21.  if  the  Lord  bo  God,/,  him 
Mark  5.  37.  and  he  suffered  no  man  to/.  Aim 
6.  1.  he  went  out  thence,  and  his  disciples/,  hivi 
I.uke  22.  10./.  him  into  the  house,  Mark  14.  13. 
John  10.  4.  he  goeth  before,  and  the  sheep  /.  him 

FOLLOW  me. 
Gew.24. 5.  the  wom.  will  not  be  willing  to/,  me,  39. 
Judg.  3.  28.  Ehud  said  unto  them,  /.  after  me 

8.  5.  give  bread,  I  pray,  to  the  people  that/,  me 

1  Kings  20. 10.  for  handfuls  for  the  people  that/,  me 

2  Kings  fi.19./.  me,  I  will  bring  you  to  man  ye  seek 
Ps.  23.  6.  goodness  and  mercy  shall/,  me  all  my  life 
Mat.  4. 19.  Jesus  saith,/.  me,  and  I  will  make  you 

fishers  ofmen,  8.22. 1  9.9.  Jl/rtrA:2.14./>«ic5.27. 

16.  24.  let  him  deny  himself  and  take  up  his  cross 

and  /.  me,  Mark  8.  34.  |  10.  21.  Lulce  9.  23. 

19.  21.  sell  that  thou  hast,/,  mc,  Luke  18.  22. 
Luke  9.  59.  he  said,  /.  me,  John  1.  43.  |  21.  22. 
John  10.  27.  my  sheep  hear  my  voice  and/,  me 

12.  26.  if  any  man  will  serve  me,  let  him/,  mc 

13.  30.  thou  canst  not/,  me  now,  but  afterwards 
.^cls  12. 8.  cast  thv  garment  about  thee,  and/,  me 

FOLLOWED. 
Ocn.  24.  61.  Rebekah  and  her  damsels/,  the  man 

32.  19.  so  commanded  he  all  that/,  the  droves 
JV«m.32.12.  they  have  wholly/,  the  Ld.  iJeut.l.'Sa. 
Deut.  4.  3.  for  all  the  men  that/.  Baal-jieor 

11.  t6.  swallowed  the  substance  which/  them 
Josh.  6.  8.  and  the  ark  of  the  covenant/,  them 

14.  8.  but  I  wholly/,  the  Lord  my  God,  9.  14. 
Judg.  2. 12.  they  forsook  the  Lord  and/,  other  gods 

9.  49.  cut  down  his  bough,  and/.  Abimelcch 

1  !^am.  14.  22.  they/,  hard  after  the  Philistines 

17.  13.  .Tesse's  three  sons/.  Saul  to  battle,  14. 
31.2.  Philistines/.  Saul,  2 Sam.  l.G.  lCAr.10.2. 

2  Sam.  2.  10.  but  the  house  of  Judah/.  David 

3.  31.  and  king  David  himself/,  the  bier 

17.  23.  Ahithophel  saw  his  counsel  was  not/. 

20.  2.  Israel/.  Sheba  the  son  of  Bichri 

1  Kings  12.20.  there  was  none  that/.house  of  David 

16.  21.  half  of  people/.  Tibni,  half/.  Omri,  22. 
18.18.have  forsaken  the  Lord,  thou  hast  /.  Baalim 
20.  19.  came  out,  and  the  army  which/,  them 

iKings  3.9.  was  no  water  for  the  cattle  that/,  them 

4.  30.  Elisha  rose  and  /.  her 

5.  21.  so  Gehazi/.  after  Naaman,  is  all  well? 
9.  27.  Jehu/,  after  Ahaziah,  and  said,  smite  him 
13.  2.  Jehoahaz/.  sins  of  Jeroboam  sonof  Nebat 

17.  15.  and  they/  vanity,  and  became  vain 
Psal.  68.  25.  the  players  on  instruments/,  after 
Ezek.  10.  11.  whither  the  head  looked,  they/,  it 
Jimos  7.  1.5.  the  Lord  took  me  as  I/,  the  flock 
^fat.27.55.many  women  which/.  Jes.  from  Galilee 
Mark  10.  28.  we  loft  all  and  /.  thee,  Luke  18.  28. 

32.  were  amazed,  and  as  they/,  they  were  afraid 
T.ukc  22.  54.  they  took  him,  and  Peter/,  afar  off 
.Arts  13.43.  religious  proselytes/.  Paul  andBarnab. 

16.  17.  the  same/.  Paul  and  us,  and  cried 
Rom.  9.  30.  Gentiles  who  /.  not  after  righteousness 

31.  who/,  after  the  law  of  righteousness 
1  Cor.  10.  4.  they  drank  of  that  rock  that/,  them 

1  T(m..'>.10.  if  she  have  diligently/every  good  work 

2  Pit.  1. 16.  we  have  not/,  cunningly  devised  fables 

21] 


FOL 

Rev.  6. 8.  his  name  was  Death,  and  hell /.with  him 

8.  7.  there/,  hail  and  fire  mingled  witli  blood 
14.8.  and  there/another  angel,  saying,  Babylon  is 

9.  and  the  third  angel  /.  them,  saying,  if  any  man 

FOLLOWED  him. 
J^Tum.  16. 25.  Moses  rose  up,  the  elders  oflsr./.  him 
Judg.  9.  4.  hired  vain  and  light  persons  who/,  him 

1  .Sam.  13.  7.  and  all  the  people/,  kirn  trembling 

2  Sam.  11. 8.  there/  him  a  mess  of  meat  from  the  k. 
.T/at.4.20.they  left  their  nets  and  f. him,  Mark  1.18. 

22.  they  immediately  left  the  ship  and  /.  him 

25.  and  there/,  him  great  multitudes  of  people, 

8.  1.  I  12.  15.  I  19.  2.  I  20.  29.  Mark  2.  15. 
I  5.  24.  J^uke  23.  27.  John  6.  2. 
8.23. when  entered, hisdisciples/.Ai'm,  LukeQ.2.^0. 

9.  27.  two  blind  men/.  Am,  crying,  and  saying 
26.  58.  but  Peter/,  him  afar  off,  Mark  14.  54. 

Mark  14.  51.  there/,  him  a  certain  young  man 
Luke  5.  11.  they  forsook  all  and/,  him,  28. 

7.9.  Jesus  said  to  the  people  that/,  him,  not  found 
Jlcts  12.  9.  Peter  went  out  and  /.  Am  and  wist  not 
Rev.  19.  14.  the  armies  /.  him  on  white  horses 

FOLLOWED  mc. 
J^um.  14.  24.  my  servant  Caleb  hath/,  me  fully 

32.  11.  because  they  have  not  wholly/.  7«c 

1  Kings  14.  8.  David  who/,  me  with  all  his  heart 
jVeh.  4.  23.  nor  the  men  of  the  guard  which/,  mc 
Mat.  19.  28.  ye  that/,  me  in  the  regeneration 

FOLLOWEDST. 

Ruth  3.  10.  thou  /.  not  young  men,  poor  or  rich 

FOLLOWER. 

2  Tim.  3. 1 10.  hast  been  a  diligent/,  of  my  doctrine 

FOLLOWERS. 
1  Cor.  4. 16.  have  begotten  you  through  the  gospel, 
I  beseech  you,  be/,  of  me,  11.  1.  Phil.  3.  17. 
Eph.  5.  I.  be  ye/,  of  God  as  dear  children 
\Thess.  1.  6.  ye  became/,  of  us  and  of  the  Lord 
2.  14.  for  ye  became/,  of  the  churches  of  God 
//c6.6.12.be/.of  them  who  thro'  faith  inherit  prom. 
1  Pet.  3.  13.  if  ye  be/  of  that  which  is  good 

FOLLOWETH. 
2KingslW5.  him  that/,  her  be  killed,  2  CAr  .03.14. 
Ps.  63. 8.  my  soul  /.  hard  after  thee,  hand  upholds 
Prov.  12.  11.  but  ho  that/,  vain  persons,  28.  19. 
15.  9.  he  loveth  him  that/,  righteousness,  21.  21. 
/sa. 1.23.every  one  loveth  gifts  and/,  after  rewards 
Eiek.  16.  34.  none/,  thee  to  commit  whoredoms 
A/os.]2.1.Ephraim  feeds  on  wind, /.after  east-wind 
Jl/aMO.38.  hethat  takethnot  u|i  hiscrossand/.  me 
Mark  9.  38.  because  he/,  not  us,  JAikc  9.  49. 
John  8. 12.  he  that/,  me  shall  not  walk  in  darkness 

FOLLOWING. 
(?e)i.4I.31.plenty  not  known  by  reason  of  famine/. 
IJcut.  7.  4.  they  will  turn  away  thy  son  from  /.  me 

12.  30.  take  heed  thou  be  not  snared  by/. them 
Josh.  22.  16.  from/,  the  Lord,  18,  23,  29.  1  Sam. 

12.  20.  2  Kings  17.  21.  2  CAr.  25.  27.  |  34.  33. 
./Hrf^.2.J9.  corrupted  in/,  other  gods  to  serve  them 
Ruth  1.  10.  or  to  return  tVoin  /.  aller  thee 

1  Sam.  12. 14.  if  ye  continue/,  the  Lord  your  God 

14.  46.  Saul  went  upi'rom/.  the  Philistines 

15.  11.  Saul  is  turned  back  from/,  me 

24.  1.  when  Saul  was  returned  from/.  Philistines 

2  Sam.".  19.  Asahel  turned  not  from/.  Abiicr,  30. 

26.  bid  the  peoi)le  return  from  /.  their  brethren 
7. 8. 1  took  (bee  from  /.  the  sheep,  to  bi;  ruler  over 

my  people,  1  Chron.  17.  7.  Psal.  78.  71. 

1  Kings  1.  7.  and  they/.  Adonijah,  helped  him 
9.  6.  but  if  you  shall  at  all  turn  from  /.  me 
21.  26.  Ahab  did  very  abominably  in/,  idols 

Psal.  48. 13.  that  ye  may  toll  it  to  the  generation/. 

109. 13.  in  generat./.  let  their  name  be  blotted  out 
Mark  16.  20.  and  confirming  the  word  with  signs/. 
/Aike  13.33.1  must  walk  to-morrow  and  the  day/. 
John  1.  33.  then  Jesus  tuinod  and  saw  them/. 
43.  thoday/.||6.22.theday/.^^JlenthepcoIlle6aw 

2I.20.Peterseeth  the  disciple  w^om  Jesus  loved/. 
./Jets  21.  1.  we  came  the  day/,  unto  Rhodes,  18. 

23.  11.  and  the  night/,  the  Lord  stood  by  him 

2  Pet.  2. 15.  are  gone  astray,  /.  the  way  of  Balaam 

FOLLY. 
<rcn.34.7.  because  Shecliem  had  wrought/,  in  Isr. 
Dcvt.  22.  21.  she  wrought  /.  by  playing  Ihc  whore 
.Tosh.  7.  15.  because  Achan  wrought/,  in  Israel 
.Tudg.  19.  23.  nay,  I  pray  you,  do  not  this/. 

124.  to  this  man  do  not  the  matter  of  this/. 
20.  6.  they  have  committed  lewdness  and/,  in  Isr. 

10.  according  to  the/,  that  they  wrought  in  Isr. 

1  Sam.  25.  25.  Nabal  is  his  name,  and  /.  is  with  him 

2  Sam.  13.  12.  my  brother,  do  not  Ihou  this/. 
Job  1. 1  22.  in  all  this  Job  attributed  not/,  lo  God 

4.  18.  behold  his  angels  he  charged  with/. 

24.  12.  yet  God  layeth  not/,  to  them 
42.  8.  lest  I  deal  with  you  after  your/. 

P.9a^  49. 13.  this  their  way  is  their/,  yet  posterity 
85.  8.  but  let  them  not  turn  again  to  /. 
Pr<?B.5.23.in  the  greatness  of  his/.hc  shall  go  astray 

13.  Ifi.  but  a  fool  layeth  open  his/. 

14.  8.  but  the/,  of  fools  is  deceitful 

18.  the  simple  inherit/,  but  prudent  arecro'wned 


FOO 

P/-.14.2-1.  crownof  wise  is  riches,  foolishn.  off.  is/. 
29.  but  he  that  is  hasty  of  si)irit  e.xalletb/. 

15.  21.  /.  is  joy  to  him  that  is  destitute  of  wisdom 

16.  22.  but  the  instruction  of  fools  is/. 

17. 12.  let  a  bear  meet  rather  than  a  tool  in  his/. 

18.13.  before  he  heareth  it,  it  ig/.  and  shainu  to  him 
26.4.answer  not  a  fool  accord,  to  his/.lest  like  hiiii 

5.  ans.  a  fool  accord,  to  his/,  lest  wise  in  conceit 

11.  as  dog  lo  vonwt, so  a  (bol  returneth  to  his/ 
Eu:l.l.  17.  Igave  my  heart  to  know  wisdom  and/. 

i?3.  I  sought  in  my  heart  to  lay  hold  on/. 

12.  turned  to  behold/.  {|  13.  wisdom  e.xcellclh/. 
7.  25.  I  applied  to  know  the  wickedness  of/. 
10.  1.  so  doth  a  little/,  him  that  is  in  reputation 

6./.  is  set  in  great  dignity,  rich  sit  in  low  plucu 
Isa.'J.n.  an  evildoer,  and cvei'y  mouth si)eaketli/. 
Jer.2'i.  13. 1  have  seen/,  in  the  pru]ihctsorSaMiar. 
ffos.".^lO.  I  will  disco V.  her/,  insight  other  lovers 
2  Cor.  11. 1.  ye  could  bear  with  me  a  little  in  my/ 
27'm.3.9.their/.shall  be  made  manifest  to  all  men 

FOOD. 
Ocn.  2. 9.  every  tree  pleasant  and  that  is  good  for/. 

3.  0.  the  woman  saw  the  tree  was  good  for/. 

6.  21.  take  thou  to  thee  of  all/,  that  is  eaten 

41.  35.  let  them  gather  all/,  of  Ihose  good  years 

42.  7.  came  to  buy  /.  10.  |  43. 2,  4,  20,  22.  |  44.  25. 
33.  take/,  for  the  famine  of  your  households 

44.  1.  he  commanded  lo  fill  the  sacks  with/. 
47.  24.  for  your/,  and  for/,  for  your  little  ones 

Kxod.  21.  10.  her/,  shall  not  be  (fiminished 
Lev.  3.  11.  the/,  of  the  offering  made  by  lire,  16. 
19. 23.  shall  have  planted  all  niannei  of  trees  lor/. 

21.  1 17.  not  approach  to  offer  the/,  of  his  God 

22.  7.  shnll  eat  of  holy  things,  because  it  is  his/ 
/Jej(M0.18.  the  stranger,  in  giving  him/,  andr^im 

1  Sam.  14.24.  cursed  that  ealeth/.  till  evening,  28. 
'2  Sam.9.10.  that  thy  master's  son  may  have/,  to  tat 

\Kings  5. 9.  my  desire,  in  giving  /.  for  my  housch. 
ll.Solom.  gavelliram  wheat  for/.to  hishouseh. 

JVfA.  9.125.  Ihey  possessed  trees  of/,  in  abundance 

Job  23.  12.  thy  words  more  than  my  necessary/. 
24.  5.  wildcrnessyieldelh/.  for  then!  and  children 
38.  41.  who  provideth  for  the  raven  his/.? 
40.  20.  surely  the  mountains  bring  him  Ibrth  /. 

Psa/.78.25.man  did  cat  angels'/,  he  sent  them  niea 
104.  14.  he  may  bring  forth/,  out  of  the  earth 
136.2.5.  who  giveth/.  to  all  fitsh,  his  morcy  forever 
H6.  7.  the  Lord  who  giveth/.  to  the  hungry 
147.9.  he  giveth  to  the  beast  his/,  to  young  ravens 

Prov.  6.  8.  the  ant  gathereth  her/,  in  harvest 
13.  23.  much/,  is  in  the  tillage  of  the  poor 
27.27. thou  shall  have  goats'  milk  enough  for  tliy/ 
28.3.  is  like  a  sweeping  rain  which  leavclh  i;o/ 

30.  8.  feed  mc  with  /.  convenient  tor  me 

31.  14.  like  ships,  she  bringeth  her/,  from  afar 
Kick.  10.  27.  I  have  diminished  thine  ordinary/. 

45.  18.  the  increase  thereof  shall  be  for/,  to  thorn 
-?c^i!  14. 17.  fruitful  eeafons,filling  our  hearts  with/. 

2  Cor.  9.  10.  both  minister  bread  for  your/. 

1  Tim.  G.  8.  having/,  and  raiment,  lot  us  be  content 

Jam.  2.  15.  if  naked  and  destitute  of  daily/. 
FOOL, 

Folly,  Foolishness,  are  to  he  understood  not  only 
according  to  th'ir  natural  and  literal  mean- 
ing, for  one  who  is  an  idiot,  or  a  very  veak 
man,  and  for  the  discourses  and  Jiotiojis  of 
fovls  and  madmen ;  hut  in  the  language  of 
scripture,  especially  in  the  bonk  o/ Pro^crbl', 
fool  is  the  usual  charaetf-r  of  the  sinner,  ami 
folly  and  foolishness  are  put  fur  sin.  Psal.  38. 
5,  My  wounds  stink,  and  are  corrupt,  berauKe 
of  my  foolishness,  my  sin.  .find  in  Psal.  CU.  5, 
O  God,  thou  knowestmy  foolishness.  Solomon 
sets  the  fool  in  opposition  to  t.'ic  prudent  man. 
Prov.  13.  16,  Every  pruilent  man  dealelh  with 
knowledge;  but  a  fool  layeth  open  his  folly. 
For  as  by  prudence  a  man  so  governs  himself, 
and  regulates  his  actions,  as  to  avoid  im- 
pending evils,  and  to  obtain  that  good  which 
is  suitable  to  his  iicccssitics :  so  it  is  the  effect 
of  folly,  not  to  foresee  evils  to  prcijent  them, 
and  to  neglect  ike  season  of  obtaining  what 
is  good. 

In  Prov.  13.  20,  Solomon  opposes  the  fool  (o  the 
wise  man.  He  that  walketh  with  wise  men, 
shall  be  wise ;  but  a  conipanion  of  fools  shall 
be  destroyed.  .4s  it  is  with  relation  to  the 
affairs  of  this  life;  the  man  of  prudence  and 
conduct  in  his  affairs,  who  takes  the  best  me- 
thod of  managing  things  to  his  oum,  his 
family's,  and  friend's,  or  any  society's  repu- 
tation, comfort,  and  advantage,  and  who 
minds  his  business  more  than  his  pleasure,  is 
the  wise  man :  Jind  the  inconsiderate.,  heed- 
less, slothful  man,  who  neglects  the  principal 
affairs  of  life,  or  goes  into  improper  or  un- 
likely methods  of  managing  them  to  advan- 
tage, or  who  minds  his  pleasure  more  than  hi.t 
business,  is  the  fool  for  this  world:  So  it  is 
with  respect  to  another  wrrld;  tkt  truly  wiss 


FOO 

man  is  he  ichoproposes  the  things  of  God,  and 
the  everlasting  iitUrest  of  Ins  iiumortal  svul,  u,< 
kis  highest  end,  and  pursuts  them  Tcith  the  ut- 
most care  and  diligence,  in  the  way  uf  (Jod' s  ap- 
puintinent  through  Jesus  Clirisl  our  only  i>a- 
viour;  and  who  seeks  all  things  else  with  less  so- 
licitude and  concern,  and  in  subordination  to 
these.  And  the  tool,  on  the  other  hand,  is  he,  who 
viakes  something  in  this  world  his  highest  end 
and  aim,  and  spendu  his  chief  time  and  care, 
concern  and  labour,  about  it,to  the  neglect  of  the 
infinitely  higher  interests  of  Hod's  glory  and 
his  own  soul's  everlasting  happiness,  iu  that 
the  highest  lolly  is  justly  charged  upon  every 
wilful  impenitent  sinner. 
Such  also  are  called  by  the  name  of  fools,  who, 
though  they  be  godly,  yet  hace  much  ignorance 
and  unbelief  remaining  in  them.  U  I'ools, 
and  slow  ol'lieart  lo  bcliuve,  says  our  Haoiour 
t»  tlie  disciples  that  were  going  to  Eminaus, 
L.uke  i!4.  i!o.  And  it  is  the  character  of  all 
men,  as  they  are  bom  possessed  of  natural  ig- 
norance and  corruption.  Tit.  3.  3,  We  our- 
selves wero  sometimes  foolish.  The  Apostle 
says,  1  Cor.  4.  10,  VVo  are  fools  for  Christ's 
sake :  that  is,  we  are  accounted  so  by  the  wise 
men  of  the  world.  And  in  Kom.  l.'Z'2,hesays, 
Prufessing  themselves  to  be  wise,  they  became 
fools:  that  is,  While  they  pretended  to,  and 
boasted  of  more  than  ordinary  wisdom,  their 
learned  men  being  at  first  usually  called  So- 
phists, or  wise  men,  though  afterwards  Philo- 
sophers, they  entertained  and  tented  many 
gross  and  absurd  opinions  and  practices,  and 
so  shewed  themscliyes  to  be  real  fouls.  The  same 
apostle  says,  in  I  Cor.  1. 18,  The  preaching  of 
the  cross  is  to  them  that  perish  foolishness.  The 
doctrine  of  ChriBl  crucified,  to  purchase  eternal 
salvation  for  believers,  is  by  unbelievers,  that 
judge  only  according  tocarnal  reason  and  sense, 
accounted  an  absurd,  ridiculous,  impossible 
thing,  and  which  none  m  their  wits  will  believe, 
aecordintr  to  the  principles  of  Ihtir  philosophy. 
Andinl  Cor.'i.  14, The  IhingsofGodare  t'oolish- 
ness  to  the  natural  man.  He  counts  them  the  most 
foolish  things  in  the  world ;  he  looks  upon 
<kem  as  either  trtfiing  and  impertinent ;  or  as 
tontaining  means  and  ends  disproportionate  : 
sr  as  undesirable  in  comparison  of  what  may 
be  set  up  in  competition  with  them. 
1  Sam.  21).  :r!l.  behold  I  have  played  the/,  and  erred 
Psal.  14.  1.  the/,  hath  said  in  his  heart,  53.  1. 
49.  10.  likewise  the/,  and  brutish  person  perish 
92.  6.  neither  doth  a/,  understand  this 
Prov.  10.  8.  but  a  prating/,  shall  fall,  10. 
23.  it  is  a  sport  to  a/,  to  do  mischief 
11.29.  the /.shall  be  servant  to  the  wiseof  heart 
12.  l.j.  the  way  of  a/,  is  right  in  his  own  eyes 

Ki.a/.  wrath  is  presently  known,  but  prudent  man 
i:i.lt>.wise  man  fcareth,  but/.layeth  open  lua  folly 
14.  16.  but  the/,  rageth  and  is  conlident 
J.'i.  ."i.  a/,  despiseth  hie  father's  instruction 
17.  7.  excellent  speech  becometh  not  a/. 
lO.a  reproof  more  than  a  hundred  stripes  into  a/. 
I'J.ieta  bear  meet  a  man  rather  than/.in  his  folly 
It),  why  isa  price  iii  hand  ofa/.  to  get  wisdom? 
21.  he  that  begetteth  a/,  doth  it  to  his  sorrow 
28.a/.whcn  he  holdcth  his  peace  is  counted  wise 
Irf.  2.  a/,  hath  no  delight  in  understamling 
6/.  lips  enter  intocontent. mouth  calls  for  strokes 
Prop. 18. 7.a/.  mouth  is  his  destruction, lips  a  snare 
20.  3.  but  every/,  will  be  meddling 
S4t).  4.  answer  not  a/.  |1  .5.  answer  a  /. 
8.  tio  is  he  that  giveth  honour  to  a/. 
lO.the  great  G.rewardeth  the/and  tranBgrcBsors 
11.  as  a  dog  so  a/,  rcturnclh  to  his  folly 
27.  3.  but  a/,  wrath  is  heavier  than  them  both 

*2.  though  thou  shouldest  bray  a/,  in  a  mortar 

29.1 1 /.iittereth  allhismin(t,  buta  wise  man  keeps 

Ecci.%  14.  but  the/,  walketh  in  darkness 

IS.  as  it  happcneth  to  the  /.  so  even  to  me 

16.igno  remembranceof  wise  man  more  than  off. 

19.  who  knoweih  whether  be  be  wise  or  a/.  ? 

4.5.  the/,  foldeth  his  hands  together,  eats  his  flesh 

5.  3.  a/,  voice  is  known  by  multitude  of  words 

6.  8.  fur  what  hath  the  wise  more  than  the/.  ? 
10. 2.  at  right  hand,  but  a/,  heart  is  at  his  left  hand 

Hf.iflfull  of  word-i, man  cannot  tell  what  shall  be 
Jcr.  17.  J 1.  and  at  his  end  he  shall  be  a/. 
Jlf(il..5.22.whosoever  shall  say,  thou/,  be  in  danger 
/.mAc  12.SW. /.  this  night  thy  soul  shall  bo  re<|uired 
)r,or.3il8.  let  him  become  a/,  that  he  maybe  wise 
1.5.  36.  Ihou/.  that  thou  gowest  in  not  (piickened 
iCor.W.  Ifi.  I  say  again,  let  no  man  think  mca/. 
I2.fi.  iho'  I  would  desire  to  glory,  shall  not  he  a/ 
ll.I  am  become  a/.in  glorying,  ye  compelled  me 
As  a  poor,. 
•{.<fam.  3.  33.  David  said,  died  .Abnerd.t  a  f.  dieth? 
Prov.  7.  22.  as  af.  totho  correction  of  the  i^tocks 
Etcl.  2.  IC.  how  dicth  the  wise  man  I  as  the  f. 
212 


FOO 

i  Cor.  \\.  16.  if  otherwise,  yet  as  af.  receive  mc 
23.are  they  ministers!  Isjieak  as  af.  1  am  more 

For  a  Pool. 

Prov.  19.  10.  delight  is  not  seemly /or  af. 
24.7.  wisdom  is  loo  high/or  a/,  opens  not  mouth 
2ti.  1.  so  honour  is  not  seemly /or  af. 

3.  a  bridle  for  the  ass,  and  a  rod /or  thef.  back 
30.  m.for  af.  when  he  is  tilled  with  meat 

Js  a  FOOL. 
Prov.  10.  18.  he  that  uttereth  a  slander  i>  af. 
19.1.  than  he  that  is  perverse  in  his  lips,  and  is  af. 

28.  26.  he  that  trustelh  in  his  own  heart  is  af. 
Eccl.iO.3.  when  he  that  is  af.  walketh,  his  wisdom 

failelhhim,  hesailh  to  every  one  tliat  he  isaf. 
//os.9.7.the  prophet  is  a/.ihe  spiritual  man  is  mad 

1  Tim.  6.  I  4.  he  is  af.  and  knoweth  nothing 

Of  a  FOOL. 
Proo.l2. 15.  the  way  of  a  f.  is  right  in  his  own  eyes 
17.  21.  and  the  father  of  af.  hath  no  joy 
24.  the  eyes  of  a  f.  are  in  the  ends  of  the  earth 
23.  9.  speak  not  in  the  ears  of  a  f.  he  will  despise 
26. 6. he  that  sendeth  a  message  by  the  hand  of  af. 

12.  there  is  more  hopeo/a/.  thanof  him,  29.  20. 
£cc/.7.6.as  crackling  of  thorns,so  laughter  o/£Ae/. 

10.  12.  but  the  lips  o/ a/,  will  swallow  up  himself 
FOOLS. 

2  Sam.  13.13.  thoushaltbe  as  one  of  the/,  in  Israel 
Job  12.  17.  and  he  maketh  the  judges/. 

30.  8.  they  were  children  of/.children  of  base  men 
Psal.  75.  4.  I  said  to  the/,  deal  not  foolishly 
94.  8.  and  ye  /.  when  will  ye  be  wise  1 
107.  17./.  bocauseof  their  Iransgres.  are  afflicted 
Prov.  1.  7.  but/,  despise  wisdom  and  instruction 
22.  how  long,  ye/,  will  ye  hate  knowledge  I 

32.  and  the  prosperity  of/,  shall  destroy  ihem 
3.  35.  but  shame  shall  be  the  promotion  of/. 

8.  5.  and  ye/,  be  ye  of  an  understanding  heart 
10.  21.  but/,  die  for  want  of  wisdom 

12. 23.  but  the  heart  of/,  proclaimeth  foolishness 
i3.19.but  itis  abomination  to /.to  depart  from  evil 

20.  but  a  companion  of/,  shall  be  destroyed 

14.  8.  folly  of/,  is  deceit  ||  9./.make  a  mock  at  sin 
24. crown  of  wise  is  riches, foolishness  of/.is  folly 

33.  what  is  in  the  midst  of/,  is  made  known 

15.  2.  the  mouth  of/,  poureth  out  foolishness 
14.  the  mouth  of/,  feedeth  on  foolishness 

16.  'J2.  but  the  instruction  off.  is  folly 

19.  2iJ.  stripes  are  prepared  for  the  back  of/. 
26.  7.  so  is  a  parable  in  the  mouth  of/.  9. 
Kcc/.5.1.more  ready  to  hear,than  givesacrificeoff. 

4.  he  hath  no  pleasure  in/,  pay  what  hast  vowed 
7.  4.  but  the  heart  of/,  is  in  the  house  of  mirth 

5.  than  for  a  man  to  hear  the  song  of/. 

9. he  not  hasty, for  anger  restcth  inthe  bosom  of/. 

9.  17.  more  th;in  cry  of  him  that  ruleth  among/. 
Isa.  19.  11. surely  the  princes  of  Zoan  are/.  13. 

35.  8.  way-faring  men,  tho'/.  shall  not  err  therein 
Mat.  23. 17.  ye/,  and  blind,  whether  is  greater,  19. 
/yuke  11.  40.  ye/.did  not  he  that  made  that  without 

24.25  O/.and  slow  of  heart  to  believe  the  prophets 
Itoin.  1.  22.  professing  to  be  wise,  they  became/. 
lC'or.4. 10.  we  are/.forChri6t'8sake,ye  wisein  Ch 
2Cor.  11.19.for  yesufrer/.gladly,seeing  ye  are  wise 
K;i/j.5. I5.see  then  that  ve  walk  notas/.bulas  wise 

FOOLISH. 
Deut.  32.  6.  do  ye  thusreciuito  the  Ld.  Of.  people? 

21.  will  provoke  thorn  with  a/nation,  ftoni. 10. 19. 
./o42.10.lhou  speakestasoneof/.woinen  speaketh 

5.  2,  for  wrath  killeth  the/,  man,  envy  slays 
3.  I  have  seen  the/,  taking  root,  but  I  cursed 
Psal.  5.  5.  the/,  shall  not  stand  in  thy  sight 
39.  8.  make  ine  not  the  reproach  of  the/. 
73.3.  for  I  was  envious  at  the/,  when  I  saw  prosp 

22.  bo/,  was  I  and  ignorant,  I  was  as  a  beast 
74.  18.  the/,  people  have  blasphemed  thy  name 

22.  remeinb.  how  the/.man  reproach,  thco  daily 
Proo.O.t).  forsake  the/,  and  live,  go  in  way  underst. 

13.  a/,  woman  is  clamor,  is  simple,  knows  noth. 

10.  1.  but  a/  son  is  the  heaviness  of  his  mother 

14.  but  the  mouth  of  the/,  is  near  destruction 

14.  1.  but  the/,  plucketh  it  down  with  her  hands 
3.  in  the  mouth  of  the/,  is  a  rod  of  pride 

7.  go  from  the  presence  ofa/.  man 

15.  7.  but  the  heart  of  the/,  doetli  not  so 

20.  but  a/,  man  despiseth  his  mother 

17.25.  a/.son  is  a  grief  to  his  father,  and  bitterness 
19.  13.  a/,  son  is  ihe  calamity  of  his  father 
21.  20.  a/,  man  spendeth  a  treasure 

29.  9.  if  a  wise  man  contendeih  with  a/,  man 
F.ccl.  4.  13.  better  is  a  wise  child  than  a/,  king 

7.  17.  be  not  overmuch  wicked,  neither  be  thou/. 

10. 15.  labour  of  the/,  wearictli  every  oneof  them 
[sa.  44.  25.  ho  maketh  their  knowledge/. 
./(;r.4.22.  for  my  people  aro/.they  are  sottish  childr. 

5.  4.  I  said,  surely  these  are  poor,  they  are/. 

21.  hear  nnw.thls,  Of.  people,  who  gee  not 
10.  8.  but  they  arc  altogether  brutish  and  /. 

/,om.2. 14.  thy  proph.  have  seen  vain  and/,  things 
F.zek.  13.3.  thiissaith  Ihe  L.  woe  to  tho /.  prophets 
Zcth.  11. 15.  take  the  instruments  of  a/,  shepherd 


FOO 

Mat.  7.26.  shall  be  likened  unto  a/,  man  whobuiTl 
25.  2.  live  of  the  virgins  were  wise,  and  live/. 
Horn.  1.  21.  and  their/,  heart  was  ilarkened 

2.  20.  an  instructor  of  the/,  a  teacher  of  babes 
ICor.  1.20.  hath  not  G.  made/,  wisd.  of  this  world 
Gal.3.  l.O/.  Galatians,  who  hath  bewitched  you 

3.  are  ye  so/.  ?  having  begun  inulie  Spirit 
Eph.  5.  4.  neither  tilthiness,  nor/,  talking 

1  'J'im.  6.  9.  they  that  will  be  rich  fallinio/.  luBt« 

2  Tim.  2.23.  but/,  questions  avoid.  Tit.  3.  9. 
Tit.  3.  3.  we  ourselves  were  sometimes  /.  deceived 

1  Pet.2.  15.  may  jiut  to  silence  the  igiior.  of/,  men 

FOOLISHLY. 
Oen.31.28.thouhast  now  done/,  in  so  doing,  in  my 
power  to  hurt  you,  1  .)>am.  13.  13.  2  CAr.  16. 9. 
JtTum.  12.  11.  the  sin  on  us  wherein  we  have  done/. 

2  Sam.  24.  10.  I  have  done  very  /.  1  Chron.  21.  8. 
Joil.22.in  all  this  Job  sinned  not,  nor  charged  G./. 
Psal.  75.  4. 1  said  to  the  fools,  deal  not/. 
Prov.  14.  17.  he  that  is  soon  angry  dealeth/. 

30.  32  if  thou  hast  done/,  in  lifting  thyself 
2Cor.  11. 17. 1  speak  it  as  it  were  /.  in  tins  boasting 
21. 1  speak  /.  I  am  bold  also,  are  they  Hebrews} 
FOOLISHNESS. 
2Sam.  15.31.  turn  the  counsel  of  Ahithophel  into/ 
Psal.  38.  5.  my  wounds  stink  because  of  my/. 
09.  5.  O  God,  thou  knoweat  my  /.  sins  are  not  hid 
Prov.  12.  23.  but  the  heart  of  tools  proclaimeth  / 

14.  24.  but  the/,  of  fools  is  folly 

15.  2.  but  the  mouth  of  fools  poureth  out/. 
14.  but  the  mouth  of  fools  feedeth  on  /. 

19.  3.  the/,  of  man  porverteth  his  way 
22. 15./.  is  bound  in  the  heart  ofa  child 
24.9.  the  thought  of/,  is  sin,the  scorner  abominat. 
27.  22.  yet  will  not  his/,  dejiart  frjm  him 
F.ccl.  7.  25.  to  know  the  wicked,  of/,  and  madness 
10.1.3.  tho  beginning  ofthewordsof  his  mouth  is/. 
Mark  7.  22.  thefts,  ])ride,/.  come  from  within 
ICor.  1.  IB.preaching  of  cross  to  them  thai  perish'/. 

21.  it  pleased  God  by  the  /.  of  preaching  to  save 
23.  we  preach  Christ  crucified,  to  the  Greeks/. 
25.  because  the/,  of  God  is  wiser  than  men 

2. 14.  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God  are/,  to  him 

3.  19.  the  wisdom  of  this  world  is/,  with  God 

FOOT 

Is  apart  of  the  body  well  known.  In  old  times  it 
was  customary  to  wash  the  feet  of  strangers 
upon  their  coming  off  a  journey.  Gen.  lb.  4.  | 
Kl.  2.  I  24.  32.  because  generally  they  were 
barefoot,  or  wore  sandals  only,  which  did  not 
secure  them  from  the  dust  or  dirt.  St.  Paul 
enjoins  enquiry  to  he  made,  whether  the  widows 
who  were  to  be  taken  into  the  number  of  those 
who  were  to  be  maintained  by  the  church,  had 
washed  the  feet  of  Ihe  saints;  whether  they 
had  been  ready  to  do  the  meanest  offices  to  the 
servants  of  (rod,  1  Tim.  5.  II).  Christ  Jesus, 
to  give  us  an  example  of  humility,  washed  the 
feet  of  his  Apostles;  and  thereby  taught  th'-m 
to  perform  all  the  mo.tt  humble  services  for 
one  another,  .lohn  13.  5. 

Feet,  in  the  style  of  the  sacred  Writers,  often 
mean  inclinations,  affections,  propensities,  ac- 
tions, motions.  Eccl.  5.  1,  Kicp  thy  fool  when 
tliougocstlo  the  house  of  God.  Psal.  36.  11, 
Jjet  not  Iho  foot  of  pride  come  against  mc. 
And  in  Psal.  119.  .59,  I  turned  my  feet  unto 
thy  testimonies.  Also  in  ICpli.  6.  15,  And  your 
feet  shod  with  the  pn^pnralion  of  ihe  gospel  of 
peace.  To  be  at  any  one's  feet,  is  used  for 
obeying,  being  in  his  serr^ice,  following  him. 
Abigail  tells  David,  that  the  presents  which  she 
brous'ht  him,  were  for  the  young  men  that 
walked  at  his  feet ;  for  the  soldiers  trho  followed 
him,  1  Sam.  25.  t  27.  Moses  says,  llciii. X\.X 
that  the  Lord  loved  his  people,  and  ihpy  sat 
down  at  his  feet:  Like  scholars,  they  heard 
him,  they  belonged  to  him,  they  were  taught  and 
instructed  in  his  doctrine.  .St.  Paul  says,  that 
hewns  brouir/itup  at  the  feet  o/ Gamaliel,  Acts 

22.  3.  And  Mary  sat  ni  "ur  Saviour's  feet, 
and  heard  his  word,  lAthe  i^.  39. 

In  Deut.  11.  10.  it  is  said,  that  the  land  of 
Canaan  is  not  like  the  land  of  Egypt,  where 
thou  Koweilst  thy  seed,  and  watercdat  it  with 
thy  foot:  that  is,  that  Palestine  is  a  country 
where  the  rains  are  not  eitremely  rare,  lehere 
the  dews  are  plentiful,  where  there  are  many 
springs,  rivulets,  and  brooks,  irilhout  reckon- 
iniTthrrivcr  Jordan,  which  supply  the  earth  with 
all  the  moisturi  that  is  necessary  to  its  pro- 
ducintr fruit:  whereas  Kgypi  is  a  country  where 
there  is  no  river  but  Ihe  Nile,  where  it  never 
rams,  and  where  the  lands  which  are  not  tcitkm 
reach  to  be  watered  by  the  inundations  of  this 
rircr,  continue  parched,  and  barren.  Tn  supplf 
this  want,  ditches  are  dug,  and  water  distribft- 
ledthrouehout  the  sereral  villages;  the  digging 
these  ditches,  and  dispersing  these  waters 
create  a  great  deal  of  labour  to  the  feat^ 


POO 

But  notwithstanding  these  precautions,  there  are 
many  places  which  have  no  water;  and  in  the 
course uf  the  year,  the  places  which  are  nearest 
to  the  Nile,  require  to  be  watered  again  in  an 
artificial  manner.     It  is  done  by  the  kelp  of 
some  machines,  which  Philo  describes  thus: 
It   is  a   wheel   which  a  man  turns  with    the 
notion  of  his  feet,  by  ascending  successively 
the  several  steps   which  are  within  it.     But 
as  while  he  is  thiis  continually  turning,  he  can- 
not keep  himself  up,  he  holds  a  stay  in  his 
hands  whichis  not  moveable,  and  this  supports 
him;  so  that  in  this  work,  the  hands  do  the 
office  of  the  feet,  and  the  feet  that  of  the  hands : 
since  the  hands  which  should  act,  are  at  rest; 
and  the  feet  which  should  be  at  rest,  are  in 
action,  and  give  motion  to  the  wheel.     This 
is  what  is  meant  by  watering  the  earth  with 
their  leet. 
It   is    said,  in  Jer.  2.  25,    Withhold   thy   foot 
from  being  unshod,  and  thy  throat  from  thirst. 
Do  not  continue  to  prostitute  yourselves,  as 
you  have  hitherto  done,  to  strange  people,    tie 
speaks  to  the  infidel  and  idolatrous  Jews.     So 
likewise  Ezek.  16.  25,  Thou  hast  opened  thy 
feet  to   every  one   thiit  passed    by.     It    is  a 
modest  expression,  fur  exposing  one's  naked 
ness,  or  going  into  the  bed  of  lust.  Jacob  said 
to  Laban,  Gen.  ^0.^30,  The  Lord  hath  blessed 
thee  at  my  foot ;  that  is,  ever  since  I  came  to 
you;  since  my  feet  entered  into  thy  house :  Or, 
by  my  foot;  that  is,  by  my  jni?tislry  and  la 
hour,  as  the  phrase  is  used,  Deut.  H.  10. 
To  be  under  any  one's  feet,  to  be  a  footstool  to 
iiim,  is  a  figurative  way  of  speaking,  to  signify 
the  subjection  of  a  subject  to  his  sovereign,  of 
a  servant  to  his  master.    Psal.  8.  6.  |  18.  36. 
I  110.  1.     Thou  hast  put  all  things  under  his 
feet.     Mine  enemies  are  fallen  under  my  feet. 
Sit  thou  at  my  right  hand,  until  I  make  thine 
enemies  thy  footstool.     To  lick   the  dust  off 
one's  feet,  Isa.  4'J.  23,  They  shall  bow  down 
to  thee  with  their  face  toward  the  earth,  and 
lick  up  the  dust  of  thy  feet.    They  shall  highly 
reverence  and  honour  thee,  and  shall   most 
bamblyandrcadily submitthemselves  unto  thee. 
The  expressions  are  borrowed  from  the  prac- 
tice of  the  eastern  people  in  their  prostrations 
and  adorations,  when  they  bowed  so  low  as  to 
touch  and  kiss  the  ground,  whereby  they  did  or 
might  seem  to  lick   tip  the  very  dust  of  the 
ground,  which  was  about  or  under  the  feet  of 
those  whom  they  adored. 
Nakedness  of  feet  was  a  sign  of  tnourning:  For- 
bear  to  cry,  says  God  to   Ezekiel,  make  no 
mourning  for  the  dead,  and  put  on  thy  shoes 
upon  thy  feet,  Ezek.  24. 17.  It  was  also  a  mark 
of  respect,  reverence,  and  adoration,  Exod.  3. 5, 
Put  off  thy  shoes  from  off  thy  feet,  for   tlie 
place   where   thou    Blandest    is    holy  ground. 
To  wash  one's  foot  with  oil,  or  with  butter,  sig- 
nifies plenty  of  all  sorts  of  good  things,  IDeut 
33.  24.  Job  2!).  6.     To  wash  one's  feet  in  the 
blood  of  sinners;  to  take  remarkable  vengeance 
on  them,  to  shed  rivers  of  their  blood,  Psal. 
53.  10. 
A  wicketlman  epeaketh  with  his  feet,.ta?/sSolomon, 
Prov.  6.  13.     lie  uses  much  gesture  with  his 
hands  and  feet  ichile  he  is  talking;  he  secretly 
signifies  to  his  companions  his  intentions  orde- 
siresof  some  evil  towards  another  per  son, which 
he  is  afraid,  or  ashamed  to  express  openly.  The 
ancient  sages  blamed  those  who  used  too  much 
gesticulation,and  spoke  with  all  their  members. 
Ezekiel  reproaches  the  Ammonites  with  clap- 
ping their  hands,  and  stamping  with  their  feet 
in  token  of  joy,  upon  seeing  the  desolation  of 
Jerusalem  atid  the  temple,  Ezek.  25.  6.     jind 
in  chap.  fi.  11.  he  makes  the  same  motions  the 
signs  of  grief,  because  of  the  ruin  of  his  people. 
The  prophet  Isaiah   says,   Blessed  are  ye  that 
BOW  beside  all  waters,  that  send  fo'th  thither 
the  feet  of  the  ox   and   the   ass,   Isa.  32.  20. 
Happy  are  the  people  that  soin  their  com  upon 
a  well-watered  soil,  who  with  their  oxen  and 
asses  plow  a  fat  and  fruitful  land ;  or  who  feed 
there  their  oxenandtheir asses .  To  send  out  their 
feet,  that  is,  to  send  them  there,  to  feed  them,  to 
plow  there  with  them.     But  this  passage  may 
be  understood  mystically,  and  seems  to  respect 
the  times  of  the  gospel :  that  is,  Happy  are  the 
.Apostles  and  gnspel-7ninisters,  in  comparison 
of  those  that  lived  before  them,  who  shall  find 
abundant  success  of  their  labours  in  the  con- 
version of  multitudes  unto  Christ.    The  same 
prophet  says,  chap.  58.  13,  If  thou  turn  away 
thy   foot   from  llie  sabbath,   from  doing   thy 
pleasure   on    my   holy  day:   This   is    taken, 
either  properly,  if  thou  forbear  walking,  or 
.  taking  any  unnecessary  journeys  on  the  aab- 
2J3 


FOO 

bath-day  ;  Or,  metaphorically,  that  is,  if  thou 
keep  thy  mind  and  affections  clear,  and  re- 
strain thyself  from  wiiatevcr  may  profane  it : 
feet  being  often  put  for  affections,  because  the 
mind  is  moved  by  the  ajfections,  as  the  body 
is  by  the  feet. 

Job  says,  that  he  was  feet  to  the  lame,  and 
eyes  to  the  blind.  Job  21).  15.  tie  led,  he  di- 
rected, and  instructed  the  one,  and  supported 
the  other:  And  in  chap.  13.  27,  he  says,  that 
God  had  put  his  feet  in  the  stocks,  and  looked 
narrowly  into  all  his  paths:  That  he  had  en- 
compassed him  with  his  judgments,  so  that  he 
had  no  way,  or  possibility  to  escape;  he  was 
like  a  bird  taken  by  the  foot  in  a  snare. 

Gen. 41. 44.  without  thee  no  man  shall  lift  up  his/. 

Exod.  12.37.  about  si.\  hundred  thousand  on/. 
21. 24.  thou  shall  give/,  for/.  iJeut.  19.21. 
30.  18.  shall  make  a  laver  of  brass  and  his  /. 
28.  I  31.  9.  1  35.  16.  j  38.  8.  |  39.  39.  |  40. 11. 
Lev.S.n. 

Lev.  13.  12.  if  a  leprosy  cover  from  head  to/. 

JV«m.22.25.  the  ass  ciushed  Balaam's/,  agst.  wall 

JJeut.  8.  4.  nor  did  thy  /.  swell  these  forty  years 
11. 10.  and  waleredsi  it  with  thy/,  as  a  garden 

25.  9.  she  shall  loose  his  shoe  from  of!"  his /. 
29.  5.  thy  shoe  is  not  waxen  old  upon  thy/. 
32.3.5.  lo  me  vengean.their/.shall  slide  in  due  lime 
33.  24.  Moses  said,  let  Asher  dip  his/,  in  oil 

.fosh.  1.  3.  every  place  your /.shall  tread  upon 
5.  15.  loose  thy  shoe  from  off  thy  /.Joshua  did  so 
.hidg.  5.  15.  Barak  was  sent  on/,  to  the  valley 

1  Sam.  23.  t  22.  and  see  where  his/,  shall  be 

2  Sam.  2.  18.  Asahel  was  as  light  of/,  as  a  roe 
21.20.  had  on  every/,  six  toes,  1  Chron.  20.  6. 

2  Kings  9.  33.  Jehu  trod  Jezebel  under/. 

2  CAr.  33.  8.  nor  any  more  remove  the/,  of  Israel 

.hb  23.11.  my/,  hath  held  his  steps,  his  way  I  kept 
28.  4.  even  the  waters  forgotten  of  the/. 
31.  5.  or  if  my/,  hath  hasted  to  deceit 
39. 15.  and  forgetteth  that  the/,  may  crush  them 

Psal.  9. 15.  in  the  net  they  hid  is  their/,  taken 

26.  12.  my/,  standelli  in  an  even  place 
36.  II.  let  not  the/,  of  pride  come  against  me 
38.  16.  when  my/,  slippeth,  magnify  themselves 
66.  6.  they  went  through  the  flood  on/. 
68.  23.  that  thy/,  may  be  dipped  in  blood 

91.12.  his  angels  shall  bear  thee  up,  lest  thou  dash 
thy/,  against  a  stone,  Mat.  4.  6.  iMke  4.  11. 

94.18. 1  said  my  /.  slippeth,  thy  mercy  held  me  up 
121.  3.  he  will  not  sutler  thy  /.  to  be  moved 
Pron.  1.  15.  refrain  thy/,  from  their  path 
3.23.  shall  walk  safely, and  thy/.shall  not  stumble 
26.  the  Lord  shall  keep  thy  /.  from  being  taken 
4.  27.  turn  not  to  right  or  left,  remove  thy/,  from 
25.17.  withdraw  thy/,  from  thy  neighbour's  house 
19. confidence  in  unt'aith.men  is  like/,  out  of  joint 
Eccl.  5.  1.  keep  thy/. when  goest  into  house  ofGod 
Isa.  14.  25.  on  my  mountains  tread  him  under/. 
18.  7.  a  nation  meted  out  and  trodden  under/. 
20.  2.  and  put  off  thy  shoe  from  oft"  thy/. 
26.  6.  the  /.  shall  tread  it  down,  even  of  the  poor 
41.2.  who  called  the  righteous  man  to  his/. 
58.  13.  if  thou  turn  away  thy/,  from  my  sabbath 
Jer.  2.25.  withhold  thy/,  from  being  unshod 

12.  10.  they  have  troildnn  my  portion  under/. 
Tjum.  1.  15.  Ld.  hath  trodden  under/,  mighty  men 
E:c/t.  6. 11.  stamp  with  thy/,  and  say,  alas 
16.  t  6.  when  trodden  under/.  I  said  to  thee,  live 
25.  t  6.  because  thou  hast  stamped  with  the/. 
29.ll.no/.  of  man,no/.of  beastshall  pass  thro'  it 

32. 13.  neither  shall  the  /.  of  man  trouble  them 
Dan.  8. 13. to  give  the  host  to  be  trodden  under/. 
./Jff!0s2.15.that  is  swift  of/.shall  not  deliver  himself 
Mat.  5. 13,  salt  unsavory,  trodden  under/,  of  men 

14.  13.  the  people  followed  him  on/,  out  of  cities 

18.  8.  if  thy  /.  offend  thee,  cut  it  off,  Mark  9.  45. 

22. 13.  bind  him  hand  and  /.  cast  him  into  darkn. 

Mark  6.  33.  many  ran  a  /.  thither  out  of  all  cities 

,/rtA?(I1.44.wa9dead  came  forth  bound  hand  and/. 

.1ct.^~. 5.notso  much  as  to  set  his/.on,yet  promised 

20.13.sohad  appointed,  minding  himself  to  go  a/. 

lCor.12.15.  if  the/,  sav, because  I  am  not  the  hand 

Heb.  10.29.  hath  trodden  under  /.  the  Son  of  God 

Rev.X.X'i.  Son  of  man  clothed  with  a  garm.to  the/. 

11.  2.  the  holy  city  shall  they  tread  under/. 

Sole  of  FOOT. 

(rcn.P.O.thedove  found  no  rest  fortheM/eo/her/. 

/>f  K(.23.35.  L.  smite  thee  with  a  botch  from  s.  off. 

56  .not  set  so^eo/ her/.on  ground  fordelicateness 

fio.nor  shall  the  sole  of  thy  /.  have  rest  [on 

Josh.1.3.  every  place  the  sole  of  yoarf.  shall  tread 

2Sam.li.25.  none  like  Ahsalom.from  (he  sole  off. 

.fob  2. 7.  Job  smitten  with  boils  from  sole  of  the  /. 

Isa.  1.  6.  from  sole  of  f.  to  the  head  no  soundness 

Ezek.  \. 7.  sole  off.  was  hketha  sole  of  a.  ca.Wa  f. 

FOOT-BREADTH. 
Deut.2.5.v/i\\  not  give, no  not  so  much  Ksf. breadth 

Deft-FOOT. 
Rev.  10. 2.  and  he  set  hia  Icft-f.  upon  the  earth 


FOIi 

Right-FOOr. 

fiec.l0.2.a little  book,  he  set  hmright-f.  on  tbesna 

See  Toe. 

FOOTED. 

Lev.  11.3.  whatsoever  is  cloven-/,  thalye  shall  eat 

7. and  the  swine, though  he  be  cloven  /.is  unclean 

21. 1-9.  a  man  that  is  broken-/,  shall  iiotapproach 

Acts  10. 12.  all  manner  of  four-/,  beasts,  11.  6. 

Rom.  1.23.  image  made  like  birds  and  lour/.beasls 

FOOTMEN. 
JVum.11.21.  the  people  are  six  hundred  thousand/. 
1  Sam.  22. 17.  Saul  said  to  the/,  slay  priests  of  Ld. 
Jer.  12. 5.  if  hast  run  wilh/.  and  tliey  wearied  thee 

FOOTSTEPS. 
Psal.  17.  5.  hold  up  my  goings  that  my  /.  slip  not 
77. 19.  thy  way  is  in  the  sea,  thy/,  are  not  known 
89.  51.  they  rejiroached  the/,  of  thine  anointed 
Cant.  1.  8.  go  thy  way  forth  by  the/,  of  the  flock 
FOOTSTOOL. 

1  rftro7!.28. 2.  build  an  house  for  the/,  of  our  God 

2  CAr.  9.  18.  were  six  steps  to  throne  with/,  of  gold 
Psnl.  99.  5.  worship  at  his/,  for  he  is  holy,  132.  7. 

110.1.  sit  thou  at  my  rigbt-hand  till  I  make  thine 
enemies  thy  /.  Mat.  22.  44.   Mark  12.  36. 
/.«ic20.  43.  Acts  2.  35.  tieb.  1.  13. 
Isa.  66. 1 .  heaven  is  mv  throne,  and  earth  is  my  /. 
Acts  7.  49. 
/,a»n.2.1. remembered  not  his/,  in  day  of  his  anger 
Mat.  5.  35.  swear  not  by  the  earth,  it  is  his/. 
i/tA. 10.13.  expecting  till  his  enemies  be  made  his/ 
Jam.  2.  3.  say  to  the  poor,  sit  here  under  my/. 

FOR. 
Deut.  4.  7.  so  nigh  in  all  things  that  we  call  on  h./. 
2SoTO. 11.22.  shewed  David  all  Joab  had  sent  him/. 
fr«i).28.21.  to  have  respect  of  persons  is  not  good; 
/.  piece  of  bread  that  man  will  transgress 
Mat.5.  45./.  maketh  hissun.riseonevil  and  good 
6  7.  they  think  to  be  heard  /.  their  much  speaking 
25.35'./.  I  was  hungry,  and  ye  gave  me  meat,  42. 
John  1. 16. out  ofhis  fuln.we  received  grace/.grace 
Rom.  13.  G.ff.  this  cause  ye  pay  tribute  also 
2  Cur.  5.  l./.we  know,  if  this  house  were  dissolved 
13.8./.  we  can  do  noihing  against  but /.the  truth 
2  Pet..'3.12.  looking/,  thcconiingof  iheday  ofGod 

FORASMUCH. 
Gen.  41.  39./.  as  God  hath  shewed  thee  all  this 
Deut.  12.12./.  as  he  hath  no  inheritance  with  you 
Judg.l\.3fi.  f.a.8  the  Lord  hath  taken  vengeance 

1  Sam.  20.  42.  /.  as  we  have  sworn  both  of  us 

2  Sam.  19.30./.  as  my  lord  is  come  again  in  peace 
1  Kings  13.21./.  as  thou  hast  disobeyed  the  Lord 
1  Chron.  5. 1./.  as  Reuben  defiled  his  father's  bed 
/.sa.29.13./.as  this  peo.  draw  near  with  their  mouth 
Jer.  10.6./.  as  there  is  none  like  to  thee,  O  Lord 

7./.  among  all  wise  men  of  nations  none  like  thee 
Dan.2.i0.f.  as  iron  break,  andsubdu.  all  things 
Luke  19.9./.  as  he  also  is  the  son  of  Abraham 
Arts  11.17. /.then  as  God  gave  them  the  like  gift 
17.  29.  /.  then  as  we  are  the  offspring  ofGod 
24.  10./.  as  I  know  that  thou  hast  been  ajudgo 
1  Cor.  11.  7./.  as  he  is  the  image  and  glory  ofGod 

14.  12./.  as  ye  are  zealous  of  spiritual  gifts 

15.  58./.  as  ye  know  your  labour  is  not  in  vain 

1  Pet.  1.  18./.  as  ye  know  ye  were  not  redeemed 
4.  1./.  then  as  Christ  hath  suffered  for  us 

FORBADE. 
Deut.  2.  37.  nor  unto  whatsoever  the  Lord/,  ua 
Mat.  3. 14.  but  John/,  him,  saying,'I  have  need 
Mark  9.  38.  we  saw  one  casting  out  devils   in 

thy   name,  we  /.  him,  because  he  foUoweth 

not  us,  LuktdA9. 

2  Pet.  2.  16.  the  ass/,  the  madness  of  the  prophet 
FORBARE. 

1  Sam.  23. 13.  Dav.  escaped,  and  Saul  /.to  go  forth 

2  Chron.'25. 10.  then  the  prophet /.and  said, I  know 
.Ter.  41.  8.  so  Ishmael  /.  and  slew  them  not 

FORBEARANCE. 
Rom.  2.  4.  or  despisest  thou  the  riches  ofhis/.? 
3. 25.  for  the  remission  of  sins,  through  the/.  ofG. 

FORBEAR. 
Exod.  23.  ."i.  if  see  his  ass,  and  would./.to  help  him 
Z>cu^23.22.  if  thou  shalt/.to  vow,  it  shall  be  no  sin 
1  Sam.  11. 1 3.  /.  us  seven  days  that  we  may  send 

1  Kings  22. 6.  shall  I  go,  or/.  ?  2  Chron.  18.  5, 14. 

2  Chron.  25. 16. /.why  shouldest  thou  be  smitten  J 
35.21./.  thee  from  meddling  with  God 

JVfA.  9.  30.  yet  many  years  didst  thou/,  them 
.Job  16.  6.  and  though  I/,  what  am  I  eased  ? 
Prov-U.  11.  thou/,  to  deliver  them  drawn  to  death 
.ler.  40.  4.  but  if  it  seem  ill  to  thee  to  come,/. 
Ezek.  2.  5.  whether  ti.ey  will  hear  or/.  7.  |  3. 11. 

3.  27.  and  he  that  forbeareth,  let  him/. 

24.  17./.  to  cry,  make  no  mourning  for  the  dead 
Zech.  11.  12. 1  said,  give  me  my  price,  if  not, /, 
1  Cor.  9.  6.  have  not  we  power  to  /.  working  1 
2Cor.l2.6./.lest  any  should  think  of  me  above  what 
1  TAcs.S.l.wherefore  when  we  could  no  longer/.  5. 

FORBEARETH. 
JVum.9.13.  that /.keep  the  passovcr  shall  be  cut  off 
Ezek  3.  27.  and  he  that/,  let  him  forbear 


'      FOR 

FORBEARING. 
Pr')V.  23  15.  by  long/,  is  a  prince  persuaded 
Jer.  20.  9.  I  was  weary  with/.  I  coulil  not  stay 
Eph.  4.  2./.  one  another  in  love,  C'ul.  3.  13. 
ti.  9.  masters,  do  the  same  things,/,  threatening 
SyVm.  2.  |24.  the  servant  of  the  Lord  must  be/. 

FORBID. 
JVum.  11.28.  Joshua  said,  my  lord  Moses,/,  them 
ISam.  24.  6.  tlie  Lord/.  1  ehobld  do  this  thing 
526.  11.  Lord/.  I  should  stretch  Ibrth  mine  hand 
lKings-21.  3.  Naboth  said  to  Ahab,  the  Ld.  /.  it  me 
lC/i)on.ll.iy.my  God/,  itme,  that  I  shoulddothis 
Mark  9. 39.  but  Jesus  said,/,  him  not,  Luke'i.  50. 
10. 14.  suffer  little  childr.  /.  them  not,  Luke  18.  IG. 
Z,u/te6.29.  takelh  thy  cloke,/.  not  to  lake  coat  also 
Jicts  10.  47.  Toter  answered,  can  any  /.  water, 
that  these  should  not  be  baptized  ? 
24.  23.  should/,  none  of  his  acquaintance  to  come 
1C<»".  14.  39.  and/,  not  to  speak  with  tongues 

God  FORBID. 
Ota.  44.  7.   God  f.  17.   Josk.  22.  29.  )  24.   16. 
1  Sdiu.  12.  23.  1  14.  45.  |  20.  2.  Job  27.  5. 
Luke  20.  16.  Rum.  3.  4,  6,  31.  |  G.  2,  15.  | 
7.  7,  13.  1  9.  14.  I  11.  1,  11.  1  Cur.  6.  15. 
Gal.  2.  17.  I  3.  21.  1  6.  14. 
FORBIDDEN. 
Lev.  5-  17.  if  a  soul  commit  any  of  these  things/. 
JDcut.  4.23.  or  the  likeness  of  what  the  Lord  hath/. 
^cW  16.  6.  and  were  /.  to  preach  the  word  in  Asia 

FORBIDDETH. 
SJoArelO.  and/,  them  that  would  receive  brethren 

FORBIDDING. 
/.ufte23.  2.  and  /.  to  give  tribute  to  Cesar,  saying 
4c«« 28.31.  preaching  kingd.  of  G.  no  man/,  him 
1  Thess.  2.  16./.  us  to  speak  to  the  Gentiles 
ITim.  4.  3.  /.  to  rnarry,  commanding  to  abstain 
FORBORNE.  [from 

Jer.  51.  30.  mighty  men  of  Babylon  have/,  to  Hght 

FORCE. 
Gen.  31.  31.  peradventure  thou  wouldest  take  by/. 
Z>eut.34.7.eye  not  dim,norwas  his  natural /.abated 
ISam.^.  16.  shall  give  it,  if  not,  I  will  take  it  by/. 
£zra4.23.  they  made  them  to  cease  by/,  and  power 
Jocl^O.  18.  by  great/,  of  my  disease,  garm. changed 
40.  16.  and  his/,  is  in  the  navel  of  his  belly 
Jer.  18. 21.  pour  out  their  blood  by/,  of  the  sword 
23. 10.  their  course  is  evil,  and  their/,  is  not  right 
48.45.theystoodunder  the  shadow, because  of  the/. 
F.iek.  34.  4.  with  /.  and  cruelty  have  ye  ruled  them 
35.  5.  thou  hast  shed  blood  by  the/,  of  the  sword 
..^mos  2.  14.  the  strong  shall  not  strengthen  his/. 
Mjt.  II.  12.  and  the  violent  take  it  by/. 
./<jAn»l.l5.when  perceived  they  would  take  himhy/. 
.^ctt  23.  10.  to  lake  Paul  by/,  from  among  them 
//eJ.9.17.for  a  testament  is  of/,  after  men  are  dead 

FORCE. 
Deut.  22.  25.  if  the  man/,  her  and  lie  with  her 
'JSam.  13.  12.  nay,  my  brother,  do  not/,  me 
Esth.l.S.v/'M.  he/.tliequeen  also  before  me  in  house 

FORCED. 
Judff.  1. 34.  the  Ammonites/,  the  children  of  Dan 
20.  5.  my  concubine  have  they/,  that  she  is  dead 
l.S'am.  13.  12.  1/.  myself  therefore,  and  offered 
2>Vzm.  13.  14.  Amnon/.  Tamar  and  lay  with  her 
22.  hated  Amnon,  because  he/,  his  sister  Tamar 
32.  determined  from  the  day  that  he/.  Iiis  sister 
Ptov.T.II.  with  the  flattering  of  her  lips  she/,  him 

FORCES. 
2CAr.  17. 2.  Jehoehaphat  placed/,  in  fenced  cities 
Joi36. 19.  ho  will  not  esteem  all  the/,  of  strength 
Jsa.  60.  5.  the/,  of  the  Gentiles  shall  come  to  thee 

11.  men  may  bring  to  thee  the/,  of  Gentiles 
j£r.40.7.when  the  captains  of  ihe/.thai  were  in  the 
field,  13.  I  41.  11,  13,  16.  I  42.  1,  8.  1  43.  4,  5. 
Dan.  11. 10.  and  shall  a-somb!e  a  mult,  of  great/. 
38. but  in  his  estate  shall  he  honour  the  God  of/. 
Obad.  II.  that  strangers  carried  away  captive  his/. 
1 13.  shouldest  not  have  laid  hands  on  their/. 
FORCIBLE. 
Job  G.  25.  how  /.  right  words,  what  arguing  prove  f 

FORCING. 
7)eul.20.19.not  destroy  trees  by  f.  axe  against  thorn 
/'roo.30.33.  so  the/,  of  wrath  bringelh  forth  strife 

FORD,  S. 
Gen.  32.  22.  Jacob  passed  over  the/.  Jahbok 
.fosk.  2.  7. and  the  men  pursued  the  spies  to  the/. 
.Tudg.  3.  28.[8rael  went  and  look  the/,  of  Jordan 
Jsa.  16. 2.  the  daushtcrs  of  Moub  atthe  /.  of  Arnon 

FORECAST. 
Doit.  11.  24.  and  ho  slmll  f  his  devices,  25. 

FOREFATHERS. 
Ji'.r.  11. 10.  are  lurncd  to  the  iniquities  of  their/. 
27Vm.  1. 3. 1  ihank  God,  whom  I  serve  from  my/. 

FOREFRONT. 
Kzod.  26. 9.  si.T  curlninfl  in  the/,  of  the  tnbemnclo 
28.  37.  a  blue  lace,  on  the  /.  of  the  mitre  it  shall  be 
I.r.v.  8.  0.  upon  his/,  did  lie  put  the  golden  plate 
ISum.  14.5.  f.  of  one  rock  was  situatr  north- wnrd 
S.f/im.  11.  15.  set  ye  Uriah  in  th"/.  of  the  bttttle 
Kinss  10. 14.  he  brought  the  brazen  altar  from  /. 
214 


FOR 

'iChron.  20.  37.  Jehoshaphat  in  the/,  of  them 
£2<;i-.40.19.  from/.of  lower  gate  to /.of  inner  court 
47.  1.  the/,  of  the  house  stood  toward  the  east 

FOREHEAD. 
Gen.  24.  t  22.  the  man  took  a  jewel  for  the/. 
Exod.~S.  38.  the  plate  shall  be  on  Aaron's/,  always 
Lev.  13.  41.  he  is /.-bald,  yet  he  is  clean 

42.  it  is  a  leprosy  sprung  up  in  his  bald  /. 

43.  if  the  rising  be  reddish  in  his  bald/, 
t  55.  whether  ii  be  in  the  head  or  /.  thereof 

lSam.l7.49.David  took  a  stone,  slang  it,  and  smote 

the  Philistine  in  his/,  the  stone  sunk  in  his/. 

2CAron.  26. 19.  the  leprosy  rose  up  in  Uzziah's/. 

20.  and  behold  he  was  leprous  in  his/. 
.hr.  3.  3.  and  thou  hadst  a  whore's/,  not  ashamed 
Ezek.  3.  t  7.  Israel  are  stiff  of/,  and  hard  of  heart 

8.  have  made  thy/,  strong  against  their  foreheads 

9.  as  an  adani.  harder  than  Hint  have  made  thy /. 
16.  12.  I  put  a  jewel  upon  thy/,  and  ear-rings  in 

Reo.li.9.  and  receive  the  mark  of  the  beast  in  his/. 

17.5.and  upon  her/,  was  a  name  written,  Mystery 

FOREHEADS. 
Ezek.3.8.  made  thy  forehead  strong  against  their/. 

9.4.  set  a  mark  on  the/,  of  them  that  sigh  and  cry 
Rev.l.  3.  havesealedtheservantsof  God  in  their/. 

9.  4.  which  have  not  the  seal  of  God  in  their/. 

13. 16.  he  causeth  all  to  receive  a  mark  in  their/. 
14.  1.  having  his  Father's  name  written  in  their/. 

20.  4.  nor  had  received  his  mark  upon  their/. 
22.  4.  and  his  name  shall  be  in  their/. 

FOREIGNER. 
Exod.  12.  45.  /.  and  hij-ed  servant  shall  not  eat 
JJeul.  15.  3.  of  a/,  thou  maycst  exact  it  again 

FOREIGNERS. 
Obad.  11.  in  the  day  that/,  entered  into  his  gates 
Eph.  2.  19.  ye  are  no  more  strangers  and/. 

FOREKNEW. 
i?om.ll.2.G.  bath  not  cast  away  people  which  he/. 

FOREKNOW. 
Rom.  8. 29.  whom  he  did/,  he  also  did  predestinate 

FOREKNOWLEDGE. 
j?c^s2. 23.  him  being  delivered  by  the/,  of  God 
IPet.l.'i.  elect  according  to/,  of  God  the  Father 

FOREMOST. 
Gen.  32.  17.  Jacob  commanded  the/,  saying 
33. 2.  he  put  the  handmaids  and  their  children/. 
'2Sam.  18.  27.  the  running  of  the/,  is  like  Ahiinaaz 

FOREORDAINED. 
Rom.  3.  t  25.  God  hath/,  to  be  a  propitiation 
IPet.  1.  20.  who  verily  was/,  before  the  world 

FOREPART. 
Ej^o(i.28.27.  two  rings  toward/,  of  ephod,  39.  20. 
1  Kings  6.  20.  the  oracle  in  the/,  was  twenty  cubits 
Eick.  42.  7.  the  wall  on  the/,  of  the  chambers 
.4cto27. 41.  the  f.  of  ship  stuck  fast  and  remained 

FORERUNNER, 
//f  J.6.20.whither  the/,  is  for  us  entered, evenJesus 

FORESAW. 
-4c(s2. 25. 1/,  the  Lord  alwriys  before  my  face 

FORESEETH. 
Prov.  22.  3.  a  prudent  man/,  the  evil,  27.  12. 

FORESEEING. 
Gal  3.3.the  scripture  f.  God  would  justify  heathen 

FORESEEN. 
Heh.W.^  40.  God  having/,  some  better  thing  for  us 

FORE-SHIP. 
3cts27.  30.  they  wo\ild  have  cast  anchors  out  of/. 

FORESKIN. 
Gen.  17. 11.  ye  shall  circumcise  the  flesh  of  your/. 
14.  whose  flesh  of  his/,  is  not  circumcised 
23.  and  circnmci.sed  the  flesh  of  their/.  24,  25. 
Exod.  4.25.  then  Zipporah  cut  off  the/,  of  her  son 
Ac«.  12.  3.  the  flesh  of  his/,  shall  bo  circumcised 
DcMM0.16.circumcise  therefore  the/.of  your  heart 
Hab.".  16.  drink  then,  and  let  thy/,  be  uncovered 

FORESKINS. 
.Tosh.  5.3.  circumcised  Israel  at  the  hill  of  the/. 
l.Som.  18.25.  but  a  hundred/,  of  the  Philistines 

27.  David  broiight  their/,  gave  them  to  the  king 
2.9am.  3.  14.  which  I  espoused  tome  for  a  bund./, 
./er .4.4. take  away/,  of  vonr  hcart,yc  men  of  Judah 

FOREST. 
l.?am.  22.  .5.  David  came  into  the/,  of  Hareth 
I  Kings  7.  2.  Solomon  built  the  house  of  the/. 
10.17.put  them  in  the  house  of  lhe/.2CAro7?.9. 16. 
2Aniir«19.23.  into  the/.of  liisCarmel,  A-a.  37.24. 
JVeh.  2.8  a  letter  to  Asaph,  keeper  of  the  king's/. 
P.tat.  .50.  10.  for  evry  beast  of  the/,  is  mine 
104.  20.  wherein  all  beasts  of  the/,  do  creep  fortli 
fsa.  9.  18.  and  slmll  kindle  in  the  thickets  of  the/. 

10.  18.  and  shall  consume  the  glory  of  his/. 
19.  the  rest  of  the  trees  of  his/,  shall  be  few 

21.  13.  in  the/,  of  Arabia  shnll  yo  lodge 

22.  8.  thou  didst  look  to  the  armour  of  the/. 

29. 17.  the  field  shnll  he  esteemed  as  a/.  32.  1.5. 
32.  10.  when  it  shall  hail,  coming  down  on  tho/. 

44.  14.  tnketh  cypress  from  among  trees  of  the/. 
Ti.  break  forth  into  singing,  ye  mounlains.  Of. 

.'>R.  9.  all  ve  beasts  of  the/,  come  to  devour 
Jer.  5.  G.  wliereforo  a  lion  out  of/,  shall  slay  thom 


FOR 

Jer.l0.3.for  one  cutteth  a  tree  out  of/,  with  the  aja 
12.  8.  mine  heritage  is  to  me  as  a  lion  in  the/. 

21.  14.  I  wUI  kindle  a  fire  in  the/,  thereof 

26. 18.  become  as  high  places  of  the/.  JUic.  3. 12. 
46.  23.  they  shall  cut  down  her  f.  saith  the  Lord 

Ezek.\5.6.  as  the  vine  tree  among  the  trees  of  the/. 
20.  46.  prophesy  against  the/,  of  the  south  field 
47.  say  unto  the/,  of  the  south,  hear  the  word 

//os.2.12.1wUI  make  them  a/.beasls  shall  eat  them 

j3mo6'3.4.will  lion  roar  in  the/,  when  hath  no  preyl 

Mic.  5.  8.  as  a  lion  among  the  beasts  of  the/. 

Zech.  11.  2.  the/,  of  the  vintage  is  come  down 
FORESTS. 

2CAron.  27.  4.  Jotham  built  castles  in  the/. 

Pstti.  29. 9.  the  voice  of  the  Lord  discovereththc/ 

fsa.  10.  34.  he  shall  cut  down  the  thickets  of  the/. 

Ezek.  39.  10.  neillicr  cut  down  any  out  of  the/. 
FORETELL. 

2Cor.  13.  2.  If.  you  as  if  1  were  present  nee.  tim« 
FORETOLD. 

Mark  13. 23.  take  heed,beh.  I  have/,  you  all  things 

jictiS.  24.  theproph.  have  likewise/,  of  iLcit  days 
FOREWARN. 

Luke  1'2. 5.h\il  I  will/,  you  whom  ye  shall  fear 
FOREWARNED. 

1  Thess.  4. 6.  as  we  also  have/,  you  and  testified 
FORFEITED. 

Ezra  10.  8.  all  hbi  subst.  should  be/  he  separated 
FORGAT. 

Oe?!. 40.23.  butler  not  remember  Josflph,  but /.him 

Judg.  3.  7.  the  children  of  Israel/,  the  Lord 

\tiam.  12.  9.  and  when  they/,  the  Lord  their  God 

Psul.  78. 11.  and  they  /.  his  works  and  his  wonders 
106.  13.  soon/,  his  works  |{  21.  /.  G.  their  Saviour 

y^a/ft.3.  17.  removed  far  from  peace,  I/,  prosperity 

//os.2.13.8lie  went  after  her  lov.  and  /.  me.saith  L. 
FORGAVE. 

Psal.  78.38.  he/,  their  iniquity,  destroyed  them  no  t 

Mat.  18.  27.  ho  loosed  him,  and/,  him  the  debt 
32.  O  wicked  servant,  I/,  thee  all  that  debt 

Z/mA-c  7.  42.  had  nothing  to  pay,  he  frankly/,  them 
43.  1  suppose  that  he  to  whom  he/,  most 

2Cur.  2.  10.  for  if  1/.  any  thing  to  whom  I  /.  it 
for  your  sakcs/.  I  it  in  the  person  of  Christ 

Col.  3.  13.  even  as  Christ/,  you,  so  also  do  yo 
FORGAVEST. 

Ps.  32.  5. 1  will  confess,  thou/,  the  iniquity  of  my 

99.  8.  was  G.  that  /.  them,  tho'  tookcsl  vengeance 

FORGED. 

Psal.  119.  69.  the  proud  have/,  a  lie  against  me 
FORGERS. 

./bil3.4.  ye  are/.of  lies, are  all  physicians  of  no  val 
FORGET 

Signifies,  [1]  To  let  things  slip  out  of  the  memory 
Deut.  4.  9,  Lest  thou  forget  the  things  thine 
eyes  have  seen.  [2]  To  let  God,  his  word, 
and  benefits,  slip  out  of  mind :  whereupon 
follow  disobedience,  neglect  of  God's  worship 
and  wicked  contempt  of  God,  as  a  fruit  and 
consequence  ofsuchforgetfulness.  Judg.  3.  7, 
The  children  of  Israel  did  evil  in  the  sight 
of  the  Lord,  and  forgat  the  Lord  their  God, 
and  served  Baalim  and  the  groves :  Thus  men 
forget  God;  the  wicked  wholly,  the  godly  in 
part.  [3]  To  east  off  one,  to  cease  to  Inve, 
care,  and  provide  for  him.  Psal.  77.  9,  Hath 
God  forgotten  to  be  gracious?  Thus  God  for- 
gets the  wicked:  and  the  godly  do  sometimes 
think  that  they  are  thus  forgotten,  yet  are 
not  so.  See  also  Isa.  49.  15,  Can  a  woman 
forget  her  sucking  child?  yea,  they  may  for- 
get, yet  will  I  not  forget  thee.  She  may  cease 
to  love  her  child,  but  I  will  not  cease  to  love 
and  provide  for  thee.  [1]  To  omit  to  punish. 
Amos  8.  7,  Surely  I  will  never  forget  any 
of  their  works:  /  jcill  not  always  defer  to 
punish  them,  Ihouah  it  may  seem  I  have  for- 
gotten. [5]  A''ol  to  esteem,  but  to  pass  over 
a  matter  as  unworthy  our  remembrance, 
Phil.  3.  13,  Foriiettiiig  those  things  which  are 
behind :  JVot  so  much  considering  or  regarding 
what  I  hane  already  done,  as  what  I  have  yet 
further  to  do. 

Jofic]\hcallcd  the  name  of  hts first-born,  Manasseh, 
that  is,  forgetting ;  for  God,  .laid  he,  hath  niado 
mo  forget  all  mv  toil,  and  all  my  father's  house: 
he  has  expelled  nil  sorrowful  reniemhranre  of 
ny  slaveryin  F.<:y\)t ,  and  of  my  sufferings  from 
my  brethren,  by  my  present  comfort  and  glory. 
In  Psal.  45.  10,  the  Psalmist  speaking  to  the 
rhurfh  says.  Forget  also  thine  own  people,  and 
ihy  father's  house:  He  alludes  to  the  law  of 
matrimony.  Gen.  2.  24.  Thou  must  forget 
and  forsake  all  carnal  relations,  so  far  as  they 
hinder  from  Christ,  and  likewise  all  those  pre- 
judices Jalsepersuasions,eorrupt  inclinations, 
and  cr  it  practices,  wh'eh  are  so  natural  to,  and 
even  part  of  thyself.  Mat.  5.  29,  .30.  .find  by 
these  words  he  seems  tacitly  to  ffiretrit,  that 
even  the  legal  worship  appointed  by  Moses,  and 


FOR 

delivered  to  them  by  their  parents  successively 
for  many  generations,  should  be  relinquishtd 
by  the  believing  iewB,  and  abolished  by  Cliridt's 
coming. 
Oen.'Zl.  45.  till  he/,  that  which  thou  hast  done  him 

41.  51.  for  God  iiath  made  me/,  all  my  toil 
Z^eaf  .4.9.1est  thou/.the  things  Ihiiie  eyes  have  seen 
23.  lest  ye/,  the  coveiiaut  of  the  Lord  your  God 
31.  the  Li.  will  not/,  the  covenant  of  thy  fathers 

6.  12.  beware  lest  thou/,  the  Lord,  8.  11,  14, 19. 

9.  7./.  not  how  thou  provokedst  the  Lord  thy  God 

25.  19.  shall  blot  out  Amaiek,  thou  shalt  not/,  it 

1  San.  1.  11.  if  tliou  wilt  not/,  thine  handmaid 
S  Kings  17.  33.  the  covenant  1  made  ye  shall  not/. 
Job  y.  13.  so  are  the  paths  of  all  that/.  God 

9.  27.  if  I  say,  I  will  /.  my  complaint 
11.  18.  because  thou  shall  /.  thy  misery 

24. 20.  womb  shall/,  him,  worm  shall  feed  on  him 
Psal.  9.  17.  and  all  the  nations  that/.  God 

10.  12.  arise,  O  Lord,/,  not  the  humble 
13.  1.  how  long  will  tliou/.  me,  O  Lordl 
45.10./.  also  thine  own  people,  and  father's  house 
50.  22.  now  Consider  this,  ye  that/.  God 

5y.  11.  slay  them  not, lest  my  people/scatter  them 
74. 19./.  not  the  congregation  of  thy  poor  for  ever 
23./.  not  the  voice  of  thine  enemies 
7H.  7.  that  they  might  not/,  the  works  of  God 

102.  4.  hearlsmitten,  so  that  If.  to  eat  my  bread 

103.  2.  bless  the  Lord,  and/,  not  all  his  beuetits 
119.  le.  I  will  not/,  thy  word 

83.  yet  do  I  not/,  thy  statutes,  109,  141. 
93. 1  will  never/thy  precepts, hast  quickened  me 
153.  deliver  me,  for  I  do  not/,  thy  law 
176.  for  I  do  not/,  thy  commandments 
137.  5.  if  I/,  thee,  O  Jerusalem,  let  my  hand/. 
Prov.  3.  1.  my  son,  /.  not  my  law,  but  let  thy  heart 
4.  5.  get  wisdom,  get  understanding,/,  it  not 

31.  5.  lest  they  drink  and/,  the  law,  and  pervert 
7.  let  him  drink  and/,  poverty,  rememb.  no  more 

/sa.49. 15.  can  a  woman/,  her  sucking  chiUf!  yea, 
they  may/,  yet  will  1  not/,  thee 
54.  4.  for  thou  shall/,  the  shame  of  thy  youth 
65.  11.  ye  are  they  that/,  my  holy  mountain 
Jer.2.32.can  maid/.her  ornaments,  or  bride  attire? 
23.27.who  tliink  to  cause  my  people  to /.my  name 

39.  behold,  I,  even  I,  will  utterly/,  yuu 
J, am.  5.  20.  wherefore  dost  thou/,  us  for  ever  ? 
Hos.i.a.  forgotten  the  law,  I  will  also/,  thy  childr. 
JImos  8.  7.  1  will  never/,  any  of  their  works 
ffeb.  fi.  10.  God  is  not  unrighteous  to/,  your  work 
13.  16.  to  do  good  and  communicate/,  not 
FORGETFUL. 
Jfcb.  13.  2.  be  not/,  to  entertain  strangers' 
Ja7n.  1.  25.  he  be  not  a/,  hearei,  but  a  doer 

FORGETFULNESS. 
Psal.  88. 12.  and  thy  righteousness  in  the  land  of/. 

FORGETTEST. 
Psal.  44.  24.  wherefore  /.  thou  our  affliction  1 
Isa.  51.  13.  and/,  the  Lord  thy  maker 

FORGETTETII. 
Job  39.  15.  and/,  that  the  foot  may  crush  thorn 
Psal.  9.  12.  he/,  not  the  cry  of  the  humble 
Prov.  2.  17.  and/,  the  covenant  of  her  God 
Jam.  1.  24.  he/,  what  manner  of  man  he  was 

FORGETTING. 
Oen.  41.  t51.  Joseph  called  the  first-born,/. 
Phil.  3.  13./.  tliose  things  which  are  behind 

FORGIVE. 
Oen.  50. 17.  /.  I  pray,  the  trespass  of  thy  brethren, 
/.  the  trespass  of  serv.  of  God  of  thy  father 
Exod.  10.  17./.  I  pray  thee,  my  sin  only  this  once 

32.  32.  yet  now,  if  thou  wilt/,  their  sin 
JVum.  30.  5.  and  the  Lord  shall/,  her,  8,  12. 
Josh.  24.  19.  a  holy  God,  he  will  not/,  your  sins 
l.Sam.25.28.  I  prav,/.the  trespassof  thy  liandmuid 
IKingsS.  30.  when  hearest/.  39. 2  CAron.  6. 21, 30. 

34.  hear,  and/,  the  sin  of  thy  people  Israel 
3G./.  the  sin  of  thy  servants,  2  Chron.6.  25,27,39. 
50./.  thy  people  that  have  sinned  against  thee 

2  Chron.  7.  14.  then  will  I  hear  and  /.  their  sin 
Psal.  25.  18.  look  on  my  pain,  and  /.  all  my  sins 

86.5.  for  thou.  Lord,  art  good  and  ready  to/. 
Isa.  2.9.  the  mean  man  bo  weth,  therefore/,  them 
.7(T.18. 23./.  not  their  iniquity  nor  blot  out  their  sin 
31.34.  fori  will /.their  iniquity,  not  remember  sin 
36.  3.  that  I  may/,  their  iniquity  and  their  sin 
Dan.  9.  19.  O  Lord  hear,  O  Lord/.  Lord  hearken 
Amos  7.  2.  I  said,  O  Lord  God,/.  I  beseech  thee 
Mat.  6.  12.  /.  us,  as  we  /.  our  debtors,  l.uke  11.4. 
14. if  ye/,  men  their  trespasses,  your  Fath.  will/. 
15.  if  ye/,  not,  nor  will  your  Father/,  you 
9.  6.  hath  power  to/,  sin,  Marlc'2. 10.  LukeTt.  24. 
18.  21.  how  oft  my  brother  sin,  and  I/,  him  7 
3.5.  if  ye  from  your  hearts/,  not  every  one 
jVfar/r2.7.who  can/.sin3,butGod  only?  iMke  5. 21. 

11.  2.").  praying/,  that  your  F.ither  may/,  you 
26.  but  if  ye  do  not/,  your  Father  will  not/. 

huke  6.  37.  f.  and  ye  shall  be  forgiven 
17.  3.  and  if  thy  brother  repent,/,  him,  4. 
91.34.  Father, /.thera,they  know  not  what  they  do 
213 


FOR 

2Cor.2.7.  ye  ought  rather  to /.him  and  comfort  him 
10.  to  whom  ye/,  any  thing.  If.  also 
12.  13.  I  was  not  burdensome,/,  nie  this  wrong 

1  John  1. 9.  he  is  faithful  and  just  to  /.  us  our  sins 

FORGIVEN. 
Gen.  4.  tl3.  my  iniquity  is  greater  than  maybe/. 
Lev.^.'iii.  make  atonement,  and  it  shall  be/,  them, 
26. 31, 35.  I  5. 10, 13, 16, 18.  |  6.  7.  I  19. 22. 
J^um.  15.  25,  26,  28.  Deut.  21.  8. 
JVum.  14.  19.  pardon,  as  thou  hast/,  from  Egypt 
/'5a/.32.1.  blessed,  whose  transgress,  is/.  Rom.i.l. 
85.  2.  thou  hast/,  the  iniquity  of  thy  people 
Isa.  33.  24.  tlie  people  shall  be/,  their  iniquity 
jWat.9.2.3on,  be  of  good  cheer,thy  sins  be/,  thee,  5. 
Mark  2.  5,  9.  Luke  5.  20,  23.  |  7.  48. 

12.  31.  all  sin  and  blasphemy  shall  be  /.  but  ag. 
H.Gh.shall  not  be/.32.Jl/arA-3.28.Z,uie  12.10. 

Mark  4.  12.  and  tlieir  sins  shall  be/,  them 
L,uke  6.  37.  forgive,  and  ye  shall  be/. 
7. 47.  her  many  sins  are/,  but  to  whom  little  is/. 
Jlcts  8.  22.  the  thought  of  thy  heart  may  be  /.  thee 
F.ph.  4.  32.  as  God  for  Christ's  sake  hath  /.  you 
Coi.2.13.he  quickened,  having/,  you  all  trespasses 
.Tarn.  5.  15.  if  committed  sins,  they  shall  be/,  him 
IJohn  2. 12. 1  write  to  you,  because  your  sins  are/. 

FORGIVETH. 
Ps.  103.  3.  healsthy  diseases,  who/,  all  iniquities 
Luke  7.49.they  began  to  say ,  who  is  this /.sins  also? 

FORGIVENESS. 
Ps.l30.4.there  is/,  with  thee  that  maycst  be  feared 
Mark  3.  29.  hath  never/,  but  is  in  danger  of  hell 
Jlcts  5.31.  him  hath  God  exalted  to  give/,  of  sins 

13.  38.  thro'  him  is  preached  unto  you/,  of  sins 
26.  18.  to  God,  that  they  may  receive/,  of  sins 

Evh.  1.  7.  in  whom  we  have/,  of  sins.  Col.  1.  14. 

FORGIVENESSES. 
Dan.  9.  9.  to  Lord  our  God  belong  mercies  and  /. 

FORGIVING. 
Exod.Zi.  7.  /.  iniquity,transgression,JVu7n.  14. 18. 
Eph.  4.  32.  forbearing,  /.  oue  another,  Cvl.  3. 13. 

FORGOT. 
Deut.  24.  19.  and  hast/,  a  sheaf  in  the  field 

FORGOTTEN. 
Oen.  41.  30.  and  all  the  plenty  shall  be/. 
Deaf  .26.13.not  transgressed  com. nor  have  I/.them 
31.  21.  it  shall  not  be/,  outof  mouths  of  their  seed 
32. 18.  thou  hast/.  God  that  formed  thee 
Job  19.  14.  my  familiar  friends  have/,  me 
28.  4.  flood  breaketh  out,  even  waters/,  of  I  he  foot 
Psal.  9.  18.  for  the  needy  shall  not  alway  be/. 
10.  11.  he  hath  said  in  his  heart,  God  hath/. 
31.  12.  I  am/,  as  a  dead  man  out  of  mind 
42.  9.  I  will  say,  my  rock,  why  hast  thou/,  me? 
44.17.all  this  is  come  on  us, yet  have  we  not/,  thee 
20.if  we  have/.name  ofour  God, or  stretched  out 
77. 9.  hath  G./.  to  be  gracious  ?  hath  he  shut  mer. 
119.  61.  but  I  have  not/,  thy  law 

139.  because  mine  enemies  have/,  thy  words 
Eccl.  2.  16.  in  the  days  to  come  shall  all  be/. 

8.  10.  and  the  wicked  were/,  in  the  city 

9.  5.  for  the  memory  of  them  is/. 

Isa.  17.  10.  thou  hast/,  the  God  of  thy  salvation 
23.  15.  that  Tyre  shall  be/,  seventy  years 

16.  take  a  harp,  thou  harlot  that  hast  been/. 
44.  21.  O  Israel,  thou  shalt  not  be/,  of  me 

49.  14.  but  Zion  said,  my  Lord  hath/,  me 
65.  16.  because  the  former  troubles  are/. 

Jer.  2.  32.  my  people  have/,  me,  13.  25.  |  18.  15. 
3.  21.  they  have  /.  the  Lord  their  God 
20. 11.  their  confusion  shall  never  be/.  23.  40. 
23. 27.  to  forget,  as  their  fathers  have  /.  my  name 
30.14. all  thy  lovers  have/.thee,  they  seek  thee  not 
44.  9.  have  ye/,  the  wickedness  of  your  fathers 

50.  5.  let  us  join  in  a  covenant  that  shall'not  be  /. 
6.  they  turned  away,  have/,  their  resting-place 

Aajft.  2. 6.  Lord  caused  thesabbath  tobo/.  in  Zion 
Eiek.  22.  12.  thou  hast/,  me,  saith  the  Lord 
23.  35.  saith  the  Lord,  because  thou  hast/,  me 
Hos.  4.  6.  seeing  thou  hast  /.  the  law  of  thy  God 
8.  14.  for  Israel  hath  /.  Maker  and  builds  temples 
13.  6.  their  heart  e.xalted,  therefore  have/,  me 
Mat.  16.  5.  they  had  /.  to  take  bread,  Mark  8.  14. 
Luke  12.  6.  and  not  one  of  them  is/,  before  God 
A/cA. 12.5. and  ye  have/.theexliortation  that  speaks 

2  Pet.  1.  9./.  Ihathe  was  purged  from  his  old  sins 

FORKS. 

1  Sam.  13. 21.  yet  they  had  a  file  for  the/,  and  axes 
FORM, 

As  taken  for  the  figure.,  shape,  or  likeness  of  n 
thing.  Job  4. 16,  It  stood  still,  but  I  could 
not  discern  the  form  thereof  Likewise  for 
outward  splendour,  pomp,  and  dignity.  Isa. 
53.  2,  He  hath  no  form  nor  comeliness ;  no 
such  outward  splendour  as  the  Jews  ex- 
pected in  their  Messiah.  It  is  also  taken 
for  a  draught  or  pattern.  2  Tim.  1.  13, 
Hold  fast  the  form  of  sound  words,  which 
thon  hast  heard  of  me.  Make  thy  discourses 
conform  to  the  pattern  of  sound  and  true  doc- 
trine wherein  thou  hast  been  instructed  by  me. 


FOR 

The  aposllePau],  advertisingTimothy  of  what 
siiould  come  to  pass  in  llie  latter  times,  says 
2  Tim.  3.  5,  That  there  should  bo  men  who 
had  a  form  of  godliness,  but  deny  the  power 
thereof:  They  should  have  an  outward  appear 
ance  and  shew  of  religion,  pretend  to  a  right 
way  of  worsliipping  God ;  to  be  the  church,  tht 
only  church  of  God;  andyct  not  only  be  destitute 
of,  but  reject  and  refuse  the  inner  part,  which 
is  lively,  active,  and  powerful  to  make  a 
t/iorough  change. 
It  is  said,  Mark  16.  12,  that  after  his  resurrec- 
tion, Jesus  appeared  in  another  form  to  two 
of  his  disciples:  Another  form  either  in  re- 
gard  of  his  habit,  or  brightness  of  his  counte- 
nance, or  some  suchparlicular.  jlndthe  apostle 
speaking  of  Christ,  says,  Phil.  2.  6,  VVho 
being  in  the  form  of  God,  thought  it  not  rob- 
bery to  be  equal  with  God  :  that  is.  Who  being 
tlic  essential  imageof  the  Father,  and  enjoying 
the  divine  essence  and  nature,  with  all  its 
glory,  knew  that  it  was  no  usurpation  in  him, 
to  account  himself  equal  with  tlie  Father,  and 
carry  himself  upon  all  occasions  at  such :  So 
by  the  form  of  God  is  meant  his  essence  and 
nature.  It  follows  in  verse  7,  But  made  him- 
self of  no  reputation,  and  took  upon  him  the 
form  of  a  servant,  and  was  made  in  the  like- 
ness of  men.  Yet  he  emptied  himself  of  that 
divine  glory  and  majesty,  by  hiding  it  in  th» 
vailof  his  flesh;  and  took  upon  him  the  quality 
and  condition  of  a  mean  person,  not  of  a  glo- 
rified saint,  or  of  some  great  mortal ;  andwua 
subject  to  all  the  frailties  and  infirmities  of 
human  nature,  sin  only  excepted. 
Oen.  1.  2.  the  earth  was  without/,  and  void 
Judg.  8.  1 18.  each  according  to  the  /.  of  a  king 

1  Sam.  28.  14.  he  said  unto  her,  what/,  is  he  of? 
2.S'ajn.l4.20.fetch  about  this/.of  speech  Joab  done 
Esth.  2.  f  7.  and  the  maid  was  fair  of/. 

Job  4.  10.  but  I  could  not  discern  the/,  thereof 
Isa.  52.  14.  and  his/,  more  than  the  sons  of  men 

53.  2.  he  hath  no/,  nor  comeliness 

Jer.  4.  23.  and,  lo,  it  was  without/,  and  void 
Ezck.  10.  8.  there  appeared  the  /.  of  a  man's  banc 

43.11.  shew  them  the/,  of  the  house  and  fashior 
Dan.  3.  19.  and  the  /.  of  his  visage  was  changer. 

25.  the/,  of  the  fourth  is  like  the  Son  of  God 
Mark  16.  12.  appeared  in  another/,  to  twoofihem 
Rom.2.10.  which  hast/,  of  knowh-dge  and  of  truth 

6.  17.  but  ye  have  obeyed  that/,  of  doctrine 
Phil. 2.  0.  who  being  in  the/,  of  God,  thought  it  no 
7.  but  took  upiin  him  tlie/.  of  a  servant 

2  Tim.  1.  13.  hold  fas-t/.  ofsound  words  hast  heard 
3.5.having/.  ofgodliness,  denying  power  thereof 

FORM. 
Isa.  45.  7.  I/,  the  light  and  create  darhiioss 

FORMED. 
Oen.  2.  7.  the  Lord  God  /.  man  of  the  dust 

19.  out  of  the  ground  God/,  every  beast  of  field 
Deut.  32.  18  and  hast  forgotten  God  that  /.  thee 
2  Kings  19.  25.  that  I  have/,  it,  Isa.  37.  26. 
Job  26.  5.  dead  things  are/,  from  under  the  water 

13.  his  hand  hath/,  the  crooked  serpent 
33.  6.  behold,  I  also  am/,  out  of  the  clay 
Psal.  90.  2.  or  ever  thou  hadst/.  the  earth 

94.  9.  he  that/,  the  eye,  shall  he  not  see? 

95.  5.  the  sea  is  his,  and  his  hands/,  the  dryland 
Prov.  26.  10.  the  great  God  that  /.  all  things   . 
/.sa.27.1].he  that/,  them  will  shew  them  nolavour 

43.  1.  thus  saith  he  that/,  thee,  O  Israel,  fearnot 
7.  I  have/,  him,  yea,  I  have  made  him 
10.  before  me  there  was  no  god/,  nor  after  me 
21.  this  peo.have  I /for  myself,  shall  shew  praise 

44.2.  that  made  thee,  and/,  thee  from  the  womb 
10.  who  hath /.a  god,  or  moltenagraven  image? 
21.  for  thou  art  my  servant,  I  have/,  thee 
24.  thus  saith  he  that/,  thee  from  the  womb 

45.  18.  God  himself  that/,  the  earth,  be/,  it 

49.5.  Lord  that/.me  from  womb  to  be  his  servant 

54.  17.  no  weapon/,  against  thee  shall  |irosper 
.Icr.  1.  5.  before  I/,  thee  in  the  bpllv,  I  knew  thee 

33.  2.  the  Lord  that/,  it  to  establish  it 
.^mosT.i.and  behold,  he/,  grasshoppers  in  bpginn. 
Itom.  9.  20.  shall  the  thing/,  say  to  him  that/,  it 
Oal.  4.  19. 1  travail  in  birth,  till  Christ  be/,  in  you 
1  Tim.  2.  13.  for  Adam  was  first/,  then  Eve 

FORMER. 
Oen.iO.l^.  shalt  deliver  the  cup  after  the/.mannor 
JVKHi.21.26.had  fought  against  the/,  king  of  Moab 
7>c»<.  24.  4.  her/,  husband  which  sriit  her  away 
Ruth  4.  7.  was  the  manner  in/,  time  nf  redeeming 

1  Sam.  17.30.  people  answered  after  the/,  manner 

2  Kings  i.  14.  the  two  captains  of  the/,  fifties 
17.  34.  they  do  after  the/,  manner,  40. 

.fsTeh.  5.  15.  the/,  governors  were  chargeable 
Job  8.  8.  inquire,  I  pray  th«o,  of  the/,  age 

30.  3.  the  wilderness  in/,  time  desolate  and  wa«f» 
P.<>a/. 79. 8.  O  remember  not  asain^t  its/,  iniquitiei 

89.  49.  where  are  thy/.  lovin<,'-kindnosses  ? 


roR 

Xccl-  1.  11.  there  is  no  remembrance  of/,  things 

7.  10.  thut  tlie/.  d;iyB  were  btUt-r  thuii  Ihese 
Jsa.  41.  Hi.  lei  them  shew  the/,  things,  43.  9. 

42.  9.  beliold  the/,  things  are  come  to  pass 
43. 18.  remember  ye  not  the/,  things,  nor  eunsider 
4G.  y.  remember  the/,  things  oloid,  for  1  urn  God 
48.3.  have  declared/,  things  from  the  beginning 
61.  4.  they  shall  raise  up  the  /.  desolations 
65.7. 1  will  measure  their/,  work  into  their  bosom 

16.  because  the/,  troubles  are  forgotlen 

17.  the/,  shall  not  be  rememb.  nor  come  to  mind 
Jer.  5. 24.  the  Lord  our  God  that  giveth  the  /.  and 

latter  rain  in  his  season,  Hos.  6.3.  Joel  2.23. 

10.  16.  for  he  is  the/,  of  all  things,  51.  19. 

34.  5.  the/,  kings  which  were  before  thee 

36.28.  write  in  it  all  the/,  words  in  the  first  roll 
JEzeA.  16. 5.1.  thy  daiijfhter  shall  return  to/,  estate 
2)an.ll.l3.  set  tbtth  a  multitude  greater  than  the/. 

29.  but  it  shall  not  be  as  the/,  or  as  the  latter 
J/ag.  2. 9.  the  glory  be  greater  than  of  the  /.  house 
Zec/t.  1.  4.  the  /.  prophets  have  cried,  7. 7, 12. 

8.  11.  1  will  not  be  to  this  people  as  in/,  days 
14.  8.  waters  go  half  of  thojn  toward  the/,  sea 

Mal.3A.  shall  be  pleasant  to  the  Lord  as  in/,  years 
^cU  1.1.  the/,  treatise  have  I  made,  OTheophilus 
Epk.  4.22.  i)ut  otf  concerning  the/,  conversation 
lPcl.1.14.  not  according  to  the/,  lusts  in  ignorance 
Rev.2i,  4.  for  the/,  things  are  passed  away 

FOK.METil. 
Amos  4.  13.  for,  lo,  he  that/,  the  mountains 
ZecA.  12.1.  and/,  ihe  spirit  of  man  within  him 

FORNICATION. 
This  word  is  taken  (1)  For  the  sin  of  impurity 
committed  between  unmarried  person!).  1  Cor. 
7.  2,  To  avoid  fornication,  let  every  man  have 
his  own  wife,  and  let  every  woman  have  her 
own  husband.  (2)  For  the  sin  of  adultery,  when 
one  or  both  persons  are  married.     Mat.  5.  32, 
Whosoever  putteth  away  his  wife,  saving  for 
the  Cause  of  fornication,  causeth  her  to  commit 
adultery.     (.3)   For  the  sin  of  incest.     1  Cor. 
5.  1,   Such  fornication  as  is   not  so  much  as 
named  among  the  Gentiles,  &c..     (4)   For  the 
sin  of  idolatry,  which  is  infidelity  to  and  for- 
saking of  the  true  (lod  for  false  gods.  2Chr. 
21. 11,  Jelioram  made  high  places  in  the  moun- 
tains of  Judah,  and  caused  the  inhabitants  of 
Jerusaleiii  to  commit  fornication.     Jiev.  19.  2, 
He   haih   judged  the  great  whore,  which  did 
corrupt  the  earth  with  her  fornication. 
2  CAr.  21.  11.  high  places,  caused  Jerus.  commit/. 
/«a.23.17.Tyre  shall  commit/with  kingd.of  world 
Eie.k.  1C.29.  thou  hast  multiiiiied  thy/,  in  Canaan 
Mat.  5.  32.  saving  for  the  cause  of/.  19.  9. 
John  8.  41.  then  said  they,  we  be  not  burn  of/. 
acts  15.  20.  that  they  abstain  from/.  29.  |  21.  25. 
Horn.  1.  2!l.  being  filled  with  all/,  full  of  envy 
1  Cor.  5.  1.  that  there  is/,  among  you,  and  such/. 
6.  13.  the  body  is  not  for/,  but  for  ttie  Lord 
18.  flee/.  II  7.  2.  nevertheless,  lo  avoid/. 
ICor.  12.  21.  and  have  not  repented  of  their/. 
Gai.5.19.  the  works  of  the  flesh,  which  are  lliese/. 
Kph.  5. 3.  /.  let  it  not  be  once  named  among  you 
C«^  3.  5.  mortify  therefore/,  nncleanness 
17'/ie.s.s.4.3.will  of  G. that  ye  should  abstain  from/ 
./udc  7. Sodom  and  cities  giving  tbcinaelv.over  to/. 
Rev.  2.  21.  I  gave  her  space  to  repent  of  her/. 
9.  21.  neither  repented  they  of  their  /  nor  thefts 

14.  8.  drink  of  the  wine  of  the  wrath  of  her/. 
17.2.  have  been  made  rirunk  with  wine  of  her/. 

4.  a  golden  cup  full  of  the  filthinoss  of  her  / 
t  S.Biibylon  the  grout, mother  of/and  abominat. 
18J.all  nations  drunk  with  wine  of  wrath  of  her/. 
19.  2.  which  did  corrupt  the  enrlh  witli  her/. 

FORNICATIO.N'S. 

F.zek.  Ifi.  15.  thou  pouredst  out  thy/,  on  every  one 

JtfaM5.19.out  of  heart  proi;eed/.lhefts,jV/ari7.21. 

SecCo>TMiT,  Committed. 

FORNICATOR. 

1  Cor.'i.  11.  if  any  that  is  called  a  brother  be  a/. 

Heb.  12.  IG.  lest  Ihi-re  be  any  f.  or  profane  person 

FORNICVtORS. 

1  Cor.  .5.  9. 1  wrote  you  not  to  company  with  /. 
10.  yet  not  altogether  with  the/,  of  thii  world 

6  9.  nof  shall/,  inherit  tlw  kingdom  of  God 
FORSAKK. 
ZJfw'^l.lfi.lhiM  people  will  /.  mo  and  break  ?oven. 
17.  in  thai  dav  I  will  f.  them  and  hide  m,  face 
Josh.  21.  16.  (;(>'d  forbid  we  should  /.  Ihe  I,:)rd 
00.  if  ye/.  Ihe  Lord,  and  serve  strange  gods 
Juds^.9. 1  (.should  f /.  my  sweoiness  ami  my  fruit? 

2  h'ings'il.  14. 1  will/,  remnant  of  iny  inheritance 
1  CAr.28.9.ifthou/.  him,  will  cast  Iheooir  for  ever 
8  Chr.l.  19.  if  vo  turn  away,  nnl/.  my  slulutcs 

15.  2.  but  if  ye/,  hiin,  he  will/,  you 
KrraS.  22.  his  wrath  is  ngfiinKt  them  ihnt/.  him 
Paal.  27.  10.  when  my  father  iind  rnnihrr/.  me 

37.  8.  censo  trom  anger,  ami  /.  wr.idi,  fn-t  not 
89.  30.  if  his  chiMren/.  inv  law  and  walk  not 
94.  14.  noither  will  he/,  hisinhcri'ancu 
216 


FOR 


P5.119..')3.horror  taken  hold,becau9e  wicked/.  law 
/'rou. 3.3.let  not  mercy  and  truth/,  thee,  bind  them 
9. 6./.  the  foolish,  and  live,  go  in  way  of  underst. 

28.  4.  they  that/,  the  law,  praise. the  wicked 
Isa.  1.  28.  they  that/,  the  Lord  shall  be  consumed 

55. 7.  let  wicked/,  his  way,  unright.  his  thoughts 

65.  ll.yeare  they  that/.  L.  forget  my  holy  mount. 
Jer.  17.13.  all  that/,  the  Lord  shall  be  ashamed 

23.  33.  I  will  even  /.  you,  saith  the  Lord,  39. 

51.  9./.  her,  and  let  us  go  everyone  to  his  country 
Lam.  5. 20.  wherefore  dost  thou  /.  us  bo  long  time 
Dan.  11.  30.  with  them  that/,  the  holy  covenant 
yo7iaA2.8. observe  lying  vanitie3,/.their  own  mercy 
Acts  21.  21.  thou  teachest  the  Jews  to/.  Moses 

FORSAKE  not. 
Deut.  12. 19.  take  heed  that  thou  /.  not  the  Levite 
.Tob  20.13.  though  he  spare  wickedness  and/,  hnot 
Psal.  38.  21.  /.  me  not,  O  Lord  my  God,  71.  9,  18. 

119.8. 1  will  keep  thy  statutes.  Of.  me  notutterly 

138.  8./.  not  the  works  of  thine  own  hands 
Pro?!.  1.8.  and /..not  the  law  of  thy  mother,  6.20. 

4.  2.  I  give  you  good  doctrine,/,  ye  not  my  law 
6.  /.  her  not  and  she  shall  preserve  thee 

27. 10.  thine  own  friend  and  father's  friend  /.  not 

J\rot  FORSAKE. 
Deut.  4. 31.  he  will  notf.  thee,  31.  6,8. 1  rAr.28.20. 

14.  27.  and  the  Levite,  thou  shalt  not  f.  him 
■  Tosh.  1.  5. 1  will  not  fail  nor/,  thee.  Neb.  13.  5. 
li'uni. 12.22.  L.will  not  f.  his  people,  1  h'ings6.\3. 

1  Kings  8.  57.  let  him  not  leave  us,  nor/,  us 
JW/i.  9.  31.  thou  didst  not  consume,  nor/,  them 

10.  39.  we  will  not/,  the  house  of  our  God 
Psal.  il.^i.  neither  f.  me,  O  God  of  my  salvation 
ha.  41.  17.  I,  the  God  of  Israel,  will  not  f.  them 

42.  16.  these  things  will  I  do,  and  notf.  iheni 
Eiek.  20  8.  nor  did  they  f.  the  idols  of  Egypt 
FORSAKEN. 

2  CAr.21.10.  because  he  had/,  the  L.  24.24.  |  28.  6. 
JVeA.  13.  11.  I  said,  why  is  the  house  of  God/.? 
.Job  18.  4.  shall  Ihe  earth  be/,  for  thee? 
Psal.  37.  25.  yet  have  I  not  seen  the  righteous/. 
Isa.  7.  IG.  the  land  shall  be/,  of  both  her  kings 

17.  2.  the  cities  of  Aroer  are/,  shall  be  for  flocks 
9.shaUbea9a/.bnugh,and  an  uppermost  branch 

27.  10.  and  the  habitation  shall  be/,  and  Irft 

32.  14.  because  the  palaces  shall  be/,  city  left 

54.6.  the  Lord  hath  called  thee  as  a  woman/. 

62.  4.  thou  shalt  no  more  be  termed/. 
Ji>'r.4.29.every  city  shall  be/,  no  man  dwell  therein 

18. 14.  shall  cold  wafers  from  another  place  be/.? 
Eiek.  36.  4.  thus  saith  the  Lord  to  the  cities/. 
.^mos  .5.  2.  the  virgin  of  Israel  is/,  on  her  land 
Zc/)A.2.4.forG!izasliall  be/and  .Ashkelon  desolate 

Have,  hast,  hath  FORSAKEN. 
Dc«t.  28.  20.  thy  doings,  whi^nby  thou  hast  f.  me 

29.25.becau9e  they  hnvef.  the  Lord,  .ludg.W.  10 
Judg.  6.  13.  but  now  the  Lord  hath  f  us 

10.  1.3.  yet  ye  have  f.  me,  and  served  other  gods 
1  Sam.  8.  8.  the  works  wherewith  they  have  f.  me 

12. 10.  we  have  sinned,  because  we  hane  f.  the  L. 

1  Kings  11.  33.  because  that  they  have  f.  me 

18.  IB.  ye  have  f.  the  commandments  of  the  Lord 

19.  10.  for  Israel  have  f.  thy  covenant,  14. 

2  Kings  22.  17.  because  they  have  f.  me  and  burnt 
incen.se  to  gods,  2  CAr. 34. 25.  .h-r.  16.11.]  19.4. 

"Chron.  12.  5.  ye  have  f.  me,  and  I  have  left  you 
13.11. we  keep  charge  of  the  L.  but  ye  have  f.  him 
24.20. because  ye  Aaue/.  the  Lord,  he  halhf.  you 
29.6.  for  fathers  have  done  evil,  and  have  f  him 
F.zra  9.  10.  for  we  have  f.  thy  commandments 
.7o43).  19. because  he  AatA  oppressed  and /.the  poor 
Psal.  22.  1.  my  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  /". 
me?  jVat.  27.  46.  ^fark  15.  34. 

71. 11.  they  take  counsel,  saying,  God  A (i^A/.  him 
/»a.l.4.tlicy  Aii'f/.  the  L.  and  provoked  Holy  One 

54.7.for  a  small  moment  Aaiir  t/.thee,  Isa-Vi.  14. 
.Ter.  1.  IR.Adue/.  me,  burnt  incense  to  other  gods 
2.13.  they  hnvef. mo,  the  fountain  of  living  waters 

17.  in  that  ihou  A(is<  /.  the  Lord  thy  God,  19. 
5.7.how  shall  I  pardon  thee?  ihy  child,  have  f.  me 

19   thou  shall  answer,  like  as  ye  hare  f.  me 
9.13.lhe  Lord  saith,  because  they  have  f.  my  law 

10.  are  confoundotl,  because  yo  have  f.  the  land 
12.7. 1  have  f.  my  bouse,  I  have  loft  my  heritage 
15.  6.  Ihou  hast  f.  me,  sailh  the  I.,or(l 
17.13.  they  have  f.  the  fountain  of  living  waters 
22.  9.  because  they  have  f.  the  covenant  of  God 
25.  38   he  hath  f.  his  covert  as  Ihe  lion 
F.zek.  8.  12.  the  Lord  hath  f.  the  earth,  9.  9. 
Mat.  19.27.  we  have  f.  all  and  followed  ihee 

29.  every  one  thai  hnlh  /.  housps  or  brethren 
2  T/7n.4. 10.  nomas  An/ft  f.  me  having  loved  world 

ret.2.15.  which  h/lve  f.lhv  rijht  way,gono  astray 

.VoC  FORSAKEN. 

2  Clirnn.  13. 10.  but  as  for  ns  ihn  I,ord  is  our  God, 

we  Imve  not  f.  him,  priests  Tniriisler  lo  the  Lord 
F.ira  9. 9.  vol  God  halh  vnt  f.  us  in  our  bondage 
P.inl.^.  10.  Ihoii  hast  nnl  f.  thfm  that  seek  Ihee 
/«(!.  62  12.  shall  bH  ealleil.sniiglit  nut,  a  city  not  f. 
Jer.51.5.  lir.  hath  not  boon/,  nor  Judah  of  his  God 


FOR 

2Cor.  4.9.  weare  persecuted,  but  not/,  cast  down 

FORSAKETII. 
Job  6.  14.  but  he/,  the  fear  of  the  Almighty 
Psal.  37.  28.  for  the  Lord  /  not  bis  sainta 
40.t  12.  more  than  my  hairs,  therefore  heart/,  me 
Prov.2. 17.  from  her  who/,  the  guide  of  her  youth 
15. 10.  correction  grievous  to  him  that/,  the  way 
28.  13.  whoso  confesseth  and /.shall  have  mercy 
Luke  14.  33.  whoso/,  not  all  that  he  hath  cannot 

FORSAKING. 
Isa.  6.  12.  until  there  be  a  great  /.  in  the  land 
heb.  10.25.  not/,  the  assemb.  of  ourselves  together 

FORSOOK. 
Deut.  32.  15.  then  he/.  God  that  made  him 
.ludg.l.  12.  and  they/,  the  Lord  God,  13.  |  10.  6 
lSam.31.7.  they/,  their  cities  and  fled,  1  CAr.  10.  7 

1  Kings'^.  9.  because  they/.  Ihe  Lord  their  God 
]2.8.but  Reboboam/.  the  counsel  of  old  men,  ano 

consulted  with  young  men,  13.  2  CAr.  10.  8,  12 

2  Kings  21.  22.  Anion/,  the  God  of  his  father: 
2  Chron.  7.  22.  they/,  the  God  of  their  fathers 

12. 1.  Reboboam/.  law  of  Lord,  and  Isr.  with  bim 
Psal.  78.  60.  he/,  the  tabernacle  of  Shiloh 
119.  87.  consumed  me,  but  I/,  not  thy  precepts 
Isa.  58.2.  that/,  not  the  ordinance  of  God 
.fcr.  14.  5.  Ihe  hind  calved  in  the  field  and/,  it 
^lfa«.26.56.disciple«/.  him  and  fled,  Mark  14.50 
Mark  1.  13.  they/,  their  nets  and  followed  him 
fyuke  5.  11.  they/,  all  and  followed  him 
2  Tim.  4.  16.  none  stood  with  me,  all  men/,  mo 
Heb.  11.27.  by  faith  Moses  f.  Egypt,  for  he  endurea 

FORSOOKEST. 

JVeA.9. 17.  art  a  God  slow  to  anger,  and/,  them  not 

19.  thou  in  thy  mercies  f.  them  not  in  the  wilder. 

FORSWEAR. 

Mat.  5.33.  thou  shalt  not  f.  thys.  but  perform  oaths 

FORT,  S. 
25(iOT.5.9.so  David  dwelt  in  the/,  the  city  of  Dav 
2  Kings  25.  1.  they  built  /.  ag.  Jerus.  .f'er.  52.  4. 
Isa.  25  12.  high  /.  of  thy  walls  shall  he  bringdown 
29.  3.  and  I  wiy  raise/,  against  thee 
i'2. 14.  the  f.  and  towers  shall  be  for  dens  for  ever 
F.zek.  4.  2.  and  built  a  /.  against  it,  21.  22.  ]  26.  8. 
17.  17.  and  building/,  lo  cut  ofi'inany  persons 
21.  22.  was  the  divination  for  Jerus.  to  build  a/. 
26.  8.  and  he  shall  make  a/,  against  Ihee 

33.  27.  and  they  that  be  in  the/,  shall  die 
Oan.11.19.  shall  turn  toward  Ihe/.of  his  own  land 

FORTH. 
JVOA.  4. 16.  from  that  time/,  my  servants  wrought 
13.  21.  from  that  time/,  came  they  no  more 
Psal.  113.  2.  blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord,  from 
this  lime/,  and  for  ever,  115.  18.  |  121.  8. 
.Ter.  49.  5.  ye  shall  he  driven  out  every  man  right  /. 
J\tat.  16.  21.  from  that  time/,  began  Jesus  loghew 
22.46.nor  durst  from  thatday/.  ask  him  questions 
.John  11.  53.  from  that  day  f.  they  took  counsel 

FORTHWITH. 
Ezra  6.  8.  that/,  e.xpences  be  given  to  these  men 
Mat.  13. 5./.  sprung  up,  because  no  deepn.  of  earth 
26.  49.  he/,  came  to  Jesus,  and  said,  hail.  Master 
Mark  1.29.  and /.when  come  out  of  the  synagogue 
43.  he  straitly  charged  him,  and/,  sent  him  away 
5. 13.  and/.  Jesus  gave  the  unclean  spirits  leave 
.John  19.  34.  and /.came  thereout  blood  and  water 
.4rt.s9.18. ho  received  sight/,  and  arose,  was  bapt. 
12.  10.  and/,  the  an"el  departed  from  him 
21.30.  they  drew  Paul  out,  and/,  doors  were  shut 

FORTY. 
(7 rn.l  8.29. he  spake  again,pernd  venture  there  shall 
be/,  liiiind  ;  he  said,  I  will  not  do  it  for/,  sake 
Find.  26.  19.  thou  shalt  make/,  sockels  of  silvoi 

21.  and  their/,  sockets  of  silver,  36.  24,  26. 
■  Tud^.  12.  14.  Abdon  had/,  sons  and  thirty  dsugh 
2/irin^.'»8.9.Hnzael  went  and  took/,  camels'  burd 
A'VA.  5.  15.  the  governors  had  taken/,  shekels 
j?ct«23. 13.  mote  than  f.madethis  conspiracy,21 

FORTY  baths. 

1  Kingsl.'X^.  mndeien  layers, one  contained/,  b 

FORTY  cubits. 

1  King'  6.17.  the  house  hefiire  it  was  /.  cubits  long 
F.zek.  4 1.2.he  measured  the  length  thereof/,  cubits 

46.  22.  there  were  courts  joined  of/,  cubits 
See  n.ws. 
FORTY  kine. 
Gen.  32.  15.  /.  kine,  ten  bulls,  n  present  to  Esao 

FORTY  stripes. 
7)f  Kt.  25.3.  /.  str.  he  may  give  bim,  and  not  exceed 

2  Cor.  1 1.24.  of  the  Jews'l  received/,  str.  save  one 
FORTY  years. 

r?rn. 25.20.  Isaac  was/,  y.  when  he  took  Rchrkah 
26. 34.  Esau  f.  years  whr^n  he  look  lo  wife  Judith 
F.rod.  16.  3.5.Is"raeldid  eat  manna/,  y.  JV^A.9.21 
JVi/m.  14.  33.  shall  wander  in  wildern./.  y.  32. 13. 

34.  ve  shall  bear  your  ini<iulties/.  years 
/Vi;t.2.  7.  hcknoweth  Ihv  walking  these/,  years 

8.  2.  Ihe  way  which  God  led  Mve  /.  years,  29. 5. 

4.  neither  did  Ihv  fool  swell  these/,  years 
.Tosh.  5. 6.  Israel  walked  /.  years  in  the  wildomeM 
11.7./.  years  old  was  I  when  Moses  sent  me 


.    FOR 

.K.iff.2.  U  The  land  had  rest/,  year*,  5. 31. 1 8.  28. 

13.  1.  Israel  into  the  hand  of  Philistinea/.  years 
ISam.  4.  18.  Eli  had  judged  Israel/,  years 
iHatn.  2.  10.  Ish-bosheth  /.  y.  old  when  he  began 

5.  4.  David  reigned/,  years,  IKin^s  'i.  11. 

15  7.  after/,  years  Absalom  said  to  the  king 
1  Kings  11.  4'2.  time  Solomon  reigned  was/,  years 
SA"i«o-sl2.1.Jehoash  reigned/,  years  in  Jerusalem 
2C/iron.  24. 1.  Joash  reigned/.  ^car.s  in  Jerusalem 
PsalM3.H).f.  y.  was  I  grieved  with  this  generation 
JCiek.  29.  11.  nor  shall  it  be  inhabited/,  years 

12.  and  her  cities  shall  bo  desolate/,  years 

13.  at  the  end  of/,  y.  I  will  gather  the  Egyptians 
'  .4mos2.  10.  I  led  you/,  years  in  the  wilderness 

5.  25.  ye  offered  sacrifices/,  years,  ^cts  7.  42. 
^c<s4.22.  for  the  man  healed  was  above/,  y.  old 
7.23.  Moses  was/,  y.  old,  he  visited  his  brethren 
30.  when/,  y.  e.vpired,  there  appeared  an  angel 
36.  had  shewed  wonders  in  the  wilderness/,  y. 
13. 18.  the  lime  of/,  y.  suffered  he  their  manners 
21.  God  gave  them  Saul  by  the  space  of/,  ^ears 
//ft. 3.9.  when  your  fathers  saw  my  works  /  years 
17.  but  with  whom  was  he  grieved/,  years  7 
FORTY-ONE  years. 
I  Kings  14.  21.  Rehoboam  was  f.-one  years  old 
when  he  began  to  reign,  2  Chron.  12.  13. 
15.  10.  Asa  reigned /-0715  years  in  Jerusalem 
S  Kings  14.  23.  Jeroboam  reigned /.-one  years  in 
FORTY-TWO.  [Sama. 

J^um.  35.  6.  to  cities  of  refuge  add/.-fzco  cities 
2A'(7! 0-4- 2.  24.  two  bears  tare/,  and  two  children 

10. 14.  Jehu  took  them  alive,  even  /.  and  two  men 
CC/ir.  22. 2./.-UC0  years  old  Ahaz.  when  he  began 
Kzra  2.  24.  the  children  of  Azmaveth/.  and  two 
J^eh.  7.  28.  the  men  of  Beth-azmaveth/.  and  two 
Bev.  11.  2.  holy  city  they  tread /.-f wo  months 
13.5.powerwa8  given  himto  continue/.tioonionths 

FORTY-FOUR. 
IC/iron.  5.  18.  of  Reuben  and  Gad  44,760. 

FORTY-FIVE. 
Ocn.  18.  28.  if  I  find/.-/ce,  I  will  not  destroy  it 
Jush.W.W.  Lord  kept  me  alive  Ihesef.-fioe  years 
1  A7nn'j-7.3.upon  the  beams  that  lay imf. -Jive  pillars 

FORTY-SIX. 
Jukni.W.f.-siz  years  was  this  temple  in  building 

FORTY-EIGHT. 
J^am.  35.  7.  cities  of  Levltes  f. -eight,  Josh.  21.41. 

FORTY-NINE. 
Z,ei;.25.  8.  the  space  shall  be  to  thee /.-nine  years 

FORTY  thousand. 
►Vmot.1.  33.  those  numbered  of  the  tribe  of  Ephraim 
were/.  thou.<!a7td  five  hundred,  2.  I'.l.  |  26.  J8. 
.Tosh.  4.  13.  about/,  thousand  prepared  for  war 
Judg.5.S.\vdiS  a  shield  orspeareeon  among/.fAou,?. 
e.S(z/«.  10. 18.  Dav.  slew  /.  t.  horsem.  1  Chr.  19.  18. 
I  Kings  4.  26.  Solo.  had/,  thousand  stalls  of  horses 
IChron.  12.  3H.of  Asher  expertin  war/,  thousand 

FORTY-ONE  thousand. 
JVu7n.l.41. of  Asher  were/,  and  one  ttousa?jd,2.23. 

FORTY-TWO  thousand. 
Jadg.  12.  6.  there  fell  of  Ephraimites  f.-tico  thous. 
£zro2. 64.  whole  coiigrega.was 42,360,  JVeA.  7.66. 

FORTY-THREE  thousand. 
JVum. 26.  7.  families  rtf  t!ie  Reubenites  was  43,730 

FORTY-FOUR  thousand. 
iChr.5. 18.  the  children  of  Reuben  were,  44,760, 
.^  hundred  FORTY-FOUR  thousand.     . 
-Sec  Hundred. 
FORTY-FIVE  thousand, 
yum.  1.  25.  that  were  numbered  of  Gad  45,650 
26.  41.  that  were  numbered  of  Benjamin  45,600 
50.  ofNaphtnIi  were  numbered  45,400. 
FORTY-SIX  thousand. 
A"um.  1.  21.  of  ReulM-n  were  46.500,  2. 11. 

FORTIETH.' 
jVum.  33.  38.  Aaron  died  there  in  the/,  year  after 
JJeut.  1.  .').  in  tlie/.  year  Moses  spake  to  Israel 

1  Chr.  20. 31.  in  the  /.  year  of  the  reign  of  David 
2CAr.  16.13.Asa  died  in  one  and/,  year  of  his  reign 

FORTIFY. 
.ru<i.^. 9.31.  and  behold, they/,  the  city  against  thee 
.A"eA.  4.  2.  will  these  feeble  Jews/,  themselves? 
/«a.22.10.houseshaveye  broken  down  to /.the  wall 
Jcr.o).  53.  tho'  she  should/,  height  of  her  strengtl 
vVoA.  2. 1.  watch  the  way,/.ihy  power  mightily 
3.14.draw  thee  waters  for  siege,/,  thy  strongholds 
FORTIFIED. 
iChron.  11.  11.  Rehoboam/  the  strong  holds 
26.  9.  Uzziah  built  towers  and  /.  them 
Xrh.  3.  8.  th»y  /.  Jerusalem  to  the  broad  wall 
»1r/)C.7.12.in  that  day  he  sliall  come  from  the/cities 
FORTRESS,  ES. 

2  Sam.  22.  2.  the  Lord  is  my  rock  and  my/.  Psal. 

18.  2. 1  31.  3.  I  71.3. 191.2.  I  144.  2. 
Prov.  12. 1 12.  wicked  desireth  the/,  of  evil  men 
Isa.  17.  3.  the/,  also  shall  cease  from  Ephraim 
25.  12.  the/,  of  the  high  fort  shall  he  bring  down 
34.  13.  nettles  and  brambles  come  up  in  the/.      i 

Jer.  6. 27. 1  have  set  thee  for  a/,  among  my  people    22.  3.  with  what  thou  hast/,  shall  do  likewise 
10.  17.  gather  thv  wares,  O  inhabitant  of  the/.    |     14.  when  I  came  to  her  If.  her  not  a  maid,  17. 
317  2  G 


FOU 

Jer.  16. 19.  O  Lord,  my/,  in  the  day  of  affliction 
Van.  ll.~.  enter  mto  the/,  of  the  king  of  the  north 
10.  shall  he  return  and  be  stirred  up  even  lo  his/. 
139.  thus  shall  he  do  in  the/,  of  munitions 
Hos.  JO.  14.  and  all  thy/,  shall  be  spoiled 
Jlvios  j.9.that  the  spoiled  shall  come  against  the/. 
Jlitt.7.12.  inthatday  he  shall  come  to  thee  from/. 

FORWARD. 
jVum.32.19.wewi'll  not  inherit  on  yonder  side  or/. 
Jer.  7.  24.  and  they  went  backward  and  not/. 
£2c/t.43.27.it  shall  be  upon  the  eighth  day  and  so/. 
Zeeh.  1.  15.  and  they  helped  /.  the  alBiction 
•iCur.  8.  10.  not  only  lo  do,  but  also  to  be/,  year  ago 
17.  but  being  more/,  of  his  own  accord  he  went 
Gal.  2.  10.  the  same  which  I  also  was/,  to  do 
'3 John  6.  whom  if  thou  bring/,  on  their  journey 
See  That  Day,  Go,  Skt,  Went. 
FORWARDNESS. 
2Cor.  8.  8.  but  by  occasion  of  the/,  of  others 
9.2.  for  I  know/,  of  your  mind,  for  which  I  boast 

FOUGHT. 
Exod.  17.  8.  then  came  Amalek  and /.  with  Israel 

10.  so  Joshua/,  with  Amalek,  Moses  went  up 
JV'm7h.21.1.  then  king  Arad/.  ag.  Isr.  and  took  some 

23.  Sihon  came  and/,  against  Israel,  Jttrfg-.  11.20. 
26.  Sihon  /.  ajainst  the  former  king  of  Moab 
Josh.  10.  14.  for  the  Lord/,  for  Israel,  42.  |  23.  3. 
29.  Joshua  and  all  Israel/,  against  Libnah 
31.  /.  against  Lachish  ||  34.  Eglon  |{  36.  Hebron 
24.  8.  the  Amorites  on  the  other  side/,  with  you 

11.  and  the  men  of  Jericho/,  against  you 
Judg.  1. 5.  they  found  Adoni-bezek  and  /.  ag.  him 

8.  Judah  had/,  against  Jerusalem,  and  taken  it 
5. 19.  the  kings  came,  then/,  the  kings  of  Canaan 

20.  they  /.  from  heaven,  tho  stars  in  courses/. 
9.  17.  my  father/,  for  you  and  delivered  you 

39.  Gaal  went  out  and/,  with  Abimelech 
12.  4.  all  the  men  of  Gilead/.  with  Ephraim 
IHam.  4. 10.  the  Philistines/.  IChron.  10.  1. 
14.47.  Saul/,  against  all  his  enemies  on  every  side 
15.15.  Saul/,  against  Amalek  in  the  valley 
19.  8.  So  David/,  with  the  Philistines,  23.  5. 
2,Sa»i.2.28.i)eople  stood  still,  nor/,  they  anv  more 
8.  10.  he  had/,  against  Hadadezer,  IChr.  18.  10. 
10.17.  the  Syrians/,  against  David,  \Chr.  19.  17 
12.  29.  David  /.  against  Rabbah  and  took  it 
~Kings  8.  29.  Joram  /.  against  Hazael,  9. 15. 

12.  17.  then  Hazael  went  and/,  against  Gath 

13.  12.  Joash/.  against  Amaziah,  ]4.  15. 
"Chr.  20.  29.  Lord/,  against  the  enemies  of  Israel 
Psal.  109.  3.  they/,  against  me  without  a  cause 
Isa.  20.  1.  Tartan/,  against  Ashdod  ajid  took  it 

63.10.  he  was  turned  their  enemy  and/,  ag.  them 
.ler.  34.  1.  the  people/,  against  Jerusnlem,  7. 
Zech.  14.  3.  as  when  he/,  in  the  day  of  battle 
12.Lord  willsmilelhem  that/against  Jerusalem 

1  Cor.  15.  32.  I  have/,  with  beasts  at  Ephesus 

2  Tim.i.l.  I  havo/.a  good  fight,  finished  my  cour.se 
Rev.Vi.l.  Jdichael  and  his  angeis/.  against  dragon 

FOUL. 
.Job  16.16.niy  face  is/,  with  weeping,on  my  eye-lid» 
Mat.  16.  3.  ye  say,  it  will  be/,  weather  to-day 
JI/arA  9. 25.  he  rebuked  the/,  spirit,  saying  to  him 
Rev.  18.  2.  Bab.  the  hold  of  every  /.  spirit  and  cage 

FOUL. 
Ezei.34.18.but  ye  must/the  residue  with  your  feet 

FOULED. 
Eze/i.34.19. they  drink  that  ve  have/with  your  feet 

FOULEDST. 
£2eAc.32.2.thou  troubledst  waters  and/,  their  rivers 
Fouls,  sec  Fowls'. 
FOUND. 
Gen.  2.  20.  for  Adam  there  was  not/,  a  helpmeet 
8.9.  the  dove/,  no  rest  for  the  sole  of  her  foot 
19.  t  15.  take  thy  two  daughters  which  are/. 
26. 1 12.  Isaac  sowed,  and/,  a  hundred  fold 
19.Isaac'B  servants  digged  and/,  a  well  of  water 
32.1saac's  servants  said  to  him,  we  have/,  water 
27.  20.  how  is  it  that  thou  hast/,  it  so  quickl 

30.  14.  Reuben  went  and/,  mandrakes  in  the  field 

31.  33.  Lahan  went  into  tents,  but/,  not  ima^ 
37.  what  hast  thou/,  of  all  thy  household  stuff? 

36.  24.  Anah  that/,  the  mules  in  the  wilderness 

37.  ,12.  brought  the  coat,  and  said,  this  have  we/. 

38.  23.  I  Bcn't  this  kid,  and  thou  hast  not/,  her 
44.  8.  money  which  we/,  in  our  sacks  we  brought 

16.  God  hath/,  out  the  iniquity  of  his  servant? 

Exod.  15.  22.  they  wentthrec  days  and/,  no  water 
16.  27.  they  went  to  gather  manna  and/,  none 
18.  fS.  Moses  told  all  the  travel  that  h:.d/.  them 

Lev.  6.  3.  or  if  he  have/,  that  which  was  lost 
t  5.  restore  it  in  the  day  of  his  being/,  guilty 
25. 1 26. and  if  his  hand  hath/,  sufficiency 

Kum.  1.5.  32./.  a  man  that  gathered  sticks  on  sabh. 

33.  they  that  /.  him  brought  him  to  Moses 
20. 1 14.  thou  knowest  the  travel  that  haih/.  U5 
31.  tSO.  we  have  brought  whatevery  man  hath/. 

/>e«<.21.tl7.givlng  double  portion  ofall/.  with  him 


FOU 

Deut.  22.  27.  he /.  her  in  field,ane  'ne  damsel  cried 

24.  1.  because  be  hath  some  uni  leanness  in  har 
32. 10.  he  /.  him  in  a  desert  land,  he  led  him  about 

Josh. 2.  22.  the  pursuers  sought,  but/,  them  not 

10. 17.  five  kings  are/,  hid  in  a  eavo  at  Makkedah 
Judg.  1.  5.  they/.  Adoni-bezek  and  fought  ag.  him 
14.18.if  not  plowed  with  heifer,uol/.  out  my  riddle 
15.  15.  and  he/,  a  new  jaw-bone  of  an  ass 
21.  12.  and  they/,  four  bundled  young  virgins 
lAa;K.9.4. passed  thro'  Shalisha,but  they/.noi  asses 
11.  they /.young  maidens  going  to  draw  water 
20.  as  for  thine  asses  they  are/.  10.  2,  16. 
12.5.  is  witness  ye  have  not/,  ought  in  my  hand 
13.  19.  now  there  was  no  smith  /.  in  Israel 
22.no  sword  nor  spear /.in  hand  of  the  people 

25.  28.  and  evil  hath  not  been/,  with  thee 

29.  3.  I  have/,  no  fault  in  hii^  since  befell  to  ma 

30.  11.  and  they/,  an  Egypti"  in  the  field 

31.  8./.  Saul  and  his  three  sons  fallen  in  Gilboa 
"Ham.  7.  27.  therefore  thy  servant  /.  in  his  heart 

to  pray  this  prayer  to  thee,  IChron.  17.  25. 

1  Kings  T.4l7.  nor  was  the  weight  of  the  brass/,  out 
11.29.the  prophet  Ahijah/.  Jeroboam  in  the  way 
13.  28.  he  went  and/,  his  carcase  cast  in  the  way 
18. 10.  he  took  an  oath  that  they  /.  thee  not 
19.  19.  Elijah  departed  thence  and/.  Elisha 
20. 36.  behold,  a  lion  /.  him  and  slew  him 
21.  20.  hast  thou /.me,Omine  enemy  7  have/.theo 

2Kings2.  17.  they  sought  Elijah,  but/,  him  not 
9. 121.  they/.  Jehu  in  the  portion  of  Naboth 

35.  they/,  no  more  of  her  than  the  skull 
22.8. 1/ thebookofthelaw  in  house  of  the  Lord 
25. 19.  he  look  si.xty  men  that  were/,  in  tho  city 

IChron.  4.  40.  they/,  fat  pasture  and  good 
29.  8.  they  with  whom  precious  stones  were/. 

iChron.  19.  3.  there  are  good  things/,  in  thee 

£2ra2.62.sought  their  register  amonglhose reckon 
ed  by  genealogy,  but  they  were  not/.  JVeA.  7.  64. 
8.  15.  and  I/,  there  none  of  the  sons  of  Levi 

JVeA.  5.  8.  then  they/,  nothing  to  answer 
8.14.they/.  written  in  the  law  of  Lord  by  Moses 

E.<th.4.  t  16.  gather  all  the  Jews/,  in  Shushan 

,Tob'28. 13.  nor  is  wisdom/,  in  the  land  of  the  living 
31.  t  25.  if  I  rejoiced  because  my  hand/,  much 
29.  or  lift,  up  myself  when  evil  /.  mine  enemy 
32.3.  wrath  kindled, because  they  had /.no  answer 

13.  lest  ye  should  say,  we  have/,  out  wisdom 
3X  24.  deliver  from  the  pit,  I  have/,  a  ransom 
42. 15.  no  women/,  so  fair  as  the  daughters  of  Job 

Psal.&J.  20.  I  looked  for  comforters  but/,  none 
7<i.5.  none  of  the  men  of  might  have/,  their  handa 
84.  3.  yea  sparrow  hath  /.  a  house,  and  swallow 
89.20. 1  have /.David  ray  servant,  I  anoinled  him 
107.  4.  they  wandered  and  /.  no  city  to  dwell  in 
116. 1 3.  I/,  trouble  and  sorrow,  pains  of  hell/,  ma 
119. 1 143.  trouble  and  anguish  have/,  me 
132.  6.  we/,  it  in  the  fields  of  the  wood 

Prov.  7.  1.5.  to  seek  thy  face,  and  I  have/,  thee 
24. 14. so  shall  wisdom  be  when  thou  hast/,  it 
25.16.hast  thou/.honey  ■?  eat  so  much  as  issuffici- 

Ercl.  7.27.  behold,  this  have  1/  saith  the  preacher 

2d.  one  man  among  a  thousand  have  I  /.  but  a 

woman  among  all  those  have  I  not/. 

20.thison!y  havel/.  that  God  made  man  upright 

Ca?it.  3.  1.  I  sought  him,  but  I  /.  him  not,  2. 

3.  the  watchmen/,  me,  to  whom  I  said,  5.  7. 

4.  but  I/,  him  whom  my  soul  loveth 
Isa.  10. 10.  as  my  hand  hath/,  kingdoms  of  idols 

14.  my  hand  hath/,  the  riches  of  the  people 

22.  3.  nil  that  are/,  in  thee  are  bound  together 
24.  t  22.  after  many  days  shall  they  be/,  wantmg 
57.  10.  thou  hast/,  the  life  of  thine  hand 
65.  1.  I  am  /.  of  them  that  sought  me  not 

.7(T.2.  5.  what  iniquity  have  your  fathers/,  in  me'? 
34.  in  thy  skirls  is/,  the  blood  of  poor  innoceiita 

5.  26.  for  among  my  people  are/,  wicked  men 

14.  3.  they  came  to  the  pits  and/,  no  water 

15.  10.  thy  words  were/,  and  I  did  eat  them 

23.  II.  in  my  house  have  I/,  their  wickedness 
41.  8.  ten  men  were/,  that  said,  slay  us  not 
.TO.  7.  all  that/,  them  have  devoured  them 

Lam.'i.  16.  this  is  tho  day,  we  have/,  we  have  seeo 
r.zek.  22.  30.  I  souglitfor  a  man,  but  I/,  none 
Dnv.  5.  12.  an  excellent  sidrit  was/,  in  Daniel 
27.  tliou  art  weighed,  and  art/,  wanting 

6.  4.  nor  was  there  any  fault/,  in  Daniel 
11.  these  men/.  Daniel  praying  before  his  God 

ffos.O.  10. 1/.  Israel  like  grapes  in  the  wilderne.«n 
12.4.  he/him  in  Beth-el,  and  there  spake  with  ut 
8.  Ephraim  said,  I  have/,  me  out  substance 
14.  8.  I  am  like  a  tree,  from  me  is  thy  fruit/. 
Jimah  1  3.  be/,  a  ship  for  Tarsbish,  so  he  jiaid  fare 
.'f7c.l.  IS.the  transgressions  of  Israel  were/in  thee 
Mat.  2.  8.  when  ye  have/,  him  bring  mo  word 
f*.  10.  T  have  not/so  great  faith  in  I.sfa'd,  Lukcl  9 
13.  44.  which  when  a  man  hath/,  he  liideth  it 
46  when  he  had  /.  one  pearl  of  great  price 
'S.  28.  and/,  one  of  his  fellow  servants  who  owed 
20.  6.  he  went  out  and/,  others  standing  idle 
21.19./.  nothing  thereon,  Mark  U.  13.  Lukt  134 


FOU 

Mat.  22.  10.  they  gathered  all  as  many  as  fhey/. 
ai.43.he/.tlicm  asleep,  Mark  14.  40.  J^uke-H.  4o. 
60.8ought  wilne88e8,yei/.they  none,  ^/orAl4.55. 
?7.  32.  they/,  a  mao  ofCyrene,  Simon  by  name 
.Mark  1.37.  when  they  had/,  him,  they  uaid  to  him 
7.  2.  tome  ate  with  delilvd  hands,  they/,  fault 
30.  when  she  wag  come,  she/,  the  devil  gone  out 

11.  4.  they/,  the  colt  tied  by  the  door  without 
J.uke  '2.  Iti.  they/,  the  biibe  lying  in  a  manger 

46.  after  three  days  they/,  him  in  the  temple 
4.  17.  he/,  the  place  where  it  was  written 
7.  10.  they  returning/,  the  servant  whole 
".  35.  they/,  man  clothed  and  in  his  right  mind 
]5.  5  when  he  hath/,  the  sheep,  he  layeth  it 

6.  rejoice,  for  I  have/,  my  sheep  which  was  lost 

V.  when  she  hath  /.  the  piece,  she  calleth  friends 
1*.  18.  aro  not  a#y  /.  that  returned  to  give  glory 
\'i.  32.  they/,  even  as  ho  had  said  to  them,  22. 13. 
2i.  2.  we/,  this  fellow  perverting  the  nation 

14.  behold,  I  have/,  no  fault  in  this  man 
24.  2.  and  they/,  the  stone  rolled  away 

3.  they/,  not  the  body  of  the  Lord  Jesus 

23.  when  they  /.  not  his  body,  they  came,  saying 
33.  and  they/,  the  eleven  gathered  together 
.John  1.  41.  andsaith,  we  have/,  the  Mossias,  45. 

2.  14.  Jesus/,  in  the  temple  those  that  sold  oxen 
-Jets  5.  10.  the  young  men  came  in,  and/,  her  dead 

22.  when  the  officers/,  them  not  in  the  prison 
7   11.  and  our  fathers/,  no  sustenance 

9.  2.  that  if  he/,  any  of  this  way,  whether  men 

10.  27.  Peter/,  many  that  wore  come  together 

12.  I'J.  Herod  sought  for  Peter,  and/,  him  not 

13.  fi.  they/,  a  certain  sorcerer,  a  false  prophet 
22.  I  have/.  David,  a  man  after  mine  own  heart 

17.  23.  1  /.  an  altar  with  this  inscription 

24.  5.  we  have/,  this  man  a  pestilent  fellow 
20.  if  they  have/,  any  evil  doing  in  me 

25.  21.  I  /.  he  hath  done  nothing  worthy  of  death 
28.  14.  we  came  to  Puteoli,  where  we  /.  brethren 

Horn.  4.  1.  what  Abraham  our  father  hath/. 
7.50.  which  was  ordained  to  life,  I/,  lobe  to  death 
1  Cor.  15.  15.  yea,  we  arc  /.  false  witnesses  of  God 

0  Cor.  2.  13.  bocnu.<e  I/,  not  Titus  my  brother 
Oat.  2.  17.  wc  ourselves  also  are/,  sinners 
Pkil.  2.  8.  and  being/,  in  fashion  as-a  man 

1  Tint.  3.  10.  use  the  office,  boiiig/.  blameless 

2  Tim.  1.  17.  Onosiphorus  souglit  me  and/,  me 
ffch.  12.  17.  for  ho/,  no  place  of  repentance 

1  Pet.  1.  7.  that  your  faith  might  be/,  to  praise 

2  John  4. 1/  of  thy  children  walking  in  truth 
/<^t).2.2.tliou  hast  tried  them,  and  haal/.  them  liars 

3.  2.  I  have  not/,  thy  works  perfect  before  God 
12.  3  nor  was  their  place  /.  any  more  in  heaven 
10.  20.  and  the  mountains  were  not/. 

lie  FOUND. 
Ofrt.  18.29.  peradventure  there  shall  he  forty/. 

44.  9.  with  whomsoever  of  thy  servanta  it  bef. 
Kici.lS.  lO.sevcn  days  no  Icav.shall  bcf.  in  houses 

21. 1(5.  that  itealcth  a  man,  if  he  Ac/,  in  his  hand 

22.  2.  if  a  thief  Ae/.  breaking  up,  7. 

4.  if  the  theft  be  certainly/,  in  his  hand 
Drut.  22.  2H.  if  a  man  lie  with  her,  and  they  bef. 
1  .Sam.  10.  21.  they  sought  him,  he  could  not  Ac/. 
2S/i>n.n.l2.  shall  come  on  him  where  he  shall  be  f. 
IfCings}.  .52.  if  wickedness  6e/.in  him,  he  shall  die 
1  Ckron.  28.  9.  if  seek  him,  will  Ac/,  of  thee,  but  if 

forsake  him  will  cast  oft"  for  ever,  2  Otron.  1.5.  2. 
.Tnh  20.  8.  he  shall  fly  away  and  shall  not  bef. 
28.  12.  but  where  shall  wisdom  bef.  ? 
/'saJ.32.f).8hallprayin  time  when  thou  mayest  Ac/. 
.V).  2.  till  his  iniquity  be  f.  to  he  hateful 
.37.  30.  I  «oii"ht  him,  but  he  could  not  be  f. 
Frnv.  0.  31.  if  he  bef.  he  shall  restore  seven-fold 
Ifi.  31.  if  it  be  fin  the  way  of  righteousness 
'M.  0.  lest  he  reprove  thee  and  thou  he  f.  a  liar 
10.  h.'st  he  curse  thee,  and  tliou  be  f.  guilty 
Isa.  30. 14.  there  shall  not  Ac  /.  a  sherd  to  take  fire 
S.'.  9.  no  lion,  nor  any  beast  shall  be  f.  thereon 
.'(I.  3.  joy  and  glailness  sliall  bef.  therein 
.55.  6.  seek  ye  the  Lord  while  he  may  Ac/. 
.trr.  20.  14.  I  will  Ac/,  of  you,saith  the  Lord 
50.  20.  sinsof  Jiidnh  be  souijht  for,  shall  not  Ac/. 
Ktek.  20.  21.  yet  slialt  thou  never  Ac/  again 
Dan.  11. 19.  he  shall  stumble  and  fall,  and  not  bef. 

12.  1.  every  one  shall  Ac/,  written  in  the  book 
//o».  10.  2.  now  shall  thev  Ac/,  faulty 
y.eph.  3.  13.  nor  a  deceitful  lonjuo  Ac/,  in  mouth 
y.ecll.  10.  10.  and  place  shall  not  Ac/,  for  them 
.tetit  5.  39.  lest  ye  he  f.  to  fight  agiiinnt  Goil 

1  Cor.  4.2.  it  is  required  that  a  steward  Ac/,  faithful 

2  Cor.  .5.  3.  if  rlolhcd,  we  shall  not  Ac /.  naked 

11.  12.  wherein  glory,  Ihey  may  be  f.  even  as  v,e 

12.  20.  that  I  shall  Ac/,  such  as  ye  would  not 
r/«iJ.3.0.  5e/.in  him, not  having  inv  own  righteous. 
2  Pet.  3.  14.  that  ye  mnv  he  f.  of  him  in  peace 
R'o.  18.  21.  thocity  of  BaliyfonAc/.  no  moro  at  all 

22.  no  crafliman  shall  he  f.  any  moro  in  Ihoo 

Hee  Favour. 

FOU.N'D  crraee. 

Ctn.  fl.  8.  Noah  /.  grare  in  tho  oyos  of  the  Lord 

213 


FOU 

Hen.  19.  19.  thy  servant  hath/,  grace  in  thy  sight 

33.  10.  if  I  have/,  g.  in  thy  sight,  47.  29.  |  50.  4. 
.39.  4.  Joseph/,  grace  in  his  sight,  he  served  him 

F.iod.  33. 12.  thou  hast  also/,  ^racc  in  mysight,!'. 

13.  if  I  have  /  grace  in  thy  sight,  consider  this 

nation  thy  people,  M.'i..ludg.  0. 17. 1  >iam.  27.5. 

16. how  known  that  1  and  thy  people  have  /.  g.7 

J\''um.  32.  5.  if  we  have  f.  grace  in  thy  sight 

fiuth  2.  10.  why  have  If.  grace  in  thine  eyes? 

1  .Sum.  20.  3.  thy  father  knowulh  I  have/,  grace 

2  Ham.  14.  22.  thy  servant  knoweth  I  have/,  grace 
,Jer.  31.  2.  tho  people/,  grate  in  the  wilderness 

Is  FOUND. 
<?cn.44. 10.  ho  with  whom  it  i«/.bo  my  servant ,  10. 
Deal.  20.  11.  people  that  is  f.  shall  be  tributaries 

1  Kings  14.  13.  in  him  there  i«/.  some  good  thing 

2  Kings  22. 13.  this  book  that  isf.'i  Chron.  34.  21. 
F,^ra  4.  19.  it  is  f.  this  city  hath  been  rebellious 
.Job  19.  28.  seeing  the  root  of  the  matter  is  f. 
Prov.  10.  13.  in  the  lips  of  him  wisdom  is  f. 
Isa.  13.  la.everyone  thati«/.»hall  be  tliiust  thro' 

37.  t  4.  lift  up  thy  prayer  for  remnant  that  is  f. 
Gj.  8.  as  the  new  wine  is  f.  in  the  cluster 
Jer.  2.  26.  as  the  thief  is  ashamed  when  he  is  f. 

34.  in  thy  skirts  is  f.  the  blood  of  innocents 
ll.O.a  conspiracy  is  f.  among  Alio  men  of  Judah 

Dan.  5.  14.  excellent  wisdom  is  f.  in  thee 
Hos.  14.  8.  I  am  like  a  tree,  from  me  i«  thy  fruit/. 
Lnke  15.  24.  this  my  son  was  lost  and  is  f.  32. 
2  Cor.  7.  14.  our  boasting  I  made  is  f.  a  truth 

IVas  FOUND. 
Gen.  44.  12.  the  cup  was  f.  in  Benjamin's  sack 
47.  14.  Joseph  gathered  the  money  that  was  f. 
Ezod.Sa.  23. every  man  with  whom  was  f.  purple 
24.  every  man  with  whom  was/,  shittim-wood 
.fiidg.  20.  1 48.  smote  with  the  sword  all  that  wasf. 

1  .Sam.  13. 22.  with  Saul  and  Jonntlian  there  wasf. 
2 AVni' .112.10. high-priest  told  Ihemoneythat  wasf. 

20.13.  shewed  all  thaltrns/.in  treasury,  /*a.39.2. 

22.  9.  gather  the  money  that  was  f.  2  C'Ar.  34.  17. 

23.  2.  read  book  which  wasf.  2  Chron.  34.  .30. 

2  Chron.  15.  4.  sought  him,  he  tea*/,  of  them,  15. 
21.  17.  carried  away  the  substance  that  wasf. 

Ezra  0.  2.  there  was  f.  at  Achmelha  a  roll 
F.ccl.  9.  15.  there  was  f.  in  it  a  poor  wise  man 
./cr.48.27.wa9  Isr.a  derision'!  was  he/.arn. thieves? 
Ezek.'HS.  15.  perfect  till  iniquity  wan  f.  in  thee 
Dan.  1.  19.  among  all  none  was  f.  like  Daniel 
2.  35.  iron,  clay  broken,  no  place  was  f.  for  them 

5.  11.  like  the  wisdom  of  the  gods  wasf.  in  him 

6.  22.  because  before  him  iniioccnry  wns  f.  in  me 
Jfat.  1.  18.  she  loas  f.  with  child  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
JMkc  9  30. when  voice  was  past,  Jesus  wasf.  alone 
.1cts8.  40.  but  Philip  wasf.  at  Azotus,  he  preached 
Rom.  10.  20.  I  wns  f.  of  them  that  sought  me  not 
1  Pet.  2.  22.  neither  was  guile/,  in  his  mouth 
Rev.  5.  4.  no  man  was  f.  worthy  to  open  tho  book 

14.  5.  and  in  their  mouth  wasf.  no  guile 

18.  24.  in  her  wasf.  the  blood  of  the  jirophets 

20.  11.  and  there  wasf.  no  place  for  liiom 

fVns  not  FOUND. 
J\fal.  2.  0.  and  iniquity  was  nulf.  in  his  lips 
Heb.W  5.Enoch  was  not/because  God  translated 
flec.20.15.  whoso  was  not  f.  written  in  book  of  life 

FOUNDATION 
Is  t/ie  ground-work,  or  lowest  part  nf  ahvildinrr, 
which  supports  the  other  parts  ;  as  the  founda- 
tion of  a  house,  of  a  castle,  of  a  fort,  tower, 
tcr..  Christ  Jesus,  both  in  the  Old  and  .Vew 
Testament,  is  called  a  Foundation.  Isa  28. 16, 
Behold,  I  lay  in  Zion  for  a  foundation,  a  stone, 
a  tried  stone,  a  precious  coriier-s.'one,  a  sure 
foundation.  Christ  is  the  foundation  on  which 
the  church  is  built ;  the  foundation  itf  all  the 
hoprs,  andcomfort,  and  happiness,  of  ti\e people 
of  God;  the  foundation  of  the  Cot<rnant  of 
Grace  made  with  the  church,  and  of  all  the  pro- 
miscs  contained  therein;  he  is  a  sure  f<mndation, 
on  whom  his  people  may  securely  rest ;  one  who 
will  not  fail  them,  nor  drccirr  Ihrm  ;  and  he  is 
the  corner-htone  that  vnites  the  several  parts 
of  the  building  together  ;  he  makes  Jews  and 
Gentiles,  that  once  were  implacable  enemies,  one 
church.  So  also  in  1  Cor.  3.  11,  Other  founda- 
tion can  no  man  Inv,  than  th;it  is  la;il,  which  is 
Je.ius  Christ.  .Indthe  above  mentioned  passage 
in  Isaiah  i.«  cited  by  St.  Peter,  and  applied  to 
Christ,  I  Pet.  2.  fi. 
God's  decree  of  election  is  the  firm  immovable 
fiiuiid.ition  upon  which  the  salvation  of  the  elect 
depends.  2  Tim.  2.  19,  The  foundMtion  of  God 
standeth  sure,  li.iving  this  seal.  The  Lord  know- 
eth them  that  are  his.  See  more  of  this  passage 
on  the  word  SKAL.  Tho  foundation  of  the 
apostles  and  prophets,  is  that  fnundalion  which 
they  laid  hy  their  preaching  and  dnctrine,name- 
/w,  Christ,  whom  they  held  forth  as  the  only 
Mediator  between  God  and  man,  the  only  Sa- 
viour and  Ifead  of  the  church.  Eph.  2.  20,  Ye 
aro  budl  upon  tho  foundation  of  Uio  aj>ostlu8 


FOU   . 

and  prophets :  Tour  faith  is  grounded  upon  Hi 
doctrine  delivered  by  them.  Foundation  is 
likewise  taken  for  the  first  principles  of  Chris- 
tianity, taught  in  an  easy  and  plain  method,io 
as  to  make  people  of  mean  capacities  to  under- 
stand them;  such  as  concerning  the  necessity 
and  nature  of  repentance  and  faith;  thenature, 
institution,  signijication,  and  use  of  the  sacra 
nients ;  concerning  the  last  judgment,  and  the 
like;  these  the  apostle  calls  the  ruuiidatioii.  Heb. 
6.  1,  2,  Not  laying  again  the  foundation  tS  rn 
pentance,  &c.  ./Jnd  in  Rom.  15.  20,  The 
apostle  says,  So  have  I  slrived  to  preach  the 
gospel,  not  where  Christ  was  named,  lest  1 
should  build  Ujiun  another  man's  foundation. 
/  did  not  choose  to  preach  the  gospel,  where  the 
fundamentals,  the  first  principles  of  religion, 
had  been  taught  by  another,  lest  I  should  seem 
to  assume  to  myself  the  credit  due  to  him.  Hea- 
ven, which  IS  the  eternal  inheritance  of  all  be- 
lievers, is  described  as  a  city  which  haih  foun- 
dations, to  denote  that  the  state  of  the  elect 
in  heaven,  and  their  glory  there,  is  not  sui- 
jrct  to  corruption,  or  the  least  alteration. 
Heb.  11.  10,  Jibraham  looked  for  a  city  which 
hath  foundations,  whose  builder  and  maker  is 
God. 

Magistrates  are  also  called  foundations.  Psal. 
82.  5,  All  the  foundations  of  the  world  are 
out  of  course  :  J]ll  magistrates,  rulers,  and  go- 
vernors, that  should  settle  and  establish  justice 
and  order,  have  disturbed  it  by  their  irregular 
and  disorderly  proceedings.  Solomon  says, 
Prov.  10.  25,  The  rishteous  is  an  everlasting 
foundation:  or,  hath  an  everlasting  foundation: 
His  hope  and  happiness  is  built  upon  a  sure 
foundation.  , 

Kjof/.  9.  18.  as  hath  not  been  in  Egypt  since  the/. 

./osh.  6.  20.  he  shall  lay  the/,  in  his  Orslborn 

\  Kings 5.n.  they  brouifht  hewn  stones  lolay  the/. 
0.  37.  in  the  fourth  year  was/,  of  house  of  L.  laid 
7.  9.  were  of  costly  stones  even  from  the/.  10. 
10.  34.  he  laid  the/  of  Jericho  in  his  firsi-born 

2  Chron.  8.  10.  work  was  prepared  tfl-day  of  the/. 
31.  7.  they  began  to  lay  the/,  of  the  heaps 

Ezra  3.  6.  the/,  of  the  temple  was  not  yet  laid 

10.  when  the  builders  laid  the/,  of  temple,  12. 
5.  10.  Sheshbazzar  laid  the/,  of  the  house 

7.  t  9.  on  the  first  day  was  the/,  of  going  up 
.liih  4. 19.  how  much  less  in  them  whose/,  is  in  dusl 

22.  16.  whose/,  was  overflown  with  a  flood 
Psal.  87. 1.  his/,  is  in  the  holy  mountains 
102.  25.  of  old  thou  hast  laid  ihe/.  of  the  earth 
137.  7.  rase  it,  rase  it,  even  to  the/,  thereof 
Prov.  10.  25.  the  righteous  is  an  everlasting/. 
fsa.  28.  16.  I  lay  in  Zion  for  a/,  a  tried  stime 
44.  2cl.  saving  to  the  tem|>le,  thy/,  shall  bo  bid 
48.  13.  mv  hand  hath  laiil  the/,  ofihe  earth 
Ezek.  13.  '14.  the/,  thereofshull  be  discovered 
Hah.  3.  13.  by  discovering  the  /.  to  the  neck 
ffng.  2.  18.  from  the  day  that  the  f.  was  laid 
y.ech.  4. 9.  Zerubhabel  hulh  laid  /.and  shall  finish 

8.  9.  prophets  which  were  when  the/,  was  laid 
12.  1.  the  Lord,  which  layeth  the/,  of  Ihe  earth 

Luke  0.  48.  diggeil  deep,  and  liiiii  ihe/.on  arock 

49.  like  a  man  that  wiihoiit  a  /.  built  a  house 
14.  29.  lest  hapiv  after  he  hath  laid  tho/. 
Rom.  1.5.  20.  lest  I  should  build  on  another  man's/. 
1  Cor.  3.  10.  as  a  wise  ina«ter  builder  I  laid  the/. 

11.  for  other/,  can  no  man  lay  than  is  laid 

12.  if  any  man  build  on  this/  gold,  silver,  wood 
Fph.  2.  20.  are  built  on  the/,  of  the  prophets 

1  Tim.  0.  19.  laving  up  in  store  forlhoins.  a  good/. 

2  Tim.  2.  19.  nevertheless'/.  ofGod  standrih  sure 
f/eb.  1.  10.  thou,  Lord,hnst  laid  the/,  of  theeartb 

0.  1.  nut  liiyinj  Ihe/.  of  repentance  artd  fnith 
Ren.  21.  19.  llp'  firs'  f.  insper;  sccimd  sapphire 

FOUNDATION  of  the  world. 
.^fat.  13.  35.  kept  secret  from  the/,  nf  the  world 

25.  34.  kin»dimi  prepared  from  the/  of  Iheworld 
l.uke  11.  .50.  the  blood  shed  from  the/,  nf  the  world 

/«An  17.24. ibou  lovi'dst  ine  before  the/ o/Miror/(i 
KpA. 1.4. chosen  us  in  him  before  the  f. of  the  world 
//cA.4.3.work8  were  finished  frnmthff.oflheworld 

9.  2*>.  miisl  have  oft  BulTerod  since/ o/rAc  iTi/rM 

1  Pet.  1  20.  foreordsinod  before  the/,  n/  Ihe  world 
llrv.  13.  8.  Lamb  slain  from  tho/.  of  the  world 

17.  8.  names  noi  written  from  the  f.  of  the  world 

FOUNDATIONS. 
Heut.  32. 22.  and  sel  on  firo  the/,  of  the  moiintaina 

2  Slim.  22.  8.  the  f.  of  heaven  mov.d  and  shook 
10.  /.of  iheworld  werodiscovond,  Ps.  18. 7, 1.S. 

F.zra  4. 12.  have  set  up  the  walls  and  joined  the/. 
0.  3.  and  let  the/  thereidbe  slrnnjlv  laid 

./oA3.^.  4.  where  wast  thou  whim  I  laid/,  of  earth  T 
0.  whi-reiipon  arc  the/,  thereof  fnslened 

r.»rt/.'  1.3  if /".be  destroyed,  what  can  riehleonsdo? 
8-2.  5.  all  the/,  of  the  earlh  arc  out  ol'coiirso 
104.  .5.  who  laid  the/,  of  enrth  not  to  be  removed 

Prov.  8.  20.  whan  ho  appointed  the/,  nf  the  oartk 


FOU 

Isa- 16.  7,  Tor  the  /.  of  Kir-harcseth  iliall  ye  mouin 
24.  18.  and  llio/.  of  the  earlh  do  shake 
40.  21.  have  ye  not  understood  I'roni /.  of  earth  ? 
51.  13.  the  Lord  that  laid  the/,  of  llio  earlh 

IG.  tliat  I  may  lay  tlie  /.  of  llie  earth 
54.  11.  1  will  lay  thy/,  with  sapphires 
58.12.lhou  shall  raise  upthe/.of  manygenerations 

Jcr.  31.  37.  if  the/,  of  the  earth  can  be  searched 
5(1. 15.  her/ are  fallen,  herwalls  are  thrown  down 
51.  20.  they  shall  not  take  of  thee  a  slutie  for/. 

Lam.  4.  11.  and  il  lialh  devoured  the/,  thereof 

Kzek.  30.  4.  Egypt's/,  shall  be  broken  down 
41  8.  the/,  of  the  side  chambers  were  a  full  reed 

Mic.  1.  6.  and  I  will  discover  llie/.  liiereof 
ti.  2.  hear,  O  riiounliiins,  and  ye  strong/,  of  earth 

Jlcts  16.  26.  the/,  of  the  prison  were  shaken 

Ueb.  11.  10.  for  he  looked  for  a  cily  that  hath/. 

Hev.  21.  14.  the  walls  of  the  city  had  twelve/. 
19.  the  /.  were  garnished  with  precious  stones 
FOUNDED. 

1  Chrun.  9  t22.  these  were  porters  whom  David/. 

2  CAron.  3.  t  3.  the  things  wherein  Solomon  was/. 
Kzra  3.  t6.  but  the  ten>ple  was  not  yet/. 
Psal.  8.  t2.  out  of  mouths  of  babes  hasl/.  strength 

24.  2.  for  he  hath/,  itupon  the  seas  and  thefioods 
78.  t  69.  Uke  the  earth  which  he  hath/,  for  ever 
89.1 1.  world  and  fulness  thereof,  thou  hast/,  them 
104.  t  5.  he  hath/,  the  earth  upon  het  bases 
8.  to  the  place  which  thou  hasl/.  for  them 
119. 15'2. thy  testimonies  thou  hast/.them  forever 

Prov.  3.  19.  the  Lord  by  wisdom  hath/,  the  earth 

Isa.  14.  32.  answer,  that  the  Lord  hath  /.  Zion 
23.  13.  this  people  was  not  till  the  Assyrian/,  it 

Jimos  9.  6.  and  he  hath  /.  his  troop  in  the  earlh 

}{ab.  1.  t  12.  O  Lord,  thouhast  ordained  them  for 
judgment;  O  God,thouhast/.  them  for  correction 

Matr^l.  2S.  and  it  fell  not  for  it  was/,  on  a  rock 

J^uke  6.  48.  could  not  shake  it,  it  was/,  on  arock 
FOUNDER. 

Judg.  17.  4.  his  mother  gave  them  to  the/. 

/sa.41.+  7.so  the  carpenter  encouraged  the/. 

Jer.  6.  29.  the  bellows  are  burnt,/,  melteth  in  vain 
10.  9.  the  work  of  the  hands  of  the/. 
14.  every/,  confounded  by  graven  image,  51.17. 
FOUNDEST. 

JVe*.  9.  8.  and/,  his  heart  faithful  before  thee 
FOUNDING. 

2  Chron.  24.  t27.  concerning  .loash/.  the  house 
FOUNTAIN 

Is  properltj  the  source  or  spring-head  of  waters, 
jletaphorinallij,  God  is  called  the  fountain  of 
living  waters,  ./(!r.  2.  13.  Springs  or  fountains 
are  called  living,  when  they  never  cease,  or 
intermit,  but  are  always  sending  forth  their 
loatcrs :  Such  had  God^s  care  and  kindness 
been  over  and  to  the  Jews,  of  wliom  he  com- 
plains, That  they  had  forsaken  him,  the 
fountain  of  living  waters.  The  blood  o/Chrisi, 
which  mashes  believers  from  all  uncleanness 
of  sin,  is  called  a  fountain.  Zech.  13.  1,  In 
that  day  there  shall  be  a  fountain  opened  to 
the  house  of  David,  and  to  the  inhabitants  of 
Jerusalem,  for  sin  and  uncleanness.  The 
legal  washings  were  but  shadows  and  types  of 
this  matchless  healing  and  purging  Fountain, 
namely,  the  blood  af  Christ,  which  never  failed 
to  heal  any  that  ever  used  it.  Jill  spiritual 
graces  and  refreshments  covtmmiicated  by  the 
Spirit,  are  also  cnmpaYed  to  a  fountain.  Joel 
3.  18,  A  fountain  shall  come  forth  of  the 
house  of  the  Lord,  and  shall  water  the  valley 
of  Shittim.  Jls  waters  are  of  a  cooling,  re- 
freshing, and  fructifying  nature,  so  these  gifts 
and  graces  should  make  the  most  barren  to 
become  fruitful.  .And  in  John  7.  38,  He  tliat 
believeih  on  me,  out  of  his  belly  shall  flow 
rivers  of  living  water.  He  shall  be  endued 
Kith,  the  gifts  and  graces  of  the  Spirit  in  a 
plentiful  measure,  which  shall  not  only  refresh 
himself,  but  shall  break  forth,  and  be  communi- 
cated to  others,  also  fur  their  refreshing. 

Yo\in\Vi\n!>aretakenfnrchildren,orposterity,Viov. 
5.  16,  Let  thy  fountains  be  dispersed  abroad  : 
May  your  posterity  be  numerous.  In  this 
passage  fountains  are  put  for  streams  or  rivers 
flowing  from  them,  by  a  metonymy  of  the  cause 
for  the  effect,  fn  the  same  sense  it  is  used 
in  Dimt.  33.  2S,  The  fountain  of  .Jacob  shall 
be  upon  a  land  of  corn  and  wine:  that  is, 
the  people  that  proceed  from  Jacob.  TVi.'.  title 
of  fountains  may  be  the  more  fitly  given  to 
children,  because  as  they  are  rivers  in  respect 
of  their  parents,  so  when  thrij  grow  up,  they 
also  become  fountains  to  their  children.  In 
Prov.  5.  18,  fountain  is  put  for  a  wife.  Let 
thy  fountain  he  blessed,  /.el  thy  wife  be 
blessed  withchildren-.harrennessbeingesleemed 
a  curse  and  reproach  among  the  I.*raelites; 
Or,  let  h^r  be  a  blessing  and  comfort  to  thee, 
arid  not  a  curie  and  a  snare,  as  a  harlot  will 
S10 


FOU 

b*  :  or,  let  her  be  made  happy  by  the  enjoyment 
of  thy  society,  and  cleaving  to  her  alone. 

Solomon  says,  Prov.  13.  14,  The  law  of  the  wise 
is  a  fountain  of  life,  to  depart  from  the  snares 
of  death  ;  that  is,  the  doctrine,  instruction,  or 
counsel  of  a  holy  pious  man,  is  a  means  to  pre- 
serve life,  and  to  help  men  to  depart  from  the 
snares  of  death.  £y  spring  and  fountain  in 
Hos.  13.  15,  aremeant  a  prosperous  condition, 
and  allblessings  which  seemed  to  be  for  a  con- 
tinua7icc ;  His  spring  shall  become  dry,  and 
his  fountain  shall  be  dried  up.  Fountain  is 
taken  for  therigkt  ventricle  of  the  hea  rt,  which 
is  the  spring  of  life,  and  of  the  vital  spirits. 
Eccl.  12.  6,  Or  the  pitcher  be  broken  at  the 
fountain  :  This  may  be  said,  when  the  veins  do 
not  return  the  bluod  to  the  heart,  but  suffer  it 
to  stand  still  and  cool  within  them,  whence 
comes  that  coldness  of  the  outward parts,ichich 
is  a  near  forerunner  of  death.  Fountain  of 
blood,  is  the  blood  of  a  person  incommoded 
with  a  loss  of  blood,  whether  natural  or  other- 
wise. Lev.  20.  18.  Mark  5.  29. 

Gen.  16. 7.  angel  of  the  Lord  found  Hagar  by  a/. 

Lev.  11.  36.  a/,  wherein  is  water  shall  be  clean 
20.  18.  he  discovered  her/,  the/,  of  her  blood 

Veut.Z'i.  28.  f.  of  Jacob  shall  be  on  a  land  of  corn 

1 5am.29. 1.  the  Israelites  pitched  by  a/  in  Jezreel 

Psal.  36.  9.  for  with  thee  is  the/,  of  life 
68.  26.  bless  the  Lord  from  the/,  of  Israel 
74.  15.  thou  didst  cleave  the/,  and  the  flood 
114.  8.  who  turned  the  flint  into  a/,  of  water 

Prov.  5.  18.  let  thy  /.  be  blessed,  rejoice  with  wife 

13.  14.  the  law  of  the  wise  is  a  /.  of  life 

14.  27.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  a/,  of  life 
25.  26.  is  as  a  troubled  /.  and  corrupt  spring 

Eccl.  12.  6.  or  the  pitcher  be  broken  at  the  /. 
Cant.  4.  12.  a/,  scaled  ||  15.  a/,  of  gardens 
Jer.  2. 13.  have  forsaken/,  of  living  waters,  17. 13. 
6.  7.  as  a/,  casteth  out  her  waters  so  she 
9.  1.  oh  that  mine  eyes  were  a/,  of  tears 
.foel  3.18.  a/.shall  come  forth  of  house  of  the  Lord 
Zech.  13.  1.  in  that  day  a/,  shall  be  opened 
Mark  5.  29.  the/,  of  her  blood  was  dried  up 
Jam.  3.  11.  doth  a/,  send  forth  sweet  waters  1 

12.  no/,  can  yield  salt  water  and  fresh 
Rev.  21.  6.  I  will  give  of  the/,  of  life  freely 

FOUNTAINS. 
Gen.  7. 11.  the/,  of  the  great  deep  were  broken  up 
8.  2.  the/,  also  of  the  deep  were  stopped 
Deut.  8.  7.  God  bringeth  thee  into  a  land  of/. 

1  Kings  18.  5.  go  into  the  land,  to  all  /.  of  water 

2  Chr.  32.  3.  he  took  counsel  to  stop  waters  of/. 
4.  there  was  much  people,  who  stopt  all  the/. 

Prov.  5.  16.  let  thy/,  be  dispersed  abroad 
8.24.when  there  were  no/,  abounding  with  water 

28.  when  he  strengthened  the/,  of  the  deep 
Isa.  41.18. 1  will  open /.in  the  midst  of  the  valleys 
Hos.  13.  15.  and  his/,  shall  be  dried  up 
Rev.  7.  17.  and  he  shall  lead  them  to  living/. 
8.  10.  the  star  fell  upon  the/,  of  waters 
14.  7.  worship  him  that  made  the/,  of  waters 
16.  4.  the  third  angel  poured  his  vial  upon  the/. 
FOUR. 
.Gen.  2.  10.  a  river  parted,  and  became/,  heads 
14.  9.  /.  kings  joined  battle  with  five 
47.  24.  and/,  parts  shall  be  your  own  for  seed 
F.zod.  22.  1.  he  shall  restore/,  sheep  for  a  sheep 
25.  20.  thou  shall  make  for  it/,  rings  of  gold 
34.  shall  be/,  bowls  made  like  unto  almonds 
2C.  2.  the  breadth  of  one  curtain/,  cubits,  8. 
27.  16.  their  pillars/,  their  socket^/.  38.  19. 

37.  20.  and  in  the  candlestick  were/,  bowls 

38.  5.  he  cast/,  rings  for  the  /.  ends  of  the  grate 

39.  10./.  rows  of  stones  set  in  the  breast-plate 
Lev.  11.  20.  all  fowls  that  creep  going  on  all/. 

27.  of  beasts  that  go  on  all/,  unclean,  42. 
J^um.  7. 7.  two  wagons,  /.  oxen  to  sons  of  Gershon 
8./.  wagons,  eight  oxen  to  the  sons  of  Merari 
Deut.  22.  12.  make  thee  fringes  on  the/,  quarters 
Judg.  11.  40.  a  custom  to  lament/,  days  in  ayear 
2  Sam.  21,  22.  these/,  were  born  to  the  giant 
1  Kings  18.  33.  he  said,  fill/,  barrels  with  water 
IKings  7.  3.  there  were/,  leprous  men  at  the  entry 
.Job  42.  16.  saw  his  son's  sons,  even  /.  generations 
Prov.  30.  15.  yea/,  things  say  not,  it  is  enough 
18.  yea  there  be/,  things  which  I  know  not 
21.  and  for/,  things  which  it  cannot  bear 
24.  there  be/,  things  which  arc  little  on  earth 
30.  29.  yea,/,  things  are  comely  in  going 
Isa.  17.  6.  /.  or  five  in  the  utmost  fruitful  branches 
Jer.  1.5.  3.  I  will  appoint  over  them/,  kinds 

36.  23.  when  Jehudi  had  read  three  or/,  leaves 
Eiek.  1.  5.  the  likeness  of/,  living  creatures 

6.  and  every  one  had  /.  faces,  15.  |  10.  14.  and 
every  one  had/,  wings,  10.  21, 

16.  and  they/,  had  one  likeness,  10.  10. 

17.  they  went  upon  their/,  sides,  10.  11. 

14.  21.  when  I  send  my/,  sore  judgm.  on  Jerus. 

37.  9,  and  ny  come  from  the  /.  winds,  O  breath 


FOU 

Eiek.  40.  41.  /.  tables  wereon  this  side,  /.  on  that 
43.  15.  the  altar/,  cubits,  and  uj)ward/.  horns 

Dan.  1.  17.  these/,  children  God  gave  knowledge 
3.  25.  lo,  I  Bee/,  men  loose,  walking  in  the  fire 

7.  2.  the/,  winds  of  heaven  strove  on  the  eea 
3.  and/,  great  beasts  came  up  from  the  sea 

.  17.  these/,  beasts  are/,  kings  who  shall  arise 

8.  8.  came/,  notable  horni  toward  the/,  winds 

22.  whereas/.  Blood  up,/,  kingdoms  shall  stand 
11.  4.  his  kingdom  divided  towards  the/,  windd 

Jimos  1.  3.  and  for  /.   I  will  not  turn  away  tha 
punishment  thereof,  6,  9,  11,  13.  |  2.  1,4,  6. 
Zech.  1.  18.  1  saw,  and  behold/,  horns 
20.  and  the  Lord  shewed  me/,  carpenters 
6.  1.  and  behold,  there  came  /.  chariots  out 
Mal.a.  31.  he  shall  send  his  angels,  and  they  shall 
gather  his  elect  from  the  /.  winds,  Mark  13. 27. 
Mark  2.3.one  sick  of  the  palsy  who  was  borne  off. 
John  4.  35.  are  yet/,  months,  then  Cometh  harvest 
11.  17.  Lazarus  had  lain  in  the  grave/,  days 
19.  23.  the  soldiers  made  /.  parts  of  his  garment 
Acts  10.  30./.  days  ago  I  was  fasting  to  this  hour 
21.9.  Philip  had/,  daughters,  virgins,  whoproph. 

23.  we  have  /.  men  which  have  a  vow  on  them 

27.  29.  they  cast/,  anchors  out  of  the  stern 
Rev.  4.  6.  round  about  the  throne  vi'eie/.  beasts 

8.  the/,  beasts  had  each  of  them  six  wings 

5.  14.  the/,  beasts  said,  amer.,  and  the  elders  fell 

6.  6.  I  heard  a  voice  in  the  midst  of  the/,  beasts 
7.1. 1  saw/,  angels,  on/,  corns:?,  holding /.winds 

9.  13.  a  voice  from  the  /.  horns  of  the  golden  altar 
14.  loose  the/,  ang.  who  are  bound  in  Eupliratea 

14.  3.  they  sung  a  new  song  before  the/,  beasts 

15.  7.  one  of  the  /.  beasts  gave  seven  vials 
19.  4.  the  24  elders  and  the/,  beasts  fell  down 

See  Corners,  Dxvs. 

FOUR  times. 

JVeh.6. 4.  yet  they  sent  to  me/,  times  afler  this  sort 

FOURFOLD. 
2  Sain.  12.  6.  and  he  shall  restore  the  lamb/. 
Luke  19.  8.  if  I  have  taken  any  thing,  I  restore/. 
See  Footed,  Twenty,  Hundred,  'Phousand. 

FOUR-SaUARE. 
Exod.'^l.  l.altarshall  be /.-square,  height  3  cubits 

28.  16.  the  breast-plate /.-syuare,  being  doubled 
\Kings&.  t33.he  made  posts  of  olive-tree /.-square 
Eiek.  40.  47.  he  measured  the  court /.-syaare 

48.  20.  ye  shall  offer  the  holy  oblation /.-syaare 
Rev.  21.  16.  and  the  city  Wefh  f. -square 

FOURSCORE. 
Ezod.  7.  7.  Moses  was/,  years  old,  and  Aaron/, 
and  three  years  old,  when  they  spake  to  Pharaoh 
.Judg.  3.  30.  and  the  land  had  rest/,  years 
2  Sam.  19.  32.  Barzillai  was/,  years  old,  Si). 
2  Kings  6.  25.  an  ass's  head  was  sold  for/,  pieces 

10.  24.  Jehu  appointed/,  men  without,  and  saic 

1  Chron.  15.  9.  Eliel  the  chief,  and  his  brethren/. 

2  Chron.  26.  17.  with  him/,  priests,  valiant  men 
Ezra  8.  8.  Zebadiah,  and  with  him  /  males 
Psal.  90.  10.  and  if  by  strength  they  be/,  years 
Ca»U.6.8.  are  threescore  queens,  and/,  concubines 
Jer.  41.5.  there  came  from  Samarin,  /.  men 
Z,w&c2.37.she  was  a  widow  about/,  and  four  years 

16.  7.  he  said  to  him,  take  thy  bill,  and  write  /. 

FOURSCORE  and  five. 
.Tosh.  14.  10.  lo,I  am  this  day/.  anrZ/pf  years  old 
1  Sam.  22. 18.  Doeg  slew  that  day/,  anrfjioe pers. 

FOURSCORE  and  six. 
G^en. 16.16. Abra. was/,  and  six  when  Hagar  bara 

One  hundred  and  FOURSCORE. 
Gen.  35.  28.  days  of  Isaac  were  one /ii/nrfrfdanrf/ 

Four  hundred  and  FOURSCORE. 
l.KV7in's6. 1.  in  fourk.f.  vearsafter  come  outofEg 

FOURSCORE  thousand. 
\Kings5. 15./".rAou«.  hewers  in  mount.  2CAr.2.18 

FOURSCORE  and  seven  thousand. 

IChr.  7.5.  Iseachar  reckoned  in  aWf. and  seventh. 

One  hundred  FOURSCORE  and  five  thousand 

2Ki7igsl9.35.Binge\  smote  in  campof Assyria  oneh. 

FOURTEEN.        \f  and  five  t. 

Gen.  31.  41.  I  served/,  years  for  thy  daughters 

46.22.who  were  born  to  Jacob, all  the  souls  were/. 

JV"um.29.13.ye  shall  offer  for  burnt-oflTering/lambj 

of  the  first  year,  17, 20,  23, 26,  29, 32. 

.Josh.  15.  36.  the  tribe  of  Judah  had  in  the  valley 

/.  cities  with  their  villages,  18.  28. 

f  Kings  8.  65.  Solomon  and  Isr.  held  a  feust/.  day» 

1  Chr.  25.  5.  God  gave  to  Ileman/.  eons,  3d  aught. 

2  Chr.  13.  21.  Abijah  waxed  mighty,  mar.  f.  wive* 
Eick.  43.  17.  the  settle  shall  be/,  cubits  long 
Mat.  I.  17.  from  Abraham  to  David  /.  from  Davia 

to  carrying  to  Babylon/,  to  Christ/,  generations 
2  Cor.  12.  2.  I  knew  a  man  above/,  years  ago 
f?a/.  2.1.  then  f.  vears  after  I  went  up  to  Jerusalem 

FOURTEEN  thousand. 
Job  42.  12.  ,foh  had  f.  Ih.  sheep,  and  0,000  cameli 

FOURTEEN  thousand  seven  hundred. 
JVum.  16.49.  thatdind  in  plairne  were/.  JA.  sevenk, 

FOURTEFJVTH. 
Gen.  14.  5,  in  the/,  year  came  Chedorlaomtr 


FOW 

lFiit^«18. 13.in  the/,  yearof  Hezeklah*,  ha.  3B.  1. 

1  Ckron.  24. 13.  the  /.  lot  came  forili  lo  Jesliebtab 
25.  21.  the  j^  lot  came  Tortli  to  Maitithiuli 

£:e*.  40. 1.  iu  Uie/.  year  al'lcr  thu  city  wan  smitten 
j9ct»  27.  27.  but  when  the/,  night  was  come 
See  Day. 
FOURTH. 
Oen.  2.  14.  and  the/,  river  id  Euphrates 

15.  IG.  in/,  generation  they  shall  conio  hither 
£zod.  20.  .5.  visiting  iniquity  of  fathers  to  the  /. 

generation,  1)4.  7.  jYum.  14.  18.  Deut.  a.  <J. 

38.  20.  and  the/,  row  shall  be  a  beryl,  39.  13. 
Leo.  19.  24.  in  Iho/.  year  the  fruit  shall  be  holy 
Joak.  19.  17.  the/,  lot  came  out  to  Issuchar 
26'a»t.  3. 4.  David's/son,  Adonijah,  1  Chron.  3.  2. 

2  Kings  10.  30.  thy  child,  of/,  generation,  15.12. 
Ezek.  10.  14.  the/,  had  the  face  of  an  eagle 
Dan.  2.  40.  the  /.  kingilom  shall  he  strong  as  iron 

3.  25.  the  form  nf  the/,  is  like  the  Son  of  God 

7.  7.  behold,  a/,  beust  dreadful  and  strong 

19.  tlien  (  would  know  the  truth  of  the/,  beast 
23.  the/,  beast  shall  be  the/,  kingdom  on  earth 
11.  2.  the/,  shall  be  far  richer  than  they  all 
Zech.  6.  3.  in  the/,  chariot  were  grisled  horses 
JlfaM4.25.  Jesus  came  in  the/,  watch  of  the  night 
Rcr.  4.  7.  the/,  beast  was  like  a  flying  eagle 

6.  7.  when  he  had  opened  the  /.  seal,  I  heard 

8.  12.  the/,  angel  sounded,  the  sun  was  smitten 

16.  8.  the/,  angel  poured  out  his  vial  on  the  sun 
21. 19.  the  third,  a  chalcedony ;  the/,  an  emerald 

Set  Day,  Month,  Part. 

FOURTH  year. 

\Kings^.\.  in  the/,  year  ofSolomon's  reign  over 

Israel  he  began  to  build,  37.  2  Chron.  3.  2. 

22.41.Jehoshuphat  began  to  reign  in/,  y.  of  Ahab 

StKings  18.9.  in  the/.ycar  of  Hczekiah  Shalmane- 

Bcr  came  up  against  Samaria  and  besiiged  it 

yer .25.1. word  came  lo.lorem.in/.jearofJehoiak 

28.  1.  in  the/,  i/furof  Zedekiah,  Hananiah  spake 

36.  l.in  the/,  year  of  Jehoiakim  (his  word  came 

to  Jeremiah  from  the  liord,  45.  1.  |  46.  2. 

51.59.  commanded  !^er:iiah  in  /.  year  of  Zodekiah 

Zech.l .l.mf.year  ofOurina  word  came  toZechar. 

FOWL. 
Oen.  1.  26.  let  them  have  dominion  over  the  /.  28. 
2. 19.  out  of  the  ground  God  formed  every/,  of  air 

7.  23.  the  /.  of  the  heaven  was  destroyed 

8.  17.  bring  forth  of  all  flesh,  of/,  of  cattle 

9.  2.  the  li-'ar  of  you  shall  be  on  every/,  of  tlie  air 
10.  behold,  I  establish  my  covenant  with  the/. 

i>t).  7.  26.  eat  no  blood,  whether  of/,  or  beast 

11.  46.  this  is  the  law  of  the  beasts  and/. 
lieut.^.  17.  the  likenossofany  winged/,  in  the  air 
Job  28.  7.  there  is  a  path  which  no/,  knoweth 
Psal.S.  8.  to  have  dominion  over  the/,  of  the  air 

148.  10.  boasts  and  flying/,  praise  the  Lord 
.7»r.9.  10.  the/  of  the  heavens  and  beasts  are  fled 
Ezek.  17.  2.3.  and  under  it  shall  dwell  all/. 

39.  17.  son  of  man,  speak  to  every  feathered  /. 
44.31. priest  shall  not  eat  any  thing  torn, /.or  beast 

Van.  7.  6.  had  on  the  back  of  itfourwingsof  a/. 

FOWLS. 
Oen.  7.  3.  take  of/,  also  of  the  air  by  sevens 

15.  11.  when  the/,  came  down  on  the  carcases 
2^ev.  1.  14.  if  the  burnt-sacrifice  to  Lord  be  of/. 

11.  13.  these/,  ye  shall  have  in  abomination 
Veut.  14.  20.  hut  of  all  clean/,  ye  may  eat 

28.26.  thy  carcase  shall  be  meat  to  all/,  of  the  ait 
1  Sam.  17.  44.  I  will  give  thy  flesh  to  the/.  46. 
1  Kines  4.  33.  Solomon  spake  of  beasts  and  of/. 

14.  11.  that  dieth  in  fields,/,  eat,  10.  4.  |  21.  24. 
A*eA..5.18.also/.  were  prepared  for  me,  store  of  wine 
Job  12.  7.  ask  the/,  and  they  shall  tell  thee 
Paai.  .50.  11.  I  know  all  the/,  of  the  mountains 

78.  27.  he  rained/,  like  as  the  sand  of  the  sea 
Ita.  18.  6.  they  shall  be  left  to  the/,  of  the  moun- 
tains, and  the/,  shall  summer  upon  them 
Dan.  4.  14.  let  the  /.  get  from  his  branches 
Mat.  6.  26.  the/,  they  sow  not,  neither  reap 

13.4.  the  f.  devoured  the  seed, 3far/f  4.4. /.uAc  8.!i. 
^ar<:4.32.that/.  may  lodge  under  it,  I.ulcr  i:i.  19. 
I.uke  12.  24.  how  much  more  are  ye  better  than  /. 
Jlcti  10.  12.  a  sheet  wherein  wen  f.  11.  6. 
Rev.  19.  17.  an  an»ol  cried  to  all  the  /.  that  fly 
21.  and  all  the  f.  were  filled  with  their  flosh 
FOWLS  of  llie  heaven. 
Job  2W.  121.  kept  cIuho  from  the  /.  of  the  heaven 
35. 11.  whomakelh  us  wiser  than  the/,  of  heaven 
Pial.T9.Z.  bodies  of  thy  «ervnnt<imoal  to/,  o/ Aca. 
104.  12.  by  them  the  /.  of  A.  have  their  habilnlion 
/cT'.  7. 33.  the  cnrcases  of  this  p<rople  shall  he  meat 
forthe/.  n/(AfAforfn,lf>.4.  |  10.7.  |  34.20. 

15.  3  I  will  appoint  the  /.  nf  the  hraveii  to  dcstmy 
Kte*.  29.  5.  given  Pharaoh  for  meat  to/,  nfheavrn 

31 .  6.  the  /.  of  heaven  made  their  in-sls  in  Aaxy  ria 

13.  on  his  ruin  Bliall  all  the  /.  of  heaven  remain 

rC  4.  will  cause  all  /.  of  heaven  lo  remain  on  thee 

38.20.  the  f.  of  heaven  shall  shake  at  my  presence 

/)(i?i.2.3fl.  the  f.ofheavm  given  lo  .Vrbnrhndne/.j; 

Hos.  2. 18.  made  a  covenant  for  thorn  with  /.  of  h. 

320 


POX 

W(>».4.3.eTery  one  shall  langui«h  with/,  of  heaven 
7.  I'J.  1  will  bring  them  down  as  the/,  of  heaven 

Zeph.  1.  3.  1  will  consume  the/,  of  the  heaven 

ivuAe  13.19.  the/.o/Aeat)cn  lodged  in  the  branches 
FOWLER. 

Pjsal.91. 3.  he  shall  deliver  thee  from  snare  of  the/. 

I'rov.  6.  5.  deliver  asa  bird  from  the  hand  of  the/. 

Ho3.'J.8.  butthe  proph.  is  a  snare  of  a/,  in  hig  ways 
FOWLERS. 

PsaM24.7.our  soul  is  escaped  out  of  the  snare  off. 

Jtr.  5.  t  26.  iny  people  pry,  os/.  lie  in  wait 
FOX, 

In  Greek,  Alopex,  in  Hebrew,  Shual :  It  is  a 
creature  vtry  well  known,  and  very  remarkahU, 
principally  for  its  cunning.  There  id  mention 
viade  of  it  in  several  places  of  the  Scripture. 
Our  Saviour  calls  Herod  the  Tctrarch  of  Ga- 
lilee, lux,  signifying  thereby  his  craft,  and 
the  refinements  of  his  policy,  Luke  13.  32. 
^nd  to  give  an  idea  of  his  own  extreme  poverty, 
he  sayii.  The  foxes  have  holes,  ami  the  birds 
of  tlie'air  have  nests,  but  the  Son  of  man  hath 
not  where  to  lay  his  head,  Luke  9.  .'58.  Eze- 
kiel  compares  the  false  prophets  with  foxes. 
Ezek.  13.  4,  Thy  prophets  are  like  the  foxes 
in  the  deserts:  whether  it  was  his  design  to 
heiglUen  their  cunning  and  hypocrisy  in  imi- 
tating the  trucprophets,  and  so  coeering  them- 
selves with  sheips'  clothing,  though  they  were 
ravening  wolves ;  or  whether  he  intended  to 
shew,  that  these  false  prophets,  instead  of  sup- 
porting JvrusMem,  endeavoured  only  to  destroy 
it,  by  undermining  its  walls,  and  shaking  its 
foundations,  as  foxes  undermine  the  ground  to 
make  holes  for  themselves.  In  the  same  sense, 
seducers  and  false  teachers  are  compared  to 
foxes.  Cant.  2.  15,  Take  us  the  foxes  that 
spoil  the  vines. 

ft  is  said,  in  Judg.  15.  4, 5.  that  Samson  took  three 
hundred  foxes,  which  he  tied  tico  and  two  toge- 
ther by  the  tails,  andthat  having  fastened  a  fire- 
brand in  thcviiddle  of  the  cord  which  bound  them 
so  together,  he  let  them  loose  among  the  crops  of 
standing  corn  belonging  to  the  Philistines,  and 
they  burnt  them.  From  the  fields  they  went  into 
the  olive  yards,  and  burnt  them  likewise.  Some 
infidels  are  much  scandalized  at  this  history, 
and  pretend  it  incredible  that  Samson  could 
muster  up  so  great  ti  number  «/ foxes.  But  to 
this  it  is  riplied,  that  foxes  are  very  common 
in  this  country;  whichis  proved  from  scripture, 
and  the  testimony  of  travellers.  Solomon  in 
his  Song  says,  that  the  liltle  foxes  spoiled  the 
vines,  Cant.  2.  15.  Jeremiah  says,  that  the 
foxes  walk  upon  the  mountain  of  Ziun,  which 
is  desolate,  I.am.  5.  18.  There  arc  some  pro- 
vinces and  cities  in  Palestine  which  take  their 
name  from  foxe3,doubtless  byreasonofthegreat 
number  of  these  animals  thereabout.  For  ex- 
ample :  the  land  of  Sliual,  or  the  fox,  1  Sam, 
13.  17,  Ilazar-shual,  the  iox's  habitation,  a 
city  »/ Judah,  or  Simeon,  Josh.  15.  28.  |  19.  3. 

Belon  says,  that  in  Palestine,  particularly  about 
C.T>s'irea,  there  is  a  kind  of  creature  beticeen  a 
wolf  and  a  fox,  which  so  abounds  there,  that 
sometimes  troops  of  two  or  three  hundred  of 
them  are  to  be  seen.  M.  Morizcm,  who  has 
travelled  in  this  country, says,that  foxvsswarin 
there,  and  that  there  are  very  great  numbers 
of  them  in  the  liedges  and  ruins  of  buildings. 
Be.'iides,  Samson  being  so  eminent  a  person, 
and  the  judge  of  Israel,  jnight  have  employed 
abundance  of  people  to  catch  this  great  number 
of  foxes,  and  they  might  have  provided  thrm 
some  time  before  for  his  purpose.  A'or  can  it 
at  allperplex  any  man's  reason  or  faith,  if  it 
be  allowed,  that  the  (fod  who  made  the  world, 
and  by  his  singular  providence  walclied  over 
Israel,  and  intended  them  deliverance  at  this 
time,  could  easily  dispose  things  so  that  they 
might  be  taken. 

jVo  animal  was  fitter  for  his  design,  especially 
when  coupled  toi^ether  in  this  manner ;  for  a 
fox  runs  very  swiftly,  but  uses  a  great  many 
turnings  and  windinirs,  not  going  straighten, 
but  running  sometimes  on  one  side,  sometimes 
on  another,  so  that  while  one  dragged  one  way, 
and  another  another  way,  thrij  fprrad  the  fire 
over  all  the  fields  of  the  Philislines,  and  could 
not  easily  get  into  the  woods,  or  holes  in  the 
rocks,  wiure  their  fire-brands  had  been  extin- 
guished, and  Samson's  stratagem  rendered 
ineffectual. 

Many  things  are  said  eoneeming  the  craft  and 
suhtilty  of  foxes.  They  lay  their  dung  in  the 
entrance  of  the  badger's  den,  anil  by  that  means 
obtain  it  for  their  own  use.  They  fright  the 
wolves, who  are  their  enemies,  from  their  dens, 
hy  Inyivsr  the  h'rh  sea-onion  at  the  month  of 
lium.    They  digholes  for  themselves,  but  then 


FRE 

they  leave  several  outlets,  that  if  the  huntsman 
lays  his  snare  at  one,  thi-y  may  escape  at  ikt 
other.  When  sick,  they  eat  the  gum  of  pin* 
trees,  whereby  thty  are  not  only  cured,  but  their 
days  lengthened.  It  is  said,  that  when  they  art 
pursued  by  hunters,  they  make  urine  on  their 
tails,  and  strike  them  upo7i  the  dog's  faces. 
Some  having  been  taken  in  a  gin  by  the  leg, 
have  bit  it  off,  and  so  escaped ;  ot/ters  have 
feigned  themselves  dead,  till  they  have  been 
taken  out,  and  then  have  run  away.  Being 
hungry,  they  feign  themselves  dead,  on  whom 
the  fowls  lighting  for  prey,  they  snatch  andde- 
vour  them.  Many  other  things  are  storied  of 
their  cunning. 
JWA.  4.  3.  a/,  shall  break  down  their  stone  wall 
I-,ukc  13.  32.  go  and  tell  that/.  I  cast  out  devils 

FOXES. 
Judg.  15.  4.  Samson  caught  three  hundred/. 
Psal.  63.  10.  they  shall  be  a  poition  for/. 
Can«.2.15.take  the/.the  little/,  that  spoil  the  vines 
Lam.  5.  18.  Zion  is  desolate,  the/,  walk  upon  it 
F.zek.  13.  4.  thy  prophets  are  like  /.  in  the  dcserta 
^fa(.8.20./.  have  holes,  the  birds  nests, /.uAe 9.58 

FRAGMENTS. 
Mat.  14.  20.  they  took  up  the  /.  twelve  basketa 
full,  Mark  6.  43.  Luke  9.  17.  .John  6.  13 
Mark  8.  19.  how  many  baskets  full  off.  7  20. 
Johnii.  12.  gather  up/,  that  remain,  nothing  be loi* 

FRAIL. 
Psal.  39.  4.  that  I  may  know  how/.  I  am 

FRAME. 
Psal.  103.  14.  he  knoweth  our/,  he  rememberelb 
Jer.  7.  1 18.  to  make  cakes  to  the/,  of  heaven 
44.  1 17.  to  burn  incense  to  the/,  of  heaven 
A':eA.40.2.by  which  was  as  the/,  of  acity  unsQulh 

FRAMES. 
Jer.  18.  t3.  behold,  he  wrought  a  work  on  the/. 

FRAME,  Kcrft. 
Jud^.12.6.  for  he  could  not/,  to  |>ronounce  it  right 
.lei .  18.  11.  behold,  1  /.  evil  against  you  and  devise 
Hos.5.  4.  they  will  not /.their  doings  lo  tuiiitoGod 

FRAMED, 
/xa.  29. 16.  shall  the  thing/,  say  to  him  that/,  it? 
Eph.^i.'il.  ill  whom  a<l  the  building/,  growelh  to 
Heb.  11.  3.  the  worlds  were/,  by  the  word  of  God 

FRAMETH. 
Psal.  50.  19.  ihymouihto  evil  thy  tongue/,  deceit 
94.  20.  throne  of  inlquitv,/.  mischief  by  a  law 

FRANKINCENSE. 
Exod.  30.  34.  lake  these  spices  wiih  pure/. 
Aej).2.1.put/.thcreon,l5.  |  5.11.  |  24.7..V«m.  5. 15. 
2.  he  shall  take  the  oil  with  all  the  /.  thereof 
16.  the  priest  shall  burn  the  oil  with  all/.  6. 15. 
lCAro7i.9.29.Bome  wereappointed  to  oversee  the/. 
A'cA.  13.  5.  where  they  laid  the/,  and  vessels 

9.  thither  brought  I  the  vessels  and  the/. 
Ca7ti.3.6.who  is  this  that  conies  perfumed  wilh/.? 
4.  6.  tin  day  break,  I  will  get  ine  to  the  hill  of/. 

14.  calamus,  cinnamon,  vsiih  all  trees  of/. 
Mat.  2.  II.  they  presented  to  him  gifts,  gold,/. 
Hcv.  18.  13.  no  man  huvelli  their/,  wine  and  oil 

FRA.NKLY. 
/.,itAc7. 42.  nothing  lo  pay,  he/,  forgave  thorn  both 

FRAUD. 
Psal.  10.  7.  his  mouth  is  full  of  cursing  and/. 
Isa.  30.  1 1'-.  wherefore  heenuse  ye  trust  in/. 
./am.  5.  4.  hire  by  you,  kept  back  by/,  crielh 

FRAY. 
Deut.  28.  26.  no  man  shall/,  them  away,.7er.7. 33. 
ZecA.  1.  21.  but  these  are  conn;  to/,  them 

FRKCKLED. 
Lev.  13.  39.  it  is  n/.  spot  that  growoth  in  the  skin 

FREE. 
Exod.  21. 2.  a  Hebrew  servant,  in  the  seventh  yeai 
he  shall  go  out/.  Deut.  \i.  12.,/er.34.9,  M. 
5.  if  the  servant  shall  say,  I  will  not  go  out/. 
11.  then  shall  she  go  out/,  without  money 
215.  he  shall  let  him  go/  fur  his  eye's  sake 
27.  he  shall  let  him  go/,  for  his  tooth's  sake 
Lev-  19.  20.  not  be  put  lo  death  hocauso  not/. 
jViirn.  5.  19.  he  thou/,  from  this  bitter  water 

2>'.  if  Ihe  woman  be  not  defiled,  she  shall  be/. 
Deut.  15.  13.  and  when  thou  senncsl  him  out/. 

18.  not  seem  hard  when  tfiou  sendest  him/. 
24.  5.  hut  he  shall  he/,  at  home  one  year 
1  .Sam.  17.  2,'>.  make  his  father's  hiiuse/.  in  Israel 
I  Kings  I.').  1 22. Asa  made  a  proclom.  none  whs/ 
I  Chr.  9.  33.  the  singers,  who  remaining  were/. 
■i  Chr.  2<i.  t2l.  Uzzinh  dwell  in  a/.  hou«e 
2'.l.  31.  and  as  many  as  wore  off.  heart  oflerdd 
Job  3.  19.  and  the  servant  i«/.  from  his  master 
30.  .5.  who  hath  sent  out  the  wild  ass  r  ? 
/'.♦a/.  .11.  12.  and  uphold  me  with  Ihy/.  Spirit 
KM.  .5.  /.  amonff  Ihe  dead,  like  slain  in  the  grave 
10.1.  20.  the  king  loosed  him,  and  lot  him  go/. 
Isa.  .If*.  6.  and  to  let  iho  oppressed  go/. 
.7er.  34.  9.  each  man  should  let  his  servant  go/. 
II.  cniised  them  whom  they  lot  go/,  to  leturn 
Mat.  15. 0.  and  honour  not  his  father,  lie  shall  bo/ 


FRE 


Mat.  IT.  2C.  Jesus  saitli,  then  are  the  cliildren  /. 
JSar0i.  11.  if  n  man  say,  it  is  Corban,he8hallbe/. 
John  8.  "Xi.  and  the  truth  shall  make  you/. 

33.  how  sayest  thou,  ye  shall  be  made/. 

36.  if  Son  shall  make  you/,  ye  shall  be/,  indeed 

cts  22.  28.  and  Paul  said,  but  I  was/,  born 
Kom.  5.  15.  not  as  the  otlence,  so  also  is  the/,  gift 

l(i.  but  the/,  gift  is  of  many  otTencus  to  juetificat 

18.  even  so  the/,  gift  came  upon  all  men  to  justit". 

6.  18.  being  then  made/,  from  sin,  22. 
20.  servants  of  sin  ye  were/,  from  righteousness 

7.  3.  if  her  husband  be  dead,  she  is/,  from  that  law 

8.  2.  the  Spirit  of  life  made  me/,  from  death 
1  Cor.  7.  21.  but  if  thou  niayest  be  made/,  use  it 

t22.  he  that  is  called  in  the  Lord  is  made/. 

9.  1  am  I  not  an  apostle?  am  1  not/.? 

19.  though  I  be/,  from  all  men,  yet  a  servant 
12.13.  baptized  by  one  Spirit,  whether  bond  or/. 

YVai.3.  28.  there  is' neither  bond  nor/.  Col.  3.  11. 

4.  26.  but  Jerusalem  which  is  above,  is/. 
31.  not  children  of  the  bond-woman,  but  of  the  /. 

5.  1.  the  liberty  wherewith  Christ  hath  made  us  /. 
£pA.6.8.  shall  receive  of  Lord,  whether  bond  or/. 
^Thess.  3. 1.  pray  that  the  word  may  have/,  course 
]  Pet.  2.  16.  as/,  and  not  using  your  liberty 
Ren.  13. 16.  causeth  all,/,  and  bond,  to  rec.  mark 

ID.  18.  ye  may  eat  the  flesh  of  both  bond  and  /. 
FREED. 
Josh.  9.  23.  and  there  shall  none  of  you  be/. 
Horn..  6.  7.  for  he  that  is  dead  is/,  from  sin 

FREEDOM. 
/>ct).  19.  20.  lieth  with  a  woman,  not/,  given  her 
Eiek.  27. 1 20.  Dedan  thy  merchant  in  clothes  of/. 
.Acts  22.  28.  with  a  great  sum  obtained  I  this/. 

FREELY. 
■Cfen.  2.  16.  of  every  tree  thou  mayest/.  eat 
JVm7;j.  11.  5.  we  remember  the  fish  we  did  eat/. 
1  Sam.  14.  30.  if  the  people  had  eaten/,  to-day 
Ezra  2.  68.  some  of  the  chief  fathers  offered/. 

7.  15.  which  the  king  hath  offered/,  to  God 
Psal.  54.  6.  I  will/,  sacrifice  to  thee,  O  Lord 
i/os. 14.4.  heal  their  backsliding,  I  will  love  them/. 
Mat.  10.  8./.  ye  have  received,/,  give 
jicts  2.  29.  men  and  brethren,  let  me/,  speak 

26.  26.  the  king  knoweth,  before  whom  I  speak/. 

Horn.  3.  24.  being  justified  /.  by  his  grace  through 

the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus 

8.  32.  will  with  him  also/,  give  us  all  things 

1  C<>r.  2.  12.  might  know  the  tilings/,  given  us 

2  Cor.  11.  7.  I  have  preached  the  gos|)el  of  God/. 
Bev.  21.  6.  I  will  give  of  the  fountain  of  life/. 

22.  17.  and  whosoever  will  let  him  take/. 

FREEMAN. 

1  Cor.  7.  22.  he  that  is  called,  is  the  Lord's/. 
Ren.  6.  15.  every  bondman  and/,  hid  themselves 

FREEofmre^,?. 
F.zod.  36.  3.  brought /.-(j^'tr«i^«  every  morning 
Jimos  4.  5.  proclaim  and  publish  the  f.-offerinrrs 

FREQUENT. 
Prov.  27.  t6.  but  the  kisses  of  an  enemy  are/. 

2  Cor.  11.  23.  in  prisons  more/,  in  deaths  oft 

FREE-WILL. 
Ezra  7.  13.  of  their  f.-will  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem 

FREE- Wl  LL-oJermo-. 
LevSi.lX.  who  offereth/.-ic.-o^.  it  shall  be  perfect 
23.  a  bullock  thou  mayest  offer  for  a  f .-will-off . 
JVwm.lS.S.  when  ye  will  ma^'  sacrifice  \nf.-w.-off. 
/>«««.  16.10.  keep  feast,  with  a  tribute  off. -will-off. 
23. 23.  A  f.-will- offer,  shalt  thou  keep  and  perform 
Ezra  1.4.  help  him  with  beasts  besides/.-MiH-o_^er. 
3.  5.  that  willingly  offered  a  f. -will-off. to  the  Lord 
7. 16.  all  the  silver  thou  canst  find  with  f. -will-off. 
8.  28.  the  silver  and  sold  are  a  f. -will-off.  to  Lord 

FREE-WILL-»feri)i.o-«. 
/,eB.22.18.  who  will  offer  oblation  toT  f. -will-offer. 

23.  38.  and  beside  all  your  f.-w.-nff.  JVum.Z'J.  39. 
Z)cH(.  12. 6.  thither  shall  ye  bring  your/.-wi/Z-o^er. 

17.  mayest  not  eat  within  thy  gates  thy  f.-w.-off. 
2  CAro7i.'31.14.  Kore  wasover/.-rorH-fi^er.ofGod 
P«aM19.103.  accept  the/.-!z);«-qff'er.  of  my  mouth 

FREE-WOMAN. 
Oal.  4.  22.  had  two  sons,  by  bond-maid,  and  by  a/. 

23.  but  he  of  the/,  was  by  promise 

30.  shall  not  be  heir  with  the  son  of  the/. 

31.  we  are  not  children  of  bond-woman,  butof/. 

FRESH. 
JVant.ll.S.  taste  of  manna  was  as  the  taste  of/,  oil 
./oA29.20.  my  glory  was/,  in  me,  my  bow  renewed 
Psal.  92.  10.  Ishall  be  anointed  with/,  oil 
Jam.2. 12.  no  fountain  can  yield  salt  water  and/. 

FRESHER. 
Job  33.  25.  his  flesh  shall  be/  than  a  child's 

FRET. 
Lev-  13.5.5.  shalt  burn  it  in  the  fire,  it  ia/.  inward 

FRET. 
1  Sam.  ^.  6.  also  provoked  her  to  make  her/. 
P.'ial.  37.  \.f.  not  thyself,  7,  8.  Prov.  24.  19. 
Jsa.  8.  21.  when  thev  b'-  hnn?ry,  they  shall/. 

FRETTED. 
K}ek  16.  43.  but  thou  hast/,  me  in  these  things 
22i 


FRI 

FRETTETH. 
Prov  19.  3.  and  his  heart  /.  against  the  Lord 

FRETTING. 
Lev.  13.  51.  the  plague  is  a/,  leprosy,  52. 1  14.  44. 

FRIED. 
Lev.  7.  12.  cakes  mingled  with  oil  of  flour/. 
1  C'Ar.23. 29.  Levites  to  wait  about  that  which  is/. 

FRIEND 
Is  taken  for  one  whom  we  love  and  esteem  above 
others,  to  whom  toe  impart  our  minds  more  fa- 
miliarly than  to  others  ;  and  that  from  a  con- 
Jidence  of  his  integrity,  and  good  will  towards 
us  ;  thus  Jonathan  and  David  were  mutually 
friends.     Solomon   in    his    book  of  Proverbs 
gives  the  qualities  of  a  true  friend.    Prov.  17. 
J7,  A  friend  loveth  at  all  times;  not  only  in 
prosperity,  but  also  in  adversity.  Chap.  18.  24, 
There  is  a  friend  that  stickeih  closer  than  a 
brother ;  he  is  more  hearty  in  the  performance 
of  all  friendly  offices.  He  reproves  and  rebukes 
when  he  sees  any  thing  amiss.     Prov.  27.  6, 
Faithful  are  the  wounds  of  a  friend;  his  sharp- 
est reproofs  proceed  from  an  upright,  and 
truly  loving  and  faithful  soul.     Ue  is  known 
by  his  good  and  faithful  counsel,  as  well  as 
by  his  seasonable  rebukes.    Prov.  27.  9,  Oint- 
ment and  perfume  rejoice  the  heart :  so  doth 
the  sweetness  of  a  man's  friend  by  hearty  coun 
eel ;  by  such  counsel  as  comes  from  his  very 
heart  and  soul,  and  is  the  language  of  his 
most  inward  and  serious  thoughts.    The  com- 
pany and  conversation  of  a  friend  is  refreshing 
and  reviving  to  a  person,  who,  when  alone,  is 
sad,  and  dull,  and  unactive.  Prov.  27. 17,  Iron 
sharpeneth  iron,  so  a  man  sharpeneth  the  coun- 
tenance of  his  friend. 
By  friend  is  meant  also  the  favourite  of  a  prince. 
Hushai  was  the  friend,  the  favourite  o/ David, 
2Sarft.  15.  37.    Zabud,  the  son  of  Nathan  was 
Solomon's  friend,  1  Kings  4.  5.     And  Ahuz- 
zath  7cas  the  particular  friend  of  Abimelech 
kin^  of  Gerar,  Gen.  26.  26. 
The  friend  of  God.     7'Ais  title  is  principally 
given  to  Abraham,  as  in  2  Chron.  20.  7,  Art 
not  thou  our  God,  who  gavest  this  land  to  the 
seed  of  Abraham  thy  friend  for  ever?    And  in 
Isa.  41.  8,   But  thou,  Israel,  art  the  seed  of 
Abraham  my  friend.     TTie  apostle  James  like- 
wise makes  mention  of  this.  Jam.  2.  23,  And 
the  scripture  was  fulfilled,  which  saith,  Abra- 
ham believed  God,  and  it  was  imputed  to  him 
for  righteousness ;  and  he  was  called  the  friend 
of  God.     This  title  is  given  him  not  only  be- 
cause God  frequently  appeared  to  him,  con- 
versed famiiiarly  with  him,  and  revealed  se- 
crets to  him.  Gen.  18.  17,  Shall  I  hide  from 
Abraham  that  thing  which  I  do  ?    But  also  be- 
cause he  entered  into  a  covenant  of  perpetual 
friendship,  both  with  him  and  his  seed.  Gen. 
12.  2,  3.  I  17.  2,  4,  7.  ajid  especially  because  he 
renewed  the  covenant  with  him,  upon  the  sacri- 
ficing of  his  son  Isaac,  and  confirmed  it  by  an 
oath,  and  thereby  admitted  him  to  a  nearer  de- 
gree of  friendship  and  communion.  Gen.  22. 
16,  17,  &c.    And  it  is  upon  this  trial  of  Abra- 
ham's obedience,  namely,  the  offering  up  of  his 
son,  that  the  apostle  James  quotes  the  passage, 
where  Abraham  is  called  the  friend  of  God, 
Jam.  2.  21,  22,  23. 
Our  Saviour  calls  his  apostles  friends.  John  15. 
15,  But  I  have  called  you  friends;  he  adds  the 
reason  of  it,  for  all  things  I  have  heard  of  my 
Father  I  have  made  known  unto  you.    As  men 
used  to  communicate  their  counsels  and  their 
whole  mind  to  their  friends,  especially  in  things 
which  are  of  any  concern,  or  may  be  of  any 
advantage  for  them  to  know  and  understand ; 
so  I  have  revealed  to  ynu  whatsoever  is  neces- 
sary for  your  instruction,  office,  comfort,  and 
salvation.   And  this  title  is  not  peculiar  to  the 
apostles  oftly,  but  is  common  with  them  to  all 
true  believers.  Cant.  5. 1,  Eat,  O  friends. 
Tiio  friend  of  the  bridegroom,  m  the  bride-man ; 
he  who  does  the  honours  of  the  wedding,  and 
leads  his  friend's  spouse  to  the  nuptial  bed 
John  the  Baptist,  with  respect  to. Christ,  and 
his  church,  was  the  friend  of  the  Bridegroom; 
by  his  preaching  he  prepared  the  people  of  the 
Jews /or  Christ,  ,7oAn  3.  29. 
Friend  is  a  word  of  ordinary  snJulntion,  whether 
to  friend,  or  foe.     He  is  called  friend  who  had 
not  on  a  wedding-garment.  Mat.  22.  12.     And 
our  Saviour  calls  Judas   the  traitor,  friend. 
Mat.  26.  50.     Some  are  of  opinion  that  this 
title  is  given  to  the  guest  by  an  irony  or  anti- 
phrases,  meaning   the   contrary  to  what  the 
word  importeth ;  or  that  he  is  called  so,  be- 
cause he   appeared   to   others    to  be  Christ's 
friend,  or  was  so  in  his  own  esteem  and  ac- 
count, though  falsely,  being  a  hypocrite.  How- 


FRI 


ever,  this  being  spoken  in  the  person  of  him 
who  made  the  feast,  it  is  generally  taken  for  a 
usual  compellation ;  and  that  ChnBt  following 
the  like  courteous  custom  of  appellation,  and 
friendly  greeting,  did  so  salute  Judas,  which 
yet  left  a  sting  behind  it  in  his  conscience, 
who  knew  himself  to  be  t/tc  reverse  of  what  he 
was  called.     The  name  of  friend  is  likewise 
given  to  a  neig/tiour.    Luke  11.  5,  VVhich  ol 
you  shall  have  a  friend,  and  shall  go  unto  him 
at  midnight,  aud  say,  friend,  lend  me   three 
loaves  ? 
Gen.'iS^.  20.  Judah  sent  the  kid  by  the  hand  of  his/. 
Exod.  ,33. 11.  God  spake  to  Moses  as  a  man  to  his/ 
/Jeu£.13. 6.  or  if  thy  wife  or/,  entice  thee  secretly 
Judg.  14. 20.  to  companiori  whom  he  used  as  his/. 
"Sam.  13. 3.  Amnon  had  a/,  his  name  was  Jonadab 
15.37.  Hushai  David's/,  came  into  city,  16.  16. 
10.  17.  Absalom  said  to  Hushai,  is  this  thy  kind- 
ness to  thy/.?  why  wentest  thou  not  w ith  thy/.? 
lliingsi.S.Zahud  was  principal  otTicer.tlie  king's/. 
2  CAron. 20. 7.  gavest  to  tlieseedof  Abraham  thy/. 
Job  0. 14.  to  him  afflicted  pity  be  shewed  from  his/. 
27.  and  ye  dig  a  pit  for  your/. 
16.  1 21.  O  that  one  might  [ilead  for  a  man  with 
God,  as  a  man  pleadeth  for  his/. 
Psal.35. 14.  as  though  he  had  been  my/,  or  brother 
41.9.  my  familiar/,  hath  lifted  up  his  heel  ag.  rae 
88.  18.  lover  and/,  hast  thou  put  far  from  me 
Prov.  6.  1.  my  son,  if  thou  be  surety  for  thy/. 
3.  when  in  the  hand  of  thy/,  make  sure  thy/. 
17. 17.  a  /.  loveth  at  all  times,  and  a  brother  is 
born  for  adversity 
18.  and  becometh  surety  in  the  presence  of  his/. 

18.  24.  a/,  that  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother 

10.  6.  every  man  is  a/,  to  him  that  giveth  gifts 

22. 11.  for  grace  of  his  lips,  the  king  shall  be  his/. 
27.  6.  faithful  are  the  wounds  of  a/. 

9.  so  doih  sweetness  of  man's/.by  hearty  counsel 

10.  thine  own/,  and  thy  father's/,  forsake  not 
14.  he  that  blesseth  his/,  with  a  loud  voice 
17.  a  man  sharpeneth  the  countenance  of  his/. 

Can«.5.16.this  is  my  beloved,  this  is  my/.  O  daught 
Isa.  41.  8.  thou  art  the  seed  of  Abraham  my/. 
Jer.  3.  t  20.  surely  as  a  wife  departeth  from  her/. 

6.  21.  the  neighbour  and  his/,  shall  perish 

19.  9.  shall  eat  every  one  flesh  of  bis/,  in  the  siege 
Ifos.  3.  1.  beloved  of  her/,  yet  an  adulteress 
Mic.  7.  5.  trust  ye  not  in  a/,  put  not  confidence 
Mat.  11. 19.  behold,  a/,  of  publicans,  Luke  7.  34. 

20.  13.  he  answered,/.  I  do  thee  no  wrong 

22. 12.  he  saith  to  him,/,  how  earnest  thou  hither? 
26.  50.  Jesus  said,/,  wherefore  art  thou  come? 

ittAe  11..5.which  of  you  shall  have  a/,  and  shall  go 

at  midnight  and  say,/,  lend  me  three  loaves 

6.  for  a/,  of  mine  in  his  journey  is  come  to  me 

S.lhough  he  will  not  give  him  because  he  is  his/. 

14.  10.  he  that  bade  thee  may  say,/,  go  up  higher 

.Tohn  3.  29.  the/,  of  the  bridegroom  rejoiceth 

11.  H.  he  saith,  our/.  Lazarus  sleepeth 
19.  12.  if  thou  let  this  man  go,  art  not  Cesar's/, 

Acts  12.  20.  and  having  made  Blastus  their/. 
Jain.  2.  23.  Abraham  was  called  the/,  of  God 
4.4.  will  bea/.  of  the  world,  is  the  enemy  of  God 

FRIENDLY. 
Tudg.  19.  3.  the  Levite  went  to  speak/,  to  her 
Ruth'i.  13.  thou  hast  spoken/. to  thine  handmaia 
Prow. 18. 24.  thathath  friends,  must  shew  himself/. 
Hos.  2.  t  14.  I  will  bring  her,  and  speak  /.  to  her 
FRIENDS. 

1  Sam.  30.  26.  David  sent  of  the  spoil  to  his/. 

2  Sam.  3.  8.  which  do  shew  kindness  to  Saul's/. 
19.  6.  thou  lovesl  thine  enemies,  and  hatcst  thy  / 

1  Kings  16.  11.  Zimri  left  him  not  one  of  his/. 
Esth.  5.  10.  Human  sent  and  called  for  his/. 
14.  then  said  his  wife  and  all  his/,  to  him 
6.  13.  Haman  told  his  wife  and/,  every  thing 
.loh  2.  11.  when  Job's  three  Jt  heard  of  this  evil 
16.20.  my/,  scorn  me,  but  mine  eye  puureth  lean 
17.  5.  he  thatspeaketh  flattery  to  his/. 
19.  14.  my  familiar/,  have  forgotten  me 
19.  all  my  inward/,  abhorred  me 

21.  have  pity  on  me,  have  pity  on  me,  O  ye/. 
32.  3.  Elihu's  wrath  was  kindled  against  his/. 
42. 7.  Lord's  wrath  kindled  against  Eliphaz  and/ 

10.  the  Lord  turned  when  he  prayed  for  his/. 
Psal.  38.  11.  my/,  stand  aloof  from  my  sore 
rro».14.20.  thepooris  hated,  Iherich  hath  many., 

16.  28.  a  whisperer  separateth  chief/. 

17.  9.  he  that  repeateth  a  matter,  separateth/. 

18.  24.  that  hath  /.  must  shew  himself  friendly 

19.  4.  wealth  maketh  many/,  but  poor  separated 

7.  how  much  more  do  his/,  go  far  from  him 
Cant.  5. 1.  eat.  Of.  drink,  yea,  drink  abundantly 
Jer.  20.  4.  1  will  make  thee  a  terror  to  thy/. 

6.  thou  shalt  be  buried  there,  thou  and  all  thy/. 

38.  22.  women  shall  eay,  thy/,  have  set  thee  on 
I.am.  1.  2.  all  her/,  have  dealt  treacherously 
Zech.  13.  6.  I  was  wounded  in  the  house  of  my/ 
Mark  3. 31.  when  his/,  hoard  of  it,  they  went  out 


FRO 

Marks.  19.  J«su8Eaith  to  him,  go  home  to  thy/. 

l^uke  7.  G.  the  centurion  sent/,  tu  liiin,  saying 
]2.  4.  my/,  be  not  afraid  of  them  that  kill  the  body 
14. 12.  when  thou  makest  a  dinner,  call  nut  thy  /. 

15.  6.  he  callelh  together  his/,  saying,  rejoice 
9.  bhe  callelh  her/,  and  neighbours,  saying 
29.  that  I  might  make  mcr.-y  uitli  my/. 

16.  9.  make  to  yourselves/,  of  the  mammon 
21.  16.  ye  shall  be  betrayed  by  parents  and/. 
23.12.  the  same  day  Piialeund  Herod  were  made/. 

John  15. 13.  that  a  man  lay  down  his  life  for  his/. 

14.  ye  are  my/,  if  ye  do  what  I  command  you 

15.  not  servants,  but  I  have  called  you  /. 
^cU  10.  24.  Cornelius  called  together  his/. 

19.  31.  certain  which  were  his/,  sent  to  liim 
27.  3.  Julius  eave  him  liberty  to  go  to  his/. 
Rom.  IG.  t  10.  them  which  are  of  Arislobuius's/. 

til.  greet  the/,  of Narcisaus  in  the  Lord 
ijohn  14.  our/,  salute  thee,  greet  the/,  by  name 

FRIENDSHIP. 
Prov.  22.  24.  make  no/,  with  an  angry  man 
Jam.  4.  4.  the/,  of  the  world  is  enmity  with  God 

FRINGE,  S. 
JVum.  la.  38.  bid  them  make/,  put  on/,  a  ribband 
39.  it  shall  be  to  you  fur  a/,  that  ye  may  look 
Deut.  22.  12.  make  thee/,  on  the  four  quarters 

FROGS. 
Eiod.  8.  2.  T  will  smite  all  thy  borders  with/. 

7.  the  magicians  brought  up/,  on  the  land 
Psal.  78.  45.  he  sent/,  which  destroyed  them 

105.  30.  and  the  land  brought  forth/. 
Rev.  16.  13.  I  saw  three  unclean  spirits  like/. 

To  and  FRO. 
Otn.  8.  7.  he  sent  a  raven,  which  went  to  and  f. 
Kzod.  29.  124.  shake  to  and  f.  a  wave-offering 
2  Kings  4.  35.  then  Elislia  returned,  and  walked 
in  the  house  to  andf. 
»7bH.7.Salansaid,from  going  to  andf.tn  earth,  2.2. 
7.  4.  I  am  full  of  tossings  to  andf.  to  the  dawning 
13.  25.  wilt  thou  break  a  leaf  driven  to  andf.7 
Psal.  107.  27.  they  reel  to  andf.  and  stagger 
Pt'ov.  21.  G.  is  a  vanity  tossed  to  andf.  of  them 
/«a.24. 20.  earth  shall  reel  to  andf.  like  a  drunkard 
33. 4.  as  the  running  tn  and  f.  of  locusts  shall  run 
49.  21.  a  cnptivp,  and  removing  to  andf. 
F.zek.  27.  19.  Dan  also  and  Javaii  going  to  andf. 
.ZecA.l.lO.Lord  sent  to  walk  to  and/through  earth 
11.  we  have  wiilked  to  and  f.  through  llic  carlh 
6.  7.  that  I  hey  might  walk  to  and  f.  through  the 
earth,  so  they  walked  <o  and/,  through  the  earth 
Eph.  4.  14.  be  no  more  children  tossed  to  andf. 
Sre  Run. 
FROM. 

1  Sam. 6.  5.  his  hand/,  offyou,  and/,  offyourland 
Jtfa<. 4.  25.  then  followed  him  multitudes/.  Dcca- 

polis, /.  Jerusalem,  /.  Judea,/.  beyond  Jordan 
FRONT. 
S.S'am.  10.  9.  Joab  saw/,  of  the  battle  against  him 

2  Chron.  3.  4.  the  porch  in  the/,  of  the  house 

FRONTIERS. 

Etek.  25.  9.  from  his  cities  which  are  on  his/. 
FRONTLETS. 

These  virre  square  pieces  of  hard  calf's  skin, 
includins  four  pieces  of  parchment,  upon 
which  the  Jews  wrote  four  passages  of  the 
law,  and  bound  them  with  string.^  on  their 
foreheads.  The  four  passages  which  they 
wrote  are  these  :  On  the  first  piece  of  parch- 
ment, E.Tod.  13.  from  verse  2.  to  10.  On  the 
second,  Exod.  13.  from  verse  11,  to  16.  On  the 
third,  I)eul.  6.  from  verse  4.  to  9.  Jind  on  the 
fourth.  Dent.  M.  from  verse  13.  to  21.  Opinions 
are  much  divided  whether  the  use  of  frontlets, 
and  other  phylacteries,  was  ordained  by  Mo- 
■e»,  as  an  observance  to  which  the  Jews  were 
obliged,  anil  such  as  required  a  literal  com- 
pliance, sn  thai  the  Hebrews  have  at  all  times 
worn  ihrm  ;  or  have  been  obliged  to  wear  them. 

They  who  believe  the  use  of  them  to  be  rigorously 
binding,  grnvnd  their  persuasion  on  the  tejt 
of  Moll's,  which  speaks  of  it  in  a  positive 
manner,  as  of  other  precepts  of  the  law;  he 
requires  that  the  commandments  of  God  should 
b«  for  R  sign  on  tliiir  hands,  and  as  frontlets 
between  Ihi'ir  evi'»,  Deut.  6.  8. 

But  the  generality  of  interpreters  on  the  con- 
trary mainlnin,  that  the  precepts  of  Mosos 
which  mmtinn  Ihrne  writings  nn  the  ilnors,  the 
signs  upon  their  hands,  and  fronllelH  between 
their  eyes,  sbmilil  be  taken  in  a  figuralire  and 
allegnrical  srnne  ;  as  meaning  that  they  should 
be  very  careful  to  preserve  the  remembrance 
of  (rod's  law,  and  observe  his  commands  ; 
that  they  should  always  have  them  before  them, 
and  never  forget  them.  It  is  certain  that  be 
fore  the  BHhylonish  captivity,  not  the  least 
footsteps  of  them  were  to  be  seen  in  the  history 
of  the  .lews.  The  prophets  never  inveiirhril 
against  the  omission  or  neglect  of  this  prac- 
tice •  nor  was  tlure  ever  any  question  ctncem- 
223 


FRU 

ing  them  in  the  reformatia%  of  manners  at 
any  time  proposed  among  the  old  Hebrews. 
F.xod.  13.  16.  it  shall  be  for/,  between  thine  eyes 
Deal.  6. 8.  shall  be  as/,  between  thine  eyes,  11. 18. 

FROST, 
tren.  31.40.  drought  consumed  by  day, /.  by  night 
Kzod.  16.  14.  round  thing,  us  mnall  as  Uie  hoar/. 
.Job  37.  10.  by  the  breath  of  God/,  is  given 
38.  29.  the/,  of  heaven,  who  hath  gendered  ill 
P«ai.78. 47.  destroyeth  theirsycamore  trees  with/. 
147.  16.  he  scattereth  the  hoar/,  like  ashes 
Jer.  36.  30.  Jehoiakim's  body  cast  out  to  the/. 

FROWARU. 
Deut.  32.  20.  for  they  are  a  very  f.  generation 
2Sam.  22.  27.  with  the  pure  thou  wilt  shew  thyself 
pure,  with  the /.shew  thyself/.  Psal.  18.20. 
Job  5.  13.  the  counsel  of  the/,  is  carried  headlong 
Psal.  101.  4.  a/,  heart  shall  depart  from  me 
Proo.  2.  12.  from  the  man  that  S|ieaketh/.  things 
15.  ways  are  crooked,  and  they/,  in  their  paths 

3.  32.  for  the/,  is  abomination  to  the  Lord 

4.  24.  put  away  from  thee  a/,  moutli 

6.  12.  the  wicked  walkelh  with  a/,  mouth 
8.  8.  there  is  nothing/,  or  perverse  in  them 
13.  the  evil  way,  and  the/,  mouth  do  I  hate 
10.  31.  but  the/,  tongue  shall  be  cut  out 
11.20.  of  a/,  heart,  are  abomination  to  the  Lord 
16.28.  a/.man  soweth  strife,  whisperer  sepnrateth 

30.  he  shulteth  his  eyes  to  devise/,  things 
17.  20.  he  that  hath  a/,  heart,  findeth  no  good 

21.  8.  the  way  of  a  man  is/,  and  strange 

22.  5.  thorns  and  snares  are  in  the  way  of  the/. 
1  Pet.  2.  18.  servants  be  subject  to  your  masters, 

not  only  to  the  good  and  gentle,  but  also  to/ 
FROWARDLY. 
fsa.  57.  17.  he  went  on  /.  in  the  way  of  his  heart 

FROWARDNESS. 
Prov.  2.  14.  who  delight  in  the/,  of  the  wicked 
4.  124.  put  away  from  thee/,  of  mouth 
6.  14./.  is  in  his  heart,  he  deviseth  mischief 
10.  32.  the  mouth  of  the  wicked  speakctb/. 

FROWNED. 
1  Sam.  3. 1 13.  his  sons  made  vile,  he/,  not  on  them 

FROZEN. 
./ob  38.  30.  and  the  face  8f  the  deep  is/. 

FRUIT 
Is  the  product  of  the  earth,  trees,  plants,  i-c 
Deut.  28.  4,  Blessed  shall  be  the  fruit  of  thy 
ground  and  rattle.  The  fruit  of  the  body  sig 
nifies  children.  Deut.  28.  4,  Blessed  shall  bi 
the  fruit  of  thy  body.  Psal.  132.  11,  Of  the 
fruit  of  thy  body  will  I  set  upon  thy  throne. 
liy  fruit  is  sometimes  meant  reward.     Prov.  1. 

31,  They  shall  eat  of  the  fruit  of  their  own 
way;  They  shall  receive  the  reward  of  their 
bad  conduct,  and  punishments  answerable  to 
their  si7is.  The/ruit  of  the  lips  is  the  sacrifice 
of  praise  or  thanksgiving,  Ileb.  13.  15.  The 
fruit  of  the  righteous,  tAat  is,  the  counsel,  ex- 
ample, instruction,  and  reproof  of  the  right 
eous,  is  a  tree  of  life;  is  a  means  of  much 
good,  both  temporal  and  eternal,  and  that  not 
only  to  himself  but  to  others  also,  Prov.  11. 
30.  Solomon  says  in  Prov.  12.  14,  A  man  shall 
bo  satisfied  with  good  by  the/ruit  of  his  mouth ; 
tAot  is.  He  shall  receive  abundant  blessings 
from  God  as  the  reward  of  that  good  he  has 
done  by  his  pious  and  profitable  discourses. 
I  will  punish  llie/ruit  of  the  stout  heart  of  the 
king  of  Assyria,  Isa.  10.  12.  I  will  punish  him 
for  his  insolent  discourses  against  me.  Friiils 
meet  for  repentance,  are  such  holy  lives  and 
conversations  as  may  manifest  the  reality  and 
sincerity  iif  repentance.  Mat.  3.  8. 

The  fruits  of  the  Spirit  arc  those  gracious  habit.'' 
which  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  produces  in  tlui.ir 
in  whom  he  dwelleth  and  worketh,  with  those 
acts  which  flow  friim  them  as  naturally  as  the 
tree  produces  its  fruit.  The  apostle  enumerates 
these  fruits  in  (Jal.  5.22,2:),  Itut  the/raitof  the 
Spirit  is  love,  both  to  God,  and  our  neighbours  ; 
joy,  or  a  delight  in  God,  arising  from  a  seme 
of  our  interest  in  Aim;  pence  icitA  God,  qui- 
etude of  conscience,  and  a  peaceable  disposi- 
tion towards  mm,  as  opposed  to  strife,  vari- 
ance, emulation,  t^-c. ;  long-suffering,  patiently 
bearing,  and  forgiving  many  provocations 
and  injuries;  this  it  opposed  to  a  hastiness 
to  revenge;  gentleness,  or  an  affahlencss,  and 
easiness  to  be  entreated,  when  any  one  has 
wronged  us ;  goodness,  kindness,  friendliness, 
or  readiness  tn  do  good  to  others ;  faith,  or 
faithfulness,  to  speak  nothing  but  the  truth, 
and  to  perform  all  our  engagements ;  meek- 
t\f*»,  forbearance  of  passion,  rash  anger,  and 
hastiness  of  spirit ;  and  Icmpciance,  or  a 
curbing  of  all  carnal  desires,  and  a  sparing 
use  of  all  sensual  delights. 

The  apostle  in  Eph.  5.  9.  comprehends  the  fruits 
of  the  sanctifying  Spirit  in  these  three  things, 


FRU 

(1)  Goodness,  uiAicA  is  that  quality  or  disposi- 
tion which  is  contrary  to  malice  and  m'cked- 
ness  ;  or  it  may  mean  benignity  and  bounty. 
(2j  Righteousness,  which  is  opposed  to  injus- 
tice, whereby  oru  becomes  hurtful  to  another, 
tlirough  deceit,  covetousness,  oppression,  and 
violence.  (3)  Truth,  which  is  opposed  to  errors, 
lies,  heresies,  hypocrisy,  both  in  common  af- 
fairs, and  also  in  matters  of  religion. 

Tiiv  fruits  of  righteousness  are  such  good  works 
and  holy  actions  as  spring  from  a  gracious 
frame  of  heart.  Phil.  1.  11,  Being  filled  with 
the /ruits  of  righteousness.  FruiL  is  taken  for 
a  cUarilablc  contribution,  which  is  the  fruit  vr 
effect  of  faith  and  love.  Rom.  15.  2tf,  When  I 
liave  sealed  unto  them  this/ruit ;  irAen  J  have 
safely  delivered  this  contribution.  II  hen  fruit 
is  spoken  of  good  men,  then  it  is  to  be  under- 
stood of  the  fruits  or  works  of  holiness  and 
righteousness :  Hut  when  of  evil  men,  then  are 
meant  the  fruits  of  sin,  immorality,  and  wick- 
edness :  This  is  our  Saviour's  doctrine,  Mat. 
7.  16,  17,  18.     First-fruits,  See  First. 

Uncircunicised/ruit,  or  impure,  whereof  there  it 
mention  in  Lev.  19.  23,  is  the  fruit  for  the 
three  first  years  of  a  tree  newly  planted;  it 
was  reputed  unclean,  and  no  one  was  permit- 
ted to  cat  of  it  in  all  this  time.  In  the  fourth 
year  it  was  offered  to  the  Lord :  after  which 
it  was  common,  and  generally  eaten.  Various 
reasons  are  assigned  for  this  precept,  at,  (1) 
Because  the  first-fruits  wire  to  be  offered  to 
God,  who  required  the  best ;  but  in  this  time 
the  fruit  was  not  come  to  perfection.  (2)  It  was 
serviceable  to  tlie  trees  themselves,  which  grew 
the  better  and  faster,  being  early  slript  of 
those  fruits,  which  otherwise  would  have  de- 
rived to  themselocs,  and  drawn  away  much  of 
the  strength  from  the  root  and  tree.  (3)  It 
tended  to  the  advantage  of  men,  both  because 
the  fruit  7cas  then  waterish,  indigestible,  and 
unwholesome,  and  because  hereby  men  were 
taught  to  bridle  their  appetites,  a  lesson  of 
great  use  and  absolute  necessity  in  a  godly 
life. 

Gen.  1.29. 1  have  given  you  every  tree  wherein  is/. 
4.  3.  Cain  brought  of  the/,  of  the  ground 

30.  2.  hath  withheld  from  thee  the/,  of  the  womb 
F.iod.  21.  22.  so  that  her/,  depart  from  her 
Lev.  19.  23.  ye  shall  count  the/,  uncircuincised 

24.  in  the  fourth  year  the/,  shall  be  holy 
2;}.  t40.  take  on  first  day  the/,  of  goodly  treei 
25.  3.  six  years  thou  shalt  gather  in  the/. 
27.  30.  the  tithe  of  the/,  is  the  Lord's,  it  is  holy 
A'um.  13.  26.  they  shewed  them  the/,  of  the  land 

27.  we  came  to  the  land,  and  this  is  the/,  of  it 
Deut.  1.  25.  they  took  of  the/,  in  their  hands 
7.  13.  he  will  aiso  bless  the/,  of  thy  land 
22.9.1est/.  of  thy  seed,/,  of  thy  vineyanl  be  defiled 
26.2.  thou  shaft  take  of  the  first  of  all  the/. 
28.4.blessed  shall  bo  the/,  of  thy  body  and  ground 

11.  make  thee  plenteous  in/,  of  thy  body,  30.  9. 

18.  cursed  t^hall  be  the/,  of  tliy  budy  and  of  land 
40.  for  thine  olive  shall  cast  his  /. 

42.  all  thy  trees  and/,  shall  the  locust  ronsume 
.Iudg.9.  11.  should  I  Ibrsake  my  sweetness  and/.? 
2  Sam.  If).  2.  summer/,  for  the  young  men  to  eat 
Ps.  21. 10.  their/,  shult  thou  destroy  from  the  earlii 
5H.  t  II.  verily  there  is/,  for  the  righteous 
72.  16.  the/,  thereof  sli|PI  shake  like  Lebanon 
104.  13.  the  eartli  is  satisfied  with/,  of  thy  works 
10.5.35.  the  locusts  devoured  the/,  of  their  ground 
127.  3.  the/,  of  the  womb  is  his  reward 
130. 11.  of/,  of  thy  body  will  I  set  on  thy  throne 
Prov.  8.  19.  my  f.  is  belter  than  fine  gold 

10.  Ifi.  the/,  of  the  wicked  tendeth  to  sin 

11.  30.  the/,  of  the  riyhleous  is  a  tree  of  life 

12.  14.  a  man  is  satisfied  by  the/,  of  his  mouth 

18.  20.  shall  he  satisfied  with  the/,  of  his  mouth 

31.  16.  with  the/,  of  her  hand  she  plaiitelh 
31.  give  her  of  the/,  of  her  hands 

Cnnt.  2.  3.  and  his/,  was  sweet  to  my  lasto 
8. 12.  those  that  keep  the/,  thereof  two  hundred 

fsa.  3.  10.  they  shall  eat  the/,  of  their  doings 
4.  2.  the/,  of  tiie  earth  shall  bo  cxcrllent 

10.  12.  1  will  punish  the/,  of  the  stout  hesrt 

13.  IH.  they  shall  have  no  pitv  on  Ihe/.ol  the  nomb 

14.  29.  his/,  shall  he  a  fiery  flying  serpent 
27.  6.  and  fill  the  face  of  the  world  with/. 

9.  ihis  is  all  the/,  to  lake  oway  his  sin 
2f.  4.  as  the  hasty/,  before  the  summer 
.17.  19.  I  Creole  the/,  of  the  lips,  pence,  peace 
f>5.  21    shall  plant  vineyiirds,  and  eat/,  of  them 
.Irr.  ft.  19.  1  will  bring  the/,  nf  their  thoughts 
7.  20.  my  fury  shall  bo  on  Ihe/.  of  the  ground 

11.  16.  a  green  olive-tree,  fair,  anil  of  goodly/, 

19.  let  US  destroy  the  tree  with  the/,  thereof 
17.  1(1.  according  to/,  of  his  doings,  21. 14.  |.'H.  19 

F:ek.  17.  9.  rut  off  the  /.  thereof  tlwit  it  wither 

19.  12.  and  the  cait-wind  dried  up  her/. 


FRU 

Ez«Jl:.  19. 14.  fire  is  gone,  which  h.itli  devour,  her/. 
25.  4.  they  shall  cat  Ihv/.  ami  drink  ihy  milk 
36.  30.  I  will  multiply  the/,  of  the  tree 
47.  12.  nor  shall  the/,  thereof  be  consumed 

£)(in.4.12.the  leaves  fair  and  the/thereof  much,21. 
14.  he  cried,  and  said  thus,  scatter  his  /. 

Ifns.9.  1 14.  give  them  a  worn!)  that  casleth  the/. 
10.  13.  ye  have  eaten  the/,  of  lies 
14.8.  lain  likoa£;r.  (ir-tree,  from  me  is  thy /.found 

Smos  2.  9.  I  destroyed  his/,  from  above 
6. 12.  have  turncd/.of  righteousness  into  hemlock 

7.  14. 1  was  a  herdman,  a  gatherer  of  sycamore/. 

8.  1.  and  behold  a  basket  of  summer/.  2. 
^ic.6.  7.  shall  I  give/,  of  body  for  sinof  my  soul? 

7.  13.  the  land  desolate,  for  the/,  of  their  doings 
Nab.  3.  17.  nci'thei  shall/,  be  in  the  vines 
Jfag.  1.  10.  the  earth  is  stayed  from  her/. 
Zech.8.1^.seei\  prosperous,ihe  vine  shall  give  her/. 
Mai.  1.  12.  the  table  is  polluteil,  and  the  jf.  thereof 

3.  11.  nor  shall  your  vine  cast  her  /  before  time 
Mat.  12.  33.  make  tree  good,  and  his/,  good,  tree 

.  corrupt/,  corrupt,  for  (he  tree  is  known  by  his/. 
21.  19.  he  sai<l,  let  no/,  grow  on  thee  for  ever 
34.  when  the  time  of  the  /".drew  near  he  sent 
26.  2t».  I  will  not  drink  of /.  of  the  vine,  till  I 
drink  it  new  in  Father's  kingdom,  jVari  14.2.1. 
Mark  12.  2.  mijht  receive  the/,  of  the  vineyard 
J,uke  1.  42.  and  blessed  is  the/,  of  thy  womb 
13.  6.  he  sought/,  thereon,  and  found  none 
7.  behold,  I  come  seeking/,  on  this  fig-tree 
20.  10.  that  ihey  should  give  him  of  the/. 
Jnkn  4.  36.  and  galhereth/.  to  life  eternal 
Jicts  2.  30.  of  the/,  of  his  loins  he  would  raise 
Rom.  1.  13.  that  I  might  have  some/,  among  you 

6.  21.  what/,  had  ye  then  in  those  things  whereof 

22.  being  free,  ye  have  your/,  unto  holiness 
15.  28.  when<  have  sealed  to  them  this/. 

Gal.  5. 22.  but  the/,  of  the  Spirit  is  love, joy,  peace 
f'.ph.  5.  9.  the/,  of  the  Spirit  is  in  all  goodness 
Phil.  1.  22.  if  I  live,  this  is  the/,  of  my  labour 

4. 17. 1  desire  /.  that  may  abound  to  your  account 
JTeb.  13.  15.  by  him  let  us  offer  the/,  of  our  lips 
Jam.  3.  18.  the  /.  of  righteousness  is  sown  in  peace 

5.7.  the  husbandman  waifeth  for  the  precious/. 

Jude  12.  trees  whose/,  withereth,  without/. 

Sec  E.vT. 

Bi-nr,  or  bearcth  FRUIT. 

2  Kinirs  19.  SO.  shall  hear  f.  upward,  I.sa.  37.  31. 

F.iek.  17.  8.  in  a  good  soil,  that  it  might  bear  f. 

23.  in  the  height  of  Israel  it  shall  hear  f. 
/fo.s.O.lG.lheir  root  is  dried  up,  they  shall  hear  no/. 
Jnel  2.  22.  be  not  afraid,  the  tree  beareth  her  /. 
Mat.  13.  23.  in  sood  ground,  is  he  who  heareth  f. 
J,nke  8.  8.  other  fell  on  good  ground,  and  haref. 

13.  9.  if  it  bear  f.  well,  if  not,  cut  it  down 
John  15.  2.  every  branch  in  nie  that  beareth  not 
/.  every  branch  that  beareth  f.  he  purgeth  it 

4.  as  the  branch  cannot  icar/.  of  ilself,  except  it 
S.that  vc  hear  much/so  shall  vebe  mv  disciples 

Brinks',  briv^eth,  or  brought  forth  FRUIT. 
Lev.  25.  21.  it  shall  bring  forth  f.  for  three  years 
A^wm.  13.  20.  and  bring  of  the/,  of  the  land 
J^eh.  10.  35.  to  bring  the/,  of  all  trees,  37. 
Psal.  1.  3.  that  bringeth  forth  f.  in  his  season 

92.  14.  ihey  shall  still  bring  forth  f.  in  old  age 
Cant.  8. 11.  every  one  for  the/,  was  to  bring  .'silver 
Jer.  12.  2.  ihe  wicked  grow,  they  bring  forth  f. 
F.zek.  3R.  11.  they  shall  increase,  and  bring  forth  f. 

47.  12.  it  shall  bring  forth  new  /.  for  meat 
Hos.  10.  1.  Israel  hringeth  forth  f.  to  himself 
Mnt.'A.W.  bring,  not  forth  good/."  7.  19.  I^ukeXO. 

7.  17.  every  good  tree  bringeth  forth  good/. 
18.  a  good  tree  cannot  bring  forth  evil/. 

13.  26.  but  when  the  blade  brought  forth  f. 
Mark  4. 20. sue h  as  hear  the  word  and  bring  forth  f. 

28.  for  Ihe  earth  bringeth  forth  f.  of  herself 
Lvke  8.  14.  and  bring  no/,  to  perfection 

15.  they  keep  it,  and  bring  forth  f. with  patience 
John  12.  24.  if  it  die,  it  bringeth  forth  much/. 

15.2.  purgeth  it,  that  it  may  bring  forth  more/ 

5.  abideth  in  me, the  same  bringeth  forth  much/. 

16.  I  ordaiiieil  Ihat  you  should  bring  forth  f. 
Rnm.  7.  4.  thnt  we  should  bring  forth  f.  to  God 

5.  motions  did  work  to  bring  forth  f.  unio  dealh 

Col.  1.  6.  Ihe  zn=\\e\  hringeth  forth  f.  in  you 

Jam.5.18.  Elijah  praved,lhp  earth  brought  forth  f. 

See  First  Fruit. 

FRUIT-TREES; 

•VeA.  9.  25.  and  possessed  f. -trees  in  abundance 

Yield,  yieldelh,  yielding  FRUIT. 
Oen.  1.  11.  and  the  fruit  tree  yielding  f.  12. 
7,cp.  25.  19.  and  the  land  shall  yield  her/. 
26.  4.  Ihe  trees  of  the  field  shall  yield  their/. 
J)eut.  11.  17.  and  ihal  the  land  yield  not  her/. 
Prov.  15.  12.  the  root  of  the  righteous  yieldethf. 
Jer.  17.  8.  nfilher  shall  cease  from  yielding  f. 
F.zek.  34.27.  the  (rpe  of  Ihe  field  shall  yield  her/ 
.36.  8.  ao'l  yield  your/.  In  my  people  Israel 
M''rk  4.  7.  ihe  thorns  choked  it,  it  yielded  no/. 

8.  otber  fell  on  good  ground  and  did  yield  f. 

233 


FUL 

TTeh.  \1.\\.  yieldelh  peaceable/,  of  righteousness 
liev.  22.  2.  llio  tree  yieldelh  her/,  every  month 

FRUITFUL. 
Gen.  1.  22.  God  blessed  them,  saying,  be  /.  and 
multiply,  28.  I  8.  17.  |  9.  7.  |  35.  11. 

17.  6.  and  I  will  make  thee  exceeding/. 
20. 1  will  makelshmacl/ II  48. 4.  make  Jacob/ 

26.  22.  God  hath  made  room  for  us,  we  shall  be/. 

28.  3.  God  Almighty  bless  thee,  and  make  thee/ 

41.  152.  called  him  /.  for  God  caused  me  to  be/. 

49.  ^2.  Joseph  is  a/,  bough,  even  a/,  bough 
F.iod.  1.  7.  and  the  children  of  Israel  were/. 
Lev.  26.  9.  I  will  make  you/,  and  multiply  you 
2  Chr.  26.  f  iO.  Uzziali  had  husbandmen  in/,  fields 
Psal.  107.34.  he  turneth  a/,  land  into  barrenness 

128.  3.  thy  wife  shall  be  as  a/,  vine 

148.  9.  mountains  and/,  trees,  praise  the  Lord 
ha.  5.  1.  my  beloved  hath  a  vineyard  in  a/,  hill 

17.6.  four  or  five  in  the  outmost/branches  thereof 

32.  12.  they  shall  lament  for  the/,  vine 
Jer.  4.  26.  lo,  the/  place  was  a  wilderness 

23.  3.  and  they  shall  be/,  and  increase 
F.zek.  19.  10.  she  was/  and  full  of  branches 
//os. 13. 15.  thcaigh  he  be/,  an  east  wind  shall  come 
Jlcta  14.  17.  and  gave  us  rain  and/,  seasons 
CoM.lO.being/.in  every  good  work, and  increasing 
See  Field. 
FRUITS. 
Gen.  43. 11.  take  of  the  best/,  in  the  land  in  vessels 
/^3-o(i.22. 29.  not  delay  to  offer  the  first  of  thy  ripe/. 

23.  10.  six  years  shalt  gather  in  the/,  thereof 

I^ev.  25.  15.  according  to  the  years  of  the/.  16. 

22.  till  her/,  come  in,  eat  of  the  old  store 

26.20.  neither  shall  the  trees  yield  their/. 
75e«t  33. 14.for  precious/brought  forth  by  the  sun 
2  Sam.  9.  10.  thou  and  thy  sons  shall  bring  in/. 
2  Kings  8.  6.  restore  to  her  all  the  /.  of  the  field 

19.  29.  plant  vineyards,  and  eat  the/,  thereof 
.Tnb  31.  39.  if  I  have  eaten  the/,  without  money 
P*.107.37.snw  fields,  which  may  yield/.of  increase 
Feci.  2.  5.  I  planted  trees  of  all  kind  of/. 
Cn7/i.4.13.the  plants  are  an  orchard  with  pleasant/ 
16.  let  my  beloved  eat  his  pleasant/. 

6.  II.  I  went  down  to  see  the/  of  the  valley 

7.  13.  at  our  sates  are  all  manner  of  pleasant/. 
Tsa.  33.  9.  Bashan  and  Carmel  shake  off  their/. 
I.nm.  4. 9.  pine  away  for  want  of  the/,  of  the  earth 
Mnl.Z.  11.  he  shall  not  destroy  the/,  of  your  ground 
Mat.  3. 8.  bring  /.  meet  for  repentance,  J,uke  3.  8. 

7.  16.  ye  shall  know  them  by  their/.  20. 

21.  34.  that  they  might  receive  the/  of  it 
41.  who  shall  render  him  the/,  in  their  seasons 
43.  kincdom  given  to  a  nation  bringing  forth/. 

T.nke  12. 17. 1  have  no  room  where  to  bestow  my/. 

18.  and  there  will  I  bestow  all  my/. 
2  Cor.  9.  10.  increase  Ihe/.  of  your  righteousness 
Phil.  1.11.  filled  with  the/,  of  righteousness 
2  Tim.  2. 6.  the  husbandman  first  partaker  of  the/. 
Jam.  3.  17.  wisdom  from  nbove  is  full  of  good/. 
Pev.  18. 14./  thy  soul  lusted  after  departed  from 

22.  2.  the  tree  of  life  bare  twelve  manner  of/. 
Sec  First. 

."fiimmpr-FRUITS. 
2  Sam.  16. 1.  Ziba  with  a  hundred  of  summer- f. 
J.-ia.  16.  9.  Ihv  siimmer-f.  and  harvest  are  fallen 
./er.  40.  10.  but  gather  ye  wine  and  snmmcr-f. 
12..1evvs  gathered  wine  and  5M?nmer-/.  very  much 
48.  32.  the  spoiler  is  fallen  on  thy  svmmer-f. 
Mic.  7.  1.  as  when  Ihev  jathered  the  summer-f. 

FRUSTRATE. 
Ezra  4.  5.  and  hired  counsellors  to/,  their  purpose 
P.ial.  .33.  tlO.  Lord  maketh/.  counsel  of  heathen 
MarkLi^.  full  well  ye/the  commandment  of  God 
Gal.  2.  21.  I  do  not  f  the  grace  of  God 

FRUSTRATETII. 
Tsa.  44.  25.  that  f.  the  tokens  of  the  liars 

FRYING-PAN. 
A,ej7.2. 7.  if  oblation  be  a  meat-offering  in  the/. 
7. 9.  all  that  is  dressed  in  the/,  shall  be  Ihe  priest's 

FUEL. 
Tsa.  9.  5.  this  shall  be  with  burning  and/,  of  fire 

19.  Ihe  people  shall  be  as  the/,  of  the  fire 
F.zek.  15. 4.  Ihe  vine-tree  is  cast  into  the  fire  for/.C. 

21.  32.  thou  shalt  be  for  f.  to  the  fire 

FUGITIVE. 
Gen.  4.  12.  a/,  and  a  vagabond  shalt  thou  be 
14.  I  shall  be  a  f.  and  a  vajnbond  in  the  earth 
FUGITIVES. 
./udg.  12.  4.  ve  Gileadiles  are/,  of  Ephraim 
2  flings  25. 11.  and  the  f.  that  fell  awav  lo  Ihe  king 
A?n..l5.5.sh.ill  cry  for  Mnab,  his  f.shall  flee  loZoar 
F.zek.  17.  21.  all  his  f  shall  falJiiy  the  sword 

FULFIL. 
Gen.  29.  27.  /.  her  week,  and  we  will  give  thee  this 
Fxod.  5.  13./.  vour  works,  vour  daily  task 
23.  26.  the  nnrnber  of  thv  davs  I  will/ 
1  Kings  2.  27.  Ihat  he  might  f.  the  word  of  the  Lord 

1  CAr.  22.  13.  if  thou  takest  heed  to/,  statutes  of  L. 

2  C^rnn.  36.  21.  to/,  threescore  and  ten  years 
Job  39. 2.  canst  thou  number  montba  that  they  /.? 


FUL 

Psal.  20.  4.  the  Lord  grant  thee  to/,  all  th/  counsel 
5.  the  Lord/,  all  thy  petitions 
145. 19.  he  will  /.  the  desire  of  them  that  fear  hint 
Mat.  3.  15.  it  becometh  us  to/,  all  righleousnes* 

5.  17.  I  am  not  come  to  destroy,  but  to/. 

.^cts  13.  22.  found  David,  who  shall  /.  all  my  will 
Horn.  2.  27.  uncircuincision,  if  it/,  the  law 

13.  J4.  for  the  flesh,  to  /.  the  lusts  thereof 
Gal.  5.  16.  ye  shall  not/.  Ihe  lusts  of  the  flesh 

6.  2.  bear  ye  one  another's  burdens,  and  so  /.  the 

law  of  Christ 
Fph.  4.  1 10.  ascended,  that  he  might/  all  things 
Phil.  2.  2./.  ye  my  joy,  that  ye  be  like-minded 
Col.  1.  25.  is  given  to  me,  to/,  ihe  word  of  God 

4.  17.  take  heed  thou/  the  ministry,  2  Tim.  4.  f  .">. 
2  Thess.  1.  11./.  all  the  good  pleasure  of  his  will 
.7am.  2.  8.  if  ye/.  Ilie  royal  law,  ye  do  well 
Rev.  17. 17.  for  God  put  in  theirhearts  to  /.  his  will 

FULFILLED. 
Gen.  2.5.  24.  when  her  days  to  be  delivered  were/. 

29.  21.  give  me  my  wife,  for  my  days  are/. 

.50.  3.  forty  days  were/,  for  so  are/,  the  days 
Ezod.5. 14.  wherefore  have  ye  not/,  your  task  ? 

7.  25.  seven  days/,  afler  Lord  hath  smitten  river 
Lev.  12.  4.  till  the  days  of  purificatmn  be/.  6. 
JVhtti.  6. 13.  when  the  days  of  his  separation  are/. 

32.  til.  because  they  have  not/,  after  me 
Deut.  1.  t  36.  Caleb  halh/  to  go  after  me 

1  Sam.  18.  t26.  and  the  days  were  not/. 

2  Sam.  7. 12.  when  days  be/  and  thou  shall  sleep 

14.  22.  in  that  the  king/,  the  request  of  servant 

1  Kings  8.  15.  and  hath  with  his  hand/,  it 

24.  and  hast/,  it  with  thy  hand,  2  Chron.  6.  15. 

11.  t6.  Solomon/,  not  after  the  Lord,  as  David 

2  Chr.  6.  4.  the  Lord  hath/,  that  which  he  spake 
Ezra  1.  1.  that  Ihe  word  of  the  Lord  might  be/. 
.lob  36.  17.  thou  hast/  the  judgment  of  the  wicked 
.7fr.44.25.ye  and  your  wives  have/. with  your  hand 
J^am.  2  17.  he  hath/,  his  word  he  had  commanded 

4.  18.  our  days  are/,  for  our  end  is  come 
F.zek.  5.  2.  when  the  days  of  the  sieeo  are/. 
Dan.  4.  33.  the  same  hour  was  Ihe  thing/. 

10.  3.  till  three  whole  weeks  were  f. 
Mat.  1.  22.  Ihat  it  might  be  /.  2.  1-5,  23.  |  8.  17.  I 
12.  17.  1  13.  35.  I  21. 4.  |  27.  35.  John  12. 38. 
I  15.25. 117. 12. 1 18.9,32. 119.24,28,36. 

2.  17.  then  was/,  that  which  was  spoken,  27.9. 

5.18.shall  in  no  wise  pass  from  the  law  till  all  be/. 

13.  14.  in  ihem  is/,  the  prophecy  of  Esnias 

24.  34.  shall  not  pass  till  all  these  things  be/. 
Mark  1.  15.  the  time  is/,  kingd.  of  God  is  at  hand 

13.  4.  whatsign  when  all  these  thinss  shall  be/.? 
Iyvke\  .20. my  words  which  shall  be/in  their  season 

2.  43.  when  they  had  /.  the  days,  'bey  returned 

21.  22.  that  all  things  which  are  written  maybe/. 
24.  until  Ihe  times  of  the  Gentiles  be/ 

22. 16.  not  eat  till  il  he/,  in  the  kingdom  of  God 

24.  44.  .all  things  must  be/  spoken  by  Moses 
John  3.  29.  this  my  joy  therefore  is/. 

17. 13.  Ihey  might  have  my  joy/,  in  themselves 
.^cts  3.  18.  what  God  had  shewed,  he  hnth  bo/. 

9.  23.  after  many  days  were/.  Jews  took  counsel 

12.  25.  Paul  and  Barnabas/  their  ministry 

13.  25.  and  as  .lohn/.  his  course,  he  said 
27.  they  have/.  Ihem  in  condemning  him 

29.  when  they  had  /.  all  Ihat  was  written  of  him 
33.  God  hath/,  the  same  to  us  their  children 

14.  26.10  grace  of  God  for  the  work  which  they/. 
Rom.  8. 4.  Ihe  righteousness  of  la  w  might  be /.in  U3 

13.  8.  he  that  lovelh  another  hath/,  the  law 
2  Cor.  10.  6.  when  your  obedierfte  is/. 
Gnl.  5. 14.  the  law  is  /.  in  one  word,  even  in  this 
Rev.  a.  II.  till  killing  of  their  brethren  should  be/. 
15.8.  till  Ihe  seven  plagues  of  seven  angels  were/. 
17.  17.  till  the  words  of  God  shall  be/. 
20.  3.  should  deceive  no  more,  till  1000  years  be/. 
See  Scripture. 
FULFILLING. 
Psal.  148.  P.  fire,  hail,  stormy  wind/,  his  word 
Rom.  13.  10.  therefore  love  is  \hpf.  of  the  law 
Fph.'2.3.f.  the  desires  of  the  flesh  and  of  the  mind 

FULL 
Signifies,  [1]  Sati.ojied  jcith.  Isa.  1.  11,  T  am  foil 
of  the  burnt-offerings  of  rams.  [2]  That  which 
is  perfect,  complete,  and  irhich  leants  nothing. 
2  John  8,  That  we  receive  a  full  reward  ;  that 
whole  portion  of  glory  which  God  hnth  pro 
misedto  diligent,  persevering  Christians.  |3] 
Such  as  are  proud,  and  puffed  up  with  a  high 
C'liccit  of  their  own  S7ijfieieney  and  worth,  so 
Ihat  they  feel  no  need  of  Christ,  /.vkc  6.  25, 
Woe  unto  you  ihat  arc  full.  [4]  ^"''  enabled 
both  to  conceive  and  bring  forth,  1  Sam.  2.  .5. 
Full  of  years,  one  who  has  lived  h'Jic  enough, 
as  Innu  as  he  de.iires.  Gen.  25. 8.  Full  of  faith, 
and  of  Ihe  Holy  Ghost,  that  is,  endued  with  a 
plentiful  mca.iure  of  faith,  and  of  the  gifls 
and  graces  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  Acts  6.  .5.  T^a 
fu'ness  of  time,  !S  the  time  wherein  t/;e  Messiah 
appeared,  which  was  appointed  hy  God,  pro 


PUL 

miied  to  the  fathers,  foretold  by  the  prophets, 
expected  by  ?A«  Jews  themselvet,  and  earncstlit 
longed  fur  by  all  the  faithful;  the  fulness  of 
this  lime,  ).i  when  that  time  was  fully  come. 
Gal.  4.  4,  When  the  fuhiess  of  the  time  was 
come,  Gud  sent  his  Son.  The  fuhitss  of  God, 
is  such  a  measure  of  perfection  as  Ood  hath 
appointed  to  every  one  of  the  elect  through 
Christ.  Kph.  .i.  19,  That  ye  nii^'ht  be  lille.l 
with  ull  the  fuhiess  of  God  ;  that  is,  Until  you 
arrive  at  the  highest  degree  of  the  knowledge 
and  enjoyment  of  (iod,  and  immediate  influence 
from  him,  and  an  entire  conformity  to  him. 
The  fulness  of  Christ,  (.<  the  infinite  treasures 
of  grace  and  mercy  with  which  he  was  filled. 
John  1.  16,  Of  his  fulness  have  all  we  received. 
Jlnd  whereas  men  are  said  to  be  filled  with  the 
Holy  Ghost,  as  John  the  Baptist,  Luke  1.  15. 
and  Stephen,  Jlcts  0.  5.  This  differs  from  the 
fulness  of  Christ  in  these  three  respects.  (1) 
Grace  and  the  Spirit  be  in  others  by  partici- 
pation ;  as  the  moon  hath  her  light  from  the 
$un,  rivers  their  waters  from  the  fountain, 
and  the  eye  its  sight  from  the  soul;  but  in 
Christ  they  be  originally,  naturally,  and  of 
himself.  (2)  In  Christ  they  be  infinite  and 
above  measure,  John  3.  M.  But  in  the  sai7its 
by  measure,  according  to  the  gifts  of  God, 
Eph.  4.  16.  The  moon  is  full  of  light,  but  the 
9un  is  more  full ;  rivers  arc  full  of  waters, 
but  the  sea  more  full.  (3)  The  saints  cannot 
communicate  their  graces  to  others;  whereas 
the  gifts  of  the  Spirit  be  in  Christ  as  a  head 
and  fountain,  to  impart  them  to  his  members. 
John  1.  16,  We  have  received  of  hie  fulness. 
It  is  said,  Col.  2.  9,  That  the  fulness  of  the 
Godhead  dwells  in  Christ  bodily;  that  is,  The 
whole  nature  and  attributes  of  God  are  in 
Christ,  and  that  really,  essentially,  or  sub- 
stantially, and  also  personally,  by  nearest 
union,  as  the  soul  dwells  in  the  body,  so  that 
the  same  person  who  is  wan,  is  God  also. 

The  church  is  called  the  fulnes.s  of  Christ,  F.ph. 
1. 23.  It  is  the  church  which  inakes  him  a  com- 
plete and  perfect  Head,  and  leithout  which  he 
would  account  himself  but  empty  and  maimed, 
as  it  were;  for  thounh  he  has  a  natural  and 
personal  fulness,  as  God;  yet  as  .Mediator,  he 
is  not  full  and  complete  without  his  mystical 
body,  {as  a  king  is  not  complete  without  his 
subjects,)  hut  receives  an  outward  relative  and 
mystical  fulness  from  his  members.  .Ind  then 
the  church  does  manifrst  and  set  forth  his  ful- 
ness, serving  as  an  empty  vessel  for  him  to  fill 
and  to  shew  his  fulness  in;  and  this  he  dues, 
by  bringing  every  member  to  his  full  stature ; 
by  dispersing  all  variety  of  gifts  and  graces 
among  them  ;  and  by  bringing  them  all  to  hea- 
ven at  last,  so  that  not  one  shall  be  wanting. 

How  much  irioro  their  fulness!  Horn.  11.  12,  If 
the  fall  of  them  be  the  riches  of  the  world,  and 
the  diniiiiijliin?  of  them  the  riches  of  the  Gen- 
tiles;  how  much  more  their  fulness?  If  the 
falling  away  of  the  Jews,  from  being  God's 
people,  through  their  rejecting  the  gospel,  and 
the  small  number  of  believers  among  them, 
was  the  occasion  of  God's  manifesting  his 
abundant  grace  in  the  conversion  of  the  Gen- 
tiles, and  spreading  the  knowledge  of  Christ 
all  the  world  over;  how  much  more  shall  u 
general  convrmsiun  of  the  Jews,  towards  the 
end  of  the  world,  confirm  the  faith  of  the  be- 
lieving Gentiles,  and  also  be  a  means  to  con- 
vert those  of  them  that  do  not  yet  believe,  all 
over  the  world  ? 

*7ot.l5.  IC).  the  iniquity  of  the  Amorites  is  not  yet/. 
2.%.  R.  Abraliiim  un  old  man,  and/,  of  years 
35.  29.  Isnac  htiwig  old  and/,  of  days,  died 
41. 1.  at  the  end  of  two/.  yeiir9,Phar.toli  dreamed 
7.  the  lliin  eats  devoured  the  seven/,  ears,  22. 
43.  21.  over?  man's  money  in  his  sack/,  weichl 

Krud.S. 21.  the  houfres  Rhnll  Wf.  ofswnrmsofllies 
Iti.  3.3.  and  put  a  homer/,  of  manna  therein 
22.  3.  for  he  should  make/,  restitution 

7,^.2. 14.  shall  offer  even  corn  beaten  out  of/,  ears 
16.  12.  ccnier/.  of  eonis,  hands/,  of  inccnso 
19.29.  and  ihc  land  became/,  of  wickedness 
25.  29.  within  a/,  year  may  ho  redeem  it 
30.  if  not  redeemed  in  a/,  year,  then  the  house 

JVum.  T.  13.  both  oflhem  were/,  nf  fine  flour,  10, 

35,  31,  37,  13,  49.  55,  61,  67,  73,  79. 

14.  one  spoon  of  ten  shekels  f.iA  inrense.SO,  26, 

32,  r'R,  44,  .50,  .56,  62,  68,  74,  P(l,  86. 

22.  18.  ifBal'ik  ?  ve  nie  house/,  of  silvi-r, 24.  13. 

Deut.fi.  11.  and  h'iuses  f.  of  nil  (rood  things,  when 
thou  sh.ilt  have  eiilen  and  be/.  8.  10,  12. 
11.15.willsenilffriiFfl,lliiil  ihon  mnveslijal  and  be/. 
21.  13.  she  shall  bewail  her  father  a /.  month 

33.  23.  Napblali  <:  ofthe  hle«»in)?  ofthe  Lord 

34.  9.  Joshua  was/. '  f  I  be  Sjiiril  of  wisdom 


FUL 

.Tudg.  C.  38.  wringed  the  dew,  a  bowl  /.  of  water 
16.27.  now  the  house  was/,  ufmen  and  women 
Huth  1.21.  1  went  out/,  and  tho  Lord  bath  brought 

2.  12.  and  a/,  reward  be  given  thee  ofthe  Lord 

1  Sam.  2.  5.  they  that  were/,  hired  out  themselves 

18.  27.  they  gave  them  in/,  tale  to  the  king 
27.7.  David  dwelt  in  country  of  Philist.  a/,  year 

2  Sam.  8.  2.  and  with  one/,  line  to  keep  alive 

1  Kings  17.1 15.  she  and  her  house  did  eat  a/,  year 
•i  Kings  3.  16.  make  this  valley/,  of  ditches 

4.  6.  when  the  vessels  were/,  she  said  to  her  son 

6.  17.  behold,  the  mountain  was/,  of  horses 

7.  15.  and  lo,  all  the  way  was/,  of  garments 
10.21.  house  of  liaal  was/.froin  one  end  lo  another 

1  Chron.  21.  22.  shall  grant  it  me  for  the/,  price 
24.  nav,  but  I  will  verily  buy  it  for  a/,  price 
23.  1.  when  David  was  old  ajid/.of  days,  29.  28. 
Eslh.  3.  5.  then  was  Haman  /.  of  wralli 

5.  9.  he  was/,  of  indignation  against  Mordecai 
Job  5.  26.  thou  shall  come  to  thy  grave  in  a/,  age 

7.4. 1  am/of  tussings  to  and  fro  to  dawning  of  day 

10.  15.  I  am/,  of  confusion,  see  mine  affliction 

11.  2.  and  should  a  man/,  of  talk  be  justified? 

14.  1.  man  is  of  few  days  and/,  of  trouble 
20.  11.  his  bones  are/,  ofthe  sins  of  his  youth 
21.23.  one  dieth  in  his/,  strength,  being  at  ease 

24.  his  breasts  are/,  of  milk,  his  bones  moistened 
32. 18. 1  am/,  of  matter,  the  Spirit  constraineth  me 
36.  16.  that  on  thy  table  should  be/,  of  fatness 
42.  17.  so  Job  died,  being  old  and/,  of  days 
Psal.  17.  14.  they  are/,  of  children,  and  leave  rest 
69.  20.  hath  broken  my  heart,  1  am/,  of  heaviness 

73.  10.  waters  of  a/,  cup  are  wrung  out  to  them 

74.  20.  dark  placesarc/.  of  habitations  of  cruelty 
7H.25.  man  did  eat  angels'  food,  sent  meat  lothe/. 
104.  16.  Ibe  trees  ofthe  Lord  are/,  of  sap 

127.  5.  ha|>py  that  hath  bis  (|uiver/.  of  them 
144. 13.  that  our  garners  maybe/,  nlfording  store 
Prov.  17. 1.  than  a  house/,  of  sacrifices  with  strife 
25.  1 17.  lest  he  be/,  of  thee,  and  hate  thee 

27.  7.  the/,  soul  loatheth  a  honey-comb 

20.  hell  and  destruction  are  never/. 

30.  9.  lest  I  be/,  and  deny  thee,  and  say, who  is  L.? 
Eccl.  1.  7.  run  into  the  sea,  yet  the  sea  is  not/. 
8.  all  things  are/,  of  labour,  man  cannot  utter 
4.  6.  than  both  hands/,  with  travail  and  vexation 
11.  3.  if  the  clouds  he/,  of  rain,  they  empty 
Isa.  1.  11.  I  am/,  of  the  burnt-offerings  of  rams 
15.  I  will  not  hear,  your  hands  are/,  of  blood 

21.  the  faithful  cily  it  was/,  of  judgment 
11.9.  the  earth  shall' be/,  of  knowledge  of  ihe  Ld. 
13.  21.  their  houses  shall  be/,  of  doleful  creatures 

15.  9.  the  waters  of  Dimon  shall  be/,  of  blood 

22.  2. /.of  stirs  ||  7.  valleys  shall  be/,  of  chariots 
25.  6.  a  feast  of  fat  things,  a  feast/,  of  niatrow 

28.  8.  for  all  tables  are/,  of  vomit  and  filihiness 
30.27.  his  lips  are/,  of  indignation,  and  his  tongue 
51.  20.  Ibcy  are/,  ofthe  fury  of  the  Lord 

.fer.i.  12.  a/,  wind  from  those  places  shall  come 
5. 7.  when  I  had  fed  thcra  to  the/,  they  commiltcd 

6.  II.  therefore  I  am/,  ofthe  fury  ofthe  Lord 
28.  3.  within  two/,  years  will  I  bring,  11. 

35.  5.  I  set  before  the  Rechabites  pots  /.  of  wine 
I.am.  1. 1.  how  cilysitsolitary  that  was/,  of  people 

3.  30.  he  is  fdled/.  with  reproach 

F.iek.  1.  18.  and  their  wings  were/,  of  eyes 
10. 4.  court  was/,  ofthe  brighlnessof  Lord's  glory 
12.  the  wheels  were-/,  of  eyes  round  about 
17.  3.  a  great  eagle  with  wings/,  of  feathers 

19.  10.  she  was  fruitful  and/,  of  branches 

28.  12.  the  sum, /.of  wisdom  and  perfect  in  beauty 
32.  6.  ami  the  rivers  shall  bo/,  of  Ihco 
.37.  1.  in  mid.st  of  Ihe  v;illey  which  whs/,  of  bones 
39. 19.  ye  shall  eat  fat  till  ye  be/,  and  drink  blood 
Dan.  3.  19.  then  was  Nebuchadne^7.ar/.  of  fury 

8.  23.  when  the  transgressors  are  come  to  the/. 
10.2.  in  those  days  Daniel  mourned  three/,  weeks 

.Joel  2.  24.  Ihe  lloors  shall  be/,  of  wheat 

Mic.  3.  8.  but  truly  I  am/,  of  power  by  the  Spirit 

6.  12.  the  rich  men  thereof  are/,  of  violence 
Ilab.  3.  3.  and  Ihc  earth  wa<!/.  of  his  praise 
y.ech.  8.  5.  the  streets  slnll  be/,  of  bovs  and  girls 
Mat.  6.22.  thy  body  shall  be/,  of  light,  I.uke  11.30. 

13.  48.  which  when  it  was  /.  they  drew  to  shore 
U.20.  of  fragments  twelve  baskets/.  Jlfurt  6. 43. 
15.  37.  they  took  up  Ihnt  was  left  seven  baskets/. 

23.  25.  but  within  are/,  nf  extortion  and  excoss 

27.  but  within  are/,  of  dead  men's  hones 

28.  within  ye  are/,  of  hypocrisy  and  iniquity 
Jiriri' 7.  9./.  well  ye  reject  commandment  of  God 

15.  36.  one  ran  ami  filled  a  Hpnnge/.  of  vinegar 
I  uke  1.57.  now  Eli7.ab./.liine  came  to  be  delivered 

4.  1.  Je.sus  being/,  ofthe  floly  Ghost,  was  led 

5.  12.  behold  a  man/,  of  leprosy,  fell  on  his  face 
(5.  25.  woe  unto  you  that  nrn  /.  yn  shall  hunger 

16.  "0.  Lazarus  was  laid  at  his  gale/,  of  sores 

■  lohn  1.14.  and  dwell  among  us./.ofgrace  and  truth 

7.  8.  I  go  not  up,  for  my  time  is  not  yet/,  come 
15.  11.  and  that  your  joy  might  he/.  16.  24. 
19.  29.  there  wa»  set  a  veisel/.  of  vinegar 


FUL 

j?c(s  2.13.  others  said,  these  men  are/,  of  new  wiiw 
28.  shall  make  me/,  ofjoy  with  thy  counteuauce 

6.  3.  look  ye  out  men/,  ofthe  Holy  Ghost 

5.  Stephen/,  of  faith  and  the  IJ.  Ghosi,  8.  |  7.  55. 

7.  23.  when  Moses  was/,  forty  years  old 

9.  36.  Dorcas/,  of  good  works  and  alms  deeds 
11.  24.  Barnabas/,  of  ihe  Holy  Ghost  and  faith 
13.  10.  and  said,0/.  of  all  subtilty  and  mischief 
19.  2H.  they  were/,  of  wrath  and  cried  out 
Kom.  1.29.  being/,  of  envy,  murder,debale,  deceit 
15.14. 1  am  persuad.  that  ye  also  are/.ofgoodoeaa 

1  Cor.  4.  8.  now  ye  are/,  now  ye  are  rich 

Phil.  2.  26.  for  he  longed  and  was/,  of  heaviness 

4.  12.  1  am  instructed  lo  be/,  and  to  be  hungry 
18.  but  I  have  all  and  abound,  I  am/. 

2  Tim.  4.  5.  make/,  proof  of  thy  ministry 
//(4.5.14.  but  strong  moat  to  them  that  arc  of/,  age 
Jam.'i.S.  tongue  anunruly  evil,/,  of  deadly  poiaoo 

17.  wisdom  from  above  is  pure,/,  of  mercy 

1  I'et.  1.  8.  yerej.  with  joy  unspeak.  and/,  of  glory 

2  Pet.  2. 14.  eyes/,  of  adultery,  not  cease  from  sin 

1  .hihn  1.4.  we  write  lo  you,  that  your  joy  may  be/. 
•2  John  8.  but  that  we  receive  a/,  reward 

12.  speak  face  to  face,  that  our  joy  may  be/. 
Rfv.  4.  6.  there  were  four  beasts/,  of  eyes,  8. 

5.  8.  having  every  one  golden  vials/,  of  odours 

15.  7.  seven  golden  vials/,  ofthe  wralh  of  God 

16.  10.  and  his  kingdom  was/,  of  darkness 

17.  3.  I  saw  a  woman/,  of  names  of  blasphemy 
4.  a  golden  cup/,  of  abominations  and  filihiness 

21.  9.  the  seven  vials/,  ofthe  seven  last  jilagues 

See  AsscKANCE,  Co.mpassion. 

Is  FULL. 

2  Kings  4.  4.  thou  shall  set  aside  that  which  is  f. 
Psal.  10.7{his  mouth  is  f.  of  cursing,  ftewi.3. 14. 

26.  10.  and  their  right  hand  is  f.  of  bribes 
29.  4.  the  voice  ofthe  Lord  is f.  of  majesty 
33.  5.  Ihe  earth  is  f.  of  the  goodni^ss  of  the  Lord 
48.  10.  thy  right  hand  »'«/.  of  righteousness 
65.9.  with  the  river  of  God,  which  ;>/.  of  water 
7.5.  8.  and  the  wine  is  red,  it  is  f.  of  mixture 
88.  3.  mv  soul  is  f.  of  trouble.*,  and  my  life 
104.  24.  O  Lord,  the  earth  isf.  of  thy  riches 
119.  64.  the  earth,  O  Lord,  i.«/.  of  thy  mercy 

F.ccl.9.2.l)\e  beartof  the  sons  of  men  i>/.  of  evij 
10. 14.  a  fool  j's/.  of  words,  man  cannot  lell  what 

/««.  2. 7.  their  land  is  f.  of  silver,  isf.  of  horses 
8.  their  land  also  is  f.  of  idols,  they  wor.«hip 

6.  3.  holy  is  Lord,  Ihe  whole  earth  is  f.  of  his  glory 
Jer.5.'2~.  as  a  cage  ;.s- /.  of  birds,houoes  full  ol  deceit 

6.  II.  the  aged,  with  him  thai  isf.  of  days 
23.  10.  for  the  land  isf.  of  adulterers 
Kzrlf.7. 23.  land  isf.  nfcrimes,  city  isf.  of  violence 
9.  9.  land  isf.  of  blood, city  js/.  of  perverseness 
.loel  3.  13.  for  the  press  isf.  the  fats  overflow 
.tmos  2. 13.  a  carl  is  pressed,  (hat  ?'«  /.  of  sheaves 
JV«A.  3.  1.  it  I.--  all/,  of  lies  and  lobbcries 
Ai/'.c  11.  34.  body  is  f.  of  light,  isf.  of  darkness 
39.  but  your  inward  part  i>  f.  of  ravening 
To  the  FULT,. 
KT»rf.l6.3.  when  we  sat,  and  did  eat  bread  ?e  tkef. 
8.  when  I.,  shall  give  in  the  morn,  bread  to  tkef. 
Lev.  26.  5.  ye  shall  enl  vour  bread  to  thef. 

FULLER,  S. 

2  Kings  18. 17.  they  came  and  stood  in  the  highway 

ofthe/.  fie'd,  /,v-n.  7.  3.  |  36.  S. 

Jifnl.  3.  2.  he  is  like  a  refiner's  fire,  and  /.  soap 

J\Iark  9.  3.  so  as  no  f.  i>n  onrtli  can  white  them 

ft:lt,y. 

Xum.  14.  24.  hut  Caleb  lliat  followed  me/. 
Ruth  2.  II.  Bnaz  said,  it  hath/,  been  shewed  me 

1  Kinrrs  11.6.  Solomon  went  not/,  afler  the  Lord 
F,ec^.S.^  1 .1  he  heart  ofsnn*  of  men  is/,  sot  to  do  evil 
■Ter.  12.  t  6.  yoa,  they  cried  after  Ihoe/. 

.Xnh.  1.  10.  tlieyshallbe  devoured  as  stubble /.  dry 
.lets  2. 1.  when  Ihe  day  ofPentecost  was/,  come 
RomA.1\.  being/,  persuaded,  that  what  hepromi*. 
14. 5.  let  every  man  be/,  persuad.  in  his  own  mind 
15.  19.  I  have/,  preached  the  gospel  of  Christ 
Col.  1. 125.  made  a  minister/,  lo  preach  tho  word 

2  Tim.  3.  10.  thou  hnel/.  known  mv  doi-trine 

4. 17.  lh.it  bvme  the  prenehiog  might  be/,  known 
liev.  14.  18.  tlirusl  in  tbv  sickle  grapes  are/,  ripe 

FULNKSS. 
Gen.  48.  tl9.  his  seed  become  a/,  of  nations 
Find.  22.  t29.  thou  sliiilt  not  delnvto  offer  thy/. 
.Vwrn.  18.  27.  reckoned  as  the/,  of  the  wine-press 
l>rul.  22.  t  9.  lest  the/,  of  thy  .seed  be  defiled 

33.  16.  iireciouslhingj  of  Ihe  earth,  and/,  thereof 
1  Snm.  28.  t2n.  Saul  fell  with  the/  of  his  stature 
I  Chron.  16.  32.  let  the  sea  roar  nml  the  f.  thereof, 

Psal.W.  il.  I  98.  7 
.Tnb'X\.  22.  in/,  of  sufliciency  shall  be  in  straits 
Psal.  in.  11.  in  thv  presence  is /.  ofjoy 

2t.  1.  earth  is  the Lord'sandils/  1  Cr.  10.26,29. 

.50.  12.  Ihe  world  is  mine,  and  /.  thereof,  89.  11. 
hn    6.  t  3.  his  glory  is  the/,  of  llie  whole  earth 

8.  t8.  the/,  ofthe  breadth  of  thy  land  shall  be  Ihe 

stretching  out  of  his  >ving<,  O  IiiimTnue. 

34.  f  1.  let  llie  earth  hear  and  the/,  thereof 


FUR 

ha.  42410. yc  that  go  down  to  sea  and  tlio/.tlirreof 
Jcr.  8. 1  lO.'have  devoured  tlie  land  and  /.  thereof 
47.t^-watcrs  shall  overflow  the  land  aiid/.lhei-eor 
Ezek.  16.  4!).  iniquity  of  sister  Sodom,/,  of  bread 
IJ.tll).  land  was  desolate  and  the/.  I'J.  7.  |  30.(12. 
^mos  6. 1 1*- 1  will  deliver  up  city,  and  the/.thereof 
JUic.  1.  t  «•  hearken,  O  earth,  and  the/,  thereof 
JoAft  1.16.  of  liis/.have  we  received  grace  for  grace 
Horn.  11.  li.  how  much  more  their/.  / 
25.  till  the/,  of  the  Gentiles  he  come  in 
15. 21).  1  shall  come  in  the/,  of  tlie  gospel  of  Christ 
Oal.  4.  4.  when  the/,  of  the  time  was  come 
Kph.  1. 10.  that  in  the/,  oftimes  he  might  gather 

23.  the/,  of  him  that  filleth  all  in  all 
3. 19.  that  ye  might  be  filled  with  all  the/.  ofGod 
4.  13.  we  come  to  the  stature  of  the/,  of  Christ 
Col.  1.  lU.  pleased  Father,  in  him  should  all/dwell 
2.  9.  in  him  dwelletli  the/,  of  the  Godhead  bodily 

FUNDAMENT. 
Jadg.  3.  t22.  notdrawdagger,  it  cameoutat  tlio/. 

FURblSH. 
Jer.  46.  4.  /.  the  spears,  put  on  the  brigandinea 

FUKBISHED. 
Etek.  21.  9.  a  sword  is  sharpened  and  also/.  10. 

11.  given  to  be/.  ||  28.  sword/,  to  consume 

FURV. 
Gen.  27.  44.  tarry,  till  thy  brother's/,  turn  away 
J^cv.  26.  28.  I  will  walk  contrary  to  you  in  /. 
Job  20.23.  God  shall  cast  the/,  of  his  wrath  un  him 
Isa.  27.  4.  /.  is  not  in  me,  who  would  sot  briers 
34.  2.  and  his/,  is  upon  all  their  armies 
51. 13.  hasl  feared  because  of  the  /.  of  the  opjires- 
sor  ;  and  where  in  the/,  of  the  oppressor  1 
17.  O  Jerusalem,  which  hast  drunk  cup  of  his/. 
20.  as  wild  bull,  they  are  full  of  the/,  of  Uie  Lord 
22.  even  the  dregs  of  cup  of  my  /.  no  more  drink 
59.  18.  he  will  rei)ay/.  to  his  adversaries 
63.  3.  for  I  \yill  trample  them  in  my/. 

5.  my  arm  brought  salvation,  my/,  it  upheld  me 

6.  and  I  will  make  them  drunk  in  my/. 

66. 15.  Lord  will  come  to  render  his  anger  with  /. 
Jer.  4.  4.  lest  my  /.  come  forth  like  fire,  and  burn 
6.  11.  therefore  I  am  full  of  the/,  of  the  Lord 
SI.  5.  I  will  fight  against  you  in/,  and  wrath 

12.  iest  my/,  go  out  like  fire  and  burn 

23.  19.  a  whirlwind  is  gone  forth  in/.  30.  23. 
25.  15.  take  the  wine-cup  of  tliis/.  at  my  hand 

32.  31.  this  city  hath  been  a  provocation  of  my/. 

33.  5.  whom  I  have  slain  in  mine  anger  and  /. 
36.  7.  great  is  the/,  the  Lord  hath  pronounced 

Lam.  4.  11.  the  Lord  hath  accomplished  his/. 
Eiek.  5.  13. 1  will  cause  my/,  to  rest  on  them,  they 
shall  know  when  I  liave  accomplished  my/. 
15.  when  1  shall  execute  judgments  in/. 
6.  12.  thus  will  I  accomplish  my/,  on  them 
8. 18.  therefore  will  I  deal  in/,  my  eye  not  spare 
13.  13.  I  will  rent  with  a  stormy  wind  in  my/. 
16.  38.  I  will  give  thee  blood  in/,  and  jealousy 
42.  so  will  1  make  my/,  toward  thee  to  rest 
19. 12.  but  she  was  plucked  up  in  my/,  cast  down 

20.  33.  with  /.  poured  out  will  I  rule  over  you 

21.  17.  and  I  will  cause  my  /.  to  rest 

22. 20.  BO  will  I  gather  you  in  mine  anger  and/. 
24.8.  that  it  might  cause/.to  comekp  to  vengeance 

13.  not  purged,  till  I  have  caused  my/,  to  rest 
25.  14.  they  shall  do  in  Edom  according  to  my/. 
36.  6.  I  have  spoken  in  my  jealousy  and  iu  my/. 
38.  18.  that  my/,  shall  come  up  in  my  face 

Dan.  3.  13.  Nebuchadnezzar  in  his  /.  comminded 

19.  then  was  Nebuchadnezzar  full  of/. 
8.6.  and  he  ran  unto  him  in  the/,  of  his  power 
9  16.  let  thy /.be  turned  away  from  thy  city  Jems. 
11.  44.  he  shall  go  forth  with  great/,  to  destroy 
Mic.  5.  15.  I  will  execute/,  on  the  heathen 
JVaA.  1.  t2.  the  Lord  revengelh,  that  hath/. 
Zech.  8.  2.  I  was  jealous  for  her  with  great  /. 
See  Pour,  Poured. 
FURIOUS. 
Prov.  22.  24.  with  a/,  man  thou  shalt  not  go 
29.  22.  a/,  man  aboundeth  in  transgression 
Ez«A.  5. 1.').  e.xecute  judgment  in  /.  rebukes,  25. 17. 
Z>a».2. 12.  Nebuchadnezzar  the  king  was  very/. 
JVah.  1.  2.  the  Lord  revcngcth,  and  is/. 

FURIOUSLY. 
2  liinffs  9.20.  like  the  driving  of  Jehu,  he  drivelh/. 
Eiek.  23.  25.  and  thov  shall  deal/,  with  thee 

FURLONGS. 
I.uke  24. 13.  Emmaus  Was  from  Jerusalem  sixty/. 
John  6.  19.  had  rowed  about  five  and  twenty/. 
11.  18.  Bethany  nigh  Jerusalem  about  fifteen/. 
Rev.  14. 20.  blood  came  out  by  the  space  of  1600/. 
21.  16.  he  measured  the  citv  with  reed,  12,000/. 

FURNACE 
Signifies,  [1]  j3  fire-place  for  melting-  gold  and 
other  metals,  Prov.  17.  3.  |  27.  21.  [2]  A  place 
of  cruel  bondage  and  oppression ;  such  was 
Egypt  to  the  Israelites,  who  there  met  with 
much  hardship,  rigour,  and  severity,  for  to 
trtj  and  purge  them,  Deut.  4.  20.  Jer.  11.  4.  [3] 
JUQtt  sharp  and  grievous  a^ictient  andjudg- 
335 


GAI 

mcnts  wherewith  God  tries  his  people,  Ezck. 
22.  18,  20,  22.     [4J  Jl  place  of  temporal  tor- 
ment; such  was  Nebuchadnezzar's /cjj/  fur- 
nace, Van.  3.  6,  11.     [5]  Hdl,  the  place  of 
endless  torment.  Mat.  13.  42. 
Gen.  15.  17.  a  smoking/,  and  a  burning  lamp 
19.  28.  the  smoke  went  up  as  the  smoke  of  a/. 
Er.od.  9.  8.  lake  you  handfuls  of  ashes  of  tJio/. 
10.  and  they  took  ashes  of  the/,  and  stood 
19.  18.  the  smoke  nscendud  as  the  smoke  of  a/. 
Dvut.  4.  20.  the^ord  hath  taken  you  out  of  the/. 
1  Kings  8.  51.  Irom  the  midst  of  the/.  Jer.  11.  4. 
PsuM2.6.  pure  words,  as  silver  tried  in  a/,  of  earth 
Prov.  17.  3.  fining  pot  for  silver,/,  for  gold,  27.  21. 
Isa.  31.9.  whose  fire  is  in  Zion,  his/,  in  Jerusalem 
48.  10.  I  Jiave  chosen  thee  in  the/,  of  affliction 
Ezek.'H.  18.  Israel  is  dross  in  the  midst  of  the/. 
20. 1  will  gather  you  as  tin  in  the  midst  of  the  /. 
22.  as  silver  is  melted  in  the  midst  of  the/. 
/Jan.  3.6.  be  cast  into  midst  of  a  burning  fiery/.  11. 
Mat.  13.  42.  and  shall  cast  them  into  a/,  of  fire,  50. 
/Jet). 1.15.  his  feet  like  brass, as  if  they  burned  in  a/. 
9.  2.  arose  a  smoke,  as  the  smoke  of  a  great/. 

FURNACES. 
N'ch.  3.  11.  Hashub  repaired  the  tower  of  the/. 
12.  38.  frotn  the  tower  of  the  /.  to  the  broad  wall 

FURNISH. 
Deut.  15. 14.  thou  shalt/.  him  liberally  out  of  flock 
Psal.  78. 19.  can  God  /.  a  table  m  the  wilderness? 
Isa.  65.11.  that/,  the  drink-offering  to  that  number 
Jer.  46.  19./.  thyself  to  go  into  captivity 

FURNISHED. 
1  Kings  9.  11.  Hiram/.  Solomon  with  cedar 
Prov.  9.  2.  she  hath  also  /.  her  table 
Mat.  22.  10.  and  the  wedding  was/,  with  guests 
Mark\\.  15.  will  shew  you  a  room/.  I^uke^H.  12. 
2Tim.  3.  17.  thoroughly/,  unto  all  good  works 

FURNITURE. 
Gen.  31.  34.  Rachel  put  them  in  the  camels'/. 
Exod.  31.  7.  the  tabernacle  and  his/.  39.  33. 
8.  table  and  his/.  ||  9.  altar  with  all  his/.      ' 
35.  14.  tho  candlestick  and  his/,  and  his  lamps 
JVah.  2.  y.  there  is  none  end  of  all  the  pleasant/. 

FURROW. 

1  Sam.  14.  1 14.  slew  twenty  men  within  half  a/. 
Job  39.  10.  canst  thou  bind  the  unicorn  in  the/.? 

FURROWS. 
Job  31.  38.  or  the/,  thereof  likewise  complain 
Psal.  65.  10.  thou  scttlest  the  /.  thereof 
129.3.  the  ploweis  plowed,  they  made  long  their/. 
Ezek.  17.7.  might  water  it  by/,  of  her  plantation 

10.  it  shall  wither  in  the/,  where  it  grew 
/fos.10.4.  judgment  as  hemlock  in  the/,  of  the  field 
10.  when  shall  bind  themselves  in  their  two/. 
12.11.  their  altars  as  heaj)S  in  the/,  of  the  fields 

FURTHER. 
JVujn.22.26.angel  went/and  stood  in  narrow  place 
Deut.  20.  8.  officers  shall  speak/,  to  the  people 
1  Sam.  10.  22.  they  inquired  of  the  Lord/. 
Job  38.  11.  hitherto  shalt  thou  come,  but  no/. 
40.  5.  yea,  twice,  but  I  will  proceed  no/. 
Eccl.  8. 17.  /.  though  a  wise  man  think  to  know  it 
12.  12./.  by  these,  my  son,  be  admonished 
Mat.  26. 39.  he  went  a  little  /.  and  fell  on  his  face 
65.  saying,  what/,  need  have  we  of  witnesses'? 
Mark  14.  63.  Luke  22.  71. 
Mark  1.  19.  when  he  had  gone  a  little/,  thence 
5.  35.  why  troublest  thou  the  master  any/.  ? 
Luke  24.28.  he  made  as  tho'  he  would  have  gone/. 
Jlcts  4.  17.  that  it  spread  no  /.  among  the  people 
2!.when  had /.threatened  them,  they  let  them  go 
12.  3.  Herod  proceeded  /.  to  take  Peter  also 
21.23./.  he  brought  Greeks  also  into  the  temple 
24.  4.  that  I  be  not  /.  tedious  unto  thee  • 

27.  28.  they  had  gone  a  little/,  they  sounded 
iTim.  3.  9.  but  they  shall  proceed  no/. 
//c6.  7. 11.  what/,  need  another  priest  should  rise 

FURTHER,  Verb.  ^ 

Psal.  140.  8.  O  Lord,  /.  not  his  wicked  oevice 

FURTHERANCE. 

rAi7.1.12.the  things  which  happened  unto  me  have 

fallen  out  rather  unto  the/,  of  the  gospel 

25.8hall  abide  with  you  foryour/.and  joy  of  failh 

FURTHERED. 

Ezra  8.36.  they/,  the  people  and  the  house  of  God 

FURTHERMORE. 
Exod.i.G.  tho  Lord  said/.to  Moses,  put  thine  hand 
Ezek.  8.  6.  Lord  said/,  to  Ezekiel,  son  of  man 

G. 

GADDEST. 
Jer.  2.  36.  why  ^.  thou  about  to  change  thy  way? 

GAIN. 
Jurf^.5.19.the  kingsof  Canaan  took  nof. of  money 
Jo6  22.  3.  isit^.  tohim  to  make  thy  way  perfect? 
Pror. 1.19.80  are  the  ways  of  every  one  greedy  of^. 
3.  14.  the^.  thereof  is  better  than  fine  gold 
15. 27.  he  that  ia  greedy  ofg.  troublstb  hia  bouse 
3H 


GAIj 

Prov.  28. 8.  that  by  usury  and  unjust  g.  incrcaieth 
Jsa.  33.  15.  he  that  desj)iseth  the  g.  oloppreSBiow 
56.  11.  every  one  for  his  g.  from  his  c|uur'.er 
Ezck. 'a.  13.  have  smitten  hand  at  thy  dishonesty. 
27.  her  princes  like  as  wolves  to  get  dishonesty, 
Dan.  11.  39.  he  shall  divide  the  land  for  g. 
Mic.  4. 13.  1  w  ill  consecrate  their  g.  to  the  Lord 
Ilab.  2.  to.  woe  to  him  that  gainelh  an  evil  ^. 
Jicts  16.  16.  which  brought  her  .masters  much  g. 

19.  24.  brought  no  small  g.  to  the  craftsmen 

2  Cor.  12. 17.  did  I  make  a  g.  of  you  by  any  1  scnll 

18.  did  Titus  make  a  g.  of  you  ? 
r/(i7. 1.21.  for  me  to  live  is  Christ,  and  to  die  isg*. 
3.  7.  what  things  were  g.  to  nie,  I  counted  losa 
1  Tim.  6.  5.  supposing  that  g.  is  godliness 

6.  but  godliness  with  contentment  is  great  g. 
Jam.  4. 13.  go  to  a  city,  there  buy,  sell,  and  get  g. 

GAIN,  Verb. 
Dan.  2.  8.  I  know  that  ye  would  g.  the  time 
Mat.  16.26.  what  profited  ifhe  should^,  the  whole 
world,  and  lose  his  soul  ?  Mark  S.'.id.Luke  9.2.5. 

1  Cor.  9.  19.  servant  to  all,  that  I  mighty,  the  mora 

20.  that  I  might  g.  the  Jews  ||  22.  g.  the  weak 

21.  that  I  might  g.  them  that  are  without  law 

GAINED. 
.Tob  27.8.what  hope  hath  hypocrite,tho'  he  hath^.? 
Kzek.  22.  12.  thou  hast  greedily  g.  by  extortion 
Mat.  18.  15.  if  he  hear,  ihou  hast^.  thy  brotlicr 
25.  17.  that  received  two  had  also /j-.olher  two,  22. 
20.  I  have  g.  besides  them  five  talents  more 
/-i(AeI9.]5.how  much  every  man  had^.by  trading 
16.  Lord,  thy  pound  hath  g.  ten  pounds 

18.  Lord,  thy  pound  hath  g.  five  |>ound3 
./lets  27.  21.  and  to  have  g.  this  harm  and  loss 

2  John  1 8.  that  yc  lose  not  the  things  ye  have  g. 

GAINS.  ^    ^  *^ 

.lets  16. 19.  saw  that  the  hope  of  their  n-.  wasgou* 
GAINSAY. 

Z,itAe  21.15.  your  adversaries  shall  not  be  abletofli 
GAINSAYERS. 

Tit.  1.  9.  that  ye  might  be  able  to  convince  the  g. 
GAINSAYING. 

j9(-fj  10.  29.  therefore  came  I  to  you  without  j. 

Horn.  10.21. 1  stretched  forth  my  hands  to  a^-.  peo. 

Tit.  2.  1 9.  servants  to  please  them,  not  g. 

Jude  11.  they  have  perished  in  the  g.  of  Core 
GALL 

Is  a  bitter  juice,  one  of  the  humours  in  the  body 
of  a  man  and  beast.  It  is  put  fur  hny  thing 
that  is  bitter  and  pernicious.  Job  20. 14,  Yet 
his  meat  in  his  bowels  is  turned,  it  is  the  gall 
of  asps  within  him  :  It  will  be  very  painful 
and  destructive  to  him  at  last.  PsaJ.  69.  21, 
They  gave  me  gall  for  my  meat ;  or  poison,  or 
bitter  herbs.  St.  Matthew  says,  that  they  gave 
our  Saviour  vinegar  to  drink  mingled  with  gall, 
Mat.  27.  34.  St.  Mark  colls  it  wine  mingled 
with  myrrh,  Mark  15.  23.  It  is  generally 
thought  that  the  gall  and  myrrh  signify  but 
one  and  the  same  thing,  that  is,  something  that 
was  very  bitter.  It  is  said  to  have  been  an 
ordinary  custom  to  give  dying  persons  some 
intoxicating  potion,  to  make  them  less  sensible 
of  their  pain.  To  give  water  of  gall  to  drink 
denotes  some  very  bitter  affliction,  Jer.  P..  14 
Their  grapes  are  grapes  of  gall,  Deut.  32.  32. 
Their  fruits,  or  actions,  are  displcasiiig  to 
God,  malicious  and  mischievous  to  others, 
and  will  at  last  be  pernicious  to  themselves. 
A  root  that  beareth  gall,  Deut.  29.  18.  may 
denote  some  secret  and  .subtle  idolaters,  who 
might  secretly  infrrt-  and  poison  others,  by 
drawing  them  to  idolatry;  which  will  produce 
bitter  fruits,  how  pleasant  soever  it  may  be 
fur  the  present.  To  be  in  the  gall  of  bitterness, 
and  bond  of  iniquity,  i.s  tc  be  in  a  state  of  great 
impiety,  to  he  under  the  power  of  sin  and  cor- 
ruption, of  hypocrisy  and  ambition.  It  is  put 
for  great  affliction,  Job  16.  13.  For  wrong, 
inju.^tice,  Amos  6.  12. 

Dnit.  29. 18.  lest  there  should  be  a  root  that  ben r.^. 
32.  32.  their  grapes  arc  grapes  of  ^r.  clusters  bitter 

.fob  16.  13.  he  poureth  out  my  g.  on  the  ground 

20.  14.  his  meat  is  Ihe^.  of  asps  within  him 
25.  the  glittering  sword  cometh  out  of  his  g. 

Psal.  69.  21.  they  gave  me  also  g.  for  my  meat 
./cr.  8. 14.  God  hath  given  us  water  of^.  to  drink 
9.  15.  I  will  give  them  water  of  ^.  23.  15. 
Lam.3.5.  he  hath  compassed  me  with  g.  and  travel 

19.  remembering  the  wormwood  and  ihc  g. 
JImos  6.  12.  for  ye  have  turned  judgment  into  g. 
.4fa(. 27.34.  they  gave  him  vinegar  mingled  with^. 
jScts  8. 23. 1  perceive  thou  artin  the  ^.of  bitterness 

GALLANT. 
Isa.  33. 21.  no  galley,  nor  shall  g.  ship  pass  thereby 

GALLANTS. 
Jfah.  2.t5.  he  shall  recount  his^.they  shall  stumbi* 
Zech.  11. 1 2.  bowl,  because  the  g.  are  spoiled 

GALLERY,  lES. 
CojU.1.  1 17-  the  beams  are  cedar,  and  our  ^.•ffii 


GAR 

Ca«t.7.5.lliy  head  likeCarmuI,king  is  held  in  thc^. 
EzckAl.iJ.  l\L-  muasurcdlhc^'-.  thurcofon  one  side 
4-.3.uguuialllieiiukX'iii.  was 'f.a^aiiist^.iii  atones 

GALLEV. 
Jsa.  33.  21.  wherein  sliull  go  no  ff.  with  oars 

GALLOWS. 
Kstk.  6.  4.  Hannin  spake  to  hang  Mordecai  on  g. 
7   10.  so  tliey  liangcd  Uanian  on  tire  g.  8.  7. 
9. 13.  let  Hainan's  ten  sons  be  hanged  on  tlie^.  25. 

gangki:ne. 

2Tjm.  2. 1 17.  and  tlieir  word  will  eat  as  doth  a  g. 

GAI>. 
E2e/t.22.30.a  man  that  should  stand  in  "•.beforcnie 

GAPED. 
Job  IG.  10.  Ihey  have  g-  upon  me,  Psal.  22.  13. 

GAfETH. 
Job  7.  t  2.  as  a  servunl  g.  after  the  shadow 

GAPS. 
Ezek.13.5.  ye  have  not  gone  up  into  tlie^.for  Israel 

GAKDEN 
b  aplot  of  ground  furnished  withpiants,floiecrs, 
4-c.  Gen.  2.  15.      7'Ae  church  is  resembled  to 
a  garden,    Cant.  4.  12.  |  5.  1.     Jis  a  garder 
is  taken  out  of  the  common  waste  ground  to 
be  apitroprialid  to  a  more  particular  use. 
the  church  o/ Christ  is  chosen  from  among  the 
rest  of  the  world  to  a  particular  use.     In  a 
garden  nothing  that  is  good  comes  up  iiutu 
rally  of  itself,  but  as  it  is  planted  and  sit  ; 
so  nothing  is  good  in  the  heart,  but  what  i 
planted  and  set  by  the  heavenly  Husbandman. 
In  a  garden  nothing  uses  to  be  planted,  but 
what  is  useful  and  delightful ;  so  there  is  no 
grace  in  the  heart  of  a  Christian  but  what  is 
useful  and  necessary.     In  a  garden  there  are 
variety  of  flowers  and  spices  ;  so  in  a  Chris- 
tian there  is  somewhat  of  every  grace,     ^s 
men  delight  much  in  their  gardens,  to  walk 
Viere  and  lake  their  pleasure,  and  take  care  to 
fence,  weed,  water,  and  plant  them;  so  Christ's 
care  and  delight  i.iforhis  church,  jfs  gardens 
vse  to  have  fountains  and  streams  runnin^ 
through  them,  as  Paradise  had  four  streams 
tchich  ran  through  it ;  so  the  church  is  Christ' 
Paradise,  and  his  Spirit  is  a  spring  in  the 
midst  of  it,  to  refresh  the  souls  of  bclievirs 
A  garden  stands  always  in  need  of  weeding 
and  dressing ;  so  in  the  hearts  of  Christians, 
ChristiAatA  always  somewhat  to  do,  they  would 
else  soon  be  overgrown  and  turn  wild.    The 
prophet  Isaiah    upbraids    the  Jews   with  the 
abominations  and  acts  of  idolatry  which  they 
committed  in  their  gardens.     Ye  shall  be  con- 
founded for  the  gardens  which  ye  have  chosen, 
Jsa.  1.20.     V'/icsc  gardens  were  either  conse- 
crated to  idols,  or  were  such  as  the  heatliens 
worshipped  idols  in;  there  they  sacrificed,  Isa. 
C5.  3.  after  which  they  thought  that  they  were 
veil  purified,  when  they  had  washed  themselves 
t'n  the  water,  Isa.  (50.  17. 
Oin.  2. 1.").  God  look  the  man  and  put  him  in  the  w. 
3.  23.  Lord  sent  him  forth  from  the  g.  of  Eden 
13.10.  the  plain  of  Jordan  was  as  the^'.  of  the  Ld. 
Deut.  11.  10.  and  watcrcst  it  as  a  "f.  of  lierbs 
1  Kings  21.2.  that  I  may  have  it  Rir  a  /r.  of  lierbs 
Job  8.  10.  his  branch  sliooteth  forth  in  his  g. 
Cant.  4.  12.  a  g.  inclosed  is  my  sister,  my  spouse 

10.  blow  upon  my  g.  let  him  come  into  his  "■. 
5. 1. 1  am  romc  into  my^.  my  sister,  my  spouse 
6.  2.  my  beloved  is  gone  down  into  h\a  g.  11. 
Isa.  1.8.  theilaughier  of  Zii-n  is  an  a  lodge  in  a^. 
30.  ye  thall  In   as  a  g.  which  hath  no  water 
51.  3.  ho  will  iniikeher  desc^rt  like  the  g.  of  God 
58.  11.  and  ihoii  shall  be  like  a  wateroil  g. 
61.  11.  as  the  g.  cnusclh  things  sown  to  spring 
Jer.  31.  12.  thi;ir  souls  shall  be  as  a  watered  ". 
/yani.2.ri.tak('n  awayhis  tabernac.as  it  were  ofa  "' 
Kick.  28.  13.  thou  hast  been  in  Eden  tlio^.  of  God 
31.  8.  cedars  in^.  of  God  could  not  hiclc  bin 
9.  nil  the  trees  in  the  g.  of  God  envied  him 
36.  35.  desolaif  land  is  txrcoino  like  thc^.of  Eden 
Joel  2.  3.  lanil  is  as  the  g.  of  Eden  before  them 
J.nke  13.  I'.l.  which  a  man  look  and  cast  into  liis^ 
fohn  18. 1.  over  the  brook  Cedron,  where  was  a^ 
26.  did  not  I  see  thee  in  the  g.  with  him? 
10.  41.  tliero  wii.s  a  5-  and  in  the  g.  a  scpulchro 
GARIIENS. 
Jfum.  24.  0.  Ihy  teiils  ns  g.  by  the  river  side 
Kccl.i.  ■>.  I  made  nic  g.  and  orchards,  and  [ilanlcd 
Cant.  4.  15.  a  foiiniain  of  i'.  n  well  of  waters 
6.  2.  to  feed  ill  the  /'.  and  to  gather  lilies 

8. 13.  thoulhnl  dmllcRi  in  thejf.  cause  rnc  to  hear 
Iia.  1.  2!).  and  ye  slmll  be  confoundeil  for  the  g. 

65.3.  a  people  tlnil  sncrificeth  in^.  burns  incense 
60.  17.  they  tlinl  purify  lliemsi-lvos  in  the /r. 
Jer.  20.  5.  plant  -r.  and  eat  the  fruit  of  them,  28 
^mo*  4.  0. 1  gent  lilasiin;,  when  your  jr.  ini-rensc 

9. 14.  Ihey  shall  mIso  inn'<ei'.  and  eat  fruit  ol  them 

GARDENER. 
fnkm  20.  IS.  she  siippiis  ng  he  had  been  the  gs 


GAR 

GARRISON,  S. 

1  Sam.  10.5.  to  hill  where  is^r.  of  the  Philistines 

13.  3.  Jonathan  smote  tlie^r.  of  the  I'iiilislines 

14.  1.  let  us  go  over  to  the  I'iiilislines'  g.  ti. 
15.  the  g.  and  the  spoilers,  they  also  trembled 

i  Sam.  8.  ti.  LWvid  put  g.  in  Syria,  1  Chron.  18.  6. 

14.  IJavid  |itl^.  in  Ldoin,  1  Chron.  18.  13. 
23. 14.^.ofPhilist.inlJetli-leliein,  1  CVtroH. 11.10. 

2  Chr.  17.2.  Jelioshap.  set^r.in  Judah  and  Ephraiiii 
f,'2c/i.  20. 11.  thy  slrongg-.  shall  go  down  to  ground 
2  Cor.  11.  32.  the  governor  kejil  the  city  with  a  g. 

GARLANDS. 

yic<«14.13.the  priest  olJupiler  brought  o.xen  and  £-. 
GARLICK. 

JVum.11.5.  we  remember  thei'.we  did  eat  in  Egypt 
GARMENT  • 

Is  that  wherewith  one  is  clothed.  Mat.  27.  35, 
Tliey  parted  my  garments,  liy  the  wedding- 
gariiieiit  is  meant  Christ  with  his  perfect  right- 
eousness imputed,  which  as  a  garment  doth 
hide  the  spiritual  nakedness,  and  decks  and 
adorns  the  soul  with  spiritual  beauty.  Mat. 
22. 11.  Some  by  wedding-garments  understand 
the  grace  of  sanctificatton,  or  a  holy  life,  an 
swcrablc  to  one's  profession;  in  which  sens 
garment  is  taken  in  Rev.  3.  4,  Thou  hast  a 
few  names  in  Sardis  which  have  not  defiled 
their  garments;  who  are  of  unblameable  lives 
He  was  clothed  with  a  garment  down  to  his 
foot,  Hev.  1.  13.  Some  are  of  opinion  that 
this  denoted  the  purity  and  innocency  of  that 
priesthood,  ichieh  Christ  did  exercise  for  his 
church:  Others,  that  it  denoted  the  dignity 
and  majesty  of  Christ,  as  King  of  his  church : 
it  being  usual  for  kings  to  wear  lung  robes  in 
token  of  7najesty.  Garments  rolled  or  dyed  in 
blood,  Isa.  y.  5. 1 03.  2.  are  garments  sprinkled 
and  stained  with  the  blood  of  the  slain,  such 
as  warriors  wear,  which  have  overcome  their 
enemies  in  battle. 

Gen.  9.  *;!.  Shem  and  Japliet  took  a  g.  and  laid  it 
25.  25.  the  first  came  out  red,  like  a  hairy  g. 
39.  12.  she  caught  Joseph  by  liis  g.  he  left  his  g. 
15.  lie  left  his  g.  with  me  and  tied  out,  18. 
10.  she  laid  up  his  g.  till  her  lord  came  home 
f.cv.  0.  27.  sprinkled  of  the  blood  thereof  on  any  ^. 
13.  47.  "-.  wherein  is  the  plague  of  leprosy,  49. 
51.  if  plague  bespread  in  llie^.  in  warp  or  woof 
59.  the  law  of  the  plagueof  leprosy  in  a^.  14.55. 

15.  17.  every  ^.  whereon  is  the  seed  of  copulation 
19. 19.  nor^'.  mingled  come  on  thee,  Deut.^2. 11. 

/>c^(^22.  5.  a  man  shall  not  put  on  a  woman's^. 
Josh.  7.  21.  when  1  saw  a  goodly  Babylonish  g. 
24.  Joshua  took  Achan,  the  silver,  and  the  g. 
Judg.  8.  25.  they  spread  a  "'.  and  cast  ear-rings 
2S«;n.l3.18.Tainar  had  ai^.of divers  colours  on  her 
19.  she  rent  her  g.  and  went  on  crying 

1  AT)?)"'*  11 .29.  Jeroboam  clad  himself  willi  a  new  g. 

2  Kings  4.  \  42.  brought  him  ears  of  corn  in  his^'. 
9.  13.  took  every  man  his  g.  and  put  under  him 
Ezra  9.3.when  I  heard  this  I  rent  my  i'.and  mantle 

5.  having  rent  my^.  and  mantle  1  fell  on  knees 
Ksth.  8.  15.  Mordecai  went  with  a  g.  of  purple 
Job  13.  28.  consuineth,  os  a  g.  that  is  moth-eaten 
30.  18.  by  force  of  my  disease  is  my  g.  changed 
38.  9.  when  I  made  the  cloud  the  "-.  thereof 
14. ills  turned  asclayto  the  seal, they  stand  ns  a^. 
41.  13.  who  can  discover  the  face  of  his  ^. .' 
Psal.  09.  11.  I  made  sackcloth  also  my  g. 
73.0.  pride  compasseth,violcnce  cover,  them  asg. 
102.  20.  Ihey  shall  perish,  yea  all  of  them  shall 
wav  old  like  a^.  /sa..50.9.  |5I.O.  Heb.A.W. 
104.2.tliou  coverest  thyself  with  light, as  with  txg. 
0.  Iliou  (-ovcredst  it  with  the  deep  as  with  a  g. 
109.  18.  he  clotltcd  himself  with  cursing  as  a  g. 

19.  let  it  be  to  him  aslhe,!^.  which  covereth  him 
Prov.  20.  10.  take  his  "-.  that  is  surety,  27.  13. 

2.').20.j|S  ho  that  takelTi  away  n^.in  cold  weather 
30.  4.^ho  hath  hound  the  waters  in  a  g.? 
Isa.  51.  rt.  the  moth  shall  cat  them  up  like  a  g. 
01.3.  to  jive /r.  of  praise  for  llics|iiiit  of  liiaviness 
.fe.r.  43.  12.  ns  a  shepherd  pnttelh  on  his  g. 
F.iek.  IH.  7.  haili  covered  the  naked  with  a^.  10. 
/Jan.  7.  0.  »  hoBC  g.  was  white  as  snow 
Mic.  2.  8.  ye  pull  off  the  robo  with  the  ^. from  them 
//a;T.2.12.ifonc  liear  holy  flesh  in  the  skirt  of  his  ^. 
7,ech.\'^.i.  neither  shall  wear  a  rough  g.  to  deceive 
Mai.  2.  10.  for  one  covereth  violence  with  his  g. 
j»/«f  .9.  lO.iiew  cloth  to  old  g.  Mark  2.21 . 1.ukf  5.30. 

20.  beliold,n  woman  diseased  touched  the  hem  of 
his  ;r.  21.  I  14.  30.  Mark  5.  27.  /,i/*rH.  44 

22.11  saw  a  man  who  had  not  on  a  wedding  <r.  12 
.Mark  13.  10.  not  turn  back  again  to  lakcnp  Imh^ 

10.5.  a  young  man  clothed  with  a  long  white  jj 
r.ul.r  22.  30.  let  him  wdl  his  g.  and  liiiy  one 
./lets  12.  H.  cast  thy  g-  aboiil  llioe  .ind  follow  mc 

hide  23.  hating  even  the  g  spotti'd  by  the  flisli 
/icu. 1.13.Son  of  man  rlnihrd  with  a/[r.dowiitofool 

GAR.MENTS. 
Otn.  35.  2.  BJid  be  cluan,  and  change  your  g. 


GAT 

Oen.  38.14.  Tamar  put  her  widow's^.olTfrom  het 

49.11.  washed  \na  g.in  wine,  his  clotlies  in  grapes 
£zo(/.28.').may  make  Aaron's^. to  consecrate  him 

29.21.  sprinkled  the  blood  on  Aaron's^.  J.ev.B.dO. 

31.  10.  1  have  given  them  wisdom  to  make  g. 
J.ev.6. 11.  jiut  ofl'his^r.puton  oilier^.  10.  23,24. 
JVum.  15.38.  make  fringes  in  the  borders  of  their  g. 

20.  20.  strip  Aaron  of  his  g.  put  them  on  Elcazar 
28.  Moses  stript  Aaron  of ^.  put  tlieni  on  Eleazat 
Josh.  9.5.  Gibeonites  brought  old  ^r.  mouldy  bread 
.Judg.  14. 12. 1  will  give  you  thirty  changes  of  ^. 

17.110. 1  will  give  thee  ten  shekels  and  order  of^ 

1  Sam.  18.  4.  Jonathan  gave  David  liis  "■. 
2AVjm.l0.4.cut  oil' their  £-. in  the  middle,  lCAr.19.4 

13.  31.  David  tare  his  g.  and  lay  on  the  earth 

2  Kings  5.  20.  is  it  a  time  to  receive  money  and^.? 
7.  15.  all  the  way  was  full  of  ^.  and  vessels 
22.  tl4.  Huldah,  wife  of  Shallum,  keeper  of^-. 
25.  29.  he  changed  Jelioiakim's  g.  Jer.  .52.  33. 

f'-zra  2.  09.  they  gave  one  hundred  priest*'  g. 
J\l'ih.  7.  'lO.  the  Tirshalha  gave  530  priests'  g. 

72.  the  people  gave  sixty-seven  priests'  g. 
.fob  37.  17.  how  thy^'.  are  warm,  when  ho  quictelh 
Psal.  22.  18.  they  part  my  ^.  among  them,  cast  lots 
45.  8.  all  thy  ^.  smell  of  myrrh,  aloes,  and  cassia 
133.2.  ointment  that  went  down  to  skirts  of  his  ^. 
Prov.'il.  121. her  household  clothed  with  double^. 
Keel.  9.  8.  let  thy  g.  be  always  white,  and  thy  head 
Cant.  4.11.  smell  of  thy  g.  is  like  smell  of  Lebanon 
Isa.  9.  5.  every  battle  is  with  g.  rolled  in  blood 
52.  1.  put  on  thy  beautiful  "-.  O  Jerusalem 
59.  6.  their  webs  shall  not  become  g. 

17.  he  luit  on  the  g.  of  vengeance  for  clothing 
01.  10.  he  hath  clothed  me  with  the^.  of  salvatioa 
03.  1.  «h.at  Cometh  with  died  g  from  Rozrah  1 

3.  their  blood  shall  be  sprinkled  upon  my  g. 
Jer.  30.  24.  yet  they  were  not  afraid,  nor  rent^. 
J. am.  4.  14.  so  that  men  could  not  touch  their  ^. 
Kiek.\^.\S.  tnokest  thy  broid.^.and  covered  them 

42.  14.  there  shall  lay  their  g.  they  ministered  in 
44. 19.  they  shall  not  sanctify  people  with  their  ^. 

Dan.  3. 21.  were  hound  in  their  coats  and  other  g. 

Joel  2.  13.  rend  your  hearts,  and  not  your  g. 

Zech.  3.  3.  Joshua  was  clothed  with  filthy  g, 

4.  saying,  lake  away  the  filthy  g.  from  him 
Mat.  21.  8.  spread  their  g.  in  the  way,  Mark  11  8. 

23.  5.  they  enlarge  the  uordrrs  of  their  "•. 
27.35.  they  parted  hie  g.  casting  lots,  Mark  ISJM. 
Mark  10.  50.  Bartimeus  casting  away  his^.  arose 
11.  7.  they  cast  tlieir^.  on  the  colt.  Juke  19.  35. 
lAike  24.  4.  two  men  stood  by  them  in  shining/. 
.lohn  13.  4.  he  laid  aside  his^.  and  took  a  towel 
./?c<«9.39.Bhewing  coats  and  ^. which  Dorcas  made 
Jam.  5.  2.  and  your  g.  are  molh-eaten 
Hev.'i.A.  few  names  which  have  not  defiled  their/. 
10.  15.  blessed  that  watcheih  mid  kcepetli  his/. 

Holy  GARMENTS. 
Krorf.  28.  2.  thou  shall  make  holy  g.  for  A  a  ton,  4. 
31.  10.  I  have  put  wisdom  to  make  holy  g. 
Jev.  16.  4.  thcoe  are  holy  g.  he  shall  wasli,  32. 
Ezek.  42.14.  lay  their  holy  ^.wherein  they  minislet 

GARNER. 
Mat.  3. 12.  gather  his  wheat  into  the/.  LukeZ.  17. 

GARNERS. 
Psnl.  144.  13.  our  /.  may  be  full,  affording  store 
.foel  1.17.the/.are  laid  desolalc,l)arns  broken  down 

GARNISH,  ED. 
2  Chron.  .3. 6.  he/,  the  house  with  precious  sfonee 
.fob  20.  13.  by  his  Spirit  he  hath  /.  the  heavens 
Mat.  12.  44.  findelh  it  swept  and  /.  I.nke  11. 515 
23.  29.  you  /.  the  sepulchres  of  the  righteous 
Rev.  21.  19.  the  foundations  of  the  wall  are/. 

GAT. 
F.yod.  24.  18.  Moses  /.  him  up  into  the  nionnt 
J^um.  10.  27.  they  /.  up  from  tabernncle  of  Korab 
Judg.^i.  51.  and/,  them  up  to  the  top  of  ihetowci 
2  Sam.  8.  13.  and  David  /.  him  a  name 
I  Kings  1.  1.  they  covered  him  but  he  /.  no  heat 
Psal.  110.  3.  the  pains  of  hell  /.  hold  on  me 
F.ccl.  2.  H.  I  /.  men-singers,  and  women-singers 
Aam.5.n.  we/.our  bread  with  the  peril  ofourlivee 

GATE 
Is  the  entrance  into  a  house  or  city.  Jiiilg.  16.  3, 
Samson  took  the  doors  of  the  gale  of  the  cily 
The  word  gate  is  often  used  in  scripture  U 
denote  the  place  of  public  assemhlirs,  where 
justice  tros  administered.  Onepnrtirulnr form 
of  thrse  judgments  is  to  he  seen  in  that,  irhiek 
>ras  given  at  the  gate  of  Belli-lihem,  hitwera 
Men/ and  another  person. n  relaliiw  of  Nnom\'s, 
upon  the  subject  o/ Ruth's  wnrrinire,  who  uus 
a  Moabitess,  Hvth  4.  1.  Jlml  in  Abraham's 
pmehase  of  a  field  to  bury  Siiriili,  f.'rn.  23. 
10,  18.  Jerom  says,  that  as  the  Jews  wtrt 
for  the  most  part  employed  in  Inhouring  m  tk» 
field,  it  was  wisely  provided,  thai  nssemhliet 
should  he  held  at  the  city  gates,  and  jvstiet 
administered  therein  a  snmniiiru  mnnnrr,  that 
those  Inhoriovs  vier,  who  were  hosy  at  their 
worky  might  lose  no  time,  and  that  tht  ttlMUtj 


GAT 

people  who  had  affairs  upon  their  hands  in 
the  town,  might  not  be  obliged  to  enter  and 
spend  time  there. 
The  word  gate  is  likevrise  sometimes  put  to  sig- 
nify power  or  dominion.  God  promises  Abra- 
liaiii,  that  his  posterity  ihou\il  possuss  lliu  gates 
of  their  enemies,  their  towns,  their  fortresses, 
Gen.  2i.  17.  They  should  conquer  them,  they 
should  have  dominion  over  them.  Tlie  gates 
of  hell  sliall  not  prevail  against  the  church, 
Mat.  16.  IS.  that  is,  neither  the  power  nor 
potiey  of  the  devil  and  his  instruviants.'  tor 
the  gates  of  cities  were  the  places  both  of 
jurisdiction  or  Judicature,  and  of  fortification 
and  chief  strength  in  war,  Judg.  5.  8.  Psal. 
147.  13.  The  gales  of  brass,  are  the  strongest 
helps  and  defeices.  Psal.  107.  10,  lie  hath 
broken  the  gates  of  brass ;  he  restored  them  to 
liberty,  in  spite  of  all  impediments  and  oppo- 
sitions. The  strait  gate  signifies  regeneration 
and  conversion,  and  true  holiness  in  heart  and 
life,  which  prepare  the  soul  for  heaven.  Mat. 
7.  13,  Killer  ye  in  at  the  strait  gate. 

The  gates  of  death  are  the  brink,  or  mouth  of  the 
grave.  Psal.  9.  13,  Thou  that  lifiest  me  up 
from  the  gates  of  death,  that  preservedst  me 
when  I  was, as  it  were, dropping  into  the  grave. 
And  /.■i7io-Hezekiah,Auo(n^  received  a  message 
of  death,  represents  in  his  hymn  the  condition 
he  had  been  in  when  he  was  sick,  and  expresses 
himself  thus  :  I  said,  I  shall  go  to  the  gales  of 
Iho  grave;  /perceive  I  must  die,  without  any 
hopes  of  prevention,  Isa.  38.  10.  The  Hebrews 
looked  upon  death,  or  the  grave,  as  a  place, 
whither  people  came  from  all  parts  of  the  world, 
there  to  enter  upon  another  life.  The  gates  of 
righteousness,  Psal.  118.  19.  are  those  of  the 
hord's  tabernacle,  where  the  righteous,  the 
saints,  the  priests  of  the  I^ord,  the  true  Israel- 
ites,/(aid  their  vows  and  praises  to  the  Lord; 
where  none  were  to  enter  but  purified  Israelites, 
a  nation  of  righteous  men.  The  gates  or  ever- 
lasting doors  mentioned  in  Psal.  24.  7,  9.  are 
either  the  gates  of  the  temple,  which  by  faith 
and  tile  spirit  of  prophecy  David  beheld  as 
ulready  built ;  these  gates  he  bids  lift  up  their 
heads,  to  receive  the  glorious  King  Jehovah 
who  dwelt  in  the  temple,  and  between  the  cheru- 
bim :  Or  the  passage  may  admit  of  a  mystical 
sense;  for  as  the  temple  was  a  type  of  Christ, 
and  of  his  church,  and  of  heaven  itself  ;  so  this 
place  may  also  contain  a  representation,  either 
of  Christ's  entrance  into  his  church,  or  into  thi 
hearts  of  his  faithful  people,  who  arehere  com 
nanded  to  set  open  their  hearts  and  souls  for 
his  reception  :  Or,  it  may  represent  his  ascen- 
sion into  heaven,  where  the  saints  or  angels 
are  poetically  introduced  as  preparing  the 
way,  and  opening  the  heavenly  gates  to  receive 
their  Ijord  and  King,  returning  to  his  royal 
habitation  with  triumph  and  glory. 

Gen.32.17.tliy  seed  possess  the^.of  ei)emies,24.60. 
28.  17.  Jacob  said,  this  is  the  g.  of  heaven 

Fzod.'im.^'l.goin  and  out  from^.  to^'.  thro'  camp 

Deut.  21.19.  his  father  shall  bring  him  to  the  ^ . 

22.  24.  bring  them  both  out  to  the  g.  of  the  city 
25.  7.  let  his  brother's  wife  go  up  to  the  g. 

Josh.  2.  7.  they  were  gone  out,  they  shut  the  g. 
Judg.  16.  .3.  Samson  took  the  doors  of  the  g. 
Ruth  4.  1.  then  went  Boaz  to  the  g.  and  sat  down 
lO.the  name  of  the  dead  be  not  cut  ofTfrom  the^. 
15aw.  4. 18.  Eli  fell  backward  by  the  side  of  the  ^. 
2  Sam. 15.2.Absalom  stood  beside  the  way  of  the  ^. 

18.33.the  king  wont  up  to  the  chamber  over  the  g. 

2.?.  15.  water  of  Belh-lehem  by  g.iG.l  Chr.  11.18. 

1  Kings  17. 10.  when  Elijah  came  to  the  ^. of  the  city 

2  Kings  7. 17.  a  lord  to  have  the  charge  of  the  g. 

1  Chrun.  20.  13.  and  they  cast  lots  for  every  g. 

2  Chron.  8.  14.  he  appointed  the  porters  at  every  g-. 
Jfeh.  13.  ]9.  I  commanded  the  g.  should  be  shut 
Ksth.i.i.  Mordecai  came  before  the  king's  ^n-.  6.12. 
Job  2n.  7.  when  I  went  out  to  the  ^.'and  j)repared 
Psal.llH.'iQ.  this  »-.of  the  Lord,  the  righteous  enter 
Cant.  7.  4.  thine  eyes  like  the  fish-pools  by  the  g. 
/>a. 14. 31. howl,  O  0-.  cry,  O  city,  shall  come  smoke 

24. 12.  ihe  g.  is  smitten  with  destruction 

23.  6.  10  them  that  turn  the  battle  to  the  g. 
Jcr-  30.  10.  Baruch  read  at  the  entry  of  new  ^. 
I.am.  5.  14.  the  elders  have  ceased  from  the  g. 
Ezek.  8.  3.  brought  me  to  the  door  of  the  inner  ^. 

11.  1.  at  the  door  of  the  g.  twenty-five  men 

43.  4.  the  glory  of  the  Lord  came  by  way  of  the  ^. 

44.  1.  this  g.  shall  be  shut,  none  shall  enter 

3.  prince  shall  enter  by  the  way  of  the  g.  46. 2,  8. 

45.  10.  put  the  blood  on  the  posts  of  the  g. 

46.  1.  the  g.  of  the  inner  court  shall  be  shut 
2.  but  the  0-.  shall  not  be  shut  till  evening 

12.  one  shall  open  him  the  ^.one  shall  shut  ihag. 
49  31.  onc^.  of  Reuben,  one^-.  of  Judah,  ofLevi 
Obad.  13.  not  entered  into  the  g.  of  my  people 
227 


GAT 

Mie.l.9.  he  is  come  into  the^.of  my  people  to  Jer! 
12.  evil  came  down  from  Lord  to  Ihe^.  of  Jerus. 

2.  13.  they  have  passed  through  the  g. 

Mat.  7.  13.  enter  in  at  the  strait  g.  wide  is  the  g. 

and  broad  is  the  way,  J4.  Luke  13.  24. 

Luke  7.  12.  when  he  came  nigh  the  g.  of  the  city 

16.20.  a  beggar,  Lazarus  laid  at  his  ^.  full  of  sores 
Acts  10. 17.  men  from  Corneliot  stood  before  the^. 

12.  10.  they  came  to  the  iron  ju  which  opened 

14.  Khoda  opened  not  the  g^  for  gladness 
Heb.  13. 12.  Jesus  also  suffered  without  the^. 
Rev.  21.  21.  every  several  o-.  was  of  one  pearl 

.See  Entkring,  Entkreth. 

GATE. 

Prov.ll.ld.  that  e.xalteth  his^.seeketh  destruction 

At  the  GATE. 
Oen.  23. 10.  of  all  that  went  in  at  the  g.  of  city,  18. 
2  A>/i«-s9.31.a8  Jehu  entered  in  at  theg.  she  said 

11.  6.  a  third  part  shall  be  at  the  g.  of  Sur,  and  a 
third  at  the  g.  behind  the  guard,  2  Chr.  23. 5. 

23.  8.  which  were  on  a  man's  left  hand  at  the  g. 
2(.'Ar.24.8.  set  a  chest  at  theg.ofihe  house  of  Lord 
Ksth.  5.  13. 1  see  Mordecai  sitting  at  the  king's  g'. 
yjju.22.7.horsemen  set  themselves  in  array  at  theg. 
Acts  3.  2.  they  laid  daily  at  the  g.  of  the  temple 

10.  who  sat  for  alms  at  beautiful  ^f.  of  the  temple 

See  Fish-gate. 
High  GATE. 
2  Chron.  23.  20.  they  came  through  the  high  g. 
27.  3.  Jotham  built  the  high  g.  of  the  house 
.fer.  20.  2.  put  Jeremiah  in  the  stocks  in  the  highg. 

See  HORSK-GATK. 

In  the  GATE. 
Gen.  19.  1.  and  Lot  sat  in  the  g.  of  Sodom 
Exod.  32.  26.  Moses  stood  in  tlie  g.  of  the  camp 
/>eu<. 22.15.  bring  tokens  of  virginity  to  elders  ing. 
Judg.  16.  2.  they  laid  wait  for  Samson  in  the  g. 
Huthi.  11.  people  in  the  g.  said,  we  are  witnesses 

1  Sam.  9. 18.  Saul  drew  near  to  Samuel  in  the  g. 

2  Sam.  3.  27.  Joab  took  Abner  aside  in  the  g. 
19.  8.  king  sat  in  tlie g.  they  told  all  the  people 

2  Kings  7. 1.  two  measures  for  a  shekel  in  the  g-18. 
20.  the  pcojile  trod  on  him  in  the  g.  and  he  died 
Esth.2.  19.  Mordecai  sat  in  the  king's^.  21. 

5.  9.  when  Human  saw  him  in  the  king's  g. 
Job  5.  4.  his  children  are  crushed  in  the  g. 

31.  21.  when  I  saw  my  help  in  the  g. 
Psal.  09.12.  they  that  sit  in  the  g.  speak  against  me 

127. 5.  but  they  shall  speak  with  the  enemies  ing. 
Piov.  22.  22.  nor  op|iress  the  alHicted  in  the  g. 

24.  7.  he  openeth  not  his  mouth  in  the  g. 

Isa.  29.  21.  lay  a  snare  for  him  that  reproveth  in  g. 
Jer.  7.  2.  stand  in  the  g.  of  the  Lord's  house 
17. 19.  stand  in  theg.  of  the  childreo  of  the  people 

37.  13.  when  he  was  in  the  g.  of  Benjamin 

38.  7.  the  king  then  sitting  in  the  g.  of  Benjamin 

39.  3.  all  the  princes  of  Babylon  sat  in  the  g. 
Dan.  2.  49.  but  Daniel  sat  in  the  g.  of  the  king 
Amos  5. 10.  they  hate  him  that  rebuketh  in  the  g. 

12.  they  turn  aside  the  poor  in  the  g. 

15.  hate  evil,  and  establish  judgment  in  the  g. 

Old  GATE. 

JVeA.3.6.  the  old  g-.repaired  Jehoiada  son  of  Paseah 

12.39.  the  priests  went  above  theoW^.  and  fish-g. 

PrisoK-GATE. 
Mch.  12.  39.  and  they  stood  still  in  ih&prison-g. 

Sheep-GAT'E.. 
JVeh.  12.  39.  they  went  even  unto  the  shcep-g. 
John  5.  t  2.  by  the  sheep-g.  there  is  a  pool 

yallry-GATE. 
2  Chron.  20.  9.  Uzziah  built  towers  at  the  vallcy-g. 
JWA.  2.  13.  and  I  went  out  by  ths  g.  of  the  valley 

15.  and  I  entered  by  thi>  g.  of  the  valley 
3.  13.  the  valley-g.  repaired  Hanun 

;rater-GATE. 
JVeA.  3. 26.  Nethinims  dwelt  over-against  water-g. 
8.  1.  gathered  into  the  street  before  the  water-g. 

3.  he  read  in  the  law  before  the  water-g. 

16.  made  booths  in  the  street  of  the  watcr-g. 

12.  37.  priests  went  even  to  the  water-g.  eastward 

GATES. 
Deut.  12. 12.  rejoice,  ye  and  Levite,  within  your^^. 
./bsA.0.2(;.in  his  youngest  son  set  up^.l^;'w^sl6.34. 
Judg.  5.  8.  chose  new  gods,  then  was  war  in  tho^. 

11.  the  people  of  the  Lord  shall  go  to  the^. 
Chr  31.2.  Hezekiah  appointed  to  praise  in  tlie,^. 

J^eh.  1.3.  the  g.  are  burnt  with  fire,  2.  3,  13,  17. 

7.  3.  let  not  the  g.  of  Jerusalem  be  opened 

12.  30.  the  priests  and  Lovites  purified  the  g. 

13.  19.  some  of  my  servants  set  I  at  the  g. 
22.  I  commanded  the  Levltcs  to  keep  tno  g. 

Psal.  9.  14.  may  shew  forth  thy  praise  in  Ihe^. 
24.7.Uft  up  your  heads,  O  ye  ^.and  be  ye  lift  U]),  9. 
87.  2.  the  Lord  lovoth  the  g.  of  Zion,  more  than 
100.  4.  enter  into  his  ^.  with  thanksgiving 
107.  16.  for  he  halh  broken  the  g.  of  brass 
118.  19.  open  to  me  \hn  g.  of  righteousness 

Pro  11.1.21.  wisdom  criethin  the  openings  ofi^.  8.3. 

8.  34.  that  heareth  me,  watching  daily  at  my  g. 

14.  19.  the  wicked  at  the  g.  of  the  righteous 


GAT 

Prov.  31.  23.  her  husband  is  known  in  the  g. 

31.  let  her  own  works  praise  her  in  the  g. 
Can(.7.13.at  our  ^.are  all  manner  of  pleasant  fruit« 
Isa.  3.  26.  and  her^.  shall  lament  and  mourn 

13.  2.  they  may  go  mto  the  g.  of  the  nobles 

26.  2.  open  ye  the  g.  that  the  righteous  may  enter 
38.  10.  I  shall  go  to  Ihe  g.  of  the  grave 
45.  l.'to  open  before  him  the  two-leaved  <r. 
2.  I  will  break  in  pieces  the  g.  of  brass 
62.  10.  go  through,  go  thro'  the  ^.prepare  the  way 
Jer.l.'i.  hear,  ye  that  enter  in  at  the  ;^.  17.20.122.2. 

14.  2.  Judah  mouriieth,  and  the  g.  languish 

15.  7. 1  will  fan  them  with  a  fan  in  g.  of  the  land 
17.  19.  go  and  stand  in  all  the  g.  of  Jerusalem 

21.  bear  no  burden  on  the  sabbath  by  the  g.  24. 
25.  then  shall  there  enter  into  the  g.  22.  4. 

27.  1  will  kindle  a  fire  in  the  g.  of  Jerusalem 
22.19.  shall  be  drawn  and  cast  forth  beyond  the  g 
Lam.  1.  4.  Zion's  g.  are  desolate,  her  priests  sigh 

2.  9.  hcr^.  are  sunk  into  the  ground,  bars  broken 
4.  12.  the  adversary  should  have  entered  the  ^. 

Eiek.  21. 15. 1  have  set  pointof  sword  ag.  their^. 

22.  to  appoint  battering  rams  against  the  g. 
26.  2.  she  is  broken  that  was  the  g.  of  the  people 
48.  32.  at  the  east  side  three  g.  one  of  Joseph 

Obad.  11.  in  the  day  that  foreigners  entered  his^ 
JVixA.  2.  0.  the  g.  of  the  rivers  shijil  be  opened 

3.  13.  the  g.  of  thy  land  shall  be  set  wide  open 
ZfcA.8.16.e.\ec.  judg.  of  truth  and  peace  in  your  o- 
Mat.  16.18.  the^.  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  againsl'it 
Acts  9.  24.  and  they  watched  the  g.  to  kill  Paul 

14.  13.  Jupiter's  priests  brought  oxen  to  the  g. 

fif?). 21.12.  the  city  had  twelve^,  at^.  twelve  ang. 

13.  on  the  east  three  g.  on  the  north  three  <r. 

21.  the  twelve  g.  were  twelve  pearls 

25.  the^.  of  it  shall  not  be  shut  at  all  by  day 

■See  Bars,  Death. 

Thy  GATES. 

Exod.  20. 10.  thy  stranger  within  thy  g.  Deut.i.lA. 

Z)eut.  6.  9.  thou  shall  write  them  oxCthy  g.  11.20. 

12.  15.  thou  mayest  eat  flesh  in  thy  g.  21. 

17.  thou  mayest  not  eat  within  thy  g.  the  titho 
I'li.  thou  must  eal,  thou  and  Lovite  in  thy  g. 

14.  21.  give  it  to  the  stranger  that  is  in  thy  g. 

27.  Levite  within  thy  g.  ihou  shall  not  forsake 

28.  thou  shall  lay  up  the  tilhe  within  thy  g. 

29.  the  widow  within  thy  g.  shall  come  "and  eat 

15.  7.  if  there  be  a  poor  man  within  anyof  ^Ay  tr 

22.  thou  shall  eat  the  firstling  within  thy  g. 

16.  5.  not  sacrifice  the  passover  within  thy  g. 
11.  shall  rejoice,  and  Levite  in  thy  g.  14.  |  26.12. 

18.  judges  and  officers  shall  make  in  all  thy  g. 

17.  5.  hring  forth  that  man  or  woman  to  thy  g. 

18.  6.  if  a  Levite  come  from  any  of  thy  g. 

23.  16.  servant  escaped  dwell  in  one  of  thy  g. 

24.  14.  thou  shall  not  oppress  within  tht/  g. 
28.  .52.  he  shall  besiege  thee. in  all  thy  g. 

55.  thine  enemies  shall  distress  thee  in  all  thy  g. 
31.  12.  gather  the  people  within  thy  g.  to  liear 
Psn/. 122.2.our  feet  shall  stand  wilhin  thy  g.  O  Jer. 
Isa.  54.  12.  I  will  make  thy  g.  of  carbuncles 
60.  11.  therefore  thy  g.  shall  be  open  continually 

18.  call  thy  walls  salvation,  and  thy  g.  praise 
Ezek.  26.  10.  when  he  shall  enter  thy  g.  as  men 

GATHER. 
Gen.  31.40.  he  said,  ^.stones,  and  they  took  stones 
41.  35.  lot  them  g.  all  the  food  of  lliose  years 
Exod.  5.  7.  let  them  go  and  «■.  straw  ||  12.  ^.slubbla 
9. 19.  g.  thy  cattle  |f  16.  4.  shall  g.  a  certain  rats 
16.  5.  g.  twice  as  much  ||  26.  si.v  days  g.  it 
23.  10.  six  years  sow  thv  land  and  g.  Lev.  25.  3. 
I^ev.  19.  9.  shall  not  g.  the  gleanings,  23.  22. 
10.  thou  shall  not  g.  every  grape  of  thy  vineyard 

25.  5.  nor  g.  grapes  of  the  vine  undressed,  11. 
20.  we  shall  not  sow,  nor  g.  in  our  increase 

JVi/m.  10.  4.  if  with  one  trumpet,  then  princes  g, 

11.  16.  g.  seventy  men  of  the  eldeis  of  Israel 

19.  9.  a  man  that  is  clean  shall  g.  ihe  ashes 
Deut.  11. 14.  I  will  give  rain  that  thou  mayest  g 

13.  16.  thou  shall  g.  all  the  spoil  of  ii  into  street 
28.  30.  plant  a  vineyard  and  not  g.  grapes,  39. 

38.  carry  much  seed  out,  and  g.  hut  little  in 

30.  3.  he  will  g.  thee  from  all  nations,  KzcA-..30.24 

.Tosh.  2. 1 18.  shall  g.  thy  ftithcr  and  mother  home 

2  Kings  4.  39.  one  went  into  the  field  to  g.  herbs 

22.  20.  I  will  g.  thee  to  thy  fathers,  2  Chr.  .34.28. 

1  Chron.  13.  2.  send  to  brethren  and  Levites  to  g. 

2  Chron.  ^4.  5.  g.  money  to  repair  house  of  the  Ld. 
JVfA.  1.  9.  yet  will  I  g.  them  from  thonce 

12.  44.  Rome  appointed  to  g.  for  the  priests 
Job  24.  6.  they  g.  the  vintaje  of  the  wicked 

34. 14.  if  he  ^.  to  himself  his  spirit  and  his  breath 
39. 12.  will  he  bring  seed,  and  g.  it  into  thy  barn  1 
Psal.  26.  9.  g.  not  my  soul  with  sinners,  nor  life 
27.tl0.whcn  father  and  mother  forsake,  L.  will  j 
.39.  6.  and  knoweth  not  who  shall  g.  them 
104.  28.  that  Ihou  givest  them  they  g. 
106.47.  save  us,  and  ^.us  from  among  Ihe  heathen 
Prov.  28.  8.  shall  g.  for  him  that  will  pity  the  pow 
Eccl.  2.  26.  to  sinner  travail  to  g.  and  heap  up 


GAT 

Cant  G.  2.  my  beloved  is  gone  down  to  g.  Itne* 
Isa.  34.  J5.  lliere  the  owl  »■.  under  her  shudow 
4(1.  11.  he  eliall  ff.  the  lambs  with  his  arms 
43.  a.  Tear  not,  1  will  ff.  thee  from  the  west 
5'J.  1 12.  the  (jod  of  Israel  will  g.  you  uj),  58.  f  8 
.S-l.  7.  but  with  great  mercies  will  1  «-.  tiiee 
."iG.  8.  yet  will  1  ;r.  others  to  him,  besides  those 
an.  10.  cast  up  tliu  highwiiy,  ^r.  out  the  stones 
(i().  18.  I  will  ^>-.  all  naiiuus  and  tongues 
Jcr.  ti.  1.  n-.  to  llee  1|  7.  18.  the  children  g.  wood 
9.  2*2.  none  shall^r.  them  ||  10. 17. g.  up  thy  wares 
iJ3.  3.  I  will  0-.  tlie  remnant  of  my  flock 
2a.  14.  I  will  "-.  you  from  all  the  nations 
31.  8. 1  will  £-.  them  from  the  coasts  of  the  earth, 
3-J.  37.  Kick.  20.  34,  41.  |  34.  13. 

10.  he  that  scattered  Israel  will  ^r.  him 
40.  10.  ff.  ye  wine,  and  summer-fruits,  and  oil 
47.  t  •>.  O  sword,  g.  thyself  mto  thy  scabbard 
4y.  5.  and  none  shall  g.  up  him  that  wandereth 
Ezek.  11.  17.  1  will  evKci  g.  you  from  the  peojile 
Jti.  37.  I  will  g.  all  thy  lovers  against  theo 
2-.'.  19.  I  will  g.  you  into  the  midst  of  Jerusalem 

20.  as  they  ^f.  silver,  so  will  I  5-.  you  in  fury,  21. 
24.4.^.  the  pieces  II  29.13.1  wdl  «■.  the  Egyptians 
37.  21.  I  will  g.  them  on  every  side,  39.  17. 
//U4-.8.10.  though  hired  among  the  nations,!  will £'. 

9.  ().  Egypt  shall  ^r.  them  uj),  Memphis  bury  them 
J(/cl  1. 14.  ^f.  the  elders  and  the  inhabitants  of  land 

2.  ti.  people  much  jiained,  all  faces  shall  «-.blackn. 
10.  g.  the  people,  g.  the  children  that  suck 

3.  2.1  wilier,  all  nations,  and  bring  them  down 
Mic.  2.  12.  1  will  surely  g.  the  renuiant  of  Israel 

4.  0. 1  will  g.  her  that  was  driven  out,  Zcph.  3. 19. 
12.  he  shall  g.  them  as  sheaves  into  the  floor 

5.  1.  g.  thyself  in  troops,  O  daughter  of  troops 
JVuA.  2.  10.  the  faces  of  them  all  g.  blackness 
Hab.  1.  9.  they  shall  g.  the  captivity  as  the  sand 

15.  they  catch  them,  and  g.  them  in  their  drag 
Zcph.3.6.  for  my  determination  is  to^.  the  nations 

18. 1  will  D-.  them  that  are  sorrowful  for  assembly 

20.  bring  you  even  in  the  time  that  I  g.  you 
Zcch.  10.  H.  I  will  hiss  for  them  and  g.  them 

10.  and  I  will  g.  them  out  of  Assyria 

14.  2.  I  will  g.  all  nations  against  Jerusalem 
Mat,  3. 12.  g.  his  wheat  into  his  garner,  J.uhe  3.17. 

6.  2li.  they  sow  not,  nor  do  they  g.  into  barns 

7.  10.  do  men  g.  grapes  of  thorns  1  Luke  0.  44. 
13.  28.  wilt  thou  that  we  go  and  g.  them  up  ? 

29.  he  said,  nay,  lest  while  ye  g.  up  the  tares 

30.  burn  tares,  but  g.  the  wlicat  into  my  barn 
41.  shall  «-.out  of  his  kingd.  all  things  that  oflend 

25.  20.  and  g.  where  1  have  not  strawed 
/>uie  13.34.  as  a  hen  doth  ^.her  brood  under  wings 
Joliti  6.  12.  g.  up  the  fragments  that  remain 

15.  0.  men  g.  them  and  cast  them  into  the  fire 
hev.  14.  18.  g.  the  clusters  of  the  vine  of  the  earth 

10.  14.  g.  them  to  the  battle  of  that  day  of  God 

•GATHER  together. 
(7f  it.34.30.  I  being  few  they  shall^.  Jon-.against  me 

49.  1.  g.  yourselves  together,  ye  sons  of  Jacob,  2. 
F.zod.  3.  10.  go  g.  the  elders  of  Israel  together 
JLfV.  8.  3.  g.  congregation  of  Israel  tog.  M'um.  8. 9. 
JVtfm.  20.  8.  and  g.  thou  the  assembly  together 

21. 10.  g.  the  people  together,  Dcut.4. 10.  |  31.12. 
2. Sum.  12.  2-'^.  g.  the  rest  together  and  encamp 
1  Chrun.  10.  35.  save  us,  O  God,  and  g.  us  together 

22.  2.  David  commanded  to  g.  tog.  the  strangers 
JWA.7..'>.  God  put  in  my  heart  to  n-.  together  nobles 
F.gth.  2.  3.  may  g.  together  all  the  fair  virgins 

4.  10.  g.  together  the  Jews  present  in  Shushan 
Job  11.  10.  if  he  g.  together  who  can  hinder  him  7 
J'sal.  50.  5.  g.  my  saints  together  unto  me 

50.  0.  they  g.  themselves  tog.  to  mark  my  steps 
91.  21.  they  g.  tugcther  against  the  righteous 
104.  22.  till!  sun  ariseth,  they  g.  themselves  tog. 

Keel.  3.  5.  there  is  a  time  to  g.  stones  together 
Isa.  II.  12.  he  shall,^.  tog.  the  dispersed  of  Judah 

49. 18.  those  g.  together  and  come  to  me,  00.  4. 
54.15.  they  shall  surely  g.  together,  but  not  by  me 

Jer.  4.  5.  blow  the  trumpet,  cry,  g.  together 
49.  14.  g.  ye  together  and  come  against  Rdom 
Dan.  3.  2.  the  king  sent  to  g.  together  the  princes 
Joel  3.  11.  /c-  yourselves  together  round  nhont 
Z.rph.'i.  I.  «■■  t<)g.yua,g.  tog.  O  nation  not  desired 
Milt.  13.  30.  g.  together  fust  the  tares,  and  bind 
24.31.  they  shall /r.««^c«/,cr  his  elect,  Mark  13.27. 
John  11..52.  h(t  »hniM  g.  together  in  (mo,  KpA.1.10. 
Rrv.  19.  17. /f.  tog.  to  lhesu|>per  of  the  great  God 
20.  8.  to  g.  Gog  unci  MacoT  together  to  battle 

GATHERED. 
Gfn.25.  8.  Abraham  (IIimI  ami  was^r.  to  his  people 

17.  Ishmael  was  ^'H  35.29.  Isaac  was  g.io  people 
49.  29.  Jarob  was  g.  to  his  people,  33. 

F.iod.  IG.  17.  nnil  they  g.  some  more,  some  less 

18.  he  Ihat^.  much,  he  that /T.  little,  iCor.S.Vt. 
2 1. they /r.  it  every  morning,  every  man  according 

23.  IR.  when  thou  hast  o-.  in  thy  labours  out  of  field 
7vfo.23.39.  whin  yo  have  ^.  in  the  fruits  of  the  land 
Xiim.  11.32.  the  jieople;?'.  Huails  II  15. 32.  ^.  sticks 

10. 19.  Korah  g.  coiigre^itiou  agaiiut  Muses,  4:2. 


GAT 

JVi/m.  20.  24.  Aaron  shall  be^.  to  his  jicople,  20. 

27. 13.  Moses  0-.  to  his  people,  31. 2.  Veut.  .32.  50 
.Judg.  1.  7.  kings  g.  their  meat  under  my  table 

2.  10.  that  generation  was  g.  to  their  fathers 

0.  34.  and  Abiezer  was  g.  after  him 

11.  3.  there  were^.  vain  men  to  Jephthah 

1  Ham.  5.  8.  they  g.  all  the  lords  of  the  Philistines 
22.  2.  every  one  that  was  in  distress  g.  to  David 

2  .Saw.  14. 14.  as  water  6i)ilt  which  cannot  be^.  up 
2  Kings  3.  21.  they  g.  all  able  to  put  on  armour 

22.  20.  Josiah  be^.  to  grave  in  peace,  2  Cftr.34.28. 
jVeh.  5.  10.  all  my  servants  were  g.  to  the  work 
Jol)  27.  lU.  rich  man  lie  down,  but  shall  not  be  g. 
Psal.  59.  3.  the  mighty  are  g.  against  me 

107.  3.  and  he  g.  them  out  of  the  lands 
Prov.  27.  25.  and  herbs  of  the  mountains  arc  g. 

30.  4.  w  ho  hath  g.  the  wind  in  his  lists  ? 
Eccl.  2.  8.  I  g.  me   also   silver   and  gold  and 
the  peculiar  treasure  of  kings 
Cant.  5.  1.  I  have  g.  my  myrrh  with  iny  spice 
Jsa.  5.  2.  he  fenced  it,  and  g.  out  the  stones 

10. 14.  as  one  galhcreth  eggs,  have  I  g.  the  earth 
27.  12.  ye  shall  be  g.  one  by  one,  O  Israel 

34.  15.  vultures  be  »-.  |{  10.  his  Spirit^'-,  them 
49.5.  tho'  Israel  be  not^.  yet  shall  1  be  glorious 
50.  8.1  will  gather  others,  besides  those  that  are ^'■. 
02.  9.  but  they  that  have  g.  it  shall  eat  it 
.Jer.  3.  17.  and  all  nations  shall  be  ^.  unto  it 
8.  2.  they  shall  not  be  g.  nor  buried,  25.  33. 
20.9.  all  people^,  against  Jeremiah  in  house  of  L. 

40. 15.  all  the  Jews  n-.  to  thee  should  be  scattered 
£z(A.28.25.when  I  shall  have  g.  the  house  of  Israel 

29.  5.  thou  shult  not  be  brought  together  nor  g. 

38.  1.3.  hast  thou^'.  thy  company  to  take  a  prey  1 

39.  27.  have  g.  them  out  of  their  enemies'  lands 
2.-J.  but  I  have  g.  them  to  their  own  land 

Hos.  10.  10.  the  people  shall  be  g.  against  them 
jMic.  7. 1.  I  am  as  when  they  "•.  the  summer-fruits 
Mat.  13.  40.  as  tares  are  g.  and  burnt  in  the  lire 
47.  a  net  cast  into  the  sea,  and  g.  of  every  kind 
25.  32.  before  him  shall  be  g.  all  nations 

27.  27.  and  g.  to  him  the  whole  band  of  soldiers 
John  11.47.  then  0-. chief  priests  a  council,  and  said 
.'lets  17. 5.  g.  a  company,  set  the  city  on  an  uproar 

28.  3.  when  Paul  hud  g.  a  bundle  of  sticks 
lieo.  14.  19.  the  angel  g.  the  vine  of  the  earth 

GATHERED  together. 
Exod.  8.  14.  they  g.  them  together  upon  heaps 
JVuTO.  10.  7.  when  the  congregation  is  to  be  g.  tog. 

1 1 .  22.  shall  all  the  fish  of  the  sea  be  g.  together  ? 
Judg.  20.  1.  the  congregation  was  g.  together  as 

one  man,  11.  Ezra  3.  1.  JVcA.  8.  1. 
2  Chron.  20.4.  Judah  5-.  together  to  ask  help  of  Ld. 
./ill/  1().  10.  thev^.  themselves  together  against  me 

'M).  7.  under  the  nettles  were  they  g.  together 
Psal.  35.  15.  the  abjeets  g.  themselves  tog.  ag.  me 

47.  9.  the  princes  of  the  people  are  g.  together 

102.22.  when  people  are^.  together  lu  serve  the  L. 

140.  2.  continually  are  they  g.  together  for  war 
I'rot}.  30.  t27.  locusts  go  forth  all  g.  together 
Hos.  1.  11.  then  shall  children  of  Judah  be  g.  tog. 
Mic.i.  II.  many  nations  are  g.  together  ag.  thee 
Zech.  12. 3.  tho'  all  people  be^r.  together  against  it 
Mat.  18.  20.  where  two  01  three  are  g.  together 

23.  .37.  how  ofken  would  I  have  g.  thy  children 
together,  as  a  hen  her  chickens,  Lnke  13.  34. 

24.  2.8.  there  will  eagles  be  g.  tog.  lAike  17.  37. 
Mark  1.  'XV  all  the  city  was^.  together  at  the  door 
I.uke  15.  13.  the  younger  son  g.  all  together 

24.  ;13.  they  found  the  eleven  g.  together 
J)ets  4.  20.  rulers  were  g.  together  against  the  L. 

12.  12.  where  many  were^.  together  praying 
14.  27.  when  they  had  g.  the  church  together 

1  Cor.  .5.  4.  when  ye  aro  g.  together  and  my  spirit 
Hev.  10.  10.  g.  I.  into  a  place  called  .\rm.igeddon 

19. 19.  beastand  his  ixrmy g. together  to  make  war 

GATHERER,  S. 
.7c7-.C.9.turn  hack  thy  hand  as  a  grape  ^.into  baskets 

49.  9.  if  grape  g.  ciune  to  thee,  Oliad.  5. 
Jimos  7.  14.  but  I  was  a  g.  of  svcamore-fruit 

GATHERESt. 
Deut.  24.  21.  when  thou  g.  the  grapes  of  vineyard 

GATIIERETH. 
jVi/m.  19.10.  that  ^.Ihn  ashes  shall  wash  his  clothes 
.ludg.  19.  1 18.  there  is  no  man  that  g.  ino  to  house 
/'.«a7.  33.  7.  ho  g.  the  waters  of  tlir  sea  together 

41.  6.  his  heart  g.  iniquity  to  itself 

147.  2.  he  g.  the  outcasts  of  Israel,  Isa.  50.  8. 
Vror.  0.  H.  tho  ant  g.  hiT  food  in  the  harvest 

10.  5.  hi!  that  g.  in  summer  is  a  wise  son 

13.  II.  hut  ho  thatir.  by  labour  shall  Increase 
lua.  10.  M.  ns  one  g.  eggs  that  are  left 

17.  5.  it  shall  be  as  when  the  harvest-man^. 
Jrr.  17.  t  II.  as  tho  partridge  /.'.young  which  she 
hath  not  brought  forth,  so  he  that  gels  riches 
JV'.iA.  3. 18.  thy  people  is  scattered,  and  no  man  n-. 
Hull.  2.  5.  hvii  g.  to  liim  all  nations,  and  hcapclh 
Mat.  12.  30.  he  that  g.  not  scaltcrelh,  Luke  1 1. 23. 

23.  37.  ;iR  a  hen  g.  her  chickens  under  linr  wingn 
John  4.  30.  ho  that  roupvlhf .  fruit  to  life  eternal 


GAV 

GATHERING 
Oen.  49.  10.  to  him  shall  the  g.  of  the  people  be 
Exod.  7. 1 19.  stretch  thy  hand  on  all  g.  of  waten 
L,cv.  11.  t30.  a^.  together  of  waters  shall  be  clean 
jVum.  15.  33.  they  that  found  him  g.  sticks 
IKiugs  17.10.lhe  widow  woman  was  there  ^.sticks 
2  Chron.  20.  25.  they  were  three  dfj's  in  g.  siKiils 
Isa.  24.  ti2.  be  gathered  with  the  ^.  of  prisoners 
32. 10.  the  vintage  shall  fail,  the  "-.  shall  not  coiua 
3;J.  4.  your  spoil  like  the  g.  of  the  caterpillar 
Ezek.  22.  fSO.  according  to  the  £-.  of  silver,  brass 
Mat.  25.  2;J.  and  g.  where  thou  hast  not  strawed 
^cts  16.  10.  assuredly  g.  the  Lord  hath  called  ui 
2  I'hcss.  2.  1.  and  by  our^.  together  unto  him 

GATIIERLNUS. 
1  Chron.  20.  f  15.  to  Obed-edoni  the  house  of  ^. 
Mic.  7.  1 1.  I  am  as  the  g.  of  summer-fruits 
1  Cor.  10.  2.  that  there  be  no  g.  when  I  come 

GAVE. 
C>cn.  2. 20.  Adam  ^.names  to  all  cattle  and  to  fow 
3.  12.  the  woman  g.  me  of  the  tree,  and  1  did  ca 
14.  20.  and  he  g.  liim  tithes  of  all,  Beb.  7.  2,  4. 
25.  5.  and  Abraham  g.  all  that  he  had  to  Isaac 
28.  4.  the  land  which  God  g.  to  Abraham,  35. 12. 
Ezod.  11.  3.  the  Lord^.  the  peojile  favour,  12.  36 
14.  20.  the  cloud  g.  light  by  night  to  these 
JVum.lI.25.Ld.tookof  liie  Spirit,  and  ^.to  seventy 
lJeut.2'2. 10.  Ig.  my  daughter  to  this  man  to  wita 
Josh.  19.  50.  they  g.  him  the  city  which  he  asked 
21.  43.  the  Lord  g.  to  Israel  all  the  land 

44.  the  Lord^.  them  rest,  2  Chr.  15. 15.  |  20.  30 
Judg.G.  9. 1  drave  them  out,  and^"-.  you  their  land 
fti/Wi  4.13.  the  Lord^. her  conception,  and  she  bare 

1  i>a7n.  10.  9.  God  g.  to  Saul  another  heart 

2  Savi.  12.  8.  and  1  g.  thee  thy  master's  house 

1  Kings  4. 29.  the  Lord  g.  Solomon  wisdom,  5. 12 

2  Kings  13.  5.  and  the  Lord  g.  Israel  a  saviour 

1  Chron.  25.  5.  God  g.  to  Heinan  fourteen  song 

2  Chron.  32.  24.  and  God  g.  Hezekiah  a  sign 
JWA.  8.  8.  read  in  book  of  the  law,  and  g.  the  sense 
Job  1.  21.  Lord  g.  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away 

42. 10.  God  ^.  Job  twice  as  much  as  he  had  before 
Psal.  18.  13.  and  the  Highest^,  his  voice 

08.11.  the  Ld.^.thc  word,  great  was  the  company 
69.  21.  they  g.  me  also  gall,  they  g.  me  vinegar 
78.  29.  for  he  g.  them  their  own  desire,  106.  15. 

Eccl.  12.  7.  the  spirit  shall  return  to  God  that£'.  it 
Isa.  42.  24.  who  g.  Jacob  for  a  spoil,  and  Israel 
43.  3.  I  g.  Egypt  for  thy  ransom,  Seba  for  thee 
.50. 0.  I  "•.  my  back  to  the  smiters,  and  my  cheek* 
.Ter.  1.  15.  I  "■.  thee  a  prophet  to  the  nations 
Ezek.  10.  19.  my  meat  also  which  I  g.  thee 
20.  11.  I  n-.  them  my  statutes,  and  shewed  them 
12.  moreover  also,  I  g.  them  my  sabbaths 
25.  I  g.  them  also  statutes  tliat  were  not  "ood 
Dan.  1.  17.  God  g.  these  four  children  knowledge 
0.  10.  Daniel  prayed  and  g.  thanks  before  God 
Hos.  2.  8.  for  she  did  not  know  that  I  g.  her  corn 
1.3.  11.  ]  g.  thee  a  king  in  mine  anger 
.Imos  2.  12.  ye  g.  the  Nazaritcs  wine  to  drink 
Mai.  2.  5.  I  g.  my  covenant  to  Levi  of  life    _ 
Mat.  10.  I.  Jesus  g.  them  power  against  uncreaii 
spirits  to  cast  them  out,  MarkG.  7. 1.tikei).  1. 
14. 19.  he  brake  and  g.  the  loaves  to  his  disciples, 
15.  30.  I  26.  10.  Mark  0.  41.  1  8.  0.  |  14.  22. 
Luke  9.  16.  I  22.  19. 
21.23.whoir.ihee author.?  .^/arA:  11.28./.uAc20.2. 
25.  35.  ye  g.  me  meat,  ye  g.  me  drink,  took  me  in 

42.  ye  g.  me  no  meat,  and  yo  g.  me  no  drink 
I.uke  15.  10.  with  husks,  and  no  man  g.  unto  him 
./ohii  1.12.to  them /?■.  ho  jiowir  to  become  sons  of  G. 
3. 16.  God  so  loved  world  that  he^.  his  only  Son 
0.  31.  he  g.  them  bread  from  heaven  to  eat 
10. 29.  my  Fath.  wlui  g.  them  me  is  greater  than  all 
14.31.  as  the  Father  n-.  me  commandmont,  so  I  do 
lets 'i. 4.  U)  speak  as  the  Spirit^,  ilieni  utterance 
7.  5.  and  ho  g.  them  no  inheritance  in  it 
1  O.God  ^.Joseph  favour  and  wisdombcforc  Pha. 
10.  2.  Cornelius  g.  much  alms  to  the  people 
11. 17.  as  God^.  them  tho  like  gift  ns  ho  did  to  us 

12.  Kt.  smote  him,  because  he  n-.  not  God  the  glory 

13.  21.  afterward  God  g.  them  Saul  forty  years 

14.  17.  he  did  good,  and  g.  us  rain  from  heaven 

15.  21.  to  whom  we  g.  no  such  commnndment 
20.  10.  when  put  to  death,  I^.  my  voice  ag.  them 

Itooi.  1.28.  God  g.  Ihcmovcr  to  a  reptohale  mind 

1  Cor.  3.  5.  even  as  the  Lord  g.  to  every  man 
6.  .\pollos  watered,  but  God  ^.  the  incnnso 

2  Oir.  R.5.  but  first ;?.  their  own  solves  to  the  Lord 
Hal.  1.  4.  wUog.  hiniBclffor  our  sins,  Tit.  2.  14. 

2.  20.  who  loved  me,  and  g.  himself  for  mo 

3.  1,-1.  but  God  g.  it  to  Abraham  by  promise 
Fph.  1.  22.  and  g.  him  to  be  head  over  all  thinjrs 

4.  8.  he  led  captivity  captive  and  g.  gifts  t*  men 
11.  and  he  g.  some  apostles;  snino  prophets 

5. 2.5.  Christ  loved  the  church,  and  ;r.him5elf  for  it 
1  T//f.«.?.4.2.yo  know  what  commandment  we^.yo« 
1  'I'im.  2.  O.'who  g.  himself  a  ransom  for  all 
Keh.  12  9.  who  corrected  n«,  we  g.{hcm  reveronc* 
Jam.  5.  18.  he  prayed,  and  the  heavens^,  rain 


GEN 

JbArt  3.2;{.  love  one  another,Rs  he ^.us  command. 
5.10.  hebelieveth  not  the  record  Godg.  of  liisSon 
Reo.1.1.  the  revelation  olJes.  Christ  which  Und  g. 
2.31.  I  g-.  her  space  to  repent  of  her  fornication 
13.  2.  tlie  dragon  g.  him  his  power  and  liis  seat,  4. 
GAVE  up. 
Ocn.  25.  8.  Abraham  g.  up  the  ghost,  and  died 
17.  Ishmael  {{  35.  29.  and  Isaac  g.  up  the  gliost, 
and  died 
2  Sam.  24.  9.  Joab  g.  up  the  sum  of  tiie  number 
2  CAr.30.7.  who  g.  tliem  up  to  desolation,  as  ye  see 
Psal.  78.  48.  he  g.  up  their  cattle  also  to  the  hail 
81-  12.  t  g.  them  up  to  their  own  heart's  lust 
Lam.  1.  19.  my  elders  g.  up  the  ghost  in  the  city 
Jilark  15.  37.  Jesus  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  and^. 
?(j»  the  ghost,  39.  Luke  23.  4fi.  John  19.  30, 
..^cts  5.  5.  Ananias^,  up  tlie  ghost  {|  12.  23.  llerod 
7.42.God  ^.them  up  to  worship  the  host  of  heaven 
Horn.  1.  24.  God  also  g.  them  up  to  uncleanness 
2G.for  this  cause  God^.them  up  to  vile  aflections 
Rev.  20.  13.  the  sea  g.  up  the  dead  that  were  in  it 

GAVEST. 
f?fK.3. 12.  the  woman  whom  thou^.  to  be  with  me 
IKings  8.34.  the  land  which  thoug-.to  their  fathers, 
40,  48.  2  Chron.  6.  25,  31,  38.  jVeA.  9.  35. 
JVf/i.  9.  7.  thou  g.  him  the  name  of  Abraham 
13.  thou  g.  them  right  judgments,  true  laws 
].').  g.  thein  bread  from  heaven  for  their  hunger 
20.  thou  o-.also  thy  good  Spirit,^,  water  for  thirst 
22.  thou  g.  them  kingdoms  and  nations 
27.  thou  g.  them  saviours  who  saved  them 
Job  39.13.o-.thou  the  goodly  wings  to  the  peacocks? 
Psal.  21.  4.  he  asked  life  of  thee;  thou  g.  it  him 
74.  14.  thou  g.  him  to  be  meat  to  the  people 
Luke  1.  44.  thou  g.  me  no  water  for  my  feet 
45.  thou  o-.me  no  kiss, but  this  woman  not  ceased 
15. 29.  yet  thou  never  ^.  me  a  kid,  to  make  merry 
John  17.  4.  I  have  finished  work  thou  g.  me  to  do 
6.  fnanifested  to  the  men  whom  thou  "-.me  out  of 
the  world,  thine  they  were,  and  thou  ^.them  me 
8.  I  have  given  them  the  words  which  thou_ 
12.  those  that  thou^.  me  I  have  kept,  none  lost 
22.  the  glory  which  thou  g.  me,  I  have  given 
18.9.  of  them  whom  thou  g.  me  have  I  lost  none 
GAY. 
Jam.  2. 3.  respect  to  him  that  weareth  g.  clothing 

GAZE. 
Eiod.  19.  21.  lest  they  break  thto'  to  the  Lord  to^-. 

GAZING. 
J^ah.  3.  6.  and  I  will  set  thee  as  a  g.  stock 
Jlcts  1.  11.  why  stand  ye  g.  up  into  heaven  ? 
Heb.  10.  33.  partly  whilst  ye  were  made  a  g.  stock 

GENDER. 
Lev.  19. 19.  shall  not  let  cattle  i^.with  diverse  kinds 
2  Tim.  2.  23.  knowing  that  Ihcv  do^'.  strifes 

GENDERED,  ETH. 
Job  21.  10.  their  bull  g.  and  faileth  not 
;<8.  29.  the  hoary  frost  of  heaven,  who  hath  g.  it  ? 
Gal.  4.24.  from  mount  Sinai,  which  «■.  to  bondage 

GENEALOGY 
•Comes  froin  the  Greek  word  Genealogia,  whieh 
signifies  a  list  of  ojir  ancestors,  a  description 
of  the  stock,  lineage,  or  pedigree  of  any  person 
or  family.  The  common  Hebrew  expression 
for  it  is  Sepher  tofedoth.  Liber  generationis. 
The  Hebrews  were  verij  careful  in  preserving 
(Afi'r  genealogies;  and  perhaps  there  nfver  was 
anynalion  more  circumspect  in  this  point  than 
that  of  the  Jews.  At  this  day  we  find  genealo- 
gies in  their  saered  writings,  carried  on  for 
above  three  thousand  five  hundred  years ;  and 
in  the  Evangelists  we  have  the  genealogy  of 
Jesus  Christ  deduced  for  four  thousand  years, 
from  Ailam  to  Joseph  or  Mary,  Luke  3.  23,  & 
TheJcsvs  were  very  exact  in  their  genealogie 
jiartlyfrom  their  oion  choice  and  interest,  that 
they  mi ght  preserve  the  distinctions  of  the  seve- 
ral tribes  and  families,  which  was  necessary 
both  to  make  out  thnr  claims  or  titles  to  offices 
or  inheritances,  which  might  belong  to  them  by 
death,  or  otherwise;  and  to  govern  themselves 
thereby  in  the  matter  of  marriages,  aiid  some 
other  things,  wherein  thepractice  of  some  laws 
required  the  knowledsre  of  these  things  :  ft  is 
observed  in  Ezra  2.  fi2.  that  siieh  priests  as 
jcere  not  able  to  produce  an  eraet  gonealogy  of 
their  families,  were  not  permitted  to  ezerrisc 
their  function  :  This  their  exactness  was  like- 
wise ordered  by  tai special  providence  of  God, 
that  so  it  might  be  certainly  known  of  what 
tribe  and  family  the  Messiah  was  born. 
Josc])hus  says,  that  thnj  had  in  his  nation  an 
uninterru/ited  suctessinn  of  priests  for  two 
thousand  years.  He  adds,  that  the  priests 
were  particularly  careful  to  preserve  their  ge- 
nealogies, and  that  not  only  in  Judea,  but  also 
in  Babylon  and  Egypt:  and  wherever  they 
were,  they  never  married  below  themselves,  and 
had  exact  genealogical  tables  prepared  from 
those  authentic  monuments  whichwerc  kept  at 
229 


GEN 

Jerusalem,  and  to  which  they  had  recourse  upon 
occasion  :  that  in  all  their  wars,  persecutions 
and  public  calandties,  they  always  were  par- 
ticularly diligent   in   securing  those  vionu- 
vients,  and  to  renew  them  from  time  to  time. 
JVotwithstanding,since  the  war  which  f/iellomans 
carried  on  against  the  Jews,  about  thirty  years 
after  the  death  of  our  Haviour,  and  since  their 
entire  dispersion  in  the  reign  of  Adrian,  the 
Jews  have  lost  their  ancient  genealogies  ;  and 
perhaps  there  is  not  one  of  those  who  say  they 
are  of  the  sacerdotal  race,  that  is  able  to  pro- 
duce any  authentic  proofs  of  his  genealogy. 
Jerom  says,  that  the  Jews  are  so  versed  in  the 
reading  of  their  books,  and  know  so  perfectly 
the  genealogies,  which  are  there  set  forth,  that 
they  can  repeat  all  the  names  from  Abraham 
to  Zerubbabel,  as  easily  as  they  canpronounce 
their  own.    St.  Paul  seems  to  condemn  tlie  af- 
fectation of  knowing  old  genealogies :  he  looks 
upon  them  to  be  useless  and  vain,  as  in  reality 
they  are,  when  they  Serve  only  for  ostentation, 
and  not  for  edification :    This  study  was  of 
great  use  before  the  Messiah  came,  that  it  might 
be  known  distinctly  of  what  tribe  and  family 
he  was  born;  but  he  being  come,  this  study  is 
'.lain,  though  still  the  Jews  arc  addicted  to  it. 
T/te  genealogies  set  down  by  Ezra  mid  Nehemian, 
in  some  particulars  vary :  The  reason  whereof 
is  assigned  by  Ur.  Pndeau.\  in  these  terms. 
"  For  the  true  settling  of  these  genealogies," 
tays  he,  "  search  was  made  by  Nehemiah  for 
the  old  registers,  and  having   among   them 
found  the  register  of  the  genealogies  of  those, 
who  came  up  at  first  from  Babylon  with  Ze- 
rubbabel and  Joshua;   he  settled  thisDnatter 
according  to  it,  adding   such  as  afterwards 
came  up,  and  expunging  others,  whose  fami- 
lies were  extinguished:  and  this  hath  caused 
the  difference   that   is   between   the   accounts 
which  we  have  of  these  genealogies  in  Ezra 
and  Nehemiah.     Fpr  in  the  second  chapter  of\ 
Ezra,  we  have  the  old  register  made  by  Zerub-I 
babel ;  and  in  the  seventh  of  Nehemiah,  from 
the   sixth   verse,   we   have    a   copy  of  it,  as 
settled  by  Nehemiah,  with  the  alterations  that 
are  now  nicntioned."   Prideau.x's  Connection, 
Part  I.  Book  VL 
1  Chron.  5.  1.  and  the  g.  is  not  to  be  reckoned 
after  the  birth-right 
Ezra  2.  62.  these  sought  their  g.  J\l'eh.  7.  C4. 
8.  1.  this  is  U^e  g.  of  them  that  went  up  with  me 
JVeA.  7. 5. 1  found  a  register  of  the  o-.  who  came  up 
GENEALOGIES. 

1  Chron.  9.  1.  so  all  Israel  were  reckoned  by  g. 

2  Chr.  12. 15.  the  book  of  Shemaiah  concerning  »■. 
31.  19.  to  give  portions  to  all  reckoned  by  g. 

1  Tim.  1.  4.  give  no  heed  to  fables  and  endless  g. 

Tit.3.9.  avoid  foolish  quest  ions,  ^.and  contentions 

GENERAL. 

1  Chron.  27.34.  the^.  of  the  king's  army  was  Joab 
Heb.  12. 23.  to  ^.assembly  and  church  of  first-born 

GENERALLY. 

2  Sam.  17. 11. 1  counsel  that  Israel  be^.  gathered 
Jcr.i8.38.  be  lanientation^.on  house-tops  of  Moab 

GENERATION. 
This  word  is  used  fur  the  history  and  genealogy  of 
any  man.  For  example :  This  is  the  book  of  the 
generations  of  Mdam,  Gen.  5. 1.    This  is  the  his- 
tory of  Adam's  creation,  and  that  of  his  poste- 
rity.   These  are  the  generations  of  the  heavens 
and  of  the  earth,  Oen.  2.  4.   This  is  a  recital  of 
the  creation  of  heaven  and  earth.  And  in  Mat. 
1.1,  The  book  of  the  generation  of  Jesus  Christ, 
the  Son  of  David.   This  is  the  genealogy  o/ Je- 
sus Christ,  and  the  history  of  his  life,death,  and 
resurrection.    It  is  likewise  taken  for  persons 
or  people  who  live  in  some  one  age.  Heb.  3. 10, 1 
was  grieved  with  thatgeneration;  with  thosemen 
that  came  out  of  Egypt,  and  rebelled  against 
me  in  the  wilderness.   Mat.  24.  34,  This  gene- 
ration shall  not  pass,  till  all  these  things  be  ful- 
filled.  All  who  are  at  present  living,  shall  not 
be  dead,  when  this  shall  come  to  pass.  There  ore 
some  at  this  day  living,  who  shall  be  witnesses 
of  the  evils  whieh  I  have  foretold  shall  befall 
the  Jews.   The  men  of  this  generation,  the  men 
who  are  now  alive,  Luke  1 1.  31.  O  faitliless  and 
perverse  generation  I   Luke  9.  41.    And,  save 
yourselves  from  this  untoward  generation, /row 
these  perverse  men.  Acts  2.  40.    To  geni'ration 
and  generation,  denotes  future  ages,  Psal.  .33. 
til.     Who  shall  declare  his  generation?   Isa. 
53.  8.     Who  can  declare  or  number  the  Mes- 
siah's spiritual  seed,  the  number  of  those  who 
shall  believe  in  him,  and  be  converted  to  him  by 
the  preaching  of  the  gospel  ?  Generation  i>  also 
taken  for  men  of  like  quality  and  disj>o..)ition, 
though  neither  of  one  place  nor  ape.    Psal.  14. 
5,  God  is  in  liie  generation  of  the  righteouB. 


GEN 

The  ancients  sometimes  computed  by  generationi 
and  the  Scripture  follows  frequently  this  me- 
thod, Gen.  15. 16.  |  50.  23,  In  the  fourth  genera 
tion  thy  descendants  shuU  come  hither  again 
Joseph  saw  Fphraim's  children  of  the  third 
generation.  A  bastard  shall  nut  be  admiltedintg 
the  congregation  even  to  his  teiiih  generation, 
J)eut.  2;!.  2.  Hy  some  of  the  ancients  a  gene- 
ration was  fixed  at  a  hundred  years,  by  others 
at  a  hundred  and  ten,  by  others  at  thirty-three, 
thirty  Jive  and  tiEenty,and<:ven  at  twenty  years 
So  that  there  was  nothing  uniform  andsettleA 
in  this  matter.  Only  it  is  remarked,  that  the 
continuance  of  generations  is  so  much  longer, 
as  it  comes  nearer  to  the  more  ancient  times. 

Gen.  7.  1.  thee  have  I  seen  righteous  in  Ihis^. 

Exod.  1.  6.  Joseiih  died,  and  all  that^. 
17.  16.  will  have  war  with  Amaiek  from  g.  to  g. 

JV«7n.  32. 13.  till  that^.  was  consumed,  2jeut.2.1i. 

IJciit.  1.35.  not  one  of  this  evil  o-.shall  see  that  land 

23.  2.  a  bastard  shall  not  enter  even  to  his  tenth  g. 
3.  an  Ammonite  to  tenth  g.  shall  not  enter 
8.  Edomite  and  Egypt,  in  the  third ^.  shall  enter 

29.  22.  so  that  the ^.  lo  come  shall  rise  up  and  say 
32.  5.  they  are  a  perverse  and  crooked  g.  20. 

t  7.  consider  the  years  of  g.  and  g. 
Judg.2.10.  all  that  o-.were  gathered  to  their  fathers, 
and  there  arose  another  g.  after  them 
Esth.'d.23.  these  days  shall  be  rememb.  in  every  g. 
Psal.  10.  t  6.  I  shall  not  be  moved  to  g.  and  g. 
12.  7.  thou  shalt  keep  them,  O  Lord,  thou  simlt 
preserve  them  from  this  g.  for  ever 
14.  5.  for  God  is  in  the  g.  of  the  righteous 
22.  30.  it  shall  be  accounted  to  the  Lord  for  a  g. 

24.  6.  this  is  the  g.  of  them  that  seek  him 

48.  13.  that  ye  may  tell  it  to  the  g.  following 

49.  19.  he  shall  go  to  the  g.  of  his  fathers 
71.  18.  till  I  have  shewed  thy  strength  to  this^. 
73. 15. 1  should  ofl'end  ag.  the  g.  of  thy  children 
77.  t8.  doth  his  promise  fail  to  g.  and  g.? 
78.4.  shewing  to  the^.  to  come  the  praises  of  Ld. 

6.  that  the  g.  to  come  might  know  them 
8.  might  not  be  a  stubborn  and  rebellious  g. 
95. 10.  forty  years  grieved  with  this^.  Heb.  3. 10. 
102.  18.  this  shall  be  written  for  the  g.  to  come 
109.13.in  ^.following  let  their  name  be  blotted  out 
112.  2.  tlieg-.  of  the  upright  shall  be  blessed 
145.  4.  one  g.  shall  praise  thy  works  lo  another 
Prov.  'il.  24.  doth  the  crown  endure  to  crvery  g  ? 
30.  11.  there  is  o  g.  that  cureeth  their  father 

12.  there  is  a.  g.  that  are  pure  in  their  own  eyPs 

13.  a  g.  lofty  II  14.  a  g.  whose  teeth  are  swords 
Ecel.  1.  4.  one  g.  passeth  away,  another^,  cometh 
Isa.  13.  20.  not  dwelt  in  from  g.  to  g.  Jer.  50.  3ft 

34.  10.  from  g.  to  g.  it  shall  lie  waste 
17.  from  g.  to  g.  they  shall  dwell  therein 

51.  8.  but  my  salvation  shall  be  from  g.  to  g. 

53.  8.  who  shall  declare  his  g.l  Acts  8.  33. 
Jer.  2.  31.  O  g.  .see  ye  the  word  of  the  Lord 

7.  29.  the  Lord  hath  rejected  the  g.  of  his  wrgth 
Lam.i.  19.  thy  throne,  <S  Ld.  remains  from ^.  to ^i 
Dan.  4.  3.  and  his  dominion  is  from  g.  to  g.  34. 
Joel  1.  3.  and  let  their  children  tell  another^. 

3.  20.  Jerusalem  shall  dwell  from  ^.  lo^. 
Mat.  1.  1.  the  book  of  the  g.  of  Jesus  Christ 

3.  7.  O  g.  of  vipers,  12.  34.  |  23.  33.  Luke  3.  7. 

11.  16.  whereto  shall  I  liken  this  g.7  Luke  7.  31. 

12.  39.  an  evil  and  adulterous^,  seeketh  after  a 
sign,  16.  4.  Mark  8.  12.  Lvke  11.  29 

41.  shall  rise  in  judgment  with  this ^.  Lukell.Xi 

42.  queen  of  the. south  rise  up  with  ^.  y,«/icll.31. 
45.  even  so  shall  it  be  also  to  this  wicked  g. 

17.  17.  O  perverse  g.  Mark  9.  19.  Luke  9.  41. 

23.  36.  all  these  things  shall  come  on  this  g. 

24.34.this^.shall  not  pass,  Jl/a?-A13.30./,«/lf21.32. 
Mark  8.  38.  shall  be  ashamed  of  me  in  this  sinful^. 
Luke  1.  .'JO.  his  mercy  is  on  them  from  g.  to  g. 

11.  30.  so  shall  the  Son  of  man  be  to  this  g. 
SO.the  blood  of  the  prophets  required  of  tliis^.51 

16.  8.  cliil(lr(Mi  of  this  world  in  their  "-.are  wiser 
17.25.  the  Son  of  man  must  be  rejected  of  this  ^ 
Acts  2.  40.  save  you  from  this  untoward  g. 
13.  30.  David,  after  he  had  served  his  own  g. 
1  Pet.  2. 9.  ye  are  a  chosen  g.  a  royal  priesthood 
See  FofRTH. 
GENERATIONS. 
Oen.  2.  4.  these  are  the  g.  of  the  heavens  and  earth 
.5.1.  the^.of  Adam||6.  9.  theg-.  of  Noah,  10.  1. 
6.  9.  Noah  was  a  just  man  and  perfect  in  his  g. 
9.  12.  of  the  covenant  I  make  for  perpetual  g. 
11.  10.  thesearelhe^-.  of  Ahem  II27.J-.  ofTcrah 
17.7.covenant  between  me  and  thy  seed  in  their^. 
9.  thou  and  thy  seed  after  thee  in  their  ^. 

12.  he  that  is  eight  days  old  shall  be  circumcised 
among  von,  every  man-child  in  your^. 

2.5. 12.  these  are  the  g.  of  Ishmael,  13.  I  Chr.  1  29 
19.  the.se  the  ir-  of  Isaac  ||  36. 1.  the^.  of  Esau,9. 
37.2.  these  are  the  o-.of  Jacob,  Jo^'Cph  17  yeare  old 
Krnd.  3.  15.  and  this  is  my  memorial  unto  all^. 
6.  16.  the  sons  of  Levi  according  to  their  ^.  19, 


GEN 

Ezod.  12. 14.  a  feait  to  the  Ld.  thiou;hout  your^. 

17.  ye  shall  observe  tliU  day  in  yuur^. 
42.  a  uigiit  10  be  much  observed  by  Isr.in  their  ^. 
It).  3i!.  fill  a  homer  to  be  kept  for  your  g.  33. 
27.  21.  it  phull  be  a  statute  for  ever  to  their  g. 
30.  21.  J.ev.  3.  17.  1  (i.  18.  |  7.  30.  |  10.  U.  | 
17.  7.  1  23.  14,  21,  31,  41. 

29. 42.  u  conliu.  burnl-ort'crii  g  tliroughout  your^'. 
30.  8.  burn  incense  i|  31.  oil  throughout  your^r. 
31. 13.  my  saiibaths  a  sign  throughout  your  ^.  10. 
40. 13.  an  everhisling  priesthood  through  their  ^. 

/,<M).21.  K.ofthyseed  m  their  ^.  thai  haih  bleinish 

23.43.  your  0-.  may  know  thai  I  niaue  Israel  dwell 
24. 3.  a  statute  for  ever  in  g.  .Yarn.  10.  S.  |  18.  23. 

Veut.T.  9.  Lord  kcejieth  covenant  to  a  thousand  or. 

32.  7.  consider  the  years  of  many  «■. 
Josh.  22.  27.  a  wilnnss  between  you  and  our  g. 

2y.wheo  tliey  should  say  to  our  of.in  time  to  come 
Jiidg.  3.  2.  the^r.  of  Israel  might  teach  them  war 
liiitli  4.  Id.  now  these  are  the  o-.  of  Pharez 
1  C/iTon.  10.  1.5.  of  his  covenant,  the  word  which 
he  commanded  to  a  thousand  g.  Psal.  105.  8. 
Job  4'i.  10.  Job  saw  liis  sons'  sons,  even  four  »•. 
Psal.  :J3.  11.  the  thoughts  of  liis  heart  to  all  g. 

45.  17.  make  thy  name  to  be  remembered  in  alt^. 

4'J.  11.  their  dwelling-places  continue  to  all  g. 

61.0.  thou  wilt  prolong  the  king's  years  as  many  w-. 
72.  5.  they  shall  fear  thee  throughout  all  g. 

79.  13.  we  will  shew  forth  thy  praise  to  all  g. 
85.  5.  wilt  thou  draw  out  thine  anger  to  all  g.7 

89. 1.  I  will  make  known  thy  faithfulness  to  all^. 
4.  and  I  will  build  up  thy  throne  to  ail  ^. 

90.  1.  thou  hast  been  our  dwelUng-place  in  all  "-. 
llMI.  5.  and  his  truth  endureth  to  all  g. 
102.  12.  and  thy  remembrance  unto  all  g. 
24.  thy  years  are  throughout  all  g. 
lot).  31.  was  counted  to  him  for  righteous,  to  allg'. 
119.  90.  thy  faithlulness  is  unto  all^. 
13.5.  13.  and  thy  memorial  throughout  all  g, 
145.  13.  and  thy  dominion  throughout  "11^'. 
140.  10.  thy  God,  O  Zion,  shall  reign  to  all  g. 
J.ia.  41.  4.  calling  the  g.  from  the  beginning 
51.9.  awake,  O  arm  of  the  Lord,  as  in  the  ^. of  old 
58. 12.  shalt  raise  up  the  foundations  of  many  g. 

60.  15.  I  will  make  thee  a  joy  of  many  n-. 

61.  4.  they  shall  repair  the  desolations  of  many  g. 
Joel  2.  2.  even  to  the  years  of  many  g. 

Mat.  1.  17.  the^.from  .\braham  to  jlavid  are  14  g. 

r.uke  1.  48.  behold,  all  g.  shall  call  me  blessed 

Cul.  1. 26.  mystery  hath  been  hid  from  ages  and  g. 
GENTILE. 

The  Hebrews  call  the  Gentiles  b7j  the  general 
name  of  Oniim,  which  signifies  the  ■nation's 
that  have  not  received  the  faith,  or  law  of 
Clod.  Jill  who  are  not  Jews,  and  circnmcised, 
are  comprised  vnder  the  word  Goiim.  Before 
Christ,  the  door  tn  life  and  justification  wai 
opened  to  the  world  by  the  belief  only  and  pro 
fession  of  the  Jewish  religion.  Those  who 
were  converted.,  and  embraced  Judaism,  they 
called  Proselytes.  Since  the  preaching  of  the 
gospel,  the  true  religion  is  not  confined  to  any 
one  nation  and  country,  only,  as  heretofore. 
God,  who  had  promised  by  his  prophets  to  call 
the  Gentiles  to  the  faith,  with  a  superabun- 
dance of  grace,  has  executed  this  promise  ■ 
So  that  the  Christian  church  is  composed  of 
scarcely  any  other  besides  Gentile  converts 
and  the  Jews,  who  were  too  proud  of  their 
particular  privileges,  for  the  most  part  have 
been  abandoned  to  their  reprobated  sense  of 
things,  and  have  disowned  Jesus  Christ  their 
Messiah  and  Hrdeemer,  for  whom,  for  so  many 
ages,  they  wished  so  impatiently. 

The  apostle  Paul  generally  comprehends  thi 
Gonlilfs  under  the  name  of  On-ek?,  Hom.i.  IG 
Jew  and  Greek  signify  Jew  and  Gentile.  See 
also  Rom.  2.  9,  10.  ]  3."  9.  |  10.  12.  1  Cor.  1.  22, 
24.  Gal.  3.  28.  .Ind  St.  Luke,  in  the  Acts,  ei. 
pressed  himself  in  the  same  manner,  Acts  11 
20.  I  18.  4.  St.  Paul  is  commonly  called  the 
Apostle  of  the  Genlile-i,  or  J//c  Greeks,  \Tim 
2.  7.  because  he  was  principally  sent  to  idola- 
trous people,  lo  preach  Christ  to  them  ;  whereas 
St.  Peter,  and  the  other  Jlpostlcs,  preached 
more  generally  to  the  Jews;  for  which  reason 
they  are  called  the  ..Apostles  of  the  circurnci 
gion.  Cat.  2.  7,  The  gonpid  of  the  imcircnmci 
«ion  was  rommitlcil  unto  me,  as  the  gospel  of 
the  rircumcisirm  was  unto  Peter. 

The  old  prophets  declared  in  a  very  particular 
mann'T  the  cnllivg  of  the  Genlile><.  Jarol 
foretold,  that  rrhen  Shihih,  or  the  Mo-iiah 
shovid  come,  lo  him  Bhonhl  the  gnlhc-ring  of  ||»; 
people  he ;  that  is,  the  Gentiles  should  yield 
obedience  to  Chrift,  and  nchnowledge  him  for 
their  Ijord  and  Saviour.  Jind  ho^e  sineerrhj 
and  heartily  the  ancient  and  godly  Jews  desired 
the.  Conner  $ion  of  the  GrnlWi-f,  may  appear  frmn 
the  prayer  which  Solomon  addresses  to  (iod, 
230 


GEN 

after  the  dedication  of  the  temple  akieh  be  had 

built.  1  Kings  8.  41,  42,  43,  kVhen  the  stran- 
ger shall  come  and  pray  toward  this  houee, 
/icar  thou  in  heaven,  tliat  all  peojile  of  the 
earth  may  know  thy  name,  to  fear  thee  as  thy 
people  Israel.  The  Psalmist  says,  that  the 
Lord  shall  give  the  Gentiles  to  the  Meesiah 
for  an  inheritance,  Psal.  2.  8.  'J'hat  the  kings 
of  Tarshish  and  of  the  isles  shall  bring  pre- 
sents; the  kings  of  Sheba  and  Seba  shall  offer 
gifts  ;  yea,  all  kings  shall  fall  down  before  him, 
Psal.  72.  10,  11.  .^nd  in  Psal.  87.  4,  I  will 
make  mention  of  F.gypt  and  Babylon,  to  them 
that  know  me ;  behold,  Fhilistiu  and  7'yrc,with 
F.thiopia:  this  man  was  born  there.  Isaiah 
abounds  with  prophecies  of  the  like  nature; 
see  Isa.  2.  2,  3,  4.  f  11.  10.  |  42.  1,  0. 
In  the  J^'ew  Testament  we  see  the  Gentiles  came 
sometimes  to  Jerusalem  to  worship  (!od  there. 
Some  of  these  arriving  there  a  little  before  the 
death  of  our  Saviour,  addressed  themselves  to 
Philip,  desiring  him  to  shew  them  Jesus,  .John 
12.  20,  &,c.  Philip  told  Andrew,  and  both  of 
them  informed  Jesus  ;  who  answered  them. 
The  hour  is  come,  that  the  Son  of  man  should 
be  glorified  ;  that  is.  Do  the  Gentiles  seek  me  ? 
why,  the  time  approaches  wherein  J  shall  be 
glorified  by  their  conversion,  and  owning  of 
me  ;  but  I  must  die  first,  like  a  grain  of  corn, 
and  from  thence  will  spring  up  a  plentiful 
crop  among  the  Gentiles.  (^uttn  Cundace's 
eunuch  who  came  to  Jerusalem,  was  likewise 
a  Gentile,  as  several  affirm.  Acts  8.  27. 
Mark  7.  120.  the  woman  was  a  »•.  a  Syrophcnician 
Horn.  2.  y.  of  the  Jew  first,  and  also  of  the  ^.  10. 

GENTILES. 
Oen.iO.5.  by  these  the  isles  of  the  ^.  were  divided 
.fudg.  4.  2.  Sisera  dwelt  in  Harosheth  of  the  g. 
Isa.  11.  10.  a  root  of  Jesse,  to  it  shall  the  g.  seek 
42.  1.  he  shall  bring  judgment  to  the  g.  Jl/aM2.18. 
0.  for  a  light  to  i'.  49.  0.  Luke  2.  32.  .ids  13.  47. 
49.  22.  behold,  I  will  lift  up  mine  hand  to  the  i'. 
54.  3.  and  thy  seed  shall  inherit  the  g. 
C>0.  3.  and  the  g.  shall  come  to  thy  light 
5.  the  forces  of  the  g.  shall  come  to  thee,  11. 

16.  thou  shalt  also  suck  the  milk  of  the  g. 
61.  G.  ye  shall  eat  the  riches  of  the  g. 

9.  and  their  seed  shall  be  known  among  the  g. 
f)2.  2.  and  the  g.  shall  see  thy  righteousness 
66.  12.  the  glory  of  the  g.  like  a  tlowing  stream 
19.  they  shall  declare  my  glory  among  the  g. 

Jer.  4.  7.  the  destroyer  of  the  g.  is  pn  his  way 
14.22.  can  any  of  the  vanities  of  the  g.  cause  rain? 
16.19.  tlie^.  shall  come  to  thee  from  ends  of  earth 
46.  1.  the  word  came  to  Jeremiah  against  the  g. 

Lam.  2.9.  her  king  and  princes  are  among  the^. 

Riek.  4.  13.  eat  their  defiled  bread  among  the  g. 

Has.  8.  8.  now  shall  they  be  among  the  g. 

./o(7  3. 9.  proclaim  ye  this  among  thc^.  prepare  war 

.W!C.5.8.the  remnant  of  Jacob  shall  be  among  the^'. 

Zech.  1.  21.  are  come  to  cast  out  the  horns  of  ^. 

Mai.  1.  U.  my  name  shall  be  great  among  the  g. 

Mat.  4.  15.  beyond  Jordan,  Galilee  of  the  g. 

6.  32.  for  after  all  these  things  do  the  "-.  seek 
10.  5.  saying,  go  not  into  the  way  of  the  g. 

18.  fur  a  testimony  against  them  and  the^. 
12.  21.  and  in  his  name  shall  the  g.  trust 
20.19.  deliv. him  to  Ihe^.  Mark  10.33.i.uic  18.32. 
25.  i«inces  of  the  ^.exercise  domin.  Luke^.  25. 
Luke  21.  24.  Jerusalem  shall  be  trodden  down  of 
the  g.  till  the  times  of  the  g.  be  fulfilled 
./ohn  7.35.  to  the  disjiersed  among /i^.  and  teach  w. 
Jlcis  4.  27.  Pilate  with  g.  were  gathered  together 

7.  4.5.  with  Jesus  into  the  possession  of  the  ^. 

9.  15.  to  bear  my  name  before  the  ;;,'■.  ami  kings 

10.  45.  on  the  g.  also  was  poured  out  the  gift 
11.1.  heard  that  the  g.  received  the  word  of  God 

18.  hath  (Jod  to  the^. granted  repentance  lo  lile? 
13.42.  g.  hcHoiight  these  words  might  bo  preached 

40.  Paul  and  Itarnabas  said,  lo,  we  turn  lo  thc^. 

48.  when  the  g.  heard  this,  they  were  glad 
14.  2.  the  unbelieving  Jews  stirred  up  the  g. 

5.  there  was  an  iissmilt  made  both  of  Jewsund^ . 

27.  he  had  opened  the  door  of  faith  to  the  g. 
1.5.  3.  declaring  the  conversion  of  the  g.  great  joy 

7.  that  Ihe^.  by  my  mouth  should  hear  the  word 

12. what  wondersGod  had  wrought  among  they. 

14.  Simoon  declared  how  God  at  first  did  visit/,'. 

17.  and  all  Ihe^.  on  whom  my  name  is  called 
19. we  trouble  not  them, which  from  Hinong  thc^. 
23.  send  greeting  lo  the  brethren  of  the  ^. 

IH.  6.  from  hencforlh  I  will  go  to  the  g. 

21.  11.  shall  deliver  Piiiil  into  the  hands  of  the  ^r. 

19.  God  wrought  among  the  g.  by  his  ministry 
21.  Icachest  the  Jews  among  ^.  lo  forsake  Moses 
2.5.  ns  touching  the /f  .which  believe,  have  written 

22.  21 .  for  I  will  send  thee  far  hence  lo  the  g. 
26.  17.  di'iivering  Ihoe  from  the  people  and  the  g. 

20.  shewing  lo  the  g.  that  they  should  repent 
03.  that  Christ  should  shew  light  lo  the  g. 


GET 

..Sets  28.  38.  the  salvation  of  God  is  sent  to  th«  g 
Born.  1.  13.  have  some  fruit,  as  among  other  ^. 

2.  14.  for  when  the  "'.  which  have  not  the  law 

24.  the  name  of  God  is  blasphemed  among  the/' 

3.  9.  we  have  proved  both  Jews  and  ^.  under  sia 

29.  is  he  not  also  of  the  g.7  yes,  of  the  g.  also 

9.  24.  not  of  Jews  only,  but  also  of  the  g. 

30.  g.  which  followed  not  after  righteousness 

11.  Jl.  salvation  is  come  lo  the^.lo  provoke  thenj 

12.  the  diminishing  of  them  the  riches  of  the  ^. 

13.  1  sjieak  to  you  g.  as  the  apostle  of  the  g. 

25.  till  the  fulness  of  the  ^.  be  come  in 

15.  9.  thai  the  n-.  might  glorify  God  for  his  mcrejr, 
for  this  cause  I  will  confess  to  thee  among  the^. 

10.  he  saith,  rejoice,  ye  g.  with  his  people 

11.  praise  Lord,  all  ye^.  and  laud  him  all  people 

12.  lo  reign  over  the  g.  in  him  shall  tlie  g.  trust 
16.  that  1  should  be  the  minister  of  Jesus  Christ 

to  the  g.  that  the  ottering  up  of  the  g. 

18.  to  make  the  g.  obedient  by  word  and  deed 

27.  i'or  if  the  g.  have  been  made  partakers  of 

16.  4.  not  only  I,  but  all  the  churches  of  the  ^. 

1  Cor.  5. 1.  is  not  so  much  as  named  among  thk  g. 

10.  20.  the  things  which  the  g.  sacrifice  to  devils 
32.  give  none  oflence,  neither  to  Jews  nor^. 

12.  2.  ye  know  ye  were  g.  carried  aw  ay  to  idols 
1.3.  into  one  body,  whether  we  be  Jews  or^. 

Gal.  2.  2.  that  gospel  which  1  preach  among  the^. 
8.  the  same  was  mighty  in  me  toward  the  ^. 
J2.  for  before  some  came,  he  did  eat  with  the^. 

14.  livest  after  manner  of  ^.  why  compellest^'.? 

15.  we  who  are  Jews,  and  not  simieis  of  the  g, 

3.  14.  blessing  of  Abraham  might  come  on  the^. 
F.ph.  2.  11.  ye  being  in  time  past  g.  in  the  flesh 

3. 1. 1  Paul  ihe  prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ  for  you  g. 
6.  that  g'.  should  be  fellow-heirs  of  the  same  body 
8.  preach  among  the  g.  the  unsearchable  riches 

4.  17.  that  ye  henceforth  w  alk  not  as  other  g. 
Col.  1.  27.  the  glory  of  this  mystery  among  Ihe  g. 
1  7'hess.  2.  IH.  forbidding  us  to  speak  to  llie  g. 

4.  5.  not  in  the  lust  of  concupiscence,  as  Ihe  g. 

1  Tim.  2.  7.  1  am  ordained  a  teacher  of  the  g. 

3. 16.  preached  lo  the  "-.  believed  on  in  the  world 

2  7'i7;i.l.ll.am  appoint,  an  apostle  and  teacher  of ^. 
4.  17.  and  that  all  the  g.  might  hear 

ll'et.  2.  12.  your  conversation  honest  among  the^. 
4.  3.  to  have  wrought  the  will  of  the  g. 

3  .lohn  7.  they  went  Ibrth,  takitg  nothing  of  the  ^. 
Hev.  11.  2.  for  the  court  is  given  to  the  g. 

GENTLE. 

1  Thess.2.7.  we  werci'.among  you,  even  as  a  nursa 

2  Tim.  2.  24.  Ihe  servant  of  Ihe  Lord  must  be  g. 
Tit.  3.  2.  but  g.  shewing  all  meekness  to  all  njen 
./am.  3.  17.  Ihe  wisdom  fiom  above  is  pureund^. 

1  Pet.  2. 18.  be  subject  not  onlv  lo  tlie  good  and/. 

GENTLENESS. 

2  Sam. '22.  36.  thy  ^.  hath  made  me  great,  rs.18.3a. 
2  Cor.  10.  1.  I  beseech  you  by  the  g.  of  Christ 
Gal.  5.  22.  Ihe  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  g.  guodnesi 

GENTLY. 
2  .Sam.  18.5.  dealer,  with  the  young  man  Absalom 
Isa.  40.  11.  he  w ill  g.  lead  lliose  with  young 

GET. 
Gen.  34.  4.  saying,  g.  me  this  damsel  to  wife 
F.jod.  1.  10.  and  so  o-.  Ibein  up  out  of  the  land 
14.  17.  and  I  will  "'.  me  honour  ui>nn  Pharaoh 
Lm.  14.  21.  if  he  be  jioor  and  caniioi  g.  so  much 
22.  two  pigeons,  such  as  he  is  able  to  g.  30,  31. 
32.  Ihe  law  of  him  whuse  hand  is  not  able  10/. 
J^um.  G.  21.  besides  that  that  his  hand  shall  ^g-. 

22.  34.  now  therefore  I  will  g.  me  back  again 
Deut.  8.  IH.  it  is  he  givelh  thie  power  to/. "wealth 

28.  43.  the  strangers  shall  g.  up  above  thee 
.Judg.  14.  2.  therefore  g.  her  for  me  lo  wife,  3. 

1  .Vuni.20. 29.  let  me^.  away  and  sec  my  brethren 

23.  26.  llavid  made  haste  to  g.  away  for  fear 

2  Sam.  20.  6.  lest  Sheba  g.  fenced  cities  and  escape 

1  Kings  1.  2.  that  my  lord  Ihe  king  may  g.  lieal 
12.  18.  king  Rehobiam  made  sjieeil  to  ^.  up  to  hi? 

chariot  lo  flee  lo  Jerusalem,  2  Chron.  10.  1? 

2  Kings  7.12.  shall  catch  them  alive,  and  /.the  city 
/'.«i/.l  19.101. thro' thy  precepts  \  g.  uiideistanding 
Prvr.  4.  5.  g.  wisdom,  g.  iinderslanding,  7. 

6.  33.  a  wound  and  dishonour  shall  he  g. 
16.16  much  belter  it  is  to/.wi..-doni  Ihangold,  and 

lo  /.undersi  niiding  rather  lo  be  cho.sen  than  silv. 

17.  10.  a  \mre  in  Ihe  hand  of  a  fool  to/,  wisdom 
22.  25.  lest  thou  learn  his  ways  and  /.  a  snare 

F.rcl.  3.  6.  there  is  a  time  to  /.  ami  a  time  to  Inso 
C(Hi(.  4.6.  I  will/,  me  to  Ihe  mounlains  of  myrrh 

7.  12.  let  us  /.  ii|>  early  to  Ihe  vineyards  and  see  if 
.  Vr.  5.  5.  I  will  /.  me  to  great  men,  and  » ill  speak 

19.  1.  and  /.  a  potter's  enrllien  Imille 

46.  4.  Iiiirness  the  horses,  and  /.  up  ye  horsemen 
48.  9.  give  wings  lo  Monb,  that  ii  may  /.  away 
/,n7a.3.7.  he  hath  hedged  me  iiboiit,  I  eininot/.out 
F.irk.  22.  27.  lo  destroy  souls,  to  /.  dishonest  gain 
Dan.  4,  14.  lei  the  beasts  /.  away  from  under  it 
Z'pA.  3.  19.  I  will  /.  them  prni>c  from  every  land 
*Vaf  .10. 1 9.  /■  neither  gold  nor  silver  in  your  purses 


GIA 

Mal.HMi.  constr.  them  to^.into  ship,  Mark6A5. 
Luke  9.  ri.  that  they  may  lodge  and  g.  victuals 
./icla'il.i'.i.  cast  themselves  into  sea,  and  o-. to  land 
S  Cor.  2.  11.  Iv6t  eatan  siiuuld  g.  advantage  of  U8 
Jam.  4.  13,  continue  there,  buy,  sell,  and  g.  gain 

GET  tliee. 
Gen.  12.  1.  g.  l/iee  out  of  thy  country,  J3cts  7.  3. 
'22.  2.  he  iaid,  g.  thee  into  the  land  of  Moriah 
31.  13.  g   tliec  out  from  this  land,  and  return 
F.iod.  7.  15.  g.  thee  to  Pharaoh  in  the  morning 

10.  28.  g.  thee  from  me,  take  heed  to  thyself 
11.8.  i-.tiecoutjand  all  the  people  that  follow  thee 
19.  24.  Jiord  said  to  Moses,  away,  g.  thee  down, 

and  thou  shall  come  up,  32.  7.  JJeut.  9. 12. 
^um.'iT.l'i.g.thee  upto  mountAbarim,Z>e«i.32.49. 
Ucut.  3.  27.  g.  thee  up  to  the  top  of  Pisgab 

17. 8.  g.  thee  up  to  the  place  the  Lord  shall  choose 
Josh.  7.  10.  g.  thee  up,  wherefore  liest  thou  thus? 

17.  15.  then  g.  thee  up  to  the  wood  country 
Jiidg.  1.  9.  arise,  g.  thee  down  unto  the  host 
Ruth  .3.  3.  wash  thyself,  g.  thee  down  to  the  floor 

4.  t  11. g-.  thee  riches  in  K|)hratah,  and  be  famous 
1  Sam.  22. 5.  depart,  g.  thee  into  the  land  of  Judah 

1  Kings  I.  13.  go,  g.  thee  in  to  king  Uavid,  and  say 
2.  26.  g.  thee  to  Anathoth  to  thuie  own  fields 
14.  2.  g.  thee  to  Sliiloh,  behold  there  is  Ahijah 

12.  arise  therefore,  g.  thee  to  thine  own  house 

17.  3.  g.  thee  hence  ||  9.  g.  thee  to  Zarephath 

18.  41.  Elijah  said,  g.  thee  up,  eat  and  drink 
44.  g.  thee  down,  that  the  rain  stop  thee  not 

2  Kings  3.  13.  g.  thee  to  the  prophets  of  thy  father 
JVeh.  9. 10.  so  didst  thou  0-.  thee  a  name  as  this  day 
Isa.  22.  15.  g.  thee  to  this  treasurer,  to  Shebna 

30.  22.  thou  shalt  say  unto  it,  g.  thee  hence 
40.  9.  O  Zion,  g.  thee  up  into  the  high  mountain 
47.  5.  sit  thou  silent,  and  g.  thee  into  darkness 
Jer.  13.  1.  g.  thee  a  linen  girdle,  put  it  on  thy  loins 
£:eA.3.4.  son  of  man,  g.  thee  to  the  house  of  Israel 

ll.'and  go,  g.  thee  to  them  of  the  captivity 
JlifaH.  10.  Jesus  saith  to  him,  ff-.  thee  hence,  Satan 
IC.  23.  he  turned,  and  s^  lo  Peter,  g.  thee  be- 
hind me,  Satan,  Mark  B.  33.  I^uke  4.  8. 
lAike  13.  31.  g.  thee  out,  for  Herod  will  kill  thee 
^Icts  10.  20.  arise,  g.  thee  down,  go  with  them 
22. 18.^.  thee  quickly  out  of  Jerusalem,  will  not 

GET  ye. 
Gen.  19.  14.  Lot  said,  up,  g.  ye  out  of  this  place 
Isa.'.iO.ll.  g.ye  out  of  the  way, turn  aside  from  path 
Jer.  49.  31.  arise,  "•.  ye  up  to  the  wealthy  nation 
Ezek.  11.  15.  have  said,  g.  ye  far  from  the  Lord 
Joel  3.  13.  come,  g.  ye  down,  for  the  press  is  full 
Zech.  6.  7.  he  said,  g.  ye  hence,  walk  to  and  fro 

GETj^oa. 
Gf7!.34.10.dwell  and  trade,  n-.^oi/posscssions  there. 
42.  2.  g.  you  down  thither  and  buy  for  us  thence 
44.  17.  rise  tip,  g.  you  up  m  peace  unto  your  father 
Exod.  5.  4.  the  kiWg  said,  g.  you  to  your  burdens 

11.  go  you,  g.  you  straw  where  you  can  find  it 
12.  31.  rise  up,  g.you  forth  from  among  my  people 

^um.  14.  25.  turn  yon, g.you  into  the  wilderness 
16.  24.  0-.  you  up  from  about  tabernacle  of  Korah 
22.  13.  Balaam  said,  g.  you  into  your  land 
J)eat.5.  '.V).  g.  you  into  your  tents  again,  Josh.22.4 
Josh.'i.lG.  g  y.lo  the  mountains,lestpur8uer8meet 
Judg.  19.  9.  lo-morrow  g.  you  early  on  your  way 

1  .Sam.  9.  13.  g.  you  up,  for  ye  shall  find  him 
15.  6.  g.  you  down  from  among  the  Amaltkites 
25.  5.  g.  you  up  to  Carmel,  and  go  to  Nabal 

Jer. 49.30.  fleej^i-.j/ou  farofT,dwelldeepjyeofHazor 
GETTETH. 

2  -Sam.  5. 8.  whosoever  g.  up  to;the  gutter,  be  chief 
Prov.3. 13.  happy  is  the  man  that  o-.  understanding 

9.  7.  he  that  reproveth  a  scorner  g.  to  himself 

shame,  he  thai  rebuketh  a  wicked  man  w.  a  blot 

15.32.  he  that  henreth  reproof  or.  understanding 

18.  15.  the  heart  of  the  prudent  .f.  knowledge 

19.  8.  he  that  g.  wisdom  loveth  his  own  soul 
Jer.  17.  11.  so  he  that^.  riches,  and  not  by  right 

48.  44.  he  that  o'.  out  of  the  pit  shall  be  taken 

GETTING. 
fren.  31. 18.  Jacob  carried  away  1  he  cattle  of  his  ^. 
Prov.  4.  7.  with  all  thy  g.  get  understanding 
21.6.  the  5".  of  treasures  bv  a  lying  tongue  is  vanity 

GHOST. 
Oen.  49.  33.  Jacob  yielded  up  fhe^.  was  gathered 
Job  10. 18.  O  that  I  had  given  up  tlie^.  noeyeeeen 
11.  20.  their  hope  shall  be  a,i  the  giving  up  of  ^. 
14. 10.  yea,  man  givcth  up  the  o-.  and  whore  is  he  ? 
.rT.lS.O.  hath  borne  seven, she  hath  given  upthe^. 
Jf  It.  27.  .50.  Jesus  cried,  and  ylellcd  up  the  g. 
Atts  S.lO.Sapphira  fell  down  and  yielded  up  the  o-. 
See  Gave,  Give,  Holy. 
GIANT. 
ih  Greek,  Gigas,  in  Hebrew,  Nophel,  or  Nephi- 
iim,  which  may  signify  a  monster,  or  a  terrible 
man,   7chn  heats  and  bears  down  other  men. 
The  f^cripture  speaks  of  Giants  who  lived  be- 
fore th"  flood;  they  are  called  Nephilim,  mighty 
men  which  were  of  old,  men  of  renown.  Gen. 
6.  4     Aquila,  instead  of  Gi^antes,  Iramlatti 
831 


GIA 

this  word  Nephilim,  ^E.vi'Tur'roirtc,  men 
who  atjack,  who  fall  with  iin])ctuostty  upon 
their  enemies ;  a  translation,  says  one,  which 
renders  very  well  the  whole  force  of  the  He- 
brew term.  Symmachus  translates  it  B/«7o<, 
violent  men,  cruel,  ichose  only  rule  of  thci 
actions  is  violence,  and  force  of  arms. 

The  Scripture  calls  them  sometimes  Kephaims. 
For  example :  Chedorlaomer  and  his  allies  beat 
the  Rephaims,  or  giants,  at  Ashteroth  Karnaim 
Oen.  14.  5.  The  Emims,  ancient  inhabitants 
of  the  land  of  Moah,  were  of  gigantic  stature, 
they  were  of  the  number  of  the  Rephaims  or 
giants,  Deut.  2. 10, 11.  The  Rephaims,  and  the 
Perizzites  are  joined  together  as  old  inhabit- 
ants of  the  laud  of  Canaan,  Gen.  15.  20.  Job 
says,  that  the  ancient  Kephaims  mourn  or 
groan  under  the  waters,  Job.  20.  5.  These 
giants  of  the  old  world,  who  once  carried  them- 
selves insolently  toward  God  and  men,  but 
were  quickly  subdued  by  the  divine  power,  and 
drowned  with  a  deluge,  do  now  mourn  or 
groan  from  under  the  waters  where  they  were 
buried,  or  in  their  sublerraiican  and  infernal 
habitations.  But  this  passage  is  otherwise 
explained  by  some.  Solomon,  in  Prov.  2.  18. 
says,  that  the  paths  of  a  debauched  woman 
lead  to  the  Rephaims,  that  is,  to  hell,  where  the 
rebellious  giants  are ;  and  that  he  who  deviates 
from  the  ways  of  wisdom,  shall  go  and  dwell  in 
the  assembly  of  the  giants  in  hell,  Prov.  21.  10. 

Tlie  Anakims,  or  the  sons  of  Aiiak,  were  the 
most  famous  giants  of  Palestine.  They  dwelt 
at  Hebron,  and  thereabouts.  Their  stature 
was  so  much  above  what  was  common,  that 
the  Israelites,  who  were  sent  to  view  the  pro- 
mised land,  told  the  people  at  their  return, 
that  they  had  seen  giants  of  the  race  of  Anak 
in  this  country,  who  icere  of  so  monstrous  a 
size,  that  the  Israelites,  in  comparison,  were 
but  grasshoppers  to  them,  Num  13.  33. 

The  Septuagint  sometimes  translate  the  Hebrew 
word  Gibbor,  giant,  though  literally  it  signifies 
no  more  than  a  strong  man,  a  man  of  valour 
and  bravery,  a  warrior.  For  example:  they 
say  that  Nimrod  was  a  giant  before  the  Lord, 
Gen.  10.  8,  9.  That  the  sun  rises  like  a  giant 
to  run  its  course,  Psal.  19.  5.  That  the  Lord 
will  destroy  the  giant  and  the  warlike  man, 
Isa.  3.  2.  That  he  will  call  his  giants  in  his 
wratJt,  toj^ake  vengeance  of  his  eneviics,  Isa. 


GIF 


3.      That  he   will   destroy  the  power  of 
Egypt  by  the  sword  of  his  giants;  that  is,  of 
warriors,  Ezek.  32.  12,  21,  27. 
As  to  the  existence  of  giants,  several  writers, 
both  ancient  and  modern,  have  imagined,  that 
the  giants  spoken  of  in  Scripture  were  indeed 
men  of  an  extraordinary  statxire,  but  not  so 
much  above  what  was  common  as  they  have 
fancied,  who  describe  giants  as  three  or  four 
times  larger  than  men  are  at  present.    They 
were,  say  they,  men  famous  for  the  violence 
which  they  committed,  and  for  their  crimes, 
rather  than  for  their  strength,  or  the  great- 
ness of  their  stature. 
It  is  very  probable,  that  the  first  men  were  all  of 
a  strength  and  stature  much  superior  to  those 
of  mankind  at  present,  since  they  lived  a  much 
longer  lime ;   long    life    being  commonly  the 
effect  of  a  strong  and  vigorous  constitution. 
Jind  that  formerly  there  were  men  of  a  stature 
much  above  that  of  common  men,  cannot  be 
denied,  at  least  not  without  contradicting  the 
holy  Scriptures.     The  Israelites  who  traversed 
tfie  Holy  Land,  told  their  brethren,  that  they 
had  seen  giants  in  this  country  nf  Anak's  race, 
who  were  so  immeasurably  large,  that  other 
men  were  but  grasshoppers  in  comparison  to 
them,  Num.  13.  33.     Moses  speaks  of  Og  the 
king  of  Bashan's  bed^  which  was  nine  cubits 
long,  and  four  wide;  that  is ,  fifteen  fret  four 
inches  and  a  half  long,  Deut.  3.  11.     Goliath 
was  six  cubits  and  a  span  in  height,  that  is  to 
say,  ten  feet  seven  inches,  ISani.  17.4.   These 
sorts  o/ giants  were  still  common  in  Joshua's 
and  David's  times,  when  the  life  of  men  was 
already  so  much   shortened,  and,  as  may  be 
presumed,  the   size   and   strength   of  human 
bodies  were  very  much  diminished.     Ee.'tidrs 
the  giants    mentioned  in    Scripture,    several 
Historians  make  mention  of  giants ;   as  He- 
rodotus,    Diodorus    Siculus,     Pliuy,     Homer, 
Plutarch,  &c. 

2  Sam.  21.  Ifi.  wa*of8on8  of  the^-.  18.  1  Chr.  00.  4. 

1  Chron.  20.  fi.  the  son  of  the  g.  ||  8.  born  to  the  g. 

Job  16.  14.  he  runneth  upon  me  like  a  g. 
GIANTS. 

Oen.  6.  4.  there  were  g.  in  the  earth  in  those  days 

JVutit.  13. 33.  there  we  saw  the^.  the  loas  of  Anak 


Deut.i.M.'Emimi  were  counted ^.as  the  Anakimt 
3. 11.  for  only  Ogof  Bashan  remained  of  the  rem- 
nant otg.  Jufh.  12.  4.  1  13.  12 
13.  Bashan,  which  was  called  the  land  of  ^. 

Josh.iS.^.  the  lot  of  Judah  went  up  at  valley  otV 
17. 15.  then  get  thee  up  to  the  land  of  the  g. 
18.  16.  Benjamin  came  to  the  valley  of  the  g. 
GIER-EAGLE. 

Xec.ll.lS.thesein  aboniination,thcfl'.  Deut.Xi.YJ 
GIFT 

Signifies,  [1]  j?  present,  Esth.  2.  18.  Mat.  2.  11. 
1,2]  Ji  reward,  Dan.  5.  17.  [3]  A  recompenct 
for  the  reparation  of  an  injury  or  iprong  done 
to  a  person,  or  something  given  in  testimony 
of  respect  and  kindness,  Gen.  34.  12.  [4]  A 
bribe,  or  something  given  to  a  judge  by  one 
who  has  a  cause  depending  in  order  to  bring 
the  judge  to  side  with  him;  which  is  forbid- 
den by  the  law,  Deut.  16. 19.  because  such  gifts 
corrupt  and  bias  the  mind,  that  as  the  judge 
will  not,  so  oft  times  he  cannot  discern  between 
right  and  wrong.  [5]  An  oblation,  or  free-will 
offering,  Mat  5.  23. 

Christ  Jesus  is  called  thegift  of  God,  John  4.  10. 
He  is  the  greatest  gift  that  God  ever  gave  to 
the  world.  The  Holy  Ghost  and  his  miracu- 
lous gifts  are  also  called  the  gift  of  G od.  Act« 
8.  20,  Thou  hast  thought  that  the  gift  of  God 
may  be  purchased  with  money.  Every  good 
thing  which  men  receive  is  the  gift  of  God. 
Jam.  1.  17,  Every  good  gift  is  from  above. 
The^//t  of  righteousness  signifies  those  bene- 
fits which  Christ  by  his  righteousness  or  obe- 
dience has  purchased  for  us,  Rom.  5.  17.  By 
unspeakable  gift,  in  2  Cor.  9.  15,  some  under- 
stand Christ  ;  others  understand  the  gospel,  by 
which  the  hearts  of  men  are  subdued,  effectu- 
ally disposed,  and  inclined  to  obey  the  will  of 
God:  Others  think  it  is  to  be  understood  oj 
that  habit  of  brotherly  love,  which  from  the 
Spirit  of  Christ,  by  the  gospel,  was  wrought 
in  the  hearts  of  these  Corinthians. 

Gen.  34.  12.  ask  me  never  so  much  dowry  and^. 

Exod.  23. 8.  take  no  g.  a  g.  blindeth,  Deut.  16. 19 
Jfum.  8. 19.  I  have  given  the  Levites  as  a  g.  18. 6. 

18.  7.  I  have  given  your  office  as  a  service  of^. 
11.  this  is  thine,  the  heave-offering  of  their^. 

De?iM6.tl7.  every  man  according  to  ^f.  of  his  hand 
2  Sam.  19.  42.  or  hath  he  given  us  any  g.? 
Psal.iS.li.  daughter  of  Tyre  shall  be  there  with  g 
Prov.  17.  8.  a  g.  is  as  a  precious  stone  in  the  eyca 
2.3.  a  wicked  man  taketh  a  g.  out  of  the  bosom 

18.  16.  a  man's  g.  maketh  room  for  him 

21.  14.  a  g.  in  sgcret  pacifielh  anger 

25.  14.  whoso  boasteth  himself  of  a  false  g". 
Ecel.  3.  13.  enjoy  good,  it  is  the  g.  of  God,  5.  19, 

7.  7.  and  a  g.  dustroyeth  the  heart 
Ezek.  4fi.  t5.  meat-offering  the  ^.  of  his  hand 

16.  if  a  prince  give  a  g.  to  any  of  his  sons 

17.  if  he  give  a  g.  to  one  of  his  servants 
Mat.  5.  23.  if  thou  bring  thy  g.  to  the  altar 

24.  leave  there  thy  g.  before  the  altar  and  go 

8.  4.  and  offer  the  g.  that  Moses  commanded 
15.  5.  but  ye  say,  it  is  a  g.  by  whatsoever  thoa 

mighte.st  be  profited  by  me,  Mark  7.  11. 

23.  18.  whoso  sweareth  by  the  g.  is  guilty,  19. 
John  4.  10.  he  said,  if  thou  knewest  the^.  of  God 
./?c<.5  2..38.  yeshall  receive  the  ^.  of  the  Holy  Ghost 

8.  20.  thought  the  g.  of  God  may  be  purchased 

10.  45.  on  the  Gentiles  also  was  poured  out  the^. 

11.  17.  (lod  gave  them  the  like^.  as  he  did  to  us 
Rum.  1.  11.  I  may  impart  to  you  some  spiritual  g. 

5. 15.  not  as  theoticnce,  so  also  is  free ^.the grace 
of  God  and  the  g.  by  grace  abounded  to  many 

16.  so  is  the  g.  the  freo^.  is  of  many  offences 

17.  they  which  receive  the  ,"■.  of  righteousness 

18.  the  free^.  came  on  all  men  to  justification 
6.23.  ihe^.of^God  is  eternal  life  thro' Jesus  Christ 

1  Cor.  1 .  7.  so  that  ye  come  behind  in  no  ^.  waiting 

7.  7.  evnrv  man  hath  his  proper^,  of  God 
]3.2.lho'  I  have  the  n-.of  prophecy  and  understand 
16. t3. 1  will  send  them  lo  bringyour^.  to  Jerusal. 

2  Cor.  1.  11.  that  for  the  g.  bestowed  upon  us 

8.  4.  praying  us  that  we  would  receive  the  g. 
t  19.  was  chosen  to  travel  with  us  with  this  g 

9.  15.  thanks  be  to  God  for  his  unspeakable  g. 
FpA.2.8.faitb  is  not  of  yourselves, it  is  the^.of  God 

3.  7.  I  was  made  a  minister,  according  to  the  g. 

4.  7.  according  to  tlie  mi-asure  of  I  he  n-.of  Christ 
Phil.  4.  17.  noi  bi'cau^e  I  desire  a  g.  but  fruit 

1  Tim.  4.  14.  neglect  not  the  g.  that  is  in  thoe 

2  Tim.  1.  6.  stir  up  the^.  that  is  in  thee  by  putting 
Heb.  6.  4.  and  have  tasted  of  the  heavenly^. 
./am.l.n.everygood^.Hnd  pcrfcctf  .is  from  above 
1  Pet.  A.  10.  as  every  man  hath  received  the  g. 

"GIFTS. 
Gen.  25. 6.  ,^braham  gave  g.  to  sons  ff  concubines 
Kiod.  23.  38.  which  Israel  t-hall  hallow  in  xhe\t g 
Lev.  23.  38.  these  are  your  fonsts,  besides  your  g 
JVu/a.  18.  29.  out  of  all  your  g.  offer  the  be«l 


GIR 

8S«m.  8. 2.  the  Moabites  and  Syrians  became  Da 
vid'sstrvanla,  and  brought^.  6.  IChron.  18.2. 
S  Chron.  Vi.  7.  with  the  Lord  18  no  taking  of^. 

21. 3.  Jf  hushaphat  gave  great  g.  ofsilver  and  gold 
2t).  8.  tlic  AininonitoB  gave,^.  to  Uzziah 

32.  23.  and  many  brought /r.  unto  the  Lord 
Ksth.  2.  18.  Ahasuerus  made  a  feast  and  gave  «■. 

9.  22.  make  them  days  of  sending  ir.  to  the  poor 
\         Psal.  16.  f  4.  that  give  g.  to  another  god 

ti8.18.  thou  haal  received  g.  fur  men,  fur  rebellious 

72. 10.  the  king«  of  Sheba  and  Seba  shall  otTer  g. 
Pruv.  6.35.  not  content.though  thon  givest  many  g. 

15.  27.  but  he  that  hateth  g.  shall  live 

19.  6.  every  man  is  friciid  to  him  that  givcth  g. 
29.  4.  he  thatreceivethg'.  overthroweth  judgment 

/»a.l.23.every  one  loveth^.followeth  after  rcward.s 
Kzfk.  16.  33.  they  give^.  to  whore.i,  g.  to  lovers 

20.  26.  and  I  polluted  them  in  their  own  g. 

31.  when  ye  ofter  your  g.  ye  pollute  youtselves 

39.  pollute  my  holy  name  no  more  with  your^. 

5J2.  12.  in  thee  have  they  taken  g.  to  shed  blood 

JDon.  2. 6.  if  ye  shew  the  dream,  ye  shall  receive^. 

48.  the  king  gave  Daniel  many  great  g. 

5.  17.  then  Daniel  said,  let  thy  g.  be  to  thyself 

.Mat.  2.  11.  they  presented  to  him  g.  gold,  myrrh 

7. 11.  if  ye  know  how  to  give  good  ^.  Luke  11. 13. 

Luke  21.l.the  rich  casting  their  g.  into  the  treasury 

5.  temple  was  adorned  with  goodly  stones  and  g. 

Horn.  11.  29.  tlie^.  of  God  are  without  repentance 

12.  6.  having  g.  diflering  according  to  the  grace 

1  Cor.  12. 1.  now  concerning  spiritual  g.  brethren 

4.  there  are  diversities  of  ^.  but  the  same  Spirit 

9.  to  another  the  g.  of  healing,  28.  30. 

31.  but  covet  earnestly  the  best  g. 

14.  1.  follow  after  charity  and  desire  spiritual  g. 

12.  forasmuch  as  ye  are  zealous  of  spiritual^'. 

/?pA.4.8.he  led  captivity  captive,and!rave^. to  men 

/icb.2.4.  God  also  bearing  them  witness  with^. 

5.  I.  that  he  may  offer  "•.  and  sacrifices  for  sins 

8.  3.  every  high  priest  is  ordained  to  oflTer  g. 
4.  seeing  that  there  are  jiriests  that  offer  g. 

9.  9.  which  were  offered,  bo'h  g.  and  sacrifices 

11.4.  God  testifyingof  Abel's  cr.  (lead  yelspeaketh 
Kev.  11.  10.  they  that  dwell  on  earth  shall  send  g. 

GILDED. 
Rei'.  17.  t4.  and  the  woman  was;?,  with  gold 

GIN. 
Job  40. 1 24.  will  any  bore  his  nose  with  n  g.? 
y.vn.S.U.  be  (ora  g.  to  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem 
j?7nos3.5.cana  bird  fall  into  a  snare  where  no  ^.  is? 

Sec  Grin. 

GIRD. 

iUfn.  3.  t7.  made  themselves  things  to  g.  about 

Kzod.  29.  5.  g.  him  with  Ihe  curious  girdle,  9. 

Judg.  3.  16.  Khud  did  "'.  his  dagger  under  raiment 

1  .'iam.  2.5.  13.  g.  ye  on  every  man  his  sword 

2  King.i  3.  t2I.  that  were  able  to  s.  themselves 
P.ial.  45.  3.  g.  thy  sword  on  thy  tliish,  O  most 
Isa.  8.  9.  g.  yourselves,  and  ye  shall  he  broken 
Kiek.  44.  18.  not.  g.  with  what  causeth  sweat 
Joel  1.  13.  g.  your.-ielves,  and  lament,  ye  priests 
/.uA'eli. 37. shall;?. himseir,and  make  ihemsitdown 

17.  8.  g.  thyself^  and  serve  me,  till  I  have  eaten 
John  21.  18.  when  old,  another  shall  g.  thee 
Jicls  12.  8.  g.  thyself  and  hind  on  thy  satidals 
ice  Loins,  Sai-kclotii. 
GIRDED. 
Lev.  8.  7.  he  g.  him  with  the  girdle  and  clothed 
him  with  the  robe 
Dcnt.\.  41.  when  ye  g.  on  every  man  his  weapons 
Judg.  13.  11.  six  hundred  men  g.  with  weapons 
1  Sam.  2.  18  Samuel  g.  with  a  linen  ephod 
2■^"a?n.fl.l4. David  danced, and  waB^/-.wit'n  anepliod 
20.  8.  and  Joab's  garment  was  g.  unto  him 
22.40.  thou  hast;?,  me  with  strength,  P.>aM8.39. 
1  Kings  20.  32.  they  g.  sackcloth  on  their  loins 
Pnal.  :U).  II.  thou  hasl  g.  me  with  gladness 
O.'i.  6.  wileth  fist  mountains,  being  ^.  with  power 

t  12.  little  hills  are  g.  with  joy  on  every  side 
93.  1.  sircnslh  wherewith  he  hnth^.  himself 
109.  19   and  for  a  girdle  wberewitn  he  '.■%  g. 
I.ia.H).  !>■  I  "■■  thee,  tlio'  tliou  linst  not  Kinmn  mt 
Lam.  2.  10.  theeldiTs  ofZion^r.  with  sai^lctolh 
F.iek.  16.  10.  I  g.  thee  about  with  fine  linen 
23.  l.'i.  images  of  the  Chaldeans  g.  with  girdles 
Tnel  I.  8.  lament  like  a  virgin  g.  with  sackcloth 
John  13.  4.  he  took  a  towel  and  g.  himself 

3.  to  wipe  with  the  towel  wherewith  he  was  g. 

R<D.15.6.iievenangiU,hreii«tHj'.with  golden  girdles 

■See  Loins,  Sword. 

GIRDEDST. 

John  21. 18.  when  thou  wnst  voung  thou  g.  thyself 

GIRDETH. 
1  fCings^.  II.  let  not  him  that  g.  on  his  harness 
.fob  12.  IK  and  he  g.  Ihnir  loins  with  a  girdle 
P.ial  18.  32.  it  is  Gr)d  that  g.  me  with  strength 
Prov.  31.  17.  she  ".  her  loins  with  strength 

GIRDING. 
Tun.  3.24.  insteail  of  astomncher,  n  g.  orsnrkrlotl: 
22.  12.  the  Lord  did  c.ill  to  g.  with  lackcloth 
233 


am 

GIRDLE. 

The  Hebrews  generally  wore  Mc  trrik  :%  lie 
huusr,  nor  even  abroaa.  «n.tr«  iBhrn  thry  were 
at  work,  or  upon  a  journey.  Jit  these  times 
they  tucked  them.telves  up,  and  girt  their  clvthrs 
about  them,  as  the  ea.itcrn  people  still  at.  this 
day  wear  them.  This  appearj  from  many  pas- 
sages of  the  Uld.  and  J^ew  Testament.  Elijah 
girded  up  his  loins,  and  ran  before  Ahab, 
1  Kings  18.  46.  jJnd  Elisha  ordered  his  ser- 
vant Gehazi  to  gird  up  his  loins,  and  to  go  and 
lay  his  staff  on  the  face  of  the  Hhunamite's 
child,  2  Kings  4.  29.  Our  Saviour  putting 
hitnsilf  in  a  proper  condition  to  wash  the  feet 
of  his  disciples,  girt  himself  about  with  a  towel, 
./ohn  13.  4.  The  soldiers  likewise  had  their 
belts  generally  girt  about  them,  to  which  the 
Psalmist  a/Zi/r/ci,  Psal.  18.  .39,  Thou  hast  girded 
me  with  sirengtii  unto  the  battle. 

Bells  orgirdles  wereoften  made  of  very  precious 
stuff.  The  virtuous  woman  mcuie  rich  girdle.^, 
and  sold  them  to  the  merchants,  Prov.  31.24. 
These  girdles  were  used  in  common  both  by  men 
and  women.  Our  Lord  appeared  to  St.  ,Iohn 
in  a  girdle  of  gold,  licv.  1. 13.  noting  the  excel- 
lency of  his  ministration  as  Priest.  .Ind  iv 
Rev.  15.  6.  the  seven  angels,  ichn  came  out  of 
the  temple,  were  ciothed  with  linen,  and  girl 
about  with  golden  girdles.  On  the  contrary, 
the  prophets,  and  persons  who  make  particular 
professions  of  humility  and  contempt  of  the 
world,  wore  girdles  of  leather.  The  prophet 
Elijah  had  one  nf  this  sort,  2  Kings  1.  8.  as 
well  as  .lohn  the  Baptist,  Mat.  3.  4.  fn  times 
of  mourning,  they  used  girdles  of  sackcloth, 
as  marks  if  humiliation  and  sorrow.  God 
threatens  the  daughters  nf  Zion,  who  had  of- 
fended him  with  the  excess  nf  their  ornaments, 
to  reduce  them  to  the  wearing  of  sackcloth, 
Isa.  3.  24.  .find  in  clinp.  22.  12.  the  Lord 
ihreatrns  Jerusalem  with  bringing  her  into 
captivity,  with  cuttirig  off  her  hair,  the  instrii- 
ment  of  her  pride,  and  obliging  her  to  gird 
herself  about  with  sackcloth. 

The  military  girdle,  or  belt,  did  not  come  oner  the 
shoulder,a,f  among  the  old  Greeks,  but  was  worn 
upon  the  loins  ;  whence  the  following  expres- 
sions have  their  original.  Every  man  had  his 
sword  girded  by  his  side,  or  upon  his  loins,  A'VA 
4.  18.  Girded  with  girdles  upon  their  loins, 
Ezek.  23.  15.  These  belts  were  generally  rich, 
and  sometimes  given  as  rewards  to  soldiers 
Joah  tells  him  who  had  seen  Absalom  hanging 
on  a  tree,  that  if  he  had  smitten  him  to  the 
ground,  he  would  have  given  him  ten  shekel 
ofsilver  and  a  girdle,  2  Sam.  IH.  11.  Jonathan 
the  son  of  Said  made  David  a  present  of  his 
girdle,  1  Sam.  18.  4.  Job,  exalting  the  poirrr  of 
Gnd,  says,  That  he  looselh  the  bond  of  kings, 
and  girdcth  their  loins  with  a  girdle  ;  hedeposeth 
them  from  their  thrones,  and  reduceth  them  to 
a  mean  and  servile  condHinn,  Job  12.  18. 

The  priest's  girdle  or  sash  was  of  several  cidours, 
of  gold,  of  blue,  and  purple  and  scarlet,  and 
fine  twined  linen,  Exod.  28.  4,  8.  Josephiis 
,s«7/.i,  that  the  priests  woreit  upon  their  breasts, 
under  their  arms ;  that  a  kind  of  flower-work 
was  there  represented,  with  threads  of  purple, 
scarlet,  and  hyacinth  ;  that  it  went  twice  round 
the  body,  was  tied  before,  and  the  ends  hun/j 
down  to  the  feet,  to  render  the  priests  more 
venerable.  fHfin  they  were  in  the  act  of 
sacrifici'nij,  thry  threw  this  girdle  over  the 
left  shoulder,  that  they  might  perform  their 
office  with  the  greater  freedom. 

The  girdle  was  used  formerly  for  a  purse,  as  ap- 
pears from  Mat. 10.9.  whereour  Saviour  forbid.^ 
his  .Opostles  to  carry  money  in  thtir  purses,  or 
girdles.  These  girdles  were  large  and  hollow, 
much  like  the  cast  skin  of  a  serpent,  or  an  eel. 

Our  Saviour  says,  l<uko  12.  35  Let  your  loins 
i/*  girded  ibout ;  that  it,  he  always  prepared 
for  any  service  '..tat  God  reijuires  of  you,  and 
dilisrent  about  it;  be  like  servants  who  are 
girded,  and  ready  to  obey  their  master's  com- 
mands, or  like  .soWiVrs  who  wait  for  orders 
from  their  commanders.  The  .Opostle  Piiul, 
describing  the  Christian's  armour,  mtkcs 
truth  the  girdle  of  the  loins.  Eph.  6.  14,  Hav- 
ing your  loins  girt  about  with  truth;  that  is. 
Let  vonr  minds  and  spiHts  be  strengthened 
and  established  with  soundness  nf  judemenl 
and  sincerity  of  heart,  and  in  etcdfaslly  en- 
deavouring to  have  a  conscirnee  void  of  offence 
toward  God  and  men.     See  Loins. 

Eroil.  23.  4.  these  garments  they'shnll  make  n  g. 
8.  the  curious  g.  of  Ihe  ephod  which  is  upon  it, 
27,  28.  I  29.  5.  I  30.  5,  20.  f.ev.  8.  7. 
39.  Ihou  shnlt  make  the  g.  of  nerdlnwork 
39  29.  they  made  a  g.  of  fine  twinod  linci> 


V  Sam  J?.  4.  Jonithan  gavcDavid  hieSiowand^ 
2  .Soot.  18.  11.  and  I  would  have  given  thee  &  g. 
1  Kings  2.  5.  he  put  the  blood  of  war  on  bis  g. 
'i  Kings  1.8.  Elijah  was  girt  with  a  g.  of  leather 

3.  t  21.  that  could  gird  themselves  with  a  g. 
Job  12.  18.  he  girdeth  the  loins  of  kings  with  a  g 

f  21.  he  looselh  the  g,  of  the  strong 
Psal.  109.  19.  for  a  g.  wherewith  he  is  girded 
Isa.  3.  24.  instead  of  a  g.  there  shall  be  a  rent 
5.  2".  nor  shall  the^.  of  their  loins  he  loosed 
U.  5.  and  righteonsness  shall  be  the  4'.  of  his  loinSi 
and  faithfulness  the  g.  of  his  rcin» 

22.  21.  I  will  strengthen  Eliakiin  with  thy  ^. 

23. 1 10. Odaught.ofTarshish, ihireisno  more^. 
Jer.  13.  1.  rfo,  get  thee  a  linen  ^;pul  it  on  thy  loina 
10.  tliis  people  shall  be  as  this  g.  good  for  nothing 
Mat.  3.  4.  Jolin  had  a  leathern  g.  Mark  1.  6. 
.ilr.ls  21. 11.  took  Paul's 4'.  manlhal  owneih  this  g. 
Rev.  1.  13.  girl  about  Ihe  paps  with  a  golden  /'. 

GIRDLES. 
F.iod.  28.  40.  thou  shall  make  for  Aaron's  sons  g, 
i!9  9.  and  thou  shall  gird  Aaron  and  sons  with  g. 
f.ev.  8.  13.  Moses  did  gird  Aaron's  sons  with  g. 
Prov.  31.24.  she  delivered  g.  to  the  merchant 
/■J;f  i.2;i.l.5.thc  imiiges  of  Chaldeans  girded  with  g. 
f)an.  5.  fl).  that  the  g.  of  his  loins  were  looseb 
licv.  15.  6.  seven  ansels  girded  with  golden^. 

GIRL,  S.  . 
.loel  3.  3.  they  have  sold  a  g.  for  wine  to  drink 
Zech.  8. 5.  streets  of  city  shall  be  full  of  boys  and  g. 

GIRT. 
I.Sam. 2.4.  they  that  stumbled  ate g.  with  strength 
2  Kinn-s  1.  8.  he  was  g.  with  a  girdle  of  leather 
,/oAk21.7.  Sirnon  Peter  g.  hie  fisher's  coat  to  him 
Kph.  6.  14.  stand,  having  your  loins  g.  w  ith  truth 
Ren.  1. 13.  /'.  about  the  paps  with  a  golden  girdle 

GITTITH. 
This  is  the  title  prefixed  to  Psalms  8,  81,  and  34. 
The  conjectures  of  interpreters  are  varitus 
concerning  this  word.  Some  think  it  signifies 
a  sort  of  musical  in^ument,  or  tune  to  which 
they  were  set ;  others,  that  the  hymns  of  this 
kind  were  invented  in  the  city  o/Gatli ;  others, 
that  Giltith  siimifies  wine-presses,  and  that  the 
Psalms  with  this  title  were  sung  after  the  vin- 
tage;  others  that  if  wine-presses  irere  meant 
by  it,  it  should  be  Gitteth;  and  that  Gilteth 
signifies  a  woman  of  Gath;  and  that  these 
Psalms  were  given  to  the  class  of  young  wo- 
men, OT  songstresses  of  Gaih,  to  he  sung  bp 
them.  Dr.  Hammond  thinks  that  the  Psalms 
with  this  title  were  a>l  set  to  the  same  tune, 
and  made  on  Goliath  the  Gittite. 
GIVE. 
Gen.  15. 2.  what  wilt  g.  me,  seeing  I  go  childless' 

23.  II.  the  field  I  g.  thee,  and  the  cave  therein 
28.22.  of  all  thou  shall  g.  me,  L.will^.  the  tenth 

29.  19.  better  I  g.  her  thee,  than  'g.  her  to  anntbei 

34.  16.  then  will  we  ^.  our  daughters  to  you 
Exod.  10.  25.  thou  must  g.  us  also  sacrifices 

22. 17.  if  her  father  utterly  refuse  to  g.  her  to  hini 
30.  on  the  eighth  day  thou  >.hall  g.  it  me 

30.  12.  then  they  shall  g.  every  man  a  ransom 
13.  this  they  shall  g.  every  one  half  a  shekel 

J^'um.  3. 9.  thou  shall  g.  the  Levites  unto  Aaron 
11.4.  ihev  said,  who  shall  g.  us  fle.sh  to  eat?  IS. 

22. 18.  if  P,alak  would  g.  ine  his  house  full,  24. 13. 
25.  12.  I  g.  lo  Phiiuhas  my  covenant  of  peacs 

20.  .54.  to  many  g.  thou  the  more  inheritarice,  to 

few  thou  shall  g.  the  lees  Inheritance,  33.  54. 

35.  2.  ye.sliall  g.  to  Levites  suburbs  fur  the  cities 
Drut.  15.  10.  thou  shall  g.  him  thine  heart,  14. 

16. 17.  every  miin  g.  as  he  is  able,  Ezek.  46. 5, 11. 

24.  1^.  at  his  day  thou  shall  g.  him  his  hire 

25.  3.  forty  striprs  he  may  g.  him,  and  not  exceed 
.Josh.W.  4.  that  fleeth,  they  shall  g.  him  a  placn 
./udjr.  7.  2.  to  g.  tiie  Midianites  into  their  hands 

8.25.  they  answered,  wo  will  willingly^,  thera 
1  Sam.  2.  16.  nay,  but  thou  shall  "■.  it  me  now 
:i2.  ill  all  the  wealth  which  God  shall  g.  Israel 
17.  2.5.  the  king  will  p.  him  his  daitghler 
22.  7.  will  the  son  of  Jesse  ir.  every  one  fields? 
25.  11.  shall  I  then  g.  it  to  men  whom  I  know  not? 
2.Sai7i.23. 15.  oh  thai  one  would  g.  medfink  of  Ihe 
water  of  the  well  of  Beth-Iehem,  1  Chr.  II.  17. 

21.  23.  all  these  did  Arannah  g.  1  Chron.  21.  23. 
1  Kings  13.8.  if  Ihou  wilt  g.  me  half  thine  house 
2Chro>i.  30.  t8.  but  g.  the  hand  unto  the  Lord 

12.  thi-  hand  oftjod  was  to  g.  thrm  one  heart 
Ezra  9.  8.  and  to  g.  us  a  nail  in  his  hidy  place 

9.  to  g.  us  a  reviving,  lo  ff.  us  a  wall  in  Jiidah 
.Ti>h  2.  4.  all  that  a  man  hath  will  he  g.  for  his  life 
|4.  t4.  who  will  g.  a  clean  thing  onl  of  unclean? 
P.»n/.2.8.  askofmc,  and  I  shall;?,  thee  Ihehealhco 
14. 1 7.  who  will  g.  salvation  onl  of  Zion,  .53.  t& 
37.  4.  hi-  shall  g.  thee  the  desires  of  (hine  heart 
49.  7.  none  can  g.  to  God  a  ransom  for  him 
51.16.  thou  dosircst  not  sacrifice,  else  would  I^. 
f)H.  t  33.  lo,  ho  doth  g.  out  his  mighty  voicn 
78.20.  ca^he^.  bread  alsoTcttn  he  provide  Oa«> 


GIV 


P/al.Ol  11.  he  shall  ^.his  angels  charge,  Mat.  4. 6. 

109.  4.  but  I  g.  myscll"  unto  prayer 

120. 13.  what  shall  the  deceitful  tongue  g:  thee? 
Prov.  29.  15.  the  rod  and  reproof^,  wisdom 

17.  he  shall ^.thee  rest,  shall  g.  delight  to  thy  sou 
Eccl.  2.  26.  that  he  may  g.  to  him  that  is  good 
Can*. 8  7.  if  a  man  would  ^.substance  ofhis  house 
Isa.  30.  23.  then  he  shall  g.  the  rain  of  thy  seed 

55. 10.  that  it  may  ^.  seed  to  the  sower  and  bread 

61.  3.  to^.  unto  them  beauty  for  ashes 
Jer.  3.  19.  how  shall  I  g.  thee  a  pleasant  land  ! 

6.  10.  to  whom  shall  1  speak  and  g.  warning  t 

9.  t  !•  who  will  g.  my  head  waters,  my  eyes  tears? 
17. 10.  to  g.  man  according  to  his  ways,  32.  19. 
29.  11.  I  think  to  g.  you  an  e.xpected  end 

Ezek.  2.  8.  open  thy  mouth,  eat  that  I  g.  thee 
3.  3.  fill  thy  bowels  with  this  roll  that  1  g.  thee 
16.  36.  by  blood  of  thy  childr.  which  didst  ^.  them 
20.  28.  when  I  had  brought  them  to  land,  I  lifted 
up  mine  hand  to  g.  it  to  them,  42.  |  47.  14. 
33.  15.  if  wicked  g.  again  that  he  had  robbed 
46.  16.  if  the  prince  g.  a  gift  to  his  sons,  17. 
Dan.  9.  22.  I  am  come  forth  to  g.  thee  skill 
^ic.6.7.  shall  I^-my  (irst-born  for  my  transgression 
Zech.  8.  12.  the  vine  shall  g.  her  fruit,  the  ground 
shall  ^.  increase,  and  the  heavens  §■.  their  dew 
Jifat..  7.  9.  if  he  ask  bread,  will  he  g.  him  a  stone  ? 
lO.ifhe  ask  fish,  will  he^.a  serpent?  /,?(A-e  11.11 
11.  how  to  g.  gifts  to  your  children,  so  your  Fa 
ther  to  g.  them  that  ask  him,  Luke  11.  13. 

10.  42.  whoso  shall  g.  to  drink  a  cup  of  cold  water 
14.  7.  he  promised  to  g.  her  what  she  would  ask 
16. 26.  g.  in  exchange  for  his  soul  ?  Mark  8.  37. 
19.7.  why  comm.  to^.  a  writing  of  divorcement? 
20.  23.  sit  on  hand  is  not  mine  to  g.  Mark  10  40. 
26. 15.  what  will  ye  g.  me,  and  I  will  deliver  him 

Mark  6. 25. 1  will  that  thou  g.  me  the  head  of  John 

12.  9.  and  he  will  g.  the  vineyard  unto  others 
Luke  4.  6.  and  to  whomsoever  I  will,  I  g.  it 

6.  38.  good  measure  shall  men  g.  into  your  bosom 

11.  8.  he  will  g.  him  as  many  as  he  needeth 
16. 13.  who  shall  g.  you  that  which  is  your  own  ? 

John  4.14.  whoso  drinketh  the  water  1  shall  g.  him 

6.  27.  meat  which  the  Son  of  man  shall  g.  you 

52.  how  can  this  man  g.  us  his  llesh  to  eat  ? 

10.  28.  and  I  g.  to  them  eternal  life,  never  perish 

11.  22.  what  thou  wilt  ask,  God  will  g.  it  thee 

13.  29.  that  he  should  g.  something  to  the  poor 

14.  16.  he  shall  g.  you  another  Comforter  to  abide 
27.  peace  I  leave  with  you,  my  peace  I  g.  to  you, 

not  as  world  giveth  g.  I  to  you,  be  not  troubled 

15.  16.  whatsoever  ye  shnll  ask,  he  may  g.  it 

16.  23.  whatsoever  ye  ask  he  will  g.  it  to  you 

17.  2.  that  he  should  g.  eternal  life  to  as  many 
^ct?  3.  6.  such  as  I  have  g.  I  thee,  rise  and  walk 

6.  4.  but  we  win  g.  ourselves  to  prayer 

7.  5.  he  promised  he  would  g.  it  for  a  possession 

20.  35.  it  is  more  blessed  to  g.  than  to  receive 
Rom.8.3'2.  with  him  also  freely  g.  us  all  things 

"1  Cor.  7.  5.  that  ye  may  g.  yourselves  to  fasting 
£ph.  1.  17.  God  may  g.  you  the  spirit  of  wisdom 
4.  23.  that  he  may  have  to  g.  to  him  that  needetl 
2Tim.  4.  8.  which  the  righteous  Judge  shall  g.  nu 
Heb.  2.  1.  we  ought  to  g.  the  more  earnest  heed 
1  John  5. 16.  g.  life  for  them  that  sin  not  to  death 
Rev.  13.  15.  he  had  power  to  g.  life  to  the  image 
1 16.  to^.a  mark  in  their  right  hand  or  foreheads 
16. 19.  to^.  her  the  cup  of  the  wine  of  his  wrath 
22.  12.  to  g.  every  man  according  to  his  work 
See  Arcou.NT,  Glory,  Sware. 
GIVE,  Imperatively. 
Oen.  14. 21.  ^.  me  the  persons,  and  take  the  goods 
27.  28.  therefore  God  g.  thee  of  dew  of  heaven 

29.  21.^.  me  my  wife  ||  30. 1.  ^.  children  else  Idle 

30.  26.  g.  me  my  wives  and  my  children 
Jfum.  6.  26.  and  the  Lord  g.  thee  peace 
Josh.  2.  12.  swear  to  me,  and  g.  me  a  true  token 

14.  12.  now  therefore  g.  me  this  mountain 

15.  19.  g.  me  a  blessing,  g.  springs,  .Jadg.  1.  15. 

1  Sam.  8.6.  when  they  said,^.us  a  kijig  to  judge  us 
17.  10.  g.  nie  a  man  that  we  may  fight  tligether 

21.  9.  David  said,  none  like  that,  g.  It  me 
IKings  3.9.^.  thy  servant  an  undeistnnding  heart 

26.  O  my  lord,  g.  her  the  living  child,  27. 

8.  39.  g.  every  man  accof.ling  to  his  ways 
17.  19.  he  said,  g.  me  thy  son,  and  he  look  him 

2  Kivgsd.W.l  saidj/f.thy  son,that  we  may  eat  him 
10. 1.5.  if  it  be,  g.  me  thine  hand,  and  he  gave  it 
14.  9.  saying,^,  thy  daughter  to  my  son  to  wife 

i  Chr.  16.  2".  g.  to  Lord,  ye  kindreds  ofthe  people, 
glory  and  strength, 29.  Psal.  29.  1,  2.  |  96.  7, 8. 

S2.12.  the  Lord^.thee  wisdom  and  understanding 
2  Chron.  1. 10.  g.  me  now  wisdom  and  knowledge 
A'eA.4. 4.  and  ^.them  for  a  prey  in  land  of  captivity 
Job  32.  21.  nor  let  me  g.  flattering  titles  to  man 
Paal.  2ii.  4.  g.  them  according  to  tneir  deeds 

60.  11.  g.  us  help  from  trouble,  108.  12. 

86.  16.  O  turn,  g.  thy  strength  to  thy  servant 

119.  34.  g.  mo  understanding,  73,  125,  144,  1G9. 

Prov.  9. 9.  f-.instruct.  to  a  wiso  man  ho  will  be  wiser  I 

333 


GIV 

Prflc.23. 26.  my  son,^.  me  thine  heart,  observe  my 
25.21.ifei:eniy  hunger,^,  him  bread,  iVoHi. 12.20. 

30.  8.  g.  me  neither  poverty  nor  riches,  feed  me 
15.  horse-leech  hath  two  daughters,  crying,  g.  g. 

Eccl.  U.  2.  g.  a  portion  to  seven,  also  to  eight 
Jsa.  49.  20.  g.  jilace  to  me,  that  I  may  dweH 

62.  7.  g.  him  no  rest  till  he  establish  Jerusalem 
Jer.  IS.  19.  g.  heed  to  me,  O  Lord,  and  hearken 

35.  2.  bring  them,  and  g.  them  wine  to  drink 
Lant.  2.  18.  let  tears  run  down,  g.  Uiyself  no  rest 

3.  65.  g.  them  sorrow  of  heart,  Uiy  curse  to  them 
Eick.  3.  17.  and^.  them  warning  from  me 
JJan.  5.  17.  and  ^.  thy  rewards  to  another 
hosl  i.  18.  her  rulers  with  shame  do  love,  g.  ye 

9.  14.  g.  them,  O  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  g.l 

13.  10.  thou  saidst,  g.  me  a.  king  and  princes 

14.  t2.  take  away  all  iniquity,  and  ^.  good 
Zech.  11.  12.  g.  me  my  jirice,  if  not  forbear 
Mat  5.  42.  g.  to  him  that  asketh  thee 

6.  11.  g.  us  this  day  our  daily  bread,  Luke  11.  3. 
9.  24.  g.  place  ||  10.  8.  freely  ye  received,  freely^. 
14.  m.g.  ye  them  to  eat,  Aiaikd.  37.  Luke'i).  J 3. 

17.  27.  that  take,  and  g.  to  them  for  me  and  thee 

19.  21.  go  sell,  and  g.  to  the  i)oor,  Mark  10.  21. 

20.  8:  call  the  labourers,  and  g.  them  their  hire 
25.  d.  g.  us  of  your  oil,  for  our  lamps  are  gone  out 

Luke  6.  38.  g.  and  it  siiall  be  given  unto  you 
11.  41.  g.  alms  of  such  things  as  ye  have,  12.  33. 
14.  9.  he  that  bade  thee  say,  g.  this  man  place 
15.12.  the  younger  said,  ^.me  the  portion  ofgoods 

John  4.  7.  Jesus  saith  to  her,  g.  me  to  drink,  10. 
6.  34.  they  said.  Lord,  evermore  g.  us  this  bread 
9.  24.^.  God  the  praise,  this  man  is  a  sinner 

Jlcts  8.  19.  Simon  said,  g.  me  also  this  power 

/ioHi. 12.19.  avenge  not,  but  rather  u-.place  to  wrath 

1  Cor.  10.  32.  g.  none  offence,  neither  to  the  Jews 

2  Co7-.9.7.  so  let  him  n-.not  grudgingly  or  of  necessity 
Cul.  4.  1.  g.  to  your  servants  that  which  is  just 
1  Tim.  4. 13.  "■.  attendance  to  reading,  to  doctrine 

1.5.  meditate,  g.  thyself  wholly  to  them 
Rev.  10.  9.  g.  me  the  little  book,  he  said,  take  it 

18.  7.  so  much  torment  and  sorrow  g.  her 
Sec  Charge,  Ear,  Gi.qrv,  Ligut. 

/  will  GIVE. 
Gen.  17.8.  /  will  g.  to  thee  and  thy  seed  the  land 
wherein  thou  art  a  stranger,  48.  4.  Deut.  34. 4 
16.  I  will  g.  thee  a  son  also  of  her,  and  bless  her 
28.  22.  I  will  surely  g.  the  tenth  to  thee 
34.  11.  what  ye  shall  say  to  me  /  will  g.  12. 
KtoiI.  3.  21.  and  /  will  g.  this  people  favour 
33.14.iny  presence  with  thee, and  IwiUg.lhee  rest 
Lev.  26.4.  /  will g. you  rain  in  season,  Leut. 11. 14. 

6.  fwillg.  (leaco  in  the  land,  ye  shall  lie  down 

1  Sam.  1.  IL  I  will  g.  him  to  the  Lord  all  his  life 
16.2\./  willg.  her,  that  she  may  be  a  snare  to  him 

2  Sant.  12.  11.  /  will  g.  thy  wives  to  thy  neighbour 
I  Kings  11.  13.  not  rend  all,  but  /  will  g.  one  tribe 

31.  behold,  I  will  g.  ten  tribes  to  thee 

13.  7.  come  home,  and  I  will  g.  thee  a  reward 
21.  2.  /  will  g.  thee  for  it  a  better  vineyard 

7.  I  will  g.  thee  the  vineyard  of  Naboth 

1  C'Ar.22.9. 1  will  g.  him  rest,  I  will  g.pencc  to  Isr. 

2  Chr.  1.  12.  /  will  g.  thee  riches,  wealth,  honour 
Psal.  30.  12.  O  Lord,  /  icill  g.  thanks  to  thee 

57.  7.  /  will  sing  and  g.  praise,  108.  1. 
I'rov.'i.  28.  to-morrow  /  willg.  when  thou  hast  it 
Isa.  3.  4.  /  will  g.  them  children  to  be  princes 

41. 27.  shall  say  to  Zion,  behold,  and  /  will  g.  to 
Jeru.«alem  one  that-bringeih  good  tidings 

42.6. /jriV/^.thee  for  covenant  ofthe  people, 49.8. 

45.  3.  /  7cill  g.  thee  the  treasures  of  darkness 

49.  6.  /  will  g.  thee  for  a  light  to  the  Gentiles 

56.  5.  I  will  g.  them  an  everlasting  name 
.ler.  3.  15.  /  will  g.  pastors  according  to  my  heart 

9.  15.  I  willg.  them  waters  of  gall  to  diink 

14.  13.  /  will  g.  you  assured  peace  in  this  land 
15. t4. 1  willg.  them  lor  a  removing  into  kingdoms 
17.  3.  /  will  g.  thy  substance  to  the  spoil 
24.  7.  /  will  g.  them  a  heart  to  know  me 
.32.  39.  I  willg.  them  one  heart,  F.iek.  11.  19. 
34.  18.  f  will  g.  the  men  that  have  transgressed 

F.zek.7.  21.  /  will  g.  it  into  the  hand  of  strangers 
11.  17.  and  /  will  g.  you  the  land  of  Israel 
16.  .38.  /  will  g.  thee  blood  in  fury,  and  jealousy 
39.  I  will  also  g.  thee  into  their  hand 
61.  /  will  g.  them  to  thee  for  daughters 
21.  27.  he  come  whose  light  it  is,  /  will  g.  it  him 
23.  46.  /  will  g.  them  lo  be  removed  and  spoiled 
29. 19.  Iwillg.  land  of  Egypt  to  Nehuchfidiiezzar 

21.  I  will  g.  thee  the  opening  ofthe  mouth 
36.  26.  and  I  will  g.  you  a  heitrt  of  flesh 

Hos.  2.  15.  /  will  g.  her  vineyards  from  thence 
Mat.  11.  28.  come  unto  me,  and  I  will  g-  you  rest 
16.  19.  J  will  g.  to  thee  the  keys  ofthe  kingdom 
20.  4.  and  whatsoever  is  right,  I  will  g.  you 
14.  /  will  g.  to  this  last  even  as  unto  thee 
Mark  6.  22.  ask  what  thou  wilt,  I  will  g.  it  thee 
L-ukeH.\o.  for  Iwillg.  you  a  mouth  and  wisdom 
John  6.  51. 1  am  living  bread,  the  bread  I  will  g.  is 
my  flesh,  which  /ujiVi^.for  the  life  of  the  world 


SI 


GIV 

Jicts  13. 34. 1  will  g.  you  the  sure  mercies  of  David 
Heb.  8.  t  10.  1  will  g.  my  laws  into  their  mind 
Hev_. 2.  lU.  be  faithful,  Iwillg.  thee  a  crown  of  lifo 
17.  Iwillg.  him  a  white  stone  and  a  new  name 
23.  Iwillg.lo  every  one  according  to  your  worki 
28.  and  J  will  g.  him  the  morning  star 
11.  3.  and  /  will  g.  power  to  my  tw  o  witnesse* 
21.6. 1  will  g.  lo  him  that  is  athirst  water  of  life 

hill  I  GIVE. 
Gen.  12.  7.  to  thy  seed  will  I g.  this  land,  13  15. 
I  24.  7.  I  28.  13.  I  35.  12.  Lxod.  32.  13.  |  33  1 
Bcut.  1.36.  save  Caleb,  to  him  will  I g.  the  land 
39.  they  shall  go  in  thither,  to  them  will  I g.  it 
Jush.  15. 16.  to  him  will  I  g.  Achsah,  .Tudg.  1. 12. 
1  Sam.  9. 8.  that  will  I g.  to  the  man  of  God  to  tell 
18.  17.  my  daughter  Merab,  her  will  I g.  thee 
1  Clir.  16. 18.  10  thee  will  I g.  land,  Psal.  105. 11. 
Psal.  iS.  49.  therefore  will  J  g.  thanks  to  thee 
Cant.  7.  12.  there  will  I g.  thee  my  loves 
isa.  43.  4.  therefore  will  I g.  men  for  thee 
ot).  5.  to' them  will  I  g.  in  mine  house  a  place 
Jer.  24.  8.  so  will  I g.  Zedekiah  king  of  Judah 
45.  5.  thy  life  will  1  g.  to  ihee  for  a  prey 
Eiek.  15.  6.  so  will  J  g.  inhabitanis  of  Jerusalem 
36. 26.  new  heart  also  will  I g.  you,  and  new  spirit 
Hag.  2.  9.  and  in  this  place  will  I g.  peace 
Mat.  4.  9.  devil  said,  all  these  things  will  I g.  thee 
/^uie4.  6.  all  this  power  will  I g.  thee,  and  glory 
Rev.  2.7.  to  him  thnlovercometh  will  I g.  17,26. 

Lord  GIVE. 
Ezo(f.]2.2J.when  ye  come  lo  the  land  which  Z,. will 
g.  you.  Lev.  14.  34.  |  23. 10.  |  25.2.  J^um.  15. 2. 

16.  8.  when  the  Lord  shall  g.  you  flesh  to  eat 
J^'uvi.  11.  18.  therefore  the  V.orii  will  ^.  you  flesh 

14.  8.  if  the  Lord  delight  in  us,  he  will  g.  it  us 
22.  13.  the  Lord  refuseth  to  g.  me  leave  to  go 

34.  13.  the  Lord  commanded  to^.  the  nine  tribea 
36.  2.  the  Lord  commanded  lo  g.  Ihe  land  by  lot 

Vcut.  1.  25.  it  is  a  good  land  the  Lord  doth  g. 
28.  65.  the  Lord  shall  g.  thee  a  trembling  heart 
Josk.9.'H.  the  Lord  command.  Moses  to^.the  land 

17.  4.  the  Lord  commanded  to  g.  us  inheritance 
21.  2.  the  Lord  commanded  to  g.  us  cities 

iJiirA4.I2.  which  the  /^.shall^.  thee  of  this  woman 

1  A'ings  15.  4.  the  Lord  his  God  did  g.  him  a  lamp 

2  Chron.  25.  9.  the  Lord  is  able  to  g.  thee  much 
Psal.  29. 11.  the  Lord  will  g.  strength  lo  his  people 

84.  II.  the  Lord  will  g.  grace  and  glory 

85.  12.  the  Lord  shall  g.  that  which  is  good 
Isa.  7.  14.  the  Lord  himself  shall  g.  you  a  sign 

14.  3.  the  I^ord  shall  g.  thee  rest  from  sorrow 

30.  20.  though  the  Lordg.yoxi  bread  of  adversity 
Zech.  10.  1.  the  Lord  sbaWg.  them  showers  of  rain 
/-jiA-<:1.32./.orrfshall^.him  the  throne  of  his  father 
2Tim.l.l6.Lordg.  mercy  tohoiiseof  Onesiphorus 

J^'-ot  GIVE,  or  GIVE  not. 
f7fn.30.31.Jacob!'aid,lhou  shall  Jioi^.me  anything 
hZrod.  5.  10.  I  will  not  g.  you  straw,  go,  get  straw 

30. 15.  the  rich  bhall  notg.  more,  poor  not  g.  lesi 
Aeu.25.  37.  ihoii  shall  nut  g.  thy  money  on  usury 
Deut.  2.  5.  I  will  nut  g.  you  of  their  land,  9.  19. 

7.  3.  thy  daughter  thou  shall  not  g.  to  his  son 

28.  55.  he  will  not  g.  ofthe  flesh  of  his  children 
jM(/^.21.1.shall  not  any  of  us  ^.his  daught.  to  Benj. 

7.  we  have  sworn  we  will  not  g.  them  wives 
l.Sam.30.22.  we  will  noig.  them  ought  ofthe  spoil 
IKings  21. 4.  I  will  not  g-.inheritanre  of  my  fathers 
Ezra  4.  f  13.  then  will  ihey  not  g.  loll,  tribute 

9.  1-i.  g.not  your  dnughlers,  JVVA.10.30.  |13.25 
Psal.  132.  4.  I  will  not  g.  sleep  to  mine  eyes 
Prov.  6.  4.  g.  nut  shep  to  thine  eyes,  nor  slumber 

31.  3.  g.  not  thy  stiengih  unto  women 
Eccl.  7.  t  21.  g.  not  thy  heart  unto  all  words 
Isa.  13.  10.  constellations  shall  not  g.  their  light 

42.  8.  my  glory  will  I  710/  g.  to  another,  48.  11. 

62.  8.  I  will  no  more  g.  thy  corn  to  enemies 
Jer.  18.  18.  let  us  not  g.  heed  to  any  of  his  word* 

26.  24. 710?^.  Jeremiah  into  the  hand  ofthe  people 
£;zeA-.32. 7  1  will  co.ver  sun  with  a  cloud,  the  moon 
shall  nn«  g.  her  light.  Mat.  24.  29.  Mark  13. 24. 
Dan.  II.  21.  to  whom  not  g.  honour  of  kingdom 
IJus.  f>.  t  4.  notg.  their  doings  to  turn  to  the  Lord 
Joel  2.  17.  g.  not  thine  heritage  to  reproach 
Mat.  7.  6.  ff.  nut  that  which  is  holy  to  the  dogs 
Mark  12.  15.  shall  we  give,  or  shall  we  not  g.7 
Fph.  4.  27.  neither  g.  place  to  the  devil 
Jam.  2.  16.  and  g.  not  those  things  they  need' 

GIVE  thanks. 
2  Sam.  22.  ,50. 1  will  g.  thanks  to  thee,  Psal.  18.49 

1  Chron.  16.  8.  g.  thanks  lo  the  Lord,  call  upon 
his  name,  P.^al.  10.5  1.  I  106.  1.  I  107.  1.  I 
118.  1,29.  I  136.  1,3. 

35.  save  us,  O  God  of  our  salvation,  that  we  may 
g.  thanks  lo  thy  holy  name,  Psal.  106.  47 

41.  who  were  expressed  by  name,  to  g.  thankg 
25.3.  sons  of  Jeduthun  with  a  harp  lo^.  thanks 

2  Chr.  31.  2.  Hezekiah  appointed  Levites  log.  th. 
Psnl.  6.  5.  in  the  grave  who  shall  g.  thee  thankt 

30.  4.  sing  to  Lord,  ye  saints  of  his.  and^.  thank§ 
at  the  remembrance  of  bis  bolinpes,  97  IS 


GIV 

35.  18.  I  will  g.  thanks  in  the  great  congregation  | 
4-.  fo.  I  sliall  ^.  thanks  tor  lielj)  ofcountLnancfi 
75.J.  to  tlicc,  O  Godjdo  \vc  g.thanks, do g-.thanks  \ 
7y.  13.  so  we  thy  people  will  g.  thee  thanks 
9i!.  1.  it  is  a  good  thing  to  g.  thanks  to  the  Lord 
106.  47.  save  us  to  g.  thanks  to  thy  holy  name 
119.  B2.  at  midnight  I  will  rise  lo  g.  thanks 
van.  4.  whither  the  tribes  go  up  tu  g.  thanks 
136.  2.  O^.  thanks  unto  the  God  of  gods 
26.  O  g.  thanks  unto  the  God  of  heaven 
140.  13.  righteous  shall  g.  thanks  to  thy  name 
Rom.  16.  4.  to  whom  not  only  I  g.  thanks 
1  Cvr.  10.  :iO.  for  that  for  which  1  g.  thanks 
Eph.  1.  16.  I  cease  not  to  g.  thanks  for  you 
Col.  1.  3.  wc  g.  thanks  to  God  and  the  Father 

1  Thess.  1.  2.  wc  g.  thanks  to  God  always  for  you 
5. 18.  in  every  thing  g.  thanks,  this  is  will  of  (iod 

2  I'hess.  2.  13.  we  are  bound  to  g.  tha7iks  for  you 
Hev.ll.l7.  vicg.  thee  thanks,  LordGotJ  Almighty 

GIVE  up. 
/>f«f.23.14.Lord  walkethto^.apthinecnem.31.5. 
1  Kings  14. 16.  he  shall  g.  Isr.  vp,  because  of  sins 
Job  3.  11.  why  did  not  1  g.  up  the  ghost  7 
13. 19.  if  I  hold  my  tongue,  1  shall  g.  tip  the  ghost 
/sa.  43.  6. 1  will  say  to  north,  g.  up,  and  to  south 
Has.  11.  8.  how  shall  I  g.  thee  up,  Epliruiin7 
Jiiic.  a.  3.  therefore  will  he  g.  tlieiu  up 

6.  14.  tlial  which  thou  delivorcst  will  I  g.  up 

GIVEN. 
Oen.  21.  7.  Sarah  should  have  g.  cliildrcn  suck 
Lev.  20.  3.  because  he  hath  g.  his  seed  to  Molech 
jVum.  18.  6.  they  arc  g.  as  a  gift  for  the  Lord 
J)eul.  12.  15.-according  to  the  blessing  ^r.  16.  17. 
Huth  2. 12.  a  full  reward  be  g.  thee  of  the  Lord 

1  Sam.  2.  t32.wealth  which  God  would  have  »•.  Isr. 

2  Sam.  4. 10.  whothought  I  would  have^.a  reward 
12.  8.  I  Would  have  g.  thee  such  and  such  things 

18.  11.  I  would  have  "-.  thee  ten  shekels  of  silver 

19.  42.  or  hath  the  king  g.  us  any  gift  1 

1  Kings  13. 5.  the  sign  which  the  man  of  G.  had  g. 
1  Chr.  29.  14.  and  of  thine  own  have  we  g.  thee 
Ezra  6.9.  let  it  bo  g.  them  day  by  day  without  fail 
Esth.  3. 11.  the  silver  is  g.  to  thee,  the  people  iiNo 

7.  3.  let  my  life  bo^.  me  at  my  petition  and  |)eopl(,' 
Job  3.  20.  why. is  light  g.  lo  him  that  is  in  misery  ? 

23.  why  is  light  g.  to  a  man  whose  way  Is  hid  ? 

15.  19.  to  whom  alone  the  earth  was  n-. 
Psal.  79.  2.  dead  bodies  of  thy  servts.  g.  to  be  meat 

112.  9.  he  hath  g.  to  the  poor,  2  Cor.  9.  9. 

115. 16.  the  earth  hath  he  g.  to  the  children  of  men 
Prov.  19. 17.  that  which  he  hath  g.  will  he  pay  him 
Eccl.if.S.  nor  wickedn.  deliver  those  that  are ^'. to  it 

12.  11.  which  CLte  g.  from  one  shepherd 
Isa.  9.  6.  for  to  us  a  Child  is  horn,  to  us  a  Son  is  g. 

47.  8.  therefore  hear,  thou  that  art  "•.  to  pleasures 
Jer.  V>.  13.  every  ode  is  g.  to  covetousness,  8.  10. 

44.  20.  he  said  to  all  who  had^.  him  that  answer 
Lam.  5.  6.  wc  have  g.  the  hand  to  the  Egyjjtians 
Eick.  11.  15.  unto  us  is  this  land  g.  33.  24. 

35.  12.  they  are  desolate,  thoy  are  g.  to  consume 
Dan.  2.  33.  beasts,  fowls  hath  he  n'.into  thine  hand 

7.  4.  like  a  lion,  and  a  man's  heart  was  g.  to  it 
1 12.  yet  a  prolonging  in  life  was  g.  them 

11.6.  she  shall  be  g.  up,  and  they  thai  brought  lipr 

JUat.  13.  11.  it  is  g.  to  you  to  know  the  mysteries 

of  the  kingdom,  Mark  4.  II.  Luke  H.  10. 

19. 1  l.dll  cannot  receive,  save  they  to  whom  it  is  g. 

21.  43.  be  g.  to  a  nation  bringing  forth  fruits 

22.30.  arc ^-.in  marriage,  J»/nri  12.25. /.uAc  20.35 

2fi.  9.  pold  for  much,  and  ^.to  the  poor,  Mark  14.5. 

2S.  18.  all  power  is  g.  to  mc  in  heaven  and  earth 
Mark  4.  24.  unto  you  that  hear  more  shall  be  g. 
Luke  12.48.to  whom  much^.of  him  much  ic'iuired 
John  3  27  can  receive  nothing,  except  it  be  g. 

5.  26.  he  hath  g.  to  the  Son  to  have  life  in  himself 

6.  39.  of  all  he  hath  g.  mc,  I  should  lose  nothin, 
65.  no  man  can  come  tomc,e.\cc|it  it  werc^.him 

19.  11.  except  it  were  g.  th(!«  from  above 
.4rf.f  4. 12.  there  is  none  other  name  it.  among  men 

24.  26.  he  hoped  that  money  shouul  be  g.  him 
Rom.  5.  5.  by  the  Holy  Ghost  which  is  g-  to  us 

11.3.5.  or  who  hath  first  n-.to  him,  and  recompensed 

15. 15.  because  of  the  grace  that  Is  g.  mc  of  God 

1  Cor.  2. 12.  might  know  thingn  freely  g.  us  of  God 

2  Cor.  1.  11,  that  thanks  may  be  g.  bv  many 
r;al.  3.21.  hccna  law  ^r.  which  could  have  ^r.  life 
Eph.J.  2.  dispensation,  which  i«^.  meto  you-ward 

8.  to  me  who  am  the  least  is  this  grace  g. 
4.  19.  who, being  past  feeling,  htivp  g.  ihemselvrs 
over  lo  InsciviousncsR 
."5.  2.  Christ  hath  loved  ns,  and  g.  himsilffor  us 
Phil.  1.  29.  to  you  it  is  o-.  in  liidialf  of  Christ 
2.  9.  and  hath  g.  him  a  name  above  every  name 
Wfd.4.8.for  if . Ten.  hnd^.ttiem  re«>,  then  not  spoken 
]  John  3.  24.  by  the  S|iiril  which  he  ha'h  g.  us 
4.  13.  because  lie  hath  g.  us  of  his  Spirit 
Rfv.n.  11.  white  robes  wore  if.  lo  every  oneofihrm 
13.  5.  power  was  g.  lo  him  to  rontiniio  42  monil.s 
7  it  was  ff.  to  him  to  make  war  with  the  sainli 
834 


GIV 

Ood,  or  Lord  hath,  had  GIVEN. 
Gen.  24.  35.  the  A.  hath  o-.  Abrah.  tlocks  and  herds 

30.  6.  and  Rachel  said.  Hud  halhg.  me  a  son 
18.  and  Leah  said,  Ood  hath  g.  me  my  hire 

31.  9.  tJius  God  hath  g.  me  your  lather's  cattle 
33.  5.  the  childr.  which  G.  hath  graciously  g.  me 
43.  23.  God  hath  g.  you  treasure  in  your  sacks 
48.  9.  the  children  God  hath  g.  me  in  this  place 

Kxod.  16.  15.  the  bread  which  the  Lord  hathg.you 

29.  for  that  llie  Lord  hath  g.  you  the  sabbaili 

J^uia  32.  7.  from  going  over  to  the  land  which  the 

Lord  hath  g.  them,  9.  Deut.  3.  18.  |  28.  52. 

Josh.  2.  9,  14.  I  23.  13,  15.  Jer.  25.  5. 

Josh.  6. 16.  shout,  for  the  Lord  hath  g.you  the  city 

18.  3.  to  possess  land  wliicli  the  J.ord  hath  g.  you 

1  ifaTH.  1.  27.  Lord  hath  g.  me  my  petition  I  asked 
15.28.  J.,  hathg.  it  to  a  neighbour  of  thine,  28. 17. 
30.  23.  not  to  do  so  with  what  the  I^ord  hath  g. 

2  Chr.  36. 23.  kingdoms  halh  Godg.  me,  F.ira  1.2. 
Keel.  5.  19.  every  man  to  whom  G.  hath  g.  riches 
Isa.  8.  18. 1  and  the  children  1j.  hathg.  Heb.%  13. 

23.  11.  the  Lord  hath  g.  a  commamlment  against 

50.  4.  the  L.  hath  g.  me  the  tongue  of  the  learned 
.Icr.  II.  18.  the  JMrd  hath  g.  me  knowledge  of  it 

47.  7.  seeing  the  Lord  hath  g.  it  a  charge 
.John  6.  23.  after  that  the  Lord  had  g.  thanks 
.lets  5. 32.  whom  G.  halh  g.  to  thim  that  obey  him 

27.  24.  God  halh  g.  thee  all  that  sail  with  thee 
Horn.  11.8.  Godhathg.  them  the  spirit  of  slumber 
2  Cor.  10. 8.  the  L.  hath  g.  us  for  eilification,  13.10. 
1  Thess.  4.  8.  but  G.  who  halh  g.  us  his  holy  Spirit 
1  ./uhn  5.  11.  this  is  tlie  record  God  hath  g.  to  us 
See  Kkst. 
I  have,  or  have  I  GIVEN. 
Gen.  27.  37.  brethren  have  I g.  him  for  servants 
1  A'/«^6'3.13.  /AttBC  "■.thee  that  thou  hast  not  asked 
Isa.  43. 28.  therefore  /  have  g.  Jacob  to  the  curse 

55.  4.  I  have  g.  hitn  for  a  witness  to  the  people 
Jer.  8.  13.  things  I  have  g.  shall  pass  from  them 

27.  5.  I  have  g.  it  to  whom  it  seemed  meet  to  me 
Ezek.A.X'y.I  have  g.\\\ce  cow's  dung  for  man's  dung 

2!).  20.  I  have  g.  him  the  land  of  Egypt  for  labour 
.■Imos  4.  6.  /also  have  g.  you  cleanness  of  teeili 

!).  1').  no  more  be  pulled  out  of  land  I  havcg.lhrm 
Jiihn  13. 15.  I  have  g.  you  an  example,  that  ye  do 

17. 8. 1  hare  ^  .thein  the  words  thou  gavest  me,  14. 
22.  the  glory  thou  gavest  ine,  I  have  g.  them 
1  Cor.  16.  1.  as  I  have  g.  order  to  the  churches 

JVut  GIVEN. 
Gen.  38.  14.  and  she  was  not  g.  unto  him  to  wife 
/.'fHt.26.14.  Iliave  ;iot  o-.ought  liiereof  forthedead 

29.  4.  yet  Lord  hath  notg.  you  s  heart  to  perceive 
1  Chr.  22. 18.  hath  he  notg.  you  rest  on  every  side? 
..V(A.  13. 10.  the  portion  of  Levites  had  not  been  g. 
.fob  22.  7.  thou  hast  not  g.  water  to  the  weary 
P6-a^78. 63.  their  maidens  were  not  ^.  to  marriage 

118.  18.  but  he  hath  not  g.  me  over  lo  death 

124.  6.  whohathnoi  "-.  us  as  a  prey  lo  their  teeth 
Isa.T!.  10.  .lerus.  no(be^.  intoihe  hand  of  Assyria 
./fr.  .39.17.  thou  slialt  not  be^.  into  hand  of  the  men 
F.iek.  3.  20.  because  thou  hast  vutg.  him  warning 

18.  8.  he  that  hath  not  g.  forth  ujion  usury 
Mat.  13. 11.  it  is  given  to  you,  to  them  it  is  notg. 
.foltn  7.  39.  for  the  Holy  Ghost  was  not  yet  g. 

1  7'/m.3.3.  bishop  not  n-.to  wine,  no  striker,  7'/M.7. 

8.  deacons  not  g.  to  much  wine,  not  greedy 

2  Tim.  1.  7.  God  hath  not  "-.  us  the  spirit  of  fear 
Tit.a.  3.  aged  women  likewise  not  n-.to  much  wine 

Shall  be  GIVEN. 
JVuTO.  26.  54.  to  every  one  shall  inheritance  be  g. 
/.)fut.28. 31.  l\iy  sUccp  shall  be g.lo  thine  enemies 

32.  thy  sons  shall  be  g.  to  anollier  people 
Ezra  4.21.  till  another  commandment  shall  be g. 
Esth.  5.  3.  it  shall  be  g.  to  half  of  the  kingdom 
Psil.  72.  15.  to  him  shall  be  g.  of  gold  of  Sheba 

120. 3.  what  .'ihall  be g,to  thee,  thou  false  tongue'? 
Isa.  3.  U.  the  reward  of  his  bands  shall  be  g.  him 
3!1.  16.  bread  shall  beg.  him,  waters  shall  be  sure 
35.  2.  the  glory  of  Lebanon  shall  he  g.  lo  it 
./cr.21. 10.  ihiscity  s/iaZ/ Ac^.inlothe  haiulofking 
of  Ilabylon,  and  he  shall  burn  it,  38.  3,  IH. 
F.iek.iT.  II.  The  marishes,  they  shall  be  g.lo  salt 
/Jan.  7.  25.  the  saints  shall  be  g.  into  his  hand 

27.  the  kingdom  shall  be g.  to  the  saints 
Mat."!.  7.  ask,  and  it  shall  be  g.  you,  Luke  11.  9. 
\0.l(^.  \tshall  brg.  vouiii  same  liMiir,  Mark  13.11. 
12.39.  nosign.f//(i/;ir^.  Markfi.  12.  /.uke\\.'2'.l 
13. 12. for  whosoever  halh, to  him  shnllbeg.ami 
more  abundance. 2.S,  29.  .AfnrA:  4. 2.').  /,u Ac 8.18. 
2ff.  2:1.  it  shall  beg.lhvm  for  whom  it  is  preparid 
21.  43.  the  kingdom  of  <;od  shall  beg.  to  a  nation 
/.u/.r  6.38.give,nnd  itshall  beg.  you.good  measure 
Philrm.'-il.  that  tlirn'  your  prayers  I  ahall  beg.  you 
Jam.  1.5.  let  him  nskof  God,and  it  shallbrg.hm 

Thou  host,  or  hast  thou  GIVEN. 
Grn.  15.  3.  Abram  said, tome  thnu  hastg.  no  seed 
l>rut.  2fi.  15.  blofs  the  land  w  hich  thou  ka.<t  g.  us 
Ji<sh\^.\^.thauhnstg.me  ••■mh  land,  ./iirf^r.  1.15. 
17.  14  wliyAo.stt/io«;r.mchul  one  lotto  inherit? 
Judg.  15   13.  thou  hatt  g.  this  ga  nl  deliveruno 


GIV 

1  Sam.  22. 13.  thou  hast  g.  him  bread  and  a  swoid 
i  Sam.  12.  14.  by  this  deed  tliou  hast  g.  occasion 

22.  36.  thou  hast  alsog.  me  the  shield  of  lliy  sal- 
vation, and  thy  gentleness  hath  made  me  great, 
Psal.  J  8.  35. 
41.tAou  hastg.me  the  necks  of  enemies,  Ps.18.40 
}  Kings  3.6.  thouhastg.  him  a  son  to  sit  onthrpne 

8.  36.  rain  on  thy  land  thou  hast  g.  2  Chr.  6.  27 

9.  13.  what  cities  are  those  Ihuu  hast  g.  rae? 

2  C'Ar.  20.  11.  cast  us  out  of  possession  thouhastg. 
Ezra  9. 13.  thou  hast  g.  us  such  deliverance  af  thii 
Psal.  21.  2.  thou  hast  g.  him  his  heart's  desire 

44.  11.  thou  hast  g.  us  like  sheep  for  mcAt 
liO.  4.  thou  hastg.  a  banner  to  them  that  fear  thea 
61.5.  thou  hastg.  me  thcherilage  of  thus*  that  ftar 
71.  3.  thou  hast  g.  commandinenl  to  save  me 
./ohn  17.  2.  as  thouhastg.  him  power  over  all  fieen 
7.  that  all  things  thou  hast  g.  me,  are  of  thee 
9. 1  pray  not  but  for  them  w  hieh  thou  hastg.  me 
11.  keeji  through  thy  name  those  thou  hast  g.mo 
Rev.  16.  6.  thou  hast  g.  them  blood  to  drink 

GIVEK. 
Isa.  24.2.  as  with  the  taker  of  usury,  so  with  thc^. 
2Cor.9. 7.  not  grudgingly,  God  loveth  a  cheerful  £•. 

GIVEST. 
Deut.  15.  9.  thou^.  him  nought,  and  he  cry  to  Lord 
10.  thy  heart  not  he  grieved  wlien  thou  g.  him 
.Tob  35.  7.  if  thou  be  righteous,  what  ^.  thou  him 
Psal.  50. 19.  thou  g.  thy  mouth  to  evil,  thy  tongue 
80.  5.  thou  g.  them  tears  to  drink  in  great  measure 
104.  28.  that  thou  g.  them,  they  gather 
145.  15.  thou  g.  them  their  meat  in  due  season 
Prov.  2.  t  3.  if  thou  ^.  thy  voice,  for  understanding 
6.  35.  nor  rest  content,  though  thou  g.  many  gifts 
Ezck.  3.  18.  thou  g.  not  warning,  to  nave  his  life 
16.  33.  but  thou  g.  thy  gifts  to  all  thy  lovers 
34.  in  that  thou  g.  a  reward,  and  none  is  given 

1  Cor.  14.  17.  for  thou  verilv  "■.  thanks  well 

GIVETII. 

Eiod.  16.29.  he  ^.  you  on  sixth  day  bread  of  two 

20. 12.  thy  days  may  be  long  in  the  l.ind  which  Ld, 

thy  God  g.  thee,  Deut.  4. 40.  ]  5. 16.  |  25. 15. 

25.2.  every  man  that  g.  it  willingly  with  his  heart 

7>(t!.  27.  9.  all  that  any  man  g.  of  such  shall  be  holy 

Deut.  2. 29.  into  the  land  which  the  Lord  our  God 

g.  us,  4.  1,  21.  1  11.  17,  31.  I  12.  1,  10.  1  15. 

4,  7.  I  16.  20.  I  17.  14.  1 18.  9.  |  19.  1,  2,  10,  14. 

[21.1,  23.  I  24.  4.  I  26.  1,  2.  I  27.  2, 3.  |  28. 8. 

Josh.  1.  11,  15. 

8.  18.  it  is  he  that  g.  thee  power  to  get  weaJlh 

9.  6.  God  g.  not  tins  land  for  thy  righteousness 
12. 10.  when  he  g.  you  rest  from  enemies,  25. 19. 
13.  1.  if  a  prophet  g.  thee  a  sign  or  a  wonder 
16.  5.  in  thy  gates  which  Lord  g.  thee,  18.  |  17.  2. 

2  .SaHi. 22. 1  48.  it  isGod  n^.  avengement  for  me,  and 

bringolh  down  peoiile  under  me,  Psal.  18. 1 47. 
1  Kings  17. 1 14.  till  the  day  the  Ld.^'. rain  on  earth 
.Job  5.  10.  who  g.  rain  upon  the  eaitli  and  fjelds 

33.  13.  ho  g.  no  account  of  any  of  his  ways 

34.  29.  when  lie^.  ([uietness  1|  35. 10.  who^.  songs 

36.  6.  but  g.  right  lo  the  poor  |]  31.  he  g.  meat 
Psal.  18.  50.  great  deliverance^,  he  lo  his  king 

37.  21.  but  the  vighieous  shewclh  mercy  and  g. 
68.  35.  the  God  of  Israel  is  he  that  g.  strcngtn 
119.  130.  the  entrance  of  thy  words  g.  light 
127.  2.  for  so  lie  g.  his  beloved  sleep 

136.  25.  who  g.  food  to  all  Hesh,  146.  7.  |  147.  9 
144. 10.^.  salvation  to  kings  ||  147.  Hi,  hc^.  snow 
Proi).  2.  6.  the  Lord  g.  wisdom,  out  of  his  mowh 
3. 34.  hc^.  grace  to  the  low  ly,  Jam.  4. 6.  iPet.  5.  5. 

13.  15.  good  understanding  £-.  favour 

21.  26.  the  righteous  ^r.  and  spareth  not,  22.  9. 
28.  27.  he  that  g.  to  the  poor  shall  not  lack 

Eccl.  2. 26.  God  g.  to  a  man  that  is  good,  w  isdom 
iind  knowledge,  but  to  the  sinner  he^.  travail 
6.  2.  yet  God  p.  him  not  power  to  eat  tlieieof 
/»a.40'.29.  he  g.  power  to  the  faint  ||  42.  5. g.  hrenlh 
Jer.  5.  24.  g.  rain  ||  31.  35.  g.  the  sun  for  a  ligh 

22.  13.  woe  to  him  that  n-.  him  not  for  his  work 
/,rim.  3. 30,  he  g.  his  cheek  to  him  that  smiteth  him 
/M/i.2.21.  he  "-.  wisdom  to  the  wise,and  knowledge 

4.  17.  and  g.  it  to  whomsoever  he  will,  2.5.  32. 
}1os.  10.  t  1.  a  vine  emptying  the  fruit  which  il^. 
Hab.2. 15.  woe  to  him  that  g.  his  neighbour  drink 
Mat.  5.  15,  It  g.  light  to  all  thai  are  in  the  house 
.fohn  3,  :M  God  g.  not  the  Spirit  by  measure  to  him 

6,  32.  hut  my  Father  g.  you  the  true  bread 

33,  who  Cometh  down  and  g.  life  to  the  world 
37.  nil  that  the  Father  i^.  mi>  shnll  eoine  to  mo 

10.  II   the  good  sheplieid  ^.  his  life  for  llie  sheep 

14,  27,  not  ns  the  world  g.  give  I  unto  you 
./tcts  17,  25,  itcg.  to  all  lifo.bicnth,  and  all  thing* 
Rom.  12,8.  he  that /rr,  lot  him  do  it  with  simplicity 

14.  (),  ho  caleth  lo  ihe  Lord,  for  he  o-,  God  thanka 

1  Ciir.  3,  7,  bill  God  that  g.  the  inrrenso 

7.  38,  he  that  g.  her  In  marriage  doplh  well 

15.  .3,'!.  God  g.  il  a  body  as  it  hath  pleased  him 
57,  but  thanks  he  to  God  w  ho  g.  ns  the  victory 

2  Cor.  3,  6.  Ihe  Idler  killelh,  but  llie  Spirit  g.  Iif« 
1  THm.  C,  17,  who  g.  us  ticlilv  all  things  to  enjoy 


GLA 

Jam.  1.5.  ask  of  God,  that  g.  to  all  men  liberally 
4.  6.  g.  more  grace,  God  g.  grace  to  the  liumble 
\Pet.i.  11.  let  him  do  it  as  of  the  ability  thatGod^. 
Rev.  22.  5.  for  the  Lord  God  g.  them  light 

GIVING. 
Deut.  10. 18.  he  loveth  the  stranger  in  g.  him  food 

21.  17.  by  g.  him  a  double  portion  of  ail  he  hath 
Ruth  1. 15.  Lord  visited  his  people  in  g.  them  bread 

1  ATin^sS.y.  shall  accomplish  my  desire,  in^.  food 

2  Chr.  6.  23.  by  g.  him  according  to  righteousness 
Job  11.  20.  their  hope  be  as  the  g.  up  of  the  ghost 
Mat.  24.  38.  were  marrying  and  g.  in  marriage 
Acts  8.  9.  g.  out  that  hnnself  was  some  great  one 

15.  6.  g.  thera  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  he  did  to  us 
Rom.  4.  20.  was  strong  in  faith,  g.  glory  to  God 
9.  4.  the  g.  of  the  law,  and  the  service  of  God 

1  Cor.  14.  7.  things  £'.  sound  II 16.  at  thy  ^.of  thanks 
S  Cor.  6.  3.  g.  no  ottence  in  any  thing,  ministry  not 
PhiLi.  15.  concerning  o-.  and  receiving,  but  ye  only 
lTim.4.1.g.  heed  to  seducing  spirits  and  doctrines 
lPet.3. 7.  g.  honour  to  the  wife  as  to  weaker  vessel 

2  Pet.  1.  5.  g.  all  diligence,  add  to  faith  virtue 
Jude  7.  g.  themselves  over  to  fornication 

Sec  Thanks. 
GLAD. 
£ro(i.4.14.when  he  seeth  thee,  he  will  be^.in  heart 
Judg.  18.  20.  and  the  priest's  heart  was  g. 
1  Sam.  11.  9.  and  the  men  of  Jabesh  were  g. 
1  Kings  8.  66.  Israel  went  to  tents  g.  2  Chr.  7. 10. 
£stA.5.9.Hanian  g.  \\  8.15.  the  city  Shushan  was^. 
Job  3.  22.  and  are  g.  when  they  can  find  the  grave 

22.  19.  righteous  see  it  and  are  g.  Psal.  G4.  10. 
Psal.  16.  9.  therefore  my  heart  is  g.  glory  rejoiceth 

21. 6.  thou  hast  made  him  ^.with  thy  countenance 
34.  2.  the  humble  shall  hear  and  be  g.  69.  32. 
35. 27.  them  be  g.  that  favour  my  righteous  cause 

45.  8.  whereby  they  have  made  thee  g. 

46.  4.  the  streams  shall  make  g.  the  city  of  God 
67.  4.  let  the  nations  be  g.  and  sing  for  joy 

90. 15.  make  us  o-.||  92. 4.  ihouL.  hast  made  me^. 
97.1.  let  the  isles  be  g.  ||  8.  Zion  heard,  and  was  g. 
104.  15.  wine  that  maketh  g.  the  heart  of  man 
34. 1  will  be  ^.  in  the  Lord|1105.  38.  Egypt  was^. 
107.  30.  then  are  they  g.  because  they  be  quiet 
1J9.  74.  they  that  fear  thee  will  be  g.  when 
122.  1.  I  was  g.  when  they  said  to  me,  let  us  go 
126. 3.  done  great  things  for  us,  whereof  we  are^. 
Prov.  10.  1.  a  wise  son  maketh  a.  g.  father,  15.20. 

12.  25.  but  a  good  word  maketh  it^. 

17.  5.  that  is  g.  at  calamities,  not  be  unpunished 

23.  25.  thy  father  and  thy  mother  shall  be  g. 
24. 17.  let  not  thy  heart  be  g.  when  he  stumbleth 
27.  11.  ray  son,  be  wise,  and  make  my  hearty. 

F.ccl.  10.  1 19.  and  wine  maketh  g.  the  life 
Ua.  35.  1  t.he  wilderness  shall  be  g.  for  them 

39.  2.  Hezekiah  wasg-.  of  them,  and  shewed  them 
Jer.  20.  15.  a  child  is  born,  making  him  very  g 

50.  11.  because  ye  were  g.  O  ye  destroyers 
ham.  1.  21.  they  are  g.  that  thou  hast  done  it 
iJan.  6.  23.  then  was  the  king  e.vceeding  g. 
JIos.7.3.  they  make  the  king  o-. with  theirwickedn. 
Jonah  4.  6.  Jonah  was  g.  because  of  the  gourd 
Zcch.  10.  7.  their  children  shall  see  it  and  he  g. 
^/arAH.ll.were^.and  promised  money,/. !(Af22.5. 
J^uke  V.  19. 1  am  sent  to  shew  thee  these  ^.  tidings 

8.  1-  shewing  the  g.  tidings  of  the  kingdom 

15.  32.  was  meet  we  should  make  merry  and  \>eg. 
John  8.  56.  .\braham  saw  my  day  and  was  g. 

11. 1.5.  I  am^.  for  yoursakes  that  I  was  not  there 
Acts  11.23  when  had  seen  the  grace  of  G.  he  was 5'. 

13.  48.  the  Gentiles  heard  this,  they  were  g. 
Rom.  16.  19.  I  am  g.  therefore  on  your  behalf 

1  Cor.  16.  17.  I  am  g.  of  the  coming  of  Stephanas 

2  Cor.  2.  2.  %vho  is  he  then  that  maketh  me  g.? 
13. 9.  we  are  "•.  when  we  are  weak,  and  ye  strong 

1  Pet.  4.  13.  his  glory  revealed,  ye  may  be  g.  also 

GliAD  joined  with  rejoice. 
1  Chron.  16.  31.  let  the  heavens  be  g.  and  let  the 
earth  rfjoice,  the  Lord  reigneth,  Psal.  96. 11. 
Psal.  9.  2.  I  will  be  g.  and  rejoice  in  thee 

14.  7.  Jacob  shall  rejoice,  Israel  shall  be  g.  .53.  6. 

31.  7.  I  will  be  g.  and  rejoice  in  thy  mercy 

32.  11.  be  g.  and  rejoice,  ye  righteous,  68.  3. 

40.  16.  that  seek  thee,  be  g.  and  rejoice,  70.  4. 
48.  II.  let  Zion  rf/oj'cfi,  daughters  of  Judah  be  o-. 
90. 14.  that  we  may  be  g.  and  rejoice  all  our  days 
118.24.  this  is  the  day,  wc  will  rej.nnA  be  g.  in  it 

Cant.  1.  4.  we  will  be  g.  and  rejoice  in  thee 
Isii.  2.5.  9.  we  will  rejoice  and  be  g.  in  his  salvation 
65.  18.  but  be  you  g.  and  rejoice  for  ever 
C6. 10.  rej.  ye  with  Jerusalem,  and  be  g.  with  her 
Lam.  4.  21.  rejoice  dn^  bo§".  O  daughter  of  Edom 
Joel  2.  21.  fear  not,  O  land,  bo  g.  and  rrjoice 

23.  bo^.ye  children  of  Zion,  and  rrjoice  in  Lord 
Hab.  1  15i  therefore  they  rejoice  and  are  g. 
Zeph.  3.  14.  be  g.  and  rejoice  with  all  the  heart, 
O  daughter  of  Jerusalem 
Mat.  5. 12.  rejoice  and  be  g.  great  is  your  reward 
Acts  2.  26.  my  heart  did  rejoice,  my  tongue  waSiO'. 
Rev.  10.7.  be  g.  and  rejoice,  tlio  marriage  is  come 
233 


GLO 

GLADLY. 
Mark  6.  20.  Herod  feared  John,  and  heard  him  ^ 
12.  37.  the  common  people  beard  Christ  g. 
Acts  2.  41.  that^.  received  the  word  were  baptized 

21.  17.  when  come,  the  brethren  received  us  g. 
2  Cor.  11.  19.  ye  suffer  fools  g.  seeing  ye  are  wise 

12.  9.  most  g.  therefore  will  I  rather  glory 

15.  I  will  very  g.  spend  and  be  spent  for  you 

GLADNESS. 

J^Tum.  10.  10.  in  the  day  of  your^".  ye  shall  blow 

Deut.  28.  47.  servedst  not  the  Lord  wither,  of  heart 

2  Sam.  6. 12.  David  brought  up  the  ark  with  g. 

1  Chron.  16.  27.  strength  and  g.  are  in  his  jHace 
29.22.  and  did  eat  and  drink  thatday  withgreat^. 

2  Chron.  29.  30.  and  they  sang  praises  with  g. 
30.21.  Israel  ke]Jl  feast  of  unleavened  bread  with^, 

23.  and  they  kejit  other  seven  days  with  g. 

JVVA.  8.  17.  and  there  was  very  great  g. 
12.  27.  Levites,  to  keep  the  dedication  with  g. 

Esth.  8. 16.  the  Jews  had  light,  and  g.  and  joy,  17. 
9. 17.  they  made  it  a  day  of  feasting  and  g.  18,  19. 

Psal.  4.  7.  thou  hast  put  g.  in  my  heart  more  than 
30.  11.  and  thou  hast  gnded  me  with  g. 
43.  1 4.  I  will  go  to  God  the  g.  of  my  joy 
45.  7.  hath  anointed  thee  with  oil  ofg.  Heb.  1.  9 
15.  with  ^.  and  rejoicing  shall  they  be  brought 
51. 8.  make  me  to  hear  joy  and  g.  that  the  bones 
97.  11.  and  g.  is  sown  for  the  upright  in  heart 
100.  2.  serve  the  Lord  with  g.  come  with  singin, 

105.  43.  he  brought  forth  his  chosen  with  g. 

106.  5.  that  I  may  rejoice  in  the  g.  of  thy  nation 
Prov.  10.  28.  the  hope  of  the  righteous  shall  be  " 
Cant.  3.  11.  and  in  the  day  of  the  g.  of  his  heart 
Isa.  16. 10.  joy  andg'.  is  taken  away  out  of  the  field 

22.  1.3.  and,  behold,  joy  and  g.  slaying  oxen 

30.  29.  ye  shall  have  a  song  and  g.  of  heart 
35.  10.  they  shall  obtain  joy  and  g.  51.  11. 
51.  3.  joy  and  g.  shall  be  found  therein 

Jcr.  7.  34.  cease  voice  of  mirth  and^.  16.9.  |  25. 10. 

31.  7.  sing  with  ^.  for  Jacob,  shout  among  nations 
33. 11.  there  shall  be  heard  a  voice  of  joy  and  g 
48.  33.  joy  and  g.  taken  from  the  plentiful  field 

Joel  1.  16.  joy  and  g.  from  the  house  of  our  God 
Zcch.  8. 19.  shall  be  to  house  of  Judah  joy  and  n' 
Mark  4.  IG.  who  immediately  receive  it  with  g. 
Luke  1. 14.  shalt  have  joy  and^.  and  many  rejoice 
Acts  2.  46.  did  eat  their  meat  with  g.  of  heart 
)2.  14.  she  opened  not  the  gate  for  g.  but  ran 

14.  ]7.  filling  our  hearts  with  food  and  g. 
Phil.  2.  29.  receive  him  in  the  Lord  with  all  g. 

GLASS. 

1  Cor.  13. 12.  for  now  we  see  through  a  g.  darkly 

2  Cor.  3.  18.  with  open  face,  beholding  as  in  a  g. 
Jam.  1.23.  a  man  beholiling  his  natural  face  in  a^, 
Rev.  4.  6.  there  was  a  sea  of  ^.  like  unto  crystal 

15.  2.  and  Isaw  a  sea  of^.  mingled  with  fire 
21.  18.  the  city  was  pure  gold,  like  clear  ^.  21. 

GLASSES. 

Isa.  3. 23.  the  Lord  will  take  away  the^.  and  vails 

See  Looking. 

GLEAN. 

/>eD. 19.10.  thou  shalt  not^.  vineyard,  Deut.  24.21. 
Ruth  2.  2.  let  me  now  go  to  the  field  and  g.  ears 
Jer.  6.  9.  they  shall  thoroughly  g.  the  remnant 

GLEANED. 
Judg.  1.  t  7.  kings  g.  their  meat  under  my  table 
20.  45.  and  they  g.  of  them  in  the  high-ways 
Ruth  2.  3.  she  came  and  g.  after  the  reapers 

GLEANING,  S. 
Lev.  19.  9.  not  gather  the  g.  of  harvest,  23.  22. 
Judg.  8. 2.  is  not  the  g.  of  the  grapes  of  Ephraim  1 
Isa.  17.  6.  yetg.  grapes  shall  be  left  in  it  as  shaking 
24.  13.  as  the  g.  grapes  when  vintage  is  done 
Jer.  49.  9.  would  they  not  leave  some  ^.?  Ob  ad.  t5. 
Mic.  7.  1.  1  am  as  the  grape  g.  of  the  vintage 

GLEDE. 
Deut.  14.  13.  ye  shall  not  eat  the  g.  Rite,  vulture 

GLISTERING. 
1  Chron.  29.  2.  now  I  have  prepared  g.  stones 
.fob  20.  25.  the  g.  sword  Cometh  out  of  his  gall 
Luke  9.  29.  and  his  raiment  was  white  and  g. 

GLITTER,  ING. 
Dent.  32.  41.  if  I  whet  my  g.  sword  I  will  render 
,/ob  39.  23.  the  g.  spear  raltleth  against  him 
Ezek.  21.  10.  it  is  furbished  that  it  may  g. 

28.  it  is  furbished  to  consume,  been  use  of  the  g. 
JVaA.  3.  3.  the  horseman  liftelh  up  the  g.  sjiear 
Hab.  3. 11.  they  went  at  the  shining  of  thy  g.  spear 

GLOOMINESS. 
./oel  2.  2.  a  day  of  darkness  and  g.  Zeph.  1.  1.5. 

GLORIFY. 
To  glorify,  signijirs  to  make  glorious,  Rom.  8. 
30,  Whom  he  justified,  them  he  also  glorified. 
Thus  Ciod  glorifies  the  elect,  by  adorning  them 
with  gifts  and  graces  in  this  world,  and  by 
bringing  them  to  the  full  possession  of  glory 
and  blessedness  in  the  other  world,  li'hen 
man  is  said  to  glorify  God,  it  is  not  to  be  un- 
derstood as  if  he  could  add  any  thing  to  (iod's 
essential  glory :  But  ice  may  be  said  to  glo- 


GLO 

rify  God,  when  we  acknowledge  him  to  be  glo- 
rious, and  ascribe  to  him  the  glory  of  everf 
excellency  whether  of  natuie  or  grace,  and 
confess  that  he  is  worthy  to  receive  honour, 
glory,  might,  and  majesty.  Rev.  4.  11.  When 
we  confers  that  all  the  jilury,  gifts,  and  dig  ■ 
nily  which  we  have  above  other  men,  are  given 
us  of  God,  1  Chron.  29.  11,  12.  When  we  art 
willing  to  abase  ourselves  in  the  acknowledg- 
ment of  our  own  vileness,  that  God  may  be 
magnijicd  in  any  of  his  attributes  iir  ordi- 
nances by  it,  Jer.  13.  16.  Mai.  2.  2.  IVhen  we 
believe  God's  promises,  and  wait  for  the  per- 
formance of  them,  though  we  see  no  means 
likely  for  their  accomplishment,  Rom.  4.  20. 
IVhen  ice  publicly  ucknowlcijge  true  religion, 
or  any  special  truth  of  God,  when  it  is  gene- 
rally opposed,  Luke  SJ3.  47.  When  we  suffer 
for  God,  1  Pet.  4.  16.  When  on  the  sabbath 
we  devote  ourselves  only  to  the  service  of  God, 
Isa.  58.  13.  When  we  give  thanks  to  God  for 
benifus,  or  dclivcrancis,  Psal.  113.4.  Luke  17. 
18.  When  we  love,  praise,  admire,  and  esteem 
Christ  above  all,  John  1.  14.  [  11.  4. 

God  the  father  is  glorified  in  Christ  the  Media- 
tor by  his  obedience  unto  death,  and  thereby 
consummating  the  work  of  man's  redemption, 
which  tends  so  much  to  the  advancement  of  the 
justice,  wisdom,  mercy,  and  holiness  of  God: 
But  Christ  the  Son  is  glorified  of  the  Father, 
as  touching  his  human  nature,  by  sustaining 
it  against  the  gates  of  hell  in  his  agony  and 
passion  on  the  cross;  by  manifestly  owning 
him  to  be  his  Son  ;  by  enabling  him  to  triumph 
over  his  and  his  people's  enemies,  in  his  re- 
surrection, ascension,  and  exaltation  to  his 
Father's  right  hand.  John  17.  1,  Father,  glo- 
rify thy  Son,  that  thy  Son  also  may  glorify  thee. 

Piai.22.23.  allye  the  seed  of  Jacobg'.  him  and  fear 
50.  15.  I  will  deliver  thee,  and  thou  shalt  g.  me 
86.  9.  all  nations  shall  come  and  g.  thy  name 
12.  and  I  will  g.  thy  name  for  evermore 

Isa.  21.  15.  wherefore  g.  ye  the  Lord  in  the  fires 
25.  3.  therefore  shall  the  strong  people  g.Xhee 

60.  7.  and  I  will  g.  the  house  of  my  glory 
.ler.  30.  19.  I  will  multiply,  I  will  also  g.  them 
Mat.  5.  16.  g.  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven 
Joh7i  12.  28.  Father,  g.  thy  name  ;  I  will  g.  it 

13.  32.  God  shall  also  g.  him  in  himself 
16. 14.  he  shall  ^.  mc;  fur  he  shall  receive  of  mine 
17. 1.  g.  thy  Son,  that  thy  Son  also  may  g.  thee 
5.  now,  O  Father,  g.  me  with  thine  own  self 
21.  19.  signifying  by  what  death  hesliould  »■.  God 
Rom.\5.(}.  ye  may  with  one  mind  and  month  n'.God 

9.  that  the  Gentiles  might  g.  God  for  his  mercy 

1  Cor.6. 20.  i^A  G.  in  body  and  spirilwhich  are  God's 

2  Cor.  9.  13.  g.  God  for  your  professed  subjection 
1  Pet.  2.  12.  may  g.  God  in  the  day  of  visitation 

4.  16.  but  let  him  g.  God  on  this  behalf 
/Je«.15.4.  who  shall  not  fear  thee,  and^.  thy  name  1 

GLORIFIED. 
Lev.  10.  3.  before  all  the  people  I  will  be  g. 
Isa.  26. 15.  thou  hast  increased  nation,  thou  art  w. 

44.  23.  for  the  Lord  hath  g.  himself  in  Israel 

49.3.  art  my  servant,  O  Israel, in  whom  I  will  be^. 

.55.  .5.  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  he  hath  ^.  thee,  60.  9. 

CO.  21.  the  work  of  my  hands,  that  1  may  be  ^. 

61.  3.  the  planting  of  the  Lord  that  he  might  be  ;o-. 
66.  5.  your  brethren  said,  let  the  Lord  be  g. 

Ezek.  28.  22.  I  will  be  g.  in  the  midst  of  thee 
39.  13.  be  a  renown  in  the  day  that  I  shall  be  g. 

Z>an.  5. 23.  and  the  God  in  whose  hand  thy  breath 
is,  and  whose  are  all  thy  ways,  hast  thou  not^. 

Hag.  1.  8.  I  will  take  pleasure  in  it,  and  be  "■. 

J/«<.9.8.marvelled,ando-.G.  Jl/arA2.12./.MAc5.26. 
15.  31.  and  they  g.  the  God  of  Israel 

lAike  4. 15.  he  taught  in  synagogues,  being^.  of  all 
7.  16.  there  came  fear  on  all,  and  they  g.  God 
13.  13.  and  she  was  made  straight,  and  g.  God 
17.]5.ilift  leper  ^.  God  ||  23.47.  the  centurion  o-.  G. 

.hihn  7.39.  H. Ghost  not  given,  because  Jesus  not^. 
]1.  4.  that  the  Son  of  God  might  be  "'.  thereby 
12.16.  but  when  Jcs.  was  n-.then  remembered  they 
23.  the  hour  is  comcthe  Son  of  man  should  be  o-. 
28.  I  have  both  g.  it,  and  will  glorify  it  again 
13.  31.  now  is  the  Son  of  man  g.  God  is^.  in  him 
.32.  if  God  be  g.  in  him,  God  shall  glorify  him 
}4.  13.  that  the  Father  may  be  g.  in  the  Son 
15.  8.  herein  is  my  Father  g.  that  ye  bear  fruit 
17.  4.  I  have  g.  thee  on  earth,  I  have  finished 

10.  and  thine  are  mine,  and  I  am  g.  in  them 
Acts  3.  13.  the  God  of  our  fathers  hath  g.  his  Sor 

4.  21.  for  all  men  g.  God  for  what  was  done 
11. 18.  they  held  their  peace,  and  g.  God,  saying 
13.  48.  Gentiles  heard  this,  they  ^.  word  of  Lord 
21.  20.  they  of  Jerusalem  g.  the  Lord,  and  said 

Rom.  J.  21.  they  knew  God,  they^.  liininota=God 
8.17.  if  we  suffer  with  him,  that  we  may  b.?  also  g 
30.  and  whom  he  justified,  them  he  also  g. 

Oal.  1.  24.  and  they  g.  God  in  me 


GLO 

iTkess.  1 .  10.  when  heehallcomc  tobe^.in  saints 

12.  that  the  name  of  Jesus  may  be  g.  in  yuu 
3.  1.  tliat  the  word  of  the  Lord  may  be  g. 

Heb.  5.  5.  so  Christ  g.  not  himself  to  be  iiigh-pricst 

1  Fet.i.  11.  God  in  all  things  may  be  ^.  thro'  Jesus 
14.  is  evil  spoken  of,  buuon  your  part  he  is  g. 

liev.  ly.  7.  how  much  she  haili  g.  hurtelf 
GLOKU'lETH,  liNU. 

Psal.  50.  23.  whoso  oticreth  praise^,  me 

/^uke  2.  20.  the  shepherds  returned,  g.  God 
5.  25.  he  dejiarled  to  his  own  house,  ^r.  God 
18.  43.  the  blind  man  followed  him,  g.  God 
GLORY 

Ii  taken  for  worldly  splendour  and  magnificence, 
tohic/i  make  kings  glorious  before  men,  Mat. 
().  29.  i>olomon  in  all  his  glory,  in  all  his 
lustre,  and  in  his  richest  ornaments,  teas  not 
to  beautiful  as  a  lily.  Thus  riches,  authority, 
sumptuous  buildings  and  garments,  which 
men  are  ready  to  praise,  and  which  make  their 
possessors  glorious  before  men,  are  called  in 
scripture  glory.  Psal.  4'J.  10,  When  the  glory 
of  his  house  is  increased.  By  glory  is  meant 
the  tongue,  which  is  that  peculiar  eicellency, 
wherein  chiefly,  except  reason,  man  surpasses 
all  other  creatures.  Psal.  Ki.  9,  My  heart  is 
glad,  and  my  glory  rcjoiceth :  Aly  tongue  breaks 
out  mlo  holy  boastings  and  praises.  So  in 
Psal.  1U.-I.  I,  I  will  sing  and  give  praise,  even 
with  my  glory.  The  glory  of  the  king  of  Jls- 
syria,  is  his  splendid  princes,  brave  captains, 
valiant  commanders,  and  powerful  armies, 
ickich  would  make  a  gallant  shew,  and  whci  ein 
,hc  would  glory,  and  boast  exceedingly,  Isa.  8. 
7,  The  Lord  bringeth  upon  them  the  king  of 
Assyria,  and  all  his  glory.  (Jlory  is  put  for 
the  ark  of  the  covenant,  which  was  a  glorious 
type  and  assurance  of  God's  presence,  and 
the  great  safe-guard  and  ornament  of  Israel, 
which  they  could  glory  iii  above  all  other  na- 
tions. 1  Sam.  4.  21,  The  glory  is  departed  from 
Israel.  Horn.  9.  4,  To  whom  pertaineth  the 
glory. 

Glory  is.put  for  the  church,  which  God  makes 
glorious,  not  only  in  his  own  eyes,  but  even  in 
the  eyes  of  the  world.  Isa.  4.  5,  Upon  all  the 
glory  shall  be  a  defence;  vpon  all  holy  assem- 
blies of  sincere  Christians.  It  is  put  for  grace, 
S  Cor.  3.  18,  We  are  changed  into  the  same 
image,  from  glory  to  glory;  growing  from  one 
degree  of  glorious  grace  to  another,  till  it 
come  to  i(s-  perfection  in  eternal  glory.  The 
apostle  calls  man  the  image  and  glory  of  God, 
and  for  this  reason  he  ought  not  to  cover  his 
head  ;  that  is,  Since  God  would  have  the  male 
sex  to  be  a  kind  of  representation  of  his  glory, 
vtajesty,  andpower,  a  man  oughtnol,by  hiding 
his  face,  wherein  these  things  are  most  con- 
spicuous, to  conceal  the  glory  of  God  shining 
in  him.  Uavid  calls  God  his  glory,  Psal.  3.  3, 
Th<m  art  my  glory ;  thou  art  the  Jluthor  of 
that  royal  dignity  to  which  I  am  advanced: 
Or,  thou  art  the  matter  of  my  glorying,  thuu 
hast  formerly  given,  and  wilt  further  give  me 
occasion  of  glorying  or  boasting  of  thy  power 
and  favour  to  me.  Glory  is  taken  for  the  un- 
speakable blessedness,  joy,  and  felicity  of  the 
sainis  in  heaven.  Psal.  73.  24,  'I'huu  sliall 
guide  me  with  thy  counsel,  and  afterwards  re- 
ceive nic  to  glory.  God  promises  to  be  to  his 
church  a  wall  of  lire  round  about,  and  the  glory 
in  till-  midst,  Z.ech.  2.  5.  that  he  would  protect 
his  church,  and  that  his  presence  and  power 
should  make  her  glorious.  It  is  put  for  the 
presence  of  God,  Psal.  ()3.  2. 

When  the  Israelites  forsook  God  in  the  wilder- 
ness, they  changed  their  glory  into  the  simili- 
tiifle  of  an  ox  lliat  oatetli  grass,  Psal.  W>.  20. 
They  changed  llicir  glory;  that  is,  their  God, 
who  was  indeed  their  glory,  into  the  golden 
image  of  an  or  or  calf.  Joshua  speaking  to 
Arhan  says,  (Jivo  glory  to  God,  Josh.  7.  I'.l. 
Confess  the  truth,  and  ascribe  unto  God  the 
glory  of  his  omniscience  in  knowing  thy  sin, 
and  of  his  justice  in  punishing  thee  according 
to  thy  desert.  Hlirn  God  thought  fit  to  call 
hit  servant  Moses  to  himself,  he  directed  him 
to  go  up  to  mount  Abarim,  and  die  there, 
Num.27.  12,  &c.  Moses  hereupon  desired  of 
God  lliat  he  would  provide  a  man  who  should 
be  set  oner  the  multitude.  The  lord  there- 
fore commanded  him  to  take  Joslnin,  Ihr  son 
of  Nun,  saying,  He  is  a  man  who  i<<  lllind  with 
the  S()lrit,  lay  thine  hand  upon  him,  nml  give 
him  ft  cimrgo  in  the  presenrw  of  Ihr  multitude, 

.  and  put  some  of  thine  honour,  in  llrlirrw,  »/ 
thy  glory  or  splendour,  upon  him.  The  e/ues- 
tion  is,  what  glory  this  was,  which  ^lo■ieR 
communicated  to  Joshua.  Onkehis,  and  some 
of  the  Kabbini,  art  of  iminion.that  Mosea  I'm- 


GLO 

parted  him  some  of  that  lustre  which  appeared 
upon  his  countenance,  after  the  conversation 
which  he  had  been  admitted  to  with  God.  Mo- 
ses, they  say,  shined  like  tlie  sun,  and  Joshua 
like  the  moon:  this  was  a  weak  and  borrowed 
brightness.  But  it  is  to  be  undcrsiood  vf  that 
authority,  dnd  empire,  whereof  he  stood  in 
need  for  the  government  of  the  people.  Moses 
laid  his  hands  on  him,  and  by  this  ceremony 
appointed  him  for  his  successor  in  the  conduct 
of  the  Israelites:  He  gave  hint  his  orders  and 
instructions,  that  he  might  acquit  himself 
with  honour  in  this  employment. 
The  glory  of  God.  Moses  earnestly  begged  of 
God  to  shew  him  his  glory  Kxod.  33.  18,  1 
beseech  thee,  shew  me  thy  glory  ;  that  is,  the 
highest  manifestation  of  thy  divine  glory  that 
J  am  capable  of;  or  that  glorious  shape, 
which,  together  with  a  human  voice,  thuu  hast 
now  assumed.  The  heavens  declare  the  glory 
of  God,  l^ial.  19.  1.  'I'hc  visible  heavens  af- 
ford matter  and  occasion,  in  respect  of  their 
vast  extent,  glorious  furniture,  and  powerful 
influences,  to  acknowledge  and  admire  the  glo- 
rious being,  in  finite  power,  wisdom,  anil  good- 
ness of  God.  The  glory  of  the  Loril  hath  filled 
the  house  ol  the  Lord  ;  that  is,  the  cloud,  which 
was  a  usual  token  vf  (iod's  glorious  presence, 
1  Kings  8.  11.  Christ  says  to  Martha,  .hhnll. 
40,  If  thou  wouldest  believe,  thou  shouldest  see 
the  glory  of  God  ;  that  is,  an  admirable  in- 
stance of  the  divine  power,  in  raising  thy 
dead  brother.  The  miracles  which  our  Sa- 
viour wrought,  manifested  his  glory,  or  his 
divine  power,  John  2.  11,  'I'he  glory  of  the 
Lord  shall  be  revealed,  Isa.  40.  5.  that  is,  the 
glorious  power  and  goodness  of  God  shall  be 
manifested  in  the  deliverance  oj'  thejcwajrom 
Babylon,  but  more  especially  in  the  redemp- 
tion of  all  nations  by  our  herd  Jesos  Christ. 
Whether  ye  eat  or  drink,  or  whatsoever  ye  do, 
do  all  to  the  glory  of  God,  1  Cor.  10.  31.  that  is, 
let  the  glory  and  honour  of  God  be  habitually 
and  really  the  chief  end  of  all  your  actions. 
Gcn.3l.  1.  of  our  father's  hath  he  gotten  all  this  g. 
Exod.  28.  2.  make  garments  for  Aaron  for  g.  40. 
1  *'ajn.2. 8.  to  make  them  inherit  the  throne  of  «■. 
4.  21.  the  g.  is  departed  from  Israel,  22. 

t  21.  where  is  the  g.7  there  is  no  g. 
1  Chr.  22.  5.  house  for  Lord  must  be  of^.  and  fame 
20.11.  thine  is  greatness,  power,  and  g.  Mat.G.l'i. 
Esth.  5.  11.  Hainan  told  of  the  ^.  of  his  riches 
.lob  39.  20.  the  g.  of  his  nostrils  is  terrible 
40.  10.  and  array  thyself  with  g.  and  beauty 
Psal.  24.  7.  and  the  King  of  ^.  shall  come  in,  9. 
10.  who  is  this  King  of  g.?   the  Lord  is  King 
ii't.  3.  the  God  of  g.  thundereth.  Lord  on  waters 
49.  16.  when  the  g.  of  his  house  is  increased 
73.  24.  thou  shall  afterward  receive  me  to  g. 
79.  9.  help  us,  O  God,  for  the^.  of  thy  name 
85.  9.  that  g.  may  dwell  in  our  land 
89.  17.  for  thou  art  the  g.  of  their  strength 
lOtl.  20.  they  changed  tlieir  g.  into  similitude 
145.  11.  speak  «f  the  g.  of  thy  kingdom 
149.  5.  hit  the  saints  bo  joyful  in  g. 
Prov.  3.  35.  the  wise  shall  inherit  ^. 
17.  fi.  the^.  of  children  are  their  talhors 
20.  29.  Ihe^.  of  young  men  is  their  strength 
25.  tfi.  set  not  out  thy  g  in  presence  of  the  king 
27.  so  for  men  to  search  their  own  g.  is  not  g. 
28.  12.  when  the  righteons  men  rejoice  there  is^r. 
/.fa. 2.  10.  hide  thee  for  thoi'.of  his'niajesty,  19,21. 

4.  t2.  branch  of  the  Lonl  shall  bo  beauty  and  g. 
5.  for  upon  all  the  g.  shall  be  a  defence 

5.  1 13.  and  their  g.  arc  men  of  famine 

14.  their  ^.  and  pomp  shall  descend  unto  it 

10.  3.  and  where  will  yo  leave  your  g.? 
12.  I  will  punish  the  ^.  of  his  high  loots 
18.  and  sliall  consume  the  g.  of  his  forest 

11.  t  10.  n  root  of  Jesse,  his  rest  shall  be  p. 

13.  19.  Babylon  the /jf.ofkingd.  shall  be  as  Sodom 
II.  18.  all  of  them  lie  in  g.  each  in  his  house 
Ifi.  14.  the  "-.  of  Moah  shall  he  contemned 
17.3.  tliey  shall  beasthe^.oflhe  children  oflsracl 
4.  that  the  g.  of  Jacob  shall  he-  made  thin 

20.  5.  thev  shnll  be  ashoiiud  of  Kgvpt  their  ^. 

21.  10.  and  all  the  g.  of  Kedar  shall  fail 

22.  24.  shall  hang  on  him  g.  of  his  Father's  house 

23.  9.  hnlh  purposed  to  slain  (lie  pride  of  all  g. 

24.  10.  we  hoard  songs,  even  g.  to  the  righteous 
t  23.  thero  shall  bo  g.  before  his  ancients 

35.  2.  the  g.  of  Lubanoii  slial!  he  given  to  It 

(il.  0.  iri  their  g.  yn  shnll  boast  yourselves 

fiO.  II.  he  delightod  with  the  abundance  uthcrg 

12.  the  g.  of  the  Gonlilos  as  a  (lowing  stream 
Jrr.  2.  11.  but  my  people  have  changed  ihoir^. 
i:i.  11.  that  Ihcy  might  be  to  ine  for  a  g. 

18.  shall  come  down,  even  the  crown  of  your^. 
Fiek.  30.  0.  which  is  the  g.  of  all  lands,  15. 
24.  25.  when  I  lake  from  them  tho  joy  uf  llicir  g. 


GLO 

F.zck.  25.  9.  I  will  open  the  g.  of  the  coontrjr 
20.  20.  I  shall  set  g.  in  the  land  of  the  living 
31.  18.  to  whom  art  thou  thus  like  in  g.? 

Dun.  2. 37.  God  hath  given  thee  power  and  ^.7.14 
4.  30.  the  ^.  of  my  kingdom  returned  to  me 

11.  39.  shall  acknowledge,  and  increase  with  ^ 
IIos.  4.  7.  I  will  change  Iheir  g.  into  shame 

9.  II.  as  for  Ephraini,  their  ^'■.  shall  Hy  away 

10.  5.  tho  priests  that  rejoiced  for  the  g.  thereof 
Mic.  1.  15.  he  shall  come  to  AduUam  the  g.  of  Isr 
jVah.  2.  9.  there  is  none  end  of  the  store  and^. 
JIab.  2.  10.  thou  art  filled  with  shame  for^. 
Hag.  2.  3.  who  saw  this  hou.<;e  in  her  first  ^.7 

7.  I  will  fill  this  house  with  g.  saith  tlie  Lord 
9.  g.  of  this  latter  house  greater  than  of  formei 

Zech.  2.  5.  I  will  be  the  g.  in  the  midst  of  her 

8.  after  the^.  hath  he  sent  me  to  the  nations 
0.  13.  he  shall  build  temple,  he  shal*  bear  the  g. 
11.3.  their  g.  is  spoiled,  a  voice  of  roaring  of  lions 

12.  7.  g.  ot  the  house  of  David,  ^.  of  Jerusalem 
Mat.  4.  8.  kingdoms  of  the  world,  and  ^.  of  them 

0.2.  sound  trumjiet,  that  they  may  have^.  of  men 

10.27.sliallcomeintlie^.ofliisFather,JV/arA-8.33 

24.  30.  they  shall  sec  the  Son  of  Man  coming  with 

power  and  great  g.  Mark  13.  20.  l.uke  21.27 

Luke  2.  14.  saying,  g.  to  God  in  the  highest,  19.  38 

32.  light  to  Gentiles,  and  tlie^.  of  thy  people  Isr 

4.  0.  all  this  power  will  I  give  thee,  and  the^. 

9.  31.  who  appeared  in  ^. and  spake  of  hisdeceaM 

John  17.  5.  with  the  g.  which  I  had  with  thee 

22.  the  g.  thou  gavcsl  mo,  I  have  given  them        > 
Jlcts  7.  2.  the  God  o( g.  appeared  to  our  father 

12.  23.  because  he  gave  not  God  the  g. 
22.  11.  when  I  could  not  see  for,  the  g.  of  light 
Horn.  4.  20.  was  strong  in  faith,  giving  g.  to  God 
0.  4.  raised  from  the  dead  by  the  g.  of  the  Father 

8.  18.  are  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the^, 

9.  4.  to  whom  pertaineth  the  g-.  and  covenants 

23.  which  he  had  afore  prepared  unto  g. 

11.  30.  of  him  aro  all  things,  to  whom  be  g.  for 

ever.  Gal.  1.  5.  2  Tim.  4.  18.   Heb.  13.  2L 
1  Pct.i.W. 

10.  27.  to  God  only  wise  be  g.  1  Tim.  1.  17. 

1  Cor.  2.  7.  which  God  hath  ordained  to  our^. 

8.  they  «  ould  not  have  crucified  the  Lord  of^. 

11.  7.  but  the  woman  is  the  g.  of  the  man 

15.  if  a  woman  have  long  hair,  it  is  a  g.  to  her 
15.  40. ^'.of  celestial  is  one,lhc£'.  of  the  terrestrial 
41.  one  »■.  of  the  sun,  another^,  of  the  moon 
43.  it  is  sown  in  dishonour,  it  is  raised  in  g. 

2  Cor.  3.  7.  for  the  g.  of  his  countenance,  which^. 

9.  if  the  ministration  of  condemnation  be  p.  the 
ministration  of  righteousness  doth  e.xceeain  g. 

10.  had  no  g.  by  reason  of  the  g  that  excellelh 
18.  but  we  are  all  changed  from  g.  to  g. 

4.  17.  workAh  for  us  an  eternal  weight  of  ^. 

8.  19.  administeied  by  us  to  the  5^.  of  the  same  Ld. 

23.  they  are  mrssengers,  and  the /''.  of  Christ 
F.ph.  1.  0.  to  the  praise  of  the  g.  ai\m  grace 

17.  the  Father  of  ^.  may  give  you  the  Spirit 

18.  ye  may  know  what  is  the  riches  of  the  ((. 
3.  13.  my  tribulations  for  you,  which  is  your^ 

21.  to  him  be  g.  in  the  church  by  Christ  Jerus 
Phil.  1.  II.  fruits, which  are  byChrist  to^.of  God 
3.  19.  and  whose  g.  is  in  their  sliame 
4. 19.  according  to  his  riches  in  g.  by  Christ  Jesua 
20.  now  to  God  and  our  Father  be  «•.  for  ever 
Col.  1.  27.  what  is  the  riches  of  the  g.  of  this  mvB- 
■  tery,  which  is  Christ  in  you,  the  hope  01^. 
3.  4.  then  shall  ye  appear  with  him  in  g. 

1  Thfss.  2.  6.  nor  of  men  f  ought  we  g.  nor  of  yon 

12.  who  hath  called  you  to  his  kingdom  and  ^ . 

20.  for  ye  are  our  g.  ami  joy 

2  Thess.  I.  9.  punislii  d  ftoin  the  ^.  of  his  power 

2.  14.  lo  ilie  obtaining  of  the  g.  of  our  Lord 
\Tim.  3.  10.  seen  of  angels,  received  up  into^. 
2  Tim.  2.  10.  salvation  in  Christ,  with  eternal^. 
Hib.  2.  10.  in  bringing  many  sons  lo  g.  to  make 

3.  3.  this  man  was  counted  worthy  of  more  ^. 

9.  5.  over  il  the  clieriihims  of  ^.  shadowing 
./om.2.l.lhe  faiih  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  the  Lord  of  ^ 

1  Pet.  I.  8.  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable,  full  of  ^ 

11.  it  leslified  the  g.  lliat  should  follow 

21.  that  God  raised  him  up,  and  gave  him  g. 

24.  and  all  the  ^.  of  man,  ns  tho  flower  of  grosi 
2.  20.  fur  what  g.  is  it,  if  when  ye  he  bulfeied  T 

4.  14.  the  Spirit  of  g.  and  of  God  lesteth  on  yol 

5.  1.  a  pjirlaker  of  the  g.  that  shall  be  revealed 
10.  hath  called  us  to  eternal  g.  by  Christ  Jesui 

2  Pet.  I.  3.  that  hath  cnlleil  us  to  g.  and  virtue 
17.  came  such  a  voice  lo  him  from  e.\cellent  ^f 

3   18   lo  him  be  g.  both  now  »nd  ever,  Rit)  I.  6 

.hide  25.  lo  the  only  wise  God  oiir  Saviour  be  g. 

liev.  4.  II.  thou  art  worthy  to  receive  g.  5.  12. 

7.  12.  blessing  and  g.  and  wisdom  bo  lo  our  Go« 

11.13.  remnant  were  afTrighli'd, and  gave^^.to  Go* 

See  Crown,  lloNoru,  Vain. 

WiticGLOItY. 

.fosh.  7.  ID.  my  son,  give  g.  to  the  God  of  Israo. 

1  Sam.  6.  5.  ye  shall  give  g.  lo  the  God  of  Israd 


GLO 

1  Chr  16.28.  ^^iBf  to  the  Lord,  ^!oe  to  the  Lord  g. 
and  sirength,  29.  Ps.  29.  l,a.  |  96.7,8.  .Icr.lAAti. 
Psal  84.  11.  Uie  Lord  will  give  grace  and  g. 
115  1.  not  to  us,  but  to  lliy  name  give  the  g. 
Jsa.  42.  12.  let  Ihem  give  g.  unto  the  Lord 
Mai.  2.  2.  if  ye  will  not  lay  it  to  heart  lo  give  g. 
Luke  17.  18.  that  returned  to  gioc  g.  to  God 
Rev.  4.  9.  when  those  beasts  give  g.  and  honour 

14.  7.  fear  God,  and  give  g.  lo  him,  worship  him 
16.9.  were  scorclied,  and  repented  not  lo giveg. 

GLORY  of  Ciod. 
Psal.  19.  1.  llio  heavens  declare  the  g.  of  God 
Prov.  23.  2.  it  is  the  g.  of  God  to  conceal  a  thing 
F.zek.  8.  4.  the  g.  of  the  God  of  Israel  was  there 

9.  3.  the  g.  of  God  was  gone  up  from  the  cherub 

10.  19.  tlio^.  of  God  was  over  them  above,  11.22. 
43. 2.  tlie^r.  of  God  came  from  the  way  of  the  east 

John  11.  4.  this  sickness  is  for  the  g.  of  God 

40.  if  believe,  thou  shouldest  see  the  g.  of  God 
.^cti  7. 5o.  Stephen  looked  up  and  saw  the  g. of  G. 
Kom.'3.2'A.  allsmned  and  come  shorlof  the ^.o/G. 

5.  2.  we  rejoice  in  hope  of  the  g.  of  God 

15.  7.  as  Christ  also  received  us  to  the  g.  of  God 
1  Cor.10.31.  ye  eat  or  drink,  do  all  to  the  g.  of  God 

11.  7.  for  a  man  is  the  image  and  g.  of  God 
SCor.l.OO.promiscsinhiniyeaand  an)en,  log. of  G. 

4.  6.  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  g.  of  God 
15.  thanksgiving  of  many  redound  to  g.  of  God 
Phil.  1.  U.  which  are  by  Christ  lo  the  g.  of  God 

2. 11.  confess  that  Jesus  is  Lord  to  the  g.  of  God 
Rev.  15.  8.  temple  filled  with  smoke  from  g.ofGod 

21.  11.  the  holy  Jerusalem,  having  llie  g.  of  God 

23.  no  need  of  the  sun,  g.  of  God  did  lighten  it 

His  GLORY. 

Deut.5.  24.  the  Lord  our  G.  halh  shewed  us  hisg. 

33.  17.  his  g.  like  the  firstling  of  a  bullock 
I  CAr.16.24.  declareth  hisg.  among  heath,  /-s.96.3. 
Psal.  21.  5.  his  g.  is  great  in  thy  salvation 

29.  9.  in  his  temple  doth  every  one  speak  of  hisg. 

49.  17.  his  g.  shall  not  descend  after  him 

72.  19.  let  the  whole  earth  be  filled  with  his  g. 

78.  61.  delivered  his  g.  into  the  enemies'  hand 

89.  44.  thou  hasl  made  his  g.  to  cease 

97.  6.  and  all  the  people  see  his  g. 

102.  16.  when  L.  build  Zion,  shall  appear  in  hisg. 

113.  4.  and  his  g.  above  the  heavens,  148.  l;!. 
Prov.  19. 11.  it  is  his  g.  to  pass  over  transgression 
Tsa.  3.  8.  to  provoke  the  eyes  of  his  g. 

6.  3.  one  cried,  the  ^^lole  earth  is  full  of  his  g. 

8.  7.  the  king  of  Assyria  and  his  g.  shall  come  up 
10.  16.  under  his  g.  he  shall  kindle  a  burning 

59.  19.  shall  fear  Ids  g.  from  rising  of  ihe  sun 

60.  2.  and  his  g.  shall  he  seen  upon  Ihee 

Jer.  22. 18.  not  lament,  saying,  ah  lord,  or  ah  his g. 
Ezek.  43.  2.  and  the  earth  shined  with  his  g. 
Dan.  5.  20.  and  they  look  his  g.  from  him 
Hab.  3.  3.  God  came,  his  g.  covered  the  heavens 
Mat.  6.  29.  Solomon  in  all  his  g.  Luke  12.  27. 

19.  28.  Son  of  man  shall  sit  in  his  g.  Luke  9.  26. 
r,uAe9.32.  when  they  were  awake,  I  hey  saw /us  V. 

24.  26.  to  have  sutT'red,  and  lo  enter  into  his  g. 
John  1.  14.  we  brheld  Ai's^.  the  glory  as  of  the  only 

2.  11.  thus  did  Jesus,  and  manifested  forth  his  g. 

7.  18.  but  he  that  seeketh  his  g.  that  sent  him 
12.41.  these  things  said  Esaias,  when  hesawAjs^. 

Rom.3.7.  hath  abounded  through  my  lie  unio  Ai;,- o-. 

9.  23.  might  make  known  the  riches  of  ids  g. 
Eph.  1.  12.  should  be  to  the  praise  of  /us  g.  14. 

3. 16.  grant  you  according  to  the  richfs  of  his  g. 
Heb.  1.  3.  who  being  the  brightne.-s  of  his  g. 
I  Pet.  4.  13.  that  when  his  g..  shall  be  revealed 
lude-^i.  present  you  before  the  presence  of  his  g. 
Rev.  18.  1.  the  cailh  was  liehlened  with  his  g. 

My  GLORY. 
Gen.  45.  13.  tell  my  father  of  all  my  g.  in  Egypt 
Ejod.29.43.  tabernncle  shall  be  sanctified  by  my  g. 

33.  22.  while  my  g.  passeth  by,  I  will  put  thee 
^um.  14.  22.  those  men  which  have  seen  my  g. 
fob  19.  9.  he  lialh  stript  me  of  my  g.  and  taken 

29.  20.  my  g.  was  fresh  in  me,  my  bow  renewed 
Psal.  3.  3.  thou  art  my  g.  and  lifter  up  of  my  head 

4.  2.  how  long  will  ye  turn  my  g.  into  shame  ? 

16.  9.  my  g.  rejoiceth  ||  30.  12.  viy  g.  may  sing 

57.  8.  awake  up  my  g.  ||  62.  7.  in  God  is  my  g. 

108.  1.  I  will  sing  and  give  praise  with  my  g. 
(sa.  42.  8.  myg.  will  I  not  give  to  another,  48.  11. 

43.  7  for  I  have  created  him  for  my  g. 

46.  13.  I  will  place  salvation  for  Israel,  my  g. 

60.  7.  I  will  glorify  the  house  of  my  "-. 

66.  18.  and  they  shall  come  and  see  my  g. 

19.  have  not  seen  7ny^.  they  shall  declare  myg. 
F.irk.  39.  21.  I  will  set  my  g.  among  the  heathen 
Jlf/e.  2.  9.  from  children  have  ye  taken  awayTny^. 
fohn  8.  50.  and  I  seek  not  mine  own  g.  one  seeks 

17.24.  be  with  me,  that  they  may  behold  my  g. 

GLORY  of  the  Lord. 
Ezod.  16.  7.  in  morning  ye  shall  sec  g.  of  the  Lord 
10.  the  g.ofthe  /^orrf appeared  in  the  cloud,  Lev. 
"  9.  23.  JVum.  14.  10.  |  16.  19,  »2.  |  20.  6. 

34.  16.  the^.  of  the  Lord  abode  oc  mount  Sinai 

237 


GLO 

1  F.zod.'ii.M.  theg'.  o//.or(/ was  like  devouring  fire 

40. 34.  the  g.  of  the  Lord  rilled  the  tabernacle,  3o. 
/.CD. 9. 6.  ihtig.  of  the  Lord  sUaW  appear  unto  you 
JVuTO. 14.21.  earth  shall  be  filled  with ^.  ufthe  Lord 
■1  Kings  8. 11.  the  g.  of  the  Lord  filled  the  house, 
2  Chr.  5.  14.  I  7.  1,  2,  3.  Ezek.  43.  5.  |  44.  4. 
Ps.  104.  31.  the^.  of  the  Lord  shall  endure  for  ever 
138.  5.  for  great  is  the  g.  of  the  J.ord 
/sa.  35.  2.  they  shall  see  lUug.  of  the  Lord 
40.  5.  and  the  g.  of  the  J.urd  shall  be  revealed 
58.  8.  the  g.  of  the  Lord  shall  be  thy  rereward 
60.  1.  and  the  ^ .  of  the  Lord  is  risen  ujion  thee 
E:ci.l. 28. appearance  of  the  likeness  of  «■.  of  Lord 
3. 12.  blessed  be  Iho g.ofthc  Lord  from  hisjiluce 
23.  and  behold,  the  g.  of  the  Lord  stood  there 

10.  4.  the  "-.  of  the  Lord  went  up  from  the  cherub 
18.  g.  of  the  Lord  ileparted  from  the  threshold 

11.  23.  the  g.  of  the  Lord  went  up  from  the  city 
43.  4.  the  g.  of  the  J^ord  came  into  the  house 

Hab.'i.  14.  filled  with  knowledge  of  "■.  of  the  Lord 
Luke  2.  9.^1-.  of  the  Lord  shone  round  about  them 

2  Cor.  3. 18.  beholding  as  in  a  glass  g.  of  the  Lord 

Thy  GLORY. 
Kiorf.33.18.  he  said,  I  beseech  thee  shew  me  Ihy  ^. 
Psal.  8.  1.  who  hasl  set  thy  g.  above  the  heavens 

45.  3.  gird  thy  sword  on  thy  Ihigh  wiih  thy  g. 

57.5.  let  rAy^r.  be  above  all  the  earth,  11.  |  108.5. 

63.  2.  lo  see  ihy  power  and  thy  g.  as  I  have  seen 

90.  16.  let  thy  g.  appear  unto  their  children 

102.  15.  and  all  the  kings  of  the  earlh  thy  g. 
Isa.'£l.  18.  the  chariots  of  t//!/^.  shall  be  Ihe  shame 

60. 19.  ihy  God  thyg.  \\  62. 2.  kings  shall  see  thyg. 

63.  15.  behold  from  the  habitation  of  thy  g. 
Jer   J4.  21.  do  not  disgrace  the  throne  ot  tliy  g. 

48.  18.  come  down  from  thy  g.  and  sit  in  thirst 
Hab.'i.  16.  and  shameful  spewing  shall  be  on  thy  g. 
Mark  10.  37.  the  other  on  thy  left  hand  in  thy  g. 

GLORIOUS. 
Exnd.  15.  6.  thy  right  hand,  O  Lord,  is  become^. 

11.  who  is  like  thee,  O  Lord,  g.  in  holiness 
Deut.  28.  58.  that  thou  mayest  fear  this  g.  name 
2  Sam.  6.  20.  how^.  was  the  king  of  Israel  to-dayl 

1  Chron.  29. 13.  we  thank  and  praise  thy  g.  name 
/Vi7i.  9.  5.  blessed  be  tliy  ^.  name  which  Is  e.\alled 
Psal.  29.  t2.  worship  Lord  in  g.  sanctuary, 96. 19. 

45.  13.  the  king's  daughter  is  all  g.  wiihin 

jjpi.  2.  sing  forth  his  honour,  make  his  praise  g. 

i2.  19.  and  blessed  be  his  ^r.  name  for  ever 

76.  4.  thou  art  more^.  than  the  mountains  of  prey 

87.  3.  g.  things  are  spoken  of  thee,  O  city  of  God 

111.  3.  his  work  is  honourable  and  g. 

145.5. 1  will  speak  of  the  o-.  honour  of  thy  majesty 

12.  to  make  known  the  ^r.majesly  of  his  kingdom 
fsa.  4.  2.  the  branch  of  the  Lord  shall  be  g. 

11.10.  be  a  root  of  Jesse,  and  his  rest  shall  be  g. 
22.  23.  he  shall  be  for  a  g.  throne  to  his  F.  house 
28.  1.  whose  g.  beauty  is  a  fading  flower 

4.  thejr.  beauty  which  is  on  head  of  the  fat  valley 
30.30.  liieLord  shall  cause  his  o-.  voice  to  be  heard 
33.21.lhe^.  Lord  will  bo  to  us  a  place  of  streams 

49.  5.  yet  shall  I  be^.  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord 
60.  13.  I  will  make  the  place  of  my  feet  g. 

63.  1.  who  is  this  that  is  g.  in  his  apparel  ? 
12.  that  led  them  by  Moses  with  his  "-.  arm 
14.  didst  lead  people  to  make  thyself  a  ^.  name 

./er.  17.  12.  a  "■.  high  throne  from  the  beginning 
Ezek.  27.  2.').  made  very  g.  in  the  midst  of  the  seas 
Dan.  11.  16.  and  he  shall  stand  in  the  g.  land 
41.  he  shall  enter  also  into  the  g.  land 
45.  between  the  seas  in  the  g.  holy  mountain 
Luke  13.  17.  people  rejoiced  for  the^.  things  done 
/J«Hi.  8.21.  into  llie^.liberty  of  the  children  of  God 

2  G/r.3.7.  if  ministration  engraven  in  stones  was^. 
8.  the  ministration  of  the  Spirit  be  rather^. 

4.  4.  IhsI  light  ofg.  gospel  should  shine  to  them 
Eph  5^.  he  might  present  it  to  himself  a  ^.  church 
PAi7.3Sl.that  it  maybe fashiimed  like  to  hisir.body 
Col.  1.  II.  strengthened  according  to  his  g.  power 

1  7'im.\.  11.  according  to  the^'.  gospel  of  blessed  G. 
T';£.2.13.lookiiig  for  the  ^.appearing  of  the  greatG. 

GLORIOUSLY. 
Exod.  15. 1.  sing  to  the  Lord,  he  hath  triumphed  n-. 
fsa.  24. 23.  the  Ld.  shnll  reign  before  his  ancients^'-. 

GLORY,  Ferh. 
Ezod.  S.  9.  g.  over  me,  when  shall  I  entreat  for  thee 

2  h'ings  14.  10.  g.  of  this,  and  tarry  at  home 

1  Chr.  16. 10.  g.  ye  in  his  holy  name,  Psal.  105.  3. 

35.  we  may  give  thanks,  and  g.  in  thy  praise 
Psa/.63.1 1 .  every  one  that  sweareth  by  him  shall  g. 

64.  10.  and  all  the  upright  in  heart  shall  g. 
106.  5.  that  I  may  g.  with  thine  inheritance 

hn.  41.  16.  and  shall  g.  in  the  holy  One  of  Israel 
45.  25.  in  the  Lord  shall  all  the  seed  of  l.^rael  g. 

.ler.  4.  2.  bless  in  him,  and  in  him  shall  they  g. 
9.  23.  let  not  the  wise,  mighty,  the  rich  man  g. 
24.  lei  him  g.  in  this,  that  he  knowelh  me 

Rom.  4. 2.  he  hath  whereof  to  i'.  but  not  before  God 

5.  3.  not  only  so,  but  we  g.  in  tribulations  also 
15. 17. 1  have  therefore  whereof  I  may  ^'.ihro'Jesus 

1  Cor.  1.  29.  that  no  flesh  should^,  in  his  presence 


GO 

1  Cor.  1.  31.  he  that  glorietli,  let  him  g.  in  the 

Lord,  2  Cor.  10.  17. 
3.21.  therefore  let  no  man^.  inmen,  all  areyourf 
4.  7.  why  dost  thou  g-. as  if  thou  hadst  not  received 
9.  16.  though  I  preach,  I  have  nothing  to  g  of 

2  Cor.  5. 12.  give  occasion  to  g.  on  our  behalf;  to 

answer  them  who  n-. in  aiijiearance,  not  in  heart 

11. 12.  wherein  they  g.  they  may  be  found  as  we 

18.  seeing  many  g.  after  the  flesh,  I  will  g.  also 

30.  if  I  must  needs  «■.  \  will  g.  of  my  infirmiliei 

12.  1.  it  is  not  expedient  for  me  doubtless  to  g. 

5.  of  such  a  one  will  I  g.  of  myself  I  will  not^ 

6.  for  though  I  would  desire  tOi^-.I  shall  not  be  a  f. 
9.  therefore  I  will  ralher^.  in  mine  infirmities 

O'a/.6.l3.you  circumcised,  that  they  may  ^.in  flesh 
14.  G.  forbid  I  should  »-.  save  in  the  cross  of  Jesus 
2  TAess. 1.4.  that  weouiselves^.inyou  incliurcbes 
./am.  1.  t  9.  let  the  brother  of  low  degree^. 
3.  14.  if  ye  have  envying  in  your  hearts,  g.  not 

GLORIEST. 
,/er.  49.  4.  wherefore  g.  thou  in  the  valleys  1 

GLORIETH. 
./er.  9. 24.  let  him  that^.  1  Cor.  1. 31.  2  Cor.  10. 17 
./am.  2.  t  13.  and  mercv^".  against  judgment 

GLORYING. 

1  Cor.  5.  6.  your  g.  is  not  good,  a  little  leaven 

9. 15.  than  that  any  man  should  make  my  g.  void 

2  Cor.  7.  4.  great  is  my  boldness,  great  myg.  of  you 
12.  11. 1  am  become  a  fool  in  g.  ye  compelled  me 

1  Thess.  2. 1 19.  what  is  oiir  crown  of  a-.?  are  not  ye 
GLUTTON,  S. 

Deut.  21.  20.  this  our  son  is  a  "-.  and  a  drunkard 

Pruy.23.21.  drunkard  and  o-.  shall  come  to  poverty 
28.  1  7.  he  that  feedeth  g.  shamelh  his  father 
GLUTTONOUS. 

Mat.  11. 19.  they  said,  behold  a  man  a-.  LukeT. 34. 
GNASH. 

Ps.^  12.10.  he  shall ^.  with  his  teeth,  and  melt  away 

La7H.  2. 16.  all  thine  enemies  hiss  and  «■.  the  teeth 
GNASHED. 

Psal.  35.  16.  they  n-.  upon  me  with  their  teeth 

.^cts  7.  54.  and  they  g.  on  him  with  their  teeth 
GNASUETH. 

./ob  16.  9.  he  g.  on  me  w  ilh  his  teeth,  Psal.  37. 12. 

Mark  9.  18.  he  foameth  and  rr.  with  his  teeth 
GNASHING. 

jMat.  8. 12.  there  shall  be  weeping  and  g.  of  teeth, 
13. 42, 50. 1 22. 13. 1 24. 51.  |  25. 30.  Luke  13.28. 
GNAT. 

Mat.  23.  24.  who  strain  at  a  ^.and  swallow  acama' 
GNAVY. 

Zp;)A.3.3.her  judges  o-.nol  the  bones  till  the  morrow 
GNAWED. 

Rev.  16.  10.  and  they  g.  their  tongues  for  pain 
GO. 

To  go  down,  and  go  up;  We  go  up  to  Jcrusa 
letti,  Mat.  20.  18.  He  goes  down  to  .Jericho 
Luke  10.  30.  Jibraham  went  up  out  of  Egypt 
Gen.  13.  1.  Jacob  went  down  into  Egypt, 
Gen.  46.  3.  Go  up  to  ./?/,  Josh.  7. 3.  He  went 
down  to  Cesarea,  Acts  12.  19.  By  all  which 
nothing  more  is  meant,  than  that  they  went 
to  Jerusalem,  into  Egypt,  to  Jericho,  Ai,  and 
Cesarea;  bitt  the  situation  of  the  places  they 
were  going  to,  is  described  by  the  words  going 
up  and  going  down. 

To  go  down  into  hell,  or  schenl ;  to  go  down  to 
the  grave,  the  place  where  the  dead  are.  Psal. 
55.  15,  Let  them  go  down  quick  into  hell; 
Let  them  go  down  alive  into  the  grave;  cut 
them  off  by  a  sudden  and  violent  death,  like 
Korah,  Dathan,  and  Ahiram.  The  dead  praise 
not  the  Lord,  neither  any  that  go  down  into 
silence;  into  the  grave,  Psal.  115.  17.  All 
they  that  go  down  to  the  dust,  shall  bow  be- 
fore him,  Psal.  22.  29.  Such  as  are  poor,  and 
in  great  misery  and  distress,  .ihall  own,  sub- 
mit unto,  and  adore  Christ  as  their  supreme 
I^ord.  They  w  ho  go  down  into  the  sea,  are 
the  merchants  or  mariners  who  make  voyages 
upon  the  sea,  Psal.  107.  23.  Jonah  says,  that 
he  went  down  to  the  very  bottoms  of  the  moun- 
tains; that  is,  to  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  when 
the  mountains  have  their  basis  and  foundor 
lion,  Jonah  2.  6.  Sec  on  Hei.l. 
To  go  in  and  out,  signifies  all  the  actions  of  life. 
Psal.  121.  8,  The  Lord  shall  preserve  thy 
going  out  and  thy  coming  in:  He  shall  guard 
and  assist  thre  in  all  thy  expeditions,  affairs, 
and  actions,  either  at  home  or  abroad.  And  in 
2Sam.  3.  2.5,  Jibner  came  to  know  thy  going 
out  and  thy  coming  in  ;  to  search  out  thy 
counsels  and  secret  designs.  To  go  in  and  out, 
denotes  also  freedom  and  security,  .lohn  10.  9, 
He  shall  go  in  and  out,  and  find  pasture:  He 
shall  have  much  spiritual  freedom  and  security 
of  mind.  To  go  into  a  woman's  chamber,  to 
enter  her  apartment  ,ic  as  allowable  only  for  her 
husband,  .ludg.  15.  1.  To  j.'o  in  unto  her,  that 
is,  to  use  the  marriage  bed,  or  the  particul* 


GO 

rigMs  which  thehusband  claims  over  his  wife's 
person^  Geii.  "U.  ^3.  j  30.  3. 
Oen.3.  14-  on  thy  belly  shall  thou  go,  and  eat  dust 

16.  8.  whence  taiiifSt  thou?  whither  wilt  ihuu^o.' 
24.  42.  il'  now  lliou  do  jiro.sper  my  way  which  1  »-ti 

55.  abide  a  few  days,  after  IhatKebekah  shail^'o 

56.  send  me  away,  that  I  may  go  to  my  master 
58.wilt  thou^o  with  this  man?  she  said,  I  will^ry 

26.  16.  and  Abimeiech  said  to  Isaac,  go  frojn  us 
iid.  '.iO.  it" God  will  keep  me  in  this  way  that  I  go 

30.  '25.  send  ma  away  that  1  may  go  to  my  jilace 
3°J.  i;^6.  let  me  ^'o,  for  the  day  breaketli ;  and  Jacob 

said,  I  « ill  not  let  thee  go,  except  thou  bless  me 
37.  30.  the  child  is  nut,  and  1,  whither  shall  I  go? 
43.  8.  send  lad  with  me,  and  we  will  arise,  and^'o 
Eiod.  3. 11).  king  of  Kjjypt  will  not  lot  you  go,  4. 21. 

20.  and  after  that  ifo  w  ill  let  you  go,  11. 1. 

21.  that  when  ye^o,  ye  shall  not  ^'o  empty 

4.  23.  M  my  srmgo  ;  ifthou  refuse  to  let  him  go,  I 

will  slay  thy  hrst-born,  8.  2,  21.  |  9.  2.  |  10.  4. 
26.  so  he  let  him  go,  then  she  said,  a  bloody  hush. 

5.  1.  tlius  saith  tlie  Lord  God  of  Israel,  let  my 

peoide^o,  7.  16.  |  8.  1,  20.  |  9.  1,  13.  |  10.  3. 
2.   I  know  not  the  Lord,  nor  will  I  let  Israel  go 

8.  8.  and  I  will  let  thy  people  go,  28.  |  9.  28. 

32. 1'iiaraoh  hardened  his  heurt,neilher  would  he 

let  the  peoj.le  ao,  7.  14.  |  9.  35.  |  10.  2(5,  27. 

10.7.1etthe  mcn^To  |j8.wlio  are  they  that  shall  ^o.? 

9.  we  will  go  with  our  young  and  with  our  old 

13.  21.  light  to  n-o  by  day  and  night,  JVrA.  9. 12,  10. 

14.  5.  that  we  have  let  Israel  go  from  serving  us 
t  25.  cliariot- wheels,  and  made  them  go  heavily 

17.  5.  Lord  said  to  Moses,  go  on  before  the  people 

23.  23.  mine  angel  shall  go  before  thee,  32.  34. 

32.  23.  make  us  gods  to  go  before  us,  J^c«i7.  40. 

33.  14.  he  said,  my  presence  shall  go  with  thee 

34.  9.  if  I  have  found  grace  in  sight,  go  among  us 
^um.  10.  32.  and  it  shall  be,  ifthou  go  with  us 

20.  17.  we  will  go  by  the  king's  highway,  19. 
22.  13.  the  Lord  tefuselh  to  give  me  leave  to  go 

20.  if  men  call  thee,  rise  up,  and^o  with  thein,35. 

24.  14.  and  now  behold,  I  go  unto  my  peoi)lo 
31. 2.1.  shall  make  it  «■«  through  the  fire  and  water 

32.6.  shall  your  brethr.  ^o  to  war,  and  ye  sit  here? 

17.  but  we  will  go  ready  armed  before  Israel 
Dcut.  1.  33.  to  shew  youby  what  way  ye  should  ^u 

4. 5.  in  land  whither  ye  go,  26. 1 11.  8, 1 1.  I  30.  18. 
40.  that  it  may  gu  wellwith  thee,  5. 16.  |  19.  13. 

11.  28.  a  curse,  if  ye  go  after  other  gods,  28.  14. 
20.  5.  let  him  go  anil  return  to  his  house,  0,  7,  8. 
21. 14.  then  thou  shall  let  her  go  whither  she  will 
22.  7.  thou  shall  in  anywise  let  the  dam  go 

24.  2.  she  niny  go  and  he  another  man's  wife 

31.  6.  thy  God,  he  it  is  that  doth  go  with  thee 

7.  for  thou  must  go  with  this  people  to  the  land 

8.  the  Lord,  he  il  is  thai  doth  go  before  lliee 
16.  the  land  whithi:r  ihoy  go  to  be  among  them 

21.  I  know  thoir  iiiuigiiiation  they  go  about 
Josh   1.  Hi.  wlMlh(-r  ihou  sendest  us  we  will  go 

.3.  4.  ye  may  know  the  way  by  which  yc  mnst^o 
Jade.  1.25.  but  they  let;5'o  the  man  and  his  family 
4.  8.  ifthou  will^o  with  me,  then  I  will  ^o 
fi.  14.  the  Lord  said  to  him,  go  in  this  thy  might 
7.4.  of  whom  I  say,lhis  shall  ^'o,  the  same  shall  i'o 
11.8.  we  turn  to  Iheo,  that  thou  mayest^o  with  us 

16.  17.  if  I  be  shaven,  then  my  strength  will  go 

18.  5.  whet  her  our  way  we  ^o  shall  be  prosperous? 

6.  before  the  Lord  is  your  way  wherein  ye  go 

9.  be  not  slothful  t»  go  to  possess  the  land 

10.  when  ye  go  \\  19.  iiold  thy  peace,  ^o  with  us 

19.  25.  when  day  began  to  spring,  they  let  her  go 
Ruth  1.  11.  turn  again,  why  will  ye  go  with  nie  ? 

18.  she  saw  she  was  stediaslly  minded  to  go 
2.2.  let  me^wto  the  field  an<l  glean, ^o  my  daught. 

1  .Sam.  5.  II.  let  it  go  again  to  its  own  place 

6.6.  ilid  Ihi'y  not  let  peofile^o?  and  they  departed 
8.  take  the  ark,  send  it  away,  that  it  may  go 

9.  6.  h;t  us  go  thither,  he  can  shew  us  our  way 

7.  if  we  go  what  shall  we  bring  the  man  1 

19.  gn  up  before  nie,  to-morrow  I  will  lei  thco^o 

10.  9.  whi'n  he  turned  his  back  to  go  from  Samuel 

12.  21.  for  then  should  ye  go  after  vain  things 
16.2.  how  can  I  gn?  ifSauT  hear  it  ho  will  kill  me 
17„33.  thou  art  not  able  to^o  against  this  Philistine 

18.  2.  Saul  would  let  him  gn  no  moro  homo 

19.  17.  he  said,  let  me  go,  why  should  I  kdl  Iheo? 

20.  a.  but  let  mngn,  that  I  may  hide  myself  in  field 
23. 13.  David  and  hin  men  went  whither  could  go 
26.  19.  driven  me  nut,  saying, /ro  serve  other  gods 

28.7.  ft  woman,  that  I  may  go  and  impiirc  of  her 

2  ^am.  12.  23.  I  shall  gn  to  iiim,  he  shall  not  return 

13.  13.  whither  shall  I  cause  my  shame  to  gn? 

15.  7.  Absalom  said,  let  mo  gn  and  pay  my  vow 

20.  seeing  \  go  whither  I  may,  n-turn  iliou 

17.  11.  that  tlioM  gn  to  battle  in  thy  person 

19.  3fi.  tliy  servant  will  go  a  little  way  over 

20.  11.  that  is  for  Davii),  let  him  go  aflf  r  Jonh 

1  Kings  i  2  I  ^othc  way  of  all  the  earth,  be  strong 
11.21.  lei  me  depart,  that  f  mny^'o  to  my  country 

22.  nolliing,  howbeit,  let  tnc  go  iu  ony  wise 

238 


GO 

1  Kings  12.  27.  shall  kill  me,  and  "•o  to  Rehoboani 

13.  17.  nor  turn  to  go  by  the  way  thou  camest 
2U.  42.  because  thou  hast  let  go  u  man  appointed 
22.  4.  wilt  tliou  go  with  me  to  battle  ?  2  CVir.  18.3. 

2  Kings  3.  7.  will  ihou^'u  with  me  against  Moab? 

4.  23.  wherefore  wilt  ihou  go  to  him  to-day  ? 
6.2'.'.Bet  bread  and  water,  thai  they  may  ^w  and  eat 
10.  24.  he  that  letteth  him  go,  his  life  be  for  him 
18.21.  it  will  n't)  into  hand  and  pierce  it,  /.va.  36. 6 

2  CVir.  14.  11.  in  thy  name  vm gu  ag.  this  multitude 
25.  7.  let  not  the  army  of  Israel  go  with  thee 

8.  ifthou  will^u,  do  it,  be  sliong  for  battle 
Job  6.  18.  they  ^u  to  nothing  and  perish 

10.21.  before  1  go  whence  I  shall  not  return,  16.22, 
20.  20.  it  shall  ^0  ill  with  him  that  is  left  in  tiibern. 
21. 29.  have  ye  not  asked  Ihein  Ihat^'u  by  the  way? 

27.  6.  my  righteousness  I  will  nut  let  go 
I'sal.^a.i.  and  teach  ihee  in  the  way  thou  shalt^'o 

39.  13.  before  I  go  hence,  and  be  no  more 

42.  9. 1  will  say  to  God,  why  go  I  mourning,  43. 2. 
49. 19.  he  shall  go  to  the  generation  of  his  lathers 

84.  '.\ht:y go  from  strength  to  sirength,lill  ajipear 

85.  13.  righteousness  shall  go  before  him 

89.  14.  mercy  and  truth  shall  go  before  thy  face 
107.  7.  that  they  might  go  to  a  city  of  habitation 
132.7.  we  viWigo  into  his  tabernacles, will  worship 
139.  7.  whither  shall  I  go  from  thy  presence  ? 
Vrov.  2.  19.  none  that  go  unto  her  return  again 
3.  28.  go  and  come  again,  lo-morrow  I  will  give 

6.  28.  can  one  go  on  hot  cuals,  and  not  be  burnt  ? 
9. 15.  tu  call  passengers  who^u  right  on  their  way 

14.  7.  go  from  the  jiresence  of  a  foolish  man 

15.  12.  neither  will  thescorner^o  to  the  wise 

19.  7.  much  more  do  his  friends  ^o  far  from  him 

22.  6.  train  up  a  child  in  the  way  he  should  go 

23.  30.  they  thut^'u  to  seek  mi.\t  wine 

30.  29.  there  be  three  things  which  go  well 
Keel.  1. 1  7.  rivers  come,  thilher  they  return  to  gu 

3.  20.  all  go  unlo  one  place,  all  are  of  the  dusi 

5.  15.  naked  shall  he  return  to  o'o  as  he  came,  16. 

6.  6.  hath  seen  no  good,  do  not  all  go  to  one  place? 

7.  2.  it  is  better  to  go  to  the  house  of  mourning 
9.«.  and  after  that,  they  go  to  the  dead 

10.  15.  because  he  knowelh  not  how  to  gu  to  city 
12.  5.  and  the  mourners  go  about  the  slreeUi 
Cant.  3.  4.  I  held  him,  I  would  nut  let  him  go 
I.sa.  3.  16.  walking  and  mincing  as  lUay  go 
6.8.  whom  shall  1  send,  and  who  will  gu  for  us? 

9.  he  said,  gu  and  tell  this  people,  jicts  28.  26. 
27. 4. 1  would  ^'o  through  them,  I  would  burn  them 

28.  13.  that  they  might  ^-o  and  fall  backward 
4.1.  13.  he  shall  let^ro  my  captives,  not  for  price 

43.  17.  leudeth  thee  by  the  way  thou  shouldest^ro 
58.  8.  thy  righteousness  shall  go  before  thee 

62. 10.  go  thro'  go  thro'  the  gates,  prepare  the  way 
./cr.  1.  7.  thou  shiilt  go  to  all  that  I  send  thee 
9.  2.  I  might  leave  my  people,  and  go  from  them 
12.  t2.  they  have  taken  root,  they  go  on 
29. 12.  ye  shallow  and  pray  to  me,  I  will  hearken 

31.  22.  how  long  wilt  thou.^o  about,  Odaughler 
34.  3.  thou  shall  go  to  Habylon,  J\I,c.  4.  10. 

40.  4.  whither  it  seerneth  good  to  go,  there  go,  5. 
5.  he  gave  him  reward,  and  let  him  go 

1.5.  saying,  let  me  go,  and  I  will  slay  Ishmael 

42.22.  ye  shall  die,  ill  place  whilher  ye  desire  lo^u 
40.22.  the  voice  thereof  shall  go  like  a  serpent 
48.  t2.  O  Madman,  the  sword  shall  go  after  thee 
50.  4.  they  shall  go  and  seek  the  Lord  their  (Jod 

33.  held  them  fast,  they  refused  to  let  them  go 
F.zek.  1.  12.  whither  the  Spirit  was  to^'o,  20. 

8.  0.  that  I  should  go  far  from  my  sanctuary 

9.  4.  go  through  the  midst  of  the  city,  .5. 

H.  17.  or  if  I  say,  sword,  go  through  the  land 

20.  20.  what  Is  the  high  place  whereto  yu  gn? 

21.  16.  go  thee  one  way  or  other,  elllier  on  right 
//os.  5.6.  they  shall /TO  with  flocks  to  seek  I  he  Lord 

7.  11.  they  call  to  Kgypt,  they  go  lo  Assyria 
12.whcn  Ihey  shall  4<-o  will  spread  my  net  on  them 

11.3.  I  taught  Kphraim  also  Ui  g,,,  tjiev  kmnvnot 

J)//(;.5.8.  who,  lfhe;7r<lhlough,liollilreiidcllj.luwn 

Zrch.  6.  7.  the  bay  went  forth,  and  sought  to  gn 

8.  these  go  toward  north,  have  (|iiiel(d  my  spirit 

8.  21.  inhabitanii  of  one  city  shall  gn  to  nnotlicr 
2;J.  we  will  go  with  you,  for  we  have  heard 

9.  14.  and  shall  gn  with  whirlwinds  of  the  south 
J\lal.  2.  22.  .loseph  was  afraid  to  go  thilher 

5.4 1. compel  iheo  to  iP'w  a  mile,  A'o  twain,  /,uAc7. 8. 

8.  9.  and  I  say  to  this  man,  gn,  and  ho  goeth 
32.  he  said  lo  0\i'.m,  go,  llioy  went  into  the  herd 

9.  13.  but  gn  ye  IcHrn  what  that  mcnnelh 

10. 6.  gn  rather  to  the  lo.<t  sheep  of  house  of  Israel 
21.  30.  ho  answered,  I  gu  sir,  and  went  not 

25.  9.  but  go  rother  lo  them  that  stdl,  and  buy 

26.  36.  sit  yc  hero,  while  I  go  and  pray  yonder 
28. 10  yo,  lr',1  my  brethren  that  they  n-o  to  Galilee 

19.  go  ve  therefore  ami  Irach  all  nations 
.W«r/r  6.38.  TOond  sen  ||  11.6.  and  Ihoy  let  lliom  ^co 
/.i/A-r  1. 1 7. sha  11^0  before  him  inthe  piiwerof  Klias 
9.  51.  he  Btedfastly  set  his  face  to  go  to  Jciusftlcm 

60.  but  go  thou  and  preach  the  kingdom  of  God 


GO 

7,1/Ae  10.  37.  then  said  Jesus,  go,  and  do  likewise 
14. 18. 1  bought  ground  and  must  needs^oandsee 

22.  33.  I  am  ready  to  go  with  thee  to  prison 
68.  you  will  not  answer  me,  nor  let  me  go 

23.  22.  I  will  chastise  him,  and  let  him  go 
.John  6.68.  Peter  said,  Lord,  to  whom  shall  we  go 

7.  33.  and  then  I  go  unto  him  that  sent  me 

8.  14.  bull  know  whence  I  came  and  whilher  I  ^« 
21.  I  go  my  way,  whither  I  go  ye  cannot  como 

11.  44.  Jesus  sailh,  loose  him,  and  let  him  go 

13.  36.  whither  I  go  thou  canst  not  follow  now 

14.  2.  I  gu  lo  prepare  a  place  for  you 

4.  whither  1  go  ye  know,  the  way  ye  know 

12.  because  1  go  vlnto  tny  Father,  16.  10. 

28.  because  1  said,  I  go  to  the  Father,  10.  17,  28. 

19.  12.  the  Jews  cried,  ifthou  let  this  man  go 
21.3. 1 ^«  a  fishingjthey  say,  we  also ^'« with  thee 

.Ids  1.  25.  that  he  might  go  lo  his  own  place 
3.  13.  when  he  was  determined  to  let  him  go 
4.21.  when  had  threatened  ihein,  lliey  let  ihem go 

23.  being  let  go  they  went  lo  their  company 
5.  40.  that  they  should  not  sjieak,  and  let  them  go 
11.  22.  ihat-Barnabas  should  "-«  asfar  as  Antiocb 
16. 7.  Ihtjj'  essayed  to  ^'o  into  Kithynia,  but  Spin 

35.  magistrates  sent,  saying,  let  those  men  go 
17.9.  had  taken  sccuriiy  ol  Jason,  they  let  theni^o 

20.  22.  I  go  bound  in  the  Spirit  lo  Jerusalem 
2.5.1 2.hasi  apjiealed  tot."esar,toCesar  shall  thou^o 
28.  18.  had  examined  me,  would  have  let  me  go 

hum.  15.  25.  but  now  I  go  Jeiusalem,  lo  minister 

1  Cor.  6. 1.  dare  you  gu  lo  law  before  the  unjust? 
10.  27.  if  any  bid,  anil  ye  be  dispo,-pd  to  go 

16.  4.  if  it  be  meet  that  I  go  also,  they  shall  go 

2  Cor. 9.  5.  exhort  the  brethren  that  they  wo  belore 
Phil.  2.  23.  as  I  shall  see  how  it  will  go  wiih  me 
Jam.  4.  13.  we  will  go  into  such  a  city  and  buy 

f<f.e  Frek. 

GO  aside. 
.N'um.a.  12.  if  any  man's  wife^o  a.«iWcand  commit 
Dcut.  28.  14.  ihuu  shall  nol^'o  aside  from  words 
Jcr.  15.  5.  who  shall  go  aside  to  ask  how  thou  dost 
Jiclni.  15.  when  they  coininandtd  them  io go  aside 

GO  aslrny. 
/>f  J/^22.1  .Ihou  shall  not  see  brother's  ox  go  astray 
Psal.  5^.  3.  they  go  astrny  as  soon  as  they  be  bom 
/'rot'.5.23.in  greatness  of  his  follyhe  sliall^'H  astray 
7.25.declilie  notloherwaySj^runut  ».-'r«yintopalh 
28.  10.  whoso  causelh  the  righteous  lo  go  astray 
Jcr.50.6.  their  shepherds  caused  thini  to  go  astray 
i?:cA.14.11.  house  of  Israel  may  gu  no  more  astray 

GO  avjay. 
F.xnd.  8.  28.  only  you  shall  not  go  very  far  away 
Dcut.  15. 13.  thou  shall  not  let  him  t'ootroj  empty 

16.  if  he  siiy,  I  w  ill  not  go  awoy  from  thee 
1  Sam.  15.  27.  as  Samuel  turned  uln'Ut  lo^-o  away 

24.  19.  find  his  enemy,  will  he  let  him  go  avny  ? 
./oh  4.  21.  dolh  not  iheir  excellency  gn  away? 

15.  .30.  by  breath  of  his  moulh  shall  ho  go  away 
.fer.  51.  50.  ye  that  escaped  the  sword,  go  aicay 
JIns.  5.  14.  I,  e\cn  I,  will  tear  and  go  away 
jVat.  8.  31.  sufler  us  to  go  awoy  iulo  ihe  swine 

25.  46.  these ^0  ajr«w  into  everlasting  punishment 
Johv  6.  67.  then  said  Jesns,  will  ye  also  go  avayJ 

14.  28.  ye  have  heard  how  I  said,  I  go  aicay,  IC.  7. 

GO  A  I*  vny. 

Juilg.  19. 27.  her  lord  rese  up  and  went  \ogohis  w, 

GO  thfir  way. 
.John  18.  8.  if  ye  seek  me,  l«'t  these  go  their  way 

GO  thy  way. 
Oev.  12. 19.  behold  thy  wife,  lake  her,  fo  thy  way 

1  Sam.  20.  22. ^<»  thy  way,  the  Lord  haih  sent  Ihee 

2  Kings  4.  2t>.  he  said,  lake  my  staff,  and  go  thyw. 
Feel.  9.  7.  go  thy  way  eat  thy  liread  w  ilTi  joy 
Cant.l.S.  go  thy  way  forth  by  foolstips  of  the  flock 
Don.  12.9.^0  thy  tro)/,  for  the  words  are  closed  up 

13.  gn  thii  will/  till  l)ie  end  be,  for  thou  pIibII  rest 
Jifat.!i.^2\.gn  thy  way,  be  reconciled  lo  thy  brother 

8.  4.  gu  thy  win/,  shew  thyself  lo  the  priest 

20.  14.  lake  that  thine  is,  and  go  thy  way 
Murh  7.  29.  he  said,  for  this  saying,  go  thy  way 

10.  21.  gu  Ihy  xcay,  sell  whatsoever  thou  hast 
52.;^o  thij  w.  faith  made  thee  whole,  J.uke  17.19. 
.liihn  4.  .">0.  Jesus  sailh,  ffo  thy  way,  ihy  son  liveth 
Jlcts  9.  1.5.  gu  thy  way,  for  ho  is  a  chosen  vessel 

24.  25.  Felix  answered,  gn  thy  way  for  this  time 

GO  yovr  way. 
Grv.  19.  2.  ye  shall  rise  up  and  gn  on  t/oi/r  tray* 
.fo.-A.  2.  16.  "afterward  gn  your  way,  Jiidg.  19.  5. 
Huth  1.  12.  turn  again  my  daughters  go  yimr  way 
JVrh.f'.  10.  ^o  j/oiirtp.  cat  the  fal,  drink  the  sweet 
Mnt.^"!.  f:i.  go  your  w.mnko  il  a-"  sure  as  you  can 
Mark  11.2.  ^o  your  way  into  vi11n;e  over  ngailirt 

16.7.  gn  yovr  troy,  tell  his  disciples  ihal  liesoelh 
/.wAc7.22.;;i-o  your  w.lellJohn  what  things ye  heard 

10.3.^0  ynurways,\  send  you  as  lambs  am.wolvei 

10.  they  receive  you  not,  go  your  ways  to  street! 

li  I  v.lfi.l.  "oyour  jrnr/.e, pour  out  the  vials  of  wrath 

*■  GO  back. 

F.rod.  14.  21.  the  Lord  caused  Ihe  sea  to  go  bach 
./osh.  23.  12.  else  if  ye  do  in  any  wise  ^ o  back 


GO 

Juig.  11.  35. 1  opened  my  mouth,  I  cannot  ^9  hack 
lA'iHi'siy.-O.iTuA.againjWhathavel  liotie lo  Ihee ? 
•i  icings  -Ai.  y.  sliall  thu  shallow  go  b  ten  dugreea  ! 
Fsal.  80.  18.  so  will  not  we  go  back  I'rom  thee 
Jer.  40.  5.  go  back  to  Gedahah,  son  of  Ahikam 
Eiek.  24.  14.  I  will  not  go  back,  nor  will  I  spare 

GO  down. 
Oen.lt  7.  let  ui  go  d.  and  confound  their  language 
18.  21.  I  will  go  down  now,  and  see  whether 
2<J.  2.  the  Lord  said,  go  not  down  into  Egypt 
43.  5.  if  thou  wilt  not  send  him,  we  will  not  "■»  d. 
44. 26.  we  cannot  go  down,  then  will  we  go  down 

46.  3.  fear  not,  Jacob,  to  go  down  into  Kgypt 
lUod.lQ.'il.  Lord  said,  go  down,  charge  the  people 
JVum.  16.  30  and  they  go  down  quick  into  the  pit 
£)eut.  24. 15  nor  shall  the  sun  godown  on  his  hire 
Jos/i.lO.  13.  sun  hasted  not  to  gu  down  about  a  day 
Jadg.1.10.  if  thou  fear  to  5-0  down,  go  wMi  Phurah 
1*07/1.10.8.  thou  shallow  down  before  me  toGilgal 

14.  36.  let  us  go  down  after  Philistines  by  iiiglit 
23.4.  godown  to  Keilah,  I  will  deliver  PhilisUnes 
26.  6.  who  will  go  down  with  me  to  Saul  1 
2'J.  4.  let  him  not  go  down  with  us  to  battle 
2  Sam.  11.  8.  David  said,  go  down  to  thy  house 
10.  why  didst  thou  not  go  down  to  tliine  house  1 
15.20.  should  I  chisday  make  thee  n-o  up  and  dawn 
IKingsll.lS.go  doKintomeet  Ahab  king  of  Israel 
2  Kings  1.  15.  go  down  with  him,  be  not  afraid 
20.  10.  for  the  shadow  to  go  down  ten  degrees 
2  Chron.  20.  16.  to-morrow  go  down  against  him 
Job  21.  13.  in  a  moment  go  down  to  the  grave 
P«<i/.  22. 29.  all  that  ^0  down  to  the  dust  sliall  bow 
28.  1. 1  become  like  them  that  go  down  to  the  pit 
5.5.  15.  and  let  them  go  down  quick  into  hell 

107.  23.  they  that  go  down  to  the  sea  in  ships 
115.  17.  neither  any  that  go  down  into  silence 
143.  7.  lest  I  be  like  them  that  go  down  to  the  pit 

Prov.5.  5.  her  feet  o-o  down  to  death,  her  steps  take 
Isa.  14. 19.  thou  art  cast  out,  as  those  that^ru  down 

30.2.woe  to  them  that  walk  to^o  rf.  to  Egypt,31.1. 

38.  18.  they  that  go  down  into  pit  cannot  hope 

60.20.  sun  shall  not  go  duwn,noT  moon  withdraw 
Jer.  50.  27.  let  them  go  doion  to  the  slaughter 
Eiek.  24.  1 16.  neither  shall  thy  tears  go  down 

26.  11.  and  thy  strong  garrisons  shall  go  down 
20.  when  I  shall  set  thee  with  them  that^^o  down 
to  the  pit,  31.  14.  I  32.  18,  24,  25,  29,  30. 

47.  8.  these  waters  go  dpwn  into  the  desert 
Wm»s(i.2.  then^orftfioTitoGathof  the  Philistines 

8.  9.  I  will  cause  the  sun  to  go  down  at  noon 
Mic.  3.  6.  the  sun  shall  go  down  over  the  prophets 
Mark  13.  15.  let  him  that  is  on  house-top  not^ra  d. 
.Ids  25.  5.  which  are  able  to  go  down  with  me 
E^ih.  4.  26.  let  not  the  sun  go  down  on  your  wrath 

GO  forth. 
Gen.  8. 16.  go  forth  of  the  ark,  thou  and  thy  wife 

42.  15.  not  go  forth  hence,  except  iJrolhcr  come 
L,ev.  14.  3.  the  priest  shall  go  forth  of  the  camp 
JVum.  1. 3.  all  able  to  go  forth  to  war,  2  Chr.  25.  5. 
Dent.  23.  12.  thou  shalt  have  a  place  to  go  forth 
1  .Sam.  23.  13.  and  he  forbare  to  go  forth 
2 Sam.  11. 1.  at  time  when  kings ^o/o/£A  to  battle 

18.  2.  T  will  surely  go  forth  with^u  myself 

19.  7.  if  thou  go  not  forth,  there  will  not  tarry 

1  Kings  2. 36.  and  go  not  forth  thence  any  whither 
22.22.  he  said,  I  wdl  go  forth;  go  forth  and  do  so 

2  Kings  9. 15.  if  it  be  your  minds,  let  none  go  forth 
19.  31.  out  of  Jerusalem  shall^o/ort/t  a  remnant 

they  that  escape  out  of  mount  Zion,  Isa.  37.  32. 
Job  24.  5.  as  wild  asses  go  they  forth  to  their  work 
Psal.  78.  52.  he  made  his  own  people  to  go  forth 

108.  11.  wilt  not  thou  go  forth  with  our  hosts'? 
Prov.  'io.S.go  not /«r?A  hastily  to  strive,  lest  thou 

30.  27.  have  no  king,  yet  go  they  forth  by  bands 
Cant.  3.  11.  go  forth,  O  ye  daughters  of  Zion 

7.  11.  come,  let  us  go  forth  into  the  villages 
/sa.2.3.  out  of  Zion  shall  o'o/ortA  the  law,  jl/8c.4.2. 

42.  13.  the  Lord  shall  go  forth  as  a  mighty  man 

43.  20.  go  forth  of  Babylon,  flee  ye,  Jer.  50.  8. 
49.  9.  that  tliiiu  mayest  say  to  prisoners,  o-o /orWt 

17.  thev  that  made  thee  waste  shall  go  forth 
62.  1.  till  the  righteousness  thereof  n-o  forth 

Jer.  6.  25.  go  not  forth  into  the  field,  nor  walk 
11.  til.  they  shall  not  be  able  to  go  forth 

14.  18.  if  I  go  forth  into  the  fi'dd,  then  the  slain 

15.  Met  them  goforth\\-2.  whither  shall  we  gof.? 
25.  32.  evil  shall  go  forth  from  nation  to  nation 

31.  4.  O  Israel,  thou  shalt  o-o/ort/t.in  the  dances 
39.  the  mnasnring-line  shall  yet  iro  forth 

33.  17.  if  thou  wWx  go  forth  to  the  king  of  Babylon 

18.  but  if  thou  wilt  not  go  forth  foUw  princes,21. 
43.  12.  he  shall  go  forth  from  thence  in  peace 

Eick.\2.i.  go  forth  as  th(7  thiit  go  forth  into  cnpt. 
12.  prince  go  /»rtA||21 .4. my  sword  shall  go  forth 
30.  9.  in  that  day  messengers  shall  go  forth 
46.  8.  and  he  shall  go  forth  by  the  way  thereof 
9.  but  he  shall  go  forth  over-againsl  it 
Dan.  11.  44.  he  shall  go  forth  with  great  fury 
7oci2.  IG.  lit  the  bridogr.  j?o /ortft  ofhis  chamber 
Uab.  1.  4.  and  judgment  doth  nsver  go  forth 
239 


GO 

Zech.  6.  5.  thcBO  arc  the  four  spirits  which  go  forth 
6.  black  horses  ^'u /orf  A  into  the  north  country 

14.  3.  then  shall  the  Lord  go  forth  and  light 
jVal.  4.  2.  ye  shall  go  forth  and  grow  up  as  calves 
j)/u£.24. 26.  behold  lie  is  in  the  desert,  ^0  not  forth 
Jicts  16.  3.  him  would  Paul  have  to  go  forth 
JHcb.13.1'3.  let  ua  go  forth  to  him  without  the  camp 
Heo.  16.  14.  the  spirits  of  devils  which  ^o/urt/t 

GO  forward. 
Exod.  14.15.  speak  to  Israel  that  they  go  forward 
jV«;«.3.  24.  they  shall  go  forward  in  the  third  rank 
2  A'iH  n-s  20.9.shall  shadow  ^«/«r«)ar(/  ten  degrees? 
Job'2'i.8.  behold,  I  ^'o/urward,  but  he  is  not  there 

GO  in,  or  into,  or  not  GO  in. 
Gen.ll.31.from  Ur,to^o  into  land  of  Canaan, 12.5. 
Exod.  30.  20.  when  go  into  tabernacle,  shall  wash 

32.  27.  go  in  and  out  from  gate  to  gate  thro'  canq 
Aeu.lO.y.do  not  drink  wine, when  ye g-umiotabern 

14.  36.  empty  the  house,  before  the  priest  go  in 
21.  11.  neither  shall  he  go  in  to  any  dead  body 

23.  only  he  shall  not^oiii  to  the  vail  or  near  altar 
JVum.  4  19.  Aaron  and  his  sons  shall  go  in  and  ap. 

2U.but  they  shall  not^o  m  tosee  whenholylhings 
8.  15.  and  atler  that  shall  the  Levites  go  in 
27.  17.  which  may  go  out,  and  go  in  before  them 
32.  9.  that  they  should  not^o  into  the  land 
Dent.  1.  37.  thou  also  shalt  not  go  in  thither,  4.  21 

38.  but  Joshua  son  of  Nun  he  shall  ^oni  thither 
4. 1 .  that  ye  may  live,  and  go  in  and  possess,  8. 1 

6.  18.  that  thou  mayest  go  in  and  possess,  10.  II 
11.  8.  that  ye  may  be  strong,  and  go  in  and  possess 

24.  10.  not  go  into  his  house  to  letch  his  pledge 
Judg.  19. 15.  they  turned  aside  to  go  in  and  lodge 
Ruth  3.  4.  thou  shalt  go  in,  and  uncover  his  feet 
2Sam.ll.ll.  shall  I  then  go  into  miue  house  to  eat? 

1  Kings  13.  8.  I  will  not  go  in,  nor  eat  with  thee 

10.  I  may  not  return,  nor  go  in  with  thee 

17. 12.  may  go  in,  and  dress  it  for  me  and  my  son 

2  fl'dH^«9.2.look  out  Jehu, and  n-o  in, make  him  arise 
10.  25.  go  in  and  slay  them,  let  none  come  forth 

2  Chr.  18.  24.  thou  shalt  0-0  into  an  inner  chamber 
23.  6.  they  that  minister  of  the  Levites  shall  go  in 
JVeh.  6. 11.  who  is  there  as  I  am  would^o  into  the 
temple  to  save  his  life  1  I  will  not  go  in 
Esth.  2. 15.  when  Esther's  turn  was  come  to  go  in 

4.  8.  and  to  charge  her  that  she  should  go  in 

16.  and  so  will  I  0-0  in  unto  the  king,  if  I  perish 

5.  14.  then  go  thou  in  merrily  with  the  king 
.lob  34. 1 23.  he  should  go  into  judgment  with  God 
Psal.  26.  4.  nor  will  I  go  in  with  dissemblers 

118.  19.  open  the  gates,  I  will  go  in  to  them 
119.35.  make  me  n-o  in  path  of  tliy  commandment 
132.  7.  we  will  n-o  into  his  tabernacle  and  worship 
Prov.  27.  10.  nor  go  into  thy  brother's  house 
fsa.  2. 19.  they  shall  go  into  the  holes  of  the  rocks 
,fer.  4.  5.  and  let  us  go  into  the  delenced  cities 
36.  5.  I  cannot  go  into  the  house  of  the  Lord 
42.  14.  no,  but  we  will  go  into  the  land  of  Egypt 

19.  the  Lord  hath  said,  go  ye  not  into  Egypt 
Ezek.  7. 1 17.  all  knees  shall  go  into  water,21.  t7. 
46.  10.  the  prince  when  they  go  in  shail  go  in 
J\rah.  3.  14.  go  into  clay,  and  tread  the  mortar 
Zcc/i.6.10.  go  into  house  of  Josiah  son  of  Zephani. 
Mat.  2. 20.  lake  the  young  child,  and  go  into  Israel 

7.  13  and  many  there  be  that  go  in  thereat 
20.  4.  go  into  the  vineyard,  and  they  went,  7. 

2 1 .2.  iro  into  village  over  against  you,  lyuke  19.30. 

31.  harlots  go  into  kingdom  of  God  before  you 

22.9.  go  J7i<0  the  highways,  as  many  as  ye  find,  bid 

23. 13.  ye  neither  go  in,  nor  sufTer  others  to  go  in 
26.18.  n-o  info  the  eily,tosuch  a  man,  Mark  14.13. 

Mark  6.  36.  that  they  may  go  into  the  country 

8.  26.  nor  go  into  the  town,  nor  tell  it  to  any 
16.  15.  s'o  into  all  the  world,  preach  the  gospel 

Luke  8.  51.  he  suffered  no  man  togo  in,  save  Peter 

15.  28.  and  ho  was  angry,  and  would  not^o  in 
.John  10.  9.  he  shall  n-o  in  and  out,  and  find  pasture 
.^?(;£5l.ll.sliallsocome,asyesee  him^oinfoheaven 
fiei'. 17.8. the  beast  waSji.-f  not,shall  go  intoperdilion 

See  Captivity. 
GO  irt. 
Grn.\&.'2.iiaxa\  said,!  pray  thee,^o  in  unto  mymaid 
19.  34.  make  him  drink  wine,  and  go  thou  in 
30.  3.  behold,  my  maid  Bilhah,  go  in  unto  her 
38. 8.  go  in  unto  thy  brother's  wife,  and  marry  her 
Di-ut.  21.  13.  after  that  thou  shalt  go  in  unto  her 
2-2.  13.  if  take  a  wife,  and  go  in  unto  her,  hate  lar 

25.  5.  her  husband's  brother  shall  go  in  unto  her 
./ii.vA.  23.  12.  make  marriages,  and  go  in  unto  them 
./«rfn-.15.1. 1  will  S'O  in  to  luv  wife  into  the  chamber 
2  .Sam.  16.  21.  go  in  unto  t1iy  father's  concubines 
1  Kincf.i  11.2.  ve  shall  not  go  in  to  them,  nor  they 
Kzrk.  23.  44.  went  to  her  as  they  go  in  to  a  woman 
Jlmos  2.7.  a  man  and  his  father^o  in  to  same  raaid 

GO  in  peace. 
Gen.  15.  15.  thou  shalt  go  to  thy  fathers  in  peace 
F.Tod.  4.  18.  Jethro  saul  to  Moses,  go  in  peace 
18.23.  thispeojiln  shall  go  to  their  place  in  peace 
■Tndg.  13.6.  the  priest  said  to  Danites,  §-0  in  peace 
1  Sam.  1.  17.  Eli  said  to  Hannah,  go  in  peace 


GO  ^ 

1  Sam.  20.  42.  Jonathan  snid  to  David,  go  in  peact 
25.  35.  David  said  to  Abigail,  go  up  i?i  peace 
29.  7.  Achish  said  to  David,  gu  in  peace 

2  Sam.  15.  9.  the  king  said  to  Absalom,  go  inpcace 
lA'i7i^52.6.  letnot  his  hoary  head  godown  in  peace 
2  Kings  5.  19.  Elisha  said  lo  Naainan,^'©  inpeace 
Isa.  57.  12.  he  shall  go  in  peace,  they  shall  rest 
Mark  5.'.i4.  go  in  peace,  and  be  whole  of  thy  plague 
Lnkc  7.50.  faith  hath  saved  thee,  go  in  peace,  8.48. 
.ficts  15.  33.  they  were  let^o  inpeace  from  brethren 

J^et  us  GO. 
Ocn.  37. 17. 1  heard  them  say,  let  us  go  to  Dothan 
Exod.  3.18.  now  let  us  go  three  days' journey,  5.3. 

5.  8.  therefore  they  say,  let  us  go  sacrifice,  17. 

13.  15.  when  PJiaraoh  would  hardly  let  us  go 
Deut.  13.  2.  let  us  go  after  other  gods,  6.  13. 

1  Sam.  9.9.  thus  he  spake,  let  us  go  lo  the  seer,  10. 
11. 14.  let  us  go  toGilgal  and  renew  the  kingdom 

14.  1.  let  as  go  over  to  th<;  Philistines'  garrison,  6 
'iKingsG.^.  Ut  us  go  to  3ord!\.n,take  thence  a  beam 
Psal.  122.  1.  let  ils  go  into  the  house  of  the  Lord 
Isa.  2.  3.  let  us  go  ui>  to  the  mountain  of  the  Lord 
Jer.  4.  5.  let  us  go  into  the  delenced  cities 

6.  5.  let  us  go  by  night  and  destroy  her  palaces 
35. 11.  let  us  £-0  to  Jerusalem  for  fear  of  Chaldeans 
46.  16.  arise,  let  us  go  again  to  our  own  people 
51.  9.  let  us  go,  every  one  to  his  own  country 

Zeeh.  8.  21.  let  us  go  to  pray  before  tlie  Lord 
Mark  1. 38.  he  said,  let  us  go  into  the  next  towns 
14.42.riseup,  ict  us  go,he  thalbetrayeth  is  at  hand 
f.uke  2. 15.  let  us  go  to  Bethlehem,  see  this  thing 
Joh7i  11.  7.  then  saith  he,  let  us  go  to  Judea  agaio 
15.  let  us  goto  hini||lfi.  let  us  go  th&t  we  may  die 

14.  31.  even  so  I  do;  arise,  let  us  go  hence 
.•^cts  15. 36.  let  us  go  again  and  visit  our  brethren 
//cA.6.1.  let  ii«g-o  on  to  perfection,  not  layingagain 

I  will  GO. 

Grn.ld.Q.  I  will  go  to  the  right,  I  tcill  go  to  the  hfi 
24.  .')8.  wilt  thou  go  with  this  man?  I  will  go 
33.  12.  let  us  go,  I  icill go  before  thee,  Isa.  45.  2. 
45.28.my  son  is  alive,  I  will  go  see  him  before  I  die 

JVum.  20.  19.  I  will  only  go  through  on  my  feet 

23.  3.  stand  by  thy  burnt-offering,  and  /  will  go 
Deut.  2.  27.  I  will  go  along  by  the  highway 
Judg.  1.3.  Iteillgo  likewise  with  thee  into  thy  lot 

4.  8.  if  thou  wilt  go  w-ith  me,  then  will  I  go 
9.  and  she  said,  /  will  surely  go  with  thee 
16.  20.  /  will  go  out  as  at  other  times  before 
Rut/i.  1. 16.  Ruth  said,  whither  thou  goes^  Iwillgt 

2  Kings  G.3.go  with  servant,  he  Av.s\\c\e6,Iteilt  go 
2  Chron.  IB.  29.  he  said,  /  will  go  to  the  battle 
Psal.  43.  4.  then  will  I  go  to  the  altar  of  God 

66. 13. 1  will  gointo  thy  house  with  burnt-offering 
71.  16.  I  will  go  in  the  strength  of  the  Lord  God 
118.I9.open  thegates  of  righteousness,  Itcillgoin 
.Ter.  2.  25.  I  loved  strangers,  after  them/  will  go 
Eiek.  38.  11.  I  will  go  to  them  that  are  at  rest 
Hos.  2.  5.  for  she  said,  I  will  go  after  my  lovers 

7.  I  will  go  and  return  to  my  first  husband 
5. 15. /iiJiVi  0-0  to  my  place,  till  they  seek  my  face 
.Mie.  1.  8.  I  will  wail,  /  will  go  strifit  .iid  naked 
Zeeh.  8.  21.  go  to  seek  the  Lord  :  /  leill  go  also 
Mat.'i.Q.'i'^.Iwillgo  before  intoGalilce,,Variil4.28 
Ijuke  15.  18.  /  will  arise  and  go  to  my  father 
JJcts  18.  6.  henceforth  /  will  go  to  the  Gentiles 

GO  near. 
Deut.  5.  27.  go  near,  and  hear  all  the  Lord  says 
2  Sa7n.  1.  15.  David  said,  go  near  and  fall  on  him 
.fob  31.  37.  as  a  prince  would  I  go  near  unto  him 
Jlcts  8.  29.  go  near.  Join  thyself  to  this  chariot 

GO  not,  or  not  GO. 
F.Tod.  33.  1.5.  if  thy  presence  go  not  with  me 
.Viim.  10.  30.  Hobab  said,  I  will  not  go,  but  depart 
20.  20.  and  he  said,  thou  shalt  not  go  through 
2-2.  12.  God  said  to  Balaam,  shalt  not  sro  with  them 
18. 1  envnotgo  beyond  the  word  of  Lord,  24. 13. 
Deut.  3.  27.  thou  shalt  not  go  over  this  Jordan 
6. 14.  ye  shall  71.^0  after  other  gods,  \Kings  l\.\(i, 

15.  16.  if  he  say,  I  will  not  go  aw-ny  from  thee 

24.  19.  thou  shalt  7io«^o  again  to  fetch  it 

.12.  52.  but  thou  shalt  not  gn  thither  to  the  land 
Jnsh.  8.  4.  go  not  far  from  the  city,  but  be  ready 
.fudg.i.8.  if  thou  wilt  7io(  n-o  with  me,  I  will  not  go 

7.  4.  I  say,  this  shall  not  go,  the  same  shall  not  go 
20.  8.  we  will  Tiot  any  of  us  jj-o  to  his  tent 

Ruth  3.  17.  go  not  empty  to  thy  mother-in-law 

1  Sam.  17.  39.  David  said,  I  cannot  iro  with  these 
29.8.that  1  may  not  go  fight  ag.  enemies  of  the  king 

2.S'nm. 13.25. let  jfofullyp-o,  howbeithewouM  not  gc 

2  Kinn-s  2. 18.  he  said,  did  I  not  sayto  you,  go  not  ? 

1  Chron.  21.  ,30.  but  David  could  not  go  before  it 

2  CAro7i.25. 13.  soldiers  that  should  not  go  lo  battle 
rroii.  4. 13.  take  hold  of  in.^truction,  let  hernotgo 

14.  and  go  not  into  the  wa^  of  evil  men 
22.  24.  with  a  furious  man  thou  shnit  not  go 
Tsa.  .52.  12.  for  ye  shall  not  go  out  with  haste 
.7?r.l0.5.  theymust  be  borne, because  they  r<i  71  Tiof^a 

16.  8.  thou  shalt  not  go  into  the  house  of  feosti-.-ig 

25.  6.  go  7iot  after  other  gods  lo  serve  I  h'-.-n,  3o.  15 
27.  18.  that  the  vessels  left  fo  not  to  Babylco 


Gd 

.f«r.43.2.  go  not  into  Egypt  to  sojourn  there,  42.19. 

49.1'2.  thou  elialt  not  ^0  unpunished, but  drink  of  it 
£,am.4.ls.  hunt  steps,  that  we cannot^o in  our str. 
£2ea(.42.14.wheo  the  priests  enter,  shall  nut  go  out 
Mat.  10.  5.  go  not  into  tlic  way  of  the  Gentiles 
Luke  10.  7.  go  noi  from  house  to  house 

17.23.  see  here  or  there, ^o  not  after  tliem,21. 8. 

GO  over. 
Deut.  3. 25. 1  pray  thee  let  me  go  over  and  see  land 

28.  Joshua  shall  go  over  before  the  people,  31. 3. 
4. 14.  land  whither  ye^o  over,  i!(j.  |  31. 13.  |  32.  47. 

2si.  I  must  not  go  over  Jordan,  ye  shall  go  over 

24.  20.  thou  shalt  not  go  over  the  boughs  again 
30. 13.  who  shall  ^0  ucersea  for  us  and  bring  it  7 
31.  3.  the  Lord  thy  God  will  go  over  before  thee 
34.  4.  but  thou  shalt  not  go  over  thither 

Josh.  1.  2.  therefore  arise,  go  over  this  Jordan 
Judg.  12.  5.  the  Ephraimites  said,  let  nie  go  over 
ISam. 14.1. come,  let  us  o-o  over  to  the  Philistines,!). 
30.  10.  so  faint,  they  could  notigo  over  the  brook 
3  Sam.  10.  9.  let  me  go  over  and  take  oft"  his  head 

19.  37.  thy  servant  Chimham,  let  him  go  over 
Isa.  8.  7.  he  shall  come  and  go  over  all  his  banks 

11.  15.  he  shall  make  men  go  over  dry-shod 
51.23.  which  said,  bow  down,  that  we  may  ^o  over 

54.  9.  the  waters  of  Noah  should  no  more  go  over 
Jifr.41.10.  Ishmael  depart. to ^oouertoAmmonitcs 
ZiUke  8.  22.  let  us  go  over  to  the  other  side 

GO  out. 

Gen.  9. 10.  from  all  that^o  out  of  the  ark 
24. 11.  the  time  that  women ^o  out  to  draw  water 
45.1.  he  cried,  cause  every  man  to  go  out  from  me 

Exod.  6.  11.  that  he  let  children  of  Israel  go  out 
8.  29.  behold,  I  go  out  from  thee,  I  will  entreat 
11.  8.  after  that  I  will  go  out,  and  he  went  out 

10.  he  would  not  let  the  children  of  Israel  ^o  out 
12.22.noneof  you  shall^o  out  at  the  door  of  house 
16.4.people  shall  go  out  and  gather  a  rate  everyday 

29.  let  no  man  go  out  of  his  place  on  seventh  day 
SI.  2.  in  the  seventh  year  he  shall  go  out  free 

3.  if  he  came  in  by  himself,  shall  go  out  by  him- 
gelf ;  if  married,  his  wife  shall  go  out  with  him 

4.  her  master's,  and  he  shall  go  out  by  himself 

5.  if  the  servant  say,  I  will  not  go  out  free 

7.  a  maid-servant  not  go  out  as  men-servants  do 

11.  then  shall  she  go  out  free  without  money 
Z,«.  6.  13.  the  fire  on  the  altar  shall  never  ^o  out 

8. 33.  shall  not  wo  out  of  tabernacle  in  seven  days 
10.  7.  ye  shall  not  go  out  at  the  door,  lest  ye  die 

14.  38.  then  the  priest  shall  go  out  of  the  house 

15.  16.  if  any  man's  seed  of  copulation  go  out 
10. 18.  he  shall  go  out  to  the  altar  before  the  Lord 
81.  12.  nor  shall  ho  ^o  out  of  the  sanctuary 

25.  28.  and  in  the  jubilee  it  sliall  go  out,  31,  33. 

30.  it  shall  not  n-o  out  in  jubil.||d4.  he  shall  g'o  out 
/Jcu!.24..5.  taken  a  wife,  he  shall  not  n-o  out  to  war 

is.  2.").  thou  ihahgo  otit  one  way,  flee  seven  ways 
JosA.'i.l'.l.who  shall  o'o  oHt,his  blood  be  on  hishead 
Judg.O.'ifi:  go  out,  I  pray  now,  and  fight  with  them 
lCt."i().  he  said,  1  will  go  out  as  at  other  times 
20.28,  shalll  yet  .igain  go  o.  to  battle  ag.  Henjamin 
Ituth  2.  22.  it  is  good  thou  go  out  with  his  maidens 
I.Sam.  19. 3.  I  will  ^'o  out  and  stand  beside  my  father 

20.  11.  come,  let  iis  go  out  into  the  field 

28.  1.  Aihisli  said,  thou  shalt  "•«  out  with  me 
2.Vom.5.24.  then  the  Lord  shall ^-o  out  before  thee 

21. 17.  thou  sluilt  n-o  no  more  out  with  us  to  battle 
1  Kings  15.  17.  that  he  might  not  sufier  any  to  go 

out,  or  come  in  to  Asa,  2  Chron.  16.  1. 
20.  31.  put  ropes  on  heads,  and  go  out  to  the  king 

1  Chron.  20.  1.  at  the  time  kings  go  out  to  battle 

2  Chron.  18.  21.  go  out  and  be  a  lying  spirit,  go  out 
20.  17.  fear  nol,  to-morrow  ^o  out  against  them 

86. 18.  go  out  of  sanctuary.for  I  liou  hast  trespassed 
20.  yen,  himself  hasted  also  to  "-o  out 

Job  15.  13.  leitcst  such  words  go  out  of  thy  mouth 
Psiil.i)i).\0.  whichdidst  not;rro  nut  with  our  armies 
109.  t  7.  when  he  is  judged,  let  him  go  out  guilty 
Pr(n)  22. 10.  cast  out  the  scornor,  contention  fro  out 
F.r.cl.  8.  3.  be  nfit  hasty  to  go  out  of  his  sight 
Isa.  52.  II.  depart  ye,  go  ye  out  from  Ihenco 

12.  ye  shall  not  go  out  with  haste  or  by  flight 

55.  12.  V"  slinll  go  out  with  joy,  and  ho  led  forth 
Jer.  21.  12.  lent  my  fury  go  out  like  fire  nnd  burn 

51.  45.  my  people,  /rn  ye  out  of  the  midst  of  lier 
JKtfk.  15.  (.  lliry  Hhall  go  out  from  one  fire 

44.  3.  the  prince  shall  go  out  the  same  way 

46.9.  entnreth  by  north,  shall /ru  out  by  south-gate 
Jlmos  4.  3.  nnd  ye  shall  go  out  at  the  breaches 
X«cA.l  4.8.1  hat  living-waiers^o  out  from  Jerusalem 
Jlfa(.25.  0.  bridegr.  roinelh,i)-o  ye  out  to  meet  him 
/,uAre9. 5.  when  ye  p-o  out  ofi  he  city  shake  ofl'dnst 

14.  21.  go  out  qut-hly  into  the  streets  and  lanes 

23.  go  out  into  the  hiphv/nvs  and  lu-dges 

1  Cor.  5. 10.  then  must  ye  neeils^o  out  of  the  world 

Heb.  11.8.  Abraham,  when  he  was  rallrd  lo/roout 

/;ra.3.12.  hethatovorcomcth,8hiill^o  no  moreout 

SO.  8.  and  shall  go  out  to  deceive  the  nationa 
GO  to. 

Got.  11.  3.  FO  to,  let  us  make  trick  and  Uuro  them 
840 


GO 

Oen.11.4.  ^0  to,  let  us  build  II  7.^0  to,  let  confound 
Keel.  2. 1.^0  to  now,  1  will  prove  thee  with  mirtii 
Jsa.  5.  5.  go  to,  I  will  tell  you  what  1  will  do 
./um.4. 13.^0  to  now,  ye  that  say  to  day,  or  to-mor. 

5.  1.  go  to  now,  yo  rich  men,  weep  and  ho»-l 

GO  up. 
Gen.  3.5.  1.  arise,  go  up  to  Beth-cl,  dwell  there,  3. 
44.  33.  and  let  the  lad  go  up  witli  his  brcihren 
34.  how-  shall  I  go  up  to  my  father  ?  45.  U. 
50.  6.  Pharaoh  said,  go  up  and  bury  thy  father 
Exod.S.'i.  frogs  shall  ^o  up  and  come  into  thy  hou 

19.  12.  take  heed  ye  go  not  up  into  the  mount 

20.  26.  nor  shalt  thou  go  up  by  steps  to  my  altar 
24.  2.  neither  shall  the  people  go  up  with  him 

32.  30.  ye  have  sinned  a  great  sin,  1  will  go  up 

33.  1.  depart  and  go  up,  thou  and  the  people 
3.  for  1  will  not  go  up  in  the  midst  of  thee 

34.  24.  not  desire  thy  land,  when  thou  shalt  go  vp 
Z.ey.l9.1tJ.shaltnot^rou;)  and  down  as  a  tale-bearer 
J^um.  13.  30.  let  us  go  up  at  once  and  possess  it 

31.  we  be  not  able  to  go  up  against  this  people 
14.40.  lo,  we  be  here,  and  w-ill^o  up,  Deut.  1.  41. 
42.  go  not  up  II  44.  but  they  presumed  to  go  up 
Deut.  25.  7.  let  his  brother's  wife  go  up  to  the  gate 
30. 12.  who  shall  go  up  for  us  to  heaven,  and  bring 
.Josh.  7.  3.  let  not  all  go  up,  let  3000  men  go  up 
22.  33.  did  not  intend  to  go  up  ag.  them  in  battle 
Judg.  1.  1.  who  shall  go  up  for  us  to  fight  them  ? 

2.  the  Lord  said,  Judah  sholl  go  up,  20.  18. 
2. 1.  an  angel  said,  1  made  you  u-o  up  out  of  Egypt 
9.  t  9.  should  I  go  vp  and  down  for  other  trees  ? 
1 1.37.lhat  I  tua.y  go  upanil  down  on  the  mountains 
18.  9.  arise,  that  we  may  go  up  against  them 
20.  9.  we  will  go  up  by  lot  against  Gibeah 
18.  which  of  us  shall  go  up  first  to  battle  ? 
23.  shall  I  go  up  again?  ||  ^28.  go  up  against  him 
l.S'um.1.22. 1  willnot^ojjp  till  the  child  beweaned 

6.  9.  if  it  go  up  by  the  way  of  his  own  coast 
20.  and  to  whom  shall  he  go  up  from  us  1 

9.  13.  ye  shall  find  him  before  he  go  up  to  eat 
14.  Samuel  came  to  go  up  to  the  high  place,  19. 

14.  9.  if  they  say  tarry,  we  will  not^o  up 

10.  if  they  say,  come  uj)  unto  us,  we  will  go  up 
2  Sam.  2. 1.  David  said,  shall  I  go  up  to  any  of  the 

cities  of  Judah?  the  Lord  said,  oro  up  to  Hebron 
5.  19.  shall  I  go  up  against  the  Philistines? 
15.20.should  1  make  thee  ^0  up  and  down  with  us? 
19. 34.  how  long  have  I  to  live,  that  I  should  go  up 
24.  18.  go  up,  rear  an  altar  in  floor,  1  CAr.  21. 18. 

1  Kings  12.  24.  ye  shall  not  go  up,  2  CAron.  11.  4. 

27.  if  this  peojile  ^o«j>  to  do  sacrifice  at  Jerusal. 

28.  it  Is  too  much  for  you  to^o  up  lo  Jerusalem 
18.  43.  go  up,  look  toward  the  sea,  and  he  went 
22.  6.  go  up,  for  the  Lord  shall  deliver  it  into  the 

hand  of  the  king,  12.  ^Cliron.  18.  11,  14. 
20.  may  ^0  up  and  fall  at  Ramoth,  2  CAr.  18.  19. 

2  Kings  1.3.^0  up,  meet  the  messengers  of  the  king 
2.23.^0  up  thou  bald-head,  ^0  up  thou  bald-head 
3.  7.  wilt  thou  go  up  with  me  against  Moab  ? 

8.  and  he  said,  which  way  shall  we  go  up 
12.  17.  Hazael  set  his  face  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem 
18.25.Lord  said,  ^o  up  against  theland,/«a..36.10. 

20.  5.  on  third  day  thou  shalt  go  vp  to  the  house 
8.  what  the  sign  that  I  shall  go  tip?  Isa.38.  22. 

22.4.  go  up  to  Ililkiah  high-priest  to  sum  silver 

1  CAr.  14. 10.  shall  1^0  up  II  14.  ^w  not  up  alter  th>^m 

2  Chr.  18.  5.  shall  we  go  vp  to  Kanioth-gilead  ? 
36.  23.  God  be  with  him,  let  him  go  up,  Kira  1. 3. 

K:rrt  7.  9.  he  began  to  go  up  from  Habyloii 

13.  all  which  are  minded  lo  ^  o  uyj  go  with  me 
JV(-A.  4.  3.  if  a  fox  go  up  he  shall  even  break  down 
I'snl.  104.  8.  they  go  up  by  the  mountains 
132.  3.  surely  I  will  not  go  up  into  my  bed 
Cunt.O.G.  Hs  flock  of  sheep  that  go  up  from  washing 

7.  8.  I  said,  I  will  go  up  to  the  pnlm-tree 
/.»a.2. 3.  let  us  go  up  to  mounlnin  of  Lord,  .l/ic.4.2. 

7.  0.  let  us  go  up  against  Judah  and  vex  it 

15.  5.  with  weeping  shall  they  go  it  vp 

21  2.  go  up,  O  Elam||34. 10.  the  smoke  shall  go  vp 

35.  9.  nor  any  ravenous  beast  shall  go  vp  there 

36.  10.  ,iro  vp  ogainst  this  land,  and  destroy  it 
.Jrr.  5.  10.  go  ye  vp  upon  her  walls  nnd  destroy 

6  4.  arise,  nnd  let  us  go  up  at  noon,  woe  unto  us 

21.  2.  that  Nehiichadne-/-/ar  nmy  go  vp  from  ns 
22.20.^0  vp  to  Lebanon,  and  cry,  lift  up  thy  voice 
31.  6.  lot  us  go  up  to  Zion,  to  the  Lord  our  God 
46.  8.  he  saith,  I  will  go  vp  nnd  cover  the  earth 

11.  go  vp  into  Gilcad,  and  lake  balm,  O  virgin 
48.  5.  continual  weeping  shall  go  vp 
49.28.^0  vp  toKcdur,  nnd  spoil  men  of  the  east 
."iO.  21.  go  vp  against  the  l.ind  of  Mernlhnim 

F.ifk.'Xi.ll.lw'iWgovp  lo  land  of  uiiw  ailed  villagei; 
40.  26.  there  w-ore  seven  steps  to  go  vp  to  it 
Uos.  4.  15.  neither  go  vp  to  Relh-nven,  nor  swear 
Ifag.  \.8.  go  up  to  the  mountain,  and  bring  wood 
ZrrA.  14.  10.  go  up  from  year  to  year  lo  worship 
Mat.  20.  18.  we  go  up  to  Jpiusniem,  Son  of  man 
shall  be  betrayed,  Mark  10  .33.  Dvke  18.  31. 
I.ukc  14.10.  he  may  say  to  thee,  friend,  ^o  vp  higher 
John  7.  8.  go  ye  up  to  this  feast,  I  go  not  vp  yet 


GOE 

.^cts  15.  2.  go  up  to  Jerusalem  about  this  question 

21.  4.  that  Paul  should  nut  go  up  to  Jerusalem 
12.  we  besought  him  not  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem 

25.  9.  -wilt  thou  go  vp  to  Jerusalem  and  be  judged 

GO  a  whoring. 
Ezod.34.^5.  lest  they  go  a  whoring  after  their  god* 
16.  and  Uiy  sons  go  a  whoring  alter  their  gods 
^fii.20.5. 1  will  cut  otFall  that  go  a  whor.  al'tei  him 
6. 1  will  cut  oft"  such  us  go  a  whor.  aller  wizards 
JVum. 15.39.  ways,  after  w  hich  ye  use  lo^o  o  whor. 
Deut.  31. 16.  this  people  will  go  a  whor.  after  gods 
2  Chron.  21. 13.  Jehoram  made  Judah  gn  a  whor. 
Psul.''S.'2'i.  destroyed  all  that^o  a  whor.  from  thoe 
Ezek.  6.  9.  eyes  which  go  a  whoring  after  idols 

GOEST. 
^en.28.15.  will  keep  thee  in  places  whither  thou  g. 
32.  17.  whose  art  thou  ?  whither  g.  thou  ?  Judg. 
19.  17.  Zech.  2.  2.  .John  13.  36.  |  16.  5. 
Ezod.  33.  16.  is  it  not  in  that  thou  g.  with  us? 
34. 12.  no  coven,  with  inhabitants  whither  ihou^. 
JVum.  14. 14.  and  thou  g.  before  them  by  day-time 
Deut.l.  1.  when  Lord  God  shall  bring  thee  into  the 
land  whither  thou  g.  to  possess  it,  11.  29. 
11.  10.  the  land  whither  thou  g.  is  not  as  Egypt 
?'12.  29.  God  shall  cut  ofT  nations  whither  thou^ 
20.  1.  when  thou  g.  to  battle  and  seest,  21.  10. 
23.  20.  God  may  bless  thee  in  all  that  thou  settest 
thine  hand  to,  whither  thou  g.  Josh.  1.  7. 
28.  0.  blessed  shalt  thou  be  when  thou  g.  out 

19.  cursed  shalt  thou  be  when  thou  g.  out 

21.  make  pestilence  cleave  to  thee  width,  thou^. 

63.  shall  be  plucked  olfthe  land  whither  thou^. 
32.  50.  and  die  in  the  mount  whither  thou  g. 
Josh.  1.  9.  the  Lord  is  with  thee  whither  thou  g. 
Judg.  14.  3.  that  thou  g.  to  take  n  wife  of  Philist. 
Riith  1.  16.  for  whither  thou  g.  I  will  go 
2  .Sam.  15.  19.  wherefore  g.  thou  also  with  us? 
lKings'2.27.  on  the  day  thou  g.  over  the  brook,  42. 
Psal.  44.  9.  but  thou  g.  not  forth  with  our  armies 
ProB.4.12.when  thou^.sleps  shall  not  be  straitened 

6.  22.  when  thou  g.  it  shall  lead  thee 
i'>ct.5.1. keep  thy  foot  when  thou^.to  house  of  God 

9.  10.  nor  wisdom  in  the  grave  whither  tliou^. 
./er.  45.  5.  I  will  give  for  a  jirev  whither  thou  g. 
Mat.  8. 19. 1  will  follow  thee  whither  g.  J.uke9.S7, 
Duke  12.  58.  when  thou  g.  with  thine  adversary 
John  11.  8.  sought  to  stone  ihee,^.  thither  again? 

14.  5.  Lord,  we  know  not  whither  thou  nr. 

GOETU. 
Exod.  7.  15.  lo,  he  g.  out  unto  the  water 

22.  26.  shall  deliver  it  by  that  the  sun  g.  down 
28.  29.  Aaron  shall  bear  them  when  he  g.  in 

30.  they  shall  be  on  Aaron's  heart  when  he^.  in 
35.  his  sound  shall  be  heard  when  he  g.  in 
Dcv.  11.  21.  these  ye  may  eat  that  g.  on  all  four 

14.  46.  he  that  g.  into  the  liouse  shall  be  unclean 

15.  32.  law  of  him  who.se  seed  g.  from  him,  22. 4. 
Ifi.  17.  none  in  the  tabernacle  when  he  g.  in 

22.  3.  who  g.  to  holy  things  having  uncleanness 
27.  21.  the  field,  when  it  g.  out  in  jubilee,  be  holy 

J^uin.  5.  29.  this  is  the  law,  when  a  wife  i'.  aside 
Deut.  1.  .30.  the  Lord  which  g.  before  shiill  fight 
9.  3.  thy  GoAis  he  that  g.  over  before  you 
19. 5.  as  when  a  man /r-'nto  wood  with  his  neighb. 
20.  4.  the  Lord  your  God  is  he  that  g.  with  you 

23.  9.  when  the  host  g.  forth  against  thy  enemies 

24.  13.  deliver  the  pledge  when  the  sun  g.  down 
.hidg.  5.31.  be  as  the  sun  when  he  ^.  forth  in  might 

1  Sam.  22.  14.  as  David,  who  g.  at  thy  bidding 

30.  24.  as  his  part  is  that  g.  down  to  the  battle 

2  Kinirs  5.  18.  my  master  g.  to  house  of  Rimmon 
11.8.  be  with  the  king  ns  he  "-.  out,  2  CAron. 2:1.7 

Ezra  5.  8.  this  work  g.  fast  on  and  prospeieth 
.Tob  7.  9.  that  g.  down  to  grave  come  up  no  more 
9.  11.  lo,  he  g.  by  me,  nnd  I  see  him  not 

16.  t  6.  and  though  I  forbenr,  whnt;^.  from  me? 
34.8.w-hen  g.  in  company  with  workers  of  iniquity 
37.  2.  hear  the  sound  that  g.  out  of  his  mouth 
39.  21.  he  g.  on  to  meet  the  armed  men 

I'sal.  17.  I.  prayer  that  g.  not  out  of  Icigned  lipt 
41.  6.  when  he  ^r.  abroad,  he  tellelh  it 
68.  21.  such  a  one  ns  g.  on  in  his  trespasses 
88.  16.  Ihv  fierce  wrath  g.  over  me 
97.  3.  n  fire  ^r. before  him,  and  burnetii  up  enemies 
104.  23.  man  g.  forth  to  his  work  until  evening 
126.  6.  he  that  g.  forth  and  weepelh,  bearing 
146.  4.  his  breath /T.  forth  ;  he  returnelh  to  enrlh 

Prnv.  6.  29.  so  he  that/J-- '"  '"  '''"  nei:;hliniir'8  wife 

7.  22.  g.  nfler  her,  ns  nn  ox  g.  l«  the  shiiichter 

11.  10.  when  it  ^. well  with  righteous,  city  rejoices 
16. 18.  pride  ^.before  destruction,  a  haiiglily  spirit 
20.1(1.  that /T.  about  ns  n  tale  ben  rer  reveals  spcrfM 
26.  9.  as  a  thorn  g.  up  into  the  hand  of  a  drunkard 

20.  where  no  wood  is,  there  the  dTP  g.  out 

31.  18.  her  candle  g.  not  out  by  iiifflrt 

f"rr/.1 . 5.  the  sun  g.  down,  and  hnslelh  lo  his  place 
3.  21.  spirit  of  man  g.  up,  spirit  of  benst^.  down 

12.  5.  because  man  g.  to  his  long  home 

Cant.  7.  9.  that  g.  down  sweetly,  cnusins  the  lips 
Isa.  28.  19.  from  the  time  it  g.  foith,  it  shall  take 


GOI 

Tsa.  30.20.  when  one  g-.with  pipe  to  come  In  mount 
55. 11.  so  shall  my  word  be  that  ^r.  I'oi  (li  of  moutli 
59.  8.  whoso  g.  therein  sliall  noi  know  peace 
Ca.  14.  as  a  beast  g.  down  into  the  valley 

Jer.  5.  6.  every  one  that  o-.  out  thence  shall  be  torn 

6.  4.  woe  unto  us,  for  the  day  g.  away 

21  9.  that  g.  out  to  Chaldoans  shall  live,  38. 2. 
'£1.  10.  but  weep  sore  for  him  that  ff.  away 
30.  2:i.  whirlwind  of  the  Lord  g.  forth  with  fury 
44. 17.  we  will  do  vvhat^.  out  of  our  own  mouth 
49.17.  everyone  that  ^.  by  it  be  astonished,  50. 13. 

Ezek.  7.  14.  they  have  blown,  but  none  g.  to  battle 
33.  31.  their  hearty,  after  their  covetousness 
44.  'i7.  in  the  day  that  he  g.  into  the  sanctuary 

fios.fi.i.  your  goodn.  is  as  the  early  dew,it^.away 
5.  thy  judgments  are  as  light  that  o-.  forth 

Zech.  3.  J.  this  is  the  curse  that  o-.  (urth  . 
(i.  he  said,  this  is  an  ephah  that  g.  forth 

Mat.  S.  y.  I  say  to  this  man  go,  and  he  g.  JmUc  7.8. 
I'-i.  45.  then  g.  he  and  takelh,  /.u/rc  11.  21!. 
13.  44.  for  joy  thereof^,  and  selleth  all  he  hath 
15.11.  not  that  which  g-.  into  mouth  detileth  a  man 
17.  21.  this  kind  g.  not  out  but  by  prayer 
2().'24.  the  Son  of  man  g.  as  it  is  written  of  him, 
Mark  14.  21.  Luke  22.  22. 
28.  7.  he  g.  before  you  into  Galilee,  Mark  Iti.  7. 

John  3.  8.  but  canst  not  tell  whither  it^. 

7.  20.  thou  hast  a  devil ;  who  g.  about  to  kill  thee? 

10.  4.  he  g.  before  them,  the  sheep  follow  him 

11.  31.  she  g.  unto  the  grave  to  weep  there 

12.  35.  knoweth  not  whither  he  g.  1  John  2.  11. 
1  Cor.  fi.  0.  but  brother  »■.  to  law  with  brother 

9.7.  who^.  a  warfare  any  time  at  hisown  charges 
Jam.  1.24.  he  beholdeth  himself  and  o-.  his  way 
licv.\i.\.\h-d\  follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever  he^. 
17.  11.  and  is  of  the  seven,  and  "•.  into  perdition 
19.  15.  and  out  of  his  mouth  g.  a  sharp  sword 

GOING. 
Ger.. 15.12.  sun^.down,adeepsleei)  fell  on  Abram 

25.  t32.  Esau  said,  behold,  I  am  g.  to  die 
Eiod. 17. 12.1iis  hands  steady,  to^.down  of  the  sun 

23.  4.  if  thou  meet  thine  enemy's  ox  g.  astray 
JV"«m.34.4.  g.  forth  of  border  from  south  to  Kadesh 
Deul.  lfj.6.  sacrifice  the  passover  at  ^.  down  of  sun 

33.  18.  he  said,  rejoice,  Zebulun,  in  thy  g.  out 
Jo.sh.  7.  5.  and  smote  them  in  the  g.  down 

10. 11.  as  they  were  in  thc^.down  to  Belh-horon 
27. at  the  or.down  of  the  sun  carcases  taken  down 
23.  14.  [  am  g.  the  way  of  all  the  earth 
ludg.9.  t  30.  Gideon  had  70  sons  ^.  out  of  his  thigh 
19.  18.  I  am  now  g.  to  the  house  of  the  Lord 
28.  up,  let  us  be  g.  but  none  answered 

1  Sam.  10.  3.  meet  thee  three  men  g.  up  to  God 

2  .Sam. 2.  19.  in  ^.turned  not  from  following  Abner 
5. 24.  hearest  a  sound  of  ^.  in  trees,  1  Chr.  14. 15. 

1  Khiirs  17.  11.  as  she  was^.  to  fetch  it,  he  called 
22.  3{i.  went  a  proclamation  at  "-.  dowr.  of  the  sun 

2  Kings  2. 23.  g.  by  the  way,  children  mocked  him 
9.  27.  they  smote  Ahaziah  ut  the  g.  up  to  Gur 

1  Chron.  11.  t  9.  David  went  in  g.  and  increasing 

2  Chron.  18.  34.  at  lime  of  sun  g.  down,  he  died 
Ezra  7.  t  9.  foundation  of  the  g.  from  Babylon 
Job  1.  7.  from  g.  to  and  fro  in  the  eaith,  2.  2. 

3.3.  24.  deliver  him  from  g.  down  to  the  pit 
28.  he  will  deliver  his  soul  from  g.  into  the  pit 
Psal.  19.  (i.  his^.  forth  is  from  the  end  of  heaven 
50.  1.  the   mighty   God  calle'.h  the  e;irth,  from 
rising  of  Hun  to  ^.  down,  113.  3.  Mai.  1.  11. 
104.  19.  the  sun  knoweth  his  g.  down 
fProv.  7.  27.  g.  down  to  the  chambers  of  death 
14. 1.5.  but  the  prudent  man  lookelh  well  to  his^. 
30. 2n.  three  go  well,  yea,  four  are  comely  in  g. 
Isa.  1.3. 10.  the  sun  shall  be  darkened  in  his  w'.  forth 
Jcr.  48.  5.   in   the   g.  up  to  Luliiih,  continual 
weeping  shall  go  up;   in  the  g.  down  of 
Horonaini 
."iO.  4.  n-.  and  weeping  they  shall  seek  the  Lord 
F.zck.  40.  31.  the  g.  up  had  eight  steps,  34,  37. 
44.  5.  with  every  g.  forth  of  the  sanctuary 
4fi.  12.  after  his  g.  forth,  one  shut  the  gate 
Dan.  6.  14.  and  labomed  till  g.  down  of  the  sun 
9.  25.  from  the  "■.  forth  of  the  commandment 
Hos.  6.  3.  his  g.  forth  is  prepared  as  the  tiiorning 
Zfck.  8. 1 7.  from  the  country  ofg.  down  of  the  son 
t21.  g.  speedily  to  entreat  the  face  of  the  Lord 
Mat.  2.).  1 8.  give  oil,  for  our  lamps  are  g.  out 

26.  4fi.  rise,  let  us  be  g.  behold,  he  is  at  hand 
I.nke  14.  31.  what  king  or.  to  war  with  another 
JoAnS.  .50.  g.  through  midst  of  them,  so  passed  by 
.^cts  20.  5.  these  g.  before,  tarried  at  Troas 
Rom. 10.3.  g.  about  to  establish  their  righteousness 
I  Tim.  5.24.  some  men's  sins  g.  before  to  judgment 
Heb.l.  18.  is  a  disannulling  of  command.^,  before 
J'i«i»  7.  ^.after  strange  flesh  are  set  forth  an  examp. 

See  Coming. 
GOINGS. 
JVum.  33.  2.  and  Moses  wrote  their  jr.  out 

34.  5.  the  g.  out  of  their  borders,  8,  9,  12.  .Tosh. 

15.  4,  7,  11.  I  16.  3,  8.  I  18.  12,  14. 
Job  34.21  his  eyes  are  on  man,  he  seeth  njl  his  g. 
S41 


GOA 

Psal.Yi.S.  hold  up  my ^.  in  thy  paths  that  footgleps 

37.  t31.  none  of  his  ^.  shall  slide 

40.  2.  he  set  my  feet  on  u  rock,  established  my  ^. 

44.  1 18.  nor  have  our  "-.  declined  from  thy  way 

68.  24.  they  have  seen  thy^.  even  the  g.  of  God 

140.  4.  who  have  purposed  to  overthrow  my  g. 
Pry« .5.21.  before  Lord,  and  he  pondurelh  all  his  n-. 

20.  24.  man's  ^)-.  are  of  the  Lord,  how  can  u  man 
Isa.  59.  8.  there  is  no  judgment  in  their  ^. 
F.zck.  42.11.  their  5-.  out  w  ere  according  to  fashion 

43.  11.  shew  them  g.  out  thereof  and  conungs  in 
Mic.  5.  2.  whose  g.  forth  have  been  from  of  old 

GOAD,  S. 
.Tuiig.^.2\.  Shamgar  slew  600  men  with  an  ox^. 
1  Sam.  13.  21.  they  had  a  file  to  sharpen  the  g. 
£cc/. 12. 11.  the  words  of  the  wise  are  as^.and  nails 

GOAT. 
Oen.  15.  9.  take  a  heifer,  a  she-^.  of  three  years 
Eiod.  22.  1 1.  if  a  man  steal  an  o.x  or  a  g. 
IjCO.  3. 12.  if  his  ottering  be  a  g.  then  shall  ofTer  it 

4.  24.  he  shall  lay  his  hand  on  the  head  of  the  g. 

7.  23.  he  shall  cat  no  fat  of  o.\,  sheep,  or  of^. 

9. 15.  he  took  the  g.  which  was  the  sin-otTering 

10.  16.  Moses  sought  the  g.  of  the  sin-offering 

16. 9.  .\aron  shall  bring  the^.  on  which  the  lot  fell 
22.  he  shall  let  go  the  g.  in  the  wilderness 

17.  3.  whosoever  killeth  a  g.  in  the  camp 

22.  27.  when  a  ^.  is  brought  forth  seven  days 
.ATam.  1.5. 27.  if  sm  thro' ignora.  he  shall  bring  a^. 

bS.  17.  the  tirstling  of  a  g.  thou  .shall  not  redeem 
28.22.  one  ^'.  for  a  sin-otlering,  to  make  an  atone- 
^^       ment  for  you,  29.  22,  28,  31,  34,  38. 
Deut.  14.  4.  ye  shall  eat  the  ox,  sheep,  and  the  «■. 
17.  1 1.  not  sacrifice  a  g.  wherein  is  blemish 
.Tudg.  6. 1 4.  the  Midianites  left  no  ox,  or  g.  or  ass 
Ezck.  43.  2.5.  seven  days  prepare  every  day  a  g. 
/J<in.8.5.the  i.'.had  a  notable  horn  between  his  eyes 
21.  the  rough  g.  is  the  king  of  Grecia 
//c  GOAT. 
Prov.  30.  31.  four  are  comely  in  going,  a  hc-g. 
Jcr.  51.40.  bring  them  down  like  rams  \vM;he-g. 
Dan.  8.  5.  behold,  a  he-g.  came  from  the  west 
8.  therefore  the  heg.  waxed  very  great 
IJvc  GOAT. 
Z,e».lG.20.  bring Zi«e-g-.l|21.  lay  both  hands  on  l.-g. 
Scapc-QOA'V. 
See  Signification  on  Offerino. 
I^ev.  16.  8.  and  the  other  lot  for  the  scapc-g. 
10.  to  let  him  go  for  ascn/je-^. into  the  wilderness 

26.  he  that  let  go  scape-g.  shall  wash  his  clothes 

;^'yW-GOAT. 
Deut.  14.  5.  ye  shall  eat  the  wild-g.  and  wild  ox 

,  GOATS. 

Gen.  4.  t  4.  Abel  brought  the  firstling  of  the  g. 
27.  VI.  f.;fch  mo  from  thence  two  kids  of  the  g. 
16.  she  put  t)ie  skins  of  the  ^.011  his  hands 

30.  32.  all  the  spotted  and  speckled  among  the  g. 
33.  is  not  speckled  among ^.  ||  35.  he  removed^. 

31.  38.  thy  slie-^.  have  not  cast  their  young 

32.  14.  two  hmidred  she-^.  and  twenty  he-n-. 

37.  31.  Joseph's  brethren  killed  a  kid  of  the  ^. 

38.  1 17.  1  will  send  thee  a  kid  from  the  g. 
Eiod.  12.5.  ye  shall  take  it  out  from  the  sheep  org. 
Lev.  1.  10.  if  his  offering  be  of  the  sheep  or  ^. 

4.  23.  if  his  sin  come  to  his  knowledge,  he  shall 
bring  his  offering,  a  kid  of  the  g.  2-^.  |  5.  6. 
9.  3.  take  a  kid  of  the  ^.  for  a  sin-offering 
16.  5.  two  kids  of  the  g.  \\  7.  two  "-.  present  them 
22. 19.  ye  shall  offer  a  male  of  the  sheep  or  g. 
t21.  a  free-will  offering  in  beeves  or^r. 

23.  19.  then  ye  shall  sacrifice  one  kid  of  the  g. 

for  a  sin-olfcring,  JVtt»n.  7.  16.  |  15.  24. 

J^um.  7.  17.  five  rams,  five  he-^.  five  lambs,  23, 

2!t,  35,  41,  47,  53,  59,  6.5,  71,  77,  83. 

87.  the  kids  of  the  g.  for  a  sin-otfering,  twelve 

88.  the  he-^.  sixty,  the  lambs  of  first  year  sixty 
31.  t  30.  th(m  shalt  take  one  portion  of  the  g. 

Dent.^.lA,  rams  and  he-^.  of  the  breed  of  Bashan 
.Juilg.  6.  1 19.  Gideon  made  ready  a  kid  of  the  g. 
I.Snm.25.2.  Nabal  had  a  thousand  yj.  was  shearing 
2  Citron.  17.  11.  the  Arabians  brought  7,700  he-^. 

29.  21.  they  brought  seven  he-"',  for  a  sin-oflering 
Ezra  6.  17.  ottered  at  the  dedication  twelve  ho-"-. 

8.  35.  children  out  of  captivity  offered  12  he-w. 
P.<<al.  .50.  9.  I  will  take  no  he-^r.  out  of  thy  fo]d 
13.  or  will  I  drink  the  blood  of  o-.  ? 

06,  15.  I  will  OfTer  to  thee  bullocks  with  g. 
Prnv.  27.  26.  the  g.  are  the  price  of  thy  field 

27.  thou  shalt  have  g.  milk  enough  for  food 
Cant.  4.  1.  thy  hair  is  as  a  flock  of^.  6.  5. 
Isa.  1.  11.  I  delight  not  in  the  blood  of  lie-^. 

14.  t9.  it  slirreth  up  for  dtiee  all  great  ^. 

34.  0.  sword  of  the  Lord  fat  with  the  blood  of  ^. 
.Tir.  .50.  8.  and  be  as  the  hc-n-.  before  the  flocks 
Ezrk.  27.  21.  Arabia  occupied  with  thee  in  g. 

34.  17.  I  judge  between  the  rams  and  he-o'. 

.39.  18.  ye  shall  drink  the  blood  of  lambs  and  g. 

43.  22.  on  the  second  day  otTer  a  kid  of  the  g. 

45.  23.  a  kid  of  the  g.  daily  for  a  sin-offering 
Mic.  5.  t  8.  as  a  young  lion  among  thu  flocks  of  ^. 
2  K 


GOD 

Zcch-'10.3.  my  anger  was  kindled,  I  punished  the^ 
Mat.  25.  32.  u  shepherd  dividelh  tlie  sheep  from  ff 

33.  he  shall  set  the  g.  on  his  left  hand 
Heb.  9.  12.  nor  entered  by  blood  oCg.  and  calves 
13.  if  the  blood  of  bulls  and  g.  sanctifieth 
19.  he  took  the  blood  of^r.and  sprinkled  the  book 
10.4.  is  not  possible  the  blood  of  n-.  lake  away  gina 

GO.VrS-HAIR.' 
£i:od.25.4.  this  is  the  ofl'ering  ye  shall  take,  ^.-Aoi'r 
26.  7.  thou  shalt  make  curtains  o( g.-hair 

35.  0.  who  is  willing,  let  him  bring  ^.-AaiV 
23.  every  man  with  whom  was  found  g  Stair 
26.  and  all  the  women  spun  g.-hair 

36.  14.  she  made  curtains  of  g.-hair  for  the  tent 
M'um.  31. 20.  purify  all  work  of  g.-hair  and  wood 
l.Suni.l9. 13.  put  a  j)illow  oi g.-hair  for  bolster,  16. 

GOATS-SKINS. 
Ileb.  11.37.  wandering  in  sheep-skins  and  g.-skins 

IVild-GOATS. 
1  Sam.  24.  2.  to  seek  David  on  rocks  of  the  wild-g. 
Job  39.1.knowest  thou  when  the  tDilil-g.ht'wg  forth 
Paul.  104. 18.  high  hills  are  a  refuge  for  the  wild-g. 

GOBLET. 
Cant.  7.  2.  thy  navel  is  like  a  round  g. 

GOD  referred  to  man. 
Ezod.  4.  16.  thou  shalt  be  to  Aaron  instead  of  g. 

7.  1.  I  have  made  thee  a  g.  to  Pharaoh 

GOD  for  idol. 
Dcvt.  32.  21.  moved  me  with  that  which  is  no\.g.^ 
Judg.  6. 31.  if  he  be  a  g.  let  him  plead  for  himself 

8.  33.  they  made  Baal-berith  their  g. 

9.  27.  they  went  into  the  house  of  their  g.  and  eat 
11  24.  possess  that  whi,ch  Chemosh  \\i\g.  givelli 
16.  23.  the  Philistines'  g.  was  Dagon,  24. 

1  Sam.  .5.  7.  his  hand  is  sore  on  us,  and  our  g. 
\I\ings  11.33.  Israel  worshipped  the  g-.of  Moubitea 

18.  27.  he  is  a.  g.  either  talking,  or  pursuing 

2  Kin^s  1.  2.  Baal-zebub  the  n-.  of  Ekron,  3,  6, 16. 

19.  37.  worshipping  in  the  house  of  Nisroch  his 
g.  smote  with  sword,  2  Chr.  32. 21.  Isa.  37. 38. 

PsaM6.4.sorrows  multiplied,  hasten  after  other  ^. 
/ia.  44.10.  who  hath  formed  a^'.  or  molten  image  1 
15.  he  maketh  a  g.  and  worshippeth  it,  17. 

45.  20.  and  that  pray  to  a  g.  that  cannot  save 

46.  6.  he  maketh  it  a  g.  they  fall  down,  they 

worship 

Dan.  1.2.  he  carried  the  vessels  into  house  ofhisjr. 
4.8.  Belteshazzar  according  (o  the  name  of  my  ^. 
11.  36.  and  magnify  himself  above  every  ^. 

Jimosf).  20.  thestar  of  your  nr.  ye  made,  Jlcts  7.  43 
cf.  14.  that  swear,  and  say,  thy  g.  O  Dan,  liveth 

■Jonah  1.  5.  the  mariners  cried,  every  man  to  his  ff. 

Mic.  4. 5.  all  people  will  walk  in  the  name  olhis^'-. 

Hah.  1.  11.  imputing  this  his  power  to  his  g. 

Jlcts  12.  22.  it  is  the  voice  of  a  g.  not  of  a  man 
.any  GOD. 

Exod.  22. 20.  that  sacrifice  \oanyg.  save  the  I^ord 

2.Sa;H.7.22.  nor  is  there  any  G.  beside,  1  CAr.17.20. 

/J«n.3.28.that  they  might  not  worsh.  any  ^.except 
6.  7.  who  shall  ask  a  petition  ofevy  g.  or  man,  12. 
11.  37.  neither  shall  he  regard  any  g. 
Other  GOD. 

Ezod.  34.  14.  thou  shalt  worship  no  other  g. 

Dan. 3.  29.  because  there  is  no  other  g.  can  deliver 

1  Cor.  8.  4.  there  is  none  other  g.  but  one 
Strange  GOD. 

Dent.  32.  12.  there  was  no  strange  g.  with  them 

R<n/.44.20.  stretched  out  our  hands  to  a  strange g 
81.9.UO  strange g. he  in  thee,nor  wonh.strangeg. 

Isa.  43.  12.  when  there  was  no  .t.  g.  among  inem 

Dan.  11.  39.  thus  shall  he  do  with  a  strange  g. 
GOD. 

This  is  one  of  the  names  tehieh  ue  give  to  that 
eternal,  infinite.,  and  incomprehensible  Jleing, 
the  Creator  of  all  things,  who  preserves  and 
governs  evry  thing  by  his  almighty  power  and 
wisdom,  and  is  the  only  object  of  our  worship. 
The  Hebrews  firf  to  God  generally  the  name 
of  Jkiiovaii,  he  who  exists  of  himself,  and 
gives  being  and  existence  to  others :  this  is  a 
name  ineffable  and  mysterious,  which  denolet 
the  eternity,  immutaliility,and  independency  of 
God,  and  the  infallible  certainty  of  his  word 
and  promises.  The  import  of  this  name  ii 
opened  and  predicted  of  Christ,  in  Rev.  1.  4,8. 
The  Hebrews  had  such  a  veneration  for  this 
holy  name,  that  they  never  pronounced  it,  hvt 
instead  of  it  made  7ise  of  that  of  Adonai, 
which  signifies  properly  My  Lords,  in  the 
plural  number :  and  of  Elohi,  Eloi,  or  Elohim. 
They  likewise  called  him  El,  which  signifies 
Strong;  or  Shaddai,  whereby  may  be  mjednt 
one  who  is  self-sufficient:  or,  according  to 
another  pronunciation,  the  Destroyer,  the 
pojoerful  One ;  or  Elion,  the  most  High,  or 
El-sabaoth,  the  God  of  Hosts  ;  or  Ja,  God. 

This  name  Jehovah,  in  the  Ihhtov;,  consists  of 
fovr  letters,  as  for  the  most  part  it  doth  in  all 
larguagcs.  Thus  among  the  Persians  thenamg 
is'Eoiv;  amoTi^JAc  Arabians,  Alia;  among  the 


GOD 

Assyrian!,  Adad  ;  among  tAe  Egyptians,  Quud 
or  QluB  ;  with  (AeGrecians,  ©lOf  ;  the  Latins, 
Deus;  the  French,  Dieu;  the  Simniards,  Uios; 
the  Italians,  Idio  ;  and  with  (Ae Germans,  (»ott. 
Hereof  some  give  this  reason,  that  the  number 
of  tour  is  a  perfect  number,  and  so  hereby  the 
perfection  of  God  is  noted.  Others  sui/,  that 
God  is  he  who  created  all  things,  consisting 
of  four  elements. 

God  declared  to  Moses,  that  he  7ens  not  known 
by  the  name  Jehovah,  to  Abruliiun,  Isnuc,  and 
Jacob;  and  yet  God  is  called  by  thii  name  Je- 
liovali,  in  Gen.  15.  7.  |  2().  24.  This  is  not  to 
be  understood  of  the  name,  but  of  the  thing 
signified  by  that  name.  For  that  denotes  all 
his  perfections,  and,  among  others,  the  con- 
stancy and  immutalnlity  of  his  nature  and 
Kill,  and  the  infallible  certainty  of  his  icord 
and  promises.  Jind,  though  this  was  believed 
iy  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob;  yet  God  had 
not  given  any  actual  being  to  his  promises  for 
their  deliverance,  by  the  accomplishment  of 
them  :  for  they  only  saw  the  promises  afar  o£'. 
This  expressio7i  may  likewise  be  understood 
comparatively ;  the.y  knew  this  but  darkly  and 
imperfectly,  which  was  now  to  be  made  known 
wore  clearly  and  fully. 

God  is  taken,  I.  Properly,  and  that  either  essen- 
lialiy, /or  the  whole  Trinity,  Isa.  40.  28.  John 
4.  24.    Ur,  personally,  (1)  For  the  Father,  Eph. 

I.  3.  (2)  The  .Son,  John  1. 1.  (3)  For  the  Holy 
Ghost,  Acts  5.  3,  4.  II.  Improperly,  (1)  For 
an  idol,  or  false  and  imaginary  god,  Exod.  22. 
20.  Judg.  11. 24.  (2)  For  princes,  magistrates, 
and  judges,  Exod.  22.  2S.  Peal.  H2.  1,  ti.  (3) 
For  the  ark  of  God.  Thus  when  the  ark  came 
into  the  camp  of  the  Israelites,  the  Philistines 
said,  God  is  come  into  their  camp  ;  this  name 
they  gave  to  the  ark,  as  they  used  to  do  to  the 
images  of  their  false  gods,  1  Sam.  4.  7.  The 
J^ord  tells  Moses,  Kzod.  7. 1,  See,  I  have  made 
tiiee  a  God  to  Pharcoh :  Thou  shall  represent 
my  person,  and  act  like  God,  by  requiring  his 
obedience  to  thy  commands,  and  by  punishing 
his  disobedience  with  such  punishmmts  as 
none  but  God  can  inflict;  to  which  end  thou 
Shalt  have  my  omnipotent  assistance.  Satan 
is  called  the  god  of  this  world,  2  Cor.  4.  4. 
because  he  rules  over  the  greatest  part  of  the 
viorld,  and  they  are  his  servants  and  slaves. 
St.  Panl,  in  Phil.  3.  19.  speaks  of  some  that 

.make  their  belly  their  god ;  that  is,  who  mind 
nothing  but  the  sati.ifaction  of  their  fleshly 
appetites.     God  forbid,  is  a  strong  form  of 
denial  with  a  loathing  of  what  is   objected, 
Rom.  3.  31.  I  9.  14.     In  the  original  it  is,  Let 
it  not  be. 
Gen.  10.  13.  called  name  of  Lord,  thou  (?.  seestme 
17.7.  to  be  a  G.  to  thee  and  thy  seed  after  thee 
31.  1.3. 1  am  the  (r.of  Beth-cl, where  thou  vowedst 
42.  28.  what  is  this  that  G.  hath  done  to  u.s  ? 
4.'>.  8.  it  was  not  you  that  sent  me  hither,  but  G. 
4S.  21.  behold,  I  die,  but  G.  shall  be  with  you 
F.rod.ft.l.  I  will  take  you  to  me,  and  be  to  you  a  G. 
18.1!).sive  thee  coimsel,  and  G.  shall  be  with  tlieij 
A'um.23. 23.  said  of  Jacob,  what  hath  f?. wrought! 
24.  23.  alas,  who  shall  live,  when  G.  doetli  this? 
Deut.  4.  7.  what  nation  which  hath  G.  so  nigh? 
29.  13.  that  he  may  be  to  thee  a  G.  as  he  siiid 

1  5am.  3.  17.  G.  do  so  and  more  also,  14.44.  |  25 

22.  2  .Sam.  3.  9,  35.  |  19.  13.  1  Kings 

2.23.  1  Kings  6.31. 
17.  4(5.  all  may  know  that  there  is  a  G.  in  Israel 
22.  3.  till  I  know  what  G.  will  do  for  me 

2  Sam.  22.  32.  who  is  O.  save  the  Lord  ?  Ps.  18.  31. 

1  Kings  18.  21.  if  the  Lord  be  G.  follow  him 

3".».  the  Lord,  he  is  the  G.  the  Lord,  he  is  the  G. 

2  Kings  19.  15.  thou  art  the  G.  even  thou  alone 
i2  CJir.  20.6.  O  Ld.  God,  art  not  thou  G.  in  heaven  ? 
Ezra  1.  3.  his  fl.  he  with  him,  he  is  the  G. 
JWA.  9.  17.  art  a  fi.  rcadv  to  pardon,  slow  to  anger 
Job  22.  13.  saycsl,  how  doth  G.  know  ?  Ps.  73. 11. 
}'s.  5.4.  art  not  a  G.  that  hast  pleasure  in  wickedn. 

52.  7.  the  man  that  made  not  G.  his  strength 
86. 10.  thou  art  great,  thou  art  <?. alone,  Isa.'.Vl.W. 
Jsa.  12.2.  behold,  G.  is  my  salvation,  I  will  trust 
44. 8.  is  there  a  G.  besides  me?  yea,  there  is  no  G. 

45.  22.  look  unto  me,  I  am  G.  there  is  none  else 

46.  9.  I  am  f/.  there  is  none  else,  none  like  mo 
Jcr.31.33. 1  will  bi-  their  G.  Iheymy  people, 32.:!8. 
A":cA.  28. 2  hasi  said,  I  am  a  god, I  ail  in  seat  of  Tr. 

9.  hut  thou  slinit  he  n  man,  ami  no  O. 
f/os.  8.6.  workman  made  it,  therefore  it  is  not  G. 

II.  9.  for  I  am  G.  and  not  man,  the  holy  One 
Mic.  7.  18.  who  is  a  G.  like  to  thee,  that  pardons? 
Mat.  1.23.  name  Emmanuel,  whirh  is  G.  with  U' 

6.24. ye  cannot  serve  G.nn(\  mammon,  AHftrlH. 13 
19.  17.  there  i«  none  good  hut  one,  Ihnf  is  fl 

Mark  la  18.  Liikt  18.  19. 

343 


GOD 

Mark  12.  32.  there  is  one  G.  and  none  other  but  he 
,/ohn  1.1.  the  Word  wun  withG'.and  Word  was  G. 

3.  2.  can  do  miracles,  e.\cept  (f.  lie  with  iiim 
8.  41.  they  said,  we  have  one  Father,  even  G. 

42.  for  1  proceeded  lortli,  and  cume  from  G. 
17.  3.  they  might  know  lliee,  the  only  true  G. 
Jicts  2.  22.  by  wonders,  which  G.  did  by  him 
5.  29.  we  ought  to  obey  G.  rather  than  men 

7.  y.  patriarchs  sold  Joseph,  but  G.  was  with  him 

10.  34.  I  perceive  G.  is  no  respecter  of  jiersons 
Horn.  3.  4.  let  G.  be  true,  and  every  man  a  liar 

8.  31.  if  G.  he  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us? 
15.  5.  now  the  G.  of  patience  and  consolation 

1  Ceir.  a.  0.  to  ud  there  is  but  one  G.  tlie  Fallier 
15.  28.  that  (;.  may  be  all  in  all 

2  Cor.  1.  21.  he  which  hath  anointed  us,  is  O. 

4.  4.  the  g.  of  this  world  hath  blinded  minds 
13.  11.  G.  of  love  and  jieace  shall  be  with  you 

iThess.  2.  4.  above  all  culled  (r.  so  that  he,  as  G. 
1  Tim.  3.  10.  G.  was  manifest  in  the  flesh 
Tit.  1.  16.  they  profess  that  they  know  G. 
Heb.  3.  4.  but  he  that  built  all  things  is  G. 
4.  10.  ceased  from  his  works,  as  G.  did  from  his 

8.  10. 1  will  be  to  tlieni  a  G.  they  to  nie  a  people 
1  .hhn  1.  5.  G.  is  light,  in  him  is  no  darkness  at  all 

4.  12.  no  mail  hath  seen  (t.  at  any  time 
Rev.  21.  3.  and  G.  himself  shall  be  with  them 

4.  G.  shall  wipe  away  all  tears 
7.  I  will  be  his  G.  and  he  shall  be  my  son 
Against  GOU. 
<rcn.39.9.  how  do  this  wickedne6s,and  sin  ag.G.7 
JVum.  21.  5.  the  jieople  spake  ag.  G.  Psal.  78.  19. 

1  Chron.  5.  25.  and  they  transgressed  against  G. 

2  Chron.  32.19.  spake  against  the  G.ol'Jerusalem 
./ob  15.  13.  thou  turnest  thy  spirit  against  G. 

25.  for  he  stretcheth  out  his  hand  against  O. 
34.  37.  he  multiplietli  his  words  against  G. 

Dan.  3. 29.  which  speak  amiss  ag.  G.  of  Shadrach 

11.  30.  speak  marvellous  things  ag.  G.  of  gods 
Hos.  13.  10.  she  hath  rebelled  against  her  G. 
Acts  5.  39.  lest  ye  be  found  to  tight  against  O. 

6. 11.  he  hath  spoken  blasphemous  words  ag.  O. 

23.  9.  let  us  not  fight  against  G. 
Rom.  8.  7.  the  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  G. 

9.  20.  who  art  thou  that  repliesl  against  G.? 
Rev.  13.  6.  opened  his  mouth  in  blasiiheiny  ag.  G. 

See  Al-.MIGHTV. 
Before  GOD. 
Gen.  6.  11.  the  earlh  was  corrupt  before  G. 
Kiod.lS.l'i.uu.t  bread  with  Moses'  father  beforcG. 
.Josh.  24.  1.  they  presented  themselves  before  G. 
.ludg.  21.  2.  the  people  abode  till  even  before  G. 

1  Chron.  13.  8.  David  and  all  Isr.  played  before  G 

10.  and  there  Uzza  died  before  G. 
IB.  1.  they  oflered  burnl-sacrifices  before  O. 

2  Chr.  33.12.  Manasseh  humbled  himself  6</ure  G. 
.34.  27.  Josiah's  heart  was  humbled  before  G. 

Ezra  7.  19.  deliver  before  the  (r.  of  Jerusalem 

Job  15.  4.  yea  thou  restrainest  prayer  before  G. 

Psal.  42.  2.  when  shall  I  appear  before  G.  7 
.56.  13.  may  walk  before  G.  in  light  of  the  living 
61.  7.  he  shall  abide  before  G.  for  ever 
08.  3.  let  the  righteous  rejoice  before  G. 
84.  7.  every  one  in  Zion  appearelh  before  G. 

Keel.  2.  20.  give  to  him  that  is  good  before  G 

5.  2.  heart  hasty  to  utter  any  thing  before  G. 
8.  13.  because  he  feareth  not  before  G. 

Dan.  2.  \  18.  would  desire  mercies  from  before  O. 

6.  10.  gave  thanks  before  his  G.  as  aforetime 

1 1.  louiid  him  making  supplication  before  G. 

26.  that  men  tremble  before  the  G.  of  Daniel 
Jyuke  1.  6.  they  were  both  righteous  before  G. 

12.  0.  not  one  of  them  is  forgotten  before  G. 

24.  19.  a  prophet  mighty  in  deed  and  w<ird  bcf.G. 
Acts  7.  46.  who  found  favour  before  G. 

10.  4.  thine  alms  are  come  for  a  memorial  hef.  G 

33.  we  are  all  here  present  before  G.  lo  hear 

23.  1.  I  lived  in  all  good  conscience  before  G. 

Rom.  2.  13.  not  hearers  of  law  are  just  before  G. 

3.  19.  the  world  may  become  guilty  before  G. 

4.  2.  hath  whereof  to  glory,  but  not  before  G. 
14.22.  hast  thou  faith?  have  it  to  thyself  ftr/urc  G 

2  Cor.  12.  19.  we  speak  before  G.  in  Chiist 
Gal.  1.  20.  behold,  before  G.  I  lie  not 
1  Thess.  3.   13.  he  may  establish  your  hearts 
before  G. 
1  Tim.  5.  4.  that  is  good  and  acceptable  before  O, 

21.  1  charge  thee  before  G.  2  Tim.  4.  1. 

.7nm.  1.  27.  pure  religiim  and  undefiled  before  G 

Rev.  3.  2.  not  found  thy  works  perfect  brfvre  G. 

9.13.  a  voice  from  the  horns  of  ihe  altar  before  G. 

12.  10.  which  accu.sed  them  brf.  TJ.day  and  night 

16.  19.  Ilabylon  came  in  renuMiibriince  before  G 

20. 12. 1  saw  dead,  small  and  great,  stand  bcf.  O 

See  CALLicn,  Ciioskn,  (Ommandkd. 

Eternal  GOO. 

Deut.  33.  27.  the  eternal  G.  is  thy  refuge 

Everla.iting  GC)!). 
Ccn.21.33.  Abraham  called  on  name  of  ever.  G. 
Iia.  40. 28.  the  tctr.  O.  fainteth  not,  nor  u  weoiy 


GOD 

7?0m. 16.26.  according  to  commandment  of  ever.O 

See  Father,  Fkar,  Forbid,  Gave,  Glorify. 

High  GOD. 

Oen.14.18.  was  priest  of  the  most  high  G.  Heb.T.l 

19.  blessed  be  Abraham  of  the  most  high  G. 

20.  blessed  be  the  moathigh  G.  which  defivercd 

22.  I  have  lift  up  my  hand  to  the  most  high  O 
Psal.5T.ii.  I  will  cry  unto  G.  most  high,  unto  God 

78.35.G.  was  their  rock,lheAi5'A  (;. their  redeemei 

50.  they  tempted  and  provoked  the  most  highO 

Dan.  3.  26.  servants  of  most  Ai^'A  G   C(mie  Ibrth 

4.  2.  shew  the  wonders  the  Ai^'A  G.  hath  wrought 

5.  18.  Ai'^A  G.  gave  Nebuchadnezzar  a  kingdom 

21.  till  he  knew  that  the  most  Aio-A  G.  ruled 
Mic.  6. 6.  and  bow  myself  before  the  most  Ai^A  O. 
Mark  5.7.thou  Son  of  the  most  Ai^'A  G.  Duke  8.28. 
Acts  16.17.  these  men  are  servants  of  most  AiVAO 

Holy  GOD. 
Josh.  24.  19.  he  is  a  holy  G.  he  is  a  jealous  God 
1. Sam. 6.20.  who  is  able  to  stand  before  this  holy  G.I 
Psal.  99.  9.  for  the  Lord  our  G.  is  holy 
Isa.  5.16.  G.  that  is  holy  shall  be  sanctitied  in  lighL 

GOD  of  heaven. 

2  Chron.  36.  23.  all  kingdoms  of  the  earth  hath  the 

Lord  Ct.  of  heaven  given  me,  Ezra  1.  2 

£zro5.n.  we  are  the  servants  of  the  G.  of  heaven 

12.  our  fathers  have  provoked  the  G.  of  heaven 

6.  9.  for  burnt-otferings  of  the  G.  of  heaven,  10. 

7.  12.  a  scribe  of  the  law  of  the  G.  of  heaven,2l. 

23.  whatever  is  commanded  by  the  G.  of  heaven 
J^eh.  1.  4.  I  fasted  and  prayed  before  the  G.  of  h. 

2.  4.  so  I  prayed  to  the  G.  of  heaven,  and  said 

Psal.  136.  26.  O  give  thanks  to  the  G.  of  heaven 

Dan.  2.  18.  they  would  desire  mercies  of  G.  of  K 

19.  then  Daniel  blessed  the  G.  of  heaven 

44.  the  G.  of  heaven  shall  set  up  a  kingdom 

Jonah  1.  9.  I  fear  the  Lord,  the  G.  of  heaven 

Rev.  11. 13.  the  remnant  gave  glory  to  G .of  heaven 

16.  11.  and  they  blasphemed  the  G.  of  heaven 

GOD  of  hosts. 
Psal.  80.  7.  turn  us  again,  O  G.  of  hosts,  19. 
14.  return,  we  beseech  thee,  O  G.  of  hosts 
A/nos  5. 27.  saith  Lord,  whose  name  is  the  G.ofh- 
See  Lord  God.  « 

GOD  is. 
Gen.  21.22.  G.  is  with  thee  in  all  that  thou  doert 
31.  50.  see,  G.  is  witness  betwixt  me  and  thee 
Exod.  20. 20.  fear  not,  for  G.  is  come  to  jirove  yoa 
J^um.  23.  19.  G.  is  not  a  man,  that  he  should  lie 
7J<«^3.24.what  G.is  there  in  heaven  who  can  del 
33.27.  the  eternal  G.is  thy  refuge,  and  underneath 
JosA.24.19.  our  holy  G.  is  a  jealous  God,  JVaA.1.2. 

1  Sam.  4. 7.  G.  is  come  into  the  camp,  woe  unto  lu 

10.  7.  for  G.  is  come  with  thee,  1  Chron.  17.  2. 
28. 15.  G.  t>  departed  from  me,  he  answereth  not 

2  Sam.  22.  33.  G.  is  my  strength  and  power 

1  C'Aro7t.l4.15.  G.  is  g(me  forth  before  thee  to  smite 

2  Chr.  13. 12.  G.  himself  is  with  us  for  our  captain 
.fob  33. 12. 1  answer  thee,  O.  is  greater  than  man 

36.  .5.  behold,  G.  is  mighty  and  despisctli  not  any 

26.  behold,  G.  is  great,  and  we  know  him  not 

Psal.  1. 11.  G.  is  angry  with  the  wicked  everyday 

10.4.  G.  is  not  in  all  his  thoughts,  not  seek  after  G. 
14.  5.  for  G.  is  in  the  generation  of  the  righteous 
33.  12.  blessed  nation,  whose  G.  is  Lord,  144. 15. 
40.  1.  G.  is  our  refuge  and  strength,  62.  8. 

ri.G. is  in  the  midst  oflier,she  shall  not  be  moved 

47.5.  G.  is  gone  up  with  a  shout||7.  for  G.is  King 
48.  3.  G.  is  known  in  her  palaces  for  a  refuge 
50.  6.  for  G.  is  judge  himself,  Silah,  75.  7.        t 
54.  4.  behold,  G.  is  my  helper,  Lord  is  with  thctn 
56.  9.  turn  back ;  this  I  know,  for  G.  is  for  me 
59.  9.  I  will  wait,  for  G.  is  my  defence,  17. 

62.  7.  in  G.  is  my  salvation  and  glory,  Isa.  12.  2. 
C8.5.a  father  of  the  fatherless  isG.in  his  habitation 
73.1. truly  ('/.I'sgood  to  Israel,  even  to  such  as  ore 
2().<7.i.»  strength  of  my  heart, and  portion  forever 
74. 12.  G.  is  my  King  of  old,  working  salvation 
89.  7.  G.  is  greatly  to  be  feared  in  the  assembly 
110.  5.  gracious  is  the  Lord,  our  G.  is  merciful 
118.  27.  G.  is  the  Lord  that  hath  shewed  us  light 
Eccl.  5.  2.  for  G.  is  in  heaven,  and  thou  on  earth 
/.iu.5.16.f.i.  that  is  holv  shall  bo  sanctified  in  right. 
8. 10.  for  G.  is  with  u's)|45. 14.  surely  G.  is  in  thee. 
Zeck.  8.  23.  we  have  heard  that  G.  is  with  you 
Jfar. 3.9.  r;.  IX  able  of  these  stones  to  raise, /,Ki-('3.8. 
22.  32.  G.  is  not  God  of  the  dead,  but  of  the  living 
John  3.  33.  haih  set  to  his  seal  that  G.  is  true 
4.  24.  G.  is  a  Spirit  ||  13.  31.  G.  is  glorified  in  him 
.lets  10.  34.  G.  is  no  respecter  of  persons 
Rom.  1.  9.  for  G.  is  my  witness,  whom  I  serve 

11.  2:t.  for  G.  is  able  to  grafTthom  in  ng;iin 
14.  4.  for  G.  is  able  lo  make  him  stanil 

1  Ciir.  1.  9.  G.  is  faithful,  by  whom  ye  were  called 
in.  13.  G.  is  faithful  who  will  not  sufier  you 
14.  2.1.  and  report  that  G.  is  in  you  of  a  truth 

33.  G.  is  not  aullior  of  confuson,  but  of  peace 

2  On-.I.IS.  as  G.is  trno,our  word  was  not  yea,  nay 
9.  H.  (7.  is  able  to  make  all  grace  abound  to  yoO 

Gal.  X  SO.  but  a.  u  one  t|  6. 7.  O.ia  not  mocked 


GOD 

Eph.  2.4.  but  Cwho  ii  rich  in  mercy  quickened  us 
F/iU.  1.8.  G.  ii  my  record,  how  greatly  1  long  after 

3.  19.  for  many  walk,  whose  g.  is  their  belly 

1  T'Aei«.2.5.iiorcloakofcovetousnes3,(5.iswitne8S 
i/ei.ti.lO. Gf.(S  not  unrighteous  to  forget  your  work 

11.  Itj.  G.  is  not  ashamed  to  be  called  their  God 

12.  29.  for  our  O.  is  a  consuming  tire 

13.  16.  for  with  such  sacritices  G.  is  well  pleased 
1  Jo/m  1.  5   O.  is  light  ||  4.  8.  for  O.  is  love,  16. 

3.20.  O.  is  greater  than  our  heart,  knows  all  things 

GOD  of  Jsrael. 
Exod.  24. 10.  they  went  up,  and  saw  the  O.  of  Isr. 
J\i'am.  16.  9.  the  G.  of  Israel  hath  separated  you 
JwsA.7.19.  to  give  glory  to  the  O.  of  Isa.  1  Sa;n.6.5. 

13.  33.  the  O.  of  Israel  was  their  inheritance 

22. 16. what  trespass  ye  committed  'a^^.G, of  Israel 
24.  what  have  ye  to  do  with  the  O.  of  Israel  ? 

24.  23.  incline  your  heart  to  the  G.  of  Israel 
Judff. 11.23. G.oflsraelilispoHsessed  the  Amorites 
Jiuth  2.12.  a  full  reward  be  given  thee  off?,  of  Isr. 
1  Sam.  1.  17.  the  G.  of  Israel  grant  thy  petition 

5.  11.  send  away  the  ark  of  the  G.  of  Israel 

1  Kings  8.23. L.  G.of  Isr.no  G.  like  thee,  2CAr.6.14. 
14. 13.  some  good  thing  toward  the  G.  of  Israel 

1  Chron.  4.  10.  Jabez  called  on  the  G.  of  Israel 
17.  24.  the  Lord  of  hosts  is  the  G.  of  Israel 

2  Chron.  15. 13.  who  would  not  seek  the  G.of  Isr.? 
£ira  7. 15.  have  freely  olfered  to  the  G.  of  Israel 

9.  4.  trembled  at  the  words  of  the  O.  of  Israel 
Ps.4l.  13.  blessed  betheL.G.o//5r.  from  everlast. 

to  everlasting,  72.  18.  |  106.  48.  Luke  1.  68 
Isa.  41. 17. 1  the  G.  of  Israel  will  not  forsake  them 

45. 3.  I  which  call  thee  by  name,  am  G.  of  Israel 

48.  2.  they  stay  themselves  on  the  G.  of  Israel 
Ezek.  8.  4.  the  glory  of  the  G.  of  Israel  was  there 
Mat.  15.31.  the  multitude  gloritiedthe  G.of  Israel 

Living  GOD. 
Deut.  5.  26.  that  heard  the  voice  of  the  living  G. 
./»«/i.3.10. hereby  know  the  living  G.  is  among  you 
lSa)n.l7.2i).should  defy  the  armies  oi living  G.  36. 
2  Kings  19.  4.  whom  the  king  of  Assyria  hath  sent 
to  reproach  the  living  G.  16.  Isa.  37.  4,  17. 
PsaJ. 42.2.  my  soul  thirsteth  for  God,  ihelieing  G. 

84. 2.  my  heart  and  tlesh  crieth  out  for  living  G. 
Jer.  10. 10.  he  is  the  living  G.  an  everlasting  King 

23.  36.  have  perverted  the  words  of  the  living  G. 
Dan.  6.26.  he  is  the  living  fr.andstedfast  for  ever 
/Tos.l.lO.shall  be  said,  ye  are  sons  of  the  living  G. 
Mat.  16. 16.  art  Christ,  Son  oi living  G.  John  6.69. 

26.  63.  I  adjure  thee  by  the  living  G.  tell  us 
Jicts  14.15.turii  from  these  vanities  to  the  livingG 
yjom.9.26.they  shall  be  called  children  oUiving  O. 
2  Cor.  3.  3.  but  with  the  Spirit  of  the  living  G. 

6.  16.  for  ye  are  the  temple  of  the  living  G. 

1  Thess.  1.9.  from  idols  to  serve  living  and  true  G. 

1  Tim.  3.  15.  which  is  the  church  of  the  living  G. 

4.  10.  because  we  trust  in  the  living  G.  6.  17. 
Heb.3.12.an  evil  heart  in  departing  from  living  G. 

9.14.purge  your  conscience  to  serve  the  living  G. 
10. 31.  it  is  fearful  to  fall  into  hands  of  living  G. 

12.  22.  ye  are  come  to  Zion,  the  city  of  liviyig  G. 
Rev.  7.  2.  angel  having  the  seal  of  the  living  G. 

Lord  God,  Lord  his  God, Lord  my,  Lord 
our,  their,  your.  Goo.     See  these  in  the 
divisions  of  the  word  Lord. 
Merciful  GOD. 
.Exod. 34. 6. the  Tjord,the  l^nrdG./nercif al,grac\ous 
Deut.  4.  31.  the  Lord  thy  God  is  a  meiciful  G. 

2  Chr.  30.  9.  Lord  your  G.  is  merciful  if  ye  turn 
JVeA.  9.  31.  thou  art  a  gracious  and  merciful  G. 
PsaMlO.o.gracious  is  the  Lord,  our  O.  is  merciful 
Jonah  4.  2.  I  knew  that  thou  art  a  G.  merciful 

Mighty  GOD. 
Oe7i.49.24.  bow  abode  by  hands  ofjni^rA.fr.of  Jac. 
Deut.l.'i]..  Lord  is  among  you,  a  mighty  G.  10.17. 
JVeA.  9.  32.  now  therefore  our  God,  the  mighty  G. 
yo430.5.behold,f?.is  7nj>At//,anddespisethnot  any 
Psal.  50.  1.  the  mighty  G.  the  Lord  hath  spoken 
132.  2.  how  he  vowed  to  the  mighty  G.  of.Tacob 
5.  till  I  find  a  habitation  for  mighty  G.  of  Jacob 
Isa.  9.  6.  his  name  shall  be  called  the  mighty  G. 

10.  21.  the  remnant  shall  return  to  the  mighty  G. 
Jer.  32. 18.  mighty  (r.the  Lord  of  hosts  is  his  name 
Hab.X.Vi.  O  mighty  G.  thou  hast  established  them 

My  GOV). 
<^n.2S.21.  Jacob  said,  then  shall  theLd.be  my  G. 
Kiod.  15.2.  he  is  my  G.  my  father's  G.\  will  e.\alt 
huth  l.lfi.  thy  people  be  my  people,  thy  God  myO. 
2  Sam.  22.  7. 1  cried  to  my  f?.  he  heard,  Psal.  13. 0. 

22.  and  have  not  departeil  from  my  G.  Ps.  18.21. 

30.  by  my  G.l  have  leaped  over  a  wall,  P«.18.29. 
1  Chr.  28. 20.  for  God,  even  my  G.  will  be  with  thee 
8  Chr.  18.  13.  what  my  G.  sailh,  that  will  I  speak 
JVeh.  5.  19.  think  upon  me,  rny  G.  for  good,  13. 31. 

13.  14.  remember  me,  my  G.  concerning  this,  22. 
Psal.22.}.my  G.my  O. why  hast  thou  forsaken  me? 

why  so  far  from  helping  me  ?  Mat.  27.  46. 
10.  thou  art  my  G.  from  my  mother's  belly 
31.  14.  I  trusted  in  thee,  I  said,  thou  art  my  O. 
38.  21.  O  my  O.  be  not  far  from  me,  71.  12. 
243 


GOD 

Ps.  89. 26.  he  shall  cry,  thou  art  my  Father,  my  O. 

104.  33.  I  \vill  sing  praise  to  my  G.  146.  2. 

118.  28.  thou  art  my  G  and  1  will  praise  thee 

145. 1.  I  will  e.xtol  thee,  my  G.  O  King,  and  bless 
Prov.  30.  9.  and  take  the  name  of  my  G.  in  vain 
Isa.  7.  13.  but  will  ye  weary  viy  G.  also  .' 

40.  27.  my  judgment  is  passed  over  from  my  G. 

44.  17.  he  sailh,  deliver  me,  for  thou  art  my  G. 

61.  10.  my  soul  shall  be  joyful  in  my  G. 
Z)a(i.6.22.7rtyG.halh  sent  his  angel,hath  shut  lions' 
//os.2.23.  they  shall  say,  thou  art  my  G.  Zech.l'i.'i 

8.  2.  Israel  shall  cry  to  me,  my  G.we  know  thee 

9.  17.  my  G.  will  cast  them  away,  not  hearken 
Mic.  7.  7.  I  will  wait,  for  my  G.  will  hear  me 
John  20.17.  and  say,  I  ascend  to  my  G.and  yourG. 

28.  Thomas  answered  and  said,  my  L.and  myG 
Horn.  1.  8. 1  thank  my  G.  through  Jesus  Christ,  fur 
you  all,  1  Cor.  1.  4. 1 14.18.  Phil.  1.3.  Philem.  4. 
2  Cor.  12. 21.  lest  when  I  come,  my  G.  will  humble 
Phil.  4.  19,.7nj/  O.  shall  supply  all  your  need 
Hcv.  3.  12.  I  will  write  on  him  the  name  of  7;iy  G 
See  Lord  7ny  God, 
JVo  GOD. 
Deut.32.30. 1,  even  I  am  he,  there  is  no  G.with  me 

1  Kings  8. 23.  there  is  no  G.  like  thee,  2  Chr.  6.14. 

2  Kings  1.  16.  is  it  because  there  is  7io  G.  in  Israel  ? 

5.  15.  now  I  know  there  is  no  G.  in  all  the  earth 
2  Chron. 'a.  15.  no  G.  of  any  nation  able  to  deliver 
Psal.  14. 1.  the  fool  hath  said,  there  is  710  G.  53. 1. 
Isa.  43.  10.  before  me  there  was  710  G.  formed 

44.  6.  besides  me  there  is  no  G.  8.  ]  45.  5,  14,  21. 
Eze/i.  28.  9.  but  thou  shalt  be  a  man,  and  no  G. 
Hos.  13.  4.  and  thou  shalt  know  no  O.  but  me 

0  GOD. 
JVum.  12.  13.  heal  her  now,  0  G.  1  beseech  thee 
Judg.  16.  28.  strengthen  me,  only  this  once,  O  G. 
Psal.  4.  1.  hear  me,  O  G.  of  my  righteousness 

25. 22.  redeem  Israel,  O  G.  out  of  all  his  troubles 

51.  14.  deliver  me  from  blood-guiltiness,  O  G. 

56. 12.  thy  vows  are  upon  me,  O  G.l  will  render 
Isa.  64.  4.  nor  hath  the  eye  seen,  0  G.  besides  thee 
Heb.  10. 7. 1  said,  lo,  I  come  to  do  thy  will,  O  G.9. 

Of  GOD. 
Exod.  9.t28.  entreat  there  be  no  more  voices  of  G. 
1  Sam.  14.  1 15.  so  it  was  a  trembling  of  G. 
2CAr.l0.15.  hearkened  not,  for  the  cause  was  of  G. 

25.20.  Amaziah  would  not  hear,  for  it  came  of  G. 
Psal.  7. 10.  my  defence  is6p/G.wh6saveth  upright 
Isa.  29. 1 1.  woe  to  the  lion  of  G.  add  year  to  year 

53.4. we  did  esteem  him  smitten  of  G.and  afflicted 
Mat.  16.  23.  savourest  not  things  of  G.  Mark  8.33. 
John  1. 13.  born  not  of  the  will  of  man,  but  of  G. 

6.  46.  he  which  is  of  G.  hath  seen  the  Father 

7.  17.  shall  know  of  doctrine  v.liether  it  be  ofG. 

8.  47.  he  that  is  of  G.  heareth :  ye  are  not  of  G. 
9.16.  this  man  is  not  ()i/G.l|33.if  he  were  not  of  G. 

12.  43.  loved  the  praise  of  men  more  than  of  G. 
Jicts  5.  .'♦9.  if  it  be  of  G.  ye  cannot  overthrow  it 
Rom.  2.  29.  whoso  praise  ia  not  of  men,  but  of  G 

9.  16.  but  of  G.  that  sheweth  mercy 

13.  1.  no  power  but  of  G.  powers  ordained  ofG. 

1  Cut-.  1.  30.  who  of  G.  is  made  unto  us  wisdom 
6.  19.  which  ye  have  of  G.  ye  are  not  your  own 
11.  12.  but  all  things  are  of  G.  2  Cor.  5.  18. 

2  Cor.2.17.  but  as  of  G.  in  the  sight  of  G.  speak  we 
3.  5.  we  ace  not  sulRcicnt,  our  sufficiency  is  of  G. 

Phil.  1.28.  but  to  you  of  salvation,  and  that  «/G. 
3.  9.  the  righteousness  which  is  of  G.  by  faith 
Heb.  5.  4.  he  that  was  called  of  G.  as  was  Aaron 
1  .Tohn  3.  10.  doeth  not  righteousness,  is  not  of  G. 
4.1.  beloved,  try  the  spirits  whether  they  are  of  G. 
3.  confesseth  not  that  Christ  is  come,  is  not  of  G. 
6.  we  areo/G.||5.19.  we  know  that  we  are  o/G. 

3  John  11.  follow  good,  he  that  doeth  good  is  of  G. 
See  Angel,  Ark,  Born,  Children,  Chosen, 

Church,  Counsel,  Fear,  Glory,  Grace, 
Hand,  House,  Kingdom,  Knowledge,  Love, 
Man,  People,  Power,  Servant,  Sight,  Son, 
Sons,  Spirit,  Will,  Words,  Work, Works, 
World,  Wkath. 

077r  GOD. 

KTod.5.8.  they  cry,  let  us  go  and  sacrifice  to  our  G. 

Drut.  31.  17.  because  our  O.  is  not  among  us 
32.  3.  ascribe  ye  greatness  unto  our  G. 

.Josh.  24.  18.  we  will  serve  the  I^ord,  he  is  our  G. 

Judg.  10.  10.  because  wp  have  forsaken  our  G. 

1  Sam.  2.  2.  neither  is  thbre  any  rock  like  our  G. 

2  Sa7«.10.12.  and  let  us  play  the  men  for  our  people, 

and  for  the  cities  of  our  G.  1  Chron.  19.  13. 
22.32.  who  is  a  rock,  save  oitr  G.?  Psal.  18.  31. 

1  Chr.  29. 13.  now  therefore,  our  G.  we  thank  thee 

2  Chron.  2.  5.  for  great  is  our  G.  above  all  gods 
14.11.  O  Lord,  thou  art  ojtr  G.let  not  man  prevail 
20.  7.  art  not  thou  our  G.  who  didst  drive  out 

Ezra^.'iO.  now,  O  our  G.  what  shall  we  sav  after? 

.VrA.4.4.hear,0  our  G.||20.  our  G. shall  fight  for  us 
6.  16.  that  this  work  was  wrought  of  our  G. 
9.  32.  now  therefore  our  G.  the  great,  mighty  God 
13.  2.  ojir  G.  turned  the  curse  into  a  blessing 

P*.40.3.hath  put  a  new  song,  even  praise  to  our  G. 


GOD 

Psal.  48  14.  this  God  is  our  G.  for  ever  and  evef 
50.  3.  our  G.  shall  come  and  not  keep  silencB 

67.  6.  and  God,  even  our  own  G.  shall  bless  ua 

68.  20.  he  that  is  our  O.  is  the  God  of  salvation 
77.  13.  who  is  so  great  a  God  as  our  G.  ? 

95.7.  he  is  our  G. II  115.3.  our  G.  is  in  the  heavena 
116.  5.  gracious  is  the  Lord,  our  G.  is  merciful 
Isa.  25. 9.  lo,  this  is  our  G.  we  have  waited  for  him 
55.  7.  to  our  G.  for  he  will  abundantly  pardon 

59.  13.  and  departing  away  t'rom  our  G. 

61. 2.  to  proclaim  the  day  of  vengeance  of  our  O 
L)an.3.17.  our  G.  whom  we  serve  it-  able  to  deUver 
Zech.  9.  7.  he  that  remainelh  shall  be  for  our  G. 

1  Cor.6.11.ye  are  sanctified  by  the  Spirit  of  our  O 
Heb.  12.  29.  for  our  G.  is  a  consuming  fire 
Hev.r>.H).  hast  made  us  to  our  G.  kings  and  priests 

7.10.  salvation  to  our  G.Who  sitteth  on  the  throne 
12.  blessing,  and  honour,  and  power  be  to  our  G. 
See  Peace,  Said,  Saith,  Serve,  Sent,  Speak, 
Speed,  Spoken. 

Their  GOD. 
Ge7(.17.8. 1  will  be  their  G.  Exod.20.i5.  .Jer.  24.7. 
I  31.  33.  I  32.  38.  Ezek.  11.  20.  j  34.  24.  |  37.  23, 
27.  Zech.  8.  8.  2  Cor.  6.  16.  Rev.  21.  3. 
/.cB.21.6.they  shall  be  holy  to  their  G.for  ofl^eringa 
of  the  Lord,  and  bread  oi' their  G.  they  do  ofler 
26.  45.  that  1  might  be  their  G.  Ezek.  14.  11. 

2  Sa7H^7.24.  thou  art  become  their  G.  1  CAr.17.22. 
Ezra  5.  5.  the  eye  of  their  G.  was  on  the  elders 
Psal.  79. 10.  where  is  their  G.  ?  115.  2.  Joel  2. 17. 
Isa.  8.  19.  should  not  a  people  seek  to  their  G.  ? 

21.  shall  fret,  and  curse  their  king,  and  their  G. 

58.  2.  and  forsook  not  the  ordinance  of  their  O. 
Jer.  5.4.  they  know  not  thejudgment  of  Meir  G.5. 
Dan.  11.  32.  but  the  people  that  know  their  G. 
Hos.  4.  12.  have  gone  a  whor.  from  under  their  O. 

5.  4.  not  frame  their  doings  to  turn  to  their  G. 
ZecA.12.5.my  strength  in  the  Lord  of  hosts  their  O. 
Heb.  11.16.  he  is  not  ashamed  to  be  called  their  O. 
See  Lord  their  God. 
Thy  GOD. 
Lev.  19.  14.  thou  shalt  fear  thy  G.  25.  17,  36,  43. 
Lent.  10.  21.  he  is  thy  praise,  and  he  is  thy  G. 

26.17.  hast  avouched  this  day  the  Ld.to  be  thy  G. 
Ruth  1. 16.  thy  people  my  people,  thy  G.  my  God 
2Kings  19.10.1et  not  <AyG.deceive  thee,  /6'a.37.10. 

1  CAr.  12. 18.  peace  to  thee,  for  thy  G.  helpeth  thee 

2  C'Ar.9.8.  because  Ihy  G. loved  Isr.  made  thee  king 
Ezra  7.  14.  according  to  law  of  thy  G.  in  thy  hand 

25.  after  the  wisdom  of  thy  G.  laws  of  thy  G. 
JVeh.  9.  18.  this  is  thy  G.  that  brought  thee  up 
Ps.  42.3.  continually  sav  tome,  irtiere  is  rAr/G.?  10. 
45.  7.  God,  thy  G.  hath  anointed  thee,  Heb.  1.9. 

50.  7.  hear,  O  Israel,  I  am  God,  even  thy  G. 
68.  23.  thy  G.  hath  qomnianded  thy  strength 
147.  12.  praise  the  Lord,  praise  thy  G.  O  Zion 

Isa.  41.  10.  be  not  dismayed,  for  I  am  thy  G. 

51.  20   they  are  full  of  the  rebuke  of  thy  G. 
.52.  7.  that  saith  to  Zion,  thy  G.  reigneth 

60.  19.  Lord  shall  be  a  light,  and  thy  G.  thy  glory 
62.  5.  so  shall  thy  G.  rejoice  over  thee 

Dan.  6. 16.  thy  G.  whom  thou  servest  will  deliver 
20.  is  thyG.whom  thou  servest  continually  able? 

10.  12.  and  to  chasten  thyself  before  thy  O. 
Hos.i.  6.  thou  hast  forgotten  the  law  of  thy  O. 

9.  1.  thou  hast  gone  a  whoring  from  thy  G. 

12.  6.  turn  thou  to  thy  G.  and  wait  on  thy  G. 
JImos  4.  12.  prepare  to  meet  thy  G.  O  Israel 
.Jonah.  1.  6.  O  sleeper,  arise,  call  upon  thy  G. 
Mic.  6.  8.  and  to  walk  humbly  with  thy  G. 
See  Lord  thy  God. 
To,  or  unto  GOD. 
Gen.  40.  8.  do  not  interpretations  belong  to  G.  7 
F.iod.2.2X  ihey  cried,  and  their  cry  came  up  to  G 
Lev.  21.  7.  for  he  is  holy  uti^o  his  G. 
Deut.  32.  17.  sac.  to  devils,  not  to  G.l  Cor.  10. 20 

33.  26.  there  is  none  like  to  the  G.  of  Jeshurun 
.Judg.  13. 5.  shall  be  a  Nazarite  unto  G.  7.  |  16. 17 
1  .S«;7(.10.3.shall  meet  thee  three  men  going  up  to  G 
1  Chron.  26.  32.  for  every  matter  pertaining  to  O, 
.Job  22.  2.  can  a  man  be  profitable  to  G.? 

34.  31.  surely  it  is  meet  to  be  said  unto  G.  I  have 
Fsa/.  62. 11. 1  have  heard,  power  belongeth  to  G 

68.20.  to  G.the  Lord  belong  the  issues  from  death 
31.  Ethiopia  shall  stretch  her  hands  to  G. 
73.  29.  it  is  good  for  me  to  draw  near  to  G. 
77.  1.  I  cried  to  G.  even  to  G.  with  my  voice 
F.ccl.  12.  7.  and  the  spirit  shall  return  unto  G. 
Isa.  58.  2.  they  take  delight  in  approaching  to  G. 
Lam.  3.41.  \el  us  lift  up  our  heart  with  hands  «o  G. 
Mat.  22.  21.  render  unto  G.  the  things  which  are 
God's,  Mark  12.  17.  Luke  20.  25. 
.John  13.  3.  that  he  was  come  from  God, went  to  G. 
Jlcts  4.  19.  to  hearken  to  you  more  than  unto  G. 
5.  4.  Ihou  hast  not  lied  unto  men,  f""  unto  G. 
26. 18.  to  turn  them  from  power  of  Satan  UTito  O. 
20.  turn  tn  G.  and  do  works  meet  for  repentanca 
Rom.  6. 10.  he  liveth  unto  G.ljll.  but  alive  unto  O 
13.  yield  yourselves  unto  G.  as  alive  from  dead 
7.  4.  that  we  should  bring  forth  fruit  unto  O. 


GOD 

Rdm.12.1. present  your  bodies  a  living  sac.  unto  G. 

14.  I'J.  every  one  give  accouiuof  luinscirto  O. 
1  Cor.  a.  -i.  8j)(.'ukelh  not  unio  men  but  unlo  (i. 

15.  '2i.  he  s\i;i\\  bave  delivered  U|i  kingdom  to  O. 
Phil.  4, 20.  now  unto  G.  and  our  Father  be  glory 
//c4.7.25.1io  is  able  to  save  tbcni  thalcome  untuG. 

11.  (i.  he  that  comctb  to  G.  must  beheve  tliat  lie  is 

12.  2J.  but  ye  are  come  to  G.  the  Judge  of  all 
Jam.  4.  7.  submit  yourselves  therefore  tu  G. 

I  f  e«.3.18.CIirisl  once  sulFerecl,  might  bring  uatuG. 

4.  t).  hut  live  according  to  G.  in  the  Spirit 
Rev.  .5.1).  thou  hast  redeemed  us  to  G.  by  tliy  blood 

12.5.her  child  was  caught  up  unlo  G.lo  his  llirunc 

14. 4.  being  the  fust-lVuils  unlo  O.  and  the  Lamb 

See  Tri'E. 

H'M  UUI). 

Gm.  .5.22  Enorh  walked  icit/i  G.  and  was  not,  24. 

6.  M.  Noah  wulked||;i2.-Jri.Jaeob  liath  power  w.G. 
Ezod.H).\~.  .Moses brought  people  to  meet  with  G. 
1  Sam.  14.  45.  he  hath  wrought  wilh  G.  this  day 
S  Ham.  23.  r>.  iiltljough  my  house  be  not  so  wit/i  G. 
"Chron.  35.  21.  forbear  from  meddling  with  O. 
Job  'J.  2.  how  should  man  be  just  icilh  G.  ? 

13.  3.  and  I  desire  to  reason  with  G. 

10  21.  U  ihat  one  might  i)leadfor  a  man  with  G. 

2.5.  4.  how  then  can  a  man  be  justified  icilh  G.  ? 

27.  13.  this  the  portion  of  a  wicked  man  icilh  G. 

34.  9.  that  he  should  delight  him.self  with  G. 
2).  that  he  should  enter  into  judgment  with  G. 

37.  22.  with  G.  is  terrible  majesty 
r.^al.  78.  H.  whose  spirit  is  not  stedfast  with  G. 
Uos.  11.  12.  but  Juilah  iet  ruleth  with  G. 

12.  2.  Jacob  by  his  strcmgili  had  power  with  G. 
Mat.  19.  2t).  with  men  this  is  impossible,  but  with 
G.  all  Ihings  are  possible,  Mark  10.27.  J^uke 
1.  37. 1  ]H.  27. 
J,ukc  1.  30.  for  thou  hast  found  favour  wilh  G. 

2.  52.  Jesus  increased  in  favour  with  G.  and  man 
John  1.  l.the  Word  was  wilh  G.  the  Word  was  G. 

5.  18.  making  himself  equal  wilh  G.  I'hil.  2.  li. 
Kom.  2.  11.  there  is  no  respect  of  persons  u;i7/j  G. 

5-1. being  justified  by  faith, we  have  peace  wilhG. 
9  14.  is  tlieie  unrighleousn.  with  G.  ?  God  forbid 

1  Cor.  3.  9.  we  are  labourers  t<igethcr  wilh  (f. 

19.  the  wisdom  of  this  world  is  foolislin.  with  G. 

7.  21.  let  every  man  therein  abide  with  G. 

2  T/icss.l.d.ii  righteous  Ih'mg with  G.lo  recompense 
Jam.  4. 4.  the  friendship  of  world  is  enmity  irith  G. 
l/'et.2.20.tako  patiently,this  is  ncrrptabic  icilh  G. 

IVoitld  God,  .S'ce  Would. 

Your  GOD. 

Gfn.i^.i^.yourG.hMh  given  you  treasure  in  sacks 

F.xiid.  8. 2.").  go  ye,  sacrifice  to  ijour  G.  in  iIk;  land 

/.CO.  11.  45.  Lord  that  bringi'th  vou  out  of  Ki'vpl 

to  be  your  G.  22.  33.  |  2.).3-3.  J\''im.  \5.'i\. 

20.12. 1  will  be  your  a.  and  ye  shall  be  my  people, 

J,r.  7.  23.  I  II.  4.  I  30.  22.  F.zek.  30.  2.-\ 

J'/'uvi.  10. 10.  be  to  you  a  memorial  before  your  G. 

15.  40.  do  my  commandments,  be  holy  to  your  G. 

.To^h.  24.  27.  stone  be  witness,  lest  ye  deny  your  G. 

1  .fdr/i.  10.  19.  ye  have  this  day  rejected  your  G. 

2  Chrov.  :^2.  14.  that  your  G.  should  deliver  you 

1.5.  how  miirli  less  shall  your  G.  deliver  you  ? 
F.zra  4. 2  let  us  build,  for  we  seek  your  (7. as  ye  do 
Jsi.  35.  4.  your  G.  will  come  with  vengeance 
40.  1.  Comfort  ye  my  people,  saith  your  G. 

9.  say  to  the  cities  of  Judah,  behold  your  G. 
59.2.inii|uitiisscparated  between  you  iindyo«r<7. 
y.zek.  3-1.  31.  I  ain  your  G.  saitli  the  Lord  God 
Dan.  2.47.  of  a  truth  it  is,  your  G.  is  a  God  of  guds 
//««.!. 9.ye  arc  not  my  people,  I  will  not  be  yourG. 
John  R.  54.  of  whom  ye  say  I  hat  he  is  your  G. 
-20.  17.  I  ascend  to  my  God  anil  your  G. 
See  LoKi)  ynur  Gud. 
GOUDKHS. 
XKinira  11.5.  folom.went  after  the^.of  Zidoniane 

3.3.  they  have  worshipped  Ashtorclh,  the  "-. 

Acta  19.27.  the  tcmplcof great ^.Diana  bcdespised 

3.5.  Ephcsians  are  worshippers  of  the  ^.  Diana 

37.  nor  yet  are  thev  hhisphemers  of  your  "•. 

GODHEAD. 

Jleti  17.  29.  nor  think  that  the  /r.  in  like  to  gold 

Rom.  1.  20.  evi-n  his  eternal  power  and  g. 

Col%9.  inhimdwelleth  the  fulnessof  the  £'.  bodily 

GODLY. 
Tsal.  4.  3.  the  TiOrd  hath  set  apart  him  thai  is  g. 
12.  1.  h<lp,  Lord,  for  the  g.  man  coiiseth 
32.  f>.  for  thill  shall  every  one  Ihat  is  p.  prny 
Mie.  7. 1 2.  the  i'.  man  in  |>.Tisli.d  out  of  the  earth 
Mai.  2.  15.  that  he  miglit  seek  a  g.  seed 
2  Cor.  1.  12.  in  g.  sincrily  hail  our  cimvemation 
7.  9.  yc  were  ninde  norry  alter  a  g.  manner,  11. 

10.  f'lr^'.  sorrow  workelh  repentance 
11.  2.  I  am  jcnliins  over  you  vs'ith  «•.  jealousy 
2  Tim.  3.  12.  all  that  will  live  g.  in  Christ,  siitTer 
Til.  2.  12.  thnt  ye  should  live  g.  in  thii  world 
Hob.  12.  28.  let  ug  serve  God  with  reverence  and 

g.  fear 
S  PH.  1.  9.  the  Lord  knoweth  hnw  fo  deliver  the  g. 
2  John  Q.  if  thou  brine  forward  afler  ag.  sort 


GOD 

GODLINESS. 

Jsa.5'7.  jl.  Old  men  of^.  are  taken  away 

1  'J'lm.  2.  2.  that  wo  may  lead  a  quiet  life  in  all  g. 

JO.  which  becometh  women  professing  g. 

3.  10.  great  is  the  mystery  of  g.  God  in  the  flesh 

4.  7.  and  exercise  thyself  rather  unto^'. 

8.  but  g.  is  profitable  unto  all  things 
6.  3.  to  the  doctrine  which  is  according  to  g. 

5.  corrupt  men,6upi>cying  that  gain  is  «-. 
0.  but  g.  wilh  contentment  is  great  gain 
11.  tullow  alter  righteousness,  g.  faith,  love 

2  Tim.  3.  5.  having  a  form  of  ^.  buttlenying  jiowcr 
Tit.  1. 1.  acknowledging  the  truth  which  is  after^. 
2  J'ct.  1.  3.  all  things  that  (lertain  to  life  and  g. 

0.  add  to  patience  £^.  to^'.  brotherly  kin<!iiess,  7. 
3. 11.  what  manner  of  i)er.soiis  ought  to  be  in  all  "■. 

GOD-WARU. 
Exod.\8.\9.God  with  thee, be  thou  for  peojilc  to  G. 
2  Cor.  3.4.  such  trust  have  we  through  Christ  to  6". 
1  Thess.  1.  8.  your  faith  to  G.  is  spread  abroad 

GODS. 
Gen.  3.  5.  ye  shall  be  as  g.  knowing  good  and  evil 

31.  30.  yet  wherefore  hast  thou  stolen  my  g.  ? 
F.zod.  12.  12.  against  all^.  of  Kgyjit  I  will  execute 

20.  23.  shall  not  make  with  me  ^.  of  silver  or  gold 
22. 28.  thou  shall  not  revile  tlie^.  nor  curse  ruler 
23.  24.  Ihou  shall  not  bow  down  to  their  g. 
32.shallmakeno  covenant  with  them  nor  their^. 

32.1.  up,  make  us^.to  go  before  us,  23.  Jicls  7.40. 
4.  these  be  thy  g.  O  Israel,  which  brought,  8. 
31.  Moses  said,  they  have  made  them  g.  of  gold 

34.  15.  lest  Ihey  go  a  whoring  after  their  ^. 
JVu7/i.25.2.  called  people  to  thesaci  ilices  ollhcir  n-. 

33.  4.  upon  the  Egyptians'  g.  also  the  Lord  e.\e- 

ciiled  judgment,  Jcr.  43.  12,  13.  |  40.  25. 

Deul.  7.  25.  the  images  of  their  ^.  shall  ye  burn 

10.  17.  Lord  your  God  is  God  of^.  Lord  of  lords 

12.  3.  ye  shall  hew  down  the  images  of  their  ^. 

30.  Ihat  thou  enquire  not  after  tiieir  g. 

31.  have  done  every  abomination  to  their  n-.burnt 
their  sons  and  daughters  in  the  tire  to  iheir^'. 

13.7.  entice  thee  to  tlic^/-.  of  |)eople  round  about 
20.  18.  not  to  do  as  they  have  done  to  their  g. 
2'J.  t  1".  and  ye  have  seen  their  dungy  g. 

32.  37.  and  he  shall  say,  where  are  tlieir  «-.  ? 
Josh.  22.  22.  the  Lord  God  of  «-.  knoweth 

23.  7.  nor  make  mention  of  the  name  of  their  ^. 
./ud^/-.  5.8.  they  chose  new  n^.  then  was  war  in  gates 
0.  JO.  I  said,  fear  not  the  ^.  of  the  Amorites 
10.  14.  go  and  cry  to  the  n^.  which  ye  have  chosen 

17.  5.  the  man  Micah  had  a  house  of  ^. 

18.  24.  ye  have  taken  away  my  g.  which  I  made 
Uuth  1.  15.  thy  sister-in-law  is  gone  back  to  her^. 
1  Ham.  4.  8.  these  are  the  g.  that  smote  Egyptians 

0..5.  will  lighten  his  hand  from  otf  you  and  your^. 

17.  43.  the  Philistine  cursed  Davfd  by  his  g. 
28.13.  she  said,  I  saw^.  ascending  out  of  llie  earth 

2Som.7.2:i.  thou  redeoinestfrom  Egypt  and  their^'. 

1  A"/?!  «■»■  11.2.they  will  turn  your  heart  alter  their  w. 

S.Solomon  burnt  incense  and  sacrificed  to  their^. 
12.  28.  it  is  too  much  to  go  up,  behold  thy  g. 

18.  24.  and  call  ye  on  the  name  of  your  g.  2.5. 

19.2.  let  the  "■.  do  bo  to  me  and  more  also, 20. 10. 
20.  23.  their  g.  are  g.  of  the  hills,  therefore 

2  Kings  17.29.  every  nation  made^i-.  of  their  own 

33.  they  feared  thcLord,«nd  served  their  own  ^. 
18.33.  hath  anyofthe^. delivered  his  land  ?  19.12. 

2  Chron.  32.  13,  14.  Isn.  36. 18.]  37.  12. 

34.  where  are  the  g.  of  Hamath  ?  Isn.  30.  19. 

19.  18.  have  cast  their^.  into  fire,  they  were  no^. 

1  Chron.  5. 25.  went  a  whoring  after  ^.  of  the  land 
10.  10.  put  Saul's  armour  in  the  house  of  iheirw. 
14.  12.  they  left  their  i'.  David  burnt  them 

2  Citron.  13.8.  golden  calves  Jeroboam  made  for  »•. 
9. the  same  may  be  a  priest  to  them  that  arc  no^r. 

2.").  M.  .\maziaii  brought  "■.  of  Seir  to  be  his  g. 

2.-i.  2:1.  Aha/,  sacrificed  to  the  g.  of  Damascus 

32.  17.  the  g.  of  the  nations  have  not  delivered 
F.zra  1.7.Nebiich.  put  vessels  in  the  house  of  his  ^. 
/'.vui.  82. 1.  God  standoth,  hejudgeth  among  the  ^. 
C.  I  have  said,  ye  are  g.  John  10.  34. 

1.30.  2.  O  give  thanks  unto  the  God  of  ^. 

138.  1.  before  the /f.  will  I  sing  praise  unto  thee 
Isa.  21.  9.  Babylon  is  fallen,  and  her  ^.  broken 

41.  23.  that  we  may  know  that  ye  are  g. 

42i  17.  that  say  to  molten  images,  ye  are  owr  g. 

Jcr.  2.  II.  lialh  B  nation  changed  hi-r/r.  are  no  g.7 

28.  where  arc  thy;^.  Ihou  hast  made  7  according 

to  the  numberof  thy  cities  are  thy /f.  11.13. 

.5.  7.  children  have  sworn  by  them  that  are  no  g. 

10.  II.  the  g.  that  have  not  made  the  heavens 

1 1.  12.  cry  to  the  g.  to  whom  Ihey  offer  incense 
Iti.  20.  shall  a  man  make  t^.  and  Ihey  are  no  g.! 
48.35.  to  cease  him  that  burneih  incense  to  his^. 

Dan.  2.  II.  no  other  con  shew  it,  except  the/!'. 
47.  of  0  truth  it  is,  that  your  God  is  a  God  of  g. 

4.  8.  in  whom  is  the  spirit  of  the  holy  jr. 

9.  I  know  ipiril  of\w\yg.  is  in  thee,  18.  |  5.  14. 

5.  4.  tlioy  prnised  ihe  g.  of  gold  and  silver,  23. 
11.  and  wisdom  like  tha  wisdom  of  the  ^. 


GOL 

Da*  118.  ;arry  captives  into  Egy.  ^.with  princei 

30.  sliiJI  speak  marvellous  things  against  G.of^ 
]Ios.  14. 3.  neither  will  we  say  more,  ye  are  our  g. 
JVah.  1.  14.  out  of  the  house  of  thy  4'.  1  will  cut  ofl 
John  10.35.  if  he  called  them  ^.  to  whom  the  word 
Jicls  14.  II.  the  g.  are  come  dow  n  to  us  like  men 

17.  123.  1  beheld  your  ^.  that  you  worship 

19.  20.  they  be  no  g.  which  are  made  with  hand* 

1  Cor.  8.  5.  be  that  are  called  g.  there  be  g.  many 

Gal.A.8.  did  service  to  them  wliich  by  nature  uo^. 

■See  Slrve. 

Ml  GODS. 

Eiod.\8.\\.  I  know  Ihe  Lord  is  greater  than  all g. 

1  Chron.  10.25.  to  be  feared  above  all g.  y'«u/.'J0.4. 
20.  all  g.  of  the  people  are  idols,  Fsal.  90.  5. 

2  Chron.  2.  5.  great  is  God  above  all g.  fsa/. 13.5.5. 
P.s«/.  95. 3.  the  Lord  is  a  ereat  King  above  all  g. 

97. 7.  worsh.  him  all  ye  "■.1|  9.  exalted  above  all  g. 
7,iph.  2.  11.  he  will  famieli  all  the  g.  of  the  earth 

.Imong  the  GODS. 

F.iod.i^.W. among  the  g.v,\\o\i  like  thee,  O  Lordi 

a  Kings  18.  35.  who  among  the  g.  could  deaver 

their  country?  2  Chron.  32.  14.   Isa.  30.  20. 

Psal.aa.  8.  among  the g.  there  is  none  like  thee 

Mullen  GODS. 
Exod.  34. 17.  shall  make  no  molten  g.  Lev.  19.  4. 

Other  GODS. 
/?/orf.20.3.  shall  have  no  0.  ^'.before  me,  Z)et!t.5.7. 
23.  13.  make  no  mention  of  names  of  otAer  g. 
Dent.  6. 14.  ve  shall  not  go  after  other  g.  11.  28.  | 
28.  14.  1  Kings  11.  10.  .hr.  25.  6.  |  35.  15. 
7.  4.  they  will  turn  tliy  son  to  serve  other  g. 
8. 19.  if  thou  walk  after  other  g.  and  serve  them 
13.2.  lei  us  go  after  otArr^.  and  serve  them,  0. 13. 
17.  3.  hath  gone  and  served  other g.  29.  2l).  .Jo.'h. 
23.  Ki.  .Fadg.  10.  13.  1  Sam.  6.  8.  Jer.  11.  10. 
18.20.proiphet  that  shall  speak  in  name  ai other  g. 

30.  17.  but  shall  be  drawn  away,  and  wo.-ship 

other  g.  and  serve  them,  Jer.  22.  Ji 

31.  18.  in  that  day  they  turned  to  other  g. 
20.then  will  they  turn  to  othir  g.nnA  provoke  me 

Judg.^.l2.  forsook  the  Lord,  and  followed  other g. 

17.  x^'cnt  a  whoring  after  other  g.  bowed  to  them 
19.in  following  other g.to  serve  them, and  to  bow 

l.Snm.26. 19. driven  ine  out, saying, go  serve  other g 

1  Kings  9.  9.    have   taken   hold  upon  oIIut  g, 

2  Chron.  7.  22. 
11.  4.  his  wives  turned  liis  heart  after  oUArr  ^. 
14.9.  for  thou  hast  gone  and  made  the  other  g. 

2  Kings  5. 17.  I  « ill  not  offer  sacrifice  to  other  g 
17.  7.  Israel  had  sinned,  and  h.ad  feared  other  g 

35.  ye  shall^iiot  fear  other  g.  nor  bow  to  them, 

nor  serve  them,  nor  sacrifice  to  them,  37,  38 

22.  17.  have  forsaken  me,  and  burnt  incense  to 

other  g.  2  Chron.  34.  25.  Jcr.  1.  10.  |  19.  4. 

2  Chron.  2."'.  25.  .'Vhaz  burnt  incense  to  otlur  g. 

Jcr.  7.  6.  nor  walk  after  other  g.  to  your  hurt 

9.  walk  after  other g.  whom  ye  know  not,  13. 10. 

10.11. have  forsaken  me, and  walked  afler  other g. 

44.5.  hearkened  not  to  burn  no  incense  to  other g 
8. burning  incense  to  other  g.in  land  of  Egypt,  l5. 

//o«.3. 1.  looktooMer^.  and  love  flagons  of  wine 

See  Skrvk. 

Strange  GODS. 

Gen.  3.5.  2.  put  away  the  strange  g.  1  Sam.  7.  3 

4.  they  gave  Jacob  the  strange  g.  .lo.<h.  24.  23. 

/VH<.32.10.pn)viik.him  to  jealousy  withs/rnn^e^ 

.hsh.  24. 20.  if  ye  forsake  Ld.  and  serve  strange  g. 

Judg.  10.  16.  they  put  away  their  strange  g. 

2  Chr.  14.  3.  .Asa  took  away  the  altar  oi strange g. 

33.  15.  Josiah  took  away  the  strange  g.  and  idol 

./fr.5.19.  asye  served  strange g.  soserveslrangera 

.■7c/*17.18.scemeth  to  be  a  setter  forth  uf  strange g. 

GOLD. 
<7fn.2.11.  whole  land  ofllavilah,  where  there  \f  g. 

12.  the  ^Mif  that  land  is  irood,  there  is  bdellinin 
41.  42.  he  put  a  chain  of  "■.  on  Joseph's  neck 

F.roil.  20.  23.  nor  shall  ve  make  you  gods  of  ^. 
25. 12.  thou  shrill  cast  fimr  ringsof /?•.  for  Ihe  ark, 
20.  I  20.  29.  I  2-^.  2:1,  20,  27.  |  37.  3,  13. 

13.  shall  make  staves  of  shitlini-wood,  overlay 
them  with  g.  28.  ]  26.29,37.  |  30.5.  |  37.4, 15.28. 

18.  thou  shall  make  two  cheriibims  of  i'.  37.  7. 

26.6.  thou  shall  make  fifty  laches  of^.  30.  13. 
32.  their  hooks  shall  be  ofg.  37.  |  30.  38. 

2N.  6.  ephoil  .r.  II  8.  girdle  /r.l|  1.5.  breasl-plaie  g 
1 1.  to  be  set  ill  ouches  ofg.  13.  |  39.  6,  13,  16. 
24.  chains  ofg.  ||  ,33.  thou  shalt  make  bells  of  ^. 

32.24.  who  both  any  g.  let  him  break  it  otr 

31.  oh,  this  people'havo  made  them  sods  of  ^p. 
35.  22.  they  broiiffht  jewels  of  ^.  an  oll'ering  o)  g. 
.'to.  .34.  he  overhiid  the  linariU  wilh  rr.  bars  wilh  g. 

.38.  ho  overlaid  their  chapiters  and  fillets  w  ith  g. 
38.  24.  all  the  g.  that  was  occupied  in  the  work 
:i9.  3.  Ihey  did  boat  the  g.  into  thin  plates 
40.  5.  Ihoi'i  slinlt  set  the  altnr  of  g.  before  the  nrk 
.Vuni.  7.  14.  one  spoon  often  shekels  of  ^.  20. 

84.  at  dedication  of  the  altar  twelve  spoons  ofg. 

86.  all  the  g.  of  the  spoons  was  120  shekels 
31.  50.  the  captains'  oblation,  jewels  ofg.  chaini 


GOL 

Josli.  7. 21.  Achan  took  a  wedge  of/,',  of  50  shekels 

24.  Joshua  took  Achaii  and  tiie  wuilgu  of  ^. 
Jadg.  «.  i!(3.  tlie  ear-rings  1700  sliokels  of  ^r. 

1  Ham.  G.  8.  and  put  the  jewels  of^'.  in  a  coffer 
11.  they  laid  coffer  and  the  mice  of  ^.  on  the  cart 
15.  Levites  took  tiic  colfer  with  tlie  jewuU  of^. 

2  Sam.  H.7  David  took  shiekls  of  ^.  1  CAr.  18.  7. 
t  Kings  G.  22.  house,  altar,  he  overlaiil  with  g. 

28.  he  overlaid  clieruhinjs  with  g.  2  Chron.  3. 10. 
7.  48.  Solomon  made  the  altar  and  table  of  g. 

4'J.  iainjis  and  tongs  of  ^.  ||  50.  hinges  of^. 
9.11.  Uirani  king  of  Tyre  furnished  Solomon  with 
g.  and  cedar  trees,  10.  11.  2  CAron.  9.  10. 
10.2.  queen  of  Sheha  came  with  g.  2  C/tr.  9.  1. 

14.  the  weight  of^'.caine  in  one  year,  2  CVir.9.13. 
IG.  Solomon  made  200  taigets  of  heaten  g. 

17.  ho  made  three  hundred  shields  of  ^. 

18.  he  overlaid  the  throne  with  the  best^. 
12.  28.  Jeroboam  made  two  calves  of  ^. 

22.  48.  Jehoshajihat  made  ships  to  go  for  g. 

2  Kings  18. 16.  Hezekiah  cut  off  ^.  from  the  doors 

1  Chrun.  28.  14.  David  gave  iii g-  by  weightfor^. 

2  Chron.  3.  6.  and  the  g.  was  g.  of  Farvaim 

4.  7.  ten  candlesticks  of^.  1|  8.  basons  of  ^. 
22.  snuffers,  censers,  and  spoons  of  pure  g. 

9.  18.  steps  to  the  throne,  with  a  footstool  of  ^. 

12.  9.  Sliishak  carried  away  the  shields  of  ^. 
Ezra  8.  27.  basons  of  ^.  copper  precious  as  g. 
•VcA.  7. 70.  Tirshatha  gave  thousand  drachms  ofg. 

71.chiefof  the  fathers  gave  "■.||72.people  gave ^. 
Job  22.  24.  lay  up  g.  as  dust,  the  g.  of  Ophir 
125.  yea,  the  Aljiiighly  shall  be  thy^. 

23.  10.  when  tried,  I  shall  come  forth  like  g. 
28.  6.  as  for  the  eartli,  it  hath  the  dust  of  ^. 

15.  wisdom  cannot  be  gotten  for  g.  nor  silver 
10.  it  cannot  be  valued  with  the^r.  of  Opllir 
17.  the  g.  and  the  crystal  cannot  equal  it 

31.  24.  if  I  made  g.  my  hope,  or  said  to  line  g. 
3(>.  19.  will  he  esteem  thy  riches'?  no  not  «■. 
37.  1 22.  g.  Cometh  out  of  the  north 
42.  11.  every  one  gave  Job  an  ear-ring  of  g. 

Fsal.  19.  10.  move  to  be  desired  are  they  than  g. 
45.  9.  did  stand  the  queen  in  g.  of  Ophir 
72. 15.  to  him  shall  be  given  of  the  g.  of  Sheba 

Proo.  11.  22.  as  a  jewel  of  g.  in  a  swine's  snout 

16.  16.  much  better  it  is  to  get  wisdom  than  g. 
20.  15.  there  is  g.  and  a  multitude  of  rubies 

Cant.  1.  10.  thy  neck  is  comely  with  chains  of  g. 

5.  14.  his  hands  are  as  n-.  rings  set  with  beryl 
Ixa.  14.  t  4.  how  hath  the  e.\actress  of  ^.  ceased 

30. 22.  ye  shall  deiiie  ornament  of  thy  images  of^. 

40.  19.  the  goldsmith  spreadeth  it  ovw  with  g. 

Go.  17.  for  brass  I  will  bring  ^.  fur  iron  bring  silver 
Jcr.  4.30.  thou  deckest  thee  with  ornaments  of  ^. 
/-am. 4. 1. how  is  the^.becomedirn!  fine^.changedl 
Ezik.  27. 22.  nicrcliants  of  Sheba  occupied  w  ith  g. 
X'un.2.38.art  head  of^.l|3.1.Neb.maiie  image  of^. 

5.  23.  and  thou  hast  praised  the  gods  ofg. 

29.  they  put  a  chain  of  ^r.  about  DaniePs  neck 
Zec/i.  4.  2.  and  behold  a  candlestick  all  of  g. 

13.  9.  and  I  will  try  them  as  g.  is  tried 

Mat.  2.  11.  they  presented  to  him  "■.  and  myrrh 
23.  16.  whoso  shall  swear  by  the  g.  of  the  temple 
17.  for  whether  is  greater,  the  g.  or  the  temple 

1  7'im.2. 9.  not  adorned  with g-.or  pearls,  IPet.  3.3. 

f/eh.  9.  4.  the  ark  overlaid  round  about  with  g. 

Jam.  2.  2.  if  there  come  a  man  with  a  g.  ring 

1  I'd.  1.7.  the  trial  of  faith  more  precious  than  g. 

}itv.  3.  16.  I  counsel  thee  to  buy  of  me  g.  tried 
4.  4.  the  elders  had  on  their  heads  crowns  of^. 

9.  7.  the  locusts  had  on  their  heads  crowns  of  ^. 

17.  4.  the  woman  was  decked  wiih  g.  and  pearls 

18.  10.  that  great  city  that  was  decked  with  g. 

See  Be.itkn,  Crown,  Fink. 

Pure  GOLD. 

Exod  25.11. thou  shalt  overlay  the  ark  w'Mh  pure  a-. 

within  nnd  wiihout,  24. 'j  30.  3.)  37.2,11,26. 

17.  thou  shalt  niakea  mercy-seat  ot/jurt^n-.  37.  6. 

29.  dishes,  .spoons,  and  covers  of  p.  g.  37.  16.  23. 
31 .  make  a  candlest.  ofp.  g.  37. 17. 1  Kin  "•«  ■7.49. 
38.  Bneff-dislies  p.  g.  1  Kings  7. 50.  2  C/lr.  4. 22. 

28. 14.  two  chains  of  pure  g.  at  ends,  22.  1  39.  15. 

30.  thou  shalt  make  a  plate  of  pure  g.  39.  30. 

1  Kini's  6. 20.  the  oracle  he  overlaid  wilh  pure  g. 

10.  21.  vessels  of  Lebanon  of  pure  g.  2CA)'.  9.  20. 

1  C/iron.^.M.pure  g.  for  flesh-hooks,  howls,  cups 

2  CAron.3.4.overlai.l  the  porch  wiiliin  v.\th pureg. 
9.  17.  he  overlaid  the  throne  with  pure  g. 

.Tub  28.  19.  wisdom  not  to  be  valued  w\\h  pure g. 
Pxal.  21.  3.  settest  a  crown  of  pure  g.  on  his  head 
Rev.  21.  ISL  city  was  pure  g.  ||  21.  street  of  pure  g. 

GOLD  with  silver. 
Orn.  13.2.  Abram  was  rich  in  .siVurrnnd^i-.  24.35. 

44.  8.  steal  out  of  mv  lord's  house  silver  or  g. 
Erorl.  3.  22.  jewels  of  silver  and  ^.11.2.]  12.  35. 

25.  3.  this  is  the  offering,  take  silver  and  g. 

31.  4.  to  work  in  g.  silver,  and  brass,  35.  32. 
JV»m.  22. 18.  his  house  full  of  silrer  and  g.  24. 13. 

31.  22.  only  g.  nnd  silver  that  may  abide  the  fire 

Dcul.  7.  25.  shalt  not  desire  silver  and  g.  on  idols 

345 


GOL 

Deut.  8.  13.  when  thy  silver  and  g.  is  multiplied 
17.  17.  nor  shall  he  greatly  nmltiply  silver  and  g. 
29.  17.  ye  have  seen  their  idols,  silver  and  g. 

Josh.  6. 19.  silver  and^r.are  consecrated  to  Ld.  24. 
22.  8.  return  to  your  lenta  wilh  silver  and  g. 

2  6'a)tt.8.11.si7o. and  u-.Dav. dedicated, IA'di^'s 7.51. 

21.  4.  wo  will  have  no  silver  or  g.  of  Saul 
IKings  IS.lS.Asa  brought  inio  house  of  Ld.silver 

and  g.  he  had  dedicated,  2  Chron.  15.  18. 

18.  Asa  took  all  the  «i7utr  and^.  2  Chron.  IG.  2. 

19. 1  have  sent  a  present  of  ijV«.and  g.  2C'Ar.l6.3. 

20.  3.  silocr  and  g.  IS  mine  {|  5.  deliver  siiu.  and ^. 

2  Kings  7.  8.  carried  thence  silver  and  g.  raiment 

14. 14.  Jehoash  took  the  silo,  and  g.  2  CAr.  25.24. 

10.  8.  Ahaz  took  Site.  and^.  found  in  Ld.'s  house 
20. 13.  Hezek.  shewed  them  silo,  and^r.  Isa.  39.2. 
2;i.35.Jehoiak.gave  Ai/u. and  ^.exacted  ii/o.amlg-. 

25. 15.  things  otg.  iiig-  of  silv.  in  silv.  Jer.  52.19. 

1  Cytr.29.3.  of  my  own  proper  good,  of^.and  silver 

2  CAr.  1. 15.  the  king  made  stlocr  and  g.  plenteous 
Eiral.  4.  men  of  his  place  help  with  stiver  and  g. 

2. 69.  gave  silv.  and  g.\\  7. 15.  to  carry  silv.  and  g. 

8.  25.  they  weighed  tliem  the  silver  and  g.  33. 
Esth.  1.  G.  beds  were  of^.  and  silv. on  a  pavement 
.fub  28.  1.  there  is  a  vein  for  silver,  a  place  for  g. 
Psal.aS.  13.  covered  with  silv.  her  feathers  witli^i-. 

105.  37.  he  brought  them  out  with  silver  and  g. 

115.  4.  their  idols  are  silver  and  g.  135.  15. 

119.  72.  thy  law  is  better  than  ^.  and  silver 
Prov.  8. 10.  not  silv.  receive  knowl.  rather  than^. 

17.  3.  lining-pot  for  silver,  furnace  for  g.  27.  21. 

22.  1.  loving-favour  rather  than  silver  or  g. 
25.  11.  like  apples  of  o-.  in  jiictures  of  silver 

Eccl.  2.  8.  I  gathered  me  also  silver  and  g. 
Cant.  1. 11.  make  borders  of  ^f.  with  studs  of  Si7per 

3.  10.  he  made  the  pillars  of  silver,  bottom  of  ^. 
Isa.  2.  7.  the  land  also  is  full  of  silver  and  g. 
20.  a  man  shall  cast  his  idols  of  silv.  and  g.  31. 7. 

13. 17.  which  shall  not  regard  silver  or  g. 

4t).6.  {hey  lavish  ^.out  of  the  bag,  and  weigh  silu. 

60.  9.  to  bring  their  silver  and  g.  with  them 
.fcr.  10.  4.  they  deck  it  with  silver  and  g. 
Eick.  7.19.  they  shall  cast  away  their  silver  and  g. 
silv.  and  ^r.not  able  to  deliver  them,  Zeph.i.iS. 

16.  13.  thus  wast  thou  decked  with  g.  and  silver 
X'an.2.35.then  was  .«(7o.andg-.broken  to  pieces,45. 

5.  4.  they  praised  the  gods  of  silver  and  g.  23. 

11.  38.  a  god  shall  he  honour  with  g.  and  silver 
43.  have  power  over  treasures  of  g.  and  silver 

Hos.  2.8.  did  not  know  I  multiplied  her  silv.hnd  g. 

8.  4.  of  their  silver  and  g.  have  they  made  idols 
Joel  3.  5.  because  ye  have  taken  my  silver  and^. 
JVaA.  2.  9.  take  the  spoil  of  silver  and  spoil  of  g. 
Hab.  2. 19.  behold  it  is  laid  over  with  silver  and^. 
Hag.  2.  8.  the  silver  is  mine,  and  the  g.  is  mine 
ZccA. G. 11. then  take  5i7«cr  and ^. and  make  crowns 
Mai.  3.  3.  he  shall  purge  them  as  g.  and  silver 
Mat.  10. 9.  provide  neither  g.  nor  silver,  nor  brass 
.lets  3.  6.  Peter  siiid,  silver  and  g.  have  I  none 

17.29.  nor  think  Godhead  is  like  lo  «/7i»crand^. 

20.  33.  I  have  coveted  no  man's  silver  ox  g. 

1  Cur.3.12.  if  any  build  on  this  foundation^.  szYfcr 

2  7'jm.2.20.  in  a  great  house  vessels  of  6-i7«tr  and  g. 
Jam. 5.  3.  your f. and  siViicr cankered,  rust  oftliem 

1  P<;(.1.1S.  we  were  not  redeemed  wi'lisi7u.and^. 
liev.  9.  20.  repented  not  of  idols  of  silver  and  g. 

Talent  nnd  talents  of  GOLD. 
i=;jO(Z.  25. 39.of  ft  tale7it  of  \mte  g.  shiiU  he  make  it 
37.  24.  of  a  talent  of  pure  g.  made  he  it 

2  Sam.  12.  30.  weight  of  <rown  a  t.  ofg.  lCAr.20.2. 
l/r/Tt^'s  9.14. Hiram  sent  Solomon  120  talents  ofg. 

28.  they  sent  from  0))hir  420  talents  of  g. 
10.  10.  she  gave  Solomon  120  t.  of  g.  2  CAr.  9.  9. 
14. in  one  year cameto  Solomon  GGGtuhntsofg. 
2Kings  23.33.  put  the  land  lo  a  f.  ofg.  2  CAr.  3G.  3. 

1  CAr.  22. 14.  David  prepared  100,000  talents  ofg. 
29.  4.  pre|iared  of  my  proper  sood  .3000  t.  of  g. 

7.  the  chief  of  the  fathers  gave  .5000  talents  ofg. 

2  Chron.  8.  18.  look  from  Ophir  4.50  tiilmts  ofg.  ] 
Ezra  8.  26.  I  weighed  ofg.  ves.sels  100  talents 

Vessels  of  GOLD. 
2.?aOT.8.10.  Toi  sent  to  Duv.  ves.  ofg.  IChr.  18. 10. 

1  Kings  10.21.  Solomon's  drinking  vessels  were 

ofg.  i  Chron.  9.  20. 
25. every  man  brought  present,  v.ofg.  2CAr.0.24. 

2  Kings  12. 13.  not  made  for  house  of  Lord  v.ofg. 
24.13.  Nebuchadnezzar  cut  in  pieces  vessels  ofg. 

2  CAr.  24. 14.  of  rest  of  money  made  they  v.  of  g. 
Ezra  1.  11.  all  the  vessels  of  g.  nnd  silver  .5400. 

5.  14.  Ilie  vessels  of  g.  Cvms  delivered  to  one 

8.  26.  I  weighed  of  vessels  ofg.  100  talents 
F.sth.  1.  7.  thcv  gave  them  drink  in  vessels  of  g. 
Dan.  1 1. P.  shall  also  carry  into  Kgypt  vessels  ofg. 
2  Tim.  2.  20.  not  only  vessels  of  g.  but  of  wood 

GOLDEN. 
F.rod.  25.  25.  a.g.  crown  to  the  border  round  about 

28.  34.  a  g.  bell  ||  30.  4.  two  g.  rings,  39.  20. 

32.  2.  .Aaron  said,  break  off  the  g.  ear-rings 
Lev.  8.  9.  upon  forefront  he  put  the  g.  plnte 
Au'm.7.2S.  oneg.  spoon  often  sliek.  full  of  incense 


GON 

Judg.8.  24.  had  g.  ear-rings,  because  Ishmielitcs 
2G.  the  weight  of  ^.  ear-rings  he  requested 

1  Sam.  G.  4.  live  g.  emerods,  live^r.  mice,  17,  18. 

2  Kings  10.29.Jehu  dejiarted  not  from  ihe^.  calves 

1  Chron.  28.  17.  for  the  g.  basons  he  gave  gold 

2  Chron.  13.  8.  there  are  with  you  g.  calves 
Ezra  6.  5.  and  also  let  the  g.  vessels  be  restored 
i'>£A.4.11.  king  shall  hold  out  a  ^r.sccptre,  5.2.  [8.4. 
Ecel.  12  6.  or  the  g.  bowl  be  broken,  or  pitcher 
Jsa.  13.  12.  man  more  prec.  than  g.  w  edge  of  Ophir 

14.  4.  how  hath  the  oppressor,  the  g.  city  ceased 
Jcr.51.7.Babylon  hath  been^.  cup  in  Lord's  hands 
Van.  3.5.  fall  down  and  worship  Ibu g.  image,  12. 
5.2.  llelshazzar  commanded  to  bring  the  ^.vessels 
3.  they  brought  the^-.  vessels  taken  out  of  temple 
Zech.  4.  12.  through  the  g.  pipes,  empty  the  g.  oil 
7/(4.9.4. had  the^.censer  and  ark  where  was^.pot 
Rev.1.1'2.  being  turned,  I  saw  seven  ^.candlesticks 
13.  one  girt  about  the  paps  with  a  g.  girdle 
20.  the  mystery  of  the  seven  ^.  candlesticks 
2.  1.  who  walketh  in  midst  of  the  g.  candlesticks 
5.  8.  g.  vials,  15.  7.  ||  8.  3.  having  a  g.  censer 

14. 14.  on  his  head  a^.  crown  !|  17.  4.  Rg.  cup  full 

21. 15.  had  ag.  reed  to  measure  the  city  and  gates 

See  Altar. 

GOLDSMITH,  S. 

JVcA.  3.  8.  Uzziel  of  the  g.  repaired  next  to  him 

31.  the^.son  ||  32.  and  merchants  ro|>aired  and  o'. 
Isa.  40.  19.  the  g.  spreadeth  it  over  with  gold 

41.  7.  so  the  carpenter  encouraged  the  g. 
46.  6.  they  hire  a  g.  and  he  maketh  it  a  god 

GONE. 
Gen.  24. 1 1.  Abraham  was  old,  and  g.  into  days 
31.30.  and  now  though  thou  wouldcst  needs  bo^o' 
34.  17.  take  our  daughter,  and  we  will  be  g. 

42.  33.  take  food  for  your  households,  and  be  g 
Ezod.  12.  32.  take  your  Hocks  and  herds,  and  be  g 
Deut.  32.  36.  when  he  seeth  their  power  is  g. 

1  .S(i?«.14.3.  the  people  knew  not  Jonathan  was^. 

17.  number  now,  and  see  who  is  g.  from  us 

15.20.1  have  ^.  the  way  which  the  Lord  sent  me 

20.  41.  as  soon  as  the  lad  was  g.  David  arose 

2&a7H. 3. 7. wherefore^. in  to  my  father's  concubine'! 

24.  he  isquite5'.||13. 15.  A mnon  said,  arise,  be^. 

1  Kings  2.  41.  that  Shimei  had  g.  from  JerusaJem 

13.24. when  he  was  ^.  a  lion  met  himbylheway 

14. 10.  as  a  man  takes  away  dung  till  it  be  all  g. 

18. 12.  as  soon  as  I  am  g.  Spirit  shall  carry  thee 
20.  40.  as  1  was  busy  here  and  there,  he  was  g. 

22. 13.  the  messenger  that  was  g.  to  call  Micaiah 
1  Chron.  17.  5.  but  have  g.  from  tent  to  tent 

.fob  7.  4.  when  shall  I  rise,  and  the  night  be  g.  ? 

19.  10.  lie  hath  destroyed  me,  and  I  am  g. 

24.  24.  they  are  exalted  for  a  while,  but  are^. 

28.  4.  they  are  dried  up  and  g.  away  from  men 
Psal.  38.  10.  as  for  light  of  mine  eyes,  it  also  is  g 

42.  4. 1  had^.  with  the  multitude  to  house  of  Gou 

73.  2.  but  as  for  me,  my  feet  were  almost  g. 

77.  8.  is  his  mercy  clean  g.  for  ever  f 

103.  16.  the  wind  pas.seth  over  it,  and  it  is  g. 

109.  23.  I  am  g.  like  the  shadow  that  declineth 
Prov.  7.  19.  the  good  man  is  g.  a  long  journey 

20.  14.  when  he  is  g.  his  way,  then  he  boasteth 
Eecl.  S.lO.who  had  come  and  g.  from  place  of  holy 
Cant.  2. 11.  winter  is  past,  the  rain  is  over  and  g. 

5.  6.  but  my  beloved  had  withdrawn,  and  was^ 

6.  1.  whither  is  thy  beloved  g.  O  thou  fairest  1 
fsa.  5. 13.  therefore  my  people  are  g.  into  captivity 

24. 11.  all  joy  darkened,  the  mirth  of  the  land  g 
41.  3.  by  the  way  he  had  not  g.  wilh  his  feet 

Jer.  2.  5.  what  iniquity  in  me,  that  they  arc  g. 
23.how  canstthou  say.I  have  not  ^.afterBaahml 

5.  23.  but  this  people  are  revolted  and  g. 

9.  10.  beasts  are  g.  \\  15.  6.  thou  art  g.  backward 

44.  14.  none  that  are  g.  into  Egypt  shall  escape 
28.  all  ihe  remnant  that  are  g.  shall  know 

50.  6.  they  have  g.  from  mouniain  to  hill 
Linn.  1.  3.  Judah  is  g.  ||  5.  Zion's  children  are  g. 
6.  g.  wiihont  strength  ||  18.  my  virgins  are  g. 

F.zek.  37.  21.  take  Israel  from  heathen  whither  g 
f)an.  2.  5.  the  king  said,  the  thing  is^.  fr»)m  me,  8 
Hos.  4.  t  18.  their  drink  is  g.  they  committed 

9.  6.  for  lo,  they  are  g.  because  of  destruction 
jimos  8..5.  when  will  new-moon  be^.  that  we  may 
Luke  2.  15.  angels  were  g.  from  them  into  heaven 

24.  28.  he  made  as  if  he  would  have  g.  further 
John  4.  8.  for  his  disciples  were  g.  to  buy  meat 

12.  19.  behold,  Ihe  world  is  g.  afler  him 
Jlets  16.19.  their  masters  saw  hope  of  gains  was/r. 

20.  25.  among  whom  I  have  g.  preaching  the 
kingdom  of  God 
1  Pet.  3.  22.  who  is  g.  into  heaven  on  right  hand 
Judc  11.  they  have  c".  in  the  way  of  Cain 

GONE  about: 
1  .''am.  15. 12.  Saul  is^.  about  and  passed  to  Gilgal 
.Toh  1.5.  whim  davsiif  their  fiaslings  were^.  about 
/.9a.l5.8.for  the  city  is  g.ahout\hc  borders  of  Moab 
Acts  24.  6.  hath  g.  about  lo  profane  the  temple 

GONE  aside. 
Xum.  5. 19.  if  thou  hast  notg. aside  to  uncleanucs* 


GON 

JVum.5.20.  \n\JMg.asideto  anoth.insteadofhusb. 
Psal.  J4.  3.  Uicy  are  all  g.  aside,  tliey  are  filtliy 
jJcU  2(3.  31.  when  they  were  g.  aside,  they  talked 

GONE  astray. 
Psal.  119.  176.  I  have  g.  astray  like  a  lost  sheep 
Jsa.  53.  6.  all  we  like  sheep  have  g.  astray 
JtfaMH.12.  if  amanhave  lUOsheeji,onoof  lliem  be 
g.  astray,  heseekcth  that  which  is^.  astray 
SPet.'i.lS.forBaketh  the  right  way, and  a.reg. astray 

GONE  away. 
2  Sam.  3. 22.  but  Abner  was  g.  aicay  in  peace,  23. 
23.  9.  and  the  men  of  Israel  were  g.  away 
Job  28. 4.  even  tlie  waters  were^.  aicay  from  men 
Jsa.  1.  4.  they  are  g.  away  backward 
JCiek.  44. 10.  Levites  which  are  g.  away  from  me 
JUal.  3.  7.  ye  are  g.  away  from  mine  ordinances 
John  6.  22.  but  his  disciples  were  g.  away  alone 

.      GONE  back. 
Ruth  1.  15.  behold,  thy  sister-in-law  is  g.  back 
Job  23. 12.  nor  have  Ig.  back  from  commandment 
Psal.  53.  3.  every  one  is  g.  back,  none  doeth  good 
Jer.iO.0.  while  he  was  not  vet^-.i.  he  said,  go  buck 

GONE  'doicn. 
1  Sam.  15. 12.  Saul  is  passed,  and  g.down  to  Gilgal 

1  Kings  1.  25.  Adonijah  is  g.down,  and  slain  o.\en 
21. Id.  Ahah g.down  to  possess  Naboth's  vineyard 

2  Kings  20. 11.  by  which  the  shadow  had  g.  down 

in  the  dial  of  Ahaz,  Isa.  38.8. 
Cant.  6.  2.  my  beloved  is  g.  down  into  his  garden 
Jer.  15.  9.  her  sun  isg.  down  while  it  was  yet  day 

48.  15.  his  young  men  are  g.  down  to  slaughter 
Ezek.  31.  12.  ail  people  g.  down  from  his  shadow 

32.  21.  the  strong  arc  g.  down,  slain  by  the  sword 

24.  there  is  Elam  ||  27.  Tubal  |{  30.  Zidong.down 

Jvnah  1.  5.  Jonah  was  g.  down  to  sides  of  the  shij> 

GONE  forth. 
Oen.  19. 1 23.  sun  g.  forth  when  Lot  entered  Zoar 
Exod.  19. 1.  in  third  month  when  Isr.  was g.  forth 
2  Kings  6. 15.  when  servant  of  Elisha  was  g.  forth 
1  C'hron.  14. 15.  God  is  g.  forth  before  thee  to  smite 
Isa.  51.  5.  ray  salvation  is  g.  forth,  and  my  arms 
Jer.i.T.  he  is  g.  forth  to  make  thy  land  desolate 

10. 20.  my  children  are  g.  forth  of  me,  and  are  not 
23.'  15.  is  profanenessg-. /orWt  into  all  the  land 

19.  a  whirlwind  of  the  Lord  a  g.  forth  in  fury 

29.1G.  brethren  that  are  not  g.  forth  into  captivity 
Kick.  7.  10.  day  is  come,  the  morning  is  g.  forth 

36.  20.  these  are  people  of  the  L.  and  are g.  forth 
Dan.  2.  14.  g.  forth  to  slay  wise  men  of  Babylon 

10.  20.  when  I  am g.  forth,  prince  of  Grecia  come 
JtfarA10.17.wbenhe  was  n-./or«A  one  came  running 

GONE  out. 
Kr.od.O.^Q.as  soon  as  I  am  g.out  I  will  spread  hands 
J'lTum.  10.  46.  there  is  wrath  g.  out  from  the  Lord 
JJeut.  13. 13.  certain  men  g.  out,  and  withdrawn 

23.  23.  that  which  is  g.  out  of  thy  lips,  shall  keep 
Judg.  4.  14.  is  not  the  Lord  "•.  out  before  thee  ? 
Ruth  1.  13.  hand  of  the  Lord  is  g.  out  against  me 

1  .Sam.  9.  t7.  bread  is  g.  out  of  our  vessels 
25.  37.  when  the  wine  was  g.  out  of  Nabal 

2  Kings  5.  2.  the  Syrians  had  g.  out  by  companies 
7.  12.  we  be  hungry,  therefore  they  are  g.  out 
20.  4.  afore  Isaiah  was  g.  out  into  the  court 

Psal.  19.  4.  their  line  is^.  out  through  all  the  earth 

89.  34.  alter  the  thing  that  is  g.  out  of  my  lips 
Isa.  4.5.  23.  the  word  is  g.  out  of  my  mouth 
Eiek.  24.  6.  pot,  whose  scum  is  not  g.  out  of  it 
^aM2.4.3.  when  unclean  spir.  is ^. out,  />it/i:ell.24. 

25.  8.  give  us  of  your  oil,  our  lamps  are^.  out 
^larA-5.30.that  virtue  had  ^.out  of  him,  A«Ac)-'.40. 

7.  29.  devil  is^.  ottt  of  daughter,  30.  I^uke  11.  H. 
John  13.  31.  when  he  was^.  out,  Jesus  said 
horn.  3. 12.  they  are  all  g.  out  of  way,  unprofitable 
lJohni.\.  many  false  prophetsare^'-.uuf  into  world 

GONE  ovrr. 
2  Sam.  17.  20.  they  be  "■.  over  the  brook  of  water 
Psal.  38.  4.  mine  miquilies  are  "■.  oi'cr  my  head 

42.  7.  all  thy  waves  and  billows  are^.  over  me 

124.  4.  then  the  stream  had  g.  over  our  soul 
."i.  the  proud  waters  had  g.  over  our  soul 
/5a.l0.29.ll)oy  are  g'.oDCT- the  passage, and  taken  up 

16.  8.  they  are  p.  over  the  sea,  .Iir.  48.  32. 
Mat.  10. 23.  shall  noi  have  ^.  OBcr  the  cities  of  Isr. 

GONKu;>. 
Gen.  49.  9.  from  the  prev,  my  son,  thou  art^.  up 
2  Kings  1.4.  not  come  otfbed  on  wliich^.  up,  6,10. 
Psal.  47.  5.  Gild  is^.  up  with  a  shout,  sing  praidcs 
Jsa.  15.  2.  he  is  g.  up  to  Bnjilh  and  to  Dibon 

57.8.  discovereilto another  than  me,  and  art^. 
Jer.  3.  0.  she  is  g.  vp  on  every  high  mountain 

14.  2.  and  the  rry  of  Jerusalem  is  g.  up 

34. 2 1 .  the  k  ing  of  Babylon's  army, wliicli  are  ;f.M;) 
48.  15.  Monb  iiispoilo<l,  nnd^.  up  out  of  her  cities 

Ezek.  9.  3.  the  glory  of  the  God  of  Israel  wag^.  up 

13.  5.  ye  have  not^.  up  into  the  gaps 
J/os.  8.  9.  for  they  are  g.  up  to  Assyria,  a  wild  ass 
J«kn  7.  /O.  but  when  his  brethren  were  g.  up 
JJcts  18.22.when  he  had  g.up  and  salul.  the  church 

GONE  a  irhoring. 

Lev.  17.  17.  after  whom  they  have  g.  a  whoring 

240 


up 


GOO 

Eiek.  23.  30.  because  thou  hast  g.  a  ichcrring 

Hos.  4.  12.  g.  a  whoring  from  under  their  God 

9.  1.  for  thou  hast  g.  a  whoring  from  thy  God 

GOOD 

Is  taken,  (1)  For  that  sort  of  happiness  which  all 
men  desire,  as  beinir  pleasant  and  agreeable  to 
them.  Psal.  4.  6,  VV  ho  will  shew  us  any  good  ? 
(2)  For  that  which  is  virtuous,  morally  honest, 
and  just.  Psal.  34.  14,  Depart  from  evil,  and 
do  good.  (3)  For  that  which  is  beautiful  and 
agreeable ;  for  something  perfect  in  its  kind. 
Ood  beheld  every  thing  he  had  created,  and  it 
was  very  good,  (Jen.  1.  31.  Every  creature  had 
the  goodness,  beauty,  and  perfection  which  it 
required.  Andin  2  Chr.  18.  7,  This  man  never 
prophesieth  good  unto  me,  nothing  agreeable. 
(4)  For  that  which  is  pleading  and  acceptable 
to  God.  Psal.  14.  1,  There  is  none  that  doeth 
good.  (.5)  That  which  is  eipedienl  or  conve- 
nient. Gen.  2.  18,  It  is  not  good  that  the  man 
should  be  alone  :  It  is  not  convenient  cither 
for  my  purpose  of  the  increase  of  mankind,  or 
for  man's  personal  comfort.  .Ilso  in  1  Cor.  7. 
1,  It  is  good  for  a  man  not  to  touch  a  woman. 
It  were  more  convenient  for  a  man  not  to 
marry.  (6)  It  signifies  seasonable  and  com- 
mendable. Mat.26.10,  The  woman  hath  wrought 
a  good  work  on  me.  (7)  Cheerful  and  festival. 
ISam.  25.  8,  We  come  in  a  good  day;  in  a 
time  of  feasting  and  rejoicing.  (8)  Lawful 
to  be  used.  1  Tim.  4.  4,  Every  creature  of  God 
is  good.  (9)  Christian  liberty.  Rom.  14.  16, 
Let  not  your  good  be  evil  spoken  of:  Use  not 
your  Christian  liberty  unduly,  whereby  it 
should  come  to  be  reproached,  as  if  it  were 
only  profane  licentiousness,  and  matter  of 
contention.  (10)  Kind,  merciful,  bountiful. 
Rom.  5.  7,  For  a  good  man  some  would  even 
dare  to  die.  (11)  Useful  and  valuable,  Deut. 
6.  11.  (12)  Pleasant  and  agreeable.  Psalm 
133.  1.  (13)  Sweet.  Prov.  24.  13,  Eat  honey, 
because  it  is  good.  (14)  Pious  and  religious. 
Acts  11.  24,  The  good  of  the  land  denotes  all 
sorts  of  temporal  blessings.  Isa.  1.  19,  The 
good  hand  of  God,  that  i.i,  the  favour  and 
kind  providence  of  God,  Neh.  2.  8. 
GOOD,  Substantive. 

Gen.  32.  12.  thou  saidst,  I  will  surely  do  thee  g. 
45. 18.  I  will  give  you  the  g.  of  the  land  of  Egypt 

20.  for  the  g.  of  the  land  of  Egypt  is  yours 
!>0.  20.  God  meant  it  unto  g.  to  bring  to  pass 

JV«m. 10.29.  Lord  hath  sjioken^.  concerning  Israel 
Deut.  23. 1 6.  thou  shalt  not  seek  their  peace  nor^. 
./«.9A.24.20.  consume  you, after  he  hath  done  you  g. 
1  Sam.  20.  12.  behold,  if  there  be  g.  toward  David 

24.  17.  for  thou  hast  rewarded  me  g.  for  evil 
19.  wherefore  the  Lord  rewarded  thee^. 

25.  30.  according  to  all  the  g.  he  hath  spoken 
2.S'aM.  14.32.  it  had  been^.  for  mo  to  been  there 

16. 12.  Lord  will  rcijuite  g.  for  his  cursing  this  day 

1  Kings  22. 13.  words  of  the  prophets  declare  g.  to 

the  king  with  one  mouth,  2  Chron.  18.  12. 

1  Chr.  29.  3. 1  have  prepared  of  mine  own  proper^. 

2  Chron.  24.  16.  because  he  had  done  g.  in  Israel 
F.ira  9.  12.  be  strong,  and  eat  the  g.  of  the  land 
Esth.  7.  9.  who  had  spoken  g.  for  Ihe  king 

Job  2.  10.  shall  we  receive  w.  at  Ihe  hand  of  God? 
5.  27.  hear  it,  and  know  thou  it  for  thy  g. 
7.  7.  mine  eye  shall  no  more  see  g. 
9.  2.5.  my  days  flee  away,  they  sec  no  g. 

15.  3.  or  with  speeches  wherewith  he  can  do  no  «•. 

21.  16.  lo,  their  ^.  is  not  in  their  hand 

22.  21.  be  at  peace,  thereby/'',  shall  come  to  thee 
24.  21.  and  he  doeth  not^.  to  the  widow 

Psal.  4.  0.  many  say,  who  will  shew  us  anv  g.  ? 

14. 1.  none  doeth  ^.  not  one,  3.  |, 53. 1,3.  fto»i.3.12. 

34.  12.  and  lovelh  many  days,  that  he  may  see/.'. 

."19.2.  I  was  dumb,  I  held  my  peace  even  from  "•. 

104.28.  Ihou  openest  hand,  they  are  filled  with  ^. 

106.  .5.  that  I  may  see  Ihe  g.  of  thy  cliosen 

122.  9.  because  of  house  of  Lord  I  will  seek  thy  g. 

128.  5.  shall  see  the  g.  of  Jerusalem  all  Ihy  life 
/Vo?». 3. 27. withhold  not^.  from  them  to  whom  due 

11. 17.  the  merciful  man  doeth  "•.  to  his  own  soul 
27.  he  that  diligently  seeketh  g.  procurelh 

12. 14.  a  munsalisfied  willi  n-.by  fruil  ofhismoulh 

1.3.2.  a  man  shall  ent /^.  by  Ihe  fruit  of  his  mouth 

21.  but  to  the  righteous  ;f.  shall  he  repaid 

14.  22.  metry  and  truth  be  to  lliein  that  devise  g. 

16.  20.  hiindlelh  a  mailer  wisely,  shall  find  g. 
17. 20.  lie  that  hath  a  froward  heart,  findelh  no^. 

22.  n  merry  heart  doeth  g.  like  a  medieino 
19.8.  he  thai  keopelh  unditrslnnding  shall  find;|T. 

Eccl.  2.  24.  make  )iis  soul  enjoy  g.  3.  13.  |  5. 18. 
3.  12.  I  know  that  there  is  no  g.  in  them 
4. 8.  whom  do  I  labour  and  bereave  my  soul  ofg.? 
5. 11.  and  what  g.  is  lhi>re  lo  the  owners  thereof  ? 
0.  3.  his  soul  be  not  fillrd  wiih  g.  and  no  burial 

6.  yet  hath  ho  seen  no  g.  all  go  to  one  place 
T.  20.  not  a  man  jutl,  that  duoih^'.and  sinncth  not 


GOO  ^ 

Eccl.  9.  18.  but  one  linuer  destroycth  much  p. 
Isa.l.  19.  if  willing,  ye  shall  eat  llie^.  of  the  land 
52.  7.  that  bringeth  good  tidings  of^.  of  salvation 
Jer.  8. 15.  we  looked  for  peace,  no^.  came,  14. 19 

17.  6.  he  shall  not  see  when  g.  conieth 

18.  10.  if  it  do  evil,  I  will  repent  of  the  g. 
20.  I  stood  before  thee  to  sjjeak  g.  for  them 

29.  32.  neither  shall  he  behold  the  g.  I  will  do 

32.  42.  I  will  bring  all  the  o-.  I  have  promised 

33.  9.  which  shall  hear  all  Ihe  g.  that  I  do  them 
Dam.  3. 1 17.  my  soul  far  from  peace,  I  forgat  g. 
Eiek.  16.  50.  1  took  them  away  as  I  saw  g. 
Hos.  14.  12.  take  away  all  inKiuity,  and  give^. 
Zech.  1.  tl7.  ray  cities  through  g.  shall  be  spread 

11. 12.  I  said,  if  ye  think  g.  give  me  my  price 
J)/a£.26.24.  been  g.  for  that  man  had  not  been  born 
Mark  10.  t42.  think  g.  to  rule  over  the  Genljles 
John  5.  29.  that  have  done  g.  to  the  resurrection 
Jicts  10. 38.  who  went  about  doing  g.  and  healing 

14.  17.  in  that  he  did  g.  and  gave  us  rain 
Rom.i.  10.  honour  t,o  every  man  that  worketh  g. 
1  Thess.  3. 1.  we  thought  it  g.  to  be  left  at  Athens 
IJohn  3.17.who  hath  Ihisworld's ^.aud  shuttelh  up 

For  GOOD. 
Deut.  6.  24.  to  fear  the  Lord /or  out  g.  always 

10.  13.  which  I  command  thee  thisday/or  thV|j'. 

28.  fll.  Ld.  shall  make  thee  jilenteous/or  ^.  30.9. 

30.  9.  the  Lord  will  again  rejoice  over  thee  for  g. 
Ezra  8. 22.  hand  of  our  God  on  all  of  them  for  g. 
JVeh.  5.19.  think  upon  me,  O  my  GoU,  for  g.  13.  31. 
.fob  5.  27.  hear  it,  and  know  thou  il/«r  thy  g. 
Psal.  86. 17.  shew  me  a  token  for  g.  they  may  see 

119.  122.  be  surety  for  thy  servant /or  ^. 
Jer.  14.  11.  pray  not  for  this  people/or  their  g. 

24.  5.  whom  I  sent  out  of  this  place /or  their  ^. 
6.  for  I  will  set  mine  eyes  on  ihem  for  g. 

32.  39.  may  fear  me  for  ever,  for  the  g.  of  them 
JMic.  1.  12.  Maroth  waited  carefully /or  ^. 
/iom.8.28.  we  know  all  things  work  together/or^ 

13.  4.  he  is  the  minister  of  God  to  thee  for  g. 

15.  2.  let  every  one  please  his  neighbour /or  ^. 

See  Bad,  Evil. 
GOOD,  .Adjective. 
Gen.  21.  16.  Hagar  sat  her  down  a  g.  way  off 

24.  12.  I  pray  thee,  send  mo^.  sjieed  this  day 

1 16.  Rebekah  was  g.  of  countenance,  a  virgin 
26.  29.  as  we  have  done  to  thee  nothing  but  g. 
27.46.  Rebekah  said,  what ^.  shall  my  life  domcT 
41.  5.  g.  ears  ||  26.^.  kine  ||  35.  g.  years 
43.  28.  thy  servant  our  father  is  in  g.  health 
46.29.  Joseph  wept  on  his  father's  neck  a  "■.while 
Deut.  33.  Kk  for  g.  will  of  him  that  dwelt  in  bush 

1  .S(im.  2. 24.  my  sons,  it  is  no^.  reporl  that  I  hear 

12.  23. 1  will  teach  you  the  g.  and  right  way 

25.  15.  men  were  very g.  to  us,  we  were  not  hurt 

29.  9.  I  know  that  thou  art  g.  in  my  sight 

2  5am.  15.  3.  see  thy  matters  are  g.  and  riglit 

19.  18.  and  lo  do  what  the  king  thought  g. 

1  Kings  8.  36.  that  thou  teach  them  the  g.  way 
56.  hath  not  failed  one  word  of  his  g.  promise 

12. 7.  and  speak  g.  words  to  I  hem,  2  Chron.  10. 7 

2  Kings  20.19.  g.  is  the  word  of  the  Lord,  /srt.39.8 
2  Chron.  19.  1 1,  the  Lord  shall  be  with  Ihe  g. 

30.  18.  saying,  the  ^.  Lord  pardon  every  one 
Ezra  7.  9.  Iheg.  hand  of  his  God  on  him,  JWA.2.8 

8.  18.  and  by  the  g.  hand  of  our  God  upon  us 
JVcA.  9. 13.  thou  gavest  th(  ni  true  laws,  "•.  slatutei 

20.  Ihou  gavest  thy  "•.  Spirit  to  instruct  lliem 
Job  10.  3.  is  it  g.  that  Ihou  shouldest  oppress  ? 

13.  9.  is  it  g.  thai  he  should  search  you  out  ? 
22. 1 2.  doth  his  g.  success  depend  thereon  ? 
39.  4.  their  young  ones  are  in  g.  liking 

Psal.  25.  S.g.  and  U|iright  is  the  Lord,  ihereforfi 
37.  23.  steps  of  a  g.  man  are  ordered  by  the  Loid 
45.  1.  my  heart  is  inditing  a  g.  matter 
86.  5.  Ihou,  Lord,  art  ^.  ready  to  forsive,  119.68 
112.  5.  a  g.  nmn  shewclh  favour,  and  leiidolh 
119.  39.  turn  reproach,  thy  judgments  arc^. 

66.  teach  me  g.  judgment  and  knowledge 
Prov.  2.  9.  Ihou  shall  understand  every  ^p.  path 

20.  that  Ihou  mayest  walk  in  ihe  way  of  ff.  men 
12.  2.'>.  but  a  «'.  word  maketh  the  heart  gind 
14. 19.  the  evd  bow  before  Ihe  g.  and  Ihe  wicked 
15.03.  and  a  word  in  due  season,  how  g.  is  it  I 

30.  and  n  g.  report  maketh  Ihe  bones  fat 

20.  18.  and  wilh  g.  advice  make  war 

22.  I.  a  ff.  name  is  rather  lo  bocliosi-n  than  rirhcg 
F.rrl.  4.  9.  they  have  a  g-  reward  for  their  labour 
5.  11.  what  g.  is  there  lo  ihe  own"'rs  thereof? 

9.  2.  there  is  ime  event  lo  Ihe  g.  and  In  Ihe  clenn 

11.  6.  or  whether  they  both  shall  be  alike  g. 
Jrr.  6.  16.  where  is  Ihe  g.  wnv,  and  walk  therein 

24.2.  g.  fij;«  II 3.  very,p.  II  5.  hke^r  fig«,  so  will  [ 
29.  10.  I  will  perform  my  g.  word  toward  you 
y-.rk.  17.  8.  planted  in  a  g.  poll  by  great  walnr« 
24.  4.  gather  every  ^.  piece,  thigh,  and  shoulder 
lian.  4.  2.  I  (bought  it  g.  to  shew  Ihe  signs 
ZtA.  1.13.  Lord  an«wcrcd  Ihe  angelwith  n-.  wordi 
.Val.  2.  13.  roceivelb  it  wilh  ^.-w  ill  at  vour  ha-id 
Mat.  7. 11.  know  how  to  givp  g.  gifts,  I.uke  1 1. 13. 


GOO 

Mat.  7. 17.  every  g  tree  bringeth  forth  g.  fruit,  18. 

y.  ii.  (laugliler,  be  of  ^.  comfort,  Luke  8.  48. 

13.  a.  tell  HI  g.  gr.  iS.  Mark  4.  d,  20.  Luke  8. 8, 15. 
iJ4.  ^.  seed  1|  19.  16.^.  Master,  what^.  thing 

19. 17.  wliy  callest  thou  me  g.  ?  none  g.  but  ouu 

SO.  15.  is  thine  eye  evil  because  I  am  g.  ? 

25.  '21.  well  done,  thou  g.  and  faithful  servant 
L,uke  2.  14.  peace  on  earth,  g.  will  toward  men 

6.  38.  ^.  measure,  pressed  down,  shaken  together 

10.  42.  and  Mary  hath  chosen  tliat^.  part 

12.  32.  it  is  your  Father's  g.  pleasure  to  give  you 
Jo/in  2.10.  but  thou  hast  kept  tho^.  wine  until  now 

10.11. 1  am  the^. Shepherd, the^.Shepherd  giveth 
^cts  15.  7.  ye  know  how  that  a  g.  while  ago 
Horn.  7. 12.  commaiulnient  is  holy,  andjust,  and^. 

12.  2.  what  is  that  g.  and  perfect  will  of  God 
1  Cor.15.33.  evil  communications  corrupt^,  mann. 
1  Tkess.  3.  6.  that  ye  have  g.  remembrance  of  us 
3  Tivi.  3.  3.  dcspisers  of  those  that  are  g. 
Tit.  1.  8.  a  bishop  nmst  be  a  lover  of  ^.  men 
Heb.  6.  5.  that  have  tasted  the  g.  word  of  God 
Jam.  1.  17.  every  g.  gift  ||  2.  3.  sit  in  a  g.  place 
1  Pet.  2.  16.  be  subject  not  only  to  the^.  and  gentle 

3.  10.  he  that  will  love  life,  and  see  g.  days 

See  B.vD,  Chkkr,  Conscience,  Courxgk,  Do, 
Day,  Old  age. 

As  GOOD. 
Heb.  11. 12.  sprang  of  one,  and  him  as  g.  as  dead 

GOOD  heed. 
Dent.  2.  4.  take  ye  g.  heed,  4.  15.  Jos/i.  23.  11. 
Eccl.  12.  9.  preacher  gave  g.  heed,  and  sought  out 

Is  GOOD. 
Gen.  2.  12.  and  the  gold  of  that  land  is  g. 
10.  16.  do  as  «  g.  in  thine  eyes,  19.  8.  [20.  flS. 
Deut.  1. 14.  the  thing  which  thou  hast  spoken  is  g. 
0. 18.  do  that  which  15  g.  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 
23. 1 16.  he  shall  dwell  where  it  is  g.  for  hira 
Jadg.  9.  t  -•  speak  whether  it  is  g.  for  you 
1  Sam.  21).  d.  coming  in  with  me  in  the  host  is  g. 
1  Kings  2.  38.  and  Shimei  said,  the  saying  is  g. 
42.  the  word  that  [  have  heard  £S  g.  18.  f  24. 
22.  13.  and  speak  that  which  w  g. 
iKings  20.3. 1  have  done  that  which  is  g.  /sa..'}8.3. 
1  Ckron.  IG.  34.  the  Lord  is  g.  2  Chr.  5. 13.  |  7.  3. 
Ezra  3.  11.  Psal.  100.  5.  |  106.  1. 1  107. 1. 
I  118.  1,29.  I  135.  3.  I  136.  1.  I  145.  9.  Jer. 
33.  11.  Lam.  3.  25.  jVnA.  1.  7. 
19.  13.  the  Lord  do  that  which  is  g.  in  his  sight 
Job  34.  4.  know  among  ourselves  what  is  g. 
Psal.  34.  8.  O  taste  and  see  that  the  Lord  is  g. 
69.  16.  hear  rae,  for  thy  loving-kindness  is  g. 
73.  1.  truly  God  is  g.  to  Israel,  to  such  as  are 
85.  12.  the  Lord  shall  give  that  which  is  g.    ■ 
109.  21.  because  thy  mercy  is  g.  deliver  me 
143.  10.  thy  Spirit  ii-  g.  lead  me  to  the  land 
Proc.  11.  23.  the  desire  of  the  righteous  is  only  g. 
25  25.  so  IS  g.  news  from  a  far  country 
31.  18.  she  perceivelh  her  merchandise  is  g. 
Eccl.  2  26.  God  giveth  to  a  man  that  is  g.  in  his 
sight,  may  give  to  him  that  is  g.  belore  God 

6.  12.  who  knoweth  what  is  g.  for  man  in  life  1 

7.  11.  wisdom  is  g.  with  an  inheritance 
t  26.  that  is  g.  before  God  shall  escape 

9.  2.  as  is  the  g.  so  is  the  sinner 
Jsi.  55.2.  eat  ye  that  which  is  g.  let  your  soul 
Jer.  13.  10.  this  girdle  which  is  g.  for  nothing 
Hos.  4.  13.  because  the  shadow  thereof  is  g. 
Mic.  6. 8.  he  hath  shewed  thee,  O  man,  what  is  g. 
Mai.  2. 17.  yo  sav,  every  one  that  doeth  evil  is  g. 
Mark  9.  50.  salt'ts  g.  but  if  the  salt,  Luke  14.  34. 
Luke  6.  45.  bringeth  forth  that  which  is  g. 

18.  19.  none  is  g.  s.ive  one,  that  is  God 
Rom.  7. 13.  wa-s  then  that  which  is  g.  made  death 
18.  but  how  to  perform  that  i's  g.  I  find  not 

12.  9.  abhor  evil,  cleave  to  that  which  is  g. 

16.  19. 1  would  have  you  wise  to  that  which  isg. 
1  Cor.  7.  26.  that  this  is  g.  for  the  present 
Epk.  4.  29.  no  communication  but  that  is  g. 
1  Tkess.  5.  15.  follow  that  which  is  g.  3  John  11. 

21.  prove  all  things,  hold  fast  that  which  is  g. 
1  Tim.  1.  8.  bat  we  know  that  the  law  i^  g. 

2. 3.  this  IS  g.  and  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  God 

4.  4.  for  every  creature  of  God  is  g. 

5.  4.  for  that  is  g.  and  acceptable  before  God 

1  Pet.  3.  13.  if  ye  he  followers  of  that  which  is  g. 
h  is  GOOD. 

P.'>a/.52.9. 1  will  wait  on  thy  name,  for  it  is  g.  54.6. 
73.  28.  it  IS  g.  for  me  to  draw  hear  to  God 
92. 1.  it  is  H  g.  thing  to  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord 
119.71.  it  is  g.  for  me  that  I  have  been  afHicted 
147.  1.  it  is  g.  to  sing  praises  unto  our  God 

Proi'.24.13.  my  son,eat  Ihou  honey,becau3eiJt's^. 

.Ecc/.5.18.  it  is  g.  and  comely  for  one  lo  eat  and  dk. 
7.  18.  it  is  g.  that  thou  shouldest  take  hold 

Isa.  41.  t  7.  haying  of  the  soder,  it  is  g. 

Lam.  3.  26.  it  is  g.  that  a  man  shonlri  both  hope 

27.  it  is  g.  that  a  man  bear  the  yoke  in  his  youth 

Mat.  5. 13.  it  is  g.  for  nothing  but  to  be  caRt  out 

17.4.  it  isg.foT  us  to  be  here,  Mork9.^.  /.«if9.33. 

Rom.  1.  16.  I  consent  untp  the  law,  thai  it  f>  g. 
SA7 


GOO 

Rom.li.'2l.it  is  ^.neither  to  eat  flesh  nor  drlnkwlne 
lCor.7.1.  it  is^.for  aman  not  to  touch  a  woman,8. 

26.  1  say,  it  is  g.  ibr  a  man  so  to  be 
Oal.  i.  i8.  it  is  g.  to  be  zealously  aflected  always 

GOOD  land. 
Exod.3.8.  come  to  bring  them  to  g.land,  Deut.Q.l. 
JVum.  14.  7.  the  land  we  searched  is  a  g.  land 
Vcut.  1.25.  it  is  a^.  land  which  the  Lord  doth  give 
35.  none  of  that  generation  see  that  g.  land 
3.  25. 1  pray,  let  me  go  over,  and  see  the  g.  land 
4. 21.  Lord  sware  I  should  not  go  unto  that  g.land 
22.  yo  shall  go  over  and  possess  that  g.  land 
6.  18.  thou  mayest  go  in  and  possess  the  g.  land 
8. 7.  the  Lord  thy  God  bringeth  thee  into  a  g.  land 
10.  Shalt  bless  the  Lord  thy  God  for  the  g.  land 
9. 6.  giveth  not  this  g.  land  for  thy  righteousness 

11.  17.  lest  ye  perish  Irora  oft"^.  land  Lord  giveth 
Josh.  23. 13.  until  ye  perish  from  this  g.  land,  15. 

16.  ye  shall  quickly  perish  from  otf  the  g.  land 
Judg.  18.9.  we  have  seen  the  land,  and  it  is  very  g. 

1  Kings  14. 15.  shall  root  Israel  out  of  this^.  land 

2  Kings  3.  19.  mar  every  g.  piece  of  land,  25. 

1  Chrun.  28.  8.  that  ye  may  possess  this  g.  land 

GOOD  with  viakeA  Affirmative. 
(  Negative. 
Exod.il.'ii.  the  owner  of  pit  shall  rna/te  it  £-.  22.14. 
22.  11.  the  owner  shall  not  make  it  g.  13,  15. 
Lev.  24.  18.  he  that  killeth  a  beast  shall  make  it  g. 
JViim.  23. 19.  hath  spoken,  shall  he  not  make  ilg.? 
Jer.  18.  11.  and  make  your  ways  and  doings^. 
GOOD  man. 

2  Sam.  18.  27.  the  king  said,  Ahimaaz  is  ag.  man 
PsaZ.37.23.steps  of  a  ^.man  are  ordered  by  the  Ld. 

112.  5.  a.  g.  man  sheweth  favour  and  lendeth 
Prov.  7. 19.  the  g.  man  is  not  at  home,  he  is  gone 

12.  2.  a  g.  man  obtaineth  favour  of  the  Lord 

13.  22.  a  g.  man  leaveth  an  inheritance  to 

14. 14.  a^.  7Ha?i  is  satisfied  from  himself,  12.  14. 
Mic.  7. 2.  the  g.  man  is  perished  out  of  the  earth 
Jtfa£.12.35.^.Hian  outofgood  treasure,  Luked.ia. 
20.  11.  they  murmured  against  the  g.  man 
24.43.if  the^.man  of  the  house  had  known  inwhat 
watch  the  thief  would  coma,  Luke  12.  39. 
Luke  23.  50.  Joseph  was  a  g.  man,  and  a  just 
./o/ire7.12.somesaid,  he  is  a  j^.7ii(zn,others  said, nay 
JictsW.'ii.  Barnabas  was  a^.maii,  full  of  Holy  G. 
Rom.5.1.  for  a  g.  man  some  would  even  dare  to  die 

JVot  GOOD. 
Gen.  2.  18.  it  is  not  g.  that  man  should  be  alone 

1  .Sam.  29.  to.  thou  art  not  g.  in  the  eyes  of  the  lords 

2  Ham.  17.  7.  the  counsel  is  not  g.  at  this  time 
PsaZ.  36.  4.  setteth  himself  in  a  way  that  is  not  g. 
Prov.  16.29.  leadeth  him  into  a  way  that  is  notg. 

17.  26.  also  to  punish  the  just  is  not  g. 

18.  5.  is  notg.  to  accept  the  person  of  the  wicked 
19. 2.  that  the  soul  be  without  knowledge  is  notg. 
20.  23.  and  a  false  balance  is  not  g. 

24.  2.3.  not  g.  to  have  respect  of  persons,  23.  21. 

25.  27.  it  is  not  g.  to  eat  much  honey 
/sa.()5.2.  which  walketh  in  a  way  that  is  not  g. 
Ezck.  18.  18.  and  did  that  which  is  not  g.  among 

20.  25,  I  gave  them  statutes  that  were  not  g. 

36.  31.  remember  your  doings  that  were  not  g. 
Milt.  19. 10.  il'the  ease  be  so,  it  is  not  g.  to  marry 
Jlcts  15.  38.  Paul  thought  notg.  to  take  him  with 

1  C'c/r.  5.  6.  your  glorymg  is  not  g.  know  ye  not 

(•ecm,  seemed,  scemeth  GOOD. 
J(7sA.9.25.  as  it  secmethg.  to  thee  to  do  unto  us,  do, 

Jndg.  10.  15.  I  Sam.  14.  36,40.  Ezra  7. 18. 

Esth.  3.  11.  Jer.  26.  14.  |  40.  4. 
Judg.  19.  24.  do  to  them  what  seemrth  g.  unto  you 
l.S-am.l.23.do  what  sccmctA^.  3. 18.  |  11. 10.  |  24.4. 

2  Sam.  3.  19.  Abner  spake  all  seemed  g.  to  I.-^rael 
10.  12.  the  Lord  do  what  sermelh  him  g.  1.5.  26. 

19.  37.  do  to  Chiniham  what  shall  seem  g.  38. 
24.22.  take  and  offer  up  what  seemethg.un\o  him 

1  Kings  21.  2.  if  it  seem  g.  to  thee,  Jer.  40.  4. 

1  Chron.  13.  2.  if  it  seem  g.  to  you,  let  us  send 

Ezra  5.  17.  if  it  seem  g.  to  the  king,  Esth.  5.  4. 

Jer  18.  4.  as  seemed  g.  to  the  potler  to  make  it 

Mat.  11.  26.  eo  it  seemed  g.  in  sight,  Luke  10.  21. 

Luke  l.'.i.'il  seemed g.  to  me, having  perfect  undersl. 

Acts  15.  2.5.  it  seemed  g.  unto  us,  being  assembled 

28.  it  seemed  g.  to  the  Holy  Ghost  and  to  us 

GOOD  with  thing. 

Ezod.  18.  17.  the  thing  that  thou  doest  is  not^. 

Dcut.  26.  11.  thou  shalt  rejoice  in  every  g.  thing 

./osA.  21. 45.  there  failed  not  aught  of  any  ^.  tAin^ 

1  .Sam.  26.  16.  the  thing  is  not^r.  ihou  hast  done 

1  Kings  14.  13.  in  him  there  is  found  some  "■.  thing 

2A7H^/s8.9.IIa7.ael  took  ofevcry^.tAiiinfof  Damas. 

Psal.  34. 10.  that  seek  Lord  not  want  any  g.  thing 

38.  20.  because  I  follow  the  thing  Ihiit  g.  Is 

84.  11.  no  g.  thing  will  he  wilhhold  from  them 

92. 1.  it  isa^.  thing  to  give  Ih.nnks  unto  the  Lord 

ProD. 18.22.  whoso  findelh  a  wife,  findcth  Sig.thing 

Jer.  33.14. 1  will  perform^,  thingl  have  promised 

Hos.  8.  3.  Israel  h.ith  cast  ofTthe  thing  that  h  g. 

Mat.  19.  16.  what g.thing  shall  I  do  to  mlierit  Viftil 

Johnl.  46.  canany^.tAiH^  come  out  of  Nazareth? 


GOO 

Rom. 7. 18.  that  is  in  my  flesh,  dwelleth  no  g.thing 
fVu^4.18.good  to  be  zealously  affected  in  a^.t/iin^ 
£^A. 4.28. woi king  with  hishands  t/iiTi^whichis^/-. 

6.  8.  knowing  that  what  g.  thing  any  man  doeth 
2T'm.l.l4.  that^.  thing  committed  unto  tlice,kecp 
Philem.  6.  by  acknowledging  every  g.  thing  in  vou 
Heb.  13.  9.  it  is  a  g.  thing  the  heart  be  established 

GOOD  things. 
Deut.  6. 11.  to  give  thee  houses  full  of  all  g.  things 
Josh.  23.  14.  not  one  failed  of  all  the  g.  things 
15.  that  as  all  g.  things  are  come  upon  you 
2  Kings  25.t28.  he  spake  ^.tA.with  hirn,yer.52.t32. 
iChron.  12.  12,  in  Judah  there  were^.  things 

19.  3.  in  Jehoshaphat  there  are  g.  things  found 
Job  22. 18.  yet  he  tilled  their  houses  with  g.  things 
Ps.  103. 5.  who  satisfieth  thy  mouth  with  g.  things 
Prov.  28.  10.  the  upright  shall  have^.  things 
Jer.  5.  25.  your  sins  have  witbholden  g.  things 

12.  t  6.  believe  not,  though  they  speak  g.  thinga 
Mat.  7.  11.  give  g.  things  to  them  that  ask  him 

12.  34.  how  can  ye  being  evil  speak  g.  things  ? 
35.  a  good  man  bringeth  forth  g.  things 

Luke  1.  53.  he  hath  filled  the  hungry  with  g.things 

16.  25.  in  thy  life-time  receivedst  thy  g.  things 
Rom.  10.  15.  and  bring  glad  tidings  o( g.  things 
Oal.  6.  6.  communicate  unto  him  in  all  g.  things 
Tit.  2.  3.  the  aged  women  be  teachers  of  ^.  things 

3.  8.  these  things  are  g.  and  profitable  unto  men 
Heb.  9. 11.  Christ  being  a  high  priest  of  ^.  things 

10.1.  the  law  having  a  shadow  of^.tAin^stocome 

GOOD  tidings. 

2  Sam.  4. 10.  thinking  to  have  brought  g.  tidings 

18.  27.  a  good  man,  and  Cometh  with  g.  tidings 
IKings  1.42.  a  valiant  man, and  bringest^.tiiiia^* 
2  Kings  7.  9.  this  day  is  a  day  of  ^.  tidings 
Isa.  40.  9.  O  Zion,  that  bringcst  g.  tidings 

41.27. 1  will  give  Jerusalem  one  that  bringeth ^.tj. 

52.  7.  the  feet  of  him  that  bringeth  g.  tidings 

61. 1.  he  hath  anointed  me  to  preachy,  tidings 
JsTah.  1.  15.  behold  feet  of  him  who  bringeth  g.  tid. 
I^uke  2.  10.  I  bring  you  g.  tidings  of  great  joy 
IThess.  3.  6.  brought  us  ^.  tidings  ol  your  faith 

Was  GOOD. 

Gen.  1.  4.  God  saw  that  it  was  g.  10, 12, 18,  21 ,  25. 

31.  God  saw  every  thing,  behold  it  Kas  very  g. 

3.  6.  the  woman  saw  that  the  tree  was  g.  for  food 

40.  16.  the  baker  saw  the  interpretation  7cas  g. 

41.37.  thing  was  g.  in  eyes  of  Pharaoh,  45.  f  16. 

49.  15.  Issachar  saw  that  rest  was g.  and  the  land 
Josh.  22.  t30.  it  was  g.  in  the  eyes  of  Phinchas 

1  Sam.  15.9.  Saul  and  people  spared  all  that  wasg. 

2  Chron.  14.2.  Asa  did  that  which  iras  ^.and  right 
31.  20.  Ilezekiah  wrought  that  which  was  g. 

JWA.  2.  18.  the  liand  of  God  which  wasg. 

Eccl.  2.  3.  till  I  might  see  what  was  that  o-.  for  sons 

GOOD  understanding. 
l.SfliH.25.3.Abigail  was  a  woman  ot  g.understand 
Ps.ll\.\0.g.unders.  have  all  that  do  his  command. 
Proi'.  3.  4.  so  ghalt  thou  find  favourand^.  undcrs. 

13.  15.  g.  undtrstanding  giveth  favour 

GOOD  work. 
JVih.  2. 18.  strengthen  their  hands  for  this  g.  work 
Jlfa?.26.10.she  hath  w  roughr  ag.work,  Mark  14.6. 
./uAn  10.  33.  for  a  g.  work  we  stone  thee  not 
2  Cor.  9.  8.  that  ye  may  abound  to  every  g.  work 
Phil.  1.  6.  that  he  which  hath  begun  a  g.  work 
Col.  1.  10.  being  fruitful  in  every  g.  work 
27'AfS.2.17.  stablish  you  in  every/?-. word  atid  work 

1  Tim.  3. 1.  oflice  of  a  bishop,  desirelh  a  g.  work 
5.  10.  if  she  diligently  follo\»ed  every  g.  work 

2  Tim.  2.  21.  and  prepared  unto  every  g.  work 
Tit.  1.  16.  and  unto  every  g.  work  reprobate 

3. 1.  put  them  in  mind  lo  be  ready  to  every  ^.icorjfc 
i/cJ.  13.21.  God  make  vou  perfect  in  every  o-.  work 

GOOD  works. 
1  Sam.  19.  4.  his  works  to  tliee  have  been  very  g. 
Mat.  a.  16.  that  they  rnay  see  your  g.  works 
.John  10.  32.  many  g.  works  have  I  shewed  vou 
Acts  9.  ,36.  Dorcas  full  of  ^.  works  and  alms-deeds 
Rom.  13.  3.  for  rulers  are  not  a  terror  to  g.  works 
Fph.  2.  10.  created  in  Christ  Jesus  unto  g.  works 
1  7'iwi.  2. 10.  that  women  be  adorned  with  g.  works 

5.  10.  a  widow  well  reported  of  for  g.  works 
25.the/T.iirorAs  of  some  are  manifest  bef()re-hand 

6.18.  charge  the  rich,  th.nttheyberich  m  g.  works 
'2Tim.  3. 17.  thoroughly  furnished  unto  all ^.irorAj 
Tit.  2.  7.  shewing  thyself  a  pattern  in  g.  works 
14.  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  ^.  works 

3.  8.  they  be  careful  to  maintain  g.  works,  14. 
Hrh.  10.  24.  to  provoke  unto  love  and  g.  works 
1  P(<.2.!2.  they  may  bv  youf  g.  works  glorify  God 

GOODLY. 
Gen.  27.  15.  Rebekah  took  g.  raiment  of  hor  son 

39.  6.  Joseph  was  a  g.  person  and  well-favoured 

49. 21.  Naphtali  a  hind  let  loose,  giveth  g.  words 
Ezod.  2.  2.  when  she  saw  he  was  a  g.  child 

39.  28.  they  made  g.  bonnets  of  fine  linen 
Lev.^i.AO.  on  the  first  day  the  boughs  of  5-.  tree* 
Jfum.  24.  5.  how  g.  are  thy  tents,  O  Jacob  I 

31.  10.  they  burnt  all  their  ^.castles  wiiJi  fire 


GOO 

Dm.  3.25.  let  mc  sec  that  ^.  mount.  an<l  Lcbafion 
().  10.  gioat  and  ^'.  cities  which  lliou  buiiileiiat  not 
8.  1-.  lest  when  thuu  hast  built  /r.  houses 

.lush.  7.  21.  1  saw  a.  g.  Babyluiiish  guniieiit 

1  Ham.  9.  2.  Saul,  a  clioico  young  man,  anil  a  «•. 
Iti.  Vi.  David  was  ruddy  and  g.  to  look  lo 

2  Sa:ii.%iM\.  Bcnuiali  slew  an  Kgyptian,  a^'.  man 
1  Kin<rs  I.  6.  Adonijah  also  was  a  very  g.  man 
'iCIirun.'M.  10.  brought  to  Babylon  the  ^'.  vessels 

VJ.  burnt  palaces,  and  destroyed  tlie^'.  vessels 
Job  3'J.  13.  gavest  thou  ff.  wings  to  tho  peacocks? 
J'sal.  10.  C.  yea,  I  have  a  f^.  heritage 
80.  10.  the  boughs  wore  like  the  ff.  cedars 
Jcr.  3.  19.  how  shall  I  give  ihoe  a  «■.  herilugo ! 
11.  IG.  a  green  olive-tree,  fair,  and  ot'^.  fruit 
JCzrk.  17.  8.  was  planted,  that  it  might  be  a^/-.  vine 

23.  it  sliall  bear  fruit,  and  be  a  ff.  cedar 
iJan.  11.  1 16-  I'c  shall  stand  in  the  ff.  land,  t  41. 

t45.  he  shall  plant  in  the  ff.  holy  niouiUaiu 
Hos.  10.  1.  they  have  made  ff.  images 
Joel  3.  5.  carried  into  your  temple  my  "■.  things 
Zcch.  10.3.  hath  made  them  as  his  »-.  horse  in  battle 
11.  13.  a  ff.  price  that  I  was  prized  at  of  thein 
Mat.  13.  45.  a  merchant-man  seeking  ff.  pearls 
Luke  21.  5.  how  it  was  adorned  with  ff.  stones 
Jam.  2.  2.  if  there  come  a  man  in  "•.  apparel 
Rev.  18.  14.  all  things  dainty  and^.  are  departed 

GUOULIEU. 
I  Sam.  9.  2.  not  in  Israel  a  ff.  person  than  Saul 

GOOULIEST. 
1  Sam.  8.  16.  he  will  take  your  ff.  young  men 

1  Kings  20.  3.  thy  childven,  even  the  ff.  are  mine 

GOODHNESS. 
/so.  40.  6.  the  "•.  thereof  as  the  flower  of  the  field 

GOODNESS. 
F.iod.\8.9.  Jethro  rejoiced  for  all^.Lord  had  done 
33.  19.  1  will  make  all  my  ff.  pass  before  thee 
.■J4.  6.  the  Lord  God  abundant  in  ff.  and  truth 
Jfum.  10.  32.  that  what  g.  the  Lord  shall  do  to  us 

2  Sam.  7.23.  thou  promisedst.  this  »-.  1  Ckr.  17.  2t). 
J  A'lni-s  8.  G6.  joyful  for^-.L.  had  done,  2  CA;-.  7.10. 

lO.t?.  thou  hast  added  wiwloni  and  n'.  to  thy  fame 
2  Chron.  6.  41.  let  thy  saints  rejoice  in  g. 
32.32.  Hezekiah  his  «^.  ||  3d.2l).Josiah  and  his 5-. 
J^eh.  9.  25.  and  delighted  themselves  in  thy  i^. 
35.  they  have  not  served  ihec  in  thy  great  ^. 
P.iai.  It).  2.  my  g.  e.\tendeth  not  to  thee 
21. 3.  for  thou  iirgventest  him  with  blessings  of  «-. 
23.  G.  surely  ff.  and  mercy  sliali  follow  me 
2.5.  7.  remember  thou  me,  for  thy  ff.  sake,  O  Lord 
tl.3.  hie  soul  sliall  lodge  in  ff.  seed  inherit  earth 
27.  13.  I  had  believed  to  see  tho  g.  of  the  Lord 
31.  19.  O  how  gieat  is  thy  ff.  thou  hast  laid  up 
33.  5.  the  earth  is  full  of  the  ff.  of  the  Lord 
.52.  1.  the  ff.  of  God  endureth  continually 
t>5.4.  we  shall  be  satisfied  with  t.ho^.  of  thy  house 

II.  tliou  crownest  the  year  with  thy  ff. 
68.  10.  thou  hast  prepared  of  thy  g.  for  the  poor 
107.  8.  praise  the  I^ord  for  his  g.  15,  21,  31. 
9.  and  filleth  the  hungry  soul  with  g. 

144.  2.  my  g.  and  my  fortress,  my  high  tower 

145.  7.  they  shall  utter  the  memory  of  thy  «-. 
ProB.2().6.  most  men  will  proclaim  everyone  hisir. 
/.■^a.  63. 7.  his  great  g.  toward  the  house  of  Israel 
Jer.  2.  7.  I  brought  you  to  eat  the  g.  thereof 

31. 12.  they  shall  How  together  to  the  g.  of  ihe  Ld. 
M.  people  shall  be  satisfied  with  mv^'.  saith  Ld. 

33.  9.  they  shall  fear  and  tremble  for  all  the  g. 
lion.  3.  5.  thi^y  shall  fear  the  Lord  and  his  g. 

6.  4.  yonr/T.  is  as  a  mornin"  cloud  and  early  dew 

10.1.  according  to  «•.  of  his  liind  they  made  images 

Zrc/t.9.  17.  for  how  great  is  his/r-and  his  beauty  ! 

J{oiit.2.  4.ordcspisesi  thou  the  richesof  his  "-.  not 

know  ing  Iheff.nf  God  leadelh  thee  to  rc|)entanco 

11.  22.  behold,  therefore,  the  g.  and  severity  of 

God,  toward  thee  g.  if  thou  coniinun  in  hia^. 

15.  14.  I  am  persuaded  thai  you  are  full  of  ^. 

flrtl.  5.  22.  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  g.  F.jih.  5.  9. 

8  Thias.  1. 11.  fulfil  all  the  cood  pleasure  of  his  "-. 

GOODS. 
<?«»!.  14.in.  Ahrnmbroiiglil  hack  all  Ihe^.  and  Lot 
21.  ^ive  me  the  persons,  and  lake  the^r.lo  thyself 

34.  10.  the  a-,  of  his  master  were  in  his  hand 
31.  18.  .lacob  carried  away  all  hi»^.  46.  6. 

.Krorf.  22.  8.  not  put  hand  to  his  iieighhour's  g.  11. 
JVum. 16.32.  the  earth  swallowed  them  iind  their  «■. 

31.  9.  Israel  took  the  spoil  of  Midiaii  and  their  g. 

35.3.lheHiilMirbs  shall  he  for  Li^viles'  cattle  and  jr. 
Jjriit.  28.  1 1 .  I,ord  shall  make  thee  plenteous  in  g. 
2  CAr.21.  14.  the  Lorfl  will  smile  thy  wives,  thy//. 
Kzra  1.  4.  lei  llie  men  of  his  place  help  him  with  g. 
6  all  about  them  strengthi-iiid  their  hands  with/''. 

6.  8.  thatof  kins;'s/T.  expenses  he  given  these  men 

7.  26.  lo  banishment  or  lo  confiscation  of  g. 
J'J'(h.  9.  2.5.  they  jiossesiii'd  houses  full  of  all  g. 
Job  20.  10.  and  his  hands  shall  n  store  their  g. 

21.  therefore  shall  no  man  look  for  hiS||T. 

28  lis;"',  shall  flow  away  in  Ihc- day  of  his  wrath 
f'rrl.  X  II.  when  g.  increase,  they  lire  increased 
i'liA.  38.  12.  which  h-ivo  "olten  catUo  and  g. 

sua 


(30S 

Ezch.  38. 13.  art  come  to  take  away  cuttle  and  g.7 
'/.tji/t.  I.  13.  their  ^r.  shall  become  a  booty 
Jldt.  12.29.  how  enter  a  strong  man's  house,  and 
spoil  his^r.e.vcciithe  bind  strong  maii,JI/urA'3.27. 

24.  47.  he  shall  make  hmi  ruler  over  all  Uis  g. 

•2'>.  14.  who  called  and  delivered  to  them  liis^. 
A«A«  G.  30.  ol'liim  that  taketh  away  thy  g.  ask  not 

11.  21.  kee|ieth  his  jialace,  his  ^'.  arc  111  jieaco 

12.  18.  there  will  1  bestow  all  my  fruits  and  my^. 
19.  thou  liust  much  g.  laid  up  lor  many  years 

15.  12.  give  mo  the  portion  of  ^z-.  that  falletli  to  me 
IG.l.was  accused  lo  him  that  he  had  wasted  his^. 

19.  8.  the  half  of  my  g.  1  give  to  the  jioor 
Jlcts  2.  45.  sold  their  ^.  and  jiarted  tlieiii  lo  all  men 
1  L'vr.  13. 3.  tho'  I  bestow  all  my  g.  to  feed  the  poor 
Hcb.  10.34.  ye  took  joyfully  the  sjioilingofyour^'. 
Hev.  3.  17.  1  am  rich,  and  mcresused  with  g. 

GOl'HEK  woud. 

Oen.  C.  14.  make  thee  an  ark  of  "■.  wood,  rooms 
GOKE,  D. 

Exod.^l.  28.  if  an  o.t  g.  man  or  woman  that  they 

31.  whether  he  have  g.  a  son  or  a  daughter 

GORGEOUS. 

Euka  23.  11.  Herod  arrayed  Jesus  in  a  g.  robe 
GORGEOUSLY. 

£2c/;.23.12.  she  doted  on  .'\s3yrians  clothed  most^. 

JLuke  7.  25.  that  are  n-.  ap;>atelled  in  kings'  courts 
GOSl'EL. 

The  Gospel  is  a  revelation  of  the  grace  of  God 
to  fallen  man  through  a  JMcdtator.  Or,  it  is  a 
wise,  aholij,  and  gracious  constitution  of  (rod, 
for  the  rccoocnj  of  fallen,  sinful, and  miserable 
man,  from  that  deplorable  state  into  which  sin 
had  brought  him,  by  soiding  his  own  ■S'0»  Jesus 
Christ  in  ihe  Jlesh,  to  obey  his  law  wkich  man 
had  broken,  to  make  a  proper  atonement  for 
sin  by  his  death,  and  thus  lo  procure  pardon, 
and  the  favour  of  (rod,  and  eternal  happiness 
for  all  that  believe  and  repent,  and  receive  the 
go.spcl-salvation ;  together  with  a  promise  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  to  work  this  faith  and  repent- 
ance in  their  hearts,  to  renew  their  sinful 
natures  unto  holiness,  to  form  them  on  earth 
fit  for  this  happincs.'!,  and  to  bring  them  to  the 
full  possession  of  it  in  heaven. 

Hence  it  is  called  the  gosjiel  of  God,  as  it  came 
originally  from  the  father,  Rom.  1.  1.  It  is 
called  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God,  ./?c/.s  20. 
24.  because  it  proceeds  from,  and  maniftsts 
his  favour,  and  is  the  means  whereby  his 
grace  is  bestowed.  It  is  called  the  gospel  of 
Christ,  Horn.  1.  IG.  as  he  is  the  immediate  Jiu- 
thor,  and  the  subject  matter  of  it.  In  the  same 
passage  it  is  said  to  be  the  jiowerof  God  unto 
salvation:  It  is  the  means  which,  by  the  influ- 
ence of  the  Spirit  of  God,  is  made  effectual  to 
salvation.  It  is  called  the  gospel  of  salvation, 
I'.ph.  1.  13.  It  brings  the  good  news  thut  sal- 
vation is  to  be  had ;  it  offers  this  salvation  ; 
it  shews  Ihe  way  how  it  is  attained ;  it  works 
grace  to  fit  for,  and  bring  men  to  salvation. 

This  gosjiel  the  Spirit  of  God  preached  to  Abra- 
ham under  the  Uld  'Testament.  Gal.  3.  8,  The 
Scripture  foreseeing  that  God  would  juslify  the 
heathen  through  faith,  preached  before  the  gos- 
pel unto  JIbraham,  saying,  In  thee  shall  all 
nations  be  blessed.  The  glad  tidings  of  justi- 
fication and  salvation  by  faith  iw  Christ,  wire 
preuohcd  to  Abraham,  and  were  contained  in 
that  promise  made  lo  him,  which  is  the  sum  of 
thr  covcntint.  In  thy  seed  sliall  all  nations  be 
ble.'ised.  Gen.  22.  18. 

The  word  gospel,  in  the  original,  'EuayyiKlif, 
signifies !^o<m\  news,orglad  tidings.  Jhuisurrbj 
when  a  sinner,  who  is  exposed  to  the  wralh  of 
God,  is  sensible  of  his  guilt  and  danger,  it 
viust  needs  be  glad  tidings  to  him  lo  hear  of  a 
way  of  salvation,  and  an  all-sufficient  Saviour. 

Gospel  is-  taken  for  an  historical  narration  of 
jffA.it  Chiist  did  and  spake,  of  his  life,  mira- 
cles, death,  rrsurrrction,  and  doctrine ;  as  the 
Gospel  according  to  Matthew,  Mark.&c.  The 
beginning  of  tho  gospel  of  Christ,  Mark  I.  1. 
Som'tioies  it  is  token  for  the  preaching  and 
puhlicntion  of  the  go-pel,  and  adminislration 
of  affairs  thai  ennrrrn  il.  Uom.  1.  9,  Whom 
I  serve  with  my  s|>irit  in  the  gospel  of  bis 
Son.  Il  is  put  for  the  doctrines  of  free  grace, 
Horn.  11.28. 

Mark  1. 1.  the  beginning  of  the  g.  of  .lesuB  Christ 
15.  J(  sin  came,  savin".',  nrpent  and  believe  thog. 

8.  35.  whoso  sliall  lose  li;a  life  for  my  sake  and  g. 
10.  29.  that  hath  left  house  for  my  sake  and  g. 

13.  10.  ihfg.  must  he  published  among  all  imtinns 
^^r(.v  1.5.  7.  that  the  (Jentiles  by  my  mouth  bear  ;;'. 

20.  24.  to  testify  thi-  g.  of  tho  grnco  of  God 
Horn.  1.  1.  nn  npowlb^  separated  to  Ihc^.  of  God 

9.  whom  I  serve  with  my  spirit  in  g.  of  his  Son 
Ifi.  for  I  am  not  asbami'd  of  Ihe  g.  of  (Christ 
2.1C.8hall  judge  secrets  of  men  according  to  iny^. 


GOT 

Horn.  10.  16.  but  they  have  not  all  obcyo<l  the  g 
Jl.  28.  as  concerning  the^.  they  are  enemies 

15.  IG.  to  the  Gentiles,  ministering  tlie  g.  of  God 
29.in  the  fulness  ol  the  blessing  of  the^'-.of  Clirist 

16.  25.  of  power  to  stabhsh  you  according  to  g. 
lCor.4.15.in  Jesus  1  have  begotten  you  thro' the  5-. 

9.  12.  lest  we  should  hinder  the  g.  of  Christ 

17.  a  dispensation  of  the  g.  is  committed  lo  me 

18.  when  I  preach  g.  I  may  make  the^'.  of  Christ 
without  charge;  that  I  abuse  not  my  jiower  in^. 

2:1.  this  1  do  for  the^.  sake  to  be  partaker  thereof 
2C«r.  4.  3.if  our  n-.  be  hid.  It  is  bid  to  them  are  lost 

4.  lest  light  of  glorious^,  of  Christ  should  shine 

8.  18.  sent  the  brother,  whose  praise  is  in  the  g. 
9. 13.  for  your  professed  subjection  to^r.  of  Christ 
11.  4.  if  ye  receive  another  Sjiirit  or  "-.  Gal.  1.  6. 

Gal.  1.  7.  and  would  pervert  ihe  g.  of  Christ 
2.  2.  I  communicated  to  them  the  g.  I  preach 

5.  that  the  truth  of  the  ^.  might  continue 

7.  when  saw  the  "-.of  uncircum.  committed  to  mo 

14.  not  uprightly  according  to  the  truth  of  the  g. 
Kph.\.l'3.  the  word  of  truth  the^.  of  your  salvation 

3.6.  be  |iarlakors  of  bis  jiroinise  in  Christ  by  tlie^. 
6. 15.  shod  with  the  preparation  of  the  ^.  of  peace 

19.  to  make  known  tho  mystery  of  the  g. 
Phil.  1.  5.  for  your  fellowship  in  the  g.  till  now 

7.  in  the  defence  and  confirmation  of  the  g.  17 

12.  have  fallen  out  to  the  furtherance  of  the  g'. 

27.  only  let  your  conversation  be  as  becometh  the 

g.  striving  together  for  the  faith  of  the  ^. 

2.  22.  he  hath  served  with  me  in  the  «•. 

4.  3.  helj)  women  who  laboured  with  me  in  the ^. 

15.  know  also  that  in  the  beginning  of  the  ,"■. 
Col.  1.  5.  ye  heard  before  in  word  (if  truth  of  the  ^. 

23.  bo  not  moved  away  from  the  hope  of  the  g. 
1  Thess.  I.  5.  g.  camo  not  in  word  but  in  power 

2.  2.  we  were  bold  lo  speak  the^'.  of  God  to  you 
4.  were  allowed  of  Goil  to  be  put  in  trust  with  (r. 

.8.  were  willing  lo  have  imparted  not  the ^.  only 

3.  2.  Timothy  our  fellow-labourer  in«thc  g'. 
27'Ars.l.8.  on  them  that  obey  not  the  «•.  l/-'t«.4.17. 

2.  14.  whcreunto  be  called  you  by  our  g. 

1  Tim.i.  11.  according  to  the  ^.  of  the  bll•^scd  God 

2  Tim.  1.  S.  be  partaker  of  tlie  afflictions  of  the  ^. 

10.  brought  immortality  to  light  through  the  g. 

2.  8.  Jesus  Christ  was  raised  according  to  my  g. 
Philem.l^.have  ministereil  to  me  in  bonils  of  tlie^ 
GOSPEL  joined  \vilhpreach,preached,prcnching 
J/aM.23.  Jes.  went  preaching  g.  9.35.  jMark  1.14. 

11.  5.  the  poor  have  the  g.  preached,  I.,uke7.  22. 

24.14.  this^. shall  be ;)rer(cAc(/,2ii.l3.JI/dr/i  14.9. 
Mark  16.  15.  go,  preach  the  g.  to  every  creature 
I.uke  4.  18.  he  lialli  anointed  me  to  preach  the  g. 

9.  G.  they  depart ed,;<rf«cA(7;^  their,  and  healing 
20.  1.  that  as  he  taught,  and  preached  the  g. 

Jlels  8.  2.5.  and  preached  the  »■.  to  the  Samaritan* 
14.  7.  and  there  they  preached  the  g. 
21.  when  they  had  prcichcd  the  g.  to  that  rity 
16.10.  that  the  Lord  had  called  us  \t> preach  Ihe  «-. 

Horn.  1.  15.  I  am  ready  to  preach  the  g.  at  Romo 

10. 15.  how  beiiiitiful  feet  of  them  that  preach  g. 
1.5.  19.  I  have  fully  ;;rtacA/;(/  Ihe  i'.  of  Christ 

20.  so  hnve  I  strived  to  preach  the  "•.  not  where 

1  Cor.\.  17.  sent  me  not  to  baptize,  but  Uy  preach g. 

9.  14.  thai  preach  the  "'.should  live  of  tho  gospel 

16.  tho'  I  preach  the  g.  have  nothing  to  glory  of, 
for  necessity  on  me,  woe  tome  if  I  preach  npt^. 

18.  that  when  \  preach  the  n-.  I  may  maUegos|>ol 
15. 1.  I  declare  to  you  the  g.  which  I  preached 

2  Cor.  2. 12.  when  I  came  toTrons  lo  preach  the^ 

10.  14.  come  as  far  as  to  yon  in  prraching  Ihe  g 

11.  7.  bocauiio  I  preached  to  you  freely  the  g. 
Gal.  I.  ft.  tho  wn  or  an  angel  prfacA  any  other  "•.O 

1 1,  the  g.  preached  of  me  is  not  after  man 

3.  8.  prrarhrd  before  the  "•.  to  .Miraham,  Rayin; 

4.  13.  through  infirmity  of  Ilesh  I  preached  tho  g. 
1  ThesS.  2.  9.  wo  preached  to  you  the  g.  of  God 
Heb.i^.  lo  IIS  was  the  "-.  preached  as  well  as  them 

1  Pel.  1.  12.  by  them  that  preached  the  g.  to  you 
25.lhis  is  the  word  which  byir.ispr<"ncAr(/to  you 

4.  6.  for  this  cause  was  the^.prcflcAc;/ toihe  dead 
Hev.  14.6.  havingeverlasting  «•.  topreacA  lo  them 

Gor. 

'7cn.30.12.  Joseph  fled  from  her  nn.l  ff.  bini  out, 13. 
/'.««/.  44.3.  they  g.  not  Ihe  land  by  their  own  sworJ 
Feel.  2.  7.  I  gi  mo  servants  and  maidens 
.Irr.  13.  2.  I  ^.  a  sirdio  according  lo  word  of  Lord 
4.  take  the  girdle  that  Ihoii  hast  g.  and  arise 
Gt^TTKN. 
t7cn.  4.  1.  »he»aid,  I  hnvc g.  n  m:'n  from  the  Lord 
31.  I.  what  was  our  father's  halb  he  g.  all  Ibis 
/.'rorf.]4.l3.  when  f  hnve^'-.nie  hoiioiiron  Pharaoh 
/,er.  6.  4.  or  the  Ihinjr  ho  hath  deceitfully  g. 
JVnm.  31.  .50.  what  every  mini  halb  g.  of  jf'wols 
Dent.  8.  17.  might  of  my  hand  hath /r.  this  wonlth 

2  Sam.  17.  13.  moreover  If  ho  be  g.  into  a  city 
./ob  28.  1.5.  wisdom  cannot  be  g.  lor  gold 

31.2.5.  if  I  rejoiced  because  niv  hand  had/f.  much 
/>.««/. 98. 1.  his  holy  arm  hiilli  g.  him  tho  victory 
froe.lS.Il.  wealthy. by  vaniiy  shall  be  diminished 


GOU 

( 

Prov.ZO.  21.  an  inherit,  may  be^.  hastily  at  begin. 

31.  f  29.  many  daughters  have^.  riches 
Eul.1.16.  have^.  more  wisdom  than  all  before  me 
Isa.  15.  7.  the  abundance  g.  they  shall  carry  away 
Jer.  48.  36.  because  riches  he  hath  g:  are  perished 
Ezek.  28.  4.  with  thy  wisdom  thou  hast^.  riches 
Dan.  9.  15.  thou  hast  g.  thee  renown  as  at  this  day 
Mat.  11. 1 12.  the  Ivingdom  of  heaven  is^.  by  force 
Rev.  15.  2.  I  saw  them  that  had  g.  the  victory 

GOVERN. 
J  Kings'2\.l.  dost  thou  now  g.  the  kingdom  of  Isi.? 
Job  34.  17.  shall  even  he  that  hateth  right  g.l 
Psal.  67  4.  for  thou  shall  ^Jthe  nations  upon  earth 

GOVERNMENT,  S. 
Isa.  9.  6.  and  the  g.  shall  be  upon  his  shoulder 
7.  of  the  increase  of  his  g.  there  shall  be  no  end 

22.  21.  I  will  commit  thy  g.  into  his  hand 

1  Cor.  12.  28.  helps,  g.  diversities  of  tongues 

2  Pet.  2. 10.  but  chiefly  them  that  despise  g. 

GOVERNOR. 
Oen.  42.  6.  Joseph  was  g.  over  the  land,  45.  26. 
1  Kings  18.  3.  Obadiah  was  g.  over  Ahab's  house 
1  Chr.  29.  22.  they  anointed  Solomon  to  be  chief^. 
Ezra  5.  14.  Cyrus  delivered  the  vessels  to  the  g. 
JVeA.  5.  14.  1  have  not  eaten  the  bread  of  the  ^. 
18.  for  all  this  I  required  not  the  bread  of  the  ^. 
10.  1 1.  those  that  sealed  were,  Nehemiah  the  g. 
Psal.  22.  28.  he  is  the  g.  among  the  nation 
./er.30.21.their^.  shall  proceed  from  midst  of  them 

40.  5.  he  said,  go  back  also  to  Gedaliah  the  g, 

41.  2.  then  Ishmael  smote  Gedaliah  the  g.  18. 
ffa^.  1. 14.  the  Lord  stirred  up  Zerubbahel  the  ^  . 

2. 2.  speak  to  Zerubbabel  the^.and  to  Joshua,  21. 
Zcch.  9.  7.  and  he  shall  be  as  a  g.  in  Judah 
JWoM.8.  offer  it  now  to  thy  ^.will  he  accept  person 
Mat.  2.6.  out  of  thee  shall  come  a.g.  to  rule  Israel 

27.  2.  they  delivered  him  to  Pontius  Pilate  the^. 

28.  14.  and  if  this  come  to  the  ^.'s  ears 
John  2. 8.  draw  out,  and  bear  to  the  g.  of  the  feast 
.^cts  24.  1.  who  informed  the  g.  against  Paul 
iCor.  11.32.  the^.  under  Aretas  the  king  kept  city 
Jam.  3.  4.  the  ships  turned  whither  the  g.  listeth 

GOVERNORS. 
Judg.  5.  9.  my  heart  is  toward  the  g.  of  Israel 

14.  out  of  Machir  came  down  g. 
Ezra  8.  36.  delivered  the  king's  commissions  to  o-. 
JVeA.  2.  7.  let  letters  be  given  me  to  ^.beyond  river 
5. 15.  but  the  former^,  were  chargeable  to  people 
Isa.  19. 1 13.  they  have  seduced  the  g.  of  Egypt 
Dan.  2.  48.  the  king  made  Daniel  chief  of  the  g. 
Zech.  12.  5.  the^.  of  Judah  shall  say  in  their  heart 

6.  I  will  make  the  g.  of  Judah  like  a  hearth 
Mat.  10.18.  ye  shall  be  brought  before  g-.  and  kings 
Oal.  4.2.  but  the  heir  is  under  tutors  and  g.  till 
1  Pet.  2. 14.  submit  yourselves  tog.  as  sent  by  him 

GOURD, 

In  Hebrew,  Kikajon.  TMs  word  is  found  in 
Jonah  4.  (5.  where  the  Septuagint  translate  it 
KoKOKuSh.  Jerom  uses  Iledera,  Ivy  ;  as  also 
docs  Aquila.  Jerora  acknowledges,  that  the 
word  Ivy  docs  not  answer  the  signification  of 
the  Hebrew  Kikajon  ;  but  as  he  could  not  find 
any  Latin  words  proper  to  express  it,  he  chose 
rather  to  set  down  Hedera,  than  to  leave  Ki- 
kajon, which  might  be  taken  for  a  monstrous 
animal  in  the  Indies  or  mountains  of  Basotia. 
His  account  of  Kikajon  is  this  :  It  is  a  shrub 
which  grows  in  the  sandy  places  of  Palestine 
and  increases  so  suddenly,  that  7oithin  few 
days  it  comes  to  a  considerable  height.  The 
leaves  of  it  are  large,  and  almost  like  those  of 
the  vine.  It  is  supported  brj  its  trunk  without 
being  upheld  by  any  thing  else,  aitd  furnishes 
a  very  agreeable  shade  under  the  thickness  of 
its  leaKcs. 

Modern  interpreters  almost  all  agree  that  the 
Hebrew  Kikajon  signifies  the  Palma  Chrisli, 
or  Ricinus,  in  Egyptian  called  Kiki,  and  in 
Greek,  Selicyprion.  It  is  a  plant  like  a  lily, 
the  leaves  whereof  are  smooth,  scattered  here 
and  there,  and  spotted  with  black  spots.  Dios- 
corides  says,  that  there  is  a  sort  of  it  which 
grows  large  like  a  tree,  and  as  high  as  a  fig- 
tree.  The  leaves  of  it  arc  like  those  of  the 
plum-tree ;  though  broader,  smoother,  and 
blacker.  The  branches  and  trunk  of  it  are 
hollow  like  a  reed.  Some  think,  that  Jonah 
speaks  of  this  last  species. 

W'lM  gourd,  in  Hebrew,  Pekaah.  This  is  aplant 
which  produces  leaves  and  branches  much  like 
the  garden  cucumbers,  which  creep  upon  the 
earth,  and  are  divided  into  several  branches. 
Its  fruit  is  of  the  size  and  figure  of  an  orange. 
It  is  of  a  light,  white  substance,  if  you  pare 
iff  the  rind  ;  and  so  bitter  to  the  taste,  that  it 
has  been  called  the  gall  of  the  earth.  Mention 
is  made  of  this  plant  in  2  Kings  4.  39. 

Jonah  4. 6.  God  prepared  a  g.  Jonah  glad  of  the  g. 

7.  e  worm  gmote  the  g.  that  it  withered 
10.  Ibou  hut  bad  pity  on  thef'.for  which  hut  Dot 

348 


GRA 

GOURDS. 

1  Kings  6. 1 18.  cedar  of  the  house  carved  with^-. 
mid  GOURDS. 

2  Kings  4.  39.  one  gathered  wild  g.  his  lap  full 
GRACE 

Is  taken  (1)  For  the  free  and  eternal  love  and 
favour  of  God,  which  is  the  spring  and  source 
of  all  the  benefits  7ohich  we  receive  from  htm 
Rom.  11.  6,    And   if  by  grace,   then  it  is  no 
more  of  works.     2  Tim.  1.  9,  Who  hath  saved 
us,  and  called  us  with  a  holy  calling,  accord- 
ing to  his  own  purpose  and  grace.     T/iis  free 
and  unmerited   love  of  God  is  the  original 
mover  in  our  salvation,  and  hath  no  cause 
above  it  to  excite  or  draw  it  forth,  but  merely 
arises  from  his  oicn  will.     It  was  this  mercy 
or  love  of  God  that  found  out  redemption  for 
mankind:    God   so   loved   the  world,  that  he 
gave    his    only   begotten  Son   to  die   for  us, 
John  3. 16.    Andwhat  could  his  love  give  more 
than  the  life  of  his  ^on  ?     (2)  Grace  is  taken 
for  the  free  imputation  o/ Christ's  righteous- 
ness, by  the  merit  whereof  true  believers  be- 
come righteous  in  the  sight  of  God.     Rom.  5 
20,  Where  sm  abounded  grace  did  much  more 
abound.  (3)  For  the  work  of  the  Spirit,  renew- 
ing the  soul  after  the  image  of  God,  and  con- 
tinually guiding   and  strengthening  the  be- 
liever to  obey  his  will,  to  resist  and  mortify 
sin,  and  to  overcome  it.     Rom.  6.  14,  Ye  are 
not  under  the  law,  but  under  grace.    2  Cor.  12. 
9,  My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee.    (4)  For  that 
excellent  and  blessed  state  of  reconciliation, 
friendship,  and  favour  with  God,  which  God 
graciously  bestows  upon  his  people.  Rom.  5.  2, 
By  whom  also  we  have  access  by  faith,  into 
this  grace  wherein  we  stand.     (5)  For  the  free 
love,  favour,  and   bounty  of  Christ.    2  Cor. 
8.  9,   Ye  know  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.      (6)  For  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel, 
which  proceeds  from  the  grace  of  God,  and 
wherein  his  grace  is  offered  and  bestowed  upon 
all  penitent  believers.     1  Pet.  5.  12,  This  is  the 
true  grace  of  God  wherein  ye  stand ;  true  and 
only  doctrine  of  the  gospel.     (7)  For  a  liberal 
and   charitable   disposition,  wrought  in   the 
heart  by  the  grace  of  God.    2  Cor.  8.  7,  As  ye 
abour-d  i^  every  thing,  see  that  ye  abound  in 
this  grace  also.     (8)  For  spiritual  instruction 
and  edification.    Eph.  4.  29,  That  your  com- 
munication may  minister  grace  to  the  hearers  ; 
that  it  may  be  a  means  of  some  spiritual  ad- 
vantage to  them.     (9)  Grace  is  taken  for  the 
office  of  Mpostlcship, which  was  given  of  grace, 
together  with  ability  and  other  qualifications 
necessary  for  the  faithful  discharge  of  that 
office.     Rom.  15.  15,  I  have  written  the  more 
boldly  to  you,  becau.<;e  of  the  grace  that  is  given 
me  of  God.  Eph.  3.  8,  To  me,  who  am  less  than 
the  least  of  all  saints,  is  this  grace  given,  that  I 
should  preach,  &c.     (10)  For  the  free  and  un- 
deserved love  and  favour  of  God,  and  a  lively 
sense  thereof  in  the  soul;  this  theJipostlewishes 
to  be  continued  with  and  increased  in  the  Ro 
mans,  Rom.  1.  7.    (11)  For  the  love  and  fear  of 
God  dwelling  in  the  heart ;  or,  for  the  assist- 
ance of  divine  grace.   2  Cor.  1. 12,  By  the  grace 
of  God,  we  have  had  our  conversation  in  the 
world.     (12)  For  faith,  patience,   and  other 
graces  that  enable  to  bear,  and  support  under 
sufferings,  2  Pet.  3.  18.     Phil.  1.  7,  Ye  all  are 
partakers  of  my  grace.     (13)  For  eternal  life, 
or  final  salvation,  which  God  will  graciously 
bestow  upon  his  people,  at  the  appearing  of 
Christ,  at  the  day  of  judgment.     1  Pet.  1.  13, 
The  grace  that  is  to  be  brought  to  you  at  the 
Teve\at\on  of  .lesus  Christ.  (14)  For  something 
acceptable,  beautiful,  and  graceful.  Prov.  4.  9, 
She  .hall  give  to  .hine  head  an  ornament  of 
grace;  a  beautiful  ornament.   (15)  For  favour 
or  friendship  with  men.   Joseph  found  grace  in 
the  sight  of  Potiphar,  Gen.  39.  4.     See  Save. 
Ezra  9.  8.  for  a  little  space  ^.  hath  been  shewed 
Esth.  2.  17.  Esther  obtained  g.  in  his  sight 
Psal.  45.  2.  ;"•.  is  poured  into  lips,  G.  hath  anointed 
84. 11.  the  Lord  is  a  sun,  he  will  give^.  and  glory 
Prov.  1.  9.  they  shall  be  an  ornament  of  ^.  to  head 

3.  22.  so  shall  they  be  life  and  g.  to  thy  neck 
34.  but  ho  giveth  o-.  to  the  lowly,  .Jam.  4.6. 

4.  9.  shall  give  to  thine  head  an  ornament  of  |^. 
22.  11.  for  the^.  of  hislips  the  king  be  his  friend 

Eccl.  10. 1 12.  words  of  tf  wise  man's  mouth  arc^. 
Zech.  4.  7.  with  shoutings,  crying,  g.  g.  unto  it 
12.10. 1  will  pour  the  Spirit  of  ^.  and  supplinations 
John  1. 14.  begotten  of  Father,  full  of  ^.  and  truth 

16.  of  his  fulness  we  have  all  received,  g'.  for^. 

17.  lul  g.  and  truth  came  by  Jesus  Christ 
jScM  4  33.  and  great  g.  was  on  them  all 

14.  3.  which  gave  testimony  to  the  word  of  his ^. 

18.27.  helped  Ihem  which  had  believed  through  g. 

%  L 


GRA 

.^ets  20. 32.  r  commend  you  to  the  word  of  hl«  g, 

Kom.  1.5  by  whom  we  received^,  andapostleship 

7.  g.  and  peace  to  you  from  God  our  Father, 

1  Cor  1.  3.    2  Cor.  1.  2.    Gal.  1.  3.    Eph. 
1.  2.    Phil.  1.  2.     Col.  1.  2.    lU'hess.  1.  1. 

2  Thess.  1.  2.     Philem.  3. 
3.24.  being  justified  freely  by  his^.throughredcm. 

4.  4.  the  reward  is  not  reckoned  of  ^.  but  of  debt 

16.  it  is  of  faith,  that  it  might  be  by  g. 

5.  2.  we  have  access  into  this  g.  wherein  we  stand 

17.  much  more  they  who  receive  abundance  of^-. 

20.  where  sin  abound.^,  did  much  more  abound 

21.  even  so  mighty,  reign  through  righteousness 
6.1.  shall  we  continue  in  sin,  that  g.  may  abound  3 

14.  under ^.  ||  15.  shall  we  sin,  because  under  ^.T 

11.  5.  a  remnant  according  to  the  election  of  ^. 
6.  and  if  by  g.  then  it  is  no  more  of  works 

12.  3.  for  I  say,  through  the  g.  given  unto  me 

6.  gifts  dirt'ering  according  to  ihe  g.  given  to  ua 
15.  15.  because  of  the  g.  given  to  me  of  God 

1  Cor.  10.  30.  for  if  I  by  g.  bo  a  partaker,  why 
15.  10.  his  g.  bestowed  upon  me  was  not  in  vain 

2  Cor.  1. 1 15.  that  ye  might  have  a  second  g. 

4.  15.  abundant^,  might  redound  to  glory  ot  God 
8.6.  so  he  would  also  tinish  in  you  the  same^.also 

7.  see  that  ye  abound  in  this  g.  also 
19.  who  was  chosen  to  travel  with  us  with  this  ^. 

9.  8/  and  God  is  able  to  make  all  g.  abound  to  you 
12.  9.  he  said,  my  g.  is  sufficient  for  theo 

Gal.  1.6.  removed  from  him  who  called  you  to^. 

15.  when  it  pleased  God,  who  called  me  by  his  ^. 
2.  9.  when  James  perceived  the  g.  given  to  me 

5.  4.  justified  by  the  law,  ye  are  fallen  from  g. 
Eph.  1.  6.  to  the  praise  of  the  glory  of  his  g. 

7.  forgiveness,  according  to  the  riches  of  his  ff. 
2.  5.  by  g.  ye  are  saved  through  faith,  8. 

7.  he  might  shew  the  exceeding;  riches  of  his  ^. 
3. 8.  to  me  the  least  of  all  saints  is  this  g.  given 
4.  7.  but  unto  every  one  of  us  is  given  g. 

29.  that  it  may  minister  g.  to  the  hearers 

6.  24.  "■.  be  with  all  that  love  our  Lord  Jesua 
Phil.  1.  7.  ye  are  all  partakers  of  my^. 
Col.3.16.  singing  with  g.  in  your  hearts  to  the  Lord 

4.6.  let  speech  be  alway  with  ^.seasoned  with  salt 

18.  g.  be  with  you,  2  Tim.  4.  22.  Tit.  3.  15. 
Beb.  13.  25. 

2  Thess.  2. 16.  hath  given  us  good  hone  through^. 

1  Tirn.  l.'i.g.  mercy,  and  peace  from  G.  our  Father 
and  our  L.  J.  Christ,  2  Tim.l.'i.  Tit.  1 .4.  "iJohn  3. 
14.  the  g.  of  our  Lord  was  exceeding  abundant 

6.  21.  g.  be  with  thee,  amen 

2  Tim.  1.  9.  who  called  us  according  to  his  g. 
2.  1.  be  strong  in  the  g.  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus 

Tit.3.1.  being  justified  Dy  his^.  we  should  be  heirs 
Heb.  4. 16.  let  us  come  boldly  to  the  throne  of  ^. 

10.  29.  and  hath  done  despite  to  the  Spirit  of  ^. 

12.  28.  let  us  have  g.  to  serve  God  acceptably 

13.  9.  it  is  good  the  heart  be  established  with  g. 
Jam.  1.  11.  the  "■.  of  the  fashion  of  it  pcrisheth 

4.  6.  he  giveth  more  g.  giveth  g.  to  the  humble 

IPet.  1.2.  n-.  and  peace  be  multiplied,  2  Pet..].  2. 

10.  who  prophesied  of  the  g.  to  come  to  you 

13.  hope  for  the  g.  \\  3.  7.  as  being  heirs  of  ^. 

5. 5.  God  resisteth  the  proud,  giveth  g.  to  humbh) 

10.  the  God  of  ^.  who  hath  called  us  to  glory 

2Pe<.3.18.  grow  in  g.  and  knowledge  of  Jes.  Christ 

Jude  4.  turning  the  g.  of  God  into  lasciviousnees 

Rev.  1.  A.g.  and  peace  from  him  which  is  and  was 

See  Find,  or  Found. 

GRACE  o/Gorf. 

Luke  2.  40.  and  the  g.  of  God  was  upon  him 

Jlcls  11.23.  when  he  had  iecng.  o/<rorf,  was  glad 

13.  43.  persuaded  them  to  continue  in  the g.  of  G. 

14.  26.  had  been  recommended  to  o-.  vf  G.  15.40. 
20.  24.  to  testify  the  gospel  of  ihe  g.  of  God 

flom.5.15.much  more  the g.of  God  hath  abounded 
1  Cor.  1. 4.  the  g.  of  God  given  you  by  Jesus  Christ 
3. 10.  according  lo^.  o/ God  which  is  given  tome 

15.  10.  by  thCifi'.  of  God  I  am  what  I  am,  yet  not  1, 
but  the  g.  of  God  which  was  with  me 

2ror.l.l2.by  the/T.o/Godwehad  our  conversation 
6.  1.  that  ye  receive  not  the  g.  of  God  in  vain 

8.  1.  of  the  g.  of  God  bestowed  on  the  churchea 

9.  14.  for  the  exceeding  g.  of  God  in  you 
Gal.  2.  21.  I  do  not  frustrate  Ihe  g.  of  God 
Eph.3.^.  if  have  heard  of  dispensation  of  ^.  of  God 

7.  according  lo  the  gift  of  the  o-.o/Gcid  given  me 
Col.  1.  6.  since  the  day  ye  knew  the  g.  of  God 
2Thess.].l'2.  and  ye  in  him,  according  to  g.of  God 
Tit.  2.  11.  the  g.  of  God  that  bringcth  salvation 
Hrb.  2.  9.  that  he  by  ^.  of  God  should  taste  death 

12. 15.  looking  lest  any  man  Hiil  of  the  g.  of  God 
lPet.4. 10.  good  steward  of  the  manifold  ^.n/  God 
5.  12.  te.stifying  Ihat  this  is  the  true^.  of  G«d 
GRACE  of  our  Lord  Jesus. 
./?c(j  15.11.  through^.  o/Z,.  J. we  shallTje saved  ai 
Rom.lO.W.  the g -of  ovrLord.Tcsus  Cbnstbewith 
you,  24.  1  Cor.  16.  23.  Phil.  4.  2i 
i  Thess.  5.  28.  2  Thest.  3. 18. 
2  Cor.  8.9.  for  y»  know  Ihd  g.of  our  LordjtCbriM 


GRA 

t  Cor.lS.U.  Iheg.  of  our  L.  J.  ChrUt,  love  of  God, 

and  cuminuiiioii  ofHoly  Ghoot  be  with  yuu  all 
GalX^.li.g.of  L,.  J.  Chr.  be  with  spirit,  I'UiUm.'ii. 
Jiev  ■i.i.'il.  g.of  L.  J.  Christ  be  wiUi  you  all.  Amen 

GKAflOUS. 
Ocn.  43. 29.  and  he  suid,  God  be  g.  to  thee  my  son 
Ki.oii.a.'i,~.\\\iv.\\  he  cneth,  I  will  hear,  lor  1  am  g. 
3.').  19.  I  will  be  g.  to  whom  I  will  be  g. 
34.  G.  the  Lord,  the  Lord  God,  g.  2  Chrun.  30.  0. 
Psal.  103.  8.  1  no.  5.  |  145.  a.  Joel  2.  13. 
J\*ttjn.6.25.  the  Lord  inuke  his  face  bhine,  and  be  g. 
2  Sam.  12.22.  who  can  tell  whether  God  will  be^.? 
S/f(W^«5.tl.now  Naaiiian  was^.  with  his  master 
'  13.  i3.  and  the  Lord  w  us  g.  unto  them 
Xch.  y.  17.  a  God  ready  to  i.ardon,  s-  niercilul,  31. 
Job  3.3.24.  then  he  is  g.  toliiin,  aiicT saitli,  deliver 
Psiil.  4. 1 1-  be  g.  unto  me,  and  hear  my  prayer 
77.  y.  hath  God  forgotten  to  be  g.l 
80. 15.  but  thou,  O  Lord,  art  G.  g.  111.  4.  1 112.  4. 
Prov.  11.  10.  a.g.  woman  retaijietli  lionour 
20.  t25.  when  hemaketh  voice  ^.believe  him  not 
F.cclM-\~  the  words  of  a  wise  man's  mouth  are^. 
Ua.  30.  18.  the  Lord  w  ill  wait  that  he  may  be  g. 
19.  he  will  be  very  g.  to  thee  ||  33. 2.  be  g.  to  us 
Jer.  22.  23.  how  g.  when  panijs  come  upon  thee 
Jlmos  5.  15.  may  be  the  Lord  will  be^.  to  remnant 
JonaJi  4.  2.  for  1  know  that  thou  art  ixg.  God 
Mai.  1.  9.  beseech  God  that  he  will  be^.  to  us 
/-uAe  4.  22.  wondered  at  a-,  words  which  jiroceeded 
1  fe£.  2.  3.  if  ye  have  Listed  that  the  Lord  is  g. 

GRACIOUSLY. 
Of  n.  33.  5.  tlie  chddren  which  G.  hath  g.  given  me 

11.  because  God  hath  dealt  ^.  with  me 
Psal.  119.  29.  and  grant  me  thy  law  g. 
Hos.U.  2.  take  away  all  iniquity,  and  receive  us^. 
L,u.ke  l.fSS.  hail,  tliou  that  art  f.  accepted 

GRAFT,  ED. 

Horn.  11. 17.  thou  being  a  wild  olive- tree  wert^.  in 

19.  branches  were  broken  that  I  might  be  g.  in 

23.  they  shall  be^.  in,  forGud  is  able  to^.  them 

24.  were  cut  out  and  g.  much  more  these  be  g. 

GRAIN,  S. 
Joel  1. 1 17.  the  g.  are  rotten  under  the  clods 
^mos  9.9.  yet  shall  not  the  least^^.fall  on  the  earth 
JKal.  13.  31.  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  a  ^.  of 
mustard-sei-d,  Mark  4.  31.  Luke  13.  19. 
17.20.  if  ye  have  faith  us  a.g.  of  mustard-seed,  ye 
shall  say  unto  this  mounlani, remove,  l.ukc  17.0. 
1  Cor.  15.  37.  bare  g.  wheat,  or  some  other  ^. 

GRANDFATHER. 
Dan.S.  1 11.  in  days  of  thy  ^.  in  hiui  whom  thy  g. 
1 13.  thatDaniel  whom  g.  brought  out  of  Jewry 
GRANDAItDTHER. 

1  Kings  15.  1 10.  his^.'s  name  was  Maachah 

2  Tim.  1.  5.  faiU)  which  dwelt  first  in  thy  «•.  Lois 

GRANT. 
Ezra  3. 7.  according  to  thei'.  they  had  of  Cyrus 

GRANT. 
/,«tJ.  25.  24.  ye  shall  g.  a  redemption  for  the  land 
Ruth  1.  9.  the  Lord  g.  you  tliat  ye  may  find  rest 
I  Sam.  1.  17.  the  God  of  Israel  g.  thee  thy  p(!tition 

1  Chron.  21.  22.  g.  me  the  place  of  this  thrcsliing- 

floor  ;  thou  shalt  «-.  it  me  for  the  full 

2  Chron.  12. 7.  hut  I  will  g.  them  some  deliverance 
AVA.  1.  ll.and^.  him  mercy  in  sight  of  this  man 
F.sth.  5.8.  if  it  please  the  king  to  n-.  my  petition 
Job  0.  8.  that  God  would  g.  the  thing  I  long  for 
Psal.  20.  4.  g.  thee  according  to  thine  own  heart 

85. 7.  shew  us  thy  mercy,  O  Lord,  g.  us  salvation 
119.  29.  and  g.  me  Ihy  law  graciously 
140.  fl.  g.  not  O  Lord,  the  desires  of  the  wicked 
Mai.  20.  21.  g.  my  two  sons  may  sit,  Mark  10.  37. 
J.,uke  1.  74.  g.  to  us,  that  we  being  delivered 
Jirls  4.  29.  g.  that  with  boldness  we  may  speak 
Horn.  15.  5.  now  God  g.  you  be  like-minded 
Eph.  3.  16.  g.  you  to  ue  strengthened  with  might 
2  Tim.  1.  18.  the  Lord  g.  that  he  may  find  mercy 
Rev.  3.  21.  will  I  g.  to  sit  with  me  in  my  throne 

GRANTED. 
1  Chron.  4. 10.  God  g.  him  that  which  he  requested 
2Chron.  1.  12.  wiiidom  and  knowledge  is  ^'.  thee 
J'.zra  7.  fi.  and  llic  king  w-.  him  all  his  requests 
AVA.  2.  8.  ihf  kine/r.  according  to  good  hand  of  G. 
Ksth.  5.  0.  what  thy  petition,  shall  bo  g.  7. 2.  ]  9.12. 

9.  13.  lot  it  b"  g.  t(i  the  .lews  in  Shiislian 
Job  10.  12.  them  hast  g.  ine  life  and  favour 
Prov.  10.  24.  thn  desire  of  the  righteous  shall  be  g. 
Jlefs  3.  14.  and  desiroil  a  iniirdorer  lo  h'>jf.  you 
Jl.  18.  then  hath  God  also  to  the  Gentib'S  g.  re- 
pcnliince  unto  life 
■    14.  3.  who  g.  signs  to  he  done  liv  their  hands 
ileii.  19.8.  to  her  wasj?.  she  should  be  arrayed  in 

GRAPE. 
T%ere  te/M  abundance  of  fine  vineyards,  and  ex- 
eellevt  grnprs  in  Talesiine.  Now  larirr  thi 
fruit  aas  in  that  country,  toe  may  judge  by 
the  bunch  of  grnpes  which  was  cut  in  the  vallry 
of  Eshcn),  and  was  bmur^ht  vpnn  a  staff  be- 
tween two  men  to  the  camp  nf  Israel  at  Ka 
decbbaracai,  Num.  I.X  2X  34  Trwedler§ 
ISO 


GRA 

relate,  that  there  was  some  to  be  seen  there  of 
a  prodigious  size.  Strabo  and  Pliny  aj/ir;n  the 
same.  Home  ajlfirm,  that  in  the  valley  of  Esh- 
col  there  were  bunches  of  grapes  Lo  be  found 
still  often  and  twelve  pounds. 

Moses  in  the  law  commanded,  that  when  the 
Israelites  gat/ured  their  grapes,  they  should 
not  be  careful  to  pick  up  those  which  fell,  nor 
be  so  exact  as  to  have  none  upon  the  vines. 
Hliat  fill,  and  was  left  bihind,  he  ordered 
should  be  for  the  poor,  Lev.  19.  10.  Deut.  24. 
20,  21.  I'cople  who  were  passing  that  way 
were  permitted  to  gu  into  another  man's  vine- 
yard, and  eat  what  grapes  thiy  would;  but 
they  were  not  allowed  to  carry  any  away  with 
than,  Deut,  23.24. 

Some  learned  men  are  of  opinion,  that  the  pro- 
hibition delivered  by  iMoses  against  gleaning 
grapts  after  the  vintage,  may  signify  a  second 
vintage  after  the  first,  which  was  never  so 
good  or  so  plentiful  as  the  farmer ;  for  this, 
they  say,  was  over  in  the  hot  countries  about 
the  end  uf  August,  and  Vie  other  in  September. 
God  requires  thirefore  that  this  second  vin- 
tage should  be  left  to  the  poor,  us  well  as  the 
grapes  of  the  first  which  had  escaped  the  ob- 
servation of  the  gatlurers. 

It  is  frequent  in  Scripture  to  describe  an  almost 
total  destruction,  by  the  similitude  of  a  vine 
stripped  in  such  a  manner  that  there  was  not 
a  bunch  of  grapes  left  for  those  who  came  a 
gleaning.  Isa.  24.  13,  Thus  it  shall  be  in 
the  midst  of  the  land,  there  shall  be  as  the 
gleaning-grapes  when  the  vintage  is  done. 
./lad  Jer.  0.  9,  They  shall  thoroughly  glean  the 
remnant  of  Israel  as  a  vine.  See  Jer.  49.  9. 
Obad.  5. 

The  blood  of  grapes.  Gen.  49.  11.  signifies  wine. 
He  washed  his  clothes  in  the  blood  of  grapes. 
Nis  habitation  shall  be  in  a  country  where 
there  are  vineyards.  Jlnd  Deut.  32.  14,  Thou 
didst  drink  the  pure  blood  of  the  grape;  pure, 
unmixed  wine.  The  fathers  have  eaten  a  sour 
grajie,  and  the  children's  teeth  are  set  on  edge, 
Jer.  31.  29.  Kick.  18.  2.  'J'his  is  a  proverbial 
way  of  speaking  in  the  sacred  text;  meaning, 
that  the  fathers  have  sinned,  and  the  children 
have  borne  the  punishment  of  their  crimes.  It 
was  a  complaint  made  by  the  Jews  to  God,  who 
punished  those  sins  in  them,  whereof  they  pre- 
tended they  were  not  guilty  But  the  Lord 
said,  he  would  cause  this  proverb  to  cease  in 
I.sra<;l,  and  that  for  the  future  every  one  should 
suffer  the  punishment  of  his  oicn  iniquity. 

Lev.  19.  10.  nor  gather  every  g.  of  thy  vineyard 

Deut.  32.  14.  thou  didst  drink  the  blood  of  the  o-. 

■lob  15.33.  he  shall  shake  off  his  unripe  g.  as  vine 

Cant.  2. 13.  vines  with  tender  g.  give  a  good  smell 
7.  12.  let  us  see  whether  the  tender  g.  appear 

Isa.  18.  5.  the  sour  g.  is  ripening  in  the  flower 

Jer.  31.  2i).  the  fathers  have  eaten  a  sour^. 
30.  every  man  that  caleth  the  sour  g. 

Mic.  7.  1. 1  am  as  the  o-.-gleanings  of  the  vintage 
GRAPE-GATHERER. 

Jer.  6.  9.  turn  b.ack  thy  hand  as  a  g.-gatherer 
49. 9.  \(g.-g.come,  would  they  not  leave?  Obad.5. 
GRAPES. 

Ocn.40.10.  the  clusters  thereof  brought  forth  ripe  g. 
49.  11.  he  washed  his  clothes  in  the  blood  of  ^'. 

Lev.  25.  ,5.  nor  gather  the  g.  of  thy  vine  undressed 

1 1.  in  jubilee,  nor  gather  the  g.  of  thy  vine 
M'lim.  0.  3.  nor  shall  be  eat  moist  g.  or  dried 

13.  20.  the  time  was  the  time  of  the  first  ripe^. 
23.  they  cut  down  a  brunch  with  one  cluster  of^. 
Deut.  23.  24.  then  thou  mayest  eat  g.  thy  till 

24. 21.  when  thou  gathorest  Ihc^'.  of  thy  vineyard 

28.  30.  Shalt  plant  a  vineyard,  niilgatherthe^'.  39. 

32.  32.  their  ^i-.  are  0-.  of  gull,  their  clusters  bitter 
Judg.8.2.\s  not  the  gleaning  of  the  g-.  of  Ephraim 

9.  27.  they  trodc  the  g.  and  cursed  Abimclech 
JVcA.  13. 15.  bringing  in  wine  and^.  on  the  sabbath 
Cant.  2.  15.  for  our  vines  have  tindery. 

7.  7.  and  thy  brensis  are  like  to  clusters  of/. 
Isa.  5.  2.  he  looked  it  should  bring  forth  g. 
4.  should  bring  forth ;rr.  brnugbt  it  forth  wild/.? 

17.  fi.  yel  gleaning  /.  shall  be  left  in  it 

24.  13.  ns  tlie  gleaning  g.  when  vint.igc  is  done 
.rrr.  8.  13.  there  shall  be  no  g.  on  ihe  vino 

25.  30.  shall  give  a  shout,  as  they  that  tread  Iheg. 
49.  9.  would  not  leave  some  gleaning  g.  Obad.  5. 

F.zek.  18.  2.  the  fathers  have  ealen  miur  g. 
Has.  3.  t  1.  look  to  gods,  and  love  flagons  of/. 
9.  10.  I  found  Israel  like  /.  in  Ihe  wilderness 
Jlmos'i.  13.  trcador  of/,  shall  overtake  the  sower 
Mat.l.XG  do  men  gather/. orthdTriH.liss  of  thistles? 
Luke  6.  44.  nor  of  a  bramble-busli  gather  they  /. 
Rev.  14.  18.  Ihrust  in  sirkl^',  her  /.  arc  fully  ripe 

GR.\SS. 
Gen.  1. 11.  God  said,  let  iho  earth  bring  forlh  /. 

12.  and  tlio  eoitli  bruujhl  forth  /.  aiul  berb 


GRA 

Xum.  22. 4.  a>  the  ox  licketb  up  the  /.  of  the  field 
Deut.  11.15. 1  will  Bend/,  in  thy  fields  for  thy  catll* 

29.  23.  it  is  nol  sown,  nor  any  /.  groweth  ihcreio 
32.2.  my  speech  shall  distil  as  showers  upon  the/ 

2  Sam.  'ii.  4.  as  tjie  /.  springeth  out  of  the  earth 

1  Kings  18. 5. iieradveiiture  find  /.  lo  save  horse! 

2  Kings  19.  20.  they  were  as  the  /.  of  the  field,  as 

green  herb,  as  /.on  the  house-tops,  Isa.  37. 27. 
.fob  5.  25.  thine  ofispring  as  the  /.  of  the  earth 

0.  5.  doth  the  wild  ass  bray  when  he  h«lli  /.? 

40.  15.  behold,  bcl)pmolh  eatetli  /.  a*  ui  ox 
Psal.  23.  t  2.  to  lie  down  in  pastures  of  tender  / 

37. 2.  for  they  shall|f oon  be  cut  down  like  the  /. 

72.  G.  he  shall  coine  down  like  rain  upon  mow  n  /. 

10.  theyol  the  city  shall  flourish  like  /.  of  earth 
90.  5.  in  the  morning  Ihey  are  like/,  which  grown 
92.7.  when  the  wicked  spring  as  the /.and  flourish 

102.  4.  my  heart  is  smitten,  and  withered  like  /. 

11.  my  days  like  a  shadow,  am  withered  like/. 

103.  15.  as  for  man,  his  days  are  as/,  as  a  flower 

104.  14.  he  causeth  /.  to  grow  for  cattle 

100.  20.  in  the  similitude  of  an  ox  that  eateth  /. 

129.  0.  let  them  be  as  the/.  U|)on  the  house-tops 

147.  8.  who  inaketh  /.to  grow  upon  the  mountains 
Pruii. 19.12.  Ihe  king's  favour  is  as  dew  upon  the/. 

27.  25.  hay  appeafeth,  the  tender/,  shewelh  itself 
Isa.  15.  0.  the  /.  faileth,  tliere  is  no  green  thing 

35.  7.  in  Ihe  habitation  of  dragons  shall  be/. 

40.  6.  the  voice  said,  cry,  all  flesh  is/.  1  Pet.  1.24 
7.  the  /.  wilhereth,  surely  the  peojde  is  /.  8. 

44.  4.  they  shall  spring  up  as  among  the  /. 

51.  12.  Ihe  smi  of  man  which  shall  be  made  as/ 
./cr.14.5.  hind  forsook  )t,because  there  was  no/.  0 

50.  11.  ye  are  grown  fat  as  the  heifer  at  /. 
Dan.  4.  15.  leave  the  slump  in  the  lender/.  23. 

25.  shall  make  thee  eat/,  as  oxen,  32,  33.  |  5.  21. 
Jlmos  7.2.  they  had  made  an  end  of  eating/. of  land 
Mic.  5.  7.  as  showers  upon  the  /.  that  tiwrieth  not 
Zech.  10. 1.  Lord  shall  give  every  one/,  in  the  field 
Mat.  0.  30.  if  God  so  clothe  the/.  LuK-e  12.  28. 

14. 19.  the  mullitudeto  sit  down  on/.  JJ/ortO.  39. 
John  6.  10.  now  there  was  much  /.  in  the  place 
yam. 1.10.  as  the  flower  of  the /.he  shall  pass  ai^ay 
11.  sun  is  no  sooner  risen,  but  it  wilhereth  the/. 
liev.  8.  7.  and  all  green  /.  was  burnt  up 

y.  4.  that  they  .should  not  hurt  the  /.  of  Ihe  earth 

GRASSHOPPER,  S. 
Lev.  11. 22.  these  ye  may  eat,  the  /.  after  his  kind 
JVuni.  13.  33.  and  we  were  in  our  own  sight  as/. 
Judg.  0.  5.  tliey  came  as/,  for  multitude,  7.  12. 
Job  39.  20.  canst  thou  make  him  afraid  as  a/.7 
Keel.  12.  5.  and  the/,  shall  be  a  burden,  desire  fail 
Isa.  40.  22.  the  inhabitants  thereof  are  as  /. 
Jer.  4fi.  23.  because  they  are  more  ihan  the  /. 
Jlmus  7.  1.  behold,  he  formed/,  in  the  beginning 
JVuA.  3.  17.  thy  cajilains  are  as  Ihe  great  /. 
Grate,  See  Erases. 
GRAVE,  Substantive. 
Oen.  35. 20.  Jacob  set  up  a  pillar  upon  her  /.  that 
is  Ihe  pillar  of  Rachel's  /.  unto  this  day 

37.  35.  I  will  go  down  to/,  to  my  son,  mourning 

42.  38.  bring  gray  hairs  with  sorrow  to  /.  44.  31. 

50.  5.  bury  me  in  the/,  which  I  have  digged 
J^nm.  19. 16.  whosoever  touchelh  a  /.  is  uncleao 
18.  sprinkle  it  on  him  that  touched  one  dead  or/. 

1  Sam.  2.  6.  Ihe  Lord  bringelh  down  to  the/. 

2  Sam.  3.32.  the  king  and  people  wept  at  Abner'g/. 
19.  37.  and  be  buried  by  the  /.  of  my  father 

1  Kings^.  0.  let  nol  his  head  go  lo  Ihe/.  in  peace 
9.  his  head  bring  down  to  the  /.  witli  blood 

13.  30.  and  he  laid  his  carcase  in  his  own  /. 

14.  13,  he  only  of  Jeroboam  shall  come  lo  the/ 

2  Kings  22.20.  ihou  gathered  to  thy  /.  2CAr.34.i& 
.fob  3.  22.  who  are  glad  when  they  can  find  the  / 

.5.  20.  thou  shall  come  to  Ihy  /.  in  a  full  age 
7.  9.  so  he  that  goeth  to  /.  shall  come  up  no  more 
10.19.  I  should  have  heen  carried  from  womb  to/. 
14.  13.  O  that  thou  wouldest  hide  mc  in  the  /. 
17.  13.  if  I  wail,  thn  /.  is  my  house 
21.  13.  and  in  a  moment  Ihey  so  down  to  the/. 
32.  yet  shall  he  be  brought  to  iho/.  and  in  tomb 
24.  19.  so  doth  Ihe  /.  those  llint  have  sinned 

30.  24.  he  will  not  stretch  out  liis  hanfl  Ip  the  / 
33.  22.  vrn,  bis  soul  drnwcth  near  lo  the  /. 

Psal.  C>.  '5.  in  the  /.  who  shall  give  lliee  Ibnnks  ? 

30.  3   thou  hast  brought  up  my  soul  from  the  /. 

31.  17.  let  the  wicked  be  silpnl  in  the  /. 

49. 14.  like  sheep  laid  in  the  /.  roiisnme  in  Ihe  / 

15.  redeem  my  soul  from  the  power  of  the  /. 
.55. 1 1.5.  let  Ihem  go  down  quick  inio  Ihe  /. 
80.  1 13.  ihoii  hnst  delivered  my  soul  from  the/ 
88.  3.  and  my  life  drawelh  nigii  l<i  Ihe  /. 
5.  freenniongthedend,likeBlninlhnl  lie  in  the/ 
11.  Ihy  loving  kindness  be  declared  in  <''e /. 
89.48.  shall  he  deliver  his  soul  from  hand  of/.? 
141.  7.  our  boned  are  scnllered  at  Ihe  g.'»  mouth 
J'rnr.  1.  12.  let  us  swallow  them  nlive  as  Ihi'  /. 
:I0.  10.  /.  and  barren  womb,  sny  nol,  it  \<i  enough 
y.crl.  9.  10.  no  wisdom  in  thfg.  «  hitliertliou  joesl 
CuKt.8.6.  love  ii  ilrong,  jcalou«y  i»  cruel  ai  tlic  g. 


GRA 

'««.  14.  1 9.  the^.  is  moved  for  thee  to  meet  thee 
11.  thy  pomp  ia  brought  down  to  the  g. 

19.  thou  art  cast  out  of  thy  g.  hke  a  branch 

38.  10.  I  said,  I  shall  go  to  the  gates  of  the  g. 
18.  the  5'.  cannot  praise  thoc,  death  cannot 

5?.9.  he  made  his ^. with  the  wicked,and  witlirich 
Jcr.  20.  17.  that  my  mother  might  have  been  niy^. 
F.iek.  31. 15.  the  day  when  lie  went  down  to  th'e  g. 
32.  23.  and  her  company  is  round  about  her^. 
f/o.--.13.1-l.l  will  ransom  them  from  the  jiowcrof^. 
will  redeem  from  death,  O^'.I  will  be  destruction 
Jonah  2.  1 2.  out  of  the  belly  of  the  g.  cried  I 
wVaA.  1.  14.  1  will  make  thy  g.  for  tliou  art  vile 
John  11.17.  he  found  he  had  lain  in  the  ^'■.  four  days 
31.  saying,  she  goeth  to  the^.  to  weep  there 
38.  Jesus  again  groaning,  cometh  to  the  g. 
12.  17.  when  he  called  Lazarus  out  of  his  g. 
1  Cvr.  15.  55.  O  g.  where  is  thy  victory  7 
Rev.  20.  t  13.  death  and  g.  delivered  up  the  dead 

GRA  VE-C  LOTH  KS. 

John  11.  44.  Lazarus  came  forth  bound  with^.-cZ. 

GR.WE,  Adjective. 

1  7'im.3.8.  deacons  must  be^-.Hll.  wives  must  be ^. 
Tit.  2.  2.  that  aged  men  be  sober,  "-.  temperate 

GRAVE. 

£ioJ.23.9.  thou  shall  ^.  on  the  ony.\-stones  names 

3ti.  shall  make  a  plate  of  pure  gold,  and^.  on  it 

2  Chrov.  2.  7.  send  me  a  man  that  can  skill  to  g. 
14.  I  have  sent  a  cunning  man  to  g.  any  graving 

GRAVED. 

1  Kings  7.  36.  on  the  borders  he  g.  cherubims 

2  Chron.  3.  7.  and  he  g.  cherubims  on  the  walls 

GRAVEL. 
Prov.  20.  17.  but  his  mouth  shall  be  filled  with  g. 
ha.  48.  19.  offspring  of  thy  bowels  like  g.  thereof 
Z,am.  3.  16.  hath  broken  my  teeth  with  g.  stones 

GRAVEN,  Verb. 
Isa.49. 16.  Ihave^.  theeon  the  palmsof  my  hands 
Hab.  2.  18.  that  the  maker  thereof  hath  g.  it 

GRAVEN. 
F.xod.  32.  16.  was  the  writing  of  God  g.  on  tables 

39.6.  "■.  as  signets  are  g'.  with  the  names  of  Israel 
Job  19.  24.  that  they  wcre^.  with  an  iron  pen 
Jer.  17.  1.  it  is  g.  upon  the  table  of  their  heart 
Acts  17. 29.  that  the  Godhead  is  like  gold  g.  by  art 

GRAVEN  image. 
Ezod.  20.  4.  thou  shall  not  make  unto  thee  any  ^. 
image,  L,ev.  26.  1.  IJeut.  5.  8. 
DeM^4.16.  lest  ye  corrupt  and  make  a  ^.ma^e,  25. 
27.  15.  cursed  (he  man  that  maketh  uny  g.  image 
Jndg.l~.3.  the  silver  for  my  son  to  make  ag.image 
4.gave  them  to  the  founder,wlio  made  a  g.image 
18.  14.  there  is  in  these  houses  a  g.  image 
17.lhe g.image  \\  30.  Dan  set  up  the^^.ima^e,  31. 
2  iTni^s  "21 .7.  Manasseh  setupg-.un.in  house  of  G. 
Isa.  40.  19.  the  workman  melleth  n,  g.  image 

20.  he  scekelh  a  workman  to  prepare  ag.  image 

44.  9.  they  that  make  a  g.  image  are  vanity 
10.  who  hath  molten  a  g.  image  not  profitable 
17.  with  theresulue  thereof  he  maketh  his^.  im. 

45.  20.  that  set  up  the  wood  of  their  g.  image 
48.  5.  and  my  g.  image  hath  commanded  them 

Jer.W.li.  founder  confounded  by  ^.  image,  51.17. 
JVaA.  1.  14. 1  will  cut  off  the  g.  and  molten  image 
Hab.  2.  18.  what  profileth  the  g.  image  ? 

GRAVEN  images. 
X)eu«.7.5.ye  shall  burn  their  ^.jmai''fs  with  fire,  25. 
12.  3.  ye  shall  hew  down  the  g.  im.  of  their  gods 
J'«rf^.3.tl9.Ehud  turned  by  the g.images  alGilgal 
2  Kings  17.  41.  feared  the  Lord  and  served  g.  im. 
2  C'Ar.  33. 19.  set  up  g.  im.  before  he  was  humbled 

34.7.  when  he  had  beaten  the  g.images  to  powder 
Psal.ld.  58.  moved  him  to  jealousy  wilhg.images 

97.  7.  confounded  be  all  they  that  serve  ^.  images 
Isa.  10. 10.  whose  or.  im.  did  excel  them  of  Jerusa. 

21.  9.  Babylon  is  fallen,  and  all  the  g.  images 

30.  22.  shall  defile  the  covering  of  thy  g.  images 

42.  8.  neither  will  I  give  my  praise  to  g.  images 

17.  shall  be  greatly  ashamed  that  trust  in  g.  im. 

Jer.  8. 19.  provoked  me  to  anger  with  their  ^.m. 

.50.  38.  it  is  the  land  of  g.  images,  they  are  mad 

51.  47.  I  will  do  judgment  on  the  g.  images,  52. 
Hos.  11.  2.  they  burnt  incense  to  g.  images 
Mid."!,  all  the g.  images  shall  be  beaten  to  pieces 

5. 13.  thy  g.  images  also  will  I  cut  off 

GRAVES. 
F.iod.  14.  n.  because  there  were  no  g.  in  Egypt 
J^um.  11.  t34.  he  called  the  place  the  g.  of  lust 
2  Kings  23. 6.  cast  the  powder  on  the  g.  of  the  peo. 
2  Chron.  34.  4.  strowed  it  on  the  g.  of  them  that 
Job  17.  1.  days  extinct,  the  g.  are  ready  for  me 

21.  t  ^2.  yet  shall  he  be  brought  to  the  g. 
Isa.  65.  4.  which  remain  among  the  g.  and  lodge 
Jer.B.  1.  shall  bring  tho  priests'  bones  out  of  their  i'. 

26. 23.  and  cast  his  dead  body  into  ^. of  the  people 
Kiek.  32.  22.  his  g.  are  about  him,  23,  25,  26.. 

37.  12. 1  will  open  your  ^.  and  cause  you  to  come 

up  out  of  your  g. 

13.  when  I  have  opened  yoQT  g.  brought  out  of  ^. 

39.  11.  I  will  give  Gog  a  place  off.  in  brael 

251 


GRE 

Mat.  27. 53.  the^.  were  opened,  many  saints  arose 
53.  and  many  bodies  of  the  saints  came  out  of^. 
Luke  11.  44.  for  ye  aro  as  g.  which  appear  not 
John  5. 28.  all  that  are  in  Ihe^.  shall  hear  his  voice 
Reiv.  11.  9.  not  suffer  their  bodies  to  be  put  in  g. 

GRAVETH. 
Isa.  22.  16.  as  he  that  g.  a  habitation  in  a  rock 

GRAVING. 
Ezod.  32. 4.  he  fashioned  golden  calf  with  a  g.  tool 

GRAVING. 
2  CItr.  2. 14.  skilful  to  grave  any  manner  of^.  t7. 
Zech.  3.  9. 1  will  engrave^,  thereof,  saith  the  Lord 

GRAVINGS. 
1  Kings  7. 31.  upon  the  mouth  of  the  laver  were  g. 

GRAVITY. 
1  7'inj.3. 4.  having  children  in  subjection  with  all  "-. 
3Vt.  2.  7.  in  doctrine  shewing  g.  sincerity 
Gray,  see  Hairs  and  Head. 
GRAY-HEADED. 
lSam.12.2. 1  am  old  and^.-A.my  sons  are  with  you 
Job  15.  10.  with  us  are  the  g.-headed  and  aged 
Psal.'iX.ld.  when  lam  old  and  ff.-A. forsake  me  not 

GREASE. 
Psal.  119. 70.  their  heart  is  as  fat  as  g.  but  I  delight 

GREAT. 
This  word  is  put  for  rich,  powerful,  celebrated, 
viagniJicent,illustrious,  ancient.  Naanian  was 
a  great  man  loith  the  ktng  his  master  ;  he  was 
in  great  consideration  with  him,  2  Kings  5.  1. 
I  will  make  of  thee  a  great  nation.  Gen.  12.  2. 
I  will  make^hee  head  or  father  of  a  numerous 
and  powerful  people.    JUvses  was  very  great  in 
the  land  of  Egypt,  E.\od.  11.  3.     The  whole 
country  looked  upon  him  as  an  extraordinary 
man,  and  as  one  sent  from  God.    The  Great 
Sea,  A'um.  34.  6.  in  the  wwj  of  eminence,  is  the 
Me(i\lcirixn<i!xn,greater  beyond  comparisonthan 
the  Dead  Sea  andtheSea.  of  Genesareth,  which 
are  but  lakes.     The  king  y/ Assyria  is  called 
tke  great  king,  the  Euphrates,  the  great  river, 
the  city  of  Nineveh,  the  great  city ;  because  the 
king  o/ Assyria  was  the  most  potcerful  king 
in  the  east;  the  Euphrates  the  greatest  river 
in  Syria  ;  and  Nineveh  the  greatest  city  in  the 
dominions  of  tke  king  of  Assyria,  and  of  all 
the  countries  round  about. 
Gen.  12.  2. 1  will  bless  thee,  and  make  thy  name  g. 
24.  35.  Abraham  my  master  is  become  »■. 
30.8.  with  ^.wrestlings  have  I  wrestled  with  sister 
39.  9.  how  can  I  do  this  g.  wickedness  and  sin  ! 
45.  7.  to  save  your  lives  by  a  g.  deliverance 
48.  19.  I  know  it,  my  son,  he  also  shall  be  g. 
Deut.  3.  5.  besides  unwalled  towns  a  g.  many 

10. 17.  the  Lord  your  God  is  a  o-.  God,  2  Chr.  2.  5. 
11.7.  youreyes  have  seen  l\-ieg.  acts  of  the  Lord 

18.  16.  neither  let  me  see  this  g.  fire  any  more 
29. 24.  what  meaneth  the  heat  of  this  "■.  anger  1 

Josh.  7.  9.  what  wilt  thou  do  unto  thy  g.  name? 

14. 12.  thou  heardest  the  cities  were  g.  and  fenced 
22.  10.  built  there  a  g.  altar  by  .lordan  to  see  to 

24.  17.  for  he  did  those  g.  signs  in  our  sight 
./urfo-. 5. 15. divisions  of  Reuben  ^.thoughts  of  heart 
1  Ham.  12. 17.  may  perceive  your  wickedness  is  g. 

22.  1 15.  1  knew  nothing  of  all  this,  little  or^. 
2Sam.5.10.  Dav.  went  on  and  grew  o-.Ld. with  him 

7.9.  I  have  made  thee  a^.  name,  1  was  with  thee 
22.  thou  art  g.  O  Lord  God,  none  is  like  thee 

12.  14.  given  g.  occasion  to  enemies  to  bliispheme 

22.  36.  thy  gentleness  hath  made  me ."-.  Ps.  18.  35. 
I^m^s8. 42.  shall  hear  ofthy^.  name,  2  CAi-.6.32. 

19.  7.  because  the  journey  is  too  g.  fo#thee 
2A'in^s4.8.passedto  Shunem,where  was  o-.woman 

22. 13.^.  is  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  that  is  kindled 

1  Chron.  16.  25.  g.  is  the  Lord,  and  greatly  to  be 

praised,  Psal.  48.  1.  |  96.  4.  ]  135.  5.  |  145.  3. 

21.13.  into  Lord's  hand,  for  very  ^.  are  his  mercies 
29.  12.  and  in  thine  hand  it  is  to  make  g. 

2  Chro?i.2.5.  the  house  I  build  is^.for  w.  is  our  God 
9.  the  house  I  am  to  build  shall  be  wonderful^. 

17.  12.  Jehoshaphat  waxed  g.  exceedingly 

28. 13.  our  trespass  is  g.  ||34.  21.^.  wrath  poured 
JWA.  4. 14.  remember  the  Ld.  who  isg.  and  terrible 

9.  32.  now  therefore  our  God,  the^.  the  mighty  G. 
E5«A.1.20.published  thro'  all  his  empire,  for  it  is^-. 
Job  5.25.  thou  shall  know,  that  Ihy  seed  shall  be^. 

22.  5.  is  not  thy  wickedness  g.?  iniquities  infinite 

30. 18.  by  g.  force  of  my  disease  garment  changed 
35.  15.  yet  he  knowelh  it  not  in  g.  extremity 

36. 18.  a^.  ransom  ||26.  God  is^.we  know  him  not 
33.  21.  or  because  the  number  of  thy  days  is  g. 
39. 11.  wilt  thou  trust  him,  because  strength  is  ^.? 

Psal.  12.  t  3.  cut  off  tongue  that  speaks  g.  things 
14.  5.  there  were  they  in  g.  fear,  53.  5. 
19.11.  and  in  keeping  of  them  there  is  5^.  reward 
21.  5.  his  glory  is  g.  in  thy  salvation,  honour 

25.  J  I.  O  Lord,  pardon  mine  iniquity,  for  it  is  g. 

31. 19.  O  how^.  is  thy  goodness  thou  hnst  laid  up 
86.  10.  thou  art^.  and  doest  wondrous  things 
92.  5.  how  g.  are  thy  works  ||  103. 1 8.  g.  of  mercy 
139.  17.  O  God,  how  g.  is  the  sum  of  them! 


GRE 

Ecct.  9. 13.  this  wisdom  seemed  g.  unto  me 
Isa.5.9.  houses  even  g.  and  fair  without  inhabitant 
9. 2.  sat  in  darkness,  have  seen  g.  light,  Mat.  4.16. 

12. 6.  g.  is  the  holy  One  of  Israel  in  midst  of  theft 
19.20.  ho  shall  send  them  a  Saviour  and  a.g.  one 

53.  12.  1  will  divide  liKn  a  portion  with  the  <r. 

54.  13.  and  g.  shall  be  .the  peace  of  thy  children 
Jer.  5.  27.  therefore  they  are  become  g.  and  rich 

10.  6.  thou  art  g.  and  thy  name  is  g.  in  might 
20.  17.  and  her  womb  to  be  always  g.  with  me 
32.  18.  the  g.  the  mighty  God  is  his  name 

19.  g.  in  counsel,  and  mighty  in  work 
44.  26.  behold,  I  have  sworn  by  my  g.  name 
Lam.  3.  23.  they  are  new,  g.  is  thy  failhfulnesa 
Ezek.  16.  7.  thou  hast  increased  and  waxed  g. 
17.  3.  a^.  eagle  with  g.  wings,  long-winged,  7. 

24.  9.  I  will  even  make  the  pdc  for  fire  g. 
29.  18.  to  serve  a  g.  service  against  Tyrus 

31.  4.  tho  waters  nuide  him  g.  the  deep  set  him  up 
36.  23.  and  1  will  sanctify  my  g.  name 

i'an.4.3.how^.hisBigns,  how  mighty  his  wonders' 

8.  4.  I  saw  tile  rain  pushing,  and  he  became  g. 
.Joel  3. 13.  get  you  down,  fbr  their  wickedness  is  g 
Amos  6.  2.  and  from  tlience  go  to  Hamath  the  g. 
Jl/(c.  5.  4.  now  shall  hebe^.  unto  ends  of  the  earth 
Zech.O.n.  how  ^.  his  goodness,  how  ^.his  beauty! 
jVal.  1.11.  my  name  shall  be^-.  among  Gentiles,  11. 
Mat.  5.  12.  rejoice  and  be  exceeding  glad,  for  g, 

is  your  reward  in  heaven,  Luke  6.  23,  35. 

19.  shall  be  called  g.  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven 

6.  23.  if  light  be  darkness,  hnw^.  is  that  darkness! 

13. 46.  one  pearl  of  ^.  price  {|  15. 28.  g.  is  thy  faith 

19.  22.  for  he  had  g.  possessions,  Mark  10.  42. 

20.  25.  they  that  are  g.  exercise  authority 

26.  whosoever  will  bec'.amongyou,  Mark  10.43. 
22.  36.  Master,  which  is  the  g.  commandment'? 

38.  this  is  the  first  and  g.  commandment 
Luke  1.  15.  he  shall  be^.  in  sight  of  the  Lord,  32. 

9.  48.  that  is  least  among  you,the  same  shall  be  o'. 

10.  2.  the  harvest  truly  is^.  but  the  labourers  few 

16.  26.  between  us  and  you  there  is  a  g.  gulf 
Acts  8.  9.  giving  out' that  he  was  some  g.  one 

19.  28.  g.  is  Diana  of  the  Ephesians  I  34. 

2  Cor.  7.  4.  g.  is  my  boldness,  g.  is  my  glorying 
Col.  4. 13.  that  he  hath  ag.  zeal  for  you  and  them 

1  T'2>».3.16.  g.  is  mystery  of godliness,God  manifest 

2  THm.  2.  20.  in  g.  house  not  only  vessels  of  gold 
Tit.  2.  13.  the  glorious  appearing  of  the  g.  God 
Heb.  7.  4.  now  consider  how  g.  this  man  was 
.Jam.  3.  5.  how  g.  a  matter  a  little  fire  kindleth 
Rev.  15.  1.  and  I  saw  another  sign  in  heaven,  g. 

16.19.  yor.  Babvlon  came  in  remembrance  before  G. 

17.  5.  Babylon  the  o-.  the  mother  of  harlots,  18.2, 
19.17.  gather  together  unto  the  supper  of  the  ^.  G. 

See  City,  Company,  Congregation,  Cry,  Dat 
Destruction. 

GREAT  evil. 

1  Sam.  6.  9.  then  he  hath  done  us  g.  evil 

JVcA.  13. 27.  hearken  unto  you  to  do  all  Ihis^.  evil 
Eccl.  2.  21.  this  also  is  vanity,  and  a  g.  evil 
Jer.  16.  10.  wherefore  Lord  pronounced  thisg'.  evil 
26. 19.  thus  might  we  procure i'.  evil  ag.  our  souls 

32.  42. 1  have  brought  this  g.  evil  upon  this  people 

44.7.  why  commit  this  ^.eijiZ  against. your  souls'? 
Z^07i.9.12.  confirmed,  by  bringing  upon  us  a^.  evil 

See  ExcEEDiNt;,  .Toy. 
GREAT  king  or  kings. 

2  Kings  18. 19.  thus  saith  the^.  k.  28.  Isa.  36.4,13. 
Ezra  5.  11.  which  a  g.  king  of  Israel  builded 
Psal.  47.  2.  the  Lord  is  a^.  King  over  all  the  earth 

48.  2.  is  mount  Zion,  the  city  of  the  g.  King 
95.  3.  the  Lord  is  a  g.  King  above  all  gods 
136.  17.  give  thanks  to  him  that  smote  g.  kings 
Eccl.  0.  14.  and  there  came  a  g.  king  against  it 
,Ier.  25. 14.  g.  kings  shall  serve  themselves,  27. 7. 
Mnl.  1.  14.  for  I  am  a  g.  King,  saith  the  Lord 
Mat.  5.  35.  Jerusalem  is  the  city  of  the  g.  King 

GREAT  men. 
2  Sdin.  7.9.  like  name  of  g.m.  in  earth,  1  CAr.  17.8. 
2  Kings  ^O.Cy.  Ahab'ssons  were  with  ^.■mpn  of  city 

11.  Jehu  slew  all  Ahab's  g.  men  and  kinsfolks 
JVch.  11.  14.  Zabdiel  overseer,  son  of  one  of^.  men 
Job  32.  9.  g.  men  are  not  always  wise,  nor  the  aged 
Prov.  18.  16.  a  gift  bringeth  him  before  g.  men 

25.  6.  and  stand  not  in  the  place  of^.  men 

Jer.  5.  5. 1  will  get  me  unto  the  g.  men  and  speak 
.')2.  13.  all  the  houses  of  the  ^.  men  burnt  he 
Ezek.  21.  14.  it  is  the  sword  of  the  g.  men  slain 
Jonah  3.  t7.  with  the  consent  of  hisi^f.  men 
JVah.  3.  10.  all  her  g.  men  were  bound  in  chains 
Rev.  fi.  15.  g.  men  hid  themselves  in  dens  and  rocks 
18.23.  thy  merchants  were  tho  n-.  men  ofthe  earth 
GREAT  multitude,  mvUifudrs. 
AuTO.32.1.Reuben,Gadhada  o-.mw^tjfKrfrofoattla 
lA'in^i  20.13.  hast  thou  seen  all  \\m  g.vmltitvde? 
28. 1  will  deliver  this ^.  7nu/^7?(rfe  into  ihine  hand 
2  CAr.  13.  8.  beyea^.  muJ«.  yehaverolden  calves 

20.  2.  there  cometh  a  g.  multitude  P!;ainst  thee 
15.  not  dismayed  by  reason  of  this  g  jmultitudt 

28.5.  tarried  a  g.  mHltitvde  captives  to  Damaiwol 


GRE 

Suh  3134.  dtd  I  fiiar  a;T.  mullitude  or  did  contempt 
Aa.  16. 14.  all  \ha\. g.inultitudeshaW  be  contemned 
Jer.  44.  15.  women  lliat  stood  by,  even  a  g.  mult. 
EiekAIM.  there  shall  be  a  veryg'.  mullitude  offish 
Dan.  11.  II.  king  uf  south  thai!  set  forth  a^.  mult. 
Mat.  4.  25.  or.  multitudes  followed  him,  8.  1.  |  12. 
15.  1  19.  2.  I  20.  29,  Mark  3.  7.  .John  «.  2. 

8.  18.  when  Jtsus  saw ^.  mult.  14.  14.  J/arA- 9.  14. 
15.  30.  g.  mult,  came,  having  lame,  bhnd,  dumb 

33.  whence  so  much  bread  as  to  (ill  su  g.  multi. 
21.8.  a  ^.  multitude  B\tti:a.A  their  garments  in  way 
26.47.  with  Judas  a  ^.  m.  with  swords,  Jl/arA  14.43 
Lvke  5.  6.  they  inclosed  a  g.  multitude  of  fishes 

15.^.  mult,  came  together  to  hear  and  be  liealed 
^oAn5.3.  in  these  lay  a  4'.  mu/<i£u(/e  of  impotent  folk 
^ct3  14. 1.  &g.  mult,  of  Jews  and  Greeks  believed 

17.  4.  and  of  the  devout  Greeks  a  g.  mullitude 
Rev.  1.  y.  a  g.  mult,  which  no  man  could  number 
J9.  6.  I  heard  as  it  were  the  voice  of  a  g.  mult. 

GREAT  nation  and  nativtis. 
Oen.  12.  2.  I  will  make  of  thee  a  g.  nation,  and 
will  bless  thee,  18.  18.  |  4G.  3.  Exod.  32.  10. 

17.  20.  I  will- make  Ishmael  a  g.  nation,  21.  18. 
Deut.  4.  G.  surely  this  g.  nation  is  a  wise  people 

26.  5.  he  became  there  a  nation  g.  and  mighty 
Josh.  23.  9.  hath  driven  out  before  you  g.  nations 
/'ia/.  135.10.  who  smoleg.  nations,  and  slew  kings 
Jer.  6.  22.  a  g.  nation  Shall  be  raised  from  the  sides 
50.9. 1  will  raise  against  Bab.  an  assembly  of  ^.  n. 
41.  |)eople  shall  come  from  the  north,  a^.  nation 
Ezek.  31. 0.  under  his  shadow  dwell  all  g.  nations 

GREAT  people. 

Deut.  2.  10.  the  Emims  dwelt  therein,  a  people  g. 

21.  Zamzummims,  a  people  g.  many  and  tall 

9.  2.  a  people  g.  and  tall,  cliddren  of  Anakims 
Josh.l'.  14.  why  but  one  lot, seeing  I  am  a.g. people 

15.  if  thou  be  a  g. people  ||  17.  thou  art  a^.propic 

I  Kings 3.H.  a  g. people  that  cannot  be  nimdiered 

9.  who  isable  tojudge  t\\isg. people?  2  Chr.  1. 10. 

5.  7.  given  David  a  wise  son  over  tliis  g.  people 
/>a.l3. 4.  the  noise  in  mountains  like  as  of ^.pfop/e 
Joel  2. 2.  a  g.  people,  haih  not  been  ever  the  like 

GREAT  power. 
Ezod.  ,32.  11.  thy  people  thou  hast  brought  out  of 
Egypt  v.;lUg.powcr,2  Kings  17.36."jVcA.1.10. 
.Yum.  14.  17.  let  the  power  of  my  lord  be  g. 
Josh.\'t.\T.  thou  art  agreat  people  and  hast  ^.potc. 
yo4  23.fi.  will  he  plead  against  me  with  g.  power? 
Psal.  147.  5.  great  is  our  Lord,  and  of  ^.  power 
Jer.i~.5.  I  have  made  the  earth,  the  man  and  the 
beasts  on  the  ground,  by  my  g.  power,  32.  17. 
F.zek.  17.  9.  it  shall  wither  even  without  ^.  power 
JVaA.  1.  3.  the  Lord  is  slow  to  anger,  g.  in  power 
Mark  13.  26.  coming  in  the  clouds  with  g.  power 
^etsi.Xi.  wilU g. power  ^avelhe  apostles  witness 

8.  10.  saying,  this  man  is  the^.  power  of  God 
Rev.  11.  17.  thou  habt  taken  to  tiiee  thy  g.  power 

18.  1.  angel  come  from  heaven,  having  ^.puwer 

GREAT  sea. 
Jfum.  34.  6.  yc  shall  have  the  g.  sea  for  a  border 
Josh.  1.  4.  from  the  wilderness  unto  the^.  sea 

9.  1.  when  the  kings  in  the  coasts  of  g.  sea  heard 
15.  12.  the  west  border  was  to  the  g.  sea  and  coa^t 

47.  inheritance  of  Judah,  to  tlieg'.  sea  and  border 
23.4.  with  ail  nations  I  have  cut  off  to  ihe.  g.  sea 
Ezek.  47. 10.  as  fish  of  the  g.  sea,  exceeding  many 
15.  border  of  land  toward  nortli  from  the  g.  sea 
Dan.  7.  2.  the  four  winds  strove  upon  the^.  jea 
See  .Sin. 
GREAT  slaughter. 
Jo'h.  10.  10.  slew  them  with  a  g.  .1.  at  Gibeon 
20.  made  an  end  of  slaying  them  with  g.  s. 
Judg.  II.  33.  Jephthah  smote  Arninon.  with  g.  s. 
15.  8.  Samson  smote  the  Philistines  with  g.  1. 

1  .Sam.  4.  10.  Philistines  smote  Israel  with  g.  s.  17. 

6.  19.  I,ord  had  smitten  the  people  with  a  g.  s. 

19.  8.  David  slew  Philistines  with  a  g.  s.  23.  5. 

2  ."?<im.  1«.  7.  a  g.  slaughter  Ihtit  day  of  20,000  men 

1  Kings'ii).'i\.  king  of  Isr.  slew  Syrians  with^.«. 
ZChron.  13.  17.  Abijah  slew  Israel  with  tig.  s. 

28.  5.  king  of  Israel  smote  Ahaz  with  a  g.  s. 
Isa.  30.  25.  in  the  day  nf  g.  ».  when  the  towers  fall 

34.6.  Lord  hath  ag.  daughter  ii>  landof  Idumea 

.So  GREAT. 
Krod  32.21. tbon  hast  brought. «o/t.  nsin  upon  them 
Deut.i.l.  what  nation  to  g.  hath  God  so  nigh7  8. 
l/riV«3.9.wh(.nbletojudg<!»o<!'.  peo.?2CAr.l.l0. 
Psal.  77.  13.  who  \\t  so  g.  a  God  as  our  God  1 

103.  11.  so  g.  is  bin  mercy  to  them  that  fear  him 
Mat.f*.  10  nut  fiHind  »o;f.  faith  in  Israel,  f.ukeT.O. 

J5.  33.  >o  much  bread  as  to  fill  so  g.  a  multitude 

2  Cor.  I.  10;  "ho  delivered  ns  from  so  g.  a  d'-alh 
Ifeh.2.  3.  how  escape, if  wo  ncglrrt  so  g.  salvation! 

12.1.  nrecompaniied  with*of .  a  cloud  o^" witnesses 
Jam.  3.  4.  shi|i«  tho'  so  g.  yi't  turned  with  a  helni 
Rev.  IB.  18.  so  mighty  an  earthquake  and  so  g. 
■'6.  17.  in  one  hour  so  g.  rii-hen  come  to  nought 

Snia2/«nd  GREAT. 

rJ»ii-10. 11.  smote  men  with  blind nem  tmnll  and  g. 

Dtut.  1.  17.  but  ye  ihnll  hear  rmall  ai  well  aj  g. 

853 


GRE 

Z)f  ut.25.13.shaltnot  have  divers  weights,a  g.and  s 

14.  shalt  not  have  divers  measures,  a  g.  and  sm 
lSam.5.0.  smote  the  men  sm.andg.  withemerods 

20.  2.  my  father  will  do  nothing  g.  or  small 
;   30.  2.  they  slew  not  any  either  g.  or  small 
I      19.  there  was  nothing  lacking  neither  sm.  nor  g. 

1  Kings  22. 31.  fight  not  with  sm.  norg.  2  CAr.18.30. 

'2Kings  23. 2.  sm.anrf^. went  to  house,  2  CAr.34.30. 

25.  26.  all  the  people  small  andg.  came  to  Egyjit 

1  Chr.  26.  13.  they  cast  lots  as  well  the  small  as  g. 

2  Chr.  15. 13.  be  put  to  death,  whether  small  or  g. 
31.  15.  to  give  to  brethren  by  courses,  g.  andsm. 
36.  18.  gave  into  his  hands  vessels,  g.  and  .<7nall 

Esth.  1.5.  Ahasuirus  made  a  feast  unto  o-.a7id.s-;n. 

20.  ihull  give  to  husbands  honour,  g.  and  small 
Job  3.  19.  small  and  g.  are  there,  servant  is  fiee 

.37.  6.  he  saith  to  the  sixall  rain,  and  to  g.  rain 
Psal.  104.  25.  are  things  creeping,  small  and  g. 

1 15. 13.  bless  them  that  fear  the  Lord,  .imaltand  g. 
Er.cl.  2.  7.  I  had  possessions  of  ^.  and  small  cattle 
Jer.  16.  6.  g.  and  small  shall  die  in  this  land 
.imos8.  5.  making  the  cphah  small,  the  shekel  g. 
Jlcts  26. 22.  I  continue  witnessing  to  small  and  g. 
flcB. 11. 18. reward  to  them  that  fear  \>\m,sm.andg. 

13. 16.  he  caused  small  and  g.  to  receive  a  mark 

19.5. praise  our  God,  ye  that  fear  him,  small  andg. 
18.  that  ye  may  eat  Hesh  of  all  men, small  and  g. 

20. 12. 1  saw  the  dead,sm.  andg.  stand  before  God 

GREAT  stone  and  stones. 

Gen.  29.  2.  a  g.  stone  was  upon  the  well's  mouth 

Deut,  27.  2.  that  set  up  g.  stones  and  plaster  them 

Josh.  10.  11.  Lord  cast  down  g.stones  from  heaven 

18.  roll  g.  stones  upon  the  mouth  of  the  cave 

24.  26.  Joshua  took  a  g.  stone,  and  set  it  up  there 

1  Sani.6.14.the  cart  came-wbere  there  was  a  g.stone 

15.  and  the  Levites  put  them  on  the  g.  stone 
18.  to  the ^.  siojie  of  Abi^l,  whereon  they  set  ark 

14.33.  ye  have  transgressed,  roll  a  g.stone  unto  me 

2  .Sam.  20.  8.  when  they  were  at  g.  sto7te  in  Gibeon 

1  Kings  5. 17.  they  brought^..'!(o?i(r,s-  to  lay  foumlat. 

7.  lU.  the  foundation  was  of  ^.  stones,  Ezra  5-  8. 

2  Chr.  26.  15.  he  made  engines  to  shoot  g.  stones 
Eira6.4.threerow6of^.st«ncAanda  row  of  timber 
.fer.  43.  9.  take  g.  stones  and  hide  them  in  clay 
Mat. 21.  60.  he  rolled  a  ^.  itiwu' to  door  of  sepulchre 

GREAT  thing  and  things. 
/)«ii£. 4. 32. whether  any  such  thing  as  ihis^.tAin"'  is 

10.  21.  he  is  thy  God  that  hath  done  g.  things 
lSa7n.i2.l6.  stand  and  see  iWxsg. thing  Lord  will  do 

24.  consider  how^.  things  he  hath  done  for  you 

26.  25.  thou  shalt  both  do  g.  things  and  prevail 
2.Sam.7.21.  for  word's  sake  hast  thou  <\ one  g.  things 

23.  and  to  do  for  you  g.  things  and  terrible 
2  Kings  5.  13.  if  prophet  had  bid  thee  do  some^.  t. 

8.  4.  tell  me  all  the  g.  things  Elisha  hath  done 
13.  is  he  a  dog,  that  he  should  do  this  g.  thing  ? 

1  Chron.  17.  19.  in  making  known  these  g  things 

.fob  5. 9.  to  God  who  docth  g.  things,  9. 10.  |  .37.  5. 

Ps.71.19.  who  hast  done  g.  things,  who  is  like  thee 
106.  21.  they  forgat  God  who  had  done  g.  things 
126.  2.  the  Lord  hath  done  g.  things  for  them,  3. 

./cr.  33.  3.  I  will  shew  thee  g.  and  mighty  things 
45.  5.  and  seekcst  thou  g.  things  for  thyself? 

Dan.  7.  8.  a  mouth  speaking  g.  th.  20.  Kev.  13.  5. 

ffos.  8.  12.  I  have  written  the  g.  things  of  my  law 

./oel  2.  20.  because  he  hath  done  g.  things 

21.  fear  not,  O  land,  the  Lord  will  do  g.  things 
Mark  3.  8.  when  they  heard  what/r.  things  he  did 

5.19.  tell  how g.things  Lord  hath  done,  Luke  8.39. 
f,uke  1.  49.  he  that  is  mighty  hath  done  g.  things 

8. 39.  he  MibliKlied  how  g.  things  Jesus  had  done 
Jlets  9.  \CtA  will  shew  how  g.things  he  must  suffer 

1  Cor.  9.  11.  isita/!'.  (AiTin- if  we  ri.ap  carnal  things? 

2  Cor.11.15.  nn  g.lh.  if  his  ministers  belransforrned 
.fam.  3. 5.  tongue  a  little  member  boastcth  g.  things 

Very  GREAT. 
Oen.  20   13.  Isaac  grew  till  he  became  very  g. 
Kind.  11.3.  the  man  Moses  was  nrry  g.\n  the  land 
JViim.l  1.33.  Ld.  smote  people  with  a  vrryg.  plague 

13.  28.  and  the  cities  are  walled  and  very  g. 

22.  17.  I  will  promote  thee  unto  vny  g.  honour 

1  Sam.  2. 17.  the  sin  of  tho  young  men  was  very  g. 
4.  10.  and  there  was  a  pert/  g.  slaughter 

14. 15.  reryg.  trembling  ||  20.  rcT^yf. discomfiture 
2.5.  2.  Nabnl  wnsB  very  g.  man,  be  had  300f)  sheep 

2  .S'arn.  18. 17.  they  laid  a  very  g.i\cn]i  on  Absalom 
19.  32.  for  nnrzillai  was  a  very  g.  man 

1  Kings  10.2.  (|U.  of  Sheba  came  with  a  veryg.  train 

1  Chron.  21.  13.  for  very  g.  are  his  mercies 

2  CArnn.lfi.  11.  they  made  a  um/yf- burning  for  Asa 
24.24.  Ld.  delivered  a  r cry  ;j7-.)i(iHt  into  their  hand 
.30.13.as«emble<l  a  t'fry ;?.cnngregation,  f'lra  10.1. 
33. 14.  Manass.  raised  up  the  wall  a  vrryg.  height 

JVcA.  8.  17.  and  there  wos  a  very  g.  gladness 
.Job  1.3.  Job  apery  4^.  household,  greatest  in  the  cost 
2.  13.  for  they  saw  that  his  grief  was  very  g. 
Psal.  104.  1.  O  Lord  my  God,  thou  art  very  ^. 
F.ifk.Vl.  9.  there  shall  be  a  very  g.  multitude  offish 
Dan.  8.  8.  therefore  the  he-go'at  waxed  very  g. 

11.  85.  king  ofiouthstirrad  up  with  a  eery  f.  army 


GRE 

.Toel  2.  11.  for  his  camp  is  very  i>.  he  is  slrongr 
ZtcA.  14.  4.  and  there  shall  be  a  very  g.  valley 
Mat.lX.S.  a  vcry^.multitude  spread  their  gurmenU 
Mark  8.  1.  the  multitude  very  g.  having  nothing 

16. 4.  the  stone  was  rolled  awav,  for  it  was  very g. 

Was  GREAT. 
<7cn,.6. 5.  God  saw  the  wickedness  of  man  wasg 

13.6.  their  substance  wasg.  so  that  they  could  no 

1  Kings  3.  4.  to  Gibeon,  that  was  the  g.  high  place 

2  Kings  3.  27.  there  tra*^.  indignation  against  Isr. 
Esth.  4.  3.  where  the  decree  came  iras^. mourning 

9.  4.  Mordecai  was  g.  in  the  king's  house,  10.  £ 
.lob  31.  25.  if  I  rejoiced  because  my  wealth  was  g. 
Kccl.2.9. 1  was g.  and  increas.  more  than  all  bel'or« 
Art/n.  1.  1.  she  that  was  ^.  among  the  nations 
Dan.  4.  10.  the  tree's  height  was  g.  and  it  grew 
Mat.'i.'i'.  it  fell, and  p'.  uas  the  fall  of  it,  Luke  C.4& 

GREAT  iratcr*. 

2  Sam.  22. 1 17.  drew  me  out  of  g.  w.  Psal.  18. 1 16. 

Psal.  29.  t  3.  the  voice  of  Lord  is  upon  g.  wutirt 
32.  6.  in  floods  of  g.  waters  shall  not  come  nigh 
77.  19.  thy  way  is  in  the  sea,  thy  path  in  g.  waters 
107.  23.  they  that  do  business  in  g.  icatirs 
144.  7.  send  from  above,  deliver  me  nut  ofg.  wot, 

fsa.  23.  3.  and  by  g.  waters  the  seed  of  Sinor 

Jer.  41.  12.  found  fshinael  by  g.  waters  of  Gibeoa 
51.  55.  when  her  waves  do  roar  like  g.  waters 

F.zek.  1.  24.  the  noise  of  their  wings  like  g.  waters 
17.  5.  he  placed  of  the  seed  by  g.  waters,  set  it 
8.  it  was  planted  in  a  good  soil  by  g.  waters 

26.  19.  when  g.  waters  shall  cover  tnee 

27.  26.  thy  rowers  brought  thee  into  g.  waters 
31.  7.  he  was  fair,  for  his  root  was  by  "•.  waters 

15. 1  restrained  floods,  the^.  waters  were  stayed 
32.13. 1  will  destroy  all  the  beasts  beside ^.a?atfr» 

//uA.3.15.  didst  walk  through  iheUf-apof g.  waters 
GKEAT  while. 

2Sam.7.19.  but  thou  hast  spok.  also  of  thy  scrvant'i 
house  for  a  g.  while  to  come,  1  Chron.  17.  17. 

Mark  1.35.  ri.sing  upa^.  rfAr'/ebefoieday,  he  went 

Luke  10. 13.  had  g.irhilc  ago  repented  in  sackcloth 

.^cts  28.  6.  after  itie  barbarians  looked  a^.  while 
GREAT  work  and  works. 

Ezod.  14.  31.  Israel  saw  that  "-.  work  the  Lord  did 

Judg.  2.  7.  who  had  seen  all  the  g.  works  ef  the  L. 

1  CAr«n.29.  1.  my  son  is  young,  and  the  icorA:  isF. 

M'eh.  4.  19.  the  work  \s  g.  and  we  are  separatea 
6.  3.  I  am  doing  a  g.  work,  I  cannot  come  down 

Psal.]  11.2.  the  works  of  the  Lord  are  g.  Rev.  15.3. 

F.ccl.  2.  4.  I  made  g.  works,  I  builded  me  houses 
GREATER. 

^fTi.  1.  Ifi.  God  made  tiie  ^.  light  to  rule  the  day 
4.  13.  my  punishment  \s  g.  than  I  can  bear 
39.  9.  there  is  none  g.  in  this  house  than  I 
41.  40.  only  in  the  throne  will  I  be  g.  than  thou 
48.  19.  his  younger  brother  shall  be  g.  than  he 

Exod.  18.  11.  I  know  the  Lord  is  g.  than  all  godi 

J^um.  14.  12.  makcofthoe^.  nation,  Deut.  9.  14 

Deut.  1.  28.  the  peoftle  li  g.  and  taller  than  we 
4. 38.  drive  nations^,  than  thou,  7.1.  |9.1.  |  11.23L 

Josh.  10.  2.  because  Gibeon  was  g.  than  .^i 

1  .S'<77n.  14.  30.  had  there  not  been  a  g.  slaughter 

2  Sam.  13.  15.  the  hatred  was  g.  than  the  love 

16.  this  evil  is  g.  than  the  other  thou  didst  me 
1  Kings  1.  37.  make  his  thrrme  g.  than  David,  47 

1  Chron.  11.9.  David  waxed  g.  and  g.  L.  was  with 

2  Chron.  3.  5.  the  nr.  house  he  ceiled  with  fir-tree 
f?.<(A.  9.  4.  fiir  this  man  Monlecai  waxed  g.  and  g. 
.fob  .33.  12.  I  will  answer,  that  God  is  ^.  than  man 
/,n»i.  4.  6.  is  g.  than  the  punishment  of  Sodom 
Ezek.  8.  R.  thou  shalt  see  g  abominations,  13,  15. 
/)an.  1 1.1 3.shall  set  fiirth  a  multitude ;f.than  former 
.■Imos  6.  2.  or  their  border  g  than  your  horder 
ffng.  2.  9.  the  glory  of  latter  house  g.  than  former 
Mat.  11.  11.  not  risen  n  g.  than  John  the  Raptisf ; 

least  in  kingd.  of  heaven^,  than  he,  Lukel.  28. 
12.  6.  in  this  place  is  one  g.  than  the  temple 

41.  behold,  a  g.  than  Jonas  is  here,  Luke  11.32. 

42. 1)eh(d<l,  a  /r'hanScdomon  is  here, /.i/Ac  11.31. 
2.3.  14.  receive ;r.  damn.  .1/nrA  12.40.  Luke'iOM 

17.  for  whether  is  g.  the  gold,  or  tho  temple  ? 
19.  for  whether  i.«  g.  the  gift,  or  the  altar? 

Mark  4.  32.  sown,  it  becometh  g.  than  all  herbs 

12.  31.  there  is  no  other  command,  g.  than  these 
LvkrM.M*.  Twill  pull  down  my  barns.nnd  build  p. 

22.27.  whether  is  g.  he  that  sittoth  or  that  servelh'' 
.fohn  I.  ."50.  thou  shalt  see  g.  things,  .5.  20.  |  14.  12. 

4.  12.  art  thou  g.  than  our  father  Jacob? 

5.  36.  I  have  g.  witness  than  that  of  John 

8.  .53.  art  thou  g.  than  our  father  Abraham? 

10.  29.  my  Father  is /r-  <han  all,  14.  28. 

13.  16.  the  servant  is  not  g.  than  his  lord,  15.  20L 
15.  13.  g.  love  hath  no  man  than  ibis  to  lay  dowi, 
19. 11.  he  that  delivered  me  to  thee  bath  ihe^.  sin 

.■7rf.<  15  28.  to  Inv  upon  yon  no  g.  burden  than  these 
Unm.9.  tI2.  it  was  said,  the  <r.  shall  serve  the  lesser 
1  r.ir.  14.  y  for  g.  is  he  that  propliesielh,  than  he 
15.  6.  of  whom  Ihe/r.parl  remain  unto  this  present 
//fA.fi.13.  because  he  could  swear  by  ncig.he  swore 
IG.  for  men  verily  swear  by  the  g.  and  tn  oath 


GRE 

U«b.  9-  11.  by  a  g.  and  more  perfect  tabcrDacle 

11. 26.  esteeming  the  reproacli  of  Clirist  g.  riches 
Jam.3.1.lcnowing  we  shall  receive^.condemnation 
S  Pet.i.  11.  whereas  angels  which  are^.  in  power 
Uo/in3.  20.  God  is^.  than  our  heart,  and  knowetli 

4.  4.  g.  is  he  that  is  in  you,  than  he  in  the  world 

5.  9.  witness  of  God  is  ^.  this  is  the  witness  of  God 
3  John  4. 1  have  no  g.  joy  than  to  hear  that  children 

GREATEST. 

-1  CAr.12.14.  least  was  over  100,  ^i-.  over  a  thousand 

29.  hitherto  the  g.  part  had  ke]it  the  ward  of  Saul 

Job  1.  3.  this  man  was  the  g.  of  all  in  the  east 

Jcr.  6.  13.  from  ieaat  to g.  given  to  covetousn.  8.10. 

31.  34.  all  know  me,  from  least  to  the^.  Ueb.8.11. 
42.  1.  alt  people  from  the  least  to  the  g.  came  near 

8.  Jeremiah  called  the  people  from  least  to  the^ 
44.  12.  they  shall  die,  from  the  least  to  the^. 
JonaA3.5.  put  onsackclolh,  from  the ^.to  the  least 
Mat.  13.  3-.  when  grown,  it  is  the  g.  among  herbs 
18.  1.  who  is  the  g.  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven 

4.  bumble  himself  as  this  little  child,  same  is^. 

23.  II.  but  he  that  is  g.  shall  be  your  servant 
Mark  9.  34.  disputed  who  sliould  be  g.  Luke  9. 46. 
Luke  22.  21.  there  was  a  strife  who  should  be  g. 

20.  hut  he  that  is^.  let  him  be  as  the  younger 
Jlcts  8.  10.  all  gave  heed  from  the  least  to  the^. 
1  Cor.  13.  13.  but  the  g.  of  these  is  charity 

GREATLY. 
Gen.  a.  16.  he  said,  I  will  g.  multiply  tliy  sorrow 
19. 3.  Lot  pressed  upon  them  g.  and  they  turned  in 

24.  35.  the  Lord  hath  blessed  ray  master  g. 

27.  t  33.  Isaac  trembled  with  a  trembling  g. 

32.  7.  then  Jacob  was  g.  afraid  and  distressed 
Kiod.  19.  IS.  and  the  whole  mount  quaked  "-. 
J^um.  11. 10.  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled^. 

14.  39.  Moses  told,  and  the  people  mourned  g. 
Deut.  15.  4.  the  Lord  shall  g.  bless  thee  in  the  land 

17.  17.  nor  shall  he  g.  multiply  silver  and  gold 
Jmig.'i,.  15.  Lord  ag.  them,  they  were  o-.  distressed 

6.  6.  Israel  was^.  impoverished  by  Midian 

1  Sam.  11.  6.  Saul's  anger  was  kindled  g. 
15.  Saul  and  all  the  men  of  Israel  rejoiced^. 

12. 18.  the  people  g.  feared  the  Lord  and  Samuel 
1<).  21.  beloved  him^.  became  his  armour-bearer 
17. 11.  when  heard  Philistines,  they  were  ^.afraid 

28. 5.  Saul  saw  the  Pliilist.  his  heart  trembled  g. 

30.6.  David  was  ^.distressed,  for  the  people  spake 

2  .Sam.  10.  5.  the  men  were  g.  ashamed,  1  C'Ar.19.5, 
12.  5.  David's  anger  was  g.  kindled  ag.  the  man 
13. 1 15.  Amnon  hated  her  with  great  hatred^. 

136.  the  king  wept  with  a  great  weeping  g. 
14.12.5.  was  not  a  beautiful  man  in  Isr.  to  praise^. 

24. 10.  David  said,  I  have  sinned  g.  1  Chr.  21.  8. 
iKings'i.  12.  Solomon's  kingd.  was  established  g. 

.5.7.  Hiram  heard  Solomon's  words,  he  rejoiced  g. 

18.  3.  now  Obadiah  feared  the  Lord  g. 

1  Chr.  4.  38.  the  house  of  their  fathers  increased^. 
16.  25.  great  is  the  Lord,  g.  to  be  praised,  to  be 

feared  above  all  gods,  Ps.  48. 1.  i  96.4.  |  145.3 

2  Chr.  25. 10.  their  anger  was^.  kindled  ag.  Judah 

33.  12.  Manaseeh  humbled  himself^,  before  God 
F.ira  10.  1 13.  we  have  g.  ofl'ended  in  this  thing 
Job  8.  7.  yet  thy  latter  end  should  g.  increase 
P.tal.  21.  1.  in  thy  salvation  how  o-.  shall  he  rejoice 

28.  7.  therefore  my  heart  g.  rejoiceth,  I  will  praise 
38.6.  I  am  bowed  dowT^.  go  mourning  all  the  day 
45.  11.  so  shall  the  king  ^.  desire  thy  beauty 
47.9.  shields  of  earth  belong  to  God,  he  is^.exalted 
62.  2.  he  is  my  defence,  1  shall  not  be  g.  moved 
65.  9.  thou  ^.  enrichest  it  with  the  river  of  God 
71.23.  my  lips  shall^.  rejoice  when  I  sing  unto  thee 
78.  59.  he  was  wroth,  and  g.  abhorred  Israel 
105.  24.  he  increased  his  people  g.  107.  38. 
109.  .30. 1  will  g.  praise  the  Lord  with  my  mouth 
112. 1.  blessed  that  delighteth^.  in  his  command. 
116.  10.  I  was  g.  afflicted,  I  said  in  my  haste 
119.  51.  the  proud  have  had  me  g.  in  derision 

Prov.  23.  24.  the  father  of  righteous  sliall^.  rejoice 
Isa.  42. 17.  shall  be^.  ashameil  that  trust  in  images 
61.  10. 1  Willi/-,  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  soul  be  joyful 
Jer.  3.  1.  shall  not  that  land  be  g.  |)olluted  ? 
4.  10.  surely  thou  hast  g.  deceived  this  people 
9.19.  we  are  ^.confounded, have  forsaken  the  land 

20.11.  persecutors  shall  be  /j. ashamed,  not  prosper 
F.zek.  20.  13.  and  my  sabbaths  they  g.  polluted 

25.  12.  because  that  Edom  hath  g.  offended 
Dan.  5.  9.  then  was  king  Belshazzar  g.  troubled 

9.  23.  for  thou  art  g.  beloved,  10.  11,  19. 
Obad.  2.  I  made  thee  small,  thou  art  g.  despised 
./onaA 4. t4.  art  thou  »'.nngry'?  t9.  ||  t9. 1  am^.angry 
Zeph.  1.  14.  the  great  day  of  the  Lord  hasteth  g. 
Z.fch.  9.  9.  rejoice  g.  O  daughter  of  Zion,  shout 
Mat.  27. 14.  insomuch  that  governor  marvelled  g. 
*VirA  5.2.3.Jairu3  besought  hi  mer.saying,  my  daug. 
38.  he  seeth  them  that  wc()t  and  wailed  g. 

9.  1.5.  when  they  beheld,  they  were  amazed  g. 

12. 27.  the  God  of  the  living,  ye  therefore  do ^.  err 
^oA)t3.29.rejoiceth,e'because  of  bridegroom's  voice 
^ctsXl\.a.]\  the  people  ran  to  porch, /'■.wondering 

6.7.  number  of  disciples  multipied  io  Jerusalem  g 
253 


GRE 

1  Cor.  16. 12.  I^.  desired  ApoUos  to  come  unto  you 
Phil.l.S.  how  g.  I  long  after  you  all  in  Jesus  Christ 
4.10. 1  rejoiced  in  the  Lord  ^g-.that  at  last  your  care 

1  Thess.  3.  6.  desiring  »■.  to  see  us,  as  we  to  see  you 

2  7'(;ft. 1.4. ^.desiring  to  see  thee,  that  I  may  be  filled 

4.  15.  for  he  hath  g.  withstood  our  words 
lfcf.l.6.ye^.  rejoice  tho' now  ye  arc  in  heaviness 
2./oArt4.  I  rejoiced  "■.  that  I  found  children  walkin^ 
'iJoka  3.  I  rejoiced  ^.  when  the  brethren  testified 

Sec  Feared. 

GllEATNESS. 

Eiod.\5. 7.  in  "■.  of  thy  excellency  overthrow  them 

16.  by  g.  of  thine  arm  they  shall  bo  still  as  a  stone 

JiTum.  14. 19.  pardon  according  to  ^.  of  thy  mercies 

i^cit£.3.24.  thou  hast  begun  to  shew  thy  serv.thy^. 

5.  24.  the  Lord  hath  shewed  us  his  glory  and  «■. 
9.  26.  which  thou  hast  redeemed  through  thy  ^. 
11.  2.  not  with  children  who  have  not  seen  his  g. 
32.  3.  ascribe  ye  g.  unto  our  God,  he  is  the  rock 

1  Chr.  17. 19.  to  thy  own  heart  hast  done  all  this^. 
21.  to  make  thee  a  name  of  ^.  and  terriblcness 

29.  11.  thine,  O  Lord,  is  theg.  power,  and  gloiy 

2  Chr.  9.  6.  one  half  of^r.of  thy  wisdom  notshewcd 
24.  27.  and  the  g.  of  the  burdens  laid  upon  him 

JV«A.  13.  22.  spare  me  according  to^.  of  thy  mercy 
Esth.  10.2.  the  declaration  of  the  ^.  of  Mordecai 
Psal.  66.  3.  by  g.  of  thy  power  enemies  submit  to 
71.  21.  thou  shalt  increase  my  g.  and  Comfort  me 
79. 11.  according  to  the  g.  of  thy  power  preserve 
145. 3.  his  "•.  is  unsearchable  1|  6.  I  declare  thy  g. 
150.  2.  praise  him  according  to  his  excellent  g. 
Prov.  5. 23.  in  the  g.  of  his  folly  he  shall  go  astray 
Isa.  40.  26.  he  calleth  by  name,  by  g.  of  his  might 
57.  10.  thou  art  wearied  in  the  g.  of  thy  way 
63.  1.  travelling  in  the  g.  of  his  strength 
Jcr.  13.  22.  for^.  of  iniquity  thy  skirts  discovered 
Ezek.  31.  2.  whom  art  thou  like  in  thy  g.? 

7.  thus  was  he  fair  in  his  g.  in  his  branches 
Dan.  4.  22.  thy  ^.  is  grown  and  reacheth  to  heaven 

7.  27.  the^o-.of  the  kingdom  shall  be  given  to  saints 
Eph.  1.  19.  what  is  the  exceeding^,  of  his  power 

GREAVES. 
1  Sam.  17.  6.  Goliath  had  g.  of  brass  upon  his  legs 

GREEDY. 
Psal.  17.  12.  like  as  a  lion  that  is  g.  of  his  prey 
Prov.  1.  19.  so  is  every  one  that  is  ^.  of  gain 
15.  27.  he  that  is^.  of  gain  troubleth  his  house 
/so.  56. 11.  they  are ^. dogs,  can  never  have  enough 
1  Tim.  3.  3.  not  g.  of  filthy  lucre,  but  patient,  8. 

GREEDILY. 
Prov.  21.  26.  he  coveteth  g.  all  the  day  long 
Ezck.  22. 12.  thou  hast  £•.  gained  of  thy  neiglibours 
Jade  11.  they  ran  g.  aner  the  error  of  Balaam 

GREEDINESS. 
Eph.  4. 19.  given  over  to  work  all  unclean,  with  g. 

GREEK. 
Luke  23.38.superscription  written  in  G.  Johnl9.20. 
JJcls  21.  37.  chief  captain  said,canst  thou  speakG. 
Rev.9. 11.  but  in  O.  tongue  hath  his  name  Apollyon 

GREEN. 
Oen.  1. 30.  to  every  beast  of  the  earth  I  have  given 

1  every  g.  herb  for  meat 
9.  3.  as  the  g.  herb  have  I  given  you  all  things 
30.  37.  Jacob  took  rods  of  ^.  poplar  and  hazel 

Eiorf.l0.15.there  remained  not  any  ^.thing  in  trees 
Lev.  2.  14.  offer  for  thy  first-fruits^,  ears  of  corn 
23. 14.  eat  no^.ears,  till  ye  have  brought  an  offer. 
Judg.  16.  7.  if  they  bind  me  with  seven  g.  withs 

8.  then  they  brought  to  her  seven  g.  withs 

2  Kings  19.  26.  inhabit,  were  as  ^.herbs,  /?a.37.27. 
Esth.  1. 6.  where  were  white,  ^.and  blue  hangings 
Job  8.  16.  he  is  g.  before  the  sun,  branch  shooteth 

15.  32.  and  his  branch  shall  not  be  g. 

39.  8.  the  wild  ass  searcheth  after  every  £-.  thing 
Psal.  23.  2.  he  maketh  me  lie  down  in  g.  pastures 

37.  2.  and  they  shall  wither  as  the  g.  herb 
35.  I  have  seen  wicked  spread,  like  ag.  bay-tree 

92.  1 14.  in  old  age  they  shall  be  fat  and  g. 
Cant.  1. 16.  thou  art  fair,  also  our  bed  is^. 

2.  13.  the  fig-tree  puttnth  forth  her  o-.  figs 
fsa.  15.  6.  the  grass  faileth,  there  is  no  g.  thing 
Jer.  11.  16.  the  Lord  called  thy  name,  a  g.  oHve 

17.  8.  as  tree  spreadeth  her  roots,  leaf  shall  be  g. 
Has.  14.  8.  I  am  like  a  g.  fir-tree,  from  me  thy 
Amos  7.  t  1.  he  formed  g.  worms  in  the  beginning 
Mark  6.  39.  sit  down  by  companies  on  the  g.  grass 
Rev.8.7.  hail  and  fire,  and  all  ^.  grass  was  burnt  up 

9.  4.  were  commanded  not  to  hurt  any  g.  thing 

GREEN  tree. 
Deut.  12.2.  nations  served  gods  under  every  ^.<rfc 

1  /ir;nDr.sl4.23.imagee  und.  every  g.  t.  2KingsVi .10. 

2  Kings  16.4.  Asa  sac.  under  evory  g.  t.  2CAr.28.4, 
Ps.  a-2.  8. 1  am  like  a  g.  oVive-lrce  in  house  of  God 
fsa.  57. 5.  inflaming  yourselves  under  every  g.  tree 
J(-r.2.20.  when  under  every  g.  tree  thou  wanderest 

3.  6.  under  every  g.  tree,  there  played  the  harlot 
13.  hast  .scattered  thy  ways  under  every  g.  tree 

Ezck.  6.  13.  ihy  slain  shall  be  under  every  g.  tree 
17.  24.  know  that  I  have  dried  up  the  g.  tree 
20.  47.  it  shall  devour  every  g.  tree  and  dry  tree 


Luke  23.  31.  if  they  do  these  things  In  tig.  ire* 

GREEN  trees. 
JtT.17.2.  whilst  children  remember  groves  by  ^.  tr 

GREENISH. 
Leo.  13.  49.  if  the  plag:ue  be  g.  in  the  garment 
14.  37.  if  plague  bewlth  hollow  strakes  £-.  or  rod. 
GREENNESS. 
Job  8.  12.  whilst  it  is  yet  in  hiso-.  and  not  cut 

GREET. 

1  .Sum.  25.  5.  go  to  Nabal  and  g.  him  in  my  name 

i?(«/i.l6.3.  "■.Priscilla  and  Aquilamy  helpers  in  C.J. 

5.  g.  church  ||  6.  g.  Mary  who  bestowed  labour 

8.  g-.Amplias  |{  ll.^.tha  household  of  Narcissus 

1  Cor.  16.20.  all  the  brethren  g.  you,  Phil.  4.  21. 

20.  g.  ye  one  another,  2  Cor.  13. 12.  1  Pet.  5. 14. 
Col.  4.  14.  Luke  the  physician  and  Demas  g.  you 

1  Thess.  5.  26.  g.  the  brethren  with  a  holy  kiss 
Tit.  3.  15.  g.  them  that  love  us  in  the  J'aith 

2  .John  13.  the  children  of  thy  elect  sister^,  thee 

3  John  14.  peace  be  to  thee,  g.  the  friends  by  n.ime 
GREETETH. 

2  TVm.  4.  21.  Eubulus  g.  thee,  Pudens,  and  Linus 

GREETING,  S. 
Mat.  23.  7.  g.  in  markets,  Luke  11.  43.  |  20.  46. 
Jlcts  15.23.  apostles,  elders,  and  brethren,  send  ^. 

23.  26.  Claudius  Lysias  to  Felix  sendeth^. 
Jam.  1. 1.  to  the  twelve  tribes  scattered  abroad,  p- 

GREW. 
Gen.  2.  5.  the  Lord  made  every  herb  before  it^ 

19.25.  he  overthrew  that  which  ^.upon  the  ground 

21.  8.  Isaac  g.  26.  13.  ||  21. 20.  Ishmael  g. 

25.  27.  boys  g.  ||  47.  27.  Israel  g.  and  multiplied 
Exod.  1.  12.  the  more  they  afflicted,  more  they  g' 

2. 10.  Moses ^.  II  Judg.  11.2.  his  wife's  sons^.  up 
hidg.  13.  24.  Samson  g.  and  the  Lord  blessed  hira 
l.Sa7n.2.21.  the  child  Samuel^.before  the  Lord,  26. 
2  Sam.  5.  10.  and  David  went  on  and  g.  great 

12.3.  it  ^.up  together  with  him,  did  eat  of  his  meat 
Ezek.  17.  6.  it  g.  and  became  a  spreading  vine 
Dan.  4.  11.  the  tree  g.  and  was  strong,  it  reached 
Jonah  l.fll.  the  sea  ^r. more  and  more  tempestuous 
Mark  4.  7.  and  the  thorns  g.  up  and  choked  it 

5.  26.  was  nothing  bettered,  but, rather  g.  worse 
I^uke  1.80.  child  ^.and  waxed  strong  in  spirit,  2.40. 

13.  19.  and  it  g.  and  waxed  a  great  tree 
Acts  7.  17.  the  people  g.  and  multiplied  in  Egypt 

12.  24.  but  the  word  of  God  g.  and  multiplied 

19.20.so  mightily  0-. the  word  of  God  and  prevailed 

GREY-HOUND. 
Prov.  30.  3L  four  comely  in  going,  a  g.-kound 

GRIEF,  S. 
G<e;i.26.35.which  werea^z-.untoIsaacandRebekah 
15am. 1.16. out  of  the  abundance  of^.have  I  spoken 

25.31.  this  shall  be  no  n-.to  thee,or  offence  of  heart 
2CAr(?7j.6.29.when  every  one  shall  know  his  own^. 
Job  2.  13.  they  saw  that  his  g.  was  very  great 

6.  2.  oh  that  my  g.  were  thoroughly  weighed 
t  3.  therefore  I  want  words  to  express  my  g. 

]6.5.the  moving  of  my  lips  should  assuage  your^ 
6.  though  I  speak,  my  g.  is  not  assuaged 
Psal.  6.  7.  my  eye  is  consumed  because  of  ^.  31.  9 

31. 10.  my  life  is  spent  with  ^.  my  years  with  sigh 
69.  26.  they  talk  to^.  of  those  thou  hast  wounded 
139.  t21.  see  if  there  be  any  way  of  ^.  in  me 
147.  t3.  he  healeth  and  bindeth  up  their  ^. 

Prov.  17.  25.  a  foolish  son  is  a  g.  to  his  father 
Eccl.  1.  18.  for  in  much  wisdom  is  much  g. 
2.23.  for  all  his  days  are  sorrfiws, and  his  travail^. 
Isa.  1.  t  13.  it  is  g.  even  the  solemn  meeting 

17. 11.  but  the  harvest  shall  be  a  heap  in  day  of^. 
53.  3.  a  man  of  sorrows,  and  acquainted  with  ^. 

4.  he  hath  borne  our^.  and  carried  our  sorrows 
10.  it  jileased  Ld.  to  bruise  him,  he  put  him  to  g. 
Jer.  6.  7.  before  me  continually  is  g.  and  wounds 
10. 19. 1  said,  truly,  this  is  a  g.  and  I  must  bear  it 
45.  3.  for  the  Lord  hath  added  g.  to  my  sorrow 
/^am.3.32.llio'  he  cause ^.he  will  liave  compassion 
Ezek.  .32.  \'i.\  will  provoke  many  people  to  g. 
Jonah  4. 6. a  gourd, a  shadow  to  deliver  him  from  g. 
2  Cor.  2. 5.  if  any  caused  g.  he  hath  not  grieved  me 
Ilcb.  13.  17.  may  do  it  with  joy  and  not  with  g. 
1  Pct.2. 19. for  conscience  toward  God  endure £'. 

GRIEVANCE. 

Hab.  1.  3.  why  dost  thou  cause  me  to  behold  g.? 

1 1.3.  thou  art  of  purer  eyes  than  to  look  on  g. 

GRIEVE. 

1  Sam.  2.  33.  the  man  shall  be  to  g.  thine  heart 

2  Kings  3. 1 19.  he  shall  ^.every  good  piece  of  land 
1  Chr.  4. 10.  keep  from  evil,  ihat  it  may  not  g.  me 
Psal.  78.  40.  how  oft  did  they^.  him  in  the  desert? 
/xOm.3.33.doth  not  willingly  fl'.lhe  children  of  men 
Eph.  4.  30.  g.  not  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  whereby 

GRIEVED. 
Gen.a.a.and  it  repented  the  Lord  that  he  had  made 
man  on  the  earth,  and  it  ^.  him  at  his  heart 
34.  7.  Jacob's  sons  heard  and  were  g.  and  wroth 
45.  5.  now  be  not  g.  thai  ye  sold  me  hither 
49.  23.  the  archers  have  sorely  g-  him,  and  shot 
Exod.  1.  12.  and  they  were  g.  becauso  of  Israel 
Deut. 15. 10.  shall  not  be  ^.wlien  thou  givest  to  hiia 


GRl 

/uJ^.lO.  16.  his  soul  was^.  for  I'le  misery  of  Israel 
lium.l.  8.  why  wecpest  thoul  why  is  thy  heurt^.? 

15.  II.  it  ^.  Saiimul,  and  hu  cried  unto  thu  Iiurd 

SO.  X  let  Qot  Jonathan  know  tliig  lest  he  be  g. 
34.  Jonathan  arose,  I'ur  he  \i\iA  g.  lor  David 

30.  ti.  because  the  bouI  of  all  the  people  was  g. 
8  Ham.  19.  2.  heard  how  the  king  was  g.  for  liis  son 
.VeA.  2.  10.  it^.  thcin  exceedingly,  that  there  was 

IJ.  8.  it  g.  me  sore,  and  I  cast  forth  all  the  stufl' 
Rsth.  4.  4.  then  was  the  queen  e.vceedingly  ^'■. 
Job  4.  'J.  if  we  assay  to  commune,  wilt  thou  be  g.l 

30.  25.  was  not  my  soul  g.  for  the  poor  7 
Vsal.  T3.  21.  thus  my  heart  was  g.  I  was  pricked 

U5.  10.  forty  years  was  I  g.  with  this  generation 

112.  10.  the  wicked  shall  see  it,  and  be  g. 

119.  158.  I  beheld  ihe  transgressors  and  was  g. 

139.21.  am  not  I  ^'.with  those  that  rise  up  ag.  thee 
/.*a.  54. 6.  theL.  called  thee  as  a  woman  g\i\  spirit 

57.  10.  therefore  thou  wast  not  g. 
J:r.  5.  3.  thou  hast  stricken  them,  they  have  not  g. 
Dan.  7.  15.  I  Dan.  w  as  n-.  in  spirit  in  midst  of  body 

11.  30.  therefore  he  sliall  be  g.  and  return 
/imus  t3.(5.they  are  not  jf  .lor  the  attliction  of  Joseph 
.Mark  3.  5.  being  «■.  for  the  hardness  of  their  hearts 

10.22.he  went  away  ^'.for  he  had  great  possessions 
Julm  21.17. 1'eter  was  "■.  because  he  said  third  time 
Acts  4.  2.  being  g.  that  they  taught  the  peoi)le 
9.  t  'W.  that  he  would  not  be  g.  to  come  to  them 
Iti.  18.  Paul  being  g.  said  to  the  spirit,  come  out 
Rofii.  14.  15.  if  thy  brother  be  «•.  with  thy  meat 
2  Cor.  2.  4.  I  wrote  not  that  ye  should  be  g. 

5  caused  grief,  he  hath  hot  «-.  me,  but  in  part 

Heb.  3. 10.  wherefore  1  was  n-.with  that  generation 

17.  but  with  whom  was  he  g.  forty  years  ? 

GRIEVETH. 

llulh  1.  13.  for  it  g.  me  nmch  for  your  sakes 

Proo.  20. 15.  it  "•.him  to  bring  it  again  to  his  mouth 

GRIEVING. 
Ezek.  28. 24.  shall  be  no  more  a  ^.thorn  unto  Israel 

GRIEVOUS. 
Oeri.  12.  10.  for  the  famine  was  g.  in  the  land 
18.  20.  Lord  said,  because  their  sin  is  very  g. 
21.  11.  the  thing  was  very  g.  in  Abraham's  sight 

12.  God  said,  let  it  not  be  g-  in  thy  sight 
41.  31.  for  the  famine  shall  be  very  g. 
50.  11.  this  is  a  g.  mourning  to  the  Egyptians 
F.xod.  8.  24.  there  came  a  g.  swarm  of  flies 

9.  3.  a  g.  murrain  ||  18.  to  rain  a  very  g.  hail,  24. 

10.  14.  locusts  were  very^'.  before  were  no  such 
1  King.-i  2.8.  Sliimei,  who  cursed  me  with  a^'.curse 

12.  4.  make  the  g.  service  lighter,  2  Chron.  10.  4. 
Psa/.lO.j.his  ways  always  n-.judgmeiil  out  of  sight 

31  16  which  speak  ^'.things  against  the  righteous 
Jh-or,.  1.5.  1.  but  g.  words  stir  up  anger 

10.  correction  is  n'.to  him  that  forsakelli  the  way 
Keel.  2.  17.  work  wrought  under  the  sun  is^.  to  me 
Isa.  15.  4.  his  life  shall  he  g.  unto  him 
21.  2.  a  g.  vision  is  declared  unto  me 
Jcr.  C.  28.  they  are  all  "■.  revolters,  walking  with 
10.  19.  woe  is  me  for  my  hurt,  my  wound  is  g. 
14. 17.  virgin  of  my  people  broken  with  a^.  blow 
Ifi.  4.  they  shall  die  of^.  deaths,  not  be  buried 
23.  19.  a  I',  whirlwind  slinll  fall  on  the  wicked 
30.12.brnise  incurable,  thy  wound  is  n'.  JV(i/i.3.19. 
Mai.  23.  4.  bind  heavy  burdens  and  g.  Ijuke.  11.4(1, 
Jicls  20.  29.  shall  g.  wolves  enter  in  among  you 
2.").  7.  Jews  laid  many  i'.  complaints  against  Paul 
P/iiV.  3.  1.  to  me  indeed  is  not  g.  but  fur  you  safe 
lir,b.  12.  1 1.  no  chastening  seems  joyous,  but  g 
1  .lohn  5.  3.  and  his  commandments  are  not  <'. 
Rtv.  16. 2.  a  g.  sore  on  men  that  had  mark  of  Boa.st 

GRIEVOrjSI.Y. 
I.%a.  9.  1.  and  afterward  did  more  g.  afflict  her 
./tr.  23. 19.  it  Khali  fall  g.  on  the  head  of  the  wicked 
Aam. l.S.Jerusa.  hath  ^.sinned,  therefore  removed 

20.  my  heart  is  turned,  for  I  have  g.  rebelled 
y.xr.k.  14.13.  when  land  sinneth  by  trespassing^ 
jJfi'e.  1.  t  9.  she  is  g.  sick  of  her  wounds 
.Mat.  8.  C.  n.  lormimlcd  ||  1.'>.22.  daughters',  vexed 

GRIKVOUS.NESS. 
Ua.  10. 1  that  write  ^.  which  they  have  prescribed 
21.  15.  for  tliey  fled  from  the  g.  of  war 

GRLN'I). 

Judg.  16.  21.  Samson  did;!^.  in  the  prison-houso 
.Job  31.  10.  then  let  my  wife-^.  unto  another 
F.ccl.\i.^2.  the  grindc'rs  cease  because  they  fr. little 
/.»a.  3. 15.  what  mc^an  ye  to  fi'.tlie  faces  of  the  poor? 
47.2.  take  miilsionos  and  g.  meal,  uncover  locks 
l.am.  5.  13.  ihev  look  the  young  men  lo  g. 
Mat.  21.  44.  it  will  g.  him  lo  powder,  I.ukc  20.  18. 

GRINDRIIS. 
.Job  29.  t  n.  I  brake  the  g.  of  ihe  wicked 
Eccl.  12.  3.  the  g.  cenne,  hi-rnuso  they  are  few 

GRI.N'DING. 
F.crl.  12.  4   when  the  sniiml  of  the  g.  is  low 
Mai.  24.  41.  two  women  /»•,  nt  the  m'lll,  Luke  17.35. 

GRIN. 
Jbb  18.  9.  the  g.  shall  t>ik<-  him  by  the  lioel 

GRI.N3. 

Vtal,  140.  5.  they  spread  a  net,  tliey  sot  g.  for  mc 

2M 


GRO 

Pi.l41.9.keep  me  from  the^.of  tlie  workers  oflniq. 
See  Gin. 
GRISLED. 
Gen.  31.  10.  the  rams  were  speckled  and  g.  12. 
ZfcA.  li.  3.  in  the  fourth  chariot  were  g.  horses 
(3.  the  g.  go  fuilh  toward  the  south  country 
GROAN. 
Job  24.  12.  men  g.  from  out  of  the  city 
7fr.51.52.througli  all  her  land  the  wounded  shall^'. 
Kick.  30.  24.  I'liaraoh  shall  g.  before  him 
Jucl  I.I8.I10W  do  the  beasts^r.iierdb  have  no  pasture 
Rom.  8.  23.  we  ourselves  g.  within  ourselves 
2  Cor.  5. 2.  in  this  we^.  desiring  to  be  clothed  upon 

4.  we  in  tins  tabernacle  do  g.  being  burdened 

GROANED. 
John  11.  33.  \\e  g.  in  spirit,  and  was  troubled 

GROANETH. 
Rom.  8.  22.  we  know  that  the  whole  creation  g. 

GROANING,  S. 
Exod.  2.  24.  God  heard  their  g.  and  remembered 
6.  5.  I  have  heard  the^'.  of  Israel,  Jlcts  7.  34. 
Judg.'-i.\6.  it  repented  the  Lord  because  of  tlieir^. 
Jolt  23.  2.  my  stroke  is  heavier  than  my  g. 
Psal.  6.  6.  I  am  weary  with  g.  all  the  night 
38.  9.  and  my  g.  is  not  hid  from  tlieo 
102.  5.  by  reason  of  my  g.  bones  cleave  to  my  skin 
20.  to  hear  the  g.  of  the  prisoner,  to  loose  those 
Eiek.  30.  24.  with  the  g.  of  a  deadly  wounded  man 
Horn.  8.  20.  for  us  with  g.  that  cannot  be  uttered 

GROANING. 
JoAnll.38.  Jesus  "•.ill  himself,  comethlo  the  grave 

GROPE,  ETH. 
Deut.  28.  29.  thou  shall  g.  at  noon  as  the  blind  g. 
Job  5.  14.  they  g.  in  noon-day  as  in  the  night 
12.  25.  they  g.  in  the  dark  without  light 
Isa.  59. 10.  we /f.  for  the  wall  like  the  blind,  we^. 

GROSS. 

Isa.  CO.  2.  and  g.  darkness  shall  cover  the  people 
yer.13.10.  while  look  for  light,  make  it^.  darkness 
Mat.  13.  15.  people's  heart  is  wa.xed^.  Jlcts  28.  27. 

GROVE. 

Oen.  21.  33.  Abraham  planted  a  g.  in  Beer-sheba 
Dc.ut.\*i.  21.  thou  slialt  not  plant  a g.  near  the  altar 
fudg.  6.  25.  and  cut  down  the  g.  that  is  by  it 

28*.  the  g.  waAut  down  that  was  by  it 
1  .Sam.  22. t6.  Saul  abode  under  a.g.  in  a  high  place 

1  Kings  15.  13.  because  she  had  made  an  idol 

in  a  g.  2  Chron.  15.  10. 
lfi.33.Ahab  made  a  o-.and  did  more  to  provoke  G. 

2  Kings  13.  6.  there  remained  the  g.  in  Samaria 

17.  10.  Israel  made  a  g.  and  served  Baal 

21.  3.  Manasseh  reared  up  altars,  and  made  ag. 
23.  4.  to  bring  out  the  vessels  made  for  tlie^. 
0.  he  brought  out  thc^.  from  house  of  the  Lord 
15.  Josiah  burnt  the  high  place  and  the  g. 
GROVES. 
Exod.  34. 13.  ye  shall  cut  down  their  ^.  Deut.7.5 
Deut.  12.  3.  ye  shall  burn  their  g.  with  tiro 
.Judg.  3.  7.  forgat  Lord  and  served  g.  2  Cfir.  24.18. 

1  Kings  14.  iS.  shall  root  up  Israel  out  of  this  good 

land,  because  they  have  made  their  g.' 
23.  built  tliem  n-.on  every  high  hill,  -2Kings  17.10. 

18.  19.  the  prophets  of  the  ».  four  hundred 

2  Kings  18.  4.  Hezek.  cut  down^.  and  brake  serp. 
23.  14.  Josiah  cut  down  the  g.  2  Chron.  34.  3, 4. 

2  Chron.  14.  3.  Asa  brake  down  the  images,  and 

cut  down  the  g. 

17.  0.  Johnshaphat  took  away  the^.  out  of  Judah 

19.  3.  in  that  thou  hast  taken  away  Ihe  g. 

31.  1.  all  Isrind  that  were  present  cut  down  tho^r. 

33.  3.  Manasseh  made  «•.  ||  19.  where  he  set  up  g. 

34.  3.  Josiah  began  to  purge  Judah  from  the  g. 
7.  when  ho  had  broken  down  the  altars  and  the ^j^. 

Isn.  17.  8.  neither  shall  he  respect  the ^.  or  images 
27.  9.  the  g.  and  the  images  shall  not  stand  up 
.Ter.  17.2.  whilst  children  remember  altars  and  g. 
jWic.5.14.  Iwill  pluck  up  thy  ^.out  of  midst  of  thee 

GROUND. 
Exod.  :i2.  20.  he  nr.  the  calf  to  powder,  Deut.  9. 21 . 
J^'am.  11.  8.  the  people  g.  the  manna  in  mills 

GROUND  com. 
2  Sam.  17.  19.  spread  g.  corn  on  the  well's  mouth 

GROUND. 
Gf.n.'i.  5.  and  there  was  not  a  man  to  till  the^. 
7.  the  Lord  God  formed  inanof  ihedust  of  Ihe^. 
19.  out  of  the /f.  the  Lord  formed  every  beast 
3.  17.  he  said,  cursed  is  the  g.  for  thy  sake 
4.2.  Abel  a  kcepiT  nfshoep,  hut  ('nin  a  tiller  of  ff. 
10.  thy  brother's  blood  crioth  to  mo  from  Iho^. 

5.  29.  because  of  the  ^.  the  Lord  hath  cursed 
8.  21.  I  will  not  again  rumo  the  g.  any  more 
18.  2.  Abram  bowed  himself  toward  the/;'. 

19. 1.  Lot  bow^  himself  with  his  face  toward  g. 
K/o(Z.8.5.  where  tlioustnndcst  is  holy  n'.  -Ids  l.'Xi. 

8.  21.  g.  whereon  they  are  shall  be  fiill  <>f  flies 
yum.  10.  31.  tlie^.  clavo  asunder  under  them 
7>e«t.28.  4.  blessed  shall  be  the  fruit  of  thy  ^.  11. 
Judg.  4.  21.  Jael  fastened  the  nail  into  Ihe  g. 
1  .Sam.  8. 12.  he  will  set  f  hem  to  car  his  f^.  and  renji 

2G.  7.  liij  spear  stuck  in  the  g.  at  his  bolster 


GRO 

3  5a77i.23.11.  where  was  a  piece  of^.  full  of  lentilea 

12.  he  stood  in  the  midst  of  the /»•.  and  detended  iC 

2  A'inCTj-2.I9.but  the  water  is  nought,  and  ^.barren 

9.20.now  take  him  and  cast  him  into  the  plat  oig 

1  Chr.  11. 13.  where  was  a  parcel  of^.full  of  barley 

2  Chr.  4. 17.  the  king  did  cast  them  111  the  clay  g. 
JV<A.  10.  35.  and  to  bring  the  lirst-fruils  of  our  g. 

37.  and  bring  the  tithes  of  our  ^z^.  to  the  Levites 
Job  5.  0.  nor  doth  trouble  sjiriiig  out  of  the  g. 
14.  8.  and  though  the  slock  thereof  die  in  the  g.^ 

18.  10.  the  snare  is  laid  for  him  in  the^'. 

38.  27.  lo  satisfy  the  desolate  and  waste  g. 

39.  24.  he  swallows  the^.with  fierceness  and  rage 
I'sal.  105.35.  locusts  devoured  the  liuit  ol' their  jj' 

107.  33.  he  lurnelh  the  water-springs  into  dry  g. 

35.  and  ho  turiiclli  dry  g.  into  water-springs 

/sa.  28.  24.doih  he  open  and  break  clods  of  his^.? 

29.  4.  and  thou  shall  speak  out  of  the  g. 

30.  2:1.  seed  that  thou  shall  sow  the  g.  withal 

24.  oxen  and  young  asses  thatcar  the  ^.sliall  eat 
35.  7.  and  the  jjarched  g.  shall  become  a  pool 
51.  23.  and  thou  hast  laid  thy  body  as  the  g. 

Jcr.  4.  3.  break  up  your  fallow  g.  JJus.  10.  12. 
7.20.  my  fury  shall  be  poured  on  the  fruit  of  the  ^ 
14.  4.  because  the^.  is  cliapt,  there  was  no  rain 

J.am.  2.  9.  her  gales  are  sunk  into  the  g. 

Kick.  12.  6.  cover  thy  face,  thou  see  not  the  g.  12. 
41.  10.  ceiled  from  the  «•.  up  to  the  windows 

Dun.  8. 5.  a  he-goat  came,  and  touched  not  the  g 
18.  Daniel's  lace  was  toward  the  g.  10.  9, 15. 

//os. 2.18. make  covenant  for  them  with  things  of^ 

Zcch.  8.  12.  and  the  g.  shall  give  her  increase 

Mai.  3.  11.  he  shall  not  destroy  the  fruits  ofyour^ 

Mat.  13.  8.  but  other  fell  into  good  g.  J.ukc  8.  8. 
2;l.  he  that  received  seed  into  good  g.  LukeS.M. 

j¥arA-4.20.  as  if  a  man  should  cast  seed  into  the^. 

Luke  12. 16.  "•.  of  a  certain  rich  man  brought  forth 

13.  7.  cut  it  dow  n,  why  cumbereth  it  the  g.? 

14.  18.  the  first  said,  I  have  bough',  a  piece  of^. 

19.  44.  they  shall  lay  thee  even  with  Ihe  g. 
John  4.  5.  near  the  parcel  n( g.  Jacob  gave  Joseph 

12.  24.  cccept  a  corn  of  wheal  fall  into  the  j. 
Sec  Dry,  Face. 
On  or  upon  the  GROUND. 
Oen.  38. 9.  he  spilled  it  o«  theg.  lest  he  should  give 
44. 14.  Josejili's  brethren  fell  before  hiin  nn  the g. 
Kxod.  4.  3.  cast  the  rod  on  the  g.  he  cast  it  on  theg. 

9.  23.  ihunder,  and  the  fire  ran  along  vpon  the  g. 
14. 10.  Israel  shall  go  07idry^.  through  the  sea,  S. 

10.  14.  as  small  as  the  hoar-frost  on  the  g. 
fjeut.  15.23.  pour  the  blood  vpon  the  g.  as  water 

22.  0.  if  a  bird's  nest  chance  to  be  on  the  g. 
28.  56.  woman  that  would  not  set  her  foot  upon  ^. 
Judg.  0.  39.  and  vpon  all  the  g.  let  there  be  dew 
40.  and  there  was  dew  upon  all  the  g. 

1  .Sam.  14.  25.  and  there  was  honey  vpon  the  g. 
.32.  the  peoide  slew  oxen  and  calves  on  the  g. 

20.  31.  as  long  as  the  son  of  Jesscliveth  on  tAe^. 

2  .Sam.  14.  14.  for  we  are  as  water  spilt  on  the  g. 
17.  12.  shall  light  on  him  as  dew  falkth  on  the g. 

2  Kings  13. 18.  he  said,  smite  vpon  theg.  he  smote 
./vh  1.  20.  Job  fell  upon  the  g.  and  worshipped. 
2.13.  Ihey  sat  down  with  him  upon  theg.  sev.dftys 

10.  13.  he  poureth  out  my  gall  upon  the  g. 
Isn.  3.  26.  she  being  dcsoinfe  .■ihall  sit  on  the  g. 

47.  1.  O  daughter  of  liabylim,  sit  oh  the  g. 
Ji:r.  25.  33.  Ihey  shall  be  dung  vpon  the  g. 

27.  5.  [  have  made  man  and  beast  vpon  the  g. 
A(r»«.2.10.lho  elders  of  daught.  of  Zion  sit  on  tA*^. 

21.  young  and  old  lie  071  the  g.  in  the  slreets 
Ezek.  24. 7.  she  poured  it  nut  vpon  theg.  to  cover  it 

20.  10.  then  all  the  princes  shall  sit  upon  theg. 

Mat.  15. 35.  the  multitude  sit  on  the g.  Mark  8.  6. 

Mark  4.5.some  fell  on  stony  g.  it  had  not  earth,  16. 

8.  and  other  fell  on  good  g.  20.  Dvke  8.  8,  15. 

9.  20.  he  fell  on  the  g.  and  wallowed  foaming 

14.  35.  he  went  forward,  and  fell  on  g.  and  prayed 
.John  8.6.he  wrote  on  tJug.  8.  ||  9.ri.lie  spat  on  Vie  g. 

To  or  unto  tlie  GROIIND. 
Cm.  3.  19.  till  thou  return  iinfo  rA<'^.  for  out  of  it 

33.  3.  Jiiri.b  bowed  himself  (0  the  g.  seven  time* 
.Judg.  13.  20.  Manoah  and  his  wile  fell  to  the  g. 

20.  21.  Benjamin  destroved  to  theg.  22,000  men 
25.  and  destioyed  to  the  g.  of  Israel  18,000  men 
Rulk  2.  10.  Ruth  bowed  and  fell  to  Ihe  g. 
1  Sam.  3.  19.  let  none  of  his  words  fall  to  theg. 

5.  4.  Diig.ui  was  fallen  on  his  face  to  the  g. 

M.  45.  shall  not  one  hair  of  his  head  fall  to  the  g 

20.  41.  David  arose  and  fell  on  his  fac<  «o  the g 

25.  23.  Abigail  bowed  to  the  g.  before  David 

28.  14.  Saul  stoo|>ed  with  his  face  to  the  g. 
'■iSnm.'i.'i-l.  wherefore  should  I  smite  thee  ta  theg.f 

H. 2.  ho  smote  Moali,  rBsting  him  down  to  theg 

1 1.  4.  woman  of  Tckonli  fell  on  her  face  to  the  g. 
22.Joab  fell  <ff<A<'^.||.33. Absalom  U^wciUothrg. 

If*.  1 1.  why  didst  not  lliou  smile  him  to  the  g.1    ' 
20.  10.  Jnab  shed  out  Amssa's  bowels  to  the  f. 

1  A'i»<^.'!l.23.NBlhan  bowed  tn  the  ^.before  the  kinf 

2  Kings  2. 15.  son*  of  the  prophets  bowed  to  the  g 
4.37.  wuinan  ufShunani  bowed  herself  to  CjKjr 


GRO  » 

I  Chivn  21.  SI.  Oman  bowed  te  the  g.  to  David 
S  Clir.  7.  3.  all  Israel  bowed  with  their  faces  to  g 

20. 18.  Johoshaphat  bowed  with  his  face  to  the  g 
A'eA.8.6. worshipped  Lord  with  their  faces  to  the  g 
/'sai74.7.ihc  dwelling-place  of  thy  name  to  the  g 

Kl.  39.  profaned  his  ctown,  by  casting  it  tu  Iheg. 
44.  thou  hast  cast  his  throne  down  to  thcg. 

143.  3.  he  hath  smitten  my  life  down  to  the  g. 

147.  6.  he  caateth  the  wicked  down  to  the  g. 
Jsa.  14.  lii.  how  art  thou  cut  down  to  the  g.! 

iil.  9.  Babylon's  images  he  hath  broken  to  theg. 

25.  12.  lay  low,  bjing  to  the  g.  even  to  the  llust 

26.  5.  the  lofty  city  he  layetli  even  to  the  g. 
Jer.  14.  2.  her  gates  languish,  are  black  to  the  g. 
LamSl.  2.  hath  brought  strong  holds  of  Judah  tog. 

10.  virgins  of  Jerusal.  hang  their  heads  to  theg. 
Ezck.  13.  14. 1  will  bring  down  the  wall  to  the  g. 

19.  12.  thy  mother  was  cast  down  to  the  g. 

20.  11.  thy  strong  garrison  shallgodown  to  thcg. 
as.  17. 1  will  cast  thee  to  the  g.  1  will  lay  thee 

i>an.8.7.he  castthe  ram  down/o  (Ae^.and  stamped 
10.  it  cast  down  some  oi  hosts  and  stars  to  theg. 
12.  and  cast  down  the  truth  to  the  g. 

Amos  3.14.  the  hornsof  the  altar  shall  fall  to  the  g. 

Obad.  3.  saith,  who  shall  bring  me  down  to  the  g.? 

Mat.  lU.  29.  one  of  them  shall  not  fall  to  the  g. 

J>uke  22.  44.  as  drops  of  blood  falling  to  the  g. 

John  18.  6.  they  went  backward,  and  fell  to  theg. 

Acts  22.  7.  I  fell  to  the  g.  and  heard  a  voice 
GROUND. 

1  Tim.  3.  15.  which  is  the  pillar  and  g.  of  truth 
Heb.  11.  t  !•  faith  is  g.  of  things  hoped  for 

GROUNDED, 
/.sd.  30.32.  in  every  place  where  ^.  slaif  shall  pass 
Eph.  3.  17.  that  ye  being  rooted  and  g.  in  love 
Col.  1.  23.  if  ye  continue  in  the  faith,  g.  and  settled 

GROW. 
Oen.  2.  9.  the  Lord  God  made  every  tree  to  g. 
48.  16.  and  let  them  g.  into  a  multitude 
J^um.  6.5.  and  shall  let  the  locks  of  his  hair  ^. 
Deut.  21.  t  12.  she  shall  suffer  her  nails  to^. 
Judg.  16.  22.  the  hair  of  his  head  began  to  g. 

2  Sam.  23.5.  all  my  desire,  tho'  he  make  it  not  to  g. 
2  Kings  19.  29.  eat  such  things  as^.  of  themselves 
£zra4. 22.  why  should  damage  ^.to  hurt  of  kings? 
Jcb  8.  11.  can  the  rush  ^.  up  without  mire? 

19.  and  out  of  the  earth  shall  others  g. 

14.19.thou  washest  away  things  that  o-.out  of  dust 

31. 40.1et  thistles  g.  instead  of  wheat,  and  cockle 

39.  4.  they  g.  up  with  corn,  they  go  forth 
Psal.  92.  12.  he  shall  g.  like  a  cedar  in  Lebanon 

104. 14.  hecausethgrass  to^.  for  the  cattle,  147.8. 
Keel.  11.  5.  nor  how  the  bones  g.  in  the  womb 
Isa.  11.  1.  and  a  branch  shall  g.  out  of  his  roots 

17.  11.  in  the  day  sliait  thou  make  thy  i}lant  g. 

53. 2.  he  shall  ^.  up  before  him  as  a  tender  plant 
Jcr.  12.  2.  they  g.  yea,  they  bring  forth  fruit 

33. 15.  the  branch  of  righteousness  to^.  to  David 
Ezek.  44.  20.  nor  suffer  their  locks  to^.  long 

47.  12.  by  the  river  shall  g.  all  trees  for  meat 
Uos.  14. 5.  he  shall  g.  as  the  lily,  cast  forth  his  roots 
7. they  shall  revive  as  the  corn,  and  g.  as  the  vine 
Jonahi.XO. not  madcst  it  ^. which  came  up  in  night 
y.ech.  6. 12.  whose  name  is  the  Branch,  heshall  n-. 

9.  t  17.  corn  shall  make  the  young  men  g. 
Jilal.  4.  2.  yc  shall  g.  up  as  calves  of  the  stall 
^Va«.G.23.consider  the  lilies  how  they^.  jCKAel2.27. 

13.  30.  bt  both  g.  together  till  the  harvest 

21. 19.  let  no  fruit  g.  on  thee  henceforward 
Mark  4.27.  seedshould^.  up,  he  knowcth  not  how 
Acts  5.  24.  they  doubted  whercunto  tins  would  g. 
Eph.  4.  15.  may^.  up  into  him  in  all  things 

1  Pet.2.2.  desiring  the  milk  of  word,  that  ye  may^. 

2  Pet.  3.  18.  g.  in  grace  and  in  knowledge  of  Lord 

GROWN. 
Oen.  38.  11.  till  Shelah  be^.  ||  14.  Shelah  was  g. 
Ezod.  2.  11.  that  when  Moses  was  g.  he  went  out 

9.  32.  were  not  smi:ten,  for  they  were  not  »•.  up 
Z)eut.32.l5.  thou  tirlg.  thick,  covered  with  fatness 
Ruth  1.13.  would  ye  tarry  for  them  till  they  were  «■. 
2  .Sam. 10.5.  tarry  till  your  beards  be^.  1  Chr.  19.  5. 
1  Kings  12.  8.  consulterl  with  young  men^.  10. 
S  Kings  4. 18.  when  the  child  was  g.  uj),  it  fell  sick 

19.  26.  as  corn  blasted  before  it  be  g.  Asa.  37. 27. 
Ezra  9.  6.  our  trespass  is  g.  up  to  the  heavens 
Psal.  144. 12.  that  our  sons  may  be  as  plants  g.  up 
Prov."i.  31.  and  lo,  it  was  all;?,  over  with  thorns 
Jcr.  50.  II.  because  ye  are  g.  tat  as  the  heifur 
£zcA-.  10. 7.  thy  breasts  arc  fa9hioned,thy  hair  is^. 
Dan.  4.  22.  thou  art  g.  Strong,  thy  greatness  iig. 

$i.  till  his  hairs  wore  g.  like  eagle's  feathers 
Mat  13.32.  when  it  is  ^.  it  is  greatest  among  herbs 

GROWETH. 
Exod.in.S.  the  locusts  shall  eat  every  tree  that  ^. 
Lrv.  13.  39.  a  freckled  spot  that  g.  in  the  skin 

2.5.  5.  whicli  g.  of  its  own  accord,  not  reap,  U. 
Deut.  29  23.  nor  any  grass  g.  therein,  like  Sodom 
Judg.  19.9.  behold,  the  day  ^.to  an  end,  lodge  here 
Juh  33. 38.  when  the  dust^.  into  hardness  and  clods 
Psal.  37.135.  the  wicked  spreadeth  as  tree  that  r.  | 
353 


GUI 

Psal.  00k  5.ln  the  morning  like  grass  which ^.up,  6, 

129.  6.  as  the  grass,  which  witbereth  afore  itg.  up 
Asa.  37. 30.  ye  shall  eat  this  year  such  as^/-.  of  lUelf 
Mark4.'ii.w\\ea  it  is  sown  it^.  up  and  beconieth 
Eph.  2.  21.  g.  unto  a  holy  temple  in  tho  Lord 
2  Thess.  1.3.  because  your  (aith  /r.  exceedingly 

GROWTH. 
j?mos7.1.shooting  up  of  latter  g.  lo,  it  was  latter*'. 

GRUDGE. 
Lev.  19.  18.  nor  bear  any  g.  against  thy  people 
Mark  6.  ]  19.  Herodias  had  a  g.  against  John 

GRUDGE. 
Psal.  59. 15.  let  them  g.  if  they  be  not  satistied 
Jam.  5.  9.  g.  not  one  against  another,  brethren 
GRUDGING. 

1  Pet.  4.9.  use  hospitality  one  to  another  without ^•. 

GRUDGINGLY. 

2  Cor.  9.  7.  let  him  give  not  g.  or  of  necessity 

GUARD. 
Oen.  37.36.  Joseph  sold  to  a  captain  of  the  g.  39. 1. 
41.  12.  a  Hebrew,  servant  to  a  captain  ot  the  g. 

1  Sam.  22. 1 17.  king  said  to  the^.  slay  the  priests 

2  Sam.  23.23.  David  set  him  over  his^.  IChr.  11.25. 

1  Kings  14.27.  shields  to  captain  ofg.  2  Chr.  12. 10. 
28.  g.  bare  them  and  brought  them,  2  Chr.  12.11 . 

2  Kings  11.  6.  a  third  part  at  the  gate  behind  the  g. 
25.8.  captain  of^.  came  to  Jerusalem,  Jer.  52. 12. 

10.  captain  of  ^.  brake  down  walls,  Jcr.  52. 14. 

11.  the  rest  of  people  captain  of  g-.  canied  away 

12.  the  capt.  of  the  g.  left  of  the  poor  of  the  land 
JVch.  4.  22.  that  in  the  night  they  may  be  a  g.  to  us 

23.  nor  I  nor  men  of  the  g.  put  otfour  clothes 
Jer.  39. 11.  charge  to  captain  of  "■.  concerning  Jere. 
40. 1.  when  the  captain  of  the  g.  had  let  him  go 
5.  the  captain  of  the  ^.  gave  him  victuals 
52.  30.  the  captain  of  the  g.  took  captive  4600 
Eiek.  38.  7.  be  thou  prepared,  and  be  ng.  to  them 
Dan.  2.  14.  Daniel  answered  the  captam  of  the  ^. 
Mark  6.t27.king  sent  one  of  his  o-.and  commanded 
Acts^.  16. delivered  the  prisoners  to  captain  ofg. 

GUARD-CHAMBER. 
Ifi'n(^sl4.28.guard  bare  them  to  o'.-cA.2CAr.l2.11. 

GUEST. 
Luke  19.  7.  he  was  ?one  to  be  g.  with  a  sinner 

GUEST-CHAMBER. 
Mark  14. 14.  where  is  the  g.-chamber?   Luke  22. 
GUESTS.  [11. 

IKings  1.41.  Adonijah  and  all  g.  with  him  heard  it 
49.  all  g.  with  Adonijah  were  afraid  and  rose  up 
Prov.  9.  18.  that  her  g.  are  in  the  depths  of  hell 
Zeph.  1.  7.  for  the  Lord  hath  prepared  and  bidg. 
JV/at.  22.10.  and  the  wedding  was  furnished  with^. 
11.  when  the  king  came  in  to  see  the  g.  he  saw 
GUIDE,  S. 
Psal.  48.  14.  he  will  be  our  g.  even  unto  death 
55. 13.  it  was  thou,  a  man,  my  ^.my  acquaintance 
Prov.  2.  17.  who  forsaketh  the  g.  of  her  youth 
6.  7.  which  having  no  g.  overseer,  or  ruler 
.Jer.  3.  4.  my  father  thou  art  the  g.  of  my  youth 
.l//c. 7.5. trust  not  friend,  put  ye  not  confidence  in  g. 
Mat.  23.  16.  woe  to  you,  ye  blind  g.  24. 
Acts  1.  16.  who  was  g.  to  them  that  took  .Tosus 
Rom.  2. 19.  art  confident  thou  art  a,?-,  of  the  blind 
Heb.  13. 1 7.  remember  them  that  are  g.  over  you 

GUIDE. 
Job  38.  32.  canst  thou  g.  Arcturus  witb  his  sons  1 
Psal.  25.  9.  the  meek  will  he  g.  in  judgment 

31.  3.  for  thy  name's  sake  lead  mt?  and  g.  me 

32.  8.  I  will  teach  and  g.  thee  with  mine  eye 
73.  24.  thou  shalt  g.  me  with  thy  counsel 
112.  5.  he  will  g.  his  affairs  with  discretion 

Prut'. 11. 3.the  integrity  of  the  uprightshall  »■.  them 
23. 19.  be  wise,  and^.  thine  heart  in  the  way 
Fsa.  49. 10.  by  springsof  water  shall  he g.  them 
51. 18.  there  is  none  to  g.  her  among  all  the  sons 
58.  11.  the  Lord  shall  ^.  thee  continually 
Lvkr.  1.  79.  to  "-.  our  feet  into  the  way  of  peace 
■fohn  16.  13.  he  will  g.  you  into  all  truth 
Acts  8.  31.  how  can  I,  except  some  man  g.  met 

1  Thcss.  3.t  11.  now  God  himself^,  our  way  to  you 
1 7'i(H.5.14.  younger  women  bear  children,  ^.house 
Heb.  13. 1 17.  obey  them  thai  "".  you,  and  sijbmit 

GUIDED,  ING. 
Oen.  48.  14.  Israel  g.  his  hands  wittingly 
Eiod.  15.  13.  thou  hast  «-.  them  in  thy  strength 

2  Chron.  32.  22.  the  Lord  g.  them  on  every  side 
.Toll  31.  18.  I  have  0'.  her  from  my  mother's  womb 
Psiil.lP.  5^.  g.  thom  in  the  wilderness  like  a  flock 

72.  hast^.  them  by  the  skilfuUiessof  his  hands 
GUILE. 
Erod.  21.  14.  if  a  man  slay  with  "■.  let  him  die 
Psal.  32.  2.  and  in  whose  spirit  there  is  no  g. 
34.  13.  keep  lips  from  speaking  g.  1  Pet.  3. 10. 
55.  11.  deceit  and^.  depart  not  from  her  streets 
John  1.  47.  an  Israelite  indeed,  in  whom  is  no  g. 
2  Cor.  12.  16.  being  crafty,  I  caught  you  with  g. 
1  Thcss.  2.  3.  for  our  exhortation  was  not  in  g. 
1  Pet. 2. 1,  laying  iLside  all  malice  and  «•.  and  envies 
22.  who  did  no  sin,  nor  was^.  found  in  his  mouth 
fiev,  14.  3.  and  in  their  mouth  was  found  no^. 


HAB 

GUILT. 
Deut.  19.  13.  put  away  g.  of  innocentblood,  21.  9 

GUILTY 
(?cn,.42.21.  we  are  verily  n-.  co  i.;crning  our  brothel 
Ezod.  3^1.  7.  will  by  no  means  clear  n-.  JSTum.  14  18 
Dev.  4.  13.  which  should  not  be  done,  are  <r.  i>2  27. 
5.2.  if  hid  from  him,  he  shall  be  unclenn°and  g. 
3.  when  he  knowethof  it,  he  shall  be  n-.  4. 
5.  when  he  shall  be  g.  he  shall  confess  his  sin 
17.  tho'  he  wist  it  not,  yet  is  he^.  and  shall  bear 
6.  4.  bMjause  he  sinned  and  is  g.  he  shall  restoro 
Xum.  3." 27.  tho'  he  kill  the  slayer  shall  not  be^. 
31.  take  nosatisfaction  for  a  murderer  ^.of  death 
Judg.  21. 22.  ye  did  not  give,  that  you  sho<dd  be^ 
Ezra  10.  19.  being  g-.  ottered  a  ram  of  the  flock 
Ps.  5.tl0.  to  make  Ihcm  n-.  let  them  fall  from  conn. 
34.  t  21.  they  that  hate  the  righteous  shall  be  g. 
109. t7.  when  he  shall  be  judged,  let  him  go  out  ^. 
Prov.  30.  10.  lest  he  curse,  and  thou  be  found  ^. 
Ezek.  22.  4.  art  become ^r.  in  blood  thou  hast  shed 
Hos.  5. 1 15. 1  will  return  to  the  place  till  they  bo^ 
Zcch.  11.  5.  slay  them,  and  hold  themselves  not^r 
Mat.  23.  18.  swear  by  the  gift  on  it,  he  is  g. 
26. 66.  they  said,  ho  is  g.  of  death,  Mark  14.  64. 
fiom.  3.19.  all  the  world  may  become^,  before  God 
1  Cor.11.27.  shall  he^.  of  the  body  and  blood  of  L. 
■Tam.'i.  10.  shall  offend  in  one  point,  he  is  g.  of  all 

GUILTINESS. 
Oen.  26.  10.  thou  shouldost  have  brought  g.  on  us 
Ezra  9.  f  6.  our  g.  is  grown  up  to  the  heavens 
Psal.  51.  14.  deliver  me  from  blood-^.  O  God 
69.  t  5.  and  my  g.  is  not  hid  from  thee 

GUILTLESS. 
Exod.  20.  7.  Lord  will  not  hold  him  or.  Deut.  5. 11 
J^Tum.  5. 31.  then  shall  the  man  be  g.  from  iniquity 
32.22.  afterwards  shall  return  and  be^.  before  La. 
.Tosh.  2.  19.  his  blood  be  on  him,  and  he  will  be^. 

1  Sam.  26.  9.  hand  agst.  Lord's  anointed  and  be  g. 

2  Sam.  3.  28.  I  and  my  kingdom  are^.  of  blood 
14.  9.  women  said,  the  king  and  his  throne  be  g. 

lKi7igs  2.9.hold  him  not  ^.for  thou  art  a  wise  m.au 

Mat.  12.  7.  ye  would  not  have  condemned  the  £. 

GULP.  * 

Luke  16.  26.  between  us  and  vou  is  a  groat  a-,  fixed 

GUSH,  ED. 

1  Kings  18.  28.  till  the  blood  g.  out  upon  them 
PsaLIB.  20.  he  smote  the  rock,  the  waters^,  out 

105.  41.  he  opened  the  rock,  the  waters  g.  out 
Tsa.48.21.be  clave  the  rock,  and  the  waters^,  out 
Jcr.  9.  18.  and  our  eye-lids^,  out  with  waters 
Ads  1. 18.  he  burst  asunder,  and  his  bowels  g.  out 

GUTTER,  S. 
G'en.30.38.Jacob  set  rods  in  theg.  before  the  cattle 
41.  laid  rods  before  the  eyes  ofthe  cattle  in  Ihe^ 

2  Sam.  5. 8.  whogetteth  up  to  the  J-,  and  smiteth 

H. 


HA. 

Job  .39.  25.  ho  sailh  among  the  trumpets,  Ac,  Ao/ 

HABERGEON. 
Exod.  28.  32.  as  it  were  the  hole  of  a  A.  39.  23. 
./ob  41.  26.  the  spear,  the  dart,  tho  A.  cannot  hold 

HABERGEONS. 
2  Chron.  26.  14.  h.  and  bows  Uzziah  prepared 
JVeA.  4.  16.  half  of  my  servants  held  bows  and  A. 

HABITABLE. 
Prov.  8.  31.  rejoicinir  in  the  h.  part  of  his  earth 

HABITATION. 
Exod.  1.5.  2.  he  is  my  God,  I  will  prepare  him  aA. 
T.cv.  13.  46.  without  the  camp  shall  his  A.  be 
Deut.  12.  5.  even  to  his  A.  shall  ye  seek  and  come 
ISam.  2.  29.  why  kick  at  offerg.  commanded  in  h.? 

32.  and  thou  shalt  see  an  enemy  in  my  h. 
2  Sam.  15.  2.5.  he  will  shew  me  both  it  and  his  A. 
2  Chron.  6.  2.  I  have  built  a  house  of  A.  for  thee 

29.  6.  and  have  turned  from  the  A.  of  the  Lord  , 

30.  t  27.  prayer  came  up  to  the  A.  of  his  holinesa 
Ezra.  7. 15.  to  God  of  Isr.  whose  A.  is  in  .lerusalem 
Job5.3.  foolish  taking  root,but  suddenly  I  cursed  A. 

24.  thou  shalt  visit  thy  A.  and  shult  not  sin 
8.  6.  make  the  A.  of  thy  rightcousnes.^  prosperous 
18.  15.  brimstone  shall  be  scattered  upon  his  h. 
Psnl.  26.  8.  I  have  loved  the  h.  of  thy  house 
33.  14.  from  the  place  of  his  A.  he  looUeth 
40.  t  14.  the  grave  a  A.  for  every  one  of  them 
60.  25.  let  their  A.  be  desolate,  none  dwell  in  lenfs 
71.3.  b(!  thou  my  strong  A.  whereunto  I  may  resort 
89.  14.  and  judgment  the  A.  of  thy  throne,  97.  2L 
91.  9.  thou  iiast  made  the  most  High  thy  A. 
104.  12.  the  fowls  ofthe  heaven  have  their  A. 
107.  7.  that  they  might  go  to  a  city  of  A.  36. 
132.  5.  find  a  A."  for  the  mighty  God  of  Jacoh 

13.  for  the  Lord  hnlh  desired  it  for  his  A. 
Prov.  3.  33.  but  he  blessed  the  A.  of  the  juBt  f 

Tsa.  22.  16.  and  thntgraveth  a  A.  for  himself 
27.  10.  and  the  A.  shall  be  forsaken  ond  left 

32.  18.  my  people  shall  dwell  in  a  peaceable  A. 

33.  30.  thine  eyes  shall  see  Jerusalem  a  quiet  Jk 


HAD 

ha.  34. 13.  It  shall  be  a  h.  of  dragom,  and  a  court 
J5.7.  in  the  h.  ufdragoiij  shall  be  gnus  with  reeda 
G3.  Id.  and  behold  Iroin  the  A.  ul  thy  holiness 
Jer,  9.  6.  thine  A.  is  in  tlie  midst  of  deceit 
]U.  '25.  and  they  have  made  his  h.  dcbulate 
S5.  30.  the  Lord. shall  nightly  roar  on  his  A. 
31.  23.  the  Lord  bless  thee,  O  A.  of  justice,  50.  7. 
33.  1-2.  the  cities  thereof  be  a  A.  of  shepherds 
41.  17.  and  they  dwell  in  the  A.  of  Chimham 

49.  19.  he  shall  come  against  A.  of  strong,  50.  44. 

50.  19.  I  will  bring  Israel  again  to  his  A 
45.  surely  he  shall  make  Uieir  A.  desolate 

Ezek.  16.  t  3.  thy  A.  is  of  the  land  of  Canaan 
SJ9.  14.  I  will  cause  Egypt  to  return  to  their  A. 
j3mos  6.t3.and  cause  iheA. of  violence  to  come  near 
Obad.  3.  whose  A.  is  high,  that  saith  in  his  heart 
MiU).  3. 11.  the  sun  and  mocm  stood  still  in  their  A. 
Jicta  1.  'JO.  it  is  written,  let  his  A.  be  desolate 

17.  26.  hath  determined  the  bounds  of  their  A. 
Jiph.  2.  22.  for  a  A.  of  God,  through  the  Spirit 
Jude  6.  the  angels  which  left  their  own  A. 
liev.  18.  2.  Babylon  is  become  the  A.  of  devils 

Huhj  HABITATION. 
Ezod.  15. 13.  thou  hast  guided  them  to  thy  holy  A. 
/?<rut.26.15.look  down  from  thy  holy  A.  from  lieav. 
l'sal.68.  5.  a  Judge  of  widows  is  God  in  his  A(//y  A. 
ftr.  25.  30.  Lord  shall  utter  his  voice  froniA»/y  A. 
Ztck.i.  13.  for  he  is  raised  up  out  of  his  holy  A. 

HABITATIONS. 
Gen.  49.  fi.  instruments  of  cruelty  are  in  their  h. 
F.xod.l2.QO.  in  all  your  A.  shall  eat  uiileaven.  bread 

35.  3.  shall  kindle  no  tire  thro' your  A.  on  sabbath 
JVum.l5. 2.  when  ye  becomeinto  the  A.  Igiveyou 
Psal.  74.20.  dark  places  of  earth  full  of  A.  of  cruelty 

78.  28.  he  let  it  fall  round  about  their  A. 
Isa.  54.2.  let  them  stretch  fortJi  curtains  of  thy  A. 
Jer.  9. 10.  for  the  A.  of  the  wilderness  a  lamentation 

21.  13.  which  say,  who  shall  enter  into  our  A.? 
25.  37.  and  the  peaceable  A.  are  cut  down 

40.  20.  surely  he  shall  make  their  A.  desolate 
/,(i7n.2. 2.  Lord  hath  swallowed  up  the  A.  of  Jacob 
F.zek.  C).  14.  in  all  their  A.  make  the  land  desolate 
Hos.  10. 1 10.  I  shall  bind  them  in  their  two  A. 
Joel  1. 1  19.  fire  hath  devoured  A.  of  the  wilderness 
JImas  1.  2.  the  A.  of  the  shejjherds  shall  mourn 
L,uke  16.9.they  mav  receive  you  into  everlasting  A. 

HAD. 
Octi.  24. 2.  his  servant  that  ruled  over  all  that  he  A. 
39.  6.  he  knew  not  ought  he  A.  save  bread  he  eat 
Kzod.  Hi.  18.  he  that  gathered  much  A.  nothing 
Deut.  10.  15.  the  Lord  A.  a  delight  in  thy  fathers 
yosA.6. 25.  Joshua  saved  Raliab  and  all  that  she  A. 
7.  24.  Joshua  took  Achan  and  all  that  he  A. 
2  .Sam.  6.  22.  of  them  shall  I  be  A.  in  honour 
12.  6.  because  he  did  this  thing,  and  A.  no  pity 
23.8.  the  names  of  mighty  men  whom  David  A. 
2/irnio-s9.31.shesaid,A.Zimri  peace  who  slew  mast. 
1  C/ir.  13.  14.  Lord  blessed  his  house  and  all  he  A. 
28.  2.  as  for  me,  I  A.  in  my  heart  to  build  a 
12.  and  the  pattern  of  all  that  he  A.  by  the  Si)irit 
Job  3.  2fi.  I  was  noi  in  safety,  neither  A.  I  rest 
31.  31.  if  men  said  not,  oh  that  we  A.  of  his  tlesh  ! 
42. 10.  the  Lord  gave  him  twice  as  much  as  he  A. 
Psal.  55.  6.  I  said,  O  that  I  h.  wings  like  a  Hove 
84.10. 1  A. rather  be  a  door-keeper  in  house  of  God 
89. 7.  to  be  A.  in  reverence  of  all  them  about  him 
119.  51.  the  proud  have  A.  me  greatly  in  derision 
y.r.cl.A.  1.  as  were  oppressied,  they  A.  no  comforter 
J.ia.  38.  17.  behold,  for  peace  I  A.  great  bitterness 
.50.  10.  we  grope  as  if  we  h.  no  eyes,  we  stumble 
60.  10.  in  my  favour  have  I  A.  mercy  on  thee 
.'<rr.4.23.I  beheld  the  heavens,  and  they  A.  no  light 
44. 17.  for  then  A.  we  plenty  of  victuals,  were  well 
L,am.  1.  7.  her  pleasant  things  she  A.  in  days  of  old 
9.  she  cnmo  down  wonderfully,  A.  no  comforter 
JEicft.  29.  18.  yet  A.  he  no  wngi's  for  the  service 

36.  21.  hut  I  A.  pity  for  mine  holy  name 

Hos.  12.3.  by  his  strength  Jacob  A.  power  with  God 
4.  yea  he  A.  power  over  the  angel  and  prevailed 
Zcch.  1. 12.  against  which  thou  hast  A.  indignation 
Mai.  2.  15.  yet  A.  he  the  residue  of  the  Spirit 
Mat.  13.  AC.  he  sold  all  that  he  A.  and  bought  it 

22.  28.  whose  wife  of  seven,  for  they  all  A.  her? 
Mark  12.  44.  she  of  her  want  did  cast  in  all  she  A. 
John  4.  18.  for  thou  hast  A.  five  husbands 

5. 4.  was  made  whole  of  whatsoever  disease  ho  A. 
12.  6.  Judfls  A.  the  bag,  and  bare  what  was  in  it 
15.  22.  if  I  A.  not  come  they  A.  not  A.  sin 
17. 5.  the  glory  I  A.  with  thee  before  the  world  was 
,?eM  2.  44.  all  that  believed  A.  all  things  common 

18.  IS.  having  shnrn  his  head,  for  he  A.  a  vow 
25.  26.  that  after  examination  A.  I  might  write 

Worn. 4. 11. a  seal  A. yet  being  imcirrumcisid,  12. 
fi.  21.  what  fruit  A.  y<  in  thing<  whereof  ashamed 

1  Car.  7. 29.  that  have  wivea  be  ns  tho'  thoy  A.  none 

2  (>rr.  1.  9.  but  we  A.  tlie»enten/o  of  doiitii  in  u» 
1  Theia  1.  9.  what  manner  of  entering  in  we  A. 

to  you 
Heh.  7.  fi.  and  bIcKied  him  that  h.  the  promises 
^oAn  3.  7.  old  oommand.  wliich  yc  A-  from  b  «in. 


HAL 

2  John  5.  that  wliich  we  A.  from  the  beginning 
See  All,  Compassio.n. 
HADST. 
Gen.  30.  30.  for  it  was  little  thou  A.  before  I  came 
Psal.  44.  3.  because  thou  A.  a  favour  to  them 
Jtr.  3.  3.  and  thou  A.  a  whore's  forehead 
Heb.  10. 8.  and  oflcring  for  sin  thou  A.  no  pleasure 

HAFT. 
Judg.  3.  22.  and  the  A.  also  went  in  after  the  blade 

HAIL. 
loiod.O.lS.I  will  cause  it  to  rain  a  very  grievous  A. 
23.  theLd.  sent  thunder  and  A.  the  fire  ran  along 
26.  where  children  of  Israel  were,  was  there  noA. 

29.  nor  shall  there  be  any  more  A.  ||  33.  A.  ceased 

10.  5.  that  which  remaineth  from  the  A.  12, 15. 
.Job  38.  22.or  hast  thou  seen  the  treasures  of  the  A.'! 
Psal.  78.  47.  he  destroyed  their  vines  with  A. 

48.  he  gave  up  their  cattle  also  to  the  A. 
105.  32.  he  gave  them  A.  for  rain  and  fiaming  fin 
148.  8.  fire,  A.  snow  and  vapour  fullilling  his  word 
Isa.  28.  2.  which  as  a  tempest  of  A.  shall  cast  down 

17.  the  A.  shaH  sweep  away  the  refuge  of  lies 
Hag.  2.  17.  I  smote  you  with  A.  in  all  the  labours 
Rev.  8.  7.  there  followed  A.  and  fire  mingled  blood 

11.  19.  temple  was  opened,  and  there  was  great  A. 
16.  21.  there  fell  on  liien  a  great  A.  out  of  heaven 

HAIL. 
Isa.  32. 19.  my  people  shall  dwell  when  it  shall  A 

HAIL. 
Mat.  2G.  49.  Judas  said,  A.  master,  and  kissed  him 
27.29.A.  king  ofthe  Jews,  Mark  15. 18.  ./oAn  19.3, 
Luke  1.  28.  the  angel  came  to  Mary,  and  said,  A. 

HAILSTONES. 
Josh.  10.  11.  there  were  more  which  died  with  A 
Psal.  18. 12.  clouds  passed,  A.  and  coals  of  fire  13 
ha.  30. 30.  the  Lord  shall  shew  indignation  with  A 
f;:cA-.13.11.andye,  OgrealA.  shall  fall,  and  a  wind 
]3.therosha!l  be  great  t  inmy  fury  to  consume  it 
3d.  22.  I  will  rain  great  A.  fire,  and  brimstone 

HAIR. 
il,e».13.3.when  the  A.  in  the  plague  is  turned  white 

30.  if  in  plague  a  yellow  A.  ||  31.  no  black  A.  in  it 
37.  there  is  black  A.  grown  H  14.  8.  shaveotf  A.9. 

JS'um.  6.  19.  after  the  A.  of  his  separation  is  shaven 
./u(/n'.20.16.cvery  one  could  sling  stones  at  A.  brea 
2  .Sam.  14. 11.  not  one  A.  of  thy  son  fall  to  the  earth 
26.  because  the  A.  was  heavy  on  him  he  polled  it 
I  Kings  l..'>2.  there  shall  not  a  A.  of  him  fall  to  earth 
JVcA.  13.  25.  I  pluckt  off  their  A.  and  made  them 
.fob  4.15.then  a  spirit  passed,  h.  ofniy  flesh  stood  up 
Cant.  4.  1.  thy  A.  is  as  a  Hock  of  goats,  6.  5. 
Isa.  3.  24.  and  instead  of  well-set  A.  baldness 
7.  20.  the  Lord  shall  shave  the  head  and  A.  of  feet 
50.  6.  my  cheeks  to  them  that  plucked  oft' A. 
.Ter.  7.  29.  cut  off  thy  A.  O  Jerusalem,  cast  away 
Ezek.  5.  1.  and  divide  theA.  i|  16.  7.  thy  A.  is  grown 
Zech.  13. 1 4.  nor  shall  they  wear  a  garment  of  A. 
JVfat.3.4.  John  had  raimentof  camel's  A.  Mark  1.6. 
5.  30.  thou  canst  not  make  one  A.  whitu  or  black 
John  11.2.  and  wiped  his  feet  with  her  A.  12.  3. 
1  Cor.  11.  14.  if  a  man  have  long  A.  it  is  a  shame 
1.5.  if  a  woman  have  long  A.  it  is  a  glory  to  her 
1  Tim.  2.  9.  not  with  broidered  A.  or  gold,  or  pearls 

1  Pet.'.i.  3.  not  of  plaiting  the  A.  and  wearing  gold 
RcxK  6. 12.  the  sun  became  black  as  sackcloth  of  A. 

9.  8.  and  they  bad  A.  as  the  A.  of  women 
Hee  Goats,  He.^d. 
HAIRS. 
Oct;.  42.  38.  ye  shall  bring  down  my  A.  44.29,31. 
Lev.  13.  21.  if  there  bo  no  white  A.  therein 
Deut.  32.25.  the  suckling  also  with  man  of  gray  A. 
Ruth  4.  t  15.  heshallboanourisher  oflhy  gray  A. 
Ps.  40.  12.  are  more  than  the  A.  of  my  head,  69.4. 

71.  t  18.  now  to  gray  A.  O  God,  forsake  me  not 
Isa.  46.  4.  and  even  to  hoar  A.  w  ill  I  carry  you 
Dan.  4.  33.  till  A.  were  grown  like  eagle's  feathers 
Hus.  7.  9.  gray  A.  are  here  and  there  upor.  him 
Mat.\y).'Xi^.X\\ch.  ofourhoadnnmberod,  /,iiAd2.7. 
Au<:c7.38.  did  wipo  them  with  A.  of  her  head,  44. 
Rev.  1.  14.  his  head  and  A.  were  white  like  wool 

IIAIUY, 
Ocn.  2.5. 25.  tho  first  red,  all  over  like  a  A.  garment 

27.  II.  Esau  is  a  A.  man  1|  il.  his  hands  were  A. 

2  Kings  1.  8.  Elijah  was  a  A.  man  and  girt  with 
/^saJ.08.21.  llio  A.  scalp  of  such  a  one  asgcelh  on 

HAI.E. 
Lvki  12.  58.  lest  the  adversary  A.  thee  to  tho  judge 

HALING. 
Jicts  8.  3.  Saul  A  men  and  women  committed  them 

HALF. 
KTorf.24  O.Moscs  took  A.  the  blood,  A.  ho  sprinkled 

30.  23.  take  thou  of  sweet  cinnamon  A.  so  much 
Lev.  6.  20.  A.  of  it  in  the  morning,  and  A.  at  night 
Num.  12.  12.  of  whom  the  flesh  is  A.  consumed 

31.  29  take  it  of  their  A.  and  give  it  to  Elenznr 
.Jnsh.  8.  33.  A.  of  Ihom  over-against  mount  Ebnl 
1  Sam.  II.  M  within  as  it  were  a  A.  aero  of  land 
2.SVim.  10.4.  rianun  shaved  ofl'one  A.  of  their  boards 

18.  3.  nor  if  A.  ofiu  die,  will  they  care  for  us 

19.  40.  A.  the  people  of  Israel  coniiuctod  David 


HAM 

1  /r7n^3  3.25.  give  A.  of  the  child  to  one,  A.  to  oth^v 
10.  7.  and  behold,  the  A.  was  not  told,  2  CAr.  9. 9. 

13.8.  if  thou  wilt  give  nie  A.  thine  house,  I  will  not 
It;.  21.  A.  ofthe  people  followed  Tibni,  A.  Omri 

A'tA.  3. 9.  the  luler  of  ihe  A.  part  of  Jerusalem,  12. 
16.  A.  part  of  Belhzur  |1  17.  A.of  Keilah,  18. 

13.  24.  children  spake  A.  in  the  speech  of  Ashdod 
Hstk.5.'i.  to  theA.  ofthe  kingdom, 7.  2.  J»farA6.23. 
Psal.  55.  23.  bloody  men  shall  not  live  A.  their  days 
F.iek.  16.51  .nor  hath  Samaria  committed  A.  thy  sins 
Dan.  12.7.  be  for  lime,  times,  and  a  A.  Rev.  12. 14. 
Hos.  3.  2.  I  bought  her  for  A.  a  homer  of  barley 
Zech.  14.  2.  A.  ofthe  city  t^hall  go  into  captivity 

4.  A.  of  moqnt  toward  the  south  {|  8.A.  toward  sea 
I^uke  10.  30.  and  departed,  leaving  him  A.  dead 

19.  8.  behold,  the  A.  of  my  goods  I  give  to  the  poor 
Rev.  8.  1.  was  silence  about  space  of  A.  an  hour 

11.9.  shall  see  dead  bodies  three  days  and  a  A.  11. 
See  Shekkl,  JliN,  Tribk. 

HALL. 
Mat.  27.27.  the  soldiers  took  Jesus  into  common  h. 
Mark  15.  16.  the  soldiers  led  him  away  to  theA. 
Luke  22. 55.  bad  kindled  a  fire  in  the  m  idst  of  theA. 
See  JuncMENT. 
HALLOW. 
F.xod.  28.  38.  with  iTie  children  of  Israel  shall  A. 
29.  1.  A.  them  to  minister  to  me  in  priest's  office 
Lev.  22.  2.  in  those  things  which  they  A.  to  me,  3. 
32. 1  will  be  hallowed,  I  am  the  Lord  who  A.  you 
25.  10.  shall  A.  the  fiftieth  year,  proclaim  liberty 
JVum.  6. 11.  and  he  shall  h.  his  head  that  same  day 
1  Kings  B.M.aame  davdid  king  A.  court,  2  CAr.7.7. 
.fer.  17.  22.  but  A.  ye'lhe  sabbath-day,  24,  27. 
^zcA.20.20.and  A.my  sabbaths,  they  shall  beasii^o 
44.  24.  thev  shall  keep  Ijjws  and  A.  my  sabbatha 

HALLOWED. 
F.iod.20. 11.  I.^,  blessed  the  snbbath-day  and  h.  it 
29.  21.  .\aron  shall  be  A.  and  his  garments 
Lev.  12.  4.  she  shall  touch  no  A.  thing,  nor  coiT>e 
19.  8.  because  he  hath  profaned  the  A.  thin»  of  L 
22.  32.  I  will  be  A.  among  the  children  of  Israel 
JVum.^.  13.  I  A.  unto  me  all  the  first-born  in  Israel 
5.  10.  and  every  man's  A.  things  shall  be  his 
16.  37.  take  up  the  censers,  for  they  are  A.  38. 
18.  8.  of  all  the  A.  things  I  have  given  unto  thee 
29.  even  Ihe  A.  i>art  thereof  out  of  it 
Deut.  26.  13.  I  have  brooight  away  the  A.  things 

1  .^'am.  21.  4.  is  no  common,  but  theie  is  A.  bread 
6.  so  Ahimelech  the  priest  gave  him  A.  bread 

\  Kings  9.  3. 1  have  A.  this  house  thou  h!istbuilt,7. 

2  Kings  12.  18.  Jehoash  took  all  the  A.  things 
2  CAroB.36. 14.  polluted  the  house  of  L.  he  had  A. 
Mat.  6.  9.  A.  be  thy  name,  Luke  11.  2. 

HALT. 
Mat.W.  8.  is  better  to  enter  into  life  A.  Mark  9.  45. 
Lvke  14.  21.  bring  in  hither  the  A.  and  the  blind 
.lohn  5.  3.  of  A.  waiting  for  the  moving  ofthe  water 

HALT. 
To  halt,  to  be  lame  on  both  sides.  With  this  Eli- 
jah reproaches  the  Israelites  of  the  ten  tribes, 
I  Kings  18.  21,  How  long  halt  ye  between  two 
opinions?  'I'hry  did  not  adore  God  Kith  a 
pure  and  unmixed  worship,  but  were  for  re^ 
conciling  the  worship  of  God  with  that  of 
idols.  God  says,  I  will  assemble  her  that  hall- 
eth,  and  her  that  is  ilnvcn  out,  Mic.  4.6.  That 
is,  I  will  restore  my  people  ofthe  Jews,  though 
vow  in  a  weak,  banished,  afflicted  condition, 
to  thnr  former  privilegfs,  and  plant  them  in 
their  own  country;  I  trill  determine  sueh  of 
them  to  return,  who  seem  unresolved  whether 
to  go  or  not.  The  Psalmist  says,  that  his 
enemies  rejoiced  to  see  him  half,  Psal.  3.5.  15, 
But  in  mine  adversity,  //eft.  halting,  they  rr- 
joiccd.  IVhrn  I  was  in  great  danger  of  fall- 
in"  into  trouble  ;  when  1  had  any  sickness,  or 
ill  success  in  my  affairs.  .Ind  in  Jer.  20.  10, 
All  my  familiars  watclipil  for  my  hnli'ing  :  They 
lay  in  wait  to  take  me  tripping  in  any  thing, 
if  they  could,  that  they  might  give  mine  adrer 
saries  any  adrantage  against  me. 
1  Kings  1S.2I.  how  long  A.ye  between  two  opinions 
Psal.  38.  17.  am  rendv  lo'  A.  my  sorrow  is  before 
HAT,TEn.  fme 

Gen.  32.  31.  as  Jacob  passed,  he  A.  upon  his  thigh 
J»/if.  4.  7.  I  will  mnke  her  thai  A.  a  remnant 

HALTETH. 
Mic.  4.  6.  in  that  day  I  will  assemble  her  that  A. 
ZrpA.  3.  19.  behold,  at  llint  lime  I  will  e.ivo  hei 
HALTING.  [that  * 

Jer.  20.  10.  all  my  fnmili.irs  watched  for  my  k. 

HAMMER. 
Judg.  4.  21.  then  Jael  took  a  A.  in  her  hand 
5.  26.  with  A.  she  smote  Pisera,  she  smote  oflTlui 

head 
1  KingsCi.  7.  was  neither  A.  nor  axn  heard  in  house 
Isa.  41.  7.  and  he  that  stiiomhe'li  with  the  A. 
.Trr.  23.  29.  like  a  A.  that  bnnketh  rock  in  pifcca 
.50.  23.  how  is  the  A.  of  whole  earth  cut  nsundci 
.VjA.  2.  t  1.  lite  A-  "  come  up  before  thy  face 


HAN 

HAMMERS. 
Psal.  74.  6.  broak  down  the  carved  work  with  h 
Isa.  44.  12.  the  smith  fashioned  it  with  A. 
fcr.  lU.  4.  tiicy  fasten  it  with  nails  and  with  A. 

HAND 
b  apart  of  the  body  well  known.     By  hand,  is 
sometimes  understood  the  vengeance  of  God  ex- 
ercised upon  any  one  ;  1  Sam.  5. 0, 7,  The  hand 
of  the  Lord  wan  heavy  upun  them  otJIshdod, 
after  they  had  taken  the  ark,  and  had  been 
told  that  it  should  continue  to  oppress  them, 
till  they  should  send  it  back  with  presents. 
To  pour  water  on  any  one's  hands,  signifies  to 
serve  him.   Thus  Ehsha  is  said  to  have  poured 
water  on  Ehjah's  hands,  thereby  meaning  that 
he  was  his  seroant,  2  Kings  3.  11. 
To  wash  one's  hands,  denoted  that  the  person 
was  innocent  of  manslaughter,  when  the  mur- 
derer was  not  known,  Deut.  21.  6,  7.     Pilate 
washed  his  hands.  Mat.  27.  24.  to  denote  his 
being  innocent  of  what  was  required  of  him, 
when  he  p<rocceded  to  condemn  Josus,  in  whom 
he  found  nothing  to  deserve  such  a  sentence. 
Some  think  that  Pilate,  living  among  the  Jews, 
had  learned  this  rite  from  them;  but  others 
arc  of  opinion,  that  it  was  a  ceremony  used  in 
protestations  of  innocency  among  other  people 
as  well  as  the  Jews. 
To  kiss  one's  hand,  is  an  act  of  adoration,  Job 
31.  27,  If  I  beheld  the  sun  when  it  shined,  and 
my  mouth  had  kissed  my  hand. 
To  fill  one's  hand,  signifies  to  put  one  in  posses- 
sion of  the  priesthood,  to  enter  him  in  the  en- 
joyment of  the  sacerdotal  dignity ;  because  in 
this  ceremony  the  parts  of  the  victim  which 
were  to  be  offered  were  putinto  the  new  priest's 
hand.     Exod.  2d.  41,    Thou   shall  consecrate 
thera ;  in  Hebrew,  till  their  hand.     See  also 
Judg.  17.  5,  12.  1  Kings  13.  33. 
To  lean  upon  any  one's  hand,  is  a  mark  of  fami- 
liarity and  superiority.  The  king  of  Israel  had 
one  of  his  confidents  upon  whom  he  leaned,  2 
Kings  7.  2,  17.     Jind  in  like  manner  the  king 
of  Syria  leaned  on  Naaman,  ichen  he  went  up 
to  the  temple  of  his  god  Rimmon,  2  Kings, 
5.  13. 
To  lift  up  one's  hand,  is  a  way  of  taking  an  oath 
in  use  with  all  nations.  Gen.  14.  22,  I  have 
lifted  up  my  hand   unto  the  Lord.  It  teas  like- 
wise a  posture  used  in  praying  for  a  blessing 
upon  the  people.    Lev.  9.  22,  Aaron  lifted  up 
his  hand    toward  the  people,  and  blessed  them. 
To  lift  up  the   hand  against  one,  is  to  rebel 
against  him.    2  Sam.  20.  21,  Sheba  hath  lifted 
up  his  hand  against  king  David. 
To  give  one's  hand,  signifies  to  grant  peace,  to 
swear  friendship,  to  promise  all  security,  to 
make  alliance.  2 Kings  10.  15,  Jehusiud  to  ./« 
honadab.  Is  thine  heart  right,  aa  my  heart  is 
with  thy  heart  1  If  it  be,  give  me  thine  hand 
and  he  gave  him  his  hand.   The  Jews  say,  they 
were  obliged  to  give  the  hand  to  the  Egyptians 
and  Assyrians,  that  they  might  procure  bread; 
that  is,  to  surrender  to  them,  to  make  an  alli- 
ance with  them,  that  they  might  be  enabled  to 
subsist,  that  in  their  extreme  necessity  they 
might   preserve  their    lives.     Others    think 
that  by  this  phrase  is  meant,  that  the  Jews 
were  glad  to  labour  with   their  hands,  and 
work  for  them,  in  order  to  procure  the  neces- 
saries of  life,  Lam.  5.  6. 
Eight  hand.     The  right   hand   denotes    power, 
strength.    The  scripture  generally  imputes  to 
Ood's  right  hand  all  the  effects  of  his  omnipo- 
tence.    Exod.  15.  6,  Thy  right  hand,  O  Lord, 
19  become  glorious  in  power  ;  thy  right  hand,  O 
Lord,  hath  dashed  in  pieces  the  enemy.     See 
Psal.  17.  7.  I  20.  6.  |  44.  3. 
To  sit  down  on  the  right  hand  of  God.     T%e  Son 
of  God  is  often  represented  as  sitting  at  the 
right  hand  of  his  heavenly  Father.     Psal.  110. 
],    The  Lord  Raid  to  my  Lord,  sit  thou  at  my 
right  hand.     Thou  hast  done  thy  work  upon 
earth,  now  take  possctsion  of  that  sonereisin 
kingdom  and  glory  ;  which  by  right  helongclh 
to  thee;  do  thou  rule  with  authority  and  honour, 
as  thou  art  Mediator. 
Fhe  right  hand  commonly  denotes  the  South,  as 
the  left  hand  denotes  the  J^Torth.     Far  the  He- 
brews speak  of  the  quarters  of  the  world  in 
respect  of  themselves,  having  their  faces  tum- 
id towards  the  F.ast,  their  backs  to  the  fVest, 
their  right  hands  to  the  South,  and  their  left  to 
the  JVortA.     Thus  Kedem,  which  signifies  be- 
fore, stands  also  for  the  East;   and  Achor, 
whu-\  signifies  behind,  marks  out  the  West; 
Jamin,  the  right  hand,  is  the  South;  and  She- 
mol,  the  left  hand,  is  the  JVortA.  For  example: 
Doth  not  David  hide  himself  with  ua  in  strong 
aoUa  ia  tii«  woods,  in  Iho  hill  ot  Hachilah, 


HAN 

which  is  on  the  south  of  .kshimon  ?  Heb.  o\ 
the  right  hand  o/ Jeshinion.     See  East. 
The  accuser  was  commonly  at  the  right  hand  of 
the  accused.    Psal.  lOD.  (5,  Let  Satan  stand  at 
his  right  hand.     And  in  Zech.  3.  1.  Satan  was 
at  the  right  hand  of  the  high  priest  Josliua  to 
accuse  him. 
Often,  in  a  contrary  sense  to  be  at  one's  right 
hand  signifies  to  defend,  to  protect,  to  support 
him.    Psal.  16.  H.  |  lOJ.  31,  1  liave  set  the  Lord 
always  before  me ;  because  ho  is  at  my  right 
hand  1  shall  not  be  moved.    For  he  shall  stand 
at  the  right  hand  of  the  poor,  to  save  him  from 
those  that  condemn  his  soul. 
To  turn  from  the  law  of  God,  neither  to  the  right 
hand,  nor  to  the  left,  is  a  frequent  Scripture 
expression,  Josh.  1.  7.  |  23.  6.   2  Kings  22.  2. 
7'Ae  meaning  is,  that  we  must  not  depart  from 
it  at  all,  neither  by  attempting  to  go  beyond 
it,  and  doing  more  than  it  requires,  nor  by 
doing  less.     But  we  must  observe  it  closely, 
constantly,  and  invariably,  as  a  traveller,  who 
does  not  go  out  of  his  way,  cither  to  the  right 
or  to  the  left. 
Our  Saviour,  in  Mat.  6.  3,  to  shew  with  what 
privacy  we  should  do  good  works,  says,  That 
our  left  hand  s^hould  nut  know  what  our  right 
hand  does.     Above  all  things  we  should  avoid 
vanity  and  ostentation  in  all  the  good  we  un- 
dertake to  do,  and  should  not  think  that  there- 
by we  merit  any  thing. 
To  stretch  or  spread  out  the  hands,  is  sometimes 
a  gesture  that  denotes   mcixy.    Isa.  65.  2,  I 
have  sjuead  out  my  liands  all  the  day  unto  a 
rebellious  people;  I  have  invited  them  by  my 
prophets,  and  used  all  means  to  allure  them  to 
myself.     So  in  Prov.  1.  24,  I  have  called,  and 
ye   have    refused ;    I  have   stretched  out  my 
hand,  and  no  man  regarded.     I  would  not  put 
forth  my  hand  against  the  Loid's  anointed,  / 
would  not  kill  him.  1  Sam.  24. 10,  To  put  forth 
one's  hand  upon  any  thing,  to  take,  to  steal 
it.     Exod    22.  8,  11,  He  shall  swear  that  he 
hath  not  put  his  liands  to  his  neighbuur's  goods. 
Hand  is  likewise  frequently  taken  for  the  power 
and  impression  of  the  Holy  Spirit  felt  by  same 
prophet.  I  Kings  18.  46,  The  hand  of  the  Lord 
was  on  Elijah.     See  2  Kings  3.  15.     Ezek.  1. 
3.  I  3.  14.     It  is  said  in  several  place.',  that 
God  gave  his  law,  or  sent  his  orders  by  the 
hand  of  Moses,  or  some  other  prophet ;  that  he 
spake  to  his  people  by  the  hand  of  prophets, 
iS-c.  that  is,  by  their  means,  by  their  mouth. 
Laying  on  hands,  or  imposition  of  hands,  is  un- 
derst(fod  in  different  ways  both  in  the  Old  and 
JVew  Testament.     (1)  It  is  of  ten  taken  for  or- 
dination and  consecration  of  priests  and  mi- 
nisters, as  well  among  the  Jews  as  Christians, 
Num.  8.  10.  Acts  6.  6.  1  13.  3.  1  7'(m.4. 14.  (2) 
It  is  sometimes  also  made  use  of  to  signify  the 
establishment  of  judges  and  magistrates,  on 
whom  it  was  usual  to  lay  hands,  when  they 
wereintrusted  with  these  employ ments  :  Thus 
7ohen  Moses  constituted  Josliua  his  successor, 
God  appointed  him  to  lay  his  hands  upon  him, 
JVuOT.  27.   18.     Jacob   laid  his    hands   upon 
Ephraim  am/.Manassch,  when  he  gave  them  his 
last  blessing.  Gen.  48.  14. 
The  high-priest  stretched  out  his  hands  to  the 
people,  as  often  as  he  recited  the  solemn  form 
of  blessing.  Lev.  9.  22.     7'/te  Israelites  who 
presented  sin-offerings  at  the  tabernacle,  con- 
fessed their  sins,  while  they  laid  their  hands 
upon  them.  Lev.  1.  4.     This  testified  that  the 
person  acknowledged  himself  worthy  of  death, 
that  he.  laid  his  sins  upon  the  sacrifice,  that  he 
trusted  in  Christ /or  the  expiation  of  his  sins, 
and  that  he  devoted  himself  to  God.  /fitnesses 
laid  their  hands  upon  the  head  of  the  accused  \    19.  4.  1  will  give  over  into  the  A.  of  a  cruel  lord 


HAN 

ProY.  3. 27.  [3]  Jiis  help,  2  Kings  15. 19.  (4] 
Possession,  1  Kings  11.  31.  [5]  Advice,  2  Sam. 
14.  19.  [li]  I'yranny,  E.\od.  1(3.9.  [71  YVorks^ 
Acts  20.  34.  I-  i 

Gen.  9.  2.  into  your  h.  are  they  delivered 
39.  6.  he  letl  all  that  ho  had  in  Joseph's  A. 
44.  17.  but  the  man  in  whose  A.  the  cup  is  found 
Exod.0. 1.  with  a  strong  A.  shall  he  drive  thorn  out 

13.  '.i.  by  strength  of  A.  Lord  brought  out 

14.  8.  Israel  went  out  with  a  higii  A.  JVu  ji.  33.  3. 
16.  stretch  out  thine  A.  over  the  sea 
t31.  Israel  saw  that  great  A.  Lord  did  on  Egyp*. 

17. 1 16.  the  A.  ujion  the  throne  of  the  Lord 

19.  13.  there  shall  not  a  A.  touch  it,  but  he  shall 

21.  24.  A.  for  A.  foot  for  foot,  Vcut.  19.  21. 
28.  t41.  anoint  them,  and  fill  their  A.  29.  t  9. 
34.  29.  two  tables  of  the  testimony  in  Moses  A. 
3d.  15.  on  this  A.  and  that  A.  wure  hangings 

Lev.  12.  t  8.  if  her  A.iind  not  sufficiency,  then 
25.  28.  remain  in  the  A.  of  him  that  bought  it 
J\rum.  15.  t  30.  soul  that  doth  ought  with  a  high  h. 

35. 1 17.  if  he  smite  him  with  a  stone  of  the  A. 
Deut.  13.  9.  afterwards  the  A.  of  all  the  people 

25.  12  thou  shalt  cut  oif  her  A.  pity  her  not 
32. 1 36.  rejienl,  when  he  seeth  their  A.  is  gone 
.hsh.  2. 19.  his  blood  on  our  head  if  any  A.  on  him 
Judg.  1.  35.  the  h.  of  the  house  of  Joseph  prevailed 
4.  9.  the  Lord  shall  sell  Sisera  into  A.  of  a  woman 

15.  18.  now  fall  into  the  A.  of  the  uncircumcised 
17.  t  5.  Micah  filled  the  A.  of  one  of  his  sons 

20.  48.  Isr.  smote  all  that  came  toA.  of  Benjamin 
ISain.  12.  3.  of  whose  A.  have  I  received  any  bribe? 

13. 22.  nor  spear  found  in  the  A.  of  any  of  Israel 

17.  50.  there  was  no  sword  in  the  A.  of  David 
20.  19.  didst  hide  thyself  when  the  business  was 

22.  17.  because  their  A.  also  is  with  David  [in  A- 
2  Sain.  13.5.  that  I  may  see,  and  eat  it  at  her  A.  6. 

14. 19.  is  not  the  A.  of  Joab  with  thee  in  all  thia7 

21.20.  had  on  every  A.  six  fingers,  1  CAron.  20.  6. 
24. 14.  let  rae  not  fall  into  A.  of  men,  1  CAr.  21. 13 

1  A'(n^s2.4fi.kingdom  established  in  A.  of  Solomon 
13.  6.  and  the  king's  A.  was  restored  again 

18.  44.  there  ariseth  a  cloud  like  a  man's  A. 
22.  6.  they  said,  go  up,  for  the  Lord  shall  deliver 

it  into  the  king's  A.  12, 15.  2  CAr.  18. 5 

2  Kings  7. 2.  lord  on  whose  A.  the  king  leanedj  17. 
13.  5.  went  out  from  under  the  A.  of  the  Syrians 

19.  t26.  inhabitants  were  short  of  A.  Isa.  37.  127. 

1  CAr.  29. 1 24.  sons  of  David  g.ave  A.  under  Solom. 

2  Chron.  12.  5.  hath  Lord  lefl  you  in  A.  of  Shishak 
Ezra  7.  9.  according  to  good  A.  of  his  God  on  him 

9.2.  the  A.  of  princes  have  been  chief  in  tresjiass 
Job  9.  24.  earth  is  given  info  the  A.  of  the  wicked 
12.  6.  into  whose  A.  God  bringeth  abundantly 
10.  in  whose  A.  is  the  soul  of  every  living  thing 
20. 22.  every  h.  of  the  wicked  shall  come  on  him 
21.  16.  lo,  their  good  is  not  in  their  A. 
34.  20.  the  mighty  shall  be  taken  away  without  A 
37.  7.  he  sealeth  up  the  A.  of  every  man 
Psal.  31.  8.  thou  hast  not  shut  me  into  A.  of  enemy 
36.  11.  let  not  the  A»  of  the  wicked  remove  me 
71.4.  deliver  me  out  of  A.  of  wicked,  82.4. 1 97.10. 
123.  2.  as  eyes  of  servants  look  to  the  A.  of 
masters 
127.  4.  as  arrows  are  in  the  A.  of  a  mighty  man 
149.  6.  let  a  two-edged  sword  be  in  their  A. 
Prov.  6.3.  when  tliou  art  come  intoA.  of  thy  friend 

10.  4.  he  bceometh  poor  that  dcaleth  with  a  slack 
A.  but  the  A.  of  the  diligent  maketh  rich 

11.  21.  though  A.  join  A.  wicked  not  unpunished, 

16.5. 

12.  24.  the  A.  of  the  diligent  shall  bear  rule 
17. 16.  why  a  price  in  A.  of  a  fool  to  get  wisdom? 
26.  9.  as  a  thorn  goeth  up  into  the  A.  of  a  drunkard 

Eccl■i.^  l.onA.  of  their  oppressors  was  power 
Isa.  10.  5.  the  staff  in  their  A.  is  my  indignation 

13.  2.  shako  the  A.  that  they  may  go  into  the  gates 

14.  26.  and  this  is  the  A.  that  is  stretched  out 


person,  as  it  were  to  signify  that  they  charged 
upon  him  the  guilt  of  his  blood,  and  freed 
themselves  from  it,  Deuf.  13.  0.  ]  17  7.  Our 
Saviour  laid  his  hands  upon  the  childrhi  that 
were  presented  to  him,  and  blessrd  them,  Mark 
10.  16.  And  the  Holy  Ghost  was  conferred  on 
those  who  were  baptized,  by  the  laying  on  of 
the  Apostle's  hands.  Acts  8.  17.  ]  19.  6. 

Hand  when  referred, I.  To  God,  signifies,  ['l]His 
eternal  purposes,  and  executive  power,  Acts 
4.  28.  30.  [2]  His  providential  bounty  ami 
goodness,  Tml  104.  28.  [3]  His  mis-hty  power 
to  preserve  and  defend,  John  10.  2.S,  29.  [4] 
His  frowns  and  corrections,  Judg.  2.  15.  P.^sal. 
.32.  4.  I  33.  2.  [5]  His  sovereign  dispose, 
Psal.  31.  1.5.  [6]  His  help,  Neh.  2.  8.  Psal. 
74.  11.  [7]  His  favour,  Luke  1.  66.  [81  His 
Spirit,  1  Kings  18.  46.  Ezek.  ].  3.1  37.  1. 
[9]  His  providence,  1  Chron.  29.  16.  Job.  2.  10. 

Referred,  11.  To  men,  signifieth,  [1]  An  instru- 
mtnt,  Exod.  4.  13.  Hog.   i^.  f  '•  "[21  Power, 


28.  2.  Ld.  shall  cast  itown  to  the  earth  with  the  A. 
./(■r.  12.  7.  have  given  dearly  bclov.  into  A.  of  ene. 
13.  4.  vessel  was  marred  in  the  A.  of  the  potter 

6.  as  clay  in  the  potter's  A.  so  are  yo  in  mine 
21.  5.  with  an  out-stretched  A.I  will  fight  ag.  you 
26. 24.the  A.  of  Ahikam  was  with  Jeremiah,  not  to 
give  him  into  A.  of  people  to  put  him  to  death 
.50. 15.  shoutngst.  her  roiKid,  shehath  given  her  A. 
I.,am.  5.  6.  we  have  given  the  A.  to  the  Egyptians 

12.  princes  are  hanged  up  by  their  A. 
Ezek.  2.  9.  a  A.  was  sent  me,  and  lo,  a  roll 
8.  3.  and  he  put  forth  the  form  of  a  A.  10.  8. 
16.  49.  nor  did  she  strengthen  the  A.  of  the  needy 
21.  t  14.  prophesy,  and  smile  A.  to  A.  together 

24.  I  eay,  ye  shall  be  taken  with  the  A. 
28.  9.  be  no  god  in  the  A.  of  him  thatslnyeth  thM 
34.  10.  behold,  I  will  require  my  flock  at  their  A. 
37.19.  take  the  stick  which  is  in  the  A.  of  Ephraim 
40.  5.  and  in  the  man's  A.  a  measuring  reed 
Dan.  5  .5.  there  came  forth  the  fingers  of^a  man's  I. 

23.Gud,  in  whose  A.thy  breath  !«,  hut  not  gloriC 


HAN 

Da%.i.  35.  but  he  shall  be  broken  without  h. 

10.  l».  behold,  a  A.  touched  me,  which  set  ino 
Joel  3.  8.  sell  svm  uml  daughters  into  k.  of  Judah 
Mic.  '2.  1.  because  it  is  in  tiie  power  uf  their  h. 
Zeck.  4. 10.  shall  see  plummet  in  h.  of  Zerubbabel 
Mat.  8.  15.  be  touched  her  h.  \\-ii.  13.  bind  him  A. 
Mark  3.  l.a  man  who  had  a  withered  A.  3.  />u.  6.8. 

14.41.  the  S^uof  man  is  betrayed  into  A.  of  sinners 
L,ukc  1.  1.  as  many  have  taken  in  A.  to  set  forth 

74.  being  delivered  out  of  the  A.  of  our  enemies 
32.  m.  the  A.  of  him  that  betraycth  me  is  with  me 
John  10.  39.  but  he  escaped  out  of  their  A. 

11.44. that  was  dead  came  forth,  bound  h.  and  foot 
Jicts  12.  17.  Peter  beckoning  to  them  with  the  A. 
1  Cor.  12.15.  because  I  am  not  the  A.  I  am  not  body 
21.  eye  cannot  say  to  the  A.I  have  no  need  of  thee 
Oa/. 3. 19. ordained  by  angels  in  the  A. of  a  mediator 
Heo.  10.8.  take  little  book  open  in  A.  of  the  angel 
17.  4.  the  woman,  having  a  golden  cup  in  her  A. 
19.  2.  hath  avenged  the  blood  of  servants  at  her  A. 

At  HAND,  or  at  the  H.^ND. 
Gen.  9.  5.  at  the  A.  of  every  beast  I  will  rcf|uiro  it, 
at  the  A.  of  man,  at  the  A.  of  man's  brother 
27.41.theday8of  mourningTor  my  father  are  at  A. 
33.10.  field  Jacob  bought  at  A.  of  child,  of  Hamor 
Dcul.  15.  9.  saying,  the  year  of  release  is  at  A. 
.32.  35.  for  the  day  of  their  calamity  is  at  A. 

1  Sam.  9.  8. 1  have  here  ath.  fourth  partof  ashekel 
20. 16.  let  Ld.  re([uire  it  at  h.  of  David's  enemies 

2  Kings  9.7.  may  avenge  blood  at  the  A.  of  Jezebel 
•VcA.  11.  24.  Pethahiah  was  at  the  king's  A.  in  all 
ysa.  13.6.  day  of  Lord  is  at  A.  Joell.la.  Zqj/i.l.T. 
Jcr.  23.  23.  am  I  a  God  at  h.  and  not  a  G.  alar  off  t 
Ezek.  12.  23.  the  days  are  at  h.  and  effect  of  vision 

33.6.  but  his  blood  will  I  require  at  watchman's  A. 

36.  8.  and  yield  fruit,  for  they  are  at  A.  to  come 
Joel  2.1. the  day  of  the  Lord  comcth,  it  is  nigh  ath. 
Mat.  3.  2.  kingiloni  of  heaven  is  at  A.  4.  17.  |  10.7. 

26.  18.  my  time  is  at  h.  \\  45.  the  hour  is  at  h. 
"  46.  he  is  at  h.  that  doth  betray  mo,  Mark  14.  42. 
Mark  1. 15.  kingdom  of  God  is  at  h.  Lake  21.31. 
J.ukc  21.  30.  that  summer  is  now  nigh  at  A. 
John  2.13.and  the  Jews'  passovcr  was  at  A.  1 1.  55. 

7.  2.  now  the  Jews'  fcast  of  tabernacles  was  at  A. 

19.42.  for  the  sepulchre  was  nigh  ath. 

Rom.  13. 12.  the  night  is  far  spent,  the  day  is  at  A. 

PAi7. 4. 5.  let  moderation  be  known,  the  Ld.  is  at  A. 

2  Thess.  2.  2.  as  that  the  day  of  Christ  is  at  A. 

2  Tim.  4.  6.  the  time  of  my  departure  is  at  A. 

1  Pet.  4.  7.  the  end  of  all  things  is  at  A.  be  ye  sober 

Rev.  1.  3.  for  the  time  is  at  A  22.  10. 
By  the  IIAXD. 

F.zod.  4. 13.send4yA.  of  him  whom  thou  wilt  send 
38.21.Eum  of  tabernacle  counted  iy  A.  of  Ithaniar 

Lev.  8.36.  which  Lord  commaiulcd*?/ A.ofMoses, 
10.  11.  I  2G.  46.  jYuiii.  4.  37,  45,  49.  I  9. 
23.  I  10.  13.  1  15.  23. 1  16.  40.  |  27.  23.  I 
36.  13.  .To.;h.  14.  2.  I  20.  2.  I  21.  2,  8. 


22. 9.   Jud^r-  3.  4.   1  Kin<r3  8.  53, 


Ckron.  33.  a.  ]  35.  6.  jWt.  9.  14.  Psat. 
77.20. 
16.  21.  send  him  away  by  the  h.  of  a  fit  man 
Jo$h.  20.  9.  not  die  by  t/ie  h.  of  the  avenger  of  blood 
Judff.  16. 26.  Samson  s^iid  to  lad  that  held  by  the  h. 
1  Sam.  18.25.  make  Duv.f  ill  by  the  A.  of  Philistines 
27.  1.  I  sfiall  one  day  perish  by  the  A.  of  Paul 
2.Sam.3.18.Aj/  tlic  A.  of  my  servant  David  I  will  save 

10.  2.  David  sent  to  comfort  him  by  A.  ofservants 

11.  14.  David  wrote  a  letter,  sent  it  byh.  of  Uri:.h 

12.  0.5.  he  gent  by  the  A.  of  Nathan  the  prophet 
21.22.  they  fell  Ay  ac  A.  of  David,  1  CAr.  20.  8. 

1  Kirurs  2.  25.  Solomon  sent  by  the  h.  of  Bcnaiah 
14.18.  which  he  spake  by  the  A.  of  his  sorv.  Ahijuh 
lfi.7.also  by  theh.  of  Jehu  came  word  of  the  Lord 

S  Kines  14.25.  which  ho  spake  by  tAc  A.of  Jonah 
27.  Tic  saved  them  by  llw.  A.  of  Jeroboam 

SCAr.  10. 15.  word  which  he  spake  byh.  of  Ahijih 
12.  7.  not  piiur  out  wrulh  by  the  A.  of  Slii^hak 

F.ira  1.8.  bring  out  veasuls  by  the  A.  of  Milliredath 

8.  33.  the  vessels  weighed  by  iH,-.  h.  of  Mercmolh 
Job  8.  t  20.  nor  will  he  take  un-odly  by  thr.  A. 
Ptov  26.  6.  that  sendeth  a  mes'^ago  by  A.  of  a  fool 
Jsa.  51.  18.  nor  any  th;it  takoth  hor  by  the  A. 
Jer.in.  3.  Bend  yokce  by  the  A.  of  the  messengers 

31.  32.  in  Ihi!  day  I  took  them  by  theh.  I/eb.  8.  9. 
/riif*.25. 14.my  vengeance  on  Edorn  4i/A.  of  Israel 

30. 12. 1  will  lay  the  hind  waste  ij/ A.  of  stranger* 
Hon.  12.  t  10.  uscdsimilitudosii/ tAe  A.  of  projilieis 
Mat.  9.  25.  ho  went  in  and  took  lur  by  the  h 
Mark  1.  31.  I  5.  41.  LuheS.  .54. 
Mark  fi.23.  he  took  the  blind  man  by  h.  and  led  him 

9.  27.  Jesus  look  him  that  was  po>.He«ycd  by  the  h. 
Jlctt  7.  35.  »cnd  to  be  a  deliverer  by  h.  of  the  angel 

9.8.  he  saw  no  man,  hut  they  led  him  by  ih".  A. 

13. 11.  he  went  seeking  somolo  lo'id  him  Aw  theh. 

Cel.  4.  18.  the  salutation  by  the  A.  of  mo,  Paul 

See  CiiALnCASd,  Knkmv. 

HAND  jciined  with  enfmics. 

Kam  4.  3.  the  ark  of  th<^  covenant  inny  save  ii» 

out  of  the  A.  otoutenrmieffli.  10.3  Sam.3.  18. 

SS8 


HAN 

1  Sani.l2.11.deliv.you  out  of  A.of  f.  2  R'ingt  17. 39. 

2  .Sam.  18.t  19.  Lord  judged  him  from  A.  ol  enemies 
19. 9.  the  king  saved  us  out  of  the  A. of  our  cnemicn 

2  Kings  21.  14.  I  will  deliver  them  into  the  A.  of 
tlieir  enemies,  2  Chron.  25.  20.  JVeA.  9.  27. 
..WA.  9.  28.  leftest  thou  them  in  A.  of  their  enemies 
Hs.  31. 15.  deliver  me  from  the  A.  of  mine  enemies 
Jer.  20.  5.  I  will  give  this  city  into  the  A.  of  their 
enemies,  21.  7.  |  34.  20,  21.  Kzek.  30.  23. 
44.  30.  1  will  give  Pharaoh  into  A.  of  his  enemies 
Mic.  4. 10.  redeem  thee  from  the  A.  of  ihy  enemies 
Luke  I.  74.  dchvercd  out  of  the  A.  of  our  cneynies 

From  the  HAiND. 
Gen.  32.  II.  deliver  mi:  from  A.  of  my  brother  Esau 
Deut.  7.8.  L.  redeemed  you  from  tAc  A. of  Pharaoh 
.fudg. B.-a.lhou  hast  delivered  us  from  A.ot  .Midian 

1  *'a/rt.25.39.i)leadedmy  reproach/roni  A.ofNubal 
Job  5.15.  he  saveth  the  \yoo!  from  the  h.  of  mighty 

6.  23.  or  redeem  me  from  the  A.  of  the  mighty 
Psal.  22.t20.  deliver  my  darling /rw?;!  A.  of  the  dog 

49.t  15  God  will  redeem  my  soul  from  A.  of  grave 

89.48.  deliver  his  soul  from  the  A.  of  the  grave 

lOG.lO.lie  saved  them/rom  the  A.of  him  that  hated 

them,  and  redeemed  them  from  A.  of  the  enemy 

144.7.  deliver  me  from  A.  of  strange  children,  II. 

Prov.6.5.  deliver  thyself  as  a  toe  from  A.  of  hunter 

Jer.  20.  13.  he  hath  delivered  poor  from  A.  of  evil 

31.  II.  from  A.  of  him  tliat  was  stronger  than  he 
Dan.  6.  f  27.  delivered  Daniel /rojH  A.  of  the  lions 
Hot.  13.t  14. 1  will  ransom  them/r.  A.  of  the  grave 
Luke  1.  71.  be  saved /row!  theh.  of  all  that  hate  us 

HAND  of  God. 
lSam.5.\l.h.of  Godwas  heavy  on  them  of  Aslidod 

2  Chr.  30. 12.  A.  of  God  was  to  give  them  one  heart 
Ezra  7.9.  according  to  the  good  h.of  G.  M'eh.  2.  8. 

8. 18.  by  good  A.  of  God  upon  us,  they  brought  us 

22.  A.  of  G.  is  upon  all  them  for  good  liiat  seek 
3).  the  A.  of  God  is  njion  us,  and  he  delivered  us 

A7-h.  2.  18.  then  I  told  them  of  the  A.  of  Godou  me 
.hb  2.  10.  shall  we  receive  good  at  the  A.  of  God? 

19.  21.  have  pity  on  me,  A.  of  G.  Unlit  touched  me 
27.  11.  I  will  teach  you  by  the  A.  of  God 

Ecci.2.24.  this  I  saw  that  it  was  from  the  A.  of  God 
9.1.tli'3  wise  and  their  works  are  in  the  A.  of  God 
fsa.  62.  3.  shalt  be  a  royal  diadem  in  A.  of  thy  God 
Mark  16.19.into  heaven,  and  sat  on  right  A.  of  God 
Horn.  8.  34.  Col.  3.  1.  }Ieb.  10. 12.  I  Pit.  3.  22. 
.lets  2.  33.  being  by  the  right  A.  of  God  e.vnlted 

7.  55.  saw  Jesus  standing  on  the  right  A.  of  G.  56. 
l.Pct.  5.  G.  humble  yourselves  under  the  A.  of  God 

His  HAND. 
G'ei!.3.22.1pst  he  put  forth  his  A.and  take  tree  of  life 
16. 12.  his  A.  will  be  against  every  man,  and  every 
man's  hand  against  him 
19. 16.  while  ho  lingered,  men  laid  hold  on  his  A. 
24.  10.  all  the  goods  of  his  master  were  in  AiV  A. 

32.  13.  Jacob  took  of  that  which  came  to  hish. 
30.  3.  Lord  made  all  that  he  did  prosper  in  AAv  A. 
41.42. 1'liarnoh  look  the  ring  ofi'Ai.s-  A.  and  jiut  it 

/Cxtirf.4.4.lieiiut  fortliAfS  A.it  became  a  rod  in  hish. 
6.  when  he  look  it  out,  his  A.  was  leprous  as 
20.  Moses  took  the  rod  of  God  in  hish.    [snow 

8.6..\ar(m  stretched  out  Aii'A.  over  thy  waters,  17. 

10.22.  Moses  stretched  forth  AisA.  toward  heaven 

17.  11.  when  Moses  held  up  Ar*  A.  letdown  Ais  A. 

21.  13.  but  God  delivered  him  into  his  A. 
16.  if  found  in  his  k.  \\  20.  he  die  under  his  A. 

22.4.  if  the  theft  bo  certainly  found  in  A(.*  A.  alive 

8.  to  see  wliellier  he  hath  j)ut  Ai.v  h.  to  goods,  II. 

24.  11.  on  t!ie  nobles  of  Israel  he  laid  not  his  A. 
32.  1.5.  two  tables  of  testimony  were  in  Ai,"  A.  34.  4. 

/,r».1.4.hc  shall  put  Ais  A. on  head  of  burnt-offering 
5.t7.if  Ai*  A.  cannot  reach  to  eufficiency  of  a  lamb 
16.  t32.  the  priest  whom  he  shall  fill  Ai>  A. 

jVuw.  5.  18.  priest  shall  have  in  his  h.  bitter  water 
(i.  21.  besides  that  his  A.  shall  get 
21.  2n.  and  had  taken  all  his  land  out  of  his  A. 
2-:.23.  hissworddtawninAiJtA.  31.   1  rAr.21.I6. 

25.  7.  I'hinehas  took  a  javelin  in  his  h.  and  went 
r>eut.  19.  5.  hish.  fetchelh  a  stroke  with  the  a.xe 
Josh.  5. 13.  a  man  with  his  sword  drawn  in  Ai>  A. 

8.  2G.  Joshua  drew  not  his  A.  back  till  destroyed 

20.  5.  shall  not  deliver  the  slayer  up  into  Ai»  A. 
.Tude.C^.  21.  put  forth  the  end  of  the  staff  in  Ai>  A. 

7.  14.  into  Ais  A.  hath  God  delivered  Miilian 
\Sam  6.3. known  whyAi«A.iHnot  romovodfrom  you 

9.  that  it  is  not  his  A.  that  smote  us,  but  chance 
14.  26.  but  no  man  put  his  A.  to  his  mouth 

27.  but  Jonathan  put  his  A.  to  his  mouth 
16.  16.  that  he  shall  play  with  his  A.  thou  bo  well 

23.  look  a  harp  and  jilaycd  with  his  A.  18. 10. 
17.40.  David  look  his  staff  and  his  sling  in  Ai;>' A. 

.57.  with  the  head  of  the  Phdisline  in  hit  A. 

19.5.he  put  his  life  in  his  A.and  slew  the  Pliilisline 

23.  16.  and  .lonnlhan  streiislhrnrd  Ai.«  A.  in  tind 
2.Sam.6.0.  Urriah  putAiiA.  lonrk,  I  f  Ar.  13.  10. 
1  Kinps  8.  15.  and  hath  with  his  h.  fulfilled  it 

II.  34.  nor  take  the  whole  kingdom  out  of  Ai.«  A. 

13.4.Ai«  A.wlnrh  he  put  forth  against  him  dried  up 
"icings  5.11. ckll  on  Ld.and  strik*  hit  h.  overplaca 


HAN. 

'XKimgt  10.13.  he  gave  Ai>  A.took  him  up  in  charint 

11.  £5.  ye  shall  compass  the  king  every  man  wiifc 

his  weapons  iii  his  A.  11.  2  Chron.  23.  7 

14.  5.  the  kingdom  was  confirmed  in  hit  A. 
15.19.Ai\ii  A.might  be  with  him  to  confirm  kingdom 

18.  21.  on  which  if  a  man  lean  will  guintoAif  Ai 

19.  19.  I  beseech  thee,  save  us  out  ut'  hia  k. 

1  Chr.  28. 19.  made  me  understand  by  Ai*  A.  on  ma 
29. 1 5.  who  is  willing  to  fill  his  A.  this  day  ? 

2  Chron.  26.  19.  Uzziah  had  a  censer  in  hts  A, 

36.  17.  he  gave  them  all  into  his  A. 

JVrh.  6.  5.  sent  his  servant  with  open  letter  in  his  h. 
.lob  t).  9.  he  would  let  loose  his  A.  and  cut  me  off 

15.  23.  the  day  of  darkness  is  ready  at  Ai«  A. 
2.").  for  he  strelcheth  out  his  A.  against  God 

20.  13.  his  A.  hath  formed  the  crooked  ucrpent 

27.  22.  he  would  fain  flee  out  of  Ai.*  A. 

28.  9.  he  putteth  forth  his  A.  upon  the  rock 
Psal.  37.  24.  the  Lord  upholdeth  him  with  his  A. 

33.  the  Lord  will  not  leave  him  in  his  A. 
78.  42.  they  remembered  not  his  A.  nor  the  day 
89.25.1  wi;4  set  his  A. also  in  the  sea, and  right  hand 
95.  4.  in  Ai»  A.  are  the  deep  places  of  the  earm 
7.  sheep  of  Ai>  A.io-day  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice 
106.  26.  therefore  he  hited  up  his  A.  against  thera 
129.  7.  wherewith  the  mower  fiileth  not  his  A. 
Prov.  7.  t  20.  hath  taken  a  bag  of  money  in  Ai*  k. 
19.24.  a  slothful  man  hideth  his  A.  26.  15. 
Ecel.  5.  14.  begets  a  son,  and  nothing  is  in  Ai>  A. 
15.  nothing  which  he  may  carry  away  in  his  A. 
Cant.  5.  4.  my  beloved  put  in  Ais  A.  by  hole  of  door 
Jsa.  5.  25.  his  anger  not  turned  away,  but  his  A.  is 
stretched  out  still,  9.  12, 17,  21.  1 10.4.  |  14.  27. 
10. 32.  he  shall  shake  his  A.  against  mount  Zion 

11.  II.  Lord  shall  set  his  A.  agaiii  the  second  time 
15.  and  he  shall  shake  AiV  A.  over  the  river 

22.  21.  I  will  commit  thy  government  into  Aij  4. 
28.  4.  while  it  is  yet  in  Ais  A.  he  oatelh  it  up 
31.  3.  when  the  Lord  shall  stretch  out  Ai*  A. 

37.  20.  therefore,  O  Lord,  save  us  from  Ai>  A. 
40.  12.  who  measured  waters  in  hollow  of  Au  A. 
44.  5.  another  shall  subscribe  with  his  A.  to  Lord 
49.  2.  in  the  shadow  of  Ais  A.  hath  he  hid  me 

53. 10.  the  ))leasure  of  Lord  shall  prosper  in  Ais  A. 
56.  2.  and  keepeth  Ais  A.  from  doing  any  evil 

Jer.  27.  8.  till  I  have  consumed  them  by  Ais  A. 
/,u!n.l.l4.yoke  of  my  transgression  bound  byAis  A. 

2.8.  ho  hath  not  withdraw  n  Ais  A.  from  desttoyirig 

3.  3.  he  turnelh  Ais  A.  against  me  all  the  day 
F.iek.i^.ll.  even  every  man  with  his  censer  in  Ajs  A. 

9.1. every  man  with  his  destroying  weapon  in  A.  A. 

17.18.  despiseth  oath,  whenio,  he  had  given  Ais  A. 

30.  22. 1  will  cause  the  sword  to  fall  out  of  his  A. 
24.  and  I  will  put  my  sword  in  Ais  A. 

46.7.for  landis according  asAis  A.shall  attain  unto 
/Jan.4.35.nonecanstayA  A.orsay,wluitdoeslthuu? 

8.  4.  neither  any  that  coulddeliveroulof  Ais  A.  7. 
2.5.  he  shall  cause  craft  to  prosper  in  his  A. 

11. 11.  but  the  multitude  shall  be  given  iuto  Ais  A. 
41.buttheseshall  escape  out  of  Ai.s-  A.  even  Edom 

Nos.  7.  5.  he  stretched  out  his  A.  with  scornere 

12.  7.  thi"  balances  of  deceit  are  in  Ais  A. 
Nab.  3.  4.  he  had  horns  coming  out  of  his  A. 
Zcph.  2.  15.  passeth  her  shall  hi.ss  and  wag  Ats  A. 
ZftA.8.4. every  man  with  staff  in  Ais  A.  for  very  age 

14. 13.  Ais  A.  rise  up  ag.  the  hand  of  his  neighbour 
.Mat.  3.  12.  whoso  fan  is  in  Ais  A.  J^uke  3.  17. 

26. 2.3.  he  that  dippeth  Ais  A.  with  me  in  the  di»h 
.Mark  3.5.  and  Ai.v  A. was  restored  w  hole,  J^u.  6.  10. 

7.  32.  they  beseech  him  to  put  Ais  A.  upon  him 
/.i/Ar9.62.  no  man  having  pulAisA.to  the  plough 

15.  22.  put  a  ring  on  Ais  A.  and  shoes  on  his  Uxt 
.hihn  3.35.  and  hath  given  all  things  into  Ais  A. 

18.22.an  officer  struck  him  with  the  palm  of  Ais  A. 
Arts  7.  25.  how  God  by  Ais  A  would  deliver  them 

28.3.  a  viper  fastened  on  Ais  A.  ||  4.  hang  on  Ais  A. 
liev.  6.5.  he  that  sal  had  a  pair  of  balances  in  AtsA. 

10.  2.  and  hi'  had  in  Ais  A.  a  little  book  open 

14.  9.  receive  his  mark  in  his  foreliend,  or  in  Ais  A. 
14. having  giildi  n  crown,  and  in  A.  A.  sharp  sickle 

20.  1.  an  angel  came  with  a  great  chain  in  Ais  A. 

HAND  .if  the  Lord,  or  Lord's  HAND. 
Ki.od.  9.  3.  the  A.  of  the  Lord  is  upon  lliy  cattle 

16.  3.  would  to  God  wo  had  died  by  A.  cf  the  Ld. 
.Viim.  II.  23.  said  to  Moses,  is  /,.'s  A.wa.^ed  short? 
/)cvt.2.15.  h.of  the  L.  was  against  Ihem  to  de«troy 
Josh.  4.24.  all  people  know  that  h.of  l.d.  is  mighty 

22.  31.yi>  have  delivered  Isr.oul  of  A.«/fAe  /A>ri 
.Ittdg.  2. 15.  theA.  of  the.  Ld.  was  ag.  Ilirm  for  evil 
Ruth  1.  13.  the  A.  of  the  Ld.  is  gnne  out  against  me 

1  >'am. 5.6.  h.of  Ld.  wne  heavy  on  them  of  Ashdod 

9.  A.  of  Ld.wns  against  the  citv  with  destructioo 
7. 13.  the  A.  of  the  l.d.  was  against  the  Pliili.stinc* 
12  15.  then  shall  the  A.  <///Af  Ld.  be' against  you 

2  .«-am.24.I4.letusfallintoA.  of  Ld.  1  C'Ar.  21.13. 
I  Kings  IP.  46.  the  A.  of  the  Lord  was  on  Elijah 
2A'in^»3.15.that  the  A.  of  the  /..came  U|>on  Elishs 
F.iral.  6.  kins  granted  accord ui':  to  A. /i//,. on  him 
.'«A12.  9.  A.  ()//-'/.  hath  wronght  ths,  Isa.  41.20. 
Ptal.  7S.  8.  in  tlia  k.  oftki  Lord  ibcia  is  a  aap 


HAN 

Prov.  21. 1.  king's  heart  is  ii)  the  h.  of  the  Lord 
/«a. 19.16.  because  of  the  shaking  of  iheh.  of  Z.vrd 
25. 10.  in  this  mountain  sliall  tlie  A.  of  the  Ld.  rest 

40.2.  she  hath  received  of  the  I^ord's  h.  double 
51.  17.  hast  drunk  at  A.  0/  /-d.  the  cup  ot'liis  fury 
59.1. Z-ord'i  A. is  not  shortened, that  it  cannot  sav 
62.  3.  thou  shalt  be  a  crown  of  glory  in  A.  o/  J^ord 
C6.  14.  A.  of  Lord  shall  be  known  toward  servants 

Jer.  25. 17.  then  took  I  the  cup  at  the  Lord'' 3  A. 
51.7.  Babylon  hath  been  a  golden  cup  in  Lord's  h. 
Ezek.  1. 3.  the  A.  of  the  Lord  was  there  upon  him 

3.14.  the  A.  of  the  L.  was  upon  me,  22.  |  8.  l.|  37.1. 
33.  22.  the  A.  of  the  Ld.  was  on  me  in  the  evening 
40.1.  the  self-same  day  the  h.of  Ld.  was  with  him 

Luke  1.  tit),  and  the  A.  of  the  I^ord  was  with  him 
.acts  11.  21.  the  A.  of  the  Lord  was  with  them 
13.  11.  behold,  the  A.  of  the  Lord  is  upon  thee 
See  Lay,  or  Laid. 
Left  HAND. 
Gun.  13. 9.  if  thou  wilt  take  ic/t  A.I  will  go  to  right 
14.15  Hobah  which  is  on  lefth.  of  Damascus 
24. 49.  that  I  may  turn  to  the  right  A.  or  to  the  left 
48. 13.  Joseph  took  Ephraim  in  his  right  hand  to- 
ward Isr.'s  left  A.  and  Manasseh  in  his  left  A. 
14.  Israel  laid  his  left  A.  upon  Manasseh's  head 
Ezod.  14. 22.  waters  a  wall  on  right  A.  and  left,  20. 
Lev.  14.  15.  pour  the  oil  into  his  own  left  A.  27. 
A''ttm.20. 17.  we  will  not  turn  to  the  right  A.  nor  to 
left,  Veut.  2. 27.  |  5.  32.  1 17. 11,  20.  |  28. 14. 

22.  26.  no  way  to  turn  either  to  right  A.  or  left 
Josh.  1.  7.  turn  not  from  it  to  the  right  A.  or  to 

left,  that  thou  mayest  prosper,  23.  6.  1  Sam. 
6. 12.  Prov.  4.  27. 
Judg.  3.  21.  Ehud  put  forth  left  A.  and  took  dagger 

7.  SW.  the  companies  held  lamps  in  their  Uft  A. 
16.29.Samson  took  hold  of  other  pillar  with  left  A. 

2  Sam.  2. 19.  he  turned  not  to  lefth.  from  following 
14. 19.  none  can  turn  to  the  right  A.  or  to  the  left 
16. 6.  all  the  mighty  men  were  on  right  A  and  left 

IKings  22.19.host  of  hea.on  his  left  A.  2CAr.l8.18. 

iKings  22.2. Josiah  turned  not  to  the  right  A.or  left 

23.  8.  which  were  on  a  man's  left  A.  at  the  gate 
1  CAr.6. 44.  the  sons  of  Merari  stood  on  the  left  A. 

12.  2.  they  could  use  both  right  A.  and  left  in  hurl. 
S  Chr.  3. 17.  he  called  name  of  that  on  left  h.  Boaz 

4.6.  and  he  put  five  on  the  left  A.  to  wash  in  them 
7.five  candlesticks  on  the  right,  five  on  the  left  A. 
JWA.8.4.Ezra  on  pulpit,  on  his  left  A.stood  Pedaiah 
Job  23.  9.  on  left  A.  he  doth  work,  not  behold  him 
Prov.  3.  16.  and  in  her  left  A.  riches  and  honour 
Eccl.  10.  2.  but  a  fool's  heart  is  at  his  left  A. 
Crt7jt.2.-6.^'/iA.is  under  myhead, right  embraces  me 

8.  3.  his  left  h.  under  my  head,  right  embraces  me 
Isa.  9.20.  he  shall  eat  on  left  h.  and  not  be  sat  isfied 

30.  21.  earshear  a  word,when  ye  turn  to  the  left  A. 

.'54.3.  thou  shalt  break  forth  on  the  right  A.  and  left 

Ezek.  16.  46.  her  daughters  dwell  at  thy  left  h. 

21.16.  go  thee  either  on  the  right  A.  or  on  the  left 

39.  3.  I  will  smite  thy  bow  out  of  thy  left  A. 

JJan.  12.  7.  when  he  held  up  his  left  A.  to  heaven 

J()«aA4.11.cannotdiscern  between  right  A.  and  left 

Zech.  12.6.  shall  dev.  all  people  on  right  A.  and  left 

Jilal.  6.  3.  let  not  left  A.  know  what  thy  right  doeth 

20. 21.  one  on  right  A.  other  on  left,  Mark  10.  37. 

23.to3iton  right  A.and^e/£  not  mine,  Mark  10.40. 

25.33.he  shall  set  sheep  on  his  right  A.goats  on  left 

41.lie  shall  say  to  them  on  left  A.  depart  from  me 

27.  38.  were  two  thieves,  one  crucified  on  right  h. 

other  on  the  left,  Mark  15.  27.  Luke  23.  33. 

.Hcts  21.  3.  we  left  Cyprus  on  the  left  h.  and  sailed 

S  Car .6.7.  armour  of  righteousn.  on  right  A.  and  left 

Sec  Lift  hand  or  hands. 

Mighty  HAND. 

i^zo(i.3.19.will  not  let  you  go,no  not  v!\ihmightyh. 

32.11. people  thou  broughtest  forth  with  mighty  A. 

/)eK<.3.24.  hast  began  to  shew  servant  thy  migh.  A. 

4.  34.  assayed  to  take  him  a  nation  by  a  mighty  A. 

5. 15.  God  brought  thee  out  of  Egypt  by  a  mishty 
A. 6. 21.  I  7.8, 19.  I  9.26.1  11.2.  |  26.8.J  .34. 12. 

ZCkr  6.32.  stranger  that  is  come  for  thy  miirhty  h. 
Ezek.  20.33.  with  a  mighty  h.  will  1  rule  over  you 

34.  and  I  will  bring  you  out  with  a  viisrhtti  A. 
X)an.9.15.broiight  peo.out  of  Egypt  with  mighty  A. 
IPc(.5.6.  humble  yourselves  under  mighty  h.  of  G. 

Mine  nnd  my  HAND. 
Oen.  14.22. 1  have  lifted  up  mineh.  unto  the  Lord 

21.  30.  seven  ewe-lambs  shalt  thou  take  ofmy  A. 
31.29.  it  is  in  the  power  of  my  A.  to  do  you  hurt 

39.  I  bear  loss,  of  my  A.  d^idst  thou  require  it 

3.3.  10. 1  pray  thee,  receive  my  present  at  my  A. 

42.37.  deliv.  him  into  my  A.  I  will  bring  him  thee 

43.9.  I'll  he  surety,  of  mj/ A.  shalt  thou  require  him 

Ernd.7. 17.  I'll  smite  with  the  rod  that  is  in  mine  h. 

15.9.mj/4.shall  destroy  them  ||  17. 9.  rod  in  mt'ne  A. 

33.  K.  I  will  cover  thee  with  mine  A.  while  I  pass 

23.  I  will  take  away  mine  A.  nnd  thou  shalt  tee 

AV7n.21.2.ifthnuwilt  deliver  this  people  into  my  A. 

22.  29. 1  would  there  were  a  sword  in  mine  A. 
J)eut.8.i7.m\fhi  of  iny  A.hath  gotten  me  thiswoalth 

10. 3.  went  up,  having  the  two  tables  in  mine  A.  , 

259 


HAN 

Z)eM«.S2.39.nor  any  deliver  out  of  »ny  A.  Tja.  43.13. 
40. 1  lift  up  7ny  A.  to  lieav.  and  say,  I  live  for  ever 
41.  and  if  mine  A.  take  hold  on  judgment 

Judg.  6. 36.  if  thou  wjlt  save  Israel  by  my  A.  37. 
7.2.le8t  vaunt,  saying,  mine  own  A.  hath  saved  me 

8.7.  when  theL.  hath  delivered  Zebaintomine  A. 
9.  29.  would  to  God  this  people  were  under  my  A. 

12.  3.  and  the  Lord  delivered  them  into  my  A. 
17.3.  dedicated  the  silver  to  the  Lord  from  my  A. 

1  Sam.  12.  5.  that  ye  have  not  found  ought  in  my  A. 

17.  46.  Lord  will  deliver  thee  this  day  into  mine  A. 

18.  17.  Saul  said,  let  not  mine  A.  be  upon  him 
21.  4.  there  is  no  common  bread  under  mine  A. 

23.  7.  God  hath  delivered  him  into  mine  A. 

24.  6.  to  stretch  mine  A.  against  Lord's  anointed 

11.  see  skirt  in  mine  h.  no  transgression  in  m.  A. 

12.  but  mine  A.  shall  not  be  upon  theo,  13. 

26. 18.  what  have  I  done  7  what  evil  is  in  mine  A. 
23.  Ld.  delivered  thee  into  myh.  to-day,  24.  10. 

28. 21. 1  have  put  my  life  in  my  h.  and  hearkened 
2Sam.  3.  12.  jhj/ A.shall  be  with  thee  to  bring  Israel 

5.  19.  wilt  thou  deliver  the  Philistines  into  mine 

A.?  I  will  doubtless  deliver,  1  Chron.  14.  10. 

18.12.  yet  not  put  fortli  mineh.  against  Absakmi 

1  Kings  13. 0.  that  my  A.  may  be  restored  me  again 

2  Kings  5. 18.  and  he  leancth  on  my  A.  and  1  bow 

myself  in  the  house  of  Rimmon 

18.  34.  have  they  aelivered  Samaria  out  of  my  h.7 

35.  have  delivered  their  country  out  of  7n.  h.  that 

the  Ld.  shall  deliver  Jerusalem  out  of  ?ninc  A. 

1  Chr.  22.  18.  given  inhabitants  of  land  into  my  h. 

2  Chr.  32. 15.  shall  G.  deliver  you  out  of  my  A.?  17. 
Job  13. 14.  wheretbre  do  I  put  my  life  in  mine  h.l 

29.  20.  and  my  bow  was  renewed  in  my  A. 

31.  25.  rejoiced  because  7«i?ie  h.  had  gotten  much 
27.  or  my  mouth  hath  kissed  my  A. 

33.  7.  neither  shall  my  A.  be  heavy  upon  thee 
Psal.  77.  1 2.  my  A.  ran  in  the  night,  and  ceased  not 

81.  14.  and  turned  myh.  against  their  enemies 

89. 2).  with  whom  my  A.  shall  be  established 

119. 109.  my  soul  is  continually  in  my  A. 
Proj). 1.24.1  have  stretched  out  my  h.  none  regarded 
/«a.l.25. 1  will  turn  my  h.  upon  me  and  purge  dross 

10. 10.  as  my  h.  hath  found  the  kingdoms  of  idols 

13.  by  the  strength  of  my  A.  I  have  done  it 
14.  my  h.  hath  found  as  a  nest  the  riches  of  people 

36. 19.  have  they  delivered  Samaria  out  of  mytk.J 
20.that  L.  should  deliver  Jerusalem  out  of  7ny  A. 

48. 13.  jniTie  A.alsohath  laid  foundation  of  earth 
50.  2.  ismy  A.  shortened  ||  11.  this  ye  haveof  ttj?/ A.r 
51. 16.  have  covered  thee  in  the  shadow  of  mineh. 
66.  2.  all  those  halli  mine  A.  m^de,  .^cts  7.  50. 

Jer.  6.  12.  I  will  stretch  out  my  h.  15.  6.  |  51.  25. 
16.21.1  will  cause  them  to  know  mine  A. and  might 
18.  6.  so  are  ye  in  mine  A.  O  house  of  Israel 

25.  15.  take  the  wine-cup  of  this  fury  at  7rty  A. 
Ezek.  6.  14.  so  will  I  stretch  out  myh.  upon  them 

12.7.in  the  even  I  digged  thro' the  wall  with  myh. 
13.9.)ni7if  A.  shall  be  upon  prophets  that  see  vanity 
20. 5. 1  lifted  up  7Hi/ie  A.  saving  I  am  the  Ld.  your 
God,  6,  23,  28,  42.'|  36. 7.  1 44.  12.  |  47. 14. 
22.1withdrew  7«y  A.aiid  wrought  for  name's  sake 
22.13. 1  have  smitten  mineh.  at  thy  dishonest  gain 
37. 19.  one  stick,  and  they  shall  be  one  in  mine  A. 

Hos.  2.  10.  none  shall  deliver  her  out  of  mine  A. 

.^mos  1.  8.  I  will  turn  mine  A.  against  Ekron 
9. 2.  tho'  into  hell,  thence  shall  »7i(7ic  A.  take  them 

ZecA.  2.  9.  behold,  I  will  shake  mine  A.  on  them 

13.  7.  1  will  turn  mine  A.  upon  the  little  ones 
.7nA7i  10.  28.  nor  shall  any  pluck  them  out  of  my  h. 

29.  none  is  able  to  pluck  them  out  my  Father's  A. 

20.  25.  e.tcept  I  shall  thrust  my  A.  into  his  side 

1  Cor.  16.21.  the  salutation  of  me  Paul  with  mine 

own  A.  the  grace  of  Lord  J.  C.  2  7Viess.3. 17. 

Gal.Q.  11. 1  have  written  with  7)iyA.  Philem.  19. 

Our  HAND. 
f?c7i.37.27.letnotour  A  be  on  him,  he  is  our  brother 
43.  21.  and  we  have  brought  it  again  in  our  h. 
^um.31.t49.takon  sum  of  men  ofwarunder  oitr  A. 
Deut.'Xi.  27.  lest  their  adversaries  should  say,  our 
A.  is  high,  and  the  Lord  hath  not  done  all  this 
.^urf4'.lfi.23.our  God  hath  deliv. Samson  into  our  h. 
1  .Sam.  14. 10.  L.  hath  deliv.thcm  into  our  A.  30.  2;}. 
./(■r.11.21.  prophesy  not,  that  thou  die  not  by  our  h. 
2Cor.l0.16.not  boast  in  things  made  ready  tHour  A. 

Out  of  HAND,  or  out  of  the  HAND. 
Of  71. 48.  22.  which  I  lookout  of  the  h.  of  Amorite 
Ezod.  2. 19.  Egyptian  deliv.  us  our  o/ A.  ofslicph. 

3.8.  to  deliver  them  out  of  h.  of  Egyptians,  14.  30. 
JVum.5.25.lakejcalouBy-ofreringo«t  o/ woman's  A. 

11.  15.  if  thus,  kill  me,  I  priiy  thee,  out  of  h. 

35.  25.  deliver  him  out  of  h.  of  theaveng.  of  blood 
.Josh.  9.  26.  deliver  them  out  of  the  h.  of  Israel 
.fudg.  2.  16.  judges  which  delivered  them  out  nfh. 

6.  9.  I  delivered  you  out  of  the  h.  of  Kgvptians 
13.5.  deliver  Israel  out  of  the  h.  of  the  Philistines 

l."?nm.4.8.wlin  shall  deliv.usoH«o/A. of  these  gods? 

17.37.L.will  deliver  mc  out  ofh.  of  this  Philistine 
2.f,(m.  12.7. 1  delivered  theo  ou(o/ A.  of  Paul,  22. 1. 

33.21.  plucked  the  apear  out  oftkt  Egyptian*!  A. 


HAN 

IKings  W.IS.  will  rond  king,  out  o/A.ofSolom.  31 

22.  3.  we  take  it  not  out  of  A.  of  the  king  of  Syria 
2  Kings  13. 25.  took  again  out  of  A.  of  Ben-hadad 

20.  6.  out  of  A.  of  the  king  of  Assyria,  Jsa.  38.  6. 
Psal.  71.  4.  deliver  me  out  ofh.  of  the  wicked 

82.  4.  rid  them  out  of  the  A.  of  the  wicked 

97. 10.  he  delivereth  them  out  o/  A.  of  the  wicked 
Jcr.l5.21.I  will  deliver  thee  out  «/ A.  of  the  wicked 

21.12.  hini  spoiled  out  of  h.  oflheojipressor,  22.  3. 

32.  4.  not  escape  om£  ofh.  of  Chaldeans,  38. 19,23. 
7^am.  5.  8.  none  doth  deliver  us  out  of  their  A. 
ZccA.  11.  6.  out  of  their  A.  I  will  not  deliver  them 
JoAnl0.39.totakc  hini,butheesca|)ed  out  o/thcirA. 
Jicts  12.  11.  delivered  me  out  of  the  A.  of  llerod 
Jlev.S.i.  ascended  beforeG.  outo/angel'sA.lO.  10. 

Hight  HAND. 
fJen.  35. 1 18.  Jacob  called  him  son  of  theri^AfA. 

48. 14.  put  his  right  A.  on  Ephraim's  head,  18. 
Ezod.  15. 6.  thy  right  h.  O  Ld.  is  become  glorioui 

29.20.  put  the  blood  on  the  thumb  of  their  r/>At 
A.  Lev.  8.  23,  24.  |  14. 14,  17,  25,  28. 
Deut.  33.  2.  from  his  ri'^'At  A.  went  a  fiery  law 
Judg.  5.  26.  her  right  A.  to  the  workman's  hammer 
2  .SnHi.20. 9.  Joab  took  Amasa  with  r/^At  A.tokisj 
lA77io-«2.19.Balh-shebasaton  Solomon's  righth. 
2A77in'»'23. 13.on  right  A. of  the  mount  of  corruption 
./('A  23.  9.  he  hidetli  himself  on  the  right  A. 

30. 12.  upon  my  right  A.  rise  the  youth,  they  push 
4(1.  14.  that  thine  own  right  A.  can  save  thee 

Psal.  16. 8.  he  is  at  my  right  A.  Ishall  not  be  moved 

11.  at  thy  right  A.  are  pleasures  for  evermore 
17. 7.  savest  by  thy  righth.  them  that  trust  in  the* 
18.  35.  and  thy  righth.  hath  holden  me  up 
20.  6.  with  tlie  saving  strength  of  his  right  A. 
21.8.thyr(r'A<  A. shall  find  out  those  that  hate  ibe« 
26. 10.  andtheir  right  h.  is  full  of  bribes 

44.  3.  but  thy  right  A.  and  thy  arm  saved  them 

45.  4.  thy  right  h.  shall  teach  thee  terrible  thingt 
9.on  thy  right  A. did  stand  quc^en  in  gold  of  Ophij^ 

48.  10.  thy  right  A.  is  full  of  righteousness 
60.  5.  save  with  thy  right  h.  and  hear  me 
63.8.my  soul  followeth,  thy  righth.  upholdeth  me 

73.  23.  thou  hast  holden  me  by  my  right  A. 

74.  11.  why  withdrawest  thou  thy  right  A.? 

77.  10.  I  will  remember  the  years  of  the  right  A. 

78.  54.  to  mountain  which  his  right  A.  purcliased 
80.  15.  the  vineyard  which  thy  right  A.  planted 

17.  let  thy  hand  be  upon  the  man  of  thy  right  A. 

89.  13.  strong  is  thy  hand,  high  is  thy  right  A. 
25.  I  will  also  set  his  right  A.  in  the  rivers 
42. thou  hast  set  up  the  right  A.  of  his  adversariei 

91.  7.  ten  thousand  shall  fall  at  thy  right  A. 

98.  1.  his  right  A.  hath  gotten  him  the  victory 

108.  6.  save  with  thy  right  A.  and  answer  me 

109.  6.  and  let  Satan  stand  at  his  right  A. 

31.  for  he  shall  stand  at  the  right  A.  of  the  poor 
110.1. sit  thou  at  myright  A.lill  I  make  enemies  thy 
footstool,  Luke  20.  42.  .Sets  2.  34.  fJeb.  1. 13. 
5.  the  Ld.  at  thy  right  h.  shall  strike  thro'  kings 
118.  15.  the  right  A.  of  the  Lord  doth  valiantly 

16.r/nr/,t  A.  ot'the  Lord  is  exalted,  doth  valiantly 
121.  5.  the  Lord  is  thy  shade  upon  thy  right  A. 
]37.5.if  I  forget,  let  my  right  A. forget  her  cunning 
138.  7.  and  thy  right  h.  shall  save  me 
1.39.  10.  even  there  thy  right  h.  shall  hold  me 
142.4. looked  on  my  I'l^At  A.oone  would  know  me 
144.  8.  their  right  A.  is  a  ri^o-At  A.  of  falsehood,  11. 
Prov.  3.  16.  length  of  days  is  in  lier  right  A. 
27.  16.  the  ointment  of  Ins  7^'^At  A.  bewrayelh 
F.ccl.  10.  2.  a  wise  man's  heart  is  at  his  ri'^At  A. 
OiJir.  2.  6.  and  his  right  A.  doth  embrace  me 
8.  3.  and  his  right  A.  should  embrace  me 
/srt.41.10.I  will  uphold  theo  with  ri^At  A.of  righte. 
13.  I  the  Lord  thy  God  will  hold  thy  right  h. 

44.  20.  nor  say,  is  there  not  a  lie  in  my  right  b.     ' 

45.  1.  to  Cyrus  whose  rj^At  A.  I  have  holden 

48. 13.  mv  right  A.  hath  spanned  the  heavens 
62.  8.  the  Lord  hath  sworn  by  his  right  A. 
63. 12.  that  led  them  by  the  right  A.  of  Mosei 

.^fr.22.24.  tho'  Coniah  were  the  signet  on  my  r.  A. 
Z,n7«.2.3.  hath  drawn  back  hisri^AtA.from  enemy 

4.  he  stood  with  his  right  A.  as  an  adversary 
KzcA.  21.22.  at  right  A.  divination  for  .Terusalcm 
//a6.2.16.  cupof  Lord's  right  ft.  shall  helurned  tr 
Z''fA.3.1  Satan  standing  at  hisrj'^At  A. to  resist  hin. 
Mat.  5.  30.  if  thy  r!>At  A.  offend  thee,  cut  it  off 

6.  3.  let  not  thy  left  know  what  thy  right  A.  doeth 
Mark  14.  62.  ye  shallsec  Son  of  man  sitting  on  th» 

right  A.  of  power,  coming  in  clouds,  jAike  22.69. 

16.  ]•.  received  to  heaven,  sat  on  righth^  of  God, 

Hcb.  1.  3.  I  8.  1.  1  10.  12.  I  12.  2.  1  Pet.  3. 22. 

Luke  6.  fi.  was  a  man  whose  right  A.  was  withered 

Jlcts  2.25.  he  is  on  mv  right  h.  I  shnll  not  be  moved 

33.  being  hv  the  right  h.  of  God  exalted,  5.  31. 

3.  7.  he  took  him  by  theriVAt  A.  and  lift  him  up 

7.  55. saw  Jesus  standing  on  right  A.  of  Gnd,56. 
7?om.  8.  34.  who  is  even  at  the  right  A.  of  God 
Eph.\.  20.  sot  him  at  hisn>A«A.in  heavenly plnc«« 
C^>l.'^.^.  where  Christ  iitteih  nn  theriVAtA.'af  God 
iJro.1.10.  he  had  in  hii  right  A.ieven  itari  20.1  '•'• 


HAH 

Ktt)-t.  17.  laid  Hjg-At  A.  upon  me,  lajrlog,  ftsr  not 
5. 1. 1  law  in  his  right  h.  a  book,  written  within,  7. 
13;i6.lo receive  raark  in  Iheir  right  A.or  foreheads 
See  Left  Hand. 
Right  HANDS. 
Ga2.2.9.gave  to  me  and  liarnab.  right  h.  of  fellow. 

To  stretch  forth  or  out  HAND. 

Oen.  22.10.  Abraham  stretched  forth  hid  A.  to  slay 

£xod.3.20. 1  will  stretch  out  my  A.on  Egy  .7.5.19. 15. 

14. 16.  streteh  out  thy  A.  over  the  sea,  iJ6.  7,  J'J. 

21.  Moses  stretchtS  out  his  A.  over  the  sea,  27. 

1  Som.26.9.  who  can  st.f.h.  aga.  Lord's  anointed? 
2£am. 1.14. bow  wast  not  afraid  to  stretch  f.  thy  A. 
Ps.  133. 7.  will  streUh  f.  thy  hand  against  enemies 
Prov.  31. 20.  she  stretcheth  out  her  A.  to  the  poor 
Ezek.  14.9.  I  will  stretch  out  my  A.  on  that  prophet 

13.  then  will  1  stretch  out  mine  A.  upon  the  land 

25. 7. 1  will  sir.  out  mine  A.  upon  the  Ammonites 

13.  I  will  also  stretch  out  mine  A.  upon  Edom 

16. 1  will  itrctcA  out  mine  A.  on  the  Philistines 

35.3. 1  will  stretch  out  mine  A. against  mount  Seir 

Dan.  11. 42.  shall  stretch  f.  his  A.  on  the  countries 

Zepk.  1.  4.  on  Judah  ||  2.  13.  against  Assyria 

See  Stkoso. 

TAJne  or  thy  HAND. 

fje«.4.11.  to  receive  thy  brother's  blood  from<Ay  A. 

16. 6.  thy  maid  is  in  thij  h.  do  to  her  as  it  pleaseth 
22. 12.  and  he  said,  lay  not  thine  A.  upon  the  lad 
24.  2.  put,  I  pray,  thy  A.  under  my  thigh,  47.  29. 
49.  8.  (Ay  k.  shall  be  in  the  neck  of  thy  enemies 

Ezod.  4.  2.  what  is  that  in  thine  A.?  he  said,  a  rod 
17.  thou  shalt  take  this  rod  in  t.A.  7. 15.  |  17.5. 
8.  5.  stretch  forth  thine  A.  over  the  rivers,  9.  22. 
I  10.  12,  21.  Mat.  12.  13.  Mark  3.  5. 
13. 9.  it  shall  be  for  a  sign  on  t.  A.  16.  iJeut.  G.  S. 
23.  1.  put  not  Mine  A.  with  wicked  to  be  witness 
Aunt.  21.  34.  for  I  have  delivered  Og  into  thy  A. 
Deut.^.T.  L.  thy  God  hath  blessed  thee  in  works  of 
_  thy  A.  14. 29. 1 15. 10.  |  23. 20.  |  28. 8, 12,  20. 

24.  behold,  I  have  given  into  thy  A.  Sihon 
3.  2. 1  will  deliver  O^  and  his  people  into  thy  h. 
13.9.tAyA.shallbclirstonhim,to  put  him  to  death 
17.  shall  cleave  nought  of  cursed  thing  to  thine  A. 

14.  25.  thou  shalt  bind  up  the  money  in  thine  h- 

15.  7.  nor  shut  thine  A.  from  thy  poor  brother 

8.  thou  shalt  open  thine  A.  wide  to  thy  brother 

23.  25.  thou  mayost  pluck  the  ears  with  thine  h. 

28.  32.  there  shall  be  no  might  in  thine  A. 

30.  9.  make  thee  plenteous  in  every  work  off.  A. 
33.3.he  loved  the|)eople  all  the  saints  are  in  thy  h. 
Josh.  6.  2.  I  have  given  into  thine  A.  Jericho 

8.  18.  for  I  will  give  Ai  into  tA<ne  h. 

9.  25.  now  behold,  we  are  in  thine  A.  to  do  to  us 

10.  6.  slack  not  thy  A.  from  thy  servants,  save  us 
8.  r  have  delivered  kings  of  Canaan  into  thy  A. 

Jtidg.  4.  7.  I  will  deliver  Sisera  into  thine  A. 
7.  7. 1  will  deliver  the  Midianites  into  (Ai'ne  A. 
8.15.are  hands  of  Zpba  and  Zainmnna  in  thine  h.? 
18. 19.  hold  thy  peace,  lay  thine  A.  on  thy  mouth 

20.  2d.  I  will  deliver  Itenjainin  into  thine  h. 
li'am.l4.19.Saul  said  to  the  priest,  withdraw  thy  h. 

21.  3.  what  is  under  thine  h.?  give  me  five  loaves 
23.4. 1  will  deliv.  Philistines  info  t.  h.  2  .Sam.  5  19. 

2  Sam.  13.10.  bring  meat,  that  I  may  oat  of  «Ain<  ft. 

24.  16.  it  is  enough,  Btoy  thine  A.  1  ChroJt.  21.  l.'i. 
17.  lettAine  A.  I  pray,  be  ai;.  me,  1  CAron.  21. 17. 

1  A'iVa-*3.24.  hast  fulfilled  it  with  (.A.  2  Chr.  6.15. 
17.11.  dhe  said,  bring  me  a  roorsel  of  bread  in  t.  A. 
20  13.  I  will  deliver  Syria...  into  tkine  h.  28. 

42.  because  thou  hast  let  go  out  of  thy  A.  a  man 

2  Kings  4.  29.  and  take  my  staff  in  thine  A. 
8.8.  the  king  said,  t«ke  a  present  in  thine  A. 

9.  1.  Elisha  said,  take  this  box  of  oil  in  thine  A. 
10. 15.  give  me  thine  h.  and  he  gave  him  his  hand 
13.  16.  and  he  s.iid,  put  (Aine  A.  upon  the  bow 
1  Chron.  4. 10.  and  that  thine  A.  might  be  with  me 

29.  12.  in  tAine  A.  power ;  and  to  make  great 
10.  all  this  store  for  house  Cometh  of  Min.'  A. 

S  Chr.  2f>.  fi.  \nthyh.  is  thore  not  power  and  might? 
XtraT.  14.  the  law  of  thy  God  which  is  in  tAine  A. 

25.  after  wisdom  ofGod,  that  is  in  thine  A. 
Job  1.  11.  but  put  forth  thiite  A.  and  touch,  2.  5. 

12.  only  upon  himself  put  not  forth  thine  h. 
2.  6.  behold,  he  is  in  fAi'ne  A.  hut  save  his  life 

10. 7.  there  if  none  tlint  can  deliver  out  of  thine  h. 
11. 14.  if  iniquity  \wi  in  thine  A.  put  it  far  nway 
13.21.  withdraw  f.A.farfrom  me,  lelnoi  ihydrcad 
3.5.  7.  or  what  rccoiveth  ho  nf  thine  A..' 

Ptal.  10.  12.  arise,  O  Lord,  O  Gud  lift  up  (Aine  A. 

14.  bcholdest  spile  to  requite  it  with  thy  hi' 
17.  14.  from  men  which  are  (Aw  A.  O  Lord 
21.  8.  thine  A.  «hall  find  out  all  thme  enemies 
31.  .5.  into  thine  A.  I  rommil  my  spirit 

15.  my  limes  are  in  thy  A.  doliv.  mo  from  enemies 
S2.  4.  for  day  and  nijhl  thu  A.  wsk  heavy  upon  me 
38.2. (Av  A.  prenseth  me  l|  39.10. by  blowof  (Aine  A. 
74. 1 1.  why  withdrawrsl  thou  Ihy  A.?  pluck  il  nut 
80.  17.  le*  tAy  A.  bo  upon  the  man  of  Ihy  right  A. 
88.  5.  snd  they  arc  rut  ofT  Iroin  thy  A. 
104.S8.thoaop«neitt*vA.fdlcd  with  good,  145.16. 

900 


HAN 

Psal.  109.i?7.  that  they  may  know  that  thh  ts  f  Ay  h. 
1 1 '.1. 173.  let  thy  A.  help  me  ||  139. 5.  laid  t.  A.  on  me 
131).  10.  even  there  shall  thy  A.  lead  me 
144.7.  send  fAi'ne  A-from  above,  rid  me,  deliver  me 

I'rov.  3.  27.  when  it  is  in  power  of  <  Aine  A.  to  do  it 
6. 1.  if  thou  hast  stricken '{Ay  A.  with  a  stranger 
30. 32.  if  thought  evil,  lay  thy  A.  upon  thy  mouth 

Kccl.l.lB.  yea  also  from  this  withdraw  not  thine  h. 

9.  10.  whatsoever  (Ay  A.  findeth  to  do,  do  it 
11.  6.  in  the  evening  withhold  noKAine  A. 

Isa.  3.  6.  and  let  this  ruin  be  under  thy  A. 
21).  11.  when  (Ay  A.  is  lifted  up,  they  will  not  see 
42.6. 1  the  Lord  will  hold  thineh.  and  keep  thee 
47.  6.  I  have  given  my  inheritance  into  (Ainc  A. 
51.22. 1  have  taken  out  of  (Ay  A.  cup  of  trembling 
57.  10.  thou  hast  found  the  life  of  thine  A. 
64.  8.  art  our  Father,  we  are  the  work  of  (Ay  A. 

Jer.  6.  9.  turn  back  (Aine  A.  as  a  grape-gatherer 
15.17.1  sat  alone  becauseof  (Ay  A.  ihou  hast  filled 
25.  28.  if  they  refuse  to  take  the  cup  at  thine  A. 
36.14. take  in  (Ay  A. the  roll, wherein  thou  hast  road 
40.4.  free  from  chains  which  were  upon  thine  A. 

f:zei-.3.18.his  blood  will  I  require  at  (.  A.  20.  |  33.  8. 
6. 11.  smite  with  thine  h.  and  st^imp  with  thy  foot 

10.  2.  and  fill  (Aine  A.  with  coals  of  fire 

23.  31.  therefore  I  will  give  her  cup  into  (Ame  A. 

29.  7.  when  they  took  hold  of  thee  by  (Ay  A. 

37. 17.  go  in  and  they  shall  become  one  in  (Aine  A. 

38.  12.  to  turn  (Ai«e  A.  upon  the  desolate  places 
Dan.  2.  38.  the  fowls  hath  he  given  into  (Ainc  A. 

3.  17.  our  God  will  deliver  us  out  of  (Ai'ne  A. 
Mic.5,9.  (A.  A. shall  be  lift  up  on  thine  adversaries 

12.  I  will  cut  otf  witchcrafts  out  of  thine  A. 
Mat.  18.8.  if  (Ay  A.  or  foot  offend  thee,  Mark  9.  43. 
fohn  20.  27.  reach  (Ay  A.  and  thrust  it  into  my  side 

JJcts  4.28.  to  do  whatever  (.A.  and  counsel  determ. 
30.  by  stretching  forth  (A!J(e  A.  to  heal 
Your  HAND. 
Gen.  9.  2.  into  your  A.  are  they  delivered 
43.  12.  and  take  double  money  in  your  A. 
f;j-orf.l2.11.witli  shoes  on  vour  feet,  staff  in  yourh. 

23.  31.  the  inhabitants  nf  the  laud  intu  your  A. 
iJeut.  12.  7.  ye  shall  rejoice  in  all  ye  put  your  A.  to 
Josh.  8.  7.  God  will  deliver  it  into  yonr  A.  20. 

10. 19. the  Lord  hath  delivered  them  into  yourh. 

24.  8.  I  gave  the  Amorites  into  yoi/r  A.  11. 
fndg.S.'-iS.  Moabites||7.15.Midianites  into  yowr  A. 

2  .Sam.4.11.  shall  I  not  require  his  blood  of  yowr  A.? 
2  C'A)-.  18.  14.  they  shall  be  delivered  into  your  A. 

28.  9.  God  hath  delivered  them  into  your  h. 
Isa.  1.  12.  who  hath  required  this  at  your  A.? 
./er.  26. 14. 1  am  in  y.A.  do  with  me  as  seemeth  good 

38.  5.  Zedekiah  said,  behold,  be  is  in  your  A. 

44. 25.  ye  have  spoken  and  fulfilled  wiih  your  h. 
Ezek.  13.21.  and  they  shall  be  no  more  in  your  A. 

2:{.  I  will  deliver  my  people  out  of  your  A. 
Mai.  1. 10.  nor  will  I  accept  an  offering  at  your  A. 

13.  should  I  accept  thisof  yoiir  A.?  saith  the  Ld. 
2.  13.  or  receiveth  it  with  good-will  at  your  A. 

H.vNnicn,  see  Lkft,  Weak. 
HAND-BREADTH. 
Exnd.  25.2.5.  a  border  of  a  A.  round  about,  37.  12. 
1  Kings  7. 2<).  a  molten  sea  A.  thick,  2  Chron.  4.  5. 
I'sal.  39.  5.  thou  hast  made  my  days  as  a  A. 
Ezek.  40.  5.  a  reed  of  si.r  cubits  long,  and  a  A. 
43.  13.  the  cubit  is  a  cubit  and  a  A. 

HAND-BROAD. 
f;:eA.40.43.  within  were  honks  a  A.-iroa(2  fastened 

HANDFUL. 
Lev.  2.  2.  the  priest  shall  take  thereout  a  A.  of 
flour,  5.  12.  1  6.  15.  |  9. 17.'  JV«;n.  5.  26. 
1  KingslT.li.ah.  of  meal  in  a  barrel,  oil  in  a  cruse 
Pnal.l^.  16.  there  shall  be  a  A.  of  corn  in  I  he  earth 
f,VcM.6.better  is  A.withquietness,than  both  hands 
Jcr.  9.  22.  and  as  the  A.  after  the  harvest-man 

HANDFITLS. 
Geri.  41.  47.  and  the  earth  brought  forth  by  A. 
rT.i((.il.  H.  take  to  you  A.  of  a^^hi's  of  the  fOriiace 
Ruth  2.  16.  let  fall  also  some  A.  of  purpose  tor  her 
l/ri»:.r.<20.IO.  ifduslofSainariaKliiillHufliceforA. 
F.zek.  13.  10.  will  ye  pollute  mo  for  A.  of  barley? 

HANDY. 
Ptal.  19.1.  and  the  (irmnrnml  «heweth  his  A.  work 

HANDKER('niFF.=!. 
./fc(.»10.I2.from  his  boilywcre  brought  to  the  sick  A. 

H.VNDLE. 
(7en.  4.21.  .Tubal  wai  father  of  such  anA.the  harp 
Judir.  5.  14.  they  that  A.  the  pen  of  the  writer 
I  Chr.  12.  8.  men  thai  could  A.  spear,  2  rAr.25.  5. 
Psal.  1 1.5.  7.  they  have  hands,  but  they  k.  not 
.Trr.  2.  8.  and  they  that  4.  the  law  knew  mo  not 
46.  9.  and  the  Libyans  tlint  A.  the  shield 
Ezek.  27.29.  all  that  A.  the  oar,  and  all  the  pilots 
Luki  24.39.A.mo  and  see  j!  Oi/  2.21  .taito  not,  A.not 

HANDLED. 
f.zek.  21.  11.  to  be  furnishiil,  that  it  may  be  A. 
Mark  12.  4.  and  they  sent  him  nwav  nhamrfiillyA. 
1  .lohn  1.  1.  our  hand*  have  h.  of  Uic  word  of  life 

HANDI.ETH. 
Prev.  16.20.  ha  tbati.  matter  wisely  ihall  find  good 


HAa^ 

J(^..TO.10.cot  oflThlm  that  A.sickle  In  time  orTiarreK 
Jlmos  2.  15  nor  shall  he  stand  that  A.  the  bow 

HANDLING. 
Ezek.  38. 4.  great  company,  all  of  them  A.  swordg 
2  Cor.  4.  2.  not  A.  the  word  of  God  docuilfully 

HANDLES 
Can(.5. 5.  hands  dropped  with  myrrh  on  A.  of  lock 

HANDMAID. 
Gen.  16. 1.  Sarai  had  a  A.  whose  name  was  Haga/ 
29. 24.  Laban  gave  Zilpah  to  be  Leah's  A.  35^ 
2<J.Lu.gave  Bilhah  to  be  Rachel's  A.  30.4.  1 35. 25. 
Exod  2;j.  12.  that  son  of  thy  A.  may  be  refreshed 
./i((/nr.l9.]9.there  is  bread  andwine  for  me  andthyA. 
/<«(A2.13.for  that  liic;;  Wast  spoken  fricndlytothyA 
3.  9.  and  she  answered,  I  am  Ruth  thine  A. 

1  Sam.  l.ll.  if  wilt  look  on  the  afHiciion  of  Ihine  A 

16.  count  not  thine  A.  for  a  daughter  of  Belial 
18.  Hannah  said,  let  thy  A.  find  grace  in  thy  sight 

25.  24.  let  thy  A.  speak  jl  31.  remembct  thy  A. 
41.  let  thy  A.  be  a  servant  to  wash  feet  of  servanta 

2  .Sam.  14. 6.  Ihy  A.  had  two  sons,  they  two  strove 
20.  17.  she  said  to  him,  hear  the  words  of  thy  A. 

lA';no-.?1.13.did8t  not  thou  mylord  swear  to  Ihy  A.? 

17.  thou  swearest  by  the  Lord  thy  God  totby  A. 
3.  20.  she  took  my  son  while  thine  A.  slept 

iKings  4.2.thy  A.hath  not  any  thing,  save  pot  of  oil 

16.  nay,  Ihou  man  of  God,  do  not  lie  to  thine  A. 
Psal.  86. 16.  turn  to  me,  and  save  the  son  of  Ihy  A 

116.  16.  I  nm  thy  servant,  and  the  son  of  thy  A. 
Prov.  30.  23.  and  a  A.  that  is  heir  to  her  mistress 
Jer.  34.  16.  ye  caused  every  man  his  A.  to  return 
Luke  1.  38.  behold  the  A.  of  the  Lord,  be  it  to  me 

HANDMAIDEN. 
Z-uAe  1.48.he  hath  regarded  the  low  estate  of  bis  A. 

HANDMAHJS. 
^<n.33. 1.  Jacobdivided  the  children  tolhetwo  A. 

2.  he  put  the  A.  and  their  children  foremost 
Ruth  2.  13.  though  I  be  not  like  to  one  of  thy  A. 

2  Sam.  6.  20.  who  uncov.  himself  in  eyes  of  the  A. 

Jer.  34.  11.  they  caused  the  A.  to  return  for  A. 

Joel  2. 29.  on  the  A.  will  I  pour  my  spirit,  Acts  2. 18. 
HANDS. 

Gen.  16.  9.  return  and  submit  thyself  under  her  A. 
27.22.the  voice  is  Jacob's,  the  A.are  the  A.  of  Esau 
49.  24.  A.  were  made  strong  by  A.  of  mighty  God 

Kzorf.n.  12.  but  Moses'  A. were  heavy,  took  a  stone 
26. 1 17.  two  A.  shall  be  in  one  board  set  in  order 
29.  24.  and  thou  shalt  put  all  in  the  k.  of  Aaron 
32.t29.Moses  said,  fill  your  A.  to-day  to  the  Lord 

Lev.  8. 27.  put  all  on  Aaron's  A.  and  on  his  son's  A. 

yum.  5. 18.  put  the  offering  of  memorial  in  her  A. 
6. 19.  and  shall  put  them  on  the  A.  of  the  Nazarite 

Deut.  4.  28.  there  ye  shall  serve  gods,  the  work  of 

men's  A.  27.  15.  2  Kings  19.  18.  2CAr..'}2. 19. 

9. 15.  the  tables  of  the  covenant  were  in  my  two  A. 

17. 1  cast  them  out  nf  my  two  A.  and  brake  them 

17.  7.  the  A.  of  the  witnesses  shall  bo  first  on  hira 
31.29.  to  provdke  him  through  the  work  of  your  A. 

.Tudg.^.'ii.  he  delivered  them  into  A.  nf  the  spoilers 

6. 13.  into  A.  of  Midianites  ||  10.7.  into  A.of  Philist. 

8.6.  are  A.  of  Zeba  and  Zaimunnn  in  thy  hand?  15. 

34.  delivered  them  out  of  A.  ofene.  1  Sam.  14.48. 

18.  10.  for  God  hath  given  Laish  into  your  k. 

19.  27.  and  her  A.  were  upon  the  threshold 

1  .Sam.  30.  15.  nor  deliver  me  into  A.  of  my  master 

2  ■'^am.  2.  7.  let  your  A.  be  strong,  Zech.  8.  9,  13. 

16.  21.  then  the  A.  of  nil  with  thee  shall  be  strong 
21.9.  delivered  them  into  the  A.  of  the  Gibconitea 
23.  6.  because  they  cannot  be  taken  with  A. 

1  Kings  lO.t  19.  there  wereA.  on  seat,  2  CAr.O.flS 
14.  27.  into  the  A.  of  the  guard,  2  CAron.  12.  10. 

2  Kings  3.1\.  who  poured  water  on  the  A.  of  Elijah 

9.  .'Vi.  they  found  the  skull  and  the  palms  of  lier  A. 

10.  24.  the  men  whom  I  hroughl  into  your  A. 

1  Chr.  25.  2.  sons  of  Asaph  under  the  A.  of  Asaph 

3.  under  the  A.  of  Jediilhun  ||  6.  A.  of  their  father 

2  CTiron.  15.  7.  be  strong,  let  not  vour  A.  Ix?  weak 
2:f.t  18.  was  ordained  by  the  A.  of  David,  29.  t27. 

FzraAA.  weakened  the  A.  of  the  people  of  Judah 
Jnh  4.  3.  Ihnii  Tinst  strengthened  the  weak  A. 
.5.  t  20.  redeem  in  war  from  the  A.  of  the  sword 
Ifi.ll.God  hath  turned  me  into  the  A. of  the  wicked 

17.  .3.  H  ho  is  he  that  will  strike  A.  with  me  ? 

9. that  bath  clean  A  shall  be  stronger  and  stronger 
r'Jn/.24.4  who  shall  ascend?  he  that  hnth  clean  A 

26.  10.  inwhnseA  is  mischief  ||  47.1.  clap  your  A 
.')8.2.  ye  weigh  the  violence  of  your  A.  in  the  earth 
63.  t  iO.  make  him  run  out  byth«!  A.  of  the  sword 
68.  31.  Ethiopia  shall  streteh  out  her  A.  unto  God 
11.5.4.idols,  the  work  of  men'sA.I3.').15.  /.,a..37.19. 

7.  they  have  A.  but  handle  not,  feet,  but  walk  not 
134  2.lift  up  your  A.  in  the  sanctuary,  and  bless  L. 
1 10.4.  keep  tiie,  O  Lord,  from  the  A.of  the  wicked 
Pror.  6. 10.  a  little  folding  of  the  A.  to  sleep,  24.  .33 

17.  Ld  doth  hate  the  A.  that  sheil  innocent  blond 
12.1 1. 1  he  reeompenre  nf  man's  A. be  rendered  him 
14.  1.  the  foolish  pliirkclb  it  down  with  her  A. 
17.  18.  a  man  strikelh  A.  and  heeomelh  surely 
22.  26.  be  not  thou  one  of  them  that  strike  A. 
30. 28.  ipider  taketh  hold  with  her  A.  it  io  palacei 


HAN 

Proo.31.  13.  and  she  woiketh  willingly  with  her  h. 

19.  she  luyelh  her  h.  tu  tho  spinillu,  her  A.  Iiold 

20.  yea,  she  reucheth  forth  lier  A.  to  the  needy 
31.  give  iier  ot'the  fruitut'lier  A.  and  let  herwurks 

EcclA.ti.  than  bulh  A.  full  with  travail  and  vexation 
7. 2t).  h«r  A.are  as  hands  |{  10.  Iti.  the  idleness  of /(. 

Ca>tt.7.1.lhe  work  of  tiie  A.  of  acuuning  workman 

Isa.  1.  13.  when  ye  spread  forth  your  A.  1  wdl  lude 
my  eyes  from  you ;  your  A.  are  full  of  blood 
2.  8.  they  worship  tht  work  of  their  own  A. 
13  7.  therefore  sliall  all  A.  be  faint,  andheurtmelt 
31  7.  idols  which  your  own  A.  have  made  to  you 
33  t  21.  the  Lord  will  be  a  place  broad  of  A. 
35  3.  strengthen  ye  the  weak  A.  and  coutirm  knees 
45  9.  or  shall  thy  work  say,  he  hath  no  A. 
5f)3-A.  are  defiled  with  blood,  fingers  with  iniquity 

Jet  4  31.  that  spreadeth  her  A-  saying,  woe  is  me 

10  3  a  tree,  the  work  of  the  A.  of  the  workman 

9  and  of  the  A  of  the  founder,  blue  and  jjurple 

19  7.  cause  them  to  fall  by  A.  that  seek  their  lives 

21  4.  will  turn  back  weapons  that  are  in  your  A. 

23.  M.they  strengthen  also  the  A.of  evil  doers,  that 

none  return  from  wickedness,  Ezck.  13.  22. 
25.  6.  provoke  me  not  with  the  works  of  your  A.  7. 

33.  13.  shall  pass  under  A.  of  him  that  telleth  them 
38.4.  he  weakenelh  A.of  menof  war,A.  ofpeople 
48.  37.  upon  all  the  A.  shall  be  cuttings 

Lam.  1.  17.  Zion  spreadeth  her  A.  none  to  comfort 

4.2.how  esteemed  as  the  workof  A.  of  the  potter ! 

6.  that  was  overthrown  and  no  A.  stayed  on  her 

lO.A.of  pitiful  women  have  sodden  their  children 

Eiek.  7.  17.  all  A.  shall  be  feeble,  21.  7. 

35. 1 5.  hast  shed  blood  of  Israel  by  A.of  the  sword 
Dan.  2.34.  till  a  stone  was  cut  out  without  A.  45. 
^ic.7.3.that  they  may  do  evil  with  both  A.earnestly 
JVttA.  3.  19.  all  shall  clap  the  A.  over  thee 
t/a^.  2.  17.  in  nil  labour  of  your  A.  I  smote  you 
ZecA.  4.9.  the  A.  ofZerubbabel  laid  the  foundation 
JUai.  15. 20.  to  eat  with  unwashen  A.  Mark  1.  2,  5. 

17.  22.  the  Son  of  man  shall  be  betrayed  into  the 
A.  of  men,  26.  45.  Mark  9.  31.  Luke  9.  44. 

18.8.having  two  A. to  be  cast  into  tire,  Mark  9.  43. 
JtfarA14.58.  temple  made  with  A.another  withoutA. 
Liy,ke22.  53.  ye  stretched  forth  no  A.  against  me 

24.  7.  must  be  delivered  into  the  A.  of  sinful  men 
^ct«2. 23.  by  wicked  A.  have  crucified  and  slain 

5.  12.  by  A.  of  the  apostles  were  wonders  wrought 

7.  48.  dwellelh  not  in  temples  made  with  A.  17.  24. 

8.  18.  that  through  laying  on  of  the  apostles'  A. 
11.3U.sent  to  elders  by  the  A.of  Barnabas  and  Saul 
17.  25.  neither  is  worshipped  with  men's  A. 
19.2t).lhal  they  be  no  gods  which  are  made  with  A. 
20.  34.  that  these  A.  have  ministered  to  my  necess. 

21.11.  shall  deliver  him  into  the  A.  of  the  Gentiles 
Cor.  5.  1.  we  have  a  house  not  made  with  A. 

Eph.  2.  11.  the  circumcision  in  flesh  made  by  A. 
Ckil.  2.  11.  with  the  circumcision  made  without  A. 
1  Thess.i.}  l.that  ye  study  to  workwith  your  ownA. 
1  Tim.2.  8.  men  pray  every  where  lifting  U|)lioly  A. 

4. 14.  by  laying  on  of  A-  of  the  presbytery,  Hclt.6.2. 
Heb.  9.  11.  by  a  greater  tabernacle  not  with  A. 
24.Chr.not  entered  into  holy  place  made  with  A. 

10.  31.  fearful  to  fall  into  the  A.  of  the  living  God 

12. 12.  wherefore  lift  up  the  A.  which  hajig  down 
JiiTB.  4. 8.  cleanse  your  A.  ye  sinners,  purify  your 

Sec  Clap. 
i/(i- HANDS. 
G<?n.27.23.  his  k.  were  hairy  ||  48. 14.  gmim^hU  h. 
Exod.  17.  12.  and  Aaron  and  Hur  stayed  upA/sA. 
32.  19.  and  Moses  cast  the  tables  out  of  Ais  A. 
I^en.  7.  30.  his  own  A.  shall  bring  the  olfering 

15.  11.  and  hath  not  rinsed  his  A.  in  water 

16.  12.  his  A.  full  of  sweet  incense  beaten  small 
21.  Aaron  shall  lay  both  Aijs  A.  on  he;id  oflive-g. 

JVum.  24.  10.  and  Balak  smote  his  h.  together 
Deiil.  33.  7.  let  his  A.  be  sufficient  for  him 
11.  ble.«s,  Lord,  and  accept  the  work  of  his  h. 

34.  9.  fur  Moses  had  laid  his  A.  upon  Joshua 
Jado'.9.16.rtone  according  to  thedeservingof  A/i  A. 

1 24.  who  strengthened  his  h.  to  kill  his  brethren 

1  Sam.  S.  4.  both  the  palms  of  Ai.s  A.  were  cut  otf 
14.  13.  Jonathan  climbed  upon  his  A.  and  his  feet 
23.16.Jonalhan  went  and  strengthened  Ai>  A.  in  G. 

2  5ara.4.1.when  Saul's  son  heard.  A;*  A.  were  feeble 
l^in^sH. 22. Solomon  htood  and  spread  forth  his  h. 

toward  heaven,  38.  54.  2  Chron.  6.  12,  13,  29. 

16.  7.  in  provoking  him  with  the  work  of  his  A. 
S  Kings  4..34.he  went  up  and  put  his  A.  upon  hish. 

5.20.haih  aparedNaaman  in  notreceivingat  Ais  A. 

13.  Ifi.  Elisha  put  his  A.  upon  the  king's  hands 
2  Chron.  fi.  4.  who  hath  with  his  A.  fulfilled  that 
J^eh.  4.  17.  with  one  of  Ais  A.  wrought  in  the  work 
Job  1.  10.  thou  hast  blessed  the  work  of  his  h. 

5.  18.  he  woundelh,  and  hish.  muko  whole 

20.  10.  and  his  h.  shall  restore  their  goods 

34.  19.  for  they  all  are  the  works  of  Ai«  A. 

37.  for  he  clappeth  his  A.  amongst  us 
Ptal.  9.  Ifi.the  wick,  is  snared  in  the  work  of  his  A. 

28.  5.  they  regard  not  the  operation  of  Ai«  A. 

78. 73.  be  guided  them  hy  the  skilfulness  of  kit  A.  I 
961 


HAN 

Psal.  81.  C.  At'i  A.  were  delivered  from  the  pots 
95.  5.  thij  sea  is  his,  and  his  A.  formed  dry  land 
111.7.  the  worksof  A<s  A.  are  verity  and  judgment 
Prov.  21.  25.  for  Ai*  A.  refuse  to  labour 
Eccl.  4.  5.  the  fool  I'oldeth  A;*  A.  together 
Cant.  5. 14.  his  A.  are  as  gold  rings  set  with  beryl 
Jsa.  3.  11.  the  reward  o( his  A.  sliall  be  given  him 
5.  12.  nor  consider  the  oi>eration  of  Ais  A. 
17.8.he  shall  not  look  to  altars,  the  work  of  At«  A. 
25.11.  L.shall  spread  I'orth  hcs  A.  in  midst  of  them, 
as  he  that  swimmeth  spreadeth  A!«  A.  to  swini 
33.  15.  that  shaketh  Ais  A.  from  holding  bribes 
Jer.30.6.why  see  every  man  with  Ais  A.on  his  loins? 
50.  43.  king  heard  the  report,  Ais  A.  waxed  feeble 
Hab.  3.  10.  the  deep  lifted  up  Ais  A.  on  high 
Zech.  4.  9.  Ais  A.  shall  also  finish  the  house 
Jl/aJ.19.13.he  should  put  his  A.on  theni,JV/u?-A10.16. 
27.  24.  he  washed  Ais  A.  before  the  multitude 
Ji'arA6.2.such  mighty  works  are  wiought  by  Ais  A. 
8.  23.  when  he  had  put  Ais  A.  on  his  eyes,  25. 
/-MAc24.40.shewed  them  Ais  A. and  feet,.7oA7i  20.  20. 

50.  and  he  lifted  up  Ais  A.  and  blessed  them 
Johnl'.i.  3.  the  Fath.  had  given  all  things  into  Ais  A. 

20.  25.  except  I  see  in  Ais  A.  the  print  of  the  nails 
Mcts9. 17.  putting  Ais  A.  on  him,  said,  brother  Saui 

12. 1.  Herod  stretch,  forth  Ais  A.  to  vex  the  church 
7.  and  his  chains  fell  oti"  from  Ais  A. 

2C«r.ll.33.was  let  down  by  a  wall, and  escap.Ais  A. 

Ej>h.  4.  28.  working  with  Ais  A.  thing  that  is  good 

See  Lay,  Laid. 

Mine  HANDS,  my  HANDS. 

Gen.  20.  5.  in  innocency  of  my  A.  have  I  done  this 

31.  42.  God  hath  seen  the  labour  of  my  A. 

Exod.  9.  2J.  I  will  spread  abroad  my  A.  Ezra  9.  5. 

Jadg.  12.3. 1  put  my  life  in  my  h.  and  passed  over 

2S<i«j.22.21.accord.  to  clean.of  my  A.  Ps.  18. 20,24. 

35.he  teacheth  my  A.  to  war,  Fs.  18.  34.  |  144. 1. 

1  Chr.  12.  17.  seeing  there  is  no  wrong  in  wine  A. 
A'eA.  6.  9.  now,  therefore,  O  God,  strengthen  my  A. 
Job  9.  30.  and  if  I  make  my  A.  never  so  clean 

16.  17.  not  for  any  injustice  in  mine  A. 
31.  7.  and  if  any  blot  hath  cleaved  to  mine  h. 
Psal.  7.  3.  O  Lord,  if  there  be  iniquity  in  my  A 
22.  16.  they  pierced  my  A.  and  my  feet 
26.6.  I  will  wash  my  A.  in  innocency,  so  will  [  com. 

28.2.  when  I  lift  up  my  h.  toward  thy  holy  oracle 
63.  4.  I  will  lift  up  my  A.  in  thy  name 

73.  13. in  vain  I  have  washed  my  A.  in  innocency 
88.  9.  I  have  stretched  out  my  A.  unto  thee 
119.  48.  my  A.  will  I  lift  to  thy  commandments 
141.  2.  lifting  uj)  of  my  A.  as  the  evening  sacrifice 
143.  6.  I  stretch  forth  my  A.  to  thee,  my  soul 
£cc^  2. 11.  on  all  the  worksihat/rti/ A.  had  wrought 
Cant.  5.  5.  I  rose,  and  my  A.  dropped  with  myrrh 
Isa.  19  25.  blessed  be  Assyria  die  work  of  my  A. 
29.  23.  when  he  seeth  the  work  of  mine  A.  in  thee 
45.  11.  ask  me  concerning  the  work  of  my  A. 

12.  even  my  A.  have  stretched  out  the  heavens 
49.  16.  I  have  graven  thee  on  the  palms  of  my  A. 
60.  21.  thy  people  also  the  work  of  hi?/  A. 
65.  2. 1  have  spread  out  my  h.  all  day  to  rebellious 
Eiek.  21.  17.  I  will  also  smite  mfne  A.  together 
Dan.'i.  15.  who  is  God  todeliver  you  out  of  my  h.  7 
10.10.  a  hand  which  set  me  on  the  palms  of  my  h. 
I.uke  24.39.bchold  my  A.  and  my  feet,  John  20.  27. 
./0A71  13.  9.  not  feet  only,  but  also  my  A.  and  head 
Rom.  10.  21.  all  daj'  I  have  stretched  forth  my  A. 

2  Tim.  1.  6.  the  gitl  in  thee  hy  putting  on  of  viy  h. 

Our  HANDS. 
Gen. 5.29.  shall  comfort  us  concerning  toil  of  our  A. 
43.  22.  other  money  have  we  brought  in  our  A. 
Z)euf.3.3.  G.  deliver,  intooiir  A.  Og  kingofBashan 

21.  7.  shall  say,  our  A.  have  not  shed  this  blood 
Josh.i.  24.  L.  hath  deliver.  intowurA.  all  the  land 
Judg.  13.  23.  not  received  a  meat-offering  at  our  A. 

16.24.our  G.  hath  delivered  into  our  A.  our  enemy 
1  Sam.  17.  47.  and  he  will  give  you  into  our  A. 
PsaZ.44. 20.  or  stretched  out  our  A.  to  a  strange  god 

90.  17.  establish  thou  the  workof  our  A.  upon  us 
yer.6.24.  we  have  heard  the  same,  o«r  A. wax  feeble 
lipn.  3.  41.  let  us  lift  up  our  heart  with  our  h.  to  G 
//os.14.3.  nor  say  to  work  of  our  A.  ye  are  our  gods 
Jlcts  24.  7.  Lysias  look  him  away  out  of  our  A 
1  Cor.  4.  12.  and  labour  working  with  our  own  A. 

1  John  ].  1.  our  h.  have  handled  the  word  of  life 

TAeir  HANDS. 
Gen.  .37.  21.  he  delivered  him  out  of  tAf  ir  A.  22. 
£;j,od.29.I0.shall  put  theirh.  on  head  of  the  bullock 
15.  shall  put  their  h.  on  the  head  of  the  ram,  19. 
25  thou  shall  receive  them  of  their  A.  Eev.  8.28. 
JVuni.  8.  lO.Israel  shall  put  their  A.  on  the  Levites 
12.  the  Levites  shall  lay  their  A.  on  the  bullock 
Dcut.  1.  25.  they  brought  of  fruit  of  land  in  their  h. 
21.C.tlie  elders  shall  wash  tAeir  A.  over  the  heifer 
Judg.T.i.  too  many  to  give  Midianitesinto  tAeir  A. 
12.  2.  yc  delivered  me  not  out  of  their  A. 

2  .Sam.  4. 12.  and  they  cut  otf  tA^ir  A.  and  their  feet 
2  Sinn's]  1.12. they  clapped(AcirA.said,G. save  king 

22.  17.  that  they  might  provoke  me  to  anger  with 

all  the  work!  of  their  h.  2  Chren.  34.25. 


HAN 

Ezra^  e.strcngthened  tAeir  A.  with  vessels  of  silver 

5. 8.  work  goeth  fast  on  and  prospereth  in  theirh. 

6.22.to  streiigthei:  theirh.  in  the  work  of  the  houie 

10. 1'J. they  gave  tAeir  A.  that  they  would  putaway 
JVcA.  2.  18.  so  they  strengthened  tA.  A.  for  the  work 

6.  9.  tAeir  A.  shall  be  weakened  from  the  work 

9.  24.  gavest  them  mto  tAeir  A.  whh  their  kings 
.>ob  5.  12.  tAeir  A.  cannot  perform  their  enterprise 

30. 2.  whereto  might  strength  of  tAeir  A.  profit  me? 
Psal.  28.  4.  give  them  after  the  work  ol  theirh. 

76.  5.  the  men  of  might  have  not  lound  tAeir  A. 

91.  12.  the  angels  shall  bear  thee  up  in  tAeir  A. 

125.  3.  lest  righteous  put  forth  tAeir  A.  to  iniquity 
/su. 25.1] .  pride,  together  with  the  sjxiils  of  lAeir  A. 

39.  6.  and  the  act  of  violence  is  in  tAeir  A. 

65.  22.  mine  elect  shall  enjoy  the  work  of  tAeir  A 
Jer.  1.  16.  worshipped  the  works  of  their  own  A. 

3.  t  31. the  priests  take  into  tAeir  A.  by  their  means 

25. 14.  accord,  to  the  works  of  tAeir  A.  Jam.  3. 64. 

32.  30.  provoked  to  anger  with  work  of  tAeir  A. 
/-am. 1. 14.  the  Lord  hath  delivered  me  into  their  A. 

2.  t  20.  women  eatchildren  swaddled  with  theirh. 
Ezek.lO.  12.  tAeir  A.  and  wings  full  of  eyes  round 

23.  37.  committed  adultery,  blood  is  in  tAeir  A.  45. 

43.  t  26.  they  shall  imrge  altar  and  fill  tAeir  A. 
Junah  3.8.  turn  from  the  violence  that  is  in  theirh. 
Mag.  2.  14.  so  is  every  work  of  tAeir  A.  unclean 
jl/at.4.6.with  tA.A.they  sh.  bear  thee  up,X,uAe4. 11. 

15.  2.  they  wash  not  (Aeir  A.  when  they  eat  bread 

26.  67.  smote  with  palms  of  tAeir  A.  Mark  14. 65. 
Mark  7.  3.  Jews,  except  they  wash  lAeir  A.  eat  not 
Juke  6.  1.  and  did  eat,  rubbing  them  in  tAeir  A. 
■  Ivhn  19.  3.  and  they  smote  him  with  theirh. 
Jlcts  7.  41.  they  rejoiced  in  the  works  of  tAeir  A. 

]4.3.granted  signs  and  wonders  to  hedone  by  th.h. 
Rev.  7.  9.  with  while  robes,  and  palms  in  tAeir  A 

9.  20.  yet  repented  not  of  the  works  of  their  A. 

20.  4.  nor  had  received  his  mark  in  tAeir  A. 

TAiue  or  tAy  HANDS. 
Ezod.  1.5. 17.  in  sanctuary  which  thyh.  have  estftb. 
Deut.  16.  15.  the  Lord  shall  bless  thee  in  all  worki 
of  thine  A.  therefore  shalt  surely  rejoice,  24.  19. 
.fudg.  7. 11. afterward  shall  thine h.  be  strengthened 
2  Sam.'S.3i.thy  h.  were  not  bound, nor  feet  in  fetters 
Job  10.3»  is  it  good  to  despise  the  work  of  tAine  A.7 

8.  thine  h.  have  made  and  fashioned  me  together 

14.15.thou  wilt  have  desire  to  the  work  of  tAine  A. 

22.  30.  and  it  is  delivered  by  pureness  of  thine  A. 
Psal.8.H.  to  have  dominion  over  the  worksof  tAjr  A. 

92.  4.  I  will  triumph  in  the  works  of  thy  A. 

102.  25.  and  the  heavens  arc  the  work  of  tAy  A. 

119.  73.  thy  h.  have  made  me  and  fashioned  me 

128.  2.  for  thou  shalt  eat  the  labour  of  thine  A. 

138.  8.  forsake  not  the  works  of  thine  own  A. 

143.5^1  meditate,  I  muse  on  the  work  of  tAy  A. 

144.t7.send  thine h.  from  above,  rid  me,  deliv.  me 
F.ccl.S.G.wby  should  G. destroy  the  work  of  thine  h. 
Jer.2.37.thou  shalt  go  forth,  and  (A.  A.  on  thy  head 
Lam.  2. 19.  lift  up  thyh.  for  the  life  of  thy  children 
Ezek.  21. 14.  prophesy  and  smite  thine  h.  together 
22.14.  cantAineA.be  strong  in  the  day  that  I  deal  ? 
Mic.  5. 13.shalt  no  more  worship  the  work  of  tA.  A. 
Zeph.  3.  16.  and  to  Zion,  let  not  thine  A.  be  slack 
Zech.  13.  6.  what  are  these  wounds  in  tAine  A.  7 
i-uAe23.46.  Father,  into  tAy  h.  I  commend  my  spirit 
■  John  21.  18.  thou  shalt  stretch  forth  tAy  A. 
Heb.  1.  10.  the  heavens  are  the  works  of  tAine  k. 
2.  7.  thou  didst  set  him  over  the  works  of  tAv  A. 
HAND-STAVES. 


Ezek.  39. 9.  and  shall  burn  the  h.-staves  and  snears 

HAND-WEAPOx\. 

JVum.  35.  18.  or  if  he  smite  him  with  a  h.-uieaDon 

HAND-WRITING. 

Col.  2.14.  blotting  out  the  h.-uiriting  of  ordinances 
HANG. 

Gen.  40.  19.  Pharaoh  shall  A.  thee  on  a  tree 
A"u7n.25.4.A.them  before  the  Lord  against  the  sun 
/Jcut.  21. 22.and  if  thou  A.  him  on  a  tree,  his  body 

28.  66.  and  thy  life  shall  A.  in  doubt  before  theo 
2  Sam.  21. 6.  and  we  will  A.  them  up  unto  the  Lord 
Esth.  6.  4.  to  speak  to  the  king  to  A.  Mordecai 

7.  9.  then  the  king  said,  A.  him  thereon 
Cant.  4.  4.  whereon  there  A.  a  thousand  bucklers 
ha.  22.  24.  they  shall  A.  upon  him  all  the  glory 
/.arn.  2. 10.  the  virgins  of  Jerusalem  A.  their  heads 
f,'2eA.15.3.will  men  take  pin  toA.nny  vesselthereon? 
Jlfat.22.40.on  these  two  A.  all  the  law  and  prophets 
Jicts  28.4.  saw  the  venomous  beast  A.  on  his  hand 
Heb.  12. 12.  lift  up  hands  A.  down  and  feeble  knees 

HANGED. 
Gen.  40.  22.  but  he  A.  the  chief  baker,  41.  1.3. 
Deut.  21.23.  for  he  that  is  A.  is  accursed  of  God 
JosA.  8.  29.  and  the  king  of  Ai  he  A.  on  a  tree 

10.  26.  the  five  kings  A.  he  on  five  trees 
2  5awi.  4. 12.  Rechab  and  Baanah  A.  over  the  pool 

17.  23.  Ahithophel  A.  himself  II  18.  10.  Absalom  A. 

21.  9.  the  seven  sons  of  Saul  A.  they  in  the  hill 
K:ra6.  )1.  and  being  set  up,  let  him  be  A.  thereon 
KstA.  2.  23.  the  two  chamberlain.*  were  A.  on  a  tree 

7.  10.  they  A.  Haman  ||  9.  14.  tht.y  A.  bis  ten  sou 


HAR 

Psal.  137.  2.  we  h.  our  harpi  on  the  willcwa 

Lam.  5.  I'J.  princes  are  h.  up  by  their  liaiijj 

Ezek.  i'.  10.  they  A.  the  shield  and  helmet  in  thee 

ll.theyA.theirshieMsupon  ihy  walls  round  about 

Mat.  18.  (i.  it  were  belter  for  him  that  u  millstone 

.were  A.  about  his  neck,  JMarkO.  42.  Luke  17. "i. 

27.  5.  Judas  departed,  and  went  and  A.  himself 

Luke  19.  t  -IS.  all  the  people  A.  on  him  to  hear  him 

23.39.  one  of  the  thieves  who  were  A.  railed  on  him 

.^ets  5.  30.  whom  ye  slew  and  A.  on  a  tree,  10.  39 

llANGETH. 
Job26.  7.  and  he  A.  the  earth  upon  nothing 
Gal.  3. 13-  cursed  is  every  one  that  A.  on  a  tree 

HANGING. 
Josh.  10. 26.  they  were  A.  on  trees  till  the  evening 

HANGING. 
Exod.  26. 36.  thou  shalt  make  a  A.  for  door  often*. 
37.  thou  shalt  make  for  the  A.  five  pillars 

27. 16.  A.  for  court  gate,  3^3.  18.  [39.  40.  ]  40.  ?,  33. 
35.  15.  the  A.  for  the  door  at  the  entering  in  of 

the  tabernacle,  36.  37.  |  39.  3d.  |  40.  5,  28. 
ll.VNGLNGS. 
Exod.  27.  9.  A.  of  a  hundred  cubits,  11.  |  38.  9, 11. 
12.  there  shall  be  A.  of  tilly  cubits,  38.  12. 

14.  the  A.  on  either  side  of  gate,  15.  \  38.  14,  15. 

35. 17.  tJic  A.  of  court,  his  pillars  and  theirsockets, 

38.  9,  16,  18.  1 39.  40.  .Vum.  3.  26.  1  4. 26. 
3  King.i  23.  7.  where  women  wove  A.  for  the  grove 
£»^A.1.6.blueA.i'astened  with  cords  of  lin.and  purp. 

HAP. 
Ruth'2. 3.  and  her  A.  was  to  light  on  Boaz'  field 

HAPLY. 
1  Sam.  14.  30.  if  A.  the  people  had  eaten  freely 
JtfarA  II.  13.  if  A.  he  might  find  any  fruit  thereon 
Z.uA'el4.29.  lest  A.  after  he  had  laid  the  foundation 
Acts  5.  '.a.  lest  A.  ye  be  found  to  fight  against  God 

17. 27.  if  A.  they  might  feel  after  him  and  find  him 
2C<jr.9.4.1est  A.  if  tliey  of  .Macedonia  coiue  with  me 

HAPPEN. 
1  Sam.2d.10.no  punishment  A.  to  thee  for  this  thing 
Prov.  12.  21.  there  shall  no  evil  A.  to  the  just 
Isa.  41.  22.  and  let  them  shew  us  what  shall  A. 
^arA10.32.beganto  tell  what  things  shouldA.tohim 

HAPPENED. 
Ruth'i.  t3.  her  hap  A.  to  light  on  Boaz'  filld 
1  Sam.  6.  9.  it  was  a  chance  that  A.  to  us 
ZHam.  1.  G.  as  I  A.  by  chance  upon  mount  Gilboa 

20.  Land  there  A.  to  be  there  a  man  of  Belial 
Eath.  4.7.Mordecai  told  him  of  all  that  had  A. 
./«r.44.23.thorelbre  thisevil  is  A.  to  you  at  this  day 
Luke  24.  14.  they  talked  of  all  things  that  had  A. 
Acts  3.10.  were  filled  with  wonder  at  that  which  A 
Rom.  II.  25.  that  blindness  in  part  is  A.  to  Israel 
1  Cor.lO.  II.  now  all  things  A.  lo  them  forensampli 
Phil.  1.  12.  the  things  which  A.  tome  have  fallen 

1  Pet.  4.  12.  as  though  some  strange  thing  A.  to  you 

2  Pet.  2. 22.  it  is  A.  to  them  according  to  tlie  proverb 

HAPPENETH. 
Ecd.  2. 14. 1  perceived  thai  one  event  A.to  them  all 

15.  I  said,  as  it  A.  to  the  fool,  so  it  A.  even  to  n 
8. 14.  there  be  just  men,  wicked  men  to  whom  it  A. 
9.  11.  but  time  and  chance  A.  to  them  all 

HAPPY. 
fiFcn.30.13.A.  am  I,  for  daughters  will  call  me  bless 

1 13.  and  Leah  called  his  name  Asher,  A. 
Dent.  33. 29.  A.  art  thou,  O  Isr.  who  is  like  to  thee? 
I  JTi'n^^lO.S.  A.  thy  men,  A.thy  servants,  2  CAr.  9. 7. 
Job  5.  17.  A.  is  the  man  whom  God  correcteth 
Psal.  127.  .5.  A.  man  who  hath  quiver  full  of  them 
128.  2.  A.  shall  thou  be,  it  shall  he  well  with  thee 
137.  8.  A.  shall  he  be  that  lewardelh  thee,  9. 
144. 15.  A.  is  that  people  that  is  in  such  a  case,  yea 
A.  is  that  people  whose  God  is  the  Lord 
146.  5.  A.  is  he  that  lialh  God  of  Jacob  for  his  help 
Pruv.  3.  13.  h.  is  ihe  man  that  findeth  wisdom 

18.  and  A.  is  every  one  that  retaineth  her 
14.  21.  A.  is  he  that  hath  mercy  on  the  poor 
16.  20.  and  whoso  trusleth  in  the  Lord,  A.  is  he 
29.  14.  h.  is  the  man  that  feareth  ulway 
29.  18.  but  he  that  kecpeth  the  law,  A.  is  lie 
Jer.  12.1.  why  arc  they  A.  thatdeal  treacherously  ? 
Mai.  3.  1.5.  and  now  we  call  the  proud  A. 
Jihn  13.  17.  if  vc  know  these  things,  A.  if  do  them 
Acts  26.  2.  I  think  my.self  A.  king  Agrippa 
Horn.  14.  22.  A.  is  he  that  con.lenmeih  not  himself 
Jam.  5.  11.  behold,  wo  count  Ihom  A.  who  endure 
1  P«t.3.I4.  if  yo  suitor  for  righteousness' sake,  A.  ye 
4.  14.  if  reproached  for  name  of  Christ  A  are  ye 

HAPPIEIl. 
1  Cor.  7.  40.  but  she  \^  A.  if  she  bo  Bbido,  after  my 

HARD. 
b  taken  for  di^cull,  sad,  or  sorroicful,  crurl,  aus- 
tere, «fc.  Pharaoh  ovrrwhrlmiil  the  Isrnelitrs 
with  hard  boiidngc,irt{A  r.rurland  in.iujiportiihtr 
slavery,  Exod.  I.  14.  The  sons  of  '/.eruinh  ntr. 
too  hard  for  me ;  they  are  too  powerful,  they 
treat  me  with  insnhnc,  with  unseasonnhlr 
cruelty,  2  Sam.  3.  39.  .lo.ieph  sjiuke  hard  lhini,'s 
with  his  brolhren  ;  At  spakr  ruuvhly,  or  harshly 
It  them.,  Gen.  42.  f  7.  The  hard,  or  difficult 
202 


HAR 


HAR 


causes  tlioy  brought  to  Moses,  £xod.  18.  i26. Vw.lQ.  IS.haveA.theirnecksnottohearmy  wor* 
Thou  art  not  sent  unto  a  people  of  a  hard  Van.  5.  20.  but  when  his  mind  was  A.  in  pride 
language,  of  an  unintelligible  language;  that  ^UarAU.52.  they  consider,  nut,  for  their  heart  was  A. 
is,  t/iey  wilt  need  no  interpreter  to  understand  8.  17.  perceive  ye  not  ?  have  ye  your  heart  yet  A.? 
thee,  ntilher  wilt  thou,  to  understand  <Ae»i.  J0A11  12.40.  he  hath  blind,  their  eyes,  A.  their  heart 
Hannah  said  to  Eli,  1  am  a  woman  of  a  sor-'.4ces  19.9.  but  when  divers  were  A.  and  believed  not 
rowful  spirit,  Heb.  hard  of  spirit.  I  know  Aum.  II.  1 7.  election  obtained  it,  and  rest  were  A. 
thee  that  thou  art  a  baid  man,  a  severe,  aas-.Heb.  3. 13.  lest  any  of  you  be  A.  thru' deceitfuloesa 
terc,  rigorous,  and  churlish    man,   Mat.   25.  |  HAKUENETH. 

24.  Solomon  says,  that  the  way  of  transgressors  Prov.il.  29.  a  wicked  man  A.  his  face  but  he  direct* 
is  hard,  or  rough,  it  is  offensive  and  hateful    28.  14.  he  that  A.  his  heart  shall  fall  inio  mischief 
to  Ood  and  men,  as  rough  ways  are  to  a  lra-\  2it.  1.  he  that  being  often  reproved  A.  his  ueck 
veller.    Ur,  he  is  fierce,  intractable,  and  incur-  Hoin.'J.lS.  mercy  on  whom  he  will,  whom  he  will  h. 
rigible  in  his  sinful  course,  Prov.  13.  15.  HAIID-HE.MITEU. 

fflun  God  is  said  to  harden  ihe  heart,  it  is  not   Ezek.  3.  7.  all  the  house  of  Israel  lue  h.-hearted 
to  be  understood  as  if  (jod  did  properly    and\  H.\KDER. 

positively  make  men's  hearts  hard,  but  onlypri-  j  /'roo. 18.19.  brother  ortended  A.  to  be  won  than  city 
vately,  either  by  denying  to  them,  or  withdraw-  Jer.  5.  3.  they  have  made  their  faces  A.  than  a  rock 
ing  from  them  that  grace,  which  alone  can  i-'zf A.  3.  9.  A.  than  Hint  have  1  made  thy  forehead 
make  the  hearts  of  men  soft,fie£ible,  and  pli-\  ILAKULY. 

able  to  the  divine  will ;  as  the  sun  hardens  the  Gen.  16.  6.  when  Sarai  dealt  h.  with  her  she  fled 
clay  by  drawing  out  of  it  that  moisture  which]  F.iud.  13.  15.  and  when  Pharaoh  would  A.  let  us  go 
made  it  soft;  ur  by  ezposing  them   to  tAu*e I /»a. 8. 21.  shall  pass  thro' it  A.  bestead  and  hungry 
temptations  vf  the  world,  or  the  devil,  which  JJ/aM9.  23.  1  say  that  rich  Inan  shall  A.  enter  into 


meeting  with  a  corrupt  heart,  are  apt  to  har- 
den it. 
Gen.  18.  14.  is  any  thing  too  A.  for  the  Lord  ? 

35.  16.  Rachel  travailed,  and  had  A.  labour,  17. 

42.  t  7.  Joseph  spake  A.  things  with  them,  *  ."tO. 
£io(/.1.14. they  made  ihcir  lives  bitter  with  A.  bond. 

18.  26.  the  A.  causes  they  brought  unto  Moses 
Deal.  1. 17.  cause  that  is  too  A. you  bring  it  to  me 

15.  18.  it  shall  not  seem  A.to  thee  when  thou  send. 

17.  8.  if  there  arise  matter  too  A.  for  theein  judg. 

26.  6.  Egyptians  afflicted  and  laid  on  A.  bondage 
fudg.  4.  t  24.  the  hand  of  Israel  was  A.  ag.  Jabin 
1  6'a/n. l.f  15.  no,  my  lord,  I  am  a  woman  A.  of  spirit 

2.  t  3.  let  not  A.  come  out  of  your  mouth 

1  Sam.  3.  39.  the  sons  of  Zeruiah  be  too  A.  for  me 

13.  2.  Amnon  thought  it  A.  to  do  any  thing  to  her 

1  Kings  10. 1,  to  prove  with  A.  questions,  2  C'Ar.9.1. 
14. 1 6.  for  1  am  seut  to  thee  with  A.  tidings 

2  Kings  2. 10.  he  said,  thou  hast  asked  a  A.  thing 
J<^  ,30.125.  did  not  I  weep  for  him  was  A.  of  day  T 

41.  24.  as  A.  as  a  piece  of  the  nether  millstone 
Psai.31.tl8.1et  the  lying  lips, which  speak  aA. thing 

60.  3.  thou  hast  shewed  thy  people  A.  things 

88. 7.  thy  wrath  lieth  A.  on  me,  thou  hast  afflicted 

91.  4.  how  long  shall  the  wicked  speak  A.  things  I 
Prov.  13.  15.  but  the  way  of  transgressors  is  A. 
fsa.  14.  3.  Lordshall  givethee  rest  I'roiii  A.  bondage 

21.  t2.  a  A.  vision  is  declared  unto  me 
./t-r.  32.  17.  and  there  is  nothing  too  A.  for  thee 

27. 1  am  Lil.  is  there  any  thing  too  A.  for  me  ? 
E:(7i:.2.t4.  for  the^  are  children  A.  of  face 

H.  5.  thou  ait  not  sent  lo  a  peojile  of  A. language,  6. 
Dan.  .5.  12.  and  shewing  A.  sentences,  were  found 
j1/at. 25. 24.  Lord,  I  knew  that  ihou  art  a  A.  man 
jUfiWilO.24.  how  h.  forlhem  trust  in  riches  to  enter 
Jiihnd.  60.  this  is  a  A.  saying,  who  can  hear  it  ? 
.icts  9. 5.  it  is  A.  fpr  thee  to  kick  ag.  pricks,  26. 14. 
Heb.  5. 11.  many  things  to  say,  and  A.  to  be  uttered 
2  Pet.  3.  16.  in  which  are  things  A.  to  bo  understood 
Judc  15.  to  convince  all  ungodly  of  their  A.  speeches 

HARD. 
Ari).3.9.tho  rump  shall  take  otfA.  by  the  back-bone 
.Indg.  9.52.  .Vbimelech  went  A.  to  the  door  of  lower 

20. 45.  Israel  pursued  A.  after  Benjamin  to  Gideon 
1  Sam.  14.  22.  followed  A.  after  Philistines  in  battle 

31.  2.  the  Philistines  followed  A.  upon  Saul,  and 
upon  his  sons,  2  Sam.  1.  6.  1  CAr.  10.  2. 
1  Kings1\.  I.Naboth  had  a  vineyard  A.  by  Ihepal. 
1  CAr,  19.  4.  cut  oflTgarments  A.  by  their  buttocks 
Psal.  03.  8.  my  soul  followelh  A.  after  thee 
./onflh  I.  13. the  men  rowed  A.  totlring  it  to  the  land 
Acts  18.  7.  whoso  liiuise  joined  A.  lo  the  synagogue 

HARDEN. 
Exod.  4.  21. 1  will  A.  Phiiraoh's  lieait,  7.  3.  |  14.  4. 

14.  17.  I  will  A.  the  hearts  of  the  Egyptians 
Deut.  IS.  7.  shall  not  A.thy  heart,  nor  shut  thy  haW 
.Josh.  II.  20.  it  WHS  of  the  Lord  to  A.  their  lienV 

1  .Sam.  0.  6.  wherefore  then  do  ye  A.  your  hearts! 

2  CAr.  20. 1 8.  A.  not  your  necks  as  your  fathers 
Job  6.  10.  yea,  I  would  A.  myself  in  sorrow 
Pj»a/.  95. 8.  A.  not  your  hmirt,  Heb.  3.  8,  15.  I  4.  7. 

H.ARDENED. 

Ezod.t.  13.  Lord  A.  Phiiraoh's  heart,  ho  hearkened 

not  to  them, 9.  12.  |  10.  1,20,27.  I  11.  10. 

I  14.  a 

14.Pharaoh'8hearti«A.||22.ivasA.8.19.l9.  7,3.-.. 

8.  15.  he  A.  his  heart  and  hearken,  noi,  32.  |  9.34. 

Deut.i.  .30.  the  Lord  thy  G.  A.  his  spirit  and  heart 

1  .Sam.  6.  6.  as  Egyptians  and  Phar.  A.  their  hearts 

2  Kings  17.  14.  they  A. their  necks  like  to  their  falh. 
2  CAr.  36.  I3.Z()dokiah  A.hearl  from  turning  to  L. 
.VrA.9.16.thev  and  our  fathers  A.  their  nc!Ck«,  17.29. 

tiiliW.  4.  who  iiaih  A.  himself  ns.  him  and  prospered 
39.  16.  she  is  A.  against  her  yming  unos,  ns  not  hers 
lsii.iy.\.  17.  why  hast  thou  A.  our  heart  froju  Ihy  fear 
Jir.  7.  36.  Ihoy  hearJLenod  not,  but  A.  their  nock 


the  k  ingdom  of  God,  JiJark  10. 23.  Luke  18. 24. 

/.uAeS.39.  aspir.  takelh  him,  A.  depart,  from  him 

Acts27.8.h.  passing  it,  we  came  to  the  fair  haven* 
HARDNESS. 

.Job  38.  38.  when  dustgrowelh  into  A.  clods  cleave 

/'«n/.Sl.tl2. 1  gave  them  up  to  the  A.  of  their  hearts 

Mat.  19.8.  because  of  A.  of  your  hearts,  JUarklO.S. 

Mark'3.  a.  he  being  grieved  for  the  A.of  their  heart* 
16.  14.  he  upbraided  them  with  their  A.  of  heart 

Rom.  2.  5.  but  alter  thy  A.  and  impenitent  heart 
11.  1 25.  not  ignorant  that  A.  in  jiart  liappen.  to  Isr. 

2  Tim.  2.3.  endure  A.  ns  a  good  soldier  of  Jes.  Chr. 
HARE. 

Lev.  11.  6.  the  A.  is  unclean  to  you,  Deut.  14.  7. 
HARLOT 

Is  taken  for  whore  or  prostitute,  Prov.  29.  3. 
Also  for  one  who  forsakes  the  true  Godandhil 
pure  worship,  to  follow  idols  and  false  gods. 
Isa.  1.  21,  How  is  the  faithful  city  become 
a  harlot!  that  is,  like  a  harlot,  leaving  God 
her  husband,  to  cleave  to  false  gods.  By  har- 
lots may  also  be  understood  the  most  infamout 
and  scandalous  sinners.  Mat.  21.  31,  Publi- 
cans and  harlots  go  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
before  you. 

Rahab,  who  received  into  her  house  and  concealed 
the  spies  sent  by  Joshua  to  vi<w  the  city 
Jericho,  is  called  a  harlot.  lie  Hebrew 
text,  Josh.  2.  1.  calls  her  Zona,  icAicA  St. 
Jeroni  and  many  others  understand  of  a  woman 
of  an  ill  life.  The  Septuagint  render  it  by 
—  opv;),  as  also  the  apostle  Paul  in  Heb.  11.  31. 
And  James,  .Jam.  2.  25.  Some  think  that  sha 
was  only  a  hostess  or  innkeeper ;  and  that 
this  is  the  true  signification  of  the  original. 
word.  Had  she  been  a  woman  of  ill  fame,  say 
they,  would  Salmon,  a  prince  of  the  tribe  of 
Judah,  and  one  of  OUT  Saviour's  ancestors,  have 
taken  her  to  wife,  or  could  he  have  done  it  by 
the  law  ?  Besides,  the  spies  0/ Joshua  tcould 
hardly  have  gone  to  lodge  with  a  prostitute,  a 
common  harlot,  they  who  were  charged  with  so 
nice  and  dangerous  a  commission. 

Gen.  34.  31.  should  deal  with  our  sister  as  with  A. 7 

,38. 15.  Judah  saw  her,  he  thought  her  to  be  a  A. 
24.Tamar  thy  daughier-in-law  halh  played  A. 

I^rv.  21.  14.  the  high-priest  shall  not  take  a  A. 

■  fosh.".  1. spies  came  IntoaA.'s  housenamedRahab 
6.  17.  only  Rahab  the  A.  slmlllive,  and  all  with  her 

■  fudg.  11.  I.  now  Je|>hlhah  was  Ihe  son  of  a  A. 
16.  1  Samson  saw  there  a  A.  and  went  in  unto  her 

Prov.  7.  10.  uwiiinan  met  him  with  attire  of  a  A. 
Isa.  1.21.  how  is  the  faithful  city  become  a  A.! 
23.  m.  after  seventy  years  shall  Tyre  sing  as  a  A. 

16.  take  a  harp,  thou  A.  that  hasi  been  forgotten 
.7er.  2.  20.  when  thou  wanderest,  playing  the  A. 
3.  1.  thou  hast  played  the  A.  with  many  lovers 

6.  under  every  gr.  tree,  and  there  halh  played  A. 

8.  Judah  feared  not,  but  went  and  played  A.  also 
Ezek.  16.  15.  playedst  the  A.  because  of  thy  renown 

lO.playedst  A.  thereon  ||  28.plaved8t  A.  with  them 

31.  hasi  not  been  as  a  A.  jj  35.  ()  A.  hear  Ihe  word 

41.1  will  cause  thee  lo  cease  from  playing  the  A. 
2.1.  .5.  Aholah  played  the  A.  when  she  was  mine 

19.  the  days  wherein  she  had  played  Iho  A. 

44.nsthcy  goinuntn  n  woman  that  pliiyeth  the  h 
Hos.  2.  .5.  for  their  mother  hnlh  played  the  A. 

3.  3  I  sai<l  unto  her,  thou  shall  noi  ilay  the  A. 

4.  l.").  tho'  Israel  play  iho  A.  lot  nut  Judah  ofTend 
Joel  3.  3.  they  have  given  a  hoy  for  a  A. 
Amosl.  17.  thy  wife  shall  he  a  A.  in  the  city 
..V/r.  1.7.  they  shall  return  to  Ihr  bin'  of  a  A. 
A"«A.  3.  4.  the  whoredom^  iif  the  well-fiivonred  h 

1  Oir.6.  15.  shall  I  mnk<'  them  the  nienibersof  8* 

16.  that  be  who  is  joined  lo  a  A.  is  one  body 
Heb.  11.  31.  by  faith  tJio  A.  Rahab  porished  nat 


HAR 

^am.8. 2S.waf  not  Rahab  the/i.Juatlfledbj  works 
HARLOTS. 

IKingsX  16.  there  came  two  women  h.  to  the  king 
froD.aU.  3.thal  keepcth  company  witli  A.  spendeth 
Jer.  5.  7.  they  assemble  by  troops  in  A.  houses 
HosA.  14.  separated  with  whores,  sacrifice  with  A. 
JUat.2l.  31.  publicans  and  A.  go  into  kingdom  ol'U. 

32.  but  the  publicans  and  the  A.  believed  him 
Luke  15.  30.  who  hath  devoured  thy  living  with  A. 
Jiev.VI.5.  mystery,  Babylon  the  great,  mother  ofA. 

HARM. 
0<n.31  52.3halt  not  pass  over  this  pillar  to  me  for  A. 
i,eo.  5   IG.  shall  make  amends  for  A.  he  hath  done 
JVum.  35.  23.  was  not  his  enemy,  nor  sought  his  A. 

1  Sam.  2ti.  21.  return,  I  will  no  more  do  ihee  A. 
2Sa7n.20.6.  now  shall  Shebado  more  A. than  Absal. 

2  Kings  4.  41.  and  there  was  no  A.  in  the  pot 

1  Chron.  16.22.  do  my  prophets  no  A.  Psal.  105. 15. 
Prov.  3.  30.  strive  not,  if  he  have  done  thee  no  A. 
Jer.  39.  12.  look  well  to  him,  and  do  him  no  A. 
Jlcts  16.28.  do  thyself  no  A.  ||  27.21.  gained  this  A. 
28.5.  he  felt  no  A.  |16.sawnoA.  ||  21.  spake  any  A. 

HARM. 
1  Pet.  3.  13.  who  will  A.  you,  if  followers  of  good? 

HARMLESS. 
Mat.  10.  16.  be  wise  as  serpents  and  A.  as  doves 
Rom.  16.  t  19.  would  have  you  A.  concerning  evil 
Phil.  2.  15.  that  ye  may  bo  A.  the  sons  of  God 
Heb.  7. 26.  is  holy,  A.  undefil.  separate  from  sinners 

HARNESS,  Substantive. 
1  A'inn's20. 11.  let  not  him  girdeth  on  A.boastbims. 

22.  34.  between  joinis  of  his  A.  2  Chron.  18.  33. 
S  Chr.  9. 24.  they  brought  every  man  A.  and  spices 

HARNESS,  Verb. 
I  Jer.  46.  4.  A.  the  horses,  and  get  up  ye  horsemen 
HARNESSED. 
Exod.  13. 18.  Israel  wont  up  A.  out  of  land  of  Egypt 

HARP. 

Oen.  4.21.  Jubal  was  father  of  them  that  handle  A. 

31.27.might  have  sent  thee  away  with  tabr.  and  A. 

1  Sam.  10.  5.  meet  a  company  of  prophets  with  a  A. 

16.  16.  a  man  who  is  a  cunning  player  on  a  A. 

23.  David  took  a  A.  and  played  with  his  hand 

1  Chr.  25. 3.  six  prophesied  with  a  A.  to  give  thanks 

^o!i21.  12.  they  take  the  timbrel  and  A.  and  rejoice 

30. 31.  my  A.  also  is  turned  to  mourning  and  organ 

Psal.  33.  2.  jiraise  the  Lord  with  the  A.  150.  3. 

43.  4.  yea  on  the  A.  will  I  praise  thee,  O  my  God 

49.  4.  I  will  open  my  dark  saying  upon  the  A. 

57.  8.  awake  psaltery  and  k.  I  will  awake,  108.  2. 

71. 22.  sing  with  A.  02.  3.  |  93. 5.  |  147.  7.  |  149.  3. 

81.2.  bring  hither  the  pleasant  A.willi  the  psaltery 

Isa,  5. 12.  the  A.  and  the  viol  are  in  their  feasts 

16.11.  my  bowels  shall  sound  like  a  A.  forMoab 

23.  16.  take  a  A.  ||  24.  8.  the  joy  of  the  A.  ceaseth 
Dan.  3.  5.  at  sound  of  the  A.  fall  down,  7,  10,  15. 
1  Cor.  14.  7.  whether  pipe  or  A.  except  they  give 

HARPS. 
2Sii77i.  6. 5.  David  and  all  Isr.  played  on  A.and  corn. 
1  Kings  10.  12.  the  king  made  of  the  almug-trees  A. 
Psal.  137.  2.  we  hanged  our  A.  upon  the  willows 
Jsa.  30.  32.  it  shall  be  with  labrets  and  A. 
Eiek.  26.  13.  the  sound  of  thy  A.  shall  be  no  more 
Rev.  5.  8.  having  every  one  of  them  h.  and  vials 
14.  2.  harping  with  their  A.  ||  15.  2.  theA.  of  God 

Src  CYMBA.L. 

HARPED. 

lOr  .14.7.how  shall  it  be  known  whatis  piped  or  A. 

HARPERS. 

/Jet). 14.2. 1  heard  the  voice  of  A.harping  with  harps 

18.  22.  the  voice  of  A.  f  hall  be  heard  no  more  at  all 

HARROW. 

Job  39.  10.  or  will  he  A.  the  valleys  after  thee  "i 

HARROWS. 
25nm.l2. 31.  he  put  them  under  saws  and  A.  of  iron 
IChr.  20.  3.  and  cut  them  with  saws  and  A.  of  iron 

HART. 
/3eut.l2. 15.  may  eat  flesh  as  of  the  A. 14. 5.  ]  15.22. 
Psal.M.  1.  as  the  A.  pantoth  after  the  water-brooks 
ha.  35.  6.  then  shall  the  lame  man  leap  as  a  A. 

See  YonKo.  , 

HARTS. 
lffin^»4.23.ten  fat  oxen,  besides  A.  and  roe-bucks 
A-om.l.6.herprincesl)ecom<?  likeA.without  pasture 

HARVEST 
Is  the  time  of  reaping  corn  and  other  fruits  of 
the  earth,  Gen.  8.  22.  It  is  taken  for  a  sea- 
sonable and  proper  time  for  business.  Prov. 
10.  5,  He  that  sleepeth  in  harvest  is  a  son  that 
causeth  shame.  He  that  neglrctrth  and  mis- 
improvrth  tlif  proper sca-sonn  and  opportunities 
of  doing  i'nod  lo  himsrlf  and  to  ottirrs,  cavseth 
akame  both  lo  himself  for  his  folly,  and  the 
poverty  and  misery  which  follows  Ihrrevpon ; 
and  also  to  his  parefits,  to  who've  negUrrrnt  or 
evil  education  such  things  are  often,  andsome- 
timesjuslhj  imputed. 
Harvest  is  put  for  a  people  whose  sins  are  ripe 
for  judgment.  Joel  3.  13,  Put  ye  in  the  sic- 
kle, for  the  harvest  is  ripa :  Cut  dorcn  these 
963 


HAS 

ttnners  that  are  ripe  for  judgment.  The  time 
of  Babylonia  harvest  sliall  come ;  the  timu 
when  she  shall  be  cut  down,  Jer.  51.  33.  Our 
Saviour,  in  the  parable  of  the  sower,  calls  thi 
end  of  the  world,  or  the  day  of  judgment,  the 
harvest,  Mat.  13.  39.  Then  Ood  will  separate 
the  tares  from  the  wheat,  the  wicked  from  the 
godly.  In  Mat.  9.  36,  37,  Christ  seeing  mul- 
titudes coming  to  hear  him,  said  lo  his  disci- 
ples. The  harvest  truly  is  plenteous;  many  are 
willing  to  receive  instruction.  This  was 
spoken  at  the  feast  of  Tabernacles,  which  was 
in  harvest. 

Oen.8.  22.  while  earth  remaineth  A. shall  not  cease 
30. 14.  Reuben  went  in  days  of  wheal  A. 
45.  6.  in  five  years  shall  neither  be  earing  nor  A. 

Exod.  23. 16.  thou  shalt  keep  the  feast  of  A.  34.  22. 
34.  21.  in  earing-time  and  in  A.  thou  shalt  rest 

Ley.  19. 9.  when  ye  reap  A.  23. 10, 22.  Vcut.  24. 19. 
25.  5.  what  grows  ofitsown  accord  of  A.  not  reap 

Huthl  22.came  to  Beth-lehem  in  begin. of  barley-A. 

2.  21.  tarry  with  my  maidens  till  end  of  A.  23. 

1  Sam.  6.  13.  men  of  Beth-sliemesh  reaping  their  A. 
8.  12.  and  he  will  set  them  to  reap  his  A. 

12.  17.  is  it  not  wheat-A.  to-day,  I  will  call  to  Ld. 

2  Sam.  21.  9.  were  put  to  death  in  A.  in  barley-A. 
10.  spread  it  for  her  from  beginning  of  barley-A. 

. 7045.5.  whose  A.  the  hungry  ealeth  up  and  taketli  it 
Prov.  6.  8.  the  ant  gathereth  her  food  in  the  A. 
10.  5.  he  that  sleepeth  in  A.  causeth  shame 
26. 1.  as  rain  inA.so  honour  is  not  seemly  for  a  fool 
Isa.O.  3.  they  joy  before  thee  according  to  juy  in  A. 

16.  9.  for  the  shouting  for  thy  A.  is  fallen 

17.  11.  but  the  A.shall  be  a  heap  in  the  day  of  grief 

18.  4.  and  like  a  cloud  of  dew  in  the  heat  of  A. 
5.  for  afore  the  A.  when  the  bud  is  perfect 

23.  3.  the  A.  of  the  river  is  her  revenue 
.fer.  5.  17.  they  shall  eat  up  thy  A.  and  thy  bread 
24.  he  reserveth  to  us  the  appointed  weeks  of  A. 

8. 20.  tlie  A.  is  past,  summer  is  ended,  we  not  saved 
Has.  6.  11.  O  Judah,  he  halh  set  a  A.  for  thee 
.Tocl  1.  11.  because  the  A.  of  the  field  is  perished 

3.  13.  put  in  the  sickle,  for  the  A.  is  rijie,  come 
Amos  4.  7.  w  hen  there  were  yet  three  months  to  A. 
Jl/a<.9.37.  the  A.  is  plenteous,  the  labourers  are  few 

38.  pray  ye  the  Lord  of  the  A.  to  send,  lAikeW.  2. 

13.  30.  let  both  grow  together  until  A.  in  lime  of  A. 

39.  the  A.  is  end  of  the  world,  reapers  the  angels 
Mark  4.  29.  put  in  the  sickle  because  A.  is  come 
Luke  10.  2.  he  said  nnto  them,  the  A.  truly  is  great 
■  fohni.  35.  then  Cometh  A.  the  fields  are  white  to  A. 
Rev.  14. 15.  time  is  come,  for  the  A.  of  earth  is  ripe 

HARVEST-MAN. 
Isa.  17.  5.  it  shall  be  as  when  the  A.  gathereth  corn 
Jer.  9.  22.  carcases  shn  11  fill  as  the  handful  after  A. 

HARVEST-TIME. 
.losh.  3. 15.  Jordan  overlloweth  all  the  time  of  A. 
.fudg.Mi.  1.  in  ^i^Heof  wheal  A.  Samson  visited  wife 
2Sain.  23.  13.three  chiefs  came  to  David  in  h.-time 
Prov.  25.  13.  as  the  cold  of  snow  in  the  time  of  A. 
,Tnr.5n.  16.  cut  off  him  handleth  sickle  in  h.-time 
51.  33.  a  litile  while  the,  (jme  of  her  A.  shall  come 
J/at. 13.30.  in  the  time  of  A.I  will  say  to  the  reapers 

HAST. 
Gen.  19. 12.  the  men  saiil  to  Lot  A.  thou  here  any 
besides  ■?  whatsoever  thou  A.  in  city  bring  out 
27.  38.  Esau  said,  A.  thou  but  one  blessing,  father? 

32.  28.  as  a  prince  A.  thou  power  with  G.  and  men 

33.  9.  Esau  said,  keep  that  thou  A.  to  thyself 
4.5.  10.  come  thou,  thy  tlock,  and  all  that  thou  A. 

Exod.  9. 19.  send  and  gathfr  all  that  thou  A.  in  field 
13.  12.  every  firstling  thou  A.  shall  he  the  Loril's 
Dcut.8. 13.  silver,  gold,  and  all  thou  A. is  multiplied 
.Tudg  18.3.  what  makest  thou?  what  A.  thou  here? 

1  Sam.  25.  6.  peace  be  lo  thee  and  all  that  ihou  A. 

2  Sam.  15.  35.  A.  thou  not  hero  with  thee  Zadok  ? 
2  Kings  i.  2.  Elisha  said,  tell  me,  what  A.  in  house 
.lob  10.  4.  A.  thou  eyes  of  flesh,  or  seest  as  man  ? 

40.  9.  A.  thou  an  arm  like  God  ?  or  canst  thunder  ? 
Prov.  3.  28.  say  not,  go,  when  thou  A.  it  by  Ihce 
Isa.a.  16.  what  A.  thou  here?  whom  A.  thou  here  ? 
,Wnf. 19.21  sell  all  Ihou  A.  Mark  10.21.  Luke  18.22. 

2.5.  25.  lo,  there  thou  A.  that  is  thine 
JohnA.  11.  from  whence  then  A.  thou  living  water  ? 
18. and  ho  whom  thou  now  A. is  not  thine  husband 

6.  63.  to  whom  go  ?  thou  A.  words  of  iternal  life 

7.  20.  the  people  said,  thou  A.  a  devil,  8.  48,  52. 

13.  8.  if  I  wash  thee  not,  thou  A.  no  part  with  me 
.^(;^?8. 21.  thouA.neithnr  part  nor  lot  in  this  matter 
Rom.  2.  20.  thou  who  A.  the  f)rm  of  knowlcdse 

14.  22.  A.  thou  faith?  have  it  to  thyself  before  God 
ICor.  4.  7.  what  A.  thon  that  Ihou  didst  nol  receive 
.7a?n.2.18.aman  may  say,  thou  A.  fiith.and  1  works 
Rrv.  2.  3.  thou^.  patience,  and  for  my  name's  sake 

6. but  this  Ihou  A.  ||  3. 1.  thou  A.  a  name  to  live.  4. 
8.  thou  A  alittlestrengthll  11.  hold  what  thou  A. 
U.\?,T'E,  Substantive. 
ETod.^O.  16.  Phar.  called  forMos.  and  Aaron  in  A. 
12.  11.  ye  shall  eat  it  in  A.  wiih  your  loins  girded 
33.  migbtEeod  thenioutofUnd  in  A.  Dent.  16.  3. 


HAT 

'lSiim.21. 8.  because  the  king's  business  required  h 
2  Kingsl.  15.  the  Syrians  had  cast  away  in  their  A 
F.ira  4.  23.  they  went  uj)  in  A.  lo  Jerusalem 
Psal.  31.  22.  I  said  in  my  A.  I  am  cut  off  from  thee 
116.  11.  I  said  in  my  A.  all  men  are  liars 
Isa.  52.  12.  ye  shall  notgo  out  with  A.  nor  by  flight 
L>un.  2.  25.  Arioch  brought  Dan.  before  king  in  A. 
3.  24.  the  king  rose  up  in  A.  and  spake,  and  said 

6.  19.  the  king  went  in  A.  unto  the  den  of  lions 
^/nrA6.25.  she  came  in  straightway  with  A.  to  king 
I.uke  1 .  39.  Mary  went  into  the  hill-country  with  A. 

2. 16.  the  shepherds  came  with  A.  and  found  Mary 

HASTE. 
Gen.  19.22.  A.  thee,  escape  thither,  fori  cannot  do 
4.5.  9.  A.  ye  and  go  up  to  my  father,  and  say,  13. 
lSam.20.38. Jonathan  cried,make  speed, A.stay  not 
23.27.A.thee,for  Philistines  have  invaded  the  land 
Psal.  22.  19.  O  my  strength,  A.  thee  to  help  ine 
■See  Makk  haste. 
HASTED. 
Gen.'i?!.!.  give  it  to  young  man, and  he  A.  to  dress  it 

24.  18.  she  said,  drink,  my  lord,  and  she  A.  20. 
Ezod.  5.  13.  and  the  ta-sk-masters  A.  them,  saying 
Josh.  4.  10.  the  people  A.  and  passed  over  Jordan 

8.  14.  and  when  the  king  of  Ai  saw  it,  they  A. 
19.  the  ambush  A.  and  set  the  city  on  fire 
10.  13.  the  sun  A.  not  to  go  down  a  whole  day 
Judg.  20.  37.  liers  in  wait  h.  and  rushed  on  Gibeah 

1  Sam.  17.  48.  David  A.  ||  25.  23.  Abigail  A.  42. 

25.  34.  except  thou  hadsl  A.  and  come  to  meet 
28.  24.  the  witch  at  En-dor  h.  and  killed  the  calf 

2  .Sam.  19. 16.  Shimei,  who  was  of  Bahurim,  A. 

1  Kings  W.  41.  the  prophet  A.  and  took  ashesaway 

2  Kingsl.  13.  they  A.  and  put  garments  under  Jehu 
2  Chron.  26.  20.  yea,  himself  A.  also  to  go  out 
Esth.  6.  12.  Haman  A.  to  his  house  mourning 

14.  they  A.  to  bring  Haman  unto  the  banquet 

■fob  31.  5.  or  if  my  foot  hath  A.  to  deceit 

Psal.  48.  5.  they  were  troubled  and  A.  away,  104.7. 

.dcts  20.  16.  Paul  A.to  \)f  at  Jerusalem  aiPtntccost 

HASTEN. 

1  Kings  22.  9.  A.  hither  Micaiah  the  son  of  Imlah 

2  C/trun.  24.  5.  and  see  that  ye  A.  the  matter 
Psal.  16.  4.  sorrows  multiplied  A.  after  another  god 

,55.8.  I  would  A.  my  escape  from  the  windy  storm 
Kcc/.2.25.or  who  else  can  A.  hereunto  more  than  I? 
Isa.  5.  19.  lei  him  A.  his  work  that  we  may  see  it 

CO.  22.  I  the  Lord  will  A.  it  in  his  time 
.fer.  1.  12.  I  will  A.  my  word  to  perform  it 

HASTENED,  ETH. 
Gen.  18.  6.  Abraham  A.  into  the  tent  unto  Sarah 

19.  15.  angels  A.  Lot,  saying,  arise,  takii  thy  wile 
2  Chron.  24.  5.  howbeit  the  Levites  A.  it  not 
Esth.  3.  15.  posts  went  out,  being  A.  by  king,  8.  14. 
Isa.  51.  14.  the  captive  exile  A.  to  be  loosed 
■Icr.  17.  16.  I  have  not  A.  from  being  a  pastor 

HASTETH. 
./oft  9.  26.  as  the  eagle  that  A.  to  tlie  prey 

40.  23.  behold,  he  drinketh  up  a  river,  and  A.  not 
Prov.  7.  23.  asa  bird  A.  tosnarc,  and  knoweth  not 

19.  2.  and  lie  that  A.  with  his  feet  sinneth 

28.  22.  he  that  A.  to  he  rich,  hath  an  evil  eye 
F.ccl.  1.  5.  the  sun  A.  lo  the  place  where  he  arose 
.Trr.  48.  16.  the  affliction  of  Mo.nb  A.  fast 

Hab.  1.  8.  they  shall  fly  ns  the  ea^'le  that  A.  to  eat 
Zeph.  1.  14.  the  great  day  of  the  Lord  A.  greatly 

HASTILY. 
Gcn.4^.  14.  they  hroughi  Joseph  A.  out  of  dungeon 
.ludg.2.  23.  left  nations  without  diivinglhem  out  A. 
9. 54.  Abimelech  called  A.  unto  his  armour-bearer 
1  Smn.  4.  14.  and  the  man  came  in  A.  and  fold  Eli 

1  KingsW.^'i.  the  men  did  A.  catch  it,  and  they  said 
Prov.  20.  21.  an  inheritance  may  be  golKn  A. 

25.  8.  go  not  forth  A.to  strive, lest  thou  know  not 
./oArt  11.31.  when  Jews  saw  Mary  that  she  rose  A 

HASTING. 
Isa.  lf>.  5.  seeking  judgment,  and  A.  righteouFnesi 

2  Pet.  3. 12.  and  A.  iinto  the  coming  of  day  of  the  L. 

HASTY. 
Prov.  14.29.  hut  he  that  is  A.  of  spirit  exalteth  folly 
21.  5.  but  of  every  one  ihat  is  A.  only  to  wnnt 

29.  20.  seest  thou  a  man  that  is  A.  in  his  words 
Eccl.  5.  2.  let  not  thy  heart  he  A.  lO  utter  before  G. 

7.  9.  be  not  A.  in  thy  spirit  to  he  angry 

8.  3.  he  not  too  A.  to  go  out  of  his  sight 
Isa.  23.  4.  as  the  A.  fruit  beforo  the  summer 

32.  t  4.  the  heart  of  the  A.  shall  understand 
35. 1 4.  say  to  them  that  are  of  A.  heort,  be  slrotip 
Dan. '2.  15.  why  is  the  decree  so  A.  from  the  king? 
Hab. 1.6.  the  Chaldeans,  ihat  bitter  and  A.  nation 

HATCH. 
Isa.  34. 15.  owlshall  A.  and  gather  under  her  shad. 
59.  5.  they  k.  cockafrice-r gss,  weave  spiders'  web 

HATCHETH. 
Jer.  17.  11.  as  pattridec  sitielh  on  eggs  and  A  not 

HATE. 
Tohate,i".tno£  always  to  be  uvderstoodrigoro:isly. 
It  frequently  signifies  no  mort.  than  a  lesser 
degree  of  love.    Dnut.  21.  1.5,  If  a  man  hav* 
two  wivos,  one  beloved,  ana  another  bated 


HAT 

that  it,  less  belooed.  Thus  ovr  Saviour  lays, 
that  he  who  would  follow  Aim,  muat  halefaUier 
and  mother;  that  is,  should  luve  them  less  than 
Christ,  less  than  his  own  salvation  ;  he  ought 
not  to  prefer  them  to  Ood.  Solomon  says, 
•ihat  he  that  eparoth  hie  rod,  haleth  his  son, 
Prov.  13.  24.  Fathers  often  spare  their  chil- 
dren out  of  an  excessive  love  to  them ;  but  this 
is  not  a  proper  instance  of  affection,  to  for- 
bear correcting  them;  their  fond  affection  is  as 
pernicious  to  their  children,  as  other  men's 
hatred  could  be;  they  keep  back  from  them 
what  would  do  them  good.  There  is  a  malicious 
hatred  of  the  persons  of  men,  not  of  their  sins; 
thus  Ahab  hated  the  Lord's  prophet  Micaiah, 
1  EtJtgs  22.  8.  Jlnd  wicked  men  do  thus  hate 
the  righteous.  Psal.  34.  21,  They  that  hate 
the  righleoiiB  shall  be  desolate.  There  is  also 
a  hatred  of  the  sins  of  men,  not  of  their  per- 
sons; thus  the  righteous  hate  even  the  garment 
spotted  with  corruption,  Jude  23.  What  1 
hate,  that  do  I,  Rom.  7.  15.  The  godly  hate 
sin,  because  it  is  a  breach  of  God's  law. 

Oen.  24.  BO.  let  seed  possess  gate  of  those  that  A. 
50.  15.  they  said,  Joseph  will  peradventure  A.  us 

Lev.  19. 17.  thou  shalt  not  h.  thy  brother  in  heart 
26.  17.  they  that  h.  you  shall  reign  over  you 

J^'um.  10.  35.  let  them  that  A.  thee  flee  before  thee 

Deut.  7.  10.  and  repayeth  them  that  A.  him  to  face 

15.  he  will  lay  them  upon  them  that  A.  thee, 30.  7. 

19.  ll.if  any  man  A.  his  neighbour  and  lie  in  wait 

22. 13.  if  take  a  wife,  and  go  in  unto  her  and  A.  her 

24.  3.  if  the  hitter  husband  A.  her  and  write  a  bill 
33. 11.  smite  through  the  loins  of  them  that  A.  him 

2  Chr.  19.  2.  and  love  them  that  A.  the  Lord  ■? 

Job  8.  22.  that  A.  thee  shall  be  clothed  with  shame 

Psal.  21.  8.  thy  hand  shall  find  those  that  A.  thee 
34.  21.  they  that  A.  the  righteous  shall  be  desolate 
44.  10.  they  which  A.  us  6i)oil  for  themselves 
68.  1.  let  them  also  that  A.  him  flee  before  him 
83.  2.  they  that  A.  thee  have  lifted  up  the  head 
89.  23.  and  I  will  plague  them  that  A.  him 
97.  10.  ye  that  love  the  Lord  A.  evil 
105.  25.  he  turned  their  heart  to  A.  his  people 
129.  5.  let  them  be  turned  back  that  A.  Zion 

Prov.  1.  22.  how  long,  fools,  will  ye  h.  knowledge ! 
6.  16.  these  six  doth  the  Lord  A.  a  proud  Inok 

8.  13.  fear  of  the  Lord  is  to  A.  evil  ;  pride  do  I  A. 

9.  8.  reprove  not  a  scorner,  lest  he  A.  thee 
19.  7.  all  the  brethren  of  the  poor  do  A.  him 

25.  17.  lest  he  be  weary  of  thee,  and  so  A.  thee 
29.  10.  the  blood-lhirsly  A.  the  upright 

F.ccl.  3.  8.  a  time  to  love  and  a  time  to  A. 
Ji;:«A.16.27.delivered  unto  will  of  them  that  A.  thee 
y:>an.  4.  19.  the  dream  be  to  them  that  A.  thee 
.Hmos  5.  10.  they  A.  him  that  rebuketh  in  the  gate 

IS.A.the  evil,  and  love  the  good,  establish  judgm. 
^Jic.  3.  2.  who  A.  the  good,  and  love  evil,  who  i)!uck 
Mat.f>.  43.  been  said,  love  thy  neighbour,  A.  enemy 

44.  do  good  to  them  that  A.  you,  Luke  6.  27. 
6.  24.  either  he  will  A.  the  one,  Lujie  Ifi.  13. 

24.  in.  and  shall  betray  andshall  A.  one  another 
Lukr,  1.  71.  saved  from  the  hand  of  all  that  h.  us 

6.  22.  bles.tcd  are  ye  when  rnen  shall  A.  you 
14. 26.  and  A.  not  his  father,  and  mother,  and  wife 
^ToAn 7. 7.thc  world  cannot  A.  you,  but  me  it  haleth 

15.18.  marvel  not  if  the  world  A.  you,  1  .John  3.  13. 
Rev.  17.  16.  the  ten  horns,  these shuUA.  the  whore 

/  HATE. 
lA'!n5-.<;22.P.therci8oneman,bul/A.him,2CAr.l8.7 
/'>n/.'l01.  3.  Ih.  the  work  of  them  that  turn  aside 
119.  104.  therefore  I  h.  every  false  way,  128. 

11.3.  /A.vain  thoughts  ||  163.  Ih.  and  abhor  lying 
139.21.  ilonoi  /A.  them,  O  Lord,  thathate  Ihce  ? 
22.  yea,  I  h.  them  with  perfect  hatred 
Prov.?.  13.  the  evil  way  and  froward  mouth  <lo  /A. 
laa.  61.8.  I  h.  robbery  for  burnt-ofTering 
Jer.  44.  4.  d.i  not  this  abominable  thing  thai  I h 
Jimns  5.  21.  I  h.  I  des(ii«e  your  feast-days 
6.  8.  I  A.  his  palaces,  therefore  will  I  deliver  city 
ZecA.R.  17.  for  all  these  are  things  that  Ih.  eailh  L 
Rom.  7.  15.  but  what  /  h.  that  do  I 
Rev.  2.  6.  the  deeds  of  the  Nicolaitanes  I  h.  15. 

HATK  me. 
Cm.  26.  27.  why  come  ye  to  me,  seeing  ye  h.me? 
Etod.  20.  5.  viiiiting  iniquity  to  the  third  and  fourth 
generation  of  them  that  A.  me,  Ocut.  5.  9. 
Deut.  .32.  41.  and  I  will  reward  them  that  A.  me 
Judg.  11.7.  do  not  vuh.me?  ||14.16.  thou  do^t  A.me 
2  Sam.  22.  41.  de'<ir'oy  th<'m  that  A.  me,  Ps.  1^.  40. 
Psal.^.  13.  Ironhio  which  IsutTer  of  them  that  A.me 

25.  19.  and  ihey  A.  me  with  cruel  hatred 

.35.  19.  let  them  wink  that  A.  me  without  a  cause 

38. 19.  they  Ihat  A  me  wrongfully  ate  many,  69.  4. 
41.  7.  bU  thai  A.  me  whisper  together  against  me 
55.  3.  they  cast  ini(|uily  upon  me,  in  wrath  A.  me 
69.  14.  let  me  be  delivered  from  them  thai  A.  me 
8fi.  17.  that  Ihey  which  A.  me  may  see  it 

1 18.  7. 1  shall  see  my  desire  upon  them  that  A.  me 
Prov.  8.  36.  all  thay'lhni  A.  m<  lov«  dealU 
»64 


HAT 

H.\TED. 

Oen.  27. 41.  Esau  A.  Jacob,  because  of  the  blessing 
29.  31.  the  L.  saw  Leah  was  A.  ||  33.  that  I  was  A. 
37.  4.  his  brethren  A.  Joseph  yet  ihe  more,  5,  8. 

49.  23.  the  archers  shot  at  him  and  A.  him 
Deut.  1.27.  and  said,  because  the  Lord  A.  u8,9.28. 

4.  42.  A.  him  not  in  times  past,  19. 4, 6.  Josh.  20. 5. 

21.  15.  another  A.  ||  16.  before  the  son  of  the  A. 
17.  shall  acknowledge  the  sonof  A.for  tirst-born 

ludg.  15.2. 1  thought  tiiat  thou  hadst  utterly  A.  her 
2Sain.5. 8.  the  lame  and  blind  that  are  A.  of  David's 

13.15.  AmnonA.  Tamar  ||  22.  Absalom  A.  Amnon 

22.  18.  he  delivered  nie  from  my  strung  enemy, 
and  from  them  that  A.  me,  Psal.  18.  17. 

Esth.9. 1,  the  Jews  had  rule  over  them  that  A.  them 
5.  did  what  they  would  unto  those  that  A.  thein 

lob  31.  29.  at  the  destruction  of  him  that  A.  me 

Ps.  26.  5. 1  have  A.  the  congregation  of  evil  doers 
31.  6.  I  have  A.  them  that  regard  lying  vanities 
44.  7.  thou  hast  put  them  to  shame  that  A.  us 
55.12.neither  was  it  he  that  A. me, that  did  magnify 
106.  10.  he  saved  them  from  him  thai  A.  them 
41.  and  they  that  A.  them  ruled  over  them 

Prov.  1.  29.  they  A.  knowledge,  and  did  not  chouse 

5.  12.  and  say,  how  have  1  A.  instruction 

14.  17.  and  a  man  of  wicked  devices  is  A. 
20.  the  poor  is  A.  even  of  his  own  neighbour 

Eccl.  2.  17.  therefore  I  A.  life  ||  18.  I  A.  labour 
Isa.  60. 15.  whereas  thou  hast  been  forsaken  and  A. 

66.  5.  brethren  that  A.  you  said.  Lord  be  glorified 
Jer.  12.  8.  therefore  have  I  A.  mine  heritage 
F.zek.lG.  37. 1  will  gather  all  them  that  thou  hast  A. 

35.  6.  sith  thou  hast  not  A.  blood,  blood  pursue 
//os.9.15.  for  there  I  A.  them  for  wickedn.  of  doings 
JUal.  1.  3.  I  loved  Jacob,  and  A.  Esau,  Rom.  9.  IH. 
Mat.W.  22.  ye  shall  be  A.  Mark  Kil3.  Luke  21. 17. 

24.  9.  ye  shall  be  A.  of  all  nations  for  my  name 
Luke  19. 14.  his  citizens  h.  him,  and  sent  a  message 
John  15.  18.  ye  know  that  it  A.  me  before  it  A.  you 
24.  have  both  seen  and  A.both  me  and  my  Father 

■  25. written  in  their  law,theyA.mewilliout  a  cause 

17.  14.  world  hath  A.  them,  because  not  of  world 
F,ph.  5.  29.  no  man  ever  yet  A.  his  own  flesh 
i/c4.1.9.thou  hast  loved  righteousn.and  A.  iniquity 

HATEFUL. 
Psal.  36.  2.  until  his  iniquity  be  found  to  be  A. 
Tit.  3.  3.  we  were  A.  and  hating  one  another 
Rev.  18.  2.  a  cage  of  every  unclean  and  A.  bird 

HATEFULLY. 
Ezek.  23.  29.  and  they  shall  deal  with  thee  A. 

HATEKS. 
Psai.  81.15.  the  A.  of  Lord  should  have  submitted 
Rom.  1.  30.  backbiters,  A.  of  God,  despiteful 

HATEST. 
2.Sam.l9. 6.  lovcst  thine  enemies,  and  A.  thy  friends 
Psal.  5.  5.  thou  A.  all  workers  of  iniquity 

45.7.lhou  lovest  righteousness,  and  A.  wickedness 

50.  17.  thnu  A.  instruction,  and  castest  my  words 
Ezek.  23.  28.  deliver  thee  into  hand  wliom  thou  A. 
Rev.  2.  6.  thou  A.  Ihe  deeds  of  the  Nicolaitanes 

HATETH. 
Exod.  23.  5.  if  see  the  ass  of  him  that  A.  thee  lying 
Deut.  7.  10.  Lord  not  be  slack  to  him  that  A.  him 

12.  31.  every  abomination  he  h.  have  they  done 

16.  22.  nor  set  up  any  image  which  the  Lord  A. 

22. 16. 1  gave  my  daughter  unto  ihisman,  he  A. her 
Job  16.  9.  he  tcareth  nie  in  his  wrath,  who  A.  me 

.34.  17.  shall  even  he  that  A.  right,  govern  ? 
Psal.  11.  5.  him  that  loveth  violence,  his  soul  A. 

120.  6.  my  soul  long  dwelt  with  himthatA.  peace 
I'rov.  11.  15.  and  he  that  A.  suretyship  ia  sure 

12.  1.  but  he  that  A.  reproof  is  brutish 

13.  5.  a  righteous  man  A.  lying,  but  a  wicked  man 
24.  he  that  spareth  his  rod  A.  his  son 

15.  10.  and  he  that  A.  reproof  shall  die 

27.  but  he  that  A.  gifts  shall  live 

26.  24.  he  that  A.  dissenibleth  with  his  lips 

28.  a  lying  tongue  A.  those  that  are  afflicted 

28. 16.  he  thalA.covotousness  shall  prolong  days 
29.24.  whoso  is  partner  with  a  thiefA.hisown  soul 

Isa.  1.  14.  and  your  appointed  feasts  my  soul  A. 

Miifi.  16.  the  Lord  saiih,  that  he  A.  putting  away 

John  3.  20.  every  one  that  docth  evil,  A.  the  light 

7.  7.  hut  me  the  world  A.  b>'causc  I  testify  of  it 

12.  25.  he  that  A.  his  life  in  this  world  shall  keep  it 

15.  19.  ye  are  not  of  world,  therefore  world  A.you 

23.  he  that  A.  inc  A.  my  Father  also 

1  ./oAn2.  9.  he  that  A.  his  brother  is  in  darkness,  11 
.3.  15.  whosoever  A.  his  brothc^r  is  a  murderer 
4.  20.  if  say,  I  love  Ond, and  A.hisbrother,  isa  liar 
HATING. 

Exod.  18. 21.  provide  men  of  truth,  A.  covotousnes.s 

Tit.  3.  3.  in  limes  pnsi  hateful,  and  A.  one  another 

Judc  23.  A.  even  the  garment  spptlcd  by  the  flesh 
H.\TH. 

Oen.  24.  36.  and  unto  him  A.  he  giv.  nil  that  he  A. 

/,<•».  22.  5.  whatsoever  urn-leanness  he  A. 
27.  28.  no  devoted  lliinff  of  all  ho  A.  shall  be  sold 

JVum.  23. 22.  heA.  the  strength  of  an  unicorn,  24.  8. 

27.  4.  why  nanis  dona  away  becauM  he  A.  no  son 


HAT 

Deut.  21.  16.  his  sods  to  inherit  that  which  he  K 

17.  the  first-born  a  double  portion  of  all  he  A. 
Josh.  6. 22.  bring  out  thence  woman  and  all  she  A. 

7.  15.  he  shall  be  burnt  with  fire,  he  and  all  he  A. 
1  Ham.  15.22.  A.  Lord  as  great  delight  inolTeringsl 
2A'm^s4.2.thinehandmaid  A.not  any  thing  in  huu. 

14.  verily  she  hath  no  child,  her  husband  is  old 
Job  1.10.  hedge  aboutallhe  A.  ||  11.  touch  all  he  A. 

12.  behold,  all  that  he  A.  is  in  thy  power 

2.  4.  all  that  a  man  A.  will  he  give  for  his  life 

5. 16.  so  the  poor  A.  hope  ||  38. 28.  A.  rain  a  father  ? 
Psal.  37. 16.  a  little  that  a  righteous  man  A. is  bettor 

109.  11.  let  the  extortioner  catch  all  ihat  he  A. 

127.5.  happy  is  the  man  A.  his  quiver  full  of  them 

146.  5.  happy  he  that  A.  God  of  Jacob  for  his  help 
Prov.V-.  9.  he  that  is  despised  and  A.  a  setv.  better 

13.  4.  the  sluggard  desireth,  and  A.  nothing 
7.there  is  thatmaketh  himself  rich,yetA. nothing 

16.  22.  understanding  is  W^e  unto  him  who  A.  it 

17.  8.  a  precious  stone  in  eyes  of  him  that  A.  it 
19.  S3,  and  be  that  A.  it,  shall  abide  satisfied 
23.29.who  A. woe"!  who  A.sorrow?  who  A.  w  oundsl 

Eccl.  4.  8.  yea,  he  A.  neither  child  nor  brother 

10.  for  he  A.  not  another  to  help  him  up 
6.8.  for  what  A.  the  wise  more  than  the  fool? 

8.  8.  neither  A.  he  the  power  in  the  day  of  death 
Cant.8. 8. wehave  a  little  sister, and  she  A. no  breasts 
/«a.29. 8.  behold  he  is  faint,  and  hissoul  A.apj)etiuj 

45.  9.  he  A.  no  hands  |{  50.  10.  and  A.  no  light 

53.  2.  he  A.  no  form  nor  comeliness,  when  see  him 

55.  1.  he  that  A.  no  money,  come  ye,  buy  and  eat 

Jer .23.28. prophet  that  A.  a  dream,  let  him  tell,  and 

he  thatA.  my  word,  let  him  speak  my  word 

49.  1.  A.  Israel  no  sons?  A.  he  no  heir  ?  why  then 

Jl/aM.14.cursed  be  deceivcrwhicliA.in  flock  a  male 

Mat.  8.  20.  A.  not  where  to  lay  head,  Luke  9.  58.     . 

11. 15.  he  that  A.  cars  to  hear,  let  him  hear,  13.  9, 

43.  Marki.  9.  Luke  8.  8.  |  14. .35.  Rev.2.7. 

18.  nor  eating,  nor  drinking,  they  say  he  A.a  devil 
13.12.  whosoever  A. to  him  shall  be  given, and  more 

abundance  ;  who  A.  not,  from  him  shall  be  taken 

thatheA.25.29.  JV/arA 4.25. AuAe8. 18.  1  19.26. 

44.  selleth  all  that  he  A.  and  buyeth  that  field 

56.  whence  A.  this  man  these  things?  MarkS.i. 
JV7ffiri3.22.  he  A.  Beelzebub,  and  casteth  out  devils 

30.  because  they  said,  he  A.  an  unclean  spirit 
Luke  7.  33.  and  ye  say,  he  A.  a  devil,  .fohn  10.  20 
12.  44.  he  will  make  him  ruler  over  all  that  he  A. 
14. 33.  that  fursaketh  not  all  that  lie  A.  cannot  be 
20.24.  whoso  superscriptionA.it?  they  said  Cesar's 
22.  36.  he  that  A.  a  purse,  he  that  A.  no  sword 
24.39.  a  spirit  A.  not  flesh  and  bones,  as  ye  seems 
.John  3.  29.  he  that  A.  the  bride,  is  the  bridegroom 

36.  believeth  A.  everlasting  life,  5.24.  |  6.  47,54. 
5.  26.  as  the  Father  A.  life  in  himself,  so  A.  given 
12.  48.  A.  one  judgeth  him,  the  word  I  have  spoken 
14.21.hothat  A.mycommandm.and  kccpeth  them 

30.  Ihe  prince  of  this  world  A.  nothing  in  me 
15.13. greater  love  A.noman  than  this,  that  a  man 
16.  15.  all  things  that  the  Father  A.  are  mine 

19.  11.  delivered  thee  unto  me,  A.  the  greater  sin 
Rom.  3.  1.  what  advantage  then  A.  the  Jew  ? 

4.  2.  if  justified  by  works,  he  A.  whereof  lo  glory 

9.  21.  A.  not  the  poller  jiower  over  the  clay  T 

1  Cor.7.  4.  the  wife  A.  not  power  of  her  own  body 
7.  hut  every  man  A.  his  proper  gift  of  God 

14.  26.  every  one  of  you  A.  a  psalm,  A.  a  doctrine 

2  Cor.  6. 14.  what  fellowship  A.  righlcousness  witn 

uiiright.?  what  communionA. light  with  darkn.? 

15.  what  concord  A.Christ?  |{  16.  A.  temple  of  G. 
8.  12.  it  is  accepted  according  to  that  a  man  A 

(Va/.4.27.  forthe  desolate  A. more  children  thanshe 
Eph.5.5.  nor  idolater  A. any  inheritance  in  kingdom 
PAiV.  3.4. if  any  thinketh  he  A.  whereof  may  trust 
//;A.3.3.  the  builder  A.  more  honour  than  the  house 
7.  24.  this  man  A.  an  unchangeable  priesthood 
10.35.  confideni-e,  which  A.  recoinpence  of  reward 
Jam.l.  14.  though  a  man  say  he  A. faith,  not  works 

1  John  2.  2;t.  who  denielh  Son,  same  A.  not  Father 

3.  3.  every  man  that  A.  ihis  hope  in  him  purifieth 
15.  ye  know  that  no  murderer  A.  clernnl  life 
f".  whovo  A.  this  world's  good,  and  seeth  brother 

4. 16.  wehave  believed  Ihe  love  ihatGod  A.  to  us 
18. there  is  no  fear  in  Iove,bccause  fear  A.tormeot  * 

5.  10.  he  Ihat  believeth  on  Sonof  G.  A.  the  witncsa 
12.  hclbatA.  iheSonA.  life,  A.  not  Son  A.  not  life 

2./0A71  9.  whoso  abidcih  not  in  doctrine  nf  ChristA. 

not  God, that  abideth  A.  bolh  llic  Father  and  Son 

Rer.  3. 7.  that  A.  key  of  David  opens,  mi  man  shuts 

12.6.  wildern.  where  she*,  a  place  pr'pared  ofG. 
12.becaU8eho  knowcth  that  he  A. hut  a  short  time 

17.7.  beast  which  A.  theseven  heads  and  ten  horns 
9.  and  here  is  the  mind  whirh  A.  wisdom 

20.  6.  on  such  the  second  death  A.  no  power 

HATRED. 
Oen.  26.  t21.  Iheydiggcd  another  well,  called  it  A 
A'um.  35.20.  if  he  thrust  him  of  A.  or  hurl  at  him 

2  Sam.  13.  15.  A.  wherewith  he  haled  her  greater 
Psnl.  25.  19.  and  they  hate  mo  with  cruel  A. 

109.  3.  ibey  compascsd  mo  about  with  A. 


HAV 

Ps.  109.  5.  they  have  rewarded  me  A.  for  my  lovo 

1J9.  22.  1  hatu  them  with  perfect  h.  i  cuum  (hem 

Proc.  10.  12.  h.  stirs  up  strifes,  love  covers  all  sins 

18.  he  that  hideth  h.  with  lymg  lips,  is  a  fool 
1.5.  17.  hetter  than  a  stalled  ox,  and  A.  therewith 
2(5. '26.  whose  A.  is  covered  by  deceit,  his  wickedn. 
EcrA.  y.  1.  no  man  knoweth  either  love  or  A. 

6.  their  love,  their  A.  and  envy  is  now  perished 
Eiek.  -25.  15.  vengeance  to  destroy  it  lor  the  old  A. 
35.  5.  because  thou  hast  had  a  perpetual  A. 

11.1  will  do  according  to  envy  hast  used  out  of  A. 
HosM.l.  for  multitude  of  iniquity,  and  for  great  A. 
i.  but  the  pro])het  is  A.  in  the  house  of  his  God 
Gal.  5.  ao.  witchcraft,  A.  the  works  of  tiie  flesh 

IJATS. 
Dan.  3.  21.  men  were  bound  in  their  hosen  and  A. 

HAUGHTY. 

S  Sam.  2-2. 28.  thine  eyes  are  upon  A.  to  bring  down 

Psal.Vil.  1.  Lord,  my  heart  IS  not  A.  nor  eyes  lofty 

Prov.'o.\  17.  the  Lord  lialeth  A. eyes,  a  lying  tongue 

16.  18.  and  a.  A.  spirit  goeth  before  a  fall 

18.  12.  before  destruction  the  heart  of  man  is  A. 
21.. 24.  proud  and  A.  scorner  is  his  name 

Jsa.  3.  16.  because  the  daughters  of  Zion  are  h. 
10.  33.  high  hewn  down,  a7)d  A.  shall  be  humbled 
24.  4.  the  A.  people  of  the  earth  do  languish 
Ezek.  16.  50.  were  A.  before  me,  t  took  them  away 
Zcpk.'i.il.  no  more  be  A.  because  of  holy  mountain 

HAUGHTILY. 
Mic.  2.  3.  neither  shall  ye  go  A.  (his  time,  is  evil 

HAUGHTINESS. 

Prop.  21.  t4.  the  A.  of  eyes  and  a  proud  heart  is  sin 

7)1.1.2.11.  A.  of  men  shall  be  bowed  down,  L. exalted 

17.  and  the  A.  of  men  shall  be  made  low 

13.  11.  and  I  will  lay  low  the  A.  of  the  terrible 

16.  6.  we  heard  of  the  A.  of  Moab,  Jcr.  48.  29. 

HAUNT. 
1  Sam.  23.  22.  go  and  see  his  place  where  his  A.  is 

HAUNT. 
I.5ar7!.30.31.  where  David  and  men  were  wont  to  A. 
Ezek  26. 17.  cause  their  terror  to  be  on  all  that  A.  it 

HAVE. 
Gen.  11.  6.  the  Ld.  said,  they  A.  all  one  language 
43.  7.  A.  ye  another  brother  ||44. 19.  A.  ye  a  father  1 
46.  32.  and  they  have  brought  all  that  they  A. 
Kzod.  20.  3.  thou  shalt  A.  no  other  gods,  J)eut.  5.  7. 
Aen.7.7. priest  ihatmaketli  atonement  shall  h.  it,  3. 
•    lO.evory  meat-offering  the  sons  of  Aaron  shall  A. 

19.  36.  ajust  ephah  and  a  ju.st  hin  shall  ye  A. 
22. 13.  priest's  daughter  h.  no  child,  JVu7h.27.8,9. 

A*um.ll.l3.  whence  should  I  A.flesh  to  give  unio  all 
22.  38.  A.  I  now  any  power  at  all  to  say  any  thing? 
25.13.  covenantof  peace  he  and  his  seed  shall  A.  it 
35.  8.  from  them  that  A.  many,  them  that  A.  few 

/)euf.5.26.  who  hath  heard  voice  of  God,  as  we  A.? 

Josh.  2.  13.  ye  will  save  alive  father  and  all  they  A. 

17.  18.  though  they  A.  iron  chariots  and  he  strong 
22.24.  what  A.  you  to  do  with  Lord  God  of  Israel? 

Jvdg.  14.  15.  A.  ye  called  us  to  take  that  we  A.? 
13.°24.  ye  A.  taken  my  gods,  and  what  h.  I  more  ? 
Ruth  1. 12.  turn  again,  for  I  am  too  old  to  A.  a  hus- 
band, if  I  should  A.  a  husband  also  to-night 
1  Sam.  8.  19.  but  we  will  A.  a  king  over  us 
9.  7.  there  is  not  a  present  to  bring  ;  what  A.  we7 
'     15.  3.  go  and  utterly  destroy  all  that  they  A. 

18.  8.  what  can  he  A.  more  but  the  kingdom  ? 
21.  15.  A.  I  need  of  mad-men,  that  ye  h.  brought 

S  Sam.  13.  9.  Amnon  said,  A.  out  all  men  from  me 

15.  36.  they  A.  there  with  them  their  two  sons 
Ifi.  10.  what  A.I  to  do  with  you, ye  sonsofZeruiah? 
18.1  H.I  A. no  son  to  keep  my  name  inremambrance 
19.28.  what  right  A.  I  yet  to  cry  any  more  to  king? 

34.Birzillai  said  unto  king,  how  long  A.  I  to  live? 

43.  Isriiel  said,  we  A.  ten  parts  in  the  king 
lArrr!o'.«8.28.A.(hou  re.spectunto  prayerofthyserv. 
12   16.  snying,  what  portion  A.  we  in  David 
17  12.  I  A.  not  a  cake,  but  a  hindful  of  meal 

20.  4.  my  lord,  O  king,  I  am  thine,  and  all  I  A. 

21.  2.  that  I  may  A.  it  for  a  garden  of  herbs 

22.  17.  tsr.  pcatiered  as  sheep  that  A.  no  shepherd 
'H.Kivss  11.  15.  A.  her  forth  with<.ut,2  CAr.23. 14. 

20.  9.  Isaiah  said,  this  sign  shalt  thou  A.  of  (he  L. 
^^     B  Citron.  1.  12.  nor  shall  any  aflcr  thee  A.  the  like 

16.  9.  from  henceforth  thou  shall  A.  wars 

35.  21.  what  A.  I  to  do  with  thee,  king  of  Judah? 
23.  he  saiil,  A.  me  away,  for  I  am  sore  wounded 
.ffek.  5.  5.  other  men  A  our  lands  and  vineyards 
Job  3.  9.  Ipt  it  look  for  light  but  A.  none 
6. 9.  O  th:it  I  might  A.  my  request,  that  God  would 
10.  then  should  I  yel  A.  comfort,  yea,  I  would 

21.  15.  what  profit  should  we  A.  if  we  pray  to  him? 
30.  13.  (hey  mar  my  p  ith,  they  A.  no  helper 

35. 3.  what  profit  shall  I  A.  if  be  cleansed  from  sin? 
Pnal.  2.  4.  the  Lord  shall  A.  them  in  derision 
14.  4.  A.  workers  of  iniquity  no  knowledge?  .53.  4. 
Ifi.  6.  in  pleasant  places,  I  A.  a  goodly  hfritage 
35.  25.  let  them  not  say,  ah,  so  would  we  A.  it 
73.25.  whom  A.  I  in  heaven  but  thee?  none  upon 
104.  33. 1  will  sing  to  my  God  while  I  A.  my  being 

.  111.  10.  a  good  understanding  A.  all  they  that  do 

*  2(4 


HAV 

PjoM  15.5. they  A. mouths;  eyes  A.  they,  but  see  not 
6.  they  A.  ears  ;  noses  A.  they,  7.  |  135.  16,  17. 
119.  42.  so  shall  I  A.  wherewitii  to  answer  him 

165.  great  peace  A.  they  which  love  ihy  law 
146. 2.  sing  praises  unio  my  G.  while  I  A. any  being 
149.  9.  this  honour  A.  all  his  saints,  praise  the  L. 
ProB.  1.  14.  cast  in  thy  lot,  let  us  all  A.  one  purse 
20.4.  thcslugg.  shall  big  in  harveslaiid  A.  nothing 

29.  21.  shall  A.  him  become  his  son  at  the  length 

30.  2.  and  I  A.  not  the  understanding  of  a  man 
3.  nor  A.  I  the  knowledge  of  the  Holy 

Eccl.'i.  19.  yea, they  A.  all  one  breatli,so  that  a  man 

7.  12.  that  wisdom  giveth  life  to  them  that  A.  it 
9.  5.  neither  A.  they  any  more  a  reward 

6.  neither  A.  they  any  more  portion  for  ever 
Ca7i<.8.8.we  A. a  litde  sister  and  she  hath  no  breasts 

12.  thou,  C)  Solomon,  must  A.  a  thousand 
fsa.  5. 13.  are  gone,  because  they  A.  no  knowledge 
23.  12.  pass  over,  there  also  shalt  thou  A.  no  re»t 
26. 1,  we  A. a  strong  city,  salvation  \viliG.  appoint 
30.29.  ye  shall  A. a  song  as  in  (benight  when  a  holy 

43.  8.  bring  (hi-  blind  (hat  A.  eyes,  deaf  that  A.  ears 
45.  21.  A.  not  1  the  Lord?  there  is  no  G.  betide  mu 

24.  say,  in  the  L.  A.  I  righteousness  and  strength 
49.  20.  the  children  which  thou  shall  A.  shall  say 
50.2.isniy  hand  shortened?  A.I  no  power  to  deliv.! 

11.  Ibis  A.  ofmy  hand,  ye  shall  lie  down  iii  sorrow 
52.  5.  therefore  what  A.  I  here,  saith  t^ie  Lord 
56. 11.  are  greedy  dogs,  which  can  never  A.  enough 
61.  7.  for  your  shame  you  shall  A.  double 
Jer.  5.  21.  which  A.  eye^and  see  not,  which  A.  ears 

31.  my  people  love  to  A.  it  so,  what  will  ye  do  in 

12.  12.  sword  of  L.devour,  no  tlesh  shall  A.  peace 

16.  2.  neith.  shalt  A.  sons  nordaught.  in  this  place 
23. 17.  the  Lord  hath  said,  ye  shall  A.  peace,  29.  7. 

35.  7.  ye  shall  not  plant  vineyard,  nor  A.  any 

36.  30.  he  shall  A.  none  to  sit  upon  throne  of  David 
38.  2.  he  shall  A.  his  life  for  a  prey,  and  shall  live 

44.  14.  to  the  which  they  A.  a  desire  to  return 
49.  9.  they  will  destroy  till  they  A.  enough 

31.  the  nation  which  A.  neither  gaits  nor  bars 
/,am.  3.21.  this  I  recal  to  my  mind,  tlieref.A.  1  hope 
F.2ek.5.  11.  neith.  will  I  A.  pity,  7.  4.  1  8. 18.  |  9.  10. 

9.  5.  let  not  your  eye  spare,  neither  A.  ye  pily 

18.  23.  A.  I  any  pleasure  that  the  wicked  die? 

32.  I  A.  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  him,  33.  11. 

21.  25.  when  iniquity  shall  A.  an  end,  29. 
7)an.2. 30.  for  any  wisdom  that  1  A.  more  than  any 

3.  25.  I  see  four  men  loose,  and  they  A.  no  hurt 

5.  7.  shall  A.  a  chain  of  gold  about  his  neck,  16. 

6.  2.  and  the  king  should  A.  no  damage 

N'js.  10.  3.  for  now  they  shall  say  we  A.  no  king 
Mic.  3.6.  night  shall  be  unto  you,  ye  shall  not  A. vis. 
Zeph.  2.  10.  ihis  shall  they  A.  for  tli'eir  pride 
Hug.  1.  6.  ye  eat,  but  ye  A.  not  enough  ;  ye  drink 
J)/fi/.  2.  lO.A.  we  not  all  one  father?  haih  not  God 
Milt.  3.  9.  we  A.  Abraham  to  our  father,  J.,u.ke  3.  8. 

5.  40.  take  thy  coat,  let  him  A.  thy  cloflk  also 
46.if  love  flumi  who  love  you,  what  reward  A.  ye? 

6.  2.  verily  I  say,  they  A.  their  reward,  5,  16. 
8.20.  the  foxes  A.  hole's,  birds  A.  nests,  Luke  9.  58. 

29.  what  A.  we  do  with  thee,  Jesus,  thou  Son 
of  God  ?  Mark  1.  24.  Luke  4.  34. 

13.  12.  and  he  shall  A.  more  abundance,  25.  29. 

14.  4.  itis  notlawful  for  thee  to  A.her,  JV/arA  6. 18. 
15.33.  whence  should  we  A.  so  much  bread  in  wil. 

34.  how  many  loaves  A.  ye  ?  JSIark&.  36.  |  8.  5. 

17.  20.  if  A.  faith  as  a  grain  of  mustard,  21.  21. 

19. 16.  what  shall  I  do,  that  I  may  A.  eternal  life? 
27.  followed  thee,  what  shall  we  A.  therefore  ? 

26.  11.  ye  A.  the  jioor  always  with  vou,  but  me  ye 

A.  not  always,  Mark  14.  7.  .hkn  12.  8. 
65.  what  further  need  A.  we  of  witnesses? 

27.  19.  A.  nothing  to  do  with  thnt  just  man 
43.  let  him  dfdiver  him  now,  if  he  will  A.  him 

Mark  2.  17.  the  whole  It.  no  need  of  the  physician 
19.  as  long  as  they  A.  the  bridegroom  wilh  them 

4.  23.  if  any  man  A. ears  to  hear,  7.  16.  Hev.  13.  9. 

40.  why  are  ye  so  fearful,  how  is  it  ye  A.  no  faith? 

8.  16.  saying,  it  is  because  we  A.  no  bread 

9.50.  A.  sail  in  yourselves,A.  peace  one  with  anoth. 
10. 21.  thou  shalt  A.  treas.  in  heaven,  Luke  18.22. 
1 1.23.but  shall  believe,  shall  A.  wh.ilsoev.  he  saith 
24.  believe  ye  receive  them,  and  ve  shall  h.  them 
iMkeT).  32.  who  love  you,  what  ih  liik  A.  ye?  33, 34. 
8.  18.  from  him  bo  taken  what  he  seemeth  to  A. 

11.  5.  which  of  you  shall  A.  a  friend,  and  shall  go 

41.  but  rather  give  alms  of  such  (lungs  as  ye  A. 

12.  4.  and  after  (hat  A.  no  more  that  they  can  do 
24.  which  neither  k.  store-house  nor  hnrn 

33.  sell  that  ye  A.  and  give  alms,  provide  biga 
14. 18. must  go  and  see  it,  I  pray  A.  me  excused, 19. 

15.  31.  thou  art  ever  with  me,  all  that  I  A.  is  thine 

19.  14.  we  will  not  A.  this  man  to  reign  over  us 

22.  31 .  Satan  hath  desired  to  A.  you,  (hat  he  may 

24.17.  what  communications  ye  A.  one  to  another? 
39.  spirit  hath  not  flesh  and  bones, as  ye  see  me  A. 
41.  he  said,  ft.  ye  here  any  meat?  .John  21.  5. 

John  2.  3.  the  mother  of  Jesus  said,  (hey  A.  no  wine 
4.  woman,  what  A.  I  to  do  with  thee? 
9N 


HAV 

./^AkS.  15.  should  not  perish,but  A,  everlast.  life,  Iflk 

4.  17.  the  wonian  answered  and  said,  1  A,  no  hiub. 

5.  26.  he  hath  given  the  Son  to  A.  life  in  himself 
38.  and  ye  A.  not  his  word  abiding  in  you 

42.  1  know  that  ye  A.  not  (he  love  of  Cod  in  you 

6.  40.  believeth  on  him,  may  A.  everlasting  life 
53.  excejit  ye  eat  his  flesh,  ye  A.  no  life  in  you 

8.  6,  tempting,  that  they  might  A.  to  accuse  him 

'    12.  he  that  lolloweth  me,  shall  A.  the  light  of  Ufa 
41.  A.  one  father  even  God  ||  49. 1  A.  not  a  devil 

9.  41.  if  ye  were  blind,  ye  should  A.  no  sin 

10. 10.  1  am  come  that  they  might  A.  life  and  more 

16.  other  sheep  I  A.  which  are  not  of  this  fold 
12.  35.  walk  while  ye  A.  light,  lest  darkness,  36. 

16.  33.  that  in  me  ye  might  A.  peace,  in  the  world 
ye  shall  A.  tribulation,  I  A.  overcome  the  world 

18.  39.  but  ye  A. a  custom  (hat  I  should  release  one 

19.  7.  we  A.  a  law  ||  15.  we  A.  no  king  but  Cesar 

20.  31.  that  believing  ye  might  A.  life  thro'  Jesu» 
Jicls'i.fi.  silver  and  gold  A,  1  none,  but  such  as  I  A. 

9.  6.  he  said,  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  A.  me  to  del 

17.  28.  in  him  we  live,  move,  and  A.  our  being 
19.  25.  know  that  by  this  craft  we  A.  our  wealth 

21.  23.  we  A.  four  men  which  A.  a  vow 
Koin.i.  14.  when  the  Gentiles,  w  hich  A.  not  the  law 

ti.  22.  ye  A.  your  fruit  unto  holiness,  the  end  lifa 

8.  9.  now  if  any  man  A.  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ 

9.  9.  this  titnel  will  come,  and  Saia  shall  A.  a  son 
12.  4.  and  all  members  A.  not  the  same  office 

14.  22.  hast  thou  faith  ?  A.  to  thyself  before  God 

15.  17.  I  A.  whereof  I  may  glory  through  Christ 
1  Cor.  2.  16.  but  we  A.  the  mind  of  Christ 

4.  1 1,  are  nuked,  and  A.  no  certain  dwelling-place 

15.  though  instructors,  yet  A. ye  not  many  fathers 

5.  1.  that  one  should  A.  his  faiher's  wife 

6.  19.  Holy  Gh.  which  is  in  you,  which  ye  A.  of  G. 
7. 2,  to  avoid  fornicEiion,  let  every  man  A. his  own 

wife,  let  every  woman  A.  her  own  husband 

28.  yet  such  shall  A.  trouble  in  tlie  flesh 

29.  (hey  that  A.  wives  be  as  tho'  they  had  none 
32. 1  v/ould  A.  you  without  carefulness 

40.  I  think  also  that  I  A.  the  Spirit  of  God 

8.  1.  we  know,  that  we  all  A.  knowledge 

9.  4.  A.  we  not  power  to  eat  and  drink  ?  5.  6. 

11.  14.  if  a  man  A.  long  hair,  it  is  a  shame  to  him 
1.5.  if  a  woman  A.  long  hair,  it  is  a  glory  to  her 

16.  we  A  no  such  custom,  nor  the  churches  of  G. 
22.  what,  A.  ye  not  houses  to  eat  and  drink  in  7 

12.  21.  eye  not  say  to  hand,  I  A.  no  need  of  thee 

30.  A.  all  (he  gifts  of  healing?  do  all  interpret? 

13.  l.A.  not  charity,  I  am  become  sounding  brass 

2.  though  I  A.  allfaith  and  A.  not  charily,  3. 
15.  31.  by  your  rejoicing  which  I  A.  in  Christ  Jcsuj 

34.  for  some  A.  not  the  knowledge  of  God 
2C(>r.  3. 4.  such  (rust  A.  we  thro'Christ  to  God-ward 

4.  1.  seeing  we  A.  this  ministry,  we  faint  not 
8.  11.  a  performance  out  of  that  which  ye  A. 

Fph.  4.  28.  he  may  A.  to  give  to  him  that  ncedefh 

5.  11.  A.  no  fellowship  wiih  the  unlruitlul  works 
PA77. 1.  7.  I  A.  you  in  my  heart  1|  4.  18.  but  I  A.  all 
Col.  1.  4.  and  love  which  ye  A.  to  all  the  saints 

2.  1,  ye  knew  what  great  conflict  I  A.  fur  you 

3.  13.  if  any  man  A.  a  quarrel  against  any 

4.  1.  knowing  that  ye  also  A,  a  Master  in  heaven 

1  Thess.  2.  14.  ye  suffered,  as  they  A.  of  the  Jews 

2  7'A''.5.'.  3.  2.  pray  for  us,  for  all  men  A.  not  faith 

9.  not  because  we  A.  not  power,  but  to  make 
1  Tim.  2.  4.  who  will  A.  all  men  to  be  saved 
ffe.b.  4. 13.  the  eyes  of  him  with  whom  we  h.  to  do 

14.  seeing  then  that  we  A.  a  great  high-priest 

5.  14.  by  reason  of  use  A.  their  senses  exercised 
G.  19.  which  hope  we  A.  as  an  anchor  of  the  soul 
R.l.  we  A.  such  a  High-priest,  sot  on  right-hand 

3.  that  this  man  A.  somewhat  also  to  offer 

10.  34.  that  ye  A.  in  heaven  a  better  substance 
13.  5.  be  content  with  such  things  as  ye  A. 

10.  we  A.  an  allar  whereof  they  A.  no  right  to  eat 
14.  here  A.  we  no  continuing  city,  we  seek  one 

Jam.  1.  4.  hut  let  patience  A.  her  perfect  work 
2. 1.  A.  not  faith  of  Christ  with  respoc(  of  persons 
14.  and  A.  not  works,  can  faith  save  him  ? 

17.  even  so  faith,  if  it  A.  not  works,  is  dead 
IS.amanniay  say,  thou  hast  faith,  and  I  A. works 

3.  14.  ifyeA.  bitter  envy,  and  strife  in  your  hearts 

4.  2.  ye  lust  and  A.  not,  ye  desire  to  A.  ye  fight  and 

war,  yet  ye  A.  not,  because  ye  ask  not 

1  Pet.  4.  8.  above  all  things  A.  fervent  charity 

2  Pet.  1.  19.  we  A.  a  more  sure  word  of  pro,ihecy 
2.  14.  aheart  they  A.  exercised  wilh  covetnusness 

1  .John  l.S.if  wesay,  weA.  no  sin,  deceive  ourselv. 
2.  1.  we  A.  an  AdvocaV?  with  the  Father,  Jesus 
20.  but  we  A.  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One 

4.  21.  and  this  commandment  A.  we  from  Hira 

5.  13.  that  ye  may  know  that  ye  A.  eternal  life 

14.  this  is  the  confidence  that  we  A.  in  him 

15.  know  we  A.  the  iietiiions  wedosred  of  him 

3  .hkn  4. 1  A.  no  grealer  joy  than  to  hear  that  my 
9.  Diotrephes,  who  loveth  to  A.  the  pre-eminenc* 

Rev.  1.  18.  I  A.  the  keys  ofhell  and  of  df  itli 
2.  4.  yet  I  A,  somewhat  against  thse,  14,  90 


HE 

Kev.  9  10.  and  je  shall  A.  tribulation  ten  days 
34.  to  you,  and  to  as  many  as  A.  nut  tliia  doctrine 
25.  but  what  ye  A.  already,  hold  fast  till  I  come 
9.  4.  which  A.  not  the  seal  of  Uod  iu  their  loreh. 
li.  17.  and  A.  the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ 
J4.  II.  they  A.  no  rest  day  nor  night  who  worship 

17.  l^J.  these  A.  one  mind,  and  give  their  power 
I'J.  10.  of  brethren  that  A.  the  testimony  of  Jesus 
21.8.  liars  shall  A.  their  part  in  the  lake  that  burns 
22.  14.  that  they  may  A.  right  to  the  tree  of  life 

See  Compassion,  Uo.minion. 
HAVING. 
J^v.  7.  20.  A.  his  uncleanness  upon  him,  22.  3. 

20.  1?.  A.  her  sickness  ||  -Zi.  'ii.  k.  a  wen  or  ecurvy 
JVum.  24.  4.  into  a  trance,  but  A.  hi.s  eyes  open,  16. 
Huth  l.l'J.would  yeslay  lorihcnifromA.  husbands 

1  ChroH.  21.  Iti.  A.  a  drawri  sword  in  his  hand 

2  C/tron.  11. 12.  A.  Judah  and  Benjamin  on  his  side 
£»tA.  (i.  12.  morning,  and  A.  his  head  covered 
Prop.  6.  7.  which  A.  no  guide,  overseer,  or  ruler 
F.zek.  38.  II.  and  A.  neitljer  bars  nor  gates 

JUic.  1.  1 1.  pass  ye  away,  A.  thy  shame  naked 
Zech.  9.  9.  thy  king  cometh  to  ihee,  A.  salvation 
JUal.  7.  29.  he  taught  as  one  A.  authority 

8.9.under  authority, A.soldiers  under  ine,/,i/Ae7.8. 

9.  36.  were  as  sheep  A.  no  shepherd,  Jilark  G.  34. 

18.  6.  rather  than  h.  two  hancis  or  two  feet 

9.  rather  than  A.  two  eyes  to  be  cast,  Mark  9.  43. 
22.  12.  how  earnest,  not  A.  a  wedding-garment? 

24.  if  a  man  die,  A.  no  children,  Luke  20.  2<^. 

25.  and  A.  no  issue,  left  his  wife  to  his  brother 
26.  7.  woman  A.  an  alabaster-box,  Mark  14.  3. 
Mark  6.  1.  and  A.  nothing  to  eat,  Jesus  called 

18.  A.  eyes,  see  ye  not  ?  A.  ears,  hear  ye  not? 

11.  13.  a  fig-tree  A.  leaves  ||  12.  6.  A.  one  son 
/^«te8.43.  woman  A.  an  issue  of  blood  twelve  years 

15.  4.  what  man  of  you  A.  a  hundred  sheep  1 
8.  either  what  woman  A.  ten  pieces  of  silver? 

17.  7.  but  which  of  you  A.  a  servant  plowing 
John  7.  15.  how  knows  he  letters,  A.  never  learned  ? 

18.  10.  then  Simon  Peter  A.  a  sword  drew  it 
^cts  4.  37.  A.  land,  sold  it,  and  brought  the  money 

22.  12.  A.  a  good  report  of  the  Jews  who  dwelt 

24.  2i.  A.  more  perfect  knowledge  of  that  way 
Rom.  2.  14.  A.  not  the  law,  are  a  law  to  themselves 

12.6.  A.  then  gifts  difTering  accord,  to  grace  given 
J  Cor.  6.  1.  A.  a  matter  against  another,  go  to  law 

7.  37.  he  that  stamleth  sterlfast,  A.  no  necessity 
2Cor.  4.  13.  we  A. the  same  spirit  of  faith,  as  written 

6.  10.  as  A.  nothing,  and  yet  possessing  all  things 

7.  1.  A.  therefore  these  promises,  beloved,  cleanse 

9.  8.  ye  always  A.  all  sufficiency  in  all  things 

10.  6.  A.  in  a  readiness  to  revenge  all  disobedience 
15.  but  A.  hope,  when  your  faith  is  increased 

F.ph.'i.  12.  A.  no  hope  ||  5.27.  not  A.  spot  or  wrinkle 
6.  14.  A.  your  loins  girt  about  with  truth 
Fhil.  1.23.  A.  a  desire  to  depart,  and  be  with  Christ 
2'5.  A.  this  confidence  ||  30.  A.  the  same  conflict 

2.  2.  A.  same  love||3.0.  not  A.  my  own  righteousn. 
CnM.20.  A.  made  peace  thro'  the  blood  of  his  cross 

2. 19.  ft.  nourishment  ministered,  and  knittogeihei 
\Tim.'i.i  A.  his  child. in  subjection  with  all  gravity 

4.  8.  A.  the  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is 

5.  12.  A.  damnation,  because  they  have  cast  off 
C.  8.  and  A.  f'lod  and  raiment,  let  us  be  content 

2  Tim.  2.  10.  A.  this  seal,  the  Lord  knowetb  his 

3.  Ti.  A.  a  form  of  godliness,  but  denying  the  power 

4.  3.  they  shall  heap  teachers,  A.  itching  ears 
Tit.  1.  6.  A.  faithful  children,  not  accused  of  riot 

1  Pel.  2. 12.  A.  conversation  honest  among  pontiles 
3.  16.  A.  agood  conscience,  they  may  be  ashamed 

2  Pet.  2. 14.  A.  eyes  full  of  adult,  that  cnnnot  cease 
Jude  19.  these  be  sensual,  A.  not  the  Spirit 

Rev.  5.  6.  k.  seven  horns  ||  8.  A.  every  one  harps 
■  7.  2.  I  saw  an  angel,  A.  the  seal  of  the  living  God 

8.  3.  A.  a  golden  censer  |l  9.  17.  A.  breast-plates 

12.  3.  A.  seven  heads  ||  12.  k.  great  svratli 

14.  6.  A.  the  everlasting  gospel  to  preach  to  Ihcin 

15.  2.  A.  the  harps  of  God  1|  17.  4.  A.  a  golden  cup 
18.  1.  A.  great  power  ||  20.  1.  A.  the  key  of  the  pit 

21.  11.  the  holy  Jerusalem,  A.  the  glory  of  God 

H.WF.N. 
rjen.40.  13.  Zobiil.  shall  dwell  at  the  A.a  A.  ofships 
Ttal.  107.  30.  he  bringeth  them  to  their  desired  h. 
JlctB  27.  12.  A.  not  commodious,  a  A.  of  Crete 

Fair  M.AVENS. 
.5ef#i?7.8.camc  to  a  place  which  is  called  the/,  h. 

IIAVOCK. 
Aett  8.  3.  M  for  Saul,  h^'  mndo  A.  oftho  church 

II.WVK. 
T.ev.  11.  16.  A.  had  in  abmninalion,  Drut.  14.  15. 
Job  39.  26.  doth  the  A.  fly  t.y  thy  wisdom  ? 

II. \Y. 
Proi).  27.  25.  the  A.  appenreth,  and  tender  grass 
Ua.  15.  6.  iheA.is  witlM'rid  away,  tliogr  Ks  faileth 
]  Cor.  3.  12.  who  hudd.th  on  this  foundation,  A. 

H.\7Kr,. 
Gen.  30.  37.  Jacob  took  him  rods  ofA.  and  choanut 

IIF. 
Gm  3. 16.  and  A«  ahall  rt/.e  over  the* 
900 


HE 

■  Gen.t.  3.  not  always  strive  with  man,  for  Ae  la  flesir 
44.1U.Aewith  whom  it  is  found  shall  bu,my  servant 

48.  J 9.  younger  brother  shail  be  greater  than  At 

49.  8.  art  he  whom  thy  brethren  shall  praise 
Exod.i.lQ.hc  shall  be  thy  spokesman  to  the  jieople, 

and  he  shall  be  to  tliee  instead  of  a  mouth 
9.  34.  and  hardened  his  heart,  Ac  and  his  servants 
35.  34.  he  hath  put  in  his  heart  that  he  may  teach 
both  Ae  and  Aholiaboflhe  tribe  of  Uan 
Arp.7.33.  Ac  among  the  sons  of  Aaron  Ihatoffereth 
2.^.  54.  shall  go  out  in  jubilee,  lie  and  his  children 
JVum.  24.  9.  and  cursed  is  he  that  curseth  thee 
/Jeut.  3.  1.  came,  he  and  all  his  peojile  to  battle 

8.  18.  it  is  he  that  giveth  power  to  get  wealth 
27.  16.  cursed  be  he.  So  to  the  end  uf  the  chaptfr 
31.6.  Ae  thatdoth  go  witii  ihee,Acwill  not  fail,  8. 
32.  6.  is  notAe  thy  Father  that  lialh  bought  thee  ? 

39.  I,  even  I  am  he,  and  there  is  no  God  with  me, 

ha.  41.  4.  I  43. 10, 13.  |  46.  4.  1  48.  12. 

.Josh.  23. 3.  Ij.  your  G.  is  Ae  that  fought  for  you,  10. 

Judg.  10.  18.  what  man  is  he  will  begin  to  fight? 

1  Sam.  4.  1().  I  am  Ac  that  came  out  of  the  array 

9.  2.  there  was  not  a  goodlier  person  than  Ae 
16.  12.  this  is  Ae  ||  25.25.  as  his  name  is  so  is  Ac 

1  Kings  2.  32.  who  fell  on  two  men  belter  than  he 
17.15  she  and  Acand  her  house  did  eat  many  days 
18.  17.  art  thou  Ae  that  troubleth  Israel  ? 

2/rin^.?18.22.  is  not  thatAe  whose  idace8,/sa.36.7. 

2CArwn.  29.  3.  Ae  in  first  year  of  reign  oi)encd  doors 

Job  9.  24.  if  not,  where,  and  who  is  Ae  ? 

13.  19.  who  is  Ac  that  will  plead  with  me? 

14. 10.  man  dieth.and  where  is  Ac?  20.7.  /sa.63.11. 

/'sa^22.9.lhouartAe  that  took  me  out  of  the  womb 
60.  12.  Ae  it  is  shall  tread  down  enemies,  108.  13. 
68.  20.  Ae  that  is  our  God  is  the  God  of  salvation 
1110.  3.  Ae  is  God,  it  is  Ae  that  hath  made  us 
144.  10.  it  is  Ae  that  giveth  salvation  to  kings 

Prov.  16.20.  that  trusteth  in  L.  happy  is  Ac,  29.  18. 

F.crl.  5.  8.  Ac  that  is  higher  than  the  highest  regarii. 

6.  3.  I  say  that  an  untimely  birth  is  better  than  Ac 
[sa.  40.22.  it  isAcsitteth  on  the  circle  of  the  earth 

51. 12. 1,  even  I,  am  Ac  that  comforteth  you,  52. 6. 

./oAn18.5,6,  8.  Rcu.  1.18.  |  2.03. 

./er  5. 12.have  belied  the  Lord,  and  said,  it  is  not  Ac 

14.  22.  art  not  thou  Ac,  O  Lord  our  God 

38.  5.  the  king  is  not  Ae  that  can  do  any  thing 
48.  26.  and  Ae  also  shall  be  in  derision 
F.irk.  :iH.  17.  art  thou  Ae  of  whom  1  have  spoken? 
Hab.  1.  13.  the  man  that  is  more  righteous  than  Ac 
Jtfut.  2.  2.  where  is  Ac  that  is  born  kingofthe  Jews  ? 

3.  3.  this  is  Ae  that  was  spoken  of  by  the  prophet 

11.  3.  art  thou  Ae  that  sliould  come?/-«Af  7. 19,20. 

12.  30.  Ac  that  is  not  with  me  is  against  me,  and  Ac 

that  gathere'h  not  with  me,  Luke  11.  23. 

22.42.  what  think  ye  of  Christ?  whose  son  is  Ae? 

24.26.  Ac  is  in  the  desert,  Ae  is  in  the  secret  chamb. 

26. 48.  the  same  is  Ac.  hold  him  fast,  Mark  14.  44. 
Mark  12.  .32.  and  theie  is  none  other  but  Ae 
Luke  10.22.  Ae  to  whom  the  Son  will  reveal  him 

11.  7.  and  Ae  from  within  shall  answer  and  say 

20.  2.  who  is  Ae  that  gave  thee  this  authority  ? 

22.  27.  he  that  sitteth  at  meat,  or  Ac  that  serveth 

24.  (!.  they  said,  Ae  is  not  here,  but  is  risen 
21.  we  trusted  Ac  should  have  redeemed  Israel 
.John  1.  1.5.  this  was  Ae  of  whom  I  spake,  30. 

4.  26.  Jesua  saith,  I  that  speak  to  thee,  am  Ae 

7. 1 1 .  where  is  Ac?||2').is  not  this  Ac  they  seek  to  k.? 

8.  24.if  ye  believe  not  that  I  am  Ae,  ye  shall  die 
28.  linn  shall  ye  know  that  I  am  Ae 

9.  8.  tli'-y  said,  is  not  this  Ae  that  sat  and  begged  ? 

9.  some  said,  this  is  Ac,  but  Ae  said,  I  am  Ac 
30.  who  is  Ac,  Lord  ||  37.  Ae  that  talketh  with  thee 

13.  19.  I  tell  you  that  ye  may  believe  that  I  am  Ac 
Jlcts  3.  10.  they  knew  it  was  Ae  who  sat  for  alms 

7.  38.  this  is  Ac  that  was  in  the  church  in  wildern. 
9.21.  is  not  this  he  that  destroyed  them  who  called 

10.  21.  Peter  said,  I  am  Ac  whom  ye  seek 

42.  Ac  that  was  ordained  of  God  to  be  the  juilgc 
13.  2.').  whom  think  ye  that  I  am  ?  I  am  not  Ac 
Rom.  2.  28.  Ac  is  not  a  Jew  that  is  one  outwardly 
™).  but  Ac  is  a  Jew  that  is  one  inwardly 
M.  18.  Ac  that  in  these  things  serveth  Christ 

1  Cor.  10.  22.  are  we  stionger  than  Ae  ? 

2  Cor.  10.7.  of  himself  think  this  again,  that  as  Ae 

is  Christ's,  eicn  so  are  we  Christ's 

1  TAcs«.5.24. faithful  is  Ac  that  calhrth  you, will  do  it 

2  TAe*.«.  2.  7.  Ac  v»ho  Intleth,  will  let  till  Ac  he  taken 
//eft.  12.  7.  what  son  is  Ac  the  father  chaslencth  not? 

10.  but  Ac  f^ifoiir  profit,  that  we  might  be  partak. 
1  Pet.  1.  1.1.  as  Ac  which  hath  called  you  is  holy 

1  ./()An  1.  7.  if  wo  walk  in  light,  as  Ar  is  in  the  light 
2.28.wlun  he  shall  appear,  we  may  havcconliden. 

3.  7.  is  righteous,  even  as  Ac  is  rlphleous 
24.  dwellelh  in  liim,  and  Ac  in  him,  4.  15. 

4.  4.  greatei*;s  Ae  that  is  In  you,  than  Ae  in  world 
17.  because  as  he  is  so  are  we  in  thin  world 

5.  12.  Ae  that  hath  the  Son,  haih  life  ;  and  Ac  that 

halh  not  the  Son  of  God,  hath  not  life 

3  .John  11.  follow  not  evil,  Ac  that  doeth  good  is  of 

God ;  Iu  that  docth  evil  halh  not  *oen  Gud 


HEA 

/?CB.20. 6.  holy  is  Ae  that  hath  part  In  first  reiurree. 
22.  11.  Ae  that  is  unjust,  Ae  that  is  filthy 
See  Ulesukd,  Did,  Saith. 
V  HEAD. 

The  head  is  the  uppermost  and  chief  part  of  th* 
body.  Jl  is  sometimes  taken  for  the  whole  man 
Prov.  10.  6,  Blessings  arc  upon  the  head  of 
the  just,  that  is,  upon  their  persons.  And  God 
says  of  the  wicked,  I  will  recompense  their  way 
upon  their  head,  F.zek.  9.  10.  Jt  is  taken  also 
fur  the  life.  Dan.  1.  10,  Ye  shall  make  ma 
endanger  my  head  to  the  king.  Jt  also  signijict 
a  chief  or  capital  city.  Isa.  7.  8,  'I'he  head  of 
Syria  is  Damascus.  Hdtnotea  a  chief  or  prin- 
cipal member  in  any  society.  Ua.  9.  14,  15. 
The  Lord  will  cut  off  from  Israel  head  and 
tail.  The  ancient  and  honourable,  he  is  the 
head.  It  is  said.  Gen.  3.  15,  The  sead  of  the 
woman  shall  bruise  the  serpent's  head  ;  that  is, 
Christ  Jesus,  the  blessed  seed  of  the  woman, 
shall  ovrrt/irow  the  power,  policy,  and  work* 
of  the  decil. 

Head  ^;,-  taken  for  one  that  hath  rule  andpre-emi- 
nence  over  others.  Thus  God  is  the  head  of 
Christ,  as  Mediator ;  from  him  he  derives  all 
his  dignity  and  authority  :  Christ  is  the  only 
spiritual  Im&i  of  his  church,  both  in  respect  of 
eminence  and  influence ;  he  communicates  life, 
miilinn,  and  strength  to  every  believer:  also  the 
husband  is  the  head  of  his  wife,  because  by 
God^s  ordinance  he  is  to  rule  over  her,  Gen.  3. 
10.  Also  in  regard  of  pre-eminence  of  sex, 
1  Pet.  3.7.  and  excellency  of  knowledge,  1  Cor. 

14.  35.  The  apostle  mentions  this  subordination 
of  persons  in  1  Cor.  11.  3,  Put  I  would  have 
you  know,  that  the  head  of  every  man  ii 
Christ :  and  the  head  of  the  woman  is  the  man  ; 
and  the  head  of  Christ  is  God. 

Thericcrin  Paradise  jrasdii'idcd  into  four  heads, 
into  four  springs,  four  branches.  Gen  2.  10. 
The  stone  which  the  builders  rejected,  was 
made  the  head  of  the  corner,  Psal.  118.  22,  it 
was  the  first  in  the  angle,  whether  it  were  dis- 
posed at  the  top  of  that  angle  to  adorn  and 
crown  it,  or  at  the  bottom  to  support  it.  This 
in  the  JVcic  Testament  is  applied  to  Christ,  who 
is  the  strength  and  beauty  of  the  church,  to 
unite  the  several  parts  thereof,  namely,  both 
Jews  and  Gentiles,  together.  Thou  hast  caused 
men  to  ride  over  our  heads,  Psal.  G6.  12.  Thou 
hast  given  us  masters  who  use  us  like  slaves 
yea,  like  beasts  to  carry  their  burdens.  The 
Lord  shall  make  thee  the  head,  and  not  the  tail, 
Deut.  28.  13.  Thou  shall  be  always  masttr, 
and  never  in  subjection. 

Head  IS  taken  sometimes  for  poison,  because  the 
Hebrew  word  Rosch,  which  signifies  head, si^- 
vifies  likewise  poison.  Job  20.  16,  He  shall 
suck  the  poison,  or  head  of  asps.  In  times  of 
mowning,  they  covered  their  heads,  they  cut  aid 
plucked  off  their  hair;  I  will  bring  baldnesa 
upon  every  head,  soys  the  prophet,  speaking  of 
calamitous  times,  Amos  8. 10.  Onthe  contrary, 
in  prosperity  thry  anointed  their  heads  with 
swtet  oils.  Eccl.  9.  8,  Let  thy  head  lack  no 
ointment.  To  shake  the  head  at  one,  is  ages- 
tare  of  contempt  and  insult.  Psal.  22.  7, 
They  shoot  out  the  lip,  they  shake  the  head. 

<7cn.3. 15.  It  shall  bruise  thy  A.  thou  bruise  his  hee] 
40.  13.  yet  Pharaoh  shall  lift  up  thy  A.  19. 
49.  26.  blessings  shall  be  on  the  A.  of  Joseph, 
and  on  the  top  of  the  A.  of  him,  Drut.33.  16. 

Ezod.  29.  10.  .\aron  and  his  sons  shall  put  their 
hands  upon  A.  of  the  bullock, /.CD.  4.  4.  |  H.14. 

15.  put  bauds  on  A.  oftheram,  19.  /,«'.  8.  18,22. 
Lev.  1.4.  shall  put  handon  the  A.  of  burnt-nffering 

3.  2.  shall  lay  his  hand  on  the  A.  of  his  olTerlng 
4.29.  lay  his  band  on  the  A.  of  sin-offering,  33. 
13.  44.  he  is  leprous,  his  plague  is  in  his  A. 
45.  his  clothes  shall  be  rent,  and  his  A.  bare 
21.  5.  they  shall  not  make  baldness  on  their  A. 

10.  sliall  not  uncover  his  A.  nor  ri'nd  his  clothes 
A'urn.5.  18.  the  priest  shall  uncover  the  woman's  A> 

O..*!.  there  shall  no  raiior  come  on  thaNazarito'g  A. 
7.  the  consirration  of  his  God  is  on  his  A. 

9.  then  he  shall  shave  his  A.  IH.  Drut.  21.  12. 

11.  and  he  shall  hallow  his  A.  that  same  day 
./(<.«A.  2.  19.  hill  blood  be  on  his  A.  blond  on  our  k. 
.ludir.  5.  26.  she  smote  ofTSIsera's  A.  when  she  had 

13,5.  sinit  bear  a  son,no  roKor  shall  come  <m  his  A. 

1  .SVim.  17..57.GoIiath'sA.||3l. 9. cutotf Saul's* 
25.  39.  the  wickedness  of  Nabal  on  bis  own  A. 
28.  2.  I  will  make  theo  keeper  of  my  A.  for  ever 

2.">(7m.1.2.a  mnncame,  and  earth  u,inii  his  A  l.*!.  32 

10.  thy  blood  bo  upon  thy  A.  1  AV»iM  ?    :>7. 

3.  8  .Miner  was  »  roth,  and  sind,  am  1  a  doy's  A.  * 
29.  let  it  rest  on  the  A.  of  Joah,  nn<l  on  his  hoUSfl 

16.  9.  let  me  go  over,  and  take  off  his  A. 

2  Kings  2.  3.  take  thy  master  fioni  thy  A.  to  doT  * 

4.  19.  and  be  said  unlo  hia  fulhtr  my  A-  my  f^ 


HEA 

S  Kings  6.  31.  tf  the  A.of  Elisha  ihall  stand  on  hhn 

"32.  8on  of  a  murderer  sent  to  take  away  my  A. 

19.21.  the  virgin  despised  thee,  the  daughter  ol' Je- 
rusalem hath  shaken  her  h.  at  thee,  Isa.  37. 22 

25.  27.  did  lift  up  the  h.  of  Jehoiachin,  Jer.  52. 31. 
2  C'Ar.  t).  23.  by  recompensing  his  way  on  his  A, 
Ezra  9.  tj.  our  iniquities  are  increased  over  our 
JVeA.  4.  4.  and  turn  their  reproach  on  their  own  A. 
Eslk.  9.  25.  his  device  should  return  on  his  own  A 
Job  1.  20.  Job  arose,  shaved  his  A.  and  fell  down 

10.  15.  if  righteous,  yet  will  not  I  liil  up  my  A. 

It).  4.  and  1  could  shake  my  A.  at  you 
Psal.  3.  3.  my  glory  and  the  lifter  up  of  mine  A. 

7.  16.  lis  mischief  shall  return  on  his  own  A. 

22.  7  they  shoot  out  the  lip,  they  shake  the  A. 

23.  5.  thou  anointe^my  A.  with  oil,  cup  runneth 
27.  6  now  shall  my  A.  be  lifted  up  above  enemies 
3fi.  4.  mine  iniquities  are  gone  over  mine  A. 
44.  14.  a  shaking  of  the  A.  among  the  people 
60.  7.  Ephraim  is  the  strength  of  my  A.  108.  8. 

68.21.  God  shall  wound  the  A.  of  his  enemies 
83.  2.  they  that  hale  thee,  have  lift  up  the  A. 
110.  7.  therefore  shall  lie  lift  up  the  A. 

140.  9.  as  for  the  A.  of  those  that  compass  me 

141.  5.  be  an  oil,  which  shall  not  break  my  A. 
Prov.  10.  6.  blessings  are  on  the  A.  of  the  just 

11.26.  blessing  on  the  A.  of  him  which  selleth  corn 

25.22.  shall  heap  coals  of  fire  on  his  A.  /iom.12.20. 
Eccl.  2.  14.  the  wise  man's  eyes  are  in  his  A. 
Cant.  2.  6.  his  left  hand  is  under  niy  A.  8.  3. 

5.  2.  my  A.  is  filled  with  dew,  my  locks  with  drops 
11.  his  A.  as  most  fine  gold  ||  7.5.  thy  A.asCarmel 

Tsa.  1.  5.  the  whole  h.  is  sick  and  the  heart  faint 
51.  11.  everlasting  joy  shall  be  on  their  A. 

58.  5.  is  it  to  bow  down  his  A.  as  a  bulrush  1 

59.  17.  he  put  on  a  helmet  of  salvation  on  his  A. 
Jer.  2.  37.  go  forth,  and  thine  hands  on  thy  A. 

9.  1.  O  that  my  A.  were  waters,  mine  eyes  tears 
23.  19.  fallgrievouslyontheA.  of  wicked,  .30.23 

Ezek.  9.  10.  recompense  their  way  on  their  A. 
29. 18.  every  A.  was  made  bald,  shoulder  peeled 

Dan.  2.  38.  O  king,  thou  art  this  A.  of  gold 

Joel  3.  4.  return  your  recompense  on  your  A.  7. 

.^mos  2. 7.  that  pant  after  dust  on  the  A.  of  the  poor 

8.  10.  and  I  will  bring  baldness  on  every  A. 

9.  1.  he  said,  cut  them  in  the  A.  all  of  them 
Zeck.  1.  21.  so  that  no  man  did  lift  up  his  A. 

6.  11.  then  set  the  crowns  on  the  A.  of  Joshua 
Mat.  5.  36.  neither  shall  thou  swear  by  thy  A. 

27.  30.  and  they  smote  him  on  the  A.  Mark  15.  19. 
Mark  6.  24.  she  said,  the  A.  of  John  the  Baptist 
iMke  7.  46.  my  A.  with  oil  thou  didst  not  anoint 
Jokn  13.  9.  not  feet  only,  but  also  my  hand^j  and  A 

1  Cor.  11.  4.  his  A.  covered,  dishonoureth  his  A. 
10.  the  woman  ought  to  have  power  on  her  A. 

12.  21.  the  A.  to  the  feet,  I  have  no  need  of  you 
Eph.  L  22.  put  all  things  under  his  feet,  and  gave 
him  as  A.  to  the  church,  4. 15.  Col.  1.  18. 
Col.  2.  19.  not  holding  the  A.  from  which  the  body 
fteo.l9.12.eyestlame  of  fire, and  his  A.manycrowns 
See  Beard,  Bald,  Bow,  Bowed,  Cover, 
Covered,  Crowk. 

^le-HEAD. 
Deut.  19.  5.  and  the  axe-h.  slippeth  from  the  helve 

2  Kings  6.  5.  axe-h.  fell  into  the  water,  and  he  cried 

Bed's  HEAD. 
Oen.  47.  31.  Israel  bowed  himself  on  the  bed's-h. 

Spear's-HEAD. 
ISam.n.  7.S.-A.  weighed  600  shekel3,2  Sam.21.16. 

he.Id-stone. 

Psal.  118.22.  is  become  the  h.-slone  of  the  corner 
Zech.  4.  7.  bring  forth  the  h.-stone  with  shoutings 

HEAD  of  the  comer. 
Mat.  21.  42.  is  becop^e  the  A.  of  the  corner,  Mark 
12.  10.  r.uke  20.  17.  .^cts  4.  11.  1  Pet.  2.7. 
HEAD,  for  Ruler,  Governor, 
^um.  17. 3.  one  rod  shall  be  for  the  A.  of  the  house 
SJ5.  15.  he  was  A.  over  a  people  of  a  chief  house 
Devt.'iS.  13.  Lord  willmake  theethe  A.  not  thetail 
44.  he  shall  be  the  A.  and  thou  shall  be  the  tail 
Josh.  22. 14.  each  one  a  A.  of  house  of  their  fathers 
Judff.  10.  18.  he  shall  be  h.  over  all  Gilead,  11.8. 
11.9.  shall  I  beyour4.?||ll.the  people  made  liimA. 
1  .Sam.  15.  17.  wast  thou  not  made  the  A.  of  Israel  ? 
2Sam.22.  44.  thou  hast  kept  me  to  be  A. PsaM8.43. 
1  Chron.  11.  t6.  who  sniiteth  Jebusites,  shall  be  A. 
29.  11.  and  thou  art  exalted  as  A.  above  all 
Isa.  7. 8.  A.  of  Damascus  is  Rezin,  A.  ofSamaria,  9. 
9.  14.  Lord  will  cut  off  from  Israel  A.  and  tail 
1.5.  the  ancient  and  honourable,  he  is  the  A. 
19.  1.5.  nor  work  which  A',  or  tail,  or  rush,  may  do 
J-r.  22.  6.  thou  art  Gilead  to  me,  A.  of  Lebanon 
ffos.  1.  11.  they  shall  appoint  themselves  one  A. 
.Wn6.3.13.  woundedsttheA.  out  of  house  of  wicked 
14.  thou  didst  strike  through  the  A.  of  his  villages 
1  Cor.  11.3.  that  the  A.of  every  man  is  Christ,  the  A. 
of  the  woman  is  the  man,  the  A.  of  Christ  is  God 
Eph.^.  23.  the  husband  is  the  A.  of  the  wife,  even  as 
Christ  is  A.  of  the  church,  and  Saviour  of  body 
Coi.2.10.who  it  the  A.  of  all  principality  and  power 
207 


HEA 

HEAD,  for  Top,  Chief. 
Psal.  137.  1 6.  prefer  Jerusalem  beforoA.  of  my  Joy 
Isa.  28.  I.  which  are  on  the  A.  offal  valleys,  4. 
51.  20.  they  lie  at  the  A.  of  all  the  streets 
Ezek.  16.  25.  built  high  places  at  A.  of  the  way 
21.  19.  choose  it  at  the  A.  of  the  way  to  the  city 
21.  king  of  Babylon  stood  at  the  A.of  two  ways 
HEAD  with  hair  or  hairs. 
/-<•». 13.40.  the  man  whose  hair  is  fallen  offhis  A.41. 
14.  9.  the  leper  shall  shave  all  his  hair  oti'his  A. 
JVum.  6.  5.  let  the  locks  of  the  Aajrof  his  A.  grow 
18.  and  shall  takethe  Aat'r  of  A.  of  his  separation 
Judg.  16.  2!4.lhe  hair  of  his  A.  began  to  grow  again 
1  .bam.  14.  45.  not  a  Aui'rof  his  A.shall  fall  to  ground 
'iSam.  14.26.  weighed  Aaj'rof  his  A.  at  200  shekels 
Ezra  9.3. 1  plucked  off  the  hair  of  my  A.  and  beard 
Ps.  40. 12.  they  are  more  than  hairs  of  my  A.  69.  4. 
Cant.  7.  5.  and  the  hair  of  thine  A.  like  purple 
Dan.  3.  27.  nor  was  a  hair  of  their  A.  singed 

7.  9.  the  hair  of  his  A.  like  the  pure  wool 
.l/aM0.30.Aai>s  of  your  A.are  numbered, />uAel2.7. 
Luke  7.  38.  did  wipe  them  with  hairs  of  her  A.  44. 

21.  18.  there  shall  not  a  hair  of  your  A.  perish 
Acts  27.  34.^101  a.  hair  tall  from  the  A.  of  any 
Rev.l.li.  his  A.  and  his  Aai'rs  were  white  like  wool 

Boary  HEAD. 
Lev.  19.  32.  thou  shall  rise  before  the  hoary  A. 

HEADBANDS. 
Isa.  3.  20.  Lord  will  take  away  the  A.  and  tablets 

HEADY. 
2  Tim.  3.  4.  for  men  shall  be  A.  high-minded 

HEADLONG. 
Tob  5.  13.  the  counsel  of  the  froward  is  carried  A. 
Luke  4.  29.  that  they  might  cast  him  down  A 
Jicts  1. 18.  and  falling  A.  he  burst  asunder  in  midst 

HEADS. 
Gen.  43.  28.  they  bowed  down  their  A.  Ezod.  4. 31. 
Lev.  10.  6.  uncover  not  your  A.  lest  ye  die 
.losh.  7.  6.  and  put  dust  upon  their  A.  Job  2.  12. 
.fudg.  8.  28.  so  that  they  lifted  up  their  A.  no  more 
9.  57.  all  the  evil  did  God  render  upon  their  A. 
1  Sam.  29.  4.  should  it  not  be  with  the  A.  of  these 
1  Kings  20.  31.  let  us,  I  pray,  put  ropes  on  our  A. 
32.  put  ropes  on  their  A.  and  came  to  the  king 
'i  Kings  10.6.  take  ye  the  A.  of  your  master's  sons 

8.  they  have  brought  the  A.  of  the  king's  sons 
1  Chron.  12.  f  19.  he  will  fall  to  Saul  on  our  h. 
Psal.  24. 7.  lift  up  your  A.  O  ye  gates,  and  be  lift,  9. 

66. 12.  thou  hast  caused  men  to  ride  over  our  A. 

74. 13.  thou  brakest  the  A.  of  the  dragons  in  waters 
14.  thou  brakest  the  A.  of  leviathan  in  pieces 

109.  25.  they  looked  on  nie,  they  shaked  their  A. 
Isa.  15.  2.  on  all  their  A.  shall  be  baldness 
35.10. to  Zion  songs, and  everlasting  joy  on  their  A. 
Jer.  14.  3.  they  were  ashamed  and  covered  their  A. 
4.  plowmen  were  ashamed,  they  covered  their  A. 
Ezek.  7.  18.  and  baldness  shall  be  on  all  their  A. 
11.21. Iwill  recompense  their  way  on  their  A.22.31. 
32.  27.  they  laid  their  swords  under  their  A. 
44.  18.  shall  have  linen  bonnets  on  their  A. 

20.  nor  shall  they  shave,  they  shall  poll  their  A. 

Mat.  27.39.  reviled,  wagging  their  A.  Mark  15.29. 

Luke  21.  28.  then  look  up,  and  lift  up  your  A. 

.^cts  18.  6.  he  said,  your  blood  be  upon  your  own  A. 

Rev.  9.  7.  and  on  their  A.  were  as  it  were  crowns 

19.  their  tails  were  like  to  serpents,  and  had  A. 

13.  1.  1  saw  a  beast  having  seven  A.  and  on  his  A. 

3. 1  saw  oneof  his  A.as  it  were  wounded  Xo  death 

17.  9.  the  seven  A.  are  seven  mountains,  on  whicli 

18.  19.  they  cast  dust  on  their  A.  and  cried,  alas! 
HEADS,  for  Governors. 

Exod.  18.  25.  and  made  them  A.  over  the  people 
JVum.  1. 16.  they  were  A.  of  thousands  in  Israel 

25.  4.  take  all  the  A.  of  the  people  and  hang  them 
.7osh.  22.  21.  Reuben  and  Gad  answered  the  A. 

23.2.Joshua  called  for  their  A.  and  for  their  judges 

1  Chron.  12.  32.  the  A.  of  Israel  were  two  hundred 
2CAro?i.  5.  2.  Solomon  assembled  all  the  h.  to  bring 

28.  12.  certain  of  the  A.  of  Ephraiin  stood  up 

Psal.l\0. 6.  shall  wound  the  A.ovormany  countries 

Isa.  29.  1 10-  the  prophets  and  A.  hath  he  covered 

Mic.  3. 1.  hear,  O  A.  of  Jacob,  and  princes  of  Fsr.  9. 

11.  A.  thereof  judge  for  reward,  and  priests  teach 

See  Fathers. 

HEAL. 

JVum.  12.  13.  A.  her  now,  O  God,  I  beseech  thee 

Dent.  32.  39.  I  kill  and  make  alive,  I  wound,  I  A. 

2  Kings  20.  5.  I  will  A.  thee,  and  add  to  thy  days 

8.  what  shall  be  the  sign  that  the  L.  will  A.  me'? 
2  CAr.  7. 14. 1  will  forgive  their  sin,  and  will  A.  land 
Psal.  6.  2.  O  Lord,  A.  me,  for  my  bones  are  vexed 

41.  4.  A.  my  soul,  for  I  have  sinned  against  thee 
60.  2.  A.  the  breaches  thereof,  for  it  shakcth 

Eccl.  3.  3.  a  time  to  kill,  and  a  time  to  A. 

fsa.  19. 22.  shall  smite  and  A.  it, and  he  shall  A.them 
57.  18.  I  have  seen  his  ways,  and  will  A.  him,  19. 

.Jer.  3.  22.  return,  and  I  wiil  A.  your  blackslidings 
17.  14.  A.  me,  O  Lord,  and  I  shall  be  healed 
30.  17.  I  will  A.  thee  of  thy  wounds,  saith  the  L. 

/,am.2.13.  for  thy  broach  ia  great,  who  can  A.  theel 


HEA 

ffos.  5.  13.  yet  could  he  not  A.  you,  fior  cure  you 
6.  I.  let  us  return,  he  hath  torn,  and  vsill  A.  us 
14.  4. 1  will  A.  their  backsliding,  1  will  love  freely 
Zech.  11. 16.  he  shall  not  A.  that  that  is  broken 
Mat.  8.  7.  Jesus  saith,  I  will  come  and  A.  him 

10.  1.  to  A.  all  manner  of  sickness,  Mark  3.  15. 

8.  A.  the  sick,  cleanse  the  lepers,  Luke  9.2.  j  10.9. 
12.10.  is  it  lawful  to  A.  on  sabbath-day7  I,vkeii.3. 
13. 15.  I  should  A.  them,  John  12.40.  .,?cts 28.27. 

^/arA3.2.whcther  he  would  A.on  sabbath, y.ut(;6.7. 
Lukc4.lS.bo  hath  sent  me  to  A.  the  broken-hearted 
23.  ye  will  surely  say,  physician,  A.  thyself 
5.17.the  power  of  the  Lord  was  present  to  A.  them 
7.3.beseeching  that  he  would  come  and  A.hisserv. 
John  A.  47.  that  he  would  come  down  and  A.  his  son 
Mcts  4.  30.  by  stretching  forth  thine  hand  to  A. 

HEALED. 
Gen.  20.  17.  God  A.  Abimelech  and  his  wife 
J'';xo(i.21.19.  he  shall  cause  him  to  be  thoroughly  A, 
Lev.  13.  18.  the  bile  is  A.  ||  37.  the  scall  is  A. 
14.  3.  and  if  the  plague  of  leprosy  be  A.  48. 
/Jc«r.28.27.with  itch,  whereof  thou  canst  not  be  A. 

1  Sam.  6.  3.  return  on  offering,  then  he  shall  beA. 
~Kings2. 21.  have  A.  the  waters||22.  waters  were  A. 

8.  2!t.  king  Joram  went  to  be  A.  in  Jezreel 

9. 15.  Jorain  was  returned  to  be  A.  2  CAron.  22.6. 

2  Chron.  30.  20.  the  L.  hearken,  d  and  A.  the  people 
PsaJ.  30.  2.  I  cried  to  thee,  and  thou  hast  A.  me 

107.  20.  he  sent  his  word,  and  A.  them 
Isa.  6.  10.  lest  they  see,  and  convert,  and  be  A. 

53.5.he  was  bruised,  and  with  his  stripes  weareA. 
Jer.  6.  14.  they  have  A.  the  hurt  slightly,  8.  11. 

15. 18. my  wound  incurable,which  refuseth  to  beA. 

17.  14.  heal  mc,  O  Lord,  and  I  shall  be  A. 

51.8.  howl  tor  her,take  balm,ifsobeshemay  be  A. 

9.  we  would  have  A.  Babylon,  but  she  is  not  A. 
^2eA.30.21.  and  lo,  it  shall  not  be  bound  up  to  be  A. 

34.  4.  neither  have  ye  A.  that  which  was  sick 
47.8.  brought  forth  into  sea,lhe  waters  shall  beA.9. 

11.  and  the  marishes  thereof  shall  not  be  A. 
Hos.  7.  1.  when  I  would  have  A.  Isr.  then  iniquity 

11.  3.  but  they  knew  not  that  I  A.  ihem 
Mat.4.  24.  those  that  had  the  palsy,  and  he  A.  them 

8. 8.  speak,  and  my  servant  shall  be  A.  Luke  1. 7. 

12.15.rnuUitudes  followed  liim,  he  A.  them,  14. 14. 
Mark  5.  23.  that  she  may  be  A.  and  she  shall  live 
Luke  8.  43.  had  spent  all,  nor  could  be  A.  of  any 

13. 14. therefore  come  and  beA.  and  not  on  sabbath 

17.  15.  when  he  saw  that  he  was  A.  turned  back 

22.  51.  and  he  touched  his  ear,  and  A.  him 
John  5.  13.  he  that  was  A.  wist  not  who  it  wag 
Jicts  4.  14.  and  beholding  the  man  who  was  A. 

5.  16.  and  they  were  A.  every  one 

14.  9.  and  perceiving  that  he  had  faith  to  be  A. 

28.  8.  Paul  prayed,  and  A.  the  father  of  Puhliug 
Heh.  12. 13.  be  out  of  the  way,  but  let  it  rather  be  A. 
Jam.  5.  16.  pray  one  for  another,  that  ye  may  beA. 

1  Pet.  2.  24.  by  whose  stripes  ye  were  A. 
Rev.  13.  3.  and  his  deadly  wound  was  A.  12. 

HEALER. 
Isa.  3.  7.  shall  swear,  saving,  I  will  not  be  a  A. 

HEALETH. 
Exod.  15.  26.  for  I  am  the  Lord  that  A.  thee 
Psal.  103.  3.  bless  the  Lord  who  A.  all  Ihy  diseases 
147.  3.  he  A.  the  broken  in  heart,  and  bindeth  up 
Isa.  30.  26.  and  he  h.  the  stroke  of  their  wound 
HEALING,  Substantive. 

2  CAron.24.  +  13.  and  the  A.  went  up  upon  the  work 
36. 1 16.  wrath  of  Lord  arose,  till  there  was  no  A. 

Prov.  15.  t  4.  the  A.  of  the  tongue  is  a  tree  of  life 
.ler.  14.  19.  there  is  no  A.  for  us,  the  time  of  A. 
Dan.  4.  t  27.  if  it  may  be  a  A.  of  thv  error 
JVaA.3.19.there  is  noA.of  thybruise,woundgrievoui 
jWa/.4.2..<hall  Sun  ofright. arise  with  A. in  his  winga 
f.uke^.  11.  and  he  healed  them  that  had  need  of  A. 
.^cts  4.22.  on  whom  this  miracleof  A.  was  shewed 

1  Cor.  12.  9.  is  given  to  another  the  gift  of  A.  28. 
30.  have  all  the  gifls  of  A.  ?  do  all  Interpret  ■? 

Rev.  22.  2.  leaves  of  the  tree  were  for  A.  of  nationa 

HEALING. 
.ler.  30. 13.  none  to  plead,  thou  hast  no  A.  medicins 
Mat.  4.  23.  want  about  A.  all  manner  of  sickness 
A«*c9. 6.  preaching  the  gospel,  and  A.  every  where 
Jicts  10.  38.  A.  all  that  were  oppressed  of  the  devil 

HEALTH. 
Gen.  43.  23.  our  father  is  in  good  A.  he  is  yet  alive 

2  Sam.  20.  9.  Joab  said,  art  thou  in  A.  my  brotherl 
Psal.  38.  t  3.  neither  k  there  any  A.  in  my  bones 

42.  11.  who  is  the  A.  of  my  countenance,  4.3.  5. 
67.2.lhy  savingA.maybe  known  among  \\\  nationg 
Prov.  3.  8.  it  shall  beA.  to  thy  navel,  and  marrow 
4.  22.  for  they  are  A.  to  all  their  flesh 

12.  18.  but  the  tongue  of  the  wise  is  A. 

13.  J7.  but  a  faithful  ambassador  is  A. 
16.  24.  sweet  to  the  soul,  and  A.  to  the  honee 

Isa.  58.  8.  thy  A.  shall  spring  forth  speedily 
.ler.  8.  15.  looked  for  a  time  of  A.  behold  trouble 
22.  why  is  not  the  A.  of  my  people  recovered  ^ 
30. 17.  fori  willrestore  A.  unto  thee,  and  hwil  tijK 
33.  0.  behold,  I  will  bring  it  A.  and  cur* 


HEA 

tfets  27.  34  Jtakc  some  meat,  for  this  is  for  your  A. 
3  Jokn  V!.  liinyest  be  in  A.  us  Itiy  buuI  iirosperetli 

HEAP,  HubstanUoe. 
Oen.  31.  4G.  tliey  made  a  A.  ami  did  eat  on  the  A. 
5i'.  this  A.  bo  wilneMi,  and  Ihis  pilhir  be  wUiieBs 
JEi<;J.lJ.ti.waterrgulhcred,lhe  tloodssiood  upright 
as  a  A.  .^sA.  3.  13,  Iti.  I'sal.  33.  7.  |  -d.  J  3. 
Dtu-t.  13.  lb.  shall  be  a  A.  lor  ever,  nor  buiU  again 
^usA.  T.'iU.tliey  raised  over  him  a  great  A.  ot  oloiies 
ij.:id.  Joshua  burnt  Ai,  and  ma<ie  it  a  A.  lor  ever 
2U.  raise  on  the  king  ol  Ai  a  great  A.  ol  stones 
11.  1 13.  llie  citiis  that  stood  siiU  on  their  A. 
Jadcr.  15.  \  10.  wilh  uiejaw-buiieolan  ass,  a  A. 
Rulii  3.  7.  to  lie  down  at  the  end  of  the  A.  ol'  corn 
2  ium.  Id.  17.  they  laid  very  great  A.  on  Absalom 
Job  21.  T32.  yet  snail  he  wutcli  in  the  A. 

30.  t21.  he  will  not  stretchout  his  hand  to  the  A. 
Pruv.  21).  1  ti.  that  puttelh  a  precious  stone  in  a  A. 
CoMt-  7.  2.  lliy  belly  is  like  a  A.  of  wneat  set  about 
ito.  17.  1.  Damascus  sliall  be  a  ruinous  A. 

11.  harvest  shall  be  a  A.  in  the  day  of  grief 
25.  2.  for  thou  hast  made  of  a  city  a  A. 
Jtr.  30.  IS.  the  cily  shall  be  builded  on  her  own  A. 
49.  2.  and  Kabbah  shall  be  a  desolate  A. 
Mic  1.  t).  will  make  Samaria  as  a  A.  of  the  field 
J^tt4.3.15.didKt  walk  througlithe  A.  ol  great  waters 
Jia'  2   Hi.  when  one  came  to  a  A.  ol  "JU  measures 

HEAl*. 
Deal.  32.  23.  I  will  A.  mischiefs  upon  them 
Jvb  ItJ.  4.  1  could  A.  up  words  against  you 
27.  10.  though  he  A.  uj)  silver  as  the  dust 
aO.  13.  but  the  hypocrites  in  heart,  A.  up  wrath 
Pruu.  25. 2-J.  thou  slialt  A.  coals  of  tire,  Hum.  U.-JSi. 
Eccl.2.-Jii.lu  siuiiir  hegiveth  to  galher  and  to  A.  up 
i'ztfc.  24.  10.  A.  on  wood,  kindle  the  tire,  consume 
Hab.  1. 10.  for  they  shall  A.  dust  and  take  it 
27'i/«.4.3.  A.  lo  thems.  Ives  teachers,  having  itching 

HEAPED. 
ZecA.9.3.Tyrus  A.uii  silver  as  the  dust, and  fine  gold 
Jam.  5.  3.  ye  have  A.  treasure  together  for  last  days 

HEAPETH. 
Psal.  39.  6.  he  A.  up  riches,  and  knowethnot  who 
JJab.  2.  5.  and  he  A.  unto  hira  all  people 

HEAPS. 
Ezod.  8.  14.  Ihey  gathered  them  together  on  A. 
Judtr.  l.i.  16.  withtlie  jaw  bone  of  an  ass,  A.  on  A. 
2  JClngs  10.  8.  lay  ye  ihein  in  two  A.  at  eiiiering  in 
I'J.  25.  to  lay  waste  fenced  cities  into  ruinous  A. 
2  C/ir.  31.0.  liiey  brought  tithe,  and  laid  them  by  A. 

7.  in  the  third  month  they  began  to  lay  the  A. 

8.  when  the  princes  came  and  saw  the  A. 
JVcA.  4.  2.  will  they  revive  the  stones  out  of  the  A.  ? 
Job  15.28.  in  houses  which  are  ready  to  become  A. 
I'sal.  79.  1.  they  have  laid  Jerusalem  on  A. 

Jer.  9.  11.  and  I  will  make  Jerusalem  A.  2t).  18. 

31.  21.  set  thee  up  way-marks,  make  thee  high  A. 
50.2li.cai-t  P)abyloii  up  as  A. and  destroy  her  utterly 
51  37.  and  Bahyioii  shall  become  A. 

Jios.  12.  11.  the.r  altars  are  as  A.  in  the  furrows 
Mic.  3.  12.  and  Jerusalem  shall  become  A. 

HEAR 
Bignifios,  (I)  To  rccr.ir.c  a  voice  or  sound  by  the 
ear,  2::am.  15. 10.  (2)  To  grant  or  ansicer  uur 
prayer.  Psal.  110.  1, 1  love  the  Lord,  because 
he  hath  heard  my  voice.  It  is  often  used  in 
this  sense,  in  the  Psalms  and  elsewhere.  Jlnd 
God  is  said  not  to  hear,  when  lie  does  not  grant 
one's  desires.  John  9.  31,  We  know  that  God 
heareth  not  sinneis.  (3)  To  listen  to  (iod's 
words  only  wilh  the  outward  sense  of  the  car. 
Mat.  13.  19,  When  any  one  heareth  the  word 
of  the  kingdom  and  underslandeth  it  not.  Thus 
all  wicked  men  icho  arc  within  the  church  da 
hear  the  word ;  they  hear  the  sound  of  the  leords, 
but  then  thfy  haee  not  s»  much  as  a  notiomil 
knowledge  of  these  things,  or  else  regard  them 
not,  necer  consider,  or  lay  them  to  heart.  (4) 
To  yield  a  witting  a-tsent  in  our  minds  to  the 
word  of  God,  tcilh  a  firm  purpose  to  obey  it. 
John  8.  47,  He  that  is  of  God,  heareth  God's 
word  ;  he  believes  and  obeys  it.  -So  in  John 
10.  27,  Jly  sheep  hear  my  voice,  aafi  follow  me. 
It  is  used  often  in  this  sense.  IJout.  1.  43,  I 
spake  unto  you,  and  ye  would  not  hear;  ye 
would  not  ohiy  we.  1  Sam.  24.  0,  Wherefore 
hearcsl  thou  men's  wonls  ?  fVhy  bclieecst  thou 
what  mine  rni  mil  s  say  against  vie7  So  in 
MaL  17.  5.  This  in  my  bi'loveil  Son,  hear  hiin  ; 
believe  and  obey  him.  {!>)  'To  learn,  John  8. 
26,40, 1  speak  to  the  world  thiise  things  whiih  I 
have  heard  of  him;  llto.ir  things  which  hrhnlh 
taught  vtr,  which  he  hath  coinmunicalrd  to  me. 
(0)  7'ti  approve  uf,  and  rmbraer.  1  John  4.  5, 
They  speak  of  the  world,  and  the  world  heareth 
them  ;  these  seducers  and  fnUr  teachers  preach 
such  doctrines  as  may  grulifii  and  comply  with 
the  corrupt  affections  of  worldly  men;  and  Ihey 
greedily  hearken  lo^opprore,and  eiiibrare  such 
doctrines.  (7)  To  judge  and  determine. i^^nnt. 
16.  3,  Thv  matter*  are  good  und  right,  but  tliere 
SC8 


HEA 

is  no  man  deputed  of  the  king  to  hear  thee  ;  to 

determine  thy  cause  wiUijusticc  and  equity. 

Gen.  21.  0.  so  that  ail  that  A.  will  laugh  witli  me 

'£i.  0.  A.  us,  my  lord,  thou  art  a  mighty  prince 
Ej.od.  19.  y.  that  the  people  may  A.  when  1  speak 

32.  18.  but  the  noise  of  ttiem  that  sing  do  I  A. 
M'um.  10.  8.  A.  1  pray  you,  ye  sous  of  Eevi 

i3.  18.  rise  up,  Ualak,  and  A.  hearken  unto  me 

JO.  4.  and  her  father  A.  her  vow  and  her  bond 
iJeut.  1.  10.  A.  the  causes  between  your  brelhren 

4.  10.  and  1  will  make  them  A.  my  words 

5.  1.  A.  Israel  the  statutes  and  judgments,  6  3. 

1  9.  1.  1  iJU.  3.  Isa.  48. 1.  Mark  12.  29. 
27.  and  A.  all  that  the  Lord  our  God  doth  say 

12.  28.  A.  all  these  words  whicli  I  coiumand  thee 

13.  Vi.  if  thou  shalt  A.  say  in  one  of  thy  cities 
30.  12.  bring  it,  that  we  may  A.  it  and  do  it,  13. 
31. 12.  that  they  may  A.  and  lear  L.  13.  .kr.  0.  10. 
losh.  3.  9.  A.  the  words  of  the  Lord  your  God 

0.  5.  when  yeA.  the  sound  of  the  trumpet,  the  peo- 
ple shall  shout,  JVeA.  4.  2U.  Dan.  3.  5, 15. 
Judg.  5.  3.  A.  O  ye  kings,  give  ear,0  ye  princes 
10.  why  abodest,  to  A.  the  bleatings  of  the  Hocks? 

14.  13.  put  forih  thy  riddle,  that  we  may  A.  it 

1  Ham.  ij.  23.  for  1  A.  of  your  evil  dealings  by  all 
24.  nay,  my  sons,  it  is  no  good  report  that  I  A. 

15.  14.  and  the  lowing  of  the  oxen  which  I  A. 
10.  2.  how  can  I  go  7  if  Saul  A.  it,  he  will  kill  me 
25.24.A.tlie  words  of  thy  handmaid,  2  Sam.  20. 17. 
20.  19.  let  my  lord  the  king  A.  words  of  his  servant 

2  Sam.  14.  t  !"•  so  is  my  lord  the  king  to  A.  good 
15.3. there  is  no  man  deputed  of  the  king  to  A.  thee 

iO.  us  soon  as  ye  A.  the  sound  of  the  trumpet 

35.  thai  what  thing  soever  thou  shall  A. 

30.  ye  shall  send  to  me  every  thing  that  ye  A. 

17.  5.  and  let  us  A.  likewise  what  Hushai  saith 
20.  10.  a  wise  woman  cried  out  of  the  city,  A.  A. 
'J2.  45.  soon  as  they  A.  shall  be  obedient,  /'s.l8. 44. 

lA'(n^»3.  til.  asked  understanding  to  A. judgment 

4.  34.   to  A.  the  wisdom  of  Solomon,  10.  8,  24. 

2  Chron.  9.  7,  23.vl/u£.  12.  42.  LukeW.  31. 

8.  30.  then  A.  thou  in  heaven  and  forgive,  32,  34, 

30,  39,  43,  45,  49.  2  Lhron.  6.  21. 

18.  20.  they  called  on  Baal,  saying,  O  Baal,  A.  us 
•2Kings1.6.  made  the  hosttoA.  a  noiseof  chariots 

18.  28.  A.  the  word  of  the  great  king,  Isa.  30. 13. 

19.  10.  A.  the  words  of  Sennacherib,  Isa.  37.  17. 
lCAron.14. 15.  when  thou  shallA.  a  sound  of  going 
jVtA.l.  0.  that  thou  inayestA.  the  prayerof servant 

4.  4.  A.  O  our  G.for  we  are  despised,  turn  reproach 
8.  2.  and  all  that  could  A.  with  understanding 

.fob  5.  27.  A.  it,  and  know  thou  it  for  thy  good 
13.  17.  A.  diligently  my  speech  with  ears,  21.  2. 
27.  9.  will  God  A.  his  cry  1  ||  34.  2.  A.  my  words 
42.  4.  A.  I  beseech  thee,  and  I  will  speak 

Psal.  4.  1.  have  mercy  upon  me,  A.  my  prayer,  O 
God,  39.  12.  I  54.  2.  |  84.  8.  |  102.  1.  |  143. 1. 

20.  1.  the  Lord  A.  thee  in  the  day  of  trouble 

9.  save,  I^ord,  let  the  king  A.  us  when  we  call 
27.  7.  A.  O  Lord,  w hen  1  cry  with  my  voice 
30.  10.  A.  O  Lord,  and  have  mercy  upon  me 
49.1.  A.  this,  all  ye  people,  give  ear,  all  inhabitants 
50.  7.  A.  O  my  people,  and  I  will  speak,  81.  8. 
51.8. make  me  to  A.joy  and  gladness, that  the  bones 
59.  7.  swords  in  lips,  for  who,  say  they,  doth  A.? 
61.  1.  A.  my  cry,  O  God,  attend  to  my  prayer 
CO.  10.  come,  and  A.  all  ye  that  fear  God 
102. 20.  A.  groaning  of  the  prisoner,  to  loose  those 
138.  4.  Vhen  they  A.  the  words  of  thy  mouth 
143.8.cause  ineto  A.  thy  loving-kindness  in  morn. 
I'ror.  1.  8.  myson,  A.  the  instruction  of  thy  father 
4.  1.  A.  ye  children,  the  instruction  of  a  father 

10.  A.  O  my  son,  and  receive  my  sayings,  19.  20. 
y.  0.  A.  for  I  will  speak  of  excellent  things 

33.  A.  instruction,  and  be  wise,  refuse  it  not 
19.  27.  cease  to  A.  instruction,  that  causeth  to  err 

22.  17.  how  thine  ear,  A.  the  words  of  the  wise 
23. 19.  A. I  lion,  mv  son,  be  wise,  and  guide  thy  heart 

F.crl.  5.  1.  and  lie  more  ready  to  A.  than  to  give 
7.  5.  it  is  hotter  to  A.  the  rebuke  of  the  wise 

12.  13.  let  us  A.  the  conclusion  ofthemaltPf 
Can<.8. 13.  hearken  to  thy  voire,  cause  me  to  A.  it 
Isn.  1.  2.  A.  O  heavens,  and  give  ear,  O  earth 

fi.  9.  A.yc  indeed,  but  understand  not,  Jfarki.  12. 
18.  3.  and  when  ho  bloweth  a  trumpet,  A.  ye 

33.  13.  A.  ye  that  are  afar  ofFwImt  I  have  done 

34.  1.  lot  the  earth  A.  and  all  that  is  therein 

42.  18.  A.  vo  deaf  ||  23.  who  will  A.  for  time  to  come 

43.  9.  or  fct  thom  A.  and  say,  it  is  truth 
48.  14.  all  ye,  assemble  your.iolves  and  A. 

10.  A.  ye  this,  I  have  not  siiokcii  in  secret 
!>r>.  3.  A.  and  your  soul  shall  live,  .fnhn  5.  25. 
ler.  4.  21.  shall  I  A.  the  sound  of  the  trumpet  1 
0.  18.  therefore  A.  ye  nations  ||  19.  A.  O  earth 

11.  2.  A.  ve  the  words  of  ihls  covenant,  6. 
10.  forefathers,  who  refnsod  to  A.  13.  10. 

13.  15.  A.  ye,  give  ear,  for  the  Lord  halh  spoken 
Ifl.  2.  then  I  will  caufie  ihoo  to  A.  my  words 

23.  22.  and  had  cauied  my  people  to  A.  my  words 
38.  25.  if  the  princoi  A.  that  I  have  talked 


HEA 

Jrr.49.20.  therefore  A.  the  counsel  of  the  L(i.50.45 
in«i.  1.  18.  A.  I  pray  you,  all  people,  aid  behoM 
Kzek.'i.ti.  A. what  1  say  ||  3.l7.A.at  my  mouth,  33, 7 
3.  27.  he  tliatlK;arcih,let  him  A.  he  that  fni  beats 
13.19.  by  your  lying  lo  my  people,  ihat  A.  your  lieu 
33.  30.  A.  what  is  the  word  that  cuiiieth  forth 
31.  they  A.  thy  words,  but  will  not  do  them,  33 
IMn.  9.  17.  O  God,  A.  the  piayer  •!' thy  servant 

lil.  U  Lord,  A.  O  Lord,  forgive,  hearken  and  do 
Nus.5. 1 .  A  ye  this,  O  priests,  and  lu'arkeii,give  ear 
7i;t71.2.A.lhis,yeoldmen,and  give  car,  all  inhabit. 
^;«o»3.1.A.lhis  wd.L.liathspokeii,4.1.  |  5.1.  1  8.  4. 
Mic.  I.  2.  A.  all  ye  people,  hearken,  O  earth 
3.  1.  I  said,  A.  1  pray  you,  O  heads  of  Jacob,  9. 
0.2.  A.  ye,  f)  mountains  II 9.  A.  ye  the  rod  and  hiio 
J\rah.  3.' 19.  all  that  A.  the  btuil  of  thee  shall  clap 
Zeeh.  7.  12.  lest  they  should  A.  the  law  and  words 
Jitut.  11.  4.  shew  John  the  things  which  ye  A.  and 
5.  lame  walk, and  deaf  A.  Mark  7. 37.  Luhel.  22. 

13.  17.  to  A.  those  things  that  ye  A.  Luke  10.  24. 
I.').  10.  he  said  lothemultitudg  A.  and  understand 

17.  5.  this  is  my  beloved  Son,  A.  him,  Mark^.l. 
IH.  17.  he  neglect  to  A.  them,  to  A.  the  church 

j»/urA4.18.are  such  as  A.the  word,  20.y.uAt6.12,13. 

24.  take  heed  what  ye  A.  you  that  A.  more  given 
I.uke  5.  1.  pressed  on  him  to  A.  the  word  of  (Jod 

15.  multitudes  came  together  to  A.  and  bo  healed 
0.  17.  which  came  to  A.  him,  and  to  he  healed 

27.  I  say  lo  you  which  A.  love  your  enemies 

8.  18.  take  heed  therefore  how  ye  A.  whoever  hath 
21.  are  these  which  A.  the  word  and  do  il,11.38. 

9.  9.  but  who  is  this  of  whom  I  A.  such  things  1 

15. 1.  then  drew  near  publicans  a  iidsinn.  to  A.  him 

10.  2.  he  said,  how  is  it  thai  1  A.  this  of  thee? 
29.  they  have  .Moses  and  proph.  let  them  A.  them 

18.  0.  Loiil  said,  A.  what  the  unjust  judge  saith 
l'.l.  48.  the  [leople  were  very  attentive  to  A.  him 

21.  'is.  came  to  him  in  the  temple  for  to  A.  him 
John  5.  30.  as  I  h.  I  judge  ||  0.  60.  who  can  A.  it? 

7.  51.  doth  our  law  judge  a  man  before  it  A.  him 

9.  27.  wherefore  would  ye  A.  it  again 

10.3. the  -sheeji  A.his  voice,  and  he  calleth  by  name 

12.  47.  if  any  man  A.  my  words,  and  believe  not 

14.  24.  and  the  word  which  ye  A.  is  not  mine 
Jicis  2.  8.  how  A.  we  every  man  in  our  own  tongue 

33.  hath  shed  forth  this,  which  ye  now  see  and  k 

10.  22.  to  send  for  thee,  and  to  A.  words  of  Ihce 
33.  to  A.  all  things  that  are  comm.Tnded  thee 

13.  7.  and  desired  lo  A.  the  word  of  God 

44.  the  whole  city  came  together  to  A.  the  word 
13.  7.  Gentiles  by  my  mouth  should  A.  the  word 
17. 21.  either  to  tell  or  to  A.  some  new  thing 

19.  20.  j'e  A.  Paul  hath  turned  away  much  people 

22.  1.  A.  ye  my  defence  which  I  make  now  to  you 
24.  4.  that  thou  wouldcst  A.  us  of  thy  clomi-ncy 
2.5.  22.  Agrippa  said,  I  would  A.  the  man  myself 

28.  22.  hut  we  desire  to  A.  what  thou  thinkest 

1  Car.  11. 18. 1  hear  there  be  divisions  among  you 
Phil.  1.27.orcisobe  absent,!  may  A. of  your  affairs 

2  Thess.  3.  11.  we  A.  that  some  walk  disorderly 

1  7"im.4.10.  shalt  save  thyself  and  them  thai  A.  thee 

2  Tim.  4.  17.  and  that  all  the  Gentiles  might  A. 
./am.l.  19.  let  every  one  be  swift  to  A.  slow  to  S4)eak 
1  John  5. 15.  wc  know  thai  he  A.  ns,  what  we  ask 

3  ./(/An  4.  than  to  A.  my  children  walk  in  truth 
Hev.  1.  3.  blessed  that  A.  words  of  this  prophecy 

9.  20.  which  neither  can  see,  nor  A.  nor  walk 
Sec  Ear,  Kaup,  Voice. 
HEAR  mr. 
F.rod.  6.  12.  how  then  shall  Pharaoh  A.  me? 
1  Kings  IH.  :tT.  A.  we,  O  Ld.  A.  tne,  that  this  people 

1  Chriin.  2S.  2.  A.  me,  my  brethren,  and  my  people 

2  Chron.  13.4.  A.  mr,  ihim  Jeroboam,  and  all  Israel 

15.2.  A.  mi-,.\sall20.20.and  he  said,  A.  me,  O  Jud.ih 

29.  5.  A.  me,  ye  Lovites,  sanctify  now  yourselves 
,/oA  15.  17.  I  will  shew  thee,  A.  me,  I  will  declare 

31.  35.  O  thai  one  would  A.  mr,  my  desire  is 
Psal. 4.1.  A.mr  when  I  call,  OG.  of  my  righleousn. 
i;t.  3.  consider,  and  A.  vie,  O  Lord  my  God 
17.  6.  I  culled  up<m  theo,  for  thou  will  A.  >ne 
38.  16.  for  I  said,  A.  me,  lest  they  f  hoiiM  rejoice 
55.  2.  attend  unto  me,  and  A.  me,  I  mourn 
00.  5.  save  wilh  thy  right  hand,  and  A.  me 
69. 13.  OGod,  in  the  multitude  ofthymercy  A.  ml       0 

17.  for  I  am  in  trouble,  A.  me.  spoidilv,  143.  7.  ' 
Mie.  7.  7.  I  will  wait  for  God,  my  God  will  A.  mt 
.Iris  20.  3.  wherefore  I  beseech  thoo  lo  A.  wic 

29.  but  also  all  that  A.  tne,  wore  such  lu  I  am 
1  Cor.  14.  21.  vet  for  all  that  will  thev  not  A.  me 

HEAR  not,  or  not  UF..\R. 
Prut.  2S.  t49.  whose  tongue  thou  shalt  not  k. 

30.  17.  so  thou  wiltnotA.  Iiut  worship  other  gods 
1  Sam.  8.  18.  the  Lord  will  tiiif  A.  you  in  lliai  day 
.loh  30.20.  lory  unto  thee,  and  ihoii  do<t  not  A.  me 

35.  13.  siirojv  God  will  not  A.  vanily,  nor  rei'ard  it 
r.'!«/.li6.18.if'l  repord  iniquity,  L<'ril  will  net  h.  mo 

94.  9.  he  that  planted  the  our,  shall  ho  nor  A.? 
ha.  1.  15.  when  mnko  innnv  pnivers,  I  will  not  A. 
.ffr.7.  16.  I  11. 14. 1 14.12.  Firk.i^.  18.  ./5»io.<5.  'a. 

30.  9.  childicn  that  will  not  A.  tlialaw  of  the  Lord 


HEA 

ha.  59.  1.  neitlier  his  ear  Iieavy  tliat  It  cannot  h. 
2.he  will  not  A.|i65.  J2.  when  1  spake  ye  did  not  h. 

C6.  4.  when  I  spake,  ihey  did  nut  k.  Zech.  1.  4. 
Jer.5.21.have  ears  and  A.nof,E2cA-.l-2.'2.JWai-*8.18. 

J3.  17.  but  if  ye  will  not  h.  W.  5.  Mai.  2.  2. 

17.  23.  that  they  might  not  A.  19.  15.  ZccA.  7.  11. 
22.  21.  I  spake,  but  thou  saidat,  1  will  not  h. 

Dan.  5.  23.  thou  hast  praisfcd  the  gods  of  silver, 
which  see  not,  nor  k.  nor  know,  Rev.  9. 20. 
^Vjc.3. 4.  shall  cry  to  Lord,  but  he  w'xWnoth.  them 
Hab.  1.  2.  how  long  shall  I  cry,  and  thou  wilt  not  A. 
J\Iat.  10.  14.  not  receive  you,  nor  A.  your  words 

18.  16.  if  he  will  not  A.  ihee,  then  take  one  or  two 
Luke  16.  31  if  they  A.  not  Moses  and  the  prophets 
John  8.  43.  even  because  ye  cannot  h.  my  word 

47.  ye  therefore  A.  theniHot,  because  not  of  God 
0.  27.  he  answered,  I  told  you,  and  ye  did  not  A. 
10.  8.  are  robbers,  but  the  sheep  did  not  A.  Wiem 

^1cts2.  23.  every  soul  which  will  not-li-  be  destroy. 
1  Cor.  14.  21.  yet  for  all  that  will  they  not  h.  me 
Gal.  4.  21.  ye  under  the  law,  do  ve  not  A.  the  law 

Would  not  HEAR. 

Oen.  42. 21.  when  he  besought  us,  we  would  not  h. 

22.  do  not  sin  against  the  child,  ye  would  not  h. 

Ezod.  7.16.  behold,  hitherto,  thou  woiildcstnoth. 

yJewM. 43. Israel  wouldnot  k.  3.26.  2  Kincrs  17. 14. 

HKint'S  14.11.  AmaziahwKM/ifinoJ  A.2CAr.25.20. 
18.  12.  Israel  tcotild  noth.  Mek.  9.  29.  Zech.  7. 13. 

/sa.28.12.thi3istherefre6hing,yptthey2coaW7(oiA. 

Jcr.  13. 11.  might  be  for  praise,  Ihey  w.n.  A.  29.  19. 

36. 25.  he  wouldnot  A.  ||  Zech.  7. 13. 1  would  not  A. 

HEAR  now,  or  now  HEAR. 

JVum.  12.  6.  and  he  said,  A.  now  my  words,  20.  10. 

ISam.  22.  7.  then  Saul  said,  A.  now,  ye  Benjamites 
12.  A.  now,  thou  son  of  Ahilub,  he  answered 

Job  13.  6.  A.  now,  my  reasoning,  and  hearken 

Prov.  5.  7.  A.  me  now,  therefore,  O  ye  children 

Jsa.  7.13.  and  he  said,  A.  ye  noio,  O  house  of  David 
44.  1.  yet  now  A.  O  Jacob  my  servant,  and  Israel 
47.  8.  A.  now,  thou  that  art  given  to  pleasures 
51.  21.  therefore,  A.  now  this  thou  afflicled 

Jer.'5.  21.  therefore,  A.  now  this,  O  foolish  people 
28.15.A.  710W  Hananiah jl  Zech.  3.8.A.  now,0  Josh. 
37.  20.  A.  now,  1  pray  thee,  O  my  lord  the  king 

Mic.  6.  1.  A.  ye  now  what  the  Lord  saith,  arise 

Jlcts'i.  33.  shed  forth  this  which  ye  no(o  see  and  A. 

PA(M.30.  which  ye  saw  in  me,  and  now  h.  to  be  in 
Shall  HEAR. 

£iO(f.l5.14.tlie  people  shall  A.  and  be  afraid, 7?eM«. 
13.  11.  I  17.  13.  1  19.20.  [21.21. 

JVum.  14.13.MoBes6aid,  then  the  Egypt.  sAa/Z  A.  it 

Deut.  1.  17.  ye  shall  A.  small  as  veil  as  great 
2.25. who  shall  A.  report  of  thee,  and  shall  tremble 
4.  6.  which  shall  A.  all  these  statutes  and  say 

Josh.  7.9.  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  shall  A.  of  it 

Judg.  7.  11.  and  thou  shall  A.  what  they  eay 

2*'am.  16.21.  \sia.e\  shall  h.  that  thou  art  abhorred 

1  Kino-s8.  42.  for  they  shall  A.  of  thy  great  name 

2  Kings  19. 7.  and  he.shall  A.  a  rumour,  /sa.  37.  7. 
Job  22.  27.  shall  make  prayer  to  him,  he  shall  A. 
fsuJ.34.2.  the  humble«AuZ<  A.  thereof,  and  be  glad 

55.17. 1  will  pray  and  cry, and  he  shall  A. my  voice 

19.  God  shall  h.  and  afflict  them,  even  he  that 
92.  11.  mine  tare  shall  A.  desire  of  the  wicked 
141.  a.  they  shall  h.  my  words,  for  they  are  Sweet 

Jsa.  29.  18.  in  that  day  shall  the  deaf  A.  the  words 
30.  19.  when  he  shall  A.  it  he  will  answer  thee 

21.  thine  ears  shall  A.  a  word  behind  Ihee 
Jer.  33.  9.  which  shall  A.  all  the  good  that  I  do 
//o.e.  2.  21.  and  the  heaven  shall  A.  the  earth 

22.  the  earth  shall  A.  the  corn  and  the  wine 
Mat.  13.  14.  by  hearing,  ye  shall  A.  ./Jets 28.  20. 

18.  15.  if  he  shall  A.  thee  thou  hast  gained  thy 

24.  6.yesAuHA.of  wars,  Mark  13. 7.  /.uke'2\.' 
John5.i5.  the  dead  *Aa/ZA.voice  of  the  Son  of  God 

16.  13.  whatsoever  be  shall  A-  that  shall  bespeak 
.^cts  3.  22.  him  shall  ye  A.  in  all  things,  7.  37. 

25.  22.  to-morrow,  said  he,  thou  shalt  A.  him 
Kom.  10. 14.  how  shall  they  A.  without  a  preacher 

mil  HEAR. 
Ezod.  20.  19.  speak  unto  us,  we  will  A.  Deut.  5.27. 

22.  23.  if  they  cry,  1  will  i-urely  A.  their  cry,  27. 
J'^um.  9.  8.  I  will  A.  what  the  Lord  will  command 
2  Sam.  14.  16.  king  will  A.  todeliver  his  handmaid 
2  Kings  19.  4.  it  may  be  thy  God  will  A.  the  words 
2  CAr.  7. 14.  then  rc'ill  I  A.  from  heaven,  Ps.  20.  G. 

20.  9.  then  thou  wilt  A.  and  help,  Psal.  38.  15. 
Psal.  4. 3.  the  Lord  will  h.  ||  1".  6.  thou  wilt  A.  me 

85.  8.  I  will  h.  what  God  the  Lord  will  speak 

145.  19.  he  also  will  h.  iheir  cry,  and  save  Ihcm 
Prov.  1.  5.  wise  man  will  A.  and  increase  learning 
Isa.  41   17.  the  Lord  willh.  them,  and  not  forsake 

65.  24   while  they  are  yet  speaking,  I  will  h. 
Jer.  36  3.  it  may  he  the  house  of  Judah  will  h. 
ii;t<!A.2.5.  whether  they  Ki/W  A.  or  forbear,  7.  ]  3.11. 
Has.  2.  21.  I  will  A.  the  heavens,  ihey  the  earth 
Mic.  7.  7.  I  will  wait  for  God,  mv  God  will  A.  me 
Zech.  10.  6. 1  am  iheirGod  and  willh.  them,  13.  9. 
Jf'-tf  17.  32.  we  will  A.  thee  again  of  this  matter 

iil,  22.  for  thev  will  h.  that  thou  art  come 
869 


HEA 

.4c(s23.35.Ttci72  A.thee,whenthyaccuser8arecorae 

23.28.Balvati(in  is  sent  to  the  Gentiles,  they  willh 

HEAR  the  word  of  the  J.oid. 

1  Kings  22. 19.  A.  therefore  the  word  of  the  Lord, 
2  CAr.  18.  18.  Jer.  29.  20.  |  42.  15.  Jlmos  7.  16. 

2  Kings  7. 1.  then  Elisha  said  A.  ye  the  word  of  the 
Lord,  Jer.  17.  20.  |  21.  11. 

20.16.l9aiali  said  to  Hezekiah,A.Mi»r(i  of  /,orrf,all 

in  thy  house  be  carried  to  llabylon,  ha.  39. 5. 

Isa.  1. 10.  A.  word  of  the  Lord,  ye  rulers  of  Sodom 

28.  14.  A.  the  word  of  the  Lord,  ye  scornful  men 
66.5.  A.  Mor(Zo/Z,flr(Z,  yethat  tremble  at  his  word 

.kr.  2.  4.  A.  word  of  Lord,  O  house  of  Jacob,  10. 1. 
7.  2.  A.  the  word  of  the  Lord,  all  ye  of  Judah 
9.  20.  yet  A.  the  word  of  the  Lord,  O  ye  women 
19.  3.  A.  word  of  Lord,  O  kings  of  Judah,  22.  2. 

22.  29.  O  earth,  earth,  A.  the  word  of  the  Lord 
31.  10.  A.  the  word  of  the  Lord,  O  ye  nations 
34.4.yetA.to((ri/o//>or(i,OZedekiah,king,of  Jud. 

44.  24.  A.  the  word  of  the  Lord,  all  Judah,  26. 
£2cA.6.3.ye  mountains  of  Israel,  A.  the  word  of  the 

Lord,  I  will  bring  a  sword  on  you,  36. 1,  4. 

13.  2.  say  lo  prophets  A.  ye  tAs  word  of  the  Lord 
16.35.  wherefore,  O  harlot,A.£Aea!orrfe/£Ae  I,urd 
20. 47.  forest  of  the  south,  h.the  word  of  the  Lord 
25.  3.  say  to  Ammonites,  A.  the  word  of  the  Lord 
34.  7.  ye  shepherds,  A.  the  word  of  the  J^ord,  9. 
37.  4.  say,  O  ye  dry  bones,  h.  theword  of  the  Lord 

Hos.4.  1.  h.word  of  the  Lord,  ye  children  of  Israel 
Amosl.  16.  Amaziah,  A.  thou  the  word  of  the  Lord 

HEARD. 
Oen.  16. 1 1.  because  the  Lord  hath  A.  thy  affliction 

21.  26.  neither  yet  A.  I  of  it,  but  to-day 

29.  33.  because  the  Lord  hath  A.  that  I  was  hated 

45.  2.  Joseph  wept  aloud,  and  the  Egyptians  A. 
Exod.".H.  God  A.  their  groaning,  and  remembered 

16.  9.  for  he  hath  A.  your  murmurings 

23.  13.  neither  let  it  be  A.  out  of  thy  mouth 

28.  35.  his  sound  shall  be  ft.  when  he  goeth  in  and 
33.  4.  when  the  people  A.  these  evil  tidings 

Lev.  24.  14.  let  all  that  A.  him  lay  their  hands 
JVum.  11.  1.  the  people  complained,  the  Lord  A.  it 
12.  2.  Miriam  spake  againstMoses,  the  LordA.  it 

14.  14.  they  have  A.  thou  art  among  this  people 
15.  the  nations  which  have  A.  the  fame  of  thee 

30.  7.  held  his  peace  at  her  the  day  he  A.  it,  14. 
./o.«A.  9. 16.  Ihey  A.  that  they  were  their  neighbours 
1  Sam.  7.  9.  Samuel  cried,  and  the  Lord  A.  him 

23.  11.  will  Saul  come,  as  thy  servant  hath  A.  ? 

1  Kings  1.  11.  bast  not  A.  that  Adonijah  doth  reign 
6.  7.  nor  was  any  tool  of  iron  A.  in  the  house 
10.7.the  halfnottold  me,  thy  wisdom  and  prospe- 
rity exceedeth  the  fame  which  I  A.  ?  2  CAr.9.6. 

2  Kings  19.25.ha6t  thou  not  A.  long  ago,  /so.37.  26. 
2  CAr.  5.  13.  make  one  sound  to  he  A.  in  praising 

33.  13.  he  was  entreated  and  A.  his  supplications 
Ezra  3.  13.  people  shouted,  the  noise  was  A.  afar 

/VfA.  12.  43.  the  joy  of  Jerusalem  A.  even  afar  off 
Job  15.  8.  hast  thou  A.  the  secret  of  God  ? 

19.  7.  I  cry  out  of  wrong,  but  I  am  not  A. 

26.  14.  but  how  little  a  portion  is  A.  of  him 

29.  11.  when  the  ear  A.  me,  then  it  blessed  me 
Psal.  6.  9.  the  Lord  hath  A.  my  supplication 

10.  17.  thou  hast  A.  the  desire  of  the  humble 
22.  21.save  me,  for  thou  hast  A.  me  from  the  horns 
24.butwhenliecriedheA.34.6.  |  40.  1.  |  120.1. 
.34.  4.  I  sought  the  Lord,  and  he  A.  me,anddeliv. 
38.  13.  but  I  as  a  deat  man  A.  not,  I  was  dumb 
61.5.  thou,  O  G.  hast  A.  my  vows,  thou  hast  given 
66.  19.  verily  God  hath  A.  me,  he  hath  attended 
76.  8.  cause  judgment  to  be  A.  from  heaven 
78.  21.  therefore  the  Lord  h.  this  and  was  wroth 
59.  when  God  A.  this,  was  wroth,  and  abhorred 
81.  5.  where  I  A.  a  languagethat  I  understood  not 
97  8.  Zion  A.  and  was  glad,  and  Judah  rejoiced 
106.  44.  he  regarded  their  affliction,  when  he  A. 
118.  21.  for  thou  hast  A.  me,  and  art  my  salvation 
132.  6.  lo,  we  A.  of  it  at  Epliraiah,  we  found  it 

Prov.  21.  13;  he  shall  cry  him.-ielf,  but  not  be  A. 

/srt.l0.30.cause  it  to  be  A.  unto  Laish,  O  Analholh 
40.  21.  have  ye  not  A.  ?  hath  it  not  been  told  you  ? 
28.hast  thou  notA.  everlasting  God  fainleth  nol7 
48.  6.  ihoii  hast  A.  see  all  this,  will  not  ye  declare? 
52.  15.  which  they  had  notA.  shall  they  consider 
t)0.  18.  violence  shall  no  more  be  A.  in  thy  hind 

64.  4.  men  have  not  k.  what  he  hath  prepared 

65.  19.  the  voice  of  weeping  shall  be  no  more  A. 

06.  8.  who  hath  A.  such  a  thing,  who  bath  seen  ? 
19.  to  the  isles  afar  off,  that  have  not  A.  my  fame 

Jer.  4.  19.  because  thou  hast  A.  sound  of  (rumpei 
6.7.  fhecasfeth  out  wickedness,  spoil  is  A.  in  her 

7.  13.  I  spake  unto  you,  rising  early,  but  ye  A.  not 

8.  6.  [  hearksned  and  A.  butthey  spake  not  aright 
18.  13.  ask  the  heathen,  who  hath  A.  such  things 

22.  let  cry  be  A.  from  houses  when  shalt  bring 
25.  36.  a  howling  of  the  Hock  shall  be  A. 
26. 11.  for  he  hath  prophesied  as  yc  have  A. 

34.  10#A.  every  oneshould  let  his  man-servant  go 

35.  17.  I  have  spoken,  but  they  have  notA. 
46.  12.  the  oalicnt  have  A.  of  thy  ehaine 


HEA 

Jer.  50.  46.  and  the  cry  is  A.  among  the  nntioo^ 
51.  46.  a  rumour  that  shall  bo  A.  In  the  land 
Lam.  1.  21.  they  have  A.  that  I  sigh,  there  is  non« 

3.  61.  thou  hast  A.  their  reproach,  O  Lord 
Eick.  19.  4.  the  nations  A.  of  him,  he  was  taken 

26.  13.  the  sound  of  thy  harp  shall  be  no  more  A. 

33.  5.  he  A.  the  sound  of  the  trumpet,  and  took 
Dan.  12.  8.  and  I  A.  but  I  understood  not 
Hos.l.M.  chastise  them,  as  their  congrega.  hath  A. 
Jonah  2.  2.  I  cried  unto  the  Lord,  and  he  A.  me 
Mic.  5.  15.  in  fury,  such  as  they  have  not  A. 
Hah.  3.  16.  when  I  A.  my  belly  trembled 
Mai.  3.  16.  and  the  Lord  hearkened  and  A.  it 
Mat.  5.  21.  ye  have  A.  it  was  said,  27,  33,  :i8,  43. 

6.  7.  they  shall  be  A.  for  their  much  speaking 

13.  17.  ye  hear,  and  have  not  A.  them,  Luke  10. 24. 

15.  12.  were  offended  at'ler  they  A.  this  saying 

22.  7.  when  the  king  A.  thereof,  he  was  wroth 
26.  65.  ye  have  h.  his  blasphemy,  Mark  14.  64. 

Mark  4.  15.  but  when  they  have  A.  Satan  cometh 

14.  11.  and  when  they  h.  it  they  were  glad 
Luke  1.  13.  fear  not,  thy  prayer  is  A.  Acts  10.  31. 

12.  3.  what  ye  have  spoken,  shall  be  A.  in  the  light 

20.  16.  when  they  A.  it,  they  said,  God  liotbid 
.Tohn  3.  32.  what  he  hath  A.  that  he  testifieth 

6.  45.  every  man  that  hath  A.  of  the  Father 

8.  6.  wrote  on  the  ground,  as  tho'  he  A.  them  not 

9.  32.  since  the  world  begin  was  it  not  A. 
11.  41.  Father,  I  thank  ihee  that  thou  hast  A.  me 

18.  21.  ask  them  which  A.  me,  what  I  have  sold 

21.  7.  when  Simon  Peter  A.  that  it  was  the  Ld. 
Acts  1.  4.  wait  for  the  |iromise  ye  have  A.  of  me 

2.  .37.  when  they  A.this,they  were  pricked  in  heart 

4.  4.  many  of  them  which  A.  the  word  believed 

5.  5.  fear  came  on  all  them  that  A.  these  things 

13.  48.  when  the  Gentiles  A.  this  ihey  were  glad 

14.  9.  the  same  li.  Paul  speak,  who  beholding 

16.  14.  a  woman  which  worshipped  God,  A.  us 
25. sang  praises  lo  God,  and  the  prisoners  A.  them 

19.  5.  when  they  A.  this,  they  were  baptized 
22. 15.  shalt  witness  of  what  thou  hast  seen  and  A. 
24.  24.  A.  him  concerning  the  faith  in  Christ 

Rom.  10.  14.  in  him  of  whom  Ihey  have  not  k. 
18.  but  I  say,  have  they  not  A.  ?  yes,  verily 

15.  21.  they  that  have  not  A.  shall  understand 

1  Cor.  2.  9.  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  A.  neither 
Gal.  1.  13.  for  ye  have  A.  of  my  conversation 
Eph.  1.  13.  alter  that  ye  A.  the  word  of  trulh 

15.  after  I  A.  of  your  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
4.  21.  if  so  be  ye  have  A.  him  and  been  taught 
Phil.  2.  26.  tliat  ye  had  A.  that  he  had  been  sick 
4.  9.  those  things  ye  have  A.  and  seen  in  me,  do 
Col.  1.  4.  since  we  A.  of  your  faith  in  Christ 
6.  since  day  ye  A.of  il,  and  knew  the  grace  of  G. 
9.  since  day  we  A.  it,  do  not  cease  to  pray  for  you 

2  Tim.  2.  2.  things  thou  hast  A.  of  me,  commit  lo 
Heb.  2.  3.  was  confirmed  to  us  by  them  that  A.  him 

3.  16.  for  some  when  they  had  A.  did  provoke 

4.  2.  not  being  mi.xed  with  faiih  in  them  that  A. 
5.7.  offer,  up  prayers,  and  was  A.  in  that  hefeared 

Jam.  5.  11.  ye  have  A.  of  the  patience  of  Job 
1  John '2.  IS.  ye  A.  thatantichristshallcome,  4.  3. 
24.  have  A.  from  the  beginning,  3.  11.  2  John  6. 
Rtv.  3.  3.  renieniher  therefore  how  thou  hast  A. 

5.  13.  and  all  that  are  in  ihein  A.  I,  saying 
7.  4.  I  A.  the  number  of  them  which  were  scaled 
9.  16.  and  I  A.  the  number  of  the  horscmcii 

16.  5.  and  I  A.  the  angel  of  the  waters  say 
18.  22.  the  voice  of  trumpeters  shall  be  A.  no  mere 

23.  the  voice  of  bride  shall  be  A.  no  more  in  thee 
22.  8.  I  saw  these  things,  and  A.  them,  when  I  A. 

/  have  HEARD. 
Gen.  17.  20.  and  as  for  Ishinael  I  have  A.  thee 

41.  15.  I  have  dreamed  a  dream,  I  have  A.  say  of 
thee  thou  canst  inlerp. dreams,  Dan.  5. 14, 16. 

42.  2.  I  have  A.  that  there  is  corn  in  Egypt 
Ezod.  3.7.  I  have  h.  their  cry  ||  6.5./A.  A.  groaning 

16.  12.  I  have  h.  the  murmuring,  A*«m.  14.  27. 
Deut.  5.  28.  I  have  h.  the  voice  of  your  words 
1  Sam.  25.7.  now/  haveh.  thallhou  has!  shearers 

1  Kings  2.  42.  the  word  that  I  have  A.  is  good 
9.  3.  /  have  h.  Ihv  prayer  thou  hast  made  before 

me,  2  Kings  20.  5.  2  CAron.  7. 12.  Isa.  38. 5. 

2  Kings  19. 20.  that  which  thou  hast  prayed  /  A.  A. 
22.  19.  /  also  have  A.  thee,  saith  L.  2  CAr.  34.  27. 

./fl/;16.2.  /AajicA.mnny  such  things, miserable  com. 
20.  3.  I  have  A.  the  check  of  my  reproach 
42.  5.  J  have  A.  of  ihee  by  the  hearing  of  the  ear 

Psnl.  31.  13.  for  I  have  A.  the  slander  of  many 
62.  II.  tw  ice  I  hare  h.  this,  power  belongeth  loG. 

Isn.  21.  10.  that  which  I  have  A.  of  Lord  of  hosU 
28.  22. 1  have  A.  from  the  Lord  a  consumption 
49.  8.  in  an  acceptable  time  Aai'C  I h.'iCor  6.2. 

,Jrr.  23.  25.  I  have  h.  what  the  prophets  said 
31. 18.  I  haveh.  Ephraim  bemoaning  himself  thug 
42.4.  Ihaveh.you,  behold,!  will  pray  unto  the  L 
49.  14.  I  have  A.  a  rumour  from  the  Lord 

Eirk.  35.  12.  know  I  have  h.  all  thy  blasphemiei 

Hos.  14.  8.  I  have  A.  him  and  oboerved  him 
I  Hab.'i.'i.  OL./Aace  A.  thy  spt)ech,and  was  afraid 


HEA 

Zeph.  2.  8.  Ihava  h.  the  reproach  of  Moab 

Jo/inS.  3C.  I  speiik  thone  things  /  have  h.  of  him 
40.  told  you  the  truth,  whicli  I  have  h.  ol'Goil 
15.  15.  all  things  that  I  have  A.  of  my  J'ather 

^cts'.'Ji-  I kave  h.  their  giuaning,  ami  am  coini' 

9.  IS.  Lorii  I  kane.  A.  by  iiiaiiy  of  thin  man,  how 

HEARD  joined  with  uoice. 

Oen.  n.  8.  they  A.  voice  of  the  L.  walking  in  garden 
10. 1  A.  thy  vuice,  and  was  afraid,  because  naked 
21. 17.  God  A.  the  ouj'cc  of  the  lad,  the  angel  called 
30.(5.  God  hath  A.  my  voice,  and  given  me  a  son 
;W.  15.  when  he  A.  that  1  lifted  up  my  vuice 

J^'um.  7.81).  then  he  A.  the  voice  of  one  speaking 
20.  16.  wc  cried,  he  A.  our  voice,  and  sent  an  angel 

Deut.  1.  34.  the  Lord  A.  the  euice  of  your  W9rdi 

4.  1-.J.  saw  no  similitude,  only  he  A.  a  noice 

33.  hear  v.  of  God  as  thou  hast  A.  and  live,  5.  2(i. 

5.  23.  ye  A.  the  voice  out  of  the  midst  of  darkness 
24.  we  have  A.  his  cuice  out  of  the  inidst  of  the  tire 

28.  and  the  Lord  A.  the  voice  of  your  words 
2ti.  7.  we  cried,  the  Lord  A.  our  voice,  and  looked 
Judff.  18.  2.r  let  not  thy  voice  he  A.  among  us 
ISam.  1.  13.  her  lips  moved,  her  voice  was  not  A. 

1  Kintrs  17.  22.  the  Lord  A.  the  voice  of  Elijah 

2  Chroii.  30.  27.  their  voice  was  A.  prayer  came  up 
Job  4.  IG.  there  was  silence,  I  A.  a  voice,  saying 

33.  8.  I  have  A.  the  voice  of  tJiy  words,  saying 
37.  4.  he  will  not  stay  them  when  his  voice  is  A. 
Psnl.  3. 4. 1  cried  to  the  L.  with  my  voice,  ho  A.  me 

6.  8.  the  Lord  hath  A.  the  voice  of  my  weeping 

18.  fi.  r  culled,  he  A.  my  voice  out  ol  his  temple 
in.  3.  there  is  no  speech  where  their  uui'cc  is  not  A. 
28. 6.  because  he  hath  h.  the  voice  of  my  supplica. 
t)6.  8.  and  make  the  voice  of  his  praise  to  be  A. 
llli.l.I  love  the  Lord,  because  he  hath  A.  my  voice 

Cant.  2.  12.  the  voice  of  the  turtle  is  A.  in  our  land 
/.♦o.  6.  8.  also  I  A.  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  saying 
15.  4.  their  voice  shall  be  A.  even  unto  Jahaz 
30.  30.  Lord  shall  cause  his  glorious  voice  to  be  A. 
42.2.  nor  cause  his  voice  to  be  A.  in  the  street 
5H.  4.  not  fast,  to  make  your  voice  be  A.  on  high 
C5. 19.  uuice  of  weeping  shall  no  more  be  A.  in  her 
ler.  3.  21.  a  voice  was  A.  upon  the  high  places 

4.  31. 1  have  A.  a  voice  as  of  a  woman  in  travail 

9.  19.  for  a  voice  of  wailing  is  A.  out  of  Zion 
30.  5.  we  have  A.  a  voice  of  trembling,  of  fear 
31. 1.5.  a  voice  was  A.  in  Ramah,  J^Iat.  2.  18. 

J^ain.3.  50.  thou  bast  A.  my  voice,  hide  not  thine  car 
£zek.  1.  28.  and  I  A.  a  voice  of  one  that  spake 
3.  I'i.  I  A.  behind  me  a  voice  of  great  rushing 

19.  9.  that  his  voice  should  no  more  oe  A. 
27.30.  and  shall  cause  their  voice  to  be  A.ag.  thee 

J)an.8.  It).  I  A.  a  man's  voice  between  the  banks 

10.  9.  yet  A.  I  l\ie  voice  of  his  words,  when  I  A. 
JVaA.  2.  13.  voice  of  thy  messengers  no  more  be  A. 
John  5.  37.  ye  have  neither  A.  his  voice  at  any  lime 
^c/s9.4.A.  a  o«(CC,saying,  Saul,Saul,  22.  7.  |  26. 14. 

11.  7.  I  A.  a  I'uicc  saying  to  me,  arise,  slay  and  eat 
22.  9.  they  A.  not  the  voice  of  him  that  spako 

Hcb.  12.  19.  which  voice  they  that  A.  entreated 
2  Pet.l.lH.the  voice  which  came  from  heaven  we  A. 
liev.  1. 10. 1  A.  a  great  voice,  16.  1.  |  19.  1.  ]  21.  3. 
4. 1.  the  fust  voice  I  A.  was  as  it  were  ofa  trumpet 

5.  11.  I  beheld,  and  A.  the  voice  of  many  angels 

6.  6.  I  A.  a  voice  in  the  midst  of  the  four  boasts 
7.IA.a  voice  of  the  fourth  beastsay,  come  and  se 

9. 13.  I  It.  a  voice  from  the  four  horns  of  the  altar 
10. 4. 1  A.a  voice  from  heaven,  8.  |  14.  2,  13.  ]  18.  4 

12.  10.  and  I  A.  a  loud  voice,  saying  in  heaven 
14.2. 1  A.  the  voice  of  harpers  harping  with  harps 
19. 6. 1  A.  as  it  were  the  voice  of  a  great  multitude 

fVe  hove  UF..\llD. 
Josh.  2. 10.  tee  hare  h.  how  the  Lord  dried  Red-sen 
11.  as  soon  as  we  had  h.  these  things  hearts  melt 

9.  9.  we  have  A.  the  fame  of  him,  and  all  he  did 
ZSain.  7.  2J.  there  is  none  like  thee  ncforiling  to 
oil  we  kave  A.  wilh  our  oars,  1  Chr.  17.  20 
1  ATinif /1 20.31.  irfA'UicA.  kingsoflsr.  are  merciful 
Job  2-(.  22.  we  have  h.  the  famo  thereof,  ./fr.  0.24. 
P«a/.44.1.irc  hnnrh.  with  our  ears,  our  fathorslold 

48.8.afi  wr  hnrr  h.  so  have  we  seen  in  city  of  Lord 

78.  3.  ilark  s-iyinj;*  which  we  hove  A.nnd  known 
ha.  10.0.  wehaneh.  of  pride  of  Moab,  Jer.if.  29. 

24.  16.  we  hare  h.  songH,  glory  to  the  righteous 
,7rr.  30.  5.  ir/"  Anne  A.  a  voice  of  trembling,  of  fear 

51.  51.  rnnfiiiinded,  liecniise  we  have  A.  reproach 
Obail.  1.  w  hare  h.  a  iimioiir  from  the  Lonl 
ZccA.8. 2:1.  for  irrhav  h.  thai  God  is  wilh  you 
Mark  14.  .58.  we  have  h.  Iiiin  say,  I  will  destroy 
/,HA'4.23.whatever  uie  hieve  A.  done  in  Capernaum 

22.  71.  ve  ouraelves  Art'"'  A.  of  his  own  mouth 
John  4.  42.  we  believe,  ire  have  A.  him  ourselves 

12.34.wft'"'''A.  out  ofihe  InwI'hnt  f 'hrisi  nhidelh 
^i;M4.20.  wp  raiinol  but  s|)onk  things  we  have  h. 

6.  11.  we  have  h.  him  spenk  biniphemous  words 
14.  we  hone  A.  biiii  say,  this  Jesus  nhall  denlroy 

15.24.  we  hare  h.  that  rorlain  have  troiihleil  you 

lfl.2.irr  AaBrnol  A. whether  there  be  any  llolyGh. 

Heb.  2.  1.  to  sive  herd  to  Ihing^  which  we  have  h. 
I  Jdikn  1  1.  that  which  wr  have  k.  and  seen,  3. 
S70 


HEA 

1  /uAn  1.5.  this  h  the  message  which  ui«A.A.ofhiin 

HEARli  joined  with  word  or  words. 
Gen.  24.30.  and  when  he  A.  the  iforJsof  Ilebekah 

5i2.  when  Abraham's  servant  A.  their  words 
27.  34.  and  when  Esau  A.  the  icon/.'-"  of  his  father 
31.  1.  Jacob  A.  ihe  words  of  Laban'ssons,  saying 
39.  19.  when  his  master  A.  the  words  of  his  wife 
JV'um.  24.4. he  hath  said, which  h. words  of  God,  16. 
./««A.22. 30.  when  headsof  Isr.  A.  words  of  Reuben 

24.  27.  for  it  hath  A.  all  the  words  of  the  Lord 
Judg.  9.  30.  when  Zebul  A.  the  words  of  Gaal 

1  Saw.  8. 21.  Samuel  A.  all  the  words  of  the  people 
17.  11.  Saul  and  Israel  A.  Goliath's  words 

23.  accord,  to  the  same  words,auii  David  ft-  them 
31.  when  the  words  were  A.  which  David  spake 

1  Kings  2.  42.  the  word  that  1  have  A.  is  good 

5. 7.  when  Hiram  A.  Solomon's  words  he  rejoiced 

21.  27.  when  Ahab  A.  those  icon/s, rent  his  clothes 

2  Kings  6.30.  when  the  king  h. words  of  the  woman 
19.6.  be  nol  afraid  ofwords  thou  hast  A.  Isa.  37.  6. 

22.  11.  when  the  king  had  A.  the  wuriAs  of  book  of 

law,  he  rent  his  clothes,  18.  2  Chr.  34.  19. 
2  Chron.  15. 8.Asa  A.  these  words,  he  took  courage 
JWA.  1.  4.  I  A.  these  words,  I  sat  down  and  wept 
.5.  6.  and  I  was  angry  when  I  A.  these  words 
8.9.the  people  wept,  when  they  A. word*  of  the  law 
Job  33.  8.1  have  A.  the  voice  of  thy  words,  saying 
Keel.  9.  16.  the  poor  man's  words  are  not  A. 
17.  the  words  of  wise  men  are  A.  in  quiet 
Isa.'M.4.  will  reprove  the  words  which  God  hath  A. 
Jer.  23.18.  hath  perceived,marked,aMd  A.  his  word 

25.  8.  therefore  because  ye  have  not  A.  my  words 

26.  12.  against  this  city  all  the  words  ye  have  A. 
21.  when  the  king  and  all  the  princes  A.  his  words 

36. 13.  declared  unto  them  all  the  words  he  had  A. 

24.  they  were  not  afraid  that  A.  these  words 
38.  1.  Pashur  A.  the  words  Jeremiah  had  spoken 

Dan.  6. 14.  when  Darius  A. these  w.  was  displeased 
10. 12.  thy  words  were  A.  I  am  come  for  thy  words 
.Wa(.22.22.when  thcyA.these  words  they  marvelled 
Mark  5.  36.  as  soon  as  Jesus  A.  the  word  sjioken 
I.uke  10.39. Mary  sat  at  Jesus'  feet,  and  A.  his  word 
Jiets  10. 44.  Holy  Ghost  fell  on  them  who  A.  word 
2  Cor.  12.4.  caught  up,  and  A.  unspeakable  words 
F.ph.  1.  13.  after  that  ye  A.  the  word  of  truth 
Col.  1.  5.  whereof  ye  A.  in  the  word  of  the  gospel 

1  Thess.  2.  13.  received  the  Moi-ii  which  ye  A.  of  us 

2  Tim.  1.  13.  hold  fast  form  of  sound  words  thou 

hast  A.  of  me 
ffeh.  12.19.  they  that  A.  entreated  that  the  ^pord 

1  John%  7.  the  w.  ye  have  A.  from  the  beginning 

HEAUDEST. 
Deut.  4.  36.  and  thou  A.  his  words  out  of  the  fire 
Josh.  14.  12.  for  thou  A.  in  that  day  how  Anakims 

2  Kings  22. 19.  when  thou  A.  what  I  spake  ag:iinst 

this  place,  hast  rent  thy  clothes,  2  Chr.  34.2" 

JWA.  9.  9.  and  thou  A   their  ery  by  the  Red-sea 

27.  they  cried,  thou  A.  them  from  heaven,  28. 

/'.^fl^  31.  22.  thou  A.  the  vniceof  my  supiilicntions 

ll'.K  26.  i  have  declared  my  ways,  and  thou  A.  me 

Isa.  48.  7.  before  the  day  when  thou  A.  them  not 

8.  yea,  thou  It,  not,  yea,  thou  kncwest  not 
Jonah  2.  2.  out  of  belly  of  hell  I  cried,  thou  A. 

HEARER. 
Jam.  1.23.  if  any  he  a  A.  of  the  word,  and  not  a  doer 

25.  he  being  not  a  forgeiful  A.  but  doer  of  work 

HEARERS. 
Itom.  2.  13.  nol  the  A.  of  the  law  are  justified 
F.ph.  4.  29.  ihat  it  may  minister  grace  unto  the  A. 
2  Tim.  2.  14.  but  to  th<!  subverting  of  the  A. 
./am.  1.22.  he  doers  of  the  word,  and  not  A.  only 

IIRAREST. 
ni/M2.  S,  HoaztoRuth,  A.  thou  not,  my  daughter? 
1  .Sam.  24.  9.  wlierefi>re  A.  thou  men's  words  ? 
2. Sam. 5.24.  when  A.  sound  in  the  mulberry-trees 
1  Kings  fi.:m.  when  thou  A.  forgive,  2  CA7-,)n.6.21. 
Psal.QH.  2.  I  cry  in  the  day-lime,  but  thou  A.  nol 
65.  2.  thou  that  A.  prayer,  unto  l  bee  all  flesh  come 
.1faf.21.16.  said  unto  him,  A.  thou  what  these  say? 

27.  13.  A.  Ihoii  not  how  many  lliiiiss  they  witness 
.fohn  3.  8.  wind  hloweth,  and  lliou  A.  the  sound 

11.  42.  and  I  knew  that  thoo  h.  me  always 

HEARETH. 
F.zod.  16.7.  for  that  he  A.  your  murniurinss,  8. 
.Vum.MO.S.  if  f.itherdisollow  her  in  day  Ihnt  bo  A. 
Deut.  29.  19.  wbiin  he  A.  Ihe  words  of  this  curse 

1  .Sam.  3.  9.  speak.  Lord,  for  thy  Mirvnnl  A.  10. 

11.  1  will  do  a  thins  at  which  ears  of  every  one 
thai  A.  "ball  tingle,  2  Kings  21.  12.  ./er.  19.  3. 

2  .Snm. 17.9. wlioHoeverA.il  will  H:iy,  there  inslaugh. 
.Tob  34.  28.  and  be  A.  the  cry  of  llio  iiUlioled 
['sal   34.  17.  Ihe  righteous  rry,  and  the  Lord  A. 

38.  14.  thus  I  was  as  a  man  that  A.  not 
ft9. 33.  Ld.  A.  poor,  and  despiscth  nol  his  prisoners 
Prnv.  H.  34.  hlcKsed  is  ihe  man  Ihat  A.  me,  WHlching 
13.  1.  a  wi«e  son  A.  his  father's  Instruction 
8.  rnnsom  his  riches,  l.ul  the  |>oor  A.  not  rebuke 
15.  29  but  h<-  A.  Ihe  prayer  of  ihe  riehtcwut 
31.  the  ear  Ihat  A.  the  reproof  of  life,  32. 
18. 13.  ho  that  answcrotli  a  matter  before  he  A.  it 


HEA 

ProD.21 .28.hut  the  man  tbSt  A.  speaketh  oonitantly 

25.  10.  lest  he  that  A.  it  put  thee  to  shame 

29.  24.  he  A.  cursing,  and  bcwrayelh  it  not 
Isa.  41.  26.  yea,  there  is  none  that  A.  your  words 

42.  20.  opening  the  ears,  but  be  A.  not 
F.iek.'J.  27.  thou  ahaltsay,  he  that  A.  let  him  hear 

33.  4.  whosoever  A.  the  sound  of  the  trumpet 
Jlfa«.7.24. whoso  A.these  suyiiiS3,26.  Lake  6. 47, 49. 

13.  lit.  when  any  one  A.  the  word  of  Ihe  kingdom 
20.  the  same  is  he  that  A.  the  word,  22,  23. 
Luke  10.16.  he  that  A.you  A.  me,  and  thatdespiseth 
./uA«3.29.wlio  slanueth  and  A.him  rejoicelh  greatly 

5.  24.  he  that  A.  my  word,  and  believeth  ou  him 

8.  47.  he  that  is  of  God  A.  God's  words 

9. 31.  God  A.  not  sinners, but  if  any  man  bo  a  wor- 
shipper of  God,  and  doelh  his  sv ill,  him  he  A. 

18. 37.  every  one  that  is  of  Ihc  truth,  A.  my  voice 
2  C^r.  12.  6.  think  of  me  above  that  he  A.  of  me 

1  John  4.  5.  are  of  the  world,  and  the  world  A.  them 

6.  we  are  of  God,  he  that  knowelh  God  A.  us 
5.  14.  if  we  ask  according  to  his  will,  he  A.  ua 
Iter.  22.  17.  and  let  him  that  A.  say,  come 

18.  for  I  testify  to  every  man  that  A.  the  words 
IlEAlilXG. 
Ocn.W.  1 13.  whenLaban  beard  the  A.  of  Jacob 

t33.  she  called  his  name  Simeon,  that  is,  A. 
Ocut.  31.  II.  sbalt  read  this  law  to  Israel  in  their  A. 

2  .Sam.  18.  12.  for  in  our  A.  the  king  charged  thee 
2  Kings  4. 31.  but  there  was  neither  voice  nor  A. 
JV( A.H.  1 2.  the  law  before  all  that  understood  in  A. 
.fob  33.  8.  surely  thou  hast  sjiokcn  in  my  A. 

37. 1 2.  hear  in  A.  the  noise  of  his  voice  and  sound 
42.  5.  I  have  heard  of  thee  by  the  A.  of  the  ear 

I'sal.  18.  t  44.  at  the  A.  of  the  ear  they  will  obey 
Isa.  6.  9.  hear  ye  in  A.  but  understand  not 
11.  3.  nor  reprove  al^er  the  A.  of  liis  ears 
21.  3.  I  was  bowed  down  at  the  A.  of  it 
28.  t  9.  whom  shall  he  make  to  understand  Ihc  A.? 
33. 15.  he  that  sloppclb  his  ears  from  A.  of  blood 
.53. 1 1.  who  hath  believed  our  A.  ?  Rom.  10.  t  16. 
Ezek.  9.  5.  to  others  he  said  in  my  A.  go  after  him 

10.  13.  it  was  cried  unto  them  in  my  A.O  wheel 
16. 1 56.  thy  sister  Sodom  was  not  for  A.  in  the  day 

.Imos  8.  II.  a  famine  of  A.  the  word  of  the  I^ord 
Hab.  3.  1 2.  O  Ld.  I  have  heard  thy  h.  I  was  afrair 
Jirts  25.  21.  to  be  reserved  to  the  A.  of  .Augustus 

23.  Agripjia  was  entered  into  the  place  of  A. 
Iiom.\0.\~.  faith  Cometh  by  A.  and  A  hy  wordofG 
1  C«r.  12.  17.  where  were  the  A.  ?  if  whole  were.' 
Oa/.3.2.tho  works  of  law,  or  by  the  A.of  fiith.i 
//f  A.5.11.  many  things  hard,  seeing  ye  are  dull  of  A 
HEARING. 

1  Kings  3.  t  9.  give  thy  servant  a  A.  heart  to  judge 
Prnv.  20.  12.  the  A.  ear,  the  Lord  hmh  made 

28.  9.  that  turneih  away  the  ear  from  A.  the  law 
Keel.  1.  8.  nor  is  the  ear  filled  with  A. 

K:f  A.33.14.he  that  A.heareih  the  sound  of  Irumpela 
Mat.  13. 13.  and  A.  they  hear  not,  nor  understand 
14.  hy  A.  ye  shall  hear,  and  shall  not  understand 
1.5.  their  ears  dull  of  A.  .'Ids  2>:.  27.  Heb.  5.  11. 
Morkli.  2.  many  A.  him  were  astonished,  snying 
Z,uA'r'2. 46.  both  A.  them  and  asking  ihem  <|uesiions 
./icts  r>.  5.  .Ananias  A.  these  words  fell  down 
8.  6.  A.  and  seeing  the  miracles  which  he  did 
9.7.  the  men  stood,  A.  a  voice,  but  seeing  no  man 
18.  8.  many  of  Ihe  Corinthians  A.  believed 
Philem.  5.  A.oflhy  love  and  failh  loward  Ld.  Jesus 

2  Pet.  2.  8.  Lot  in  seeing  and  A.  vexed  his  righteous 

HKARKEiN. 
F.Tod.  6.  30.  behold,  how  shall  Pharaoh  A.  lo  mef 
Deut."!. la.iCyt!  A. to  ihi'sejudaments,aiHl  keepthem 

11.  13.  if  ye  will  A.  diligently  lo  fiiv  commands 
1.5.5.  iflhoucirefullyA.  lo  voice  of  Ld../^»-.  17.24. 
18.  15.  a  prophet  like  to  me,  lo  him  ve  shall  A. 

28.13.  ifthoiiA.tocoi.mianduienls.l  Kings  11.38. 
./ij.tA.  1.  17.  as  111  Moses,  fo  will  we  A.  unto  ihco 

1  .Sam.  15.  22.  and  lo  A    than  the  fat  of  rams 

30.  24.  for  who  will  A.  lo  you  in  this  mailer  ? 
lA'in/T.s"*.28.have  thou  respect  loA.to  errand  prayer 

29.  mayist  A.  to  the  prayer,  52. 2.  Chron.  6.19,20. 
JVcA.  13.  27.  shall  we  A.  ihen  to  vnii  lo  do  nil  this  1 
Psnl.  HI.  H.  ()  Israel,  iflliou  will  A.  unto  me 
/'ri>t'.29. 12.  Ifa  ruler  A.  lo  h,es,serv,inis  arc  wicked 
Isa.  '.K.  3.  and  the  ears  of  lliem  llint  hear  shall  A. 
42.  2:1.  who  «lll  A.  and  hear  for  the  lime  loronio 
./(T.  26.  3.  if  so  he  ihoy  will  A.  and  liirii  from  evil? 

5.  lo  A.  to  Ihe  prophets  whom  I  »enl  un'o  you 

29.  12.  yi-  shall  pray  to  mo,  and  I  will  A.  unto  you 
:i.5.  i:i.  will  ye  nol  receive  iiislriiclion  lo  A.lo  words 

y.rch.~.  1 1.  but  they  refused  lo  A.  slopped  iheir  ear* 
.lets  4.  19.  lo  A.  unto  vou  more  than  unto  God 

12.  13.  OS  Prter  knocked,  a  ilnnis.  I  came  lo  A. 

H  E A  R  K  EN ,  twpero  I  irely. 
Oen.^  23.  yp  wives  of  Lnin«>ch,  A.  lo  my  spoofh 

23. 15.  my  loid,  A.  lo  niejl  49.2. A.  to  Isr.  yi>ur  father 
.Vhhi.23.  18.  rise  lip,  A.  unto  mo,  Ihoii  son  ofZippor 
/V11/.4.  1.  A.  O  Israel,  to  the  sliiliiles  I  lesrh  yoo 

27.  9.  lake  heoil,  and  A.  O  Israel,  this  dav  ihoii  art 
.hidg.  9.  7.  he  cried,  A.  to  nie,  ye  men  of  Sheehem 
I  Kings  8.30.  A.  to  the  supplications,  2  Chr  6.  21 


HEA 

/Tinirs  22.28.  he  eaid,A.  O  people,  every  one  of  you 
2  Citron.  18.  27.  and  lie  said,  /t.  nil  ye  people 

2U.I5./1.  ye,  all  Judali,  uiid  ye  inhabitant'^  ofJcrus. 
Job  I'J.  0  unil  h.  to  the  pleadings  of  my  lips 

32. 10.  A.  to  me,  33.  31.  ||  33. 1.  A.  to  all  my  words 

34.  10.  A.  unto  me,  ye  men  of  under*taiiding 

34  lot  a  wise  man  A.  ||  37.  14.  A.  to  this,  O  Job 
Psa/ 34.I1.A.I  will  teach  you  ||  4.5. lO.A.O  daughter 
Prvn.  7  24  A.  to  me,  therefore,  O  children,  8.  32. 
/sa.  28.  23.  hear  my  voice,  A.  and  hear  my  speech 

34.  1.  comti  near  ye  nations,  A.  ye  people,  49.  1. 

46.3.  A.tonic,  O  house  of  Jacob,  48.  12.  Hos.5. 1. 
12.A.to  me, stout-hearted,  are  far  from  righteous. 

51.  1.  A.  to  me,  ye  that  follow  alter  righteousness 
4.  A.  unto  me,  my  people,  give  ear,  O  my  nation 

7.  A.  to  nic,  ye  thai  know  righteousness 

55. 2.  A.  diligently  unto  ine,  eat  that  which  is  good 
Jer.  6.  17.  saying,  h.  to  the  sound  of  the  trumpet 
Z>an.  9. 19.  O  Lord,  A.  and  do;  defer  not,  O  my  God 
Mic.  1.  2.  A.  O  earth,  and  aV  that  therein  is 
Mark  7.  14.  he  said,  A.  to  me,  every  one  of  you 
^cts  2.  14.  ye  men  of  Judah,  A.  to  my  words 

7.  2.  he  said,  men,  brethren,  and  fathers,  A. 

15.  13.  saying,  men  and  brethren,  A.  to  me 
Jam.  2.  5.  It.  my  beloved  brethren,  hath  not  God 

HE.ARKEN  not,  or  not  HE.\RKEN. 
Orn.  34.  17.  if  ye  will  not  A.  to  he  circumcised 
Ezod.  7.  4.  Pharaoh  shall  not  It.  to  you,  22.  |  11.  0. 
Lev.  26.  14.  but  if  ye  will  not  It.  to  me,  18,  21,  27. 
Vent.  13.  3.  thou  shall  nut  h.  to  that  dreamer 

8.  not  k.  unto  him,  nor  shall  thine  eye  pity  him 

17.  12.  the  man  tlml  will  not  It.  to  the  priest 

18.  19.  that  whosoever  will  not  A.  lo  my  words 
21.  18.  when  chaslened,  he  will  not  It.  to  them 
23.  5.  Lord  would  nut  It.  to  Balaam,  Josh.  24. 10. 

Josh.l.  18.  and  will  not  h.  to  thy  words  in  all 
Judg.  2.  17.  yet  they  would  not  A.  to  their  judges 
11.  17.  the  king  of  Edom  would  not  It.  thereto 

19.  25.  the  men  of  Giheah  would  not  h.  to  him 

20.  13.  the  children  of  Benjamin  would  not  h. 

1  A'(Tin-s20. 8.  elders  said,  A.»io<  to  him,  nor  consent 

2  Kings  17.  40.  did  nut  A.  but  did  after  their  manner 
18.  31.  k.  not  lo  Hezekiah,  A.<a.  3G.  10. 

2  Ckr.  10.  16.  king  Rehohoam  would  not  It.  to  them 
33. 10.  and  the  Lord  spake,  but  lliey  would  not  It. 

Job  33.33.  if  not  A.  hold  thy  peace,  [  shall  teach  thee 

Psal.  58.5.  who  will  not  It.  to  the  voice  of  charmers 
81.  11.  hut  my  people  would  not  It.  lo  my  voice 

^er.  6.10.  their  ear  is  uncircnmcised,  they  cannot  It. 
17.  but  they  said,  we  will  not  A.  44.  16. 
7.  27.  thou  shall  speak,  they  will  not  A.  unto  thee 
n.  11.  tho"  they  cry  to  me,  I  will  not  h.  to  them 

16.  12.  after  evil  heart,  that  they  may  not  A.  to  me 

17.  27.  if  ve  will  not  A.  to  me,  25.  4.  F.ielc.  00.  30. 
23. 16.  h.'not  to  prophets,  27.  9,  14, 16, 17.  |  29.  8. 

38.  15.  if  I  give  counsel,  wilt  thou  not  li.  to  me? 
F.zf.k.  3.  7.  not  A.  to  thee,  for  they  will  not  A.  lo  me 

20.  8.  they  rebelled,  and  would  not  A.  unto  me 
Woi.  9.17.  because  I hev  did  not.k.iu  him,  Zeclt.  1.4. 

HE.\aKENED. 
Orn.  23.  16.  Abraham  It.  to  Epiiron,  and  weighed 
30.  17.  God  A.  to  Leah  ||  22.  God  A.  to  Rachel 

34.  24.  lo  Hnmor  A.  all  that  went  out  of  the  gate 

39.  10.  thai  Joseph  A.  not  to  her,  to  lie  by  her 
Ex.od.  6.  9.  but  they  A.  not  to  Moses,  16.  20. 

12.  the  cliildren  of  Israel  have  not  li.  to  me 
7.  13.  Phara.>h  A.  not  to  them,  8.  15,  19.  |  9.  12. 
Deiil.  9.  19.  Lord  A.  to  me  at  that  lime,  10.  10. 
16.  14.  these  nations  A.  to  observers  of  times 
34.9.  Israel  A.  to  Joshua  as  to  Moses,  ./b.<rA.  1. 17. 
Judg.  11.2S.  king  of  Ammonites  A.  not  to  Ji;phthah 
J  .^(nn.28.21.lhc  woman  of  Endor  It.  to  Saul's  words 
lA7no'.9l-2.l5.kingA.nottopeople,16.2C//r.l0.1.'J. 
24.  they  A. therefore  to  the  word  of  the  Lord 

15.  20.  Ben-hadad  A.  to  king  Asa,  2  Citron.  16.  4. 
2  fCings  13.  4.  and  the  Lord  It.  to  Jehoahaz 

16.  9.  the  king  of  Assyria  A.  to  Asa 

20.13  n^'Zi^kiah  A.to  the  m^ssenjers  from  Biihvlon 

21.  9.  Judah  A.  not  to  Ihe  law,  Mana^seh  seduced 

22.  13.  our  fathers  A.  not  to  the  words  of  the  hook 
2CAr.  24. 17.  then  Joasli  A.  to  the  princes  of  Judah 

2i.  16.  Amnziah  h.  not  to  the  prophet's  counsel 
30. 20.  Lord  A.  to  Hczekiab,  and  healed  Ihe  people 

35.  22.  Josiah  A.  not  lo  Pharaoh-necho 

Jifch.  9.  16.  our  fathers  dealt  proudly,  and  A.  not 
to  thy  commandments,  29,  34.  .hr.  34.  14. 
F.stk.  3.  4.  now  when  Mordccni  A.  not  to  them 
Psal.  81.  13.  O  that  mv  people  hnd  A.  to  me 
fsu.  21.  7.  nnd  he  A.  diligently  with  much  heed 
48. 18.  O  that  thou  had-ii  A.  to  my  commandments 
Jtr.  6.  19.  they  have  not  A.  to  my  woril,  7.  24, 
'26. 1  2.'t.  3,  4,  7.  I  26.  5.  |  29.  19.  |  32.  33.  I 
34   17. 1  3.>.  14,  1.),  16.  I  36.  31.  |  44.  .5. 
37.  14.  Irijah  A.  not  to  Jeremiah,  so  he  took  him 
Firk.  3.  6.  had  I  sent,  thev  woidd  have  A.  to  Ihec 
Jian.  9.  6.  neither  have  we  A.  to  thv  servants 
Mnl.  3.  16.  the  Lord  A.  nnd  heard  it,  .fer.  8.  6. 
.4fts27.21.  Paul  said,  sirs,  ye  should  have  A.  tome 
.Sec  Voice. 
S71 


HEA 

HEARKENEDST. 

/?eit£.  28. 45.  because  thou  A.  not  to  voice  of  the  L. 

HEARKI'.NETH 

Proo.  1.  33.  but  whuso  A.  to  me  shall  dwell  safely 
12.  15.  but  he  that  A.  to  counsel  is  wise 
HEARKENING. 

Psal.  103.  20.  ye  angels  It.  to  the  voice  of  his  word 
HEART. 

Tlu;  Hebrews  look  vpon  the  heart  as  the  source 
of  wit,  understanding,  love,  courage,  "grief, 
and  pleasure.  J  fence  are  derived  many  ways  of 
speaking.  An  honest  and  good  heart;  that  is 
a  heart  studious  of  holiness,  being  prepared  by 
the  Spirit  of  Clod,  to  entertain  the  word  with 
due  affections,  dispositions,  and  resolutions, 
Luke  8.  15.  H^e  read  of  a  broken  heart,  a 
clean  heart,  an  evil  heart,  a  hardened  heart,  a 
liberal  heart,  a  heart  that  does  an  act  of  kind 
ness,  freely,  voluntarily,  with  generosity.  To 
incline  the  heart  to  God;  to  beseech  him  to 
change  our  stony  hearts  into  hearts  of  llesh ;  to 
love  with  all  one's  heart,  &-c.  To  turn  th< 
heart  of  the  fathers  to  the  children,  and  the 
heart  of  the  children  to  their  fathers,  Mai.  4. 
C.  that  is,  lo  cause  thent  to  be  perfectly  recon- 
ciled, and  that  they  should  be  of  the  same 
mind.  Let  no  man's  heart  fail;  let  no  man  be 
discouraged,  1  Sam.  17.  32. 
To  want  heart,  sometimes  denotes  to  want  under- 
standing and  prudence.  Hos.  7.  II,  Ephraim 
is  like  a  silly  dove,  without  heart;  they  call  to 
Egypt,  they  go  to  Jlssyria.  They  have  no 
judgmeiit  or  understanding  of  the  right  way, 
to  free  themselves  from  their  troubles,  which 
is  seen  in  their  seekiitg  to  Egypt  and  Assyria 
O  fools  and  slow  of  heart,  ignorant  men  with- 
out insight  and  understanding,  Luke  24.  25 
Tliis  people's  heart  is  waxed  gross ;  lest  they 
should   understand   with  their  heart,  Mat.  13. 

15.  Their  heart  is  stupified,  so  as  to  be  des- 
titute of  understanding ;  they  resist  the  light, 
and  reject  all  impressions  of  truth.  The 
prophets  prophesy  out  of  their  own  hearts, 
Eiek.  13.  2.  They  prophesy  according  to  their 
own  inclinations  and  affections,  and  what  their 
own  imaginations  suggest  to  them,witliout  any 
warrant  from  Ood.  "To  lay  any  thing  to  heart 
lo  set  one's  heart  on  any  thing  ;  that  is,  to  re- 
member it,  to  apply  one's  self  to  it,  to  have  it  at 
heart.  No  man  layeth  it  to  heart,  no  one  con 
cerns  himself  ahotil  it,  Jer.  12.  11. 

The  heart  dilates  with  joy , con  tracts  with  sadness, 
breaks  with  sorroic,  grows  fat,  and  hardens  in 
prosperity;  it  resists  truth;  God  opens  it,  pre- 
pares and  turns  it  as  heplcase.i.    To  steal  one'i 
heart,  is  an  expression  in  Gen.  31.  t  20.    .Jacob 
stole  away  the  heart  of  I^ahan;  that  is,  he  went 
away  without  his  knowledge  and  consent.  The 
heart  melts,  under  discourngrment ;  the  heart 
forsakes  one,  under  terror  ;  the  heart  is  deso- 
late, in  amazement  ;  the  heart  is  fluctuating,  (ti 
doubt.      To  speak  to  one's  heart,   to  comfort 
him,  to  say  pleasing  and  affecting  things  to  him 
Py  the  heart  likeicise  the  middle  of  any  thing 
is  meant :  Tyre  is  in  the  heart  of  the  fcas,  in  the 
midst  of  the  seas,  Ezek.  27.  4.     We  will  not 
fear,  though  the  mountains  he  carried  into  the 
heart,  or  midst  of  the  sea,   Psal.  40.  2.     As 
Ji)n«.«  was  three  days  nnd  three  nights  in  the 
whale's  belly,  so  shall  the  Son  of  man  be  three 
days  and  three  nights  in  the  heart  of  the  earth, 
in  the  grave.  Mat.  12.  40. 
Oen.  31.  t20.  Jacob  stole  away  the  A.  ofLaban 
34.  t  3.  Shechem  s|)ake  to  the  A.  of  Dinah 
45.  26.  Jncoh's  A.  fainted,  for  he  believed  them  not 
Kr.nil.  23.  9.  for  ve  know  the  It.  of  a  stranger 
28.30.lheyshanb(>on  Aaron's  A.  when  hegoeihin 
.3.').  5.  whoso  is  of  a  willing  A.  let  him  bring  it 

3.').  tlmm  hath  he  filhd  witti  wi-doni  of  A. 
Lev.  26.  16.  shall  consume  eyes,  cause  sorrow  of  A. 
.V«m.32.7.whereforediscniirMceyethe  A.  oflsrael? 
9.  they  discouraged  the  A  of  the  children  oflsrael 
Dent.  5.  29.  O  that  there  were  such  a  A.  in  thetr. 
28.  28.  Lord  shall  smite  with  astonishment  of  A 
47.  thou  servedst  not  the  Lord  with  gladness  ofA. 
65.  Ihe  T>ord  shall  give  thee  there  a  IremhlinjA. 
59.  4.  the  Lord  hath  not  given  you  a  ft.  to  perceive 
■Tosh.  14.  8.  they  made  the  A.  of  the  people  melt 
.Tttdir.  .5.  l.i.  for  divisions  were  great  thoughts  of  *. 

16.  for  divisions  there  were  great  searchings  of  A. 
18.20.  Ihe  priest's  A.  was  glad,  he  took  the  ephod 

1  Sam.  1.  13.  now  Hannah,  she  spake  in  her  A. 
4.  t  20.  she  answered  not,  nor  set  her  A.  to  it 
10.  9.  it  was  so  that  God  save  him  another  ft. 
16.  7.  hut  Ihe  Lord  looketh  on  the  A. 
17.."?2.nnv.  said, lot  no  mnn'sA.  fail  becauspof  him 
24.  ."i.  David's  A.  smote  him  hecatise  he  cut  off 
25.31.  shall  he  no  grief,  nor  offence  of  A.  to  my  lord 

36.  and  Nabal's  A.  was  merry  within  him 

2  Sam.  6. 16.  she  despised  him  iii  A.  1  Chron.  15. 29. 


WEA 

2  Sam.  13.28.  when  Ammon's  A.  is  merry  vi'ith  wina 

14. 1.  that  the  king's  A.  was  toward  Ahsaloni 
18. 14.  Joab  thrust  darts  through  the  A.  of  Ab^al 

19.  t  "•  go  forth  and  speak  to  A.  of  thy  servants 
14.  he  bowed  the  A.  of  all  the  men  of  Judah 

1  Kings  3.  9.  give  thy  serviini  an  understanding  A 

12.  I  have  given  thee  uu  understanding  A. 
4.2y.G.  gave  Solomoli  wisdom  nnd  largeness  of  A. 
8.  17.  it  was  in  the  A.  of  David,  2  Chron.  6.  7. 

66.  people  went  to  tents  glad  of  A.  2  Chron.  7. 10. 

10. 2.  communed  of  all  was  in  her  A.  2  Chron.  9.L 
11.4.  perfect,  as  was  tl)e  A.  of  David  his  fatlier 
12.  27.  then  shall  Ihe  A.  of  this  people  turn 

2  Kings  6.  U.the  A.of  kingof  .\ssyria  was  troubled 

12. 4.  that  Cometh  into  any  man's  A.  2  Chr.  29.31. 

1  Otron.  12.  3.3.  they  were  not  of  double  A. 
t  33.  they  were  without  a  A.  and  a  A. 

16.  10.  let  the  A.  of  them  rejoice,  Psal.  105.  3. 

29.  17.  I  know  thou  triest  the  A.  18.  Jer.  11.  20. 

2  Chr.  7.  11.  nnd  all  that  came  into  Solomon's  A. 

30.  t  i!2.  He/.ekiah  spake  to  the  A.  of  the  Levites 
Ezra  6.22.  turned  the  It.  of  the  king  of  Assyria 

7.  27.  put  such  a  thing  as  this  in  the  king's  A. 
JVcA.  2.  2.  this  is  nothing  else  but  sorrow  of  A. 
Esth.  1.  10.  when  Ihe  A.  of  Ihe  king  was  merry 

5.  9.  Hainan  went  forth  that  day  with  a  glad  A. 
Job  9.  4.  he  is  wise  in  h.  and  mighty  in  strength 

12.  t  3.  but  I  have  a  It.  as  well  as  you 

24.  he  taketh  away  the  A.  of  the  chief  of  people 
29.  13.  I  caused  the  widow's  A.  to  sing  for  joy 
34.  1 10.  therefore  hearken  to  mc,  ye  men  of  A. 

t34.  let  men  of  A.  tell  mo,  let  a  wise  man  hear 

36.  13.  hut  the  hypocrites  in  A.  heap  up  wrath 

37.  24.  he  respocteth  not  any  that  are  wise  of  A 

38.  36.  who  hath  given  understanding  to  the  A. 
Psal.  12.  2.  and  with  a  double  A.  do  they  speak 

19. 8.  the  statutes  of  Lord  are  right,  rejoicing  the  A. 
34. 18.  theLd.is  nigh  them  that  are  of  a  broken  A. 
44.  21.  for  he  knowelh  the  secrets  of  the  A. 

45.5.  thine  arrows  are  sharp  in  the  A.  of  enemies 
58.2.in  A.you  work  wickedness  1104.6.theA.isdeep 
73.  7.  they  have  more  than  A.  could  wish 

101.  4.  a  froward  A.  shall  depart  from  me 

5   a  high  look,  and  a  prou'l  A.  will  not  I  sufler 

104.  15.  wine,  that  maketh  glad  the  A.  of  man; 

bread,  which  strengthenoth  man's  A. 

Prov.fi.  18.  aA.  that  deviseth  wicked  imaginations 

t32.  whoso  committeth  adultery,  lackelh  A. 

7.  10.  behold,  there  met  him  a  woman  su4itle  of  A. 

8.  5.  and  ye  fools,  be  ye  of  an  understanding  A. 

10.  8.  the  wise  in  A.  will  receive  commandmentg 
20.  the  A.  of  the  wicked  is  little  worth 

11.20.  they  ofa  froward  A.are  abomination  loLd. 

29.  Ihe  fool  shall  be  servant  to  the  wise  of  A. 

12.  8.  hut  he  that  isof  [leryerseA.  shall  be  despised 
20.  deceit  is  in  the  A.  of  them  who  imagine  evil 

25.  heaviness  in  the  A.  of  man  maketh  it  stoop 

13.  12.  hope  defened  maketh  tho  A.  sick 

14.  10.  the  A.  knoweth  his  own  bitterness 

13.  even  in  laughter  the  A.  is  sorrowful 

14.  backslider  in  A.  be  filled  with  his  own  wavi 

30.  a  sound  A.  is  the  life  of  the  flesh,  but  envy  tfm 
33.  wisdom  restelh  in  A.of  him  that  hath  nndereU 

15.  7.  but  the  A.  of  Ihe  foolish  doeth  not  so 

13.  a  inerry  A.  maketh  n  cheerful  countenance; 

hut  by  sorrow  of  the  A.  the  spirit  is  broken 

ll.A.of  him  th:i1  hath  undersl.  seeketh  ktiowledge 

15.  he  that  is  of  a  merty  A.  hath  a  continual  feast 
28.  tho  A.  of  the  righlc  ous  studidh  to  answer 
30.  the  light  of  the  eyes  rejoi'-eth  the  A. 

t  32.  he  that  heareth  reproof  possesseth  a  A. 
16  l!  the  preparation  of  A.  in  man  from  the  Lord 
5.  every  one  proud  in  A.  is  nn  abomination  lo  Ld 
9.  a  man's  A.  deviscth  his  way,  hut  Lord  directs 
23.  the  A.  of  the  wise  tcachcth  his  mouth 

17.  16.  a  price  in  hand,  seeing  he  hath  no  A.  to  it 
20.  he  that  halft  a  froward  A.  findeth  no  good 
22.  n  merry  A.  doeth  good  like  a  medicine 

18.  12.  before  destruction  the  A.  of  man  is  haughty 
15.  the  A.  of  tho  prudent  gettcth  knowledge 

19.  21.  there  are  many  devices  in  a  man's  h. 

20  .1.  counsel  in  the  A.  of  man  is  like  deep  w.iter 

21.  I.  the  king's  A.  is  in  the  hand  of  the  Lord 
4.  n  high  look,  nnd  a  proud  A.  is  sin 

22.  Il.lhalloveth  purencssof  A.  the  king  his  friend 
15.  foolishness  is  hound  in  the  A.  of  n  child 

94.12.  doth  not  he  ihat  ponderclh  the  A. consider  it? 

25.  3.  nnd  Ihe  A.  of  kings  is  unsenrchable 

20.  so  is  he  that  sinjeth  songs  to  n  heavy  It. 

26.  23.  a  wicked  A.  is  like  a  potsherd  covered  with 

27.  9.  oinlment  and  perfume  rejoice  the  A. 
19.  BO  the  A.  of  man  answerelh  to  man 

2P.  25.  he  that  is  of  a  proud  A.  stirreth  op  strife 

31.11.  the  A.  of  her  hnshnnd  doth  safely  trust  in  her 

Ecel.7.2.  by  sadness  ofrniinlennnce  the  A.  is  better 

4.  the  A.  of  the  wise  ts  in  the  house  of  mourning, 

but  the  A.  of  fools  is  in  the  house  of  mirth 

7.  oppression  makes  mud,  n  gift  destroyeth  the  A 

8. 5. wise  man's  A.  disccrneth  bnth  time  nnd  jiidgm 

11.  the  k.  of  men  is  fully  set  in  them  to  do  evil 


HEA 

Ecel.  9.3.  alno  the  h.  ofthe  8ons  of  men  la  full  of  evil 
7.oat  thy  bread,and  drink  ihy  wine  with  merry  h 
10. '2.  a  wiae  mnn'sA.  is  alright  hiindilbnisA.at  lot't 

/sa.6.10.  make  their  k.  fat,  Mat.  Vi.  15.  .^cts  •iii.ii~. 
9.  9.  that  Bay  in  the  pride  and  stoutness  of  A. 
10. 12.  will  punish  the  fruit  ofthe  stout  h.  of  kinj 
J:J.  7.  all  hands  faint,  every  man's  A.  sIkiII  melt 
30.  29.  yo  shall  have  gladness  uf'A.  us  when  one 
3'2.4.tlieA.  ofthe  rash  shall  understand  knowledge 

35.  4.  say  to  them  that  ar«  of  fearful  A.  be  strong 

40.  t  2.  speak  ye  to  the  A.  of  Jeru.salem 

42.  25.  it  burned  him,  yet  ho  laiil  it  not  to  A. 

41.  20.  a  deceived  A.  Iialh  turned  him  axide 
57.  1.  and  no  man  layctli  it  to  A.  Jer.  12. 11. 

15.  and  to  revive  the  A.  ofthe  contrite  ones 
59.  13.  uttering  from  the  A.  words  of  falsehood 
()5.  14.  behold,  my  servants  shall  sing  for  joy  of  A. 
but  yc  shall  cry  for  sorrow  of  A.  and  liovvl 
t  17.  the  former  heavens  not  come  upon  the  A. 
yer.2.  t24.  that  snu  tie  th  wind  at  the  desire  of  her  A. 
3. 1 16.  neither  eliall  it  come  upon  the  A. 

4.  9.  the  A.  ofthe  king  and  princes  shall  perish 

5.  23.  but  this  people  hath  a  rebellious  A. 

9. 2I>.  the  house  of  Israel  are  uncireunicised  in  A. 
11.  20.  O  Lord,  that  friest  the  reins  and  the  A. 

17.  9.  the  A.  is  deceitful  above  all  things 
10.  I  the  Lord  search  the  A.  I  try  the  reina 

20.  12.  O  Lord,  that  seest  the  reins  and  A. 
23.26.  how  long  shiill  this  be  inihe  A.  of  prophets? 
24.  7.  and  I  will  give  them  a  A.  to  know  me 
48. 41.  be  as  the  A.  of  a  woman  in  her  pang8,40.22. 
7.,ani.3.65.  give  them  sorrow  of  A.  thy  curse  to  them 
Ezek.  0.  9.  I  am  broken  with  their  whorish  A. 
11.  19.  I  will  take  the;  stony  A.  out  of  Iheir  flesh 
13.  22.  with  lies  yc  made  A.  ofthe  righteous  sad 

18.  31.  and  make  you  a  new  A.  and  a  new  spirit 
21. 7.  every  A.  shall  melt,  all  hands  shall  be  feeble 
25. 6.  rejoiced  in  A.  with  all  thy  despite  ag.  Israel 

15.  have  taken  vengeance  with  a  despiteful  A. 
27.  31.  shall  weep  for  thee  with  bitterness  of  A. 

36.  26.  and  I  will  give  you  a  A.  of  flesh 

44.  7.  strangers  uncircumcised  in  A.  9.  Wc£s  7.  51. 
f)an.  4.  Ifi.  let  a  beast's  A.  be  given  unto  him 

7.  4.  and  a  man's  A.  was  given  lo  it 
I{os.  2.  t  14.  I  will  allure  her,  and  speak  to  her  A. 

4.  11.  whoredom  and  win(!  take  away  the  A. 

7.  11.  Ephraim  is  like  a  silly  dove  without  A. 
J^ali.  2.  10.  the  A.  mellcth,  and  the  knees  smite 
Ze.yh.  2.  \T>.  this  the  city  that  said  in  her  h.  I  am 
Mai.  2.2.  if  ye  will  not  lay  it  to  A.  to  give  glory,  I 

will  send  a  curse,  because  ye  do  not  lay  it  to  A. 

4.6.  shall  turn  the  A.  of  fathers,  nnd  A.of  cliildieii 

Mnt.  11.29.  come  to  me,  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  A. 

12. 34.  out  of  the  abundance  of  the  A.  Liil:efi.  45. 

35.  out  ofthe  treasure  ol'the  A.  I^ukr.  fi.  45. 

15.  18.  come  forth  from  the  A.  and  defde  the  man 

IR.outof  the  A.proceed  evil  thoughts,  Mnrlc'.'iX. 

Mark  16. 14.  he  upbraided  them  with  hardness  of  A. 

Luke  2. 19.  Mary  kept  and  pondered  them  in  her  A. 

51.  but  his  mother  kept  th:>se  sayings  in  her  A. 

8.  15.  which  in  a  good  h.  having  heard  the  word 
24.  2.5.  O  fools,  slow  of  A.  to  Itelieve  the  prophets 

John  13.2.  the  devil  having  put  into  the  A.  of  Judas 
.fct,9  2. 46.  did  eat  their  meat  with  singleness  of  A. 

5.  33.  heard  that,  they  were  cut  to  the  A.  7.  54. 
11.23.wilh  purpose  of  A. they  would  cleave  to  Lord 

Rom.  2.  5.  after  thy  impenitent  A.  treasures!  up 
29.  circumcision  is  that  ofthe  A.  in  the  Spirit 

6.  17.  ye  have  obeyed  from  the  A.  that  doctrine 
10. 10.  with  the  A.  man  belinveth  to  righteousness 

1  Cor.  i.  9.  neither  have  entered  into  the  A.  of  man 

7.  37.  hath  so  decreed  in  his  A.  that  hi:  will  keep 

2  Oir.  2.  4.  out  of  much  anguiali  of  A.  I  wrote  you 
3.  3,  not  in  stone,  but  written  in  fleshly  tables  of  A. 
5.  12.  which  glory  in  appearance,  and  nut  in  A. 
8. 10.  the  same  earnest  care  in  tjin  A.  of  Titus 

F.ph.  6.  6.  doing  the  will  of  God  from  the  A. 
Col.  3.  23.  but  in  singleness  of  A.  fearing  God 
1  Thr.ia.'i.  17.  taken  fr()m  you  in  presence,  not  in  A. 
Heb.  4. 12.  is  a  discerner  of  the  intents  of  the  A. 

10.22.  let  us  draw  near  with  a  true  A.  in  assurance 

13. 9.  it  is  good  tint  theA.be  cstabiislied  with  grace 
1  Pet.  3.  4.  let  it  be  ilici  hidden  man  ofthe  A. 
iPet.^i.  14.  n  A.  exorcised  with  covetous  pnicticcs 
Rev.  19.  7.  for  she  snith  in  her  A.  I  sit  a  qpcen 

I!F,.ART. 
F.zod.  15. 8.  depths  were  congealed  in  A.  ofthe  sea 
r>eul.A.^  II.  mountain  burnt  to  the  A.  of  heaven 
Ph.  46.  t  2.  tliough  mountain*  he  carried  into  A.  of 
Prop.  23.  t34.  as  he  that  lietli  down  in  A.  of  sea 

30.  1 19.  the  wnv  of  a  ship  in  the  A.  ofthe  sea 
j';«a.  19.  1.  A.  of  Kgvpt  shull  melt  in  the  inidn  of  it 
Mat.  12.  40.  »o  shall  S'<n  of  man  be  in  A.  of  earth 

nB.\RT  with  all. 
Dtut.  11. 13.  to  servo  him  with  a// your  A.  and  with 
nil  your  soul,  ./rwA.  22.  5.  1  .Sam.  12.  20,  21. 

13.3.  love  the  Ld.  with  alt  vour  A.  and  soid,  llO.fi, 
.Mat.  22.  37.  Mat)k  12  30,  33.  f.ukr  10.  27. 

2fi.lfi.  thou  shall  keep  and  do  them  with  alt  thy  A. 

30.2.  return  to  the  L.with  all  thine  h.  10.  Joel  2. 12. 
27S 


HEA 

.hidg.  16.  17.  that  Samson  told  her  all  his  A.  18. 

1  KingsH.  4.  walk  before  me  with  all  their  A.  8.  23. 
8.  48.  and  so  return  lo  theo  with  all  their  A.  and 

all  their  soul,  2  Kinffn  23.  25.  2  Chron.  6.  38. 

14.  8,  David,  who  followed  me  with  all  his  A. 
2A'inn'A-10.3I.Jehu  took  no  heed  to  walk  with  allh 

2.3.  3.  made  a  covenant  to  walk  before  the  L.  with 
all  their  A.  and  all  their  soul,  2  Citron.  34.  31 

2  CAr.  15. 12.  seek  God  of  fathers  with  all  iheir  A. 

15.  for  they  had  sworn  with  all  their  A. 

22.  9.  Jehoshaphat  sought  the  Lord  with  all  his  A 
31.  21.  he  did  it  with  all  his  A.  and  prospered 

Psal.  86.  12. 1  will  praise  ihee,  O  L.  with  all  my  A 
I'rov.  3.  5.  trust  in  the  L.  with  all  thy  A.  lean  not 
Jer.  29.  1.3.  when  ye  search  tor  me  with  all  your  A 
F.zek.  36.  .5.  with  the  joy  of  hH  their  A.  to  cast  it  out 
Zi^ph.  3.  14.  be  glad  with  all  the  A.  O  Jerusalem 
.flcls  8.  37.  if  thou  believest  with  all  thy  A.  mayest 
See   Apply,  Buoken,  Clban,  Evil,  IIakdkn, 

II.».RDENKD. 

His  HEART. 

Oen.  6.  5.  every  imagination  of  A/s  A.  was  only  evil 
6.  it  repented  the  Lord  and  grieved  him  at  AisA. 

8.2I.L.  said  in  Ais  A.  II  17. 17.  Abrahaiti  inAi.sA. 

27.41.  Klsau  said  in  Ms  A.  the  days  of  mourning 
A'j:o(i.  4.14.whenseeth  thee,  he  will  be  glad  in  A(»A. 

7.  23.  neither  di/l  he  set  hh  A.  to  this  also 

25.2.  every  tnai  that  givetli  willingly  with  hi.i  A. 

28.  29.  in  the  breastplate  of  judgment  upon  Ajs  A. 
35.  34.  ho  hath  put  in  his  A.  that  he  may  teach 

Deut.  2.  30.  the  Lord  hath  made  Ai's  A.  obstinate 
17.  17.  multiply  wives,  that  his  A.  turn  not  away 

20.  his  A.  be  not  lifted  u|)  above  his  brethren 
19.  6.  lest  the  avenger  pursue,  while  his  A.  is  hot 
20.8.  lest  his  brethren's  heart  faint  as  well  aihish. 

24.  15.  for  he  is  poor,  and  settelh  his  A.  upon  it 

29.  19.  that  he  bless  himself  in  Ai.5  A.  saying 
Ruth  3.  7.  hi-1  A.  was  merry,  be  wen',  to  lie  down 

1  Savi.  4.  13.  Ai>  A.  trembled  for  the  ark  of  God 
21. 12.  David  laid  up  these  words  in  his  h. 

25.  t  2.5.  let  not  my  lord  lay  it  to  A/.?  A. 

37.  it  came  to  pass  that  Am  A.  died  within  him 
27. 1.  David  said  in  his  A.  ||  28.  5.  his  A.  trembled 

2  Satn.  7.  27.  thy  servant  hath  fouml  in  his  A.  lo 

pray  this  prayer  unto  thee,  1  Chron.  17.  25. 
13.  33.  let  not  my  lord  take  the  tliinff  to  liis  A. 

1  h'ings  10.24.which  G.  had  put  in  A(S  A.2  CAr.9.23. 

11.3.  and  his  wives  turned  away  Ais  A.  4,  9. 
12.26.  Jeroboam  said  in  his  h.  the  kingdom  return 

2  King-s^.'i'i.  the  arrow  went  out  at  Aw  A.and  sunk 
2  Chron.  12.  14.  because  he  prepared  not  his  A.  to 

17.  6  A;.s  ,'i.  was  lifted  up  in  the  ways  ofthe  Lord 

26.  16.  his  A.  was  lifted  up  to  his  deslructiou 

30. 19.  that  prepareth  his  A.  to  seek  God,  Lord  G. 

32.25.  for  Ai.v  A.  was  lifted  up, therefore  was  wrath 

26.  ho  humbled  himself  for  the  pride  u{ his  A. 

31.  that  he  might  know  all  that  was  in  his  A. 

Ezra  7. 10.  Ezra  prepared  Ai.*  A.  loseek  law  of  Ld. 

jVcA.  9.  8.  and  foundcst  his  h.  faithful  before  thee 

f;.</A.6.6.Haman  iliouijht  in  AisA.to  whom  the  king 

7.5.  where  is  he  that  durst  presume  in  his  A.  to  do 

■Tab  34.  14.  if  he  set  his  h.  upon  man,  if  he  gather 

41.  24.  his  A.  is  as  firm  as  a  stone,  yea,  as  hard 

Psal.  10.  3.  th»"  wicked  boasleth  of  his  A.  desire 

fi.  he  hath  said  in  A(s  A.  11,  13.  I  14.  1.  j  53.  1. 

15.  2.  that  speaketh  truth  in  Ai.*  A.  shall  dwell 
21.  2.  thou  bast  given  him  his  A.  desire,  hast  not 
33.  11.  the  thciughls  of  his  h.  to  all  generations 
.37.  31.  law  of  his  God  is  \n  hinh.  none  of  his  steps 
41.  6.  his  h-  giitliorcth  iniquity  to  itself 

55.  21.  svords  were  smooth,  but  war  was  in  his  A. 
78.  72.  ho  f -d  them  according  to  integrity  of  his  h. 
1 12.  7.  A).'  A.  is  fi.iced,  trusting  in  the  Lord 
8.  Ai's  A.  is  established,  he  shall  not  be  afraid 
Proi).  6.  14.  frowardness  in  his  A.  deviseth  inischf 

18.  2.  but  that  Ais  A.  may  discover  itself 

19.  3.  and  his  h.  fretteth  against  the  Lord 

23.  7.  for  as  he  thinkoth  in  Ais  A.  so  is  he ;  eat  and 

drink,  saith  he,  but  his  h.  is  not  with  thee 
28.  14.  but  he  that  haidencth  his  A.  shall  fill 
F.ccl.  2.  23.  yea  his  A.  taketh  mil  rest  in  the  night 

5.  20.  God  answereth  him  in  ihe  joy  of  A/.i  A. 
Cant.  3.  11.  in  the  day  ofthe  gladness  of  Ai»  A. 
Isa.  7. 2.  his  A.  was  moved,  and  the  A.  of  his  people 

10.  7.  ho  meancih  not  so,  noilhiT  doth  Ai>A.  think 
so,  hut  it  is  in  Ai.'<A.  lo  destroy  and  cut  ofl'natiun^ 
32.(5.Ai.;A.wiII  work  ininuity.to  practise  hypocrisy 
44. 19.  none  consiilerolli  in  hU  A.  neither  is  there 
.57.  17.  he  wont  on  frownrrlly  in  the  way  u(  his  h. 
Jrr.  9.  8.  but  in  A.  ho  layetli  Kis  wait 
23.2(1.  till  he  have  performed  thonghts  of  Ats  A. 

30.  21.  thnt  engaged  his  A.  to  ap|)roach  unto  mo 

21.  until  he  have  perfornnxl  the  intents  nf  his h. 
48.  20.  wo  have  heard  the  hiuyrhtinoss  of  Ai5  A. 

F.iek.  14.  4.  that  soltnth  up  hi*  idols  in  Am  A.  7. 

31.  10.  his  A.  lirted  up  in  his  hcishi,  Dan.  3.  20. 
Pan.  I.  8.  Daniel  proposed  in  Aw  A.  that  hit  would 

4.  Ifi.  let  Ai.i  A.  be  changed  from  man's,  5.  21. 

6,  14.  the  king  set  his  A.  ot  D  rnlol  to  d-jliver  him 

8.  25.  and  bo  shall  magnify  himself  lo  his  h. 


HEA 

T)an.M.lZ.his  h.  shall  be  lifted  up,  shall  cast  down 

28.  Ais  A.  shall  be  against  the  holy  covenant 
0Aa(i.3.that»aithin  AwA.whoshall  bring medownT 
.■V/«t.5.28.hath  committed  adultery  with  her  in  A.  A. 

13.  19.  and  culchclh  away  that  was  sown  in  Ai.s  A. 

24.48.ifevil8ervanl8hallsay  in  AwA.  J.uke  12.45. 
Mark  7.  19.  because  it  enlereth  not  into  Aw  A. 

11.23.  and  shall  not  doubt  in  his  h.  but  believe 
Luke  6.  45.  good  man  out  of  good  treasure  of  Aj»  A. 
an  evil  man  out  ofthe  evil  tre:isure  of  Aj»  A. 
Mcts  1. 23.  it  came  into  his  A.  to  visit  his  brethren 

1  Cor.  7.  37.  he  that  standeih  sieartfast  in  his  A. 
14. 25.  thus  are  the  secrets  of  Ai«  A.  made  manifest 

2  Cur.  9.  7.  as  he  purpuseth  in  his  A.  so  let  him  giva 

Mine  or  my  HEART. 
f?cn.20.  5.  in  the  integrity  of  »ny  A.  I  have  done  thij 

24.  45.  done  speaking  in  mine  A.  Rcbekah  came 
Deut.'iS.  19.  tlio'  I  walk  in  the  imagination  of »»»/ A. 
Josh.  14.  7.  1  brought  him  word  »s  it  was  in  viine  A. 
ludir.  5  9.  my  A.  is  toward  Ihe  governors  of  Israf^l 

1  Ham.  2.  I.  she  said,  my  A.  rejoiceth  in  the  Lord 
l!.5.  shall  do  according  lo  that  which  is  in  vtineh. 

IJi'iiiffsd.'i.  lo  jtul  my  name,  and  my  eyesand  wirne 
A.  shall  be  there  perpetually,  2  Chron.  7.  16. 

2  Kititra  .5.20.  went  not  mine  A.  with  thee,  when 
10.  15.  is  thioe  A.  right  as  viy  A.  is  with  thy  h.7 

3U.  hast  done  according  to  all  that  wag  in  mineh. 

1  Chron.  12.  17.  if  to  help,  rwy  A.  shall  be  knit  loyou 
28.  2.  I  had  in  nine  A.  lo  build  a  house  of  rest 

2  Chron.  29.  10.  it  is  in  Jiiinc  h.  to  make  a  covenant 
j\'t7i.2. 12.  what  God  had  put  in  tny  A.  to  do,  7.  5. 

5.  t  7.  then  my  A.  consulied  in  nie,  I  rebuked 
.Tulj  17.  II.  the  lhou:,'htji  of  «iy  A.  are  broken  off 
23. 16.  God  inaketh  my  A.  soft,  and  the  Almighty 
27.  6.  my  A.  shall  not  reproach  mo  so  long  as  1  live 
31.  7.  and  my  A.  walked  after  mine  eyes 

9.  if  mine  h.  have  been  deceived  by  a  woman 
27.  and  my  h.  iialh  been  »::crelly  enticed 

33.3.  my  wordsshall  be  of  iheuprightncssofmy  A. 

37.  1.  at  this  also  my  A.  trembleth,  and  is  moved 
Ps,il.i.7.l\\{ju  hast  put  gladness  in  7ny  A.  more  than 

13.2.  how  long  take  counsel,  sorrow  in  my  A.  daily 
!>.  but  I  Irusled,  my  h.  shall  rejoice  in  thy  salvat. 
W.'i.my  A.  is  glad  ||  17. 3.  thou  hast  proved  mine  h. 
10.  14.  let  the  meditation  uf  my  h.  be  acceptable 
22.I4.m.A.i3  like  wa.t  ||  26.2.  try  my  reins  and  m.  A. 

25.  17.  the  troubles  of  my  A.  are  enlarged,  O  bring 

27.  3. 7«)/A.slmll  not  fear  though  war  should  rise 
8.  my  A.  said  to  thee,  thy  face,  Lord,  will  I  seek 

28.  7.  my  A.  trusted  in  him,  «iy  A.  greatly  rejoiceth 
36.1. the  transgression  of  tliewicked  saith  in  my  h. 

38.  8.  by  reason  ofthe  disquietness  of  nijr  A. 

10. 7717/ A.  pantelli,  my  strength  failelh,  Isa.  21.4. 
30.  3.  7n7/  A.  was  hot  within  me,  while  musing 
40.8.  yea,  thy  law  is  within  my  A. 

10.  I  have  not  hid  thy  righteousness  within  wy  h. 
12.  notable  to  look  up,  therefore  my  h.  failelh  ma 

4.~>.  1.  my  A.  is  indiling  a  good  matter,  I  speak 
49.  3.  the  meditation  of  my  A.  be  of  understanding 
55.4.7»i7/A.issorepained  within  me, terrors  of  death 
5T.  7.  my  A.  is  fixed,  O  God,  my  A.  is  li.xed,  lOH.  1. 
61.  2.  I  will  cry,  wlien  my  A.  is  overwhelmed 
66. 18.  ifi  regard  iniquity  in  my  A.  L.  will  not  heat 
69.  20.  reproach  hath  broken  my  h.  I  am  full 
73.  13.  verily  I  have  cleansed  my  A.  in  vain 
21.  myh.  was  grieved,  I  was  pricked  in  my  reins 
2l).  my  A.  failelh,  liut  God  is  the  sireiiglh  ofmy  h. 
84.  2.  myh.  and  flesh  rriolh  out  for  the  living  Ooil 
86.  II.  unite  my  A.  lo  f 'ar  thy  name 
102.4.  7/1^  A.  is  siiiillen  and  withered  like  grass 
100.  22.  and  my  A.  is  wouniled  within  me 
119.  II.  thy  word  have  I  hid  in  mineh.  not  to  sin 
32.  I  will  run,  when  lluni  shall  enlarge  my  A. 
36.  incline  wy  A.  lo  thy  testimonies,  not  lo  covet 
80.  let  7717/  A.  be  sound  in  Ihy  slutiiies 
111.  Ihy  lesliinonies  are  Ihe  rejoicing  of  7;7jr  A. 
112. 1  have  inclined  mine  A.  loperfurm  thy  statu. 
131.  1.  Lord,  my  A.  is  not  haughty,  nor  eyes  lofty 
1.39.  23.  search  me,  and  know  my  A.  try  me 
141.  4.  incline  not  7ny  h.  to  any  evil  thing 
143.  4.  7117/  A.  within  me  is  riesolale 
Pmv.  5.  12.  how  halli  my  A.  despised  reproof 
20.  9.  who  can  sny,  I  have  made  7715!  A.  clean  ' 
23.  15.  if  lliiiie  heart  bo  wise,  my  A.  shall  rejoica 
F.rrl.  1.  13.  I  gave  7?iy  A.  lo  sock  and  learih  out 

16.  my  A.  had  ^rcat  experience  of  wisdnin 

17.  I  gave  my  A.  to  know  wisdmn  and  inadnpsa 

2.  1. 1  said  in  mine  A.  go  lo  now,  I  will  nrove  Ihoe 

with  mirlh,  15.  |  3.  17,  16. 
3.  I  sought  in  mine  A.  lo  give  myself  lo  v»ine, 
yet  acquainting  mine  A-  with  wisdom  lo  'ay 
hol<l  on  fidly 
10.  I  withhold  not  my  A.  from  any  joy 
20.  to  cause  7ny  A.  to  despair  of  nil  the  labour 
7.25. 1  applied  w;/A.  lo  know  ands<-arch,8  9,  16 
9.  1.  for  all  this  I  considered  in  my  A. 
Cant.  4.  9.  thou  hast  ravished  my  A.  my  sislPT,  9 
5.  2.  I  sleep,  but  7717/  A.  waketh,  it  is  the  voiC4 
Isa.  15.  5.  my  A.  shall  cry  oul  for  RIonb 

03.  4.  for  tlic  day  of  vengeance  is  in  mine  A. 


HEA 

Jtr.S.lS.  will  give  you  pastora  according  to  mine  A. 
4  19.  I  am  pained  at  my  h.viyh.  niakelli  a  noiso 
7. 31. 1  commanded  not,  neither  came  it  into  inyh. 

8.  19.  when  1  comfort  myself,  my  A.  is  faint  in  me 
12.  3.  hast  seen  me  and  tried  mine  h.  toward  lliee 
15.  10.  thy  word  the  joy  and  rejoicing  oi mine  h. 
20.  9.  his  word  was  in  mine  h.  as  a  burning  fire 
23.  9.  mine  k.  is  broken  |{  48.  31.  my  A.  sliall  mourn 

43.  36.  therefore  mine  A.  shall  sound  for  Moab 
l.am.  1.  2U.  behold,  mine  h.  is  turned  within  me 

iS.  my  sighs  are  many,  and  my  A.  is  faint 
3.  .■>!.  mine  eye  atlecteth  mine  A.  because  of  all 
Dan.  7.  28.  but  1  kept  the  matter  in  my  It. 
Jios.ll.  8.  my  A.  is  turned  within  me,  my  repenlings 
^cts  2. 20.  tlierefore  did  my  A.  rejoice,  tongue  glad 

21. 13.  what  moan  ye  to  weep,  and  break  mine  A.? 
Ii»m.  9.  2.  1  have  continual  sorrow  in  my  A. 

10.  r.  my  k.  desue  to  God  for  Isr.  is  they  be  saved 
Phil.  1.  7.  because  I  have  you  in  my  A.  inasmuch 
See  Applikd. 
One  HEART. 
2  CAron.30.12.  hand  of  God  was  to  give  them  one  A. 
Jer.  32.  3'J.  1  will  give  them  one  A.  Eiek.  11.  19. 
.^cts  4.  32.  multitude  that  believed  were  of  one  A. 

Own  HEART. 
JVum.  15.  39.  that  ye  seek  not  after  your  own  h. 

1  Sam.  13.14. soughtman  afterhis  o.h.Actsl^.'ii. 

2  .Sam.  7.21.  for  thy  word's  sake,  according  to  thine 
own  A.  hast  thou  done  these  tilings,  1  C'Ar.  17. 19. 

XKingsSi.  38.  know  every  man  plague  of  his  own  A. 

12.  33.  which  he  had  devised  of  his  own  h. 
A'eA.  0. 8.  llioH  feigncst  them  out  of  thine  own  h. 
Psal.  4. 4.  commune  with  youroicn  A.  on  your  bed 

20.  4.  grant  thee  according  to  thine  own  A. 

37.  15.  their  sword  shall  enter  into  their  own  h. 

77.  6.  I  commune  with  my  own  A.  and  my  spirit 
Prov.  23. 2G.  he  that  trusteth  in  his  own  A.  is  a  Ibol 
Eccl.  1. 16.  I  communed  with  mine  own  A.  saying 

7.  22.  thy  own  A.  knoweth  thou  hast  cursed  others 
Jer.  0. 14.  after  imagination  of  their  own  A. 23. 17. 

23.  16.  they  speak  a  vision  of  their  own  A. 

26.  prophesy  the  deceit  of  their  o.  A.  Ezck.  13. 17. 
Ezek.  14. 0.  may  lake  house  oflsrael  in  their  own  A. 
Jam.  1.  26.  but  deceiveth  his  ownh.  this  man's 

0«)- HEART. 
Deut.  1.28.  our  brethren  have  discouraged  our  h. 
Psal.  33.  21.  for  oxir  A.  shall  rejoice  in  him 

44.  18.  our  h.  is  not  turned  back,  neither  our 
J^am.  3.  41.  let  us  lift  up  our  A.  with  our  hands 

5.  15.  the  joy  of  our  A.  is  ceased  ||  17.  ou7- A.  isfaint 

/yufee24.32.  did  not  our  A.  burn  within  us,  while  he 

■  2  Cor.  8.  11.  our  mouth  is  ojien,  our  A.  is  enlarged 

1  ,!ohn  3.  20.  if  our  A.  condemn  us,  God  is  greater 

21.  if  «it7- A.  condemn  us  not,  we  have  confidence 

Per/,c£  HEART. 

1  Kings  8.  61.  let  your  A.  he  perfect  with  the  Lord 
11.4.  his  A.  was  not  perfect  with  the  Lord,  15.  3. 

15.14.  nevertheless  Asa's  h.  vas  perfect  with  the 

Lord  all  his  days,  2  Cfiron.  15.  17. 

2  K'27!^.5  20.3.Hezekiahsaid,  remember  howl  have 
walked  before  thee  with  a  perfect  A.  Isa.  38.  3. 

ICAr.  12. 38.  came  witli/>er/.  A.  to  make  Dav.king 

28.  9.  Solomon,  my  son,  serve  God  with  a  perf.  A. 

29.9.because  with  perfect h.  they  offered  willingly 

19.  and  give  unto  riolomon  my  son  &  perfect  A. 

2  Chr.  16.  9.  in  behalf  of  them  whose  A.  \s  perfect 

19.9.  thus  shall  ye  do  in  fear  of  Ld.  v/\ihperfecth. 

25. 2.  Amaziah  didright,  but  not  with  aperfect  A. 
P5aM01.2. 1  will  walk  in  my  house  willi perfect  fi. 

Pure  HEART. 
Psal.  24.  4.  who  shall  ascend  ?  that  hath  npure  h. 
Mat.  5.  8.  blessed  are  pure  in  A.  they  shall  see  God 

1  Tim.1. 5.  end  of  comman.  is  charity  out  of;;«re  A. 
2 Tim.  2.22.  that  call  on  the  Lord  out  of  a  pure  k. 
lPeJ.1.22.  love  one  another  with  a  pure  A.  fervently 

Tkeir  HEART. 
Oen.  42. 28.  their  h.  failed  them,  they  were  afraid 
Josh.  5.1.  the  kingsof  Amoritesheard/A.  A.  melted 

2  Sam.  18. 13.  if  we  flee,  they  will  not  set  (A.A. onus 
1  Kings  8.t47.if  they  bring  back  to  ^A.  A.  2CA.6.t37. 

18.  37.  thou  hast  turned  (Aet'r  A.  back  again 
1  Chrim.  29. 18.  and  prepare  fAe?r  A.  unto  thee 
Job  8.10.  shallthcy  not  utter  words  out  of  tAcir  A.? 

17.  4.  thou  h:ist  hid  their  h.  from  understanding 
P.s-fiMO.  17.  Lord,  thou  wilti)repare  their  A. 

T*?.  8.  a  getieration  that  set  notlAeiV  A.  aright 
18.  they  tempted  God  in  their  A.  by  asking  meal 
37.  their  A.  was  not  right  with  him,  nor  were 

P5.  10.  it  is  a  people  that  do  err  in  fAci'r  A. 

105.  25.  he  turned  their  A.  to  hate  his  people 

107. 12.  therefore  he  brought  down  their  A. 

119. 70.fA.  A.  is  as  fat  as  grease,  1  delight  in  thy  law 

140.2.  which  imagine  mischiefs  in  4A. A.  with  labour 
Trov.  24.  2.  for  their  A.  studieth  destruction 
Eccl.  3.  11.  also  he  hath  set  the  world  in  their  h. 

9.  3.  madness  is  in  tAeir  A.  while  they  live 

Jso.  6. 10.  lest  they  hear  with  their  cars  and  under- 

itand  with  ihcir  h.  Afat.  13.  15.  -lets  28.  27. 

S9. 13.  «A.  A.  is  far  from  me,J»faM5.  8.  Mark!.  6. 

/«r.9.24jieitber  lay  they  in  th.  k.  let  mm  fear  the  Ld. 

273 


HEA 

/er.l3.10.wlBch  walk  in  the  imagination  oftAeir  A- 
14.14.  the  prophets  prophesy  the  deceit  of  Mtir  A. 
n.l.sinof  Juduhis  graven  on  the  table  uU/icirh. 
Lam.ilH.  ihcir  h.  ciied  tothe  Ld.O  wallof  Zion 
Ezc/c.  14.  3.  these  have  set  up  their  idols  in  Ikcirk. 

20.  16.  for  their  A.  went  after  their  idols 

21.  15.  that  tAeiVA.may  faint,  ruins  bo  multiplied 
33.  31.  but  their  h.  goetli  after  their  covetousness 

Hos.  4.  8.  they  set  their  A.  on  their  iniquity 
7.  6.  they  have  made  ready  tAeir  A.  like  an  oven 
14.  they  have  not  cried  unto  me  with  their  A. 
10.2.  tAeiV  A.  is  divided  ||  13.6.  their  h.  was  exalted 

13.  8.  1  will  rend  the  caul  of  their  A.  and  devour 
Zcph.i..l)i.  I  will  punish  the  men  that  say  in  tA.  A. 
ZceA.  10.  7.  their  A.  shall  rejuice  in  the  Lord 

12. 5.  the  governors  of  Judahshall  say  in  thcirh. 
Mark  6.  52.for  their h.  was  hardened,  Horn.  1.  21. 
/yitAe  9.47.  Jesus  perceiving  the  thought  of  their  A. 
John  12.  40.  he  hath  hardened  their  A.  that  they 
should  not  see  nor  understand  with  their  A. 
.dcts  2.37.  were  pricked  in  (Aci'r  A.  and  said  to  Peter 
2  Cor.  3.  15.  when  Moses  is  read  vail  is  on  their  h. 
Eph.i.  18.  because  of  the  blindness  of  their  A. 

7'Ai«c,  thy  HEART. 
Oen.  20.  6.  thou  didst  this  in  the  integrity  of  thy  A. 
£iorf.9.14.1  will  send  all  my  plagues  upon  tAz'ne  A. 
Leu. 19. 17.  thou  shalt  not  hate  thy  brother  in  (A.  A. 
Deut.  4.  9.  le.st  they  depart  from  thy  A.  all  thy  life 
29.  shalt  find,  if  thou  seek  hiin  with  all  thy  A. 

4.  39.  know  and  consider  it  in  thine  A.  8.  5. 

6.  5.  thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  with  all  thine  A. 

7.  17.  if  thou  shalt  say  in  (Ai'ne  A.  these  nations 

are  more  than  1,  8.  17.  |  18.21.  Jer.  1,3.  22. 

8.  2.  led  thee,  to  know  what  was  in  thine  h. 

14.  then  tAi?ie  A.  be  lifted  up,  and  thou  forget  L. 

9.4.  speuk  not  thou  in  thine  h.  after  that  the  Lord 
5.  not  for  uprightness  of  thine  h.  dost  thou  go  to 

10.  12.  to  serve  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  tA?^A. 
15.  9.  there  be  not  a  thought  in  tAy  wicked  A. 

lO.tAineA.  shall  not  be  grieved  when  thou  givest 
28.67.  for  the  fear  of  thine  A.  wherewith  shall  fear 
30.  6.  circumcise  thine  A.  and  the  A.  of  thy  seed 

14.  but  the  word  is  very  nigh  to  thee  in  thy  A. 

17.  if  thine  h.  turn,  so  that  thou  wilt  not  hear 
.hidg.  16.  15.  when  thine  A.  is  not  with  me 
19.  6.  and  let  thine  A.  be  merry,  9. 1  Kings  21.  7. 

8.  the  damsel's  father  said,  comfort  thine  A. 

1  Sa;rt.l.8.why  weepesl  thou  1  why  is  thy  A. grieved? 
2.33.  the  man  of  thine  shall  be  to  grieve  thine  A. 

9.  19.  I  will  tell  thee  all  that  is  in  thine  A. 

14.  7.  do  all  thatis  in  thine  A.  2  .Sam.  7.3. 1  Chron. 
17. 2.  behold,  I  am  with  thee,  according  to  thy  A. 

17.  28.  [  know  thy  pride  and  naughtiness  oi'thy  h. 

2  Sam.  3.  21.  reign  over  all  that  thine  h  .desireth 

13.  t20.  he  is  thy  brother,  set  not  thine  A.  on  this 

1  Kings  2.44.  knowest  wickedness  thine  h.  is  privy 
8. 18,  in  tA/7ic  A.  to  build,  2  Chron.  1. 11.  |  G.  8. 

'2  Kings  10. 15.  Jehu  said,  is  ^AmcA.right  as  my  A. 
is  with  thy  h.  Jehoiiadah  answered,  it  is 

14.  10.  thine  h.  hath  lifted  thee  up,  2  CAr.25.  19. 
22. 19.  because  thine  h.  was  tender,  2  CAr.  34.27. 

2  Chron.  19.  3.  hast  prepared  thine  h.  to  seek  God 
Job  1. 1  8.  hast  thou  set  thy  A.  on  my  servant  Job? 

7.17.  and  that  thou  shouldestset  MmeA.  upon  him 
10. 13.  and  these  things  hast  ihou  hid  in  thine  h. 

11.  13.  if  Ihou  prepare  thine  A.  and  stretch  out 

1.5.  12.  why  doth  thine  h.  carry  thee  away 

22.  22.  receive,  and  lay  up  his  words  in  Mine  A. 
P.ial.  27.  14.  and  he  shall  strengthen  thine  A. 

37.  4.  and  he  shall  give  thee  the  desires  of  thy  h. 
Prov.  2.  2.  and  apply  thine  h.  to  understanding 

10.  when  wisdom  enterelh  into  thine  A. 
3. 1.  my  son,  let  thine  A.  keep  my  commandments 

3.  write  them  upon  the  table  of  thine  A.  7.  3. 
4.4.  he  said,  let  thine  A.  retain  my  words,  21. 

2:!.  keep  thy  A.  with  all  diligence,  for  out  of  it 

6.  21.  bind  them  continually  upon  thine h. 
2.Vlnst  not  after  her  beauty  in  thine  h. 

7.  25.  let  not  thine  A.  decline  to  her  ways 

23.  15.  my  son,  if  tAi'ne  A.  be  wise,  my  A.  rejoice 

17.  let  not  thine  A.  envy  sinners,  but  be  in  fear 
19.  hear,  my  son,  and  guide  thine  A.  in  the  way 
26.  my  son,  give  me  thine  A.  let  thy  eyes  observe 
33.  and  thine  h.  shall  utter  perverse  things 

24. 17.  let  not  thine h.  be  glnd  when  hestumblelh 

27.  t  23.  and  set  thy  A.  to  thy  herds 
Eccl.  5.  2.  not  thine  A.  be  hasty  to  utter  any  thing 

7.  t21.  also  give  not  thine  A.  unto  all  words 

11.  9.  let  tAy  A.  cheer  thee  ;  walk  in  wnysoftAj/ A. 
10.  therefore  remove  sorrow  from  thy  A. 
Fsa.  14.  13.  thou  hast  said  in  fftine  A.  I  will  ascend 

33.  IS.  thine  A.  shall  meditate  terror,  where  is 

47.7.  thou  didst  not  lay  these  things  to  thy  A.  57.1 1. 
8.  thatsayestin  thine  h.  1  am,  and  none  else,  10. 

49.  21.  then  shnit  thou  say  in  thine  A.  who  hath 
.Acr.4.  14.  O  Jerua.  wash  (Aine  A.  from  wickedness 

18.  it  is  bitter,  because  itreacheth  unto  thine  A. 
22.  17.  thine  A.  is  not  but  for  thy  covctousnesB 
31.21.  BPt  thine  h.  teward  the  high-way,  turn 
49.16.  the  pride  of  tAt'ne  A.  deceived  thee,  Obad.  3. 

30 


HEA 

Lam.  2. 19.  pour  out  tAi'ne  A.  like  water  before  Ld. 

£2cA.  3.  10.  receive  inlAine  A.  hear  with  thine  car* 
10.  30.  how  weak  is  thine  A.  saith  the  Lord  God 
22.  14.  can /AincA.  endure  in  days  Ideal  with  lhe« 
28.2.becau6e  thine  h.  is  lifted  up  for  thy  riches,  5. 
6.  thou  hast  set  thine  A.  as  the  heart  of  God 

17.  thine  A.  was  lifted  up  because  of  thy  beaut/ 
40.  4.  set  tAi'ne  A.  upon  all  that  I  shall  shew  thee 

J)an.  2.  30.  mightesl  know  the  thoughts  of  thy  h. 
5.  22.  and  thou  hast  not  humbled  Ihiveh. 

10.  12.  thou  didst  set  thine  h.  to  understand 
Jicls  5. 3.  why  hath  Satan  filled  thine  A.  to  lie 

4.  why  hast  thou  conceived  lliis  in  thine  A.  ? 
8.  21.  fox  thy  h.  is  not  right  in  the  sight  of  God 
Jicts8. 22.  thought  of  Mine  A.  may  be  forgiven  thee 
Hum.  10.  6.  say  not  in  tAine  A.  who  shall  ascend  1 

9.  and  shalt  believe  in  {Ai'ne  h.  that  God  raised 

Upright  in  HV..\KT. 

2  C'Ar.  29.  34.  Levites  were  more  upright  in  A. 

Psal.  7.  10.  which  savelh  the  upright  in  h. 
11.2.  that  they  may  shoot  at  the  upright  in  A. 
.'12.  11.  shout  for  joy,  ye  that  are  uprigfitin  h. 
36. 10.  continue  thy  righteousness  to  upright  in  A. 
64.  10.  and  all  the  upright  in  A.  shall  glory 
94.  15.  and  all  the  upright  in  A.  shall  follow  it 
97.  11.  gladness  is  sown  for  the  upright  in  A. 
f;)r«,s-Atnes,?  0/ HEART. 

1  Kings  3. 0.  he  walketh  in  uprightness  of  A.  9. 4. 
Psal.XViTt.X  will  praise  thee  with  uprightness  ofh. 

/fAoie  HEART. 
Psal.%.\.\  will  praise  thee,  O  Lord,  with  my  wholl 
A.  will  shew  forth  thy  works,  HI.  1.  [  138.  1. 
119.  2.  blessed  that  seek  him  with  the  irholeh. 

10.  with  my  whole  A.  have  I  sought  thee 
34.  yea,  I  sliall  observe  it  with  my  whole  A. 
58.  I  entreated  thy  favour  with  my  whole  h. 
C9.  I  will  keep  thy  jirecepts  with  my  whole  A. 
145.  I  cried  with  my  whole  A.  hear  me,  O  Lord 

Isa.  1.5.  the  whole  head  is  sick,  thewAo/e  A.isfaint 
Jer.  3.  10.  not  turned  with  whole  A.  but  fcignedly 
24.  7.  they  shall  return  unto  me  with  their  w.  A. 
32.  41.  I  will  plant  them  in  land  with  my  whole  A. 

Wiosc  HEART. 
Exod.  .35.  21.  whose  A.  stirred  him  up,  29.  ]  30.  2. 

26.  all  the  women,  whose  A.  stirred  them  up 
r)eu.t.2'ii.l8.whose  A.turnethaway  thisday  fromLd. 

2  Sam.  17.  10.  whose  A.  is  as  the  heart  of  alien 

1  Kings  8.  39.  whose  A.  thou  knowest,  2  CAr.  6. 30. 

2  Chron.  Iti.  9.  in  behalf  of  them  whose  A.  is  perfect 
Psal.S4.  5.  in  whose  A.  are  the  ways  of  them 
Keel.  7.20.  the  woman  whose  A.  is  snares  and  nelt 
Isa.  51.7.  hearken  ye  people,  in  whose  h.\s  my  law 
./er.  17.5.  wAose  A.departeth  from  the  Lord 
i?;:fA.ll. 21. u,'Aosc  A.  walketh  after  detestable  things 
.ictslG.  14.  whose h.  the  Lord  opened,  she  attended 

rour  HEART. 
Dcut.lQ.lG.  circumcise  foreskin  ofyotfr  A.. /cr.  4.4. 

11.  16.  lake  heed  that  your  A.  be  not  deceived 

18.  ye  shiill  lay  up  these  my  words  in  your  A. 

1  Kings  11.  2.  surely  they  will  turn  away  your  A. 
1  CAr.  22.  19.  set  your  A.  and  soul  to  seek  the  Lord 
P.?  rtZ.22.20. meek  shall  enl.your  A.shall  live  forever 

31.  24.  he  shall  strengthen  yourh.  yo  that  hope 

62.  8.  ye  people,  pour  out  your  A.  before  him 
10.  ifriclies  increase,  set  not  j/our  A  upon  thorn 

G9.  32.  and  your  h.  shall  live  that  seek  God 
Isa.  66. 14.  when  ye  see  this,  yourh.  shall  rejolc* 
.ler.  51.  46.  and  lest  your  h.  faint,  and  ye  fear 
Juel^.  13.  and  rend  yourh.  and  not  your  garment* 
Zech.  7. 10.  let  none  of  you  imagine  evil  in  yourh. 
jMnt.  6.21.  there  will  yourh.  be  also,  fjuke  12.  34. 
Jilark  8. 17.  have  ye  your  h.  yet  hardened  ? 

10.  5.  for  the  hardness  of  your  A.  he  wrote 
./nhn  14.  1.  let  not  your  A.  be  troubled,  27. 

lO.O.becanse  Isaid  this,  sorrow  hath  filled  yourh. 
^2.  I  will  see  you,  and  j/o«r  A.  shall  rejoice 
F.ph.  6. 5.  in  singleness  of  your  A.  as  unto  Christ 

HEARTED. 
.Eto(/.35.22.  they  came,  as  many  as  were  willing- A. 
Psal.  76.  5.  the  stout-A.  are  spoiled,  Ihey  slept 
A5(i.24.7.  new  wine  mourns,  all  the  nierry-A.do  sigh 

61.  1.  he  hath  sent  me  to  hind  up  the  broken-A 
Ezek.  3.  7.  all  the  house  oflsrael  are  hard-A. 

Frtint-HEARTED. 
Deut.  20.  8.  what  man  is  there  that  is  faint-h.  7 

Tender  UEARTET). 
'iChron.  13.7.  Rehoboam  was  young  and  tendrr-k. 
F.ph.  4.  32.  and  be  kind  one  to  another,  tender-h. 

/fise-HEARTED. 
£iO(i.2fi.3.  thou  shalt  speak  unto  all  that  are  je.-A- 

31.  6.  and  in  the  hearts  of  all  that  are  wise-h. 

35.  10.  and  every  wise-h.  among  you  shall  come 
25.  all  the  women  that  were  wise-h.  did  spio 

36.  l.then  wrought  everv  wise-h.  man,  2,  8. 

HEARTH. 
Oen.  13.  6.  knead  it,  and  make  cakes  upon  the  h. 
Psal.  102.  3.  and  my.  bones  are  burnt  as  a  A. 
Jsa.  30.  14.  not  a  sherd  to  take  fire  from  the  A. 
Jer.  36.  22.  a  fire  on  the  A.  burning  before  him 
23.  cast  the  roll  into  fire  that  waa  on  the  A.    . 


HE  A 

ZtcK  12. 6.  make  governra.  of  Judah  Iilte  h.  of  fire 
HEARTILY. 

Luitf22.tl.5. 1  have  A.  desired  to  eat  this  pnssover 
Col.  3. 2J.  what  ye  do,  do  it  A.  as  to  the  Lord,  not  to 

HEARTS. 
JVum.  32.  9.  they  discouraged  the  A.  of  Israel 
Josh.  7.  .5.  wherefore  the  A.  of  the  people  melted 
lSam.10.26.  band  of  men, whose  A.  G.  hath  touched 
ZSam.  15.  6.  eo  Absalom  stole  the  A.  of  Israel 

13.  the  A.  of  the  men  of  Israel  are  after  Absalom 
IKmgs  6. 39.  thou  only  knowest  the  A.  2  Cfir.  6.  30. 
1  Chron.  28.  9.  for  the  Lord  searcheth  all  A. 
Ps.7.9.  the  righteous  Gud  trieth  the  A.  Hrov.  17.  3. 
Prov.  15.  11.  how  much  more  then  the  A.  of  men 

21.  2.  but  the  Lord  pondereth  the  A. 

31.  6.  give  wine  to  those  that  be  of  heavy  A. 
Jer.  48.  41 .  mighty  men's  A.  of  Moab  like  a  woman 
Eiek.  32.  9.  I  will  also  vex  the  A.  of  many  people 
/> an. 11.27.  both  these  k.'s  A.shall  be  to  do  mischief 
Luke  1. 17.  turn  the  A.  of  the  fathers  to  the  children 

2.  35.  that  the  thoughts  of  A.  may  be  revealed 
21.  26.  signs  in  the  sun,  men's  A.  failing  them 

^cts  1.  24.  which  knowest  the  A.  of  all  men,  15. 8. 
Pom.8.  27.  he  that  searcheth  the  A.  knoweth  the 
16. 18.  by  fair  speeches  deceive  the  A.  of  the  simple 
1  Cor.  4.  5.  make  manifest  the  counsels  of  the  A. 
Jiev.  2.  23. 1  am  he  that  senrcheth  the  reins  and  A. 

Our  HEARTS. 
Josh.  2.  11.  as  soon  as  we  heard,  our  A.  did  melt 
1  Kings  8.  58.  that  he  may  incline  our  h.  to  him 
Jicts  14.  17.  filling  our  A  with  food  and  gladness 
Rom.  5.  5.  the  love  of  God  is  shed  abro.id  in  our  A. 
3  Cor.  1.  22.  given  the  earnest  of  the  Spirit  in  our  A. 

3.  2.  ye  are  our  episfle  written  in  our  A. 

4.  6.  God  hath  shined  in  our  A.  to  give  the  light 
7.  3.  that  you  are  in  our  A.  to  die  and  live  with  you 

\Thess.  2.  4.  but  pleasing  God,  who  trieth  our  A. 
//eft. 10.22.  our  A.  sprinkled  from  an  evil  conscience 

1  John  3.  19.  and  shall  assure  our  A.  before  him 

TAeir  HEARTS. 
Lev.  26.  36.  I  will  send  a  faintncss  into  their  A. 
41.  if  then  their  uncircumcised  A.  be  humbled 
Judg.  9.  3.  their  A.  inclined  to  follow  Abinielech 
16.  25.  vheu  their  A.  were  merry,  they  said 
19.  22.  as  they  were  maki.ig  their  A.  merry 

2  Chron.  6.  14.  walk  before  thee  with  all  their  h. 
11.  16.  such  as  set  their  A.  to  seek  the  Lord  God 
20.33.  the  people  had  not  prepared  their  A.  to  God 

Job  1.5.  it  may  be  my  sons  have  cursed  G.  in  their  A. 

P«al.28. 3.  s|ieak  peace,  but  mischief  is  in  their  h. 
33.  15.  he  fashioneth  their  A.  alike,  he  considers 
35.25.  let  them  not  say  in  their  A.  ah,  so  would  we 
74.  8.  they  said  in  their  A.  let  us  destroy  them 
81.  12.  I  gave  them  up  to  their  own  A.  lust 
125.  4.  and  to  them  that  are  upright  in  their  A. 

Isa.  44.  18.  hath  shut  (A.  A.  they  cannot  understand 

Jcr.  31.33.  and  write  my  law  in  tAc/r  A.  Heb.V.  10. 
32. 40.  but  I  will  put  my  fear  in  th.  A.  not  to  depart 

F.iek.  13.  2.  that  prophesy  out  oC  their  own  h. 

No.'!.  7.  2.  and  they  consider  not  in  their  A. 

Zech.  7. 12.  yea,  they  made  «Acir  A.  as  an  adamant 

Mark  2.  6.  silting  there,  and  reasoning  in  their  A. 

3.  5.  being  grieved  for  the  hardness  of  their  A. 

4.  15.  taketh  away  word  sown  in  th.  h.  I.uke  8.12. 
r.ukel.  51.  scattered  proud  in  imaginntionaof  t.  A. 

66.  all  that  heard  laid  them  up  in  their  h. 

3.  15.  all  men  mused  in  th.  A.  of  John,  whether  Ch. 
..ctt  7.  39.  in  their  A.  turned  back  again  to  Egypt 
Pom.  1.24  through  the  lust  t)f  their  h.  to  dishonor 

2.  15.  shew  the  work  of  the  law  written  in  their  A. 
Cnr2.2  that  their  h.  might  be  comforted,  being  knit 
ffeb.  3.  10.  said,  they  do  always  err  in  their  A. 
Rev.  17. 17.  God  hath  put  in  their  A.  to  fulfil  his  will 

Kour  HEARTS. 
Oen  18.  5.  comfort  ye  your  A.  after  that  pass  on 
Dent.  20.  3.  O  Israel,  let  not  your  A.  faint,  fear  not 

32.  46.  set  yowrA.to  all  the  words  which  I  testify 
Jo/>h.  23. 14.  and  ye  know  in  all  your  h.  and  sonls 

24. 23.  incline  your  A.  to  the  Lord  God  of  Israel 
1  .5om.  6.  6.  wherefore  then  do  ye  harden  tjour  A.? 

7.  3.  if  ye  return  to  the  Lord  with  all  your  A.  and 
prepare  your  A.  to  the  Lord  to  serve  him  only 
Jer.  42.  20.  ye  dissembled  in  your  A.  when  ye  sent 
Ziich.H.  17.  let  none  of  you  imagine  evil  in  ynurh 
Jtfat.  9.4..1eFn«Bnid,  wheref  think  ye  evil  in  y.  h.? 

18.  35.  if  ye  from  your  A.  forgive  not  every  one 

19.  8.  because  of  th«i  hardness  of  y.  A.  ye  snfferpd 
Jlfar*2. 8.  why  rtas'm  ye  these  things  in  ynurh.? 
f.ukf.a.  22.  .lesUB  said,  what  reason  ye  in  ynur  h.? 

16. 1.5.  ye  justify  yourselves,  Gorl  knoweth  your  h. 

21.  14.  se'tle  it  in  your  h.  not  to  meditate  before 
34.  lest  at  iinv  li'ne  ynur  A.  be  overcharged 

24.  38.  and  why  do  thoiights  arise  in  your  A. 7  . 
Cct.A.fi-  God  sent  the  Spirit  ofhisflon  into  ynur  A. 
Fph.  3. 17.  that  ("lirist  may  dwell  in  your  A.  bv  faith 

5. 19.  making  melody  in  w.  A.  to  Iho  Lord,  ToJ.  3.16. 

fi.  22.  I  sent  that  he  mijjht  comfort  ynur  h. 
PAt/.4.7.  shall  kecpyour  A.  and  minds  thro' C'.Jcs. 
Col.  3.  15.  let  the  peace  of  God  rule  in  your  k. 

4  8.  mirht  know  your  ctato,  and  comfort  your  A. 
274 


HEA 

1 7^M*.3.13.  hemay  establish  yourA-unWameable 
2  Thess.  2.  17.  comfort  your  h.  and  establish  you 

3.  5.  the  Lord  direct  your  A.  into  the  love  of  God 
.Jam.  3.  14.  if  ye  have  strife  in  your  h.  glory  not 

4.  8.  and  purify  your  h.  ye  double-minded 

5. 5.  have  been  wanton,  ye  have  murishcd  yourh. 

8.  be  ye  also  patient,  stablish  yourh.  the  coming 

1  Pet.  3.  15.  sanctify  the  Lord  God  in  your  h. 

2  Pet.  1.  19.  till  day  da  wn,  and  day-star  arise  xay.h. 

HEARTY. 
P7-OP.27.9.  so  the  sweetness  of  a  friend  by  A. counsel 

HEAT. 
Oen.  8. 22.  cold,  A.  summer,  winter,  shall  not  cease 
18.  1.  sat  in  the  lent  door  in  the  A.  of  the  day 
Exod.  11.  1 8.  and  he  went  out  in  the  A.  of  anger 
£)f  ut.29.24.what  meaneth  the  A.of  this  great  anger? 

32.  24.  they  shall  be  devoured  with  burning  A. 

1  Sam.  11.11.  slew  the  Ammonites  till  A.  of  the  day 

2  Sam.  4.  5.  and  they  came  about  the  A.  of  the  day 

1  A'ln^sl.l.buthegatnoA.  ||2.  my  lord  may  get  A. 
Job  6.  1 17.  ice  and  snow  vanish  in  the  A.  thereof 

24.  19.  drought  and  A.  consume  the  snow  waters 
30.  30.  my  skin  black,  my  bones  are  burnt  with  A. 

Psal.  19.  6.  there  is  nothing  hid  from  the  A.  thereof 
Keel.  4.  11.  if  two  lie  together,  then  they  have  A. 
Isa.  4.  6.  a  shadow  in  the  day-time  from  A.  25.  4. 
18. 4.  I  will  take  my  rest,  like  a  clear  A.  on  herbs, 
and  like  a  cloud  of  dew  in  the  A.  of  harvest 

25.  5.  as  the  A.  in  a  dry  place,  even  the  A. 
49.  10.  neither  shall  the  A.  nor  sun  smite  them 

.fee.  17.  8.  and  shall  not  see  when  A.  Cometh 
36.30.  dead  body  shall  be  cast  out  in  the  day  to  A. 
51.  39.  in  their  A.'l  will  make  their  feasts 
F.zek.  3.  14.  and  I  went  in  the  A.  of  my  spirit 
Nos.7.'\f>.  have  made  him  sick  with  A.  through  wine 
Mat.W.  12.  have  borne  the  burden  and  A.of  the  day 
I.uke  12.55.  when  south-wind  blow,  there  will  be  A. 
Jicts  28.  3.  there  came  a  viper  out  of  the  A. 
./am.  1. 11.  the  sun  no  sooner  risen  with  a  burning  A. 

2  Pet.  3. 10.  the  elements  shall  melt  with  fervent  A. 

HEAT. 

Dan.  3.  19.  A.  the  furnace  one  seven  times  more 

than  it  was  wont  to  be  heated 

HEATED. 

Dan.  3.  19.  the  furnace  more  than  wont  to  be  A. 

Hos.  7. 4.  are  adulterers,  as  an  oven  A.  by  the  baker 

HEATH. 
Jer.  17.  6.  he  shall  be  like  the  A.  in  the  desert 
48.  6.  flee,  and  be  like  the  A.  in  the  wilderness 

HEATHEN. 
Lev.  25.44.  bond-men  shall  be  of  the  A.  round  vou 

26.  45.  whom  I  brought  forth  in  sight  of  the  A. 

2  .Sam.  22.  44.  kept  me  to  behead  of  A.  Psal.  18.43. 

2  Kin  wsl6.3. walked  according  to  theabominations 

of  the  A.  17.  15.  I  21.  2.  2CAr.  28.  3.  |  36.  14. 

17.  8.  Israel  walked  in  the  statutes  of  the  A. 

II.  ns  did  the  A.  whom  the  Lord  carried  away 

1  Chron.  16. 35.  save  us,  and  deliver  us  from  the  A. 

2  Chron.  20.  6.  thou  rulest  over  all  kingdoms  of  A. 

33.  2.  but  did  like  to  the  abominations  of  the  A. 

9.  Ma  nasseli  made  Judah  to  do  worse  than  the  A. 
Kzrn  6.21.36  had  separated  from  filthiness  of  the  A. 
JW'A.5.8.  we  redeemed  the  Jews  who  were  sold  to  A. 

9.  because  of  the  reproach  of  the  A.  our  enemies 
6. 16.  all  the  A.  that  were  about  us  saw  these  things 

Psal  2.  1.  why  do  the  A.  rage?  jicts  4.  25. 
8.  I  shall  give  thee  the  A.  for  thy  inheritance 

9.  5.  thou  hast  rebuked  the  A.  thou  hast  destroyed 
1.5.  the  A.  are  sunk  in  the  pit  that  llicy  made 
19.  arise,  let  the  A.  be  judged  in  thy  sight 

10.  16.  the  A.  are  perished  out  of  his  land 

33.  10.  the  Ld.  brings  the  counsel  of  A.  to  nought 
44.  2.  we  hEar<l  how  thou  didst  drive  out  the  A. 

46.  6.  the  A.  raged,  the  kingdoms  were  moved 

47.  8.  God  rcigneth  over  the  A.  God  silteth  on 
59.  5.  thou,  therefore,  awake  to  visit  all  the  A. 

8.  thou  shalt  have  all  the  A.  in  derision 

78.  .">5.  be  cast  out  the  A.  also  before  them,  80.  8. 

79.  t.  Ihe  A.  are  come  into  thine  inheritance 

6.  pour  out  thy  wrath  upon  the  A.  .Icr.  10.  25. 

10.  whori'fore  should  the  A.  say,  where  is  their 
God  7  let  him  bo  known  among  the  A.  115.  2. 

94  lO.he  that  chastiselh  the  A.  shall  not  he  correct? 
9"'.2.  he  hath  opeidy  shewed  inthosightof  the  A. 
102.  15.  the  A.  shall  fear  the  name  of  the  Lord 

105.  44.  and  gave  them  the  lands  of  the  A. 

106.  41.  and  he  gave  them  into  the  hand  of  the  A. 
111.  6.  he  may  give  them  the  heritage  ofthe  A. 
135.  15.  the  idols  ofthe  A.  are  silver  and  gold 
149.  7.  to  execute  vengeance  upon  the  A. 

ha.  16.  8.  the  lords  ofthi'  A.  have  broken  down 
./cr.  10. 2.  learn  not  wnyoftheA.be  notdismayed  pt 
signs  of  heaven,  for  the  A.  dismayed  at  them 
49. 14.  an  ambassador  is  sent  to  the  A.  saying 
/.(im.l.lO.  seen  that  Ihe  A.  entered  into  her  sanctun. 
F.zek.  7.  24.  I  will  bring  the  worst  ofthe  A. 

11.  12.  but  have  done  after  the  manners  of  A. 
20.  9.  should  not  be  polluted  before  Iho  A.  14.22 

32.  that  ye  sav,  wo  will  bo  na  the  h. 

41. 1  will  be  sanctified  before  the  *.  2a  25. 


HEA 

Ezek.  29. 4. 1  have  made  thee  a  reproach  to  the  k. 

16.  take  thine  inheritance  in  sight  ofthe  A. 
23.  30.  thou  hast  gone  a  whoring  after  the  A. 
25.  7.  I  will  deliver  thee  for  a  8|ioil  to  the  A. 

8.  behold,  the  house  of  Judah  is  like  to  all  the  A 

30.  3.  day  is  near,  it  shall  be  the  time  cf  the  A. 

31.  11.  into  the  hand  of  the  mighty  one  ofthe  A. 

17.  thatdwelt  under  his  shadow  in  midstof  the  A. 
34.  28.  they  shall  no  more  be  a  prey  to  the  A. 

29.  neither  bear  the  shame  ofthe  A.  any  more 
36.  .3.  might  be  a  possession  to  the  residue  ofthe  h 

4.which  became  a  derision  to  the  residue  ofthe  ;1 
6.  because  ye  have  borne  the  shame  ofthe  A. 
20.  when  they  entered  unto  the  A.  whither 

23.  A.  know  1  am  Lord,  36. 137. 28.  138.16. 1  a.).  7 
39.  21.  and  all  the  A.  shall  see  my  judgment 

Joel  2.  17.  that  the  A.  should  rule  over  them 
3.  11.  and  come  all  ye  A.  and  gather  yourselves 
12.  let  theA.be  wakened, and  come  up  to  vallayof 
Jehoshaphat,  there  will  I  sit  to  juclge  all  the  A. 
Amus  9.  12.  they  may  possess  remnant  of  all  the  k. 
Obad.  15.  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  near  on  all  the  A. 

16.  BO  shall  all  the  A.  drink  continually 
J\fic.  S.  15.  I  will  execute  fury  upon  the  A. 
Hub.  3.  12.  thou  didst  thresh  the  A.  in  anger 
Zeph.a.  II.  all  the  isles  of  the  A.shall  worship  him 
Hag.  2.  22.  I  will  destroy  the  strength  of  the  A. 
Zech.  1.  15.  I  am  sore  displeased  with  the  A. 
9.  10.  and  he  shall  speak  peace  to  the  A. 
14.  14.  the  wealth  of  all  the  A.  shall  be  gathered 

18.  the  plague  wherewith  Lord  will  smite  the  i. 
Mat.  6.  7.  use  not  vain  repetitions  as  the  A.  do 

18. 17.  let  him  be  to  thee  as  a  A.  man  and  publican 
2  Cor.  11.26.  in  perils  by  the  A.  in  perils  in  the  sea 
Oal.  2.  9.  that  we  should  go  unio  the  A. 

3.  8.  that  God  would  justify  the  A.  through  faitk 

.among  the  HEATHEN. 

/^ct>.26.33. 1  willscattervou  among  theh.  and  land 

be  desolate,  Jer.  9.  16.  i';:fA.20.23.  |22.  15 

38.  and  ye  shall  perish  among  the  h.  and  the  lana 

Deut.  4.27.  ye  shall  be  left  few  in  number  among  h. 

2  Sam.  22.  50. 1  will  give  thanks  to  thee,  O  Lor4 

(imo7i^A.andsing  praises  to  thy  name,  P».18.49 

1  Cliron.  16.24.  declare  his  glory  amoJi"' A.  P.'. 96. 3. 

jVe.h.  5.  17.  that  came  to  us  from  among  ihe  A. 

I).  6.  it  is  reported  among  the  h.  Gashmu  saith  it 

Psal.  44.  11.  thou  hast  scattered  us  among  the  Jk 

14.  thou  makest  us  a  by-word  among  the  A. 
46.  10.  I  am  God,  I  will  he  exalted  among  the  h. 
79. 10.  let  him  be  known  among  the  h.  in  sight 
96.  10.  say  among  the  A.  that  the  Lord  reigncth 
106.  35.  but  they  were  mingled  among  the  A. 
47.  save  us,  O  Lord, and  gather  us  from  amongh. 
110.  6.  he  shall  judge  among  the  A.  he  shall  fill 
126.2.  said  amon^  (Ac  A.  L.  hath  done  great  things 
Jer.  18. 13.  ask  amon^«Ac  A.  who  heard  such  thing! 
49.  15.  I  will  make  lliec  small  among  the  A. 
Lam.  1.  3.  she  dwelleth  among  the  A.  she  tindetb 

4.  15.  said  among  the  A.  they  shall  no  more  sojourn 

20.  under  his  shadow  we  shall  live  among  the  h. 
KrfA-.ll.16.tho'  I  havecastthem  faroft'amori^  t.h 

12. 16.  may  declare  their  abominations  among  t.k. 
16.  14.  thy  renown  went  forth  among  the  h. 
36.  19.  and  1  did  scatter  them  among  the  A. 

21.  which  Israel  profaned  among  the  A.  22,  23. 

24.  I  will  take  you  from  among  the  A.  37.  21. 

30.  no  more  reproach  of  famine  among  the  A. 
39.  21.  and  I  will  set  my  glory  aiming  the  A. 

28.  caused  them  to  be  led  -iilo  captivity  omonff  A. 

.f(iel  2.  19.  no  more  make  yon  a  repronrli  among  A. 

Ohail.  1.  an  ambassador  is  sent  among  the  A.  '• 
2.  behold,  I  have  mnde  thee  .small  among  theh, 

Hah.  I.  5.  behold  ye  among  the  A.  regard,  wonder 

7.eeh.  8.  13.  that  as  ye  were  a  curse  among  the  A. 

Mill.  1.11.  my  name  shall  be  great  among  the  A. 
14.  and  my  name  is  dreadful  among  the  A. 

Gal.  1.  16.  that  I  might  preach  him  among  the  k. 
HEAVE. 

JV«m.l5. 20.  as  ye  do  Acrrr-otVering,  so  shall  ye  A.  it 
HEAVED. 

F.rod.  20.  27.  is  A.  ofthe  ram  of  consecration 

M'um.  18.  ;tO.  when  ye  have  A.  the  best  thereof,  32. 

Sco  Offhrino,  Shouldkk. 

HEAVEN. 

Heaven  and  earth,  m  Gen.  1.  1.  are  used  for  the 
substance  and  common  matter  of  all  sensiiJe 
creatures.  Heaven  is  often  taken  for  the  air  ; 
The  fowls  of  lieav(!n,  are  the  birds  which  fly  in 
the  air,  Job  35.  11.  The  dew  of  heaven,  the 
clouds  of  heaven,  the  winds  of  heaven;  in  all 
which  passages,  heaven  is  put  for  Ihe  air. 

'Ihe  stars  are  placed  in  heaven,  or  in  ihc  firma- 
ment, Gen.  1.  17.  Thry  are  called  the  host  or 
army  of  heaven,  Deut.  17.  3  God,  like  a  power- 
ful monarch,  eallelh  them  by  their  nnmes,  and 
girelh  them  his  orders.  The  God  of  the  He- 
brews i>  named,  not  only  by  Ihe  Jews,  but  alsa 
by  the  heathens  and  strange  people, Ihc  God  of 
Heaven,  F.zra  1.  2.  |  5.  11.  |  6.  9,  10.  1  7.  12 
Jonai  1.  9.  because  tht  Jews  adored  notking 


HEA 

sensible,  and  said,  their  Ood  uat  Hi  ieavtn; 
Ihat  there  he  had  his  throne,  and  exercised  his 
sovereign  dominion  over  all  creatures. 
The  heaven  of  heavens  is  the  highest  heaven,  as 
the  song  of  songs  is  the  most  excellent  song; 
the  God  of  gods,  the  Lord  of  lords,  t/te  great- 
est of  the  gods,  the  most  powerful  of  lords. 
From  these  passages  it  appears,  that  the  He- 
brews acknowledged  three  heavens:  (1)  The 
atrial  heaven,  where  the  birds  fly,  the  winds 
blow,  and  the  showers  are  formed.  (2)  The 
heaven,  or  firmament,  wherein  the  stars  are 
disposed.  (3)  The  heaveit  of  heavens,  or  the 
third  heaven,  which  is  the  place  of  God's  rest 
dence,  the  dwelling  of  angels  and  the  blessed. 
ThisisthetruepalaceofOod,cntirely  separated 
from  the  impurities  and  imperfections,  the  al- 
terations and  changes,  of  the  lotoer  world; 
where  he  reigns  in  eternal  peace.  It  is  the 
temple  of  the  divine  Majesty,  where  his  excel- 
lent glory  is  revealed  in  the  most  conspicuous 
manner.  It  is  the  habitation  of  his  holiness, 
the  place  where  his  honour  dwells,  ft  is  the 
sacred  mansion  of  light,  and  joy,  and  glory. 

Heaven,  or  heavens, !«  put /or  Ood,whodweUeth 
and  reigneth  there.  Dan.  4.  26,  After  thou 
•halt  have  known  that  the  heavens  do  rule. 
So  in  Luke  15.  21,  1  have  sinned  against  hea- 
Ten.  Jilso  for  the  angels  in  heaven.  Job  15. 
15,  The  heavens  are  not  clean  in  his  sight ;  the 
angels  that  dwell  in  heaven  arenotpure  simply, 
perfectly,  andcomparativelyto  Ood.  It  is  put 
also  for  the  visible  church.  Rev.  12.  7,  9, 
There  was  war  in  heaven.  Heaven  by  an 
hyperbole  is  put  for  a  great  height.  Deut.  1. 
28,  Their  cities  are  wailed  up  to  heaven.  It 
is  taken  for  great  glory  and  royal  majesty  ,\sa.. 
14.  12,  How  art  thou  fallen  from  heaven,  O 
Lucifer,  son  of  the  morning!  speaking  of  the 
overthrow  of  the  king  of  Babylon  by  the  Medes 
and  Persians. 

The  enjoyment  of  the  divine  presence  in  heaven 
is  the  supreme  and  everlasting  felicity  of  the 
saints ;  whatsoever  is  requisite  to  their  com- 
plete blessedness  is  enjoyed  there;  there  is  an 
exemption  from  all  evds;  sin  and  all  the  penal 
consequences  are  abolished ;  the  body  is  revived 
to  a  glorious  life,  and  the  soul  lives  in  cotiimu 
nion  with  God  and  Christ.  Theunderstanding 
there  shall  be  clearly  enlightened  with  the 
knowledge  of  God.  Here  the  revelation  of  Ood 
in  his  works  and  word,  is  according  to  our 
capacities,  but  in  heaven  it  is  most  glorious 
and  our  faculties  are  raised  and  refined  to  re- 
ceive it.  The  communion  also  of  the  angels 
and  saints  in  heaven  affords  the  purest  plea 
eure.  And  the  fulness  of  joy  in  heaven  is 
everlasting,  without  defect,  and  without  end. 

Gen. 1.1.  in  the  beginning  God  created  h.  and  earth 
8.  and  God  called  the  firmament  A. 
14.  let  there  be  lights  in  the  firmament  of  A.  15. 

20.  fowl  Ihat  mayfly  in  the  openfirmiimentofA. 

7.  11.  and  the  windows  of  A.  were  opened 

8.  2.  and  the  windows  of  A.  were  stopped 
14.19.mo9l  high  God,  pos.sessor  of  A.  and  earth,  22. 
19.24.  Lord  rained  fire  from  the  Lord  out  of  A. 

21 .  17.  the  angel  of  God  called  to  Hagar  out  of  A. 

22.  11.  the  angel  called  to  Abraham  out  of  A.  15. 

27.  28.  God  give  thee  of  the  dew  of  A.  39. 

28.  17.  and  he  said,  this  is  the  gate  of  A. 

ff.  25.  shall  bless  thee  with  blessings  of  A.  above 
rod.  20. 11.  six  days  Ld.  made  A.  and  earth,  31.17. 
24.  10.  dut  it  were  the  body  of  A.  in  his  clearness 
J.ev.  26.  19. 1  will  make  your  A.  as  iron,  earth  brass 
Deut.  A.  11.  the  mountain  burned  to  the  midst  of  A. 
26.  I  call  A.  and  earth  to  witness,  30.  19.  |  31.  2a 
;i2.  ask  from  the  one  side  of  A.  to  the  other 
36.  out  of  A.  he  made  thee  hear  his  voice 
10.14.  behold,  the  A.  and  A.  of  heavens,  Ps.  115.16. 
11.  11.  and  diinkelh  water  of  the  rain  of  A. 
17.  he  shut  up  A.  1  KingsS.  .35. 2CAr.  6.26.  |  7. 13. 

21.  be  multiplied  as  the  days  of  A.  on  the  earth 
28.  12.  open  the  A.  to  give  thee  rain  in  his  season 

23.  the  A.  that  is  over  thy  head  shall  be  brass 
30.  4.  scatter  thee  to  the  utmost  part  of  A.  JVcA.  1.9. 
3.3.  13.  for  the  precious  things  of  A.  for  the  dew 

26.  God  of.IesJiurunrideth  upon  the  A.  in  thy  help 

1  Sam.  2.  10.  out  of  A.  shall  he  thunder  on  them 

2  Sam.  18.  9.  he  was  taken  up  between  A.  and  earth 

21.  10.  till  water  dropped  on  them  out  of  A. 

22.  8.  the  fnimdati<pn3  of  A.  moved  and  shook 
1  Kings  8.  27.  behold,  the  A.  and  the  A.  of  heavens 

cannot  contain  thee,  2  Chron.  2.6.  |  6.  18. 
35.  when  A.  is  shut  up,  and  there  is  no  rain 
18.  45.  mean  while  the  A.  was  black  with  clouds 
S  Kings  19.  15.  thou  art  Ood  of  all  kingdoms,  thou 
hnstmadeA.  and  earth,  2  CAr.  2.  12.  ATsA-O.  6. 
1  Oiron.  21.  16.  nngel  stood  between  A.  and  earth 
Job  11.8.  it  is  high  as  A.  what  canst  thou  dol 
20,27.  the  h  i hall  reveal  his  iniquity,  eartb  rise  up 
875 


HEA 

Job  22. 12.  iinot  God  in  height  of  A.?  behold  height 

14.  and  he  walketh  in  the  circuit  of  A. 
26. 11.  the  pillars  of  A.  tremble  at  his  reproof 
38.  29.  the  hoary  frostof  A.  who  hath  gendered  it? 
33.  knowestthou  the  ordinances  of  A.  7 
37.  or  who  can  stay  the  bottles  of  A..' 
Psal.  19.  6.  his  going  forth  is  from  the  end  of  A. 

20.  6.  he  will  hear  him  from  his  holy  A. 
69.  34.  let  A.  and  earth  praise  him,  the  seas 
78.  23.  and  though  he  opened  the  doors  of  A. 

24.  and  had  given  them  of  the  corn  of  A. 
89.  29.  his  throne  to  endure  as  the  days  of  A. 
103.  11.  for  as  the  A.  is  high  above  the  earth 
105.40.  he  satisfied  them  with  the  bread  of  A. 
115.  15.  the  Lord  who  made  A.  and  earth,  121.  2. 
I  124.8.  I  134.  3.  I  146.  6.  Isa.  37.  16.  Jer.  32. 
17.  .lets  4.  24.  1  14.  15.  Rev.  14.  7. 
147.  8.  whocovereth  A.  with  clouds,  who  prepares 
148. 13.  his  glory  is  above  the  earth  and  A. 
Prov.  25.  3.  the  A.  for  height,   the  earth  for  depth 
Isa.  13.  5.  they  come  from  far,  from  the  end  of  A 
40.  12.  who  hath  meted  out  A.  with  a  span  1 
49.  13.  sing,  O  A.  and  be  joyful.  Rev.  18.  20. 
66.  1 .  A.  my  throne,  earth  my  footstool,  ylcts  7.  49. 
Jer.  7.  18.  to  make  cakes  to  the  queen  of  A. 

10.  2.  and  he  not  dismayed  at  the  signs  of  A. 
23.  24.  do  not  I  fill  A.  and  earth  1  saith  the  Lord 

31.  37.  if  A.  above  can  be  measured 
33.  25.  if  I  have  not  appointed  ordinances  of  A. 
44.  17.  to  burn  incense  to  queen  of  A.  18,  19,  25. 
49.  36.  four  winds  from  the  fout  quarters  of  A. 
51. 15.  hath  stretched  out  the  A.  by  his  understand. 

48.  the  A.  and  earth  shall  sing  for  Babylon 
LaTTi.  4. 19.our  enemies  swifter  than  the  eagles  of  A. 
Ezek.  8.  3.  the  Spirit  lifted  me  between  earth  and  A. 

32.  7.  I  will  cover  the  A.  and  make  the  stars  dark 
8.  the  lights  of  A.  will  I  make  dark  over  thee 

Dan.  4. 15.  be  wet  with  dew  of  A.  23, 25,  33.  |  5. 21. 

35.  doeth  according  to  his  will  in  the  arniy*)f  A- 
37.  now  I  extol  and  honour  the  King  of  A. 

5.23.  hast  lifted  up  thyself  against  the  Lord  of  A. 

7.  2.  the  four  winds  of  A.  strove  upon  the  sea 

13.  one  like  Son  of  man,  came  with  clouds  of  A. 

8.  8.  four  horns  toward  the  four  winds  of  A. 

11.  4.  his  kingdom  divided  toward  four  winds  of  A. 
JImos  9.  6.  he  that  buildeth  his  stories  in  the  A. 
Hag.  1.  10.  the  A.  over  you  is  stayed  from  dew 
Zrch.  2.  6. 1  have  spread  you  as  the  four  winds  of  A. 

5.9.  lifted  the  ephah  between  the  earth  and  A. 
Mai.  3.  10.  if  I  will  not  open  the  windows  of  A. 
Mat.  5.  18.  till  A.  and  earth  pass,  one  jot  not  pass 
34.  nor  swear  by  A.  it  is  God's  throne.  Jam.  5.  12. 
11.25.Ithankthee,Father,LordofA. /,uAcl0,21. 
2.3.  22.  he  that  shall  swear  by  A.  svvtareth  by  God 
24. 30.  then  shall  appear  the  sign  ofthe  Son  of  man 
coming  in  the  cioudsof  A.26. 64.  Mark  14.62. 
31.  gather  elect  from  one  end  of  A.  to  the  other 
35.A.earth  sh.  pass  away,J»/arA13.31./.Mit21.33 

36.  no,  not  the  angels  of  A.  but  my  Father  only 
Mark  13. 27.  gather  his  elect  from  utmost  part  of  A. 
Luke'i.  21.  and  Jesus  praying,  the  A.  was  opened 

4.  25.  when  the  A.  was  shut  up  three  years 

15.  18.  father,  I  have  sinned  against  A.  21. 

16.  17.  it  is  easier  for  A.  and  earth  to  pass 
21.  26.  for  the  powers  of  A.  shall  be  shaken 

John  1.51.  hereafter  ye  shall  see  A.  open,  ami  angels 

./9c<jj3.  21.  whom  the  A.  must  receive  until  the  times 

10.  11.  I  saw  A.  opened,  and  a  vessel,  Hev.  19.  11. 

17.  24.  seeing  that  he  is  Lord  of  A.  and  earth 
.Tarn.  5. 18.  he  prayed  again,  and  the  A.  gave  rain 
Rev.  3.  12.  Cometh  down  out  of  A.  from  my  God 

6.  14.  A.  departed  as  a  scroll  when  it  is  rolled 
8.  13.  an  angel  flying  through  the  midst  ofA.  14.6. 

10.  6.  who  created  A.  and  the  things  therein 

11.  6  these  have  power  to  shut  A.  that  it  rain  not 
16.  17.  came  a  great  voice  out  of  the  temple  of  A. 

21.  there  fell  on  men  a  great  hail  out  of  A. 

18.  20.  rejoice  over  her,  Ibou  A. 

19.  17.  to  all  the  fowls  that  fly  in  the  midst  of  A. 

20.  9.  and  fire  came  down  from  God  out  of  A. 
11. earth  and  A.  fled  away,  and  there  was  no  place 

21.  1.  I  saw  a  new  A.  and  earth,  the  first  A.  passed 
10. holy  Jerusalem  descending  out  of  A.  from  God 

See  Fowl,  Fowls. 
From  HEAVEN. 
Orn.  8.  2.  and  the  rain /rom  A.  was  restrained 
F.Tod.  16.  4.  I  will  rain  bread/rom  A.  for  you 
20.22.1  havetalked  with  you /rom  A,  JVfA.  9.  13. 
Deul.1f>.\5.\ooV.  dov/nfromh.  ^so.03.15.  A.am.3..50. 
28. 24.  as  dust  from  A.  shall  it  come  down  on  thee 
.fosh.  10.  11.  Lord  cast  great  stonrs /rom  A.  on  them 
Judg.  5.  20.  they  fought  from  A.  the  stars  fought 
2  Sam.  22.  14.  Lord  thundered /rom  A.  and  uttered 
2  Kings  1. 10.  then  let  fire  come  down  from  A.  and 
there  came  down  fire /rom  A.  12,  14. 

1  Chron.  21.  26.  he  anewered  him /rom  A.  by  fire 

2  Chron.  6.  21.  hear  lliou/ro7n  A.  23,  27,  30. 

7.  1.  the  fire  came  down /rom  A-  and  consumed 

14.  then  will  I  hear /rom  A.  and  will  forgive 
AVA.  9.  IS.  gavsft  them  bread /rom  A.  for  hunger 


HEA 

^eA.9.27.they  cricdjthou  hcardcst  them/row  A58. 
Job  1.  16.  the  fire  of  God  is  talten /rom  A. 
Psal.  14.  2.  the  Lord  looked  down/ro7«  A.  53.5. 

33.  13.  the  Lord  looketh /rom  A.  and  beholdelh 

57.  S.shall  8cnd/rom  A.and  save  me  from  reproach 

76.  8.  didst  cause  judgment  to  be  heard  from  A. 

80.  14.  OGod,  look  down/ro7rt  A.  and  behold 

85.  11.  righteousness  shall  look  down /rom  A. 

102.  19. /rom  A.  did  the  Lord  behold  the  earth 
Isa.  14.  12.  how  art  thou  fallen/ro»n  A.  O  Lucifer; 

55.  10.  as  snow  falleth /rom  A.  and  returneth  not 
Lam.  2. 1.  Lord  cast  down  from  A.  beauty  of  Israel 
iJun.  4. 13.  heboid,  a  watcher  came  down /rom  A. 

23.  the  king  saw  a  holy  one  coming  down  from  A. 
31.  fell  a  voice /rom  A.  saying,  kingd.  is  departed 
from  thee,  Mat.  3. 17. 1.uke  3.  22.  John  12. 28. 
Mat.  16.  1.  he  would  shew  Iheni  a  sign /rorn  A. 

21.25.  the  baptism  of  John,  whence  was  ill  from 
A.  or  of  men  1  Mark  11.  30.  Luke  20.  4. 

28.2.  there  was  a  great  earthquake,  for  the  angel 

descended /rom  A.  Rev.  10.  1.  |  18.  1.  |  20.  1. 

J)/arA8.  ll.seekingofhimasign/.  A.  Luke  11.  16. 

Luke  9. 54.  we  command  firetocomedown/rom  A. 

10.  18.  I  beheld  Satan  as  lightning  fall//om  A. 
17. 29.  it  rained  fire  and  brimstone/.  A.  on  Sodom 

21.  11.  and  great  signs  shall  there  be /rom  A. 

22.  4.3.  appeared  an  angel/.  A.  strengthening  him 
John  1.  32.  I  saw  the  Spirit  descending /rom  A. 

3.  13.  but  he  that  came  down /rom  A.  6.  33. 
27.  receive  nothing,except  it  be  given  him/rom  A. 

31.  he  that  comelh  from  A.  is  above  all 
6.  31.  he  gave  them  bread  from  A.  to  eat 

32.  Moses  gave  you  not  that  bread /rom  A. 
38.  I  came /rom  A.  not  to  do  mine  own  will,  42. 
41.  bread  which  came  down /rom  A.  50,  51,  53. 

.^cts  2.  2.  suddenly  there  came  a  sound  from  A. 
9.  3.  a  light/.  A.  shined  about  him,  22.  6.  |  26.  13. 

11.  5.  as  it  had  been  a  great  sheet  let  down  from  A. 
9.  but  the  voice  answered  me  again /rom  A. 

14.  17.  in  that  he  did  good,  and  gave  us  rain  /.  A. 
Rom.  1.  18.  the  wrath  of  God  is  revealed /rom  A. 
1  Cor.  15.  47.  the  second  man  is  the  Lord /rom  A. 
2Co7-.  5. 2.  clothed  on  with  our  house  that  is  from  A. 
Gal.  1.8.  an  angel /rom  A.  preach  any  other  gospel 

1  Thess.  1.  10.  and  to  wait  for  his  Son  from  A. 

4.  16.  the  Lord  himself  shall  descend /rom  A. 

2  Thess.  1.7.  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  be  revealed/.  A. 
Heb.  12.  25.  ifturn  from  him  that  speakelh/ro»nA. 

1  Pet.l.  12.  by  them  thnt  have  preached  the  gospel 
to  you,  with  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down /rom  A. 

Rev.  8.  10.  and  there  fell  a  great  star/ro7«  A. 

9.  1.  and  I  paw  a  star  fall/ro;n  A.  to  the  earth 

10.  4. 1  heard  a  voice/.  A.  seal  up  those  things,  and 
write  them  not,8.  |  11.12.  |  14.2, 13.  |  18.4. 

13.  13.  that  he  maketh  fire  come  down  fromh. 

Sec  God  of  heaven. 

Host,  or,  hosts  of  HEAVEN. 

Dent.4. 19.  seest  the  A.  ofji.  shouldest  worship  him 

17.  3.  hath  gone  and  worshipped  the  Aost  of  h. 
lKings22.VJ.l  saw  the  Lord  sitting  on  the  throne, 
and  the  Ao,s<o/ A.  standing  by  him,  2  CAr.  18. 18. 

2  Kings  17.  16.  Israel  worshipped  the  host  of  h. 
21.  3.  Manasseh  worshipped  Aost  of  h.  2  CAr.33.3. 

5.  he  built  altars  for  the  Aost  ofh.  2  Chron.  33. 5. 

23.  4.  Josiali  brought  out  vessels  made  for  A.  of  h. 
5.  put  down  them  that  burnt  incense  to  A.  of  h. 

J^eh.  9.  G.  thou  hast  made  the  A.  of  heavens  with 
their  Aost,  and  the  Aost  of  A.  worebippeth  thca 
Isa.  34.  4.  all  the  Aost  of  h.  shall  be  dissolved 
.ler.  8.  2.  they  shall  spread  ihem  before  the  A.  ofh, 

19.  13.  they  burnt  incense  to  all  the  Aost  of  h. 

33.  22.  as  the  Aost  of  h.  cannot  be  numbered 
Dan.  8.  10.  it  waxed  great,  even  to  the  Aost  of  h. 
Zeph.  1.5. 1  will  cut  off  them  that  worship  A.  of  h. 
.'lets'!.  i2.  gave  them  up  to  worship  the  Aost  ofh. 

In  HEAVEN. 
F.xod.  20.4.  nor  likeness  of  any  thing  in  h.Deut.5.8. 
Deut.  3. 24.  what  god  in  A.  can  do  like  thy  workg  ? 

4.  39.  that  the  Lord  he  is  G.  in  A.  above  and  earth 

30. 12.  it  is  not  iH  A.  that  thou  shouldest  say,  who 
./osA.  2. 11.  for  Lord  vonr  G.  he  is  God  in  A.  above 

1  Kings  8.23.  is  no  God  like  thee  in  A.2  CAr.  6. 14. 
30.  liear  thou  in  A.  .32,  34,  36,  39,  43,  45,  49. 

2  Kings  7.  2.  if  the  Lord  make  windows  in  A.  19. 

1  Chron.  29.  11.  all  that  is  in  A.  and  earth  isthino 

2  CAr.  20.  6.  O  Lord  God,  art  not  thou  God  in  A.  ? 
■lob  16. 19.  also  now  behold,  my  witness  is  in  A. 
Psal.  11.4.  the  Lord's  throne  is  /n  A.his  eyes  behold 

73.25.  whom  have  I  in  A.  but  thee,  none  on  earth 

77.  18.  the  voice  of  thy  thunder  was  in  the  A. 

78.  26.  he  caused  an  east  wind  to  blow  in  the  A. 
89.  0.  who  in  A.  can  be  compared  to  the  Lord  ? 

37.  shall  be  established  as  a  faithful  witness  in  A, 
113.  6.  hunibleth  himself  to  behold  things  in  A. 
119.  89.  for  ever.  Lord,  thy  word  is  settled  in  A. 
135.  0.  that  did  he  in  A.  and  earth,  in  the  seas 
F.ccl.  5.  2.  for  God  is  in  A.  and  thou  upon  earth 
Isa.  34. 5.  for  my  sword  shnll  be  bathed  in  h.  behold 
Jer.  8.  7.  yea,  the  stork  in  A.  knowcth  her  time* 
r>an.3.28.ther«  ii  a  God  in  k.  that  revealeth  icoteli 


HEA 

Jt>an.6.27.worke(h  signs  and  wond.  hi  A. and  earth 
Jlmoi  "X  6.  he  thai  buildeth  his  sIoiils  in  the  h. 
Mat.  5.  V2.  rejoice,  for  great  in  your  reward  in  h. 

16.  and  glorify  your  Father  who  is  in  A. 

45.  the  children  of  your  Father  who  is  ink. 

48.  be  perfect  aj  your  Father  in  h.  is  perfect 
6.9.  pray  ye,  our  Fath.which  artin  A.  AhAc  11.2. 

10.  will' be  done  on  earth  as  it  is  in  A.  Luke  11.  2. 

20.  but  lay  up  for  yourselves  treasures  in  h. 
7.  11.  shall  your  Fa'ther  m  A.  give  good  things 

21.  that  doelh  the  will  of  my  Father  inh.  12.50. 
10.  32.  him  will  I  confess  belore  my  Father  in  h. 

33.  him  will  I  deny  before  my  Father  in  A. 
16.  17.  but  my  Father  which  is  in  A.  revealed  it 
19.  shall  be  bound  in  A.  be  loosed  in  h.  18.  18. 

18.  10.  despise  not  these  little  ones,  in  h.  angels 
do  aUvays  behold  the  face  of  my  Father  in  h. 

19.  shall  be  done  for  them  of  my  Father  in  h. 
19.21.  thou  shall  have  treasure  in  A.  /,uAe  18.22. 

22.  30.  are  as  the  angels  ol'God  in  A.  Mark  12.  25. 

23.  9.  for  one  is  your  Father  who  is  in  h. 
24.:J0.  shall  appear  the  sign  of  the  Son  of  man  in  A. 
528.  18.  all  power  is  given  to  me  in  A.  and  inearth 

Mark  11.26.  nor  will  your  Father  in  A.  forgive  you 
13.  25.  the  poweis  that  arc  in  A.  shall  be  shaken 
X2.  no,  not  the  angels  which  are  in  A.  nor  the  Son 

Luke  6.  23.  for  behold  your  reward  is  great  in  h. 
10.  20.  because  your  names  are  written  in  h. 
15.  7.  joy  shall  be  in  A.  over  one  sicmur  that  repent. 

19.  38.  peace  in  A.  and  glory  in  the  highest 
John  3.  13.  even  the  Son  of  man  who  is  in  h. 
^ct.i'2. 19.1  will  shew  wonders  in  A. above  and  signs 

Cor.  8. 5.  and  called  gods,  whether  in  A.  or  in  earth 
F.ph.  1.  10.  he  might  gather  in  one,  things  in  A. 

3.15.  of  whom  Ihe  whole  family  in  A.  is  named 

6.  9.  knowing  that  your  master  is  in  h.  Col.  4.  1. 
Phil.  2.  10.  every  knee  should  bow,  of  things  in  h. 

3. 20.  our  conversati.  is  in  h.  from  whence  we  look 

Col.  1.5.  for  the  hope  which  is  laid  up  for  you  in  A. 

16.  by  him  were  all  things  created  that  are  in  A. 

20.  by  him  to  reconcile  all  things  in  h.  and  earth 
Hfb.  lb.  34.  that  ye  have  in  h.  a  better  substance 

12.  23.  the  first-born  which  are  written  in  h. 
1  PH.\.  4.  to  an  inheritance  reserved  in  A.  for  you 

1  .John  5. 7.  there  are  three  that  bare  record  in  h. 
Rev.  4.  1.  and  behold,  a  door  was  opened  in  A. 

2.a  throne  was  set  in  A.  and  one  sat  on  the  throne 
5.  3.  no  man  in  h.  or  earth  was  able  to  open  book 

13.  every  creature  in  h.  saying,  blessing',  honour 
8. 1,  was  silence  in  A.  ||  11.  15.  great  voices  in  A. 
11. 19.  the  temple  of  God  was  opened  in  A. 

12.  1.  there  appeared  a  great  wonder  in  A.  3. 

7.  there  was  war  in  A.  Mirhael  and  his  angels 

8.  nor  was  there  place  found  any  more  in  h. 

10.  I  heard  a  loud  voice,  saying  in  h.  19.  1. 

13.  6.  to  blaspheme  them  that  dwell  in  h. 

14.  17.  angel  came  out  of  the  temple  which  is  in  A. 

15.  1.  I  saw  another  sign  in  A.  great  and  marvel. 
.5.  the  tabernacle  of  testimony  in  A.  was  opened 

19.  14.  the  armies  that  were  in  h.  followed  him 
Into  HEAVEN. 

2  Kinsra  2. 1 .  the  l,ord  would  take  up  F.lijah  into  h. 

11.  Elijah  went  up  by  a  whirlwind  intp  A. 
Psal.  139.  8.  if  I  ascend  into  A.  thou  art  there 
rrov.'M.  4.  who  hnth  ascended  into  A.?  Rom.W.  6 
Jsa.  14.  13.  thou  hast  said,  I  will  ascend  into  h. 
Mark  16.  19.  the  Lord  was  received  up  into  A. 
7^tiJ(:c2. 15.  as  the  nncels  were  gone  away  into  h. 

24.51.  he  was  parted  from  them,  carried  upiwM  A. 

,9cts  1. 11.  gazing  up  in«o  A.  taken  from  you  into  h. 

Jesus  shall  come  as  ye  have  seen  him  frnintoh. 

7.55.Rlephen  looked  upsteadfastly  into  A. and  saw 

10.  Ifi.  the  vessel  was  received  up  into  h.  11.  10. 

Urb.  9.  24.  but  into  A.  itself,  to  appear  for  us 

1  Prt  .3.22.  who  is  gone  into  A.  on  right  hand  of  God 

Srf.  KiNODOM. 

HEAVEN  j.)ined  with  star.n. 
Om.  1.  17.  God  set  stnr.i  in  the  firmament  of  A. 

22.  17.  IwillmnlliplvthyRfied  as  utam  nf/i,2l>.  4. 

Krod.  32.  13.  1  Chron.  27.  23.  JVrA.  9.  23. 
Dfvt.  1.  10.  vou  are  this  day  as  star.i  of  A.  10.22. 

28.ti0  wlirrens  ye  were  as  stars  of  A.  for  multitude 
Ua.  13.  10.  the  stam  of  A.  shall  not  give  light 
J^ifilr.  .32. 7.  I  will  rover  A.  and  make  stars  dark 
JVoA.  3.  16.  multiplied  merrlianlB  as  stars  of  A. 
.V(i«.24,29.  Ihf  stars  shall  fall  from  A.  Mark  13.25. 
Rev.  6.  13.  and  Ihe  stars  of  A.  fell  on  the  earth 

12.  4.  his  l->i|  drow  the  third  part  n(  stars  of  A. 
To  HEAVEN,  or  «n^>  HEAVEN. 
'   Ofn.  11.4.  a  tower  wliosn  lop  may  reach  vnloh. 

2P.  12.  a  ladder,  and  the  lop  of  it  reached  to  A. 
/)<:f;l!.1.28.  the  cities  erea I  and  walli'd  up(n  A.9. 1 

4.  19.  and  lest  thou  lift  up  thine  eyes  unto  h. 

30.12.who  shall  go  up  for  us  to  A.  and  brinp  it  lo  us 

32.  40.  far  I  lift  np  my  hand  to  A.  and  sav,  I  live# 
Josh.  R.20.  Ihe  smoke  of  Iherily  ascended  \\\tloh. 
J«rf/r.20  4n.  the  flnmeoftlincilv  ascendrd  up  Inh. 
1  Kam.  .">.  12.  and  the  rrv  oflhe  niy  wcmiI  np  to  A 
}  Kings  P.  54.  with  his  hands  spread  up  to  h. 
I  CAron.  28.  9.  in  a.  ragf  that  toacheth  up  unto  ft. 
S7S 


HEA 

2  Chron.  30.  27.  their  prayer  came  np  even  unto  ft. 

32.  20.  the  prophet  Isaiah  prayed  and  cried  to  h. 
Pnal.  107.  26.  they  mount  up  to  A.  they  go  down 
./cr.  51.  9.  for  her  judgment  reacheth  unto  A. 
Dan.  4.  11.  the  tree  whose  height  reached  toh.  20. 

12.  7.  when  he  held  up  his  left  hand  unto  h. 
JimosQ.  2.  though  they  climb  up  to  A.  thence  will  I 
Mat.  11.  23.  Capernaum,  which  art  exalted  to  A. 

14.  19.  and  looking  up  to  A.  Jl/arA  6. 41.  /,wArit.l6. 
Mark  7.  34.  looking  up  lo  A.  he  sighed,  and  saith 
f.ukc  18. 13.  not  lift  up  so  much  as  his  eyes  unto  A. 
John  3.  13.  and  no  man  hath  ascended  up  lo  A. 

17.  1.  Jesus  lift  up  his  eyes  to  A.  and  said,  Father 
2  Cor.  12.  2.  such  a  one  caught  up  to  the  third  A. 
Rev.  10.  5.  the  angel  lifted  up  his  hand  to  A. 

11.  12.  and  they  ascimded  up  to  A.  in  a  cloud 

18.  5.  for  her  sins  have  reached  unto  A. 
7'o«)ar(/ HEAVEN. 

Ocn.  15.  5.  look  now  toward  h.  and  tell  the  stars 
Ezod.  9.  8.  let  Moses  sprinkle  it  toward  the  A. 

10.  and  Moses  sprinkled  it  up  toward  A. 
22.  stretch  forth  thine  hand  toward  A.  10.  21. 

23.  Moses  stretched  forth  his  rod  toward  A. 

10.  22.  Moses  stretched  forth  his  hand  toward  A. 
Judff.  13.  20.  when  the  flame  went  up  toward  A. 

1  Kings  8.  22.  Solomon  stood  before  altar  of  Lord, 
and  spread  forth  his  hands  toirard  A.  2  CAr.  6. 13. 

■fob  2.  12.  sprinkled  dust  on  their  heads  toward  h. 
Prov.  23.  5.  they  fly  away  as  an  eagle  toward  A. 
Acts  i.  10.  while  they  looked  steadfastly  toward  A. 

UnUer  HEAVEN. 
Gen.  1.  9.  lot  the  waters  under  A.  he  gathered 

6.  17   a  flood  to  destroy  all  flesh  from  under  A. 
'.  19.  the  high  hills  unrfer  the  whole  A.  were  cover. 

Exod.  17.  14.  I  will  utterly  put  out  the  remem- 
brance of  Amalek  from  underh.  Deut.  25.  19. 
I)e\it.  2.  25.  the  fear  of  thee  on  nations  under  h. 
4.  19.  God  hath  divided  lo  all  nations  under  k. 

7.  24.shaltdfstroy  theirname  from  unrferA.9.14. 
29.20.  Lord  shall  blot  out  his  name  from  underh. 

2  Kings  14. 27.  blot  out  name  of  Isr.  from  underh. 
.Ml  28.  24.  for  God  seeth  %inder  the  w  hole  h. 

37.  3.  he  dircclcth  it  under  the  whole  A. 
41.  II.  whatsoever  is  under  the  whole  A.  is  mine 
Ecrl.  1.  13.  to  search  out  all  things  done  under  A. 

2.  3.  w  hat  was  that  good  they  should  do  under  A. 

3.  1.  a  lime  lo  every  purpose  under  the  A. 
/-«A(;17.24.  that  liglitenethoutofone  part  underh. 
Acts  2.  5.  devout  men  of  every  nation  underh. 

4.  12.  none  other  name  under  A.  given  among  men 
0;M. 23.  gospel  preached  to  every  creature  und.h. 

HEAVENLY. 
Mat.  6.  14.  your  A.  Father  will  forgive  you 
26.  yet  your  A.  Father  feedelh  them 

32.  your  A.  Father  knowelh  that  ye  have  need 

15.  13.  every  plant  my  A.  Father  hath  not  planted 
18.  35.  so  shall  my  A.  Father  do  also  to  you 

AuAc2.13.a  multitude  of  the  A.  host  praising  God 
11. 13.  your  A.  Father  shall  give  the  Spirit  to  them 
.JohnX  12.  how  believe,  if  I  tell  you  of  A.  things 
Acts  26.  19.  I  was  not  disobedient  to  the  A.  vision 

1  Chr.  15.  48.  as  is  the  A.  such  are  they  that  are  A. 
49.  we  shall  also  bear  Ihe  image  of  the  A. 

KpA.1.3.  with  spiritual  blessings  in  A.  places  in  Chr 
1.  20.  set  him  at  his  right  hand  in  A.  places,  2.  6. 
3.  10.  that  now  unto  the  powers  in  A.  places 

2  7'i«i.4. 18. 1/d.  will  preserve  me  to  his  A.  kingdom 
f/eb.  3.  I.  brethren,  partakers  oflhe  A.  calling 

6.4.  once  enlightened, and  have  tasted  oflhe  A.  gift 

8.  5.  who  serve  to  example  and  shadow  ofA. things 

9.  23.  hut  A.  thinss  with  better  sacrifices  than  these 

11.  16.  a  A.  country  ||  12.22.  the  A.  Jerusalem 
HEAVENS. 

dm.  2.  1.  thus  the  A.  and  the  earth  were  finished 

4. these  are  the  (.'enerationsofthe  A.  and  theearlh 

in  Ihe  dav  that  the  Ld.  marie  the  A.  and  earth 

neat.  32.  1.  give  ear,  O  A.  I  will  speak,  Isa.  1.  2. 

33.  2H.  also  his  A.  shall  drop  down  dew 
Tudg.  5.  4.  the  enrlh  trembled,  the  A.  dropped 

2  .Slim.  22.  10.  he  bowed  the  A.  and  came,  Ps.iS.9. 
1  A'in;5r.«8.27.thehoavenof  A.  cannot  contain  ihce 

1  Chr.  16. 26.  the  gods  are  idols,  but  the  Lord  made 
the  A.  .Vf  A.  9.  6.  P.^al.  96.  5.  |  102. 25.  |  1.36.  5. 

31.  Ill  \h-  A  be  glad,  let  the  earth  rejoice 

2  CAron.  6,  25.  then  hear  from  the  A.  33,  35,  39. 
Ezra  9.  6.  our  trespass  is  crown  np  to  the  ft. 
.fob  9.  8.  which  alone  spreadeih  out  the  A. 

14.  12.  man  riseth  not  till  the  A.  be  no  more 

15.  15.  yea,  the  A.  are  not  clean  in  his  sight 
20.  6.  Ihotich  his  excellency  mount  up  to  the  ft. 
26.  13.  bv  his  Spirit  he  halii  garnished  ihe  A. 
3S.5.looklolheA.  and  see,  and  behold  the  clouds 

Psnl.t^  1.  thou  hast  set  thy  glory  above  the  A.I  13. 4. 
3.  when  I  consider  Ihy  A.  the  work  of  lliy  fingers 
19.  1.  Ihe  A.  declare  the  glory  of  God,  and  firmam. 

33.  6  by  the  word  of  llie  Lord  were  the  A.  made 
.')(!.  4.  shall  call  lo  llioA.  from  above,  and  tocarlh 

6.  the  A.  shall  declare  his  righlnousii.  G.  is  jodtfe 
.57.  5.  be  thou  exalted,  O  God,  above  A.  11.  |  10.S.  5. 
10.  for  thy  mercy  ii  great  unto  the  A.  106.  4. 


HEA 

Psal.  68.  4.  extol  him  that  rideth  upon  the  ft.  3S 
8.  the  A.  also  dropped  at  the  presence  of  Go<' 
73.  9.  thoy  set  their  moiilh  against  the  A. 
89.  5.  the  A.  shall  praise  thy  wonders,  O  Lord 

11.  the  A.  are  thine,  the  earth  also  is  thine 

96.  II.  let  the  A.  rejoice,  earth  be  glad,  Aec.  12. 12 
97. 6.  A.  declare  his  righteousness,  people  hie  glory 
104.  2.  who  strelchust  out  the  A.  ha.  40.  22. 
108.  4.  for  Ihy  mercy  is  great  above  the  A. 
115.  16.  the  heaven,  even  the  A.  are  Ihe  Lord's 
144.  5.  bow  thy  A.  O  Lord,  and  come  down,  touch 
148.  1.  i>rai8e  ye  tlie  Lord  from  the  A.  praise  him 
4.  praise  him,  ye  A.of  A.  and  waters  above  theft 

Prui).  3. 19.  by  understanding  he  cstabhshed  the  ft 
8. 27.  when  he  prepared  the  A.  I  was  there 

Isa.  13. 13.  will  shake  the  A.  and  earth.  Hag.  2.0,21 
34.  4.  the  A.  shall  be  rolled  together  as  u  scroll 
42.  5.  thus  saith  he  that  created  the  A.  45.  18. 
44.  23.  sing,  O  ye  A.  fur  the  Lord  huth  done  it 

24.  saith  the  Lord,  that  streicheth  forth  the  A. 

45.  12.  I  51.  13.  Jcr.  10.  12.  Zech.  12.  1 
45.8.dropdown  ye  A.  from  above,let  the  skies  pour 

48.  13.  my  right  hand  hath  spanned  the  A. 

49.  13.  sing,  U  A.  and  he  joyful,  O  earth 

50.  3. 1  clothe  A.  with  blackness,  I  make  sackdoth 

51.  6.  lift  up  your  eyes  to  the  A.  and  look,  the  ft. 
shall  vanish  away  like  smoke,  and  earth  wax  old 

16.  that  I  may  plant  the  A.  and  lay  foundatioQi 
55.  9.  lor  as  the  A.  are  higher  than  the  earlh 

(14. 1. that  thou  wouldcst  rend  tlieA.and  comedowo 
(i5.  17.  behold,  I  create  new  A.  and  a  new  earth 
66.  22.  for  as  the  new  A.  which  I  will  make 
.fer.  2.  12.  he  astonished,  O  ye  A.  and  be  afraid 
4.  2.3.  I  beheld  the  A.  and  they  had  no  light 

25.  all  the  birds  oflhe  A.  were  fled,  9.  10. 

28.  fur  this  shall  the  earth  mourn,  A.  above  black 
10. 11.  the  gods  that  have  not  made  the  A.  and  the 
earth  shall  perish,  and  from  under  these  ft. 
14.  22.  or  can  the  A.  give  showers  7  art  not  ihouhe 
f.am.'i.  66.  destroy  them  from  under  the  A.  oflhe  L. 
Ezek.  1.  I.  that  the  A.  were  opened.  Mat.  3.  16. 
I>an.  4.  26.  shall  have  known  that  the  A.  do  rule 
//o.s.2.21.1  will  hear  the  A.  they  shall  hear  theearth 
./od2.10.the  A.  shall  tiemble,sun  and  moon  be  dark 

3.  16.  and  the  A.  and  the  earlh  shall  shake 
Hab.  3.3.  God  came,  his  glory  covered  the  A. 
Zech.  6.  5.  these  are  the  four  spirits  of  the  ft. 

8.  12.  and  the  A.  shall  give  their  dew 

Mat.  24.  29.  the  powers  of  ihe  A.  shall  be  shaken 
Mark  1.  10.  and  coming  up,  he  s.iw  Ihe  A.  opened 
Acts'2.  34.  for  David  is  not  ascended  into  the  A. 
3.21.  whom  Ihe  A.  must  receive  until  llie  times 
7.  56.  behold,  I  see  the  A.  opened,  andSonof  mao 
Heb.  1.  10.  the  A.  are  the  work  of  thine  hands 

4.  14.  we  have  a  High-Priest  thai  is  passed  into  ft. 
7.  26.  a  High-Priest  made  higher  than  tlie  A. 

2  Pit.  3.  5.  by  the  word  of  God  ihc  A.  were  of  old 
7.  but  the  A.  which  are  now,  are  kept  in  store 
10.  Ihe  A.  shall  pass  away  with  a  great  noise 

12.  wherein  Ihe  A.  being  on  fire  shall  he  dissolved 

/ntAe  HEAVENS. 
P.ial.  2.  4.  he  that  silteth  in  the  A.  fh;;ll  laugh 

18.  13.  the  Lord  also  thundered  in  Ihe  h. 

36.  5.  thy  mercy,  O  Lord,  is  in  tAf  A.  ihy  failhfuln. 

89. 2. thy  faithfulness  shall  thou  esliiblish  inlheh. 

103. 19.  Ihe  Lord  hath  prepared  his  throne  in  theh. 

115.  3.  God  is  in  tA«A.  he  halh  done  what  pleased 

123.  1. 1  lift  my  eyes,  O  thou  that  dwellcsliii  tAfft. 
Isa.  5.  30.  the  light  is  darkened  in  the  A.  thereof 
.ftr.  10.  13.  a  mullilude  of  ualeis  in  the  A.  51.  16. 
Aam.  3.  41.  lot  IIS  lift  upourheaits  toGodin  tfte  ^ 
.foel  2.  30.  I  will  shew  wonders  in  the  A. 
f.ukc  12.  33.  a  treasure  in  theh  which  failethnol 
2Cor.  5   1.  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  A 
Heb.  8.  1.  oflhe  throne  oflhe  Majesty  in  Ihe  h. 

9.  2;). necessary  Ihallho  patterns ufthings  in  theh 

HEAVY. 
Gen.  41.  t  31.  for  ihe  famine  shall  be  very  A. 
48.  t  10.  now  Ihe  eyes  of  Israel  were  A.  lor  aj;a 
Erod.  .5.  t  9.  let  the  work  be  A.  upon  the  men 

17.  12.  Moses'  hands  were  A.  they  took  a  stone 

18.  18.  for  this  thing  is  loo  A.  fo'r  thee,  thou  art 

not  able  lo  perform  it  thyself  alone 
.Vurn.  11.  14.  not  able,  because  ilia  too  A.  for  me 
./i/'/jl,r.l.t.35.  the  hand  oflhe  house  of  Joseph  was  A. 

1  .Sam.  4.  18.  for  Eli  was  an  old  man  and  A. 

5.  6.  hand  oflhe  L.  was  A.  on  them  of  Ashdod,  11 

2  .Sum.  14.  26.  becau.se  the  hair  was  *■  on  him 

1  Kings  12.  4.  thy  father's  A.  yoke  lichli-i,  we  will 

serve  thee,  10,  11,  14. "2  Chr.  10.  4,  10,  11,  14. 
14.  6.  for  I  am  scml  lo  thoe  with  A.  lidmirs 
20.  43.  king  Ahah  went  lo  his  house  A.  21.  4. 

2  AVn^.v6.  t  14.  the  king  sent  lo  riolhnn  a  A. host 
18.  t  17.  SiMinarlierib  sent  lo  Hezekiah  aft.  host 

J^rh.  5.  18.  because  the  bondnffe  was  A.  on  peopl* 
tol,  33.  7.  neilher  shall  my  hand  bn  A.  upon  tlieo 
f'snl.  32.  4.  day  und  nieht  thy  hand  was  A.  on  me 
38.  4.  as  a  A.  burden  they  are  too  A.  for  me 
Prnr  25.  20.  he  that  sin  jelh  songs  lo  a  A.  heart 
i  27.3.slone  is  A.  and  sand  weighty,  but  fool's  wieilk 


HEI 

Proc.  31.  6.  give  wine  to  those  thai  be  of  h.  hearts 

Jsa.  6.  10.  make  their  ears  A.  shut  Iheir  eyes 
24. 20.  the  transgression  thereof  shall  be  A.  upon  it 
30. 27.  with  his  anger,  and  the  burden  thereof  is  A. 
46. 1.  your  carriages  were  A.  loadcn,  are  a  burden 
58. 6.  is  not  this  the  fast,  to  undo  the  A.  burdens  1 
59.  1.  neither  his  car  A.  that  it  carniot  hear 

7yam.3.7.hedged  me  about,  hath  made  my  chain  A. 

Jifat.  11.  23.  come  to  me,  all  ye  that  are  A.  laden 
23.  4.  for  they  bind  A.  burdens,  and  grievous  to  be 
26.  37.  he  began  to  be  sorrowful,  and  very  A. 
43.  for  their  eyes  were  very  A.  Mark  14.  33,40. 

L-ukc9.  32.  that  were  with  him,  were  A.  with  sleep 
HEAVIER. 

Job  6.3.  now  it  would  be  A.  than  the  sand  of  the  sea 
23.  2.  my  stroke  is  A.  than  my  groaning 

Prov.  27.  3.  a  fool's  wrath  is  A.  than  them  both 
HEAVILY. 

Kio<i.l4.25.  takeoff  wheels,  so  that  drave  them  A. 

Psal.25. 14.1  bowed  down  A.  as  one  that  mourneth 

Isa.  47.  6.  on  the  ancient  hast  thou  A-  laid  thy  yoke 
HEAVINESS. 

.EzraO.S.at  the  evening  sacrifice  I  rose  from  my  A. 

Job9.^'.  if  I  say,  I  will  leaveoifmy  A.  and  comfort 

Psal.  69.  20.  broken  my  heart,  and  I  am  full  of  A. 
119. 28.  my  soul  melteth  for  A.  strengthen  thou  me 

Prov.  10.  1.  a  fdolish  son  is  the  A.  of  his  mother 
12.  2.').  A.  in  the  heart  of  man  makelh  it  stoop 
14.  13.  and  the  end  of  that  mirth  is  A. 

fsa.l.  t4.  ah  sinful  nation,  a  people  of  A.  with  iniq. 

29.  2.  and  there  shall  be  A.  and  sorrow 

30.  t27.  wilhhis  anger,  and  the  burd.  thereof  is  A. 
61.  3.  to  give  the  garment  of  praise  for  spirit  of  A. 

Rom.  9. 2.  thatl  have  great  A.  and  continual  sorrow 
2  Cnr.  2.  1.  I  would  not  come  again  to  you  in  A. 
Phil.  2. 26.  Epaphroditus  my  brother  was  full  of  A. 
Jam.  4.  9.  let  your  joy  be  turned  into  A. 
IPel.l.G.lho'  now  for  a  season,  if  need,  ye  are  in  A. 

HEDGE. 
Job  1.  10.  hast  thou  not  made  a  A.  about  him  ? 
Prov.  15.  19.  the  way  of  slothful  is  a  A.  of  thorns 
/^cci. 10. S.whoso  breaketh  a  A.  a  serpcntshall  bite 
Isa.  5.  5.  I  will  take  away  the  A.  thereof 
J.am.  2.  t6.  he  hath  violently  taken  away  his  A. 
Eiek.  13. 5.  nor  made  up  the  A.  for  the  house  of  Isr. 

22.  30.  Isoughta  man  that  should  make  up  the  A. 
Mic.  7.  4.  the  most  upright  sharper  than  a  thorn  A. 
Jiark  12. 1.  he  set  a  A.  about  it,  digged  for  wine  fat 

HEDGE. 
Hoa.  2.6.  behold,  I  will  A.  up  thy  way  with  thorns 

HEDGED. 
Job  3.  23.  whose  way  is  hid,  whom  God  hath  A.  in 

10.  fll.  thou  hast  A.  me  with  bones  and  sinews 
J  jam.  3.  7.  he  hath  A.  me  about,  I  cannot  get  out 
Kick.  13.  t  5.  ye  have  not  A. up  the  hedge  for  Israel 
Jl/af. 21.33.plantod  a  vinevard, andA.it  round  about 

HEDGES. 
ICAr.  4. 23.  those  tliat  dwelt  amongst  plants  and  h. 
Psal.HO.  12.  hast  thoubroken  down  her  A..'  89.  40. 
Jer.  49.  3.  lament  and  run  to  and  fro  by  the  A. 
JVaA.  3.  17.  as  grasshoppers  which  camp  in  the  A. 
Luke  14.  23.  go  out  into  the  high-ways  and  A. 

HEED. 
2  Sam.  20.  10.  but  Amasa  look  no  A.  to  the  sword 
2  Kings  10.  31.  .lehu  took  no  A.  to  walk  in  the  law 
Psal.  119.  9.  by  taking  A.  according  to  thy  word 
Prov.  17.  4.  a  wicked  doer  giveth  A.  to  false  lips 
Fee/.  12.9.f  he  preacher  gave  good  A.and  sought  out 
Isa.21.  7.  he  hearkened  diligently  with  much  A. 
Jer.  ]8.  18.  let  us  not  give  A.  to  any  of  his  words 

19.  give  A.  to  me,  O  Lord,  and  hearken  to  voice 
.ffcls  3.5.  he  gave  A.unfo  them,  expecting  to  receive 

8.  6.  the  people  of  Samaria  gave  A.  to  Philip 

10.  they  gave  A.  to  Simon  from  least  to  greatest 
1  Tim.  1.  4.  neither  give  A.  to  fables,  Tit.  1.  14. 

4.1. some  givingA.toseducingspiritsnnd  doctrines 
I{eb.  2.  1.  we  ought  to  sive  the  more  earnest  A 
Sfe  T.V.KI!. 
HEEL,  S. 

(7en.3.15. it  bruise  thv  head, thou  shall  bruise  his  A. 

25.  26.  his  hand  took  hold  on  F.iau's  h.Hos.  12.3. 

49. 17.  Dan  be  an  adder  that  biteth  the  horse's  h 
Job  13.  27.  thou  settest  a  print  on  the  A.  of  my  feet 

18.  9.  the  gin  shall  take  him  by  the  A.  robber 
Ps.41.0.  hath  lift  up  his  A.  against  me,  .Tohn  13.  18. 

49.5.  when  initpiity  of  mv  A.  compass  me  about 
Jcr.  13.  22.  for  thine  iniquity  arc  thy  A.  made  bare 

HEIFER. 

<?c>i.l.5. 9. 1.1  ke  me  a  A.  of  three  years  old,  and  goat 

JVum.  10. 2.  bring  a  reil  A.|15.burn  the  A.  in  his  sight 

9.  gather  up  the  ashes  of  the  A.  and  lay  them  up 

Ofur.  21.  3.  the  elders  of  that  city  shall  take  a  A. 
4. shall  strike  off  A. neck||0. wash  hands  over  theA. 
Jttdg.  14.  18.  if  ye  had  not  plowed  with  my  h. 
1  Sam.  16.  2.  the  Lord  said,  take  a  A.  with  thee 
/.ia.15.5.  crv  out  for  Moab  as  a  A.  of  three  years  old 
./er.46.  20.  Egypt  is  like  a  fair  A.  destruction  comes 

48.  31.  uttered  their  voice  as  a  A.  of  three  years 

50.  II.  because  ye  are  grown  fat  as  a  A.  at  grass 

&0«.4.16.for  Israel  slideth  back,  as  a  backslidintV 
277 


HEL 

Hos.  10.  11.  and  Ephraim  is  ai  a  A.  that  Is  taught 
Hcb.  9.  13.  the  ashes  of  a  A.  sprinkling  the  unclean 

HEIGHT. 
Gen.  6. 15.  the  A.  of  the  ark  shall  bo  thirty  cubits 
Kxoii.  25.  10.  shalt  make  an  arkofshitlim-wood,  a 
cubit  and  a  half  shall  be  A.  of  it,  2:1.  |  37.  1,  10. 
27.  1.  A.  of  the  altar  shall  bo  three  cubits,  38.  1. 
18.  A.  of  the  court  shall  be  five  cubits,  38.  18. 
30.  2.  A.  of  altar  of  incense  two  cubits,  37.  25. 
1  Sam.  16.  7.  look  not  on  the  A.  of  his  stature 
17.  4.  Goliath's  A.  was  six  cubits  and  a  span 

1  A'(n^«6.2.the  A.  of  house  of  God  was  thirty  cubits 

20.  the  oracle  twenty  cubits  in  the  A.  thereof 
20.  the  A.  of  the  one  cherub  was  ten  cubits 

7.  2.  the  h.  of  the  house  of  Lebanon  thirty  cubits 

16.  the  A.  of  the  one  chapiter  was  five  cubits 
23.  the  A.  of  the  molten  sea  was  five  cubits 
27.  the  A.  of  one  base  was  three  cubits 

2  Kings  19.  23.  with  multitude  of  chariots  I  am 

come  up  to  the  A.  of  the  mountains,  Isa.  37.24. 
25.  17.  the  A.  of  one  pillar  was  eighteen  cubits 
2  Chr.  33.  14.  and  raised  it  up  a  very  great  A. 
Ezra  6.  3.  the  A.  of  God's  house  sixty  cubits 
Job  22.  12.  is  not  God  in  the  A.  of  heaven  ?  and 
behold  the  A.  of  the  stars,  how  high  they  are 
Psal.  102. 19.  Lord  looked  from  A.  of  his  sanctuary 
Pron.  25.  3.  the  heaven  for  A.  the  earth  for  depth 
ha.  7.  11.  ask  it  in  the  depth,  or  in  the  A.  above 
./fr.31.12.theyshallconie  and  sing  in  the  A.  of  Zion 
49.  16.  O  thou  that  boldest  the  A.  of  the  hill 
51. 53.  tho'  she  should  fortify  the  A.  of  her  strength 
Ezck.  17.  23.  in  mountain  of  the  A.  of  Israel,  20.  40. 
19.  11.  she  appeared  in  her  A.  with  her  branches 
3 1.5. therefore  hisA.was  e.xalted  above  all  the  trees 

10.  because  thou  hast  lifted  up  thyself  in  A. 
14.  that  none  of  trees  exalt  themselves  for  A. 

.32.  5.  I  will  fill  the  valleys  with  thy  A. 
Dan.  3. 1.  image  of  gold  whose  A.  was  sixty  cubits 
4.  10.  I  saw  and  beheld  a  tree  whose  A.  was  great 

11.  and  the  A.  thereof  reached  unto  heaven,  20. 
Jlmns  2.  9.  whose  A.  was  like  the  A.  of  cedars 
/Jom.8.39.  nor  A. nor  depth  shall  be  able  to  separate 
K/yA.  3.  18.  what  is  the  A.  of  the  love  of  Christ  1 
/ifu.21.  16.  the  breadth  and  A.  ofthe  city  are  equal 

HEIGHTS. 
.Toh  9.  t8.  which  treadeth  upon  the  A.  of  the  sea 
H.  t  8.  it  is  the  A.  of  heaven,  what  canst  thou  dol 
Psal.  95.  t  4.  the  A.  ofthe  hills  are  his  also 
148.  1.  praise  the  Lord,  praise  him  in  the  A. 
Kcol.  JO.  t  6.  folly  is  set  in  great  A.  rich  sit  low 
Isa.  14.  14. 1  will  ascend  above  the  A.  of  the  clouds 
33.  1 16.  he  shall  dwell  on  A.  his  place  of  defence 

HELNfOUS. 
.lob  31.  11.  for  this  is  a  A.  crime,  yea,  an  iniquity 

HEIR,  S. 
Oen.  15.  3.  and  lo,  one  born  in  my  house  is  mine  A. 
4.  word  came,  saying,  this  shall  not  b^  thine  A. 
21.  10.  Ishmael  shall  not  be  A.  with  my  son  Isaac 
■  hidg.  18.t7.  there  was  no  A.  of  restraint  in  the  land 
2  Sam.  14.  7.  and  we  will  des'^roy  the  A.  also  . 
Prov.  30.23.  a  hamlmaid  that  is  A.  to  her  mistress 
Jer.  49.  1.  hath  Israel  no  sons?  hath  he  no  A.  ? 

2.  Israel  shall  be  A.  unto  them  that  were  his  A. 
Mic.  1.  15.  yet  will  I  bring  an  A.unto  thee,0  inhab. 
Mat.  21. 38.  this  is  theA.  Mark  12.  7.  LuUe  20.  14. 
Rom.  4.  13.  that  he  should  be  A.  ofthe  world 
14.  for  if  they  which  are  ofthe  law  be  A. 

8.  17.  if  children,  then  A.  A.  of  God,  and  joint 

A.  with  Christ;  if  we  sutfer  to  be  glorified 
Gal.  3.  29.  ye  are  A.  according  to  tho  promise 
4.  1.  I  say,  that  the  A.  as  long  as  he  is  a  child 
7.  if  a  son,  then  an  A  of  God  through  Christ 
30.  the  son  ofthe  bond-woman  shall  not  be  A. 
F.pk.  3.  6.  that  the  Gentilc'S  should  be  fellow  A. 
Tit.  3.  7.  A.  according  to  the  hope  of  eternal  life 
Heh.  1.  2.  whom  he  appointed  A.  of  all  things 
14.  for  them  who  shall  be  A.  of  salvation 

6.  17.  God  willing  to  shew  unto  the  A.  of  promise 
11.  7.  became  A.  ofthe  righteousness  by  faith 

0.  and  Jacob,  A.  with  him  ofthe  same  promise 
.Tarn.  2.  5.  A.  ofthe  kingdom  he  hath  iiromised 
1  Pel.  3.  7.  as  A.  together  ofthe  grace  of  life 

HELD. 
Gen.  48.  17.  Joseph  A.  up  his  father's  hand 
F.rod.M.  11.  when  Moses  A.  up  hand,  Isr.  prevailed 

.36.  12.  the  loops  A.  one  curtain  to  another 
.Tuds-  7.20.  and  A.  the  lamps  in  (heir  lef.-hands 

10.26.Samson9aid  unto  lad  that//. him  hythe  hand 
Ii\tth  3. 15. when  she  A. it, he  measured  six  me.asurcs 

1  Sam.  25.  36.  Nabal  A.  a  feast  in  his  house 

2  Sam.  18.  16.  for  Joab  A.  hack  the  people 

1  Kings  8.  65.  at  thai  time  Solomon  A.  a  feast 

1  Chron.  11.  t  10.  these  A.  strongly  with  David 

2  Ckron.  4.  5.  the  sea  A.  three  thousand  baths 
JVrA.4.  16.  the  other  half  of  them  A.  both  spears,  21 

17.  and  with  the  other  hand  he  A.  a  weapon 
F.sth.  5.  2.  the  kin»  A.  out  the  golden  sceptre 

7.  4.  if  we  have  been  sold,  I  had  A.  my  tnnguo 
,Tnb  23.  H.  my  foot  A.  his  step8,hit  way  have  I  kept 
Psal.  32.  9.  whose  mouth  must  be  A.  in  with  bit 


HEL 

Ps.94.ia.  my  foot  8lippeth,thy  mercy,  O  L.A.me  up 
Vrov.  16.  15.  not  he  A.  innocent,  17.  fS.  |  19.  fS. 
Cant.  3.  4.  I  A.  him,  and  would  not  let  him  go 
7.  5.  hair  like  purple,  the  king  is  A.  in  the  galleries 
Jcr.  50.  33.  that  took  them  captives,  A.  them  fast 
Dan.Vl.  7.  when  he  A.  up  his  right  hand  and  sware 
Mat.  12.  14.  A.  a  council  against  him,  Mark  15.1 
Luke  22.  03.  the  men  that  A.  Jesus  mocked  him 
Jicls'i.W.  the  same  man  that  was  healed,  A.  Peter 

14.  4.  part  A.  with  Jews,  part  with  the  aptjstlef    . 
Ham.  7.  6.  that  being  dea<l  wherein  we  were  A. 
yicu.6.9.  were  slain  for  the  testimony  which  they  h- 

HELD  peace. 
frcn.  24.  21.  the  man  wondering  at  her,  A.  his  peoc* 
34.  5.  Jacob  A.  his  peace  until  they  were  come 
/yC».10.3.I  will  be  glorified,  and  AaronA.  hispeacc 
JVum.  30.7.  her  husband  A.  his  peoceat  Irer,  11,  14. 
I  Sam.  10.  27.  they  despised  Saul,  he  A.  his  peace 
2A'in^.9l8.  36.  butpcopie  A.  their  peace,  would  not 
jVcA.  5.  8.  they  A.  their  peace,  and  found  nothing 
./«/;29.  lO.nobles  A.theirpeace,their  tongue  cleaved 
Psal.  .39.  2.  I  was  dumb,  I  h.  my  -peace  from  good 
/.s-a.  36.  21.  they  A.  their  peace,  Mark  3.4.  |  9.34 
.57.  II.  liave  not  I  A.  my  peace,  even  of  old  1 
.Mat.  20.  63.  but  Jesus  A.  his  peace 
Luke  14. 4.  they  A.  iheirpcace,  20.  26.  Jicts  11.  18 
.flcts  15.  13.  they  A.  their  peace,  James  answered 

HELL. 
In  Hebrew,  Scheol.     This  word  most  commonly 
signifies  the  grave,  or  the  place  or  state  of  the 
dead.   Jacob  says,  Gen.  37.  35,  I  will  go  down 
into  the  grave,  unto  my  son,  mourning.     I  will 
die  with  grief,  I  will  never  leave  mnurnin'r  till 
I  die.   Sain  Gen.  42. 38,  If  mischief  befall  Ben- 
jamin, then  shall  ye  bring  down  my  gray  hairi 
with  sorrow  to  the  grave.     I'oa  will  make  me, 
who  am  tcom  away  already,  to  die  with  grief 
Theconspiralors,  Korah,  Dathan,  and  Ahnam 
were  swallowed  up  in  the  earth,  and  descended 
quick  into  the  grave;  they  wire  buried  aline, 
Num   16.  30,  31.     Thou  wilt  not  leave  my  sou. 
in  hell ;  TAoit  wilt  not  suffer  my  body  to  putrefy 
in  the  grave,  Psal.  16. 10.  which  isprnpheticalltj 
spoken  of  the  Messiah.     Jl?id  in  Psal.  55.  15 
Let  death  seize  upon  them,  and  let  th^m  go 
down  quick  into  hell,  into  the  grave.     Jimah 
says,  that  he  cried  to  (be  Lord  out  of  the  belly 
of  hell ;    that  is,  out  of  the  belly  of  a  fish 
wherein  he  was  shut  up  as  in  the  grace,  Jonah 
2.  2.     This  word  Schf^ol  is  sometimes  put  for 
hell,  the  place  where  the  wicked  or  the  damned 
are  tormented;  as  in  3 oh    11.8,   7'Ac  secrets 
of  God^s  providence  are   high  as  heaven,  and 
depper  than  hell.    Mndin  Prov.   15.  11,  Hel. 
and  destruction  are  before  the  Lord  ;  tlie  place 
and  state  of    the  damned  are  known  to  God. 
The  wicked  shall  be  turned  into  hell,   PsaL 
9.  17. 
.^s  the  happiness  of  heaven  is  ei pressed  in  scrip- 
ture under  the  idea  of  a  feast  or  wedding,  at 
which  there  is  a  great  deal  of  li!/ht,joy,  ana 
pleasure;  so  hell,  in  the  Jfem  Testament,  is 
set  forthbysuchrepresentations  as  may  power- 
fully in'stJ  uct  and  terrify  even  the  most  carnal 
man.     J^othing  is  more  intolerably  painful, 
than  suffering  the  violence  of  fire  enraged  with, 
brimstone;    and  hell  is  described  by  a  lake  of 
fire  and  brimstone.  Rev.  19.  20.  |  21.  8.     It  is 
represented  as  a  dismally  dark  place,  where 
there  is  nothing  but  grief,  sadness,  vexation, 
rage,  despair,  and  gnashing  of  teeth,  like  one 
excluded  or  shut  out,  during  the  obscurity  of 
the  nii'ht,  and  severity  of  the  cold.  Mat.  8.  12 
TAe  wicked  in  hell  not  only  undergo  the  pu- 
nishment of  sense,  but  also  that  of  loss,  which 
is  a  separation  from  God,  a  privation  of  hit 
sight  and  of  the  beatific  vision,     .'idd  to  these 
the  eternity  of  tlfir  inisery,  which  nbooe  all 
other  considerations    makes    it    intolerable : 
Their  worm    dieth  not,  and  their  fire  is  not 
qticnched,  Mark  9.  48. 
By  the  gales  of  hell.  Mot.  16.  18.  7>  meant  the 
power  and  policy  of  the  devil,  and  his  instru 
ments.    The   sorrows   of  hell,    the    pains  of 
hell ;  that  is,  deadly  or  killing  pains,  such  ago- 
niis  and  horrors  as  dying  persons  used  to  feel 
within  themselves,  or  such  sorrows  as  bring 
to  the  brink  of  the  graiie,  Psal.  18.  5.  |  1 16.  3. 
Deut.  32.  22.  afire  shall  burn  unto  the  lowest  A. 
2.*fttm.22.6.8orrowsofA.compassed  me,  Psal.  18.  5. 
.Job  11.  8.  deeper  than  A.  what  canst  ihou  knowl 
26.  6.  A.  is  naked  before  him,  and  destruction 
Paal.  9.  17.  the  wicked  shall  he  turned  into  A. 
16.10.  thou  wilt  not  leave  my  soul  in  A.  .'?eM2.  27. 
^fl.  1 15.  redeem  mysoul  from  power  of  A.  86.  13, 
55.  15.  and  let  them  go  down  quick  into  A. 
116.  3.  and  the  pains  of  A.  gat  hold  upon  me 
139.  8.  if  I  make  my  be.l  in  A.  thou  art  there 
Pron. 5.5.her  feet  to  death, her  steps  take  hold  onjk. 
7.  27.  her  house  is  tho  way  to  A.  going  dow« 


HEL 

Prov.  0. 18.  that  her  guests  are  in  the  depths  of  A. 

15.  11.  A.  aniJ  destruction  are  hefore  the  Lord 
24.  that  he  may  depart  from  h-  beneath      g^ 

23.  14.  and  shall  deliver  his  soul  Irom  A. 

27.  2U.  A.  and  destruction  are  never  full 
Isa.  5.  14.  therefore  A.  hath  enlarged  herself 

14.  9.  A.  from  beneath  is  moved  lor  thee  to  meet 
15.  yet  Ihou  ehalt  be  brought  down  to  A. 

28.  15.  and  with  A.  are  wo  at  agreement 
18.  your  agreement  with  A.  shall  not  stand 

57.  9.  and  didst  debase  thyself  even  unto  A. 
Ezek.  31.16  when  I  cast  him  down  to  A.  with  Ihem 
17.  they  also  went  down  unto  A.  with  him 

32.  21.  shall  speak  to  him  out  of  the  midst  of  A. 
27.  which  are  going  down  lo  A.  with  weapons 

^mosQM.  tho'  thuy  dig  into  A.  thence  my  hand  take 
JonaM.-2.Qul  of  the  belly  of  A.cried  I, thou  heardesl 
Jiab.  2.  5.  who  enlargetli  his  desire  as  A.  is  as  death 
Mat.  5.  22.  say,  fool,  shall  be  in  danger  of  A.  fire 
29.  thy  whole  body  should  be  cast  into  A.  30. 

10.  28.  to  destroy  soul  and  body  in  A.  JLukc  12.5. 

11.23.Caiiernaum  brought  down  to  A.  /^u/i«10. 15. 

16.  18.  the  gales  of  A.  shall  not  prevail  against  it 
18.9. having  two  eyes,  to  be  cast  into  /i.Jilar);9.4'. 
23.  15.  make  him  Iwofold  more  the  child  of  A. 

33.  how  can  ye  escape  the  damnation  of  A.  .' 
I.uke  16.  23.  in  A.  he  lifted  up  his  eyes,  in  torments 
Scls  2.  31.  that  his  soul  was  not  left  in  A. 
1  Cor.  15.  t  55.  O  A.  where  is  thy  victory  ? 
Jam.  3.  6.  the  tongue  is  set  on  fire  of  A. 
2fet.  2. 4.  if  God  spared  not,  cast  angels  down  to  A. 
tiev.  1.  13.  and  1  have  thp  keysof  A.  and  of  death 
6.  8.  name  was  Death,  and  A.  followed  with  him 
20. 13.  df  ath  and  A.  delivered  up  the  dead  in  them 
14.  death  and  A.  were  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire 
HELM. 
Jam.  3.  4.  they  are  turned  about  with  a  small  A. 

HELMET. 
1  Sam.  17.5.  he  had  a  A.  of  brass  upon  his  head,  38. 
Isa.  59.  17.  and  a  A.  of  salvation  upon  his  head 
Eiek.  23.  24.  shall  set  against  the  shield  and  A. 
27.  10.  they  hanged  the  shield  and  A.  in  thee 
38.  5.  all  of  them  with  shield  and  A. 
Eph.  6.  17.  take  A.  of  salvation,  and  sword  ofSpirit 

1  Thess.  5.  8.  and  for  a  A.  the  hope  of  salvation 

HELMETS. 

2  Chron.  26.  14.  Uzziah  prepared  spears  and  A. 
Jer.  46.  4.  get  up  and  stand  forth  with  your  A. 

HELP,  Substantive. 
Ocv.  2.  18.  I  will  make  him  a  A.  meet  for  him 

20.  there  was  not  found  a  A.  meet  for  him 
Fzod.  18.  4.  God  of  my  father,  said  he,  was  my  A. 
Deut.  33.  7.  be  ihou  a  A.  to  him  from  his  enemies 

26.  who  rideth  upon  the  heaven  in  thy  A. 

29.  O  people,  saved  by  the  L.  the  shield  of  thy  A. 
fudg.  5.  23.  they  came  not  to  the  A.  of  the  Lord 

1  fiam.  11.  9.  by  lime  sun  be  hot,  ye  shall  have  A. 

2  Chron.  20.  4.    Judah  gathered  themselves  to- 

gether to  ask  A.  of  the  Lord 
Job  6.  13.  is  not  my  A.  in  me  ?  is  wisdom  driven  ? 
31.  21.  lift  my  hand, when  I  saw  my  A.  in  the  gate 
Psal.3.  2.  say  of  my  soul,  there  is  no  A.  for  him 
20.  2.  the  Lord  send  thet  A.  from  tho  sjincluary 
27.  9.  thou  hast  been  my  A.  leave  me  not, O God 

33.  20.  our  soul  wails  for  L.  he  is  our  A.  and  shield 
35.2.lake  hold  ofshi«ld,slatid  up  for  mineA.44.26. 
40.  17.  thou  art  my  A.  and  my  deliverer,  70.  5. 
42.  5.  praise  him  for  the  A.  of  his  countenance 
46.  1.  God  is  a  very  present  A.  in  time  of  trouble 
f)0. 11. give  us  A.  for  vain  is  the  A.  of  man,  108.  12. 
63.  7.  because  thou  hast  been  my  A.  therefore 
71.  12.  O  my  God,  make  haste  for  my  A. 

89.  19.  I  have  laid  A.  upon  one  that  is  mighty 
»1.  17.  unless  the  Lord  had  been^y  A.  my  soul 

11.5.  9.  he  is  their  A.  and  their  shield,  10,  IL 
121.  1.  to  the  hills,  from  whence  conielh  my  A. 

2.  my  A.  coineth  from  Lord  which  made  heaven 
124.  8.  our  A.  is  in  name  of  the  Lord,  who  made 
146.  3.  trust  not  in  man,  in  whom  there  is  no  A. 

5.  happy  that  huth  the  God  of  Jacob  for  his  A. 
,»(!.  10.  3.  lo  whom  will  ye  flee  for  A.?  and  where 

20.6.  whilher  we  flee  for  A.  to  bedeliver.froni  king 
30.5  nnr  be  a  A.  nor  profit, but  nhame  and  reproach 
31.  1.  woe  lo  them  that  go  down  to  Egypt  for  A. 

2.  against  the  A.  of  them  that  work  iniquity 
/,am.  4.  17.  our  eyes  n«  yet  failed  for  our  vain  A. 
Dan.  11.  34.  they  shall  bo  holpcn  with  a  little  A. 
Jfof.  13.9.  hnst  destroyed  thys.  but  in  me  is  thine  A. 
.^cts  20.  22.  havinjohiaiiied  A.  of  God,  I  continue 

HELP,  rerb. 
Of  n.49.25.by  Ihn  G.oflhy  fatlier,  who  shnll  h.  thee 
ioxod-23.5.lyinRunder  his  burden, wouldest  forbear 
to  A.  him,  ihounhalt  surely  A.  him,  /^riit  22.  4. 
Deut.  32.  Sf".  let  them  rise  and  A.  ynu,  and  hi:  your 
Jo.ih.  1.  14.  pass  before  your  brethren,  and  A.  thpri^ 
JO.  4.  come  unio  mc,  and  A.  mo,  that  we  may  smile 

6.  come  up  lousquickly,  and  save  us,  and  A.  us 
33.  Horanikingof  Gezar  came  up  lo  A.  Larhish 

2  Sam.  10.  H.  then  thou  shall  A.  mn;  then  I  will 
come  and  A.  thoe,  1  Chron.  19.  13. 
878 


HEL 

2 .9am.  10. 19.  Syrians  feared  to  A.  Am.lCSr.  19. 19. 
14.  4.  woman  »aid,  A.  O  king,  2  Kings  6.  26. 

1  Chron.  12.  17.  if  ye  be  come  unto  me  to  A.  me 

22.  day  by  day  there  came  to  David  to  A.  him 
18.  5.  Syriansof  Damascus  came  to  A.  Hadarezer 
22.  17.  David  commanded  to  A.  Solomon  his  son 

2  Chron.  14.11.  it  is  nothing  with  thee  to  A.  A.  us,  O 

Ld.  our  G.  we  resl  on  thee,  and  in  thy  name  go 
19.2.shouldesl  thou  A.  the  ungodly,  and  lovctiiem 

20.  9.  if  we  cry,  then  thou  wilt  hear  and  A. 

25.  8.  for  God  hath  power  to  A.  and  to  cast  down 
26.13.  made  war  with  mighty  power  to  A.  the  king 

28.  16.  send  unto  the  kings  of  Assyria  la  A.  him 

23.  the  gods  of  Syria  A.  Inem,  that  they  mayA.me 

29.  34.  their  brethren  the  Levites  did  A.  Ihem 
32.  3.  his  princes  and  his  mighty  men  did  A.  him 

8.  but  with  us  is  the  Lord  our  God,  lo  A.  us 
Ezra  1.4.  let  the  men  of  his  place  A.  him  with  silver 
8.  22.  I  was  ashamed  to  require  horsemen  to  h. 
Job  8.  20.  neither  will  he  A.  the  evil-doers 

29.  12. 1  delivered  him  that  had  none  to  A.  him 
Psat.  12.  1.  A.  Lord  II  22.  11.  for  there  is  none  to  A. 

22. 19.  haste  thee  to  A.  me,  38. 22.  |  40.  13.  |  70.  1. 
37.  40.  Lord  shall  A.  them  ||  46.  5.  God  shall  A.  her 
59.  4.  awake  to  A.me  ||  79.9.A.us,  OGod  ofsalvai. 
107. 12.  they  fell,  there  was  none  to  A.  Isa.  63.  5. 
109.  26.  A.  me,  O  Lord  my  God,  O  save  me 

1 18.  7.  Lord  takelh  my  part  with  them  that  A.  me 

119.  86.  A.  thou  me  ||  173.  let  thine  hand  A.  me 
175.  let  my  soul  live,  and  let  thy  judgments  A.  me 

Feci.  4.  10.  for  he  hath  not  another  to  A.  him  up 
Isa.  30.  7.  for  the  Egyptians  shall  A.  in  vain 

41.  10.  fear  not,  1  will  A.  thee,  13,  14.  |  44.  2. 

.50.  7.  for  the  Lord  God  will  A.  me,  9. 
.ler.  37.7.  Pharaoh's  army,  which  is  come  to  A.  you 
/jam.  1.  7.  her  people  fell,  and  none  did  A.  Iier 
Ezek.  12.  14. 1  will  scalier  all  about  biin  lo  A.  him 

32.  21.  speak  out  of  hell  with  them  that  A.  him 
Dan.  10.  13.  lo,  one  of  the  princes  came  to  A.  me 

11.  45.  shall  comelo  his  end,  and  none  shall  A.  him 
J\fat.  15.  25.  she  worshipped  him,  saying,  L.  A.  me 
Mark  9.  22.  have  compassion  on  us  and  A.  us 

24.  Lord,  I  believe,  A.  Ihou  mine  unbelief 
/v7/Ae5.7.ihey  beckon. that  they  should  come  andA. 

10.  40.  bid  her  therefore  that  she  A.  me 
^3cls  16.  9.  come  over  into  Macedonia,  and  A.  us 

21.  28.  the  Jews  crying  out,  men  of  Israel,  A. 
Phil.  4.  3.  A.  those  women  that  laboured  with  me 
Heb.i.  16.  we  may  find  grace  to  A.  in  time  of  need 

HELPED. 
Kxod.  2.  17.  but  Moses  stood  up  and  A.  them 
1  Sam.  7.  12.  Ebenezer,  hitherto  hath  the  Ld.  A.  us 
1  Kings  1.  7.  and  they  following  Adoiiijah,  A.  him 
20.  16.  the  Ihirly  ami  two  kings  that  A.  him 

1  Chron.  5.  20.  and  they  were  A.  against  them 

12.  19.  but  they  A.  them  not,  for  the  lords  sent 
21.  they  A.  David  against  the  band  of  the  rovers 

15  26.  when  God  A.  the  Levites  that  bare  the  ark 

2  Chr.  18. 31.  the  Lord  A.  Jehoshaphat,  and  moved 
20i  23.  every  one  A.  to  destroy  another 

26.  7.  God  A.  him  against  the  Philistines 

15.  for  he  was  marvellously  A.  till  be  was  strong 
28.  21.  but  the  king  of  .Assyria  A.  him  not 
Ezra  10.  15.  and  Shabbelhai  the  Lovile  A.  them 
F.sth.  9.  3.  the  officers  of  the  king  A.  the  Jews 
./»^26.2.howhast  thou  A. him  that  is  without  power 
Psal.  2H.  7.  and  I  am  A.  ||  1 18.  13.  but  the  Ld.  A.  me 
116.  6.  I  was  brought  low,  and  be  A.  me 
Isa.  41.  6.  they  A.  every  one  his  neighbour 
49.  8.  in  a  day  of  salvation  have  I  A.  thee 
Z.eeh.  1.  1.5.  and  they  A.  forward  the  affliction 
^c(«18.27.  who,  when  he  was  come,  A.  them  much 
Rev.  12.  16.  the  earth  A.  the  wompn,  and  opened 

HELPER. 
2  Kings  14.  26.  nor  was  there  any  A.  for  Israel 
.lob  30.  13.  they  mar  my  path,  they  have  no  A. 
Psal.  10.  14.  Ihou  art  the  A.  of  tho  fatherless 

22.  1 11.  he  not  far  from  me,  for  there  is  not  a  A. 

30.  10.  Lord,  be  Ihou  my  A.  1|  54.  4.  God  is  my  A. 
72.  12.  he  shall  deliver  him  thul  bath  no  A. 

ler.  47.  4.  cut  off  from  Tyrus  and  Zidon  every  A. 
Kom.  16.  9.  salute  Urbane,  our  A.  in  Christ 
Heb.  13.  6.  the  L.is  my  A.  I  will  not  fear  what  man 
HELPERS. 

1  Chron.  12. 1 .  among  the  mighty  men  A.  of  tho  war 
18.  peace  bo  to  thee,  and  peace  he  to  thine  A. 

Job  9.  13.  the  proud  A.  do  stoop  under  him 
Fzrk.  30.  8.  when  all  her  A.  shall  be  destroyed 
JVnA.  3.  9.  Put  and  Lubim  were  Ihy  A. 
linm.  16.  3.  Priscilla  and  Aquila  my  A.  in  Christ 

2  Oir.  1.24.  but  are  A.  of  your  joy;  by  faith  ye  stand 

3  .luhn  8.  that  we  mighl  he  fcllow-A.  to  the  truth 

HELPS. 
Jlrts  27.  17.  they  used  A.  umlergirding  the  ship 
1  Cor   12.  28.  gift*  of  henliTign,  A.  governmeiit» 

HELPETH. 
ICAron.  12. 18.  peace  unto  thee,  for  Ihy  God  A.  Ihee 
/.fa. 31.3.  both  he  that  A. shall  fall,  he  Ihat  isholpen 
liom.  8.  26.  tho  Spirit  also  A.  our  infirmities 
1  COr.  IC.  10.  ye  lubmit  lo  every  one  that  A.  with  ui 


HER 

HELPING. 

Ezra  5.  2.  where  the  propheU  of  God  A.  them 
Psal.  22.  1.  why  an  thou  so  far  from  A.  mel 
2Cor.l.ll.  ye  also  A.  together  by  prayer  for  us 

HELVE. 
Deut.  19.  5.  and  the  head  slippeth  from  the  A. 

HEMLOCK. 
/Aos.lO.  4.  thus  judgment  springeth  upas  A.  infieM 
Mmos  6.  12.  ye  turned  fruit  of  righteousnesB  into  A. 

HEM,  S. 
E2-orf.28.33.upon  IheA.nf  it  thou  shall  make  pome- 
granatesofblue  and  purple,  34.  ]  39.24,25,26. 
Jl/ar.9.20.woman  touched  A.  of  his  garment,  14.36. 

HEN. 
jVa«.23.37.  as  a  A.  gatherelhchickens,  Z,«Ae  13.  3^ 

HENCE. 
Gen.  37.  17.  the  man  said,  they  arc  departed  A. 
42.  15.  by  the  life  of  Phar.  ye  shall  not  go  forth  A. 
50.  25.  carry  up  my  bones  from  A.  Exod.  13.  19. 
F.Tod.  11.  1.  he  will  let  you  go  A.  thrust  you  oulA 
33.  1.  depart  and  go  up  A.  thou  and  (he  people 

15.  if  Ihy  presence  not  wiih  me,carry  us  not  up  A. 
Deut.  9.  12.  arise,  get  thee  down  quickly  from  A. 
.losh.  4.  3.  take  A.  out  of  Jordan  twelve  stones 
Judg.  6.  18.  depart  not  A.  I  pray  thee,  until  I  come 
/<w(/i2.8.neilher  go  A. but  abide  fastbv  my  maidens 

1  Kings  17.  3.  get  Ihee  A.  Isa.  30.  22.  Mat.  4.  10. 
Ps.  39.  13.  O  spare,  before  I  go  A.  and  be  no  more 
./«r.38.10,  saying,lake  from  A.  thirty  men  with  lhe« 
Zech.  6.  7  he  said,  get  you  A.  walk  to  ano  fro 
Mat.  17.  20.  shall  say,  remove  A.  lo  yonder  plac« 
I.ukc  4.  9.  if  Son  of  God,  castlhyselfdown  from  A. 

13.  31.  get  thee  out,  and  depart  A.  .fohn  7. 3. 
16.26.lhey  which  would  pass  fromA.lo  you  cannot 

John'2. 16.  lake  things  A.  make  not  my  Father's  A. 

14.  31.  arise,  let  us  go  A.  ||  18.36.  my  kingd.  not  A 
20. 15.  sir,  if  Ihou  have  borne  him  A.  tell  me  where 

j?c/.?1.5.  baptized  with  Holy  Gh.  not  many  days  A. 

22.  21.  I  W4ll  send  ihee  far  A.  unto  the  Gentiles 
Jam.  4.  1.  come  they  not  A.?  even  of  your  lusts 

HENCEFORTH. 
Oen.4. 12.  the  ground  not  A.  yield  thee  her  strength 
JVum. 18  22. neither  must  IsraelA.coine  nigh  tabern. 
Deut.  17.  16.  ye  shall  A.  return  no  more  that  way 

19.  20.  shall  A.  commit  no  more  any  such  evil 
Judg.  2.21. 1  will  not  A.  drive  out  any  before  them 
2Kings5. 17.  thy  serv.  will  A. not  offer  lo  other  gods 

2  Chron.  16.  9.  from  A.  thou  shall  have  wars 
Psal.  125.  2.  so  is  Lord  about  his  people  from  A. 

131.3.  Israel  hope  in  the  Lord  from  A.  and  for  ever 
Isa.  9.7.  to  establish  it  with  justice  from  A.  forever 
52.  1.  A.  there  shall  no  more  come  the  unclean 
59.21.out  of  moulhofthyseeri'sseedA.nnd  forever 
E7.fk.  36.  12.  thou  shall  no  more  A.  bereave  them 
JV/(c.4.7.thp  Lord  shall  reign  in  mount  Zion  from  A. 
Mat.  23.  39.  ye  shall  not  see  me  A.  till  ye  say 

26.  29.  I  will  not  drink  A.  of  this  fruit  of  vine 
I.vke  1.  48.  A.  all  generations  shall  call  me  blessed 

5.  10.  fear  not,  from  A.  thou  shall  catch  men 
12.  52.  A.  there  shall  be  five  in  one  house 
John  14.  7.  A.  ye  know  him,  and  have  seen  him 

15.  15.  h.  I  call  you  not  servants,  but  friends 
JJcts  4.  17.  they  speak  A.  to  no  man  in  this  name 

18.  6.  I  am  clean,  A.  I  will  go  unto  the  Gtntiles 
Itom.  6.  6.  that  A.  we  should  not  serve  sin 
2r'or.5.15.shoulil  not  A.  live  unto  themsplves,buf  to 

16.  A.  know  we  no  man,  A.  know  we  him  no  more 
Gal.  6. 17.  from  A.  let  no  man  trouble  mr,  for  I  bear 
E;jA.4.14.we  A.be  nomore  childr.  tossed  to  and  fro 

17.  that  ye  A.  walk  not  as  other  Gentiles  walk 
2  '/"tm.4.8.A.lhore  is  laid  up  for  me  a  crown  of  right, 
Ileb.  10.  13.  A.  expecting  till  enemies  be  made 
Wer.14.13.ble«sed  are  ihev  who  die  in  Lord.fromA. 

HENCEFORWARD. 
JVum.  15.  23.  and  A.  among  your  generations 
Mat.  21.  19.  let  no  fruit  grow  on  thee  A.  for  ever 

HERALD. 
/.)an. 3.4. then  aA. cried  alnud,to  you  it  is  command. 

HERB. 
Grn.  1.11.  bring  forth  the  A.  yielding  seed,  12. 

29.  I  have  given  you  every  A.  bearing  seed 
2.  5.  nuule  every  A.  ||  3.  18.  thou  shall  eat  the  A. 

9.  3.  even  as  the  A.  I  have  given  you  all  Ihines 
F.iod.  9.  22.  the  hail  smote  every  A.  of  the  field, 25. 

10.  12.  the  locusts  eat  every  A.  of  the  land,  15. 
Drul.  32  2.  as  the  small  rain  upon  the  tender  A. 
2  Kings  19.  26.  were  as  the  green  A.  Isn.  37.  27. 
.fob  8.  12.  flag  witherelh  before  any  other  A. 

38.  27.  to  cause  the  bud  of  the  lender  A.  lo  spring 
Psal.  37.  2.  for  they  shall  wither  as  the  gteen  A. 

104. 14.  hocBuseth  A.  lo  grow  for  servirn  of  man 
l.'a.  66.  14.  your  bones  shall  flourish  like  a  A. 

HERPS. 
F.Tnd.  12.  8.  and  with  bitter  A.  enl  il,  JVum.  9.  IL 
r>rul.  11.  10.  and  waloredst  it  as  a  carden  of*. 
I  Kings  21.2.  that  I  may  have  it  for  a  sarden  of  A. 
■2h'in!TsA.  39.onc  went  out  into  the  field  lo  gather  A. 
I'sal.  10.%.  35.  and  did  eat  up  all  the  A.  in  their  land 

'roil.  15.  17.  heller  is  n  dinner  of  A.  where  loveil 

27.  25.  and  A.  of  the  mountains  are  gathered 


HER 

ha.  13.  4. 1  will  conaider  like  a  clear  heat  upon  k 
2t>.  19.  for  thy  dew  is  as  the  dew  of  A.  and  earth 
42.  15.1  will  dry  up  all  ilieir  A.  make. rivers  islands 

Jer.  V-i.  4.  how  loug  the  A.  of  every  field  wither  ? 

Mat.  13.  32.  is  greatest  among  all  A.  Mark  4.  32. 

lyuke  11.  42.  for  ye  tithe  all  manner  of  A. 

Horn.  14.  2.  another  who  is  weak  eateth  A. 

Heb.  6.  7.  and  hringeth  forth  A.  meet  for  them 
HERD,  S. 

Ge«.18.7,AbrahaiB  ran  to  the  A.  and  fetched  a  calf 
32.  7.  Jacob  divided  his  h.  into  two  bands 
47.  18.  my  lord  also  hath  our  A.  of  cattle 

Ezod.  10.  9.  with  our  flocks  and  A.  will  we  go 

L,ev.  1.  2.  ye  shall  bring  your^fTering  of  the  A. 
3. 1.  if  ye  offer  it  of  A.  male  orTemale,  J^um.  16. 3. 

27.  32.  concerning  the  tithe  of  the  A.  or  flock 
Deut.  12.  21.  thou  shall  kill  of  thy  A.  and  flock 

1-5.  19.  the  firstling  males  that  come  of  thy  A. 
1  Sam.  11. 5.  Saul  came  after  the  A.  out  of  the  field 
8  Sam.  12.  4.  he  spared  to  take  of  his  A.  to  dress 
1  Chr.  27.  29.  over  the  A.  in  Sharon,  A.  in  valleys 
Isa.  65.  10.  AchoT  a  place  for  the  A.  to  lie  down  in 
Jcr.  31.  12.  shall  flow  together  for  young  of  the  A. 
Joel  1. 18.  the  A.  of  cattle  are  perplexed,  no  pasture 
Jonah  3.  7.  let  not  the  A.  nor  flock  taste  any  thing 
JIab.  3.  17.  and  there  shall  be  no  A.  in  the  stalls 
Jlifat.a  30.  A.  of  swine  feed.  Mark5.U.  AuAe8.32. 
32.whole  A.ran  violently,  JI/arA 5. 13. /-uAe 8.33. 

See  Flocks. 

HERDMAN. 
Jimos  7.  14.  I  was  no  prophet,  but  I  was  a  h. 

HERDMEN. 
0«n.l3.7.  a  strife  between  theA.ofAbramand  Lot 

8.  let  there  be  no  strife  between  my  h.  and  thy  A. 
26.  20.  the  A.  of  Gerar  did  strive  with  Isaac's  A. 

\.Sam.  21.  7.  JDoegchiefest  of  A.  belonged  to  Saul 
8m.os  1.  1.  who  was  among  the  A.  of  Tekoa 

HERE. 

Gen. 19. 12.the  men  said,  hast  thou  A.  any  besides? 

15.  arise,  take  Ihy  two  daughters  which  are  A. 

21.  23.  now  therefore  swear  unto  me  A.  by  God 

22. 1.  A.  I  am,  7, 11.  |  27.  1,  18.  |  31.  11.  |  37.  13. 

1  46.  2.  Exod.  3.  4.  1  Sam.  3.  4,  5,  6,  8,  16. 

2  Sam.  1.  7.  |  15.  26.  ha.  6.  8. 

5.  abide  ye  A.  with  the  ass,  I  and  lad  will  go  yond. 
24.  13.  behold,  I  stand  A.  by  the  well  of  water 

31.  37.  set  it  A.  before  my  brethren  that  they  may 
40. 15.  and  A.  also  have  I  done  nothing  to  put  me 
42.  3.1.  leave  one  of  your  brethren  A.  with  me 
47.  23.  lo,A.  is  seed  for  you,  ye  shall  sow  the  land 

Exod.  24.  14.  tarry  ye  A.  for  us,  till  wecomefoyou 
J^um.  14.  40.  saying,  lo,  we  be  A.  and  will  go  up 

22.8.  lodge  A.  this  night,  I  will  bringyou  word,  19. 

23.  1.  build  A.  seven  altars,  prepare  A.  o.ien,  29. 

32.  6.  shall  your  breth.  go  to  war,  and  you  sit  A.  ? 
15.  we  will  build  sheep-folds  A.  for  our  cattle 

£)cu(.5.3.even  us,  who  are  all  of  us  A. alive  this  day 
12.  8.  after  all  the  things  we  do  A.  this  day 
29.  15.  with  him  that  standeth  A.  that  is  not  A. 

Josh.  18.6.  that  I  may  cast  lots  for  you  A.  8. 

■Judir.i.  20.  is  there  any  man  A.  ?  thou  shall  say,  no 

18.  3.  and  what  hast  thou  A.  ?  ||  19.  9.  lo.ige  A. 

19.  24.  behold,  A.  is  my  daughter,  a  maiden 

20.  7.  give  A.  your  advice  and  counsel 
RutA  2.  8.  but  abide  A.  fast  by  my  maidens 

4.  1.  unto  whom  he  said,  turn  aside,  sit  down  A.  2. 
I  Sam.  1.  20. 1  am  the  woman  that  stood  by  thee  A. 
9.  11.  they  went  up  the  hill  and  said,  is  the  seer  A.I 
12.  3.  behold,  A.  I  am,  22.  12.  fsa.  58.9. 
14.34.  slay  them  A.  and  eat,  and  sin  not  against  L. 
16.  11.  Samuel  said  to  Jesse,  are  A.  all  thy  childr. 

21.  8.  is  there  not  A.  under  thine  hand  a  spear? 

9.  it  is  A-  wrapped  in  a  cloth,  none  save  that  A. 
23.3.  behold,  we  be  afraid  A.  in  Judah;  how  much 
29.3.  the  princes  said,  what  do  these  Hebrews  A.  ? 

J.Snm.  11. 12.  tarry  A.  to-day  ||  18.  30.  turn  aside  A. 
20.  4.  be  thou  A.  present  {{  24.  22.  A.  be  oxen 
1  Kin^rs  2.  30.  and  he  said,  nay,  but  I  will  die  A. 

18.  8.  tell  thy  lord,  behold,  Elijah  is  A.  11,  14. 

19.  9.  he  said,  what  doestthou  A.  Elijah  ?  13. 

20.  40.  as  thy  servant  was  busy  A.  and  there 

22.  7.  is  there  not  A.  a  prophet  of  L.  2  Kiufrs  3. 11. 
3  King.i  2.  2.  Elijah  said,  tarry  A.  I  pray  thee,  6. 

3.  n.  A.isElish.T  11  7.3.  whysilwe  A.  until  wedie? 

7.  4.  the  lepers  said,  if  wesltstillA.  we  die  also 

10.23.  look  thpre  be  Anoneofthe  servants  of  Lord 
1  Chr.  29. 17.  with  joy  thy  people  present  A.to  offer 
Job  38.  11.  A.  shall  tliy  proud  waves  he  stayed 

35.  that  lightnings  may  say  unto  thee,  A.  we  are 
Fsal.  132.  14.  this  is  my" rest,  A.  will  I  dwell 
Isa.  21.  9.  behold,  h.  cometh  a  chariot  of  men 

22.  16.  what  hast  thou  A.  '  whom  hast  thou  A.  ? 

28.  10.  A.  a  little,  and  there  a  little,  13. 

.52.  5.  now  therefore,  what  have  I  A-  ?  sailh  Ld. 

Etek.  8.  6.  th(?  house  of  Israel  committeth  A.  17. 

Has.  7.  9.  sray  hairs  are  A.  and  there  upon  him 

Mat.  12.  41.  a  greater  than  Jonas  is  A.  I.uke  II.  32. 

42.  a  greater  than  Solomon  is  A.  I.uke  11.  31. 

14.8.  give  mo  A.  John  Baptist's  head  in  a  charger 

17.  we  have  k.  but  five  loaves,  and  two  fishea 

279 


HER 

Mat.  16.  28.  there  be  some  standing  A.  Lytke  9. 27. 

17.  4.  Lord,  it  is  good  for  us  to  be  A.  let  us  make  A 

24.  2.  shall  not  be  left  h.  one  stone  upon  another 
23.  if  any  say  to  you,  lo,  4.  is  Chr.  Mark  13.21. 

26.  36.  sit  ye  A.  while  I  go  and  pray,  Mark  14.32. 
3d.  tarry  ye  A.  and  watch  with  me 

28.6.hei8notA.he  is  risen,  Mark  16.  6.Z,uAe24.6. 
Mark  6.  3.  and  are  not  his  sisters  A.  with  us? 

13.1.  Master,  see  whatslones  and  buildings  are  A. 
Luke  4.  23.  what  heard  done,  do  A.  in  thy  country 

9.  12.  for  we  are  A.  in  a  desert  place 

17.  21.  neither  shall  they  say,  lo,  A.  or  lo  there 

23.  say  to  you,  see  A.  or  see  there,  go  not  after  th. 
19.  20.  behold,  A.  is  thy  pound  which  I  have  kept 
22.  38.  A.  are  two  swords,  he  said,  it  is  enough 
24.  41.  he  said  unto  them,  have  ye  A.  any  meat? 

John  6.  9.  there  is  a  lad  A.  which  hath  five  loaves 

11.  21.  Lord  if  thou  hadst  been  A.  my  brother,  32. 

.^ctsfi.  36.  A.  is  water  ||  9. 10.  behold,  I  am  A.  Lord 

9.  14.  and  A.  he  hath  authority  from  the  priests 

10.  33.  are  we  all  A.  present  before  God,  to  hear 

16.  28.  do  thyself  no  harm,  for  we  are  all  A. 

24.  19.  who  ought  to  have  been  A.  before  thee 

25.  24.  and  all  men  which  are  A.  present  with  us 
Col.  4.  9.  make  known  unto  you  all  things  done  A 
Heb.  7.  8.  and  A.  men  that  die  receive  tithes 

13. 14.  for  A.  have  we  no  continuing  city,  seek  one 
Jam.  2.  3.  sit  A.  in  a  good  place,  or  sit  A.  under 
\Pet.  1. 17.  pass  time  of  your  sojourning  A.  in  fear 
Rev.  13.10.  A.  is  the  patience  of  the  saints,  14. 12. 

18.  A.  is  wisdom;  let  him  that  hath  understand 
14.  12.  A.  are  they  that  kept  the  commandments 

17.  9.  and  A.  is  the  mind  which  hath  wisdom 

See  Stand. 
HEREAFTER. 
Isa.  41.  23.  shew  the  things  that  are  to  come  A. 
Eick.  20. 39.  A.  also,  if  ye  will  not  hearken  unto  me 
Dan.  2.  29.  what  should  come  to  pass  A.  45. 
Mat.  26. 64.  A.  shall  ye  see  the  Son  of  man  sitting 
Mark  11.  14.  no  man  eat  fruit  of  thee  A.  for  ever 
Lvke'ii.  69.  A.  shall  Son  of  man  sit  on  right  hand 
John  1.  51.  I  say,  A.  ye  shall  see  heaven  opened 

13.  7.  thou  knowest  not  now,  thou  shalt  know  A. 

14.  30.  A.  I  will  not  talk  much  with  you 
ITm.l.  16. pattern  to  them  which  A.believe  on  him 
Rev.  1.  19.  write  the  things  which  shall  be  A. 

4.  1.  I  will  shew  thee  things  which  must  be  A. 
9.  12.  and  behold,  there  come  two  woes  more  A- 

HEREBY. 
G'en.42. 15.  A. ye  shall  be  proved,  by  life  ofPharaoh 

33.  A.  shall  I  know  that  ye  are  true  men 
JV«m.  16.  28.  A.  know  that  the  Lord  hath  sent  me 
Josh.  3.  10.  A.  know  that  the  living  God  is  among 
1  Cor.  4.  4. 1  know  nothing,  yet  am  I  not  A.  justified 

1  John  2.  3.  A.  we  do  know  that  we  know  him 

5.  keepeth  word,  A.  know  we  that  we  are  in  him 

3.  10.  A.  perceive  we  the  love  of  God,  because 

19.  and  A.  we  know  that  we  are  of  the  truth 

24.  and  A.  we  know  that  he  abideth  in  us 

4.  2.  A.  know  ye  the  S|iirit  of  God,  every  spirit 

6.  A.  know  we  the  Spirit  of  truth  and  of  error 
13.A.  know  we  that  we  dwell  in  him,  and  he  in  us 

HEREIN. 
Gen.  34.  22.  only  A.  will  the  men  consent  unto  us 
2CAr.  10.  9.  A.  thou  hast  done  foolishly,  therefore 
John  4.  37.  A.  is  that  saying  true,  one  sowelh 
9.30.  A.  isa  marvellous  thing,  that  ye  know  not 

15.  8.  A.  is  my  Father  glorifieil,  that  ye  bear  fruit 
JletS'2i.\(i.h.Ao  I  exercise  myself  to  have  conscien. 

2  Cor.  8. 10.  A.  I  give  my  advice,  for  this  expedient 
1  John  4.  10.  A.  is  love  ||  17.  A.  is  love  made  perfect 

HERESY. 
This  word  copies  from  the  Greek  Ha;resis,  and 
signifies  in  general,  a  sect,  or  choice.  It  is 
somntimes  taken  m  a  good  sense,  as  in  Acts  26. 
5,  After  the  most  straitest  sect,  or  heresy,  of 
our  religion,  I  lived  a  Pharisee.  St.  Paul 
commends  the  sect,  opinion,  aiid  icatj  of  the 
Pharisees,  as  being  more  learned  and  strict, 
and  as  coming  nearer  to  the  truth  in  many 
things,  than  the  other  sect  of  the  Sadducees. 
But  most  commonly  it  is  taken  in  a  bad  sense, 
for  some  fundamental  error  in  matters  of  reli- 
gion, adhered  to  with  obstinacy.  St.  Paul  enu- 
merates heresies  among  the  works  of  the  flesh. 
Gal.  5.  20.  jind  St.  Peter  says.  There  shall 
be  false  teachers  among  you,  who  privily  shall 
bring  in  damnable  heresies,  even  denying  the 
Lord  that  bought  them,  2  Pet  2.  1.  St.'Paul 
says  in  1  Cor.  11.  19,  There  must  be 
also  heresies  among  you,  that  they  which 
are  approved  may  be  made  manifest  among 
you.  Il  is  not  simply  and  absolutely  ne- 
cessary that  there  should  be  such  schisms 
and  dirifions  in  the  church,  but  God  has 
decreed  to  permit  Satan  to  shew  his  malice, 
and  men  to  discover  the  lusts  and  corrup- 
tions of  their  nature  by  causing  such  divi- 
tions  that  the  sincerity  of  his  people  may  be 
tried  and  knovtn  by  their  itedfastncss  to  the 


HER 

truth,  and  opposition  to  those  corrupttem. 
Christianity  was  called  a  sect,  or  heresy,  bf 
Tertullus  and  the  profane  Jews,  ./IctsQ-t.  5, 14, 
We  have  found  this  man  a  pestilent  fellow, 
and  ring-leader  of  the  sect  of  the  J^aiarenes. 
This  I  confess,  says  St.  Paul,  that  aller  the 
way  which  they  call  heresy,  so  worship  I  the 
God  of  my  fathers. 

jJ«  to  the  Sects,  or  Heresies  among  the  Jews,  Stt 
Sect. 

From  the  very  beginning  of  the  Christian  cAurcA 
there  were  very  dangerous  andpcrniciuus  here- 
sies ;  for  the  most  essential  doctrines  of  re- 
ligion were  attacked,  such  as  the  divinity  of 
Christ,  Ais  quality  of  Messiah,  the  reality  ana 
truth  of  his  incarnation,  the  lesurrection  of 
the  dead,  the  liberty  of  Christians,  and  their 
freedom  from  the  legal  ceremonies,  and  other 
points  of  this  nature.  The  most  ancient  of 
these  founders  of  heresy,  is  Simon  the  magi- 
cian, who  desired  to  buy  the  gift  of  God  with 
money,  and  afterwards  set  himself  up  fur 
Messiah,  atid  God  Jilmighty  the  Creator,  Actg 

8.  9,  10.  The  false  apostles,  against  whom 
St.  Paul  so  often  speaks  in  his  epistles,  had  a 
mind  that  the  faithful  should  receive  circumci 
sion,  and  subject  themselves  to  all  the  legal 
observances.  Gal.  5.  11.  |  6.  12. 

TheNiCola'aanBallowedof  a  community  of  joomen, 
and  without  any  scruple  com.millcd  the  most 
ignominious  actions,  and  followed  the  super- 
stitions of  heathenism.  It  is  said,  they  went 
over  lo  the  sect  of  the  Cainists,  who  acknow- 
ledged a  power  superior  to  that  of  the  Creator. 
St.  John  speaks  of  the  Nicolaitans,  as  a  sect 
of  heretics  then  subsisting,  and  producing 
great  disorders  in  the  churches  of  Asia,  Rea. 
2.  6,  15.  Jit  the  same  lime  there  were  false 
Christs,  and  false  prophets,  1  John  2.  18,  22. 
2  John  7.  St.  Paul  speaks  of  Hymeneus  and 
Philetus,zcAo  departed  from  the  truth,  saying, 
that  the  resurrection  is  already  past,  2  Tim 
2.  17,  18.  He  foretold  that  in  the  last  times 
there  would  be  some  who  should  forsake  the 
faith,  and  give  themselves  up  to  the  spirit  of 
error,  and  the  doctrines  of  devils,  1  Tim.  4.  1 
5£.  Peter  and  Jude  foretell  the  same  thing, 
2  Pet.  2.  1.  Jude  18.  jlnd  herein  they  only 
copy  what  Jesus  Christ  himself  had  said  in  tht 
gosprl.  Mat.  7.  15.  I  24.  24,  Beware  of  false 
prophets,  which  come  to  you  in  sheep's  cloth- 
ing, hut  inwardly  they  are  ravening  wolves. 
For  there  shall  arise  false  Christs,  and  false 
prophets,  and  shall  shew  great  signs  and  won- 
ders ;  insomuch  that,  'f  it  were  possible,  they 
shall  deceive  the  very  elect. 
Jicls  24.  14.  after  the  way  which  they  call  A. 
HERESIES. 

1  Cor.  11.  19.  there  must  he  also  A.  among  you 
Gal.  5.  20.  the  works  of  the  flesh,  wrath,  strife,  h, 

2  Pet.  2.  1.  who  privilv  bring  in  damnable  A. 

HERETIC. 
Tit.  3. 10.  a  A.  after  the  second  admonition,  reject 

HERETOFORE. 
Ezod.  A.  10. 1  am  not  eloquent,  neither  A.  nor  since 
5.  7.  no  more  give  straw  lo  make  brick  as  A. 
.Tosh.  3.  4.  for  ye  have  not  pa.=sed  this  way  A. 
huth  2.  11.  to  a  people  which  ihou  knewrst  not  h. 

1  Sam.  4.  7.  there  hath  not  been  siieh  a  thing  h. 

2  Car.  13.2. 1  write  to  them  which  A.  have  sinned 

HEREUNTO. 
Keel.  2. 25.  or  who  else  can  hasten  A.  morK>  than  I? 
1  Pet.  2.  21.  for  even  A.  were  ve  called,  because 

HEREWITH. 
/CieS.  16.  29.  and  yet  thou  wast  not  satisfied  A. 
Mai.  3.  10.  that  there  may  be  meat  in  mine  house, 
and  prove  me  now  A.  saith  the  Lord  of  host! 
H'ERITAGE. 
F.zod.  0.  8.  the  land,  I  will  give  it  ynu  for  a  A. 
.Tob  20.  29.  and  the  A.  appointed  by  God  for  him 

27.13. the  A  ofoppressors  which  they  shall  receive 
Ps. 16.0.  in  pleasant  places,  yea,  I  have  a  goodly  A. 

61.  .").  give  me  the  A.  of  those  that  feiT  thy  name 

94.  5.  they  break  thy  people,  they  afflict  thy  A. 

111.  6.  he  may  give  them  the  A.  of  tlie  heathen 

119.  111.  thy  testimonies  have  I  taken  as  a  A. 

127.  3.  lo,  children  are  a  A.  of  the  Lord 

135.  12.  and  gave  their  land  for  a  h.  136.  21,  22. 
Isa.5i.  17.  this  is  the  A.  of  the  servants  of  the  Lord 

58.  14.  I  will  feed  thee  with  the  A.  of  Jacob 
.ler.  2.  7.  and  ye  made  mine  A.  an  abnniination 

3.  19.  how  shall  I  give  thee  a  goodly  A.  ? 

12.  7.  T  have  left  mine  A.  ||  8.  mine  A.  is  as  a  lion 

9.  mine  A. is  unto  me  as  a  speckled  bird,  the  birds 
1.5.  I  will  bring  them  again  every  mnn  to  his  A. 

17.  4.  thou  shalt  discontinue  from  thine  h.  I  give 
.50.  11.  Odestroyersof  mine  A.  because  grown  fat 

.Toeli.  17.  and  give  not  thine  A.  to  reproach 
3.  2.  I  will  plead  with  them  for  my  A.  lerae. 

Mic.  2.  2.  so  they  oppress  a  man  and  his  L 


HIB 


JIftc.  7.  14.  feed  ths  flock  of  thine  h.  with  thy  rod 

18.  that  passeth  by  the  Iransgrcision  of  his  A. 
JUal.  1.  3.  X'laid  Esau's  mountuins  and  A.  waste 
1  Pet.  5.  3.  neither  as  being  lords  over  God's  A. 

HERITAGES. 

lia.  49.  8.  to  cause  to  inherit  the  desolate  A. 

HERODIANS. 

See  Signijication  on  Skct. 

Mat.  22. 16.  they  sent  unto  him  their  di8ciples,with 

H.  saying,  we  know  thou  art  true,  MuTk  12. 13. 

Mark  3.  6.  the  Phariseee  took  counsel  with  the  H. 

HERON. 

7>c.  11. 19.  the  stork,  the  A.  unclean,  Deut.U.18. 

HsRSELF,  See  Self. 

IlER'S. 

Jo439.16.ostrich  is  hardened  as  tho'they  were  notA. 

HEW. 
Exod.  34. 1.  A.  the  two  tables  ofstone,  Deut.  10. 1. 
Veut.  12.  3.  ye  shall  A.  down  the  graven  images 
19.5.when  a  man  goeth  with  neighbour  to  A.  wood 
lKings5.6.  that  they  A.  me  cedar-lrees  out  of  Leb. 
IS.'Solomon's  and  Hiram's  builders  did  A.  them 
1  Chron.  22.  2.  David  set  masons  to  A.  stones 
2CAr.  2.2.  Soloni.  told  i:0,000  lo  A.  in  mountains 
Jer.  6.  6.  A.  ye  down  trees  and  cast  a  mount 
Dan.  4.  14.  he  cried  aloud,  A.  down  the  tree,  23. 

HEWED. 

£iod.34.4.he  ft.two  tables  like  the  first, /)cuM0.3. 

1  Sam.  11. 7.  Saul  A.  oxen  in  pieces,  and  sent  them 

15.  33.  and  Samuel  A.  Agag  in  pieces  in  Gilgal 

1  Kings5.\l.h.  stones  to  lay  foundation  of  house 
6.  36.  with  three  rows  of  A.  stones,  7.  12. 
"7.  9.  accordiiij  to  the  measures  of  A.  stones,  11 

2  Kings  12. 12.  buy  A.  stone  to  repair  the  breaches 
ha.  22.  16.  thou  hast  A.  thee  out  a  sepulchre 
Jer.  2.  13.  my  people  have  A.  them  out  cisterns 
Hos.  6.  5.  therefore  have  I  A.lhem  by  the  pirophets 

HEWER. 
Z)eu£.29.11.  from  A.iifwood,  unto  drawer  of  water 

HEWERS. 
Josh.  9.  21.  let  them  beA.of  wood  and  drawers,  23. 

27.  Joshua  made  them  that  day  A.  of  wood 
liTin^s  5.15.  and  8O,0O0A.in  mountainB,2Cy*r.2.18. 
2  Kings  )2.  12.  laid  out  money  to  masons  and  A. 

1  Chron.  22.  15.  are  A.  with  thee  in  abundance 

2  Chr.  2. 10.  I  will  give  to  thy  servants  the  A. 
Jer.  46. 22.  shall  co  me  against  Egypt  as  A.  of  wood 

HEWETH. 
Isa.  10. 15.  shall  the  axe  boast  against  him  that  A.  ? 
22.  16.  as  he  that  A.  him  out  a  sepulchre  on  high 
44. 14.  he  A.  him  down  cedars,  and  taketh  cypress 

HEWN. 
Prov.  9.  1.  she  hath  A.  out  her  seven  pillars 
Isa.W.  33.  the  high  ones  of  stature  shall  be  A.  down 
33.9.Leban.  is  ashamed,  and  A.  down,Sharon  like 
51.  1.  look  unto  the  rock  whence  ye  are  A. 
Jl/a£.3.10.  A.  down  and  cast  into  fire,  1.19.  Luke  3.9. 
27.  60.  and  laid  it  in  a  sepulchre  w  hich  he  had  A. 
out  in  the  rock,  J^Iirk  15.  46.  Luke  23.  53. 
See  Stone. 
HID. 
Oin.2.  8.  and  Adam  and  his  wife  A.  themselves 

10.  afraid  because  I  was  naked,  and  I  A.  myself 
35.  4.  .lacoh  A.  them  under  the  oak  by  Shechem 
Ezod.  2.2.  goodly  child,  she  A.  Moses  three  months 
12.  Woses  slew  the  Egyptian,  and  A.  him  in  sand 
3.  6.  Moses  A.  his  face,  for  he  was  afraid  to  look 
Josh.  2.4.  Rahab  A.  the  spies  with  stalks  of  flax,  6. 
fi.  17.  because  she  A  the  messengers  we  sent,  25. 
7.  21.  and  behold  they  are  A.  in  the  earth 
10.  16.  the  five  kings  A.  themselves  in  a  cave 
.fud/;'.9.  5.  yet  Jotliam  was  left,  for  hnA.  himself 
1  .Sam.3.18.  Samuel  told  Eli  and  A.  noth.  from  him 
10. 22.  Saul  A.  himself  ||  20.  24.  David  A.  himself 

1  Kings  18.  4.  Obadiah  A.  the  prophets.  13. 

2  Kings  A.  27.  and  the  Lord  halh  A.  it  from  me 
6.20.  I  said,  give  thy  son,  ehe  hath  A.  her  son 
7. 8.  lepers  went  and  A.  it,  carried  thence,  ami  A.  it 
11.2.  they  h.  him  and  his  nurse,  2  CAro7i.22. 11. 

IChron.  21.  20.  Orniin  and  four  sons  A.  themselves 
Joh  3. 10.  nor  A.  sorrow  from  mine  eyes 
10.  13.  these  things  hast  thou  A.  in  thino  heart 
17.  4.  thou  h.ist  A.their  heart  from  understanding 
23.  t  12.  I  have  A.  the  word's  of  his  mouth 
20.8.  the  yiung  men  saw  me  and  A.  themselves 
P»a/.9.15.in  net  which  IhcyA. their  own  foot  taken 
82.  24.  neither  hnth  he  A.  his  face  from  him 
35.  7.  without  cftui-e  they  A.  for  mn  their  net 
8.  let  his  net  that  he  hath  A.  catch  himself 
K.  12.  then  I  would  have  A.  myself  from  him 
119.  11.  Iliy  won!  have  I  A.  in  mine  heart 
140.  5.  the  proud  have  A.  n  snare  for  me,  and  cords 
Isa.  28.  15.  under  falsehood  have  we  A.  oursfllves 

49.  2.  in  shadow  of  his  hand,  in  quiver  ho  A.  me 

50.  6.  I  A.  not  my  face  from  shame  and  spitting 
S^.  3.  and  we  A.  ns  it  were  our  f  ices  from  him 
54.  8.  in  a  little  wrath  I  A.  my  fare  from  thee 
57.  17.  I  A.  me  and  was  wriitfi,  and  he  went 
59.  2.  and  your  sins  have  A.  his  face  from  you 
ft4.  7.  for  thou  hast  A.  thy  face  from  u< 

280 


HID 

fsa.  65.  16.  because  they  are  A.  from  mine  eye* 
Jer.  13.  5.  bo  I  went  and  A.  it  by  Euphrates 
7.  1  took  girdle  from  the  place  where  1  had  A.  it 
18.  22.  for  they  have  A.  snares  for  my  feet 
33.  5.  1  have  A.  my  face  from  this  city 
36.  26.  to  take  them,  but  tlie  Lord  A.  them 
43.10.  willset  his  throne  on  these  stones  I  have  A. 
Eiek.  22. 20.  have  A.  their  eyes  from  my  sabbaths 
39.  23.  therefore  A.  I  my  face  from  them,  24. 
Mat.  11.25.  thou  hast  A.  from  the  wisc,/^uAcI0.21. 
13.  33.  A.  in  three  measures  of  meal,  Luke  13.  21. 
25.  18.  but  he  went  and  A.  his  lord's  money 

25.  1  went  and  A.  thy  talent  in  the  earth 
Luke  1.  24.  Elizabeth  A.  herself  five  months 
John  8.  59.  but  Jesus  A.  himself,  and  went  out 
Rev.  6.  15.  bond-man  and  free-man  A.  themselves 

HID. 
Deut.  33. 19.  they  shall  suck  of  treasures  A.  in  sand 
Josh.  7.  22.  and  behold,  it  was  A.  in  his  tent 
10.  17.  the  five  kings  are  found  A.  in  a  cave 
2  Sam.  17.  9.  behold,  he  is  A.  now  in  some  pit 

18.  13.  no  matter  A.  from  king,  1  Kings  10.  3. 
2  Chron.  9.  'J. 

2  Kings  II.  3.  he  was  A.  in  house  ofG.  2  CAr.22.12. 
2  Chron.  22.  9.  Ahaziah  was  A.  in  Samaria 
Job'i.  21.  and  dig  for  it  more  than  for  A.  treasures 

23.  why  is  lightgiven  to  a  man  whose  way  is  A. .' 
0.  16.  stream  of  brooks,  wherein  the  snow  is  A. 

28.  11.  the  thing  that  is  A.  bringeth  he  forth 
21.  seeing  it  is  A.  from  the  eyes  of  all  living 

29.  t  10.  the  voice  of  the  nobles  was  A. 
38.  30.  the  waters  are  A.  as  with  a  stone 

Ps.  17.  14.  whose  belly  thou  fillest  with  A.  treasure 

19.  6.  nothing  is  A.  from  the  heat  thereof 
Prov.  2.  4.  anil  aearchest  for  her  as  for  A.  treasures 
/sa.  40.  27.  why  sayest,  my  way  is  A.  from  the  Ld. 

42.  22.  and  they  arc  A.  in  prison-houses 
Jer.  16.  17.  nur  their  iniquity  A.  from  mine  eyes 

32.  t  17.  and  there  is  nothing  A.  from  thee 

Has.  13.  12.  sin  of  Ephraim  bound  up,  his  sin  is  A. 

Mat.  10.  26.  there  is  nothing  A.  that  shall  not  be 

known,  Mark  4.22.  LukeS.  17.  |  12.  2. 

Lvke  9.  45.  this  saying  w«w  A.  from  them,  18.  34. 

19.  42.  but  now  they  are  A.  frqm  thine  eyes 
F.pfi.  3.  9.  from  the  beginning  hath  been  A.  in  God 
Col.  1.  20.  mystery  which  halh  been  A.  from  ages 

2.  3.  in  whom  are  A.  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom 

3.  3.  and  your  life  is  A.  with  Christ  in  God 
Heb.  11.  23.  by  faith  Moses  was  A.  three  months 

Be  HID. 

Oen.  4. 14.  hast  driven  me  from  the  face  of  the 
earth,  and  from  thy  face  shall  I  be  A 

Lev.  4. 13.  thing  Ae  A.  from  the  assembly,  5.  3,  4. 

J^um.  5.  13.  and  it  be  A.  from  the  eyes  of  her  hush. 

.lob  5.21.shalt  bch.  from  ihescourgcof  the  tongue 
20.20.  darkness  shall  be  A.  in  his  secret  places 

Isa.  29.  14.  the  understanding  of  prudent  men  6e  A. 

Hos.  13. 14.  repentance  shall  be  A.  from  mine  eyes 

.']mos  9.  3.  and  though  Uiey  be  A.  from  my  sight 

JV(iA.3.  11.  thou  shaltbe  drunken,  thou  shall Ae A. 

Ztph.  2.  3.  it  may  be  ye  shall  be  A.  in  the  day 

2  Cur.  4.  3.  if  our  gospel  be  A.  it  is  hid  to  the  lost 
JVot  be  HID. 

McLt.5. 14.  a  city  that  is  set  on  a  hill  cannot  be  h. 

JMnrA 7. 24.  entered  a  house,  but  he  could  not  be  A. 

1  Tim.  5.  25.  they  that  otherwise  cannot  be  A. 
JVot  HID. 

.fob  15.  18.  told  from  their  fathers,  and  not  A.  it 

Psal.  32.  5.  and  mine  iniquity  have  I  not  A. 
38.  9.  and  my  groaning  is  not  A.  fioin  thee 
40.  10.  I  have  ?iot  A.  thy  righteousness  within 
69.  5.  and  my  sins  are  not  A.  from  thee 
139.15. my  substance  was  not  A.  when  I  was  made 

Jcr.lO.l".  my  eyes  upon  their  ways,  they  are  not  A. 
from  my  face,  neither  is  ini(|.  hid  from  my  eyes 

f-fns.  5.  3.  I  know  Ephraim,  Israel  is  not  A.  from  me 

Au/ifH.47.w  Oman  saw  that  she  was  nolA.she  came 
HIDDEN. 

F.zod.  9.  t  32.  for  the  wheat  and  the  rye  were  A. 

Lev.  5.2.  if  it  bu  A.  from  him,  he  shall  bo  unclean 

f)fut.  30.  1 1.  it  is  not  A.  from  thee,  nor  is  it  afar  off 

./oh  3.  in.  as  an  A.  untimely  Irirlh,  I  had  not  been 
15.  20.  the  number  of  years  is  A.  lo  the  oppressor 
]H.  t  10.  the  snare  is  A.  for  him  in  the  ground 

24.  1.  seeing  times  are  not  A.  from  thee 
P»aZ.51.C.  iuA.partshallmake  me  know  wisdom 
Pron.  28.  12.  when  the  wicked  rise,  a  man  is  A. 
fsa.  45.  3.  I  willgive  thee  A.  riches  of  secret  places 

48.  6.  I  have  shewed  thoe  new  things,  A.  things 
.fer.  33.  t  3.  and  I  will  shew  thee  A.  things 
Ohad.  6.  how  are  his  A   things  sought  up! 
Zech.  1 1.  t  16.  shepherd  not  visit  llioso  who  be  K. 
Mcts  26.  26.  none  of  these  things  are  A.  from  him 

1  Cor.  2. 7.  even  the  A. wisdom  which  God  ordiiineil 
4.  5.  will  bring  lo  light  the  A.  things  of  darkness 

2  Cor.  4.2.  have  renounced  A.  things  of  dishonesty 
1  Pet.W.  4.  but  let  it  bo  the  A.  man  of  the  heart 
Rev.  2.  17.  I  will  give  to  eat  of  the  A.  manua 

HIDDEN  ones. 
PtaU  83.  3.  they  consulted  against  Uiy  k.  onet 


HID 

HIDE,  Substantivt. 

Lev.  8. 17.  his  A.  and  llesh  be  burnt  with  fire,  9. 11 
HIDE 

Signifies,  [1]  To  conceal,  or  keep  any  thing  from 
the  sight  and  knowledge  of  others.  lSani.20.2, 
Why  should  my  father  hide  this  thing  from  me  1 
Oen.  18.  17,  Shall  I  hide  from  Abraham  that 
thing  which  I  do?  I  will  not,  I  cannot  hide  it  ; 
it  is  against  the  laws  of  friendship  to  conceal 
my  secrets  from  him.  [2]  JN'ot  to  conftss  one's 
sins  or  lo  excuse  and  extenuate  them.    I'sal. 

32.  5,  I  acknowledged  my  sin  unto  thee,  and 
mine  iniquity  have  I  not  hid.  Jlnd  in  Prov. 
28.  13,  He  tiiat  c^ercth  his  sins  shall  not  pros- 
per. That  does  nut  confess  them  lo  God,  and 
men  too,  when  occasion  requires  it:  That  be- 
ing convinced,  or  admonished  of  his  sins, 
either  justifieth,  or  dcnicth,  or  ezcuseth  them, 
[3J  To  cover  sin  by  free  pardon  and  forgive- 
luss.  Psal.  51.  9,  Hide  thy  face  from  my  sins; 
look  not  upon  them  with  an  eye  of  revenge, 
but  forget  and  forgive  them.  [4]  To  protect 
and  keep  safe.  Psal.  27.  5,  In  the  time  of 
trouble  he  shall  hide  me  in  his  pavilion.  The 
saints  are  called  the  hidden  ones.  Psal.  83. 
3,  They  have  consulted  against  thy  hidden 
ones  ;  against  thy  people,  whom  thou  hidest  as 
a  precious  treasure,  and  prolectest  from  the 
rage  of  their  enemies.  [5]  To  put  one's  self 
under  the  protection  of  the  Jilmighly  by  faith, 
prayer,  and  repentance.  Prov.  22.  3,  The 
prudent  man  foreseelli  the  evil,  ond  hideth 
himself  Thus  the  godly  hide  themselves  un- 
der the  icings  of  Cr'od's  promises. 

The  Psalmist  says,  I  have  not  hid  thy  righteous- 
ness within  my  heart,  Psal.  40.  10.  that  is,  I 
have  not  smothered,  or  shut  it  up  there,  but 
spread  it  abroad  for  thy  glory,  and  the  good 
of  Ihe  world.   Our  first  parents  hid  themselves 
from  the  presence  of  God,  aftrrlhey  had  eaten 
the  forbidden  fruit,  being  filled  with  shama 
and   conscious  of  their  guilt,  and  dread  of 
judgment.  Gen.  3.   8.      7'Ac  Psalmist  prays, 
That  God  would   not   hide   himself  from    big 
supplication,  Psal.  55.  1.  that  is,  that  he  would 
not  turn  away  his  face  and  ear,  as  oneresolved 
not  to  hear  nor  help;  but  that  he  would  be 
pleased  to  hear  him,  to  look  favourably  upon 
him.     It  is  spoken  after  the  manner  of  men, 
who  shew  their  aversion  and  estrangement,  by 
hiding  their  face,  by  turning  from  any  one. 
In  Psal.  119.  19,  David  prays  to    God,  not  lo 
hide  his  commandments  from  him  ;  to  discover 
to  him  the  sense  and  meaning  of  them. 
Gen.  18.  17.  shall  1  A.  from  Abraham  what  I  do  1 
47.  18.  we  will  notA.  it  from  my  lord,  how  that 
Exod.  2.  3.  and  when  she  could  not  longer  A.  hira 
Lev.  20.  4.  any  ways  A.  their  eyes  from  ihe  man 
Deut.  22. 1.  go  astray,  and  A.  thyself  from  them,  4. 
3.  with  all  lost  things,  thou  maycsl  not  A.  thyself 
Josh.  2.  16.  and  A.  yourselves  there  three  days 
7. 19.  tell  what  thou  hast  done,  A.  it  not  from  me 
ludg.  6.  II.  to  A.  the  wheat  from  iho  Midianites 
l.^ain.S.n.A.it  not  from  me,  if  thou  A.2Sarn.  14.13 
19.  2.  abide  in  a  secret  place,  and  A.  thyself 
20. 2.  why  should  my  father  A.  this  thing  from  me? 
5.  let  me  go,  that  I  m.iy  A.  myself  in  the  field 

19.  come  to  Ihe  place  where  thou  didst  A.  thyself 
1  Kings  17.  3.  and  A.  thyself  by  the  brook  Cherilh 

22.  25.  into  an  inner  chamber  to  A.  2  Chr.  18  24. 
.lob  13.  20.  then  will  I  not  A.  myself  from  thee 
14. 13.  O  that  thou  wouldest  A.  me  in  ihe  graTe 

20.  12.  though  he  A.  it  under  his  longiie 

33.  17.  from  his  purpose,  and  A.  pride  from  man 
40. 13.  A.  them  in  the  dust  together,  and  bind 

Psal.  17.  8.  A.  me  under  the  shadow  of  thy  winga 
27.5.  time  of  trouble  he  shall  A.  me  in  his  pavilion, 
in  secret  of  his  tabernacle  shall  he  h.  me 
30  7.  thou  diilsi  A.  thy  face  and  I  w.is  troubled 
31 .  20.  thou  shall  A.  them  in  secret  of  thy  presence 
.55.  1.  and  A.  not  tliyself  from  my  supplication 
64.2.  A.  me  from  the  secret  counsel  of  Ihe  wicked 
78.  4.  we  will  not  A.  ihein  from  llioir  children 
89.  46.  how  long,  O  Lord,   wilt  thou  A.  thyself? 
119.  19.  A.  not  thy  commandments  from  me 
143.  9.  deliver  me,  O  Lord,  I  flee  lo  thee  to  A.  me 

Prov.  2.  1.  and  A.  my  commnndnn  n's  with  thee 

/.««.!.  15. 1  willA.  my  eyes  from  you,  I  will  not  bear 
2. 10.  and  A.  thee  in  the  dust,  for  fear  of  the  Lord 
3.  9.  they  A.  not  their  sin  ||  16.  3.  h.  the  outca»W 
26.  2t),  A.  Ihyselfaf  it  were  for  a  little  moment 
29. 15. woo  to  Ihcm  that  seek  deep  toA. their  rouns. 
."iH.  7.  that  thou  A. not  thyself  from  thine  ow  n  flesh 

Jer.  13.  4.  and  A.  it  there  in  a  hole  of  Ihe  rock 
6.  girdle  which  I  commanded  thee  to  A.  there 
36. 10.  go,  A.  thee,  thou,  and  .Teremiiih,  and  let 
38. 14. 1  will  nsk  thee  n  thing,  A.  nothing  from  m« 
25.  A.  it  not  from  us  ||  43.  9.  A.  them  in  the  clay 
/.a7n.3.  .56.  A.no<  thine  ear  at  my  brealhiiip,  my  cry 
i;zcA.28. 3.  therein  no  lecret  they  can  A.  from  lhe« 


HIG 

Etek.21.8.  cedar^  in  garden  orGod  could  not  h.  him 

39.29.  neither  will  1  A.my  face  any  more  from  Ihem 
Jam.  5.  20.  and  shall  h.  a  multitude  of  sins 
Rev.  6.  Iti.  h.  us  from  the  face  of  bim  that  sitteth 
See  Face. 
HIDE  kimself. 
1  Sam.  23.  19.  doth  not  David  A.  himself?  26.  1. 
Jer.  23.  24.  can  any  A.  Mmself  in  secret  places  1 

49.  10.  and  he  shall  not  be  able  to  h.  himself 
John  12.  36.  and  Jesus  did  A.  himself  from  them 

HIDE  themselves. 
Deut.7. 20.  till  they  that  A .  themselves  bo  destroyed 
1  Sam.  13.  6.  the  people  did  A.  themselves  in  caves 
a  Kings  7.  13.  Syrians  gone  to  A.  themselves  in  field 
Job  24.  4.  the  poor  of  the  earth  A.  themselves 

34.22.  where  workers  of  iniquity  may  h.themselves 
Psal.  56.  6.  they  A.  themselves,  they  mark  my  steps 
Prop.28.28.when  the  wicked  rise,menh.themselves 
Dan.  10.  7.  so  that  they  fled  to  A.  themselves 
^mos  9. 3.  tho'  they  A.  themselves  in  top  of  Carmel 

HIDEST. 
Job  13.  24.  why  A.  thy  face?  Psal.  44.  24. 1  88.  14. 
Psal.  10.  1.  why  A.  thou  thyself  in  limes  of  trouble  ? 

104.  29.  thou  A.  thy  face,  they  are  troubled 
Isa.  45. 15.  verily  thou  art  a  God  that  A.  thyself 

HIDETH. 
1  Sam.  23.  03.  find  the  lurking  places  where  he  A. 
Job  23.  9.  he  A.  himself  on  the  right  hand,  that 

34.29.  when  he  A.  his  face  who  can  behold  him? 

42.3.  who  is  he  that  A.  counsel  without  knowledge 
Psal.  10.  11.  he  A.  his  face,  he  will  never  see  it 

139.  12.  yea,  the  darkness  A.  not  from  thee 
Prov.  10.  18.  he  that  A.  hatred  with  lying  lips 

19.24.  the  slothful  A.  his  hand  in  his  bosom,  26. 15. 

22.3.a  prudent  man  foreseeth  and  A.  himself,  27.12. 

27.  16.  whosoever  A.  her  A.  the  wind 

28.  27.  he  that  A.  his  eyes  shall  have  many  a  curse 
[sa.8.  17.  that  A.  bis  face  from  the  house  of  Jacob 
Mat.  13.  44.  which  when  a  man  hath  found,  he  A. 

HIDING. 

Job  31.  33.  by  A.  mine  iniquity  in  my  bosom 

Psal.  32.  7.  thou  art  my  A.. place,  119.  114. 

Jsa.  28.  17.  the  waters  shall  overflow  the  A.  place 
32.  2.  a  man  shall  be  as  a  A.  place  from  the  wind 

Hab.  3.  4.  and  there  was  the  A.  of  his  power 
HIGH. 

High  places,  in  Hebrew,  Bamoth.  They  arc  often 
spoken  of  in  scripture,  and  the  prophets  upbraid 
the  Israelites /or  nothing  with  so  much  zeal  as 
for  worshipping  upon  the  high  places.  The 
destroying  of  these  high  places  is  a  commen- 
dation given  but  to  fete  princes  in  the  scrip 
tare;  and  many  of  them,  though  otherwise 
icalous  for  the  observance  of  the  lain,  had  not 
the  courage  to  ruin  these  eminences,  and  pre 
vent  the  people  from  sacrificing  upon  them. 

ffhile  the  temple  was  not  built,  there  was  nothing 
in  high  places  expressly  contrary  to  the  law, 
provided  God  only  was  adored  there,  and  that 
no  incense  or  victims  were  offered  to  idols. 
Under  the  Judges  they  seem  to  have  been  tole- 
rated ;  and  Samuel  offered  sacrifices  in  several 
places  besides  the  tabernacle,  where  the  ark  was 
jiot  present.  Even  in  David's  time,  they  sacri 
ficed  to  the  Lord  at  Shiloh,  Jerusalem,  and 
Gibeon.  But  after  that  the  temple  was  built, 
and  a  place  prepared  for  the  fixed  settlement  nf 
the  ark,  it  was  no  more  allowed  of  to  sacrifice 
out  of  Jerusalem.  Solomon  in  the  beginning 
of  his  reigv,  went  to  Gibeon  to  sacrifice  there, 
1  Kings  3.  4.  But  from  that  time  ice  see  no 
lawful  sacrifices  offered  out  of  the  temple. 

Dr.  Pridenux  thinks  it  probable  that  the  Pro 
geuchre,  tohich  he  says  were  open  courts,  built 
like  tlwse  in  which  the  people  prayed  at  the  ta 
bernacle,  and  at  the  temple,  and.  in  one  of  which 
our  Saviour  is  said  to  have  continued  all  night 
in  prayer  to  God,  Luke  6.  12,  were  the  same 
which  in  the  Old  Testament  are  called  high 
places.  .^Ttrf  Ae  says,  that  he  is  confirmed  in 
this  opinion,  in  that  the  Proseuchce  had  groves 
in  or  about  them,  in  the  same  manner  as  the 
high  places  had.    Connect.     Part  I.  Book  6. 

Gen.  29.  7.  and  he  said,  lo,  it  is  yet  A.  day 

Erod.U.B.  Israel  went  out  with  A. hand,  JVum.33.3. 

A'um.11.31.  brought  quails  ns  it  were  two  cubits  A. 

Dent.  3.  5.  the  cities  were  fenced  with  A.  walls 
12.  2.  served  their  gods  on  the  A.  mountains 
26.  19.  and  to  make  thee  A.  above  all  nations 
28. 43.  the  stranger  shall  get  up  above  thee  very  A. 
52.  till  thy  A.  and  fenced  walls  come  down 
32.  27.  lest  they  should  say,  our  hand  is  A. 

1  Kings  9.8.  at  this  house  which  is  A.  every  one  hiss 

1  Chr.  17.  17.  to  the  estate  of  a  man  of  A.  degree 

2  CAr.7. 21.  this  house  isA.  shall  be  an  astonishment 
Esth.^.M.  a  gallows  he  made  of  fifty  cubits  A.  7. 9. 
Job  11.  8.  it  is  as  A.  as  heaven,  what  canst  thou  do? 

21.  22.  seeing  he  judgelh  those  that  are  A. 

22.  12.  and  behold  the  stars,  how  h.  they  are 
3S.  15.  and  the  A.  arm  shall  be  broken 

381 


HIG 

Job  41.  34.  he  beholdeth  all  A.  things,  he  is  a  king 
Psal.  18.  27.  but  thou  wilt  bring  down  A.  looks 
49.  2.  give  ear,  both  low  and  A.  rich  and  poor 
62.  9.  and  men  of  A.  degree  are  a  lie 
71.  19.  thy  righteousnbss  also,  O  God,  is  very  A. 
78.  69.  he  built  his  sanctuary  like  A.  palaces 
89.  13.  strong  is  thy  hand,  A.  is  thy  right  hand 
97.  9.  thou,  Lord,  art  A.  above  earth,  99. 2.  |  1 13.  4. 
101.  5.  him  that  hath  a  A.  look  and  a  proud  heart 
103.  11.  for  as  the  heaven  is  A.  above  the  earth 
131.  1.  nor  do  I  exercise  in  things  too  A.  for  me 

138.  6.  though  the  Lord  be  A.  yet  bath  he  respect 

139.  6.  such  knowledge,  it  is  A.  cannot  attain  to  it 

149.  6.  let  the  A.  praises  of  God  be  in  their  mouth 

150.  5.  praise  him  on  A.  eouTiding  cymbals 
Prov.  18.  11.  and  as  a  A.  wall  in  his  own  conceit 

21.  4.  a  A.  look,  and  a  proud  heart,  is  sin 

24.  7.  wisdom  is  too  A.  for  a  fool,  he  openeth  not 

Ecc/.  12. 5.  when  shall  be  afraid  of  that  which  is  A. 

Isa.  2.  13.  day  of  the  Lord  on  all  cedars  that  are  A. 

14.  and  upon  all  the  A.  mountains  and  hills 
6.  1.  the  Lord  sitting  on  a  throne  A.  and  lifted  up 

10.  12.  I  will  punish  the  glory  of  his  A.  looks 

33.  the  A.  ones  of  stature  shall  be  hewn  down 
24.  21.  punish  the  hoStof  the  A.  ones  that  are  on  A. 
25. 12.  the  fortress  of  A.  fort  shall  he  bring  down 

30.  13.  as  a  breach  swelling  out  in  a  A.  wall 
52.  13.  behold  my  servant  shall  be  very  A. 
57.  15.  for  thus  saith  the  A.  and  lofty  One 

Jer.  17. 12.  a  glorious  A.  throne  from  the  beginning 

31.  21.  set  up  way-marks,  make  thee  A.  heaps 

49. 16.  though  thou  makest  thy  nest  A.  as  the  eagle 
51.  58.  her  A.  gates  shall  be  burnt  with  fire 

F.iek.  1.  18.  as  for  their  rings  they  were  so  A. 
17.  24.  that  I  have  brought  down  the  A.  tree 
21.  26.  exalt  the  low,  and  abase  him  that  is  A. 
31.  3.  behold,  the  .Assyrian  was  of  A.  stature 
34.  14.  I  will  feed  them  on  the  A.  muuntains 
Dan.  8.  3.  the  two  horns  were  A.  one  was  higher 
Obad.3.  whose  habitation  isA.tbat  saith  in  his  heart 
ZcpA.  1.  Id.  a  day  of  alarm  against  the  A.  towers 
.John  19.  31.  for  that  sabbath-day  was  a  A.  day 
.lets  13.  17.  with  a  A.  arm  brought  he  them  out 
Rom.  12. 16.  mind  not  A.  things  ||  13. 11.  it  is  A.  time 
2  Cor.  10.5.  casting  down  every  A.  thing  that  exalts 
Phil.  3.  14.  for  the  prize  of  the  A.  calling  of  God 
Rev.  21. 12.  holy  Jerusalem  had  a  wall  great  and  A. 
See  Gatk,  God,  Mill,  Hills. 
Most  HIGH. 
JVKm.24.16.and  knew  the  knowledge  of  the  mo.stV. 
Dcut.^i.S.when  the  most  H.  divided  to  the  nations 
2. Sam.  22.  14.  when  the  most  H.  uttered  his  voice 
Psal.l.Vi.  I  will  praise  the  Lord,  and  sing  praise  to 
the  name  of  thei,ord  most  H.  9.  2.  |  92.  1. 
21.7.thro'  mercy  of  the  mo$t  //.shall  not  be  moved 

46.  4.  holy  place  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  most  H. 

47.  2.  the  Lord  most  II.  is  terrible,  a  great  King 
.50. 14.  ofr«r  to  God,  and  pay  thy  vows  to  most  H. 

56.  2   tliat  fight  against  me,  O  thou  most  //. 

57.  2.  I  will  cry  unto  God  most  //.  unto  God  that 
73.  11.  and  is  there  knowledge  in  the  most  H.l 
77.  10.  the  years  of  the  right  hand  of  the  most  H. 

78.17.  by  provoking  xhemoslH.'xa  wilderness, .56. 
82.6.  all  ofyou  are  the  children  of  the  most  H. 
83.  18.  that  thou  art  most  H.  over  all  the  earth 

91. 1.  dwelleth  in  the  secret  place  of  the  most  H. 
9.  thou  hast  made  the  most  H.  thy  habitation 

92.  8.  but  thou.  Lord,  art  most  H.  for  evermore 
107.  11.  contemned  the  counsel  of  the  most  H. 

Isa.  14. 14. 1  will  ascend,  I  will  be  like  the  most  H. 

/.am.3.35.  turn  aside  before  the  faceof  the  most  H. 
38.  out  of  mouth  o(  most  H.  proceedeth  not  evil 

T)an.  4.  17.  that  the  most  H.  ruleth  in  the  kingdom 

24.  and  this  is  the  decree  of  tho  most  H. 

25.  that  the  mast  H.  rules  in  kingdom  of  men,  32. 

34.  and  I  blessed  the  most  H.  and  I  praised  him 
7. 18.  the  saints  of  most  i/.  shall  take  the  kingdom 

22.  judgment  was  given  lo  the  saints  oi  most  H. 
25.  shall  speak  great  words  against  thamost  H. 
27.  to  the  people  of  the  saints  of  the  most  H. 
Hos.  7.  16.  ihoy  return,  hut  not  to  the  most  H. 

11.  7.  though  they  called  them  to  the  most  H. 
Jlcts't .i'i.\.\iiimost  //.dwelleth  not  in  temples  made 

Sec  Mountain. 
On  HIGH. 

Kind.  25.  20.  cherubims  stretch  wings  on  A.  37.  9. 

39.  31.  they  tied  a  lace  of  blue,  to  fasten  it  on  A 

Deut.  28.  1.  thy  God  will  set  thee  oti  A.  above 

2  Sam.  22.  49.  thou  hast  lifted  me  >ip  on  A. 

23.  1.  and  the  man  who  was  raised  up  on  h.  said 

1  Kings  2 1 .9.  set  Naboth  on  A.  among  the  people,  12 

2^!?;o-.5l9.22.against  whom  bast  thou  liflcdupthine 

eyes  on  A.?  against  HolyOne  of  Israel? /sa.37.23. 

1  CAr.  14.  2.  for  his  kingdom  was  lifted  up  on  h. 

2  CAr.  20.  19.  stood  up  to  pra  ise  God  of  Israel  onh. 
.lob  5.  11.  to  set  up  on  h.  those  that  be  low 

16.  19.  witness  is  in  heaven,  and  my  record  is  onh 

31.2.  what  inheritance ofthe  Almighty  from  onA.? 
39.  18.  what  time  she  lifteth  up  herself  on  A. 

27.  the  eagle  mount  up  and  make  her  ne«t  ox  h.J 
2  P 


HIL 

Psal.  7.  7.  for  their  sakes  therefore  return  on  h, 

08.  18.  ihou  hast  ascended  on  A.  thou  hast  led 
69.  29.  let  thy  salvation,  O  Ood,  set  me  up  on  k 
75.5.  lift  not  up  your  horn  on  A.  speak  not  with 
91.  14. 1  will  set  him  on  A.  because  he  hath  known 
9i  4.  the  Lord  on  A.  is  mightier  than  the  noise 
iff?.  41.  settelh  he  the  poor  071  A.  from  aflliction 
113.5.  who  is  like  to  our  God,  who  dwelleth  onh.? 

Isa.  22. 16.  that  heweth  him  out  a  sepulchre  on  h 
24.  18.  for  the  windows  from  on  A.  are  open 
21.  punish  the  host  of  high  ones  that  are  on  A. 
26.  5.  he  bringeth  down  them  that  dwell  071  A. 

32.  15.  till  the  Spirit  he  poured  on  us  from  on  A. 

33.  5.  he  dwelleth  on  A.  ||  16.  he  shall  dwell  on  A. 
40.  26.  lift  up  your  eyes  07i  A.  and  behold 

58.  4.  to  make  your  voice  to  be  hoard  on  h. 
./er.  25.  30.  tile  Lord  shall  roar  from  o7i  A. 
K:c/i. 31.  4.  the  deep  set  him  up  071  A.  with  her  rivers 
//■ai.2.9.  that  he  may  set  his  nest  071  A.  to  be  deliver. 
3.  10.  the  deep  lifted  up  bis  hands  oti  A. 
Liike  1.78.  the  day-spring  from  on  h.  hath  visited  us 
24.  49.  till  ye  be  endued  with  jiower  from  071  A. 
K/)A.4.8.wlien  he  ascended  upo7iA.be  led  captivity 
Htb.  1.  3.  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  A. 
See  Place,  Places,  Prikst,  Towbr. 
HIGH-VV.\Y,  S. 
I.cn.  26.  22.  and  your  h.-ways  shall  be  desolate 
JVum.20.17.by  king's  A.-2cay,  19. 1 21.22. Dfut.2.27 
JuJg.5.S.  in  (lays  of  Jael  h.-ways  were  unoccupied 
20.  31.  they  began  to  kill  the  people  in  the  h-ways 
32.  let  us  flee,  and  draw  them  unto  the  h.-ways 
45.  gleaned  of  them  in  the  h.-ways  5(X)0  men 

1  .Sam.  6. 12.  the  kine  went  along  the  A.-!cay  lowing 

2  Sam,  20. 12.  Amasa  wallowed  in  blood  in  h.-way 
2  A'jnn-s  18.17.A.-K3.  of  fuller's  field,  Isa.  7. 3.  |  36.2. 
Prod.  l(i.  17.  A.-75a7/ of  upright  to  depart  from  evil 
Isa.  11. 16.  a  h.-way  for  the  remnant  of  his  people 

19.2;l.  shall  be  a  h.-wiiy  out  of  Egypt  to  Assyria 
33.8.  h.-ways  lie  waste,  way-faring  man  ceaseth 
35.  8.  and  a  h.-way  shall  be  there,  and  a  way 
40.  3.  make  in  the  desert  a  h.-way  for  our  God 
49.  11.  and  my  h.-tcays  shall  be  exalted 
62.  10.  cast  up,  cast  up  the  A.-May.  gather  stones 
./er.  31.  21.  set  thine  heart  toward  ine  h.-way 
.Imos  5.  16.  they  shall  say  in  all  the  h.-ways,  alas 
J/a«.22.9.go  therefore  into  the  h.-ways, Luke  14.23. 
Mark  10. 46.  Bartimens  sat  by  the  h.-way  begging 

HIGHER. 
J^um.  24.  7.  and  his  king  shall  be  A.  than  Agag 

1  Sam.  9.  2.  Saul  was  A.  than  any  ofthe  people 

2  Kings  15.  35.  Jotham  built  A.  gate  of  the  house 
JVcA.  4  13.  on  the  A.  places,  I  even  set  the  people 
.Tob  35.5.  beholil  the  clouds,  which  arei.  than  thou 
Psal.  61.  2.  lead  me  to  the  rock  that  is  A.  than  I 

89.27.  I  will  make  him  A.  than  kings  ofthe  earth 
Keel.  5. 8.  he  regardeth,  and  there  be  h.  than  they 
Isa.  55.9.  as  the  heavens  are  A.  than  earth,  so  my 
ways  h.  than  your  ways,  thoughts  than  yours 
.ler.  36.  10.  then  read  Baruch  in  the  A.  court 
Kzek.^  2. six  men  came  from  the  way  of  the  A. gate 

42.  5.  for  the  galleries  were  A.  than  these 

43.  13.  and  this  shall  be  the  A.  place  ofthe  altar 
Dan.  8.  3.  one  horn  A.  than  the  other,  A.  came  last 
Luke  14.  10.  he  may  say  to  thee,  friend,  go  up  A. 
/?om.l3. 1.  let  every  soul  be  subject  to  the  A.  powers 
Heb.  7.  26.  a  High-Priest  made  A.  than  tJ|e  heavens 

HIGHEST.  • 

2  Chr.  32.  f  33.  hurie<l  Hpzekiah  in  A.  of  sepulchres 
Psal.  13. 13.  Lord  thundered,  the  //.gave  his  voice 
87.  5.  and  the  //.  himsidf  shall  establish  her 
Prov.  8.  26.  nor  the  A.  part  of  the  dust  of  the  world 

9.  3.  she  crieth  upon  the  A.  places  ofthe  city 
Keel.  5.  S.  he  that  is  higher  than  the  A.  regardeth 
Eiek.  17.  3.  and  took  the  A.  branch  ofthe  cedar 

22  I  will  take  ofthe  A.  branch  ofthe  ce^ar 
41.7.  so  increased  from  lowest  chamber  to  the  A. 
.Wa(.  21.9.  saying,  Hosanna  in  the  A.  Mark  11. 10. 
Lvke  I.  32.  and"^5hall  be  called  the  Son  ofthe  H. 
3.5.  the  power  ofthe  H.  shall  overshadow  thee 
76.  thou  shalt  be  called  the  prophet  ofthe  //. 
0. 14.  glory  to  God  in  the  A.  on  earth  peace,  19.38, 
6.  35.  and  ye  shall  he  the  children  of  the  //. 
14.  8.  when  bidden,  sit  not  down  in  the  .'«.  room 
20.  46.  and  love  the  A.  seats  in  the  synagogues 

HIGHLY. 
Luke  1.  28.  the  ang^l  said,  thou  art  A.  favoured 
Ifi.  15.  that  which  is  A.  esteemed  among  men 
.^cts  12.  20.  Herod  was  A.  displeased  with  Tyre 
Rom.  12.  3.  not  to  think  of  himself  more  A.  than 
Phil.  2. 9.  wherefore  God  also  hath  h.  exalted  him 

1  Thess.  5.  13.  and  to  esteem  them  very  A.  in  love 

HIGH-MINDED. 
Rom.  11.  20.  be  not  A.  but  fear,  1  Tim.  6.  17. 

2  Tim.  3.4.  traitors,  heady,  h.  lovers  of  pleasure* 

HIGHNESS. 
.fob  31  23.  by  reason  of  his  A.  I  could  not  endure 
Isa.  13.  3.  even  them  that  rejoice  in  my  A. 

HILL. 
Frod.  24.  4.  Moses  built  an  altar  under  the  k 
J\rum.  14. 45.  the  Canaaniles  which  dwell  in  that  h 


HIL 

Deut  1.41.7*  were  ready  to  go  up  into  the  h.  43. 

Jotk.  5. 3.  circumciead  UtaiA  at  the  k.  of  furcskius 
17.  10.  they  said,  the  A.  is  not  cnougli  for  us 
24.30.  Joshua  buried  on  the  A.  Gaasli,  .fudir.i.  9. 
33.  Eleazar  was  buried  in  a  A.  that  pcrtuTned 

Judg.  7.  1.  the  Midianiles  were  by  the  A.  of  Sibreh 

I  Sam.  7.  1.  ark  into  house  of  Abinadab  in  the  A. 
9.  II.  as  Saul  and  his  servants  went  u|)  the  A. 
10. 5.  after  that,  ihou  sbalt  come  to  A.  of  God,  10. 
23.  19.  David  hid  in  the  A.  of  Huchilah,  20. 1. 
25.  20.  Abigail  came  down  by  the  covert  of  tlie  A. 

S5am.  2. 24.  wliep  they  were  come  to  A.  of  Ammah 
13.  34.  much  |>eo|ile  came  by  the  A.  behind  him 
16.  13.  Shimei  went  along  on  the  A.  side,  cursin;^ 
21.9.  they  hanged  them  in  the  A.  before  the  Lord 

1  Kings  11.  7.  Solomon  built  in  the  A.  for  Chemosh 

16.  24.  Omri  bought  the  A.  Samaria,  built  on  A. 
fi  Kings  4. 27.  she  came  to  the  man  of  God  to  the  A. 
Psal.  24. 3.  who  shall  ascend  into  the  A.  of  the  Lord 

42.  6.  I  will  remember  tliee  from  the  A.  Mizar 
B3. 15.  the  A.  of  God  is  as  the  A.  of  Bnshan 

16.  this  is  the  A.  which  God  desireth  to  dwell  in 
Cant.  4.  G.  I  will  get  me  to  the  A.  of  frankincense 
Isa.  5.  1.  hath  a  vineyard  in  a  very  fruitful  A. 
10. 32.  shall  shake  his  hand  against  A.  of  Jerusalem 

30.  17.  till  ye  bo  left  as  an  en.sign  on  a  A. 

31.  4.  Lord  of  hosts  shall  fight  for  the  A.  thereof 
40.  4.  every  mountain  and  A.  shall  be  made  low 

Jer.  16.  16.  they  shall  hunt  Ihem  from  every  A. 
31.  39.  the  mea.suring  line  upon  the  A.  Gareb 

49.  16.  thou  that  holde.'t  the  height  of  the  h. 

50.  6.  they  have  gone  from  mountain  to  A. 

/Czf  A. 34.26.  will  make  places  about  my  A.  a  blessing 
Mat.  5.  14.  a  city  that  is  set  on  a  A.  cannot  be  hid 
Luke  3.  5.  and  every  A.  shall  be  brought  low 
4.  29.  and  they  led  him  to  the  brow  of  the  A. 
9.  37.  when  they  were  come  down  from  the  A. 
.Sets  17. 22.  then  Paul  stood  in  the  midst  of  Mars  A. 

HILL-COUNTRY. 
JbiA.lS.G.  inhabitants  ofh.-country  will  I  drive  out 
21.)  I.  gave  to  the  sons  of  Aaron,  Arba  in  h.-coun. 
Jyuke  1.39. and  Mary  went  down  into  the  A.-c«unrr^ 
65.  were  noised  thro'  all  the  A.-couHtry  of  Judea 
High  HILL,  S. 
Oen.T.  19.  all  high  A.  under  heaven  were  covered 
l^in^sl4.23.groves  on  every  Ai'^A  A.  ZKings^l.W. 
Psal.  GS.  15.  is  a  kigh  A.  as  the  hill  of  lia^han 
16.  why  leap  ye,  ye  highh.7  this  ishillGod  desires 
104.  18.  Ai^A  A.  are  a  refuge  for  the  wild  goats 
ha.  30.  25.  and  on  every  high  h.  rivers  of  water 
Jer.2.20.when  on  every  Ai>A  A.  thou  wandunst,  23. 

17.  2.  whils'.  children  remember  groves  on  Ai'^'^A  h. 
Etek.  6. 13.  slain  men  among  idols  on  every  hiir/t  A, 

20  28.  then  they  saw  every  high  A.  and  thick  trees 
34.  6.  my  sheep  wandered  on  every  Ai^A  A. 

Hull/  HILL. 
Psal.%(i.  I  have  set  my  king  on  my  holy  h.  of  Zion 
3.4. 1  cried  to  Lord,  he  heard  me  out  of  his  holy  h. 

15.  1.  Lord,  who  shall  dwell  in  thy  lioly  A.? 

43.  3.  let  them  lead  me,  bring  me  to  thy  hoh/  A. 
99.  9.  worship  at  his  holy  A.  the  Lord  is  holy 

HILL,  with  top. 
Ezod.  17.9.  to-morrow  I  will  stand  on  top  of  I  he  A. 
10.  Moses,  Aaron,  and  Hur,  went  to  topoftlte  A. 
Jfum.  14, 44.  they  presumed  to  go  u])  to  the  A.  tup 
Judg.  103.  Samson  carried  them  to  the  top  of  a  A. 
1  .Sam.  2t).  13.  David  stood  on  the  tup  of  n  h. 
S  Sam.  2.  25.  and  Abner  stood  on  the  to])  of  a  A. 

16.  1.  David  was  a  little  past  the  top  o(  the  A. 
i  Kings  1.  9.  Elijah  sat  on  the  top  of  a  A. 

HILLS. 
Or.«  49.26.  to  the  utmo.st  bound  of  the  everlasting  A. 
JVuJi.  23.  9.  and  from  the  A.  I  b.diold  him 
Det  (.  8.  7.  that  spring  out  of  the  valleys  and  A. 
9  out  of  whose  A.  thou  mayest  dig  brass 

II  II.  it  is  a  land  of  A.  and  valleys,  and  drinketh 
33    15.  for  the  precious  things  of  the  lasting  A. 

Jos\.  in.  40.  Joshua  smote  all  the  country  of  the  A. 
11.  16.  BO  Joshua  look  all  that  land,  the  A. 

I  K\  nes  20. 23.  their  gods  are  the  gods  of  the  A.  28. 
22  17.  I  saw  all  Israel  scattered  on  the  A. 

S  R-  airs  IG.  4.  burnt  incense  on  the  A.  2  Chr. 28.  4. 

Joti  15.  7.  or  wast  thr)U  made  before  the  A.? 

Psal.  18.  7.  the  foundations  also  of  the  A.  moved 
50.  10.  the  cattle  on  a  thousand  A.  are  mine 
65.  12.  the  little  A.  rejoice  on  every  si<lo 
72.  3.  an<l  the  little  A.  by  riebteousness 
SO.  10.  the  A.  v/i'u:  covered  by  the  shadow  of  it 
95.  4.  the  strength  of  the  A.  is  his  also 
97.  5  the  A.  melti-il  like  wax  at  the  presence  of  Ld. 
68.  8.  let  the  A.  bcjovful  together 
104  IO.ho«rn(lelh»(irinirs,  which  run  among  the  A. 
13    he  watcreth  the  A.  from  bis  chnmhors 
32  he  louchith  the  A.  and  they  smoke 
114.  4.  and  the  little  A  skipped  like  lambs,  fi. 
121.  1.  I  will  lift  up  mine  eyi's  to  the  A.  whence 
148.  9.  moimtains  and  all  A.  praise  the  Lord 

Prov.  8.  25.  before  the  A.  was  I  broucht  forth 

CatU  3.  8.  he  coineth  skipping  upon  tho  A. 

ha.  2.  2.  and  thall  be  exulted  above  the  k. 
382 


HIM 

fsa.  3.  14.  the  day  of  the  Lord  ihall  be  on  all  A. 

5.  25.  the  A.  dU  tremble,  their  carcases  were  torn 
7.  25.  on  all  A.  shall  not  come  the  fear  of  briers 

40.  12.  who  hath  weighed  the  A.  in  a  balance  1 

41.  15.  and  thou  shalt  make  the  A.  as  chaff 

42.  15.  I  will  make  waste  mountains  and  A. 

.'54. 10.  mountains  shall  depart,  the  A.  be  removed 
55.  12.  the  A.  shall  break  forth  into  singing 
65.  7.  which  have  blaspheraed  me  ujion  the  A. 

Jer.  3. 23.  in  vain  is  salvation  hoped  for  from  the  A. 
4.  24.  I  beheld,  and  lo,  the  A.  moved  lightly 
13.  27.  I  have  seen  thy  abominations  on  the  A. 

Ezek.  6.  3.  thus  saith  the  Lord  to  the  A.  30.  4. 

35.  8.  with  his  slain  men  in  thy  k.  and  valleys 

36.  6.  and  say  to  the  A.  to  the  rivers,  and  valleys 
Hos.  4.  Xi.  they  burn  incense  on  the  A.  under  oaks 

10.  8.  and  they  shall  say  to  the  A.  fall  on  us 
Joel  3.  18.  and  the  A.  shall  flow  with  milk 
jiinos  9.  13.  drop  wine,  and  all  the  A.  shall  melt 
Mic.  4.  1.  and  it  shall  be  exalted  above  the  A. 

6.  1.  arise,  and  let  the  A.  hear  thy  voice 
J\fah.  1.  5.  the  A.  melt,  and  the  earth  is  burnt 
Hal/.  3.  6.  the  perpetual  A.  did  bow,  his  ways 
Zeph.  I.  10.  and  a  great  crashing  from  the  A. 
Luke  23.30.  they  shall  begin  to  say  to  the  A. cover  us 

Hl.M. 
Oen.  41.  13.  me  he  restored,  and  A.  he  hanged 
Kzod.  32.  33.  whoso,  hath  sinned,  A.  I  will  blot  out 
JVum.  14.  24.  Caleb,  A.  will  I  bring  into  the  land 

10.  5.  to  come  near,  even  A.  whom  he  hath  chosen 
Deut.  10. 20.  A.  shall  thou  serve,  and  to  A.  cleave 

18. 5.  the  Lord  bath  chosen  A.  and  his  sons  for  ever 
1  Sam.  10. 24.  see  ye  A.  whom  the  Lord  hath  chosen 

1  Kings  14.  11.  A.  that  riieih  in  city,  16.  4.  |  21.24. 
21.21.  A.that  pisseth  against  the  wall,  2  A'in^s9.8. 

2  Kings  11.2.  and  they  hid  A.  even  A.  and  his  nurse 

15.  and  A.  that  followed  her,  kill  with  the  sword 

17.  30.  A.  shall  ye  fear,  A.  shall  ye  worship 
JVVA.  13.20.  A.  did  outlandish  women  cause  to  sin 
Ksth.  8.  7.  A.  they  have  hanged  on  tho  gallows 
.Tnh  15.  31.  let  not  A.  that  is  deceived  trust  in  vanity 

29.  12.  I  delivered  A.  that  had  none  to  help  A. 

31).  22.  behold,  who  teacheth  like  A.? 

40.  9.  or  canst  thou  thunder  with  a  voice  like  A.? 

42.  8.  Job  shall  pray  for  you,  for  A.  will  I  accept 
Psal.  4.  3.  the  Lord  hath  set  apart  A.  that  is  godly 

25.  12.  A.  shall  he  teach  in  the  way  he  shall  choose 

45.  II.  worship  A.  ||  72.  12.  A.  who  hath  no  helper 

101.  5.  A.  will  I  cut  off,  A.  that  hath  a  high  look 
Prov.  6. 19.  A.  that  sowetb  discord  among  brethren 

24.24.  A.  shall  the  people  curse,  nations  shall  abhor 
F.ccl.  10.  1.  a  little  folly  A.  that  is  in  reputation 
.Tcr.  4fi.  .35.  A.  that  offereth  in  the  high-places 
F.zek.^5.7.  and  cut  off  from  it  A.  that  passeth  out 
Jlmos  1.  5.  and  A.  that  holdelh  the  sreptre 
Mai. -2.  12.  will  cut  off  A.  that  ofTerelh  an  ofTering 
Mat.  4.  10.  A.  only  shalt  thou  serve,  I^uke  4.  8. 

10. 32.  whosoever  shall  confess  ine  before  men,  A. 
will  I  confess  also  bef.  my  Father,  A«Ae  12.8. 
33.  A.  will  I  deny  before  my  Father  in  heaven 
40.  receiveth  A.  that  sent  me,  Mark  9.  37. 

17.  5.  this  is  my  Son,  bear  ye  A.  .^cts  3. 22.  |  7. 37. 

18.  15.  go  tell  A.  between  A.  and  thee  alone 

21.  18  nor  let  A.  in  the  field  return,  Mark  13. 16. 
27.  32.  A.  they  compelled  lo  bear  his  cross 
Mark  1.3.  14.  let  A.  that  readeth  understand 

15.  let  A.  that  is  on  the  house-top  not  go  down 
Luke  23.  25.  A.  that  for  sedilion  and  murder  was 
24.  24.  as  the  women  had  said,  hut  A.  they  saw  not 
./ahn  5.  38.  whom  he  hath  sent,  A.  ye  believe  not 
43.  come  in  his  own  name,  A.  yo  will  receive 
6.  27.  for  A.  hath  God  the  Father  sealed 
37.  A. that  Cometh  to  me,  I  will  in  nowise  east  out 

9.  31.  A.  he  heareth  ||  12.  26.  A.  will  my  Father  hon. 
13.  32.  God  shall  also  glorify  A.  in  himself 

.1rl.i  2. 23.  A.  being  delivered  ||  5.  31.  A.  God  exalted 

10.  40.  A.  God  raised  up  the  third  day,  and  shewed 
10.  3.  A.  wouM  Paul  have  to  go  forth  with  A. 

17.  23.  whom  vc  worship,  A.  di'clare  I  unto  you 
Rom.  14.  1.  A.  that  is  weak  in  the  faith  receive 
3.  let  not  A.that  eatotb,  despise  A.  that  eateth  not 

1  Cor.S.n.ifany  defilelcmple,  A.  sliallGod  destroy 

10.  12.  let  A.  that  thinketh  he  s'andetli  take  hei-d 

2  Cor.  5.  21.  for  he  hath  made  A.  to  be  sin  for  us 
fiat.  6.  6.  let  A.  that  is  taught  in  the  word 
KpA.  4.  23.  let  A.  that  stole  steal  no  more 
Phil.  2.  23.  A.  lherefi)ro  I  hope  lo  send  picscntly 

29.  receive  A.  th'-.-cfore  in  the  Lord  with  gladness 
2  T*r#«.  2. 9.  A.  whose  coming  is  after  the  working 
//rA.2.14  miglitdcBlroy  A.  that  hath  power  of  death 

11.  12.  sprang  there  of  (me,  and  A.  Osgood  as  dead 

.//Aoi>(!  HIM. 
Dan.1 1. 5.  shall  be  dlrong  nhnrc  A.  and  have  domin. 

^hnut  HIM. 
1  Sam.  22. 6.  his  servants  wen^  standing  about  A.  7. 
17.  king  said  to  the  footmen  that  stood  ahout  A. 

1  Pin  "•.1 5. 3.  not  build  for  wars  which  woib  about  A. 

2  fAron.  18.  31.  they  com|>a"«ed  about  A.  to  fichl 
Job  1.  10.  hast  not  thtiu  made  a  hedge  about  A. 7 
r*oi.76.  11.  let  all  round  about  k.  bring  presents 


HIM 

Psal.  89. 7.  and  be  had  in  reverence  of  all  about  k 

Jer.  48.  17.  all  ye  that  are  about  A.  bemoan  him 

39.  Muab  shall  be  a  dismaying  to  all  about  k. 

50.  32.  and  it  shall  devour  all  round  ahout  k. 
Lam.  1. 17.  his  adversaries  shall  be  round  about  h. 
Ezek.\2. 14. scatter  all  that  areaioufA.lo  help  him 

32.  22.  his  graves  are  round  ahout  A.  25,  26. 
.4/at.8. 18. when  Jesus  saw  great  multitudes  aAoK<  A. 
Mark  3.  32.  the  multitude  sat  about  A.  and  said 
John  10.  24.  then  came  the  Jews  round  about  A. 
Hcv.  4.8.  four  beasts  had  each  six  wmgs  about  Ik 

Jifter  HIM. 
Oen.  17.  19.  with  him  and  with  his  seed  after  k. 

18.  19.  he  will  command  his  household  after  h, 
Ei:oil.^28.43.  itshall  be  a  statute  for  his  seed  after  k. 

29.29.  the  holy  garments  shall  be  his  son's  after  h- 
Lev. '20.  5.  will  cut  off  all  thatgo  a  whormg  a/t/»  C 
JVum.  32.  15.  for  if  ye  turn  away  from  after  A. 
./os/i.  20.  5.  if  the  avenger  of  blood  pursue  after  h. 
Judg.  1.6.  Adoni-bezek  fled,  they  pursued  after  k. 

3.  28.  they  went  after  A.  and  look  the  fords 

6.  34.  and  Abiezer  was  gathered  after  A.  35. 

1  Sam.  14.  13.  and  his  armour-bearer  after  h. 

17.  35.  I  went  out  after  A.  and  emote  him 
26.  3.  and  David  saw  that  Saul  came  after  A. 

2  Sam.  1.  6.  the  horsemen  followed  hard  after  A. 

15. 17.  king  went  forth  and  all  the  people  afterh. 

23.  10.  the  people  returned  after  A.  only  to  spoil 

1  Kings  1.20.  on  the  throne  of  luylord  after  A.  27. 
15.  4.  to  set  up  his  son  afterh.  and  establish  Jerus. 

2  Kings  5.20.  I  m  ill  run  after h.and  take  somewhat 

9.  27.  Jehu  followed  after  A.  and  said,  smite 

14.  19.  sent  after  A.  lo  Lachish,  2  Chron.  25.  27. 

18.  5.  so  that  after  h.  was  none  like  him,  23.  25. 

1  CAron.  27.  7.  Joab,  and  Zebiidiah  hisson  afterh. 

2  Chron.  26.  17.  Azariah  the  priest  went  in  afterh. 
JVeh.  3.  16.  after  A.  repaired.  So  totheSlst  verse, 
.fob  18.  20.  they  that  come  after  A.  shall  be  astonied 

21.  21.  what  pleasure  hath  he  in  his  house  after  k. 
33.  and  every  man  shall  draw  after  A. 

41.  ?P,.  he  maketh  a  path  to  shine  after  A. 
Psal.  49.  17.  his  glory  shall  not  descend  after  h. 
Pron.  20.  7.  his  children  are  blessed  after  b. 
Keel.  3.22.  bring  to  see  whatshall  be  after  h.  6.13. 

7.  14.  that  man  should  find  nothing  after  A. 

10.  14.  what  shall  be  after  A.  who  can  tell  himT 
F.iek.O.  5.  go  ye  after  h.  thro'  the  city,  and  smite 
Luke  19.  14.  and  sent  a  messenger  after  A.  saying 
John  12.  19.  behold,  the  world  is  gone  after  k. 
Jlcts  5.  37.  and  drew  away  much  people  after  k. 

7.5.lie  would  give  it  to  him,  and  to  hisseed  after  k. 
17. 27.  seek  Lord,  if  haply  they  might  feel  after  A. 

19.  4.  believe  on  liim  which  should  come  after  k. 

.Against  HIM. 
Oen.  16.  12.  and  every  man's  hand  against  h. 

32.  2.^.  he  saw  that  he  prevailed  not  again  <t  k. 

37. 18.  Ihey  conspired  against  h.  1  Kings  15  27. 
I  16.  9.  '2  Kings  14.  19.  |  15.  10,  25.  [  21  23. 

Exod.  16.  8.  Lord  heareth  your  murmnrings  which 
ye  murmur  against  A.  JVum.  14. 36.  |  16.  1 L 
JVum.  22.  22.  stood  for  an  adversary  against  k. 
Deut.  19.  11.  but  if  any  man  rise  up  against  A. 
16.  if  a  false  witness  rise  lo  teslil)'  against  h. 
33. 11.  smite  through  the  loins  that  rise  against  h. 
.Josh.  5.  13.  there  stood  a  man  o\rtj-against  k. 
Judg.  14.  5.  behold  a  young  lion  roared  against  h 

15.  14.  the  Phi'istines  shouted  against  A. 

20.  2.3.  and  the  Lord  said,  go  up  against  k. 

2  Sam.  10. 9.  the  front  of  the  battle  was  against  h. 

1  Kings  V.\.  4.  hand  he  put  forth  against  A.  dried  up 

21.  10  sons  of  Belial  to  bear  witness  against  A. 

2  Kings  23.  29.  and  king  Josiah  went  up  against  k. 

24.  2.  Lord  sent  against  A.  bands  of  Cbaldees 
2  Chron.  32.  17.  to  rail  and  to  speak  against  A. 
F.sth.  6.  13.  thou  shall  not  prevail  against  A. 
.fob  2.  3.  although  thou  movedst  me  against  k. 

8.  4.  if  thy  children  have  sinned  against  A. 

9.  4.  who  hardened  himself  a^.  A.  and  prospered  1 
14.  20.  thou  pri'vailest  for  ever  against  h. 

33.  13.  why  dost  thou  strive  against  A.? 

35.  6.  if  Ihou  sinnest,  what  doest  thou  against  A.7 
Psal.  78.  17.  and  Ihey  sinned  vol  more  against  A. 
I'roiK  17.  11.  a  cruel  messenger  shall  be  sent  a^.  A. 
F.rcl.  4.  12.  and  if  one  prevail  ag.  k.  two  withstand 
fsa.  10.  15.  shall  tho  axo  boast  ag.  h.  that  hcwcth? 
or  the  saw  magnify  itself  iiir.  A.  that  sbakelh  it? 

31.  4.  when  shepherd's  are  called. forth  against  k. 

■15  21.  all  that  are  ince^.^ed  ng.iinst  A.  i>e  ashamed 

59.  19.  Spirit  of  Lord  shall  lift  up  a  «tan<Iard  d^.  A. 
.Irr.  20.  10.  bo  enticed  and  wo  shall  prevail  ag.  k. 

31.20.  for  since  Isftakc  against  h.  I  remember  him 

51 .  3  against  A.  that  bendolh,  let  the  archer  bond 
F.irk.  29.  2.  and  prophesy  ag.h.  and  Egypt,  38. 2. 

38.  21.  and  I  will  call  for  a  sword  against  k. 

22.  I  will  plead  ag.  A.  with  peslilenro  and  blood 
Dan.  9.  11.  boiause  we  have  sinn<'d  against  k. 

11.16.  but  he  that  Cometh  ag.h.  shall  dosccording 
.1fi>.  3.  5.  they  even  prepare  war  against  A. 

7.9. 1  will  bear,  bccausci  havosinned  agaittst  k 
Hub.  2. 6.  shall  not  those  take  up  a  parable  ag  k.l 


HIM 

JlfaM2.14.and  held  a  counsel  against  h.  Mark  3.6. 
JLuke  14.  31.  to  meet  him  that  cometh  against  h. 
^cts  22.  24.  wherefore  they  cried  so  against  h. 

23. 30.  to  say  before  thee  what  they  had  against  h. 

25.  3.  the  high-priesl  desired  favour  against  h. 

15.  Jews,  desiring  to  have  judgment  against  A. 
Jude9.  durst  not  bring  against  A.  aruihng  accusal. 

IS.whichungodly  sinners  have  spoken  againsth. 
Rev.  19. 19.  make  war  ag.  h.  that  sat  on  the  horse 

M  HIM. 
Oen.  49.  23.  the  archers  shot  at  A.  and  hated  liim 
1  Sum.  20.  33.  Saul  cast  a  javelin  at  h.  to  smite  him 
S'Sa/n. 16.13. Shimei  threw  stones  at  A.  and  cast  dust 
Job  27.  23.  rnen  shall  clap  their  hands  at  A. 
Paal.  12.  5.  in  safely  from  him  that  [mtfeth  at  h. 

31  13.  the  Lord  shall  laugh  at  A.  for  he  seelh 

S'2.  6.  the  righteous  also  shall  see  and  laugh  at  A. 

64.  4.  suddenly  do  they  shoot  at  A.  and  fear  not 
Isa.  52.  15.  the  kings  shall  shut  their  mouths  at  A. 
Dan.  11.  40.  the  king  of  the  south  shall  push  ath. 
Jfah.  1.  5.  the  mountains  quake  at  A.  and  hills  melt 
Mark  G.  3.  and  they  were  olVended  at  A. 

12.4.at  A.tlicy  cast  stones,  and  wound.himin  head 
17.  and  they  marvelled  at  h.  • 

Ltike  7.  9.  he  marvelled  at  h.  and  turned  about 

8.  19.  they  could  not  come  at  A-  for  the  press 
John  6.  41.  the  Jews  then  murmured  at  A. 

8.  59.  then  took  they  up  stones  to  cast  at  h. 

Before  HIM. 
Oen.  24.  33.  there  was  set  meat  before  h  to  eat 

32.  3.  Jacob  sent  messengers  before  h.  to  Esau 
21!  so  went  the  present  over  before  h. 

41.  43.  and  they  cried  before  A.  bow  the  knee 

43.  33.  they  sat  before  h.  \\  44.  14.  fell  before  k. 
Eiod.  34.  6.  and  the  Lord  passed  by  before  A. 
JVum.  11.  20.  and  have  wept  before  A.  saying 
JosK.  6.5.  ascend  up  every  man  straight  before  A. 

22.  27.  might  do  the  service  of  the  Lord  before  A. 
Judg.  9.  40.  Abimelech  chased,  he  fled  before  A. 

14.  16.  Samson's  wife  wept  before  A.  and  said,  17. 

1  Sam.  IG.  6.  surely  the  Lord's  anointed  is  before  A. 
21.  and  David  came  to  Saul  and  stood  before  h. 

17.  7.  and  one  bearing  a  shield  went  before  h. 

2  Sam.  10.  13.  they  fled  before  A.  1  Chron.  19.  14. 

11.  13.  Uriah  did  eat  and  drink  before  h. 

12.  20.  when  he  required,  they  set  bread  before  A. 

15.  1.  and  fifty  men  to  run  before  h.  1  Kings  1.  5. 

22.  24. 1  was  also  upright  before  A.  Psal.  18.  23. 
\Kings  3. 16. then  came  two  harlots,  stood  beforeh. 

16.25.  Omri  did  worse  than  all  before  A.  30.  33. 
21.  10.  and  set  two  men,  sons  of  Belial,  before  A. 
S  Kings  2.  15.  they  bowed  to  the  ground  before  A. 
4.  12.  the  Shuiiamite  when  called,  stood  before  A. 
38.  the  sons  of  the  prophets  were  silting  beforeh. 
6.  32.  and  the  king  sent  a  man  from  before  A. 
10.4.  kings  stood  not  before  h.  how  shall  we  stand? 

17.  2.  not  as  kings  of  Israel  that  were  before  A. 

18.  5.  nor  any  that  were  before  A.  were  like  him 
21.  11.  as  the  Ainorites  did,  which  were  before  A. 
23. 25.  like  to  Josiali  there  was  no  king  before  A. 

25.  29.  did  eat  bread  continually  bef.  A.  ./er.  52.  33. 
ICAron. 16.29.  bring  an  ofl"ering,  and  come  beforeh. 

30.  fear  before  A.  Psal.  96.  9.  Eccl.  3.  14.  |  8.  12. 

29. 25.  not  any  6e/ore  A.  like  Solomon  for  majesty 
2  Chron.  2.  4.  to  burn  before  A.  sweet  incense,  6. 

14.  5.  and  the  kingdom  was  quiet  before  h. 

29.11.  the  Lord  hath  chosen  you  lostand  Ac/ore  A. 
JVeA.  2.  1.  it  came  to  pass  that  wine  was  before  h. 
Dsth.  4.8.  to  make  request  6c/or«  A.  for  her  people 

6.  9.  proclaim  before  A.  11.  ||  13.  fall  before  A. 
Job  13.  15.  but  I  will  maintain  my  ways  before  A. 

16.  a  hypocrite  shall  not  come  before  A. 
21.  33.  as  there  are  innumerable  before  h. 

23.  4.  I  would  order  my  cause  Ac/ore  A.  and  fill 

26.  6.  hell  is  naked  before  h.  and  destruclion 
35.  14.  judgment  is  Ac/ore  A.  therefore  truslin  him 
41.  22.  and  sorrow  is  turned  into  joy  before  A. 

Psal.  18.  6.  my  cry  came  before  A.  even  to  his  ears 
12.  at  the  brighlness  that  was  Ac/ore  A. 

22. 29.  all  that  g..  to  the  dust  shall  bow  before  A. 

50.  3.  God  shall  come,  a  fire  shall  devour  Af/ore  A. 

62.8.  ye  people,  pour  out  your  heart  before  A. 

68.  l.let  them  that  hate  him  flee  before  A. 
4. sing  unto  God,  sing  and  rejoice  before  A. 

72.9.they  that  dwell  in  wildern.shall  bow  before  A. 
11.  kings  shall  fall  A*;/.  A.  nations  shall  serve  him 

85.  13.  righteousness  shall  go  beforeh.  and  set  us 

96.  6.  honour  and  majesty  ari;  before  A.  strength 
9  worship  the  Lord,  fear  Af/ore  A.  all  the  earth' 

97.  3.  a  fire  goeth  before  A.  and  burneth  enemies 
106.23.  had  not  Moses  his  chosen  stood  before  A. 
142.  2.  I  shewed  before  A.  my  trouble 

Prov.  8. 30.  hisddight,  rejoicing  always  before  h. 

17.  24. wisdom  is  before  h.  that  hath  understanding 
ha.H).  10.  reward  with  him,  work  beforeh.  Gi.  11. 

17.  all  nations  beforeh.  are  as  nothing 

41.  2.  gave  nations  before  A.  and  made  him  rule 
45.  1.  I  have  holden  to  subdue  nations  before  A. 

J(?r.42.9.  topre..ent  your  supplications  before  A. 

Eitk. 28.  U.  wilt  thouBayA«/orc A. that slayeth  thee 


HIM      • 

Ezek.  30. 24.  shall  groan  beforeh.  with  grosnings 
Dan.l.lO  ten  thousand  times  lO.OOOstood  beforeh. 

8.  4.  so  that  no  beasts  might  stand  beforeh. 
7.lhete  was  no  power  in  the  ram  to  standA^ore  A. 

II.  16.  to  his  own  will,  none  shall  stand  beforeh. 
22.  they  shall  be  overflown  from  before  A. 
Mic.6.6.  shall  I  come  Ac/ore  A.  with  burnt-otrerings? 
Hab.  2.  20.  let  all  the  earth  keep  silence  beforeh. 

3.5.  before  A. went  the  pestilence  and  burning  coals 
Mai.  3.16.  a  book  of  remembrance  written  beforeh. 
Mat.  25.  32.  before  h.  be  gathered  all  nations 

27.  29.  they  bowed  the  knceAe/oreA.  and  mocked 
Mark  3. 11.  fell  down  before  A.  and  cried,  5.  33. 
Luke  1.17.  he  shall  go  before  A.  in  the  spirit  of  Elias 
75.  in  holiness  and  righteousness  beforeh. 

5.  18.  they  sought  means  to  lay  him  before  A. 

11.  6.  a  friend  is  come,  I  have  nothing  to  set  Ae/.  A. 
.John  3.  28.  I  said,  that  I  am  sent  before  A. 

Acts  23.  33.  they  presented  Paul  also  before  A. 
Rom.  4. 17.  before  h.  whom  he  believed,  even  God 
F.ph.  1.  4.  holy  and  without  blame  before  A.  in  love 
Heb.  12.  2.  who  foj:  the  joy  that  was  set  before  A. 

1  John  2.28.  not  be  ashamed  Ae/ure  A.  at  hiacoming 
3.  19.  and  shall  assure  our  hearts  before  A. 

Rev.  13. 12.  all  the  power  of  the  first  beast  before  h. 
19.20.false  prophet  that  wroughtmiracles  before  A. 

Behind  HIM. 
Oen.  IS.  10.  Sarah  heard  in  the  tent-door  behind  A. 

2  Sam.  2.  23.  that  the  spear  came  out  behind  A. 
^Kings  6.32.is  notsound  of  his  master's  feetAeA.A.? 
JoeZ2.14.and  repent,  and  leave  a  blessing  AcAnid  A. 
Zech.  l.S.AeA.A.were  red  horses  speckled  and  white 
Mat.Q.aO.  a  woman  diseased  with  an  issue  of  blood 

came  AeA.  A.  and  touched  the  hem,  Luke  8.  44. 
Mark  12.  19.  brother  die,  and  leave  his  wife  AeA.  A. 
Luke  7.  38.  stood  at  bis  feet  behind  h.  weeping 

Beside  HIM. 
Deut.  4.35.  the  Lord  is  God,  there  isnoneicside  A. 
2  Sam.  15.  18.  his  servants  passed  on  beside  A. 
^eA.  8.  4.  beside  A.  stood  Maltithiah  and  Siiema 

Between  HIM. 
/>et).  26.46.  laws  the  L.  made  between  h.  and  Israel 
Mal.3.  18. shall  discern  beliceen  A-  thatserveth  God 

Beyondnm. 
1  Sam.  20.  36.  Jonathan  shot  an  arrow  beyond  h. 

By  HIM. 
Deut.  2.  30.  but  Sihon  would  not  let  us  pass  by  A. 
33.  12.  the  buioved  of  L.  shall  dwell  in  safety  by  h. 
Jtidg.  3.  15.  by  A.  children  of  Israel  sent  a  present 

19.  all  that  stood  by  A.  went  oht  from  him 
I  Sam.  2.  3.  and  by  A.  actions  are  weighed 

20.  7.  then  be  sure  that  evil  is  determined  by  A. 
1  Kings^a.  19.  the  host  of  heaven  sfnnding  by  A. 
2A'mu-s3.  II.  we  may  inquire  oftheL.A^A.  8.  8. 

5.  1.  Ay  A.  the  Lord  hud  given  deliverance  to  Syria 
I  Chr.  11.11.  three  hundred  slain  by  A.  at  one  time 
JWA.2.6.king  said  to  me,  the  queen  also  sitting  Ay  h 

4. 3.  now  Tobiah  the  Ammonite  was  by  A. 
Psal.  63. 11.  every  one  that  sweareth  by  A.  glory 
Isa.  27.  7.  the  slaughter  of  them  that  are  slum  by  A. 
Dan.8.  11.  by  A.  daily  sacrifice  was  taken  away 

12.  7.  swear  by  A.  that  livetli  for  ever.  Rev.  10.  6. 
.^oA.  1.  6.  and  the  rocks  are  thrown  down  by  h. 
Mat.  23.  21.  sweareth  by  A.  who  dwelleth  therein 

22.  sweareth  by  A.  that  sitteth  thereon 
/,uAe3.19.  Herod  being  reproved  byh.  shut  up  John 
9.  7.  Herod  heard  all  that  was  done  by  A. 

13.  17.  the  glorious  things  that  were  done  by  A. 
John  1.  3.  all  things  were  made  by  A.  without  him 

10.  the  world  was  made  Ay  A.  and  knew  him  not 

Mcts  'Xa.  by  miracles  and  wonders  God  did  by  him 

3.  16.  the  faith  ivhich  is  Ay  A.  hath  given,  4.  10. 

13.  39.  Ay  A.  all  that  believe  justif.  from  all  things 

23.  11.  the  night  following  the  Lord  stood  by  A. 

1  Cor.  1.  5.  in  every  thing  ye  are  enriched  Ay  A. 

8.  6.  by  whom  are  all  things,  and  we  Ay  A. 
F.ph.  4.  21.  heard  him,  and  have  been  taught  Ay  A. 
Col.  1.16.  tor  byh.  were  all  things  created  in  heaven 

17.  he  is  before  all  things,  Ay  A.  all  things  consist 

20.  Ay  A.  to  reconcile  all  things  to  himself  Ay  A. 
3.  17.  giving  thanks  to  God  the  Father  Ay  A. 

2  Tim.  2.  26.  who  are  taken  captive  Ay  A.  at  his  will 
Heb.  7.  25.  to  save  them  that  come  to  God  Ay  A. 

13.  15.  Ay  A.  let  us  offer  the  sacrifice  of  praise 
1  Pet.  1.  21.  who  Ay  A.  do  believe  in  G.  that  raised 

2.  14.  are  sentAyA.for  punishment  of  evil-doers 
Concerning  HIM. 
.Judg.  21.  5.  made  an  oath  eon.  A.  that  came  not  up 
2«-in^s-19.21.  word  L.  hath  spoken  con.A./sa.37.22. 
K«tA.3.2.thekinghad  so  commandedconccrni'n^  A. 
/>an.5.29.  and  made  a  proclamation  concerning  h. 
.John  7.12.  murmuring  among  people  concern.  A. 32. 

9.  18.  the  Jews  did  not  believe  concerning  h. 
Jicts  2.  25.  for  David  speakelh  concerning  A. 

23. 15.  yo  would  inquire  something  concerning  h. 
1  Cor.  5.  3.  concerning  A.  that  hath  so  done  this 
See  Fear. 
For  HIM. 
Oen.  2. 18. 1  will  make  him  a  help  meet /or  A.  20. 
37.  35.  thus  Joseph's  father  wept /or  h. 


HIM 

Oen.  43. 9. 1  will  be  surety /or  A. of  my  hand  reqnir« 

Exod.  22. 2.  no  blood  shed/.  A.||3.  blood  shcd/er  ;t 

Lev.  1.  4.  and  it  shall  be  accepted /or  A.  to  muka 

atonement  for  A.  4.  26,  31.  [5.  13.  I  14.  18, 

19,  20,  31.  I  15.  15.  I  19.  22.  Jfum.  5.  8.  I  6. 

11.  I  15.  28. 

JVujn.27.21.  the  priest,  who  shall  ask  counsel /or  A. 

35.  32.ye  shall  take  no  satisfaction  for  A. that  is  fied 

7Je«M9.11.liein  wail/or  A.and  rise  up  againsthim 

33.7.let  his  hands  hesufficient/wr  A.  be  help  to  him 

.Judg.  6.  31.  ho  that  will  plead/or  A.  let  him  die 

1  Sam.  2.  25.  if  a  man  sin,  who  shall  entreul/ur  A.? 

15.  2.  how  he  laid  wait /or  A.  in  the  way,  when 

17.  31.  they  rehearsed  them,  and  Suul  sent/or  h. 
22.  10.  and  he  inquired  of  the  Lord /or  A.  15. 

27.  4.  and  he  sought  no  more  again  for  A. 

2  Sam.  9. 10.  thy  servants  shall  till  the  land  for  h. 

1  Kings  2.  22.  ask /or  A.  the  kingdom,  even /or  A. 
13.23.  saddled/or  A.  the  aes,  to  wit,  for  the  proph. 
14. 13.  all  Israel  shall  mourn /or  A.  and  bury  him 

2  CAr.  IG.  14.  they  made  very  great  burning /or  A- 
21.  19.  and  his  people  made  no  burning/or  A. 

Esth.  5.4.to  the  banquet  thati  have  prepared /or  A. 
9.  when  Haman  saw  that  he  moved  not.  for  h. 

6.  3.  the  servantssaid,  there  is  nothing  done /or  A. 
4.  to  hang  on  the  gallows  he  had  prepared /or  A. 
Job  13.  7.  and  will  you  talk  deceitfully /or  h.? 

30.25.  did  not  I  weep /or  A.  that  was  in  trouble'? 
Psal.  3. 2.  who  say,  there  is  no  help/or  A.  in  God 

37.  7.  rest  in  the  Lord,  and  wait  patiently /or  A. 

49.  7.  nor  give  to  God  a  ransom  for  A. 

72. 15.  prayer  also  shall  be  made/or  A.  continually 
Prov.  9.4.  as  fork,  that  wanteth  understanding,  16. 

28.  8.he  shall  gather  it/oM. that  will  piiy  the  poor 
Cant.  5.  4.  and  my  bowewwere  moved /or  A. 
Isa.S.  17.1  will  wait  upon  the  Lord  and  look /or  A. 

25.  9.  we  have  wailed /or  A.  he  will  save  us,  9. 
29.21.  that  lay  a  snare/or  A.  that  reprbvcth  in  gate 

30.  18.  blessed  are  all  they  that  wait /or  A. 

40.  10.  Lord  will  come,  his  arm  shall  rule  for  h. 
64.4.  what  he  hath  prepared /or  A. thatwaiteth/.A- 
Jer.  22.  18.  they  shall  not  lament /or  A.  18. 

31.  20.  therefore  my  bowels  are  troubled /or  A. 
Lam.  3.25.  Lord  is  good  to  them  that  wait /or  A. 
£26*.  17.  17.  nor  shall  Pharaoh  make /or  A.  in  war 

31. 15. 1  covered  thedeep/or  A.  I  caused  Lebanoa 
tomourn /or  A.  treesof  the  field  fainted /o»-  A. 

45.  20.  so  shalt  thou  do/or  A.  that  is  simple 
Dan.  II.  17.  not  on  his  side,  nor  shall  she  be /or  A, 
./imos  3.  5.  fall  in  a  snare  where  no  gin  is /or  A. 
Zeph.  1.6.  have  not  sought  Ld.  nor  inquired/or  A. 
ZecA.12.10.shall  mourn/or  A. be  in  bitterness /or  A. 
Mat.  12.  4.  which  was  not  lawful /or  A.  to  eat 

18.  6.  it  were  better  for  A.  that  a  millstone  were 
hanged  about  his  neck,  Mark9.i2.  Lukel'.iL 

24.  50.  when  he  looketh  not  fork.  Z.uAel2.46. 
Mark  5.  20.  how  great  things  Jesus  had  done/or  A. 
Luke  2.  27.  brought  in  the  child  Jesus,  todo/or  A. 
after  the  custom  of  the  law 

8.  40.  for  they  were  all  waiting /or  A. 

9.  52.  and  they  went  to  make  ready /or  A. 
yJcts  12.  5.  but  prayer  was  made  unto  God /or  A. 
I  Cor.  16.  11.  for  1  look /or  A.  with  the  brethren 
Col.  1. 16.  all  things  were  created  by  him  and /or  A. 
Heb.  9. 2d.  to  them  that  look  for  A.  shall  he  appear 

From  HIM.  a 

Oen.  35. 13.  and  God  went  up/row  A.  iffthe  place 
Lev.  5.  3.  it  behid/rom  A.  when  he  knoweth  of  it 
Judg.  3. 19.  all  that  stood  by  him,  went  oul/romA. 

16.  19.  to  shave  locks,  his  strength  went /rom  A. 

1  Sam.  3.  18.  and  Samuel  hid  nothing /rom  A. 

2  .Sam.  11.15.  retire/romA.  I!  13.9.  wentout/r.A. 
^Ki^^gs^0.33.  whether  any  thing  would  come/r.A. 
2  Kings  25. 5.  all  his  army  were  scattered /rom  A. 
2  Chron.  12.  12.  the  wrath  of  the  L.  turned /rom  A. 
Job  14.  6.  turn/romA.  that  he  may  rest,  till  he  shall 
Psal.  22.  24.  nor  hath  he  hid  his  face /rom  A. 

.35.  10.  the  poor  from  A.  that  spoileth  him 

55.  12.  then  I  would  have  hid  myself/rom  A. 

G2. 1,  waiteth  on  God,  /r.  A.  comelh  my  salvation 
Jsa.  5.  23.  the  righteousness  of  the  righteous /r.  A. 

53.  3.  and  we  hid  as  it  were  our  faces  from  A. 
Jer. 2. 1.  she  go  from  A.  and  become  another  man's 
/>an.5.  24.  ihen  was  part  of  the  hand  sent /rom  A. 
JImos  5.  II.  ye  take /rom  A.  burdens  of  wheat 
.hnah  3.  6.  he  arose,  and  laid  his  robe /rom  A. 
Mat.  5.  41.  from  A.  that  would  borrow  of  thee 

1.3.l2./r.A.shall  be  taken,  Mark  4.  25.  /,«Ae8.18. 

25.  29. /r.  A.  hath  not  shall  be  taken,  Luke  19.  26. 
Mark  l4.  35.  prayed,  that  the  hour  might  pass/r.  A. 
I.uke  II.  22.  he  taketh  from  A.  all  his  armour 
./0A71 7. 29. 1  am  from  A.  ||  10. 5.  but  will  Rue  from  A. 
Oal.  1. 6.  are  so  soon  removed/r.  A.  that  culled  you 
Heb.  12.25.  if  we  turn  away  from  A.  that  .apeaketh 
iyoA>>3.17.  shutteth  up  bowels  ofcompassion/r.  A. 

4.21.  and  this  commandment  have  we:  from  h. 

Rev.  1.  4.  and  peace /rom  A.  which  is,  which  wae 

See  Depart,  Dkparted. 

In  HIM. 

0«n.l6.18.  all  nationi  of  earth  ihall  be  blcMod  m  k 


HIM 

Ezod.  23.  21.  beware  of  him,  for  my  name  is  in  h. 
Judg.  9.26.  men  of  Sechem  put  confidence  in  A. 

1  Sam.  28.  20.  and  there  was  no  strength  in  h. 
29.  3.  I  have  found  no  fault  in  h.  John  19.  4,  6. 

2  Sam.  22.  .3.  in  h.  will  I  trust,  Psal.  91.  2. 

31.  he  is  a  buckler  to  all  that  trust !«  A.  Isa.  36.  G. 
1  Kings  1.  52.  if  wickedness  be  j'n  A.  he  shall  die 

3.  il3.  ihey  saw  that  the  wisdom  of  God  was  ink. 

14.13.becausein  A.  there  is  found  some  good  thing 

17. 17.sickncss,  that  there  was  no  breath  leflinA. 
1  Chron.  5.  20.  because  they  put  their  trust  in  A. 
Job  13.  15.  though  he  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust  in  A. 

35.  14.  judgment  is  before  him,  trust  thou  in  h. 
Psal.2.  12.  ble^ssed  are  they  that  put  their  trust  in  A. 

18.  30.  a  buckler  to  all  those  that  trust  in  A. 

28.  7.  my  heart  trusted  in  A.  and  I  am  helped 

33.  21.  our  heart  shall  rejoice  in  A.  66.  6.  |  149.  2. 

34.  8.  blessed  is  the  man  that  trusteth  in  A. 

22.  none  of  them  that  trust  in  A.  shall  be  desolate 
37.  5.  trust  in  A.  ||  40.  because  they  trust  in  A. 
62.  8.  trust  in  A.  at  all  times,  yo  people,  pour  out 
64.  10.  the  righteous  shall  be  glad  and  trust  in  h. 
72.  17.  men  shall  be  blessed  in  A.  all  nations  call 
92.  15.  is  no  unrighteousness  ink.  John  7.  18. 

Prov.  14.  7.  perceivest  not  in  A.  lips  of  knowledge 
30.5.  he  is  a  shield  to  them  that  put  their  trust  in  A. 

Eccl.  4.  16.  that  come  after  shall  not  rejoice  in  A. 

Jer.  4.  2.  the  nations  shall  bless  themselves  in  h. 
46.  2.5.  Pharaoh  and  all  them  that  trust  in  h. 
48.  11.  therefore  his  taste  remained  in  A. 

J^am,  3.  24.  my  portion,  therefore  will  I  hope  in  h. 

Dan.3.  28.  delivered  hisservants  who  trusted  in  A. 
6.  4.  nor  was  any  error  or  fault  found  in  A. 

Ohad.  7.  there  is  none  Aderslanding  in  A. 

J^Tak.  1.  7.  he  knoweth  tnem  that  trust  in  A. 

Ilab.  2.  4.  behold,  his  soul  is  not  upright  in  h. 

Mat.  13.  57.  and  Ihey  were  offended  in  A. 

14.  2.  mi"hty  works  do  shew  themselves  in  h. 
J,uke  2.3.  22.  I  have  found  no  cause  of  death  in  h. 
John  1.  4.  in  A.  was  life,  the  life  was  light  of  men 

3.  15.  whosoever  believeth  in  h.  16.  Jlcts  10.  43. 

4.  14.  shall  be  in  h.  a  well  of  water  springing  up 

6.  56.  dwelleth  in  me,  and  I  in  h.  10.  38.  |  15.  5. 

7.  5.  neither  did  his  brethren  believe  i'n  A. 

8.  44.  because  there  is  no  truth  in  A. 

9.  3.  made  manifest  in  A.  ||  11.  10.  no  light  i'n  A. 
13.31.  God  is  glorified  in  A.  ||  32.  if  glorified  in  A. 

Jlcts  17.28.  in  A.  we  live,  move,  and  have  our  being 
linm.  10.  14.  how  shall  they  believe  in  A.  of  whom 

15.  12.  in  A.  shall  the  Gentiles  trust 

1  Cor.  2.  11.  save  the  spirit  of  man  which  is  in  h. 

8.  6.  of  whom  arc  all  things,  we  in  A.  1  John  5. 20. 

2Cor.  1. 10.  was  not  yea,1iay,  but  i'n  h.  was  yea,  20. 

5.  21.  might  be  made  the  rightenusn.  of  God  in  A. 
13.4.  for  we  are  weak  inh.  but  shall  live  with  him 

Kph.  1.  4.  chosen  us  in  A.  ||  10.  gailier  even  in  A. 
PAii.  3.  9.  that  I  may  win  Christ,  and  be  found  in  A. 
Col.  1.  19.  that  in  A.  should  all  fulness  dwell,  2.  9. 

2.6.  HO  walk  ye  in  A.  ||  7.  rooted  and  built  up  in  A. 

.  9.in  A.  dwelleth  the  fulness  of  IhcGodhead  bodily 
10.  ye  are  complete  in  A.  who  is  the  head  of  ail 
He.b  2.  13.  and  again,  I  will  put  my  yxvtsl  in  A. 

10.  38.  my  soul  shall  have  no  pleasure  in  A. 

1  .lohn'i.  4.  is  a  liar,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  h. 

5.  whoso  keepeth  his  word,  in  A.  verily  is  love  of 
G.  perfected, hereby  know  we  that  we  are  in  h. 

6.  he  that  faitli  he  ahideth  in  A.  ought  to  walk 

8.  which  thing  is  true  in  A.  and  in  you 

10.  and  there  is  none  occasion  of  stumbling  in  h. 
15.  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in  h.  3.  17. 
27.  as  it  hath  taughtyou,  ye  shall  abide  in  A.  28. 
3.  3.  and  every  man  that  hath  this  Impo  in  h. 
5.  in  A.  is  no  sin  ||  6.  who  ahideth  in  h.  sinneth  not 

9.  for  his  seed  remaineth  in  A.  he  cannot  sin 
15.  no  murderer  hath  eternal  life  abiding  in  h. 
64.  dwellflh  in  h.  and  he  in  h.  4.  13,  15,  16. 

5.  14.  this  is  the  confidence  that  we  have  in  A. 

/nfuHlM. 
1  Kin^s  17.  21.  let  this  child's  soul  come  into  h. 

22.  the  soul  of  Ibe  child  came  into  h.  again 
/.u/ifP. 30. because  many  devils  were  entcfd  into  h. 
John  13.  27.  after  the  sop,  Satan  entered  info  A. 
Eph.  4.  15.  may  grow  up  into  A.  in  all  things 

O/HIM. 
Or.n.  25.  21.  and  the  f^ord  was  entreated  ofh. 
/"rnrf.  23.  21.  hewarf  nf  h.  and  obey  his  voice 

32.  1.  wo  wot  not  what  is  become  of  A.  23. 
Am. 15.7. that  toucheth  thsh  of  h.  hath  the  issue,33. 

25.  30.  take  thou  mi  usiirv  "/  h.  or  increase 
JVi/m.  35.  33.  hut  by  the  blnod  ofh.  that  shed  il 
jynit.  18.  in.  not  hcnrkrn,  I  will  requirn  ito/A. 

22.  thou  shnlt  not  he  afraid  ofh.  2  Kings  1.  15. 
1  Sam.  17.  32.  let  no  mnn's heart  fail  because  o/ A. 

1  Kings  5.  20.  I  will  run  and  take  Pomcwliat«/A. 
10.  24.  his  life  shall  he  for  the  lift-  of  h. 

ICfir.  5.  2.  nf'A.cnme  the  chief  ruler,  but  hirlh-right 

2  Chr.  28.  23.  they  were  the  ruin  of  h.  and  Israel 

33.  13.  prayed,  and  ho  was  entreated  of  h.  19. 
F.zra  8.  21.  to  neck  ofh.  a  rig'it  way  for  us 
AJ7.8.  eve  ofh.  hath  leen  me  «hall  see  mo  no  more 

284 


HIM 

,/(iil2.5.dcspiBed  in  the  thoughto/ft.that  Is  at  ease 
18.21.  this  is  the  place  o/ A.  that  knoweth  not  God 
23.  15.  when  I  consider,  I  am  afraid  of  h. 
Ps.37.7.  fret  not  thyself  because  o/ A.  who  prospers 
Prov.  16.  26.  for  his  mouth  craveth  it  of  h. 
23.  24.  begetteth  a  wise  child,  shall  have  joy  ofh. 

26.  12.  is  more  hope  of  a^ool  than  ofh.  29.  20. 

27.  13.  take  a  pledge  of  h.  for  a  strange  woman 
ha.  29.  IC.  shall  the  work  say  ofh.  that  made  it 

52.7.  the  feeto/A.bringeth  good  tidings,  J\''aA.1.15. 
Jcr.  20.  9.  I  said,  I  will  not  make  mention  of  h. 

42.  11.  be  not  afraid  of  k.  saith  the  Lord 
Eiek.  14.  10.  as  the  punishment  ofh.  thatseeketh 

17. 13.  king  of  Babylon  hath  taken  an  oath  of  h. 

18.  32.  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  h.  that  dieth 

19.  4.  the  nations  also  heard  ofh.  he  was  taken 

28.  9.  in  the  hand  of  h.  that  slayeth  thee 
Zech.8.  23.  take  hold  of  skirt  ofh.  that  is  a  Jew 

9.  8.  I  will  encamp  because  of  h.  that  relurneth 
Mat.  26.24.  as  it  is  written  ofh.  Mark  9. 13.  |  14.21. 

27.  19.  I  suffered  in  a  dream,  because  of  A. 
Mark  8.  30.  that  Ihey  should  tell  no  man  ofk. 

38.  o/A. shall  Son  ofman  be  ashamed, Z,i<Ae9.2G. 
AnAf  6.30.0/A.that  taketh  thy  goods,  ask  not  again 

12. 48.  much  given,  o/A.  shall  much  be  required  • 
JoAn  10.  36.  say  ye  of  h.  whom  Father  sanctified 
Rom.3.  26.  thejustifiero/A.  that  believeth  in  Jesus 

9.  11.  not  of  works  but  of  h.  that  calleth 
16.  it  is  not  of  h.  that  willeth,  but  of  God 

11.  36.  for  o/A.  and  through  him  are  all  things 

1  Cor.  1. 30.  but  of  h.  are  ye  in  Christ,  who  of  God 

1  Pet.  2.  9.  shew  forth  praises  of  A.  who  called  you 

2  Pet.  3.  14.  that  ye  may  he  found  o/A.  in  peace 
\.fbhnl.5.  is  the  message  which  we  have  heard  o/A. 

2. 27.  the  anointing  which  we  have  received  o/A. 

29.  he  that  doeth  righteousness  is  horn  of  h. 
Rev.  1.7.  all  kindr.  of  earth  sha'll  wail  because  o/A. 

On,  or  vpon  HIM. 
Ezod.Zl.  30.  shall  give  whatsoever  is  laid  uponh. 
Lev.  7.  20.  eateth,  having  his  uncleanness  7/pon  h. 
1^.  21.  if  her  flowers  be  upon  h.  he  is  unclean 
19.17. Ihoushalt  rebuke,  and  not  suffer  sin  upon  A. 

20.  9.  he  cursed  father,  his  blood  shall  be  uponh. 
21. 12.  crown  ofanointingoilof  his  God  is  uponh. 

J^'um.  11.  25.  took  of  the  spirit  that  was  uponh. 

15.31.  shall  be  cut  off,  his  iniquity  shall  be  upon  h. 

35.  23.  seeing  him  not,  cast  it  upon  h.  that  he  die 
Dcut.  13.  9.  thine  hand  shall  be  first  upon  h. 

17. 7.  the  hands  of  witnesses  shall  be  first  upon  A. 

29.  20.  all  curses  written  in  this  book  lie  upon  A. 
Josh.  2.  19.  be  on  our  head,  if  any  hand  be  n;)on  A. 
Judg.3.10.  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  camcupon  A.14.6, 

.  19.  I  15.  14.  J\rum.  24.  2.  1  Sam.  10.  10.  1 19.23. 

1  Sam.  18.  17.  the  hand  ofthe  Philistines  be  upon  A. 

2  Sa7n.  17.2. 1  will  come  i/pon  A.  while  he  is  weary 

1  Kings  8.  31.  an  oath  be  laid  upon  A.  2  Chr.  6.  22. 
1.3.  4.  put  forth  his  hand,  saying,  lay  hold  on  A. 

2  ffi'nD-s4.21.she  shut  the  door  uponh.  and  went  out 

6.  31.  if  the  head  of  Elisha  stand  on  A.  this  day 

7.  17.  the  people  trode  upon  A.  in  the  gale,  20. 
2  CAr.  32.  25.  therefore  there  was  wrath  upon  A. 
Ezra7.  6.  the  hand  of  the  liOrd  his  God  upon  A.  9. 
.Toh  7. 17.  that  thou  shouldest  set  thy  heart  upon  A. 

15.21.  in  prosperity  the  destroyer  shall  comen.  A. 
2(1.  22.  the  hand  of  the  wicked  shall  come  upon  A. 
23.  and  shall  rain  it  upon  h.  while  he  is  eating 
25.  the  Bword  cotneth,  terrors  are  upon  A. 
27.9.  will  God  henr,when  trouble  Cometh  npon  A.? 
Psal.  116.  2.  I  will  call  upon  A.  as  long  as  I  live 
145. 18.  Lord  is  nigh  to  all  that  call  upon  A. in  truth 
/so.  44.  3.  I  will  pour  water  uponh.  that  is  thirsty 
53.  5.  the  chastisement  of  our  pence  was  upon  h. 
55.6.fleek  the  Lord,  call  yei/ponA.while  he  is  near 
7.  return  to  Lord  and  he  will  have  mercy  uponh. 
.Trr.  31.20.  I  will  surely  have  mercy  vpon  A. 
F.rck.  12.  13.  rny  net  also  will  1  s|ircad  uponh. 

18.  20.  the  righteousn.  of  the  righteous  shall  be 
upoM  /(.wickedness  ofthe  wickeil  shall  he  upon  h. 

ffos.  7.9.  yea,  gray  hairs  are  here  and  there  upon  A 

12.  14.  tlierefore  he  shall  leave  his  blood  upon  A. 
Mat.  12.  18.  and  I  will  put  rny  f  pirit  upon  A. 

27.  30  and  ihey  spit  upoii  A.  and  smote  him 
Luke  23.  26.  and  on  A.  they  Inid  the  cross 
.John  1.  32.  it  abode  upon  A.  ||  33.  remaining  on  A. 

3. 18.  he  that  believeth  on  A.  is  not  condemned, 
5.  21.  I  6.  40.  Horn.  9.  33.  1  Pet.  2.  0. 

19.  37.  they  shall  look  on  h.  whom  they  pierced 
.flcts\X  9.  then  Saul  set  his  eyes  on  A.  lind  said 
Phil.  1.  29.  not  only  to  believe  on  A.  hut  to  suffer 

2.  27.  but  God  harl  mercy  on  h.  anil  not  on  A.  only 
Ileb.  2.  16.  he  took  not  on  h.  the  nature  of  angels 
Rev.  fi.  2.  and  he  that  sat  on  A.  5,  8.  |  19. 11. 

20.  3.  shut  him  up,  and  he  set  a  seal  upon  h. 

Orcr  IMM. 
Gen.  4.  7.  be  his  desire,  thou  shall  rule  over  h. 
Lev.  16.  21.  and  confess  or^r  A.  all  the  iniquities 

25.  43.  thou  shall  not  rule  ovirh.  with  rigmir,  .53. 
2  Sam.  3.  .34.  all  the  people  wept  ngain  over  A. 
1  A"ini'.<il3.  30.  they  mo\irned  over  k.  sayinf,  alas 

16.  18.  burnt  the  king'i  houiie  ovtr  h.  with  fire 


HIM 

Psal.  109. 6.set  thou  a  wicked  man  erver  h.  letSataa 
Eiek.  19.  8.  the  nations  spread  their  net  over  h. 
Dan.  4.  16.  and  let  seven  times  pass  over  A.  23. 
Jlcts  8.  2.  devout  men  made  lamentation  over  A. 
Horn.  6.  9.  death  hath  no  more  dominion  over  h. 
Jam.  5.  14.  is  any  sick?  let  them  pray  over  A. 

Through  HIM. 
John\.  7.  that  all  men  through  h.  might  believe 

3.  17.  that  the  world  through  A.  might  be  saved 
Rom.J>.'i.  we  shall  be  saved  from  wrath,  through  h. 

8.  37.  more  than  conquerors  thro'  h.  that  loved  ui 

11.36.  ofhim,(Arouo-AA.  and  to  him,  are  all  thing* 
£pA.2.18.  throughh.  w.e  have  access  to  the  Father 
1  John  4.  9.  sent  his  Son  that  we  might  live  t.  h. 

To,  or  unto  HIM. 
Gen.  4.  26.  to  Seth,  to  A.  also  there  was  born  a  son 

12. 7.  an  allar  to  the  Lord,  who  appeared  unto  h. 

17.  17.  shall  a  child  be  born  unto  h.  that  is  old  7 

21.  2.  at  set  time  of  which  God  had  spoken  to  A. 
24.  36.  unto  A.  hath  he  given  all  that  he  hath 
49.  10.  unto  h.  shall  the  gathering  of  the  people  be 

Ezod.  4.  16.  thou  shalt  be  to  A.  instead  of  God 

22.  25.  thou  shalt  not  be  to  h.  as  an  usurer 

■  28.  43.  it  shall  be  a  statute  for  ever  unto  A.  30.  21. 
Dcut.l.  36.  and  to  A.  will  I  give  the  land 

18. 15.  raise  up  a  Prophet,  unto  A.  ye  shall  hearken 
Judg.  15.  10.  to  do  to  A.  as  he  hath  done  to  us 

1  Sam.  28. 17.  the  Lord  hath  done  to  h.  as  he  spake 

2  Sam.  3.  9.  hath  sworn  to  David,  even  so  Ido  to  A. 
2  Kings  4.  23.  wherefore  wilt  thou  go  to  h.  to-day7 

7.  20.  so  it  fell  out  unto  A.  for  the  people  trode 

2  Chron.  13.  5.  even  to  h.  and  his  sons  by  covenant 

34.  26.  as  for  the  king,  so  shall  ye  say  unto  h. 
J0AG.I4./0  A.thatis  atHictcd,  pity  should  be  shewed 

35.  6.  if  thou  sinnesf,  what  doest  thou  unto  A.  ? 
Psal.  68.  33.  to  A.  that  rideth  on  the  heavens 

72.  15.  toh.  shall  be  given  ofthe  gold  of  Sheba 
136.  7.  to  h.  that  made  great  lights,  for  his  mercy 

17.  to  A.  that  smote  great  kings,  for  his  mercy 
Eccl.  9.  2.  all  things  come  alike  to  all,  one  event  to 

h.  that  sacrificeth,  and  to  h.  that  sacrificeth  not 
Isa.  9.  13.  people  lurneth  not  to  A.  that  smileth 
31.  6.  turn  to  A.  from  whom  Israel  have  revolted 
40.  17.  they  are  counted  to  A.  less  than  nothing 

18.  or  what  likeness  will  ye  compare  unto  A.  ? 
45.  24.  even  to  h.  shall  men  come,  and  all  that  are 
49.  7.  thus  saith  the  L.  to  A.  whom  man  despiseth 
57.  19.  peace  to  h.  that  is  afar  off,  and  to  A.  near 
6fi.2.I  will  look,  even  to  h.  that  is  poor  and  contrite 

Mat.  7.  8.  to  A.  that  knockcth,  it  shall  be  opened 
7,1/ Ae  6.  29.  to  h.  that.smiteth  thoe  on  one  cheek 

8.  18.  whosoever  hath,  to  A.  shall  be  given 
12.10.  to  A.  that  blasphemeth  against  Holy  Ghost 
20.  :)8.  the  God  ofthe  living,  for  all  live  unto  h. 

.John  7.  33.  then  I  go  unto  h.  that  sent  me,  16.  5. 

10.  3.  to  h.  the  porter  openeth,  the  slieep  hear 
Jlcts  5.  40.  to  A.  they  agreed,  and  called  apostles 

8  1  l.ro  A. they  had  regard, bccausehe  had  bewitch. 
10.43.  to  h.^ive  all  the  prophets  witness,  that  thro' 
Rom.  4.  4.  now  to  h.  that  worketh,  is  the  reward 
5.  to  A.  that  worketh  not,  hut  believeth  on  hin) 
7.  4.  even  to  A.  who  is  rai^^ed  from  the  dead 

11.  36.  and  to  A.  are  all  things,  to  whom  be  glory 
14.  14.  to  h.  that  esleemeth,  to  A.  it  is  unclean 
16.  25.  now  to  h.  that  is  of  power  to  stablishyou 

ICor.  14.  11.  I  be  to  A.  who  speakelh  a  barbarian 
Gal.  3.  6.  it  was  accounted  to  A.  for  righteousness 
F.ph.  3.  21.  unto  k.  be  glory  in  Ihechurch  by  {^'hrist 
Hrh.  1.  5.  I  will  he  to  A.  a  Father,  ho  to  me  a  Son 
.5.  7.  to  h.  that  was  able  to  save  him  from  death 
Jam. '2.  23.  it  was  imputed  untoh.  forrighteousnesg 

4.  17.  to  h.  that  knoweth  to  do  good,  toh.  it  is  sin 
Rev.  1.  5.  unto  h.  that  loved  us,  and  washed  us 

2.  7.  to  A.  thai  overcomelh  will  I  give,  17.  |  3.21. 
26.  to  A.  will  I  give  power  over  the  nations 
21. 6. 1  will  give  unto  h.  that  is  athirst,  of  fountain 

Toward  HIM. 
Gen.  3].  2.  behold,  it  was  not  toward  A.  as  before 

■  fu'lg.  8.  3.  their  anger  was  abated  toward  h. 
2CAr.l6.9.of  them  whose  heart  is  perfect  toward  A, 
Job  II.  13.  and  stretch  out  thine  hamls  toward  h. 
Lam.  2.  19.  lift  up  thy  hands  toward  h.  for  thy  child 
Eirk.  17.  6.  who.se  branches  turnei)  toward  A. 

2  Cor.  2. 8.  yo  would  confirm  your  love  toward  h. 

Under  HIM. 
F.rod.  17. 12.  they  took  a  st(me  and  put  it  under  h. 
2  Slim.  18.9.  the  rnule  that  was  under  h.  went  aw  ay 
.fob  9.  13  the  proud  helpers  do  sloop  under  A. 
fsa.  58.  .5.  to  spread  sackcloth  and  ashes  under  h, 
/C:c/f.  17.6.  the  roots  thereof  were  u^idcrh. 
1  Car.  15.  27.  all  thingi  put  under  h.  2^.  llcb.  2.  8. 

With  HIM. 

fjrn.39,3.  his  master  saw  that  the  Lord  was  with  A. 

r.jod.  31.  6.  I  have  civen  with  h.  Aholiab,  38.2.3. 

A'"uin. 12. 8.unVAA.willI speak  mouth  tomnuth,Pven 

npparcnilv,  not  in  dark  speeohes,  .Jer.  32.  4. 

23.  21.  the  Lord  his  (Jod  is  with  A.  and  the  shout 
/;««t.  29.15. iPiM  A. thai  stanileth  here  with  us,  also 

with  h.  that  is  not  here  with  us  this  daT 
33.  12.  and  there  was  no  strange  god  iritA  i 


HIM 

1  Sam.S.  19.  nnd  the  Lord  was  with  h.  18.  12. 14. 
16. 18.  the  Lord  is  witlih.  ||  25.  25.  foily  is  wi'lh  h. 

M  Sam.  5. 10.  Lord  of  hosts  was  wit^  h.  1  C:hr.  11.  9. 

16.  18.  his  will  I  be,  and  witli  A.  will  I  abide 
J  Kings  8. 65.  Solomon  held  a  feast,  and  all  Israel 
icitk  h.  from  Ilamath  to  Egypt,  2  Ckr.  7. 8. 

2  Kings  3. 12.  said,  the  word  of  the  Lord  is  with  h. 
15.  19.  ga 70  silver,  that  his  hand  might  be  with  k 
18.  7.  the  Lor     was  icith  h.  and  he  prospered^ 

1  Chron.  9.  20.  2  Chron.  1.  1.  |  15.  9. 
2  Chron.  15. 2.  Lord  is  with  you,while  ye  be  with  h. 

26.  17.  with  h.  fourscore  priests  of  the  Lord 

32.  7.  for  there  be  more  with  us  than  with  h. 

8.  with  h.  is  an  arm  of  flesh,  with  us  the  Lord 
36.  23.  the  Lord  his  God  be  with  h.  Ezra  1.  3. 
EzraS.  3.  with  h.  150  males  ||  4.  with  h.  200  males 
6.withh.50nm\es\\Jub\'i.l'3.withh.is\\isdom,l(i 
Job  18.  6.  and  his  candle  shall  be  put  out  with  h. 
22.  21.  ac(iuaint  thyself  with  h.  and  be  at  peace 
Psal.  89.  24.  and  my  mercy  shall  be  with  h. 
91. 15. 1  will  he  with  h.  in  trouble,  I  will  deliver  him 
130.  7.  and  with  h.  is  plenteous  redemption 
Prov.  8.  30.  then  wa«  I  as  one  brought  up  with  h. 
Keel.  8. 15.  that  shall  abide  with  h.  of  his  labour 
/su.3.10.  say  lo  the  righteous,  it  shall  be  well  withh. 
11.  woe  to  the  wicked,  it  shall  be  ill  with  h. 

40.  10.  behold,  his  reward  is  with  h.  62.  11. 
57.  15.  with  h.  also  that  is  of  a  contrite  spirit 

Jer.  22.  15.  and  then  it  was  well  with  h.  16. 
JEzck.  31. 11.  the  mighty  one,  he  shall  deal  with  h. 
Mai.  2.  5.  my  covenant  was  with  h.  of  life 
J\Iat.  5. 25.  agree  while  thou  art  in  the  way  with  h. 
Mark'i.Xi.  ordained  12,  that  they  should  ha  withh. 

5.  18.  prayed  that  he  might  be  with  h.  hulte  8. 38. 
Luke  1.  66.  and  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  withh. 

22.  56.  a  maid  said,  this  man  was  also  with  h. 
John  3. 2.  do  these  miracles,  e.xcept  God  be  with  h. 

14.  23.  we  will  come  and  make  our  abode  with  h. 
^cts  7..9.  sold  Joseph,  but  God  war  with  h.  10.  38. 

10.  35.  he  that  feareth  him  is  ac-  ?;pted  with  h. 

21.  36.  multitude  followed,. cry  ,»,  away  with  h. 
Iioni.6.4.  weareburied  withh.)"   ipaptism,  CyZ.2.12. 

8.  Vivewithh.  2  ror.13.4. 1  T  ,m;.5.10.2  VVm.2.11. 
8.  32.  how  shall  he  not  will,  h.  give  us  all  things 

1  Thess.  4. 14.  sleep  in  .Tesus,  will  God  bring  with  h. 

2  Tim.  2. 12.  we  also  shall  reign  with  h.  Hcv.  20.  6. 
Heb.  11.  9.  the  heirs  with  h.  of  the  same  promise 
2  Pet.\.  18.  when  we  were  with  h.  in  the  holy  mount 
Rev.  3.  20.  and  I  will  sup  with  h.  and  he  wiih  me 

14.  1.  with  h.  144,000  having  his  Father's  name 
17.  14.  they  that  are  with  h.  are  called,  chosen 
fVithin  HIM. 
Joh  14.  22.  and  his  soul  within  h.  shall  mourn 

20.  14.  his  meat  is  the  gall  of  asps  within  h. 
Prov.  26.  24.  and  layeth  up  deceit  within  h. 
Isa.  63. 11.  is  he  that  put  his  Holy  Spirit  within  h. 
Zech.  12. 1.  andfornieth  the  spiritof  nianzcitAin  A. 

rVithout  HIM. 
John  1.  3.  and  without  h.  was  not  any  thing  made 
.SVe  Hymn. 
HIMSELF. 
Oen.  43.  32.  they  set  on  for  him  by  h.  and  for  them 
Exod.21.  3.  if  became  in  by  h.  he  shall  go  out  by  A. 
/^cv.  9.  8.  sin-ofiering  which  is  for  A.  16.  6,  11. 
16.  11.  shall  make  an  atonement  for  A.  17,  24. 
J'fum.  16.  9.  separated  you  to  bring  you  near  to  A. 
31.53.  men  of  war  had  taken  spoil,every  man  for  A. 
Deut.  7.  6.  Lord  hath  chosen  thee  to  be  a  people 
to  A.  14.  2.  I  28.  9.  1  29.  13.   2  Sam.  7.  23. 

33.  21.  and  he  provided  the  first  part  for  A. 
Josh.  22.  23.  let  the  Lord  A.  require  it 

Judg.  3.  19.  he  h.  turned  again  from  the  quarries 
1  Sam.  30.  6.  but  David  encouraged  A.  in  the  Lord 

1  Kings  19.  4.  hut  Elijah  A.  went  a  day's  journey, 

and  he  requested  for  h.  that  he  might  die 

2  Chron:  13.  12.  God  A.  is  with  us  for  our  captain 
26.20.  thrust  him  out,  yea,  A.  hasted  also  logo  out 

F.tra  10.  8.  A.  separated  from  the  congregation 
Job  1.  12.  oidy  on  A.  put  not  forth  thine  hand 

22.  2.  he  that  is  wise  may  be  profitable  to  A. 

27.  lb.  will  he  delight  A.  in  the  Almighty? 
'.Vl.  2.  because  he  justified  A.  rather  than  God 

34.  9.  that  he  should  delight  A.  with  God 

41.  25.  when  he  raiseth  A.  the  mighty  are  afraid 
Psal.  4.  3.  hath  set  apart  him  that  is  godly  for  A. 

10.  14.  the  poor  conimittcth  h.  unto  thee 

35.  8.  let  his  net  timt  ne  hath  hid  catch  A. 

36.  4.  he  aetteth  A.  in  a  way  that  is  not  good 
5a  a  for  God  is  judge  A.   Selah. 

87.  5.  and  the  Highest  A.  shall  establish  her 
132.  18.  but  on  A.  shall  his  crown  flourish 
135.  4.  for  the  Lord  hath  chosen  Jacob  to  A. 
Prov.  5.  22.  his  own  iniquities  shall  take  wicked  A. 

11.  2,5.  he  that  watereth  shall  be  watered  also  A. 

13.  7.  that  makelh  A.  rich,  that  makeih  A.  poor 

14.  14.  and  a  good  man  shall  he  Rati^fi(•d  from  A. 
J6.  4.  the  Lord  hath  made  all  things  fur  A. 

26.  he  that  lahoureth,  laboureth  for  A. 

21.  13.  he  also  shall  cry  A.  but  shall  not  be  heard 

22.  3.  foreneeth  the  evil,  and  hidetli  A.  27.  12. 

285 


HIM 

Proc.29. 15.  but  a  child  left  to  A.  bringefh  to  shame 

Cant.  5.  6.  but  my  beloved  hath  witlidrawn  A. 

/.<a.  7.  14.  the  Lord  A.  shall  give  you  a  sign 
38.  15.  he  hath  siioken,  and  A.  hath  done  it 
44.  5.  another  shall  call  A.  by  the  name  of  Jacob 
59. 15.  that  departeth  from  evil,  maketh  A.  a  prey 
63.  12.  to  make  A.  an  everlasting  name 

.hr.  10.23. 1  know  that  the  way  of  man  is  not  in  A. 
29.26.  man  that  is  mad,  and  maketh  A.  a  prophet 
51.  14.  the  Lord  hath  sworn  by  A.  Amos  6.  8. 

Ezek.  45.  22.  on  that  day  shall  prince  prepare  for  A. 

Dan.  9.  2li.  Messiah  shall  be  cut  ofl",  but  not  for  A. 

Bos.  5.  6.  he  hath  withdrawn  A.  from  them 
10. 1.  Israel  an  empty  viiie,bringeth  forth  fruit  to  A. 

Amos  2.  14.  nor  shall  the  mighty  deliver  A. 
15.  he  that  is  swift  of  foot  shall  not  deliver  A. 

Mat.  6.  4.  A.  shall  reward  thee  openly 

8.  17.  A.  took  our  infirmities,  bare  our  sicknesses 
13.  21.  yet  hath  he  not  root  in  A.  but  dureth  awhile 
27.42.savedothers,A.he  cannot  save,  Mark  15.31. 

Mark  3.  21.  for  they  saiil,  he  is  beside  A. 
8.34.1ethimdeny  A.  and  take  his  cross,  Luke9.  23. 

12.  33.  to  love  his  neighbour  as  h.  is  more  than 
Luke  10.  1.  sent  them,  whither  he  A.  would  come 

11.26.  he  taketh  seven  spirits  more  wicked  than  A. 
12  47.who  knew  his  lord's  will, and.preparednot  A. 
15. 17.  and  when  he  came  to  A.  he  said,  how  many 
19. 12.  a  nobleman  went  to  receive  for  A.a  kingdom 

23.  2.  saying,  that  he  A.  is  Christ,  a  king 

51.  who  also  A.  waited  for  the  kingdom  of  God 

24.  27.  he  expounded  the  things  concerning  A. 
36.  Jesus  A.  str  jd  in  the  midst  of  them,  and  saith 

.Tohn  4.2.tho'  J„sus  A.  baptized  not,  but  his  disciples 
5.18.God  was  his  Father,  making  A.  equal  with  G. 

19.  verily,  I  say,  the  Son  can  do  nothing  of  A. 

26.  for  as  the  Father  hath  life  in  A.  so  the  Son 

6.  6.  for  he  A.  knew  what  he  would  do 
61.  when  Jesus  knew  in  A.  that  his  disciples 

7.  4.  and  he  A.  seeketh  to  be  known  openly 
18.  he  that  speaketh  of  A.  seeketh  his  own  glory 

9.  21.  he  is  of  age,  ask  him,  he  shall  speak  for  A. 
11.51.  this  spake  he  not  of  A.  but  being  high-priest 

13.  32.  God  shall  glorify  him  in  A.  and  glorify  him 

10.  13.  he  shall  not  speak  of  A.  but  whatsoever 

27.  the  Father  A.  loveth  you,  because  ye  loved  me 
19.12.whoso  maketh  A.  a  king,  speaketh  ag.  Cajsar 
21.  1.  Jesus  shewed  A.  again  to  the  disciples,  14. 

Acts  5.  13.  of  the  rest  durst  no  man  join  A.  to  them 
36.  rose  up  Theudas,  boasting  A.  to  be  somebody 

8.  9.  giving  out  that  A.  was  some  great  one 

34.  of  whom  speaketh  the  prophet  this?  of  A.? 
10. 17.  now  while  Peter  doubted  in  A.  what  this 
12.  11}  and  wdien  Peler  was  come  to  A.  he  said 

14.  17.  he  left  not  A.  without  witness,  in  that 

25.  8.  while  he  answered  for  A.  26.  1. 
26.24.ashespakefor  A.Ffstussaid  with  loud  voice 
28.  16.  but  Paul  was  suffered  to  dwell  by  A. 

Rom.  12.  3.  not  to  think  of  A.  more  highly  than  he 

14.  7.  none  of  us  liveth  to  A.  no  man  dieth  to  A. 
15.3.foreven  Christ  pleased  not  A.  but  as  is  written 

1  Cor.  2.  15.  yet  he  A.  is  judged  of  no  man 

3.  15.  but  he  A.  shall  be  saved,  yet  so  as  by  fire 

11.  28.  but  let  a  man  e.\amine  A.  so  let  him  eat 

15.  28.  then  shall  the  Son  A.  be  subject  to  him 

2  Cvr.5. 18.  who  hath  reconciled  us  to  A. by  Jesus,  19. 
10.  7.  if  any  man  trust  to  A.  let  him  of  A.  think 
11.20.  for  ye  suffer  if  a  man  exalt  A.  if  a  man  smite 

Gal.  1.4.  who  gave  A.  for  our  sins,  that  he  might 
2.20.  gave  A.  for  me  ||  6.3.  think  A.  to  be  something 
6.  4.  then  shall  he  have  rejoicing  in  A.  alone 

Eph.  2.  15.  to  make  in  A.  of  I  wain  one  new  man 

20.  Jesus  A.  being  the  chief  corner-stone 

5.  2.  hath  given  A.  for  us  ||  25.  gave  A.  for  it 

27.  ho  might  present  it  to  A.  a  glorious  church 

28.  loveth  A.  ||  33.  so  love  his  wife,  even  as  A. 
Col.  1.  20.  and  by  him  to  reconcile  all  things  to  A. 

2.  t  15.  triumphing  over  them  in  A. 

2  Thess.  2.  4.  sitteth,  shewing  A.  that  he  is  God 
1  Tim.  2.  6.  who  gave  A.  a  ransom  for  all 
Tit.  2.  14.  who  gave  A.  for  us,  to  purify  to  A. 

3.  11.  he  sinneth,  being  condemned  of  A. 
Heb.  1.  3.  when  he  had  by  A.  purged  our  sins 

2.  14.  he  also  A.  likewise  took  part  of  the  same 
18.  in  that  he  A.  hath  suffered,  being  tempted 

5.  2.  for  that  he  A.  also  is  compassed  with  mfirniity 

3.  as  for  the  people,  so  also  for  A.  to  offer  for  sins 

4.  no  man  taketh  this  honour  to  A.  but  he  that 

5.  Christ  glorified  not  A.  lo  bo  made  a  high-priest 
6. 13.  he  Bware  by  A.  ||  7. 27.  when  he  oflered  up  A. 
9.26.  appeared  to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  A. 

1  Pet.  2.  23.  but  committed  A.  to  him  that  judgelh 
1  ./(/An  2.  6.  ought  A.  to  walk,  even  as  he  walked 

3.  3.  hath  this  hope,  purifieth  A.  even  as  he  is  pure 
5.  10.  he  that  believeth  halh  the  witness  in  A. 

"3. John  10.  nor  doth  he  A.  receive  the  brethren 
Rrv.  19.  12.  had  a  name  that  no  man  knew  but  A. 
21.3.  God  A.  shall  be  with  them,  and  be  their  God 
See  BowRn,  Hidb. 
HIN 
Was  a  liquid  measure  of  the  Hebrews :  It  was 


HIR 

the  .lixth  part  of  a  Bath,  and  held  or.e  gallon 
and  two  pints. 
Ezod.  29.  40.  with  the  fourth  part  of  a  A.  of  oil 

30.  24.  take  also  unto  thee  of  oil-olive  a  A. 
Lev.  19.  36.  a  just  ephah  and  A.  shall  ye  have 

23. 13.the  drink-offering  shall  be  of  wine,the  fourth 
part  of  a  A.  of  oil,  JVum.  15.  4.  |  28.  14. 
Jfum.  15.  5.  the  fourth  part  of  a  A.  of  wine 

6.  the  third  part  of  a  A.  of  oil  1|  9.  half  a  A. 
Ezek.i.  11.  shall  drink  sixth  part  of  a  h.  of  wat^ 

45.  24.  a  A.  of  oil  for  an  ephah,  46.  5,  7,  11. 

46.  14.  third  part  of  a  A.  of  oil  to  temper  with 

HIND,  S. 
Gen.  49.  21.  Naphtali  is  a  A.  let  loose,  he  giveth 
2  Sam.  22.  34.  he  maketh  my  feet  like  A.  feet,  and 
settoth  me  on  high  places,  Ps.  18.33.  //a*.3.19. 
.Tab  39. 1.  or  canst  thou  mark  when  the  A.  do  calve? 
P.s.  29.  9.  the  voice  of  Lord  maketh  the  A.  lo  calve 
Prov.  5.  19.  let  her  be  as  the  loving  A.  and  roe 
Cant.  2.  7.  I  charge  you  by  the  A.  of  the  field,  3. 5. 
Jer.  14.5.  the  A.  calved  in  the  field,  and  forsook  it 

HINDER. 
<Ven.24.56.  A.me  not,  seeing  the  Ld.  hath  prospered 
N'um.  22. 16.  let  nothing  A.  thee  from  coming  to  me 
J^eh.  4.  8.  to  come  and  tight,  and  A.  the  building 
.lub  9.  12.  behold,  he  taketh  away,  who  can  A.  him? 
II.  10.  if  he  cut  off  and  shirt  up,  who  can  A.  him  ? 
Acts  8.  36.  what  doth  A.  me  to  be  baptized  ? 
1  Cor.  9.  12.  lest  we  should  A.  the  gospel  of  Christ 
Gal.5.7.  who  did  A.  you  that  should  not  obey  truth? 

HINDERED. 
Ezra  6.  8.  expenses  be  given,  that  they  be  not  A. 
J.uke  11.  52.  and  them  that  were  entering  in,  ye  A. 
Wow. 15.22.  have  been  much  A-  from  coming  lo  you 
1  T/iess.  2. 18.  we  would  have  come,  but  Satan  A. 

1  Pet.  3.1.  asheirsof  life, that  your  prayers  be  not  A. 

HINDERETH. 

Isa.  14.  6.  he  that  ruled  is  persecuted,  and  none  h. 

HINDER  end. 

2  Sam.  2.23.  Ahner  smote  him  with  A.  end  of  spear 

HiNDERMOST,  or  HINDMOST. 
Ge7i.  33.  2.  and  he  put  Rachel  and  Joseph  A. 
JSTum.  2.  31.  they  shall  go  A.  with  their  standards 
Deut.  25. 13.  he  met  thee,  and  smote  the'A.  of  thee 
Josh.  10.  19,  pursue,  and  sinitc  the  A.  of  them 
.Jer.  50. 12.  the  A.  of  the  nations  shall  be  a  wildern. 

.HINDER  part. 
.Toel  2.  20.  and  his  A.  part  toward  the  utmost  sea 
.Mark  4.  38.  Jesus  was  in  the  A.  poj-t  of  Ihe  ship 
Acts  27.  41.  the  A.  part  was  broken  with  waves 

MINDER  parts, 
i Kings!. '25.  iheir h.pa7-ts  were,  inward,  2  CAr. 4.4. 
Psal.  78. 60.  he  smote  his  enemies  in  the  A.  parts 

HINDER  sea. 
Zcch.  14.  8.  and  half  of  them  toward  the  A.  sea 

HINGES. 
1  Kings  7.  50.  and  the  A.  of  gold  for  doors  of  house 
Prov.  26.  14.  as  the  door  turneth  upon  his  A. 

HIP. 
Judg.15.8.  he  smote  them  A.  and  thigh  with  slaugh. 

HIRE,  Substantive. 
Gen.  30.  18.  give  me  my  A.  t  called  his  name  a  k 

32.  among  the  goats,  and  of  such  shall  be  my  A. 

33.  when  it  shall  come  for  thy  A.  before  thy  face 

31.  8.  if  he  said,  ihe  ring-strakcd  shall  be  thy  A. 
Exod.  22.  15.  if  a  hired  thing,  it  came  for  his  A. 
Deut.  23. 18.  thou  shall  not  bring  the  A.  of  a  whore 

24.  15.  at  his  day  thoii  shall  give  him  his  A. 

1  Kings  5.  6.  lo  thee  will  I  give  h.  for  thy  servant* 
Isa.  23.  17.  she  shall  turn  to  her  A.  and  commit 

18.  and  her  A.  shall  be  holiness  lo  the  Lord 
Ezek.  16.31.  not  as  a  harlot  in  that  thouscornest  A, 
41.  and  thou  also  shall  give  no  A.  any  more 
29.  t20.  [  have  given  him  Egypt  for  his  A. 
Mic.  1.  7.  for  she  gathered  it  of  the  A.  of  a  harlot, 
and  they  shall  return  In  the  A.  of  a  harlot 
3.  11.  and  the  priests  thereof  teach  for  A. 
Zech.  8. 10.  there  was  no  A.  for  man,  any  A.  forbeast 
Mat.  20.  8.  give  Ihein  their  A.  beginning  from  last 
Luke  10.  7.  for  the  labourer  is  worthy  of  his  A. 
./am. 5.4.  behold, Ihe Aofihelabourersiskept  back 

HIRE. 
/«a.46.6.they  A.  a  goldsmith,  aTid  he  maketh  itagoij 
Jtfa«.20.1.went  out  to  A.  labourers  into  his  vineyard 

HIRED. 
Gen.'M\.\<S.  1  have  A.  thee  with  my  son's  mandrakea 
Exod.  22.  15.  if  it  be  a  A  thing  it  came  for  his  hire 
Lev.  19.  13.  the  wages  of  him  that  is  A.  not  abide 
Deut.  23.  4.  they  A.  against  thee  Balaam,  JVcA.13.2. 
.fudg.  9.  4.  wherewith  Abimclech  A.  vain  persona 
18.  4.  Micah  halh  A.  me,  and  I  am  his  priest 

1  Sam.  2.  5.  that  were  full,  have  A.  out  themselves 

2  Sam.  10.  6.  Ammon  A.  the  Syrians,  1  Chr.  19.  7. 
2  Kings  7.  6.  the  king  of  Israel  hath  A.  against  us 
2  Chron.  24. 12.  A.  masons  and  carpenter.^  lo  repair 

25.  6.  Amaziah  A.  100,000  mightv  men  of  valour 
F.irai.5.  A.  counsellors  acaiiist  tlioni  lo  fiustrata 
JVcA.  6.  12.  Tohiah  and  Sanhnllat  hnd  A.  him,  13. 
Isa.  7. 20.  shall  Lord  shave  with  a  razor  ihnt  is  A> 
Jir.  46.  21.  her  h.  men  are  like  fatted  bullock* 


HISS 

Hoi.  8.  9  are  gone  up,  Ephraim  hath  \.  lovers 
10.  yea,  '.Ijouyli  Ihey  have  h.  among  the  nations 

Mat.  '20.  7.  they  say,  because  no  mun  hath  h.  us 
9.  when  they  came  that  were  A.  ah.  eleveiiili  Imur 

Mcl3  2{i.30.Faul  (J  well  two  years  in  his  own  A.  house 
HIRED  servant. 

Ezod.  12.  45.  a  A.  serv.  not  eat  thereof,  Lev.'H.lQ. 

Ltv.  25.  ti.  tlie  sabbath  shall  be  meat  for  thy  h.serv. 
40.  but  as  a  A.  se7T>ant  he  shall  be  witli  iheo 
50.  according  to  the  lime  of  a  A.  serv.  shall  it  be 
53.  as  a  yearly  A.  servant  shall  he  be  wilh  him 

Deut.  15.  18.  hath  been  worth  a  double  A.  servant 
24.  14.  thou  shall  nut  oppress  a  A.  servant 
UlHEli  servants. 

Mark  1.20.  left  Zebedue  in  the  ship  with  A.  serv. 

L.uke  15.  17.  how  many  A.  serv.  have  bread  enough 
19.  make  me  as  one  of  thy  A.  servants 
HIKKLING. 

It  is  commanded  in  the  law,  that  the  hireling 
should  be  paid  as  soon  as  his  work  is  over. 
Lev.  19.  i;i,  The  wages  of  him  that  is  hired 
shall  not  abiile  with  lliee  all  night  until  the 
morning  ;  because  his  urgent  necessitirs  re- 
quire it  for  present  subsistence.  A  hireling's 
day  or  year,  is  a  kind  of  proverb,  signifying 
a  full  year,  without  abating  any  thing  of  it. 
Are  not  his  days  like  the  days  of  a  hireling? 
Job  7.  1.  The  days  of  man  are  like  those  of 
a  hireling  ;  as  nothing  is  deduced  from  them, 
so  nothing  is  added  to  them.  And  in  Job  14. 
6,  Till  he  shall  accomplish  as  a  hireling  liis 
day;  to  the  time  of  his  death,  which  he  waits 
for  as  the  hireling /or  the  end  of  the  day.  See 
Isa.  16.  14.  1  21.  16.  Jn  John  10.  12,  13.  the 
it  hireling  is  set  in  opposition  to  the  true  shep- 

herd; the  first  neglects  the  sheep,  and  aims 
only  at  his  own  advantage ;  the  second  loves 
and  guides  them  carefully.  The  hirelings 
whom  the  Father  of  the  farnty,  that  is,  God, 
sends  into  his  vineyard,  are  the  prophets  and 
apostles,  Jews  and  Christians  ;  the  second  suc- 
ceeded the  fir.1t,  and  all  receive  their  reward 
tohen  their  work  is  done.  Mat.  20.  1 — 16. 

Job  7.  1.  are  not  his  days  like  the  days  of  a  A.7 
2.  as  a  A.  looketh  for  the  reward  of  his  work 
14.  6.  till  he  shall  accomplish  as  a  A.  his  day 

Isa.  16.  14.  in  three  years  as  the  years  of  a  A.  21. 16. 

Mai.  3.  5  witness  against  those  that  oppress  the  A. 

John  10.  12.  h^tlial  is  a  A.  and  not  the  shepherd 
13.  the  A.  Heeth,  becaii.se  he  is  a  A.  and  carelh  not 
HI  REST. 

Ezek.  16.  33.  thou  A.  th.-m   .hat  they  may  come 
HIRES 

Mic.  1.  7.  all  the  A.  thereof  shall  be  burnt  with  fire 
HIS. 

(ren.  38.  9.  Onan  knew  the  seed  should  not  bo  A. 

Ezod.  21.  34.  and  the  dead  beast  shall  be  A. 

22.  9.  which  another  challengelh  to  be  A. 
Lev.  27.  15.  add  the- fifth  part,  and  it  shall  he  A. 
JVum.  5.  10.  a  man's  hallowed  things  shall  be  A. 

16.  5.  to-morrow  the  Lord  will  shew  who  are  A. 

23.  10.  righteous,  and  let  my  last  end  be  like  A. 
Deut.  21.  17.  the  right  of  the  first-born  is  A. 

2  Sam.  16.  18.  A.  will  I  be,  with  him  will  I  abide 

1  Kings  2.  15.  for  it  was  A.  from  the  Lord 

2  Kings  )5.  25.  a  caplain  of  A.  conspired  ag.  him 
Esth.  4.  11.  is  one  law  of  A.  to  put  him  to  death 
Job  12.  16.  the  deceived  and  the  deceiver  arc  A. 

18.  15.  in  his  tabernacle,  because  it  is  none  of  A. 

V.ial.  30.  4.  sing  unto  the  Lord,  all  ye  saints  of  A. 
95.  4.  the  strength  of  the  hills  is  A.  also 
103.  21.  ye  ministers  of  A.  that  do  his  pleasure 

Cant.  2.  16.  my  beloved  is  mine,  and  I  am  A. 

F.zek.  16.  1.5.  on  every  one  that  passeth  by,  A.  it  was 
46.  17.  then  it  shall  be  A.  to  the  year  of  liberty 

Dan.  2. 20.  blessed  he  G.  wi.sdom  and  might  are  A. 

Obad.  14.  Incut  otT  those  of  A.  that  did  escape,  nor 
ahooldesl  have  deliver,  up  those  of  A. that  remain 

Hab  i.fi.  woo  to  him  increascth  that  which  is  not  A. 

John  7.  16.  doctrine  is  not  mine,  hut  A.  thai  sent  mo 

..^cts  16.33.  was  baptized,  he  and  all  A.  straightway 

/<om.8.9.  ifnny  have  not  the  Spirit,  ho  is  none  of  A. 

2  Tim.  2.  19.  The  Lorti  knoweth  them  that  are  A. 

Heb.i.W.  hath  ceased  from  works,  as  G.did  from  A. 
HISS. 

To  hiss,  is  a  kind  of  in.iult  and  contempt.  I  Kings 
9.  8,  All  Ihey,  irho  shall  see  the  destruction  of 
this  temple,  shall  be  astonished,  ami  shall  bL-is, 
and  say,  why  hath  ihe  I.rfird  done  thus  unlo  this 
land,  and  to  thi.<  house'?  .Ind  inh,  speaking 
of  the  wicked  under  calamities,  sayn,  that  they 
■hall  clap  Ihi-ir  hands  at  him,  and  sbiill  hiss  him 
out  of  his  place.  Job  27.2.3.  .Ind  in  J«r.  19  8, 
I  will  make  this  city  desolate  ami  a  hissing; 
every  one  lliat  pa»"eth  thereby  «hall  be  iihIo- 
nished,  and  hiss,  because  of  all  the  pinciies 
thereof;  /  will  make  this  city  Ihe  subject  of 
ridicule  and  scorn. 

To  hiss,  to  call  any  one  wilh  hissing,  m  a  mark 
of  power  and  authority.    Tht  Lord  sayt,  that 


HO 

in  his  an^er  he  will  hiss,  and  call  the  enemy 
against  Jerusalem.  Isa.  5.  26,  He  will  hiss 
uuio  them  from  the  end  of  Ihe  earth.  He  will 
bring  tlicm  with  a  hiss  frojn  the  very  extremi- 
ties of  the  earth.  Jind  in  Isa.  7.  18,  Tlie  Lord 
shall  hiss  for  the  fly,  and  shall  bring  it  to  him, 
that  is  in  Ihe  uttermost  part  of  tiiu  rivers  of 
Egypt,  and  for  the  bee  that  is  in  the  land  of 
Assyria.  The  fly  and  the  bee,  which  God  wilt 
bring  thus  with  a  hiss,. are  the  kings  of  Egypt 
and  Assyria:  they  shall  come  with  their  troops 
into  the  territories  of  Israel,  and  shall  disperse 
themselves  over  the  whole  country.  Theodoret, 
writing  upon  Isaiah,  remarks,  that  in  Syria, 
and  Palestine,  they  who  looked  after  bees  drew 
them  out  of  their  hives,  carried  them  into  the 
fields,  and  brought  them  back  again  with  the 
Sound  of  a  flute  and  the  noise  of  hissing. 
Zechaiiah,  speaking  of  the  return  from  the 
Babylonish  captivity,  says,  that  the  Lord  will 
gather  them  us  it  were  with  a  hiss,  and  bring 
them  buck  into  their  country,  Zech.  10.  B. 
Which  shews  the  ease  and  authority  with 
which  lie  will  perform  this  great  work. 

1  Kings  9.  8.  and  at  this  house  every  one  shall  A. 
lob  27.  23.  men  shall  A.  him  out  of  his  place 
Isa.  5.  2Ui;iie  will  A.  to  them  from  end  ol'  the  earth 

7.  IS.fSt'  Lord  shall  A.  for  the  fly  in  Egy|)t 
Jer.  19. 8.  passeth  thereby  shall  A.  49.  17^  |  50.  13. 
Lain.  2.  15.  they  A.  at  the  daughter  of  Jerusalem 
16.  thy  enemies  A.  and  gnash  the  teeth  ug.  thee 
Kiek.  27.  36.  the  merchants  shall  A.  at  thee 
y.rph.  2. 15.  every  one  that  passeth  by  her  shall  A. 
Zech.  10.  8.  I  will  A.  for  them  and  gather  them 
HISSING. 

2  Chron.  29.  8.  and  he  hath  delivered  them  to  A. 
ler.  18.  16.  to  make  their  land  a  porjietual  A. 

19.  8.  I  will  make  this  city  a  A. 
25.  9.  and  I  will  make  them  a  A.  18.  ]  29.  18. 
51.  37.  Babylon  shall  be  a  A.  without  inhabitant 
jVic.  6.  16.  should  make  inhabitants  thereof  a  A. 

HIT. 
1  Sam.  31.  3.  and  the  archers  A.  him,  1  Chron.  10.  3. 

HITHER. 
Gen.  45.  5.  now  be  not  angry  that  ye  sold  me  A. 
8.  it  was  not  you  that  sent  me  A.  but  God 
13.  ye  shall  haste  and  bring  down  my  father  A. 
Exod.  3.  5.  draw  not  nigh  A.  put  ofl'thy  shoes 
.losh.  2.  2.  behold,  there  came  men  in  A.  to-nighl 

IH.  6.  ye  shall  bring  the  description  A.  to  me 
Judg.  18.  3.  they  said  to  him,  who  brought  thee  A.? 
19.  12.  we  will  not  turn  aside  A.  into  the  city 

1  Sam.  13.  9.  bring  A.  a  burnt-offering  to  mfe 

14.  18.  and  Saul  said,  bring  A.  the  ark  of  God 
34.  bring  me  A.  every  man  his  o.\  and  his  sheep 
36.  the  priest  said,  let  us  draw  near  A.  unto  God 

15.  32.  bring  A.  Agag  ||  17. 28.  wliy  earnest  ihou  A. 
23.  9.  said  to  Abiathar,  bring  A.  the  ephod,  30.  7. 

2  Sam.  1.  10.  I  have  brouglil  them  A.  unto  my  lord 

1  Kings  22.  9.  hasten  A.  Micaiah  the  son  of  Iiiilah 

2  Kings  2.  8.  Jordan  divided  A.  and  thither,  14. 
2  Chron.  28.  13.  ye  shall  not  bring  in  captives  A. 
Ezra  4.  2.  king  of  Assur,  which  brought  us  up  A. 
Psal.  73.  10.  therefore  his  people  return  A. 

81.  2.  take  a  psalm,  and  bring  A.  the  timbrel 
Prov.'i.  4.  whoso  is  simple,  let  him  turn  in  A.  16. 
Isa.  .57.  3.  draw  near  A.  ye  sons  of  the  sorceress 
J\lat.  14.  18.  he  said,  bring  them  A.  to  me 

17.  17.  Jesus  said,  bring  him  A.  lo  me,  Luke  9.  41. 

22.  12.  friend,  how  earnest  thou  in  A.  not  having 
l.uke  14.  21.  brin"  in  A.  the  poor  and  the  maimed 

15.  23.  bring  A.  the  fatted  calf  and  kill  it 

19.  27.  bring  h.  and  slay  them  before  me 

30.  shall  find  a  colt  tied,  loose  him,  bring  him  A. 
./i)A7i6.25.  thiy  said,  Rabbi,  when  earnest  iliou  A..' 

20.  27.  real  h  A.  thy  finger,  reach  A.  thy  hand 
Acts  9.  21.  that  came  A.  for  that  intent,  that  he 

10.  32.  call  A.  Simon,  whose  surname  is  i'eler 

19.37.  ye  have  brought  A.  these  men,  which  are 

Sec  Co.MK. 

HITHERTO. 

Etod.  7.  16.  behold,  A.  thou  woiildest  not  hear 
J^um.  14.  t  19.  as  thou  hast  forgiven  this  people  A. 
Josh.  17.  14.  as  the  Lord  hath  blessed  me  A. 
.ludg.  16.  13.  A.  ihou  hast  mocked  mo,  ar.dtold  lies 
1  Sam.  1.  16.  for  out  of  my  grief  have  I  spoken  A. 
7.  12.  and  saying,  A.  hath  the  Lord  helped  us 
2.S'om.  7.  18.  Ihou  hast  brousht  mo  A.  1  Chr.  17. 16. 

15.  34.  as  I  have  been  thy  father's  servant  A. 

1  Chron.  9.  18.  who  A.  wailed  in  the  king's  goto 
12.  29.  A.  Ihe  greatest  part  kept  the  ward 
.lob  38.  11.  A.  shall  Ihou  come,  hut  no  further 
/'»a/.71.17.  A.  have  I  declared  thy  wondrous  works 
Ma. 18. 2.  a  people  terrible  from  iheir  beginning  A.  7. 
.Inhn  5.  17.  my  Father  workelh  A.  and  I  work 

16.  24.  A.  have  ye  asked  nothing  in  my  name 
Horn.  1.  13.  I  purposed  to  come,  but  »vbs  lei  A. 
1  Cor.  3.  2.  for  A.  ye  were  not  able  lo  bear  it 

HO. 
Ruth\  1  to  whom  ho  laid,  iaiuch  a  one,  Hit  down 


HOL 

Isa.  55.  I.  ho  every  one  that  thirsteth,  come  yn 

Zech.  2.  6.  ho,  /lO,  come  forth,  flee  from  the  land 

HOAR,  HOARY,  See  Frost,  Hairs,  HsiD 

HOARV. 

Job  41.  32.  one  would  think  the  deep  to  be  A. 

HOISED. 
Acts  27.  40.  they  A.  up  ihe  main-sail  to  the  wind 

HOLD,  Substantive. 

./ufZw.  9. 46.  Ihey  entered  inloa  A.of  the  god  Berith 

49.  they  put  ihem  to  the  A.  and  set  the  A.  on  fire 

1  Sam.  22. 4.  David  in  A.  24. 22.  2  Sam.  5. 17.  \  23.14. 

5.  abide  not  in  the  A.  depart  and  gel  thee  into  land 

1  Chr.  12.  16.  there  came  of  Judah  to  A.  of  David 
Acts  4.  3.  and  put  them  in  A.  unto  the  ne.xt  day 
Hev.  18.  2.  is  become  the  A.  of  every  foul  spirit 

Set  Stro.so. 
HOLD. 
Gen.  21.  18.  lift  u^  the  lad,  A.  him  in  thine  hand 
Ezod.  5.  1.  that  they  may  A.a  feast  to  me  in  wildern. 
9. 2.  refuse  lo  let  them  go,  and  wilt  A.  them  still  1 
10.  9.  for  we  must  A.  a  feast  unto  the  Lord 

20.  7.  Lord  will  not  A.  him  guiltless,  Lieut.  5. 11. 
IJvul.  22.  t  25.  if  the  man  take  strong  A.  of  her 
liuth  3.  15.  he  said,  bring  the  vail,  and  A.  it 

2  Sam.  2.  22.  how  should  I  A.  up  my  face  to  Joab 

6.  6.  Uzzah  put  forth  his  baud  to  ark  of  God,  and 

look  A.  of  it,  oxen  shook  it,  1  Chron.  13.  9, 

1  Kings  2.  9.  now  therefore  A.  him  not  guiltless 
Esth.  4.  11.  the  king  shall  A.  out  the  golden  sctplre 
Job  6.  24.  teach  me,  and  I  will  A.  my  tongue 

9.  28.  I  know  that  thou  wilt  not  A.  nie  innocent 
13.  19.  if  I  A.  my  tongue,  I  shall  give  up  the  ghoat 
17.  9.  Ihe  righteous  also  shall  A.  on  his  way 

41.  26.  the  spear,  dart,  tlie  habergeon  cannot  A. 
Psal.  17.  5.  A.  up  my  goings  in  thy  paths 

119.  53.  horror  hath  taken  A.  upon  me,  because 
117.  A.  thou  me  up,  and  I  shall  be  safe 

ISh  10.  and  ihy  right  hand  shall  A.  me 
Prov.  31.  19.  and  her  hands  A.  the  distaflT 
Cunt.  3.  8.  they  ull  A.  swords,  being  expert  in  war 
Isa.  41.  13.  I  the  Lord  will  A.  thy  right  hand 

42.  6.  anil  I  will  A.  thine  hand,  and  keep  thee 
Jer. 2. 13.  hewed  broken  cisterns,  can  A.  no  water 

8.  21.  astonishment  halh  taken  A.  on  me 
50.  42.  they  shall  A.  the  bow  and  the  lance 

43.  anguish  took  A.  of  iiim,  and  pangs  as  of  worn 
Ezek.  30.  21.  to  make  it  strong  to  A.  the  sword 
41.  6.  that  they  might  have  A.  they  had  not  A. 
Amos  U.  10.  then  shall  he  say,  A.  thy  tongue 
Zech.  11.5.  slay  them,  and  A.  themselves  not  guilty 
Mat.  6.  24.  else  he  will  A.  lo  the  one,  Luke  16.  IJ. 

21.  26.  for  all  A.  John  as  a  prophet 

Mark  7.  4.  other  things  they  have  received  to  A. 

8.  ye  A.  the  trudilion  of  men,  as  washing  of  pots 
Rom.  1.  18.  who  A.  the  truth  in  unrighteousness 
PAi7.  2.  29.  receive  him,  and  A.  such  in  reputation 

2  Thess.'i.  15.  A.  the  traditions  ye  have  been  taught 
Ueb.  3. 14.  if  we  A.  the  beginning  of  our  confidence 
Rev.  2. 14.  hast  lliem  that  A.  the  doctrine  of  Balaam 

]5.hasi  them  tJiat  A.  doctrineof  the  Micolaitaiiea 

See  Caught. 

HOLD  fast. 

.lob  8. 15.  he  shall  A.it/as-t,  but  it  shall  not  endura 

27. 6.  my  righteousness  I  h.  fast,  I  will  nol  let  it  go 

.ler.  8.  5.  they  h.fast  deceit,  they  refuse  to  return 

1  TAess.  5.  21.  prove  all  things,  A. /ast  that  is  good 

2  Tim.l.  13.  h.fast  the  form  of  sound  words, which 
Heb.  3.  6.  if  we  h.fast  the  confid.  and  the  rejoicing 

4.  14.  let  us  h.fast  our  profession,  10.  23. 
Heo.  2. 25.  ihal  ye  have  already  h.fast  till  I  come 

3.3.h.fast  and  repent  ||  il.h.fast  which  thou  bast 

HOLD  peace. 
Ezod.  14.14.  Lord  shall  fight,  ye  shall  A.  yourpeac« 
J\rum.  30.  4.  if  her  father  A.  his  peace  at  her 

14.  if  her  husband  altogether  A.  hta  peace  at  her 
.ludg.  18.  19.  A.  thy  ;;facc,luy  hand  on  thy  mouth 
2  Sam.  13. 20.  A.  thy  peace,  my  sister,  ho  is  brother 
2  Kings'2.2.h{'  said,  I  know  it,A.you  your peace,S, 

7.  9.  a  ilay  of  good  lidifgs,  and  we  A.  our  ^eac< 
JVeh.  8.  11.  saying,  A.  your  peace,  the  day  is  holy 
.lob  II.  3.  should  thy  lies  muko  men  A.  iheir  peace 7 

13.  5.  that  yo  would  altogether  A.  your  peace 

13.  A.  your  pforf,  lei  mo  alone  that  I  may  speak 

33.  31.  mark  well,  A.  Ihy  peace  and  I  will  speak 

:t3.  A.  Ihy  peace,  and  Iwill  leach  thee  wisdom 

Psal.  83.  I.  O  God,  A.  nol  Ihy  p.  bo  mil  still,  109.  L 

ha.  62.  I.  for  '/ion's  sake  w'ill  I  not  A.  my  peace 

6.  which  shall  never  A.  their  p.  day  nor  night 
64.  12.  will  thou  A.  thy  ;if ocf  and  afilict  us  sore? 

.ler.  4.  19.  I  am  pained  at  heart,  I  cannot  A.  my  d. 
Zrph.  1.  7.  A.  thy  p.  at  the  presence  of  the  Lord 
jVur20. 31.  ihemultiiiide  rebuked  them,  because 

Ihey  should  A.  their  ;>eacf,  Mark  10.  48 

l.uke  18.  39. 
Mark  1.25.  A.  thy  p.  come  oul  of  him,  /,uA:«  4.  35. 
l.uke  19.40.  if  they  should  A.  their /jriirc  the  stone* 
Acts  12.  17.  beckoning  to  them  lo  A.  Iho'ir  peace 

18.9.  be  not  afraid,  hut  apeak,  and  A.  not  l\\ypeac4 
1  Cor.  14.  30.  to  another,  let  the  first  A.  hi*  peac* 
Set  TaKK. 


HOL 

HOLDEN 
2  ^m;Tj  23.29. there  was  not  A.  such  a  passover,  23. 
Job  36.  8.  it'  they  be  A.  in  cords  of  affliction 
Psal.  18.  35.  and  thy  right  hand  hath  A.  me  up 

71.  6.  by  thee  have  I  been  A.  up  from  the  womb 

73.  23.  thou  hast  A.  mo  up  by  my  right  hand 
Prop.  5.22.  and  shall  be  A.  with  the  cords  of  his  sins 
Asa.  42. 14.  I  have  long  A.  my  peace  and  been  slill 

45.1.  whose  right  hand  I  have  A.  to  subdue  nations 
A,uA:« 24.16.  eyes  were  A.  they  should  not  know  him 
<Jc(s  2. 24.  it  was  not  possible  he  should  be  A.  of  it 
Rvta.  14.  4.  yea,  he  shall  be  A.  up,  for  God  is  able 

HOLDEST. 
Rsth.  4. 14.  if  thou  altogether  A.  thy  peace  this  time 
Job  13.24.  wherefore  A.  thou  me  tor  thine  enemy? 
Psal.  77.  4.  thou  A.  my  eyes  waking,  I  am  troubled 
Jer.  49.  16.  O  thou  that  A.  the  jieight  of  the  hill 
Hub.  1. 13.  A.  thy  tong.  when  the  wicked  devoureth 
Rev.  2.  13.  thou  A.  fast  my  name,  hast  not  denied 

HOLDETH. 
Job  2.  3.  and  still  he  h.  fast  his  integrity 

26.9.  heA.  back  the  face  of  his  throne,  and  spread. 
Psal.  66.  9.  bless  God  who  A.  our  soul  in  life 
Prov.  11. 12.  a  man  of  understanding  A.  his  peace 

17. 28.  a  fool  when  he  A.  his  peace  is  counted  wise 
Dan.  10.  21.  and  none  A.  with  me  but  Michael 
Jlmos  1. 5. 1  will  cut  off  him  that  A.  the  sceptre,  8. 
Rev.  2.  1.  that  A.  the  seven  stars  in  his  right  hand 

HOLDING. 
Isa.  33. 15.  that  shaketh  his  hands  from  h.  of  bribes 
Jer.  6.  11.  I  am  weary  with  A.  in,  I  will  pour  fury 
Mark  7.  3.  eat  not,  A.  the  tradition  of  the  elders 
Phil.  2.  16.  A.  forth  the  word  of  life,  that  I  may 
Col.  2.  19.  not  A.  the  head,  from  which  the  body 

1  Tim.  1.  19.  h.  faith  and  a  good  conscience 

3.  9.  A.  the  mystery  of  faith  in  a  pure  conscience 
Tit.  1. 9.  A.  fast  faithful  word,  as  hath  been  taught 
Rev.  7.  1.  I  saw  four  angels  A.  the  four  winds 

HOLDS. 
Jer.  51.  30.  they  have  remained  in  their  A. 
£16*.  19.  9.  and  they  brought  him  into  A. 
Sec  Strong. 
HOLE. 
Exod.  28.  32.  there  shall  be  a  A.  in  the  top  of  it 

2  Kings  12.  9.  Jeboiada  bored  a  A.  in  the  lid  of  it 
Cant.  5.  4.  put  in  his  hand  by  the  A.  of  the  door 
Isa.  11.  8.  suck,  child  shall  play  on  the  A.  of  the  asp 

51.  1.  look  to  A.  of  the  pit  whence  ye  are  digged 
Jer.  13.  4.  and  hide  it  there  in  a  A.  of  the  rock 
Eiek.  8.  7.  when  I  looked,  behold  a  A.  in  the  wall 
Jam.Z.\'\\.  a  fountain  send  at  same  A.  sweet  water 

HOLES. 
Ren.  40.  1 16.  I  had  baskets  full  of  A.  on  my  head 
1  Sam.  14. 11.  the  Hebrews  come  forth  out  of  the  A. 
Isa.  2.  19.  they  shall  go  into  A.  of  the  rocks,  7. 19. 
42.  22.  they  are  all  of  them  snared  in  A.  are  hid 
Jer.  16.  16.  hunt  them  out  of  the  A.  of  the  rocks 
48.  28.  makelh  her  nest  in  sides  of  the  A.  mouth 
JUic.  7.  17.  they  shall  not  move  out  of  their  A. 
JVaA.  2. 12.  the  lion  filled  his  A.  with  prey,  and  dons 
Hag.  1.6.  earneth  wages  to  put  it  in  a  bag  with  A. 
Ztch.  14.  12.  their  eyes  shall  consume  in  their  A. 
JV/ai.8.20.  Jesus  saith,  the  foxes  have  A.  Luke  9.58. 

HOLIER. 
Isa.  65.  5.  come  not  near,  for  I  am  h.  than  thou 

HOLIEST. 

Hcb.  9.  3.  the  tabernacle  which  is  called  the  A. 

8.  the  way  into  the  A.  was  not  yet  made  manifest 

10.  19.  to  enter  into  the  A.  by  the  blood  of  Jesus 

HOLILY. 

1  Thess.  2.  10.  ye  are  witnpsses  how  A.  we  behaved 

HOLINESS. 
Ezod.  15.  11.  who  is  like  thee,  glorious  in  A.? 
28. 36.  A.  to  the  L.  35. 1 2.  |  39.  30.  Zeck.  14.  20,  21 
1  CAr.  16.  29.  come  before  the  Lord,  worship  the 
Lord  in  the  beauty  of  A.  Psal.  29.  2.  |  96.  9. 
S  CAr.S.tU.Sdlomonsaid,  because  the  places  are  A. 
20. 21.  singers,  that  should  praise  the  beauty  of  A. 
31.  18.  in  office  they  sarJified  themselves  in  A. 
Psal.  30.  4.  at  the  remomarance  of  his  A.  97.  12. 

47.  8.  God  siltelh  upon  the  throne  of  his  A. 

48.  l.greatlv  tobepr.iised  in  the  mountain  of  his  A. 
60.  e.God  hath  .«poken  in  his  A.  108.  7. 
89.  35.  once  I  have  sworn  by  my  A.  I  will  not  lie 
03.  5.  A.  becometh  thine  house,  O  Lord,  for  ever 
110. 3.  thy  people  shall  be  willing,  in  beauties  of  A. 

Isa.  23.  18.  and  her  hire  shall  be  A.  to  the  Lord 
35.  8.  and  it  shall  he  called  the  way  of  A. 

62.  0.  ihey  shall  drink  it  in  the  courts  of  my  A. 

63.  l.*).  behold  from  iKibitation  of  thy  A.  and  glory 
18.  the  people  of  thy  A.  have  possessed  it 

Jer.  2.  3.  Israel  was  A.  to  the  L.  and  the  firstfruita 
23.  9.  and  because  of  the  words  of  his  A. 
31.  23.  the  Lord  bless  thee,  O  mountain  of  A. 
^mos  4.  2.  the  Lord  God  hath  sworn  by  his  A. 
Chad.  17.  but  upon  mount  Zion  there  shall  be  A. 
JV/af.2. 11.  JuHah  hath  profaned  the  A.  of  the  Lord 
yyKAel.75.  mrghtserve  him  in  A.  and  righteousness 
.Acts  3. 12.  as  though  by  our  A.  made  this  man  walk 
Rom.  1.  4.  with  power,  according  to  the  Spirit  of  A. 
287 


HOL 

Ram.  6. 19.  yield  members  servts.  to  right,  unto  A. 

22.  ye  have  your  fruit  unto  A.  and  the  end  life 
2  Cor.  7.  1.  perfecting  A.  in  the  fear  ofGod 
Kph.  4.  24.  new  man  created  in  rlghteousn.  and  A. 
1  Thess.3. 13.  stablish  your  hearts  unblumeab.  in  A. 

4.  7.  hath  not  called  us  to  uncleanness,  but  to  A. 
1  Tim.  2.  15.  if  they  continue  in  faith  and  A. 
Tit.  2. 3.  that  they  be  in  behaviour  as  becometh  A. 
Heb.  12.  10.  that  we  might  be  partakers  of  his  A. 

14.  follow  peace  with  men,  and  A.  without  which 
HOLLOW. 
Oen.  32.  25.  he  touched  the  A.  of  his  thigh,  32. 
Exod.  27. 6.  shsih  make  altar  A.  with  boards,  38.  7. 
Lev.  14.  37.  if  the  plague  be  in  walls  with  A.  strakes 
.Tudff.  15.  19.  God  clave  a  A.  place  in  the  jaw 
Isa.  40. 12.  who  measured  waters  in  A.  of  his  hand 
Jer.  52.  21.  concerning  the  pillar,  it  was  A. 

HOLPEN. 
Psal.  83.  8.  they  have  A.  the  children  of  Lot 
86.  17.  because  thou,  Lorl,  hast  A.  me 
Isa.  31.  3.  and  he  thkt  is  A.  shall  fall  down 
Dan.  11.  34.  they  shall  be  A.  with  a  little  help 
Luke  1. 54.  hath  A.  his  servant  Isr.  in  remembrance 

HOLY. 
Holiness.  TVue  holiness  consists  in  a  conformity 
to  the  nature  and  will  of  God,  whereby  a  Saint 
is  distinguished  from  the  unrenewed  world^and 
is  not  actuated  by  their  principles  undprecepts, 
nor  governed  by  their  maxims  and  customs 
There  are  different  degrees  of  holiness  in  the 
Saints,  but  sincerity  is  inseparable  from  the 
being  of  it.  Jill  gold,  as  one  observes,  is  not 
refined  to  the  same  degree  and  height  of  purity: 
but  true  gold,  though  in  the  lowest  degree  of 
fineness,  will  endure  the  furnace  and  the  touch- 
stone, and  by  that  trialis  discerned  from  coun- 
terfeit metal.  The  Holy  .'Spirit,  in  renewing  a 
man,  infuses  a  unii^crsal  habit  of  holiness,  that 
is  comprehensive  of  all  the  variety  of  graces 
to  be  exercised  in  the  life  of  a  Christian.  Gal. 

5.  22,  23,  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy, 
peace,  long-suffering,  gentleness,  goodncss,faith, 
meekness,  temjierance.     See  Sanctify. 

Holy  is  applied,  I.  To  God  the  Father,  Son,  and 
Spirit,  who  is  ivfinitely  holy  above  all  crea- 
tures, and  is  called  by  way  of  emphasis.  The 
Holy  One.  Jill  the  holiness  and  perfection 
that  creatures  do  or  shall  enjoy  and  possess 
to  eternity  is  derived  from  the  unmensurable 
abyss  of  God's  holiness,  for  he  is  the  fountain 
of  all  holiness  and  purity.     II.  To  his  saints 


HOL 


who  are  holy,  [1]  By  separation  and  choice, 
1  Pet.  2.  9.     [2]  By  the  imputation  of  Christ's 


holiness  or  righteousness  to  them,  Ezek.  16. 14. 
2  Cor.  5. 21.  [3]  By  partaking  of  a  holy  prin- 
ciple of  grace,  whereby  the  soul  is  renewed  in 
holiness  by  degrees,  till  it  attains  a  perfection 
of  it,  Heb.  12.  23.  III.  To  angels,  Mat.  25.  31. 
IV.  To  persons  and  things  dedicated  to  God, 
Exod.  30.  35.  I  31.  14.  Lev.  16.  4. 
TAe  prophets  call  the  Lord,  The  Holy  One  of  Is- 
rael, as  if  the  name  of  Holy  were  synonymous 
with  that  of  God.  Tliey  provoked  the  holy 
One  of  Israel  to  anger,  Isa.  1.  4.  They  shall 
stay  upon  "he  Lord,  the  holy  One  of  Israel,  Isa. 
10.  20.  And  in  Isa.  29.  19,  The  poor  among 
men  shall  rejoice  in  the  holy  One  of  Israel.  The 
Messiah  in  like  manner  is  called  the  holy  One. 
Psal.  16.  10,  Thou  wilt  not  suffer  thine  holy 
One  to  see  corruption.  Jlnd  in  Luke  4.  34,  I 
know  thee  who  thou  art,  the  holy  One  of  God. 
■So  in  Luke  1.  35,  That  holy  thing  which  shall 
he  born  of  thee,'8hall  be  called  the  Son  of  God. 
Christ  is  called  simply  the  holy  One,  .8cts  3.  14. 
Holy  is  likewise  the  common  epithet  given  to 
the  third  Person  of  the  glorious  Trinity,  Holy 
Ghost. 

The  Isiaclites  are  often  called  holy  in  scripture 
because  they  were  the  Lord's,  who  sanctified 
them;  they  professed  the  true  religion,  were 
called  to  holiness,  which  they  were  to  endea- 
vour to  acquire,  and  which  many  in  reality 
did  attain  to  under  the  old  Law.  Exod.  19.  6, 
Ye  shall  be  a  holy  nation.  See  Exod.  22.  31 
Lev.  11.  44,  45.   Num.  16.  3. 

Christians  are  still  more  particularly  declared 
holy.  They  having  received  the  earnests  of  the 
iHoly  Spirit  in  a  more  plentiful  and  perfe'-.t 
manner  than  were^cnjoyed  undr.r  the  Law.  In 
the  Acts  and  in  St.  Paul's  Epistles,  Christiaits 
arc  generally  described  under  the  name  of 
Saints.  Acts  9.  13,  32,  41,  Lord,  I  have  heard 
by  many  of  this  man,  how  much  evil  he  hath 
done  to  thy  saint«.  Si.  Peter  came  down  to  the 
saints  which  dwelt  in  Lydda  ;  Ae  raised  Tahi- 
tha  from  the  dead,  and  presented  her  to  the 
saints.  St.  Paul  directs  his  Epistle  to  the  Ro- 
mans thus,  To  the  beloved  of  God,  called  to  be 
saints,  Rom.  i.  7. 

Holy  plase  is  put  for  the  holy  of  holies,  or  the 


most  holy  place.  Exod.  28.  29,  Aaron  shaH 
bear  the  names  of  the  children  of  Israel  in  the 
breast-plate  of  judgment  upon  his  heart,  when 
he  goeth  in  unto  the  holy  place.  Sometimes  it 
is  put  for  the  court  of  the  priests.  Lev.  10.  IS, 
Behold,  the  blood  of  it  was  not  brought  in 
within  the  holy  place ;  ye  should  indeed  have 
eaten  it  in  the  holy  place;  the  court  of  the 
priests  is  called  holy,  compared  with  the  court 
of  the  people;  as  in  Ezek.  42.  14,  The  priests 
shall  not  go  out  of  the  holy  place  into  the  outer 
court  It  is  also  taken  for  the  whole  temple. 
Acts  6. 13,  This  man  ceascth  not  to  speak  blas- 
phemous words  against  this  holy  jilace,  and  the 
law.  .Ind  sometimes  for  heaven  itself.  lea. 
57.  15,  I  dwell  in  the  high  and  holy  place;  so  in 
Heb.  9.  12,  Neither  by  the  blood  of  goats  and 
calves,  but  by  his  own  blood,  he  entered  in  once 
into  the  holy  place. 
ETod.2.5.  place  whereon  thou  standcst  is  A.  ground 
16.  23.  to-morrow  is  the  rest  of  the  A.  subhath 

19.  6.  ye  shall  be  to  me  a  h.  nation,  1  Pet.  2.  9. 

20.  8.  remember  the  sabbath  day  to  keep  it  A. 

28.  38.  Israel  shall  hallow  in  all  their  A.  gifts 

29.  6.  and  put  the  A.  crown  upon  the  mitre 
33.  because  they  are  A.  1|  34.  because  it  is  A. 

30.  25.  make  it  an  oil  of  A.  ointment  compound 

32.  it  is  A.  and  it  shall  be  A.  unto  you 
35.  a  perfume  tempered  together,  pure  and  A. 

31. 14.  keep  the  sabbath,  for  it  is  A.  unto  you,  15, 
Lei}.  8.  9.  and  he  put  upon  Aaron  the  A.  crown 
10.10.  ye  may  put  difference  between  A. and  unholy 
Ifi.  4.  he  shall  put  on  the  A.  linen  coat 

33.  he  shall  make  atonement  for  the  A.  sanctuary 

19.  2.  for  I  the  Lord  your  God  am  A.  21.  8. 

20.  7.  be  ye  A.  ||  21.  7.  for  he  is  A.  unto  his  God 
27. 14.  a  man  sanctify  his  house  to  be  A.  to  the  Ld 

30.  the  tithe  of  the  land  is  A.  unto  the  Lord 
J^um.  5.  17.  and  the  priest  shall  take  A.  water 

15  40.  that  ye  may  remember,  and  be  A.  to  your  G. 
.  16.  3.  seeing  all  the  congregation  are  A.cveryone 
5.  (he  Lord  will  shew  who  are  his,  and  who  is  h, 
18. 17.  thou  shalt  not  redeem  them,  they  are  A. 

31.  6.  sent  Phinehas  with  the  A.  instruments 
1  Sam.  2.  2.  for  there  is  none  A.  as  the  Lord 

21.  5.  and  the  vessels  of  the  young  men  are  A. 

1  Kings  S.  4.  they  brought  up  the  ark  and  the  taber- 
nacle, and  all  the  A.  vessels,  2  Chron.  5.  5. 

2  Kings  4.  flf.  I  perceive  this  is  a  h.  man  of  God 

1  C'hr.  22. 19.  bring  the  A.  vessels  into  house  of  God 
29.3.above  all  that  I  have  prepared  for  the  A.  house 

2  Chron.  23.  6.  they  shall  go  in,  for  they  aie  A. 

35.  3.  said  to  the  Levites  which  were  A.  to  the  Ld 

put  the  h.  ark  into  the  house  Solomon  built 
13.  but  the  other  A.  oflTerings  sod  llicy  in  pots 
Ezra  S.  28.  ye  are  A.  to  the  Lord,  vessels  are  A.  also 
9.  2.  the  A.  seed  mingled  themselves  with  people 
JWA.  9. 14.  madest  known  unto  them  thy  A.  sabbath 
Psal.  20.  6.  he  will  hear  him  from  his  A.  heavens 

22.  3.  thou  art  A.  O  thou  that  inhabiiest  praises 
2f'.  2.  when  I  lift  my  hands  toward  thy  A.  orael« 
86.  2.  preserve  my  soul,  for  I  am  A.  O  God  save 

98.  1.  his  A.  arm  hath  gotten  him  the  victory 

99.  5.  worship  at  his  footstool,  for  he  is  A. 

9.  exalt  the  Lord,  and  worship  at  his  A.  hill 
105.  42.  for  he  remembered  his  A.  promise 
145.  17.  the  Lord  is  A.  in  all  his  works 

Prow. 9.10.  the  knowledge  of  the  A. is  understanding 
20.  25.  to  man,  who  devoureth  that  \<>hich  is  A. 
30.  3.  nor  have  I  the  knowledge  of  the  A. 

Isa.  4. 3.  remaincih  in  Jerusalem  shall  he  called  k. 
0.  3.  one  cried,  A.  A.  A.  is  the  Lord  of  hosts 

13.  the  A.  seed  shall  be  the  substance  thereof 
27.13.shall  worship  in  the  A.monntain  at  Jernsalem 
30.  29.  a  song,  as  when  a  A.  solemnity  is  kept 
.52.  10.  the  Lord  hath  made  bare  his  A.  arm 
58.13.  call  sabbath,  the  A.  of  the  Lord,  honourable 
64.10.  thy  A.  cities  are  a  wilderness,  Zion  a  wilder. 

11.  our  A.  and  beautiful  house  is  burnt  up 
.Ter.  11.  15.  and  the  A.  Hesh  is  passed  from  thee 
KifA-.22.26. put  no  difference  bet  ween  A. and  profane 

36.  .38.  I  will  incrense  them  as  the  A.  flock 
42.  13.  they  be  A.  chambers,  where  priests  eat 

14.  there  lay  their  garments,  for  they  are  A. 

44.  19.  and  lay  them  in  the  A.  chambers 

23.  shall  teach  diflerenco  between  A.  and  profane 

45.  1.  shall  offer  a  A.  portion  of  the  land,  4. 

6.  against  the  oblation  of  A.  portion,  7.  |  48.  IfiL 

46.  19.  into  the  A.  chambers  of  the  priests 
48.  10.  for  the  priests  shall  be  this  A.  oblation 

14.  not  sell  first-fruits,  for  it  is  A.  unto  the  Lord 
20.  shall  offer  the  A.  oblation  fnur-sqnare,  21. 
Dan.  4. 8.  butDaniel  came  in  before  me,  in  whom 
is  the  spirit  of  the  A.  gods,  9,  18.  |  5.  11. 
11.  28:  his  heart  shall  be  against  the  A.  covenant 
30.  indignation  against  the  A.  covenant,  intelli- 
gence with  them  that  forsake  the  A.  covenant 
Hag.  2.  12.  if  one  bear  A.  flesh,  and  with  his  skirt 
touch  bread,  or  pottage,  or  wine,  or  oil 
shall  it  be  A.7 


HOL 

ieek.  2. 12.  Lord  shall  inherit  Judah  in  the  h.  land 

13.  Lord  is  raised  up  out  of  bis  A.  habitation 
Mat.  7.  6.  give  not  that  which  ia  A.  unto  the  dogs 

25.  31.  shall  come,  and  all  the  A.  angels  with  him 
Jl/arA;6. 20.  knowing  that  he  was  a  just  man  and  A. 

8.  38.  Cometh  in  glory  with  A.  angels,  /^uAci). 'Jfi. 
L,ukel.~0.  by  the  mouth  of  A.  propliels,  ..^cti  3.  iJl 
72.  and  to  remember  his  A.  covenant 

2.  23.  every  male  shall  be  called  A.  to  the  Lord 
Johnll.  11.  A.  Fath.  keep  those  thou  hasi  given  me 
Jlcts  4.  27.  against  thy  A.  child  Jesus,  whom  thou 

30.  wonders  may  be  done  by  name  of  thy  A.  child 
7.33.  the  place  where  thou  Blandest  is  A.  ground 

10.  22.  was  warned  from  God  by  a  A.  angel 
i!(mi.I.2.which  he  had  promised  in  the  A.  scriptures 

7.  12.  the  commandment  is  A.  just,  and  good 

11,  16.  if  the  first-fruit  be  A.  if  the  root  be  A. 
12.1.thatye  present  your  bodies  a  A.  sacrifice  to  G 
16. 16.  salute  one  another  with  a  A.  kiss,  ]  Cor.  16. 

20.  2  Cor.  13.  12.  1  Thess.  5.  26.  1  Pet.  5.  14. 
1  Cor.  3.  17.  the  tempio  of  God  is  A.  which  temple 

7. 14.  hut  now  are  they  A.  ||  34.  that  she  may  be  h 
Eph.  1. 4.  we  should  be  A.  and  without  blame,  5.27 
Col.  1.  22.  to  present  you  A.  and  unblamable 

3.  12.  put  on,  as  the  elect  of  God,  A.  and  beloved 

1  TAes«.5.27.this  epistle  be  read  to  all  the  A.brethren 
17>m.  2.  8.  lifiing  up  A.  hands  without  wrath 

2  THm.  1.  9.  who  hath  called  us  with  a  A.  callin 

3. 15.  thou  hast  known  A.  scriptures,  able  to  make 
7\t.  1.  8.  a  bishop  must  be  sober,  A.  temperate 
Neb.  3. 1.  A.  brethren,  partakers  of  heavenly  calling 

7.  26.  such  a  high-priest  became  us,  who  is  A. 

1  Pet.  1.  15.  so  be  ye  A.  in  all  conversation,  16. 

2.  5.  a  A.  priesthood  to  offer  up  spiritual  sacrifices 

3.  5.  the  A.  women  also  who  trusted  in  God 

2  Pet.  1. 18.  when  we  were  with  him  in  A.  mount 
21.  but  A.  men  spake  as  moved  by  Holy  Ghost 

2.  21.  than  to  turn  from  the  A.  commandment 

3.  2.  the  words  spoken  before  by  the  A.  prophets 
11.  what  persons  to  be  in  all  A.  conversation 

Rev.  3.  7.  write  these  things,  saith  he  that  is  A. 
4. 8. saying,  A.  A.  A.  Ld.God  Almighty,  which  was 
6. 10.  cried,  saying,  how  long,  O  Lord,  A.  and  true 

14.  10.  be  tormented  in  presence  of  the  A.  angels 

15.  4.  who  shall  not  fear  thee?  for  thou  art  A. 
18. 20.  rejoice  over  her,  ye  A.  apostles  and  prophets 
20.6.  A.  Is  he  that  hath  part  in  the  first  resurrection 
21.  10.  and  he  shewed  me  the  A.  Jerusalem 
5B.  6.  Lord  God  of  the  A.  prophets'sent  his  angel 

11.  and  he  that  is  A.  let  him  be  A.  still 
See  CdNVOCATtON. 
HOLY  day. 
F.iod.  3.">.  2.  the  seventh  day  shall  be  a  A.  day 
J^eh.  8.  9.  this  diiy  is  A.  unto  the  Lord,  10,  11. 

10.  31.  not  buy  it  of  them  on  sabbath  or  A.  day 
Psal.  42.  4.  with  a  multitude  that  kept  A.  day 
Isn.  58.  13.  from  doing  thy  pleasure  on  my  A.  day 
C0Z.2.I6.  let  no  man  judje  you  in  respect  of  a  A.iinj/ 
See  Garments. 
HOLY  Ghost. 
Jfat.1.18.  shewas  found  with  chililof  the  TT.Ghost 
20.  what  is  conceived  in  her  is  of  the  //.  (thnst 
S.ll.shall  baptize  you  with  H.GhostynnA  with  fire, 
Mark  \.  8.  I.uke  3.  16.  Ji>An  1.  33.  .^cts  1.  5 

12.  31.  blasphemy  against  the  II.  Ghost  shall  not 
be  forgiven  unto  men,  Mark  3.  29.  I.uke  12.  10, 

32.  whosoever  speaketh  against  the  H.  Ghost 
28.19.b:inti7,oinnamoofFathcr,Son,andW.<7Ao.<!< 

Mark  12.36.David  said  by  the  H.Ghost,  ..lets  1.10. 

13.  11.  it  is  not  ye  that  speak,  but  the  II.  Ghost 
Luke  1. 15.  John  shall  be  filled  with  the  H.  Ohost 

35.  the  H.  Ghnsl  shall  come  upon  then 
41.  and  Elisabeth  was  filled  with  the  //.  Ghost 
67.  his  father  Zacharias  was  filhjd  with  //.  Ghost 
2.  25.  name  was  Simeon,  and  //.  G.wns  upon  him 

26.  and  itwasrevealcduntohim  bythe  If. Ghost 
3.22.  the  //.  Ghost  descended  in  a  bodily  shape 
4.  1.  Jesus  being  full  of  the  H.  Ghost  returned 
12. 12.  H.  Ghost  shall  teach  you  in  the  same  hour 

John  7.  30.  for  the  H.  Glw.it  waR  not  yd  given 

14.  26.  but  the  Comforter,  who  is  the  It.  Ghost 
20.  22.  he  Biiiih,  receive  ye  the  //.  G.  Jlcts  2.  38. 

^cta  1. 2.  after  that  he  through  the  H.  G.  had  given 

8.  after  that  the  H  Ghost  is  come  upon  you 
2.  4.  they  were  all  filled  with  the  H.  Ghost,  4. 31. 

33.  having  rfceived  the  promise  of  the  H.  Ghost 
4.  8.  Peter,  filled  with  the  //.  G.  said  unto  them 
fi.  3.  Satan  filled  thy  heart  to  lie  to  the  //.  Ghost 

32.  we  arc  his  witne^ies,  so  is  also  the  //.  Ghost 

6.  3.  look  out  men  full  of  the  ff.  G.  and  wi.sdom 
5.  they  chn«n  .Stephen,  a  mnn  full  of  the  H.Ghnst 

7.  51.  ye  slifT-necked,  ve  always  n-sist  the  //.  G. 
55.  ho  being  full  of  //.  G.  loDked  up  to  heaven 

8.  15.  prayed  that  they  might  receive  the  IT.  G. 

17.  hands  on  them,  and  they  received  the  //.  G. 

18.  when  Simon  saw  that  the  II.  G.  was  eivf>n 

19.  on  whom  I  lay  hands,  he  may  receive  }l.  G. 
0.  17.  thou  mightest  be  filled  with  the  U.  Ghost 

31.  walkin?  in  the  comfort  of  the  //.  Ghost 
10.  38.  bow  God  aooinled  Jeaui  with  the  H.Okosl 


HOL 

.^cts  10.  44.  H.  O.  fell  on  all  which  beard  the  word 
4.5.  on  Gentiles  was  poured  the  gift  of  the  H.  O. 
47.  which  have  received  the  H.  G.  as  well  as  we 
11.  15.  H.  G.  fell  on  them  as  on  us  at  beginning 
16.  but  ye  shall  be  baptized  with  the  U.  Ghost 
21.  Barnabas,  full  of  the  H.  Ghost  and  faith 

13.2.  the  H.  O.said,  separate  Barnabas  and  Sau 
4.  being  sent  forth  by  the  H.  Ohost,  departed 
9.  Paul,  filled  with  the  H.  O.  set  his  eyes  on  him 
52.  the  disciples  were  filled  with  the  H.  Ghost 

15.8.  giving  them  the /f.  Ghost  as  he  did  unions 
28.  it  seemed  good  to  the  H.  Ghust,  and  to  us 
16.6.were  forbidden  of  the  H.  G.  to  preach  in  Asia 

19.  2.  have  ye  received  the  H.  Ghost?  we  have 
not  heard  whether  there  be  any  //.  Ghost 

6.  laid  hands  on  them,  the  H.  G.  came  on  them 

20.  23.  save  that  the  H.  G.  wilnes.seth  in  every  city 
28.  over  which  H.  G.  hath  made  you  overseers 

21. 11.  thus  saith  the  H.  Gho.it,  so  shall  the  Jews 
28. 25.  well  spake  the  H.G.  by  Esaias  the  prophet 
Horn.  5.  5.  love  of  God  shed  ui  hearts  by  the  H.  G. 
9. 1.  conscience  bearing  me  witness  in  the  ff.  O. 
14. 17.  the  kingdom  of  God  is  joy  in  the  H.  Ghnst 
15. 13.  abound  in  hope  through  power  ofthe  H.G. 
16.  acceptable,  being  sanctified  by  the  H.  Ghost 

1  Cor.  2. 13.  but  in  words  wiiich  the  H.  G.  teacheth 
6.  19.  your  body  is  the  tem])le  ofthe  H.  Ghost 

12.3.  say  that  Jesus  is  Lord,  but  by  the  H.  Ghost 

2  Cor.  6.  6.  by  kindness,  by  the  H.  Ghost,  by  love 
13.  14.  the  communion  ofthe  H.  O.  be  with  you 

1  Thess.  1.  5.  for  our  gospel  came  in  the  H.  Ghost 
6.  received  the  word  with  joy  ofthe  H.  Ghnst 

2  Tim.  1. 14.  that  good  thing  keep  by  the  H.  Ghost 
Tit.  3.  5.  he  saved  us  by  the  renewing  of  the  H.  G. 
i/eA.2. 4.  bearing  witness  with  gifts  ofthe  H.Ghost 

3. 7.  as  the//.  Ghost  sailh,  to-day  if  ye  will  hear 
6.  4.  and  were  made  partakers  ofthe  H.  Ghost 

9.  8.  the  //.  Ghost,  this  signifying,  that  the  way 

10.  15.  whereof  the  H.  Ghost  is  a  witness  to  us 

1  Pet.  1. 12.  with  the  //.  O.  sent  down  from  heaven 

2  Pet.  1.21.  spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the  H.  G. 
\John  5.7.  the  Father,  the  Word,  and  the  H.  G. 
Jade  20.  but  ye,  beloved,  praying  in  the  H.  Ohost 

Hee  God,  Habitation,  Hill. 
Most  HOLY. 
ETod.^6.33.  between  the  holy  place  and  the  inost  A. 
34.  on  ark  ofthe  testimony  in  the  most  h.  place 
29.  37.  and  it  shall  be  an  altar  most  A.  40.  10. 
30. 10.  it  is  viost  A.  ||  29.  that  they  may  be  most  h. 
.36.  the  perfume  shall  be  to  you  most  h. 
Lev.  2.  3.  the  remnant  of  the  meat-offering  shall 
be  Aaron's,  it  is  most  A.  10.  |  6.  17.  ]  lO.  12. 

6.  25.  the  sin-offering  is  most  A.  29.  ]  10.  17. 
7. 1.  the  trespass-offering  is  most  A.  0.  |  14.  13. 
21.22.  eat  bread  of  God  both  of  most  A.  and  holy 
24.  9.  the  cakes  of  fine  flour  are  most  h.  to  him 
27.28.  every  devoted  thing  is  most  h.  to  the  Lord 

^um.4. 4.  this  shall  bi!  service  about  most  h.  things 
19.  thus  do,  when  they  approach  the  most  A.things 
18. 9.  the  offering  they  render  to  me  shall  be  m.  A. 
10.  in  the  most  h.  place  shall  thou  eat  it 

1  Kin/rs  6.  16.  he  built  them  for  the  most  A.  place 

7.  .50.  Solomon  made  vessels  for  the  most  h.  place 

8.  6.  brought  the  ark  unto  m.  A.  place,  2  Chr.  5.  7. 

1  Chron.  6.  49.  Aaron  and  sons  for  work  of  most  A. 
2.3.  13.  Aaron  separated  to  sanctify  most  A.  things 

2  Otron.  3.  8.  Solomon  made  the  most  A.  house 
10.  in  \.\\cmosth.  house  he  made  two  cherubims 

4.  22.  the  inner  doors  thereof  for  the  most  A.  place 
31.  14.  and  Koro  to  distribute  the  most  A.  thin 

Ezra  2.  63.  not  eat  ofthe  mo,s-£  A.  things,  JVVA.  7.  65. 

Eiek.  43.  12.  the  whole  limit  shall  be  most  h. 
44.  13.  slrill  not  come  near  in  the  most  A.  place 
45.3.  in  it  shall  be  the  sanctuary  and  mosth.  place 
48.  12.  this  oblation  shall  bo  a  thing  most  A. 

Dan.  9.  2t.  seventy  weeks  to  anoint  the  most  h. 

Hos.  11.  t  12.  Judah  is  faithful  with  the  most  h. 

■fudc  20.  building  yourselves  on  your  most  A.  faith 
HOLY  mountain. 

Psal.  87.  1.  his  foundati(m  is  in  the  A.  mountains 

Isn   11.0.  nor  destroy  in  my  A.  mountain,  6.5.  25. 
56.  7.  even  them  will  I  bring  to  my  A.  mountain 
.57.  13.  and  ho  shall  inherit  my  A.  mountain 
6.5.  II.  ye  are  they  that  forget  my  A.  mountain 
66.  20.  on  mules  and  swift  beasts  to  my  A.  mount. 

K:c<r.20. 40.  in  my  h.  mountain  they  shall  serve  mo 
28.  14.  thou  wast  upon  the  A.  mountain  of  God 

Dan.  9.  16.  lot  thy  anner  be  turned  from  thy  A.  m. 
20.  prnaeniing  supplication  for  the  A.  mountain 
11.  45.  plant  tabernacles  in  glorious  A.  mountain 
fori  2.  1.  sound  an  alarm  in  my  A.  mountain 
3.17. 1  am  the  I..ord,  dwelling  in  Zion  my  A.  mount. 

Ohad.  16.  for  as  ye  have  drunk  on  my  A.  mountain 

Zejih.  3. 11.  no  more  hnughly  bccauHoof  A.  mount. 

Z<'cA.8.3.mounlain  ofthe  Lord  called  the  A. mount. 
HOLY  name. 

Lev.  20.  3.  seed  to  Molech,  to  profane  my  A.  name 
22.  2.  and  that  they  profiini-  not  my  A.  name 
32.  neither  shall  ye  profane  my  A.  pame 

1  Chron.  10. 10.  glory  >«  in  hi«  A.  name,  Ps.  105.  3 


HOL 

1  CAr.16.35.  wc  give  thanka  to  thy  A.  n.  PsallK.'tt 
29.  16.  to  build  thee  a  house  for  thy  A.  name 

Psal.  33.  21.  because  we  trusted  in  his  A.  nlime 
99.  3.  praise  thy  terrible  natne,  for  it  is  A, 
103.  1   bless  the  Lord,  bless  his  A.  name,  145.  21 
111.  9.  A.  and  reverend  is  his  name,  Luke  1.  49. 

Isa.  57.  15.  saith  the  lofty  One,  whose  name  is  A. 

Ezek.  20.  39.  but  pollute  you  my  A.  naine  no  mora 
36. 2U.  they  profaned  my  A.  name  when  they  said 

21.  but  I  had  pity  for  mine  A.  name 

22.  not  for  your  sakes,  but  for  my  A.  name's  sake 

39.  7. 1  will  make  my  A.  name  known  in  Isr.  1  will 

not  let  them  pollute  my  A.  name  any  more 
25.  and  I  will  be  jealous  for  my  A.  name 
43.  7.  my  A.  na7ne  shall  Israel  no  more  defile 
8.  they  have  defiled  my  A.  ji.  by  their  aboininat 
Jlmos  2. 7.  go  in  to  same  maid,  to  profane  my  A.  j«. 

^OLY  One. 
Deut.  33.  8.  Thummim  and  Urim  be  with  thy  A.  O. 
.lob  6.  10.  not  concealed  the  words  ofthe  A.  One 
Ps.  16. 10.  not  leave  my  soul  in  hell,  nor  suffer  thine 
A.  One  to  see  corruption,  Jlcts  2.  27.  |  13.  35. 
89.  19.  then  thou  spakest  in  vision  to  thy  A.  One 
Isa.  10.  17.  and  his  A.  One  shall  be  for  a  flame 
29.  23.  they  shall  sanctify  the  A.  One  of  Jacob 

40.  25.  to  whom  shall  I  be  equal  1  saith  the  A.  One 
43.  15.  I  am  the  Lord  your  A.  One,  the  Creator 
49.  7.  thus  saith  the  Redeemer  of  Israel,  his  A.Ojm 

Dan.  4. 13.  a  A.  One  came  down  from  heaven,  2;!. 
Hos.  11.  9.  for  I  am  the  A.  One  in  the  midst  of  theo 
Hab.l.  12.  art  thou  not  from  everlast.O  L.  my  A.O 
3.  3.  the  A.  Ojie  came  from  mount  Paran 
Mark  1.24. man  with  unclean  spir.said,!  know  theo 
who  thou  art,  the  A.  One  of  God,  Luke  4.  34. 
Jlcts  3.  14.  but  ye  denied  the  A.  One  and  the  Just 
1  7uAn2. 20.  ve  have  an  unction  from  the  A.  One 

HOLY  One  of  Israel. 
2ff^in^sl9.^.thou  hast  exalted  thv  voice, and  lifted 
thy  eyes  against  the  h.One  of  Isr.  Isa.  37.  23. 
"1.22.  to  thee  will  I  sing,  O  thou  h.One  of  Isr. 


Psal. ' 


78.  41.  yea,  they  limited  the  A.  One  of  Israel 
89.  18.  and  the  A.  One  of  Israel  is  our  Kine 
Isa.  1.  4.  they  have  provoked  the  A.  One  of  Israel 
5.  19.  let  counsel  of  the  h.One  of  Israel  Araw  nigh 
24.  and  despised  the  word  of  the  A.  One  of  Israel 
10.20.  shall  stay  on  the  Lord,  the  A.  One  of  Israel 
12  6.  great  is  the  A.  One  of  Israel  in  midst  of  thee 
17. 7.  his  eyes  shall  have  respect  to  A.  One  of  Isr. 
29. 19.  the  i>oor  shall  rejoice  in  the  A.  One  of  Isr. 

30.  11.  cause  the  A.  One  of  Israel  to  cease  from  us 
12.  thus  saith  the  A.  One  of  Israel,  15. 

31.  1.  they  look  not  unto  the  A.  One  of  Israel 
41.  14.  saith  thy  Redeemer,  the  A.  One  of  Israel 

16.  and  thou  shall  glory  in  the  A.  One  of  Israel 
20.  and  the  A.  One  of  Israel  hath  created  it 

43.  3.  I  am  the  Ld.  the  A.  One  of  Isr.  thy  Saviour 
14.  thus  saith  your  Redeemer,  the  A.  One  of  Isr. 

45.  lI.lheLd.  the  A.  One  of  Israel,  and  his  Maker 

47. 4.  Lord  of  hosts  is  his  name,  the  A.  One  of  Isr. 
48.17.  sailh  thy  Redeemer,  the  A.  One  of  Isr.  M.  5. 
49.  7.  the  Redeemer  of  Israel,  and  his  A.  One 

55. 5.  nations  run  unto  thee,  fiir  the  A.  One  of  Isr. 
60.  9.  bring  their  gold  to  the  A.  One  of  Israel 

14.  shall  call  thee  tho^ion  ofthe  A.  One  of  Isr. 
.Irr.  .50.  29.  Babylon  proud  ag.  the  A.  One  of  Israel 
51.5.  land  filled  with  sin  against  the  h.One  of  Isr. 
Ezek.  39.  7.  that  I  am  the  Lord,  the  A.  One  in  Isr. 

HOLY  ones. 
Dan.  4. 17.  the  demand  by  the  word  of  tho  A.  ones 

HOLY  oil, 
Ezod.  30.  25.  it  shall  be  a  A.  anointing  oil,  31. 
.37.  29.  and  be  made  the  A.  anointing  oil 
.Arum.35.25.  the  high-priest  was  anoinli'd  withA.oii 
Psal.  89.  20.  with  mv  A.  oil  have  I  anointed  him 

Hdl.Y  people. 
Deut. 7. 6.  thou  art  a  h. people  to  the  Lord,  14.2,21. 
26.  19.  that  thou  mnyesl  he  a  A.  people  to  the  Lord 
28. 9.  L.  shall  establish  thee  a  A.  people  to  himself 
Isa.  62.  12.  they  shalUinll  them  the  h.  people 
/>an.  8. 24.  he  shall  HKper,  and  destroy  iho  k.peo 
12.  7.  to  scatter  the"^wer  of  the  h.  people 

HOLY  place. 
Kj-nrf.  23.29.  when  hogoeth  in  untollin  A.p/flt«,35. 
43.  come  near  to  minister  in  the  h. place,  29.  30. 
29.  31.  thou  shall  seethe  his  flesh  in  ihe  A.  place 
31.  II.  mav  make  sweet  incense  fur  the  A.  place 
35.  19.  to  do  service  in  Ihe  A.  place,  3il.  1,41. 
38.  24.  the  gold  in  all  the  work  of  thf  A.  place 
Lev.  6. 16.  with  unleavened  bread  it  shiill  be  cstca 
in  the  A.  place,  26.  |  7.  6.  |  10.  13.  |  24.  9. 
27.  thou  shall  wash  that  in  the  A.  place  0 

30.  brought  to  reconcile  withal  in  Ihe  A.  place 
10. 17.haveyenoleatensin-offerin<;  in  iheA.pIoetT 
18.  blood  was  not  brought  in  wiihin  the  h.plaet 
14.  13.  shall  slay  Ihe  burnl-offerini;  in  the  h.plact 
16.2.  that  ho  come  not  at  nil  timemnlo  thoA.pIoce 
3.  thus  shall  Aaron  come  inio  Ihi'  A.  place 

16.  ho  shall  make  an  ntoni^ment  for  iJieA.  plae« 

17.  goeth  to  make  atonement  in  the  A.  place,  27. 
20.  hath  made  an  end  of  reconciling  l\iiili.pla€* 


HOL 

Z.e».16.23.he  put  on  when  he  went  into  the  k.  place 
24.  slrtill  vvasli  his  flesh  with  water  in  tlio  li. place 

Josh.  5.  15.  the  place  whereon  thou  stanilest  is  A. 

l.K"(n^*8.  B.thestavcs  were  seen  out  in  Ibe  It.  place 
10.  priests  come  out  of  the  A.  place,  2  C/ir.5. 11. 

1  Ckron.  23.  32.  keep  the  charge  of  the  A.  place 

2  Cliron.  29.  5.  curry  fillhinese  out  of  the  A.  place 
7.  nor  offered  burjit-otfcrings  in  the  A.  place 

30.  27.  prayer  came  up  to  his  A.  cIwelling-;>/uce 
«!5.  5.  stand  in  the  A.  place  according  to  divisions 
Ezra  9.  8.  and  to  grve  us  a  nail  in  his  A.  place 
Psal.  24.  3.  and  who  shall  stand  in  his  A.  place! 
4G.  4.  the  streams  whereof  make  glad  tUeli.  place 
68.  17.  among  thom  as  in  Sinai,  in  the  h.  place 
Eccl.  8. 10.  who  had  gone  from  the  place  of  the  A. 
Isa.  57.  15.  I  dwell  in  the  liigh  and  A.  place 
Ezelc.  41.  4.  he  said  to  me,  this  is  the  most  A.  place 
42  13.  tlie/y/ifceis  A.  II  14.  not  go  9ut  of  the  A.  yiace 
45.  4.  it  shall  he  a  A.  place  for  the  sanctuary 
,Va£.24.)5.yesee  the  abominations  stand  in  A.;)J!ace 
jicts  (5.13.  blasphemous  words  against  this  A. /(iace 
21.  2.?.  this  man  halh  polluted  this  A.  place 
Heb.\>.  12.  Christ  entered  m  once  into  tlie  h. place 
25. the  high-priest  entered  every  year  into  h.place 
HOLY  places. 
8  Cliron.  8.11.  because  iheplaces  are  A.  whereunto 
Psal.  63.  35.  tlioU  art  terrible  out  of  thy  A.  places 
Ezek.  7.  24.  and  their  h.  places  shall  be  defiled 
21.  2.  and  drop  thy  word  toward  the  h.  places 
ffei.  9. 24.  Christ  is  not  entered  into  A.piacesraade 

Shall  be  HOLY. 
Exod.  22.  31.  and  ye  shall  he  A.  men  unto  me 

20.  37.  whatsoever  toucheth  the  altar  shall  be  h. 
30.29.whatsocver  touchelhthemiA.6eA.i>ct).6.18. 

32.  it  is  holy,  and  it  shall  be  h.  unto  you,  37. 
40.9.  shalt  anoint  the  tabernacle,  and  it  shall  be  A. 
Lev.  6. 27.  shalt  touch  the  flesh  thereof  shall  be  A. 
11.44.ye  shall  be  A.for  I  am  holy ,  45.  |  19. 2.  |  20.20. 
19.  24.  fruit  thereof  ^AaJi  be  h.  to  praise  the  Lord 

21.  6.  the  priests  shall  be  h.  unto  their  God 

23. 20.  they  shall  be  A.  to  the  Lord  for  the  priest 
25.  12.  it  is  the  jubilee,  it  shall  be  h.  unto  you 
27.  9.  that  any  man  giveth  to  the  Lord  shall  be  A. 

10.  then  the  exchange  thereof  «Aa7Z  be  h.  33. 
21.  in  the  jubilee  it  shall  be  A.  to  the  Lord 
32.  the  tenth  shall  be  h.  unto  the  Lord 

A'am.  6.  5.  the  Nazarite  shall  be  A.  unto  the  Lord 
16.7.the  man  whom  Lord  doih  choose  he  shall  be  h. 
IS.lO.every  maleshalleat  it,itsAa/iAe  A.  unto  thee 
Deut.  23.  14.  therefore  shall  thy  camp  be  A. 
Jcr.  31.  40.  the  gate  toward  the  east  shall  beh- 
.Ezfii.  45.1.  the  holy  portion  6-AaW  6e  A.with  borders 
Joel'i.Vl.l  dwell  in  Zion,then  sAaW  Jerusalem  be  h. 

HOLY  Spirit. 
Psal.  51.  11.  and  take  not  thy  h.  Spirit  from  me 
Isa.  63.  10.  they  rebelled  and  vexed  his  A.  Spirit 

11.  where  is  he  that  puthia  A.  S;;iri£  within  him? 
Luke  11.13.your  heavenly  Father  give  the  h. Spirit 
Eph.  1.  13.  sealed  with  that  A.  Spirit  of  promise 

4.  30.  grieve  not  the  A.  Spirit  of  God,  whereby 
I  TAe«s.  4.  8.  who  hathgiven  unto  us  hia  h.  Spirit 

HOLY  temple. 
Psal.5.1.  Twill  worship  toward  thy  A.  temple,\38.^. 

11.  4.  the  Lord  is  in  his  A.  temple,  his  eyes  behold 
65.4. be  satisfied  with  the  goodnessof  thy  A.temp/e 
79.  1.  thy  A.  temple  have  they  defiled,  they  laid 

Jonah  2.  4. 1  will  look  again  toward  thy  A.  temple 
7.  my  prayer  came  in  unto  thee,  to  thy  A.  temple 
Mic.  1.  2.  the  Lord  from  his  A.  temple  be  witness 
Hab.  2.  20.  but  the  Lord  is  in  his  A.  temple 
Eph.  2.  21.  groweth  to  a  A.  temple  in  the  Lord 

HOLY  thing. 
Z/CP.22. 10.  no  stranger  shall  eat  of  the  A.  thing 

14.  if  a  man  eat  of  the  A.  tAi'n^  unwittmgly 
27.  23.  thy  estimation  as  a  A.  thing  to  the  Lord 

JVum.4. 15.  but  they  shall  not  touch  any  A.  thing 
Ezek.  48.  12.  oblation  be  to  them  a  thing  mosi  A. 
Luke  1.  35.  therefore  that  A.  thing  born  of  thee 

HOLY  things. 
j;zod.28.38.Aaron  may  bearthe  iniquity  of  A.  thin. 
/.eo.  5.15.  sin  thro'  ignorance  in  the  A.  things  of  L. 
22.2. separate  themselves  from  the  h.things  of  Isr. 
3.  whosoever  he  be  that  goelh  unto  the  A.  things 
4.  not  eat  of  the  A.  things  till  he  be  clean,  6,  12. 
7.  be  clean,  and  shall  afterward  eat  of  the  A.  thin. 

15.  they  shall  not  profane  the  A.  things  of  Israel 

16.  to  hear  iniquilf ,  when  they  eat  A.  things 
JVuni.  4.  20.  not  go  in  to  see,  when  h.  t.  are  covered 

5. 9.  every  offering  of  A.  things  shall  be  his,  18. 19. 
18.  32.  neither  shall  ye  pollute  the  A.  things 
Deut.  12.  2fi.  thy  A.  things  lake  and  go  to  the  place 

1  CAron.  23.  28.  their  ofTice  was  in  purifying  ft.  th. 

2  Cliron.  31.6.  they  brought  in  the  tithe  of  h.things 
JVeA.  10.  33.  we  made  ordinances  for  the  A.  things 

12.  47^  they  sanctified  the  A.  things  to  the  Levites 
Eifk.  20.  40.  there  will  I  require  your  A.  things 

22.  8.  thou  hast  despiped  mine  A.  things 
26.  her  priests  have  profaned  my  A.  things 

44. 8.  ye  have  not  kept  the  charge  of  my  A.  things 

13.  [hall  not  come  near  to  any  of  my  h.  things 

389 


HON 

1  Cor.  9.  13.  they  who  minister  about  A.  things 
Hcb.  8.  t  2.  a  high-priest,  a  minister  of  A.  things 

HOIVIi;. 
Oen.  39. 16.  laid  up  garments  till  her  lord  came  A. 

43.  16.  bring  these  men  A.  slay  and  make  ready 
Exod.  9.  19.  man  and  beast  not  brought  A.  shall  die 
/.)fiu«.21.12.then  thou  shall  bring  her  A. to  thy  house 

24.  5.  but  he  shall  be  free  at  A.  one  year 
yosA.2.18. bring  all  thy  father's  household  h.  to  tlieo 
Judg.  11.  9.  if  ye  bring  me  A.  again  to  fight 

19.  9.  get  on  your  way,  that  thou  mayest  go  A. 
Ruth  1.21.  the  Lord  hath  brought  me  A.  empty 

1  Sam.  2.  20.  and  they  went  unto  their  own  A. 
6.  7.  and  biing  their  calves  A.  from  them 

10.  and  the  men  shut  up  their  calves  at  A. 
10. 26.  and  Saul  also  went  A.  to  Gibeah,  24.  22. 

18.  2.  let  him  go  no  more  A.  to  his  father's  house 

2  Sam.  13.7.  then  David  sent  A.  to  Tamar,  saying 
14.  13.  the  king  doth  not  fetch  A.  his  banished 
17.  23.  Ahithophel  gat  him  A.  to  his  house 

\  Kings  5.l\.VLmon\.h  in  Lebanon, two  months  at  A. 

13.  7.  come  A.  with  me  and  refresh  thyself,  15. 
2  Kings  14.  10.  and  tarry  at  A.  2  Chron.  25.  19. 

1  Chron.  13.  12.  bring  the  ark  of  God  A.  to  mo 
13.  so  David  brought  not  the  ark  A.  to  himself 

2  Chron.  25.  10.  Amaziah  separated  the  army  of 

Ephr.  to  go  A.  they  returned  A.  in  great  anger 
Esth.b.  10.  when  Hamancame  A.  called  his  friends 
Job  39.  12.  heheve  that  he  will  bring  A.  thy  seed 
Psal.  68. 12. she  that  tarried  at  A.  divided  the  spoil 
Pruv.  7.  19.  the  good  man  is  not  at  A.  he  is  gone 

20.  and  he  will  come  A.  at  the  day  appointed 
Keel.  12.  5.  because  man  goeth  to  his  long  A. 
Jer.  0. 1 2.  likened  Zion  to  a  woman  dwelling  at  A. 

39.  14.  that  Gedaliah  should  carry  him  A. 
Lam.  1.29.  abroad  thesword,atA.thereisas  death 
liab.  2.  5.  he  is  a  proud  man,  neither  keepeth  at  A. 
Hag.  1.  9.  when  ye  brought  it  A.  I  did  blow  upon  it 
Mat.  8. 6.  my  servant  lieth  at  A.  sick  of  the  palsy 
Mark  5.  19.  go  A.  to  thy  friends  and  tell  them 
lyuke  9.  61.  let  first  bid  them  farewell  who  are  at  A. 

15. 6.  w  hen  he  cometh  A.  he  calleth  his  friends 
.John  16.  t  32.  scattered,  every  man  to  his  own  A. 

19.  27.  that  disciple  took  her  to  his  own  A. 

20.  10.  the  disciples  went  away  to  their  own  A.  , 
Jicts  2. 1 46.  contin.  in  temple  tweaking  bread  at  A 

21.  6.  we  took  ship,  and  they  returned  h.  again 

1  Cor.  11.  34.  if  any  man  hunger  let  him  eat  at  A 

14.  35.  let  them  ask  their  husbands  at  A. 

2  Cor.  5.  6.  that  whilst  we  are  at  A.  in  the  body 
1  Tim.  5.  4.  let  them  learn  to  shew  piety  at  A. 
Tit.  2.  5.  to  be  discreet,  cfiaste,  keepers  at  A. 

HOME-BORN. 
Exod.  12.49.  one  law  shall  be  to  him  that  is  h.-born 
Lev.  18.  9.  thy  sister  whether  bom  at  A.  or  abroad 
Jer.  2. 14.  is  Israel  a  servant?  is  he  a  h.-born  slave? 

HOMER 
Was  a  measure  of  capacity  in  use  among  tlw. 
Hebrews,  containing  six  pints   very  nearly. 
It  was  the  tenth  part  of  the  Ephah,  and  was 
the  measure  of  manna  which  Ood  appointed 
for  every  Israelite,   Exod.   16.   16,  36.      See 
Ephah. 
/..CD.  27.  16.  a  A.  of  barley-seed  at  fifty  shekels 
Isa.  5.  10.  the  seed  of  a  A.  shall  yield  an  ephah 
Ezek.  45.  11.  the  measure  shall  be  after  the  A. 

13.  the  3i.\th  part  of  an  ephah  of  a  A.  of  wheat 

14.  tenth  part  of  a  bath,  for  ten  baths  are  a  A. 
Hos  3.  2.  I  bought  her  for  a  A.  and  half  a  A. 

HONEST. 
Luke  8. 15.  which  is  an  A.  and  good  heart,  having 
Jlcts  6.3.Iook  out  among  you  seven  men  of  A.  report 
iJont.  12.17.  provide  things  A.  in  the  sight  of  all  men 
2  Cor.  8.21.  provid.  A.  things  in  sight  of  L.  and  men 
13.  7.  but  that  ye  should  do  that  which  is  A. 
PA;7.4.8.whatsoeverthingsare  A.jnsi,  pure,  lovely 
Tit.  3.  t  14.  let  ours  learn  to  profess  A.  trades 
lPct.2. 12.havingourconvprsation  A.  am.  Gentiles 

HONESTLY. 
Rom.  13. 13.  let  us  walk  A.  as  in  the  day,  not  in  riot 
1  Thess.  4.  12.  may  walk  A.  toward  them  without 
//c4.13.18.conscienoe,  in  all  things  willing  to  live  A. 

HONESTY. 
1  Tim.  2. 2.  may  lead  peaceable  life  in  godli.  and  A. 

HONOUR, 
Or  to  honour,  in  scripture  style,  is  taken  not 
only  for  the  inward  or  outward  re.tpcct  which 
peoplehave  andpay  to  persons  who  are  superior 
to  them;  and  to  whom  theyowe particular  marks 
of  deference  and  di.-itinction  :  but  likewise  for 
real  services  which  are  due  to  them.  E.tod.  20. 
12,  Honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother.  This 
precept  requires,  not  only  that  we  should  shew 
our  parents  respect  and  deference,  hut  likewise 
that  we  should  assist  and  relieve  them,  and  per- 
form such  services  for  them  as  they  may  stand  in 
need  of;  as  this  precept  is  explained  by  our  Sa- 
viour;  Mat.  15.  4,5,6.  Honour  j*  likewise 
taken  in  the  same  sense  in  1  Tim.  5.  3,  17. 
Honour  widows  that  are  widows  indeed.  J^ot 
3  Q 


HON 

only  respect,  but  also  relieve  them.  Let  elders 
that  rule  well  be  counted  worthy  of  double  lio- 
nour.  Let  them  have  a  liberal  maintenance. 
Honour  is  taken  for  a  recompencc,  or  reward, 
Num.  24.  11,  I  thought  to  promote  thee  unto 
great  honour,  but  lo,  the  Lord  hath  kept  thee 
back  from  honour;  that  is,  hath  deprived  thee 
of  the  reward  I  designed  for  thee.  By  honour 
IS  also  understood  that  adoration  which  is  dua 
to  God  only,  Psal.  29. 2,  Give  unto  the  Lord  the 
honour  due  unto  hia  name.  .So  in  Mai.  1.6, 
If  then  I  be  a  father,  w  here  is  mine  honour  1 
Jlnd  in  1  Tim.  1.  17,  Unto  the  only  wise  God 
be  honour  and  glory.  It  is  put  for  an  honoura- 
ble function,  or  office,  such  as  was  that  of  the 
holy  priesthood  under  the  law.  Heh.  5.  4,  No 
man  taketh  this  honour,  this  honourable  office, 
unto  himself,  hut  he  that  is  called  of  God,  as 
was  Jiaron.  Jlnd' for  those  great  blessings 
and  enjoyments  which  arc  bestowed  on  the 
saints  in  heaven.  Rom.  2.  10,  Glory,  honour, 
and  peace  to  every  man  that  worketh  good. 
Gen.  49.  (>.  to  their  assembly,  my  A.  be  not  united 
Exod.  8. 1 9.  Moses  said,  have  this  A.  over  me 

14.  17.  and  I  will  get  me  A.  upon  Pharaoh 
18.  when  I  have  gotten  me  A.  upon  Pharaoh 

JVm/b.  22.  17.  I  will  promote  thee  unto  great  A.  37. 

24.  11.  the  Lord  halh  kept  thee  back  from  A. 

27.  20.  thou  shalt  put  some  of  thine  A.  upon  him 
Deut.  26. 19.  make  thee  high  above  all  nations  in  A. 
Judg.  4.  9.  the  journey  shall  not  be  for  thine  A. 

13. 17.  thy  sayings  come  to  pas.a,  we  may  do  thee  A. 
2  Sam.  6.  22.  of  them  shall  I  be  had  in  A. 
1  Kings  3. 13. 1  have  also  given  thee  riches  and  A. 

1  Chron.  16.  27.  glory  and  A.  are  in  his  presence 

17. 18.  what  can  David  say  more  for  A.ofthy  serv. 
29.  12.  both  riches  and  A.  come  of  thee 

28.  David  died  in  old  age,  full  of  riches  and  A, 

2  Chron.  1.  11.  thou  hast  not  asked  riches  or  A. 
12.  I  will  give  thee  riches,  and  wealth,  and  A. 

17.  5.  Jehoshaphat  had  A.  in  abundance,  18.  1 
26.  18.  nor  shall  it  be  for  thy  A.  from  the  Lord 
32.  27.  Hezekiah  had  much  riches  and  A. 

33.  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  did  him  A. 
Ksth.  1.4.  to  shew  the  A.  of  his  excellent  majesty 

20  all  wives  shall  give  to  their  husbands  h. 
6.  3.  what  A.  hath  been  done  Mordecai  for  this  t 

t6.  the  man  in  whose  A.  the  king  delighteth 
8. 16.  the  Jews  had  light  and  gladness,  joy  and  A. 
Job  14.  21.  his  sons  came  to  A.  he  knowelh  it  not 
Psal.  7.  5.  let  the  enemy  lay  mine  A.  in  the  dust 
8.  5.  thou  hast  crowned  him  with  A.  Hcb. '2.  7,9. 
21.  5.  A.  and  majesty  hast  thou  laid  upon  him 
26.  8.  I  loved  the  place  where  thine  A.  dwelieth 
29.  t2.  give  unio  the  Lord  the  A.  of  his  name 
49.  12.  nevertheless  man  being  in  A.  abideth  not 

20.  man  that  is  in  A.  and  undersfandelh  not 
66.  2.  sing  forth  the  A.  of  his  name,  make  his 
71.  8.  let  my  mouth  be  filled  with  thy  A.  all  the  day 
96.  6.  A.  and  majesty  are  before  him,  strength 
104.  1.  thou  art  clothed  with  h.  and  majesty 
112.  9.  his  horn  shall  be  exalted  with  h. 
145.  5.  I  will  speak  of  the  A.  of  thy  majesty 
149.  9.  this  A.  have  all  his  saints,  praise  the  Lord 
Prov.  .3. 16.  and  in  her  lefl  hand  are  riches  and  A. 
4.  8.  exalt  her,  and  she  shall  bring  thee  to  h. 
a.  9.  lest  thou  give  thine  A.  to  others,  thy  years 
8.  18.  riches  and  A.  are  with  me,  durable  riches 
11.  16.  a  gracious  woman  retaineth  A. 
14.28.  in  the  multitude  of  the  peop.  is  the  king's  A. 

15.  .3.3.  and  before  A.  is  humility,  18.  12. 

20.  3.  it  is  an  A.  for  a  man  to  cease  from  strife 

21.  21.  he  that  followeth  mercy,  findeth  A. 

22.  4.  by  the  fear  of  the  Lord  are  riches  and  A. 

25.  2.  the  A.  of  kings  is  to  search  out  a  matter 

26.  1.  so  A.  is  not  seemly  for  a  fool 
8.  so  is  he  that  giveth  A.  to  a  tool 

29.  23.  A.  shall  uphold  the  humble  in  spirit 
31.25.  strength  and  A.  are  her  clothing 
Keel.  6.  2.  a  man  to  whom  God  hath  given  A. 

10.  1.  so  folly  him  that  is  in  reputation  for  A. 
./cr.  33. 9.  be  to  me  an  A.  before  all  nations  ofeartb 
Dan.  2.  6.  ye  shall  receive  rewards  and  great  A. 

4.  30.  that  I  have  built  for  the  A.  of  my  majesty 
36.  mine  A.  and  brightness  returned  unto  me 

5.  18.  O  king,  God  gave  thy  father  glory  and  A. 

11.  21.  they  shall  not  give  the  A.  of  the  kingdom 
Mai.  1.  6.  if  then  I  be  a  father,  where  is  mine  A.? 
Mat.  13.  57.  Jesus  said,  a  prophet  is  not  without 

h.  save  in  his  own  country,  Mark  6.  4. 
John  4.  44. 
.lohn  5.  41.  I  receive  not  A.  from  men 

44. who  receive  A.  one  of  another,  and  seek  not  A. 

8.  54.  if!  honour  myself,  my  A.  is  nothing 
Rom.  2.  7.  in  well  doing  seek  for  glory  and  A. 

10.  but  A.  to  every  man  that  workelh  good 

9.  21.  of  the  same  lump  to  make  one  vessel  to  h. 
12.10.kindly  affeetioned,  in  A.  preferring  one  anot 
13.  7.  render  therefore  A.  to  whom  A.  is  due 

1  Cor.  12.  23.  ws  bestow  mora  abundant  h.  S4. 


HON 

S  Cor.  6.  8.  by  k.  and  diihonour,  byevil  report 
Col. '2.  23.  not  in  any  A.  to  thesulisfyinj  of  ilie  flesli 

1  Thess.  4.  4.  know  how  to  puBscss  Iii8  vessel  in  h. 
J  Tim.  1.  17.  to  the  only  wi.se  God  be  A.  and  glory 

5.  17.  let  elders  be  counted  worthy  of  double  A. 

6.  1.  count  their  own  masters  worthy  of  all  A. 
16.  to  whom  be  A.  and  power  everlasting 

2  Tim.  2.  20.  vessels,  some  to  A.sonietodishon.Sl 
y/eA.3.3.  who  buildod,  hath  more  A.  than  the  house 

5.  4.  noman  taketh  this  A. to  himself,  hut  he  called 

1  Pet.  1.  7.  might  be  found  to  praise,  A.  and  glory 
2-17.  unto  you  that  believe,  he  is  an  A. 
3. 7.  giving  A.  to  the  wife  as  to  the  weaker  vessel 

2  Pet.  1.  17.  he  received  from  God  the  Father  A. 
Rev.  4.  9.  when  those  beasts  give  glory  and  A. 

II.  thou  art  worthy  to  receive  glory  and  A.  5. 12. 
5. 13.  A.  power  and  might  be  to  him,  7. 12.  |  J9. 1. 
19.  7.  let  us  be  glad,  rejoice,  and  give  A.  to  him 
21.  24.  kings  bring  thfir  glory  and  A.  to  it,  26. 

HONOURS. 
Jicts  28.  10.  who  also  honoured  us  with  many  A. 

HONOUR,  Verb. 
Exod.  20. 12.  A.  thy  fath.  and  thy  mnlh. Deuf.  5.16. 
Mat.  15.  4.  I  19.  19.  Mark  7.  10.  |  10.  19. 
Luke  18.  20.  Kph.  6.  2. 
L,ev.  19.  15.  shalt  not  A.  the  person  of  the  mighty 

32.  thou  shalt  A.  the  face  of  the  old  man 
Judg.  9. 9.  wherewith  by  me  they  A.  God  and  man 

1  Sam.^.  30.  Ld.  saith,  for  them  that  A.  me  I  will  A. 
15.  30.  vet  A.  me  now,  I  pray  thee,  before  elders 

2  Sam.  lb.  3.  thinkcst  thou  that  David  doth  h.  thy 

father,  that  he  sent  to  thee?  1  Chron.  19.  3. 
E«tA.  6.  6.  whom  the  king  delighleth  to  A.  7,9,  11. 
Psal.  91.  15.  I  will  deliver  him  and  A.  him 
Prot).3.9.A.tbe  Ld.  with  thy  substance  and  first-fru 
Isa.  29.  13.  this  people  with  their  lips  do  A.  me 
43.  20.  the  beast  of  the  field  shall  A.  me 
58.  13.  and  shalt  A.  him,  not  doing  thine  own  ways 
Dan.  4.  37.  I  extol  and  A.  the  King  of  heaven 

11.  33.  in  his  estate  shall  he  A.  the  god  of  forces, 
a  god  whom  his  fathers  knew  not,  shall  he  A 

Mat.  15.  6.  and  A.  not  his  father  or  his  mother 
John  5. 23.  that  all  men  should  A.  Son  as  they  A. Fa. 

8.  49.  but  [  A.  my  Father,  and  ye  dishonour  me 
54.  if  I  A.  myself  my  A.  is  nothing 

12.  26.  if  any  serve  me,  him  will  my  Father  A. 
1  Tim.  5.  3.  A.  widows  that  are  widows  indeed 
1  Pet.  2.  17.  A.  all  men,  fear  God,  A.  the  king 

HONOUR.^  BLE. 
Gen.  34. 19.  Shechem  was  more  A.  than  all  house 
,Vum.  22. 15.  Ralak  sent  princes  more  A.  thnn  they 

1  .Sam.  9.  6.  there  is  in  the  city  a  man  of  God,  and 

he  is  an  A.  man,  all  he  saith  cometh  to  p.ass 

22.  14.  faithful  as  David,  who  is  A.  in  thy  house 
Z  Sam.  23.  19.  was  he  not  most  A.  of  threel  there- 
fore he  was  their  captain,  1  Chron.  11.  21. 

23.  was  more  A.  than  the  thirty,  but  attained  not 

2  Kings  5. 1.  now  Naaman  was  A.  with  his  master 
1  Chron.  4.  9.  Jabez  was  more  A.  than  his  brethren 

11.25.  behold,  was  A.  among  thirty,  attained  not 
Job  22.  8.  as  for  the  mighty  man,  he  had  the  earth, 
and  the  A.  man  dwelt  in  it 
Pial.  45.  9.  king's  daughters  among  thy  A.  women 
111.  3.  his  work  is  A.  and  glorious 
ha.  3.  3.  the  Lord  doth  take  away  the  A.  man 
5.  the  base  shall  behave  proudly  against  tho  A. 
5.  13.  and  their  A.  men  arc  famished 

9.  15.  the  ancient  and  A.  he  is  the  head 

23.  a.  whose  traffickers  are  the  A.  of  the  earth 
9.  bring  into  contempt  all  Ihe  A.  of  the  earth 

42.  21.  he  will  magnify  the  law  and  make  it  A. 

43. 4.  thou  hast  been  A.  |1 .58.  13.  holy  of  tho  L.  A. 
A"aA.  3.  10.  and  they  cast  lots  for  her  A.  men 
Mark  15. 43.  Joseph  of  Arimatheaan  A.  counsellor 
I.uke  14.  8.  lest  a  mote  A.  man  be  bidden  of  him 
^clf  13.  .50.  the  Jews  stirred  up  the  A.  women 

17.  12.  also  of  A.  women  not  a  few  helieved 
1  Cor.4.10.we  are  weak,  but  yo  are  strong,  ye  are  A. 

12.  23.  those  members  which  wo  think  less  A. 
Heb.  13.  4.  marriage  is  A.  and  the  bed  undcfiled 

HONOURFD. 
F.xod.  14.  4.  I  will  ho  A.  on  Pharaoh  and  his  host 
Prov-  13.  IB.  he  that  regardeth  reproof  shall  be  A. 

27. 18.  he  that  waiteth  on  his  master  shall  be  A. 
ha.  43. 23.  nor  hast  thou  A.  me  with  thy  sacrifices 
/..aOT.l  J^.all  that  A.  her,  despise  her,  they  have  seen 

5.  12.  the  faces  of  tho  elders  were  not  A. 
Dan.  4.  31. 1  praised  and  A.  him  that  livctli  for  ever 
^ctj  2^.  10.  who  iilso  A.  us  with  many  honours 
1  Car.  12.26.  or  one  member  he  A.  all  rejoice  with  it 

flONOIIRnST. 
1  Sam.  2. 29.  and  A.  thy  srin"  nhovc  me,  to  make  fat 

IIO.VOURKTH. 
Psal.  15.  4.  but  ho  A.  them  that  fear  the  Lord 
Prov.  12.  9.  is  h<'tler  Ibun  ho  thai  A.  himself 

14.  31.  hut  he  that  A.  him  hath  mercy  on  the  poor 
Mai.  1.  6.  a  son  A.  his  father,  where  is  my  linnour? 
Mat.  15.  8.  anl  A.  nie  with  their  lips,  Mirkl.C-). 
./oAnS.  23.  he  that  A. not  the  Son,*,  not  the  Father 

8.54.  itiimy  FatJier  tliat  A.  ine,  of  whom  yo  say 

aso 


HON 

HONEY. 

Bees  are  some  of  the  smallest  creatures  that  fly, 
and  the  produce  of  them  is  the  sweetest  thing  tn 
the  world.    The  scripture  describing  a  troop  of 
enemies  pursuing  with  obstinacy  and  warmth, 
makes  use  of  the  similitude  of  bties.  Dent.  1.44, 
The  Jimorites  chased  you  as   bees.     And  in 
Psal.  118.  12,  They  compassed  me  about  like 
bees.     Jls  to  honey,  Ood  did  not  permit  any  to 
be  offered  to  him  upon  his  altar.     Lev.  2.  II, 
Ve  shall  burn  no  leaven,  nor  any  honey,  in  any 
offering  of  the  Lord  made  by  fire.     There  are 
many  reasons  given  for  the  expediency  of  this 
law;  such  as,  that  honey  does  not  agree  welt 
with  other  things,  which  are  offered  in  the  way 
of  sacrifice,  that  it  makes  bread  tour,  and  is 
not  good  with  roast  ineat ;  or  because  bees  are 
insects  which  arc  judged  to  be  unclean.  Lev, 
11.  23.     Or  because  honey  is  the  symbol  of 
carnal  pleasures :  or,  lastly,  to  keep  at  a  dis- 
tance from  the  customs  of  the  heathens,  who 
were  used  to  offer  honey  in  their  sacrifices. 
But  at  the  same  time  that  God  forbids  any  ho- 
ney to  be  offered  to  him  in  sacrifice,  he  com- 
mands the  first-fruits  of  it  to  be  presented  to 
him,  Lev.  2.  12,  As  for  the  oblation  of  the  first- 
fruits,  ye  shall  offer  them  unto  the  Lord ;  but 
these  first-fruits  and  offerings  were  designed 
for  the  support  and  sustenance  of  the  priests, 
and   were   not   offered   upon   the  altar.     The 
Ral.biiiB,  by  the  word  honey  in  the  above-cited 
place,  understand  not  only  the  honey  of  bees, 
but  likewise  the  honey  of  dates,  or  the  fruit  of 
the  palm-tree,  or  the  dates  thcinsclves,  from 
which  lioney  is  eztracted. 
The  expressions  of  scripture  which  import  so  fre- 
quently that  Palestine  was  a  land  flowing  with 
milk  and  honey,  arc  a  good  proof  that  lioney 
was  formerly  very  common  in  that  country. 
Moses  says,  that  the  I.,ord  made  his  people  to 
suck  honey  out  of  the  rock,  and  oil  out  of  the 
flinty  rock,  Deut.  32.  13.     Honey  ran  upon  the 
ground  in  the  forest,  where  Jonathan  dipped 
the  end  of  his  staff  in  this  liquor,  and  convey- 
ed it  tn  his  mouth,  1  Sam.  1-1.  25,  2fi,  27.     John 
the  Baptist  fid  upon   wild  honey,  which  was 
found   to   be  in  the  rocks  up  and  down  the 
country,  or  in  hollow  trees.  Mat.  3.  4.     CAiV- 
drcn  were  fed  with  rnilk,  cream  and  honey. 
Isa.  7.  15,  Butter  and  honey  shall  he  cat,  thiit 
he  may  know  to  refuse  the  evil,  and  choose  the 
good.     This  was   the  sweetest  and  most  de- 
licious thing  which  was  then  known  before  the 
invention  and  preparation  of  sugar,  and  there- 
fore  things  that    are    sweet,   pleasant,   and 
airrceahle,  are  in  scripture  compared  to  it.   .^s 
the  word  of  God,   Psal.  119.  103.     Wisdom, 
Prov.  24. 13,  14.     God  complains  of  Jerusalem 
for  offering  that  bread,  oil,  and  honey  to  idols, 
which  he  had  given  to  the  inhabitants  thereof 
for  their  nourishment,  Ezek.  16.  13,  19.     .Ind 
Solomon  obsei~nes,  that  too  great  a  quantity 
of  honey  is  hurtful  to  the  stomach,  and  cre- 
ates a  loathing,  Prov.  25.  16. 
Gen.  43.  11.  carry  a  little  A.  spices,  myrrh,  nuts 
Kio(i.l6.31.tasteofit  was  like  wafers  made  with  A. 
Lev.  2.  11.  ve  shall  burn  no  leaven  nor  any  A 
Deat.  8. 8.  aland  of  oil-olive  and  A.  2  Kings  18. 32. 
32.  13.  he  made  him  to  suck  A.  out  of  the  rock 
Judg.  14.8.  there  was  A.  in  carcase  of  the  lion,  9, 
IH.what  sweeter  than  A.?  what  strong,  than  liun? 

1  f<am.  14.  2.5.  and  there  was  A.  upon  the  ground 
26.  A.  dropped  ||  29.  I  tasted  a  little  A.  43. 

2  Sam.  17.  29.  brought  A.  and  butter  to  David 

1  Kings  14.  3.  lake  a  cruse  of  A.  and  go  to  him 

2  Chron.  31.  5.  Israel  brought  the  first-fruits  of  A. 
.lob  21).  17.  he  shall  not  see  the  brooks  of  A. and  but. 
Psal.  19.  1(1.  juilgment  s\.eeter  than  A.  119.  103. 

81.  16.  with  A.  out  of  the  rock  have  satisfied  thee 
/'r«r.2-l.l3.iny  son,  eat  A.  because  it  is  good,  25.1G. 
25.  27.  it  is  not  good  to  eat  much  A. 
Cant.  4.  11.  A.  and  milk  are  under  thy  tongue 
5.  1.  I  have  eaten  my  honey-comb  with  my  h. 
/«a.  7.l.5.but.  and  A. shall  he  eat,  that  he  may  kao.v 
22.  for  butter  and  A.  shall  every  one  eat  that  is  left 
Jrr.  41.  8.  we  have  treasures  of  A.  in  the  field 
/?rtrA.  3. 3.  it  was  in  mv  mouth  as  A.  for  sweetness 
16.  13.  Ihou  didsl  cat  'fine  flour,  A.  and  oil,  19. 
27.  17.  Judah  traded  in  A.  and  halm  with  Tyriis 
.flfaf.3.4. John  tho  Baptist's  raiment  oframcl's  hair, 
and  his  meat  was  locusts  and  wild  A.  Mark  1.6. 
Ren.  10.  9.  but  it  shall  be  in  thy  mouth  sweot  as  A. 
10.  and  it  was  in  my  mouth  swd  as  A. 
,     See  Flowktii,  Flowi.so. 
HONKY-t^OMIl. 
I  Sam.  14.27.  put  forth  rod  and  dipt  it  in  a  h.-comh 
Psal.  19.  10.  sweeter  also  than  lioney  and  h.-cnmh 
/'r<ip.5.3.the  lipi)  of  a  strange  wonian  dropnsn  A.-c. 
16.  24.  pleasant  words  are  as  a  h.-comh,  swei-t 
21.  13.  eat  tlicA.-comA  which  is  swccl  to  Iby  tattu 


HOP 

Prov.  27.  7.  the  full  goal  loatheth  a  h.-comh 
Cant.  4. 11.  thy  lips,  O  my  spouse,  drop  aea  A.-coi7i4 
5.  1.  I  have  eaten  my  h.-comb  with  my  honey 
Luke  24.  42.  they  gave  him  a  piece  of  a  h.-comb 

HOODS. 
Isa.  3.  23.  I  wiL  take  away  the  A.  and  the  vails 

HOOF. 
Ezod.  10.  26.  there  shall  not  a  A.  be  left  behind 
Lev.  11.3.  whatever  parteth  A. and  is  cloven-footed 

4.  of  them  that  divide  the  A.  but  divideth  not  A. 

5.  but  divideth  not  the  A.  6.  Deut.  14.  7. 
7.  tho  Bwine,  tho'  he  divide  the  A.  Deut.  14.  8. 

HOOFS. 
Judg.  5.  22.  then  were  the  horse  A.  broken 
Psal.  69.  31.  please  Lord  better  than  an  o.\  with  A, 
Isa.  5.  28.  tlieir  horses  A.  shall  be  counted  like  flint 
,/er.  47.  3.  at  the  noise  of  the  3tani|iing  of  the  A. 
Ezek.'2iy.ll.  with  A.  of  horses  shall  tread  thy  streets 
32.  13.  nor  shall  the  A.  of  beasts  trouble  them 
Mic.  4. 13. 1  will  make  thy  A.  brass,  and  shall  beat 

HOOK. 
iKinga  19.28.1  will  put  my  A.  in  thy  nose, /sa.37.29. 
Job  41.  1.  canst  thou  draw  leviathan  with  a  A.?  2. 
Mat.  17.  27.  go,  and  cast  a  A.  and  take  up  a  fisb 

HOOKS. 
Kzod.  26.  32.  their  A.  shall  be  of  gold,  37.  ]  36. 36. 
27. 10.  the  A.  of  the  pillars  shall  he  of  silver,  and 
their  fillets  of  silver,  11,17.  |38."l0,  11,12,17,19. 
Isa.  2.  4.  their  spears  into  pruning  A.  Mic.  4.  3. 
18.  5.  he  shall  cut  off  the  sprigs  with  pruning  A. 
F.zek.  29.  4.  but  I  will  put  A.  in  thy  jaws,  38.  4. 
40.  43.  and  within  were  A.  a  hand-htoad 
Joel  3.  10.  beat  your  pruning  A.  into  spears 
Amos  4.  2.  that  he  will  take  you  away  with  A. 

HOPE. 
Christian  hope  is  a  firm  expectation  of  all  pro- 
mised good  things,  so  far  as  th-^  may  be  for 
God's  glory  and  our  good,  but  especially  of 
eternal  salvation  and  happiness  in  heaven, 
where  we  shall  be  conformed  to  the  Son  of  Ood; 
which  hope  is  founded  on  the  grace,  blood, 
righteousness,  and  intercession  o/ Christ,  and 
ths  earnest  of  tlie  Holy  Spirit  in  our  hearts, 
artd  the  unchangeable  truth  and  almighty 
power  of  God,  ichich  always  second  his  word. 
Thi;  hope  is  distinguished  from  worldly  hopes, 
(1)  By  the  excellency  of  the  object,  which  is  an 
eternal  state  of  glory  and  joy;  whereas  worldly 
hopes  are  terminated  on  empty  vanishing 
things,  gilded  over  with  the  thin  appearance  of 
good.  (2)  By  the  stability  of  its  foundation, 
namely,God's unchangeable  truth,  andalmigh- 
ty  power.  God  cannot  lie,  and  consequently 
neither  deceive  our  faith,  nor  disappoint  our 
hopes;  and  he  can  do  all  things,  which  the  apos- 
tle makes  the  ground  of  his  confidence.  2  Tim. 
1.  12,  I  know  whom  I  have  believed,  and  I  am 
persuaded  that  he  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I 
liave  committed  to  him  against  that  day.  But 
worldly  hopes  are  always  uncertain:  There  is 
so  much  of  impotence  or  deceit  in  all  the  means 
used  to  obtain  human  desires,  that  the  success 
is  doubtful.  (3)  Divine  hope  is  distinguished 
from  carnal  presumption,  by  its  inseparable 
effect,  it  has  a  cleansing  efficacy.  1  John  3.  .3, 
Every  man  that  hath  this  hope  in  him  purifieth 
himself,  even  as  he  is  pure.  He  endeavours 
to  shun  all  sin,  and  to  be  perfecting  holiness. 
He  purifies  himself  by  the  assistance  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  from  whom  the spiiitual  life,  and 
all  the  operations  of  it,  do  proceed.  But  vain 
and  groundless  hopes  are  inspirations  of 
win't,  loose  and  ineffective. 
The  Hope  of  Israel,  is  the  Messiah,  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  Acts  28.  20,  For  the  hope  of  Israel  I 
am  bound  with  (his  chain.  Christ  is  so  called 
in  respect  of  the  fatliers,  who  looked  for  his 
promised  coming.  Some  by  this  understand  Ihe 
belief  of  Ihe  resurrection.  Christ  is  called  onr 
hope;  that  is,  the  only  foundation  we  hare  to 
build  our  hope  of  heaven,  or  any  good  thing, 
upon,  I  Tim.  1.  1.  Hope  i.»  taken  for  that 
eternal  salvation,  which  is  the  object  or  end  of 
our  hope.  Tit.  2.  13,  Looking  for  that  blessed 
hope.  The  I^rd  is  called  the  hope  of  his  poet- 
pie,  .Trr.  14.  8.  He  is  that  God  in  whom  alone 
thnt  hope  for  help,  and  their  hi>pe  shall  not  be 
confounded:  On  tlie  contrary,  the  hopn  of  the 
ungodly  shall  perish,  Prov.  1().  2H.  |  11.7.  their 
hope  shall  be  without  effect :  or  thru  shall  live 
and  die  without  hope.  Hope  ili-ferreil  maketb 
the  heart  sick:  delays  in  obtaining  Ihnt  good, 
which  a  man  passionately  desires  and  hopet 
for,  make,  the  heart  sad  and  sorrowful;  hut 
lehrn  any  one  possesses  what  he  drsir/s,  hit 
soul  is  comforted  and  revived,  Prov.  13.  12. 
Mv  flesh  shill  rest  in  hoi.e,  Psal.  16.  9.  My 
body  shall  quietly  and  sweetly  rest  in  the  grave, 
in  confident  assuranc  of  its  resurrection  to  € 
blessed  and  immortal  life.     Abraham  against 


HOP 

nope  believed  in  hope,  vihen  hein^  advanced  in 

1/ears,  God  promised  him  a  son,  Rom.  4.  18. 

He  confidently  believed  God's  promise  that  he 

should  have  a  son,  against  all  grounds  of  hope, 

when  it  was  most  unlikely  in  a  way  of  nature 

attd  reason.    The  prisonora  of  liope,  Zeeh.  9. 

12.  are  the  Israelites,  who  were  captives  in 

Babylon,  but  were  inhnpes  of  deliverance.    Or, 

ye  prisoners  of  liope,  ye  who,  though  captives 

to  sin  and  Satan,  yet  have  good  grounds  to 

hope  for  deliverance :  turn   ye  to  the  strong 

hold,  repent,  believe,  and  apply  to   the  Lord 

Jesus  Christ,  your  only  help  and  refuge. 

Huti  1.12.  if  I  edoiild  say,!  have  h.  if  I  should  have 

Ezra  10.2.  there  is  h.  in  Israel  concprnina;  this 

Job  4.  6.  is  not  this  thy  fear,  confidence,  thy  A.? 

.  5.16.  poor  hath  A.  and  iniquity  stoppeth  lier  mouth 

7.  6.  my  days  are  spent  without  A. 

8.  13.  and  the  hypocrite's  A.  shall  perish,  14. 
11.  18.  thou  shall  be  secure,  because  there  is  A 

20.  their  A.  shall  be  as  Ihegivinsf  up  of  the  ghost 
14.  7.  for  there  is  A.  of  a  tree  if  it  be  cut  down 
19.  and  thou  destroyest  the  A.  of  man 
27. 8.  what  is  h.  of  hypocrite  tho'  he  hath  gained? 
41.  9.  behold,  the  A.  of  him  is  in  vain 
Psal.  78.  7.  that  they  might  set  their  A.  in  God. 
146..5.  happy  is  he  whose  A.  is  in  the  Lord  his  God 
ProB. 10.2.S.  the  A.  of  the  righteous  shall  be  gladness 
11.  7.  and  the  A.  of  unjust  men  perisheth 

13.  12.  A.  deferred  maketh  the  heart  sick 

14.  32.  but  the  righteous  hath  A.  in  his  death 
19.  18.  chasten  thy  son  while  there  is  A. 

26.12.  lhi>re  is  more  A.  of  a  fool  than  of  him, 29. 20. 
Eccl.  9. 4.  to  him  who  is  joined  to  living,  there  is  A. 
[sa.  57.  10.  there  is  no  A.  Jer.  2.  2.5.  |  18.  12. 
Jer.  14.  8.  O  the  A.  of  Israel,  the  Saviour,  17.  13. 

17.  7.  blessed  is  the  man  whose  A.  the  Lord  is 
31.  17.  there  is  A.  in  the  end,  saith  the  Lord 
50.  7.  even  the  Lord,  the  A.  of  their  fathers 

Lam.  3.  21.  this  I  recall  to  my  mind,  therefore 
have  I  A 
29.  his  mouth  in  the  dust,  if  so  be  there  may  be  A 
Ezek.  19.  5.  when  she  saw  that  her  A.  was  lost 
37. 11.  behold,  they  say,  our  bones  dried,  our  A.lost 
Hos.  2.  15.  the  valley  of  Achor  for  a  door  of  A. 
Joel  3.  16.  the  Lord  will  be  the  A.  of  his  people 
Zech.  9.12.  turn  to  the  strong  hold  ye  prisoners  of  A 
.Acts  16. 19.  when  saw  the  A.  of  their  gains  was  gone 

23.  fi.  of  the  A.  and  resurrection  of  the  dead 

24.  15. 1  have  A.  toward  G.  which  they  also  allow 

26.  6.  now  I  am  judged  for  the  A.  of  the  promise 
7.  for  which  A.  sake,  1  am  accused  of  the  Jews 

27.  20.  all  h.  that  we  should  be  saved  was  gone 
28. 20.  for  A.  of  Israel  I  am  bound  with  this  chain 

Rom.  5.  4.  patience,  experience;  e.xperience,  A. 

5.  A.  maketh  not  ashamed,  because  love  of  God 
8.24.  for  we  are  saved  by  A.  but  h.  seen  is  not  A 

15.  4.  that  we  through  patience  might  have  h. 
13.  that  ve  may  abound  in  A.  thro'  the  H.  Ghost 

1  Cor.  9.  10.  that  he  should  be  partaker  of  his  A 
13.  13.  now  abideth  faith,  A.  charity,  these  three 
15.  19.  if  in  this  life  only  we  have  A.  in  Christ 

2  Cor.  1.  7.  and  our  A.  of  you  is  stedfast,  knowing 
3. 12.  seeing  that  we  have  such  A.  we  use  plainness 
10.  15.  having  A.  when  your  faith  is  increased 

Gal.  5.  5.  for  we  thro'  the  Spirit  wait  for  A.  of  rishl. 
F.ph  1. 18.  may  know  what  is  the  A.  of  his  calling 

2. 12.  having  no  A.  and  without  God  in  the  world 

4.  4.  one  Spirit,  even  as  ye  are  called  in  one  A. 
Col.  1.  5.  for  the  A.  laid  up  for  you  in  heaven 

23.  be  not  moved  away  from  the  A.  of  the  gospel 
27.  which  is  Christ  in  you,  the  A.  of  glory 

1  Thess.  1.3.  your  patience  of  A.  in  our  Lord  Jesus 

2.  19.  for  what  is  our  A.  or  joy  ?  are  not  even  ye 

4.13.  ye  sorrow  not,  even  as  others  who  have  no  A. 

5.  8.  and  for  a  helmet  the  A.  of  salvation 

2  TA''«s.2.16.who  hath  given  us  good  A.  thro'  grace 
1  Tim.  1.  1.  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  who  is  our  A. 
.Tiy.2.13.  looking  for  that  blessed  A.  and  appearing 

3.  7.  made  heirs  according  to  the  A.  of  eternal  life 
Heb.  3.  6.  ri'joicing  of  the  A.  firm  to  the  end 

6.  11.  to  the  full  assurance  of  A.  unto  the  end 

18.  who  have  fled  to  lay  hold  on  A.  set  before  us 

19.  which  A.  we  have  as  an  anchor  of  the  soul 

7.  19.  but  the  bringing  in  of  a  better  A.  did 
1  Pi-t.  1.3.  who  hath  begotten  us  again  to  a  lively  A. 

21.  thnt  your  faith  and  A.  might  be  in  God 
3. 15.  that  asketh  a  reason  of  the  A.  that  is  in  you 
I  .Tohn  3.  3.  every  man  that  hath  this  A.  in  him 

h  HOPE. 
Psal.  16.  9.  my  flesh  sh.all  rest  in  A.  .lets  2.  26. 
Rom.  4.  18.  who  against  hope  believed  in  A. 
5.  2.  and  rejoice  in  A.  of  the  glory  of  God 

8.  20.  of  him  who  hath  subjected  the  same  in  A. 
12.  12.  rejoicing  in  A.  patient  in  tribulation 

15. 13.  that  yo  mav  abound  in  A.  thro'  Holy  Ghost 
I  Co,.  9.  10.  that  pioweth  in  A.  that  Ihresheth  in  h. 
Tit.  1.2.  m  A.  of  eternal  life  which  God  promised 

My  HOPE. 

/oi  J7. 13.  and  where  is  now  my  A.  T  as  for  my  h. 

291 


HOR 

Job  19.  10.  and  my  A.  hath  he  removed  like  a  tree 
31.  24.  if  I  have  made  gold  my  A.  or  have  said 
Psal.  39.  7.  Lord,  what  wait  I  for'.'  my  A.  is  in  thee 
71.5.  for  thou  art  ?ny  A.  O  Lord  God,  Jer.  17.  17 
119.  116.  and  let  me  not  be  ashamed  of  my  A. 
Lam.  3.  18.  and  my  A.  is  perished  from  the  Lord 
Phil.  1.  20.  accord,  to  my  h.  that  in  nothing  I  shall 

HOPE,  Verb. 
•Tab  6. 11.  what  is  my  strength,  that  I  should  A.  ? 
Psai.22.9.  thou  didst  make  ine  A.  when  I  was  upon 
31.  24.  be  of  courage,  all  ye  that  A.  in  the  Lord 
33.  18.  upon  them  that  A.  in  his  mercy,  147.  11. 
22.thy  mercy  be  on  us,  according  as  we  A.  in  thee 
38. 15.  for  in  thee,  O  Lord,  do  I  A.  thou  wilt  hear 
42.  5.  why  cast  down  7  A.  thou  in  God,  11.  |  43. 5. 
71.  14.  but  I  will  A.  continually,  and  praise  thee 
119.  49.  word  on  which  thou  hast  caused  me  to  A. 
81.  my  soul  faint.  I  A.  in  thy  word,  114.  I  130. 5. 
130.  7.  let  Israel  A.  in  the  Lord,  131.  3. 
Isa.  38.  18.  they  in  the  pit  cannot  A.  for  thy  truth 
Lam.  3.  24.  my  portion,  therefore  will  I  A.  in  him 
26.  it  is  good  that  a  man  should  both  A.  and  wait 
Ezek.  13.  6.  and  they  have  made  others  to  A. 
LukeC>.3i.  if  lend  to  them  of  whom  ye  A.  to  receive 
J3cts  26.  7.  to  which  promise  our  tribes  A.  to  come 
Rom.  8.  24.  what  a  man  seeth,  why  doth  he  A.  for? 
25.  if  we  A.  for  what  we  see  not,  then  do  we  wail 
Phil.  2.  23.  him  I  A.  to  send  presently,  soon  as  I  see 

1  Pet.  1. 13.  wherefore  be  sober,  and  A.  to  the  end 
HOPED. 

Esth.0.1.  the  enemies  of  the  Jews  A.  to  have  power 
.fob  6.20. they  were  confounded  because  they  had  A, 
Psal.  119.  43.  for  I  have  A.  in  thy  judgments 
74.  because  I  have  A.  in  thy  word,  147 
166.  Lord,  I  have  A.  for  thy  salvation 
Jer.  3.  23.  in  vain  is  salvation  A.  for  from  the  hills 
/yuAe  23.  8.  he  A.  to  have  seen  some  miracle  done 
.lets  24.  26.  he  A.  money  should  have  been  given 

2  Cor.  8.  5.  and  this  they  did,  not  as  we  A. 
Jieb.  11.  1.  faith  is  the  substance  of  things  A.  for 

HOPETH. 

1  Cor.  13.7.  charity  A.  all  things,  endureth  all  things 
HOPING. 

Luke  6. 35.  do  good,  and  lend,  A.  for  nothing  again 

1  Tim.  3.  14. 1  write,  A.  to  come  unto  thee  shortly 
HORN.     • 

The  principai  defence  and  greatest  strength  of 
horned  beasts  consist  in  their  horns;  and' the 
scripture  mentions  the  horn  as  the  symbol  of 
strength.  Moses  compares  Joseph  to  a  young 
bullock,  and  says,  that  his  horns  are  like  the 
horns  of  unicorns ;  that  is.  his  strength  and 
power  shall  be  very  great,  Deut.  33.  17.  Jlnd 
ivi  Psal.  132.  17,  I  will  make  the  horn  of  David 
to  bud  ;  /  will  make  his  power  and  glory  to 
flourish  and  increase.  I  will  cut  off  the  horns 
of  the  wicked,  Psal.  75.  10.  So  in  Jer.  48.  25, 
The  horn  of  jyfoab  is  cut  off.  In  Psal.  44.  5, 
a  victory  over  enemies  is  expressed  by  these 
■words.  Through  thee  we  will  push  down  our 
enemies:  in  Hebrew,  we  will  smite  with  the 
horn,  we  will  subdue,  destroy,  and  disperse 
them,  as  a  bull  disper<ics  every  thing  that 
comes  before  him  with  his  horns. 

Horn,  signifies  likewise  glory,  honour,  bright- 
ness, and  rays.  1  Sam.  2.  1,  Mine  horn  is  e.x- 
alted  in  the  Lord  ;  my  glory  is  advanced  and 
manifested;  God  hath  loaded  me  with  honour 
Job  says,  I  have  defiled  my  horn  in  the  dust : 
/  have  parted  jcith  all  my  glory  and  dignity, 
and  been  contented  to  lie  in  the  dust,  Job 
16.  15.  The  Psalmist  says,  I  said  to  the 
wicked,  lift  not  up  the  horn ;  Do  not  carry 
yourselves  either  arrogantly,  boasting  of  your 
own  strength,  or  scornfully  and  maliciously 
towards  me,  Psal.  75.  4.  In  Hab.  3.  4,  it  is 
said,  God  came  from  Paran,  and  his  bright- 
ness was  as  the  light,  and  he  had  horns  coming 
out  of  his  hand,  or,  beams  and  rays  of  light, 
that  is,  glorious  manifestations  of  his  power 
in  these  his  acts.  Or,  according  to  others, 
having  Ai»  hands  armed  with  flaming  darts, 
end  fiery  arrows. 

Kingdoms  and  great  powers  are  often  described 
by  the  word  horns.  H  is  thus  Daniel  represents 
the  power  of  the  Persians,  of  the  Greeks,  of  Sy- 
ria and  Egypt.  Ke  represents  Darius  and 
Alexander  tike  agoat  and  a  ram  running  vio- 
lently at  each  other  with  their  horns,  Dan. 
8.  3,  5,  6.  7'Ae  Hebrews,  by  the  word  horn, 
sometimes  understood  an  eminence,  an  angle, 
a  corner.  Isa.  5.  I,  My  well-beloved  hath  a 
vineyard  in  a  very  fruitful  hill,  Heb.  in  the 
horn  of  the  son  of  oil:  my  beloved  has  a  vine- 
yard situated  on  an  eminence,  or  on  the  corner 
of  a  rich  and  fertile  mountain.  The  horns  of 
the  altar  of  burnt  offering  were  eminences  or 
spires  at  the  four  corners  of  it,  which  were  not 
only  for  ornament,  butmalso  for  use,  either  to 
keep  things  put  upon  them  from  falling,  or 


HOR 

that  beasts  to  be  offered  might  be  bound  to 
them,  as  the  Psalmist  seems  to  insinuate,  Psal. 
118.  27.  ^s  the  ancients  frequently  made  use 
of  horns  to  hold  liquors,  the  vessels  wherein 
oil  was  put,  and  perfume-i,  are  called  often 
horns,  whether  they  really  were  of  horn,  or  of 
any  other  matter.  Fill  thine  horn  with  oil, 
,  says  the  Lord  to  Samuel,  and  go  anoint  David 

king,  I  Sam.  16.  1. 
Ezod.  21.  29.  if  ox  were  wont  to  push  with  his  h, 
lAnOT.  2.1.  Hannah  said,  mine  A. is  exalted  in  theL. 

10.  and  he  shall  exalt  the  A.  of  his  anointed 
16.  1.  fill  thine  A.  with  oil,  go,  I  will  send  thee 

13.  Samuel  took  the  A.of  oil  and  anointed  him 
2  Sam.  22.  3.  the  A.  of  my  salvation,  Psal.  18.  2. 
1  Kings  1.  39.  Zadok  the  priest  took  a  A.  of  oil 
1  CAn2.>.  5.  in  the  words  of  God,  to  lift  up  the  k 
.fob  16.  15.  I  have  defiled  my  A.  in  the  dust 
Psal.  75.  4.  to  the  wicked,  lift  not  up  the  A.  5. 
89. 17.  and  in  thy  favour  our  A.  shall  be  exallod 

24.  and  in  my  name  shall  his  A.  be  exalted 
92.  10.  my  A.  shalt  thou  exalt  like  A.  of  a  unicora 
112.  9.  his  A.  shall  be  exalted  with  honour 
132.  17.  I  will  make  the  A.  of  David  to  bud 
148.  14.  he  also  exalteth  the  A.  of  his  people 
.Xer.  48.  25.  the  A.  of  Moab  is  cut  off,  and  his  arm 
Lam.  2.  3.  he  hath  cut  off  all  the  A.  of  Israel 

17.  he  hath  set  up  the  A.  of  thine  adversaries 
Ezek.  29.  21.  I  will  cause  the  A.  of  Israel  to  bud 
Dan.  1.  8.  among  them  a  litile  A.  in  this  A.  20. 

11.  of  the  great  words  which  the  A.  spake 
21.  the  same  A.  made  war  wilh  the  saints 

8.  5.  the  goat  had  a  notable  A.  between  his  eye« 
8.  8.  when  he  was  strong,  great  A.  was  broken 

9.  out  of  one  of  them  came  forth  a  little  A. 
21.  the  great  A.  that  is  between  his  eyes 

7.ech.  1.  21.  which  lift  up  their  A.  over  the  land 
Luke  1.69.  hath  raised  up  a  A.  of  salvation  for  ua 

HORNS. 
Gen.  22.  13.  a  ram  caught  in  a  thicket  by  his  A. 
£iO(/.27.2.make  the  A.  of  it  on  the  four  corners,  his 
A.  shall  be  of  the  same,  30.  2.  |  37.  25.  |  38.  2. 

29.  12.  and  put  of  the  blood  on  the  A.  of  the  altar, 
Lev.  4.  7, 18,  23,  30, 34.  |  8.  15.  |  9.  9.  |  16. 18. 

30.  3.  with  pure  gold  shalt  overlay  the  A.  37.  26. 

10.  make  an  atonement  on  A.  of  it  once  a  year 
Deut.  33.  17.  his  A.  are  like  the  A.  of  unicorns 
1  Kings  2.28.  Joab  caught  hold  on  the  A.  of  the  altar 

22. 11.  Zedekiah  made  A.  of  iron,  2  Chron.  18. 10. 
Psal.  22. 21.  hast  heard  me  from  the  A.  of  unicorns 
69.  31.  than  a  bullock  that  hath  A.  and  hoofs 
75.  10.  all  the  A.  of  the  wicked  will  I  cut  off,  but 
the  A.'of  the  righteous  shall  be  exalted 
118.  27.  bind  the  sacrifice  to  the  A.  of  the  altar 
Ezek.  27.  15.  they  brought  for  a  present  A.  of  ivoty 
34.  21.  ye  pushed  all  the  diseased  wilh  your  A. 
43. 15.  from  the  altar  and  upward  shall  be  four  h. 
Dan.  7.  7.  behold,  a  fourth  beast  had  ten  h.  20. 
8.  I  considered  the  A.  three  A.  were  plucked  up 
24.  the  ten  A.  are  ten  kings  that  shall  arise 
8.  3.  the  ram  had  two  A.  the  two  A.  were  high 

6.  the  he-gout  came  to  the  ram  which  had  two  A. 

7.  and  he  smote  the  ram,  and  brake  his  two  A. 

20.  two  A.  are  the  kings  of  Media  and  Persia 
Amos  6. 13.  have  we  not  taken  A.  by  our  strength? 
,We.4.13.for  I  will  make  thy  h.  iron, and  hoofs  brag* 
Hab.  3.  4.  he  had  A.  coming  out  of  his  hand 
Zech.  1.  18.  then  I  saw,  and  behold,  four  A. 

19.  these  the  A.  which  have  scattered  Judah,  31. 

21.  are  come  to  cast  out  the  A.  of  tho  Gentiles 
Rev.  5.  6.  in  midst  stood  a  Lamb  having  seven  A. 

12.  3.  a  red  dragon,  having  seven  heads  and  ten  A. 
13.1. a  beast  having  ten  A.  and  on  his  A.  ten  crowns 

11.  another  beaft  had  two  A.  like  a  lamb 
17.  3.  a  scarlet-coloured  beast,  having  ten  h, 

7.the  beast  which  hath  the  seven  heads  and  ten  A. 

12.  the  ten  A.  thou  sawest  are  ten  kings,  16. 
See  Rams'. 
HORNET. 

Hornets  are  a  sort  of  strong  flies  which  the  Lord 
used  as  instruments  to  plague  the  enemies  of  his 
people.  Tliey  are  of  themselves  very  troublesome 
and  mischierwus:  but  those  the  J,ord  made  use 
of  were,  it  is  thought,  like  the  flies  wherewith 
he  plagued  Egypt,  of  an  extraordinary  bigness 
and  perniciotuiness.  It  is  said,  thry  live  as  the 
wasps,  that  they  have  a  ki7ig  or  captain,  and 
pestilent  stings  as  bees,  and  that  if  twenty-se- 
ven of  them  sting  man  or  beast,  it  is  certain 
death  to  eith'r.  j^or  is  it  strange  that  such 
creatures  did  drive  out  the  Canaanites  from 
their  habitations ;  for  many  heathen  writers 
give  instances  of  somepeoplr  driven  from  their 
seats  by  frogs,  others  by  mice,  others  by  bees 
and  wasps;  of  which  see  Herodotus,  Diodorus, 
Pliny,  .(Elian,  Justin,  &-c.  JInd  it  is  said,  that 
"a  christian  city  being  besieged  iv  Saporeg, 
king  of  Persia,  teas  delivrred  by  hornets;  for 
the  elephants  and  beasts  being  stung  by  them, 
loazed  unruly,  and  so  the  whole  army  fled." 


HOR 

Dent.  7. 20.  the  Lord  will  send  llio  h.  among  tliem 

Josk.  24.  li  I  sent  the  A.  hefore  you,  which  drave 
HORNETS. 

jEiod.23.  28. 1  will  send  h.  before  thee,  which  drive 
HORRIBLE. 

Psal.ll.fi.  on  the  wicked  he  shall  reign  a  A. tempest 
40.  2.  he  brought  me  up  also  out  of  a  A.  pit 

Jer.  5.  'M.  a.  A.  thing  is  coniniiltrd  in  the  land 
18. 13.  the  virgin  of  Israel  hath  done  a  A.  thing 
23.  14.  I  have  seen  in  the  prophets  a  A.  thing 

Hos.  6. 10. 1  have  seen  a  A.  thing  in  house  of  Israel 
HORRIBLY. 

^er.2.12.be  A.  afraid,  O  ye  heavens,  al  this,  saith  L. 

Ezek.32. 10.  their  kini.'s  sliail  be  A.  afraid  for  thee 
HORROR. 

Ofh.  15.  12.  a  A.  of  great  darkness  fell  on  Abram 

Job  18.  f  2U.  they  that  went  before  laid  hold  on  A, 

Pgal.  55.  5.  and  A.  hath  overwhelmed  me 
119.  53.  A.  hath  Liken  hold  on  nie,  because 

£jeit.7.18.A.  shall  cov.  iliein.and  shame  on  all  faces 
HORSE 

Is  a  very  common  bea.it,  and  very  well  known  in 
these  counlrici;  but  very  rare  among  the  He 
brews  till  Solomon's  time.  Before  him  we 
find  no  horsemen  mentioned  in  the  armies  of 
Israel.  God  forbids  the  kings  of  his  people  to 
keep  mnny  horses,  Dcut.  17.  16.  Hereby  God 
irouldprevent  oppression  and  tyranny,  and  the 
imposition  of  unnecessary  burdens  and  tai.es 
upon  his  people ;  as  also  carnal  confidence  in 
the  kinffs,  which  by  this  means  would  be  pro 
moled.  As  in  Psal.  20.  7,  Some  trust  in  cha 
riots,  and  some  in  horses.  By  this  God  would 
likewise  prevent  their  havinir  commerce  trilk 
Egypt,  which  was  famous  fur  horses.  David 
haninfr  iron  a  great  battle  against  Hadadezer 
king  of  Zobah,  took  seiienteen  hundred  horses, 
and  lamed  all  belonging  to  the  chariots  of 
war,  reserving  only  a  hundred  chariots,  2  Sam. 
8.  4.  The  .fudges  and  Princes  of  Israel  used 
generally  to  ride  on  mules,  or  asses. 
Soloinon  is  the  first  king  of  .fudah  wlio  had  a 
greatnumber  of  horses, and  he  kiptthemrather 
for  pomp  than  for  war.  He  had  forty  thousand 
stalls  of  horses  for  his  chariots,  and  twiioe 
thousand  horsemen  distributed  in  his  fortified 
places,  I  Kings  4.  26.  He  had  his  horses  from 
Egypt,  1  Kings  10.  23.  although  the  Lord  had 
forbidden  the  king  of  the  Hebrews  to  multiply 
horses,  and  that  in  order  to  prevent  the  Israel- 
ites having  commerce  with  the  Egyptians,  le.it 
they  should  be  infected  with  their  idolatry, 
and  their  other  wickednesses,  Deut.  17.  10. 

UoRSKS  coiiseerated  to  the  Son.  /«  2  Kings  23. 
11.  it  is  said,  that  .loii'itii  took  away  the  horsi^s 
which  the  kings  of  Judah,  his  predecessors, 
had  gioen  to  the  sun.  It  is  known,  that  the  sun 
was  worshipped  over  all  the  east,  and  that  the 
horse,  tAc  swiftest  of  tame  bea.its,  was  conse- 
crated to  this  deity,  wlio  was  represented  as 
riding  in  a  chariot  drawn  by  the  most  beautiful 
andswiftrsl  horses  in  the  world,  and  perform- 
ing every  day  his  journey  from  east  to  west, 
in  order  to  communicate  his  light  to  mankind. 

Some  are  of  opinion,  that  these  horses  were  sacri- 
ficed to  the  sun:  Others,  that  ciiery  morning 
they  were  put  to  tlie  chariots  dedicated  to  the 
sun,  whereof  there  is  mention  made  in  the 
same  passage,  and  that  tlie  king,  or  some  of  his 
officers,  got  up  and  rode  to  meet  the  sun  in  its 
rising,  as  far  as  from  the  eastern  gate  of  the 
temple  to  the  suburbs  of  •)enjBii\cm.  Xenophon 
testifies  that  both  these  were  the  customs  of  the 
Persians  and  Armenians:  He  describes  a 
solemn  sacrifice  of  horses,  which  was  made 
icith  ceremony  to  the  sun :  thry  were  all  i\f  the 
finest,  and  were  led  with  a  white  chariot, 
crowned,  and  consecrated  to  the  same  god. 
/.aslly,  others  are  of  opinion,  Ihul  these  horses 
mere  of  woml,  stone,  or  metal,  erected  in  the 
temple  in  honour  of  the  sun. 

Oen.  49.17.  nn  adder  in  p.itli  that  hilelh  the  A.  hcele 

JRzod.l5.2l. the  A.and  rider  hath  lie  thrown  into  sea 
Judg.  5.  22.  then  were  A.  hoofs  broken  bv  prancini; 

I  fCings  10.  20.  a  A.  for  150  shekels,  2  Chr.  1.  17. 

20.20.Renlia<lad  kingcseaped  imA.with  horsemen 
25.  niiinbfr  an  army  like  the  army  lost,  A.  for  A. 

£sth.  6.  8.  let  the  A.  the  king  ridctb  on  be  brought 
0.  let  this  A.  be  delivered  lo  one  of  the  princes 

10.  take  the  apparel  and  A.  as  thou  hast  said 

11.  then  took  Hainan  the  apparel  and  iho  A. 
Job  39.  Ifl.  she  seorntlli  the  A.  and  his  rider 

19.  hast  llioii  given  A-Btringlh?  hast  thou  clothed 
PsaL  ."K.  9.  he  ye  not  as  Ihi'  A.  or  as  the  mute 
33.  17.  a  A.  is  a  vain  thing  for  safely 
"76.  6.  the  chiriot  and  A.  are  cast  into  a  dead  sleep 
147.  10.  hedfliehlfthnotinlho  gtrnnglli  of  the  A, 
Prov.  21.  31.  t hi-  A.in  prnpared  aiainHtday  of  bntllc 
26.  3.  a  whip  for  the  A.  a  rod  for  the  fool's  bark 
Iia.  43.  17  which  bringcth  foctti  the  chariot  and  A. 
292 


HOR 

ha.  63.  13.  that  led  them  thro'  the  deep,  as  a  A. 
Jer.  8.  6.  as  the  A.  rushelh  into  the  battle 
51.21.  with  thee  will  I  break  in  pieces  A.  and  rider 
.^ma«2.15.norshallhe  that  rideth  A. deliver  himself 
y.ech.  1.8.  and  behold,  a  man  riding  upon  a  red  A 

9.  10.  and  I  will  cut  oiT  the  A.  from  Jerusalem 

10.  3.  hath  made  them  as  his  goodly  A.  in  battle 
12.  4.  I  will  smite  every  A.  with  blindniss 

14. 15.  so  shall  be  the  plague  of  the  A.  of  the  mule 
Rev.  6.  2.  and  I  saw,  and  behold,  white  A.  19.  11. 
4.  a  red  A.  ||  5.  a  black  A.  ||  8.  behold,  a  pale  A. 
14.  20.  and  blood  came  even  to  the  A.  bridles 
19. 19.  to  make  war  again.st  him  that  sat  on  the  A. 
21.  slain  with  the  sword  of  him  that  sat  on  the  A. 
HORSEBACK. 
2  Kings  9.  18.  there  went  one  on  A.  to  meet  Jehu 
19.  then  he  sent  out  a  second  on  A.  which  came 
Esth.  6.  9.  and  bring  him  on  A.  through  the  city 
11.  Ilaman  brought  him  on  A.  through  the  city 

8.  10.  and  Mordecai  sent  letters  by  posts  on  A. 

HORSE-GATE. 
2  CAr.23.15.whenslie  was  come  to  entering  of  A.-^ 
.Vt'A.  3. 28.  from  above  the  h.-g.  repaired  the  pricbts 
Jer.  31.  40.  the  fields  to  the  corner  of  the  h.gate 

HORSES. 
Gen.  47. 17.  Joseph  gave  bread  in  exchange  for  A 
Ex-od.  9.  3.  the  hand  of  the  Lord  is  upon  the  A. 
Deut.  17.  16.  but  be  shall  not  multiply  A.  to  him- 
self, to  the  end  that  he  should  multiply  A 

1  King.',  4.  28.  barley  also  and  straw  for  the  A. 
10.  2.>.  they  brought  A.  and  mules,  2  Chr.  9.  24. 

2-^,.  Sol.  hadA.outofEgypt,2CAr.I.10,17.|9.28. 
18.  5.  may  find  grass  to  save  the  A.  and  mules  alive 

22.  4.  and  my  A.  are  as  thy  A.  2  Kings  3.  7. 

2  Kingsi.  11.  there  appeared  A.  of  fire,  and  parted 
5.  9.  Naaman  came  with  his  A.  an<l  chariot 

7.  7.  they  left  lh«ir  A.  and  fled  for  their  life 
10.  but  A.  tied  ||  13.  some  take  five  of  the  A. 

9.  33.  Jezebel's  blood  was  sprinkled  on  the  A. 
U.  20.  brought  Aniaziali  on  A.  2  Chron.  25.  23. 
18.  23.  I  will  deliver  thee  2000  h.  Isa.  36.  8. 

2:1. 11.  Josiah  took  away  the  A.  given  to  the  sun 
Rira  2.  66.  their  A.  were  736.  yeh.  7.  68. 
Eccl.  10.  7. 1  have  seen  servants  on  A.  and  princes 
Isa.  2.  7.  their  land  is  also  full  of  A.  and  chariots 

5.  28.  their  A.  hoofs  shall  be  counted  like  flint 

30.  16.  but  ye  said,  no,  for  we  will  flee  upon  A. 

31.  1.  and  stay  on  A.  and  trust  in  chariots 
3.  and  their  A.  are  flesh,  and  not  spirit 

Jer.  4.  13.  his  A.  are  swifter  than  eagles 

5.  8.  they  were  as  fed  A.  in  the  morning 

6.  2.3.  they  ride  on  A.  set  in  array  as  men  for  war 

8.  16.  the  snorting  of  his  A.  was  heard  from  Dan 

12.  5.  thetj  how  canst  thou  contend  with  A  ? 

46.  4.  harness  the  A.  and  get  up,  ye  horsemen 

47.  3.  noise  of  theslamping  of  the  hool's  of  his  A. 
.50.42.  and  they  shall  ride  upon  A.  put  in  array 
51.  27.  cause  the  A.  to  come  up  as  caterpillars 

F.zek.  17.15.ihatthey  might  give  him  A.  and  people 

23.  6.  young  men,  horsemen  riding  on  A.  12. 
20.  and  whose  issue  is  like  the  issue  of  A. 
23.  renowned,  all  of  them  riding  on  A.  38.  15. 

26.  10.  because  of  the  abundance  of  his  A. 

27.  14.  To^armiih  traded  in  thy  fairs  with  A. 
38.  4. 1  will  bring  thee  forth,  and  all  thy  army,  A. 

Hos.  1.  7.  I  will  not  save  them  by  battle  nor  A. 
14.  3.  Ashur  shall  not  save,  we  will  not  ride  on  A. 
.Joel  2.  4.  as  the  appearance  of  A.  and  horsemen 
.flmos  4.  10.  and  I  have  taken  away  vour  A. 
6.  12.  shall  A.  run  upon  the  rock?  will  one  plow 
Mie.  5.  10.  that  I  will  cut  off" thy  A.  out  of  thee 
Hah.  l.P.  their  A.  also  are  swifter  than  the  leopards 
3.  8.  that  thou  didst  ridif  on  thv  A.  and  chariots 

15.  thou  didst  walk  through  the  sua  wiih  thy  A. 
Hag.  2.  22.  I  will  overthrow  the  A.  and  riders 
7.erh.  1.  8.  and  behinil  him  there  were  red  A. 
6.  2.  in  first  chariot  red  A.  in  the  second  black  A. 
3.  in  third  while  A.  in  fourth  chariot  bay  A. 
6.  the  black  A.  go  forth  into  thn  north-country 

10.  .5.  the  riders  on  A.  shall  be  confounded 

14.  20.  on  bolls  of  A.  Hoi,inkss  to  the  Lord 
Jam.  3.  3.  behold,  we  put  bits  in  the  A.  mouths 
Her.  9.7.  the  locusts  were  like  A.  prepared  lo  battle 

17. 1  saw  the  A.  the  heads  of  A.  as  heads  of  lions 

18.  1.3,  no  man  biiyolh  the  merchandiBO  of  A. 

19.  14.  the  armies  followed  him  upon  white  A. 
18.  that  yc  may  eat  flesh  of  kings  and  A. 

.'ire  Chariots. 

MORSKI.F.ECH. 

Trop.  30. 15.  theA.linihiwodniiiliterf,  crying, give 

HORSr.MAN. 
2  Kings  9. 17.  Joram  said,  take  a  A.  send  to  meet 
Jfah.  3.  3.  A.  lifleih  up  the  brijlit  sword  and  spear 

HORSKMF.N. 

Gen.  .50. 9.  there  went  with  Joseph  rhnriots  and  A. 

ACiOfi.  14.  9.  the  A.ofPharaoh  pursued  after  tliem 

17.  I  will  get  mo  honour  on  I'hiiraoh  and  his  A 

15.  19.  Pharaoh  and  A.  went  into  si'a,  .losh.  24.  6 
I  !>arn,  H.  11.  he  will  lake  vour  sons  lo  be  his  A. 

13.  5.  the  Philitt.  gathered  OOOO,  A.  ngaintt  Isroel 


HOS 

2  Ham.  1.  6.  lo,  the  A.  followed  hard  after  him 
8.  4.  and  David  took  from  HadadLzer  700  A. 
10.  18.  David  slew  40,000  A.  smote  Sliobach 

1  Kings  1.  5.  Adonijah  prepared  chariots  and  h 
4.  26.  Solomon  had  12,000  A.  JO.  20. 

9. 19.  Solomon  had  cities  of  store  for  his  chariot*. 

and  cities  for  his  A.  22.  2  Chr.  8.  6,  9. 

20.20.  Ben-hadad  escaped  on  a  horse  with  his  A. 

2  Kings  2.12.lhe  chariot  of  Israel  and  the  A.thereof 
13.  7.  nor  did  he  leave  to  Jehualiaz  but  fifty  A. 

14.  Joosh  said,  O  my  father,  the  A.  of  Israel 
18.  24.  put  thv  trust  in  Egvpt  for  chariots  and  A. 

2  CAr.  12.  3.  Shishak  came  up  with  60,000  A. 
16.  8.  the  Ethiopians  a  huge  host  ^vith  inaiiy  A. 

Ezra  8.  B2.  was  ashamed  lo  ask  soldiers  A.  to  help 

A'cA.2.9.now  king  had  sent  captains  and  A.  with  me 

A*a.  21.7.  he  saw  a  chariot  with  a  couple  of  A.  9. 
22.7.the  A.  shall  set  themselves  in  array  at  the  gate 
28.  28.  because  he  will  not  bruise  it  with  his  A. 
31.  1.  and  trust  in  A.  because  they  are  very  strong 
36.  9.  how  wilt  thou  put  thy  trust  on  Egypt  for  h. 

Jer.  4.29.  whole  city  shall  flee  for  the  noise  of  the  A. 
40.  4.  get  up  ye  A.  and  stand  with  your  helmets 

Ezek.  23.  6.  all  of  them  A.  riding  on  horses,  12. 
26. 7.bring  Nebuchadnezzar  againstTyius  with  A. 
10.  thy  walls  shall  shake  at  the  noise  of  the  A. 
27. 14.  they  of  Togarmah  traded  in  faits  with  A. 
38.  4.  Gog  I  will  bring  thee  forth,  horses  and  A. 

/J'un.ll.40.tlje  king  of  the  northshall  come  with  A. 

Hos.  1.  7. 1  will  not  save  them  by  horses,  nor  by  A. 

Ju«/2.4.appearanccof  hor8es,as  A.  so  shall  they  run 

Hab.\.8.  their  A.  shall  spread  themselves,  and  their 
A.  shal]  come  from  far,  shall  tly  as  the  eagla 

Jlcts  23.  23.  make  ready  A.  threescore  and  ten 
32.  on  morrow  they  left  the  A.  to  go  with  hinr^ 

Rev.  9.  10.  the  number  of  the  array  of  A.  were 
HOSANNA 

Is  a  Hebrew  word,  which  signifies,  Save  I  be- 
seech you.  It  is  a  form  of  acclamation,  of 
blessing,  or  wishing  one  well.  Thus  at  tha 
Saviour's  entrance  into  Jtrusilcin,  when  the 
people  cried,  Hosanna  to  the  Son  of  David  ; 
their  meaning  was.  Lord  preserve  this  Son  of 
Daoid;  this  king:  heap  faeours  and  blessings 
on  him.  Tlie  word  is  found  in  Mat.  21.  9,  15. 
Mark  11.  9,  10.  John  12.  13. 
HOSEN. 

Z?an.3.01.these  men  were  bound  in  their  A.ond  hats 
HOSPITALiry 

Signifies  lovetoslrangcrs,eiprcsscd  in  entertain- 
ing and  using  them  kindly,  Rom.  12. 13.  It  has 
always  been  very  much  in  esteem  among 
civilized  people.  The  Scripture  furnishes  us 
with  several  examples  of  hospitality  exercised 
by  the  patriarclis.  Abraham  received  thret 
angels,  and  earnestly  invited  them,  and  served 
them  himself;  while  Sarah  his  wife  took  care 
to  make  ready  provisions  for  his  guests,  Geti. 
18.  2,  3,  &c.  Lot  waited  al  the  city-gate  to 
receive  such  guests  as  might  come  tlUther, 
Gen.  19.  1,  2,  &c.  St.  Paul  makes  use  of 
Abraham's  and  Lot's  example  to  encourage 
the  faithful,  and  persuade  them  to  the  exercise 
of  hospitality,  saying,  that  they  who  have 
practised  it,  have  had  the  honour  of  receiving 
angels  under  the  form  of  men,  Heb.  13.  2. 

The  apostles  Peter  and  Paul,  icho  abounded  with 
the  spirit  of  their  Master,  tcith  great  care  re- 
commended hospitality  to  the  faithful.  1  Pet. 
4.  9,  Use  hospiiality  one  lo  another  without 
gruilging.  And  St.  Paul  recommends  this  duty, 
particularly  to  such  as  are  overseers  in  tie 
church  of  God,  1  Tim.  3.  2.  Our  Saviour  tells 
his  apostles,  .Mat.  10.  W,  42,  He  that  receiveth 
you  receiveth  me:  .\nd  whosoever  shall  give  to 
drink  unto  one  of  these  little  ones,  a  cup  of 
cold  water  only,  he  shall  in  no  wise  lose  his  re- 
ward. .Ind  in  Mat.  2.5.  41,  43,  45.  at  the  day 
of  judgment  he  will  say  to  the  wicked,  Depart 
from  me,  yo  cursed,  into  everlasting  fire;  1 
was  a  stranger,  and  ye  look  me  not  in.  In  ag 
much  as  ye  did  it  not  lo  one  of  the  least  of 
these,  ye  did  it  not  to  me. 

The  primitive  Christians  made  one  principal 
part  of  their  duty  to  consi.it  in  tke  exercise  of 
hospitality;  and  they  were  so  exact  in  the  dis- 
charge of  it  that  the  very  healhrns  admired 
them  for  it.  They  were  hospitable  to  all 
strangers,  but  chiefly  to  those  lh.it  were  of  the 
same  faith  and  communion.  Iltln  rrrs-  scarce 
ever  went  witlwut  letters  of  communion,  which 
te.ilifird  the  purity  of  their  faith  ;  this  was 
sulfirimt  to  procure  them  rirrj.lion  in  all 
thoie  places  where  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ 
7rns  known. 

Tiiun.  12   13.  distributing,  given  to  A.  1  Tim.  X  2. 

Tit.  1.  8.  but  n  lover  of  A.  a  lover  of  good  men 

I  Pet.  4.  9.  use  A.  one  lo  anoiher  without  grudging 
HO.'^T. 

Luke  10.35.hetook  two  poiico,  and  gave  tliom  to  A 


HOS 

KoRi.l6.23.Gaiue  mineA.and  of  church  sulutethyou 

HOST. 
Gen.  2.  1.  theearlli  was  finished,  and  all  A.  of  them 
21.'2-J.  Phicholtlie  chief  captain  of  his  A.  32. 

32.  2.  Jacob  saw  them,  he  said,  this  is  God's  A. 
Exod.  14.  4.  I  will  be  honoured  on  all  his  A.  17. 

24.  Lord  looked  to  A.  of  Egyptians  thro'  pillarof 

fire  and  of  cloud,  and  troubled  the  A.  of  Egypt. 

28.  the  waters  covered  all  the  A.  of  Pharaoh 

IC.  13.  in  morning  the  dew  lay  round  about  the  A. 

wVMm.2.4.  and  his  A.  and  ihose  that  were  numbered 

of  them,  6,  8,  11,  13,  15,  19,  21,  23. 

4.  3.  all  that  entered  into  the  A.  to  do  the  work 
10.  14.  over  the  A.ofJudah  ||  15.  the  A.  of  Is.sachar 

16.  over  A.of  Zebulun  ||  18.  Reuben  ||  19.  Simeon 
31.  14.  Moses  was  wrolh  with  the  officers  of  the  A. 

48.  the  officers  of  ihe  A.  came  near  to  Moses 
Z>c«(.2.14.  the  men  of  war  were  wasted  from  the  A. 

15.  to  destroy  thecn  from  among  A.  till  consumed 
23.  9.  when  the  A.  gocth  forth  against  enemies 

Josh.  1. 11.  pass  thro' the  A.  and  command  the  peo. 
3.  2.  after  three  days  the  officers  went  thro'  the  A. 

5.  14.  as  captain  of  the  A.  of  the  Lord  am  I  come 
18.9.  and  came  again  to  Joshua  to  the  A.  at  Shiloh 

Judg.  4.  2.  the  captain  of  whose  A.  was  Sisera 

16.  and  all  the  A.  of  Sisera  fell  on  the  sword 

7.  8.  the  A.  of  Midian  was  beneath  in  the  valley 
9.  God  said,  arise,  get  thee  down  unto  the  A.  10. 
13.  a  cake  of  bread  tumbled  into  the  A.  of  Midian 
21.  and  all  the  A.  ran,  and  cried,  an/1  Hed 

8. 11.  Gi<lcon  went  up  and  smote  the  A.  the  A.  sec. 
12.  Gideon  pursued  and  discomfited  all  the  h. 

1  Sam.  11. 11.  Saul  came  into  the  A.  in  the  morning 
14.  J5.  there  was  trembling  in  the  A.  in  the  field 

19.  the  noise  of  Ihe  A.  went  on  and  increased 

50.  the  captain  of  Saul's  A.  was  A  bner  son  of  Ner 

17.20.  Dav.came  as  the  A.  was  going  forth  to  fight 

28.  5.  when  Saul  saw  the  h.  of  the  Philistines 

19.  Ld.  shall  deliver  the  A.  of  Fsr.  to  Philistines 

29.6.thy  going  and  coming  in  with  me  in  A.  is  good 

2  Sam.  5. 24.  L.  shall  smile  the  A.  of  the  Philistines 

8.  9.  whenToi  king  of  Hamath  heard  that  David 
had  smitten  all  theft,  of  Hadadezer,  1  CAr.  18.9. 

10.  18.  Syrians  fled,  Dav.  smote  Shobach  the  cap- 
tain of  their  A.  who  died  there,  1  Chron.  19.  18. 

17.  25.  Absalom  made  Amasa  captain  of  the  A. 

19.  13.  if  thou  be  not  capt.  of  A.  in  room  of  Joab 

20.  23.  Joab  was  over  all  the  h.  1  Chron.  18.  15. 

23.  16.  these  three  brake  thro'  the  A,  1  Chr.  11. 18. 
XKings^.  32.  Abner  thesonof  Nercapt.  of  the  A. 

of  Isr.  and  Amasa  captain  of  the  A.  of  Judah 
3.5.  Ihe  king  put  Benaiah  over  the  A.  4.  4. 
16.  16.  Israel  made  Omri  captain  of  the  A.  king 
20.  1.  Ben-hadad  gathered  all  his  h.  together 
92.  34.  turn  thy  hand  and  carry  me  out  of  the  A. 
ZKings'i.^.  there  was  no  water  for  the  A.  and  cattle 
4.13.  wouldest  be  spoken  for  to  the  capt.  of  the  A.? 
6.14. therefore  sent  he  horses  and  greatA.toDothan 
24.  Ben-hadad  gathered  his  A.  and  went  up 
'/.4.  come  and  let  us  fall  unto  the  A.  of  the  Syrians 
6.  Lord  made  the  A.to  hear  the  noise  of  a  great  h. 

9.  5.  behold  Ihe  captains  of  the  A.  were  sitting 

18.  17.  Sennacherib  sent  a  gre^t  A.  against  Jcrus. 

25.  l.Ncbuchad.  came  and  his  A.  against  Jerusal. 
19.  the  principal  scribe  of  the  A.  .Ter.  52.  25. 

1  Chron.  9.  19.  their  fathers  over  the  A.  of  the  Lord 
12.  22.  till  it  was  a  great  A.  like  the  A.  of  God 
27.  3.  was  the  chief  of  all  Ihe  captains  of  the  A. 

2  Chron.  14. 9.  against  them  Zerah  came  with  a  A. 
16.  7.  not  relied,  therefore  the  A.  of  Syria  escaped 

8. were  not  the  Ethiopians  andLubims  a  huge  A.? 
18.  33.  turn  thy  hand  and  carry  me  out  of  the  A. 
24. 24.  the  Ld.  delivered  a  sreat  A.  into  their  hand 

26.  11.  rT'/7,iah  had  a  A.  of  fighting  men  for  war 
28.9.  Odod  wentoutbeforetheft.  and  said,  behold 

Vs.  27.  3.  though  a  A.  should  encamp  against  me 

33.  6.  all  A.  of  them  made  by  breat.h  of  thy  mouth 
16.  no  king  is  saved  by  the  multitude  of  a  A. 

136.  15.  hut  overthrew  Pharaoh  and  A.  in  Red  sea 
tsa.  13.  4.  Lord  of  hosts  muslereth  the  A.of  battle 

24.  21.  Lord  shnll  punish  the  A.  of  Ihe  high  ones 
40.26.  that  bringeth  out  their  A.  by  number 

45.  12.  and  all  their  h.  have  I  commanded 
Jer.  51.  3.  spare  not,  destroy  ye  utterly  all  her  h. 
F.zek.  1.  24.  the  voice  of  speech,  as  the  noiseof  a  A. 
Dan.  8.  10.  and  it  cast  down  some  of  the  A. 

11.  he  magnified  himself  to  the  prince  of  the  A. 

12.  a  A. was  given  him  against  the  daily  sacrifice 

13.  to  give  the  A.  to  be  trodden  under  foot 
OJnd.  20.  the  captivity  of  this  A.  shall  possess  that 
/,«A-e2.13.  multitude  oft  he  heavenly  A.  praising  G. 

Sm  ITkavbv. 

HOSTAGES. 

iKing/>M.  14.  Jehoash  took  all  Ihe  sold  and  silver 

and  A.  and  returned  to  Samaria,  2  CAr.  25.24. 

HOSTS. 

<?cn.32.t2.he  called  the  name  of  that  place,  two  A. 

F.ind.  12.  41.  (he  A.  of  Lord  went  out  of  Esypt 

.7o/!A.10  S.the  kings  ofCnnaan  and  all  their  A.  11.4. 

Juds-  8.  10.  Zeba  and  Zalmunna  with  their  A. 

293 


•  HOU 

lArm^»15.20.Ben-hadad  sent  the  captains  of  the  A, 
Psal.  103.  21.  bless  ye  the  Lord,  all  ye  his  A. 
108.  11.  will  not  thou,  O  God,  go  forth  with  A.  1 
148.  2.  praise  ye  him,  all  his  angels,  all  his  A. 
Jer.  3.  19.  a  goodly  heritage  of  the  A.  of  nations 
See  God,  Lord. 
HOT. 
Ezod.  16.  21.  when  the  sun  waxed  A.  it  melted 
Lev.  13.24.any  flesh,  whereof  there  is  a  A.  burning 
Deut.9.19. 1  was  afraid  of  anger  and  A.  displeasure 

19.  6.  lesl  the  avenger  pursue,  while  liig  heart  is  A. 
.Josk.  9.  12.  this  our  bread  we  took  A.  for  provision 
Ju(i^.2.14.angerof  Lord  was  A.  against  Israel,  and 

he  delivered  to  the  spoilers, '20.  |  3.  8.  |  10.  7. 

6.  39.  Gideon  said,  let  not  thine  anger  be  A.  ag.  mo 

9.  t30.  when  Zebul  heard  Gaal,  hisanger  was  A. 

1  Sam..  11.  9.  by  the  sun  be  A.  ye  shall  have  help 

21.6.  put  A.  bread  in  day  when  it  was  taken  away 

1  Kings  3.  t26.  for  her  bowels  were  A.  upon  her  son 

JVeA.  7.  3.  let  not  g:ates  be  opened  till  the  sun  be  A. 

Job  6.  17.  when  it  is  A.  they  are  consumed 

Psal.^.l.not  chasten  me  in  thy  A.displeasure,  38. 1. 

39.  3.  my  heart  was  A.  within  me,  while  musing 

78.  48.  he  gave  their  flocks  to  A.  thunderbolts 

85.  t  3.  hast  turned  thine  anggr  from  waxing  A. 

Prov.  6.28.can  one  go  on  A.coals  and  not  be  bumf? 

EzcA.  24. 11.  that  the  brass  of  it  may  be  A.  and  burn 

Dan.  .3.  22.  because  the  furnace  wasexceeding  A. 

Hos.  7.  7.  they  are  all  A.  as  an  oven,  and  devoured 

1  Tim.  4.  2.  their  conscience  scared  with  a  A.  iron 
Rev.  3. 15. 1  know  thy  works,  that  thou  art  neither 

cold  nor  A.  I  would  thou  wert  cold  or  A.  16. 

See  Wax,  Verb. 

HOTLY. 

Oen.  31.  36.  that  thou  hast  so  A.  pursued  after  me 

HOTTEST. 

2  Sam.  11.15.  set  Uriah  in  forefront  of  the  A.  battle 

HOUGH. 

Tosh.  1 1.6.  the  Lord  said,  thou  shall  A.  their  horses 
HOUGHED. 

.Tosh.  11. 9.  A.  their  horses,  burnt  chariots  with  fire 

2  Sam.  8.  4.  and  David  A.  all  the  chariot-horses 
HOUR. 

TAe  ancient  Hebrews  did  not  divide  the  day  by 
hours :  TAe  day  was  divided  into  four  parts, 
morning,  high  day  or  noon,  the  first  evening, 
and  the  last  evening;  and  the  night  was  divided 
into  three  parts,  night,  mid-night,  arid  the  mor- 
ning-watch. But  afterwards,  when  Ihe  Jews 
came  to  be  under  the  Romans,  they  followed 
them  in  dividing  the  night  into  four  parts, 
which  they  called  watches,  because  they  relieved 
their  se7ilinels  every  three  hours.  Thus  in 
Mat.  14.  25.  it  is  said,  that  in  Ihe  fourth  watch 
of  Ihe  night,  Jesus  went  to  his  disciples,  walking 
on  Ihe  sea;  that  is,  about  three  hours  before 
the  rising  of  the  sun. 

In  the  hooks  of  the  JVoio  Testament  wc  see  clearly 
the  day  divided  into  twelve  equal  hours,  after 
the  manner  of  the  Greeks   and  Romaiis,  Mat. 

20.  1,  2,  3,  &c.  John  11.  9.  These  hours  mere 
equal  to  each  other,  but  uncqualwith  re.'ipcct  to 
the  different  seasons.  The  twelve  hours  of  the 
longest  days  in  summer  were  much  longer  than 
those  of  the  shortest  days  in  winter.  The  first 
hour  was  that  which  followed  the  rising  of  the 
sun,  and  was  answirabie  to  our  six  o'clock  in 
themorning  in  the  Equinox;  and  to  other  times 
in  proportion  to  the  length  or  shortness  of  the 
days.  The  third  hour  icas  answerable  to  nine 
o'clock  of  the  morning  in  the  Equinox  ;  the 
sixth  at  all  times  to  noon,  and  so  on. 

Dan.  4.  19.  then  Daniel  was  astonied  for  one  A. 

Mat.  9.  22.  woman  was  made  whole  from  that  A. 
15.28.  her  daughter  made  whole  from  that  very  A 
17.  18.  the  child  was  cured  from  that  very  A. 

20.  3.  he  went  out  about  Ihe  third  A.  and  saw 

5. about  the  sixth  and  ninth  A.  ||  6.  Ihe  eleventh  A. 

12.  saying,  these  last  have  wrought  but  one  A. 
24.  36.  that  A.  knowelh  no  man,  42.  Mark  13. 32. 

44.such  an  A.as  ye  think  net,  .50  J.uke  12.  40,  46. 
2.5.  13.  for  ye  know  neither  Ihe  day  nor  the  A. 
26.  40.  could  ye  not  watch  one  A.  7  Mark  14.  37. 

45.  the  A.  is  alliand,  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed 
27. 45. from  Ihe  sixth  A.  was  darkness  over  Ihe  land 

to  Ihe  ninth  A.  Mark  15.  33.  T.uke  23.  44. 

46.  about  the  ninth  A.  Jesns  cried,  Mark  15.  .34. 
Mark  13. 11.  whatsoever  shall  be  givci»you  that  A. 

14.  3.5.  that  if  possible  the  A.  might  pass  from  him 

15.  25.  it  was  the  third  A.  and  they  crucified  him 
lAike  10.  21.  in  that  A.  Jesus  rejoiced  in  spirit  and 

said,  I  thank  thee,  O  Father 
12.  39.  had  known  what  A.  the  thief  would  come 
22.  14.  nnd  when  the  A.  wns  come,  he  sat  ilown 
53.  but  this  is  your  A.  and  Ihe  powerof  dnrknrss 
.59.ahotit  the  space  of  oneA. after  anolhoralTirmed 
.Tohn  1.  30.  abode  that  day,  foritwa?  about  tenth  A. 
2.  4.  Jesus  saith,  woman,  mine  A.  is  not  yet  come 
4.  6.  Jesus  sat,  it  was  about  the  sixth  A.  19.  14. 

21.  woman,  believe  me,  the  A.  cometh,  23. 


HOU 

JoAn4.52.  then  inquireil  he  the  A.  when  he  began  to 

amend,  yester.  at  seventh  A.  the  fever  left  hira 

5.  25.  the  A.  is  coming,  and  now  is,  28.  ]  16.  32. 

7.  30.  because  his  A.  was  not  yet  come,  8.  20. 

12.23.  Ihe  A.  is  come,Son  should  be  glorified,  17. 1 . 

27.  my  soul  ie  troubled,  Father,  save  me  from 

this  A.  for  this  cause  came  I  to  this  A 

1.3.  1.  when  Jesus  knew  that  his  A.  was  come 

16.21.  woman  hath  sorrow,  because  her  A.  is  come 

19.  27.  from  that  A.  that  disciple  took  her  home 
Jicts  2. 15.  not  drunken,  seeing  it  is  third  A.  of  day 

3.  1.  at  the  A.  of  prayer  being  Ihe  ninth  A. 

10.  3.  he  saw  about  the  ninth  A.  an  angel  comin» 

9.  Peter  went  up  to  pray  about  the  sixth  A. 
30.  four  days  ago  I  was  fasting  until  this  A. 

23.  23.  make  ready  at  the  third  A.  of  the  night 
ICor.  4.  II.  to  this  present  A.  both  hunger  and  thirst 

8. 7.soine  with  conscience  of  the  idol  unto  this  A. 

15.  30.  and  why  stand  we  in  jeopardy  every  A.? 
Gal.  2. 5.  to  whom  we  gave  place,  no  not  for  an  A. 
Rev.  3.  3.  not  know  what  A.  I  will  come  upon  thee 

10.  I  will  keep  thee  from  the  h.  of  temptation 
S.l.therc  was  silence  about  Ihe  space  of  half  an  A. 
9.  15.  which  were  prepared  for  an  A.  and  a  day 
14.  7.  fear  God,  for  Ihe  A.  of  his  judgment  is  come 
17. 12. hut  receive  power  as  kings  one  A.  withbeaei 
18.  10.  for  in  one  A.  is  thy  judgment  come 

17.  in  one  A.  so  great  riches  is  come  to  nought 
19.  that  great  city  in  one  A.  she  is  made  desolate 
Same  HOUR. 
Dan.  3.  6.  the  same  A.  be  cast  into  Ihe  furnace,  15. 
4.33.thesame  A.  was  the  thing  fulfilled  on  Nebuc. 
5.  5.  in  the  «anie  A.  came  forth  fingers,  and  wrote 
Mat.  8.  13.  his  servant  was  healed  the  same  A. 
10.19.it  shall  be  given  you  the.?amcA./,t/Afl2.  12. 
26.  55.  in  Ihe  same  A.  said  Jesus  to  the  multitude 
/,KAe7.2I.that  same  A.cured  many  of  their  plaeues 

20.  19.  scribes  same  A.  sought  to  lay  hands  on  him 
24.33.they  rose  up  the  same  A. returned  to  Jerusal. 

JbAn4.53.  tbefatherknewthatit  was  at  the  same  A. 

Acts  16.  18.  and  he  came  out  the  some  A. 

33.he  took  them  sameA.oflhe  night  and  washed 
22.  13.  and  the  same  A.  I  looked  up  upon  him 

/ietJ.11.13.thesamcA.was  there  a  great  earthquake 
HOURS. 

.John  11.  9.  are  there  not  twelve  A.  in  the  day  7 

.9cts5.  7.  wife  came  in  about  space  of  three  A.  after 

19.34.  all  cried  about  two  A.groat  is  Diana  of  Eph. 

HOUSE 

Signifies,  (1)  ./?  place  to  dwell  in.  Gen.  19.  3. 
(2)  TAe  household,  or  persons  dwelling  in  the 
house.  Acts  10.  2,  Cornelius  feared  God,  with 
all  hishousf,7r(<A  all  his  family.  So  in  Heh.  11. 
7,  JVoffA  prepared  an  ark  to  the  saving  of  his 
house,  .find  in  many  other  places.  (3)  Kindred, 
stock,  or  lineage,  2  Sam.  7.  18,  What  is  my 
house,  that  thou  hast  brought  me  hitherto?  .Ind 
Luke  1.  27,  Gabriel  Was  sent  to  a  virgin 
espoused  to  Joseph,  of  the  house  of  D  arid,  of 
the  lineage  or  family  of  David.  (4)  JVealth, 
riches,  or  estates.  Mat.  23.  14,  Ye  devour 
widows'  houses;  ye  consume  their  estates.  (5) 
The  grave,  or  a  sepulchre.  Job  30.  23, 1  know 
that  thou  will  bring  nie  lo  Ihe  bouse  appointed  for 
all  living.  And  Isa.  14.  18,  Every  one  in  his 
own  house.  (0)  One's  family  affairs  and  con- 
cerns. 2  Kings  20.  1,  Set  thine  house  in  order. 
(7)  This  frail,  corrvptible , mortal  body,whcrein 
the  soul  lodges  for  a  time.  2  Cor.  5.  1,  If 
our  earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle  were  dis- 
solved ;  if  our  bodily  frame  nf  nature  were 
taken  to  pieces  by  death.  (8)  The  church  among 
the  Jews.  Heb.  ^.  2,  Moses  wns  faithful  in  all 
his  house.  He  ordered  all  things  in  the  Jewish 
church  according  to  the  command  nf  God. 

Our  Saviour,  tn  John  14.  2,  calls  heaven  his 
Father's  house,  in  which  there  are  many  man- 
sions, wherein  saints  and  blessed  spirits  shall 
dwell  with  God  for  ever  in  immortal  glnry. 
The  chnrch  of  God  is  colled  his  house.  1  Tim. 
3.  15,  That  thou  mayest  know  how  to  behave 
thyself  in  the  house  of  God,  which  is  Ihe 
church  of  the  living  God  ;  a  people  in  and 
among  whom  he  dtcelleth.  And  in  Heh.  3.  6, 
But  Christ  as  a  Son  over  his  own  house,  whose 
house  are  we.  Believers  are  set  apart  from 
profane  uses,  and  dedicated  to  the  service  of 
God  ;  among  whom  hemanifests  his  gracious 
presence  by  his  Spirit.  The  tabernacle  is  also 
called  the  house  of  God,  .Jxidg.  18.  31.  as  also 
the  temple,  2  Chron.  5.  14.  Persons  are  said 
to  join  house  to  house,  when  they  irn'ch  all 
opportunities  to  di.<!possess  others  by  any  meant 
whalsoerer,  and  lo  ingross  all  tn  themselves. 
Isa.  5.  8,  Woe  unto  them  that  join  house  to 
house.  F.syyil  was  the  house  of  bondage ;  where 
the  people  of  Israel  were  in  great  bondage  and 
slavery,  Deut.  5.  6. 

Grit.  19.  4.  men  of  Sodom  compassed  the  A.  round 
24. 27.  L.  led  me  to  the  A.  of  my  master's  brethren 


HOU 


O^n.  24. 31. 1  have  prepared  the  A.  room  for  camels 
Sri.  2.  go  to  the  k.  of  I5etliuel,thy  niother'a  lather 
39.5.L. blessed  the  Egyptian's  A.  for  Joseph's  sake 
45.  2.  the  Egyptians  and  the  A.  of  Pharaoh  heard 

£rod.8.3.frog8 shall  come  into  iheA-oflhy  servants 

12.  3.  a  lamb  according  to  the  A.  of  their  fathers 
30.  was  not  a  A.  where  there  was  not  one  dead 
46.  thou  shalt  ifot  carry  of  the  flesh  out  of  the  A. 

13.  3.  remember  dav  ye  came  out  from  Egypt,  out 

of  the  A  of  bondage,  14.  Deut.  5.  6.  |  6.  12. 

20.  17.  shalt  not  covet  neighbo'ir's  A.  Deut.  5. 21 
Ze»).14.36.  priest  shall  coinmiind  they  empty  the  A. 

38.  priest  shall  go  out  of  the  A.  and  shut  up 
45.  he  shall  breiik  down  the  A.  and  mortar  of  A 
40.  he  that  goeth  into  the  A.  shall  be  unclean 
49.  he  shall  take  to  cleanse  the  A.  two  birds 
25.  30.  A.  sold  in  walled  ciiy,  notgoout  in  jubilee 
JVu7/i.  :(0.  10.  and  if  she  vowed  in  her  husband's  A 
Dfut.l.  8.  redeemed  you  outof  the  A.  of  bond-men 
8. 14.  wliich  brought  vououtof  the  land  of  Egypt 
from  the  A.  of  bondage,  13. 5, 10.  Josft.'24 
17.  Judir.  6.  8.  Jer.  34.  13.  Mic.  6.  4. 
25.  10.  the  A.  01  him  that  hath  his  shoe  loosed 
Josh.  2.  15.  for  her  A.  was  upon  the  town-wall 
Judg.  8. 35.Deithcr  shewed  kind,  to  A.  of  Jerubbaal 

9.  ft  all  the  A.  of  MiUo  made  Abimelech  king 
20.  let  fire  come  from  A.  of  Millo  and  devour 

10.  9.  Ammon  fought  against  the  A.  of  Ephraim 
lf>.  26.  that  I  may  feel  pillars  whereon  A.  standeth 

27.  theA.wasfullof  men  ||  30.  A.  fell  on  the  lords 

17.  5.  Micah  had  a  A.  of  gods,  made  an  ephod 

18.  13.  and  they  came  unto  the  A.  of  Micah 

19.  18.  there  is  no  man  that  receiveth  me  to  A. 
22.  the  sons  of  Belial  beset  the  A.  round,  20.  5. 

1  Sam.  3. 14.  therefore  I  have  sworn  unto  A.  of  Eli 
.5.  2.  they  brought  the  ark  into  the  A.  of  Dagon 
7.  1.  and  brought  the  ark  into  the  A.  of  Abinadab 
9.  18.  tell  me,  I  pray  thee,  where  the  seer's  A.  is 
2.5.  3.  Nabal  was  churlish,  and  of  the  A.  of  Caleb 

28.  the  Ld.  will  certainly  make  my  lord  a  sure  A. 
SS'am.3.1.  long  war  betw.A.of  Saul  and  A.of  David 

8.  do  shew  kindness  to  the  A.  of  Saul  thy  father 

29.  let  there  not  fail  from  the  A.  of  Joab  one 

4.  5.  came  to  A.  of  Ishbosheth,  who  lay  on  bed  at 

5.  8.  the  blind  and  lame  shall  not  come  in  the  A. 

6.  12.  the  JjA.  blessed  the  A.  of  Obed-edom,  David 

broughtthearkfromhisA.  12.  1  CAr.  13,  14. 

7.  6.  I  have  not  dwelt  in  any  A.  1  Chron.  17.  5. 
11.  Lord  telleth  thee,  he  will  make  thee  a  A. 
29.  to  bless  the  A.  of  thy  servant,  1  Chrun.  17.  27. 

9.  1.  ia  there  any  that  is  left  of  the  A.  of  Saul  ? 

12.  8.  and  I  gave  thee  thy  master's  A.  and  wives 

13.  7.  go  now  to  thy  brother  Amnon'.s  A,  and  dress 
16,5,  came  a  man  of  the  family  of  the  A.of  Saul 

1  Kings  2.  24.  who  made  rne  a  A.  as  he  promi.sed 
27.  which  he  spake  concerning  the  A.  of  Eli 

6.  22.  and  the  whole  A.  he  overlaid  with  gold 
9.25  he  burnt  incense,  so  Solomon  finished  the  A, 

11.  18.  they  came  to  Pharaoh,  who  gave  him  a  A. 

12.  31.  Jeroboam  made  a  A.  of  his  high  places 

14.  10.  I  will  bring  nn  evil  on  the  A.of  Jerob.  14 
1.5.  29.  Baasha  smote  all  the  A.  of  Jeroboam 
lO.ll.Zimri  slew  all  the  A.  of  B.iasha,  he  left  none 
17.  15.  she,  and  he,  and  her  A.  did  eat  many  days 
21.22.  I  will  make  thy  A.  like  the  A.of  Jeroboam 

2  Kinirs  8.  3.  to  cry  to  the  king  for  her  A.  and  land 
IS.asdidlheA.of  Ahah,  27.  2CAr.21.(i.  |  22.4. 

9.  8.  for  the  whole  A.  of  .'Vhab  shall  perish 

10.  3.  look  out  the  best,  fight  for  your  master's  A. 

21.  A.  of  Baal  was  full  from  one  end  to  another 
27.  and  thev  made  the  A.  of  Baal  a  draught  A. 

12.  12.  for  all  that  was  laid  out  for  A.  to  repair  it 

20.  13.  Hezekiah  shewed  them  A.  of  his  precious 

things,  all  the  A.  of  his  armour,  Isa.  39.  2. 

,    23. 27.  A.  of  which  1  saiil  my  name  shall  be  there 

25.  9.  every  great  man's  A.  he  burnt  with  firo 

1  Chr.  2.  54.  sons  of  Salma;  Alaroih  the  A.  of  Joab 

26.  15.  and  to  his  sons,  the  A.  of  Asnppim 

2  CAr.  7.  1.  glory  of  L.  filled  the  A.  F.itk.  43.  4,  5. 
12.  chosen  this  place  to  myself  for  A.  of  sacrifice 

22.  9.  80  the  A.  of  Aha/inh  had  no  power  to  keep 
35.  21.  but  against  the  A.  wherewith  I  have  war 
Etra  .5.  8.  that  we  went  to  the  A.  of  the  groat  God 

6.  3.  let  the  A.  be  buildod,  the  place  where  olTerod 
JWA.  2.  8.  and  for  the  A.  which  I  shall  enter  into 
FMh.  2. 3.  gather  all  the  virgins  to  the  A.  of  women 

8.  1.  kings  did  give  the  A.  of  llaman  to  Esther,  7. 

Job  1.  13.  drinking  wine  in  oldest  brotlior's  A.  IS. 

19.  a  winil  came  and  smote  the  corners  of  the  A. 

20.  19.  hath  taken  away  a  A.  which  he  huilded  not 

21.  28.  for  ye  say,  whore  is  the  A.  of  the  prince  ? 
30.  23.  and  to  the  It.  appointed  for  nil  living 
38.20.  thou  shouldcst  know  |>alhstothe  A.  thereof 
39.  6.  whose  A.  I  have  mado  tho  wildornoss 

/".«.  31 .  2.  my  rock  he  for  a  A.  of  defence  to  save  mc 
m.  3.  yea  tho  sparrow  hnlli  found  a  A. 
104.  17.  as  for  the  stork,  fir-tices  are  her  A. 

rrov.  2. 18.  her  A.  inclinelh  lo  death,  paths  to  dead 

7.  8.  tho  young  man  went  the  way  lo  her  A. 
ll.loadandftubborn,  her  feet  abide  not  In  her  A. 


HOU 

Prov.  7.27.  her  A.  is  the  way  to  hell,  going  to  death 
9. 1.  wisdom  hath  budded  her  A.  hath  hewn  pillars 
12.  7.  but  the  A.  of  the  righteous  shall  stand 

14.  11.  the  A.  of  the  wicked  shall  be  overthrown 

15.  25.  the  Lord  will  destroy  the  A.  of  the  proud 
17.  1.  than  a  A.  full  of  sacrifices  with  strife 
IS).  14.  A.  and  riches  are  the  inheritance  of  fathers 
21.  9.  is  better  to  dwell  in  corner  of  A.  lop,  25.  24. 

12.  righteous  wisely  considereth  the  A.  of  wicked 
24.  3.  thro'  wisdom  is  a  A.  built  and  established 
25. 17.  withdraw  thy  foot  from  thy  neighbour's  A. 

27. 10.  nor  go  into  brother's  A.  in  day  of  calamity 
i^ccZ.7.2.lo  go  lo  A.  of  mourning,  than  A.  of  feasting 

10.  18.  thro'  idlen.  of  hands  the  A.droppelh  thro' 
12.  3.  when  the  keepers  of  the  A.  shall  tremble 
Cant.  1.  17.  the  beams  of  our  A.  are  cellar,  and  raft. 

2.  4.  brought  nie  to  the  banqueting  A.  his  banner 

3.  4.  till  I  had  brought  him  into  my  mother's  A. 

8.  2.  I  would  bring  thee  into  ray  mother's  A. 
Isa.  5. 8.  woe  to  them  tliat  join  A.  to  A.  field  to  field 

6,  4.  and  the  A.  was  filled  with  smoke 

14.  17.  that  o|pened  not  the  A.  of  his  prisoners 

23.  1.  so  lliat  there  is  noA.  ||  24.  10.  every  A.  shut 
31.  2.  he  will  arise  against  the  A.  of  evil  doers 
60.  7.  and  I  will  glorify  the  A.  of  my  glory 
64.  11.  our  holy  and  beautiful  A.  is  burned  up 

Jer.  16.  5.  enter  not  into  the  A.  of  mourning 
8.  thou  shalt  not  go  into  A.of  feasting  with  them 

21. 11.  touching  the  A.  of  the  king  of  Jud.ih,  22. 1. 
35.  2.  go  to  the  A.  of  the  Rechabiies  and  speak 

37.  20.  not  to  return  to  A.  of  Jonathan,  38.  26. 
£lzeA.2.5.for  they  are  a  rebellious  A.  yet  shall  know 

a  prophet  been  among  them, 3.  9,  26,  27.  ]  12.  3. 
8.  be  not  thou  rebellious  like  that  rebellious  A. 

9.  7.  he  said  to  them,  defile  the  A.  go  ye  forth 
12.2.  thou  dwellestin  the  midst  of  a  rebellious  A. 

25.  in  your  days,  O  rebellious  A.  will  I  say 
17.  12.  say  now  to  the  rebellious  A.  know  ye  not 

24.  3.  and  utter  a  parable  to  the  rebellious  A. 
43.  11.  if  ashamed,  shew  them  the  form  of  the  A. 

12.  this  is  the  law  of  A.  on  the  top  of  mountain 

45.  20.  so  shall  ye  reconcile  the  A. 
Dan.  1.  2.  which  he  carried  to  the  A.  of  his  god 
Hos.  1. 4.  avenge  blood  of  Jezreel  on  the  A.  of  Jehu 
Amos  1.  4.  I  will  send  a  fire  into  the  A.  of  Hazael 

5.  that  holdeth  the  sceptre  from  the  A.  of  Eden 

3.  15.  I  will  smite  the  winter  A.  with  summar  A. 

5.  19.  or  went  into  A.  and  leaned  his  hand  on  wall 

6.  11.  he  will  smite  the  great  A.  and  the  little  A. 

7.  9. 1  will  rise  against  A.of  Jeroboam  with  sword 

16.  drop  not  thy  word  against  the  A.  of  Isaac 
Obad.  18.  the  A.  of  Esau  shall  be  for  stubble 
Mic.  3. 12.  Jerus.  become  heaps,  and  the  mountain 

of  the  h.  shall  be  as  high  places  of  the  forest 

4.  2.  let  us  go  up  to  the  A.  of  the  God  of  Jacob 
6.  16.  all  the  works  of  the  A.  of  Ahah  are  kept 

jYah.  1. 14.  out  of  the  A.  cf  thy  gods  will  cut  I  off 

ZicA.  5.  4.  it  shall  enter  into  the  A.  of  the  thief,  into 

the  A.  of  liim  that  sweareth  falsely  by  my  name 

12.  12.  the  family  of  the  A.  of  Natl)an  apart 

Mat.  7.  25.  and  beat  upon  that  A.  27.  I.ukc  6.  48. 

10.  12.  and  when  ye  come  into  a  A.  salute  it 
13,ifA.be  wortliy,let  your  peace  come, /y«ie  10.5. 

12.  25. every  A.divided  against  itself,  Mark  3.  25. 

29  how  enter  into  a  strong  man's  A.  Mark  3.  27. 

20.  11.  murmured  against  tho  good  man  of  the  A. 

23.  38.  your  A.  is  left  lo  you  desolate,  Lake  13.  25. 

24.  43.  if  tho  good  man  of  the  A.  had  known  in 
what  watch  the  thief  would  come,  Luke  12.  39. 

Mark  3.  25.  a  A.  divided  agst.  itself,  that  A.  cannot 
10.  29.  that  hath  left  A.  or  brethren  for  my  sake 

14.  14.  Master  saith,  where  is  the  guest-chamber  ? 
say  ye  to  tho  good  man  of  tho  A.  I.vke  22.  11. 

Luke  10.  7.  in  that  A.  remain,  go  not  from  A.  to  A. 

38.  named  Marlha,  received  him  into  her  A. 

15.  8.  doth  nol  light  candle  and  sweep  A.  and  seek 
.John  12.  3.  A.  was  filled  with  the  odour  of  ointment 
.Hct.i  2.  2.  a  sound  frotn  heaven  fillorl  all  tho  A. 

46.  breaking  bread  from  A.  to  A.  did  cat  their 

5.  42.  in  every  A. ceased  not  to  teach  and  preach  J. 

10.  6.  Simon  a  tanner,  whoiio  A.  is  by  sea-side 

11.  12.  and  wo  entered  into  tho  man's  A. 
12. 12.  hecamo  to  the  A.  of  Mary,  mcilhorof  John 

17.  5.  but  tho  Jews  assaulted  the  A.  of  Jason 

18.  7.  whoiie  A.  joined  hard  to  the  synagogue 
19. 16.  ihey  fl"d  out  of  that  A.  naked  and  wounded 

20.  20.  I  taught  you  publicly,  and  from   A.  lo  A. 

21.  8.  entered  into  tho  A.  of  Philip  the  nvanjolist 
fiurn.  16.5.groKllhochurch  intheir  A.10)r.  16.  19. 

1  Cor.  1.  11.  bylhem  which  areof  thn  A.  ofChloe 

16.  15.  vo  know  tho  A.of  Stephanas  Iho  firslfruit 

2  Cor.  5  1.  ifoarthly  A.  be  dissolved,  we  have  a  A. 
2. desiring  tobeclotlied  upon  with  A. from  heaven 

17'im.5.13.waiidering about fromA.loA.and  tattlers 
14.  that  the  younger  women  guide  the  A. 

2  Tim.  I.  16.  Lord  give  mercy  to  A.of  Onesiphorus 
2.20.  in  ngreal  A.thoreare  vessels  of  gold  andsilv. 

Hib.  3.  3.  ho  who  built  the  A.  more  honour  than  A. 
4.  for  every  A.  is  built  by  some  man,  he  that  budt 
0.  whoseA.  are  we,  if  wehold  fast  llio  confidence 


HOU 

2  John  10.  receive  him  not  into  your  A.  nor  bid  him 
See  A.iRON,   Born,  Build  or  Built,  CatEr 
David,  Door,  Dwell. 

HOUSE  joined  with  father. 

Gen.  12. 1.  Lord  said,  gel  thee  from  \\ij  father's  h. 

20.13.whenGod  caused  to  wander  (lom  father' s/t. 

24.  7.  God,  which  look  me  from  my  father's  A. 

38.  thou  shalt  go  to  my  f.'s  A.  and  take  a  wife 

40.  shalt  take  a  wife  for  my  son  of  my  father's  A. 

31. 14. is  there  any  portion  for  us  in  out  father's  A.? 

38.  11.  remain  widosv  at  thy/.'*  A.  tillShelahbe 

grown,  Tamar  went  and  dwelt  in  her  father's  A. 

41.  51.  God  hath  made  me  forget  my  father's  A. 

40.  31. my  brethren  and  father's  A. are  come  to  me 

50.  22.  Joseph  dwelt  in  Egypt,  he  and  his/.'  A. 

Fzod.i2.'.i.  a  lamb,  according  to  A.  of  iheir/aiAfrs 

A«i'.  22.  13.  if  she  is  returned  to  her  father's  A. 

JVum.1.2.  take  sum  of  Israel  by  A.  of  ihnir  fathers, 

with  number  of  their  names,  18,  20,  22,  24. 

4.  there  shall  be  a  man  of  every  tribe,  every  one 

head  of  the  A.  of  his/a<Aer,  44.  Josh.  22. 14. 

45.  that  were  numbered  by  the  A.  of  their/otAer* 

2.  2.  every  man  pitch  with  ensign  of  their /.'«  A. 

3.  15.  number  of  the  children  of  Levi  after  the  A. 
of  their /atAcrs,  by  their  families,  20.  |  4.46. 

4.38.Gershon  ||  42.  Meriiri  after  A.  of  thcir/alAer* 

17.  2.  according  to  A.  of  their /.*s  twelve  rods,  3. 

18.  1.  thou  and/.',«  A.  bear  iniquity  of  sanctuary 
30.3.wonian  vow  a  vow,beingin  her/a/Af7-'sA.16. 
34. 14. Reuben,  Gad,  according  to  the  A.of  their/. 

Dent.  22.  21.  to  play  the  whore  in  lier/atAcr's  A. 
Josh. 2.  12.  ye  will  shew  kindness  to  my  father's  h. 
Judg.  6.  15.  and  I  am  the  least  in  my  father's  A. 

9.  18.  and  ye  are  risen  up  against  my /a<A<;r'«  A. 
11.2.  thou  shalt  not  inherit  in  onr  father's  h. 

14.  15.  lest  we  burn  thee  and  thy/.'s  A.  with  fire 
16.31.  all  the  A.of  his/oMer  came  and  buried  him 

19.  2.  his  concubine  went  to  \\\si  father's  A. 
3.  and  she  brought  him  into  tier  father's  A. 

ISam.  2.  27.  did  I  plainly  appear  to  A.  oflhy/u<Aer 
30.  I  said  the  A.  of  thy  /.  slmulil  walk  before  ma 
9. 20.  is  it  not  on  thee,  and  on  all  thy  father's  A.? 
17.25.  king  will  make  b\s  father's  A.  free  in  Israel 
18.2.  let  him  go  no  more  home  to  i»3  father's  h. 
22. 11.  the  king  sent  to  call  all  his /n(Aer's  A. 

16.  thou  and  all  thy  father's  A.  shall  die 
24.  21.  wilt  nol  destroy  my  name  out  of  father's  A 

2  Sam.  3.  29.  let  it  rest  on  Joab  and  all  his/.'s  A 

14.  9.  the  iniquity  be  on  me,  and  on  my  father's  h 

19.  28.  all  of  my  father's  A.  were  but  dead  men 

24.17.  let  thy  hand,  I  pray  thee,  be  against  me  and 

against  my  father's  A.  1  Chron.  21. 17. 

MCinirs^.Sl.  take  innocent  blood  from  me  and/.A. 
18.  18.  thou  and/rt/Aer''.«  A.  have  troubled  Israel 

1  Chron.  2.  55.  Ilemath  /(j</i«)-of  iheA.  of  Rechab 

4.  38.  the  A.  of  their/a«A«r,'!  increased  greatly 
5. 15.  A  hi  son  of  Abdiel,son  ofGuni,  chief  of  the 

house  of  their /n^Aer's  A.  24.  |  7.  2,  7,  9,  40. 
7.  4.  wiih  them  after  the  A.  of  fathers  were  hands 
9  0.  chief  in  the  A.  of  their  fathers,  13.  |  12.  30. 
12.28.ofZadok,  his/ufA.'.?  A. twenty-two  captains 
2-i.  4.  God  chose  me  before  the  A.  of  my  father 

2  CAron.21.  13.  slain  thy  brethrenoflhy/arArr'»- A 
K2ra2..59  could  not  show  their/a^/i i-r's  A.JWA.1.6 

10.  16.  chief  of  the  A.  of  iWir  fathers  examined 
JWA.  1.  6.  both  I  and  mv  father's  A.  have  sinned 
f:»7*.4.14.tliou  and  thy  fathi^'s  A. shall  h«- destroy 
Psal.  45.  10.  forget  thy  people  and  ihy  father's  h. 
Isa.  3.  6.  take  hold  ofhis  brother  of  A.  of  his/u(Aer 

7.  17.  biing  on  thy/.'.9  A.  days  that  have  not  come 
22. 23. shall  be  for  glnrious  throne  to  h'la  father' sh. 
24.  hang  on  him  all  the  glory  of  liis/ntAur'*  A. 

.Trr.  12.6.  the  A.  of  thy /^(Acr."!  dealt  treacherously 

/.uAr!6.27. 1  pray  then,  send  him  to  my  father's  h. 

./oAn2.16.make  nol  my  i^'atAcr's  A.houseof  merch. 
14.  2.  in  mv  Father's  A.  are  many  mansions 

yiclsl.'HO.  Moses  was  nourisheii  in  h'la  father's  h. 
HOUSE  of  God. 

Gen.  28.  17.  this  is  none  other  but  the  A.  of  God 

22.  and  this  stone  which  I  set  shall  be  God's  A. 
.Ai.i!A.9.23.from  being  drawers  of  water  for  A.  nf  (J. 
.Jud^r.  Irt.  31.  all  the  lime  A.  of  God  was  in  Shdoh 

20.  18.  Israel  arose  and  went  up  to  the  A.  of  God 
21"..  all  the  people  came  unto  the  A.  of  Gnd,  21.  2. 
31.  high -way,  of  which  one  joclh  up  \nh.of  Gnd 

1  Chr.  9.  11.  Azarinhrnlerof  A.o/r?.  .Vz-A  11.  II. 
24.5.tliegovernorsof  A.of  ^. were  sons  of  El.-nzBr 

2  Chr.  .5.  14.  glory  of  the  Lord  filled  the  A.  of  God 
20.  12.  ho  was  with  ihum  hid  in  h.ofG.»\\  years 
24.  13.  and  they  set  Ihc  A.  of  Gud  in  hi'*  ulnle 
33.7.Mana«seh  sot  a  carved  imnsoinihoA.<i/<7<id 
3ll.l'.ltbey  burnt  the  A  o/ f?orf  and  brake  Iho  wall 

F.ira  5.  8.  we  went  I"  thn  A.  o/"the  groat  God 

15.  let  the  A.  of  God  be  bnilded  in  bin  place,  6.  7. 
7.20.  what  more  shall  beneedfu'  for  the  h.of'God'^ 

23.  let  it  budnno  fortho  A.  o/lh.' «7nrforheaven 
.V^A.  0.  10.  Inl  ua  meet  in  A.  of  Gnd  in  thelempln 

13. 11.  then  I  said,  wliy  is  the  A.  nf  God  fi.rsnken  1 
Psnl.H.i.  I  went  with  ihemlo  tin- A.  o/"  rjo./.S.'i.H. 
52.  8. 1  am  like  a  greoa  olive-lreo  in  the  A  of  God 


HOU 

Ps.  84. 10. 1  had  rather  be  door-keeper  in  h.  of  God 
Keel.  5. 1.  keep  thy  foot  when  thou  goest  to  A.  of  G. 
Isa.  2. 3.  come,  lei  us  go  up  to  the  A.  of  G.  Mic.  4.  2. 
tios.  9.  8.  the  prophet  is  hated  in  the  h.  of  God 
Joel  1. 13.  drink-uffering  withholden  from  h.ofGod 
16.  joy  and  gladness  cut  off  from  the  h.  ofOod 
Zech.l .i.v/\ieu  they  had  sent  to  h.of  C.men  to  pray 
Mat.  12.  4.  how  lie  entered  into  the  A.  of  God,  and 
did  eat  the  shew-bread,  Mark  2. 26.  LukcG.4. 
lTim.3. 15.  how  to  behave  thyself  in  the  A.  of  God 
Ueb.  10. 21.  having  a  High-Priest  over  the  A.  of  G 
IPet.i.  n.judgnient  must  begin  atfheA.  of  God 

His  HOUSE. 
Oen.  12.  17.  the  Lord  plagued  Pharaoh  and  Ms  h. 
17.27.  all  the  men  of  his  A.  were  circumcised 
39.  4.  and  he  made  him  overseer  over  Ms  A.  5, 

45.  8.  hath  made  nie  lord  of  all  Ai»- A.  .^cts  7.  10. 
/.CO,  16.  6.  and  make  an  atonement  for  Ms  It.  11. 

27.  14.  and  when  a  man  shall  sanctify  Ms  A. 
15.  if  he  that  sanctified  it  will  redeem  his  h. 
JVum.  22. 18.  ifUalak  would  give  me  A.  full  of  silver 
and  gold,  Icannotgo  beyond  word  of  L.  24.  13 
Dcut.  20.  5.  let  him  go  and  return  to  Ms  A.  6,  7,  8. 

24.  1.  then  let  him  send  her  out  o( Ms  A. 
10.  thou  shaltnotgo  intoAi's  A.  to  fetch  his  pledge 

Judg.  8.  27.  which  thing  became  a  snare  to  Ai>  A. 

9.  16.  if  dealt  well  with  Jerubbaal  and  his  A.  19. 

1  Sam.  3.  12.  which  I  have  spoken  concerning  his  h. 

13.  I  told,  that  I  will  judge  Ms  A.  for  ever 
7.17.  his  return  was  to  Raniah,  for  there  was  kis  A. 

25.  1.  Israel  buried  Samuel  in  his  A.  at  Ramah 

2  Sam.  6. 19.  the  people  departed  every  one  toAi's  A. 

21.  which  chose  me  before  thy  father  and  Ai's  A. 
7.  1.  it  came  to  pass,  when  the  king  sat  in  his  A. 

25.  hast  spoken  concerning  Ms  h.  1  Chron.  17. 23. 
11.9.  but  Uriah  went  not  down  to  Ak' A.  10,  13. 
27.  David  fetched  her  to  his  A.  became  his  wife 

19.  11.  why  last  to  bring  the  king  back  to  hish.  ? 
21. Lit  is  for  Saul  and  his  bloody  Abecause  he  slew 

4.  have  no  silver  and  gold  of  Saul,  nor  of  his  h 

lAring-s2.33.on  A!.sA.there  shall  be  peace  fVom  Lord 

7. 1.  Solomon  was  building,  and  finished  all  hish. 

12. 24.  return  every  man  to  Ms  h.  for  thing  is  from 

me,  22. 17. 1  Chr.  16.  43.  2  Chr.  11.  4.  |  18. 16. 

13.  19.  did  eat  bread  in  Ms  A.  and  drank  water 

16.  7.  came  the  sword  against  Baasha  and  Ms  A. 

20.  43.  king  of  Israel  went  to  his  A.  heavy,  21.  4. 
2 /Tin o'«6.32.Elisha  sat  in  his  h.  and  elders  with  him 

20. 13.  nothing  in  Ms  A.  Hezekiuh  shewed  not 

1  Chron.  7.  23.  because  it  went  evil  with  his  A. 

10.  6.  Saul,  his  sons,  and  all  his  h.  died  together 

13.  14.  the  ark  remained  in  his  A.  three  months 

2  Chr.  24.  16.  had  done  good  toward  God  and  Ms  A. 
EzraG.  11.  let  his  A.  be  made  a  dunghill  for  this 
JVeh.  3.  28.  every  one  repaired  over-against  his  h. 

5.  13.  so  God  shake  out  every  man  from  his  h. 
7.  3.  and  every  one  to  be  over-against  his  A. 
Job  1. 10.  hast  not  thou  made  a  hedge  about  his  h.  ? 

7.  10.  he  shall  return  no  more  to  his  A. 

8.  15.  he  shall  lean  on  his  A.  it  shall  not  stand 
20.  28.  the  increase  o( his  A.  shall  depart 
21.21. for  what  pleasure  hath  he  in  Ms  A. after  him? 
27. 18.  he  buildeth  Ais«A.  as  a  moth,  as  a  booth 

Psal.  49.  16.  when  the  glory  o(  his  h.  is  increased 
105.  21.  he  made  him  Lord  of  hish.  and  ruler 
112.  3.  wealth  and  riches  shall  be  in  his  A. 

ProB.  6.  31.  give  the  substance  of  A/.<:  A.  Cant.  8.7. 

17.  13.  evil  shall  not  depart  from  his  h. 

Jer.  23.  34.  I  will  even  punish  that  man  and  Ms  h. 
Mic.  2.  2.  so  they  oppress  a  man  and  his  A. 
Jlab.  2.  9.  coveteth  an  evil  covetousnpss  to  his  h. 
Xech.  5.  4.  it  shall  remain  in  the  midst  of  Ms  h. 

Mat.  12.  29.  then  he  wili  spoil  A;*- A.  Mark  3.  27. 

24. 17.  to  take  any  thing  out  of  Av-s  A.  Jt/arA13. 15. 
43.  not  have  suffered  Ais  A.  to  be  broken  up 
/,uAe8.  41.  besought  that  he  would  come  inio  hish. 

18.  14.  this  man  went  down  to  his  A.  justified 
^eA«4.53.  and  himself  believed  and  his  whole  A. 
j?e{s  10.  2.  one  that  feared  God  with  all  his  A. 

22.  was  warned  to  send  for  thee  into  his  A. 

11.  13.  shewed  how  he  had  seen  an  angel  in  Ai'sA. 
16.  32.  they  spake  to  him  an^  to  all  in  his  A. 

34. when  the  jailer  brought  them  into  his  A.  ho  re- 
joiced, believing  in  God  with  all  Ms  A.  18.8. 
Col.  4.  15.  salute  the  church  which  is  in  Ms  A. 
Heb.  3.  2.  Moses  was  faithful  in  all  his  A.  5. 
11.  7.  Noah  prepared  an  ark  for  the  saving  of Ais  A. 

HOUSE  nf  Jacob. 
Gen. 46.27.  all  the  souls  of  A.  of  Jacob  were  seventy 
Exod.  19.  3.  thus  shalt  thou  say  to  the  A.  of  .facob 
Psal.Ui.\.h.  of  J.  from  people  of  strange  language 
Jsa.  2.  .5. 0  A.  nf.Taeob.  let  us  walk  in  light  of  Lord 

6.  thou  iiast  forsaken  thy  people,  the  A.  o/Jacui 
8.  17.  Lord  rfiat  hideth  his  face  from  A.  of  .Jacob 
10.  20.  such  as  are  escaped  of  the  A.  of  .Tacob 

14.  1.  and  they  shall  cleave  to  the  A.  of  Jacob 
29.  22.  thus  sailh  the  Lord  concerning  h.of  .facob 

46.  3.  hearken  unto  me,  O  A.  of  .facob  and  Israel 
48.  1.  h^ar  ye  this,  O  A.  of . Jacob,  which  are  called 
58.  1.  spare  not,  shew  the  A.  of  Jacob  their  sins 

205 


HOU 

Jer.  2. 4.  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  O  h.  of  Jacob 

5.  20.  declare  this  in  the  A.  of  Jacob,  publish  it 
Ezek.  20. 5.  I  lifted  up  my  hand  to  the  A.  of  Jacob 
Amos  3.  13.  hear  ye,  and  testify  in  the  A.  of  Jacob 

9.  8.  I  will  not  utterly  destroy  the  A.  of  .facob 
Obad.  17.  the  A.  of  Jacob  shall  possess  possessions 

18.  A.  of  Jacob  shall  be  a  fire 
Mic^.l.  O  thou  that  art  named  the  A.  of  Jacob 
3.  9.  hear  this,  I  pray,  ye  heads  of  the  A.  of  .facob 
Juke  1.  33.  he  shall  reign  over  the  A.  of  Jacob 

HOUSE  ofJosepfi. 
Gen.  43. 17.  he  brought  the  men  into  .foseph^s  A. 
JosA.  18. 5.  the  A.o/./osqjAshall  abide  in  their  coast 
Judg.  1. 22.  the  A.  of  Joseph  went  up  against  Bethel 
23.  the  A.  of  Joseph  sent  to  descry  Belh-el 
35.  yet  the  hand  of  the  h.of  .foseph  prevailed 
2  Sam.  19. 20.  am  come  first  of  all  the  A.  «/  .foseph 
I  Kings  11.28.  ruler  over  the  charge  of  A.o/J««fpA 
Amos  5.  6.  lest  he  break  out  like  fire  in  A.  of  .foseph 
Obad.  18.  and  the  A.  of  Joseph  shall  be  a  flame 
Zech.  10.  6.  and  I  will  save  the  A.  of  Joseph 

HOUSE  of  fsrael. 
Lev.  10.  6.  let  A.  of  Israel  bewail  the  burning 
1?.  3.  what  man  soever  there  be  of  the  A.  of  Israel 
that  killeth  an  ox  or  lamb,  8,  10.  |  22.  18. 
J^um.  20. 29.  all  the  A.  of  Israel  mourned  for  Aaron 

1  Sam.  7.  2.  the  k.  of  Israel  lamented  after  the  Lord 

2  Sam.  ].  12.  they  mourned  for  the  A.  of  Israel 

6.  5.  all  the  h.  of  Israel  played  before  the  Lord 

15.  David  and  the  A.  of  Israel  brought  up  the  ark 

12.  8.  I  gave  thee  the  A.  of  Israel  and  Judah 

16.  3.  to-dayehall  A.  of  Israel  restore  the  kingdom 
1  Kings  20.  31.  kings  of  A.  oflsr.  are  merciful  kings 
Ps(iZ.98.3.remembered  his  truth  toward  A.  of  Israel 
115. 12.  he  will  bless  us,  he  will  bless  A.  of  Israel 
135. 19.  ble.>.sye  the  Lord,  O  A.  of  Isr.  bless  Lord 
Isa.  a."!,  (he  vineyard  of  the  Lord  is  the  A.  of  Israel 
14.2.  the  A.  o//sra«Z  shall  possess  them  in  the  laud 
46.3.the  remnant  of  theA.o/ /iraei,  hearken  to  me 
63.  7.  the  great  goodness  toward  the  h.  of  Israel 
Jer.  2.  4.  hear,  all  the  families  of  the  A.  of  Israel 
26.  as  a  thief,  so  is  the  A.  of  Israel  ashamed 
3.  18.  the  house  ofJudah  shall  walk  with  h.of  Isr. 

20.  you  dealt  treacherously,  O  h.  of  Israel,  5. 11. 
9.26.  all  the  A.  of  Isr.  are  uncircumcised  in  heart 
11.  10.  the  A.  of  Israel  have  broken  my  covenant 

17.  pronounced  evil  for  evil,  of  the  A.  of  Israel 
13. 11.  caused  to  cleave  to  me  the  whole  A.  of  Isr. 
2.3.  8.  the  Lord  liveth,  who  led  the  A.  of  Israel 
31.  27. 1  will  sow  the  A.  of  Israel  with  seed  of  man 

31. 1  will  make  new  covenant  with  h.of  Israel,'S3. 

33. 14.  perform  that  I  promised  to  the  A.  of  Israel 

48.  13.  as  the  A.  of  Israel  was  ashamed  of  Beth-el 

Ezek.  3.1.  eat  this  roll,  and  go,  speak  to  h.of  Israel 

17.  2.  I  20.27,  30.  |  24.  21.  |  33.  10.  |  36.  22. 

4.  go,  get  thee  unto  the  A.  of  Israel,  and  speak 

5.  but  thou  art  sent  to  the  A.  of  Israel 

7.  the  A.  nf  Isr.  will  not  hearken  to  me,  for  all  the 
A.  of  Israel  are  impudent  and  hard-hearted 

17.  I  made  thee  a  watchman  to  A.  of  Israel,  33.7. 
4. 3.  this  shall  be  a  sign  to  the  A.  of  Israel 

4.  and  lay  the  iniquity  of  the  A.  of  Israel  upon  it 

5  thou  shalt  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  h- of  Israel 
5.  4.  a  fire  shall  come  forth  into  the  A.  of  Israel 
6.11.  the  evil  abominations  of  the  A.  of  Israel,  8. 6. 
8.10.  all  theidolsof  the  A.  of  Israel  are  pourtrayed 

11.  seventy  menoftlie  ancients  of  A.  of  Israel,\'i. 
9.  9.  the  iniquity  of  the  A.  o//at.  is  exceeding  great 
11.  5.  thus  haveye  said,  O  A.  of  Israel,  for  I  know 

lf>.  and  all  the  A.  of  Israel  v/hoWy  are  they 
12.9.  hath  not  the  A.  of  Israel  said,  27.  1  18.  29. 

24. nor  any  more  divination  within  the  h.of  Israel 

13.  5.  nor  made  up  the  hedge  for  the  A.  of  Israel 
9.  written  in  the  writing  of  the  A.  of  Israel 

14.  4.  every  one  of  A.  of  Isr.  that  setleth  up  idols,7 
11.  that  the  A.  of  Israel  may  go  no  more  astray 

15.  6.  nor  lift  his  eyes  to  the  idols  of  A.  of  Israel. \6 
25.  hear,  O  A.  of  Israel,  is  not  my  way  equal  1 

30.  therefore  will  I  judge  you,  O  A.  of  Israel 

31.  for  why  will  ye  die,  O  A.  of  Israel  ?  33.  11. 
20.  13.  but  the  A.  of  Israel  rebelled  against  me 

39.  as  for  you,  O  h.of  Isracl,so  ye,  serve  ye  every 

one  his  idols,  if  ye  will  not  hearken  to  me 

40.  there  shall  all  the  A.  of  Israel  serve  ine 

44.  according  to  your  corrupt  doings,  O  A.  o//sr. 
22.  18.  the  A.  of  Israel  is  to  me  become  dross 

28.  24.  no  more  a  pricking  briirto  the  A.  of  Israel 
25.  when  I  shall  have  gathered  the  A.  of  Israel 

29.  6.  havQ  been  a  staff  of  a  reed  to  the  h.  of  I.'<rael 

16.  shall  be  no  more  the  confidence  of  A.  of  Israel 

21.  I  will  cause  the  horn  oftheA.o/Zsrrtei  to  bull 
34.30.that  they  even  the  A.  of  Israel  are  my  people 

36.  10.  and  I  will  multiply  all  the  A.  of  Israel 

17.  when  the  h.of  Israel  dwelt  in  their  own  land 

21.  my  holy  name  which  the  h.of  hracl  profaned 

22.  I  do  not  this  for  your  sakes,  O  A.  of  Israel 
32  be  ashamed  for  your  ways,  O  A.  of  Israel 
37. 1  will  for  this  be  inquired  of  by  the  h.of  Israel 

37.  11.  these  bones  are  the  whole  A.  of  I.<srael 
16.  write  on  it,  for  the  k.  ofltratl  bia  compaoions 


HOU 

Eielc.  39.  12.  seven  months  shall  A.  of  Isr.  be  bury 

22.  the  A.  of  Israel  shall  know  I  am  the  Lord    ' 

23.  that  the  A.  of  Israel  went  into  captivity 

25.  I  will  have  mercy  on  the  whole  A.  of  Israel 
29.  I  have  poured  out  my  Spirit  on  the  A.  of  Isr. 
40.  4.  declare  all  that  thou  seest  to  the  A.  of  Israel 
43. 10.  son  of  man,  shew  the  house  to  A.  of  Israel 
44.  6.  say  to  the  rebellious,  even  to  Iho  h.of  Israel 
12.  and  caused  the  A.  of  Isr.  to  fall  into  miquity 

22.  shall  lake  maidens  of  the  seed  of  the  A.  of  I.fr, 
45. 6.  possession  shall  be  for  the  whole  A.  of  Israel 

8.  the  rest  of  the  land  shall  they  give  to  h.of  Isr 

17.  to  make  reconciliation  for  the  A.  of  Israel 

Hos.  1.4.  cause  to  cease  the  kingdom  of  h.of  Israel 

6.  I  will  no  more  have  mercy  on  the  A.  of  Israel 

5.  1.  and  hearken,  ye  A.  of  Israel,  and  give  ear 

6.  10.  have  seen  a  horrible  thing  in  A.  of  Israel 
11. 12.  A.  oflsr.  compaseeth  me  about  with  deceit 

Amos  5.  3.  the  city  shall  leave  ten  to  the  A.  of  Isr. 
4.  saith  the  Lord  to  the  A.  of  Israel,  seek  ye  me 
25.  have  ye  offered  sacrifices  40  years,  O  h.of  Is.? 
6. 1.  chief  of  nations,  to  whom  the  A.  of  Isr.  came 
14.  I  will  raise  against  you  a  nation,  O  A.  of  Isr. 
1.  10.  hath  conspired  against  thee  in  the  A.  of  Isr. 
9.  9.  I  will  sift  the  A.  of  Israel  among  all  nations 
Jl/ic.  1.5.  for  the  sins  of  the  A. «/" /sraci  is  all  this 

3.  1.  hear,  ye  princes  of  the  A.  of  Israel,  9. 
y.ech.  8.  13.  that  as  ye  were  a  curse,  O  h.of  Israe* 
Mat.  10.  6.  go  to  lost  sheep  of  the  A.  of  Isr.  15. 24 
.lets  2.  36.  let  all  the  A.  of  Israel  know  assuredly 

7.  42.0  h.of  Israel,  have  ye  offered  to  me  beasts'? 
Heb.8.8.  make  a  new  covenant  with  A.  o//sr.  10. 

HOUSE  of  Judah. 
2  Sam.  2.  4.  the  men  of  Judah  came  and  anointed 
David  king  over  A.  of  Judah,  7, 11.  1  CAr.2S.  4. 
12.  8. 1  gave  thee  the  A.  of  .fudah  and  of  Israel 

1  Kings  12.  21.  he  assembled  all  the  A.  of  Judah 

23.  speak  to  all  the  A.  of  Judah  and  Benjamin 

2  Kings  19.30.  the  remnant  that  is  escaped  of  the  A. 
o/./udaA shall  fake  root, and  bear  fruit,/4a.37.31. 

2CAr.  19.  ll.ZebadiahtheruleroftheA.  of  Judah 
JVeh.  4.  16.  the  rulers  were  behind  the  A.  of  .fudah 
Isa.  22.  21.  he  shall  be  a  father  to  the  A.  nf  Judah 
Jer.  3. 18.  A.  ofJudth  shall  walk  with  house  of  Isr. 
5.  11.  the  A.  of  Judah  hath  dealt  treacherously 
11. 10.  the  A.  of  Judah  hath  broken  my  covenant 
17.  for  evil  of  the  A.  of  Judah  that  they  have  done 
12. 14.  I  will  pluck  A.  of  Judah  from  among  them 
13.11. 1  caused  to  cleave  to  me  the  A.  of  Judah 
31.27. 1  willsowtheA.  o/./wdaA  with  seed  of  man 
31. 1  will  make  anew  covenant  with  A.  of  .Judah 
,3,3.]4.perform  that  good  I  promised  to  A.  of  Judah 
36.  3.  it  may  be  A.  of  Judah  will  hear  all  the  evil 
E2eA.4.6.  bear  the  iniquity  of  A.  of  Judah  forty  days 

8.  17.  is  it  a  light  thing  to  the  A.  of  .Judah? 

9.  9.  the  iniquity  of  tlie  A.  of  Judaji  is  great 
2.5.3.  Ammonites  said,  aha,against  the  A.  o/yurfoA 

8.  the  ft,,  of  Judah  is  like  to  all  the  heathen 
12.  Edom  hath  dealt  against  the  A.  of  Judah 
Hos.\.l.ha\  I  will  have  mercy  upon  the  A.  of  Judah 
5.  12.  I  will  be  to  the  A.  of  Judah  as  rottenness 

14.  I  will  be  as  a  young  lion  to  the  A.  of  .Judah 
Zeph.  2.  7.  coast  shall  be  for  remnant  of  A-  of  Judah 
Zech.  8.  13.  as  ye  were  a  curse,  O  A.  of  .fudah 

15.  I  have  thought  to  do  well  to  the  h.of  .fudah 
19.  the  fast  shall  bo  toh.of .fudah  joy  and  gladness 

10.  3.  for  the  Lord  hath  visited  the  A.  of  Judah 
6.  and  I  will  strengthen  the  A.  of  Judah 

12.  4.  I  will  open  mine  eyes  unto  the  A.  of  Jvdah 
Heb.B.S.l  will  make  new  covenant  with  A.  of  Judah 

King's  HOUSE. 
2KS'am.  11.  2.  David  walked  on  roof  of  the  Aj'n^'eA. 
8.  and  Uriah  departed  out  of  the  king's  A. 
15.  35.  what  thou  shalt  hear  out  of  the  king's  h. 

1  A7n5's9.1.whenSolomon  had  finished  theking's  h. 
14. 26.  he  took  awav  the  treasure  of  the  king's  A. 

15.  18. 2  fCi'ngs  16.  8. 2  Chr.  12.  9. 1 25.  24. 
16.18.  Zimri  burnt  the  Ani;?-'sA.  over  him  with  fire 

2  Kings  7. 11.  Ihcv  fold  it  to  ihe  king's  A.  within 
2.5.  9.  ho  burnt  the  king's  h.  .fer.  39.  8.  |  52.  13. 

2  Chr.  23.  5.  a  third  part  shall  be  at  the  king's  A. 

26.  21.  Jotham  his  son  was  over  the  king's  h. 

28.21. took  away  a  portionoutoftlie  A.ofthe  A-i'n^f 
Ezra  6.  4.  let  expences  be  given  out  of  the  king's  k. 
KstA.  2.  9.  gave  her  seven  maidens  oul  of  king's  h. 

4.  13.  think  not  thou  shall  escape  in  the  king'sh. 
9.  4.  for  Mordecai  was  groat  in  the  king's  A. 

Nos.  5.  1.  and  give  ve  ear,  O  A.  of  the  king 

HOdSE  nf  Levi. 
Kiod.'i.  1.  and  there  went  a  man  of  the  A.  of  J. em 
JVum.  17. 8.  rod  of  Anrou  for  h.of  Jeeisyaa  budded 
Psal.  135.  20.  bless  the  Lord,  6  A.  of  Levi 
Zech.  12.  13.  Hie  family  of  the  A.  of  Jevi  apart 

/n(Ae  HOUSE. 
Oen.27.]5.she  took  raiment  ofEsanthat  wercr'ni. 
34.29.  they  spoiled  even  all  that  was  in  the  A. 
39.  5.  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  was  on  all  in  the  h. 
8.my  master  wotteth  not  whatis  wiih  meintheh 
45. 16.  the  fame  thereof  was  heard  in  PharaohV* 
£x<Kt  12. 4S.  in  one  h-  shall  tlie  passover  be  ealea 


,  HOU 

L,n.  14.  34. 1  pufthe  plague  of  leprosy  in  a  h.  3,^. 

43.  if  plague  come  again  and  brcuk  out  in  the  h. 

44.  boliold,  if  ihe  plague  be  spread  in  theh. 

47.  he  that  lieth,  that  ealcth  in  the  k-  uliali  waaU 
4d.  behold,  the  plague  bath  not  spread  in  the  A. 
Jonh.  'i.  1"J.  whoso  with  thee  in  thrh.  his  blood  on  ns 
6.  17.  Rahab  live,  all  that  are  with  liiTtn  the  h. 
Judg.  17.  4.  and  they  were  in  the  h.  of  ftlicnh,  12. 
Ruih  1.  9.  may  find  rest,  each  in  A.  of  her  husband 
2.  7.  unlit  now,  that  she  tarried  a  little  i'h  the  A. 
1  Sam.  'JS.  24.  the  women  had  u  fat  calf  in  the  A. 
31.  <J.  sent  to  publish  it  in  Ihe  A.  of  their  idols 

10.  they  put  his  armour  in  the  h.  of  Ashlaroth 

1  Kings  3.  17.  I  and  this  woman  dwell  in  one  h 

and  I  was  delivered  of  a  child  with  her  in  tAcA. 
6.  7.  there  was  not  any  tool  of  iron  heard  in.  the  A 

14.  13.  is  found  some  good  in  the  A.  of  Jeroboam 
16.  9.  drinking  himself  drunk  in  the  A.  of  Arza 

2  Kinirg  4.  2.  tell  me  what  hast  thou  in  thrh.?  thine 

handmaid  hath  not  any  thing  iii  th".  ii 
35.  he  returned,  and  walked  in  the  A.  to  and  fn 

5.  18.  leanetli  on  my  hand,  bow  inh.  ofRimmon 
24.  he  took  them,  and  bestowed  them  in  the  A. 

19.  37.  worshipping  i'n  A.  ofNisroch,  Isa.  37.  3d. 

21.  7.  Manasseh  set  a  graven  image  in  theh. 

2  Chr.  3(i.  17.  slew  young  men  in  the  A  of  sanctua. 
F.ira  1.  7.  and  had  put  ihem  in  the  h.  of  his  gods 

6.  I.  search  was  made  in  the  A.  of  the  rolls  where 
Esth.  7. 8.  will  he  force  the  (|ueen  also  in  the  A.  ? 

9.  behold,  the  gallows  standeth  in  h.  of  Unman 
Vsal.  6S.  t  (i.  God  setteth  the  solitary  in  a  h. 

119.  54.  beenmy  songs  in  theh.  of  rny  pilgrimage 
Prov.  3.  33.  curse  of  Lord  is  in  thrh.  of  ibe  wicked 

5.  10.  thy  labours  be  in  the  A.  of  a  stranger 

7.  11.  she  is  loud,  her  feet  abide  not  in  her  A. 

15.  (i.  in  the  A.  of  the  righteous  is  much  treasure 
£cc/.  7.  4.  the  heart  of  the  wise  is  in  A.  of  mourn- 
ing ;  but  the  heart  of  fools  is  in  the  A.  of  mirth 

Tsa.  44.  13.  maketh  idol  that  it  may  remain  in  the  A. 
Jer.  7.  30.  set  their  abominations  in  the  A.  32.  3-t. 

34.  15.  ye  made  a  covenant  before  me  in  the  h. 

37.  \5.  put  him  in  the  h.  of  Jonathan  the  scribe 
Jimos  G.  9.  if  there  remain  ton  men  in  one  h. 
Mic.  1.  10.  in  the  h.  of  Aphruh  roll  thyself  in  dust 

6.  10.  treasures  of  wickedness  in  the  A.  of  wicked 
Zcch.  13. 6. 1  was  wounded  in  the  A.  of  my  friends 
Mat.  5.  15.  giveth  light  imtoall  that  are  in  the  A. 
JWark  'i.  1.  and  it  was  noised  that  he  was  in  theh. 

9.  33.  being  in  the  h.  he  asked  them  what  was  it 
10. 10.  in  the  A.  his  discijiles  asked  of  the  matter 
14.3. being  inBethany,  in  the  h.  of  Simon  Ihe  leper 

IjUke  8.  27.  nor  abide  in  any  A.  but  in  the  tombs 
John  8.  35.  the  servant  abidi'th  not  in  the  A. 
11.  20.  Martha  met  him,  Mary  sat  still  in  the  A. 
jjcf.«  9.  11. inquire  in  theh.  of  Judas  for  one  Saul 

10.  32.  Peter  rs  lodged  in  the  h.  of  Simon  a  tanner 

HOUSE  joined  with  J.nrd. 
Ezod.  23.  19.  the  first-fruits  thou  shalt  bring  into 

the  A.  of  the  y.»rrf,  34.  2ti.  .Vch.  W.  35. 
Drut.  23. 18.  not  bring  price  of  a  dog  into  A.  of  f.d 
Josh.  fi.  24.  put  into  the  treasury  of  A.  of  the  Lord 
Jvdg.  19.  18.  i  am  now  going  to  the  A.  ofthe  J^ord 

1  Som.  1.7.  when  she  went  upto  the  A. ofthe  Lord 
24.  Hannah  brought  him  unto  the  A.  ofthe  Lord, 

2  Kinf^s  12.  4,  9,  13.  |  22.  4.  2  CAron.  34.  14 

2  Sam.  12. 20.  then  David  came  into  A.  ofthe  Lord 

1  Kingn  3. 1.  made  an  end  of  buililing  Ihe  A.  of /,// 

6.  37.  was  the  foundation  of  the  A.  of  the   Lord 

laid,  2  Chron.  8.  Ki.  Kira  3.  II.  '/.ech.  8.  9. 

7.  40.  the  work  he  made  for  the  A.  of  the  Aorrf, 

45.  51.  2  Chron.  4.  10.  I  .1.  1.  |  24. 14. 

8.  10.  Uiat  the  cloud  filled  Ihe  A.  ol  Ihe  Lord,  11. 

2  Chron.  .5.  13.  |  7  2.  F.irk.  44.  4. 
83. so  Israel  dedicated  the  A.  ofthe  Lord 
10.  5.  he  went  up  unto  Ihe  A.  of  Lord^i  Chr.  9.  4. 
SKinirs  11.  3.  he  was  hid  in  the  A.  of /,or(/ six  years 
4.  he  took  an  oath  of  them  in  the  A.  ofthe  I^ord 
1.5.  let  her  not  he  slain  in  A.  of /,.  2  CAr.  23.  14. 

18.  appointed  officers  over  A.  of/..  2  CAr.  23.  18. 

19.  Ihey  bronght  from  the  A.  of  the  /.ord,  23.  fi. 
12. 10.  found  ill  A.  ofthe  /,.  14.  14.  |  Ifi.8.  [  18. 15. 

11.  had  the  oversight  of  the  A.  of  tlii-  Lord 

10.  IrespasK  money  was  not  liroui.'ht  intoA.  of />. 

16.  18.  the  kingVenlrv,  turned  he  from  A.  of /,(/. 

2  KinfTs  20.  .5.  third  day  shall  go  up  A.  of  r.nrd 

8.   what  sign  Lord    will    hi-al    me,  and  that  I 

shall  go  up  to  the  A.  ofthe  /,.  J.in.  .38.  22. 

23.  2.  rend   words  of  the  covenant  which   were 

found  in  the  A.  of  the  J.ord,  24.  2  CAron. 

34.  17,  30. 

7.  housed  iifSodomilcs  that  were  by  A.  of  the  /,. 

11.  the  horses  at  entering  in  ofthe  A.  ofthe  f.ord 
25.  9.  and  he  burnt  ihe  A.  of  the  ford,  .//r.  .52. 13. 

1  Chr.  6.  31.  service  of  song  in  the  A.  ofthe  f.nrd 

22.  1.  then  David  "inid,  this  is  the  h.  oflbo  Lord 
II.  now,  my  son,  build  the  A  of  the  /,orr/ thy  (J. 
14.  have  prepared  fur  the  A.  of  thn  f.ord 

23.  4.  to  HCt  forward  the  work  ofthe  A.  ofthe  /,. 
26. 12.  porters,  to  miniBt"r  in  the  A.  of  the  /.nrrf 

2  CAron.  8. 16.  »o  the  k.  oftho  Lord  was  porfoctcd 

296 


HOU 

■:Chr.  26.21.  for  he  was  cut  off  from  A. qf  L.Joell.Q 
29.  5.  ye  Levitcs,  sanctify  the  A.  ofthe  Lord 
15.  they  came  to  cleanse  the  A.  ofthe  /,ord 
3.3.  1.5.  Manasseh  took  the  idol  out  of  A.  of  J.ord 

34.  15.  I  found  the  book  ofthe  law  in  A.  of  J^ord 

36.  14.  the  priests  polluted  the  A.  ofthe  /.ord 
Ezra  7.  27.  to  beautify  A.  ofthe  Lord  in  Jerusalem 
R«a/.  23.6.1  will  dwell  in  the  A.  of  ihe  Lord  forever 

27. 4. that  1  may  dwell  in  the  A.  of  AorJ  all  my  life 
92.  13.  those  that  be  planted  in  the  A.  of  ihe  Lord 
116.  19. 1  will  pay  my  vows  in  courts  of  Lord'. s  A. 
1 18.  26.  we  have  blessed  you  out  of  ihe  A.  of  J, ord 
122.  1.  when  they  said,  let  us  go  into  A.  of  Ihe  L. 
9.  because  of  the  A.  of /.urd  I  will  seek  thy  good 
134.  1.  ye  that  stand  in  the  A.  ofthe  J.ord,  135.  2. 
Isa.  2.2.  mountain  ofthe  Lord's  A.  be  established 
in  the  top  of  the  mountains,  jMic.  4.  1. 

37.  14.  Hezekiah  went  up  into  Ihe  A.  ofthe  /.ord 
,/ffr.l7. 26.  sacrifices  of  praise  to  theA.  of  the  /.ord 

20."  1.  Pashur  was  governor  in  the  A.  ofthe  J.ord 

2.  the  high  gate,  which  was  by  A.  ofthe  Lord 
26.  2.  which  come  to  worship  in  tl>e  /.ord's  A. 

7.  speaking  the.ae  words  in  the  A.  ofthe  J.ord 
28. 1.  Hananiah  spake  to  me  in  the  A.  of  the  Lord 

5.  the  people  that  stood  in  ihe  A.  ofthe  J.ord 

29.  26.  ye  should  be  officers  in  the  A.  ofthe  J.ord 

35.  2.  bring  the  Kechabites  into  the  A.  ofthe  J.,ord 

36.  5.  1  am  shut  up,  I  cannot  go  into  A.  of  J.ord 

6.  read  in  the  Lord's  A.  upon  Ihe  fasliiig-day 
:W.  14.  the  third  entry  that  is  in  the  A.  of  ihe  JA. 
41.  5. 10  bring  them  to  the  A.  ofthe  J.ord 
51.  51.  are  come  into  the  sanctuaries  of  J.nrd's  h. 

/.a7n.2.7.they  have  made  a  noise  in  the  A.  of  the  J.. 
tjiig.\.i.  the  time  that  the  Lord's  h.  should  be  built 
See  Court,  Door,  G.\tk,  Treasurks,  Vks- 

Minr,  or  my  HOUSE. 
Grn.  1.5.  2.  the  steward  of  my  h.  is  this  Eliezer 

3.  and  lo,  one  born    in  my  A.  is  mine  heir 
34.  30.  and  I  shall  be  destroyed,  I  and  my  h. 
41.  40.  thou  shall  be  over  my  A.  and  according  to 

JVitm.  12.7.  Moses  not  so.whois  faith,  in  all  mineh. 
ffevt.  26.  13.  the  hallowed  things  out  of  mine  A. 
■/osh.  24.15.  as  for  me  and  my  A.  we  will  serve  Lord 
./udiT.  II.  31.  Cometh  forth  ofthe  doors  of  my  A. 
19.  23.  seeing  this  man  oomeinto»n»/ A.  do  not  thus 

1  .Sam.  20.  15.  not  cut  ofTlhy  kindness  from  vty  A. 
21.  15.  shall  this  fellow  come  into  my  A.? 

2  .Sam.  7.  18.  who  am  I,  and  what  is  my  A.  that 

thou  hast  brought  me  hitherto?  ICArtin.  17. 16. 

11.11.  shall  I  then  go  into  mine  A.  to  eat  and  drink? 
23.  5.  Iho'  my  h.  be  not  so  wilh  God,  yet  he  hath 

1  Kings  21.2.  give  it  me,  because  it  is  near  to  my  A. 

2  /lings  20.  15.  all  things  that  are  in  mine  A.  have 

they  seen,  nothing  I  have  not  shewn  them, 
Isa.  39.  4. 

1  Chrnn.  17.  14. 1  will  settle  him  in  mine  A.  for  ever 
./«il7.13.  ifl  wait,  the  grave  is  mine  A.I  have  made 
/'.s-«M01.2.Iwillwalk  in  myh.  with  a  perfect  heart 

1.32.3. 1  will  not  come  into  the  tabernacle  of  in?/ A. 
f'roD.  7.6.  at  the  window  of  my  h.  I  looked  through 
/.la.  3.  7.  in  my  A.  is  neither  bread  nor  clothing 

56.  5.  unto  thom  will  I  give  in  mine  h.  a  name 

7. 1  will  make  them  joyful  in  my  h.  of  prayer 

mine  A.  shall  bo  callerl  a  A.  of  prayer  tor  all 

penplc,  Jl/w^.21.  1.3.  MorkW.  17.  /.uke  19.46. 

.fer.  11. 1.5.  what  halh  my  beloved  lo  do  in  mineh.? 

12.  7.  I  have  forsaken  mineh.  I  left  mine  heritage 

23.  II.  in  my  A.  have  I  found  their  wickedness 
F.zek.  8.  l.nsl  sat  in  minff  A.  and  elders  before  me 

23.  31).  thus  have  they  done  in  midst  of  mine  A. 

44.  7.  in  my  sanctuary  lo  pollute  it,  even  my  A. 
/>rin.4.4.  I  Nebuchadnezzar  wasat  rest  in  minf  A. 
/■fos.  9.  15.  I  will  drive  them  out  of  mine  h. 
Ung.  1.9.  why?  because  of  mine  A.  that  is  waste 
Zi-rA.3.7.  then  thoushnll  also  judge  my  A.  and  ki  ep 

9.  8.  I  will  encamp  about  mine  h.  fur  the  army 
jMnl.  3. 10.  that  there  may  be  meat  in  mine  A. 
Mat.  12.  44.  I  will  return  into  my  A.  Luke  11.  24. 
Luke  9.  61.  let  mo  bid  Ihem  farewell  at  my  A. 

14.  23.  compel  them,  that  my  A.  may  be  lrlli-d 
J/els  10.  30.  at  Ihe  ninth  hour  I  prayeil  in  my  A. 

16.  1.5.  saying,  come  into  mv  li.  anil  abide  there 

Oirn  MOITSR. 
flm.  14.  14.  armed  liisservanlx  born  in  his  ow  A. 

30.  ;10.  when  shall  I  provide  for  mine  eirn  A.  nKo 
Deut.  22.  2.  Ihou  shalt  bring  it  unto  lliini-  own  A. 
,fosh.  20.  6.  shall  return  and  cnmo  unto  his  own  A. 
./Krfy.8. 29.  Jerubbual  went  nmldwrdl  in  his  own  h 

2  Sam.  4.  11.  slain  a  righteous  person  in  his  oif  n  A. 
12.  11.  raise  evil  against  thee  out  of  thy  oirn  A. 
14.  21.  Ill  him  turn  to  his  otrn  A.  aird  not  .sen  my 

fare,  so  Ahsnlom  retuinrd  lo  ha  nirn  A. 
19. 30. the  king  is  come  again  in  pi-ace  lo  hisoirn  A. 
1  Kingi  2.  34.  Jonb  buried  in  his  own  A.  in  wildern. 
3.  1.  he  had  m.ndc  an  end  of  huilding  his  ovn  h. 
7.  1.  Solomon  was  building  his  otrn  A.  13  years 
9.  15.  Solomon  raipcd  a  levy  to  build  his  own  A. 
12.  16.  Bce  to  thine  oipn  A.  David,  2  CAron.  10.  16. 

14. 12.  arise  therefore,  get  Iheo  into  thine  ovsn  A. 


HOU 

2  Kings  51 .18.  Mai.  assch  slept  wilh  his  father*,  WM. 
buried  in  the  garden  of  his  oicn  A.  2  CAron.  33.20 
23.  slew  the  king  in  his  own  A.  2  CAron.  33.  24 
'2  Chr.  7. 11.  came  in  hr»  heart  lo  inakein  hisoicn  A 
8.  1.  at  the  end  of  twenty  years,  wherein  Sulonioa 
had  built  the  house  ofthe  Lord  and  his  own  A 
f-XA.l  22.  every  man  should  bear  rule  in  his  ovn  A. 
ProB.Jl.  29.  he  that  troublctli  his  oicn  A, shall 
15.  27.  that  is  greedy  of  gain  trmiblelh  bisoicnA. 
/.va.  14.  18.  lie  in  glory,  every  one  in  his  oicn  A. 
.Mic.  7.6.  a  man's  enemies  are  tlie  men  of  his  own  k. 
Hug.  1.  9.  and  ye  run  every  man  lo  his  own  A. 
J/ul.  13.  57.  Jesus  said  to  them,  a  piophet  is  not 
without  honour, ..^ave  in  his  oirn  A.  Mar/c6.A. 
J^uke  1.  2:t.  he  depailed  to  his  own  A.  5.  25. 

56.  and  Mary  relumed  lo  her  own  A. 
5.  29.  Levi  made  him  a  great  foasl  in  his  ojrn  A. 

8.  .39.  return  to  thy  o.  h.  and  shew  how  great  tliinge 
■  /ohn  7.  53.  and  every  man  went  unto  his  otrn  A. 
.Iris  28.  30.  Paul  dwell  two  years  in  his  oirn  A. 
1  y'ini.  3.  4.  a  bishopyone  that  ruleth  well  his  oifn  A. 

5.  lor  if  a  nran  know  not  how  lo  rule  his  oirnA. 
5.  8.  and  especially  for  those  of  his  own  h. 
IJeb.  3.  6.  but  Christ  as  a  Son  over  his  ojon  A. 

7-Ais  HOl'SE. 
Gen.  39.  9.  there  is  none  greater  in  this  A.  than  I 
40.  14.  think  on  me,  and  bring  me  out  of  this  A. 

1  Ji'ings  6.  12.  concerning  thish.  thou  art  building 
8.27.  how  much  less  this  A.  that  1  have  budded 

29.  eyes  be  opened  toward  thish.  2  CAron.  6.20. 
31.  before  Ihine  altar  in  thish.i  Citron.  6.  22. 
33. shall  confes.^  thy  name,  pray  and  make  suppli* 
cation  to  thee  in  titis  A.  42.  2  CAr.  6.  24,  32. 
38.  and  3])rcad  forth  his  hands  toward  (Ai»  A. 

9.  3.  I  have  hallowed  (Ais  A.  2  CAr.  7.  16,  20. 

8.  at  £Ai.*  A.  every  one  shall  hiss,  2  Chron.  7.  21. 

2  Kings  21.  7.  t.  A.  which  1  have  chosen,  2CAr.33.7. 
2  Chron.  20.  9.  if  when  evil  comelh  upon  us  wo 

sland  before  Mis  A.  for  thy  name  is  in  tAt»  A. 
^^2ra3. 12.  the  foundationof  (Ai»  A.  was  la  id  before 
5.  12.  Nebuchadnezzar  who  destroyed  thish. 
6. 15.  this  h.  was  finished  on  the  third  day  of  Adar 
■ler.  7. 10.  and  come  anil  sland  before  me  in  this  A. 
ll.is  thi.i  h.become  a  den  of  robbers  in  your  eyesi 
14.  therefore  will  I  do  lo  this  A.  as  to  Shiioh 
22.4.  then  shall  there  enter  in  by  the  gales  of  t.A. 

5.  that  this  h.  shall  become  a  (le!^<diition 
26.  6.  ihen  will  I  make  this  A.  like  Shiioh 

9.  saying,  this  A.  shall  be  like  Shiioh 

12.  the  Lord  sent  meto  prosphi'sy  against  (Ai>  A. 
f/og.  1.4.  to  dwell  ill  hoiis"S,  and  this  A.  lie  waste 

2.  3.  who  is  ]oJ\  that  saw  this  A.  in  her  first  glory? 
7.  I  will  fill  this  h.  wilh  glory,  sailh  Ihe  Lord 
9.  the  glory  of  ^Aislatler  A.  greater  than  former 
y.rch.  4.  9.  Zcrubb.  laid  Ihe  foundation  of  Mi.«  A. 
/.vke  10.  5.  ye  enter,  first  say,  peace  be  lo  this  A. 
19.  9.  Jesus  said,  this  day  is  snlv.  come  lo  this  A, 

Thine  or  thy  HOl'SF. 
Gen.  7.  1.  come  thou,  and  all  thy  A.  into  Ihe  ark 
31.  41.  thus  have  1  bei-n  twenty  years  in  thy  A. 
F.xod.  8.  3.  frogs  shall  go  up  anil  come  into  thine  k. 
JSTum.  18.  11.  every  one  that  is  clean  in  thy  A.  13. 
/)eut.  6.  7.  talk  when  tlioitsillest  in  fAinc  A.  II.  19 

9.  shalt  write  them  on  the  posisof /Ay  A.  11.20. 
7.  26.  nor  shall  bring  an  abomination  inli>  <Ain*  k. 
15.  16.  br'Cause  he  Inveth  thee  and  thine  A. 

21.  12.  then  thou  shall  bring  hi'r  home  to  rAin«  k. 

13.  Khali  remain  in  Ihine h  and  bewail  herfiither 

22.  8.  that  thou  bring  nut  blood  upon  thine  A. 
2.'i.  14.  shalt  not  have  in  thine  A.  divers  mensurea 
26. 1 1,  good  thing  God  given  lo  thee  and  thine  k 

,/ii.<A.  2.  3.  brirg  num  which  lire  entered  into  thine  h. 

19.  whosoever  shall  go  out  of  the  doors  off  Ay  h. 

.fvdg.  12.  1.  wo  will  hum  thine  h.  on  thee  with  fir« 

19.22.  bring  forth  Ihe  man  Ihatcnme  inlo(Ain«  A. 

Wi//A  1. 11.  miikc  woman  that  is  come  into  (Aine  A. 

12.  and  lei  thy  A.  be  like  thf  house  of  Pharez 

1  vS'iim.  2.  30   ihat  thy  A,  should  walk  before  me 
31.  there  shall  not  be  an  old  man  in  Ihinrh. 
33.  Iho  incr.  of  thine  h.  shall  ilio  in  flower  of  ag« 
.36.  rverv  one  in  thine  A.  shall  crouch  lo  him 

i  22.  14.  as  D Mvid,  who  is  hcuiourable  in  thine  h. 

25.  6.  peace  bo  to  thine  A.  and  lo  all  thon  hast 
."'.5.  Dav.d  said  lo  her,  ?o  up  in  peace  lo  thine  ft 

2  Sam.  7.  16.  tliinr  A.  shall  beisliiblisheil  for  ever 
11.8.  go  down  to  thy  A.  and  wash  thy  feet 

10.  why  then  didst  not  thou  go  down  \olhine  A. 7 
12.  10.  till-  sword  shall  never  depart  from  thine k, 
14.  f<.  the  king  said,  go  lo  thine  h.  1  Kim's  1.  53. 

1  /\'in^s  13.  8.  if  Ihou  wdlg.ve  nie  hiilf  ihine*. 
1H.  brine  him  back  with  thee  into  (Aine  A 

16,3.mak(fAyA.likelheA.orjerid)oam,  21.  28. 
20.  6.  mv  servants,  they  shall  search  Ihine  k. 

2  Kings  20.  1.  set  Mine  A.  in  order,  Isa.  .38.  I. 
15.  wlial  have  they  fecn  in  thine  A.?  Isa.  39.  4. 
17.  all  in  thine  A.  shall  In-  carried,  Isa.  39.  6. 

'sol  a.  7.  I  will  come  lo  f  A  inniuliit.  oflhv  irorcy 

26.  8.  I  have  loved  the  habilnlioii  of  thy  k. 
36.  8.  thry  Bbnil  be  snti»:fied  »  ilh  fnin'  ss  of  tjtf  k. 
50.  9.  I  will  take  no  bullock  out  of  tky  k. 


HOU 

P*a?  65.4.  we  shall  be  gatisfied  with  goodness  of  t.h. 
66.  13.  I  will  go  into  thy  A.  with  burnt-offeringa 
6U.9.  zealof  tAi'ne  A.  hath  eaten  me  up,  John  2. 17. 
93.  5.  holiness  becomeihtAine  A.  O  Lord,  for  ever 
128.3.wife  shall  be  as  a  fruitful  vine  by  sides  ofi.A. 

Isa.  58.  7.  bring  the  poor  that  are  cast  out  to  thy  h. 

Jer.  38.  17.  go  forth,  thou  shall  live  and  thine  A. 

£zeA.  3. 24.  Spirit  said,  shut  thyself  within  thine  h. 
44.  30.  may  cause  the  blessing  to  rest  in  Mine  A. 

Hab.  2.  10.  thou  hast  consulted  shame  to  tA^  A. 

Mat.  9.  6.  arise,  go  to  t.  h.  Mark  2. 1 1.  Luke5.  24. 

26.  18.  I  will  keep  the  passover  at  thy  A. 
Luke  7.  44. 1  entered  (.  A.  thou  gavest  me  no  water 

19..5.  come  down,  for  to-day  I  must  abide  at  thy  A. 

^c/sll.l4.  thou  and  all  thy  h.  shall  be  saved,  16. 31. 

Philem.  2.  to  the  church  in  thy  A.  grace  to  you 

See  Tops. 

HOUSES. 

Gen.  42. 19.  go  carry  corn  for  the  famine  of  your  A 

F.xod.l.^l.  mid  wives  feared  God,  he  made  them  A. 

6.  14.  these  be  the  heads  of  their  fathers'  A. 

8.  9.  to  destroy  the  frogs  from  thee  and  thy  A.  11. 

13.  and  the  frogs  died  outof  the  A.  and  the  field. 

21.  I  will  send  swarms  of  flies  into  thy  A.  24. 
9.20.hemade  his  servants  and  cattle  flee  into  the  A 
10.6. 1  he  locusts  shall  fill  thy  A. and  the  A.  of  all  thy 

servants,  and  the  A.  of  all  the  Egyptians 

12.  7.  strike  ii  on  the  upper  door-posts  of  the  A. 
13.blood  be  for  a  token  upon  the  A.where  you  are 
15.  ye  shall  put  away  leaven  outof  your  A. 
19.  there  shall  be  no  leaven  found  in  your  h. 
23.  not  suffer  the  destroyer  to  come  in  to  your  A. 
27. who  passed  over  and  delivered  our  A. in  Egypt 

Z,e».25.31  .the  A.  of  villages  be  counted  as  the  fields 

33.  the  A.  of  the  cities  of  their  possession,  33. 
3VKm.4.22.  sum  of  Gershon  thro'A. their  fathers,  40. 

16.  32.  the  earth  swallowed  them  up  and  their  A. 

17.  6.  for  each  prince,  according  to  their  fathers  A. 
32.  18.  we  will  not  return  unto  our  A.  till  Israel 

Deut.  6.  11.  to  give  thee  h.  full  of  all  good  things 
8.  12.  when  hast  built  goodly  A.  and  dwelt  therem 

19.  1.  dwellest  in  their  cities  and  A.  JVtA.  9.  25. 
Josh.  9.  12.  we  took  hot  provision  out  of  our  A. 
Judv-.  18.  14.  do  ye  know  that  there  is  in  these  A. 

22.  the  men  that  were  in  the  A.  near  to  Micah's 
INITIO'S  13.32.  he  cried  against  the  A.  of  high  places 

20.  6.  they  shall  search  the  A.  of  thy  servants 
2  Kings  17.29.  pul  them  in  the  A.  of  the  high  places 

32.  which  sacrificed  in  the  A.  of  the  high  places 
23.  7.  he  brake  down  the  A.  of  the  Sodomites 

19.  the  A.  of  the  high  places  Josiah  took  away 
25.9.  he  burnt  all  the  A.  of  Jerusalem,  .fer.  52.  13. 

1  Chron.  15.  I.David  made  A.  in  the  city  of  David 

28.  11.  David  gave  to  Solom.  the  pattern  of  the  A. 

29.  4.  to  overlay  the  walls  of  the  A.  wilhal 

2  Chron.  34.  11.  to  buy  timber  lo  floor  the  A 
35.  4.  and  prepare  yourselves  by  A.  ofyour  fathers 

jWA.  4.  14.  fight  for  your  wives  and  your  A. 
5.3. some  said,  we  have  morteaged  our  lands  and  A. 
11.  restore  to  them  their  vineyards  and  A. 

7.  4.  but  the  peo|)le  were  few,  and  A.  not  huilded 

10.  34.  we  cast  lots  after  the  A.  of  our  fathers 
Job  1.  4.  his  sons  went  and  feasted  in  their  A. 

3.  i5.  with  princes,  who  filled  their  A.  with  silver 

4.  19.  much  less  in  them  that  dwell  in  A.  of  clay 
15.  28.  hedwellcth  in  A.  which  no  man  inhabiteth 
21.9.their  A.  aresafe  from  fear,  nor  is  the  rod  of  G. 
22.  18.  yet  he  filled  their  A.  with  good  things 
24. 16.  in  the  dark  they  dig  through  A.  which  they 

Psal.  49.  11.  that  their  A.  shall  continue  forever 
83.  12.  let  us  take  the  A.  of  God  in  possession 
Prov.  1.  13.  wc  shall  fill  our  A.  with  spoil 

30.  26.  yet  make  they  their  A.  in  the  rocks 
F.ccl.  2.  4.  I  builded  me  A.  I  planted  me  vineyards 
Isa.  3.  14.  the  spoil  of  the  poor  is  in  your  A. 

5.  9.  of  a  truth,  many  A.  shall  be  desolate,  6.  11. 

8.  14.  for  a  rock  of  offence  to  both  the  A.  of  Israel 

13.  16.  their  A.  be  spnilcd,  their  wives  ravished 

21.  Iheir  A.  shall  be  foil  of  doleful  creatures 

22.  the  wild  beasts  shall  cry  in  their  dfsolale  A. 
15.  3.  on  the  tops  of  their  A.  everv  one  shall  howl 
22.  10.  ye  have  numbered  the  A.  of  Jerusalem,  and 

the  A.  have  ye  broken  down  to  fortify  the  wall 
32. 1.3.  yea,  upon  all  the  A.  of  joy  in  the  joyous  city 
65.  21.  they  shall  bnild  A.  and  inhabit  them 
Jer.  5.7.  and  assembled  by  troops  in  the  harlots' A. 

27.  as  cage  is  full  ofhirds,  are  their  A.  fu'lofjuc. 

6.  12.  and  their  A.  phall  bfl  lurnod  unto  others 

18.  22.  let  a  cry  be  heard  from  their  A. 

19.  13.  the  A.  of  Jerusalem  and  the  A  of  the  kings 
of  Judah  shall  be  defiled  as  the  place  of  Tophet 

29.  5.  build  ye  A.  and  dwell  in  them,  28. 

32.  15.  A.  and  fields  shall  be  possfS«ed  in  this  land 
29.  A.  on  whose  roofs  they  offered  incense  to  Baal 

33.  4.  concerning  A.  of  this  eiiy,  and  A.  of  kings 
39.  8.  they  burnt  the  A.  of  the  people  with  fire 
43.12.1  will  kindle  a  fire  in  A.  of  gods  of  Egypt,  13. 

Lam. 5. '2. oath,  are  turned  to  aliens,  we  are  orphans 
Bzek.  7.  24.  the  heathen  shall  possexa  their  A- 

11.  3.  which  say,  it  i«  not  near,  let  us  build  A. 

897 


HOW 

f;iet.l6.41.they  shall  burn  thine  A.  with  fire,  23.47. 

26.  12.  and  they  shall  destroy  thy  ph'nsant  A. 
28.  26.  they  shall  build  A.  and  plant  vineyards 
33.  30.  talking  against  thee  in  the  doors  of  the  A. 
45.  4.  the  holy  portion  shall  be  a  place  fortheirA. 

Van.  2.  5.  and  your  A.  shall  bo  made  a  dunghill 
3.  29.  and  their  A.  shall  be  made  a  dunghill 
Mos.ll.U.I  will  place  them  in  their  A.  saith  Lord 
Joeia.  9.  they  shall  climb  up  upon  the  A.  shall  enter 
Jlmos  3. 15.  will  smite  winter  and  summer-house, A. 
of  ivory  shall  perish,  great  A.  shall  have  an  end 
Mic.  1.  14.  the  A.  of  Achzib  shall  be  a  lie  lo  kings 
2.  2.  and  they  covet  A.  and  take  them  away 
9.  the  women  ye  cast  out  from  their  pleasant  A. 
Zeph.  1.  9.  which  fill  their  masters'  A.  with  violence 
13.  their  A.  shall  become  a  desolation,  they  shall 
build  A.  but  not  inhabit  them,  plant  vineyards 
2.  7.  in  the  A.  of  Aslikelon  shall  they  lie  down 
Mag.  1.4. is  it  time  for  you  to  dwell  in  yo.  ceiled  A? 
Zech.  14.2.  A.shallbe  rifled,  and  the  worn,  ravished 
Mat.  11.8.  they  that  wear  soft  cloth,  are  in  kinAs'A. 

19.  29.  everyone  that  hath  forsaken  A.  or  wife 
23.  14.  dey.  widows'  A.  Mark  12.  iO. Luke'X).  47. 

Mark8. 3.  if  send  them  away  fasting  to  their  own  A. 
Luke  16.  4.  that  they  may  receive  me  into  their  A. 
./icts  4.  34.  as  many  as  were  possessors  of  A.  sold 
1  Cor.  11.  22.  have  ye  not  A.  to  eat  and  drink  in  ? 

1  Tim.  3.  12.  deacons  ruling  their  own  A.  well 

2  Tim.  3. 6.  of  this  sort  are  I  hey  which  creep  into  A. 
Tit.  1.  11.  who  subvert  whole  A.  teaching  things 

HOUSEHOLD,  or  HOUSEHOLDS. 
Oen.  18.  19.  he  will  command  his  A.  after  him 
35.  2.  Jacob  said  to  his  A.  put  away  strange  gods 
42.33.  take  food  for  the  famine  of  your  A.  begone 
45.  11.  lest  thou  and  thy  A.  come  to  poverty 

18.  take  your  father  and  your  A.  and  come  to  me 
47. 12.  Joseph  nourished  his  father's  A.  with  bread 
24.  four  parts  shall  be  for  food  for  your  A. 
Exod.  1.  1.  every  man  and  his  A.  came  with  Jacob 
12.  4.  if  the  A.  be  too  little  for  the  lamb 
Lev.  16. 17.  till  he  havennade  an  afonem.  for  his  A. 
^urn. 18.31. ye  shall  eat  it  in  every  place,and  yourA. 
/.)eut.6.22.ihe  Lord  shewed  wonders  upon  all  hisA 
11.  6.  the  earth  swallowed  them  and  their  A. 

14.  2fi.  thou  shall  rejoice,  ihou  and  thy  A. 

15.  20.  thou  shall  eat  it  before  L.  thou  and  lliy  A 
.Josh.  2.  18.  bring  all  thy  father's  A.  homn  to  thee 

6.  25.  saved  Rahah  her  father's  A.  and  all  she  had 

7.  14.  and  the  family  shall  come  by  A. 
18.  and  he  brought  his  A.  man  by  man 

.Judg.  6.  27.  so  it  was,  bee.  he  feared  his  father's  A. 

15.  25.  thou  lose  thy  life,  with  the  lives  of  thy  A. 

1  .Sam.  25.  17.  evil  is  determined  against  his  A. 
27.  3.  every  man  with  his  A.  2  Sam.  2.  3. 

2  Sam.  6.  11.  the  Lord  blessed  him  and  all  his  A. 

20.  then  David  returned  to  bless  his  A. 
1.5.  16.  and  the  king  went  forth  and  all  his  A. 

16.  2.  the  asses  be  for  the  king's  A.  to  ride  on 

17.  23.  put  his  A.  in  order,  and  hanged  himself 
19.  18.  a  ferry  boat  to  cairy  over  the  king's  A. 

41.  why  have  Judah  brought  the  king  and  his  A. 

1  Kings  4.  6.  and  Abishai  was  over  the  A. 
7.  which  provided  victual  for  the  king  and  his  A. 

5.  9.  shall  do  my  desire,  in  giving  food  for  my  A. 
11.  Salomon  gave  Hiram  wheat  for  food  to  his  A. 
11.  20.  and  Genubatli  was  in  Pharaoh's  A. 

2  Kings  7.  9.  thai  we  may  go  and  tell  the  king's  A. 

8.  1.  go  and  thine  A.  to  sojourn  where  thou  canst 
18.18.  there  came  out  to  them  Eliakim  son  of  Hil- 

kiah  who  wts  over  the  A.19. 2.  Isa.  30.  22.  137. 2. 
I  CAr.  24.6.  one  principal  A.  being  taken  for  Eleaz. 
.Job  1.  3.  three  thousand  camels  and  agreat  A. 
Prov.  27.  27.  have  goats'  milk  for  food  of  thy  A. 
31.  1.5.  she  riseth  and  giveth  meal  to  her  A. 

21.  she  is  not  afraid  of  the  snow  for  her  A.  for 
all  her  A.  are  clothed  with  scailel 

27.  she  looketh  well  to  the  ways  of  her  A. 
Mat.  10.25.much  more  .ahall  they  call  them  of  his  A. 

3fi.  a  man's  foes  shall  be  they  of  his  own  A. 
24.  45.  bath  made  ruler  over  his  A.  Luke  12.  42, 
Jlcts  16.  15.  when  she  was  baptized  and  her  A. 
/?om.l6.10.salutr!  them  which  are  of  Aristobulus'A. 
11.  greet  them  that  he  of  the  A.  of  Narcissus 

1  Cor.  I.  16.  I  baptized  also  the  A.  of  Stephanas 
Gal.  6.  10.  to  them  who  are  of  the  A.  of  faith 
Fph.^.  19.  no  more  strangers,  but  of  the  A.  of  God 
Phil.  4.  22.  chiefly  they  that  are  of  Cesar's  A. 

2  Tim.  4.  19.  salute  the  A.  of  Onesiphorus 
HOUSEHOLDER. 

Mnt.  13. 27.  so  the  servants  of  the  A.  came  and  said 

.52.  is  like  unto  a  man  that  is  a  A.  20.  1. 
21.  33.  there  was  a  certain  A.  planted  a  vineyard 

HOUSEHOLD-SERVANTS. 
.^ets  10.  7.  Cornelius  called  two  of  his  h.-servants 

HOUSEHOLD-STUFF. 
(7<?n.31.37.whnt  hast  thou  found  of  all  thvA.-s<Mjf  ? 
JVeA.  13.  8. 1  cast  out  all  the  A.stujf  of  Tobiah 

HOW. 
Om.  2R.  9.  and  A.  saidgt  thou,  she  is  mjr  sister 
27. 20.  A.  it  it  thou  hast  found  it  to  quickly  1 

9  a 


HOW 

Oen.  28.  17.  Jacob  said,  A.  dreadful  is  this  placi 
39.  9.  A.  then  can  I  do  this  great  wickedness 
44.  8.  A.  then  should  westeal  out  ofthy  lord's  hou 
16.what  shall  we  si)eak?A.  shall  we  clear  ourvlv 
34.  A.  shall  I  go  to  my  father,  lad  not  with  me  t 
Exod.  2.  18.  A.  is  that  ye  are  come  so  soon  to-day 

6.  12.  A.  then  shall  Pharaoh  hear  me  of  uncircum. 
i)0.  and  A.  shall  Pharaoh  hearken  unto  me  I 

18.  8.  Moses  told  A.  the  Lord  delivered  theiri 

19.  4.  ye  have  seen  A.  I  bare  you,  Deut.  1.  31. 
Afum.  10.  31.  A.  we  arc  to  encamp  in  the  wilderness 

23. 8.  A.  shall  1  curse  G.  not  cursed?  A.  shall  I  defyt 

24.5.  A.goodly  are  thy  icnts,  O  Jacob,  and  tabern. 
Deut.  1.  12.  A.  can  I  myself  bear  your  cumbraucel 

7.  17.  if  thou  shall  say,  A.  can  I  dispossess  them? 
1  I.e. A.  the  earth  opened  her  mouth  and  KWallowud 
12.  30.  A.  did  these  nations  serve  their  gods  1 
25.  18.  A.  he  met  thee  by  the  way  and  smote  thee 
29.  16.  we  know  A.  we  nave  dwell  in  Egypt,  and 

A.  we  came  through  nations  which  ye  passed  by 
3'J.30.A.  should  one  chase  a  thousand,  and  two  pul 
.hsh.  9.  7.  A.  shall  we  make  a  league  with  you  I 
.fudg.\3.  12.A.  shall  wc  order  the  child,  A.do  lohim? 
16.  15.  she  said,  A.  canst  thou  say,  I  love  thee  7 

20.  3.  they  said,  tell  us,  A.  was  this  wickedness 

21.  7.  A.  do  for  wives  for  Ihem  that  remain  t  16. 
Huth  3.  18.  till  thou  know  A.  the  matter  will  fall 

1  Sam.  10.  27.  said  A.  shall  this  man  save  us  7 
14.  29.  see  A.  mine  eyes  have  been  enlightened 

16.  2.  A.  can  I  go  7  if  Saul  hear  he  will  kill  me 

2  .Sam.  1. 4.  A.  went  the  matter,  I  pray  thee,  tell  me 
5.A. know  est  thou  that  Saul  and  Jonalh.  be  deadi 
19.  A.  are  the  mighty  fallen  !  25,  27 

11.7.  A.  Joabdid,A.  the  peopledid,  and  A.  the  war 
12.  18.  A.  then  will  he  vex  himself,  if  we  tell  hioi 

1  Kings  3.  7.  I  know  not  A.  to  go  out  or  come  in 

12. 6.  A.  do  you  advise,  that  I  may  answer  people 
14.  19.  A.  Jeroboam  warred,  and  A.  he  reigned  , 
18.  13.  A.  1  hid  a  hundred  men  of  Lord's  prophets 
20.  7.  and  see  A.  the  man  seekcth  mischief 

2  Kings  5.  7.  A.  he  seeketh  a  Quarrel  against  me 

10.  4.  two  kings  stooil  not,  A.  then  shall  we  stand? 

17.  28.  taught  Ihem  h.  they  should  fear  the  Loid 

18. 24.  A.  then  wilt  ihou  turn  away  7  Isa.  36.  9. 

19.25.  heard  long  ago,  A.  I  have  done  it,  /sa. 37.26. 
20.  3.  A.  I  have  walked  before  thee,  Isa.  33.  3. 

2  Chron.  20.  II.  behold,  I  say,  A.  they  reward  us 
33.  19.  his  prayer, and  A.  God  was  entreated  of  him 
.A''eA.2.17.  ye  see  A.  Jerusal.  lieth  waste,  gates  burnt 
KstA.2.11.  Mordecai  walked, to  know  A.Esther  did 

8.  6.  A.  can  I  endure  to  see  evil  that  shall  come 
.fob  9.  2.  but  A.  should  a  man  be  ju^t  with  God  1 

22.  13.  and  thou  sayest,  A.  di>th  God  know  7 
26.2.A.hast  thou  helped  him  that  is  without  power! 

A.  savest  thou  arm  that  hath  no  strengths 
14.  but  A.  little  a  portion  is  heard  of  him ! 
Psal.  11.  1.  A.  say  ye  to  my  soul,  flee  as  a  bird 
44.  2.  A.  thou  didst  drive  out  heathen,  A.  afllict 
66.  3.  say  to  God,  A.  terrible  art  thou  inihv  works 
73.  11.  A.  doth  G.  know?  II  89.  47.  A.  short  my  lims 
84.  1.  A.  amiable  are  thy  tabernacles,  O  Lord 
104.  24.  O  Lord,  A.  manifold  are  thy  works 
119.  97.  O  A.  love  I  thy  law,  it  is  my  meditatioa 
103.  A.  sweet  are  thy  words  unto  my  taste 
159.  consider  A.  I  love  thy  precepts,  quicken  me 
132.  2.  A.  he  sware  unto  the  Lord  and  vowed 
139.  17.  A.  precious  are  thy  thoughts  unto  me! 
Prov.  15.  23.  a  word  in  dueseason,  A.  good  is  it! 
.30.  13.  there  is  a  generation,  O  A.  lofty  their  eyes 
Ecct.  10.  15.  ho  knoweth  not  A.  to  go  to  the  city 

11.  5.  knowest  not  A.  the  bones  grow  in  the  womb 
Can*.  4. 10.  A.  fair  is  thy  love,  my  sister,  spouse,  7.  6. 

5.  3.  I  have  put  off  my  coat,  A.  shall  I  put  it  on  ? 

7.  1.  A.  beautiful  are  thy  feet  with  shoes,  Odaugh. 

ha.M.  12. A.  art  thou  fallen  from  heaven,0  Lucifer 

20.6.  shall  say  in  ihatday,  and  A.  shall  weescapel 

48.  11.  for  A.  should  my  name  be  polluted? 

50.  4. 1  should  know  A.  to  speak  a  word  in  season 

.52.  7.  A.  beautiful  are  the  feet  of  him,  Pom.  10. 1.5. 
.Ter.  2.  23.  A.  canst  thou  say,  I  am  not  polluted  ? 

3. 19.  Isaid,  A.  shall  I  put  thee  among  the  children? 

5.  7.  A.  shall  I  pard.m  ||  8.  8.  A.  do  ve  sav?  48.  14. 

9. 19.A.  are  we  spoiled?  ||  15.5.to  ask  A.  thou  doeat? 

47. 7.A.  can  it  be  quiet,  seeing  the  Lord  hath  given 

50.  23.  A.  is  the  hammer  of  the  whole  earth  cut? 
I.am.  1. 1.  A.  doth  the  city  sit  solitary  as  a  widow? 
F.iek.  16.  30.  A.  weak  is  thy  heart,  saith  the  Lord 

,33.  10.  if  we  pine  away  in  sins,  A.  should  we  live? 
Nos.  11.8.  A.  shall  I  give  thee  up,  Ephrnim?  A.  de- 
liver thee?  A.  make  tlipo  as  Admah  and  Zeboim? 
■loel  1.  18.  A.  do  the  beasts  groan  7  herds  of  cattle 
Chad.  5.  if  thieves  came  to  thee,  A.  art  thou  cutoff 
Ze//A.2.15.  A.isshe  become  desolat.  place  for  beasts 
Hag.  2.  3.  A.  do  you  see  it  now?  is  it  not  as  nothing  ? 
Z.ech.  9. 17.  A.  greatis  hisgoodnees  and  his  beauty ! 
jWaf.  6.  23.  iflightbedarkn.  A.  great  is  that  darkn. 

7.  4.  A.  will  thou  say  to  thy  brother,  let  me  pull 
11.  if  ye  know  A.  to  give  good  gifts,  /_,t.*ell.  13. 

10.  19.  take  no  thought  A.  or  what  ye  shall  speak 

13.14.  A.  they  might  destr.  him,  Mark  3. 6. 1 11. 18 


HOW 

JUax.  K!.26.  A.shallhig  kingdom slawT?  /,u*e  11.18. 

34.  A.  cun  ye,  being  evil,  speiik  good  things  7 
]b.  11.  h.  u  itthatycdo  not  underst.  that  1  epiiiie 
18.  12.  h.  think  ye?  if  a  man  have  a  hund.  sheeji 
21.  20.  h.  soon  is  the  fig-tree  withered  nway 

22. 12.  h.  earnest  thou  in  hither  not  having  a  giirm. 
45.  ifcall  hitn  Ld.A.  is  he  hisson  ? /,ute20.  44. 

2.3.  H.  A.  can  ye  escape  the  damnation  of  hell  7 
26. 54.  A.  then  shall  the  scriptures  be  fulfilled 
*farA  2.  16.  A.  is  it  that  he  eaieth  with  sinners "? 

2tj.  A.  he  went  into  the  house  of  God,  /^uAe6. 4. 

4.  27.  the  seed  shall  grow  up,  he  knowetli  not  A. 
40.  he  said,  A.  is  it  that  ye  have  no  faith  ? 

10.  23.  A.  hardly  shall  they  that  have  riches  enter 
14.  1.  sought  k.  they  might  take  him  by  craft 

11.  sought  A.  he  might  betray  him,  Luke  22.  4. 
/,utel.34.  A.  shall  this  be,  seeing  I  know  not  a  man 

2.  49.  A.  is  it  that  ye  sought  niel  wist  ye  not  that  I 
8.  18.  take  heed  A.  ye  hear  ||  10.  2t).  A.  readest  thou 
12. 50.  and  A.  am  I  straitened  till  it  be  accomplish. 

56.  A.  is  it  that  ye  do  not  discern  this  time? 
16.  2.  he  said,  A.  is  it  that  I  hear  this  of  thee? 
24.  6.  remember  A.  he  sjiako  unio  you  in  Galilee? 

35.  A.  he  was  known  of  them  in  breaking  bread 
John  3.  4.  A.  can  a  man  he  born  when  lie  is  old  ? 

9.  A.  can  these  things  be?  ||  5. 44.  A.  can  ye  believe 

5.  47.  if  not  his  writing,  A.  believe  my  words? 

6.  52.  A.  can  this  man  give  us  his  flesh  lo  eat? 

7.  15.  saying,  A.  knoweth  this  man  letters? 

9. 10.  A.  we  re  thy  eyes  opened?  1|  26.  A. opened  eyes? 

11.  36.  A.  loved  him  ||  14.  5.  A.  can  we  know  way? 
14.  22.  A.  is  it  thou  wilt  manifest  thysdf  to  us  ? 

Acts  4.  21.  finding  noth.  A.  they  might  punish  them 

5.  9.  A.  is  it  that  ye  have  agreed  together  to  tempt? 

7.  25.  A.  God  by  his  hand  would  deliver  them 

8.  31.  A.  can  I,  except  some  man  should  guide  me? 

9.  27.  told,  A.  he  had  seen  the  Lord  in  the  way 

10.  38.  A.  G.  anointed  Jesus  of  Naz.  wiihHolyG. 

11.13.  shewed  A.  he  had  seen  an  angel  in  liis  house 

14.  27.  A.  he  had  opened  the  door  of  faith 

15.  36.  let  us  go  again,  and  tee  A.  they  do 

20.  20.  A.  kept  back  nothing  that  was  profitable 

35.  A.  so  labouring,  ye  ought  to  support  the  weak 

Rom.  3.  6.  for  then  A.  shall  God  judge  the  world? 

6.  2.  A.  we  that  arc  dead  to  sin  live  longer  therein? 

7.  18.  A.  to  perform  what  is  good,  I  find  not 
8.32.A.shall  he  not  with  him  fre>dy  give  all  things? 

10.  14.  A.  shall  they  call?  A.  shall  believe?  A.  hear? 

11.  2.  A.  he  maketh  inlerce.-sion  loG.  against  Isr. 
33.  A.unsearchable  hisjiidgnieiits,  and  ways  past 

1  Cor.  3.  10.  take  heed  A.  he  buildeth  thereupon 

7.  32.  unmarried  carelh  A.  he  may  please  the  Lord 

33.  that  is  mar.  careth  A.  he  may  please  his  wife 

34.  she  careth  A.  she  may  please  her  husband 
14.7  A.shall  it  he  known  what  is  piped  or  harped? 

9  A.  shall  it  be  known  what  is  spoken  ? 
1.5.  12.  A.  say  some  that  there  is  no  resurrection? 

35.  some  man  will  say,  A.  are  the  dead  raised  up? 
CCor.  7.15.  A.  with  fear  and  trembling  received  him 

8.  2.  A.  that  in  a  great  trial  of  affliction  their  joy 
13.  5.  know  ye  not  A.  tliat  Je.-fua  Christ  is  in  you? 

fial.  4.  9.  A.  turn  ye  again  to  the  weak  elements? 

6.  11.  ye  see  A.  large  a  letter  I  have  written  you 
F.ph.  6. 21 .  but  that  ye  also  may  know  A.  I  do 
PAi<.2.2:!.80SOon  ns  IshalUce  A.  it  will  go  with  me 

4.12.1  know  A.  lo  be  abascd.and  knowA.to  abound 
Col.  4.  6.  thiit  ye  may  know  A.  ye  ought  to  answer 

1  TAe«».  I.O.andA.ye'turned  toG.from  idols  to  serve 
2. 10.  A.  Iioldy  we  behaved  ourselves  among  you 

11.  A.  we  exhorted  you  II  4.  1.  A.  ye  ought  to  walk 

4.4.  should  know  A.  to  possess  his  vessel  in  honour 

2  TA«.?s.  3. 7.  for  you  know  A.  ye  ought  to  follow  us 
1  Tim.  3. 5.  for  if  a  man  know  not  A. to  role  his  own 

house,  A.  shall  he  take  care  of  iho  church  of  God? 
1.5.  mave.-t  know  A.  thou  ouglilcst  to  bidinve 
ffft.2.3.A.shallwc  escape  if  we  neglect  so  great  sal. 

7.  4.  now  consider  A.  great  this  man  was,  to  whom 
/am.2.24.  vesee  A.  thatby  works  a  man  is  justified 

3.  5.  behold  A.  great  a  matter  a  little  fire  kindloth 
iPet.  2. 9.  the  Lord  knowoth  A.  to  ileliver  the  godiv 
l./oAn  3.  17.  A.  dwelleth  the  love  of  God  in  him? 

4.20.  A  r:M\  hi'  love  God  whom  he  hath  not  seen? 
Judr  .1.  A.  ihat  th.;  Lord  having  saved  the  people 
Arv.2.  2.  A.  thou  canst  not  bear  them  who  arc  evil 
3.  3.  remember  A.  tliou  hast  received  and  heard 
.S>r  Dii. 
HOW  lcn<r. 
Exnd.  10  X  A.  Ion)!  « ilt  refuse  to  humble  thyself? 
7.  h.  lov/r  sh  ill  this  man  be  a  snare  to  us? 
16.28.  A.  Innirrffitf.':  I.)  ki-i  p  my  roinmandiiients? 
AVm.  14.  II.  A.  /oi^'will  this  |M'o;de  provoke  ine? 
A.  lonir  will  it  lie  ere  thi-y  believe  me? 
27.A.  Innn-'-hniri  bear  with  this  evil  congregation 
.7o»A.lH.3.A./'in;Tnre  ve  slack  logo  lo  poitscHS  land? 
1  Sam.  l.Il.riisaid.A.  Jon/r  will  thou  be  drunken? 

16.  \.h.  I.  wilt  thou  mourn  for  Snul,  seeing  I  hav 
If^am.  10.  ^♦.Rarzillaionid,  A. /on»h  iv.-ltnlive? 
Jffiii;f*!8'?I.A./oBFh:ilt  ynbclwernlwo  opinion 
Kth.  2.  6.  king  said,  for  h.l.  shall  thv  Journ.'y  l»  ? 
J»b  7.  19.  A.  lunr  will  thou  not  dejurl  from  inel 
»9 


HOW 

Job  8.2.A.  hng  wflt  thou  speak?  A.  long  shall  words 

of  thy  mouth  be  like  a  strong  wind? 

18. 2.  A.  long^  will  it  be  ere  you  make  end  ot  words? 

19.  2.  A.  long  will  ye  vex  my  soul  and  break  me? 

Psal.  4.  2.  A.  I.  will  ye  turn  my  glory  into  shame? 

A.  t.  will  ye  love  vanity,  and  seek  after  leasing? 

6.  3.  my  soul  is  vexed  ;  but  thou,  O  Lord,  A.  long  ? 

13.  1.  A.  lovg  wilt  thou  forget  me,  O  Ld.  for  ever? 

2.  A.  lo7ig ahaW  I  take  counsel  in  my  soul?  A.  long 

shall  my  enemy  be  exalted  over  me? 

35. 17.  Ld.  A.  Z.  wilt  thou  look  on?  rescue  my  soul 

62.3.A./«n^will  ye  imagine  mischief  against  man? 

74. 9. nor  is  there  any  among  us  that  knoweth  A.  I. 

10.  O  G.  A.  long  shall  the  adversary  reproach? 

79.  5.  A.  long  wilt  thou  be  angry  for  ever?  80.  4. 

82.  2.  A.  /.  wilt  judge  unjustly  and  accept  persons? 

89.  46.  A.  long  L.  wilt  thou  bide  thyself?  for  ever? 

90.  13.  return,  O  Lord,  A.  long?  let  it  rejient  thee 
94.  3.  render  a  reward  to  the  proud,  Lord,  A.  lung 

shall  the  wicked,  A.  longshall  wicked  triumph? 

4.  A.  long  shall  they  utter  and  speak  hard  things? 

Pro!).  1.22.  A.  ion^simpleones  will  lovesimjilicity 

6.9.A.  long  will  thou  sleep,0  sluggard?  when  arise 

Isa  6.  11.  then  said  1,  Lord,  A.  long?  he  answered 

Jer.4.  14.  A.  ioni^  shall  vain  thoughts  lodge  in  thee? 

21.  A.  long  shall  1  see  standard,  and  hear  trump.? 

12.  4.  A.  /«n^  shall  land  mourn  and  herbs  wither? 

'i^.iCt.h.lnng  shall  this  be  in  the  heart  of  propiiets? 

47.  5  baldness  on  Gaza,  A.  long  wilt  cut  thyself? 

6.  O  sword  of  the  Lord,  A.  (on^  ere  thou  be  quiet? 

Dan.  8.13.  A.  lungshnW  be  vision  ofdaily  sacrifice? 

12.  6.  A.  long  shall  it  be  to  end  of  these  wonders? 

Nos.S.a.h.liing  will  it  be  ere  they  attain  innoceney? 

//rtA.  1.2.A./ow^shallIcry,and  thou  wilt  not  hear? 

2.  6.  woe  to  him  increaseth  what  not  his,  A.  long? 

Zech.  1.12.A.  long  wilt  thou  not  have  mercy  on  Jer. 

Mat.  17.  17.  A.  /.  shall  I  be  with  you  A.  I.  suffer 

you  bring  him  me?  JVfarA  9.  19.  Luke  9.  41. 

Mark  9.21.  A.  long  is  it  ago  since  this  came  to  him? 

John  10.  24.  A.  long  dost  thou  make  us  lo  doubt? 

Rev.  6.10.  A.  long,0  L.  holy  and  true,  dost  thou  not 

HOW  many, 
.fob  13.  23.  A.  many  are  mine  iniquities  and  sins? 
Psal.  119.  84.  A.  inanj/ arethe  davs  of  thy  servants? 
MatA5.M.h.  m.  loaves  haveye?>/ari-6.38.  |  8.  5. 
16.  9.  A.  OT.  baskets  ye  took  up?  Mark  8.  19,  20. 
Mark  l.').4.A.manylhings  they  witness  againsrthce 
lAike  15.  17.  A.m.  hired  scrvts.  of  my  father's  have 
2  Tim.  1.  18.  in  A.  many  things  he  ministered  tome 
HOW  many  times. 

1  Kings  22. 16.  A.  m.  times  shall  1  adjure  tlice,  thou 
tell  nothing  but  what  is  true?  2  Chron.  18.  15. 

HOW  muck. 

2  Iiings5.  13.  A.  muck  rather  when  he  saith,  wash 
Ezra  7.  22.  and  salt  without  prescribing  A.  much 
Prov.U^.^^y.h.much  better  is  it  to  get  wit.d.than  gold 
Cant.  4.  10.  A.  much  better  is  thy  love  than  wine 
Mat.  12.  12.  A.  much  is  a  man  bettvjr  than  a  sheep  I 
Luke  II).  5.  A.  much  owest  ilioii  to  my  lord?  7. 

19.  15.  A.  mucA  every  man  hath  gained  by  trading 

.^ct.'s'J.]'.i.k.iiiuckev\]  he  bath  done  thy  saints  atJer. 

HrbK  6.by  A.  much  he  is  Mediator  of  better  coven. 

10.  29.  of  A.  mucA  sorer  punishment,  suppose  ye 

Rev.  18.  7.  A.  much  she  hath  glorified  herself 

HOW  mucA  less. 
1  A'inn-sS.  27.  heaven  cannot  contain  thee,  h.mvch 
less  Ibis  house  which  I  have  built,  2.  Chr.  6.  IH. 
2CAr(jji.  :i2. 15  A.  much  irssshall  your  God  deliver 
./oA4.iy.A.mur:A  less  in  them  dwell  in  housesofclay 
9.14.A.mu(;A  less  shall  I  answer  him  choose  words 
25.  fi.A.  jnucA  less  man  that  is  worm,  and  son  of  in. 
'M.V}.k.niuchUss\.o  him  Ihat  acceptelhnol  persons 
Kick.  15.  5.  A.  much  less  shall  it  bo  meet  for  work 

HOW  jiiuch  more. 
Drut.  31.  27.  and  A.  mucA  more  aflor  my  death? 
1. S'am. 14.30.  A.  inucA  more  if  people  had  enlen  freely 
23.  3.  A.  much  more  then  if  we  como  to  Keilah 
2.S(iM.4.11.A.m.  more  when  wicked  men  have  slain 
lli.l  l.A.  mucA  more  now  may  this  Renjamiie  do  it? 
lob  15. 111. A  mucA  m.  abominable  and  fillhy  is  man? 
Vrov.  15.  II.  A.  inufA  more  than  the  heartsof  men? 
1!'.7.  A.  m.  mfirfdo  his  friends  go  far  from  him? 
21.  27.  A.  much  more  when  with  a  wicked  mind 
F.iek.  14.21.  A.  m.  mure  when  send  sore  judgmrnis? 
Mat.  7.  II.  A   m.  more  shall  your  heavenly  Father 
give  good  thing"!  to  them  ihat  ask?  Luke  II.  13. 
10.  25. A.  m.  morr  shall  call  themofhis  househoM? 
Luke  12.  24.  A.  m   m.  nrcyn  better  Iban  the  fowls? 
2."^.  A.m.  more  will  clothe  you,  O  ye  of  little  faith? 
Rnm.  11.  12.  A.  mufA  more  iheir  fulness? 

21.  A.  m.  more  IheRo  which  be  naluial  brnnchen? 
1  Cnr.  0.  3.  A,  viuch  more  lliingH  that  pertain  to  life? 
Philem.  16.  a  brother  lo  me,  A.  m.  more  lo  thee? 

HOW  oft,  often. 

./o/)2I.17.  A.  oft  is  the  candle  of  Iho  wicked  put  out? 

A.  oft  Cometh  their  destruction  ii|ion  thoin? 

Tia.  '<*■  40  A.  oft  did  they  provoke  him  in  wildein 

.Mat.  18.21.  A.  «/<  shall  mv  brother  sin  ajainst  imc' 

23.37.0  Jerusalem,  A.  o/foiw.iold  I  have  ca'heod 

thy  childran  as  a  hen  livr  chickwns,  Luke  13.  31. 


HUM 

Ht  WBEIT. 

yu(f|'.  4. 17.  A.  Sisera  fled  on  bis  le<nto  tentuf  Jset 

11.  28.  A.  the  king  of  Ammonites  hearkened  not 

16.  22.  A.  the  hair  of  his  head  began  to  grow  again 
18.  29.  A.  the  name  of  the  city  was  Laish  at  first 
21.18.A.wemay  not  give  them  wives  of  our  dangh. 

Ruth  3.  12.  A.  there  is  a  kinsman  nearer  than  1 

1  Sam.  8.  9.  A.  yet  protest  solemnly  unto  them 

2  Sam.  2.  23.  A.  Asahel  refused  to  turn  aside 

12.  14.  A.  because  by  this  deed  hast  given  occasion 

13.  14.  A.  he  would  not  hearken  unto  her  voice 
25.  A.  he  would  not  go,  but  blessed  him 

23.  19.  A.  he  attained  notfirst  three,  1  CAr.  11.21. 

1  Kings  2.  15.  A.  the  kingdom  is  turned  about 

10.  7.  A.  I  believed  not  the  words,  2  Chron.  9.  6 

11.  13.  A.  I  will  not  rend  all  the  kingdom,  34. 

22.  and  he  answered,  I  have  lacked  nothing,  A. 
let  me  go  in  any  wise 

2  Kings'i.  25.  A.  slingers  went  about  it  and  smote  it 
8.  10.  A.  Lord  shewed  me,  that  be  shall  surely  die 

10.  29.  A.  from  sins  of  Jeroboam  Jehu  turned  not 

12.  13.  A.  there  were  not  made  for  house  bowls 

14.  4.  A.  high  places  were  not  taken  away,  as  yet 

people  did  sacrifice,  15.  35.  2  CAr.  20.  33- 

17.  29.  A.  every  nation  made  gods  of  their  own 
40.  A.  they  did  not  hearken,  but  did  after  their 

22.  7.  A.  there  was  no  reckoning  made  with  them 

1  CAr.  28.  4.  A.  the  Lord  Gorl  of  Israel  chose  me 

2  CAr,  18.  34.  A.  the  king  of  Isr.  stayed  himself  up 

24.  5.  A.  the  Levites  hastened  it  not 

27.2.  A.  he  entered  not  into  the  temple  of  the*Lord 
32.31. A.  in  the  business  of  ambassadors,  G.lefl  him 
^WA.  9.  33.  A.  thou  art  just  in  all  brought  on  us 

13.  2.  A.  our  God  turned  the  curse  into  a  blessing 
./oh  30.  24.  A.  he  will  not  slretil,  out  his  hand 
/.<a.  10.  7.  A.  he  meanctli  not  so,  nor  thinketh  so 
Jer.  44.  4.  A.  1  sent  to  you  all  my  servants,  propheta 
Mat.  17.21.  A.  this  kiridgoelb  not  out  but  by  prayer 
jl/urA5.I9.A.  Jesus  suffiTed  him  not, but  sail!)  to  him 

7.  7.  A.  in  vain  do  they  worship  me,  teaching 
■  fohn  6.  23.  A.  there  came  boats  from  Tiberias 
7.  13.  A.  no  man  spake  openly  of  him  for  fear 
27.  A.  we  know  this  man  whence  he  is 

11.  13.  if  he  sleep,  do  well,  A.  Jesus  spake  of  bil 

16.  13.  A.  when  he  the  Spirit  of  truth  is  come 
Acts  4.  4.  A.  many  who  heard  the  word  believed 

7.  48.  A.  the  Most  High  dwelleth  not  in  temple* 

14.  20.  A.  he  rose  up  and  came  into  the  city 

17.  34.  A.  certain  men  clave  to  him  and  believed 

27.  26.  A.  we  must  be  cast  upon  a  certain  island 

28.  6.  A.  they  looked  w  hen  lie  should  have  swollen 
ICor.  2.  6.  A.  we  speak  wisdom  among  the  perfect 

8.  7.  A.  there  is  not  in  every  man  that  knowledge 

14.  2.  A.  in  the  Spirit  hespeakelh  mysteries 

20. A.  in  malice  be  children,  in  understanding  men 

15.  46.  A.  that  was  not  first  which  is  spiritual 
2Cor.  11.21.  A.  whereinsoever  any  is  bold,  I  am  also 
Gal.  4.  8.  A.  when  ye  knew  not  God  ye  did  service 

1  Tim.  1. 16.  A.  for  this  cause  I  obiained  mercy 
Heb.  3.16.  A.  not  all  Onl  cnmo  outof  Egvptby  Mos. 

HOWL. 
Isa.  13.  6.  A.  yp,  for  the  dav  of  the  Lord  i?  at  hand 
14.  31.  A.  O  gate  ||  V<.  2.  Moab  sbnil  A.  3.  |  16.  7. 

23.  1.  A.  ye  ships  of  Taisliish,  for  it  is  laid  waste 
6.  pass  over  to  Tarshisli,  A.  ye  inhabitants  ofislo 

52.  5.  make  them  to  A.  |1  65.  14.  A.  for  vexation 
Jer.  4.  8.  lament  and  A.  48.  20.  1|  25  34.  A.  ye  sliep. 

47.  2.  and  all  the  inhabitanLs  of  the  land  shall  A. 

48.  31.  I  will  A.  for  Moab  ||  39.  they  shall  A. 

49.  3.  A.  O  Heshbon  H  51.  8.  A.  for  Babylon 
f'.zek.  21.  12.  cry  and  A.  son  of  man,  for  it  shall  be 

30.  2.  prophesy  and  .say,  A.  ye,  woe  worth  the  day 
.Jorl  1.  5.  A.  ye  drinkers  ||  11.  A.  ye  vine-drcssers 

13.  lament  and  A.  ye  ministers  of  the  allar 
^f/c.l.S.lhercfore  I  will  wail  and  A.  will  go  stripped 
y.rph.  I.  II.  A.  ye  itihabitantsof  Maktesh 
'/.rch.  11.  3.  A.  fir-tree,  A.  O  ye  oaks  of  Ilashan 
./am.  5.  1.  go  lo  now,  ye  rich  men,  weep  and  A. 

HOWLED. 
Hos.l  14. not  cried  to  me, when  they  A.on  iheir  beda 

HOWLING. 
fsa.  15  8.  A.  thereof  is  gone  lol'glaim  nndI5eor-erim 
.'er.  25.  36.  a  A.  of  principal  of  the  flock  bo  heard 
y.rph.  1.  10.  there  shall  he  a  A.  from  the  second  p«»e 
ZecA.11.3.there  isa  voice  of  the  A.  of  the  shepherd* 

HOWLING. 
A>ri(t.32.10.he  found  him  in  the  waste  A.  wildornoM 

HOWLINGS. 

-Imo.t  8.3  gongs  ofthe  temple  shuU  be  A.  in  that  day 

H17GR. 

2  CAron.  10.  8.  the  Kllii"|'in"s  and  Lubims  a  A.host 

lirMHLE. 
Humility  is  a  moxt  erreltent  ernrr  nf  the  Spirit, 
rpideiiee.i  the  ful'jrcl  of  it  to  hr  n  rhiUI  of  God, 
and  isaccompanieihrilli  eontr-ntment,peace and 
submission  to  iKr  trill  of  God.  The  sense  of  the 
vieaknetsofnurunilersi  audi  mr.v^hJchiKt  he  effect 
o/humili'v.ii  n  temprnf  soullhntprrparesitfor 
faith:  Parthiis  it  pot'uson  a  serious  eonsidera 
tion  of  those  thingsichich  an  mtal*d  touaiulk* 


HUM 

Kwrrf;  partly  is  H  stops  all  curhua  inguMes 
into  those  things  which  are  unsearchable;  and 
principally  as  it  graciously  entitles  to  the  pro- 
mise, God  giveth  grace  lo  the  humble,  1  Fet. 
5.5.  This  uur  Saviour  makes  anecessary  qua- 
lification in  all  those  who  shall  enter  into  his 
kingdom.  Mat.  18.  3,  E.vcept  je  he  coiiveited, 
and  become  as  little  children,  ye  shall  not 
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Mnd  since 
pridearises  out  of  ig)iorance,the  gospel,to  cause 
in  us  a  lowly  sense  of  our  unworthiness,  dis- 
covers the  si>ifulness,nahedness,  and  misery  of 
the  human  nature,  divested  of  its  primitive 
righteousness.  IVe  have  the  example  of  our 
Saviour,  in  whom  there  is  a  union  of  all  di- 
vine and  human  perfections,  debasing  himself 
to  the  form  of  a  servant,  to  itlstruct  us  to  be 
meek  and  lowly.  Mat.  11.  29,  Learn  of  me, 
for  I  am  meek  and  lowly.  Humility  is  put 
for  an  humble,  dejected,  andlow  estate.  Luke 
1.48,  he  hath  regarded  the  low  estate  ot  his  hand- 
maiden ;  in  Greek,  tx^uvwo-iv,  the  humility. 

To  humble  signifies  to  afflict,  lo  prove,  to  try. 
Deut.  8.  2,  God  led  thee  in  the  wilderness  to 
humble  thee.  To  humble  a  woman,  is  to  lie 
with  her,  to  rob  her  of  her  honour.  Deut.  2).  14, 
Thou  shalt  i}ot  make  merchandise  of  her,  be- 
cause thou  hast  humbled  her.  Jind  m  Ezek. 
22.  10,  In  thee  Jiave  they  humbled  her  that 
was  set  apart  for  pollution :  They  came  near 
a  woman  at  a  certain  particular  time  when  the 
law  forbids  it. 

.Tob  22.  29.  and  he  shall  save  the  A.  person 

Psal.  9.  12.  he  forgelteth  not  the  cry  of  the  h. 
10.  12.  arise,  O  Lord,  O  God,  forget  not  the  k 
17.  Lord,  thou  hast  heard  the  desire  of  the  A. 
34.  2.  the  h.  shall  hear  thereof  and  be  glad 
69.  32.  the  h.  shall  see  this  and  be  glad 

Prov.  16.  li).  better  be  of  a  h.  sjiirit  with  the  lowly 
29.  23.  but  honour  shall  uphold  the  h.  in  spirit 

Isa.  57.  15.  with  him  also  that  is  of  a  contrite  and 
h.  spirit,  to  revive  spirit  of  A.  and  heart  of 
conlriie 


HUN 


Jam.  4.  6.  hut  giveth  grace  to  the  A.  I  Pet.  5.  5. 
HUMBLE. 

Ezod.\0.3.  how  long  wilt  thou  refuse  to  A.  thyself? 
I)eut.  8.  2.  to  A.  thee  and  to  prove  thee,  16. 
Judg.  19.24.  A.  ye  them,  and  do  with  themasseem. 
2Chron.  7.  14.  my  people  shall  A.  themsel.  and  pray 

34.  27.  because  thou  didst  h.  thyself  before  God 
Prov.  6.3.  go,  h.  thyself,  and  make  sure  lliy  friend 
Jer.  13.  18.  say  to  the  king,  A.  yourselves,  sit  down 
Mat.  18.  4.  whosoever  shall  A.  himself,  23.  12. 
2  Cor.  12.  21.  my  God  will  A.  me  among  you 
Jam.  4.  10.  A.  yourselves  in  the  sight  ot  the  Lord 

1  Pet.  5.  6.  A.  yourselves  under  mighty  hand  of  God 

HUMBLED. 
Aei'.  26.  41.  if  their  uncircumcised  hearts  be  A. 
Deut.%.  3.  he  A.  thee  and  suffered  thee  to  hunger 

21.14.  not  sell  her,  because  thou  hast  A.  her,  22.  29. 

22.  24.  because  lie  hath  A.  his  neighbour's  wife 

2  A'in^s22.  19.  because  liast  A.thyselfbeforethe  L. 
2CAr.  12.6.  the  princes  and  the  king  A.  themselves 

7.  when  the  Lord  saw  that  they  A.  themselves 

12.  when  he  A.  himself,  wrath  turned  from  him 

30. 11.  divers  of  Asher  aud  Zebulun  h.  themselv. 

32.  2(;.  Hezekiah  h.  hims.  for  the  pride  of  his  heart 

33.  12.  ManassehA.  himself  greatly  before  God 
19.  he  set  up  graven  images  before  he  was  A. 
23.  Amon  A.  not  himself  before  the  Lord,  as  Ma 

nasaeh  his  father  A.  himsi-lf,  trespassed  more 
30.  12.  Zndekiah  A.  not  himself  before  Jeremiah 
Psal.  35.  13.  as  for  me,  I  A.  my  soul  with  fasting 
Isa.  2.  11.  the  lofiy  looks  of  man  shall  be  A. 
5. 15.  mighty  man  shall  be  A.  eyes  of  the  lofty  be  A 
10.33.high  hewn  down, and  the  haughty  shall  be  A. 
Jer.  44.  10.  they  are  not  A.  even  to  this  day 
I^am.  3.  20.  my  soul  hath  in  remembrance  and  is  A. 
Ezek.  22.  10.  in  thee  have  they  A.  her  set  apart 

11.  iind  another  in  thee  hath  A.  his  sister 
/)(in.  5.  22.  thou  his  son  hast  not  A.  thine  heart 
PAiZ.2.8.heA.himself.nnd  became  obedient  to  death 

HUMBLEDST. 
2  Chron.  34.  27.  because  thou  h.  thyself  before  me 

HU.MBLETH. 
I  Kings  21.  29.  how  Ahab  A.  because  he  A.  himself 
Psal.  10. 10.  hecroncheth  and  A.  hmiself,  that  poor 
113.  6.  who  A.  himself  to  behold  things  in  heaven 
/sa.2.9.mean  man  bowe'M),the  great  man  A.himselP 
Lukeii.  11.  he  that  A.  hims.  shall  be  exalted, 18. 14. 

HUMBLENESS. 
Col.  3.  12.  put  on  kindness,  A.  of  mind,  meekness 

HUMBLY. 
2.S«7n.  10.  4.  I  A.hcseecli  thee  that  I  may  find  grace 
Mic.  6.8.  to  lovemercv,  and  to  walk  A.  with  thy  G. 

HUMILIATION. 
^cts8.  33.  in  his  A.  his  indgment  was  taken  away 

HUMILITY. 
Prov.  15.  33.  and  before  honour  is  A.  1?   12. 
SS.  4.  by  h.  are  riches,  ami  honour,  an  i  life 


/Jots  20.  19.  serving  the  Lord  with  all  A.  of  mind 

Col.  2.  18.  let  no  man  beguile  you  in  a  voluntary  A. 

23.  have  a  shew  of  wisdom  in  w  ill  worship  and  A. 

1  Pet.5.i.  be  subject  one  to  another,  clothed  with  A. 

Hundred-fold.     See  Fold. 

HUNDHED. 

Gen.  11.  10.  Shem  was  a  A.  years  old  and  begat 

17.  17.  shall  cliild  be  born  to  him  that  is  a  A. 
years  old,  and  shall  Sarah  bear?  21.  5. 
Rom.  4.  19. 

33.  19.  Jacob  bought  for  a  A.  pieces,  yo«A.  24.  32. 

Exud.  27.  9.  hangings  A.  cubits  long,  U.  \  38. 9, 11. 

18.  tlie  length  of  the  court  shall  be  a  A.  cubits 

38.  27.  a  A.  sockets  were  cast  of  the  A.  talents 
Lev.26.S.  five  shall  chase  a  A.  and  a  A.jiut  totlight 
Deut.  22. 19.  shall  amerce  him  m  A.  shekels  of  silv. 
Judg.7.i9.so  Gideon  and  the  A.  men  with  him  came 

20.  10.  we  will  take  ten  of  a  A.  a  h.  of  a  1000 
35.  Israel  destroyed  of  tlieBenj.  25,000  and  a  A. 

1  Sam.  18.  25.  but  a  A.  foreskins,  2  Sam.  3.  14. 
25.  18.  a  A.  clusters  of  raisins,  2  Sam.  18.  1. 

2  .Sam.  8. 4.  reserved  for  a  A.  chariots,  1  Chr.  18.  4. 
IKings  4.  23.  Solom.  provision  for  oneday  A.sheep 

7.  2.  Ieng,th  of  the  house  of  the  forest  a  A.  cubits 

18.  4.  Obadiah  took  a  A.  proph.  and  hid  them,  13. 
2  Kings  4.  43.  what  should  I  set  this  bef.  aA.  men? 

23.  33.  Pharaoh-necho  put  Jehoahaz  in  bands, 
and  put  land  to  a  tribute  of  a  A.  talents, 
2  Chron.  36.  3. 

1  Chron.  12.  14.  one  of  the  least  was  over  a  A. 
25.children  of  Simeon  seven  thousand  and  one  A. 

21.  3.  Lord  make  his  people  a  A.  times  so  many 

2  Chron.  3.  16.  Solomon  made  a  A.  pomegranates 
4.  8.  and  he  made  a  A.  basins  of  gold 
25.  6.  he  hired  also  men  for  a  A.  talents  of  silver 

9.  what  shall  we  do  for  the  A.  talents  I  have  given 

27.  5.  Ammon  gave  Jotham  a  A.  talents  of  silver 
29.  32.  the  congregation  brought  a  A.  rams 

Ezra  2.  69.  they  gave  one  A.  priests'  garments 

6.  17.  and  oftered  at  the  dedication  a  A.  bullocks 

7.  22.  let  it  be  done  to  a  A.  talents  of  silver,  a  A. 
measures  of  wheat  and  wine,  and  a  A. 
baths  of  oil 

8.  26.  silver  vessels  a  A.  talents  of  gold,  a  A. talents 
JVeA.5.  11.  restore  to  them  the  A.  part  of  the  money 
Prov.  17.  10.  more  than  a  A.  stripes  into  a  fool 
Eccl.  6.  3.  if  a  man  beget  a  A.childr.  and  live  years 

8.  12.  tho' sinner  do  evil  A.  times,  days  be  prolong. 
Isa.  65.  20.  for  the  child  shall  die  a  A.  years  old, 
but  the  sinner  being  a  A.  years  old  shall  be 
accursed 
Ezek.  40.  19.  he  measured  a  A.  cubits  eastward 
23.  he  measured  from  gate  to  gate  a  A.  cubits,  27 
47.  the  court  a  A.  cubus  long,  a  A.  cubits  broad 

41.  13.  so  he  measured  the  bouse  a  A.  cubits  long 

14.  of  the  separate  place  toward  east,  a  A.  cubits 

15.  the  galleries  oji  one  side  and  other,  a  A.  cubits 

42.  8.  and  lo,  before  the  temple  were  a  A.  cubils 
.Imos  5.  3.  city  that  went  out  by  a  1000,  shall 

leave  a  A.  that  which  went  forth  by  a  A. 
shall  leave  ten 
Mat.  18.  12.  if  a  man  have  a  A.  sheep,  Luke  15.  4. 

28.  went  and  found  one  who  owed  him  a  A.  pence 
/^uke  16.  6.  and  he  said,  a  A.  measures  of  oil 

7.  how  much  owest  thou?  a  A.  meas.  of  wheat 
John  19.  39.  mixt.  of  mvrrh  and  aloes  a  A.  weight 

One  HUNDRED  and  five. 
r?en.5.6.Seth  lived o?ifi  A.  andfiveycars,  beg.  Enos 

One  HUNDRED  and  ten. 
Gen.  50.  22.  Joseph  lived  one  A.  and  ten  years,  26. 
./o«A.24.  29.  Josh,  died  a  A.  ten  years  old,  Judg.H.S. 
EzraS.  12.  with  Jnhanan  a  A.  and  ten  males 

One  HUNDRED  and  twelve. 
1  Chr.  15.  10.  of  the  sonsof  Uzziel  a  A.  andtwelve 
Ezra  2. 18.  the  children  of  Jorali,  a  A.  and  twelve 
JVeA.  7.  24.  the  children  of  Hariph,  a  A.  andtwelve 

One  HUNDRED  and  nineteen. 
Gen.l  1.25.Nahor  lived  after  beg.Terah  h.nineteen 

One  HUNDRED  and  twenty. 

Gen.  6.3.  yet  bis  days  shall  be  A.  and  twenty  years 

A'i;;n.7. 80g()ld  ofspoons  was  a  A.  and  tw.  shekels 

Deut.  31.  2. 1  am  a  h.  and  twenty  years  old  this  day 

.34.  7.  Moses  a  A.  and  tw.  years  old  when  he  died 

1  Kings  10.  10.  she  gave  king  a  A.  and  twenty 

talents  of  gold,  spices,  and  precious  stones, 

2  Chron.  0.  9. 

1  Chron.  15.5.  Uriel  and  brethren  ah.  and  twenty 

2CAr«/i.3.4.  height  of  porch  a  A.  and  twenty  cubits 

5.  12.  with  them  a  A.  and  twenty  priests,  sounding 

Dan.  6. 1 .  lo  set  over  kingdom  a  A.  and  tw.  princes 

Jicts  1. 15.  numberof  names  were  about  aA.  andt. 

One  HUNDRED  twenty-two. 
Erra2.27.  men  of  Michmash,  A.  tw.-two,  JVcA.7.3I. 

One  HUNDRED  twenty-three. 

JV«m.33.3y.  Aaron  A.  tw.-tliree  years  when  he  died 

Kzra  2. 21.  the  children  of  Beth-lehem  went  up  out 

of  captivity  a  A.  twenty  and  three,  JVOA.7.32. 

One  HUNDRED  and  twenty-seven. 

Oen.  23.  1.  Sarah  was  ^  A.  tweniy-seren  years 

old,  and  died  in  Kirjath-arba 


HUN 

Eath.  1.  1.  this  is  Ahasuerus  who  relgnod  over  % 
A.  and  twenty-seven  provinces,  8.  9.  |  9.  30. 
Oyte  HUNDRED  and  twenty-eight. 
£;2ra2.23.men  of  Analhoth  A.  tw.-cighl,  JVeA.7.27. 

41.  the  children  of  Asaph  a  A.  twenty-eight 
JVeA.  11.  14.  their  brethren  a  A.  and  twenty-eight 

.    O/ie  HUNDRED  «Ah«2/. 

<?en.5.3.Adani  lived  A.  thirty  years,  and  begat  son 

47.  U.  years  of  my  pilgrimage  are  u  A.  and  thirty 

M'um.l.l^.  weight  thereof  was  a  A.  t.  shekels,  1 9,25. 

85.  each  charger  weighing  a  A.  thirty  shekels 

1  Chron.  15.  7.  Joel  and  brethren  a  A.  iind  thirty 

2  Chron.  24.  15.  Jehoiada  was  a  A.  t.  years  old 
One  HUNDRED  thirty-three. 

Exod.^.lB.  years  of  life  of  Kohatli  a  A.  thirty-three 

One  HUNDRED  thirty-seven. 

Gen.  25. 17.  life  of  Ishmael  a  A.  and  t.-sevcn  years 

£xo(/.0.16.theyoar8  of  Levi  wereh.andthirty-seven 

20.  the  years  of  Amram  were  a  A.  thirty-seven 

One  HUNDRED  thirty-eight. 

JVcA.7.45.the  children  of  Shobai  oCAlvr,h.th.-eigAt 

One  HUNDRED  thirty-nine. 
.E:ra2. 42.cliildreri  of  l#|](jb.Ti  in  all  a  A.  thirty-nine 

One  IWMmED  forty. 
Job  42.  16.  after  this  lived  Job  a  h.  forty  years 

One  IIVNDRED forty-four. 
Rev.  21. 17.  nieasured  the  wall  a  h.f.-f.  cubits 

One  HVNDHEV  forty-seven. 
Gcn.47.28.  whole  age  of  Jacob  a  h.  forty-seven  ye 

One  HVJ^DRl'.i)  forty-eight. 
JVtA.  7. 44.  singers,  the  cliildr>'n  of  Asaph  h.f. -eight 

One  HVNDUED fifty. 
Gen.  7.  24.  waters  prevailed  a  h. fifty  days,  8.  3. 
1  Kings  10.  29.  a  chariot  went  out  of  Egypt,  and 
a  horse  for  a  A.  and  fifty  shekels,  2  Chron. 
1.  17. 
1  Chr.  8.  40.  Ulam's  sons  and  sons'  sons  a  h.  fifty 
Ezra  8.  3.  were  reckoned  of  males,  a  A.  and  fifty 
JVtA.  5.  17.  there  were  at  my  table  a  h.  fifty  Jews 

One  HUNDRED  fifty-three. 
John  21. 11.  drew  the  net  full  of  fishes  a  h.f.-three 

One  hWJ^DRED  fifty-.six. 
Ezra  2.30.  the  children  of  Magbish,  a  h.  f.-siz 

One  HVNDRED  sixty. 
Ezra  8.  10.  Shelomilh,  and  with  him  A.  s.  males 

One  HUNDRED  sixty-two. 
Gen.5. 18.  Jared  lived  A.  s.-two  years,  begat  Enoch 

One  HUNDRED  seventy-two. 
JVeh.lh  19.  the  porters  and  bteUueah.  seventy-two 

One  HUNDRED  seventy-five. 
Gen.  25.  7.  Abraham's  life  was  a  A.  seventy-five 

One  HUNDRED  eighty. 
Gen.  35.  28.  thadays  of  Isaac  a  A.  and  eighty  years 
Esth.  1. 4.  Ahasuerus  fensi  for  a  A.  and  eighty  days 

One  HUNDRED  eighty-two. 
(?e7t.5.28.L.%mech  lived  h.eig.-two  and  begatNoah 

One  HUNDRED  eighty -seven. 
G'<;n.5.25.MethnselalilivedA.e(^'-A.-.'rei)fnbegalLam. 

.    One  HUNDRED  eighty-eight. 
JVeh.l.  20.  the  men  of  Beth-lehem  a  A.  eighty-eight 

HUNDRED  thousand. 

JVum.  2.  9.  all  numbered  in  Judah  were  a  k.  thous. 

16.  numbered  in  the  camp  of  Reuben  a  A.  thous. 

1  KingsW.^).s\cw  of  the  Syrians  A.  «Af)«i.  fool  men 

.Kings 3.  4.  Mesha  kingof  Moab  rendered  to  kitiy 

of  Israel  a  A.  thous.  lambs,  a  A.  thous.  rams 

1  Chr.  5.  21.  took  from  Hagariles  a  h.  thous.  men 

21.  5.  of  Israel  a  thousand  thousand  and  h.tttoua. 

22.  14.  for  house  of  Lord  A.  thous.  talents  ofgold 
29.  7.  and  gave  a  A.  thousand  talents  of  iron 

2  Chr.  2.1.  6.  ho  hired  a  A.  thousand  men  of  valour 
HUNDRED  eight  thousand  and  a  HUNDRED. 
JVum.  2. 24.  numbered  ofcamp  of Ephraim,  108,100 

.'?  HUNDRED  twenty  thousand. 
.Tu-dg.  8.  10.  there  fell  of  the  Midianites  120,000 

1  Kings  8.  63.  Solomon  offered  a  sacrifice  of  a  A. 
and  twenty  thousand  sheep,  2  Chron.  7.  5. 

lCAr.]2.37.ofReuben,Gad,and  Manassch,  120,000 
2CAr.28.6.Pekah  slew  in  Judah  in  one  day  120,000 
Jonah  i.  II.  in  Nineveh  were  about  120,000  persons 

.4  HUNDRED /ftrr7/-/our  thousand. 

«ft).7.4. were  sealed  144,000  "of  nil  the  tribes  of  Isr. 

14. 1.  with  him  ]44,Ot'iO,  having  his  Father's  name 

3.  no  man  could  learn  that  song  but  the  144,000 

.4  HUNDRED  fifty-thousand. 

2  Chron.  2.  17.  strangers  that  were  in  Ihe  land  of 
Isrnel  were  found  a  h.  fifty  thousand 

,^  HUNDRED  eighty  thousand. 

1  ;ir(7in'sl2.21.  Willi  Benjamin  180,000,2  CAr.l  1.1. 

2  CAr.17.18.  with  J.hoza'bad  were  180,000,  for  war 
.4  HUNDRED  eighti/-five  thousand. 

2  Kings  19.  35.  that  night  ihe  angel  of  the  Lord 
smote  of  the  Assyrinns,  18.5,000,  fsa.  37.  36. 
Two  HUNDRED. 
<?f7i.l1.23.Serng  lived  aO. begat  Nahor  iico  A. years 
32. 14.  tiro  h.  she-goals,  and  two  h.  cwos  for  Esau  , 
■  Tosh.  7.  21.  Achan  saw  two  h.  shekels  of  silver 
.fudg.  17.  4.  bis  mother  took  two  h.  shekeis  of  silver 
1  Sam.  18.27.  David  slewoftbePhilist.  rwn  A.  men 
25.  13.  two  h.  abode  by  the  stuff,  30.  10,  21. 


HUN 

l$<zffl.?5.1?.Abig.tookri£0A.loavei,twoA.cakesftg8 

25am.  14.0).  Absalom  weighed  liuir  ttco  /t.  eliekt'la 

15.11. with  Absalom  went  tico  A.nien  outof  Jcrua 

16.  1.  Zibu  brought  David  two  h.  loavus  of  bread 

\Kingsl:iti.  the  pomegranates  were  two  A.  in  rows 

10.  16.  Solomon  made  tif»  A.  targets,  ii  CAr.  9. 15. 
2  Chron.  29.  32.  for  burnl-ofToringa  two-h.  lambs 
Eira  2.  05.  were  among  them  two  h.  singing  men 

6.  17.  and  offered  at  the  dedication  twu  A.  rania 
Cant.  8. 12.  those  that  keep  the  fruit  thereof  two  A. 
£iek.  45.  15.  ye  shall  offer  one  lamb  out  ot'lwoh. 
John  6.  7.  tico  A.  pennyworth  is  not  sulficicnt 
Jicts  23.  2:1.  he  called,  saying  make  ready  two  It 
soldiers  to  go  to  Cesarea,  and  spearmen  two  A 
TwoUUNDREUjice. 
Gen.  11.32.  the  days  olTerah  were  two  h.  Jive  yeata 

Two  IIUNURED  seven. 
Oen.  11.21.  Reu  lived  twoh.  secfn  years  and  begat 

'Pwo  HUNUREU  nine. 
Oen.  11. 19.  Peltg  lived  two  A.  nine,  years  and  begat 

Two  HUNDRED  twelve. 
lCftro7i.9.22.poricrs  in  the  gates  were  two  h. twelve 

Two  HUNDRED  eighteen. 
Ezra  8.  9.  with  Obadiah  two  h.  eighteen  males 

Two  HUNDRED  twenty. 
F.zra  8.  20.  forserviceof  Levitestifu  A.  tw.  Nethin. 

Two  HUNDRED  twenty-three. 
Ezra  2.  2d.  men  of  Beth-el  and  i\\twu  h.  tto.-three 

Two  HUNDRED  tAiWy-too. 
\Kings  20.15.  of  princes  of  provinces  two  h.th.-two 

Two  HUNDRED /or<!/-«u!o. 
JVVA.  11.  13.  chief  of  the  fithers  two  h.  forty-two 

Two  HUNDRED /uWy/iDe. 
Ezra  2.  66.  their  mules  two  A.  and  forty-five 
JVVA.  7.  67.  and  two  A.  45  singing  mc:n  and  women 
68.  Uieir  mules  two  h.  anA  forty-five 
Two  HUNDRED^/tjr. 
Ezod.  30.23.  take  thou  to  thee  of  cmnamon  two  h. 
anA  fifty  of  calamus  two  h.  anA  fifty  shekels 
A*«w.  16.  2.  twoh.  anJ_/i/(!/ princes  of  the  assembly 
17.and  bring  ye  before  L.  twoh.  s.nA  fifty  censers 
35.  a  fire  consumed  the  two  A.  and  fifty  men 
2  Chron.  8.  10.  two  A.  and//(y  that  bare  rule 
F.zek.  48.  17.  suburbs  toward  north  two  h.  fifty 

Two  HUNDRED  sevctity-six. 
^c<«  27.  37.  in  all  the  sbi^)  two  h.  seventy-six  souh 

Two  HUNDRED  eighty-four. 
AVA.ll.  18.  Levites  in  the  holy  city  two  h.  eight.y-f. 

Two  HUNDRED  eighty-eight. 

lCAron-25.7.all  cunning  in  songs  two  A.  righ.-eight 

Two  HUNDRED//!')/  thousand. 

1  Oiron. 5.21.  took  awavofsliee|i(rooA.yi/(y  thous. 

Three  HUNDRED. 
Oen.  5. 22.  Enoch  walked  with  God  three  A.  years 
and  begat  sons  and  daughters 
6.  15.  the  length  of  the  ark  shall  be  three  A.  cubits 
45.  22.  he  gave  Benjamin  three  A.  pieces  of  silver 
Jurf^.7.H.the  number  that  lapped  were  ^ArceA.  men 

8.  and  he  retained  those  three  A.  men 
9.  4. the  (ArccA.men  that  were  with  hiin  were  faint 

11.  26.  Israel  by  the  coast  ofArnon  three  h.  years 
15.  4.  Samson  went  and  caught  three  h.  foxe.-* 

2  Sam.  21. 16.  whose  s|)ear  weighed  tArce  A- shekels 
23. 18.  Abishai  Joub's  brother  lifted  up  his  spear 

against  JArce  A.  and  slew  them,  1  CAr.  II.  11,20. 

1  Kings  10.17.  he  made  <Arec  A.  shields  of  boat.gold 
11.  3.  Solomon  had  three  A.  concubmes 

i  Kings  18.  M.appointeil  to  Ilezek.  tArcc  A.  talents 

2  CAr.O.  16.  th.  A.  shckel.-i  ofgold  went  lo  one  shield 
14.  9.  Zera  came  against  Asa  with  th.  A.  chariots 
35. 8.  gave  lo  priests  for  passover-offer.  th.  A.  oxen 

Ezra  8.  5.  with  Shechamali  three  A.  males 
E.'th.^.  15  the  Jewsslew  iArcf  A.  men  atShushan 
John  12.  5.  this  ointment  snlil  for  three  A.  pence 

Three  HUNDRED  eighteen. 
Oen.  14. 14.  Abram  went  with  ^A.  A.  c/^'Af. servants 

Three  HUNDRED  twenty. 
/^irn  2.  32.  the  children  of  H.irim//t.A.  and  twenty 
AeA.7.  35.  the  children  of  HariiiUA.  A.  and  twenty 

Three  HU.VDRF.l)  twenlii-three. 
Ezra  2. 17.  ihf  riMldn  II  ,.<■  It.ziii  32:1,  jY>h.  7. 23. 

Three  HUNDRED  twenty-eight. 
ATtA.  7. 23.  rhildr.  of  llashiim  three  A.  twenty-eight 

Three  HUNDRED  forty-five. 
£ira2.34.  children of.Ierirho'345,JVeA. 7.  36. 

rArrcHUNl)RED//?y. 
Oen.O.W.  Noah  lived  aHer  Hood  (A.  A.//(y  years 

Three  HUNDRED  sixty.        • 
2  Sam.  2.  31.  so  tlin'  of  Israel  th.  A.  sij-fwmen  died 

Three  HUNDRED  siity-five. 
Oen.  5.23.Rnnch'«  dnv"  were  /A.  A  .•iizty-fioc  years 

Three  HU.VDRED  nerenly-lwo. 
/::ra2.4.thnchild.  nfSheidmtitdi  372,  J^eh.  7.9. 

Three  HUNDRED  ninr/y. 
Ezek.  4.5.  according  to  number  of  dnvs  tA.  A.  n.  9. 

Three  HUNDRED  JA-itsnnd. 

ATum.  31, 36.  of  them  that  went  out  to  wnr30(l,000 

1  .'iam.  11.  P.  Israel  were  riOO.OOO,  2  Chron.  M.  H. 

Chrnn.  17.  14.  with  Adnrili  mighty  m.-n  3(IO,(l()n 

25.  5.  found  Judah  and  Renjainin  to  be  300,000 

soo 


HUN 

Three  HUNDRED  thousand  seven  tkontand 

/oe  HUNDRED. 

2  Chron.  26.  13.  Uzziah  had  an  army  of  307,500. 

Three  HUNDRED  and  thirty  thousand 

seven  thousand  five  HUNDRED. 

JVum.Sl.  43.  now  the  half  that  pertained  unto  the 

congregation  was  337, 5tX)  sheep 

Four  HUNDRED. 

Oen.  15.  13.  afflict  them  four  h.  years,  JJcts  7.  6. 

23.  15.  land  is  worth /uur  A.  shekels  of  silver,  16. 

32.  6.  Esau  cometh  lo  thee  with/our  A.  men,  33.  1. 

^uJ^.  21. 12.  found/our  A.  virgins  of.labesh-gilead 

1  AVim.  22. 2.  were  with  Dav.fuur  A. 25.  13.  |  30.  10. 

30. 17.  save /uur  A.  young  men  on  camels  that  fled 

1  Kings  7.  a.  four h.  pomegranates  for  net- work 
18.  19.  and  the  projihets  of  the  groves /our  A. 
2-2.  6.  Aliab  gathered  of  the  prophets  about/«ur  A 

and  said,  shall  I  go  ag.  Ramoth  ?  2  Chr.  18.  5. 

2  Kings  14. 13.  Jehoash  came  and  brake  down  tin 

wall  of  Jeru. /our  A.  cubits  2  CAr.  25.  23 
£ira6.17.  offered  at  dedication  of  house/.  A.  lambs 
./icts5.'i(i.  to  whom  about/our  A- joined  themselves 

Four  HUNDRED  and  three. 

Gc7i.ll.l3.Arphaxad  lived/.  A.  th.  years  and  begat 

15.  Salah  lived  after  he  begat  P^ber  403  years 

Four  HUNDRED  and  ten. 

Ezra  l.IO.  silver  basins  ofa  second  sort /our  A.  ten 

Four  HUNDRED  and  twenty. 
IKingsd.'iS.  they  fetched  from  thence gold,420  t:il. 

i'our  HUNDRED  thirtT/. 
Oen.  11.  17.  Eber  lived  430  years  and  begat  sons 
F.zod.  12.  40.  sojourning  in  Egypt  430  years,  41. 
GuJ.S.n.lhelaw  which  was  430  years  after  cannot 

Jf.«ur  HUNDRED  thirty-five. 
Ezra  2.  67.  their  camels  were  435.  JVcA.  7.  09. 

Four  HUNDRED  and  fifty. 
1  Kings  18.  lit.  gather  the  prophets  of  Baal  450,22. 
.dots  13.  20.  gave  judges  about  four  h.  fifty  vears 

Four  H  UN DRED fifty-four. 
Ezra  2.  15.  the  children  n(  AAin  four h. fifty-four 

Four  HUNDRED  siityeigkt. 
JVeh.  11.  6.  all  the  sons  of  Perez  were  4G8  men 

Four  HUNDRED  eighty. 
1  KingsG.  I.  in  480  years  Solomon  began  to  build 

Four  HUNDRED  thousand. 

Judg.  20.  2.  Israel  besides  Benjamin  400,000,  17. 

2CAr.  13.  3.  set  the  battle  in  array  with  400,000  men 

Four  HUNDRED  seventy  thousand. 

1  CAr.  21. 5.  Judah  was  470,000  that  drew  the  sword 

FiDc  HUNDRED. 
Oen.5.32.Noah  wa.s/nc A.ycarsold  and  begatShcni 
11.  II.  Shem  lived  after  five  A.  years  and  begat 
Exod.  30.  23.  take  of  pure  myxrU  five  A.  shekels 

24.of  cassia/.A.shekels  after  shekel  of  sanctuary 
.Vum.  31.  28.  levy  one  soul  o(five  A.  for  the  Lord 

2  Chron.  35.  9.  for  passover-otTerings/i'C  A.  oxen 
F.sth.  9.  6.  Jews  slew  at  Shushan/«e  A.  men,  12. 
.Job  1.  2.  five  h.  yoke  of  oxen,/oeA.  she-asses 
Ezik.i'i.  16.  hemeasured/rtA.  reeds,  17,18,19,20. 

45.2.  of  this  there  shall  be  for  the  sancluary/ucA. 

in  length,  with/we  A.  in  breadth,  square  round 

/,uAc7.4I.  the  one  owed/.  A.  pence,  the  oilier  filly 

1  Cor.  15.6.  was  seen  of  ahove/?>c  A.  brethr.  at  once 

Ftve  HUNDRED  and  thirty. 
jVeh.T.'O.  g-.ivc fire  A.  and  thirty  priests'  garments 

Five  HUNDRED  mid  fifty. 

IKingsO.'i'.i.fiveh.  and  fifty  hart:  rule  over  people 

Five  HUNDRED  thousand. 

2  .S,i)n.24.  9.  the  men  of  Judah  were  500,000  men 
2  CAr.  13.  17.  there  were  slain  of  Israel  500,000  men 

Six  HUNDRED. 
(7(n.7.6.NoahS!'i  A.  years  old  when  flood  came,  11. 
F.iod.]i.  7.  Phar.  took  sixh.  chariots  to  pursue  Isr. 
.luilg.'A.  3).  Shamgar  slew  with  an  ox  goad  sixh. 

18.  II.  Danites  sent  out  of  Eshtaol  sii  A.  16,  17. 

20.  47.  six  A.  Benjamites  fled  to  rock  Rimmon 

1  Sam.  13.  15.  Saul  numbered  the  people  i/'jA. 14.2. 
17.7.  Cioliath's  spear  bead  weighed  six  A.  shekels 
23.  13.  Dav.  and  his  men  about  *i>  A.  27.  2.  |30.9. 

2  Sam.  15.  18.  all  the  Gitiites  were  six  h.  men 

1  A'in^.il0. 16.  Solomon  made  targets,. »it  A.  sbekels 

ofgold  wont  to  one  target,  2  Chron.  9.  15. 

29.  a  chariot  went  for  six  A.  shekels,  2  Chron. 

I.  17. 
1  Ctiron.  21.  25.  David  gave  Oman  sij  A.  shekels 
Vhr.  3. 8.  overlaid  hoiiKO  with  gold  to  .fir  A.  talents 
29.  33.  the  consecrated  things  were  six  A.  oxon 

Six  HUNDRED  twenty-one. 
Ezra2.26.ehild.  ofRamah.iiT.  A.  /(r.-onc,JVcA.7.30. 

Six  HUNDRED  twenty-three. 
Ezra2.1I.the  children  of  Rebai,,iix  A.  twenty-three 

Six  HirNDRI'D  twenty-eight. 
JVVA. 7. 16.thcchil<lrenof  Ri-bai,.«ir  A.rwcnty-ri^At 

Six  HUNDRED /orfy-^wo. 
F.zra'i.  10.  the  children  of  Hani,  sir  h.  forty-two 
A'VA.  7.62.  the  children  of  Nekoda,  .91/;  h.  forty  two 

.Sir  HUNDRED /or(;/ci>Ar. 
A>A.7.I5.thn  children  of  llinnui,.«ir  h.  forty-eight 

Six  HUNDRED  and  fifty. 
F.zra  8.20.  weighed  to  thoirxliand  lii  h.Jifiy  talents 


HUN 

Six  HUNDRED  fifly-two. 
F.zrai.  60.  the  children  ofNekoda,  sixh.fifty-tvt 
JVeh.'.lO.  the  children  of  .Arab,  sixh.  aadjifty-tioo 

Six  HUNDRED  sixty-six. 
1  KVn^slO.U.gold  to  Sol. in  year  six  h.sixty-six  tal. 
jEzra  2. 13.  children  of  Adonikam,  six  A.  sixty-siM 
Kev.  13.  18.  and  his  number  is«ii  A.  andsi'ity-.'jij 

Six  HUNDRED  sixty-seven. 
A/"eA.7.]8.children  of  Adonikam,  sii  A.  sixty-seven 

Six  HUNDRED  seventy-five. 
J'lTum.  31.37.  Lord's  trili.ofsheep  w&asix  h.sev.-five 

Aiz  HUNDRED  njntfy. 
1  CAron.9. 6.  Jeueland  brethren  were  sixh.  ninety 

Six  HUNDRED  thousand 
/;Torf.l2.37.  Israel  journeyed  about  60(J,000  on  foot 
38.  26.  a  bekah  for  every  man  for  000,000  men 
JVam.  1.  46.  all  that  were  numbered  were  tK)0,000 
11.21.  Mosessaid,  the  people  are  600,000  footmen 
Six  HUNDRED  seventy-five  thousand. 
JVujTi.  31. 32.  the  rest  of  the  pny  was  675,000  sheep 

Scora  HUNDRED. 

■Tudg.  20.15.  of  Gibeah  were  sev.  h.  chosen  men,16. 

2.Srjm.  8.  4.  David  look  from  him  sfp.  A.  horsemen 

10. 18.  Dav.  slew  men  ofscu.  A.  chariotsof  Syrians 

1  Kings  1 1.3.Solom.  bad  seven  A.  wives,  princesses 

2  Kings  3.  26.  the  king  of  Moab  took  seven  A.  men 
2  CAr.  15. 11.  they  offered  to  the  Lord  seven  A.  oxen 

Seven  HUNDRED  twenty-one.     I 
wVcA.  7.37.  childien  of  Lod,  Hadid,  Ono,721. 

Seven  HUNDRED  twenty-five. 
Ezra  2.  33.  children  of  Lod,  Hadid,  One, 725. 

Seven  HUNDRED  thirty-six. 
F.zra  2.  66.  their  horses  were  736,  JVtA.  7.  68. 

.Seven  UV NDHED  fori y-three. 
F.zra'i.  25.  the  children  of  Kirjatli-ariin,  743. 

Seven  HUNDRED/or(y-/pe. 
.Jer.  .52.  30.  took  away  captive  of  the  Jews  745. 

Seven  HUNDRED -viriy. 
Kzrtt  2.  9.  the  children  of  Zuccai  7(30,  JWA.  7.  14 

Seven  HUNDRED  seventy-five. 
£;zra2.5. the  children  of  Arab,  seven  h.  seventy-five 

Seven  HUNDRED  seventy-seven. 
Oeji.  5.  31.  all  tliediiys  of  Lainecli  were  777  years 

Seven  HUNDRED  eighty-two. 
fiC?i.5.26.Methusal.  lived  782  years,  begat  Lamech 

Eight  HUNDRED. 
Oen.  5.4.  Adam  after  he  begat  Seth  lived  800  vearg 
19.  Jared  after  he  begat  Enoch  lived  800  vears 
2  Sam.  23.  8.  he  liftrd  up  his  spear  against  8U0 

Fig/il  HUNDRED  .?fiif7i. 
Oen.  5.  7.  Seih  lived  afl.'i  he  begat  Enos 807 year* 

F.igh-t  HUNl)RED//<«n. 
Oen.  5. 10.  Eiios  after  be  begat  Cainan  815  years 

Fight  HUNDRED  twenty-two. 
JWA.  11.  12.  their  bre'hien  that  did  work  were  829 

f;(>A<  HUNDRED  thirl,/. 
Oen.  5. 16.  Miilmbileel  nfiiT  he  be;Ht  ilared  83C  yrs. 

Eight  II I 'NOR  ED  thirty-two. 
Jer.  52.  29.  NebiKh;uliii  7?ar  carried  captive  832 

Fight  HUNDRED /or^y. 
Oen.  5.  13.  Cainan  alter  he  begat  Mnhalaleel  640 

Right  UVSDREDforly-five. 
jVeh.  7.  13.  the  children  ofZatlu  were  845 

Eirrht  HUNDRED  ninety  fire. 
fi'en.S.n.alT  the  days  i.rMiihal!ileeiwere895year« 

M-ine  Hl'NDRED. 
.Tudg.  4.  3.  Jabin  had  nine  A.  chariots  of  iron,  13. 

.Wne  HUNDKED/i-f. 
Oen.  5.  11.  all  the  davs  <if  Enos  were  905  yeara 

A'ive  HUNDRED  ten. 
Oen.  5.  14.  all  the  davs  of  Cainan  910  years 

JVine  HUNDRED  <w</rc. 
Oen.  a.  P.  all  the  davs  of  Selh  were  912  veara 

JVin«  HUNDRED  twentv-ight. 
mh.  11.  8.  and  after  him  Gabhai,"  Sallai,  928 

.Vine  HUNDRED  thirty. 
Oen.  5.  5.  all  davs  that  .Adam  lived  were  930  yrs. 

.Vine  HUNDRED /orM/^oif. 
£ira  2.  8.  the  children  »f  Zntlu  945 
•Vi/ii-  HUNDRED  ^//v. 
Oen.  9.  29.  all  the  davs  of  Noah  were  9.)0  yean 

J^nie  IIUNDRED///y  .sir. 
1  CAroii.O.O.  britliren  according  to  g'Micrations  956 

^^lne  HUNDRED  sixty-two. 
Oen.  5.  20.  nil  Hie  davs  of  Jared  were  902  years 

J\7rrr  HUNDRED  sixty  nine. 
Oen.  5.  27.  the  davs  of  Methuselah  were 909 year* 

.Vine  HUNDRED  sevenlv-lhree. 
F.zra'i.  36.  the  children  of.Iodaiah'973,  .V<A.7.  39. 

HUNDREDS. 
Frorf.I8.21.  he  rulers  ofA.  and  lens,  2.').  DchM.15. 
A"i/ta.31.14.Mose9  wnn  wroth  with  c;ipnins  over  A. 

54.  Moses  look  the  gold  of  the  captMin.^  of  A. 
I.Vrtm.22.7.will  9onof.Ie«Bemftke  you  captain^  of  A 
29   2.  the  lords  of  the  Philistines  n:issed  on  by  A. 
2. Slim.  18.  1.  David  set  captains  of  A.  over  them 

4.  the  kins  stood,  all  the  people  came  out  by  A. 

0A'ini'.ill.4.Jehoiada  sent  and  set  the  rulers  over  A. 

10.  to  cnplains  over  A   did  the  priest  give  sp-'ir* 

and  shields  that  were  in  tbc  temp.  2  C^r.  23.  9 


HUN 

1  CRr.13.1  Davldconsulted  with  the  captains  of  A. 
26.  26.  which  the  captains  over  A.  had  dedicated 

28.  1.  David  assembled  the  captains  over  the  A. 

29.  6.  then  the  captains  of  A.  otTered  willingly 

8  CAr.  23. 1.  Jehoiada  took  captains  of  A.  into  cov. 

25.  5.  Amaziah  made  them  oaptains  over  A. 

JIfarAt).  40.  they  sat  down  in  ranks  hy  A.  and  fifties 
HUNGER,  Substantioe. 

Ezod.  16.  H.  to  kill  this  whole  assemlily  with  A. 
JJeut.  28. 48.  thou  shalt  serve  thine  enemies  in  A. 

32.  24.  they  shall  be  burnt  with  A.  and  devoured 
JVcA.'J.lS.thougiivest  bread  from  heaven  for  theirA. 
Psal.  34.  10.  the  young  lions  do  lack  and  suffer  A. 
Prov.  19.  15.  and  an  idle  soul  shall  sutfer  A. 
Jer.  3fi.  9.  he  is  like  to  die  for  A.  where  he  is 

42.  14.  we  shall  see  no  war,  nor  have  A.  of  bread 
/,am.2.1U.  that  faint  for  A.  in  the  top  of  every  street 

4.  9.  are  better  than  they  that  be  slain  with  A. 
£2fA.34.29.they  shall  be  no  more  consumed  with  A. 
Luke  15.17. have  bread  enough,  and  I  perish  with  A. 
2  Cor.  11.27. 1  have  been  in  A.  and  thirst,  in  fastings 
Rev.  6. 8.  and  power  was  given  them  to  kill  with  A. 

HUNGER,   Verb. 
Z)e«(.  8.3.  he  suffered  thee  to  A.and  fed  with  manna 
/f  a.49.10.  they  shall  not  A.  nor  thirst,  nor  sun  smite 
Mat.  5.  fi.  blessed  are  they  that  A.  Luke  6.  21. 
Luke  6. 25.  woe  to  you  who  are  full,  for  ye  shall  A. 
John  6.  3.5.  he  that  cometh  to  me  shall  never  A. 
Roni.  12.  20.  therefore  if  thine  enemy  A.  feed  him 
I  Cor.  4.  11.  we  both  A.  and  thirst,  and  are  naked 

11.  34.  and  if  any  man  A.  let  him  eat  at  home 
Rev.  7.  16.  they  shall  A.  no  more,  neither  thirst 

HUNGER-BITTEN. 
Job  18. 12.  his  strength  shall  be  A.-Ai'^.  destruction 

HUNGERED. 
Jtfat..  4.  2.  he  was  afterwarils  a  A.  Ijuke  4.  2. 

12. 1.  hisdiscip.  were  a  A.  and  began  to  pluck  ears 
3.  what  David  did  when  he  was  a  A.  JV/acA  2.25. 

21.  18.  now  as  he  returned  into  the  city  he  A. 
25.  3.5.  for  I  was  a  A.  and  ye  gave  me  meat 

37.  L.  when  saw  we  tliee  an  A.  and  fed  thee  1  44. 
42.  for  I  was  a  A.  and  ye  gave  nie  no  meat 
Luke  6.  3.  what  David  did  when  himself  was  a  A.* 
HUNGRY. 

1  Sam.  2.  5.  and  they  that  were  A.  ceased 

2  Sam.  17.  29.  the  people  is  A.  weary,  and  thirsty 
Z  Kings  7.  12.  they  know  that  we  be  A.  therefore 
y»6  5..5.whose  harvest  the  A.eateth  up  and  taketh  it 

22.  7.  thou  hast  vvilhholden  bread  from  the  A. 
24.  10.  they  take  awav  the  slieaf  from  the  A. 

Psal.  .50.  12.  if  I  were  A.  I  would  not  tell  thee 
107.  5,  A.  and  thirsty,  their  soul  fainted  in  them 

9.  for  he  filleth  the  A.  snul  with  goodness 
36.  and  there  he  maketh  the  A.  to  dwell 

146.  7.  hope  is  in  Ld.  who  giveth  food  to  the  A. 

Prop.6.30.ifhe  steal  to  satisfy  his  soul  when  he  is  A. 
iJ5. 21.  if  thine  enemy  be  A.  give  him  bread  to  eat 
27.  7.  to  the  k.  soul  every  hitter  thing  is  sweet 

/«a.8.21.tliey  shall  pass  thro'  it,  hardlv  bes'ead  and 
A.  when  they  shall  be  A.  they  shall  fret  thenis. 
9. 20.  he  shall  snaleh  on  the  right  hand,  and  be  A. 
29.  8.  it  shall  even  be  as  when  a  A.  man  dreameth 
32.  6.  to  make  empty  the  .soul  of  the  A. 
44.  12.  yea,  he  is  A.  and  hi«  strength  faileth 
SS.  7.  is  it  not  to  deal  thy  bread  to  the  A.? 

10.  and  if  thou  draw  out  thy  soul  to  the  A. 
65.  13.  mv  servants  shall  eat,  but  ye  shall  he  h. 

F.iek.  IS.  7.  hath  given  his  bread  to  the  A.  16. 
Mark  11.  12.  were  come  from  Bethany  he  was  A. 
Luke  1.  53.  he  hath  filled  the  A.  with  good  things 
.6ct.i  lO.lO.Peter  became  very  A.  would  have  eaten 
I  Cor.  11.  21.  one  is  A.  and  another  is  drunken 
Phil.  4.  12.  I  know  how  to  be  full  and  to  be  A. 

HUNT. 
Hunting  has  been  railed  a  kind  of  an  apprentice- 
ship to  war.,  and  an  imitatinn  of  it.  Nimrod 
was  a  mighty  himter  before  the  Lord,  Gen.  10. 
9.  .'inrne  think  he  did  good  with  his  hunting, 
served  his  country  by  ridding  it  of  the  wild 
beasts  which  did  infest  it,  and  so  insinuated 
hiinself  into  the  nffeelions  of  his  neighbours, 
and  got  to  be  their  prince.  Others  think,  under 
pretence  of  hunting,  he  gathered  men  under  his 
command,  and  by  their  help  established  a  ty- 
rannical and  absolute  power  over  men  :  He 
was  a  mightv  hunter;  that  is.  he  was  a  violent 
invader  of  his  neighbours^  rights  and  proper- 
ties, and  o  persecutor  of  innocent  men;  carry- 
inrr  all  before  him.  and  endeavouring  to  make 
all  his  own  by  force  and  violence. 
The  prophets  sometimes  rxnre.is  war  under  the 
name  if  hunting.  .Jer.  16.  IR,  I  will  send  for 
many  hunters,  and  they  shall  hunt  them  from 
every  mountain,  and  from  every  hill,  and  out 
of  the  holes  of  the  rocks.  He  speaks  of  the 
Chaldeans  or  Per-ians,  who  took  the  Jews,  and 
h'td  them  under  their  dominion,  .^ome  are  of 
opinion,  that  the  hunters  mentioned  by  Jere- 
miah are  the  Persians,  trAo  set  the  Hebrews  at 
liberty,  and,  in  a  more  elevated  sense,  the 
801 


HUR 

Apostles,  who  mere  as  hunters,  that  endea- 
voured to  take  men  with  their  preaching.  Mi- 
cah  complains  that  every  one  lays  ambuscades 
fur  his  neighbour,  and  that  one  brother  hunts 
after  another  to  destroy  him.  Mic.  7.  2,  They 
all  lie  in  wait  for  blood,  they  hunt  every 
man  his  brother  with  a  net.  Ezekiel  inveighs 
against  the  false  prophetesses,  who  place  cush 
ions  under  the  elbows  of  sinners,  thereby  pro- 
mising them  ease  and  security,  while  really 
they  were  spreading  a  net,  as  hunters  do,  to 
catch  the  prey  and  devour  it,  Ezek.  13.  18,  20 
Oen.  27.  fS.  now  therefore  go  A.  mo  some  venison 

5.  Esau  went  to  field  to  A.  venison,  and 
1  Sam.  26.  20.  as  when  one  doth  A.  a  partridge 
.rob  38.  39.  wilt  thou  A.  the  prey  for  the  lion1 
Ps.  140. 11.  evil  shall  A.violent  mantooverthr.  him 
Pruo. 6. 26. the  adulteress  will  A.  for  the  precious  life 
.Jcr.  16. 16.  they  shall  A.  them  from  every  mountain 
Lam.  4.  18.  they  A.  our  steps  that  we  cannot  go 
Eiek.  13.  18.  will  ye  A.  the  souls  of  my  people  7 

20.  pillais  wherewith  ye  there  A.  the  souls 
Mid.  2.  they  A.  every  man  his  brother  with  a  net 

HUNTED. 
Gen.  27.  f  33.  where  is  he  that  hath  h.  venison  ■? 
Ezek.  13.  21.  shall  be  no  more  in  your  hand  to  be  A. 

HUNTER,  S. 
Gc7i.]0.9.he  was  a  mighty  A.  before  the  Ld.  where- 
fore it  is  said,  even  as  Nimrod  the  mighty  A 
25.  27.  Esau  was  a  cunning  A.  a  man  of  the  field 
ProD.  6.  5.  deliver  as  a  roe  from  the  hand  of  the  A 
Jer.  16.  16.  and  after  uill  I  send  for  many  A. 

HUNTEST. 
1  Sam.  24.  11.  yet  thou  A.  my  soul  to  take  it 
Job  10.  16.  thou  A.  me  as  a  fierce  lion,  and  again 
HUNTETH.  [sheweth 

Lev.  17.  13.  which  A.  and  catcheth  any  beast 

HUNTING. 
Gen.  27. 30.  that  Esau  his  brother  came  ift  from  A. 
Prov.  12.  27.  roastelh  not  that  which  he  took  in  A 

HURL. 
JV*«m. 35.20.  if  A.  at  him  bv  Iving  in  wait  that  he  die 

HURLETH. 
Job  27.  21.  and  as  a  storm  A.  him  out  of  his  place 

HURLING. 
lCAr.12.2.  could  use  right  hand  and  left  in  A.  stones 

HURT,  Substantive. 
Gen.  4.23.  fur  I  have  slain  a  young  man  to  my  A. 
26.20.  make  a  covenant,  that  thou  wilt  do  us  no  A. 
31.  29.  it  is  in  the  power  of  my  hand  to  do  you  A. 
.7o«A.24.20.if  forsake,then  will  he  turn  and  doyouA. 

1  Sam.  20.  21.  there  is  peace  to  thee,  and  no  A. 
24^  9.  sayitig,  behold,  David  seekelh  thy  A. 

2Snm.  18.32.  that  rise  to  do  A. he  as  thatyonng  m.nn 

2  Kings  14.  10.  for  why  shouldest  thou  meddle  to 

thy  A.  that  thou  shouldest  fall  1  2  Chr.  25.  19. 
F.zra  4.  22.  why  damage  grow  to  the  A.  of  kings? 
F.slh.  9.  2.  to  lay  hands  on  such  as  sought  their  A. 
Ps.  15.  4.  that  sweareth  to  his  A.  and  changeth  not 

35. 4. brought  to  confusion  that  devise  my  A.  70.  2. 
26.  let  them  he  ashamed  that  rejoice  ai  my  A. 

38. 12.  seek  my  A. speak  mischievous  things  ag.  me 

41.  7.  aeainst  me  do  they  devise  my  A. 

71.  13.  be  covered  with  reproach  that  seek  my  A. 

24.  they  are  brought  to  shame  that  seek  my  A. 

F.ccl.  5.  13.  riches  kept  for  the  owners  to  their  A. 

8.  9.  one  man  ruleth  over  another  to  his  own  A. 
Jer.(i.14.have  healed  A.  of  my  people  slightly,  8. 11. 

7.  6.  neither  walk  after  other  gods  to  your  A. 

8. 21.  for  the  A.  of  my  people  am  I  A.  I  am  black 

10.  19.  woe  is  me  for  my  A.  my  wound  is  grievous 

24.  9.  will  deliver  them  to  he  removed  for  their  A. 

2.5.  6.  provoke  me  not,  and  I  will  do  you  no  A. 
7.  that  ye  might  provoke  me  to  your  own  A. 

38.4  seeketh  not  welfare  of  this  people,  but  the  A 
7)an.  3.25.  they  have  no  A.||  6. 22. 1  have  done  no  A 

6.  23.  and  no  manner  of  A.  was  found  upon  him 
.^cts  27.I0.thal  this  voyage  will  be  with  A.I  perceive 

HURT,   Participle. 
F.rod.  22.  10.  if  a  beast  he  A.  no  man  seeing  it 

14. if  it  be  A.  and  die  the  owner  thereof  not  with  it 
1  .'Nam. 25.15.  the  men  weregood  and  we  were  not  A. 
KrcMO.O.whosoremoveth  stones  shall  be  A.therew. 
.?(>r.8.21.for  the  A.  of  my  people  am  I  A.  I  am  hlark 
Reu.2.11.  overcomes, shall  not  be  A.  of  second  death 

HURT,   Verb. 
Gen.  3T.  7.  but  God  suffered  him  not  to  A.  me 
F.yod.  21.22.  if  men  strive  and  A.  woman  with  child 

35.  if  one  man's  ox  A.  another's  that  die,  shall  sell 
.\''iim.  Ifi.  15.  neither  have  I  A.  one  of  them 
1  .'Nnm.25.7.  thy  shepherds  with  us,  we  A.  them  not 
.Job  35.  P.  thy  wickedness  may  A.  a  man  as  thou  art 
P.«n/.in5.18.  whose  feet  A.  with  fetters,  Iniil  in  iron 
Isa.  11.9.  they  shall  not  A.nor  destroy  in  all  mvhnly 
mountain,  earth  full  of  knowledge  of  Ld. 65.25. 

07.  3.  lest  any  A.  it,  T  will  keep  it  night  and  day 
Dan.  (i.  22.  that  the  lions  have  not  A.  me 
Mark  16.  \f.  any  deadly  thing,  it  shall  not  A.  them 
/,t/A»4.35. the  devil  rameoui  of  him,  and  A. him  not 

10.  19.  and  nothing  Bhall  by  any  means  A.  you 


HUS 

.^cts  18.  10.  no  man  shall  set  on  thee  to  h.  ihos 
Rev.  6.  6.  see  thou  A.  not  the  oil  and  the  wine 
7.  2.  to  whom  it  was  given  to  A.  earth  and  sea 

3.  saying,  h.  not  the  earth,  neither  the  sea 

9.  4.  they  should  not  h.  the  grass  of  the  earth 

10.  and  their  power  was  to  A.  men  five  months 
19.  and  had  heads,  and  with  them  they  do  A. 

11.  5.  if  any  A.  them,  fire  proceedeth  out  of  moutt 

HURTFUL. 
Ezra  4. 1.5.  shalt  find  that  this  city  is  A.  to  kings 
Ps. 144.  10.  whodelivereth  David  from  the  A.  sword 
1  Tim.  6.  9.  they  that  will  he  rich  fall  into  A.  lusts 

HURTING. 
1  Sam.  25.  34.  Lord  who  hath  kept  me  from  h.  thee 

HUSBAND. 
Gen.  20.  t  3.  dead  man,  for  she  is  married  to  a  A. 
F.Tod.  4.  25.  surely  a  bloody  A.  art  thou  to  me,  26. 

21.  22.  as  the  woman's  A.  will  lay  upon  him 
J.ev.  19.20.  that  is  betrothed  to  a  A.  DfwZ.22.23. 

21.3.  his  sister  who  hath  had  no  A.  F.ick.  44.35. 
M'um.  30. 6.  if  she  had  at  all  a  A.  when  she  vowed 
iJeut.  22.  22.  lying  with  a  woman  married  to  a  A. 

24.  3.  and  if  the  latter  A.  hate  her  or  die 

4.  her  former  A.  may  not  take  her  again  to  wife 

25.  5.  and  perform  the  duly  of  a  A.  brother  to  her 
28. 56.  her  eye  shall  be  evil  toward  A.  of  her  bosom 

Judg.  20.  4.  the  A.  of  the  woman  slain,  answered 
Rvth  1.  3.  Elimelech,  Naomi's  A.  died,  she  was  left 

12. 1  am  too  old  to  have  a  A.  if  I  should  have  a  A. 
Jcr.  6.  11.  the  A.  with  the  wife  shall  be  taken 
31.  32.  although  I  was  a  A.  to  them,  sailh  the  Lord 
Joel  1.  8.  girded  with  sarkcloth  for  h.  of  her  youth 
Mat.  1.16.  and  Jacob  begat  Joseph  the  A.  of  Mary 
Luke  2.  36.  she  had  lived  with  a  A.  seven  years 
.John  4. 17.  I  have  no  A.  hast  well  said,  I  have  no  h. 
Rom.  7. 2.  if  A.  be  dead,  she  is  loosed  from  her  A.  3. 

1  Cor.  7.  3.  let  the  A.  render  to  the  wife  due  bene- 
volence, and  likewise  also  the  wife  to  the  A. 

4.  also  the  A.  hath  not  power  of  his  own  body 

11.  and  let  not  the  A.  put  away  his  wife 

13.  the  woman  who  hath  a  A.  that  believeyi  not 

14.  unbelieving  A.  is  sanetified  by  the  wife,  and 
unbelieving  wife  is  sanctified  by  the  A. 

2  Cor.  11.  2.  for  I  have  espoused  you  to  one  A. 
Gal.  4.  27.  more  children  than  she  who  hath  a  A. 
f:yA.5.23.the  A.is  head  of  wife,  as  Christ  of  Church 
1  Tim.  3.  2.  bishop  he  blameless,  A.  of  one  wife.  Tit. 

Her  HUSBAND.  [I.  fi. 

Gen.  3.6.Eve  did  eat  of  the  fruit,  and  gave  to  her  A. 

16.3.Sarai.Abraham's  wifegavellagarloA.A.Ahr. 

J.ev.  21.7.  nor  take  a  woman  put  away  from  htr  h. 

JViim.  5.  13.  if  it  be  hid  from  the  eyes  of  her  h. 

27.  if  she  have  done  trespafs  against  her  A. 

29,when  one  goeth  aside  toanoth.  instead  of  A.  A. 

30.  7.  and  A.  A.  heard  it,  and  held  his  peace,  11,  14 

8.  if  her  A.  disallow  her  on  the  day  he  hea^d  it 

10.  and  if  she  vowed  in  her  A.  house  or  hound 

12.  if  Afr  A.  hath  utterly  made  them  void  on  day 

13.  Apr  A.  may  establish  it  or  make  it  void 
Deut.iJ.13.  thou  shalt  go  in  unto  her,  and  be  Aer  A. 

25.  5.  her  A.  brother  shall  go  in  unto  her  and  take 

11.  the  wife  draweth  near  to  deliver  her  A. 
.Judg.  13.  6.  then  the  woman  came  and  told  her  h. 

9.  hut  Manoah  her  A.  was  not  with  her 

10.  the  woman  made  haste,  and  shewed  her  A. 
19.  3.  her  A.  aro.^e  and  went  after  her  to  speak 

Ruth  1.  5.  Naomi  left  of  her  two  sons  and  her  h. 

9.  find  rest  each  of  you  in  the  house  of  Aer  A. 
2.1.  N."!omihad  kinsman  of  her  A.  a  man  of  wealth 

1  Sam.  1.  8.  then  said  Elkanah  her  A.  to  her,  23. 
22.  she  said  unto  her  A.  I  will  not  go  up  till  child 

2.1 9.  when  she  came  up  with  Aer  A. to  offer  sacrifice 

4.19.she  heard  that  her  father  and  Afr  A. were  dead 

21.hecauseof  A'^rA.||25.  19.  she  told  not  Apr  A. 

2.Srtm.3.15.Ish-bosheth  sent  and  took  her  from  A.  A. 

16.  Aer  A.  went  with  her  along  weeping  behind  her 

11.  26.  wlien  the  wife  of  TTriah  heard  that  Aer  A. 

was  dead,  she  mourned  for  A<'r  A. 

2  Kings  4. 0.  she  said  to  A.  A.  behold  now  I  perceive 

14.  verily  she  hath  no  child,  and  Afr  A.  is  old 

22.  she  called  unto  Aer  A.  and  said,  send  me  one 
Pror.  12.  4.  a.virtunus  wife  is  a  crown  to  her  A. 

31. 11.  the  heart  of  her  h.  doth  safely  trust  in  her 

23.  A''r  A.  is  known  in  the  gates  among  the  elders 
2R.  Arr  A.  also  riseth  up,  and  he  praiseth  her 

.Jer.  3.  20.  surely,  as  a  wife  departeth  from  her  A. 
Ezek.  16.  32.  who  taketli  strangers  instead  of  her  h 

45.  thatloalheth  AerA.  and  her  children, thou  art 
Hns.  2.  2.  she  is  not  my  wife,  neither  am  I  Acr  A. 
Mot.  1.  19.  now  Joseph  Acr  A.  being  a  just  man 
Mark  10.  12.  if  a  woman  shall  put  away  Aer  A. 
/.wA-elfi.lR.whoso  marrieth  her  put  away  from  A. A. 
■.'?f^«5.^0.  and  carry,  her  forth  liiried  her  by  Aer  A 
Rom.T.l.h  bound  by  law  to  A.  A.  so  long  as  he  liveth 

3.  if  Aer  A.  be  dead,  she  is  free  from  that  law 
1  Cor.  7.  2.  and  let  every  woman  have  Aer  ownA. 

.3.  and  likewise  the  wife  to  her  A. 

10.  let  not  the  wife  depart  from  A'-r  A. 
11. let  her  remain  unmar.or  be  reconciled  to  Ai^Jk 
34.  is  married  carclli  how  she  may  please  A.  A. 


HYP 

1  Cor.7. 39.  bound  by  the  law  as  long  at  herh.Uvcth 
£pA.5.33.iind  tlie  wife  see  dial  shu  reverence  her  h. 
Jiev.  21.  '2.  jirepareU  as  a  bride  adorned  fur  her  h. 

My  HUSBAND. 

Gen.  29.  32.  now  therefore  tny  h.  will  love  me 

34.  now  this  time  will  my  h.  be  Joined  to  me 

30.13. is  it  small  matter  that  tliou  bust  taken  myh.7 

16.  because  1  have  given  my  maiden  lo  my  h. 

2U.  Leah  said,  now  will  mi/  h.  dwell  with  me 

Deut.  25.  7.  my  h.  brotber  relusetb  to  raise  a  name 

2^>am.l4.5.ani  a  widow,  my  h.  is  dead,  2Kings  4.1. 

7.  shall  not  leave  to  my  A.  a  name  on  the  earth 

Hos .2.~ .she  shall  say,  will  go  and  return  to  7/1. first  A. 

t  IG.  in  lliat  day  tliou  shall  call  me  my  A. 

Thy  IIL'SH.AM). 

Oen.'i.  16.  thy  desire  shall  he  to <Ay A.  bo  shall  rule 

yVuiii.  5.  I'J.  with  anuther  instead  oi  thy  A.  iiO. 

./urf^.l4.15.they  said  toSamson's  wife,entice  thy  A. 

RutWi.  11.  dune  lolhy  mother  since  death  ot't/iy  h. 

2  Kings  4.2G.  and  say  to  her,  is  it  well  with  thy  h.7 

Isa.  54.  5.  thy  Maker  is  ihyh.  the  Lord  is  his  name 

John  4.  lb.  go,  call  thy  A.  1|  18.  be  is  not  thy  A. 

jJc<s5. 9.  the  feet  of  them  that  have  buried  thy  A. 

1  Cor.  7.16.  knowest  whether  thou  shall  save  fAu  A. 

HUSBANDMAN. 
O«n.9.20.Noab  began  to  be  a  A.  and  planted  viney. 
Jer.  51.23.  with  ibee  will  I  break  in  |)icce3  theA. 
Jlmos  5. 16.  alas !  ibey  shall  call  the  A.to  mourning 
Zech.  13. 5.  he  shall  say,  1  am  no  prophet,  I  am  a  A. 
John  15. 1.  I  am  the  true  vine,  my  Father  is  the  A. 
27i»n.2.6.  theA.  that  labour,  must  be  first  partaker 
Jam.  5. 7.  A.  waitelh  for  the  precious  fruit  of  earth 

nUSBANUMEN. 
ZKings  25.12.he  lell  of  the  poor  lo  be  A.  Jer.  52. 10. 

2  Chron.  26.  10.  Uzziah  bad  A.  also  in  Carmel 
Jer.'ii.  24.  and  there  shall  dwell  in  Judah  itself  A. 
Joel  1.11. be  ashamed,  O  ye  A.  howl,0  vine-dressers 
JUat.2l.33.  be  letitouttoA.  Mark  12.2.  Luke20.Q. 

34.8ent  his  servants  to  A.  Mark  12.2.  J.ukc  20.10. 
3^  when  A. saw  the  son,  Mark  12.7.  LukeiO.ii. 

40.  when  lie  comeih  what  will  he  do  to  those  A. 

41.  he  will  let  out  bis  vineyard  to  other  A. 
JlfarA12.2.  he  might  receive  from  IheA.ofthe  fruit 

9.  he  will  come  and  destrov  the  A.  and  give  viney. 
HUSBANDRY. 

2  Or.  26. 10.  Uzziah  bad  husbandmen,  fur  loved  A. 

Job  1.  t  3.  Job  had  a  very  great  A. 

1  Cor.  3. 9.  ye  are  (Jod's  A.  ye  are  God's  building 
HUSBANDS. 

Huthl.ll.  arc  there  more  sons,  tiiey  may  be  your  A. 
13.  would  ye  stay  for  them  from  having  A.? 

£s<A.1.17.so  they  shall  desjiise  their  A.  in  their  eyes 
20.  the  wives  shall  give  lo  their  A.  honour 

Jer.  29.  6.  and  give  your  daughters  to  A. 

i''2eit.l6.4.).whicli  loalhed  their  A.andtbeirchildren 

John  4.  18.  Ihou  bast  had  five  A.  he  not  thy  husband 

1  Cor.  14.  35.  let  them  ask  their  A.  al  home 

JEph.  5.22.  wives,  submit  yourselves  to  your  A.  24. 

25.  A.  love  your  wives,  even  as  Christ  also  lovi-d 

the  church,  and  gave  himself  for  it.  Cut.  3.  19. 

Coi.  3. 18.  wives,  submit  yourselves  to  your  own  A. 

I  Tim.  3.  12.  let  the  deacons  be  the  A.  of  one  wife 

Tit.  2.  4.  teach  young  women  to  love  their  A. 
5.  lo  be  chaste,  obedient  to  their  own  A. 

1  Pet.3.  l.ye  wives,  be  in  subjection  toyour  own  A. 

7.  ye  A.dwell  with  ihein  according  to  knowledge 

HUSK,  S. 

J^um.  6.  4.  from  the  kernels  even  to  the  A. 

iKings  4.  42.  brought  fulleixrs  of  corn  in  A.  thereof 

J^uke  15.16.  would  Oiin  have  lilk-J  bis  belly  with  A. 
HYMN,  S. 

Mat.  26.  30.  when  they  bad  sung  a  A.  Mark  14. 26. 

F.ph.  5.  19.  Rjieakingto  yourselves  in  psalms  and  A. 

Col.3.16.  adinonishrn<!  one  another  in  psalms  and  A. 
HYPOCRISY 

Comex  from  the  Greek,  Hypocrisis:  It  i.t  a  coun- 
Urfcitimr  mliirion  and  virtue  ;  an  affectation 
of  the  name,  joined  with  a  disaffection  to  the 
thing  ;  or,  the  having  a  form  of  godliness 
with  denyins  the  power  of  it.  Thus  he  is  a 
hypocrite  who  feigns  lo  be  what  he  is  not,  who 
puts  on  afiiltepcf  ^on,  like  the  actors  in  Tra- 
gedies and  Comedies.  Our  Saoiour frequently 
aecvscd  the  I'harisees  of  hypocrisy.  Mat.  23. 
13,  14,  <S-c.  Their  character  is  drawn  out  in 
thai  chapter  i  as  (1)  They  say  and  do  not, 
verse  3.  tli'ii  practice  was  not  agreeable  to 
their  doctrine,  and  tlierefore  their  example  was 
not  to  be  imitated;  for  they  imposed  many 
strict  injunctions,  over  and  above  what  the 
law  required,  and  severely  exacted  obedience 
thereto  from  others,  hut  did  not  observe  the 
least  part  thereof  Ihemseloes,  verse  4.  (2) 
What  good  things  they  did,  were  only  for  os- 
tentation, to  be  seen  of  men,  verso  5.  (3)  They 
ambitiously  affected  titles,  vain  applause,  and 
the  precedency  at  entertainments,  verse  6—12. 
(4/  They  hid  their  crying  sins  under  the 
colourable  appearance  of  virtues,  and  pre- 
tended to  koliHesB,  that  they  mi^/U  tin  with 

3oa 


HYS 

less  suspicion  and  more  security,  terie  14. 
These  our  Saviour  compares  to  whited  sepul- 
chres, that  within  contain  sordid  dust  and  rot- 
tenness, verses  27,  28.  (5)  They  were  exact  in 
light  matters,  they  tithed  mint  and  cummin,  but 
neglected  substantial  duties  :  They  were  zeal- 
ous in  the  outward  parts  of  religious  worship, 
and  neglectid  rightcousttcss  and  mercy,  think- 
ing to  compensate  their  defects  in  the  duties  of 
one  table,  by  strictly  observing  the  duties  of 
<Ae  o<Aer,  verses  23, 24.  (0)  They  studied  rather 
an  external  purity,  than  the  inward  purity  of 
the  heart,  verse  25.  (7)  These  hypocritical 
Scribes  and  Pitm'isees pretended  a  great  deal  of 
respect  to  the  ancient  prophets,  and  to  disallow 
what  their  fathers  did  to  them,  and  yet  were  as 
ready  to  practise  the  like  themselves  lo  Christ 
and  his  Jlpostlcs,  verses  29,  30,  31.  (8)  Hyjio- 
crites  ;;ray  lo  God  only  in  the  lime  of  sicknes 
and  danger,  when  by  their  affiictions  t.hty  are 
driven  to  it,  but  shew  no  love  to  prayer  or  de- 
light in  Ood  in  time  of  prosperity.  Job  27.  8,  9, 
10.  (9)  They  judged  and  censured  others  se- 
verely for  smaller  faults,  being  i«  the  mean 
time  themselves  guilty  of  greater  crimes,  Wat 
7.5.  (10)  They  were  wore  for  outward  cere- 
monies and  human  traditions  than  for  thetru 
and  spiritual  worship  of  (iod.  Mat.  12. 1,2,  7. 
15.  2,  7,  8,  9.  (11)  In  wwldly  affairs,  they  were 
guick-sighled,not  so  in  .'Spiritual  andhcaci  nly 
things,  Mark  3  4.  (12)  Hy|iocrite»  in  public 
calamities  are  fearful,  lsa.33.  14. 
This  sin  0/ hypocrisy  <s  difficultly  cured,  in  that 
it  is  not  easily  discovered  by  men,  and  does  not 
expose  to  shame,  but  is  subservient  to  many 
carnal  e7ids.  Men  cannot  dive  into  the  hearts  of 
others,  and  cannot  discern  between  the  paint 
of  hypocrisy  and  the  life  of  holiness.  Hypo- 
crisy also  turns  the  means  of  salvation  into 
poison  ;  for  the  frequent  exercise  of  religious 
duties,  which  is  the  means  to  sanctify  others, 
confirms  and  hardens:  hypocrites. 
The  cff'ectual  means  to  cure  it,  is  a  steadfast  be- 
lief of  the  pure  and  all-seeing  eye  of  God ; 
who  sees  sin  wherever  it  is;  and  will  bring  it 
into  judgment.  M  hypocrite  may  hide  his  sin 
from  the  eyes  of  others,  and  sometimes  from 
his  own  conscience,  bat  can  never  impose  upon 
(rod.  The  steadfast  belief  of  this  truth  will 
cause  frequent  and  solemn  thoughts  of  God.  as 
our  Inspector  and  .fudge ;  Our  Saviour  makes 
use  of  it  as  an  argument  against  hypocrisy. 
I.uke  12.  1,2,  3,  Beware  ye  of  the  leaven  of  ihe 
Pharisees,  which  is  hypocrisy.  For  there  is 
nothing  covered  that  siiall  not  be  revealed  ; 
neither  hid  that  shall  not  be  known,  &c. 
/sa. 32.6.his  heart  will  work  iniquity,  to  practise  A. 
Mat.  23.  28.  within  ye  are  full  of  A.  and  iniquity 
Mark  12.  15.  he  knowing  their  A.  said  unto  them 
7^u/icl2.1. beware  ofleaven  ofPharisees, which  isA. 
1  7Vm.4.2.8peakingliesin  A. their  conscience  seared 
JuHi.3.17.wisdoni  from  above  is  pure  and  without  A. 

HYPOCRISIES. 
1  Pet.  2. 1.  wherefore  laving  aside  all  malice  and  A. 

HYPOCRITE. 
.Job  8.  13.  and  the  A.  hope  shall  perish 
13.  16.  for  a  A.  shall  not  come  before  him 
17.  8.  the  innocent  shall  stir  up  himself  against  A. 
20.  5.  and  the  joy  of  the  A.  is  but  for  a  moment 
27.8.  what  is  the  hojioofthe  A.  tho'  he  bath  gained 
34.30.  that  the  A.rfi"n  not,  lest  the  peo.bo  snared 
Vrov.  11.9.  a  A.  with  his  mouth  deslroy.  neighbour 
Isa.  9.  17.  for  every  one  is  a  A.  and  an  evil  doer 
Mat.  7. 5.  tliou  A.  first  cast  out  the  beam  out  of  eye 
I.uke  6.  42.  thou  A.  cast  beam  out  of  thy  own  eye 
13.  15.  thou  A.  doth  not  each  one  loose  his  o.x  ? 
HYPOCRITES. 
Job  15. 34.  the  congregation  of  A.  shall  be  desolate 
36.  13,  hill  the  A.  in  heart  heap  up  wrath 
Isa.  33.  14.  tearfulness  bath  surprised  the  A. 
Mat.  ().  2.  do  not  sound  a  trumpet,  as  the  h.  do 
5.  when  Ihou  praye8l,lhou  shall  not  bo  as  A. are 
16.  moreover,  when  ye  fast,  bo  not  as  Ihc  A- 

15.  7.  ye  A.  well  did  E<aias  prophesy,  Mark  7.  6. 

16.  3.  O  yo  A.  ye  can  discern  the  face  of  sky,  but 
can  yonotdiscorn  ihesignjof  timosi  Lu.  12.50. 

22.  18.  but  Jesus  said,  why  tempt  yo  mo,  ye  A.? 
23. 13.  woe  unto  you,  scribes  and  Pharisoos,  A.  vn 
shut  up  kingdimi  ag.men,  14,  l.'>,23,25,27, 'i9. 
24.  51.  shall  appoint  him  his  portion  with  tho  A. 
Lukc\\.i\.  woe  niitci  voo.scrihcH  and  Phoriscos,  A. 

HYP()(U1TI('AI,. 
r.«nl.35.16.wilh  A.  murkirs  111  frasls,  they  ennsbcd 
Isa.  10.  6.  I  will  send  him  against  a  A.  niltiim 

HYSSOP 

Is  an  herb  very  generally  known,  and  in  Hebrew 

called  F..-iob.     It  teas  cnmmonly  made  use  of  in 


the  blood  of  the  Paschal- T^imo,  and  sprinite 
the  lintel  and  two  side-posts  Willi  ti,  Exod.  Iv! 
22.  Sometimes  they  added  a  liiilc  wool  to  tt 
of  a  scarlet  colour.  So  in  the  purification  of 
lepers,  they  dipped  a  bunch  composed  of  hys. 
suj),  the  branches  of  cedar,  and  red  wool,  in 
water,  mingled  with  the  blood  of  a  bird,  and 
with  it  sprinkled  the  leper.  Lev.  14.  4,  S,-c 

David  alludes  lo  these  ceremonial  purijicationi. 
Psal.  51.  7,  Purge  me  with  hyssop,  and  1  ehiill 
be  clean :  that  is,  .^s  lepers  and  other  unclean  1 
persons  are  by  thy  appointment  purified  by  the 
use  of  hyssop  and  other  things,  so  do  thou 
cleanse  me,  a  most  leprous  and  polluted  crea- 
ture, by  thy  grace,  and  by  the  virtue  of  the 
blood  of  Chriot,  which  is  represented  and  siV- 
nificd  by  those  ceremonial  usages. 

Hyssop  14-  a  shrub,  which  shoots  out  abundance 
of  suckers  from  one  root  only :  it  is  as  hard  as 
any  large  wood,  and  grows  about  afoot  and  a 
half  high,  ./itparticular  distances  on  both  sides 
of  Its  stock  it  pushes  out  longish  leaves,  which 
are  hard,  odoriferous,  warm,  and  a  little  bitter 
to  the  taste.  The  blossom  of  it  appeals  at  the 
top  of  the  stem,  of  an  azure  colour,  and  like  an 
ear  of  corn.  There  are  tico  sorts  of  tt,  the  gar- 
den, and  mountain  hyssop.  It  is  very  probable 
that  hyssop  grows  to  a  very  great  height  in 
Judea,  since  it  is  said  in  the  gospel,  that  the 
soldiers  having  filled  a  sponge  with  vinegar, 
they  put  it  upon  a  stick  of  hyssop,  and  present- 
ed it  to  our  Saviour's  mouth,  who  was  tlitn 
upon  the  cross,  John  19.  29. 

F.xod. 12.2-2.  ye  shall  take  a  bunch  of  A.  and  dip  it 

/_.fi'. 14. 4. takecedar-wood, scarlet,  and  A. 6.  49,5!. 
52.  shall  cleanse  the  house  with  the  A.  and  scarlet 

JVHm.l9.6.sliall  cast  A. into  the  midst  of  the  burning 
18.a  clean  person  shall  lake  A.  and  dipjt  in  walei 

\  Kings  4.  33.  from  the  cerlar-tree  even  unto  the  A. 

Psal.  51.  7.  purge  me  with  A.  and  I  shall  be  clean 

./uA7i  19.  29.  they  filled  a  sponge,  and  init  it  on  A. 

Heb.^.Vi.Xxid  took  blood  with  A. and  sprinkled  people 

I. 

r  IS  referred  (I)  To  God,  to  set  forth,  [1]  The 
'^  dignity  of  his  person,  Psal.  81.10.   Isa.  45.5,6 
[2]  His  great  power  and  might,  (Jon.  17.  1.  [.')] 
JIis  eternal  and  unchangeable  being  in  Aim- 
Sfi/,  E.xod.  3.  14.  [4]  The  certainty  of  his  pro- 
1-iises    and   threalenings,  Exod.   6.   2.    Num. 
14.  35.    (\\)To  the  Son  of  God.  [1]  Before  his 
manifestation  in  the  flesh,  Cant.  2.  1.  [•niv'hen 
manifested,  Mark  14.62.  Luke  24.  39.  (Ill)  To 
the  Holy    Ghost,    Ads   10.  20.     (IV)  To  the 
church,     Cnnt.  2.  16.  |  6.  3.     (V)  To  the  gonit 
angels,   Luke  1.  19.  j  2.  10.    Rev.  22.  9.     (VI) 
To  evil  angels,  1  Kings  22.  21,  22.     (VII)  To 
men   and   women,  denoting,   [I]    Their  pride, 
Isa.  47.  8,  10.     [2]  The   certainli/  of  what    is 
spoken.  Gal.  5.  2.  Philem.  19.     [3]  The  readi- 
ness of  thf.  speaker  to   perform  his  duty,  or 
what   is  enjoined  him,  Mic.  3.  8.  Mat.  21.  30. 
(VIII)  To  the  creatures,  Nam.  i'i.SU.  Judg.  a 
9,  11,  13. 
(7cn.6.I7.behoId  /,  even  I,  do  bring  a  flood  on  eflrth 
9.  9.  /,  behold  /,  eslablinh  my  covenant  with  you 
.34.  30.  A  shall  be  destroyed,  /and  my  house 
37.10.  shall  /,  thy  mother  and  brcth.Comelo  bow  ? 
30.  the  child  is  not,  and  /,  whither  shall  /go'? 
39.  9.  there  is  none  in  this  house  greater  than  /" 
/:x»(/.3.11.whoam  /,  that  /shouldfo  lo  PbarBoh'* 
9.27.  L.  is  righteous,  /and  my  people  are  wicked 
14.  17.  and  /,  behold  /  will  harden  Ihe  hearts 
IS. (I.  /thy  father-in-law  Jcthro  am  como  to  thee 
31.  6.  /,  bi'hold  /,  have  given  with  him  Aholiqb 
I.ei'.  26.28.  /,  even  /,  will  chastise  you  lor  your  sins 
JV«m.  3. 12.  /,  behold  /,  have  taken  the  Lev.  18.  6. 
/^fi;(.7.I7.  nations  more  than  /,  bow  run  /disposs. 
32  39.  /,  even  /,  am  he,  there  is  no  God  with  me 
./k.vA.14  7. forty  years  old  was  /when  Moses  sent  me 
.Iudg.h3.  /,  even  /,  will  sins;  lo  the  liord  Gorl  of  Isr. 
7.  tdl  /D.borah  arose,  that./nrose  niolher  in  I«r. 
7.  IS.  when  /blow,  /and  all  that  are  with  mo 
11.  37.  mav  bewail  my  viruiiiity,  /and  my  follows 
12  2.  /  and  my  people  were  at  strife  with  Ammnii 
20,  4    /ciimo  to  Gibenh,  /and  my  concubine 
l.'>«m.2I.I7,ho  Bnid,  tboii  nrl  more  righteous  than  / 
2  .V(im. 3,28. /and  my  kinird.  are  guilt  hss  before  Ld. 
13.  13.  /,  whither  shall  /  ruiise  my  shame  lo  go  ? 
IA7nfr.?l,2I./and  son  Solum,  be  counted  offendera 
IH.  2-i.  /,oven  /only  remoin  a  prophet,  19.  10,  14. 
1  Chr.  29.  14.  who  am  /,  what  my  peop.  2  Chr.  2. 6. 
2CAr,32.13.  what  /and  fathers  have  done  lo  peopis 
F.ira  7.21.  /,  oven  /  Artiixerxes,  make  a  decree 
.VcA.  5.  15.  but  so  did  not  /,  becnnsn  of  fear  of  G 
lh.\.Vi.  /also and  mv  maiden.*  will  fast  likewise 
16,17,19. 


purification  instead  nf  a  sprinkler:   Thus  f/nd\.r„b  1. 15.  /only  am  escaped  toti'll  thei',  16,  V, 
commanded  the  Hebrews,  when  they  came  out]    15.  6,  thy  own  mouth  cnnilrnineth  Ihoe,  and  not  / 
0/  Egypt,  to  take  a  bunch  of  hyssop,  to  dip  rf  in  1  34.  33.  whether  thou  rofuso  or  choose,  and  not  / 


JAS 

Ps.  SI.  2.  !cnJ  mo  to  the  rock  that  Is  higher  than  / 

H2.  6.  persecutors,  for  they  are  stronger  than  / 
J!;cci.  2. 25.  who  can  hasten  hereunto  more  than  /? 
Canf.  2. 1.  /am  the  rose  of  Sharon,  and  lily  of  vail 

6.  3.  /  am  my  beloved's,  7.  10.  ||  8. 10.  /  am  a  wall 
Isa.  8.18.  /and  childr.  L.  hath  given  me,  //f  A. 2.13, 

41.  4.  /the  I,ord  the  first,  /am  he,  43.  11,25. 

10.  /am  with  ihee,  for  /am  thy  God,  43.  5. 
44.  6.  /am  the  first,  /am  the  last,  48. 12.  Rev.l.n. 

7.  who  as  /shall  call,  and  shall  declare  if? 

45. 12.  /,  even  my  hands  have  stretched  outheav. 

46. 4.  even  to  your  old  age  /  am  he,  /  have  made 
9.  /am  God,  and  there  is  none  else,  /atjj  God 

48. 15.  /,  even  /  have  spoken,  /  have  calloa  h 
16.  from  time  that  it  was,  there  am  I^Mat.  18.  20. 
49.  5.  yet  shall  /  be  glorious  in  the  eyes  of  the  Ld 
51.  12."  /  even  /am  he,  52.6.  ||  .52.  6.  behold,  it  is  / 
65.  5.  stand  by  thyself,  for  /  am  holier  than  thou 
/er. 20.  7.  /was  deceived,  thou  art  stronger  than  / 

23.  39.  be-hold  /,  even  /,  will  utterly  forget  you 
Ezek.  5.  8.  behold  /,  even  /,  am  against  thee 

6. 3.  behold  /,  even  /,  will  bring  a  sword  upon  you 

34.  11.  beh.  /,  even  /,  will  search  sheep  and  seek 
20.  /,  even  /,will  judge  between  fat  catt.  and  lean 

44.  28.  /am  their  inherit,  /am  their  possession 
Z)0Ji.8.1.5.  when  /,  even  /Dan.  had  seen  the  vision 
Hos.  5.  14.  /,  even  /,  will  tear,  /will  take  away 
Hti.^.\.  13.  Ilaggai  spoke,  /am  with  you,  saith  Ld. 
Zech.  1. 15.  for  /was  but  little  displeased,  they  help 
JV/(iM.13.  should /accept  of  your  hands?  saith  Ld. 
Jl/at.3. 11.  afler  me  is  mightier  than  /,  Mark  1.  7. 

14.27.  it  is  /,  be  not  afraid,  MarkG.  50.  John  6.20. 

16. 13.  whom  do  men  say  that  /the  Son  of  man  am? 
18.20.  two  or  three,  there  am  /  in  midst  of  them 

24.5.  many  shall  come  in  name,  saying,  /am  Chr. 
2C>.  23.  everv  one  began  to  say,  Lord,  is  it  /? 

Mark  14.29.  tho'  all  shall  be  offended,  yet  will  not  / 

J^ukei.  4P.  thy  father  and  /sought  thee  sorrowing 

11.19.  if /liy  Beelzeb.  cast  out  devils,  by  whom  do 

20.  if  /  with  the  finger  of  God  cast  out  devils 

21. 8.  shall  come  in  my  name,  saying,  /am  Christ 

22.  27.  but  /am  among  you  as  he  that  serveth 

24.  39.  that  it  is  /  myself",  handle  mo  and  see 
John  1.  20.  he  confessed,  /am  not  the  Christ,  3.  28. 

33.  /knevv  him  not  ||  4.  2fi.  /that  speak  am  he 

8. 16.  /am  not  aUme,  but  /and  Falh.  that  sent  me 

23.  /am  from  above,  /urn  not  of  this  world 

2>!.shall  know  that  /am  he, /do  nothingof  myself 

58.Je6U8  said,  verily,  before  Abraham  was,  /am 

10.  30.  /  and  mv  Father  are  one 

38.  the  Fat  her  in  me,  and  /in  him,  17. 21. 1 15.5. 

12.  32.  and  /,  if  /  be  lifted  up,  will  draw  all  men  to 

1.3. 14.  if /then  vour  Ld.  and  Master  have  washed 

14.  20.  /in  my  Father  ||  15.4.  abidein  me,  /in  you 

28.  /go  to  Fatli.  for  iny  Father  is  greater  than  / 

17.23."/  in  them,  20.  ||  25.  but  /have  known  thee 

18.  35.  Pilate  answered,  am  /  a  Jew? 

Sets  11.17.  what  w!is  /,  that  /could  withstand  God 

22.  2.8.  /  obtained  this  freedom  ;  /  was  free  born 

Rom.  7. 17.  it  is  no  more  /,  but  gin  dwell,  in  me,  20. 

lCor.1.12.  /am  of  Paul,  /of  Apolloa,  /ofChr.3.4. 

2. 1.  and  /  brethren  when  /came  to  you  declaring 

3. 1.  and  /,  bnthr.  could  not  speak  to  you  as  to  sp. 

7.  7.  /would  that  all  men  were  even  as  /myself 

8.  ifllieyahideeven  as  /||  10.  yet  not  /,  but  Lord 
.  9.  6.  or  /  only  and  Barnabas,  have  not  we  power 

26.  /  Ihcrefiire  so  run,  po  fight  /,  nut  as  one  that 
11.1.  be  ye  followers  of  me,  even  as  /am  of  Christ 
15.10.  by  the  grnce  ofG./am  what /am,yet  not  / 

11.  whether  it  were  /or  they,  so  we  preached 
16.50.  for  ho  worke'li  the  work  r)f  Christ,  even  as/ 

S  Cer.  11.  22.  are  tht'y  Hebrews?  so  am  / 

23.  /  am  more  ||  29.  who  is  offended,  /  burn  not  ? 

Oa.l.'i.  19.  /Ihro' thelawam  dead  to  thelaw,that  / 
20.  /live,  yet  not  /,  but  Christ  livelh  in  me 

4.  12.  brethren  he  as  /am,  for  /am  as  ye  are 

5.  11.  /  brethren,  if /yet  preach  circumcision 
6. 14.  that  /  should  glory  in  cross,  and  /to  world 

Eph.l.lft.  /mIso,  after  /heard  of  your  faith  in  Jesus 

4.1.  /therefore,  prisoner  of  the  Lord, beseech  you 

1  Vet.  1.  16.  it  is  written,  be  ye  holy,  for  /  am  holy 

i.John  1.  whom  /  luve  in  the  truth,  and  not  /only 

Rev.  1.8.  /am  Alpha  and  Omegn,beginn.  and  end 

3.  19.  as  many  as  /love,  /rebuke  and  chasten 

21.88  /also  overcame  ||  21.2.  /John  gaw,22. 8. 

22.  9.  oee  thou  do  it  not,  /  am  thy  fellow-servant 

16.  /  Jesus  have  sent  my  angel  to  testify  these 

things,  /am  the  root  and  offspring  of  David 

JACINTH. 

/Jei».9.17.haviii2hreast-platesoffire,j.  and  brimst. 

21.30.  the  elnvenlh  foundation  of  the  city  was  a  ?'. 

JAILER. 
jJrt«  10.  23.  chargins  tlie_/.  to  keep  them  safely 

JANGLING. 
\Tim.  1.6.  having  swerved,  turned  aside  to  vain  ;'. 

JASPER. 
fri(>rf.2a!00.  tl.o  fourth  row  an  ony.x  and  aj.39. 13. 
FifJlc.28.13.  top:iz,  the  diamond  and_;.  thy  covering 
Rnt.  4.  3.  he  iliat  sat,  was  to  look  upon  like  a^'. 
tt.  11.  her  light  was  like  to  a  ?'.  stone,  clear  a 
303 


IDO 

Rev.  21. 18.  bunding  of  the  wall  of  city  was  of^. 

19.  with  precious  stones,  the  first  foundat.  wasj. 

JAVELIN. 

Jfum.  25.  7.  and  Phinehas  took  a/,  in  hie  hand 

1  Sam.  18. 10.  there  was  Q.j.  in  Saul's  hand,  19.  9. 

11.  Saulcast  thej.  for  hcsaid,!  will  smite  David 

19. 10.  he  smote  the^'.  into  the  wall,  David  Hod 

JAW. 

Judg.15. 19.  but  God  clave  a  hollow  place  in  thej. 

./ob  41. 2.  canst  thou  bore  his  j.  thro'  with  a  thorn? 

JAW-BONE. 
.Tud^.  15. 15.  Samson  found  a  now  j.-bone  of  an  ass 

16.  with  the  j.-bone  of  an  ass  have  I  slain 

17.  lie  cast  away  the  j.-bone  out  of  his  hand 
JAWS. 

./«&  29.  17.  and  I  brake  thej.  of  the  wicked 
Psal  22.  15.  and  my  tongue  cleaveth  to  myj. 
fsa.  30. 28.  there  shall  be  a  bridle  in_;.  of  the  people 
Hos.  11. 4.  as  they  that  take  off  the  yoke  on  their  j. 

JAW-TEETH. 
Prov.  30. 14.  and  their  j, -teeth  as  knives  to  devour 
ICE.     See  YCE. 
IDLE 
Signifies,  [1]  One  uho  is  slothful  or  lazy,  Exod. 
5.  8,  17.     [2]  One  that  would  work,  but  is  not 
employed  or  hired,  Mat.  20.  3,  6.   [3]  Unprofi- 
table, not  tending  to  edification.  Mat.  12.  36. 
Kxod.  5.  8.  for  they  be  i.  therefore  they  cry 
•  17.  but  he  said,  ye  are  i.  ye  are  i.  ye  say,  let  us  go 
Prov.  19.  15.  an  i.  soul  shall  suffer  hunger 
Mat.  12.  36.  that  every  i.  word  men  shall  speak 
20. 3.  he  saw  others  standing  i.  in  market-place,  6. 
Ijuke  24.  ll.  and  their  words  seemed  as  t.  tales 
1  Tim.5. 13.  wiihal  they  learn  tobe  t.  and  notonly  i. 

IDLENESS. 
Prov.  31.  27.  she  eateth  not  the  bread  of  i. 
Eccl.  10. 18.  through  i.  the  house  droppcth  through 
Eick.  16.  49.  and  abundance  of  i.  was  in  her 

IDOLATER. 
lC«r.5. 11.  ifanycalfed  a  brother  be  an  i.  not  to  eat 
Eph.5.5.v/ho\s  an  i.  hath  any  inheritance  in  kingd. 

IDOLATERS. 
1  Cor.5.10.  yet  not  altogether  with  the  covetous  of  i. 
6.  9.  i.  shall  not  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God 
10.  7.  neither  be  ye  i.  as  were  some  of  them 
Rev.  21.8.  but  i.  shall  have  their  pjirt  in  the  lake 
22. 15.  without  are  murderers  and  i.  and  all  liars 

IDOLATRY 
Signifies,  [1]  The  superstitious  worship  which  is 
given  to  idols  or  false  gods,  Acts  17. 16. 1  Cur. 
10.  7.     [2]  The  making  of  any  image  or  like- 
ness of  God  or  any  creature  for  a  religious 
end,  Deut.  5.  8.  Gal.  5.  20.     [.3]  Ml  human  in- 
ventions thrust  into  the  iDorship  of  God,  Deul. 
12.32.  [4]  The  setting  of  the  heart  inordinately 
upon  any  creature,  Phil.  3.  19.     [5]  jjn  inor 
dinate  love  to,  and  distrustful  care  for,  the 
things  of  the  world.  Col.  3.  .5. 
1  Ham.  15.  23.  stubbornness  is  as  iniquity  and  i. 
Jicts  17.J6.  when  he  saw  the  city  wholly  given  tot. 
1  Cor.  10.  14.  my  dearly  beloved,  flee  from  i. 
Gal.  5.  20.  the  works  of  the  flesh  are  i.  witchcraft 
Col.  3.  5.  mortify  covetousness,  which  is  i. 
IDOLATRIES. 

1  Pet.  4.  3.  when  we  walked  in  abominable  i. 
IDOLATROUS. 

2  Kings  23.  5.  Josiah  put  down  the  i.  priests 
IDOL. 

ZecA.ll.I7.woetothe  i.shepherd  thatleaveth  flock 

IDOL 
Signifies,  [1]  J)n  image  or  statue  representing 
some  false  deity,  2  Cor.  6.  IB.     [21  ./?ny  thing 
ton  muck  and  sinfully  indulged,   1  John  5.  21. 
[3]  Devils,  Isa.  19.  3.  1  Cor.  10.  21. 
\h'ivgs  15.13.  she  madeani.  in  grove,  2  CAr.  15.1fi. 
2  Chron.  33.  7.  he  set  the  i.  in  the  house  of  God 
15.  he  look  the  i.  out  of  the  house  of  the  Lord 
/« (1.48.5.  lest  thou  should  say,  my  i.  hath  done  them 
66.  3.  he  that  hurneth  incense  as  if  he  blessed  an  i. 
/irr.22.  28.  is  this  man  Coniah  a  despised  broken  i. 
.<?(:?.<  7.41.  made  a  calf  and  offered  sacriliceto  the  i. 
\  Cor.?.  4.  we  know  nni.  is  nothing  in  world,  10. 10. 
some  with  conscience  of  till!  i.to  this  hour  eat  it 
IDOLS. 
Arc. 19.4.  turn  ye  not  unto  i.  {|  26.1.  shall  make  no«. 
26.3n.willca8t  your  carcases  on  carcases  of  your  i. 
Deut.  29. 17.  ye  have  seen  their  i.  wood  and  stone 
1  .'yam.  31.  9.  to  publish  it  in  the  house  of  their  i. 

1  KiniTS  15. 12.  Asa  removed  the  i.  his  father  made 
21.26.  Ahnh  did  very  nbomiiinble  in  followin?  i. 

2  Kings  17.  12.  for  they  served  (.  2  Chron.  24.  \i>. 
21.  ll.Managseh  hath  made  Jndah  sin  with  hist. 

21.  Amon  served  the  j.  that  his  father  served 
23.21.  the  i  that  were  s(iied  in  ihehind  of  Jnilah 

1  Ckr.  10.  9.  to  carry  tiding.i  to  their  I  and  people 
16.  26.  for  all  the  gods  of  the  people  are  «. 

2  CWr.lS.a.  .Asa  put  away  abominable  i.  out  nf  Jud. 
34.  7.  Josiah  cut  ilown'all  thei.  in  the  land  oflsr. 

Psal.  96.  5.  for  all  the  gods  of  the  nations  are  t. 
97. 7.  confotiiided  they  that  boast  themselves  of  t. 


JEA 

Psal.  106. 30.  they  serv.  their  i.  that  were  snnrc  »o 

38.  whom  they  sacrificed  to  the  i.  of  Canaan 
115.  4.  their  i.  are  silver  and  gold,  135.  15. 

/sa.2.8.  their  land  is  fullof  i.worship  work  of  handa 
18.  and  the  i.  he  shall  utterly  abolish 
20.  shall  cast  away  hisi.  of  silver  and  gold, 31. 7. 
10. 10.  as  my  hand  haih  found  kingdoms  of  thei, 

11.  to  Samaria  and  her  i.  sodoto  Jeriis.and  her  j. 
19.  1.  i.  of  Egypt  shall  be  moved  at  his  presence 

3.  they  shall  seek  to  the  i.  and  to  the  charmers 
4.5.  16.  the  makers  of  i.  shall  go  to  confusion 

46. 1.  their  t.  were  on  the  beasts  and  on  the  cattle 

57. 5.  inflaming  youi selves  with  i.  under  green  tree 
./fr.  .50. 2.  her  i.  are  confounded,  her  images  broken 

38. land  of  images,  and  they  arc  mad  upon  their  i. 
Kick.  6. 4.  cast  your  slain  men  before  your  i.  5. 13. 

6.  all.  laid  waste,  your  I'.may  be  broken  and  cease 

9. with  their  eyes  which  go  a  wiioring  after  their  i. 

13.  where  they  did  offer  sweet  savourloalllh.  i. 
8. 10. 1  saw  all  the  t.  of  Israel  ponrtrayed  on  wall 
14.3.  these  men  set  up  their  i.  in  their  hcart,4,7. 

5.  they  are  estranged  from  me  through  their  i. 

6.  repent,  and  turn  from  your  i. 

16.  3(i.  and  with  all  the  i.  of  thy  abominations 

18.6.  nor  hath  lift  up  his  eyes  to  the  i.  of  Israel,  15. 

12.  oppressed  the  poor,  hath  lift  up  his  eyes  to«. 

20.7.  defile  not  yourselves  with  I  he  i.  of  Egypt,  18. 
8.  nor  did  they  fiirsake  the  i.  of  Egypt,  I  will  pour 
lO.polluted  mysabbaths,fortheir  heartwcnlaft.i. 
24.  polluted  sabb.  their  eyes  wcntafter  father's  i. 
31.  ye  pollute  yourselves  with  all  your  i.  even 

unto  this  day,  22.  4.  |  23.  7,  30,  37. 

39.  but  pollute  ye  my  holy  name  no  more  with  i. 
22.  3.  the  city  maketh  i,  against  herself  to  defile 
23.39.  when  they  had  slain  theirchildren  to  their  i. 

49.  and  ye  shall  bear  the  sins  of  your  1. 1  am  Ld. 
30. 13. 1  will  destroy  i.  and  will  cause  their  imagea 
33.  25.  and  ye  lift  up  your  eyes  toward  your  i. 
36.  18.  for  their  t.  wherewith  they  polluted  it 

2.5.  from  all  your  i.  will  I  cleanse  you,  57.  23. 
44.  10.  which  went  astray  from  me  after  their  t. 

12.  because  they  minister,  to  them  before  their  i. 
ffos.  4.  17.  Ephraim  is  joined  to  i.  lei  him  alone 
8.  4.of  tlieir  silv.  and  gold  have  they  made  them  i. 

13.  2.  have  made  i.  according  to  their  understand. 

14.  8.  what  have  I  to  do  any  more  with  i.? 
Mtc.  1.7.  and  all  the  i.  thereof  will  I  lay  desolate 
llah.'i.  18.  maker  trusteth  therein  to  make  dumb  i 
Zcph.  1.  t  3.  I  will  consume  ).  with  the  wicked 
Zff 7(.10.2.  for  the  i.  have  spoken  vanity,  and  divin 

13.  2. 1  will  cut  off  names  of  the  i.  out  of  the  land 
Jlcts  15.  20.  they  abstain  from  pollulicms  of  i. 
29.  abstain  from  meats  offered  to  i.  21.  25. 

17.  t  16.  when  he  saw  the  city  foil  of  i. 
/?nm.2.22.  thou  that  abhorrest  i.  dost  thou  commit 

1  Cur.  8.  1.  as  touching  things  offered  to  i.  4.  10. 

I  10.  19,  28.  Rev.  2.  14,  20. 

12.2.  were  Gentiles  carried  away  to  these  dumb  i. 

2  COJ-.6.16.  what  agreement  temple  of  God  with  /.? 
1  Thess.  1.  9.  how  ye  turned  to  God  from  i. 

1  .John  5.  21.  children  keep  yourselves  from  :. 
Rev.  9.20.  not  worship  devils  and  i.  of  gold  and  sil. 

JEALOUS. 
F.zod.  20.  5.  for  I  the  Lord  thy  God  am  nj.  God, 
34.  14.  Deut.  A.  24.  j  5.  9.  |  6.  15.  Josh.  24. 19. 
J^um.  5.  14.  and  he  hej.  of  his  wife,        30. 
\  Kings  10.10. 1  have  been./,  for  the  L.  of  hosts,14. 
F.zek.  39.  25.  and  will  hpj.  for  my  holy  name 
.Toel  2.  18.  then  will  the  Lord  be.?',  for  his  land 
JVaA.  1.  2.  God  isj.  and  the  liord  rcvengelh 
Zcch.  1. 14. 1  am;,  for  Jerus.  ||  8.  2.  was^'.  fiir  Zion 

I  /.over  you  wi 

.IE  A  LOUSY 


2C</r.ll.2.  fori  am.;,  over  you  with  godly  jcalou.sy 


as  7.  lor; 
idlyjcali 


Sign  firs,  [1]  Suspicion  between  married  per sor.3 
of  Iheir  fidrlily  one  to  another,  Num.  5.  14.    [2] 
jln  earnest  desire  and  concern  for  the  icclfare 
of  others,  joined  with  some  degree  of  fear  of 
them,  2  Cor.  11.2.    [3]  The  hot  displeasure  and 
indignation  of  God,  Psiil.  79.  5.  1  Cor.  10.  22. 
JVum.  5. 14.  the  spirit  of.;',  come  upon  him,       30. 
15.  forit  is  an  offering  of /.  and  ofmemorial,  18. 
25.  then  priest  shall  lake./,  offering  from  woman 
25.  II.  that  I  consumed  not  Israel  in  my.;'. 
Deut.  29.  20.  his  J.  shall  smoke  against  that  man 
.32. 16.  they  provoked  him  toj.  1  Kings  14.  22. 
21.  have  moved  me  to.;'.  I  will  move  them  to  J. 
Psal.  78.  58.  they  m'oved  him  to  J.  with  images 
79.  5.  how  long.  Lord,  shall  thy  j.  burn  like  fir« 
ProD  6. 34. for  J. is  the  rage  of  man, be  will  not  spaio 
27.  t4.  but  who  is  able  to  stand  before.?'.? 
Cnnf.8,6J.is  cruel  asthe  grave, the  coals  theroofnw 
Isa.  42.  13.  he  shall  stir  up  ;'.  like  n  man  of  war 
Ezek.  8.  3.  where  was  the  seat  of  the  image  of  j". 
5.  behold  at  gate  of  altar  this  iinaire  of ;.  in  entry 
16.  38.  and  I  will  give  thee  hieod  in  fury  andj. 
42.  my  7.  shall  depart  from  thee  and  will  be  quiet 
23.  25.  I  will  set  my  j.  against  Ihee,  fliev  shall  deal 
36.  5.  in  the  fire  of}',  have  I  spoken,  6.  I  38^  19. 
Zi^iA. 1.18.  whose  land  devoured  by  fire  of  his.;*.  3.8. 
Zcck.  1. 14. 1  am  jealous  for  Zion  with  great.;.  8. 2. 


IGN 

Jbffl.  10.19.  Mos.  saith,  will  proT.you  to/,  by  them 
H.lLsalvalioa  to  Uentiles,  to  provoke  them  to^'. 
J  C4>r.  10.  W.  do  we  provoke  the  Lord  to  _;.? 
S  Cor.  11.2.  for  I  am  jealous  over  you  wilJi  irodly  ?'. 

JEALOUSIES. 
AVtm.S.  29.  this  is  law  of;'. when  a  wife  goeth  aside 

JEOPARDED. 
Judg.S.lS.v/ere  people  thatj.  their  lives  unto  death 

JEOPARDY. 
2  Sam.  23. 17.  went  in  ?'.  of  their  lives,  1  CAr.  11. 19. 
1  Chr.  12.  19.  ho  will  talllo  Saul,  to  j.  of  our  heads 
/,uAe8.23.shipwas  filled  with  water,lhey  were  in_;'. 
1  Cor.  15.  30.  and  why  stand  we  in  j.  every  hour? 

JESTING. 
Epk.  S.  4.  nor  lillhinesit,  nor^'.  not  convenient 

JEWEL 
Bignifies,[\].^  precious  and  costly  omament,Oen. 

24.  53.     (2)   God's  children,  Mai.  3.  17. 
Prov.  11.  22.  as  aj.  of  gold  in  a  ewine'a  snout 
20.  15.  but  the  lips  of  knowledge  are  a  preciousj. 
£zeil:. 16.12. 1  put  a_;.on  thy  forehead, and  ear-rings 

JEWELS. 
Oen.  24.  53.  the  servant  brought  forth  j.  of  silver 
Ezod.  3.22.shallborrowj.of  gold,  11.2.  |  12.  35. 
35.  22.  they  brought  all  j.  of  gold,  JVum.  31.  50. 
JVuni.  31.  51.  took  the  gold,  even  all  wroughlj. 
1  .5am.  6.  8.  and  put  the  7.  of  gold  in  a  cotfer,  15. 
8  Chron.  20.  25.  they  foui,  riches  and  precious _;". 

32. 27.  made  treasuries  for  all  manner  pleasant,;'. 
Job  28.  17.  the  exchange  of  it  shall  not  be  for  j. of 
Cant.  1. 10.  thy  cheeks  are  comely  with  rows  ofj. 

7.  1.  the  joints  of  thy  thighs  are  like  ?'. 
Isa.  61.  10.  as  a  bride  adornoth  herself  with  her  jf. 
Ezek.  16. 17.  hast  taken  ihyj.  of  my  gold  and  silver 

39.  and  they  shall  take  thv  fair  j.  23.  26. 
I/os.  2. 13.  she  decked  herself  with  ear-rings  and^' 
JlfaZ.3.17.lhey  shall  be  mine,wheDl  make  up  my  j' 

IF 

Signifies,  [l].Surcfy,  Num.  14.  t  23.     [2]  JFhether 

or  no,  Gen.  8.  8.     [3]    ff'hen,   Judg.  21.  .21. 

John    12.   32.      It   denotes,   [ij    ^   condition, 

Deut.  28.  15.  Luke  9.  23.     [2]  Jl  supposition, 

Rom.  4.  2.  1  Pet.  3.  17.     [3]  A  Teason  of  a 

matter,  Eph.  4.  21. 

Oen.  25.  22.  she  said,  (/"it  beso,  why  am  I  thus 

31.8.  j/ he  said  thus  ||  34. 15.  if  ye  will  be  as  we  be 

43.  11.  t/it  must  beso  now,  take  of  the  best  fruits 

^■0.9*.  14.  12.  if  so  be  the  Lord  will  be  with  me 

1  Sam.  14.  it.  if  they  say  to  us,  tarry  till  we  come 
20.  7.  if  he  say  thus,  it  is  well,  2  Sam.  15.  26. 

2  fCiniTsl.4.  (/ we  say,  </ we  sit  here,  1/ they  kill  us 
10. 6.  if  ye  b'l  mine,  if  ye  will  hearken  to  my  voice 

/ab  9.29.  if  I  be  wicked, lO.l.").]!  24.25.i/it  be  not  so 
Psal.  7.  3.  if  I  have  done  this,  if  there  be  iniquity 
Jer.l'l.  18.!/ they  be  prophets,  1/ the  word  of  Lord 

51.8.  take  balm  for  her  pain,  i/so  be  may  be  heal. 
Dan.  3. 17.  if  it  bo  so,  our  God  is  able  to  deliver  us 

4.  27.  if\\  may  be  a  lengthening  of  thy  tranquillity 

Wos.8.7.  if  in  be  it  yield,  strangers  shall  swall.  it  up 

Mat.\.'i.  if  thou  be  the  Son  of  God, command  that 

these  stones  he  made  bread,  27.  40.  Uuke  4.  3. 

14. 28.  if  ii  bo  thou,  bid  mo  come  to  thee  on  water 
27.  43.  Ii!t  him  deliver  him,  1/ he  will  have  him 

Mark  1.40.  i/ihuu  wilt,  thou  canst  make  me  clean 

11.  32.  if  we  Khali  savof  men,  they  feared  people 
/.u&e2.3.  35.  i/he  be  Christ,  39.  John  10.  24. 
yoftn  1.2.1. 1/ thou  bfpot  Elias,  nor  that  prophet 

15.  18.  1/ the  world  hate  you,  1  John  3.  13. 

19. 12.  Jews  crii'd  out,  j/thou  let  this  man  go 
Jlctx  5.  39.  (/  it  bcof  (Jod  ye  cannot  overthrow  it 
1  Cor.  15. 19.// in  this  life  only  we  have  hope  in  Chr. 
(lot.  4.7.  if  n  aim,  then  anlicir  of  God  thro' Christ 
Phil.2.\.  if  any  consol.it  ion,  1/ any  comfort  of  love 
Neh.  3.  t  H./fthey  shall  enter  into  rest,  4.  3,  5. 
1  John  2.  19.  if  they  had  been  of  u.i,  they  would 

IF  not. 
Oen.  18.91.  i/nn«  T  will  know  ||  24.49.  ifn.  tell  me 
Kz»d.3-2.3^.  if  not,  blot  me,  I  pray,  oulof  thy  book 
./urf;f.9.15.i/n.lct  fire  come  oulof  the  bramble,  20. 
1  Sam.  2.  1(1.  and  if  not,  I  will  take  it  by  force 

6.0.  if  not,  then  we  shall  know  it  is  not  his  hand 
S  .Sam.  13,  20.  if  not,  1  pray  thef",  let  Arnnon  go 

17.  6.  shall  \vi-  do  aOer  his  say.?  if  not  spoak  thou 
S  ICingK  2   10,  but  if  not,  it  shall  not  bo  so 
Job  9,  24.  if  not,  wiicro,  and  who  is  ho  ? 

33.  33.  if  not,  hiark>ri  unto  me,  hold  thy  peace 
Dan.3. 18.  but  ;/no^bo  it  known  to  then,  O  king 
Zeeh.  11.  12.  give  me  my  price;  if  not,  forbear 
Luke  10.  6.  but  if  not,  it  shall  turn  to  you  again 

13.  9.  if  not,  after  that  thou  shalt  cut  it  down 
Se'  Wkhb. 
IF  note. 
Oen.lB.^.tfnow  I  h'lve  found  favour  in  thy  sight 

24.  42.  O  God,  if  now  ihou  do  prosper  my  way 
49.  if  now  you  will  deal  kimlly  with  mn 

33. 10. Jacob  said,  if  now  I  have  found  grace  in  thv 

sight,  47.  29.  F.Tod.  34.  9.  ./urf^.  6.  17. 

lQw.4.7.1/  n.  thou  did-il  rnreive  it,  why  dost  glory 

IGNOMI.NY. 

Pr»o.  18.  3  Cometh  cuntemut.aQd  with  t.  reproach 

904 


ISL 

IGNORANCE 

Signifies,  [1]  fVant  of  the  true  knowledge  of  Ood 
and  of  heavenly  things,  Eph.  4.  18.     [2]    Un- 
belief, which  follows  ignorance,  1  Pet.  1.  14. 
[3]  Error,  imprudence,  or  surprise,  Lev.  4.  3, 
13.     [4]  Idolatry,  AcU  17.  30. 
/,e».4.2.  ifa  soul  shall  sin  thro'  i.  against  anv  com- 
mandment, 5.  15.  JVum.  15.  24,  27,  28,  29. 
13.  the  whole  congregation  of  Israel  sin  thro'  i. 
22.  when  a  ruler  hath  done  somewhat  thro'  i. 
27.  if  any  of  the  common  people  sin  thro'  j. 
J^um.  15.  25.  it  shall  be  forgiven  them,  for  it  ii  j. 
Jicts  3.17. 1  wot  that  thro'i.  yedid  it  as  your  rulers 
17.  30.  and  the  times  if  this  t.  God  winked  at 
F/)A.1.18.boing  alienated  thro'  the  i.that  is  in  them 
1  Pet.  1. 14.  according  to  the  former  lusts  in  your  i. 
2. 15.  that  ye  may  put  to  silence  i.  of  foolish  men 

IGNORANT 
Signifies,  [1]  One  tAa(  wants  understandinrr,  Isa 

06.  10.  [2]  One  that  is  not  in  a  capacity  to 
know  one's  condition, or  deliver  from  troubles, 
laa.  63.  10.  [3]  fVithout  the  knowledge  of  the 
true  God,  Acts  17.  23.  [4J  One  sinning  un 
wittingly,  not  knowing  that  the  Christianrcli 
gion  was  the  true  religion,  1  Tim.  1.  13.  [5] 
Onethat  hasnot  been  trained  up  in  schoolsof  po- 
lite learning,  nor  attained  his  knowledge  by  the 
ordinary  way  of  learning  it  from  men.  Acta  4. 
13.  [0]  One  not  rightly  conceiving  or  appre- 
hending, Rom.  10.  3.  [7]  One  that  sinnclh  for 
want  of  the  knowledge  of  his  duty, and  through 
inconsideration,  Heb.  5.  2. 

Psal.  73. 22.  so  foolish  was  I  and  i.  I  was  as  a  beast 

fsa.  56.  10.  they  are  all  t.  they  are  all  dumb  dogs 

63.16. thou  art  our  father,iho'  Abraham  be  i.  of  us 

.^cts  4.  13.  and  perceived  that  they  were  i.  men 

Rom.  1. 13.  now  I  would  not  have  you  i.  brethren, 

1  Cor.  10.  1.  I  12.  I.  2 Cor.  1.8.  1  Thess.  4.  13. 

10.3. they  being!.  ofGod's  righteous,  going  about 

11.25.  that  ye  should  be  i.  of  this  mystery 

1  Cor.  14.  38.  if  any  man  be  i.  let  him  he  i. 

2  Cor.  2.  11.  for  we  are  not  t.  of  Satan's  devices 
Ucb.  5.  2.  who  can  have  compassion  on  the  i. 

2  Pet.  3.  5.  for  this  they  are  willingly  j.  of 

8.  but,  beloved,  be  not  i.  of  this  one  thing 

IGNORANTLY. 
.Vum.l5.28.prie8ls  atone  for  the  soul  that  sinneth !. 
Deut.  19.  4.  the  case, whoso  killeth  his  neighbour  i. 
.^cts  17.23.  whom  therefore  ye  i.  worship  1  declare 
1  Tim.  1.13.  had  mercy,  because  Idid  it  i.  in  unbel. 

ISLAND. 
.fob  22.  30.  he  shall  deliver  the  1.  of  the  innocent 
/sa. 34.  14.  shall  meet  with  the  wild  beastsof  the  i. 
yjcts  27. 16.  and  running  under  a  certain  i.  Clauda 
26.  howbeit,  we  must  be  cast  on  a  certain  i. 
28.  1.  they  knew  that  the  1.  was  called  Melita 

7.  were  possessions  of  the  chief  man  of  the  i. 

9.  others  who  had  diseases  in  the  i.  were  healed 
Re.B.  6.  14.  every  i.  was  moved  out  of  its  place 

16.20.  every  j.  fled  awav,  mountains  not  found 

ISLANDS. 
/.ta.Un. to  receive  his  people  from  the  i.ofihe  sea 
13,22.  wild  beasts  of  the  ;.  shall  cry  in  their  houses 

41.  1.  keep  silence  before  mo  O  i.  and  let  people 

42.  12.  and  declare  the  Lord's  praise  in  the  j. 
1.5.  I  will  ms,ko  the  rivers  !.  and  dry  up  the  pools 

.59. 18.  to  the  i.  he  will  repay  recompcnco 
.hr.  50.  39.  wild  beasts  of  the  i.  shall  dwell  there 

ISLE. 
/.<ia.  20.  6.  the  inhabitants  of  the  i.  say  in  that  day 

23.  2.  be  still,  ye  inhabitants  of  the  i. 

G.  piissover  to  Tarsliish,  howl,  inhabitants  of  i. 
.^cts  13.6.  they  had  gone  thro'  the  i.  to  Paplios 

28.  11.  in  a  ship  which  hnd  wintered  in  the  i. 
Hev.  1.9. 1  John  was  in  ihet.  that  is  called  Patmos 

ISLES. 
frcn.lO.S.by  these  were  the  I'.of  iheGcntiles  divided 
F.^th.  10.  1.  .Ahasuerus  laid  a  tribute  on  the  1. 
Psiil.  72.  10.  the  kings  of  the/,  shall  bring  pre  sonts 

97. 1.  let  the  multitude  of  the  i.  be  glad  thereof 
hn.  24.  15.  glorify  yc  the  Lord  in  the  i.  of  the  sea 

4(1.  15.  ho  taketh  up  the  i.  as  a  very  little  thing 

41.5.  the  I.  saw  it  and  feared,  thecndsof  the  earth 

42.  4.  and  the  1.  shrill  wait  for  his  law 

10.  the  I.  and  the  inhabit,  thereof  sing  his  prniso 
49.  1.  listen,  O  1.  unto  me,  and  hearken  ye  peofile 
51.  5.  the  I.  shall  wail  upon  me  and  trust,  60.  9. 
66. 19.  the  I.  afar  off  that  have  not  heard  my  fame 

.ler.  2.  10.  for  pass  over  the  1.  of  Cliiltim,  ond  see 
25.22.  the  kings  of  the  i.  shall  drink  aOor  them 
31.  10.  hoar  and  declare  it  in  the  «'.  afar  off 

K:fA.20.  IS.shall  not  1.  shake  at  sound  of  thy  fall? 

M.  ihn  I.  trembled,  the  t.  shall  be  troubled 
27.3.  who  art  a  merchant  of  the  people  for  many  1. 

6.  benches  of  ivory,  broucht  out  of  i.  of  Chittim 

7.  blue  and  purple  from  the  i,  of  Klisha 

l,!.  manv  i.  were  the  merrhandise  of  thy  hand 

3.').inhabitantsofth<'  i  shall  bo  astonished  at  then 

39.  fi.  among  them  that  ilwoll  carelessly  in  the  1'. 

Dan.  11.18.  after  this  he  shall  turn  his  face  tollie  i. 


IMA 

Zeph.  2. 11.  men  shall  worship  him,  every  ant 
from  his  place,  even  all  the  1.  of  the  beatheu 
ILL. 
<7fn.41.3.  kinecame  up  j.-favoured,  4,  19,20,21. 
43.6.  why  dealt  ye  so  t.  with  me  as  to  tell  iht  mani 
Deut.Vi.il.  hath  any  i.  blemish  thou  slialt  not  offer 
Job  20.  26.  it  shall  go  i.  with  him  that  is  letl 
Psal.  106. 32.  it  went  i.  with  Moses  for  their  sakes 
ha.  3.  11.  woe  to  the  wicked,  it  shall  be  1.  with  him 
Jer.  40. 4.  if  it  seem  t.  to  thee  to  conic  with  me 
./oel  2.  20.  his  stink  and  his  i.  savour  shiill  come  up 
JV/ic.3.4.  they  behaved  themselves  i.  in  their  doings 
Rom.  13.  10.  love  worketh  no  1.  to  his  neighbour 

IhL  favouredness. 
Z)eut.l7.1.not  sacrifice  goat  wherein  i.-favouredn. 

ILLUMINATED. 
/^e4.10.32.  after  ye  were  t.  ye  endured  a  sreat  fight 

IMAGE  *  * 

Signifies,  [l].'Jrfprf«fnta(ion  orlikenes.i  ofaper- 
son  or  thing,  1  Sam.  19.  13.  Mat.  22.  20. 
[2]  Jiny  shape  or  picture  representing  God,  or 
any  creature,  7nade  for  the  sake  of  divine  wor- 
ship, Exod.  20.  4.  [3]  Our  resemblance  of 
God  in  righteousness  and  holiness,  Gen.  1.26. 
[4]  Our  likeness  to  God  in  respect  of  dominion 
and  power,  1  Cor.  11.  7.  [5]  ^n  essential, 
substantial,  real,  and  adequate  resemblance  of 
the  person  of  another,  Col.  1.  15.  Heb.  1.  3. 
It  is  taken,  [1]  Essentially,  as  Christ  is  the 
image  of  his  Father,  Heb.  1.  3.  [2]  Jlcciden- 
tally,or  respecting  qualities,spiritunl  andhea- 
ceniy,  Gen.  1.26.  27.  [3]  Ezielentially,  for  the 
Sttbstanci  of  the  things  whereof  tiny  be  images, 
1  Cor.  15.  49.  Hob.  10.  1.  [4]  Mystically, 
Rev.  13.  14,  15.  I  14.  9,  11.  [5]  Representa- 
tively, 1  Cor.  11.  7.  [6]  Civilly,  Mat.  22.  2a 
[7]  Imaginarily,  as  in  apparitions.  Job  4.  16. 
[a\Figuratively,for  the  transitory  felicity  and 
glory  of  the  wicked,  Psal.  73.  20.  [9]  Idola 
trously,  2  Kings  17.  10,  16. 
Ge7i.  1.  26.  let  us  make  man  in  our  »'.  27.  |  9.  6. 
5.  3.  Adam  begat  a  son  in  his  own  1.  after  his  i 
I.ev.^S.  1.  nor  rear  up  a  standing  1.  /)eut.  16.  22. 

1  .Sam.  19. 13.  Michael  took  an  i.  and  laid  it  in  bed 

16.  behold  there  was  an  i.  in  the  bed  with  pillow 

2  Kinifs  3.  2.  for  Jehoram  put  away  the  i.  of  B-aal 
10.27.  they  brake  down  the  i.  and  house  of  Baal 

2  CAr.  .13. 7.  Manasseh  set  carved  i.  in  house  of  G. 
.fob  4.  16.  an  j.  was  before  mine  eyes,  was  silence 
Psal.  39.  t  6.  surely  every  man  walketli  in  an  i. 

73.  20.  when  thou  awakest,  shalt  de,<pise  their  i. 
F.zek.8.  3.  there  was  the  seat  of  the  i.  of  jealousy,  5. 
fjan.  2.  31.  behold,  a  great  i.  slood  before  thee 
35.  stone  that  smote  i.  became  a  great  mountain 

3.1.  Nebuchadnezzar  the  king  made  an  i.  of  gold 
5.  full  down  and  worship  the  golden  1.  10,  15. 
Hos.  3.  4.  Isr.  shall  abide  manv  days  w  iihout  on  t. 
Jl/nt.22.20.whose  is  this  i.?.MttVA12.16./,u*rt!0.24. 
Jlcts  19.  35.  of  the  t.  which  fell  down  from  Jupiter 
Rom.  1.  23.  and  changed  the  glory  of  G.  into  an  1. 

8.  29.  to  be  conformed  to  the  1.  of  his  Son 

11.4.  who  have  not  bowed  the  knee  to  1.  of  Baal 
ICor.  11.7.  forasmuch  as  he  is  tbei.  anil  glory  ofG. 

15.  49.  and  as  we  have  borne  the  1.  of  the  earthy 
2  Cor.3.  18.  and  changed  into  the  same  I'.fnim  glory 

4.  4.  of  Christ,  who  is  the  i.  of  God,  Col.  1.  15. 
Coi.  3.  10.  after  the  i.  of  him  that  created  him 
Heb.  1.  3.  by  his  Son,  the  e.\pres9  1.  of  his  person 
10.  1.  a  shadow,  not  the  very  i.  of  the  things 
Rev.  13.14.  that  they  should  make  an  1.  to  the  beast 
15.  had  power  to  give  life  unto  the  i.  of  the  beast 
14.9.  if  any  man  worship  llie  beast  and  his  1. 
11. they  have  no  rest,  who  worsh.  beast  and  his  1. 
15.2.  that  have  gotten  victory  over  beast  and  his  i. 

16.  2.  grievous  sore  fell  on  them  that  worship  i. 
19.  20.  lie  deceived  them  that  worshipped  his  1. 
20.4. who  had  not  worshipped  the  beast  nor  his  1. 

See  Gr.^ven. 

IMAGE-WORK. 

2CAron.  3.  10.  he  made  two  rherubims  ofi.-ieonk 

Molten  IMAGE. 
Dent.  9.  12.  they  have  made  them  a  molten  i. 
./udfT. 17. 3. the  silver  for  my  son  to  make  n  molten  i. 
P*"?/. 106. 19.  made  a  cnlfand  worshipped  molten  i. 
Jer.  10.  14.  for  h\»mallen  i.  is  falsehood,  51.  17. 
flab.  2. 18.  what  profititli  the  graven  and  molten  I. 

IMAGES. 
Gen.  31.  19.  Rachel  had  stolen  her  father's  i.  .34. 

35.  Lnhnn  searched  but  found  not  the  1. 
F.iod.  23.24.  thou  shalt  overthrow  and  qniie  break 
down  their  t.  34.  13.  Deut.  7.  5.  JVM7n.:i3.  .52. 
/,c7i.2fi.30.I  will  rut  down  your  1.  and  cast  rnrrases 
lofim.fi.S.yeshall  make  I'.ofyouremerods  and  mica 
11.  they  laid  the  i.  of  their  cmerods  on  the  cart 
2.'>(7m. 5.21. there  they  left  their  i.  David  burnt  ihem 

1  Kin^s  14.  9.  hast  made  molien  1.  to  provoke  me 
23, they  also  build  thi  m  high  plare»,/.«nd  grovc» 

2  Kings   10.  26.  they  brought   i,  out  of  house  of 

Bnnl,  II.  18. 1,  brake  they  in  pieces,  18 
4.193.14. 


IMM 

I 

3  Kinffs  17. 10.  set  up  i.  ||  10.  they  made  molten  /. 

•j;!.  iJi.  Josiati  put  awiy  /.  tliat  were  sj>iod  in  laiiU 
2  Chroit.  14.  3.  and  Asa  broke  down  the  a.  5. 

a3.17.Jelioiadabiiili.c  i.  ||  31. 1.  He/.ekiali  brake  ;'. 

28.  2.  Aiiaz  made  also  molten  i.  for  ISualim 

3;?.  •2i.  lor  Anion  sacrificed  to  all  the  carved  «. 

34. 3.  Josiah  cut  down  the  carved  and  molten  i.  4. 
[au.  17.  8.  he  shall  not  look  to  grove*  or  i. 

37.  9.  llio  groves  and  i.  shall  not  stand  up 

30.  a.  ye  shall  delile  the  ornament  ofmoltdn  2. 
41.  2i).  their  molten  i.  are  wind  and  confusion 

Jer  43. 13.  lie  shall  break  the  i.  ol"  Heth-shomesli 
50.  2.  idols  confounded,  her!,  arc  broken  injiieccs 
fif/k.t).4. altars  desolate,and  your  i.shall  bo  broken 
6.  idols  broken,  and  that  your  i.  may  be  cut  down 
7.20.  but  they  made  the  t.  of  their  abominations 
It).  17.  taken  gold,  and  madest  to  thyself/,  of  men 
21.  21.  the  king  of  Babylon  consulted  with  /. 
43.  14.  tlie  (.  of  the  Chaldeans  pourtrayed 
30. 13.  I  will  cause  their  /.  to  cease  out  of  Noph 

Hos.lOA.  increas.  altars,  they  have  made  goodly  i. 
2.  shall  break  down  their  altars,  spoil  their  t. 
13.  2.  they  have  made  their  molten  i.  of  silver 

Amos  ,1.  2(i.  ye  have  borne  the  tabernacle  of  your  i. 

.Vic. .').  13.  tliy  graven  and  standing  i.  will  I  cut  off 
IMAGERY. 

Ezek.  S.  12.  every  man  in  the  chamber  of  his  «'. 
IMAGINE. 

Job  G.  26.  do  ye  i.  to  reprove  words  and  specclies? 
^.  27.  the  devices  ye  wrongfully  i.  against  me 

Pxal.  2.  ].  why  do  the  people  i.  a  vain  thing  ? 

38.12.  they  seek  my  hurt  and  i.  deceits  all  day  long 
()2.  3.  how  long  will  ye  i.  mischief  against  me  7 
140.  2.  which  i.  misch.  in  their  heart,  are  for  war 

Prow. 12.20.deceit  is  in  the  heart  of  them  that  i.evil 

Mos.  7.  15.  yet  do  they  i.  mischief  against  me 

JV'ah.  1.  9.  what  do  ye  t.  against  the  Lord  ? 

Zeclt.l.  10.  let  none  j. evil  against  neighbour, 8.17. 

Jicts  4.  25.  why  did  the  people  i.  vain  things? 
IMAGINATION 

Signifies,  [1]  The  first  ideas,  purposes,  and  mo- 
tions of  the  soul.  Gen.  fi.  5.  [2]  Stubbornness, 
Deut.  2y.  1 19.  Jet-  27.  t  17.  [3]  Corrupt  rca- 
soni7i;rs,  2  Cor.  10.  f '>. 

Oea.  6.  5.  every  t.of  his  heart  was  evil  continually 
8.  21.  the  i.  of  man's  heart  is  evil  fiom  hi,-;  youth 

Deut.  2;l.  10.  th  lugh  1  walk  in  the  i.  of  mine  Jieart 

31.  21.  for  I  know  their  ».  1  Chron.  28.  9. 

1  Chr.  20.  18.  keep  this  for  ever  in  the  i.  of  heart 

Jfr.i'i.n.  say  to  every  one  walketh  after  i.of  his  h. 

/  uke  1.51.  scattered  the  proud  in  i.  of  their  hearts 

IMAGINATIONS. 

1  CAr.2S.  0.  Ld.  understands  all  the  i.  of  thoughts 
/'sai.  81.112.  I  gave  them  up  to  the  hardness  of  j. 
I'rov.  6.  18.  a  heart  that  deviseth  wicked  i. 
I^am.  3.  60.  thou  hast  seen  all  their  i.  against  me 

61.  thou  hast  heard  all  their  i.  against  me 
/?om.l.2l.hutbecame  vain  intheiri.  heart  darken. 

2  Gir.  10.  5.  casting  down  t.  that  e.\alt  against  God 

4'ec  Hkart. 

IMAGINED. 

Gen.  11.  G.  nothing  restrained,  which  they  have  i. 

P»a/.  10.2.  let  thern  be  taken  in  devices  they  have  i. 

21.  II.  intended  evils,  they  t.  mischievous  device 

IMAGINETH. 
JVoA.l.  11.  there  is  one  that  i.  evil  airainst  the  Lord 
IMBALM,  <^e.     See  A.r^tr  E. 
IMMEDIATELY. 
Mat.  4.  22.  they  i.  left  the  ship  and  followed  him 
8.3.1.  his  leprosy  was  cleans.  JVfarAl.  42.  /,k.5.  13. 
20.  34. !.  received  sight,  Mark  10.  .52.  J.n.  18.  43. 
26.  74.  i.  the  cock  crew,  Lukc'22.  GO.  .hhn  18.  27. 
Mark  1. 12./.  the  Spirit  driveth  him  into  wilderness 
31.  he  lifled  her  up,  and  t.  the  fever  left  her 
4.  15.  Satan  cometh  i.  and  takoth  away  the  word 
17.  when  affliction  ariseth,  i.  they  are  oGended 
Lnke  1.  G4.  Zacharias,  his  mouth  was  openoil  i. 
G.49.t.itfeli  II 8.  44.1.  her  issue  of  blood  staunched 

13. 13.  i.  shi!  was  made  straight  and  glorified  God 
19.  II.  tha'  the  kingdom  of  God  should  i.  appear 

,fohn  5.  il.  and  i.  the  man  was  made  whole 
J]cts  0.  :t4.  Eneas  arose  i.  ||  10. 33.  I  sen'  i.  to  thee 
12.  23.  1.  the  angel  of  the  Lord  smote  him 
Ifi.  2G.  and  i.  all  the  doors  were  opened 
Oal.  1.  IG.  t.  I  conferred  not  with  flesh  and  blood 
Ree.  4.2.  and  i.  I  wai  in  the  Spirit,  and  behold 

IMMORTAL 
Signifies,  [1]  One  who  is  simpiv  and  everii  way 
incorruplilil",  without  possibility  of  perishinir 
or  dyin^,  1  Tim.  1. 17.  [2]  Thut  whieh  beinv 
once  dead  shall  rise  again,  nener  to  die  more, 
]  Cor.  15.  .53.  [3]  The.  consummate  glory  and 
eternal  blessedness  of  the  saints  in  heaven, 
Rom.  2.  7. 
I  Tin.  1. 17.  now  to  the  King  eternal,  t.  invisible 

IMMORTALITY. 
Rom.  2.  7  to  them  who  seek  for  i.  eternal  life 
1  Cor.  1.5.  53.  and  this  mortal  must  put  on  i". 
54.  when  thig  mortal  shall  have  put  on  i. 
1  Tim.  6. 10.  who  only  hath  i.  dwelling  in  tb«  light 
309 


INC 

'2  Tm.  1.10.  who  brought  i.  to  light  thro'  Ihe.gogpel 

IMMUTAULE. 
Hcb.  0.  18.  that  by  two  i.  things,  in  w  hich  it  was 

IMMUTAlULIir. 
i/6)6.0.17.tliei.otliiB  counsel,  confirm,  it  by  an  oath 

IMPART. 
/,«A-f3.]l.twocoats,lethini  i.tohim  that  hath  none 
Rom.  1. 11.  that  1  miiy  i.  to  you  some  siuritual  gift 

IMPARTED. 
.hb  39.  17.  nor  hath  he  i.  to  her  understanding 

1  'y'Aei«.2.8.we  were  willing  to  have  i.our  own  souli 

IMPEDIMENT. 
Mark  7.  32.  they  bring  one  that  had  i.  in  his  speech 

IMPENITENT. 
/i!om.2.5.thou, after  tliv  (.heart  treasurest  up  wrati 

IMPERIOUS. 
Kzek.  16.  30.  the  W(jrk  of  an  i.  whorish  woman 

IMPLACABLE. 
Rom.  1.31.  without  natural  affection,  i.  unmerciful 

IMPLEAD. 
^cts  19.38.  the  law  is  open,  let  them  i.  one  anotl 

IMPORTUNITY. 
Luke  1  l.S.because  of  his  I'.he  will  rise  and  give  him 

IMPOSE. 
Ezra  7.24. it  shall  not  lie  lawful  to  i"  toll  upon  them 

IMPOSED. 
//ei.O.lO.stood  only  in  carnal  ordinances  i.on  them 

IMPOSSIBLE. 
Mat.  17.  20.  and  nothing  shall  be  i.  unto  you 
19.  26.  with  men  is  i.  Murk  10.  27.  J.uke  18.  2 
I^uke  1. 37.  for  with  tJod  nothing  shall  be  1. 18.  27. 
17.  l.he  said,  it  is  t.  but  that  offences  will  conn 
Heb.G.i.it  is  i.  for  tho.se  who  were  once  enlightened 
18.  in  which  it  was  j.  for  G.  to  lie,  we  might  hav'e 
II.  0.  but  without  faith  it  isi.  to  please  God 

-   I.MPO'4;i5NT. 
.hhn  5.  3.  in  these  lay  a  great  multitude  of  i.  folk 
.■lets  4.  9.  of  the  good  deed  done  to  the  i.  man 
14.  8.  there  sat  a  man  at  Lysirai.  in  his  feet 

IMPOVERISH. 
.7er.  5.  17.  they  shall  »'.  thy  fenced  cities  thou  trust 

IMPOVERISHED. 
.Tudg.  G.G.  Isr.  was  greatly  ('.  because  of  Midianii' 
Psal.  106.  t  43.  they  were  i.  for  their  iniquity 
/.<a.40.20.he  that  is  so  i.  chooseth  a  tree  will  not  rot 
Jkfai.l.4.whei(a9  Edom  saith,  we  are i. but  will  re 
IMPRISONED.  [turn 

.^cts  22.  19.  thev  know  that  I  /.  and  beat  them 

IMPRISONMENT. 

Ezra  7.26.wliether  it  be  to  death,  banishment,  or  t. 

y/cA.  11.36.  others  had  trial  of  mockings,  bunds,  i. 

IMPRISONMENTS. 

2  Cor.  6.  5.  approvirg  ourselves  in  stripes,  in  t. 

IMPUDENT. 
Prov,  7.  13.  and  with  an  i.  face  she  said  to  him 
Ezek.  2.4.  lor  they  are  /.  children,  and  still-hearted 
3.  7.  the  house  of  Israel  are  i.  and  hard-hearted 

IMPUTE 
Signifies,  [I]  Freely  to  account  or  ascribe  to  a 
person  that  which  he  himself  hath  not,  nor  did 
not,  Rom.  4.  22.  [2]  To  laii  to  one's  chara-e, 
2  Sam.  19.  19.  [3]  '/'»  be  hdd  guilty.  Lev.  17. 
4.  [4]  To  suspect,  1  Sam.  22.  1.5. 

1  .Srtm.22.15.let  not  king  /.  any  thing  to  his  servant 

2  Sam.  19.  19.  let  not  my  lord  .i.  ini(|uity  to  me 
/iom.4.8.  blessed,  to  whom  the  Ld.  will  not  i.  sin 

I.MPUTED. 
Lev.  7. 18.  nor  shall  it  be  i.  to  him  that  offi'reth  it 
17.  4.  blood  shall  be  i.  to  that  man,  he  shed  blood 
Rom.  4.11.  thatrighteousn.  might  be  i.  to  them  a'so 
22.  therefore  it  was  i.  to  him  for  righteousness,  2). 
./am.  2.23.  Oat.  3.  t  0. 
24. for  us  also,  to  whom  it  shall  be  i.  if  wo  believe 
5.  13.  but  sin  is  not  i.  when  there  is  no  law 

IMPUTETH. 
Psal.  32. 2.  blessed,  to  whom  the  L.  i.  not  iniquity 
Rom.  4.6.  to  whom  G.  i.  righteousn. without  works 

IMPUTIN(;. 
Nah.  1.11.  he  shall  pa.ss  over,!. his  power  to  his  god 
2  Cor.  5. 19.  God  in  Christ  not  «'.  their  trespasses  to 

them 
IN 
Signifies,  [1]  Bifnr  through,  John  17.  10.  Gal.  3. 
8.     [2'|  Out  of,  Exod.  31.4.    [3]  JVith,  or  toge- 
ther with,  Mat.  16.27.  [4]  As,  Matthew  10.41. 
[5]  fYom,  Colossians  3.  16.     [0]  Brforc,  .lolin 
1.1.     [7]  {//(on,  .Tohn  14.  1.     [8]  .'J/?-^,  Mark 
13.  24.  compared  with  Mat.  24.  29. 
Gen.~.  Hi.  Noah  in  the  ark,  and  the  L.  shut  him  in 
.John  14.  10.  that  I  am  in  the  Father,  11,  20. 
See  JIiM,  We,  Tiir.K,  Them,  Us,  You. 
INASMUCH. 
Deut.  10.  6.  1.  as  he  hated  him  not  in  time  past 
Ruth^.  10. 1. as  thou  folio wedst  not  young  men 
.M^at.25.40.1.  as  have  done  it  to  one  ofleast  of  these 
45.  1.  as  ye  did  it  not  to  one  ofthelcast  of  these 
INCENSE 
Signifies,  [\]  A  rich  perfume  used  in  sacrifices, 
Exod.  37.  29.  [2]  The  mcritt  of  Christ's  death, 


Rev.  8.  3. 


sa 


INC 

KTorf.30.8.shall  burn  a  perpetual  i,  befoic  the  Lord 

y.ye  shall  oM'er  no  strange  i.thereun,  norsacrifice 

.'(7.  20.  he  made  the  pure  i.  of  sweet  sjiiccs 

40..5.8halt  Het  the  altar  of  gold  for  i.  beloic  the  ark 

Leo.  10.  I.  each  took  his  censer,  and  put  i.  thereon 

16.  13.  he  shall  put  t.  on  the  fire  belore  the  Lord 

Ji'um.  7.  14.  one  spoon  often  shekels  full  of  t.  86. 

16.  7.  put  1.  in  them  before  the  Ld.  to-monow,  17. 

35.  a  fire  consumed  the  250  men  that  ufieied  t. 

46.  Moses  said  to  Aaron,  put  on  I'.anrl  go  ijuickly 

47.  he  put  on  j.  and  made  an  atonem.  for  peopls 
l)eul.'i'i.\0.  they  shall  putt,  before  lhei',aiid  sacritj. 
2  Chron.  30.  14.  the  altars  of  i.  took  they  away 

34.  2.5.  forsaken  me,  and  burned  i.  to  other  gods 
Psal.  06.  15.  I  will  offer  to  thee  the  i.  of  rams 

141.  2.  let  my  prayer  be  set  forth  before  thee  as  t 
/.'>'(!.  1. 13.  no  oblations,  t.  is  an  abomination  to  ms 

43.  23.  1  liavo  not  wearied  thee  with  i. 

tiO.G.  shall  bring  gold  and  i.  and  shew  forth  praises 

f)5. 3.  sacrificeth  and  burnetii  i.  on  altars  of  brick 

66.  3.  he  that  burncth  i.  as  if  he  blessed  an  idol 
Jrr.  6.  20.  why  cometh  there  to  me  i.  from  Sheba  t 

II.  12.  and  crv  to  the  gods  to  whom  they  offer  t 
17.  to  provoke  me  to  anger,  in  offering  i.  to  Baal 

41. 5.  offerings  and  i.  in  their  hand  to  bring  them 

48.  35.  and  hiin  that  burncth  i.  to  his  gods 
Rzck.^a.  II.  and  a  thick  cloud  ofi.  went  up 

II).  18.  thou  hast  set  mine  oil  and  i.  before  them 

23.  41.  whereupon  thou  hast  set  mine  i.  and  oil 
Mai.  1. 11.  in  every  place  i.shall  be  offered  to  my 
/.uAcl.  10. people  were  praying  without  at  lime  ofi. 
Rev  5.t  8.  having  harps,  and  golden  vials  full  ofi. 

8.  3.  there  was  given  to  him  much  i.  to  oGer 

4.  the  smoke  of  thy  i.  ascended  uj)  before  God 

See  Altar,  Burn,  Burnt. 

Sweet  INCENSE. 

f:iOf/.2.5.6.  spices  for  siceet  i.  35.  8,  28.  JVum.  4.  16, 

31.  11.  to  make  oil  and  siccct  i.  for  the  holy  place 

39.  38.  they  brought  the  oil  and  sweet  i.  to  Mose* 
An;. 16.12.  Aaron  took  a  censer,  hands  full  ofsw.  i. 

INCENSED. 
Isa.  41. 11.  all  they  that  are  t.  ag.  thee  be  ashamed 

45.  34.  all  that  are  i.  ngainst  him  shall  be  ashamed 

INCHANTER. 
Deut.lS.W.  there  shall  not  be  found  an  z.or  a  witch 

INCIIANTERS. 
./«".  27.  9.  therefore  hearken  not  to  dreamers  nor  i, 

INCHANTMENTS. 
Exod.  7. 11.  magicians  did  so  with  2.22.  |  8.7, 18. 
/,rv.  19.  26.  nor  shall  ye  use  i.  nor  observe  times 
JV«7n.23.23.there  is  no  /.against  Jacob,  nor  divinat 

24. I.Balaam  went  not  to  seek  for  I'.but  set  his  face 
2  Kings  17.17.  Isr.  used  divinat.  and  /.  and  did  evil 

21.  6.  Mnnasseh  used  i.  2  Chron.  33.  6. 

Ecel.  10.  II.  surely  the  serpent  will  bite  without  f. 

fsa.  47.  9.  and  for  the  great  abundance  of  thine  i, 

12.  stand  now  with  thine  i.  and  thy  sorceries 

INCLINE. 

.fo.iA.  24. 23. 2.  your  heart  to  the  Lord  God  oflsrael 

1  Kings  8.58. that  he  may  j'.our  hea.  to  keep  his  law 

Psal.  78.  1 .  /.  your  ears  to  the  words  of  my  mouth 

1 10. 36.1. my  heart  unto  thy  testimoni.not  to  coven. 

141.  4.  i.  not  my  heart  to  any  evil  tiling 

.fee  Ear. 

INCLINED. 

Judg.  0.  3.  and  their  hearts  i.  lo  follow  Abimelech 

Psal.40.\   L.  1.  unto  me,  and  heard  my  cry,  116.  2. 

119.  1 12. 1  have  i.  mine  heart  to  perform  thy  slut. 

Pr»t>..5.13.nor  /.  mine  ear  to  them  who  ins'rurt.  ma 

.rer.  7.  24.  nor  i.  ear,  26.  |  11.8.  t  17.2).  1 .34. 14. 

25.4.  but  ye  have  not  ?.  vmr  ear,  35.  15. 1  44.  5. 

INCLINETH. 
ProD.  2.18.  her  house  i".  to  death,  and  patlistodcad 

INCLOSE. 
Conf.  8.9.  if  she  be  a  door,  we  willt.  her  with  cedar 

INCLOSED. 
Eiod.  39.  G.  (inyx-stone  ».  in  ouches  of  gold,  13. 
.fudrr.'iO.y.i.  I.-rael  /.  the  Benjamites  round  about 
P.«.17.10.they  are  i.  in  their  own  fat,si>e;ik  proudly 

22.  16.  the  assembly  of  the  wicked  have  i.  me 
Cant.  4.  12.  a  garden  i.  is  my  sister,  my  spou-e 
/.am.  3.  9.  he  hath  2.  my  ways  with  hewn  stone 
Luke  5.  6.  they /.  great  miiltit.  of  fishes,  net  braka 

INCLOSINGS. 
Exod.  28.  20.  stones  shnll  be  set  in  goldin  t.  39.13 

INCONTINENCY. 
I  Cor.  7.  5.  that  Hainn  tempt  you  not  for  your  i, 

INCONTINENT. 
iTim.  3. 3.  without  natural  affection,  i.  fierce 

INCORRUPTIBLE. 
Rom.  1.  23.  and  changed  the  glory  of  the  i.  God 
1  Cor.  9.  2.5.  we  do  it  to  obtain  an  i.  crown 
15.  .52.  and  the  dead  shall  bo  raised  t.  wo  changed 
I  PrM.4. begotten  us  to  an  inheritance/,  undefiled 
23.  being  born  of/,  peed,  bv  the  word  of  God 
INCORRUPTION. 
1  Cor.  15. 42.  il  is  sown  in  corrupt,  it  is  raised  in  i, 
50.  neither  doth  corruption  inherit  t. 

53.  for  tliia  corruptible  must  put  on  i. 

54.  lo  when  this  corruptible  shall  have  put  oiri. 


INC 

INCREASE 

Signifies,  [1]  The  profit  which  comcth  of  the 
earth  and  uf  cattle,  Ucut.  7.  13.  |  Xi.  13.  Prov. 
14.  4.  ["JJ  '/'«  i'roMj,  advance,  or  iiiipruue,  Ciil. 
1.  10.  1  Tliuss.  3.  1-2.  [3J  'Jo  be  uf  mure  es- 
teem and  authority,  Jolin  3.  30.  [4]  To  swel! 
up,  Gen.  7.  17.  [5J  I'o  recruit  or  reinforce, 
Judg.  y.  '29.  [6]  7'«  multiply,  1  Cliroii.  'J7.  'i3. 
[7]  To  aggravate  or  make  greater,  Kzra  10. 
lU.  [S]  To  strengthen  and  eiUarge,  Luke  17. 
5.  [9J  To  maUe  profitable  and  fruitful,  1  Cor. 
3.  6,  7. 

INCRE.\SE,  Substantive. 
Lev.  19.  25.  tlmt  il  may  yielil  yuu  the  i.  thereof 
2J.  7.  for  lliy  cattle  sliull  all  the  ('.thereof  be  meat 
30.  take  lliou  no  usury  ot'hiin  or  i.  but  fear  God 
37.  not  money  for  usury,  lenil  him  victuals  for  i. 
2ij.  4.  the  lanil  shall  yield  her  i.  and  trees  o.  field 
20.  your  land  shall  notyield  her «.  or  trees  oltield 
Jfu.ni.  IH.  30.  as  the  «'.  of  the  thresliing-floor 
32.14.  risen  up  in  father's  stead  an  i.  of  smful  men 
l)eut.~.l'.\.  I  will  also  bless  the  i.  of  thy  kine,  iW.4. 
U.-li.  thou  shall  truly  tithe  all  thez.  of  thy  seed 
2d.  shall  bring  forth  all  tithe  of  the  i.  same  year 
lU.  15.  the  Ld.  thy  G.  shall  bless  thee  in  all  thy  i. 
2cl.  18.  cursed  shall  be  the  i.  of  thy  kine,  51. 
\Sam.i.'Si.  J.  of  thy  house  shall  die  m  fiowcr  of  age 
JVcA.  0.37.  it  yieldeth  nnich  i.  to  the  kings  over  Uj 
Job  20.28. the  i.of  his  house  shall  depart,  and  goods 
31.  12.  it  is  a  fire  would  root  out  all  mine  i. 
Psal.  G7.(3.  earth  shall  yield  her  i.  and  God  bless  us 
78.  4b.  lie  gave  also  their  i.  to  the  caterpillar 
85.12.what  is  good,  and  our  land  shall  yield  her  i- 
Prov.  14.  4.  but  much  i.  is  by  the  strength  of  the  ox 
18.20.  and  willi  the  i.  of  his  lips  he  shall  be  filled 
F.ccl.5  10  shall  not  be  satisfied  with  e.this  is  vanity 
Jia.Sh  7.  of  the!,  of  liisgovernment  shall  be  no  end 
Jer.  2.3.  first-fruits  of  his  i.  was  holiness  to  the  L. 
ICiek.  18.  8.  not  usury,  nor  hath  taken  any  i.  17. 
13.  he  hath  given  on  usury,  and  taken  i.  22.  12. 
34.  27.  tree  yield  fruit,  and  earth  shall  yield  her  /. 
Zech.  8.  12.  and  the  ground  shall  give  her  j. 
1  Cor.  3.  6.  I  have  planted,  but  God  gave  the  i.  7. 
i^;;;4.4.16.maketli  i.  of  the  body  to  edifying  in  love 
CW.2.19.  all  the  body  inoreaseth  with  the  i.  of  God 

I\'CRE.\SE,  rerb. 
J.cv.  2.5. 16.  by  years  thou  shall  ('.  the  price  thereof 
Deal.  6. 3.  hear,  O  Israel,  that  ye  may  i.  mightily 
7.  22.  not  at  once,  lest  beasts  of  the  field  i.  on  ihee 
Judg.  9.29.  ho  said,  i.  thy  army,  and  come  out 

1  CAroR.27.  23.  he  would  t.  Israel  like  to  the  stars 
Kzra  lO.lO.taken  strange  wives  to  i.lrespass  of  Isr. 
Job  8.7.tho'  small,  yet  thy  lat.  end  should  greatly  i. 
}'.<:al.4i.  12.  dost  not  i.  thy  wealth  by  their  price 

t)2. 10.  if  riches  i.  set  not  your  heart  upon  them 
71.  21.  thou  shall  i.  my  greatness,  and  comfort 
73.  12.  who  prosper  in  the  world,  they  t.  in  riches 
115.  14.  the  Lord  shall  i.  you  more  and  more 
Prov.  1.  5.  a  wise  man  will  i.  learning,  9.  9. 
22. 16.  he  that  oppresseth  the  poor  to  t.  his  riches 
28.  28.  but  when  they  perish,  the  righteous  i. 
Kccl.o.ll.  goods  i.  they  arc  increased  that  eat  them 
G.  11.  there  be  many  things  that  i.  vanity 
Jsa.  29. 19.  the  meek  shall  i.  their  joy  in  the  Lord 
57.  9.  and  didst  *'.  thy  perfumes  and  didst  send 
Rzek.5.  16.  (  will  i.  the  famine  on  you  and  break 
36.  29.  1  will  i.  it,  and  lay  no  famine  on  yuu 
37.  I  will  i.  them  with  men  like  a  Hock 
Dan.  11.  39.  whom  ye  shall  i.  with  glory 
Nos.  4.  10.  they  commit  wlioriMlom,  and  shall  not  j. 
y.rxk.  10.  8.  tJicy  shall  i.  as  lliny  have  increaseil 
J^uke  17.  5.  the  apostles  said  to  Lord,  i.  our  faith 
.John  3.  30.  he  must  i.  but  I  must  decrease 

2  Cor.  9.  10.  and  i.  the  fruits  of  your  righteousness 
1  Thess.  3.  12.  the  Lord  make  you  to  i.  in  love 

4.  10.  we  beseech  you,  that  ye  i.  more  and  more 
iTim.  2.  16.  thev  will  i.  to  more  ungodliness 

INCREASED. 
Gen.  7.  17.  the  waters  t.  and  bare  up  the  ark,  18. 

30.  30.  it  was  little  thou  hadst,  and  ills  now  i. 
43.  Jacob  J.  II  F.iod.  1.  7.  Israel  i.  abundanllv 
Eiod.  2.3.  311.  till  thou  be  )'.  and  inherit  the  land 
1  Sam.  14.  I'.l.  tin:  noise  in  the  host  went  on  andt. 
^Sam.  15.  12.  the  people  i.  with  Absalom 
1  Jrin^s2'2.:i'i.the  battle  «'.  that  day,  2  Chr.  18.  34. 
1  Chron.A.  3-'.  the  house  of  their  fathers  i.  greatly 
SiraM.  6.  for  our  ini(nillics  are  i.  over  our  head 
Psal.  3.  1.  how  arc  they  i.  thai  trouble  mo 

4.  7.  in  the  time  ihal  their  corn  and  wine  i. 
49.  16.  when  ilio  g'ory  of  his  house  is  i. 
105.  24.  anil  he  i.  his  peoiile  (jreatly 

Proo.  9.  11.  the  years  oftliy  life  Hhall  bo  I. 
Keel.  2.  9.  I  I.  more  than  all  before  mo 

5.  II.  gooils  inrreaso,  they  are  i.  that  eat  them 
7*0.9.  3.  mnllipled  :  In- nation,  and  not  t.  the  joy 

26.  15.  thou  ha-l  i.  the  nation,  O  Ixird 
Jtr.  ft.  G.  and  their  harkslidings  are  t. 
I5.8.their  widows  n<  e  I'.abovo  the  sand  of  the  seas 
S9.  C.  take?  wives,  that  ye  may  be  i.  there 
30. 14.  wounded  ilioe,  bi^rauso  Uijr  iin«  were  1. 15. 
308 


IND 

/.am.  2.  5.  hath  t.  in  daughter  ofJudah  mourning 
Kzek.  16.  2l).  and  hast  i.  thy  whorudoiiis,  2:1.  14. 

28.  5.  by  tliy  great  wisdom  hast  thou  i.  lliy  riches 
JJan.  12.  4.  many  tun,  and  knowledge  shall  be  t. 
//us.  4.  7.  as  they  were  i.  so  they  sinned  against  me 

10.  1.  according  to  the  fruit,  he  halh  i.  the  altars 
Zech.  10.  8.  they  shall  increase,  as  they  have  i. 
wl/ur/t  4.8.othcr  did  yield  fruit,  that  sjirang  up  and  i. 
J^uke  2.  52.  Jesus  t.  in  wisdom  and  stature 
..ids  6.  7.  and  the  word  of  (jod  t.  and  the  number 

9.  22.  but  Saul  i.  the  more  In  strength 
16.  5.  the  churches  «.  in  number  daily 

2  Cor.  10.  15.  but  having  hope  when  your  faith  is  i. 
heo.  3.  17.  sayest,  I  am  rich,  and  i.  with  goods 

INCREASEST. 
./ob  10.  17.  and  i.  Ihioe  indignation  upon  mo 

INCfEASETH. 
.fob  10.  16.  my  atHiction  i.  |{  12.  23.  he  i.  nations 
l-'sal.  74.  23.  the  tumult  of  those  i.  continually 
I'roo.  11.  24.  there  is  that  scalterelh,  and  yet  j. 

23.  28.  she  i.  the  transgressors  among  men 

24.  5.  a  man  of  knowledge  t.  strength 

2*^.  8.  he  that  by  unjust  gain  i.  his  substance 
29.16.wheii  wicked  are  multiplied, transgression «'. 
Keel.  1.  18.  he  that  i.  knowledge,  i.  sorrow 
/.<rt.40.2D.to  them  that  have  no  might,  he  {.strength 
Hos.  12.  1.  he  daily  i.  lies  and  desolation 
Hub.  2.6.  woe  to  him  that  t.  that  which  is  not  his 
Col.  2.  19.  the  body  i.  with  the  increase  of  God 

l^  CREASING. 
Col.  1.  10.  and  i.  in  the  knowledge  of  God 

INCREDIBLE. 
jJcts  26. 8.  whv  thought  i.  God  shouUl  raise  dead  1 

INCURABLE. 
2  Chr.  21. 18.  Lord  smote  him  with  an  i.  disease 
./oh  34.  6.  my  wound  is  i.  without  transgression 
./(•r.  15.  18.  why  is  my  wound  i.  which  refuseth 
30.  12.  thy  bruise  is  i.  {|  15.  ihy  sorrow  is  (. 
J\lic.  1.  9.  for  her  wound  is  i.  it  is  come  to  Judah 

LNDEBTED. 
Luke  11.  4.  we  forgive  every  one  that  is  ;.  to  us 

INDEED. 
Gen.  17.  19.  Sarah  thy  wife  shall  bear  a  son  i. 

20.  12.  yet  i.  she  is  my  sister,  she  is  daughter 
37.  8.  shall  thou  i.  reign  over  us,  shall  thou  j.? 

10.  shall  1,  'by  mother  and  brethren  t.  come 
40.  15.  lor  I.  1  was  stolen  away  out  of  the  land 
Kiod.  19.  5.  if  you  will  obey  my  voice  z.  23.  22. 
y^ru.  10. 18.  ye  should  i.  have  eaten  il  in  holy  place 
JV«m.  12.2.  halh  the  Lord  i.  spoken  only  by  Moses? 

21.  2.  if  thou  wilt  i.  deliver  this  people 

22.  37.ani  I  not  able  i.  to  promote  thee  to  honour  ? 
I leut.  2. 15.  i.  the  hand  of  the  L.  was  against  them 

21.  10.  son  of  the  haled,  which  is;,  the  first-born 
Josh.  7.  20.  i.  I  have  sinned  against  the  Lord 
1  .Vum.  1.  11.  if  thou  wilt  i.  look  on  the  allliclion 

1  Kings  8.  27.  God  i.  dwell  on  earth,  2  Chr.  6.  18. 

2  King.s  14.  10.  thou  hast  i.  smitten  Edom 

1  Chron.  4.  10.  O  that  thou  w  ouldesl  hlcss  me  i. 
21.  17.  it  is  I  that  have  sinned  and  done  evil  i. 

.Job  19.  4.  and  bo  it  i.  that  1  have  erred 
Ks«/..58.1.  do  ye  /'.  speak  righteousness,  O  congreg. 
Isa.  6.  9.  hear  ye  i.  see  yei.  but  perceive  not 
.ler.  22.  4.  for  if  ye  do  this  thing  i.  then  kings 
Mat.  3.  U.  I  i.  baptize,  Mark  1.  8.  J.uke'i.  10. 
Mark  1 1.32.  men  counted  that  he  was  a  prophet  i. 
/,((/■(•  23.  41.  we  i.  justly  ||  24.  34.  Lord  is  risen  i. 
.John  1.  47.  behold  an  Israelite  i.  in  whom  no  guile 

4.  42.  that  this  is  i.  the  Christ,  the  Saviour 

0.  55.  my  flesh  is  meat  i.  my  blood  is  drink  i. 

7.2<i.do  lIio  rulers  know  i.  that  this  is  very  Chrisf! 

8.  31.  if  ye  continue,  then  are  ye  my  discijiles  i. 

3().  if  the  Son  make  you  free,  ye  sliull  be  free  i. 

J?c^<t  4.  10.  for  that  i.  a  notable  miracle  been  done 

/ioin.  8.  7.  not  subject  to  the  law,  neither  i.  can  be 

14.  20.  all  things  t.  are  pure,  but  it  is  evil  for  that 

2  Cor.  11.  1.  you  could  bear,  and  i.  bear  with  me 
I'hil.  1.  15.  some  i.  preach  Christ,  even  of  envy 

3.  1.  to  write  to  you  to  me  i.  is  not  grievous 
Col.  2. 2.3.  which  things  i.  have  a  shew  >)f  wisdom 
1  Thrsf.  4. 10. 1,  ye  do  il  toward  all  the  brethren 
1  Tim.  5.  3.  honour  widows  that  are  widows  i. 
.1.  she  Ihal  is  a  widow  /.  and  desolate,  16. 

1  Pet.  2.  4.  disallowed  j.  of  men,  but  chosen  of  God 

See  Emmjavoi'r. 
IN'DIGNATION 
Sienifies,  [1]  fVralh,  anger,  Neh.  4.  1.  Esth..").  9. 
[2]  F.nry,  Arts  5.  17.  [3]  The  judgments  of 
ff'od,  or  the  dreadful  rtferts  of  hi.i  anger,  Isa. 
20.20.  \4]  .Mrs.iages'of  trrnth,  Jer.  1.5.  17. 
[5]  .ri  hobj  displra.inre  against  one's  self  for 
sin,  nrcompauird  with  a  fear  of  falling  into 
templations,  so  as  lo  be  overcome  by  them,  2 
Cor.  7.  11. 

2  Kinns  3.  27.  there  was  great  i.  ugairst  Tsrnel 
.V'A.4.1.Siinballut  took  great  «.  mocked  the  Jews 
F.sih.Ti.S).  Ilamun  was  full  of  i.  .igiiinst  Mordecni 
Jolt  5.  t  2.  and  i.  slnyeth  ihe  silly  one 

10.  17.  and  incrensest  thine  i.  upon  me 
I'sal.Qi.  24.  pouiout  thy  i.  on  them,  and  let  anger 


INP 

Psal.  78. 49.  he  casi  on  them  wrath,  i.  and  trouble 
102.  10.  because  of  thine  i.  and  thy  wrath 

Isa.  10.  5.  and  the  stuff  in  tiieir  hand  is  mine  t. 
25.  for  yet  a  little  while,  and  the  i.  shall  cease 
13.  5.  Lord,  and  weapons  of  his  i.  Jer.  .50.  25. 
20.  20.  hide  thyself  till  the  j.  be  overjiast 
30.27.  his  lips  are  full  of  i.  his  tongue  as  fir* 

30.  with  the  4.  of  his  anger,  and  with  the  flam* 
34.  2.  for  llie  i.  of  the  Lord  is  on  all  nations 
66.  14.  i.  shall  be  know.n  toward  his  enemies 

Jer.  10. 10.  nations  shall  not  be  able  to  abide  hif  i. 

1.5.  17.  for  thou  hast  fdled  me  with  j. 
Aam.  2.  6.  halh  despised  in  i.  of  his  anger  the  king 
F.iek.  21.  31.  1  will  pour  out  mine  i.  upon  thee 

22.  24.  the  land  not  rained  on  in  the  day  of  i. 

31.  therefore  I  poured  out  mine  j.  on  them 
Dan.  11.30.  and  havej.  against  the  holy  covenant 
Mic.  7.  9.  I  will  bear  the  »'.  of  the  Lord 

Js'ah.  1.  6.  who  can  stand  before  his  i.1 
Hub.  3. 12.  thou  didst  march  through  the  land  in  i 
Zeeh.  1.  12.  thou  hatt  had  i.  these  seventy  years 
Mai.  1.  4.  people  against  whom  the  Lord  hath  i. 
Mat.  20. 24.  they  were  moved  with  j.  against  two 
2().  8.  they  had  i.  saying,  to  what  purpose  is  this 
l.ukc  13. 14.  ruler  of  synagogue  answered  with  i. 
Jicts  5.  17.  and  they  were  filled  with  i. 
Knm.  2.  8.  but  obey  unrighteousness,  i.  wrath 
2  Cor.  7.  11.  yea  what  i.!  yea  what  fear  I 
Heb.  10.  27.  a  fearful  looking  for  of  fiery  t. 
Rev.  14.  10.  poured  out  into  the  cup  ofhis  i. 

INDITING. 
Psal.  45. 1.  my  heart  is  i.  a  good  matter 

INDUSTRIOUS. 
IKings  11.28.  seeing  the  young  man  that  he  was  t. 

INEXCUSABLE. 
Rom.  2. 1.  therefore  thou  art  i.  O  man,  that  judgest 

INFALLIBLE. 
Jlcts  1.  3.  ho  shewed  himself  by  many  i.  proofs 

INFAMY. 
Prov.  25. 10.  and  thine  (.  turn  not  away 
F.iek.  36.  3.  and  ye  are  an  t.  of  the  people 

INFAMOUS. 
Ezek.  22.  5.  they  shall  mock  thee  which  arti. 
INFANT. 

1  Sam.  15.  3.  slay  man,  woman,  i.  and  suckling 
Isa.  65.  20.  shall  be  no  more  thence  an  i.  of  days 

INFANTS. 
.Job  3. 16.  or  as  i.  which  nover  saw  light 
Jfos.  13.  16.  their  i.  shall  be  dashed  in  pieces 
I^uke  18.  15.  and  they  brought  also  i.  to  him 

INFERIOR. 
.fob  12. 3.  understanding  I  am  not  i.  to  you,  13.  2. 
Dan.  2.  39.  shall  arise  another  kingdom  j.  to  thee 

2  Cor.  12. 13.  what  were  ye  i.  to  other  churches 
Heb.  2.  t  7.  madest  him  little  i.  to  the  angeJi 

INFIDEL. 
2  Cor.  6. 15.  hath  he  that  bclievcth  with  an  t. 

1  7  i'ln.  5.  8.  denied  faith,  and  is  worse  than  an  I. 

INFINITE. 
.fob  22.  5.  and  are  not  thine  iniquiiica  j'.? 
/'.■lal.  147.  5.  great  is  Lord,  his  understanding  is  » 
JVdA.  2.  t  9.  take  the  spoil  of  their  i.  store 
3.  9.  and  Egypt  were  her  strength,  and  it  was  »'. 

INFIRMITY 
Si"nifics,  [1]  .Sickness,  or  feebleness  of  body,  I 
Tim.  5.  23.     [21  .^J7f/cfinn.«,  rrproaehes,  and 
persecutions,  2  Cor.  12.  10.  [3]  f^piritnnl  weak- 
ness and  defects  in  grace,  Rom.  6.  19.  |  8.  26. 
[4]  Failings  and  mistakes,  either  through  i^ 
nornnee  or  weakness,  Rom.  15.  1. 
J.er.  12.  2.  the  days  of  separation  for  her  i. 
Psal.  77.  10.  I  said,  this  is  mine  j.  but  I  will 
Prov.  18.  M.the  spirit  of  a  man  will  sustain  his  i. 
J,nke  13.  11.  a  woman  which  had  a  spirit  ofi. 

12.  woman,  thou  art  loosed  from  thine  i. 
.Tohn  5.  5.  which  had  an  t.  thirty-eight  year« 
Rom.  fi.  19.  because  of  the  :.  of  your  flesh 
frnl.  4.  13.  ye  know  how  through  i.  I  prenrhrd 
fjch.  .5.  2.  for  he  himself  also  is  compiissed  with  • 
7.28.  the  law  mnketh  high-priests  which  have  i. 

INFIRMITIES. 
Mat.  8.  1".  himself  took  our  i.  and  bare  our 
J.uke  5.  15.  came  to  he  healed  by  him  of  iheir  ». 
7.21  in  tlmt  hour  he  cured  many  of  their  i.  8. 1. 
Horn.  8.  20.  the  Spirit  also  helpeth  our  ?. 
15.  I.  strcmg  ought  to  hear  the  i.  of  the  weak 

2  O.r.  II.  30.  of  the  things  which  cnnr.rn  mine  I. 
12.  5.  of  myself  I  glory  not,  but  in  mine  i.  9. 

10.  therefore  I  take  pleasure  in  mine  j. 

1  Tim.  5.  23.  use  a  little  wine  for  thine  often  i. 
Ileb.  4.  15.  bo  touched  With  the  feeling  of  our  i. 

INFLAME. 
Isa.  5.  11.  woo  to  those  conltnno  till  wino  i.  thflni 

INFLAMING. 
Isa.  57.  5.  i.  yourselves  with  idols  under  ovcrv  trat 

INFLAMMATION. 
I.er.  13.  28.  for  It  is  iin  i.  of  Ihe  burning 
Deut.  28. 22  ihe  Lord  shall  smite  thee  with  an  «. 
INFLICTED. 

2  Cor.  2.  6.  ounishmeni  which  was  t.  of  many 


INH 

INFLUENCES. 
Job  38.  31.  canst  thou  bind  the  i.  of  Pleiades  1 

INFOLDING. 
Eiek.  1.  4.  a  tire  t.  itself,  and  a  brightness 

INFORM. 
Deut.  17.  10.  according  to  all  that  they  i.  thee 

INFOKMEU. 

Dan.  9.  32.  i.  nie,  and  talked  with  me,  and  said 

j}ct5  21. 21.  arri  t.  of  thoe  that  thou  teacliest,  24. 

24. 1.  i.  the  governor  against  Paul,  25.  2,  15. 

INGATHERING. 

Exod.  23. 16.  feast  of  the  i.  in  tlio  end  of  the  year 

INGK.-^FTKU. 
Jtm.  1.21.  and  receive  with  meekness  the  t.  word 

INHABIT. 
A'unt.  35.  34.  delile  not  the  land  which  ye  shall  t. 
Frov.  10.  30  the  wicked  shall  not  i.  the  earth 
Isa.  42.  11.  the  villages  that  Kedar  doth  i. 
65.  21.  they  shall  build  houses  and  i.  them 
■  22.  they  shall  not  build,  and  another  i. 
Jcr.  17.  6.  but  shall  i.  the  i)arched  places 
48.  18.  thou  daughter,  that  dost  i.  Uibon 
Ezek.  33.  24.  they  that  i.  those  wastes  of  Israel 
^mos  9.  14.  shall  build  the  waste  cities  and  i.  them 
Zcph.  1.  13.  shall  build  houses,  but  not  i.  them 

INHABITANT. 
/sa.  5.  9.  many  houses  great  and  fair  without  i. 
6.  11.  till  the  cities  be  wasted  without  i. 

9.  9.  E|)hraim  and  the  i.  of  Samaria  shall  know 
12.  6.  cry  out  and  shout,  thou  i.  of  Zion 

20.  6.  the  i.  of  this  isle  shall  say  in  that  day 

24.  17.  the  pit  and  snare  are  on  thee,  O  t'.of earth 
Xl.  24.  the  J.  shall  not  say,  I  am  sick 
Jer.  2.  15.  his  cities  are  burned  without  i. 

4.  7.  thy  cities  shall  be  laid  waste  without  an  i. 

9.  11. 1  26.  9.  I  33.  10.  I  34.  22. 

10.  17.  gather  thv  wares,  O  i.  of  the  fortress 

21.  13.  i.  of  the  valley  ||  22.  23.  «.  of  Lebanon 
44.  22.  your  land  is  a  curse  without  an  i. 

46.  19.  waste  and  desolate,  without  i.  51.  29,  37. 

48.  19.  O  i.  of  Aroer  ||  43.  O  i.  of  Moab 

51.  35.  be  upon  Babylon,  shall  the  i.  of  Zion  say 
^mos  1.  5.  I  will  cut  oif  the  i.  from  plain  of  Aven 

8.  and  I  will  cut  off  the  »'.  from  Ashdod 
Mic.  1.  11.  pass  away  t.  of  Saphir,  i.  of  Zaanan 

12.  the  i.  of  Maroth  waited  carefully  for  good 

13.  O  thou  !.  of  Lachish,  bind  the  chariot 

15.  will  bring  an  heir  to  thee,  Oi.  of  Mareshah 
Zeph.  2.  5.  I  will  destroy,  that  there  shall  be  no  i. 
3. 6.  their  cities  destroyed,  so  Ihut  there  is  none  i. 

INHABITANTS. 
Gen.  19.  25.  he  overthrew  all  the  i.  of  the  cities 
Exod.  15. 14.  shall  take  hold  of  the  i.  of  Palestina 

15.  all  the  i.  of  Canaan  shall  melt  away 
hcv.  18.  25.  the  land  itself  vomiicth  out  her  i. 
25. 10.  shall  proclaim  liberty  to  all  the  i.  thereof 
fiTum.  13.  32.  is  a  land  thateateth  up  the  i.  thereof 
Devi.  13.  13.  have  withdrawn  the  i.  of  their  city 

15.  thou  shalt  surely  smite  the  i.  of  that  city 
Josh.  2.  24.  even  the  i.  of  the  country  do  faint 

11.  19.  that  made  peace,  save  the  i.  of  Gibeon 

17.  12.  could  not  drive  out  the  i.  .TuAg.  1.  19,27. 
Judg.'i.^i.  make  no  league  with  the  i.  of  this  land 

5.  7.  the  t.  of  the  villages  ceased  till  I  arose 
23.  curse  ye  bitterly  the  i.  thereof 

]0.  18.  be  head  over  all  the  i.  of  Gilead,  11.  8. 
21.  9.  werejiOnc  of  the  i.  of  Jabcsh-gilead  there 

10.  go  anAmite  the  i  of  Jabesh-gilead 
Huth  4.  4.  saying,  buy  it  before  the  i.  and  elders 
1  Kings  17.  1.  Elijah  who  was  of  the  i.  of  Gilead 
3  Kings  10.  26.  their  i.  were  of  small  power 

1  Chron.  9.  2.  first  j.  that  dwelt  in  their  possessions 

2  Chron.  20.23.  stood  against  the  i.  of  mount  Seir 
Job  26.  5.  arc  formed  from  under  the  i.  thereof 
Psa/.  33. 8.  all  the  i.  of  world  stand  in  awe  of  him 

14.  he  looketh  on  all  the  i.  of  the  earth 

49.  1.  hear  this,  give  ear,  all  ye  t.  of  the  world 
75.  3.  the  earth  and  all  the  i.  thereof  are  dissolved 

Isa.  10.  13.  put  down  the  i.  like  a  valiant  man 

18.  3.  all  ye  i.  of  the  world,  see  ye,  when  he 

23.  2.  be  still,  yo  t    of  the  isle,  thou  whom,  6. 

24.  1.  and  scattcreth  abroad  the  /.  thereof 

5.  the  earth  is  defiled  under  the  i.  thereof 

6.  therefore  the  i.  of  the  earth  are  burned 

26.  9.  the  i.  of  the  world  will  learn  righteousness 

18.  nor  have  the  i.  of  the  world  fallen 
38.11. behold  man  no  more  with  the*,  of  the  world 
40.  22.  the  i.  thereof  are  as  grasshopperrs 
42.  10.  i.sles  and  i.  sing  to  the  Lord  a  now  song 

11.  let  the  I.  of  the  rock  sing,  let  them  shout 
49.  19.  land  too  narrow  by  reason  of  the  i. 
Icr.  13.  13.  I  will  fill  the  i.  with  drunkenness 
]».  12.  thus  will  I  do  to  the  i.  thereof 

21.6.  I  will  smite  the?',  of  this  city,  man  and  beast 
23.  14  as  Sodom,  and  the/,  thereof  as  Gomorrah 

25.  29.  for  a  sword  upon  the  i.  thereof,  .50.  35. 

26.  15.  ye  shall  bring  innocent  blood  on  the  i. 

49.  8.  turn  bark,  dwell  deep,  O  i.  of  Dedan,  30. 

50.  34.  the  Lord  will  disquiet  the  i.  of  Babylon 

51.  35.  and  my  blood  upon  the  i.  of  Chaldea 

307 


INH 

Lam.  4. 12.  i.  of  the  world  would  not  have  believed 
Eick.  29.  6.  i.  of  Egypt  shall  know  I  am  the  Lord 
Dan.  4.  35.  i.  of  the  earth  are  reputed  as  nothing 
Mic.  6. 12.  the  i.  thereof  have  spoken  lies 

16.  that  I  should  make  the  !.  thereof  a  hissing 
Zech.  8. 20.  there  shall  come  the  i.  of  many  cities 

21.  the  i.  of  one  city  shall  go  to  another 

Rev.  17.2.  the  i.  of  the  earth  have  been  made  drunk 

.See  Jerusalem. 

INHABITANTS  of  the  Land. 

<7en.34.30.  to  make  me  to  stink  among  the  i.  of  I. 

Exod.  '■XS.  31.  I  will  deliv.  the  i.  of  I.  into  yourhand 

34.12.  lest  thou  make  a  coven,  with  i.  of  land,  15. 
JV«rti.32.17.  dwell  in  cities  because  of  the  i.  of  land 

33.52.  shall  drive  out  thei.  o/Z.55.  2  Chr.  2U.  7. 
JosA.  2.9.  all  the  i.  of  the  land  faint  because  of  you 

7.9.all  the  i.  of  land  shall  hear  of  it  and  environ 

y.24.  to  destioy  all  thei.  of  the  land  from  bef  you 
1  Sarrt.27.8.  these  nations  were  of  old  the  i.  of  land 

1  Chr.  22.  18.  he  hath  given  j.  of  I.  into  my  hand 
Jer.  1.  14.  an  evil  shall  break  forth  on  all  the  i.  of  I. 

10.  18.  behold,  I  will  tliiig  out  the  i.  of  I.  at  once 
47.  2.  men  shall  cry,  and  the  i.  of  I.  shall  howl 

Hos.  4. 1.  Lord  had  a  controversy  with  the  i.  of  I. 
Joel  2. 1.  let  all  the  i.  of  the  I.  tremble  for  the  day 
Zech.  11.  6.  for  I  will  no  more  pity  the  i.  of  the  I. 

INHABITED. 
Exod.  16.  35.  eat  manna,  till  they  came  to  a  land  j. 
Zye«.16.22.goat  bear  their  iniquities  to  a  land  not  i. 

2  Sam.  24.  t  6.  came  to  the  nether  land  newly  i. 
Isa.  13.  20.  it  shall  never  be  i.  nor  dwelt  in 

44.  26.  thou  shalt  be  i.  ||  45. 18.  formed  it  to  be  i. 

54.  3.  and  make  the  desolate  cities  to  be  i. 
Jer.  6.  8.  lest  I  make  thee  a  land  not  i. 

17.  6.  shall  inhabit  in  a  salt  land  and  not  i. 

22.  6.  1  will  make  thee  cities  which  are  not  i. 

46.26.  afterward  it  shall  be  j.  as  in  the  days  of  old 

50.  13.  it  shall  not  be  i.  |{  39.  no  more  i.  for  ever 
Ezek.  12.  20.  the  cities  that  are  i.shall  be  laid  waste 

26.  20.  when  I  shall  set  thee,  that  thou  be  not  i. 

29.  11.  nor  shall  it  be  i.  forty  years 

36.  10.  the  cities  shall  be  i.  and  the  wastes  builded 
38.  12.  upon  the  desolate  places  that  are  now  i 

Zech.  2. 4.  Jerusalem  be  i.  as  towns  without  wall 
9.  5.  from  Gaza,  and  Ashkelon  shall  not  be  i. 
12.  6.  Jerusalem  shall  be  i.  again  in  her  place 
14.  10.  it  shall  be  lifted  up,  and  j.  in  her  place 
11.  no  destruction,  but  Jerusa.  shall  be  safely  i. 
INHABITERS. 
Rev.  8. 13.  saying,  woe,  woe,  woe,  toi.  of  the  earth 
12.  12.  woe  1,0  the  i.  of  the  earth  and  of  the  sea 

INHABITEST. 
Psal.  22.  3.  O,  thou  thnLi.  the  praises  of  Israel 

INHABITETH. 
.7o615. 28.  he  dwellcth  in  houses  which  no  man  j. 
Isa.  57.15.  thus  saith  the  lofty  One  that  i.  eternity 

INHABITING. 
Psal.  74. 14.  be  meat  to  the  people  i.  the  wilderness 

INHERIT 

Signifies,  [1]  To  possess  by  right  of  inheritance 
or  succession,  Deut.  21.  16.     [2]  'J'o  subdue  by 
grace,  and  gain  to  the  church  of  Christ,  Psal 
82.  8.  Isi^.  .ft.  3.     [3]  To  come  into,  Luke  18 
18.  1  Cor.  6.  9.     [4]  To  be  led  away  with,  Jer. 
16.  19. 
Cfen.  15.  8.  whereby  shall  I  know  that  I  shall  i.  it  1 
Exod.  .32.  13.  and  they  shall  i.  it  for  ever 
JVvm.  18.  24.  I  have  given  it  to  the  Levites  to  i. 
26.  55.  accord,  to  the  names  of  tribes  they  shall  i. 
32.  19.  we  will  not  j.  on  yonder  side  Jordan 
Deut.  1.  38.  fo^  he  shall  cause  Israel  to  i.  it 
12.  10.  which  the  Lord  God  giveth  you  to  i. 
21.  16.  he  inaketh  his  sons  to  j.  what  he  hath 
Judg.  11.  2.  thou  shalt  not  i.  in  our  father's  house 
1  .Sam.  2.  8.  to  make  them  i.  the  throne  of  glory 
Psal.  25.  13.  and  his  seed  shall  i.  the  eartl? 

37.  9.  that  wait  on  the  Lord  shall  i".  the  earth 
11.  but  the  meek  shall  i.  the  earth,  Mat.  5.  5. 

22.  such  as  be  blessed  of  him  shall  i.  the  earth 
69.  36.  the  seed  also  of  his  servants  shall  i.  it 
82.  8.  arise,  O  God,  for  thou  shalt  i.  all  nations 

Prov.  3.  35.  the  wise  shall  i.  glory,  but  shame 
8.  21.  cause  those  who  love  me  to  i.  substance 

11.  29.  troubleth  his  own  house,  shall  i.  the  wind 

14.  18.  the  simple  i.  folly,  but  the  prudent 
Isa.  49.  8.  to  cause  to  j.  the  desolate  heritages 

54.  3.  and  thy  seed  shall  i.  the  Gentiles 

65.  9.  and  mine  elect  shall  i.  it,  and  my  servant* 
Jcr.  12.  14.  I  have  caused  my  people  Israel  to  »'. 

49.  1.  why  then  doth  their  king  i.  Gad  ? 
Eiek.  7.  t  24.  they  shall  i.  their  holy  places 

47.  14.  ye  shall  i.  it,  one  as  well  as  another 
Zech  2.  12.  the  Lord  shall  i.  Judah  his  portion 
Mat.  VJ.  29.  and  shall  j.  everlasting  life 

25.  34.  come,  i.  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you 
Mark  JO.  17. ;.  eternal  life,  Luke  10.  25. 1 18.  18. 
1  Cor.  6.  9.  unrighteous  not  t.  the  kingdom  of  God 
10.  neither  shall  extortioners  i.  Oal.  5.  21.  i 

15.  50.  ll'sh  and  blood  cannot  i.  the  kingdom  of | 

God,  nor  doth  corruption  i.  incorruplion, 


INH 

Neb.  6. 12.  who  through  faith  t.  the  promises 
1  Pet.  3.9.  are  called,  that  ye  should  i.  a  bles.^ing 
/i«B.21.7.  he  that  overcomelh  shall  i.  all  things 

INHERIT  land. 
Gen.  15.  7.  to  give  thee  this  land  to  i.  it 
28.  4.  that  thou  mayest  i.  land  wherein  a  stranger 
Lev.  20.  24.  1  have  said,  ye  shall  i.  their  land 
JVum.  34.  13.  this  is  the  land  ye  shall  i.  by  lot 
Deut.  2.  31.  possess,  that  thou  mayest  i.  his  land 

16.  20.  i.  the  land  the  Lord  giveth  thee,  19.  3. 
Psal.  37.  29.  the  righteous  shall  i.  the  land 

34.  and  he  shall  exalt  thee  to  >'.  the  land 
Isa.  60.  21.  they  shall  t.  the  land  for  ever 
i!,'ici.47.13.border,  whereby  ye  shall  i.  the  land 

INHERITANCE 
Signifies,  [1]  j?n  estate,  whether  come  by  succes- 
sion, or  donation.   Num.  20.  54.   Prov.  13.  22. 
[2]  Those  whom  God  chooseth  as  his  peculiar 
people,  Psal.  28.  9.  )  94.  14.     [3]  The  land  of 
Canaan,  Psal.  79.    1.      [4]  The  nations   that 
should  become  the  subjects  of  Christ's  king- 
dom, and  be  governed  and  saved  by  him,  Psal. 
2.  8.     [5]  The  kingdom  of  heaven,  1  Pet.  1.  4. 
[6]  Ucrtdilary,    Deut.  4.  20.     [71  Possession, 
Num.  34.  2. 
Gen.  31.  14.  is  there  any  portion  or  i.  for  us? 
48.  6.  after  the  name  of  their  brethren  in  their  i. 
Exod.  15.  17.  plant  them  in  mountain  of  thine  i. 
Lev.  25.  46.  for  ever  take  them  as  an  i.  for  ever 
jVum.  16.  14.  or  given  us  i.  of  fields  or  vineyards 

18.  20.  have  no  i.  for  I  am  thy  part  and  thine  i. 

27.  8.  shall  cause  his  i.  to  pass  to  his  daughters 
9.  i.  to  brethren  ||  10.  i.  to  father's  brethren 

32.  19.  our  i.  is  fallen  on  this  side,  32.  |  34.  15. 
'  34.  18.  take  one  prince,  to  divide  the  land  by  t, 

36.  3.  and  shall  be  put  to  the  j.  of  the  tribe,  4. 
9.  nor  i.  remove  from  one  tribe  to  another 

Deut.  4.  20.  a  people  of  i.  as  ye  are  this  day 
9.  26.  destroy  not  thine  i.  ||  29.  they  are  thy  t. 
32.9.  Jacob  IS  the  lot  of  his  j. 
./o.«A.  13.  14.  sacrifices  of  Lord  their  i.  18.  7. 
33.  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  was  their  i. 
14.  2.  by  lot  was  their  i.  Psal.  78.  55. 
14.  Hubrtm  thetefore  became  the  i.  of  Caleb 

17.  6.  daughters  of  Manasseh  had  i.  among  son* 
24.  28.  every  man  to  his  i.  .ludg.  2.  6.  |  21.  24. 

Judg.  21.  17.  must  be  an  i.  for  them  that  escaped 
Ruth  4.  6.  cannot  redeem  i.  lest  mar  mine  own  i. 

1  .Sam.  10.  1.  hath  anointed  thee  captain  over  his  i. 

20.  19.  iri.m  abiding  in  the  i.  of  the  Lord 

2  Sam.  20.  1.  nor  «.  in  son  of  Jesse,  1  Kings  12. 16. 

21.  3.  that  ye  may  bless  the  i.  of  the  Lord 

1  Kings  8.  51.  they  be  thy  people  and  thy  t.  5.3. 
21.  3.  gi^  ihe  i.  of  my  fathers  to  thee,  4. 

2  Kings  21. 14.  will  forsake  the  remnant  of  mine  i. 
1  Chron.  16.  18.  land  of  Canaan,  the  lot  of  your  »■ 
JVcA.  11.  20.  in  all  cities,  every  one  in  his  i. 

Job  31.  2.  what  i.  of  the  Almighty  from  on  high? 
Psal.  16.  5.  the  Lord  is  the  portion  of  mine  i. 

28.  9.  bless  thine  i.  ||  33.  12.  chosen  for  Jiis  i. 

37.  18.  and  their  i.  shall  be  for  ever 
47.  4.  he  shall  choose  our  i..for  us 

08.  9.  whereby  thou  didst  confirm  thine  t. 
74.  2.  the  rod  of  thine  t.  thou  ha^t  redeemed 
78.  62.  and  was  wroth  with  his  i. 

71.  he  brought  him  to  feed  Israel  his  j. 
70.  1.  O  God,  the  heathen  are  come  into  thine  i, 
94.  14.  not  cast  off,  neither  will  he  forsake  histt. 
10.5.  11.  the  land  of  Canaan,  the  lot  of  your  i. 
106.  5.  that  I  may  glory  with  thine  i. 

40.  insoiimch,  that  he  abhorred  his  own  j. 
Prov.  13.  22.  a  good  man  leavclh  an  i.  to  children 
17.  2.  t-hall  have  part  of  the  i.  among  the  brethren 

19.  14.  house  and  riches  are  the  i.  of  fathers 
20.21. an  ;'.  may  be  gotten  hastily  at  the  beginning 

Eccl.  7.  11.  wisdom  is  good  with  an  i. 
Isa.  19.  25.  bli'ssed  be  Israel  mine  i. 
47.  6.  I  have  polluted  mine  i.  ijnd  given  them 

03. 17.  for  thy  servants'  sake,  the  tribes  of  thine  2. 
.Jcr.  10.  16.  Israel  is  Ihe  rod  of  his  i.  51.  19. 

32.  8.  for  right  of  i.  is  thine,  redemption  is  thine 
Lam.  a.  2.  our  i.  is  turned  to  strangers,  our  hoiisea 
K:fA.30.12.shall  possess  thee,  thou  shalt  be  their  i. 

44.  28.  it  shall  be  unto  them  for  an  i.  I  am  their  i. 

46.  16.  the  i.  thereof  shall  be  his  son's,  17. 
18.  shall  not  take  of  the  people's  i.  by  oppression 

47.22.they  shall  have  i.  among  you  with  tribes,  23. 
Mat.  21.  38.  kill  him,  and  let  us  seize  on  his  : 
Mark  12. 7.  and  the  i.  shall  be  ours,  Luke  20.  14. 
Luke  12.  13.  speak,  that  he  divide  the  i.  with  me 
j?f f« 20. 32.  to  give  you  an  i.  amons  all  sanctified 

26.18.  and  i.  aniong  them  sanctified  by  faith  in  ma 
Gal.  3.  18.  if  the  i.  be  of  the  law,  it  is  no  more 
Eph,  1. 11.  in  whom  also  we  have  obtained  an  i. 

14.  which  is  the  earnest  of  our  i.  till  redemption 
18.  the  riches  of  the  glory  of  his  i.  in  Ihe  saint.^ 
.5.5.  halhanv  i.  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ  and  God 
Col.  1.  12.  lobe  partakers  of  the  i.  of  thesaintg 
3.  24.  and  ye  shall  receive  Ihe  rewiird  of  the  i. 
Ilei.  1.  4.  as  he  hath  by  »'.  obtained  a  name 


INI 

Meb.9.1^.  might  receive  the  promise  of  eternal  /. 
1  Pet.  1.  4.  begotlen  us  to  an  i.  iiicorruptibio 

For  INHEKITANCE. 
£rorf.'34.n.piir<lii!i  our  sin,  and  take  \isfor  thine  i. 
J^am.  18.  21.  all  the  tenth  in  Israel /or  an  i.  "JO. 
Um.  53.  the  land  Bliall  he  divided/or  an  i.  3i).  54.  { 

34.  i.  I  30.  2.  Vcul.  4.  i!l,:«.  |  15.  4.  | 

I'J.  10.    Josh.  13.  ti,  7,  3-J.  I  14.  1.  I  I'J. 

4a,  51.  y.ick.  45.  1.  I  47.  ii.  |  48.  '£i. 
Deut.  20. 1(3.  the  Lord  doth  give  iliee/iv  an  i.21. 

23.  I  24.  4.  I  25.  10.  |  2(i.  1.    .lush.  11. 

2.3.  I  13.  ().  I  14.  13.    1   Kiiiirs  8.  3G.  2 

Chron.  fi.  27.  ./er.  3.  18. 

1  CJIir.28.3.leuve  it /or  an  i.lbr  children,  Kzru  9.12. 
Psal.  2.^.  I  shall  give  thee  the  lieallnn  for  lliy  i. 
Ezck.  33.  24.  the  land  is  given  us  for  an  i. 

44. 28.  il  shall  he  to  ihem  fur  au  i.  I  am  their  in. 
47.  14.  this  land  shall  fall  unto  jou/ur  an  i 
Hcb.  11.  8.  wliicli  hcsiiould  after  riceive/or  an  i. 

jVu  or  none  INHEKITANCE. 
J^um.  18.  20.  thou  shall  have  no  i.  23,  24.  1 2G.  f,2. 
J)eut.  10.  y.  I  14. 27, 29. 1 18.  1, 2.  .huh. 
13.  14,  33.  I  14.  3. 

2  Chron.  )0.  It),  wc  have  no  i.  in  the  son  of  Jesse 
Jliits  7.  5.  and  he  gave  him  iioni^  i.  in  it 

I.NIIEUITANCES. 
Josh.  19.  51.  these  arc  the  i.  .Toeliua  divided  by  lot 

Kn'UEIUTEU. 
JVam.  32.  18.  wo  will  not  return  till  Israel  have  t. 
.Josh   14.  1.  children  of  Israel  ;.  in  land  of  Canaan 
I'xal.  105.  44.  rbey  i.  the  labour  of  the  |H;o(de 
Jer.  Ifi.  19.  surely  our  fathers  have  i.  lies 
i:zcU.  33.  24.  Abraham  was  one,  and  he  i.  the  land 
JJcb.  12.  17.  when  he  would  have  i.  the  blessing 

INIIERITETH. 
J^Tiiin.  35.  8.  according  to  his  inheriting  which  hei. 

INHERITOR. 
Isa.  05.  9.  out  of  Judali  an  i.  of  my  mountains 
Sie  Enjov,  Enjoin. 
IMUUITY 
G'gnifies,   [1]  Sill   and   wickedncis  in  several, 
Mat.   7.  23.     [2]   Original  corruption.    Psal. 
51.  5.     [3]  Puni.ihuien.t  for  sin,   Geri.   19.  15. 
Lev.  5  1. 
Oen.  15.  10.  the  t.  of  the  Amorites  is  not  yet  full 
19.  15.  list  then  be  consumed  in  the  /'.  of  the  city 
44.  10.  God  iialh  found  out  the  /.  of  thy  servants 
F.xod.  20.5.  visiiin?  the  /.  of  the  fathers  U|!on  the 
children,  34.  7.  J^um.  14.  18.   Deut.  5.  il. 
34.  7.  forgiving  /.  and  transgression,  JVum.  14. 18. 
J*,  go  amongst  us,  and  pardon  our  i.  and  our  sin 
Lee.  18.  25.  therefore  I  do  visit  the  i.  thereof 
J^'uin.  .5. 15.  an  offering  bringing  i.  to  remembrance 
31.  then  Khali  the  man  be  guiltless  IVo.ii  i. 

14.  19.  pardon,  I  pray  thee,  the  !.  of  this  people 
2.'!.  21.  he  h  itli  not  beheld  i.  in  Jacob,  nor  .seen 

J)ciit.  19.  15.  nor  rise  up  against  a  man  for  any  i. 

32.  4.  he  is  a  God  of  truth  and  without  i.  just 
Jo.'h.  22.  17.  is  the  t.  of  Peor  too  little  for  us  ? 

1  !?am.  3.  13.  judge  for  the  i.  which  he  knoweth 

14.  the*,  of  Eli's  house  >hall  not  be  purged 

15.  2.3.  and  stubbornness  is  as  i.  and  idolatry 
2!).  8.  if  there  be  in  me  t.  .stay  me  thyself 
25.  24.  upon  me  let  this  i.  be,  2  Sain.  14.  9. 

2  .Sirm.  14.  32.  if  there  bo  i.  in  me,  let  him  kill  mo 
19.  19.  let  not  my  lord  impute  j.  to  me 

21. 10.  to  take  away  /.  of  thy  sf-rvaiit,  1  Chr.  21.  8. 
2  CAr.  19.  7.  for  there  is  no  i.  with  Lord  our  God 
Jo'i  4.  8.  they  that  plow  i.  rca|)  the  siimo 
5.1'i.llie  poor  hath  hope, and  i.sloppolh  her  mouth 
6.  29.  return,  I  pray  you,  let  it  not  be  i.  retnri> 

30.  is  there/,  in  my  tongue'?  cannot  my  tnste 
11.  fi.  God  exactelh  less  than  thine  i.  deserveth 

14.  if/,  be  in  thy  hand,  put  it  far  away 
15.  .■>.  for  thy  moiiih  uttcreth  thine  »'. 

10.  filthy  is  man  which  drinketh  i.  like  wat'"r 
22.  23.  thou  shnit  put  awny  i.  far  from  Ihy  tabern. 
31.  11.  it  is  an  i.  Ipbe  punished  by  juil(;e«,  28. 

33.  9. 1  nro  innocent,  nor  is  there  ».  in  me 

34.  32.  in  have  done  i.  I  will  do  no  more 

30.  10.  he  conmand<'th  that  ih^'y  return  from  i. 

21.  lake  Ined,  r«anrd  not  i   for  this  hast  ehoseii 

5J3.  or  who  can  »av,  thou  hast  wrought  i.f 
Punt.  7.  3.  O  Lord,  if  there  he  i.  in  my  hands 

14.  bi'liold,  he  Iravailelh  with  i.  and  conceived 
10.  t  7.  under  his  tongue  is  mischief  and  i. 
32.2.  bh  sseil  to  whom  )he  Lord  impntcth  noti. 

5.  and  thou  forcavcst  the  i.  of  my  sin 
30.  3.  the  wnrU  of  his  month  are  i.  and  deceit 
30.  n.  when  Ihoii  do^t  correct  man  for  i. 
41.  fi.  his  hi-ari  galhcrelh  i.  to  i'S'df 

49.  5.  wh-^n  the  i.  of  my  heels  nhnll  compnso  me 
.^T.  5.  heliolil  I  was  slnipcn  in  i.  and  in  sin  tiuilher 
.S3.  1.  Ihny  are  cnrru(it,  nnrl  have  done  alioniin.  i. 
.Vi.  3  lliev  cast  i.  upon  me,  and  in  wrath  hnle  me 

50.  7.  slinll  Ihi'V  escape  hvi.7cnBl  down,  O  God 
60   18.  if  I  rcgnril  i.  in  my  hi'nrl,  Lord  not  hear  me 
P5.  2.  thiMi  htist  forgiven  the  i.  of  tliv  i"'nido 

94.  20.  ilirone  of  r.  have  ftllowsliii.  with  tho 
107.  43.  and  all  i.  (haO  stop  her  mouth 
M8 


LNI 

PiaM09.14.  let  the  i  of  his  fathers  be  remembered 
119.  3.  ihey  also  do  no  i.  they  walk  in  his  ways 
133.  let  not  any  i.  have  dominion  over  me 
12.5.  3.  lest  they  put  forth  their  hands  to  i. 

Prov.  16.  0.  by  mercy  and  truth  i.  is  purged 
19.  23.  the  mouth  of  the  wicked  devoureth  i. 
22.  8.  he  that  soweth  i.  shall  reap  vanity 

Keel.  3. 16.  place  of  righteousness  that  i.  was  there 

ha.  1.  4.  a  ]ieople  laden  with  i.  a  sei'd  of  evil  doers 

13.  it  is  I.  even  the  solemn  meeting 
5.  18.  woe  to  them  that  draw  i.  with  cords 
0.  7.  thine  i.  is  taken  away,  and  thy  sin  is  purged 
14.  21.  prep.ire  for  the  i.  of  their  fathers 
22.  14.  this  !.  shall  not  be  purged  from  you 
27.  9.  by  this  shall  the  j.  of  Jacob  he  purged 

29.  20.  and  all  that  watch  for  i.  are  cut  off 

30.  13.  this  J.  shall  be  loyou  as  a  breach 
40.  2.  cry  unto  her.  Iter  i.  is  pardoned 

53.  6.  the  Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  i.  of  us  all 
.57.  17.  for  the  i.  of  his  covetousness  was  I  wroth 
59.  3.  for  your  ling(>rs  are  defiled  with  i. 

4.  bring  forth  i.  \\  0.  iheir  works  are  works  of  I. 

7.  their  thoughts  are  thoughts  of  i.  wastuig 
64.  9.  be  not  wroth,  nor  remember  i.  for  ever 
Jir.  2.  5.  what  I.  have  your  fathers  found  in  me ? 

22.  thine  i.  is  marked  before  me,  saith  the  Lord 
3. 13.  oidy  acknowledge  thine  i.  tiiat  thou  hast 

13.  22.  for  the  greatness  of  thine  2.  are  thy  skirts 

14.  20.  we  ackiiowlodge  the  i.  of  our  fathers 
10.  10.  what  is  our  j.  |{  17.  t.  hid  from  mine  eyes 
30.  14.  for  multitude  of  thine  i.  15.   Jios.  9.  7. 

32.  18.  recompensest  t.  of  fathers  into  the  bosom 
50.  20.  the  (.  of  Israel  be  sought  for,  and  none 
51. 0.  flee  out  of  Babylon,  be  not  cut  off  in  her  t. 

Liint.  2.  14.  they  have  not  discovered  thine  j. 
4.  0.  for  the  jiunishment  of  the  i.  of  my  people 
22.  the  punishini'nt  of  thine  !.  is  aecomjilished, 
he  will  visit  thine  i.  O  daughter  of  Edoin 
Ezrk.  4.  4.  lay  i.  of  the  house  of  Israel  upon  it 
7.  13.  nor  strengthen  himself  in  the  i.  of  his  life 

9.  9.  the  i.  of  the  house  of  Israel  is  great 

10.  49.  this  was  the  i.  of  thy  sistor  Sodom 
18.  8.  that  halh  withdrawn  his  hand  from  «. 

17.  he  shall  not  die  for  the  i.  of  his  father 
30.  repent,  so  ».  shall  not  be  your  ruin 

21.  23.  he  will  call  to  nMiieinbrance  your  i.  24. 
2.5.  when  :'.  shall  have  an  end,  29.  |  35.  5. 
2-i.  15.  wast  perfect,  till  i.  was  found  in  thee 

18.  defiled  thy  sanctuaries  by  i.  of  thy  Irafiic 
44.  12.  caused  the  bouse  of  Israel  to  fall  into  j. 

Dan.  9.  24.  to  make  reconciliation  for  i. 

//o.v.  7.  1.  the  I.  of  Ephraim  was  discovered 
10.  9.  against  children  of  i.  ||  13.  ye  reaped  i. 
12.  8.  find  no  i.  in  me  ||  11.  is  there  i.  in  Gilead  l 
13. 12.  iho  i.  of  Ephiaini  is  bound  up,  his  sin  hid 

14.  1.  return,  for  thon  hast  fallen  by  thine  i. 
2.  take  away  all  t.  and  receive  us  graciously 

.W/f.  2.  1.  woe  to  them  that  devise  i.  on  tlieir  beds 
3.  10.  the\rf|iuild  up  Jerusalem  with  i. 

7.  ]f.  who  i^  u  God  like  to  thee,  that  pnrdonelh  i.? 
J  fall.  1.3.  why  dost  thou  shew  me  i.  and  cause  me 

13.  of  purer  eyes,  and  thou  canst  not  look  on  j. 
2.  12.  woe  to  him  that  estahl'slieih  a  f  ity  by  i. 
T.rpk.  3.  ,5.  the  pist  I>ord,  he  will  not  do  i. 

13.  tho  remnant  of  Israel  shall  not  do  i. 

ZcrA.  3.  4. 1  have  caused  thine  ;.  to  pa-s  from  thee 

9.  I  will  mnove  the  >.  of  that  hind  in  one  day 
.V(i/.2.0.  nml  I'.was  not  found  in  his  lips,  he  walked 
in  peace,  and  did  turn  many  away  from  i. 
Mnt.  13.  41.  Ihey  shall  •rather  them  which  ilo  i. 
23.  as.  within  ye  arc  full  of  hy;)Ol^isy  and  (.  | 

24.l2.b'>cause  i.  plinll  abound,  love  shall  wax  cold 
Jirts  1.  IS.  punhased  afield  with  llie  reward  of  i. 

8.  23.  ^I  perceive  thou  art  in  the  bond  of  r. 
Ilnm.  (UKT.  vour  nieinhirs  serviintsto  i.  unto  /. 

1  Cor.  lif.  O.'reioiceth  not  in  i.  bnl  in  Jhe  truth 
IThrsD.i.  7.  tiie  invsleryof  I.  doili  airr  ndy  work 
•iTim.'i.  19.  lh:it  namdh  Ghrist,  depart  from  i. 
Tit.  2.  14.  thai  he  niicht  redeem  us  from  all  i. 
Ifrh.  1.  9.  and  thou  liayt  hiile.l  i.  therefore  God 
.fani.  3.  0.  till,  tongue  is  a  fire,  a  wothi  of  i. 

See  Ukar,  Commit.  Committkd. 
His  IMdIJITV. 
jVum.  1.5.  31.  h-s  I.  shall  be  upon  him 
.fnsh.'H.  20.  that  man  perishid  not  alonr<  in  his  i. 
.7nh  20.  27.  the  heavens  slinll  reveal  his  i. 
21.  19.  God  lavitli  np  his  i.  0)r  his  children 
PsnI.  30.  2   until  Am  i.  he  found  to  bo  halefiil 
.f,r.31.30.  die  for  A.t.  P.irk.  3.  18,19.  |  7.  lfi.|18.26. 
F.zrk.  14.  7.  the  slumbhns  block  of  Ai>  i.  14. 

15.  IS.  even  he  shall  die  in  his  i.  33.  8,  9. 

33.  0.  be  is  taken  away  in  his  i.  but  his  blood 

2  ret.  2. 10.  Balaam  wns  r..t.til,.d  for  his  i. 

Jlfin*- INIQCITY. 
Cfn.  4.  1 13.  rninr  i.  is  preal'T  ihan  may  be  forsiv. 
1  ."Nom.  20.  1.  "  hal  ia  niinr  i.  anil  what  is  mv  sin  7 
;som.22.24.  Ikepllby-elffroojininci.  />.«.  18.  23. 
/ol,  7.  21.  why  dost  ihfoi  not  tiike  away  rninf  i.? 
10.  0.  thai  thou  impiiretl  n*ler  min<-  i. 

14.  thou  wilt  not  acquit  ma  from  miii«i 


INI 

,/oJ  I4.I7.seak:d  in  a  bag,  thou  scwcstup  mine  i. 
31.  33.  if  I  covered,  by  liiding  minci.  in  my  bosom 
P.-^al.  25.  11.  O  Lord,  pardon  mine  i.  for  it  is  great 

31.  10.  my  strength  laileth  because  of  mint  i. 

32.  5.  and  mine  i.  have  I  not  hid,  I  said 
38.16.for  I  will  declare  mine  i.  I  will  be  soiry  for 
51.  2.  wash  me  thoroughiv  from  viinei.  tleai'^e 

'/"AeirlMtiUITV. 
LcB.  20.  39.  left  of  you,  shall  pine  away  in  theif  i. 
40.if  they  confess  Iheir  i.  and  the  iniij.  of  fathers 
41.  accept  of  the  punishment  of  their  i.  43. 
.VtA.4.  5.  and  cover  not  their  i.  let  not  their  sin  bo 
Psal.  09.27.  add  iniquity  unto  their  i.  and  let  them 
78.38.  he  forgave  their  t.||89.32. 1  will  visit  tAeiri. 
94.23.  he  shall  bring  upon  them  their  i. 
100.  43.  the^  were  brought  low  for  their  i. 
Isa.  13.  11.  I  will  punish  the  wicked  for  their  i. 
20.21. to  punish  the  inhabitants  of  earth  IbrtAtir  j 

33.  24.  the  people  shall  be  Ibigiven  their  i. 
./cr.  14.  10.  he  will  now  reinendier  (Aeir  j.  ' 

16.  18.  and  first,  I  will  recompense  /A«ir  i. 

18.  23.  forgive  not  tAa'r  i.  nor  blot  out  their  sin 

25.  12.  and  I  will  punish  that  nation  for  their  i. 

31.  34.  all  know  me,  for  I  will  forgive  their  i. 
33.  8.  I  will  cleanse  thein  from  all  their  i. 

36.  3.  that  I  may  forgive  their  i.  and  sin 
31.  I  will  punish  his  servants  for  their  i. 

Kirk.  4.  5. 1  have  laid  on  thee  the  years  of  their  i. 

17.  they  may  consume  away  for  their  i. 
7.  19.  the  stumbling-block  of<Adir  i.  14.  3. 
14.  10.  they  shall  bear  the  punishment  of  tArir  i. 

29.  10.  wliich  bringeth  their  i.  to  remend>rance 

30.  23.  Israel  went  into  captivity  for  their  i. 
Hos.  4.  8.  and  they  set  their  heart  on  <Acir  i. 

5.  5.  shall  Israel  and  Ephraim  fall  in  their  i. 

9.  9.  he  will  remember  their  i.  he  will  visit  sins 

y/ork  INiaUITY. 
rsaM4I.4.  to  practise  works  with  men  lliat  uorki. 
Isa.  3].  2.  against  the  help  of  Ihem  that  irori  i. 

32.  6.  hi.s  heart  will  irori  i.  to  practise  hypocrisy 
Hos.  0.  8.  Gilead  is  a  city  of  them  that  icork  i. 
Mat.  7.  23.  de|iart  from  me,  ye  that  work  i. 

Workers  o/INKiUITY. 
.Toh  31.3.n  strange  punishment  to  the  workers  ofi. 
34.8.  which  goeth  in  company  with  the  work.  I'f  i. 
22.where  the  icorkcrs  o/i.  may  hide  themselves 
P.«.5.5.foolish  shall  not  stand, thou  liatest  all  ir.ofi. 
0.8.  depart  from  me  all  ye  work,  of  i.  Luke  13. 27. 
14.  4.  have  all  the  work,  of  i.  no  knowledge?  53.  4. 
23.  3.  draw  me  not  away  with  the  workers  ofi. 
.30.12.there  are  tberf .o/i.falicr,tliey  are  castdown 

37.  1.  nor  be  thou  envious  against  ihe  work,  of  i. 
59.  2.  deliver  me  fiom  the  work,  of  i.  and  save  ma 
64.  2.  from  the  insurrection  of  the  workers  ofi. 
92.  7.  and  when  all  the  workers  of  i.  do  flourish 

9.  all  tJic  work(-rs  of  i.  shall  he  scattered 

94.  4.  and  all  the  workers  ofi.  boast  themselves 
10. or  whowill  stand  npformeagainsitbeir .<j/"i.? 
125.  .5.  lead  them  forth  with  Ihe  workers  of  i. 
111. 9.  keep  me  fiomlhc  gins  of  the  7corkers  of  i, 
Prou. 10.29.  destruction  shall  be  to  work.jfi.  21.15. 

INiaUITIES. 
Lev.  10.  21.  confess  over  the  goat  all  the  i. 
20.  39.  in  the  >'.  of  their  fathers  shall  they  pine 
F.ira  9.  0.  our  i.  are  increased  over  our  head 

7.  for  our  i.  have  we,  our  kings,  been  delivered 
13.  thou  hast  imnished  us  less  than  our  i.deserve 

.ViA.  9.  2.  Israid  confessed  the  i.  of  their  fathers 
Joh  13.  23.  bow  many  are  mine  i.  and  sins 
20.  thou  makcsl  me  to  possess  the  i.  of  my  youth 
22.  .5.  thy  wickedness  great,  and  thine  ».  infinite 
Psal.  .38.  4.  and  mine  i.  are  sone  over  my  head 
40.  12.  mine  i.  have  taken  hidd  on  inn 
5t.9.hide  thy  face  from  my  sins,  and  blot  out  all  i. 
64.0.  Ihey  search  out  r.  ||  li.5.  3.  i.  pievail  against 
79.  8.  r'inember  not  against  us  former  »'. 
90.  8.  h.isl  set  our  i.  before  thee,  our  secret  sini 
103.  3.  bless  the  Lord,  w  bo  forciveth  all  thine  i. 

10.  nor  rewnrilid  us  according  to  our  i. 

I  "0.3.  if  thou,  Ld.  shouldest  mark  i.  who  stand? 

8.  and  ho  shall  redeem  Israel  from  nil  bis  i. 
Pror.  5. 22.  bis  own  I'.shall  take  Ihe  wicked  himself 
Is^.  43.  24.  thou  hnst  wearied  mo  with  thine  i. 

.13.  5.  but  he  was  bruised  for  our  i. 

.59.  12.  and  as  for  our  i.  wo  know  ihcm 

04.  0.  our  I.  like  Ihe  wind  have  taken  us  away 

7.  Ihou  h.-isl  consumed  ut  because  of  our  f. 

.Trr.  11.  10.  Inrned  hack  to  «.  of  their  forefulher* 

14.  7.  O  Lr.rd,  Ihoiijh  our  i.  testify  aaainsi  us 
Lnm.  4.  i:t.  for  i.  of  her  priests  that  shed  blood 
Firk.  28.  18.  by  the  multitude  of  thine  i.  defiled 
Dan.  4.  27.  break  ofTthinc  i.  by  shewing  mercy 

9. 13. 1  bat  we  might  turn  from  our  i  and  understand 

10.  forWiiir  sins,  and  for  ihe  i.  of  our  fathers 
.Vir.  7.  10.  he  will  turn,  he  will  subdue  onri. 
.■?l■^9^.  20.  In  bless  in  turning  every  one  fi<im  A(*i. 
Pun:.  4.7.  blessed  are  they  whose  i.  are  forgiven 
Urv.  18.  5.  for  God  lin'li  nnirmbered  her  i. 

TAmV  LMQI'ITirS 
Lev.  IC.  32.  tho  (oat  shall  bear  on  him  all  tAcif  • 


INS 

pj.tJ,  107.  17.  fools  because  of  their  i.  aro'afflicted 
Isa.  5:t.  11.  justily  many,  for  he  shall  \n:a.t  their  i. 
JcT.  ;«.  8.  and  I  will  pardon  all  their  i.  whereby 
L,am, .5.7.our  fathers  sinned,  we  have  borne  their  i. 
JEzek.  32.  27.  but  titcir  i.  shall  bo  on  their  bones 
43.  10.  that  Uiey  may  be  ashamed  of  their  i. 
IJeb.  8.  12.  their  i.  will  [  remember  no  more,  10.  17. 

Your  INiaUlTIES. 
^um.  14.  34.  forty  years  shall  yc  bear  your  i. 
Jsa.  !)Q.  I.  for  yaur  i.  have  you  sold  yourselves 
59.2.  your  i.  separated  between  you  and  your  God 
(J5.7.  your  J.  1  will  recompense,  and  iniq.of  fathers 
Jcr.  5.  2o.  your  i.  have  turned  away  these  things 
Kzek.  24.  23.  ye  shall  pine  away  for  your  i. 
3l>.  31.  and  shall  loathe  yourselves  for  your  i. 
3.3.  I  shall  have  cleansed  you  from  all  your  i. 
Aiaos'iSl.  therefore  I  will  punish  you  for  ally«ur«. 

INJURED. 
Oal.  4. 12. 1  am  as  ye  are,  ye  have  not  i.  me  at  all 

INJURIOUS. 
XTim.  1.  13.  who  was  before  a  persecutor  and  i. 

INJUSTICE. 
JyJ  16. 17.  not  for  j.  in  my  hands,  my  prayer  pure 

INK. 
Jcr.  30.  18.  I  wrote  them  with  j.  in  the  book 
2  Cor.  3.  3.  written  not  with  i.  but  the  Spirit  _ 
2  John  12.  I  would  not  write  with  i.  3  John  13. 

INK-HORN. 
Ezck.  9.  2.  with  a  writer's  i.  by  his  side,  3,  11. 

INN. 
Qcn.  42.  27.  to  give  his  ass  provender  in  the  i. 
43.21.  when  we  came  to  the  i.  we  opened  our  sacks 
Eiod.  4.  24.  by  the  way  in  the  i.  the  Lord  met  him 
J^ukc  2.  7.  there  was  no  room  for  them  in  the  i. 
10. 34.  brought  him  to  an  i.  and  took  care  of  him 

INNER. 
]  Kings  6. 27.  he  set  the  cherubims  in  the  i.  house 
1  Chrun.  28.  11.  gave  patterns  of  the  /.  parlours 
Kstk.  4.  II.  shall  come  to  the  king  into  the  i.  court 
5.  1.  Esther  stood  in  the  i.  court  of  the  house 
Ezi-h.  10.  3.  and  the  cloud  filled  the  i.  court 
42. 15.  he  made  an  end  of  measuring  the  i.  house 
46. 1,  the  gate  of  the  i.  court  shall  be  shut  si.v  days 
•Sets  16.  24.  who  thrust  them  into  the  i.  prison 
Epk.  3.  16.  strengthened  with  might  in  the  i.  man 
Sie  Chamber. 
INNERMOST. 
Prov.  18.  8.  into  thje  i.  parts  of  the  belly,  26.  22. 

INNOCENCY. 
Oen.  20.  5.  in  the  i.  of  my  hands  have  I  done  this 
Psal.  26.  6. 1  will  wash  my  hands  in  i.  so  compass 
73.  13.  in  vain  I  have  washed  my  hands  in  i. 
Dan.  6.  22.  before  him  i.  was  found  in  me 
Hos.  8. 5.  how  long  will  it  be  ere  they  attain  to  i.7 

INNOCENT. 
F.iod.  23.  7.  the  i.  and  tlie  righteous  slay  thou  not 
Dtut.  27.  25.  that  taketh  reward  to  slay  the  i. 
1  Sain.  14.  141.  Saul  said  to  the  Lord,  shew  the  i. 
Job  4.  7.  remember,  whoever  perished  being  i.? 
9.  23.  he  will  laugh  at  the  trial  of  the  i. 
23.  but  I  know  ihat  thou  wilt  not  hold  me  /. 
]7.8.thei  shall  stir  up  hlmselfagainst  the  hypocrite 
22.  10.  and  the  i.  laugh  ihem  to  scorn 
30.  he  shall  deliver  the  island  of  the  i. 

27.  17.  and  the  i.  sliajl  divide  the  silver 

33.  9.  h;ist  said,  I  am  i.  nor  is  iniquity  in  mo 
Psiil.  10.  8.  in  secret  places  doth  he  murder  the  i. 

15.  3.  nor  taketh  reward  against  the  i. 

19.  13.  I  shall  be  i.  from  the  great  transgression 
Prov.  1. 11.  if  they  say,  let  us  lurk  privily  lor  the  i. 

fi.  20.  whosoever  toucheth  her  shall  not  be  /. 

28.  20.  maketh  haste  to  be  rich  shall  not  be  t. 
Jt-r.  2.  35.  yet  thou  saycst,  because  I  am  ;'. 
Mat.  27.  24.  I  am  i.  of  the  blood  of  this  person 

Sr.(  Blood. 
INNOCENTS. 
Jer.  2.  34.  is  found  the  blood  of  the  poor  ;'. 
19.  4.  have  filled  this  place  with  the  blood  oft. 
INNUMERABLE. 
Juh  21.  33.  after  him,  as  there  are  /.  before  him 
Psnl.  40.  12.  i.  evils  have  compassed  me  about 

104.  2.3.  sea,  wherein  are  things  creeping  i. 
Jcr.  46.  23.  more  than  grasshoppers,  and  are  i. 
Jyake  12.  1.  an  i.  multitude  gathered  together 
J/eb.  11. 12.  as  the  sand  which  is  by  the  sea-shore  i. 
12.  22.  ye  are  come  to  an  i.  company  of  angels 

INORDINATE. 
Kzrk.^Xll.  she  was  the  more  corrupt  in  her  i.  love 
Col.  3.5.  mortifv  fornication,  i.  affection 

"INaUISITION. 
JDnit.  19.  18.  the  judges  shall  make  diligent  t. 
J?,«//t.  2.  23.  when  i.  was  made  of  the  matter 
Psal.  9.  12.  when  he  maketh  i.  for  blood 

INSCRIPTION. 
^cls  17.  23.  I  found  an  altar  with  this  i. 
INSIDE. 

1  Kings  6  15.  covered  the  walls  on  i.  with  wood 

INSPIRATION. 
70*32.*  «  of -Minighty  giveth  understanding 

2  Tim.  3  16.  all  sciiiirure  is  given  by  t.  of  God 

309 


INS 

INSTANT 

Signifies,  [1]  A  short  inomtnt  of  time,  Isa.  29.  5. 
[2]  To  be  very  eager,  or  pressing,  Luke  23.23. 
[3J  To  set  about  any  thing  with  care  and  dili- 
gence, Acts  26.  7. 
Isa.  29.  5.  yea,  it  shall  be  at  an  i.  suddenly 
30.  13.  whose  breaking  cometh  suddenly  at  an  i. 
,lcr.  18.  7.  at  what  i.  1  speak  concerning,  9. 
lAtke  2.  38.  she  coming  in  that  i.  gave  thanks 
23.  23.  and  they  were  i.  with  loud  voices 
Jicts  12.  t  5.  i.  i)rayer  was  made  of  the  church 
Horn.  12.  12.  patient,  continuing  i.  in  prayer 
2Tim.  4. 2.  preach  the  word,  be  i.  in  season,  out  of 

INSTANTLY. 
I.,uke  7.  4.  they  besought  him  i.  saying 
Jicts  26.  7.  our  twelve  tribes  i.  serving  God 

INSTRUCT 
Signifies,  To  train  up,  or  teach,  Psal.  32.  8.  VVe 
are  instructed  by,  [1]  God,  Deut.  4.  36.  Isa.  28. 
26.     [2]  Christ,  as  a  prophet,  who  leaches  in- 
wardly, and  spiritually.  Acts  3.  22.     [3]  The 
Spirit,  Neh.  9.  20.     [4]  The  church.  Cant.  8.2. 
[ri]  Ministers,    Dan.  11.  33.   2  Tim.  2.  25.     [61 
The  law,  Rom.  2.  18.     [7]  The  scriptures,  2 
Tim.  3.  16.     [8]  Corrections,    Jer.  31.  I'J.    [9] 
The  godly,  Job  4.  3.  Acts  18.  25.     [10]  The 
wicked,  Prov.  24.  32. 
Deut.  4.  30.  made  thee  hear,  that  he  might  i.  thee 
jVch.  9.  20.  thou  gavest  thy  good  Spirit  to  t.  them 
.lob  40.  2.  shall  he  that  contendeth  i.  him  1 
Psal.  16.  7.  my  reins  also  i.  me  in  night-seasons 
32.  8.  I  will  i.  thee  and  teach  thee  ir;  the  way 
Cant.  8.  2.  in  my  mother's  house,  who  will  i.  me 
Isa.  23.  26.  JiisGod  doth  i.  him  to  discretion 
Dan.  11.  3.3.  they  that  understand  shall  i.  many 

1  Cor.  2.  16.  the  mind  of  Lord,  that  he  may  i.  him 

INSTRUCTED. 
Gen.  14.  t  14.  Abraham  armed  his  t.  servants 
Deut.  32.  10.  the  Lord  led  him  about,  he  i.  him 

2  Kings  12.  2.  wherein  Jehoiada  the  priest  i.  him 

1  C/iron.  15.  22.  Chenaniah  ;'.  about  the  song 
25.  7.  that  were  i.  in  the  songs  of  the  Lord 

2  Oiron.  3.  3.  Solomon  was  i.  for  the  building 
./<?/)  4.  3.  behold  thou  bast  i.  many,  and  hast 
Psal.  2.  10.  be  i.  ye  judges  of  the  earth 
Prov.  5.  13.  inclined  mine  car  to  them  that :'.  me 

21.  11.  tlie  wise  is  i.  he  receiveth  knowledge 
Isa.  8.  11.  the  Lord  spake  thus  to  me  and  i.  me 

40.  14.  who  i.  him,  and  taught  him  the  path 
.ler.  6.  8.  be  i.  O  Jerusalem,  lest  my  soul  dejiart 

31.  I'J.  after  that  I  was  i.  I  smote  on  my  thigh 
.Mat.  13.  52.  every  scribe  who  is  i.  to  the  kingdom 

14.  8.  and  she,  being  before  ;'.  of  her  mother 
I,akr  1.  4.  of  things  wherein  thou  hast  been  i. 
.,icts  18.  2,}.  this  man  was  i.  in  the  way  of  the  Lord 
liom.  2. 18.  kndwest  his  will,  being  i.  out  of  lav 
Phil.  4.  12.  every  where,  and  in  all  things  I  am  i. 

INSTRUCTING. 
2  Tim.  2.  25.  i.  those  that  oppose  themselves 

INSTRUCTOR. 
Gen.  A.  22.  Tubal-Cain,  an  i.  of  every  artificer 
Iioin.2.  20.  an  i.  of  the  foolish,  a  teacher  of  babes 
INSTRUCTORS. 

1  Cor.  4. 15.  though  ye  have  10.000  i.  in  Christ,  yet 

INSTRUCTION. 
.Tob  33.  16.  he  openeth  the  ears,  and  scaleth  i. 
Psal.  50. 17.  seeing  thou  halest  ;.  and  castelh  my 
Prov.  1.  2.  to  know  wisdom  and  i.  to  perceive 
3.to  receive  the  i.  of  wisdom,  justice,  and  judgm. 

7.  but  fools  despise  wisdom  and  i.  1.5.  5. 

8.  my  son,  hear  the  i.  of  thy  father,  4.  1. 
4.  13.  take  fast  hold  of  i.  let  her  not  go,  keep  her 
5. 12.  how  have  I  hated  i.  and  my  heart  despised 

23.  he  shall  die  without  i.  and  shall  go  astray 
6.  23.  and  reproofs  of  z.  are  the  way  of  life 

8.  10.  receive  my  i.  ||  33.  hear  i.  and  be  wise 

9.  9.  eive  i.  to  a  wise  man  and  he  will  be  wiser 

10.  17.  he  is  in  the  way  of  life  that  keepeth  j. 
12. 1.  whoBo  loveih  i.  love  li  knowledge 
13.  1.  a  wi.^e  son  hearetli  his  father's  i. 

18.  shame  shall  be  to  him  that  refuscth  ;. 
15  32.  he  that  refuseth  i.  despiseth  his  own  soul 

33.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  ii.  the  i.  of  wisdom 
16.  22.  but  the  i.  of  ft.ols  is  folly 
19.  20.  hear  counsel,  and  receive  /.  that  thou 

27.  cease  to  hear  the  i.  that  caufeth  to  err 

23.  12.  apply  thy  heart  to  i.  and  thine  cars 
23.  buy  the  truth,  also  i.  and  understanding 

24.  32.  r  looked  upon  it  and  received  i.   • 
.ler.  17.  23.  they  might  not  hear,  nor  receive  i. 

32.  33.  tliey  have  not  hcirkened  to  receive*. 

35.  13.  will  vc  not  receive  i.  to  hearken  to  my 
F.zeh.  5.  15.  it  shall  he  a  reproach,  a  taunt,  an  i. 
'Aiph.  3.  7.  I  said,  surety  tlioii  wilt  receive  (. 

2  Tivi.  3.  16.  all  scrintnre  is  profitable  for  i. 

INSTRUMENT. 
.Vujn.3.1. 16.  if  he  smite  him  with  an  i.  of  iron 
Pf.  33. 2.  sins  to  him  with  nn  i.  of  ten  i\1m.^,  92. 3. 
71.  t  22.  I  will  praise  with  the  i.  of  psaltery 
144.  9. 1  will  sing  a  new  soiig,  O  God,  on  an  i. 


INT 

Isa.  28. 27.  fitches  not  threshed  with  a  threshing  ». 

41. 15.  I  will  make  thee  a  new  Bhar|)  threshing  i. 

54.  16.  that  bringeth  forth  an  i.  for  his  work 
Kzek.  33. 32.  song  of  one  that  can  play  on  an  i. 

INSTRUMENTS. 
Gen.  49.  5.  i.  of  cruelty  are  in  their  habitatipna 
jExorf.  25. 9.  the  pattern  of  all  the  i.  thereof 
M'uia.  3.  8.  shall  keep  all  the  i.  of  the  tabernacle 

4.  12.  they  shall  take  all  the  i.  of  ministry 

7. 1.  sanctified  all  the  i.  {{  31. 6.  w  ilh  thoholy  t. 
1  Sam.  8.  12.  to  make  i.  of  war,  and  i.  of  chariotd 

18.  6.  to  meet  king  Saul  with  i.  of  music 
1  Kings  19.  21.  b6iled  their  flesh  with  i.  of  oxen 

1  Chron.  9.29.  to  oversee  the  i.  of  the  sanctuary 
16.  42.  make  a  sound  with  musical  i.  of  God 

2  Chron.  30.  21.  singing  with  loud  i.  to  the  Lord 
J^ch.  12.  30.  Ilanani  with  the  musical  i.  of  David 
Psal.  7.  13.  hath  prepared  for  him  the  j.  of  death 

68.  25.  the  players  on  i.  followed  after 
87.  7.  as  the  players  on  *'.  shall  bo  there 
150.4.  praise  him  with  stringed  i.  and  organs 
Eccl.  2.  8.  as  musical  i.  and  that  of  all  sorts 
Isa.  22.  1 24.  hang  on  him  all  the  i.  of  vioU 
32.  7.  the  i.  also  of  the  churl  are  evil 
38.  20.  we  will  sing  my  songs  to  the  stringed  i. 
Jer.  40.  t  19.  make  thee  i.  of  captivity 
Kzek.  12.  t  3.  prejiare  thee  i.  for  removing 
16.  t  39.  shall  take  i.  of  thy  ornament,  23. 126. 
Dan.l^.  18.  nort.  of  music  brought  before  him 
Jlvios  1.3.  threshed  Gilead  with  thresliing  i.  of  iron 
6.  5.  .and  invent  to  themselves  i.  of  music 
Nab.  3.  19.  to  the  chief  singer  on  my  stringed  t. 
y.cch.  11. 15.  take  thee  i.  of  a  foolish  shepherd 
Rom.  6.13.  nor  yield  members  i.  of  unrighteousness 
members  as  i.  of  righteousness  to  God 
INSURRECTION. 
Ezra  4. 19.  this  city  hath  made  i.  against  kings 
P^al.  64.  2.  from  the  i.  of  the  workers  of  iniquity 
Jilark  15.  7.  lay  bound  with  them  that  had  made  j. 
who  had  committed  murder  in  the  «. 
Jlcts  18.  12.  the  Jews  made  i.  with  one  accord 

INTANGLE 
Signifies,  To  perplex.  This  maybe,  [1]  Corpo- 
really, Exod.  14.  3.  [2]  Verbalbj,  JMat.22.  15. 
[3]  Ceremonially,  Gal.  5.  1.  [4]  Worldly,  2 
Tim.  2.  4.  [5]  Spiritually,  to  return  to,  and 
continue  in  sin,  2  Pet.  2.  20. 
Mat.  22.  15.  how  they  might  i.  him  in  his  talk 

INTANGLED. 
Exod.\i.3.  Pharaoh  will  say,  they  are  i.  in  the  land 
Gal.  5. 1.  be  not  i.  again  with  the  yoke  of  bondage 
2  Pet.  2. 20.  they  are  again  r.  therein  and  overcome 

INTANGLETH. 
2Tim.Z.i.i.  liimselfwith  the  afi'airs  of  tliU  life 

INTEGRITY. 
Geyi.  20. 5.  in  i.  of  my  heart  I  have  done  this 
6. 1  know  thou  did.st  this  in  the  i.  of  thy  heart 

1  Kings  9. 4.  as  David  thy  father  walked  in  i. 
.Job  2.'3.  and  still  he  holdeth  fast  his  i. 

0.  his  wife  said,  dost  thou  still  retain  thine  i.? 

27.  5.  I  will  not  remove  my  i.  from  me 

31.  6.  be  weighed,  that  God  may  know  my  i. 
Psal.  7.  8.  according  to  my  i.  that  is  in  me 

25.  21.  lot  /.  and  uprightness  preserve  me 
'  26.  1.  I  walked  in  my  i.  \\  II.  I  will  walk  in  t. 

41.  12.  as  for  me,  thou  upholdest  me  in  my  i. 

78  72.  he  fed  them  according  to  i.  of  his  heart 
Prov.  11.  3.  the  ;'.  of  the  upright  shall  guide  them 

19.  1.  better  is  the  poor  that  walketh  in  his  i. 

20. 7.  just  man  walketh  in  his  i.  cnildren  blessed 

INTELLIGENCE. 
Dan.  11.  30.  t.  with  them  that  forsake  covenant 

INTEND. 
.Tosh.  22.  33.  did  not  /.  to  go  up  against  Ihem 

2  Chron.  28. 13.  yc  »'.  to  add  more  to  our  sins 
.lets  5.  28.  ye  i.  to  bring  this  man's  blood  on  us 

35.  what  ye  i.  to  do  as  touching  these  men 
INTENDED. 
Psal.  21.  11  for  thev  i.  evil  against  thee 

INTENDEST. 
F.jod.  2.  14.  t.  thou  to  kill  me,  as  the  Egyptian 

INTENDING. 
7-wAv  14.28.  winch  of  you  i.  to  build  a  tower 
Jicts  12.4.  i.  after  Eas'er  to  bring  him  forth 
t20.  Ilerod  i.  war  with  them  of  Tyre  and  Sidoa 
20. 13.  sailed  to  Assos,  there  i.  to  take  in  Paul 

inti:nt. 

2  .f/im.  17.  ]4.to  the  !.  the  Lord  might  bring  evil 
2  Kings  10. 19.  to  i.  he  might  destroy  worshippers 
2  Chron.  16.  i.  to  the  i.  he  might  let  none  go  out 
Kirk.  40.  4.  to  the  i.  that  I  might  shew  them 
Dan.  4. 17.  to  the  ;.  that  the  living  may  know 
.John  11. 15.  not  there  to  the  i.  ye  may  believe 

13.  28.  for  what  i.  he  spake  this  to  him 
.lets  9.  21.  and  came  hither  for  that  i. 

10.29. 1  a.sk  for  whati  ve  have  sent  for  me 
1  Cor.  10.  0.  to  the  i.  we'should  not  lust  after 
Kph.  3.  10.  to  the  i.  that  mw  to  the  principaliti*. 

intents. 

Jer.  30.24.'till  he  have  performed  t.  of  his  heart 


INT 

JEM.  4. 13.  is  a  diacerncr  of  the  >'.  of  the  heart 

INTEUCKSSIO.V 
Signifies,  Ji  plcaiUng  or  intreating  in  behalf  of 
another,  Jer.  7.  16.     It  \a  spoken,  (I)  Of  the 
intercession  of  Christ,  Isa.  53.  12.    Hub.  7. 2.). 
WItich  he  perforins,  [IJ  Btj  apf  earing  for  us 
before  the  Father,  Heb.  i).  24.    [-2]  By  present- 
in"  the   merit  of  hi.i    sacrifice   once  offered, 
Heb.   10.   12,  14.     [3J  By   declaring  his    will, 
that  alich  and  such  blessings  may  be  bestowed 
on  the  elect,  Ik-b.  10.  10.     [4]  By  th''  Father's 
consenting   and  agreeing  to  this  will  of  his 
Hon,  John  11.  42.     (II)  Of  the  Holy  Ohost  in 
Ood'a  children,  lloni.  (5.  2(5.     (Ill)  Of  men  in- 
terceding,  [1]  For  temporal  blessings,  Jer.  7. 
16.     [2]  Fur  spiritual  blessings,    1  Tim.  2.1. 
(IV)  Of  KUas,  who  coiAptained  against  the  ten 
tribes,  who  were  generally  become  idolaters, 
Rom.  11.  2. 
Jsa.  53.  12.  and  made  i.  for  the  transgressors 
Jer.  7. 16.  neither  lilt  up  cry,  nor  make  ('.  to  me 
27  18.  let  them  now  make  i.  to  the  Lord 
36. 25.  EInathan  and  Gemuriah  had  made  i. 
Horn.  8. 26.  but  the  Spirit  mnkcth  i.  for  us,  27,  34. 

11.  2.  how  he  maketh  t.  to  God  against  Israel 
Jieb.l.'io.  he  ever  liveth  to  make  i.  for  them 

INTERC'ESSlOiNS. 
1  Tim.  2. 1.  that  pravers  and  i.  be  made  for  all  men 

INTERCESSOR. 
Isa.  59.  16.  he  wondered  that  there  was  no  i. 

IN'TERM  i;UDLE. 
Prov.  14.  10.  a  straiiirpr  dotli  not  i.  with  his  joy 

INTERMEDDLETH. 
Prav.  18.  1.  seeketh  and  i.  with  all  wisdom 

INTERMISSION. 
JLam.  3.  49.  mine  eye  ceaseth  not  without  any  t. 

INTERPRET. 
Oen.  41.  8.  none  that  could  j.  them  to  PharaoJi 

12.  to  each  according  to  his  dream  he  did  i. 
I  Cor.  12.  30.  do  all  !.?  ||  14.  5.  except  he  (. 
14.  13.  pray  that  he  may  i.  \\  27.  let  one  i. 
INTERPRETATION 
Bii^nifies,  [1]  .4  translation,  or  turning  from  one 
language  into  another,  1  Cor.  12.  10.    [2]  7'Ae 
gift  of  eipounding  visions  and  dreams,  Gen 
40.  8.     [3]  Exposition,  or  shewing  the  sense 
and  import  of  any  thing,  2  Pet.  1.  20. 
Gfn.  40.  3.  each  according  to  i.  of  dreams,  41.11. 
12.  this  is  the  i  of  it,  18.  Dan.  4.  24.  |  5.  26. 
16  when  the  baker  saw  that  the  i.  was  good 
Judg.  7.  13.  when  Gideon  heard  the  i.  thereof 
Prov.  1.  6.  to  understand  a  proverb  and  the  i. 
Dan  2.  4.  and  we  will  shew  the  i.  7,  36. 
4.7.  the  dream  is  certain,  and  the*,  thereof  sure 

4.  19.  and  the  /.  thereof  be  1;o  thy  enemies 

5.  12.  he  will  show  the  /'.  {{  13.  not  shew  the  i. 

7. 16.  and  he  made  me  to  know  the  /.  of  the  things 
.  John  1.  42.  Cephas,  which  is  by  i.  a  stone 
9.  7.  in  the  pool  of  Siloani,  which  is  by  ;.  Sent 
.Sets  9.  36.  named  Tabitha,  by  ('.  is  called  Dorcas 

13.  8.  Elymas  the  sorcerer,  so  is  his  name  by  i. 

1  Cor.  12.  10.  to  another  the  J.  of  tongues 

14.  26.  every  one  of  you  hath  an  i. 

Heb.  7.  2.  bemg  by  i.  king  of  righteousness  j. 

S  Pet.  1.  20.  no  prophesy  i-'  of  any  private  i. 

INTERPRETATIONS. 
Oen.  40.  8.  Joseph  said,  do  not  i.  belong  to  God  ? 
Dan.  5. 16. 1  have  heard  that  thou  canst  make  i. 

INTERPRETED. 
Gen.  40.  22.  as  Joseph  had  i.  to  them,  41.  13. 
F.ira  4.  7.  written  and  i.  in  the  Syrian  tongue 
^fat.  1.  23.  which  being  i.  is,  God  with  us 
Mark  5.  41.  which  is,  being  i.  damsel  arise 

15.  22.  which  is,  being  i.  the  place  of  a  sknll 
34.  I.  my  God,  my  God,  why  hast  forsaken  mo 

John  1.  ".W.  being  i.  master  |{  41.  >'.  the  Clirist 
Jictsi.  :J6.  is,  being  i.  the  son  of  cnnsolalion 

INTERPRETER,  S. 
Gen.  40.  ^.  we  dreamed,  and  there  is  no  i.  of  it 
42.  23.  fur  Joseph  spako  to  thrm  by  an  i. 

2  Chron.  32.  f  31.  howbcil  in  the  business  of/. 
Job  33.23.  ihfre  be  an  j.  one  among  a  thousand 
Isa.  43.  t  27.  and  Ihy  i.  have  tran.^gressed 

1  Cor.  14.  28.  but  if  there  be  no  i.  let  him  keep 

INTERPRETING. 
Dan.  5.  12.  i.  ofdreams  was  found  in  Daniel 

INTREAT 
Signifies,  [11  To  siipplirnir  or  pray  to,  Exod.  8 

8.  Judg.  13.  8.  [2]  To  inlrrcrdr,  or  speak  in 
one's  behalf.  Gen.  23.  8.  1  Sam.  2.  2.'5.  [3]  To 
entertain  or  u.ie  kindly,  Gen.  12.  16.  [4]  To 
urge  or  press  rarnrslhi,  Riilh  I.  16.  |.5J  To 
hear,  grant,  or  arcfvt  of,  (Ji'n.  2.').  21.  [6]  To 
seek,  Prov.  19.  6.  [7J  To  gine  good  words,  1 
Cor.  4.  13. 

Oen.  23.  8.  i.  for  me  to  Ephron  the  non  of  Zoar 
F.zod.  3.  8.  then   Phnrnoh  railed  for   Moses,  and 
said,  I.  the  Lord,  28.J  9.  2^,  |  10.  17 

9.  when  shall  I  ».  for  Ib'-e  ||  29.  I  will  t.  Lord 
Ruth  1.  16.  Ruth  said,  /.  me  not  to  Icni-c  thoo 

310 


INW 

1  Sam.  2. 25.  if  a  man  sin,  who  shall  j.  for  hire  7 
1  Kings  13.  6.  i.  the  face  of  the  Lord  thy  God 
Job  11.  t  19.  yea,  many  shall  i.  thy  face 
Psal.  45. 12.  among  the  people,  shall  i.  thy  favour 
Prov.  19.  C.  many  will  i.  the  favour  of  the  prince 
Jer.  15.  11.  1  will  cause  the  enemy  to  i.  tliee  well 
Jicts  7.  6.  and  should  i.  them  evil  400  yeara 

1  Cor.  4.  13.  being  defamed,  we  i.  we  are  made 
Phil.  4.  3.  1  i.  thee  also,  true  yoke-fellow 
VPim.  5. 1.  rebuke  not,  but  i.  hira  as  u  father 

INTREATED. 
Oen.  12. 16.  he  !.  Abraham  well  for  her  sake 

25.  21.  Isaac  i.  for  his  wite,  Lird  was  i.  of  him 
Ezod.  5.  22.  why  hast  thou  so  evil  i.  this  i)eople7 

8.  30.  Muses  went  out  and  i.  the  Lord,  10.  18. 
Deut.  26.  6.  and  the  Egyptians  evd  i.  us 
.Judg.  13.  8.  then  Manoah  i.  the  Lord,  and  said 

2  Sam.  21.  14.  after  that  God  was  i.  for  the  land 
24.  25.  the  Lord  was  i.  for  the  land,  and  the 

plague  was  stayed  from  Isra>  1 

1  Chroi.  5.  20.  they  cried  and  he  was  i.  of  them 

2  Chron.  33.  13.  Manasseh  prayed,  and  God  was  i. 
Ezra  8.23.  we  besought  God,  and  he  was  i.  of  us 
Job  19.  16.  1  called,  1  i.  him  with  my  mouth 

17.  tho'  I  i.  for  the  children's  sake  of  my  body 
Psal.  119. 58. 1  i.  thy  favour  with  my  whole  heart 
Isa.  19.  22.  he  shall  be  i.  of  them  a'lid  leal  them 
Mat.  22.  6.  and  i.  them  spitefully,  J.uke  18.  32. 
/^uke  15.  28.  then  came  his  father  out,  and  i.  him 
20.  11.  i.  him  shamefully,  and  sent  him  away 
.Sets  7.  19.  the  same  evil  j.  our  fathers 
27.3.  and  Julius  courteously  i.  Paul 
IThess.  2.  2.  after  that  we  were  shamefully  i. 
Heb.  12.  19.  J.  the  word  should  not  be  sjioken 
Jam.  3.  17.  wisdom  from  above  is  easy  to  be  :. 

INTREATETH. 
Job  24.21.  he  evil  i.  the  barren  that  bearelh  not 

INTREATIES. 
Prov.  18.  23.  the  poor  useth  i.  but  the  rich 
2  Cor.  8.4.  praying  us  with  much  i.  that  we  rcceiie 

INTRUDING. 
Col.  2.  18.  i.  into  those  things  he  hath  not  seen 

INVADE. 
2  Chr.  20. 10.  whom  thou  wouldest  not  let  Israel  i. 
Hab.  3.  16.  lie  will  )'.  them  with  his  troops 
INVADED. 

1  Sam.  23.  27.  the  Philistines  have  i.  the  land 
27.  8.  David  and  his  men  !.  the  Geshurites 

30.  1.  the  Amalekiles  i.  the  soutli,  and  Ziklag 

2  Kings  13.  20.  a  band  of  Moabites  i.  the  land 
2  Chron.  28.  18.  the  Philistines  had  i.  the  cities 

INVASION. 

1  Sam.  30.  14.  we  made  an  i.  on  the  south 

INVENT. 
Ainos  6.  5.  J.  instruments  of  music,  like  David 
INVENTED. 

2  Chron.  26. 15.  made  engines  i.  by  cunning  men 

INVENTIONS 
Signify,  [1]  Conlrirances,  Prov.  8.  12.     [2]  .Sin- 
ful  practices,  P.sal.  99.  8.     [3]  Idolatrous  acts, 
Psal.  10().  29,  39.     [4]  J\rrw   ways  of  making 
one's  self  more  wise  and  happy  than  (iod  has 
made  us,  Eccl.  7.  29. 
Psal.  99.  8.  thou  tookest  vengeance  of  their  i. 
J06.  29.  provoked  him  to  anger  with  thinr  i. 
39.  and  went  a  whoring  with  their  own  i. 
Prov.  8.  12.  and  find  out  knowledge  of  witty  i. 
Eccl.  7.  29.  but  they  have  sought  out  many  i. 

INVENTORS. 
Rom.  1.30.  i.  of  evil  thines,  disobedient  to  parents 

INVISIBLE. 
Horn.  1.  20.  the  i.  things  of  him  are  clearly  seen 
Col.  1.  1.3.  who  is  the  linage  of  the  i.  fJoif 

16.  that  are  in  heaven  and  earth,  visibli.'  and  »'. 
1  Tim.  1.  17.  now  to  the  King  immortal,  i. 
Ilcb.  11.  27.  he  endured,  as  seeing  him  who  is  i. 
INVITED. 

1  .Sam.  9.  24.  sinre  I  said,  I  have  7.  the  people 

2  Sam.  13.  23.  Absalom  i.  nil  the  king'^sons 
F.slh.  5. 12.  to-morrfiw  am  1 1.  to  her  with  the  king 

INWARD, 
^fw.  41.t21.  when  they  had  come  to  the  i.  parts 
Lev.  13.  .V>.  shall  burn  it  in  the  lire,  It  is  fret  i. 
1  Kings  7.  25.  and  all  their  hinder  parts  were  :'. 

17.  t21.  this  child's  soul  come  into  his  i.  parts 
'i  Chron.  3.  13.  lliny  stood  and  their  fares  were  I. 
Job  19.  19.  nil  my  i.  friends  abhorred  me 

38.  36.  who  hftih  put  wisdom  in  the  »'.  parts 
Psal.  5.  9.  their  i.  part  is  very  wickedness 

49.  11.  their  i.  Ihiuight  is,  that  their  houses 

31.  6.  behold,  thou  desirest  truth  in  the  i.  parts 
Ii2.  t  4.  but  they  curse  in  their  i.  parts 

(H.  (5.  t.  thought  of  rvery  one  of  them  is  deep 
/'j-oM.20. 27.  searching  ail  thei.  parts  of  ihc  bolly 

30.  so  do  slripnii  the  i.  pans  of  the  belly 
Isa.  16.  II.  my  ».  parts  sound  for  Kir-harosh 
.Irr.  31.^3. 1  will  put  my  law  in  their  i.  |>arts 
Mark  rt:TI9.IIerodin«  hail  an  i.  grudge  against  him 
I.uke  11.  39.  vour  i.  pnrt  is  flill  of  ravening 
Hotn.  7. 22. 1  delight  in  the  law  of  God  afti'r  i'.  man 


JOU 

2  Cor.  4. 16.  yet  the  j.  man  is  renewed  day  by  da 

7.  15.  his  i.  utfectioii  is  more  abundant  to  you 

INWARDLY. 
Psai.62.4.  they  bless  with  their  mouth,  but  curse  i 
Mat.  7.  15.  but  i.  they  ore  ravening  wolves 
Horn.  2.  29.  but  he  Is  a  Jew  who  is  one  i. 

INWARDS. 
.£xoJ.29.13.  the  fat  that  covereth  the  i.  22.  Lev 
3.  3,  9j  14.  I  4.  8.  17.3.  |  9.  19. 
17.  thou  Shalt  wash  the  i.   J.ev.  1.9, 13.  |  9.  14. 
Lev.  4.  11.  his  i.  and  dung  burn  in  a  clean  place 

8.  16.  the  fat  on  the  i.  Moses  burnt  on  the  altar 
21.  and  he  washed  the  !.  and  the  legs  with  water 

JOIN 
Signifies,  [1]  To  knit,  or  unite  together.  Job  41. 

17.  [2]  To  make  leagues  and  alliances,  Dan. 
11.  6.  [3]  To  go  close  to,  Acts  8.  29.  [4]  To 
be  numbered,  or  reckoned  with.  Job  3.  6.  It  is 
spoken,  (I)  Materially,  of  things,  Isa.  5.  8. 
(II)  Personally,  as  [l]In  marriage,  Epii.  5. 
31.  [2]  In  aj/inity,  2  Chron.  18.  1.  [3]  In 
aiding,  or  assisting,  Exod.  1.  10.  [4]  In  bat- 
tle, army  wrainst  army,  I  Sam.  4.  2.  1  Kings 
20.  29.  (Ill)  Mentally,  1  Cor.  1.  10.  (IV)  Car- 
nally, 1  Cor.  6.  16.  (V)  Idolatrously,  Hos. 
4.  17.  (VI)  Spiritually,  Jer.  50.  5.  1  Cor.  6. 17. 

Eiod.  1.  10.  lest  they  j'.  to  our  enemies  and  fight 
against  us,  and  so  get  them  up  out  of  the  land 
2  Chron.  20.  35.  did  Jehnshaphat  j.  with  Ahaziah 
Ezra  9.  14.  and 7.  in  affinity  witn  the  pedple 
Prov.  11.21.  hand  J.  in  hand,  the  wicked,  16.  5. 
Isa.  5.  8.  woe  to  them  tliatj.  house  to  house 

9.  11.  the  Lord  shall  _;".  his  enemies  t.igelher 

56.  6.  sons  of  stranger  that  j'.  themselves  10  Lord 
.Jer.  50.  5.  come,  let  us_;.  ourselves  to  the  Lord 
Eztk.  37.  YI.j.  them  one  to  anether  into  one  stick 
Dan.  11.  6.  they  shall,;,  in  the  end  of  years 
JJcts  5.  13.  of  the  rest  durst  no  inan_;'.  himself 

8.  29.  go  near  andj.  thyself  to  this  chariot 

9.26.  Saul  assayed  to_;.  himself  to  the  discijdes 

JOINED. 
CfH.  14.3.  all  these  kings  were j.  together  in  vale 
8.  they  j'.  battle  with  them  in  the  vale  of  Siddim 

29.  34.  this  time  will  my  husband  be^".  to  me 
JVkto.  18.  2.  thy  brethren  of  Levi  be  j.  to  thee,  4. 
1  5om.  4.2.  when  they  J.  battle,  Israel  was  smitten 
1  Kings  20.  29.  In  the  seventh  day  the  battle  wasj. 
i  Chron.  18.  1.  Jehoshaphnt  j.  atlinity  withAbab 

20.  36.  he  7'.  wirh  .■Miaziah  to  make  ships,  37. 
Ezra.  4.  12.  set  up  walls,  and  j'.  the  foundations 
JVcA.  4.  6.  all  the  wall  w&aj.  together  unto  half 
Esth.  9.  27.  all  that  j.  should  keep  Piirim 
Job  3.  6.  let  it  not  bej'.  to  the  days  of  the  year 

41.  17.  Leviathan's  scales  arej.  one  to  another 
23.  the  Hakes  of  his  thsh  are  /.  together 
Psal.  83.  8.  A.ssur  also  is  j.  with  them 
Eccl.  9.  4.  to  him  that  isj.  to  all  the  living  is  hops 
Isa.  13. 15.  every  oiie^'.  to  them  shall  fall  by  sword 

14.  1.  and  the  strangers  shall  hi-  j.  with  ihein 
20.  thou  shalt  not  hoj.  with  them  in  burial 

56.  3.  nor  him  that  hath^'.  to  the  Lord  speak 
Ezek.  1.9.  their  wings  werej'.  one  to  anoiher 

46.  22.  there  were  courts^',  of  forty  cubits  long 
Ifos.  4.  17.  Ephraim  taj.  to  idols,  let  him  alone 
y.irh.  2.  11.  many  nations  shall  bo  j.  to  the  Lord 
Mat.  19.  6.  what  God  hath  j.  to»ether,  Mark  10. 9. 
//like  15.  13.  he  wrnt  and_;.  himself  to  a  citizen 
Acts  5.  36.  about  four  hundred  j.  themselves 

18.  7.  whose  house  /.  h.ird  to  the  synagogue 

1  Oir.  1. 10.  that  ye  be  perfectly^',  in  thcsamcuiinJ 
6.  16.  he  which  \aj.  to  a  harlot  is  one  body 

17.  he  that  is^".  to  the  Lord  is  one  spirit 
Eph.  4.  16.  the  whole  body  fitly 7.  Vjjeihcr 
5.  31.  and  shall  ht-j.  to  his  wife,  and  they  two 
See  BaalPkor. 
JOINING,  S. 

1  Chron.  22.  3.  David  prepared  iron  for  the 7. 

2  Chron.  3.  12. 7.  to  the  wing  of  the  other  cherub 

JOIN'I". 
Oen.  32.  25.  hollow  of  Jacob's  thigh  was  ont  ofy. 
Psal.  22.  14.  and  all  my  hones  are  out  of_;. 
Prnr.  25.  19.  .-(infidcnce  is  like  a  foot  out  ofj. 
Eph.  4.  16.  by  that  which  every  J.  supplieth 

JOINTS. 
1  Kings  22.  34.  smote  the  king  of  Israel  hetw<«on 
ihoj.  of  the  harne-.'s,  2  Chron.  18.  33. 
Cant.  7.  1.  the  /'.  of  thy  thighs  are  like  jewels 
Pan.  5.  6.  that  the  j.  of  his  loins  were  looisod 
Col.  -2.  19.  all  Ihe  body  byj.  knit  togi-lher 
Heb.  4.  12.  to  diviiling  asunder  of/,  and  m.irrow 

JOINT-HEIRS.  ■ 
Horn.  8. 17.  heirs  of  God,  nnd  j.-heirs  with  Christ 

JOT. 
Mat.  3.  18.  one  J.  or  tittle  shall  in  no  wise  pass 

JOTTRNEV. 
Orn.  24.21.  the  Lord  hntli  made  \mj.  prnsporoui 
St.  1.  Jacob  went  on  his  V.  anil  rnme  to  the  cast 
31.23.  Laban  pursued  ntler  him  seven  days' j. 
33.  12.  let  lis  lake  oiir_;.||46.  1.  Israel  took  hisj. 
EtoU.  13.  20.  Ihev  look  their  j.  from  Succotb 


JOY 

t-n^d.  16.  I.  Israelites  took  tlicir  X  Trom  Elim 
JVufli.  ".1. 10.  be  in  aj.  yet  shutl  keep  the  iiaesover 
13.  is  not  in  a.j.  and  I'orbeareth  to  keep  pussover 
10.  13.  they  first  took  their  j.  according  to  tlie 
Deut.  l.'J.  there  are  eleven  days' j.  from  Horeb 
10.  11.  arise,  take  thy  7.  before  the  people 
Josh.  y.  11.  take  victuals  with  you  for  your  j. 

13.  become  old,  by  reason  of  the  very  long j. 
'ndg.  4. y.  thej.  thou  takest  is  not  for  thy  honour 

1  Ham.  15.  Id.  and  the  Lord  sent  thee  on  aj. 

2  .Sum.  11.  10.  earnest  thou  not  from  thyj.? 

1  Kings  18.  '27.  or  he  is  in  a^.  ||  19. 7.  tlie_;'.  is  great 
•2  Kings  3.  9.  fetched  a  compass  of  seven  days',;'. 
Jifck.  '2.  <i.  for  how  long  shall  thy.;,  bel 

Prov-  7.  ly,  the  good  man  is  gone  a^long^'. 
Mat.  10.  10.  nor  scrip  for  your^.  nor  two  coats 
Mark  ti.  8.  take  nothing  for  theirj.  Ijuke  9.  3. 
L,uke  11.  (i.  a  friend  of  mine  in  his.;,  is  come  to  me 

15. 13.  the  younger  took  his  j.  into  a  far  country 
John  4.  (5.  Jesus  wearied  with  his  j.  sat  thus 
Horn.  1.  10. 1  might  have  a  prosperous j.  to  come 

15. 24.  for  I  trust  to  see  you  in  my  7. 

3  Cor.  10.  0.  that  ye  may  bring  me  on  niyj;'. 
Tit.  3.  13.  bring  Zenas  and  Apollos  on  their.;. 

2  John  6.  whom  if  thou  bring  forward  on  their  j. 

Daifs  JOURNKY. 
JVum.  11.  31.  the  quails  fall  a  day's  j.  on  this  side 

1  Kings  19.4.  himself  went  a  day's  j.  into  wildern. 
Jonah  3.4.  began  to  enter  city  a  day's  j.  and  cried 
Ijuke  a.  a.-went  a  day' s  j.  among  their  acquaint. 
^cts  1. 12.  is  from  Jerusalem  a  sabbath  day's  j. 

See  three  Days. 
JOURNEYED. 
Oen.  11.  2.  that  as  they  J.  they  found  a  plain 
12. 9.  Abramj.  going  on  toward  the  south,  20.  1. 
13.  11.  Lot  J.  east  |  33.  17.  Jacob  j.  to  Succoth 
35.  5.  Israel  J.  toward  Beth-cl,  and  the  terror 

16. 7".  from  Beth-el  II  21. 7.  to  the  tower  of  Edar 
Ezod  40.  t  36.\vhcn  cloud  was  taken  up,  Israelj. 

37.  cloud  not  taken  up,  theyj.  not,  JVum.  9.  21. 
■Vwm.9.  17.  after  that  the  children  of  Israel  j.  18. 

19.  kept  the  charge  of  the  Lord,  and  j'.  not 

20.  at  the  commandment  of  the  Lord  they.;.  23. 
12.  15.  J.  not  till  Miriam  was  brought  in  again 

Jttdg  17.  8.  came  to  the  house  of  Micah  as  hej. 
Jicts  9.3.  as  Saul.;',  he  came  near  Damascus 

7.  the  men  which  7.  with  him  stood,  2t).  13. 
JOURNEYING. 
Oen.  12.  t  9-  Abram  in  going  and 7'.  toward 
J^'um.  10.  2.  make  trumpets  tor.;,  of  the  camps 

29.  we  are  J.  to  the  place  of  which  Lord  said 
J,uke  13.  22.  and  as  he  wasy.  toward  Jerusalem 

2  Cor.  11.  26.  in  ;'.  often,  in  perils  of  waters 

JOURNEYINGS. 
.Vum.  10.  28.  thus  wore  the  j.  of  Israel's  armies 

•     JOURNEYS. 
Oen.  13.  3.  Abram  went  on  hisj.  from  tlie  south 
Eiod.  17.  1..;'.  according  lo  the  commandment 
40. 36.  taken  up,  they  wenl  on  in  ;'.  JSTum.  10. 12. 

38.  the  cloud  was  on  tabernacle  thro'  all  theirj. 
JVam.  10.  6.  they  sliall  blow  an  alarm  for  theirj'. 

33. 1.  these  are  Ibej.  of  Israel  with  armies,  2. 
JOY 

Signifies,  [1]  .?n  agreeable  and  sweet  affection  of 
the  soul,  aris ins  from  some  present  ur  hoped- 
for  good,  IChron.  12.40.  [2]  The  delight  and 
satisfnrtinn  of  the  reasoiiahli:  kouI  in  its  union 
with  God  in  Christ,  as  the  g'rrntest  and  high- 
est good,  with  an  actual  rejoieing  in  what  is 
for  his  honour  and  glory.  Gal.  5.  22.  [3]  That 
joyful  and  glorious  state,  unto  which  Christ 
himself  should  attain  after  his  sufferings,  and 
which  he  will  communicate  to  all  who  believe 
in  him,  Hcb.  12.  2.  [4]  That  free,  graciou^s, 
and  liberal  reward,  which  God  icill  bestow  on 
the  righteous  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Mat. 
25.  21,  23.  [5]  The  matter  or  cause  of  joy,  1 
Thess.  2.  20.  [R]  Songs  of  thanksgiving  and 
praise,  Psal.  42.  4.  It  is,  [1]  J^atural,  Prov. 
23.  24.  Eccl.  2.  10.  [2]  IVirrldlv,  Job  29.  13. 
Isa.  9.3.  [3]  fhtpnrriiiral,  Jnb  20.  5.  Mat. 
13.20.  [4]  Ungodly,  Prov.  1.5.21.  Hns.  9.  I. 
[5]  Mized,  worldly,  and  spiritual,  1  Chron.  12. 
40.  Luke  10.  17.  [6]  Hmvenly,  Mai.  25.  21, 
83.  Luke  15. 7,  10.  [7]  Spiritual,  Psal.  51. 
12.  Rom.  14.  17. 

JOY,  Suhstantire. 

1  Sam.  18.  6.  came  out  to  meet  king  Saul  with 7. 

1  Chrnn.  12.  40.  for  there  was ;'.  in  Israel 

15.  16.  singer?,  by  lifting  up  the  voice  with  ;. 
25.  went  to  bring  the  ark  of  the  covenant  wilhj. 
29.  17.  now  have  I  seen  with 7.  the  people  offer 

2  Chron.  20.  27.  to  go  again  to  Jerusalem  with  7. 
Eira  3   13.  not  discern  noise  of  the  shout  ofj. 

6.  16.  dedication  of  the  house  of  God  wilhj. 
92.  and  kept  the  feast  seven  days  with 7. 
AVA.  8.  10.  the;',  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength 
12.  43.  the  /.  of  Jerusalem  was  hoard  afar  off 

t44.  for  tlie  ;.  ofJudah  and  T,cvit03  which 
Bsih.  8.  16.  the  Jews  had  light, 7.  and  honour 
311 


JOY 

EstK.  9.  22.  turned  to  them  from  sorrow  107'.  they 
should  make  them  days  of  feasting  and  7. 
Job  8. 19.  behold,  this  is  thej.  of  his  way 

t  21.  till  he  till  thy  lips  with  shouting  for  7. 
20. 5.  the7'.  of  the  hypocrite  is  but  for  a  moment 
29. 13. 1  caused  the  widow's  heart  to  sing  for7'. 
33.  26.  and  he  will  see  his  face  with 7. 

41.  22.  and  sorrow  is  turned  into  7.  before  him 
Psal.  16.  11.  in  thy  presence  is  fulness  of7'. 

27.  6.  offer  in  his  tabernacles  sacrifices  of7'. 
30.  5.  but 7.  Cometh  in  the  morning 

42.  4.  I  went  with  the  voice  of7'.  and  praise 

43.  4.  then  will  1  go  to  God  my  e.\ceeding7'. 
48.  2.  the  7.  of  the  whole  earth  is  mount  Ziou 
51.  12.  restore  to  me  thej.  of  thy  salvation 
()5. 1 12.  the  little  hills  are  girded  with7'. 

67.  4.  let  the  nations  be  glad  and  sing  lor 7'. 
105.  43.  he  brought  forth  his  people  with 7. 
126.  5.  they  that  sow  in  tears  shall  reap  in7'. 
137.  6.  if  prefer  not  Jerusalem  above  my  chief7'. 
Prov.  12.  20.  but  to  the  counsellors  of  peace  is7'. 

14.  10.  a  stranger  not  intermeddle  with  hisj. 

15.  21.  folly  is7.  to  him  destitute  of  wisdom 

23.  a  man  hath7'.  by  the  answer  of  his  mouth 
17.  21.  and  the  father  of  a  fool  hath  no7'. 

21.  15.  it  is7'.  to  the  just  to  do  judgment 

23.  24.  who  begettelh  a  wise  child  shall  have  7. 
Eccl.  2.  10.  I  withheld  not  my  heart  from7'. 

26.  God  giveth  him  wisdom,  knowledge,  and7 
5.  20.  God  answereth  him  in  the  7.  of  his  heart 

9.  7.  go  thy  way,  eat  thy  bread  with7'. 

Isa.  9.  3.  not  increased  the7.  according  to  the7'. 

17.  Lord  shall  have  no 7.  in  their  young  men 

12.  3.  with7'.  shall  ye  draw  water  out  of  wells 

16.  10.7'.  is  taken  out  of  the  plentiful  field 

24.  8.7.  of  the  harp  ceaseth  ||  11. 7.  is  darkened 
29. 19.  the  meek  shall  increase  their7'.  in  Lord 
32.  13.  on  all  houses  of 7.  ||  14.  a7'.  of  wild  asses 
35.  2.  and  rejoice  even  with7'.  and  singing 

10.  with  everlasting7.  on  their  heads,  51.  11. 
52.9.  break  forth  into7'.  ||  55.  12.  go  out  with  7'. 

60.  15.  I  will  make  thee  a7'.  of  many  generations 

61.  3.  to  give  them  the  oil  of ;'.  for  mourning 
7.  everlasting^,  shall  be  unto  them 

65.  14.  my  servants  shall  sing  for7'.  of  heart 

18.  for  behold,  I  create  her  people  a7. 

66.  5.  but  he  shall  appear  to  your7'. 

10.  rejoice  for7'.  with  her,  all  ye  that  mourn 
.Ter.  15. 16.  the  word  was  to  me  thej.  of  my  heart 

31. 13.  I  will  turn  their  mourning  into 7. 
3;{.  9.  it  shall  be  to  me  a  name  017.  a  praise 

11.  again  there  shall  be  heard  the  voice  of7'. 

48.  27.  since  thou  spakest,  Ihou  skippedst  for 7. 
33.7.  is  taken  from  the  jilentiful  field 

49.  2.5.  the  city  of  praise,  the  city  of  my7'. 
Lam.  2.  15  the  city,  the7.  of  the  whole  earth 

5.  15.  the7'.  of  our  heart  is  ceased,  our  dance 
/Cz(;t.24. 2.5.  take  from  them  the7.  of  their  glory 

30.  5.  appointed,  with  \\\cj.  of  all  their  heart 
Hos.  9. 1.  rejoice  not,  O  Isr.  forj.  as  other  people 
.loel  1. 12.  because7'.  is  withered  away  from  men 
Zeph.'i.  17.  he  will  rejoice  over  thee  with7'. 
Mat.  13.20.  anon  with 7.  receivelhit,  I.uke  8.  13. 
44.  for7'.  thereof  goeth  and  selleth  all  he  hath 

25.  21.  enter  thou  into  the 7.  of  thy  Lord,  2,3. 
Luke  1.  44.  the  babe  leaped  in  my  womb  for7'. 

6.  23.  rejoice  ye  in  that  day,  and  leap  forj. 

10.  17.  the  seventy  returned  again  with  7. 

15.  7.7'.  shall  be  in  heaven  over  one  sinner  that 

10.  there  is  7.  in  the  presence  of  the  angels 
24.  41.  while  they  yet  believed  not  for 7. 
.I'hn  3.  29.  this  my  7.  therefore  is  fulfilled 

15.  11.  I  have  spoken  to  you,  that  my  7.  might 

remain  in  you,  and  that  your7'.  miglit  be  full 

16.  20.  your  sorrow  shall  be  turned  inl07'. 

21.  lor 7'.  that  a  man  is  born  into  the  world 

22.  and  your7'.  no  man  taketh  from  you 

24.  ye  sliall  receive,  thai  yoiir7'.  may  be  full 

17.  13.  might  have  my  7.  fulfilled  in  thcmselveB 
Jlcts  2.28.make  me  full  of  7.  with  thy  countenance 

13.  .52.  discipl<:s  filled  wil'li7'.  and  the  Holy  Ghost 
20.  24.  that  I  mifflit  finish  my  course  with  ;'. 

Rom.  14. 17.  kingdom  of  God  is7'.  in  the  H.  Ghost 
15.  13.  God  fill  you  with  all 7.  in  believing 
32.  may  come  to  you  with  7.  by  the  will  of  God 

2  Cor.  1.  24.  hut  we  are  helpers  of  your  7. 
2.  3.  that  my  7.  is  the7.  of  yon  all 

7.  13.  the  more  joyed  we  for  the  7'.  of  Titus 
8.2.  the  abundance  of  their  j.  abounded  to  riches 

Gal  .5.22.  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,7.  peace 
Phil.  1.  4.  in  prayer,  making  request  with 7'. 

25.  abide  for  your  furtherance  and  7.  of  faith 

2.  2.  fnlfil  ye  riiy.;'.  ||  4.  1.  inv.;'.  and  crown 

1  TAf'.'!.5.1.6.received  the  word  with7'.of  Holy  Ghost 
2. 19.  what  is  our  hope  or7'.  ||20.  ye  are  our 7. 

3.  9.  for  the7.  wherewith  wp  joy  before  God 
2Tim.  1.  4.  that  I  mav  be  filled  wilnj. 
Philem.  20.  let  me  have?',  of  thee  in  the  Lord 
Heb.  12.  2.  who  for  the  7.  that  was  set  before  him 

13. 17.  they  may  no  it  with  7.  and  not  with  grief 


IRO 

Jam.  1. 2.  count  117'.  when  ye  fall  info  temptation 
4.  9.  and  your7'.  be  turned  into  heaviness 
1  Pet.  1.  8.  ye  rejoice  with  7.  unspeakable 

4.  13.  ye  may  be  glad  also  with  excecdiMg7. 

1  John  1.  4.  that  your7'   may  be  full,  2  John  12. 
3  John  4. 1  have  no  gredter7.  than  to  hear  that  my 
Jude  24.  to  present  you  faultless  with  exceeding7. 
See  Gladnkss. 
Great  JOY. 
1  Kings  1.  40.  the  people  rejoiced  with  great  j. 

1  Chr.  29.  9.  David  the  king  rejoiced  with  great  j 

2  Chron.  30.  26.  so  there  was  great  j.  in  Jerusalem 
JVt/i. 12.43.  G.  had  made  them  rejoice  with  great  j. 
Mat.2.l0.  saw  the  star,  they  rejoiced  with^rreat7'. 

28.8.  went  from  sepulchre  with  fear  and  great  j. 
Luke  2. 10. 1  bring  you  good  tidings  of  great  j. 

24.52.  they  returned  to  Jerusalem  with  great  j 
Jlcls  8.  8.  and  there  was  great  j.  in  that  city 

15.  3.  they  caused  great  j.  to  all  the  brethren 
Philem.  7.  for  we  have  great  j.  in  thy  love 

Shoxit,  or  shouted  for  JO'Y. 
jEzra3.  12.  and  many  shouted  aloud  for  j. 
Job  38.  7.  and  all  the  sons  of  God  shouted  for  j. 
Psal.  5.  11.  let  those  that  put  their  trust  in  the* 
rejoice :  let  them  ever  shout  furj.  35.  27. 

32. 11.  shout  for  j.  all  ye  that  are  upright  in  heart 

05.  13.  the  valleys  shout  for  j.  they  also  sing 
132.  9.  and  let  thy  saints  shout  for  j.  16. 

JOY,  Verb. 
Psal.  21.  1.  the  king  shall7.  in  thy  strength 
Isa.  9.3.  they  7.  before  thee  according  to  the  joy  „ 

65.  19.  I  will  rejoice  and7'.  in  my  people 
Hab.'i.  18.  I  will  7.  in  the  God  of  my  salvation 
Ziph.  3.  17.  he  W1II7.  over  thee  with  singing 
Rom.  5.  11.  but  we  also  7.  in  God  through  our 

Lord  Jesus  Chrisi 
Phil.  2.  17.  yea,  1 7'.  and  rejoice  with  you  all 
18.  for  the  same  cause  also  do  ye  7.  and  rejoice 

1  Thess.3.d.  for  all  the  joy  wherewith  we 7. for  you 

JOYED. 

2  Cor.  7. 13.  the  more  7.  we  for  the  joy  of  Titua 

JOYFUL. 

1  Kings  8.  66.  they  went  to  their  tents 7.  and  glad 
Ezra  6.  22.  for  the  Lord  hath  made  them  7. 
Esth.  5.  9.  then  Haman  went  forth  that  dayj. 
.fob  3.  7.  let  no 7.  voice  come  therein 

Psal.  5.11.  let  them  that  love  thy  name  be7'.  in  the* 
35.  9.  and  my  soul  shall  be 7.  in  the  Lord 
ti3.  5.  my  mouth  shall  praise  thee  with7'.  lips 

66.  1.  make  aj.  noise  to  God,  all  ye  lands 
81.  1.  make  a  7.  noise  to  the  God  of  Jacob 

89.15.  blessed  is  the  people  that  know  the 7'.  sound 
95. 1.  make  a7'.  noise  to  the  rock  of  our  salvation 

2.  a  7.  noise  to  him  with  psalms,  S8. 4.  |  100.  1. 
98.  6.  make  a 7.  noise  before  the  Lord  the  king 

8.  let  the  hills  be  7.  together  before  the  Lord 
113.  9.  the  barren  to  be  a7'.  mother  of  children 
149.  2.  let  the  children  of  Zion  be 7'.  in  their  kinf 

5.  let  the  saints  be 7.  in  glory  ;  let  them  sing 
Eccl.  7. 14.  in  the  day  of  prosperity  be 7'.  but  in 
Isa.  49.  13.  sing,  O  heavens,  and  be7'.  O  earth 
56.  7.  t  will  make  them7'.  in  my  house  of  prayer 
61.  10.  my  soul  shall  hej.  in  my  God 

2  Cor.  7. 4. 1  am  exceeding7'.  in  all  our  tribulation 

JOYFULLY. 
Eccl.  9.9.  live 7'.  wilh  the  wife  whom  thou  lovcst 
/-ui-c  19.0.Zacclicu3  came  down  and  receiv.him7' 
Heb.  13.  34.  ve  look  7.  the  spoiling  of  your  goods 

JOiTULNESS. 
Deut.  28.  47.  because  servedst  not  the  Lord  with7' 
Col.  1.  11.  strengthened  lo  long-suffering  with  7. 

JOYING. 
Col.  2.  5.  absent,  yet  am  I  with  you  in  the  spirit,  i 

JOYOUS. 
Isa.  22.  2.  thou  art  full  of  stirs,  aj.  city 
23.  7.  is  this  your.;',  city,  whose  antiquity  is 
32.  13.  on  all  the  houses  of  joy  in  the,;,  city 
Heb.  12.  11.  no  chastening  seemeth  to  be 7'. 

IRON 
Signifies,  [1]  The  metal  so  called,   Deut.  3.  11. 
[2]  .In  are,  Isa.  10.  34.     [31  Insensible  hard- 
ness, 1  Tim.  4.  2.     [4]  Hard,  dry,  and  barren, 
like  iron,  Deut.  28.  23.     [5]  Unhcndable,  Isa. 
48.  4.     [6]   Mighty  and    irresistible  power, 
Psal.  2.  9.  [7]  Fetters,  ar  chains,  Psal.  107.  la 
[8]  It  denotes  strength,  Dan.  2.  33,  41. 
IRON,  Substantive. 
.ATum.  35.  Ifi.  smite  him  with  an  instrument  of  i. 
I/eut.  3.  11.  Og's  bedstead  was  a  bedstpad  of  i. 
4.20.  Lord  bronffht  you  out  of  the  ;'.  funiace,  out 
of  Egypt,  1  Kings  S.  51.  Jer.  11.  4. 
R.  9.  a  land  whose  stones  are  i.  and  ou'  of  hills 
28.  23.  the  earth  that  is  under  thee  shad  be  t. 
48.  put  a  yoke  of  i.  on  Ihy  neck,  .Ter.  28. 14. 
.fosk.  8.  31.  altar  of  stones,  over  which  no  man 
hath  lifted  up  any  i 

17. 16.  Cannanites  have  chariots  off.  Judg.  1. 19. 
Judg.  4.  3.  had  nine  hundred  chnrints  of  j.  13. 

1  Sam.  17.  7.  his  Bpcar  weighed  (100  sivkels  of  a. 

2  Sam.  12. 31.  under  harrows  of ».  1  Qiron.  20.  3, 


IS 

2  Sam.  23. 7.  but  tlie  man  must  be  fenced  with  f. 

J  Kings  0. 7.  nor  any  tool  of  i.  heuiil  in  tlie  liuuse 
'i-.Ml.  Zudckiah  made  him  hums  ol'i.  'i  CVtr.ld.lU. 

3  Kinifs  0.  0.  and  the  i.  did  swim 

1  CArun.  i^-.  3.  David  prepared  i.  in  abundance 
Sy.  2.  i  prepared  i.  t'ur  the  things  of )'.  7. 

J(>&  '26.  i.  i.  is  taken  out  of  the  earth,  and  hiass 

40.  18.  behemoth's  bones  are  hke  bars  ofV. 

41.  'il.  he  estecmcth  i.  as  straw,  brass  as  wood 
/'.»a/.-2.  9.  thou  Shalt  break  them  wiih  a  rod  of  i. 

1U.">.  18.  whose  feet  they  hurt,  he  was  laid  ini. 

107.  10.  being  bound  in  i.  \\  lb.  cut  bars  of  i. 

14'J.  8.  to  bhid  their  nobles  with  fetters  of  J. 
froc.  -7. 17.  e.  sharpeneih  i.  so  a  man  uis  friend 
Keel.  10.  10.  if  the  i.  be  bhint,  and  he  do  not  whet 
/.v(i.  10.  34.  cut  down  thickets  of  the  forest  witli  i. 

45.  2.  1  will  cut  asunder  the  bars  of  i. 

bO.  17.  for  i.  1  will  bring  silver,  for  stones «. 

I'.r.  15.  \'i.  shall  I.  break  the  northern  i.  and  sti'd  ? 

17.  1.  the  sin  of  Judah  is  written  with  a  pen  ol  i. 

28.  13.  thou  shalt  make  for  them  yokes  of ». 
K-.ck.  4.  3.  lake  an  i.  pan,  and  set  it  for  a  wail  of  a. 

27.  12.  Tarshisli  was  thy  merchant  with  i. 

19.  Dan  and  Javan  occupied  with  bright  i. 
Dan.  2.  .'13.  his  legs  of  i.  feet  part  i.  34,  41,  42. 

33.  then  was  the  i.  and  clay  broken  in  |iieces 
40.  the  fourth  kingdom  shall  be  strong  as  i. 
7.  19.  the  tburth  beast,  whose  teeth  were  of  i. 
,imus  1.  3.  thresh  Gilead  with  instruments  of  i. 
.W(c.  4. 13.  for  I  will  make  thy  horn  i.  and  hoots 
1 1'im.  4.  2.  their  conscience  seared  with  a  hot ». 
At  p.  2.  27.  rule  them  with  a  rod  of  i.  12.  5.  |  19. 15. 
U.  9.  and  tliey  had  as  it  were  breast-plates  of  j. 
Hee  liRAsa. 
lUOx\. 
l>cu.t.^l.  5.  slialtnot  lift  up  any  i.  tool  on  them 
Ji),sA.17.ldtlio'  they  have  i.  chariots,  and  be  strong 
Job  19.  24.  that  they  were  graven  with  an  i.  pen 
20.  24.  he  shall  tiee  from  the  i.  weapon 
Isa.  48.  4.  thy  neck  is  an  i.  sinew,  thy  brow  brass 
Jer.  1.  18.  I  have  made  thee  this  day  an  i.  pillar 
E:ckA.  3.  take  thou  unto  thee  an  i.  pan 
Dan.  7.  7.  it  had  great  «.  teeth,  it  devoured 
.lets  12.  10.  they  came  to  the  i.  gate  that  leads 

IRONri. 
Job  41.7.  canst  thou  fill  his  skin  with  barbed  i.7 

13 
Signifies,  [1]  The  existence  of  a  per.ton,  or  tkin<r, 
1  Cor.  8.  4.    Heb.  11.  (i.     [2]  Hrprcsents,  Cxoil. 
12.11.    Mat.  26.  2(i,  28.     [:{J  J.rads  or  brings 
unto,   Rom.  6.  23.  |  7.  7.     |4]  Oii^At  to  be,  or 
.ft  it  be,   ileb.  13.  4.    [5]  Causcth,  deaerveth, 
Rom.  8.  6. 
Job  II.  ti.  that  they  are  double  to  that  which  is 
J.ake  10.  22.  who  the  .non  is,  and  who  the  Father  u- 
John  1.47. an  Israelite  indeed,  in  whom  is  no  guile 

3.  0.  born  of  flesh  is  tiesh,  of  the  Spirit  is  sj)irit 
13.  buttiic  Son  of  man  which  ism  heaven 
29.  he  that  hath  the  bride  is  the  bride-groom 

4.23.  but  the  hour  eometh,  and  now  is 

7.  27.  no  man  knoweth  whence  he  is 

8.47.  he  that  is  of  (iod  ||  18.  37.  that  is  of  the  truth 

9.  29.  we  know  not  from  whence  he  is,  30. 

Jlets  4.24.  made  the  sea,  and  all  that  in  thi^m  is 
17. 19.  what  new  doctrine  whereof  thou  speakest  is 

Kp/t.  5.  17.  understanding  what  the  will  of  Lord  is 

2  T/icss.  2.4.  above  all  that  is  called  God,  or  that  is 

worshipped,  shewing  him.self  that  ho  is  God 
1  Tim.  4.  8.  having  promise  of  life  tli.it  now  is 
Ileb.  11.  6.  must  believe  he  is,  and  is  u  lewarder 

1  .lohn  3.  2.  for  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is 

3. an  he  is  pure  ||  4.  sin  is  the  transgression  of  law 

liec.  1. 4.  which  is,  was,  and  is  lo  come,  8.  |  4. 8. 

17.  H.  beliol'l  the  beast  that  was,  is  not,  yet  is 

10.  and  one  is  and  the  other  is  not  yet  come 

Sef  HkTTKR,  (,'IIIIIST,  C'LE.iN,  De.vd,  Ephrai.m, 

Fool,  Goto,  Right. 

13  it. 
Orn.  19.  20.  thiR  cit,v  is  near,  is  it  not  a  little  one  ? 
32.  29.  wherefore  is  it  thou  askest  after  my  name 

42.  )4.  that  is  it  that  I  xpake  lo  you,  ye  :ire  Sjiies 
49.  28.  this  is  it  that  their  father.-t  spake  !o  them 

F.ZB-l.^.  18.  how  IS  il  that  you  are  coino  so  soon 

20.  why  is  it  that  ye  have  left  the  man  ? 

5.  22.  MospJi  saiil,  why  is  it  that  thou  hiet  sent 

32.  18.  neither  is  it  the  voice  of  thein  ihal  cry 

33.  16.  IS  it  not  in  that  Ihou  go»t  with  us  ? 
Deut.  3.  II.  IS  it  not  in  Rabbmh  of  Aminon? 

:iO.I  l.nor  is  it  far  offH  13.  nor  is  it  beyond  tliosoa 

Jadg.  14.  15.  to  take  that  wo  have,  is  it  not  go? 

1.Sain.9.20.is  it  not  on  thor.and  onfiithtr's  house? 

10. 1.  is  it  not  becauto  the  I,ord  halh  anointed 

12.  17.  is  i£  not  wheat  harv(!'<t  tii-dny  ?  I  will  call 

2  Kings  I.  3.  is  it  notherausiino  God  in  Ii<r.  6,  Ki. 

4.  20.  IS  it  well  with  thoo,  is  it  well  with  hu.band 
9.  17.  and  let  him  sav,  is  it  peace,  18,  19,  '22. 
20.  19.  is  it  not  gooif,  if  pence  be  in  my  days 

1  ( 7(r.21.17.  is  it  not  I  that  ronimandcd  the  people 
Jnb  10.  3.  is  irgood,  13.  9.  ||  l.l.  23.  say,  where  is  it 
22.  3.  IS  It  nnv  pleasure  to  the  Almighty  that 
313 


IS 

Prov.  15.23.  a  word  indue  season,  how  jood  is  it! 
Jsa.  7. 13.  ijr  it  a  small  thing  for  you  to  weaiy  uivn 

29.I7.is  it  not  yet  a  very  liitle  wliile,  and  Lebanon 

3b.  7.  is  It  not  he  whose  high  places  and  altars 

58.  5.  ts  it  such  a  fast  that  I  have  chosen  ? 
7.  »«  it  not  to  deal  thy  bread  to  the  hungry  7 
Jer.  10.  5.  neither  also  is  it  in  them  to  do  good 
y>am.l.l2.is  it  noihing  lo  you,  all  ve  llial  puss  by  1 
JJan.  3.  14.  is  it  true,  O  Shadrach,  Meshach  ! 
Jimus  2.11.is>t  not  even  thus.  O  children  of  Israel? 
J\lic.  1.5.  transgression  of  Jacob,  is  it  not  Samaria? 

3.  1.  is  it  not  fur  you  to  know  iudginent  1 
Hab.  2. 13.  is  it  nut  of  the  Ld.  ol  hosts  that  people 
Hag.  2.  3.  is  it  nut  in  yuur  eyes  as  nuihing  ? 
Zcch.  5.  6.  what  is  it  ?  Mat.  2b.  02.  Mark  14.  CO. 
Acts  10.  4. 1  21.  22.  2  Cor.  12. 13.  Kpli.  4. 9. 
J\lal.  1.  8.  IS  il  not  evil  ||  3.  14.  what  prolii  is  it 
Mat.  12.  10.  is  It  lawful  lu  heal  on,  Luke  14.  3. 

Ib.U.how  is  il  ye  do  not  understand,  Mark  8.  21. 

19.3.  is  it  lawful  to  put  away  his  wife,  Mark  10. 2 

20.  15.  is  it  not  lawful  fur  me  to  do  what  1  will 
22.  17.  is  it  lawful  to  give  tribute  to  Cesar,  or 

not?  Mark  12.  14.  J.uke  20.  22. 
26.22.  began  to  say.  Lord,  is  it  1?  25.  Mark  14.19. 
02.  what  is  it  which  these  witness,  Mark  14.00. 
Mark  2.  9.  whether  is  it  easier  to  say,  thy  sins 

10.  how  is  it  that  he  eatelli  with  publicans 
3.4. is  it  lawful  to  du  guod  on  sabbath,  lAikcfi.9. 
4.40. he  said,  how  is  it  that  you  have  no  laith  ? 

9.  21.  how  long  is  it  ago  since  this  came  to  him? 

10.  24.  hard  is  it  for  them  that  trust  in  riches 
ll.n.saying  to  theiii,is  it  not  written,  .lukn  10.34. 

J.nke  2.  49.  lie  said  to  thein,  how  is  it  ye  sought  me 
12.  50.  how  is  it  that  yo  do  not  discern  this  time? 

10.  2.  how  is  it  that  1  hear  this  of  thee  ? 
22.  (54.  pro|)hesy,  who  is  it  that  smote  thee? 

.lo/in  4.  9.  how  is  il  thou  being  a  Jew  askesi  of  me 
14.  22.  how  is  it  that  thou  wilt  manifest  thyself? 

.^Icts  5.  9.  how  is  it  that  ye  have  agreed  together 
22.25.  is  it  lawful  for  you  to  scourge  a  Roman  ? 

1  Cor.  6.  5.  is  it  so,  that  there  is  not  a  wise  man 
9.  1 1.  is  it  a  great  matter  if  we  reap  your  curiial 
10. 10.  is  it  not  the  communion  of  blood  of  Christ 
12.  1.1.  is  it  therefore  not  of  the  body,  10. 
14.  20.  how  is  it  every  one  of  you  hath  a  psnlm 

1  Pet.  2. 20.  what  glory  is  it,  if,  »  hen  ye  be  buffeted 

IJoAn  4.  3.  even  now  already  is  it  in  the  world 
/t  IS. 

f?ff7i.3 1 .29.  it  is  in  the  power  of  my  hand  to  do  hurt 
41.  16.  and  Jdscph  answered,  it  is  not  in  me 

vV/im.  13.  18.  go  up  and  see  the  land  what  it  is 

Deut.  31.  8.  ho  it  is  that  doth  go  before  thee 

1  Soni.3. 18.  it  is  the  Lord,  let  him  do  what  seems 

2  .Sam.  13.  35.  so  it  is.  Jot,  5.  27.  Luke  12.  54. 

21.  1.  il  is  for  Saul  and  for  his  bloody  house 

2  Kings  10.  IS.is  thine  heart  right  as  my  heart?  it  is 

1  f  Vir.e.lO.  he  it  is  that  executeth  the  [irieslf  suffice 
21.17.  even  1  itis  that  have  sinned,  and  done  evil 

2  C/ifon.  5.  9.  and  there  it  is  unto  this  d:iy 

.lob  20.  3.  how  hast  thou  declared  the  thing  as  it  is 
/'.■i.39.4.to  know  the  measure  of  my  days  what  it  is 
.kr.  30.  7.  it  is  even  the  time  of  Jacob's  trouble 
Imm.  3.  22.  it  is  of  Lord's  mercies  not  consumed 
Kick.  21.  27.  till  he  come  whu.se  right  it  is 
Mat.C>.  10.  will  be  done  on  earth,  as  it  is  in  heaven 

1-1 . 27.of  good  cheer,it  is  l,be  notafr.iid,./()/i77  6.20. 

16.7.  it  is  because  we  have  no  bread,  Mark  B.  16. 
.John  1 .27. he  it  is  who  coming  after  me  is  preferred 

7.  22.  not  because  it  is  of  Moses,  but  the  fnlheis 

1.3.  26.  he  it  is  to  whom  I  shall  give  n  sop 

14.  21.  hath  eommandrnenls,  ho  it  is  that  loveth 
.'ifts  12.  15.  then  said  they,  it  is  his  angel 

1  Cor.  ItlU.  try  every  man's  work,  of  what  sort  it  is 

11.  14.  that  li"  a  man  have  long  hair  it  is  a  shame 

15.  if  a  woman  have  long  hair  it  is  a  glory  to  hiT 

2  Cur.  5. 13.  it  is  to  God,  or  if  we  bo  sober,  il  is  for 
Gal.  4.  29.  but  as  then,  even  so  it  is  now 

Cnl.  1.  ti  «<  come  to  you,  as  it  is  in  all  the  world 

iTficss   ..   1    be  glorified,  evoii  as  it  is  with  you 

See  Biiiioi.D,  Bkttkr,  Good,  VVitfnEN. 

IS  not. 

f?r?!.37.30.the  child  is  ni>ti|42.I3.and  one  isnot,32. 
42.36. and  Jaeoh  snid,Jotieph  is  not.  Simoon  is  not 
44.  5.  is  not  this  it  in  which  my  Lord  drinkelh  ? 

F.zod.  4.  14.  is  net  .Aaron  the  Levito  thy  hrolher? 
14.  12.  is  not  this  the  word  that  we  did  tell  thee? 

JVuni.  12.  7.  my  servant  Mohi-s  is  not  so,  %vho  is 
l().4fl.  is  not  of  seed  of  Aaron,  eoine  ncartoofTcr 
91.  19.  (jod  is  not  a  man  that  ho  should  lie 

Dent.  11.  10.  the  land  is  not  as  the  land  of  Egypt 
29.  15.  also  with  him  that  is  not  here  this  day 
31.  17.  because  our  God  is  not  omongsl  us 
32  0.  is  vol  ho  thy  FalhiT  thit  bought  thee? 
31.  for  their  rock  is  not  as  niirrnr-lt 
.34.  is  not  this  laid  lip  in  store  with  me  ? 

Judg.  4.  14.  IS  not  the  Lord  pone  out  bpforo  thro? 
19.12.  a  city  that  is  not  of  tlip  rhildri'n  of  Israel 

1  .Sam. 15.29.  he  is  not  a  man  that  he  should  repent 

20.  '.fj.  ho  cried,  is  not  the  arrow  hevond  thio  ? 

21.  11.  is  u>t  this  DaYiJkingof  the  land?  29.3,5. 


18 

2  Sam.  11.  3.  is  not  (his  Bath-sheba  wife  orUrialit 
14. 19.  is  not  the  hand  of  Joab  with  thee  in  ttiu 
'.'0.  21.  and  Joab  said,  the  matter  is  not  so 
23.  17.  is  not  this  the  blood  of  the  men  that  went 
I  Kings  8.41.  stranger  that  is  not  of  Isr.  2  CAr.0.32 
'^Kings  6. 19.  this  is  not  the  way,  nor  this  the  city 
32.  is  not  the  sound  of  his  m.isler's  feet  behind 

1  Chron.  22. 18.  isnot  the  Lord  your  God  with  yoi, 

2  Chron.  25.  7.  for  the  Lord  is  not  with  Israel 
Kstk.  4.  10.  which  is  not  according  to  the  law 
Job  4.  6.  IS  not  this  thy  fear,  thy  confidence 

6.13.is  not  my  lielji  in  me  ||  9.32.he  is  not  a  man  at 

21.  16.  lu,  their  good  is  not  in  Iheir  hand 

22.  5.  is  not  thy  wickedness  great  and  infinite  ? 
12.  is  not  God  in  the  height  of  heaven  ? 

23.  8.  behold,  1  go  forward,  but  he  is  not  thero 
27. 19.  the  rich  man  openelh  his  eyes,  and  he  is  n.? 

I'rov.  7.  19.  for  the  good  man  is  not  at  home,  he  is 
23.  5.  wilt  Ihou  set  thy  eyes  on  that  which  is  rot 
7.  eat,  saiih  he,  but  his  heart  is  not  with  theo 

Keel.  9.  11.  1  saw  the  race  is  not  lo  the  swift 

/so.l0.9.is  7iot  Calno,  is  not  Hamath, is  not  Sainar. 
17.  14.  and  behold,  before  the  morning  he  is  not 
55.  2.  spend  money  for  that  which  is  not  bread 

Jer.  .5.  13.  and  Iho  word  is  ?iot  in  the  prophets 
8.19.isnot  the  Lord  in  Zion, is  not  her  King  in  her 

10.16.  the  portion  of  Jacob  isnollike  them,  51.19. 
23.1  know  that  the  way  of  man  is  not  in  him.self 

23. 29.  IS  not  my  w  ord  like  as  a  fire,  saith  the  Lord 
38.  5.  the  king  is  not  he  that  can  du  any  thing 
49.10.and  Esau  is  not  \\  51.9.  but  she  is  not  healed 

F.zek.  18.  25.  ye  say  the  way  of  the  Lord  is  not 
ei|ual,  is  not  my  way  equal?  29.  |  33. 17,20. 

/Jan.2.11.lhe  gods,»  hose  dwelling  is  notwilh  flesb 

30.  as  for  me,  this  secret  is  not  reveahid  to  me 

4.30.isnr.t  this  great  Babylon,  that  1  have  built 

tins.  2.  2.  tor  she  is  not  my  wife,  nor  I  her  husband 

Mic.  2.  10.  arise,  depart,  for  this  is  not  your  rest 
3.  11.  yet  will  they  say,  is  not  the  Lord  among  us 

Ifab.  2.  4.  his  soul  which  is  lilled  up  is  not  upright 

ZfcA.3.2. is  nut  this  a  brand  plucked  out  of  ih'-  fire? 

.W(it.l3.55.is  not  tins  the  caipenter'sson,  is  ml  h'S 
20.23.on  my  left,  is  not  mine  to  give,  Mark  10.40 
22.32.jGod  isnot  the  God-of  thedo:id,  but  of  the 
living,  Mark  12.  27.  J.nke  20.  38. 
24.6.  come  to  pass,  but  the  end  is  not  yet,  /.ii.2l.9. 
28.  6.  he  is  not  here,  for  he  is  risen,  I.uke  24.  (i. 

/^nke  6.  40.  the  disciple  is  not  above  his  master 
22.  27.  is  not  he  that  sitteth  at  meat  greater 

.lohn  3.  18.  he  that  believelh  >s  not  condemned 
5. 31.  my  witness  i.s  not  tiuc  ||  9.16.  this  man  is  na< 
11.4.  Jesus  said, this  sickness  isnot  unto  death 
14.24.  the  word  which  you  hear  is  not  mine,  7,16. 
18.36.  mv  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world 

Rom.  2.  28.  he  is  not  a  Jew  that  is  one  outwardly 

29.  whose  praise  is  not  of  men  but  of  Gml 
3.29.is  not  he  also  of  the  Gentiles,  yes,  of  Gentiles 
8.  24.  but  hope  that  is  seen  is  not  hope 

14. 17.  the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  moit  and  drink 
23.  fiir  whatsoever  is  not  of  fiiith  is  sin 

1  Cor.  4.  20.  for  the  kin!.'dom  of  God  is  not  in  word 

6.  i:!.  now  the  body  isnot  lor  tornicalion 

7.  15.  a  broiher  or  sister  is  not  iiniler  bondage 
II.  8.  lor  the  man  is  not  of  the  woman,  but  the 

20.  this  is  not  to  eat  the  Lord's  ,'.iip|H'r 
12.14.  for  the  boily  is  nnt  one  nienber,  hutmanjr 
13.  4.  charily  enviolli  not,  is  not  puffed  up 
15. 39.  all  flesh  is  not  the  same  lle>h,  but  Ihcro  ■« 
58.  that  your  labour  is  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord 
tro/. 1.7. which  is  not  nnnther,biit  some  trouble  you 
II.  the  gospel  preached  by  me  is  nnt  af'er  man 
3.l2.luw  is  not  of  faith  \\  20.is  n.  a  mediator  ofono 
6.  7.  be  not  deceived,  (Jod  is  not  mocked 
/^Ai7. 3. 1.  to  wiile  I  he  same  to  me  is  not  grievoin 
//?ft.  6.10.  for  God  is  not  nnrighteoiiB,  to  forget 
2  Pet  3.  9.  ihe  Lord  is  not  slack  concerning  hU 
1  .lohn  1.8.  the  truth  isn.in  u»,2.4.H  MO.woid  isn. 

2.  15.  the  hive  of  ihe  Father  is  not  in  h  m 
16.  is  not  of  the  F'lilhcr,  but  is  of  lh>'  world 

3.  10.  doth  nut  rifhlcoiisiiesB,  is  not  of  God,  4.Tt,f». 
5. 16.  if  brother  sin  a  sin  which  is  nnt  iinlodenih 

fte?'.  17.  8.  b':«st  thou  hnwe8',«ns,  and  is  not,  II 

n  IS  not. 
Gen.  2.  la  it  is  not  good,  I'rov.  18.  5.  |  25.27.  ( 
2S.  21.   Hos.  a.  «.  Mat.  19.  10. 
31.  5.  that  it  is  not  townrds  me  as  before 
41.  16.  it  is  not  in  me,  God  shall  give  an  answer 
F.iod.  8.  2li.  and  Moses  said,  t  is  not  meet  so  lo  do 
Deitt.  :!2  47.  for  il  i.t  not  a  vn-n  thing  for  you 
1  Som.  6.9.shall  know  it  is  not  his  hand  that  smote 
20.  2.  Jonathan  said,  (Jod  forbid,  it  is  not  mt 
F.zra  5.  16.  been  in  building,  yi-t  it  is  tint  finisheif 
./oA9.  35.  I  woulil  speak,  but  it  is  not  so  wilhmr 
28.14.it  isnot  in  mc,lhescn  suitli, it  is  notw^h  tn« 
3.5.15.biit  now  because  it  is  nnt  so, he  hnlh  risited 
Tror. 31.  4.  it  isnot  forkinffs,  O  Lemuel,  to  drink 
.//•r.5. 12. itis  not  he||10.2;t.it  isnot  in  innn Indirect 
Fzrk.  11.3.  which  »av,  it  is  not  near,  let  us  build 
.3fnt. 10.20.ror  il  is  not  ye  that  speak,  but  IhnBpiril 
13.  ll.toyou  it  is  given,  but  to  IhemitisMolgivac 


IS 

JtfatMA.it  is  not  law.to  have  her,27.6.  Mark  6.18. 

15.2tj  it  is  not  incet  totakecliildreii's,  .A/urA  7.27. 

18.  14  even  so  it  is  not  the  will  of  your  Father 
Acts  1.  7.  it  is  not  for  you  to  know  the  times 

6.2.tt  IS  not  reason  that  we  should  leave  the  word 

22.  22.  for  it  is  not  tit  that  he  should  live 

25.  16.  it  is  not  the  manner  of  the  Romans 
Horn.  9.  16.  so  then  it  is  not  of  him  that  willuth 
i  Cor.  12.  1.  it  is  not  expedient  for  me  to  glory 

IS  there. 
Gen.  31. 14.  ts  (Acre  yetany  portion  or  inheritance 
/)eu£.  3. 24.  what  God  is  there  in  heaven  or  earth 

4.7.what  nation  is  there  so  great,  who  hath  God,8. 

5.  26.  who  is  there  of  all  tlesh  that  hath  heard 

20.  5.  what  man  is  there  that  hath  huilt,  7,  8. 

32.  28.  nor  is  there  any  understanding  in  them 
Judg.A.'iQ.is  there  any  man  ||  14.3.  is  there  never  a 

21.5.  who  is  there  among  all  the  tribes  of  Israel,  8. 
1  Sam.  2.  2.  neither  is  there  any  rock  like  our  God 

17.  29.  and  David  said,  is  there  not  a  cause? 
8Sayn.7.22.  nor  is  t.any  God  besides  thee,  /sa.44.8. 
,      9.  1.  is  there  any  that  is  left  of  Saul's  house,  3. 

1  Jrin^s22.7.is  there  not  here  a  prophet  of  the  Ld. 

besides  ?  2  Kings  3.  11.  2  Chron.  18. 6. 

2  Chr.  20. 6.  in  thy  hand  is  t.  not  power  and  might? 
36.23.  who  is  t.among  you  of  his  people?  £zral.3. 

JVeA. 6.1  Land  who  is  tAcre  being  as  I  am  would  go 
Job  6.  30.  is  (Acre  iniquity  in  my  tongue,  33.  9. 

15.  11.  is  there  any  secret  thing  with  thee? 
Psal.  30.  9.  w  hat  profit  is  t.  in  my  blood  when  I  go 
Prov.  17.  16.  is  there  a  price  in  the  hand  of  a  fool 
£ecZ.1.10.is  there  any  thing  whereof  it  may  be  said 

5.  11.  what  good  is  there  to  the  owners  thereof 
Isa-  2.  7.  nor  is  there  any  end  of  their  treasures, 
nor  is  there  any  end  of  their  chariots 

44.19.  nor  is  there  knowledge  to  s  jy,  I  have  burnt 

20.  nor  say,  is  there  not  a  lie  in  my  right  hand  ? 
Jer.  8.22.  is  t.  no  balm  in  Gilead,  is  t.  no  physician 

32.  27. 1  am  Lord,  is  t.any  thing  too  hard  for  me 
37.  17.  asked  him,  is  there  any  word  from  the  Ld. 
Hos.Vi.ll.  is  there  iniquity  in  Gilead,  surely  vanity 
Mnws  6. 10.  is  t.  j'et  any  with  thee,  ye  shall  say,  no 
Jt/at.7.9.what  man  is  there  oC  you,  whom  if  his  son 
.Jets  4. 12. nor  is  t/tere  salvation  in  any  other,  for  no 
Rom.  3.  1.  what  profit  is  there  of  circumcision  ? 
9.  14.  is  there  nnrighteousness  with  God? 

7'Aere  IS. 
Lev.li.35.  tlureis  as  it  were  a  plague  in  the  house 
A*um.  11.6.  there  is  nothing  at  all  besides  manna 
Deut.'H.  39. 1  am  he,  and  there  is  no  god  with  me 
Judg.  19.19.  yet  there  is  both  straw  and  provender 

21.  19.  (Aere  is  a  feast  of  the  Lord  in  Shiloh 
1  Sam.  14.  6.  lor  there  is  no  restraint  to  the  Lord 

17.  46.  may  know  that  £Aerc  is  a  God  in  Israel 
20.3.  there  is  but  a  step  between  me  and  death 

21.  then  come  thou,  for  (Acre  is  peace  to  thee 
1  Kings  5.  4.  there  is  neither  adversary  nor  evil 

8.23.  t.  is  no  God  like  thee  in  heaven,  2  Chr.  6. 14. 
46.  there  is  no  man  that  sinneth  not,  2  Chr.  6. 36. 

14.2.  behold,  there  is  Ahijah  the  prophet  who  told 
1 /iTino's  22.8.  th.  is  one  man,  Micaiahson  of  Imlah 
3  Kings  5. 8.  he  shall  know  t.  is  a  prophet  in  Israel 
Ezra  10. 2.  yet  tAere  is  hope  in  Israel,  Job  11.18 
Esth.  3.  8.  (Acre  is  a  certain  people  scattered 
Job  19.29.  that  ye  may  know  there  is  a  judgment 

22.  29.  then  thou  shall  say,  (Aere  i'S  lifting  up 
.32.  8.  but  (Acre  is  a  spirit  in  man,  the  inspiration 

PsaM4.1.  the  fooi  hath  said,  there  is  no  God,  53.1. 
19. 11.  in  keeping  them  (Acre  is  great  reward 
34.  y.  (Acre  is  no  want  to  them  that  fear  him 
46.  4.  (Acre  is  a  river  whose  streams  make  glad 
58.  11.  verily  there  is  a  reward  for  the  righteous 
68.  27.  (Acre  is  little  Benjamin  with  their  ruler 
146.3.  put  not  trust  in  man,  in  whom  t.  is  no  help 

Prov.  11.24.  there  isthatscaltereth,  yet  increaseth 

13.  7.  (Acre  is  that  maketh  himself  rich,  yet  hath 

14.  9.  but  among  the  righteous  (Acre  is  favour 
12.  t.is  a  way  that  scemelh  right  to  a  man,  16.25. 
2.3.  in  all  labour  (A.  is  profit  ||  23. 18.  (A.  is  an  end 

30. 11.  (Acre  is  a  generation  thatcurseth,  12,13,14. 

Eccl.  3. 1.  to  every  thing  th.  is  a  season,  and  a  time 
7.  15.  (Aere  is  a  just  man,  (Acre  is  a  wicked  man 
8.4.  where  the  word  of  a  king  is,  (Acre  is  power 
Ifi.  (Acre  is  that  neither  day  nor  night  seeth  sleep 
9. 2.  (Acre  is  one  event  ||  4. for  to  him  (Acre  is  hope 

fsa.  43.  11.  and  besides  me  (Acre  is  no  Saviour 
44.  6.  and  besides  me  (Acre  is  no  God,  8.  |  45. 5. 
47. 1. 1.  is  no  throne,  Odiiughter  of  the  Chaldeans 
48.  22.  (.  is  no  peace  to  wicked,  57. 21.  Jer.  6.  14. 
50.2.  because  (.  is  no  water  ||53. 2.  (.is  no  beauty 
57.  10.  saidst  thou  not,  (.  is  no  hope,  Jer.  2. 25.  ( 

18.  12. 

Jer.31.17.(.  is  hope  in  thy  end  ||  .37. 17.  he  said,  (.  is 

JEiei.  22  25.  (Acre  is  a  conspiracy  of  her  prophets 
32. 24.  (A.  is  Elam  ||  29.  tAere  is  Edom,  her  kings 
34.5. were  scattered,  because  (Acre  is  no  shepherd 

Dan.  2.  28.  (Acre  is  a  God  that  revealeth  secrets 
5.  11.  (Aere  is  a  man  in  thy  kingdom  in  whom  is 

I/cs.  4.  1.  because  (Acre  is  no  truth,  or  mercy 

JVaA.3.I9.  (.  it  do  boaling  of  thy  bruise,  thy  wound 
Ji3 


JU 

Mat.  22.  23.  the  Sadducees,  who  lay,  (Aer«  is  no 
resurrection,  JJark  12.  18.  1  Cor.  15.  12. 
Mark  10.18.(Acre  is  none  good  but  ono,that  is  God 
Luke  14.  22.  and  yet  (.  is  room  {|  15.  10.  (.  is  joy  in 
Joh7t  8.  44.  because  (Acre  is  no  truth  in  liim 

11.  lU.  he  stumbleth,  because  (.  is  no  light  in  him 
1  Cur.  3.  3.  (Acre  is  among  you  envying  and  strife 

5. 1.  it  is  reported  (Acre  is  fornication  among  you 

8. 6.  but  to  us  (Acre  is  but  one  God,  the  Father 

15.44.  t/iere  is  a  natural  body,  t.is  a  spiritual  body 

frai.5.23.tempcrance,  against  such  (Acre  is  no  law 

Col.  3.  25.  and  (Acre  is  no  respect  of  persons 

l./oAn  4.18.(Aere  is  no  fear  in  love,  but  perfect  love 

5.1(>.(Aereisasin  unto  death,  1  do  not  say  he  shall 

17.  and  (Acre  is  a  sin  not  unto  death 

See  None,  One. 

There  IS  not. 

Gen.4.7.18.therc  is  not  ought  left  in  sight  of  my  lord 

2  Sam.  13.30.  slain  the  king's  sons, (A. is  7iot  one  left 

lKings5.(j.th.is  not  among  us  that  can  >kill  to  hew 

2  Kings  1.  3.  not  because  there  is  not  a  God  in 

Israel,  6. 

19.  3.  to  birth,  and  (A.  is  not  strength  to  bring  forth 

.Job  41.  33.  upon  earth  (Acre  is  not  his  like 

£;cci.4.8.there  is  one  alone,  and  there  is  not  second 

Cant.  6.  6.  and  (Acre  is  not  one  barren  among  them 

Luke  7.28.  there  is  not  a  greater  prophet  than  John 

1  C(/r.6.5.that  (Acre  is  not  a  wise  man  amongst  you 
8.  7.  (Acre  is  not  in  every  man  that  knowledge 

ISLAND,  &c.     See  after  Iunorantly. 
ISSUE 
Signifies,  [I]  .^passage,  way,  or  outlet,  Psal.  68. 
20.    [2]  CAiWrcn  or ;;os(cri(y.  Gen.  48.  6.    [3] 
Afiux  or  running.  Lev.  12.  7.  [4]  Seed,  Ezek. 
23.  20.     [5]   To   spring   or  proeecd  from,   2 
Kings  20.  18.  [6]  To  flow,  Ezek.  47.  8.     [7]  To 
come  forth  hastily  and  violently,  Josh.  8.  22. 
ISSUE,  Substantive. 
Gen.  48. 6.  thy  t.  which  thou  begeitest  after  them 
Lev.  12.  7.  the  i.  of  her  blood,  15.  25.  Mat.  9.  20. 
Mark  5.  25.  J^uke  8.  43,  44. 
15.  2.  running  i.  3.  |  22.  4.  ||  J 5.  8.  hath  the  i.  28. 

2  Sam.  3.29.  from  the  house  of  Joab,  one  hath  an  i. 
Isa.22.  24.  shall  hang  on  him  the  oifspiing  and  i. 
Ezek.  23.  20.  whose  i.  is  like  the  i.  of  horses 
Mat.  22.25.  having  no  t.  left  his  wife 

ISSUE. 
2  Kings  20.18.thy  sons  that  i.from  thee,  Isa.  39. 7. 
-EzcA.  47.  8.  these  waters  i.  toward  the  east  country 

ISSUED. 
.Tosh.  8.  22.  other  i.  out  of  the  city  against  them 
.fob  38.  8.  break  forth  as  if  it  i.  out  of  the  womb 
Ezek.  47.  1.  waters  i.  from  under  the  threshold 

12.  because  their  waters  i.  out  of  the  sanctuary 
Dan.  7.  10.  a  fiery  stream  i.  and  came  forth 
Rev.  9.  17.  and  out  of  their  mouths  i.  fire,  18. 

ISSUES. 
Psal.  68.  20.  to  God  belong  the  i.  from  death 
Prov.  4.23.  keep  heart,  for  out  of  it  are  the  i.  of  life 

IT. 

Pro!). 4.23.  keep  Iieart,  foi/out  of  i(  are  issues  of  life 

Isa.  6. 13.  in  it  shall  be  a  tenth,  and  it  shall  return 

7.  7.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  it  shall  not  stand 

11.  10.  to  it  shall  the  Gentiles  seek,  and  his  rest 

30.  21.  a  word,  saying,  this  is  the  way,  walk  in  it 

51.  9.  art  thou  not  it  that  hath  cut  Rahab? 

10.  art  thou  not  it  which  hath  dried  the  sea? 

See  Better,  Goon,  Writtkn,  Sklf. 

ITCH. 

Deut.  28.  27.  the  Lord  will  smite  thee  with  the  i. 

ITCHING. 
2  T'im.4.3.6hall  they  heap  teachers  having  i.  ears 

JUDGE 
Signifies,   [1]   To   try  and  determine   a  cause, 
Exod.  18. 13.  1  Cor.  6.  2.  [2]  Rightly  to  under- 
stand and  discern,  1  Cor.  2. 15.     [3]  To  cen- 
sure rashly,  Mat.  7.  1.  ICor.  4.  3.  [4]  Topro- 


JU 

Psal.  7. 1 11.  God  is  a  righteous/  and  is  angry 
50. 6.  heavens  declare,  for  God  is>  himscU;  selal- 
68.  5.  a^'.  of  the  widows  ||  75  7.  God  is  the 7. 
94.  2.  lilt  up  thyself,  tliou  ./.  of  the  earth,  render 

Isa.  3.  2.  doth  take  away  from  Jerusalem  thej. 

Jlmos  2. 3. 1  will  cut  oil' thej. from  the  midst  thereof 

Mic.5.1.  they  shall  smite  the  ./.  of  Is.ael  with  a  rod 
7.  3.  prince  askuth,  and  thej.  asketli  for  a  reward 

Mat.  5. 25.  the  adversary  deliver  thee  to  the  j.  the 
j.  deliver  thee  to  the  ofiicer,  Luke  12.  58 

Luke  12.  14.  man,  who  made  me  aj.  over  you? 
18.2.say)ng,  there  was  in  a  city  aj.  feared  not  G 
6.  the  Lord  said,  hear  what  the  unjust  j.  saith 

Jlcts  10.  42.  of  God  to  be  thej.  of  quick  and  dead 
18.  15.  for  I  will  be  noj.  of  such  matters 
24.10.  hast  been  of  many  years  a  j.  of  this  nation 

2  Tim.  4.8.  the  Lord  the  righteous  j.  shall  give  me 

Heb.  12.  23.  yc  are  come  to  God  the  ./.  of  all 

Jam.  4.  11.  thou  art  not  a  doer  of  the  law,  but  aj. 
5.  !l.  behold,  the  ./.  slandeth  before  the  door 
JUDGE,  yt7b,  applied  to  God  and  Christ. 

^cn. 16.5  j.  between  me  and  tliee,  1  5a7n.  24.12,15. 
31.  53.  the  God  of  Iheir  father  j.  betwixt  us 

Exod.  5.  21.  tiicy  said,  \hc  Lord  look  on  you,  andj. 

Deul.  32.  36.  tiur  the  Loid  shall  j.  liis  people,  Ps. 
.50.  4. 1 13.5.  14.  Heb.  10.  30. 

\Sam.  2.10.  the  Ld.  shall  j.  the  ends  of  the  earth 
24.  t  15.  the  Lord  j.  mo  out  of  thy  hand 

IKivgs  8.  32.  hear  and  j. thy  servants,  2  CAr.  fi.23. 

1  CAr.l(i..33.cometh  to  j.  the  earth,  Ps.  96.13.  |  98.9. 

2  CAron.20  12.  O  our  God,  wilt  thou  not  j.  them? 
■hb  22. 13.  sayest,  can  he  j.lhiough  the  dark  cloud? 
Psal.l.S.lbe  Lord  shall  j.  the  people  righteously, 

9.  8.  I  50.  4.  I  96.  10. 
10. 18.^.  the  fatherless  and  poor,  82.  t3.  Isa.  11.4. 
26.  1.  j.  me,  O  Lord,  7.  8.  |  35.  24.  |  43.  1.  |  54. 1. 
Lam.  3.  59. 
82. 8.  arise,  O  God,  j.  the  earth,  thou  shalt  inherit 
96.  13.  he  shall  j.  the  world  with  righteousness, 
98.  9.  Mts  17.  31. 
110.  6.  he  shall  j.  among  tlie  heathen 
Eccl.  3.  17.  God  shall  j.  the  righteous  and  wicked 
Isa.  2.  4.  and  he  shall  j.  among  the  nations 
3.  13.  the  Lord  standeth  to  j.  the  people 

11.  3.  he  shall  not  j.  after  the  sight  of  his  eyes 
51.  5.  and  mine  arm  shall  j.  the  people 

Ezek.  7.  3.  and  will  j.  thee  according  to  thy  ways 
34.  17.  behold  1  j.  between  cattle  and  cattle 
.foel  3.  12.  there  will  I  sit  to  j.  the  heathen 
Mic.  4.  3.  he  shall  j.  among  many  people 
■fohn  5.  30.  as  I  hear  I  j.  my  judgment  is  just 
8.  15.  Ij.  no  man  ||  16.  and  ytt  if  Ij. 
26. 1  have  many  things  to  say  and  to  j.  of  you 

12.  47.  I  j.  him  not,  I  came  not  to  j.  the  world 
Rom.  2. 16.  when  God  shall  j.  the  secrets  of  men 

3.  6.  for  then  how  shall  God  j.  the  world? 
2Tim.  4.1.  who  shall  j.  quick  and  dead,  1  Pet.  4.  5. 
Heb.  13  4.  whoremongers  and  adulterers  G.  will  j. 
Rrv.  6.  10.  dost  thou  not  j.  and  avenge  our  blood 
19.  11.  in  riglitpoustiess  he  doth  j.  and  make  war 
See  farther,  I  will  Judge. 
JUDGE,  applied  to  Man,  or  other  things. 
Geii.  31.  37.  that  they  may  j.  betwixt  us  both 
49.16.  Dan  shall  j.  his  people  as  oneof  the  tribe* 
Exod.  18.  13.  that  Moses  sat  to  j.  the  people 
16.  they  oome,  I  j.  between  one  and  another 
22.  but  every  small  matter  they  shall  j. 
Lev.   19.   15.  in  righteousness  shalt  thou  j.  thy 
neighbour,  Deut.  1.  16.  |  16.  18. 
J\"am.35.24.lhc  congregation  j.  between  the  slayer 
Deut.  2.5.  1.  come,  that  the  judges  may  j.  them 
1  Sam.  2.  25.  if  a  man  sin,  the  judge  shall  j.  him 
8.  5.  thou  art  old,  make  us  a  king  toj.  us, 6. 20. 
1  Kings  3.  9.  give  an  understanding  heart  to  j. 
who  is  able  to  j.  this  great  people,  2  CAron. 


7.  a  porch  for  the  throne  where  he  might  j. 
ceed   against,   Acts  24.  6.     [5]  To  esteem  or '2  Chron.  1.  11.  that  thou  mayest  j.  my  people 
reckon,  Acts  16.  15.     [6]  7'o  rule  and  govern,}   19.  6.  for  yej.  not  for  man,  but  for  the  Lord     * 
Psal.  67.  4.  Heb.  10.  30.    [7]  To  punish,  Ezek.  |  Ezra  7.  25.  sot  judges  which  may  j.  all  the  poopis 
r   o  Q    ti...   ,•.   ..      It  is  spoken,  (J)  Of  God,   Psn/.  58.  1.  do  3;e>  uprightly,  O  ye  sons  of  men 

72.  2.  he  shall  j.  thy  people  with  righteousness 
4.  he  shall  j.  the  poor  of  the  people,  Prov.  31.9. 
82.  2.  how  long  will  yej.  unjustly,  and  accept 
Isa.  1.  17.  j.  the  fatherless,  plead  for  the  widow 
23.  they  j.  not  the  fatherless,  .ler.  5.  28. 


3,  8.  Heb.  13.  4 
Gen.  18.  25.  Heb.  12.  23.   (H)  Of  Christ,  Acts 
10.42.  (Ill)  O/mencaHcrfo-orf.sPsal.  82.  1.6. 
[1]  Ordinarif,  Deut.  1.  16.  [2]  Extraordinary, 
Judg.  2.  18,  19. 

JUDGE,  SK!'s(an(it)e. 
Gen.  13.25.  shall  not  the  .1.  of  all  the  earth  do.  right  I  5.  3.  j.  I  pray  you  betwixt  me  and  my  vineyard 
19.  9.  this  one  fellow  came,  and  will  needs  he  a  j.  .fer.  i2l.  1 12.  j.  judgment,  ZecA.  7.  f  9.  |8.  t  ifi. 
Exod.'i.  14.  made  thee  a  j.  over  us,  j?c(s  7. 27,  35.  .EicA-.  20.  4.  wilt  thou  j.  them,  son  ofman?22. 2. 


/?CH(.17.9.come  to  thej.  that  shall  be  in  those  days 

12.  the  man  that  will  not  hearken  to  thej. 
25.  2.  that  thej.  shall  cause  him  to  lie  down 
Judg.  2.  18.  then  the  Lord  was  with  thej. 

19.  the,/',  was  dead,  they  corrupted  themselves 
11.  27.  the  Lord  the  J.  be,?',  this  day  between 

1  Sam.  2.  25.  if  a  man  sin,  thej.  shall  judge  him 

2  Sam.  15.4.  Absalom  said,  O  that  I  were  made  j. 
lob  9.  15. 1  would  make  supplication  to  my  j 

23.  7.  I  should  be  delivered  for  ever  from  my  j. 

31.  28.  an  iniquity  to  be  punished  by  thej 

9T 


23.  24.  and  they  shall  j.  thee,  45.  |  24.  14. 
36.  son  of  man,  wilt  j.  .\holah  and  Aholibah? 
44.  24.  they  shall  j.  it  according  to  my  judgments 
Obad.  21.  saviours  come  toj.  the  mount  of  Esau 
Mic.  3.  11.  the  heads  thereof  j.  for  reward 
ZecA.  3.  7.  then  thou  shalt  also  j.  my  hous« 
Mat.  7.  1.  j.  not  that  ye  be  not  judged 

2.  for  with  what  judgment  yej.  Luke  6.  37 
Luke  12.  57.  yea,  and  whyj.  ye  not  what  is  right  t 
John  7.24.  j.  not  according  to  the  appearance, but 
j  righteoua  judyoMM 


JUD 

JoknT.  51.  doth  our  lawj.  any  man  before  It  hear 

8. 15.  ye^  after  flcHli  |{  12.  4ti.  same  eliall_;'.  Iiiin 

18.  31.  take  andj.  iiiin  according  to  yout  law 

^cls  4.  ly.j. ye  {{  13.  46._;.  yourselves  uiiwortliy 

23.3.  for  siltcst  thou  \oj.  nie  after  the  la\v7 

/?om.2.27.uncircuinci»iou  if  itfuilil  the  law,  j'.tJiee 

14.  t  !•  not  to  J.  his  doubtful  Ihou^htg 

3.7.  him  that  cateth  [j  10.  whyj.  tliy  brother 

13.  let  us  nutj.  one  another,  butj.  this  rather 

1  Cor.  4. 3. 1_7.  not  myself,  |{  5._;.  noth.  before  time 

5.  12.  what  have  I  to  do  j.  them  that  arc  without, 

do  not  ycj.  them  that  are  withinl 
6.2.  do  ye  not  know  that  saints  shall  J.  the  world? 

3.  know  ye  not  that  wo  shall  j  angels? 

4.  set  them  to  j.  who  are  least  esteemed  in  churcli 

5.  shall  be  able  toj.  between  his  brethren 
10. 15.7.  ye  what  I  say  II  11   13.  J.  in  yourselves 
]I.  31.  for  if  we  would  ^'  ourselves,  we  should 
14.  29.  let  the  prophets  speak,  and  the  other,;'. 

2  Cor.  5.  14.  because  we  thus  7.  that  if  one  died 
Col.  2.  Id  lei  no  mart  therefore j.  you  in  meat 
Jam.  4.  11.  but  if  thouj.  the  law,  thou  art  not 

/wji«  JUDGE. 

1  Sam.  3.  13. 1  told  that  I  will  j.  his  house  for  ever 
Psal.  "75.2.  when  shall  receive,  J  will  j.  uprig'htly 
EzcA.V.  3.  j.  according  to  thy  ways,  8.27.  ||  33.20. 

11.  10.  I  will  j.  you  in  the  border  of  Israel,  11. 
1(>.38.  [ icillj.  thee  as  women  that  break  wedlook 

18.  30.  therefore  /  tcillj.  you,  O  house  of  Israel 
21.30.  /  willj.  thee  in  the  place  where  thou  wast 
34.  20.  1,  even  /,  willj.  between  fat  cattle,  22. 

mil  I  JUDGE. 
Oen.  15. 14.  the  nation  tliuy  shall  serve-7.  .Sets  7.  7. 
J..u/ce  19.  22.  out  of  thine  own  mouth  will  Jj.  thee 

JUDGED. 

Oen.  30.  6.  God  hnlh^'.  me  and  heard  my  voice 

Ezod.  IS.  26.7.  the  people,  small  matler  they 7. 

Judg.  3.  10.  tJthnielj.  ||  4.  4.  Deborah  7.  Israel 

10.  2.  Tolaj.  II  3.  J.iir  j.  ||  12.  T.  Jephihah^. 

12.  8.  Ibzanj.  ||  lI.Elon;.  |i  14.  Abdonjf.  Israel 

13.  20.  Samson^'.  Israel  twenty  years,  Iti.  31. 
Ruth  1. 1 1.  when  judjes  j.  there  was  a  famine 
l.VrtHi.  4.18.  Eli  j.ll'  7.6.  .siamuel  j.  Isiael,  15, 16, 17. 

2  Ham.  18.  t  19-  the  Lord  j.  him  from  his  enemies 

1  Kings  3. 28.  heard  the  judgment  the  king  had  j. 

2  Kings  2.3. 22.  from  the  days  of  the  judges  that  7. 
Psal.  9.  19.  let  the  heathen  bo  j.  in  thy  sight 

.37.  33.  not  condemn  him  when  he  is  7. 

109.  7.  when  he  shall  be 7.  lot  him  be  condemned 

Jitr.  22. 16.  hcj.  the  cause  of  the  poor  and  needy 

Kzrk.  IG.  38.  as  women  that  shed  blood  are  7. 

52  thou  also  who  hast/.iliy  sisters,  bear  shame 
28.  23.  and  the  wounded  shall  be 7.  in  her 
3.5.  11.  make  myself  known,  when  I  havej.  thee 
36.  19.  according  to  their  doings  Ij.  them 

/Jan.  9.  12.  and  against  our  judges  tliat^'.  ua 

^f'Zt.7.1.thatycbe  nct7.ll 2.  shall  be 7".  Luke  6.  37. 

l.uke  7.  43.  he  said  to  him,  thou  hast  rightly 7. 

John  16.  11.  the  prince  of  this  world  is 7'. 

.lets  16.  15.  if  yo  liave7'.  me  to  be  faithful 

24.  6.  we  would  have7.  according  to  our  law 

25.  9.  there  be  j.  of  these  things  before  me,  20. 
10.  Paul  said,  I  stand,  where  I  ought  to  be  7'. 

26.  6.  and  am  ;'.  for  the  hope  of  the  promise 
Rom.  2.  12.  shall  be7.  by  the  law,  .Aim.  2.  12. 

3.  4.  thou  mightcst  overcome  when  thou  art7'. 
7.  why  yet  am  I  also7*.  as  a  sinner? 

1  Cor.  2.  i.'i.  yet  he  himself  187.  of  no  man 

4.  3.  n  small  thing  that  I  should  be  7'.  of  you 
.5.3.1  have 7'.  already,  as  though  I  were  present 

6.  2.  and  if  the  world  shall  be 7.  by  you 

10.  20.  for  why  is  my  liberty 7.  ol'anolher  man's 

11.  31.  if  we  would  judge  we  should  not  ho 7'. 
32.  when  we  are 7".  we  are  chnslcned  of  the  Ld. 

14.  24.*lie  is  convinced  of  all,  he  is;',  of  all 
Heb.  11.  II.  because  s!ie7'.  him  faithful  who  had 
1  Pet.  4.  0.  they  might  1107'.  according  to  men 
Rev.  11.18.  time  of  the  dead,  that  they  should  be7'. 

16.  5.  art  righteous  because  thou  hast 7'.  thus 

19.  2.  righteous,  for  ho  hath 7'.  the  great  whore 

20.  12.  the  dead  were 7'.  out  of  those  things 
13.  were 7.  every  man  according  to  his  works 

JUDGES. 
Exod.  21.  G.  his  master  shall  bring  him  to  the7". 
22.  and  he  shall  pay  oa  the7'.  determine 
22.  8.  then  the  master  shnll  he  brought  to  the7'. 
9.  the  rnu«c  of  f.<illi  sli.\ll  romo  before  the7'. 
t  28.  thou  shall  not  revile  thoj. 
J^Tum.  25.  .5.  Mnscs  said  to  the 7'.  slay  each  his  men 
lieut.  1. 16. 1  charged  your  ;*.  at  lh.it  lime,  saying 
16.  18.7'.  shiilt  thou  make  in  all  ihy  gale*) 
19.17.bnth  the  men  shall  standlieHire  priests  andj*. 
18.  the 7'.  shall  make  diligent  inquisition 

21.  2.  thy  elders  and  Ihyj.  nhall  come  forth 
25.  1.  they  come  that  tin; 7'.  may  judge  llicm 
32.  31.  even  our  erii;mii»«  Iheniwlves  being;'. 

Josh.  8.  33.  their?',  stood  on  this  side  the  ark 
23  2.  Joshua  called  for  their  heads  and 7.  24.  I. 
.A(d£.2.16.llic  I>ori!  raisi-d  up7'.  who  delivered,  18. 
I'/  Ihey  would  Dot  hi'«rk(a  to  ihoif  *. 
814 


JUD 

Ruth  1.  1.  when  the^'.  ruled  a  famine  wag 

1  6am.  8.  1.  he  made  his  sonsj.  over  Israel,  2. 

2  Sam.  7.  11.  1  comnianded7'.  to  be  over  my  peo. 
2  Kings  2;{.  22.  from  the  days  cf  the7'.  that  juilgi  d 
1  Chr.  17.  0.  ei)ake  I  a  word  to  any  of  the  7.  10. 

23.  4.  and  six  thousand  were  otlicers  and  7. 

26.  29.  Chenaniah  and  his  sons  were  for 7. 
2CAron.  1,  2.  then  Solomon  spake  to  the  7. 

19.  5.  he  set7'.  in  the  land  ||  6.  said  to  the7'. 
Ezra  1.  25.  setj.  which  may  judge  the  people 

10.  14.  and  with  them  tho7.  of  every  city 
Job  9.  24.  he  covereth  the  faces  of  the7'.  thereof 

12.  17.  and  he  maketh  the 7.  fools 

31.  11.  it  is  an  iniquity  to  be  punished  by  the 7. 

hsal.  2.  10.  be  instructed  ye  7.  of  the  earth 
lO'J.  t  31.  to  save  him  from  the7'.  of  his  soul 
141.  6.  when7'.  are  overthrown  in  stony  places 
148. 11.  princes,  and  all7'.  of  the  earth 

Prov.  8.  16.  by  me  princes  rule,  and  all  7.  of  earth 

Isa.  1.  26.  I  will  restore  thy  7.  as  at  the  tirst 
40.  23.  he  maketh  tliej.  of  the  earth  as  vanity 

Dan.  3.  2.  Nebuchadnezzar  sent  to  gather  thc7'.  3. 
9.  12.  his  words  against  our  7.  that  judged  us 

Hos.  7.  7.  and  they  have  devoured  their 7. 

13.  10.  where  »re  thy  7.  of  whom  th(>u  saidst 
Zepk.  3.  3.  herj.  are  evening  wolves,  they  gnaw 
Mat.  12.  27.  they  shall  be  your7.  ].uke  11.  19. 
jlcls  13.  20.  and  after  that  ho  gave  to  them  7. 
Jam.  2.  4.  and  are  'oecomo7.  of  evil  tlioughts 

JUDGKST. 
Pi-a/.  51.4.  thou  mightest  be  dear  when  thou 7. 
Jer.  11.  20.  Lord  ol  hosts,  that7'.  righteously 
Horn.  2.  1.  O  man,  whosoever  thou  art  thatj. 
3.  O  man,  that7'.  them  which  do  such  things 

14.4.  who  art  thou  thatj.  another  man's  servant? 
Jam.  4.  12.  who  art  thou  that7.  another 

JUDGETll. 
Job  21.  22.  seeing  he  7'.  those  that  were  high 

36.  31.  for  by  tliemj.  he  the  people 
Psal.  7. 11.  God 7.  the  righteous,  is  angry  with 

58.  11.  verily  he  is  a  God  that7'.  in  the  earth 

82.  1.  in  congregation  of  mighty,  he7'.  among  gods 
Pruv.  29.  14.  the  king  that  faiihfully7'.  the  poor 
John  5.  22.  for  the  father/,  no  man,  bL'.  hath 

8.  .50.  there  is  one  that  7.  ||  12.  48. one  that7'.  Irim 
1  Cor.  2.  15.  he  that  is  spiritual  7.  all  things 

4.  4.  but  he  thal7.  me  is  the  Lord 

5.  13.  but  them  that  are  without,  God 7'. 
Jam.  4.  11.  he  that 7.  his  brother, 7.  the  law 

1  Pet.  1.  17.  «ho  without  respect  of  personsj. 
2.  23.  but  committed  himself  to  him  that7'. 

Rev.  18.  8.  for  strong  is  the  Lord  that 7.  her 

JUDGING. 
Gen.  30.  t  6.  Rachel  called  his  name,  7. 

2  Kings  15.5.7.the  people  of  the  land,  2  C/ir.  26.21 
I'sal.  9.  4.  thou  sattest  in  the  throne7'.  right 
Isa.  16.  5.  he  shall  sit 7'.  and  seeking  judgment 
Jiat.  19.  28.7.  the  twelve  tribes,  lAikc  22.  30. 

JUDGMENT 
Signifies,  [11  The  sentence,  or  decision  of  a  judge, 
1  Kings  3.  28.  [2]  The  spirit  of  wisdom  and 
pnidenee,  enabling  to  know  and  discern  right 
from  wrong,  and  good  from  evil,  Psal.  72.  ). 
[3]  'J'hose  rrmarkable  punishments,  ithich  dud 
injlicts  upon  people  for  their  sins  and  trans- 
gressions, Prov.  19.  2.1.  Ezek.  31).  14.  [4]  The 
spiritual  government  of  the  world,  which  is 
committed  by  (Uid  the  Father  to  Christ  the 
JMediatiir.  and  which  he  manages  with  a  per- 
fect rectitude  and  equity,  John  5.  22.  |  9.  .19. 
[5]  Tlwse  afjlictiuns  and  chastisements  which 
God  brings  upon  his  children  for  their  trial 
and  instructivn,  1  Pel.  4.  17.  [li]  God's  mer- 
ciful moderation  in  chastising  his  people, 
J-;r.  10.  24.     [71  The  solemn  artion   and  lYiai 


,t  th 


he  great  and  last  day,  Eocl.  12.  14.  Jnile 

6.  [8]  The  riiyhteous  statutes  and  command-  ' 
ments  of  God,  Psal.  119.  7,  20.  [9]  The  nu- 
nishoicnl  inflicted  on  Christ  for  our  sins,  Isa. 
53.  8.  [10]'  The  doctrine  of  the  gospel,  or 
God's  word.  Mat.  12.  IH.  Psal._119.  7,  20.  [11] 
Justice  and  equilij,  Isi.  I.  17.  Luke  11.42. 
[12]  The  deliverance  and  vindication  of  man- 
kind from  the  power  and  tyranny  of  the  devil, 
John  12.  31.  [13]  God's  decrees  and  purposes 
concerning  nati'ins,  or  persons,  Rom.  II.  33. 
[14]  The  scnt-nce  of  damnation  upon  the 
wicked,  and  of  absolution  in  favour  of  the 
godly.  Judo  15.  [1.5]  Courts  nf  judgment, 
Blat.  5.  21.  [16]  I'ifferencrs  and  controver- 
sies to  be  decided,  1  (.'or.  6.  4.  [17]  Sentiment, 
or  opinion,  1  Gor.  1.  10.     [W].-ldvice,    1  (V.r. 

7.  2.')!     [19]  The  gospel,  or  kingdom  of  grace. 
Mat.  12.  20. 

Gm.  30.  t  21.  I  pah  rnllefl  her  nanio7'. 

y.Tod.  12.  12.  against  the  gods  I  will  c.xeculrj. 
21.  31.  a<  cordmg  to  thisj.  bo  it  done  to  him 
23.  2.  to  decline  after  many,  to  wreot  7'.  6. 
2.'^.  15.  thou  shall  make  the  hreast-iJnlc  of7'. 
29.  Aaiun  boax  iiuinei  in  broo^liilalc  ofj.  30. 


•  JUD 

^um.  27.  11.  to  Israel  a  statute  ofj.  35.  29. 

21.  after  the7.  of  Urim  before  the  Lord 
JJeut.  1.  17.  not  afraid  of  man,  for  Ihej.  is  God's 
10.  18.  he  doth  execute  11107.  of  the  I'atiierlei* 

16.  18.  they  shall  judge  the  people  with  just 7. 
19.  not  wrest 7.  ||  17.  11.  according  to  the 7. 

17.  9.  they  shall  shew  thee  the  sentence  017. 

24.  17.  thou  shall  not  i)ervert  lhe7'.  of  the  etrangct 

25.  1.  be  a  controversy,  and  they  come  unt07. 
27.  19.  cursed  be  he  that  perverteth7.  of  stranger 
32.  4.  for  all  his  ways  arc  7.  a  God  of  truth 

41.  if  my  hand  take  hold  on7.  I  will  render 
.Josh. '20.  6.  stand  before  the  congregation  for 7". 
Judg.  4.  5.  Israel  came  up  to  Deborah  for7. 

1  Sam.  8.  3.  his  sons  took  bribes  and  perverted 7. 

2  Sam.  8.  15.  David  executedjf.  1  Ckron.  18. 14. 

15.  2.  when  any  man  came  to  ihe  king  for7.  6. 

1  Kings  3.1 1. hast  asked  understanding  to  digcem7 

'28.  all  Israel  heard  of  11107.  •''*  king  judged 

7.  7.  the  porch  of7.  ||  20.  40.  so  shall  thy  7.  he 

2  Kings  25.6.  took  the  king  and  gavej.  upon  him 
2  CAron.  19. 8.  chief  of  fatliers  ioij.  of  the  Lord 

20.  9.  when  evil  comelh  on  ua  as  the  sword,7 
22.  8.  when  Jehu  was  executing7.  on  Ahab 
24.  24.  so' they  executed  7.  against  Joash 
Kira  7.  26.  Iet7.  be  executed  speedily  on  him 
F.sth.  1.  13.  towards  all  that  knew  law  and 7. 
Job  8.  3.  doth  God  pervert ;'.  or  pervert  justice? 
9.  19.  if  I  speak  of7'.  ||  19.7.  but  there  is  no 7. 
19.  29.  that  ye  may  know  there  is  37. 

32.  9.  neither  do  the  aged  understand 7'. 

34.  4.  let  us  choose  to  US7'.  know  what  is  good 

12.  neither  will  the  Almighty  pervert 7'. 
.35.  14.  yet  7.  is  before  him,  trust  in  him 
36. 17.  thou  hast  fulfilled  the/  of  the  wicked, 7. 
and  justice  take  hold  en  the« 
Psal.  7.  6.  awake  for  me  to  the 7.  thou  hastcom- 
9.  7.  he  hath  prepared  his  throne  for7'.  [manded 

8.  shall  ministerj.  to  the  people  in  righteouaness 
16.  the  Lord  is  known  by  thej.  ho  executetb 

33.  5.  he  lovrlh  righteousness  and  7'.  37.  28. 

37.  6.  he  shall  bring  forth  thy  7.  as  the  noon-day 
30.  and  his  tongue  talketh  0I7'. 
72.  2.  and  he  shall  judge  thy  poor  wilh7'. 
76.8.  thou  didst  cause7'.  to  be  heard  from  heaven 

9.  when  God  arose  toj'.  lo  8.ave  all  the  metk  of 

the  earth 
89.  14.  justice  and7'.  are  the  habitation,  97.  2. 
94.  15.  hutj.  shall  return  to  righleoUKness 
99.  4.  the  king's  strength  also  lovcth7'.  thou  ex»- 
cutest7'.  and  rightcousntis  in  Jacob 
101.  1.  I  will  sing  of  mercy  and  7.  to  thee,  O  Ld. 
103.  6.  Ld.  executeth7'.  for  the  oppressed  .1'46.  7 
106.  3.  blessed  are  they  that  keep 7'. 
30.  then  Phinehas  stood  up  and  executed 7. 
111.7  the  works  of  his  hands  are  verity  and  7. 
112.  t  5.  he  will  guide  his  affairs  with;'. 
119.  (16.  teach  ine  good7'.  and  knowledge 

121.  I  have  done 7.  and  justice,  leave  me  not 
149  O  Lord,  quicken  me  according  lo  thyTL 

122.  5.  for  there  are  set  thrones  of7'. 

149.  9.  to  execute  upon  them  the 7.  written 
Proi'.l  .3.to  receive  the  instructionof  wisdom  andj 
2.  8.  he  keepeth  the  paths  of 7.  and  preserveth 
9.  then  sh.Ol  thou  understand 7.  and  equity 

8.  20.  I  l/!nd  in  the  midst  of  the  paths  01^7'. 
13.23.  there  is  that  is  destroyed  for  want  of7' 
17.  23.  takelh  a  gift  to  pervert  ihe  ways  of7'. 

19.  28.  an  ungodly  witness  scorncth7'. 

20.  8.  n  king  that  sitteth  in  the  throne  of 7'. 

28.5.  evil  men  iindorBtand  nolj.  but  they  thatscek 
29.  4.  the  king  by 7.  establishelh  the  land 

26.  every  man's 7.  comelh  from  the  Lord 

31.  5.  nor  pervert  lhe7'.  of  any  of  the  altlicted 
Feel.  3.  16.  I  saw  under  the  sun  the  place  of?'. 

5.  8.  if  thou  scest  the  oppression  of  the  poor,  and 
violent  perverting  of?',  and  juslrce 

8.  5.  and  a  wise  man  discerneih  both  time  and 7. 
6.  because  to  every  purpose  there  is  time  Boij. 

Isa.  1.  17.  seekj.  ||  21.  it  was  full  of7'. 

27.  Zion  shall  he  redeemed  with7'. 
4  4.  shall  have  [lurgod  Jerusnlem  by  Ihe  spirit  of 7 
5.  7.  and  looked  for?'.  ||  16.  5.  soekin^j. 

9.  7.  and  tooetablish  It  with  7.  and  \ylth  justice 

10.  2.  to  turn  aside  the  needy  from 7'. 

16.  3.  execute  7.  .Ter.  21.  12.  |  22.  3.  F.zek.  18.  P. 
I  45.  9.  y.eeh.  7.  9   |  8.  11 

28. 6.  for  a  spirit  of 7. 1 17. 1  wili  lay  7.  to  the  line 
.10.  IM.will  have  mercv,  lor  the  Lord  is  a  God  of7'. 

32.  16.  th.n  ;.  shall  dwell  in  the  wildmnesii 
:!1.5.I,d.  liaOi  filled  7,ion  witly'.nnd  righteonsne« 

34.  5.  and  upon  the  people  of'^mv  curse  to  »'. 

40.  14.  anil  who  taucht  him  in  the  path  ofj.1 

41.  1.  let  us  come  near  together  to  ?'. 
42. 1.  he  shall  brine  forth 7.  to  the  Gontilo* 

3.  he  shall  brine  forth 7.  unto  truth 

4.  he  shall  not  fiiil,l.ll  lie  haves"l7'.  in  the  eartb 
.53.  8.  ho  was  taken  from  prison  and  from  <. 
.56.  L  keep  ye7'.  and  do  justice,  Ilos.  12  & 
59.  B.  and  there  ii  no/  ni  Uicir  going! 


JUD 

Isa.  59.  9.  therefore  isj.  far  from  us,  neither  doth 
11.  we  look  for^'.  but  there  is  none 
14._7.  is  turned  away  backward,  and  justice 
15.  it  displeased  him  that  tliere  was  nuy. 
61.  8.  I  the  Lord  lovey.  I  hate  robbery 

Jer.  5.  1.  if  there  be  any  that  executelhj'. 

4.  they  know  not  ihej.  of  their  God,  8.  7. 

5.  they  have  known  thoj.  of  their  God 

7.  5.  if  ye  thoroughly  execute  J.  between  a  man 
9. 24.  which  exercise  _;'.  and  righteousness  in  earth 
10.  24.  correct  me,  but  willi  J.  not  in  thine  anger 
21.  12.  Kxecutej.  in  the  morning,  and  deliver  him 
23.  5.  branch  shall  execute _;.  in  the  earth,  33. 15. 

26.  fll.  thej.  of  death  is  for  this  man 

39.  5.  toRiblah,  where  he  gave  j.  upon  him,  .52. 9. 
48.  21.  andj.  is  come  upon  the  plain  country 

47.  thus  far  is  thej.  of  Moab 
49. 12.  they  whose  J.  was  not  to  drink  of  the  cup 
51. 9.  forsake  her,  for  her  j.  reacheth  unto  heaven 
Eiek.  23.  10.  for  they  had  executed  >'.  on  her 

24. 1  will  set  J.  before  them,  they  shall  judge 
Dan.  4.  37.  king  of  heaven,  all  whose  ways  arej. 
7.  10.  y.  was  set  ||  26.  but  xhej.  shall  sit 

22.  J.  was  given  to  the  saints  of  the  most  High 
Uos.  5. 1.  give  ye  ear,  for_;.  is  toward  you 
10. 4.  thus  _;'.  springeth  up  as  hemlock  in  the  field 
Amos  5.  7.  ye  who  turn  J.  into  wormwood 
15.  love  the  good,  and  establish  j'.  in  the  gate 
24.  but  let_7.  run  down  as  waters  and  righteousn. 

6.  12.  for  ye  have  turned  j.  into  gall 

Mic.  3.  1.  is  it  not  to  knowy'.  ||  8. 1  am  full  of_;. 
9.  that  abhor  J.  ||  7.  9.  and  execute  j.  for  me 

Hab.  1.  4.  law  is  slacked, _?'.  doth  never  go  forth 
7.  their_;.  shall  proceed  of  themselves 
12.  O  Lord,  thou  hast  ordained  them  for  j. 

Zeph.  2.  3.  all  ye  which  have  wrought  his_7. 

3.  5.  every  morning  doth  he  brings',  to  light 
J\Ial.  2.  17.  yet  ye  say,  where  is  the  God  oij.7 
Mat.  5.  21.  shaM  be  in  danger  of  the  j.  22. 

7.  2.  with  whatj.  ye  judge,  ye  shall  be  judged 
12.  18.  he  shall  shewj.  to  the  Gentiles 

20.  till  he  send  forth  j.  unto  victory 

23.  23.  and  have  omitted^,  mercy,  and  faith 
I.uke  11.  42.  and  pass  over  j.  and  the  love  of  God 
John  5.  22.  but  hath  committed  allj.  to  the  Son 

27.  hath  given  him  authority  to  execute/  also 
7.24.  not  to  appearance,  but  judge  righteous  j. 

9.  39.  forj.  I  am  come  into  this  world 

12.  31.  now  is  thej.  of  this  world,  now  shall 
16.  8.  he  will  reprove  the  world  of/  11. 
.HrAs  8-33.  in  his  humiliation  his  j.  was  taken  away 

24.  25.  as  he  reasoned  of/  Felix  trembled 

25.  15.  the  Jews  desiring  to  havej.  against  him 
t21.  Paul  appealed  to  the/  of  Augustus 

Ron.  1. 128.  G.  gave  them  over  to  a  mind  void  of/ 

32.  who  knowing  thej.  of  God,  that  they  which 
2.2.are  sure  that  thej'.  of  G.  is  according  to  truth 

3.  thinkest  that  thou  shall  escape  the/ of  God? 

5.  and  revelation  of  the  righteous  J.  of  God 
3  1 19.  world  may  be  subject  to  the  J.  of  God 
5.  16.  fur  the  J.  was  by  one  to  condemnation 

18./  came  on  all  men  to  condemnation 
i  Cor.  I.  10.  but  be  joined  together  in  the  same/ 

4.  3.  that  I  should  be  judged  of  man's  j. 
1 1. 1  29.  eateth  and  drinkeih/  to  himself 

t  34.  that  ye  come  not  together  to/ 
^Thrss.  1.5.  token  of  the  righteous/  of  God 
ITitn.  5.  24.  some  sins  are  open, going  before  to,;'. 
iTim.  3.  t8.  men  of  no/  concerning  the  faith 
Tit.  1.  t  16.  to  every  good  work  void  ofj. 
Heh.  6.2.  and  of  eternal  J.  ||  9.27.  after  this  they". 

10.  27.  but  a  certain  fearful  looking  for  o(j. 
Jam.  2.  13.  he  shall  have  j.  without  mercy  that 

shewed  no  mercy,  and  mercy  rejoiceth  againsty. 
3.  1 1.  knowing  we  shall  receive  greater y. 

1  Pet.  4. 17.  that  /  must  begin  at  the  house  of  God 

2  Pet.  2.3.  whose /lingereth  not  ||  4.  reserved  to/ 
Jude  6.  toy.  of  the  great  day  ||  15.  to  executey. 
Rsv.  14.7.  fear  God,  for  the  hour  of  his  y.  is  come 

17. 1.  will  shew  thee  they,  of  the  great  whore 

18. 10.  alas,  alas,  for  in  one  hour  is  thy y.  come 

20.  4.  they  sat  on  ihom,  andy'.  was  given  to  them 

Sef  Be.*r,  D.4Y. 

Do  .JUDGMENT. 

Gen.  18. 19.  to rftf  justice  andy.  lKin^siO.9.  Prov. 

21.  3.  Jer.  22.  15. 

1  ^i7i^«3.28.  wi.^dom  of  God  was  in  him  to  doj. 

2  Chron.  9.  8.  set  over  them  to  do  justice  andy. 
Prov.  21.  7.  because  they  refuse  to  doj. 

15.  it  is  joy  to  the  just  to  do  j.  but  destruction 
Jer  51.  47.  I  will  doj.  on  the  graven  images 

52.  I  will  doj.  on  her  graven  images 
Ez'.k.  18.  t  5.  if  a  man  do  j.  and  justice,  33.  f  14. 

■    JUDGME.'VT-H.ALL. 
John  18.  28.  then  they  led  Jesus  to  the  kail  of  y. 
they  themselves  went  not  into  the  j.-hall 

33.  then  Pilate  entered  into  they'.-Aa^i  again 
19.  9.  went  into  the  j.-hall,  and  saith  to  Josus, 

whence  art  thou? 
act*  23L  35.  to  be  kept  in  Herod's y.-Aa/^ 
315 


JUD 

In  JUDGMENT. 
Lev.  19.  15.  do  no  unrighteousness  2';iy.  35. 
JVum.  35.  12.  stand  before  the  congregation  inj. 
Dent.  1. 17.  ye  shall  not  respect  persons  inj. 

17.8.  if  there  arise  amatter  toohurd  for  thee  inj 
Jadg.  5. 10.  ye  that  sit  inj.  and  walk  by  the  way 
2  Chron.  19.  6.  for  the  Lord,  who  is  with  you  inj 
Job  9.  32.  and  we  should  come  togellier  inj. 

37.  23.  he  is  excellent  in  power  and  my. 
Psal.  1.  5.  the  ungodly  shall  not  stand  inj. 

25.  9.  the  meek  will  he  guide  inj.  and  teach 
Prov.  16.  10.  his  mouth  transgressetli  not  inj. 

18. 5.  not  good  to  overthrow  the  righteous  inj. 

24.  23.  not  good  to  have  respect  of  persons  inj. 
Isa.  5.16.  but  the  Ld.  of  hosts  shall  be  e.xalted  my. 

28.  6.  him  that  sitteth  in  y.  ||  7.  they  stumble  inj. 
32.  1.  behold  princes  shall  rule  inj. 

t7.  when  he  speaketh  against  the  poor  inj. 
54.  17.  every  tongue  that  shall  rise  ag.  thee  inj. 
Jer.  4.  2.  the  Lord  liveth  in  righteousness  and  inj. 
49. 1 19.  who  will  convent  me  »«y.? 
Eiek.  44.  24.  in  controversy  they  stand  inj. 
Has.  2.  19.  I  will  betroth  thee  to  me  inj. 
5.  11.  Ephraim  is  oppressed  and  broken  inj. 
Mai.  3.  5.  and  I  will  come  near  to  you  inj. 
Mat.  12.  41.  the  men  of  Nineveh  shall  rise  inj. 

42.  queen  of  south  shall  rise  inj.  JLuke  11.31,32. 
PAii.  1.9.1  pray,  that  your  love  may  abound  inj. 

Into  JUDGMENT. 
Job  14.  3.  and  bringest  me  into  j.  with  thee 
22.4. will  he  reprove,  will  he  enter  with  thee  intoj. 

34.  23.  that  he  should  enter  intoj.  with  God 
Psal.  143.  2.  enter  not  intoj.  with  thy  servant 
Eccl.  11.  9.  for  these  God  will  bring  thee  intoj. 

12.  14.  God  shall  bring  every  work  intoj. 
Isa.  3.  14.  Lord  will  enter  intoj.  with  ancients 

»  jl/y  JUDGMENT. 

JbJ  27.  2.  who  hath  taken  away  viyj.  34.  5. 

29.  14.  myj.  was  as  a  robe  and  a  diadem 
40.  8.  wilt  thou  also  disannul  myj.?  wilt  thou 

Psal.  9.  t  4.  for  thou  hast  made  my  j. 

35.  23.  stir  up  thyself,  and  awake  to  myj. 
Isa.  40.  27.  myj.  is  passed  over  from  my  God 

49.  4.  yet  surely  myj.  is  with  the  Lord 

51.  4. 1  will  make  myj.  to  rest  for  a  light  of  people 

Ezek.  39.  21.  all  the  heathen  shall  see  myj. 

.fohn  5.  30.  and  my  j.  is  just  ||  8. 16.  myj.  is  true 

1  Cur.  7. 25.  yet  I  give  my  j.  \\  40.  ha[)pier  in  myj. 
JUDGMENT-SEAT. 

Mat.  27. 19.  he  was  set  down  ony.-.s.  John  19. 13. 
.lets  18.  12.  the  Jews  brought  him  to  ihej.-seat 

16.  and  he  drave  them  from  they'.-seat 

17.  the"  Greeks  beat  Sostlieiies  before  the y'.-seat 
25.10.  Island  at  Cesar'sy'.-^cat  ||  17.1  sat  ony .-scat 

Rom.  14.10.  stand  before  y.-s.  of  Christ,  2  C'ur.5.1fl. 
Jam.^.  6.  rich  men  draw  you  before  thej.-seats 

JUDGMENTS. 
Eiod.G.6.  I  will  redeem  you  with  greaty.  7.  4. 

21.  1.  these  are  they,  thou  shall  set  before  them 

24.  3.  and  Moses  told  the  people  all  the  j. 
JVum.  33.  4.  on  their  gods  the  Lord  execuledy. 

35.  24.  shall  judge  according  to  these y. 

36. 13.  these  are  they,  which  the  Ld.  commanded 
Deut.  7. 12.  if  ye  hearken  to  Ihesey.  and  keep  them 

33. 10.  they  shall  teach  Jacob  thyy.  and  law 
21.  he  executed  they,  of  the  Lord  with  Israel 

2  Sam.  22.  23.  hisy.  were  before  me,  Psal.  18.  22 
1  Chr.  16. 12.  remem.  y".  of  his  mouth,  Psal.  105. 5. 

14.  hisy.  are  in  all  the  earth,  Psal.  105.  7. 

JVeA.  9.  29.  but  sinned  against  thyy. 

Psal.  10.  5.  thyy.  are  far  above  out  of  sight 
19.  9.  they,  of  the  Lord  are  true  and  righteous 
36.6.  thyy.  are  a  great  dee]) ;  O  L.thou  preservesl 
48.  11.  let  Judah  be  glad  because  of  thyy. 
72. 1.  give  the  king  thyy.  O  God,  and  rigliteousn. 
97.  8.  Judah  rejoiced,  because  of  thyy.  O  Lord 
119.  7.  when  I  have  learned  thy  righteous  y. 

13.  with  my  lipsldeclared  all  they,  of  thy  mouth 
20.  for  the  longing  that  it  hath  unto  thyy. 

30.  thyy.  have  I  laid  before  me 
39.  turn  away  my  reproach,  for  thyy.  are  good 
43.  I  hoped  in  thyy.  ||  52.  I  remembered  thyy. 
62.  give  thanks,  because  of  thy  righteousy.  164. 
75.  I  know,  O  Lord,  that  thyy.  are  right 
102.  I  have  not  departed  from  thy  j. 
lOti.I  have  sworn  that  I  will  keep  thy  righteousy. 
108.  teach  me  thyy.  ||  120.1am  afraid  of  thyy. 
137.  righteous  art  thou,  and  upright  are  thyy. 
1.56.  O  Lord,  quicken  me  according  to  Ihyy. 
160.  every  one  of  thy  righteousy.  endureth 
175.  let  my  soul  live,  and  let  thyy.  help  mo 

147.  20.  hisy.  they  have  not  known  them 
Prov.  19. 29.y.  are  prepared  lor  scorners,  stripes 
Isa.  26.  8.  in  the  way  of  thyy.  we  waited  for  thee 

9.  for  when  thyy.  are  in  the  earth,  inhabitants 
.Jer.  4. 1 12.  nftw  will  I  utter  y.  against  them 
12.  1.  yet  let  me  talk  with  thee  of  thyy. 
£2?'A.5.7.nor  done  according  to  ihey'.ofthe  nations 
8.  executey.  in  the  midst  of  thee,  10,  15.  |  11.9. 
7.  f  27.  with  their  J.  will  I  judge  them 


JUS 

Eiek.  18. 41.  executey.  on  thee  in  s'jht  :f  wonje* 
23.  24.  they  shall  judge  thee  accordmg  lo  their/ 
25.  11.  and  I  will  execute j.  on  Moab 
28.  26.  execuledy.  on  all  those  that  despJM  tiiitin 
30.  14.  I  will  execute/  in  No 

19.  thus  will  I  executey.  in  Egypt 
34.  16.  I  will  destroy,  I  will  feed  them  withy. 
Dan.  9.  5.  we  sinned  by  departing  from  thyy. 
Hos.  6.  5.  thyy.  are  as  the  light  that  goeth  forth 
Zeph.  3.  15.  the  Lord  hath  taken  away  thyy. 
Rom.  11.  33.  how  unsearchable  are  hisy.  and  waya 
1  Cur.  6.  4.  if  ye  havey.  of  things  of  this  lifo 
Rev.  15.  4.  for  thyy.  are  made  manifest 

16.  7.  true  and  righteous  are  'hyy.  19.  2. 
My  JUDGMENTS. 

Lev.  18.  4.  ye  shall  do  my  j.  I  am  the  Lord 
5.  ye  shall  therefore  keep  myj.  2.5.  18. 
26. 15.  if  your  soul  abhor  myj.  so  that  ye  do  not 
43.  because,  even  because  they  despised  myj. 
1  Chron.  28.  7.  if  ye  be  constant  to  do  myj. 
Psal.  89.  30.  if  his  children  walk  not  in  viyj, 
Jer.  1.  16.  I  will  utter  my  j.  against  them 
Ezek.  5.  6.  she  changed  viyj.  into  wickedness 
7.  neither  have  kept  my  j.  nor  done 
14.21.  when  I  send  my  four  sorey.  on  Jerusalem 
36.  27.  and  ye  shall  keep  v\y  j.  and  do  them 
44.  24.  they  shall  judge  it  according  to  myj. 

Statutes  and  JUDGMENTS. 

I^v.  18.5.  keep  my  statutes  and  myy.  26.  [20.  22. 

Dent.  7.  11.  |  11. 1. 1 26.  16, 17.  |  30. 16. 

1  Kings  2.  3. 1  8.  58. 1  9.  4. 1 11. 3.3. 

19.  37.  ye  shall  observe  all  my  statutes  and  j. 

Dcut.  11.  32. 1  12. 1.  2  Chron.  7.  17. 

26.46.these  are  the  st.andj.  L.  made,  Deut.  4.45. 

Deut.  4. 1.  hearken  to  st.  andj.  which  I  teach,  5.1 

5.1  taught  you  st.andj.\\9,  hatlist.  a.j.  so  right 

ll.commandedto  teachst.  ujirfy.  6.1.  Ezral.lQ. 

5.31. 1  will  speak  the  stat.  andj.  thou  shall  teach 

6.20. thy  son  asketh  the^,  what  mean  the  st.  and  j. 

8. 11.  forget  L.  in  not  keep,  his  st.  and  j.  J^eh.  1.7. 

1  Kings  6. 12.  walk  in  mv  stat.  and  execute  myy. 

1  Chr.  22. 13.  if  thou  takest  heed  to  fulfil  st.  andj. 

2  Chr.  19.10.  what  cause  shall  come  belw.  st.andj. 
J^ch.  9.  13.  and  thou  gavest  them  right  st.  andj. 

10.  29.  entered  into  a  curse,  to  do  all  his^t.  andj. 

Psal.  147. 19.  he  she  welh  his  stat.  andj.  to  Israel 

Ezek.  5.  6.  for  they  refused  myy.  and  my  statutes 

11.12.  for  ye  have  not  walked  in  my  statutes,  nor 

executed  my  ?'.  20.  13,  16,  21. 

18.9.  walked  in  my  st.  andj.  17.  f20.  19.  |  37. 24. 

20. 11.  give  them  my  statutes,  and  shewed  myy. 

18.  not  in  stat.  of  fathers,  nor  observe  theiry. 

25.  gave  them  stat.  not  good,  andj.  whereby 

Mai.  4. 4.  remember  ye  law  of  Moses  with  statutet 

JUICE.  [andj. 

Ca7it.8.2.to  drink  wineofthey.  of  mypomegrariate 

JUMPING. 
J^Tah.  3. 2.  the  noise  of  horses  and  they,  chariota 

JUNIPER. 
i Kings  19.4.  Elijah  came  and  sat  under  ay. tree,  5. 
.fob  30.  4.  who  cut  upy.  roots  for  their  meat 
Psal.  120.  4.  arrows  of  the  mightv  with  coals  ofy. 

IVORY.      ■ 
1  Kings  10.18.  king  made  a  throne  of  i.  2  CAr.9.17. 
22.  bringing  gold,  silver,  and  i.  2  Chron.  9.  21. 
22.  39.  and  the  i.  house  which  .\hab  made 
Ps.  45.  8.  out  of  the  i.  palaces,  whereby  they  made 
Cant.  5.  14.  his  belly  is  as  bright  i.  overlaid  with 
7.  4.  thy  neck  is  as  a  tower  of  z'.  thine  eyes 
Ezek.  ^7.  6.  the  Ashuritesmade  thy  benches  of  i. 
15.  they  brought  thee  for  a  present  horns  of  i. 
Amos  3.  15.  and  the  houses  of  i.  shall  perish 
6.4.  that  lie  upon  beds  of  i.  and  stretch  themselves 
Rev.  18.  12.  for  no  man  buyelh  vessels  oft. 

JURISDICTION. 
1  Kings  8.  t  37.  besiege  in  the  land  of  theiry. 
iaAc23.7.a8  he  knewlhat  he  belonged  to  Herod'sy. 

JUST 
Signifies,  [1]  One  who  is  upright  and  sincere  in 
his  actions  and  dealings  with  others,  Luke 
23.50.  [2]  7'Ac  great  Creator,  who  is  essen- 
tially just  and  righteous,  ajid  the  fountain  of 
justice,  Deut.  32.  4.  [3]  O.ie  who  is  exceed- 
ing faithful,  keeping  his  word  and  promise, 
1  John  1.  9.  [4]  One  who  in  his  life  and  death, 
answered  the  perfect  justice  of  the  law  of  God, 
1  Pet.  3.  18.  [5]  One  who  is  righteous  by  the 
imputation  of  Christ's  righteousness,  Rom.  1. 

17.  [6]  One  who  is  not  truly  convinced  of  his 
own  sinfulness,  and  is  only  righteous  in  his 
own  opinion,  Luke  18.  9.  [7]  One  that  is 
gnod-natured,  mild,  and  indulgent.  Mat.  1. 19. 
[8]  One  of  a  charitable,  liberal  disposition, 
Psal.  37.  12. 

Oen.  6.  9.  Noah  was  a  y.  man,  and  perfect,  and 

walked  with  God 

Lev.  19.  36. y.  balanccs,y.  weights,  ay.  ephah,  and 

ay.  hin  shall  ye  have,  Deut.  25.  1.5.  Ezek.  45.10. 
/)e«M6.]8.  they  shall  judge  peo.withy.  judgnientf 

SO.  that  is  altogethery.  shall  thou  follow 


JUS 

Dcut.32.4.a  Gud  without  iniquity,j.an(l  tight  is  lie 
yA'avn-il.  3.  he  that  ruleth  over  men  must  bej. 
JVc/t.  9.  33.  thou  art  J.  in  all  that  is  brought  on  us 
Job  4.  17.  shall  mortal  man  be  more  j.  than  Uod ! 

9.  2.  but  how  should  man  be  J.  with  God? 
1'2.  4.  tliej.  upright  man  is  laughed  to  scorn 

27.  17.  he  may  piepare  it,  but  the  j'.  shall  put  it  on 

33.  12.  behold,  in  this  thou  art  tiotj. 
Pial.  7.  9.  let  wickedness  end,  but  establish  thej. 

37.  12.  the  wicked  ploiteth  against  thej. 
Proo.  3. 33.  but  he  blesseth  the  habitation  of  the  j. 

4.  Id.  the  path  of  the  j.  is  as  the  shining  light 
9.9.  leach  a  j.man,aiid  he  will  increase  in  learning 

10.  6.  blessings  are  upon  the  head  of  the^. 
7.  the  memory  of  the  J.  is  blessed 

20.  the  tongue  of  the  J.  is  as  choice  silver 

31.  the  mouth  of  the  j.  bringeth  forth  wisdom 

11.  1.  butj.  weight  is  his  delight 

9.  but  thro'  knowledge  shall  the  j.  be  delivered 

12. 13.  but  the  j.  shall  come  out  of  troublo 

21.  there  shall  no  evil  happen  to  thej. 

13.22.  the  wealth  ofthesinner  is  laid  up  for  the^'. 

16.  11.  aj.  weight  and  balance  are  the  Lord's 

17.  15.  he  that  condemneth  thej.  is  abomination 

26.  also  to  punish  the  j.  is  not  good 

18. 17.  he  that  is  lirsl  in  his  own  cause  seemeth  j. 

20.  7.  the  J.  man  walketh  in  his  integrity 

21.  15.  it  is  a  joy  to  the  j.  to  do  judgment 
24.16.  aj.raan  falleth  seven  times  and  riseth  again 
29.  10.  hate  the  upright,  but  the,?',  seek  his  soul 

27.  an  unjust  man  is  an  abomination  to  thej. 
Eccl.  7.  15.  there  is  a  j.  man  that  perisheth  in  his 

20.  not  a  j.  man  upon  earth  that  sinneth  not 
8.  14.  there  hcj.  men  to  whom  it  happeneth 
Jsa.  2(3.  7.  the  way  of  the  j.  is  uprightness,  thou 
most  upright  dost  weigh  the  path  of  the  j. 
29.  21.  turn  aside  the  j.  for  a  thing  of  nought 
45.  21.  I  the  Lord,  a  j.  God,  and  a  Saviour 
49.  t  24.  or  the  captivity  of  the  J.  delivered 
L,am.  4.13.  that  haveshed  the  blood  of  thej.  in  her 
Eiek.  18.5.  but  if  a  man  bej.  and  do  that  is  right 
9.  he  isj.  he  shall  surely  live,  saith  the  Lord  God 
Hos.  14.  9.  ways  of  Ld.  right,  j.  shall  walk  in  them 
^mos  5.  12.  thev  afflict  the  j.  they  take  a  bribe 
Hob.  2.  4.  but  the  j.  shall  live  by  faith,  Horn.  1. 
17.  Gal.'i.  11.  Heb.  10.38. 
Zepk.  3.  5.  thej.  Lord  is  in  the  midst  thereof 
ZecA.  9.  9.  he  is  j.  and  having  salvation,  lowly 
Mat.  1.  19.  Joseph  her  husband,  being  a  j.  inan 

5.  45.  and  sendeth  rain  on  thej.  and  on  unjust 
13.  49.  and  sever  the  wicked  from  among  thej. 
27.  19.  have  nothing  to  do  with  that  j.  nian 

24.  I  am  innocent  of  the  blood  of  this  j.  person 
Mark  6.20.knowing  that  he  was  a  j.  man  and  holy 
jMke  1.17.  the  disobedient  to  the  wisdom  of  thej. 

2.  25.  Simeon  was  j.  and  devout,  waiting  for 

14.14.  be  recompensed  at  the  resurrection  of  thej. 
15.  7.  more  than  over  ninety  and  ninej.  persons 
20.  20.  spies  which  should  feign  themselves  j. 
23.50.Josephof  Ariinatheawasagoodmanandj. 

Jokn  5.30.  as  I  hear,  I  judge,  and  my  judgment  is  j. 
Acts  10.  22.  Cornelius  the  centurion  a  j.  man 
24.  l.'i.  shall  be  resurrection  both  of"j.  and  unjust 
Rom.  2.  13.  for  not  the  hearers  of  the  law  are  j. 

3.  8.  whose  damnation  isj.  ||  26.  he  might  bej. 
7.  12.  and  the  commandment  holy,  j.  and  good 

Phil.  4.  8.  finally,  whatsoever  things  are  j.  pure 
Col.  4.  1.  give  servants  ^liat  which  isj.  and  eciual 
Tit.  1.  8.  a  bishop  must  bej.  holy,  temperate 
Ucb.  2.  2.  received  a  j.  recompcnce  of  reward 

12.  23.  and  to  the  spirits  ofj.  men  made  perfect 
Jaiit.  5.  6.  ye  have  condemned  and  killed  thej. 

1  Pet.  3.  18.  Christ  sutFered,  thej.  for  the  unjust 

2  Pct.2  7. delivered  j.  Lot,  vexed  with  conversation 
UoAnl.O.ifwc  confess,  he  isj.to  forgive  us  our  sins 
licv.  15.  3.  j.  and  true  are  thy  ways,  thou  King 

Most  JUST. 
Job  34. 17.  will  thou  condemn  him  tliatis  mostj.? 

JUST  One. 
AUs  3. 14.  ye  denied  the  Holy  One  and  the  J.  One 
7.  52.  shewed  before  of  the  coming  of  the  J.  one 
22.14.  ahouldestknow  his  will,  and  sec  that  J.  One 

JUSTICK 

Ii,  (1)  That  cusr.ntial  perfection  in  Ood,  whereby 
lie  is  injinitrtii  righteous  and  just,  both  in  his 
nature,  and  in  lill  his  proceedings  with  his 
creatures,   Psal.  80.  14.     (11)  TUat   political 
virtue  which  renders  to  entry  man  his  due,  and 
IS,   [I]  Ijistributior,  which  concerns  princes, 
mai^istratcs,  A-c.  Job 29. 14.  [2]  Gimmutative, 
which  concerns  all  persons  in  their  dealing 
one  with  another,  Gen.  IH.  10. 
Ocn.  18.19.  keep  wayof  Ld.  todoj.  and  judgment 
Dcut.  I'i.  t  20.  what  in  j.  shall  thou  follow 
33.21.  he  cxuculetl.  the  j.  of  Loril  and  judgments 
2  Sam.  8.  15.  David  executed  j.  1  Chron.  18.  14. 
15.  4.  O  that  I  were  mode  judge,  I  would  do  j. 
Jpl,  8.  3.  or  doth  the  Almighty  pervert  j.? 
31.  1 6.  let  him  weigh  me  In  the  balance  ofj. 
36  17.  iudjincnt  and  j.  lake  hold  on  tlico 
^  318 


JUS 

Job  37. 23.  is  excellent  in  plenty  ofj.  will  not  afflict 

Psal.  82.  3.  do  j.  to  the  atliicted  and  needy 
89.14j.and  judgment  are  habitation  of  thy  throne 
119. 121. 1  havedonejudgra.  andj. leave  me  not 

f ?'o».1.3.to  receive  the  instruction  ofj.  and  equity 
8.  15.  by  me  kings  reign,  and  princes  decree  j. 

Eccl.  5.  8.  if  thou  seest  the  perverting  ofj. 

Isa.9.  7.  to  establish  his  throne  with  j.  and  judgm. 
56.1.keepye  judgment,  and  do  j.  for  my  salvation 
58.  2.  they  ask  of  me  the  ordinances  ofj. 
59.4.  none  calleth  for  j.  ||  9.  nor  doth  j.  overtake  lis 
14.  j.  standelh  afar  oil",  truth  is  fallen  in  the  str. 

Jcr.23.5.shall  execute  judgment  and  j.  in  the  earth 

31.  23.  Lord  bless  thee,  (J  habitation  ofj. 
50.7.sinned  against  the  Lord,  the  habitation  ofj. 

Ezek.  45.  9.  O  princes,  execute  judgment  andj. 
See  ho  Judgment,  before. 
JUSTIFICATION. 
Signifies,  [1]  Ji  gracious  act  of  God,  whereby  he 
pardons  and  accepts  of  sinners  on  the  account 
of  Christ's  righteousness  imputed  to  them,  and 
received  by  faith,  Rom.  5.  16,  18.     Our  justi- 
fication was  [1]  Confirmed  and  ratified  by  the 
resurrection  of  Christ,  Rom.  4.  25.     [2]  Jiud 
it  is  manifested  by  the  good  works  of  believers. 
Jam.  2.  21,  24,  25. 

See  Sanctify. 
Rom.  4.  25.  Christ  was  raised  again  for  our  j. 
5.  16.  but  the  free  gift  is  of  many  olTences  to  j. 
18.  the  free  gift  came  upon  all  men  to  j.  of  life 
JUSTIFY  \ 

Signifies,  [1]  To  absolve  or  declare  one  innocent, 
I'rov.  17.  15.  [2]  'J'o  absolve  and  acquit  a  sin- 
ner from  the  guilt  and  punishment  of  sin, 
through  the  imputation  of  Christ's  righteous- 
ness, Rom.  3.  28.  |  5.  9.  [3]  To  declare  an- 
other to  be  less  guilty  than  ourselves,  Ezek. 
16.51.  [4]  'J'u  acknowledge  a  thing  or  person 
to  be  just.  Mat.  11.  19.  Luke  7.  35.  [5]  To 
prove  and  manifest  one's  self  to  be  in  a  justi- 
fied state.  Jam.  2.  21.  It  is  fourfold,  [1]  False- 
ly and  vain- gloriously,  Luke  10.  29.  |  16.  15. 
[2]  Politically,  Deut.  25.  1.  Isa.  5.  23.  [3]  Le- 
gally, Rom.  3.  20.  Gal.  2.  16.  [4]  KvangeU- 
cally,  Rom.  5.  1.  This  is  said  to  be  [I]  By 
Christ,  Gal.  2.  16.  [2]  By  grace  freely,  Rom. 
3.  24.  Tit.  3.  7.  [3]  By  faitfi.  Gal.  3.  8.  [4] 
By  his  blood,  Rom.  5.  9.  [5]  By  his  know- 
ledge, Isa.  53.  11. 
Exod.  23.  7.  for  I  will  not  j.  the  wicked 
JJeut.  2.5.  1.  then  they  shall  j.  the  righteous 
./ob  9.  20.  if  I  j.  myself,  my  own  mouth  shall  con- 
27.  5.  God  forbid  that  I  should  j.  you  [demn 

33.  32.  answer  me,  speak,  for  I  desire  to  j.  thee 
Isa.  5.  23.  which  j.  the  wicked  for  reward 
53. 11.  by  knowl.  shall  my  righteous  serv.  j.  many 
Luke  10.  29.  he  willing  to  j.  himself,  said  to  Jesus 
16. 15.  ye  are  they  which^.  yourselves  before  men 
Rom.  3.  30.  one  God  shall  j.  circumcision  by  faith 
Gal.3.8.  foreseeing  that  God  would  j.  the  heathen 

JUSTIFIED, 
./oj  11.  2.  should  a  man  full  of  talk  bej.? 
13.  18.  behold  now,  I  know  that  I  shall  bej. 
25.  4.  how  then  can  man  bej.  with  G.  or  be  clean? 

32.  2.  because  he  j.  himself  rather  than  God 
Psal.  51.4.  thou  mightest  bej.  when  thou  speakest 

143.  2.  in  thy  sight  shall  no  man  living  bej. 
/sa.  43. 9.  they  may  bej.  ||26.  thou  mayest  be  j. 

45. 25.  in  the  Ld.  shall  all  the  seed  of  Israel  bej. 
Jir.  3.  11.  the  backsliding  Israel  hath  j.  herself 
Kick.  16.  51.  j.  thy  sisters  in  all  abominations,  52. 
JJan.  8.  t  14.  then  shall  the  sanctuary  bej. 
Mat.\  1.19.  wisiimi  isj.  of  her  children,  Au/rc  7.35. 

12.  37.  for  by  thy  words  thou  shall  bej. 
J.uke  7.  29.  all  the  people,  and  publicans  j.  God 

18.14.  this  man  went  down  j. rather  than  the  other 
Acts  13.  39.  all  that  believe  are  j.  from  all  things 
from  which  ye  coulil  not  bej.  by  the  law 
Rom.  2.  13.  hut  the  doers  of  the  law  shall  bej. 

3.  4.  that  thou  mightest  bej.  in  thy  sayings 
20.  there  shall  no  tiesh  he  j.  in  his  sight 
24.  being  j.  freely  by  his  grace,  Tit.  3.  7. 

28.  a  man  isj.  by  faith,  5.  1.  Gat.2. 16.  |  3.  24. 

4.  2.  if  .Abraham  were  j.  by  works,  he  hath 

5.  1.  being  j.  hy  faith  we  have  peace  with  God 
9.  being  now  j.  by  his  blood,  wo  shall  he  saved 

8.  30.  and  whom  he  j.  them  he  also  glorified 
1  Cor.  4. 4. 1  know  nothing,  yet  am  I  not  hereby  j. 

6.  11.  ye  are  j.  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Gal.  2.10.  a  man  is  notj.  by  the  works  of  law,  3.11. 

5.  4.  whosoever  of  you  isj.  by  law,  ye  are  fallen 
1  Tim.^.  16.  G.  manifest  in  the  flesh,  j.  in  the  Spirit 
./«m.2.21.wa8  not  Abraham  nur  father  j.byworks? 

24.  ye  see  how  that  by  works  a  man  isj. 

25.  was  not  Rahab  the  harlot  j.  by  works? 

JUSTIFIER. 
Rom.  3.  26.  thej.  of  him  who  beliovoth  in  Jesus 

JUSTIFIETII. 
Pror.  17. 15.  he  that  j.  the  wii-kod  is  nbominntion 
1  /»a.50.8.ho  is  noor  that  j.whowill  contend  with  me 


KEE 

Rom.  4.  5.  butbelieveth  on  him  that  j.  the  nngodTy 
8. 33.  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect?  it  is  God  thatj^ 

JUSTIFYING. 
1  Kings  8.  32.  andj.  the  righteous,  2  Chr.  6.  23. 

JUSTLE. 
JVaA.2. 4.  the  chariots  shall  j.  one  against  another 

JUSTLY. 

Mic.  6.  8.  what  doth  the  Ld.  require  but  to  doj.? 
AuAre  23.41.  we  indeed  j.  for  we  receive  the  rewari'. 
IThess.  2.  10.  how  holily  andj.  we  behaved 


K. 


KAB. 

2  Kings  6.25  a  t.of  doves'  dung  sold  for  five  pieces 
KEEP. 

Signifies,  [1]  To  retain  or  holdfast,  2  Tim.  1. 
14.  [2]  To  remember,  Luke  2.  51.  [3]  To  de- 
fend and  protect,  Psal.  127.  1.  [4]  'J'o  obscrva 
and  practise,  Psal.  119.  4.  Acts  16.  4.  [5]  To 
save  or  deliver,  John  17.  15.  [6]  To  celebrate. 
Mat.  26.  18.  [7]  To  perform  fully  and  per- 
fectly, Mat.  19.  17. 

fit7i.2.15.Ld.puthiminthe  garden  of  Eden  to  A.  it 
18.  19.  and  they  shall  k.  the  way  of  the  Lord 

28.  15.  and  behold  I  am  with  thee,  to  k.  thee,  20. 
30.  31.  1  will  again  feed  and  k.  thy  flock 

33.9.  my  brother,  k.  that  thou  hast  to  thyself 
41.  35.  and  let  them  k.  food  in  their  cities 
y.zod.  6.  5.  whom  the  Egyptians  k.  in  bondage 

12.  6.  shall  k.  it  till  the  fourteenth  day  of  month 
14.  ye  shall  k.  it  a  feast  to  the  Ld.  through  your 

generations,  23.  15.  |  34.  18.  Lev.  23.  41. 
25.  that  ye  shall  k.  this  service,  13.  5. 
47.  and  the  congregation  of  Israel  shall  k.  it 

13.  10.  Ihou  shall  k.  this  ordinance  in  his  season 
20.8.  remember  the  sabbath  day,  to  k.  it  holy,  31. 

13,  14,  16.  Veut.  5.  12,  15. 

22.  7.  if  a  man  deliver  money  or  stuff  to  k.  10. 

23.  7.  k.  thee  far  from  a  false  matter 

14.  three  times  shall  thou  k.  a  feast  to  me 
20.  I  send  an  Angel  to  k.  thee  in  the  way 

/.ev.  t).  2.  and  lie  in  that  delivered  him  to  k.  4. 

18.  4.  ye  shall  k.  my  ordinances,  I  am  the  Lord 

30. 1  22.  9.   Kzek.  11.  20. 

19.  3.  shall  k.  my  sabbaths,  30. 1 26.  2.  Jsa.  56.  4. 
23.  .39.  shall  A",  a  feast  seven  days,  2  Chr.  30.  13. 

25. 18.  ye  shall  k.  my  judgments  and  do  them 
JVuOT.  6.  24.  the  Lord  bless  thee  and  k.  thee 

9.  3.  in  the  fourteenlli  day  at  even  ye  shall  k.  it 

11.  day  of  second  month  at  even  they  shall  k.  it 
18.7. thou  and  thy  sons  shall  k.  your  priests'  office 

29.  12.  ye  shall  k.  a  feast  to  the  Lord  seven  days 
36.7.shall  k.  himself  to  the  inheritance  of  tribe,  9. 

Deut.  4.  6.  /;.  therefore  and  do  them,  5.  1. 
7. 8.  because  the  Ld.  loved  you.  would  k.  the  oath 

12.  if  ye  k.  them,  the  Lord  shall  k.  the  covenant 

16.10.  thou  shall  k.  the  feast  of  weeks  to  the  Ld. 

15.  shall  k.  a  solemn  feast  to  the  Lord  thy  God 

17. 19.  may  learn  to  k.  all  the  words  of  this  law 
23.  9.  then  k.  thee  from  every  wicked  thing 

2;j.lhat  which  is  gone  out  of  thy  lips  thou  shall  k. 

29.  9.  k.  therefore  the  words  of  this  covenant 
Josh.  0.  18.  k.  yourselves  from  the  accursed  thing 

10.  18.  and  set  men  by  the  cave,  fbr  to  k.  them 
23.6.  to  k.  all  (hat  is  written  in  (he  law  of  Moses 

.fudg.  2.  22.  whether  they  will  k.  the  way  of  Lord 
Ruth  2.  21.  thou  shall  k.  fast  by  my  young  men 

1  Sam.  2.  9.  he  will  k.  the  feel  of  his  saints 

7.  1.  Elcnznr  his  son,  to  k.  the  ark  of  the  Lord 

2  Sam.  15. 16.  the  king  left  ton  women  which  wer« 

concubines  to  k.  the  house,  16.21.  |  20.  3. 
18.18.1  have  no  son  toA-.my  name  in  remembranca 
1  Kings  8.25.  A.  with  thy  servant  Dav.  2  CAr.  6.  16. 

20.  30.  brought  a  man  to  me  and  said,  k.  this 

1  CAr.  4.  10.  that  thou  wouldesl  k.  me  from  evil 

12.  33.  fifty  thousand,  which  could  k.  rank,  38. 
22.  12.  that  thou  mayest  k.  the  law  of  the  Lord 
2il.  18.  A.  this  for  ever  in  the  imagination  of  heart 

2  f 'Ar.22. 9.  had  no  power  to  ft.  still  the  kingdom 
28.10.  ve  purpose  to  A.undor  the  children  of  Judah 

30.  3.  for  thi'y  could  not  k.  it  nl  that  lime 

23.  asKonihiy  look  counsel  to  k.  other  seven  days 
Ezra  8.  29.  watch  and  ft.  them  till  ye  weigh  them 
JWA.  12. 27.  to  A.  the  dedication  with  gladness 

13.  22.  that  the  Levites  should  ft.  the  gates 
F.ith.  3.  8.  nor  A.  thoy  the  king's  laws 

9.27.  that  ihev  would  ft.thosclwo  days  of  Purim 
.hh  14.  13.  O  ih;il  Ihou  wouldesl  ft.  me  secret  till 
20.  13.  though  ho  A.  it  still  within  his  mouth 
r.-ul.  12.  7.  thou  shall  ft.  them,  O  Lord,  31.  20. 
17.8.  ft.  mo  ns  the  apple  of  the  eye,  hide  me 
19.  13.  A.  back  also  from  presumpiuous  sins 
25.  20.  O  A.  my  soul,  and  deliver  me,  I  trust 
34.  13.  ft.  thy  tongue  from  evil,  and  thv  lips 
.37.  .34.  and  A.  his  way  ||  30.  1 .  I  will  A.  my  mouth 
W.^H.  my  mercy  will  I  A.  for  him  for  ever 
91.  ll.hisnngelscharge,  tofclhecin  nllthy  wayf 
103.  9.  nor  chide,  nor  will  he  ft.  his  anger  for  evcf 


KEE 

Pial.  105.  45.  they  might  observe  and  k.  his  laws 
lot).  3.  blessed  are  they  that  k.  judgment 
)13.  9.  he  inaketh  the  barren  women  to  k.  house 
liy.  2.  blessed  are  they  that  k.  his  testimonies 
4.  thou  liast  commanded  us  to  k.  tliy  precepts 
17.  that  I  may  live  and  k.  thy  word,  101. 

33.  teach  me,  and  I  Ehall  k.  it  to  the  end 

34.  give  understanding,  I  shall  k:  thy  law,  44. 
57.0  Lord,  1  have  said,  that  I  would  k.  thy  words 
()3.I  am  a  coropanioji  of  them  that  k.  thy  precepts 
69.  I  will  k.  thy  precepts  with  my  heart,  134. 
88.  I  will  k.  the  testimony  of  thy  mouth 
100.  I  understand,  because  I  k.  tJiy  precepts 
lOtj.  I  will  k.  thy  righteous  judgments 
1SJ9.  wonderful,  therefore  doth  my  soul  k.  them 
13ti.  down  my  eyes,  because  they  k.  not  thy  law 
146.  save  me,  and  1  shall  k.  thy  testimonies 

127.  1.  except  the  Lord  k.  the  city  the  watchman 

140.  4.  k.  me  from  the  hands  of  the  wicked 

141.  3.  O  Lord,  k.  the  door  of  my  lips 
9.  k.  me  from  the  snares  they  have  laid  for  me 

Prtv.  2. 11.  understanding  shall  k.  thee 

20.  thou  mayest  k.  the  paths  of  the  righteous 

3.  21.  ray  son,  k.  sound  wisdom  and  discretion 
26.  Lord  shall  k.  thy  foot  from  being  taken 

4.  6.  love  wisdom,  and  she  shall  k.  thee 
13.  k.  instruction,  let  her  not  go,  for  she  is  thy  life 

21.  k.  my  sayings  in  the  midst  of  thy  heart 

23.  k.  thy  heart  with  all  diligence,  lor  out  of  it 

5.  2.  and  that  thy  lips  may  k.  knowledge 

6.  22.  when  thou  steepest  it  shall  k.  thee 

24.  to  k.  thee  from  the  evil  woman 
7.1. my  son,^.my  words,  and  lay  up  my  command. 

5.  they  may  k.  thee  from  the  strange  woman 
8.  32.  for  ble.<8ed  are  they  that  k.  my  ways 
22. 5.  he  that  doth  A.his  soul  shall  be  far  from  them 

18.  it  is  pleasant  if  thou  k.  them  within  thee 
24. 1 19.  it-  not  company  with  the  wicked 

28.  4.  such  as  k.  the  law  contend  with  them 
Eccl.  3.  6.  there  is  a  time  to  k.  and  to  cast  away 

5.  1.  k.  thy  foot  when  thou  goest  to  the  house 
Cant.  8.  12.  that  k.  the  fruit  thereof,  two  hundred 
Isa.  26.  3.  thou  wilt  k.  him  in  perfect  peace 

27. 3. 1  the  Lord  do  k.  it,  I  will  k.  it  night  and  day 

42.  6.  I  the  Lord  have  called  thee,  I  will  k.  thee 

43.  6.  k.  not  back  ||  56.  1.  k.  ye  judgment 
Jer.  3.  5.  will  he  k.  his  anger  to  the  end  7 

12.  and  I  will  not  k.  anger  for  ever 
31.  10.  and  k.  him  as  a  shepherd  doth  his  flock 

42.  4.  I  will  k.  nothing  back  from  you 
Ezek.  20. 19.  k.  my  judgments  and  do  them,  36.  27. 

43.  11.  that  they  may  k.  the  whole  form  thereof 
Hos.  12.  6.  k.  mercy  and  judgment,  wait  on  God 
Mic.  6.  t  16.  he  doth  much  k.  statutes  of  Omri 

7.  5.  k.  ihe  doors  of  thy  mouth  from  her  that 
,VoA.  1.  15.  k.  thy  feasts  1|  2.  1.  k.  the  munition 
Zeck.  3.  7  then  tiiou  shalt  also  k.  my  courts 

13.  5.  man  taught  me  to  /;.  cattle  from  my  youth 

14.  16.  and  to  k.  the  feast  of  tabernacles,  18,  19. 
Mai.  2.  7.  for  the  priests'  lips  should  k.  knowledge 
Mdrkl.  9.  that  ye  may  k.  your  own  tradition 
Luke  4.10.  he  shall  give  his  angels  charge  to  k.  thee 

8.  l.'>.  they  who  having  heard  the  word  k.  it 
11.28.  blessed  are  they  that  hear  the  word  and  4.it 
19.  43.  thy  enemies  shall  k.  thee  in  on  every  side 

John  8. 51.  if  ^.  my  saying  shall  never  see  death,  52. 
55.  but  I  know  him,  and  k.  his  saying 
12.2.5.he  that  hateth  his  life  in  this  world  shall  k.  it 

14.  23.  if  a  man  love  me  he  will  k.  my  words 

15.  20.  if  kept  my  saying,  they  will  k.  ymirs  also 

17.  H.  k.  through  thy  name  |{  15.  k.  from  the  evil 
Acts  5.  3.  and  to  k.  back  part  of  the  price  of  land 

10.  28.  for  a  man  that  is  a  Jew  to  k.  company 
12.  4.  and  delivered  him  to  siddiers  to  k.  him 

15.  5.  to  command  them  to  k.  the  law  of  Moses 
24.  ye  must  be  circumcised,  and  k.  the  law 

29.  from  which,  if  ye  k.  yourselves,  ye  do  well 

16.  4.  they  delivered  them  ihe  decrees  for  lo  k. 
23.  charging  the  jailer  to  k.  them  safely 

18.  21. 1  must  by  all  means  k.  this  feast  in  Jcrusal. 
21.25.  k.  themselves  from  things  offered  to  idols 
24.  23.  he  comtnanded  a  centurion  to  k.  Paul 

/?om.2.2.5.  circumcision  protiteth,  if  thou  k.  the  law 
26.  if  circumcision  k.  the  righteousness  of  law 

1  Cor.  5.  8.  let  us  k.  the  feast  ||  11.  not  k.  company 
7.  37.  decreed  that  he  will  k.  his  virgin,  doeth  well 

9.  27. 1  k.  under  my  body  and  bring  it  into  subjec. 
11.2.  that  ye  k.  the  ordinances,  as  I  delivered  tliem 
15.  2.  if  ye  k.  in  memory  what  I  preached  to  you 

t  Cor.  11.  9.  kept  myself,  and  so  will  I  k.  myself 
ffal.  6.  13.  neither  do  circumcised  k.  the  law 
F.ph.  4. 3.  endeavouring  to  k.  the  unity  of  the  Spirit 
PkU.  4.  7.  the  peace  of  God  shall  k.  your  hearts 
27'Ara«.3.3.who  shall  establish  and  k.you  fromevil 
J  Tim.  5.  22.  nor  partaker  of  sins,  k.  thyself  pure 
6.  20.  k.  that  which  i«  committed  to  thy  Irnsl 

2  Tim.  1.  12.  able  to  //.  that  I  committed  to  him 
14.  good  thing  committed  to  thee  k.  by  Holy  G. 

Jam.  1.  27.  and  to  k.  himself  unspotted  from  wo:id 
a  10.  for  whosoever  shall  k.  the  whole  law 
817 


KEE 

]  John  5.  21.  children,  k.  yourselves  from  idols 
Jude  21.  k.  yourselves  in  the  love  of  God,  looking 

24.  to  him  that  is  able  to  k.  you  from  falling 
Rev.l.  3.  blessed  are  they  thai  hear  and  A.  those  tli. 
3.  10.  I  will  k.  thee  from  the  hour  of  temptation 
22.  9.  of  them  who  k.  the  sayings  of  this  book 

KEEP  alive. 
Gen.  6. 19.  bring  into  the  ark  to  k.  them  aiiwe,  20. 
7.  3.  to  k.  seed  alive  on  the  face  of  all  the  earlh 
JVam.31. 18.  women  children  k.  alive  for  yourselves 
2Sam.8.'2.  he  measured  with  one  full  line  to  k.  alive 
Fsal.  22.  29.  and  none  can  k.  alive  his  own  soul 
33.  19.  to  deliver  and  k.  them  alive  in  famine 
41.  2.  the  Lord  will  preserve  him  and  k.  him  alive 

KEEP  charge. 

I^ev.  8.  35.  and  k.  the  cAar^re  of  the  L.  1  Ki7i^s2.3. 

Mum.  1.  .53.  Levites  k.  charge  of  the  tabernacle  ol 

testimony,  18.  4.  |  31.  30.  1  Chron.  23.  32. 

3.  7.  they  shall  k.  his  c.  8.  26.  |  18.  3.  Veut.  11. 1 

8.  theyshallA.  the  charge  of  the  children  of  Israel 

32.  k.  c.  of  the  sanctuary,  18.  5.  1  Chron.  23.  32. 

Ezek.  44.  16.  to  minister  lo  me,  and  k.  my  charge 

ZecA.3.7.if  thou  wilt  k.  my  charge  then  shalt  judge 

KEEP  commandtiients. 
£a;od.l6.28.  how  lorlg  refuse  ye  to  k.  my  command. 
20.  6.  shewing  mercy  to  them  that  k.  my  com- 
mandments, Dcut.  5.  10.  I  7.  9.  Van.  9.  4. 
Z,c«.22.31.  therefore  shall  ye  k.  my  commandments 
and  do  them.  Dent.  4.  40.  j  6.  17.  |  7.  11. 
26.  3.  if  ye  k.  my  commandments ,  Dent.  11.  22. 
I  19.  9.  I  28.  9.  1  30.  10.  1  Kings  3.  14. 
Dent.  4.  2.  that  ye  may  k.  the  com.  of  the  Lord 

5.  29.  O  that  they  would  fear  me  and  k.  my  c. 
8.2.know  whether  thou  wouldest  k.  his  command. 

6.  thou  shalt  A:,  ihe  command.  11. 1,  8.  |  13.  4. 18. 

10. 13.  the  Lord  requires  thee  to  k.  c.  27. 1.  1 30. 16. 

26.  17.  thou  hast  avouched  the  Lord  to  k.  his  c. 

18.  Lord  avouched  thee,  that  thou  shouldcst  k.  c. 

28.  45.  because  thou  hearkcnedst  not  to  A.  his  c. 

Josh.  22.  5.  take  heed  lo  k.  his  c.  to  cleave  to  him 

I  Kings  2. 3.  keep  the  charge  of  the  Lord  to  A.  his  c. 

6.  12.  k.  my  c.  2  Kings  17.  13.  Prov.  4.  4.  |  7.  2. 

5.  58.  that  he  may  incline  our  hearts  to  k.  his  c. 
61.  let  your  heart  be  perfect  to  k.  his  command. 

9.  6.  if  he  will  not  k.  my  c.  I  will  cut  off  Israel 

11.  38.  if  thou  wilt  A.  myc.  JVch.  I.  Q.John  15.  10 
^Kings  23. 3.  made  a  covenant  to  k.  c.  2  CAr.34.31 
1  Chr.  28.  8.  k.  and  seek  for  all  the  c.  of  the  Lord 

29. 19.  give  to  Solomon  a  perfect  heart  to  k.  thy  c. 
Psal.  78.7.  not  forgetthe  works  of  God,  but  k.hisc. 

119.  60.  I  made  haste  and  delayed  not  to  k.  thy  c. 

115.  depart  ye  evil  doers,  fori  will  k.  c.  of  my  G. 

Prov.  3. 1.  forget  not  my  law,  let  thy  heart  k.  my  c. 

6.  20.  my  son,  k.  thy  father's  c.  forsake  not  the  law 
Eccl.  8.  2. 1  counsel  thee  to  k.  the  king's  command. 

12.  13.  fear  God  and  k.  his  c.  this  is  Ihe  whole  duty 
Mat.  19.  17.  if  thou  wilt  enter  into  life,  k.  the  c. 
•John  14.  15.  if  ye  love  me,  k.  my  commandments 

1  Tim.  6.  14.  that  thou  k.  this  com.  without  spot 
l.h/in  2.3.weknow  that  we  know  him  if  we  A. his  c. 

3.22.what  we  ask  we  receive,  because  we  A.  his  c. 

5.2.  when  we  love  God  and  A.  his  commandments 

3.  this  is  the loveof  God, that  we  A.  his  command. 

Rev.  12.  17.  make  war  with  her  seed  which  A.  c. 

14.  12.  here  are  they  which  A.  the  c.  of  God 

See  CovKN.VNT. 

KEEP   Passovrr. 

Exod.  12.  48.  when  a  straijgpr  will  A.p.  to  Lord,  let 

his  males  be  circumcised,  then  let  him  A.  p. 

Mum.  9.  2.  let  the  children  of  Lsrael  A.  passovcr  in 

its  season,  4.  Dcut.  16.  1.  2  Kings  23.  21. 

6.  could  not  k.  the  pass.  \\  10.  yet  he  shall  k.pass. 

12.  all  the  ordinances  of  passovcr  they  shall  A.  it 

13. and  forbeareth  to  A. the  pass.lhat  soul  cut  off 

14.  if  a  stranger  will  A.  tbepassover  to  the  Lonl 

2  Chr.  30. 1.  come  to  A.  the  p.  to  Ihe  God  of  Israel 
2.  taken  counsel,  to  A.  pass,  in  the  second  month 

35. 16.  all  the  service  was  prepared  to  k. passovcr 
18.  nor  did  all  the  kings  of  Israel  A.  such  a  pass. 

Mat.  "5.  18.  say  to  him,  I  will  k. pass,  iillhy  house 

KEEP  silence. 

.Tudg.  3.  19.  who  said,  A.  silence,  and  all  went  out 

P.5. 35.22.  A.  not  si.  83. 1 .  ||  50. 3.  come  and  not  A.  si. 

Eccl.  3. 7.  a  time  to  A.  silence  and  a  time  to  speak 

Isa.i\.\.k.si.  before  me,0  islands,  and  let  the  peo. 

62.  6.  A.  not  si.  \\  65.  6.  behold,  I  will  nol  A.  si. 

Eam.l.  10.  the  elders  of  daughter  of  Zion  k.silrnce 

^^mos  5. 13.  the  prudent  shall  A.  silence  in  that  time 

//a4. 2.20.1, ord  in  his  temple,  let  Ihe  earth  k.silcnce 

1  Cor.  14.  28.  let  him  A.  silence  in  the  church 

34.  let  your  women  A.  silence  in  the  churches 

KEEP  statutes. 

Exod.  15.26.  if  thou  wilt  A.  all  his  statiUes,  Dcut. 

30.  10.  1  Kings  9.  4.  |  11.  38. 

Lev.  18.  5.  you  shall  A. my  statutes  and  judgments, 

26.  I  19.  19." I  20.  8,  22.  Ezek.  44.  24.1  29.  9.  Rachel  c:ime  with  sheep,  for  she  A.  them 
Deut.  4.  40.  thou  shalt  A.  therefore  his  sta.  26.  16.     ,30.  9.-nor  hath  he  A.  bach  any  thing  frorn  me 
6.2.lhat  thou  mightest  fenr  liord  to  A.  his  statutes]   42.  Ifi.  send  one,  and  ye  shall  be  A.  in  prison 

26. 17.  Ihou  hast  avouched  theliOrd  to  A.  his ,«(;««.   Er.nd.  3.  1.  now  Moses  A.  the  flock  of  jelbio 
28.  45.  thou  hearkenedst  not  to  i.  his  statutes    J    16.  23.  lay  up  for  you,  to  be  A.  tiU  tho  morning 


KEP 

1  Kiiigs  11.33. not  walked  in  my  ways  to  A.my  ttat 

Ps.  119.5.  thatmy  ways  were  directed  to  A.  thy  »t 

«.  I  will  A.  thy  Stat,  lorsake  me  nol  utterly,  145. 

Ezek.  18. 21.  if  the  w  icked  will  turn  and  A.  my  staL 

KEEPER. 
Gen.  4. 2.  Abtl  was  A.  of  sheep  |1  9.  my  brother's  k. 
39. 21.  Lord  gave  Joseph  favour  in  sight  of  the  k. 

22.  the  A.  of  the  prison  committed  to  Joseph 

23.  the  k.  of  the  prison  looked  not  to  any  thine 

1  Ham.  17.  20.  David  left  the  sheep  with  a  A. 
22.  David  left  his  carriage  in  Ihe  hand  of  the  fc 

28.  2.  1  will  make  thee  A.  of  mine  head  for  ever 

2  Ki7igs  22.  14.  A.  of  the  wardrobe,  2  Chr.  34.  SS. 
Mck.  2.  8.  Asaph  the  A.  of  the  king's  forest 

3.  29.  after  him  Shemaiah  A.  of  the  east  gale 
Esth.  2.  3.  custody  of  Hege  A.  of  women,  8.  15. 
.fob  27.  18.  and  as  a  booth  that  the  A.  makelh 
Psal.  121.  5.  Lor-J  is  thy  A.  the  Lord  is  Ihy  shade 
Cant.  1.  6.  they  made  me  the  A.  of  the  vineyards 
./cr.35.4.Mauseiah  the  son  of  Slnillum  A.of  the  door 
J3cts  16.  27.  and  the  A.  of  the  prison  awaking 
36.  the  A.  of  the  prison  told  tins  saying  to  Paul 
19.  t  35.  the  city  of  the  Ejihesians  is  a  temple  k. 
KEEPERS. 
2  Kings  1 1.  5.  a  third  part  shall  be  A.  of  the  watch 
1  Chron.  9.  19.  A.  of  the  gates  of  the  tabernacle 
Heel.  12.  3.  when  the  A.  of  the  house  tremble 
Cant.  5.  7.  the  A.  took  away  my  vail  from  rae 
8.  11.  Solomon  let  out  the  vineyard  to  A. 
■fcr.  4. 17.  as  A.  of  the  field  are  they  against  her 
Ezek.  40.  45.  k.  of  charge  of  house,  46.  |  44.  8,  14 
Mat.'2S.  4.  for  fear  of  him  the  A.  did  3hake 
.j'icts  5.  23.  the  A.  standing  before  the  doors 
12.6.A.kept  the  prison  ||  19.Herod  examined  the  k 
Tit.  2.  5.  to  be  discreet,  chaste,  A.  at  home,  good 
See  Dour. 
KEEPEST. 
1  Kings  8.  23.  who  A.  covenant  and  mercy  with  thy 
servants,  2  Chron.  6.  14.  Meh.  9.  32. 
Jicts  21.  24.  thou  walkost  orderly  and  A.  the  law 

KEEPETH. 
Exod.  21.  18.  and  he  die  not,  but  A.  his  bed 
Deut.  7. 'J.  faithful  G.  which  A.  covenant,  JVeii.1.5. 
1  Sam.  16.  11.  and  behold  he  A.  Ihe  sheep 
.fob  33.  18.  he  A.  back  his  soul  from  Ihe  pit 
Psal.  34.  20.  he  A.  all  his  bones,  none  is  broken 
121.  3.  he  that  A.  thee  will  not  slumber,  4, 
146.  6.  Lord  God,  which  A.  truth  for  ever 
Prov.  2.  8.  he  A.  the  paths  of  judgment 
10.  17.  he  is  in  the  way  of  lite  that  A.  instruction 
13.  3.  he  that  k.  his  mouth  A.  his  life,  21.  23. 
6.  righteousness  A.  him  upright  in  the  way 
16.  17.  that  A.  his  way  preserveth  his  soul,  19.  16. 
19.  8.  he  that  A.  understanding  shall  find  good 
24.  12.  that  A.  thy  soul,  doth  not  he  know 

27.  18.  whoso  k.  the  fig-tree  shall  eat  fruit 

28.  7.  whoso  A.  the  law  is  a  wi.se  son,  but  he 

29.  3.  that  A.  company  with  harlots,  spendeth 
11.  but  a  wise  man  A.  it  in  till  afterwards 
18.  but  he  that  A.  the  law,  happy  is  he 

Eccl.  8.  .5.  A.  the  commandments  shall  feel  no  evi 
Isa.  26.  2.  that  nation  which  A.  truth  may  enter  ir 
56. 2.  that  A.  the  sabbath  from  jiolluting  it,  and  A 
his  hand  fiom  doing  any  evil,  6. 
.fer.  48.  10.  cursed  he  he  that  A.  back  his  sword 
Lam.  3.  28.  he  sitteth  alone  and  A.  silence 
Hab.  2.  5.  he  is  a  proud  man,  neither  A.  at  home 
Luke  11.21. when  a  strong  man  armed  A.  his  palac* 
John  7.  19.  and  yet  none  of  you  A.  Ihe  law 
9.  16.  is  not  of  God,  because  he  A.  not  the  sabbath 
I   14.  21.  that  hath  my  commandments  and  A.  Ihem 

24.  he  that  loveth  me  not,  A.  not  my  sayings 
1  .fohn  2.  4.  that  saith,  I  know  him,  and  A.  not 

.5.  whoso  A.  his  word,  in  him  is  love,  3.  24. 
5.  18.  he  that  is  begotten  of  God  A.  himself 
Rev.  2.  26.  he  thai  overcometh  and  A.  my  works 
16.  1,5.  ble.ssed  is  he  that  A.  his  garments,  lest  he 
22.  7.  blessed  is  he  that  A.  the  sayings  of  this  book 

KEEPING. 
Exod.  34.  7.  tho  Lord  God  A.  mercy  for  thousands 
Mum.  3.  28.  A.  the  chnrse  of  the  sanctuary,  ,38. 
Deut. 8.  II.  forget  not  God,  in  not  A.his  commands 
1  Sam.  2.^.  16.  while  we  were  with  them  A.  sheep 
1  Chron.  12  136.  of  Asher  A.  rank,  forty  thousand 
Meh.  12.  25.  were  porters  A.  the  wanl  at  the  gates 
Psal.  19.  11.  and  in  A.  of  them  is  great  reward 
Prov.  4. 1 23.keep  thy  heart  above  all  A.  for  out  of  it 
Kzek.  17. 14.  by  A.  of  his  covenant  he  might  stand 
Dan.  9.  4.  O  Lord  the  great  God,  A.  covenant 
Luke  2. 8.  there  were  shepherds  A.  watch  by  night 
1  Cor.  7. 19.  but  A.  the  commandments  of  God 
ffch.  4.  t9.  there  remainelh  a  A.  of  a  sabbath 
1  Pet.  4. 19.  commit  the  A.  of  their  souls  to  him 

KEPT. 
Gen.  26.  5.  Abraham  A.  my  charge  and  my  law* 


KEP 


KIL 


£ioi.lfi.32.pot  ofmanna  k.  for  generations,  33,34. !  /lets  5.  2.  sold,  and  k.  back  part  of  the  price 
21.  2'J.  if  tlie  owner  hath  not  k.  liiiu  iu,  30.  1  7.  53.  who  received  the  law,  and  have  noi  k.  it 


A'unt.  5.  13.  and  it  bo  k.  close,  and  she  be  dctiled 
9.  5.  they  k.  the  passover  |{  7.  why  are  we  k.  back 
19.  then  Israel  k.  the  charge  of  the  Lord,  -Zi. 
17.  10.  bring  Aaron's  rod  to  be  k.  tor  a  token 
19  9.  water  of  separation  k.  lor  the  congregation 
24.  11.  Lord  hath  k.  thee  back  from  lionour 
31.  47.  wliich  k.  the  charge  of  the  tabernacle 

Veut.  32.  10.  he  k.  them  ai>  the  apple  of  hia  eye 

33.  9.  they  observed  thy  word,  k.  lliy  covenant 
Jtih.  5.  10.  Israel  k.  the  passover  in  Gilgal 

14.  10.  the  Lord  that  k.  me  alive  these  45  years 
2"2.  2.  ye  have  k.  ail  that  Moses  ''.omniandedyuu 

3.  have  /.•.  the  char2e  of  commandment  of  Lord 
Rulh  2.  23.  so  she  A.Tast  by  the  maidens  of  Bonz 
X  Sam.  0.  24.  to  this  time  it  hath  been  k.  for  thee 

13. 13.  hast  not  k.  the  commandment  of  Lord,  14. 

17.34.  David  said,  thy  servant  k.  liis  father's  sheep 

21.  4.  have  k.  themselves  at  least  from  women 
25. 21.  David  said,  surely  in  vain  have  I  k.  all  that 

33.  blessed  be  thou  who  hast  k.  me  this  day 

34.  the  Lord  God  hath  k.  me  from  evil,  39. 
2»5. 15.  why  hast  thou  not  k.  thy  Lord  the  king? 

IC.because  ye  have  not  i.your  master, the  Lord's 
3  Ham.  13.  34.  the  young  man  that  k.  the  watch 

22.  22.  1  have  k.  the  ways  of  the  Lord,  Pg.  16.  21. 
24.  I  have  k.  myself  from  iniquity,  Pdul.  18.  23. 
44.  thou  hast  k.  me  to  be  head  of  the  heathen 

1  Kinirs  2.  43.  why  hast  thou  not  k.  the  oath  of  Ld. 
3.  6.  thou  hast  k.  for  liiin  this  great  kindness 
8.24.  who  hast  A.  with  thy  servant  David  my  father 

that  thou  promisedst  him,  2  Citron.  6. 15. 

11. 10.  Solomon  A',  not  that  the  Lord  commanded 
ll.and  thou  hast  notA-.  my  covenant  and  statutes 
34.  because  David  A.  c«j'  commandments,  14.  8. 

13.21.  man  of  God  from  Judah  not  A.  coiuinandin. 

20.  t  7.  I  A.  not  back  silver  and  gold  from  him 

2  Kiiiffs  17.  19.  Judah  A.  not  the  commandiiienta 

15.  C.  Hezekiah  A.  the  commandments  oflhe  Lord 

1  Citron.  10.  13.  the  word  of  the  Lord  Saul  A.  not 
12.1. while  David  A.himself  close,  because  of  Sau 

2  Chron.  7.  S.  Solomon  A.  the  feast  seven  days 
9.  for  they  A.  the  dedicat.  of  the  altar  seven  days 

30.  21.  A.  feast  of  unleavened  bread,  Ezra  6.  22 
23.  and  ihey  A.  other  seven  days  with  gladness 

34.  21.  because  our  fathers  have  not  A.  the  word 

35.  1.  Josiah  and  Israel  A.  the  passover,  17,  19. 

18.  there  w  as  no  passover  like  to  that-A.  in  Israel 
Ezra  3.  4.  they  A.  also  the  feast  of  tabernaclrs 

6.  16.  A.  the  dedication  of  this  house  with  joy 

19.  the  children  of  the  captivity  A.  the  passover 
^ch.  1.  7.  we  have  notA.  the  commandments 

8.  18.  aird  they  A.  the  feast  seven  days 

9.  34.  nor  our  priests,  nor  our  fathers  A.  thy  law 
F.slk.  9.  2r<.  that  these  days  of  Purim  slniuld  be  A. 
Joo  23.  11.  his  ways  have  I  A.  and  not  declined 

28  21.  and  A.  close  from  the  fowls  of  the  air 
Psal.  17.4. 1  have  A.  me  from  paths  of  the  destroyer 
30.  3.  hast  A.  me  alive  |!  42.  4.  that  A.  holy  day 
78.  10.  they  A.  not  the  covenant  of  God 

56.  they  tempted  God,  and  A.  not  his  testimonies 
99.  7.  they  k.  his  testimonies  and  the  ordinance 
119.  22.  for  I  have  A.  thy  testimonies,  167. 
55. 1  have  A.  thy  law  ||  50.  I  A.  thy  precepts,  lfi8. 
67.  now  have  I  A.  thy  »  ord  ||  \r>8.  A.  not  thy  word 
Eccl.  2.10.  what  my  eyes  desired,  I  A.  not  from  them 
5.  13.  riches  A.  for  the  owners  thereof  to  their  hurt 
Cant.  1.  G.  but  my  own  vineyard  have  I  not  A. 
Isa.  30.29.  a  song  as  when  a  holy  solemnity  is  A 
Jcr.  16.  11.  not  A.  my  laws  ||  35. 18.  A.  his  preccjits 
F.iek.  5.  7.  nor  have  A.  my  judgments,  20.  21. 
18.  9.  hath  A.  my  judgments  ||  19.  A.  my  statutes 
44.8.  ye  have  notA.  the  charge  of  my  holy  things 
15.  tiiat  A.  the  charge  of  my  sanctuary,  48.  11. 
Dan.  5.  19.  whom  he  would,  he  A.  alive,  ho  set  ujt 

7.  28.  but  I  A.  the  matter  in  my  heart 
Has.  12.  12.  Israo]  served  for  a  wife,  and  A.  sheep 
Jimu)  1.  11.  and  Edom  A.  his  wrath  lor  ever 

2.  4.  Judah  hath  not  A.  his  commandments 
Jtfic.6.  16.  for  the  statutes  of  Omri  arc  k. 
Mal.".9.  according  as  yo  have  not  A.  my  ways,  3. 7. 

3.  14.  what  profit  that  we  have  A.  his  ordinance 
JUat.  8. 33.  and  they  that  A.  the  swirtt!  fled,  and  told 

13. 35.  will  niter  things  which  have  been  k.  secret 

14.  6.  but  when  Herod's  birthday  was  A. 
19.20.  these  have  I  A.  from  my  youth,  Luke  18. 21. 

JlfarA4.22.  nor  was  any  thing  A.  secret,  but  that  it 
9.  10.  and  tlicy  A.  that  saying,  J,uke  9.  :«i. 
J^ukf  2.  19.  .Mary  A.  these  things  in  her  heart,  51 

8.  29.  «nd  he  was  A.  bouml  with  chains,  in  fetters 
19.  20.  thy  ptiuTuI,  which  1  have  A.  in  k  napkin 

Johni.  10.  but  ihoii  hast  A.  the  good  wine  till  now 
12.  7.  against  day  of  my  burying  hnlh  she  A.  this 

15.  10.  as  I  have  A.  my  father's  commandments 
20.if  they  have  A.my  sayings, they  will  keep  yours 

17.  6.  thine  thoy  were,  and  have  A.  thy  word 
IS.fe  in  thy  name,  those  lliou  gavest  toe  I  have  A. 

18.  16.  and  spake  to  her  that  A.  the  door 
IT.ttlQn  sai'Ji  tl.e  damsel  timt  k.  the  door  to  Peter 

3ia 


9.  33.  Kneas  had  A.  his  bed  eight  years,  was  sick 
12.  5.  Peter  was  A.  in  prison  ||  6.  A.  the  prison 
20.  20.  I  A.  back  nothing  protitable  to  yon 

22.  20.  and  A.  the  <aimeiit  of  them  that  slew  hliu 

23.  35.  and  he  commanded  him  to  be  A.  25.  21. 
25.  4.  Festus  answered  that  Paul  shoulil  be  A. 

27.  43.  the  centurion  A.  them  from  their  purpose 

28.  16.  Paul  dwelt  with  a  soldier  that  A.  him 
Rom.  16.25.  mystery  A.  secret  since  the  world  began 
2  Cor.  11.  9.  1  A.  myself  from  being  burdensome 

32.  the  governor  A.  the  city  with  a  gariison 
Gal.  3.  23.  before  faith  came,  wo  were  A.under  law 
2  Tim.  4.  7.  have  finished  my  course,  I  A.  the  faith 
He!/.  11.28.  through  faith  Moses  A.  the  passover 
.Jam.  5.  4.  the  hire  that  is  A.  back  by  fraud,  crieth 

1  Pet.  1. 5.  who  are  A.  by  the  power  of  G.  thro'  laith 

2  Pet.  3. 7.  which  by  the  same  word  are  A.  in  store 
Jade  6.  the  angels  which  A.  not  their  first  estate 
Ilev.  3.  8.  hast  A.  my  word, and  not  denied  my  name 

10.  because  thou  hast  A.  the  word  of  my  patience 
KEPT  silence. 
Job  29. 21.  men  gave  ear,  and  A.  sil.  at  my  counsel 
31.  34.  did  1  fear  a  great  multitude,  that  1  k.  sil. 
Psal.  32.  3.wiien  1  A.  silence,  my  bones  waxed  old 
50.21.  these  things  hast  thou  dune, and  I  A.  silence 
Acts  15.  12.  then  all  the  multitude  A.  silence 
22. 2.  that  he  spake  Hebrew,  thoy  k.  the  more  sil. 

KEK  CHIEFS. 

£:eA.13.18.raake  A.on  head  ofeverystature  to  hunt 

21.  your  A.  also  will  I  tear,  and  deliver  my  people 

KERNELS 

JVum.  G.  4.  eat  nothing  from  the  A.  even  to  the  husk 

KETTLE. 
\Satn.  2.14.  priest'sservantstruck  into  the  A.  or  pot 

KEY 
Signifies,   [1]   .4?i   instrument   to   open   a  lock, 
Judg.  3.  25.     [2]    7'Ae  gift  and  ability  to  in- 
terpret the  scripture,  ichereby  an  entrance  is 
■made  to  the  knoiclcdge  thereof,  Luke  11.  52 
[3]   The  whole  administration  of  the  Ciospel, 
ictth  reference  both  to  the  publication  of  it 
doctrine,  and  the  dispensin<r  the  ordinances  of 
it.  Mat.  16.  19.     It  is  an  emblem  of  goetrn 
ment  and  potcer,  Isa.  22.  22. 
.Tndg.  3.  25.  therefore  they  took  a  A.  and  opened 
ha.  22.  22.  the  A.  ol'house  of  David  lay  on  Eliakim 
A«Af  11.  52.  ye  have  taken  away  the  A.  of  knowl. 
Rev.  3.  7.  saith  he  that  hath  the  A.  of  David 
9.1. to  him  was  given  the  A. of  bottomless  jiit,  20. 1. 

KEYS. 
J\Iat.  16.  19. 1  will  give  the  A.  ofkingdom  of  heaven 
Rev.  1.  18.  and  have  the  A.  of  hell  and  of  death 

KICK. 
1  Sam.  2.  29.  wherefore  A.  yo  at  my  sacrifice? 
jlcts  9.  5.  it  is  hard  to  A.  against  the  pricks,  26. 14. 

KICKED. 
Deut.  32.  15.  but  Jeshurun  waxed  fat  and  A. 

KID. 
r;fn.37.31..Toscpirs  brethren  killed  a  A. of  the  goals 
38.  17.  I  will  send  thee  a  A.  from  the  Hock 
JCzoJ.  23.19.  thou  shalt  not  see  the  A.in  his  mother's 
milk,  '34.  26.  Jjeut.  14.  21. 
/,fu.  4.  23.  he  shall  bring  his  offering  a  A.  of  the 
goats,  28.  I  9.  3.  Ezek.  43.  22.  |  45.  23. 
5.  6.  bring  a  lamb  or  a  A.  for  a  sinolVering 
23.  19.  then  ye  shall  s»crifice  one  A.  of  the  goats, 
jV«;/i.  7.  16,  22,  28.  |  15.  24.  |  28.  15,  30. 
I  29.  5,  11,  16,  19,  25.  Ezek.  45.  t  15. 
^Vh7».  1.5.  11.  thus  shall  it  be  done  for  a  lamb  or  a  A. 
Juilg.  G.  19.  Gideon  went  and  made  ready  a  A. 
13.  19.  60  Manoah  took  a  A.  with  a  ineal-offering 
14.6.  Samson  rent  lion  as  a  A.  nothing  in  his  hand 
15.  1.  Samson  visited  his  wife  with  a  A.  and  said 
1  .Sam.  16.  20.  .lesse  took  an  ass  laden,  and  a  A. 
Isa.  11.  6.  the  leopard  shall  lie  down  with  the  A. 
iMke  15.  29.  and  yet  thou  never  gavest  me  a  A. 

KIDS. 
Gen.  27.9.  fetch  me  from  thence  two  A.  of  goats 

IG.  she  put  the  skins  of  the  A.  on  his  hands 
Lev.  16.  5.  he  shall  take  two  A.  of  the  goats 
JVum.7.H7.thc  A. of  the  goals  for  sin-offering  twelve 
1  Sam.  10.  3.  one  carrying  three  A.  another  bread 
1  Kings  20.  27.  i>itclied  like  two  little  (locks  of  A. 
2CAr«n.35.7.Jo.''iah  gave  lambs  and  A.  tor  offerings 
Cant.  1.  8.  feed  lliv  A.  besidi-  the  shepherds'  tents 

KIDNEYS 
Signify,  [I]  Those  natural  parts  of  the  body  in 
man  or  beast.  Lev.  3.  4.     [2]  The  kernel.i  of 
wheat,  Deut.  32.  14.     [3]  The  innermost  affec- 
tions t^nd  desires,  Psnl.  16.  7. 
Ezod.  29.  13.  thou  slialt  take  Ihi'  two  A.  and  burn, 
22.  Lr^.  3.  4,  10,  15.  I  4.  9.  ]  7.  4.  |  8.  16,  25. 
Lev.  9.  10.  but  fat  and  A.  he  burnt  on  the  altar,  19. 
Deut.  32.  14.  rams,  with  the  fut  of  A.  of  wheat 
/sa.  34.  6.  the  swonl  of4.ord,  with  fat  of  A.  of  rams 

KILL 
Is  spoken,   (I)   Of  God,  icAo  has  many  vnys  In 
deprive  qf   Ujk,   Lam.  2.  21.     (Iff  Of  man. 


KIL 

[1]  Lattf-ully  ,when  a  malefactor  is  put  to  death 
by  the  sentence  of  a  magistrate,  Deut.  13.  9 
L2J  L  nlau-fuUy,  2  Sam.  13.  28-  1  Kings  21.  19 
(111)  Uf  wrathj  which  kills  men,  either  as  H 
preys  upoii  their  spirits,  and  wasteth  them  in- 
wardly  ;  or,  as  it  prompts  them  to  such  rash, 
furious,  and  wicked  actions,  as  may  procute 
their  death ;  or,  as  it  provoketh  God  to  cut 
them  vjj'.  Job  5.  2.  (U  )  Uf  the  desire  of  the 
slothlul,  which  exposeth  him  to  extreme  want, 
and  so  to  death  :  or  puts  him  upon  such  wicked 
courses  to  supply  his  wants,  as  bring  him  to  un 
untimely  death,  Prov.  21.  25.  (V)  uf  the  let- 
ter, that  is,  the  late,  which  is  said  to  kill,  be- 
cause it  accuseth,  conUeinneth,  and  denounceth 
the  wrath  of  God  against  men,  for  not  doing 
their  didy,  but  gives  no  strength  for  the  doing 
of  It,  2  Cor.  3.  6. 
Gen.  4. 15.  lest  any  finding  Cain,  should  A.  him 
12.  12.  they  will  A.  me,  but  will  save  thee  alive 

26.  7.  lest  the  men  of  the  place  sliould  A.  me 

27.  42.  doth  comlbrt  himself,  purposing  to  A.  thee 
37.  21.  Keuben  heard  and  said,  let  us  notA.  him 
43. 1 16.  bring  these  men  home,  A.  a  killing 

Kiod.  1.  16.  it  it  be  a  son,  then  ye  shall  A.  him 

2.  14.  intendest  thou  to  A.  me  'i  Acts  7.  28. 

4.  24.  the  Lord  met  him,  and  sought  to  A.  him 
12.  6.  the  congregation  of  Israel  shall  A.  it,  21. 

16.  3.  to  A.  this  whole  assembly  with  hunger 

17.  3.  to  A.  us  and  our  children  with  thirst 

20.  13.   thou  shalt  not  A.  Veut.  5.  17.  Mat.  5 
21.  Rom.  13.  9 
22.  1.  if  a  man  steal  an  ox  or  sheej),  and  A.  it 

24.  and  I  will  A.  vou  with  the  sw  ord 

29.  11.  A.  bullock  before  the  Lord,  Lev.  1  5.  |  4.4. 

20.  then  shalt  A.  the  ram,  and  take  of  his  blood 
Lev.  1.  11.  shall  A.  it  on  the  side  ol'  the  altar,  16. 15. 

3.  2.  and  A.  it  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle 
8.  he  shall  A.  it  before  the  tabernacle,  13. 

4.  24.  he  shall  A.  k  in  the  place  w  heie  they  k. 
33.  where  they  A.  the  burnt-otfering,  7.  2. 

14.  13.  where  he  shall  A.  the  sin-offering,  16. 11. 

25.  he  shall  A.  the  lamb  of  the  tresimss-offering 
50.  and  he  shall  A.  the  one  of  the  birds 

20.  4.  giveth  his  seed  to  Molecb,  and  A.  him  not 

16.  thou  shalt  A.  the  woman  and  the  beast 
22.  28.  whether  cow  or  ewe,  ye  shall  not  A.  it 

J^'um.  11.  15.  if  thou  deal  thus  with  me,  A.  me 

14.  1.5.  if  thou  A.  all  this  people  as  one  man 

lf>.  13.  hast  brought  us  to  A.  us  in  the  wilderness 

22.  29.  were  a  sword,  for  now  would  1  A.  thee 

31.  17.  now  A.  every  male  among  the  little  ones, 

A.  every  woman  that  hath  known  man 
35.  27.  and  the  revenger  of  blood  k.  the  slayer 
Deut.  4.42.  who  should  A.  his  neighbour  unawares 

12.  15.  thou  inayest  A.  and  eat  fi.-sh  in  thy  gatei 

21.  then  thou  shall  A.  of  thy  held  and  Hock 

13.  9.  but  thou  shalt  surely  A.  him,  thine  hand 
16.  t  5.  not  A.  the  passover  within  thy  gates 

32.  39. 1  A.  and  I  make  alive,  1  wound  and  I  hcaj 
Judg.  9.  t  24.  which  strengthened  his  hands  to  A 

13.23.  if  the  Lord  were  pleased  to  A.  us,  would  no'. 

15.  13.  saying,  surely  we  will  not  A.  thee 

16.  2.  morning,  when  it  is  day,  we  shall  k.  him 

20.  31.  Ihey  began  to  A.  as  at  other  times,  39. 

1  Sam.  16.  2.  if  Saul  hear  it,  he  will  A.  me 
17.9.  if  he  bo  able  to  A.  me,  then  we  will  serve 
19.  1.  to  all  his  servants,  that  they  should  A.  David 

2.  saying,  Saul  my  father,  seekelh  to  A.  thee 

17.  \»'hy  should  I  A.  thee  ||  24.10.  bade  mc  A.  thee 

30.  1.5.  swear  thou  wilt  neither  A.  me,  nor  dclivei 

2  .Sam.  13.  28.  I  say,  smite  Amnon,  then  A.  him 

14.  7.  that  we  may  A.  him,  for  life  of  his  brother 
32.  if  any  iniipiity  be  in  mo,  let  him  A.  me 

21.  4.  nor  for  us  shalt  thou  A.  any  man  in  Israel 

1  Kings  1 1 .  40.  Solomon  sought  to  A.  Jeroboam 
12.27. and  they  shall  A. me,  and  go  again  to  Rehob. 

2  Kings  5  7.  am  I  a  God,  to  A.  and  make  alive  1 
7.  4.  and  if  thoy  A.  us,  we  shall  but  dio 

II.  15.  him  that  followeth  her  A.  with  the  sword 
2  Chron.  35.  6.  A.  ihp  pas.iovcr,  sanctify  yourselves 
F.ilh.  3. 13.  letters  were  sent  by  p'osts  to  A.  all  Jews 

7.  t  4.  an-  sold,  that  they  should  di'stroy  and  A. 
F.rrl.  3.  3.  a  time  to  A.  and  n  time  to  liral 
/.-■a.  14.  30.  and  I  will  A.  thy  root  with  famine 

29.  I.  add  ye  year  to  year,  let  llicin  A.  sacrifice! 
Ezek.'.U.  3.  yo  A.  them  thai  aie  fed,  but  feed  not 
Mat.  5.  21.  vC'ho  shall  A.shall  hein  danger  of  judgm. 

l(l.2'^.fcarnot  them  which  A.  thi'bndv,  f.ukr  12.4. 

IT.  23.  and  they  shall  A.  him,  Mark  9.  31.  |  10.  34. 

21.  3-1.  this  is  the  heir,  come  lot  us  A.  him,  Mark 
12.  7.  Luke  20.  14. 

23.  34.  and  some  of  Ihem  ye  shall  A.  and  crucify 
24.0.t  hen  shall  Ihey  deli  v.  yon  up,  and  shall  k.  you 
26.  4.  they  might  take  Jesus  by  siiblilly  and  k.  him 

.UorA  3.  4.  is  It  lawful  to  save  life,  or  to  A.  ? 
10.  19.  do  not  A.  Luke  18.  20.  .Jam.  2.  11. 

f.uke  13.  31.  d.part  hence,  for  llerod  will  k.  thee 
l.'>.  23.  and  bring  hither  the  failed  calf  and  k  it 
22. 2.  the  priests  and  scribes  sought  how  to  k.  him 


KIL 

John  5.  18.  Jew*  sought  the  more  to  k.  him,  7.  1. 
7. 19.  keepeth  ihe  law,  why  go  ye  about  to  k.  me  ? 

20.  tliou  hast  a  devil,  who  goetli  about  lo  k.  thee  ? 

2o.  b  not  this  he  whom  they  soek  to  k.  } 
8. 22.  will  he  k.  himself?  ||  37.  ye  seek  to  k.  me,  40. 
10. 10.  the  thief  coineth  not  but  to  sleal  and  k. 
JicUO.^.  the  Jews  took  counsel  to  k.  Paul,2ti.  21. 

24.  watched  the  gates  day  and  night  to  k.  him 
10. 13.  came  a  voice  to  him,  rise,  Peter,  k.  and  eat 
21.  31  as  they  went  about  to  k,  him,  tidings 
23. 15.  we,  ere  he  come  near,  are  ready  to  k.  him 
25.  3.  laying  wait  in  the  way  to  k.  him 

27.  42.  the  soldiers'  counsel  was  to  k.  the  prisoners 
yawi.2.11.if  thou  commit  not  adullery  ,yet  it' thou  k. 

4.  2.  ye  k.  and  desire  to  have,  and  cannot  obtain 
Kev.  2.  23.  and  I  will  k.  her  children  with  death 

6.  4.  and  that  ihey  should  k.  one  another 
8.  power  was  given  them  to  k.  with  the  sword 
9.  5.  it  was  given  that  they  should  not  k.  them 
11.7.  the  beast  slnll  overcome  them  and  k.  them 

KILLED. 
Ocn.  31.  t54.  then  Jacob  k.  beasts  on  the  mount 
37.  31.  they  took  Joseph's  coat,  and  k.  a  kid 
Ezod.  21.  29.  the  beast  hath  k.  a  man  or  woman 
L-ev.i.  15.  the  bullock  shall  be  k.  before  the  Lord 
6.  25.  in  the  place  where  the  burntotfering  is  k. 
shall  the  sin-offering  be  k.  before  the  Lord 

5.  19.  the  ram  he  /.-.  H  14.  5.  one  of  the  birds  be  /;. 
14.  C-  shall  dip  them  in  the  blood  of  the  bird  k. 

J^um.  16.  41.  ye  have  k.  the  people  of  the  Lord 
31.  19.  whosoever  hath  k.  any  person,  purify 

1  Sa/n.  24. 11.  the  skirt  of  thy  robe,  and  k.  thee  not 
2.5.  11.  take  my  flesh  I  have  k.  for  my  shearers 

28.  24.  the  woman  hasted  and  k.  the  calf 

S  Sam.  12.  9.  thou  hast  k.  Uriah  with  the  sword 
21.  17.  Abishai  smote  the  J'hilistine  and  k.  him 

1  Kings  16.7.  like  Jeroboam,  and  because  he  t.hiin 

10.  Zimri  went  and  smote  Ela,  and  k.  him 
21.  19.  hast  thou  k.  and  also  taken  possession  7 

S  Ktiiffs  15.  25.  Pekah  k.  Pekahiah,  and  reigned 

1  Chron.  19.  18.  David  k.  Shophach  the  captain 
S  CAron.l8.2.Ahab  Ar.sheep  and  oxen  in  abundance 

25. 3.  he  slew  those  that  had  A:,  the  king  his  father 

29.  22.  so  they  A-,  the  bullocks,  rams,  lambs 

24.  the  priests  k.  them  and  made  reconciliation 

30.  15.  k.  the  passover,  35.  1,  11.  Etra  (i.  20. 
Psal.  44. 22.  for  thy  sake  are  we  k.  all  the  diy  long 
Prov.  9.  2.  hath  k.  her  beasts,  mingled  her  wine 
JLam.  2.  21.  thou  hast  k.  and  not  pitied 

Mat.  16. 21.  k.  and  raised  again,  Mark  8.  31 .  |  9.  31. 

21.  35.  beat  one,  and  k.  another,  Mark  12.  5. 

22.  4.  my  oxen  and  my  fallings  are  k.  all  things 

23.  31.  are  children  of  them  that  k.  the  prophets 
Mark  6.  19.  and  Herodias  would  have  k.  him 

12.  8.  k.  him  and  cast  him  out  of  the  vineyard 
14.  12.  the  first  day,  when  they  k.  the  passover 
I^uke  11,  47.  and  your  fathers  k.  them,  48. 

12.  5.  after  he  hath  !c.  hath  power  to  cast  into  hell 
1.5.  27.  thy  father  hath  k.  the  fatted  calf,  30. 

22.  7.  the  day  when  the  passover  must  be  k. 
Jicts  3. 15.  k.  the  Prince  of  life  ||  12. 2.  he  k.  James 

16.27.he  drew  his  sword,  and  woulifliave  k.  hims. 

23.  12.  nor  eat  nor  drink  till  they  had  k.  Paul 
27.  taken  of  the  Jews,  and  should  have  been  k. 

Rom.  8.  36.  for  thy  sake  we  are  k.  all  the  day  long 
11.3.  Lord,  they  have  /i.  thy  pro[ihets,  and  digged 

2  Cur.6.9.  as  dying  we  live,  as  chastened  and  not  /.•. 
1  T/nrs.5.2. 15.  who  k,  the  Lord  Jtsus  and  prophets 
Jam.  5.  6.  ye  have  condemned  and  k.  the  just 
Rrv.  6. 11.  brethren  who  should  be  k.  as  they  were 

9. 18.  by  these  three  was  the  third  part  of  men  k. 
20.  the  rest  which  were  not  k.  by  these  plagues 
11.5.  if  any  hurt  him  he  must  in  this  manner  be  /.-. 

13.  10.  killeth  with  sword,  must  be  k.  with  sword 
15.  not  worsliip  imnge  of  the  beast,  should  be  k. 

KILLEDST. 
F.iod.  2.  14.  to  kill  me,  as  thou  k.  the  Egyptian 
1  Sam.  24. 18.  forasmuch  as  thou  it.  me  not 

KILLEST. 
Mat.  23.  37.  that  k.  the  prophets,  Luke  13.  34. 

KILLETH. 

Z,«B.  17. 3.  who  A-.an  ox,  goat  in  the  camp,  or  it.  out 

34.  17.  he  that  k.  any  man  shall  surely  be  put  to 

death,  21.  :N'um.  35.  30. 

18.  he  that  k.  a  bens',  shall  make  it  good,  21. 

JV^m.35.11.  the  slaver  may  floo,  who  k.  any  person 

una-v;)re?,  15.  Deut.  19.  4.  ,/o.sA.  20.  3,  9. 

1  Sam.  2.  C.  the  Lord  k.  and  maketh  alive 

17.  25.  man  who  k.  him,  king  will  enrich,  26,  27. 
Job  5.  2.  for  wialh  k.  the  foolish  man 

24.  14.  tlie  murderer  k.  the  poor  and  needy 
Frov.  21.  25.  the  desire  of  the  slothful  k.  him 
Isa.  66.  3.  he  that  k.  an  ox,  as  if  he  slew  a  man 
John  16.2.  who/r.  von,  think  he  doeth  God  service 

2  Cor.  3.  6.  for  the'li-lter  k.  the  Spirit  giveth  life 
Rev.  13.  10.  he  that  k.  with  sword  must  be  killed 

KILLING. 
Gen.  43.  t  16-  bring  these  men  home,  kill  a  k. 
JvilsT.  !).  24.  which  aided  him  in  k.  his  brethren 
S  Ckr.  30. 17.  the  Lcvites  had  charge  of  i.  passover 
B19 


KIN 

Psal.  4^.  1 10.  fta  with  a  Jt.mlnc  enemies  reproach 
Proe.  9.  t  2.  wisdom  hath  killed  her  *.  • 

Isa.  22. 13. slaying  oxen,  and  k.  slieeji,  eating  flesh 
Hus.  4.  2.  by  swearing,  lying,  k.  and  stealing 
Mark  12. 5.  sent  others,  beating  some,  and  k.  some 

KIN. 
Lev.  18.  6.  none  shall  ap))roach  to  any  near  of  k. 

20.  lU.  for  he  imcovereih  his  near  k. 

21.  2.  for  his  k.  that  is  near,  ho  may  be  defiled 
25.  25.  if  any  of  his  k.  come  lo  redeem  it,  49. 

/i«iA2.  20.  Naomi  said,  the  man  is  near  of  A.  to  us 

2  Savi.  19.  42.  the  king  is  near  ofk.  to  ue 

Mark  6.  4.  a  prophet  is  not,  but  among  his  own  k. 

KIND,  Substantive. 
Gen.  1.  11.  fruit-tree  yielding  fruit  after  his  k.  12. 
12.  herb  yielding  seed  after  his  k.  and  the  tree 
21.  the  waters  brought  forth  abundantly  alter 
their  A',  and  every  winged  fowl  after  his  k. 

24.  earth,  and  beast  of  earth  after  their  k. 

25.  God  made  the  beast  of  the  earth  after  his  k. 
6.20.  of  fowls  after  their  k.  and  of  cattle  after  their 

k.  every  creeping  thing  after  his  k. 
7.  14.  beast,  cattle,  and  fowl,  after  their  k. 
Lev.  11.  14.  in  abomination,  vulture,  kite,  raven, 
hawk  after  his  k.  15,  16,  19.  Deut.  14.  14. 
29.  the  weasel,  mouse,  and  tortoise  after  his  k. 
19.  19.  not  let  thy  cattle  gender  with  a  diverse  A-. 
1  Chron.  23.  14.  for  all  inslrunienls  of  every  k. 
JVcA.  13.  20.  sellers  of  all  k.  of  ware,  lodged 
Eccl.a.  5.  I  planted  trees  of  all  A-.  of  fruits 
Ezek.  27.  12.  the  multitude  of  all  A-.  of  riches 
Mat.  13.  47.  like  a  net,  and  gathered  of  every  k. 
17.21.  A-.  goethnot  out  but  by  prayer,  ^WarA- 9. 29. 

1  Cor.  15.  39.  there  is  one  A",  of  flesh  of  men 
Jam.  1.  18.  that  we  should  be  a  A",  of  first-fruits 

3.  7.  for  every  k.  of  beasts  and  birds  is  tamed 
KIND. 

2  Chron.  10.  7.  saying,  if  thou  he  k.  to  this  people 
Lvke  6.  35.  God  is  A-.  to  the  unthankful  and  evil 

1  Cor.  13.  4."charity  sufl'erelh  long  and  is  k. 
Eph.  4.  32.  be  k.  one  to  another,  tender-hearted 

KINDS. 
Gen.  8.  19.  whatsoever  creepeth  after  their  it. 

2  Chron.  16.  14.  filled  with  divers  k.  of  spices 
Jer.  15.  3  I  will  appoint  over  them  four  k. 
Ezek.  47. 10.  their  fish  shall  be  according  to  their  k. 
Dan.  3.  5.  dulcimer,  and  all  k.  of  music,  7,  10,  15. 

1  Cor.  12.  10.  lo  another  divers  k.  of  tongues 

14.  10.  there  are,  it  may  be,  so  many  k.  of  voices 

KINDLE. 
Prov.  26.  21.  so  is  a  contentious  man  to  k.  strife 
fsa.  9.  18.  it  shall  A-.  in  the  thickets  of  Ihe  forest 
10.  16.  A',  a  burning  like  the  burning  of  fire 
30.  33.  the  breath  of  the  Lord  doth  k.  it 
43.  2.  nor  shall  the  flame  k.  upon  thee 
.hr.  33. 18.  never  want  a  man  to  k.  nieat-oflerings 
Obad.  18.  fire  and  flame  shall  k.  in  them 

KINDLED. 
Gen.  39.  19.  Potiphar's  wrath  was  k. 
Lev.  10.6.  bewail  the  burning  Ihe  Lord  hath  it. 
JVu7n.  11.  33.  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  was  k.  iHvl. 
11.  ll.'i. Kings  22.  13,  17.  P.^al.  10(i.  40. 

2  Saw.  22.  9.  coals  were  A-.  by  it,  Psal.  18.  8. 
Job  19.  11.  he  hath  also  k.  his  wrath  against  me 

32.  2.  then  was  k.  the  wrath  of  Elihu,  against  Job 
was  his  wrath  A-.  because  he  justified  himself 
3.  against  his  three  friends  was  his  wrath  k.  5. 
42.  7.  my  wrath  is  k.  against  thee,  and  friends 
Psal.  2.  12.  when  his  WTalh  is  k.  but  a  little 
124.  3.  when  their  wrath  is  k.  against  us 
Isa.  50.  11.  walk  in  the  sparks  that  ye  have  it. 
Jirr.  44.  0.  wrath  was  k.  in  the  cities  of  Judah 
Ezek.  20.  48.  shall  see,  that  I  the  Lord  have  k.  it 
Hos.  11.  8.  my  repeniings  are  k.  together 
Luke  12.  49. -what  will  I,  if  it  be  already  it. 
See  ANr.ER,  Fire. 
KINDLETH. 
.Toh  41.  21.  his  breath  k.  coals,  a  flame  goc'h 
Isa.  44.  15.  yea,  he  k.  it,  and  baketh  bread 
Jam.  3.  5.  how  great  a  matter  a  little  fire  k.! 

KINDLY. 
Gen.  24.  49.  if  you  will  denl  A-.  with  me,  47.  29. 
34.  3.  Shechem  spake  k.  to  the  damsel 
50.  21.  Joseph  spake  k.  to  his  brethren 
Josh.'i.  14.  that  we  will  deal  k.  and  truly  with  thee 
Rvth  1.  8.  the  Lord  deal  k.  with  yon,  as  ye  dealt 
1  Sam.  20.  8.  thou  shalt  deal  A-.  with  thy  servant 
2Kivgs  2.i.28.spake  t.lo  Jehoiachin,  .Ter.^i.  32. 
Rom.  12.  10.  be  A-.  affectionpd  one  to  another 

KINDNESS. 

Gm.  20.  13.  this  is  thy  k.  thou  fhalt  shew  to  me 

21.  23.  according  lo  the  k.  I  have  done  to  thee 

24.  12.  O  Lord,  shew  k.  to  my  master  Abraham 

14.  know  that  thou  hast  shewed  A-.  to  my  master 

39.  t21.  the  Lord  extended  k.  to  Joseph 

40.  14.  think  on  me,  and  shew  k.  I  pray  thee 
Josh.  2. 12.  swear,  since  I  have  shewed  you  k.  that 

ye  will  also  shew  A',  to  my  fathi'r's  house 
.Tudg.S.^ri.  nor  shewed  k.  t#llie  houi-eof  Jcrnhhaal 
Ruth  2.  20.  not  lefl  off  hia  k.  to  living  and  dead 


KIN 

!  Rvth  3. 10.  thou  hast  shewed  more  k.  In  latter  end 

1  ^am.lJ.G.  je  shewed  k.  to  Israel  when  they  came 
20.  14.  thou  shall  shew  me  the  k.  of  the  Lord 

15.  thou  shalt  not  cut  olf  thy  A.  from  my  hou^e 

2  Aum.2.  5.  ye  have  shewed  this  k.  unto  your  lord 
0.  now  Lord  shew  k.  to  you,  1  also  w  ill  requiW 

yon  this  k.  because  ye  have  done  Ilia  tiling 
3.  8.  against  Judah  shew  k.  to  the  house  of  baul 

9.  1.  tliat  I  may  shew  him  k.  tor  Jonathan's  sake 
"3.  any,  that  I  may  shew  the  k.  of  God  to  him 

7. 1  will  surely  shew  thee  k.  lor  Jonathan's  eako 

10.  2. 1  will  shew  k.  to  Ilaiiun  son  of  Nahash,  at 

his  father  shewed  k.  lo  me,  1  Chron.  19.  2. 
16.  17.  Absalom  said,  is  this  thy  k.  to  thy  friend  1 

1  Kings  2.  7.  hut  shew  k.  to  the  sons  of  Uarzillai 
3.  6.  ihou  hast  kept  for  David  this  great  k. 

2  CAr.  24.22.  Joash  remembered  not  /;.of  Jehoiada 
JVcA.  9.  l*;.  but  thou  art  a  God  gracious,  of  great  k. 
Eslh.  2.  9.  and  the  maiden  oblained  A',  ot  hirn 

1 17.  she  obtained  k.  more  than  all  the  virgins 
I'sal.  31.  21.  he  hath  shewed  ine  his  inarvclloLs  k. 
117.  2.  for  his  merciful  k.  ia  great  toward  us 
119.  'ili.  let  Ihy  merciful  k.  he  for  my  comfort 
141.  5.  let  the  righteous  smile  me,  itsliall  be  a  it. 
I'rov.  19.22.  Ihe  desire  of  a  man  is  his  A.  and  a  poor 
31.  26.  and  in  her  tongue  is  the  law  of  A. 
Isa.  54.  8.  with  everlasting  k.  w  ill  1  have  mercy  oa 

10.  but  my  k.  shall  not  dejtart  from  ihee 
57. 1 1.  men  of  A.  taken  away,  none  considering 
.hr.  2.  2.  I  remember  thee,  the  k.  of  ihy  youth 
llos.^\  4.  yuui  A.as  a  morning  cloud  and  early  dow 
Joili.  13.  for  he  is  gracious,  of  great  A".  .Jonah  4.  % 
Jlcts  28.2.the  barbarous  peop. shewed  us  no  little  4. 
2  Cor.  6.  6.  by  pureness,  by  hing-sutl'ering,  by  k. 
Kph.  2.  7.  in  his  k.  toward  us  iluough  Chiisv  Jesus 
Col.'i.  12.  put  on  k.  humbleness  of  mind,  meekness 

1  Tim.  5.  t  4.  let  them  learn  lo  shew  k.  at  home 
Tit.  3.  4.  after  the  k.  of  God  our  Saviour  ajipeared 

2  Pet.  1.  7.  lo  godliness  hrolherly  k.  to  k.  charity 

/-oriHg-KlNDNKSS. 
Psal.  17.  7.  shew  thy  marvellous  loving-k  92.  'i 
2fi.3.thy  lov.-  A.is  bel'ore  mine  eyes,  I  have  walked 
36.  7.  how  excellent  ia  thy  luving-k.  O  God  ! 

10.  O  continue  thy /ooin^'-  A.  to  them  that  know 
40.10.1  have  not  concealed  thy  lovi7ig-k.a.Tid  truth 

11.  let  thy  luving-k.  continually  preserve  me 
42.8.  yet  the  Lord  will  command  his  loving-k. 
48.  9.  we  have  thought  of  thy  lovingk.  O  God 
51.1. have  rnercy  on  me  according  tolhyioi'/n^-t. 
63.  3.  because  thy  loving-k.  is  better  than  life 
69. 16.  hear  ine,  O  Lord,  for  thy  loving-k.  is  good 
88. 11.  shall  thy  loving  A.bedeclared  in  the  gravel 
89..^3  my  Win^-A.will  I  not  utterly  take  from  him 
92.  2.  to  shew  forth  thy  luving-k.  in  the  morning 
103.4. who  crowneth  thee  wilh  lov.-k.  and  mercies 
10T.43.they  shall  understand  /onn^-A.of  the  Lord 
119.  f-8.  quicken  me  after  thy  loving-k.  159. 

149.  hear  my  voice  according  to  thy  Invingk. 
138.  2.  I  will  praise  thy  name  for  thy  loving-k. 
143  8.  cause  me  to  hear  Ihy  lorinn-k.  in  ihe  morn, 
./cr. 9.24.  1  am  the  Lord  which  exertrise  loving-k. 
16.5. 1  have  taken  away  my  peace,  even  loving-k. 
31.  3.  therefore  with  lovivg-k.  have  I  drawn  ihoe 
32..  18.  thou  shewest  loving-k.  unto  thousands 
Hos.  2.  19.  I  will  betroth  Ihce  to  me  in  loving-k. 

Loving-K  INDN  ESSES. 
r.9a/.25.6. remember  Ld.  thy  mercies  and  toring-k. 
89.  49.  Lord,  where  are  thy  former  loving-k.''. 
Isa.62.  7. 1  will  mention  the  loving-k.  ofthe  Lord, 
according  to  the  multitude  of  his  loving-k. 
KINDRED. 
Gen.  12. 1.  Gnd  said,  get  thee  from  Ihy  k.  .^cts  7.  3. 
24.  4.  go  lo  k.  and  lake  a  wife  to  my  son,  .'18,  40. 
7.  I/ord  who  look  me  from  my  k.  shall  send 
41.  when  Ihou  comtst  to  my  A",  if  they  give  not 
31.  3.  the  Lord  said,  return  to  thy  k.  13.  |  32.  9. 
43.  7.  the  man  asked  us  straiily  of  our  k. 
JVtim.  10.  30. 1  will  depart  to  my  own  land  and  It. 
./.),';/).  6.  23.  and  they  brought  out  all  her  k. 
Roth  2.  3.  noaz  was  ofthe  k.  of  Elimelech,  3.  2. 
1  Chrnn.  12.  20.  of  Renjamin  Ihe  k.  of  Saul  30(lO 
Fstli.'i.  10.  Esther  shewed  not  her  people  or  A'.  20. 
8.  6.  how  endure  to  see  the  destruction  of  my  A. 
./»/».T2.2.  the  wrath  of  Elihu,  ofthe  k.  of  Ram. 
Ezfk.  11.1.5.  mcnoflhy  A.  8aid,getfar  from  ihe  L. 
Lvke  1.  61.  none  of  thy  A.  cnlfed  by  this  name 
.lets  4.  6.  as  were  ofthe  A.  ofthe  high-piioFl 
7.  13.  Joseph's  k.  was  made  known  lo  Pharaoh 
14.  called  his  father  Jacob  to  him  and  ail  his  k. 
19.  ihe  s;ime  dealt  subtilly  with  cmr  A. 
1  Tim.  5.  f  8.  provide  not  for  those  of  his  own  It- 
Rev.  5. 9.  redeemed  us  out  of  every  A.  and  longua 
14.  6.  the  everlasting  gospel  to  preach  to  every  k 

KINDREDS. 
1  Chr.  10.  28.  give  to  Ihe  Lord,  ye  k.  Psal.  BP.  7. 
Ts.  22.  27.  allA.  of  nations  shall  worship  bef.  thoc 
.lets  3.  25.  shall  all  the  A.  of  the  earth  he  blcsHWl 
Ren.  1.  7.  and  all  A.  of  the  earth  sIkiII  wailbecaudo 
7.  9.  3  great  multitude  of  all  A.  stood  before  throne 

11.  9.  of  A.  shall  see  their  dead  bodies  three  daw 


KIN 

Rn.  13.  7.  and  power  was  given  lilm  over  all  k 

KINE 

Ji  taken,  [1]  Properly, /^r  cotes,  Deut.  7.  13.    [2] 

Figurativulj,  for  the  proud,  wealth;/,  and  po 

tent  rulers  of  Israel,  Amod  4.  1. 

Oen.  32.  15.  forty  k.  ten  bulls,  a  present  to  Esau 

41.  2.  tliere  came  up  seven  well-favoured  k.  18. 

3.  seven  other  k.  came  out  of  the  river,  4,  lU,  20. 

26.  the  seven  good  k.  arc  seven  years 

27.  the  seven  thin  ill-favoured  k.  are  seven  years 
Deut.  7.  13.  he  will  bless  the  increase  of  thy  k. 

28.  4.  bles.>iod  shall  be  the  increase  of  thy  k. 

18.  cursed  shall  be  the  increase  of  thy  k. 

51.  which  shall  not  leave  the  increase  of  thy  k. 

32.  14.  butter  of  k.  milk  of  sheep,  fat  of  lambs 
1  Sam.  6.  7.  take  two  milch  k.  and  tie  the  k. 

10.  took  two  k.  II  li.  the  k.  took  the  straight  way 

14.  they  clave  the  wood  of  cart,  and  offered  the  A 
S  Sam.  17.  29.  butter,  and  cheese  of  i.  for  David 
Amos  4.  1.  hear  ye  this  word,  ye  k.  of  Bashan 

KING 
Signifies,  ./I  sovereign  prince,  or  chief  ruler  in  a 
kingdom,  Prov.  8.  15.     It  is  applied,  [1]   To 
Ood,  the  supreme  Ruler  and  Governor  of  the 
world,  Psal.  44.  4.     [2]    To  Christ,  the  King 
and  Head  of  his   church,  Psal.  2.  6.  |  45.  1. 
[3]  To  all  real  Christians,  who  arc  heirs  of  the 
kingdom  of  glory,  and   are  enabled  to  war 
against,  and  at  last  to  conquer  sin,  Satan,  and 
all  their  spiritual  enemies.  Rev.  1.  6.     [4J   To 
the  devil,  Rev.  9.  11. 
Oen.  14.  18.  Melchlzedek  /I.  of  Salem,  Heb.7. 1 
36.  31.  kings  that  reigned  in  Edom,  before  there 
reigned  any  k.  over  Israel,  1  Chron.  1.43 
Ezod.  1.  8.  there. arose  up  a  new  k.  over  Egypt 
JiTum.  23.  21.  the  shout  of  a  k.  is  among  them 
24.  7.  and  his  k.  shall  be  higher  than  Agag 
Deut.  17.  14.  shaJt  say,  I  will  set  a  k.  over  me 

15.  thou  shalt  in  any  wise  set  him  k.  over  thee 

28.  36.  Ld.  shall  bring  thee  and  thy  k.  to  a  nation 

33.  5.  and  he  was  k.  in  Jeshurun  when  the  heads 
Judg.  8.  18.  each  resembled  the  children  of  a  k. 

9.  8.  the  trees  wont  to  anoint  a  k.  over  them 
17.  6.  in  those  days  no  k.  in  Israel,  but  every 

man  did  right  in  his  own  eyes,  18.  1.  t  10.  1 

1  21.  25. 

1  Sam.  2.  10.  Lord  shall  give  strength  to  his  k. 

8. 5.  go  make  us  a  k.  to  judge  us  like  the  nations 
6.  give  us  a  k.  ||  9.  shew  the  manner  of  a  k.  11. 
IS.ye  shall  cry  out  on  that  day  because  of  your  k. 

19.  we  will  have  a  k.  ||  22.  and  make  them  a  k. 

20.  that  our  k.  may  judge  us,  and  go  before  us 
10. 19.  ye  said  unto  liim,nay,  but  set  a  A:,  over  us 

24.  the  people  shouted,  and  said,  God  save  the  k. 
2  Sam.  16.  16.  2  Kings  11.  12.  2  Chr.  23.  11. 

12.  1.  behold,  I  have  made  a  k.  over  you 

2.  and  now  behold,  the  k.  walketh  before  you 

12.  ye  said  unto  nic,  nay,  but  a  k.  shall  reign 
over  us,  when  the  Lord  your  God  was  your  /r. 

13.  behold  the  k.  whom  ye  have  chosen 

17.  that  your  wickedness  is  great  in  asking  a  k. 
19.  have  added  to  our  sin  this  evil,  to  ask  ua  a  k. 

25.  ye  shall  be  consumed,  both  you  and  your  k. 
1.5.  1.  the  Lord  sent  me  to  anoint  thee  to  be  k. 

23.  he  hath  rejected  thee  from  being  k.  26. 
16.  1.  I  have  provided  me  a  k.  among  his  sons 

19.  4.  let  not  the  k.  sin  against  his  servant  David 

20.  5.  I  should  not  fail  to  sit  with  the  k.  at  meat 
22.  15.  let  not  the  k.  impute  any  thing  to  hisserv. 
24.  20.  I  know  that  thou  shalt  surely  be  k. 

2.5.  36.  Nabal  held  a  feast  like  the  feast  of  a  k. 

29.  8.  against  the  enemies  of  my  lord  the  k. 

2  Sam.  2.  9.  he  made  Ish-bosheth  k.  over  Gilead 
3.  36.  what  the  k.  did,  pleased  all  the  people 

37.  that  it  was  not  of  the  k.  to  slay  Abner 
5.  12.  the  Lord  had  established  him  k.  over  Israel 
11.8.  there  followed  him  a  mess  of  meat  from  k. 
12. 7.  thus  snith  Lord,  I  anointe<t  thee  k.  over  Isr. 

13.  13.  therefore  I  pray  thee,  speak  to  the  k. 
14^9.  and  the  k.  and  his  throne  be  guiltless 

1".  as  anancclof  (!.80  is  my  Lord  the  k.  19.  27. 

15.  2.  that  had  a  controversy,  came  to  the  k. 

3.  there  is  none;  dc;>iited  of  the  *.  to  hear  thee 
19.  abide  with  the  *.  for  thou  art  a  stranger 

21.  in  what  phipe  my  lord  the  k.  shall  be     / 

16.  9.  why  shoitfil  tins  dead  dog  curso  the  k.  ? 

17.  2.  people  shall  tlei!,  I  will  smite  the  k.  only 

18.  13.  then-  is  no  matter  hid  from  the  * 
19.9.the  k.  saved  ns  mif  of  the  hand  of  our  enemies 

11.  the  sprech  of  all  Inraid  is  come  to  the  k. 
19.  that  th«  /.-.  shonl.1  lake  it  to  his  heart 

22.  I  know  that  [  am  this  day  A.  over  Israel 
88.  what  right  havii  I  to  cry  any  more  to  the  k.  7 

42.  because  the  k.  is  near  of  kin  to  us 

43.  and  said,  we  have  ten  parts  in  the  k. 
22.  51.  he  is  the  towor  of  salvation  for  his  k. 
24.  23.  theno  did  Araunah  as  a  k.  give  to  the  *. 

1  King!  I.  5.  then  Adonijah  said,  I  will  bo  k. 
35.  for  Solomon  shall  be  k.  in  my  stead 
2.  18.  well,  I  will  speak  for  tliee  to  the  k. 
830 


KIN 

1  Kings  2.  33.  as  k.  hath  said,  so  will  thy  servant  do 

3.  7.  hast  made  thy  servant  k.  instead  of  David 
22.  thus  the  women  spake  before  the  k. 

as.  Israel  heard  the  judgment  the  k.  judged 
8.  62.  the  k.  and  all  Israel  offered  sacritice 
10.  3.  there  was  not  any  thing  hid  from  the  k. 
11.26.  Jeroboam  lifted  up  his  hand  against  the  A. 

37.  thou  shalt  reign  and  shalt  be  k.  over  Isnael 
14.  2.  Ahijah,  who  told  me  I  should  be  k. 

14.  the  Lord  shall  raise  up  a  k.  over  Israel 
16.  16.  Zimri  conspired  and  hath  slain  the  k. 

21.  10.  thou  didst  blaspheme  God  and  the  k. 
22.13.prophets  declare  good  to  the  k.  2  Chr.  18. 12. 

47. there  was  then  no  k.  in  Edom,  a  deputy  was  k. 

2  S'm^-a  l.ll.O  man  of  God,  k.  said,  come  down,  9. 

4.  13.  wouldest  thou  be  spoken  for  to  the  k.  7 

1.  2.  then  a  lord  on  whose  hand  the  k.  leaned 
8.  3.  she  went  to  cry  to  the  k.  lor  her  house 

13.  the  Lord  hath  shewed  that  thou  -halt  be  k. 

20.  Edom  revolted,  made  a  k.  over  themselves 
10.  5.  sent,  saying,  we  will  not  make  any  k. 
11.8.and  be  with  the  A-.as  he  goeth  out  and  cometh 

17.  Jehoiada  made  a  covenant  between  the  Lord 

and  the  k.  between  the  k.  also  and  the  people 

14.  5.  had  slain  the  k.  his  father,  2  Chron.  25.  3. 

22.  9.  brought  the  k.  word,  20. 2  Chron.  34.  16, 28. 
10.  Shaphan  read  it  before  the  k.  2  Chron.  34.  18. 

25.  6.  they  took  the  k.  and  brought  him,  Jer.  52.  9. 
1  Chron.  4. 23.  they  dwelt  with  the  k.  for  his  work 

24.  6.  Shemaiah  wrote  them  before  the  A". 

29. 20.  bowed  and  worshipped  the  Lord  and  the  A. 
2C'Aron.2.  il. he  hath  made  thee  A. over  them,9  8 

10.  15.  so  the  A.  hearkened  not  to  the  people 

11.  22.  for  he  thought  to  make  him  A. 

24.  21.  they  stoned  him  at  the  command  of  the  k. 
25. 16.  art  thou  made  of  the  A.  counsel  7  forbear 
Ezra  4. 12.  be  it  known  to  the  A.  that,  13.  |  5.  8. 

6.  10.  and  pray  for  the  life  of  A.  and  sons 

7.  26.  who  will  not  do  the  law  of  the  A. 

27.  who  hath  put  in  the  A.  heart  to  beautify 

8.  22.  to  require  of  the  k.  a  band  of  soldiers 
.VcA.  1.  11.  for  I  was  the  k.  cup-bearer 

2.  19.  what  do  ye  1  will  ye  rebel  against  the  k.  ? 
6.  6.  mayest  be  their  A.  according  to  these  words 

7  to  preach,  saying,  there  is  a  k.  in  Judah 
13.  26.  yet  among  many  nations  was  there  no  A. 
like  him,  God  made  him  A.  over  all  Israel 
Ksth.  4.  IG.  so  I  will  go  in  unto  the  A.  if  I  perish 

6.  6.  whom  the  A.  delighteth  to  honour,  7. 

7.  8.  as  the  word  went  out  of  the  A.  mouth 

9.  for  Mordecai,  who  had  spoken  good  for  the  A. 
.Job  15.24.  shall  prevail,  as  a  A.  ready  to  the  battle 

18.  14.  il  shall  bring  him  to  the  A.  of  terrors 

29.  25.  I  sat  chief,  and  dwelt  as  a  A.  in  the  army 
34.  18.  is  it  fit  to  say  to  the  A.  thou  art  wicked  ? 
41.  34.  ho  is  a  A.  over  all  the  children  of  pride 

Psal  2.  6.  I  set  my  A.  upon  my  holy  hill  of  Zion 
5. 2.  hearken  to  my  cry,  my  A.  and  my  God,  84.  3. 
10.  16.  the  Lord  is  A.  for  ever  and  ever,  29.  10. 
18.  .50.  great  deliverance  giveth  he  to  his  k. 

20.  9.  lef  the  A.  hear  us  when  we  call 

21.  1.  the  A.  shall  joy  in  thy  strength,  O  Lord 

7.  for  the  A.  trusteth  in  the  L.  and  not  be  moved 
24.  7.  and  the  A.  of  glory  shall  come  in,  9. 

8.  who  is  A.  ofglory?  the  Lord  strong  and  mighty 

10.  the  Lord  of  ho.^t.s,  he  is  the  A.  of  "lory 
.3.}.  16.  no  A.  saved  by  the  multitude  ot  a  host 

44.  4.  art  my  A.  O  God,  command  deliverances 

45.  1.  of  the  things  I  have  made  touching  the  A. 

11.  so  shall  the /r.  greatly  desire  thy  beauty 
14  ahe  shall  be  broufflit  to  the  A.  in  raimert 

47.  6.  sing  praises  to  our  A.  n  7.  God  is  the  A. 
•il.  6.  thou  wilt  prolong  the  A.  life  and  years 
63.  11.  but  tlfe  A.  shall  rejoice  in  God,  every  one 
f>H.24.  they  have  seen  the  goings  of  my  God,  my  A. 
72.  I.  give  tho  A.  thy  judgments,  O  God 
74.  12.  God  is  my  A.  of  old,  working  salvation 
89.  18.  the  holy  One  of  Israel  is  our  k. 

98.  6.  make  a  joyful  noise  before  tho  Lord  tho  A. 

99.  4.  tho  A.  strength  also  loveth  judgment 

10.5. 20.  the  k.  sent  and  loosed  him,  let  him  go  free 
149. 2.  lot  the  children  of  Zion  be  joyful  in  their  A. 
Prow.  14.28.  in  multitude  of  people  is  the  A.  honour 

35.  the  A.  favour  U  toward  a  wise  servant 
20.  28.  mercy  ami  truth  preserve  the  A. 
22.11.  for  grace  of  his  lips,  the  A.  shall  be  his  friend 

24.  21.  my  son,  fear  Ihnu  the  Lord,  and  tho  k. 

25.  .5.  lake  away  the  wicked  from  before  tho  A. 

30.  27.  the  locusts  have  no  A.  yet  go  they  forth 
31.  and  a  A.  against  whom  there  is  no  rising  up 

K(;<;/.2.12.what  can  the  man  do  that  cometh  aflerA. 

5.  9.  tho  A.  himself  is  srTved  by  the  field 

8.  4.  whore  the  word  of  a  A.  is  there  is  power 
10. 16.  woo  to  thee,  O  land,  when  thy  A.  is  a  child 

17.  blessed  when  thy  A.  is  the  son  of  nobles 

20.  curse  not  the  A.  no,  not  in  thy  thought 

Cant.  1.  4.  the  A.  brought  me  into  his  chamber 

12.  while  the  A.  sittcth  at  his  table,  my  spikenard 

3.  II.  behold  A.  Solomon  willi  the  crown 
7.  5.  tho  A.  is  hald  in  tho  galleries 


KIN 

Isa.  6. 5.  mine  eyes  have  seen  the  A.  the  L.  of  host* 

7.  6.  let  us  set  a  A.  in  the  midst  of  it,  son  of  Tabeai 

8.  21.  curse  their  A.  and  their  God,  and  look  up 

19.  4.  and  a  fierce  A.  shall  rule  over  tliera 
23.  15.  according  to  the  days  of  one  k. 

30.  33.  for  Tojihet,  yea,  for  the  A.  it  is  prepared 

32.  1.  behold,  a  A.  shall  reign  in  righteousness 

33.  17.  thine  eyes  shall  sec  the  A.  in  his  beauty 
22.  the  Lord  is  our  A.  he  will  save  us 

41.  21.  bring  your  reasons,  saith  the  A.  of  Jacob 
43.  15.  I  am  the  Creator  of  Israel,  your  A. 
57.  9.  and  thou  wentest  to  the  A.  with  ointment 
Jer.  4.  9.  that  the  heart  of  the  A.  shall  perish 
8.  19.  is  not  the  L.  in  Zion  1  is  not  her  A.  in  her  1 
10. 10.  the  Lord  is  the  true  God,  an  everlasting  A 
13.  18.  say  to  the  A.  and  queen,  humble  yourselves 
23.  5.  a  A.  shall  reign  and  prosper,  and  execute 
29.  16.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  of  the  A.  that  sitteth 
38.  5.  for  the  A.  is  not  he  that  can  do  any  thing 
25.  declare  what  hast  said  to  the  A.  the  A.  to  thee 
46.  18.  as  I  live,  saith  the  A.  whose  name  is  the 
Lord  of  hosts,  48.  15.  |  51.  57. 
49.  1.  why  doth  the  A.  inherit  Gad  and  dwell  in 
38.  I  will  destroy  from  thence  the  A.  and  princes 
/.urn.  2.  6.  the  Lord  hath  despised  the  A.  and  priest 
Eiek.  7.  27.  the  A.  shall  mourn,  and  the  princes 

17.  12.  hath  taken  the  A.  and  the  princes  thereof 
13. hath  taken  of  the  A. seed  and  made  a  covenant 
16.  where  the  A.  dwelleth  that  made  him  A. 

26.  7.  I  will  bring  a  A.  of  kings  from  the  north 
37.  22.  and  one  A.  shall  be  A.  to  them  all,  24. 

Van.  2.  10.  there  is  no  A.  asked  such  things  at  any 
11.  there  is  none  that  can  shew  it  before  the  A. 
24. bring  me  in  before  the  A.and  I  will  shew  the  At. 

3.  13.  they  brought  these  men  before  the  A. 

4.  24.  decree  which  is  come  upon  my  lord  the  k. 
31.  while  the  word  was  in  the  A.  mouth 

37.  I  praise,  extol,  and  honour  the  A.  of  heaven 

5.  5.  the  A.  saw  the  part  of  the  hand  that  wrote 

6.  6.  the  princes  assembled  together  to  the  k. 
8.  23.  a  A.  of  fierce  countenance  shall  stand  up 
11.  3.  and  a  mighty  A.  shall  stand  up  to  rule 

36.  the  A.  shall  do  according  to  his  will 
Hos.  3.4.  Israel  shall  abide  many  days  without  a  k. 
5.  Israel  shall  seek  the  Lord,  and  David  their  k. 
5.  13.  then  Ephraim  sent  to  A.  Jareb,  10.  6. 

7.  3.  they  make  the  A.  glad  with  their  wickedness 
5.  in  the  day  of  our  A.  princes  made  film  sick 

10.  3.  we  have  no  A.  what  then  should  a  A.  do  ? 
7.  her  A.  is  cut  off,  as  the  foam  upon  the  water 

11.  5.  but  the  .Assyrian  shall  be  his  A.  because 

13.  10. 1  will  be  thy  A.  give  me  a  A.  and  princes 
11. 1  gave  thee  a  A.  in  mine  anger  and  took  bira 

Jlmos  1.  15.  and  their  A.  shall  go  into  captivity 
7.  13.  for  it  is  the  A.  chapel,  the  A.  court 

Mic.  2.  13.  and  their  A.  shall  |iass  before  them 
4.  9.  why  dost  thou  cry  ?  is  there  no  A.  in  thee 

Zcch.  9.  5.  and  the  A.  shall  perish  from  Gaza 
9.  behold  thy  A.  cometh  to  thee.  Mat.  21.  5. 
11.6.  will  deliver  every  one  into  the  hand  of  his  it. 

14.  9.  the  Lord  shall  be  A.  over  all  the  earth 
IG.everyone  shall  even  go  up  to  worship  the  A.17. 

Mat.  18.  i.\.  kingdom  likened  to  a  certain  A.  22. 2. 

22.  11.  when  the  A.  came  in  to  see  the  guests 
Jl/arA6.25.  she  came  with  haste  to  tho  A.  and  asked 
AuAf  14.3I.what  A.  goeth  to  war  against  another  A. 

19.38.  blessed  be  the  A.  that  comeih  in  name  ofL 

23.  2.  saying,  that  he  himself  is  Christ,  a  A. 
.JohnCi.  15.  to  make  him  a  A.  ||  12. 15.  thy  A.  cometh 

18.  37.  Pilate  said  to  him,  art  thou  a  A.  then  1 
19.12.whosoever  makeih  himself  a  A.sjicakelh  ag. 

14.  Pilate  saith  to  the  Jews,  behold  your  k. 

15.  shall  I  crucify  your  A.  ?  have  no  A.  but  Cesai 
.^ clsl .\S.\\\\  another  A.aro80,who  knew  not  Joseph 

13.21.  afterward  they  desired  a  A.  and  Gorl  gavs 
17.  7.  sayin",  that  there  is  another  A.  one  Jtsus 
26.  26.  for  the  K.  knoweth  of  these  things 

1  Tim.  1.  17.  now  to  the  A.  eternal,  immortal 

6.  15.  who  is  the  A.  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords 
Hrb.  11.23.  not  afraid  of  the  A.  commandment 

27.  M.isos  not  fearing  the  wrath  of  the  A. 
l/'r^2.13.  whether  to  the  k.  as  supreme,  or  govern 

17.  honour  nil  men,  fear  God,  honour  the  A. 
lirr.  9.  11.  they  had  a  A.  over  them,  the  angel 

15.  3.  just  are  thv  ways,  thou  A.  of  sainfs 

17.  14".  he  is  Lord  of  birds,  K.  of  kings,  19.  16. 

KING  of  the  .tmoritts.  See  Siiion. 

KING  of  J}.i.-yHa. 

2  Kings  15. 19.  Pul  the  A.  of  .Assy,  came  agst.  land 

20.  Menahein  exacted  money  to  give  A.  of  .Assy. 
16.18.  turned  he  from  house  of  Lord  tnk.nfji.isy, 
17.6, in  ninth  yearof  Hosheo  A.  nf.1  took  Samaria 
18. 11.  A.  nf  Jissy.  did  carry  away  Israel  to  Assy. 

19.  speak,  thus  saith  great  king  the  A.  of  Jlssyria 
33.delivered  his  land  out  of  hand  of  k.ofJissyria 
19.32.sniih  L.concerning  A.o/./?.'>.'>i/rio,/»a.37.33. 
y.zra  6. 22.  turned  the  heart  of  A.  of  jlssy.  to  ihem 
Isa.l.\7.  Lord  shall  bring  upon  thee  the  A.  ofJIssy. 
20  shall  shave  by  k.<)f  .Assyria  the  head  and  hair 
Jer.OO.n.dnt  the  A.  of  Assyria  hath  devoured  him 


KIN 

Aer.50.18.  wUl  punish  Baby.as  I  punished  k.  ofj9ss. 

Mi,'i.3.i8.th y  shephurds  slumber, O  k.nfA.  tliy  nob. 

Hcc  Bashan,  Babylon,  Uavid. 

KING  of  Egypt. 

ExodA.n.  mid  wives  did  not  as  k.  of  F.ffypl  comm. 

3.  lit.  I  am  sure  the  k.  of  Egypt  will  not  let  you  go 

6.13.  the  L.  gave  them  a  charge  to  the  k.  of  Egypt 

2  Kings  '24. 7. the  k.  of  E.canie  not  again  any  more, 

had  taken  all  that  pertained  to  tlieA.  of  Egypt 

2  Chr.  1'2.  'J.  k.  of  Eg.  came  up  against  Jerusalem 

3ti.  3.  the  k.  of  Egypt  put  him  down  at  Jerusalem 

4  the  k.  of  Egypt  made  Eliakim  his  brother  king 

/ia.3t).0.  sois  tlie  k. of  Egypt  to  all  that  trust  in  him 

.S'cfi  Phak.voii. 

See  Great,  House,  Jews. 

KLVG  of  Israel. 

I  Sam.  24.  14.  after  whom  is  the  k.  of  Isr.  come  out 

21).  20.  tor  the  k.  of  Isr.  is  come  out  to  seek  a  Hea 

SSnm.G.-O.liow  glorious  was  the  k. of  Israel  to-day 

1  Iiings'M.  31.  let  iis,  I  pray  thee, go  out  to  k.of  Is. 
2'2.  31.  tight  not,  save  Only  with  tlie  k.  of  Israel 

32.  Ihey  said,  surely  it  is  k.  of  Israel,  2  C7ir.l8.31. 

2  ICingsij.  11.  shew  me  which  of  us  is  for /c  of  Isr  a. 
16.  7.  save  me  out  of  the  hand  of  A',  of  Israel 

2  Chr.  18.  30.  fight  ye  not,  save  only  with  k.  of  Isr. 
32.  captains  perceived  that  it  was  not  k.  of  Israii 
3.1.  3.3011  of  David  k.  of  Isr.  did  build,  F.irao.  11. 
JVe/j.  13. 21).  did  not  Solomon  k.  of  Isr.  sin  by  these 
Isa.  44.  6.  thus  saitli  flie  Lord,  the  k.  of  Israel 
//«s.l0.15.iii  a  morning  shall  the  k.of  I.i.be  cut  ofl" 
Zep/i.  3. 15.  the  k.  of  Israel  is  in  the  midst  of  thee 
.Wa«.27.42.ifhe  he  k.I.  let  him  descend,  Jt/ari  15.32. 
John  1. 49.  thou  art  k.  of  Is.  ||  12.13.blessed  is  k.  of  I. 

KING   of  .Iiidah. 
2  fCingsS.  16.  Jehosliaphat  being  then  k.  of  .Tudah 

22.  18.  but  to /i  o/J«dtt/t  which  sent  you  to  inquire 
S  Chron.'.ii.  26.  and  as  for  k.  of  Judah  who  sent  you 

35.21.  what  have  I  to  do  with  thee,  thou  t.o/./ud 
Jer.  34.  4.  hear  the  word  of  the  Ld.  O  k.  of  .Tudah 

37.7.  thus  shall  vesav  to  t.  of  Judahv/ho  sent  you 
KING  of  Jiloab. 
JV*um.23.7.BaIak  /co/JWoai  brought  me  froniAram 
Josh.  24.  0.  the  k.  of  Moah  warred  against  Israe" 
Jiidg.3. 14.  Israel  served  Eglon  the  k.of  J\I.  18  years 

11.  17.  Israel  in  like  manner  sent  to  the  k.  ofjfnah 

25.  art  thou  any  thing  hetrer  than  Balak  k.  ofM.? 
1  Sam.  12.9.  sold  them  into  the  hand  ofk.ofMoab 

22.4.  David  brought  father  and  mother  to  k.of  M. 

ih'ings  3.4. and  Mesha  k.ofM.  was  a  sheep-master 

5.  the  k.  of  JiloaO  rebelled  against  Israel,  7. 

26.  when  the  k.  ofM.f.a.w  the  batlle  was  too  sore 
Jer.^.  3.  send  bonds  and  yokes  to  the  k.  of  jMoab 

O  KING. 

1  Sam.  17.  55.  Abner  said,  O  k.X  cannot  tell 

23.  20.  now,  therefore,  O  h.  come  down 
26.  17.  my  lord,  0  k.  2  Sam.  14  9,  22.  |  16.  4. 

1  19.  26.  1  Kinrrs  1.  13,  20,  24.  ]  20.  4 

2  Kings  6.  12,  26.  (  8.  5. 

2  Sam.  14.  4.  the  woman  of  Tekoali  said,  help,0  A-. 

15.  34.  if  thfiu  say,  I  will  be  thy  servant,  O  k. 

2  Chron.  25.  7.  O  k.  let  not  the  army  of  Israel  go 

Psal.  145.  1.  I  vvill  extol  thee,  my  Gcd,  O  k. 

Jer.  10.7.  who  would  not  fear  thee,  O  h.  of  nations? 

Dan.  2.  4.  0  k.  live  for  ever,  3.  9.  |  .'5.  10.  |  6.  21. 

20.asforthee,O /c.y  31. thou  0  k.  sawest  an  image 

37.  thou  O  k.  art  a  king  of  kings,  for  God  hath 

S.lO.thou  O  k.  hast  raadea  decree,  that  every  man 

17.  he  will  deliver  us  out  of  thy  hand,  O  k. 

18.  be  it  known  to  thee,  O  k.  \\  24.  true,  O  k. 

4.  22.  it  is  thou,  O  k.  \\  27.  O  k.  let. my  counsel  be 
31. saying,  0  A.Nebuchadnez.  tothee  it  is  spoken 

5.  13.  Othou  k.  the  most  high  God  gave  thy  father 

6.  7.  shall  ask  a  petition  save  of  thee,  O  k. 

8.  now,  O  k.  establish  the  decree,  and  sign  it 

13.  regardeth  not  thee,  O  k.  \\  15.  know,  O  k. 

22.  also  before  thee,  O  k.  have  I  dcme  no  hurt 

^c«426.13.at  mid-day, O  ft.  I  saw  in  the  way  a  light 

19.  whereupon,  O  k.  I  was  not  disobedient 

KING  of  Persia. 

Ezra  4.3.a3  Cyrus,  k.  of  Pers.  hath  commanded  us 

5.  even  till  the  reign  of  Darius  k.  of  Persia 

7.Bishlam  wrote  unto  A  rtaxerxes  k.  of  Per.  6. 14. 

9.9.  extended  mercy  to  us  in  sight  of  the  k.  of  Per. 

See  Cyrus. 

KING  of  Syria. 

l/Tino's 20.20.Benhadad  k.  o/S. escaped  on  ahorse 

22.  the  k.  of  Syria  will  come  up  against  thee 
2  Kins^s  5. 1.  Naainan  captain  of  host  of  k.of  Si/ria 
8.7.A.n/S.wassick  ||  9./;.o/.S.hath  .sent  me  to  thee 
13.  4.  because  the  k.  of  Syria  oppressed  them 
7.  for  the  k.  of  Syria  had  destroyed  them 

16.  7.  save  nie  out  of  the  hand  of  the  k.  of  f^yria 
2  Chr.  16.  7.  because  ihou  hast  relied  on  k.of  Syria 

the  host  of  the  k.  ofS.  is  escaped  out  of  thy  hand 
See  Beniiadad,  Hazael,  Rezin. 
KING  of  Tyre. 
2  Sam.  5.  11.  Hiram  k.  of  Tyre  .sent  messengprs  to 
rtavid,  and  they  built  him  a  house,  1  Chr.  14. 1. 
XKinps  Ti.l.  tlie  k.of  Tyre  senteervants  to  Solomon 
Q.ll.Hiram  the  k.  of  Tyrehm\  furnished  Solomoo 
321 


KIN 

2  Chr.  2. 3.  Solomon  sent  to  Iluram  the  k.  of  Tyre 
11.  Hurum  the  k.  of  Tyre  answered  in  writing 
KINGS. 
Oen.  17.  6.  k.  shall  come  out  of  thee,  16.  |  35.  11. 
36.  31.  these  are  the  k.  that  reigned  in  Edoni 
jYum.  31. 8.  and  they  slew  the  k.  of  Slidian 
Deut.  3.  21.  the  Lord  hath  done  to  those  two  k. 
7.  24.  ho  shall  deliver  their  k.  into  thy  iiand 
Josh.  10.  5.  five  k.  of  Amorites  gathered  together 
16.  these  five  k.  fled  ||  22.  bring  out  those  five  A. 
24.  come  near,  put  your  feet  on  necks  of  iheso  k. 
40.  so  Joshua  smote  all  their  k.  11.  17. 
12.  24.  all  these  k.  thirty  and  one 
Judg.  1.7.  seventy  k.  having  their  thumbs  cut  ofT 

5.  3.  hear,  O  ye  k.  \\  19.  the  k.  came  and  fought 
2  Sam.  11.  1.  the  time  when  k.  go  forth  to  battle 

1  Kings  3. 13.  there  shall  not  be  any  among  the  k. 

like  thee,  10.  23.  2  Chron.  1.  12.  \  9.  22. 
4. 24.  Solomon  over  all  the  k.  on  this  side  the  river 

20.  1.  Benhadad  and  thirty-two  k.  with  him 

2  Kings  3.  10.  hath  called  these  three  k.  together 
23.  this  is  blood,  the  k.  are  surely  slain 

7.6.  hath  hired  against  us  the  k.  of  the  Hittites 
10.  4.  behold,  two  k.  stood  not  before  him 

1  Chr.  16.  21.  he  reproved  k.  for  them,  Ps.  105.  14. 

2  Chr.  9. 23.  all  k.  sought  the  presence  of  Solomon 

21.  20.  but  not  in  the  sepulchres  of  the  k.  24.  25 
26.23.  in  field  of  the  burial  which  belonged  to  k. 

Ezra  4. 13.  shalt  endamage  the  revenue  of  the  A- 

15.  this  city  hath  been  hurtful  to  k.  and  provinces 

19.  this  city  hath  made  insurrection  against  k. 

20.  there  have  been  mighty  k.  over  Jerusalem 

6.  12.  God  destroy  k.  that  shall  alter  this  house 

7.  12.  Artaxerxes  king  of  A.  to  Ezra  the  priest 
9.7.our  A.  and  priests  have  been  deliver.  .A/eA.9.24 

JVeA.  9.  32.  trouble  seem  little  to  us  and  our  A. 

34.  nor  have  our  A.  or  princes  kejit  thy  law 
■Tpb  3.  14.  had  I  been  at  rest  with  A.  and  counsellors 

12.  18.  he  looseth  the  bond  of  A.  and  girdeth 
36.  7.  but  with  A.  are  they  on  the  throne 

Psal.  2. 2.  A.  of  the  earth  set  themselves,  Acts  4. 26 

10.  be  wise,  therefore,  O  ye  A.  be  instructed 
45. 9.  A.  daughters  among  thy  honourable  women 

48.  4.  lo,  the  A.  were  assembled,  they  passed  by 
68.  12.  k.  of  armies  did  flee  ajiace,  she  that  tarried 

14.  when  the  Almighty  scattered  A.  in  it 

29.  shall  A.  bring  jiresents  to  thee 
72.  11.  yea,  all  A.  shall  fall  down  before  him 
76.  12.  he  is  terrible  to  the  A.  of  the  earth 
89.  27.  make  him  higher  than  the  A.  of  the  earth 
102.  15.  the  A.  of  the  earth  shall  fear  thy  glory 
]  10.  5.  he  shall  strike  thro'  A.  in  the  day  of  wrath 
119.  46.  I  will  speak  of  thy  teslimonies  before  A. 
135  10.  smote  great  nations,  and  slew  mighty  A. 
136.  17.  to  him  which  smote  great  A.  18. 
138. 4.  all  A.  of  the  earth  shall  praise  thee,  148. 11. 
144.  10.  it  is  he  th.at  giveth  salvation  to  A. 
149.  8.  to  bind  their  A.  with  chains,  their  nobles 
Pro!).8.15.by  me  A.  reign, and  princes  decree  justice 
16.12.an  abomination  for  A. lo  commit  wickedness 

13.  righteous  lips  are  the  delight  of  A. 
22.29.  the  diligent  in  business  shall  stand  before  A. 
25.  2.  it  is  the  honour  of  A.  to  search  a  matter 

3.  and  the  heart  of  A.  is  unsearchable 

30.  28.  and  the  spider  is  in  A.  palaces 

31.  3.  nor  thy  ways  to  that  which  destroyeth  k. 

4.  it  is  not  for  A.  O  Lemuel,  to  drink  wine 
Ecd.  2.  8.  gold  and  the  peculiar  treasure  of  A. 
Isa.  7. 16.  the  land  shall  be  forsaken  of  both  her  A. 

10.  8.  are  not  my  princes  altogether  k.  ? 
14.  9.  it  hath  raised  all  the  A.  of  the  nations 
18.  all  the  k.  of  the  nations  lie  in  glory 
19.  11.  how  say  ye,  I  am  the  son  of  ancient  k. 
24. 21.  L.  shall  piinish  the  k.  of  the  earth  on  earth 
41.  2.  who  raised  up  and  made  him  ruler  over  A. 

45.  1.  I  will  loose  the  loins  of  A.  to  open  gales 

49.  7.  A.  shall  see  and  arise,  princes  shall  worship 
23.  A.  shall  be  thy  nursing  fathers  and  queens 

.52.  1.5.  the  A.  shall  shut  their  mouths  at  him 
60  3.  and  A.  lo  the  brightness  of  thy  rising 

10.  and  their  A.  shall  minister  lo  thee 

11.  thy  gates  open,  that  their  k.  ijiay  be  brought 

16.  Ihou  shall  also  suck  the  breast  of  A. 
62.  2.  and  all  A.  shall  see  thy  glory 

Jer.  2.  26.  they,  their  A.  and  princes  ashamed 

13.  13.  even  A.  that  sit  upon  David's  throne 
17.2.5.  shall  enter  into  the  gates  of  this  city,  A. 

22.  4.  A.  silting  upon  the  throne  of  David 
25.  18.  I  made  Judah  and  A.  drink  of  the  cup 

2-2.  A.  of  Tvrns  ||  24.  all  the  A.  of  Arabia 
2.5.  the  A.  ofZimri  ||  26.  nil  the  A.  of  the  north 

32.  32.  to  provoke  me  to  anger,  they,  their  A. 
34.  5.  and  with  the  burnings  of  former  A.  bef.  thee 
44.  17.  as  we,  our  A.  and  princes  to  burn  incense 

21.  your  A.  and  princes  burnt  incense  in  Judah 

46.  25.  I  will  punish  their  A.  and  their  gods 
49.  3.  for  their  A.  shall  go  into  captivity,  and  priests 
50.41.  many  A.  shall  be  raised  up  from  the  earth 
51. 11.  Lord  raiseduplhespiritofA.  of  the  Medes 

Z.am.  4. 1 2.  A.  of  the  carl  h  would  not  have  believed 
2U 


KIN 

Eiek.  27.  35.  their  k.  shall  be  sore  afraid,  32. 10. 

28.  17.  I  will  lay  thee  before  A.  to  behuld  thee 

32.  29.  there  is  Edom,  her  A.  and  all  her  princes 

43.  7.  their  A.  shall  no  more  defile  my  holy  name 

Dan.  2.  21.  he  /emoveth  A.  and  s.cttcth  up  A. 

44.  in  thedaysofthese  A.shallG.  set  up  akingd 

47.  of  a  truth  it  is,  that  your  God  is  a  Lord  of  A. 

7. 17.  the  four  great  beasts  are  four  i.  shall  rise 

24.  the  ten  liorns  are  ten  A.  shall  subdue  three  k 

9.6.  which  sjiake  in  thy  name  to  our  A.  our  princei 

8.  to  our  A.  and  princes  belong  confusion  of  face 

10.  13.  I  remained  there  with  the  A.  of  Persia 

11.2.  stand  up  three  A.  {|  27.  both  these  A.  hearts 
Hos.  7.  7.  are  hot  as  an  oven,  all  their  A.  arc  fulJen 

8.  4.  they  have  set  up  A.  but  not  by  me 
Hab.  1.  10.  they  shall  scoft'at  A.  and  princes 
J)Iat.  10.  18.  ye  shall  be  brought  before  governora 
and  A.  for  my  sake,  Mark  13.  9.  J.uke  21.  12 

11.  8.  they  that  wear  softclothing  are  in  A.  houses 
17.25.of  whomdo  the  A.  of  the  earth  take  customl 

/,?(A«10.24.  prophets  and  A.  have  desired  to  see 
22.  25.  A.  of  Gentiles  exercise  lordship  over  them 
./3ct«  9. 15.a  chosen  vessel  tobear  my  name  before  A. 
1  Cor.  4.  8.  ye  have  reigned  as  A.  without  us 

1  Tim.  2.  2.  that  prayers  be  made  for  A.  and  for  all 
6.15.  King  of  A.  Lord  of  lords,  Rtv.  17. 14.  \  19. 16. 

//tA.7.1.  Abraham  returned  from  slaughter  of  the  k. 

liev.i.5.  Jes.  Christ  the  prince  of  the  A.  of  the  earth 

6.  hath  made  us  A.  and  priests  unto  God,  5.  10. 

6. 15.  the  A.  of  the  earth  hid  themselves  in  the  deni 

10.  11.  thou  must  prophesy  again  before  A. 
16.  12.  the  way  of  the  A.  of  east  might  be  prepared 

14.  spirits  which  go  forth  to  the  A.  of  the  earth 

17.2. with  whom  A.  of  earth  committed  fornication 

10.  there  are  seven  A.  five  are  fallen,  and  one  ia 

12.are  ten  A.which  receive  power  as  A. with  beast* 

18.  that  great  city  which  reignethover  A.  of  earth 

18.3.  A.  of  the  earth  have  committed  fornication 

9.  A.  of  earth  shall  bewail  her  and  lament 

19.  18.  that  ye  may  eat  the  flesh  of  A.  and  captains 

19.  A.  of  the  earth  gathered  to  make  war  against 

21.  24.  the  A.  of  the  earth  do  bring  their  glory 
KINGS  of  the  Amorites. 

Deut.  4. 47.  two  A.  A.  31.4.  JosA.2.10.  |  9.10. 1 24.12. 
Josh.  5. 1.  came  to  pass,  when  all  A.  of  Am.  heard 
10.5.  therefore  five  A.  of  Am.  gathered  together,  6. 
See  Book,  Great. 
KINGS  of  Israel. 
IKings  14.19.  written  in  the  book  of  the  Chronicles 
of  the  A.  of  Israel,  15.  31.  |  16.5,  14,  20,  27. 
I  32.  39.  2  Kings  1.  18.  1  10.  34.  )  13.  8,  12. 
I  14.  15,28.  I  15.  11,  1.5,21,26,31. 
16.33.Ahab  provoked  L.  more  than  all  A.  of  Israel 
20. 31.  we  heard  that  A.  of  Isr.  are  merciful  kings 

2  Kings  8.  18.  Jehoram  walked  in  way  of  A.  of  Isr. 
13. 13.  Joash  was  buried  with  the  A.  of  Isr.  14. 16w 
14. 29.  Jeroboam  slept  with  his  fathers  A.  of  Isr. 

16.  3.  Ahaz  walked  in  the  way  of  ihe  A.  of  Isr. 

17.  2.  Hoshea  did  evil,  but  not  as  the  A.  of  Isr. 
8.  Israel  walked  in  the  statutes  of  the  A.  of  Isr. 

23.19. Josiah  took  away  houses  the  A.  of  Isr.  made 
22.  not  such  a  pasgoverin  ihe  days  of  the  A.  of  Is. 

1  Chr.  9. 1 .  were  written  in  the  book  of  k.of  Israel 
and  Judah,  2  Chron.  16.  11.  \  25.  26.  I  27.  27. 

I  28.  26.  I  32.  32.    33. 18. 

2  CAron.  20. 34.  in  book  of  Jehu  who  is  mentioned 
in  the  book  of  Ihe  A.  of  Isr.  35.  27.  |  36.  8. 

28.27.  Ahaz  was  not  brought  into  sep.  of  A.  of  Isr. 

Mic.  1.14.  houses  of  .Achzib  shall  be  a  lie  to  A.  of  Is. 

KINGS  of  .Tudah. 

1  .Sam.  27.  6.  Ziklag  pertained  lo  the  A.  of  Jvda/t 
lKings^A.^O.  aclsofRehoboam  in  Ihe  book  of  the 

Chronicles  of  the  A.  of  .Tudah,  15.  7,  23.  |  22. 
45. 2  Kings  8. 23.  |  15. 6, 36.  1 16. 19.  I  20.  20 
I  21.  17,25.  1  23.28.  |  24.  5. 

2  Kings  12.18.  hallowed  things  the  A.  of  .Tudah  had 
dedicated,  19.  written  in  the  book  of  Ihe  Chro- 
nicles of  the  A.  of  .Tudah,  14.  18.  2  Chron.  25. 
26.  I  28.  26.  I  32.  32. 1  35.  27.  1  36.  8. 

18.  5.  there  wasnonelikenim  ofall  the  A.  of  .Tudah 
23.5.Jo3iah  put  down  priests  A.  of.Tudnh  ordained 

1 1,  took  horses  A.  of  .Tudah  had  eiven  to  Ihe  sun 
12.beatdo\vn  altars  which  k.of  .Tudohhad  made 

22.  not  such  a  passoverin  all  days  of  A.  of  .Tudah 
2CAron.34.11.lo  floor  houses  A.  of  .Tudah  destroyed 
Tsa.i.l.  the  vision  of  Isaiah  in  days  of  the  k.of.Tud. 
/cr.1.18.  I  have  made  an  iron  pillar  against  k.of  J. 
8.  1.  they  shall  bring  out  bones  of  the  A.  of  .Tudah 
17.  19.  stand  in  gate,  wliercby  A.o/./i/'/iAcome  in 

20.  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord  ye  A.  of  .Jud.  19.  3. 
19.4. burnt  incense  to  gods  A.  of  J.  have  not  known 

13.  the  houses  of  the  A.  of  .Tudah  shall  be  defiled 

20.  5.  treasures  of  A.  of  .Tudah  will  I  cive  to  encm. 

33.4. concerning  houses  of  A.  of  Jud.  tlnown  down 

44.0.  have  ye  forgotten  wickedness  ofA.  of.Tudahf 

Hos.  1. 1.  the  word  of  the  Lord  that  came  to  Hosea 

in  the  days  of  Ihe  A.  of  .Tudah,  Mie.  1.  1. 

See  Kings  of  Israel. 

KINGDOM 

Signifies  [1]  One  or  mart  countries  suhffect  (•  A 


KIN 

hng,  Deut.  3. 4.    [2]  Sovercig-ntj/,  or  unitcr/al 
iiominion,  1  Cliron.  '.'9.  11.     Peal.  22.  28.  |  103. 
19.     [3]  Heaven,  Mm.  2e.  29.     2  Tim.  4.  18. 
[4]  .1  riffht  to  be  a  king,  1  Sam.  20.   31.     [5] 
Governvienl^or supreme  aJminis(ralivn,l  Sam. 
la  8.     There  is  (I)   Tlie  kingdom  of  Gad,  |.l] 
Of  his  power,  Psal.  145.  12,   13.     Dan.  4.  3. 
[2]  Of  his  giace,  Mat.  4.  23.  |  6.  10,  33.     [3] 
Of  his  glory,  Luke  22.  IG.     1  Cor.  6.  9.    (II) 
Of  Christ,  Mat.  16.  2«.     Col.  1.  13.    (Ill)  Of 
heaven,  signifying,  [1]  The  state  of  the  church 
under  the  gosprt,  or  the  kingdom  of  ike  Mes- 
siah, wherein  greatspiritual  blessings  andpri- 
vileges  were  tu  be  bestowed,  Mat.  3.  2.  [2]  The 
risible  church,  which  is  heacenly,  and  prepares 
for  the  kingdom  of  glory,  Mat.  5.  19,' 20.  |  13. 
47.     [3]    The  stale  of  the  church  or  gospel  in 
the  world,  or  of  grace  in  the  soul,  which  should 
increase,  nuticithstanding  its  small  appearance 
alfirst,  Mat.  13.  31.   Or,  for  grace  in  the  heart, 
Luke  17.21.  [4]  The  place  of  eternal  happiness 
and  glory.  Mat.  5.  10.     (IV)  Of  priests,  E.\od. 
19.  f..  1  Pet.  2.  9.     (V)  Of  men,  Uan.  5.  21. 
F.zod.  19.  <).  and  ye  shall  be  to  me  a  k.  of  priests 
Jfum.  32.  33.  Moses  gave  to  Gad,  Reuben,  and 
Manasseh  the  A.of  Sihon  and  the  k.  ofOg, 
Deut.  3.  13.  Josh.  13.  12,  21,  27,  30. 
r>eut.  3.  4.  took  the  k.  of  Og  in  Bashan  sixty  cities 
1  Sam.  10.  16.  of  the  matter  of  k.  he  told  him  not 
25.  then  Samuel  told  the  manner  of  the  k. 
11.  14.  renew  the  k.  there  ||  14.  47.  Saul  took  k. 

15.  28.  Lord  hath  rent  the  k.  oflsrael,  28.  17. 
IH.  8.  and  what  can  he  have  more  but  the  k.  1 

SSam.  3.  10.  to  translate  the  A.  from  house  of  Saul 

16.  3.  Israel  shall  restore  me  the  k.  of  my  father 

8.  halh  delivered  the  k.  into  hand  of  Absalom 

1  Kings  2. 15.  thou  knowest  that  the  k.  was  mine 
22.  ask  for  him  tlie  k.  for  he  is  my  elder  brother 

10.  20.  not  like  made  in  any  k.  2  Chron.  9.  19. 
11. 11. 1  will  surely  rend  the  /.-.  from  thee,  31.  35. 

13.  I  will  not  rend  away  all  the  k.  34. 
12.21.  to  bring  4.  again  to  Kehoboam,  2  CAr.  11.1. 
2t>.  now  shall  k.  return  again  to  house  of  David 

14.  8. 1  rent  the  k.  away  from  the  house  of  David 
18. 10.  no  k.  where  my  lord  halh  not  sent  to  seek 
21.  7.  do^t  thou  now  govern  the  k.  of  Israel? 

S  Kings  14.  5.  as  soon  as  the  k.  was  confirmed 

15.  19.  with  liim,  to  confirm  the  k.  in  his  hand 

1  Chr.  10.  14.  and  turned  the  k.  to  David,  12.  23. 
J6. 20.  from  one  k.  to  another  people,  Ps.  105. 13. 
29.  11.  all  in  heaven  and  earth  is  thine,  thine  is 

the  k.  O  Lord,  Psal.  22.  28.  Mat.  6.  13. 

2  Chron.  13. 8.  think  to  withstand  the  k.  of  the  Lord 
14.  5.  and  the  k.  was  quiet  before  him 

21.  3.  the  k.  gave  he  to  Jehoram  the  first-born 
4.  Jehoram  was  risen  up  to  the  k.  of  his  father 

22.  9.  Ahaziah  had  no  power  to  keep  still  the  k. 
29.  21.  for  a  sin-ofl'ering  for  the  k.  and  Judah 
32. 1.5.  for  no  god  of  any  nation  or  k.  was  able 

JV«*.  9. 35.  for  they  have  not  served  thee  in  their  k. 
Kslh.  1.14.  seven  princes  which  sat  first  in  the  k. 

4.  14.  thou  art  come  to  the  k.  for  such  a  time 

5.  3.  it  shall  be  given  to  the  half  of  the  k.  6.  |  7.  2. 
Isa.  19.2.  they  shall  fight,  k.  against  k.  Mat.  24.  7. 

Mark  13.8.  Lukc'21.  10. 
34.12.  Ihev  shall  call  the  nobles  thereof  to  the  k. 
fiO.  12.  the'/:,  that  will  not  serve  thee,  .Jcr.  27.  8. 
Jtr.  18.  7. 1  speak  concerning  a  k.  to  destroy  it 

9.  concerning  a  k.  lo  build  and  to  plant  it 
/y<im.  2.  2.  he  hath  polluted  the  k.  and  the  princei 
Kiek.  16.  13.  and  thou  didst  prosper  into  a  k. 

17. 14.  that  the  k.  might  be  base,  and  not  lift  itself 
29.  14.  and  they  shall  he  there  a  base  k. 
Dan.  2.  37.  the  (Jod  of  heaven  hath  given  thee  a  4. 

44.  in  their  davH  shall  God  of  heaven  set  up  a  A-. 
4.  17.  the.  Most  High  rnleth  in  the  i.  of  men,  25. 32. 

31.  <■)  king,  the  k.  is  departed  from  thee 

6.  4.  no  fault  against  Daniel  concerning  the  k. 

7.  18.  the  saints  shall  take  the  k.  and  possess  the  k. 
22.  the  time  came  that  the  saints  possessed  the  k. 
27.  the  Most  High  whose  k.  is  an  everlasting  k. 

11.  21.  they  shall  not  :;ivc  the  honour  of  the  k. 
J/os.  1.  4.  and  will  cause  to  cease  the  Ic.  ofl.-irael 
^mo»9.  8.  the  eyes  of  the  Ld. are  upon  the  sinful  k. 
Obad.  21.  and  the  k.  shall  bo  the  Lord's 

Afi'e.  4.8.  <r.  shall  come  to  the  dauchter  of  Jerusa. 
»a«.  4.23.  Ihoffospel  of  the  ft.  9.  35.)  24.  14. 

8.  12.  llic  chilclri-n  of  the  k.  shall  bo  east  out 

12.  25.  every  ft.  divided  aeainat  itself  is  brought 

to  desolatin/i,  Mark  3.  24.  r.uke  II.  17. 

13.  38.  the  eood  scirl  are  the  children  of  the  ft. 
43.  shall  shine  as  the  sun  in  the  ft.  of  their  father 

2."i.34.  inherit  the  ft.  prf  pared  for  you  from  the 

26.  20.  till  I  drink  it  new  in  my  Father's  k. 
Mark  \\.  10.  blessed  be  the  ft.  of  our  father  David 
l.uke  12.  32.  f'alher'Hffond  pleasure  to  give  y"u  ft. 

19.  12.  n  nobleman  went  to  receive  for  hirnsi'lf a  ft. 
15.  he  was  returned,  having  received  the  ft. 

22.  29.  I  appoint  unto  ynu  a  ft.  as  my  Father 
Acts  I.  6.  wilt  tbou  restore  again  the  ft.  lo  Uracil 


KIN 

1  Cor.  15.24.  when  he  shall  have  delivered  up  the  ft. 
Col.  1.  13.  hath  translated  us  into  the  ft.  of  his  Son 
i/cA.12.28.whereforo  we  receiving  a  ft.  that  caimot 
Jam.  2.  5.  heirs  of  the  ft.  which  he  hath  promised 

2  I'et.  1.  11.  an  entrance  ministered  inioeverlu"t.  ft. 
Acv. 1.9.  companion  in  the  ft.  and  patience  of  Jesus 

17. 12.  ten  kings,  which  have  received  no  ft.  as  yet 

17.  lo  agree,  and  give  their  ft.  to  the  boast 
See  EsTAULisH,  Established,  Throne. 

KINGDOM  of  God. 

Mat.  6. 33.  but  seek  ye  first  the  ft.  of  O.  Luke  12. 31 

12.28. ft-.  o/G.  is  come  unto,  Luke  10.9, 11.  |  11.20. 

19.24.  through  eye  of  a  needle, than  for  a  rich  man 

to  enter  into  ft.  of  O.  Mark  10.  23.  Luke  18.  24. 

21. 31.  the  harlots  go  into  the  ft.  of  G.  before  you 

43.  the  ft.  of  God  shall  be  taken  from  you 

Jl^orft  1.  14.  preaching  ft.  of  God,  Acts  8.  12.  |  20. 

25.  I  28.  31. 

15.  the  h.of  God  is  at  hand,  repent  and  believe 

4. 11.  to  know  the  mVstery  of  ft.  of  G.  Luke  8. 10. 

26.  and  he  said,  so  is  the  ft.  of  G.  as  if  a  man  cast 
30.  whereunto shall  lik.  ft.  ofG.7  Luke  13.  18,2(1. 

9. 1.  till  Ihey  have  seen  ft.  of  G.  come  with  power 
47.  better  to  enter  into  the  ft.  of  G.  with  one  eve 
10.  14.children,forofsuchisA-.  o/<V.A«fte  18.  l"( 
15.  whoso  shall  not  receive  ft.  of  G.  Luke  18.  \'i 
24.  how  hard  is  it  fur  them  that  trust  in  riches  to 
enter  into  the  ft.  of  God,  25.  Luke  18.  25. 
12. 34.  he  said,  thou  art  not  far  from  the  ft.  of  G. 

14.  25.  till  that  day  I  drink  it  new  in  the  ft.  of  G. 
15.43.  which  waited  for  the  ft.  of  G.  Luke'Hi.  51. 

Luke  4.43. 1  must  preach  the  ft.  o/O.  to  other  cities 

6.  20.  blessed  be  yo  poor,  lor  yours  is  the  ft.  of  G 
7. 28.  that  is  least  in  the  ft.  of  G.  is  greater  than  he 
8.1. preaching  and  shewing  glad  tidingsof  ft.o/O. 

9.  2.  and  he  sent  them  to  preach  the  ft.  of  G.  60 
11.  received  them,  and  spnke  to  them  of  A.  o/ (V 

27.  shall  not  taste  of  death,  till  they  see  ft.  of  G. 
62.  and  looking  back,  is  fit  for  the  ft.  of  God 

13.  28.  ye  shall  see  all  the  prophets  in  the  k.of  G. 
29.  and  they  shall  sit  down  in  the  ft.  of  (^od 
14. 15.  blessed  is  he  that  shall  eat  bread  in  ft.  nf  G. 

10.  16.  since  that  time  the  ft-,  of  G.  is  preached 
17.20.  was  demanded  when  ft.  of  G.  should  come 

20.  the  ft.  of  God  comelh  not  with  observation 

21.  for  behold  the  ft.  of  God  is  within  you 

18.  20.  left  wife  or  children  for  the  ft.  of  G.  sake 
l!).  II.  they  thought  that  ft.  of  G.  should  appear 

21.  31.  know  ye  that  the  ft.  of  Q.  is  nigh  at  hand 

22.  16.  nor  eat  till  it  be  fulfilled  in  the  ft.  of  O. 

18.  I  will  not  drink  until  the  ft.  of  G.  shall  come 
John  3.  3.  except  man  he  born  again,  cannot  see  ft. 

5.  bornof  water,  he  cannot  enter  into  the  ft.  of  G. 
Acts  1.3.  things  pertaining  toft,  o/ <7. 8.  12.  |  19.8. 

14.32. through  much  tribulation  enter  into  ft.  of  G. 

28. 23.  to  whom  he  expounded,  and  testf.  ft.  of  G. 
Rmn.  14.  )7.  for  the  ft.  of  O.  is  not  meat  and  drink 

1  Ciir.  4.20.  the  ft.  of  G.  is  not  in  word,  but  in  power 
6.9.  the  unrighteous  shall  not  inherit  the  k.of  G 

10.  nor  extortionwB  inherit  ft.  of  O.  Gal.  5.  21 
F.ph.  .5.  5. 

15.  50.  flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  ft.  of  G 
Col.  4.  11.  my  fellow- workers  unto  the  ft-,  of  God 
'iThess.  1.5.  may  be  counted  worthy  of  the  ft.  o/ G. 
Rev.  12.  10.  now  is  come  the  ft.  o/"our  God 

KINGDOM  of  Heaven. 
Mat.  3. 2.  repent,  for  ft.  ofh.  is  at  hand,  4.  17.  |  10.  7. 
5.  3.  blessed  are  poor  in  spirit,  theirs  is  k.of  h.  10. 

19.  shall  be  called  least  in  ft.  of  h.  great  in  ft.  of  k. 

20.  shall  in  no  case  enter  into  ft.  of  heaven,  18.  3. 

7.  21.  not  that  sailh.  Lord,  shall  enlcr  ft.  of  h. 

8.  11.  shall  sit  down  with  Abraham  in  ft.  of  h. 

11.  II.  he  that  is  least  in  ft.  ofh.  is  greater  than  he 
12.ft.o/A.  suffer,  violence,  violent  take  it  by  force 

13.  II.  to  know  the  mysteries  of  theft,  of  heaven 
24.  the  ft.  of  h.  is  like,  31,  :t3.  44,  45,  47,  .52.  | 

IS.  23.  I  20.  I.  I  22.  2.  |  25.  1,  14. 

16.  19.  I  will  give  to  thee  the  keys  of  ft-,  ofh. 
18.  1.  who  is  the  greatest  in  ft.  of  heaven,  4. 

23.  13.  for  ye  shut  up  the  ft.  of  h.  against  men 

His  KINGDOM. 
Orn.  10. 10.  and  the  beginning  of  Ai>  ft.  was  nobel 
M'um.  24.  7.  and  his  ft.  shall  bo  exalted 
Deut.  17.  18.  he  sittelh  on  the  throne  of  Am  ft. 
20.  that  he  may  prolong  his  days  in  his  ft. 

2  Sum.  5.  12.  perceived  that  he  had  exalted  Ais  ft. 

1  Chron.  11.  10.  strengthened  with  him  in  Ai>  ft. 

14.  2.  for  Aw  ft.  was  lift  up  on  high  fur  Israel 

2  Chr.  1.  1.  Solomon  was  strengthened  in  his  ft. 
2.  1.  determined  to  build  a  house  for  his  ft.  12. 

33. 13.  brought  him  again  to  Jerusalem  intoAis  k. 
Ptal.  103.  19.  and  Ai*  ft.  ruleth  over  all 

145.  12.  and  the  glorious  m.ijesty  of  his  ft. 
F.ccl.  4.  14.  whereas  ho  that  is  born  in  his  ft. 
fsa.  9.  7.  upon  Ai>  ft.  to  order  and  establish  it 
f)an.4.  3.  the  high  God,  Ai«  ft.  is  an  everlasting  ft. 
34.Ai>ft.  from  generation  lo  genera.  6. 26.  |  7.14, 
11.  4.  All  ft.  sliall  be  broken  and  plucked  up 
9.  the  king  of  the  south  shall  come  intoAi>  ft. 
Mat.  12.  26.  bow  shall  his  ft.  stand  7  Luke  11.  18. 


KIN 

Mat.  13.  41.  ibey  shall  gather  out  of  his  ft.  all  Ihini^ 

16.  28.  they  see  the  Son  of  man  Cuming  in  his  ft. 
Luke  1.  33.  and  of  Ai6-  ft.  there  shall  be  no  end 

1  7'Af.*.f.2.  1-2.W  ho  hath  called  you  to  A.  ft.  and  glory 
i'J'im.4. 1.  who  shall  judge  at  his  appearing  and  A.il(. 
Rev.  16.  10.  and  his  ft.  was  full  of  darkness 

.;Vy  KINGDOM. 
rrVn.20. 9.  has  brought  on  nie  and  my  ft.  a  great  sin 

2  Sam.  3.  28. 1  and  inij  ft  are  guililui-s  belbre  the  L. 
I  (Jhrcn.  17.  14.  I  will  settle  biin  in  oiy  ft.  lor  cvcf 
Dan.  4.  36.  and  for  the  glory  ufvuj  ft.  in  mi/  ft. 

6.  26.  ill  every  dominion  ol  mi/  ft.  iiuii  tremble 
Mark  6.  23.  I  will  give  it  to  the  half  of  my  ft. 
Luke  22. 30.  may  eat  and  drink  at  my  table  in  yny  k. 
John  18.  36.  Jesus  said,  my  A.  is  not  of  this  world, 

ifniy  ft.  were,  but  now  m>i  ft.  is  not  from  lienca 
Thy  KINGDOM. 
1  Sam.  13.  14.  but  now  Ihy  ft.  shall  not  continue 
Ps.  45.  6.  scejitreof  t.  ft.  a  right  seepire,  Heb.  I.  8. 
14.5.  11.  they  shall  speak  of  the  glory  i)(  thy  k. 
13.  thy  ft.  is  an  everl.  kiiigd.  thy  doiiiin.  eudureth 
Dan.  4.  26.  thy  ft.  shall  be  sure  to  thee,  after  that 
5.  11.  there  isa  man  in  fAj/ft.  Il'ili.  R.  numb.  tAy  ft. 
28.  thy  ft.  is  divided  to  the  Medes  and  Pvrsiang 
j1/.i(.6.10.  thy  ft.  come,  thy  will  he  doiie,/,uftc  11.2. 
20.  21.  and  ihe  other  on  ihy  left  in  thy  k. 
/,uftc23.42.reinemli.me  «  hen  thou  coinesltotAyi. 

KINGDOMS, 
/^eut.  3.21.  so  shall  the  L.  doio  all  the  ft.  whither 

28.  25.  be  removed  into  all  the  ft.  of  the  earth 
Josh.  11.  10.  Ilazor  was  the  head  of  all  those  ft. 

I  Sam.  10.  18.  I  delivered  you  out  of  hand  of  all  ft. 

1  A7;i^« 4.21. Solomon  reigned  over  all  ft. from  rivef 

2  Kings  19.  15.  the  God  of  all  the  ft.  of  the  eaith 
19.  that  all  the  ft.  may  know,  Isa.  37.  20. 

1  Chron.  29.  30  times  lliat  went  over  all  the  ft. 

2  Chron.  12,  8.  Ihey  may  know  the  service  of  the  i 

17.  10.  Ihe  fear  of  the  Lord  fill  on  the  ft.  20.  29. 
20.  6.  thou  rulost  over  all  the  ft.  of  the  heathen 

36.  23.  all  ft.  hath  the  Lord  given  me,  F.ira  1.  2 
JVeh.  9.  22.  thou  gavest  them  ft.  and  nations 
Psal.  46.  6.  the  heathen  raged,  the  ft.  were  moved 

68.  32.  sing  unto  God,  ye  ft.  of  the  earth 
79.  6.  thy  wrath  on  the  ft.  that  have  not  called 
102.  22.  the  ft.  are  gathered  to  serve  the  Lord 
135   II.  who  smote  all  the  ft.  of  Canaan 
Isa.  10.  10.  as  my  hand  hath  found  the  ft.  of  idok 

13.  4.  the  noise  of  the  ft.  of  natioiisgathered 
19.  Babylon  the  glory  of  ft.  as  Sodom,  47.  5. 

14.  16.  is  this  the  man  that  did  shake  ft.  ? 
23.  11.  he  shook  the  ft.  ||  37.  16.  God  of  all  *. 

Jer.  1.  10.  and  over  the  ft.  I  have  S8t  thee 
10.  7.  and  in  all  their  ft.  none  like  thee 

15.  4.  to  be  removed  into  all  ft.  24.  9.  |  34.  17. 
25.  26.  all  the  ft.  of  the  world  shall  drink 

2H.  8.  the  prophets  prophesied  against  great  k. 

29.  18.  I  will  make  them  a  terror  to  all  ft. 
34.  1.  all  the  ft  fought  against  Jerusalem 

49.  28.  concerning  Kedar  and  the  ft.  of  Hazor 
51.  20.  and  with  thee  will  I  destroy  ft. 

27.  call  together  against  her  the  ft.  of  Ararat 
Ezek.  29. 15.  it  shall  be  the  basest  of  the  k. 

37.  22.  nor  shall  they  be  divided  into  two  ft-. 
Dan.  2.  44.  and  it  shall  consume  all  these  ft. 

7.  23.  which  shall  be  diverse  from  all  ft. 

8.  2-2.  four  ft.  shall  stand  up  out  of  the  nation 
.■^mosO.  2.gotoGHtli-,  be  th.y  better  than  iheseft.1 
JVaA.  .3.5.  and  I  will  shew  the  ft,  thy  shame 
Zrph.  3.  8,  that  I  may  asrcemble  Ihe  ft.  to  pour  on 
Hag.  2.  22.  I  will  nvcrllirow  the  throne  of  ft.  and 

I  will  destroy  iheslrengih  of  the  ft.  ofthe  heatliea 
.Viit.  4. 8.  shewed  him  all  ihe  ft.  of  world,  Luke4.5. 
Heb.  II.  'M.  who  ihrongli  faith  subdued  ft.  wrought 
Rev.  11.  15.  ft.  of  this  worlil  become  ft.  of  the  Lord 

KINGLY. 
Dan.  5.  20.  he  was  drposnl  from  his  ft.  throne 

KINSFOLK. 
Jab  19.  14.  my  ft.  have  failed  and  forgotten  me 
Auft<-2.44.soughtJesiis  a  mnnglheirft. and  acquaint. 
KINSFOLKS. 

1  Kings  16.  II.  Zimri  left  none  of  Baasha'i  k. 

2  Kin^s  10.  II.  Jehu  slew  .Ahab'»  ft,  ond  prieula 
Luke  21,  16,  ye  shall  be  betrayed  by  ft.  and  friends 

KINSMAiV. 
JVum.  5.  8.  if  the  man  have  no  ft.  to  rocompensn 
27,  II.  ye  shall  give  his  inheritance  to  his  ft-. 
Deut.  25.  t  5.  her  husband's  next  ft.  shall  go  in 
t  7.  if  a  man  like  not  to  lake  his  next  ft.  wife 
Ruth  2.  I.  Naomi  had  a  ft.  his  name  was  Boaz 

3.  9.  thou  art  a  near  ft.  ||  12.  a  ft.  neari'r  than  I 

13.  if  he  will  (lorform  to  iheo  the  part  of  a  ft.  well ; 

if  not,  I  will  do  the  part  of  a  ft.  to  thee. 

4.  I.  behold  Ihe  ft  of  whom  Il.iuz  spiike,  came  by 
6.  the  ft.  said,  I  cannot  redeem  it  I'or  myself 

8,  Ihe  ft.  said  nnio  Uoaz,  buy  it  for  thee 

14.  hath  not  left  thee  this  day  without  a  k 
John  18,  26,  being  his  ft,  whose  car  Peter  cut  off 
Horn.  10.  11.  salute  Heniili  in  my  ft.  greet  thera 

KINSMF.N. 
/iwtA2.20.tbcman  is  near  of  kin,  oneof  our  next  i 


KNE 

I  CAron.15.t5. Uriel  and  hia  k.  two  hundred  twenty 
Vsal.  as".  11.  my  lovers  and  k.  stood  alar  off 
Mark  3  fiJl.  when  k.  heard,  they  went  to  lay  hold 
Luke  14.  \'i.  call  not  friends,  brethren,  nor  k. 
Jicts  10.  24.  Cornelius  had  called  together  his  /■:. 
Hnm.  9.3.  accursed,  for  my  k.  according  to  the  lleah 
1(5.  7.  salute  my  k.  ||  'Z\.  thy  /..  salute  you 

KINSWOMAN. 
Lev.  18. 12.  father's  sister.she  is  my  father's  near  k. 

13.  mother's  sister,  slie  is  thy  mother's  near  k. 
Prov.  7.  4.  and  call  understanding  thy  k. 

KINSWOMEN. 
Leu.  18.  17.  not  uncover,  lor  they  are  her  near  k. 

KISS. 
They  are  signs,  [1]  Of  reverence  and  subjection 
to  3  superior,  1  Sam.  10.  1.     1  Kings  19.  IS. 
[i)    Jf  spiritual  submission  and  adoration  to 
Christ,  i*sal.  2.  12.     [3]  Of  love  and  affection, 
Gen.  27.  2ti,  27.     1  Sam.  20.  41.     [4]   Of  ido- 
latrous reverence  and  adoration,  Ilos.  13.  2. 
They  are,  [1]  Traitorous,  such  as  Joab's  to 
jlinasa,  when  he  kissed  him  and  slew  him,  and 
Judas's  to  Christ,  when  he  kissed  him  and  be- 
trayed him,  2  Sam.  20.  9.     Mat.  26.  40.     [2] 
Hypocritical,  2  Sam.  15.  5.     [3]  Idolatrous, 
1    Kings  19.  ]8.     [4]    Carnal   and   whorish, 
Prov.  7.  13.      [5]   Spiritual,   those   sensible, 
familiar,  and  frequent  discoveries  of  Christ's 
love  communicated  to  his  church  by  his  word 
and  Spirit,  Cant.  1.  2.  |  8.  1.     [0]  Holy,  pro- 
ceeding from,  and  a  pledge  of  Christian  and 
holy  love,  Rom.  10.  lU.  1  Cor.  10.  20. 
KISS,  ES. 
Prov.  27.  6.  but  the  k.  of  an  enemy  are  deceitful 
Cant.  1.2.  let  him  k.  me  with  the  /;.  of  his  mouth 
Luke  7.  45.  thou  gavest  me  no  k.  but  this  woman 
22.  48.  betrayest  thou  the  Son  of  man  with  a  k.l 
Horn.  1(1.  16.  salute  one  another  with  a  holy  k. 
1  Cor.  16.  20.  greet  with  a  holy  A".  2  Cor.  13.  12. 

1  Thess.  5.  26.  greet  the  brethren  with  a  holy  k. 
lPe2.5.14.  greet  ye  one  another  witli  a  k.  of  charily 

KISS. 
Ocn.  27.  25.  come  near  now  and  k.  me,  my  son 
31.28.not  suffered  me  to  k.  my  sons  and  daughters 
41.  t  40.  at  thy  word  shall  all  my  people  k. 

2  Sam.  20.  9.  Joab  took  Amasa  by  the  heard  to  k. 
1  Kinsrs  19.  20.  let  mo  k.  my  father  and  mother 
Psal.  2.12.  k.  the  Son,  lest  lie  be  angry  and  ye  perish 
Fron.  24.  26.  every  man  shall  k.  his  lips  that  gives 
Cant.  1.2.  let  him  k.  me  with  the  kisses  of  his  mouth 

8.  1.  I  would  k.  thee,  yea  I  should  not  be  despised 
Hos.  ]3.  2.  let  men  that  sacrifice  k.  the  calves 
Mat.  26.  48.  give  a  sign,  saying,  whomsoever  I  k. 
the  same  is  be,  hold  him  fast,  Mark  14.  44. 
i«Ae~.45.this  woman  hath  not  ceased  to  k.  my  feet 
22.  47  Judas  drew  near  to  Jesus  to  k.  him 

KISSED. 
Gen.  27.  27.  and  Jacob  came  near  and  k.  him 
29.  11.  and  Jacob  k.  Rachel  and  wept 

13.  Laban  k.  Jacob  ||  33.  4.  Esau  k.  Jacob 
31.  55.  and  Laban  k.  his  sons  and  his  daughters 
45.  15.  moreover  Joseph  k.  all  his  brethren 

48.  10.  Jacob  k.  and  embraced  Joseph's  sons 
50. 1.  Joseph  fell  on  his  father's  face  and  k.  him 
F.zod.  4.27.  Aaron  met  Moses  in  mount  and  k.  him 

18.  7.  Moses  met  his  faihcr-in-law  and  k.  him 
Jluth  I.O.Naomi  A.  her  daughters-in-law, they  wept 

14.  and  Orpnh  k.  her  mother-in-law,  but  Ruth 

1  Sam^  10.  1.  Samuel  poured  oil  and  k.  Saul 
20.  41.  Jonathan  and  David  k.  one  another 

2  .Sam.  14.  33.  he  bowed,  and  the  king  k.  Absalom 
15.  5.  Absalom  k.  any  man  that  came  nigh  to  him 

19.  39.  the  king  k.  Barzillai,  and  blessed  him 

]  Kings  19. 18.  every  mouth  which  hath  not  k.  him 
.fob  31.  27.  or  my  mouth  hath  k.  my  hand 
Psal.  85. 10.  right eousncs.s  and  peace  k.  each  other 
Prov.  7.  13.  so  she  caught  him  and  k.  him 
F.zek.  3.  1 13.  winss  of  creatures  k.  one  another 
.Mat.  26.  49.  hnil  Master,  and  k.  him,  Mark  14.  45. 
I^nke  7.  38.  Mary  k.  his  feet  and  anointed  them 

15.  20.  his  father  fell  on  his  neck  and  k.  him 
Acts  20.  37.  they  fell  on  Paul's  neck  and  k.  him 

KITE. 
Lev.  11. 14.  the  k.  after  his  kind  unci.  Deut.  14. 13. 

KNEAD. 
Oen.  18.  C.  k.  if,  and  make  cakes  on  the  hearth 
Jer.  7.  18.  and  the  women  /.-.  their  dough 

KNEADED, 
1  Sam.2-S.  24.  woman  at  EndortookflourandAr.it 
ZSaw.  13.  8.  Tamar  look  Hour  A.  nndniade  cakeB 
Jloa.  7.  4.  the  baker  A.  the  dough  fill  it  be  leavened 

KNEADING. 
F.cod.  8.  3.  frogs  shall  come  into  thy  A. -troughs 
J2.  34.  their  A.-troughs  being  bound  up  in  clothes 
KNEE 
Pijnlfres,  [1]  That  part  of  the  ho'hj  which  joins 
the  leer  and  thigh  together,  Jn.lg."7.5.    [2J  The 
body,  ?i!a\.  100.  24.      [3]    Persons,  Job  4.   4. 
Heb.  12.  12.    To  bow  the  KNEE  signifies,  [I] 
To  worship,  1  Kings  19.  18.    Rom.  11.  4.    [2] 
323 


KNE 

To  pray,  Eph.  3.  14.  [3]  To  be  in  subjection, 
Phil.  2.  10. 
Gen.  41.  43.  they  cried  before  him,  bow  the  k. 
Isa.  45.23.  that  uuto  me  every  k.  shall  bow,  every 
tongue  shall  swear,  Horn.  14. 11.  Phil.  2.  10. 
Mat.  27. 29.  bowed  the  A.  before  him,  Mark  15. 19. 
Rom.  11.  4.  who  have  not  bowed  the  k.  to  Baal 

KNEES. 
Geji.  30.  3.  my  maid  Bilhah  shall  bear  on  my  A. 
48.  12.  Josepli  brought  them  out  from  betw.  his  A. 
50.  23.  children  were  brought  up  on  Joseph's  A. 
Deut.  23.  35.  the  Lord  shall  smite  thee  in  the  A. 
Judg.  7.  5.  that  boweth  down  on  his  A.  to  drink,  6. 
16.  19.  and  she  made  Samson  sleep  on  her  A. 

1  Kings  8.  54.  Solom.  arose  from  kneeling  on  his  A. 

18.  42.  Elijah  put  his  face  between  his  A. 

19.  18.  all  the  A.  which  have  not  bowed  to  Baal 

2  Kings  1.13.  third  capt.  fell  on  his  A.  before  Elijah 
4. 20.  he  sat  on  his  mother's  k.  till  noon,  and  died 

2  Chrun.  C.  13.  Solomon  kneeled  down  on  his  A. 
Eira  9.  5.  I  fell  on  my  A.  and  spread  my  hands 
.hb  3.  12.  why  did  the  A.  prevent  me,  or  breasts 

4.  4.  and  thou  hast  strengthened  the  feeble  A. 
/'saM09.24.  my  A.  are  weak  thro'  fasting,  my  tlesh 
Isa.  35.  3.  weak  hands  and  contirm  the  feeble  A. 

66.  12.  ye  shall  suck,  and  be  dandled  on  her  A. 
Ezek.  1.  17.  all  A.  shall  be  weak  as  water,  21.  7. 

47.  4.  he  measured,  the  waters  were  to  the  A. 
Dan.  5.  6.  his  A.  smote  one  against  another 

6.10.kneeled  onhisA.three  timesaday  and  prayed 

10.  10.  behold  a  hand  set  me  upon  my  A. 
JVaA.  2.  10.  she  is  empty,  and  the  A.  smite  together 
Mark  15.  19.  bowing  their  A.  worshipped  him 
Luke  5.  8.  Simon  Peter  fell  down  at  Jesus'  k. 
F.ph.  3.  14.  for  this  cause  I  bow  my  A.  to  the  Father 
//(.'6. 12. 12.  lift  hands  that  hang  downandleeble  A. 

KNEEL. 
Gen.  24. 11.  he  made  his  camels  A.  down  by  a  well 
Psal.  95.  6.  let  us  A.  before  the  Lord  our  Maker 

KNEELED. 
2  Chron.  6.  13.  Solomon  A.  down  on  his  knees 
Dan.  6. 10.  Dan.  A.  three  limes  a  day  on  his  knees 
iMkc  22.  41.  and  Jesus  A.  down  and  prayed 
Acts  7.  60.  Stephen  A.  and  cried  with  a  loud  voice 

9.40.Pet.A.and  prayed  ||  20.  36-  Paul  A.  and  prayed 

21.  5.  and  we  A.  down  on  the  shore  and  prayed 

KNEELING. 
1  Kings  8. 54.  Solomon  rose  up  from  A.  on  his  knees 
Mat.  17. 14.  a  man  A.  to  him  saying,  Mark  10. 17. 
Mark  1.  40.  there  came  a  leper  A.  down  to  him 

KNEW. 
Gen.  4.  I.Adam  A.  Eve  his  wife,  she  conceived,  25. 
17.  Cain  A.  wife  ||  38.  26.  Judah  A.  her  no  more 
Judg.  11.  39.  Jephthah's  daughter  A.  no  man 

19.  25.  they  A.  her  and  abused  her  all  the  night 
1  Sam.  1.  19.  Elkanah  A.  Hannah  his  wife 

I  Kings  1.  4.  she  was  fair,  but  the  king  A.  her  not 
Mat.  1.  25.  Joseph  k.  her  not,  till  she  brought  forth 

KNEW. 
Gen.  3.  7.  Adam  and  Eve  A.  that  they  were  naked 
9.  24.  Noah  k.  what  his  younger  son  had  done 

37.  33.  Jacob  A.  it,  and  said,  it  is  my  son's  coat 

38.  9.  Onan  A.  the  seed  should  not  be  his 
42.  7.  Joseph  saw  and  A.  his  brethren,  8. 

J\''«7H.24.16.and  A.  the  knowledge  of  the  Most  High 
Deut.  9.  24.  been  rebellious  from  the  day  I  A.  you 
.34.  10.  a  prophet  whom  the  Lord  A.  face  to  face 
Judg.  3.  2.  such  as  before  A.  nothing  thereof 
13.  21.  Manoah  A.  he  was  an  angel  of  tlie  Lord 
18.  3.  they  A.  the  voice  of  the  young  man 

1  Sam.  3.  20.  all  Israel  A.  Samuel  was  a  prophet 

18.  28.  Saul  A.  that  the  Lord  was  wiih  David 

20.  9.  for  if  I  A.  then  would  I  not  tell  thee 

33.  Jonathan  A.  that  it  was  determined  by  Saul 
.39.  only  David  and  Jonathan  A.  the  matter 

22.  15.  for  the  servant  A.  nothing  of  all  this 

17.  slay  the  priests  because  they  A.  when  he  fled 
22.  David  said  to  Abialhar,  I  A.  it  that  day 
23.9.  David  A.  that  Saul  secretly  practised  against 
20. 17.  Saul  A.  David's  voice,  and  said,  is  this  thy 

2  Sam.  11.  10.  where  he  A.  that  valiant  men  were 

1  Kimrs  18.7.0badiah  A.  Elijah,  and  fell  on  his  face 

2  Chr.  33.  13.  then  Manasseh  A.  the  Lord  was  God 
F.sth.  1. 13.  manner  to  all  that  A.  law  and  judgment 
.lob  23.  3.  O  that  I  A.  where  I  might  find  him! 
Isa.  48.  4.  because  I  A.  that  thou  art  obstinate 

7.  lest  thou  shouldest  say,  behold  I  A.  them 
8. 1  A.  thatihou  wouldest'deal  very  treacherously 
Jer.  ^.  5.  before  I  formed  thee,  I  A.  thee 
32.  8.  then  I  A.  this  was  the  word  of  the  I/ord 
41.  4.  he  had  slain  Gedaliah,  and  no  man  A.  it 
44.15.  men  which  A.  their  wives  had  burnt  incense 
F.iek.  10.  20.  I  A.  that  they  were  the  clierubims 

19.  7.  and  he  A.  their  desolate  palaces,  laid  waste 
Dan.  5.  21.  till  he  k.  that  the  most  High  ruled 

6.  10.  when  Daniel  A.  the  writing  was  signed 
.Jonah  4.  2.  I  A.  that  thou  art  a  gracious  God 
Zceh.  II.  11.  A.  that  it  was  the  word  of  the  Lord 
Mat.  7.  23.  I  will  profess  I  never  A.  vou 

12. 15.  when  Jesus  k.  be  withdrew  bimstlf 


KNE 

Mat.  12.  25.  Jesus  A.  their  thoughts,  Luke  6.  8. 
25.  24.  I  A.  thee  that  thou  art  a  hard  man 

27.  18.  he  k.  that  lor  envy  they  had  delivered 
Mark  1.  34.  not  to  speak  because  they  A.  him 

6.  54.  out  of  the  ship,  straightway  they  A.  him 
12. 12.  A.  he  had  spoken  the  parable  against  their 

Lukci.il.  the  devils,  for  they  A.  that  he  wasChriat 
12.  47.  that  servant  which  A.  his  lord's  will 
18.  34.  nor  A.  they  the  things  that  were  sjioken 
24.  31.  their  eyes  were  opened,  and  they  A.  him 

John  2.  9.  but  the  servants  A.  whence  it  was 

24.  not  commit  himself  because  he  A.  all  mea 

25.  and  testily,  for  he  A.  what  was  in  man 

4.  53.  the  father  A.  it  was  at  the  same  hour 

5.  6.  Jesus  A.  he  had  been  long  in  that  case 

6.  6.  for  he  himself  A.  what  he  would  do 
61.  Jesus  A.  that  his  disciples  murmured 

01.  Jesus  A.  from  the  beginning  who  believed  ntt 

11.  42.  I  A.  that  thou  hearest  me  always 

57.  that  if  any  man  A.  where  he  were,  to  shew  it 
13. 1.  when  Jesus  A.  that  his  hour  was  come 
11.  for  he  A.  who  should  betray  him 
28.  no  man  at  the  table  A.  for  what  intent 

10.  19.  Jesus  A.  that  they  were  desirous  to  ask 

18.  2.  Judas  which  betrayed  him  A.  the  place 
Acts  3.  10.  A.  that  it  was  he  that  sat  fur  alms 

9.  30.  which  when  the  brethren  A.  they  brought 

12.  14.  when  Rhoda  A.  Peter's  voice  she  opened 
16.  3.  they  A.  ail  that  his  father  was  a  Greek 

19.  34.  hut  when  they  A.  that  he  was  a  Jew 
22.  29.  afraid  after  he  A.  that  he  was  a  Roman 

20.  5.  which  A.  me  from  the  beginning,  a  Pharisee 

28.  1.  then  they  A.  the  island  was  called  Melita 
Horn.  1.  21.  because  that  when  they  A.  God 

1  Cor.2.8.  which  none  of  the  princes  of  this  world  A. 

2  Cor.  5.  21.  he  made  him  to  be  sin,  who  A.  no  sia 
12. 2. 1  A.  a  man  in  Christ  above  14  years  ago,  3. 

Col.  1.6.  in  you  since  ye  A.  the  grace  of  God  in  truth 
2.  1.  I  would  you  A.  what  great  conflict  I  have 
Jude  5.  put  in  remembrance,  tho'  ye  once  A.  this 
Rev.  19. 12.  he  had  a  name  written  that  no  man  A. 

KNEW  not. 
Gen.  28. 16.  Lord  is  in  this  place,  and  I  A.  it  not 
31.  32.  Jacob  A.  not  that  Rachel  had  stolen  them 
38.  16.  Judah  A.  not  she  was  his  daughter-in-law 
39.6.heA.notaughtliehad||42.8.  butlheyA.n.hun 
Kxod.l.S.yhetc  arose  a  new  king  which  A.n.Joseph 
J^um.  22.  34. 1  A.  not  that  thou  stoodest  in  the  way 
Deut.  8.  16.  with  manna  which  thy  fathers  k.  not 

29.  20.  served  gods  which  thy  fathers  A.  n.  32. 17. 
Judg.  2.  10.  a  generation  which  A.  not  the  Lord 

13.  10.  Manoah  A.  not  that  he  was  an  angel 

14.  4.  his  father  A.  not  that  it  was  of  tije  Lord 
20.  34.  Benjamin  A.  not  that  evil  was  near 

1  Sam.  2.  12.  now  tlie  sons  of  Eli  A.  not  the  Lord 
14.  3.  the  people  A.  not  that  Jonathan  was  gone 
20.  39.  the  lad  A.  not  any  thing,  only  Jonathan 

2  Sam.  3.  26.  sent  after  Abner,  Imt  David  A.  it  not 

11.  20.  A.  ye  not  they  would. shoot  from  the  wall? 
15.11. they  went  in  simplicity,  and  A.  not  any  thing 
18.29. 1  saw  a  tumult,  but  I  A.  not  what  it  was 
22.  44.  a  jieople  which  1  A.  not  shall  serve  me 

2  Kings  4. 39.  gathered  gourds  for  they  A.  them  not 
J^eh.  2.  16.  the  rulers  A.  not  whither  1  went 
Job  2.  12.  Job's  friends  A.  him  not,  and  wept 
29.  16.  the  cause  which  I  A.  not  I  searched  out 
42.3.  things  which  I  A.  not  too  wonderful  for  me 
Psal.  .35. 11.  they  laid  to  my  charge  things  I  A.  not 
15.  ahjecls  gathered  against  me,  and  I  A.  it  7iot 
73.1 22.  so  foolish  was  I,  and  k.  not,  I  was  a  beast 
Prov.  23.  t35.  they  have  beaten  me,  and  I  A.  it  not 

24.  12.  if  thou  sayest,  behold,  we  A.  it  not 
/«a.42.10. 1  will  bring  the  blind  by  a  way  they  A.  no< 

25.  it  hath  set  him  on  tire,  yet  he  A.  not 

55.5.  and  nations  that  A.  not  thee,  shall  run  to  thee 
Jer.  2.  8.  and  they  that  handle  the  law  A.  me  not 
11.  19.  I  A.  not  that  they  had  devised  devices 
44. 3.  went  to  serve  other  gods  whom  they  A.  not 
Dan.  11.  38.  honourn  god  whom  his  fslhers  A  not 
Ilos.  8.  4.  they  have  made  jirinces  and  I  A.  it  not 

11.  3.  but  Ihcy  A.  not  that  1  healed  them 

Zceh.  7.  14.  among  the  nations  wlumi  they  A.  not 
Mat.  17.  12.  Elins  is  come,  and  they  A.  him  not 
24.  39.  A.  not  till  flood  came  and  took  them 
7^1/ Ae  2.  43.  Joseph  and  his  mother  A.  not  of  it 

12.  48.  that  A.  not  and  did  commit  things  worthy 
./»An  1.10.  the  world  A.  him  not  ||  31.1  A.  him  not,33. 

2.  9.  when  the  governor  A.  7>ot  whence  it  was 
20. 9.  for  as  yet  they  A.  not  the  scriptures  that  be 
14.  and  A.  not  that  it  was  Jesus,  21.  4. 
Acts  13.  27.  for  they,  because  they  A.  him  not 
19.  32.  the  more  part  A.  not  wherefore  they  cnma 
27.  39.  when  it  was  day,  they  A.  not  the  land 
1  Cor. 1.21.  the.world  by  wisdom  A.  not  God,  it  pleas. 
f7ai.4.8.1iowbeit,  then  when  yck.not  God,  ye  did 
1  JoAh 3.1. world  knoweth  lis  not, because  A.  him  not 

KNEWEST. 
Dcut.8.3.\\c  fed  thee  with  manna, which  thou  A.not 
Ruth  2.  1 1.  art  come  to  a  people  which  thou  A.  not 
AeA.9. 10.  thou  k.  that  they  dealt  proudly  dgainst 


KNO 

Psal.  142.  3.  then  thou  A.  my  path  in  the  way 
Jsa.  4S-  H.  thou  hcurduBt  not,  yea,  tliou  k.  not 
JJan.  5.  ii-.  not  humbled  thy  lieart,  thou  k.  ull  this 
Mai.  'io.  •ti.  thou  k.  I  rea|)ed  where,  J^uke  I'J.  ii'i. 
J^uke  ly.  44.  Iliou  k.  not  the  time  of  thy  visitation 
Jolin  4.  lU.  if  thou  A.  the  sift  of  Uod,  and  wlio  it  is 

KMFE. 
Oen.  2i.  tj.  Abrahiim  took  the  k.  in  his  hand,  10. 
F.iod.  4.  t4>.  then  Zipporah  took  u  sharp  k. 
Judg  ID.  -29.  took  a  *.  and  laid  hold  on  his  concub. 
Prov.  i'X  i.  and  put  a  k.  to  thy  throat,  if  given  to 
Biek.  5.  1.  son  of  man,  take  thee  a  sharp  k. 

2.  take  a  third  part,  and  smite  about  it  with  a  k. 

KNIVKS. 
Josh.  5.  2.  make  thee  sharp  k.  and  circumcise 

3.  Joshua  made  him  sharp  k.  and  circumcised 
1  Kings  ld.2«.  they  cut  themsel.  with  k.  and  lancets 
Kira  1.  9.  nine  and  twenty  k.  Cyrus  brought 
PritvM-  U.their  jaw-teeth  as  k.  to  devour  the  poor 
Eitk.  21.  t  21.  the  king  of  Babylon  made  bright  k. 

KNIT. 
Judg.  20.  11.  Israel  were  k.  together  as  one  man 
1  ><ain.  Id.  1.  the  soul  of  Jonathan  was  k.  to  David 
1  Chr.  12.  I",  if  come,  my  heart  shall  be  k.  to  you 
Acts  10.  11.  I  saw  a  sheet  k.  at  the  four  corners 
Col.  2.  2.  their  hearts  being  k.  together  in  love 

19.  body  k.  togelh.  increaseth  with  increase  of  G. 

KNOCK 
Signifies,  [1]  To  beat,  hit,  or  strike  vpon,  Acts 

12.  13,  16.  [2j  To  pray  with  fervency,  con- 
stancy, and  importunity,  Mat.  7.  8.  Luke  11. 
10.  [3J  Christ  calling  and  inviting  us  by  his 
icord, providence  and  Spirit,  to  admit  him  into 
our  hearts,  and  receive  him  by  faith  and  love. 
Cant.  5.  2.     Rev.  3.  20. 

Mat.  7.  7.  k.  and  it  shall  be  opened,  Luke  11.  9. 
Lrike  13.2.i.  ye  begin  to  A.  at  the  door,  saying,  ojjcn 
Rev.  3. 20.  be'hold,  I  stand  at  the  door  and  k.  if  any 

KNOCKED. 
Mts  12.  13.  and  as  Peter  k.  at  the  door  of  the  gate 

KNOCKETH. 
Cant.  5.2.it  is  voice  of  my  beloved  that  Ar.open  to  me 
Mat.'.S.lo  him  that  k.  shall  be  opened,  Luke  11.10. 
Luke  12.36.  when  ho  cometh  and  k.  they  may  open 

KNOCKING. 
Jlcts  12. 16.  Peter  contin.  k.  and  when  they  saw  him 

KNOP,  S. 
Exod.  2,5.  31.  his  k.  and  his  flowers,  34,  36;  I  37. 17. 
33.  with  a  k.  and  tlower  in  one  branch,  37.  19. 
36.  and  k.  branches  of  the  same,  37.  17,  20,  22. 
I  irinn-.s6.18.cedar  carved  with  A.and  open  Mowers 
7.24.  were  k.  compassing  it,  A-.  cast  into  two  rows 
Amos  9.  t  1.  he  said,  smite  the  A.  of  the  door 
Zeph.  2.  1 14.  the  bittern  shall  lodge  in  k.  of  it 

KNOW 
Signifies,  [1]  To  understand  or  perceive,  Ruth 
;<.  11.  [2]  To  approve  of, love,  and  delight  in, 
Psal.  1.  6.  [3]  To  cherish  and  take  care  of, 
John  10.  27.  [4]  To  have  the  ezpcricnce  of. 
Gen.  3.  5.  ',  22.  12.  [5]  To  possess,  or  have  it 
in  one's  power,  Psal.  50.  11.  [0]  lawfully  to 
use  the  marriage-bed.  Gen.  4.  1,  17.  [7]  Tu 
consider  and  ponder  seriously,  Psal.  90.  II. 
[8]  To  believe  upon  undoubted  testimony,  John 

4.  22.  I  1 1. 24.  [9]  To  have  a  bare  speculative 
knowledge,  Luke  12.  47.  [10]  To  commit  the 
sin  against  nature.  Gen.  19.  5.  Judg.  19.  22. 
[11]  To  be  fully  persuaded,  Judg.  6.  37.  |  18. 

5.  [12]  To  have  a  vain  and  groundless  assur- 
ance, iud;;.  17.  13.  [13]  Tu  discern  and  find 
fut,  Mat.  7.  16.  [14]  To  teach  and  ezcite  men 
to  know  thoronghty  and  practically,  Prov.  1.2. 
\\S\  To  hear  or  be  informed  of.  Acts  24.22. 
[16]  To  acknowledge  persons  with  due  respect, 
to  as  to  perform  our  duty  to  them,  1  Thess.  5. 
12.  [17]  To  choose,  Amos  3.  2.  [18]  To  com- 
mit, or  have,  2  Cor.  5.  21.  [19]  To  take  par- 
ticular notice  of,  Gen.  39.  0. 

Oen.  3.  5.  God  doth  A.  your  eyes  shall  be  opened 
32.man  is  becotne  as  one  of  us,  to  A.good  and  evil 
IS.13.said  to  Alirain,A.  thy  seed  shall  be  astranger 
18. 21.  I  will  go  down  and  see,  and  if  not,  I  will  A 

20.  7.  if  thou  restore  her  not,  A.  thou  shall  dio 
Ezod.  18.  16.  I  make  thorn  A.  the  statutes  of  God 

33.  12.  hniit  not  let  me  A.  whom  thou  wilt  send 
JVum.  14.  31.  th(7  shall  A.thc  land  ye  have  despised 
Deut.  4.  39.  k.  this  day  and  consider  it,  11.  2. 

8.2.  to  provH  thee  anil  k.  what  was  in  thy  heart 
.1.  nor  did  thy  fathers  A.  ho  might  make  thee  A. 

13.  3.  provelh  ynii,  to  k.  whether  ye  love  the  Lord 
Josh.  4.  22.  then  yo  shall  let  your  children  A. 

22.  22.  the  Lord  knoweth,  and  Israel  he  shall  A. 
Juilg.  3.  4.  to  A.  whether  they  would  hearken  to 
Ruth  3.  11.  city  of  my  people  dolh  k.  thou  art 
14.  she  rose  up  before  one  could  k.  another 
18.  sit  still,  my  daughter,  till  thou  A.  how  matter 
l.Sam.I7.47.  and  all  ihisasnemhly  shall  A.  the  Lord 
20.3. he  snilh,  let  not  Jonathan  A.  this,  lost  grieved 

21.  2.  lot  no  man  A.  any  thinp  of  the  business 
24  11.  A.  and  see  that  there  is  no  evil  in  mo 

324 


KNO 

1  Sam.  25. 17.  therefore  k.  and  consider  what  thou 
28.  1.  Achish  said  to  David,  A.  ai-suredly  that 

2.  surely  thou  shalt  A.  what  thy  servant  can  do 

2  Ham.  3. 25.  to  A.  thy  going  out,  to  A.  all  ihou  docst 
7.21. done  these  things  tomakethy  servant  A.  them 
14.  20.  to  A.  all  things  that  are  in  the  earth 

19.  20.  thy  servant  dolh  A.  that  I  have  sinned 

1  Kings  8.38.  k.  every  man  the  |)laguc,2  CAr.6.29. 

2  Kings  5. 8.  he  shall  k.  that  there  i.s  a  [irophet  in  Is. 
7.  12.  they  A.  that  we  be  hungry,  iheretbre 

10.  10.  A.  now  that  there  shall  fall  nothing  of  word 

1  Chr.  12.  32.  Issachar,  to  A.  what  Isia.  ought  to  do 
28.  9.  my  son,  A.  thou  the  God  of  thy  father 

2  Chr.  13.  5.  ought  ye  not  to  A.  that  the  Lord  gave 
F.zra  4.  15.  A.  that  this  city  is  a  rebellious  city 

7.  25.  all  such  as  A.  the  laws  of  thy  God  and  teach 
Esth.  2.  11.  Mordecai  walked  to  A.  how  Esther  did 
4.  5.  to  A.  what  it  was,  and  why  it  was 

11.  people  k.  whosoever  shall  come  to  the  king 
Job  5.  24.  thou  shalt  A.  thy  tabernacle  in  peace 
25.  thou  shalt  A.  that  thy  seed  shall  be  great 

27.  hear  it,  and  A.  thou  it  for  thy  good 

7.  10.  nor  shall  his  place  k.  liim  any  more 

8.  9.  wo  are  but  of  yesterday,  and  A.  nothing 
11.6.  k.  therefore  that  God  e.xacteth  less  than  thine 

8.  it  is  deeper  than  hell,  what  canst  thou  k.  ? 
13.  23.  make  mo  to  A.  my  transgression  and  sin 

19.  6.  A.  that  God  hath  overthrown  ine 

21.  19.  God  rewardeth  him,  and  he  shall  A.  it 

22.  13.  and  thou  sayest,  how  doth  God  k. 
24.  1.  do  they  that  A.  him  not  see  his  days  1 

17.  if  one  A.  them,  they  are  in  terrors  ot  shadow 
34.  4.  let  us  A.  among  ourselves  what  is  good 

37.  15.  dost  thou  A.  when  God  disposed  them 

16.  dost  thou  A.  the  balancing  of  the  clouds 

38.  12.  and  caused  the  day-spring  to  A.  his  jilace 
20.  that  thou  shouldcst  A.  the  paths  to  the  house 

Psal.  4.3.  but'A.  the  Lord  hath  set  apart  the  godly 
9. 10.  they  that  A.  thy  name  put  their  trust  in  thee 

36.10.  continue  thy  loving  kindness  to  them  A.  thee 
39.4.  Lord,  make  me  to  A.  mine  end,  and  measure 
46.  10.  be  still,  and  A.  that  I  am  God,  I  will  be 

51.  6.  in  hidden  part  thou  shalt  make  me  to  A. 

59. 13.  and  let  them  A.  that  God  ruletb  in  Jacob 

73. 11.  how  doth  God  A.  |1  16.  I  thought  to  A.  this 
87.  4.  I  will  mention  Babylon  to  them  that  A.  me 
89.  1,5.  blessed  are  they  that  A.  the  joyful  sound 
103.  16.  the  place  thereof  shall  k.  it  no  more 
139. 2;}.  A.  my  heart,  try  me,  and  A.  my  thoughts 
142.  4.  there  was  no  man  that  would  A.  me 
143.8.cause  me  A.  the  way  wherein  I  should  walk 

Prov.  1.2.to  A.  wisdom  and  instruction,  to  perceive 
4.  1.  hear,  and  attend  to  A.  understanding 

10.  32.  the  lips  of  righteous  A.  what  is  acceptable 
27. 23.  be  thou  diligent  to  A.  the  state  of  thy  Hocks 

Eccl.  1.  17.  and  I  gave  my  heart  to  A.  wisdom 
7.  25.  I  apjilied  my  heart  to  A.  wisdom  and  folly 
8.16.  when  I  applied  my  heart  to  A.wisdom  and  see 

17.  tho'  a  wise  man  think  to  A.  it  yet  not  able 

9.  5.  the  living  A.  they  shall  die,  but  the  dead 

11.  9.  but  A.  that  God  will  bring  theeto  judgment 
Isa.  7.  16.  for  before  the  child  shall  A.  to  refuse  evil 

9.  9.  and  all  the  people  shall  A.  even  Ephraim 
19. 21 .  the  Egyptians  shall  A.  the  Lord  in  that  day 
41.  20.  that  they  may  see  and  A.  and  consider 
22.  that  we  may  A.  the  latter  end  of  them 
49.  26.  all  flesh  shall  A.  that  I  am  thy  Saviour 
.50.  4.  should  A.  how  to  speak  in  season  to  weary 

52.  6.  therefore  my  people  shall  k.  my  name 
.58.  2.  they  seek  me,  and  delight  to  A.  my  ways 
60.  16.  thou  shalt  A.  that  I  the  L.  am  thy  Saviour 

./er.2.19.A.  and  see  that  it  is  an  evil  thing  to  fors.ike 
23. see  thy  way  in  valley,  A.  wiiatthou  hastdone 
6. 18.  and  k.  O  congregation,  what  is  among  them 
9.6.  thro'  deceit  they  refuse  to  k.  me,  saith  Lord 
15. 15.  A.  that  for  thy  sako  I  have  suftercd  rebuke 

16.  21.  I  will  cause  them  to  A.  my  liand  and  my 
might,  and  they  shall  A.  that  my  name  is  the  L. 

17.  9.  tho  heart  is  deceitful,  who  can  A.  it? 
22.  16.  was  not  this  to  A.  me?  saith  the  Lord 
24.  7.  I  will  give  tliom  ft  heart  to  A.  me 

31. 34.  k.  the  L.  for  they  shall  all  A.  inc,  Heh.9. 11. 

36.  19.  go,  hide  thee,  lot  no  man  A.  where  ve  bo 
38.  24.  he  said,  lot  no  man  A.  of  those  words 
40. 15.  slay  Islimael,  and  no  man  shall  A.  it 

44.  28.  Judah  shall  A.  whose  wiirdf  shall  stand 
Etek.Z.5.  A.  that  there  hath  been  a  prophet,  33.  33. 
5. 13.  shall  A.  I  tho  Lord  hath  spoken  in  my  zeal 
16.  2.  Jerus.  to  A.  her  abomination,  20.  4.  |  22.  \  2, 

20.  t  11.  and  made  them  to  k.  my  judgments 

25. 14.  and  they  shall  A.  my  vengeance,  saith  Lorrl 

28.  19.  all  that  A.  Ihco  shall  bo  astonished  at  thee 
34.  30.  thus  shall  they  A.  thai  I  am  with  them 

37.  28.  and  tho  heathen  shall  A.  39.  23. 

7>an. 2.21.  givcslknowl.  to  them  who  A.  understand. 
4.  25.  till  thou  A.  that  the  Most  High  ruleth,  32. 
7.  16.  and  made  mo  A.  the  interpretation 

19.  I  would  A.  tho  truth  of  the  fmirth  beast 
P.  19.  I  will  make  thee  A.  what  shall  be 

9.  25.  A.  therefore  and  underntand,  that  from 


KNO 

/)an. 11.32.  people  that  A.  their  God  shall  bestron), 
Has.  2. 20.  thou  shalt  A.  the  I-ord  ||  9. 7.  shall  A.  it 

13.  4.  and  thou  shalt  A.  no  God  but  me 

14.  9.  who  is  |)ru<lent,  and  he  shall  A.  them 
Mic.  3.  1.  is  it  not  lor  you  to  A.  judgment? 
Zech.  2.1 1.  thou  shalt  A.  that  the  Lord  sent  me,  4. 9 
Mai.  2.  4.  and  ye  shall  A.  that  I  have  sent  this 
Mat.(S:i.\cl  not  thy  letl  hand  A.what  thy  right  doeth 

7.  11.  if  ye  A.  how  to  give  good  gifts,  J.ake  II.  I'X. 
9. 30.  see  no  man  A.  it,  Mark  5.  43.  1 7.  24.  |  9.  30 
]3.11.iti6giventoyou  to  A.  JVf<irA4.n./,i;A<i8.I0 
24.33.  A.  desolat.  is  near,  Mark  13. 29.  J.uk,  2 1 .  20 
43.  but  A.  this,  if  the  good  man,  J.uke  12.  39. 
.John  4.  42.  we  A.  that  this  is  indeed  tlie  Christ 

7.  17.  if  any  do  his  will,  he  shall  A.  of  the  doctrine 

26.  do  the  rulers  A.  indeed  ||  51.  k.  what  he  doeth 
10.  4.  the  sheep  follow  him,  for  they  A.  his  voice 

14. 1  A.  my  sheep  ||  13.  7.  thou  shalt  A.  hereaUcr 
13.  35.  by  this  shall  all  men  A.  ye  are  my  disciples 
18.  21.  ask  them,  behold,  they  A.  what  I  said 

.^cts  1. 7.  it  is  not  for  you  to  A.  the  times  or  seasons 
2.36.  let  a  II  the  house  of  Israel  A. assuredly  that  Gud 
22. 14.  shouldest  A.  his  will  and  see  that'juslOne 
lO.tlieyA.I  imprisoned  them  that  believed  on  thee 
26.  4.  my  manner  of  life  from  my  youth  A.  all  Jews 

Rom.  7.  1.  I  speak  to  them  that  A.  the  law 
10.  19.  but  I  say,  did  not  Israel  A.  ?  first  Moses 

ICor.  2. 14.  neithtrcanhe  A.  them,  bec.iuse  they  are 

8.  2.  he  knoweth  nothing  as  he  ought  to  A. 
11.3.  but  I  would  have  you  A. that  the  head  is  Chr. 

KyiA.3.19.and  to  A.the  love  of  Christ,  which  passeth 
1  Tluss.  3.  5.  for  this  cause  I  sent  to  A.  your  faith 
4. 4. every  one  should  A. how  to  possess  his  vtssel  in 
5.  12.  to  A.  them  who  labour  among  you,  and  are 

1  7V;n.4.3.  of  them  which  believe  and  A.  the  truth 

2  Tim.  3. 1.  this  A.  also  that  in  the  last  days  perilous 
Tif. 1.16.  they  profess  that  they  A.God,  but  in  works 
Jam.  2.  20.  but  wilt  thou  A.  O  vain  man,  that 

5.  20.  let  him  A.  he  which  converteth  a  sinner 
Jude  10.  but  what  they  A.  naturally,  as  brute  beast* 
/<et).2.2:t.  all  the  churches  shall  A. that  I  am  he  who 

3.  9.  I  \v\\\  make  them  to  A.  that  1  have  loved  thea 

See  Certain,  Certainly,  Certainty. 

/  KNOW. 

Grn.  12.  11.  now  Ik.  that  thou  art  a  fair  woman 

15.  8.  whereby  shall  /  A.  that  I  sliull  inherit  it 
18.  19.  Ik.  that  he  will  command  his  children 
20.  6.  /  A.  thou  didst  this  in  integrity  of  thy  heart 
22.  12.  for  now  /  A.  that  thou  fearest  God' 

24.  14.  thereby  shall  Ik.  that  thou  hast  shewed 
48.  19.  his  father  said,  Ik.  it,  my  son,  /  A.  it 
Exod.  3.  7.  the  Lord  said,  Ik.  their  snrroHS 

4.  14.  .Aaron  thy  brother  Ik.  he  can  speak  well 

9.  30.  Ik.  that  ye  will  not  yet /ear  the  Lord  God 

18. 11.  /  A.  that  the  Lord  is  greater  than  all  gods 

33. 12.  yet  thou  hast  said,  /  A.  thee  by  name,  17. 
Deut.  31.  21.  /  A.  their  imagination  even  now 

27.  for  Ik.  thy  rebellion  and  thy  stiff  neck 

29.  Ik.  that  after  my  death  ye  will  utterly  corrupt 
.Josh.  2.  9.  /  A.  the  Lord  hath  given  yon  ilie  land 
Judg.  6.  37.  then  shall  Ik.  that  ihoti  will  save 

17.  13.  now  A.  /  that  the  Lord  will  do  mo  good 
l.^'rtFn. 17.28.  Ik.  thy  prido  and  naughtiness  of  heart 

20.  30.  do  not  /  A.  thou  hast  chosen  son  of  Jesse? 
22.  3.  till  Ik.  what  God  will  do  for  me 

24.  20.  /  A.  well  that  thou  shMli  surely  be  king 

29.  0.  /  A.  that  thou  art  good  in  my  sight,  as  angel 
2  Kings  2.  3.  yea  /  A.  it,  hold  you  your  peace,  5. 

5.  15.  and  he  said,  behold,  now  Ik.  that  there  is 

no  (>od  in  all  the  earth,  but  Israel 
8.  12.  fk.  the  evil  that  thou  wilt  do  to  Israel 
10.27.  Ik.  thv  abode  and  going  out,  Isa.  37.  28 

1  Chron.  29.  it.  Ik.  that  thou  triest  the  heart 

2  C/iroH.  25.  16.  Ik.  that  God  hath  determined 
.Job  9.  2.  /  A.  it  is  so  of  a  truth,  but  how  should 

28.  Ik.  thou  wilt  not  hold  me  innocent 

10.  13.  things  hast  hid,  /A.  that  this  is  with  thee 
13.2.whai  ve  know,thosamodo  /A.  also,  not  infer 

18.  Ii.lmld,  Ik.  that  I  shall  be  justified 
19.25.  A  A.  that  my  Uidecmer  liveth  and  shall  stand 

21.  27.  /  A.  your  thoushts  and  devices  ve  iniRgino 

30.  23.  tor  /  A.  thnt  Ihou  wilt  bring  mo  lo  deulh 
42.  2.  Ik.  that  Ihou  canst  do  every  thing 

Psol.  20.  6.  t  A.  that  the  Lord  snveih  his  anointed 
41.  II.  hv  this  /  A.  that  thou  favouiesl  me 
50.  11.  Ik.  all  the  fowls  of  the  mountains 
56.  <l.  litis  /  A.  for  God  Is  for  mo 
119.75.  //,-.()  Lord,  that  thy  judgments  are  right 
135.  5.  for  Ik.  the  Lord  is  great  and  above  all  godl 
140.  12.  Ik.  the  Lord  will  maintain  the  cause 

F.rrl.  n.  12.  /A.  that  there  is  no  good  in  them 

14  AA.  that  whatsoever  (Jod  doeth,  il  shall  be  for 
8.  12.  /  A.  it  shall  ho  well  with  them  that  fear  God 

ha.  47.  8.  nor  shall  Ik.  the  los.s  of  children 
50.  7.  and  /  A.  that  I  fhall  not  be  ashamed 
66.  18.  Ik.  their  works  and  their  Ihouglits 

.ler.  10.  23.  Ik.  tho  way  of  man  is  not  in  himself 

11.  1H.  Lord  hath  given  me  kno«  lodge,  and  fk  i 
29.  11.  for  Ik.  the  thoughts  that  I  think 

23.  /  A.  and  am  a  witness,  saith  tho  Lord 


KNO 

Jtr.  48.  30.  Ik.  his  wrath,  eaith  the  Lord,  it  ehnll 
Kiek.  11.  5.  /  k.  things  lliut  come  into  your  mind 
i)art.".i.!i  thcrelbro  tell  mu  the  (iri^arn,  anil  Yblialj  k. 
Hos.  5.  'A.  I  k.  Ephraini,  and  Israel  is  not  iiid 

13.  5.  /liid  k.  thee  in  tlie  wilderness 
.Hinos  5.  Vi.  Ik.  your  nianil'old  tranngressionn 
Jaiiu/t  1.  l"i.  i  k.  tnat  lor  my  sake  tins  tenijieat  is 
Mat.  '2c<.  5.  fear  not  ye,  /  k.  that  ye  seek  Jesus 
Mark  1.  'i4.  I  k.  Iheo  who  thou  art,  Luke  4.  3-1. 
Luke  1    \6.  whereby  eliall  i  k.  this,  tor  X  am  old 
Juha  4.'ii.  /  k.  that  iVtessias  comelli,  called  Christ 

5.  4'2.  bi*  /  k.  you  ||  8.  14.  /  k.  whence  I  caine 

t!.  37.  /  4   that  ye  are  Abraham's  seed 
5.5.  but  /  k.  him  1|  !).  'i5.  one  thing  /  k. 

10.  15.  as  Father  knowcth  me,  so  7  k.  the  Father 
27.  and  /  k.  my  sliee|i,  and  they  follow  me 

11   'W.  /  k.  that  what  lliou  wilt  ask  of  God 
24   Martha  said,  /  k.  that  he  shall  rise  again 

12.  50.  /  k.  his  comniandment  is  life  everlasting 

13. 18.  I  speak  not  of  all,  Ik.  whom  1  have  chosen 
Jicts  12.  II.  now  Ik.  of  a  surety  that  the  Lord  sent 

li).  15.  Jesus  /  k.  and  Paul  I  k.  but  who  are  ye? 

20.  25.  /  k.  that  ye  shall  see  my  face  no  more 
21).  /  k.  this,  that  after  my  departing,  wolves 

24.  22.  /will  k.  the  uttermost  of  your  matter 

20.  3.  because  /  k.  thee  to  be  expert  in  customs 
27.  king  Agrippa.  Ik.  that  thou  believest 

Xiom.  7.  18.  i  k.  that  in  nie  dwelleth  no  good  thing 

1  <^ur.  4.  4.  for  Ik.  nothing  by  myself,  yet  am  1  not 
13.12.now  Ik.  in  part,  then  shall  Ik.  as  I  am  kno. 

2  Cor.  9.  2.  Ik.  the  forwardness  of  your  mind 
Vhil.  1.  I'.*.  /  k.  this  shall  turn  to  my  salvation 

^Sj.l k.  that  I  shall  abide  with  you  all,  and  contin. 

2.  19.  be  of  good  comfort,  when  Ik.  your  estate 

4.  12.  Ik.  how  to  be  abased,  Ik.  how  to  abound 
2  Tim.  1.  12.  for  /  i.  wh.mi  1  have  believed 
1  .hhn  2.  4.  he  that  saith,  /  k.  him,  and  keepcth 
Hev.  2.  2.  Ik.  thy  works,  it.  13,  19.  |  3.  1,  8,  15. 

2.  9.  Ik.  the  bla.-phemv  of  them,  who  suy 

KNOW  nut,  o"r  not  KNOW. 
Rere.4.fl.Lord  said, where  is  Abel?  he  said,  I  k.  not 

27.2.  I  am  old,  I  k.  not  the  day  of  my  death 
Eiud.  5.  2. 1  k.  nut  the  Lord,  nor  will  1  let  Israel  go 

10.20.  we  k.not  w  iih  what  we  must  serve  the  Lord 
iJiut.  22.  2.  or  if  thou  k.  him  not,  then  bring  it 
1  .S'am.  3.  7.  now  Samuel  did  n«£  yet  k.  the  Lord 

25.  11.  take  my  bread,  give  to  men  whom  I  k.  not? 

1  Kings  .3.  7.  I  k.  not  how  to  go  out  or  come  in 
18. 12.  the  Spirit  shall  carry  thee  whither  I  k.  not 

2  Kings  17.2tj.  they  k.not  the  manner  of  G.  of  land 
Ezra  7.  2.5.  and  teach  ye  them  that  k.  them  not 
J\'e/i.  4.  11.  they  shall  not  k.  nor  see,  till  we  come 
Job  9.21.  though  perfect,  yet  would  I  notk.my  soul 

15.  9.  what  knowest  thou  that  we  k.  not? 

21.  29.  and  do  ye  not  k.  their  tokens? 

24.  13.  (hey  k.  not  the  ways  thereof,  nor  abide  in 
16.  they  dig  in  the  dark,  they  k.  not  the  light 

32.  22.  for  I  k.  not  to  give  flattering  titles 

3C.  2!).  God  is  great,  and  we  k.  him  not 
Psnl.  71.  15.  for  I  k.  not  the  numbers  thereof 

82.  5.  they  k.  not,  neither  will  they  understand 

94.  10.  he  that  teacheth  man,  shall  he  not  k.? 

101.  4.  I  will  not  k.  a  wickc-d  person 
Prov.  4. 19.  they  k.  not  at  what  they  stumble 

.S.G.waysare  moveable,that  thou  canst  not  A. them 

24.  12.  doth  not  he  /■.  it,  and  shall  not  he  render 

25.  8.  lest  thou  k.  not  what  to  do  in  the  end 

29.  7.  but  the  wicked  regardeth  not  to  k.  it 

30.  18.  yea,  there  are  four  things  whi(-h  I  k.  not 
F.ccl.  9.  5.  but  the  dead  k.  not  any  thing 

Cant.  1.  8.  if  thou  k.  not,  O  fairest  among  women 
/.Id.  1.  3.  but  Israel  dolh  not  k.  norconsidcr 
43.  19.  shall  ye  not  k.  ii?  ||  44.  8.  I  k.  not  any 
47.  11.  thou  shalt  not  k.  from  whence  it  arisetli 
48.6.evcn  hidden  things, and  thou  didst  Tiot  /c.them 
59. 8.  way  of  peace  they  k.  not,  shall  not  k.  peace 
Jrr.  5.  4.  for  they  k.  not  the  way  of  the  Lord 
7.9.will  ye  walk  after  othergorls,  whom  ye  k.  not? 
8.7.but  iny  people  k.not  the  jndgmcnisofthe  Lord 
9.  3.  and  they  k.  not  ine,  saith  the  Lord 
,  10.  25.  thy  fury  on  the  heathen  that  k.  thee  not 
14.  18.  go  about  into  a  land  thai  they  A.  not,  22.28. 
F.ick.:iS.  14.  dwelleth  safely,  shalt  thou  not  k.  it? 
Hos.  2. 8.  she  did  not  k.  that  I  gave  her  corn,  wine 
.9mos  3. 10.  for  they  k.  not  to  do  right,  saith  the  L. 
Mic.  4.  12.  they  k.not  the  thoughu  of  the  Lord 
Mm.  25.  12.  verily  I  pay  unto  yon,  I  k.  you  not 

26.  70.  Peter  said,  I  k.  not  what  thou  sayest 
74.  then  began  he  to  curse  and  swear,  saying, 

I  k.  not  the  man,72.  Mark  14.  68,71. 
Mirk  10.  38.  Jesus  said,  ye  k.  not  what  yp  ask 

12.  24.  ye  err,  because  ye  k.  not  the  scriptures 
J,uk'-1.  34.  how  shall  this  bp,sceing  I  k.not  a  man 

13.  2.5.  ho  shall  say,  I  k.  not  whence  you  are,  27. 
'22.  57.  denied  him,  saying,  woman,  I  k.  him  not 

60.  Peter  said,  man,  I  k.  not  what  thou  sayest 
23.  34.  forgive  them,  they  k.  not  what  Ihcy  do 
24. 16.  eves  holden,  that  they  should  not  k.  him 
John  1.26.  slandeih  one  among  you  whom  ye  k.not 
8.  55.  if  I  siiouh'  say,  I  k.  him  not,  I  should  lie 
325 


KNO 

John  9.  12.  the  blind  man  said,  I  k.  not,  25. 
i;l.  or  who  hath  opened  his  eyes,  we  k.  not 
29.  for  this  fellow,  we  k.  nut  from  whence  he  is 
10.  5.  for  they  k.  not  the  voice  of  strangers 

14.  5.  Lord,  we  k.  nut  whither  thou  goest 

15.  21.  because  they  k.  nut  him  that  sent  me 
20.2. we  A.a.||13. 1  k.nut  where  they  have  laid  hirii 

Jlcts'ii..  .34.  and  whin  he  could  not  k.  the  certainty 
Hani.  8»2t).  for  we  k.  nut  what  we  should  pray  for 
1  Cur.  1.  lb.  1  k.  not  whether  I  baptized  any  other 
2.2. 1  determined  nitt  to  k.  any  thing  among  you 
14.  II.  if  1  k.  not  the  meaning  of  the  voice 

1  Thess.  4.  5.  as  the  Gentiles  which  k.  not  God 

2  Thess.  1.  8.  vengeance  on  them  that  k.  not  God 
1  7Y/«.  3.  5.  if  a  man  k.  not  how  to  rule  his  house 
Jade  JO.  these  speak  evil  of  things  they  k.  not 
Kco.  3.  3.  thou  slialt  not  k.  what  hour  1  will  come 

iice,   }'c  Know. 
KNOW  t/iat  I  am  the  Lord. 
Ezod.  6.  7.  ye  shall  k.  that  I  am  the  Lord,  10.  12. 
1  Kiiifrs  20.  28.  Eiek.  6.  7,  13.  1  7.  4, 9.  I  11. 10, 

12.  I  12.  20.  I   13.  9,  14,  21,  23.  |  14.  8.  |   15.  i. 
I  20.  38,  42,  44.  |  23.  49.  \  24.  24.  j  25.  5.     35, 

9.  I  30.  11.  I  37.  tj,  13.  Joel  3.  17. 
7.5.  and  the  Egyptians  shall  k.  1. 1  am  I^.  14.4,18. 

17.  thou  shall  k.  I  am  L.  1  Kings  20.  13.  Isa. 

49.  23.  Eick.  10.  62.  |  22. 10. 1  25.  7. 1  35.  4, 12. 

8.23. to  end  that  thoumayest  k.thati  am  the  Lord 

10.  2.  that  ye  may  /.-.  t.  I  am  L.  31. 13.  £:ei.20.20. 
29.46.  they  shall  k.  that  lam  theLurd,Ezck.n.U), 

14.  I  7.  27.  I  12.  15,  16.  |  24.  27.  |  25.  11,  17.  | 

20.  6.  I  28.  22,  23,  24,  20.  |  29.  9,  JO,  21.  [  30.  6, 

19,  25,  26.  I  32.  15.  |  33.  29.  |  34.  27.  I  35.  15. 

I  36.  38.  I  38.  23.  |  39.  6,  28. 

Deut.  29.  6.  that  ye  might  k.  that  I  am  the  Lord 

.ler.  24.7.1  will  give  them  a  heart  to  k.  I  am  Lord 

£2eA:.20.12.my  sabbat.that  they  mighi/t./am/..26. 

30.  23.  and  the  heathen  shall  k.  I  am  the  L.  39.  7. 
39.22.  the  house  of  Israel  shall  k.  that  1  am  the  L. 

May,  mayest,  or  might  KXOW. 
E,i.od.%.Vi.\.\\n\x  mayest  A. there  is  none  like  G.9.14. 
9.2y.that  thou  mayest  /c.that  the  earth  is  the  Ld.'s 

11.  7.  ye  may  k.  the  Lord  dolh  put  a  difterence 
33.  5.  that  1  may  k.  what  to  do  to  thee 

13.  shew  ine  thy  way,  I  hat  I  may  k.  thee 
Lev.  23.  43.  that  your  generations  may  k.  that 
JVum.  22. 19.  that  1  may  k.  what  the  Lord  will  say 
/Jctt«.4..35.that  thou  mtghtist  A. that  the  L.  he  is  G. 
Josh.  3.4.  ye  may  k.  the  way  by  which  ye  should  go 

7.  ihey  may  A. that  as  I  was  with  Moses,  so  I  will 
4.  24.  all  i)eople  might  A.  the  hand  of  the  Lord 
Judg.  3.2.  that  Israel  might  A.  to  teach  them  war 

18.  5.  v/amay  k.  whether  our  way  be  prosperous 
Huth  4.  4.  if  not,  then  tell  me,  that  I  may  A. 

1  Ham.  17.  46.  that  all  the  earth  may  k.  there  is  a 
G.  in  Israel,  1  Kings  8.  43,  00.  2  Kings  19.  19. 

2  Sam.  24.2.  that  I  may  A.  the  number  of  the  people 
1  Kings  18.37.this  people  may  k.  that  thou  art  God 
2C/tr.  6.  33.  that  all  people  may  A.  thy  name,  and 

7nay  k.  that  this  house  is  called  by  thy  name 

12.  8.  his  servants,  that  they  may  A.  my  service 
■lob  19.  29.  that  ye  may  k.  there  is  a  judgment 

31.  6.  be  weighed,  that  God  may  k.  my  integrity 
37.  7.  that  all  men  may  A.  his  work 

P.sa/.9.20.  nations  may  A. themselves  to  be  butmen 
39.  4.  measureof  days,  that  may  k.  how  frail  I  am 
78.  0.  that  the  generation  to  come  might  k.  Ihem 
83.18.lhat  men  man  A. that  thou  art  the  Most  High 
109.  27.  that  they  may  k.  that  this  is  thy  hand" 
119.  125.  that  I  may  A.  thy  testimonies 

Isa.  5.  19.  lot  counsel  draw  nigh  that  we  may  A.  it 
7.  15,  that  he  may  A.  to  refuse  the  evil 

37.  20.  that  all  may  k.  that  thou  art  the  Lord 
41.  23.  that  we  may  k.  ye  are  gods,  yea,  do  good 

20.  who  hath  declared, that  we  may  k.  and  before 
43. 10.  ye  may  k.  and  believe  me,  and  understand 
45.  3.  that  thou  mayest  A.  that  I  am  the  G.  of  Isr. 
6.  tliat  they  may  k.  from  the  rising  of  the  sun 
.hr.  6.  27.  that  thou  mayest  k.  and  try  their  way 
44.  29.  that  ye  may  k.  that  my  wfjrds  shall  stand 
Ezek.il.  5. all  flesh  may  k.i  have  drawn  my  sword 

38.  16.  .ngainst  the  land,  that  heathen  may  A.  me 
Dan.  2.  .30.  mightcst  k.  the  ilmughts  of  thy  heart 

4.  17.  to  the  intent  that  the  living  may  k. 
Jonah  1.  7.  come,  let  us  cast  lots,  that  we  may  k. 
Mic.  6.  .5.  ye  may  A.  the  righteousness  of  thr-  Lord 
.1/fl/.9. 6.  but  that  ye  may  k.  that  the  Son  of  man 
hath  power  to  forgive,  Mark  2. 10.  lAike^.  24. 
John  10.38. ye  ;rea^  k.  and  believe  the  Fath.is  in  me 

14.31.  that  the  world  mow  A.  I  love  Fath.  17.  23. 

17.  3.  that  they  might  A.  ihee  the  only  true  God 

19.  4.  that  ye  may  k.  th:it  f  find  no  fault  in  him 
lets  17.  19.  may  we  A.  what  this  new  doi'trino  is? 
21.  24.  all  may  k.  that  those  things  are  nothing 

1  C»r.2.l2.  we  might  A.  the  thinss  given  us  of  God 

2  Cor.  2.  4.  that  yo  wight  k.  the  love  I  have  to  you 
9.  that  I  miVAt  A.  the  proofof  you,  whether  ye  be 

F.ph.  1.  18.  lliat  ye  may  k.  the  hope  of  his  calling 
6.  22.  whom  I  sent,  that  ye  might  k.  our  atTnir.* 
rhil.X  10.  that  I  may  A.  him,  and  the  power  of  hi;- 


KNO 

Col.  4. 6.  that  ye  may  k.  how  to  answer  every  maa 
8.  whom  I  sent,  that  he  might  k.  your  estate 

1  3'im.3.15.  thou  may  k.  how  thou  oughtest  to  bch. 

1  John  5.  13.  that  ye  may  A.  ye  have  eternal  lile 

20.  given  us,  that  we  may  k.  him  that  is  true 

lye  KNOW,  or  KNOW  lee. 

Gen.  29.  5.  know  ye  Laban?  they  said,  we  k.  him 

iJeut.  18.  21.  if  thou  say,  how  shall  we  A.  the  word 

1  .Sam.  6.  9.  then  shall  wc  A.  it  is  not  his  hand 

2  C'Ar.20.12.  we  have  no  might, nor  A.icc  what  to  do 
Jub  30.  20.  behold,  God  is  great,  and  we  A.  him  not 
Isa.  59.  12.  as  Icir  our  iniquities,  wc  k.  them 
Hos.  0.  3.  then  shall  wck.  if  we  follow  on  to  know 

8.  2.  Israel  shall  cry  to  me,  my  God,  we  A.'thoe 
Mat.  22.  16.  tne  A.  thou  art  true,  and  teachest  the 
way  of  God,  Mark  12.  14.  Luke  20.  21. 
John  3.  2.  we  k.  thou  art  a  teacher  come  from  God 
11.  verily  I  say  to  thee,  wc  speak  that  we  do  A. 
4.22.  i^jc  A.  what  we  worship;  for  salvation  is  of 
0.  42.  Jesus,  whose  father  and  mother  we  k.? 

7.  27.  howheit,  we  k.  whence  this  man  is 

8.  .52.  now  we  k.  that  thou  hast  a  devil 

9.  20.  ice  A.  that  this  is  our  son  who  was  blind 
24.  said  to  him,  we  k.  that  this  man  is  a  sinner 
29.  we  k.  that  God  spake  to  Moses,  as  for  this 
31.  now  we  k.  that  God  hcareth  not  sinners 

14.  5.  Thomas  saith  to  him,  Ld.  ice  A.  not  whither 
thou  goest,  and  how  can  we  k.  the  way? 

21.  24.  and  we  k.  that  his  testimony  is  true 
.^cts  17.  20.  jcc  would  A.  what  these  things  meaa 

28.  22.  we  A.  it  is  every  where  spoken  against 
Rom.  3.  19.  we  k.  that  what  things  the  law  saith 

7.  14.  for  wc  k.  that  the  law  is  sjiiriiual,  but  I  am 

8.  22.  we  k.  the  whole  creation  groaneth  and 
travaileth  in. pain  together  until  now 

23.  we  k.  that  all  things  work  together  for  good 

1  Cur.  8.  1.  we  k.  that  we  all  have  knowledga 

4.  we  k.  that  an  idol  is  nothing  in  the  world 
13.  9.  for  we  A.  in  part,  and  prophesy  in  part 

2  Cor.  5.  1.  for  we  A.  that  if  our  earthly  house 
10.  k.wc  no  man  after  the  flesh, A.rce  him  no  more 

1  Tim.  1.  8.  but  we  A.  that  the  law  is  good 

Heb.  10.30.for  we  A.  him  that  hath  said,  vengeance 

1  John  2.  3.  hereby  wek.  that  wek.  him,  if  we  keep 

5.  hereby  k.  we  that  we  are  in  him 

18.  whereby  we  k.  that  it  is  the  last  time 

3.  2.  but  we  k.  that  when  he  shall  appear 

14.  wc  A.  that  we  have  passed  from  death  to  life 

19.  hereby  ice  A.  that  we  are  of  the  truth 

24.  hereby  we  A.  that  he  abideth  in  us 

4.  6.  hereby  A.  we  the  spirit  of  truth  and  error 
13.  hereby  A.  wc  that  we  dwell  in  him 

5.  2.  by  this  we  k.  we  love  the  children  of  God 

15.  and  if  we  A.  that  he  heareth  us,  we  k.  that 
we  have  the  petitions  that  we  desire  of  him 

IS.  we  A.  whosoever  is  born  of  God,  sinneth  not 

19.  ire  A.  that  we  areof  God,  and  the  world  lieth 

20.  and  wc  k.  that  the  Son  of  God  is  come,  an 
understanding,  that  wc  mav  k.  him  that  is  true 

Ye  KNOW,  or  KNOW  ye. 

C!cn.  29.  5.  he  said,  A.  ye  Laban  the  son  of  Xahor? 
31.  6.  yc  k.  that  with  all  my  power  I  served  your 
44.  27.  ye  A.  that  my  wife  bare  me  two  sons 

Ezod.  16.  6.  at  even  ye  shall  A.  the  Lord  brought 
2.3.  9.  ye  k.  the  heart  of  a  stranger,  seeing  ye  were 

ytnn.  14.  34.  ye  .shall  A.  my  breach  of  jirornise 

10.  28.  ye  shall  A.  that  the'Lord  hath  sent  me 
.losh.  3.  10.  ye  shall  A.  the  livingGod  is  among  you 

23.  14.  and  yck.  in  all  your  hearls  and  souls 
.ludg.lS.  14.  ye  k.  there  is  in  these  houses  an  ephod 

1  Kings  ~-2.^.k.ye  thai  Ramoih  in  Gilead  is  ours? 

2  Kings  O.ll.ye  k.  the  man  and  his  communication 
.loh  13.  2.  what  ye  k.  the  same  do  I  know 
Ps.  100. 3.  A.  ye  that  the  Lord  he  is  God,  he  made 
Isa.  51.  7.  hearken,  ye  that  A.  righteousness 
.ler.  20.  15.  A.  ye  for  certain,  if  ye  put  me  to  death 

48.  17.  all  ye  that  A.  his  name,  say,  how  is 
Ezek.  14.  23.  ye  shall  A.  that  I  have  not  done 

17.  21.  ye  shall  A.  I  the  Lord  have  spoken  if, 

37.  14. 
.Inel  2. 27.  ye  shall  A.  that  I  am  in  midst  of  Israel 
Zech.  2.  9.  ye  shall  A.  the  Lord  hath  sent  ine,  6. 15. 
Mat.  7.  16.  ye  shall  A.  thein  by  their  fruits,  20. 

20.  25.  yc  A.  princes  of  the  Ge'ntiles,  Mark  10. 42. 

24.32.  ye  A.summer  nigh, JlfarA  13.28.  XwAc21.30. 

25.  13.  watch,  for  ye  A.  neither  day  nor  hour 
Mark  4. 13.  he  said  to  tliem,  A.  ye  not  this  parable? 
AKAe21.  31.  A.  ye  that  the  kingilom  of  God  is  nigh 
,Tohn  7.  28.  ye  both  A.  me,  and  know  whence  I  am 

8.  28.  yc  shall  A.  I  am  he  ||  32.  ye  shall  A.  the  truth 

H.49.t.  ye  nothing  ||  13.12.  A.  yc  what  I  have  done 

13. 17.  ifye  A.  thest"things,happy  areyeifdo  them 

14.  4.  whither  I  go  ye  A.  and  the  way  ye  A. 
7.  from  henceforth  ye  A.  him,  and  have  seen,  17. 
20.  ye  shall  A.  I  am  in  my  Father,  ami  you  in  me 

15.  18.  ye  A.  that  it  hated  me  bol'ore  it  hated  you 
.'?r«s2.22.  man  approved,  as  yc  yourselve.-i  also  it. 

10.  23.  ye  k.  how  that  it  is  unlawful  for  a  Jew 
15.  7.  brethren,  yc  k.  how  that  a  £ood  while  ago 
19.  25.  ye  A.  that' by  this  craft  v.e  have  our  wealth 


y 


KNO 


Jlil.s  20. 18. yc  k.  from  the  first  d^y  tliat  I  camo 

1  Cor.  12.  'i.  yc  k.  that  yo  were  GeiitilKS,  carried 
15  58.  ye  k.  your  labour  is  nut  in  vain  in  the  Lord 
Itj  15.  Iirethren,  j/e  k.  the  house  of  Stephanas 

2  Cor.  8.1).  yc  k.  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Ji:3u.s  Christ 
13.  G.  1  trusl  ye  simll  k.  we  are  not  reprobates 

Hal.  3.  7.  /;.  yc  that  tliuy  which  are  of  faith 
4.  13.  ye  k.  how  through  infirmities  I  preached 
y.ph.  5.  5.  for  this  ije.  k.  that  no  whoreniungor 
riiil.  2.  22.  yc  k.  the  proof  of  him,  (hut  as  a  son 

1  Thess  1.5.  as  ytA-.  what  manner  uf  men  we  were 
'2.  -i.  and  were  sliamefully  entreated,  as  ye  k. 

5.  nor  used  we  flattering  words,  as  ye  k. 

11.  ye  k.  how  we  e.xhoried  and  comforted 
3.  4.  even  as  it  came  to  pass,  and  yc  k. 
4.2.  ye  k.  what  commandments  we  gave  by  Lord 

2  Thcss.  2.  0.  and  now  ye  k.  what  withhoMeth 
Jfeb.  12.  IT.  ye  k.  w  hen  he  would  have  inherited 

13.  23.  k.  yc  that  our  brolherTimothy  is  set  at 

1  I'd.  1. 18.  ye  k.  that  ye  were  not  redeemed  witli 

2  /•*.«. 1.12.put  you  ill  remembrance,  tho"  yc  A-.them 

3.  17.  seeing  yc  k.  these  things  belore,  beware 

1  John  2. 20. yet.  all  tilings  ||  21. because  ye  k.  it 
2S).  if  yf  /.'.  lie  is  riglileou.s,  ye  k.  that  every  one 

'i.^.yek.  he  was  manifested  to  take  away  oui^. sins 
15.  ye  k.  no  murderer  hath  eternal  life  in  liim 

4.  2.  hereby  /.-.  ye  the  Siiirit  of  God,  every  spirit 

3  John  12.  and  yc  k.  that  our  record  is  true 

Ye  KNOW  nut,  or  KNOW  ye  nut. 

2  !?am.  3.  38.  k.  ye  not  that  there  is  a  prince  fallen 
2  Clir.  32. 13.  k.  yc  not  what  I  and  my  fathers  have 
Job  21.29.  have  not  asked,  do  yc  vol  k.  their  tokens 
Eiek.  17.  12.  k.  yenot  what  these  things  mean? 
Mat.  20.  22.  Jesus  said,  yc  k.  not  what  ye  ask 

24. 42.  ye  k.  not  what  hour  your  Lord  doth  come 
Jl/ar/t  4. 13.  he  said  to  them,  /.-.  ye  not  this  parable'! 

12.  24.  ye  err,  because  ye  k.  not  the  scrijxures 

13.  33.  watch,  for  yek.  not  when  the  time  is,  35. 
J,:ike0.o').yck.  not  wliatmanner  of  spirit  ye  be  of 
John  1.20.  standeth  one  among  you, whom  ye  k.not 

4.22.ye  worshipyc  k.not  whal!|32.meatyc  A.jiotof 

7.  2ri.  he  that  sent  me  is  true,  whom  ye  k.  not 

8.  19.  ye  neither  A",  nie  nor  my  Father 

P.  30.  that  ye  k.  not  from  whence  he  is,  and  yet 
Horn.  G.  3.  k.  ye  not  that  so  many  as  were  baptized 

If),  k.  ye  nut  that  to  whom  ye  yield  servants 
7.  1.  k.  yc  not, brethren,  fori  speak  to  them  jliat 

1  ri/r.3.1G.  k.  yc  not  yo  are  the  teinjile  of  G.<j. 15,11). 
S.O.A.yc  (luithat  a  little  leaven  Inavenelh  the  lump 
fi.  2.  doye  not  fc.  the  saints  shall  judge  the  world? 

3.  k.  yc  not  that  we  shall  judge  angels? 
0.  A",  ye  not,  the  uiuigliteous  shall  not  inherit 
\lj.  k.  ye  not,  that  he  which  is  joined  to  a  harlot 
0.  13.  do  i/e  not  k.  that  they  which  minister 
2 1. A.  If  not,l\i:a  llii'y  which  run  in  a  race, run  all 

2  Ciir.  ]":!.5.A.yf  nut  vaiirselves,lhat  Jesus  is  in  you 
Jiiin.  4.  4.  k.  yenot  that  the  friendship  of  the  world 

14.  ye  k.  nut  w-hat  shall  be  on  the  morrow 

1  John  2.21.  not  written, because  ye  k.  not  the  truth 

KN0VVK3T. 
Cm.  30.  2fi.  thon  k.  my  service  that  I  have  done 
2!).  thou  k.  how  I  have  served  tbee,and  thy  cattle 

47.  0.  and  if  thou  k.  any  man  of  activity  among 
Exoil.  10.  7.  A",  thou  not  that  Egypt  is  destroyed 

32.  22.  Ihon  A.  the  people  are  set  on  mischief 
M'um.  10.  31.  for  thou  k.  how  we  are  to  encamp 

20.  14.  thou  k.  the  travail  that  hath  befallen 
J)eut.'.  15.  the  diise.ises  of  Egypt,  which  thou  k. 

9.2.  the  chiiilrenof  the  Anakims,  svhom  thou  k. 

28.  ;Ki.  a  nation  thou  k.  not,  shall  eat  up 
Josh.  14.  6.  thou  A.  the  thing  that  the  Lord  said 
Ju  Iff.  l.'i.  11.  A.  thou  not  tho  Philistines  are  rulers 
J  Sam.28.!). woman  8aid,thouA.whatSaul  hath  done 
S.Siim.l.S.howA.lhou  thatSiiulandJonatli.be  dead 

2.2(i.  A.  thon  not  that  it  will  be  bitierncss  in  end? 

3.  2.5.  thou  A.  Abnur  the  son  of  A'er,  that  ho  came 
7.  20.  thou,  T,nrd,  k.  thy  servant,  1  Ckron.  17. 18. 
17.  8.  fur,  said  Ilusliai,  thou  A.  thy  father 

]  Kin<r.i  1.  18.  my  lord  the  king,  thou  k.  it  not 
2.  ,5.  thou  A.  also  what  Joab  did  to  me 
n.  thou  k.  what  thou  ouglitest  to  do  to  liinj 

15.  I'loii  A.  that  the  kingilom  was  mine 

44. thou  A.  nil  the  wickednts.i  thou  diilst  to  David 
P.  39.  who«'  he  irl  thou  A.lhou  only  A.  2  CAr.(i..30. 
S  h'inffi>-2.  3.  A. thou  the  Ld.will  lake  thy  ma«ter,5. 

4.  l.lhou  A.  Ilmt  thy  snrvaul  did  fear  the  Lord 
Job  10.  7.  tlii>u  A.  that  I  am  not  wicked 

)j.  9.  what  A.  ihon  thai  we  know  not? 
W.  4.  k.  thou  not  this  of  idd,  since  man  was 
'M.  33.  therefore  opcak  what  IIkui  A. 
SH.S.  who  hath  laiil  rnca"urea  of  earth, ifllioii  A.? 
13.  breadth  of  the  clirlh,  declare,  if  thou  A.  it  all 
21.  A.  thou  it,  bocniisc  thou  wast  thon  b(jrn? 
33.  A.  thou  the  nrdinanre*  of  hi-avon? 
3"'.  1.  A.  thou  wh«n  the  wild  goatsj  hrinj  forth,  2. 
P.ial.AO.  9. not  refrained,  OLd.  thou  k.Jer.  15. 15. 
69.  ."S.  O  God,  thou  k.  my  foolishness 
139.  2.  thou  A.  my  down-sitting  and  up-rising 

4.  lo.  O  Lord,  thou  A.  it  alliii(i'ther 
T)  or.  27. 1.  thou  A.  not  what  a  day  may  bring  forth 
32G 


KNO 

Eccl.  11.  2.  thou  A.  not  what  evil  shall  be 

5.  as  thou  A.  imt  what  is  tho  way  of  the  S])irit, 

even  so  thou  A.  nut  the  works  of  God 

6.  for  thou  k.  not  whether  shall  prosper 

Isa.  55.  5.  thou  shalt  call  a  nation  that  thou  A.  not 
.Jcr.  5.  15.  a  nation  whoso  language  thou  A.  not 
12.  3.  but  thou,  O  Lord,  A.  me,  thou  hast  seen  me 
15.  14.  into  a  land  which  thou  A.  not,  17.  4. 

17.  11).  nor  have  1  desired  the  woeful  day,  thou  A. 

18.  23.  thou  A.  all  their  counsel  to  slay  ine 

33.  3.  I  will  shew  thee  things  which  tiiou  A.  not 
Kick.  37.3.  and  I  answered,  U  Lord  God,  thou  A. 
Van.  10. 20.  said,  A.  thou  wherefore  I  come  to  thee 
Zech.  4.5.  angel  said,  A.  thou  not  what  these  be,  13. 
wVuM5.12.A.thou  that  the  Pharisees  were  oHended 
Mark  10. 19.  thou  A.  commandments,  J.ukeVi.  20. 
J^uke  22.  34.  shalt  thrice  deny  that  thou  A.  me 
John  1.48.  A'alhanael,  said,  whence  A.  lliou  me? 

3.  10.  art  thou  a  master,  and  A.  not  these  things? 
Ti.  7.  Jesus  said,  wliat  1  do,  thou  A.  not  now 
l(i.  30.  we  are  sure  thou  A.  all  things,  21.  17. 

19.  10.  A.  thou  not  I  have  jiower  to  erucity 
21. 15.  yea.  Lord,  thou  A.  that  I  love  thee,  IG. 

JJcts  1.  24.  tlidu  which  A.  the  hearts  of  all  men 
25.10.  1  have  done  no  wrong,  us  thou  very  well  A 
Horn.  2. 18.  A.  his  will,  and  ajiprovest  the  things 

1  Cor.  7. 16.  what  A.  thou,  O  wife,  A.  thou,  O  man? 

2  Tim.  1.15.  thou  A.  that  all  they  in  Asia  be  turned 
18.  how  he  ministered  to  iiie,  thou  A.  very  well 

Rev.  3. 17.  and  A.  not  that  thou  art  wretched,  blind 
7.  14.  and  1  said  nnto  him,  sir,  thou  A. 

KNOWETH. 
Qcn.  33.  13.  my  lord  A.  the  children  are  tender 
Lev.  5.  3.  when  he  A.  of  it,  ho  shall  bo  guilty,  4. 
Drut.  2.  7.  ho  A.  thy  walking  thro'  this  wihleme.ss 

34.  6.  no  man  A.  of  Moses'  sepulchre  to  this  day 
Josh.  22.  22.  the  Lord  God  of  gods,  he  A.  and  Israel 

1  .Sum. 3.13.  Eli's  house  for  the  iniijuity  which  he  A. 

20.  3.  tliy  father  certainly  A.  tbat-I  found  grace 
23.  17.  and  that  also  Saul  my  father  A. 

2  Smn.  14.  22.  thy  servant  A.  that  I  found  grace 
17.  10.  all  Israel  A.  thy  father  is  a  mighty  man 

Job  11.  11.  he  A.  vain  men,  ho  soelh  wickedness 
15.23.he  A.tlie  day  of  darkness  is  ready  at  his  hand 
23.  10.  but  he  k.  the  way  that  1  take 
28.  7.  there  is  a  path  which  no  fowl  A 
23.  God  undeistandeth  and  A.  the  place  thereof 
34.25.  therefore  he  A. their  works  and  overlurneth 

Psal.  1.  G.  tho  Lord  A.  the  way  of  the  righteous 
37.  18.  the  Lord  A.  the  days  of  the  upright 
44.  21.  for  he  A.  tlie  secrets  of  the  heart 
74.  9.  nor  is  there  any  among  us  that  A.  how  Ion; 
94.  11.  Lord  A.  the  thoughts  of  man  are  vanity 
103. 14.  ho  A.  our  frame, rcmemboreth  we  are  dust 
104.19.moon  for  3oasons,lhe  sun  A.his  going  down 
13!^.  G.  but  the  proud  he  k.  afar  olT 
139. 14.  thy  works,  and  that  my  soul  A.  right  well 

Prov.  9. 13.  foolish  woman  is  simple  and  A.nolhin_ 
14.10.  the  heart  A.  his  ownbitterness,and  stranger 

Keel.  G.8.  the  poor,  that  A.  to  walk  before  the  living 
7.  22.  thine  own  heart  A.  Ihou  hast  cursed  others 
9.  1.  no  man  A.  either  love  or  hatred  by  all  that 

/ia.l.3.tho  Qx  A.his  owner,lhe  ass  his  master's  crib 

Jt)-.8.7.lhe  stork  A.  her  appointed  times,  and  turtle 

9.  24.  glory,  that  he  understandeth  and  A.  mo 
Dan.'i.  22.  he  k.  what  is  in  tlio  darkness,  and  light 
jVaA. 1.7. Lord  is  good,  ho  A.  them  that  trust  in  him 
Zcph. '.i.5.  hcfailelh  not,but  the  unjust  A.  no  shame 
Mat.  fi.  8.  your  Father  k.  what  things  yo  need 

32.A.ye  have  need  of  all  these  things,  AuAc  12.30. 

11.27.  no  man  A.  the  Son  but  the  Fallier,  nor  any 

A.  the  Father  save  tlie  Son,  J.ukc  10.  22. 

21.  3C.  of  that  day  A.  no  man,  Mark  13.  32. 
J.iike  10.  1.5.  yo  justify,  hut  God  A.  your  hearts 
/(/An  7. 15.  saying,  how  A.  tlii.s  man  letters? 

27.  when  Christ  comith,  no  man  A.  whence  he  is 

10.  15.  as  the  Father  A.  me  \\  14.  17.  nor  A.  him 
19.35.  he  saw  it,  and  ho  A.  that  ho  saith  true 

.^cts  15.  8.  God  which  A.  tho  hearts  bare  witness 
2G.  2G.  for  tho  king  A.  of  these  things  before  whom 
Horn.  8.  27.  he  A.  what  is  tho  mind  <if  the  Spirit 

1  Cor.  2.  11.  for  what  ninn  A.  the  things  of  a  man, 

even  so  the  things  of  God  A.  no  man  but  Spirit 
8.2.il'any  man  think  he  A.  any  thing,  he  A.  nothing 

2  Cor.  II.  11.  because  I  love  vou  not?  God  A. 
31.  God  A.  I  lie  not  ||  12. 2. 1  cannot  tell,  God  A.3. 

2  Tim.  2.  19.  the  Lord  A.  them  that  are  his 
rum.  4. 17.  to  him  that  A.  todogooil  and  doeth  not 
•J  I'rt.  2.  9.  the  Lord  A.  how  to  deliver  the  jodlv 
1  .rohn  3. 20.  and  A.  nil  things  ||  4.  G.  ho  that  A.  God 

4.  7.  he  that  loveth  ki  born  of  tlod,  and  A.  God 
Iter. '2.  17.  a  new  namn  written,  which  no  man  k. 

12.  12.  bncnu'o  he  A.  tliot  he  liaih  Imt  a  short  time 

UTio  K.VOWETII,  .ir  KNdWI'.TII  not. 

1  A'ni;o's  1.  U.doth  r.-i";n,and  Dav.  our  I.d.  A.  iln 

Ki^lh.A.  14.  who  A  whither  Ihon  art  come  to  king 


Job  12.  3.  yea,  who  k.  not  such  tliinp  ns  thew? 
9.  who  k.  not  in  all  tlvse,  ih.at  the  hand  of  Lord 
14.  21.  his  don't  come  lo  honour,  lie  A.  it  not 
18.  21.  thin  U  tho  place  uf  liiin  that  k.  not  God 


KNO 

Job  28.13.manA. not  theprice  tliereof,nor  is  it  found 
35.  15.  ho  hath  visited  lu  anger,  yet  he  A.  it  net 

Psal.  39.G.  riches,and  A.  >iot  who  shall  gather  thera 
90.  11.  who  k.  the  power  of  thine  anger? 
92.6.a  brutish  mauA.not.nor  a  fool  understand  thia 

Prov.  7.23.  and  A.  nut  tliat  it  is  for  his  lifo 
9.18.  but  lie  A.  not  iliat  llie  dead  are  there 
24.  22.  and  u;ho  A.  the  ruin  of  ihein  both? 

Keel.  2.  19.  who  A.  whether  he  be  wise  or  a  fool 
3.  21.  who  A.  the  spirit  of  man  that  goeth'upward 
G.  12.  for  wlw  k.  what  is  good  for  man  in  life 

8.  1.  icho  A.  tlie  interpretation  of  a  thing? 
7,  for  he  A.  not  that  which  shall  he 

9.  12.  for  man  also  A.  not  his  time,  as  the  fishes 

10.  15.  because  be  A.  7tot  how  to  go  lo  the  city 
Ija.  29.  15.  and  they  say,  who  seeth  us,who  k.  usl 
//«.«.  7. 9.  gray  hairs  here  and  there,  yet  he  A.  no< 
.loci  2.  14.  who  k.  if  he  will  return  and  repent 
.Mark  4.27.  and  seed  shouldgrow  up,  he  A.  not  how 
./oA7>  7.  49.  bill  this  jieople,  who  A.  not  the  law 

12.35.walketh  in  darkness,A. not  whither  he  goetli 
15.  15.  the  servant  A.  not  what  his  lord  dooih 
Jicts  19. 35.  what  man  that  A.  not  that  Ephesians 
1  .luhn  2.1].walketh  indarkness,A.  not  whither  go. 

3.  1.  therelbre  thi  world  A.  us  nut,  it  knew  him  not 

4.  8.  he  that  loveth  not,  A.  7iot  God,  for  God  is  love 

KNOWING. 
Gen.  3.  5.  yc  shall  be  as  gods,  A.  good  and  evil 
43.  T  7.  A.  could  we  know,  he  would  say,  bring 

1  Kings  2.  32.  slew  them,  my  father  David  not  A. 

2  Chron.  2.  f  12.  to  David  a  wi.=e  son,  A.  prudence 
Mat.  9.  4.  Jesus  A.  their  thoughts,  Luke  11.  17. 

22.29.  ye  err, not  A.  ihe  scriptures  nor  power  ofG. 

Mark  5.  30.  Jesus  immediately  A.  in  himself  virtue 
33.  but  the  woman  A.  what  was  done  in  her 
6.  20.  feared  John,  A.  that  he  was  a  just  man 
]2. 15.  but  he  k.  their  hypocrisy,  said  to  them 

Luke  8.  53.  tliey  laughed,  A.  that  she  was  dead 
9.  .33.  and  one  for  Elias,  not  A.  what  he  said 

./oA?i  13.  3.  Jesus  A.  the  Father  had  given  all  things 
18.4.Jesus  A.all  things  that  should  come  upon  him 
19.  23.  Jesus  A.  that  all  things  were  accomplished 
21. 12.  none  durst  ask  him,  A.  that  it  was  the  Lord 

Jlcts  2.  30.  k.  that  God  had  sworn  with  an  oath 

5.  7.  his  wife  not  A.  what  was  done,  came  in 
18.  25.  he  taught,  A.  only  the  baptism  of  John 
20.22.  not  A.  the  things  that  shall  befall  me  there 

Rom.  1.  32.  who  A.  the  judgment  of  God  that  they 

2.  4.  not  A.  that  the  goodness  of  God  Icadelh  tho 
5.  3.  A.  that  tribulation  worketli  patience 

0. 6.  A.  this,  that  onr  old  man  is  crucified  with  him 

9.  A.  Chr.  being  raised  from  riead,dieth  no  more 

13.  11.  A.  the  time,  now  it  is  high  time  to  awake 

2  Cur.  1.7.  A.  that  as  ye  are  partakers  of  sufferinga 

4.  14.  A  that  he  which  raised  the  Lord  Jesus 

5.  6.  A.  that  whilst  we  are  at  home  in  the  body 
11.  A.  the  terror  of  tlie  Lord,  we  persuade  men 

Gal.  2.  10.  A.  Ihaln  man  is  not  justified  by  the  law 
Kph.  6.  8.  A.  that  whatsoever  good  any  man  doeth 

9.  A.  that  your  master  is  in  heaven.  Col.  4.  1. 
Phil.  1.  17.  A.  that  I  am  set  for  defence  of  gospel 
Col.  3. 24.  A.  that  of  the  L.  ye  shall  receive  reward 
1  Thess.  1.  4.  A.  beloved,  your  election  of  God 
1  Tim.  1.9.  A.  this, that  the  law  is  made  for  lawless 
C.4.is  proud,A.niithing,but  doling  about  questions 
2Tim.2.23.  questions,  A.  that  they  do  gender  strifes 

3.  14.  A.  of  whom  thon  hast  learned  thorn 
Tit.  3.  ]  1.  A.  that  he  that  is  such,  is  subverted 
Philcm.  21.  A.  that  thou  wilt  do  more  than  I  say 
//■pj. 10.34.  A.  ye  have  in  heaven  a  better  substance 

11.  6.  he  went  out,  not  A.  whither  he  went 
.Tarn.  1.  3.  A.  this,  tliiit  tho  trying  of  your  faith 

3.  1.  A.  we  shall  receive  greater  condemnation 

1  Pet.  3. 9.  blessing,  A.  that  ye  are  thereunto  called 
5.  9.  A.  the  same  afllictions  aro  accomplished  in 

2  Pft.  1.  14.  A.  that  shortly  I  must  nut  otfthistaher. 
20.  A.  this,  that  no  prophecy  of  scripture  is  of 

3.  3.  A.  that  there  slmllcome  scofforsin  last  days 

KNOWLEDGE 
Signifies,  [1]  7'Ac  essential  and  infinite  imili-r- 
stamlin/r  uf  God,hy  which  he  ktwws  every  thinp 
in  the  in,i.it  prrfcet  manner,  lSam.2.3.  [2]  .^ 
bare  un<lrrslandin<r  of  divine  truths,  withovt 
failk  in  Christ  and  love  to  our  Christian  bre- 
thrrii,  1  Cor.  8.  1.  [3]  .'?  riVAl  understanding 
and  rnncrption  of  spiritual  Ihinrrs,  2  Cor.  C.  6. 
'4]  That  knnwledfre  of  God's  will,  and  of  the 
icay  uf  salvation,  which  is  in  C:hrist  in  its 
hiffhr.^t  perfection,  and  which  by  him  is  reveal- 
ed In  his  people,  and  imprinted  on  thrir  minds 
and  hearts  by  his  Spirit,  so  as  to  product 
failh.luvr,  and  obedience,  Isn..53. 11.  [5]  Chris- 
linn  prudence  and  holy  rjperirncr  in  the  ways 
uf  God.  2<-or.8.7.  2  Pel.  1.5,6.  fO)  That  impcr 
i'lrt  knoirlrdire  pf  divine  lhin<rs  which  we  Aott 
'in  this  world,  1  Cor.  13.  8.  [7]  The  gift  of 
interprrtin/r  dreams,  Dan.  5.  12.  It  is  [1^ 
Natural,  that  knowledge  which  men  have  hy 
the  light  of  nature,  Rom.  1.  21,  28.  Judo  10 
[2]  Aitificlil,  such  as  is  bestowed  on  men  for 


KNO 

Jcvising  curiovs  and  excellent  pieces  of  work- 
vtanskip,  Exod.  35.  31.  [3]  Legal,  namely, 
that  knowledge  of  our  guilt  and  danger  wkich 
were  taught  by  the  law,  Kom.  3.  20.  [7.  7.  [4] 
Evangelical,  such  is  that  knowledge  of  Christ, 
and  of  salvation  through  him,  which  the  gos- 
pel acquaints  us  with,  'J  Cor.  '2.  14. 

Oen.  2.  9.  and  the  tree  o(  k.  of  good  and  evil,  17. 

Kzod.  31.  3.  I  have  filled  Bezaleel  in  k.  35.  31. 

/.cc.  4.  23.  or  if  his  sin  come  to  his  k.  28. 

JVum.  24.  16.  and  knew  the  k.  of  the  most  High 

Jiut/i  2.  10.  that  ihou  shouldest  take  k.  of  mo 

19.  blessed  be  he  that  did  lake  k.  of  thee 
1  Sam.  2.  3.  for  the  Lord  is  a  God  of  k. 

23.  23.  see,  take  k.  of  all  the  lurking  places 

1  Kings  9.  27.  Hiram  sent  in  the  navy,  shipmen 

that  had  k.  of  the  sea,  2  Chr.  8.  18. 

2  Ckrvn.  1.  10.  give  me  k.  that  1  may  go  out 
11.  but  hast  asked  k.  ||  12.  k.  is  granted  thee 

JVeA.  10.  28.  every  one  having  k.  6ei)arated 
Job  15.  2.  should  a  wise  man  utter  vain  k.? 
21.  14.  for  we  desire  not  the  k.  of  thy  ways 
22.  shall  any  teach  God  A',  seeing  ho  judgeth 

33.  3.  and  my  lips  shall  utter  k.  clearly 

34.  2.  give  ear  unto  me,  ye  that  have  k. 

36. 3. 1  will  fetch  my  k.  from  afar,  and  will  ascribe 

4  he  that  is  perfect  in  k.  is  with  thee,  37.  IG. 
Psal  19.  2.  and  night  unto  niglit  slieweth  k. 
73.  11.  and  is  there  k.  in  the  most  High  ? 

94. 10.  he  that  teachetii  man  k.  shall  not  he  know  ? 
119.  66.  teach  me  good  judgment  and  k. 

139.  6.  such  k.  is  too  wonderful  for  me 
144.  3.  what  is  man,  that  thou  takest  k.  of  him? 
Prov.  1.  4.  to  give  the  young  man  /;.  and  discretion 
7.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  k. 

22.  fools  hate  k.  ||  2.  3.  if  thou  criest  after  it. 
29.  for  that  they  hated  k.  and  did  not  choose 

2.  ().  out  of  his  mouth  cometli  i.and  understanding 
10.  and  when  k.  is  pleasant  to  tliy  soul 

3.  20.  by  his  k.  the  depths  are  broken  up 
5.  2.  and  that  thy  lips  may  keep  k. 

8.  9.  they  are  right  to  them  that  find  k. 

10.  k.  rather  than  gold  ||  12.  and  find  out  k. 

9.  10.  and  the  k.  of  the  Holy  is  understanding 

10.  14.  wise  men  lay  up  k.  but  the  foolish 

11.  9.  but  through  k.  shall  the  just  be  delivered 

12.  1.  whoso  loveth  instruction  lovelh  k. 

23.  a  prudent  man  concealeth  k.  but  fools 

13.  16.  every  prudent  man  dealeth  wilh  k. 

14.  6.  k.  is  easy  to  him  that  understandeth 
7.  thou  perceivest  not  in  him  the  lips  of  A. 
IS.  but  the  prudent  are  crowned  with  k. 

15.  2.  the  tongue  of  the  wise  useth  k.  aright 
7.  the  lips  of  the  wise  disperse  k. 

14.  the  heart  that  halh  understanding  secketh  k. 

17.  27.  he  that  hath  k.  spareih  his  words 

18.  15.  the  heart  of  the  prudent  gettetli  k.  and  the 

ear  of  the  wise  seeketh  k. 

19.  25.  reprove,  and  he  will  understand  k. 

27.  cease,  my  son,  to  err  from  the  words  of  k. 

20.  15.  the  lips  of  k.  are  a  precious  jewel 

21. 11.  when  the  wise  is  instructed,  he  receiveth  A. 
2i.  12.  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  preserve  k. 

17.  and  apply  thine  heart  unto  my  k. 

20.  written  excellent  things  in  counsels  and  k. 
23.  12.  and  apply  thine  ears  to  the  words  of  A:. 
24.4.  by  A.  shall  the  chambers  bo  filled  with  riches 

5.  yea,  a  man  of  A.  increaseth  strength 
14.  so  shall  the  A.  of  wisdom  be  to  thy  soul 
28.  2.  by  a  man  of  A.  the  stale  shall  be  prolonged 

30.3.  nor  learned  wisdom,  nor  have  the  A.  of  Holy 
Ercl.  1.  10.  yea,  my  heart  had  experience  of  A. 

18.  he  that  increaseth  A.  increaseth  sorrow 
2.  21.  for  there  is  a  man  whose  labour  is  in  A. 

20.  God  givclh  to  a  man  wis<lom,  k.  and  joy 
7.12.bnt  the  excellency  of  A.  is  that  wisdom  giveth 
9.  10.  nor  A.  in  the  grave,  whither  thou  goeat 
13.  9.  the  preacher  still  taught  the  people  A. 
Isa.  8.  4.  for  before  the  child  shall  have  A.  to  cry 
11.  2.  the  spirit  of  A.  and  of  the  fear  of  the  Lord 

28.9.  whom  shall  he  teach  A.?  them  that  are  wean. 
32.  4.  the  heart  of  the  rash  shall  understand  A. 
33. 6.  wisdom  and  k.  shall  be  stability  of  thy  times 
40.  14.  who  taught  him  A.  {|  44. 19.  nor  is  there  A. 
44.  25.  and  maketh  their  A.  foolish 

47. 10.  thy  wisdom  and  thy  A.  hath  perverted  thee 

53. 11.  by  his  A.  my  righteous  servant  justify  many 
Jcr.  3.  1,5.  pastors,  which  shall  feed  you  with  A. 

10. 14.  every  man  is  brutish  in  his  A.  every  founder 
11.  18.  the  Lord  hath  given  me  A.  of  it 
51. 17.  every  man  is  brutish  by  his  A.  every  founder 
Dan.  1.4.  children  well  favoured  and  cunning  in  A. 
17.  God  gave  them  A.  ||  2. 21 .  he  giveth  A.  to  tliem 
5. 12.  excellent  spirit  and  A.  were  found  in  Daniel 

12.4.  many  run  to  and  fro,  and  A.  shall  be  increased 
Hos.4.  6.  my  people  arc  dcsi  roved  for  lack  of  A.  be- 
cause thou  hast  rejected  A.  I  will  reject  thee 

W(ii.2. 14.  the  earth  filled  with  the  A.  of  the  Lord 
Mai.  2.  7.  for  the  priest's  lips  should  keep  A. 
■Mat.  14.  35.  the  men  of  iliat  place  had  A.  of  him 
327 


KNO 

Lukel.Tl.  to  give  A.  of  salvat.  by  remission  of  sins 
11.  52.  ye  have  taken  away  the  key  of  A. 

Jlcts  4.  13.  they  marvelled  and  took  k.  of  them 
24.  22.  having  more  [lerlbct  k.  of  that  way 

Horn.  1.  28.  did  not  like  to  retain  God  in  their  A, 

2.  20.  which  hast  the  form  of  A.  and  of  truth 

3.  20.  no  flesh  juslilied,  for  by  law  is  the  A.  of  sin 

10.  2.  they  have  a  zeal,  but  not  according  to  A. 
15.  14.  that  ye  also  are  filled  wilh  all  k.  able  to 

1  Cor.  1.  5.  are  enriched  in  all  utterance  and  all  A 
8.  1.  we  know  that  wo  all  have  A.  A.  putfeth  up 

7.  howbeit  there  is  not  in  every  man  that  A. 

10.  if  any  man  see  thee  which  hast  A.  sit  at  meat 

11.  through  thy  A.  shall  thy  weak  brother  jierisb 
12.8.  to  another  the  word  of  A.  by  the  same  Spirit 
1.3.2.  though  I  understand  all  mysteries  and  all  A. 

8.  whether  there  be  A.  it  shall  vanish  away 
14.  6.  except  I  s|)eak  to  you  by  revelation  or  A. 

2  Cor.  2.  14.  maketh  manifest  the  savour  of  his  k. 
4.6.  to  give  the  light  of  the  A.  of  the  glory  of  God 
6.6.  by  pureness,  by  A.  by  long-suffering,  by  kindn. 
8.  7.  as  ye  abound  in  faith,  utterance,  and  A. 

11.  6.  though  I  be  rude  in  speech,  yet  not  in  A. 
Eph.  1. 17.  may  give  you  wisdom  in  the  A.  of  him 

3.  4.  when  ye  read,  ye  may  understand  my  A. 
19.  the  love  of  Christ  which  passetli  A. 

4. 13.  till  we  come  in  the  unity  of  the  A.  of  the  Son 
Phil.  1.  9.  that  your  love  may  abound  more  in  A. 

3.  8. 1  count  all  things  but  loss  for  the  A.  of  Christ 
CoM.9.  that  ye  might  be  filled  with  the  A.  of  his  will 

2.3.  in  whom  are  hid  the  treasures  of  wisd.  and  A. 

3.  10.  jmt  on  the  new  man  which  is  renewed  in  A. 

1  Tim.  2.  4.  all  men  to  come  to  the  A.  of  the  truth 
2 '/"('m.  3. 7.  never  able  to  come  to  the  A.  of  the  truth 
Hcb.  10.  26.  if  we  sin  after  we  have  received  the  A. 
./aH!.3.13.  who  is  a  wise  man,  and  endued  with  A..' 
l/'e(.3.7.husbands  dwell  with  them  according  to  A. 

2  Pet.  1.  3.  thro'  the  A.  of  him  that  hath  called  us 
5.  add  to  virtue  A.  and  to  A.  temiiernnce 

8.  nor  unfruitful  in  the  A.  of  our  Lord  Jes.  Christ 
3. 18.  grow  in  grace  and  in  the  A.  of  our  Lord  Jesus 

KNOWLEDGE  of  God. 
Prov.  2.  5.  then  shalt  thou  find  the  A.  of  God 
Hos.  4. 1.  there  is  no  truth,  nor  A.  o/  God'ui  the  land 
6.().desired  the  A.o/  (?o<i  more  than  burnt-ofl'orings 
iJo«.  11.33.  the  riches  both  of  wisdom,  and  A.o/ Tr. 

1  Cor.  15.  34.  for  some  have  not  the  A.  of  Gud 
2CV)r.l0.5.  high  thing  exalteth  itself  against  A.o/  G. 
Col.  1.  10.  and  increasing  in  the  A.  of  God 

2  Pet.  1.  2.  peace  be  multiiiliud,  thro'  the  A.  of  God 

KNOWLEDGE  of  the  Lord. 
2  Chrov.  30.  22.  that  taught  the  good  A.  of  the  T.ord 
Isa.  11.9.  the  earthshalfbe  full  oftlie  A.  of  the  Lord 
2  Pet.  2. 20.  escaped  pollution  thro'  the  A.  of  the  L. 

JVo  KNOWLEDGE. 
Deut.\.39.  your  cbildr.  which  in  that  day  had  no  A. 
Psal.  14. 4.  have  the  workers  of  initiuity  no  A.  53.  4, 
/ia.  5.13.  gone  into  captiv.  because  ihoy  hn\enok. 
45.  20.  they  have  no  A.  that  set  Uj)  their  images 
58.  3.  we  afflicted  our  soul,  and  thou  takest  no  A. 
Jcr.  4.  22.  but  to  do  good,  they  have  710  A. 

Without  KNOWLEDGE. 
JVK7«.15.24.commilted  without  A.  of  the  congregat 
./ob  34.35.  Job  hath  spoken  without  A.  and  wisdom 
3.5.  Hi.  he  multiplieth  words  without  A. 
36. 12.  they  shall  perish  by  sword,  and  die  icith.  A. 
38.2.  darkeneth  counsel  by  words  without  k.  42.3. 
Proo.I9.2.  it  isnotgond  that  Ihe  aoa\  he  without  k. 

KNOWN. 
Gcn."4.  16.  was  a  >ir°;in,  nor  had  any  man  A.  her 
^Eiod.  2.  14.  Moses  said,  surely  this  thing  is  A. 
21.  36.  if  it  he  A.  that  the  ox  hath  used  to  push 
33.  16.  for  wherein  shall  it  be  A.  here  that  I  and 
/.CO.  4.  14.  when  the  sin  they  have  sinned  is  A. 
5. 1.  is  a  witness  whether  he  hath  seen  or  A.  of  it 
J^'um.  31.  17.  kill  every  woman  tliat  lialli  A.  man 
/><"«£.  1.13.  take  wise  men,  and  A.  among  tribes,  15. 
21.  1.  and  it  be  not  k.  who  halh  slain  him 
.Tosh.  24. 31.  and  which  had  A.  the  works  of  the  Ld. 
1  Sam.  6.  3.  and  it  shall  be  A.  to  you  why  his  hand 
1  Kings  18.  .36.  let  it  be  A.  that  Ihou  art  God  in  Isr. 
Ezra  4.  12.  be  it  k.  to  tne  king,  13.  j  5.  8. 
JVr/i.  4.  15.  when  enemies  heard  that  it  was  A.  to  us 
F.sth.  2.22.  the  thing  was  A.  to  INIordecai  who  tol<l  it 
Psal.  9.  16.  the  Lc;a  i*  A.  by  the  judgment  which 
31.  7.  thou  hast  A.  my  soul  in  adversities 
48.  3.  God  is  A.  in  her  palaces  for  a  lefuge 
67. 2.  that  thy  way  may  be  A.  on  earth,  thy  health 
69.  19.  thou  hast  A.  my  reproach  and  my  shame 
76. 1.  in  Judah  is  God  A.  his  name  is  great  in  Isr. 

77.  19.  thy  way  in  the  sea,  thy  footsteps  are  not  A. 

78.  3.  sayings  of  old,  which  we  have  heard  and  k. 

79.  10.  let  him  bo  A.  among  the  heath,  in  our  sight 
88.  12.  shall  thy  wonders  be  A.  in  the  dark? 

91. 14.  set  him  on  hiffh,  because  he  hath  A. my  name 
119.  79.  those  that  have  A.  thy  testimonies 
l.">2.  f  have  A.  ofold  thou  Imsl  found. I  hero  for  ever 
139. 1.  O  Lord,  thou  hast  searched  me,  and  A.  me 
Prop.  10.9.  but  lie  that  pervert,  his  ways  shall  be  A 


12. 16.  a  fool's  wrath  is  presently  A.  but  a  prudcntj  Rom.  9.  22.  God  willing  to  make  his  power  A 


KNO 

Prnr.  20. 11.  a  child  is  k.  by  his  doings  wliether  hii 
31.23.  her  husband  is  A.  in  the  gates,  when  he  sitt. 

£11:^5.3.  a  fool's  voice  is  A.  by  multitude  of  words 
6.  10.  and  it  is  A.  thai  it  is  man,  nor  may  contend 

Isa.  12. 5.  excellent  things,  this  is  k.  in  all  the  eaitli 
19.  21.  and  the  Lord  shall  he  A.  to  Egypt 
61.  9.  their  seed  shall  be  A.  among  the  Gentiles 
6li.  14.  hand  of  llie  Lord  shall  bo  A.  to  his  servanl8 

.Jer.  5.  5.  for  they  have  A.  the  way  of  the  Lord 
28.  9.  then  shall  prophet  be  A.  the  Lord  sent  liira 

Eiek.  30.  32.  sailli  the  Lord  God,  be  it  A.  to  you, 
Jicts  4.  10.  I  13.  :i8.  \  28.  28. 
38.  23.  I  will  be  A.  in  the  eyes  of  many  nationa 

Dan.  3.  18.  but  if  not,  he  it  A.  to  thee,  O  king 

4.  26.  after  thou  shall  have  A.  the  heavens  rule 
.4;«o.s3.2.  you  only  have  I  A.  of  all  families  of  eanh 
'Aech.  14.  7.  a  day  which  shall  bo  A.  to  the  Lord 
Mat.  12.  7.  but  if  ye  had  A.  what  this  meant 

33.  the  tree  is  A.  by  his  fruit,  J.ukc  6.44. 
24.43.  if  the  good  man  of  lionschad  A.  Ai.Af  12.39. 
Luke  7. 39.  il  he  were  a  prophet,  he  would  have  A. 
19.  42.  saying,  if  ihou  liadst  A.  in  this  thy  day 
24.35.  how  he  was  A.  of  them  in  breaking  of  bread 
John  7.  4.  ho  himself  seeketh  to  be  A.  openly 
8. 19.  nor  know  mo  nor  my  Father,  if  yc  had  A.  me 
ye  should  have  A.  my  Father  also,  14.  7. 
10.  14.  I  know  my  sheeji.  and  am  A.  of  mine 
17.  7.  now  they  have  A.  ||  8.  and  have  A.  surely 
25. 1  have  A.  thto,  these  have  A.  that  thou  sent  1110 
18. 15.  that  discijile  which  was  A.  to  high-priest,  lO. 
Jicts  1.  19.  and  it  was  A.  to  all  dwellers  at  Jerus 
2. 14.  be  this  A.  unto  you,  and  lieiirken  to  my  words 
9.  24.  hut  their  laying  await  was  A.  of  Saul 
42.it  was  A.lhrougliout  all  Jojipa,  many  believed 
15. 18.  A.  unto  God  are  all  his  w  orks  from  begiiin 

19.  17.  this  was  A.  to  aii  the  Jews  and  Greeks 
22.  30.  he  would  have  k.  the  certainty,  23.  28. 

/i«m.  1.  19.  because  that  which  may  be  A.  of  God 
11.34.  who  halh  A.  the  mind  of  Lord,  1  Cor.  2.  16. 

1  Cor.  2.8.  for  had  they  A.  it  ||  8.3.  sanu' is  A.  of  him 

13.  12.  then  shall  I  know,  even  as  t  also  am  A. 

14.  7.  how  shall  it  be  A.  what  is  piped  or  harped 
9.  how  shall  it  be  A.  what  is  spoken  7 

2  Cor.  3.  2.  arc  our  episiJe  A.  and  read  of  all  moil 

5.  16.  though  we  have  .v.  Christ  after  the  flesh 

6.  9.  as  unknown  and  yet  well  A.  as  dying  and 
Gul.  4.  9.  after  ye  have  A.  God  or  arc  A.  ol  God 
Eph.  3. 10.  might  be  k.  bv  church  the  wisd.  of  God 
Phil.  4.  5.  let  your  monc-ation  be  A.  to  all  men 
2  Tim.  3.  10.  thou  hast  lully  A.  my  doctrine 

15.  from  a  child  thou  hast  A.  the  holy  scriptures 
4.  17.  tlint  by  mc  the  preaching  might  be  fully  A. 

1  .Tohn  2.  13.  I  write,  because  ye  have  A.  him 
4.  16.  we  have  A.  and  be'jevcd  the  love  God  hath 

2  John  1.  and  all  they  that  have  A.  the  truth 
Made  or  madcst  KNOWN. 

Gen.  45.1. while  Joseph  iitailc  himself  A. to  brethren 
jVcA.  9. 14.  and  madcst  A.  to  them  thy  holy  sabbath 
Psal.  98.  2.  the  Lord  hath  made  A.  his  salvation 
103.  7.  he  made  A.  his  ways  to  Moses,  his  acts 
Pro!\14.33.that  which  is  in  ihemidstof  fi)olsis7;/.A. 
22. 19. 1  have  mofic  A.  to  ihee  this  day,  even  to  thee 
Ezek.  20.  5.  and  made  myself  A.  to  them,  9. 
i)on.2.I5.then  Arioch  iH([i/clhe  thing  A.  to  Daniel 
17.  Daniel  made  the  thing  A,  to  Ilananiah 
23.hastma.lA.to  me,  joa.  A.  tous  the  king's  matter 
t08.  a  God  in  heaven  liuth  made  A.  to  the  king 
45.  the  great  God  haih  made  A.  to  the  king 
Hos.  5. 9.  have  1 7nade  A.  that  which  shall  surely  be 
Luke  2.  15.  which  the  Lord  hath  made  A.  to  us 

17.  had  seen  it,  they  made  A.  abroad  the  saying 
.Tohn  15.  15.  all  that  I  heard,  I  have  made  A.  lo  yini 
.Icls'i.  28.  thou  hast  made  k.  tome  the  ways  of  life 
7. 1.3.  at  the  second  time  Joseph  was  made  k.  to  his 
broth,  and  .Joseph's  kindred  made  A.  to  Pharaoh 
/?om.  li'..2fi.  7n.  A.  lo  all  nations  for  obedience  of  fail  h 
Fph.  1.  9.  having  w.  A.  to  us  the  mystery  of  his  will 
3. 3.  how  by  revelation  he  m.  k.  to  me  the  mystery 
Phil.  4.  6.  let  your  requests  be  made  A.  lo  God 
2  Pet.  1. 16.  when  we  ma.  A.the  coming  of  our  Lord 

Make  KNOWN. 
JVum.  12. 6. 1  will  make  mvaolf  A.  to  him  in  a  vision 
1  Sam  28.15.lhou  mayest  m.A.tome  what  Ishnlldo 
1  C/ir.  16.8.777.  A.  his  deeds  among  people,  Ps.\05.1. 
17.  19.  in  mnkivg  k.  all  ihese  great  things 
P.ial.  76.  5.  that  they  should  »7iaAc  them  A. 
89.1.  with  my  mouth  will  I  make  k.  thy  failbfulness 
106.  8.  that  he  might  ttiaAc  A.  his  mighty  power 
145. 12.  t0T7i«A«  A.  to  sons  of  men  hi.s  mighty  ac'j 
Prov.  1.  23.  I  will  make  A.  my  words  lo  vou 
/«a.38. 19.  the  father  to  children  shall  771.  A.  thy  iruth 
64.  2.  to  make  thy  name  A.  to  thy  adversaries 
Ezek.  35.  II.  I  will  make  myself  A.  among  lliem 
39.  7.  60  will  I  maAc  my  holy  name  A.  in  Israel 
Dan.  2.2.5.  found  a  man  that  will  make  A.  to  the  king 

20.  nrl  thou  able  to  make  A.  lo  me  the  dream  7 
28.  but  the  Lord  maketh  k.  to  the  king,  29. 
30.  shall  maAc  A.  the  interpretation,  5. 15, 16, 17 

Hab.  3. 2.  O  Lord,  in  the  midst  of  the  ycarsmnAe  A 


LAB 

Rom.  9. 23.  that  he  might  make  k.  riches  of  his  glory 
£pk.  0.  11'.  to  make  k.  the  mystery  of  the  gospel 

iJl.  'i'ychicua  shall  make  k.  to  you  all  things 
Col.  1.27.  to  whomCi.  will  m.k.  what  is  the  riches 
4.  9.  they  shall  make  k.  to  you  all  tilings  done  here 

^Yvt  KNOWN. 
Oen.  I'J.  8.  I  have  iwo  daughters  which  have  not 
k.  man,  S^'um.  'Si.  18,  35.  JuUg:  iil.  lii. 

41.  21.  it  could  not  bo  k.  they  had  ealen  them 
.'U.  and  the  plenty  shall  not  be  k.  in  the  land 

Elod.  0.  'J.  by  my  name  Jkiiovah  w:is  I  not  k. 
l)cut.  II. -i.  with  children  which  have  nut  A.  31.13. 
"ii.togoaAer  gods  which  ye  have  yiui  k.  13.6, 13. 

28.  30.  neither  thou  nor  ihy  fathers  have  k.  t)4. 
Ju(Lg.  3.1. as  many  as  had  not  k.  the  wars  of  Canaan 

10.  9.  brake  the  withs,  so  his  strength  wasnwf  k. 
Ruth  3.  3.  but  make  not  thyself  A.  to  the  man 

14.  let  it  nut  be  k.  that  a  woman  came  in 
2  Ham.  17.  Ivl.  spread  corn,  and  the  thing  was  not  k. 
k  Kini^s  H.  2.  be  not  k.  to  be  the  wife  of  Jeroboam 
/"»■.  Id.  43.  people  whom  I  have  not  k.  shall  serve  ine 

77.19.  way  is  in  the  sea,  and  thy  footsteps  are  n(/£  A. 

79.  0.  pour  wrath  on  heathen  that  have  not  k.  thee 

35. 10.  and  they  have  not  k.  my  ways.  Hub.  3. 10. 

147.  20.  ihy  judgments,  they  have  nut  k.  them 
Kccl.^.b.  he  hath  not  seen  the  sun,  nor  k.  any  thing 
Vsn.40.21.have  ye  iwt  k.?  ||  28.  hast  thou  not  k.i 

42.  16.  lead  them  in  paths  that  they  have  not  k. 
44.18.they  have  not  k.  nor  understood, he  halh  shut 
45. 4.  I  surnamed  thee,  tho'  thou  hast  not  k.  me,  5. 

JcT.  4.22.  my  peopK;  is  foolish,  they  have  nut  k.  me 
Ezek.  32.  9.  into  countries  which  thou  hast  not  k. 
Dan.  2.  5.  if  ye  will  not  make  k.  the  dream,  i). 
4.7.they  did  not  make  k.  to  me  interpretation,  5.  8. 
Hos.  5.  4.  and  they  have  not  k.  the  Lord 
.VaA.  3.  17.  their  jilace  is  not  k.  where  they  are 
Mat  10. 20.  fear  them  not,  for  there  is  nothing  hid 
that  shall  not  be  k.  Ltike  8.  17.  ||  12.  2. 
12.  16.  they  should  not  make  him  k.  Mark's.  12. 
JjUkc  24. 18.  a  stranger,  and  liasl  nut  k.  these  things 
John  8. 55.  yet  ye  have  jwt  k.  him,  but  I  know  hmi 
14.!).so  long  time,  and  yet  hast  thou  n.k.  me,Philiji 
10. 3.  because  they  have  not  k.  the  Falher  nor  me 
17. 25.  O  righteous  Fath.  the  world  hath  n.  k.  thee 
Rom.  3.  17.  the  way  of  peace  have  they  nut  k. 
7.7. 1  hadn»£  A.  sin  but  by  the  law,  I  hud  n.k.  lust 
F.ph.  3.  5.  which  in  other  ages  was  not  made  k. 
i.  Pit.'i.  21.  been  better  not  A",  way  of  righteousness 
1  John  3.  6.  the  sinner  hath  not  seen  nor  k.  him 
Rev.  2.  24.  which  have  not  k.  the  depths  of  Satan 


LABOUR 

S  unifies,  [1]  Dilignit  care  and  pahis,  Prov.  14. 

23.  Eccl.  1.  3.  [2]  The  increase  and  fruit  of 
labour,  E.\od.  2.3.  16.  Eccl.  2.  10.  [31  The 
pang.^  of  a  woman  in  child-birth.  Gen.  35.  Ifi, 

17.  [4]  The  work  dune  or  performed  by  labour, 
Eccl.  2.  11.  [5]  AU  evils  both  of  sin  and 
misery,  particularly  those  of  persecution.  Rev. 
14.13.  [6]  To  cndearour  earnestly,  Xsa.^il.i 
Hcb.  4.  11.  [7]  7'«  journey  or  travel.  Josh.  7. 
3.  [81  To  prrfurin  Christian  o,yiccs,  Rom.  16. 
6.  ['.IJ  Diliirentlii  and  carefully  to  discharge 
pastoral  duties,  1  Tim.  5.  17. 

L.ABOUR,  Substantive. 
Oen.  31.  42.  God  hath  seen  the  /.  of  my  hands 

35.  Ki.  Rachel  travailed  and  had  hard  I.  17. 
I>eut.  26.  7.  the  Lord  heard,  and  looked  on  our  I. 
JVeh.  5.  13.  BO  God  shake  out  every  man  from  his  /. 
Job  5. 1 7.  yet  man  is  born  to  I.  as  sparks  fly  upward 

30.  11.  or  wilt  thou  leave  thy  I.  to  him  ) 

111.  h'  r  I.  is  in  vain  without  fear 
r.al.  73.  t  16.  to  know,  it  was  I.  in  mine  eyes 

74.  46.  he  gave  their  /.  to  the  locust 

90. 10.  yet  is  their  strength  /.  and  sorrow,  soon  cut 

104.  23.  man  goeth  to  his  /.  till  the  evening 

105.  41.  they  inherited  the  I.  of  the  people 
107.  12.  he  brought  down  their  heart  with  I. 
109.  11.  Itl  (lie  stranger  spoil  his  I. 

12-f.  2.  thou  shalt  eat  the  I.  of  thy  hands 
Prov.  10.  Ifi.  ilir; ;.  of  the  righteous  lendcth  to  life 
13.  11.  ho  that  galhercth  by  /.  shall  increase 
M.  23.  in  ull  /.  there  is  profit,  but  the  lalU  of  lips 
Eccl.  I.  3.  what  profit  hath  a  man  of  ull  his  I. 

8.  all  things  are  full  of  I.  man  cannot  niter  it 
2. 10.  rejoiced  in  nil  my  /.  my  portion  of  all  my  /. 

18.  yea,  I  hated  nil  my  I.  which  I  had  taken 

19.  yet  shall  ho  have  rule  over  all  my  I. 

20.  to  cause  my  heart  to  despair  of  the  /.  I  took 

21.  for  there  is  a  man  whose  /.  is  in  wisdom 

22.  what  hath  man  of  nil  his  I.  under  the  sun? 

24.  nr.nke  his  soul  eniny  good  in  I.  3.  13.  |  Ti.  18. 
4.  8.  yet  there  is  no  end  of  nil  his  I.  nor  eye  satisfied 

9.  bi;caii9e  they  have  n  good  reward  for  their  /. 

5.  15.  nothing  of  his/,  which  ho  may  carry  nway 

10.  to  rejoice  in  his  /.  this  is  the  gift  of  God 

6.  7.  all  the  /.  of  man  is  for  his  mouth,  and  yet 
8.  15.  for  that  shall  abide  with  him  of  his  I. 

3iM 


LAB 

Eccl.  9. 9.  that  is  thy  portion  in  thy  I.  under  the  sun 
lU.  15.  the  I.  of  the  foolioh  wearieth  every  one 

Isa.  45. 14.  the  I.  of  i^gypt  shall  come  over  to  thee 

55.2.  why  spend  your  I.  fur  that  which  salisli.  nol7 
Jer.  3.  24.  shame  devoured  the  /.  of  our  fathers 

20. 18.  wherefore  came  1  out  of  the  womb  to  see  /. 
Ezek.  23.  29.  they  shall  take  away  all  thy  I. 

29. 20. 1  have  given  him  the  land  ol  Kgypi  for  his  I. 
Hab.  3.  17.  though  the  /.  of  the  olive  should  fail 
Hag.  1.  11.  a  drought  on  all  the  I.  of  the  hands 
.yuArt4. 38.  to  reap  tliat  whereon  ye  bestowed  no  I. 
7i!«/«. 16. t). greet  Mary,  who  bestowed  much  /.  on  us 
1  Cor.  3.  8.  every  man  shall  receive  accord,  to  his  ^ 

15.  5(1.  you  know  that  your  /.  is  not  in  vain 
6=u/.4.1 1.1  am  afraid  of  you, lest  Ibesto  wed /.invain 
Phil.  1.22.  if!  live  in  the  Hesh,  this  is  fruit  of  my  /. 

2.  25.  Kpaphroditu?,  my  companion  in  I.  brother 

1  7'Aess. 1.3. remember. your/,  oflove, andjiatiemre 
2. 9.  for  ye  remember,  brethren,  our  I.  and  travail 
3.5. tempter  have  teni|)tedyou,and  our /.be  in  vain 

2  7'AciS.3. 8.  but  wrought  with/,  and  travail  night 
Heb.  6. 10.  not  unrighteous  to  forget  your  /.  of  love 
Rt'o.  2.2. 1  know  thy  works,  and  /.  and  patience 

LAbUUK,  Ven-b. 
Exod.  5.  9.  more  work,  that  they  may  /.  therein 

20.  9.  six  days  slialt  thou  /.  JJeut.  5.  13. 
./0.1'A.  7.  3.  make  not  all  the  people  to  /.  thither 

24.  13.  given  you  a  land,  for  which  ye  did  not  /. 
JVeA.  4. 22.  may  be  a  guard  to  us,  and  /.  on  the  day 
./ob  9.  29.  if  I  be  wicked,  why  then  /.  /  in  vain  ? 
Psal.  127.  1.  except  the  Lord  build  they  /.  in  vain 

144.  14.  that  our  oxen  may  be  strong  to  /. 
Prov.  21.  25.  the  slothful,  his  hands  refuse  to  /. 

23. 4.  /.  not  to  be  rich,  cease  from  thy  own  wisdom 
Eccl.  4.  8.  nor  saith  he,  for  whom  do  1  /.  ? 

8. 17.  because  tho'  aman/.toseek  itout,  not  find  it 
Isa.  22.  4. 1  will  weep  bitterly,  /.  not  to  comfort  me 

65.  23.  they  shall  not  /.  in  vain,  nor  bring  forth 
./er.  51.  58.  and  the  people  shall  /.  in  vain 
I>am.  5. 5.  under  persecution  we  /.  and  have  no  rest 
Mic.  4. 10.  be  in  pain,  and  /.  to  bring  forth,  O  Zion 
Hub.  2.  13.  that  the  people  should  /.  in  the  fire 
jlf«t.  11.28.  come  tome  all  ye  that /.  and  are  laden 
John  6.  27.  /.  not  for  the  meat  that  perishcth 
Rom.  16.  12.  and  Tiyphosa  who  /.  in  the  Lord 

1  Ckir.  4.  12.  and  /.  working  with  our  own  hands 

2  Cor.  5.  9.  wherefore  we  /.  to  be  accepted  of  him 
Eph.  4.  28.  hut  rather  /.  working  with  his  hands 
Col.  1.  29.  whereunto  I  also  /.  striving  according  to 
1  Thess.  5. 12.  to  know  them  which  /.  among  you 
1  7'/m.4.10.therefore  we  both  /.  and  suffer  reproach 

5. 17.  especially  they  that  /.  in  word  and  doctrine 
Heb.  4. 11.  let  us  /.  therefore  to  enter  into  that  rest 

LABOURED. 

JVcA.  4.  21.  so  we  /.  in  the  work,  and  helil  the  spears 

.IoIj  20.  18.  that  which  he  /.  for,  shall  he  restore 

Eccl.  2.  11.  1  looked  on  the  labour  I  had  /.  to  do 

19.  have  rule  ov  i^r  all  my  labour  wherein  I  have  /. 

21.  yet  to  a  man  that  hath  not  /.  therein 

22.  of  the  vexation  of  his  heart  wherein  he  hath  /. 
5.16.  what  profit  hath  he  that  hath  /.  for  the  wind? 

Isa.  47.  12.  with  thy  sorceries  wherein  thou  hast/. 
15.  shall  they  he  to  thee  with  whom  thou  hast/. 
49.  4.  I  said,  I  have  /.  in  vain,  spent  my  strength 
62.  8.  stranger  not  drink,  for  which  thou  hast  /, 
/)an.  6.  14.  then  the  king  /.  to  deliver  Daniel 
.Tonah  4.  10.  the  gourd  for  which  thou  hast  not  I. 
John  4. 3S.  other  men  /.and  ye  are  entered  into  their 
Rom.  16.  12.  salute  Persis,  who  /.  much  in  the  Lord 
1  Cor.  15. 10.  but  I  /.  more  abundantly  than  they  all 
Phil.  2.  10.  that  I  have  not  run  nor  /.  in  vain 
4.  3.  help  those  that  /.  with  me  in  the  gospel 
Rev.  2.  3.  hast  borne,  and  for  my  name's  sake  /. 

LABOURER. 
Lvke  10.  7.  for  the  /.  is  worthy  of  his  hire 
1  Tim.  5.  18.  the  /.  is  worthy  of  his  reward 

LABOURERS. 
Jlfn(.9.37.harvest  plenteous,  but/,  few,  /,iiAfl0.2. 
38.  pray  the  Lord  that  he  will  send  /.  huke  10.  2. 
20.  1.  went  out  early  to  hire  /.  into  his  vineyard 
2.  when  lie  had  agreed  with  the  I.  \\  8.  call  the  /. 
1  Cur.  3.  9.  for  we  are  /.  together  with  God 
Jam.  5.  4.  b'-holJ  the  hire  of  the/,  that  reaped 

LABOURETH. 
Prov.  16.  20.  he  that  /.  /.  for  himself 
Eccl.  3.  9.  what  profit  in  that  wherein  he  /.  ? 

1  Cur.  16.16.  submit  to  every  one  that  holpeth  and  /. 

2  Tim.  2.  6.  tho  hu.-hnndmnn  that  /.  must  be  first 

LABtJUKING. 
Eccl.  5.  12.  the  sleep  of  a  /.  man  ii  sweet 
.ficis  20.  35.  so  /.  ye  ought  to  support  the  weak 
Col.  4.  12.  always  /.  for  you  in  prayer,  tliat  yo 
1  Thess.  2.9./.  night  ami  dav  we  preached  to  you 

LABOURS. 
Ei:od.23.1G.  the  first  fruitM  of  ihy  /.  when  thou  hast 

gathered  in  ihy  /.  out  of  the  field 
Deut.  28.  33.  and  all  ihy  /.  shall  a  nation  oat  up 
Prov.  5. 10.  and  thy  /.  bo  in  the  house  of  a  stranger 
Isa.  ."iS.  3.  in  day  of  your  fast  you  exact  all  your  /. 
Jcr.  20. 5. 1  will  deliver  all  ihsir  /.  to  Iheir  ouomies 


LAD 

Hoa.  13.8.  in  my /.shall  they  find  no  iniquity  in  niA 
Hag.i.Yl.  1  smote  you  in  all  the  /.of  your  hands 
./wA«  4.  38.  and  ye  are  entered  into  their  /. 
2  Cor.  6.3.  in  tumults,  in  /.in  walchinga,  in  fastings 

10.  15.  not  boasting  of  other  men's  /. 

11.  23.  in  /■  more  abund.  in  stripes  above  measure 
hcv.  14.  13.  that  they  may  rest  from  tlieir  /. 

LACE. 
/':xo(/.28.28.8halI  bind  the  breast-plate  with  /.of  blue 

37.  and  thou  shalt  put  it  on  a  blue  /. 
3'J.  31.  and  they  tied  it  to  a  /.  of  blue  to  fasten  it 

Lack,   substantive. 
Gen.  18.  28.  wilt  thou  destroy  all  for  /.  of  five? 
A'j;o(/.16.18.that  gathered  little  had  no  /.  2  C<ir.  8.15 
Job  4.  11.  the  old  lion  pcrisheth  for  /.  ol  prey 

38.  41.  when  his  young  ones  w^fider  for  /.of  meat 
Hos.  4. 6.  my  peo.  are  destroyed  for  /.  of  knowledge 
Phil.  2.  30.  Ills  life  to  supply  your  /.  of  service 

1  Thess.  4. 12.  and  that  ye  may  have  /.  of  nothing 
LACK,   Verb. 

Gen.  18.  28.  if  there  shall  /.  five  of  the  fifty 
iJeut.  8.  9.  thou  shall  not  /.  any  thing  in  it 
Psal.  34.  10.  the  young  lions  do  /.  and  sutler  hunger 
Prov.  25.  27.  that  givelh  to  the  poor  shall  not  /. 
Eccl.  9.  8.  and  let  thy  head  /.  no  ointment 
jVlat.  19.  20.  these  things  have  I  kept,  what  /.  I  yet? 
./am.  1.5.  if  any  of  you  /.wisdom,  let  biiii  ask  of  God 

LACKED. 
Dnit.'i.l.  Ld.  been  with  thee,  thou  hast  /.  nothing 

2  .Sam.  2.  30.  there  /.  of  David's  serv.  nineteen  men 
1  A7Hi?^.'!4.27.ollicers  provided  victual,they/. nothing 

II.  22.  but  what  hast  thou  /.  with  me? 
JVeA.  9.  21.  thou  didst  sustain  them,  they /.  nothing 
Luke  8. 6.  it  withered  away,  because  it  /.  moisturo 

22.35.  I  sent  you  without  purse,  /.  ye  any  thing'' 
-lets  4.  34.  nor  was  there  any  among  them  that  /. 

1  Cor.  12.24.  given  more  honour  to  that  part  which  /. 
Phil.  4.  10.  ye  were  careful,  but  /.  opportunity 

LACK  EST. 
Mark  10.  21.  but  one  thing  thou  /.  Luke  18.  22. 

LACKETH. 
JVum.  31.  49.  and  there  /.  not  one  man  of  us 

2  Sam,  3.  29.  let  there  not  tail  one  that  /.  bread 
Prov.  6.  32.  committeth  adultery,  /.  understanding 

12.9.  than  hetliat  honoureth  himself,  and  /.  bread 
2  Pet.  1.  9.  but  he  that  /.  these  things  is  blind 

LACKING. 
Lev.  2. 13.  nor  shalt  thou  suffer  salt  to  be  /. 
22.  23.  notofier  a  lamb  that  hath  any  thing  /. 
.7uaV.21.3.  that  there  should  be  one  tribe/,  in  Israel 
1  Sam.  30.  19.  and  there  was  nothing  /.  to  Iheni 
.fer,  23.  4.  they  shall  fear  no  more,  nor  shall  be  /. 
1  Cor.  16.  17.  for  that  which  was  /.  they  supplied 
2ror.  11.9.  what  was  /.  tome  tlie  brethren supjilied 
1  Thess.  3. 10.  might  perfect  what  is/,  in  your  faith 

LAD,  S, 
Signifies,  .1  boy,  or  one  young  in  years,  Gen.  21. 
12,  17.  It  is  applied,  [1]  To  one  irAo  teas 
seventeen  years  old.  Gun.  37.  2.  [2]  'Jo  a 
married  wan,  Gen.  43.  8.  compared  witli  46. 
21.  [3]  To  a  servant,  1  Sam.  20.  36. 
Ge7i.  21.  12.  let  it  not  be  grievous  because  of  the  /. 

17.  and  God  heard  the  voice  of  the  /. 

18.  arise,  lift  up  the  /.  {{  19.  she  gave  the  /.  drink 
20.  God  was  with  the  /.  and  he  grew  aud  dwell 

22.  5.  I  and  the  /.  will  go  yonder  and  worship 

12.  ho  said,  lay  not  thine  hand  upon  the  /. 
37.  2.  the  /.  was  with  the  sons  of  Ililhuh 

43.  H.  send  the  /.  with  rae,  and  we  will  arise  and  go 

44.  22.  we  said,  the  /.  cannot  leave  his  father 
30.  my  falher,  and  the  /.  be  not  with  us,  31,  34. 

his  life  is  bound  up  iu  the  /.  life 

32.  thy  servant  became  surety  for  the  /. 

33.  abide  instead  of  the  /.  let  the  /.  go  up 
48.  16.  the  angel  who  icilceined  mo,  bless  the  L 

Judg.  16.  26.  Samson  said  to  the  /.  that  hold  him 

1  Sa«i.20.  21.  and  behold  1  will  send  a/,  saying,  go 

36.  Jonathan  said  to  the  /.  run,  as  the  /.  ran 

37.  Jonathan  cried  after  the  /.  make  speed,  38. 

39.  hut  the  /.  knew  not  nny  thing,  onlv  David 

40.  Jonulhan  gave  his  nrlillory  to  his  i. 

2  Sam.  17.  18.  u  /.  saw  ihem  and  told  .Absalom 
./oA«  6.  9.  there  is  a  /.  bote  liatli  five  barley  loaves 

LADDER. 

Oen.  28. 12.  Jacob  drcaim^d,  and  behold  a  /.  set  up 
LADE 

Signifies,  [11  To  lay  on  a  burden,  Nch.  4.  17 
J  13.  !.=».  [2]  To  oppress,  1  Kines  12.  11. 
[3]  7'«  impose  the  performance  of  unnecessary 
traditions, orslrict  injunctions.orcr  and  above 
irhat  the  law  requires,  Luke  11.46.  [4]  To 
he  burdened  not  with  the  sins<-,  but  jrith  the 
guilt  and  bondage  of  .tin,  Ua.  1.  4.  [."i]  To  be 
sen.iihle  of  and  mourn  under  the  burden  of  tin, 
Mat.  11.2.''. 

That  ladcth  himself  with  Ihirk  rlay,  Uab.  2.  6. 
that  burdens  and  difles  himself  inth  amassed 
treasures,  gotten  by  eiturliun  and  oppression. 

Oen.4Ti.\7. 1,  your  bcnsiB  and  go  to  land  of  Tanaaa 

Lev.  22.  t  IIJ-  '■  tbemselvca  with  llie  iniquitjr 


LAM 

•  Kings  12. 11.  my  father  did  I.  you  with  a  yoke 
Luke  11.  46.  lor  ye  I.  men  with  grievous  burdens 

LAUEU. 
Gen.  42.20.  they  I.  their  asses  with  the  corn,  44. 13. 
JVeA.  4.  17.  those  llial  I.  wrouijlit  in  the  work 
^cts  28,10.  they  /.  us  with  sucii  things  as  necessary 

LADEN. 
G<;n.4.5.23.sentten  asses  i.withgood  tilings  of  Bgy. 
1  Sam.  16.  20.  Jesse  took  an  ass  I.  witli  bread 
Isa.  1. 4.  a  people  I.  with  iniquity,  seed  of-evil  doers 
.'l/aM1.28.conio,allye  thatiubour  and  are  heavy  I. 
S  Tim.'i.G.  silly  women,  /.  with  sins,  led  away  with 

L.AUETH. 
fia6.2.6.woo  to  him  that  i.  himself  with  thick  clay 

EADINU. 
JV'^'  13.  15.  I  saw  some  on  the  sabbath  I.  asses 

LADING. 
■/Sets  27. 10.  much  damage  not  only  of  I.  and  ship 

LADY. 
Jsa.  47.  5.  shall  no  more  be  called  a  I.  of  kingdoms 

7.  and  thou  saidst,  I  shall  be  a  I.  for  ever 
iJolm  1.  the  elder  to  the  elect  i.  and  her  childi-en 

5.I10W  1  beseeclithee,  I.  that  we  love  one  another 
LADIES. 
Judg.  5.29.  wise  I.  answered  her,  yea,  she  returned 
Esth.y  .18.  likewise  shall  L  of  Persia  and  Media  say 
LAID,  see  after  Lay. 
LAKE 
Signifies,  [1]  A  larsrc  place  full  of  water  encom- 
passed with   land,  Luke  5.   1,  2.     [2J  JJell, 
Kev.  19.  20.  I  20.  10. 
Luke  5.  1.  Jesus  stood  by  the  I.  of  Gennesaret 
2.  and  saw  two  ships  standing  by  the  I. 

8.  22.  let  us  go  over  to  the  other  side  of  the  /. 
23.  there  came  down  a  storm  of  wind  on  the  I. 
3:1.  herd  ran  violently  down  a  sleep  place  into  I. 

Rev.  l'.>.  20.  these  both  were  cast  into  a  I.  of  tire 
•   20. 10.  devil  was  cast  into  I.  of  tire  and  brimstone 

14.  death  and  hell  were  cast  into  the  I.  of  fire 

15.  was  not  found  in  the  book  of  life,  ca=t  into  I. 
21.8.  murderers  have  their  part  in  the  I.  burneth 

LAMB 

Signifies,  A  sheep  under  a  year  old,  of  a  vieek, 
gentle,  and  tractable  nature,  which  is  ufirful 
for  food  and  iluthing,  and  under  the  law  loas 
used  fur  sacrifice, particularly  in  thepa'ssover. 
Gen.  21.  2.-*.  Exod.  12.  3,  5.  Prov.  27.  26. 
To  which  are  compared,  [I]  Christ  .lesus, 
who  wa-!  typified  hy  the  lamb  in  the  passover, 
and  Aeci/HC  a  sacrifice  fur  sin,  John  1.  21). 
Rev.  5.  6,  3.  [2]  Jill  true  Christians,  who 
are  humble,  meek,  and  tractable,  Isa.  11.  6. 
John  21.  lo.  [3]  An  innocent,  inoffensioe, 
and  harmless  teacher,  who  had  dune  nothing  to 
merit  the.  cruelty  and  barbarity  of  his  enemies, 
and  was  as  ignorant  of  their  inhuman  devices 
against  him,  as  a  lamb  is  of  the  design  of 
such  as  lead  it  to  the  slau^;htrr,  Jer.  11.  10. 
[4]  A  tnan's  wife,  2  Sam.  12.  3,  4.  [5]  Anti- 
christ, who  by  his  pardons  and  indulgences 
presumptuously  assumes  the  power  and  prero- 
gative of  Christ  Jesus  the  I,amb  of  God, 
Rev.  13.  11. 

Oen.  22.  7.  hut  where  is  the  I.  fox  a.  burnt-offering  ? 

8.  my  son,  God  will  provide  himself  a  I. 
£;j;o(f.  I2.3.tlicy  shall  take  to  them  every  man  aZ.21. 

.5.  your  I.  .shall  be  witliout  bleinisli,  a  male 

13.  13.  an  ass  slialt  thou  redeem  with  a  i.  34.20. 
2!).  30.  one  I.  thou  shalt  offiT  ii^  the  morning,  and 

the  other  I.  at  evening,  41.  jVum.  2B.  4. 

40.  with  a  J.  a  tenth   deal  of  flour   mingled, 

^ru.m.  28.  21,  '2'}.  I  2!).  4,  10,  15. 

I^v.  3.7.  if  he  ofier  a  1. 4.  32. )  .5. 6. 1  22.  23.  |  23.  12. 

4.  3.5.  he  shall  lake  away  the  fat,  as  the  fat  of  a  I. 

5.  7.  if  he  be  not  able  to  bring  a  I.  12.  8. 

9.  3.  take  a  I.  of  the  first  \o:u  without  blemish, 

14.  10.  jYum.  6.  12.  |  7.  15,  21. 

14.  12.  the  priest  shall  take  the  I.  and  offor  him 
li  slay  the  I.  25.  ||  24.  I.  of  trespass-olfering 

17.3.  that  killelh  an  ox,  or  a  i.  or  goat  in  the  camp 

23.  12.  shall  ort'r  a  I.  without  blemi.sh 

JVu'n.6.14.  he  shall  offer  on"  he-i.  of  first  year  for  a 

burnt-ofiering,  ewe-^  of  first  year  for  a  sin-oircr. 

LV  5.  shalt  prepare  with  the  sacrifice  for  one  I. 

11.  thus  done  'or  one  I.  28. 7, 13,  14.  Ezck.  46. 15. 

1  Sam.  7. 9.  Sam 'icl  offered  asuckingi.  lolhe  LorrI 
17.  34.  th're  came  a  lion  and  beir  and  took  a  I. 

2  5am.  12.  4.  fo  ik  the  poor  m.iii's  I.  and  dressed  it 
6.  and  he  shall  restore  the  I.  four-fokl 

fsa.  11.  6.  the  wolf  aNo  shall  dwell  with  the  I. 
If).  1.  send  ye  the  I.  lo  the  ruler  of  the  land 
53.7.wasb-ougli'  as  ?. 'otiieslaughier,  ./fr.  11.19. 
B5.  25.  the  wolf  and  the  I.  shall  feed  together 
♦jG.  3.  that  siorificelh  nl.  nsif  hc^  cut  off  dog's  neck 
Ezek.  45.  15  nn'^  /.  out  of  flock  'iira  peace-offering 
46.  13.  a  I.  o'"  the  first  vear  lliou  shalt  prepare 
Hos.  4.  16.  1,1.  will  fned  them  ■■<•>  I.  in  a  largo  place 
/(>Anl.2't  behold  ^ofGodihat  takes  away  sin,  36. 
Sets  8.  3?.  like  a  I.  dumb  befor'-  the  shearer 
"^et.  1. 19.  a.s  of  a  I.  wi'hout  blemish  and  »pot 
329 


LAM 

Rev.  5.  6.  in  the  midst  of  the  ciders  stood  a  t.  slain 

8.  the  four  beasts  fell  down  before  the  I. 

12.  saying,  worthy  is  the  I.  that  was  slain 
13.honour,  glory,  and  power,  be  to  the  /.  for  ever 

6.  1. 1  saw  when  the  I.  opened  one  of  the  seals 

16.  and  hide  us  from  the  wrath  of  the  I.  that  sits 
7. 9.  a  great  multitude  stood  before  the  I.  clothed 

10.  saying,  salvation  to  our  God  and  to  the  I. 

14,  and  made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  /. 

J  7.  for  the  I.  shall  feed  and  lead  them  to  fountains 
12.  11.  they  overcame  him  by  the  blood  of  the  /. 
13. 8.  the  I.  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world 

11. he  had  two  horns  like  a  I  and  spake  as  dragon 
14.1.1  looked, and  lo,  a  I.  stood  on  the  mount  tiion 

4.  these  are  they  that  follow  the  I.  whithersoever 

10.  tormented  in  the  presence  of  angels  and  the  I. 

15.3.  they  sing  the  song  of  Moses  and  song  of  the  I. 
17.  14.  war  with  the  I.  and  the  /.  shall  overcome 
19.7.for  the  marriage  of  the  I.  is  come,andhi3  wife 

9.  that  are  called  to  the  marriage-supperof  the  I. 

21.  9.  I  will  shew  thee  the  bride,  the  /.  wife 
14.  the  names  of  the  twelve  apostles  of  the  I. 

22.  God  Almighty  and  the  I.  are  the  temple  of  it 

23.  God  did  lighten  it,  and  the  /.  is  light  thereof 
27.  but  they  wlio  are  written  in  the  i.  book  of  life 

22.  1.  proceeding  out  of  throne  of  God  and  of  1.3. 

LAMBS. 
Gen.  30.  40.  and  Jacob  did  separate  the  I. 
.33.  t  19.  Jacob  bought  it  for  100 1.  Josh.  24.  t  32. 
JV««i.  7.  87.  rams  twelve,  I.  of  the  first  year  twelve 

88.  sixty  I.  II  29.  13.  Iburtecn  I.  17,  20,  23. 
29.18.drink-ofl[erings  for  the  bullocks,  /.  and  rams 
Deut.  32.  14.  milk  of  sheep,  with  fiit  oil.  and  rams 

1  Sam.  15.  9.  but  Saul  spared  the  best  of  the  I. 

2  Kings  3.  4.  Moab  rendered  to  Israel  100,000  I. 

1  Chr.  29.  21.  they  offered  to  the  L.  a  thousand  I. 

2  Chr.  29.  22.  priests  killed  I.  and  sprinkled  blood 
32.  the  number  of  burnt-offerings  two  hundred  I. 

35.  7.  Josiah  gave  to  the  people  I.  and  kids 
Ezra  7.  17.  that  thou  mayest  buy  speedily  I. 
Psal.  37.  20.  the  wicked  shull  be  as  the  fat  of  Z. 

114.4. mountains  skipped, little  hills  skipped  like  /. 
6.  ye  little  hills  that  skipped  like  I. 
Prov.  27.  26.  I.  are  for  thy  clothing,  and  goats 
fsa.  1.  11.  I  dilight  not  in  the  blood  o(  I.  or  goats 

5.  17.  then  shall  the  I.  feed  after  their  manner 

3-1.  6.  the  sword  of  the  Lord  filled  with  blood  of  /. 

40.  11.  he  shall  gather  the  I.  with  his  arm,  carry 
■  fer.  51.  40.  I  will  bring  them  like  I.  to  slaughter 
F.zek.  27.  21.  .'\rabia  o.?cupied  with  thee  in  I. 

39.  18.  ye  shall -<Jrink  the  blood  of  I.  and  rams 

46. 4.  in  the  sabbath  six  /.  ||  6.  in  new  moons  six  I. 

5.  and  meat-oftaring  for  the  /.  as  able  to  give,  7. 
Amos  6.4.  andeat  thei.  ontofthe  flock,  and  calves 
Luke  10.  3.  1  scmd  you  forth  as  I.  among  wolves 
Joh?i  21.  15.  Jesus  saith  to  Peter,  feed  my  /. 

fYve  LAMBS. 
JV«m.  7. 17.  five  I.  of  the  first  year,  23, 23,  35,  41,  47. 

Seven  LAMBS. 
Gr;n.21.28..\braham  set  seven  ewe-l.hy  themselves 

29.  what  mean  these  seven  ewr.-l.  set  hy  ihemstj. 

30.  these  seveyi  ewr.-l.  thou  shalt  take  of  my  hand 
Lev.  23.  18.  ye  shall  ofl'er  with  the  bread  seven  I. 
J^um.  28.  11.  ye  shall  offer  seven  I.  of  the  first 

year  without  spot,  19.  27.  |  2H.  2,  8,  36. 

21.  a  tenth  deal  throughout  sev.  1. 23.  |  29. 4,  10. 

2  CAr.  29.  21.  they  brought  scom  I.  for  a  sin-offer. 

Two  LAMBS. 
Exori.29.38.2?flfl  I.  of  the  first  year  offer,  JVum.28.3. 
Lev.  14. 10.  on  the  eighth  day  he  shall  take  two  I. 
23.19.  then  ye  shall  sacrifice  two  I.  of  the  first  year 
JWi«.28.9.and  on  the  sabbath  two  i.of  the  first  year 

LAME 
Signifies,  One  that  is  maimed,  or  enfeebled  In  his 
limbs,  Prov.  26.  7.     .'\nd  is  taken,   (I)  Corpo- 
rally, and  that  cither  hy  accident  or  birth,  " 
Sam.  4.  4.     Acts  3.  2.     (II)  Figuratively,  [1] 
For  idols,  2  Sam.  .5.  6.     [2]    The  wenlust  or 
meanest,   Isa.  33.  2;!.      (Ill)   Spiritually,  for 
such  as  are  halting  in  their  minds  between 
two  opinions,  Heb.  12.  1.3. 
Lm).  21. 18.  a  blind  or  I.  man  shall  not  approach 
Pent.  1.5.  21.  if  it  be  I.  thou  shalt  not  sacrifice  it 
2  Sam.  4.  4.  Jonath.  had  a  son  I.  of  his  feet.  9.  ,3, 13. 
5.  6.  e-(ccpt  thou  lake  away  the  blind  and  the  /. 
8.  whosoever  smiteth  the  I.  and  the  blind 
10.  2''.  that  1  may  ride,  because  thy  servant  is  I. 
.Tub  20.  15.  I  was  eyes  to  the  blind,  foot  to  the  I. 
Pron.  26.  7.  the  legs  of  the  I.  are  not  equal,  so  is 
/.•{a.3:t.  23.  then  is  prey  divided,  the  I.  take  the  prey 
35.  6.  ih^m  shall  the  I.  man  leap  as  a  hart 
Jrr.  31.  8.  bring  with  ihcm  the  blind  and  the  I. 
.Mnl.  1.8.  if  ye  offer  the  I.  for  sacrifice,  is  it  not  evil? 

13.  and  ve  brought  that  which  was  torn  and  I. 
.Mat.  11..%:  thei.  walk,  15.31.  |  21. 14.  Lukel.'23. 
Luke  14.  13.  call  the  poor,  the  I.  and  the  blind 
Acts  3.2.a  certain  man,  I.  from  womb,  was  carried 

11.  and  as  the  I.  man  held  Peter  and  John 
.»R.7.nnny  with  palsies  and  that  were /.were  healed 

Heb.  12.  13.  lest  the  (.  be  turned  out  of  the  way 


LAM 

LAMENT. 
Judg.W.^fi.Xhz  daughters  of  Israel  went  yearly  to/. 
ha.  3.  26.  and  her  gates  shall  I.  and  mourn 
19.  8.  the  fishers  also  shall  mourn  and  I, 

32. 12.  they  shall  I.  for  the  teats  and  pleasant  fields 
ftr.4.  8.  for  this  I.  and  howl,  for  the  anger  of  Lord 
16.  5.  neither  go  to  I.  nor  bemoan  thein,  6. 

22.  18.  they  shall  not  /.  for  him,  saying,  ah  Lord 

34.  5.  they  will  I.  ihee,  saying,  ah  Lord 
49.  3.  ye  daughters  of  Rabbah,  I.  and  run 

Lam.  2. 8.  he  made  the  rampart  and  the  wall  to  I. 
Ezek.  27.  32.  they  shall  I.  over  Tyrus,  saying,  what 
32.  16.  the  daughters  of  the  nations  shall  I.  her 
Joel  1.  8.  /.  like  a  virgin  girded  with  sackcloth 

13.  gird  yourselves,  anr'  I.  ye  priests,  howl 
Mic.  2.  4.  I.  with  a  doleful  lamentation  and  song 
Juiin  16.  20.  verily  I  say,  ye  shall  weep  and  I. 
Rev.  18.  9.  the  kings  of  ihe  earth  shall  I.  Babylon 

LAMENTED. 

1  Sam.&.Vi.  people  I.  because  the  Lord  had  smitten 
7.  2.  all  the  house  of  Israel  I.  after  the  Lord 

25.  1.  all  the  Isr.aelites  /.  Samuel,  23.  3. 

2  Sam.  1.  17.  David  I.  over  Saul  and  Jonathan 
3.  .33.  the  king  I.  over  Abner  and  said 

2  Chron.  35.  25.  and  JeremiaJi  I.  for  Josiali 

./er.  16.  4.  they  shall  die  and  not  be  I.  25.  33. 

Mat.  J 1. 17.  we  mourned  to  you,  but  ye  have  not  I. 

Luke  23.27.and  a  great  company  of  people  I.  Jesua 
LAMENTABLE. 

Dan.  6.  20.  the  king  cried  with  a  I.  voice  to  Daniel 
LAMENTATION 

Signifies,  [1]  Mourning,  bemoaning,  and  bewail- 
ing, Jer.  31.  1.5.  [2]  Songs  of  lamentation, 
2  Ciiron.  35.  25.  [3]  Such  dreadful  judgments 
as  would  cause  most  bitter  lamentations,  Ezek. 
2.  10.  [4]  The  title  of  a  book,  the  subject 
whereof  is  lamentation,  2  Chron.  35.  2.5. 

Gen.  5(1.  10.  there  they  mourned  v\'ith  a  sore  I, 

2  Sam.  1.  17.  and  David  lamented  with  this  /. 

Psal.  78.  64.  and  their  widows  made  no  I. 

Jer.  6.  26.  wallow  thyself  in  ashes,  make  bitter  I. 

7.  20.  and  take  up  a  I.  on  the  high  places 
9. 10.  for  the  habitations  of  wilderness  a  I. 

20.  and  teach  every  one  her  neighbour  I. 

31.  15.  in  Ramah  I.  and  weeping,  Mat.  2.  18. 
48.  38.  there  shall  be  /.  generally  on  the  tops 

Jjum.  2.  5.  Lord  hath  increased  mourning  and  I. 
Ezck.  19.  1.  take  thou  up  a  I.  for  the  princes 

14.  this  is  a  I.  and  shall  be  for  a  I. 

26.  17.  Ihey  shall  take  up  a  I.  for  Tyrus, 27. 2, 32 
28.  12.  take  up  a  I.  upon  the  king  of  Tyrus 

32.  2.  son  of  man  take  up  a  /.  for  Pharaoh,  16. 
Amos  5.  1.  a  I.  against  you,  O  house  of  Israel 

16.  shall  call  such  as  are  skilful  of  I.  to  wailing 

8.  10.  and  1  will  turn  all  your  songs  into  I. 
Mic.  2.  4.  and  lament  with  a  doleful  I. 
Acts  8.  2.  and  made  great  /.  over  Stephen 

LAMENTATIONS. 
2  CAron.  35. 25.  the  singers  spake  of  Josiah  in  their 
I.  and  behold,  they  are  written  in  the  I 
Ezek.  2.  10.  there  was  wriuen  therein  I.  mourning 

LAMP 
Signifies,  [11  A  light  made  with  oil  in  a  proper 
vessil,  1  Sam.  3.  3.     f2]  A  sincere  profession 
of  rcliirion,fluwing  from  an  inward  principlt 
of  holiness,  Mat.  25.  4.     [3]  A  form  of  godli- 
ness, without  saving  faith  and  true  repentance, 
Mat.  25.  3.     [4]  A  son  or  successor  who  pre- 
serves one's  name  and  memory  from  bring  ex- 
tinguished and  forgotten,  I  Kings  1.5.  4.  Psal. 
132.  17.    [51  Outward  prosperity,  Prov.  13.  9.  | 
20.  20.     It  IS  spoken,  [1]  Of  God,  who  enlight- 
ens, directs,  and  comforts  his  people,  2  Sam. 
22.  29.     [2]  Of  his  word,  which  affords  direc- 
tion and  comfort  in   all  doubts,  difficulties, 
and  distresses,  Psal.  119.  105. 
Gen.  15  17.a  burning/,  that  passed  between  pieces 
F.zoi.  27.  20.  to  cause  the  I.  to  burn  always 
1. Sum. 3.3.  ere/,  went  out,  Samuel  was  laid  lo  sleep 
2. Sam.  21. 1 17.  that  thou  quench  not  the  /.of  Israel 
22.  29.  thou  art  my  /.  O  Lord,  Lord  will  lighten 
1  Kings  ll.t36.  David  ray  servant  may  liave  a  /. 
15.4.  for  David's  sake  God  gave  him  a/,  in  Jcrus. 
Job  12.  5.  is  as  a  /.  despised  in  the  thought  of  him 
18. 1 6.  wicked  man's  /.  put  out,  21.  t  17. 

29. 13.  when  his  /.  shined  on  my  head 
Psal.  18.  t  28.  for  thou  will  light  my  /. 

119.  10,5.  thy  word  is  a  /.  to  my  feet,  and  a  light 
132  17.  I  have  ordained  a  /.  for  mine  anointed 
/Von.P.23.  for  commandment  is  a/,  the  liiw  is  light 
13.  9.  the  /.  of  I  he  wicked  shall  be  put  out 
20.20.whocur3eth  his  father,  his/,  slinil  ho  put  out 

t  27.  the  spirit  of  man  is  the  /.  of  the  Lord 
ha.  62.  1.  salvation  thereof  as  n  /.  ihnt  buinelli 
Rev.  8.  10.  a  great  star  burning  as  it  were  a  /. 

L.AMPS. 
F.Tod.  2.5.  37.  thev  shall  light  Ihe  /•  thereof,  40.  4. 
.30.  7.  whsn  he  iire--8Clh  Ihe  /.  burn  mcense  on  it 
S.when  A:irnn  lighteth  Ihe  /.at  even  burn  incooM 

35.  14.  and  hia  /.  with  the  oil  for  th«  light 


LAN 

Ezod.  39.  37.  and  they  brought  the  I.  to  Moses 
40.  '25.  he  lighted  the  ;.  belote  tin;  L.  A'um.  H.  i,  3. 
L,ev.~\.-.l.  lo  hum  cuiiUiiually,  «  CUruit.  13.  Jl. 

4.  Older  llie  I.  \\  JV'uwi.  4.  y.  and  cover  his  I. 
Judtr.  7.  It),  he  put  I.  within  ilie  pilcliers 

2U.  and  held  the  I.  in  their  left  liuiid  uiid  trumpele 
1  Kings  7.  4'J.  he  made  I.  ot'guld,  i  Uiron.  4.  M'ii. 
Job  4l.i9.uutol°his  mouth  go  burning  L  and  sparks 
Eiek.  1.  13.  was  like  the  appearance  ut^. 
JJan.  lU.  fj.  body  like  beryl,  and  hu  eyes  as  /.  of  fire 
Mat.  '2j.  1.  ten  virgins  wliich  took  their  I.  3,  4. 

7.  those  virgins  arose  and  trimmed  their  I. 

8.  give  us  ot'  your  oil,  for  our  /.  are  gone  out 

Htveii  LAMPS. 
Ezod.  25.  37.  thou  snalt  make  the  seven  I.  thereof 
37.  23.  he  made  his  seven  I.  of  pure  gold 
J^um.  8.  2.  the  seven  I.  shall  give  light  over  against 
Zech.  4.  2.  and  behold  a  candlestick  and  seven  I. 
Hev.  4.  5.  there  were  seven.  I.  of  tire  burning  before 

L.\NCE. 
Jer.  50. 42.  they  that  hold  the  I.  are  cruel,  will  not 

LANCETS. 
1  Kings  18.  26.  cut  themselves  with  I.  till  blood 

LAiNU 
Bignifies,  [1]   The  whole  continent  of  the  earth, 
as  distinguished  from  sea,  Mat.  23.  15.     [2J 
One  particular  country,  Mat.  'J.  2G.     [3]  .Ara- 
ble ground,  Gen. 'iii.  l)^.     [4]   The  inhabitants 
of  a  country,  Isa.  37.  11.     [5]  .<?  certain  pos- 
session, 2  Sara.  19.  29.  Acts  4.  37. 
Oen.  2.  12.  and  the  gold  of  that  I.  is  good 
10.  11.  out  of  that  I.  went  forth  Asbur 

12.  1.  get  thee  into  a  i.  I  will  shew  thee,  .^cts  7. 3. 

13.  6.  and  the  I.  was  not  able  to  bear  them 

9.  is  not  the  whole  I.  before  thee,  separate  1 
17.8.  will  give  thee  and  seed  the  I.  28.  13.  |  3.1. 12 
20.  15.  behold,  my  /.  is  before  thee,  dwell  where 

24.  37.  of  the  Canaanite,  in  whose  I.  1  dwell 
26.  12.  Isaac  sowed  in  that  I.  and  received  in  year 
47.  20.  bought  the  /.  so  the  I.  became  Pharaoh's 

22.  only  the  I.  of  the  priests  bought  he  not 
Ezod.  8.  24.  the  I.  was  corrupted  hy  the  Hies 

10.  1.5.  so  that  the  /.  was  darkened,  and  they  eat 

20.  12.  that  thy  days  may  be  long  upon  the  /. 
Leclt).22.goat  hear  iniqiiilies  into  ai.not  inhabited 

18.  25.  and  the  /.  is  defiled,  therefore,  27. 
28.  that  the  /.  spue  not  you  out  also,  20.  22. 

25.  2.  then  shall  the  I.  keep  a  sabbath,  2fi.  34. 

23.  the  I.  shall  not  be  sulci,  for  the  /.  is  mine 

26.  4.  the  I.  shall  yield  her  increase,  2.').  19. 
38.  the  /.  of  your  enemies  shall  cat  you  up 

42.  and  I  will  remember  the  I. 

43.  the  I.  also  shall  be  left  of  them,  and  enjoy 
tfum.  13.  18.  see  the  /.  what  it  is,  and  the  people 

32.  the  I.  is  a  I.  that  latcth  up  the  inhabitants 

14.  23.  surely  they  shall  not  see  the  /.  1  sware  te 

24.  my  servant  Caleb  will  I  bring  to  the  /. 

15.  2.  when  ye  be  come  into  the  I.  of  your  habi- 

tation, 18.  Deut.  17.  11.  I  18.  9.  ]  26.  1. 

21.  34.  delivered  into  thy  hand  his  /.  Deut.  3.  2. 
32. 4.  the  country  the  Lord  smoic  is  a  I.  for  rattle 
35.33.  fur  blood  delilelh  the  L.  and  the  l.  cannot 

Dtut.  1.  'Mi.  to  him  will  I  give  the  /.  he  hath 
2.  20.  that  was  accounted  a  I.  of  giants,  3.  13. 

8.  8.  a  /.  of  wheat,  and  barley,  and  vines 

9./.  wherein  eat  bread,  /.  whose  stones  arc  iron 

9.  28.  vi'as  not  able  to  bring  them  into  the  I. 

10.  7.  to  .lotbnth,  a  /.  of  rivers  of  waters 

11.  12.  a  /.  which  the  Lord  thy  <jk)d  careth  for 
29.  23.  the  whole  I.  thereof  is  brimstone  and  salt 

28.  cast  them  into  another  I.  as  at  this  day 
32.10.  he  found  him  in  a  desert/.  a:id  in  wilderness 
43.  ho  will  bo  merciful  lo  his  I.  and  people 

33.  ]'.i.  he  said,  blessed  of  the  Ijoril  bfi  his  I. 

34.  1.  and  the  Lord  shewed  him  all  the  I. 
Josh.  2.  1.  Bi-nt  two  men,  saying,  go  view  the  I. 

9.  the  Lord  hath  given  you  the  t.  21.  43. 
11.  Itj.  .I.,shiia  took  all  that  I.  the  hills,  -23. 
14.  \'t.  and  the  /.  had  rest  from  war 
21.  13.  giv.ii  von  a  /.  for  which  ye  did  not  labour 
Judif.  3.  II.  the  /.  had  rest  forty  years,  .5.  31. 
30.  and  the  /.  had  rest  fourscoro  years 
11.  12.  thou  art  coirie  to  fight  against  me  in  my  I. 
18.  10.  when  ve  go  ye  shall  come  to  a  large  /. 
30.  till  the  day  of  the  captivity  of  the  t. 
1  .Sam.  14.  29.  my  father  hath  troubleil  the  I. 
21.  II.  is  not  this  David  the  kfng  of  the  l.l 
Q  .Sum.  3.  12.  Abner  simt,  saying,  whose  i»  the  I.  ? 
9.  7.  I  will  restore  thee  all  ihi!  /.  of  Saul 
21.  14.  God  was  entreated  for  the  I.  24.  2.5. 
1  Kings  9.  13.  and  he  called  Ihi'in  the  /.  of  Cahnl 
11.  If*,  appointed  him  victuals,  and  gave  him  I. 
I  Kings  H.  3.  went  lo  cry  lo  the  king  for  her  /. 
6.  since  tho  day  that  she  left  the  /.  even  till  now 

17.  26.  the  manner  of  the  Ocd  of  the  I.  27. 

18.  32.  take  vou  to  I.  of  corn  and  wine,  Ata.30. 17. 
Xi.  any  jod  delivered  his  /.  ha.  3IV  IH. 

21.  •*.  move  any  more  out  of  tho  /.  2  Chr.  33.  8. 
2i  7.  the  king  of  Egypt  came  no  moronut  of  his  /. 
85  12.  \»H  of  the  uoor  of  the  I.  Jar.  52.  16. 
330 


LAN 

1  Ckron.  4.  40.  and  the  /.  wai  wide,  and  quiet 
7.  21.  men  of  Gatli,  who  were  born  in  that  I. 

2  CAron.  7.  20.  I  will  pluck  them  out  of  my  I. 
14.  7.  make  walls,  while  the  I.  is  yet  beloic  us 
34.  8.  when  he  had  purged  the  /.  and  the  house 

A'2ra9.12.  that  ye  may  eatthegood  ol7.  Jsa.  1. 19. 
JVeA.  5.  16.  work  of  wall,  nor  brought  we  any  I. 
y.  36.  lor  the  I.  behold,  we  are  servants  in  it 
Job  31.  3d.  if  my  I.  cry  against  me,  or  furrows 

37.  13.  whether  for  correction,  or  his  /.  or  mercy 

39.  6.  and  the  barren  I.  his  dwellings 

Psal.  10.  J6.  the  heathen  are  peri^hed  out  of  his  I. 
42.  6.  remember  thee  from  the  /.  of  Jordan 
44.  3.  for  they  got  not  the  I.  in  possession 

52.  5.  and  root  thee  out  of  the  I.  of  the  living 
80.  9.  to  take  deep  root,  and  it  filled  the  /. 

101.  6.  mine  eyes  shall  be  on  the  faiihful  of  the  /. 
b.  1  will  destroy  all  the  wicked  of  the  /. 

105.  16.  he  called  tor  a  famine  on  the  I. 

30.  the  I.  brought  tbrth  liogs  in  abundance 

106.  24.  yea,  they  dcB])i6cd  the  pleasant  /. 
3fj.  and  the  I.  was  polluted  with  blood 

107.  34.  he  turiieth  the  fruitful  I.  into  barrenness 
143.  6.  my  soul  thirsts  after  thee  as  a  thirsty  /. 

10.  lead  ine  into  the  I.  of  uprightness 
Proo.l2.ll.tliattilleth  his /.shall  be  satisficd,2S.19. 

28.2.  for  the  transgression  of  a  /.  many  princes 
£cc/.lU.16.woe  to  lhee,U  /.when  thy  king  is  a  child 

17.  blessed  art  thou,  O  /.  when  thy  king  is  son 
Isa.  5.  30.  if  one  look  unto  the  /.  behold  sorrow 

7.  16.  the  /.  that  thou  abhorrest  shall  be  forsaken 
24.  because  all  /.shall  become  briers  and  thorns 

9.  1./.  of  Zebulun,  /.  of  Napthtali,  Mat.  4.  15. 
19.  through  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  is  /.  darkened 

13.  5.  they  come  to  destroy  the  whole  /. 

14.  25.  1  will  break  the  Assyrian  in  my  /. 

18.  1.  woe  to  the  /.  shadowing  with  wings! 

2.  whose  /.  the  rivers  have  s])oiled,  7. 

19.  24.  shall  be  a  bles>ing  in  the  midst  of  the  /. 

21.  1.  Cometh  from  the  desert,  from  a  terrible  /. 

23.  1.  from  the  /.  of  Chittim  it  is  revealed 

24.  3.  the  /.  shall  be  utterly  emptied  and  sjioiled 

11.  joy  is  darkened,  the  mirth  of  the  /.  is  gone 
30.  6.  into  the  /.  of  trouble  and  anguish 

32.  2.  as  the  shadow  of  a  great  rock  in  a  weary  /. 

13.  on  the  /.  of  iny  people  shall  come  thorns 
33. 17.  and  behold  the  /.  that  is  very  far  ofl" 

34.  9.  the  /.  thereof  shall  become  burning  pitch 

35.  7.  and  the  thirsty  /.  springs  of  water 
49.  12.  and  lo,  these  from  the  /.  of  Sinim 

19.  the  /.  of  thy  destruction  be  too  narrow 

53.  8.  he  was  cut  oil"  out  of  the  /.  of  the  living 
■fer.  1.  18.  an  iron  pillar  against  the  whole  /. 

2.  2.  wentest  after  me,  in  a  /.  that  was  not  sown 

6.  led  us  through  a  /.  of  deserts,  a  /.  of  drought 

7.  when  he  entered,  ye  defiled  my  /.  3.  9. 

15.  the  young  lions  made  his  /.  waste 

3.  19.  how  shall  1  give  thee  a  pleasant  /.  ? 

4.  20.  the  whole  /.  is  spoiled,  sudilenly  are 
■'>.  19.  serve  strangers  in  a  /.  that  is  not  yours 
6.  8.  lest  I  make  thee  a  /.  not  inhabited 

8.  16.  the  whole  /.  trembled  at  the  sound 

9.  12.  for  what  the  /.  perisheth  and  is  burnt 
19.  because  we  have  forsaken  the  /. 

11.  19.  let  us  cut  him  off  from  the  /.  of  the  living 

12.  4.  how  l.ing  shall  the  /.  mourn,  herbs  wither  ^ 

12.  from  one  (!nd  of  the  /.  even  to  the  other 

15.  [  will  bring  again  every  man  to  his  /. 

16.  15.  brought  Israel  from  /.  of  tho  north,  31.  16. 

18.  because  they  have  defiled  my  /.  they  filled 
17.6. inhabit  wilderness  into  a  salt  /,  not  inhabited 

22.  27.  to  t!ie  /.  wlvcreunto  they  desire  lo  return 

23.  15.  is  |irofanene9s  gone  forth  into  the  /. 
2-').  13.  I  will  bring  on  that  /.  all  my  words 
27.  7.  till  Uie  very  time  of  his  /.  come 

40.  4.  behold,  all  the  /.  is  before  thee 

46.  12.  ihvsliame,  and  thy  cry  halli  filled  the  /. 
.50.  l.->.  r  will  punish  the  king  of  Babylon  and  his  /. 

38.  for  it  is  the  /.  of  graven  imag'  h,  they  are  mad 
51.  43.  a  dry  /.  a  /.  wherein  no  man  dwellelli 

47.  her  whole  /.  shall  be  confounded 
Ezek.  7.  23.  for  the  /.  is  full  of  bloody  crimes 

8.  17.  thiy  hiiv(>  filled  tin'  /.  with  viidence 

9.  9.  and  the  /.  is  full  of  blood,  and  the  city 
14.  13.  when  the  /.  siiiiieth  against  mo 

17.  bring  a  sword  on  I.  \{  19.  a  pestilence  into  /. 

17.  5.  h(3took  also  of  the  seed  of  Ihi^/.  and  planted 

13.  he  hath  taken  the  mijlily  of  the  /. 
21.  19.  both  shall  come  forth  out  of  one  I. 

22. 24.  thou  art  the  /.  is  not  cleansed  nor  rained  on 
30.  should  stand  in  the  gap  before  me  for  the  /. 

32.  4.  then  will  I  leave  Ihee  upon  the  /.  I  will  cast 

33.  2.  when  I  bring  the  sword  upon  a  /. 

3.  if  when  he  soelh  the  sword  come  upon  the  /. 
24.  the  /.  is  given  us  for  iiihcritanco 

36.  5.  have  appointed  my  /.  into  thi'ir  possession 
13.  thou  /.  devouresi  up  men,  anil  hast  beri'aved 

38.  9.  thou  shall  belike  a  cloud  to  cover  ihe  /.  16 
11.  I  will  go  up  lo  the  /.  of  unwulled  villages     , 

16.  anU  1  will  bring  tluM  atjainst  my  U 


liAN 

Etek.  39.  12.  that  they  may  cleanic  the  I. 

16.  thus  shall  they  cleanse  the  /. 
47.  15.  and  this  shall  be  ihe  border  of  the  I 
JJan.  11.  16.  he  shall  stand  in  the  glorious  /.  41 
J/os.  4.  3.  therefore  shall  Ihe  /.mourn  and  languiib 
Jot  1 1.6.  lor  a  nation  is  come  up  upon  my/,  strong 

2.  3.  the  /.  is  as  the  garden  ol  Eden  before  them 
18.  then  will  tho  Lord  be  jealous  for  his  /. 

21.  fear  not,  O  /.  be  glad  |f3.  2.  and  parted  my  i. 
.^mo«5. 2.  she  is  forsaken  upon  her/,  there  is  none 

7.  10.  the  /.  is  not  able  to  bear  all  his  words 

8.  4.  even  to  make  the  poor  of  the  /.  to  fail 
8.  shall  not  the  /.  tremble  for  this  7 

9.  5.  the  Lord  G.  of  Hosts  is  he  that  touchcth  the  / 
Zcph.  1.  2.  1  consume  all  things  from  oil'  the  /. 

18.  w  hole  /.  shall  be  devoured  by  fire  of  jealousy 

3.  19.  I  will  get  them  praise  and  fame  in  every  L 
Zech.  2.  6.  ho,  ho,  flee  from  Ihe  /.  of  the  north 

3.  9.  1  will  remove  the  iniquity  of  that  /.  in  one 
9. 16.  of  a  crov\n  lifted  up,  as  an  ensign  upon  his  I 

12.  12.  the  /.  shall  mourn,  every  family  apart 

13.  2.  and  the  unclean  spirit  to  pass  out  of  the  I 
H.  in  all  the  /.  two  parts  therein  shall  he  cut  off 

14.  10.  all  the  /.  shall  be  turned  as  a  plain 
Mai.  3.  12.  for  ye  shall  be  a  delighlsoine  /. 
Mat.y.  26.  fame  hereof  went  abroad  into  all  that/. 

10.  15.  more  tolerable  for  the  /.  of  Sodom,  11.  24. 
23.15.  ye  compass  sea  and  /.  to  make  one  proselyte 
27.  45.  was  darkness  over  all  the  /.  Mark  15.  33. 

JIfurA'6.47.shii)was  in  the  sea, and  he  alone  on  the  I 
J.uke  14.  35.  neither  fit  for  the  /.  nor  dunghill 

15.  14.  there  arose  a  great  famine  in  that  /. 
John  6.  21.  immediately  the  ship  was  at  the  /. 

21.  11.  Peter  drew  the  net  to  /.  full  of  great  fishei 
Jicts  4. 37.  having  /.  sold  it,  and  brought  the  money 
5.8.  tell  me  whether  ye  sold  tlie  /.  lor  so  much 

27.  39.  when  it  was  day,  they  knew  not  the  /. 

43.  cast  themselves  into  the  sea,  and  get  to  /. 

44.  that  they  escaped  all  safe  to  /. 

See    Benja.min,   Chalpeans,   Canaan,  Dark- 
ness, Desolate,  Divide,  Divided. 
Jjry  LAND. 
Gen.  1.  9.  let  dry  I.  appear  1|  10.  called  dry  I.  earth 
7.  22.  of  all  that  was  in  the  dry  I.  died 
£iod.4.9.takeand  jiuur  water  on  the  dry  /.and  tho 
w  aters  shall  become  blood  on  the  dry  I. 
14.  21.  and  Ihe  Lord  made  Ihe  sea  dry  I. 
29.  Isr.ael  walked  on  dry  I.  \\  15. 19.  JVcA.  9.  11. 
.Josh.  4.  18.  the  priests'  feet  were  lifted  up  on  dry  J. 

22.  Israel  came  over  this  Jordan  on  dry  I. 
Psal.  63.  1.  my  flesh  longeth  for  thee  in  a  dry  I. 

66.  fi.  he  turned  the  sea  into  dry  I. 

68.  6.  but  the  rebellious  dwell  in  a  dry  I. 

95.  .5.  sea  is  his,  and  his  hands  formed  the  dry  Z. 
Isa.  41.  18.  I  w  ill  make  dry  I.  sjirings  of  water 
./«r.  50.  12.  hiiidermost  of  nations  shall  be  a  rfry /. 

51.  43.  her  cities  are  a  dry  I.  and  wilderness 
Nos.  2.  3.  lest  I  set  her  as  a  dry  I.  and  slay  her 
.funah  1.9. 1  fear  God,  who  made  Ihe  sea  and  dry  !. 

2.  10.  the  fish  vomited  out  Jonah  on  Ihe  di-y  I. 
Hag.  2.  6.  and  I  will  shake  the  sea  and  dry  I. 
Htb.  11.  29.  they  passed  the  Red  sea  a^  by  dry  h 
Sec  Dwell,  Ef;vi'T,  Goon. 
In  the  LAND. 
Oen.  13.  7.  and  the  Canaanitps  dwelt  then  in  Ihe  I 

26.  22.  and  we  shall  be  fruitful  in  the  I. 

41.  31.  the  plenty  shall  not  be  known  in  the  I. 

42.  34.  I  shall  know,  and  ye  shall  tralTick  in  the  1. 
47.  4.  fi>r  lo  fojourn  in  the  I.  are  we  come 

Exod.  8. 25.  go  ye,  sacrifice  to  your  God  in  the  I. 

9.  5.  to-morrow  the  Ld. shall  dotliis  thing  in  the  I 

14.  3.  he  will  say,  they  are  entangled  in  the  I. 
J.,ev.  26.  6.  and  1  w  ill  give  peace  in  the  I.  and  ye 
l)cut.4.}4.  that  ye  may  do  them  int. I.  wliith.  ye  go 

5.  16.  that  il  may  go  well  with  thee  in  the  I. 

11.9.  thai  you  may  prolong  days  in  /.  /.  21. 1 25. 15. 

25.  19.  God  hiilh  given  thee  rest  in  Ihe  I. 

28.  8.  he  shall  bless  thee  in  the  /.  11.  |  30.  IG. 

31.  13.  fear  the  Lord  as  long  as  ye  live  in  the  I 
Judg.  18.7.  iind  there  was  no  magislrale  in  the  I 

1  ."f«m.  23.  23.  .ind  if  he  be  in  the  I.  I  will  search 

2  ■'""am.  15.  4.  O  thnl  I  were  made  judge  in  the  I. 

1  KinL'S  8.37.if  there  be  fiimine  in  the  1. 2  Chr.  6.2.9 
2fAr.  6.31.  f.ai  thee  so  long  as  they  live  in  the  I. 
19.  5.  and  Jehosliajihal  set  judges  i«  the  I. 

32.  31.  inquire  of  the  wonder  that  won  done  in  /.  I, 
/o/i28.  13.  nor  is  it  found  in  Ihe  I.  of  the  living 
P.«.27.13.g.iodnoss  of  Ihe  Lord  in  the  /.of  Ihe  living 

.35.  20.  llicy  devise  deceilfiil  mailer  in  the  I. 
74.  8.  Ihev  burnt  the  gynagogues  of  Gud  in  the  I. 
lin.9.1  will  walkbeforo  tho  L.  in  /.  /.  ofthe living 
J42.  5.  thou  art  my  portion  in  the  I.  ofthe  living 

Isa.  7.  22.  for  lioni"y  shall  every  one  cat  in  the  I. 
ifi  '0.  in  Ihe  /.of  upriphtnegs  he  will  deal  unjuatlj 
3l;   i  .  I  shall  not  see  111"' L.  in /Ar /.  of  Ihe  living 

Eiek.  2fl.  40.  shall  all  of  them  in  the  I.  serve  me 

26.  20.  I  shall  set  glory  in  (Ac  /.  ofthe  living 
32.  23.  caused  terror  in  the  I.  of  the  living,  24.  32, 

,  37.  22.  I  will  make  ihem  one  nation  in  i.'ie  I. 
45.  8.  in  the  !•  ehall  be  his  possession  in  larafl 


LAN 

Hes.  4.  1.  because  there  is  no  truth  in  tK»  I. 
Zech.  11.  16.  I  will  raise  up  a  Shepherd  in  the  I. 
L,uke  21. 23.  there  shall  be  great  distress  in  the  I. 
Ueb.llM.  by  faith  he  sojourned  in  the  I.  of  promise 

>S«e  Inhabitant,  Ikherit,  Israel,  Juoau 

Our  LAND. 
Oen.  47.  19.  buy  us  and  o.  I.  for  bread,  we  and  o.  I. 
Psal.  85.  12.  and  our  I.  shall  yield  her  increase 
Cant.  2  12.  the  voice  of  the  turtle  is  heard  in  our  I. 
Mic.  5.  5.  the  Assyrian  shall  come  into  our  I. 
6.  he  shall  deliver  us  when  lie  Cometh  into  our  I. 
Own  LAND. 
£j:od.l8.27.Jethro  went  into  h\aownl.  A^um.10.30, 
l^in^sl0.6.a  true  rep.  I  heard  in  my  o.Z.2  CAr.9.5, 
S  Kings  17.  23.  Israel  carried  out  of  their  own  I. 

18.32.take  you  to  aland  like  your  oirni./sa.36.17. 

19.  7.  and  he  shall  return  to  his  own  I. 
2  Chr.  32.  21.  he  returned  with  shame  to  his  own  I. 
lia.  13.  14.  and  flee  every  one  to  his  own  I. 

14.  1.  choose  Israel,  and  set  them  in  their  own  I. 

37.  7.  and  fall  by  the  sword  in  his  own  I. 
Jer.  25.  8.  they  shall  dwell  in  their  own  I.  27.  11. 

37.  7.  return  to  Egypt,  into  their  own  I.  42.  12. 

50. 16.  they  shall  flee  every  one  to  his  own  I. 
Etek.  34.  13. 1  will  bring  them  into  their  own  I. 
36.  24.  I  37.  14,  21.  |  39. 28. 

36.  17.  when  Israel  dwelt  in  their  own  I. 
Amos  7.  11.  Israel  led  captive  out  of  their  own  I. 

See  People,  Possess,  Possession,  Strange. 

Their  LAND. 
Oen.  47.  22.  wherefore  the  priests  sold  not  their  I. 
Lev.  20.  24.  but  I  said,  ye  shall  inherit  their  I. 
JVum.  18. 20.  Aaron  had  no  inheritance  in  their  I. 
Deut.  2.  5.  for  I  will  not  give  you  of  their  I.  9. 

4.  38.  bring  thee,  and  give  Ihee  their  I.  Judg-.G.  9. 

29.  8.  we  took  their  L  and  gave  it.  Josh.  10.  42. 
28.  and  the  Lord  rooted  them  out  of  their  I. 

1  Kings  8.48.return  and  pray  to  thee  toward  theirl. 

2  Chron.  7.  14.  forgive  their  sin  and  heal  their  I. 
Psal.  105.  32.  he  gave  them  flaming  fire  in  their  I. 

135. 12.  and  gave  their  I.  for  a  heritage,  136.  21. 
Jsa.  2.  7.  their  I.  is  full  of  silver  and  horses 
8.  their  I.  also  is  full  of  idols,  they  worship 
34.  7.  their  I.  shall  be  soaked  with  blood 
Jer.  12. 14.  behold,  I  will  pluck  them  out  o{  their  I. 
16.  15.  I  will  bring  them  again  into  their  I. 
51.5.  not  forsaken,  tho'  their  I.  was  filled  with  sin 
Ezek.  34.  27.  and  they  shall  be  safe  in  their  I. 
39.  26.  when  they  dwelt  safely  in  their  I.  and 
Amos  9.  15.  and  I  will  plant  them  on  their  I. 

This  LAND. 
Gen.  12.  7.  the  Lord  said,  unto  thy  seed  I  will  give 
this  1. 15. 18. 1  24.  7. 1 48.  4.  Ezod.  32. 13. 

28.  15.  I  will  bring  thee  again  into  this  I. 

31. 13.  get  thee  out  from  this  I.  and  return  to  land 

50.  24.  and  God  will  bring  you  out  of  this  I. 

JV«7n.l4.3.  why  hath  the  L.  brought  us  unto  this  I. 

8.  then  he  will  bring  us  into  this  I.  and  give  it 

32.  5.  let  this  I.  be  given  to  thy  servants 

22.  this  I.  shall  be  your  possession  before  the  Ld. 

34.  2.  this  I.  shall  fall  to  you,  13.  Josh.  13.  2. 

Deut.  4.22.  but  I  must  die  in  this  I.  and  not  go  over 

26.  9.  and  he  hath  given  us  this  I.  Josh.  1.  13. 

29.  24.  wlierefore  hath  the  Lord  done  thus  to 

this  Z.?  27.  1  Kin^s  9.  8.  2  Chrun.  7.  21. 
Judg.  2.  2.  no  league  with  the  inhabitants  of  this  I. 
2Kings  18.25. Ld.  said,  go  up  ag.  this  I.  fsa.  36.10, 
2  Chron.  3D.  9.  they  shall  come  again  into  this  I 
Jer.  14.  15.  say,  the  sword  shall  not  be  in  this  I. 
16.  3.  their  fathers  that  begat  them  in  this  I. 
6.  both  great  and  small  shall  die  in  this  I. 
13.  therefore  I  will  cast  you  out  of  this  I. 
22.  12.  and  he  shall  see  this  I.  no  more 

24.  6.  and  I  will  bring  them  again  to  this  I. 

25.  9.  and  I  will  bring  them  against  this  I. 
11.  and  this  whole  I.  shall  be  a  desolation 

26.  20.  a  man  who  prophesied  against  this  I. 

32.  15.  houses  shall  be  possessed  again  in  this  I. 
41.  and  I  will  plant  them  in  this  I.  assuredly 

36.  29.  the  king  of  Babylon  shall  destroy  this  I. 

37.  19.  shall  not  come  against  you,  nor  this  I. 
42. 10.  if  ye  will  abide  in  this  I.  I  will  build  you 

13.  if  ye  say,  we  will  not  dwell  in  this  I. 
45.  4.  I  will  pluck  up  even  this  whole  I. 
Ezek.  11.  15.  to  us  is  this  I.  given  in  possession 

47.  14.  this  I.  shall  fall  unto  you  for  inheritance 

48.  29.  this  is  the  I.  which  ye  shall  divide 
Acts  7.4.  he  removed  him  into  this  I.  wherein 

Thy  LAND. 
Exod.  23.  10.  six  years  thou  shall  sow  thy  I. 
26.  nothing  shall  cast  their  young  in  thy  I. 
33.  they  shall  not  dwell  in  thy  I.  lest  they 
34.  24.  nor  shall  any  man  desire  thy  I. 
Kun.  21. 22.  Israel  said,  let  me  pass  through  thy  I. 
TJcut.  2.  27.  .TudiT.  11.  17,  19. 
Deut.  7.  13.  he  will  bless  the  fruit  of  thy  I. 
21.  23.  bury  him,  that  thy  I-  be  not  defiled 
28.  12.  to  give  the  rain  to  thy  I.  in  his  season 
18.  cursed  shall  be  the  fruit  of  thy  I.  42. 
Saw.  7.  23.  and  to  do  great  things  for  thy  I.     • 
331 


LAN 

2  Sam.  24. 13.  shall  famine  come  to  thee  in  tky  I.  ? 
Psal.  85.  1.  thou  hast  been  favourable  to  thy  I. 
Isa.  8.  8.  his  wings  shall  fill  the  breadth  oIl  thy  I. 
14.  20.  because  Uiou  hast  destroyed  thy  I, 
23.  10.  pass  through  thy  I.  as  a  river,  O  Tarshish 
60.  18.  violence  shall  no  more  be  heard  in  thy  I. 
62.  4.  nor  shall  thy  I.  be  termed  desolate;  the  Lord 
delighteth  in  thee,  and  thy  I.  shall  be  married 
Ezek.  32.  8.  and  I  will  set  darkness  upon  thy  l- 
.dmos  7.  17.  and  thy  I.  shall  be  divided  by  line 
Mic.  5.  11.  I  will  cut  otf  the  cities  of  thy  I. 
JVoA.  3.13.  the  gates  of  thy  I.  shall  be  set  wide  open 

Your  LAND. 
Gen.47.23. 1  have  bought  you  and  your  I.  this  day 
/,£». 19.9. when  ye  reap  theharvestofj/ouri.  23.22. 

25.  45.  children,  which  they  begat  in  your  I. 

26.  5.  ye  shall  eat,  and  dwell  in  your  I.  safely 
6.  nor  shall  the  sword  go  through  your  I. 
20.  for  your  I.  shall  not  yield  her  increase 

J^um.  10.  9.  if  you  go  to  war  in  your  I.  then  blow 
22.13.  get  into  your  I.  ||  34.12.  this  shall  be  your  I. 
Deut.  11. 14.  give  you  the  rain  of  jo«7-i.  in  season 

1  Sam.  6.5.  he  will  lighten  his  hand  from  ofT^our  I 
Jer.  5. 19.  and  have  served  strange  gods  in  your  I 

27.  10.  prophesy,  to  remove  you  far  from  your  I 
44.22.therefore  is  yourl.a  desolation  and  astonish. 

LANDED. 
.^cts  18.  22.  when  we  had  I.  at  Cesarea 
21.  3.  and  sailed  into  Syria,  and  /.  at  Tyre 

LANDING. 
Acts  28. 12.  I.  at  Syracuse  we  tarried  three  days 

LAND-MARK. 
Deut.  19.14.  thou  shall  not  remove  thy  neighbour's 
l.-mark,  Prov.  22.  28.  |  23.  10 

27.  17.  cursed  that  removeth  neighbour's /.-?«. 
LAND-marks. 

Job  24.2.some  remove  the  l.-marks.anA  take  away 

LANDS. 
Gen.  41.  54.  and  the  dearth  was  in  all  I.  57. 
47.  18.  not  ought  left  but  our  bodies  and  I. 
22.  wherefore  they  sold  not  their  I. 
Judg.  11.  13.  restore  those  I.  again  peaceably 

2  Kings  19. 11.  thou  hast  heard  what  the  kings  of 
Assyria  have  done  to  all  I.  Isa.  37.  11. 

1  Chron.  14. 17.  the  fame  of  David  went  into  all  I. 

2  Chron.  13. 9.  priests  after  the  manner  of  other  I. 
17.  10.  fear  fell  on  all  I.  round  about 
32.  17.  as  the  gods  of  other  I.  have  not  delivered 

Ezra  9. 1.  have  not  separated  from  the  people  of  I. 

2.  have  mingled  with  the  people  of  those  I.  11. 
JVeA.5.  3.  some  said,  we  have  mortgaged  our  I.  4. 

5.  for  other  men  have  our  I.  and  vineyards 
11.  restore,  I  pray  you,  this  day  their  I. 

10. 28.  that  had  separated  from  the  people  of  the  I. 
Psal.  49.11.  they  call  their  Z.  after  their  own  names 
66.  1.  make  a  joyful  noise  all  ye  I.  100.  1. 

105.  44.  and  gave  them  the  I.  of  the  heathen 

106.  27.  lifted  his  hand,  to  scatter  them  in  the  I. 

107.  3.  gathered  them  out  of  the  /.  from  east 
Jer.  16. 15.  that  brought  up  Israel  from  I.  whither 

27.  6.  have  given  all  these  I.  to  Nebuchadnezzar 
Ezek.W.G.into  a  land  which  is  the  glory  of  all  I.  15. 
39.  27.  gathered  them  out  of  their  enemies'  I. 
Mat.  19.  29.  hath  forsaken  houses,  I.  Mark  10.  29. 
Mark  10.  30.  shall  receive  a  hundred  fold  /. 
Acts  4.  34.  as  many  as  were  possessors  of  I.  sold 

LANES. 
Luke  14.  21.  go  out  quickly  into  the  I.  of  the  city 

LANGUAGE 
Signifies,  [1]  A  set  of  tcords  which  a  particular 
nation  or  people  make  use  of  to  express  their 
thoughts,  2  Kings  18.  26.  [2]  The  Hebrew 
tongue,  Gen.  11.  1,  6. 
Shall  speak  the  language  of  Canaan,  Isa.  19.  18. 
Shall  make  profession  of  the  true  religion, 
and  become  members  of  the  gospel  church. 

1  will  turn  to  the  people  a  pure  language,  Zeph 

3.  9.  /  will  renew  them  by  my  Spirit  and 
give  them  a  pure  way  of  worshipping  me  in 
])rayer  and  praises,  as  the  fruit  and  issue  of 
a  purified  heart. 

Gen.  11. 1.  the  whole  earth  was  of  one  I.  and  sp. 

6.  the  people  is  one,  and  they  have  all  one  /. 

7.  go  down,  and  there  confound  their  I.  9. 

2  Kings  18.  26.  speak  in  the  Syrian  :.  Isa.  .36.  11. 

28.  Rab-shakeh  cried  in  the  Jews' i.  /ja.36. 13. 
JVf/t.  13.  24.  their  children  could  not  speak  in  the 

Jews'  Z.  but  according  to  the  I.  of  each  people 
Ksth.  1.22.  to  every  people  after  their  1. 3.  12.  |  8. 9. 
Psal.  19.    3.  no  I.  where  their  voice  is  not  heard 
81.  5.  where  I  heard  a  I.  that  I  understood  not 
114.  l.houseof  Jacob  from  a  people  of  strange/. 
Tsa.  19.  18.  five  cities  speak  the  I.  of  Canaan 
,Ter.  5.  15.  a  nation,  whose  I.  thou  knowcat  not 
Ezek.  3.  5.  not  sent  to  a  people  of  hard  I.  6. 
Dan.  3.  29.  I  decree,  every  I.  that  spcakelh  amiss 
Zcpk.  3.  9.  I  will  turn  to  the  people  a  pure  I. 
Acts  2. 6.  every  man  heard  them  speak  in  his  own  /. 

LANGUAGES. 
Dan.  3.  4.  to  you,  O  people,  nations,  and  I 


LAS 

X)an.3.7.  all  J.fell  down  and  worshipped  the  image 
4.1.Nebuchadne2zar  to  all  /.||  6. 25.  Darius  to  all  I. 
5.  19.  all  I.  trembled  and  feared  before  him 
7.  14.  all  people,  nations,  and  I.  should  serve  him 
Zech.  8.  23.  ten  men  out  of  all  I.  shall  take  hold 

LANGUISH. 
Isa.  16.  8.  for  the  fields  of  Heshbon  I.  and  vine 
19.  8.  and  they  thatspread  nets  on  waters  shaL'  I. 
24.  4.  the  haughty  people  of  the  earth  do  I. 
Jer.  14.2.  gates  of  Judah  I.  and  are  black  to  ground 
Hos.  4.  3.  every  one  that  dwelleth  therein  shall  L 

LANGUISHED. 
Lam.  2.  8.  rampart  and  wall  to  lament,  I.  together 

LANGUISHETH. 
Isa.  24.  4.  the  world  I.  and  fadeth  away 

7.  the  vine  I.  \\  33.  9.  the  earth  mourneth  and  {. 
Jer.15.9.  she  that  hath  born  seven  I.  given  up  ghost 
Joel  1.  10.  the  oil  /.  1|  12.  the  fig-tree  I. 
J\rah.  1.  4.  Bashan  I.  and  Carmel,  the  flower  I. 

LANGUISHING. 
Psai.41.3.Lord  will  strengthen  him  on  the  bed  of  Z. 

LANTERNS. 
John  18.  3.  Judas  cometh  with  I.  and  torches 

LAP. 
2  Kings  4. 39.  and  gathered  wild  gourds,  his  I.  full 
JVch.  5.  13.  I  shook  my  I.  and  said,  God  shake 
Prov.  16.33.  the  lot  is  cast  into  the  /.  but  disposing 

LAPPED. 
Judg.  7.  6.  the  number  that  I.  were  three  hundred 
7.  the  Lord  said,  by  them  that  I.  I  will  save  you 
LAPPETH. 
.Judg.  7.  5.  every  one  that  I.  of  the  water  as  a  doe 
LAPWING.     See  Bat. 
LARGE. 
Gc7i.34.21.  the  land,  behold  it  is  I.  enough  for  them 
FjKod.  3.  8.  to  bring  them  into  a  good  and  I.  land 
J«(/^.18.10.when  ye  go,  ye  shall  come  into  a  i.  land 
2  Su7n.22.20.  he  brought  me  into  I.  place,  Ps.  18.19. 
JVt'A.  4. 19. 1  said  to  people,  the  work  is  great  and  I. 
7.4.  the  city  was  I.  and  great,  but  the  people  few 
9.  35.  have  not  served  thee  in  the  I.  and  fat  land 
Psal.  31.  8.  thou  hast  set  my  feet  in  a  I.  room 
118.5.  Lord  answered  me,  and  set  me  in  a.  I.  place 
119. 1 45. 1  will  walk  at  I.  for  I  seek  thy  precepts 
Isa.  22.  18.  he  will  toss  thee  into  a  I.  country 
30.23.in  that  day  shall  thy  cattle  feed  in  Z.pasturei 
33.  Tophet  is  ordained,  he  made  it  deep  and  I. 
Jer.  22.  14.  that  saith,  I  will  build  I.  chambers 
Ezek.  23.  32.  drink  of  thy  sister's  cup  deep  and  /. 
Hos.A.lG.hd.  will  feed  them  as  a  lamb  in  a  /.  place 
Mat.  28.  12.  they  gave  I.  money  to  the  soldiers 
Mark  14.15. will  shew  a  I.  upper  room,  Luke  22.12. 
Gal.  6.  11.  ye  see  how  I.  a  letter  I  have  written 
Rco.  21.  16.  the  length  is  as  I.  as  the  breadth 
LARGENESS. 

1  Kings  4.  29.  God  gave  Solomon  I.  of  heart 

LASCIVIOUSNESS. 
Mark  7.  21.  out  of  the  heart  of  men  proceed  /. 

2  Cor.  12.  21.  and  have  not  repented  of  the  I. 
Gal.  5.  19.  the  works  of  the  flesh  are  manifest,  { 
Eph.i.  19.  who  hath  given  themselves  over  to  I. 

1  Pet.  4.  3.  when  we  walked  in  I.  Insls,  excess 
Jude  4.  turning  the  grace  of  ourVjod  into  /. 

LAST. 
Gen.  49.  19.  But  Gad  shall  overcome  at  the  I. 
J^um.  23.  10.  and  let  my  /.  end  be  like  his 

2  Sam.  19.  11.  why  are  ye  I.  to  bring  the  king,  12 
23.  1.  now  these  be  tho  I.  words  of  David 

1  Chron.  23.  27.  lor  by  the  I.  words  of  David 
29. 29.  now  the  acts  of  David  the  king,  first  and  /. 

2  Chron.  9.  29.  the  acts  of  Solomon  first  and  I. 
12.  1.5.  of  Rehoboam  first  and  I.  ||  16.  11.  of  Asa 
20.  34.  the  acts  of  Jehoshaphat  first  and  /. 

25.  26.  the  acts  of  Amaziah  first  and  I. 

26.  22.  of  Uzziah  first  and  I.  ||  28.%.  of  Ahaz 
3.").  27.  Josiah's  deeds  first  and  I.  are  written 

Ezra  8.  13.  and  of  the  I.  sons  of  Adonikam 
J\r,h.  8.  18.  from  the  first  day  to  the  /.  he  read 
Prov.  5.  11.  and  thou  mourn  at  the  I.  when  thy 

23.32.  at  the  I.  it  biteth  like  a  serpent,  and  stingeth 
Isa.  41.  4. 1  the  Lord,  the  first,  and  with  the  I.  44. 6. 
I  48.  12.  Rev.  1.  11,  17.  ]  2.  a  |  22.  13. 
.Ter.  12.  4.  they  said',  he  shall  not  see  our  I.  end 

50.17.at /.Nebuchadnezzar  hath  broken  his  bonei 
iMm.  1.  9.  she  remembcreth  not  her  /.  end 
Dan.  4.  8.  at  the  /.  Daniel  came  in  before  me 

8.  3.but  one  was  higher,  and  Ihc  higher  cnme  up  /. 
19.  make  Ihee  know  what  shall  be  in  the  /.  end 
Amos  9.  1.  I  will  slay  the  /.  of  them  with  sword 
jTfflt. 12.45. /.state  of  that  man  is  worse, /-i/Av  11.26. 

19.  30.  many  that  are  first  shall  be  /.  and  the  /. 

first,  20.  16.  Mark  10.  31.   l.uke  13.  30. 

20.  8.  beginning  from  the  /.  to  the  first 
12.  these  /.  have  wrought  but  one  hour 
14.  I  will  give  to  this  /.  even  as  unto  thee 

21.  37.  /.  of  all  he  sent  higson,s.-iying,  Mark  12.  6 

22.  27.  and  /.  of  all  the  woman  died  also,  in  re- 

surrection whose  wife?  Mark  12. 22.  Lxiki 
20.32. 
2C.  60.  at  the  /.  came  two  false  witnessei 


LAU 

Jlfal.27.64.  the  I.  error  shall  we  worse  than  tlic  fiist 
Mark  'J.  M  il'dosirc  tu  be  lirst,  the  sumu  sliall  be  I. 
Luke  1'2.  o'J.  till  ihuu  hast  |iukI  the  /.  mite 
'o/irtH.  y.  bcginiiliii,'  at  ihoelcltst  even  to  the  /. 
1  Cur.  4.  '.I.  (jU(I  hath  ect  I'orlh  U:i  llio  u|i()stle8  I. 
J5.  >i.  aijd  /.  of  nil  he  was  Been  of  me  also 
i.'G.  the  l.  enemy  is  death  ||  45.  the  I.  Adatr. 
5'i.  all  be  changed  in  a  moment,  at  the  I.  Irun.ji 
}'/til.-\.  lU.  at/,  your  care  of  mu  nourished  ugain 
Jiev.  2.  19.  the/,  works  to  be  more  tlian  the  lirs: 
15.  1.  seven  angels  having  the  seven  /.  i>la!;u<.'S 
iil.y.  seven  vials  full  of  the  seven  I.  i)lagues 
LAST  Udij,  days. 
Signifies,  [1]   T/ic  cigliUi  and  jrrcat  day  of  the 
fcoit  of  tabeniaclci,  wherein  there  uncd  to  be 
the g-rcatest  as.iciiililies, iDUn'.'.iy.  ['2J  The  day 
of  judgment,  John  11.  -24.  |  li.  48.     L^J  From 
Vte  time  of  Christ' s  first  coming  to  his  second, 
Acts  2.  17.     Hel).  1.2. 
Oen.  49.  1.  which  shall  befall  you  in  the  I.  days 
/;ja.2.2.comc  to  pas.<  in  /.  days,  Mic.  4.1.  jjcts  2. 17. 
JoAiiti.;?.!.  should  raise  it  up  at  the /.  t/ay,  40,44,54. 
7.  ;i7.  in  the  /.  day,  the  great  day  of  the  feast 
11. 24. 1  know  that  he  shall  rise  again  at  the  I.  day 
12.  48.  the  same  shall  judge  him  in  the  /.  day 
2  Tim.  y.  1.  in  I.  days  jjerllous  times  shall  come 
Hcb.  1.  2.  hath  sjioken  in  tliese  I.  days  by  his  Son 
Jam.  5. 3.  ye  have  hea])ed  treasure  for  the  I.  days 
S2  Pet.  3.  'i.  there  shall  come  in  the  I.  days  scoft'ers 

LAST  time,  times. 
1  Pet.  1.  5.  ready  to  be  revealed  in  the  I.  time 

20.  but  was  manifest  in  these  I.  times  for  you 
1  John  2.  18.  little  children,  it  is  the  I.  ti.  are  many 
antichrists,whereby  we  know  that  it  is  the  I.  time 
Jude  18.  told  there  should  be  mockers  in  the  I.  time 

LASTED. 
Jad".  14.  17.  and  she  wept  while  the  feast  I. 

LASTING. 
Deut.  33.  1.5.  for  the  precious  things  of  the  /.  hills 

LATCH  liT. 
Isa.  5.  27.  nor  the  /.  of  their  shoes  be  broken 
Mark  1.  7.  the  I.  of  whose  shoes,  Au/ie  3.  10. 

LATE. 
Psal.  127.  2.  it  is  in  vain  for  you  to  set  up  I. 
Mic.  2.  8.  of  I.  my  people  is  risen  up  as  an  enemy 
John  11.  8.  the  Jews  of  i.  sought  to  stone  thee 

L.\TELY. 
.lets  18. 2.  found  Acpiila  a  Jew  I.  come  from  Italy 

LATIN. 
7.uAe23.  ;}3.  written  in  H.^brcw  and  I.  .John  19.  20. 

LATTElt. 
F.Jtod.A.S.  they  will  believe  ihe  voice  of  the  I.  sign 
Deal.  11.  14.  will  give  thee  the  first  rain,  and  I.  rain 
24.  3.  and  if  her  I.  husband  hate  her  or  ilie 
Job  19.2.).  my  Redeemer-shall  stand  at  the  I.  day 
29.23.  they  opened  their  mouth  as  for  the  /.  rain 
Prov.  10.  15.  his  favour  is  as  a  cloud  of  the  I.  rain 
19.  20.  that  thou  mayest  be  wise  in  the  I.  end 
Jer.  3.  .1.  and  there  hath  been  no  I.  rain 
5.  24.  both  the  former  and  /.  rain  in  hiS  season 
F.iek.  38.  8.  in  the  I.  years  thou  shall  come 
Dan.  8.  23.  in  the  I.  time  of  their  kingdom 
11.  29.  but  it  shall  not  be  as  the  former  or  the  I. 
Hos.fi.  3.  ho  shall  come  as  the  I.  and  former  rain 
Joel  2.  23.  and  the  I.  rain  in  the  fir^t  month 
.Imos  7.  1.  in  the  beginning  of  the  I.  growth 
Hag.  2.  9.  the  (!lory  of  the /.  house  shall  be  greater 
Zeeh.  10.  1.  ask  ye  rain  in  the  time  ofthe  I.  rain 

1  Tim.  4.  1.  that  in  Ihe  I.  times  some  shall  dejiarl 

See  Dws,  End. 

LATTICE. 

Judg.  5.28.  Sisera's  mother  cried  through  the  I. 

2  Kingn  1.  2.  Ahazinh  fell  down  through  the  I. 
Cant.  2.  9.  shewing  him.><elf  through  the  I. 

LAUn. 
7?ctm.  15.11. praise  the  Lord,  and  Miim  all  ye  people 

LAYER. 

Ezod.  30. 18.  thou  shall  also  make  a  /.  of  brass 

2«.  tlu'  I.  and  hi.s  foot,  31.  9.  |  35.  10.  |  39.  39. 

3H.  H.  he  made  the  I.  of  l)rass  and  the  foot  brass 

40. 7.  thou  shall  sot  the  {.  ||  30.  and  he  set  the  I. 

II.  and  Ihou shall  anoint  the/,  and  his  foot 
J.r.n.  8.  11.  he  nfioimed  holh  the  I.  and  his  foot 

1  Kings  7.30.untlcr  the  I.  were  undf-rseltcrs  molten 
38.  every  I-  was  forty  liaihs,  and  every  [.  was 

2  Kings  16.  17.  and  king  Aim/,  removed  the  I. 

LA  VERS. 

1  Kingf  7.  38.  then  made  he  ten  /.  of  hrnsR 
40.  and  Hiram  made  the  /.  and  the  shovels 
43.  and  the  ten  I.  on  I  lie  bn9ei,2  Chrvn.4.  fl,  14 
LAUGH 

BignificB,  [  I ]  To  rrjoicr  greatly  in  a  blessing  pro- 
viisid,  or  already  cnnfirrri),  i'.in.  17. 17. 1 21. 0. 
[2J  7V,  distrust,  or  doubt  nf  Ihr  fiilfilottnt  of  a 
/irwrnisc, Gen. 18.12.  [3]  Torrerine comfort  and 
jn»/,LukeG.21.  [4]  Tohcmerryin  asinfalmun- 
ni'r,  Luke  0. 25.  [5]  To  carry  one's  sriffa  inili- 
arbj  and  pleasantly  towards  nnolher..}<)\i  2'.l,'2l. 

At  clestrui'tion  and  famine  thou  filiall  Inngli,  .'ah  5. 

22.    Tkou  Shalt  rrjoire.  that  by  Cod's  watchful 

332 


I-AW 

end gracioju  providence  thou  hast  been  secured 
from  them,  ichcii.  others  are  destroyed  thtrcby. 
(ten   18.  13.  wherefore  did  Sarah  /.  saying 
15   and  he  said,  nay,  but  thou  didst  /. 

21.  (j.God  hath  made  me  to /.all  vvilU.  with  me 
Job  5.  22.  at  destruction  and  famine  thou  shall  /. 

9  23.  he  will  /.  at  Ihe  trial  of  the  innocent 

22.  19.  and  the  innocent  /.  them  to  scorn 
Psal.  2.4.  he  that  siiteth  in  the  heavens  shall  /. 

22.  7.  all  they  that  see  me  /.  me  to  scorn 
37.  13.  the  Lord  shall  /.  at  him,  for  he  seetli 
52.  0.  the  righteous  also  shall  /.  at  him 
59.  8.  but  thou,  O  Lord,  shall  /.  at  them 
80.  0.  and  our  enemies  /.  among  themselves 

Pi-ov.  1.  20.  1  also  will  /.  at  your  calamiiy 
29.  9.  whether  he  rage  or  /.  there  is  no  test 

F.ccl.  3.  4.  a  lime  to  weep,  and  a  lime  to  /. 

J.ukc  0.  21.  blessed  are  ye  thai  weep,  ye  shall  /. 

25.  woe  unto  you  that  /.  now,  ye  shall  weep 

LAUGHED. 

<7f7i.  17. 17.  Abraham  /.  |  18. 12.  Sarah  /.  in  herself 
18.  15.  then  Sarah  denied,  saving,  1  /.  not 

2  Kings  19. 21.  daughter  of  Zio'ii  hath  /.  Jsa.  37.22. 

2  ( 'hriin.  30. 10.  they  /.  them  to  scorn,  and  mocked 

jVcA.  2.  19.  they  /.  us  to  scorn,  and  despised  Us 

.fob  ]-2.  4.  the  just  and  upright  man  is  /.  to  scorn 

29.  'J4.  if  I  /.  on  them,  they  believed  not 
Kzch.  23.  32.  thou  shall  be  /.  to  scorn,  and  had 
Jt/u/.9.24.  they  /.  to  scorn,  Mark  5. 40.  jUukc  8. 53. 

LAUGHETll. 
.fob  41.  29.  he  /.  at  the  shaking  of  a  spear 

LAUGHING. 
Job  8.  21.  till  he  lill  thy  mouth  with  /.  and  thy  lips 

LAUGHTER. 
Psal.  120.  2.  then  was  our  niouiii  filled  wilh  /. 
Proo.  14.  13.  even  in  /.  the  heart  is  sorrowful 
F.ccl.  2.  2.  I  s.tid  of/,  it  is  mad,  and  of  mirth 
7.  3.  sorrow  is  better  than  /.  ||  0.  so  is  /.  of  the  fool 
lam.  4.  9.  let  your/,  be  turned  to  mourning 

LAVISH. 
Isa.  40.  0.  they  /.  gold  out  of  the  bag,  and  weigh 

LAUNCH. 
Luke  5.  4.  he  said  to  Simon,  /.  out  into  the  deep 

LAUNCHED. 
Luke  8.  22.  let  us  go  over,  and  they  /.  forth 
Acts  21.  1.  thai  after  we  had  /.  27.  2,  4. 

LAW 

Signifies,  [1]  Ji  rule  directing  and  obliging  a  ra- 
tional creature  in  moral  and  religious  actions, 
I'rov.  28.  4.     [2]    'J'hat  which  often  hath  the 
force  of  governing  and  over-ruling  our  actions 
in  our  present  imperfect  slate,  Rom.  7.23,  25. 
[3j   The  whole  doctrine  of  the  word  delivered 
by  (iod  to  his  church,  Psal.  1.  2.  ]  19.  7.     [4] 
7'Ae  decalogue,  or  ten  moral  precepts,  Rom.  2. 
25.  I  7.  7.     [51   'J'hc  second  tabic  of  ihe  law, 
Uoin.  13.  8.     [0]  The  precejits  of  God,  moral, 
ceremonial,   and  judicial,   John    1.    17.      [7] 
The  principles  of  reason,  or  the  law  of  na- 
ture icritten  in  man's  heart,  Rom.  2.  14.     [8] 
The  old  testament,  ^ohtt  10.  'M.  \  15.  25.   1  Cor. 
14.   21.      [9]     The    doctrine    of    the   gospel, 
which  no  less  obliges  men  to  the  belief  and 
practice  of  it,  than  the  law  did,  Isa.  2.  3.  |  42. 
4.  Rom.  3.  27.      [10]   'I'hc  works  commanded 
by  the  law,  Gal.  3.  1 1.     [II]  .'i  strict  and  pre- 
cise observation  of  the  lam,  Phil.  3.  5.      [12] 
'J'hc  covenant  that   (Iod  made  with  the  .Jews, 
with  oil  the  constitution  of  worship  thereto 
belonging,  Ileb.  10.  1. 
Oen.  47.  20.  Joseph  made  it  a  /.  over  tlio  land 
Ezod.  12.  49.  one  /.  to  him  that  is  home-born  and 
to  the  stranger,  /.(;«.  21.22.  A'um.  15.  10,29. 
24.  12.  I  will  give  thee  a  /.  and  commandment 
Heut.  17.  II.  according  to  the  sentence  ofthe  /. 
33.  2.  from  his  right  hand  went  a  fiery  /.  for  llieni 
4.Mosi's  commanded  us  a  /.  even  Ihe  inheritance 
.Tosh.  I.  7.  mayest  ohs.  to  do  according  to  all  the  /. 
8. 32.  wrote  on  the  stones  a  copy  ofthe  /.  of  Moses 

34.  afterward  he  read  the  words  ofthe  /. 
22.  5.  lake  held  to  the  /.  2  Kings  17.  13,  37.  |  21.  8. 
2  Kings  17.  34.  nor  ilo  afu^r  the  /.  and  command. 
2.3.  24.  Ihat  he  might  perform  the  words  ofthe  /. 
25.  according  lo  all  llio  /.  of  Moses 

1  Chran.  10.  17.  hath  ronfiimed  lo  Jacob  for  a/. 
22.  12.  Ihiil  Ihoii  mayest  keep  Ihe  /.  of  God 

2  Chron.  14.  4.  cominnnded  Judah  lo  do  the  /. 
19. 10.  between  /.  and  eommnndment,  stnMiles 

30.  10.  Blood  in  their  place  according  to  /.of  Moses 
31.21.  Hezekiah  ilid  in  every  work,  and  in  Ihe  /. 

33.  8.  take  heed  lo  do  according  to  Ihe  whole  /. 

34.  19.  when  Josiah  heard  the  words  of  Ihe  /. 
F.zrii  7.  0.  he  wns  a  ready  scribe  in  ihe  /.  12,  21. 

14.  loeiKpiire  nccordini;  to  Ihe/.  of  Ihv  God 
20.  will  not  do  the  /.  of  God,  and  /.  ofthe  king 
10.  3.  and  lei  it  be  done  accurdnig  lo  the  /. 
JiTrh.H.  2.  ami  Ezra  the  priest  brought  Ihe  /.  before 
7.  LeviU'Scaused  the  people  lo  underslund  the  /. 
9.  people  wept  when  they  heard  Ihe  words  of/. 
13.  were  {gathered  togcllicr  to  understand  the  /. 


LAW 

J\reh.  10. 88.  had  Beparated  themselves  to  I.  of  Go$         > 
29.  entered  into  an  oath  to  walk  in  God's  /. 

12.  44.  to  gather  into  them  the  portions  of  the  /. 

13.  3.  when  they  had  heard  the  /.  they  fe])arated 
F.sth,  1.  8.  the  drinking  was  according  to  the  I. 

15.  what  do  to  the  queen  Vashti  according  lo  /.  ? 
4.  1 1.  there  is  one  /.  of  his  to  |)ut  him  to  death 

10.  1  will  go  in,  which  is  not  according  to  the  {. 
Job  22.  22.  receive  the  /.  from  his  mouth,  lay  up- 
Psal.  1.  2.  in  his  /.  ho  meditates  day  and  night 
37.  31.  the  /.  of  his  God  is  in  his  heart 
78.  5.  for  he  appointed  a  /.  in  Israel,  which  he 

10.  and  they  refused  lo  walk  in  his  /. 
81.  4.  this  was  a  /.  of  the  God  of  Jacob 
94.  20.  which  frametl* mischief  by  i  /. 
105.  10.  and  confirmed  ihe  same  lo  Jacob  for  a  /■ 
119.72.  the  /.  of  Ihy  mouth  is  better  than  go'd 
Prov.  ).  8.  forsake  not  the  /.  of  thy  mother,  0.  20. 
0.  23.  commandmenl  is  a  lamp,  and  the  /.  is  light 
13.  14.  the  /.  of  the  wise  is  a  fountain  of  lil'u 
28.  4.  they  that  forsake  the  /.  praise  the  wicked, 
but  such  as  keep  the  /.  contend  witli  them 
7.  whoso  keepelh  the  /.  is  a  wise  son 
9.  he  Ihat  turns  away  his  ear  from  hearing  the  I. 
29. 18.  but  he  that  keepelh  the  /.  happy  is  he 
31.  5.  lest  they  drink  and  forget  ihe  /. 

20.  and  in  hertongU(!  is  the  /.  of  kindness 
Isa.  1.  10.  and  give  ear  lo  the  /.  of  our  God 

2.  3.  out  of '/ion  shall  go  forlli  the  /.  Mic.  4.  2. 
8. 10.  seal  the  /.  ||  20.  lo  the  /.  and  the  leslirncmy 
42.  4.  and  Ihe  isles  shall  wait  for  his  /. 

21.  the  Lord  will  magnify  Ihe  /.  and  make  it 
24.  neither  were  they  obedient  lo  his  /. 

51.  4.  for  a  /.  shall  proceed  from  me 
Jer.  2.  8.  they  that  handle  the  /.  knew  me  not 
18. 18.  the  /.  shall  not  perish  from  the  priest 
32.1I.evidence  was  sealed  accord,  to  /.andcusloin 
44.  23.  ye  have  not  obeyed,  nor  walked  in  his  / 
Lam.  2.  9.  the  /.  is  no  more,  prophets  find  no  visioD 
Fzeli,  7.  20.  the  /.  shall  pinish  from  the  prics;s 
Dan.  0.  i).  except  concerning  the  /.  of  his  God 
12.  true  according  to  the  /.  of  the  Medes,  15. 
Hos.  4.  0.  Ihoti  hast  forgotten  the  /.  of  Ihy  God 
JIab.  1.4.  thereroie  ihe  /.  is  slacked,  and  judgment 
y.rph.  3.  4.  her  priests  have  done  violence  lo  ihe  i. 
7/i(g.  2.  11.  ask  now  the  priests  concerning  the  /. 
Zech.J.  12.  lest  they  should  hear  the  /.  and  words 
Mol.  2.  0.  ihe  /.  of  truth  was  in  his  mouili 

7.  and  Iho^y  should  seek  the  /.  at  his  mouth 

8.  ye  have  caused  many  lo  stumble  at  the  / 
9.iiot  keplmyways.bul  have  been  i)artial  inlhcZ 

4.  4.  rcmemhcr  the  /.  of  Moses  my  servant 
Mat.  5.  17.  think  not  I  am  come  to  destroy  the  L 

18.  one  titlle  shall  in  no  wise  pass  from  Ihc  /. 
40.  and  if  any  man  will  sue  thee  at  the  /. 

11.  13.  the  /.  prophesied  lill  John,  Luke  10.  16. 

12.  5.  have  ye  not  read  in  the  /.  how  ihal  on 
22.  30.  which  is  the  great  commandment  in  »iic  I 

40.  on  these  two  commnndments  hang  all  ihe  /. 
2.3.23.  have  omitted  the  weightier  maitcis  of  ihe  /. 
/,hAv>2.  27.  lodo  forhim  aftcrlhe  cnsiom  ofthe/. 

5.  17.  there  were  doctors  ofthe  /.  sillins  by 
10.  17.  than  for  one  liltle  of  ihe  /.  lo  fail 

./ohn  1. 17.  for  the  /.  was  given  by  Mosi  s,  but  grace 
45.  him  of  whom  Moses  in  the  /.  did  wiile 

7.  19.  did  not  Moses  give  you  the  /.  and  yet  nono 

of  yon  kee[>eih  Ihe  /.  why  go  ye  lo  kill  iiiol 
23.  that  the  /.  of  Moses  should  not  be  broken 
49.  people  who  kniiwelh  not  the  /.  me  cursed 
Sl.doih  oiir/.judge  any  m:in  before  it  h^iir  htm'! 

8.  5.  now  Moses  in  ihe  /.  commanded  iis 

in.  :m.  is  it  not  wrillen  in  your  /.  ye  are  gods  ? 

12.  34.  we  have  heard  out  of  Ihe  /.  ihal  Christ 
15.  2.').  might  be  fulfilled  what  is  wrillen  in  Iheir/. 
18.  31.  and  judge  him  necmding  to  your  /. 

10.  7.  we  hiive  a  /.  and  by  our  /.  he  oushl  10  die 
.iris  .5.34. then  stooil  up  Gamaliel,  a  doctor  ofthe  t. 
0.  13.  lo  speak  blasphemous  words  against  tho  /. 
7.  53.  who  have  received  the  /.  by  aiigeN 

13.  15.  after  reMdiii:;  of  Ihe  /.  and  prophets 

39.  ve  could  nol  he  justified  by  the  /.  of  Most* 
1.5.  .5.  to  command  llicm  lo  keep  ihe  /.  r)f  Mosos 
21.  ve  mnsi  Ix;  circumcised  and  keep  the  /. 

18.  ll  men  lo  worship  God  conlinry  lo  Ihe  /. 

15.  hut  if  it  he  a  (lueslion  ofyour/'.  look  ve  toil 

19.  38.  the  /.  is  open  1|  21.  20.  zealous  ofthe  /. 
21.21.  hnl  Ihal  Ihou  Ibvself  keepesi  the  /. 

28.  this  is  Ihe  mini  IhnI  leachclh  against  thr  I. 

22.  3.  taught  according  lo  the  ninnner  of  the  /. 

12.  .Ananias  a  devoiii  man  according  lo  Ihe  /. 

23.  3.  for  sillesl  ihou  to  jnilgo  me  after  ihe  /.  nnG 
oommandeflmoto  be  smitten  contrary  lolhc  t.t 

21.  0.  and  would  have  judged  according  lo  our  I 
25.  8.  nor  ajninst  the  /.  of  Ihe  Jews,  nor  lemplo 
28.  23.  persuading  thorn  out  ofthe  /.  and  prophctf 
Horn.  'J.  12.  sinned  in  ihe  /.shall  he  judged  by  the  t 

13.  nol  the  hearers  ofthe  /.  arejuBl.beforo  God 
14. when  Ihe  Gentiles  which  hav.'  nol  the  /.  do  bj 

nature  things  conlained  in  the  /.  these  liuving 
*        not  the  I.  arc  a  I.  unto  ihumaolvci 


LAW 

Horn.  2.15.  which  shew  the  work  of  the  /.written  in 

17.  thou  art  called  a  Jew,  and  restest  in  llie  /. 

18.  kiiowest,  being  instructed  out  of  tiie  I. 
20.  which  hast  tlie  form  of  tire  truth  in  the  I. 
ii3.  thou  that  niakest  thy  boast  of  the  I.  through 

breaking  the  I.  dishonouresl  thou  God  7 

25.  circumcision  verily  protiteth  if  thou  keep 

llie  I.  but  if  thou  be  a  breaker  of  the  /. 

26.  therefore  if  keep  the  righteousness  of  the  /. 
»  27.  uncircumcision,  if  it  fultil  the  I.  judge  thee 

who  by  circumcision  dost  transgress  the  I. 

3.  VJ.  we  know  what  things  soever  the  I.  saith 

20.  by  the  deeds  of  I.  no  flesh  be  justified,  for  by 
the  I.  is  the  knowledge  of  sin,  28.  Oal.  2.  16. 

21.  the  righteousness  of  G«  is  witnessed  by  the  I. 

27.  by  what  I.  excluded  ?  by  the  I.  of  faith 

31.  do  we  make  void  the  I.  ?  we  establish  the  /. 

4.  13.  for  the  promise  was  not  through  the  I. 

14.  for  if  they  which  are  of  the  I.  be  heirs 

15.  the  I.  worketh  wrath,  for  where  no  I.  is 
10.  be  sure,  not  to  that  only  which  is  of  the  I. 

5.  13.  for  until  the  I.  sin  was  in  the  world,  but 

sin  is  not  imputed  where  there  is  no  I. 

20.  the  I.  entered,  that  the  otTence  might  abound 
7.  1.  I  speak  to  them  which  know  the  I.  the  I. 

hath  dominion  over  a  man  as  long  as  he  liveth 

2.  the  woman  is  bound  by  the  I.  to  her  husband ; 

if  he  bo  dead,  she  is  loosed  from  the  I.  3. 

4.  ye  also  are  become  dead  to  the  I.  by  Christ 

5.  ihe  motions  of  sins  which  were  by  the  I. 

6.  but  now  we  are  delivered  from  the  I. 

7.  is  the  I.  sin  1  I  had  not  known  sin  but  by  I.  nor 

lust,  except  I.  had  said,  thou  shall  not  covet 

8.  for  without  the  I.  sin  was  dead 

12.  the  I.  is  holy,  and  commandment  holy,  just 

14.the  Ms  spiritual  ||  IG.the  I.  is  good,  1  Tim.  1. 8. 

21. 1  find  then  a  I.  ||  22. 1  delight  in  the  I.  of  God 

23. 1  see  another  I.  warring  against  the  I.  of  my 

mind,  bringing  me  into  captivity  to  I.  of  sin 

7.  25.  with  mind  I  serve  I.  of  God,  flesh  I.  of  sin 

S.  2.  the  I.  of  life  made  me  free  from  the  I.  of  sin 

3.  for  what  the  I.  could  not  do,  in  that  weak 

4.  the  righteousness  of  the  I.  might  be  fulfdled 
7.  the  carnal  mind  is  not  subject  to  the  I.  of  God 

9.  4.  to  whom  pertaineth  the  giving  of  the  I. 

31.  Israel  followed  after  the  /.  of  righteousness 

32.  because  they  sought  it  by  the  works  of  the  I. 

10.  4.  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  I.  for  righteousne.ss 

5.  describes  the  righteousness  which  is  of  the  I. 
13.  8-.  he  that  loveth  another,  hath  fulfilled  the  I. 

10.  therefore  love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  I. 
I  Cor.  G.  1.  dare  any  of  you  go  to  I.  before  the  unjust 

6.  but  brother  goeth  to  I.  with  brother 

7.  bccau.se  ye  go  to  I.  one  with  another 

7.39. wife  is  bound  by  the  l.as  long  as  her  husband 
!).  8.  or  saith  not  the  I.  the  same  also  1 
14.34.  to  be  under  obedience,  as  also  saith  the  I. 
15.56.  of  death  is  sin,  and  strength  of  sin  is  the  I. 
Oal.2.\G.  man  is  notjustified  by  tlie  works  of  the/. 
19.1  thro'  the  I.  am  dead  to  the  I.  that  I  might  live 

21.  for  if  righteousness  come  by  tlie  I.  then 

'i.  2.  received  ye  the  spirit  by  the  works  of  the  1. 1 
.*>.  miracles,  doeth  he  it  by  the  works  of  the  /.  7 

10.  as  many  as  are  of  the  works  of  the  I. 

11.  that  no  man  isjustifii;d  by  the  /.  is  evident 

12.  and  the  I.  is  not  of  faith,  but  the  man 

13.  Christ  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of/. 

17.  the  covenant  in  Christ,  the  /.  cannot  disannul 

18.  if  the  inheritance  be  of  the  /.  not  of  promise 
V.t.  wherefore  then  serveth  the  /.  ?  it  was  added 

21.  is  the  /.then  against  the  promises  7  if  a  /.  had 

been  given,  righteousness  had  been  by  the  /. 
21. the  /.  was  ourschoolmaster  to  bring  us  to  Chr. 

4.  21.  tell  me,  do  ye  not  hear  the  /.  ? 

5.  3.  that  he  is  a  debtor  to  do  Ihe  whole  /. 

4.  for  whosoever  of  you  are  justified  by  the  /. 

14.  all  the  /.  is  fulfilled  in  one  word,  even  in  this 
23.  temperance,  against  such  there  is  no  /. 

6.  2.  bear  ye,  and  so  fulfil  the  /.  of  Christ 

13.  nor  themselves  keep  the  /.  but  desire  to  have 
Kiik.  2.  15.  having  abolished  in  his  flesh  the  /. 
Phil.  3.  5.  as  touching  the  /.  a  Ph.arisee 

6.  touching  the  righteousness  in  the  /.  blameless 

fl.  not  having  mine  own  righteousness,  of  the  /. 
I  Tim.  1.  7.  desiring  to  be  teachers  of  the  /. 

0.  the  /.  is  not  made  for  a  righteous  man 
T't.  3.  9.  but  avoid  contentions  about  the  /. 
H'h.  7. 5.  to  take  tithes  of  people  according  to  the  /. 

11.  for  under  it  the  people  received  the  /. 

12.  there  is  made  of  necessity  a  change  of  the  /. 

16.  not  after  the  /.  of  a  carnal  commandment 

19.  for  the  /.  made  nothing  perfect,  but  bringing 
23.  the  /.  maketh  men  high-priests,  but  the  word 

of  the  oath  which  was  since  the  /.  maketh  Son 
¥.4.  there  .are  priests  offer  gifts  according  to  the  /. 
9.  19.  when  Mososhad  spoken  according  to  the/. 

22.  all  thinss  are  by  the  /.  purgfd  with  blood 
10. 1.  the  /.  having  a  shadow  of  good  things 

28.  be  that  despised  Moses'  /.  died  without  mercy 
/am.  J .  25.  whoso  lookef  h  in'.o  perfect  /.  of  liberty 

333 


LAW 

James  2. 8.  if  ye  fulfil  the  royal  /.  ye  do  well 
y.  and  are  convinced  of  the  /.  as  transgressors 

10.  for  whosoever  shall  keep  the  wliole  /. 

11.  if  thou  kill,  Ibou  art  a  transgressor  of  the  /. 

12.  they  that  shall  be  judged  by  the  /.  of  liberty 
4. 11.  that  speaketli  evil  of  llie  /.  and  judgeth  tlie  /. 

1  Joto3.4.whosoever  committeth  sin  traiisgresseth 

also  the  /.  for  sin  is  the  transgression  of  the  /. 
Hee  Book. 
LAW  of  the  Lord. 
Ezod.  13. 9.  that  the  JLurd's  I.  may  be  in  thy  mouth 

2  Kings  10.31.Jehu  took  no  heed  lo  walk  in  l.of  L. 
2  Chron.  12.  1.  Rehoboam  forsook  /.  o/  JL.  and  Isr. 

31. 4.  that  they  might  be  encouraged  in  the  /.  of  L. 

35. 26.  Josiah's.goodness  according  to  the  /.  of  L. 
Ezra  ".lO.prejiared  his  heart  to  seek  the  /.  of  Lord 
Fsal.  1.2.  his  delight  is  in  the/,  o//,.  and  in  ills  law 

19.7.lhe  /.  of  the  L.  is  perfect,  converting  the  soul 

119.1. blessed  are  they  who  walk  in  the  /.  of  the  L. 
Isa.  5. 24.  because  they  have  cast  away  the  /.  of  y>. 

30. 9.  children  that  will  not  hear  the  /.  of  the  Lord 
Jer.8.8.  how  do  ye  eay, the  I.  of  the  J.ordiawiUi  us 
.4nio«2.4. because  they  havedespised  the  l.ofthcJ^. 
Luke  2.39.had  performed  according  to  the  /.  of  L. 

My  LAW. 
Ezod.  16.  4.  whether  they  will  walk  in  my  I.  or  no 
2  Chron.  6. 16.  so  that  thy  cliildren  walk  in  my  I. 
Psal.  78. 1.  give  ear,  O  iny  people,  to  my  /.  incline 

89.  30.  if  his  children  forsake  my  I.  and  walk 
Prott.  3.  I.  my  son,  forget  not  my  I.  but  keep 

4.2.forsake  not  my  1. 1|  7.2.  keepm!/  /.  as  the  apple 
Isa.  51.  7.  the  people  in  whose  heart  is  my  I. 
.Jcr.  6.  19.  they  have  not  hearkened  unto  my  I. 

9.  13.  because  they  have  forsaken  7uy  I. 

16. 11.  have  forsaken  me,  and  have  not  kept  my  I. 

26.  4.  if  ye  will  not  hearken  to  walk  in  my  I. 

31.  33.  1  will  put  my  I.  in  their  inward  parts 

44. 10.  nor  have  they  feared  nor  walked  in  my  I. 
Eiek.  22.  26.  her  priests  have  violated  my  I. 
Hos.  8.  1.  because  they  trespassed  against  my  I. 

12.  have  written  to  him  the  great  things  of  my  I. 
This  LAW.  fc 

TjCV.  14.  2.  this  shall  be  the  /.  of  leper  in  cleansing 
JV«m.5.  30.  the  priest  shall  e.\ecute  on  her  this  L. 
19.  2.  this  is  the  ordinance  of  the  /.  31.  21. 
Dent.  1.  5.  began  Moses  lo  declare  this  I.  saying 
4.  8.  all  this  I.  which  1  set  before  you  this  day 
I7.18.hc  shall  write  him  a  cojiy  ui'this  /.in  a  book 
19.  he  may  learn  to  keep  all  the  words  of  tlds  I. 

27.  3.  shall  write  on  them  the  words  of  this  I.  8. 
26.cursed  that  confirmetli  not  the  words  of  (A;«  /. 

28.  58.  if  thou  wilt  not  observe  the  words  oithis  I. 
29.29.that  we  may  do  all  tbe'wordsof /A/s  /.  31.12. 
31.9.Moses  v/tote  this  l.\\  11.  thou  shalt  read  this  I. 

24.  of  writing  the  words  of  this  /.  in  a  book 

32.  40.  your  children  to  do  the  words  of  this  I. 
Josh.  S.  34.  afterward  he  read  the  words  of  this  I. 

This  is  the  LAW. 
/,C77.  6. 9.  this  is  the  I.  of  the  hurnt-ofTering,  7.  37. 
ii.this  is  the  I.  of  meat-otfcring  ||  25.of  sin-offer. 
7.  1.  this  is  the  I.  of  the  trespass-oti'ering,  it  is  holy 
11.46.  this  is  the  I.  of  Ihe  beasts  and  of  the  fowl 
12.7.;.  is  the  I.  of  her  that  hath  born  male  and  fem. 
13..59.  this  is  thel.  of  the  plague  oflepr.  14.  32,  57. 

14.  .54.  this  is  thel.  for  all  manner  of  plag.  of  scall 

15.  32.  this  is  the  I.  of  him  that  hath  an  issue 
A''inii.  5.29.  this  is  the  I.  of  jeal<iU?ieK,  when  a  wife 

0. 13.  this  is  the  I.  of  theNazarite,  when  days,  21. 
19.  14.  this  is  thel.  when  a  mnn  dieth  in  a  tent 
/)exit.4.i4.this  is  the  I.  which  Moses  set  before  Isr. 
Ezek.  43. 12.  this  is  the  I.  of  the  house,  on  lop  of 
Mat.  7.12.  do  to  them, fur  this  is  the  I.  and  projihels 

Thv  LAW. 
Drvt.  33.  10.  they  shall  teach  Israel  thy  I. 
JVrA.  9.  26.  they  cast  thy  I.  behind  their  backs 
29.  that  thou  mightest  bring  them  again  tu  thy  I. 
34.  nor  our  kings,  nor  our  princes  ki^jit  thy  I. 
Psal.  40.  P.  yea,  thy  I.  is  within  my  heart 
94.  12.  chastcnest,  and  teacliest  him  out  of  thy  I. 
119.  JR.  behold  wondrous  things  out  of  thy  I. 
2^l.the  way  of  lying,and  grant  me  ;/ii/ /.graciously 
34.give  me  understanding,  and  I  sluill  keep /Ay /. 
44.  so  shall  I  keep  thy  !.  continuiilly  for  ever 
51.  yet  have  I  not  diclined  from  thy  I. 
53.  because  of  the  wicked  that  for>^ake  thy  I. 
5-5.  I  remember  thy  name,  and  kept  thy  I. 
61.  have  robbed  me,  but  I  have  not  forjotton  /. /. 
70.  their  heart  is  fat,  but  I  delight  in  thy  I. 
77. 1  may  live,  for  thy  I.  is  my  delight,  92, 174. 
P5.  the  proud  digged  pits,  wliicli  are  not  after  1. 1. 
97.0  bow  I  love  1. 1.  \\  109.  vet  do  I  not  forget  (.  /. 
11.3.  hut  1. 1,  do  I  love,  163.'||  126.  made  void  /.  /. 
136. waters  run  down,  because  they  keep  not  1. 1. 
142.  and  «Ay /.is  the  truth  ||  ISO.aro"  far  from  thyl. 
165.  sri-at  peace  have  they  who  love  thy  I. 
Jrr.  32.  23.  they  obeyed  not,  nor  walked  in  thy  I. 
Dan.  9.  11.  all  Israel' have  transgressed  thy  I. 

Under  the  LAW. 
Rnm.  3. 19.  it  saith  lo  them  that  are  vndrr  the  I. 
0.  14.  for  ye  are  not  under  the  I.  but  under  grace 


LAY 

/i(om.6.I5.shall  we  sin  because  we  are  not  uni/ft  l.t 
lC'«r.9.20.lo  them  that  are  under  the  /.as  under  th» 
I.  that  1  might  gain  them  that  are  under  the  L 
21. not  without  law  to  God,  but  under  I.  lo  Christ 
Gal.  3.  23.  we  were  kept  u.  the  I.  \\  4.  4.  made  u.  I. 
4.5.seiit  his  Son  to  redeem  them  that  were  under  I. 

21.  tell  me,  ye  that  desire  to  be  under  tlie  /. 
5.  18.  if  ye  be  led  by  Sjiirit,  are  not  under  the  I, 
IVithout  LAW. 
2  Chr,  15.  3.  a  long  season,  Israel  hath  been  v>.  L 
A'o;h.  2.12.  as  many  as  sinned  without  l.yiurish  w.  I. 
3.  21.  the  righteousness  of  Gud  w.  I.  is  inanifesled 
7.8.for  w.  I.  sin  was  dead  ||  9. 1  was  alive  w.  I.  once 
1  Cor.9.21. that  are  w.  l.a.^w.  I.  being  not  w.l.  toG. 

Urittcn  in  the  LAW. 
1  Kings  2.  3.  as  it  is  written  in  the  I.  of  Moses, 
2  Chro7i.  23.  18.  |  25.  4.  |  31 .  3.  Ezra  3.  2. 
J\rch.  10.  34,  36.  Dan.  9.  13.  J.uke  2.  23. 
1  Chr.  16.  40.  do  accord'og  to  all  w.  I.  2  Chr.  35. 26. 
JV(A.  8. 14.  and  they  Ibund  writ,  in  the  L  that  Isr. 
Dan.'d.  11.  and  the  oath  that  is  writ,  in  I.  of  Moses 
J.uke  10.26. what  is  K!n'/.i«  the  /.how  readest  thoul 
24.44.  all  must  be  fulfilled,  which  \\exewril.ini. 
Acts  24. 14.  believing  all  things  that  are  wrxt.  in  I. 
1  Cor.  9. 9.  it  is  w.  /.  ||  14. 21.  in  the  I.  it  is  written 

LAWS. 
Gen.  26.  5.  Abraham  keju  my  statutes  and  my  /. 
Exod.  16.  28.  how  long  refuse  ye  to  keep  my  l.'i 
18.  16.  I  do  make  them  know  the  /.  of  God 
20.  thou  shalt  teach  them  ordinances  and  /. 
/,cu.  20. 46.  these  are  the  /.  which  the  Lord  made 
Ezra  7.  25.  all  such  as  know  the  /.  of  thy  God 
JVf/i.  9. 13.  earnest  down,  tliou  gavest  them  true  I 

14.  and  commandedst  them  statutes  and  /. 
FsfA.1.19.lobe  written  among  the  /.  ofthel'ersianl 
3.  8.  a  certain  people,  their  /.  are  diverse  from  al 
people,  neither  keep  they  the  king's  I 
Psal.  105.  45.  that  they  might  keep  his  /. 
fsa.  24.  5.  because  they  have  transgressed  the  I 
Ezek.  43.  11.  shew  them  all  the  /.  thereof 
44.  5.  hear  all  the/.  ||  24.  they  shall  keep  my  /. 
Dan.  7.  25.  and  think  to  change  times  and  /. 

9.  10.  nor  have  we  obeyed  to  walk  in  his  /. 
Heb.  8.  10.  I  will  put  my  /.  inio  their  mind 

10.  16.  I  will  put  my  /.  into  their  hearts 

LAWFUL. 
Ezra  7.  24.  shall  not  be  /.  to  impose  toll  on  them 
Isa.  49.  24.  shall  the  /.  captive  he  delivered  ? 
Ezek.  13.  5.  do  that  which  is  /.  21.  27.  |  33.  14,  19 

19.  tlie  son  hath  done  that  which  is  /.  33.  16. 
Mat.  12. 2.  do  what  is  not  /.  Mark  2.  24.  Luke  6. 2. 
4.W  as  not  /.for  him  to  eat,  Mark  2.  26.  Luke  6.   . 
10.  Ilieya6kedliim,isit /.  lo  heal  on  the  sabba.h 
day  ■?  12.  Mark  3.  4.  Luke  6.  9.  1 14. 3. 
14. 4.  it  is  not  /.  for  thee  to  have  her,  Mark  6.  18. 
19.3. is  it  /.  for  man  to  put  away  wife'?  Mark  10. 2. 
22.  17.  tell  us,  is  it  /.  to  give  tribute  to  Cesar  or 
noti  Mark  12.  14.  Luke  20.  22. 
27.  6.  it  is  not  /.  to  put  ihem  in  the  treasury 
John  5. 10.  it  is  not  /.  for  thee  to  carry  thy  bed 

18.  31.  it  is  rot  /.  for  us  to  put  any  man  to  death 
Acts  16.  21.  teach  customs  which  are  not  /.  to 

rcce.ve 

19.  39.  it  shall  be  determined  in  a  /.  assembly 
22.  25.  is  it  /.  for  you  to  scourge  a  Roman  7 

1  Cor.  6. 12.  all  things  are  /.  to  me,  /.  for  me,  10. 23. 

2  Cor.  12.  4.  which  is  not  /.  linr  a  man  to  utter 

LAWFULLY. 

1  Tim.  1.  8.  the  law  is  good,  if  a  man  use  it  /. 

2  7'im.2.  5.  yetisnot  crowned,  except  ho  strive  I. 

LAWGIVER. 
Gen.  49.  10.  nor  a  /.  froin  between  his  feet 
A"k>h.  21. 18.  digged  the  well  by  direction  of  Ihe  I. 
Diut.  33.  21.  in  a  portion  of  the  /.  was  he  sealed 
Psal.  60. 7.  Gilead  is  mine,  Judah  is  my  '.  108.  8. 
Isa.  33.  22.  the  Lord  is  our  /.  and  our  king 
.Jam.  4. 12.  there  is  one  /.  who  is  able  to  save 

LAWLESS. 
1  Tim.  1.  9.  the  law  is  for  the  /.  and  disobedient 

LAWYER. 
.1/«f  .22.35.one  that  Was  a  /.asked  him,  Luke  10.25. 
Tit.  3.  13.  bring  Zenaa  the  /.  and  Apollos 

LAWYERS. 
Lvke.'i.  30.  the  /.  rejected  the  counsel  of  God 

11.  45.  then  answered  one  of  the  /.  and  said 

46.  woe  unto  you,  /.  52.  ||  14.  3.  .lesus  spake  to  /. 
L.^Y,  as  with  a  woman. 
Gen.  19.  3.3.  Ihe  first-born  /.  with  her  father,  34,35. 
30.  16.  and  Jacob  /.  with  Leah  that  night 

34.  2.  Shcchem  /.  with  Dinah  and  defiled  her 

35.  22.  Reuben  went  and  /.  with  Bilhah 
/)fu/.22.22.man  that  /.  with  woman,  both  shall  die 

25.  the  man  only  that  /.  with  her  shall  die 
29«the  man  that  /.  with  her  give  fifty  shekels 

1  .Sam.  2.  22.  Eli  heard  thcv  /.  w'iili  the  women 

2  Sam.  11.  4.  she  came,  and  he  /.  with  her,  12.  24. 
13. 14.  Amnon  forced  Tamar  and  /.  with  her 

Ezek.  23.  8.  for  in  her  youth  they  /.  with  her 

LAV. 
Eiod.  5.  8.  the  tale  of  bricks  you  shall  /.  on  tlieni 


LAY 

Erod.Zl  22.  as  woman's  husband  will  I.  upon  him 

32.  '25.  nrither  shult  thou  I.  upon  hun  usury 
J^ev.  1.  7.  and  I.  the  wood  in  order  on  the  tiro 

8.  the  priests  shall  I.  the  parts  in  order,  12. 

3.  15.  tliou  shalt  I.  fVankincense  thereon 

6.  12.  atjd  /.  the  burnl-otfcring  in  order  U|>on  it 
JV*u7n.  1'2. 11.  alas,  my  Lord,  I.  not  the  sin  upon  us 
Deut.  7.  ]5.  but  will  /.  them  on  them  ihut  hate  the 
11.  25.  shall  I.  the  fear  of  you  upon  all  the  land 
21.  8.  /.  not  innocent  blood  to  thy  people  Israel 
J«sh.i.]  l.they  came  to  Kahah's  house,  and  /.there 

8.  2.  I.  thco  an  ambush  tor  the  city  behind  it 
Judg.  16.  3>  Samson  I.  till  midnight,  and  arose 
Ruth.  3.  8.  and  behold,  a  woman  I.  at  his  feet 

1  Sam.  3.  15.  and  Samuel  I.  till  the  morning 
11.  2.  and  I.  it  for  a  reproach  on  all  Israel 

25.  t  25.  let  not  my  lord  /.  it  to  his  heart 

26.  5.  Saul  I.  in  the  trench,  people  about  him,  7 

2  Sam.  A.  5.  Ish-bosheth,  v  ho  I.  on  a.  bed  at  noon 
12.3.cwe-lanib  eat  of  his  meat,  and  /.  in  his  bosom 

16.  David  I.  all  night  on  the  earth,  13.  31. 

1  Kinqs  13.  31.  I.  my  bones  beside  his  bones 

18.  2.3.  I.  it  on  wood  and  put  no  fire  under 

19.  5.  and  as  he  I.  and  slept  under  a  juniper  tree 

21.  27.  Aliab  fasted  and  /.  in  sackcloth 

2  fCinrr.^  4. 34.  he  went  up  and  I.  upon  the  child 
10.  8.  I.  yi;  them  in  two  heaps  at  the  gate 

2  Chr.  36.  21.  long  as  she  I.  desolate,  she  kept  sabb. 
Kslh.  4.  3.  many  I.  in  sackcloth  and  ashes 
Job  29.  19.  the  dew  /.  all  night  upon  my  branch 
34.  23.  he  will  not  I.  on  man  more  than  tight 
Psal.  7.  5.  let  him  I.  mine  honour  in  the  dust 
38.  12.  they  that  seek  my  life,  I.  snares  for  me 
84.3.  found  a  nest,  where  she  may  /.  her  young 
F.ccl.  7.  2.  and  the  living  will  I   it  to  heart 
ha.  5.  8.  woe  to  them  that  I.  field  to  field 

10.  t  6.  give  them  charge  to  I.  them  a  treading 
13.  9.  to  /.  the  land  desolate,  Kzrk.  33.  28. 

11.  I  will  I.  low  the  haughtiness  of  the  terrible 

22.  22.  key  of  house  of  David  I.  on  his  shoulder 
25.  12.  and  the  fortress  shall  he  I.  low 

28.  16.  behold,  I  will  I.  in  Zion  a  tried  stone 

17.  judgment  will  I  /.  to  the  line,  and  righteousn 

29.  21.  that  /.  a  snare  for  him  that  reproveth 

30.  32.  the  slatf  which  the  Lord  shall  I.  on  him 
34. 15.  there  shall  the  great  owl  I.  and  hatch 
38.  21.  a  lump  of  figs,  and  I.  it  for  a  plaister 
47.  7.  so  thou  didst  not  /.  those  things  to  thy  heart 
54.  11.  I  will  I.  thv  stones  with  fair  colours 

.Jer.G.  21.  I  will  I.  stumhling-blocks,  Kzrk.  3.  20. 

Ezek.  4.  1.  take  thee  a  tile,  and  /.  it  before  thee 

2.  I.  siege  against  it,  3.  ||  8.  I.  bands  on  thee 

4.  I.  the  iniquity  of  the  house  of  Israel  upon  it 
2.5.  14.  I  will  I.  my  vengeance  on  Kdom,  17. 
28.  17.  I  will  ;.  thee  before  kings  to  behold  thee 
32.  5.  I  will  I.  thy  flesh  on  the  mountains,  and  fill 

36.  29.  and  I  will  /.  no  famine  upon  you 

34.  the  land  shall  be  tilled,  whereas  it  /.  de.«olate 

37.  6.  I  uijl  I.  sinews  upon  you  and  bring  flesh 
42.  13.  there  /.  the  most  holy  things,  14.]  44.  19. 

Jonah  1.  14.  O  Lord,  /.  not  on  us  innocent  blood 
Mic.  I.  7.  the  idols  tbercof  will  I  I.  desolate 
Jifal.Z.  2.  if  ye  will  not  I.  it  to  heart,  I  will  send  a 
curse  upon  von ;  because  ye  do  not  I.  it  to  heart 
^fat. 8  20.hatli  not  where  to  /.  his  head ,  J.nkc  9. 58. 

23.  4.  bind,  and  I.  them  on  men's  shoulders 
28. 6.  come,  see  the  place  where  the  Lord  I. 

Marki.  4.  the  bed  wherein  the  sick  of  the  palsy'. 
/.-like  19.  44.  and  shall  I.  thee  even  with  the  ground 
Jnhv  .5.  3.  in  these  I.  impotent  folk,  blind,  halt 

11.  S"*.  it  was  n  cave,  and  n  stone /.  ufion  it 
J)ri.^  7.  60.  Lord,  /.  not  this  sin  to  their  charge 

15.  2-f.lo  /   on  you  no  greater  burden  than  these 

27.  20.  and  no  small  tempest  I.  on  us,  all  hope 
Hnm.».X\.  I.  anvlhinj  to  the  charge  of  r.od's  elect 

9.  33.  bi'hiiM,  1  I   in  /ion  a  stnnibling-stonn 
1  0)r.  16.  2.  let  every  one  I.  by  him  in  store 
Jfrb.  12.  1 .  let  us  I.  aside  every  weipht,  and  the  sin 
.Mm.  1.  21.  whrre'ore  I.  apart  all  fillhiness 

1  Pet.  2.  6.  I  [.  in  7.ion  a  chief  corner-slono 

.Sec    FofNOATtOS. 

L.AY  ilotrv. 
Grn  19.4.  b'-fore  they  /.  d.  men  of  Sodom  compass. 

33.  aiifl  Lot  perceived  not  when  she  /.  dnwrty  35. 

28.  IL  .lacoh  /.  dnwn  in  that  place  to  sleep 
^wm.  24. 9.  couched,  he  l.d.  as  n  lion,  as  a  voun:: 
./!/(/<r.  5.  27. 1„.  /.  ,l,„rv  at  h.T  fe.l.he  bowed,  he  fill 
Uvth  3.  4   imcover  his  fi'et^  and  /.  thee  down 

1  Sam.  3. 5.  lie  down,  and  Pamiiel  went  and  I.  d.  9. 
19.  24.  Saul  /.  dtnr-n  naked  nil  that  dav  and  nislit 

2  Sam.  13.  5.  Jonmlah  said,  t.  thee  dnwn  on  lliv  beil 
6.  BO  .Amnon  /.  dmrn  and  made  himself  sink 

1  Kimrn  14.  t20..Ierobonm  l.dnjrn  with  his  fathers 
Job  17.  3. 1,  dotrn  now,  imt  me  in  surety  with  thee 
P.ial.  4.  8.  I  will  I.  me  rlntrn  in  pence  nnd  sleep 
104.  22.  vnung  lions  I.  them  dotrn  in  their  dens 
F.zek.  19.  2.  thy  molher  I.  dnwn  nmone  lions 
Anion  2.  fi   lliev  /.  Ihrmselves  dnwn  on  iloi|ie<i 
Mot.  9.  +  36.  h'-cause  thev  wire  tir<-d  nnd  I.  dnwn 
John  10.  15.  and  I  /.  down  my  life  for  my  slioou,  17. 
334 


LAI 

John  10. 18. 1 1,  it  d.  of  myself,  have  power  iol.  itd. 

13.  37.  I  will  /.  down  my  life  for  thy  sake,  38. 

15.  13.  that  a  mail  I.  down  his  life  for  his  friends 
1  John  3. 16.  we  ought  lul.d.  our  lives  for  the  brcth. 

LAY  hand. 
Gen.  22. 12.  he  said,  /.  not  thy  hand  on  the  lad 

37.  22.  shed  no  blood,  I.  no  hand  upon  Joseph 
Exod.  7.  4.  that  1  may  /.  my  hand  upon  Kgypt 
Z,eu.3.2. /.  hisAaKi/on  the  head  of  his  olltring,  8. 
13.  I.  his  hand  on  tiie  bead  of  the  goat,  4.  24. 

4.  4.  he  shall  /.  his  hand  on  the  bullock's  head,  15. 
29.  he  shall  I.  his  hajid  on  the  sin-otfering,  33. 

JVu7n.27. 18.  the  Lord  said,/,  thy  hand  on  Joshua 
Judg.  18.  19.  /.  thy  hand  upon  thy  inoulh,  and  go 
Esth.  2.  21.  and  sought  to  I.  hand  on  the  king 

9.  2.  to  I.  hand  on  such  as  sought  their  hurt 
Job  9.  33.  any  days-man  to  I.  his  hand  on  us  both 

21.5.  mark  me,  and  I.  your  hand  upon  your  mouth 

40.  4.  shall  I  uiisw.  I  will  /.  my  hand  on  my  moulh 

41.  8. 1,  thy  haiid  upon  him,  remember  the  battle 
Prov.  30. 32.  if  thou  thought  evil  I.  hand  on  moulh 
Isa.  11.  14.  they  shall  I.  their  hand  on  Edom 
Mic.l.  16.  they  shall  I.  their  hand  on  their  mouth 
Mat.  9. 18.  come,  and  /.  thy  hand  on  her 

LAY  haniis. 
Ap!). 16.21.  Aaron  shall  I.  both  h'tshandji  on  the  goat 

24.  14.  all  that  heard  him  I.  their  hands  on  head 
JViim.  8. 12.  the  Leviles  /.  their  A.  on  the  bullocks 
jV(;/i.l3. 21.ifyedosoagain,  I  wilU  hands  on  you 
/;i(A.3.6.he  thought  scorn  to  I.  h.  on  Rlordec.  alone 
JHat.21.46.they  sought  to/.  A.  on  him,  Luke  20. 19. 
Mark  5.  23.  come  and  /.  thy  hands  on  her 

It).  18.  /.  hands  on  the  sick,  and  they  shall  recover 
Euke  21. 12.  they  shall  /.  hands  on  you,  and  per^c. 
Acts  8.  19.  on  whomsoever  I  /.  A.  he  may  receive 

1  Tim.  5. 22.  /.  hands  suddenly  on  no  man,  nor  be 

LAY  hold. 
Dent.  21.  19.  then  shall  his  father  /.  hold  on  him 
22.  28.  and  /.  hold  on  her,  and  lie  with  her 

2  Sam.  2.  21.  /.  thee  hold  on  one  of  the  young  men 
1  Kings  13.4. put  forth  his  hand,  saying,  /.  A.  on  him 
Prov.  3. 18.  a  tree  of  lil'e  to  them  that  I. hold  on  her 
Eccl.  2. 3.  and  I  sought  to  /.  A.  on  folly,  till  I  misht 
fsa.  5.  29.  they  shall  roar,  and  /.  hold  on  the  prey 
.7cr.  6.  23.  they  shall  /.  hold  on  bow  and  spiar 
Zech.  14. 13.  every  one  shall  /.  A.  on  his  neighbour 
J/aM2. 11.  will  he  not  I.  hold  on  it,  nnd  lift  it  out? 
Mark  3.  21.  his  friends  went  out  to  /.  hold  on  him 

12.  12.  thev  sought  to  /.  hold  on  him,  but  feared 

1  Tim.  6.  12.  /.  hold  on  eternal  life,  whereunto,  19. 
Heb.  6.  18.  to  /.  hold  on  the  hope  set  before  us 

LAY  vp. 

Ocn.  41. 'Mi.  I.  vp  corn  under  the  hand  of  Pharaoh 
Exod.  16.  23.  /.  up  manna  for  you  till  the  morning 
33. /.wp  a  pot  of  manna  to  be  keiil  lorgenirrations 
J'J'um.  17.  4.  shall  /.  them  vp  in  the  labernacle 
19.9.  /.  them  up  without  the  camp  in  a  clenn  place 
Dnit.  11.  18.  I.  vp  these  my  words  in  your  heart 
14.  28.  and  shall  /.  it  vp  within  ihy  gates 
Toh  22.  22.  and  I.  tip  his  words  in  thy  heart 

24.  then  shalt  /.  vp  gold  as  dust  nnd  stones 
Prov.  7.  1.  I.  vp  my  ccmimandments  with  thee 

10.  14.  wise  men  ?.  wp  knowledge,  but  the  foolish 
Mat.  6. 19.  /.  not  up  for  you  treasuies  on  earlh 

20.  /.  lip  fi)r  ynurselves  treasures  in  heaven 

2  Cor.  12.  14.  children  not  to  /.  vp  for  the  parents 

I, AY  wail. 
Fzra  8.  31.  delivered  us  from  such  a«  /.  in  wait 
P»nl.~\.  10.  that  /.  wait  for  mv  soul  take  counsel 
Pror.  1.  11.  let  us  /.  wait  fir  blood,  ht  us  lurk 

IH.  nnd  they  /.  wait  for  their  own  bhxid,  and  lurk 
24.  15.  /.  not  wait  against  the  riglitedos 
.Jer.  5.  26.  they  /.  wait  as  he  that  seltrth  snares 

LAY  waste. 
2  ;rj>>jr.»19.  25.thntshotddestbeto/.  »r.  A.«n.  37.26. 
fsn.  5.  6.  I  will  /.  it  wnstr.  it  shall  not  be  pruneil 
Kzrk.  35.  4.  I  will  /.  thv  cities  waste,  Ihou  shall 

LAID. 
Om.  9.  23.  nnd  /.  it  on  both  their  shoulders 
22.  6.  Ahrnhnin  look  wood  and  /.  it  en  Isaac 
30.  41.  Jacob  /.  the  rods  before  the  cattle 
38.  19  she  wi-iit  nwnv,  and  /.  by  her  vail  from  her 
48.  14.  riirhl  hand,  nnd  /.  it  on  Kphraim's  head 
F.ynd.  2.  3.  she  /.  it  in  (he  flnffs  hy  the  river 

5.  9.  let  more  work  be  /.  on  the  men 

21.  30.  he  Bhnll  L'ive  whnlsoeviT  is  /.  on  him 
Urnl.  26.  6.  the  Fcvptinns  /.  on  us  hnrd  hondnge 
Jnsh.  2.  6.  wilh  stalks  of  flax  she  hail  /.  in  order 

7.  23.  thi'V  look  nnd  /.  them  out  bi-fori'  Ihe  Lord 
Jiidir.  9.  24.  their  hi. mil  he  /.  en  .Miimelerh 
7^1//*  4.  16.  look  Ihe  child  nnd  /.  it  in  her  bosom 
2  Snm.  18.  17.  /.  a  greni  heap  of  stones  on  Abanloni 
1  A7nxr.'»3.  20.  she  nrnsennd  took  mv  son  nnd /.it  in 

herhosorn.  nnd/.  her  dend  child  in  mv  bosom 

8.  31.  an  oath  he  /.  on  him  to  cause,  2  TAro. 6. 22. 

13.  29.  Ihe  t.rophel  /.  the  cnrcnse  on  Ihe  OM 
30,  he  /.  his  cnrcnse  in  his  own  ernvn 

17.19.hecnrried  him  U(>,and  /.him  on  his  own  bed 
'.  Kinsr.f  4.  21.  "he  went  nnd  /.  him  on  the  bed 

9.  25.  the  Lord  /.  tliii  burden  on  him 


LAI 

2  Kings  20. 7.  and  they  took  and  I.  it  on  the  buil 
2  CArun.  24. 9.  Moses /.on  Israel  in  tiie  wilderoea 
A"(A.  13.  5.  where  they  /.  llie  nieat-oti'erings 
Job  6.  2.  and  my  calanjity  /.  in  the  balances 

18.  10.  the  snare  is  /.  for  him  in  the  ground 
38.  6.  or  who  /.  the  corner-stone  thereof 

Psal.  i^.  5.  lionour  and  majesty  bast  /.  on  him 
31.  4.  pull  nie  out  of  the  net  they  have  /.  fur  m0 
49.  14.  like  sheep  they  are  /.  in  the  grave 
62.  9.  to  be  /.  in  the  balance,  they  are  vanity 
79.  1.  they  have  /.  Jerusalem  on  heaps 

88.  6.  thou  hast  /.  me  in  the  lowest  pit 

89.  19.  I  have  /.  help  upon  one  that  is  mighty 
105.  18.  feet  hurt  with  fetters,  be  was  /.  in  iion 
119.  30.  thy  judgments  have  1  /.  before  me 

110.  the  wicked  have  /.  a  snare  for  me,  141  9. 
139.  5.  thou  hast  /.  thine  hand  upon  me 
142.  3.  they  have  privily  /.  u  snare  for  me 
J.ia.  6.  7.  and  he  /.  it  upon  luy  moulh,  and  said 
42.  25.it  burned  him,  yet  /.  it  not  to  heart,  57.  11 
47.  6.  thou  hast  very  heavily  /.  thy  yoke 
53.  6.  the  Lord  /.  on  him  Ihe  iniquity  of  us  all 
./cr.  50.  24.  I  have  /.  a  snare  for  thee,  U  Babylon 
Ezek.  32.  19.  be  thou  /.  wilh  the  uncircumcised 
33.  29.  when  I  have  /.  the  land  most  desolate 
35.  12.  hatt  spoken,  saying,  they  are  /.  desolate 
Hos.  11.  4.  I  drew  them,  unil  I  /.  meat  unto  them 
.Joel  1.  17.  the  garners  are  /.  desolate,  the  barns 
Amos  2.  8.  on  clothes  /.  to  jiledge  by  every  altar 
Obad.  7.  they  have  /.  a  wound  under  thee 
Jonah  3.  6.  he  arose  and  /.  his  robe  from  him 
Mic.  5.  1.  now  gather,  he  hath  /.  siege  against  us 
Hab.  2.  19.  it  is  /.  over  with  gold  and  silver 
hag.  2.  15.  from  before  a  stone  was  /.  on  a  stone 
ZfcA.  3.  9.  behold  the  stone  that  1  have  /. 
7.  14.  for  they  /.  the  pleasant  land  desolate 
Mat.  3. 10.  now  ihe  axe  is  /.  to  the  root,  I.uke  3.  9. 
27.  60.  he  /.  it  in  his  own  new  tomb,  and  rolled 
Mark  7.  30.  and  her  daughter  /.  on  the  bed 

15.  47.  and  Mary  behchi  where  he  was  /. 

16.  6.  behold  the  place  where  they  /.  him 
/.uke2.  7.  her  first-born,  and  /.him  in  a  manger 

16.  20.  Lazarus  was  /.  at  his  gate  full  of  sores 
23.5;i.wherein  never  man  before  was  I.John  19.41 
./ohn  11.  34.  and  said,  where  have  ye  /.  him  ? 
13.  4.  /.  aside  his  garments,  and  took  a  towel 

19.  42.  there  /.  they  Jesus  therefore,  because 

20.  2.  we  know  not  where  they  have  /.  him,  13. 
•Acts  3.  2.  whom  they  /.  at  the  gate  of  the  temple 

4.  37.  and  /   the  money  at  the  apostles'  feet,  5.  2 

5.  15.  /.  ihem  on  beds  and  couches,  that  at  least 
9.37.when  washed,  they  /.  her  in  an  upper  chanib 
13.36.David  was/,  to  his  fathers,  and  saw  corrupt 
23.  29.  nothing  /.  lo  his  charge  worihy  of  death 

25.  7.  /.  many  complaints  they  could  not  prove 
16.  concerning  the  crime  /.  against  him 

1  Cor.  9   16.  necessity  is  /.  upon  me,  woe  to  me 

2  7'im.  4.  16.  1  pray  it  be  not  /.  to  their  charge 

See  FotiNPATioN. 

LAID  down. 

Josh.  2.  8.  before  they  were  /.  down  she  came  up 

4.  8.  carried  them,  and  /.  them  down  there 

Hulh  3.  7.  Ruth  uncovered  his  feet  and  /.  her  dotrn 

1  .S(;7n.3.2.  K.li  was/.  (/o!fn||3.  Sam.  /.  down  tosleep 

2  .S'/3m.l3.8.  Amnon  was  /.  down,  nnd  she  took  flour 
1  Kings  19.6. Elijah  did  eat,  and  /.  him  down  again 

21.  4.  Aliab  came  and  /.  him  down  on  his  bed 
Psal.  3.  5.  I  /.  me(/«H-n  and  slept,  I  awaked 
Isa.  14.  8.  since  ihou  art  /.  d.  no  feller  is  come  up 
/,1/Ac  19.  22.  takine  up  that  I  /.  not  d.  and  reaping 
.Oris  4.  3.5.  nnd  /.  them  down  at  the  apostles'  feel 

7.  .'>8.  the  witnesses  /.  d.  their  clothes  at  a  young 
Horn.  16.  4.  who  for  my  life  /.  down  their  necks 

1  John  3.  16.  because  he  /.  down  his  life  for  us 

LAID  hand. 
F.Tod.  24.  II.  nnd  (m  ihe  nobles  he  /.  not  his  hand 

2  .'^ain.  13.  19.  THmnr  /.  her  A.  on  her  head,  crying 
Fsth.  8.  7.  because  he  /.  his  Annrfen  the  Jews 

9.  10.  but  they  /.  not  their  A.  on  the  spoil,  15,  16. 
./«A29.  9.  the  princes  /.  iheir  hand  on  their  moulh 
Psal.  1.39.  .5.  thou  hast  /.  thine  hand  upon  me 
F.zrk.  39.  21.  my  hand  thnt  I  have  /.  on  them 
Hcv.  1.  17.  he  /.  bis  right  hand  upon  me,  saving 

LAID  hands. 
T,rv.P.  14.  .Aaron  nnd  his  sons  /.  iheir  A.  on,  18,22 
A'Mm.  27.23.  Mosrs  /.  his  A.  on  Joshua,  Dnil.  34. 9. 
2A7»;Lr.«  1  l.lC.n,,,!  ihey/.An»r/.«on  her,  2  rAr.23.1.V 
2  flir.  29.  23.  Ihey  /.'their  hands  on  the  he-goalg 
Ohnd.  13.  nor  iwivi'  /.  hands  on  their  substance 
Mnt.  18.  28,  be  t.hands,  and  took  him  by  Ihe  throat 

10.  15.  nnd  he  /.  his  hands  on  ihem,  and  di'parteil 

26.  .50.  they  came  and  /.  A.  on  Jesus,  Mark  14.  4fi. 
.\fark  6.  5.  save  that  he  /.  hands  on  a  few  sick  folk 
/.vkr  4.  40.  he  /.  his  hands  im  every  one  of  them 

13.13.he  /.his  hands  on  her,  she  was  made  strnight 
7oAn7,  30.  but  nn  mnn /.  Aniu/.«  i.n  him,  44.  [8.20. 
Ads  4.3.  nnd  they  /.  hands  on  Ihe  apostles,  5.  18. 

6.  6.  nnd  prayed,  lh"y  /.  hands  on  the  deacons 

8.  17.  then  /.  ihev  Iheir  hands  on  them,  nnd  Ihojr 
13.  3.  they  /.  thuir  hands  on  Paul  and  Barnabu 


LAY 

^cls  19.6. iind  when  Paul  had  I.  his  hands  on  them 
21. '27.  slirrod  up  the  people,  and  /.  hands  on  Paul 
2d.  8.  Paul  I.  hands  on  Publius'  lather,  and  liealed 

LAID  hold. 

*??«. 19.16. the  men  l.h.on  Lot's  band  and  his  wife's 
f«d^.l9.2y.toc)k  a  knife,  and  l.  h.  on  hid  concubine 
lSa/n.l5.'27.9aul  I.  h.  on  Samuel's  skirt,  aM  it  rent 
2  Chron.T.'H.  I.  AoW  on  other  gods  and  worshipped 
Job  18.  t  20.  they  that  went  before  /.  hold  on  horror 
Milt.  14.  3.  Herod  had  I.  hold  on  John,  JUarkCj.  17. 

26.  55. 1,  no  A.  on  me  ||  57. 1,  h.  on  Jes.  Mark  14.51 
Z^uic 23.26.  they  I.  hold  on  one  Simon  a  Cyrenian 
Rev-  20.2.  he  I.  hold  on  the  dragon,  and  bound  him 

L.AID  up. 
Oen.  39.  16.  and  she  I.  up  his  garment  by  her 
41.  48.  Joseph  I.  up  food  in  the  cities 
Exod.16.  24.  they  I.  it  vp  till  ihe  morning,  as  Moses 

34.  Aaron  I.  up  the  pot  of  manna  to  be  kept 
JVitm.  17.  7.  Moses  I.  up  the  rods  before  the  Lord 
Dent.  32.  34.  is  not  this  I.  up  in  store  with  me  1 

1  Sam.  10.  25.  Samuel  I.  it  up  before  the  Lord 
21.  12.  David  I.  up  these  words  in  his  heart 

2  Kings  20. 17.  which  thy  fathers  I.  up  in  store 
Ezra  6. 1.  where  treasures  were  I.  up  in  Babylon 
Job  23.  f  12. 1  have  I.  up  the  words  of  his  mouth 
Psal.  31. 19.  thou  hast  I.  up  for  them  that  fear  thee 
Prov.  13.22.  wealth  of  sinners  is  I.  up  for  the  just 
Cant.  7.  13.  fruits  which  I  have  I.  up  for  thee 
Isa.  10.28.  at  Michmash  he  I.  up  his  carriages 

J5.7.  that  Z.  up  shall  they  carry  away  to  the  brook 
2.3.  18.  her  hire  shall  not  be  treasured  or  I.  up 
39.  6.  which  fathers  I.  up  be  carried  to  Babylon 
Jer.  36.  20.  they  I.  up  the  roll  in  the  chamber 
I^ulce  1.  66.  all  I.  them  up  in  their  hearts,  saying 
12.  19.  soul,  thou  hast  much  goods  I.  up  for  years 
19.  20.  thy  pound  I  have  kept  I.  up  in  a  napkin 
Col.  1.  5.  for  the  hope  which  is  I.  up  for  you 
2  Tim.  4. 8.  is  I.  up  for  me  a  crown  of  righteousness 

LAID  wait. 
Judg.  9.  34.  and  they  I.  wait  against  Shcchem 
16.  2.  they  I.  wait  all  night  for  Samson  in  the  gate 
1  Sam.  15.  2.  Amalek  I.  wait  for  him  in  the  way 

5.  and  Saul  came  ajid  I.  wait  in  the  valley 
Jab  31.9.or  if  I  have  I.  wait  at  my  neighbour's  door 
Lam.i.  19.  they  I.  wait  for  us  in  the  wilderness 
j3cis  20.  3.  when  the  Jews  I.  wait  for  him,  23.  3D. 

LAID  waste. 
Psal.  79.  7.  for  they  I.  waste  his  dwelling-place 
/s(i.l5.1.Ar  and  Kir  i.tt7asJe||23.1.Tyre,it  is  l.ioaste 
23.  14.  howl,  ye  ships,  your  strength  is  I.  waste 
37.  18.  the  kings  of  Assyria  l.waste  all  the  nations 
(54.  11.  and  all  our  pleasant  things  are  I.  waste 
Jcr.i.7.lhy  cities  shall  be  I.  waste  without  an  iiiha- 
bitant,  Eiek.  6.  6.  ]  12.  20.  |  19.  7.  |  29.  12. 

27.  17.  wherefore  should  this  city  be  I.  loastel 
^:(;/i-.2fi.2.I  shall  be  replenished  now  she  is  l.waste 
Joel  1.  7. 1,  my  vine  waste,  and  barked  my  fig-tree 
.i9mos  7.  9.  the  sanctuaries  of  Isr.  shall  he  I.  waste 
J\,'ah.  3.  7.  ail  shall  flee  and  say,  Nineveh  is  I.  joastc 
Mai.  1.  3.  1 1,  his  heritage  waste  for  dragons 

LAIDEST. 
^sal.  66.  11.  thou  I.  affliction  on  onr  loins 
Luke  19.  21.  thou  takest  up  that  thou  I.  not  down 

LAIN. 
John  20. 12.  where  the  body  of  Jesus  had  I. 

LA  VEST. 
JVfttm.ll.tl.  thou  I.  the  burden  of  this  people  on  me 
1  Sam. 28.  9.  wherefore  I.  thou  a  snare  for  my  life  1 

LAYETH. 
Job  21.  19.  God  I.  up  his  iniquity  for  his  children 
24. 12.  soul  crieth  out,  yet  God  I.  not  folly  to  them 
41.20.  the  sword  of  him  that  I.  at  him  cannot  hold 
Psal.  33.  7.  he  I.  up  the  depth  in  store-houses 
104.  3.  he  I.  the  beams  of  his  chambers  in  waters 
Prov.  2.  7.  he  f.  up  wisdom  for  the  righteous 
13.16.dcals  with  knowledge,but  a  fool  i. open  folly 
26.  24.  dissembleth,  and  I.  up  deceit  within  him 
31.  10.  she  I.  her  hands  to  the  spindle,  her  hands 
Isa.  26.  5.  the  lofty  city  he  I.  low  to  the  ground 
5'>.  2.  blessed  is  the  man  that  /.  hold  on  it 
57.1 .  righteous  perisheth,  and  no  man  I.  it  to  heart 
Jer.  9.  8.  in  heart  he  I.  wait]!  12.  11.  I.  it  to  heart 
Zech.  12.  1.  Lord  I.  the  foundation  of  the  earth 
lAtke  12.  21.  so  is  he  that  Z.  up  treasure  for  himself 
15.  5.  found,  he  I.  it  on  his  shoulders  rejoicing 

LAYING. 
JVum.  3.').  20.  or  hurl  at  him  by  I.  wait,  that  he  die 
22.  have  cast  on  him  any  thing  without  I.  wait 
Psal.  64.  5.  they  commune  of  I.  snares  privily 
Mark  7.  8.  for  /.  aside  the  commandment  of  God 
TMke  11.  .'54. 1,  wait  for  him,  and  seeking  to  caloh 
Acts  8. 18.  that  through  l.on  of  the  apostles'  hands 
9.  24.  but  their  /.  wait  was  known  of  Saul 
23.  16.  Paul's  kinsmen  heard  of  their  I.  in  wait 
25.3.  send  for  him,  I.  wait  in  the  way  to  kill  him 
lT(.'n.4.14.with  /.  on  ofthe  hands  of  the  presbytery 
6.  19. 1,  up  in  store  a  good  fcuimlation  for  time  to 
Heb.  6. 1.  not  i.again  the  foundation  of  repentance 
2.  of  doctrine  of  baptisms,  and  oft.  on  of  hands 
Pet2.1.  /.  aside  all  malice,  guile,  and  hypocrisies 
335 


LEA 

I  LEAD. 

I  Exod,  15. 10.  they  sank  as  I.  in  the  mighty  waters 
J^fam.  31.  22.  and  the  I.  that  may  abide  the  fire 
.Job  19.  24.  that  they  were  graven  with  iron  and  I. 
Jer.  6.  29.  the  I.  is  consumed  of  the  fire 
fizcA.  22. 18.  they  are  I.  in  the  midst  of  the  furnace 
20.  as  they  gather  I.  so  wUl  1  gather  you  in 

anger 
27.12.with  iron,  tin,  and  ^Tarshish  traded  in  fairs 
ZecA.  5.  7.  behold,  there  was  lilted  up  a  talent  of  ^ 
8.  he  cast  the  weight  of  J.  on  the  mouth  thereof 
LEAD 
Signifies,  [1]  To  guide  or  conduct,  Psal.  3].  3. 
1 139.  10.     [2]   To  live,  1  Tim.  2.  2.     [3]  To 
govern  or  direct,  Rom.  8.  14.     [4]  To  seduce, 
2  Tim.  3.  6.     [5]   To  walk,  Prov.  8.  t  20. 
Gen.  33.  14.  I  will  I.  on  softly  as  the  cattle 
Ezod.  13.  21.  a  pillar  of  cloud  to  I.  them  the  way 
32.  34.  now  go,  I.  the  people  to  the  place 
JVum.  27.  17.  which  may  I.  them  out  and  bring 
Veut.  4.  27.  whither  the  Lord  shall  I.  you,  2«.  37. 
20.  9.  they  shall  make  captains  to  I.  the  peoi>le 
32.  12.  so  the  Lord  alone  did  I.  him,  there  was 
.ludg.  5.  12.  arise,  Barak,  I.  thy  captivity  captive 

1  Sam.  30.  22.  they  may  I.  them  away  and  depart 

2  Chron.  30.  9.  find  compassion  before  them  that  I. 
JVeA.  9.  19.  thepillarof  cloud  to  '.  them  in  the  way 
Psal.  5.  8.  I.  me,  O  Lord,  in  thy  righteousness 

25.  5. 1,  me  in  thy  truth  |{  27. 11.  I.  in  a  plain  path 

31.  3.  for  thy  name's  sake  I.  me  and  guide  me 
43.  3.  send  thy  light  and  truth,  let  them  I.  me 

60.  9.  who  will  /.  me  into  Edom "!  108.  10. 

61.  2.  I.  me  to  the  rock  that  is  hig'ier  than  I 
125.  5.  I.  them  forth  with  the  workers  of  iniquity 
139.  10.  even  there  shall  thine  hand  I.  me 

24.  and  I.  me  in  the  way  everlasting 
143.  10.  I.  me  into  the  land  of  uprightness 

Prov.  6.22.  when  thou  goest,  it  shall  I.  thee 
8.  20.  I  I.  in  the  way  of  righteousness 

Cant.  8.  2.  I  would  I.  thee  to  my  mother's  house 

Isa.  3.  12.  they  that  I.  thee  cause  thee  to  err 
11.  6.  and  a  little  child  shall  I.  them 
20.  4.  the  king  of  Assyria  I.  Egyptians  prisoners 
40. 11.  he  shall  gently  I.  those  that  are  with  young 
42.  16.  I  will  I.  them  in  paths  not  known 
49.  10.  that  hath  mercy  on  them,  shall  I.  them 
57.  18.  I  will  I.  him,  and  restore  comforts 
63.  14.  so  didst  thou  /.  thy  people  to  make 

Jer.  31.  9.  with  supplications  will  I  I.  them 

32.  5.  and  he  shall  I.  Zedekiali  to  Babylon 
JVaA.  2.  7.  her  maids  I.  her,  as  with  voice  of  doves 
Mat.  6   13.  I.  us  not  into  temptation,  /.uke  11.  4 

1.5.  14.  if  the  blind  I.  the  blind,  J^uke  6.  39. 
Mark  13.  11.  when  they  shall  I.  you  and  deliver  up 

14.  44.  take  him  and  /.  him  away  safely 
JAike  13.  15.  loose  his  ox  and  I.  him  to  watering 
ActslS.  11.  he  went  about  seeking  some  to  I.  him 
1  Cor.  9.  5.  have  we  not  power  to  I.  about  a  sister? 

1  Tim.  2.  2.  we  may7.  a  quiet  life  in  godliness 

2  Tim.  X&.l.  captive  sillv  women  laden  with  sins 
Hcb.  8.  9.  to  /.  them  out'of  the  land  of  Egypt 
Rev.  7.  17.  the  Lamb  shall  feed  and  I.  them 

LEADER. 

1  Chr.  12.27.  Jehoiada  was  I.  of  the  Aaroniles 
13. 1.  David  consulted  with  captains  and  every/. 

Isa.  55.  4.  I  have  given  him  a  I.  to  the  people 
LEADERS. 

2  Chron.  32.21.  Lord  sent  an  angel  which  cut  off/. 
Isa.  9.  16.  the  I.  of  this  people  cause  them  to  err 

14. 19.  it  stirreth  up  all  the  I.  of  the  earth 
Kzek.  4.  t  2.  set  chief  I.  ag:iinst  it  roun<l  about 
Mat.  15.  14.  they  be  blind  /.  of  the  blind 

LEADEST. 
Psal.  80.  1.  thou  that  I.  Josi^ph  like  a  flock 

LEADETH. 
1  Sam.  13. 17.  turned  to  the  way  that  I.  to  Ophrah 
Job  12.  17.  he  I.  counsellors  away  spoiled 

19.  ho /.princes  away  spoiled,  and  (iverlhroweth 
t  23.  he  enlargeth  the  nations  and  /.  in 
Psal.  23.  2.  ho  /.  me  beside  the  still  waters 
3.  he  /.  me  in  the  paths  of  righteousness 
Pro!).  16. 29.  /.  him  into  the  wny  that  is  not  good 
Isa.  48.  17.  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God  which  /.thee 
Mat.  7.  13.  wide  is  the  way  that  I.  to  destructiijn 
14.  narrow  is  the  way  that  /.  to  life,  few  find  it 
Mark  9.  2.  Jesus  /.  them  into  a  high  mountain 
.John  10.  3.  he  calloth  his  sheep  and  /.  them 
J]cts  12. 10.  (he  iron  gate  that  /.  into  the  city 
Hom.  2.  4.  the  goodness  of  God  /.  to  repentance 
Rev.  13.  10.  he  that  /.  .shall  go  into  captivity 

LEAF 
Signifies,  [1]  The  product  or  clothing  of  trees 
and  plants,  Gen.  8.  II.  [2]  Jn  evidence  of 
grace,  Psal  1.  3.  [31  .1  furrn  of  godliness,  or 
a  hare  profession  of  Christiavily,  without  the 
fruit  of  righteousnr.-<s,  Mat.  21.  19.  [4J  The 
least  cause  of  fear,  Lev.  26.  30. 
The  leaves  were  for  the  healing  of  the  nations. 
Rev.  22.  ^  Grace  from  Christ,  the  tree  of 
life,  heals  his  people  whom  he  chooses  out  of  all 


LEA 

nation*,  and  gives  Ikemperfeet  freedom  from 
all  spiritual  diseases. 
Gen.  8.  11.  and  lo,  in  her  mouth  was  an  olive  /. 
Z,cu.  20. 36.  sound  of  a  shaken  /.  shall  chase  them 
./ob  13.  25.  wilt  thou  break  a  /.  driven  to  and  fro7 
Psal.  \.  3.  his  /.  also  shall  not  wither,  shall  prosper 
Isa.  1.  30.  shall  be  as  an  oak,  whose  /.  fadeth 

34.  4.  their  host  fall  as  a  I.  \\  64.  6.  we  fade  as  a  /. 
Jer.  8. 13.  there  shall  be  no  grapes,  the  I  shall  fade 

17. 8.  but  her  /.  shall  be  green,  and  not  be  careful 
Eiek.  47.  12.  I.  shall  not  fade,  the  /.  for  medicine 

LEAVES. 
Oen.  3.  7.  they  sewed  fig  I.  and  made  aprons 
Isa.  6.  13.  as  an  oak,  when  they  cast  their  /. 
Jer.  36.  23.  when  Jehudi  read  three  or  four  /. 
Ezek.  17. 9.  it  shall  wither  in  all  the  /.  of  her  spring 
Dan.  4. 12.  /.  thereof  fair,  21.  ||  14.  shake  olV  his  I. 
Mat.  21.  19.  nothing  thereon  but  /.  Mark  11.  13 

24.  32.  his  branch  putteth  forth  /.  Mark  13.  28. 

/ice.  22. 2.  the/,  were  for  the  healing  of  the  nations 

LEAVES  for  doors. 

1  Kings  6. 1 32.lhe  /.  of  the  doors  were  of  olive  trees 

34.  the  two  /.  of  the  one  door  were  folding 
Ezek.  41.  24.  doors  had  two  /.  apiece,  two /.for  one 

LEAGUE. 
.losh.  9.  6.  make  therefore  a  /.  with  us,  11. 

15.  Joshua  made  a  /.  with  the  Gibeonites,  16. 

Jadg.  2.  2.  make  no  /.  with  the  inhabitants  of  land 

1  Sam.  22.  8.  my  son  hath  made  a  /.  with  David 

2  Saw.  5.  3.  king  David  made  a  /.  with  them 

1  Kings  5.  12.  Hiram  and  Solomon  made  a  /. 
15.  19.  there  is  a  /.  between  me^nd  thee 

2  Chr.  16.  3.  go  break  thy  /.  witli  Baaslia  king  of 
Job  5.  23.  shalt  be  in  /.  with  the  stones  of  the  field 
Ezek.  30.  5.  men  of  the  land  that  is  in  /.  shall  fall 
Ban.  11. 23.  after  the  /.  he  shall  work  deceitfully 

LEAN. 
Gen.  41.  3.  kine  came  out  of  the  river  /.-fleshed,  19. 

4.  the  /.-fleshed  eat  up  the  seven  fat  kine,  20. 
J^uin.  13.20.  what  the  land  is,  whether  lator  /. 
2  .Sam.  13.  4.  why  art  thou  being  the  king's  son  /. 
Isa.  17.  4.  the  fatness  of  his  fleoh  shall  wax  /. 
Ezek.  34.  20. 1  will  judge  between  fat  cattle  and  /. 
Zeph.  2. 1 11.  Lord  make  /.  the  gods  of  the  earth 

LEANNESS. 
.lob  16.  8.  my  /.  rising  up  in  me,  beareth  witness 
I's.  106. 15.  gave  request,  but  sent/,  into  their  soul 
Isa.  10.  16.  I,ord  shall  send  among  his  fat  ones  /. 
24.  16.  but  I  said,  my  /.  my  /.  woe  unto  nie 
Mic.  6.  t  10.  the  measure  of  /.  is  abominable 

LEAxN 
Signifies,  [1]   To  incline  or  rest  against,  Judg. 
10.  26.     [2]  Tu  trust  or  depend  upon,  2  Kings 
18.  21.     [3J  Spiritually  bij  faith  and  Ivve  to 
cleave  to  and  rely  upon.  Cant.  8.  5. 
.Judg.  10.  26.  ihat  I  may  /.  on  the  pillars 
2  Kings  18.  21.  on  which  if  a  man  /.  Isa.  30.  6. 
.Job  8.  15.  shall  /.on  his  house,  but  it  shall  not  stand 
Prov.  3.  5.  /.  not  to  thine  own  understanding 
Mic.  3.  11.  yet  will  they  /.  on  the  Lord,  and  say 

LEANED. 
.Judg.  16.  t  29.  the  middle  pillars  on  which  he  Z. 
2  Sam.  1.  6.  behold,  Saul  /.  upon  his  spear 
2  Kings  1.2.  (hen  a  lord,  on  who.>:c  hand  the  king /. 
2  CAron.  32. 1 8.  people/,  on  the  words  ollleztklah 
Ezek.  29.  7.  when  they  /.  on  thee,  thou  brakest 
jJmos  5.  19.  /.  his  hand  on  wall,  a  serpent  bit  him 
.John  21.  20.  who  also  /.  on  his  breast  at  supper 

LEANETH. 
JVum.  21. 1 15.  brooks  /.  on  the  border  of  Moab 
2  Sam.  3.  20.  not  fail  one  that  /.  on  a  stalT 
i  Kings 5.  18. /.on  mv  hand  in  the  house  of Rimm. 

LEANING. 
Cant.  8.  5.  that  Cometh  up  /.  on  her  beloved 
.John  13.  23.  now  there  was  /.  on  Jesus'  bosom 
//cA. 11.21.  Jacob  wor.'<hipped,  /.  on  top  of  his  staff 

LEAP 
Sisnifies,  [1]    To  skip,  or  jump  to  and  fro,  .Acts 
3.  8. 1  14.  10.     [2]   To  come  violently  and  sud- 
denly upon.  Acts  19.  16.     [3]  To  rejoice  and  be 
glad,  Isa.  35.  6. 
Gen.  31.  12.  all  the  rams  which  /.  on  the  cattle 
J.ev.  11.  21.  have  h  is  to  /.  withal  upon  the  earth 
7?ruf.'1?3. 22.  and  of  Dan,  he  shall  /.  from  Bashan 
.fob  41. 19.  burning  lamps,  and  sparks  of  fire  /.  out 
Psal.  68.  16.  why  /.  ye,  ye  high  hills,  this  is  the  hill 
Isa.  35.  6.  then  shall  the  lame  man  /.  as  a  hart 
.Toel2.  5.  like  the  noise  of  chariots  shall  they  /. 
ZrpA. 1.9.  shall  punish  those  that  /.  on  the  threshold 
/,uAe6. 23.  rejoice  re  in  that  day,  and  /.  for  joy 

LEAPED. 
Gen.  31.  10.  (he  rams  which  /.  upon  the  cattle 
2S«m.  22.30.  by  my  God,  I /.over  a  wall,  Ps.  18.29. 

1  Kings  18.26.  they/,  upon  the  altar  which  wag 
I.ukeX.  41.  the  babe  /.  in  her  womb  for  joy,  44. 
.fiets  14.  10.  stand  uprisrht,  and  he  /.  and  walked 

19.  16.  he  in  whom  evil  spirit  was,  /.  on  them 
LEAPING. 

2  Sam.  6.  16.  Michal  saw  David  /.  and  dancing 
Cant.  2.  8.  behold  he  Cometh  I.  on  the  mountains 


LEA 

ctt  3. 3.  and  lie  I.  up,  etood  and  walked,  entered 
LKARN 

Signifies,  [1]    To  receive  instruction,  I  Cor.  14. 

31.  1  Tim.  2.  11.  [-2]  To  imitate,  Mat.  11.  ail. 
[3]  Ta  take  /teed,  1  Tim.  1.  'JO.  [4J  To  know, 
or  hear  one's  opinion,  or  aentivuiit  concern- 
ing any  thing,  Uul.  3.  2.  [5j  To  practise, 
I'aal.  Mi.  3j. 

No  man  could  learn  that  song,  Rev.  14.  3.    JVonc 
of  the  ^dntichristiun  parti/  could  join  in  this 
pure  gospel  worship;  Ihtij  could  not  learn  to 
ascribe  power,  riches,  wisdom,  honour,  glory, 
and  blessing  to  Jesus  Christ  alone ;  but  gave 
Christ's  honour  and  glory  to  the  Virgin  Mary, 
angels,  saints,  Si-c. 
Deut.  4.  10.  that  they  may  I.  to  fear  me,  14.  23. 
5.  1.  lliat  ye  may  /.  them,  and  keep  and  do  them 
17.  I'J.  he  shall  read  therein,  that  lie  may  I.  to  fear 
IS.O.thou  shalt  not  I.  to  do  after  the  abominations 
31.  IJ.  they  may  hear,  and  I.  and  fear  the  Lord 
13.  that  their  children  may  I.  to  fear  the  Lord 
Psal.  U'J.  "1.  that  I  might  I.  thy  Btatutcs,  73. 
Proo.  'J'-  '25.  lest  thou  I.  his  ways  and  get  a  snare 
Jsa.  I.  17.  I.  to  do  well,  seek  judgment,  relieve 
2.  4.  neither  shall  they  I.  war  any  more,  Jilic.  i.  3. 
2<).y.the  inhabitants  of  world  shalU.rigliteousness 

10.  yet  will  not  the  wicked  /.  righteousness 
29.  ■24.  they  that  murmured  shall  I.  doctrine 

Jer.  10.  2.  I.  not  the  way  of  the  heathen 
12. 1().  if  they  will  diligently  I.  ways  of  my  people 

.Vat. !).  13.  but  go  and  /.  what  that  meaneth 
11.  2'J.  I.  of  incj  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly 
24.  32.  I.  a  panffile  of  the  fig-tree,  Murk  13.  28. 

1  Cor.  4.  (i.  that  ye  might  I.  in  us  not  to  think 
14. 31. may  all  prophesy  one  by  one,  that  all  may  /. 
35.  if  they  will  I.  any  thing,  let  them  ask 

Gal.  3.  2.  this  would  1 1,  of  you,  received  ye  Sp.rit 

1  Tim.  1.  20.  that  they  may  /.  not  to  blaspheme 
2. 11. let  the  women  l.in  silence  with  all  subjection 
5.  4.  let  tbem  I.  first  to  shew  piety  at  home 

13.  and  withul  they  ^to  be  idle,  wandering  about 
Tit.  3.  14.  let  ours  I.  to  maintain  good  works 
Kcv.  14.  3.  no  man  could  I.  that  song  but  144,000 

LE.'VRNEU. 
Oen.  30.  27.  tarry,  for  I  have  I.  by  experience 
Ps.  lot}.  35.  among  the  heathen,  and  I.  their  works 
1 19.7.  when  I  shall  have  /.thy  righteous  judgments 
Prov.'iO.'i.l  neither /.wisdom, nor  have  knowledge 
Isa.  2'J.  11.  which  men  deliver  to  one  that  is  /. 
12.  to  him  that  is  not  /.  he  saith,  I  am  not  I. 
50.  4.  the  Lord  God  hath  given  nie  the  tongue  of 
the  /.  he  wakeneth  mine  ear  to  hear  as  the  /. 
Kz^Ar.  19.  3.  it  I.  to  catch  the  prey,  it  devoured,  6. 
John  >'}.  45.  every  man  that  hath  /.  of  the  Father 
7.  15.  knoweth  this  man  letters,  having  never  /. 
/icts  7.22.  Moses  was  /.  in  all  the  wisdom  of  Egypt 
Horn.  If).  17.  contrary  to  the  doctrine  ye  have  /. 
F.ph.  4.  20.  but  ye  have  not  so  /.  Christ 
Phil.  4.  9.  those  things  ye  have  I.  and  heard,  do 

11.  I  have  /.  in  every  state  to  be  content 

Col.  1.  7.  as  ye  /.  of  Epaphras  our  fellow-servant 

2  Tim.  3.  14.  but  continue  thou  in  the  things  thou 

ha.st  /.  kaowing  of  whom  thou  hast  /.  them 
Heb.  5. 8.  though  he  were  a  son,  yet  /.  he  obedience 

LEARNINt;. 
Prov.  1.  5.  a  wise  man  will  hear  and  increase  /. 
9.  9.  teach  a  just  man,  and  he  will  increase  in  /. 
Ifi.  21.  the  sweetness  of  the  lips  increaseth  /. 
23.  the  heart  of  the  wise  addelh  I.  to  his  IIjib 
Dan.  I.  4.  whom  they  might  teach  /.  ofChaldcans 

17.  (Jod  gave  them  skill  in  all  /.  and  wisdom 
^c<»2l).24.Fe8tu8Sttid,much  /.doth  make  thee  mad 
Knm.  15.  4.  for  things  were  written  for  our  /. 
2  Tim.  3. 7.  ever  /.  nnd  never  able  to  come  to  truth 

LEASING. 
Pfat.  4.  2.  how  long  will  ye  seek  after  /.  7 
5.  6.  thou  shalt  destroy  them  that  speak  /. 
LEAST 
SienificR,  [1]   The  smallest  quantity,  Num.  IL 

32.  f2j  Most  humble  and  lowly,  Lnko  9.  48. 
[3]  The  meanest  person,  or  one  of  the  least 
jwiirmrnt,  skill,  and  eipcrienre,  Judg.  fi.  15. 

Calli'd    least   in    the    kingdom    of   heaven.  Mat. 
5.  19.     Shall  be  nf  little  or  no  value  and  esteem 
lit  the  church  of  God,  and,  without  true  re- 
pentance, shall  never  come  into  the  kingdom 
of  ploni- 
Gm.  32.  10.  not  worthy  of  the  /.  of  the  mercies 
.N'um.  11.  32.  thai  gnthrrid  /.  gathered  ten  homers 
Judg.  0.  15.  I  nni  ihi-  /.  in  myfaiher's  house 

1  Sam.  9.  21.  my  family,  the  I.  of  all  families 

2  Kings  1H  21. one  rnplain  of/.of  master's  servants 
.rer.  49.  20.  /.  of  fl.ck  shall  draw  them,  50.  45. 
JJmosS).  9.  not  the  /.  g'ain  fall  upon  the  enrlh 
Mat.  2.  I>.  nr'  not  'hi-  /.among  the  princes  of.Iiidah 

5. 19.  shall  break  one  of  these  /.  coininandnK  nti, 

shall  b'^  call  ■■\  the  /.  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven 

11.  11.  John  Rapl^st,  he  thai  is  /.  in  the  kingdom 

oflienven,  is  greater  tlinn  he,  f.uke  7.  2H.. 

I3>  32.  which  indeed  is  the  /.  of  all  Mcds 

336 


LEA 

I  JV/at.  25.  40.  as  ye  have  done  it  to  the/,  of  these,  45. 
J.uke  U.  48.  he  that  is  /.  among  you,  the  .same  shall 
12.  2tJ.  if  ye  be  not  able  to  do  tliat  which  is  /. 
lb.  10.  he  that  is  faithful  in  the  /.  unjust  in  /. 
1  Cor.  G.  4.  set  them  to  judge  who  are  II  esteemed 
15.  y.  for  1  am  the  /.  of  the  apostles,  not  meet 
Eph.  3.  8.  who  am  less  than  the  /.  of  all  suinla     - 
See  Greatest. 
yjt  the  LEAST. 
Gen.  24.  55.damsel  abide  with  us,  at  the  I.  ten  days 
Judg.  3.  2.  at  the  I.  such  as  before  knew  nothing 

1  Sam.  21.  4.  if  kept  themselves  at  I.  from  women 
/,uke  19.  42.  hadst  known  at  I.  in  this  thy  day 
.dels  5.15.tliut  at  the  I.  the  shadow  of  Peter  passing 

LEATHER. 

2  Kings  1.  8.  a  hairy  man,  girt  with  a  girdle  of/. 

LEATHERN. 
Wat.  3.  4.  John  had  a  /.  girdle  about  his  loins 

LEAVE 
Signifies,  [1]  License  or  permission.  Num.  22. 
13.  Mark.!.  13.  [2]  To  depart  from,  John  W. 
28.  [3J  Tu  bid  farewell  to.  Acts  18.  18.  [4] 
JVoi  to  dwell  or  live  with.  Mat  I'J.  5.  [5]  7u 
lay  down,  lyjat.  5.  24. 

LEAVE,  Substantive. 
J\rum.  22. 13.  for  the  Lord  refuseth  to  give  me  /.  to 

1  Sam.  20.  0.  Da-'d  earnestly  asked  /.  of  me,  28. 
J^Teh.  13.  G.  after  certain  days  obtain.  I  /.  of  the  king 
Mark  5.  13.  and  forthwith  Jesus  gave  them  /. 
John  19.  38.  Pilate  gave  him  /.  to  take  away  body 
.lets  18.  18.  Paul  took  his  /.  of  the  brethren 

21.  6.  when  we  had  taken  our  /.  one  of  another 

2  Cor.  2.  13.  taking  my  /.  I  went  to  Macedonia 

LEAVE. 
f?ra.2.24.shaU  a  man  /.father  and  moth. and  cleave 
to  his  wile,  Mat.  J9.  5.  Mark  10.  7.  i.ph.  5.  31. 
3.3.  15.  let  ine  /.  with  thee  some  of  the  lolk 
42.  33.  /.  one  of  your  brethren  here  with  me 
44.  22.  the  lad  cannot  /.  his  father,  if  he  /.  him 
Kxod.  16.  19.  let  no  man  /.  manna  till  the  morning 
23.  t  5.  cease  to  /.  thy  business,  thou  shalt  /.  it 

11.  what  they  /.  the  beasts  of  the  field  shall  eat 
Lev.  7.  15.  not  /.  any  of  the  iieaco-otVering,  22.  30. 

10.  23.  shall  put  off  garments  and  /.  them  there 
19.  10.  thou  shalt  /.  them  for  the  poor,  23.  22. 

JVum.  9.  12.  /.  none  of  the  passover  till  morning 
10.  31.  and  he  said,  /.  us  not,  I  pray  thee 
32.  15.  will  yet  again  /.  them  in  the  wilderness 

i)f«/.28.51.  shall  not/,  thee  either  corn,  wine,or  oil 
54.  the  remnant  of  children  which  he  shall  /. 

.fosh.  4.  3.  and  /.  them  in  the  lodging  place 

Judg.  9.  9.  the  olive  said,  should  1  /.  my  fatness 
13.viiie  said,  should  I  /.  my  wine,whicliclieeielli 

Ruth  1.  10.  Ruth  said,  entreat  me  not  to  /.  thee 

1  .Sam.  9.  5.  lest  my  father  /.  caring  fur  the  asses 
14.  3G.  Saul  said,  let  us  not  /.  a  man  of  them 
25.  22.  if  I  /.  of  all  that  pertain  to  him 

2  Sam.  14.  7.  shall  not  /.  to  my  husband  a  name 

1  Kings  8.  57.  let  him  not  /.  us  nor  forsake  us 

2  Kings  4.  43.  they  shall  eat  and  shall  /.  thereof 
13. 7.  nor  did  he  /.  of  the  people  but  filly  horsemen 

1  ChroH.  28.  8.  may  possess  this  good  land,  and  /.  it 
Ezra'il.S.gTacc  from  L.  to  /.us  a  remnant  to  escape 

12.  /.  it  for  an  inheritance  to  yourchildr.  forever 
JWA.  4.  t  2.  the  Jews,  will  they  /.  to  themselves 

5.  10.  I  pray  you  let  us  /.  off  this  usury 

6.  3.  why  should  the  work  cease  whilst  I  /.  it7 
10.  31.  that  we  would  /.  the  seventh  year 

.Inb  .39.  II.  or  wilt  thou  /.  thy  labour  to  him  •» 
/•.'.IG.IO.  thoii  wilt  not  /.  my  soul  in  hell,  .lets  2.27. 

17.  14.  they  /.  their  substance  to  their  babes 

27.9.  thou  ha.st  been  my  help, /.  me  not,  119.  121. 

49.  10.  they  die  and/,  their  wealth  to  others 

141.  H.  ()  God,  my  trust,  /.  not  my  soul  destitute 
Prnn.  2   13.  who  /.  the  paths  of  uprightness 

17.  14.  /.  off  conlention,  before  it  bi;  ineddh'd  with 
/;cc/.2.I8.liecause  I  should  /.  it  to  the  manaller  me 
21.  yet  shall  ho  /.  it  for  his  portion 

10. 4.  if  ruler  rise  up  against  thee,  /.  not  thy  place 
Isa.  10.  3.  and  where  will  ye  /.  your  glory  ? 

fi5.  15.  nnd  ye  shall  /.  your  name  for  a  curse 
.fcr.  9.  2.  I  might  /.  my  people,  and  go  from  them 

14.  9.  O  Lord,  wc  are  called  by  thy  name,  /.  us  not 

17.  1 1,  riches,  hi-  shall  /.  them  in  midst  of  his  days 

18.  14   will  a  man  /.  the  snow  of  Lebanon 

44. 7.  child  and  suckling,  to  /.  you  none  to  remain 

48.  28.  /.  the  cities,  and  ilwcll  in  the  rock 

49.  9.  would  they  not  /.  some  gleaning-grapcs? 
11.  /.  thy  fatherless  children,  I  will  preserve  them 

F.iek.  ir..'39.  and  /.  tlicc  naked  and  bare,  23.29. 

39.  2.  will  turn  thee,  ami  /.  but  a  sixth  part  of  thee 
Dan.  4.  15.  /.  the  slump  of  his  root,  23,  20. 
Ifos.  12.  14.thereforeBliall  he  I. his  blood  upon  him 
.foel  2.  14.  will  return,  anil  /. Ji  blessing  behind  him 
ytnins  5.  3.  sliiill  /.  an  hundred,  shall  /.  ten  to  Israel 

7.  ye,  who  /.  off  riehteousness  in  the  earth 
Ohnil  !i.  grnpc-gntherers,woulil  ihiy  not  /.  grapes? 
.1/n/.4.1.lh:it  it  shall  /.them  neither  root  nor  branch 
Mat.  5.  24.  /.  there  thy  giO  before  lliQ  altar 

]8.12.dotli  he  not  /.the  ninety  and  nine,  Luke  15.4. 


LED 

Mat.  23. 23.  to  have  done,  and  not  /.  other  Dndon<) 
Mark  12. 19.  and  /.  his  wife,  and  /.  no  children 
J.uke  19.  44.  they  shall  not  /.  in  thee  one  alone 
John  14.  27.  my  peace  1  /.  w  itli  you,  peace  1  give 
1().  28.  I  /.  the  world  and  go  to  the  Father 
32.ye  shall  /.me  alone,yet  1  am  not  alone,becaure 
J]cts  Ot  2.  it  is  not  reason  we  should  /  the  woid 
1  Cor.  7.  13.  to  dwell  with  her,  let  her  not  /.  him 
fieb.  13.  5.  I  will  never  /.  thee  nor  forsake  thee 
Hev.  11.  2.  the  court  /.  out,  and  measure  it  not 
J  will,  or  will  J  LEAVE 

1  Kings  19. 1 18.  yet  /  will  /.seven  thousand  in  Isr. 
Job  9.  27.  if  I  say,  /  will  I.  off  my  heaviness 

lO.i.  J  will  /.my  complaint  on  myself, /iri//  speak 
i,'2eA-.6.8.  yet/-/,  aremnant  II  12.  10.  but /-/.  a  lew 

22.  20.  and  /  will  /.  you  there  and  melt  you 
29.  5.  /  wilt  I.  thee  thi'own  into  the  wildernesa 
32.  4.  then  /  will  I.  thee  upon  the  land  and  cast 

Zeph.  3.  12. 1  will  I.  in  midst  of  thee  a  ooor  people 

/  will  not  LEAVE. 
<7en.  23. 15.  IwUlnotl.  thee  until  1  have  done  that 

2  Kings  2.2.  as  the  L.  livetli,  I  w.  not  /.thee,  4.  30. 
4.  and  he  said,  as  thy  soul  livctli,  /-/.  thee,  0. 

Ps.  37.  33.  Ld.  I- 1. him  in  his  hand,  nor  coiideina 
Jer.  30.  II.  /-  /.  thee  together  unpunished,  46.  28. 
John  14.  Ic.  Iw.  not  I.  vou  comfortless,  I  will  come 

LEAVED. 
Isa.  45.  1.  to  open  before  him  the  two-/,  gates 

LEAVETII. 
.Job  39.  14.  the  ostrich  /.  her  eggs  in  the  earth 
Prov.  13.  22.  a  good  man  /.  an  inheritance  lo  his 

28.  3.  is  like  a  sweeping  rain  which  /.  no  food 
Zf  cA.11.17.woe  to  the  idol  ehepheid,that  /.the  (lock 
Mut.  4.  11.  then  the  devil  /.  him,  and  bi.hold 
.lohn  10.  12.  the  hireling  /.  the  sheep  and  fleeth 

LEAVEN 
Signifies,  .1  piece  iif  dough  salted  and  soured,  ta 
ferment  and  reli.-,h  a  mass  of  doui'h  for  bread, 
Hos.  7.  4.     1  Cor.  5.  6.     To  which  are  compar- 
ed, [1]   The  doctrine  of  the  gospel,  which  was 
to  be  successful  in  converting  many  sinners. 
Mat.  13.  33.     [2]  The  erroneous  doctrines,  and 
vicious  practices  of  the  Pharisees  and  Suddu- 
cecs ;  the  corrupt  glosses  of  the  law,  the  doc- 
trine of  traditions,  invented  and  promoted  by 
the  former ;  and  that  poiso7ious  ductrini  of  t/u 
mortality  of  the  soul,  strenuously  maintaivid 
by  the  latter ;  which,  like  leaven,  are  not  only 
'    of  a  sour,  but  also  of  a  contagious  and  infec- 
tious nature,  and  suited  to  men  of  atheistical 
hearts  nnd  lives,  Jlat.  IG.  G,  12.    [3]  .Votoriiius 
scandaUus   sinners,  who   infect   and  cast   a 
blot  upon  a  church,  1  Cor.  5.  G. 
Kxod.  12.  15.  ye  shiill  put  away  /.  seven  days,  19. 
13.7.  neillier'sliall  be  /.  seen  in  all  thy  (juaner.s 
34.  25.  not  oft'er  the  blood  of  my  sacrifice  wi:li  I 
Lev.  2.  11.  no  meal-olfering  shall  be  made  with  I 
G.  17.  it  shall  not  be  baken  with  /.  I  have  given 
10.  12.  take  and  eat  tbP  meat-offering  wilhoul  I 

23.  17.  be  of  fine  flour,  they  shall  be  baken  wiih  /. 
..Iwos  4.  .I.  offer  a  .sacrifice  of  thanksgiving  with  /. 
Jlf«M3.33.kingdom  oflieaven  is  like),  /.nke  13.21 

10.  6.  Jesus  said,  beware  of  the  /.  of  ihe  Phaii.'-ecs, 
and  ofthe  Sadducecs,ll.  Mark  8. 15.  J:uke  12.L 
12.  bade  them  not  beware  oltlic  /.  of  bread 
1  Cor.S.G.little /.leaveneth  the  whole  lump,  r;«/..';.9 
7.  purge  out  therefore  the  old  /.  thai  he  may  he 
S.let  us  keep  the  feast,  net  with  old /.or  of  malice 
LEAVENEO. 
Eiod.  12.  15.  for  whosoever  eateth  /.  broad,  19. 
20.  ye  shall  eat  nothing  /.  in  all  vour  hahitatiuni 
34.  people  took  their  dough  before  it  was  /.  39. 
13.  3.  there  shall  no  /.  bread  be  eaten,  7. 
//«»-. 7.4. ader  he  hath  kneaded  Ihe  dough  till  it  be  I. 
Mat.  13  33.  till  the  whole  was  /.  /,i./.c  13.  21. 
See  r.HKAn. 

LEAVENETH. 
1  Cor.5.6.a  little  leaven /.ihc  whole  lump,  Gal.o.9. 

LEAVING. 
Mat.  4. 13.  Jesus  /.  Nazareth,  dwelt  in  CiiperiiauiD 
Luke  10.  30.  thieves  departed,  /.  h.m  half  dea.l 
Hom.  1.  27.  men  /.  the  natural  use  of  the  woman 
Heh.{\.  1.  /.  Ihe  principles  of  Ihe  doctrine  of  Christ 
1  Pet.  2. 21.  Christ  suffered  for  us,  /.  us  on  uxaiupla 

LED. 
^fti.  14.  t  11.  he  /.  forth  his  troined  servants 

24.  27.  1  being  in  the  way,  Ihe  Lord  /.  me 

4-*.  blessed  ilie  Lord,  who  h.id  /.  mo  in  nglit  way 
47.  f  17.  Joseph  /.  lliein  with  broad  for  ihal  year 
F.iod.  3. 1.  Moses  /.  the  Hock  lo  back  .•■ide  of  desert 
13.17.  God  /.  them  not  thro'  I  he  land  of  Philisiinpn 
18.  hut  God  led  thcin  n^out  thro'  the  wildcrnes* 
15.  13.  thou  in  mercy  hnsl  /.  forth  the  people 
Deut.  8. 2.  the  way  which  the  L.  /.  llee  'orly  ycon 
15.  who  /.  thee  through  that  great  w  ili'ornesi 

29.  .5.  I  have  /.  you  forty  years  in  the  wildernoM 
32.  10.  he  /.  him  nboiil,  he  instructed  him 

Josh.  24.  3. 1  /.  him  ihroUL'h  aM  the  land  of  Canaan 

1  AVH^»8.4S.eneniies, which  /.  them  nway  capliv* 

2  Kings  6.  19.  but  Elisha  /.  them  toSiuiJaria 


LEP 

1  Ckr.  20.  1.  Joab  I.  forth  the  power  of  the  army 

2  Chron.  25.  II.  and  Amaziah  I.  forth  his  people 
Psal.  7^.  14.  in  tliu  day  he  I.  tlicni  witii  a  cloud 

53.  he  I.  tliom  on  safely,  so  that  they  feared  not 
lOG.  9.  30  he  /.  them  thro'  the  depths  as  thro'  a 
wilderness,  YM.  IH.  Isa.  03.  13. 
107.  7.  he  I.  them  forth  by  the  right  way 
Prov.  4.  11.  I  have  I.  thee  in  riglit  paths 
Jsa.  ',).  10.  they  that  are  I.  of  them  are  destroyed 
48.  21.  they  lliirsied  not  when  they  I.  them  ihro 
55.  12.  for  ye  shall  be  I.  forth  with  peace 
63.  12  that  I.  them  by  the  right  hand  of  Moses 
Jer.  2.G.  where  is  the  I,d.  that  /.  us  thro'  wilderness 
17.hath  forsaken  Goil, when  he/,  thee  by  the  way 
&J.  12.shalldie  in  the  place  whither  they  have  l.h'wn 
23. 8.  the  Lord  liveth  which  I.  the  house  of  Israel 
J,a.m.  3.  2.  he  hath  I.  me  into  darkness,  not  light 
Ezek.  17. 12.  and  I.  them  with  him  to  liabylon 
39.  28.  who  caused  them  to  bi  /.  into  captivity 
47.  2.  I.  me  about  to  the  outward  gate  eastward 
Jimos  2.  10.  also  1 1,  you  40  years  thro'  the  wildcrn. 
7. 11.  Israel  shall  surely  he  I.  captive  out  of  land 
A'an.  2.  7.  and  Huzzab  shall  be  /.  away  captive 
Mat.  4.  1.  then  was  Jesus  I.  of  tbeSi)irit,  Lukei.\. 
2b.  57.  they  I.  him  to  Caiaphas  the  high-priest, 
Mark  14.  53.  Uike  22.  54.  Juhn  18.  13. 
27.  2.  thoy  I.  him  to  Pont.  Pilate  the  governor,  31. 
Mark  15.  1(5,  20.  Luke  22.  54.  Jokn  Id.  13. 
Mark  6.  23.  he  took  the  blind  man  and  I.  him  out 
I.uke  4.  2y.  they  /.  Jesus  to  the  brow  of  the  hill 
21.24.they  shall  be  l.  away  captive  into  all  nations 

22.  66.  anil  I.  him  into  their  counsel,  saying 

23.  1.  the  whole  multitude  /.  him  to  Pdate 
32.  two  other  malefactors  were  I.  with  him 

24.  5l).  he  /.  them  out  as  far  as  Dethany 

John  18.  28.  they  ^  Jesus  unto  the  hall  of  judgment 
i^cts  8.  32.  he  was  I.  ^  a  sheep  to  the  slaugliter 

9.  8.  they  I.  Saul  by  the  hand  to  Damascus,  22. 11. 

21.  37.  as  Paul  was  to  be  l.  into  the  castle 
Rom.  8.  14.  as  many  as  are  I.  by  the  Spirit  of  God 

1  C(ir.l2.2.  carried  away  to  idols, even  as  ye  were/. 
Oal.  5.  18.  but  if  ye  be  /.  by  the  Sjiint,  ye  are 
2Tiin.  3.  C).  silly  woTrien,  I.  away  with  divers  lusts 

2  Pet.  3. 17.  beware,  lest  ye  also  being  /.  away  with 

the  errorof  the  wicked,  fall  from  stedfastness 
LEDDEST. 
2  .Sa77i.  5.  2.  wast  he  that  /.  out  Israel,  1  Chr.  11. 2. 
JVeh.9.  12./.  them  in  the  day  by  a  cloudy  pillar 
Psal.  77.  20.  thou  /.  Ihy  people  like  a  Hock 
Mcts  21.38.and  /.into  the  wilderness  four  thousand 
men  that  were  murderers 
LEDGES. 
1  Kings  7.  28.  the  borders  were  between  the  I. 

35.  the  /.  and  borders  thereof  were  of  the  same 

36.  on  the  plates  of  the  /.  he  graved  cherubims 

LEEKS. 
J^um.  11.  5.  we  remember  the  /.  and  the  onions 

LEES. 
Isa.  25.  6.  a  feast  of  wine  on  the  /.  well  refined 
Jer.  48. 11.  and  Moab  hath  settled  on  his  /. 
Zftph.  1.  12.  I  will  punish  men  settled  on  their  /. 

LEFT. 
Oen.  18.  33.  he  had  /.  communing  with  Abraham 
24.  27.  who  hath  not  /.  destitute  my  master 
29.  35.  his  name  Judah,  and  /.  bearing,  ,30.  9. 
32.  8.  then  the  other  company  which  is  /. 
39.  C.  he  /.  all  that  he  had  in  Joseph's  hand 

12.  he  /.  his  garment  in  her  hand,  13,  15,  18. 
41.  49.  Joseph  gathered  corn  till  he  /.  numbering 
44.  12.  at  the  eldest,  and  /.  at  the  youngest 
47.  18.  not  enough  /.  but  our  bodies  and  lands 
50.  8.  their  little  ones  /.  they  in  Goshen 
Exod.  2.  20.  why  is  it  that  ye  have  /.  the  man  ? 

9.  21.  /.  his  servants  and  his  cattle  in  the  field 

10.  12.  eat  every  herb,  all  that  the  hail  /.  15. 
26.  there  shaH  not  a  hoof  be  /.  behind 

16.  20.  but  some  of  them  /.  of  it  till  morning 
34. 25.  nor  sacrifice  of  passover  be  /.  till  morning 
I^v  2.  10.  that  which  is  /.  of  the  meat-offering 

10.  12.  and  to  Ithamar,  his  sons  that  were  /. 
26.  39.  they  that  are  /.  of  you  shall  pine  away 

43.  the  land  also  shall  bo  /.  of  ihem  and  enjoy 
JVum.  26.65.  there  was  not  /.  a  man  of  them,  ./o.<tA. 
8.  17.  Judff.  4. 16.  Hos.  9. 12. 
Deut.  2.  34.  we  utterly  destroyed,  we  /.  none  to  re- 
main, .)osli.  10.  33,  37, 39, 40. 1 11.  8, 11, 14. 
4.  27.  ye  shall  be  /.  few  in  number  among  the 
heathen,  28.  62.  Isa.  24.  6.  Jcr.  42.  2. 

7.  20.  till  they  that  are  /.  be  destroyed 
98.  5,5.  he  hath  nothing  /.  him  in  the  siege 

32.  36  power  gone,  and  there  is  none  shut  up  or  /. 
Josh.  6. 23.  and  /.them  without  the  camp  of  Israel 

8.  17.  they  /.  the  city  open,  and  pursued  Israel 

11.  15.  he  I.  nothing  undone  of  all  commanded 

22.  there  was  none  of  the  Anakims  /.  in  the  land 
E.  3.  ye  have  not  /.  your  brethren  to  this  day 

Judg.'i.'il  ofnations  which  Joshua /.when  he  died 

23.  therefore  the  Lord  /.  those  nations,  3.  1. 
6.  4.  /.  nn  sustenance  for  Israel,  neither  sheep 
8  S.  yet  Jotham  the  youngest  son  was  /. 

337 


LEF 

Ruth  1.  3.  and  she  was  /.  and  her  two  sons,  5. 

18.  was  minded  to  go,  then  she  /.  speaking  to  her 
2.  11.  how  thou  bast  /.  thy  father  and  mother 
14.  Ruth  did  eat  and  was  sufHced,  and  /. 

4.  14.  Lord  not  /.  thee  this  day  without  kinsman 

1  Sam.  2.  36.  every  one  that  is  /.  in  thy  house 

5.  4.  only  the  stump  of  Dagon  was  /.  to  him 

9.  24.  that  which  is  /.  set  before  thee  and  eat 

10.  2.  thy  father  hath  /.  the  care  of  the  asses 

11.  11.  so  that  two  of  them  were  not  /.  together 
17.20.David  rose  u])  and  /.the  sheep  with  a  keeper 

22.  David  /.  his  carriage  in  the  hand  of  a  keeper 
25.34.  not  been  /.  any  that  pisseth  against  the  wall 
27.  9.  David  /.  neither  man  nor  woman  alive 

2  .Sa»n.  5.  21.  and  there  they  /.  their  images 

9.  1.  is  there  yet  any  /.  of  the  house  of  Saul  1 

13.  30.  the  king's  sons,  there  is  not  one  of  them  /, 

14.  7.  so  they  shall  quench  my  coal  which  is  /. 

15.  16.  the  king  /.  ten  concubines,  16.  21. 
17.  12.  there  shall  not  be  /.  so  much  as  one 

1  Kiyigs  9.21.  their  children  that  were  /.  2  Chr.  8.8. 
14.10.cutotrhimthatisshutupand/.2A'in^s9.8. 

15.  29.  he  /.  not  Jeroboam  any  that  breathed 

16.  11.  he  /.  Baasha  not  one  that  pisseth  against 
17. 17.  sickness  that  there  was  no  breath  /.  in  him 
19.  3.  and  /.  his  servants  there  ||  10.  1  only  am  / 

18.  yet  I  have  /.  me  7000  1|  20.  he  /.  oxen  and  ran 

2  Kings  4.  44.  and  they  did  eat  and  /.  thereof 

7.  7.  they  arose  and  /.  tents  {|  13.  all  that  are  /. 
8. 6.  since  the  day  she  /.  the  land  even  until  now 

10. 11.  Jehu  slew  all,  till  he  /.  him  none  reniainin__ 
21.  so  that  there  was  not  a  man  /.  that  came  nol 

14.  26.  for  there  was  not  any  /.  nor  any  helper 

17.  16.  they  /.  the  commandments  of  the  Lord 

19.  4.  this  prayer  for  remnant  that  are  /.  /so. 37.4. 

20.  17.  nothing  shall  be  /.  saith  the  Lord 

2.5.  12.  /.  of  jioor  of  the  land,  .ler.  39.  10.  |  52. 10. 

1  Chron.  13.  2.  send  to  our  brethren  that  are  /. 

2  Chron.  11.  14.  for  the  Levites  /.  their  suburbs 

12.  5._I  have  also  /.  you  in  the  hand  of  Shishak 

21.  17.  so  that  there  was  never  a  son  /.  him 
24.  18.  and  they  /.  the  house  of  the  Lord  God 

25.  for  they  /.  Joash  in  great  diseases 

31. 10.  we  had  enough  to  eat,  and  liave  /.  plenty 
32.  31.  God  /.  him  to  try  him,  that  he  might  know 
34.  21.  go,  enquire  ibr  them  that  are  /.  in  Israel 
JV('A.1.2. 1  asked  concerning  the  Jews  which  had  /. 
3.  the  remnant  that  are  /.  are  in  great  affliction 

6.  1.  the  wall  that  llicre  was  no  breach  /.  therein 
Job  20.  21.  there  shall  none  of  his  meat  be  /. 

26.  it  shall  go  ill  with  him  that  is  /.  in  his  tabern, 
Psal.  106.  11.  there  was  not  one  of  them  /. 
Preu.  29.  15.  a  child  /.  to  himself  bringeth  to  shame 
Isa.  1.  8.  Zion  is  /.  as  a  cottage  in  a  vineyard 

9.  e.\cept  Lord  had  /.  us  a  remnant,  Horn.  9.  29. 
4.  3.  he  that  is  /.  in  Zion  shall  be  called  holy 
7.22.butter  and  honey  shall  every  one  oat  that  is  I. 

10.  14.  as  one  gathereth  eggs  that  are  /. 

n.  16.  a  highway  for  the  remnant  that  shall  be  /. 
17.  6.  yet  gleaning-grajies  shall  bo  /.  in  it 
24.  12.  in  the  city  is  /.  desolation,  and  the  gate 
30.  17.  till  ye  bo  /.  as  a  beacon  on  a  mountain 
39.  6.  nothing  shall  be  /.  saith  the  Lord 

Jer.  12.  7.  I  /.  my  heritage  ||  31.  2.  /.  of  the  sword 
49. 25.  how  is  the  city  of  praise  not  /.  thecity  of  joy 
50.  20.  destroy  her,  let  nothing  of  her  be  /. 

Ezek.  14.22.  behold,  therein  shall  be  /.  a  remnant 
23.  8.  nor  /.  her  whoredoms  brought  from  Egypt 

31. 12.  strangers  have  cut  him  off  and  have  /.  him 
Dan.  2. 44.  the  kingd.  shall  not  be  /.  to  other  people 
.loci  1.4.  what  the  pulmer-worm  /.  the  locust  halh  /. 
//acr  .2.3.who  is  /.  that  saw  this  house  in  her  glory? 
Zech.  13.  8.  the  third  part  shall  be  /.  therein 
Mat.  4.  20.  /.  their  nets  ||  22.  they  /.  their  ships 

8.  1.5.  he  touched  her,  and  fever  /.  her,  Mark  1.31. 

15.  .37.  took  up  of  the  meat  that  was  /.  Mark  8.  8. 
22. 25.  he  /.  his  wife  to  his  brother,  Mark  12. 20. 

23.  38.  your  house  is  /.  unto  you  desolate 

24. 2.  there  shall  not  be  /.  one  stone  upon  another, 
Mark  1,3.  2.  Luke  21.  6. 
40.  one  taken,  other  /.  41.  Liikc  17.  .34,  :«,  36. 
26.  44.  Jesus  /.  them,  and  prayed  the  third  time 
Mark  10.  28.  we  have  /.  all  and  followed  ihee 
29.  no  man  hath  /.  house,  Luke  18.  28,  29. 
12.22.  and  the  seven  had  her,  and  /.  no  seed 
Luke  5.  28.  he  /.  all,  rose  up,  and  followed  him 
10.  40.  that  my  sister  hath  /.  me  to  servo  alone 
John  4.  28.  the  woman  then  /.  her  water-pot 

52.  at  the  seventh  hour  the  fever  /.  him 
.^cts  2. 31.  of  Christ,  that  his  soul  was  not  /.  in  hell 
14.  17.  ho  /.  not  himself  without  witness 
21.:}2.  when  saw  captain,  they  /.  beating  of  Paul 

24.  27.  and  Felix  /.  Paul  bound,  2.5.  14. 

1  7'Af«.5.3.1.we  thought  good  to  be  /.at  Athens  alone 
27'/m.  4. 13.  the  cloak  that  I  /.  at  Troas  bring 

20.  Trophimus  have  I  /.  sick  at  Mdetum 
Tit.  1.  5.  for  this  cause  /.  I  thee  at  Crete 
Hcb.  2.  8.  he  /.  nothing  that  is  not  put  under 
4.  1.  let  us  fear,  lest  a  promise  being/,  of  entering 
Jude  6.  the  angeU  which  /.  their  own  habitation 

2  y 


Rev.  2.  4.  because  thou  hast  /.  thy  first  love 
■See  Alone. 
LEFT  off. 
Oen.  11.  8.  and  they  /.  off  to  build  the  city 
17.  22.  /.  off  talking  with  him,  and  God  went  up 
Huth  2.  20.  who  hath  not  /.  off  his  kindness 

1  Kinas  15. 21.  Baasha  /.  off  building,  2  Chr.  16  5. 
Job  32.  15.  answered  no  more,  they  /.  o^  speaking 
Psal.  36. 3.  he  hath  /.  off  to  be  wise  and  to  do  good 
Jer.  38.  27.  so  they  /.  o^  speaking  with  him 

44. 18.  since  we  /.  off  to  burn  incense  to  the  queen 

Ho3.  4.  10.  because  they  have  /.  off  to  take  lieed 

LEFT  comir. 

2  Kings  11. 11.  guard  stood  to  the  /.  c.  about  king 

See  Hand. 

LEFT-HANDED. 

Judg.  3.15.  raised  Ehud  a  Benjaniite,  a  man  /.-  Kan. 

20. 16.  were  seven  hundred  chosen  men  l.-htnded 

LEFT  pillar. 

IKings  7.21.  he  set  up  the  l.pil.  and  called  it  Boaz 

LEFT  side. 

1  Kings  7. 39.  five  bases  on  the  /.  side  of  the  house 
49.  five  candlesticks  on  the  /.  side  before 

2  CAro7t.23.10.  with  his  weapon  from  right  to  l.side 
Ezek.  1. 10.  they  had  the  face  of  an  ox  on  the  l.side 

4.  4.  lie  also  on  thy  /.  side,  and  lay  the  iniquity 
Zech.  4.  3.  other  olive-tree  upon  /.  side  thereof,  11. 

LEG 
Signifies,  [1]  Properly,  the  limbs  or  parts  of  an 
animal,  which  are  tlie  instruments  of  local 
motion,  and  the  supporters  nf  the  body,  Exod 
12.9.  1  Sam.  17.6.  [2'!  Figuratively,  strcji^/A, 
Psal.  147.  10.  ^  J      *•      .  ^     ' 

His  legs  are  as  pillars  of  marble.  Cant.  5.  15. 
The  dispensations  of  his  providence  are  wisely 
and  skilfully  contrived:  or,  it  may  denote,  the 
firmness  and  stability  of  Christ's  kingdom,  in 
spite  of  all  opposition. 
Isa.  47.  2.  make  bare  the  /.  uncover  the  thigh 

LEGS. 
F.xod.  12.  9.  but  roast  with  fire  his  head  and  I. 
29.  17.  wash  the  inwards  and  his  /.  Lev.  9.  14. 
Lev.  4.  11.  the  skin,  his  head,  and  his  /.  burn 
8.  21.  he  washed  the  inwards  and  /.  in  water 
11.  21.  which  have  /.  above  their  feet,  these  eat 
Deut.H8.3li.  he  shall  smite  thee  in  the  knees  and  / 
1  Sam.  17.  6.  he  had  greaves  of  bra.ss  upon  his  /. 
Ps.  147. 10.  he  tdketli  no  pleasure  in  the  /.  of  a  man 
Prov.  26.  7.  the  /.  of  the  lame  are  not  equal 
Cant.  5.  15.  his  /.  are  as  pillars  of  marble 
/.5a.  3.20.  the  L.  will  take  away  the  ornaments  of/ 
Dan.  2.  33.  his  /.  of  iron,  his  ieet  part  of  iron 
Amos  3.  12.  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  lion  two  I. 
John  19.  31.  they  besought  their  /.  might  be  broken 

32.  the  soldiers  came  and  brake  the  /.  of  the  first 

33.  and  saw  he  was  dead,  they  brake  not  his  L 

LEISURE. 
Mark  6.  31.  and  they  had  no  /.  so  much  as  to  eat 

LEND. 
Ezod.  22.  25.  if  thou  /.  money  to  any,  thou  shall 
Lev.  25.  37.  not  /.  him  thy  victuals  for  increase 
Deut.  15.  6.  and  thou  shalt  /.  to  many  nations 
8.  thou  shalt  surely  /.  him  sufficient  for  his  need 

23.  19.  thou  shalt  not  /.  upon  usury  to  thy  brother 
20.  to  a  stranger  thou  mnyest  /.  upon  usnry 

24.  10.  when  thou  dost  /.  thy  brother  any  thing 
11   tlie  man  to  whom  thou  dost  /.  shall  bring 

28.12.thou  shalt /.to  many  nations,and  not  borrow 

44.  he  shall  /.  to  thee,  thou  shalt  not  /.  him 

Lukefi.'M.ifyc  /.them  of  whom  ye  hope  to  receive, 

sinners  also  /.  sinners,  to  receive  as  much  again 

35.  but  love  ye  your  enemies,  do  pood  and  /. 

II.  5.  and  say  to  him,  friend,  /.  me  three  loaves 

LENDER. 
Prov.  22.  7.  the  borrower  is  servant  to  the  /. 
Isa.  24.  2.  as  with  the  /.  so  with  the  borrower 

LENDETH. 

Deut.  15.  2.  every  creditor  that  /.  aught  to  neighb. 

Psiil.  37. 26.  he  is  ever  merciful  and  /.  seed  blessed 

1 12.5.  a  good  man  sheweth  favour  and  /.will  guide 

Prov.  19. 17.  he  thol  hath  pity  on  the  poor  /.  Icll,. 

22. 1 7.  tho  borrower  is  servant  to  the  man  that  /. 

LENGTH. 
Oen.  13. 17.  arise,  walk  thro'  the  land  in  the  /.of  it 
Deut.  30.  20.  he  is  thy  life,  and  the  /.  of  thy  days 
.fob  12.  12.  and  in  /.  of  days,  understanding 
Psal.  21.  4.  even  /.  of  days  for  ever  and  ever 
23.  to.  dwell  in  the  house  of  Lord  to  /.  of  dayi 
91.  flC.  with  /.  of  days  will  I  satisfy 
Prov.  3.  2.  for  /.  of  days  shall  they  add  to  thee 

16.  /.  of  days  is  in  her  right  Ji;ind,  riches 
Zech.  2.  2.  and  to  see  what  is  the  /.  thereof 

5.  2.  the  /.  of  the  roll  is  twenty  cubits 
F,ph.3.l8.hc  able  to  comprehend  /.  ofloveof  Clirinl 
Rev.  21.  10.  and  the  /.  as  Inrge  ns  the  breadth 

At  LENGTH 
Psal.  36.  t  10.   O   draw   out^  at  I    thy  loving- 
kindnesf 
Prov.  29.  21.  shall  have  him  become  his  son  at  I 
Rom.  1.  10.  if  now  at  I.  I  may  have  a  journey 


LES 

LENGTHEN. 
1  Kings  :?.14.  walk  as  David,  llieii  will  1 1,  thy  days 
ha.  M.  -.  I.  tliv  coriU  ami  strengthen  thy  stakes 

LENGTHENED. 
Deut.  25. 15.  that  thy  days  niav  be  I.  in  the  land 

LENGTilENiNG. 
Dan.  4.  27.  if  it  may  be  a  I.  of  thy  tranquillity 

LENT. 
Ezad.  12.  36.  they  I.  to  them  such  as  they  required 
Deut.^.  19.  usury  of  any  thinj»  that  is  I.  on  usury 

1  Sam.  1  2d.  I  /.  Iiiin  to  the  Lord,  lie  shall  be  I. 
•i.  20.  for  the  loan  which  is  I.  to  tlie  Lord 

Jer.  15.10. 1  have  Dot  l.on  usury  nor  have  men  /.me 

LENTILEa. 
Cfen.  25.  34.  when  Jacob  gave  E?au  pottage  of  /. 

2  .Saw.  23.  11.  there  was  a  piece  of  ground  full  of/. 

Sec  Bkans. 
LEOP.ARD 

Is  a  wild  beast,  called  by  some  a  libbard ;  it  is 
full  of  spots,  aUo  ezcccding  swift,  subtle,  and 
Ji'rrce,  enraged  against  men,  and  of  such  a 
sweet  savour  that  it  allures  other  beasts  to  it; 
by  which  means  they  are  caught  and  devoured, 
Hos.  13.  7.  Hab.  1.8.  To  which  are  compared, 
[1]  .Ontickrist,  with  his  fnllowcrs  and  ad- 
herents, Kcv.  13.  2.  [2]  Men  of  a  fierce  a«- 
traetalile  disposition,  Isa.  11.  G. 

Can  the  leopard  change  his  spots'?  &c.  .Ter.  13. 23. 
It  is  as  much  labour  in  tain  to  endeavour  to 
reclaim  these  .lews,  -who  by  their  continual 
customary  sinning  have  inured  themselves  to 
wicked  practices,  a.i  to  use  means  to  take  out 
the  natural  spots  of  a  leopard. 

ha.  11.  G.  the  I.  shall  lie  down  with  the  kid 

Jer.  5.  6.  a  /.  shall  watch  over  the  cities 

13.  23.  or  can  the  I.  change  his  spots  1 
Jian.  7.  fi.  I  beheld,  and  lo,  another  like  a  I. 
tlos.  13.  7.  therefore  I  will  be  to  them  as  a  I. 
Rev.  13.  2.  and  the  beast  was  like  to  a  I. 

LEOPARDS. 
Cant.  4.  8.  look  from  the  mountains  of  the  I. 
Hab.  1.  8.  their  horses  are  swifter  than  /. 

LEPER. 
Lev.  1.3.  45.  and  the  /.  in  whom  the  plague  is 

14.  2.  this  shall  be  the  law  of  the  I.  in  the  day 
3.  behold,  if  the  leprosy  be  healed  in  the  I. 

22.  4.  what  man  of  the  seed  of  .\aroii  is  a  I. 
J^um.  5.  2.  they  put  out  of  the  camp  every  /. 
2  Sam.  3.  29.  from  the  house  of  Jnab,  one  that  is  al. 
2  Kings  5. 1.  Nanman  was  a  I.  \\  11.  recover  the  I. 
27.  went  from  his  presence  a  /.  as  white  as  snow 

15.  5.  Azariah  was  a  I.  to  the  day  of  his  death 
2  Chron.  26.  21.  and  Uzxiah  the  king  was  a  I. 

23.  they  buried  him,  for  they  said,  he  is  a  I. 

Mat.  R.  2.  and  behold,  there  came  a  /.  Mark  1.  40. 

26.  6.  in  the  house  of  i^imon  the  /.  Mark  14.  3. 

LEPERS. 

2  /Tin/rs  7.8. when  the  I.  came  lo  the  uttermost  part 

Mat.  10.  8.  heal  the  sick,  cleanse  /.  raise  the  dead 

11.5.the  lame  walk,  the/,  arecleansed,  Luhel.l^. 

/>«te 4.27.  many/,  were  in  Israel  in  limeof  Eliseus 

17.  12.  there  met  him  ten  men  that  were  /. 

LEPROSY. 
I^v.  13. 2.  and  it  be  in  the  skin  like  the  plague  of  /. 
3.  it  is  a  plague  of/.  8, 11,15,  25,27,  30,42,  49. 
9.  when  the  pinguc  of/,  is  in  a  man,  then  heHhiill 
12.  if  a  /.  break  out  ||  13.  if  the  /.  covered  his  flesh 
43.  as  the  /.  ajipcareth  in  the  skin  of  the  flesh 
47.  the  garment  that  the  plague  of/,  is  in 
59.  this  is  the  law  of  the  [jlag.  of  /.  14.  .54,  .55,  .57. 
14.  3.  if  the  plague  of/.  I>e  healed  in  the  lepor 
7.  shall  sprinkle  him  that  i.^  to  ho  eleansed  from  /. 
32.  the  law  of  him  in  whom  is  the  [ilaguo  of/. 
Devt.  21.  8.  take  heed  in  the  plague  of/,  to  observe 
2  Kings  5.  3.  for  he  would  recover  him  of  his  /.  7. 
fi.  that  thou  maycst  recover  him  of  his  /. 
27.  the  /.  of  Nnnman  shall  cleave  unto  thee 
Sf'Aren.  2').  19.  the  /.  rose  up  in  his  forehead 
.Vut.8.3.  Ins  /.was  cleansed,  Mark  1.42./.utc5.13. 
Luke  5.  12.  behold,  a  man  full  of/,  besought  him 
Sec  Frkttino. 
LEPROUS. 
F.zod.  4.  ti.  behold,  his  hand  wna  /.  as  snow 
J^rr.  13.  41.  he  Ih  n  /.  man,  he  is  unclean 
,Vum.  12.  10.  Miriam  became  /.  behold  she  was  /. 
2  Kings  7.  3.  there  were  four  /.  men  at  the  gate 
2  Chr.  26.  20.  and  Ihv.'mh  was  /.  in  his  forehead 

LESS 
Signifies,  [1]  Jl  smnllrr  quantity,  Exod.  16.  17. 
[2]  Jfol  in  proportion  to,  Ezra  9.  13.     [3]  Jin 
inferior,  Heb.  7.  7. 
Oen.  32.  t  10.  I  am  /.  than  least  of  all  the  mercies 
F.Tod.  16.  17.  and  gathered  some  more,  some  /. 
30.  15.  the  poorshall  not  give/,  than  half  a  shekel 
A"«i7i.  22. 18.  go  beyond  the  word  of  the  I,d.  to  do  /. 
26.  54.  lo  few  thou  shall  eivo  /.  inheritance,  33.54. 
1  SnmM-i.  15.  Ihyservnnt  knew  nothing  /.  or  more 
25.  3'i.  Abigail  told  him  notlnng  /.  or  mon- 
J^zra  9. 13. punished  us  /.than  our  iniquities  deserve 
Job  11.6.  God  eiaclelh  /.  than  iniquity  detorvuth 
338 


LES 

Ptov.  17.  7.  much  /.  do  lying  lips  a  prince 

19. 10.  much  /.  for  a  servant  to  rule  over  princes 
Isa.  40. 17.  all  nations  are  counted  /.  than  nothing 
Mark  4.  31.  when  it  ia  sown  is  /.  tlian  all  seedii 

15.  40.  Mary  the  motlier  of  James  the  /. 

1  Cor.  8.  t  8.  nor  if  we  eat  not,  have  we  the  /. 

12.  23.  those  members  we  think  /.  honourable 

2  Cor.  12.  15.  the  more  I  love,  the  /.  I  am  loved 
Eph.  3.  8.  who  am  /.  than  the  least  of  all  sainta 
Phil.  2.  28.  and  that  I  may  be  the  /.  sorrowful 
Ueb.  7.7.  the  /.  is  blessed  of  better  without  contrad 

LESSER. 
Oen.  1.  16.  made  the  /.  light  to  rule  the  night 
Isa.  7.  25.  and  for  the  treading  of  /.  cattle 
Ezck.  16.  t  46.  thy  sister  /.  than  thou  is  Sodom 
43.  14.  from  the  /.  settle  to  the  greater  settle 

LEST. 
Gen.  3.3.  neitlier  shall  ye  touch  it  /.  ye  die,  Lev 
10.  6,  7,  9.  J^um.  18.  32. 

11.  4.  /.  we  be  scattered  abroad  on  the  earth 
14.  23.  /.  thou  say,  I  have  made  Abram  rich 
19. 15.  /.  thou  be  consumed  in  the  inicjuity  of  city 

19.  /.  I  die,  2fi.  9.||32.  11.  /.  he  come  and  smite  nie 

38. 11.  /.  he  die,  as  his  breth.  did,  Veut.  20. 5, 6, 7. 
23.  let  her  take  it  to  her,  /.  we  be  ashamed 

45. 11.  /.  thou  and  thy  household  come  to  poverty 
Ktod.  5.  3.  go,  /.  he  fall  on  us  with  pestilence 

13.  17.  /.  peradventure  the  people  repent  in  war 

19.  21.  /.  they  break  through  to  the  Lord  to  gaze 
SS.  sanctify,  /.  the  Lord  break  forth  upon  them 

20.  19.  let  not  God  speak  with  us,  /.  wo  die 

33.  3.  I  will  not  go,  /.  I  consume  thee  in  the  way 
JVum.  4.  20.  shall  not  go  in  to  see,  /.  they  die,  18. 22. 
IJeut.  11.  17.  /.  ye  perish  quickly  from  off  the  land 

24. 15.  /.  he  cry  against  thee  to  Lord,  and  it  be  sin 

25.3./.if  he  should  exceed  and  beat  hiinabove  these 
,Iosk.  9.  20.  let  them  live,  /.  wrath  be  upon  us 

24.  27.  shall  be  a  witness,  /.  ye  deny  your  God 
.Judg.  7.  2.  /.  Israel  vaunt  themselves  against  me 

1  Sam.  20.  3.  let  him  not  know,  /.  he  be  grieved 

2  Sam.  12.  28.  /.  I  take  the  city,  and  it  be  called 
Job  .'16.  18.  /.  he  take  thee  away  with  his  stroke 

42.  8.  /.  I  deal  with  you  after  your  folly 
Ps.  2. 12.  kiss  the  Son  /.  he  be  angry,  and  ye  pcrisl, 
13.3.  lighten  mine  eyes,/.  I  sleep  the  sleep  of  death 
50.  22.  consider  this,  /.  I  tear  you  in  pieces 

91.12.  /.  thoudash  thy  foot.  Mat.  4.  6.  Luke  4.  11. 
106.  23.  Moses  stood,  /.  he  should  destroy  them 
140.  8.  grant  not,  /.  they  exalt  themselves 

14:t.  7.  /.  I  be  like  them  that  go  down  into  the  pit 
Prov.  9.  8.  reprove  not  a  scorner,  /.  he  hate  thee 
20.  13.  love  not  sleep,  /.  thou  come  to  poverty 
22.  2.5.  /.  thou  learn  his  ways,  and  get  a  snare 

24.  18.  /.  the  Lord  see  it,  and  it  displease  him 

25.  8.  /.  thou  know  not  what  to  do  in  the  end 
10.  /.  he  that  hearcth  it,  put  thee  to  shame 
17.  /.  he  be  weary  of  thee,  and  so  hate  thee 

26.4. answer  not  a  fool, /.thou  also  be  like  unto  him 
30.  6.  add  not  to  his  words,  /.  he  reprove  thee 

9.  /.  I  be  full  and  deny  thee,  or  /.  I  be  poor 
Isa.  6.  10.  /.  they  see  with  their  eyes,  .lets  28.  27. 
27.  3.  /.  any  hurl  it,  I  will  keep  it  night  and  day 
28. 22.  not  mockers,  /.  your  bands  be  made  strong 
48.  5.  /.  thou  shouldest  say,  my  idol  hulh  done,  7. 
Jrr.  1.  17.  be  not  dismayed,  /.  I  confound  thee 
4.  4.  /.  my  fury  come  torlh  like  fire,  21.  12. 
6.  8.  be  instructed,  /.  my  soul  depart  from  thee 
37.  20.  cause  me  not  to  return,  /.  I  die  there 
Hos.  2.  3.  /.  I  strip  her  naked,  and  set  her  as  in  day 
JImos  5.  6.  seek  the  Lord,/,  he  break  out  like  fire 
ZccA.7.12.as  an  adamant,/.theyphould  hear  thelaw 
Mill.  4.6.  /.  I  come  and  smite  the  earth  with  a  curse 
Mut.  17.  27.  /.  we  should  offenil,  go  to  the  sea 
25.  9.  /.  there  be  not  enough  for  us  and  you 
Murk  1.3.  5.  take  heed,  /.  any  man  deceive  you 
36.  /.  coming  suddenly,  ho  find  you  sleeping 

14.  38.  watch  and  pray,  /.  ye  enter  into  temptation 
I.nke  8.  \-i.  I.  they  shoidd  hilicve  and  be  saved 

21. 34.  /.  your  hearts  overcharged  with  surfeiting 
John  .5.14. sin  no  more,/,  a  worse  thing  come  lo  thee 

18.  28.  they  went  out  /.  they  should  be  defiled 
Jiela  5.  39.  /.  ye  be  found  to  fight  against  God 

13.  40.  beware  therefore,  /.  that  come  upon  you 
limn.  11.  21.  take  hoed,  /.  he  spare  not  thee,  44. 

1  Oir.  9.  12.  /.  wn  hinder  the  gospel  of  Christ 
10.  12.  let  him  that  slandeth  take  heed  /.  ho  fall 

2  C^r.  2.  11.  /.  S.ilan  should  get  ndvnnlagn  of  us 

12.  7.  /.  I  should  be  njtnlted  above  measure 
Gal.  2.  2.  /.  by  any  means  I  shouM  run  in  vnin 

6.  1.  considering  thyself,  /.  thou  also  be  tempted 
f7p*.2. 9.  not  of  works,  /.  any  man  phould  boost 
C0/.2.4.  /.any  man  beguilo  you  with  enticing  words 

3.21.  provoke  not  children,  /.  they  be  discournged 
1  Tim.  3.  6.  /.  being  lifted  up  with  pride  he  fall  into 
Hrh.  2.  1.  /.  at  any  time  we  should  lei  them  slip 

3.  12.  /.  there  bo  in  any  an  evil  henrt  of  unbelief 
13.  /.  nny  of  you  be  harden<Ml  throuirh  sin 

4.  11.  /.  nny  man  fall  after  the  saoM^  exnmplo 
12.  3.  /.  yi'  be  weary  and  rn;"t  in  your  roitvis 

13.  /.  what  is  lame  bo  turned  out  of  the  way 


LET 

Heb.  12.  15.  /.  any  man  fail  of  the  grace  of  God 
Jam.  5.  9.  grudge  not,  /.  ye  be  condemned 

12.  swear  not,  /.  ye  full  into  condemnation 
2  Pit.  3.  17.  beware,  /.  ye  also  being  led  away 
licv.  16. 15.  keepelli  his  garments,  /.  he  walk  naked 

LET. 

<7en.49.21.  Naphtali  is  a  hind  /.loose,goodly  worda 

£xo(/.3.19.  kingof  Egy.  will  not/,  you  go,  4.21. 1  7 

14.  I  8.  32.  1  9.  7, 17,  35.  |  10.  20,  27.  1 1:  JO 

20.  my  wonders,  and  after  that  he  will  /.  you  ;e 

5. 1.  /.  my  peo.  go,  7. 16.  |  8. 1, 20.  \  9.  1,13.  \  10.  i. 

4.  why  do  ye  /.  the  people  from  their  works  ? 
8.  28.  Pharaoh  said,  I  will  /.  you  go,  9. 28.  1 13. 17 
14.  5.  why  have  we  /.  Israel  go  from  serving 

18.  27.  and  Moses  /.  his  father-in-law  depart 
21.  8.  then  shall  he  /.  her  be  redeemed 

26.  he  shall  /.  him  go  free  for  his  eye,  27. 

23. 11.  seventh  year  thou  shall  /.  it  rest  and  lie  itill 

33. 12.  hast  not  /.  me  know  whom  thou  wilt  send 
Lev.  14.  7.  and  shall  /.  the  living  bird  loose 

18. 21.  not  /.  seed  pass  through  the  fire  to  Molech 

19.  19.  not  /.  cattle  gender  with  a  diverse  kind 
Veut.  15.  12.  thou  shall  /.  him  go  free  from  tlieo 

13.  thou  shall  not  /.  him  go  away  empty 
.losh.  10.  28.  and  all  therein,  he  /.  none  remain,  30. 

24.  28.80  Joshua  /.  the  people  depart  every  man 
Judg.  1.  25.  they  /.  the  man  go  and  his  family 

1  Sam.  18.  2.  Saul  would  /.  him  go  no  more  home 

2  Sam.  11.  12.  to-morrow  I  will  /.  thee  depart 
13.  6.  I  pray  thee,  /.  Tamar  my  sister  come 

1  Kings  18. 40.  Elijah  said,  /.  none  of  them  escape 

2  Chron.  20. 10.  thou  wouldcst  not  /.  Israel  invade 
Esth.  5.12.  queen  did  /.  no  man  come  in  but  myself 
.hb  6.  9.  even  that  he  would  /.  loose  his  hand 

27.  6.  my  righteousness  I  will  not  /.  it  go 
Pj(a/.69.6./.iiol  those  that  \^it  on  thee  be  ashamed, 
/.  not  those  that  sftk  thee  be  confounded 

109.  6.  and  /.  Satan  stand  at  his  right  hand 

119.10./.  me  not  wander  from  thy  commandmenta 
Cant.  3.  4.  I  held  him,  and  would  not  /.  him  go 

8.  11.  he  /.  out  the  vineyard  to  keepers 
Isa.  43.  13.  I  will  work,  and  who  shall  /.  iti 
./cr.  27.  11.  those  will  I  /.  remain  in  the  land 
Ezik.  39.  7.  I  will  not  /.  them  pollute  my  name 
J/ai.21.33.a  householder  planted  a  vineyard  and  /. 
it  out  lo  husbandmen,  Mark  12. 1.  Luke20.  9. 
I.ukc  22.  68.  ye  will  not  answer  me  nor  /.  me  go 
.fohn  19. 12.  the  Jews  cried,  if  thou  /.  this  mango 
Jlcts  27.  15.  ship  could  not  bear  up,  we  /.  her  drive 
Rom.  1.  13.  to  coino  to  you,  but  was  /.  hitherto 
iThess.  2.  7.  only  he  who  now  letleth,  will  /. 
Heb.  2.  1.  lest  ul  any  time  wc  should  /.  them  dip 
Sec  Alone. 
LET  down. 
Gen.  24. 14.  /.  down  thy  pitcher,  I  pray  thee,  18.46. 
Ei od.n .ll.whcn  he  /.(/.his  hantl3,Amalek  prevail. 
.hsh.  2.15.  then  Rahab  /.  them  down  by  a  cord,  18. 

1  .Sam. 19.12.  Michai  /.  David  d.  tlirough  a  window 

2  Kings  13.  21.  and  when  the  man  was  /.  dov>n 
.Jer.  38.  6.  they  /.  down  Jeremiah  with  cords 
KzcA.1.24.  they  stood,  they  /.  down  their  wings,  2.5. 
Jl/nr/iT  2.4. they  l.down  the  bed  wherein,  y.uAeS  19. 
lAike  5.  4.  and  /.  down  your  nets  for  a  draught 

5.  at  thy  word  I  will  /.  down  I  he  net 

Jlcts  9. 25.  and  /.  him  d.  in  a  basket,  2  Cor.  II.  33. 

10.  11.  /.  d.  to  the  earth  ||  27.  30.  hud  /.  d.  the  boat 

LETTED. 

J^um.  22.  t  16.  be  not  thou  /.  from  coming 
LETTER 

Signifies,  [IJ  j?n  epistle  sent  by  one  person  ts 
another,  2  Sam.  11.  14.  [2]  .<?  proclamation^ 
Esth.  3.  13.  [;)]  Learning,  or  the  knowledge 
of  the  mysterious  sense  and  meaning  of  the 
law  of  God,  John  7.  15.  [4]  Thr  outward 
ceremony  of  circumcision,  rrithovt  the  inward 
grace  signified  thereby,  Rom.  2.  29.  [5]  TVU 
I'gnl  dispivsation,  irhieh  consisted  chiifiy  in 
(7  multitude  of  cnrnnl  ordinances,  and  icAert 
they  had  the  Itttrr  of  the  command,  witieu. 
strrnntfi  to  obrii,  Rom.  7.  6.    2  Cor.  3.  6. 

2  Sam.  1 1.  14.  David  wrote  a  /.  to  Joab  and  sent 

2  Kings  5.  5. 1  will  send  a  /.  to  the  king  of  Israel 

6.  now  when  this  /.  is  come  lo  Ihee,  behold 
10.  2.  now  ns  so(m  as  this  /.  comelh  lo  thee 
19.  14.  Hezekiah  received  the  /.  Isa.  37.  14. 

Ezra  4.  7.  the  /.  was  written  in  the  Syrian  tongiM 

8.  Rehiim  wrote  a  /.  against  Jerusalem 
7.  11.  now  this  is  the  copy  of  the  /.  5.  6,  7. 
JWA.  2.  8.  a  I.  lo  Asaph  the  keeper  of  the  forest 

6.  5.  sent  to  me  with  on  open  /.  in  his  hand 
F.slh.  9.  20.  wrote  lo  confirm  this  /.  of  Purim 
Jer.  29.  1.  the  words  of  the  /.  that  Jeremiah  oenl 

29.Zephaninh  priest  read  this  /.in  the  ears  ofJer 
Jfcts  2.3.  25.  Claudius  wrote  a  /.  lo  Felix  in  this 

34.  when  the  governor  had  read  the  /.  he  aeked 
Horn.  2.27.  who  hy  the  /.  dost  Irancgresa  the  low 

2!>.  rirriimcision  of  ihe  heart,  not  in  the  /. 

7.  6.  we  should  serve,  not  in  the  oldness  of  thel 
2  Cur.  3.  6.  ministers  not  of  the  /.  but  of  the  Spirit 

7.  8.  tbo'  I  made  yuu  lorry  with  /.  I  do  not  lopaal 


LEV 

Oal.  6. 11.  ye  boo  how  Itirge  a  Z.  I  have  written 

ZTIiess.  2.  2.  be  not  soon  shaken  by  word  or  by  i 

.Heb.  13. 22. 1  have  written  a  I.  to  you  in  lew  words 

LETTERS. 

1  IH'ti^s  21. 8.  Jezebel  wrote  I.  in  Ahab's  name, 9 

2  Kings  10. 1.  Jehu  wrote  I.  and  sent  to  Samaria 
20.  12.  king  ot'Uabylon  sent  I.  to  llezckiah 

2  Ckron.'M.  1.  Hezekiah  wrote Z.  also  to  Ephraim 
6.  so  the  posts  went  with  the  I.  from  the  king 
32. 17.  Sennacherib  wrote  I.  to  rail  on  God  of  fcr. 
Keh.  2.  7.  let  I.  be  given  me  to  the  governors 
b.  17.  sent  I.  to  Tobiah,  and  I.  came  to  them 

19.  and  Tobiah  sent  I.  to  put  mo  in  fear 
Ksth.  1.  22.  Ahasuerus  sent  /.  to  the  provinces 
3.  13.  the  I.  were  sent  by  posts  to  provinces,  8. 10. 
8.5.10  reverse  Z.  devised  byllaman  to  destroy  Jews 
9.  20.  Mordecai  sent  /.  to  all  the  Jews,  30. 
Jer.  29.  25.  because  thou  hast  sent  /.  in  thy  name 
Luke  23.  38.  was  written  in  I.  of  Hebrew,  tliis  is 
John  7. 15.  how  knoweth  this  man  I.  having  never 
Acts  9.  2.  and  desired  of  him  I.  to  Damascus 
15.  23.  the  apostles  wrote  /.  after  this  manner 
22.   5.   from  whom   also   I  received  /.   to   the 
brethren 
0-8.  21.  we  neither  received  I.  out  of  Judea 

1  Cor.  16.  3.  whom  ye  shall  approve  by  your  I. 

2  Cor.  3.  1.  nor  need  we  I.  of  commendation 

10. 9.  may  not  seem  as  if  I  would  terrify  you  by  /. 

10.  for  his  I.  are  weighty  and  powerful,  but  liis 

11.  such  as  we  are  in  word,  by  I.  when  absent 

LETTEST. 
Job  15.  13.  I.  such  words  go  out  of  thy  mouth 
41.  1.  or  his  tongue  witii  a  cord  thou  I.  down  1 
Luke  2.  29.  Lord,  now  I.  thou  thy  servant  depart 

LETTETH. 
2  Kings  10. 24.  he  that  I.  him  go,  his  life  be  for  his 
Prov.  17.  14.  strife  is  as  when  one  I.  out  water 
STAfis. 2.7.  only  he  that  nowZ.  will  let  until  taken 

LETTING. 
Exod.  8. 29.  deal  deceitfully  in  not  I.  the  people  go 

LEVIATHAN. 
Job  3. 1 8.  who  are  ready  to  raise  up  a  I. 
41.  1.  canst  thou  draw  out  I.  with  a  hook  ? 
Psttl.  74. 14.  thou  breakest  the  heads  of  /.  in  pieces 
104.  26.  there  is  that  I.  thou  hast  made  to  play 
/jn.27.1.  shall  punish  I.  even  I.  that  crooked  serpent 

LEVITE. 
F.xod.  4.  14.  is  not  Aaron  the  I.  thy  brother  f 
Devi.  12.  12.  rejoice  ye  before  the  Lord  your 
God,  and  the  I.  18.  |  16.  11, 14.  |  26.  11, 13. 
14.  29.  and  the  I.  shall  come  and  eat,  20.  12. 
18.  C.  if  a  I.  come  from  any  of  thy  gates 
Judg.17.7.  a  young  man  a  I.  9.||10.  so  ihel.  wentin 

11.  the  /.  was  content  to  dwell  with  the  man 

12.  Micah  consecrated  I.  ||  13.  a  I.  to  my  priest 
18.3.  they  knew  the  voice  of  the  young  man  the/. 
19. 1.  there  was  a  certain  I.  sojourning  on  mount 

20.  4.  the  I.  said,  I  came  intoGibeah  of  Benjamin 
2  Chr.  20.  14.  on  Jahaziel  the  I.  came  the  Spirit 

31.  12.  Cononiah  the  I.  over  the  dedicated  things 

14.  Kore  the  I.  over  the  free-will  offerings 
Ezra  10.  15.  Shabbethai  the  I.  helped  them 
Luke  10.  32.  likewise  a  I.  came  and  looked  on 
Acts  4.  36.  Barnabas  a  /.  having  land,  sold  it 

LEVITE8. 
Ezod.  6.  25.  these  heads  of  the  fathers  of  the  I. 
38.  21.  it  was  counted  for  the  service  of  the  I. 
Lev.  25.  32.  cities  of  i.  may  redeem  at  any  time 

33.  the  cities  of  the  I.  are  their  possession 
J^um.  1.  47.  but  the  I.  were  not  numbered,  2.  33. 

50.  shall  appoint  the  I,  over  the  tabernacle 

51.  the  I.  shall  take  it  down  ||  53.  the  I.  shall  pitch 
3.  9.  and  tjiou  shalt  give  the  I.  unto  Aaron 

12.  I  have  taken  the  I.  the  I.  shall  be  mine 
39.  all  that  were  numbered  of  the  /.  4.  46. 
41.  and  thou  shalt  take  the  I.  for  me,  45.  |  8. 14. 

7.  5.  and  thou  shalt  give  wagons  unto  the  I. 

8.  6.  take  the  I.  from  Israel  and  cleanse  them 
9.  bring  the  I.  before  the  tabernacle,  10. 

11.  Aaron  shall  offer  the  /.  bl^fore  the  Lord 

15.  then  after  that  shall  the  /.  go  in,  22. 
24.  this  is  it  that  belongeth  unto  the  I. 

26.  thus  shalt  thou  do  to  the  I.  touching  their 

18.  6.  I  have  taken  the  I.  to  do  service,  23. 
24.  the  tithes  I  have  given  to  the  I.  to  inherit 

35.  2.  that  they  give  to  the  I.  cities  round,  8. 
r>eut.  18.  7.  minister,  as  his  brethren  the  I.  do 
Josk.  14.  3.  to  the  I.  lie  gave  none  inheritance 

21.  3.  Israel  gave  these  cities  to  the  I.  8. 
41.  all  the  cities  of  the  /.  were  forty-eight 

1  Sam.  6. 1.5.  the  I.  took  down  the  ark  of  the  Lord 

2  Sam.  15.  24.  Zadok  and  the  I.  were  with  him 

1  Chr.  15.  15.  the  children  of  the  I.  b.are  the  ark 
26.  when  God  helped  the  I.  that  bare  the  ark 

24.  6.  cne  of  the  I.  wrote  them  before  the  king 

2  Chr.  5. 12.  the  /.  which  \*ere  singers  stood,  7.  6. 
11.  14.  Ihe  I.  lefl  their  suburbs  and  possessions 
13.9.  have  ye  not  cast  out  the  sons  of  Aaron  and  I. 

19.  11.  also  the  I.  shall  be  officers  before  you 

23  6.  the  I.  shall  compass  the  king  round  about,?. 
339 


LIB 

2  Ckron.  24.  5.  howbeit,  the  /.  hastened  it  not 
2'.).  5.  hear  me,  ye  /.  sanctify  now  yourselves 
30.  22.  Hezekiah  spake  comfortubly  to  the  /. 

34.  13.  of  the  I.  there  were  scribes  and  othcers 
35. 3.  Josiah  said  to  the  /.  which  taught  Israel 

9.  the  chief  of  the  I.  gave  to  the  I.  5U0  oxen 
14.  therefore  the  I.  prejiared  for  themselves,  15. 
Ezra  a.  18.  they  set  the  i.  in  their  courses 
Jfeh.  3.  17.  after  hira  repaired  the  I.  Rehum 
8.7.  the  I.  caused  the  people  to  understand  the  law 
11.  the  /.stilled  the  peoi/le,saying,hold  your  peace 

11.  22.  the  overseer  of  the  /.  was  Uzzi 

12.  27.  at  the  dedication  they  sought  the  I. 

13.  10.  the  portions  of  the  /.  had  not  been  given 
them,  for  the  I.  were  fled  every  one  to  his  lield 

29.  they  have  defiled  the  priesthood  of  the  I. 
Jer.  33.  22.  I  will  multiply  the  /.  that  minister 
Ezek.  44. 10.  the  I.  that  are  gone  shall  bear  initiuity 

48.  11.  went  not  astray  when  the  I.  went  astray 

Priests  and  LEVITES. 

Deut.  17.  9.  thou  shalt  come  to  p.  the  I.  and  judge 

24.  8.  to  do  all  that  the  priests  and  I.  shall  teacli 

.7osh.  3. 3.  when  ye  see  ihe  p.  and  l.  bearing  the  ark 

IKiiigsH.  i.p.  and  I.  brought  up  the  ark  ol  the  Ld. 

2  Chron.  23.4.^.  and  I.  shall  be  porters  of  the  doors 

29.  'ii.p.  and  I.  were  more  upright  in  heart  than 

30.15.  j/ritsti  and  I.  were  aslianied,and  sancliliod 

21. 1,  and  Ihc priests  praised  the  Ld.  day  by  day 

27.  then  tlie  priests  and  t.  blessed  the  people 

31.9.  Hezekiah  questioned  with  ihe  priests  and  I. 

35.8.  his  princes  gave  willingly  to  the  p.  and  I. 

Ezra  2.  70.  so  priests  and  I.  dwell  in  their  cities 

6.  20.  for  thepricsts  and  I.  were  purified  together 

7.7.  there  vii;ulu\t  o( l\\c priests  and  I.  and  singers 

9.  1.  the;),  and  I.  have  not  separated  themselves 

10.5.  Ezra  arose  and  made  the;;,  and  I.  to  swear 

J^eh.  9.  38.  our  princes,  I.  and  priests,  seal  to  it 

10.34.  we  cast  lots  among/;,  and  I.  and  pcojile 

12.30.  i\\ep.and  /.purified  themselves,and  the  wall 

44.  Judah  rejoiced  for  the  ;;.  and  I.  that  wailed 

Isa.  06.  21.  I  will  lake  of  them  for  priests  and  I. 

Jer.  33. 18.  priests  and  I.  not  want  a  man  to  oiler 

21.  and  with  the  /.  the  priests  my  ministers 
Ezek.ii.  15.  but  tliep.  and  I.  that  kept  the  charge 
John  1. 19.  when  the  Jews  sunip.  and  I.  to  ask  him 

LEVITICAL. 
Heb.  7.  11.  if  perfection  were  by  the  I.  priesthood 

LEVY,  Substantive. 

1  Kings  5. 13.  Solomon  raised  a  /.  of  300,000  men 

14.  and  Adoniram  was  over  the  /. 

9.  15.  this  is  the  reason  of  the  /.  Solomon  raised 

LEVY,  Verb. 

JVum.  31.  28.  and  /.  a  tribute  to  the  Lord 

1  Kings  y.  21.  upon  those  did  Solomon  /.  a  tribute 

LEWD. 
Ezek.  16.  27.  which  are  ashamed  of  thy  I.  way 

23.  44.  so  went  they  in,  as  unto  the  /.  woman 
Acts  17.  5.  Jews  took  /.  fellows  of  the  baser  sort 

LEWDLY. 
Ezek.  22. 11.  another  liaih  /.  defiled  his  daughter 

LEWDNESS. 
Judg.  20.  6.  they  have  committed  /.  in  Israel 
Jer.  11.  15.  she  hath  wrought  /.  with  many 
13.  27.  I  have  seen  the  /.  of  thy  whoredom 
Ezek.  16.  43.  and  ihou  shalt  not  commit  this  /. 
58.  thou  hast  borne  thy  /.  and  abominations 
22.  9.  in  the  midst  of  thee  they  commit  /. 

fll.  by  /.  hath  defiled  his  daughter-in-law 
23.21.  calledst  to  remembrance  the  /.  of  thy  youth 
27.  thus  will  I  make  thy  /.  to  cease,  48. 
29.sliall  be  discovered, both  thy  /.  and  whorecrom 

35.  therefore  bear  thou  also  thy  I.  and  whoredom 

49.  and  they  shall  recompense  your  /.  on  you 

24.  13.  in  thy  filthiness  is  /.  because  I  purged  thee 
Hos.  2. 10.  and  now  w  ill  I  discover  her  /.  in  sight 

6.  9.  priests  murder  in  the  way,  they  commit  /. 
Acts  18.  14.  if  it  were  a  matter  of  wrong  or  I. 
LIAR,  see  Lyar. 
LIBERAL. 
Prov.  11.  25.  the  /.  soul  shall  be  made  fat 
Isa.  .32.  ,5.  the  vile  person  shall  not  be  called  /. 
8.  the  /.  deviseth  /.  things,  and  by  I.  things 

2  Cor.  9. 13.  they  glorifv  G.  for  vour  /.  distribution 

LIBERALITY. 
\Cor.  16.  3.  to  bring  your  /.  to  Jerusalem 
2  Cor.  8.  2.  abounded  to  the  riches  of  their  /. 

LIBERALLY. 
Deal.  15.  14.  thou  shalt  furnish  him  /.  out  of 
Jam.  1.  5.  ask  of  God,  who  givelh  to  all  men  I. 

LIBERTINES. 
Acts  6.  9.  which  is  called  the  synagogue  of  the  /. 

LIBERTY 
Signifies,  [1]  A  power  which  a  person  has  to  do 
or  forbear  any  particular  action,  1  Cor.  7.  39. 
[2]  Freedom  from  any  servitude  or  bondage, 
Lev.  25.  10.  Heb.  13.  23.  [3]  Freedom  from 
the  curse  of  the  moral  law,  and  from  the  ser- 
vitude of  the  reremoninl  law,  Gnl.  5.  I.  [4] 
Full  am!  perfret  delincrnncr  from  all  miseries 
whatsoever,  Rom.  8.  21.    [5]  A  power  or  free- 


LIB 

•\ 
dom  in  using  things  indifferent,  1  Cor.  8. 9.  ^ 
10.  29.    [6]  Freedom  from  the  veil  of  ignorant* 
and  spiritual  blindness,  the  yoke  of  the  law, 
and  the  slavery  of  sin,  2  Cor.  3.  17. 
Lev.  25.10.  yeshall  proclaim  I.  through  all  the  land 
Psal.  119.  45.  and  1  will  walk  at  /.  for  I  seek 
Isa.  61. 1.  he  sent  me  to  proclaim  /.  to  the  captive* 
Jer.  34.  8.  made  a  covenant  to  proclaim  .'.  to  them 

15.  done  right  in  my  sight,  in  proclaiming  /. 

16.  his  servant  whom  he  had  set  at  /.  to  return 

17.  ye  have  not  hearkened  to  nie  in  proelaiiniiig  /. 

I  proclaim  a  /.  for  you  to  famine,  to  swora 
Ezek.  46.  17.  it  shall  be  his  to  the  year  of/. 
Luke^  18.  to  set  at  /.  them  that  are  bruised 
Acts  4^  23.  to  keep  Paul,  and  let  him  hav«  i 

20.  32.   this  man  might  have  been  set  at  / 

27.  3.  and  gave  him  /.  to  go  to  his  friends 
Rom.  8.  21.  from  bondage  into  the  glorious  I. 

1  Cor.  7.  39.  she  is  at  /.  to  marry  whom  she  vi.l 
8.  9.  take  heed  lest  this  /.  of  yours  become 

10.  29.  for  why  is  my  /.judged  of  anolher 

2  C'or.3.]7.\vhere  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is,tliereis  I 
Gal.  2.  4.  who  came  in  privily,  to  spy  out  our  /. 

5.  1.  stand  fast  in  the  /.  wherewith  Christ  made 

13.  ye  have  been  called  to  /.  use  not  your  /. 
Heb.  10.  t  19.  having  /.  to  enter  the  holiest 

13.  23.  that  our  brother  Timothy  is  set  at  /. 
./am.  1.  25.  who.=o  lookctli  into  the  law  of/. 
2.  12.  that  shall  be  judged  by  the  law  of/. 

1  Pet.  2.  16.  as  free,  and  not  using  /.  for  a  cloak 

2  Pet.  2.  19.  while  tliey  promise  them  /.  they 

LICE. 
Erod.  8.  16.  the  dust  became  /.  through  all  Egypt 

17.  smote  dust,  it  became  /.  in  man  and  beast 

18.  magicians  did  so  with  their  enchanimeiits  to 
bring  forth  /.so  there  were  /.  upon  man  and  beast 

Psal.  I05.  31.  there  came  /.  in  all  their  coasts 

LICENCE. 
Acts  21.  40.  and  when  he  had  given  Paul  /. 
25.16.till  the  accused  have  /.to  answer  for  himself 

LICK. 
JVum.22.4.  now  shall  this  company  /.up  all  around 
1  Kings  21. 19  shall  dogs  /.  thy  blood,  even  thine 
Psal.  72.  9.  and  his  enemies  shall  /.  the  dust 
Isa.  49.  23.  and  shall  /.  up  the  dust  of  thy  feet 
JUic.  7.  17.  they  shall  /.  the  dust  Uke  a  serpent 
LICKED. 

1  Kings  18.  36.  fire  /.  up  the  water  in  the  trench 

21.  19.  where  dogs  /.  Ihe  blood  of  Nabolh 

22.  38.  and  tiie  dogs  /.  up  his  blood  and  washed 
Luke  16.  21.  the  dogs  came  and  /.  his  sores 

LICKETH. 

JSTum.  22.  4.  shall  lick  u))  all,  as  the  ox  /.  up  grass 
LID. 

2  Kings  12.  9.  and  bored  a  hole  in  the  /.  of  it 
LIE. 

Gen.  19.  32.  drink  wine,  and  we  will  /.  with  hira 

34.  and  go  Ihou  in,  and  /.  with  him 
30.  15.  therefore  he  shall  /.  wilh  thee  to-night 
39.  7.  she  said,  /.  with  me,  12.  2  .S'nra.  13.  11. 

14.  he  came  in  unto  me  to  /.  wilh  me 

F.zod.  22.  16.  if  a  man  /.  wilh  a  maid  not  betrothed 
7,cf. 15.18.  womanwith  whom  man  shall  /.with  seed 
24.  if  any  man  /.  wilh  her  at  all,  he  is  unclean 
18.  20.  not  /.  carnally  wilh  thy  neighbonr's  wife 
23.  shalt  not  /.with  mankind  ||  23.  nor /.with  beast 
20.  12.  and  if  a  man  /.  with  his  daughter-in-law 
13.  if/,  wilh  mankind  ||  15.  If/,  with  a  beast 
18.  if  a  man  /.  with  a  woman  having  her  sickness 
20.  if  a  man  /.  with  his  uncle's  wife,  he  hath 
J^um.  5. 13.  if  a  man  I.  with  her,  and  it  be  hid  from 
Deut.  22.  23.  and  a  man  find  her,  and  /.  with  her 
2.5.  if  the  man  force  her,  and  /.  wilh  her 

28.  if  find  a  tiarasel  not  betrothed,  and  /.with  her 
28.  30.  betroth  a  wife,  and  another  /.  wilh  her 

2  .Sam.  11.  11.  shall  I  ihen  go  lo  /.  with  my  wife? 
Cant.  1.  13.  he  shall  /.  Jill  nighl  betwi.xt  my  breasts 

LIE. 
<?eji.  47. 30. 1  will  /.  with  my  fathers,  not  in  Kgypt 
Kzod.  23.  11.  thou  shalt  let  the  ground  /.  still 
7.'(u/.29.20.all  Ihc  curses  in  this  book  shall  /.on  him 
.Josh.  8.  9.  and  they  went  to  t.  in  ambush,  12. 
.Judg.  19.  20.  let  all  thy  wants  /.  on  me,  only  lodge 
/jM/A3.4.thou  shalt  mark  the  place  where  he  shall /. 
1  Kings  1.^.  and  let  her  /.  in  thy  bosom,  that  king 
Psal.  57.  4.  I  I.  among  them  that  are  set  on  fire 
88.  .5.  like  the  slain  that  I.  in  the  grave 
F.crl.  4.  11.  if  two  /.  together  they  have  heat 
Isa.  13.  21.  wild  beasts  of  the  desert  shall  /.  there 
14.  18.  all  the  kings  of  the  nations  /.  in  glory 
51.  20.  thy  sons  /.  at  the  head  of  all  the  streets 
I.nm.  2.  21.  the  young  and  old  I.  on  the  ground 
Ezek.  4.  4.  /.  thtiu  also  upon  thv  left  side  and  lay 

6.  /.  again  on  thy  right  side  ||  9.  shall  /.  .390  days 

31.  18.  shall  /.  in  the  midst  of  Ihe  uncircumcised 

32.  21.  thev  /  uncircumcised,  slain  by  sworJ,  30. 
27.  and  thev  shall  not  /.  with  the  mighty 

23.  /.  with  the  slain  H  29.  /.  wilh  uncircumciwd 
34.  14.  there  shall  thev  /.  in  a  good  fold 

Joel  1.  13.  come,  /.  allnigbt  in  lackclolh 


LIE 

^mos  6.  4.  tliat  I.  on  beds  of  ivory,  and  itrctch 
JoKn  5.  0.  wlien  Jesus  saw  him  I.  he  saith  to  him 

20.  6.  Simou  Peter  secth  the  lioen  clothes  I. 

LIE  down. 
/-cu. 18.23.  before  a  beast,  to  I.  down  thereto,  20.16. 

20.  6.  ye  shall  I.  d.  and  none  .shall  make  yuu  afraid 
JV"u?«.  23.24.  Israel  shall  not  i.  (/oicn  till  he  eat  prey 
Veut.iS.  2.  judge  cause  him  to  /.  down  and  beaten 

31.  t  16.  thou  shah  /.  down  with  thy  fathers 
Ruth  3. 7.  Boaz  went  to  I.  down  at  the  end  of  heap 

13.  tarry  this  night,  I.  down  until  the  morning 

]  .Sam.  3.5.Eli  said,  I  called  not,  l.down  again,  6,9. 

&  Sam.  11. 13.  at  even  he  went  to  i.  (/own  on  his  bed 

Job  7.  4.  when  1 1,  down  1  say,  when  shall  I  arise 

11.  19.  thou  shalt  I.  d.  and  none  make  thee  afraid 

20.  11.  which  sliall  /.  down  with  him  in  the  dust 

21.  26.  they  shall  I.  down  alike  in  the  dust 

27. 19.  the  rich  man  shall  /.  d.  but  not  be  gathered 
Psal.  23.2.  he  maketh  me  /.  down  in  green  pastures 
Pc«c.3.24.ihou  sUaXll.down  and  thysleepbe  sweet 
Isa.  11.  (').  the  leopard  shall  I.  down  with  the  kid 
7.  their  young  ones  shall  /.  down  together 
14.  30.  and  the  needy  shall  I.  down  in  safety 
17.  2.  they  shall  be  lor  flocks  which  shall  I.  down 
27.  10.  there  shall  the  calf  feed  and  I.  down 
43. 17.  the  army  and  the  power  shall  I.  d.  together 
50.  11.  this  ye  have,  ye  shall  /.  down  in  sorrow 
65.  10.  shallbe  a  place  for  the  herds  to  I.  down  in 
Jer.  3. 25.  wc  I.  down  in  our  shame  and  confusion 
33.  12.  shepherds  causing  their  flocks  to  I.  down 
50.  t  6.  have  forgotten  their  place  to  /.  down  in 
Eiek.  34.  15.  and  I  will  cause  them  to  I.  down 
Hos.  2.  18.  I  will  make  them  to  I.  down  safely 
Zeph.  2.  7.  they  shall  I.  down  in  the  evening 

14.  flocks  shalW.doicn II 15.  for  beasts  to  l.down  in 
3. 13.  the  remnant  of  Israel  shall  feed  and  I.  down 

IjIE  in  wait. 
Ezod.  21.13.  if  a  man  /.  not  in  wait  but  God  deliver 
/)euM9.11.if  a  man  hate  his  neighbour  and  I.  inw. 
Josh.  8.  4.  ye  shall  I.  in  wait  against  the  city 
Judg.  9.  32.  up  by  night,  and  I.  in  wait  in  the  field 
21.  20.  saying,  go  and  I.  in  wait  in  the  vineyards 
1  .S(im.22.8.  hast  stirred  up  my  servant  to  I.  in  w.  13. 
.hb  36.  40.  and  abide  in  the  covert  to  I.  in  wait 
Psal.  59.  3.  for  lo,  they  I.  in  wait  for  my  soul 
Prnu.12.6.  the  words  of  the  wicked  are  to  l.in  wait 
Hos.  7.  6.  heart  like  an  oven,  whiles  they  /.  in  wait 
Mic.  7.  2.  they  all  I.  in  wait  for  blood,  they  himt 
Jicts  23.21.  there  /.  in  w.  for  him  more  than  40  men 
Eph.  4. 14.  whereby  they  I.  in  wait  to  deceive  me 

LIE  waste. 
/sa.33.8.tho  highways /.was^e  ||  34.10.it  shall/,  w. 
//a"'.1.4.  to  dwell  in  houses  and  this  housel.wastc 

LIEN  or  LAIN. 
Orn.  2fi.  10.  one  might  have  I.  with  thy  wife 
A*«ra.  5.  19.  if  no  man  have  I.  with  thee,  be  free 

20.  but  if  some  man  have  I.  with  thee  beside  thy 
.Tudg.  21.  11.  destroy  every  woman  that  hath  /. 
Job  3.  13.  for  now  should  I  have  I.  slill 
Psal.  68. 13.  though  ye  have  /.  among  the  pots,  j-et 
Jer.  3.  2.  see  where  thou  hast  not  been  I.  with 
John  11.  17.  he  had  I.  in  the  grave  four  days 

LIERS  in  wait. 

Josh.  8. 14.  he  wist  not  that  there  were  I.  in  wait 

Judg.  9.25.  the  men  of  Shechem  set  /.  in  w.  for  him 

16.12.  there  were  l.in  wait  abiding  in  the  chamber 

20.  29.  Israel  set  I.  in  wait  round  about  Gibeah 

33.  l.inw.camc  forth||37.  l.in  w.  hasted  and  rush. 

36.  thev  trusted  in  the  /.  in  wait  which  they  set 

Jer.  51.  f  12.  prepare  /.  in  wait  against  Babylon 

LIEST. 
Om.  28.  13.  the  land  whereon  thou  1. 1  will  give 
Dcut.  6.  7.  when  thou  I.  down  and  riscat  uj),  11. 19. 
Josh.  7.  10.  up,  wherefore  I.  thou  on  thy  face  ? 
Prov.  3. 24.  when  thou  I.  down  shall  not  bo  afraid 

LIETII. 
Orn.  4.  7.  if  thou  dost  not  well,  sin  /.  at  the  door 
49.  25.  bless  blessings  of  the  deep  that  /.  under 
Lev.  14.  47.  he  that  I.  in  the  hou.se  shall  wash 
la.  4.  every  bed  whereon  he  I.  is  unclean 
20.  every  thing  that  she  I.  on  is  unclean,  26. 
24.  all  the  bed  whereon  he  /.  shall  bo  unclean,  33. 
26.  34.  sabbaths,  as  long  as  it  /.  desolate,  35. 
43.  the  land  enjoy  sabbaths,  while  she  {.desolate 
Judg.  16.  5.  see  wherein  his  great  strength  I. 
6.  tell  me  wherein  thy  great  strength  /.  15. 
.Tob  40.  21.  ho  /.  under  the  shadv  frees,  in  covert 
Psal.  41.  8.  now  that  he  I.  he  sfiall  rise  no  more 
88.  7.  thy  wrath  I.  hard  on  mo,  thou  hast  aftlicted 
Mat.  8. 6.  my  servant  /.  at  home  sick  of  the  palsy 
Mark  5.  23.  my  daughter  /.  at  the  point  of  death 
Rom.  12.  18.  as  much  as  /.  in  you  livo  peaceably 
1  John  5.  19.  the  whole  world  I.  in  wickedness 

LIETM  down. 
PwfA  3.4. it  shall  be  v/hi-nhr:  l.down  mark  the  place 
./o*  14. 12.  soman  l.down  nai\  risilh  not  till  heavens 
Prot>.23.34.ai  he  that  l.down  in  the  midst  of  the  sea 

LIETII  in  wait. 
Psal.  10.  0.  he  I.  in  w.  secretly  n«  a  lion,  /.  in  v>.  to 
Prov.  7.  12.  and  she  I.  in  wait  at  every  corner 
340 


LIP 

Prov.  23.  28.  she  also  I.  in  wait  as  for  prey 

LIETH  waste. 

JVch.  2.  3.  the  place  of  my  fathers'  sepulchres  I.  w 

17.  then  said  I,  you  see  how  Jerusalem  I.  waste 

LIETH,  as  with  a  woman. 

£io(Z.22.19.  whoso  i.with  beast,  surely  put  to  death 

Lev.  19.  20.  whoso  I.  carnally  with  a  bond-maid 

20.  11.  the  man  that  I.  with  his  father's  wife 

13.  lie  with  mankind  as  he  I.  with  a  woman 
Deut.  27.  20.  cursed  bo  he  that  I.  with  father's  wife 

21.  I.  with  beast  ||  22.  sister  ||  23.  mother-in-law 
J\Iic.  7.  5.  thy  mouth  from  her  that  /.  in  thy  bosom 

LIEUTENANTS. 
Ezra  8.36.  they  deliver.the  king's  commissions  to  I. 
Eith.  3.  12.  Ilaman  had  commanded  the  king's  /. 

8.  9.  Mordecai  had  commanded  lo  the  I. 

9.  3.  all  the  rulers  and  I.  helped  the  Jews 

LIFE 
Signifies,  [1]  That  space  of  time  which  passes  be- 
tween the  birth  and  death  of  any  person,  Psal. 

17.  14.  Prov.  3.  2.  [2]  Ji  poicer  to  more  and 
do  the  actions  of  life,  Job  3.  20.  Eccl.  2.  17. 
[3]  jj  spiritual,  supernatural,  and  heaucnlij 
life,  whereby  we  live  to  God,  and  enjoy  peace 
with  him,  which  also  is  the  way  to  eternal  life, 
Kom.  8.  6.  Col.  3.  3.  [4]  That  eternal  happi- 
ness, glory,  and  blessedness,  which  the  saints 
enjoy  iit  heaven,  Rom.  5. 17.  [5]  'J'hat  quick- 
ening,and  strengthening  power  of  the  Spirit  of 
Christ,  which  supports  believers  under  afflic- 
tions and  sufferings,  so  that  they  are  not  Over- 
whelmed and  conquered  by  them,  2  Cor.  4.  10. 
[6]  ChrisVs  resurrection  and  intercession, 
Kom.  5.  10.  [7]  The  appetite  or  stomach,  Job 
33.20.  [8]  The  nourishment  or  support  of  life, 
Deut.  20.  19.  [0]  RUssings  pertaining  to  this 
life,  1  Tim.  4.  8.  [10]  This  world,  Luke  8. 14. 
[11]  Conversation,  Acts  26.  4.  It  is  spoken, 
[1]  Of  Christ,  who  is  the  fountain  of  natural, 
spiritual,  and  eternal  life,  who  has  promised 
eternal  life  to  his  people,  purchased  and  pre- 
pared it  for  them:  and  who  prepares  them  for 
it,nndwill  actually  bestow  it  upon  them,  John 
1.  4.  I  11.  25.  Col.  3.  4.  [2]  Ot  ihe  doctrine  of 
the  gospel,  which  points  out  the  way  to  eternal 
life,  John  6.  63.  [3]  Of  the  blood,  which,  with 
the  spirits  contained  in  it,  is  the  seat  and  sup- 
port of  life.  Gen.  9.  4. 

Gen.  1.  20.  the  moving  creature  that  hath  I. 

30.  and  to  every  thing  wherein  there  is  I. 
2. 7.  God  breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  breath  of  /. 

9.  the  tree  of/,  in  the  midst  of  the  garden,  3.  22. 
3. 24.  chorubims  to  keep  the  way  of  the  tree  of/. 
6.17.  to  destroy  all  wherein  is  the  breath  of/.  7.  22. 

9.  4.  flesh  wiUi  the  /.  shall  ye  not  eat,  Lev.  17. 14. 
5.  of  every  man  will  I  require  the  /.  of  man 

18. 10. 1  will  return  according  to  the  time  of/.  14. 

23.  1.  these  were  the  years  of  the  /.  of  Sarah 
25.  7.  the  years  of.Xbraham's  /.  ||  17.  Ishmael's  /. 
42.  15.  by  the  /.  of  Pharaoh,  ye  shall  aot  go,  16. 
4.5.  5.  God  did  send  me  before  to  preserve  /. 

47.  9.  not  attained  to  the  years  of  /.  of  my  fathers 
Ezod.  6.  16.  the  years  of  the  /.  of  Levi  were  137 

18.  years  of  the  /.  of  Kohath  ||  20.  /.  of  Amnim 
21.23.  shall  give  /.  for  /.  Lev.  24.t  18.  Deut.  19.21 , 

Lev.  17.  11.  for  the  /.  of  the  flesh  is  in  the  blood 
18.  18.  besides  the  other  in  her  /.  time 
24. 1 17.  he  that  smitelh  /.  of  man,  Deut.  lO.j  6, 11. 

Deut.  12.  2:).  blood  is  the  /.  not  eat  /.  with  flesh 
ilO.  19.  for  the  tree  of  the  field  is  man's  /. 

24.  C.  for  he  takcth  a  man's  /.  to  pledge 

30.  15.  I  have  sot  before  thee  /.  19.  Jer.  21.  8. 

32.  47.  it  is  not  a  vain  thing,  because  it  is  your  /. 
Josh.  2.  14.  the  men  answered,  our  /.  for  yours 

1  Sam.  25.  20.  shall  be  bound  up  in  the  bundle  of/. 

2  Sam.  14.  7.  for  the/,  of  his  brother  whom  he  slew 
t  14.  because  God  hath  not  taken  away  his  /. 

15.  21.  whether  in  death  or  /.  there  will  I  be 

1  Kings  3.  H .  hast  not  asked  for  thyself  long  /.  nor 

asked  the  /.  of  thine  enemies,  2  Chr.  1.  11. 

2  Arin^s4.16.timeof /.thou  shall  embrace  a  son,17. 
7.  7. left  the  camp  as  it  was,  and  fled  for  their  /. 

Ezra  6.  10.  they  may  pray  for  the  /.  of  Ihe  king 
Esth.  8.  11.  granted  the  Jews  to  stand  fur  their  /. 
./ob  3.  20.  why  is  /.  given  to  the  biltor  in  soul  ? 

10.  12.  thou  hast  granted  me  /.  and  favour 
12.  1 10.  in  whose  hand  is  Ihe  /.  of  every  thing 
24.  22.  he  riselh  up,  and  no  man  is  sure  of/. 

31.  39.  or  the  owners  tliereof  to  lose  their  /. 

33.  4.  the  breath  of  the  Almighty  hnih  given  me/. 
36.  6.  ho  presetveth  not  the  /.  of  ihe  wicked 

14.  and  their  /.  is  among  the  unclean 

38.  t  39.  wilt  thou  fill  the  /.  of  Ihe  voting  lions  7 
Psal.  16.  11.  thou  wilt  shew  me  the  path  of/. 

21.  4.  he  asked  /.  of  thee,  thou  gavesi  him 
30.  5.  in  his  favour  is  /.  weeping  mav  endure 

34.  12.  what  man  is  he  that  desireth"/.  ? 
3«i.  9.  for  with  Ihec  is  the  fountain  of  /. 
61.  6.  thou  wilt  prolong  the  king's  /. 

63.  3.  thy  loving-kindncBS  is  bolter  than  /. 


LIP 

Pjal.  66.  9.  bless  God,  who  holdeth  our  sonl  in  I 
78.  50.  but  gave  their  /.  over  to  the  pestiicnce 
91.  16.  with  long  /.  will  I  satisfy  him 
133.  3.  the  blessmg,  even  /.  for  evermore 

Prov.  1.  19.  which  taketh  away  the/,  oftheownerg 

2.  19.  nor  take  they  hold  of  the  i)alhs  of/. 

3.  2.  long  /.  and  peace  shall  they  add  to  lliee 

18.  she  is  a  tree  of  /.  lo  them  that  lay  hold  on  bei 

22.  so  shall  they  be  /.  to  thy  soul 

4.  Zi.  for  they  are  /.  to  tliose  that  find  them 

23.  keep  thy  heart,  for  out  of  it  are  the  issues  oft 

5.  6.  lest  thou  shouldest  ponder  the  path  of/. 

6.  23.  rejiroofs  of  instruction  are  the  way  of  I. 
26.  adulteress  will  hunt  for  the  precious  /. 

8.  35.  whoso  findelh  me  fnideth  /.  and  shall  oblaio 

10.  11.  the  mouth  of  the  righteous  is  a  well  of/. 
17.  is  in  the  way  of/,  that  keepelh  inslruction 

11.  30.  the  fruit  of  the  righteous  is  a  tree  of/. 

12.  10.  righteous  regardeth  the  /.  of  his  beast 

28.  in  the  way  of  nghleousnes  is  /.  and  no  death 

13.  8.  the  ransom  of  a  man's  /.  arc- his  riches 
12.  when  desire  cometh,  it  is  a  tree  of/. 
14.  the  law  of  the  wise  is  a  fountainof /. 

14.  27.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  a  fountain  of/. 

30.  a  sound  heart  is  the  /.  of  the  flesh,  but  envy 

15.  4.  a  wholesome  tongue  is  a  tree  of/. 

24.  the  way  of/,  is  above  to  the  wise 

31.  heareth  reproof  of /.  abideth  among  the  wise 

16.  15.  in  the  light  of  the  king's  countenance  is/ 

22.  understanding  is  a  well-sjiring  of  I.  to  him 
18.  21.  death  and  /.  are  in  the  power  of  the  tongua 

21.  21.  he  that  followeth  mercy,  findetli  /. 

22.  4.  by  humility  are  riches,  honour,  and  /. 
27.  127.  goals'-milk  for  /.  for  thy  maidens 

31. 12.  she  will  do  him  good  all  the  days  of  her  I. 
£cf/.2.3.  good  they  should  do  all  tliedaysof  their/ 

17.  therefore  I  haled  /.  ||  7. 12.  wisdom  givelh  I 
9. 1  9.  enjoy  t.  with  the  wife  whom  thou  lovest 

Isa.  38. 16.  in  all  these  things  is  the  /.  of  my  spirit 
20.  we  will  sing  songs  all  the  days  of  our  /. 

57.  10.  thou  hast  found  the  /.  of  thy  hand 
.Ter.  8.  3.  and  death  shall  be  chosen  rather  than  /. 

21.7.  hands  of  them  that  seek  their  /.  34.  20,  21. 

8.  I  set  before  you  the  way  of/,  and  of  death 
49.  37.  I  will  cause  Elam  to  be  dismay(ul  before 

their  enemies,  before  them  that  seek  their  /. 
Lam.  2. 19.  lift  up  thy  hands  for  the  /.  of  thy  childr. 
Ezck.  1. 1 20.  spirit  of/,  in  wheels,  t  21.  |  ill.  T  1~- 
7. 1 13.  though  their  /.  was  yet  among  the  living 

13.  22.  should  not  return  by  promising  him  /. 
33.  15.  if  the  wicked  walk  in  the  slatutis  of  I. 

JJan.  7.  t  12.  a  prolonging  in  /.  was  given  thera 
.Jonah  1.  14.  let  us  not  perish  for  this  man's  /. 
Mai.  2.  5.  my  covenant  was  with  him  of/. 
J/(ii.  2.  20.  are  dead  which  sought  the  child's  U 

3. 18.  bring  fruit  meet  for  amendment  of/. 

6.  25.  take  no  thought  for  your  /.  Luke  12.  22. 

18.  8.  to  enter  into  /.  halt  or  maimed,  Mark  9. 43. 

9.  better  to  enter  into  /.  with  one  eye,  Mark  9.45 
19.17.  if  wilt  enter  into  1,  keep  the  eoinmanilmenls 

Jfaj'A:3.4.  is  it  lawful  to  save/,  or  lo  kill,  y.u/ce  0.9. 
Luke  1.  75.  in  holiness  all  the  days  of  our  /. 
12.  l.'i.  for  a  man's  /.  consisteth  not  in  abundance 

23.  the  /.  more  than  meat,  the  body  than  raiment 
.Tohn  1.  4.  in  him  was/,  and  llie  /.  was  light  of  men 

3.  36.  that  bdievelh  not  the  Son,  shafl  not  see  /. 

5.  26.  for  as  the  Father  halli  /.  in  liimselt",  so  hath 

he  given  lo  the  Son  to  have  /.  in  himself 

29.  have  done  good,  to  the  resurrection  of/. 
40.  will  not  come  to  me  that  might  have  /.  10. 10, 

6.33.  givelh  /.  unto  world  ||  35. 1  am  breadof /.48. 
51.  which  I  will  give  for  the  /.  of  Ihe  world 
53.  and  drink  his  blood,  ye  have  no  /.  in  yon 
6.3.  the  words  that  I  speak  to  you,  they  are  /. 

8. 12.  not  in  darkness,  but  shall  have  the  light  of  I 

II.  25.  I  am  the  resurrection  and  the  /.  14.  6. 

20.  31.  believing  ye  might  have  /.  lliro"  his  name 
^r/.«2. 28.  hast  made  known  to  me  the  ways  of/ 

3. 15.  and  killed  the  Prince  of  I.  whom  God  raised 

17.  25.  seeing  he  givctli  lo  all  /.  and  breath 

26.  4.  Ihe  manner  of/,  t'rom  my  youth,  Jews  know 

27.  22.  there  shall  be  no  loss  of  any  man's  /. 
Rom.  5.  17.  shall  reign  in  /.  by  one,'Jesiis  Christ 

18.  came  on  all  men  to  justification  of  /. 

6.  4.  even  so  wo  should  walk  in  newness  oft. 
8.  2.  Ihe  law  of  the  Spirit  of/,  in  Christ  Jesu« 

6.  to  be  spiritually-minded  is  /.  and  peace 

10.  the  Spirit  is  /.  because  of  righteoiisiioss 
3H.  I  am  persuaded  that  neither  ileaih  nor  /. 

II.  15.  the  receiving  them  be  but  /.  from  the  den  « 

1  C»r.  3.  22.  the  world,  or  /.  or  death,  all  ari'  youi» 

14.  7.  even  things  without  /.  giving  sound 

2  Cnr.  1.8.  insomuch  that  we  despaired  even  of  J. 

2.  16.  to  the  other  Ihe  savour  of/,  iinio  /. 

3.  6.  Ihe  letter  killeth,  but  the  Spirit  giv.Mh  /. 

4.  10.  that  Ihe  /.  of  Jesus  might  ho  manifested 
12.  death  workolh  in  us,  hut  /.  in  you 

5.  4.  that  mortality  might  be  swallowed  up  of  J 
'■.'((/.  2.  20.  Ihe  /.  which  I  now  lire  in  Ihe  flesh 

3.  21.  a  law  given  which  could  have  jivcii  I 


LiIF 

Eph.  i  18.  being  alienated  from  the  I.  of  God 
PliiL  !.  20.  whciher  it  be  by  I.  or  by  death 
2. 16.  holding  forth  word  ol'  I.  that  l  may  rejoice 
Cul.  3.  3.  and  your  I.  is  hid  with  Clirist  in  Gud 
4.  when  Christ  who  is  our  I.  shall  appear 

1  Tim.  'i'i.  wo  may  lead  a  peaceable  I.  in  all  godlin. 
4.  8.  having  tlie  promise  of  the  I.  that  now  is 

2  Tim.  1. 1.  according  to  tlie  promise  of  i.  in  Christ 

10.  and  hath  brought  I.  to  light  by  the  gospel 

3.  10.  thou  hast  fully  known  my  manner  of  ^ 
Heb.  '2.  15.  were  all  their  /.-time  subject  to  bondage 

7.  3.  neither  beginning  of  days,  nor  end  oi  I. 

16.  who  is  made  after  the  power  of  an  endless  /. 
7aia.  1.  1*2.  he  shall  receive  the  crown  of  I. 

4.  14.  for  what  is  your  1.7  it  is  even  a  vapour 

1  Pet.  3.  7.  as  being  heirs  togethi  c  of  the  grace  of  Z. 
10.  for  he  that  will  love  I.  and  see  good  days 

4.  3.  for  the  time  [last  of  our  I.  may  suHice  us 

2  Pet.  1.  3.  hath  given  us  all  things  pertaining  to  I. 
I  .John  1. 1.  our  hands  have  handled  the  word  of  i. 

2.  for  the  I.  was  manifested,  and  we  have  seen  it 

".  1(5.  the  pride  of/,  is  not  of  the  Fath.  but  of  world 

5. 12.  he  that  hath  the  Son  hath  I.  and  he  that  hatli 

not  the  Son  of  God  hath  not  I. 

16.  he  shall  give  him  /.  for  them  that  sin  not 
licv.  2.  7.  to  hmi  will  I  give  to  eat  the  tree  oil. 

10.  be  laitliful,  and  I  will  give  thee  a  crown  of  /. 

6.  9.  third  part  of  the  creatures  that  had  I.  died 
11.  11.  the  Spirit  of  Z.  from  God  entered  into  them 
13.  J  5.  he  had  power  to  give  I.  to  the  beast 

21.  6. 1  will  give  to  thirsty  of  the  water  of /.  freely 

22.  1.  he  shewed  me  a  pure  river  of  water  of  I. 
2.  the  tree  of  I.  hare  twelve  manner  of  fruits 
14.  that  they  miglit  have  right  to  the  tree  ol' I. 

17.  let  him  take  the  water  of  I.  freely 
See  Book,  Eternal,  Kverlasting. 

Hi:i  LIFE. 
Oen.U.M.  seeing  lii.f  I.  is  bound  up  in  the  lad's  life 
F.zod.  21.  30.  he  shall  give  for  the  ransom  of  kis  I. 
I /cut.  17. 19.  shall  read  therein  all  the  days  >^fkis  I. 
Jos/i.i.  14.  they  feared  him  all  the  days  of  Ms  I. 
Judg.  9.  17.  for  my  father  adventured  his  I.  far 
10.  30.  more  than  they  which  he  slew  in  his  I. 
\  ■'Sam.  19.  5.  lie  did  put  his  I.  in  his  hand,  and  slew 

23.  15.  saw  that  Saul  was  come  out  to  seek  his  I. 
2  Ham.  18.  18.  Absalom  in  his  /.-time  had  taken 

1  fiiiivs  2. 23.  if  not  spoken  this  word  against  his  I. 
19.3. when  he  saw  that, he  arose  and  went  for  his  I. 

t  4.  Elijah  sat  down,  and  requested  for  his  I. 
20.  39.  then  shall  thy  life  be  for  his  I.  42. 

2  Kings  10.24.  his  I.  shall  be  for  the  life  of  him 
J^"eh.  6.  11.  would  go  into  the  teni)ile  to  save  his  I. 
t^th.  7. 7.  Hainan  stood  to  make  request  for  his  I. 
.full  2.  4.  all  that  a  man  hath  will  he  give  for  his  I. 

6.  behold,  bo  is  in  thy  hand,  but  save  his  I. 
33.  18.  and  kis  I.  from  perisliing  by  the  sword 
20.  his  I.  abhorreth  bread  ||  22.  his  I.  to  destroyers 
28.  he  will  deliver,  and  his  I.  shall  see  the  light 
Psal.  49. 1 18.  though  in  his  I.  lie  blessed  his  soul 
Pruv.  7.  23.  and  knowelh  not  that  it  is  for  his  I. 
13.  3.  lie  that  keepeth  his  mouth,  keepeth  his  !. 
?"cc/.3.12.  for  a  man  to  rejoice  and  do  good  inhis  I. 

7.  15.  there  is  a  wicked  man  that  prolongeth  his  I. 
8. 15. shall  abide  of  his  labours  all  the  days  of /;;>/. 

Isa.  15.4.  Moab,  his  I.  shall  be  grievous  to  him 
.//•r.21.  9.  his  I.  shall  be  to  him  for  a  prey,  38.  2. 

44.  30.  into  the  hand  of  them  that  seek  his  I. 
F.zek.  3.  18.  nor  speakest  to  warn,  to  save  his  I. 

7.  13.  iHir  strengtiien  himself  in  iniquity  of  his  I. 

32.  10.  shall  tremble,  every  man  for  his  I. 
.Imas  2. 1 14.  nor  shall  the  mighty  deliver  his  I. 
Mut.  10.  39.  be  that  iiiideth  hi's  I.  shall  lo.sc  it ;  he 
that  loselh  his  I.  shall  find  it,  16.  25.  Mark 
a  35.  J.uke  9.  24.  |  17.  33.  ./uhn  12.  25. 

20  28.  to  give  h.l.  a  ransom  for  many,  Mark  10.45. 
Auie  14.  2fi.  yea,  and  hate  not  his  own  /.  also 
Jtihn  !0.  11.  good  Slieplierd  giveih  his  I.  for  sheep 

15.  13.  that  a  man  lay  down  his  I.  for  his  friends 
lii-.ts  8.  33.  for  his  I.  is  taken  from  the  earlh 
20.  10.  trouble  not  yourselves,  Ms  I.  is  in  him 

Horn.  5.  10.  much  more  we  shall  be  saved  by  his  I. 
Phil.  2.  30.  not  regarding  his  I.  to  supply  your  lack 
1  John  3. 16.  love  of  G.  bei-ause  he  laid  down  his  I. 
Sec  Days. 
My  LIFE. 
Pfn.10.19.  mercy  tliou  hast  shewed  in  saving  my  I. 
27.46.  [am  wcaryof  myi.  what  sood  shall -/.do  me 
32.  30.  mil  I.  is  preserved  H  48. 15.  fed  me  all  my  I. 
.Vi/m.23. 1 10.  tet  my  I.  die  the  death  of  righteous 
.Tud^■.^^.X  I  put  my  I.  in  my  hands,and  passed  over 
1  Sun.  18. 18.  what  is  my  I.  or  my  father's  family 
2'l.  1.  what  is  my  sin,  that  he  seeketh  my  I.  ? 
22.  23.  he  that  seeketh  my  I.  seeketh  thy  life 
2^>.  24.  so  that  «»;/  /.  be  much  set  by  in  the  eyes 
2-'.  9.  wherefore  la yest  thou  a  snare  for  my  I.  ? 
21.1  put  my  I.  in  my  hand,  and  hearkened  to 
S  ■'<nm.  1.  9.  because  my  I.  is  yet  whole  in  me 

16.  1 1 .  behold,  my  son  of  my  bowels  seeketh  yny  I. 

18.  13.  have  wrought  falsehood  against  my  I. 

19.  t31.  how  many  davs  are  the  years  of  wiy  /. 

341 


LIP 

1  Kings  19. 4.  it  is  enough,  now,  take  away  my  I. 
10.  they  seek  my  I.  to  take  it  away,  14.  Iiom.\l.'i. 

2  Kings  1. 13.  let  my  I.  be  precious  in  thy  sight,  14. 
Esth.  7.  3.  let  wy  I.  be  given  me  at  my  petition 
Job  6.  11.  my  end,  that  I  should  prolong  my  I. 

7.  7.  O  remember  that  my  I.  is  but  wind 
15.  my  soul  chooseth  death  ratlier  than  my  I. 

9.21.  tlio'  I  were  perfect,  yet  I  would  des]iise  jnyl. 

10.  1.  my  soul  is  weary  of  my  /.  I  will  leava 

13.  14.  wherefore  do  I  put  viy  I.  in  my  hands  t 
Psal.  7.  5.  lot  him  tread  down  my  I.  on  the  earth 

23.  (i.  mercy  shall  foUow  me  all  the  days  of  my  I. 

26.  9.  gather  not  7ny  I.  with  bloody  men 

27. 1.  the  Lord  is  the  strength  of  my  I.  of  whom 
4.  dwell  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  all  days  of  my  /. 

31.  10.  my  /.  is  spent  with  grief  and  sighing 
13.  they  devised  to  take  away  my  I. 

38.  12.  that  seek  after  my  I.  lay  snares  for  mo 
42.  8.  and  my  prayer  to  the  God  of  my  I. 
64.  1.  preserve  my  I.  from  fear  of  the  enemy 
88.  3.  and  my  I.  draweth  nigh  to  the  grave 
143.  3.  he  hath  smitten  my  I.  to  the  ground 

[sa.  38.  12.  I  have  cut  otf  like  a  weaver  my  I. 
Lam.  3.  53.  they  cut  oft' my  /.  in  the  dungeon 

58.  O  Lord,  thou  hast  redeemed  my  I. 

Jonah  2.  6.  hast  brought  up  my  I.  from  corruption 

4.  3.  O  Lord,  take,  I  beseech  thee,  my  /.  from  me 

Joh7i  10.  15.  and  I  lay  down  my  /.  for  the  sheep 

17.my  Fath.  lovcth  me,  because  I  lay  down  7r>y  I. 

13.  37.  Lord,  I  will  lay  down  my  I.  for  thy  sake 

Acts  20.  24.  nor  count  I  my  I.  dear  to  myself 

This  LIFE. 
Psal.  17.14.  men  which  have  their  portion  in  this  I. 
Eccl.G.l2.  kno  weth  what  is  good  for  a  man  in  th.  I. 
9.  9.  this  is  thy  portion  in  this  I.  and  in  labour 
lAike  8.  14.  are  choked  with  the  cares  of  this  I. 

21.  34.  hearts  overcharged  with  the  cares  of  this  I. 
Jicts  5.  20.  go,  speak  all  the  words  of  this  I. 

1  Cor.  6.  3.  much  more  things  that  pertain  to  this  I. 
4.  have  judgment  of  things  pertaining  to  this  I. 

15. 19.  if  in  this  I.  only  we  have  hope  in  Christ 

2  Tim.  2. 4.  entangleth  himself  with  affairs  of  this  I. 
1  John  5. 11.  eternal  life,  and  this  I.  is  in  his  Son 

Thy  LIFE. 
Oen.  19.  17.  escape  for  thy  I.  look  not  behind  thee 
47.t8.  how  many  are  the  days  of  the  years  of  t/jy/. 
Eiod.  4. 19.  the  men  are  dead  which  sought  thy  I. 
Deut.  28.  66.  and  thy  I.  shall  hang  in  doubt  before 
thee,  and  thou  shalt  have  no  assurance  of  thy  I. 
Judg.  18.  25.  they  run  on  thee,  and  thou  lose  thy  I. 
Ruth  4.  15.  he  shall  be  to  thee  a  restorer  of  thy  I. 

1  Sam.  19.  11.  if  thou  save  not  thy  I.  to-night 

22.  23.  he  that  seeketh  my  life  seeketh  thy  I. 
20.  24.  as  1. 1,  was  much  set  by  this  day,  so  my  life 

2  Sam.i.ti.  the  head  of  thine  enemy  that  sought  1. 1. 
19.  5.  thy  servants  which  this  day  saved  thy  I. 

1  Kings  1.  12.  come  that  thou  mayest  save  thy  I. 

19.  2.  if  I  make  not  thy  I.  as  the  life  of  one  of  them 

20.  31.  go  out,  peradventure  he  will  save  thy  I. 

39.  if  he  be  missing  thy  I.  be  for  his  life,  42. 
Psal.  103.4.  who  redcemetli  thy  I.  from  destruction 
Proy.4.10.  and  tli,e  years  off./,  shall  be  many,  9.11. 

13.  let  her  not  go,  keep  her,  for  she  is  thy  I. 
9.  11.  and  the  years  of  thy  I.  shall  be  increased 
Isa.  43.  4.  therefore  will  I  give  peoiile  for  thy  I. 
Jcr.  4.  30.  thy  lovers,  they  will  seek  thy  I. 
11.21.  of  the  men  that  seek  thy  I.  22.2.5.  |  38. 16. 
.39.  18.  thy  I.  shall  be  for  a  prey  to  thee,  45.  5. 
Lyke  16.  25.  thou  in  thy  I.  rcceivedst  good  things 
■lohn  13. 38.  wilt  thou  lay  down  thy  I.  for  my  sake? 
To  LIFE. 

2  Kings  8.  1.  whose  son  he  had  restored  to  I.  5. 
P>-oi).10.16.the  labour  of  the  rijhtcous  tcndeth  to  I. 


LIP 

denoted  both  the  place  whtnct  tka  blessing  was 
expected.,  and  an  earnest  desire  for  obtaining 
it.  [3]  To  pray,  Psal.  28.  2.  [4]  To  rise  in 
rcAc/Zion,  2Sam.  18.  28. 1 20.21.  [5J  To  oppress, 
threaten,  injure,  or  wrung  any  manner  of  way, 
Job  31.  21.  [6]  7'o  shake  off  sloth,  and  hear- 
tily to  engage  in  our  duty,  Ueb.  12.  12. 

Thou  shalt  lift  up  thy  face  unto  God,  Job  22.  26 
Thou  shalt  look  vp  to  him  by  meditation  and 
prayer,  not  with,  horror  and  grief,  but  with 
cheerfulness,  confidence,  and  comfirt. 

Be  ye  lift  up,  ye  everlasting  doors,  Psal.  24.  7. 
Jill  ye  true  members  of  the  church,  raise  up 
your  hearts  and  souls,  which  are  of  an  ever- 
lasting and  iminortal  nature,  from  all  larthly 
thing,'.,  and  set  them  open  for  the  reception  of 
Christ  the  King  of  glory. 

Hath  lift  up  his  heel  against  me,  Psal.  41.  9. 
Hath  behaved  himself  insolently,  contemptu- 
ously, and  inpiriously  towards  me.  It  is  a 
phrase  taken  from  an  unruly  horse,  who 
kicks  at  him  that  owr:^  and  feeds  him. 

Lift  not  up  the  horn,  Psal.  75.  4.  Carry  net 
yourselves  arrogantly,  scornfully,  or  mali- 
ciously towards  me  or  any  of  God's  people. 

Lift  up  thy  feet,  Psal.  74.  3.  Come  speedily  to 
our  help,  and  for  our  deliverance. 

To  lift  up  one's  self  in  height,  that  is,  to  grow 
proud,  insolent,  and  oppressive,  Ezek.  31.  10. 

Gen.  7.  17.  the  ark  was  /.  up  above  the  earth 
21.  IS.  /.  up  the  lad,  and  hold  him  in  thine  hand 
29. 1 1.  then  Jacob  /.  up  his  feet  and  camo 
37.  28.  they  /.  up  Joseph  out  of  the  pit 

40.  13.  Pharaoh  shall  /.  up  thine  head,  ]9. 
Exod.  7.  20.  /.  up  the  rod  and  smote  waters,  14. 16. 

20.  25.  if  thou  /.  up  a  tool  on  it,  thou  hast  polluted 
JV«?n.  6.  26.  Lord  /.  up  his  countenance  upon  thee 
16.  3.  wherefore  then  /.  ye  up  yourselves  ? 

23.  24.  and  /.  up  himself  as  a  young  lion 
Deut.  22.  4.  shalt  help  him  to  /.  them  up  again 

27.5.  not  /.  up  an  iron  tool  on  them,  Josh.  8.  31. 
.Tosh.  4. 18.  the  soles  of  the  priests'  feet  were  /.  up 
Ruth  3. 1 4.  /.  up  the  clothes  that  are  on  his  feet 
2  Sam.  23.  8.  he  /.  up  his  spear  against  800. 

18.  he  /.  up  his  spear  against  300,  1  Chr.  11.  11. 
2  Kings  9.  32.  he  /.  up  his  face  to  the  window 

19.  4.  /.  up  thy  prayer  for  the  remnant,  Isa.  37.  4. 

25.27.  /.up  theheadof  Jehoiachin  kingof  Judali 
1  Chron.  25.  5.  all  these  were  to  /.  up  the  horn 
Ezra  1.  t4.  let  the  men  of  the  place  /.  him  up 

9.  6.  I  blush  to  /.  up  my  face  to  thee,  my  God 
Job  5.  t7.  the  sons  of  burning  coal  /.  up  to  fly 

10. 15.  if  righteous,  yet  will  I  not  /.  up  my  head 
11.  15.  then  shalt  thou  /.  up  thy  face, 22.26. 
Psal.  4.  6.  /.  up  the  light  of  thy  countenance  on  us 
7.  6.  arise,  O  Lord,  in  thine  anger,  /.  up  thyself 
24.7.  /.up  your  heads,  O  ye  gates,  be  /.ye  doors,  9. 
25. 1.  to  thee,  O  Lord,  I  /.  my  soul,  86.  4.  1 143. 8. 
28.  2.  hear  my  voice  when  1  /.  up  my  hands 
9.  feed  them  also,  and  /.  them  up  for  ever 

41.  9.  hath  /.  up  his  heel  against  me,  John  13.  18. 

74.  3.  /.  up  thy  feet  to  the  perpetual  desolations 

75.  4.  and  to  the  wicked,  /.  not  up  the  horn,  5. 

93.  .3.  the  floods  have  /.  up  their  waves 

94.  2.  /.  up  thyself,  thou  judge  of  the  earth 
110.  7.  therefore  shall  he  /.  up  the  head 

Eecl.  4. 10.  if  they  fall,  the  one  will  /.  up  his  fellow 
/sa.2.4.  nation  shall  not  /.  up  sword  against  nation, 
neither  shall  they  learn  war  any  more,  Mic.  4.  3. 
5.  26.  he  will  /.  up  an  ensign  to  the  nations 

10.  15.  as  if  stafl^  should  /.  up  itself  as  if  no  wood 

24.  smite,  and  shall  /.  up  his  staff  against  thee 
26.  so  shall  /.  it  up  after  the  manner  of  Egypt 


11.  19.  as  righteousness  tcndeth  to  I.  so  he  that     13.  2.  /.  ye  up  a  banner  upon  the  high  mountain 

pursucth  evil     33.  10.  now  will  I  rise,  now  will  I  /.  up  myself 
19.  23.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  tendoth  to  I.  [   5!l.  19.  the  Lord  shall  /.  up  a  standard  against  him 


Mat.  7.  14.  narrow  is  the  way  that  leadelh  to  I. 

.Tohn  5.24.  but  is  passed  from  death  to  I.  l.Tohn  3.14. 

.flcts  11. 18.  G.  to  (Jentiles  granted  repentance  to  I. 

lioiii.  7.  10.  the  commandment  ordained  to  I. 

Heb.  11.  35.  women  received  their  dead  raised  to  I. 
LIFT 

Signifies,  [1]  To  raise  or  heave  up.  Gen.  37.  28. 
[2]  To  put  to  death,  or  crucify,  John  8. 28.  |  12. 
32.  To  Lift  up  the  (?)es,  signifies,  [1]  To 
direct  and  make  known  our  desires  to  God  by 
prayer,  with  hope  and  expectation  of  a  gra- 
cious answer,  Ps.  121.  1. 1  123. 1.  [2]  to  behold, 
contemplate,  and  consider  irith  ironder  and 
admiration,  Isa.  40.26.  To  I,ift  up  the  hea<l, 
signifies,  [1]  To  restore  a  person  to  his  for 
mtr  dignity,  Gen.  40.  13.  [2]  To  recover 
former  strength  and  courage,  so  as  to  oppress 
'others,  Judg.  8.  28.  [3]  To  rejoice  and  be 
glad,  Luke  21.  28.  [4]  To  be  advanced  above 
others,  and  obtain  a  complete  victory  over 
them,  Psal.  27.  6.  To  Lift  up  the  harid,  sig- 
nifies, [1]  To  sierar.  or  by  oath  to  confirm  a 
thing,  Gen.  14.  22.  [2]  to  birss.  Lev.  9.  22. 
//  teas  an  usual  posture  in  blessing,  tchich 


62. 10.  /.  up  a  standard  for  the  people,  .Jer.  .50.  f  2. 
.Ter.  7. 16.  nor  /.  up  cry  nor  prayer  for  them,  11. 14. 
51.  14.  they  shall  /.  up  a  shout  against  thee 
Lnm.  3.  41.  let  us  /.  up  our  heart  with  our  hands 
K:fA-.  6.  3.  Spirit/,  me  up  between  the  earlh,  11.  1. 
17.  14.  that  it  might  not  /.  itself  up,  but  stand 
26.8.  and  shall  /.  up  Iho  lutfkler  against  thee 
Zee//. 1.21.  so  that  no  man  did  /.  up  his  head,  which 
/.  up  their  horn  over  land  of  Judah  to  scatter  it 
5.  !).  and  they  /.  up  the  ephah  between  the  earth 
Mat.  12.  11.  will  he  not  /.  it  out  on  the  sabbath  ? 
Mark  1.  31.  took  her  by  the  hand,  and  /.  her  up 
Luke  13.  11.  and  could  in  no  wise  /.  up  herself 
21.28.  /.  upyour  heads,  your  redemption  draweth 
Jajn.  4.  10.  humble  yourselves,  and  he  shall  /.  up 
See  Eyes. 
LIFT  hand  or  hands. 
Gen.  14.  22.  T  have  /.  up  mine  hand  to  the  Lord 
41.  44.  without  thee  shall  no  man  /.  up  his  hand 
Deut.  32. 40. 1  /.  up  my  h.  and  say,  I  live  for  ever 
Psal.  10.12.  /.  up  thine  Annrf,  forget  not  the  humWn 
28.2.  when  I  /.  up  my  hands  toward  thine  oraclo 
63.  4.  I  will  /.  up  mv  bauds  in  thy  name 
119.  48.  my  A.  will  I  /.  up  to  thy  comniandmcnu 


LIP 

Psal.  134  2.  /.  up  your  A.  in  the  sanctuary  and  bless 
Isa.  49.  i;i  I  wiii  I.  up  mine  haiid  to  ilio  Gentiles 
7>a/rt.  '2.  J'j.  I.  up  lljy  hands  toward  lum  for  tin-  lilc- 
Jleb.  12.  Vi.  whcrel'ore  /.  up  the  A.  that  hang  dovvu 

LIFT  voice. 
Gen.  21.  16.  and  Hagar  I.  up  her  voice  and  wept 
Job  38.  'M.  canst  thou  /.  up  thy  voice  to  the  clouds? 
Isa.  10.  30.  /.  up  thy  voice.,  O  daughter  of  Galhiu 
24.  14.  they  shall  /.  up  tlieir  voice.,  sliall  sing 
40.  9.  I.  up  thy  voice  with  strength,  hit  it  up 
4J.  2.  he  shall  not  cry,  nor  /.  up  his  voice 

11  let  tlie  wilderneas  and  cities  /.  up  I  heir  voice 
52.  8.  thy  watchmen  shall  /.  up  the  voice 

58. 1.  cry,  spare  not,  I.  up  thy  voice  hke  a  trumpet 
Jer.  22.  20.  cry,  and  I.  up  thy  ooice  in  Bashau 
£;eA.  21.  22.  to  /.  up  the  voice  with  shouting 

LIFTED. 
Gen.  13. 10.  Lot  /.  up  his  eyes  and  heheld  Jordan 

18. 2.  Abraham  /.  up  his  eyes  and  looked,  22.  13. 
27.38.  Esau  I.  up  voice  ||  39.18.  as  1 1,  up  my  voice 

29.  11.  and  Jacob  /.  up  his  voice  and  wept 

31. 10.  Jacob/,  up  his  e^es  saw  in  a  dream,  33.  1. 

40.  20.  Pharaoh  /.  up  the  head  oithe  butler 
J..ev.  9.  22.  .'Varon  I.  up  his  hand  toward  the  people 
JVuvi.  14.  1.  the  congregation  /.  up  their  voice 

20.  11.  Moses  /.  up  his  hand  and  smote  the  rock 
Dcut.  8. 14.  then  thy  heart  be  I.  up  and  thou  forget 

17.20.  that  his  heart  be  not  I  above  his  brethren 

Judg.-i.i.when  the  angel  of  Lord  spake,  the  people 

I.  up  their  voice  and  wept,  21.  2.  1  Ham.  11.  4. 

8.  28.  so  they  I.  up  their  heads  no  more 

9.7.Jolharn  i.up  his  voice  and  cried,hearken  to  me 
Ruth  1.9.  Orpah  Snd  RulhZ.  uj)  voice  and  wept,  14. 

1  .^am.  24.  Ifi.  and  Saul  I.  up  his  voice  and  wept 

30.  4.  David  and  people  l.  up  voice,  2  Sam.  3.  32. 

2  Sam.  13.36.  king's  sons  came  aim  I.  up  their  voice 
20.  21.  Sheba  hath  /.  up  his  hand  against  king 
22.  49.  thou  also  hast  /.  me  up  on  high 

IKings  1 1.26.Jeroboam  l.up  hand  against  king,27. 
i  Kings  14.  10.  and  thine  heart  hath  I.  thee  up 

1  Chvoii.  14.  2.  hi.^  kingdom  was  I.  up  on  high 

2  C/iT.  5.  13.  as  trumpeters  and  singers  /.  up  voice 
17.  C.  his  heart  was  /.  up  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord 
2t!.  IC.  heart  was  I.  up  to  destruction,  32.  25. 

Joh  2.  12.  tliey  /.  up  their  voice  and  wept 
C.  t2.  inv  calainitv  t.  up  in  the  balances 
31.21. ifi  haveJ. up  my  hand  against  the  fatherless 
29.  or  I.  up  myself  when  evil  found  him 

Psal.  24.  4.  who  hath  not  I.  tij)  his  soul  unto  vanity 
27.  0.  ixjw  shall  my  head  be  I.  up  above 
30.  1.  e.xtol  thee,  for  thou  hast  I.  me  up,  102.  10. 
74.  5.  as  he  I.  up  axes  upon  the  thick  trees 
83.  2.  they  that  hate  thee  have  I.  up  the  head 

93.3.  the  floods  have  /.  up  their  voice,  O  Lord 
106.  2t;.  therefore  ho  I.  up  his  hand  against  them 

Prov.  2f).  t7.  tiio  legs  of  the  lame  are  I.  up 
30.  13.  lolly  eyes,  and  their  eye-lids  are  /.  up 
Tia.  2. 12.  day  oflhe  Lord  on  every  one  that  is  /.  up 
13.  on  cedars  that  are  I.  ||  14.  mountains  I.  up 

6.  1.  the  Lord  sitting  on  a  throne  high  and  I.  up 
26.  11.  when  thy  hand  is  I.  up  ihey  will  not  see 
.30.t25.  there  shall  be  on  every  /.  up  hill  rivers 
37.  23.  against  whom  hast  thou  /.  up  thine  eyes  ? 

.fer.  51.  9.  her  judgment  is  /.  up  to  the  skies 
f'.zek.  1.  19.  creatures  were  I.  up  from  the  earth 
20.  the  wheels  were  /.  up,  21.  |  10.  17. 
3.  14.  so  tho  S|>irit  /.  me  up  and  took  me  away 
10.  16.  cherubims  !.  up  their  wing.<*,  11).  I  11.  22. 
20.  5.  and  /.  up  my  hand  to  the  seed  of  Jacob,  6. 
I.'),  yet  I.  up  mine  hand  in  the  wilderness, 23. 
28.  when  I  brought  into  the  land  for  the  which  I 
I.  up  mine  hand  to  give  it  to  them,  42.  |  47. 14. 
2^.  2.  b.-rause  thine  In-art  is  I.  up,  .5.  17.  |  31.  10. 
?.<>.  7.  thus  saith  the  Lonl,  I  have  I.  up  mine  hand 
44.  12.  have  I  I.  up  my  hand  against  them 
Dan. .'). 20.  when  his  heart  was/,  up  and  hardened 
23.  bill  liiist  /.  up  thyself  against  tho  Lord 

7.  4.  the  lirst  beast  was  /.  up  from  the  earth 

8.  3.  then  I  /.  up  mine  eyes  and  saw,  10.  5. 
.Vic.  5.  0.  thine  hand  shall  be  /.  up  on  adversaries 
JIab.  2.  4.  his  soul  which  is  /.  up  is  not  upright 

3.  70.  the  deep  /.  up  his  iuinds  on  high 

Zcrh.  5.  7.  behold,  there  was  /.  up  a  talent  of  lead 

9.  16.  shall  be  as  the  stones  of  a  crown,  /.  up 
14.  10.  tliu  land  shall  bo  I.  up  and  Inhabited 

.^fal.  2. to.  as  yn  have  /.  up  the  face  against  my  law 
.Mark  9.  27.  but  Jesus  /.  him  up,  and  he  arose 
J.vkr  6.  20.  ho  /.  up  bis  eyes  on  his  disciples 
J  1.27.  a  certain  woman  /.  up  her  voice  and  said 
17.  13.  ton  lepers  /.  up  tlieir  voices  and  said 
24.  .50.  and  he  /.  up  his  hands  and  blessed  them 
John  3.1 4.  and  as  Moses  /.U|>  the  serpent  in  the  wil- 
derness, oven  so  must  the  Hon  of  man  be  /.  uj) 
8.  2^.  when  ye  have  /.  up  the  Son  of  man 
12.  32.  T,  if  1  be  /.  up,  will  draw  all  men  to  mo 
34.  sayest  thou,  Son  of  man  must  be  (.  up 
.tcts  2.  14.  Peter  /.  up  his  voice  and  said  to  tlieni 

4.  21.  /.  up  their  voice  to  (iod  witli  one  accord 
11.11.  /.  up  their  voices  in  the  spoi.'ch  of  Lycnoiiia 
28. 22.  and  then  I.  up  their  voices  and  said,  away 

342 


LIQ 

1  Tim.  3.  6.  lest  being  <.  up  with  pride  he  fall 
Heo.  10.  5.  the  angtl  /.  up  his  hand^to  heaven 

LIF'l'EU. 
Psal.  3.  3.  my  glory,  and  the  /.  up  of  mine  head 

LIFTEST. 

Job  30.  22.  thou  /.  me  up  to  the  wind,  thou  causcst 

Psal.  9.  13.  that  /.  mo  up  from  the  gates  of  death 

IH.  48.  /.  above  those  that  rise  up  against  mo 

Prov.  2.  3.  and  /.  up  thy  voice  for  understanding 

LIFTETH. 
Deut,  24.  1 15.  he  is  poor,  and  I.  his  soul  to  it 

1  Sam.  2.  7.  the  Lord  bringeth  low,  and  /.  up,  8. 

2  Ckron.  25.  19.  tliine  heart  /.  thee  up  to  boast 
Job  39.  18.  what  time  the  ostrich  /.  up  herself 
Psal.  107.  25.  wind  which  /.  up  the  waves  thereof 

113.  7.  he  /.  the  needy  out  of  the  dunghill 
147.  G.  the  Lord  /.  up  the  meek,  he  castetli  wicked 
Isa.  18.  3.  see  ye  when  he  /.  up  an  ensign  on  mount 
Jer.  51.  3.  that  /.  himself  up  in  his  brigandine 
JVaA.  3.  3.  the  horseman  /.  up  the  bright  sword 

LIFTIJVG. 
.hulg.li.\\l.  called  the  place,  /.  upof  the  jaw-bone 

1  Ckron.  11.  20.  Abishai  chief,  for  /.  U])  his  spear 
15.  16.  sounding,  by  /.  up  the  voice  with  joy 

2  Chron.  32.  j  2ii.  humbled  for  /.  up  of  his  heart 
JVtA.  8.  G.  answered,  amen,  with  /.  up  their  hands 
Job  22.  29.  then  thou  shall  say,  there  is  /.  uji 
/'ia/.141.2./.up  of  my  hands  as  the  evening  sacrifice 
Prov.  30.  32.  iiasl  done  foolishly  in  /.  up  thyself 
y«u.y.l8.they  shall  mount  up  like  the  /.up  of  smoke 

33.  3.  at  /.  up  of  thyself  nations  are  scattered 
1  Tim.  2.8.  men  prav  every  where,  /.  up  holy  hands 

■  LIGHT. 
Gen.  44.  3.  as  soon  as  the  morning  was  /.  the  men 
Judg.  19.  2tj.  fell  at  door  of  the  house  till  K  was  /. 

1  Sam.  14.  36.  and  spoil  them  till  the  morning  /. 
Psal.  139.  11.  even  the  night  shall  be  /.  about  me 
Mic.  2.  1.  when  morning  is  /.  they  practise  it 
ZctA.  14.  7.  that  at  evening  time  it  shall  be  /. 

LIGHT. 
JVMm.  21.  5.  our  soul  lAitheth  this  /.  bread 
jMal.  11.30.  my  yoke  is  easy,  and  my  burden  is  /. 

2  Cor.  4. 17.  our  /.  alfliclion  worketli  for  us  a  far 
LIGHT. 

Jadg.  9.  4.  Abimelech  hired  vain  and  /.  persons 
ZepU.  3.  4.  her  prophets  are  /.  and  treacherous 

LIGHT. 
2  Sam.  2.  18.  Asahel  was  /.  of  foot  as  a  wild  roe 

LIGHT. 
Deut.  27.  16.  cursed  that  settcth  /.  by  his  father 
Ezek.  22. 7.  in  thee  they  set  /.  by  father  and  mother 
-Waf.  22. 5.  but  made  /.  of  it,  and  went  their  ways 

LIGHT  thing. 
lSa?n.l8.23.socmeth  it  a  l.thing  to  be  the  king's  son 

1  Kings  16.  31.  as  if  it  had  been  a  /.  thing  for  him 

2  Kings  3.18.  is  but  a  l.thing  in  the  sight  of  the  Ld. 
20. 10.  it  is  a  /.  thing  for  the  shadow  to  go  down 

/«a.49.6.a  /.tAini'-tliat  thou  shouldest  be  my  servant 

Kzek.S.n.isil  a.  l.thing  theycommit  abominations 
LIGHT 

Signifies,  [1]  The  sensation  which  ari.tes  from 
beholding  any  bright  object,  Exod.  10. 23.  |  14. 
20.  [2]  The  su7i  and  mooji',  which  are  the 
springs  of  light,  Gen.  1.  16.  [3]  .3  son  or 
successor,  who  keeps  one^s  name  and  memory 
from  being  extinguished,  1  Kings  11.  30. 
2  Chron.  21.  7.  [4]  Jl  windoio,  1  Kings  7.  4,  5. 
[5]  Joy,  comfort,  and  felicity,  Esth.  8. 16.  P^al. 
97.  11.  [6]  The  appearance  of  the  day,  Job 
24.  14.  [71  True  saving  knotclcdge,  Isa.  8.20. 
[8]  Happiness  and  prosperity,  Isa.  58.  8.  ^[9] 
Support,  comfort,  and  deliverance,  Mic.  7.  H. 
[10]  The  gospel,  which  is  the  means  of  spirit- 
ual comfort.  Mat.  4. 16.  [11]  The  understand- 
ing or  judgment,  Mat.  6.  23.  It  is  spoken, 
[1]  0(  iiiii]^u:ho  is  a  Being  of  infinite  wisdom, 
truth,  holiness,  purity,  iNc.  1  John  1.5.  [2] 
Of  Jesus  (;bri»t,  who  is  the  fountain  and 
author  of  alt  knowledge,  both  natural  and 
spiritual,  Luke  2.  32.  John  1.  9.  [3]  Of  the 
word  of  Gild,  which  conducts  and  guides 
Christians  in  this  world,  and  point.<:  out  the 
wall  to  eternal  /mp/)inr.«.«,  I'snl.  119.  lO.V  2  Pet. 
1.  19.  [4]  Of  John  the  Haptist,  who  was  emi- 
nent for  his  knowUulge  and  zeal,  John  5.  35. 
[5]  Of  the  apostica,  or  ministers  of  llie  gospel, 
t/iA«  assist  lUhrr.i,  and  direct  thrm,  to  Christ 
and  salvation.  Mat.  :>.  14.  [6]  Of  true  Chris- 
tians, who  are  enlightened  by  the  Spirit  of 
God,  and  brought  lu  the  saving  knowledge  of 
God  and  Christ,  Luke  16.  8.  Eph.  5.  8.  [7] 
Of  good  kings,  both  for  their  splrndonr,  and 
the  counsel  and  comfort  that  their  people  have 
from  them,  2  Sam.  21.  17. 

Tiie  light  of  my  countenance  they  cast  not  down, 
.fob  20.  24.  They  were  very  careful  not  to 
abuse  my  smites,  and  to  give  me  no  occasion 
to  change  viy  countenance  or  carriag$  to- 
wards them. 
Let  your  light  so  shino  befuro  men,  jte.   Mat. 


LIG 

5.  16.  Let  your  gifts  and  graces  be  so  appa 
rent  to  others  in  your  doctrines  and  lives,  thai 
they  may  be  brought  to  own,  and  believe  in 
the  true  God,  and  look  on  you  as  Ms  true  and 
faithful  servants. 

Ocn.  1. 3.  God  said,  let  there  he  /.  and  there  was  I 
4.  God  saw  the  /.  ||  5.  God  called  tho  /.  day 
16.  the  greater  /.  the  lesser  /.  to  rule  the  night 

Exod.  10.  23.  Israel  had  /.  in  their  dwellings 

14.  20.  but  the  pillar  gave  /.  by  night  to  these 
25.  C.  tliis  IS  the  ofterins,  oil  for  the  /.  27. 20.  |  35 

8,  14,  28.  I  39.  37.  Lev.  24.  2. 
jVkot.  4.  10.  to  Eleazar  pertaineth  oil  for  the  I. 

1  Sam.  29.  10.  and  as  soon  as  ye  have  I.  depart 

2  .Sam.  21. 17.  that  thou  quench  not  the /.  of  Israel 

23.  4.  he  shall  be  as  the  /.  of  the  morning 

1  Kings  7.  4.  /.  was  against  I.  in  three  ranks,  5. 

11.  36.  that  David  my  servant  may  have  a  /. 
jVcA.  8.  1 3.  Ezra  read  from  the  /.  till  mid-day 

9.  19.  nor  pillar  of  fire  by  night  to  shew  them  I. 
Ksth.  8.  16.  the  Jews  had  /.  joy  and  gladness 
Job  3.  4.  neither  let  the  /.  shine  upon  it 

9.  let  it  look  for  /.  but  have  none 

16.  I  had  been  as  infants  which  never  saw  I. 

20.  wherefore  is  /.  given  to  him  in  misery,  23. 

4.  t  18.  nor  in  his  angels  in  whom  he  put  /. 

10.  22.  without  order,  where  the  /.  is  as  darkneei 

12.  22.  bringeth  out  to  /.  the  shadow  of  death 
2.5.  they  grope  in  the  dark  without  /. 

18.  5.  the  /.  of  the  wicked  shall  be  put  out 

6.  the  /.  shall  be  dark  in  his  tabernacle 
22.  28.  and  the  /.  shall  shine  on  thy  ways 

24.  13.  they  are  of  those  that  rebel  against  the  I 

14.  the  murderer  rising  with  the  /.  killeth 

16.  marked  in  the  day-time,  they  know  not  the  /. 

25.  3.  and  upon  whom  doth  not  his  /.  arise'! 
28.  11.  the  thing  that  is  hid  bringeth  ho  to  /. 
31.  t2G.  if  I  beheld  the  /.  when  it  sliined 

33.  28.  will  deliver,  and  his  life  shall  see  the  /. 
30.  to  be  enlightened  with  the  /.  of  the  living 

36.  30.  behold  he  spreadeth  his  /.  upon  it 

32.  with  clouds  he  covereth  /.  and  commandeth 

37.  t3.  he  directcth  his  /.to  the  ends  of  the  eartli 
til.  he  scatterelli  the  cloud  of  his  /. 

15.  and  caused  the  /.  of  his  cloud  to  shine 

21.  men  see  not  tho  bright  /.  in  the  clouds 

38.  15.  from  the  wicked  their  /.  is  withholdcn 
19.  where  is  tho  way  where  /.  dwelleth  1 
24.by  what  way  is  the  /.partedl  which  scatteretb 

41. 18.  by  his  neesings  u  /.  doth  shine,  and  his  eyes 
Psal.  4.  6.  lift  up  the  /.  of  thy  countenance  on  ua 
27.  1.  the  Lord  is  ray  /.  and  my  salvation 
37.  6.  he  shall  bring  forth  thy  righteousness  as  2. 
38. 10.  /.  of  mine  eyes  is  gone,  it  is  gone  from  me 
49.  19.  he  shall  go,  lliey  sliall  never  see  /. 
74. 16.  thou  hast  prepared  the  /.  and  the  sun 
78.  14.  and  all  the  night  with  a  /.  of  fire 
97.  11.  /.  is  sown  for  the  righteous,  and  gladness 
104.2.who  coverest  thyself  willi  /.os  with  garment 
118.  27.  God  is  the  Lord,  who  hath  shewed  us  I. 
119. 105.  thy  word  is  a  lamp,  and  a  /.  to  my  paths 
130.  the  entrance  of  thy  words  giveth  /. 
139.  12.  darkness  and  /.  are  both  alike  to  thee 
148.  3.  praise  him,  sun,  and  all  ye  stars  of/. 
Prov.  4. 18.  the  patli  of  the  just  is  as  the  shining  I. 
0.23.  for  the  commandment  is  a  lamp,  the  law  is/. 

13.  9.  J.  of  righteous  rejoiceth,  but  lamp  of  wicked 

15.  30.  the  /.  of  the  eyes  rejoiceth  llie  heart 

21. 1 4.  a  proud  heart  and  /.  of  the  wicked  is  sin 
Ecel.  11.7.  truly  the  /.  is  sweet  and  pleasant 

12.  2.  while  tlie  sun  or  the  /.  be  not  darkened 
Isa.  5.  20.  put  darkness  for  /.  and  /.  tor  darkness 
30.  and  the  /.  is  darkened  in  the  heavens  thcreut 

8.  20.  it  is  because  there  is  no  /.  in  them 

9.  2.  have  seen  a  great  /.  on  them  hath  /.  sliined 

10.  17.  the  /.  of  Israel  shall  be  for  a  fire 

13.10.  the  sun  darkened,  the  moon  shall  not  cause 
her  /.  to  shine.  Mat.  24. 29.  Jttark  13.  24. 
30. 26.  the  /.  oflhe  moon  shall  be  as  tlie  /.  of  the 
sun,  the/,  of  the  sun  as  the  /.of  seven  days 
51.  4.  my  judgment  to  rest  for  a  /.  to  the  people 
.59.  9.  we  wait  for  /.  hut  behold  obscurity 
(iO.  19.  the  Lord  sliall  be  to  thee  an  everlasting  /. 
.Trr.  4. 23. 1  beheld  the  heavens,  and  they  had  no  /. 
25. 10. 1  will  take  from  them  the  /.  of  the  candle 
31.  35.  the  Lord  givcth  the  sun  for  a  /.  by  day,  and 
ordinances  of  the  moon  and  stars  for  / 
bv  night 
Ezrk.  32.  t  8.  the  /.  oflhe  /.  I  will  make  dark 
/;a7i.  2.  22.  and  the  /.  dwelleth  with  him 

5.  1.1.  /.  and  un<lcrslnnding  found  in  Daniel,  14. 
//;£.  6.  5.  thy  judgments  as  /.  that  goelli  forth 
jUic.7. 9.  the  i.iOid  will  bring  mo  forth  to  the  / 
Ilab.  3.  4.  and  his  brightness  wiis  as  the  /. 

11.  at  the  /.  of  thine  arrows  they  went 
y.rph.  3.  .5.  every  morning  bring  judgment  to  /. 
y.ech.  14.  0.  in  that  day  the  /.  shall  not  be  clear 
Mat.  4. 10.  to  them  that  sat  in  death,  /.  is  sprung  up 
.5. 1 1.  ye  are  the  /.  of  the  world  i|  15.  it  giveth  /. 

10.  liit  your  /.  io  sliino  before  men,  that  they  see 


Lia 

Mat.  6.22.  the  Z.  of  bod  v  is  the  eye,  if  eye  single  thy 
whole  body  ehall  be  full  of  i.  JLulcel\.M,'3ii. 
17.  2.  and  his  raiment  was  white  as  Iho  I. 
/,uA:e2.32.  ai.to  lighten  the  Gentiles,  and  the  glory 

8.  16.  they  which  enter  in  may  see  the  I.  11.  33. 
16.8  of  this  world  are  wiser  than  the  children  ol'i. 

John  1.4.  in  him  was  life,  and  life  was  the  I.  of  men 
7.  the  same  came  to  bear  witness  of  that  I.  8. 

9.  that  was  the  true  I.  which  lighteth  every  man 
3. 19  condemnation,  that  I.  is  come  into  the  world 

20.  every  one  that  doeth  evil  hateth  the  I. 

21.  but  he  tliat  *oeth  truth  comctli  to  the  I. 

5.  35.  he  was  a  burning  and  a  shining  I.  and  ye 

were  willing  to  rejoice  for  a  season  in  his  I. 

8. 12.  Jesus  saying,  I  am  the  /.  of  the  world,  9.  5. 

he  that  foiloweth  me  shall  have  the  I.  of  life 

11.  9.  he  stumblelh  not,  because  he  seeth  the  /. 

10.  he  stumbleth,  because  there  is  no  I.  in  him 

12.  35.  yet  a  Uttio  while  is  the  I.  with  you 
36.  while  ye  have  the  I.  believe  in  the  /.  that  ye 
40. 1  am  come  a  Mnto  the  world,  that  whosoever 

^cts  9. 3.  there  shined  about  him  a  I.  from  heaven 

12.  7.  a  I.  shined  in  the  prison,  and  he  smote 

13.  47.  I  have  set  thee  to  be  a  I.  to  the  Gentiles 
16.  29.  then  he  called  for  a  /.  and  sprang  in 
22.  6.  there  shone  a  great  I.  round  about  me 

9.  they  that  were  with  me  saw  indeed  the  I. 

11.  when  I  could  not  see  for  the  glory  of  that  /. 
26.  13.  at  mid-day,  O  king,  I  saw  m  the  way  a  I. 

23.  should  shew  I.  to  the  people  and  Gentiles 
Rom.  2.  19.  a  I.  of  them  which  are  in  darkness 
13.  12.  and  let  us  put  on  the  armour  of/. 
I  Cor.  4.  5.  who  will  bring  to  /.  hidden  things 
a  Cor.  4.  4.  lest  tlie  I.  of  the  gospel  should  shine 

6.  who  commanded  I.  to  shine  out  of  darkness 
11.  14.  Satan  is  transformed  into  an  angel  of  I. 

Epk.  5.  8.  but  now  are  ye  I.  walk  as  children  of  /. 
13.  all  things  that  are  reproved  are  made  manifest 
by  the  I.  whatsoever  doth  make  manifest  is  / 
Col.  1.  12.  meet  for  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  I. 
1  Thess.  5.  5.  ye  are  all  children  of  the  /.  and  day 
1  Tita.  6.  16.  dwelling  in  I.  no  man  can  approach 
tTim.  1. 10.  who  brought  life  and  immortality  to  I, 
1  Pet.  ~.  9.  who  called  you  into  his  marvellous  I. 
t  PeM.19.take  heed,as  to  a  I.  shining  in  dark  place 

1  John  1.  5.  God  is  I.  and  in  him  is  no  darkness 
Jicv.  18.  23.  the  I.  of  a  candle  shall  shine  no  more 

21.  11.  her  I.  wa.s  like  a  stone  most  precious 
23.  glory  lighten  it,  and  the  Lamb  is  the  I.  thereof 

22.  5.  they  need  no  t.  of  the  sun,  the  Lordgiveth  I. 

See  Countenance,  Darkness. 

Give  LIGHT. 

ffen.  1. 15.  and  let  them  be  to  give  I.  on  the  earth 

17.  and  God  set  the  stars  to  give  I.  on  the  earth 

Exed.  13.  21.  in  a  pillar  of  fire  to  gine  them  I. 

25.37.the  lamps  may  o-.i.ovet  against  it,  JVu»n.8.2. 

2  ^t'n^s  8.19.  be  promised  to  g.  him  ai.  2  CAr.21.7. 
JTeh.  9.  12.  to^.  them  I.  in  the  way  they  should  go 
Psal.  105.  39.  and  fire  to  give  I.  in  the  night 
/sa.13.10.  the  stars  of  heaven  shall  not  ^t'ce  their  i. 

42.  6. 1  will  g.  thee  for  a  I.  to  the  Gentiles,  49.  6. 

60.  19.  nor  shall  the  moon  g.  I.  to  thee,  Ez<k.2-2.7. 
Mat.  5. 15.  '\\.g.  I.  to  all  in  the  house,  Luke  11.  36. 
2  Cor.  4.  6.  to  give  the  I.  of  the  knowledge  of  God 
Epk.  5.  14.  awake,  and  Christ  shall  give  thee  I. 

In  the  LIGHT. 
Psai.  56. 13.  that  I  may  walk  in  the  I.  of  the  living 
Jsa-  2.  5.  come,  let  us  walk  in  the  I.  of  the  Lord 

50. 11.  walk  in  the  I.  of  your  fire,  and  in  the  sparks 
.lohn  12.  36.  while  ye  have  the  light  believe  in  the  I. 
1  .John  1.  7.  but  if  we  walk  in  the  L.  as  ho  is  in  the  I. 

2.  9.  he  that  saith  he  is  in  I.  and  hateth  his  brother 

10.  that  loveth  his  brother,  abideth  in  the  I. 
Rev.  21.  24.  nations  (hat  are  saved,  shall  walk  in  I. 

Thy  LIGHT. 
Psal.  36.  9.  and  in  thy  I.  shall  we  see  light 
43. 3.  O  send  out  1. 1,  and  thy  truth,  let  them  lead 
Jsa.  as.  8.  then  shall  thy  I.  break  forth  as  morning 
10-  then  shall  thy  J.risoin  ob9curity,and  thy  dark. 
60.  1.  arise,  shine,  for  thy  I.  is  come,  the  glory 
3.  the  Gentiles  shall  come  to  thy  I.  ami  kings 

19.  the  sun  sliall  be  no  more  thy  I.  by  day 

20.  for  the  Lord  shall  be  thy  everlasting  /. 

LIGHT,  ED. 
Ezod.  25.  37.  and  they  shall  I.  the  lamps,  40.  4. 
40.  25.  h'.'  I.  the  lamps  before  the  Lord,  JVkot.  8. 3. 
Psal.  18. 28.  for  thou  wilt  I.  my  candle,  L.  lighten 
Mat.  5. 15.  nor  do  men  I.  a  candle,  and  put  it  under 
X,ufce8.16.  noman  whenheh:ithi.  a  candle,  11.33. 
15. 8.  doth  not  I.  a  candle,  and  sweep  the  house 
Rev.l.  16.  nor  shall  the  sun  I.  on  them,  nor  heat 

LIGHT. 
i2K(A2.3.  her  hap  was  to  I.  on  apartof  Boaz'  field 

LIGHT. 
S  5am.  17.  12.  and  we  will  (.  on  him  as  the  dew 

LIGHTED. 
(r<>n.24.64.when  phe  saw  Tsanc,  she  I.  ofTthe  camel 
Jotsh.  15.  18.  and  she  I.  offher  ns<i,  .Tudg.  1.  14. 
Judg.  4.  15.  Sisera  I.  off  hie  chariot  and  fled 
1  Sam.  25.  ^  Abigail  hasted  aod  I,  ofTthe  asa 
343 


LIK 

2  Kings  5.  21.  Naaman  /.  down  from  the  chariot 

LIGHTED. 
Gen.  28. 11.  Jacob  I.  on  a  curtain  place  and  tarried 
2  Kings  lal5.  Jehu  I.  on  Jehonadab  son  of  Kechab 

LIGHTED. 
Isa.  9.  8.  sent  a  word  to  Jacob  and  it  I.  on  Israel 

LIGHTEN. 
2  Sam.  22.  29.  the  Lord  will  /.  my  darkness 
Ezra  9.  8.  tliat  our  God  may  I.  our  eyes  and  give 
Psal.  13.  3.  I.  mine  eyes,  lest  I  sleep  the  sleep 
Luke  2.  32.  a  light  to  I.  the  Gentiles  and  the  glory 
llev.  21.  23.  had  no  sun,  the  glory  of  God  did  L.  it 

LIGHTEiV. 
1  Savi.  6.  5.  pcradventure  he  will  /.  his  hand 
Jonah  1.  5.  cast  wares  into  the  sea,  to  I.  it  of  the 

LIGHTER. 
1  Kings  12.4.  make  thou  yoke  I.  9, 10.  2  C/ir.10.10. 
Psal.  62.  9.  they  are  altogether  I.  than  vanity 
Isa.  49.  f  6.  art  thou  I.  than  to  be  my  servant 
Eieh.  8.tl7.  any  thing  I.  than  to  commit  abominat. 

LIGHTEST. 
JtTum.  8.  2.  say  to  him,  when  thou  I.  the  lamps 

LIGHTETH. 
Exod.  30.  8.  and  when  Aaron  I.  the  lamps  at  even 
Joh7i.  1.9.tliat  was  the  true  light  which  I.  every  man 

LIGHTETH. 
Deut.  19. 5.  a.\e-head  slippeth  and  I.  on  his  neiglib. 

LIGHTING. 
/s(i.  30.  30.  Lord  sUallshew  the  i.  down  of  his  arm 
Mat.  3.  16.  descending  like  a  dove,  and  I.  on  him 

LIGHTI,Y. 
Gen.  26.  10.  one  might  I.  have  lien  with  thy  wife 
Isa.  9.  1.  when  at  first  he  I.  afflicted  the  land 
Jer.  4.  24.  I  beheld,  and  all  the  hills  moved  I. 
Mark  9.  39.  do  a  miracle,  can  /.  speak  evil  of  me 
See  Esteemed. 
LIGHTENED. 
PsttZ.34.5.  they  looked  to  him  and  were  Z.and  faces 
77. 18.  the  hghtnings  I.  the  world,  earth  trembled 
Rev.  18.  1.  the  earth  was  I.  with  his  glory 
See  Enlightened. 
LIGHTENED. 
.^cts  27. 18.  being  tossed,  next  day  they  I.  ship,  38. 

LIGHTNESS. 

Jer.  3.  9.  thro'  I.  of  her  whoredoms  she  defiled  land 

23.  32.  tell  them  cause  my  people  to  err  by  their  I. 

2  Cor.  1. 17.  when  I  was  thus  minded,  did  I  use  l.f 

LIGHTENETH. 
Prov.  29.  13.  the  Lord  I.  both  their  eyes 
Z/iiAe  17.24.  for  ns  lightning  that  i.  out  of  one  part 

LIGHTNING. 
2  Sam.  22.  15.  ho  sent  I.  and  discomfited  tJiem 
J<)*28.2G.when  he  made  a  way  .'or  the/,  of  thunder 

37.  3.  he  directcth  his  I.  to  the  ends  of  the  earth 

38.  25.  who  divided  a  way  for  the  I.  of  thunder 
Psal.  144.  6.  cast  forth  I.  and  scatter  them 
Ezek.  1.  13.  and  out  of  the  fire  went  forth  /. 

14.  living  creatures  ran  as  the  apjiearance  of  I. 
Dan.  10.  G.  and  his  face  as  the  ajipearance  of  I. 
JVoA.  3.  t3.  horsemen  lifted  up  I.  of  tlie  spear 
Zech.  9.  14.  his  arrow  shall  go  forth  ae  the  I. 
^Wa«.24. 27.  as/. Cometh  out  of  the  east,  Lukell.'H. 

28.  3.  his  countenance  was  as  /.  his  raiment  white 
Luke  10. 18.  I  beheld  Satan  as  /.  fall  from  heaven 

LIGHTNINGS. 
Exod.  19.16.  thunders,  /.  and  thick  cloud  on  mount 

20.18.  all  the  people  saw  the /.and  noise  of  trump. 
Job  38.  35.  canst  thou  send  /.  that  they  may  go  t 
Psal.  18. 14.  he  shot  out  /.  and  discomfited  them 

77.  18.  /.  lighted  the  world,  earth  trembled,  97.  4. 

78.  t48.  hegave  their  cattle  to  hail  and  flocks  to/. 
135.  7.  he  maketli  /.  for  the  rain,  he  bringeth  wind 

Jer.  10.  13.  ho  maketh  /.  with  rain,  51.  ifi. 
J^ah.  2.  4.  the  chariots  shall  run  like  the  /. 
Zcch.  10.  1 1-  so  the  Lord  shall  make  /. 
/iew.4.5.  out  of  the  throne  proceeded  /.  thunderings 

8.  5.  there  were  voices,  thunderings,  and  /.  11. 1!'. 

16.  18.  there  were  /.  and  n  frrcat  eartliquake 

LIGH'l'S. 
Grv.l.M.  let  there  be  /.  in  the  firmament  of  heaven 

15.  and  let  them  be  for  /.  in  the  firmament 

16.  God  made  two  great  /.  greater  to  rule  the  day 
1  Kings  6.  4.  ho  made  windows  of  narrow  /. 
Psal.  VM>.1.  to  him  that  made  great  /.  for  his  mercy 
Ezek.  32.  8.  all  the  bright  /.  will  I  make  dark 
Jyuke  12. 35.  let  your  loins  be  girded,  yonr  /.  horn. 
./7c<.5 20.8.therc  were  many  /.  in  the  n[)per  chamber 
Phil.  2. 15.  among  whom  ye  shine  as  /.  in  the  world 
Jam.  1.  17.  Cometh  down  from  the  Father  of  /. 

LIGN-ALOES. 
.\'u»n.24.6.as  trees  of /.-a.which  the  li.hath  planted 

LIGURE. 
Ezod.  28.  19.  thp  third  row  a  /.  an  agate,  39.  12. 

LIKE. 
Ocn.  13.  10.  Sodom  was  /.  the  land  of  Egypt 
Exod.  15.  11.  who  is  /.  nnto  thee?  Deut.  33.  29. 
1  Kinss  8. 23.  2  Chr.  6. 14.  Psal.  35. 10.  |  71.19. 
Ifl.  31.  manna  was  /.  coriander-seed,  while 
24  17.  the  glorv  of  the  Lord  was  /.  devouring  fire 
30.  32.  nor  shall  ye  make  any  ointment  /.  that 


LIK 

\E2:o<i.30.33.whoBocornpoundetIi  any  thing  I.  it.33 
34.  ot  each  shall  there  bo  a  /.  weight 
34. 1.  hew  two  tahies/.to  the  first,  4.  JJeut.  10. 1,3 
JVum.  23.  10.  and  let  my  last  end  be  /.  his 
Deut.  4.  32.  or  any  tiling  hath  been  heard  /.  it 
7.  26.  lest  thou  be  a  cuised  thing  /.  it 
17.14. set  king  over  me  /.  all  nations,  lSam.8. 5,20 
18.  8.  they  shall  have  /.  portions  to  eat 
15.  prophet  of  thy  breth.  /.  nie,  .^cts  3. 22.  |  7. 37 
18.  I  will  raise  a  prophet  from  brethren  /.  to  thee 

29.  23.  /.  the  overthrow  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah 
34.  10.  there  arose  not  a  prophet  /.  to  Moses 

.losh.  10.  14.  no  day  /.  that  before  or  aftsr  it 
Judg.  13.  6.  his  countenance  /.  an  angel  of  God 
16.  12.  ho  brake  them  from  his  arms  /.  a  thread 
17.  I  shall  become  weak  and  /.  any  other  man 
Ruth  2.13.  tho'  I  be  not /.to  one  of  thy  handmaidens 
4.11.  Lord  make  the  woman  /.  Rachel  and  /.Leah 
12.  let  thy  house  be  /.  tho  house  of  I'harez 

1  Sam.  2.  2.  nor  is  there  any  rock  /.  our  God 
4.9.  be  strong,  quit  yourselves  /.  men,  1  Cor.  16.13. 
17. 7.  the  staifof  his  sjiear  was  /.  a  weaver's  heu:a 

25.  36.  Nabal  held  a  feast  /.  the  feast  of  a  king 
26.15.  a  vnhant  nian,and  who  is  /.  to  thee  in  IsratI 

2  Sam.  7.  U.  /.  to  tho  name  of  tho  great  men 

23.  what  one  nation  in  earth  is  /.thy  people  Israeli 

22.  34.  ho  maketh  my  feet  /.  hinds'  feet 

1  Kijigs  3. 12.  none  /.  thee  bef.  nor  arise  /.  Ihee,  13. 
10.  21).  there  was  not  the  /.  made  in  any  kingdom 
12.32.  Jeroboam  ordained  a  feast/.  thatinJudah 
16.3.  /.  the  house  of  Jerob.  7.  |  21. 22.  ^ Kings  9.9. 
18.44.  there  ariseth  a  little  cloud  /.  a  man's  hand 
20^25.  number  thee  an  army  /.  the  army  thou  lo?J 

27.  pitched  before  them  /.two little  flocks  ofkidd 
22. 13.  word  /.  xvord  of  one  of  those,  2  Citr.  18. 12. 

2  Kings  X  2.  but  not  /.  his  father  and  /.  his  mother 
5. 14.  his  flesh  came  again  /.  flesh  of  a  little  child 

9.  9.  and  /.  the  house  of  Baasha  son  of  Ahijah 

13.  7.  had  made  them  /.  dust  by  threshing 

14.  3.  yet  not  /.  David  his  father,  16.2. 2  Ckr.  28. 1. 

17. 15.  the  L.  charged  they  should  not  do  /.  them 
18.  32.  take  you  to  a  land  /.  your  own,  Isa.  36. 17. 

23.  25.  /.  to  him  was  there  no  king,  JVeA.  13.  20. 

1  CJiron.  12.  22.  a  great  host  /.  the  host  of  God 

07.  23.  would  increase  IsVael  /.  the  stars  of  heaven 

2  Chr.  1.  9.  over  a  people,  /.  the  dust  of  the  earth 
21.  19.  no  burning  for  him  /.  burning  of  fathers 

30.  7.  be  not  ye  /.  your  fathers  and  your  brethren 

33.  2.  /.  to  tlie  abominations  of  the  heathen 

35.  18.  there  was  no  passovcr  /.  to  that  in  Israel 
Job  5.26.  to  grave  /.  as  a  shock  of  corn  cometh  in 

10.  10.  hast  thou  not  curdled  me  /.  cheese  ? 
11. 12.  though  man  be  born  /.  a  wild  ass's  colt 
12.25.he  maketh  them  tostugger/.  a  drunken  man 
13.  12.  your  remembrances  are  /.  to  ashes 

14. 2.  he  cometh  forth  /.  a  flower,  and  i.^  cut  down 

15.16.  filthy  i.s  man,  who  drinkethinirjuify  /,  water 

16.  14.  he  runneth  upon  me  /.  a  giant 

20.  7.  he  hhall  pirish  for  ever  /.  his  own  dung 

21.  11.  they  send  their  little  ones  /.  a  flock 

34.  7.  wiiHt  man  is  /.  Job,  who  drinkcth  scornin» 
36.22.God  e.xalteth  by  powtr,wlio  tcacheth/.hiin? 
.38.  .3.  gird  up  now  thy  loins  /.  a  man,  40.  7. 

40.  9.  hast  tlion  an  arm  /.  God,  or  canst  thunder 

41.  33.  on  earth  there  is  not  his  /.  who  is  made 

42.  8.  ye  have  not  spoken  right  /.  my  servant  Job 
Psal.  1.  3.  he  shall  be  /.  a  tree  planted  by  the  rivetj 

4.  ungodly  are  not  so,  but  are  /.  the  chaff 
7.  2.  lest  he  tear  my  soul  /.  a  lion,  rendipg  it 

17.  12.  /.  a  lion  that  is  greedy  of  his  jirey 

22.  14.  I  am  poured  out  /.  wa'ter,  my  heart  /.  wnx 
28.  1.  I  become  /.  them  that  go  down  to  the  pit 

31.  12.  I  am  forgotten,  I  am  /.  a  broken  vessel 

36.6.  thy  rightcousne.ss  is  /.  the  great  mountoir.a 
;<7.  2.  they  shall  be  soon  cut  down  /.  gr«=s 

3.5.  and  spreading  himself  J.  a  green  bay  tree 
3;).  ll.ihon  nmkest  his  beauty  to  consume  /.moth 
4.!.  11.  thou  hast  given  us  /.  sheep  for  meat 
49.  12.  man  is  /.  the  beasts  that  perish,  20. 
52.  2.  thy  tongue  is  /.  a  sharp  razor  working 

8.  but  I  am  /.a  green  olive-tree  in  the  house  of  G. 
55.  6.  O  that  I  had  wings  /.  a  dove,  I  would  fly 
.58.4.  /.the  poison  of  a  serpent,  /.  the  deaf  adder 
.59.  6.  they  make  a  noise  /.  a  dog,  they  go,  14. 
64.  3.  who  whet  their  tongue  /.a  sword 

72.  6.  he  shall  come  down  /.  rain  on  the  grass 

73.  5.  nor  are  they  plagued  /.  other  men 
77.20.  thou  leddest  thy  people  /.  a  flock,  78.  52. 
78.  57.  they  dealt  unfaithfully  /.  their  fathers 
79. 3.  their  blood  have  shed  /.  wafer  round  Jcrus. 
80.  10.  the  bouehs  thereof/,  the  goodly  cedars 

82.7.  but  shall  die  /.  men,  and  fall  /.  one  of  prince* 
83.  13.  O  mv  God,  make  them  /.  a  wheel 

89. 8.  a  strong  Lord  /.  to  thee,  113.  .5.  Mic.  7. 18. 
92.  12.  the  righteous  shall  flourish  /.  the  palm- 
tree,  he  shall  grow  /.  a  cedar  in  Lebanon 

102.  4.  my  heart  is  smitten,  withered  /.  <rra38,  11 
6.  I  am  /.  a  pelican,  /.  an  owl  of  the  desert 

26.  all  of  them  shall  wax  old  /.  a  garment 
103. 13. 2.  as  a  father  pitictl  his  children,  so  Lord 


LIK 

Psal.lOiM.  who  Btretcheat  out  heavens  {.  a  curtain 
105.  41.  they  ran  in  the  dry  places  I.  a  river 
107.  27.  they  reel  and  stagger  /.  a  drunken  man 
109.  18.  I.  water,  I.  oil  let  it  come  into  his  bones 
115. 8.  Ihoy  that  make  them  are  /.  to  Iheni,  135.16. 
l;Jf>.  1.  captivity  ofZion,  we  were  I.  tliein  dream 
1-13.  7.  lest  I  be  /.  them  that  go  down  to  the  pit . 
144.  4.  man  ia  I.  to  vanity,  his  days  as  a  shadow 
147.  16.  he  giveth  snow  I.  wool,  hoar  frost  I.  ashes 

Pruv.  18. 1'J.  tlieir  contentions /.the  barsofa  castle 
20.  5.  counsel  in  the  heart  of  man  is  I.  deep  water 
23.  32.  it  biteth  /.  a  serpent,  stingeth  I.  an  adder 

25.  1<J.  in  an  unfaithful  man  is  I.  a  broken  tooth 
'is.  I.  a  city  broken  down,  and  without  walls 

26.  4.  answer  not  a  fool,  lest  thou  be  I.  to  him 
Cunt.  2.  9.  my  beloved  is  /.  a  roe  or  young  hart 

17.  turn,  my  beloved,  and  be  thou  I.  a  roe,  8.  14. 

3.  t).  who  is  this  that  cometh  I.  pillars  ofsmoke  ! 

4.  2.  thy  teeth  are  /.  a  flock  of  sheep  even  shorn 

3.  thy  lips  /.  scarlet,  temples  I.  a  pomegranate 

4.  thy  neck  is  /.  the  tower  of  David  for  armoury 

5.  thy  two  breast*  are  I.  two  young  roes,  7.  3. 
5. 1.3.  Ids  li[i8  /.  lilies  dropping  sweet  myrrh 

6.  12.  my  soul  made  me  I,  chariots  of  Ammi-nadib 

7.  1.  the  joints  of  thy  thighs  are  /.jewels 

2.  thy  navel  is  /.  a  goblet,  thy  belly  is  /.  wheat 
4.  eyes  ||  5.  head,  hair  ||  7.  stature  /.  a  palm-tree 
8.  and  the  smell  of  thy  nose  I.  apples 
Isa.l.'J.  tihould  have  been  /.  Gomorrah,  7Jom.9.29. 
18.tho'  your  sins  be  red  /.crimson,shall  be  as  wool 

10.  13.  put  down  the  inhabitants  /.  a  valiant  man 

11.  7.  and  the  lion  shall  eat  straw  /.  the  ox 

IG.  and  shall  be  a  highway,  /.  as  it  was  to  Israel 
14.  10.  they  sliall  say,  art  thou  become  I.  to  us'! 

14.  I  will  ascend,  I  will  bo  /.  the  Must  High  ! 

I'J.  Ihou  art  cast  out  /.  an  abominable  branch 
It).  11.  my  bowels  shall  sound  /.  a  harp  for  Moab 
ID.  16.  in  that  day  shall  Kgypt  be  /.  unto  women 
20.  3.  /.  as  my  servant  Isaiah  hath  walked  naked 
22. 18.  will  toss  thee  I.  a  ball  into  a  large  country 
20.  17.  I.  a  woman  with  child  that  draweth  near 

30.  33.  breath  of  the  Lord  /.  a  stream  of  brimstone 
33.9.  Sharon  is  /.a  wilderness,Bashan  and  Carmel 
38.  12.  I  have  cut  off/,  a  weaver  my  life 

14.  /.  a  crane  or  swallow  so  did  I  chatter 
42.  14.  now  will  I  cry  /.  a  travailing  woman 
46.5. to  whom  will  ye  compare  me  that  we  maybe  /. 

57.  20.  the  wicked  are  I.  the  troubled  sea 

58.  1.  spare  not,  lift  uji  thy  voice  /.  a  trumpet 
U.  be  /.  a  watered  garden,  and  /.  a  sjiring 

5y.  10.  wc  grope  for  the  wall  /.  the  blind 
11.  we  roar  all  /.  bears,  and  mourn  sore  /.  doves 
19.  when  the  enemy  shall  come  in  /.  a  tlood 

63.  2.  I.  him  that  treadeth  in  the  wine-fat 

64.  6.  our  iniquities  /.  wind  have  taken  us  away 
66.  12.  I  will  extend  pence  to  her  /.  a  river 

Jer.  4.  4.  lest  my  fury  come  forth  /.  tire,  21.  12. 

5.  19.  /.  as  ye  have  forsaken  me  and  served  gods 

10.  10.  the  jiortion  of  Jacob  is  not  /.  them 

11.  19.  I  was  /.  a  lamb  brought  to  the  slaughter 
J  7.  6.  for  he  shall  be  /.  the  heath  in  the  desert 
23.  29.  is  not  my  word  /.  tire  and  /.  a  hammer  1 
26.  6.  then  will  I  make  this  house  /.  Shiloh,  9. 

18.  saying,  Zion  shall  be  plowed  /.  a  field 
29.  82.  make  thee  /.  Zedekiah  and  /.  Ahab 
'•K.  32.  were  added  besides  to  them  many  /.  words 
38.  9.  he  is  /.  to  die  with  hunger  where  he  is 
46.20.  Egypt  is  /.  a  very  fair  huifer,  but  destruction 

48.  6.  flee,  bo  /.  the  heath  in  the  wilderness 

28.  he  /.  dove  II  49. 19.  shall  come  /.  a  iion,  50. 44. 

49.  19.  who  is  /.  me,  who  will  appoint? 
51.  19.  the  portion  of  Jacob  is  not  /.  them 

Kzek.  5.  9.  whereto  I  will  not  do  any  more  the  /. 
12. 11.  /.  as  I  have  done,  so  shall  it  be  dune  them 
18.  10.  and  doeth  the  /.  to  any  of  these  things 
25.  8.  the  house  of  Judah  is  /.  to  all  the  heathen 

31.  2.  whom  art  thou  /.  in  thy  greatness,  18. 
8.  not  any  tree  was  /.  to  him  in  his  beauty 

45.  25.  in  the  seventh  month  shall  he  do  the  /. 

nan.  3.2.5.  the  form  of  the  fourth  is  /.  the  Son  of  G. 
5.21.  his  heart  was  made  /.  the  beasts,  /.  oxen 
7.  13.  one  /.  the  Son  of  man  came  with  clouds 

Ifo».  4.  9.  and  there  shall  be  /.  peojile  /.  priest 

5.  10.  the  princes  I.  them  that  remove  the  bound 
6. 7.  but  they  I.  men  have  transgressed  the  coven. 
14.  8.  I  am  /.  a  green  fir-tree,  from  me  is  fruit 

Joel2.i.  there  hath  not  been  over  the  /.  nor  shall  be 
Amos  5.  0.  lest  ho  break  out  /.  fire  in  Jowiph 

6.  5.  and  invent  instrnmcnta  of  music  /.  David 
Zech.  1.  6.  /.  as  the  Lord  of  hosta  thought  to  do 

12.  6   make  tlu^  governors  of  Judah  I.  a  hearth 
.1l'at.3.l6.  the  Spirit  descending  /.  a  dove,  and  light- 
ing on  him,  Mark  1.  iO.  J.ukv  3.22.  Jokn  1.32. 

6.  8.  be  not  yo  therefore  /.  unto  ihem 
S*.!.  was  not  arrayed  /«une  of  ihrsi:,  AwAc  12.  27. 
11.16. /.children  sitting  in  the  market,  /,«/;«  7. 32. 

12.  13.  it  was  restored  whole  /.  as  tlie  other 

13.  31.  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  /.  to  a  grain  of 

mustard  seed,  Mark  4.  31.  /.iikr  13.  19 

3).  kingdom  of  heaven  la  /.  leavun,  /.aUi*  IX  21. 

344 


LIK 

Mat.  13. 44.  is  /.  to  a  treasure  ||  45.  i»  /.  a  merchant 
47.  is  /.  to  a  net  ||  52.  is  /.  a  householder,  20. 1. 

22. 2.  tlie  kingdom  of  heaven  is  /.  to  a  certain  kin 
39.  and  the  second  is  /.  to  it,  Mark  12.  31. 

23.  27.  for  ye  are  /.  to  whited  sepulchres 

28.3.  his  countenance  was  /.lightning  and  raiment 
Luke  C.  47.  I  will  shew  you  to  xvhora  he  is  /. 

7.  31.  and  to  what  are  they  /.  ||  32.  are  /.  children 
13. 18.  ho  said,  to  what  is  the  kingdom  of  God  /.  / 

John  7.  46.  answered,  never  man  spake  /.  this  man 

8.  55.  I  shall  be  a  liar  /.  unto  you,  but  I  know 

9.  9.  some,  this  is  he,  others  said,  he  is  /.  him 
Jicts  8.  32.  /.  a  lamb  dumb  before  his  shearer 

11.  17.  forasmuch  as  God  gave  them  the  /.  gift 
14.  15.  we  also  are  men  of/,  passions  with  you 

17.  29.  not  to  think  the  Godhead  is  /.  gold  or  sUver 

19.  25.  with  the  workmen  of/,  occupation 
Hum.  1.  23.  an  image  made  /.  to  corruptible  man 

6.  4.  /.  as  Christ  was  raised  up  from  the  dead 
P/iil.  3.  21.  fashioned  /.  unto  his  glorious  body 

1 7'Aes.<.2.14.  sutlered  /.  things  of  your  countrymen 
t/cb.  2.17.  it  behoved  him  to  be  made  /.his  brethren 

4.  15.  was  in  all  points  tempted  /.  as  we  are 

7.  3.  but  made  /.  to  the  Son  of  God,  abides  a  priest 
Jam.  1.  6.  that  wavercth  is  /.  a  wave  of  the  sea 

23.  ho  is  /.  a  man  beholding  his  natural  face 

5.  17.  Klias  was  a  man  subject  to  /.  passions 

1  Pet.  3. 21.  /.  figure  whereunto  baptism  save  us 

2  Pet.  1. 1.  have  obtained  /.  precious  faith  with  us 
1  John  3.  2.  he  shall  appear,  we  shall  be  /.  him 
Rev.  1.  13.  one  /.  the  »on  of  man,  clothed,  14.  14. 

13.  4.  worshi|)[ied,  saying,  who  is  /.  to  the  beast 
11.  he  had  two  horns  /.  a  lamb,  and  tie  spake  as 

16.  13.  1  saw  tliree  unclean  spirits  /.  frogs  come 

18.  18.  saying,  what  city  is  /.  to  this  great  city? 

LIRE  manner. 
Kxod.  7. 11.  did  in  /.  man.  with  their  enchantments 
23. 11.  in  /.  man.  thou  shalt  deal  with  thy  vineyd. 
L/eKt.  22.  3.  in  /.  niu7i/i(7  shalt  thou  do  with  his  ass 
Judg.l\.\l.  in  /.jnanner  they  sent  to  king  of  Moab 
1  .Sa/n. 19.24.  he  prophesied  before  Samuel  in  l.ma. 
J^'ek.  ().  5.  Sanballat  sent  in  /.  manner  the  fifth  time 
/id.  51.6.  that  dwell  there  shall  die  in  /.  manner 
Mark  13.  29.  ye  in  /.  man.  when  ye  see  tluse  things 
J.uke^.  23.  in  /.  vian.  did  their  fathers  to  prophets 

20.  31.  third  took  her,  in  /.  man.  the  seventh  also 
jicls  1.11.  shall  so  come  in  /.  man.  as  ye  have  seen 
I  I'im.  2. 9.  in  /.  m.  that  women  adorn  themselves 
Judcl.m  /.manncrgiviiig  thenisulves  to  fornication 

LIKE-MINDED, 
i/om. 15. .5.  the  God  of  jiatienco  grant  you  to  \iel.m. 
I'hil.  2. 2.  that  ye  be  /.  vi.  \\  20. 1  have  no  man  /.  m. 

J^vtie  LIKE. 

Exod.  8.10.  there  is  none  I.  the  Lord  our  God,9.14. 

Deut.  33. 26.  2  Sam.  7.  22.  I  Chron.  17. 20. 

9.  34.  none  I.  the  hail  ||  11.6.  none  I.  cry  of  Egypt 

1  Sam.  10.  24.  none  /.  Saul  among  all  the  people 

21.  9.  David  said,  tiiore  is  none  /.  that,  give  it  me 

1  A'iii^s  3.12.  there  was  n.  /.  Sol.||  21.25.  n.  /.  Ahab 

2  Kings  18.5.  so  that  after  there  was  n.l.  Hezekiah 
.lob  1.  8.  that  there  is  none  I.  him  in  the  eartii,  2.  3. 
I'sal.  M6.t<.  among  the  gods  n.  I.  to  thee,  ./(.r.lU.6,7. 
Isa.  46.  9.  for  I  am  God,  and  there  is  none  I.  me 
Jer.  30. 7.  alas,  that  day  is  great,  so  that  none  I.  it 
Dan.  1.  19.  among  all  was  found  nons  I.  Daniel 

Such  LIKE. 
Kick.  18.  14.  considercth,  and  doclh  not  such  I. 
Mark  7.  8.  many  other  such  I.  things  ye  do,  13. 
Gal.  5.  21.  cnvyings,  drunkenness,  and  such  I. 

LIKE. 
Deut.  25.  7.  if  the  man  /.  not  to  take  her,  8. 
Rom.  1.  28.  even  as  they  did  not  /.  to  retain  God 

LIKED. 
1  Chron.  28.4.  among  the  sonsof  ray  father  he/,  me 

LIKEN. 
ha.  40.  la.  to  whom  then  will  ye  /.  God  7  25.  |  46.5, 
l.am.  2.  13.  what  thing  shall  I  /.  to  thee  ? 
Mat.  7.  24.  and  doeih  them,  I  will  /.  him  to  n  man 
II.  16.  whereto  /.  this  generation,  Jyukc  7.  31. 
Mark  4.30.  whereunto  /.  the  kingdom,  I^ukc  13.20. 

LIKEiNED. 
Psal.  89.  6.  who  among  the  sons  can  be  /.  to  Lord  ? 
.Tcr.  6.2.  I  have  /.  ihu  daughter  of  Ziuii  to  a  comely 
Mat.  7.  26.  shall  hi:  /.  to  a  fooli^ll  man  who  built 
13.  24.  kingdom  ofheaven  is  /.  18.  23.  I  25.  1. 
LIKENESS 
Signifies,    [1]   The  external  visible  form  or  re 
presentation  of  a  thing,  Ezuk.  1.  !i.     [9]  y/« 
image  representing  a  person  or  thing,  Deut. 
4.   12,  15.   Isa.  40.  18.     [3]  Ji  true  and  real 
resemblance  bcticcen  one  person  and  anot/ur, 
Gen.  5.  .3. 
Clen.  1.  26.  let  us  make  man  ofler  our  /.  5.  1. 
5.  3.  Adam  begat  a  son  in  his  own  /. 
Kxod.  20.  4.  shalt  not  make  the  /.  of  any  thing 
Deut.  4. 16.  lest  you  make  a  graven  imnge  the  /.  of 
male  or  female,  17,  18,  2;t,  25.  |  5.  8, 
Psal.  17.  t  12.  /.  of  him  is  a.H  a  lion  that  desireth 

17.  1,5. 1  shall  be  satisfied,  when  awake  with  Ihy/. 
Ua.  13.  t  4.  /.  of  groat  people  gathered  together 


LIM 

ha.  40.  18.  or  what  /.  will  ye  compare  to  hmi  1 
Kzek.  1.  5.  came  the  /.  of  four  living  creaturee 
10.  as  for  the  /.  of  their  faces,  lU.  22. 
13.  /.  of  lamps  ||  16.  they  fuur  had  one  /.  10.  10 
22.  the  /.  of  the  firmament  was  as  crystal 
26.  /.  of  a  throne,  10.  1.  |  8.  2.  lo,  as  /.  as  of  fire 
28.  this  was  the  /.  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord 
10.  21.  and  the  /.  of  the  hands  of  a  man 

19.  t  10.  thy  mother  is  like  a  vine  in  thy  /. 
Jicts  14. 11.  gods  are  come  down  in  the  /  of  men 
Rom.  6.5.  if  we  have  been  planted  in  the  /.  of  his 

death, we  shall  be  also  in  tlie  /.of  his  resurrection 
8.  3.  God  sending  his  Son  in  the  /.  of  sinful  Uesh 
Phil.  2.  7.  and  was  made  in  the  /.  of  men 

LIKETH. 
Deut.  23.  16.  lie  shall  dwell  where  it  /.  him  best 
Esth.  8.  8.  write  ye  also  for  the  Jews  as  it  /.  you 
jimos  4.  5.  for  this  /.  you,  O  children  of  larael 

LIKING. 
Job  39. 4.  their  young  ones  are  in  good  /.  grow  up 

LIKING. 
Dan.  1.  10.  why  should  he  see  vour  faces  worse  /. 

LIKEWISE'. 
F.xod.  22.  30.  /.  shalt  thou  do  with  thine  oxen 
J^eut.  12.  30.  serve  their  gods,  even  so  will  1  do  / 
15.  17.  to  thy  maid-servant  thou  shalt  do  /. 
22.  3.  to  thy  brother's  lost  goods  shalt  thou  do  /. 
Judg.l.  17.  he  said  to  them,  look  on  nie,  and  do  /. 

1  iam. 19.21. sent  mcssengeis,and  they  jirophesied  /. 
31.  5.  fell  /.  on  his  sword,  and  died  with  him 

2  Sam.  17.  5.  and  let  us  hear  /.  what  he  saith 
1  Kings  11.8.  and  /.  did  he  fur  all  his  strange  wives 
1  Chron.  19. 15.  /.  fled  before  Abishai  his  brother 

23.30.  to  praise  every  inorniiig  and  /.  at  even 
jWA.  5.  10.  I  /.  might  exact  of  i  hem  money 
Esth.  4.  16.  I  also  and  my  maidens  will  fast  /. 
Psal.  49.  10.  /.  the  fool  and  brutish  person  perisli 

52.  5.  God  shall  /.  destroy  thee  for  ever 
Eccl.  7.22.  knows  thou  thyself/,  hast  cursed  others 
JVuA.  1. 12.  though  they  be  quiet  and  /.  many,  yet 
Mat.  17. 12.  /.  shall  also  Soti  of  man  sufier  of  them 

18.  35.  30  /.  shall  my  heavenly  Father  do  to  you 

20.  5.  he  went  about  the  si.xtli  hour,  and  did  /. 
10.  they  /.  received  every  man  a  penny 

21.  30.  he  caine  to  the  second  and  said  /. 
36.  other  servants,  and  they  did  unto  then*  /. 

22.  26.  /.  the  second  and  third  died,  Mark  12.21 

24.  33.  so  /.  when  yo  see  these  things,  l.uke  21.  3L 

25.  17.  /.  he  that  had  received  two  talents 

26.  35.  /.  also  said  all  his  discijdcs,  Mark  14.31. 

27.  41.  /.  the  chief  jiriests  jnocked,  Mark  15.  31. 
Luke  2.  38.  and  she  gave  thanks  /.  to  the  Lord 

3.  11.  let  him  do  /.  ||  6.  31.  do  ye  also  to  llieiii  /. 
10.  37.  go  and  do  /.  ||  13.  3.  ye  shall  /.  perl^h,  5.  _ 

14.  33.  /.  who  forsnketh  not  nil  that  he  haih 

15.  7.  /.  joy  shall  be  in  heaven  over  one,  10. 

16.  25.  /.  Lazarus  received  evil  things,  but  now 

17.  10.  so  /.  when  ye  shall  have  done  all  thiiiga 
22.  20.  /.  also  the  cup  after  supper,  saying 

./oAn5.19.whathc  doeth,these  also  doeth  the  Son  / 
Jicts  3.  24.  prophets  have  /.  foretold  of  these  daj-» 
Pom.  ].  27.  /.  the  men  leaving  the  natural  i;se 

6.  11.  /.  reckon  yourselves  to  be  dead  to  sin 
8.  26.  /.  the  Spirit  helpeth  our  infirmities 

1  Cor.  7.  3.  and  /.  also  the  wife  to  the  husband 
Oal.  2.  13.  other  Jews  dissembled  /.  wiili  him 
1  Tim.  5.25.  /.  the  good  w  orks  of  .some  are  manifest 
7V/.  2.  6.  young  men  /.  cvluirt  lu  be  fobci-niinded 
Heb.  2.  14.  he  also  himself/,  look  part  ol' the  same 
1  Pel.  4.  1.  arm  yuur.si  Ivi  s  /.  with  the  same  mind 
•Judc  8.  /.  these  filthy  dreamers  defile  the  flesh 
Hen.  8.  12.  llie  day  shcnf  not,  and  the  night  /. 

LIKE  in:sr. 
Mat.  21. 24. 1  in  /.  wise  will  tell  by  what  authority 

LILY 
Signifies,  The  beautiful,  fragrant,  and  mrdt- 
cinnl  flower  so  called,  Blat.  fi.  28.  To  «  hich 
are  compared,  [1]  Christ,  who  is  refreshing 
and  beautiful  lu  true  belirvfrs,  Cant.  2. 1.  [9] 
His  church  uvd  pntp'e,  Cant.  2.  2,  16. 
Cnnt.  2  1.  I  am  the  ro.se  uf  ?li;iron,  and  /,of  vnllifis 

2.  as  tlic  /.  among  ihoins,  so  is  my  lovo  omong 
IJos.  14.  .5.  Israel  sliall  grow  as  the  /.  and  cast  forth 

LILIES. 
1  Kings  7. 26.  wrought  with  flowers  of/.  2  CAr.4.,'i 
Cant.  2.  16.  my  beloved  foedeth  among  the  /.  6.  3. 

4.  a.  like  two  young  roes  which  feed  among  the  /. 
.5.  13.  his  lips  like  /.  dropping  sweet  myrrh 

7.  2.  Ihy  belly  is  like  wheat  set  about  with  /. 
Mat.f).^.  consid.  the  /.how  they  grow,  /.uhe  12.27. 

LILY  trork. 

1  Kings  7.19.  the  chapiters  were  of /.to. in  the  porch 

22.  and  on  the  top  of  tlio  pillars  wan  /.  work 

LIME. 

Asa.  33.  12.  the  people  shall  he  as  the  burnings  of  t 

Jlmos  2. 1.  ho  burned  hones  of  king  of  E<lom  lo  I 

LIMIT. 
Fzek  43.  12.  the  I.  Iherenf  shall  be  most  holy 

LIMITED. 
Psal.  78.  41.  they  I.  the  Holy  One  of  Israel 


LIO 

LTMITETH. 

ffeb  4.  7.  again,  he  /.  u  curtaiji  day,  Baying,  to-day 
LINE 

Signifies,  [1]  >4  cord  or  instrument  to  measure  any 
ihhi/r  by,  1  Kings  7.  IJ,  'Jii.  ['.']  JHreclivu 
or  instruction  gicen  us  by  any  thinif,  I'salm 
19.  4.     [H]  Ji  portion  measured  by  tine,  I'salni 

16.  6.  [4J  7'Ae  doctrine  of  the.  word  hriejiy 
end  plainly  delivered,  Isaiah  28.  10,  13.  ^5] 
Judgment  and  destruction  laid  along  upon 
some  place  or  person  as  it  were  by  line,  2 
Kings  -21.  13.  [til  Ji  building  or  edijice  made 
by  line,  Zech.  1.  16. 

Jos/i.a.  18.  bind  this  i.  of  scarlet  thread  in  window 

21.  she  bound  the  scarlet  I.  in  tlie  window 
■S  Sam.  8. 2.  he  measured  Moab  with  a  I.  with  one  I. 

1  Kings!.  15.  and  a  Z.ot'twelve  cubits  did  compass 
23.  a  I.  of  thirty  cubits  did  compass,  2  C  Ac.  4.  2. 

2/fi7(;!'s21.13.strelch  over  Jerusalem  I.  of  Samaria 
yo/i38.5.  or  who  hath  stretched  the  ^  on  the  earth  ! 
Psal.  19.  4.  their  I.  is  gone  through  all  the  earth 

78.  55.  he  divided  them  an  inheritance  by  i. 
Jsa.  18.  t  2.  a  nation  of  ^  /.  and  treading  under  foot 

S8.  10.  for  I.  must  be  upon  I.  I.  upon  I.  13. 

17.  judgment  also  will  1  lay   to  the  I.  and 

righteousness 
34.  11.  shall  stretch  out  on  it  the  I.  of  confusion 

17.  his  hand  hath  divided  it  to  them  by  I. 
44.  13.  he  marketh  it  out  with  a  I.  he  litleth  it 
Jcr.  31.  30.  the  measuring  I.  shall  yet  go  forth 
J^am.  2.  8.  the  Lord  hath  suelched  out  a  I. 
Eiek.  40.3.  a  man  that  had  thei.of  rta.\in  his  hand 
47.  3.  the  man  that  had  the  I.  went  eastward 
JImos  7. 17.  thy  land  shall  be  divided  by  I.  and  die 
Zech.  1.  16.  a  I.  shall  be  stretched  on  Jerusalem 
2.  1.  u  man  with  a  measuring  I.  in  his  hand 
S  Cor.  10.  16.  not  to  boast  in  another  man's  I. 

LINEAGE. 
I.uke  2.  4.  because  he  was  of  the  I.  of  David 
LINES. 

2  Sam.  8. 2.  with  two  I.  measured,  he  put  to  death 
Psal.  16.  6.  the  I.  are  fallen  in  pleasant  places 

LINGERED. 

fytn.  19. 16.  while  Lot  /.  the  men  laid  hold  on  hand 

43.  10.  except  we  had  I.  surely  we  had  returned 

LINGERETH. 

2  Pet.  2.  3.  whose  judgment  of  a  long  time  I.  not 

LINEN. 
F.xnd.  28.  42.  thou  sbalt  miike  them  J.  breeches 
Ccv.fi.  10.  put  on  I.  garment  and  I.  breeches,  16.4. 
13.  47.  whether  woollen  or  I.  garment,  48,52,  511. 
16.  2.3.  Aaron  shall  put  off  the  I.  g;iniienl3 
32.  I.  clothes  and  I.  garments.  Kirk.  44.  17,  18. 
1  Sam.  2.  18.  Samuel  ministered  with  a  I.  ephod 
22.  18.  slew  85  persons  that  did  wear  a  I.  e|ihod 
S  Sam.  6.  14.  David  was  girded  with  a  I.  ephod 
I  Kings  10.  28.  Solomon  had  I.  yarn  brought,  the 
merchants  received  ihe  I.  yarn,  2  Chron.^.  16. 
Jer.  13.  1.  get  thee  a  I.  girdle,  put  it  on  thy  loins 
Mat.  27.  .59.  wrajiped  it  in  a  /.  cloth,  .fo/in  19.40. 
Mark  14.  51.  a  I.  cioth  cast  about  his  naked  body 

.52.  and  he  left  the  I.  cloih  and  lied  naked 
/.uke  24. 12.  Peter  beheld  the  I.  clothes,  Jokn  20. 6. 
John  20.  5.  John  saw  the  I.  clothes,  yet  went  not  in 

LINEN. 

/y<!tj.  19.  19.  nor  shall  a  garment  mingled  of/,  and 

woollen  come  upon  tliee,  J)eul.22. 11. 

1  Chron.  1.5.27.  David  had  on  him  an  ephod  ufl. 

Mark  15.  46.  wrapped  him  in  the  I.  Luke  23.  53. 

i?£tf.I5.6.seven  angels  clothed  in  pure  and  white  I. 

See  Fine. 

LINTEL. 

Ernd.  12.  22.  and  strike  the  I.  and  two  side-posts 

23.  when  he  seeth  blood  on  the  I.  he  will  p^iss 
.  A'lT?"'.?  6. 31.  the  /.  and  side-posts  were  a  fifili  part 
.dmos  9.  1.  smite  the  I.  that  the  posts  may  shake 

LINTELS. 
Zep/l.  2. 14.  bittern  shall  lodge  in  the  upper  I.  of  it 

LION 
r«  tahen,  properly,  for  the  most  courageous  and 
generous  of  all  mild  beasts,  an  emblem  of 
strength  and  valour.  Job  38.  39.     Prov.  23.  1. 
To  which  are  compared,  [1]  Christ  .Jrsus,  the 
greet,  miffhlTl,  and  invincible  lion  of  the  tribe 
of  .Tudnh,  irho  conquers  and  leads  captive  his 
own,  and  his  people's  enemies,  Rev.  5.  5.     [2] 
The  tribe  of  .Judah  and  its  kings,  VjJio  were 
valiant,  courageous,  and  terrible  to  their  ene- 
mies, and  ma'le  a  prnj  of  them.  Gen.  49.  9. 
[3]   The  devil,  who  like  a  fierce  and  hungry 
lion,  seeks  all  opportunities  and  advantages 
to  (msnare  and  destroy  mankind,  1  Pot.  5.  8. 
[4]  Tijravts  and  r.ioUnt  oppressors,  2  Tim.  4. 
17.     [51    Fnemirs   and   evils   of   every   hind, 
Psal.  91.  13      [6]   Some  pretended  difUxulties 
and  hindcranccs  to  dioerl  one  from  his  duly, 
Prov.  22.  13. 
Oni.  49.  9.  Judah  couched  ad  a  I.  who  shall  ronse 
J^um.  24.  9.  Israel  lay  down  as  a  J.  as  a  great  I. 
Deut.  33.  20.  Gad  dw'ellnih  as  a  I  and  tearcth 
343 


LIO 

Judg.  14. 8.  he  turned  to  see  the  carcase  of  Z.  therr 
was  aswarm  of  bees  and  honey  in  carcase  of/ 
18.  the  men  said,  what  is  stronger  than  &  1.7 

1  Sam.  17.  34.  there  came  a  I.  and  took  a  lamb 

1  .Sam.  17.  10.  whose  heart  is  as  the  heart  of  a  I. 
23.20.  slew  B.I.  in  the  niidstof  (ijjit,  1  Chr.  11.22. 

IKivgs  13.  24.  when  gone,  a  I.  met  him  by  the  way 
and  slew  him,  the  I.  also  stood  by  the  carcase 

25.  men  saw  the  I.  standing  by  the  carcase,  28. 

26.  the  Lord  hath  delivered  him  to  the  I. 

20.  36.  as  soon  as  thou  art  departed  from  me,  a  I. 

shall  slay  thee;  a  I.  found  him  and  slew  him 

Job  4. 10.  the  roaring  of  the  I.  voice  of  the  fierce  i. 

10.  16.  thou  huntest  me  as  a  fierce  I. 

28.  8.  nor  the  fierce  I.  passed  by  it 

38.  39.  wilt  thou  hunt  the  prey  for  the  I.  ? 
Psal.  7.  2.  lest  he  tear  my  soul  like  a  /.  rending 

10.  9.  he  lieih  in  wait  secretly  as  a  I. 

17.  12.  like  a  /.  that  is  greedy  of  his  prey 
22.  13.  they  gaped  on  me  as  a  roaring  I. 
91. 13.  thou  slialt  tread  on  the  I.  and  adder 
frou.l9.12.tlie  king's  wrath  is  as  the  roaringof  a  J. 

20.  2.  the  fear  of  a  king  is  as  ihe  roaring  of  a  /. 
22.  13.  the  slothful  saith,  there  is  a  I.  in  the  way 
26.  13.  there  is  a  I.  in  the  way,  a  /.  in  the  street 
28.  1.  but  the  righteous  are  bold  as  a  I. 

.'iO.  30.  a  I.  which  is  strongest  among  beasts 
Keel.  9.  4.  a  living  dog  is  better  than  a  dead  I. 
Isa.  5.  29.  their  roaring  shall  be  like  a  I.  shall  roar 

11.  7.  the  /.  shall  eat  straw  like  the  ox,  65.  25. 

21.  8.  he  cried,  a  I.  my  lord,  1  stand  on  watch 
29. fl.  woe  to  the  /.of God,  city  where  Dav.  dwelt 
35.  9.  no  I.  shall  be  there,  nor  ravenous  beast 
38.  13.  as  a  I.  so  will  he  break  all  my  bones 

Jer.  2.  30.  hath  devoured  your  prophets  like  a  I. 

4.  7.  the  I.  is  come  up  from  his  thicket 

5.  6.  a  I.  out  of  the  furest  shall  slay  them 

12.  8.  my  heritage  is  to  me  as  a  I.  in  the  forest 
25.  38.  lie  hath  forsaken  his  covert  as  the  Z. 
49. 19.  behold,  he  shall  come  up  like  a  I.  50.  44- 

J^am.  .3.  10.  he  was  to  me  as  a  I.  in  .secret  place-. 
Eick.  1.  10.  and  the  face  of  a  I.  on  the  right  side 
10.  14.  and  the  third  was  the  face  of  a  I. 

22.  25.  a  conspiracy  of  prophets  like  a  roaring  I. 
Dan.  7.  4.  the  first  was  like  a  I.  and  had  wings 
Hos.  5.  14.  for  I  will  he  to  Ephraim  as  a  I. 

11. 10.  be  shall  roar  like  a  I.  when  be  shall  roar 
13.7.1  will  be  to  them  as  I.  \\  8. 1  will  devour  as  a  I. 
.Joel  1.  6.  teeth  of  a  I.  cheek-teeth  of  a  great  I. 
Amos  3.  4.  will  a  I.  roar  when  he  hath  no  prey  1 
8.  the  I.  hath  roared,  who  will  not  fear  ? 
12.  as  shepherd  taketh  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  I. 
Mic.  5.  8.  the  remnant  of  Jacob  sliall  be  as  a  I. 
JV«A.2.12.Z.did  tear  in  pieces  enough  for  his  whelps 

2  Tim. A.  17. 1  was  delivered  out  of  mouth  of  the  I. 

1  Pet.  5.  8.  the  devil  as  a  roaring  I.  wulketli  about 
Rev.  4.  7.  and  the  first  beast  was  like  a  I. 

5.  5.  the  I.  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  hath  prevailed 
10.3.  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  as  when  a  I.  roareth 

13.  2.  and  his  mouth  ns  the  mouth  of  a  I. 

See  Be.\R. 

LION-LIKE. 

2Sam.23.20.s!ewtwoZ.-Z.menofi\Ioab,lC;ir.lI.22. 

Old  LION. 
Oen.  49.  9.  as  an  old  I.  who  shall  rouse  him  up  1 
Job  4.  11.  the  old  I.  perishelh  for  lack  of  prey 
/s«.  30.  fi.  from  whence  come  the  young  and  old  1.7 
J^Tah.  2.  11.  where  the  lion,  even  the  old  I.  walked 

Young  LION. 
JVum.  23.  24.  and  shall  lift  up  himself  as  a  young  I. 
Judg.  14.  5.  behold,  a  young  I.  roircd  against  him 
Psal.  17. 12.  as  it  were  a  young  I.  lurking  in  secret 
91. 13.  the  youns'  l-  shalt  thoii  trample  under  feet 
Isa.  11.  6.  the  calf  and  young  l.\\ei\ovin  together 

31.  4.  like  tlie  young  I.  roaring  on  his  prey 
Kzek.Vi.X  it  became  a  y.  I.  and  learned  to  catch,  6. 

S.then  she  look  another,and  made  him  a  youngl. 

32.  2.  thou  art  like  a  young  I.  of  the  nations 
41. 19.face  of  a  7/OK710-/.  was  towards  the  palm  tree 

/fos.  5. 14. 1  will  be  a's  ay.  Z.  to  the  house  of  Judah 
Amos  3.4.will  a  young  l.cry  out  of  his  den, if  taken? 
Mic.  5. 8.  as  a  young  I.  among  the  flocks  of  sheep 

LIONESS. 
Ezek.  19.  2.  and  sav.  what  is  thy  mother  1  n  I. 

LIONESSES. 

jVah.  2.  12.  the  lion  stranslf  d  for  his  I.  and  filled 

LIONS. 

2  Sam.  1.  23.  Saul  and  Jonathan  stronger  than  I. 

1  A7j)^s7.  29.  on  the  borders  were  I.  beneath  the  I. 
36.  he  graved  cberubims,  /.  and  palm-trees 

10.  19.  two  I.  stood  beside  the  stays,  2  Chr.  9. 18. 
20. twelve  I.  stood  on  the  one  side,  2  Chron.  9.19. 

2  Kings  17.  25.  the  Lord  sent  I.  among  them 
26.  Therefore  he  hath  sent  I.  among  lliem 

1  Chron.  12.  8.  whose  faces  were  like  fares  of  i. 
Psal.  22.  21.  Siive  me  from  the  I.  mouth  for  thou 

35.  17.  Lord,  rescue  rav  darling  from  the  I. 

.57.  4.  mv  soul  is  among  1. 1  lie  even  among  them 
Ca7i«.4.8.1ook  from  top  of  Amana,  from  the  I.  dens 
fsa.  15.  9.  I.  on  him  that  escapeth  of  M«ib 
2Z 


LIP 

.Ter.  50.  17.  the  I.  have  driven  Israel  away 
51.  3d.  they  shall  roar  together  like  I. 
Kzek.  19.  2.  a  lioness,  she  lay  down  among  L 

6.  lie  went  up  and  down  among  the  /. 
iJan.  6.  24.  and  the  I.  had  the  mastery  of  theai 

27.W  ho  delivered  Daniel  from  the  power  oWbat. 
J\ah.  2.  11.  where  is  the  dwelling  of  the  I.  ? 
Zcpk.  3.  3.  her  princes  within  are  roaring  I. 
JJcb.  11. 33.  through  faith  stopped  the  mouths  oft. 
Hev.  9.  8.  their  teeth  were  as  the  teeth  of  Z. 
17. the  headsof  the  horses  were  as  the  heads  of  i. 
See  Den. 
LION'S  whelp,  whelps. 
Gen.  49. 9.  Judah  is  I.  whelp,  from  the  prey,  my  son 
Deut.  33.22.  Dan  is  a  /.  whelp,  he  shall  leap  from 
Job  4. 11.  the  stout  I.  whelps  are  scattered  abroad 

2.!).  8.  the  I.  whelps  have  not  trodden  it,  nor  fierce 
,/tr.  51.  38.  Bliall  roar,  they  shall  yell  as  I.  whelps 

Young  LIONS. 
Job  4.  10.  the  teeth  ol  the  young  I.  are  broken 

3^.39.  wilt  thou  fill  the  appetite  of  the  young  L? 
Psal.3i.lt).  the  young  I.  do  lack  and  sufler  hunger 

58.  6.  break  out  the  great  teeth  of  the  young  I. 

104.  21.  the  young  I.  roar  after  their  prey 
Isa.  5.  29.  they  shall  roar  like  young  Z.and  lay  hoM 
.ler.  2. 15.  the  young  I.  roared  upon  him  and  yelled 
Ezek.  19.  2.  she  nourished  her  whidps  among  y.  I. 

38.  13.  with  all  the  young  I.  shall  say  to  thoo 
J^ah.  2. 11.  where  is  the  feeding-place  of  the  y.  I.? 

13.  and  the  sword  shall  devour  thy  young  I. 
ZccA.  11.3.  there  is  a  voice  of  the  roaring  oi young  I. 

LIP 

Signifies,  [1]  The  upper  and  nether  part  of  the 
mouth.  Lev.  13.  45.  [2]  Words,  or  impatient 
and  unbecoming  expressions,  Job  2.  10.  [3] 
Language  or  speech,  Gen.  11.  f  L  [4]  7'A» 
mouth,  together  with  an  ability  and  liberty  tn 
speak  to  God's  honour,  and  sing  to  his  pratss. 
Psal.  51.  15.  [5]  The  tongue,  Prov.  10.  19 
Isa.  23.  11.  [0]  Outward  devotion,  and  pro 
fcssion  of  religion,  Isa.  29. 13. 

6(7!.  11.  fl-  the  whole  earth  was  of  one  I. 

Lev.  13.  45.  he  shall  put  a  covering  on  his  I. 

Judg.  7.  t  22.  host  fied  to  the  I.  of  Abel-meholali 

1  Kings  9.126.  in  Ezion-geher  on  Z.  of  the  Red-sea 

2  Kings  2.  f  13.  Elitha  stood  by  the  I.  of  Jordan 
PsaZ.22.7.  they  shoot  out  the  I.  tiicy  shako  the  head 
Prov.  12.  19.  the  I.  of  truth  shall  be  established 
Ezek.  36.  1 3.  made  to  come  on  the  I.  of  the  tougu« 
Mic.  3. 1 7.  they  shall  cover  the  upper  /. 

LIPS. 
Frod.  C.  12.  who  am  of  uncircumcised  I.  SO. 
jVk7h.  30.  6.  or  uttered  ought  out  of  her  I.  8,  12. 

1  Sam.  1. 13.  spake  in  her  heart,  only  her  I.  mov(«l 

2  Kings  18.t  20.they  are  but  words  oil.  Isa.  36.t  3. 
Psal.  12.  2.  w  ith  flattering  I.  do  they  speak 

3.  the  Lord  shall  cut  off  all  flattering  I. 

4.  our  /.  are  our  own,  who  is  lord  over  US'? 
17.  1.  my  prayer  that  goeih  not  out  of  feigned  f. 
31.]8.k  t  the  lying  Z.be  put  to  silence,  w  hich  speak 
59.7.  behold,  swords  are  in  their  /.  who  doth  hear? 

12.  for  the  words  of  their  I.  let  them  be  taken 
63.  5.  my  mouth  shall  praise  thee  with  Joyful  /. 
120.  2.  deliver  my  soul,  O  Lord,  from  lying  /. 
140.  3.  adders'  poison  is  under  their  I. 

9.  let  the  niLi^chief  of  their  own  I.  cover  them 
Pri'V.  4.  24.  and  perverse  I.  put  far  from  thee 
5. 3.  I.  of  a  strange  woman  drop  as  a  honey-comb 

7.  21.  with  flattering  of  her  I.  she  forced  him 
10.  13.  in  the  I.  of  him  that  hath  understanding 

l.S.  he  that  hideth  haired  with  lying  /.  is  a  fool 
21.  the  I.  of  the  righteous  feed  many,  but  fools 
32.  Ihe  I.  of  righteous  know  what  is  acceptable 
12.  22.  lying  I.  are  an  abomination  to  the  Lord 

14.  3.  hut  the  /.  of  the  wise  shall  preserve  them 
7.  when  percei  vest  not  in  him  the  Z.  ofknowledga 
23.  the  talk  of  the  I.  tendeth  only  to  penury 

15.  7.  the  I.  of  the  wise  disperse  knowledge 
10.  10.  a  divine  sentence  is  in  the  I.  of  the  king 

13.  righteous  /.  are  the  delight  of  kings 
21.  the  Bwecinpss  of  the  I.  increaseth  learning 

17.  4.  a  wickrd  doer  givetli  heed  to  ftlse  I. 
7.  much  less  do  lying  I.  become  a  prince 

18.  6.  a  fool's  I.  enter  into  contentran 
20.  15.  the  I.  of  knowledge  are  a  precious  jewel 
24.2.  and  their  /.  talk  of  mischief 
26.  23.  burning  I.  are  like  a  potsherd  covered 

Feci.  10.  12.  Ihe  I.  of  a  fool  will  swallow  himself 

Cant.  7.  9.  causing  the  I.  of  those  asleep  to  spcalc 

/5a.6.5.woe  is  me,I  am  und/ine,a  man  of  unclean  I 

I  dwell  in  the  midst  of  a  people  of  unclean  I. 

28.  11.  for  with  stammering  I.  will  he  speak 

29.  13.  this  people  with  their/,  do  honour  me 
57.  19.  1  create  the  fruit  of  the  7.  peace  to  him 
59.  3.  your  /.  have  spoken  lies,  your  toiiHue 

Lam.  3.  62.  the  /.  of  those  that  rose  against  mo 
Ezek.  24.  22.  ye  shall  not  cover  your  /.  nor  eat 
36.  3.  ye  are  taken  up  in  the  /.  of  talkers 
Hos.  14.  9.  so  will  we  render  the  calves  of  our  /. 
Mic.  3. 7.  ihoy  shall  cov  .r  their  I.  no  an.swer  of  God 


LIT 

Mai.  2.  7.  the  prioat'e  /.  sljould  keep  knowledgs 
Mat.  15.  8.  Iioiiourelli  me  with  their  /.  Mark  7.  6. 
Hoin.  3.  13.  the  j)oi«on  of  a«|)»  is  uiultr  tlieir  I. 
1  Cor.  14.  'il.  witli  other  /.  will  I  sppak  to  thia 
Ilcb.  13.  15.  the  I'ruit  of  our  /.  giving  iliuuka 

Hi8  LU'S. 
Lev.  5.  4.  pronouncing  with  his  I.  to  do  evil 
JuO  i.  10.  in  all  tlm  did  not  Job  sin  with  his  I. 
11.  5.  O  that  God  would  open  hia  I.  ugiiiiist  thee 
ii:t.  li.  nor  gone  b«ck  from  conimundnient  ofA/g  I. 
I'nU.  vJl.  2.  not  wimholden  the  rin\w.tl  of  his  I. 
100.  ;}3.  so  that  he  upuke  unadvisedly  with  his  I. 
I'rov.  10.  I'J.  he  that  refruinetli  his  I.  is  wise 
I'-i.  13.  wicked  is  anared  by  transgression  of  Ai.'Z. 
13.  3.  openelh  wide  his  I.  ahall  liave  deal  ruction 
IG.'i'J.the  l)eartoflhewise  addcth  learning  lohis  I. 
ST.  and  in  his  I.  tJiere  is  a  burning  tire 
30.  moving  his  I.  lie  bringeth  evil  to  paaa 
IT.  )iS.  ahutteth  his  I.  is  u  man  of  understanding 
18.  T.  and  his  I.  are  the  snare  of  bis  soul 
20.  with  the  increase  of /it>  I.  shall  he  be  filled 
19. 1.  than  he  that  is  perverae  in  his  Land  is  a  fool 
ao.  19.  with  liim  that  llalterelli  with  his  I. 
2i.  'i  1.  for  grace  of  Ai>  I.  the  king  will  be  his  friend 
'24.  'Jlj.  shall  kiis  his  I.  that  gives  a  right  answer 
2t).  -4.  he  that  hateth  dissenibleth  with  his  I, 
Caul.  5.  1<^.  his  I.  like  lilies  dropjiing  myrrh 
Is  II.  11.4.  with  breath  of/iJ«  /.shall  he  slay  wicked 
30.'27.  his  I.  are  full  of  indignation,  and  his  tongue 
J\Ial.  -i.  0.  and  iniquity  was  not  fouiid  in  his  I. 
1  Pet.  3.  10.  B.a^  his  I.  that  they  speak  no  guile 

My  LIPS. 

Job  13.C.hcar  now,hearken  to  the  pleading  of  my  I. 

II).  5.  moving  of  mtj  /.should  as.suage  your  grief 

"7.  4.  my  I.  shall  not  ajieak  wickedness 

Si.  20. 1  will  speak,  I  will  o|)cn  my  I.  and  answer 

33.  3.  and  my  I.  shall  utter  knowledge  clearly 
Psal.  It).  4.  nor  take  up  their  names  into  yny  I, 

40.  [>.  lo,  I  have  not  refrained  mij  I.  O  Lord 
51.1o.opcn  thou  ;ny  /.||  G3.3.»H(//.  shall  praise  thee 
(iO.  14.1  will  pay  vows,  which  my  I.  have  uttered 
71.  23.  viy  I.  shall  greatly  rejoice  when  I  sing 
8'.l.  34.  nor  alter  the  thing  that  is  gone  out  of  my  I. 
ll'.l.  13.  with  my  I.  have  1  declared  thy  judgments 
lll.myl.  shall  utter  thy  praise,  when  hasi  taught 
141.  3.  O  Lord,  keep  the  door  of  7ny  I. 

Prov.  S.  (i.  the  opening  of  my  /.  shall  be  right  things 
7.  wickedness  is  an  abomination  to  my  I. 

Jer.  17.  10.  that  which  came  out  of  my  I.  was  right 

JJan.^^>■  16.  one  like  the  sons  of  men  touched  my /. 

Jiab.  3.  IG.  I  heard,  my  I.  quivered  at  the  voice 
Thy  LirS. 

/)«/f.33.23.that  which  is  gone  out  of  thy  I.  perform 

SA'nin-xl'J.'M.I  will  putmv  bridle  in  thy  l.fsa.3'.2'J. 

Job  f*.  21.  till  he  fill  thy  I.  with  rejcjicing 
13.  G.  yea,  thy  own  /.  testify  against  thee 

P.'.  17.  4.  by  the  word  of  thy  1. 1  liave  kept  me  from 

34.  13.  keep  thy  I.  from  speaking  guile 
4.">.2.grace  is  poured  \n\othy  /.  tliereliirn  G. blessed 

Prov.  5.  2.  and  that  thy  I.  may  keep  knowledge 
22.  13.  they  shall  withal  be  fitted  in  thy  I. 
'23.  IG.  rejoice  when  thy  I.  speak  right  things 
24.23.  deceive  not  with  t/iy/.  say  not,  I  will  do  so 
27.  2.  let  another  praise  thee,  and  not  thy  own  /. 

Canl.  4.  3.  thy  I.  are  like  a  thread  of  scarlet 
11.  thy  l.O  my  spouse,  drop  as  the  honey-comb 

Ixa.  6.  7.  and  said,  lo,  this  hath  touched  thy  I. 

Eiek.  24.  17.  cover  not  thy  I.  and  eat  not  bread 

Liauoii. 

.V»m.  C.  3.  nor  shall  he  drink  any  /.  of  grapes 
CaR(.  T.  2.  a  round  goblet,  which  wautelli  not  /. 

LI(iUOUS. 
Eniil.  22.  29.  nor  delay  to  oiler  the  first  of  thy  I. 

LISTED. 
•Va:.  17. 12.  done  to  him  whatsoever  /.  Mark  9. 13. 

LISTEN. 
Isn.  49.  1. ;.  O  isioa,  unto  me,  and  hearken  from  far 

LisTirni. 

.hihnX  fl.  the  wind  bloweth  where  it  /.  thou  hearest 
Jem..  3.  4.  the  shijis,  whithersoever  the  governor  /. 

LITTERS. 
Isa.  flC.20.  aliall  bring  voiir  breth.  in  chariots  and  /. 

LiTTLE 
Sijnifi**,  [1]  .-7  small  quantity,  Exod.  Ifi.  IS.     1 
Psni.  14.  29.     [2]  yrw  innitml/cr,  Exod.  12.  4. 
Luko  12.  :e.     [3]  f.i^ht,  or  of  small  acronnl, 
J.mh.'M.  17.     [4]  Mnihst,  humble,  and  siibmis- 
$tnc,  1  Sum.  9.  ijl.  ]  l.'i.  17.     [.il  Jl  short  way 
nrtim'-,  2  fam.  IG.  I.     J„l,  1(1.  Af).     ffji  ;j/,.„y;. 
I,nkfl  12.  28.     [71  Youvi;,  Gen.  43.  19.     Esth. 
3.  i:i.     [81  Low,  Luke  19.  3. 
'  f?'n.  W.  4.  lot  a  I.  water,  I  pray  von,  be  fetched 
21.  17.  let  mo  drink  a  /.  water  of  thy  pitcher 
30.  30.  it  w«s  but  /.  thou  lindst  boforo  I  camn 
3.'.  10.  tiKre  was  but  a  /.  wav  lo  Kphratli,  4H.  7 
43.2.  buy  iM  n  I.  food, 44.  2.V  Ifl  1.  /.  balm,  /.  honey 
Frnd.  12. "4.  if  tho  hrtusehold  be  loo  /.  for  iholnmb 
10.  18.  hethatga'hnreil/.  had  nolaek,2  Cor.9.]r,. 
23. 30. by  /.  and  l.\  will  drive  them  out,  Dcul.  7.  22. 
/.)tu£.'28.  33.  carry  much  out, and  gather  but  /.  in 
346 


LIT, 

Josh.  19. 47.  coaat  of  Dan  went  out  too  I.  for  them 

22.  17.  is  the  iniquity  of  I'eor  too  /.  for  us! 
.7u(/4'.4.1*J.give  me  /.  water  to  drink, 1  Kin^rs  17. 10, 
Ruth  2.  7.  that  she  tarried  a  /.  in  the  house 

1  Ham.  S.  19.  hia  mother  made  him  a  /.  coat 

14.  29.  because  1  tasted  a  /.  of  this  honey,  43< 
15. 17.  when  thou  wast  /.  in  tliine  own  sight 
22.  t  15.  knew  nothing  of  all  this,  /.  or  great 

2  Sam.  12.  3.  had  nothing,  save  one  /.  ewe-luinb 
8,  if  that  had  Ijcen  too  /.  I  would  have  given  auch 

19. 3G.  thy  servant  will  go  a  /.  way  over  Jordan 

1  Kings  8.  G4.  because  the  brascn  altar  was  loo  I. 
12. 10.  my  /.  finger  thicker  than,2  C/tron.  10. 10. 

17.  12.  and  a  /.  oil  in  a  cruse  {|  13.  make  a  /.  cake 

18.  44.  there  ariseth  a  I.  cloud  like  a  man's  hand 

20.  27.  Israel  pitched  like  two  /.  fiocks  of  kids 

2  Kings  5.2.  had  brought  away  captive  a/,  maid 
10.  18.  Ahab  served  Baal  a  /.  but  Jehu  much 

KzraO.  8.  for  a  /.  space,  give  us  a  /.  reriviug 
JVtA.  9.  32.  let  not  all  the  trouble  seem  /. 
Job  4.  12.  and  my  ear  received  a  /.  thereof 

10.  20.  cease  then,  that  I  may  lake  comfort  a  /. 

26.  14,  but  bow  I.  a  portion  ia  heard  of  him  ! 

36.  2.  sufi'er  me  a  I.  and  I  will  shew  thee 
Psal.  2.  12.  when  his  wrath  is  kindled  but  a  /. 

8.5.made  liim  a  /.lower  than  the  angels,  Htb.  2.  7. 

37.  16.  a  /.  that  a  righteous  man  hath  is  better 
42.  t  6.  1  will  remember  thee  from  the  /,  bill 
65.  12.  the  /.  hiils  rejoice  on  every  side 
G8.  27.  there  is  /.  Uenjamin,  with  their  ruler 
72.  3.  and  the  /.  hills  by  righteousness 
114.  4.  and  the  /.  hills  skipped  like  lambs,  G. 

Proe-  6.10.  a/,  sleeji,  /.  slumber,  a/,  folding,  24.  33. 
10.  20.  the  heart  of  the  wicked  is  /.  worth 

15.  16.  better  is  a  /.  with  the  fear  of  the  Lord 

16.  8.  better  is  a  /.  with  righteousness,  than  great 

30.  24.  four  things  that  are  /.  on  the  earth 
Keel.  5.  12.  is  sweet,  whether  he  eat  /.  or  much 

9. 14.  there  was  a  /.  city,  and  few  men  in  it 

10.  1.  so  a  /.  folly  him  that  ia  in  reputation 
12.  t  3.  the  grinders  fail  because  they  gritid  /. 

Cant.  2.  15.  take  us  the  foxes,  the  /.  toxes 

3.  4.  was  but  a  /.  that  I  passed  from  them 

8.  8.  we  have  a  /.  sister,  and  she  hath  no  breasts 
Isa.  2G.  20.  hide  thyself  for  a  /.  moment  till  iiidign. 

28.  10.  line  upon  line,  here  a  /.  and  there  a  /.  13. 

40. 15.  lie  taketh  up  the  isles  as  a  very  /.  thing 

JM.  8.  in  a  /.  wrath  I  hid  my  face  from  thee 
Jer.  30.  t  18.  city  shall  bo  built  on  her  own  /.  hill 
Ezek.  11.  16.  I  will  be  to  them  as  a  /.  sanctuary 

IG.  47.  but  as  if  that  were  a  very  /.  thing 

31.  4.  and  sent  out  her  /.  rivers  to  the  trees 
Dan.  7.  8.  there  came  U|)  another  /.  horn,  8.9. 

11.  34.  tlioy  shall  be  holpen  with  a  /.  help 
Hos.  8.  10.  they  shall  sorrow  a  /.  for  the  burden 
Amos  6.  11.  he  will  smite  the  /.  house  with  clel\e 
Mie.  5.  2.  though/,  among  the  thousands  of  Judah 
Hag.  1.  6.  ye  have  sown  much,  and  bring  in  /. 

9.  ye  looked  for  much,  and  lo,  it  came  to  /. 
Zeeh.  1.  15.  for  I  was  but  a  /.  displeased 
Mat.  G.  30.  shall  he  not  much  more  clothe  you, 

O  yeof /.  faithi  8. 20.  1 10.8.  Luke  Y2.il-*. 

14.  31.  O  thou  of  /.  faith,  why  didst  thou  doubtT 

15.  34.  they  said,  seven,  and  a  few  /.  fishes 
20.  39.  he  went  a  /.  further,  Mark  1. 19.  |  14.  35. 

Mark  5. 23.  my  /.  daughter  lietb  at  point  of  death 

Auic  7.47.to  whom /.is  forgiven,  the  same  loveth  /. 
12.32.  fear  not,  /.  flock  ||  19.  3.  he  was  /.  of  stature 
19. 17.  thou  ha.st  been  faithful  in  a  very  /. 

.fohn  C.  7.  that  every  one  of  them  may  take  a  /. 

/lets  5.  34.  to  put  the  apostles  forth  a  /.  spacn 
20.12.youngman  alive,and  were  not  a  /comforted 
28.  2.  tho  barbarians  shewed  us  no  /.  kindness 

1  CV)r.5.G.  a/,  leavrti  leaveiK-thlheluiiip,  (lal.  5.9. 

2  Cor.  11.  1.  could  bear  with  mo  a  /.  in  my  folly 
Ifi.  receive  mo,  that  I  may  boast  myself  a  /. 

T.ph.  3.  t  3.  as  I  wrote  a  /.  before  in  few  words 

1  Tim.  4. 8.  bodily  exercise  profileth  /.  but^odlinesa 

5.  23.  use  a  /.  wine  for  Ihy  stoinach'a  sake 
lleh.  2. 9.  who  was  made  a  /.  lower  than  the  nngels 
.Jam.  3.  5.  tongue  is  /.  member,  a  /.  firn  kindleih 

4.  14.  life,  a  vapour  that  appearoth  for  a  /.  time 

2  Pet.  2.  t  13.  ilioso  who  were  for  a/,  escajicd 
Kev.  3.  8.  tliou  hast  a  /.  strength,  and  bast  kept 

6.  ll.resta/.  season  II2U.3.  be  biosed  a /.  a^'ason 
Sec  Book,  Chamhicrs,  Ciiit.n,  CiiiLDntN. 

LITTLE  one,  or  ones. 
Oen.  19.  20.  Lot  said,  it  is  a  /.  nnf,is  it  not  a  /.  tftit 
.34.  29.  all  their  /.  ones  took  they  captive 
43.8. wc  may  llvo,  both  we,  and  tliiiu,  and  onr/.  n. 

44.  20.  wo  have  a  /.  onr,  and  his  brother  ia  dead 

45.  19.  take  wagons  out  of  Egypt  for  your  /.  onr.i 

46.  5.  carried  their  l.o.  ||  47.  21.  food  for  your/,  o. 

47.  t  12.  with  bread  according  to  their  /.  ones 
50.  8.  only  their  /.  ones  left  they  in  Goshen 

21.  fear  not,  I  will  nourish  you  and  your  /.  onr.> 
Kind.  10. 10. 1  will  let  you  go  and  your  /.  ones,  24 
.Vum.  11.  31.  but  your  /.  ones,  Iheni  will  I  bring 

31. !).  look  women  of  Midian  captives  and  /.  onr.' 
17  ihorelura  kill  erery  male  amonj  the  {  entt 


Xum.  33.  IB.  >ve  will  build  cities  for  our  t.  enti 

17.  our  /.onc«' shall  dwell  in  the  lenced  cities,  26. 
Deut.  2.  34.  we  destroyed  men,  women,  and  /.  onei 

20.  14.  but  the  women  and  /  ones  take  to  ihyMsIf 
Josh.  8.33.Josh.  read  before  the  women  and  /.  onet 
./uUg.  18.  21.  so  thty  put  the  /.  ones  before  them 
2  Ham.  13.  22.  Itta)  passed  over  and  all  the  /.  onet 
2  C'/(r.20.  13.  Judah  stood  before  Lord  and  /.  ones 

31.  18.  and  to  tho  genealogy  of  all  their  /.  ones 
Ezra  8.  21.  to  seek  a  right  way  lor  our  /.  ont* 
Esth.  8.  11.  to  cause  to  perish  /.  o7iea  and  woioeo 
.Job  21. 11.  they  send  forth  their/,  ones  like  a  flock 
Psal.  137. 9.  that  dusheth  thy  /.  ones  ag.  the  atouc* 
fsa.  GO.  22.  a  /.  one  shall  become  a  thousand 
Jvr.  14.  3.  their  nobles  sent  their  /.  ones  to  the  >it 

48.  4.  her  /.  ones  have  caused  a  cry  to  be  iieurd 
Zeeh.  13.7.  and  1  will  turn  my  hand  on  the  /.  onet 
Mat.  10.  42.  give  to  drink  to  one  of  these  /.  ones 

18.6.who  should  oti'eiid  one  of  these  l.o.MarkH.i'i. 
10.  lake  heed  that  ye  despise  not  one  of  these/.  ». 
14.  that  one  of  these  /.  ones  should  perish 
Eukc  17.2.  than  that  heotl'eiid  one  of  these/,  ones 

LITTLE  while. 
2  Chr.  12. 1 7.  therefore  1  will  grant  them  a  /.  while 
.Job  24.  24.  they  are  exalted  lor  a  /.  v>.  but  are  gone 
Psal.  37. 10.  yet  a  /.  w.  and  the  wicked  shall  not  be 
/«a.  10.25.  yet  a  /.  i^-.and  the  indignation  shall  cease 

29.  17.  is  it  not  yel  a  very  /.  while,  and  Lebanon 

63. 18.  thy  people  have  possessed  it  but  a  /.  whil« 
Jer.  51.  33.  yet  a  /.  ic.  and  her  harvest  shall  coma 
Hos.  1.4.  yet  a  /.  while  and  I  will  avenge  the  blood 
Hag.  2.  6.  a  /.  while  and  1  w  ill  shake  the  hnnvena 
/>k/i6'22.  56.  and  after  a  /.  while  anothei  saw  hira 
John  7.  33.  yet  a  /.  w.  and  1  am  with  you,  13.  33. 

12.  35.  yet  a  /.  tchile  ia  the  light  with  you,  wall* 

14. 19.  a  /.  while,  and  the  world  seeth  me  no  more 
16.16.  again  a/,  jchile,  and  ye  shall  see  me,  17,  19. 

I  go  to  Father  a  /.  w  and  ye  shall  nut  see  me 

18.  a  /.  while  ;  we  cannot  tell  what  he  saith 
/ycA.2.t7.tliou  madest  him  a  /.  S.  inferior  to  angel* 

10.  37.  for  yet  a  L  while  and  he  that  »liall  come 

LIVE. 
Eiod.  21.  35.  then  they  shall  sell  the  /.  ox 
Isa.  6.  C.  a  seraphiin,  having  a  /.  coal  in  his  hand 
Hce  Goat. 
LIVE 
Signifies,  [1]  To  move  and  do  the  actions  of  UfCf 
Gen.  45.  3.     [2]   To  be  in  health,  or  to  be  reco- 
vered from  sickness,  John  4.  50.     [3]  To  pre- 
serve alive.  Gen.  42.  2.     [4]  To  have  a  mainte- 
nance for  this  life,  1  Cor.  9.  13.     [5]  Eaith- 
fully  to  serve  God,  to  have  a  share  in  his 
favour  and  gracious  covenant,  Gen.  17.  18. 
[G]  To  enjoy  communion  with  God,  Psal.  69.  32, 
[7]  To  enjoy  ctt  rnal  life  in  heaven,  John  14.  19. 
[aj  7'w   Oe  greatly  comforted,  Psal.  22.  26.     H 
is  taken,  [1]  J^'uturally,  Gen.  SJ.  3.    John  4.  50. 
[2]  Morally,  Acts  23.  1. 1  26. 6.  [.3]  Spiritually, 
to  live  a  life  of  faith  in  Christ,  to  the  glorg 
of  God's  free  grace,  Gal.  2.  19,  20.    2  Tim.  3. 
12.     [4]  iVickedlii,  2  Pet.  2.  6.     [5}  Eternally, 
John  6.  51,58.     Kom.  6.  8. 
To  live   afier   the  llesli,  Rom.  8.  13.      To  had 
such  a  course  of  life  as  is  agreeable  to  cor- 
rupt nature  ;  to  bestow  all  our  time  and paina 
in  the  service  of  the  Jlish,  and  so  make  pro- 
vision OTtly  for  a  pnsent  life. 
Man  shall  not  live  by  bread  alone,  but  by  crery 
word,  i<-c.  J\fat.  4. 4.     Though  men  live  ordina- 
rily by  usual   and   common  food,  yet  Ood't 
power  is  not  restrained  ;  he  can  uphold  the  life 
of  man  when  that  is  wanting,  as  he  supported 
the  Israelites  with  manna  ;  yea,  by  his  pow- 
er and  will  only,  without  any  means  at  all, 
if  he  so  phases :  and  therefore  men  ought 
not  absolutely  to  rest  vpon  the  means,  and 
without   warrant  run   to   an    rjtraordinary 
course  for  supply,  but  trust  in  God,  and  Icavi 
him  to  provide  as  he  pleases. 
Grn.  3.22.  lest  he  take  of  tree  of  life,  and  /.  for  ever 
12.  13.  and  my  aoiil  shall  /.  because  of  tbco 
17.  18.  f)  that'lebmael  might  /.  before  thee ! 

19.  20.  O  let  me  escape,  and  my  aoul  slioll  /. 

20.  7.  he  shall  prav  for  thee,  anil  thou  shah  /. 
27.  40.  by  sword  shall  thou  /.  and  serve  thy  h;  ethr. 
31.  :i2.  and  findesl  fhv  goods,  let  him  Bot  /. 
42.  18.  Joseph  aaid,  this  do,  and  /.  for  I  fear  God 
45.  3.  I  am  Joseph,  doth  my  father  yet  /. ,' 

Eiod.  1.  IG.  if  it  lie  a  daughter,  then  she  slial!  /. 
33.  20.  for  there  shall  no  man  ace  nin  and  /. 
/..CO.  18.  5.  which  if  a  man  do,  ho  shall  /.  in  them,  I 
am  the  Lord,. VcA.  9.29.  Ezek.  20.  II,  13,  21. 
./Viim.21.  8.whcn  he  looketh  upon  serpent,  shall /. 

21.  23.  nlns,  who  shall  /.  when  Go<l  d<;elh  this? 
Deut.  A.  10.  may  fcnr  me  all  (ho  dnya  fhcy  shall  /. 

33.  did  ever  people  hear,  as  thou  hast,  and  /.  ? 
8.  3.  but  by  every  word  of  tho  Lorci  doth  man  I. 
12.  1.  all  the  daj-s  that  ye/,  on  the  earth 
19.  .*>.  be  shall  flee  to  ono  of  those  cities  and  /. 
3113  Uarn  to  fear  L  as  long  as  ye  /.I  Kii\e»  8-  40 


LIV 

Deul.3X&.]et  Reuben  I.  and  not  die,mcn  not  be  few 

Josli.  C.17.  only  Rahab  harlot  shall  I.  and  her  house 

9. 15.  Josh,  made  a  league  with  ihein  to  let  them  I. 

20.  wo  will  let  them  /.  lest  wrath  be  on  us,  21. 

1  Sam.  10. 1 24.  said,  lot  the  king  I.  2  .Sam.  Ifi.  f  16. 

1  Kings  1. 1 25.  2  Kings  11.  f  12. 2  C/ir.  23.  f  11. 
20. 14.  not  only  while  I  i.show  me  kindness  ofL. 

2  Kings  4.  7.  I.  thou  and  thy  children  of  the  rest 

7.  4.  if  they  save  us  alive,  we  shall  /. 

2  Chron.  C.  31.  walk  in  thy  ways  so  long  as  they  I. 
Job  7. 18.  thine  eyes  are  on  me,  I  can  I.  no  longer 
14. 14.  if  a  man  die,  shall  ho  I.  again  ?  all  days 

21.  7.  wherefore  do  the  wicked  I.  become  old  7 
Psa/. 22.26.  praise  Lord,  j>jurheart  shalU.  for  over 

49.  9.  that  he  should  still  I.  and  not  see  corruption 
63.  4.  thus  will  I  bless  thee  while  I  L  lift  up  hands 
69.  32.  your  hearts  shall  /.  that  seek  God 
72.  15.  "he  shall  1. 1|  118.  17.  I  shall  not  die  but  I. 
119.  144.  give  me  understanding  and  I  shall  I. 

175.  let  my  soul  I.  and  it  shall  praise  thee 
146.  2.  while  I  l.  will  I  praise  the  Lord 
Prov.  4.  4.  keep  my  commandments  and  I.  7.  2. 
S.O.forsake  foolish  and  i.go  in  way  of  understand. 

15.  27.  but  he  that  hateth  gitb  shall  I. 
Eccl.  6.  3.  if  a  man  I.  many  years,  6.  |  11.  8. 

9.  3.  madness  is  in  their  heart  while  they  I. 

9.  I.  joyfully  with  the  wife  whom  thou  lovest 
Isa.  26.  19.  thy  dead  men  shall  I.  together  with  my 

38. 16.  O  Ld.  by  these  things  men  I.  make  roe  to  I. 

55.  3.  come  to  me,  hear,  and  your  soul  shall  I. 
Jer.  21.9.  to  Chaldeans  shall  l.  27. 12, 17.  |  33. 2, 17. 

38.  20.  obey,  I  pray  thee,  and  thy  soul  shall  /. 
Lam.  4.  20.  we  said,  under  his  shadow  we  shall  I 
£2ei.3.21.he  shall  surely  1. 18. 9, 17.  |  33. 1.3, 15, 16 

16.  6.  I  said,  when  thou  wast  in  thy  blood,  I. 
18. 19.  kept  my  statutes  shall  I.  21, 22.  |  20.  U,  25 

24.  shall  he  I.  \\  32.  turn  yourselves  and  1. 33. 11. 
33. 10.  if  our  sins  be  on  us,  how  should  we  then  1. 1 

19.  do  that  which  is  lawful  and  right,  he  shall  I 
37.  3.  he  said,  son  of  man,  can  these  bones  I.  7 

5.  cause  breath  to  enter  you,  and  ye  shall  I.  6, 14. 
47.9.  every  thing  which  liveth  and  moveth  shall  I 

every  thing  shall  I.  whither  the  river  cometh 
Has.  6. 2.  he  will  revive  us,  we  shall  I.  in  his  sight 
^mos  5.4. saith  the  Lord, seek  me,  and  ye  shall  l.G 
Jonah  4.  3.  it  is  better  for  me  to  die,  than  to  I.  8. 
Hab.  2.  4.  the  justshall  I.  by  his  faith,  Rum.  1. 17. 
ZccA.10.9.  they  shalU.  with  their  children  and  turn 
Mat.i.A.ma.n  shall  not  I.  by  bread  alone,  Ijuke  4.  4. 
9. 18.  lay  hand  on  her,  and  she  shall  I. Mark  5. 23. 
Luke  7.  25.  they  which  I.  delicately  are  in  courts 

10.  28.  he  said  to  him,  this  do,  and  thou  shalt  I. 
20. 38.  he  is  not  a  God  of  dead,  for  all  I.  unto  him 

.7oAii5.25.dead  hear  voice  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  ^ 
6. 57.  as  living  Father  sent  me,  and  1 1,  by  Father, 
so  he  that  eateth  me,  even  shall  I.  by  me 
11.25.  believeth,  tho'  he  were  dead,  yet  he  shall  Z. 
14. 19.  because  1 1,  ye  shall  I.  also 

^cts  17.  28.  for  in  him  we  I.  and  move,  and  have 

22.  22.  for  it  is  not  fit  that  he  should  I. 

Horn.  6. 2.  that  are  dead  to  sin,  I.  any  longer  therein 

8.  we  believe  that  we  also  shall  I.  with  him 
8.  12.  we  are  debtors,  not  to  I.  after  the  Hesh 

13.  if  ye  I.  after  the  flesh  ye  shall  die,  if  ye  thro' 
the  spirit  mortify  deeds  of  the  body  ye  shall  I. 

lO.S.doeth  these  things  shall  I.  by  them,  Oal.  3.12. 

12.  18.  if  possible,  I.  peaceably  with  all  men 
14.8.  for  whether  we  Z.  we  Z.  to  the  Lord;  whether 

we  I.  therefore  or  die,  we  are  the  Lord's 

1  Cor.  9.  13.  they  Z.  of  the  things  of  the  temple 

14.  they  who  preach  gospel,  should  I.  of  gospel 

2  Cor.  4. 11.  for  we  which  Z.  are  delivered  to  death 

6.  9.  as  dying,  and  behold  we  Z.  as  chastened 

7.  3.  ye  are  in  our  hearts  to  die  and  I.  with  you 

13.  4.  we  shall  I.  with  him  by  the  power  of  God 
11.  brethren,  be  of  one  mind,  Z.  in  peace 

(?aZ.2.14.why  compellest  the  Gentiles  to  I.  as  Jews 

19.  de.id  to  the  law,  that  I  might  I.  unto  God 

20.  I  Z.  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me,  the 
life  I  now  Z.  in  flesh  I  Z.  by  faith  of  Son  of  God 

3. 11.  the  just  shall  I.  by  faith,  Hcb.  10.  38. 
S  25.  if  we  I.  in  the  Spirit,  let  us  walk  in  the  Spirit 
PAil.  1. 21.  for  me  to  I.  is  Christ,  and  to  die  is  gain 
22.  iflZ.  in  the  flesh,  this  is  the  fruit  of  my  labour 

1  Thess.  3.  8.  for  now  we  Z.  if  ye  stand  fast  in  TiOrd 
5.  10.  died,  that  we  should  I.  together  with  him 

2  7Ym.  2.  11.  if  dead,  we  shall  also  I.  with  him 

?.  12.  all  that  will  I.  godly  shall  sufl'cr  persecution 
Tit.  2.  12.  teaching  us  that  we  should  Z.  soberly 
Hcb.  12. 9.  be  in  subjection  to  Fath.  of  spirits  and  Z. 

13.  18.  in  all  things  willing  to  Z.  honestly 
Jam.  4. 1.5.  if  the  Lord  will  wo  shall  I.  and  do  this 

1  Pet.  2.  24.  that  we  should  I.  to  righteousness 
4.  2.  that  he  no  longer  should  /.  in  the  flesh 

6.  but  Z.  according  to  God  in  the  Spirit 

2  Pet.  2.  6.  an  ensampio  to  those  that  I.  ungodly 
18.  those  that  escaped  from  them  that  Z.  in  error 

1  John  4. 9.  sent  his  Son,  that  we  might  Z.  thro'  him 

Rev,  J3. 14.  beast  which  had  the  wound  and  did  I. 

See  For  Ever. 

347 


LIV 

Jis  I  LIVE. 
JVum.  14. 21.  as  truly  as  U.  earth  shall  be  filled,  28. 
Job  27. 6.  so  long  as  I  Z.  Psal.  104.  33.  |  116.  2. 
Isa.  49. 18.  asJi.  saith  the  Lord,  Jer. 22. 24.  Ezek. 

5.  11.  I  14.  16,  18,  20.  I  16.  48.  I  17.  16,  19. 
I  18.  3.  I  20.  3,  33.  I  33. 11,  27.  |  34.  8.    35. 

6,  11.  1  Zeph.  2.  9.  Horn.  14.  11. 

Jer.  46. 18.  as  1 1,  saith  the  king,  surely  aa  Tabor 

May,  might,  or  mayest  LIVE. 
Oen.  42.  2.  that  we  m.  Z.  and  not  die,  43. 8.  )  47. 19. 
Lev.  25.  35.  relieve  him  that  he  may  I.  with  thee 

36.  take  no  usury,  that  thy  brother  may  I. 
Jfwn.  4.  19.  but  thus  do  to  them  that  they  may  I. 
Dcut.A.l.Ao  to  them,  ye  m.  1. 5. 33.  |  8. 1. 1  30. 6, 16. 
42.  that  fleeing  to  one  of  these  cities  he  might  I. 
16.  20.  what  is  just  follow,  that  thou  mayest  I. 
30. 19.  choose  life,  that  ihou  and  thy  seed  may  I. 
2  Sam.  12.  22.  gracious  to  me,  that  the  child  may  I. 
2  Kings  18.  32.  to  a  land  of  bread,  that  you  may  I. 
Esth.  4.  11.  hold  out  the  sceptre,  that  he  may  I. 
Psal.  119.  17.  deal  bountifully,  that  I  may  I. 
77.  let  thy  mercies  come  to  me,  that  I  may  I. 
116.uphold  me  according  to  thy  word,  that  I  »n.Z. 
Jer.  35.  7.  dwell  In  tents,  that  ye  may  I.  many  days 
Eiek.  37.  9.  breathe  on  these  slain,  that  they  may  I. 
.3mos  5. 14.  seek  good  and  not  evil,  that  ye  may  I. 
Eph.  6.  3.  and  thou  mayest  I.  long  on  the  earth 

JVof  LIVE. 
Exod.  19. 13.  that  touch  the  mountain  shall  not  I. 
22.  18.  thou  shalt  not  suffer  a  witch  to  Z. 
Dent.  8.3.  man  doth  not  I.  by  bread  only,  but  by  the 
word  of  the  Lord,  Mat.  4.  4.  Luke  4.  4. 
2  Sam.  1.  10.  for  I  was  sure  that  he  could  not  I. 
2  Kings  lfl.l9.  whosoever  is  wanting  he  shall  not  I. 
20.1.  set  house  in  order,  thou  shalt  not  I.  Isa.  38. 1. 
Job  7.  16.  I  loathe  it,  I  would  not  I.  always 
Psal.  55. 23.  tho  wicked  shall  not  I.  half  their  days 
Isa.  26.  14.  they  are  dead,  they  shall  not  I. 
Ezek.  13.  19.  to  save  the  souls  that  should  not  I. 
18.  13.  shall  he  then  live  7  he  shall  not  Z. 
Zech.  13.  3.  shall  say  to  him,  thou  shalt  not  I. 
Luke  12.  t  29.  Z.  not  in  careful  suspense 
.^cts  7. 19.  cast  out  children,  that  they  might  not  I. 

25.  24.  crying,  that  he  ought  7tot  to  I.  any  longer 
28.  4.  yet  vengeance  suifereth  not  to  I. 

2  C(}r.5.15.they  should  not  I.  tothemselves,buthim 

LIVED. 
Oen.  25.  6.  from  Isaac  his  son,  while  he  yet  Z. 
47.  28.  Jacob  Z.  in  the  land  of  Egypt  17  years 
J\ru7n.  14.  38.  but  Joshua  and  Caleb  Z.  still 
21.  9.  when  he  beheld  the  serpent  of  brass  he  Z. 
-Deut.  5.  26.  that  heard  the  voice  of  God  and  Z. 
2  Sam.  19.  6.  if  Absalom  had  I.  and  we  had  died 
lA'm^«12.6.tbe  old  men  that  stood  before  Solomon 
his  father  while  he  yet  Z.  2  Chron.  10.  6. 
2  Kings  14.  17.  Amaziah  Z.  after  the  death  of  Je- 
hoash  fifteen  years,  2  Chron.  25.  25. 
Psal.  49.  18.  while  he  I.  he  blessed  his  soul 
Ezek.  37.  10.  breath  came  into  them,  and  they  I 
Luke'2.3G.  she  had  Z.  with  a  husband  seven  years 
yicts23. 1. 1  have  I.  in  all  good  conscience  before 
God  until  this  day 

26.  5.  after  the  sect  of  our  religion  I Z.  a  Pharisee 
Col.  3. 7.  ye  walked  sometime,  when  ye  I.  in  them 
Jam.  5.  5.  ye  have  Z.  in  pleasure  on  the  earth 
Rev.  18.  7.  how  much  she  hath  Z.  deliciously,  9, 

20.  4.  they  Z.  with  Christ  ||  5.  the  restZ.  not  again 

LIVELY. 
Exod.  1. 19.  because  the  Hebrew  women  are  I. 
Psal.  38. 19.  but  my  enemies  are  Z.  and  are  strong 
.^cts  7. 38.  who  received  the  Z.  oracles  to  give  to  us 

1  Pet.  1. 3.  who  hath  begotten  us  again  to  a  Z.  hope 
2.  5.  ye  as  Z.  stones,  are  built  up  a  spiritual  house 

LIVER. 

Exod.  29.  13.  the  caul  above  the  I.  22.  Lev.  3.  4, 
10,  15.  I  4.  9.  I  7.  4.  I  8.  16,  25.  |  9.  10,  19. 
Prov.  7.  2.3.  till  a  dart  strike  through  his  Z. 
Lam.  2.  11.  my  Z.  is  poured  upon  the  earth 
Ezek.  21.  21.  he  consulted,  he  looked  in  the  (. 

See  Caul. 

LIVES. 
Oen.  9. 5.  surely  your  blood  ofs'our  Z.  will  I  require 
4.5.  7.  to  save  your  Z.  by  a  great  deliverance 

47.  25.  Ihou  hast  saved  our  Z.  let  us  find  grace 
Exod.  1. 14.  they  made  their  Z.  bitter  with  bondage 
■  Tosh.  2.  13.  and  deliver  our  Z.  from  death 

0.  24.  therefore  we  were  sore  afraid  of  our  I. 
Judg.  5.  18.  were  a  people  that  jeoparded  their  I. 

18.  25.  thou  lose  thy  life  with  I.  of  thy  household 

2  Sam.  1.  23.  Saul  and  Jonathan  lovely  in  their  Z. 

19.  5.  who  savedZ.  of  thy  sons,  wives,  and  concu. 
23.17.tKat  went  in  jeopardy  of  their  Z.  lCAr.11.19. 

f:.<t«A.9.16.othor  Jews  gathered  and  stood  for  tlieirZ. 
Prov.  1.  18.  they  lurk  privilv  for  their  own  Z. 
.Tcr.  19.  7.  fall  by  them  which  seek  their  Z.  46.26. 
9.  they  that  seek  their  I.  shall  straiten  them 

48.  6.  flee,Bave  your  Z.be  like  tho  heath  in  wildern. 
7.,am.5. 9.  wegatour  bread  with  the  peril  of  our  Z. 
Dan.  7. 12.  their  Z.  were  prolonged  for  a  season 
Z,utc9.56.Son  of  man  is  not  come  to  deitr.  men's  Z. 


LIV 

.^cts  15. 26.  men  that  have  hazarded  their  I.  for  oiw 
27. 10.  this  voyage  will  be  with  damage  of  our  L 
\  John  3.  16.  to  lay  down  our  Z.  for  the  brethren 
Rev.  12. 11.  they  loved  not  their  I,  to  the  death 

LIV  EST. 
Z?e2iM2.19.forsake  not  theLevite  as  long  as  thouZ. 
Gal.  2.  14.  if  thou  being  a  Jew  Z.  alter  tlie  manner 
Rev.  3.  1.  hast  a  name  that  thou  I.  and  art  dead 

LIVETH. 
Gen.  9. 3.  every  thing  that  I.  shall  be  meat  for  you 

16.  t  14.  the  well  of  him  that  I.  and  seeth  me 
Deut.5.'24.  that  God  doth  talk  with  man,  and  he  i. 

1  Sam.  1.28.  have  lent  him  to  the  L.  as  lung  us  Jie  Z. 
20.  31.  for  as  long  as  son  of  Jesse  Z.  on  the  ground 
25.  6.  thus  shall  say  to  him  that  Z.  in  prosperity 

2  Sam.  2.  27.  as  God  Z.  unless  thou  hadst  spoken 
15. 21.  aa  my  lord  the  king  Z.  surely  in  what  piece 
22. 47.  tho  Lord  Z.  blessed  be  my  rock,  Ps.  18.  46. 

1  Kings  3.  23.  one  saith,  this  is  my  son  that  Z. 

17.  23.  and  Elijah  said,  see  thy  son  Z. 

Job  19.  25.  for  1  know  that  my  Redeemer  Z. 

27.2.  asG.  Z.  who  hath  taken  away  my  judgment 
/'«aZ.8U.48.what  man  that  Z.and  shall  notsceduath'! 
Jer.  4.  2.  thou  shalt  swear,  the  Lord  Z.  in  truth 

5.  2.  tho'  they  say,  the  Lord  Z.  they  swear  falsely 

12. 16.  to  swear  by  my  name,  the  Lord  Z.  as  they 

16. 14.  no  more  be  said,  the  Lord  Z.  15.  |  23.  7,  8. 

44.  26.  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  saying,  the  Lord  Z. 
Ezek.  47.9.  every  thing  that  I.  and  moveth  shall  live 
Uos.  4.  15.  nor  go  ye  up,  nor  swear,  the  Lord  I. 
Jimos  8.  14.  they  thait  swear,  and  say,  thy  God,  O 
Dan,  Z.  and  tho  manner  of  Beer-shoba  Z. 
John  4. 50.  Jesus  said, go  thy  way,  thy  son  Z.  51, 53. 

11.  26.  whosoever  Z.  and  behcveth  in  me  never  die 
Rom.  6.  10.  but  in  that  he  Z.  he  Z.  to  God 

7. 1.  law  hath  dominion  over  man  as  long  as  he  Z.2 
3.  so  if  while  her  husband  Z.  she  be  married 

14.  7.  for  none  of  us  I.  or  dieth  to  himself 

1  Cor.  7.  39.  the  wife  is  bound  as  long  as  her  husb.  I. 

2  Cor.  13.  4.  yet  he  Z.  by  the  power  of  God 
Oal.  2.  20.  I  live,  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  Z.  in  me 

1  Tim.  5. 6.  that  I.  m  [)leasure  is  dead  while  she  I. 
Heb.  7.  8.  of  whom  it  is  witnessed  that  he  Z. 
25.seeing  he  ever  Z.to  make  intercession  for  them 
9. 17.  testament  is  of  no  strength  while  testator  Z. 
Rev.  1.  18. 1  am  he  that  I.  and  was  dead,  behold 
See  For  Ever. 
Jls  the  Lord  LIVETH. 
Judg.%.  19.  as  the  L.  I.  if  ye  have  saved  them  alive 
Ruth  3.13.1  will  do  the  part  of  kinsman,  as  the  L.  I. 
1  Sam.  14.  39.  for  as  the  L.  I.  tho'  it  be  in  Jonathan 
45.  as  the  Lord  I.  19.  6.  |  20.  21.  |  25.  26.  |  26. 
10,  16.  I  28. 10.  I  29.  6.  2  Sam.  4.  9.  I  12.  5. 
14.  11. 1  Kings  1.  29. 

20.  3.  as  the  Lord  I.  there  is  but  a  step  between  me 
25. 34.  as  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  Z.  who  kept  me 

2.Sam.l5.21.a«  theL.  I.  and  as  my  Lord  the  king  Z. 

IKings  2.  24.  as  the  Lord  1. 2Kings  5.20.  2  Chron. 

18.  13.  Jer.  38.  16. 

17.  1.  as  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  Z.  18.  15. 

12.  as  the  Lord  thy  God  Z.  18.  10. 

2Amn-s2.2.  as  L.  Z.  and  thy  soul  liveth, 4.  6.  |  4.  30 

3. 14.  as  L.  of  hosts  I.  before  whom  I  stand,  5. 16 

Jls  thy  soul  LIVETH. 
l.Sam.l.26.a«s.Z.  lam  a  woman  who  stood  praying 
17..55.  Abner  said,  as  thy  s.  I.  O  king,  I  cannot  toll 
20.3.a5«.Z.thcrc  is  but  one  step  betw.me  and  death 
25.26.as  thy  soul  Z.seeing  L.hath  withholden  thee 
2.S!>»/i.  11. 11.  as  thy  soul  1. 1  will  not  do  this  thing 
14.19.  as  soul  I.  none  can  turn  to  right  or  left  hand 
iKings2.i  (•»  S.Z.I  will  not  leave  thee,  so  they  went 

LIVING 
Signifies,  [1]  One  who  is  alive,  or  enjoys  life, 
1  Kings  3.  22.      [2]  J^ever  dry,  but  always 
springing  czd  running,   Cant.  4.    15.      [3] 
Christ  risen  from  the  dead,  Luke  24.  5.     [4] 
The  godly,  departed  this  life,  Mat.  22.  32.    [.5J 
Spiritual,  Rom.  12.  1.     [6]   That  which  pro- 
cureth  and  bringeth  to  life  spiritual  and  eter- 
nal, Hcb.  10.  20.  1  Pet.  2.  4.     [7]  ./?  person's 
wealth,  goods,  or  estate,  Luke  15.  12. 
Man  became  a  living  soul,  Oen.  2.  7.     His  life- 
less body  teas  endued  with  a  soul,  whereby  hi 
became  a  living  rational  creature. 
Living  water,  John  4.  10.  j  7.  38.     The  Spirit  of 
Ood  and  his  grace,  which  will  never  fail,  but 
endure  to  eternal  life. 
Oen.  1.  28.  have  dommion  over  every  I.  thing 
2.7.man  became  a  Z.  soul||3.20.Eve,molhcr  of  all  Z. 

6.  19.  and  of  every  Z.  thing  of  all  flesh,  two 

7.  4.  and  every  Z.  substance  I  will  destroy 
23.  and  every  Z.  substance  was  destroyed 

8.  1.  God  remembered  Noah  and  every  Z.  thinj 

21.  1  will  not  smite  any  more  every  thing  Z. 
26.  t  I'J.  and  found  there  a  well  of  Z.  water 

Lev.  11.  10.  of  any  Z.  thing  which  is  in  the  water 

13.  t  10.  if  there  be  a  quickening  of  Z.  flesh 

14.  0.  as  for  the  I.  bird  ho  shall  take  it,  7.  53;. 
20.  25.  not  make  abominable  by  any  Z.  tiling 

JVum.  16. 48.  he  stood  between  the  dead  and  the  ) 


LO 

AVm.  19. 1 1'.  for  unclean  I.  waters  shall  be  given 

Jiuth.  2.  20.  hath  not  left  off  his  kindness  to  iTie  I. 

2  Sam.  "0.  3.  they  were  shut  up  /.  in  widow  hood 

i  Kind's  3. 2±  the  I.  is  my  eon,  the  dead  thy  sou,S.i3. 

25.  divide  tiie  /.  child  in  two,  and  give  halftu  one 

2!i.  whoso  the  /.  child  was,  give  her  the  i.  child 

27.  then  the  king  said,  give  her  the  I.  child 

Job  12.  10.  in  whose  hand  is  soul  of  every  I.  thing 

28.  13.  nor  is  it  found  in  the  land  of  the  /. 
21.  seeni£;  it  is  hid  from  the  eyes  of  all  I. 

30.  23.  and  to  the  house  apjiointed  for  all  I. 
'J3.  'M.  to  be  enlightened  with  light  of  the  I. 
l'^.  27. 13.  to  see  goodncsa  of  the  t.ord  in  laud  of  I. 
38.  t  19.  for  mine  enemies  being  /.  are  strong 

52.  5.  and  rout  thee  out  of  the  land  of  the  /. 
&i.  13.  ihat  I  may  walk  in  the  light  of  the  /. 
5S.9.  shall  take  them  away  both  I.  and  in  wrath 
61).  2S.  let  them  he  blotted  out  of  the  book  of  the  I. 
lie.  y.  walk  before  the  I..ord  in  the  land  of  the  /. 

142.  5.  ihou  art  my  portion  in  the  land  of  the  I. 

143.  2.  in  thy  sight  shall  no  man  /.  be  Jus'.ihed 
145. 10.  thou  satistiest  the  desire  of  every  I.  thing 

Eccl.  4.  2.  dead,  more  than  the  I.  whicli  are  alive 

15.  I  considered  all  the  I.  under  the  sun 
fi.  8.  iioor,  that  knoweth  to  walk  before  the  /. 
7.  2.  end  of  all  men,  and  the  I.  will  lay  it  to  heart 

9.  4.  that  is  joined  to  all  the  I.  a  I.  dog  is  better 
5.  for  the  /.  know  that  they  shall  die,  but  dead 

Ca«t.4.15.a  well  ot'l.  water,streams  from  Lebanon 
Isa.  4. 3.  that  is  written  among  the  I.  in  Jerusalem 
F.  19.  seek  to  their  God  for  the  I.  to  the  dead 
19. 1 10.  he  broken  that  make  ponds  of  I.  things 
3S.  11.  not  see  the  Lord  in  the  land  of  the  t. 
19.  the  I.  the  I.  he  shall  praise  thee,  as  1  do 

53.  8.  he  was  cut  off  out  of  the  land  of  the  I. 
57.  t  10.  thou  hast  found  the  I.  of  thy  hand 

Jcr.  2.  13.  forsaken  fountain  of  Z.  waters,  17.  13. 

11.  19.  let  us  tut  him  off  from  the  land  of  the  I. 
J^am.  3.  39.  wherefore  doth  a  I.  man  complain  ? 
t-'.zek.  7. 1 13.  though  his  life  be  yet  among  the  /. 

2(i.  20.  I  shall  set  glory  in  the  land  of  the  /. 

32.  23.  all  of  them  slain,  which  caused  terror  in 

the  land  of  the  I.  24,  25,  2(5,  27,  32. 

£)a7!.2.30.any  wisdom  that  I  have  more  than  any  Z. 

4.  17.  to  the  intent  that  the  I.  may  know 
Zfck.  14.  8. 1,  waters  shall  go  out  from  Jeru.^alera 
Mat.  22.  32.  God  is  not  the  Cod  of  the  dead,  but 
of  the  I.  Mark  12.  27.  Luke  20.  38. 
Mark  12.  44.  she  cast  in  all  she  had,  even  all  her  I. 
J.ukc  8.43. woman  had  spent  all  her  /.on  physicians 

15.  12.  and  he  divided  unto  them  his  I. 
13.  there  wasted  his  substance  with  riotous  I.  30. 

24.  5.  why  seek  ye  the  I.  among  the  dead  ? 
John  4.  10.  lie  would  have  given  thee  I.  water  ? 
11.  from  whence  hast  Ihou  that  I.  walerl 

C.  51.  I  am  the  /.  bread  which  came  down  from 
.57.  as  the  I.  Father  hath  sent  me,  and  I  live 

7. 38.  out  of  his  belly  shall  flow  rivers  of  I.  water 
Rom.  12. 1.  that  ye  present  your  bodies  a  /.sacrifice 

14.  9.  that  he  might  be  Lord  both  of  dead  and  I. 
1  Cor.  1.5. 4.).  the  first  man  Adam  was  made  a /.soul 
Col.  2. 20.  /.  in  the  world,  are  ye  subject  to  ordinan. 
Ti'f.  3. 3. 1,  in  malice,  envy,  and  hating  one  aiKillier 
Heb.  10.  20.  boldness  to  enter  by  a  new  and  /.  way 
1  Pet.  2.  4.  to  whom  coming  as  to  a  /.  stone,  chosen 
Rn.  7.17.  the  Lamb  shall  lead  them  to  /.  fountains 

10.  3.  and  every  I.  soul  died  in  the  sea 

See  UiRn,  riiK.\TURE,  God. 

LIZARD. 

Lev.  11.  30.  the  I.  snail,  and  mole  unclean  to  you 

LO 
Denotes,  [1]  Matter  of  attfntian  and  cnn.<;i(hra- 
tion,  Isa.  2.5.  9.  Luke  13.  10.  [2]  Readhifss, 
PbbI.  40.  7.  [3]  Certuinti/  and  ajjirmatiun, 
Ezek.  30.  9.  [4]  Demonslraliun  uf  a  tMiig 
prearnt,  (U-n.  29.  7. 
Gen.  18.  10.  /.  Sarah  thy  wife  shall  have  n  son 

29.  7.  /.  it  Ih  vet  high  day,  water  ye  the  sheep 
50.  5.  /.  I  dic'll  F.Tod.  19.  9. 1.  I  come  in  a  cloud 

JV«m.  14.  40.  /.  we  he  hero,  and  will  eo  up  to  place 
24.  11.  /.  the  Lord  hath  kept  tlice  from  honour 

1  .S(im. 14. 43. 1  iliil  but  la.i(te  honey,  and  /.  I  must  die 

2  ."Ja/n.  24.  17.  /.  I  have  sinned  and  done  wickedly 
Job  O.l-'-  if  I  speak  of  strength,  I.  he  is  strong 
}'.'ial.  37.  30.  h^'  pn««>d  away,  and  /.  he  wag  not 

40.  7.  /.  r  come  ||  132.  0. 1,  wb  heard  it  at  Ephratah 
52.  7.  /.  the  man  that  made  not  God  his  strength 
73.  27.  /.  they  that  are  fur  from  thee  shall  perish 
92.  9.  /.  thine  enemies,  for  /.  thine  enemies  perish 
F.ecl.  7.2!!./.  this  only  have  I  foiinil,  that  God  made 
Cant.l.  11.  I.  the  v*iritr!r  is  past,  itie  rain  is  over 
/,«rt.  25. 9.  {.this  is  our  God, we  have  waited  for  him 
Jrr.  4   23.  the  earlh.  and  /.  it  was  wiihont  form 
25.  T  beheld,  and  /.  there  was  no  man,  birds  flud 
P.  8.  /.  certainly  in  vain  made  he  it,  pen  in  vain 
2.5.  29.  for  /.  I  hegin  to  bring  evil  on  the  city 
Firk.  17.  18.  when  /.  he  hail  given  him  his  hand 
.^n.  9.  fnr  I.  it  Cometh  ||  .33.  .'Ci.  /.  il  will  roine 
r!ni  O.fi.for /.they  are  gone,  because  of  de^trul■^ion 
■4mus  4.  2.  that  if.  the  dnvR  shall  come  upon  you 
348 


LOC 

Hag.l.O.ye  looked  for  much,  and  1.  it  came  to  little 
Mat.  3.  10.  and  I.  the  heavens  were  opened 

24.  23.  /.  here  is  Christ,  or  there,  believe  it  not 
2d.  7.  /.  I  have  told  you  \\  20. 1.  1  am  with  you 

Luke  13.  16.  Satan  bound,  /.  these  eighteen  years 
23. 15.  /.  nothing  worthy  of  death  is  done  to  hini 
^Jctti  13.  40.  unworthy,  /.  we  turn  to  the  Gentiles 
llcb.  10.  7.  /.  I  come  to  do  thy  will,  O  God,  9. 

luadi;m. 

Psal.  lU.  1 1-t.  that  our  oxen  may  be  I.  with  tlcsh 
Jsa.id.l.  ou  the  cattle  your  carriages  were  heavy  /. 

LOADETU. 
Psal.  68.  19.  Lord,  who  daily  /.  us  with  benefits 

LOAF. 
/irzo<i.29.23.one  /.  of  bread,  one  cake  of  oiled  bread 
1  C/tr.  10. 3.  David  dealt  to  every  one  a.  I.  of  bread 
Mark  8.  14.  neither  hud  they  more  than  one  I. 

LOAN. 

1  Sam.  2.  20.  for  the  /.  which  is  lent  to  the  Lord 

L0.-\T1I,  see  LoTHK. 

LOAVES. 

1  Sam.  17.  17.  take  ten  I.  and  run  to  the  camp 

25.  18.  Abigail  made  haste  and  took  2U0  /. 

1  Kiti^s  14.  3.  take  with  thee  ten  /.  and  cracknels 

2  Ktiigs  4.42.  a  mun  brought  the  man  of  God  20/. 
Mai.  14.  17.  they  say,  we  liave  here  but  live  /. 

19.  and  he  took  the  live  /.  Mark  6. 38.  Luke  9.13. 
15.34.said,how  many  /.have  ye?  Mark  0.38.  \  8. 5. 

30.  he  took  the  seven/,  and  the  fishes,  Mark  8.0. 
IC.  9.  nor  remember  the  five  /.  of  the  5000 

10.  nor  tlie  seven  /.  of  the  4000,  and  how  many 
Mark  ti.  44.  they  that  did  eat  of  the  /.  were  5000 

52.  they  considered  not  the  miracle  of  the  /. 
Lake  11.  5.  say  to  him,  friend,  lend  nie  three  I. 
Jolin  0.  9.  a  lad  here  who  hath  five  barley  /. 

ll.Jesus  took  the  /.  and  distributed  to  the  discip. 

13.  with  tiie  fragments  of  the  five  barley  /. 
26.  because  ye  did  eat  of  the  /.  and  were  filled 

Sue  I5RE.4D. 

JVace  LOAVES. 

Aev.SS.  17.  shall  bring  two  zc.  /.of  two  tenth  deals 

LOCK. 
Cant.  5.  5.  dropping  myrrh  ou  the  handles  of  the  I. 

LOCK. 
Eiek.  8.  3.  and  he  took  me  by  a  /.  of  my  head 

LOCKS. 
JVum,  6.  5.  let  the  I.  of  the  hair  of  his  head  grow 
Judg.ia.yS.idhou  wtuvest  the  seven  /.  of  my  head 

19.  she  caused  him  to  shave  off  the  seven  /. 

.Vek.  3.  3.  set  uii  doors,  and  /.  thereof,  6,  13, 14, 15. 

Cant.  4.  1.  thou  hast  doves'  eyes  within  thy  /. 

3.  like  a  piece  of  jiomegranate  within  thy  /. 

5.  2.  my  /.  are  filled  with  the  drops  of  the  night 

11.  his  /.  are  bushy,  and  black  as  a  raven 

6. 7.  a  pomegranate  are  thy  temples  wilhin  thy  I. 
h(t.  47.  2.  uncover  thy  /.  make  bare  the  leg 
Kick.  44.  20.  nor  sutler  their  /.  to  grow  long 
See  Bars. 
LOCKED. 
Judg.  3.  23.  Ehud  shut  the  doors  and  I.  them 
24.  behold,  the  doors  of  the  parlour  were  /. 
LOCUST 
Signifies,  [1]  .3  certain  vile  insect.    Their  nature 
is  to  be  many  together,  therefore  vast  muUi- 
tadcs  arc  resembled  by  them,  Nah.  3.  15.     J71 
Arabia,  and  other  countries  that  arc  infested 
by  them,  they  come  in  vast  numbers  upon  their 
corn  tchvn  ripe,  and  ichat  they  do  not  vat  thiy 
ivftct  with  their  touch  and  the  moisture  coming 
from    them ;  and  afterwards  dying  in  great 
numbers,  they  poison  the  air,  and  cause  a  pes- 
tilence.   (Jod  plagued  the  Kgyptians,  by  send- 
ing swarms  of  them  into  their  land,  Exod.  10. 

14.  [2]  Either  a  large  sort  of  grasshoppcr.i, 
or  a  kind  of  green  herb,  Lev.  11.  22.  Mat.  3.  4. 
[3]  Jiulliors,  or  tearhers  of  false  doelrin<-, 
irho  inficl  others  by  distilling  their  poisonous 
doctrines  into  thim.  Rev.  9.  3. 

Ejodt  10. 19.  there  remained  not  one  I.  in  all  Egypt 
Lev.  11. 22.  /.  after  his  kind,  and  bald  /.  ye  may  eat 
iJeut.  28.  42.  all  thy  trees  shall  the  /.  consume 

1  Kings  8. 37.  if  th.-re  be  in  the  land  /.  2  Chr.  6. 28. 
Psnl.  78.  40.  he  gave  also  their  labour  to  the  /. 

109.  23.  I  am  tossed  up  and  down  as  the  I. 
.Tod  1.  4.  Imlh  the  /.  eaten,  and  th;it  which  /.  left 

2.  2.5. 1  will  restore  the  years  lhat  Uie  /.  hath  eaten 

LOCUSTS. 
Ezod.  10.  4.  behohl,  tomorrow  I  will  bring  I. 

12.  stretch  out  lliy  hand  over  Egypt  fur  the  I. 

13.  in  the  murning  the  cast  wind  brought  the  /. 

14.  no  such/.  II  lO.thc  west  wind  look  away  ihul. 
Drut.  28.  38.  for  the  /.  Shall  consume  it 

2  Chron.  7.  13.  if  I  command  the  /.  to  devour 
/'«a/.105.34.ho8pake,aud  /.  came,  and  caterpillars 
Prov.  30.  27.  the  /.  have  no  king,  yd  go  by  bainls 
/.•'rt.:t3.  4.  as  the  running  to  anil  fro  of/,  shall  he  run 
.Xah.  3.  15.  mako  Ihyself  many  11s  the  /. 

17.  thy  crowned  are  as  llir  /.  and  thy  captains 
.W(i<.3.4.his  meat  was  /.  and  wild  honey, .If/irA-  l.G. 
yiet>.9.3.lhero  came  out  of  the  smoke  /.  on  the  coilh 


LQX 

Rev.  IK  7.  shapes  of /.  were  like  to  horses  for  battlt 

LODGE. 
/ia.l.S.tbe  daughter  ol  Zion  is  left  as  a  /.  iu  garden 

LODGE. 
Gen.24.23.is  there  room  in  the  house  for  us  to  /.  in'« 

25.  we  have  provender  enough,  and  room  to  /.  iu 
J'li'um.  22.  8.  he  said  to  them,  I.  here  this  night 
.Josh.  4.  3.  in  the  place  where  ye  shall  /.  this  night 
Judg.  19.  9.  /.  here,  that  thy  heart  may  be  merry 

13.  to  /.  in  Gibeah  or  in  Uamali,  15.  |  20.  4. 

20.  the  old  man  said,  only  /.  not  111  the  street 
Ruth  1.  10.  where  Ihou  lodgest  1  will  /. 

2  Saia.  17.  8.  thy  father  will  not  /.  with  the  peopls 
16.  /.  not  this  night  in  the  plains  of  the  wilderuvK* 

JVih.  4.  22.  let  every  one  /.  within  Jerusalem 
13.  21.  1  said,  why  /.  ye  about  the  wall! 

.Tnb  17. 1 2.  doth  not  my  eye  L  in  their  provocation? 
24.7,  they  cause  the  naked  to  /.  without  clothing 
31.  32.  the  stranger  did  not  /.  in  the  street 

Psnl.  25. 1 13.  his  soul  shall  /.  in  goodness 
91. 1 1.  shall  /.  under  the  shadow  of  ihe  Almighty 

Cant.  7. 11.  come,  my  beloved,  let  us  /.  in  villages 

Isa.  21.  13.  in  the  forest  in  Arabia  shall  ye  /. 
G5.  4.  and  /.  in  monumeuts,  and  eat  swine's  flesh 

.fer.i.  14. how  long  shall  vain  thoughts  /.  in  tlieel 

Zeph.  2.  14.  the  btusts  shall  /.  in  the  upper  linteU 

Mat.  13.  32.  so  that  the  birds  of  the  air  come  and 
I.  in  the  branches  thereof,  Mark  4.  32. 

.1cts2l.  IC.  brought  Miiasun  with  whom  wesbo.f. 
LODGED. 

Cren.  32  13.  Jacob  /.  there  that  same  night 

21.  and  himself/,  that  night  in  llie  comjiany 
Josh.~.}.lhu  spies  came  into  a  harlot's  hou.-e,and  L 

3.  1.  to  Jordan,  he  and  all  Israel,  and  /.  there 

4.  8.  carried  them  over  to  the  place  where  they  I. 
0.  II.  they  came  to  llie  camp,  and  /.  in  the  camp 
8.  9.  but  Joshua  /.  lhat  night  among  iJie  j>eople 

Judg.  18.  2.  came  to  house  of  Micah,  Ihey  /.  Iliero 

19.  4.  so  Ihey  did  eat  and  drink,  and  /.  ther3 
7.  urged  him,  thcrefoie  he  /.  theie  again 

1  flings  19.  9.  came  into  a  cave  and  /.  tlieie 
1  Chr.  9.  27.  they  /.  round  about  the  housuof  God 
.VeA.  13.  20.  the  merchants  /.  without  Jerusakiii 
!sa.  1.  21.  riglitcousness  /.  in  it,  but  now  murdereta 
Mat.  21.  17.  he  went  to  Belhany  and  I.  there 
Luke  13. 19.  the  fowls  of  Ihe  air  i.  in  branches  of  it 
.^ct.t  10.  18.  asked  whether  Simon  were  /.  tliero 
23.  then  called  he  them  in,  and  /.  Iheiii 
28.  7.  Publius  /.  us  ihree  days  courteously 

1  7'm.  5. 10.  if  she  have  /.  strangers,  if  she  vi'ashed 

LODGEST. 
Ruth  1.  IG.  Ruth  saiil.  where  thou  /.  I  will  Uidge 

LODGETH. 
Jlcts  10.  6.  he  /.  with  one  Simon  a  tanner 

LODGLVG. 
.7osh.  4.  3.  twelve  stones,  and  leave  ihein  in  the  I 
Judg.  19.  15.  no  man  took  them  to  his  house  to  I. 
Isa.  10.  29.  they  have  taken  up  their  /.  at  Geba 
Jcr.  9.  2.  that  1  had  in  the  wilderness  a  /.  place 
Jlets  28.  23.  there  came  many  to  him  into  his  I, 
Philcm.  22.  but  withal  prepaf  me  also  a  I. 

LODGINGS. 

2  Kings  19. 23.  I  will  enter  into  the  /.  of  his  bordeif 

LOFT. 
1  Rims  17.19.he  took  him  and  carried  him  into  al 
..ids  20.  9.  Eutychus  f  II  ih.wn  liom  the  third  I. 

LOFTY. 

Ps.nl.  131.  l.IiearlisnothauL'hty,  nor  mine  eyes  {. 

Prov.  30. 13.  a  leneration,  O  how  /.  aie  Iheir  eves! 

/sa.2.11.  ihe  /.looks  of  man  shall  be  humbled,  5.' l^S. 

12.  thed.iy  of  the  Lord  be  on  every  one  that  is  I. 

20.  5.  tlic  /.  cily  he  layeth  low  to  ihe  ground 
57.  7.  on  a  /.  mounlalii  hast  thou  set  thy  bed 

15.  thussailhliighniul  lofty  One, lhat  inhubiletk 
LOFTILY. 

Psal.  73.  8.  they  arc  cnrnipt,  ihey  speak  I. 
■  LOFTI.NEP?. 

fsa.  2.  17.  the  /.  of  man  shiill  be  lowed  down 

Jcr.  48.29.  we  heard  Ihe  pride  of  Moab,  his  /. 
LOtl. 

Lev.  14.  10.  the  priest  shall  lake  a  /.  of  oil,  12, 24. 

IS.shalllnke  some  of  the  /.  of  oil.  and  |>our  it 

21.  if  he  bj  jioor,  th'n  li.>  shall  take  a  I.  of  oil 

LOINS 

Signify,  [11  The  loirrr  parts  of  the  hack,  or  tht 
vai'sl,  Exod.  28.  42.  [21  The  ickole  man,  Job 
31.20.    P9al.6O.il. 

Gird  up  the  loins  of  your  mind,  1  Pel.  1.  13 
Let  your  viinds  he  intent  upon,  rrndy,  and  pre- 
parr'd  for  your  s/iiritual  work,  rrslniined  from 
all  those  thoughts,  cares,  affections,  and  lusts, 
which  may  tntnnglr.  detain,  and  hinder  Ihrrn, 
or  make  them  -unfit  for  it.  It  is  an  allu.iion  to 
the  custom  of  tlie  Oriental  nations,  whi  vitar- 
ing  long  loose  garments  were  wont  to  gird 
them  about  their  loins,  thol  thru  might  not 
hivdrr  Ihrm  in  their  tranllivg  or  rrorkimr, 
I  Kina^  18.  4(|-  -  Kings  4.  2!>.  /(  may  al.H 
have  a  special  respect  to  Ihr  like  rite  used  ai 
the  jiassevcr,  vhcn  the    Uraclitcs  were  juH 


LON 

ready  to  enter  upon  their  journey  and  march 
out  of  Kgi/pt,  Kxod.  I'i.  11. 
Gen.  35.  11.  and  kings  sliall  come  out  of  thy  /. 
37.  34.  and  Jacob  put  sackcloth  upon  Ilia  I. 
4ti.\;f3.tlie  souls  whiclicaiue  out  of  liis/.  Exod.  1.5. 
Ezod.  1'2.  11.  ye  sliall  eat  it,  with  your  I.  girded 
^ii.  42.  breeches  reach  from  the  I.  unto  the  thighs 
Diut.'i'i.  11.  smite  through  the/,  of  them  that  rise 
2  Sam.  iO.8.  a  girdle  with  a  sword  fastened  on  his  I. 

1  Kings  i.  5.  put  the  blood  in  the  girdle  about  his  I. 

6.  lU. sun  shall  come  forth  of  tliy  I.  ij  Ckrun.  <>.  9. 
Vi.  10.  thicker  than  my  father's  I.  2  Chr.  10.  10. 
la.  4fi.  Elijah  girded  up  his  I.  and  ran  before  Ahab 
2U.  31.  let  us,  I  (ua,v  put  sackcloth  on  our  I. 

32.  so  ihey  girded  sackcloth  on  their  Z.  and  ropes 

2  Kings  1.  f .  was  a  hairy  man,  and  girt  with  girdle 

of  leather  about  his  I.  Mat.  3. 4.  |  Jlark  1.  6. 

4.29.  gild  up  thy  1. 9. 1.  Job  3d.  3. 1  40. 7.  Jcr.  1.  17. 
JVcVt.  4.  t  18.  had  each  his  sword  girded  on  his  I. 
Job  12. 18.  he  girdoth  the  I.  of  kings  with  a  girdle 

31.  20.  if  his  I.  have  not  blessed  me 

40.  1(5.  lo,  now  his  strength  is  in  his  I. 
Pxal.'.iS.l.  my  /.  arc  tilled  with  a  loathsome  disease 

t)6.  11.  thou  laidest  affliction  upon  our  /. 

G9.  23.  and  make  their  I.  continually  to  shako 
ProK.  30.  t  31.  a  horse  girt  in  the  /.  and  a  king 

31.  17.  she  girdeth  her  I.  with  strength 
/jU.5.27.  neither  shall  the  girdle  of  their  I.  bo  loosed 

11.5.  righteousness  shall  be  the  girdle  of  his  I. 
20'.  2.  louse  the  sackcloth  from  otfthy  I.  put  off 
21.  3.  therefore  are  my  /.  filled  with  pain 

32.  11.  make  bare,  gird  sackcloth  ujion  your  I. 
45.  1.  I  will  loose  the  I.  of  kings  to  open  before 

Jer.  13.  1.  get  a  linen  girdle  and  put  it  upon  thy  i. 
11.  as  the  girdle  cleaveth  to  the  i.  of  a  man 

30.  (i.  see  every  man  with  his  hands  on  his  I. 
4d.  37.  and  upon  the  I.  shall  be  sackcloth 

Eiek.  1.  27.  from  the  appearance  of  his  I.  upward 
.'i.2.  from  his  /.  downward,  fire;  from  his  I.  upward 
9.  t  2.  with  a  writer's  inkhorn  on  liis  I. 

21.6.  sigh  with  the  breaking  of  thy  I.  and  bitterness 
2i!.  15.  giidi'd  wiih  girdles  upon  their  /. 

2'.».  7.  Ihou  madest  ail  their  /.  to  be  at  a  stand 
44. 18.  they  shall  have  linen  breecheson  their  I. 
47.  4.  he  measured,  the  waters  were  to  the  I. 
iJan.  5.  6.  so  the  joints  of  his  /.  were  loosed 

10..5.  whose  I.  We're  girded  with  fine  gold  of  tJphaz 
.liii'is  8.  10.  I  will  bring  sackcloth  on  your  I. 
.VdA.  2.  1.  make  thy  I.  strong  ||  10.  pain  is  in  all  I. 
/.wt<;12. 3.5.  Id  vour  /.  be  girded  about,  and  lights 
~-?.:ls  2.  30.  that  of  his  I.  he  would  raise  up  Christ 
Kpk  6.  14.  having  your  i.  girt  about  with  truth 
He//.  7.5.  Iho'  they  came  out  of  the  /.  of  Abraham 

10.  for  he  was  yet  in  the  L  of  his  father 
1  Pet.  1.13.  wherefore  sird  up  the  /.  of  your  mind 

LON  a 
Signifies,  [1]  Of  (Treat  crtcntinlength,Ezek.  31. 
5.     [2J    To  lone  greatly,  Gen.  34.  8.     [3]    To 
thirst,  2  Sam.  23.  15.     [4]  To  desire  very  ear- 
nesthi,  Joli  3.  21.     Thus  do,  [1]  Such  as  arc 
gri  ally  afflicted  for  death,  Joh '3.  2i.     [2]    T/ie 
father  after  the  son,  2  Sam.  13.  39.     [3]    The 
ahsent  fur  his  natine  place,  Gen.  31.  30.     [4] 
Thegndly  after  God's  word,?sa.\.  119.40,  131, 
174.     [5]   Thf  faithful  teacher  after  his  flock, 
Phil.  2.  2G.     [6]  Saints  after  saints,  Rom.  1. 
n.     Phil.  1.8. 
Gen.  43. 15.  G.  who  fed  me  all  my  life  I.  to  this  day 
Ertid.  19.  13.  when  the  trumpet  soundeth  /.  19. 
50.  12.  that  thy  days  may  be  I.  on  the  land 
]\'nm.  9. 19.  when  the  clouil  tarried  I.  on  tabernacle 
Deut.  l.fi.ye  dwelt  I.  enough  on  this  mount,  2.3. 
4.  25.  and  shalt  have  remained  /.  in  the  lAd 
14.  24.  and  if  the  way  be  too  /.  for  thee 
19.  (>.  and  overtake  him,  because  the  way  is  I. 
2>'.  59.  make  great  plagues  and  of  I.  continuance 
Jis-li.  (5. 5.  when  they  make  a  I.  blast  with  the  horn 
9. 13.  are  old,  hy  reason  of  the  very  i.  journey 

24.  7.  vc  dwelt  in  the  wildi>rness  a  I.  season 
2."«nm.3. 1.  there  was  i.  war  between  house  of  Saul 
1  l^'ings  3. 1 1 .  and  hast  not  asked  /.  life,2  CAr.  1.11. 
2CAr.  1.5. 3.  for  a  I.  season  Israel  was  without  God 
Psal.  91.  16.  with  ;.  life  will  I  .satisfy  him 

95. 10.  forty  years  Z.  was  I  grieved  with  this  generat. 
120.fi.  my  soul  I.  dwell  with  him  that  hateth  peace 
129.3.  the  plowers  made  /.  their  furrows 
143.  3.  to  dwell,  as  those  tiiat  have  been  /.  dead 
Pror.  3.  2.  and  I.  life  shall  they  add  to  thee     • 

7.  19.  the  good  man  is  gone  a  I.  journey 

23.  30.  they  that  tarry  /.  at  the  wine,  that  go 

25.  15.  bv  l.  forbearing  is  a  prince  persuaded 
y.cr/.  !C.  5.  because  man  soeth  to  his  /.  home 
/c^.fi.i.22.mv  elect  shall  ren  joy  work  of  their  hands 
Jir.  29.  28.  this  cai>tivity  is /.'build  ye  houses 

r  nm.2.20.  shall  women  eat  their  children  of  span  I. 
Fzek.  17.  3.  a  great  eagle  /.  winged,  full  of  feathers 

31.  5.  his  brnncheshecumo  I.  b<canse  of  waters 
44.  20.  nor  shave,  nor  suffer  their  locks  to  grow  i. 

Dan.  10.  I.  but  the  time  appointed  was  /. 
Hos.  13.  X3.not  stay  i.in  the  place  of  breaking  forth 
319 


LON 

Mat.  11. 21.  repented  I.  ago  in  sackcloth  and  ashes 

23.14.  ye  devour  widows'  houses,  and  for  jiretence 
make  /.  prayers,  Mark  12. 40.  J.uke  20.  47. 

Mark  12.  38.  who  go  in  I.  clothing,  l,uke  20.  46. 
16.  5.  sitting  clothed  in  a  I.  white  garment 
I.uke  18.  7.  avenge,  though  he  hear  /.  with  them 
23. 8.  for  he  was  desirous  to  see  him  of  a  I.  season 
^^cts  20.9.  as  Paul  was  I.  preaching,  he  sunk  with 
27. 14. not  Waller  there  arose  a  tempest  Euroclydon 
21.  but  after  i.  abstinence  Paul  stood  in  midst  of 
1  Cor.  11.  14.  if  a  man  have  I.  hair,  it  is  a  shame 
15.  if  a  woman  have  I.  hair,  it  is  a  glory  to  her 
Eph.  6.3.  that  thou  raayest  live  I.  on  tL.  earth 
I  Tim.  3.  15.  if  I  tarry  I.  that  thou  inayest  know 
Jam.  5.  7.  the  husbandman  hath  I.  patience  for  it 
Sec  Ago. 
^s  LONG  as. 
Lev.ld.  19.  as  I.  as  she  is  put  apart  for  uncleanness 
26.34.  enjoy  sabbaths,  as  I.  as  it  lieth  desolate,  35. 
jVuHi.  9.  18.  as  I.  us  the  cloud  abode,  they  rested 
i'eut. 12.19. forsa.  not  tlie  Levite  as  Las  thou  livest 
31. 13.  fear  the  Lord  as  I.  as  you  live  in  the  land 

1  .Sum.  I.  28.  lent  to  the  Lord,  as  I.  as  he  liveth 
20.  31.  as  I.  as  son  of  Jesse  liveth  on  the  ground 
25.  15.  any  thing  as  I.  as  we  were  conversant 

2  Chr.  26. 5.  as  I.  as  he  sought  the  L.  he  prospered 
36.  21.  as  I.  as  she  lay  desolate  she  kept  sabbati, 

Psat.  72.  5.  fear  thee  as  I.  as  sun  and  moon  enduit 

17.  his  name  shall  be  continued  as  I.  as  the  sun 

104.  33.  I  will  sing  to  the  Lord  as  I.  as  I  live 

116.  2.  I  will  call  upon  him  as  I.  as  I  live 

Ezek.  42.  11.  as  I.  as  they,  and  as  broad  as  they 

Mat.a.la.  as  Las  bridegr.  is  with  them,  Mark  2.19. 

John  9.  5.  as  I.  as  I  am  in  the  world,  I  am  the  light 

Jiom.  7. 1.  dominion  over  a  man  as  I.  as  he  liveth 

1  C'i)r.7.39.wife  is  bound  as  I.  as  her  husband  liveth 
Oal.  4.1.  the  heir  as  I.  as  he  is  a  child  ditfereth  not 
lPct.3.6.  whose  daughters  ye  are  as  I.  as  ye  do  well 

2  Pet.  1.  13.  as  l.  as  1  am  in  tliis  tabernacle 

See  Cubits,  Day,  Hour. 
So  LONG. 
.Tudg.  5.  28.  why  is  his  chariot  so  I.  in  coming  ^ 
lSa/«.29.8.  what  found  in  thy  servant,so  /.  as  I  have 
2  Kings  9.22.  so  I.  as  the  whoredoms  of  thy  mother 
2  Chron.  6.  31.  they  may  fear  thee  so  I.  as  they  live 
Esth.a.13.  so  I.  as  I  see  Mordecai  sitting  at  the  gate 
.Job  27.  6.  shall  not  reproach  me  so  I.  as  1  live 
Psal.  72.  7.  peace  so  I.  as  the  moon  endureth 
t,uke  1.  21.  and  marvelled  that  he  tarried  so  I. 
horn.  7.  2.  bound  to  her  husband  so  I.  as  he  liveth 
Heb.i.  7.  to-day,  at^er  so  I.  a  time,  as  it  is  said 

LONG  time. 
Gen.  26.  8.  when  he  had  been  there  a  I.  time 
jVani.  20. 15.  and  we  have  dwelt  in  Egypt  a  I.  time 
Z)e«Z.20.19.  when  thou  shalt  besiege  a  city  a  I.  lime 
Josh.  11. 18.  Joshua  made  war  a  I.  time  with  kings 
23.  1.  a  I.  time  after  that  Joshua  wa.xcd  old 

1  Sam.  7.  2.  while  the  ark  abode  the  time  was  I. 

2  Sam.  14. 2.  as  a  woman  that  had  I.  time  mourned 
"Chron.  30.5.  for  they  had  not  done  it  of  a/,  time 
/sa.42.14. 1  have  l.time  holden  my  peace,  been  still 
f^am.  5.  20.  forget  us,  and  forsake  us  so  I.  time 
Mat.  25.19.  after  a  I.  time  the  lord  of  those  servants 

Cometh,  and  reckoneth  with  them,  J^nke  20. 9 
Luke  8.  27.  a  certain  man  which  had  devils  /.  time 
20.  9.  a  man  went  into  a  far  country  for  a  I.  time 
JohnH.G.knew  that  he  had  been  a  l.time  in  that  case 

14.  9.  have  I  been  so  I.  time  with  you,  and  yet 
Jlcts8.ll.  because  of  I.  time  he  had  bewitched  them 

14.  3.  Z.7(me  abode  they  with  the  disciples,  28. 
2  Pet.2. 3.  whose  judgment  of  Z.  time  liiigeretli  not 

LONG  while. 
Acts  20.  II.  he  talked  a  L  while  till  break  of  day 

LONG. 
Job  3.  21.  which  I.  for  death,  but  it  cometh  not 
6. 8.  O  that  God  would  grant  me  thing  that  1 1,  for! 
Horn.  1.  n.  for  I  I.  to  see  you,  thnt  I  may  impart 
2  Cor.  9. 14.  and  by  their  prayer  which  I.  after  you 
Phil.  1.  8.  how  groatlv  I  I.  after  you  all  in  bowels 

LONGED. 
2  Sam.  13.  39.  David  I.  to  go  forth  unto  Absalom 

23. 15.  David  I  and  said,  O  that  one,  1  Chr.  11. 17. 
Psnl.  119.  40.  behold,  I  have  I.  after  thy  precepts 

]31.  for  I  I.  for  thy  commandments 
174.1  have  /.  for  thy  salvation,  O  Lord 
Phil.  2. 26.  for  he  I.  after  von  all  1|  4.  1.  and  I.  for 

LONGEDST. 
Gen  31.  30.  thou  sore  I.  after  thy  father's  house 

LONGER. 
Exod.  2.  3.  when  she  could  no  I.  hide  him 
9.  28.  I  will  let  you  go,  and  ye  shall  stay  no  I. 
.fudg.  2. 14.  could  not  any  I.  stand  before  enemies 
2  Sam.  20.  5.  he  tarried  I.  than  the  set  time 
2  Kivgs  6.  33.  should  I  wait  for  the  Lord  any  1.1 
Job  7.~t  8.  thine  eyes  are  on  me,  I  can  live  no  I. 
11.  9.  the  measure  thereof  is  I.  than  the  earth 
Jer.  44.  22.  so  that  the  Lord  could  no  I.  bear 
I.nkc  16.  2.  for  thou  mavest  he  no  i.  steward 
Acts  18.  20.  when  they  desired  him  to  tarry  I. 
25.  24.  crying,  that  he  ought  not  to  live  any  I. 


LOO 

Rom.  6.  2.  that  are  dead  to  sin,  live  any  I.  thereia 
Gal.  3.  25.  we  are  no  I.  under  a  school-inasier 
1  Thess.  3.  1.  when  we  could  no  /.  forbear,  5. 
1  Tim.  5.  23.  drink  no  I.  water,  but  use  a  little  wioa 

1  Pet.  4.  2.  that  he  no  I.  live  the  rest  of  his  liuie 
licv.  10.  C.  thatfliere  should  be  time  no  I. 

LONGETll. 
Gen.  34.  8.  my  son  Shechein  l.  for  your  daughter 
IJcut.  12.  20.  because  thy  soul  I.  to  eat  flesh 
Psal.  63.  1.  my  tlesh  I.  for  thee  in  a  dry  land 
84.  2.  my  soul  I.  for  the  courts  of  the  Lord 

LONGLNG. 
Dcut.W.  32.  thine  eyes  shall  fail  with  I.  for  them 
Psal.  107.  9.  for  lie  satisfieth  the  I.  soul 
119.20.  my  soul  breaketh  for  the  I.  tliat  it  hath 

LONG-SUFFEKING. 
Ezod.  34.  G.  Lord  God  merciful  and  gracious,  I. 
suffering,  jVum.  14. 18.  Psal.SG.  15. 2  i^et.3.9. 
.Tcr.  15.15.  O  Lord,  take  me  not  away  in  thy  l.-sujf, 
Rom.  2.  4.  or  despisest  thou  riches  of  his  l.-suffcr. 
9.22.  endured  with  much  Z.-si/^er.vessels  of  w  rath 

2  Cor.  6.  6.  by  knowMge, by  l.-suffer.  by  kindness 
Cral.  5.  22.  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  l.-sufftring 
Kph.  4.  2.  with  Z.  su^VTjji^,forbearing  one  anuLlier 
CoM. 11.  strengthened  to  all  l.-svff.  with  joyfulnesa 

3. 12.  put  on,  as  elect  of  God,  meekness,  l.-suffcr. 

1  Tim.  1. 16.  that  in  me  Christ  might  shew  all  l.-a 

2  T(m.3.10.  thou  hast  fully  known  my  faith,  l.-svff. 
4.2.  rebuke,  exhort  with  alU.-si/Jcr.  and  doctrine 

1  Pc£.3.20.  when  l.-svffcring  of  God  waited  in  days 

2  Pet.  3. 15. the  l.-suff'cring  of  our  Lord  is  salvation 

LOOK,  S. 
Psal.  IS.  27.  but  thou  wilt  bring  down  high  I. 
101.  5.  that  hath  a  high  /.  I  will  not  sutler 
Prov.  6. 17.  the  Lord  hateth  a  proud  /.  a  lying 

21.  4.  a  high  I.  and  proud  heart  is  sin 

Isa.  2.  11.  the  lofty  I.  of  man  shall  be  humb.ed 
10.  12.  I  will  punish  the  glory  of  his  high  I. 
Ezek.  2.  R.  nor  be  dismayed  at  their  I.  3.  9. 
7^a?t.7.20.whose  /.  was  more  stout  tlian  his  fellows 

LOOK 
Signifies,   [1]    To   behold   or  see,  Deut.  28.   32. 
[2]   To  consider  or  take  particular  notice  of, 
Lev.  13.  5.     [3]  To  expect  or  wait  for,  Jer.  13. 
16.  Mat.  11.  3.     [4]    To  believe  and  trust  in, 
Isa.  45.  22. 
Gen.  13.  14.  I.  from  the  place  where  thou  art 
15.  5.  I.  toward  heaven,  and  tdl  the  stars 
19.  17.  escape  for  thy  lile,  I.  not  behind  thee 

40.  7.  wherefore  I.  ye  so  sadly  to-day  1 

41.  33.  now  let  Pharaoh  /.  out  a  man  discreet 

42.  1.  Jacob  said,  why  I.  ye  one  upon  another  t 
Exod.  10.  10.  I.  to  it;  for  evil  is  before  you 

25.  20.  and  their  faces  shall  /.  one  to  another 
40.  I.  that  thou  make  them  after  their  pattern 
Lev.  13.  39.  then  the  priest  shall  I.  if  the  spots 
53.  if  the  priest  shall  /.  and  behold,  50. 

14.  3.  then  the  priest  shall  Mf  the  plague,  39, 44 
Deut.  9.27.  l.  not  to  the  stubbornness  of  this  people- 

28.  32.  thine  eyes  shall  I.  and  fail  with  longing 
1  Sam.  16. 12.  David  was  ruddy,  and  goodly  to  t.  to 

17.  18.  I.  how  thy  brethren  fare,  and  take  pledge 
1  Kings  18.  43.  go  up  now,  I.  toward  the  sea 
'■2Kings3.  14. 1  would  not  I.  toward  thee,  nor  see 

6.  32.  I.  when  messenger  Cometh,  shut  the  door 

9.  2.  I.  out  there  Jehu,  and  go  in,  make  him  rise 

10.3.  /.even  out  best  and  meetest  of  master's  sons 
23.  I.  there  be  none  of  the  servants  of  the  Lord 

14.  8.  come,  let  us  I.  one  another  in  the  fiicc 
1  Chron.  12.  17.  the  God  of  our  fathers  /.  theteoD 
.Tob  3.  9.  let  it  /.  for  light,  but  have  none 

5.  t  1.  to  which  of  the  saints  wilt  thou  /.  ? 

20. 21.  therefore  shall  no  man  I.  for  his  goods 

2I,t  5./. unto  me  and  be  astonished,lay  your  hands 

35. 5.  /.  to  heavens  and  see,  and  behold  the  cloud» 
Psal.  5.  3. 1  will  direct  my  prayer  to  thee,  and  I.  up 

40. 12.  iniquities  so  that  I  am  not  able  to  I.  up 

123.  C.  as  the  eyes  of  servants  /.  to  their  mastera 
Prov.  4.  2.5.  let  thine  eyes  I.  right  on,  and  eye-lidk 

27. 2.3.  to  know  thy  flocks,  and  I.  well  to  thy  herds 
Feci.  12.  3.  thnt  I.  out  at  the  windows  be  darkened 
Cant.  4.  8. 1,  from  top  of  Amana,  Shenir,  Hermon 
fsa.  a.  30.  if  one  /.  unto  the  land,  behold  darkness 

8.  17.  I  will  wait  on  the  Lord,  I  will  I.  for  him 

21.  shall  curse  their  king  and  God,  and  I.  upward 

22.  they  shall  /.  unto  earth,  and  behold  trouble 
17.  7.  at  that  day  shall  a  man  L  to  his  maker 

8.  he  shall  not  I.  to  the  altars,  work  of  his  hands 

22.  4.  I.  away  from  me  I  will  weep  bitterly 
8.  thou  didst  I.  in  that  day  to  the  armour 

31.  1.  they  /.  not  to  the  holy  one  of  Israel 
42.  IS.  hear  ye  deaf,  I.  ye  blind,  that  ye  may  see 
45. 22. 1,  unto  me,  and  be  saved,  all  ends  of  earth 
51.  1.  /.  to  the  rock  whence  ye  are  hewn 
2.  /.  to  Abraham  your  father  and  to  Sarah 
.56.  11.  they  all  /.  to  their  own  way  for  gain 
.59.  11.  we  I.  for  judgment,  but  there  is  none 
66.  2.  but  to  this  loan  will  I  I.  that  is  poor 
Jer.  13.  16.  and  while  ve  /.  for  light,  he  turn  it 
39. 12.  take  and  I.  well  to  him,  do  him  no  h&na 


LOO 


Mr.  40.  4.  come  with  me,  and  I  will  I.  well  to  tlice 
40.  5.  llieir  mighty  ones  are  tied,  and  /.  not  back 
47. 3.  the  fatJiers  shall  not  I.  back  to  their  children 
Kiek.^£i.  15.  all  of  them  princes  to  i.  us  to  Uubylon 
'J'J.  l(i.  iniquity  to  remembrance  when  lliey  /. 
}{os.  X  1.  who  I.  to  other  gods,  and  lovo  wine 
Junah  2.  4. 1  will  I.  again  toward  thy  holy  temple 
Mic.  7.  7.  therefore  will  I  I.  to  the  Lord;  will  wait 
J\,~dli.  -2.  8.  stand,  stand,  but  none  shall  I.  back 
JUat.  11. 3.  or  do  wa  /.  for  another?  Luke  7. 19,  20. 
Jlarka.aS.pat  his  hands  on  eyes,iind  made  him  l.up 
Luke  21.  2S.  when  these  tilings  begin,  then  I.  up 
JoAn7.52.search  and  l.t'or  out  ol'Gaiilce  no  prophet 
/lets  6.  3.  I.  ye  out  seven  men  of  honest  report 
18. 15.  if  it  be  a  question  of  words,  I.  ye  to  it 
1  Cor.  l(i.  11.  1 1,  for  him  with  the  brethren 
'2  Cur.  3. 13.  Israel  could  not  stedfastly  I.  to  the  end 

4.  18.  while  we  I.  at  things  which  are  seen 
Phil.  3.  20.  from  whence  we  I.  for  the  Saviour 
/ich.  9.  28.  to  them  that  I.  for  him  shall  he  appear 

1  Pel.  1.  12.  which  the  angels  desire  to  I.  into 
8  Pet.  3.  13.  nevertheless  we  I.  for  new  heavens 

14.  seeing  yti^.  for  such  things  be  diligent  that 

2  .Tohn  8.  I.  to  yourselves,  that  we  lose  not 
Hef.  5.  3.  and  no  man  was  able  to  I.  thereon 

4.  found  worthy  to  read  the  book  nor  t.  thereon 
LOOK  down. 
Dent.  2G.  15.  I.  down  from  thy  holy  habitation 
Psal.  80.  14.  I.  down.,  behold,  and  visit  this  vine 
85.  11.  righteousness  shall  I.  down  from  heaven 
Jsa.  63.  15.  /.  down  from  heaven,  and  behold  from 
Lam.  3. 50.  till  Ld.  l.down  and  behold  from  heaven 

LOOK  ore,  or  iq>on. 
(rcn.O.lC.bow  shall  be  in  cloud,  and  I  will  I.  upon  it 

12. 11.  I  know  thou  art  a  fair  woman  to  /.  vpon 
24.  )ti.  Rebekah  was  very  fair  to  I.  upon,  2(i.  7. 

F.xj>d.  3.  6.  Moses  was  afraid  to  /.  vpon  God 

5.  21.  the  Lord  I.  vpon  you  and  judge,  because 
39.  43.  and  Moses  did  /.  upon  all  the  work 

Z.eo.13.3.  the  priest  shall  I.  on  the  plagnein  the  skin 
of  his  flesh,  21,  2.5,  20,  31,  32,  34,  43,  50. 
3.  the  priest  shall  /.  on  him,  5,  6,  27,  30. 
14.  48.  the  priest  shall  I.  upon  it,  and  behold 
J^um.  15.  39.  for  a  fringe,  that  ye  may  I.  upon  it 
JudiT.  7. 17.  Gideon,  said,  /.  on  me  anil  do  likewise 

1  .<fani.l.]l.  if  thou  wilt  indeed/.  «?i  the  affliction 

10.  7.  I.  not  on  his  countenance  or  stature 
2.Sam.9.8.  shouldost  l.upon  such  a  dead  dog  as  I  am 

11.  2.  the  woman  was  very  beautiful  to  /.  upon 

16. 12.  it  may  be  the  Lord  will  I.  on  my  affliction 

2  Chr.  24.  22.  he  said.  Lord  /.  upon  it  and  require  it 
Ksth.  1.  11.  Vashti  the  queen  was  fair  to  I.  on 
Juh  6.  28.  now  therefore  be  content,  /.  vpon  me 

40. 12. 1,  on  every  one  that  is  proud,  and  bring  low 
Psal.  22.  17.  my  bones  stare  and  /.  upon  me 
25. 18.  /.  upon  mine  affliction  and  my  pain,  forgive 
;J5.  17.  Lord,  how  long  wilt  thou  I.  on  1  rescue 
84.  9.  and  I.  upon  the  face  of  thine  Anointed 
119.  132. 1,  thou  upon  me,  and  be  merciful  to  me 
142.  t4.  /.  on  the  right  hand  and  see 
Prov.  4.  25.  let  thine  eyes  I.  right  on,  and  eye-lids 
23.  31.  I.  not  thou  vpon  the  wine  when  it  is  red 
Cant.  1.  6.  /.  not  upon  me,  because  I  am  black 

6.  13.  return,  return,  that  we  may  I.  upon  thee 
/.9a.l4.16.that  see  then,  shall  narrowly  /.  vpon  tlioc 

33.20./.i/pnn.  Zion  ||  51.6./.»pon  the  earth  beneath 

e6.24.  eo  forth  and  I.  upon  the  carcases  of  the  men 
Mic.  4.  11.  be  defiled,  and  lot  our  eve  I.  upon  Zion 
A'oA.  3.  7.  that  I.  upon  thee,  shall  flee  from  thee 
Hah.  1.  13.  of  purer  eyes  than  to  I.  upon  iniquity 

2.  15.  that  thou  mayest  /.  vpon  their  nakedness 
Zeeli.  12.  10.  shall  I.  vpon  rne  whom  they  pierced 
J,uke  9.  38.  master,  I  be?scch  thee,  /.  vpon  niy  son 
,hhn  4.  35.  lift  up  your  eyes,  and  /.  vpon  the  fields 

19.37.th';y  sha"  I.  vpon  him  whom  Ihoy  pierced 
.AcU  .>.  t.  feter  and  John  said,  I.  vpon  us,  12. 
S  Cor.^O.^.  l.upon  things  after  outward  appearance 
Phil.  2.  4.  I.  not  every  man  on  his  own  things 
Hev.  4.  3.  ho  that  sat  was  to  /.  upon  like  a  jasper 
LOOKKD. 

Oen.  6. 12.  God  I.  on  the  earth  and  it  was  corrupt 

18.  10.  the  mon  rose  up,  and   I.  lowanl  Sodom 

19.  20.  his  wife  I.  back  ||  20.  8.  /.  out  at  n  window 
29.  32.  the  Lord  hnth  I.  upon  my  nlHiciion 
Sro.  23.  the  ki^eper  of  the  prison  /.  not  to  any  thing 
40.  6.  .losnph  I.  on  them,  behold  they  were  sad 

Ernii.  2. 11.  Moans  went  ami  /.  on  their  burdens 
12.  he  I.  Ibis  way  and  that  wnv,  and  saw  no  man 
25.  and  God  I.  upon  llir-  rhildmn  of  Israel 
4.31.  Lord  had  /.  on  their  nfflirliiin,  Drut.^y.  7 
14.  24.  the  Lord  /.  on  the  host  of  the  Kgyptians 
10.  10.  that  they  /.  toward  llio  wilderness 
33.  8.  the  people  I.  at^nr  Moses  till  he  w.is  eonc 
J^iim.  12.  10.  Aaron  /•  on  Miriam,  she  wai  leprous 
10.  42.  that  they  /.   toward  the  Inhenmelo 
24.  20.  he  I.  on  Amnlek,  he  took  up  his  parable 
21.  /.  on  the  Keniles,  and  took  up  his  parable 
Jo.ih.  8.  20.  when  the  men  of  Ai  /.  behind  them 
Judtr.  •i.28.  the  mother  of  Sisera  lout  at  n  window 
6.  14.  the  Lord  I.  upon  him,  and  raid  iro  in  might 
350 


LOO 

Judff.  13.  19.  and  Manoah  and  his  wife  /.  on,  20. 
2U.  40.  the  llenjamitcs/.  behind  them,  and  behold 

1  Ham.  6.  lU.  because  they  had  /.  into  tlie  ark 
9. 10. 1  have  /.  on  my  people,  because  cry  came  to 
14.  16.  the  watchmen  of  iSaul  /.  and  behold 

16.  6.  when  they  were  come,  he  I.  on  Eliab 

17.  42.  tlie  I'hilistines  /.  about,  and  saw  David 
24.  8.  Saul  /.behind  him,  L>avidstood,2  Sam.  1.  7. 

2  Sam.'i.  20.  Abner  /.  behind  him  and  said 
6. 16.  Michal  /.  through  a  window,  and  saw  David 
22.  42.  Uiey  /.  but  there  was  none  to  save 

1  Kings  18.  43.  Elijah's  servant  went  uii  and  /. 

2  Kings  2.  24.  Elislia  turned  back  and  /.  on  them 
6.  30.  uie  people  /.  and  behold  he  had  sackcloth 
9.  30.  Jezebel  painted,  and  I.  out  at  a  window 
14. 11.  /.  one  another  in  the  face  at  Beth-sheinesh 

2  Ckron.  13.  14.  when  Judah  /.  buck,  the  battle 
26.  20.  /.  on  him,  and  behold  he  was  leprous 
Esth.  2.  15.  favour  in  the  sight  of  all  who  /.  on  her 
Job  6.  11).  the  troops  of  Teina  /.  Sheba  wailed 
Pxal.  14.  2.  the  Lord  I.  to  see  if  any  did  understand 
34.  5.  they  /.  to  him,  and  were  lightened 
53.  2.  God  /.  down  on  the  children  of  men 
102.  19.  he  hath  /.  down  from  his  sanctuary 
109.  25.  when  they  /.  they  shaked  their  heads 
Ca7it.  1.  6.  because  the  sun  hath  /.  on  me 
Isa.  5.  2.  he  I.  that  it  should  bring  forth  grapes 
7.  he  /.  fur  judgment,  but  behold  ojipression 
22.  11.  but  ye  have  not  /.  to  the  maker  thereof 
04.  3.  didst  terrible  things  which  we  /.  not  for 
Jer.  8.  15.  we  /.  for  peace,  no  good  came,  14.  19. 
Lam.  2. 10.  certainly  this  is  the  day  that  we  /.  for 
Ezek.  10.  11.  whither  the  head  /.  they  followed 
16. 1 4.  wast  not  washed  when  I  /.  upon  thee,  8. 
21. 21.  he  consulted  with  images,  he  I.  in  the  liver 
Van.l.y.i.  let  our  countenances  be  /.  on  before  thee 
Obad.  12.  not  have  /.  on  the  day  of  thy  brother 

13.  thou  shouldest  not  have  /.  on  their  affliction 
Hag.  1.  9.  ye  /.  for  much,  and  lo  it  came  to  little 
Jllal-k  3.5.  when  he  /.round  about, 5.  32.  1  10.  23. 
0.  41.  he  /.  up  to  heaven,  and  blessed  and  brake 
8.  24.  he  /.  and  said,  I  see  men  as  trees  walking 
16.  4.  when  they  /.  they  saw  the  stone  rolled 
Luke  1.  25.  /.  on  me,  to  take  away  my  reproach 
2. 38.  spake  to  all  that  /.  for  redemption  in  Jurusa. 
10.  32.  likewise  a  Levite  came  and  /.  on  him 
22.  61.  the  Lord  turned,  and  /.  upon  Peter 
John  13.  22.  then  the  disciples  /.  one  on  another 
.rJcts  1.  10.  while  they  /.  stedfastly  toward  heaven 
28.  6.  after  they  had  /.  a  great  while  and  saw  no 
Heb.  11. 10.  for  he  /.  for  a  city  which  hath  foundat. 
1  John  1. 1.  that  which  we  have/,  upon,  declare  we 

LOOKED  with  eyes. 
Gen.33.1.JttCob  lifted  up  his  eyes  and  /.  Esau  came 
37.  25.  they  lifted  up  their  eyes  and  /.  and  behold 
Dan.  10.  .5.  then  I  lifted  up  mine  eyes  I.  and  behold 
ZccA.2.1.  Zechariah  lifted  Winryes  and/. 5.9.  |  0. 1. 

/  LOOKED. 
Oen.  16. 13.  have  /  also  here  /.  after  him  that  sceth 
Deut.  9.  10.  /  /.  and  behold  ye  had  sinned 
.fob  30.  20.  when  /  /.  for  good,  then  evil  came 
P.tal.  09.  20.  and  /  /.  for  some  to  take  pity,  but 
142.  4.  /  /.  on  mv  right  hand,  and  beheld 
Prov.  7.0. at  the  window,  //.  through  my  casement 
24.  32.  //.  upon  it,  and  received  instruction 
Keel.  2.  11.  //.  on  all  the  works  that  my  hands 
fsa.  5. 4.  //.  it  should  bring  forth  grapes,  it  brought 
03.  5.  and  /  /.  and  there  was  none  to  help,  I  wond. 
Kzek.l.  4.  //.  and  l)ehold,2. 9.  |  8. 7. 1 10.1,9.  ]  44. 4 
Dan.  12.  5.  then  /  Daniel  /.  and  behold  there  stood 
Zech.4.  2.  /have  /.  and  behold  a  candlestick 
.Icl.i  22.  13.  and  the  same  hour  /  /.  up  upon  him 
Rev.  4.  1.  //.  and  behold,  6.  8.  1  14.  1,  14.  j  15.  5. 

LOOKEST. 
.Tob  13.  27.  thou  /.  narrowly  to  all  my  paths 
Hub.  1.13.  why /.on  them  "hat  deal  treacherously? 

LOOKETIl. 
Lev.  13.  12.  if  leprosy  cover  wheresoever  priest  /. 
JVi/m.  21. 8.  when  he/,  on  the  serpent,  be  shall  live 

20.  Pisgah,  which  /.  toward  Joshimon,  23.  28. 
1  .SrtJn.  16.  7.  man  /.  on  the  outward  appearance 
Jnb  7.  2.  as  a  hireling  /.  for  the  roward  of  work 
28.  24.  for  ho  /.  to  the  ends  of  the  earth 
33. 27.  he  /.  on  men,  and  if  any  say  I  have  sinned 
rj'«/.33. 13.  the  Lord  /.  from  heaven,  ho  boholdeth 

14.  he  /.  on  all  the  inhabitanU  of  the  world 
104.  32.  he  /.  on  the  earth,  and  it  trcmbleth 
Prov.  14.  1.5.  the  prudent  /.  well  lo  his  goings 
31.  27.  she  /.  well  lo  tlio  ways  of  her  household 
Cant.  2.  9.  behold,  ho  /.  forth  at  the  window 
0.  10.  who  is  she  that  /.  forib  as  the  morning  1 
7.  4.  as  the  lower  which  /.  toward  Damascus 
r.^a.  28.  4.  when  ho  that  /.  upon  it  seoth  it 
y.zrk.  H.  3.  the  door  that  /.  toward  the  north 
11. 1.  the  gate  which  ^.  eiistwavd,40.  0,22. 1  43.  1. 
I  44.  1.  I  40.  1,12.  I  47.  2. 
40.  20.  cato  of  the  court  that  /.  toward  the  north 
J\Int.  .5.  28.  whosoever  /.  on  a  woman  to  lust  alter 
24.  .50.  lor<l  come  when  /.  not  fur  him,  Lvkr  12.40. 
Jam.  1.25.  whoso/,  into  iJie  perfect  law  of  liberty 


LOO 

LOOKING. 

1  Kings  7. 25.  three  o.xen  /.  toward  the  north 

1  Chr.  15. 29.  Michal  /.  out  at  a  window,  saw  Dav. 
•2  Ckrnn.  4.  4.  three  oxen  /.  toward  the  south 
Isa.  38.  14.  mine  eyes  fail  with  I.  upward 
Mat.M.Vi.  I.  up  to  heaven,  he  blessed,  Luke  9. 16 
Mark  7.  34.  and  /.  up  to  heaven,  he  sighed 

15.  40.  there  were  also  women  /.  on  afar  off 
Luke  6.  10.  /.  round  about  them  all,  he  said 

9.  62.  and  /.  back,  is  fit  for  the  kingdom  of  God 

21.  26.  men's  hearts  failing  them  for  /.  after 
John  1.  36.  John  /.  on  Jcs.  saith,  behold  the  I>anib 

20.  5.  /.  in,  saw  linen  clotheslying,  yet  went  not  in 
Ads  0.  15.  /.  stedfastly  on  him,  saw  his  face  as  it 

2.3.  21.  are  they  ready,  /.  for  a  promise  from  thee 

Tit.  2.  13.  /.  for  that  blessed  hope  and  appearing 
Uib.  10.27.  but  a  certain  fearful  /.  for  of  judjjmeiit 

12. 2.  /.  unto  Jesus  the  author  and  finisher  ot  laith 
15.  /.  diligently,  lest  any  fail  of  the  grace  of  God 

2  Pet.  3.  12.  /.  for  the  coming  of  the  day  of  Gud 
Judc'il.  I.  for  the  mercy  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

LOOKING  GLASS. 
Job  37. 18.  spread  out  the  sky  as  a  molten  l.-glass 

LOOKING-GLASSES. 
dod.SS.S.made  laver  and  foot  of /.-^/ass.of  worn. 

LOOPS. 
Ejod.  26.  4.  thou  shalt  make  /.  of  blue,  5. 
5. /.  shaltthou  make,  10.  ||  11.  put  taches  in  the  /. 
36. 11.  made  /.  of  blue  ||  12.  fifty /.made  he,  17. 

LOOSE. 
Oen.  49.  21.  Naphtali  is  a  hind  let  /.  givelh  goodly 
Lev.  14.7.  let  the  living  bird  /.  into  the  open  field 
Job  O.O.ihat  he  would  let  /.  his  hand  and  cut  me  off 
30.  11.  they  have  let  /.  the  bridle  before  me 
Isa.  14. 1 17.  did  not  let  prisoners  /.  homeward 
/>an.  3. 25.  lo  I  see  four  men  /.  walking  in  the  fire 

LOOSE,  Verb, 
Signifies,  [1]   To  unbind,  John  11.  44.     [2]  To 
open,  Rev.  5.  2.     [3]  To  put  off,  Josh.  5.  15. 
[4]  To  remit  and  absolve,  Mat.  16. 19.     [5]  To 
set  at  liberty,  Psal.  105.  20.     |6]  To  set  sail. 
Acts  13.  13.  I  27.  21. 
Dent.  25.  9.  and  /.  his  shoe  from  off  his  foot 
.Tush.  5.  15.  /.  thy  shoe  from  off  thy  foot,  for 
.Job  38.  31.  canst  thou  /.  the  hands  of  Orion 
Psal.  102. 20.  to /.those  that  are  appointed  to  death 
Isa.  20.  2.  go  and  /.  the  sackcloth  from  thy  loins 
45.  1. 1  will  /.  the  loins  of  kings,  to  open  gates 
52.  2.  O  Jerusalem,  /.  thyself  from  the  bands 
58.  6.  to/,  the  bands  of  wickedness,  to  unt'oburd. 
.Ter  40.  4.  and  now  behold  I  /.  thee  this  day 
Mat.  16.  19.  w  hatsoever  ye  /.  on  earth,  18.  18. 
21.  2.  ye  shall  find  an  ass  tied  and  colt,  /.  and 
bring  them  to  me,  Mark  11.  2, 4.  Luke  19.  30. 
/,«A-cl9.31.  ifany  man  ask,  why  do  ye  /.  him?  33. 
.Tohn  11.  44.  Jesus  said,/.  liim,'nnd  let  him  eo 
Jlets  13.  2.5.  shoes  of  his  feel,  I  am  not  worlhll'  to  /. 
24.  20.  money  have  been  given,  that  he  might  /. 
lien.  5.  2.  who  is  worthy  lo  /.  the  seals  thereof? 
5.  hath  prevailed  to  /.the  seven  9i;als  thereof? 
9.  14.  /.  the  four  angels  bound  in  Euphrates 

LOOSED. 
Exod.  28. 28.  that  the  breastplate  be  not  /.  39.  21. 
Deut.  25.  10.  the  house  of  him  that  hath  his  shoe  /. 
.Tudg.  15.  14.  his  bands  /.  from  off  his  hands 
.Tob  30.  11.  because  ho  /.  my  cord  and  afflicted  me 
39.  5.  who  hath  /.  the  bands  of  the  wild  ass? 
Psal.  105.20.  the  king  sent  and  /.  liim,  let  him  go 
116. 10.  I  am  thy  servant,  thou  hast  /.  my  bands 
Eccl.  12.  6.  or  ever  the  silver  cord  be  /.  or  bowl 
Isa.  5. 27.  nor  shall  the  girdle  of  their  loins  be  /. 
33.  2.3.  thy  tacklings  are  /.  they  could  not  spread 
51.  H.'captive  exile  liastencth  that  he  may  be  /. 
Jer.  fi.  t  8.  lest  mv  soul  be  /.  from  thee 
Ezek.  23. 1 17.  and  her  mind  was  /.  from  them 
Dan.  5.  (i.  so  that  the  joints  of  his  loins  were  /. 
Mat.  10.  19.  be  /.  on  earth,  /.  in  heaven,  18.  18. 
18.  27.  was  moved  with  compassion,  and  /.  him 
Mark  7.35.the  string  of  his  toneue  was  /.7,»iiel.64. 
Luke  13. 12.  woman,  thou  art  /.  from  thy  infirmity 
16.  ouiiht  not  this  daughter  to  be  /.  on  sabbath? 
Arts  2.  24.  raised  up,  having  /.  the  pains  of  death 
13.  13.  when  Paul  and  company  /.  from  Paphos 
10.  20.  and  every  one's  bands  were  I. 
22.  30.  on  the  morrow  he  /.  him  from  his  hands 
27.21.  have  hearkened,  and  not  have /.from  Crete 
40.  /.  the  rudder  bands,  and  hoistoil  up  the  sail 
Rom.  7.  2.  if  the  husband  bo  dead,  she  is  /.  from 

1  r,.»-.7.27.  art  thou  /.  from  wife?  seek  not  a  wift 
Rin.  9.  15.  the  four  angels  were  /.  which  were 

20.  3.  aller  that  he  must  be  /.  a  little  season,?. 
LOOSETH. 

2  Sam.  22.  t  ^.  <^o<'  "iv  slrenjih,  and  he/.  mV "va) 
Job  12.  18.  he  /.  the  bond  of  kings,  and  girdcth 

t2l.  he  /.  the  ginllo  of  the  strong 
Pi   140  7.  food  to  hiiiiL'rv,  ll>p  L.  /.  the  prisonert 

LOOSING. 
Mark  1 1 . 5.  said  lo  them,  what  do  you  I.  the  coltt 
f.ukr  10.33.  a.1  thev  were  /.  the  colt,  the  owneri 
Jlcts  10.  11.  therefore  /.  from  Troa»,  w«  oomo 


LOR 

Jlt't  27. 13.  L  thence,  they  sailed  close  by  Crete 

LOP. 
laa.  10.  33>  behold  the  Lord  shall  I.  the  bough 

LORD 
la  (I)  Ji  word  of  authority,  signifying  a  ruler  or 
guvernor;  and  is  applied,  to  the  tUree  Dimnc 
Persons,  [i]  To  the  Father,  Gen.  2.  4.     [2]  7'o 
the  Hoii,  Psul.  110.  1.     Col.  3.  24.     [3]   To  the 
Holy  Spirit,  2  Thess.  3.  5.     Because  they  sup- 
port anduphold  the  kingdoms  of  nature,  grace, 
and  glory,  Deut.  33.  27.    Heb.  1.  3.     [4]  To 
kings,  Gen.  40.  1.    2  Sam.  19.  Vi,  20.     [5J  To 
princes  and  nobles,  Gen.  42.  10,  30.     IJan.  4. 
36.     [0]   To  tyrants,  Isa.  26.  13.     I  Pet.  5.  3. 
(11)  A  word  of  reverence  and  respect,  and  is 
applied,  [1]    To  a  husband.  Gen.  18.  12.     [2] 
To  a  master,  John  15.  15.     [3]  To  prophets,  1 
Kings  18.  7.     2  Kings  2.  19.     [4]   7V>  persons 
of  worth  and  merit,  Gen.  24.  18. 
Gen.  18.  14.  is  any  thing  too  hard  for  the  L.  7 
24.  40.  the  L,.  before  whom  I  walk  will  send 
aa.  28.  we  saw  certainly  the  /-.  was  with  thee 
28. 21. 1  come  again,  then  shall  the  L.  be  ray  God 
39.  2.  and  the  t,.  was  with  Joseph,  21,  23. 
Exod.  5.2.  who  is  the  L,.  that  I  should  obey  him  ? 

8.  24.  and  the  L,.  did  so,  and  there  came  flies 

9.  29.  the  earth  is  the  L.  Psal.  24. 1. 1  Cor.  10. 26. 
10. 10.  the  t,.  be  so  with  you,  as  I  will  let  you  go 

13.  8.  because  of  that  which  the  L,.  did  to  me 
]2.every  firstling  of  beast  the  male  shall  be  the/,. 

30.  37.  it  shall  be  unto  thee  holy  for  the  Z,. 

32.  26.  who  is  on  the  L,.  side,  let  him  come  to  me 
34.14.  for  Z,. whose  name  isjealous,  is  a  jealous  G. 

Lev.  3. 16.  food  of  the  otfering,  all  the  fat  is  the  L,. 

16.8.Aaron  shall  cast  one  lot  for  the  i.25.4. 1 27. 2. 

JVum.  14.  14.  they  heard  that  thou  L.  art  among 

this  people,  that  thou  />.  art  seen  face  to  face 

43.  therefore  the  L,.  will  not  be  with  you 

18.  6.  to  you  they  are  given  as  a  gill  for  the  L. 
20.  19.  that  I  may  know  what  the  L.  will  say 
23.  26.  all  that  the  L.  speakctli  that  must  I  do 
S4.  11.  the  L.  hath  kepi  thee  back  from  honour 

31.  50.  we  have  brought  an  oblation  for  the  /,. 

32.  12.  they  have  followed  the  L.  Bent.  1.  36. 
Deut.  3.  21.  so  shall  the  Z,.  do  to  all  kingdoms 

4. 35.  know  that  the  L.he  is  G.  39. 1  Kings  18.  39. 
5.  5.  Istood  between  the  /,.  and  you  at  that  time 

10.  14.  behold  the  heaven  of  heavens  is  the  />. 
17.  and  A.  of  lords  a  great  G.  a  mighty,  a  terrible 

29.  2.  ye  have  seen  all  that  the  L.  did  in  Egypt 

4.  yet  the  I,,  hath  not  given  you  a  heart  to 

24.  wherefore  hath  the  L.  done  thus  tn  this  land? 

1  Kings  9.  8.  2  Chron.  7  M. 

31.  4.  /,.  shall  do  to  them  as  he  did  to  Sihon 

3'i.  6.  do  ye  thus  requite  the  L.  O  foolish  people 

30.  to  flight,  except  the  L,.  had  shut  them  up 
33.29.  happy  art  thou,  O  people,  saved  by  the  L. 
Josh. '2. 12.  swear  unto  me  by  the  L.  1  .Sam.  24.  21 

3.  11.  even  the  Zy.  of  all  the  earth  passeth  over,  13. 

10.  25.  thus  shall  the  L.  do  to  all  your  enemies 

14.  12.  if  so  be  the  L.  will  be  with  me,  then 
Judg.  1. 19.  the  L.  was  with  Judah,  and  he  drave 

22.  and  the  /,.  was  with  the  house  of  Joseph 
2. 10.  arose  a  generation  which  knew  not  the  L 

4.  14.  is  not  the  L.  gone  out  before  thee? 
6. 13.  if  the  L.  be  with  us,  why  is  this  befallen  us 

11.  31.  Cometh  to  meet  me  shall  surely  be  the  L, 
17. 13.  now  know  I  that  the  L.  will  do  me  good 

Suth  1.  17.  L.  do  so  to  me  and'more,  1  Sam.  20. 13 
2.4. the  L.he  with  you,  2  Chr.  20.17.  2rAess.3.16 

1  Sam.  2.  2.  there  is  none  holy  us  the  /,.  for  there  is 

8.  for  pillars  of  the  earth  are  the  L. 
3.  I8.it  is  the //.let  him  do  what  seems,  ./b/m21.7 

19.  Samuel  grew,  and  the  A.  was  with  him,  18 

12,  14.  2  Kings  18.  7.  1  Chron.  9.  20. 

12.  16.  this  great  thing  which  the  L.  will  do 
17.37.the  /,.  be  with  thee,  29. 13.  1  Chr.  22. 11, 16. 

20.  23.  the  L.  be  between  thee  and  rac,  42. 
8  Sam.  7.  24.  /,.  art  become  their  G.  1  Chr.  17.  22. 

10.12  L,io  whatseemeth  him  good,  1  Chr.  19.  13. 

1  Kings  \8.'2\.  if  the  /.be  Cod,  follow  him,  if  Baal 

2  Kings  6, 27.  if  the  //.  do  not  help,  whence  shall  I 

33.  what  shall  I  wait  for  the  /.  any  longer  1 
10.  16.  come  with  me  and  see  my  zeal  lor  the  /,. 
18.  25.  am  I  now  come  without  the  L.  ha.  36. 10. 

IChr.  16. 2.1.  for  great  ie  the  /,.  Psal.  48. 1.  1 145.  3. 
17.  26.  and  now  /,.  thou  art  G.  and  hast  promised 

21.  24.  not  take  that  which  is  thine  for  the  L. 
B  Chr.  19.  6.  ye  judge  not  for  man,  but  for  the  L. 

11.  and  the  L.  shall  be  with  the  good 

33.  l3.  Manasseh  knew  that  the  /_,.  was  God 
JVf/t.  9.  6.  thou,  even  thou  art  /-.  alone,  fsa.  37.20. 
fsal.  4.  3.  know  the  L.  hath  set  apart  the  godly 

33.  12.  blessed  is  the  nation,  whoso  God  is  the  A. 

3.^.  10.  my  bones  say,  I.,,  who  is  like  unto  thee'? 

45.  11.  for  he  is  thy  /.  worship  thou  him 


LOR 

Psal.  109.21.dothou  forme,  O  God  the  L.  140.7. 
27.  they  may  know  that  tliou  /,.  hast  done  it 
116.  5.  gracious  is  the  A.  and  righteous 
118.  23.  this  is  the  L.  doing  ||  27.  God  is  the  />. 
124.  1.  if  it  had  not  been  the  /,.  who  was  on,  2. 
130.3.  if  thou  />.  shoul.  mark  inicpiities,  who  stand 
132.  5.  till  I  tind  out  a  place  for  the  /,. 

Prov.  24. 18.  lest  the  /,.  see  it,  and  it  displease  him 

30.  9.  lest  1  deny  thee,  and  say,  who  is  the  />.  ? 
Isa.  10.  20.  but  shall  stay  upon  the  A.  the  holy  one 

19.  21.  and  the  />.  shall  be  known  to  Egypt 
33.  21.  the  /,.  will  be  to  us  a  place  of  broad  rivers 
42.  24.  did  not  the  L.  he  against  whom  we  sinned? 
44.  23.  sing,  O  heavens,  lor  the  A.  hath  done  it 
52.  12,  the  L.  will  go  before  you,  your  rereward 
Jer.  2.  6.  where  is  the  Z,.  that  brought  ue,  8. 
5.  10.  her  battlements,  for  they  are  not  the  /,. 

8.  19.  is  not  the/,.  inZion  ?  is  not  her  King  in  her? 
16.  21.  they  shall  know  that  my  name  is  the  /,. 
21.  2.  if  so  be  that  the  L.  will  deal  with  us 
23.  6.  called.  The  />.  our  Righteousness,  33.  16. 

31.  34.  saying,  know  the  L.  Heb.  8.  11. 

50.  7.  even  the  L,.  the  hope  of  their  fathers 

51.  50.  remember  the  L.  afar  off,  let  Jerusalem 
Lam.  3.  31.  for  the  L,.  will  not  cast  off  for  ever 

50.  till  the  /.look  down,  and  behold  from  heaven 
Ezek.  35.  10.  possess  it,  whereas  the  /,.  was  there 
Dan.  2.  47.  truth  it  is,  your  God  is  a  /,.  of  kings 

9.  17.  cause  thy  face  to  shine  for  the  /,.  sake 
Ifos.  2.20.  betroth  thee, and  thou  shah  know  the  /, 

5.  4.  and  they  have  not  known  the  /,. 

11. 10.  thoy  shall  walk  after  the  L.  he  shall  roar 

12.  14.  his  reproach  shall  his  /,.  return  to  him 
,Toel  2.  21.  fear  not,  for  the  L.  will  do  great  things 
Jlmos  3.  6.  be  evil  in  the  city,  and  L.  hath  not  done 

5.  14.  and  so  the  /,.  shall  be  with  you 
Obad.  21.  and  the  kingdom  shall  be  the  /,. 
jMic.  2.  13.  and  the  /,.  on  the  head  of  them 

3. 11.  lean  on  the  /,.  and  say,  is  not  the  /.  among 

4.  7.  the  /,.  shall  reign  over  them  in  mount  Zioii 

6.  8.  and  what  doth  the  L,.  require  of  thee? 
Zcpk.  1.  5.  that  swear  by  the  /.  and  by  Malcham 
/CtcA-9.1.  when  eyes  ofman  shall  be  toward  the  L. 

14.  the  /,.  shall  be  seen  over  them 

14. 3.  then  shall  the  /,.  go  forth  and  fight  against 

'9.  in  that  day  shall  there  be  one  L.  his  name  one 

JfaJ.7.21.not  every  one  that  saith,  /.  /.shall  enter 

into  the  kingdom,  22.  Luke  13.  25. 

8.  2.  L.  if  thou  wilt,  thou  canst  make,  Luke  5. 12. 
25.  L.  save  us  ||  9.  28.  they  said,  yea,  L.  13.  51. 

14.  30.  /^.  save  me  ||  15.  25.  saying  L.  help  me 

15.  27.  she  said,  truth  />.  ||  25.  ]].  L.  L. open  to  us 

21.  3.  /,.  halh  need  of,  Mariz  11.3  Luke  19.31,34. 

22.  43.  he  saith  to  him,  how  then  doth  David  call 
him  /.  ?  45.  Mark  12.  37.  Luke  20.  44. 

24. 42.  ye  know  not  what  hour  your  L.  will  come 
46.  whom  his  A.shall  find  so  doing,  Luke  12.43. 
50.the/,.  of  that  servant  shall  come,  Luke  12.  40. 

25.  21.  enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  L. 

.37.  /.  when  saw  we  thee  a  hungered  ?  44. 

26. 22.  /..  is  it  I?  ||  28.  6.  the  place  where  the  /..  lay 
Jl/or4  2. 28.  Son  ofman  is  /.  ofsabhath,  Luke  6.5. 

5.  19.  how  great  things  the  /.  hath  done  for  thee 

9.  24.  /.  I  believe,  help  thou,  .Tolin  9.  38.  |  11.  27. 
10.51./.  that  I  may  receive  my  sight,  J)/at.  20. 33. 

16.  20.  preached,  the  /.  working  with  them 
Luke  1.  17.  to  make  ready  a  people  for  the  /,. 

25.  thus  L.  dealt  with  me,  to  take  my  reproach 

2.  1 1,  is  born  a  Saviour,  which  is  Christ  the  />. 
6.46.  why  call  ye  me  L.  L-  and  do  not  what  I  say? 
9.  57.  a  man  said  to  him,  /.  I  will  follow  thee,  61. 
11.1.  />.  teach  us  to  pray,  as  John  taught  hisdisci. 

13.  8.  /.  let  it  alone  this  year,  till  I  dig  about  it 

14.  21.  that  servant  shewed  his  /,.  these  things 

17.  5.  apostles  said  unto  the  /.  increase  our  faith 
37.  where  /,.?  ||  23.42./,.remembcr  me  when  thou 

24.34.  saying,  the  /,.  is  risen  indeed,  and  appeared 
.John  6.  68.  /,.  to  whom  shall  we  go,  thou  hast  life 
8. 11.  no  man  /,.  1|  9.  36.  who  is  ho,  /.  that  I  might 
11.  34.  they  said  to  him,  /,.  come  and  see 

13.  13.  ye  call  me  master  and  /,.  and  ye  say  well 
25.  /,.'who  is  it?  ||  20.  25.  we  have  seen  the  /. 

20.  2.  they  have  taken  the  /,.  out  nf  the  sepulchre 

21.  12.  none  durst  ask  him,  knowing  it  was  the  /,. 
21.  Peter  saith,  /,.  what  shall  this  man  do  ? 

Mclsl.  36.  \4k\nm  ye  crucified,  both  /.  and  Christ 
4.  24.  /.  thou  art  G.  ||  29.  now  L.  behold  threaten. 

9.  5.  n.id  he  said,  who  art  lliou  /..  ?  26.  15. 
10.4.  and  said,  what  is  it  /.?  |!  14.notso  A.  11.  8. 

36.  peace  by  Jesus  Christ,  he  is  />.  of  all 

22.  10.  find  r  said,  what  shall  I  do  L.  ? 
Rom.  9.  28.  because  a  short  work  will  the  /,.  make 

10.  10.  for  the  same  L.  over  all  is  rich  unto  all 

14.  9.  that  he  might  be  /.  of  the  dead  and  living 
1  Cor.  2.  8.  not  have  crucified  the  /.  of  glory 

3.  5.  even  as  the  />.  gave  to  every  man 


66,  18.  if  I  regard  iniquity,  the  /.  will  not  hear  me  |  4.  4.  but  he  tnat  judgelh  me  is  the  / 

86.  5.  for  thou  /.  art  good,  ready  to  forgive         j  19. 1  will  come  to  you,  if  the  /.  will,  .Tarn.  4. 15. 

92.  8.  thou  L.  art  most  high  for  ever,  97.  9.  6.  13.  but  for  the  L.  \\  7.  10.  yet  not  I,  but  the  L. 

lUO  3  know  ye  that  the /<.  he  is  God,  he  made  us  I  12.5.diffcrence8ofadministrations,butths8ameZ,. 
351 


LOR 

1  Cor.  15.  47.  second  man  is  the  L.  from  heaven 

2  C^>r.  5.  8.  and  to  be  present  with  the  L. 

11.  17.  1  speak  it  not  alter  tlie  L.  but  as  it  were 
Epk.  4.5.  one  L.  \\  5. 29.  even  as  the  /,.  the  church 
Phil.  2. 11.  tongue  confess  tlmt  Jesus  Christ  is  JU 

4.  5.  moderation  be  known,  the  /.  is  at  hand 
1  Thess.  4.  17.  so  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  L. 

1  Tim.  0.  15.  the  King  of  kings,  and  L.  of  lordg 

2  Tim.  2.22.  with  them  that  call  on  the  /. 

3.  11.  out  of  them  all  the  L.  delivered  me 

4.  8.  which  the  L.  shall  give  me  at  that  day 

17.  notwithstanding  the  L.  stood  with  me 
//fi.2.3.which  utfirst  began  to  be  spoken  by  the  It. 

8.  11.  saying,  know  the  L.  for  all  shall  know 
.Jam.  5.  15.  and  the  L.  shall  raise  the  Sick  up 
2  Pel.  3.  8.  one  day  is  with  the  X.  as  a  thousand 
.Jade  9.  Michael  said,  the  Ij.  rebuke  thee 
liev.  11.  8.  where  also  our  L.  was  crucified 

15.  are  become  the  kingdoms  of  our  i.  and  hisC 

17.  14.  overcome,  for  he  is  L.  of  lords,  19.  16. 
Jigainst  the  LORD. 

£iorf.l0.16.I  have  sinned  against  the  L.yoMX  God, 

Josh.  7.  20.  2  Sam.  12.  13. 

16.7.that  hehearethyourmurmuringsanr.tAe  7^.8 

/,fy.5.19.have  trespassed  ag.t.L.JVuin.5.i>.  \  31.16. 
6.  2.  if  a  sold  commit  trespass  against  the  /„ 

jVum.  14.  9.  only  rebel  not  ag.  the  L.  Josh.  22.  19 
16. 11.  are  gathcted  together  against  the  Jy.  27.,3 
Psal.  2.  2.  .acts  4.  26 
21.7. we  havosinncdjfor  wo  have  spoken  ag.the  L 
2G.9.company  of  Korah,  w  hen  they  strove  ag.t.L 
32.23.  ye  have  sinned  ug.  the  L.  Jir.  40.3. 1 44. 2a 

i->fKj. 1.41.  have  sinn.a^.fAe/,.  1  .Sc)n.7.6.J«r.8.]4. 

9.  7.  ye  have  been  rebellious  ag.  the  L.  24. 1 31.  27. 
13. 1 5.  because  he  hath  spoken  revolt  ag.  the  Ij. 

Josh.  22.  If),  that  ye  might  rebel  this  day  ag.  the  L 

18.  it  will  be,  seeing  ye  rebel  this  day  ag.  the  /,. 
22.  or  if  in  transgression  ag.  the  L.  save  us  not 
29.  God  forbid  we  should  rebel  against  the  L. 
31.  have  not  committed  this  tresjiass  ag.  the  /,. 

1  Sam.  2.25.  ifamansin  ag.  t.  L.  who  shall  entreat 

12.  23.  sin  ag.  the  /,.  in  ceasing  to  pray  for  you 
14.  33.  behold,  the  people  sin  ag.  the  /,.  in  that 
34.  slay  them  here  and  eat,  and  sin  not  ag.  the  L. 

IKings  17.7.Israel  had  sinned  ag.  the  L.  their  God 
9.  did  secretly  things  not  right  ag.  the  L.  God 

1  Chr.  10. 13.  transgression  he  committed  ag.the  L. 

2CAr. 12. 2. because  they  had  transgressed  ag.the  L 
19.10.  warn  them  that  they  trespass  not  ag.  the  L 
28.13. whereas  we  have  offended  aheadyo^.tAe/,. 

19.  Ahaz  transgressed  sore  agniitst  the  L. 
22.  in  distress  did  he  trespass  yet  more  ag.  the  /, 

P5(7?.2.2.rulers  take  counsclnn-.tAf  /.andAnointed 

Prov.  19.  3.  and  his  heart  fretteth  against  the  L. 

21.  30.  there  is  no  wisdom  nor  counsel  ag.  the  I^ 

Isa.  3.  8.  because  their  doings  are  against  the  L. 

32.  6.  will  work  iniquity  to  uttei  error  ag.  the  /,. 

59.  13.  in  fran.^gressinc  and  \\\x\%  against  the  L. 

Jer.W.  16.  hast  taught  rebellion  ag.  the  L.  29.  32. 

48. 26.  for  he  magnified  himseifagninst  the  L.  42. 

50.  7.  because  they  have  sinned  against  the  L. 

14.  against  Babyl.  she  hathsinncci,  a^.  tAe /..29. 

24.bccause  thou  hast  striven  ag.theL.Zeph.l.n. 

Dan.  5.  23.  but  hast  lifted  up  tTiyscIf  ag.  the  L. 

Hos.  5.  7.  they  have  dealt  treacherously  ag.  the  I,. 

JVaA.l.O.what  do  ye  imagine  ag.the  /.hewillmake 

11.  there  is  one  that  imagincth  evil  ag.  the  L. 

See  LivETH,  Anointed,  .Appeared. 

Jiefore  the  LORD. 

Ocn.  10.9.Ximrod  was  a  mighty  hunter  bef.  the  L. 

13.  10.  well  watered,  bef.  the  L.  destroyed  Sodom 
13.  men  of  Sod. were  sinners  b.the  /.exceedingly 

18.  22.  but  Abraham  stood  yet  h.  the  L.  and  said 
27. 7.  that  I  may  eat  and  bless  thee  before  the  L 

Ernrf.l6.9.sav  to  congregation,  come  near  b.the  L. 
33.  lay  it  uphrf.  the  L.  to  be  kept  1  .Sam.  10.  25. 

23. 17.  three  times  in  the  vear  all  thv  males  appear 
before  the  L.  34.  24.  Deut.  16. 16.  1  Sam.  1.  22. 

27.21.  Aaron  shall  order  the  lamps  b.  the  L.  40. 25. 

28.  12.  Aaron  shall  bear  their  names  bef.  the  L. 

29.  for  a  memorial  6.  the  L.  30.  16.  .Vum.  31.  54. 

/^ii.4.6.3prinkleseventime3  4.tAe/,.17. 1 14. 16,27. 

9.  24.  there  came  a  fire  out  from  before  the  /,. 
10.2.  went  out  fire, and  they  died  b.the  L.J<'um.^.4. 

JVum.  5. 16.  bring  her  near,  set  her  b.  the  /.  18, 30. 

10.  9.  ye  shall  bo  remembered  b.  the  /.  your  God 
18. 19.  it  is  n  covenant  of  salt  for  ever  before  the  L. 
25.  4.  and  hang  thorn  up  bef. the  L.  against thcsnn 
27.  5.  Moses  brought  their  cause  before  the  L. 

T)eul.9.1S.  and  1  fell  down  before  the  L.  forty  days 

12. 18.  but  thou  must  eat  them  bff.  the  L.  thy  God 
18.  7.  his  brethren  which  stand  there  before  the  />. 
19. 17.  the  controversy  is,  shall  stand  before  the  I,. 

,7esA.6.26.cursed  be  the  man  *.  the  L.  that  hnildeth 
/ifrfn-.H. 11. uttered  his  words  bef.  the  L.  in  Mizpeh 
IS.  6.  before  the  L.  is  your  way  wherein  ye  go 
20.26.all  the  people  sat  there  h.  the  L.  2  .Sa7n.7.I8 

1  .Sam.  2.17.  sin  of  the  men  was  very  great  ft.  the  I, 
12.  3.  here  I  am,  witness  against  me  bef.  the  ^ 
7  that  I  may  reason  with  you  before  tie  L. 


LOR 

)[(tcm.  31.7.  wa>  there  that  day  delaine<l  b.tht  L. 

20.  lU.  Ijut  iflliey  be  men,  cursed  be  lliey  b.  the  L. 
S  Ham.  (J.  vll.  it  was  b.  the  L.  which  chuse  nie  bet'uru 

til.  9.  uiiil  they  hanged  (hem  m  the  hill  bef.  the  />. 
SA'iJi^s  I'J.  14  Hezikiah  spread  it*. «Af.y../jiu  Tt.W. 

1  Chrun-il.  Iti.  und  the  land  a  subdued  before  the  A. 
v^.-.i-i.and  did  eal  and  drink  b.the  A.  with  °ladiie^d 

J'sal.  9U.  la.  4.  the  1,.  lor  he  coinelh  to  judge,  'Jd.U. 
IIC.I.  15.  let  them  be  before  the  A.  ciiiiiiiiuiiliy 
llti.U.  i  will  walk  before  the  I.,  in  land  ol' living 

I'rut).  15.  II.  hull  and  dentrucliun  are  before  the  J,. 

Jaa.Zi.  16.  shall  be  lor  ihi-m  that  dwell  before  the  J.. 

Jer.  'M. '.  present  their  8up|ilicalions  before  the  J^. 

y.iek.  44.  3.  bhall  git  in  it  to  eat  bread  before  the  A. 

/'uii.Sl.ia.yet  luade  we  not  our  prayer  bifore  the  L. 

Mic.6.\i.  »  herew  ilh  shall  I  come  b.  the  J^.  and  bow 

Zech.  '2.13.  be«il.nt,U  all  llesh,  before  the  A.  lor  he 
7.  i.  and  their  men  to  pray  before  the  J,.  6.  '21,  2'2. 

Afa^  3. 14. ue  have  walked  mournfully  frc/urc  (Ae A. 

271irn.'2.  H.chargiiig  themt.  the  A.  that  they  strive 

2  t'ct.-i.\  l.bniii'  no  railing  accusation  ftf/orctAe  A. 
See    Klls!!,     ItLK.ssBii,    C'allkd  ;    Cast    Out, 

Cho.SE.S,  ('HUUaE,  CuaM.«.NDED,  F£AR,  FeaR- 
SD,  Uejuick. 

From  the  LORD. 

fjfn.  4.1. 1  have  goi ten  a  man/.  A.l|19.  24.  firc/.A. 

24.50. 1,aban»Biil,tiie  thing  proceedetli/r((/;iMe7^. 

A'iim.ll.31.und  there  wentforth  a  wind//-om«AeA. 

ll>.35.  there  came  out  a  tire /.(Ac  7.,. and  consumed 

4(i.tlierc  is  wrath  joflH  niit/rom  the  A.ihe  plague 

l.Sam.lti.H.uvil  spirit/,  the  A.  troubled  him,  I'J.  9. 

3().1'2.  a  deepsleep/roni  Me  A. was  fallen  on  them 

Iii:<n^<2.15.  It  was  hig/.A.||33.8hall  be  peace/.  A. 

Ptal.'H.hMe  shall  receive  the  blessiiig/roin  the  A. 

100. '20.  reward  of  mine  adversariesyrom  the  A. 

121.  '2.  my  help  comelh/.tAe  A.  who  made  heaven 

/'rop.lfi.l.  and  the  answer  of  the  tonsue  lif.the  A. 

19.  14.  and  a  prudent  wife  \a  from  the  A. 

2y.  2li.hutev(ry  man's  judgment  conielli/.  'he  />. 

ha.  29.  15.  seek  to  hide  their  counsel/rom  tht  I  . 

40.  '27.  why  saycsl  thou,  my  way  is  hid/rom  thL  L 

Jer.7.1.lhe  word  that  came  toJeremiah/ro';i£AcA. 

11.  1.  1  18.1.  I  21.  1.  |26.  1.  I  27.  1.  \:Vd.  1. 

I  32.  1.  1  34.  1,8, 12.  I  3.5.  1.  (  3G.  1.  [  40.  1. 

17.5.  cursed  whu^e  heart  deparleth/rorn  the  A. 

37. 17.  the  king  asked,  is  there  any  word/.  (Ac  A. 

40.14. 1  have  lieard  a  rumour/,  ike  A. an  ambassa. 

/.ant.  2. 9.  her  prophets  lind  no  vi»i<m/ruin  the  L. 

3. 18. my  fircngth  and  hope  is  pcrished/Vum  the  A. 

F.iek.  1 1.  15.  Jerusalem  said,  get  ye  (it from  the  />. 

33.  30.  hear  what  is  the  word  ihTll  Cometh  f.the  A. 
//o.s.1.2.  committed  whoredom,  departing/,  the  A. 
Obad.  1.  we  have  heard  a  rumour/ruin  the  A.  arise 
Mic.  1.  12.  hutevilcamedown/.  <A«  A.  to  the  gate 

5.  7.  remnant  of  Jacob  shall  be  a.<  a  dew  /.  the  A 

ZrpA.l.ti.aiid  them  that  are  turned  hack  fromthe I. . 

ZccA.14.l3.iumuU/roin  the  /..shall  be  among  them 

/.uA'e  1.  45.  things  which  weretidd  her  from  the  J., 

S  Cvr.  5.  6.  in  the  body  we  are  ahscnt/rom  the  L,. 

See  OivE,  GiVKN 

LORD  Ood. 

Gen.  9.  25.  he  said,  blessed  be  the  /,.  Hod  of  Sliem 

15.2.  Abram  said,  A. ''/or/ what  wilt  thou  give  mi 

8.  /..f/od,  whereby  shall  I  know  I  shall  inherit 

24.27.  bles.ted  be  the  A.fJ.of  my  master  .Abraham 

28.  13.  I  am  the  A.  God  of  .Abraham  thy  father 

Ezod.yi.  27.  the  A.  God  of  Israel,  .fcsA.O.  18,  19 

I  10.  40,  42.  I  13.  14,  33.  |  14.  14. 

34.  B.  the  Lord,  the  A.  God  merciful  and  gracious 
Jatk.  7. 7.  Joshua  said,  alas,  O  A.  God,  wherefore 

K.  22.  the  A.  God  of  gods,  the  /..  God  of  ejds 


LOR 

Psal  G8. 18.  that  the  L.  O.  might  ({well  among  them 
71.  5.  thou  art  my  hope,  O  I.,.G.  thou  art  my  trust 

84.11.  lor  L.G.'ii  a  sua  and  shield,  will  give  grace 
S5.  rt.  1  will  hear  what  the  A.  God  « ill  speak 

Isii.  28.  22.  for  I  have  beard  from  the  A.  T;. of  hosts 
50.  7.  tor  the  A.  God  will  help  me,  therefore,  9. 

65.15.  for  J  J.  Tj.  shall  slay  thee,  and  call  servants 
.Jer.  44.  2t>.  not  named,  saying,  the  A.  God  liveth 
F.zek.  5.  11.  as  I  live,  saith  the  L.God,  14.  16. 

13.  9.  know  I  am  the  A.  God,  '23.  49.  |  24.  24. 
It).  19.  and  thus  it  was,  saith  the  A.  God 
23.  woe,  woe  unto  thee,  saith  the  A.  God 

18.  30.  according  to  his  ways,  saith  the  A.  Ood 
31.  7.  be  brought  to  pass,  saith  the  A.  God 

13.  it  shall  be  no  more,  saith  the  A.  God 

22. 12.  and  hast  forgotten  me,  saith  the  A.  God 
29.  '20.  because  they  wrought  for  me,  saith  A.  God 
34.  31.  and  I  am  your  God,  saith  the  A.  God 
36. 23.  know  that  I  am  the  Lord,  saith  the  L.God 

32.  not  for  your  sakes  do  I  this,  saith  the  A.  God 
37.  3.  and  I  answered,  O  A.  (Sod,  iho'i  knowest 
39.  5.   lor  I  have  spoken  it,  saith  the   A.  God, 
'23.  34.  I  '26.  14.  |  '28.  10. 
8.  it  is  come,  and  it  is  done,  saith  the  A.  God 
43.  27.  I  will  accept  you,  said  the  A.  God 
Dan.  9.  3.  1  set  my  face  unto  the  A.  God  to  seek 
Hos.  12.  5.  even  A.  God  of  hosts  is  his  memorial 
.Amos  1.8.a  remnant  of  Phil.shall  perish,snith  7..  (7 

3.  7.  A.  Ood  will  do  nothing,  but  he  revealeth 

8.  the  L.G.  hath  spoken,  who  can  but  prophesy? 

4.  5.  for  this  liketh  you,  saith  the  L.  God 

9.  5.  /..  Ood  of  hosts  is  he  that  toucheth  the  land 
Mic.  1.  2.  let  the  7>.  God  be  witness  against  you 
Hab.  3.  19.  the  /..  God  is  my  strength,  he  will  make 
1  Pet.  3.  15.  sanctify  the  L.  God  m  your  hearts 
7ifB.f8.holy,holy,7>.0.  Almighty,  11.  17.  |  16.7. 

15.3.  marvellous  are  thy  works,  L.God  .Almighty 

15. 8.  for  strung  is  the  /..  God  who  judgelh  her 

19.  6.  for  the  A.  God  omnipotent  reigneth 

21.  22.  tho  A.  God  and  the  Limb  are  the  temple 

22.  5.  for  the  A.  God  giveth  them  light 

See  Ah,  Fathers. 
LORD  At*  God. 
F.iod.  32.11.  Moses  besought  the  Tj.hisG.^nA  said 
[.ev.  4.  22.  ag.  the  commandments  of  the  />.  Ai's  G. 
JV'um. '23.21.  the  7^.A(.5  G.  is  with  him,  the  shout 
DeiLt.  17.  19.  that  he  may  learn  to  fear  the  L.hisG. 
18.  7.  he  shall  minister  in  name  of  the  /,.  /"'■>•  Gml 
l.S'«m.30.  6.  David  encouraged  liiins.  in  7^.  his  God 

1  Kings  5. 3.  a  house  unto  the  name  of  A.  Ai.i  God 

11.4.  heart  was  not  perfect  with  7..  his  G.  15.  3. 
15.  4.  did  the  L.his  G.  give  him  a  lamp  in  Jerusal. 

2  Kings  16.  2.  not  right  iu  the  sight  of  the  7>.  his  G. 
2  Chr.  1.1.  the  L.h.G.vias  with  him,  and  magnified 

14.  2.  good  and  right  in  the  eyes  of  the  /..  his  G. 
11.  Asa  cried  unto  the  A.  Ais  God,  and  said 

15. 9.  when  they  saw  that  /..  his  G.  was  with  him 

26. 16.  Uzziali  transgressed  against  the  7>.  his  G. 
27.  6.  Jotham  prepared  his  ways  before  I, .his  G. 
28.5.7..Ai«  (?.delivored  Ahaz  into  hands  of  Syria 
31 .  20.  Hezekiah  wrought  right  before  L.his  God 
33. 12.  .Manasseh  in  affliction  besought  L.his  God 
34.8  Josinh  sent  to  repa  ir  the  house  of  the  L.hisG. 
36.  5.  Jehoiakim  did  evil  in  eight  of  /..  his  G.  12. 

23.  the  L.  his  G.  he  with  him,  and  let  him  go  up 
F.-.ra'.fi.  accord. to  hand  of  the  /..  his  (7. upon  him 
/'.•ia.l46.5.happy  he  whose  hope  is  in  the  /..  Ai;i  G. 
./onaA  2.1. then  Jonah  prayed  to  the  7..  Ai>  God  ou\ 
Mic.a.i.  feed  in  majpsly  of  thenamtof /..  Ai'a  Ood 

LORD  tny  Ood. 
.^^um.  22. 18.  not  go  beyond  theM  ord  of  7..  m»/  God 


24.  what  have  ye  to  do  w  ilh  the  L.  r?odof  Israel?  .  7)eu(.  4.  5.  even  as  the  7..  my  r7o(i  commanded  me 


24.  2.  the  A.  God  of  Israel,  .radg.  4   6.  |  5.  3,  5 

I  11.21,23.121.3.  Hw«A2.  12.   1  Sam.  2.  .30. 

I  11.11.  I  20. 12.  1  23.10.  1  2.-1.32,34.  1  Kin^i 

1.311  1  Cbron.  23.  2.'i.  |  24.  19. 

^rf/r.  6  22.  (Jidoon  •nid,nlii8,0  /..  God,  because 

16  28.  O  A.  God,  remember  me  onlv  this  onco 

I9ain.fl.'20.whoiiinblotostnndhef.  (hisMy  L.O.? 

3S(im.S   10.  and  the  A.  OoiJ  of  hosts  was  with  him 

7. 18.  H  ho  nni  I,  O  /..  God,  and  wh.it  is  my  house? 

19.  and  i«  thii  the  manner  of  man,  O  7,.  God  ? 

an.  for  thriu,  /..  God,  knowe«l  thy  servant 

22.  wlvrefore  thou  art  great,  O  7,.f?o(/,nnne  like 

1  iriii;r,»Vr>5.  the  /,.  n.  of  mylordlhokingsay  so 

48.  the  king  said.hlp.wd  be  the  /..  r?n<l  of  Israf.'l 

8   15.  1  rhron.  If).  36.  )  20.  10 

14. 13.  fnimd  tome  good  thing  toward  the  L.God 

17.1.  Flijih  .aid,  n.  the  A.  f)..r/ of I«rael  liveth 

IR  37.  may  know  thou  art  7..G.\\'i  Kinsrs  19.  19. 

8/rinr»2.14.  and  said,  whernis  /,.  Gnd  of  F.lijah? 

1  r-Ar.n.l?  striieof  amnnof  highdegree.O  I,.q. 

irhr.n.  12.  filhlve  notngiiin«t  A.  ^/n/Zof  fithers 

24.  1<».  Ihoylrfl  the  hnune  of  the  /.O..-/ of  fathers 

2'5.  I.a.  nnr^ha'l  it  be  r..r  thy  honour  from  L.Gnd 

32  10.  his  nervnnts  spake  moro  ngnin«t  the  t,.C}od 

tCrh.  0.  7.  thon  art  Iho  /,.  Gnd.  didst  choo.e  Abram 

P/in/  3l.5.hniit  redermed  me,  O  /.    Onrfoftriiih 

41.13.  blessed  bo  A.f7orfofUra.rrom  everlasting 

to  everlasting,  72.  18.  I  106.  48.  Lvkz  1.68. 

SS8 


18.  16.  not  bear  again  the  voice  of  the  L.  my  G 

26.  14.  have  hearkened  to  the  voice  of  /..  7711/  God 

.hsh.\\.  8.  hut  I  wholly  followed  the  /,.  my  God 

2  ."fam  24. 24. 1  offer  burnt-ofTerines  to  the  L.  <nyG. 

1  Kines X7.0  L.my  G.H.'X.  \  17.  20, 21. .j  I  rhr. 

21.  17.  2  Chron.  6.  19.    Ps../.  7.  1.3.  |  13.  3. 

I  30.  2,  12.  I  35.  24.  |  38.  1.5.  |  40.5.  |  86. 12. 

I  109.  26.  .fonah  2.  6.  Hab.  1.  12. 

5.4.  the  L.myO.  hath  given  me  rest  on  every  side 

5.  I  purpose  to  build  a  bouse  unto  the  name  of 

the  A.  mv  God,  1  Chron.  K.  7.  2  Chrnn.  2.  4. 

K:rn7.28.aBthe  hand  of  the  A.rnr/fT.was  upon  me 

9.  5.  and  I  spread  out  my  hands  to  iho  A.  my  God 

Psal.  18.  28.  the  /..  my  O.  will  enlighten  my  darkn 

.At.  31. 18.  trm  thon  me,  for  thou  art  /..  my  God 

A)n?i.9. 4.  t  prayed  unto  the  L.my  Gnd,  and  said 

20.  while  I  was  present,  mv snpplic.  bof  A.  mv  fl. 

Z<tA.1  1.4.  thus  saith  the  L.my  God,  feed  the  flock 

14.5.  and  the  /..  my  'Vorf  shall  rnme,  and  all  saints 

LrtRD  our  Go,L 

F.Tod.X  18.  snrrifire  to  A.  G.  5.3.  |  8.27.  |  10.2.'.. 

8. 10.  there  is  none  like  to  A.  oi/r  G.  Psal.  1 13.  5 

10  26.  thereof  mu<t  we  lake  to  serve  the  L.our  G 

Dnil.  1.  6.  the  I.nvr  Gnd  spake  unto  us  in  Ilnr-  b 

19.  we  went  through  all  that  wilderness,  ns  Ibr 

A.  orrr  God  commanded  u.,  41.  |  6.  2t) 

20.which  A.our  r?.  doth  give  unto  ii«,2.V  )  2.29. 

2.  33.  the  L.  our  Ood  delivered  him  before  u?3.3 


LOR 

Deut.  S  36.  L.  our  God  delivered  all  unto  ua 
37.  iior  unto  whatsoever  L.  our  God  forbade  OS 

4.  7.  so  nigh  to  them,  as  L.  onr  Ood  is  in  all  thii)gt 

5.2.7.,.  our  Godmadu  a  covenant  with  us  iiillorvb 
'24.  the  L.  onr  God  .'lalli  shewed  us  his  glory 
2S.  if  we  hear  the  voice  of  /,.  our  God  any  mot* 
27.  go  and  hear  all  that  the  L.  our  God  shallsny 

6.4.  O  Israel,  A.  our  G.  is  one  Lt>tii,Mark  12  29. 
24.  to  fear  L.  our  G.  ||  25  to  do  lielorc  A.  our  G. 

29.15.tliatstandeth  this  day  before  the  L.ourGoi 

29.  the  secret  things  belong  to  the  L.  our  God 
Josh.  18.  6.  cast  lot.s  lor  you  before  the  L.  our  God 

22.  19.  an  altar,beside  the  altar  of  7..0Hr  God^. 
24. 17  /..  our  G.  he  11  is  that  brought  us  up  out  of 

24.  the  people  said,  the  7..  our  (Jud  wWl  we  serva 
yud^.  11. '24. whomsoever  7>.our<T0(y  shall  drive  out 
1  .Nam.7.8  cease  not  to  cry  to  the  /..  our  God  forua 

1  Kings  8.51.  L.  our  Trixibe  with  U8,a6  with  fathers 

59.  let  these  my  words  be  nigh  unto  J,,  our  God 

2  Kings  18.  22.  but  if  ye  say,  we  trust  A.  our  God 
19.  19.  O  /..  our  God  save  thou  us  out  of  his  hand 

1  C'Aru7i.l3.2.aiid  that  it  be  of  L.  cur  G.  let  us  send 
15. 13.  the  J...  our  G.  made  a  breach  on  us, for  that 
16.  14.  he  is  L.  our  G.  his  judgments,  Psal.  105.7. 
29. 16.  O  A.  our  G.  2  Chr.  14.11.  Ps.  99.8. 106.47. 

Isa.  '26.  13.  1  37.  '20.  .Jer.  14.  22.  JJan.  9. 15. 

2  Chrov.  13.11. we  keep  the  charge  of  the  J.,,  our  G. 
14.  7.  because  we  have  sought  the  L.  our  God 
19.  7.  there  is  no  iniquity  with  the  /..  our  God 
32.  8    but  with  us  is  the  L.  our  God  to  help  us 

11.  Ij.  our  God»\\M  deliver  us  out  of  the  hand 
Ktra9.8.grace  hath  been  shewed  from  the /..ourf?. 
/'««/.  20. 7. will  remeinh.  llie  name  of  the  L.ourG 
90.  17.  let  the  beauty  «>f  the  A.  our  G.  be  on  ua 
94.  23.  yea  the  7..  our  God  shall  cut  iheiii  off 
99.  5.  exalt  ye  the  A.  our  G.  and  worship  at  hi8,9 

9.  for  the  L.  G.  is  holy  l|  105. 7.  for  he  is  the  L.O 

122.  9.  because  of  the  bouse  of  the  L.  our  God 

123.  2.  so  our  eyes  wail  on  the  7..  our  God 
Jer.  3.'22.wc  come  to  tliee,for  thou  art  the  L.our O 

23.  in  the  A.  our  God  is  the  selvation  of  Israel 

25.  we  have  sinned  against  the  7.,.  our  G.v/i-.  and 
fnther9,and  have  not  obeyed  voice  of  7..  our  O 

5. 19.  wherefore  doih  the  A.  our  G.  these  lliirigs'! 
24.  let  us  now  fear  the  /..  our  G.  thai  giveth  rain 
8.  14.  for  the  L.  our  G.  hath  put  us  to  silence 
16.  10.  sin  we  have  committed  ag.  the  J.,  our  O. 

26.  Ifi.  huth  spoken  to  us  in  the  name  of  L.ourff. 
31.6.arise,and  let  uago  up  to  7ion,iolhe  I..nurO. 
37.  3.  saying  pray  now  to  L.  our  G.  for  us,  42.  20i 
42.  6.  we  will  obey  the  voice  of  the  7..  our  God 
43.2.  Ihe  L.nurG.yxMh  not  sent  ihec  to  say, go  not 
.Ifl.  28.  to  declaie  the  vengeance  of  the  L.our  G. 
51. 10.  let  us  declare  in  Zion  the  work  of  A.  ourO. 

7;on.9.  9.  lollie  L.our  G.  belong  meicies,  iho'  we 

10.  nor  liuve  we  obeyed  the  voiceof  the  L.ourO. 
14.  for  the  7..  our  G.  is  righteous  in  all  his  work* 

J)/t(;.4.5.  we  will  walk  in  the  name  of  the  L.  irur  O- 
7.  17.  they  shall  be  afraid  of  the  /..  uiir  Gad 

JJcts'2.  'X).  as  many  as  the  /..  our  God  shall  rail 

Res.  19.1. glory, honoiir.and  nower  to  the  L.our  O. 
LORD  tAfir  God. 

FTorf.10.7.  may  serve  A.f.«7.2  CAr.34.33.  ./er.3n.9. 

29.  46.  they  shall  know  that  I  nm  ihe  J..lheir  O. 

F.zek.  2«.  26.  [  34.  30.  f  39.  2-2,  28. 

7,<-B.26.44.break  coven:in',  I  nm  A.  t.  G.  Zeeh.W.G. 

./i/../;r.3.7.fo.gat  7..«.r;.8.34.  1  .'^am.  12  9.  ./rr.3.2I. 

1  AVn;?s9.9.beeause  they  forsook  /-.  t.G.  .//r.22.9 

2  Kings  17.7.  Israel  had  sinned  ngiiiB.it  the  L.  t.  fJ, 
9.  that  were  not  right  against  the  A.  Iheir  God 
14.  fathers,  that  did  not  believe  in  the  A.  thrirCt 
16.  they  left  all  the  commandments  of  the  /..t.O. 
lO.Judah  kept  not  commnndnunisof  the  L  t.O. 

1.".  12.  oliOT-ed  not  voice  of  the  A.  t.  G.  Jer.  7.  28 
2  (liron.  31.  6.  weie  consecrated  to  Ihe  I..  Ihnr  O, 
33  17.  did  sricrifiee  unto  the  /..  their  Gnd  only 
./.T.43  Llspakealllhewordsoflhe  J,  thrirG.f<r 
w  hich  the  A.  fAri'r  Gnd  had  sent  him  to  tb«m 
.50.4.  they  shall  go  and  seek  the  L.t.  G.  7/iut.  3.  5. 
Uns  1.7.  and  I  will  ssve  them  hy  Ihe  /..  thrir  Ood 
7.  10.  and  they  do  not  return  to  the  /..  their  God 
//i/T.I  I>:.  pel, pie  obeyed  the  voice  of  the  L.fhrirO. 
y.rrh.  9.  16.  the  7,.«.  G.  shall  save  tlinm  tn  thnt  day 
Lukr  1. 16. and  mnnvsh^llheinrn  to  the  L.  thrirO. 

X.OnVtt'iyGi'd. 
F.xod.  20.  2.  I  nm  the  A.  (hii  Gnd,  Psnl  81.  10 

/.9n.  51.  15.  ffos.  1'2.  9.  |  13. -1. 
5.  for  I  the  7,.  thy  (?.am  n  jealous  God,  A)fiif.5.5. 
/)ci/r   2.  7.  the  /,  thu  God  hath  been  with  thre 
4.'.M.  ihe  A.  t.  G.  isa  enn«iiming fire,  nlenhiuiO. 

31    for  the  A.  thy  Gnd  is  a  merciful  God 
70  know  therefore  that  the  A.  thy  Go'l,  he  is  God 
21.  for  Iho  I...  Iky  God  \f  among  von,  23   14. 
f  5  n«  a  man  bis  son,  so  the  A.  G.  rhnstenelh  Ihcc 
I'.'  31.  thou  shnlt  not  do  so  to  the  /..  thy  Gnd 
2(1.  1    '"or  Ihe  L.lhy  Gnd  is  with  thee  who  lin.iigh 
V-  ."■>.  and  Ihoii  fhaV  sav  beiV.re  the  A.  thy  God,  IX 
'2^  5S  mnvrst  ferir  Ibis  fearful  nnme,  Ihe  I  .thyO. 
/n^'h.  1   0.  brsiron?,  f'lrthe  /..  fAw  ^Jorf  is  wilhtlie^ 
n.only  Iho  /,.  (Ay  O.  be  with  t'liee  as  with  MosM 


LOR 

S  .<fom. 14.17.  therefore  the  L.  t.  r?.  will  be  with  thee 

i24.  23.  Araunuh  said,  the  L.  thy  O.  accept  thee 
1  Kings  13.0.  entreat  now  the  I'aceofthe //.tA^O. 

17.1-J.  as  the  Z,.  t.  G.  liv.  I  have  not  a  cake,  18.  JO. 
J.ia.  43. 3. 1  am  the  Z,.  t.  G.  tlie  holy  One  ol'  Israel 

1)5. 5.  shall  run  to  thee,  because  of  the  L,.  thy  God 
Jcr.  42. 2.  pray  for  us  to  the  A.  thy  G.  even  for  this 
3.  that  the//,  t.  6'.  may  shew  us  the  way  wherein 
Jl/ic.7.10.\vhich  said  to  me,\vliere  is  the  /y.  thy  G.l 
jCtph.3. 17.  the  A.  tliy  G.  in  midst  of  thee  is  mighty 
•/Wdt.4.7.lhou  shaltjiot  tempt  the /,.t.(T./^uA-c4.J2. 

LORD  your  God. 
I,ev.  19.  2.  ye  shall  bo  holy,  for  I  L.  y.  G.  am  holy 
Jjcut.  1. 10.  //.  y.  G.  hath  multiplied  you  as  stars 

30.  the  /,.your  God  he  shall  light  for  you,  3. 22 

6.  l(j.  ye  shall  not  tempt  the  h.  y.  Q.  as  in  Massal 
10. 17.  the  L.  y.  G.  is  God  of  gods.  Lord  of  lords 

20.  4.  the  J  J.  your  God  is  he  that  goetli  with  you 
Jo.'ihJ'i.M.  the  y>.  your  Godia  God  in  heaven  above 

23.3.  llieJy.y.G.  is  he  that  hath  fought  for  you,  10. 

1  Sam.12.12.  when  the  L,.  your  God  was  your  king 

2  Kijiffs  17.  39.  but  the  L.  your  God  ye  shall  tear 

1  Chr.  22.  18.  i.";  not  the  L.  your  God  with  you  ? 

2  CAr.20.20.  believe  in  the  L,.  your  God,  so  shall  ye 
./cr.42.20.ye  dissembled,  when  ye  sent  me  to  L.  God 
Jnel  3.17.  so  shall  ye  know  that  I  am  the  />.  yonrG. 
Acts  3.22.  a  prophet  shall  the  /,.  yourG.  raise,  7.37. 

See,  I  am  Ihr.  Lord  your  God. 
1.0111)  of  hosts. 

1  Sam.  1.  11.  O  A.  of  hosts,  I'sal.  59.  5.  |  84. 1, 

3,  12.  2  *Viw.  7.  27.  .hr.  11.  20.  |  20.  12. 

2  Sam.  6.  2.  called  by  the  name  of  the  L.  of  hosts 

7.  26.  saving,  the  />.  of  hosts  is  God  over  Israel 

1  h'inirs  18.15. Elij. said, as  L.  h.  livetb,  2A7n^s3.14. 

2  Kings  19.  31.  the  zeal  of  the  L.  uf  hosts  shall 

do  this,  Isa.  9.  7.  |  37.  .32. 

1  Chr.  11.9.  greater,  for  the  L.  ofh.  was  with  him 

17.24.  the  ],.of  h.  God  of  Israel,  even  a  G.  to  Israel 

Vs.  24. 10.  the  L.  of  hosts,  he  is  the  King  of  glory 

46.7.  they,  (//A.  is  with  us,  11. 1148.8. in  city  of />./( 

Isa.  ].  24.  therefore  saith  the  Lord,  the  L.  of  hosti 

2.  12.  the  day  of  the  />.  of  h.  shall  be  »n  the  proud 

(i.3.  and  one  said,  holy,  holy, holy  is  the  h.of  hosts 

5.  mine  eyes  have  seen  the  King,  the  L.  of  hosts 

f?.  13.  sanctify  the  />.  of  hosts  himself,  let  him  be 

14. 27.  for  the  J^.  of  hosts  hath  purposed  it,  23. 9. 

19.  18.  live  cities  shall  swear  to  the  />.  of  hosts 

47.  4.  L.  of  hosts  is  his  name,  48.  2.  |  51. 15.  I  54. 

5.  .Icr.  JO.  16. 1  31.  35.  I  32.  IB.  \  50.  34.  |  51.  19. 

Jcr.  46.  18.  king,  whose  name  is  the  Z/.  ofh.  48. 1.5. 

25.  /v.  of  hosts  saith,  I  will  punish  the  multitude 

J/«A.2.13.  is  it  not  of  the  L.of  hosts  that  the  people 

Wa^.2.4.\vork,for  I  am  with  yon,  saith  L.of  hosts 

^er/t.1.6.  likeasthe  L.of  hosts  thought  to  do  to  us 

Z.  9.  shallknow  that  the  T..nfh.  sent  me,  11. 1 4. 9. 

7.  12.  came  a  great  wrath  from  the  L.  of  hosts 
13.  they  cried,  I  woufldnol  hear,  saith  the/,,  ofh. 

8.  21.  let  us  go  to  pray,  and  to  seek  the  L.  of  hosts 
22.many  people  shall  come  to  seek  the  L.of  hosts 

14. 16.  go  up  to  worship  the  King,  /..  of  hosts,  17. 

21.  every  pot  shall  be  holinfss  unto  the  L.  <fh. 
Mai.  1.  14.  for  I  am  a  great  King,  saith  L.  of  k. 

See,  Saith  the  Lord. 

I  the  LORD. 

/>ej).19.2.ror  Tthe  L.  your  G.  am  holy,  20.26.  |  21 .8. 

21. 15.  for  I  the  L.  do  sanctify  lum",  23.  |  22.  9, 16. 

JVum. 14.35./  /..have  said  it, 1  will  do  it,  E2t'A:.21.17. 

Isa.  27.3.  I  the  /,.  do  keep  it,  I  will  water  it  every 

41.4.  I  the  L.  the  first,  and  with  the  last  I  am  he 

17.  when  the  needy  seek,  Ithe  L.  will  hear  them 

42.  6.  I  the  L.  have  called  thee  in  righteousness 

45.  3.  that  I  the  L.  which  call  thee  by  thy  name 

7.  Ithe  Ay.do  all  these  things||8./<A«/,.created  it 

19.  Ithe  L.  speak  righteousness,  I  declare  things 

21.  have  not  I  the  L.  and  there  is  no  God  else 
60-  16.  shalt  know  that  I  the  L.  am  thy  Saviour 

22.  I  the  L.  will  hasten  it  in  his  time 
f)1.  8.  for  /  the  L.  love  judgment,  I  hate  robbery 

Jrr.  17.  10.  /  the  L.  search  the  heart,  and  try  reins 
Ezck.  5.  n.  I  thn  L.  have  spoken  it,  1.5,  17.  I  17. 
21.  I  21.  32.  I  22.  14.  1  24.  14.  |  26. 14.  |  30. 12. 
14.  4.  /  the  Jj.  will  answer  him  that  cometh,  7. 

9.  Ithe  L.  have  deceived  that  prophet 
17.  24.  //,.  have  brought  down,  /  L.  have  done  it 

20.  48.  all  shall  see  that  /  the  L.  have  kindled  it 

21.  .5.  that  Ithe  /-.  have  drawn  forth  my  sword 
34. 24.  Ithe  L.  will  be  their  G.  David  their  prince 

30.  know  that  /  the  L.  their  God  am  with  them 

36.  36.  that  Ithe  L.  do  build,  Ithe  L.  will  do  it 

37.  14.  know  that  Ithe  L.  have  performed  it 
28.  shall  know  that  I  the  L.  do  sanctify  Israel 

/  am  the  LORD. 

Gen.  15.7.  lam  the  L.  that  brousht  thee  out  of  Vr 

Ezod.  6.  2.  /  am  the  L.  6,  8,  29."|  12. 12.  Lev.  18. 

5,  6,  21.  1  19.  12,  14,  16,  18,  28,  30,  32,  37. 

JTum.  3. 13,  45.  Isa.  43.  11,  15. 

20. 2.  IL.  thy  G.  who  brought  thee  out  of  Egypt 

Lev. '22.  32.  //..which  hallow  you,  that  brought 

fTa.42.8.  / /..that  is  my  name  II  44.5.  shall  say, //.. 

Jtr.  9. 24.  glory,  that  he  knoweth  that  /ant  th*  L. 

353 


LOR 

Jcr.  32. 27.  behold,  lam  the  L.  the  God  of  »11  flesh 

Mai.  3.  6.  for  /  arn,  the  L.  I  change  not,  therefore 

See  Know. 

I  am  the  LORD  your  God. 

Ezod.  6. 7.  ye  shall  know  that  /  am  L.  y.  G.  16. 12. 

Lev.  11.  44.  /  am  the  L.  your  God,  18.  1,  4,  30.  | 

19.  3,  4,  10,  25,  31,  34,  30.  |  20.  7.  |  23.  22. 

Judg.  0.  10.  Kzelc.  20*5,  7,  19,  20.  Joel  2. 27. 

LORD  Jesus,  see  Jesus. 

In  the  LORD. 

Gen.  15. 6.  he  believed  in  the  L.  and  lie  counted  it 

.7()«A.22.25.  Reuben, Gad,  ye  have  no  part  in  L.  27. 

14'a/n.2. 1.  my  heart  rejoiceth  inL.  is  exalted  in  L. 

Psal.A.5.  otter  sacrifice, and  put  your  trust  in  the  L 

11.1.  in  the  L.  put  I  my  trust,  20. 1.  |  31.6.  |  73.28. 

31.  24.  all  ye  that  hope  in  /,.||32.  II.  be  glad  in  L. 

34.  2.  my  soul  shall  make  her  boasi  in  the  L. 

35.  9.  my  soul  shall  be  joyful  in  the  L. 
37.  4.  delight  thyself  i/i  the  L.  Isa.  58.  14. 

7.trust2rt  i.//.||5().10.?H  i./..willl  praise  his  word 

04. 10.  the  righteous  shall  be  glad  in  the  L.  104.34. 
Prov.  3.  5.  trust  in  the  L.  with  all  tliine  heart 

29.  25.  putteth  his  trust  in  the  L.  shall  be  safe 
Isa.  26. 4.  in  the  L.  Jehovah  is  everlasting  strength 

29. 19.  the  meek  shall  increase  their  joy  in  the  L. 

4.5.  17.  but  Israel  shall  be  saved  in  the  L. 
24.  in  the  L.  have  I  righteousness  and  strength 
25.nitAe/,.  shall  all  the  seed  of  Israel  bejustilied 
.ler.  3.  23.  in  the  X.  is  tlie  salvation  of  Israel 
'jCcph.  3.  2.  she  trusted  not  in  the  L.  drew  not  near 
ZfcA.12.5.  Jerusalem  shall  be  my  strength  in  the  L. 
//cfs  9.42.  it  was  knowu,and  many  believed  in  t.  L. 

14.  3.  they  abode,  speakmg  boldly  in  the  L. 
/?0OT.16.2.ye  receive  her  iH/,.||8.greet  A  mplias  in/,. 

12.  salute  Persis,  who  laboured  much  in  the  L 

13.  saluteRufus,  chosen  ?n?Ae/,.and  his  mother 
22. 1  Tertms  who  wrote  this  salute  you  in  the  /.. 

1  C'or.1.31.  glorieth,  let  him  glory  in  L.  2  Cor.10.17. 
4. 17.  and  faithful  in  the  L.  ||  7. 22.  called  in  the  /,. 
7.  39.  be  married  to  whom  she  will,  only  in  the  L. 
9. 1.  am  I  not  an  apostle,  are  ye  not  my  work  i« /,. 
2.  the  seal  of  my  apostleship  are  ye  in  the  L. 

11. 11.  nor  the  woman  without  the  man  in  the  L. 

15.  58.  that  your  labour  is  not  in  vain  in  the  L. 
Eph.  2.  21.  groweth  to  a  holy  temple  in  the  L. 

4. 17.  and  testify  in  /,.1|5.8.  now  are  ye  light  in/,. 
6. 1.  children  obey  your  parents  in  theL.  for  this 

10.  finally,  my  brethren,  be  strong  in  the  L. 

21.  Tychicus  a  faithful  minister  in  the  L. 
Phil.  1.  14.  brethren  in  the  L.  waxing  confident 
2.  24.  I  trust  in  the  h.  I  shall  come  shortly 

29.  receive  him  therefore  in  the  L.  with  gladness 
4.  1.  my  brethren,  stand  fast  in  the  L.  1  Thess.,i.S. 

2.  that  they  be  of  the  same  mind  in  the  /,. 
10.  but  I  rejoiced  in  the  L.  greatly,  that  at  last 

Col.  3.  18.  submit  to  your  own  husbands  in  the  L. 
4.  7.  Tychicus  who  is  a  fellow-servant  in  the  L. 

17.  ministry  which  thou  hast  received  in  the  L. 
1  Thess.  5.12.  know  them  which  are  over  you  in  L. 
~Thess.3.i.  we  have  confidence  in  (Ae/,.  touching 
Philem.  10.  to  thee,  both  in  the  flesh  and  in  the  L. 

20.  joy  of  thee  in  t.  /..refresh  my  bowels  in  the  L. 

Rev.W.Xi.  blessed  are  the  dead  which  die  in  the  L. 

See  Rejoice,  Trust. 

LORD  isi 

Gen.  28.  16.  surely  the  L.  is  in  this  place 

£10^.9.27.  the  L.is  righteous,  I  wicked,  2CSr.12.6. 

15.  2.  the  L.  is  my  strength  andscmg,  he  is  my  G. 

3.  the  L.  is  a  man  of  war,  the  L.  is  his  name 
18.  11.  I  know  that  L.  is  greater  than  all  gods 

J\''Hm.  14.  9.  the  /..  is  with  us,  feaithem  not 

18.  the  /..  is  long-suffering,  of  great,  JVuA.  1.3. 
42.  go  not  up,  for  the  L.  is  not  among  you 

16.3.  are  holy  every  one,and  the  /..is  among  them 
Dent.  10.  9.  the  /..  is  his  inheritance,  according 

18.  2.  the  L.  is  their  inheritance,  as  he  said 
.Tosh.  22.  34.  shall  be  a  witne.ss,  that  the  /..  is  God 
.hidg.(}.V2. and  said, the  /..i.t  with  thee,  Lukei.2ti. 

1  Sam.  2.  3.  for  the  /..  is  a  God  of  knowledge 

16.  18.  the  L.  is  with  David,  2  .9nm.  7.  3. 
23.  16.  seeing  the  /..  is  departed  from  thee 

2  .Sam.  22.  2.  he  said,  the  /..  is  my  rock,  Psal.  18.2. 
1  Kinirs  8.  (iO.  people  may  know  that  the  /,.isGod 

20.  28.  Syrians  said,  the  /..  is  the  God  of  the  hills  j 
IChron.  13.  10.  but  as  for  us,  the  /..  is  our  God 

15.  2.  the  /,.  is  with  you  while  ye  bo  with  him 
Psal. 9. 16./..  is  known  by  the  judgment  which  he 

10.  16.  the  /..  is  king  for  ever  and  ever 

11.4.  the/.,  is  in  his  holy  temple,  his  eyes  behold 
14. 6.  counsel  of  poor,  because  the  /,.  is  his  refuge 

16.  5.  the  /..  is  the  portion  of  mine  inheritance 
23.  1.  the  L.  IS  my  shepherd,  I  shall  not  want 

27. 1.  the  /,.  is  my  licht  anrl  my  salvation,  the  /.. 
is  the  strengih  of  mv  life,  of  whom  be  afraid 

28.  7.  the  /,.  is  my  strength  and  shield,  118.  J4. 

8.the/,.is  their  strength, and  be  is  saving  strength 

34.  8.  O  taste  and  see  that  the  L-is  good,  blessed  is 

47. 2.  for  the  /..  most  hich  is  terrible,  a  great  king 
89.18.tho  L.is  our  defence  and  Holy  One  our  king 
92. 15.  to  shew  that  L.  i.«  upright,  ho  it  my  rock 

3A 


LOR 

rsaZ.93.1.tho  L.is  clothed  with  strength  wherewith 

94.  22.  but  the  /..  is  my  defence  and  my  rock 

95.  3.  the  L.  is  a  great  God,  96.  4.  |  99. 2. 1  j;».  5. 
100.  5.  the  L.  is  good,  34.  8.  ]  135.  3.  |  145.  9. 

Jcr.  33.  11.   Lam.  3.  25.  JVah.  1.  7. 
103. 8./,.  is  merciful  and  gracious,  111.4.  |  145.8. 
1 13.  4.  the  /..  is  high  ||  118.  6.  the  /,.  is  on  my  sido 
121.  5.  the  L.  is  thy  keeper,  the  /..  is  thy  shade 
125.  2.  so  the  /..  is  round  about  his  people 
129.  4.  L.  is  right.  145. 17.  /.a?«.  1.  ]8.  Dan.  9. 14. 
145. 18.  the  /..  is  nigh  to  all  them  that  call  on  him 
Prov.  15.  29.  the  L.  is  far  from  the  wicked 
22.  2.  the  /..  is  the  maker  of  them  all 
Isa.  30.  18.  fur  the  L.  is  a  God  of  judgment 
33.  5.  the  /..  is  e.xalted  ||  22.  /.,  is  our  judge,  our 
42.  21.  /..  is  well  pleased  for  his  righteousness 
.In:  10.  10.  the  /..  is  the  true  God,  the  livingGod 
17.7.  whose  hope  the  /..is||20.11.  the  L.is  with  me 
Lam.  3.  24.  the  L.  is  my  portion,  saith  my  soul 
Ezc/c.  48. 35.  the  name  of  the  eily,  the  L.  is  there 
.^Hi»s5.8.  makelh  ihe  stars,  the  /..  is  his  name,9.b. 
J/ab.  2.  20.  but  the  /..  is  in  his  holy  temple 
Zrph.  3.  5.  the  just  L.  is  in  the  midst  thereof,  15. 
Zech.10.5.  they  shall  fight,  because  L.i.i  w  iih  them 
13.  9.  and  they  shall  say,  the  /..  is  my  God 
/.!/Ae24.  34.  the  /..  is  risen  indeed,  anil  apjieared 
2  Cur.  3.  17.  now  the  /..  is  that  Spirit,  and  whero 
Phil.  4.  5.  moderation  be  known,  the  L.  is  at  hand 
IThcss.  4.  6.  the  L.  is  the  avenger  of  all  such 
2  Thess.  3.  3.  but  the  /..  is  faithful,  who  shall  keep 
Ucb.  13.  6.  the  /..  is  my  helper,  I  will  not  fear 
.lain.  5. 11.  •/..  is  very  pitiful,  and  of  tender  mercy 

1  Pet.  2.  3.  if  ye  have  tasted  that  the  L.  is  gracioua 

2  Pet.3.d.  the  i,.i«  not  slack  concerning  his  promise 
See  Made. 

My  LORD. 
Gen.  19. 18.  Lot  said  unto  them,  oh !  not  so  my  L. 
Ej:od.4.W.  Moses  said,  O  my  /..  I  am  not  eloquent 
13.0  my  L.  send  by  hand  of  whom  thou  wilt  send 
JVum.  14. 17.  now  let  the  power  of  ?«7^  /..  be  great- 
JosA.5.14.  he  said,  w  bat  saith  my  L.  to  his  servant? 
Jud^.li.  13. 0  7ny  L.  if  the  /..  be  with  us,  why  is  thij 
15.  O  my  /..  wherewith  shall  I  save  Israel  ? 
13.  8.  O  my  /..  let  the  man  of  G.  come  again  to  lu 
Psal.  16.  2.  thou  hast  said  to  the  L.  thou  art  my  L. 
3.).  23.  stir  up  thyself  my  God,  my  /,.  JoAn  20. 28. 
110.  1.  the  L.  said  to  my  L.  Mat.  22.  44.  Mark 
12.  36.  Luke  20.  42.  ^cts  2.  34 
Isa.  21.  8.  my  L.  I  stand  on  the  watch  tower 
49.  14.  but  Zion  said,  my  L.  hath  forgotten  mo 
Dan.  10.  16.  O  my  L.  by  the  vision  my  sorrows 
17.  can  the  servant  of  wit/  /..talk  with  ibis  my  /..T 
19.  and  I  said,  let  my  L.  speak,  for  thou  hast 
12.8.  O  my  /..  what  shall  be  end  of  these  things! 
Zech.  1.  9.  then  said  I,  O  ?«?/  /,.  what  are  these  1 
4.  4.  I  0.  4."||  4.  5.  no,  my  L.  13. 
Jirat24.48.m7/  /..delayeth  his  coming,  Luke  12.45. 
Licke  1. 43.  that  the  mother  oimy  L.  should  come 
John  20. 13.  because  they  have  taken  away  my  L, 
Phil.  3.  8.  the  knowledse  of  Christ  Jesus  my  L. 

O  LORD. 
Gen.  49. 18. 1  have  wailed  for  thy  salvation,  0  L. 
Exod.i5.11.  who  is  like  to  thee,  6 /..among gods'? 
JVum.  10.  .36.  return,  O  L.  unlo  Israel,  Ps«i.6.4. 
Dcut.  26.  10.  which  thou,  O  L.  hast  given  me 
Josh.  7.  8.  O  /,.  what  shall  I  say,  Israel  turneSi 
Judg.  5.  31.  so  let  all  thy  enemies  perish,  O  L 
2  .Sum.  15.  31.  O  /,.  turn  counsel  of  Ahitbophel 

22.  29.  thou  art  my  lamp,  O  /..  and  Lord  will 

23.  17.  be  it  far  from  me,  O  L.  that  I  should 
1  Chron.  17.  20.  O  /..  there  is  none  like  thee 

29.  11.  thine,  O  /,.  is  the  greatness,  thine,  O  L. 
"Chron.  14.  11.  help  us,  O/..  our  G.  O /,.  thou  art 
Psal.  3.7.  arise,  O  L.  save  me  {|  5.8.  lead  me,  O  /,. 

6.  2.  0  L.  heal  me  ||  3.  but  thou,  O  /..  how  long? 

7.  6.  arise,  O  /..  9.  19.  |  10.  12.  j  17.  13. 
8.  judge  me  O  /..  accord,  to  my  righteous.  26. 1. 

8. 1.  0  /..  our  /..  9.  II  9. 1. 1  will  praise  thee,  O  /,. 
9.  13.  have  mercy  upon  me,  O  /,.  consider  my 
trouble,  31.  9.  |  86.  3.  |  123.  3. 
18. 1.  I  will  love  thee,  O  L.  my  strength,  19.  14. 
22.  19.  be  not  thou  far  from  me,  O  L.  35.  22. 
27.  7.  hear,  O  /..  30.  10.  |  39. 12.  |  69.  16.  |  86.  6. 
I  102.1.1  119.  145.  I  140.6. 
.31.  14.  I  trussted  in  thee,  O  /,.  I  said 
86.  8.  among  the  gods  none  like  to  thee,  O  L. 

11.  teach  me  thy  way,  O  /..  I  walk,  2.5.4.  |  27.11. 
1 15.1. not  unto  u.»,0  /..not  unto  us, but  to  thy  name 
119.151.  thou  art  near  O  /,.  thy  commands  triilh 
143.1. hoar  my  prayer  0  /,.  7.  /s'(i.37.17./;nn.9.19. 

Isa.  2j.  1.  O  /,.  thou  art  my  God,  I  will  exalt  thee 
r)3.16.thou,  O  /..art  our  Falber, our  Redeem. 64.8. 

J<r.  10. 6.  O  /..  thou  art  great  ||  II.  5.  so  bo  it,  O  L. 
12.  3.  but  thou  0  /..  knowcst  me,  thou  hast  seen 
14.  9.  yet  thou,  O  L.  art  in  the  midst  of  us 
17.  13.  O  /-.  the  hope  of  Israel,  all  that  forsake 
14.  heal  ine,  O  /..  and  I  shall  be  healed,  save  me 

Lam.  1.11.  see,  O  L.  and  consider  I  am  vile,  2. 20. 
5.  19.  thou  O  /-.  remainest  for  ever,  thy  throne 
21.  turn  us  unto  thee,  O  L.  w«  shall  be  turned 


LOR 

JonahX-li.  we  beiseech  thee,  O  L.  we  beseech  thee 
Jiab.\.l'2.  U  /y.thou  hast  ordained  them  forjudgni. 
Hab.'i.-.O  //.revive  thy  work  in  midst  of  the  years 
JSlat.  15.  a.  O  L.  thou  Sou  of  David,  -JO.  30,  31. 
J^uke  5.  8.  depart,  for  I  am  a  sinful  man,  O  L. 
Jiec.  4.  11.  thou  art  worthy,  O  L.  to  receive  glory 
t).  10.  Baying,  how  long,  O  L.  holy  and  true 

15.  4.  who  shall  not  fear  thee,  O  />.  ftnd  glorify 
l(j.  5.  Q  L.  which  art,  and  wast,  and  shall  be 

See  Lord   God. 

Of  llie  LORD. 

Josh  11.  20.  for  it  was  of  tlie  L.  to  harden  hearts 

1  Ham.  1.  2U.  because  1  have  asked  him  of  the  L. 
8.  ■^l.  he  rehearsed  them  in  the  ears  of  Iht  1j. 
23.  21.  Saul  saul,  blessed  be  ye  of  l^.^iHam.  2.5. 

2  Sam.  12.  25.  his  name  Jvdidiuh  because  of  the  I,. 

1  Ktrtirs  15.  2'J.  according  to  the  saying  of  the  J.. 

2  ATin./.v  G.  33.  he  said,  behold  this  evil  is  of  the  /,. 
8.  d.  meet  the  man  of  G.  and  inquire  of  L.  by  him 
10. 17.  according  to  the  saying  of  the  L.  to  Elijah 

2  Chr.  18. 7.  one  man,  by  whom  we  may  inquire- />. 

34.  21.  go,  inquire  of  the  1.,.  for  me,  and  for  Israel 
Psal.  91.  2.  1  will  say  of  the  L.  he  is  my  refuge 
Prov.  10.  33.  but  the  disposing  thereof  is  o/£/i«  L. 

20.24.  man's  goings  are-//.||  21.31.  safety  is  o/  L. 
IsaA\i.'i.  worship,  because  of  the  L.  that  is  faithful 

51.  'J.  O  arm  of  the  />.  awake  as  in  ancient  days 
Jtr.  21.  2.  inquire,  I  pray  thee,  of  the  L.  for  us 
L.am.  3.  22.  it  ia  -L.  mercies  we  are  not  consumed 
Jonah  2.  9.  pay  that  \  vowed,  salvation  is  of  the  L. 
Acts  21. 14.  ceased,  saying,  the  will  of  1...  be  done 

1  Cor.  11.  23. 1  have  received  of  the  L.  that  which 

2  Cor.  2.  12.  and  a  door  was  opened  to  me  of  the  L. 
Eph.  ').  8.  the  same  shall  he  receive  of  the  />. 
CW/.3.24.  knowing  thato/tAe  L.  ye  receive  reward 
2  Tim.  1.18.  grant  that  he  may  find  mercy  of  the  J,. 
Jam.  1.  7.  that  he  shall  receive  any  thing  of  the  L,. 

5.  11.  and  ye  have  seen  the  end  of  the  1,. 

2  Ptt.  3.  15.  long-surtering  of  the  L.  is  salvation 

See  Angel. 

Anger  of  the  LORD. 

Ezod.  4.14.  anger  of  the  h.  was  kindled  ag.  Moses 

J^iim.  11.  10.  anger  of  the  /,.  was  Jvindled  against 

Israel,  2.5.  3.  .loah.  7.  1.  Jiidg.  2.  14,  20.  j  3.  8. 

I  10.  7.  2  Sam.  24.  I.  2  Kings  13.  3.  Isa.  5.  2.5. 

J^um.  12.9.  -/>.  kindled  against  Aaron  and  Miriam 

25.4.  that  the  fierce  an.  of  Ij.  may  be  turned  aw.iy 

32.14.  to  augment  yet  the  an. o/</ie  A.  toward  Isr. 

Z)<■K^6.15.  lest  the  nn.  of  the  L.  be  kindled  ag.  thee 

7.4.  so  will  a7to-cro/r//c/y.  be  kindled  against  yon 

29.20.  then  the  an.  of  J,,  shall  .smoke  ag.  that  man 

27.  anger  of  the  L.  was  kindled  against  this  land 

Josh.  2:{.  16.  the  anger  of  the  L.  be  kindled  ag.  you 

2.Sam.6.7.  -/..kindled  against  Uzzah,  1  Chr.  13.  10. 

2  Kings  24.  20.  thro'  -/..it  came  to  pass,  .Jcr.  52. .'). 

SC'Ar.  25.  1.5.  a.  of  the  L.  kindled  against  Amaziah 

Jer.i.  8.  fierce  o.  of  L.  is  not  turned  back  from  us 

12.13.  ashamed  becausoof  the  fierce  <i.  of  the  /,. 

2;>.20.  angcroflhe  L.  shall  not  return  till,  30.  21. 

51.45.  deliver  every  man  his  soul  from  a.  of  the  h. 

Lam.-."2.  so  that  in  day  n//,.  nn^cr  none  escaped 

4.  16.  the  anger  of  the  Jj.  hath  divided  them 

ZfpA.  2.  2.  before  the  fierce  a.  o///.  come  upon  you 

3.ye  shall  be  hid  intlieday  ofthe  nnofcr  o/f/ic  h. 

See     CoMMANDMK.NT,     CoNORKGATION,     COUN- 

BEL,  Dav,  Eyes,  Face,  Fear,  Feast,  Glory, 

Hand,  House,  Knowledge,  Law. 

Mouth  of  the  LORD. 

/>*«(. S. 3. word  that  proceedethout  ofmouM.  of  /,. 

yo«A.9.14.and  asked  not  rounselattheTnuwf/j  of  /,. 

I  Kings  13. 21.thou  hast  disobeyed  the  mouth  of  I.. 

Isa.  1.  20.  for  the  mouth  of  L.  hath  spoken  it,  40. 

5.  I  .58.  14.  ./er.  !l.  12.  Mic.  4.  4. 

02.  2.  by  a  new  name,  which  the  -A.  shall  name 

^cr.23.10.  and  they  speak  not  out  oCmoulh  oft.  />. 

.Vainroflhe  l.ORD. 
Gen.  12.  P.  Abrnin  called  on  the  name  of  the  Jj. 

16.  13.  shcr-alli-il  Ihp  name  of  h.  that  spake  to  her 
26.  25.  Isaac  called  on  n.  of  J,,  and  pitclit^d  there 

Ezod.  20. 7.  Shalt  not  take  -  A.  in  vain,  Dent.  5.  H. 

33.  19.  I  will  proclaim  n.  of  the  A.  before  thee 

34.  .5.  and  the  Lord  proclaimed  the  n.  of  the  I.. 
J.ev.  21.  11.  woman's  son  blasphemed  the  -/>.  16. 
Veut.  18.  5.  to  stand  to  minister  in  n.  of  the  A.  7. 

22.  when  a  prnphnt  sp^aketb  in  the  n.  of  the  J,. 

St.5.  them  halh  Goil  rho-irn  to  bless  in  n.  of  the  J,. 

88. 10.  sue  that  thou  art  called  by  the  n.  of  the  1. 

32.3.bpcauBe  I  will  publish  name  o/t/ic  A.  ascribe 

,7u.»A.9.9.tliy  wrvanis  are  come  beca.  ofn.ofthe  A 

ISam.  17.  45. 1  cnmo  to  thee  in  n.  of  the  A.  of  hosls 

20.42.  we  have«worn  both  ofusin  nnmro/JAe  A. 

SVam.O.  2.  whoso  name  iscalledby  then,  of  the  /,. 

]».  blessed  the  people  in  the  n.  A.  I  Chr.  16.  2. 

1  KiniTK  3.  2.  no  house  built  to  the  name  of  the 

Lord,  .5.  3,  5.  I  8.  17,  20.  1  Chron.  2-.'.  7,  19. 

2  r*ron.  2.  1,4.  I  6.  10. 

in.l.  queen ofShelm  heard coneemine name n/A. 

13.32.  Kli.jali  built  an  altar  inlhcnnmr  of  the  A 

?2.  16.  that  which  is  true  in  v.  A.  2  Chron.  18.  1.5 

fiifinf  (2.2'l.and  Elisha  cnrsed  tham  in  h.  of  the  L 

354 


LOR 

1  Chr.  21. 19.  which  he  spake  in  n.  L.  2  Chr.  33. 18. 
,/oA  1  21.  blessed  be  the  n.  of  the  L.  I'sal.  113.  2. 
I'sal.  7. 17. 1  will  sing  praises  to  n.  of  A.  most  high 

20.  7.  but  we  will  remember  n.  of  the  L.  our  God 
102.  15.  so  the  heathen  shall  fear  the  n.  of  the  A. 

21.  to  declare  n.  of  the  A.  in  Zion,  and  his  praise 
113. 1.  praise  the -A.  133«  1.1  148.5,  13.  ./(/W2.2b. 

3.  from  rising  of  sun  the  A.  name  is  to  be  praised 
116.  4.  then  called  I  on  n.  of  A.  O  Lord,  deliver 
118.  10.  but  in  the  -A.  will  1  destroy  them,  11,  12. 

2G.  blessed  be  he  that  comelh  in  the  n.  of  the  A. 
122.  4.  to  give  thanks  unto  the  name  of  the  A. 
124.8.  our  help  is  in  n.  of  the  A.  who  made  heaven 
129. 8.  they  which  go  by  say,  we  ble.ss  you  in  -A. 
ProD.18. 10.  the  -A.  is  a  strong  tower,  the  righteous 
Isa.  18.  7.  to  the  place  of  the  na.  of  the  A.  of  hosts 

24.15.  glorify  the  nanic  of  the  A.  in  (he  isles  of  sea 
30.27.  tbenn.o/ A.  Cometh  from  far,  burning  with 
48. 1.  which  swear  by  na.  «/ A.  and  make  mention 
50. 10.  let  him  trust  inn.  of  the  L.  and  stay  on  God 
5t).6.  and  to  love  the  na.of  A.  to  be  his  servants 
59.19.  so  shall  they  fear  the  name  of  L.  from  west 
60.9.  to  bring  their  silver  and  gold  lo  name  oft.  A. 

Jcr.  3. 17.  all  nations  gathered  to  name  of  the  Lord 
11. 21. saying,  prophesy  not  in  the  name  of  the  L. 
26.9.  why  hasl  ihou  prophesied  in  the  name  of  A. 

16.  he  hath  spoken  to  us  in  theyiawic  of  A.  44. 16. 
20.  Urijah  that  prophesied  in  the  name  of  the  L. 

.^mosG.  10.  we  may  not  ii'.ake  mention  of/i.o/t.  A. 

Jilic.4.5.  we  will  walk  in  71.  e/ A.  for  ever  and  ever 
5. 4.  ye  shall  feed  in  the  majesty  of  the  n-ofthe  A. 

Zcph.  3.  12.  and  they  shall  trust  in  name  of  the  A. 

Zcch.  13.  3.  thou  speakef  I  lies  m  the  name  of  the  A. 

jMat.  21.9.  blessed  is  he  thatcometh  inthejiamcn/ 
the  A.  23.  39.  .Murk  11.  9,  10.  Luke  13.  35.  \ 
19.  38.  .Mm  12.  13. 

Arts 'J.  29.  and  he  spake  boldly  in  n.  of  the  L.Jesus 
10.48.  commanded  them  to  be  baptized  in  n.  of  A 
19.13.  to  call  over  them  the  VI.  0/ A.  Jesi;s,sayin; 

17.  and  the  n.  of  the  A.  Jesus  was  niagnitied 

21.  13. fori  am  readytodie  for  the  n.  of  />.  Jesus 

22. 16.  wash  away  thy  sins,  calling  on  the  n.  of  A. 

2  'J'h.ess.l.l~.  that  the  n.  of  A.  Jes.  may  beglorified 
3. 6.  we  command  you  in  the  71.  of  A.  Jesus  Christ 

Jam.  5.  10.  prophets,  whohavcs|)oken  in  n.  of  L 

14.  anointing  him  with  oil  in  the  name  of  the  A. 

Sec  Caul,  Ofterings. 

Prophet  and  prophets  of  the  LORD. 

l.SffTn.  3.20.  fiamuci  established  to  be  a.p.ofthcI. 

1  Kings  18.  4.  when  Jezebel  cut  off  the  p.  of  the  A. 

13.  Jezebel  slew  the -A.  ||  22.1  only  remain  a  -/ 

22.7.  is  there  not  here  a  ;)ro/)A.  of  the  A.  to  inquire 

of  him?  2  Kings  3.  11.  2  Chron.  18.  (i. 

iChr.  28.9  a  -A.  was  there,  whose  name  was  Oded 

.Sec  Sabaoth,  Sabbath. 

Servant,  servants  of  the  LORD. 

/)CM«.34.5. Moses  the.?.  oft.L.  died  therein  Moab 

.fosh.  1.  1.  after  the  death  of  Meses  the  s.  of  the  L. 

rj.which  Moses  the. 9eru(jnto/i!Ac  A.command- 

ed,8.31, 33. 1 11. 12. 1 22.2,5. 2  Kings  18. 12. 

15.  whiih  Moses  the  servanS^fthe  A.  gave  you, 

12.  6.  1  13.  8.  I  18.  7.  I  22.  4. 

12. 6.  them  did  Moses  the  servant  of  the  A.  smite 

14.7.  when  Moses  the. «.o/  A.sent  me  from  Kadcsh 
24.29.  Joshua  sonof  Nunthe-A.  died,  Juilg.2.  8. 

2A7nx,r.s9.7.avenge  the  bloodofall  the.fcri'/.s-.o/A. 

lO.-Zi.  see  there  be  here  none  of  the  .?crr«H  (.5  o/A. 
■2('hr.  1.  3.  tal)ernaclc  Moses  the  «.  of  the  A.  mad 

24.6.  according  to  commandmciitof  Moses  tlie-A. 
Psal.  1 13.  1.  praise  the  Ld.  prai.se,  O  ye  -A.  135. 1. 

134.1. behold,  bless  ye  the  Lord,0  all  ye  scr.  of/.,. 
Isa.  42.  19.  who  ia  blind  or  deaf  as  the  A.  servant 

54.17.  this  is  the  heritage  of  the  ^7r»an«so/t.  A. 

2  Tim.  2. 24.  and  the  serv.  of  the  I.,  must  not  strive 

Sight  of  the  LORD. 
r?fn.38.7.Erwas  wicked  in  ».o/ A.and  he  slew  him 
AcB.10.19.«houId  have  been  aeco[ited  insight  of  I,. 
Deut.G.  18.  do  that  which  is  good  in  s.  of  A.  12.  2.-', 

12.  25.  do  what  is  right  in  sight  of  the  A.  21.  9 
2  Kings  12.  2.  \  14.  3.  |  15.  :i,  24.  |  18.  3.  ]  22. 
2.  2  Chron.  20.  32.  |  24.  2.  |  25.  2.  |  26.  4.  | 
27.  2.  I  2!).  2.  I  :M.  2. 

1  Sam.  12.  17.  wickedness  is  groat  yohave  done  in 

the  .light  of  A.  I  Kings  21. 25.  2  Kings  21. 6 
^Kings  3. 18.  this  Is  but  n  light  thing  in  sight  of  A 
16  2.  did  not  what  was  right  in  -A.  2  Chron.  28. 1 
Psal.Wfi.  15.  precious  in  -A.  Is  death  of  his  sninl: 
Mnl.  2.  17.  yo  say,  ho  that  doth  evil,  is  good  in  -A. 
Luke  1.  l.'i.  for  ho  shall  bo  great  in  sight  of  the  L. 

2  Cor.  8.21.  not  only  in  the  s.  of  the  A.  but  of  men 
Jam.  4.10.1iumble  yourselves  in  the  sight  of  the  A 

See  Evil. 

Spirit  of  the  \.OV.y*. 

.Inilg.X  10.  .<>.()/ A.camc  on  Othniid,  and  ho  judged 

6.  34.  .S'.  of  A.camo  on  Gideon  ||  1 1.29.  on  Jephtlin 

13.  25. -A.  began  to  move  Sams.  14.  6,  19.  |  15.  14. 
l.Snm.  lO.R. -A.  willcomoonSaulll  16.13.  on  Dav. 

16.14.  hut  the  Spirit  of  the  A.  departed  from  Saul 
2  .Sam.  23.  2.  -A.  spnko  by  nie,  his  word  was  in 
IKitftK.li.-L  shall carrylhofl  whithcrlknow  not 


LOR 

1  Kings  22.  24.  which  way  went  the  Sp.  oft!te  L, 
from  me  to  speak  unto  thee?  2  CAro7i.l8.  23. 

2/rin  CT-52.16.le8t  'he  A',  of  the  A.  hath  taken  him  up 

2  Chr.  20.  14.  on  Jahaziel  came  6'.  0/  A.  in  midst 
Isa.  11. 2.  -  A.shall  rest  upon  him.  Spirit  of  wisdom 

40.  7. -A.  bloweth  upon  it||  13.  hath  directed -A. 
59  19.  the  Spirit  of  the  A.shall  lift  up  a  standard 

61. 1.  -A.  is  upon  me,  because  ihe  Ld.  Luke  4. 18. 
63.14.  Spir.  of  L.  caused  him  lo  rest,  so  didst  thou 

Ezek.  11.5.  -A.  fell  upon  me  ||  37.  1.  carried  in  -A. 

Mic.  2.  7. 0  liouse  of  Jac.  is  the  6'.  of  A.  straitened 

3.H.but  truly  I  am  full  of  power  by  the  A',  of  the  L. 
Actsi.'i.  how  is  it  ye  have  agreed  to  lempl  A",  of  A. 

8.  39.  when  conio  up,  the -A. caught  away  Philip 

2  Cor.  3.  17.  wlicre  the  .b'.  oft.  A.  is,  there  is  liberty 

18.  from  glory  to  glory,  even  as  by  the  Spi.  of  A. 

Temple  of  the  LORD. 

l.SaTn.  1.9.  Eli  sat  on  a  scat  by  a  post  of  the  t.  of  L. 

3.  3.  and  ere  the  lamp  of  God  went  out  in  the  -A. 
2A7nCT,*11.13.  she  c.ime  to  the  people  into  t.  of  A. 

18.1t).Hezekiah  cut  gold  oil' from  doors  of  t.o/  L. 

2.3.  4.  bring  out  of  the  -A.  vessels  made  for  Baal 

24.13.all  vessels  Solomon  had  made  in  the  t.  of  L. 
2('Ac.26.l6.  Uzziah  went  in  t.  of  L.to  burn  incense 

27.2.  Jothain  entered  not  into  the  temple  of  the  L. 
29.16.took  away  uncleanness  found  in  t.  of  the  L. 

£2ra3.6.fouiidation  of  the  t.  of  L.  was  notyet  laid 

10.  laid  the  foundation  oft.  of  the  A.  Hag.  2. 18. 

./cr.  7.  4.  saying,  the  t.  of  A.  the  t.  of  A.  are  thesa 

24.1.  baskets  of  figs  were  set  before  the  t.  of  the  A. 

£2c/i.8. 16.  atthedoorofthet.  o/A.  were  25  men, 

with  their  backs  toward  -A.  and  facesto  east 

ITag.^.  15.  consider  before  a  stone  w  as  laid  in  -A. 

Zech.  6.  12.  and  he  shall  build  the  t.  of  the  A.  13.15. 

14.  crown  shall  he  for  a  memorial  in  <cm;)ic  o/A. 

Luke  1.  9.  when  Zacharias  went  into  the  t.  of  L 

Voieeofthe  LORD. 

Oc«<.30.8.  and  obey  voice  of  A.  Jtr.  26.13.  1 38.20. 

AosA. 5.6. because  theyobeyed  not  the  v.of  L.lSam. 

28.   18.  1  Kings  20.  3b.  Jcr.  3.  25.  ]  7.  28. 

I  42.  13,  21.  i  43.  4,  7.  [  44.  23.  l>an^9.  10 

l.Sa77!.1.5.  It),  wherefore  didst  thou  not  obey  v.of  L. 

20.  Saul  said,  yea  I  have  obeyed  the  v.of  the  A. 
22.and  sacrifices.as  in  obeying  \hcvoiceoftheL 

Psal.  29.  .3.  the  voice  of  the  A.  is  upon  the  waten 

4.  the  V.  of  the  A.  is  powerful,  full  of  majesty,  5, 

7.  the  voice  of  the  A.  dividetli  the  flames  of  fire 

8.  the  77.  of  A.  shaketh  the  wilderness  of  Kadesh 

9.  the  voice  of  the  A.  maketh  the  hinds  to  calve 
106.  25.  they  hearkened  not  10  the  voice  of  the  L. 

/l'!a.6.8.I  heard  the  v.  of  the  A.  saying,  who  will  go 
30. 31.  thro'  V.  of  the  A.shall  As.syrians  bcbeaten 
66.6.  a  voice  of  the  L.  that  rendereth  recompcnce 

.7cr.42.6.we  will  obey  the  v.  of  the  A.our  God  that 
it  may  be  well  with  us  when  we  obey  the  t7.  ofL. 

Mic.  6.  9.  the  A.  voice  criclh  unto  the  city 

//a^.l.]2.remnant  ofthe  people  obeyed  v.oftkeL. 

ZecA.6.15.if  ye  will  diligently  ob<5y  the  v.  of  the  A. 

Actsl. 21.  thee.  o/«Ae  A.  camt? to  Moses, saying 
JVaijof  the  hORU. 

^fn.lS.lO.command  his  household  to  kceptc.o/ A. 

.hidg.'i.^.  whether  they  will  keep  the  70.  ofthe  L. 

2/r(77:?'s21.22.  Anion  walked  not  in  the  70.  of  the L. 

P.«aM19.1.bless.aro  they  who  walk  in  xc.  of  the  L. 

/^roo.l0.29.thc  w.oflhc  A.isstrength  to  the  upright 

Isa.  40.  3.  prepare  ye  the  w.  of  the  A.  make 
straight,  Mat.  3.  3.  Mark  1.  3.  Luke  3.  4. 

,/cr.  5.  4.  are  foolish,  they  know  not  way  of  the  L. 

5.  great  men,  for  thev  have  known  way  of  the  A. 
F.iek.  18. 2.5.  the  to.  A.'isnot  equal,  29.  |  33.  17, 20. 
.hhn  1.  23.  one  crying,  make  straight  irayoftheL. 
Actsl8.25.  Apollos  was  instructed  in  way  of  the  L, 

Ways  of  the  LORD. 
2,<ra77i.  22.  22.  for  I  have  kept  the  70.  of  L.  Ps.18.21. 
2CAr.  17. 6.  Jehosliaphat  was  lifted  up  in  w.  of  A. 
r.«aM38.  5.  yea,  they  shall  sing  in  the  id.  of  the  A. 
//«.«. 14.9.  for  the  w.  ofthe  A.  are  risiit,  and  the  just 
Acts  13. 10.  cease  lo  pervert  the  riiiht  10.  of  the  L. 

IVordofthe  LORD. 
F.rod.  0.  20.  he  that  feared  the 70.  ofthe  A.among 

21.  and  he  that  regarded  not  the  ic.  ofthe  A.  left 
JVam.  3.  16.  according  to  the  word  of  the  A.  51. 

1  4.  45.  I  36.  5.  Dcut.  34.  .5.  .hsh.  8.  27. 
19.  .50.  I  22.  9  I  Kings  12.  24.  |  13.  26. 
11.  18.     16.  12,  34.  I  n.  .5,  16.  |  22.38. 

2  Kings  1.  17.  I  4.  44.  I  7.  10.  |  9.  26.  | 
14.  2.5. 

15.31  .because  he  halh  despised  the  ttord  ofthe  L- 

22.  18.  I  cannot  go  beyond  the  word  of  f,.  my  God 

r>eut.rt.r>.  at  that  time  to  show  you  the  7roi-do/ A. 

lSnni..3. 1.  Ihe  tc.of  A.  was  precious  in  those  days 

7.nor  wa8  70orrf  ofthe  A.  yet  revealed  to  Samuel 

15.2,3.  bocnusothnu  hasl  rejected  the  w.  of  L.^. 

2."?nm.22.31.lho7rorrfnrA.is  tried,  P.ial.  18.30. 

1  Kings  2.  27.  might  fulfil  ir.  of  t.  L.  2  Chr.  36. 21. 

12.24.  they  hearkened  iherefoielo  iljetoord  ofthe 

A.  and  returned,  2  Chron.  11.  4.  Jcr.  37.  2. 

13.  I.camo  a  man  of  God  by  ir.  of  L.  to  Bclh-ol 

2. he  cried  against  the  altar  in  the  word  of  the  A. 

S.the  sign  the  man  of  God  Iwd  given  by  yc.of  U. 


LOR 

«JKk^»  13.9.80  it  was  charged  me  bytr.o/Z,.9aying 

IS.anget  spake  by  jc.o/i>.sayiiig,brirjg  liim  back 

26.ihe  maiiwho  was  disobedient  unto  the  w.of  L,. 

32.  for  the  saying  iio  cried  by  the  word  of  tile  L. 

14.  18.  they  buried  him  according  to  the  w.  of  L 

17. 24.  and  that  w.  nf  the  L,.  in  my  nioutii  is  truth 

20.  35.  prophet  baid  in  w.  of  h.  smite  me,  I  pray 

22.  5.  inquire,  1  pray  thee,  at  w.  of  L.  2  Clir.  18.  4. 
KKings  ;i.l2.Jeho8haphat8aid,  w.  ofJL.h  with  liini 

9.  3U.  this  is  w.  of  1^.  ||  15. 12.  this  was  the  zc.  of  1^. 
10. 10. 1'all  to  tlie  earth  nothing  of  the  word  of  L,. 
20.  19.  Hezek.  said,  good  is  the  w.of  L.  /sa. 39.  8. 

23.  16.  according  to  the  word  of  the  L.  24.  2. 

1  Chron.  11.  3,  10.  |  12.  23.  |  15.  15.  Jtr.  13. 
2.  I  32.  a.  Jonah  3.  3. 
1  Chron.  10.13.cominitted  even  against  w.o/(AeX,. 
S  CAr.  30. 12.  to  do  comniandm.  of  king  by  w.of  L,. 

34.  21.  our  fathers  have  notkei>t  tlie  w.  of  the  L. 

36.  22.  tliat  w.  of  L,.  might  be  accomp.  Kira  1. 1 

Psal.  33.  4.  for  the  w.  of  L.  is  right,  and  his  works 

6.  by  w.  of  L.  were  heavens  made,  and  all  host 

105. 19.  till  his  word  came,  the  w.  of  7>.  tried  him 
Isa.  2.  3.  and  the  w.  of  L,.  from  Jerus.  Mic.  4.  2 

28. 13.the  10.  of  L,.  was  to  them  precept  on  precept 
Jer.  2.  31.  O  generation,  see  ye  the  word  of  the  L. 

6. 10.  the  w.  of  the  L.  is  to  them  a  leproach,  20.  8. 

8.9.1o,they  have  rejected  the  word  of  L.  and  what 

17.15.beliold,  they  say  to  me,  where  is  the  w.  uf  L. 

25.  3.  to  this  day  the  w.  of  L-  hath  come  unto  me 

27.  18.  if  the  w.  of  L.  be  with  them,  let  them  make 

32.  8.  then  1  knew  that  this  was  the  xo.  of  the  L. 
Jios.  I.  2.  the  w.  of  L,.  that  came  to  Hosoa  son  of 
Jlmos  8. 12.  they  shall  wander  to  seek  the  w.  of  L. 
Zcph.  2.5.  the  w.  of  the  L.is  against  you,  O  Canaan 
Zech.i.G.  this  is  w.  of  the  L.  to  Zerubbabel,  saying 

9. 1.  the  burden  of  the  w.  of  the  L.  in  the  land  of 
Hadrach  and  Damascus,  12.  1.  Mai.  1.  1. 

11. 11.  poor  of  the  flock  knew  that  it  was  w.  of  h. 

iu/ce22.61. Peter  remembered  w.of  L.  Acts  11.16. 

JlctsS.  25.  they  had  testified,  and  had  preached  the 

word  of  the  L.  13.  49.  |  15.  35,  36.  [  16.  32. 

13.  48.  and  glorified  the  word  of  the  JL. 

19.  10.  heard  the  word  of  the  L.  Jesus 
1  T/iets.  1.8.  for  from  you  sounded  out  the  w.  of  L,. 

4. 15  for  this  we  say  to  you  by  the  word  of  the  L. 
27'A«»5.3.].  that  the  w.  of  L.  may  have  free  course 
1  Pet.  1.  25.  but  the  word  of  />.  cndureth  for  ever 

Words  of  the  LORD. 

Exod.'ii.^.  Moses  told  peo.  all  to.  of  L.  JV«m.ll.24. 

4.  and  Moses  wrote  all  the  ?o.  of  J^.  and  rose  up 

7osA.24.27.  this  stone  heard  all  the  words  of  the  L. 

1  San'.8.\0.  Samuel  told  the  people  words  of  the  L,. 
15.1  hearken  thou  to  the  voice  of  the  jfl.  o/(/ie  L. 

2  Clir.  29.15.  came  by  w.  of  L.  to  cleanse  the  house 
Psal.Vi.&.words  of  the  f^.  are  pure  words,  as  silver 
Jer.36.4.  Baruch  wrote  all  w.  of  h.  from  mouth  of 

6.  read  in  the  roll  thou  hast  written,  w.  of  h.  8. 
11.  had  heard  out  of  the  book  all  the  w.  of  the  />. 

AmosB.ll.  but  a  famine  ofhearing  thezo.  of  the  L. 

See  Came,  Hear. 

Work  of  the  LORD. 

JEj:o(i.34.10.aIl  the  peojile  shall  see  thejc.  of  the  L. 

Isa.  5. 12.  they  regard  not  the  to.  of  L.  nor  consider 

ycr.48.10.cursed  that  doeth  the  w.  o//y. deceitfully 

50.25.this  is  the  a;. o//>.i|51. 10. declare  the  w.of  J,. 

1  Cor.  15.  58.  always  abounding  in  the  w.  of  the  /-. 

16.  10.  forhe  worketh  theto.  of  ^/teZ,.  asl  alsodo 

%Vorks  of  the  LORD. 

Josh.  24.  31.  which  had  known  all  the  w.  of  the  L. 

Jadg.  2.7.  which  had  seen  all  the  great  w.  of  the  L. 

Psal.28.5.  because  they  regard  not  the  jc.  of  the  L. 

46.8.come,behold  the  w.of  the  Z>.  what  desolations 

77. 11.  I  will  remember  the  w.  of  L.  thy  wonders 

107. 24.  these  see  the  w.  of  the  L.  and  his  wonders 

111.2.thew).o//>.aregreat||118.)7.declare!c.o/i. 

IVrath  of  the  LORD. 

JVum.ll.33.eie  it  was  chewed  w.  of  L.  was  kindled 

lieut.  11. 17.  then  the  />.  w.ho  kindled  against  you 

2A"in^s22.13.ror  great  is  the  w.  of  L.'2  CA>-.34.21. 

S  Chron.  12. 12.  the  w.  of  L.  turned  from  him,  that 

"  29. 8.  the?c.o/jL,.  wasupon  Judah  and  Jerusalem 

32.26. so  that  the  w.  of  the  L.  came  not  upon  them 

36.  16.  until  w.  of  the  Z-.  arose  against  his  peojjle 

P4a/.106.40.  therefore  was  wrath  of  the  L.  kindled 

/»a.9.19.  thro'  the  w.of  the  L.  is  the  land  darkened 

13. 13.  the  earth  shall  remove  in  the  w.  of  the  L. 

Jtr.  50.13.  because  of  w.  of  the  L.  not  be  inhabited 

£zefe.  7.J9.  their  silver  and  gold  shall  not  be  able  to 

del''er  them  in  day  of  w.  of  the  L.  Zeph.  1. 18. 

See  Praise. 

LORD  said. 

Oen.  8. 21.  the  L.  said  in  his  heart,  I  will  not  curse 

Exod.  7.  13.  he  hearkened  not  as  the  L.  said,  22. 

I  8.  15,  19.  Dcut.  9.  3.  .Tudff.  2.  15.  |  6.  27. 

16.  23.  this  is  that  which  the  L.  said,  to-morrow 

24.  3.  Moses  told  them  all  the  words  the  L.  said 

7.  all  that  the  L,.  said  we  will  do,  JsTiim.  32.  31. 
AVin.  10. 29.  journeying  to  place  of  which  I,,  said 

16.40.  as  the  L.  said  to  him  by  tliahand  of  Moses  1 
96. 65.  as  the  /,.  had  said,  they  ehall  surely  die  i 
355 


LOR 

Deut.  31.3.a9  tlie  L.  hath  s.  Josh.  14. 12.  Joel  2. 32. 
Josh.  11.  23.  according  to  ail  the  L,.  said  to  Moses 

14.  6.  thou  knowest  the  thing  that  the  L.  said 

1  Sam.  3. 17.  wliat  is  the  thing  ihat  /,.  said  to  thee 
J5. 16.  tell  thee  what  the  />.  said  to  me  this  night 
24. 4.  behold,  tlie  day  of  which  the  J^.  said  to  thee 

2  Sam.  16. 10.  bee.  the  X,.  said  to  him,  curse  David 

1  Kings  8.12.  y>.  iai(/ he  would  dwell,  2  C/«-.6. 1. 
11.  2.  nations,  concerning  which  /-.  said  to  Israel 

2  Kings  14. 27.  />.  said  not  that  he  would  blot  out 
17.  12.  whereof  the  J,,  had  said,  ye  shall  not  do 

21.  4.  of  which  L.  said  in  Jurusal.  7. 2  Chr.  33.  4. 
24.13.  Solomon  had  made  in  tem|de  as  the  L.  said 

Psal.'i.l.lhe  Zj.lialh  said  unto  me,  thou  art  my  Son 

110.  1.  the  L.  said  unto  my  Lord,  Mat.  32.  44. 

Mark  12.  36.  Luke  20.  42.  Acts  2.  34. 

Isa.  7.  3.  then  said  the  JU.  8.  3.  ihck.  44. 2.  Hos.  3. 

1.  Jo7iah  4.  10.  Luke  20.  13. 

18.4.  for  so  L.  said  unto  ine,l  will  take  my  rest 
21.16.  thus  hath  L.  said  unto  me,  Jer.  4. 27. 1 6.  6 
29.13.  wherefore  i,.sai(i,fora6much  as  this  peojile 

Kiek.  21.17.  cause  my  fury  rest,  I  the  L.  have  said 
Mat.  25.  21.  his  L.  said  unto  him,  well  done,  23. 
Mots  9. 10.  to  him  said  the  L.  in  a  vision,  Ananias 
11. 16.  1  remembered  the  word  of  i,.  how  he  said 

Saith  the  LORD. 
Exod.  4.  ^.  thus  saith  the  L.  5. 1. 1  7. 17. 1  Sam.  2, 
27.  2  Sam.  12.  11.  \  24.  12 
JVum.  24.  13.  what  the  L.  saith,  that  will  1  speak 
Josh.  7. 13.  thus  saith  the  L.  God  of  Israel,  24.2 
Judg.  6.  8.  2  Sam.  12.  7- 
ISam.  2.  30.  but  now  the  L.  saith,  be  it  far  from  me 

15,  2.  thus  saith  the  L.  of  hosts,  2  Sam.  7.  8. 

1  Chron.  17.  7.  Jer.  6.  9.  |  7.  3,  21. 

1  Kings  22.14.  what  the  L.  saith,  that  will  I  speak 

Isa.  22.14.  iniquity  shall  not  be  purged,  saith  the  L. 

God  of  hosts,  Jer.  5. 14.  |  35. 17.  |  49. 5.  |  50. 31. 

33. 10.  now  will  I  rises,  t.  L.  now  will  I,  Ps.  12.  5. 

49.5.  now  s.  the  i^.that  formed  me  from  the  womb 
54.10.be  removed,  s.  t.  L.  that  hath  mercy  on  thee 

Je?-.1.8.for  I  am  with  thee,  saith  the  L.  19.  |  30. 11. 

2.  19.  and  that  my  fear  is  not  in  thee,  saith  the  L. 
3.1.played  the  harlot,  yet  return  unto  me,  s.  the  L 
4. 1.  if  thou  wilt  return,  saith  t.  L.  return  unto  me 
5.22.fear  ye  notme,s.j?>.||7.11.Ihave  seen  it,s.  L. 

9.  3.  from  evil  to  evil,  they  know  not  me,  s.  the  L. 

22.  16.  was  not  this  to  know  me  7  saith  the  L. 
23.23.am  I  a  G.  at  hand,  s.the  L.aud  not  atar  off? 

24.ean  any  hide, that  I  shall  not  see  him,  s.  the  L. 

33.  what  burden'?  1  will  even  forsake  you, s.t/te  L. 

27. 15.  for  I  have  not  sent  liim,  s.  the  L.  yet  they 

29.9.  they  projihesy,!  have  not  sent  them,  s.  the  L. 

Ezek.  13.  6.  i..s.and  the  Lord  hath  not  sent  them, 7. 

8.  lam  against  you,  s.  />.||16.19.thus  it  was,  s.L. 

21. 13. even  the  rod,  it  shall  be  no  more,  s.  the  L.O. 

34.31. ye  my  Hock  are  men,  and  I  am  your  G.s.  L. 

39.8.  behold,  it  is  come,  and  it  is  done,  s.  theL.  G. 

43.  27.  and  1  will  accejit  you,  saith  the  L.  God 

.Imos  2. 11.  is  it  not  even  thus,  O  Isr. !  saith  the  L. 

4, 5.1  his  likelh  you,s.t.  L.\\  7.3.  shall  not  bc,s.  L. 

9. 12. are  called  by  my  name,s.iAe  iy.lhat  doeth  this 

Mic.6.1.  hear  ye  now  what  the  L.  saith,  arise  thou 

JVaA.  2. 13.  behold,  I  am  against  thee,  s.  the  L.  3.5. 

Zcph.  3. 8.  therefore  wait  ye  upon  me,  saith  the  L. 

//a^-.l.g.why?  s.  />.of  hosts||13.I  am  with  you,  s.L. 

Zeck.2.5.  for  I,  s.  the  L.  will  be  to  her  a  wall  of  fire 

4.6.not  by  might  or  power,  but  by  my  Spirit,.?.  t.L. 

Mai.  1.  2. 1  have  loved  you,  saith  the  L  yet  ye  say 

13.should  I  accept  this  of  your  hand,  saith  the  L. 

14.  for  I  am  a  great  king,  saith  the  L.  of  hosts 

3.  5.  that  oppress,  and  fear  not  me,  s.t.  L.  of  hosts 

10.  and  prove  me  now  herewith,  s.tAe  /y.  of  hosts 
17.  and  they  shall  be  mine,  sai(A  the  L.  of  hosts 

4.3.  in  the  day  that  I  shall  do  this,  s  ^/^.  of  hosts 
Jlcts\'i.\l.  saith  theL.  who  doeth  all  these  things 
Roia.  12. 19.  vengean.  is  mine,  I  willrepay,  .s.  the  L. 

1  ror.l4.21.they  will  not  hear  me  for  all  tliis,s.^Ae  L. 

2  Cor.  6. 17.  come  out  and  be  ye  separate  «.  the  L. 
Hcb.  8.  9.  and  I  regarded  them  not,  saith  the  L. 

10.  30.  who  hath  said,Iwill  recoiniiense,s.  the  L. 
Rco.  1. 8. 1  am  the  Beginning  and  Ending,  s.  the  L. 

See  Live,  Saved. 

LORD  joined  with  scik. 

Dcut.  4.  29.  if  from  thence  thou  shalt  seek  the  L. 

1  CAroH.lO.IO.lieart  rejoice,  thatsecAA.  fs.105.3. 

11.  seek  tJie  L.  and  his  strength,  Psal.  105.  4. 
22.  lQ.set  your  heart  to  seek  the  Z..2  CAr.  IL  16. 

2  Chr.  12. 14.  prepared  not  his  heart  to  seek  the  L. 
14.  4.  and  commanded  Judah  to  seek  the/y.  God 
15. 12.  they  entered  into  a  covenant  to  seeklheL. 

13.  that  whosoever  would  not  seek  ihe  L.  God 
20.  3.  Jchoshaphat  set  himself  to  seek  the  L. 

4.outof  the  cities  of  Judah  they  came  to  iff  A  L. 
iv:ra6.21.  were  come  to  sfcA  the  Z-.  God  of  Israel 
P.ia/. 22. 26.  they  ehall  praise  the  />.lhat  seek  him 
34.10.they  that  seci  the /-.shall  not  want  any  good 
Prot).28.5. theythat^ccA  /..understand  all  things 
Isa.^.  1.3.  neither  do  they  seek  L.-il.  1.  Hos.  7.  10. 
51.  1.  hearken  to  me,  ye  that  seek  the  /..look  to 
55  6.  seek  ye  the  L.  while  he  may  be  found 


LOR 

Jer.  50. 4.  they  shall  go  and  seek  the  L.  their  Ooi 

Hos.  3.  5.  shall  return  and  sei;k  the  L.  Iheir  God 

5.6.  they  shall  go  with  their  heads  to  seek  the  Z» 

10.  12.  lor  it  is  time  to  seek  the  L.  till  he  come 

Jliiios  5.6.  seek  the  L.  and  ye  shall  live,  lest  he  break 

Zcph.  2. 3.  seek  ye  the  L.  all  ye  meek  of  the  carlti 

ZicA.8.21.gaying,letus  go  to  seek  the  /..of  hosu 

'    22.  many  people  shall  come  to  seek  the  L. 

Mai.  3. 1.  the  L.  whom  ye  seek  shall  suddenly  come 

JJcts  15.17.tliat  the  residue  of  men  iiiiglit  seek  the  L. 

17. 27.  that  they  should  seek  the  L.  if  hapiy  might 

LORD  joined  with  sent. 
Gen.  3.  23.  the  L.  scut  him  fortli  from  the  gardec 
ly.  13.  wo  will  destroy,  the  L.scnt  us  to  destroy  it 
Exod.4.^26.lo\d  all  the  wordsof /..who  had  sent  Inni 
7. 16.  the  L.  God  of  the  Hebrews  sent  me  to  time 
9.  23.  and  L.  se7it  thunder  and  hail  on  Egypt 
JV'iMrt.  10.28.  ye  shall  know  that  the  /,.  hath  sent  me 
2<J.  if  die  common  death,  then  /-.  hath  not  sent 

20.  16.  and  when  we  cried,  the  L.  sent  an  ange. 

21.  6.  the  L.  sent  fiery  serpents  among  the  people 
/Jeai.9.23. when/.. sent  you  fromKadesh-barnea 

34. 11.  in  all  wonders  which  the  L.  sent  him  lo  do 
Judg.  6.8.  that  the  L.  sent  a  prophet  unto  Israel 

1  Sam.  12.  8.  then  the  />.  sent  Moses  and  Aaron 
11. and  the/.. 5. Jerubbaaiy  Id. the/.. s. thunder 

15.  l.tlie/.,.  se7itmeto  anoint  thee  king  over  Israel 
18.  the  L.  sent  thee  on  a  journey,  and  said,  go 
20.  I  have  gone  the  way  which  the  L.  sent  ine 

20.  22.  go  thy  way,  the  L.  halh  sent  thee  away 

2  i'um. 12.1.  the  L.  s.  Nathan  to  David,  and  he  came 

24. 15.  L.  sent  pestilence  on  Israel,  1  CAr.  21. 14. 
2  A'ni^6'2.2.tarry,  for  the  L.  hath  sent  me  to  Beth-el 

4./y.liath  sent  me  to  Jericho  II  O./^.j.me  to  Jordan 
17.  25.  therefore  the  /...  sent  lions  among  them 
24.2.  the  /-.  sent  against  him  bands  of  the  Chaldee« 
2  Chron.  32. 21.  the  L.  sent  an  angel,  who  cut  off 
Isa.  9.8.the  L.  sent  a.  word  into  J  acob,  and  it  lighted 
Jer.  19.  14.  whither  the  L.  sent  him  to  prophesy 
25. 4.  and  the  L.  hath  scut  to  you  all  his  servants 

17.  nations  to  drink  to  whom  the  /...  had  sent  ma 

26. 12.  L.scnt  me  to  prophesy  agst. this  house,15. 
28.  9.  be  known  that  the  L.  hath  truly  sent  him 

15.  hear  Hananiah,  the  L.  hath  not  sent  thee 
Ezek.  13.0.  Lord  saith,  and  the  i.  hath  not  s.  them 
.ionah  1.4.  the  L.scnt  out  a  great  wind  into  the  sea 
//a^.1.12.  obeyed,  as  the  L.  their  God  had  sent  him 
Zcch.l.W.  whom  the  /,.  hatlismtto  walk  to  and  fro 
2. 9.  know /..of  hosts  baths,  me,  11. 1  4. 9.  |  0.15. 
7.  12.  lest  hear  the  words  which  the  L.  hath  sent 
Jlcts  9. 17. Saul,  the  L.  Jesus  hath  sent  me,  that  thou 
12. 11.  now  know  I  that  the/y.  \in.{.\\sent  his  angel 

Serve  the  LORD. 

£a:o(i.  10.7.  men  go,  that  they  may  s.  the  L.lheirG. 

8.  Phar.  said,  go  s.  the  L.  your  G.  11.  24.  |  12.  31. 

26.  for  thereof  must  we  take  to  serve  the  /..our 
God,  we  know  not  with  what  we  musts.  theL. 

23. 25.  ye  shall  serve  the  L.  your  God,  ye  shall  blesa 
Dcut.  1(1.  12.  to  s.  the  L.  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart 
Josh.  24.  14.  therefore  fear  and  serve  the  L. 

15.  if  itseom  evil  untoyou to  s.tAc/,. choose  you 

18.  therefore  will  wes. «. /..he  is  our  God,  21. 24. 

19.  Joshua  said,  ye  cannot  s.the  L.  for  he  is  holy 
22.  that  ye  have  chosen  you  the  /..  to  serve  him 

1  Sam.  12.  20.  but  serve  the  I^.  With  all  your  heart 

2  Sam.  15.  8.  will  bring  me  again,  then  will  I  s.t.  L. 
2  CAron.  30.  8.  but  yield,  and  s.  t.  L.  your  G.  35. 3. 

33. 16.  and  commanded  Judah  to  s.  the  L.  34.  33. 
PS.2.11.S.  «./-.  withfear,aiid  rejoice  with  trembhng 

100. 2.  s.  t.  L.  with  gladn.  and  come  before  his  pres. 

102.22.  and  the  kingdoms  gathered  lo  serve  theL. 

Col.  3. 24.  receive  reward,  for  ve sc^ve  the L.  Christ 

See  Shewed,  6mite. 

LORD  spake. 

Gen.  Ifi.  13.  called  the  name  of  L.  that  spake  to  her 

Lev.  10. 3.  this  is  it  that  the  L.  spake,  saying,  I  will 

./Vhw.  3. 1.  in  the  day  the  A. /^jaAc  with  Moses,  9.  I. 

5.  4.  as  the  L.  spake  unto  Moses,  so  did  Israel 

21.  10.  that  is  the  well  whereof /y.  spake  to  Mosea  L 
Dcut.  4. 12.  L.  spake  lo  you  out  of  the  midst  of  (fro 

15.  ye  saw  no  similitude  in  the  day  the  L.  spake 
5.  22.  these  words  the  /..  spake  to  your  assembly 

9.  10.  written  all  the  words  which  the  /..  spake 

10.  4.  the  ten  commandments  which  the  L.  spake 
Josh.  14. 10.  since  the  L.  spakelh'ia  word  to  Alosei 

12.  this  mountain  whereof/.,  spake  in  tnai  oay 
1  .Sam.  16.  4.  Samuel  did  lhat  which  ihe  L.  spakt 

1  Kings  2.  4.  L.  may  coni inue  his  word  which  he  sp. 

27.  fulfil  the  woid  of  the  L.  which  he  spake 

5.  5.  as  the  L.  spake  to  David  my  father,  saying 
8.20.  /..  hath  performed  word  he  s. 2  Kings  10. 10. 
12. 15.  perform  his  saying  the  L.  s.  2  CAr.  10.  15. 

13.26.  according  to  the  word  of  the  L.  which  h« 
spake,  14.  18.  16.  12,  34.  |  17. 16.  |  22.  38 
2  Kings  10.  10.  I  24.  2. 

15. 29.  according  to  the  saying  of  the  /,.  which  h* 
spake  by  his  servant  Aliijah,  2  Kings  10.  17 
21.  2;l.  and  of  Jezebel  also  spake  the  L.  saying 

2  Kings  9. 36.  this  is  the  word  of  /..  which  he ,' »*» 

15. 13.  the  word  of  the  L.  which  he  ifakHoMU 


LOR 

tKinffsZl.W.L.spakehy  hisservanU  llie  prophets 
lCAron.il. 'J.  /^.  spake  ualo  Gad,  Dav.seer,  saying 
2  C/iron.'Xi.U).  7>.  ATyuActo  JMaiiusseli  and  liispuop. 
isa.  T.  10.  moreover,  tho  J,,  spake  again  to  Ahaz 
a,  5.  the  /^.  spake  ulgo  unto  niu  again,  saying 
11.  for  the  t,.  spake  thus  to  me  with  a  strong  hand 
yo.  2.  at  tlie  same  time  .••■pake  tho  L.  by  Isaiah 
Jar.  30.  4.  these  are  the  words  that  the  //.  spake 
50.  1.  the  word  that  tlie  //.  spake  against  Babylon 
r>\.  1-J.  lor  tho  //.  hath  done  tliat  which  ho  spake 
JoiiaWi.  10.  Uio  I.,  spake  uiuo  the  ti.-;h,  it  vomited 
Jicls  18.  y.  then  spake  thu  J^.  to  Paul  in  the  night 

IjOKD  joined  with  spokcit. 

Gen.  12.4.  Abrani  departed  as  the  J^.  had  spoken, 

i>l.  1.  I  i4.  51.  F.zod.  9.  V2,  35.  J)cut.  6.  19. 

i%zo'i.4.30.Moses  spake  the  words  lhe/,.had.s/)o/,:tn 

19.i-<.ajid  said, all  lliat  tlieA.bath  spukcnw'M  we  do 

;U.3J.gave  in  conirnandnientall  tliei.liad  spoken 

J^tc.  lU.  1 1,  teach  tlie  statutes  the  />.  hath  spoken 

A'um.  I.i6.  lor  //.  had  s.  to  Moses,  saying,  15.  2J. 

10. 29.  the  />.  hath  spoken  good  concerning  Israel 

12.2.  hath  the  /..indeed  spoken  only  by  Muses? 

iill.lT.Ualak  said  to  hini,whal  hatli  the  J^.spokcn? 

/'>eut.  18.  21.  word  which  /...  li.'ith  not  5/)o/.c7i,  22. 

Josh.  21.  45.  tailed  not  ought  which  I^.  had  spoken 

1  .Sam.-J5.:iO.Z-.havo  done  the  good  he  hath  spoken 

S  .Sum.  li.  IS.  now  then  do  it,  tor  the  /-.  hath  spoken 

7.29.it  n)ay  continue, lor  tliou,0  />.  hath  spoken  it 

I  Kini^rs  13.3.  this  is  the  sign  wliich  A.  hath  spoken 

14. 11.  lor  the  /„  hath  spoken  it,  Jsa.  21. 17.. |  22. 

25.  1  24.  3.  I  25.  8.  Joel  3.  8.  OOad.  18. 

Job  42.7.after  the  L.haii  spoken  these  words  to  Job 

Psal.^)i).l.  the  L.  hath  spoken,  and  called  the  earth 

/su.  31.4.  lor  thus  hath  the  /..  spoken  to  me,  like  as 

M.  7.  L.  will  do  this  thing  that  ho  hath  spoken 

Jer.'.).yi.  to  whom  the  mouth  ofthe  /.,.  UaVhspoken 

I3.1.5.give  ear, be  not  proud,for  the  /..hath  spoken 

2.3.35.  and  ye  shall  say,  what  hath  A.  spoken,  37. 

27.  13.  as  the  A.  hath  spoken  against  ihe  nation 

48.  8.  shall  be  destroyed,  as  the  L.  hath  spoken 

Kiek.  5.  13.  I  the  A.  have  spoken  it,  15,  17.  |  17. 

21, 21.  I  21.  32.  I  22.  14.  |  24.  14.  |  26.  14. 

I  30.  12.  I  34.  24.  I  3i).  30.  |  37.  14. 

22.2.''.thus  saith  the  Lord,  when  the  A.  halh  nets. 

26.  5.  for  I  have  s.  it,  sallh  L.  28.  10.  |  3y.  5. 

Jimos  3.  1.  hear  this  word  iliat  the  /,.  hath  spoken 

8.  the  /.,  .(J.  halh  spoken,  who  can  but  prophesy? 

J1//C.4.4.  the  mouth  oil  he  A.olhosls  halh  spoken  it 

J/aM.22.t'ultilled  which  was  spoken  ofthe  /,.  2.15. 

.Wa7-il0.19.so  then  after  the  /..had  spoken  to  them 

jicts  '■>.  27.  had  seen  the  A.  and  that  he  had  spoken 

Ucb.  2. 3.  at  the  lirst  began  to  bi;  spoken  by  the  L,. 

To  OT  nnio  the  LORD. 

Gen.  14.22. 1  have  lift  up  my  hand.s  to  Ij.  most  high 

18.27.  I  have  taken  on  me  lo  speak  to  the  Z,.  31. 

F.xod.  5.17.  let  us  go,  and  do  sacrilicc  lo  I..  8. 8, 2!l. 

10.9. we  must  hold  a  feast  to  L.  12. 14.  A'"H/n.29.l2. 

15.1.  sing  to  the  L.  21.  Judg.  5. 3. 1  Chron.  lfi.23. 

Psal.  13.  ().  I  :)0.  4.  I  08.  32.  |  95.  1.  |  9(i. 

1,2.  I  98.1,. 5.  I  101.33.1  147.7.  I  149.1. 

Isa.  12.  5.  I  42.  10.  Jer.  20.  13. 

lC.2.'5.for  to-day  is  a  sabb.  to  the  />.35.2.  /-c«.25.2. 

22.  20.  he  that  sacrificeth  save  unto  the  L.  only 

30. 10.  it  is  most  holy  vnln  the  L.  31. 1.';.  J^rn.  23. 

20.  I  27.  21,  3b,  32.  JV«;n.  »i.  8.  F.ira  8.  2-i. 

AVm.  21.  7.  said,  pray  to  1,.  Jer.  29.  7.  Jlcts  8.  21. 

29. 39.  these  tlihigs  ye  shall  do  to  the  L.  in  feasiR 

l)enl.  12. 31.  thou  shalt  not  do  so  to  the  L.  thy  Co<l 

Judir.  11.35. 1  have  opened  my  mouth  to  the  L.  30. 

17.3. 1  had  wholly  dedicated  Ihe  silver  to  the  L. 

21.  8.  ihat  came  not  up  to  the  />.  to  Mi/pch 

.Sam.l.lO.lIannah  prayed  to  the  h.  and  wcptsore 

8.  0.  displeasi'd  Sainnrl,  and  he  prayed  to  the  J,. 

14.6.tlic;re  is  no  restraint  to  the  />.  to  save  by  many 

I  .Sam.  21. 6.  will  hang  them  up  to  t.  J.,  in  Gibeali 

I  A'(n^.'!2. 27.  A hialhar  from  being  priest  to  the  A. 

{  Kinijs  4.  33.  Elisiia  shut  door,  prayed  to  /,.  (i.  18. 

IH.fi.lJi'zekinh  clave  to  /..and  kept  his  commands 

20.2.  Ilezekiah  turned  his  face  unto  ihc  wall,  and 
prny.1  lo  L.  2  Chr.  32. 24.  Isa.  37. 15.  1  38.  2. 

23. 2;i.  this  passovcrholdcn  to  the  I,,  in  .lerusalem 
Chron.  11. 18.  not  drink  it,  but  poured  it  out  to  A. 
lfi.8.?ivethnnkH«n  /-.rallon  hisname,41.rs.92.1. 

{  C'Ar.  13.  1 1.  they  burn  lo  /,.  morning  and  evening 
21.9.  to  bring  io  the  /,.  the  collection  that  Moses 
30.8.  but  yield  your8e!vn.<  to  the  I.,  and  serve  him 

P.«(li.3.8.  salvation  belongeth  to  the  /,.  Ihy  blessing 
IS.  4l.  they  cried  Mnfo  the.  J.,  but  ho  answered  not 
30.  8.  and  to  the  I,.  I  made  supplication,  142.  I. 
f^\^.  *5.who  can  be  compared  lo  A.be  likened  lo  L.l 
1  If).  12.  what  shall  7  r'lider  to  the  1,.  for  benefits  ? 
140.fi.  I  Siiid  to  the  /,.  lliou  art  my  God,  hirar  voice 

Prffo.  3. 32.  nbominntion  In  f A--  //.'  1 1. 1 ,  20. 1 12. 22. 

I  1.5.8,9,2(1.  I  Ifi.  5.  1  17.  l.").  I  20.  10,  23. 

lG.3.comn«it  thy  works  fo  /..||  19.17.1endcth  to  I.. 

r»a.lO.  21.  shall  vow  avow /,n  Mf  /..  and  perform  it 
S2.  they  shall  relurn  even  to  the  I.,  he  shall  heal 
23.18.shall  be  holiness  fo  h.Jtr.l.Vi.  ZrrA.  14.20. 
.^'>.  13.  it  shall  he  lo  the  I.,  for  a  name,  for  a  sign 
S6.  3.  that  hath  joined  himself  to  the  L.  0. 
3jG 


LOR 

tsa.  58. 5.  wilt  call  this  an  acceptable  day  to  the  L. 
Jer.  32.  115.  Jeremiah  prayed  to  the  /-.  saying 
llos.  4.  10.  they  have  left  oft'  to  take  heed  to  the  L. 
.lonah  4.  2.  Jonah  )irayed  to  the  /..  and  said 
J\lic.  4.  13. 1  will  consecrate  their  gain  unto  the  L. 
and  their  substance  unto  theL.oiihc  whole  earth 
7.  7.  therefore  I  will  look  to  the  L.  I  will  wail  for 
Z.eeh.  14.7.one  day, which  shall  be  known  lo  the  L. 
Mat.  a.  33.  but  shalt  perform  to  the  L.  thine  oaths 
Lnke  2.  22.  brought  him  to  present  him  to  the  X,. 

2.3.  every  male  shall  be  called  holy  to  the  A. 
Jlets  5. 14.  believers  were  the  more  added  to  the  Ij. 

11.  23.  e.xhorted  Ihat  they  would  cleave  to  the  A. 
13.  2.  as  they  ministered  unto  the  1^.  and  fasted 
14.23.had  prayed, they  conmiended  them  to  the  L. 
IG.  15.  if  ye  have  judged  nie  faithful  to  the  I.. 

Rom.  14.  fi.  regardeth  it  to  the  L.  eateth.  to  the  /,. 

8.  whether  we  live,  we  live  lotht/^.v.c  die  tothelj. 
2  Cor .8.  5.  but  first  gave  their  own  selves  to  the  /,. 
Kph.  5.  10.  proving  what  is  acceptable  to  the  I.. 

22.submit  yourselves, as  to  the  L.  C..7.  Col.  3. 23. 
See  Cry,  Cried,  Give,  Turn. 
LORD,  as  applied  to  man. 
Gen.  18.  12.  aller  I  am  old,  my  I.  being  old  also 
23.11.nay,iny  i.  hear  me  {{  IS.niy  Z.  hearken  tome 

24.  18.  drink,  my  I.  and  she  hasted  and  let  down 
27.  29.  be  I.  over  thy  brethren,  let  thy  mother's 

37.  Isaac  answered,  I  have  made  him  thy  I. 

31.  35.  Rachel  said,  let  it  not  displease  my  I. 

32.  4.  saying,  thus  shall  ye  speak  to  my  I.  Esau 
5. 1  have  sent  to  tell  my  I.  that  I  may  find  grace 
18.  shall  say,  it  is  a  present  sent  to  my  I.  Ksau 

,39. 10.  laid  up  his  gar.ment,  until  his  I.  came  home 
40.  1.  had  oliended  their  I.  the  king  of  Egypt 
42.  10.  nay,  my  I.  but  to  buy  food  are  we  come 

30.  the  man  who  is  the  /.  of  the  land,  33. 

44.  5.  is  not  this  it,  in  which  my  I.  drinketh  7 
8.shonld  we  steal  out  of  thy  i.house  silver  or  gold 

9.  and  we  also  will  be  my  I.  bondmen 

24.  we  came  up,  we  told  him  the  words  of  my  I. 

45.  8.  and  he  halh  made  me  /.  of  all  his  house 
9.  God  hath  made  me  I.  of  all  Egypt,  come  down 

47.18.we  will  not  hide  it  from  my  I.  how  that  there 
is  nothing  left  in  sight  of  my  I.  but  our 
F.xod.  32.  22.  let  not  the  anger  of  my  I.  wax  hot 
jVani.  II.  28.  and  said,  my  I.  Moses  forbid  them 

12.  11.  my  I.  I  beseech  thee,  lay  not  sin  on  us 
32.  25.  servants  do  as  my  l.  commandeth,  27. 
30.  2.  the  Lord  commanded  my  I.  to  give  land 

Judir.  3. 2.5.  their  /.  was  fallen  down  dead  on  earth 
4.  18.  turn  in  my  /.  turn  in  to  me,  fear  not 

19.  20.  the  woman  fell  down  where  her  I.  was 
27.  and  her  I.  rose  up  in  the  morning  and  opened 

Ruth  2. 13.  let  me  find  favour  in  thy  sight,  my  I. 

1  Sam.  1.  15.  my  /.  I  am  of  a  sorrowful  spirit 
2G.  O  my  I.  as  thy  sou!  liveth,  my  /.lam  w  oman 

22.  12.  and  he  answered,  here  I  am,  my  I. 

24. 8.  and  cried  after  Saul,  layiiig,  my  /.  the  king 

25.  24.  on  me,  my  I.  on  me  let  this  iniquity  be 

25.  let  not  my  /.  regard  this  man  of  Belial 
2ii.  they  that  seek  evil  to  my  I.  be  as  Nabal 
27.  it  be  given  to  young  men  that  follow  my  I. 

31.  when  the  Lord  shall  have  dealt  with  my  I. 
2l).  15.  why  hast  thou  not  kept  thy  I.  the  king  ? 

17.  Daviil  said,  it  is  my  voice,  my  I.  O  king 

18.  why  doth  my  I.  thus  pursue  after  his  servant? 
29.  8.  that  may  not  fight  against  enemies  of  my  I. 

2  S/im.  1.  10.  and  brought  them  hither  lo  my  /. 
3.  21.  I  will  gather  all  Israel  to  my  /.  the  king 

9.  II.  according  to  all  that  my  I.  hath  commanded 

11.9.  Uriah  slept  with  all  the  servants  of  his  I.  13. 

13.  32.  let  not  my  I.  suppose  they  have  slain 

14.  12.  let  thine  handmaid  speak  to  my  /. 

17.  as  an  angel  of  God,  so  is  my  /.  Ihe  king 

19.  none  can  turn  from  ought  my  I.  hath  spoken 

20.  my  I.  is  wi.se  according  lo  wisdom  of  an  angel 

10.  9.  wliv  should  this  dead  dog  curse  my  /.  king 
18.  31.  mid  Cuslii  said,  tidings,  my  /.  the  king 
19. 19.  let  not  my  /.  Impute  iniipiity  to  nie,  the  day 

mv  /.  the  king  went  out  of  Jerusalem 
20.  T  am  ronie  the  first  to  go  down  lo  meet  my  /. 
30.  forasnuicli  as  my  /.  is  come  again  in  peace 
3.5.  be  a  burden  to  my  /.  ||  37.  go  over  with  my/. 

20.  fi.  take  thou  Ihy  /.  servants,  and  jiursue  nfier 
24.  3.  that  the  eyes  of  my  /.  the  kins  may  see  it, 

but  why  dolli  mv  /.  delight  in  this  thing? 

22.1et  my  /.  take  and  offer  up  w  hat  seeme»h  good 
1  Kinss  1.  2.  that  my  /.  Ihe  king  may  get  heat 

27.  is  this  thing  done  by  my  I.  tho  king? 

30.  the  Lord  God  of  my  /.  the  king  say  so  loo 

37.  as  the  Lord  halh  been  with  my  I.  the  king 
2.  38.  as  my  I.  the  king  bath  said,  so  will  1  do 
3.17.0  my  /.land  this  wonmn  dwell  in  one  house 

2(5.  O  my  /.  give  her  Ihe  livin>,'  child,  not  slay  it 
11.23.  who  fled  from  his  /.  Hadadezer  kin(r  of 
18.  7.  Ohadiah  said,  art  thou  Ihat  my  /.  Elijah? 

13.  was  it  not  told  my /.what  I  did,  when  Jezebel 

14-.  go  ii'll  thy  /.  behold  Elijah  is  hero,  he  slay 
20.  4.  my  /.  I  am  thine,  mid  all  timt  I  havo 

9.  icll  my  /.  all  thou  did.<!t  send  for,  I  will  do 


LOS 

2  A7n^s2.19.thc  situation  is  pleasant  as  my  {.leetli 

4.  IG.  nay,  my  /.  do  not  lie  to  thine  handmaid 
28.  did  I  desire  a  son  of  my  /.  ?  did  I  nut  say 

5.  3.  would  God  my  /.  were  with  the  prophet 

4.  one  went  in  and  told  his  /.  saying,  thus  said 

6.  12.  and  one  of  his  servants  said,  none,  my  /. 
20.  a  woman  cried,  saying,  helj)  my  I.  O  king 

7.  2.  then  a  /.  on  whose  hand  ihe  king  leaned,  17 

8.  5.  my  /.  O  king,  this  is  the  woman,  and  her  son 
12.  and  Ilazael  said,  why  weepeth  my  /. .' 

9.  11.  Jehu  came  forth  to  the  servants  of  his  I. 
18.  23.  now,  1  pray  thee,  give  pledges  to  my  /. 

2  C'Ar.  2.  14.  with  the  cunning  men  of  my  i  Davitf 
Ezra  10.  3.  according  to  the  coun.sel  of  my  /. 
Psal.  12.4.  onr  lips  are  our  own,  who  is  /.  0(cr  ual 
Jer.  22.  18.  saying,  ah  /.  or  ah  his  glory,  34.  5. 

37.  20.  therefore  hear  now,  1  pray  thee,  my  /. 

38.  9.  my  /.  the  king,  these  men  have  done  evil 
Dan.  1.  10.  said  to  Daniel,  I  fear  my  /.  the  king 

2. 10.  there  is  no  king  nor  I.  that  asked  such  things 

4.  19.  my  I.  the  dream  be  to  them  that  hate  thee 

24.  decree  which  is  come  upon  my  /.  the  king 
J\Iat.  10.  24.  nor  is  the  servant  above  his  /. 

25.  it  is  enough  that  the  servant  be  as  his  I. 
18.  20.  /.  have  patience  willi  me,  and  I  will  pay 

31.  they  came  and  told  their  /.  all  that  was  done 
24.  48.  my  /.  delayeth  his  coming,  J.uke  12.  45. 
Luke  12. 3G.  and  ye  like  men  that  wait  for  their  /. 
10. 3.  my  /.  taketh  away  from  me  the  stewardship 

5.  so  he  called  his  lord's  debtors  to  him,  and  said 

to  the  lirst,  how  much  owcst  thou  to  my  /. 
J'oAnl5.15.lhe  servant  knoweth  not  what  his /.doth 

20.  I  said,  the  servant  is  not  greater  than  his  /. 
Jlets  25.2(i.l  have  no  certain  thing  to  write  to  my  /. 
Cial.  4. 1.  difi'ersnot  from  a  servant,  though  /.  ot  air 
1  Pet.  3.  C.  Sarah  obeyed  -iVbraham,  calling  hira  /. 

LORDS. 
Gen.  19.  2.  he  said,  behold  now  my  /.  turn  in 
JVum.  21.28.  consumed  /.  of  high  places  of  Arnon 
Dent.  10. 17.  is  Lord  of  I.  1  Tim.  6. 15.  Rev.  17. 14. 
.Tosh.  13.  3.  five/,  ofthe  Philistines,  Jndg.  3.  3. 
Judtr.  l(i.  5.  /.  ofthe  Philistines  came  up  to  her 

30.  and  the  house  fell  upon  the  /.  and  people 
1  Sam.  5.  8.  they  gathered  /.  ofthe  Philistines,  11. 

6.  4.  one  plague  was  on  you  all,  and  on  your  /. 
12.  the  /.  of  the  Philistines  went  after  them 

7.  7.  the/,  ofthe  Philistines  wenlup  against  Israel 
29.  2.  the  /.  passed  on  by  Imndreds  and  thousands 

6.  neverthele.ss,  ihe  /.  favour  thee  not 
7.return,goin  peace,that  thou  displease  not  the/. 

Ezra.  8. 25. 1  weighed  the  ofl'erings  which  /.  ofTered 
Isa.  10.  8.  the  /.  of  the  heathen  have  broke*  plants 
20.  13.  other  /.  have  had  dominion  over  us 
Jer.  2.  31.  wherefore  say  my  people,  we  are  /.  ? 
F.zek.  23. 23.  great  /.  renowneil,  all  riding  on  horses 
Dan.  4.  30.  my  counsellors  and  /.  sought  to  me 

5.  1.  made  a  great  feast  to  a  thousand  of  his  /. 
23.  thou  and  thy  /.  have  drunk  wine  in  them 

6.  17.  the  king  sealed  with  his  own  signet  of/. 
Mark  6.  21.  that  Herod  made  a  supper  lo  his/. 
1  Cer.  8.  5.  as  there  he  gods  many,  and  /.  many 
i  Pet.  5.  3.  nor  as  bein?  /.  over  God's  heritage 

LORHSIIIP. 
.^/ari  10. 42.  kings  of  Gent,  exercise  /.  /.uAe  22.25. 

LOSE. 
.Judfr.  18.  25.  run  on  thee,  and  thou  /.  thy  life 

1  AVn^«18.5.niulcs  alive, ihat  we  /.not  nil  the  beasts 
Job  ;il.  39.  or  have  caused  the  owiieis  /.  their  life 
Prov.  23.8.  shall  vomit  up,  and  /.  Ihy  sweet  words 
F.ccl.  3.  6.  there  is  a  time  to  get,  and  a  time  to  /. 
Mat.  10.  39.  ho  that  findeth  his  life  shall  /.  it, 

1().  25.  Mark  8.  35.  J.uke  9.  24. 
42.  he  shall  in  nowise/,  his  reward,  Mark  9.41. 
16. 26.  and  /.  his  own  soul,  Mark  8. 36.  Luke  9. 25. 
Luke  15.4.  if  he/,  one  sheep  ||  8.  if  she  /.one  piece 
17. 33.  whosoever  shall  /.  his  life  shall  preserve  it 
./oAn  6.  39.  the  Father's  will  I  should  /.  nothing 
12.  2.5.  he  Ihat  Invclh  his  life  shall  /.  it 

2  John  8.  look  lo  yourselves,  we  /.  not  those  things 

LOSETIl. 
Mat.  10.  39.  and  he  Ihat  /.  his  life  for  my  soke 

LOSS. 
rVf».  31.30.  that  which  was  torn,  I  hare  the /.of  it 
F.tod.  21.  19.  only  he  shall  pav  f.ir  Hie  /.  of  time 
Isa.  47.  8.  nor  shall  I  know  the  /.  of  chddren  ' 

9.  come  in  one  day  /.  of  children  and  widowhood 
Jlcis  27.  21.  and  have  gained  this  harm  and  /. 

'.'2.  there  shall  be  no  /.  of  any  man's  life 
1  Cor.  3.  15.  if  work  bo  burned,  lie  shall  suffer  /. 
Phil.  3.  7.  what  gain,  those  I  counted  /.  for  Christ 

8.  yea,  donhllcss,  and  I  count  nil  thing's  but  /.  for 
Christ,  for  whom  I  suffered  the  /.of  all  things 
LOST,  Passirtly. 
F.rod.  22. 9.  for  any  manner  of /.  thing,  Dettt.  22.3. 
/.er.  6.  3.  or  havo  found  that  which  was  /. 

4.  he  shall  restore  the  /.  thing  ho  found 
jViim.  6.  12.  the  days  thni  were  before  shall  be  I 
1  .Snm.9.3.thoafsesofKish,Sniil'sfalher,were  . 

20.  as  for  thine  nsses  that  were  /.  ihey  are  found 
Psal.  119. 176. 1  have  gone  astray  like  a  /.  sheep 


LOT 

Jtr.  50. 6.  my  people  hath  been  I.  sheep,  sheiihorjs 

Eiek.  19.  5.  when  she  saw  thai  her  hope  was  I. 
34.  4.  nor  have  ye  sought  that  which  was  I. 

16  .1  will  seek  that  wliich  was  I.  and  bring  again 
37.  11.  they  say,  our  hope  is  I.  we  are  cut  oft" 

Jilat.  Ill  ^  but  go  rather  to  the  /.  sheep  of  Israel 
15.  2i.  ifrhi  not  sent  but  to  the  I.  sheep  of  Israel 
IS.U.Son  is  come  to  save  what  was  I.  Lake  19.10. 

Luke  15.  4.  go  after  that  which  is  I.  till  he  find  it 
6.  for  I  have  found  my  sheep  which  was  I. 
24.  this  my  son  was  I.  ||  32.  thy  brother  was  I. 

John  6. 12.  gather  up  fragments  that  nothing  be  /. 
17.  12.  none  of  them  is  /.  but  the  son  of  perdition 

8  Cor.  4.  3   our  gospel  is  hid,  to  them  that  are  I. 
LOST,  Actively. 

/5e«t.22.3.with  any  thing  of  thy  brother's  he  hath  I. 

1  Kings  20. 25.  number  army  like  that  thou  hast  I. 

Isa.  49.20.  after  thou  hast  I.  the  other  shall  say 
21.  seeing  I  have  /.  my  children,  and  am  desolate 

Mat.b.Vi.  if  salt  i.  savour,  Mark^i.^^i.  huke  14.  34. 

Luke  15.  9.  I  have  found  the  piece  which  I  had  I. 

John  18.  9.  of  them  tliou  gavest  me,  I  have  l.  none 
LOT 

Bignifies,  [1]  Any  thing  cast  or  drawn  in  order 
to  determine  any  matter  in  debate,  Prov.  18. 
18.  [2]  That  which  falls  out  by  lot  to  be  one's 
proper  share, portion,  or  iitheritayice,  Josh.  15. 
1.  1  16.  1.  [3]  Habitations  or  persons,  Psal. 
125.  3.  [4]  Punishment,  Isa.  17.  14.  [5]  Or- 
der, course,  or  turn,  Luke  1.  9.  [6]  Fellow- 
ship, Acts  8.  21.  [7]  The  object  of  one's  wor- 
ship and  trust,  Isa.  57.  6.  Lots  were  used, 
[1]  To  find  out  a  person,  1  Sam.  14.  41.  Jonah 
1.  7.  [2]  To  divide  lands,  Num.  20.  55,  515.  [3] 
To  choose  a  church  officer.  Acts  1.  26.  [4]  To 
order  and  regulate  the  courses  of  men  in  office, 
1  Chron.  24.  5.  |  25.8.  [5]  To  decide  a  contro- 
versy, Psal.  22.  18. 

Lev.  16.  8.  one  I.  for  Ld.  other  for  scape-goat,  9,10. 

^KT?!.  26.  55.  land  shall  be  divid.  by  I.  Ezek.  48. 29. 

33.  54.  he  shall  divide  the  land  by  I.  for  an  inhe- 

ritance, 36.  2.  .Tosh.  13.  6.  Ezek.  47.  22. 

34.  13.  this  is  the  land  ye  shall  inherit  by  I. 
Deut.  32.  9.  Jacob  is  the  I.  of  his  inheritance 
JeslL  15.  1.  this  was  the  I.  of  the  tribe  of  Judali 

16.1. the  I.  of  Joseph  ||  17. 1.  was  a  I.  for  IManasseh 

17.  14.  why  hast  thou  given  me  but  one  I.  ? 

17.  thou  shall  not  have  one  I.  only,  but  mountain 

18.  11.  the  I.  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin  came  up 

19.  1.  and  the  second  I.  came  forth  to  Simeon 
10.  the  third  I.  came  for  the  children  of  Zebulun 
17.  the  fourth  I.  came  out  to  Issachar 

24.  fifth  I.  to  Asher  ||  32.  si.xth  /.  to  Naphlali 
40.  the  seventh  I.  came  for  the  tribe  of  Dan 
21.4.4.  for  families  of  Kohathites,  1  Chron.  6.  34. 

6.  Gershon  had  by  1. 1|  8.  gave  by  I.  to  the  Levites 
Judg.  1.  3.  come  up  with  me  into  my  I.  to  fight  aga. 

Canaanilcs,  likewise  go  with  thee  into  thy  I. 
20. 9.  we  will  go  up  by  /.  aga.  it,  and  take  ten  men 
1  Sam.  14.  41.  Saul  said  to  God,  give  a  perfect  I. 
1  Chron.  6.  63.  to  sons  of  Merari  were  given  by  /. 
16.  18.  to  thee  will  t  give  the  land  of  Canaan, 
the  I.  of  your  inheritance,  Psal.  105.  11. 
24. 5.  to  thee  they  were  divided  by  ?.  one  sort  with 

7.  now  the  first  I.  came  forth  to  Jehoiarib 
25.  9.  now  the  first  I.  came  forth  for  Asaph 

F.sth.  3.  7.  they  cast  Pur,  that  is  I.  before  Haman 
Psal.  16.5.  portion  of  cup,  thou  maintainest  my  I. 
125.  3.  shall  not  rest  on  the  I.  of  the  righteous 
Prov.  1. 14.  cast  in  thy  I.  among  us,  let  us  all  have 
16.  33.  I.  is  cast  into  lap,  disposing  of  the  Lord 
18.  18.  the  I.  causeth  contentions  to  cease 
Isa.  17.  14.  this  is  the  I.  of  them  that  rob  us 
34.  17.  and  he  hath  cast  the  I.  for  them 
57.  6.  the  smooth  stones  of  the  stream  are  thy  I. 
Jer.  13.  25.  this  is  thy  I.  from  me,  saith  the  Lord 
Ezek.  24.  6.  bring  it  out,  let  no  I.  fall  upon  it 
Van.  12. 13.  shallstandin  thy  I.  at  end  of  thedavs 
j^/jc.  2.5.  shall  have  none  that  shall  cast  a  cord  by  I. 
/.u/ic  1.9.  his  Z.  was  to  burn  incense  when  he  went 
Acts  1.  26.  the  I.  fell  on  Matthias,  was  numbered 
8.  21.  thou  hast  no  I.  or  part  in  this  matter 
13. 19.  he  divided  their  land  to  them  by  I. 
LOTS. 
1 .5am. 14.42.ca8t  ^between  me  and  Jonath.  my  son 
1  Chron.  24.  31.  these  cast  I.  over  against  brethren 
Jl/'at.27.35.  parted  garments  casting  /.  Mark  15. 24. 
AeU  1.  26.  gave  forth  their  I.  lot  fell  on  Matthias 
See  Cast. 
LOTHE. 
Extd.  7. 18.  Egypt  shall  I.  to  drink  of  the  river 
Job  7. 16.  1 1,  it,  I  would  not  live  alway 
F.zek-  C.  9.  shall  I.  themselves  for  evils  have  done 

20.  43.  ye  shall  /.  yourselves  in  your  own  sight 
36.  31.  ye  shall  I.  vourselvcs  for  your  iniquities 

LOTHED. 
Jer.  14.  19.  hath  thy  soul  I.  Zion  ?  why  hast  thou 
Zeeh.  11. 8.  my  aoul  I.  them,  their  soul  abhorred  me 

LOTHETH. 
JWm.  21.  5.  and  our  soul  I.  this  light  bread 
357 


LOV 

Prov.  27.  7.  the  fhll  soul  I.  a  honey-comb 
Ezek.  16.  45. 1,  her  husband  and  her  children 

LOTHING. 
jE2cA.16.5.thou  wast  cast  out  to  the  I.  of  thy  person 

LOTHSOME. 
JVum.  11.20.  even  a  whole  month,  till  ilbei.  to  you 
Job  7.  5.  my  skin  is  broken  and  become  I. 
Psal.  38.  7.  my  loins  are  filled  with  a  I.  disease 
Prov.yi.5.  a  wicked  man  is  I.  and  cometh  to  shame 

LOUD. 
2  Chron.  30. 21.  singing  with  /.instruments  to  Lord 
Ezra  3.  13.  the  people  shouted  with  a  I.  shout 
JVc/t.  12.  42.  the  singers  sang  I.  with  Jezrahiah 
Esth.  4.  1.  and  Mordecai  cried  with  a  I.  cry 
Psal.  3).3.  sing  to  him,  play  skilfully  with  a  I.  noise 
98.4.  make  a  I.  noise  and  rejoice  and  sing  praise 
150.  5.  praise  him  on  I.  cymbals,  praise  him 
Prov.  7. 11.  she  is  I.  and  stubborn, her  feet  abide  not 
Rev.  14. 18.  another  angel  cried  with  a  I.  cry  to  him 

LOUD  joined  with  voice. 

Gen.  39. 14.  he  came  to  me,  I  cried  with  a  I.  voice 

Eiod.  19. 16.  the  voice  of  the  trumpet  e.\ceoding  I. 

Deut.  27. 14.  the  Levites  shall  speak  with  a  I.  voice 

2  .Sam.  15.  23.  all  the  country  wept  with  a  I.  voice 

lKingsS.T>5.U&  blessed  congregation  \\'\iha.l. voice 

2  CAcon. 15.14.  they  sware  to  the  Ld.  with  a  I.  voice 

20. 19.  to  praise  Lord  with  a  I.  voice,  J.uke  19.  37. 

£z)-a3.12.many  weptwith  a  l.voice,  many  shouted 

10.  12.  the  congregation  answered  with  -dl.voic 

Pruv.  27.  14.  he  blesselh  his  friend  with  a  I.  voice 

Ezek.  8.  18.  and  though  they  cry  with  a  I.  voice 

9.  1.  he  cried  with  a  I.  voice,  saying,  cause  them 

Luke  1.42.  she  spake  out  with  a  I.  voice  and  said 

8.  28.  unclean  spiritcried  with  aZ.  voice,  Acts8. 1. 

17. 15.  turned  back  and  with  a  I.  v.  glorified  God 

.4ctsl4.10.said  witli^  I.  j'oice  stand  upright  on  feet 

26.24. Festus  said  with  a  I.  v.  Paul,  thou  art  beside 

Rev.  5. 2.  a  strong  angel  proclaiming  with  a  I.  voice 

12.  many  angels  saying  with  a /.I'oice,  worthy  is 

8.13.angel  saying  with  a  Z. «.  woe,  woe,  14.7,9,15. 

12. 10.  and  I  heard  a  I.  voice  saying  in  heaven 

'  IjOUD  voices. 
Luke  23.  23.  and  they  were  instant  with  I.  voices 

LOUDER. 
£j:od.l9.19.the  voice  of  the  trumpet  waxed  Z.and  I. 

LOVE 
Signifies,  [1]  A  natural  passion,  inclining  us  to 
delight  in  an  object,  Gen.  29.  20.  [2]  A  gra- 
cious principle  or  habit  wrought  in  the  soul  by 
God,  which  inclines  us  to  delight  »?!,  esteem, 
and  earnestly  desire  to  enjoy  an  interest  in 
God's  favour,  and  communion  with  him  as  our 
chief  good,  portion,  and  happiness,  and  the 
fountain  of  all  perfection  and  eiccllcncy;  and 
which  likewise  disposes  us  to  do  good  to  all, 
especially  to  such  as  resemble  God  in  holiness, 
and  bear  his  image,  1  John  4. 19,  21.  [3]  The 
effect  of  Zo«c,  John  15. 13.  [4]  The  persoyi  be- 
loved. Cant.  2.  2,  7.  [5]  True  friendship  or 
kindness,  Prov.  15.  17.  Love  is  (I)  Natural, 
which  is  either,  lawful.  Psal.  34.  12.  or, unlaw- 
ful, John  12.  25.  2Tim.  3.  2.  (II)  Conjugal, 
which  is,  [1]  Divine,  that  is  God's  love  to  his 
people,  7chich  is  inexpressible,  John  3.  16.  In- 
conceivable, Eph.  3. 19.  Everlasting,  Jer.  31.  3. 
Sovereign,  Deut.  7.  8.  Free  and  undeserved, 
Hos.  14.  4.  Immutable,  John  13.  1.  Compla- 
cential,  Prov.  8.  31.  Boundless  and  infinite,  1 
John  4.  16.  [2]  Human,  such  is  that  between 
a  husband  and  wife  lawfully  joined  in  wed- 
lock. Gen.  24.  67.  Eph.  5.  25.  [3]  Idolatrous, 
such  is  that  love  which  idolaters  have  for  idols 
and  strange  gods,  Jer.  2.  2.5.  |  8.  2.  (Ill)  Pa 
rental  and  Filial,  Gen.  22.  2.  |  44.  20.  |  4.5.  11. 
(IV)  Spiritual,  as,  [1]  The  love  of  God  toward 
his  children,  John  17.  23.  Rom.  5.  5,  8.  [2" 
Their  love  to  God,  Psal.  116.  1.  1  John  4 
19.  [3]  Of  Christ,  to  his  church,  Eph.  3 
19.  I  5.  2.  [4]  To  some  particular  persons, 
John  2.  2.  Gal.  2.  20.  [5]  The  love  of  be- 
lievers towards   Christ,  Cant.  1.  4,  7.     John 

21.  15.  [6]  To  one  another,  John  15.  17. 
Col.  1.  4.  [7]  Of  pastors  toward.*  their  peo- 
ple, 1  Cor.  16.  24.  2  Cor.  2.  4.  [8]  Of  hear- 
ers to  their  teachers,  2  Cor.  8.  7,  8.     1  Thess. 

5.  13.  Tit.  3.  15.  ~(V)  Carnal,  2  Sam.  13.  4. 
Prov.  7.  18.   (VI)  tVicked,^  Chron.  19.2.  Rev. 

22.  1.5. 
Gen.  29.  20.  a  few  days  for  the  I.  he  had  to  her 

1  Sam.  20. 1 17.  to  swear  by  his  I.  toward  him 

2  Sam.  1.  26.  wonderful,  passing  the  I.  of  women 
13.  15.  the  hatred  was  greater  than  the  I.  he  had 

Prov.  5.  19.  be  thou  ravished  always  with  her  I. 
7.  18.  let  us  take  our  fill  of/,  till  the  morning 
10.12.hatred  stirreth  up  strifes,but  /.  covereth  sins 
15. 17.  better  is  a  dinner  of  herbs  where  /.  is,  than 
17.  9.  he  that  covereth  a  transgression  seeketh  I. 
27.  5.  open  rebuke  is  better  than  secret  /. 
Eccl.  9.  1.  no  man  knoweth  either  /.  or  hatred 

6.  also  their  l  and  hatred  is  now  periabed 


LOV 

Cant.  2.  4.  and  his  banner  over  me  was  I. 

5.  comfort  ine  with  apples,  for  I  am  sick  of/.  &.& 
3.  10.  the  midst  thereof  being  paved  with  /. 

7.  6.  how  pleasant  art  thou,  O  /.  for  delights! 
8.6. 1,  is  strong  as  death,  jealousy  is  cruel  as  grave 

7.  many  waters  camiot  quench  /.  if  a  man  would 
give  all  his  subs,  for  /.  it  would  be  contemned 

Jer.  2.  2.  I  remember  thee,  the  /.  of  thy  esjiousaU 
33.  why  trimmest  thou  Ihy  way  to  seek  l.'i 

12.t  7. 1  have  f  Svcn  the  /.  of  my  soul  to  enemy 

31.  3.  I  have  Ic  ved  thee  with  an  everlasting  I. 
Ezek.  16.  8.  behold,  thy  time  was  the  time  of/. 

23. 11.  she  was  more  corrupt  in  her  inordinate  I 
17.  the  Babylonians  came  to  her  into  bed  of  i. 

33.  31.  with  their  mouth  they  shew  much  /. 
Dan.}  .9.  brought  Daniel  into  tender  /.  with  prince 
Hos.  3. 1.  according  to  the  /.  of  Lord  toward  Israe 

11.  4.  I  drew  them  with  bands  of/,  and  cords 
JUat.  24.  12.  the  /.  of  many  shall  wa.\  cold 
Joh7i  13.  35.  if  ye  have  /.  one  to  another 

15.13.  ^ater  /.  hath  no  man  than  this,  that  he  lay 
17.  26.  the  /.  wherewith  thou  hast  loved  me 
Royn.B.  35.  who  shall  separate  us  from  /.of  Christ? 

12.  9.  let  /.  be  without  dissimulation 

10.  be  kindly  aftectionod  with  brotherly  /. 

13.  10.  /.  worketh  no  ill,  therefore  /.  is  fulfilling 

15.  30.  I  beseech  you  for  the  /.  of  the  Spirit 
2  Cor.  2.  4.  that  you  may  know  the  /.  I  have  to  yoi 

8.  that  ye  would  confirm  your  /.  toward  him 

5.  14.  for  the  /.  of  Christ  constraineth  ua 

6.  6.  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  /.  unfeigned 

8.  8.  and  to  prove  the  sincerity  of  your  /. 
24.  shew  to  the  churches  the  proof  of  your  I. 

13.  11.  and  the  God  of  /.  shall  be  with  you 
Gal.  5.  0.  but  faith  which  worketh  by  /. 
13.  but  brethren,  by  /.  serve  one  another 
22.  but  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  /.  joy,  peace 
Eph.  1. 15.  after  I  heard  of  your  /.  to  all  Uie  sainti 
3. 19.  to  know  the  /.  of  Christ,  passeth  knowledge 
6.  23.  and  /.  with  faith,  from  God  the  Father 
Phil.  1.  9.  this  I  piay,  that  your  /.  may  abound 

17.  but  the  other  of  /.  doth  preach  Christ 

2.  1.  if  there  be  therefore  any  comfort  of  {. 
2.  that  ye  be  like-minded,  having  the  same  I. 

Col.  1.4.  and  of  the  /.  which  ye  have  to  all  the  sainta 
8.  who  declared  to  us  your  /.  in  the  Spirit 

1  Thess.  1.  3.  remembering  your  labour  of  /. 
4. 9.  touching  brotherly  /.  ye  need  not  that  I  write 

5.  8.  putting  on  breast  plate  of  faith  and  /. 

2  Thess. 2. 10.  they  received  not  the  /.of  the  trgth 

1  Tim.  1. 14.  e.vceeding  abundant  with  faith  and  I. 

6.  10.  the  /.  of  money  is  the  root  of  all  evil 

11.  follow  after  righteousness,  /.  patience 

2  Tim.  1.  7.  not  given  the  spirit  of  fear,  but  of  /. 
Philem.  9.  yet  for  /.  sake  I  rather  beseech  thee 
Hib.  0.  10.  to  forget  your  work  and  labour  of/. 

10.  24.  to  provoke  unto  /.  and  to  good  works 
13. 1.  let  brotherly  /.  continue,  entertain  stranger! 
1  Pet.  1.  22.  to  unfeigned  /.  of  the  brethren 

1  .Tohn  2.  15.  the  /.  of  the  Father  is  not  in  him 

3.  1.  behold  what  manner  of/,  the  Father  hath 

4.  7.  let  us  love  one  another,  for  /.  is  of  God 
8.God  is  /.  II 10.  herein  ip  /.  not  that  we  loved  God 

16.  known  the  /.  that  God  hath  to  us,  God  is  i. 
17.herein  is  our/,  made  perfect,  to  have  bolilneaa 

18.  there  is  no  fear  in  /.  perfect  /.  casteth  out  fear 
Z.John  6.  this  is  /.that  we  walk  after  his  commandm. 
.Tude  2.  mercy  to  you,  peace  and  /.  be  multiplied 
Rev.  2.  4.  because  thou  hast  left  thy  first  /. 

LOVE  of  God. 
Z-M7i:fll.42.ye  pass  over  judgment  and  the  l.ofGod 
.fohn5.  42. 1  know  that  ye  have  not/,  of  God  in  you 
/?om. 5.5.because/.o/ (7. isslied  abroad  inour  hearts 
8.  39.  shall  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the  /.  of  O. 

2  Cor.  13. 14.  the  /.  of  God  be  with  you  all,  amen 
2  Thrss.  3.  5.  direct  your  hearts  into  the  /.  of  O. 
Tit.  3.4.  after  the  kindness  and  /.  of  G.  appeared 
1  .hihn  2.  5.  in  him  verily  is  the  /.  of  G.  perfected 

3.  10.  hereby  perceive  we  /.  of  G.  because  be  laid 

17.  how  dwelleth  the  /.  of  God  in  him  ? 

4.  9.  in  this  was  manifested  the  /.  of  G.  toward  ua 
5.3.  this  ia  /.  of  God  that  we  keep  his  commandm. 

Jade  21.  keep  yourselves  in  the  /.  of  G.  looking  for 

His  LOVE. 
Deul'l.  Lord  did  not  set  his  I.  upon  you,  because 
Psal.  91.  14.  because  he  halh  set  his  I.  upon  me 
/sn.fi3.9.  in  his  I.  and  in  his  pity  he  redeemed  thera 
Zeph.  3. 17.  he  will  rest  in  his  I.  he  will  joy  ov»r 
■hhn  15.10.1  kept  commandments,  and  a'bide  in  h.l. 
Rom.  5.  8.  but  God  commended  his  I.  toward  us 
1  .John  4. 124Clove  one  another  his  I.  is  perfected 

In  LOVE. 
1  Kings  11.  2.  Solomon  clave  unto  these  in  l, 
Isa.  38.  17.  hast  ?7i  /.to  ray  soul  delivered  it  from  pit 

1  Cor.  4.21.  shall  I  come  to  you  with  a  rod,  or  in  /.» 

2  Cor.  8.  7.  as  ye  abound  in  your  /.  to  us,  see  that 
/!;pA.1.4.  we  should  be  without  blame  bef.  him  in  L 

3.  17.  that  ye  being  rooted  and  grounded  in  I. 

4.  2.  in  meekness,  forbearing  one  aoolher  in  I. 
15.  but  apeaking  the  truth  in  I.  may  grow  up  to 


LOV 

EsA.4.16.inaketh  increase  to  edifying  of  itself  in  I. 

5.  2.  walk  in  I.  as  Christ  hath  loved  U3  and  given 
Ciil.'2.2.1iearts  be  comforted, being  knit  togetlier  inl. 
1  'J'/ieiS.  '3.  IJ.  the  Lord  make  you  to  increusu  in  I. 

o.  13.  esluum  them  liighly  in  I.  for  work's  sake 
S  7V//1. 1.  13.  in  faith  and  I.  wiiich  is  in  Chrisi  Jesus 

1  Jo/in  4.  It),  he  that  dvvelletii  in  I.  dwcllelli  in  God 

lC.no  fear  in  I.  that  feareili  not  made  perfect  in  I. 

2  John  3.Je8iu  the  ;Jon  of  the  Father  in  trulii  and  I. 

Mij  LOVE. 
Psal.  109.  4.  fot  my  I.  they  are  mine  adversaries 

5.  they  have  rewarded  me  hatred  for  my  I. 
Cant.  1.  9. 1  liave  compared  thee,  O  my  I.  to  horses 
15.  beliold  thou  art  fair,  uiy  I.  thou  art  fair,  4.  I. 
2.  3.  as  lily,  so  is  my  I.  aniojig  the  daughters 
7.  nor  wake  my  I.  till  he  jdease,  3.  o.  |  £j.  4. 
lO.risc  up  my /.13.||5.2.open  to  me,mj  I.  my  dove 
4.  7.  art  all  fair  my  I.  there  is  no  spot  in  thee 

6.  4.  thou  art  beautiful,  O  my  I.  as  Tirzah 
John  1j.  9.  continue  ye  in  my  I.  \\  10.  abide  in  my  I. 

1  Cor.  It].  24.  my  I.  be  with  you  all  in  CJ^rist  Jesus 

Thy  LOVL. 

2  Sam.  1. 2G.  thy  I.  was  wonderful,  passing  the  love 
Cant.  1.  2.  for  Iky  I.  is  better  than  wine,  4.  10. 

4.  we  will  remember  thy  I.  more  than  wine 

4.  10.  how  fair  is  thy  I.  my  sister,  my  spouse 
Fhitem.  5.  hearing  ol  thy  I.  and  faith  toward  Jesus 

7.  we  have  great  joy  and  consolaiion  iu  thy  I. 
Jiev.  2.  4.  because  thou  hast  left  thy  tirst  I. 

LOVE,  yerb. 

Lev.  19.  18.  thou  shall  I.  thy  neighbour  as  thyself, 

34.  Jliit.  19.  19.  I  22.  39.  Marh  12.  31. 

Veut.  6.  5.  thou  shall  I.  the  Lord  thy  tJod  with  all 

Ihy  heart,  10. 12.  ]  11.  ],  13,  22.  |  19.  9.  |  30.  U. 

7.  9.  he  is  God,  the  faithful  God,  which  keepeth 

covenant  with  them  that  I.  him.  Van.  9.  4. 
13.  he  will  /.  thee,  bless  thee,  and  multiply  thee 

10. 15.  Lord  had  a  delight  in  thy  fathers  to  I.  them 
19.1.  therefore  the  stranger,  for  ye  were  strangers 

13.  3.  to  know  whether  ye  I.  the  Lord  your  God 

30. 16.  in  that  I  command  thee  to  I.  Lord  thy  God 
20.  that  thou  mayest  I.  the  L.  and  obey  his  voice 

Josh."i.a.  take  heed  to  I.  the  Ld.  your  God,  23. 11. 
Jadg.  5.  31.  let  them  that  I.  him  be  as  the  sun 
1  Ham.  18.  22.  and  all  the  king's  servants  I.  thee 

3  Chr.  19.  2.  shouldest  thou  /.  Ihem  that  hate  Lord? 
JVeA.  1. 5.  God  keepeth  mercy  for  them  that  I.  him 
Psal.  4.  2.  O  ye  sons,  how  long  will  ye  /.  vanity? 

5.  11.  let  them  that  I.  thy  name  be  joyful  in  thee 
18.  1.  I  will  I.  thee,  O  Lord  my  strength 
31.23.  O  I.  the  Lord,  all  ye  saints.  Lord  preserves 
40.  IC.  let  such  as  /.  thy  salvation  say,  70.  4. 

69.  36.  they  that/,  his  name  shall  dwell  there 
97. 10.  ye  that  I.  the  Lord  hate  evil,  he  preserves 
119.  132.  usest  to  do  to  those  that  I.  thy  name 

165.  great  peace  have  they  who  I.  thy  law 
122.  6.  they  shall  prosper  tliat  I.  thee 
145.  20.  the  Lord  prcserveth  them  that  I.  him 
Vrov.  1. 22.  how  long  ye  simple  will  ye  I.  simplicity 
4.  6.  I.  wisdom,  and  she  shall  keep  thee 

8.  36.  all  they  that  hate  me,  /.  death 

9.  8.  rebuke  a  wise  man  and  he  will  I.  thee 
16.  13.  kings  I.  him  that  speakcth  right 

18.  21.  they  that  I.  it  shall  eat  the  fruit  thereof 
Kctl.  3.  8.  a  time  to  I.  and  a  lime  to  hate 
Cant.  1.  3.  therefore  do  the  virgins  I.  thee 

4.  thy  love  more  than  wine,  the  upright  I.  thee 
Iga.  5ti.  6.  to  serve  and  I.  the  name  of  the  Lord 
61.  8.  I  the  Lord  /.judgment,  I  hate  robbery 
6<).  10.  \m  glad  with  Jerusalem  all  ye  that  /.  her 
Jer.  5.  31.  and  my  people  /.  to  have  it  so 
ilos.  3.  1.  /.  a  woman  beloved,  /.  flagons  of  wine 

4.  Xi*.  her  rulers  with  shame,  do  /.  give  ye 

9.  15.  drive  them  out,  I  will  /.  them  no  more 
14.4.  £  will/,  them  freely,  for  mine  anger  turned 
Smos  4.  t  5.  publish  ye  free-ofTeriiigs,  so  ye  /. 

5.  15.  hate  the  evil  and  /.  the  good,  establish 
Mit.  3.  2.  who  hate  the  good  and  /.  the  evil 

d.  8.  but  to  /.  mercy  and  to  walk  hniiibly 
Ztch.  K  n.  ;.  no  false  oath  ||  19.  /.  the  truth 
Mat.  5.  43.  it  hath  been  said,  /.  thy  neighbour 
44.  but  I  say,  /.  your  enemies,  Luke  (i.  27,  35. 
46.  if  ye  /.  them  which  /.  you,  lyuke  6.  32. 

6.  5.  they  /.  to  pray,  standing  in  the  synagogues 
34.  hate  the  one  and  /.  the  other,  Luke  16:13. 

22.  37.  thou  shall  /.  llic  Lord  thy  God  with  all 

thy  heart,  Mark  12.  30,  33.  I.itke  10.  27. 

23.  6.  and  /.  the  uppermost  rooms  at  feasts 
Mark  12.  38.  scribes,  who  /.  to  go  in  long  clothing 
J.ukt  7.  42.  which  of  them  will  /.  him  most? 

II.  43.  ye  /.  greetings  in  the  markets,  20.  40. 
John  14.  21.  I  will  /.  him  and  inanifeit  myself 
23.  if  a  man  /.  me,  my  Father  will  I.  him 
15.  12.  commandment,  that  ye  /.  one  another,  17. 
lil.  if  were  of  world,  the  world  would  /.  his  own 
fiom.  8.28.  allthmgs  work  for  good,  to  them  /.  God 
1.3.  8.  owe  nothing  to  any,  hut  to  /.  one  another 
6  in  thig  saying,  thou  shall  /.  thy  neighbour  os 
thyself,  Clal.  .■).  14.  .flim.  2.  8. 
CVp.  2.9.  God  hath  prepared  for  thcra  that/,  him 
358 


LOV 

1  Cor.  8.3.  if  any  man  /.G.the  game  is  known  of  him 

Eph.  5.  25.  husbands  /.  your  wives  as  Christ  loved 

the  church,  and  gave  himself,  28,  33.  Col.  3. 19. 

6.24.  grace  be  wilh  all  them  that  /.  our  Lord  Jesus 

1  'I'hess.  4.  9.  ye  are  taught  of  God  to  /.  one  another 

2  Tim.  4.  8.  but  to  all  them  thai  /.  his  appearing 
Tit.  2.4.  leach  young  women  to  /.  tlieir  husbands 

3.  15.  greet  theni  that  /.  us  in  the  faith 
.Jam.  I.  12.  Lord  promised  to  them  that /.  him, 2.  5. 

1  Pet.  1.  8.  whom  having  not  seen  ye  /.  in  whom 

22.  see  ye  /.  one  another  wilh  a  pure  heart 

2.  17.  honour  all  men,  /.  the  brotherhood 

3.  8.  /.  as  brelhrcn  1|  10.  he  that  will  /.  life 
IJohn  2.15.  /.not  the  world,  if  any  man  /.  the  world 

3.  11.  message  ye  heard  from  the  beginning  that 

we  should  /.  one  another,  4.  7,  11.  2  .John  5. 

14.  from  death  to  life,  because  we  /.  the  brethren 

23.  /.  one  another,  as  he  gave  us  commandment 

4.  12.  if  we  /.  one  another,  God  dwelleth  in  us 

19.  we  /.  hiin,  because  he  first  loved  us 

20.  how  can  he  /.  God  whom  he  hath  not  seen? 

21.  he  who  lovelh  God,  /.  his  brother  also 

5.  2.  we  /.  the  children  of  God,  when  we  /.  God 

/  LOVE. 
Gen.  27. 4.  make  me  savoury  meat,  such  as  //. 
Ezod.  21.  5.  if  servant  shall  say,  /  /.  my  master 
.ladg.  16.  15.  how  canst  thou  say,  /  /.  thee  when 

2  .bam.  13.4.//.  Tamar  my  brother  Absalom's  sister 
Psal.  116.  1.  //.  the  Lord,  because  he  hath  heard 

119.  97.  O  how  /  /.  thy  law  ||  113.  thy  law  /  /.  163. 
119.  therefore  /  /.  thy  testimonies 
127.  therefore  /  /.  thy  commands  above  gold 
159.  consider  how  //.  thy  precepts,  quicken  me 
167.  thy  testimonies  //.  exceedingly 
Prov.  8. 17.  //.  them  that  /.  me,  and  those  that 
.John  14.  31.  world' may  know  that  /  /.  the  Father 
21.  15.  Lord,  thou  knowest  that  /  /.  thee,  16,  17. 
2  Cor.  12. 15.  though  the  more  //.you,  the  less  I  be 

1  .lohn  4.  20.  if  a  man  say,  /  /.  God,  and  haleth 

2  .John  1.  whom  //.  in  the  truth,  3  John  1. 
Rev.  3.  19.  as  many  as  /  /.  I  rebuke  and  chasten 

LOVE  me. 
(Jen.  20.  32.  now  therefore  my  husband  will  /.  me 
£xo(/.20.6.shewing  mercy  to  them  /.)nc,D(!«t.5.10. 
Prov.^.Yl.X  love  them  that /.Me,and  those  that  seek 

21.  cause  those  that  /.  vie  to  inherit  substance 
./oAn8.42.if  God  wereyour  Father  you  would  /.  me 
10. 17.  therefore  doth  my  Father  /.  me,  because 
14.  15.  if  ye  /.  me.,  keep  my  commandments 
23.  if  a, man  /.  wic,  he  will  keep  my  words 
LOVE  not. 
ProD.  20. 13.  /.not  sleep,  lest  thou  come  to  poverty 

1  Cor.16.22.  ifany  man  /.  not  the  Lord  Jesus  Chrisi 

2  Cor.  11. 11.  because  T  /.  you  notl  God  knowelh 
U«An2.15./.no/  the  world||3.18.1et  us  nut  /.in  word 

LOVED. 
Gen.  24.67.  Isaac  took  Rebekah  to  wife,  and/,  her 

25.  2S.  Isaac  /.  Esau,  but  Kebekah  /.  Jacob 

27.  14.  his  mother  made  such  as  his  Father  /. 

29.  18.  Jacob  /.  Rachel  more  than  Leah,  30. 

.34.  3.  Shechem  /.  Dinah,  and  sjiake  kindly  to  her 

37.  3.  Isr.  /.Joseph  more  than  all  his  children,  4. 
Deut.  4. 37.  and  because  he  /.  thy  fathers,  therefore 

7.  8.  but  because  the  Lord  /.  you,  23.  5.  |  33.  3. 
.Jndg.  16.4.  Samson  /.a  woin.in  the  valley  of  Sorek 
l.S«;rt.l..5.  Elkanah/.  Hannah  ||  16.21.Saol  /.  Duv. 

18. 1.  Jonathan  /.  Dav.  as  his  own  soul,  3.  |  20. 17. 
16.  I>rael  and  Judah  /.  David,  because  he  went 
20.  and  Michal,  Saul's  daughter,  /.  David 
2. Sam.  12.24.  Lord/.  Solomon,  and  he  sent  Nathan 

13.  1.  Amnon,  the  son  of  David,  /.  Tamar 

15.  hatred  greater  than  love  wherewith  he  /.  her 

1  Kinifs  3.3.Solomon  /.  the  Ld.  walking  in  statutes 

10.  9.  because  the  Lord  /.  Israel,  2  C/iron.  9.  8 

11.  1.  king  Solomon  /.  many  strange  women 

2  C/iron.  2.  11.  the  Lord  /.  his  people,  /.5a.48.  14. 
1 1.21.  Rehoboam /.  Maaihah  above  all  his  wives 
26. 10.  Uzziuh  had  husbandmen,  he  /.  husbandry 

jyth.  2.  17.  the  king  /.  Esther  above  all  the  women 
./()//  19.  19.  they  whom  I  /.  are  turned  against  me 
Psal.  47.  4.  the  excellency  of  Jacob  whom  ho  /. 

78.  68.  but  chose  the  mount  Zion  which  he  /. 

109.  17.  as  he  /.  cursing,  so  let  it  come  to  him 
fsa.  38. 1 17.  but  thou  hast  /,  me  from  the  i>it 
Jcr.  8. 2.  all  the  host  of  heaven  whom  they  have  /. 

14. .10.  thus  have  they  /.  to  wander,  thoy  have  not 

Kick.  10.  37. 1  will  gather  all  them  that  thou  hast/. 

Uos.  9.  1.  thou  hast/,  a  reward  on  every  corn-floor 

10.  Ilieir  abominations  wore  according  as  they  /. 

11.1.  when  Israel  was- a  child,  then  I  /.  him 
Mai.  1.  2.  yet  ye  say,  wherein  hast  thou  /.  us  ? 

2.  11.  Judah  profaned  holiness  of  Lord  which  he  /. 
Mark  10.  21.  then  Jesus  beholding  him,  /.  him 
J.iike  7. 47.  many  sins  arc  forcivcn,  for  she  /.  much 
.John  3.  16.  "^od  so  /.  the  world  ||  19.  darkness 

11.5.  Jesus/.  Martha,  and  her  sister,  and  Lazarus 
3fi.  then  said  the  Jews,  behold  how  ho  /.  him 

12.  43.  for  they  /.  praise  of  men  more  than  praise 

13.  1.  having  /.  his  own,  he  /.  them  to  the  end 
23.  disciple  whom  Jesui  /.iy.26. 1 20.2. 1 21.7,20. 


LOV 

./oA?il4.21.he  that  loveth  me  shall  be/.ofrDyFat)i«r 
28.ifye/.me,ye  would  rejoice,because  Igo  touj 
15.  9.  as  the  Father  /.  me,  so  have  I  /.  you 
16.27.  Father  hiinselfloveth  you,  because  ye  /.  ma 
17.  23.  and  hast  /.  them,  as  thou  hast  /.  me 
26.lovewlierewiththou  hasl/.nie,niay  be  in  ihera 
Horn.  8.  37.  more  than  conquerors  ihw'  him  that/. 
2  Cor.  12.  15.  the  mote  I  love  you,  tlie  less  I  be  t 
Gal.  2.  20.  who  /.  me,  and  gave  himself  lor  mo 
Eph.  2.  4.  for  his  great  love  wherewnh  he  /.  us 
5. 2.  as  Christ  also  /.  us  ||  25.  Christ  /.  the  church 
2  'J'hess.  2.  16.  God  our  Fathnr,  which  hath  /.  us 
2  Tim.  4.  10.  Demas  having  /.  this  jiresent  woild 
//ei.  1.9. hast  /.righteousness,  and  hated  iniquity 
2  /■'tt.2.15.  Balaam  /.  the  wages  of  unnghteousnciis 

1  John  4.  10.  not  that  we  /.  God,  but  that  he  /.  us 

11.  if  God  so  /.  us  II  19.  because  he  tirst  /.  us 
Rev.  1. 5.  to  him  that  /.  us  and  washed  us  from  sins 

12.  11.  they  /.  not  their  lives  to  the  death 

/  have  LOVED. 
Psal.  26.  8.  I  have  I.  the  habitation  of  thy  houso 

1 19.47. deiight  in  thy  commands  which/Aa7)«/.48. 
Jsa.  43.  4.  /  have  I.  thee,  therefore  will  I  give  men 
Jer.2.25. 1  have  /.strangers, and  after  them  will  I  go 

31.  3.  I  have  I.  thee  with  an  everlasting  love 
Mul.l.2.I have  I.  you,  yet  ye  say, wherein  hast  thou 
.luhn  13.34. as  /Aa«e/.you,thatye  also  love,  15.12. 

15.  9.  as  the  Father  loved  me,  so  I  have  I.  you 
/io)n.9.13.as  it  is  written,  Jacob  I  have  I.  but  Esau 
Rcv.'i.M.  I  will  make  them  know  that  Ihavel.thet 

LOVEDST. 

ha.  57.  8.  thcu  /.  their  bed  where  thou  sawest  it 

John  17.  24.  thou  /.  me  befure  foundation  of  world 

LOVELy. 

2  SaTO.1.23.Saul  and  Jonathan  were/,  in  their  livea 
Can/.5.16.  he  is  altogether  /.O  daughter  of  JerusaL 
Ezrk.  33.  32.  thou  art  to  them  as  a  very  /.  song 
Phil.  4.  8.  whatsoever  things  are  /.  think  on  these 

LOVER. 

1  KiniTs  5.  1.  for  Hiram  was  ever  a  /.  of  David 
Ps.  88. 18.  /.  ond  friend  hast  thou  put  far  from  me 
Tit.  1.  8.  a  /.  of  hosjiitalitv,  a  /.  of  good  men,  sober 

LOVERS. 
Psn/.SS.  11.  my  /.  and  friends  stand  aloof  from  my 
Jer.  3.  1.  thou  hast  played  the  harlot  wilh  manv/. 
4.30.thy  /.  will  despise  thee,  they  will  seek  thy  life 

22.  20.  go  up  and  cry,  for  all  thy  /.  are  destroyed 
22.thy  /.  shall  go  into  captivity,  shall  be  ashamed 

30.  14.  all  thy  /.  have  forgotten  thee,  they  seek 
i,am. 1.2.  among  all  her  /.  hath  none  to  comfort  her 

19.  I  called  for  my  /.  but  they  deceived  me 
Ezr.k.  l*:>.  33.  thou  givest  thy  gifts  to  all  thy  /. 
36.ihy  ntikedness  discovered  wilh  thy /.and  idols 
37.  I  will  gather  thy  /.  ||  23.  5.  doted  on  her  /. 

23.  9. 1  have  delivered  her  into  the  hand  of  her  / 
22.  behold,  I  will  raise  up  thy  /.  against  thee 

Hos.  2.5.  I  will  go  after  my  /.  ||  7.  shall  follow  her  /. 
10. 1  will  discover  her  lewdness  in  the  sight  of/. 
12..  these  rewards  that  my  /.  have  given  me 
13.  and  she  went  after  her  /.  and  Ibrgnt  me 
8.0. are  gone  up  to  .Assyria, Ephriiim  halh  hired  /. 

2  Tim.  3.  2.  for  men  shall  be  /.  of  their  own  selves 
4.  heady,  /.  of  pleasures  more  than  /.  of  God 

LOVES. 
Prov.  7.  18.  come,  let  us  solace  ourselves  with  L 
Cant.  7.  12.  there  will  I  I'ive  thee  my  /. 

LOV  EST. 
OC7J.22. 2.  take  thine  only  son  Isaac  whom  thou  / 
Judg.  M.'K).  tliHU  (lost  but  halo  me,  and  /.  me  not 
2.Sum.l0.6.  in  that  thou  /.  thine  enemies,  and  hntest 
Psal.  45.7.  thou  /.  righteousness,  therefore  God  lliy 

62.  3.  thon  /.  evil  more  than  good,  and  lying 
4.  Ihou  /.  all  devouring  words,  O  thou  deceitful 
Eccl.  9.  9.  live  joyfully  with  the  wife  whom  thou  /. 
.John  11.  3.  behold,  he  whom  thou  /.  is  sick 

21.  15.  Simon,  son  of  Jonas,  /.  thou  me?  16,  17. 

LOVETH. 
Gen.  Q7.  9.  make  meat  for  thy  father,  such  as  he  /. 

44.  20.  a  rhild,  a  little  one,  and  his  father  /.  him 
Drnt.  10.18.  Lord/,  the  stranger  in  giving  him  food 

15.  16.  I  will  not  go  away  because  ho  /.  thee 
I{}illi  4.  15.  for  Ihy  daugliierin-law  who  /.  iheo 
/'.<«/.  11.  5.  and  him  that  /.  violence  his  soul  hnteth 
7.  for  the  righteous  Lord  /.  righteousness,  33.  5 

34.  12.  what  man  is  he  that  /.  manv  davs  ? 

37.  2.-I.  fur  the  Lord  /.  jndgmcnl,  9^).  4. 

87.  2.  the  Ld.  /. gates of'Zion  more  than  dwcllingn 

1 19.  140.  word  is  very  pure,  thi-rcfcire  ihy  scrv.  I 

146.  8.  Lord  openctli  Ihe  eyes,  Ld.  /.  the  righteous 
Prov.  3.  12.  for  whom  the  Lord  /.  he  rorrectcth 

12.  1.  whoso  /.  instruction,  /.  knowledge 

13.  24.  bill  he  that /.  him,  chaslenelh  him  botimoa 
15. 9.  he  /.  him  that  followeth  after  righleousneM 

12.  a  Bcorner  /.  not  one  that  reproveth  him 

17.  17.  a  friend  /.  at  all  times,  and  a  brother  is  born 
10.  /.  transgression  that  /.  strife,  ho  that  cxalteth 
19.  8.  ho  that  getleth  wisdom  /.  his  own  soul 

21.  17.  ho  that  /.  pleasure,  he  that  /.  wine  and  oil 

22.  11.  he  thai  /.  purcncss  of  heart,  the  kin^  hu 
29.  3.  whoso  /.  wisdom  rejoiccth  bit  father 


LOW 

Eccl.  5.  10.  he  that  I.  silver,  ho  that  I.  abundance 

Cant.  1. 7.  tell  me,  O  thou  whom  my  soul  /.  where 

3. 1  by  night  on  my  bed  I  sought  him  whom  souU. 

52.  I  will  arise  and  seek  him  whom  my  soul  I. 

3.  to  whom  I  said,  saw  ye  him  whom  my  soul  I.  ? 

4.  I  found  him  whom  my  soul  I.  I  held  him 
Isa.l  23.eveiy  one  i. gifts  and  follows  after  rewards 
J{os.  10.  11.  Ephraim  as  heifer  I.  to  tread  out  corn 

12.  7.  he  is  a  merchant,  he  I.  to  oppress 
Mat.  10.  37.  that  I.  father  or  mother,  he  that  I.  son 
L,ukel.  5.  he  /  our  nation  ||  47.  the  same  I.  little 
John's.  35.  the  Fathei-i.  the  Son,  hath  given,  5.20. 

12.  25.  he  thai  I.  his  life  shall  lose  it 

'4.21.  that  hath  my  commandments,  he  it  is  that  i. 
xie,  and  he  that^  me  shall  he  lovedof  my  Fath. 
2t  he  that  I.  me  not,  keepeth  not  my  sayings 

16.2  '  the  Father  himseU7.  you,  becanse  loved  me 
Rom.  1  '.  8.  he  that  I.  another  hath  fulfilled  the  law 

2  Cor.  9. ''.  or  of  necessity,  forG.Z.  a  cheerful  giver 
F,pk.  5.  28  he  that  I.  his  wife,  /.  himself 

Heb.  12.  6.  for  whom  the  Lord  I.  he  chastencth 

1  .Tohn^.  10.  he  that  I.  his  brother,  abideth  in  light 
3.  10.  he  that  I.  not  his  brother,  is  not  of  God 

14.  I.  not  his  brother,  abideth  in  death,  4.  8,  20. 
4. 7.  every  one  that  Ms  born  of  God,  and  knows  G 

21.  that  he  who  I.  God,  love  his  brother  also 
5. 1.  that  I.  him  that  begat,  /.  him  that  is  begotten 

3  John  9.  Diotrephes  I.  to  have  the  pre-eminence 
Rev.  22.  15.  and  whosoever  I.  and  maketh  a  lie 

LOVING. 

2  Sam.  19.  t  6.  by  I.  thine  enemies,  hating  friends 
Prov.5. 19.  let  herbeas  theZ.hind  and  pleasant  ro 

22.  1.  and  I.  favour  rather  than  silver  and  gold 

Jsa.  56.  10.  sleeping,  lying  down,  I.  to  slumber 

See  Kindness,  Kindnesses. 

LOW. 

Deut.  28.  43.  and  thou  shall  come  down  very  I. 

Ju.dg.\.\9.\he  Canaanites  that  dwelt  in  /.countries 

1  Sam.  2. 7.  the  Lord  bringetli  I.  and  lifteth  up 

2  Chron.  9.  27.  as  sycamore-trees  in  the  I.  plains 
26.  10.  Uzziah  had  much  cattle  in  the  I.  country 
28. 18.  Philistines  invaded  cities  of  the  I.  country 

Job  5.  11.  to  set  up  on  high  those  that  be  I. 
22.  t  29.  he  shall  save  him  that  hath  I.  eyes 
40.  12.  look  on  every  one  proud,  and  bring  him  I. 

Psal.  49.  2.  both  high  and  I.  rich  and  poor  together 

62.  9.  surely  men  of  I.  degree  are  vanity 
136.  23.  who  remembered  us  in  our  /.  estate 

Prov.  29.  23.  a  man's  pride  shall  bring  him  I. 
Eccl.  10.  6.  and  the  rich  sit  in  I.  place 
12.  4.  -when  the  sound  of  the  grinding  is  I. 
Jsa.  13. 11.  I  will  lay  I.  the  ha\ightiness  of  terrible 
25. 12.  tne  high  fort  of  thy  walls  shall  he  lay  I. 
26.  5.  the  lofty  city  ho  layeth  it  I.  to  the  ground 
29.  4.  thy  speech  shall  be  I.  out  of  the  dust 
32.  19.  and  the  city  shall  be  I.  in  a  I.  place 
Lam.  3. 55. 1  called  on  thy  name  out  of  Z.  dungeon 
Ezek.  17.  6.  it  became  a  spreading  vine  of  ^  stature 
24.  trees  shall  know  that  I  have  e.\alted  the 

I.  tree 
21.  26.  exalt  him  that  isZ.  abase  him  that  is  high 
26.  20.  shall  set  thee  in  the  I.  parts  of  the  earth 
29.  t  14.  and  they  shall  be  there  a  I.  kingdom 
0    Luke  1.  48.  he  regarded  I.  estate  of  his  handmaid 
52.  he  hath  exalted  them  of  Z.  degree 
Rom.  12.  16.  but  condescend  to  men  of  I.  estate 
Jam.  1.  9.  let  the  brother  oil.  degree  rejoice 
10.  but  the  rich  in  that  he  is  made  I. 
See  Brought. 
LOWER  parts  of  the  earth 
Signify,  [1]   The  valleifs,  Isa.  44.  23.     [2]   The 
state  of  the  dead,  Psal.  63.  9.     [3]   The  mo- 
ther's womb,  Psal.  139.  15.     [4]  The  earth,  as 
the  lowest  part  of  the  visible  world,  or  the 
grave  and  state  of  the  dead,  Eph.  4.  9. 
LOWER. 
Gcn.6.16.  with  /.second  and  third  stories  make  ark 
Lev.  13.  20.  if  rising  be  in  sight  I.  than  the  skin 

21.  and  if  it  be  no  I.  than  the  skin,  26. 
Jt'eh.  4. 13.  therefore  I  set  in  the  I.  places  the  people 
Job  12.  t  3.  I  fall  not  I.  than  you 
Psal.  8.5.  made  him  little  I.  than  ancels,  Heb.2.7,0. 

63.  9.  shall  go  into  the  I.  parts  of  the  earth 
Prov.  25.7.  shouldest  be  put  /.  in  presence  of  prince 
Isa.  22.  9.  ye  gathered  the  waters  of  the  I.  pool 

44. 23.  sing,  O  heavens,  shout  ye  Z.  parts  of  earth 
Ezek.  43.  14.  from  the  bottom  even  to  the  I.  settle 
Eph.  4.  9.  that  iio  descended  first  into  the  I.  parts 

LOWEST. 

JDeut.  32.  22.  and  shall  burn  to  the  I.  hell 

1  Kings  12.31. made  ptiesls  1. 13. 33.2  Kings  17.32. 

Psal.  86. 13.  hast  delivered  my  soul  from  the  I.  hell 

88.  6.  thou  hast  laid  me  in  the  I.  pit,  in  darkness 

139. 15.  curiously  wrought  in  the  I.  parts  of  earth 

Ezek.  41.  7.  and  so  increased  from  iho  I.  chamber 

42.  6.  the  building  was  straitened  more  than  the  I. 

hnke  14. 9.  thou  begin  with  shame  to  take  I.  room 

10.  but  go  and  sit  down  in  the  /.  room 

LOWETH. 

»«J  6. 5.  wild  as9  bray,  or  I.  the  oi  over  his  fodder? 

359 


LUiS 

LOWING. 
1  Sam.  6.  12.  the  kine  went  along  th»  high-way  I. 

15.  14.  what  meaneth  then  the  I.  of  the  0X60} 

LOWLY. 
Psal.  138.  6.  Lord  high,  yet  hath  he  respect  to  /. 
Prov.  3.  34.  the  scornejs,  but  he  giveth  grace  to  i. 
11.  2.  then  comelh  shame,  but  with  I.  is  wisdom 

16.  19.  better  to  be  of  humble  spirit  wiili  the  /. 
Zech.  9.  9.  he  is  just,  /.  and  riding  on  an  ass 
Mat.  11.  29.  learn  of  me,  for  I  am  meek  and  I. 

LOWLINESS. 
Eph.  4.  2.  that  ye  walk  with  all  I.  and  meekness 
Phil.  2.  3.  but  in  I.  of  mind,  let  each  esteem  other 

LO  WRING. 
Mat.  16.  3.  foul  weather,  for  the  sky  is  red  and  I. 

LUCRE. 
1  Sam.  8. 3.  Samuel's  sons  luined  after /.took  bribes 

1  Tim.  3.  3.  a  bishop  not  greedy  of  filthy  I.  8. 
Tit.  1.  7.  a  bishop  must  nut  be  given  to  filthy  I. 

11.  teaching  things  they  ought  not  for  filtliy  I. 
IPet.  5.2.  feed  flock  not  for  filthy  /.  but  ready  mind 

LUKE-WARM. 
Rev.  3.  16.  so  then  because  thou  art  l.-warm 
LUiVIP. 

2  Sings20.  7.  take  a  I.  of  figs  and  lay,  Isa.  38.21. 
Row.  y.  21.  of  the  same  I.  one  vessel  to  honour 

II.  16.  if  the  fir.st  fruit  be  holy  the  I.  is  holy 
1  Cor.  5.  6.  a  little  leaven  leaveneth  the  /.  Oal.  5. 9. 
7.  purge  out  old  leaveij,  that  ye  may  be  a  new  I. 
LUMPS. 
1  Sam.  25.  f  18.  Abigail  took  100  I.  of  raisins 

LUNATICK. 
Mat.  4.  24.  and  those  which  were  I.  he  healed 
17. 15.  Lord  have  mercy  on  my  son,  for  he  is  I. 
LURK. 
Prov.  1. 11.  come,  let  us  I.  privily  for  the  innocent 
18.  they  I.  privily  for  Iheir  own  lives 
LURKING 
1  Sam.  23.  23.  take  knowledge  of  all  the  I.  places 
Psal.  10.  8.  he  sitteth  in  the  I.  places  of  the  villages 
17. 12.  as  it  were  a  young  lion  I.  in  secret  places 
LUST 
Signifies,  [1]  Concupiscence,  or  unlawful  carnal 
passion  and  desire,!  Pet.  2.  11.    2  Pet.  2.  10. 
[2]   That  original  corruption  which  incline, 
man  to  sin  and  evil.  Jam.  1.  14,  15.  2  Pet.  1.  4. 
[3]  The  desiring  of  lawful  things  to  support 
and  satisfi/  nature,  Deut.  12.  IS,  20,  21.     [4] 
Tke  luveui.g  things  forbidden,  1  Cor.   10.  6. 
[5j  Corrupt  and  inordinate  desires  and  affec- 
tions, 1  Pet.  4.  2. 
The  Spirit  lusteth  against  the  flesh.  Gal.  5. 17.  Tke 
Spirit  of  God  stirs  up  motions  and  desires  in 
the  saints  contrary  to  those  oftheflcsh,  or  unre- 
neiDcdpartin  man,  and  inclines  them  to  desire 
and  endeavour  the  utter  destruction  of  it. 
Exod.  15.  9.  my  I.  shall  be  satisfied  on  them 
J^um.  11.  t4.  thn  mixed  multitude  lusted  a  I. 

1 34.  he  called  the  place  the  graves  of  I. 
33. 1 16.  and  they  pitched  at  the  grave  of  Z. 
Ps.  78.  18.  tempted  God  by  asking  meat  for  their  I. 
30.  they  were  not  estranged  from  their  I. 
81.  12.  I  gave  them  ui>  to  their  own  hearts  I. 
Rom.  1.  27.  burned  in  their  I.  one  toward  another 
7.  7.  I  had  not  known  I.  oxcept  the  law  had  said 
(7o/.5.16.walk  in  Spirit,  ye  shall  not  fulfil  I.  of  flesh 
1  Thcss.  4.  5.  not  in  I.  of  concupiscence  as  Gentiles 
Jam.  1.  14.  tempted,  when  he  is  drawn  of  his  own  I. 
15.  when  I.  hath  conceived,  it  bringeth  forth  sin 
2PeM.4.escaped  corruption  that  is  in  world  thro'  I. 
2. 10.  that  walk  after  flesh  in  the  I.  of  uncleanness 
1  Joh7i  2.  16.  the  I.  of  the  flesh,  the  .'.  of  the  eye 

17.  the  world  passeth  away,  and  the  I.  thereof 

LUST,  Verb. 
Prov.  0.  25. 1,  not  after  her  beauty  in  thy  heart 
JI/aJ.5.28.whoso  looketh  on  a  woman  to  Z.after  her 
1  Cor.10.6.  not  Z.after evil  things  as  they  alsolusted 
Jam.  4.  2.  ye  Z.  and  have  not,  ye  kill  and  deure  to 

LUSTED. 
JtTiim.  11.  34.  there  they  buried  the  people  that  '. 
Ps.  106.14.  buttheyZ.  exceedingly  in  the  wilderne  s 
1  Cor.  10.  6.  we  should  not  lust  as  they  also  Z. 
Rev.  18.  14.  fruits  Ihv  soul  Z.  after  are  departed 

LUSTETH. 
Deut.  12. 15.  what  thy  soul  I.  after,  20, 21.  |  14. 26. 
rraZ..5.17.the  fleshZ.against  the  Spirit, and  the  Spirit 
Jam.  4.  5.  the  spirit  ihat  dwelleth  in  us  I.  to  envy 

LUSTING. 
JV«m.  11.  4.  and  the  mixed  multitude  fell  a  I. 

LUSTS. 
Mark  4. 19.  the  I.  of  other  things  choke  the  word 
.lohn  8.  44.  and  the  I.  of  your  father  ye  will  <lo 
/iom.  1.24. God  gave  them  up  to  uncleanness  Ihro'Z. 
6.  12.  that  you  should  obey  it  in  the  Z.  thereof 
13. 14.  make  no  provision  for  the  flesh,  to  fulfil  Z. 
<?(iZ.5.24.that  are  Christ's  have  crucifi.  flesh  with  I. 
Eph.  2.  3.  had  our  conversation  in  the  I.  ofthc  flc.»h 
4.22.  which  is  corrupt  acrordinglothe  deceitful  I. 

1  '^im.6.9.  will  be  rich  fall  into  foolish  and  hurtful  Z. 

2  Tim  .3.22.flce  youthful  {.  but  follow  righteousness 


LIE 

2  Ttm. 3.6. lead  captive  silly  women  led  away  witb  , 
4.  3.  after  their  own  I.  shall  they  heap  teacher* 
Tit.  2.  12.  teaching  us  that  denying  worldly  I. 
3.3.were  disobedient,serving  divers  I.  and  jiieaBur. 

Jam.  4.  1.  come  ihey  not  hence,  even  of  your  I  ? 
3.  ye  ask  that  ye  may  consume  it  on  your  I. 

1  Pet.  1.  14.  not  fashioning  according  to  former  I. 
2.  11.  beseech  you  abstain  from  fleshly  I.  that  w»» 
4.  2.  tlmt  he  no  longer  should  live  to  the  I.  of  niea 

3.  when  we  walked  in  lasciviousnuss,  Z.excessof 

2  Pet.  2.  18.  they  allure  through  the  I.  of  the  flesh 
3.3.  shall  come  scofl'ers,  walking  after  their  own  L. 

Jude  16.  murinurers,  complainers,  walking  alter  I. 
18.  who  should  walk  after  their  own  ui;godly  I. 
LUSTY. 
Judg.  3.  29.  they  slew  of  Moab  10,000  men,  ail  I 

LYAR,  or  LIAR. 
Job  24.25.  if  it  be  not  so,  who  will  make  u.e  a  I.? 
Prov.  17.  4.  a  I.  giveth  ear  to  a  naughty  tongue 
19.  22.  and  a  poor  man  is  better  than  a  I. 
30.  6.  lest  he  rejuovc  thee,  and  thou  be  found  a  Z. 
Jer.  15.  18.  wilt  thou  be  altogether  to  me  as  a  I. 
John  8.  44.  for  he  is  a  I.  and  the  father  of  it 

55.  if  I  say,  I  know  him  not,  I  shall  be  a  Z.  like  to 
Rom.  3.  4.  let  God  be  true,  and  every  man  a  I. 
1  John  1. 10.  we  have  not  sinned,  we  make  him  a  Z. 
2.  4.  keepeth  not  his  commandments  is  a  Z.  4.  20. 
22.  who  is  a  Z.  but  he  that  denieth  Jesus  is  Christ 
5. 10.  that  believuth  not  God,  hath  made  him  a  I. 

LIARS. 
Deut.  33.  29.  thine  enemies  shall  be  found  Z.  to  thee 
Psal.  116.  11.  I  said  in  my  haste,  all  men  are  I. 
Isa.  44.  25.  that  frustrateth  the  tokens  of  the  Z. 
Jer.  50.  30.  a  sword  is  upon  the  Z.  they  shall  dote 
1  Tiyn.  1. 10.  law  is  made  for  Z.  for  perjured  persona 
T/t.l.l2.3aid,  the  Cretians  are  always  I.  evil  beasts 
Rev.  2.  2.  hast  tried  them,  and  hast  found  them  I. 
21. 8.  all  Z.  shall  have  their  part  in  lake  that  burns 

LYE,  or  LIE. 
Lev.  6.  2.  if  a  soul  Z.  to  his  neighbour  in  that 
19.  11.  ye  shall  not  steal,  nor  Z.  one  to  another 
JVum.  23.  19.  God  is  not  a  man,  that  he  should  Z. 

1  Sam.  15.  29.  Strength  of  Isr.  will  not  Z.  nor  repent 

2  King.i  4. 16.  my  lord,  do  not  Z.  to  thy  handmaid 
Job  6.  28.  look  on  me,  for  it  is  evident  to  you  if!  I. 

34.  6.  should  I  Z.  against  my  right,  my  wound  im 
Psal.  89.  35.  once  sworn  that  I  will  not  Z.  to  David 
Prov.  14.  5.  a  faithful  witness  will  not  Z.  but  a  false 
/sa.  63. 8.  they  are  my  people,child.  that  will  notZ 
Mic.  2.  11.  if  a  man  walking  in  falsehood  do  Z. 
Hab.  2.  3.  at  the  end  it  shall  speak  and  not  Z. 
Jlcts  5.  3.  why  hath  Satan  filled  thy  heart  to  Z.  ? 
Rom.^.  1.  I  say  truth  in  Chr.  I  Z.  not,  1  Tim.  2.  7. 
2  Cor.  11.  31.  Father  of  our  Lord  knoweth  I  I.  not 
Gal.  1.  20.  which  I  wrote  to  you,  behold  I  I.  not 
CoZ.  3.9.  Z.  not  one  to  anoth.  seeing  ye  have  put  off 
Tit.  1.  2.  God  that  cannot  I.  promi'sed,  Hcb.  6.  la 
.Tarn.  3.  14.  glory  not,  Z.  not  against  the  truth 
1  .John  1.  6.  if  we  say, we  have  fellowship  with  him, 

and  walk  in  darkness,  we  Z.  and  do  not  the  truth 
Rev.  3.  9.  which  say  they  are  Jews,  but  do  I. 

LIED. 
1  Kings  13.  18. 1  am  a  prophet,  but  he  I.  unto  him 
Psal.  78.  36.  they  Z.  unto  him  with  their  tongues 
Isa.  57.  11.  of  whom  been  afraid,  that  thou  hast  ' 
Acts  5. 4.  thou  hast  not  Z.  unto  men,  but  unto  God 

LIETH. 
Lev.  6. 3.  found  lhat  was  lost,  and  Z.  concerning  it 

LIE,  Substantive, 
Siffnifies,  [1]  A  fidsity  or  ■untruth,  Judg.  16.  JO. 

[2]   False  doctrine,   1   John  2.   21.      [3]  An 

image,  or  idolatrous  representation  of  God, 

Rom.  1.  25. 
Psril.  62.  9.  and  men  of  high  degree  are  a  I. 
119. 69.  the  proud  have  forged  a  Z.  against  me 
Isa.  44.  20.  is  there  not  a  I.  in  my  right  hand  ? 
.Icr.  27.  10.  they  prophesy  a  Z.  to  you  to  remove 
you  from  your  land,  14, 15, 16.  1 29.  1 0, 21. 
28.  15.  thou  makest  this  people  lo  trust  in  a  Z. 
20.  31.  and  he  caused  you  to  trust  in  a  Z. 
37. 1 14.  then  saiiUeremiah,  it  is  a  Z. 
Ezek.  21.  20.  whilSthey  divine  a  Z.  10  thee 
Wic.  1. 14.  houses  of  Achzib  shall  be  a  Z.  lo  kings 
y'ich.  10.  2.  for  the  diviners  have  seen  a  Z.  and  told 
./  '1  8.  44.  when  he  spcakcth  a  Z.  he  speaketh  of 
Ror    1.25.  who  changed  the  truth  of  God  into  a  I 
3.7   '  alh  more  abounded  thro'  my  Z.  to  his  glory 
•2Theit    2.11.  delusion,  that  they  should  believe  a/. 
1  .hhn  2.  21.  yo  know  that  no  Z.  is  of  the  truth 

27.  anointing  teach,  you  of  all  things,  and  is  no  /. 
Rev.  21.  27.  neither  whatsoever  maketh  a  I. 
22.  15.  without  are  whosoever  lov.  and  mak.  a  I 

LIES. 
.Tndff.  16.  10.  behold,  thou  hast  told  me  Z.  13. 
Job  i  1. 3.  should  thy  Z.  make  men  hold  their  peacet 
13.  4.  ye  are  forgers  of  Z.  physicians  of  no  value 
Psal.  40.  4.  respecleth  not  such  as  turn  aside  to  U 
58.  3.  wicked  are  estrang.  and  go  astray,  speak  /. 
62.  4.  they  delight  in  Z.  they  curse  inwardly 
63. 11.  the  mouth  that  speaketh  Z.  shall  be  stopped       # 


LYI 

Pt.  101.7.  that  tcllelh  i.  shall  not  tarry  in  my  sight 
Vrov.  6.19.  L.  hutes  a  false  witness  tiiat  sjieaketh  /. 
14.  5.  but  a  false  witness  will  utter  /. 
'Jj.  but  a  deceitful  witness  speaketh  I. 

19.  5.  and  he  that  speaketh  I.  shall  nut  escape 
9.  and  he  that  speaketh  t.  shall  perish 

29.  1-2.  if  a  ruler  hearken  to  I.  his  servants  wicked 
'M.  8  remove  far  froii*  me  vanity  and  I. 
Isa.  9. 15.  the  prophet  that  teaeheth^  hcistho  (nil 

16.  ().  the  pride  of  Moah,  but  his  I.  shall  not  be  su 

28.  15.  for  we  have  made  /.  our  refuge 

17.  the  hail  shall  sweep  away  (he  refuge  of  I. 
59.3.  your  lips  have  spoken  I.  your  tonijuc  hath 

4.  they  trust  in  vanity,  and  speak  I. 

Jcr.^.'i.  they  bend  llieir  tongues  like  their  bow  forZ. 

5.  they  have  taught  their  tongi»'  to  speak  I. 
14.  14.  the  projihets  prophesy  I.  Si.  25,  2G. 
10.  19.  surely  our  fathers  have  inherited  I. 

20.  6.  to  whom  thou  hast  prophesied  I.  vanity 
2.'i.  14.  they  commit  adultery,  and  walk  in  I. 

32.  cause  my  peo.  to  err  by  their  I.  and  lightness 
48.  30.  shall  not  be  so,  his  I.  shall  not  so  etl'ect  it 
Eiek.  13.  8.  ye  have  spoken  vanity  and  seen  I. 
9.  mine  hand  be  upon  the  prophets  that  divine  I. 
19.  hy  your  lying  to  my  people  that  hear  your  I. 
22.  with  I.  ye  have  made  the  righteous  sad 
22.28.  divining  I.  unto  them,  saylirg,  thus  saith  L. 
24.  12.  she  hath  wearied  herself  with  I. 
Dan.  11.  27.  they  shall  speak  I.  at  one  table 
Mus.  7.  3.  they  make  the  princes  glad  with  their  I. 
13.  tho'  redeemed,  yet  they  have  spoken  I.  ag.  me 
10.  13.  ye  have  eaten  the  fruit  of  I.  because  thou 
11. 12.  Ephraimcompasseth  me  about  with  I.  and 
the  house  bf  Israel  with  deceit,but  Jndah  faithful 
12.  1.  he  daily  increaspih  I.  and  desolation 
Amos  2.  4.  and  their  I.  caused  them  to  err 
Mic.  0.  12.  the  inhabitants  thereof  have  spoken  I. 
J^ah.  3.  1.  woe  to  the  bloody  city,  it  is  full  of  Z. 
Hab.  2.  18.  the  molten  image,  and  a  teacher  of  Z. 
y.eph.  3.  13.  the  remnant  of  Israel  shall  not  speak  I. 
Z,Kcli.  13.  3.  lliou  spcukesl  I.  in  the  name  of  the  Ld. 
1  Tim.  4. 2.  speak  Z.in  hviiocrisy, having  conscience 

LYliNG. 
Pj. 31. 6. 1  have  hated  them  that  regard  I.  vanities, 
but  I  trust  in  the  licircj 
IS.let  the  Mips  be  put  to  silence,  that  speak  things 
52.  3.  thou  lovesl  I,  rather  than  righteousness 
59.  12.  and  for  cursing  and  I.  which  they  speak 
109.  2.  they  have  spoken  against  me  with  I.  tongue 

119.  29.  remove  from  me  the  way  of/,  and  grant 
163.  I  hate  and  abhor  I.  hut  thy  law  do  I  love 

120.  2.  deliver  my  soul,  O  Lord,  from  l.  lips 
ProH.O.n.the  Lord  hateth  a  proud  look,  a  Z. tongue 

10.  18.  he  that  hidelh  haired  with  I.  lips  is  a  fool 
12. 19.  but  a  I.  tongue  is  but  for  a  moment 

22.  I.  lips  are  abomination  to  tho  Lord 

13.5.  a  righteous  man  hateth  I.  but  a  wicked  man 
is  loathsome,  and  Cometh  to  shame 

17.  7.  much  less  do  I.  lips  become  a  prince  j 

21.  6.  getting  of  treasures  by  a  I.  tongue  is  vanity 
26.  2^.  a  I.  tongue  hateth  those  alliieled  hy  it       ' 

/sa.  30.9.  that  this  is  a  rebellious  people,/,  children 
32.  7.  he  deviscth  wicked  devices  with  I.  words 
.59. 13.  in  transgressing  and  /.  against  the  Lord 

Jcr.7.4.trust  yc  not  in /.words,  saying,  temple  of  L. 
8.  behold,  ye  trust  in  /.  words  that  cannot  profit 

29.  23.  beoauso  have  spoken  /.  words  in  my  name 
Eiek.  13.  6.  they  have  seen  vanity  and  /.  divina- 
tion, saying,  the  Lord  saith 

7.  have  ye  not  spoken  a  Z.  divination  ? 

19.  by  your  I.  to  my  people  that  hear  your  lies 
T)an.  2.9.  ye  have  prepared  /.words  to  speak  before 
y/ui.  4.2. by  swearing,  Z.  and  killing,  they  break  out 
Juiinh  i.  8.  they  that  observe  I.  vanities  forsake 
Kph-  4.  25.  pulling  away  /.  speak  every  man  truth 
S  Tkcas.  2.  9.  whose  coming  is  with  /.  wonders 

LYING  spirit. 
1  Kings  22. 22. 1  will  bo  a  Z.  spirit  in  tho  month  of 
all  his  prophets,  2  Ckron.  18.  21. 

23.  Ld.  hath  put  a  /.  s.  in  prophets,  2  Clir.  18. 22. 

LYING. 

f7en.34.7.wroiiglit  folly  in  Z.  wilfc  .Tarob'a  daughter 

JVum  31. 17. kill  woman  that  hath  known  man  by  Z. 

13.  ail  that  have  not  known  man  by  /.  with  him, 

keep  alive  fur  yourselves,  .Judfr.  21.  12. 

31.  35.  womi-n  had  not  known  man  by  Z.  with  him 

Deul.  22.  22.  if  a  man  ho  found  Z.  with  a  woman 

Judg.  21.  t  ll.dcstrov  that  knoweth  Z.  with  man 

LYING. 
(7rn.  29.2.  there  were  three!  dorks  of  sheep/,  hy  it 
F.Tod.  23.  5.  tho  nss  of  him  llitit  liatelh  thee,  Z. 
T)e.ul.  21.  1.  ifono  he  found  sluin,  Z.  in  the  ficM 
Psal.  139.  3.  thou  compn«KeBl  my  palh  and  Z.  down 
hn.  .56.  10.  sleeping,  /.  down,  loving  to  Blumher 
Mat.  9.2.  brought  a  man  sirk  of  Iho  paNy,  Z.  on  bed 
JV/arA5. 40.  hecnterelhin  where  Iho  damncl  was  Z. 
J.uke'i.  12.  ye  shall  find  the  babe/,  in  a  manger,  16. 
John  13.  2.5.  ho  then  /.  on  .lesns'  breast,  »ailh 
20.  5.  he  saw  the  linen  clothes  Z.  vol  went  not  in 
^  7  and  tho  napkin  not  Z.  with  the  linen  clolheg 

*  300 


MAD 

LYING  in  wait. 
Josh.S.\  13.  there  Z.  in  wait  on  westsideof  the  city 
Judg.  9.  35.  and  Abimelech  rose  up  from  I.  in  trail 

10.  9.  now  there  were  men  l.in  wait  in  the  clianib. 
/^n?rt.3.10.  he  was  to  me  as  ati.(ir  Z.  in  wait.,  as  lion 
Mcts  20.  19.  which  befel  ine  by  the  /.  in  w.  of  Jews 

23.  16.  when  Paul's  kinsmen  heard  of  Iheir  Z.  in  w. 


M. 


Signifies,  [1]  One  distracted,  nr  deprived  of  rea- 
son, Acts  26.  24.  1  Cor.  14.  23.  [2J  One  dis- 
sembling utadncss,  and  bihaiing  bun  self  fool- 
ishly, I  Sam.  21.  13.  [3]  Unc  furious  with 
raging  zeal  in  persecuting,  Acts  20.  11.  [4] 
One  whose  mind  is  so  troubled  and  perplexed, 
that  he  knoics  not  what  to  do,  but  acts  irrcgii- 
larlij  and  ezlraoagnnthj,  Deut.  28.  34.  Ercl.  7. 

7.  Jcr.  25.  16.  [5]  One  who  is  infatuated,  or 
impetuous  and  violent  in  his  desires  after 
idols  and  vanity,  Jer.  50.  38.  [GJ  Foolish,  de- 
ceitful, and  lying,  Hos.  9.  7. 

Veut.2S.  34.  shall  be  m.  for  the  sight  of  thine  eyes 

1  Sain.  21.  IX  and  David  feigned  himself  m. 
H.Achishsaid  to  his  servants,  you  sec  man  is  m. 

2  Kings  9.  11.  whcrcf.  came  this  m.  fellow  to  thee? 
I'sal.  ]02.  8.  they  that  are  m.  against  nie  are  sworn 
Ecel.  2.  2. 1  said  of  laughter  it  is  m.  of  mirth,  what 

7.  7.  surely  oppression  maketh  a  wise  man  in. 
Isa.  44.  25.  and  that  makelh  diviners  m. 

59.tl.5.lie  ihatdeparteth  from  evil  is  accounted  ot. 
.Ter.  2.5.  16.  they  shall  drink,  be  moved,  and  be  m. 
29.  26.  for  every  man  ihdK  is  m.  put  him  in  prison 

50.  '38.  and  they  are  m.  upon  their  idols 

51.  7.  of  her  wine,  therefoie  the  nations  arc  m. 
Hos. '.).7.l][C  proTih.  is  a  fool,  IhcBpiriUial  man  \sm. 
.lohn  10. 20.  hath  devil  and  is  m.  why  hear  ye  him? 
Jlcls  12.  15.  and  they  said  to  Rhoda,  thou  art  m. 

26.  11.  and  being  exceedingly  m.  against  Iheni 
\i.  Paul,  much  learning  doth  make  thee  ra. 
25.  but  he  said,  I  am  not  m.  most  noble  Festus 
1  Cor.  14.  23.  will  they  not  say  that  yo  are  m.  ? 

MADE. 
F.zod.  2.14.  who  m.  thee  prince  over  us?  Acts  7. 27. 
4.  1 1.  L.  said  to  him,  who  lialh  m.  man's  mouth  ? 
9.20.  m.  his  servants  and  cattle  flee  into  the  houses 

32.  4.  after  ho  had  m.  it  a  molten  calf,  Aey  said 
25.  Aaron  had  m.  them  naked  to  Iheir  shame 
31.  and  have  m.  them  gods  of  gold,  ffos.  8.  4. 

39.  42.  so  the  children  of  Israel  m.  all  the  work 
A*H/n. 20. 5. why  have  ye  m.  us  to  come  from  Egyi>t? 
Deut.O.^l.l  took  yoursin  and  calfwhich  he  had  m. 
.Zo.fA.S.la.Joslma  and  Isr.  m.  as  if  they  were  beaten 

9.  4.  went  and  m.  as  if  they  had  been  ambassadors 

14.  8.  they  m.  the  heart  of  the  people  melt 
22.23.  the  pattern  of  the  altar  which  our  fathers  m. 

Judg.  16. 19.  she  m.  Samson  sleep  upon  her  knees 
25.  Samson  m.  the  Philistines  sport,  27. 
18.  24.  ye  have  taken  away  the  gods  which  I  m. 

1  .Sam.  3. 13.  his  sons  m.  themselv.  vile,  restrain,  not 

8.  1.  that  Samuel  m.  his  sons  judges  over  Israel 
12.  1.  behold,  I  have  to.  a  king  over  you 

15. 17.  wast  thou  not  m.  the  head  of  Israel  ? 
311.  as  thy  sword  hath  m.  women  childless 
27.l0.Achi.sh  said, whither  have  ye  rn.  road  to-day 

2  .SVim.  13  6.  Airinon  lay  down  and  m.  himself  sick 

1  Kings  12.  ,32.  sacrificing  to  calves' that  he  had  m. 

15.  12.  he  removed  all  idols  which  his  fathers  m. 
13.  she  had  m.  an  idol  in  a  grove,  2  Chr.  15. 10. 

20.34.  slialt  make  streets  as  my  father  m.  in  Sama. 

2  Kinns  11.  12.  they  m.  him  king  and  anointed  him 
in.  II.  ns  Ahaz  sent,  so  Urijah  the  priest  m.  it 

1  Chr.  26.  10.  yet  his  father  ni.  him  the  chief 

2  f:hr.  25.  16.  art  thou  m.  of  the  king's  counsel? 
28.  lO.for  Ahab  m.  Judnh  naked  and  transgressed 

33.  7.  sot  the  idol  he  had  m.  in  the  house  of  God 

34.  .33.  .losiah  m.  all  present  to  .s^rve  tho  Lord 
F.ira  5.  14.  Shesh-bazzar  whom  he  m.  governor 
J\"eh.  4.  9.  we  m.  our  prayer  unto  our  God 
Fsth.  2.  17.  Ahasuerusm.  her  queen  inst.  ofVashti 

9. 17.  Ihoy  m.  it  day  of  feasting  and  gladness,  18. 
.Tub  15.  7.  or  wast  thou  m.  before  the  hills? 
Psat.  7.  15.  he  m.  a  pit,  and  is  fallen  into  pit  ho  m. 

9.  15.  the  heathen  are  sunk  into  the  pit  they  m. 
.52. 7.  this  is  the  man  that  m.  not  God  his  strength 

Feel.  2.  4.  I  m.  mo  great  works,  I  buildcd  houses 
5. 1  »n.  tho  gardens  ||  6.  I  m.  the  pools  of  water 

Cant.  1.  0.  they  m.  me  keeper  of  Iho  vineyards 
3.  10.  he  m.  Ihe  pillars  of  silver,  bottom  of  gold 
6,  12.  my  soul  m.  me  like  chariots  of  Amminadib 

fsa.  2.  8.  that  which  their  own  fingers  have  m. 
14.  16.  is  this  the  man  that  m.  c.irth  to  tremble? 
2".  1.5.  for  wu  have  m.  lies  our  refuge,  and  falseh. 
29.16.Hhall  worksayofhim  Ihalm.  it, he  m. me  not 
31.7.  which  your  hands  have  m.  unto  you  for  a  sin 

40.  tl4.  and  who  m.  him  understand? 

59.  t  2.  your  sins  have  m.  him  hide  his  face 

8.  they  have  m.  them  crooked  path* 


MAD 

Jer.  10. 11.  the  gods  that  have  not  m.  tlic  hetivoM 
12.  10.  have  m.  my  pleasant  portion  a  wilderncM 
18. 4.  the  vessel  that  he  m.  was  marred  in  Ihe  hanu 
of  tJie  potter,  so  he  m.  it  again  another  vessel 
37.  1.5.  for  they  had  7n.  that  the  prison 
4I.9.which  Asa  the  king  had  7m.  for  fear  of  Baasha 
51.  34.  Nebuchadnezzar  m.  me  an  empty  vessel 

Ezek.  13.  22.  ye  vi.  the  heart  of  the  righteous  sad 
17.  16.  where  the  king  dwelleth  that /n.  him  king 

20.  28.  there  also  they  m.  Iheir  sweet  savour 

21. 24.  ye  have  7n.  your  iniquity  to  be  remembered 
31.4.  waters  7n.  him  grcat,deepset  him  upon  high 
/Jan.  5. 11.  thy  father  m.  master  of  the  magician* 

9.  13.  yet  m.  we  not  our  prayer  before  the  Lord 
No.-:  2.  t  8.  silver  wherewith  ihey  m.  Uaal 

7.  5.  the  princes  have  m.  him  sick  with  wino 

8.  6.  the  workman  m.  it,  therefore  it  is  not  God 
Amos  5.  26.  the  god  which  ye  m.  lo  yourselves 
Zech.  7.  t  11.  but  they  7n.  their  cars  heavy 

12.  yea,  they  m.  their  hearts  as  an  adamant 
jMat.  9. 22.  daughter,  Ihv  failh  hath  m.  thee  whole, 

Mark  5.  34.  |  10.  52.  /.uke  8.  48.  |  17.  19. 

15.  6.  hiive  m.  commandment  of  G.  of  none  clfeet 
21. 13.  called  the  house  of  i)rayer,  but  ve  have  j;i.  il 

a  den  of  thieves,  Mark'll.  17.  ZuAe  19.  40. 

25.  16.  traded  and  7/1.  them  other  five  talents 
/-like  12.  14.  man,  who  ?«.  me  a  judge  over  you  ? 
Acts  3.  16.  and  his  name  hath  m.  this  man  strong 

8.  3.  as  for  Saul,  he  j«.  havock  of  the  church 
23.13. more  than  forty  who  had  m.  this  conspiracy 
27.  40.  Iliey  hoised  sail,  and  7)1.  toward  shore 
Horn.  8.  2.  hath  m.  free  from  law  of  sin  and  death 
1  Tim.  1.  19.  concerning  faith  have??!,  shipwreck 
ffeb.  7.  19.  for  the  law  m.  nothing  perfect 
1  .hhn  5.  10.  he  that  believetlinot,hath  rn.G.aliar 
Rer.  7.  14.  m.  tliem  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb 
14.  8.  she  in.  ali  nations  drink  of  the  wine 
Sec  CovENA.ST,  End,  Fire. 
MADE,  meant  of  God,  Lord,  Christ. 
Gen.  1.  7.  God  m.  the  firmament  and  divided 

16.  m.  two  great  lights,  he  m.  stars,  Ps.  136.  5,  7. 
25.  God  771.  the  beast  of  the  earth  aUcr  his  kind 

31.  God  saw  every  thing  that  he  had  m.  was  good 
2.  2.  God  re.^ted  from  all  his  work  he  had  m. 

4.  God  m.  the  earth  and  heavens,  Exod.  20.  11. 
I  31. 17.  Psal.  140.  6.  Isa.  45.  18.  .fer.  10.  12. 
9.  m.  to  grow  every  tree  ||  22.  m.  he  a  womau 

5.  1.  in  the  likeness  of  God  w.  he  him,  9.  6. 

6.  6.  it  repented  the  Lord  he  had  7;t.  man,  7. 
8.  1.  God  m.  a  wind  to  pass  over  the  earth 

21.  0.  and  Sarah  said,  God  hath  m.  ine  to  laugh 
24.  21.  the  Lord  hath  77;.  his  journey  prosperoiie 
21).  22.  now  tho  Lord  hath  m.  room  for  us 

39.  3.  the  Lord  m.  all  Joseph  did  to  prosper,  23. 
41.  51.  God  hath  m.  me  to  forget  all  my  toil 

45.  8.  God  hath  m.  me  a  fallier  to  Pharaoh 
9.  God  halh  m.  me  Lord  of  all  Egypt 

F.xod.  1.  21.  tliemidwives  feared  God,  he  tti. houses 

14.  21.  and  the  Lord  jti.  the  sea  dry  land 
//fi'.  23.  43.  1 771.  Israel  to  dwell  in  booths 

26.1.3.1  amL.  your  G.  and  I  have  m.  you  go  uprig 
JVa/n.  32. 13.  he  m.  them  wander  in  the  wilderness 
Deut.  2.  30.  for  the  Lord  m.  his  heart  obstinate 

4.  36.  out  of  heaven  he  n:.  thee  to  hear  his  voice    A 

10.  22.  the  Lord  hath  m.  Ihee  as  the  stars  ' 

1 1.4.  how  hern,  the  waiter  of  the  Reil-sea  looverfl. 

26.  19.  thee  above  all  nations  which  he  halh  m, 

32.  6.  halh  he  not  771.  thee,  and  established  thee 

13.  he  771.  him  ride,  771.  him  suck  honey  out  of  rork 
15.  then  he  forsook  God  which  m.  him,  and  rock 

.Tosh.  22.25.  the  Lord  m.  Jordan  border  between  us 
Judg.  5. 13.  he  171.  him  have  dominion  over  mighty 
21.  15.  the  Lord  had  771.  a  breach  in  the  tribes 

1  .Sa77i.  12.  8.  and  m.  them  dwell  in  this  place 

15.  35.  the  Ld.  repented  that  he  had  m.  Saul  king 

2  fiam.  6. 8.  because  the  Lord  had  m.  a  breach  upon 
22. 12.  he  771.  darkness  pavilions  round  about  him 

36.  thy  gentleness  bath  »ii.  me  great,  Psal.  18.35. 

1  Kings  2.  24.  who  halh  Tn.me  a  house  as  promised 

10.9.  iho  Lord  loved  Israel,  therefore  he  77i.  thea 

king,  14.  7.  I  16.  2.  2CAr.  1.  II. 

1  Clir.  16. 26.  but  the  Lord  m.  the  heavens,  ^reh.  9. 

6.  Ps.  .33.  6.  I  96.  5.  I  121.  2.  ]  124.  8.  |  134.  3. 

2  Chron.  20.  27.  the  Lord  had  m.  them  to  rejoice 
26.  5.  be  sought  the  Lord,  Goil  m.  him  lo  pros|)er 

Ezra  6.  22.  Lord  had  771.  them  joyful,  JJ-.h.  12.43. 

.Toh  10. 8.  thy  hands  have  m.  mo  and  fashioned  mn 

16. 7.  he  halh  771.  ine  weary,  thou  hast  m.  desolate 

17.  6.  ho  halh  m.  me  o  by-word  of  Ihe  people 
28.26.  when  he  771.  n  decree  for  the  rain,  and  a  way 
31.  15.  did  not  ho  thai  tji.  mo  in  the  womb  mako 

33.  4.  the  Spirit  of  God  m.  me,  and  gave  me  life 
40.19.he  that  771. him  can  make  his  sword  approach 

Psnl.  30. 1.  hast  not  771.  my  foes  lo  rejoice  over  me 

46.  8.  what  desolations  he  halh  771.  in  Ihe  enrlh 

95. 5.  the  sea  is  his  and  he  m.  il  ||  100.  ,3.  ho  771.  us 
105.  28.  ho  sent  darkness,  and  w.  il  dark 

1  IS.  24. this  is  the  day  the  Ld.  hath  771.  will  rejoice 
119.  73.  thy  hands  have  771.  me  and  fashioneil  me 
136. 5.  that  by  wisdom  m.  the  licavcns,.^c(«  14. 15 


MAD 

P*.  136.14.  and  m.  Isr.  pass  tlirough  thu  miii«t  of  il 
148.  6.  lie  liath  m.  a  dvcruu  wliicii  sliull  nut  |>us:i 
1!'J.  '2.  let  Israel  rejoice  in  him  tliat  7/1.  iiim 
Prvv    in.  4.  llie  l/ord  m.  all  tliiiiga  lor  himself 
'JO.  12.  the  Lord  liath  m.  even  both  oflhoin 
i'.ccl.  3.11.  he  hath  m.  uvery  thing  hcantit'ul  in  tiinfc 
7. '.i9.  I  I'ound  lliat  God  huth'm.  man  upright 
/.)0.  27.  11.  he  that  m.  them  will  not  have  mercy 
;iU  33.  he  hath  m.  'roi)het  deep  and  large 
44  2.  thus  saith  the  Lord  that  m.  and  formed  thee 
53.  12.  he  III.  interce.s8ion  for  the  transgressors 
t)l).  2.  all  these  things  liath  mine  hand  m. 
Jcr.  6.  8.  lo,  certainly  in  vain  m.  he  it 
29. 23.  the  Lord  m.  thee  i)riest  instead  of  Jehoiada 
3-2.  20.  who  hast  m.  thee  a  name  as  at  this  day 
•iii.  1(>.  as  the  Lord  liveth,  that  »i.  us  this  soul 
Lam.  1.13.  he  hath  m.  ine  desolate  and  faint,  3.  11. 

It.  the  Lord  hath  »i.  m^  strength  to  fall 
3  4.  my  Hesh  and  my  skin  hath  he  m.  old 
7. hath  III.  my  chain  heavy  ||'.)./«. my  paths  crooked 
15.  he  hath  m.  me  drunken  with  wormwood 
F.zc/i.  31.  16.  I  m.  nations  to  shake  at  the  sound 
Jonah  1.9. 1  fear  God  who  hath  7(1. sea  and  dry  land 
Zcph.  .3.  6.  I  m.  their  streets  waste,  none  passetli 
Jl/ut.l9.4.lie  m.  them  male  and  female,  Jlur/i  10.6. 
I, like  11.40.did  not  he  that  7rt.that  which  is  without 
J'lhn  1.  3.  without  him  was  not  any  thing  m. 

4.  1.  Jesus  m.  more  disoiples||46.  he  7h. water  wine 

5.  11.  he  that  m.  me  whole  said,  take  U]>  thy  bed 
9.  6.  he  spat  antf  7/1.  clay  of  tlio  s;iitile,  11.  14. 

19.  7.  because  he  m.  himself  the  Son  of  God 
itfc.'-i  2. 36.  know  that  God  hath  7/1.  that  same  .Tcsus 

15.  7.  ye  know  that  God  771.  choice  among  us 
17. 34.  G.  that  771.  the  world  and  all  things  therein 
iC).  hath  m.  of  one  blood  all  nations  of  men 

20.  26.  the  Holy  Ghost  hath  777.  you  overseers 

1  Cor.  1.  20.  771.  foolish  the  wisdom  of  this  world 

2  Cnr.3.6.hath  7h.us  able  ministers  of  NewTeslam. 
5.21.  hath  m.  him  to  be  sin  for  us  who  knew  no  sin 

(fal.  5. 1.  liberty  wherewith  Christ  haih  771.  ud  free 
Kph.  1.  6.  he  hath  771.  us  accepted  in  the  Beloved 

2.G.  God  hath  ni.us  sit  together  in  heavenly  places 

14.  he  is  our  peace  who  haih  m.  both  one 
Philem.  2.  7.  but  771.  himself  of  no  rni)utalion 
Col.  1.  li.  who  hath  771.  us  meet  to  be  partakers 

2.  15.  he  777.  a  shew  of  them  openly,  trmmphing 
I{r:h.  1.  2.  hy  whom  also  he  »7i.  the  worlds 

fi.  13.  for  when  God  771.  promise  to  Abraham 
Rev.  1. 6.  and  hath  771.  us  kings  and  priests  to  God 

14.7.  and  worship  him  that  771.  heaven  and  earth 

I  have,  or  have  I  M.\DE. 

Ocn.  7.  4.  destroy  every  living  substance  I  have  m. 

14.  23.  Inst  thou  say,  I hai;e  m.  Abram  rich 

]7.5.a  father  of  nations  Ani'n  Im.  thee,  /fom.4.17. 

27.  37.  Isaac  said,  behold,  I  have  m.  him  thy  lord 
Kzod.  7. 1.  sec  1  have  m.  thee  a  goJ  to  Pharaoh 
2  i'am.7.9.  I  have  771. thee  a  great  name,  1  CAr.l7.S. 
1  Kings  8.59.  wherewith  /  have  m.  supplication 
1  CAr.  20.  19.  for  the  wliich  f  have  in.  provision 
F.zra  6.  11.  /  Darius  have  m.  a  decree,  12. 
Job  17.  13.  /  have  m.  my  bed  in  the  darkiless 

31.  24.  if  I  have  m.  gold  my  hope,  or  have  said 

39.  6.  whose  house  f  have  m.  the  wilderness 
Pifnl.  45. 1.  I  will  speak  of  things  which  I  have  in. 
^        Prov.  20.9.who  can  say,  I  have  m.  my  heart  clean'? 
/-(I.  IG.  10.  I  have  m.  their  shouting  to  ccx^e 

21.  2.  the  sighing  thereof  Aotjc  /771.  to  cease 
43.7. 1  have  formed  him,  yea,  Ihavrnn.  him,  46.4. 
45. 12.  I  h.  m.  the  earth,  and  creat.  man,  .ler.  27.5. 
57. 16.  and  the  souls  which  /  have  m.  should  fail 

Jer.  1.  18.  bphold  f  have  m.  thee  a  defended  city 
4').  10.  but  I  have  m.  Esau  bare,  and  uncovered 

Ezek.  3.  8.  behold,  I  have  n.  thy  face  strong,  9. 
17. 1  have  m.  thee  a  watchman  to  house  of  Israel 
13.22.  ye  made  heart  sad,  whom  I h'lve  not  n.aai 
17.  24.  and  I  have  m.  the  dry  tree  to  flourish 

22.  4.  therefore  have  I  in.  thee  a  reproach 

29.  3.  my  river  is  mine,  /  have  ni.  it  for  myself,  9. 

3L9.  Ih.  771.  him  fairbynlultitudeofhis  branches 
Dan.  3.  15.  worship  the  image  which  I  hnv  m. 
Jl7niis  4.10.  Thave  Tn.the  stink  of  camps  to  come  up 
Obad.  2.  I  have  m.  thee  small  among  the  heathen 
Mai.  2.  9.  therefore  have  Im.  you  contemptible 
John  7. 23.  because  /A.  tti.  a  man  every  whit  whole 
1  Gjr.  9.  19.  yet  have  Im.  mvsolf  servant  to  all 
Thou  hast  MADE. 
»  /;zod.l.5.17.  plant  them  in  the  place  which  tA.  A.m. 

i>9.  :i6.  when  thou  hant  m.  an  atonement  for  it 
./o'A.2.17.  this  oath  which  thnu  A.  m.  us  swear,  20. 
IB^ingsXl.  (.A.  TTi.thysr^rvant  king  instead  offiav. 

9.  3. 1  have  hoard  thy  supplication  that  thou  A.  777. 

8  fTm^.?  19.15.  O  Lord  God  of  Israel,  (Ani;  ha.il  771. 

heaven  and  earth,  I.ta.  37.  16.  .Icr.  32.  17. 

I  Chr.  22.8.  word  came,  saying  th.h.m.  great  wans 

Job  1. 10.  t.  A.  m.  a  hedge  about  him  and  his  house 

10. 9.  remember  that  thou  hast  m.  me  as  the  clay 

16.  7.  thou  hast  m.  desolate  all  my  company 
Psa/.  8.5.  thouhnst  m.  him  little  lower  than  angels 

13.  43.  thou  hast  m.  me  the  head  of  the  heathen 

SI.  6.  thou  hast  m.  him  most  bleuod  for  ever 
861 


MAD 

Psal.  30.7.  thou  hast  m.  my  mountain  stand  strong 

30.5.l>eliold,  t/iuu  k.  m.  my  days  its  a  hand  breadlii 

tiO.2.  t.h.  nt.  the  earth  to  troiiiOle,thou  hast  broken 

3.  thoahast  in.un  drink  the  wuiool  astoiiishiiient 

74.17.  thuu  hastM.  suoiiner  and  winter 

86.H.  all  nations  \"ioiii  thvii  hast  m.  shall  worship 

>ic!.  y.  thuu  hast  ni.  me  an  abomination  to  them 

89.  42.  thou  hast  nt.  all  his  enemies  to  rejoice 

44.  t.  h.  in.  his  glory  to  cease,  and  cast  Ins  throne 

47.  wherefore  hast  thnu  m.  all  men  in  vain  ^ 

91.y.becau.se  Ikou.  hast  771. the  Lord  thy  habitation 

92.  4.  thou  Ld.  hast  m.  me  glad  through  thy  work 

104.24. thy  works,  111  wisdom  hast  thuu  ;7i.tiieiiia!l 

26.Leviuthan,wliom  thoahast  m.lii  play  therein 

119.  9rt.  thouhnst  m.  me  wiser  than  niiiiueiii'inies 

Jsa.  25.  2.  for  thou  hast  m.  ol  a  city  a  heap,  a  ruin 

43.  24.  but  thou  hast  771.  me  to  serve  wiili  my  sins 

63. 17.  Ld.  wliy  (A.  h.  ni.  us  to  err  from  thy  ways  .' 

./er.  2.28.  but  w liete  are  thy  gods  that  t.  A.  7«.  tliue  / 

14.22.  we  wait  on  thee,  lor  l.h.  m.  all  tliese  lliuigs 

Lam.  3.45.  I.  h.  m.  us  as  the  offscourmg  and  refui»e 

E.vk.Vi.^.  nor  hast  t.ni.  up  the  hedge  lor  the  house 

16.  24..tAo«  A.  77J.  thee  a  high  place  in  every  street 

25.  tkou  hast  m.  thy  beauty  to  Wj  abhorred 

22.  4.  hastdetiled  in  tliy  idols  wliicli  thuu  hast  771. 

13.  at  thy  dishonest  gam  which  t.  A.  771.  and  blood 

.Wut.20.12.butoiie  hour,andr.A./H.tlieniei)ual  lo  us 

Hum.  y.  20.  thing  formed  say,  why  A.  t.  ut.  me  thus 

Rev.  5.  10.  tk.  k.  01.  us  to  our  (iod  kings  and  priests 

MADE  haste. 
Oc7i.24.4i).  Kebekah  /;i.A.  and  letdown  her  pitcher 
43.  30.  Joseph  7;(.  A.  ||  Kj:uU.  34. 8.  Moses  771.  haste 
./udg.  13.  10.  Manoah's  wife  771.  haste  and  ran 

1  ^ain.  23.26.  David  in.  h.\\  25. 18.  Abigail  m.  haste 

2  Sam.  4.4.  as  Mephibosheth's  nurse  m.hasti:  lo  tlee 
Pi(i/. 119.60. 1  m. haste,  and  delayed  not  lo  keep  thy 
Lulie  19.  6.  Zaccheus  771.  hastf,  and  came  down 

See  IsKAEL,  Sin,  Known. 

M.-VDE  manifest. 

/,!<Af8.17.nothing  secret  that  shall  not  be  771. 771(171  (/. 

John  1.31.  but  that  he  should  be  777.  manifest  to  Isr. 

3.  21.  to  the  light,  that  his  deeds  may  be  ni.  manif. 

9.3.  the  works  of  G.  should  be  771.  manifest  in  him 
Rom. SO.  20. 1  was  777.  777.  to  them  that  asked  not 

16.  26.  but  now  is  7/1.  m.  lo  all  nations  for  obed. 

1  Cor.  3.13.  every  man's  work  shall  be  ni. manifest 
11. 19.  that  they  which  are  approved  may  be  7/1. /71 
14.  2.7.  thus  are  the  secrets  of  his  heart  771.  771. 

2  Cor.  4.  10.  life  of  Jesus  should  be  ra.  m.  11. 

11.  6.  we  have  been  thoroughly  m.  771.  among  you 
Eph.  5.  13.  are  approved,  a.-e  7/1.  m.  by  the  light 
Col.  1.  26.  but  now  is  m.  manifest  lo  his  Siiints 
2  VVti;.  ].  10.  now  777.  m.  by  the  ajipearing  of  Christ 
h'e/i.  0.  8.  way  into  th<!  holiest  was  not  yet  777.  7/1. 

1  ./ohn  2.  111.  went  out,  that  they  iniglu  be  in.  in. 
Rev.  15.  4.  lor  thy  judgnien's  are  m.  manifest 

MADE  peace. 

.Josh.  9. 15.  and  Joshua  m. peace  with  thc.-n,  10.1,4. 

11.  J"J.  there  was  not  a  city  that  vi.  p.  with  Israel 

2  Sam.  10.  19.  when  the  servants  of  Hadarezer 

were  smitten,   they  in.  peace  with  Israel, 
1  CAn)7(.  r.l.  10. 
1  Kings  22.  44.  J.-hoshaphat  m.  peace  with  Israel 

M.\l)l':  rf71(/77. 

Cien.  43.  25.  they  m.  r.  the  present  ag.iinst  noon 
4li.  29.  Joseph  ;».  rcdrfy  his  chariot  10  iiieei  Israel 
Krod.H.ij.  Pharaoh  777.  r::a'ly  his  chariot,  and  look 
Jvdg.  6. 19.  and  Gideon  went  in  and  771.  rta-hj  a  kid 
13.  1.5.  Manoali  said,  till  we  have  771.  reiuh/  a  kid 

1  Kings  6.  7.  7/1.  7-.  before  it  w.as  brought  thither 

2  Kings  9.  21.  and  Joraiii's  chariot  was  777.  rrady 

1  Chron.  2'<.  2.  and  had  in.  ready  for  the  building 

2  Chron.  .35.14.  afterward  they  m.  r.  for  themselves 
Psal.  7.  12.  he  hath  bent  his  bow  and  77J.  it  ready 
Hos.  7. 15.  they  have  7(1.  r.  their  heart  like  an  oven 
.Mat.  26.  19.  the  disoijilrs  771.  ready  the  passover, 

Mark  14.  16.  J.uke2<l.  13. 
Jlcts  10. 10.  while  they  m.  r.  Peter  fell  into  a  trance 
2  Cor.  10.  16.  boast  of  things  7/7.  rrady  to  our  hand 
Rev.  19.  7.  and  his  wife  hath  771.  herself  rear/y 

MADE  speed. 
1  Kings  12.18.  Rehoboani  771.  .*.  loget,2CAr.l0.18. 

MADri  void. 
JVhtti.  30.  12.  if  her  husband  hath  utterly  m.  void 
Psal.  8'.}.  39.  thou  linst  771.  v.  covenant  of  tliv  s.-rv. 
1  J9.126.  time  to  work,  for  they  have  777.  v.  ifiy  law 
i?077i.  4. 14.  for  if  they  of  law  be  heirs,  faith  is  m.  v. 

MADE,  passiveUj. 
Ocn.  49.  24.  the  arms  of  his  hamls  were  771.  strong 
Jjcr.  22.  .5.  whereby  he  may  be  771.  unclean 
Kum.  4.  26.  they  shall  bear  all  that  in  m.  for  them 

6.4.  ho  shall  eat  nothing  that  is  771.  of  Ihe  vine-tree 

1  Kings  8. 38.  what  sup|)lication  bejTi.  2  Chr.  6.29. 

2  CAr.  6.  40.  cars  attend  to  prayer  m.  in  this  place 
F.zra  .5. 17.  let  there  be  search  m.  in  kins's  house 

6.  1.  and  search  was  777.  in  the  house  of  the  rolls 

11.  let  his  house  be  771.  a  dunghill  for  this 
Eslh.  5.  14.  let  a  gallows  be  771.  of  fifttV  cubits  high 
Job  7.  3.  I  am  m.  to  possess  months  of  vanity 
41.33.  uot  bis  like  onennh,  who  is  tr. without  fear 
SB 


MAD 

Fial  49.  16.  be  not  afraid  when  one  is  tti.  rich 
ray.  14.  1  :iiii  fearfully  und  wonderfully  771. 

/'roi7.  15.  19.  the  way  of  the  righteous  is  1/7.  plain 
21.  11.  scoriier  is  jiunislied,  the  simple  is  771.  wisa 
28.  25.  that  putleth  tru-l  in  the  L.  stiall  be  771.  Im 

F.ccl.  1.  15.  wliut  is  crooked  Ciinnot  be  vt.  straight 
7.  3.  for  by  sadness  of  count,  the  heart  is  777.  boiler 
10. 19.  a  tijast  Is  m.  lor  laughter,  und  wine  make* 

/i77i.51.12.  the  son  of  man, winch  shall  be  iii.as  grass 
t)6.  IK  shall  earth  be  ni.  to  bring  forili  in  one  day 

Jer.  19.  11.  a  vessel  that  cannot  be  771.  whide  U"am 
20.  H.  the  word  of  the  Lord  was  711.  a  lepioacli 

Dan.  5.  21.  his  heart  was  771.  like  the  bcisis 

Mat.  4.  3.  command  that  these  stones  be  771.  br<7aj 
9.  16.  and  the  rent  is  771.  worse,  Mark  2.  2L 

18.  25.  all  to  be  sold,  and  payment  lo  be  m. 

23.  15.  when  he  is  771.  ye  make  liim  twoioid  more 
25.  6.  and  at  niidiiighl  there  was  a  cry  7/7.  b..hold 
27.  24.  but  that  rather  a  tumult  was  7/1. 
64.  coiiiinaiid  that  the  sepulchre  be  171.  sure 
Mark  2.  27.  lie  said,  the  sabbalh  was  m.  lor  man 
J.uke  14.  12.  lest  a  recomiieiise  be  771.  lliee 

23.  12.  same  day  Pilate  and  Herod  were  m.  frieniis 
./ohn  1.3.  all  tli.ngs  were  777.  by  him,  and  without 

Jiim  was  niK  any  Ihing  771.  that  was  m. 

10.  was  in  the  world,  the  world  was  in.  by  liiiii 

14.  the  Word  was  7/1.  rtesh,  and  dwelt  among  us 

2.  9.  ruler  had  tasted  the  water  that  was  771.  wiiia 

5.  6.  wilt  thou  be  (71.  whole  ?  ||  14.  art  771.  whole 

8^33.  ye  snail  be  771.  free  ||  9.  *).  iiiighi  be  m.  blind 

17.  23.  that  they  may  be  >«.  perfect  in  one 

.lets  4.35.distribulion  was  771.  lo  every  man  as  need 

12. 5.  but  prayer  was  m.  without  ceasing  for  Peter 

13. 32.  promise  which  was  771.  to  oflr  failiers,  26. 6. 

16. 13.  we  went  where  jirayer  was  wont  to  be  7/1. 

19.  26.  they  be  no  gods  which  are  i;i.  with  liiimU 
Rum.  1.  3.  Jesus  who  was  771.  of  the  seed  of  Uavid 

20.  being  understood  by  Ihe  lhing.<  that  are  ni. 

2.  25.  thy  circumcision  is  t7i.  uncircumcisioii 

5.  19.  many  were  771.  sinners,  many  »«.  nglileous 

6.  18.  being  771.  free  from  sin,  ye  became,  22. 

7. 13. was  then  that  wlittli  is  good, '77<.  death  lo  mo? 
9.  t  22.  vessels  of  wrath  ni.  iij)  to  destruction 

29.  We  had  been  777.  like  to  Sodom  and  Goiiiorrha 
10.10. with  the  inoulli  confession  is m.  to  silvitiiou 

11.  9.  let  their  table  be  «i.  a  snare  and  a  trap 
14.21.  nor  any  thing  whereby  thy  broth,  is  i/i.wchk 

1  Cor.  1. 17.  kst  cross  of  (Jhrml  be  7/1.  of  none  eriect 

30.  are  in  Christ,  w  ho  of  God  is  771.  lo  us  wisdom 

4.  9.  fur  we  are  771.  a  spectacle  to  the  \^  orhl  to  ang. 
13.  we  are  m.  as  tilth  of  world  and  ortscoiiriii:{ 

9.  22.  I  am  m.  all  things  to  all  men,  that  !  luigiil 

12.  13.  have  been  all  m.  lo  drink  into  one  Spirit 
15.  22.  even  so  in  Ciirji-t  shall  all  be  »7;.  alive 

45.  it  is  written,  the  first  man  Adam  was 771. a  liv- 
ing soul,  last  .\dain  was  m.  a  <iuickeiiiijg  f  j>ii  it 

2  Cur.  3.  JO.  for  even  that  which  was  ;«.  giorii.us 

5.  1.  a  house  not  m.  with  hands,  eleriitil  in  heiivi  a 

21.  might  be  m.  \hv.  r<giiieou.~ni'SS  of  (iod  in  hiiii 
12.  9.  my  strength  is  771.  jerli'A  in  weakness 

Oiil.  3.  3.  are  ye  now  771.  perfect  by  the  f.cslr! 
13.  (.'hrist  redeemed  us,  being  in.  a  curw;  for  iia 
!♦'..  to  A  brail,  and  his  seed  were  Ihe  promises  in, 
19.  set  d  should  come,  to  whom  promise  was  m. 

4.  4.  sent  his  Son,  7'i.  of  a  woman,  m.  under  law 
/■77A.2.  !1.  the  rircunu'ision  in  the  flesh  in.  by  hands 

j:l,werp  far  of!'  are  //i.iiigh  by  the  blood  of  Christ 

3.  7.  whereof!  was  in.  a  minister,  Go/.  1.  23,  25. 
Phil.  2.  7.  and  v.as  7/1.  in  the  likenijss  of  nie^ 

3.  III.  hi'iiig  III.  conic. rmnhl»  to  his  death 
fuM.20. having  rti. peace  thro'  ihebiooti  of  liisrros* 

2.  II.  With  the  circumcision  /».  wi;hout  hai.ils 
1  Tim.  1.9.  the  law  is  not  in.  for  a  righteous  man 

2.  1.  and  giving  of  thniiks  hi-  in.  for  all  men 
7'i7.3.7.  joslilieil  bv  hisgrace,we  should  he  w.  lieiri 
Neh.  I.  4. 1'eing  »i.  so  much  heller  Ihaii  the  tingeh 

2.  IT.  It  bihoveil  iilm  to  he  777.  hke  to  h's  brelhreci 
.3.  14.  lor  wc!  ai-'  711.  partakers  of  Christ,  if  «e  hold 

5.  5.  Christ  gloriSed  not  bims.  to  he  »'>iiigh  priest 
9.bciiigin.  per 'eel,  he  beraiiicihe  .Aulluir  ofstilv. 

7.  3.  m.like  lo  the  Son  of  God,  ahidelh  a  priest 

12.  there  is  771.  pf  nece>Bity  a  change  of  Ihe  U\r 
16.  7K.  not  al^er  law  of  a  Ciirtial  commaiiilnieii* 

20.  as  not  without  an  oiitli  he  was  in.  priest 

21.  for  those  priests  were  171.  without  an  oath 

22.  Jesus  was  7/1.  a  surety  of  a  bolter  testament 
9.2.  there  was  tiiheriiacle  771. wherein  was  caiidlost. 

11.  a  perf'^ct  tabernacle  not  vi.  with  hands 

24.  not  entered  into  holy  places  m.  with  haniis 
10. 3.  there  is  a  remembrance  771.  of  sins  every  year 

13.  expecting  till  his  enemies  be  m.  his  fooisiool 

33.  partly  whilst  ye  were  711.  a  gazing-stock 

11.  3.  were  not  m.  of  things  which  do  appear 

34.  who  out  of  weakness  were  771.  strong 

40.  that  ihcy  without  us  should  not  be  771.  perfect 

12.  23.  and  to  the  spirits  of  just  men  777.  nerfecl 
.lam.  1.  10.  but  the  rich,  in  that  ho  is  m.  low 

2»22.  and  by  works  was  faith  m.  perfect 

3.  9.  which  are  in.  after  the  similitude  of  God 
1  Pet.  3.  7.  the  soino  is  m.  bead  of  th»  comor 


MAG 

9  Pet.  2. 12.  but  these  m.  to  be  taken  and  destroyed 
Hev.  fe.  11.  waters,  because  they  were  m.  bitter 
J7.  iJ.  been  m.  drunk  witli  wine  of  her  fornication 

MADKST. 
Ptal.S.a.  thou  m.hini  to  have  dominion  over  worki 
S(>  1  j.visit  tiie  branch  tliat  thou  m. atron^  for  thye. 
r.   son  of  man,  whom  tliou  hi.  strong  lor  thyself 
Kzek.  16.  17.  and  m.  to  thyself  images  of  men 
30.  7.  thou  m.  all  their  loins  to  be  at  a  stand 
Jonah  4.  10.  neither  m.  it  grow,  which  came  up 
^cWil.  38.  art  not  ihatEgyiilian  which  wi.  uproar 
Heb.  2.7.  thou  m.  him  u  little  lower  than  tJio  angels 

MAD-JIAN. 
li'am.21.15.  brought  this  fellow  to  play  the  m.-man 
Prov.  20.  Id.  as  a  madman  who  casteth  firebrands 

MAU  MKN. 
1  5am.21.15.  have  I  need  of  mad-men  that  ye  have 
Jer.  4tj.  2.  O  mad-men  the  sword  shall  pursue  you 

MAUNKSS. 
Deut.  28.  28.  the  Lord  shall  smite  thee  with  m. 
'it  Kings  9.  t  20.  like  Jehu,  for  he  driveth  in  m. 
KcclX.VlA  gave  my  heart  to  know  wisdom  and  m. 
2.  12.  I  turned  myself  to  behold  wisdom  and  m. 
7.  2j.  to  know  the  wickedness  of  folly,  and  m. 
9.  3.  m.  is  in  tlieir  heart,  while  they  live 
10. 13.  the  end  of  this  talk  is  mischievous  m. 
Zech.HA.  I  will  smite  every  horse  and  rider  with  m. 
Luke  6.  11.  and  they  were  filled  with  m. 
i  Pet.  2. 16.  dumb  ass  forbade  tlic  ;m.  of  the  prophet 

MAGICIAN. 
Dan.  2.  10.  that  asked  such  things  at  any  m. 

MAGICIANS. 
r-  1    11.  >*   Plinruuh  sent  and  called  for  the  m. 

21.  I  told  thiyto  the  in.  but  none  could  declare 
Exod.7.11,  the  /n.ofK(f)'ptdid  so  in  like  manner 

with  their  eiichantment.s.  2'.JJ  H.  7,  1h. 
P.lQ.lhem.  said  to  Pharaoh.lliis  is  tlie  fingerof 
P.  1 1.  the  7>i.  could  not  stand  before  Moses 
Ztan.l.ao.fouiid  theniicn  times  better  than  all  m 
2.  2.  then  the  king  commanded  to  call  the  wi. 
27.  the  secret  cannot  the  m.  show  to  the  king 
•l.T.lhen  came  in  them. hot  did  not  inakeknown 
9.  O  BcjIeshazZi^r.  mastcrof  the  m.  tell  mo 
5.  U.  whom  ihy  father  made  master  of  the  »n. 

MA(  J I  ST  RAT  10. 
Jufl^.  18.  7.  and  there  was  no  m.  in  the  land 
Luke  12.  58.  when  tlion  Roesi  to  the  m  give 

MAGISTRATES. 
Ezra  7.  '2!i.  set  in.  and  judges,  who  may  judge 
Luke  12. 11.  when  they  bring  you  to  thewi. 
^ic(!  16.20.  they  brought  Paul  and  Silas  to  the  m. 

22.  and  the  m.  cominandi'd  to  beat  them 
;«.  the  m.  sent  the  Serjeants,  saying.  'W. 
38.  the  Serjeants  told  these  words  to  the  m. 

T(< .3.1. put  them  inmindtoobey/n.andbc  ready 

MAGNIFICAL. 
1  CAron.  22.  S.  the  house  must  be  exceeding  »J. 

MAGNIFICKNCE. 
Acts  19. 27.  and  her  m.  sliould  be  destroyed 

MAGNIFY. 
Signifies.  [1]    To  declare  awl  shnio  forth  one's 
greatness  and.  glory.,  Luke  I.  4fi.     [2]  To  in- 
crease  one's  esteem,  reputation,  and  authority, 
.Tosh,  .3.  7.  I  4.  14.    1  Chron.  29.  2.'5. 
JraA.3.7.Lord  said, this  day  will  I  begin  to  »w, thee 
Job  7.17.whatisman  that  thou  shouldstm,him  ? 
19.5, if  indeed  yc  will  m. yourselves  againstme 
30.24,rememher  that  thou  m,  his  work  men 
PsaL^i.XOm.  the  Lord  with  me.  let  us  exalt 
35.21!, clothed  with  shame  that»n,tliemselv,ag. 
.'JH.lO.my  foot  slippcth  they  jn.thcmsclv.ag.ine 
'!}.  12.  that  did  w.  himself  against  me 
60.  .30,  and  will  tn.  him  with  thanksgiving 
/<n, 10.15. or  saw  w. itself  ag.  him  that  shaketh  it 
43.  21 .  hi-  will  m.  Ihc  law  and  make  it  honour. 
Exek.  :t^,23.thus  will  I  m.  myself,  and  sanctify 
Dan.  ft  25,aud  he  shall  m.  himself  in  his  heart 
11. -36.  ihf  kingstiallm.  himself  above  every  g. 
37.  for  he  shall  m,  himself  above  all 
>rc<rA.I2,7,tliatthey  >n  not  themselves  ag.  .Iiidah 
/,u^.1.4'i.l\lary  said,  my  soul  floili  m.  tlie  Lord 
v4'-rs.in,4<'>. heard  him  speak  wi\h  loiig.andw.G, 
Rom.  11,  13. 1  am  an  apostle.  I  ?/?,  mine  office 

MAfiMFIHD. 
Gen.  19,  19,  bi-hold  thou  hast  m.  thy  mercy 
Josh.i.M  the  I/ord  m,. Joshua  in  the  sight  of  Is, 
'2Sam  7.2'i,let  ihy  name  be  >n.    1  Chnm.  17. 24, 
1  rAr.2f),25  and  the  Lord  m.  Sf)lf>mon,  2  r/ir,l.l 
2CAron,  32, 2;i.  llezi'k^ah  was  >n.  in  the  sight  of 
Psal.'.i.').  27.  let  ihein  say.  let  the  Lord  be  m. 
40, 16.  say  continually ,  rlie  I/ord  he  m.  70. 4. 
13>^,2.thoiihast  m,lhy  word  nbovi'  all  ihy  name 
Jer.  4,S.2«>.forhe  in.  hiinsilt'a'.'aliiRi  ihe  Lord, 42 
Ezek.:irt.  t  13.  Dan.H.  II, 
Lam.  1.9, behold, for  Ihe  enemy  Kath  /n  himself 
Z/7)A.2.H  and  w.thcmselvesaganst  their  Imrder 
in  m.  tbeinselves  against  people  of  the  lyord 
Mai.  1 .  5,  Lord  will  be  m,  from  Ihc  border  of 
ArLf  5. 13,  but  the  people  tn.  them 
19. 17, and  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  wag»n 

3oa 


MAJ 

Phil.  1.20.  Christ  be  m.  in  my  body  by  life  or  death 

MAID. 
Gen.  16.  2.  I  pray  thee  go  iiiTinIo  my  m.  Ilagsr 

6.  behold,  Ihy  rn.  is  in  thy  hand,  do  to  her  as  p'tvi 
8.  llagar,  Sarai's  m.  whence  earnest  thou  w 

29.  24.  Laban  gave  Zilpah  his  m.  to  Leah 
29.  Laban  gave  Bilhah,  to  be  Rachel's  m. 

30.  3.  behold  my  m.  Bilhah  go  in  unto  her 

7.  Kacliel's  m.  conceived  {|  9.  gave  Zilpah  her  m. 
10.  Zilpah,  Leah's  m.  bare  Jacob  a  son,  12. 

£xod.2.5.  when  she  saw  Brk,she  sent  her  m.to  fetch 

8.  the  m.  went  and  called  the  child's  mother 

21.  20.  if  a  man  smite  his  m.  with  a  rod 

26.  or  the  eye  of  his  m.  that  it  perish 

22.  16.  if  a  man  entice  a  m.  not  betrothed 
/,er.25.6.  thesabb.  of  land  shall  be  meal  for  thy  m. 
Deut.  22.  M.  I  came  to  her,  I  found  her  not  a  m.  17. 
2  Kings  5.  2.  had  brought  away  captive  a  little  m. 

4.  thus  and  thus  said  the  m.  that  is  of  Israel 
Kslh.  2.  7.  and  the  m.  was  fair  and  beautiful 
.Tub  31.  1.  why  then  should  I  think  on  am.? 
Prov.  30.  19.  and  the  way  of  a  man  with  a  m. 
/«a.  24.2.  it  shall  be  as  with  m.  so  with  her  mistress 
./er.  2.  32.  can  a  m.  f?rget  her  ornaments  ? 

51.  22.  I  will  break  the  young  man  and  the  «n. 
^mo«2.7.ainan  and  his  father  go  in  to  the  samem. 
Mat.  9.  24.  give  place,  for  the  m.  is  not  dead 
2.5.  he  look  her  by  the  hand,  and  the  m.  arose 

26.71. anoth.m-saw  him,  Mark  14.09.  />uAe 22.56. 
Luke  8.  54.  and  he  called,  saying,  m.  arise 

MAIDS. 
Esth.  2. 9.  he  preferred  her  and  her  m.  to  best  place 
Job  19.  15.  my  m.  count  me  for  a  stranger 
Aa;n.  5.  11.  they  ravished  the  to.  in  cities  of  Judah 
Kick.  9.  6.  slay  utterly  both  m.  and  little  children 
J^ah.  2.  7.  her  m.  shall  lead  her  with  voice  of  doves 
Z(,cA.9.17.  in.ke  young  men  cheerful,  new  winem 

MAID-CHILD. 
/,CB.12.5.  if  she  bear  a  m.-child  unclean  two  weeks 

MAIDEN. 
Oen.  30.  18.  I  have  given  my  m.  to  my  husband 
.Judg.  19.  24.  behold,  here  is  my  daughter  a  m. 
S  f'Aroii.  36.17.  no  compassion  on  young  man  or  m 
Kslh.  2.  13.  thus  came  every  m.  to  the  king 
Psal.  I2;<.  2.  as  the  eyes  of  a  m.  to  her  mistress 
Luke  8.  51.  he  suffered  father  and  mother  of  the  m. 

MAIDENS. 
F.iod.  2.  5.  her  m.  walked  along  by  the  river 
Hulh  2.  8.  but  abide  here  fast  by  my  m. 

22.  it  is  good  that  thou  eo  out  with  his  m. 

23.  so  she  kept  fast  by  the  m.  of  Boaz 

I  Sam.  9.  11.  they  found  m.  going  to  draw  water 
F.sth.  4.  16.  I  and  my  m.  will  fast  likewise 
Job  41.  5.  wilt  lliou  bind  him  for  thy  m.  ? 
Psal.  78.63.  their  m.  were  not  given  to  marriage 

148.  12.  young  men  and  mi.  praise  Ihe  Lord 
Prov.  9.  3.  she  hath  sent  forth  her  m.  she  crieth 

27.  27.  and  for  the  inainlenance  for  thy  m. 

31.  15.  and  she  giveth  a  portion  to  her  m. 
Eccl.'i.l.  I  got  me  servants  and  7n.and  had  servants 
Ezck.  44.  22.  they  shall  take  m.  of  seed  of  Israel 
/yukc  12.45.shall  begin  to  beat  men-servants  and  m. 

MAID-SERVANT. 

Exnd.W.rt.  even  to  the  first-born  of  the  m.-serrant 

20.10.thy  rii. -servant  shall  do  no  work, l)eut.!i.l4. 

n.slmll  not  Covet  thy  neighbour's  wife,nor  m.-s. 

21.7.  if  a  man  sell  his  daughter  to  be  a  m.-servant 

27.  if  he  smite  out  his  m.-servant's  tooth, he  shall 
32.  if  an  o.x  push  a  m.-s.  he  shall  give  30  shekels 

Deut.  5. 14.  that  thy  m.-s.  may  rest  as  well  as  thou 
21. neither  shall  thou  desire  thy  neighbour's »«.-«. 

12.  18.  eat  them,  thou  and  thy  m  -.?.  16.  11,  14. 

1.5.  17.  to  thy  m.-scrvant  thou  shall  do  likewise 
Judg.  9.  1ft.  made  Abimelech,  son  of  his  m.-s.  king 
.Job  !tl.  13.  if  I  did  despise  the  cause  of  mv  m.-s. 
Jer.  34. 9.  let  his  man-servant  and  m.-s.  go  free,  10. 

MAID-SKRVANTS. 
(Irn.  12.  16.  ,\bram  had  m.-s.  and  she-assos, 2-1.35. 

20.  17.  (',(h\  healed  Abimelerh's  wife  and  m.-s. 

.30.  43.  Jacob  had  much  cattle  and  m.-scrvanls 

31.  33.  Laban  entered  into  the  two  vi.-s.  tcnis 
Deut.  12.  12.  yc  shall  rejoice,  ye  and  your  m.-sern. 

1  .S"(i7n.  8.  16.  anil  he  shall  lake  your  m.-srrvants 

2  .S'am.6.22.  of  Ihe  m.-»crn. shall  I  be  had  in  honour 
2  Kings  5. 26.  is  it  a  lime  to  receive  m.-scrvants  ? 

MAJESTY 

Signifies,  [1]    The  infinite  dignity  and  glory  of 

(Jud,  Psal.  104.  1.   Jiidc  25.     (2]    The  pomp, 

splendour,  and  grandeur  of  earthly  princes, 

Esth.  1.  4. 

I  Oiron.  2!).  11.  thine,  O  Ijord,  is  the  power  and  m. 

2.5.  and  bestowed  upnn  him  such  royal  m. 
Esth.  1.  4.  when  he  shcweil  the  honour  of  his  m. 
.lob  37.  22.  with  God  is  terrible  m. 
40. 10.  dock  thyself  now  with  m.  and  excellency 
I'sal.  21.  5.  honour  and  m.  hast  thou  laid  on  him 
29.  4.  the  voice  of  the  Lord  is  full  of  m. 
45.  3.  with  thy  glory  and  m.  ||  4.  in  thy  in.  ride 
93.  1,  Ihe  L>)rd  reignelh,  ho  is  clothed  with  m. 
00.  (V  honour  aud  rn.  «-*  bcfoie  bim 


;mau 

Psal.  104.1.  thou  art  clothed  with  honour  aid  m 
145.  5.  I  will  speak  of  the  honour  of  thy  m. 
12.10  make  known  the  glorious  m.of  his  kingdom 

Tsa.  2. 10.  hide  thee  for  Ihe  glory  of  his  m.  19.21. 
24.  14.  they  shall  sing  for  the  m.  of  the  Lord 
?6.  10.  and  will  not  behold  the  m.  of  the  Lord 

Fiek.  7.20.  as  for  beaijty  of  ornament  beset  itin  m. 

Dan  4.  30.  that  I  built  for  the  honour  of  my  m. 

36.  and  excellent  to.  was  added  unto  me 

5.  18.  God  gave  Nebuchadnezzar  thy  father  to. 

19.  for  the  m.  he  gave  him,  all  people  trembled 
.Mic.  5.  4.  feed  in  m.  of  the  name  of  Lord  his  God 
Ileb.  1.  3.  he  sat  down  on  the  right  hand  o(m.  8. 1. 
2  Pet.  1.  16.  but  were  eye-witnesses  of  his  m. 
Jude  25  to  the  only  wise  God  bo  glory  and  m 

MAIL. 
1  Sam.  17.  5.  ho  was  armed  with  a  coat  of  m.  38. 

MAIMED. 

Lev.  22. 22.  blind  or  m.  ye  shallnot  offer  to  the  Ld. 

Mat.  15.  30.  having  with  them  those  that  were  m. 

31.  wondered  when  they  saw  the  m.  to  be  whole 

18.  8.  better  to  enter  into  life  m.  Mark  9.  43. 

Luke  14.  13.  when  thou  makes!  a  feast  call  them. 

21.  bring  in  hither  the  poor  and  m.  halt  and  bhnd 

MAIN. 

Jlcts  27.  40.  they  hoised  up  the  m.-sail  to  the  wind 

MAINTAIN 
Signifies,  [1]  To  uphold  and  preserve,  Psal.  16.  5. 
[21  To  repair,  1  Chron.  26.  27.  compared  with 
2  Kings   12.  5.     [3]   To  pleait,   Psal.  140.  12. 
[4]  To  profess  and  practise,  Tit.  3.  8,  14.    [5] 
To  prove  or  argue,  Job  13. 1 15.   [61  To  make, 
Psal.  9.  1 4. 
1  Kings  8. 45.  to.  their  cause,  49,.59. 2  CAr.  6.  35,3*). 
1  CAron.  20.27.  they  dedicate  to  to.  the  house  of  L 
Job  13. 15.  but  I  will  m.  mine  own  ways  before  him 
P.?aZ.140.12.  Lord  will  m.  the  cause  of  the  afflicted 
7\t.  3.  8.  might  be  careful  to  m.  good  works 
14.  let  ours  also  learn  torn,  good  works  for  uses 
MAINTAINED. 
Psal.  9. 4.  for  thou  hast  m.  my  right  ond  mv  cause 

MAINTAINE3T. 
Psal.  16.5.  Lord  is  mv  portion,  and  thou  to.  my  hi 

MAINTENANCE. 
Etra  4.  14.  because  we  have  m.  from  the  king 
Prov.  27.  27.  and  for  the  to.  of  thy  maidens 

MAKE 
Signifies,  [1]  To  create,  frame,  or  fashion,  Gon. 
1.  31.  Exod.  32.  1.  Isa.  45.  9.  [2]  To  choose, 
or  bring  that  to  be  which  was  not  so  before. 
1  Sam.  12.  22.  [3]  To  call  one  to  a  new  voca- 
tion, and  fit  and  qualify  him  fur  the  samt, 
Mat.  4.  19.     [4]   To  ordain  and  appoint,  Acti 

26.  16.  [.5]  To  turn,  Psal.  41.  f  3.  [6]  To 
build,  Ezra  5.  t  5.  [7J  To  change  one  thing 
into  another,  John  2.  9. 

f;«n.  1.26.  Ictuem.  man  112.18.  Twill  TO.  him  a  help 
3.  6.  and  a  tree  to  be  desired  lo  m.  one  wise 
21.  TO.  coats  of  skins  |{  6.  14.  m.  thee  an  ark 

11.  3.  let  us  TO.  brick  ||  4.  let  us  ;;i.  us  a  name 

12.  2.  I  will  TO.  of  thee  a  great  nation,  and  1  will 

bless  thee,  21.  18.  |  46.  3.  Eiod.  32.  Itt 
4.  let  us  m.  us  a  name,  lest  we  be  scattered 
13. 16.  I  will  TO.  thy  seed  as  Ihe  dust  of  Ihe  earth 
17.  6.  I  will  m.  thee  exceeding  fruitful,  48.  4. 
17.  20.  I  will  TO.  Ishmael  fruitful,  I  will  m. 
19.  32.  let  us  TO.  our  father  drink  wine,  34. 
26.  4.  I  will  TO.  tliy  seed  as  Ihc  stars  of  hea»cn 
27.4.  Isaac  said, TO. inc  savoury  ineal,sn(h  as  I  love 
28.  3.  G.  Almighty  bless  thee,  and  m.  Iliee  fruitful 
.32.  12.  I  will  7H.  Ihy  seed  as  Ihe  sand  of  Iho  sea 
34. 9.  m.  ye  marriages  with  us  and  give  daughter* 
.30.  yc  TO.  nie  lo  stink  among  Ihc  inhabilanii 
35. 1.  go  to  Beth-el,  and  to.  there  nn  allar  lo  God 

3.  I  will  m.  there  an  altar  unto  God 

40.  14.  and  m,  mention  of  me  lo  Pharaoh 

47.  6.  in  best  of  the  land  m.  thy  father  lo  dwell 

48.  20.  (;<i(l  TO.  Ihco  as  Ephraim  and  Manassch 
Ezod.  5.16.  no  straw  giveii,they  say  lo  us,  m.  briell 

12.  4.  shall  TO.  your  count  for  the  lamb 
IH.  16.  I  do  TO.  them  know  Iho  statutes  of  God 
20.4. thou  shall  not  m.unto  thee  any  graven  image, 
or  likeness.  Lev.  26.  I.  Deut.  5.  b. 

23.  ye  shall  not  re.  with  me  gods  of  silver 

24.  an  altar  of  earth  shall  thou  m.  unto  me 

25.  if  thou  will  TO.  mo  an  allar  of  stones 

22.  3.  for  he  should  m.  full  restitution,  .5,  6.  I2._ 
2;i.  13.  TO.  no  mention  of  other  gods,  ./u.«A.23. 7. 

27.  I  will  m.  enemies  liirn  then  backs  lo  Ihea 
33.Hliall  not  dwell,lest  Ihev  m.lhee  nin  nguinst  bm 

2.').  8.  m.  me  u  sanctuary  ||  9.  so  shall  ye  m.  it 
28.  2.  thou  shall  in.  holy  gnrmcnts  for  Aaron,  4 

4.  these  arc  Ihe  cariiienls  which  they  shall  m 
40.  for  Aaron's  sons  thou  shall  m.  coals,  girdle* 
42.  thou  shall  m.  them  linen  breeches 

30.  1.  thou  shall  m.  an  altar  of  slnttim-wood 
2.'!   thou  shall  m.  it  an  oil  of  holy  ointmoni 

37.  n*  to  perfume,  you  shall  not  m.  like  lo  it 

31.  6.  that  they  m.  all  that  I  ciunmanded,  .35.  10 
71.  k  up,  m.  Uf  godi  lo  go  before  us,  33.  .^cti  7.4A 


MAK 

±od.  32.  10.  I  will  m.  of  thee  a  great  nation 
S'.i.  11).  1  will  m.  iny  gondiiess  pcits  Ijclure  thee 
34.ltj.aml  m.tliy  sons  go  a  whoring  afttT  (heir  gods 

17.  thou  shall  not  m. 'molten  gods,  Acii.  19.  4. 
36.  C.  neither  man  nor  woman  m.  any  more 
LiCV,  5.  lU.  he  tliiiil  m.  amends  for  tlie  harm  done 

11.  i'.i.  not  m.  yourselves  abominable,  20.  2.5. 
10.28.  not  m.  any  cuttings  in  your  Hcsh  for  dead 
21.  5.  tiiey  shall  not  m.  baldness,  Dcut.  14.  1. 

20.  9.  I  will  VI.  you  fruitful,  and  multiply  you 
19. 1  wil'.  m.  your  heaven  as  iron,  earlli  as  brass 
22  beasts,  which  shall  m.  you  few  in  number 

27.  3.  when  a  man  shall  m.  a  singular  vow 
JVam.  5.  21.  the  L.  m.  thee  a  curse,  m.  thy  thigh  rot 

6.  7.  he  shall  not  m.  hini-self  unclean  for  his  father 
2.5.  the  Lord  m.  his  face  to  shine  upon  thee 

8.  7.  lot  them  wash,  and  so  m.  themselves  clean 

14.  4.  let  us  m.  a  captain,  and  return  to  Egyi>t 

12.  I  will  m.  of  thee  a  greater  nation  than  they 
10.  13.  e.\cei>t  thou  m.  thyself  a  prince  over  us 

30.  if  the  Lord  hi. a  new  thing  and  the  earth  open 

38.  let  them  m.  them  broad  plates  for  the  altar 
17.  5  I  will  m.  to  cease  from  me  the  murmurings 

21.  8.  in.  then  a  fiery  serpent,  and  set  it  on  a  jjole 

30.  8.  he  shall  vi.  her  vow  of  none  effect 

31.  23.  yo  shall  )h.  it  go  thmugh  tire  and  water 
Deut.  1.  11.  Lord  m.  you  a  thousand  times  more 

13.  and  I  will  ;;i.  them  rulers  over  you 

4.  10.  I  will  m.  them  hear  my  words  to  fear  me 
16.  lest  ye  m.  you  a  graven  image,  23. 

7.  3.  nor  eluilt  thou  in.  marriages  with  them 

8.  3.  VI.  thee  know  that  man  liveth  not  by  bread 

20.  11.  if  it  m.  thee  answer  of  peace,  and  open  to 

12.  if  it  will  m.  no  peace  with  thee,  but  war 
2fi.  19.  to  m.  thee  high  above  all  nations  ho  made 
28. 11.  tne  Lord  shall  m.  thee  plonteous,  30.  9. 

13.  Lord  shall  m.  thee  the  head,  and  not  the  tail 

32.  2t).  m.  the  remembrance  of  them  to  cease 

39.  I  kill,  and  I  m.  alive,  I  wound,  and  I  heal 
Josh.  L^  6.  thou  shall  m.  thy  way  prosjierous 

6.  16.  lest  ye  m.  yourselves  accursed,  and  in.  the 

camp  of  Israel  a  curse,  and  trouble  it 

7.  19.  and  m.  confession  to  him,  Ezra  10.  11. 
22.23.  80  shall  your  children  m.  our  children  cease 
2.1.  12.  and  shall  m.  marriages  with  them 

Jud<r.  l(i.  2.5.  Samson,  that  he  may  m.  us  sport 
HiiUi  4.1 1.  L.  m.  the  woman  like  Rachel  and  Leah 

1  Ham.  1.  6.  jirovoked  her  sore,  to  .?«.  her  fret 

2.  8.  and  to  ;n.  thom  inherit  the  throne  of  glory 
24.  ye  m.  the  Lord's  people  to  transgress 
29.  to  m.  yourselves  fat  with  chiefest  otTerings 

6.  5.  ye  shall  m.  images  of  your  enurods 

m.  a  new  cart  ||  8.  .5.  m.  us  a  king  to  judge  us 
B.  22.  hearken  to  them,  and  vi.  them  a  king 
12.22.Ld.wiU  not  forsake,  because  it  hath  pleased 

the  Lorrl  to  771.  you  his  people,  1  Ckron.  17.  22. 
2.5.  2cl.  the  Lord  will  m.  my  lord  a  sure  hotise- 

28.  2. 1  will  771.  thee  keeper  of  mine  head  for  ever 
29.4.  77i.  this  fellow  return  that  he  may  go  again 

2  Sam.  7.  11.  that  he  will  m.  thee  a  house 

21. hast  done  these  things, to  m.lhy  servant  know 
23.  to  777.  him  a  name  ||  13.5.  and  771.  thyself  sick 

15.  20.  should  1 771.  thee  go  up  and  down  with  us? 
23.  5.  all  my  desire,  though  he  777.  it  not  to  grow 

'  Kittgs  1.  37.  771.  his  throne  greater  than  David's 

47.  God  771.  the  name  of  Solomon  better  than 
2.  42.  did  I  not  771.  Iheo  to  swear  by  the  Lord 
8.29.  maycst  hearken  to  the  prayer  which  thy  ser- 
vant shall  771.  toward  this  place,  2  Chr.  6.  21. 
33.  shall  confess  thy  name,  pray,  and  771.  suppli- 
cation to  tliee  in  this  house,  47.  2  Chron.  C.  24. 
11.34.  I  will  771.  him  prince  all  the  days  of  his  life 

12.  9.  771.  the  yoke  lighter,  10.  2  Chron.  10.  10. 

16.  3.  I  will  771.  thy  house  like  the  house  of  Jero- 
boam the  son  of  Nebat,  21.  22.  2  Kings  9.9. 

17.  13.  and  after  771.  for  tliec  and  for  thy  son 

10.  2.  if  7/1.  not  thy  life  as  the  life  of  one  of  them 

3  Kings  4.  ]0.  let  us  777.  a  little  chamber  on  the  wall 

5.  7.  am  I  God  to  kill  and  to  77!.  alive  ? 

6.  2.  let  us  771.  a  place,  where  we  may  dwell 

7.  2.  if  L'ird  would  771.  windows  in  heaven,  19. 

9.  2.  »7i   him  rise  up,  and  anoint  him  king 

10.  .5.  wc  will  not  771.  any  king,  do  that  is  good 
IH.  31.  771.  an  agreement  with  me,  ha.  30.  16. 

21.  P.  nor  will  I  771.  feet  of  Israel  move  any  more 
23.10.  that  no  man  might  m.  his  son  or  daughter  to 

pa«s  through  the  fire  to  Molech,  Eiek.  20.  31. 

1  CSroTi.  Jl.lO.  all  Israel  to  771.  him  king,  12.31,38. 
17.21.  lo  7».thR0  a  name  of  groatn.and  terriblenese 
21.  3.  Lord  771.  his  poo|)le  100  times  so  many  more 

28.  4.  he  liked  me  to  771.  me  king  over  Israel 

29.  12.  O  Lord,  in  tliine  hand  it  is  to  777.  great 

2  Chr.  7.  20.  will  771.  it  a  proverb  among  all  nations 

1 1.  22.  for  he  thought  to  771.  him  king 

2.5.  8.  God  shall  777.  thee  fall  before  the  enemy 
Kirn  ft.  8. 1  771.  a  decree  what  ye  shall  do,  7. 13, 21. 
JV.:A.8.1.5.  fetch  branches  of  thick  trees  to  »7i.booths 
f.slh.4.H.go  in  to  the  king  to  m.supplication  to  him 

7.  7.  Haman  stood  up  lo  771.  request  for  his  life 

9.  22.  lliey  should  771.  them  daysof  feasting  and  joy 

3C3 


MAK 

.Tob  5.  18.  he  woundeth  and  his  hands  m.  whole 

8.  5.  771.  thy  BUiiplicalion  to  the  Almighty,  22. 27. 

9.  30.  and  if  1  771.  my  hands  never  so  clean 

11.  3.  should  ihy  lies  771.  men  hold  their  pcacel 

13.  23.  771.  me  to  know  my  transgression  and  sin 

19.  3.  that  ye  771.  yourselves  strange  to  me 

24.  25.  if  it  be  not  so  now,  who  will  771.  mo  a  liar  7 
31. 15.  did  not  ho  that  made  me  in  womb  771.  him  7 
.34.29.he  giveth  quietness  who  then  can  771. trouble? 
35.  9.  they  771.  the  ojipressed  to  cry,  they  cry  out 

40.  19.  can  771.  his  sword  to  approach  unto  him 

41.  3.  will  he  771.  many  supplications  to  thee  7 
Fsal.  5.  8.  771.  thy  way  stiaight  before  my  face 

1 10..  771.  them  guilty,  O  God,  let  them  lall 

6.  6.  all  the  night  771.  I  my  bed  to  swim 

20.  t  3.  the  Lord  771.  fai  thy  burnt-sacrifice 

21.  9.  thou  shall  771.  them  us  a  fiery  oven  in  nngcr 

12.  therefore  thou  shall  771.  them  turn  their  back 

22.  9.  thou  didst  to.  me  hope  when  on  breasts 

25.  t  14.  he  will  771.  them  know  his  covenant 

31.  16.  771.  thy  face  shine  on  thy  servant,  119. 135. 
34.  2.  my  soul  shall  771.  her  bousl  in  the  Lord 

39.  4.  Lord,  771.  me  to  know  mine  end  and  days 
8.  771.  me  not  the  reproach  of  the  foolish 

40.17. 77i.no  tarrying,  70.5.  ||  4 1.3. will  771. all  his  bed 

45.  17.  I  will  771.  thy  name  to  be  remembered 

46.  4.  the  streams  shall  771.  glad  the  city  of  God 
51.  6.  in  hidden  part  shall  771.  me  know  wisdom 

8. 771.  me  lo  hear  joy  and  gladness,  that  the  bones 
57.  1.  of  thy  wings,  will  1 771.  my  refuge,  01.  t4. 
66.  2.  sing  forth  his  name,  771.  his  praise  glorious 

8.  ye  peojile,  771. the  voice  of  hisjiraise  to  be  heard 

83.  2.  for  lo,  thine  enemies  7;i.  a  tumult 
11.  771.  their  nobles  like  Oreb  and  Zeeb 

13.  O  my  God,  771.  them  like  a  wlieel 

84.  6.  through  the  valley  of  Baca,  771.  it  a  well 
89.  27.  also  I  will  771.  him  my  first-born 

29.  his  seed  also  will  I  771.  to  endure  for  ever 

90. 15. 771.  us  glad,  according  to  the  days  alliictcd 

110.  1.   until  I  771.  thine  enemies  thy  footstool. 

Mat.  22.  44.  Jilark  12.  36.  J^uke  20.  43. 

.acts  2.  35.  Beb.  1.  13. 

115.8.they  that  771. them  are  like  unto  them, 1.35.18. 

119.27.771. me  to  understand  the  wayof  thy  precepts 

35.  771.  me  go  in  the  path  of  thy  commandments 

132.  17.  there  will  I  711.  the  horn  of  David  to  bud 

137.  t7.  771.  bare  oven  to  the  foundation 

139.  8.  if  I  771.  my  bed  in  hell,  thou  art  there 

142.  1.  to  the  Lord  did  I  771.  my  su]>plication 

Prov.6.3.  go  humble  thyself,  and  711.  sure  thy  friend 

14.  9.  fools  771.  a  mock  at  sin,  but  among  righteous 
20.  18.  and  wiih  good  advice  771.  war 

25.  it  is  a  snare  after  vows  to  771.  inquiry 
22.  21.  that  I  might  711.  lliee  know  the  certainty 

24.  771.  no  friendship  with  an  angry  man 
2!.  5.  for  riches  certainly  771.  themselves  wings 

27.  11.  my  son,  be  wise,  and  771.  my  heart  glad 
30.  26.  yet  771.  they  their  houses  in  the  rocks 

Keel.  7.  13.  who  can  771.  that  straight  which  he 
16.  not  right,  over-much,  nor  in.thyself  over-wise 

Isa.  1.15.  when  ye  771.  many  prayers,  I  will  not  hear 

16.wash  you,  m.  you  clean  ||  3.7.7/1. me  not  a  ruler 

fi.  10.  777.  the  heart  of  this  people  fat,  ears  heavy 

7.  6.  and  let  us  777.  a  breach  therein  for  us 

til.  771.  thy  petition  deep,  or  in  the  height  above 

10.  23.  the  Lord  of  hosts  shall  771.  a  consumption 
11.3.  and  shall  771.  him  of  ([uick  understanding 

15.  and  shall  771.  men  go  over  dry  shod 

12.  4.  771.  mention  that  his  name  is  cxalmd 

13.  12.  I  will  771.  a  man  more  precious  than  gold 
16.  3.  771.  thy  shadow  as  the  night  in  noon-day 
25.  6.  Lord  771.  to  all  people  a  feast  offal  things 
27. 5.  that  he  may  m.  jieace  with  me,  and  he  shall 

28.  9.  whom  shall  he  771.  lo  understand  doctrine? 

29.  21.  that  771.  a  man  an  offender  fi)r  a  word 
.32.  6.  to  m.  em|)ty  the  soul  of  the  hungry 

.38.  16.  so  wilt  thou  recover  me  and  771.  me  live 

40.  3.  771.  straight  in  the  desert  a  highway  for  our 

God,  Mat.  3.  3.  Mark  1.  3.  J.iike  3.  4. 

41.  18.  I  will  m.  the  wilderness  a  jiool  of  water 

42.  15.  I  will  771.  the  rivers  islands,  dry  up  pools 

16.  I  will  m.  darkness  light  before  them 

21.  he  will  magnify  and  m.  the  law  honourable 

43.  19.  I  will  even  771.  a  wuy  in  the  wilderness 

44.  9.  they  that  771.  n  graven  image  are  vanity 

45.  2.  and  771.  the  crooked  places  straight 

7. 1 771.  peace  and  create  evil, I  the  L.doall  things 
t  13.  and  I  will  771.  straight  all  his  ways 

14.  they  shall  771.  supplication  to  thee 

4fi.5.to  whom  will  ye  771. me  e(iual,and  compare  mo 

47.  2. 771.  bare  the  leg,  uncover  the  thigh,  puss  over 

48.  15.  and  he  shall  in.  his  way  prosperous 

49.  11.  and  I  will  m.  all  my  mounta  ns  a  way 
.50.  2.  bi.hold  I  771.  the  rivers  a  wilderness 

51.  4.  I  will  771.  my  judgment  to  rest  for  a  light 
.52.  5.  they  tliat  rule  over  them,  J77.  tliem  to  howl 
.53.  10.  when  thou  shall  rii.  his  soul  an  offorirfg 
.54.  12.  I  will  777.  thy  wimlows  of  agates,  thy  gate* 

56.  7.  I  will  7H.  them  joyful  in  my  hou.10  of  prayer 

57.  4.  against  whom  771.  ye  a  wide  mouth  1 


MAK 

Tsa.  58.  4.  to  m.  your  voice  to  be  heitrd  on  high 

11.  and  the  Lord  shall  vi.  fat  thy  bones 

60.  13.  I  will  m.  the  place  of  my  feet  gloriout 
15.  I  will  m.  thee  an  eternal  excellency 
17. 1  will  m.  also  thy  otiicers  peace  and  exactor* 

62.  7.  till  ho  771.  Jerusalem  a  praise  in  the  earth 

63.  6.  and  I  will  771.  them  drunk  in  my  fury 

12.  the  water  to  777.  himself  an  everlasting  name 
14.  lead  thy  peojile  to  771.  thyself  n  glorious  naiua 

64.  2.  to  771.  thy  name  known  to  thy  adversaries 
66. 22.  as  now  earth  which  I  will  771.  shall  remain 

./er.  4.  30.  in  vain  shall  thou  m.  thyself  fair 

5.  14.  I  will  771.  my  words  in  thy  mouth  fire 

6.  26.  771.  thee  mourning,  as  for  an  only  son 

7.  16.  nor  vi.  intercession  to  me  for  this  people 
9.11.  I  will77i.Jeru8olem  heaps  and  den  of  dragons 
13.  16.  he  turn  it,  and  771.  it  gross  darkness 

15.  20.  I  will  771.  thee  a  fenced  brasen  wall 
16.20.  shall  a  man  771.  gods  to  himself,  and  no  gods 

18.  4.  as  seemed  good  to  the  potter  to  711.  it 

19.  7.  I  will  771.  void  counsel  of  Judah  and  Jerus. 
12.  I  will  even  771.  this  city  as  Tophet 

20.  4.  1  will  771.  thee  a  terror  lo  thyself 

22.  6.  yet  surely  I  will  771.  thee  a  wilderness 
23.16.hearken  not  to  the  pro|)het8,they  771. you  vain 
26.  6.  then  will  1 771.  this  house  like  Shiloh 
27.2.77i.thce  bonds  and  yokes, put  them  on  thy  neck 

18.  let  them  now  771.  intercession  to  the  Lord 
29.  17.  behold,  I  will  771.  them  like  vile  figs 

22.  the  Lord  777.  thee  like  Zedekiah  and  Ahab 
34.  17. 1  will  771.  you  be  removed  into  all  kingdoms 
44.  19.  did  wo  771.  her  cakes  to  worship  her  7 
48.26. 77i.ye  him  drunken, for  ho  magnified  himself 
49.  15.  1  will  771.  thee  small  among  the  heatben 
51.  25.  I  will  771.  theo  a  burnt  mountain 

36.  and  771.  her  springs  dry  ||  39.  i,i.  them  drunkea 

57.  I  will  771.  drunk  her  princes  and  wise  men 
/..am.  3.  t21.  this  I  m.  lo  return  lo  my  heart 
Kzrk.  4.  9.  771.  bread  thereof  ||  7.  23.  771.  a  chain 
14.8. 1  will  771. him  a  sign  and  a  proverb,and  cut  off 

16.  42.  I  will  771.  my  fury  toward  theo  to  rest 

18.  31.  and  771.  you  a  new  liearl,  and  a  new  spirit 

21.  10.  it  is  furbished,  should  we  then  771.  mirth? 
t27.  perverted,  perverted,  perverted  will  m.  it 

22.  30.  sought  a  man  that  should  771.  up  the  hedge 
24. 17. 771.  no  mourning  for  the  dead,  bind  the  tire 

26.  4.  and  771.  her  like  the  top  of  a  rock,  14. 

21. 1  will  771.  thee  a  terror,  thou  shall  be  no  more 
32.  7.  I  will  7».  the  stars  thereof  dark,  8. 
34.  26.  and  I  will  771.  them  and  places  a  blessing 
37.  19. 771.  them  one  stick,  shall  be  one  in  my  hand 

22.  1  will  7N.  them  one  nation  in  the  land 
44.  14.  I  will  771.  them  keepers  of  chaige  of  house 
/^n7i.  4.  25.  shall  771.  thee  lo  eat  grass  as  oxen,  32. 
8. 16. 771.  this  man  lo  understand  the  vision,  10. 14. 
9.24. seventy  weeks  to  7n.reconciliation  for  iniquity 

11.  35.  some  shall  fall  to  771.  them  white 

44.  he  shall  go  utterly  to  purge  and  771. away  many 

Hos.  2.3.  lest  1 771.  her  as  a  wildi.rncss,  and  slay  her 

6.  I  will  771.  a  wall,  that  she  shall  not  find  her  path 

18.  and  I  will  777.  them  to  lie  down  safely 

7.  3.  they  in.  the  king  glad  with  their  wickedness 

10.  II.  1  will  771.  Kphraim  ride,  Judah  shall  plow 
1 1.8.how  shall  771. thee  as  Adma.set  thee  as  Zcboim 

12.  9.  I  will  yet  771.  theo  dwell  in  tabernacles 
.foci  2.  19.  nor  will  I  771.  you  a  rejiroach  any  more 
^nios  8.  4.  even  to  771.  the  poor  of  the  land  to  fail 

9. 14.  they  shall  771.  gardens,  and  eat  fruit  thereof 
Mic.  3.  D.  the  pro|)hets  that  771.  my  people  err 

4.  7.  I  will  771.  her  that  halted  a  remnant 

6.  13.  therefi>re  I  will  771.  thee  sick  in  smiting  thee 
JViiA.  I.  14.  I  will  771.  thy  grave,  for  thou  art  vile 

.3.  6.  I  will  cast  filth  on  thee,  and  771.  thee  vile 

15. 77i.thy.self  many.as  the  canker-worm, or  locust 
//>iA.2.2.writc  the  vision.and  771.it  plain  upon  tables 

3.  19.  he  will  777.  my  feet  like  hinds'  feet 
7.rph.  1.  18.  for  ho  shall  771.  oven  a  speedy  riddance 

3.  20.  for  I  will  m.  vou  a  name  and  a  praise 
Hag.'i.'£i.  sailh  the  tiord,  I  will  771.  thee  as  a  signet 
y.rch.  10.  1.  so  the  Lord  shall  m.  bright  clouds 

12.2.  F  will  771.  Jerusalem  a  cup  of  trembling 
3.  in  that  day  will  I  Tn.Jerua.a  burdensome  stone 
Mai.  2. 15.  did  not  he  771.  one?  yet  hod  the  residue 

3.  17.  in  that  day  when  I  771.  up  my  jevNels 
Mat.  1.  19.  not  willing  to  771.  her  a  public  example 

4.  19.  I  will  771.  you  fishers  of  men,  Mark  ].  l7. 

5.  36.  thou  canst  not  771.  one  hair  white  or  block 
3.  2.  behold,  a  leper  said,  Lord,  if  thou  will,  thou 

canst  771.  mo  clean,  Mark  I.  40.  J.vke  5.  12. 
12.  33.  771.  the  tree  good,  771.  the  tree  corrupt 
17.  4.  Peter  said.  Lord,  if  thou  wilt,  let  us  771.  here 
three  tab<;rnucles,  Mark  9.  5.  J.uke  9.  33. 
23. 14.  for  pretence,  771.  long  prayers,  Mark  12.40. 
15.  lo  771.  one  proselyte,  and  when  he  is  miide 
25.ye7n.alean  the  outside  of  the  cup,  Luks  1 1.39- 
25.  21.  I  will  771.  thee  ruler  over  many  things 

27.  65.  go  your  way,  771.  it  as  sure  o»  ye  can 
Mark  5.  39.  why  771.  ye  this  ado  and  wceu  7 
/-i(A-e5.34.can  yeTn.ch'ildron  ofbridw-chamberfanf 

11.  40.  did  ho  not  m.  that  which  is  within  alsol 


A 

l.vke  J4.  IS.J1II  with  one  consent  bp»nn  to  m.cxeuK 
.).  iS).  m.  iiie  us  (UK  ot'tny  hireil  survums 
lii.ii./n.lriviuis  ul  Ihu  nianiinon  i>t  uiirijj'ucousnegs 
'c/iii  I.  U.i.  m.  8t.riiii,'hl  tliu  way  nl  tlie  Lord 
^.lii.m.nol  iii)>  FuIIkt's  tiuusu  liouee  ut  niercliuiid. 
0.  16.  uiHl  take  liim  by  turcc  to  m.  Iiiiii  a  kji)» 
b.  :<'J.  kiiiiw  truth,  und  the  truth  shall  lit.  yuu  free 
Jxi.  it  ilic  rion  in.  you  Irtc,  ye  shall  be  iVee  indued 
lU.  -.il   how  long  do«t  lliuu  in.  us  to  doubt  7 
14.  U-i.  ue  will  cuMiV  and  //(.  our  abode  witii  liiin 
.■it/s  U.  '26.  III.  nie  lull  ol  joy  with  iliy  counteimiice 
y.  :J4    I'elur  said  to  bun,  arise  and  hi.  lliy  bed 
:J(i.  Hi.  lu  m.  lliee  a  iii.nisier  and  a  witness 
•-'4.  Faul,  much  K.aininj;  uolh  m.  thee  mad 
A«i;i.  a.  ;).  in.  the  laiih  ol  God  wiiliout  ertect 

Jl.  do  we  llien  iii.  void  the  law  llirou;;ii  liiith  1 
li.  -Jl.  power  lo  in.  one  ve.ssel  unto  honour 
•.i-i.  snort  worK  will  the  Lord  m.  on  Itie  earth 
is.  14.  and  m.  not  [irovision  for  the  ttesli 
14.  4.  tiir  (iod  IS  alile  to  /».  Iiim  stand 
l'.».  t'otlow  the  ihiiij^s  winch  w.  lor  peace 
!:>.  'Jli.  10  HI.  a  certain  contribution  lor  the  poor 
1  Cur.  ().  1.1.  and  ik.  them  the  menihcrs  of  a  liarlot 
h.  13.  if  meat  in.  my  brotlier  to  olieiid 
10.  13.  Willi  tempiation  also  m.  a  way  to  escape 
£  C</r.-2.:l.  il  I  in.  you  Borry,wlio  then  makelh  glad  7 
H.  o.  and  )«.  up  bel'orehand  your  bounty 
iH.  ami  God  is  able  to  m.  all  grace  abound 
IJ.  17.  did  I  HI.  gain  of  you  by  any  of  tiiuni  7 
(int.  '2.  Ifi.  1  m.  myself  a  traiiS!:res.sor 
.'1.  17.  that  il  should  hi.  the  promise  of  none  etlect 
fi.  Ivf  as  many  as  desire  to  hi.  a  lair  sliew  in  tiesh 
I-.p/i.  '2.  lo.  to  HI.  in  hiiiiselt  of  uvain  one  new  man 
1  I'/iixs.  3.  1'2.  tlie  Lord  hi.  you  lo  increase  in  love 
t!  yVjii'5.3.U.  but  to  j«. ourselves  an  enKaniple  lo  yoii 
'2Tiin.  3.  Ij.  are  I'.ble  to  m. lliee  wise  lo  salvation 
4.  .'>.  in.  full  proof  of  thy  ministry 
J  It  .'1. -2.  iD.lu  Hi.llie(,'aiilaiiioflheirsalvation  porfocl 
17.  to  1/1.  reconciliation  for  the  sins  of  the  people 
7.  v!5.  he  ever  livelh  to  )//.  iiiHrcessioii  for  them 
K  5.  m.  all  ihin;,'.-  a'^cording  lo  pattern  sliewed 
U.  !'.  could  IK. I  m.  hnn  that  did  service  perfect 
10.  1.  HI.  the  comers  ihiiiennlo  |.erfeet 
I'i.  13.  and  in.  strai^'lit  paths  tor  your  feet 
)3.-Jl.w.you  perfect  in  every  good  work  to  dn  will 
J.iin.  3.  If*,  is  sown  in  peace,  of  ihein  that  m.  peace 
1  I'll. .').  10.  the  God  of  all  grace  hi.  yon  perlecl 
'2  I'll.  I.  JO.  m.  your  cahing  and  election  sure 
I  .I'j/tn  1.  10.  we  »i.  him  a  liar,  his  word  is  not  in  us 
h-r.  3.  !l.  1  will  m.  tliem  woiship  before  thy  feel 
12.  i  will  HI.  a  pillur  in  the  temple  of  my  God 
10.  O.  eat  it,  and  it  shall  in.  tliy  bi-lly  bitter 
J  1.7.  shall  HI.  war  against  them,  and  overcome 
lJ.17.  Weill  to  HI. war  with  the  remnant  oilier  .seed 
13.  4.  saying,  who  is  able  to  m.  war  with  him  ! 
14.  tiiat  they  should  hi.  an  image  to  the  beast 
IL*.  11.  In  riglitUMiisness  lie  doth  judge  and  m.  war 
2L  5.  behold,  I  vi.  all  things  new 
Hct   .\rKAin,    ArosEMiiST,    C'uvknant,  Deso- 
L.iTt,  Uesoi.AiioN,  tisn,  Fikk,  Good. 
M.\KK  Aa.<tc. 
/VMf.32.3.").the  things  thai  come  on  them,  in.  hastr 
.//i'/i'.'.l.4"'.and  said,  in.  /lualf  and  do  as  1  have  done 

1  Sam. it.  12.  behold,  lie  is  before  y<ni,  in.  hauli  now 

2  Chron.'.^.iX.  tiir  (jod  romiiianded  me  to  in.  Im.itr 
/.'ifA.ri.S.kingsaid,  cause  Haniaii  lo  in.  Au.stc,  fi.lO. 
.loh  20.  2.  cause  me  to  answer,  for  this  1  in.  haste 
Villi.  38.  22.  in.  hu.-'tr.  to  help  me,  O  Lord,  mv  sal- 
vation, 40.  13. 1 70.  1.171.  12. 

TO..*!.!  am  poor  and  needy, hi .Attntc  unto  me,  14LI. 
/  r«i'.  L  1-i.  they  in.  hiftf.  lo  shed  blood,  Isa.  5'J.  7. 
<■  iHt.  H.  14.  »i.  haiiti:,  my  beloved,  and  be  like  a  roe 
Ji-a.  28.  10.  he  that  beheveth  shall  not  in.  ha.Hr 

4'.l.  17.  thy  "hddren  shall  in.  ha-tte,  thy  de^troyern 
.1-r.  !l.  IS.  let  iliein  in.  Iinsli",  and  lake  up  a  wailing 
.\'uA.  2.  h.  Ihay  shall  in.  Iiuiile  to  the  wall  thereof 
I.ukr  1'.)..').  he  «aid,/iaccheus,  m.  A.  and  romeilown 
>$c<«22.l8.m.Aa«(6'aiidgctquieklyouluf.[erusalem 
Kif.  Known. 
M.M<F.  man  iff  si. 

1  ("or.4.5.wi|l  m.manij'e.sl\\\i:  counsels  of  the  heart 
F/ik.  .'».  13.  whatsoever  ilollt  in.  inanifr.xt  is  light 
Col.  4.  4.  that  I  may  i«.  il  matiifrnl  as  I  ought 

,  .St.e  .Mkntion,  .N'oisk. 

M  A  K  K  readij. 
Cm.  18.  C.  m.  really  three  measures  of  fine  meal 
43.  K).  m.  rrii'lij,  for  these  men  shall  dine  with  me 

2  A'in5-«'.l.2l.  iindjorninaaiil,  tn.r.  ami  he  went  out 
/'•«/.  n.2.  they  MI.  r<-rt</_v  their  arrow  on  the  airing 

21    12.  when  thou  shall  m.  rraihi  \W\i\v  arrows 

r.:ik.~.\i.\\\<-y  have  blown  the  truiii|iet  lo  m.rrniiij 

Mark  14.  1.5.  there  m.  rrtt'/;/  for  iik,   l.uke  'H.  12. 

J.ake  1.  17.  to  m.  rraity  h  peojile   prepared  for 

the  Lord 

17.  8.  rnthcr  »ny,  m.  rrnihj,  wherewillWI  may  sup 

j3cU  2.3.  23.  m.  rendu  200  soliliers  to  go  to  C'esaroa 

M.AKE /.;./•/■//. 

1  fatn.  20.  38.  he  cried,  m.  spfil,  Inistn,  gtny  not 

2  f-ani  I.S.  14.  in.  n/iced  lo  depart,  lest  he  overtake 
Jia.  5.  1<J.  th:it  say,  let  hinrt  t*.  tpred  and  liustun 

364 


MAK 

MAKE  aaste. 
J.cv.  26.  31. 1  will  III.  your  eiuee  irui'le,  and  bring 
J6a.  42.  15.  1  will  m.  aatlc  inounlains  and  hills 
Kick.  5. 14.  moreover,  1  will  m.  Jerusalem  wasle 
20. 10. 1  will  HI. land  of  Kgyiit  utterly  wautt,  30.12. 

MAKKK,  or  MAktUcJ. 
Job  4.  17.  shall  a  man  be  more  pure  llian  his  M.7 

32.  22.  in  so  Joing  my  M.  will  soon  take  me  away 
35.  10.  but  none  sailh,  where  is  God  my  M.7 
3li.  3.  1  will  ascribe  righlcousiicss  to  my  M. 

y^uL.  9.5.  0.  let  us  kneel  belbre  the  Lord  our  M. 
i^)'eu.l4.31.oppresseth  the  pour,ieproacheth  his  M. 

17.6.  whoso  iiiocketh  the  poor  reproucheth  his  M. 

22.  2.  rich  and  poor,  the  Lord  is  the  in.  of  iliem  all 
laa.  1.  31.  and  the  m.  of  it  as  a  spark 

17.  7.  at  liiat  day  shall  a  man  look  lo  his  J)/. 

22.  11.  ye  have  not  looked  lo  the  hi.  thereof 

33.  T  2vi.  the  Lord  is  our  Bialule  m.  he  will  save  us 
4.'>.  y.  woe  to  him  ihai  slriveth  with  his  M. 

il.  Ilius  sailh  the  holy  One  of  Israel  and  liiswl/. 
Itj.  Iheysiiallgo  to  contusion  that  are  iH.  of  itlols 
51.13.  lorgetlest  the  Lord  thy  hi. that  stretched  out 
54.  5.  thy  j1/.  IN  thy  husband,  and  thy  Kedeemer 
Jcr.  33.  2.  thus  sailh  the  Lord  ihe  Hi.  thereof 
Hon.  Vi.  14.  for  Israel  halli  forgotten  his  M. 
HiiO.'i.lS.  whal  prolitelli  iho  graven  image  that  the 
IH.  haili  graven, »«.  of  his  work  Irustelh  therein? 
Ilelj.  11. 10.  lor  a  city,  whose  builder  and  m.  is  God 

MAKKST. 
JiLiI^.  18.  3.  and  what  m.  ihou  in  this  place  7 
Jub  l3.2<i.Hi.  me  possess  the  iiiiijuilitsof  my  youth 
22.3.1s  11  gain  to  hull  that  thou  Hi.lhy  ways  perfect? 
I'sal.  4.  b.  iliou  only  in.  nie  lo  dwell  in  safety 
3y.  11.  thou  HI.  his  beauty  to  consume  as  a  moth 
44.  iU.  tliou  HI.  us  to  tuin  back  Irom  the  enemy 

13.  thou  III.  us  a  reproach  to  our  neighbours 

14.  thou  HI.  us  a  by-word  among  the  heathen 
Gj.  ».  thou  HI.  Ihe  outgoings  of  morning  to  rejoice 

10.  Ih.ju  HI.  the  earth  soli  with  showers 
So.  li.  thou  111.  us  a  strife  lo  our  neighbours 
104.  2U.  thou  in.  darkness,  and  il  is  night 
144.  3.  what  is  iniiii,  thai  ihou  hi.  account  of  him? 
Cant.  1.  7.  where  thou  in.  ihy  flock  to  rest  at  noon 
ha.  40.  y.  to  liini  that  fashionelii  it.  w  hat  in.  lliou7 
.hi:  22.23.  O  Lebanon,  thai  ni.  thy  iiesl  in  cedars 
•2>i.  15.  thou  in.  this  people  lo  Irusi  in  a  he 
Kzck.  11).  31.  iliou  in.  lliy  high  place  in  every  street 
liab.  1.  14.  and  in.  men  as  ilio  hshes  of  the  sea 
2.15.  pultcst  thy  bottle  lo  hini,  and  Hi.hiiiidiiiiikeii 
Jjuke  14.  12.  when  thou  hi.  a  dinner  or  a  suiiper 

13.  but  when  Ihou  m.  a  feast,  call  the  |ioor 

.luhn  8.53.  proph.  are  dead,  whom  ni.  thou  thyself  7 

10.  ,33.  because  thou  being  a  man  hi.  thyself  God 

y^oHi. 2.17.  art  called  a  Jew,aiid  Hi.tliy  boast  of  God 

23.  thou  iliat  HI.  thy  boast  of  the  law 

MAKETH. 

Kiod.i.lX.  or  who  ni.  the  dumb,  or  deaf,  or  blind  7 
J.ci\  7.7.  the  priest  that  in.  aloneiiieiit  clean,  14.11 
17.  11.  it  is  the  blood  that  jh.  the  atonement 
Ucut.  1.'^.  10.  that  in.  his  son  to  jiass  through  the  fire 
20.  20.  against  the  cily  that  hi.  war  with  thee 
21.10.  when  lie  in.  his  sons  lo  inherit  what  he  hall: 

24.  7.  III.  merrrhandise  of  him,  or  selleth  him 
27.15.cursed  be  the  man  tlmt  hi. any  graven  image 

18.  cursed  be  he  thai  hi. the  blind  to  waiutei outof 
21).  12.  oath  which  the  Lord  m.  with  thee  this  day 

1  .Saw.  2.  ti.  the  Lord  killeih  and  in.  alive 

7.  the  Lord  in.  poor,  and  in.  rich,  he  liringetli  low 

2  Sam.  22.  33.  God  vi.  mv  wav  perfeil,  /Vu/.  18.32. 
22.34.  hi^  in.  my  feet  like  hinds'  feet,  I'sal.  18.33. 

./i;/i  5.18.  for  he  hi.  sore, and  I'indelli  u\>,  he  woiindr 
y.  y.  Lord  in.  Arctnrus,  Orion,  and  I'leiades 
12.  17.  he  m.  the  juilges  fools  ||  25.  he  in.  to  stagger 
15.  27.  he  in.  coilops  of  fat  on  his  Hanks 
23.  Hi.  (Joii  in.  my  heart  soft,  ami  troiibleth  nie 

25.  2.  he  711.  peace  ill  his  higb-plai-es 

27.  18.  and  as  a  booh  that  Ihe  keeper  hi. 
35.  1 1.  who  hi.  us  wiser  than  the  fowls  of  heaven 
3I).27.  for  he  hi  .small  the  dro|i»  of  vvali-r,  they  pou 
41.  31.  he  in.  the  deep  to  hoil  like  a  pot 

32.  he  m.  a  path  to  shine  after  him 
Psal.  0.  12.  when  he  m.  iiKpiisilioii  for  blood 
2:1.  2.  111.'  m.  to  lie  down  in  gieeii  pastures 
2!l.  y.  the  voi<-eof  the  Lord  hi.  the  hinds  lo  calve 
33.  10.  he  ni.  the  devices  of  people  of  nolK^  ellecl 
40.  4.  Ille8^cd  is  Ihe  man  that  in.  Ihe  Lord  his  trust 
41).  y.  he  m.  wars  Ui  cease  lo  llie  enil  of  the  eortli 
104.3.  who  HI.  the  clouds  his  chariot,  who  walkolh 

4.  who  HI.  his  angels  spirits,  Hrh.  1.  7. 

1.5.  and  wine  that  m.glail  Ihe  heart  of  man 
107.  t25.  and  iii.  the  stormy  wind  to  stand 

2y.  he  m.  the  storm  a  calm,  the  waters  are  still 

3(1.  and  there  he  m.  the  hungry  to  dwell 

41.  and  jii.  him  families  like  a  flock 
113.  y.  he  in.  Ihe  barren  w.mian  to  keep  house 
135.  7.  he  m.  ligliliiings  for  rain,  brings  the  wind 
147.  8.  who  m.  grass  lo  grow  on  the  innuntnina 

14.  he  m.  pence  in  Ihy  borders,  and  lilli  111  Ihec 
I  Pr.ir.  10.  1.  a  wise  son  »i.  a  glad  lather,  15.  20. 
i      4.  but  the  hand  of  the  dil  gcnl  m.  rich 


MAL 

Prov.  10.  22.  the  blessing  of  Ine  Lord,  it  m.  rich 

12.4.  she  thai  »i.ai>lianied  is  as  rottenness  in  bone* 

25.  heaviness  io  the  heart  of  man  m.  it  10  stoop, 

but  a  good  word  m.  it  glad 

13.  7.  that  m.  himself  rich,  yet  hath  nothing,  there 

is  that  m.  himself  poor,  yet  hath  greal  richea 

12.  liojie  delerred  m.  tlie  heart  sick,  when  desite 

1,5.  13.  a  merry  heari  m.  a  cheerful  countenance 

30.  and  a  good  rejjort  m.  the  bones  fat 

10.7. he  HI. even  his  enemies  lo  be  at  peace  with  him 
1 23.  the  heart  of  the  wise  m.  wise  his  mouth 
18.  IG.  a  man's  gift  in.  room  for  liini,  and  briiigt 
19.4. wealth  m.niany  friends,  but  poor  i.«  separated 
31.  22.  she  in.  herself  coverings  of  tapesliy 
24.  she  rn.  fine  linen  and  selleth  it,  and  girdlei 
A'cc/.3.11.no  man  can  find  out  the  w  ork  thai  God  n. 

7.  7.  surely  op|iression  m.  a  wise  man  mud 

8.  1.  a  man's  wisdom  /n.  his  face  to  shine 

1 1.  ,5.  ihou  kiioweslnut  works  of  God,  who  m.  all 
Isa.  24.  1.  behold,  the  Lord  vi.  the  earth  en)]>ty 
40.  23.  he  m.  the  judges  of  the  earth  as  vanity 
43.  It),  sailh  the  Lord,  which  m.  a  way  in  the  soa 
44. 15.  he  in.  a  god,  and  worslii])petli  ii,  17.  |  4t).  6. 

24.  i  am  the  Lord  that  m.  all  things 

25.  he  in.  diviners  mad  ||  59. 1.5.  m.  himsr^lf  n  prey 
55.  10.  watereth  earth,  and  in.  it  bring  torth 

Jtr.  10.  13.  he  m.  lightnings  with  rain,  51.  lt>. 

17.  5.  cursed  be  tlie  man  that  »i.  flesh  his  arm 

29  20.  every  man  thai  ni.  himself  a  prophet,  27. 
Kiek.  22.  3.  and  m.  idols  against  herself  lo  dclilc 
J./aii.  C.  13.  but  VI.  his  petition  three  times  a  day 

11.  31.  place  abomination  that  ra. desolate,  12.  II. 
Jimos  4.  13.  that  hi.  llie  niorning  darkness 

5.  b.  seek  him  that  m.  the  seven  slurs  and  Orion 
A'flA.  1.  4.  he  relmkclh  the  sea,  and  m.  it  dry 
Alal.  5.  45.  he  m.  his  sun  rise  on  the  evil  and  good 
j>/arA  7.37. he  ni.bolh  deaf  to  hear  and  dumbsjieulc 
./ulcii  19  12.  whosoever  m.  himself  a  kmg,  speaktth 
JJcts  9.  34.  Eneaii,  Jesus  Christ  wi.  thee  whcde 
/<«>H.5.,5.hope  irt.iiot  ashamed,bccause  love  of  God 

8.  20.  the  Spitit  in.  intercession  for  us,  27,  ;i4. 

11.  2.  he  m.  intercession  to  God  against  Israi.d 

1  Cur.  4.  7.  who  m.  thee  to  ditlijr  from  another  7 

2  Cor.  2.2.  w^ho  is  he  that  in.  me  glad  but  the  samel 
14. IH. manifest  the  savour  of  his  knowledge  by  us 

Gal.  2.  tj.  whatsoever  they  were  it  m.  no  mailer 
f'ph.  4. 10.  m.  increase  of  the  body  to  the  edifying 
Ueb.  7. 28.  for  llie  law  jii.  men  high-jiriesis,  but  tlit) 
word  of  the  oath  since  the  law  in.  the  Son 
liiv.  13.  13.  he  m.  tire  come  down  from  lieav«n 
21.  27.  nor  whatsoever  m.  a  lie,  22.  15. 

MAKETH  haste. 
Frou. 28.  20.  that  m.  haste\ohe  rich, not  innocent 

MAKING. 
2C'AroTi.  30.  22.  m.  confession  to  tli^Lord  God 
Ps.  ly.  7.  lestimoiiy  of  Lord  is  sure,  m.  wise  simple 
Keel.  12.  12.  of  HI.' many  books  there  is  no  end 
Jsa.  3.  It),  walking  and  in.  a.  tinkling  with  their  feet 
./ir.  20.  15.  that  brought  tidings,  jh.  him  very  glad 
.limns  8.  5.  ni.  cphah  small,  and  the  shekel  great 
.1/«r/.-  7.  13.  m.  ihe  word  of  (Jod  of  none  elicct 
.luhn  5.  18.  in.  himself  tKjual  with  God 
2  Cur.  II.  10.  as  poor,  yet  in.  many  rich 
K;;A.  1.10. 1  cease  not  logivu  thanks  foryou.ro.men- 
lioiiofyou  in  my  prayers,17Af«.<.1.2.  /  Ai7rwi.4. 

2.  15.  one  new  man,  so  hi.  peace,  (  ul.  1.  t20. 
5.  10.  m.  melody  in  your  heart  lo  the  Lord 

Phil.i.4.in  every  prayer  for  yon  w .leipio^'f  with  ^oy 
2  Frt.2. 1).  VI.  them  an  ensumple  unto  those  that 
./ur/f22.  of  tome  have  compassion,  in.  a  ditl'crenc* 

MAKING.  , 

Kzrk.  27. 16,  multitude  of  Ihe  wares  of  thv  vi.  18. 

.MALE. 
Orn.  17.  23.  every  m.  circumcised,  34.  15,  22,  24. 
F.jinl.  12.5.  for  the  passover  a  in.  of  the  first  vear 
13.12.  Ihe  7H. shall  be  Ihe  Lord's,  34.19.  /.«♦>  2.2:1 
/,<r.  I.  3.  a  III.  »  ithoiit  blemish,  10. 1  4.  23.  |  22.  J'J 
7.0.  (verv  m.  among  the  priests  shall  cat  Iherenl 
27.  3.  thv  est. mat  ion  shall  be  of  Ihe  m.  .5,  fi,  7. 
.Vvin.  L2.  everv  iH.bv  their  polls  from  20  yenrs  old 
20.  every  in.  frmii  'JO  years  old  anil  upward 

3.  15.  every  in.  from  ainonth  old  and  Upward 

31.  17.  now  kill  every  in.  among  the  litllo  oi.rs 
Drnl.  20.  13.  Ihou  shall  smile  every  m.  thereof 
.'nihr.  21.  II.  ve  shall  utterly  destroy  every  m. 

1  A'i'h;'.--  1  l.lS.he  had  smillen  every  Tii.in  F.dom,  IG. 
.Iir.  30.  t  '>.  sec  if  n  m.  ilolh  travail  with  child 
Ftrk.  IO.  t  17.  madest  lo  thvself  images  of  a  m. 
Mai.  1.  14.  which  haib  in  his  flock  a  m. 
Sir  I'emaI.K. 

MAl.K-CIIILnitKX. 
./«.<*. 17.2.  these  wi^re  Ihe  m.-ehiUlrrn  of  ManBl*all 

MALEFACTOR. 
.Inhn  18.  30.  if  he  wi>re  not  a  jh.  we  would  not 

MALKFACTOHS. 
l.iike  23.  32.  there  were  two  m.  hil  with  hiin 
33.  there  they  crucified  him,  and  the  m. 
39.  one  of  them    rnil.d  on  him,  saying 
MALKP. 
6mi.  34.  25.  Eimcoii  and  Levi  slew  all  the  »• 


MAN 

Kttd  15  46  \et  ill  his  m.  be  circumcised 
IJ.  J6.  I  eaciitic'^  to  Iho  Lord  all  being  m. 
23.  17.  ttiree  limes  in  liio  year  ail  ihy  m.  Bhall 
ai)i)oar  betoro  the  Lord  CJod,  iJetit.  1(5.  16. 
Leo.  6.  Iri.  all  the  m.  of  Aaron  shall  eat  of  it,  ai). 
J\ruiii.  3.  i'i.  according  to  the  number  ot'allm.  IVoni 
a  month  old  and  upward,  28, 34.  |  i!6.  fii. 
40.  number  all  the  tirst-born  of  the  m.  43. 

31.  7.  warred  against  Midianites,  and  slew  (he  m. 
L'eiU.  15.  ly  all  Hrstling  m.  sanctify  to  the  Lord 
Jui:k.  5.  4.  the  m.  that  came  out  ot  Kgypt  died 

2  Chron.  31.  l(i.  beside  their  genealogy  of  jn. 

I'J.  to  give  portions  lo  all  the  m,  among  priests 
Eirai.  3.  were  reckoned  by  genealogy  of  the  m. 

MALICE. 
)  Cor.  5.  8.  keep  the  feust,  not  with  leaven  of  m. 
14.  20.  bowbeu  in  in.  bo  ye  children 
Epii.  4.  31.  be  i)tt  away  from  you  with  all  m. 
Cvl.  3.  8   but  now  ye  also  put  oH'all  these,  ;«. 
7Vi.  3.  3.  sometimes  living  in  )«.  and  envy,  hateful 
1 1'ct.  '2.  1.  wherefore,  laying  aside  nil  m.  and  guile 
MALICIOUS. 

3  John  10.  prating  against  us  with  m.  words 

MALICIOUSNESS. 

Rom.  1  .i!9.  being  tilled  with  all  unrighteousness,  ?«. 

1  Pet.  ~.  10.  not  using  liberty  for  a  cloak  of  Hi. 
MALlCi.MTV. 

Jiom.  1.  is.  full  of  envy,  murder,  debate,  ?n. 
iMALLOVVS. 

Job  30.  4.  who  cut  up  m.  by  the  bushes  for  meat 
MAN. 

Man  wa.',  in  his  original  *■£«<£•,  a  very  noble  and 
exalted  creature ;  being  placed  as  the  head  and 
lord  of  this  world,  hacing  all  the  crcntures  m 
subjection  to  him.  The  powers  and  operations 
of  his  mind  were  extensicc,  capacious,  and  per- 
fect ;  capable  of  contciiiplatiug  upon  the  works 
of  Ood  with  pleasure  and  delight,  and  of  per- 
forming his  will  without  the  least  deviation. 
But  by  sinning  against  his  Creaior,  his  mind 
is  vitiated,  corrupted,  and  debased;  and  he  is 
ill  a  ruined,  lost,  miserable,  and  wrelchtd  state: 
Hence  it  is  asked.  What  is  man?  Psal.  8.  4. 
'JVie  Hebrew  word  for  man  is  Enosh ;  t/iat  is, 
sorry,  wretched,  and  incurably  sick,  to  denote 
his  condition  in  his  apostasy  from  God. 

Man  is  put  for  [1]  The  body,  2  Cor.  4.  Ifi. 
[2]  The  sins  and  corruptions  of  human  na- 
ture, Eph.  4.  22.  [3]  Strong,  valiant,  1  Cor. 
It).  13.  [4]  .'7  magistrate,  Gen.  9.  0.  [5]  Frail, 
weak,  Psal.  9.  20.  [ii]  The  church,  Eph.  2.  13. 
[7]  .J  strong  believer,  Eph.  4.  13.  [8]  .fin 
angel,  .\cts  1.  10.     [9]   The  Lord  .)esus.  Gen. 

32.  24.    Mark  15.  39.     [10]   God  the  Father, 
Rxod.  1.5.  3.  Luke  15.  11. 

To  make  of  twain  one  new  man,  F.ph.  2.  15. 
To  unite  .Jews  and  Gentiles,  who  formerly 
tccrc  at  variance,  into  one  church,  or  body,  join- 
ing together  in,  a  new  way  of  gospel- worship. 

The  gos()el  is  not  after  man,  Gul.  1.  11.  It  is  no 
human  invention,  or  fiction,  neither  doth  it 
depend  upon  human  authority,  but  is  immedi- 
ately revealed  by  God. 

I  speak*iifter  the  manner  of  men.  Gal.  3.  15. 
J  make  use  of  a  comparison  taken  from  the 
custom  of  men  in  their  rinil  affairs. 

A  man  of  Ood,  i'/'im.  3.  17.  One  that  is  guided 
by  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  devoted  to  his  ser- 
rice  in  a  special  manner. 

The  inward  man,  Jluni.  7.  22.  The  new  man, 
the  regenerate  part  within  me,  or  the  principle 
of  grace  in  the  heart. 

The  natural  man,  1  C:or.  2.  14.  The  unreve/iced 
person,  one  that  has  no  principle  of  grace  in 
the  heart,  though  he  be  endued  with  the  ntosl 
czifuisite  natural  arcomplishments,  and  has 
improved  his  v^ason  to  the  highest  pitch. 

Oen.  1. 20.  God  sahl,  let  us  make  m.  in  our  imngp, 
after  oiir  likeni'ss,  27.  |  9.  0. 

2.  7.  llie  Lord  G.  formed  ?n.  of  the  dust  of  ffround 
18.  it  is  not  good  that  m.  should  be  alone 

2.>.  they  were  both  naked,  the  vi.  and  his  wife 

3.  22.  b'diold,  the  m.  is  become  a.-i  one  of  ns 
6.  3.  my  Spirit  shall  not  always  strive  with  m. 

7  I  wdl  destroy  vi.  whom  I  have  created 
R  21.  I  will  not  cur.so  the  ground  for  vi.  sake 
!'.  fi.  m.' blood,  by  m.  shall  his  blood  be  shed 

19.  8.  who  have  not  known  m.  JsTuvi.  31.  35. 

20.  7.  restore  the  ?«.  his  wife,  he  is  a  prophet 
24.  21.  the  m.  wondering  at  her  held  his  peace 

2'1.  Lahan  ran  out  to  the  i.i.  to  the  well 
fiS.  what  m.  is  this  that  walketli  in  the  field  1 
S^t.  10.  bettor  than  I  should  give  licr  lo  another  m, 
3*.  25.  by  tt.fc  Vi.  whoB-;  these  are,  am  I  with  child 
43.  13.  takeyonr  brotlicr,  arise,  go  nsaiii  to  the  m 
AA.  17.  the  )w.  in  who.»e  hand  the  onp  is  found 
Exod.  2.  20.  why  is  it  that  ye  have  left  the  m.  J 
21.  Moses  was  ccmtent  to  dwell  with  the  m. 

4.  II.  tliP  Lord  said,  who  h.itli  made  m.  mouth? 
30.  32.  upon  m.  flesh  shnll  it  not  be  poured 

3G5 


MAN 

Exod.  32.1.  the  ni.that  brought  us  out  of  Egypt,  23. 
Leo.  17.  4.  blood  shall  be  imputed  to  that  vi.  and 
that  m.  shall  be  cut  oH"  from  among  the  people 
JVtt»;i.5.15.  then  shall  the  jrt.  bring  his  wile  to  priest 
9. 13.  but  the  Jrt.  that  is  clean,  and  not  in  a  journey 

12.  3.  the  m.  Moses  was  very  meek  above  all  men 
15.  35.  the  7n.  shall  be  jiut  lo  death,  JJeut.  22. 25. 
10.  7i  the  in.  whom  the  Lord  doth  choose,  be  holy 
19. 20.  but  m.  that  shall  be  unclean  and  shall  not 

Veut.  4.  32.  since  the  day  that  God  created  m 

5.  24.  God  dotii  talk  with  m.  and  he  liveth 

8.3.  make  thee  know  that  iH.doth  not  live  by  broad 

only,  but  by  every  w  ord.  Mat.  4.  4.  Luke  4.  4 

20.  19.  tor  the  tree  of  the  field  is  m.  life 

Josh.  7.  14.  and  they  shall  come  m.  by  m.  17,  16. 
Judg.  1. 25.  hut  they  let  go  Uio  m.  and  all  his  family 
4.  22. 1  will  shew  thee  the  in.  whom  thou  seokest 

8.  21.  for  as  the  m.  is,  so  is  his  strength 

9.  9.  wherewith  by  mo  they  honour  God  and  jii. 

13.  my  wine  which  cheerelh  God  and  vi. 

10.  18.  what  ni.  will  fight  against  Amnion  1 

13.  10.  the  HI.  hath  appeared  that  came  to  me 

11.  art  thou  the  m.  spakest  to  the  woman? 

10.  7.  1  shall  be  weak,  and  as  another  m.  11,  17 
19.  22.  bring  forth  the  m.  that  came  into  thy  house 

28.  then  the  m.  took  her  on  an  ass  and  rose 
liuth  1.  2.  the  name  of  the  ni.  was  Elimelech,  2. 19. 

3.18.  for  the  ift.will  not  be  in  rest,till  he  hath  finish. 

1  .S"am.2.33.  the  m.  of  thine  whom  1  shall  not  cut  off 
4.  14.  the  VI.  came  in  hastily,  and  told  Eli 

9.  0.  a  m.  of  God,  and  he  is  an  honourable  m. 
17.  behold  the  m.  whom  I  spake  to  thee  of 

10.  22.  if  the  m.  should  yet  come  thither 
10.  7.  for  the  Lord  sceth  not  as  m.  seeth 

17.  20.  what  be  done  to  the  m.  that  killetli  him? 

21.  14.  lo,  ye  see  the  tn.  is  mad,  wherefore  then 

2  Sam.  12.  5.  David's  anger  kindled  against  the  ni 

said  to  Nathan,  m.  who  did  this  shall  surely  die 
7.  Nathan  said  to  David,  tliou  art  the  m. 
10.  7.  come  out,  come  out,  thou  bloody  m.  8. 
17.  3.  the  m.  thuu  seekest  is  as  if  all  returned 
21.5.  m.  that  consumed  us,  and  devised  against  us 
23.  1.  the  irt.  who  was  raised  up  on  high 

1  Kings  20.  20.  and  they  slew  every  one  his  m. 

2  Kings  5.  20.  when  »h.  turned  again  to  meet  thee 
G.  19.  I  will  bring  you  to  the  m.  whom  ye  seek  / 
9.  11.  you  know  the  m.  and  his  communication 

22.  15.  tell  the  m.  that  sent  you,  2  Chr.  34.  23. 
1  Chr.  23.  3.  the  Levites  wi.  by  iit.  were  38,000 

29.  1.  the  palace  is  not  for  /«.  but  for  the  L.  God 
i  Chron.  14.  11.  let  not  m.  prevail  against  thee 

19.  6.  for  ye  judge  not  for  m.  but  for  the  Lord 
Esth.  0. 6.  what  shall  be  done  to  the  m.  whom,  7,9. 

7.  t6.  the  ?ii.  adversary  is  this  wicked  Hainan 
Job  4.  17.  shall  m.  be  more  just  than  God  ? 
5. 7.  yet  jii.  is  born  to  trouble,  as  sparks  Hy  upward 

17.  happy  is  the  m.  whon*  God  correcteth 
7.1.  is  there  not  an  appoiiiled  time  for  m.  on  earth? 
17.  what  is  m.  that  thou  sliouldest  magnify  him  ? 
15.  14.  Psal.  8.  4.  |  144.  3.  Heb.  2.  6. 

9.  2.  but  how  should  ni.  he  just  with  God  1 

10.  4.  eyes  of  flesh?  or  seest  thou  as  m.  seeth  ? 
5.  are  thy  days  as  days  of  ni. .'  years  as>«.  days  ? 

11. 12.  vain  M.  would  be  wise,  tho'  ni.  be  born  like 

14.  1.  ni.  that  is  born  of  a  woman  is  of  few  days 
10.  m.  dielh  and  waslelh  away.iit.givelh  up  ghost 

12.  so  m.  lieth  down,  and  risetb  not  till  heavens 

15.  7.  ait  thou  the  first  m.  that  was  born  ? 

14.  what  is  m.  that  he  should  be  clean  ? 

10.  how  much  more  aliominalile  and  filthy  ism. 

20.  4.  since  m.  was  first  placed  on  the  earth 

21.  4.  as  for  mo  is  my  complaint  to  m.  7 

25.  4.  how  then  can  ni.  be  justified  with  God? 

(i.  how  much  less  m.thal  is  a  worm, and  son  of  iii. 
32.8.  there  is  asfiirilin  m.  iiispirati(m  of  Almighty 

13.  God  thrnslelh  him  down,  not  m. 

33.  12.  I  answer,  that  God  is  greater  than  711. 

14.  God  sjieaketli,  yet  m.  perceiveth  it  not 

17.  he  opens  Ihe  eais  of  men,  that  he  may  with- 
draw m.  from  jmrposi^,  and  hide  pride  from  m. 
23.  if  a  messenger,  to  shew  torn,  his  uprightness 

29.  these  things  worketh  God  often  with  Hi. 

34.  7.  what  vi.  islike  Job,  who  drinkelh  scorning? 
14.  if  he  set  his  heart  upcmm. if  he  gather  lohims. 
23.  for  he  will  not  lay  on  m.  more  than  riglit 

I'sal.  9.  19.  arise,  O  Lord,  let  not  m.  prevail 
10.  IS.  that  the  ?/i.  of  earth  may  no  more  oppress 
2.").  12.  what  m.  is  he  that  feareth  the  Lord  ? 
34.  12.  what  m.  is  he  that  d.sireth  life  ? 
39.  11.  when  thou  dost  correct  m.  for  iniriuity 
49.  12.  m.  being  in  honour  abideth  not,  20. 
•W.  11.  I  will  not  be  afraid  what  ?«.  can  do  to  me 
fi8.  t  18.  thou  hast  received  gifts  in  the  Hi. 
78.  2.';.  m.  did  eat  angels'  food,  he  sent  them  meat 
80.  17.  thy  hand  be  on  Iho  m.  of  thy  right  hand 
89. 48.  what  m.is  he  that  liveth,  and  not  see  death? 
90.  3.  thou  lunipstm.  to  destruction,  and  saycst 
94.  10.  that  leachetliHi.knowl.shallnothe  know? 

103.  l.").  as  form,  his  days  arc  as  grass,  as  a  flower 

104.  23.  m.  goeih  forth  to  bis  work  and  labour 


MAN 

Psal.  118.  6. 1  will  not  fear  what  m.  can  do  to  t» 

8.  better  trust  in  Lord,  than  put  confidence  in  m 
120.  t  7.  I  am  a  hi.  of  peace,  they  are  for  war 
144.4.  m.  is  like  to  vanity,  his  days  as  a  shadow 

Prov.  2. 12.  from  Hi.  thai  speaketJi  froward  things 
6.  11.  and  thy  want  come  as  an  armed  111.  24.  34 
16.  1.  the  preparations  of  Ihe  heart  in  m. 

20.  24.  Hi.  goings  are  of  the  Lord,  bow  can  a  hk 
26. 19. 80  is  the  m.  that  deceivelh  his  neighbour 

Eccl.  1.  8.  things  full  of  labour,  m.  cannot  utter  it 
2. 12.  what  can  the  j;i.  do  that  cometh  after  kijjg? 

22.  for  what  hath  m.  of  all  his  labour  ? 
6.  10.  is  named,  and  it  is  known  that  it  is  m. 

11.  what  is  m.  better  ?  ||  12.  what  is  good  for  7/i.? 

12.  5.  because  vi.  gooth  to  his  long  home 

/sa.  2.22.  cease  from  w.w  hose  breath  is  in  his  nostr. 
38.  11.  I  said,  I  shall  behold  /«.  no  more 
40. 1 13.  or  being  the  Hi.'of  his  counsel,  hath  taught 
40.  11.  the  ni.  that  e.vecuteth  my  counsel 
.fer.  10.  23.  it  is  not  in  m.  to  direct  his  steps 
Lam.  3.  1.  I  am  the  m.  that  hath  seen  affliction 
Ezek.  4. 15.  I  have  given  cows'  dung  for  Hi.  dung 

18.  8.  hath  executed  judgment  between  m.  and  m. 
Dan.  4.  16.  let  his  heart  be  changed  from  m. 

10.  19.  said,  O  7it.  greatly  beloved,  fear  not 
Hos.  11. 9.  for  I  am  God,  and  not  m.  the  holy  One 
.'y»ios  4.13.  and  dcclarelli  lo»«.  what  is  his  thought 
Mie.  5.  7.  that  tatrieth  not  for  m.  nor  waitcth 

6.  8.  he  hath  shewed  thee,  O  ?ii.  what  is  good 

9.  the  m.  of  wi.>.dom  shall  see  thy  name 
Hab.l.yZ.  the  wicked  devourctli  m.  more  righteous 
'/-eph.  1.  3.  I  will  cut  ofl'the  m.  from  the  land 
Zech.  6.  12.  the  m.  whose  name  is  tlie  Branch 

13.  5.  for  ?n.  taught  me  to  keep  cattle  from  youth 

7.  awake,  O  sword,  against  m.  that  is  my  lelluw 
Mai.  2. 12.  Lord  will  cut  oft"  the  m.  that  doeth  this 
jl/a£.7.9.what»H.isthereofyou,if  hisson  ask  bread, 

will  give  him  a  stone  ?  12. 11.  Luke  15.  4. 
15.  18.  from  tho  heart,  and  they  defile  the  m. 

19.  0.  let  not  m.  put  asunder,  Mark  10.  9. 
26.  72.  he  denied,  I  do  not  know  tho.  hi.  74. 

Mark  2.27.sabl)atli  was  made  for  Hi.not  rii.for  sahb. 

11.  2.  shall  find  a  colt  tied,  whereon  never  m.  sat 
J^uke  5.  20.  he  said,  m.  thy  sins  are  forgiven  tlie« 

J2.  14.  m.  who  made  me  a  judge  over  you  ? 

18.  4.  though  I  fear  not  God,  nor  regard  ni. 

22.  58.  thou  art  of  them,  Peter  said,  m.  I  am  not 
(iO.  Peter  said,m.  I  know  not  what  thou  sayest 

23.  6.  he  asked,  whelher  the  111.  was  a  Galilean  J 
.53.  wherein  never  hi.  was  laid,  .fohn  19.  41. 

.John  2.  25.  for  he  knew  what  was  in  m. 
5.  12.  what  HI.  is  that  which  said  unto  thee 
34.  hut  I  received  not  testimony  from  hi. 
15.  24.  the  works  which  none  other  m.  did 

19.  5.  Pilato  said  unto  them,  behold  the  hi. 
./iets  4.  22.  for  the  m.  was  above  forty  years  old 

8.31.  how  can  1,  e.\cept  some  m.  should  guide  me? 

34.  eunuch  said,  of  himself,  or  of  some  other  m.7 
19.  16.  the  i«.  in  whom  the  evil  spirit  was 

35.  what  HI.  is  there  that  knoweth  not  how  that 

21.  11.  so  shall  bind  Ihe  m.  that  ownelh  this  girdle 
23.  30.  how  the  Jews  laid  wait  for  the  in. 
25.22.  .\grippa  said,  I  would  also  hear  Ihem.  mys. 

I{om.2.\.  ini\cusahle,  Om.||3.  thinkest  thou,  Om 

7.  22. 1  delight  in  law  of  God  after  the  inward  m 
24.0  wrolched  m.  that  I  am, who  shall  deliv.  mc? 

9.20.  but  O  III.  who  art  thou  that  rcplicst  ag.  God? 

10.5.ihe  righteousness  of  the  law,the  m.whodoeth 

these  things  shall  live  by  them.  Gal.  3. 12. 

lO.witli  the  heart  jii.belioveth  unto  righteousness 

1  Cor.  2.  11.  what  hi.  knowelh  Ihe  things  of  a  m.J 
7.  If),  how  knowest  thou,  O  pi.  whether  thou 
10. 13.  no  tomplation  hut  such  as  is  common  to  ni. 
II.  3.  and  the  head  of  the  woman  is  the  m. 

8.  HI.  is  not  of  the  woman  |{  9.  hut  worn. for  the  m. 

11.  nor  is  the  Hi.  wilhonl  llie  woman,  nor  the  wo- 

man without  the  hi.  in  the  Lord 

12.  even  so  is  the  m.  also  by  'he  woman 

15. 21.  since  bym.  came  death,  by  hi.  came  resurr, 
45.  the  first  711.  .Adam  was  made  a  living  soul 
47.  llie  first  771.  is  ofthe  earth, earthy ;  the  secona 
711.  is  the  Lord  from  heaven 

2  Cor.  4. 10.  but  lliongh  our  outward  hi.  perish,  yet 

the  inward  m.  is  renewed  day  by  day 
Gal.  1.  1.  on  apostle,  not  of  men,  neither  by  m. 

11.  the  gosjiel  I  preached  is  not  after  711. 
F.ph.  2.  15.  for  to  make  of  twain  one  newm. 

3.  16.  with  might  by  his  Spirit  in  Ihe  inner  nt. 

4.  24.  that  ye  put  on  new  711.  created  in  rigbtcousn 
Cci/.3.10.  have  put  on  the  new  711.  which  is  renewed 
I  7'/irs.4.8.despiseth  not  771. but  God, w  ho  haihgiven 
1  7V)ii.2.5.hotween  God  and  men,  the  711.  Chr.  Jesus 

12.  woman  not  to  usurp  authority  over  the  m. 
Tit.3.4.  love  of  G.  our  Saviour  toward  7ii.app<!ared 
Neb.  3.  4.  for  every  house  is  built  by  some  m. 

fi.  2.  the  tabernacle  the  Lord  pitched,  and  not  m. 

13.  fi.  I  will  not  fear  what  7n.  shall  do  to  mo 
.fnn>.^  .8.  a  double-minded  711. is  unstable  in  his  ways 

2.  20.  wilt  thou  know,  O  vain  711.  that  faith 
1  Pit.  3.  4.  let  it  be  the  hidden  m.  of  the  UeiM 


MAN 

A  MAN. 
Ocn.  2.  5.  there  was  iiol  a  m.  to  lill  the  ground 
ii4.  lliorefore  shall  am.  leave  his  fatlier  and  mo- 
ther, Mat.  19.  5.  Mark  10.  7.  Kph.  5.  3J. 
4.  1.  I  liave  gotten  a  in.  i'roiii  tlie  Lord 
23.  Ibr  I  liave  slain  a  m.  to  my  wounding 
II    t  3.  1  "1.  Baid  to  his  neighbour,  let  us  burn 
];i  i(j.  if  a  m.  can  number  tlie  du»t  of  the  earth 
]U  31.  tiierc  is  nut  a  in.  to  come  in  unto  us 
SO.  3.  thou  art  a  dead  man,  fur  she  is  a  m.  wife 
"J.  27.  Ksau  a  cunning  hunter,  a  m.  of  the  lield 
32. 24.  there  wrestled  a  in.  with  him  till  breaking 
41.33.  let  Pharaoh  look  out  a  m.  discreet  and  wise 
''8.  a  in.  in  whom  the  Sj)irit  of  God  is 
i4.15.  wot  ye  not  such  u  hi. as  lean  certainly  divine 
4'J.  G.  for  in  their  anger  they  slew  a  in. 
Ktod.  2. 1 14.  he  said, who  made  thee  a  in.  a  prince 
.J.  t  IIJ.  I  judge  between  a  m.  and  liis  fellow 
Si.  11.  face  to  lace,  as  a  in.  speuketh  to  his  friend 
i>ev.  13.  y.  when  the  plague  of  leprosy  is  in  a  m 
IS.  5.  my  judgments,  which  if  u  /■».  do  he  shall  livi 
in  tliem,  .Vch.  9. 29.  Ezek.  20. 11, 13, 21 
S4.10.and  a  m. of  Israel  strove  together  inthe  camp 

2U.  as  he  hath  caused  a  blemish  in  a  in. 
27.  28.  no  devoted  thing  a  in.  shall  devote 
JVum.  1.  4.  there  shall  be  a  in.  of  every  tribe 
]3.  2.  of  every  tribe  shall  ye  send  a  in. 

15.  30.  they  found  a  in.  that  gathered  sticks 
!'.>■  14.  tills  is  the  law  when  a  in.  dieth  in  a  tent 
23.I9.G.  is  not  a  m.that  he  should  lie,  l.b'am.15.29. 
2u.  64.  among  these  thore  was  nut  a  m.  of  them 

do.  there  was  not  left  a  /n.saye  Caleb  andJoshua 
27.  16.  set  a  m.  over  the  congregation 
18.  take  thee  Joshua,  a  in.  in  whom  is  the  Spirit 
Dcut.  1.  31.  Lord  bare  thee,  as  a  in.  doth  his  sun 
3.  11.  the  breadth  of  it,  after  the  cubit  of  a  in. 
8.  5.  consider,  that  as  a  m.  cha.sleneth  his  sun 

19.  15.  one  witness  shall  not  rise  against  a  in. 
Josh.  3.  12.  take  ye  out  of  every  tribe  a  in.  4.  2,  4. 

5.13.  there  stood  a  m.over-against  him  with  sword 
lO.H.  there  shall  not  a  in.of  them  stand  befure  tbee 

14.  ;.'.e  I>orii  hea>kened  to  the  voice  of  u  in. 
14.15.'vliich  Arba  was  u  great  ;n. among  Anakims 
21.  44.  stood  not  a  m.  of  all  their  enemies  before 
Jiiiig.  1.  24.  the  spies  saw  u  in.  come  out  of  the  city 

3.  29.  esca|)ed  not  a  m.  |{  4.  IG.  was  not  a  m.  left 
7.13.theru  was  a  m.that  told  a  dream  to  his  fellow 

14.  save  the  sword  of  Gideon  a  m.  of  Israel 
10.1.  Tola  a  »i.  of  Issachar||ll).l9.  she  called  am. 
Jlntk  4.  7.  a  m.  plucked  oll'liis  shoe  and  gave  it 

1  Sam.  9.  16. 1  will  send  thee  a  in.  out  of  Benjamin 
1 1.  13.  there  shall  noi  a  in.  be  put  to  death 

13.  14.  the  Lord  hath  sought  aim  a  ;«. 

14.  36.  and  let  us  not  leave  a  la.  of  theui 

16.  16.  to  .seek  out  a  m.  who  is  a  cunning  player 
17.  provide  me  a  m.  that  can  play  well, bring  him 

17.  8.  choose  you  a  m.  fur  yuu,  let  him  cunie 
10.  give  me  a  rn.  that  we  may  fight  together 

25. 17.  he  is  such  that  a  m.  cannot  speak  to  him 
30.  17.  and  there  escaped  not  a  in.  of  them 

2  Sam.  3.  34.  as  a  in.  fallelh  before  wicked  men 
3S.  Abner  a  great  vi.  is  fallen  this  day  in  Israel 

16.  23.  as  if  a  vti  enquired  at  the  oracle  of  God 

18.  t  20.  thou  shalt  not  be  a  in.  of  tidings 

20.  1.  there  happened  to  be  thcire  a  in.  of  Belial 

1  Kini^s  2.  2.  be  strong,  and  shew  thyself  a  in. 

4.  not  fail  thee  a  in.  on  the  Ihroiie,  H.  25. 
2t).39.  a  in.  turned  aside,  and  brought  a  m.  to  me 
42.  a  m.  whom  I  appointed  to  destruction 

2  Kings  1.  6.  there  came  a  m.  to  meet  us,  and  said 

4.  42.  there  came  a  m.  from  Baal-shalisha 

10.  21.  there  was  not  a  in.  left  that  came  not 
13.  21.  as  they  weTe  burying  a  m.  they  sjiied 

1  Chron.  22.  9.  a  son  born,  whoshall  be  a  in.  of  ro»<t 

2  Chron.  6.  IG.  there  shall  not  fail  thee  a  m.  7.  18. 
.Vck.  2.  10.  >u>me  «  in.  to  seek  the  welfare  of  Israel 

6.  11.  I  said,  should  such  n  in.  lis  I  flee? 
J<>42.4.all  that  a  m.  halh  will  he  give  for  his  life 

3.  23.  why  is  light  given  to  a  in.  whu.se  way 

4.  17.  shall  a  m.  be  more  pure  than  liis  Maker? 
».  3S.  ho  is  not  «  m.  as  I  nm,  that  I  should  answer 

11.  2.  and  sliuuld  a  m.  full  of  talk  be  justified  ! 
12. 14.  he  shullelh  up  a  m.  \\  14.  14.  if  o  w.  die 
16. 21. 0  thai  one  might  plead  for  u  m.  with  God, 

n»  a  m.  pluadeih  for  his  neighbour 
S9  2.  canam.lK!  profitable  to  G.as  lii>  that  is  wise? 
3-1.  29.  whclher  done  against  a  nation  or  a  in. 
35.  8.  thv-winkedm-BK  may  hurt  a  w.  as  thou  art 
37.  20.  if  «  7/1.  speak  In-  shall  be  swallowiid  up 
.38.  3.  gird  up  now  thy  Inins  like  a  m.  40.  7. 

Psal.  3n.  14.  I  was  n«  a  in.  lliat  heareth  not 
.Vi.  13.  hut  it  was  Ihou  a  m.  mini!  eipnil 
62.  .3.  how  long  will  y«  imagine  iiiischirf  ag.  a  w.l 
74.  5.  nm.  was  famous  according  an  he  lifted  up 
PH.  4.  I  am  as  a  m.  that  lialh  no  strengih 
}{)!>.  17.  he  sent  a  m.  bofore  iheni,  oven  .lo.ieph 
1 17.  10.  he  Inketh  not  pleasiiro  in  the  legp*  ofn  m. 

Vrov.  3.  30.  strive  not  v»ilh  n  m.  without  cause 
6.  34.  for  jealousy  i.i  tho  rage  of  «  tn. 
14.  12.  a  way  that  teemnth  rieiii  tu  a  an   10  25 

•ma 


MAN 

Pro  B.16.2.all  ways  of  a  wi. are  t^jan  In  his  own  eye» 
7.  when  u  m.  ways  please  the  L'  • "  '•»  'naketh 
20.  24.  how  can  a  m.  understand  lii_     ca  -vay? 
23.  2.  if  thou  bo  a  m.  given  to  appetit*, 

26.  21.  so  a  contentious  in.  to  kindle  striti 

27.  8.  BO  is  a  in.  that  wandereth  from  his  pl-yr. 

21.  as  the  furnace,  so  is  a  in.  to  his  praise 

28.  12.  but  when  tho  wicked  rise  a  in.  is  hidden 
23.  he  that  rebuketh  a  m.  shall  find  more  favour 

29.  1 1.  u  m.  of  reproofs  1|  t  4.  a  »«.  of  oblations 
20.  seest  thou  a  in.  that  is  hasty  in  words  ? 

Eccl.  2.21.  there  is  a  m.  whose  labour  is  in  wisdom 
and  knowledge.yet  to  a  wi.that  hath  not  labour. 

26.  God  giveth  to  u  in.  that  is  good  in  liis  sight 

4.  4.  for  this  o  in.  is  envied  of  his  neighbour 

6.  2.  a  in.  to  whom  God  hatii  given  riches 

12.  who  can  tell  a  m.  what  shall  be  after  him  ? 
10. 14.  a  in.  cannot  tell  what  shall  be  after  him 

11.  8.  if  a  in.  live  many  years,  and  rejoice  in  them 
Cant.  8.  7.  if  u  in.  would  give  all  his  substance 
ha.  6.  5.  because  I  am  a  in.  of  unclean  lips 

13.  12.  I  will  make  a  in.  mote  precious  than  gold 
17.  7.  at  that  day  shall  a  m.  look  to  his  maker 

28.  20.  than  that  a  in.  can  stretch  himself  on  it 

29.  21.  that  make  a  in.  an  uliender  for  ^  wiid 

32.  2.  a  in.  shall  be  a  hiding  place  fron;  >>  wind 
47.  3.  and  1  will  not  meet  thee  as  a  m. 

53.3.  he  is  a  in.  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  gr. 
58.  5.  a  day  for  a  in.  to  afflict  his  soul  ? 

60.  3.  he  that  killeth  an  ox,  i»  as  if  he  slew  a  m. 
Jer.  4.  29.  forsaken,  and  not  u  in.  dwell  therein 

5.  1.  seek  in  broad  places,  if  "e  can  find-a  m. 

14.  9.  why  shouiucst  thou  be  as  a  m.  astonied  ? 
15.10.  tliat  thou  hast  borne  me  a  m.  of  strife 
16.20.Bhall  a  iii.make  ^ods  to  himself  and  no  gods? 

22.  30.  a  in.  that  shall  not  prosjier  in  his  days 

23.  9.  I  am  like  a  in.  whom  wine  hath  overcome 
.30.  6.  see  whether  a  in.  doth  tiavail  with  child  7 
31.  22.  a  woman  shall  compass  a  in. 

33.17.  David  shall  never  want  a?H.tosit  on  throne 

18.  nor  shall  the  priests  want  a  in.  befoie  me 
35.19.  Joiiadab  shall  not  want  a  ni.to  stand  bcl'.me 
50.  42.  every  man  put  in  array  like  a  in.  to  battle 
iMm.  3.  26.  It  is  good  for  a  vi.  to  hope  and  wait 
27.  it  is  guud  for  a  in.  that  he  bear  tho  yoke 
39.  cumpluin,  a  in.  for  the  jiunishment  of  his  sins 
Ezck.  22.  30.  1  sought  for  a  m.  among  them 
28.  2.  yet  thou  art  u  m.  and  not  God,  9. 

33.  2.  if  ihe  people  of  the  land  take  a  m. 
Van.  2.  10.  not  a  m.  on  earth  that  can  shew 

25.  I  have  found  u  in.  of  the  captives  of  Judah 
5.  11.  there  is  a  in.  in  thy  kingdom  in  whom 
7.  4.  stand  as  a  in.  and  a  in.  heart  was  given  to  it 

9.  t  23.  I  am  come,  for  thou  art  a  m.  of  desires 

10.  11.  he  said,  O  Daniel,  a  m.  greatly  beloved 
Ho.t.  6.  9.  as  troops  of  robbers  wail  for  a  m. 

9.12.  that  there  shall  not  be  a  in.  left,  woe  to  them 

11.4.  1  drew  them  w  ith  cords  of  a  in.  with  bands 
iino.^  2.  7.  a  in.  and  his  father  go  in  to  uiie  maid 

5.  19.  as  if  a  in.  did  flee  from  a  lion,  and  a  bear 
Mic.  2.  2.  ojipress  a  in.  and  his  house,  even  a  in. 

11.  if  a  in.  walking  in  spirit  and  falsehood 

7.0.a  m.enemies  are  the  men  (if  his  own  house, the 

daughter  against  her  mother,  Mat.  10.  36. 

Mal.3.n.;i6  J  //i.spareth  his  own  son  that  serv. him 

Mat.  H.  9.  I  am  a  m.  under  authority,  lAike  7.  6. 

10.  35.  1  am  come  to  set  a  in.  at  variance 

12.  12.  how  much  is  a  in.  better  than  a  sheep? 
43.  the  unclean  sjiirit  is  gone  out  of  a  in. 

15.  11.  Cometh  out  of  the  mouth  dofiletli  a  in. 
20.  to  eat  with  unwashen  hands  delileth  not  n  m. 

19. 3.  is  it  lawful  for  a  ;«.  to  put  away,  .Mark  10.2. 
22.  24.  if  a  in.  die,  having  no  children 
26.  18.  he  said  go  into  the  cily,  to  such  a  in.  and 
say  to  him,  Mark  14.  13.  J.nki:  22.  10. 
/,uA'nl.34.howshiill  this  be, seeing  I  know  not  a  in.? 
5.  8.  dejiart,  for  I  am  a  sinful  in.  ()  Lord 

13.  19.  which  a  m.  took  and  cast  into  his  garden 
19.  7.  to  be  guest  with  ii  hi.  thai  is  a  siiiiier 

.luhn  1.  6.  there  was  a  Tn.sent  from  (i.  named  Jolm 

30.  after  me  Cometh  a  m.  who  is  preferred  hcf.  me 

3.  3.  e.vce|)l  a  in.  ho  horn  again,  he  cannot  see,  5. 
4.  how  can  a  in.  bo  born  when  lie  is  old  ? 

27.  (1  in.  can  receive  nothing,  except  given  h'.rn 

4.  29.  come,  see  «  in.  which  told  ine  all  things 

7.  23.  angry,  hocnuse  I  have  made  a  m.  whole 

8.  40.  a  jn.'thnt  hath  told  you  tho  truth 

9.  II.  a  m.  that  is  called  .lesus  made  clay 

16.  how  can  a  in.  a  siimor,  ilo  such  miradcu 

10.  33.  thou  being  a  m.  makost  thysnif  God 

14.  23.  if  (I  HI.  love  mo,  ho  will  keep  my  words 

16.  21.  tor  joy  that  a  in.  is  horn  into  the  world 
.'Irt.i'i.  22.  Jesus  nm.  approved  of  God  among  you 

II).  26.  stand  up,  I  myself  also  nm  n  m. 
13.  22.  I  found  David,  n  m.  alter  minn  own  lieart 
41.  not  behove,  though  a  w.  doclato  it  to  you 
16.  9.  there  stood  a  m.  of  Macedonia  prayed  him 
2r.  39.  I  nm  <i  m.  who  nm  n  Jow  of  Tarsus 
Uiivi.  2.  21.  that  proachest  n  7«.  should  not  steal 

22.  sayusi,  a  m.  ihould  not  commit  adultery 


MAN 

Iiom.3.5. 1  »peak  as  a  in.  \\  7.  1.  dominion  ovei  a  m 

1  Cot.  4. 1.  let  a  in.  so  account  of  us  as  ministers 

2.  it  is  requited,  tliat  a  vi.  he  found  faitbfiJ 
6.18.  every  sin  that  a  m.  doeth  is  without  the  bodj 

7.  1.  it  is  good  for  a  m.  not  to  touch  a  womaii 
26.  I  Bay  that  it  is  good  for  a  in.  so  to  be 

9.  8.  say  I  these  things  as  a  m.  or  sailh  not  law  ? 

11.  7.  a  HI.  indeed  ought  not  '.o  cover  hii  head 
14.  if  a  m.  have  long  hair,  it  is  a  shame 

28.  but  let  a  in.  examine  hiins.  and  so  let  him  eat 
i ,♦.  11.  but  when  became  a  in.  I  put  away  childisli 

2  COJ-.2.6.  suflicient  to  such  a  in.  is  this  jiunishment 

8.  12.  it  is  accepted  according  to  that  a  in.  hath 
11.20.  if  a  in.  bring  you  into  bondage,  if  a  m.  smite 
12.2. 1  knew  a  i/i.in  Christ  caught  up  to  heaven,  3. 

4.  which  it  is  not  lawful  fur  u  in.  to  utter 
(ial.  2. 16.  a»H.  is  not  justified  by  works  of  the  law 

6.  1.  brethren,  if  a  in.  be  overtiken  in  a  fault 

3.  if  a  m.  tUnk  himself  to  be  something 
Phil.  2.  8.  and  being  found  in  fashion  as  a  m. 

1  Tim.  1.  8.  tJie  law  is  good,  if  a  in.  use  it  lawfully 
3.  1.  if  a  m.  desire  the  olSce  of  a  bishop 

5.  if  a  in.  know  not  how  to  rule  his  houee 
2'J'iin.  2.  5.  if  a  m.  also  strive  for  masteries 

21.  if  u  in.  therefore  purge  himself 
Tit.  3.  10,  (I  HI.  that  is  a  heretic,  reject 
.Jam.  I.  2:!.  he  is  like  a  m.  beholding  his 
2.  2.  if  there  come  a  in.  with  a  gold  rio^ 

14.  what  profit,  though  a  in.  say,  he  hain  f&. 

18.  a  in.  may  say,  thou  hnst  faith,  I  have  wo 

24.  ye  see  liow  that  b^'  works  a  in.  is  justifio^ 
5.17.  Elias  w  as  a  in.  subject  to  like  passions  as  we 

1  I'tt.  2.  19.  if  a  1(1.  for  conscience  toward  God 

2  Pet.  2. 19.  for  of  whom  a  in.  is  overcome 

1  .John  4.  20.  if  a  in.  say,  I  love  God,  and  hatetn 
Rev.  4.  7.  the  third  beast  had  a  face  as  a  m. 

9.  5.  as  torment  ofscorpiim,  when  hceirikcth  dm. 

.f  certain  MAN. 
Ocn. 37. 15.  a  certain  vi.  found  him,  and  asked  him 

2  .Sam. 18.10.  u  c.  in.  saw  it,  and  told  Jonb,  and  said 
Ih'intrs  22.34.  a  c.m.drew  bow  at  vent.  2CAr.lH.33. 
Mat.2l.iii.  a  certain  m.  had  two  sons,  J.nkr  15.11. 
I.,uki:  10.30.a  certain  ?n.wcnt  down  from  Jerusalem 

12.  16.  the  ground  of  a  cert,  rich  m.  biought  forth 

13.  6.  ac.  in.  had  a  fig-tree  planted  in  his  vineyard 

14.16.  ac.  in.  made  a  great  supper,  and  bade  many 
16. 1.  there  was  a  certain  vi.  which  had  a  steward 

18.  35.  a  c.  blind  m.  sat  by  the  way-side  begging 
19. 12.  a  certain  noble- hi.  went  into  a  far  country 
20.9.  a  certain  m. planted  a  vineyard,  and  let  it  out 

./oA7i4.46.ac.noble-Hi. whose  son  was  sick  atCapcr. 
11.1. now  a  on. was  sick,  named  La/ar.  of  Iletha. 

yicts3.i2.a  certain  ;h. lame  from  his  mother's  womb 
5.1. a  certain  »n. named  .Ananias,  sold  a  po.-session 
8.9. a  certain  m.  called  Simeon,  who  used  sorcery 
9.33.and  Iherehe  foun^  a  certain  in.  n.imed  Eneas 
10.1  .there  was  a  c.  in.  in  Cesarea  called  ( 'orneluia 
14.H.there  sat  a  cm.  at  Lyslra,impoteiit  in  his  feet 
18.7.entered  into  a  certain  jrt.housc  named  Justus 
19.24.acrrt«;nni.nBmed  Demetrius, a  silver-smith 
25. 14.  there  is  a  certain  in.  left  in  bonds  by  Felix 
Jiny  M.AN. 

Oeii.  24.  16.  a  virgin,  nor  had  nnti  in.  known  Ii»r 
47.6.ifthou  knowest  a.m.  of  activity  aniilhgthein 

F.xod.  24.  14.  if  any  7n.  have  any  matters  to  do 
34.  .3.  nor  h-t  any  m.be  seen  through  all  Ihe  mount 
24.  nor  shall  any  in.  desire  thy  l.ind,  when  go  up 

Lev.  15.  2.  when  any  m.  Iiatli  a  running  issue 
1<).  \i  any  in.  seed  of  copulation  go  out  from  him 
24.if  any  7H. lie  with  her  at  all,lie  shall  be  unclean 

24.17.  that  killeth  n.m.shall  surely  be  put  to  death 
jVum.  5.  10.  whatsoever  any  in.  giveth  the  priest 

12.  if  «Hy  HI. wife  go  aside,  and  commit  a  trespass 
6.  9.  if  n«y  m.  die  very  suddenly  by  him 

19.  II.  that  toucheth  the  dead  body  of  any  in.  13. 

21.9.  if  a  serpent  had  bitten  any  m.  when  beheld 
Dent.  19.  II.  ifrt.  in.  hate  his neighh.  and  smile  him 

Iti.if  falsi'  wilne.sa  rise  up  against  any  m.to  testify 
22.8.blood  on  thy  house, if  n»ii/  m.  fall  from  thenco 

23.10.  Iheie  he  any  ni. among  you  that  is  not  cli'an 
./0/.-A.I.5.  shall  not  any  ni.be  able  to  stand  hcf.  theo 

2.  11.  nor  did  there  remain  courage  in  any  in. 
.Indir.  4.20.  W'unym.  enquire,  is  there  any  in.  here? 
16.17. 1  shall  become  weak  and  be  liken.  ntherTTi. 
If^.  7.  and  had  no  business  with  nnjf  m.  28. 

1  .SiiHi.  2.  13.  that  when  any  in.  offered  sacrifice 

16.  if  on;/  in.  said,  fail  not  to  burn  the  fat 
12.  4.  nor  hnst  thou  taken  nusht  at  any  in.  hand 
l.Vii/n.  15.2.  whi'U  any  m.  that  had  a  coniroversy 

5.  it  WHS  so,  that  when  nvy  m.  came  nijh  to  him 
19,  20.  shall  any  in.  he  piil  to  death  this  day  in  Isr. 
21.  4.  nor  for  us  shalt  iIkmi  kill  any  m.  in  Israel 
lA<Hi'.«8.31.  if <iHn»n.  trespnssHirainst  hisneighb. 

38.  siipplifalion  lie  made  by  any  m.  2  CAr.  fi.  29. 

2  A'lnA'.-' 4.  Sit.  if  thou  meet  nny'm.  salute  him  not 
2  CAr.  6.  5.  nor  choose  I  any  in.  ruler  over  Israel 
.\VA.2.12.  nor  fold  I  nni/m.whiitG.  put  in  my  heart 
.loll  32.  21.  let  nm  not  accept  any  w.  jierson 
I'riir.  30.  2.  surely  I  am  more  brutish  than  any  m 
/«u.52.14.Uiii  viiago  was  mure  uiatred  lliau  anjr » 


MAN 


MAN 


Vr.  44.  8C.  no  more  named  in  mouth  of  any  m.  iJob  3.  3.  let  the  night  perish  wherein  It  wae  said, 


tizek.'J.a.come  not  near  any  m.oiiwlioin  is  the  murk 

Dan.  6.  7.  shiill  ask.  a  peulioii  ol'  any  god  or  m.  12. 

Mat.5.H).i(aii!/  m.sue  thee  at  hiw,and  lake  thycoat 
11.  27.  nor  know,  aity  m.  the  Father,  save  the  Son 
12.19.  nor  shall  any  in.  hear  his  voice  in  llie  streets 
16.  24.  i{  any  in.  will  come  after  me,  L,iike  9.  23. 
21.3.  ii any  wi.say  ought  to  you,  say,the  Lord  hath 
need  ofhnn,  Mark  11.  3.  l,u.ke  19.  31. 
22.16.  art  true,  nor  carest  thou  tor  any  m.  lor  lliou 
46.  nor  durst  any  hi.  from  that  day  ask  questions 
24.23.  if  any  7n.say,  lo,  here  is  Christ,  Mark  13.21 . 

Mark  1.  44.  see  thou  say  nothing  to  a?iy  ni.  but  go 

4.  23.  \{a7iy  m.  hath  ears  to  hear,  7. 16.  Hcv.  13.  9. 

5.  4.  neither  could  any  m.  tante  him 
9.  30.  he  would  not  that  any  m.  should  know  it 

35.lf  ait^  /M.desirc  to  be  tirst,the  same  shall  be  last 
13.  5.  take  heed,  le.st  any  m.  deceive  you 

16.8.  nor  said  any  thing  to  any  m.they  were  afraid 
Luke  14.8.  when  thou  art  bidden  u(any  j«.to  a  wed 

26.  if  any  m.  come  to  me,  und  hate  not  fatiier 

19.  8.  if  I  have  taken  any  thing  from  any  in. 

20.  28.  if  aM^r  ?«.  brother  die,  having  a  wife 
John  4. 3.3.  hath  any  m.  brought  him  ought  to  eai? 

6.  46.  not  that  any  m.  hath  seen  the  Father 
51.  it'  any  7H.eat  of  this  bread  he  shall  live  forever 

7.17.ifffi;ij^/«.dohis  will  he  shall  know  of  doctrine 
37.  if  tt«^  m.  thirst,  let  him  come  to  me  and  drink 
51.  doth  our  law  judge  any  ;«.  before  it  hear  him  J 

8.  33.  and  we  were  never  in  bondage  to  any  in. 

9.  22.  \{  imy  in.  did  confess  that  he  was  Christ 
'Sl.ifaiiy  m.be  a  worshipper  of  God,him  he  hears 
32.  that  any  )h.  opened  the  eyes  of  one  horn  blind 

10.9.  by  me,  it'  any  in.  enter  ni,  lie  shall  be  saved 
28.  nor  shall  any  m.  pluck  them  out  of  my  hand 

11.  9.  if  any  in.  walk  in  the  day,  he  stumbleth  not 
bl.\ie.ny  m.  knew  w  here  he  were,he  should  shew 

12.  26.  'i(  any  m.  serve  hie,  let  him  follow  me 
47  if  any  in.  hear  my  words,  and  believe  not 

16.  30.  needest  not  that  any  m.  should  ask  thee 
18.  31.  it  is  not  lawful  for  us  to  put  any  in.lo  death 
Jlcts  10.  28.  not  call  any  in.  common  or  unclean 
47.can  awyrn. forbid  water,thesehe  not  baptized? 
19.38.  if  have  a  matter  against  any  in.  law  is  open 

24.  12.  neither  found  me  disputing  witii  any  m. 

25.  16.  not  manner  of  Romans  to  deliver  any  m. 
27.  22.  shall  be  no  loss  of  any  in.  life  among  you 

Rom.  8.  9.  ifaiiy  m.  have  not  the  Siiirit  of  Christ 

1  Cor.  X  12.  if  any  m.  build  on  this  foundation 
14.if  any  III.  wot  k;ibide||15.ifo»ym.  work  be  burnt 

17.  if  any  m.  defile  the  temple  of  G.  him  destroy 

18.  if  a«y  m.  among  you  seemoth  to  be  wise 
S.U.if  u/iy  J«.that  is  called  a  brother  be  a  fornicat. 

7.  IS.  is  any  m.  called,  being  circumcised  ? 

8.  2.  if  any  in.  think  that  he  knoweih  any  thing 
3.  if  any  m.  loveG.  ||  11.34.if  awy  in.  hung.let  him 

10.  if  a«y  M.  see  thee  which  hast  knowledge 
9. 1.7.  that  any  m.  should  make  my  glorying  void 

10.  28.  if  any  in.  say,  this  is  offered 

11.  16.  but  if  any  ni.  seem  to  be  contentious 
14.  27.  it'  any  m.  speak  in  an  unknown  tongue 

37.  if  any  m.  think  himself  to  he  a  proiihet 

38.  if  any  m.  be  ignorant,  let  him  be  ignorant 
16. 22.^f  any  ni.  love  not  the  Ld.  Jesus,  let  liiin  be 

2  Cor.  .5. 17.  if  any  in.  be  in  C.  he  is  a  new  creature 
10.  7.  if  any  m.  trust  to  himself  that  he  is  Christ's 
10.  6.  lest  any  m.  should  think  of  me  above  what 

Gal.  1.  9.  if  any  m.  preach  any  other  gospel 
F.ph.  2.  9.  not  of  works,  lest  any  m.  should  boast 

6.8.know.that  whatsoever  good  thingany  in.doeth 

Col.  2.  4.  lest  a.  vi.  should  beguile  you  w  illi  words 

8.  beware  lest  any  M.  spoil  yuu  thro' jihilosophy 

3.  13.  if  any  m.  halh  a  quarrel  iigainst  any 
1  Thrss.  5.  15.  that  none  render  evil  for  evil  to  a.  m. 
2T/USS.  3.  8.  nor  did  eat  any  m.  bread  for  nought 

14.  if  any  m.  obey  not  our  word,  note  that  man 
1  Tim.  6.  3.  if  any  m.  leach  otherwise  and  consent 
He.b.4. 11.  lest  an)/  m.  fall  after  the  same  example 

10.38.  but  'ifnny  m.  draw  back,my  9<ml  shall  have 
12.  15.  lest  any  m.  fail  of  the  grace  of  God 
^am.1.13.  G.  cannot  be  lcnipted,nor  temple'.h  a.  m. 

26.  if  any  m.  among  you  seem  lo  be  religious 
.t  2.  if  any  m.  ofiVnd  not  in  word,  he  is  |)erfect 

J  Pet.  4. 11.  if  a.  m.  speak,  let  him  speak  as  oracles 
16.  yet  if  a.  in.sufleras  <hriBtlan,notbe  ashamed 
1  .John  2.  1.  if  any  m.  sin,  we  have  an  advocate 

15.  if  any  m.  love  the  world,  the  love  of  Father 

27.  and  ve  need  not  that  any  m.  teach  you 

.S.  10.  if  any  m.  see  his  brother  sin  not  unto  death 
Rer.  3  20.  if'any  m.  hear  my  voice,  and  open  door 

11.  5  if  any  in.  will  hurt  Iheni,  fire  proceedeth 
14.  9  if  am/  in.  worship  the  beast  and  his  imago 
22.  18.  if  any  m.  shall  add  to  these  things 

19.  if  any  m.  shall  take  away  from  the  words 

See  Bkast,  Ei.f.sskp,  Cursid. 

MAN-CHILD. 

Gen.l7.10.everym.-cAM  shall  he  circumcised,  12, 

14.  the  uncircuincised  m.-ckild  shall  be  cut  off 

■   Lev.  12.2.  if  a  woman  have  born  a  m.-ckild,  then 

1  Sa.m.\  11.  if  wilt  give  to  thy  handmaid  a  m.-cAi'W 

3«7 


there  is  a  in.c/iUd  conceived,  Jer.  20.  15. 

yA'a.60.7.she  was  delivered  of  a  m.-c/ulU,  /^cv.12.5. 

Hcv.li.l'i.  persecuted  woin.  brought  forth  in.-c/iild 

Hcc  Each. 

Every  MAN; 

Oert.  7.  21.  all  flesh  died  on  earth,  and  every  m, 

9.  0.  at  hand  of  cu.  m.  brother  require  life  of  man 
10. 12.  his  hand  be  ag.  every  jn.and  every  m.hand 
42.  2o.  to  restore  every  in.  money  into  his  sack 

35.  behold,  e.  m.  money  was  in  his  sack,  43.  21. 

44.  11.  then  tJiey  took  down  every  m.  his  sack 

13.  and  laded  every  m.  his  ass,  and  returned 

45.  1.  Joseph  cried,  cause  e.  m.  to  go  out  from  me 
47.  2U.  the  Egyptians  sold  every  in.  his  field 

Exod.  1. 1.  e.  vu  ana  his  household  came  with  Jac. 
7.  12.  for  they  cast  down  every  m.  his  rod 

11.  2.  let  every  m.  borrow  of  his  neighbour  jewels 

12.  3.  they  shall  take  to  them  every  in.  a  lamb 
4.  e.  ?«.  according  to  his  eating,  Iti.  10.  |  18.  21. 

16.  save  that  which  every  ui.  must  eat,  that  only 

10.  29.  abide  ye  e.  in.  in  his  place,  let  no  man  go 
2.").  2.  of  every  m.  that  giveth  it  willingly 
3U.  12.  shall  give  every  m.  a  ransom  lor  his  soul 
32.27.  put  every  in.  a  sword  by  his  side,  slay  every 

■III.  his  brottier,  e.  m.  his  companion  and  neigh. 
33.  8.  stood  every  m.  at  his  tent-door  and  looked 

10.  they  worshipped  every  ni.  in  his  tent-door 
36.4.  came  every  in.  from  ins  work  that  they  made 
38. 26.  a  bekah  for  every  m.  that  is,  half  a  shekel 
/^cv.  19.  3.  fear  every  m.  his  mother  and  father 
25.  10.  ye  shall  return  every  m.  to  his  family,  13. 
JVum.  1.52.  pitch  every  in.  by  his  standard,  2.  2,17. 

5.  10.  every  m.  hallowed  things  shall  be  his 
7.  5.  give  to  every  m.  according  to  his  service 
16.17.  take  every  m.  his  censer,  and  jiut  incense  in 

18.  they  took  e.  in.  his  censer  and  put  tire  in  them 
17.  2,  write  thou  every  in.  name  on  his  rod 

9.  they  looked  and  took  every  m.  his  rod 

31.  53.  men  of  war  had  taken  spoil  e.  in.  for  hinis. 

32.  18.  Israel  inherited  every  m.  his  inheritance 
27.  servants  will  pass  over  every  m.  armed,  29. 

Dent.  1.  1().  judge  righteously  between  every  m. 
3.  2(J.  shall  ye  reiurn  every  in.  to  his  possession 
12.8.  not  do  every  in.  what  is  right  in  hie  eyes 
Iti.  17.  every  in.  shall  give  as  he  is  able 
21. 16.  nor  children  for  fathers,  every  in.  shall  die 
for  his  own  sin,  2  Kings  14.  0.  2  Cliron.  25.  4. 

Josh.  4.  5.  take  you  up  every  in.  of  you  a  stone 

6.  5.  ascend  every  in.  straight  before  him,  20. 

24.  28.  every  m.  to  his  inheritance,  .Judg.  2. 6. 
.ludg.  5.  30.  divided  to  every  m.  a  damsel  or  two 

7.  7.  let  other  people  go  every  m.unto  his  place,  8. 

10.  and  he  jml  a  trumpet  in  every  m.  hand 
22.  set  e.  m.  sword  ag.  his  follow,  1  *ani.  14.20. 

8.  24.  would  give  esery  in.  his  ear-rings,  25. 

9.  49.  the  people  cut  down  every  in.  his  bough 

17.  6.  e.  m.  did  what  was  right  in  his  eyes,  21.  25. 
21.  21.  catch  you  e.  m.  his  wife  of  the  daughters 

24.  every  in.  to  his  tribe,  c.  m.  lo  his  inheritance 

1  Ham.  4.  10.  and  they  fled  every  m.  into  his  tent 
8.  22.  Samuel  said,  go  ye  every  ni.  into  his  city 

14.  34.  bring  hither  e.  m.  his  ux,  c.  in.  his  sheep 

25.  10.  that  break  away  e.  in.  from  his  master 
13.  David  said,  gird  you  on  every  in.  his  sword 

21).  23.  the  Lord  render  to  every  m.  his  righteou; 

ness  and  his  faithfulness,  2  Chr.  6.  30. 
30.  6.  grieved  every  m.  for  his  sons  and  daughters 
22.  save  to  every  m.  his  wife  and  children 

2  .Sam.  13.  9.  and  they  went  out  c.  m.  from  him 

29.  every  in.  gat  him  upon  his  mule,  and  fled 

15.  4.  that  every  ni.  which  halh  any  suit  or  cause 

30.  covered  c.  in.  his  head,  and  they  went  up 

19.  8.  for  Israel  hath  fled  every  m.  to  his  lent 

20.  ].  Sheba  said  every  m.  to  his  tents,  O  Israel 
1  Kings  4.  2.5.  dwelt  safely  e.  m.  under  his  vine 

8.38.  which  shall  knew  e.  in.  the  plague  of  heart 
39.   hear,  forgive,  and  do,  and  give  to  (very 


MAN 

Isa.  13.  7.  therefore  every  m  heart  shall  melt 

31.7.  in  that  day  every  ni.Bhall  cast  away  his  idola 
Jer.  10. 14.  every  m.  is  brutish  in  knowledge,  51.17 

26.  3.  turn  tv.  in.  from  his  evil  way,  35. 15.  |  '.Mi.  3. 

29. 26.  (ot  every  m.  that  is  mad,  and  maketh  liinm. 

31. 34.  teach  no  more  ev.m.  his  neigh.  Heb.  8. 11. 

34.15.  in  proclaiming  liberty  eo.m.to  his  neigh.  17. 

37.  10.  they  should  rise  up  every  in.  in  his  tent 

51.  45.  go  out  and  deliver  ye  every  m.  his  soul 

Eick.  8.  11.  with  every  in.  his  censer  in  his  hand 

12.  every  m.  in  the  chambers  of  his  imagery 

9. 1.  even  every  in.  with  his  destroying  weapon,  2. 

20.7.  cast  away  every  m.  abominations  of  his  eye« 
8.  they  did  not  every  m.  cast  away  ahominationg 

32.  10.  every  in.  shall  tremble  for  his  own  life 

46. 18.  not  scattered  every  in.  from  his  possession 
Z>an.3.10.  cu.m. that  shall  hear  the  sound  fail  down 

6.  12.  that  every  in.  that  shall  ask  a  petition 
Jona/i  1.5.  liie  mariners  cried  every  in.  to  his  god 
Mic.  4.  4.  they  shall  sit  every  in.  under  his  vine 

7.  2.  they  hunt  every  m.  his  brother  with  a  net 
Hag.  1.  9.  and  ye  run  every  in.  to  his  own  huuso 
Zeek.  3.10.  call  every  in.  his  neighb.  under  the  vin« 

8.  4.  every  in.  with  his  Blalfin  hi.<  hand  for  age 
Iti.  sjieak  every  in.  truth  to  his  neighb.  /?;(A.4.25. 

(Va/.2.10.  why  do  we  deal  treacherously  every  vi.7 

JtUiit.  16.  27.  the  Son  of  man  shall  reward  every  m. 
according  to  his  works,  lioin.  2.  6.  Hcv.  22. 12. 
20.  9.  they  received  every  m.  a  penny,  10. 
25. 15.  he  gave  to  every  m.  according  to  his  ability 

JV/«r/i8.25.lie  wasrestored,and  saweceryrn.cleatly 
13.34.and  gave  to  e.  m.  his  work,  and  commanded 
15.  24.  casting  lots  what  every  m.  should  take 

Luke  0.  30.  give  to  every  in.  that  asketli  of  thee 
10.  16.  is  preached,  and  every  m.  prcsseth  into  it 
19. 15.  how  much  every  m.  had  g;aiiied  by  trading 

John  1.-9.  the  true  light,  which  lightelh  eve-ym. 
2. 10.  ev.  in.  at  beginning  doth  set  forth  good  wina 
6.  45.  e.  in.  that  hath  heard  and  learned  of  Father 

.  16.  32.  ye  shall  be  scattered  every  m.  lo  his  own 

Jicts  2.8.  how  hear  we  every  in.in  our  own  tongue? 
45.  parted  to  all  men,  as  every  in.  had  need,  4. 35. 
11.29.  e.7«.  determined  to  send  relief  lo  brethren 

Horn.  2.  10.  peace  lo  every  in.  that  workelh  good 

3.  4.  yea,  let  God  be  true,  but  every  m.  a  liar 
12.3.  as  God  dealt  to  every  in.  the  measure  of  faith 
14.  5.  let  e.  rn.  be  fully  persuaded  in  his  own  mind 

1  Cor.  3. 5.  even  as  the  Lord  gave  tofrrry  7K.7.17 
13.  every  in.  work  shall  be  made  manifost 

4.  5.  then  shall  every  m.  have  praise  of  God 
7. 2.  nevertheless,  let  every  m.  have  his  ow n  wifie 

7.  l)Ut  every  m.  hath  his  proper  gift  of  God 
21).  let  every  in.  abide  in  the  same  cahing,  24. 
8.  7.  there  is  not  in  every  m.  that  knowledge 
10.  24.  but  let  every  in.  seek  another's  wealth 
11.3.  know  that  the  head  of  evert/  m.  is  Christ 
12.  7.  Spirit  is  given  to  every  m.  to  profit  witliul 
15. 23.  but  every  vi.  in  his  order,  Christ  firet-fruitji  , 

2  C'«r.4.2.  commend,  ourselves  to  <  p.  in.  conscience 
f.'a/.5.3.I  testify  again  lo  ei:  m.  that  is  circumcised 

6.  4.  let  every  m-  prove  his  own  work,  llien  shuU 
5.  for  every  m.  shall  bear  his  own  burden 
Phil.  2.  4.  look  not  every  in.  on  his  own  things 
C0/.I.28.  w  hoiii  we  preach,  leaching  every  m,  in  all 
wisdom  lo  present  (tier;/ m. perfect  in  Christ  Jes. 
4.  0.  may  know  how  ye  ought  lo  answer  every  vu 
Heb.  2.  9'.  that  he  should  taste  der.lh  for  every  m. 
./a»/.1.14.bulf«>cr;/)n.is  lcniple<l,when  he  is  drawn 
19.  let  every  in.  be  swift  to  hear,  shiw  lo  speak 
]  f  Kf.l.n.wlio  judgelh  according  to  ci-crym.work 
3.15.  lo  gi\e  a  reason  tnev.m.  that  nskelhof  hope 
4.  10.  as  every  in.  hath  received  ihe  gift,  even  so 
1  .Ivhn  3.3.>:{\»i.that  halh  thrs  hope  in  him,  purities 
Uer.  20. 13.  judged  ev.  m.  according  to  their  works 
22.18.  for  1  testify  to  ev.  m.  that  hearcth  the  worda 
Hee  Evil.,  Foolish. 
MAN  of  fy-od. 
Dcut.  33.  1.  Moses  the  m.  of  God,  .Tosh.  14.  6. 


according  to  his  ways,  '.Job  34.  11.  .Jer.  17'.  10.  ./u(/^.1.3.6.wonian  loid,8aying,  ni.o/  G.ca.ne  to  mo 
10.  25.  brought  e.  m.  his  present,  2  Ckron.  9.  24.  |  8.  let  Ihe  m.  of  fi.  come  again  to  us,  and  leach  ns 
12.  24.  not  go  up,  return  e.  in.  to  his  house,  for  1  .Sam.  2. 27.  there  came  a  m.  of  G.  to  Eli,  and  said 

this  thing  is  from  me,  22.  17,  30.  2  Chr.  11.  4.  j  9.  G.  behold  now  there  is  in  Ibis  city  a  m.  of  God 


20.  24.  lake  the  kings  every  m.  out  of  his  place 
2  Kings  0.2.  let  us  go  and  take  thence  e.m.  a  beam 
II.  8.  every  in.  with  his  weapons  in  his  hand 
14.  12.  Judah  fled  every  m.  to  their  tents 
18.  31.  and  then  eat  ye  every  m.  of  his  own  vine 


.  there  is  not  a  present  to  bring  the  m.  of  God 

8.  that  will  I  give  to  the  m.  of  God  to  tell  us 

'\ Kings  12.22. word  came  toShcmaiahihe  jn.o/  G. 

13.  1.  and  there  came  a  in.  of  God  out  of  Judah 

26.  it  is  the  In.  of  God  who  was  disobedient 


JVfA.  .5.  13.  so  God  shake  out  cm.  from  his  house  j   17. 18.  what  have  I  to  do  with  thee,  Ofr.o/Ood? 
Est/i.  1.  8.  do  according  to  every  in.  |.>leasure         |     24.  now  by  this  I  know  that  thou  art  a  m.  of  God 
22.  even/  in.  should  bear  rule  in  his  own  house     20. 28.  there  came  a  m.  of  G.  and  spake  lo  Ahah 
.Job  21.  33'.  and  every  m.  shall  dr.iw  after  him         2A'i'nj?^,<f  l.O.lhou  m.o/  rr\kingsaid,  come  down. 11. 


37.  7.  he  sealeth  up"  the  hand  of  every  m.  that 
Psal.JA.  5.  every  m.  at  his  best  state  is  vanity,  11. 
(i.  surely  every  m.  walketh  in  a  vain  show 
02. 12.  to  thee,  O  Lord,  mercy,  for  thou  renderest 
to  every  m.according  to  liia  work,  rror.24.12. 
Prov.  19.  0.  every  m.  is  a  friend  to  him  that  giveth 
24.20.  ev  m.Bhall  kiss  his  lips  that giv  eth  right  ans 


13.  ()  m.  of  G.  I  prav  Ihee,  let  my  life  be  precious 
4.7.  she  came  and  told  in.  of  G.\\  9.  ibis  is  m.  uf  G. 
16.  thou  m.  of  God,  do  not  lie  to  thine  handmaid 
22.  thai  I  may  run  to  m.  of  God,  and  come  again 
25.  she  came  unio  the  m.  nf  God  to  Carrne.',27. 
40.  O  thou  m.  of  God,  there  is  death  in  th-  pot 
42.  brought  the  m.  of  God  bread,  of  first-frnitu 


an!  2G.  eoery  m.  judgment  Cometh  from  the  Lord    5. 14.dipped,  accordingtothe  sayingof  m.o//?oa 
/ga.  9.  20.  eat  eeer^  r».  the  fle*h  of  liii  owD  aim  1     20.  GeLaii,BervantofEli«ha,  the  m.o/Gwi,  8/1 


MAN 

S  A'/n^'ji  0.10.  sent  to  place  whicli  m.of  G.  folil  him 

15.  whtii  the  servant  of  the  m.  of  Gud  was  risen 

7.  2.  a  lord  answered  the  m.  of  God  and  said,  lit. 

17.  people  Irode  on  him  as  the  n  o/f?W(/»iiid,18. 

6.  2.  the  woman  did  after  the  saying  of  m.  of  God 

l.m.uf  God  is  come  hitlitrllll.lhe  m.of  God  wepi 

8.  lake  a  present  and  go  meet  the  hi.  of  God 
\i.  19.  and  tlie  m.  of  God  was  wrotli  wiUj  him 
S3.1(i.  according  to  the  word  which  the  m.  of  Gud 

17.  it  is  the  sepulchre  of  w.  of  God  which  came 

1  Otr.^.U.  Moses  iit.uf  G.  2CAr.3n.lii.  Kith  3.2. 

2  Chroii.  8.14.  David  the  m.ofGod,jyih.  12.  24,36. 
25.  7.  but  there  came  a  in.  of  God  to  Amaziah 

9.  the  771.  o/O.  answered,  the  I, ord  is  able  to  give 
Jer.  35.  4.  Uanan  the  sun  of  Igilaliah  a  m.  of  God 
1  Tiia.  15. 11.  but  thou,  O  hi.  ofG.  Hce  lliese  things 
'iTim.  3.  17.  that  the  m.  uf  God  may  be  perfect 

Ste  Goon. 

Mighty  MAN. 

Judg.  6. 12.  the  Lordis  with  thee,  thou  mighty  m. 

11.  1.  now  Jephthah  was  a  mighty  in.  ol   valour 

/iutA2.1. Naomi  had  a  kinsniana  wiVA. m.of  wealth 

1  Sam.  9.1.  KisU  a  Beujamite,  a  migh.  m.  of  power 

16. 18.  David  m.  m.  and  man  of  war,  2  .Sum.  17. 10. 

1  Kings  11.  28.  the  man  Jeroboam  was  a  migh.  in. 

'i Kings o.i.^a.&man  was  alsoamiVA.  ni.in  valour 

1  Chr.  12.  4.  Isniaiah  a  mighty  «i. among  the  thirty 

2  CAr.l7.17.of  Benjam.  Bliada  a  ;«'.yA. m.of  valour 
&J.7.Zichri,a  migh.in.  of  Ephraim,8lcw  Maaseiah 

Joli  22.  8.  as  for  the  mighty  m.  he  had  the  earth 
Ps.  33. 16.  a  mighty  ni.  is  not  delivered  by  strength 

52. 1.  why  boastest  Ihou  in  misi-hief,  O  mighty  m. 

78.  65.  then  the  Lord  awaked  like  a  mighty  m. 

127.  4.  as  arrows  are  in  the  hand  of  a  mighty  in. 
Jsa.  3.2.  the  Lord  doth  take  away  the  mighty  m. 

5.  15.  and  the  mighty  in.  shall  be  humbled 

31. 8.  shall  fall  with  the  sword,  not  of  a  mighty  m. 

42.  13.  the  Lord  shall  go  forth  as  a  mighty  m. 
Jcr.  9.  23.  nor  let  the  mighty  m.  glory  in  his  might 

14.  9.  shouldest  be  as  a  migh.  m.  that  cannot  save 

46.6  nor  nifV/ity  (;i.e.scnpe||12.iHi^/iti/ ;« .stumbled 
Zfph.  1.  14.  the  mighty  in.  shall  cry  there  bitterly 
iiecA.9.13.have  made  thee  as  sword  of  a  mighty  m. 

10.  7.  they  of  Ephraim  shall  be  like  a  mighty  m. 

J^o  MAN. 
Oen.  31.  50.  no  m.  is  with  us,  see,  God  is  wiiness 
41.  44.  without  thee  shall  no  ni.  lift  his  hand 
45.1.  stood  HO  m.  while  Joseph  madeliims.  known 
F.iod.  2. 12.  and  when  he  saw  that  ibere  was  no  in. 
Hi.  19.  let  no  in.  leave  of  it  till  the  morning 

'O.  let  iio  m.go  out  of  his  place  on  the  beveiith  day 
?'     10.  be  hurt  or  driven  away,  no  m.  seeing  it 

33.  4.  no  m.  did  put  on  him  his  ornament.-* 
20.  for  there  shall  vu  in.  see  me  ami  live 

?A.  3.  and  no  m.  shall  come  up  with  thee 
J^fO.  16. 17.  there  shall  be  no  m.  in  the  tabernacle 
21.21.  no  m.thal  hath  a  blemish  shall  come  nigh 

27.  26.  no  in.  shall  sanctify  it,  it  is  the  Lord's 
A'"a»n.5.19.ifno  m.  hath  lain  with  thee,  be  thou  free 
J)cut.  7. 24.  no  in.  able  to  stand  before  thee,  1 1. 25. 

28.  29.  oppressed,  and  no  m.  shall  save  thee,  68. 

34.  6.  but  no  m.  knoweth  of  his  sepulchre 
JoiA.23.9.  vo  m.  hath  been  able  to  .Htand  before  you 
Jailg.  11.  39.  Jephthah's  daughter  knew  no  in. 

19.  15.  no  VI.  that  took  them  to  his  house,  18. 
21.  12.  young  vir;?in»  that  had  known  no  m. 
1  .Sam.  2.  9.  for  by  strength  shall  no  m.  prevail 

11.  3.  and  then  if  there  be  no  m.  to  save  us 
17.  32.  let  no  rn.,  heart  fail  because  of  him 

21.  2.  let  no  m.  know  any  thing  of  the  business 
2i).  12.  and  no  m.  saw  nor  knew  it,  nor  awaked 

S.sviin.  15.3.  710  m.  deputed  of  the  king  to  hear  thee 

1  Kings  8. 46.  is  no  »i.  that  sinncth  not,  2  Ckr.  6.36. 

2  Kings  7. 5.  behold,  there  was  no  m.  in  camp,  10. 

23.  18.  let  him  alone,  let  no  m.  move  his  bones 

1  Chr.  Ifi.  21.  he  sulVered  no  m.  to  do  them  wron;;, 
he  reproved  kings  for  their  sakea,  Ps.  105.  14. 

F.nth.  5. 12.  r|ueen  did  lot  no  m.  come  in  with  kin; 
8.8.  may  no  m.  reversel|9.2.  no  m.  could  withstand 

Jiih  II.  3.  ahall  no  m.  make  thee  ashamed  ? 
l.'i.  28.  in  houfiea  whiili  no  m.  iiihabiteth 
00.  21.  therefore  kIihII  no  in.  look  for  his  goodf 

24.  22.  ho  riseth,  nnd  vo  m.  is  sure  of  his  life 
;J8.  26.  where  nii  m.  is,  wherein  there  is  no  m. 

/'■■I. 22.6.  I  am  a  worm,  and  no  m.  a  reproach  of  m"ii 

142.4.  there  wns  no  m.  /.«a.  41.28.  |  .'>9.)6.  ./fr.4.2.'>. 

I't3. 2.  in  thy  sit;lil  shiill  no  m.  he  justifii'd 
/'ror>. 1. 34.* I  stretched  myhnnd.iind  710 1» .regarded 

2^.  I.  the  wicked  (lee  when  no  m.  piirsiieth 

17.  shnil  Hee  to  the  pit,  let  nn  m.  hIiiV  him 

F-rcl.  8.  8.  no  in.  hnth  power  over  the.  spiiit 

9.  1.  wo  III.  knoweth  eitliir  love  or  hatriil 

15.  no  m.  remembered  that  same  poor  man 
/.«»  9.  19.  no  m.  shall  Bpare  his  hrollier 

24.10.  no  m.  maycome  in||33.8.  he  regnrdelhTrom. 

.V).  2.  wherefore  when  I  came,  was  there  no  m. 

.•)".  1.  nnd  no  m.  Inycth  it  to  heart,  .lir.  12. 11. 

fiO.  15.  so  that  no  m.  went  through  thee 

/'r.2.6.  nnd  where  710  7n.dwelt||H.t).  no  m.  rnponted 

22.  30.  foi  ii«"Mi.  of  his  teed  sholl  pro<po» 


MAN 

J[r.  30. 17.  this  is  Zion,  whom  no  m.  sci'kctb  after 
36.  19.  go  hide,  and  let  no  in.  know  where  ye  be 
38.24.Zedekiali3aid,lclno  m.know  of  these  word 
40.15.  and  no  »n.shali  know  it  y  41.4.  no  th.  knew  it 
44.  2.  and  no  m.  dwelleth  therein,  51.  43. 
49.  18.  no  m.  shall  abide  there,  33.  |  50.  40. 
ham.  4.4.  ask  bread,  and  no  in.  brenketh  it  to  them 
^:cA.14.15.  thatnoTii.niay  pass  lliro'  fortliebeasti 
44.  2.  710  7«.  shall  enter  in  by  this  gate 
Hos.  4.  4.  yet  let  no  in.  strive  or  rej)rove  another 
A/'aA.3.  18.  is  scattered,  and  no  in.  galherelli  them 
Xeph.  3.  6.  so  that  there  is  no  m.  none  inhabitant 
Ztch.  1.  21.  BO  that  no  m.  did  lift  up  his  head 
7.  14.  that  no  m.  passed  through  nor  returned 
./Vat.6.24. 710  m.can  serve  two  masters,  Luke  16.13. 

8.4.  tell  no  ni.  16.20.  J>/arA7.36.  LuAcS.  14.  |  9.21. 
9.  30.  Jesus  charged  them,  saying,  see  that  no  in. 

know  it,  Mark  5.  43.  |  7.  24.  J  8.  30.  )  9.  9 
ll.27.no  m.knowethSon  but  Father,  y.«ie  10.22. 

17.  8.  they  saw  no  m.  save  Jesus  only 

9.  tell  the  vision  to  no  m.  till  the  Son  be  risen 
22.  46.  110  in.  was  able  to  an.<wer  him  a  word 
2.3.  9.  call  no  m.  father  on  the  earth 
24.36.  that  day  and  hour  know.no7n.  Jl/ari  13.32 
Murk  10.29. 710  7n.thal  hath  left  house,  J.uke  18.29 

11.  14.  no  in.  eat  fruit  of  thee  hereafter  for  ever 

12.  14.  we  know  that  thou  carest  for  no  in. 
fjitkcX  14.  do  violence  to  no  771.  ||  10.4.  salute  no  777 

15.  10.  with  the  husks,  and  no  7;t.  gave  unto  him 
.yoAn  1.  18.  110  in.  hatli  seen  (Jod,  1  John  4.  12 

3.  2.  no  7.1.  can  do  these  miracles,  except  God  be 
13.  no  in.  hath  ascended  up  to  heaven 

5.  22.  for  the  Father  judgeth  vo  m.  but  hath 
6.44.  no  m.  can  come  to  me,  except  Fath.draw,65. 

7.  30.  but  no  m.  laid  hands  on  him,  44.  |  8.  20. 

8.  11.  she  said,  710  771.  Lord  ||  15.  1  judge  no  m. 

9.  4.  the  night  cometh  when  770  771.  can  work 

10.  18.  no  m.  taketh  it  from  me,  I  lay  it  down 
2il.no  771.  is  able  to  pluck  them  out  of  my  Father's 

13.  28. 710  771.  at  the  table  know  why  he  spake  this 

14.  6.  no  in.  cometh  to  the  Father  but  by  ine 

15.  13.  greater  love  hath  no  m.  than  this 

16.  22.  anil  your  joy  no  m.  taketh  from  you 
Jlcts  1.  20.  and  let  710  777.  dwell  therein 

4.  17.  tliat  they  sjieak  to  no  m.  in  this  name 
.5.  13.  of  the  rest  durst  no  in.  join  himself 

23.  we  had  opened,  we  found  7>o  vi.  within 
9.  7.  hearing  a  voice,  but  seeing  no  771.  8. 

18.  10.  no  in.  sh.ill  set  on  thee  to  hurt  thee 
28.31. preaching  kingd.  of  (J.  no  ni.'forbidding  him 

/io77t.  12.  17.  recompense  to  no  m.  evil  for  evil 
13.8.  owe  to  770  771. any  thiiig,l»it  to  love  one  aiioth. 
14.  7.1iveth  to  himself,  and  110  m.dieth  to  liimsell 
13.  that  770  717.  put  a  stumbling-block  in  his  way 
1  Cirr.  2.  11.  the  things  of  God  knoweth  no  (7i. 

1.5.  yet  he  liiinjtelf  is  judged  of  no  777. 
3.11. for  other  foundation  can  710  771. lay  than  islaid 

18.  let  710  771.  deceive  himself,  21. 
10.24.  let  wo  77i.?eek  his  own,  but  another's  wealth 
ICor.5.16.henceforth  know  we  770  771. after  t ho  tlcsh 
7.2.  we  have  wronged  no  7n.lnivecorrui)ted  710  771. 
Gal.  2.  6.  God  accei)tetli  no  771.  person 
3.  II.  but  that  no  m.  is  justified  by  the  Inw 
F.ph.  5.  6.  let  no  m.  deceive  you,  2  Tkess.  2.  3. 

29.  for  no  m.  ever  yet  hated  his  own  tlesh 
PAi'/.  2. 20.  for  I  have  no  m.  like-minded,  who  will 
Ciil.  2.  18.  let  no  771.  bcgtiilc  you  of  your  reward 
1  Thess.i.ft.  that  no  711  .go  beyond  his  brother  in  any 

1  Tim.  .5.  22.  lay  hands  suddenly  on  no  m. 

2  7'/m.4.10.  at  my  first  answer  no  771.  sIoihI  with  me 
Tit.  .3.  2.  put  them  in  mind,  to  speak  evil  of  no  m. 
Hcb.  .5.  4.  no  771.  taketh  this  honour  to  himself 

7.  13.  of  which  no  ni.gavB  attendance  at  the  a  liar 

12.  14.  without  which  no  m.  shall  mie  the  /..ord 
./(177I.  1.  13.  let  no  m.  say  when  he  is  templed 

3.  8.  the  tongue  can  7>«  771.  tnme,  it  is  unruly 

1  ./f<An  3.  7.  little  children,  let  no  in.  deceive  yon 
Urn.  2.  17.  a  new  name,  which  mi  in.  knoweth 

3.  7.  he  Hint  shiiHeth,  and  n  .  in.  opimclli 
8.  and  770  7/1.  Clin  shut  it  ||  IT. no  771. take  thy  crown 

5.  3.  nnd  no  m.  was  able  to  open  the  hook,  4. 
7.  9.  and  iiiiiltiliidi!  whii-li  no  m.  could  niimlx^r 

13.  17.  that  nn  m.  might  buy  or  sell,  save  he  that 
14.3.  no  ni. could  learn  thai  song  hut  the  redeemed 

1.5.  8.  no  771.  wns  able  to  enter  into  the  temple 
18.ll.no  7n.  bnyeth  their  inen-hnndise  any  moic 

19.  12.  he  had  a  name  written,  that  no  ni.  knew 

O/.MAN. 
^7-n.  9.  5.  at  tho  hand  0/771.  will  I  remiire  life o/'m. 
F.zoJ.  13.  13.  nil  the  first-born  0/  m.  .Yum.  irf.  15. 
/)eut.  1. 17.  ye  shall  not  be  n.fraidof  the  fncrofm. 
iSam.~.  19.  i^  this  the  manner  (>/77i.  O  Lord  God? 
24. 14.  not  fall  into  the  hand  ofm.  I  rAron.2l.  13. 

2  Kinirs  1. 7.  what  manner  o/rn. wns  he  which  came 
7.  10.  there  wns  no  man  there,  nor  voice  ofm. 

.fob  10.  5.  are  thy  days  ns  the  days  of  m.7 

14.  Kt.  thou  destroyesf  the  hope  nfm. 

PsnI.  60.  II.  for  vain  is  the  help  ofm.  108.  12. 
71).  10   the  wrath  0/771.  sliiiTI  pr.ii'-e  thee 
Pm.  5.  21.  Uie  way*  o/m.  uo  before  tbs  Lotd 


P.ror.  6.  1 26.  the  woman  of  a  m.  will  hunt  for  ttfe 

18.  14.  the  spirit  o/7n.  will  sustain  his  intiraiity 

19.  11.  the  discretion  0/771.  delerreth  his  anger 
22.  the  desire  of  in.  is  his  kindness 

27.  19.  so  the  heart  of  m.  answereth  to  man 

29.  25.  the  fear  of  m.  bringeth  a  snare 

30.  2.  and  have  not  the  understanding  of  m. 
19.  and  the  way  of  a  m.  with  a  maid 

Eccl.  6.  7.  all  the  labour  of  in.  is  for  his  mouth 
8.  6.  the  misery  of  in.  is  great  U|)oii  him 
12.  13.  for  this  is  tiio  whole  duty  of  m. 

Isa.  22. 1 17.  will  carry  thee  with  captivity  of  am 
44.13.hemarkeihwiih  compass, he  niakevh  it  after 
the  figure  ofm.  accordingto  the  beauty  of  am. 
51.  12.  tiiat  thou  shouldest  be  afraid  of  a  m. 

.far.  10. 23. 1  know  the  way  of  in.  is  iioi  in  hiuitell 

ham.  3.  35.  to  turn  aside  the  right  of  a  m. 

F.it'k.  1.  10.  they  four  had  tne  face  0/  a  771.  10. 14. 
29.  11.  no  foot  of  m.  shall  pass  through  it 
32.  13.  ncitlier  shall  the  foot  0/771.  trouble  them 

/Jan.  8.  15.  stood  as  the  appearance 0/ am   10. 1,"*. 

Zech.  9. 1.  when  eyes  of  a  771.  shall  be  toward  Lord 
12.  1.  who  formeth  the'spirit  of  m.  within  him 

.Wnt.H.27.  what  manner  0/77/.  is  this  that  the  winds 
and  sea  obey  him  ?  Mark  4.  41.  J,uke  8.  25. 

19.  10.  if  the  case  77/771.  be  so  with  his  wife 
Mark  5. 8.  he  said,  come  out  o/the  ni.  hvke  8. 29. 
./0A71  1.  13.  nor  of  the  will  0/771.  but  of  (lod 

2.  25.  needed  not  that  any  should  testify  ofm. 
Jict8  12.  22.  it  is  the  voice  of  a  god,  not  of  in. 
Rom.  2.  9.  upon  every  soul  of  in.  that  doeth  evil 

4.  6.  David  describeth  the  blessedness  o/the  771. 

1  Cor.  2.9.  neither  hath  entered  into  the  heart  0/777. 
11. what  man  knoweth  the  things  o/a  ni.save  the 
spirit  0/771. which  is  in  i)im,so  Spirit  things  olGud 

4.  3.  should  be  judged  of  you,  or  of  m.  judgment 
11.  7.  but  the  woman  is  the  glory  of  tlie  in. 
8.  but  the  woman  is  of  the  771. 12. 
Gal.  1.  12.  for  I  neither  received  it  ofm. 
./a77i. 1.20.  the  wrath  0/771.  worketh  not  righteousn 

24.  forgetteth  what  manner  of  in.  he  was 
IPet.  1.  24.  Jtll  the  glory  0/771.  ns  the  flower  ofgrass 

2  Pet.  1. 21.  came  not  in  old  tinie  by  the  will  of  m. 
Rev.  13.  18.  for  it  is  ihe  number  of  a  m. 

21.  IV.  according  to  the  measure  o/a  7n. 
See  Old. 
One  MAN. 
Gen.  42.  11.  we  all  one  m.  sons,  we  are  true,  13. 
F.Toil.  16.  22.  they  gathered  two  homers  for  ow<r  m. 
21.  35.  if  one  m.  ox  hurt  another's  that  he  die 
J\rvin.  14.  15.  if  thou  kill  this  jieople  as  one  m. 
16.22.  shall  077f77i.  sin,  and  will  thou  be  wr(;th  7 

31.  49.  and  there  lacked  not  one  ni.  of  ua 

■  tosh.  23.  10.  one  771.  shall  chase  a  ihousHrd 
./ui/g.  6.  16.  smite  the  Midianiles  as  one  vi. 
18.  19.  to  be  a  priest  to  the  house  of  inie  in. 

20.  1.  the  congri  gallon  was  salliered  ns  one  nr. 
8.  all  the  jieople  arose  as  o777r  m.  saying 

1  .S'oni.  2.  25.  if  one  777.  sin  aga  list  anolier 

2  .Vfl77i.  19.  14.  even  ns  the  heart  uf  one  m, 

lAV 71 /7»22.8.lhere  is  yet  one m. Mi  .aiah,2C"Ar.;P,7. 
y.zrn  ,3.  1.  gathered  together  as  one  in.  J\"eh.  8.  I. 
./0/7  13.  9.  as  one  in.  mockeih  another,  do  ye  morh 
Feci.  7.28.  one  ni.  among  a  lliousand  have  I  found 

8.  9.  wherein  one  m.  rnhlh  over  aimthKi 

fsa.  4.  1.  se\en  women  shall  take  In  Id  of  one  771. 
F.i/k.  9.  2.  oTie  m.  was  clothed  with  lincJi 
.'oAn  II.. 50.  one  77i.hhould  d;e  for  the  people,  18.14. 
Rnni.  5.  12.  as  by  one  ni.  sin  entered  into  Ihe  world 
15.  the  gift  by  grace,  which  is  by  one  m.  Jenns 
17.  if  by  o7ie  m.  offence  death  reigned  by  one 
19.  ns  by  0777;  771.  disobedience  many  were  sinners 
14.  5.  0711!  m.  esleenieth  one  dny  above  another 
I  T7771.  5.  0.  having  lii^iii  ihe  wifeof  one  m. 
See  Poor,  Rich,  RtniiTKOUS. 
.fono/ MAN. 
JViim.  23.  10.  nor  son  of  in.  Ihut  he  should  rrpeni 
.fob  ^2f>.  6.  and  Ihe  Kon  of  in.  which  is  a  worm 
35.  8.  righteousness  may  profit  the  .«on  ofm. 
Ps.SI.  nnd  son  o/m. that  thou  visit,  him,  H'liMCy. 
HO.  17.  anil  on  sun  of  in.  whom  thon  madiiit  htrorg 
144.3.or  .ion  o/77i.that  thoumukestncrounlofh.nl 
146.  3.  pill  not  your  trust  in  the  son  nfm. 
hn.  51.  12.  he  not  afraid  of  the  ton  nfm.  which 
.56.2.  bli-ssid  is  llie.vwn  o/i7i.tlinl  Inycth  ho'd  rn  i( 
./'■r.49.IH.  Qor  shall  son  7(/m.dtvcll  in  it,  3:<.  l.'Sfl.  iO 
51.  13.  neither  diilh  any  snn  ofm.  pn.-s  the  rebv 
F.irk.  8.  15.  hiisi  thou  seen  this,  O  son  ofm.  17 
21.6.  sigh  therefore  thou  son  ofm.  wilh  biiternc.«j 
Dnn.l.  i:t.  b<hold,one  like  the  Son  o/m.cnme  wi'B 
the  clouds  of  heaven,  Rer   1.  13.  |  14.  14. 
.1fn/.8.?>..S-.  o/m.halh  not  when-  to  hiy,/,t7^f  O.-'JH. 

9.  6.  kn(  w  that  Ihe  .SV»n  ofm.  hnth  power  on  enrth 

to  forgive  sins,  Mark  2.  10.  I.vke  .■>.  34. 

10.  ^.  not  gone  over,  till  Ihe  .'•on  of  m.  bo  come 

1 1 .  19.  the  Sun  of  rn.  came  enting,  /,»<A«  7.  34. 

12.  8.  for  tho  Son  of  m.  is   liord  even  of  tho 

sahbnth,  Mnrk  2.  28.  Lvle  6.  5, 
,32.  who»oevrrspeBkclh  ng.  S.ofm.  /,u*7!  12.1*1. 
40.  .v  ihull  Son  0/  m.  be  liueo'dn/a  aod  ni^iiU 


MAN 

Vat.  I'J.  37.  tliat  aoweth  good  seed  is  tlie  Son  c/m. 
41.  tlie  Son  of  m.  shall  send  forlh  Ills  aiigols  . 
Iti.  13.  whom  do  men  suy ,  that  I,  the  .S.  of  in.  am? 

17.  y.  uiuil  the  Son  of  in.  be  risen  again,  J/arAU.S). 
'ii.  the  .>■■.  of  m.  shall  be  betrayed,  iH).  Id.  ]  iiti. 

2,  45.  Jifirh  14.  41.  I^uke  9.  44. 

21.  27.  60  shall  also  the  cofiiu."'  of  the  Son  of  m. 

bo,  37,  39.  I.ukc  17.  2G. 

30.shallsceS.o/m.com.jVurA- 13  2(3. Z^uAe  21.27. 

44.hourye  think  not  S.  o/m.cometh,  AuAe  12.40. 

25.  31.  when  the  Son  of  in.  shall  come  in  his  glory 
2(j.24.the  S.  of  m.  goelh,  J/urfc  14.  'il.Lukc^i.  22. 

Mark  8. 38.  ot'  hini shall  the  Son  of  in.  be  ashamed 
when  he  cometh  in  glory  of  the  Father 

9.  12.  and  how  it  is  written  of  the  Son  of  m. 
31.  the  Son  of  in.  is  delivered,  10.  33.  IaUu  24.  7. 

13. 34.  Son  of  m.  is  as  a  man  taking  a  far  journey 

Luke  id.  22.  reproach  you  for  the  Son  of  in.  sake 

y.  22.  the  Son  of  m.  must  sutler  many  things,  20. 

56.  tlio  S.  of  in.  is  not  come  to  destroy  men's  lives 

11.  30.  so  shall  Son  of  m.  be  to  this  general.  17.  24. 
12.8.  him  shall  the  iojio/m.  confess  before  angels 
17.22.desire  to  see  one  of  the  days  of  the  Son  of  m. 

18.  8.  when  the  ^.  ofm.  Cometh,  shall  he  find  faith 
19.10.  the  i'.  of  in.  is  come  to  seek  and  to  save  lost 

21.  36.  be  worthy  to  stand  before  the  Son  of  m. 

22.  48.  betraycst  thou  the  Son  of  in.  with  a  kiss"! 
John  1.  51.  ascending  and  descending  on  S.  of  m. 

3.  13.  even  the  Son  ofm.  which  is  in  heaven 
14.  even  so  must  the  Son  ofm.  be  lifted  up 

5. 27.  given  authority,  because  he  is  the  Son  of  m. 

6.  27.  which  the  Son  ofm.  shall  give  unto  you 
53.  except  ye  eat  the  tiosh  of  the  Son  of  m. 
62.  what,  and  if  ye  shall  see  the  Son  of  in.  ascend 

8.  28.  when  ye  have  lift  up  the  6'.  of  in.  then  shall 

12.  23.  that  the  Son  of  m.  should  be  glorified 
2i.S.ofin.  must  be  lifted  up,  who  is  this  S.  ofm.? 

13.  31.  Jesus  said,  now  is  the  San  of  m.  glorified 
Jicts'i.  5o.  1  see  the  S.  of  in.  standing  on  right  baud 

"Sec  Son. 
That  MAX. 
Lsv.  17.  9.  even  t.  m.  shall  be  cut  ofT  from  his  peo. 
ay.  3. 1  will  set  my  face  against  t.in.  .5.  Eiek.  14.  8. 
JVttni.9.13.brought  not  ofter.  t.  in.  shall  bear  his  sin 
D'vt.  17. 5.  stone  t.  m.  or  woman  till  they  die,  12. 

22.  13.  elders  shall  lake  thatm.  and  chastise  him 
2.5.  9.  answer  and  say,  so  fhall  it  be  done  to  t.  m. 
21).  20.  his  jealousy  shall  smoke  against  that  m. 

.7osA.  22. 20.  t/iat  m.  perisheth  not  alojic  in  iniquity 
Job  1.  I.  and  tkat  m.  was  perfect  and  upright 
P.ial.  37.  37.  for  the  end  o(  tkat  m.  is  peace 

■10.4.  blessed  \ilhat  m.  who  makcth  Lord  hisfrust 

S7.  5.  he  said,  this  and  that  m.  was  born  iniier 
Prov.  '28.  21.  for  bread  that  vi.  will  traiisgress 
Jar.  20. 16.  let  that  m.  be  as  cities  Lord  overthrew 

2.3.  3!.  I  will  even  punish  that  in.  and  his  house 
Mat.  12.45.  last  state  of «.  m.  is  worse,  J^ukc  11. 2f;. 

18.  7.  woe  to  that  m.  by  whom  theolfunce  cometh 

23.  24.  woe  to  that  m.  by  whom  the  Son  of  man 

is  betrayed,  Mark  14.  21.  Luke  22.  22. 
good  were  it  for  t.  m.  if  he  had  not  been  born 
27.19.  have  thou  nothing  to  do  with  /A«J  just  m. 
.^cts  17.  31.  by  that  m.  whom  he  hath  ordained 
Rom.  14.  20.  evil  for  t.  m.  who  eateth  with  offence 
2  Thess.  2. 3.  t.  in.  of  sin  be  revealed,  son  of  jierdit. 
3. 14.  note  that  m.  and  have  no  company  with  him 
Ja.-n.  1.  7.  lei  not  that  in.  think  he  shall  receive 

This  MAN. 
Om.  24.  53.  wilt  thou  go  «  ith  this  m.?  I  will  go 

26.  H.  he  that  toucheth  this  m.  or  his  wife 
F.xod.  10.  7.  how  long  shall  t.  m.  be  a  snare  to  us? 
Drnt.  22.  16.  r  gave  my  daughter  to  t.  m.  to  wife 
JuiliT.  10.  23.  seeing  this  m.  is  come  to  my  house 

24.  but  to  this  m.  do  not  so  vila  a  thing 
1  Sam.  1.  3.  tliis  m.  went  up  yearly  to  worsliip 

10.  27.  but  they  said,  how  shall  this  m.  save  us  ? 
17.  25.  have  you  seen  this  m.  that  is  come  U[)? 

25.  25.  let  not  my  lord  regard  this  m.  of  Belial 

1  Kivg-s  20.  7.  see  how  this  m.  seckelh  misihief 
39.  brought  a  man  to  me,  and  said,  ki'cp  this  in. 

2  Kina-s  5.  7.  this  m.  sends  to  me  to  recover  a  man 
A'<rA.  1.  11.  grant  him  mprcy  in  sight  of  this  m. 
Fstk.  9.4  for  this  w.  .Mordecai  waxed  greater  and 
.fob  1.3.  this  m.  wasthe  greatestofthe  men  of  east 
Psal.  52.  7.  lo,  this  m.  made  not  God  iiis  strength 

87.  4.  shall  be  said,  this  m.  was  born  there,  5,  6. 
Tsa.  14. 16.  is  this  the  rn.  that  made  earth  tremble? 

66.  2.  but  to  (his  m.  will  I  look,  even  to  him 
Jfr.  22.  28.  is  t.  m.  Coniah  a  despised  broken  idol? 
30.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  write  ye  this  m.  childless 

26.  II.  saying,  this  m.  is  worthy  to  die,  16. 

33.  4.  the  princes  said,  let  t.  m.  be  put  to  death, 
this  m.  secketh  not  the  welfare  of  this  people 
r>an.  8.  16.  innke  this  m.  umleistand  the  vision 
Jonah  1.  14.  leltis  not  perish  for  this  m.  life 
Mir.  5.  .5.  t.  m.  shall  be  the  peace  when  Assyrian 
Mat.  8.9.  fsay  to  t.m.  go,  and  he  goetli,  to  another 
9.  3. scribes  said,  this  m.  blasphemelh,  J\farh2.  7 
13.54.wheDce  had  this  m.  this  wisdom?  Jilark  6.2 
57.  47.  some  said,  this  »».  callelh  for  Elias 
369 


MAN 

Mark  14.71.1  know  nottAi>  m.  of  whom  ye  speak 
15.  3J.  truly  this  m.  was  tho  Son  of  God 
Luke  7.  3i*.  I.  m.  if  he  wore  a  projihel,  would  have 

14.  y.  come  and  say  lo  thee,  give  t/us  m.  place 
30.  saying,  t.  m.  began  to  build  and  was  not  able 

15.2. 1.  HI.  receiveth  sinners,  andeatelh  wiili  them 

15.  14.  1  tell  you,  t.  III.  went  down  justiliud  rulher 
19.  14.  we  will  not  have  Viis  m.  to  reign  over  us 
22.  .56.  and  said,  this  m.  was  also  with  liim 
23.4.1  find  no  fault  in  t.  in.  14.  ||  18.  away  wiih  t.m. 

41.  but  this  in.  hath  done  nothing  amiss 
52.  this  m.  went  to  Pilate  and  bugged  the  body 
John  0.  52.  how  can  this  m.  give  us  his  llesh  lo  eat .' 

7.  15.  how  knowcth  this  in.  letters,  having  never 
27.  howbeit,  we  know  this  m.  whence  lie  is 

46.  answered,  never  man  spake  like  this  in 

9.  2.  Master,  who  did  sin,  this  in.  or  his  parents  ? 
3.  neither  hath  this  m.  sinned,  nor  his  parems 
16.  t.  in.  is  not  of  G.  he  keepelh  not  ihe  sabbath 
24.  praise  God,  we  know  that  this  m.  is  a  sinner 
33.  M  this  m.  were  not  of  G.  he  (;ould  do  nothing 

10.  41.  all  that  John  spake  of  this  in.  were  true 

11.  37.  could  not  t.  in.  which  opened  the  eyes  of 
blind,  caused  that  t.  //(.should  not  have  died! 

47.  what  do  we?  for  this  m.  dueth  many  miracles 

18.  17.  art  not  thou  one  of  this  m.  disciples  I 
29.  what  accusation  bring  ye  against  this  m.  ? 
40.  not  t.  m.  but  Barabbas,  now  he  was  a  robber 

19.  12.  if  let  t.  in.  go,  ihou  art  not  Cesar's  friend 
21.  21.  Peter  saith,  and  what  shall  this  m.  do  ! 

Jlcts  1. 18.  now  t.  m.  purchased  a  field  with  reward 

3.  12.  as  though  wchad  made  this  in.  lo  walk,  lb. 

4.  10.  even  by  him  doth  this  m.  stand  whole 

5.  28.  and  intend  to  bring  this  m.  blood  upon  us 

37.  after  this  in.  rose  up  Judas  of  Galilee 

6.  13.  this  m.  ceaseth  nol  lo  speak  blasphemous 

8.  10.  saying,  this  m.  is  the  great  power  of  God 
9. 13.  I  heard  oi' this  in.  how  much  evil  hath  done 
13.  23.  of  this  m.  seed  hath  God  raised  Jesus 

38.  thro'  t.m.  is  preached  lo  you  forgiven,  ofsins 
13.  25.  t.  m.  was  instructed  in  the  way  of  the  Lord 

21.  23.  t.  is  the  in.  that  leacheth  all  men  ag.  law 

22.  26.  t.  m.  is  a  Roman  ||  23. 9.  find  no  evil  in  t.  in. 

23.  27.  this  in.  v/as  taken  of  the  Jews,  and  should 
24.5.  for  we  have  found  this  in.  a  pestilent  fellow 

25.  5.  accuse  this  m.  if  there  be  any  wickedness 
24.  ye  see  t.  m.  about  whom  Jews  dealt  with  me 

21).  31.  this  m.  doeth  nothing  worthy  of  death 
.32.  this  m.  might  have  been  set  at  liberty 

2'i.  4.  no  doubt  this  m.  is  a  murderer,  vengeance 
Hib.  3.3.  this  m.  was  counted  worthy  of  more  glory 

7.4.  now  consider  how  ^reallA/sin.was,  to  whom 
24.  but  this  m.  because  he  conlinueth  ever 

8.  3.  that  this  in.  have  somewhat  also  to  orfer 

10.  12.  this  in.  after  he  had  otiered  one  sacrifice 
Jam.  1.  25.  this  in.  shall  be  blessed  in  his  deed 

26.  but  deceivcth,  this  in,  religion  is  vain 

See  Understanding. 

MAN  of  war. 

F.iod.  1.5. 3.  the  Lord  is  a  in.  of  w.  Lord  is  his  name 

.Josli.Vi.  1.  Machir,son  of  Manasseh,  w  as  a /k.o/ /a. 

1  Sam.  16.  13.  David  a  in.  of  war,  2  Sam.  17.  8. 

1  Chron.  28.  3. 

17.  33.  Goliath  w.as  a  m.  of  war  fiom  his  youth 

Isa.  3.  2.  the  Lord  doth  lake  away  the  in.  of  war 

42.  13.  he  shall  stir  up  jealousy  like  a  in.  of  war 

Hoicked  MAN. 
Dcut.  25.2.  if  the  wicked  in.  be  worthy  to  be  be.aten 
.Job  15.  20.  the  wicked  in.  travailelh  with  pain 
20.29. the  portion  of  a  wicked  in.  from  God,  27. 13. 
Psal.  109.  6.  sol  thou  a  wicked  m.  over  him 
Pr«a.6.12.a  wicked  //j.walkelhwitli  froward  mouth 

9.  7.  he  that  rebnketh  a  wicked  m.  gcttelh  a  blot 

11.  7.  when  a  wiclied  in.  dielh,  his  expectation 
13.  5.  h  wicked  in.  is  loathsome,  and  cometh  to 

17. 23.  a  wicked  in.  taketha  gift  out  of  the  bosom 
21.  2'J.  w.  111.  hardeneth  his  face,  but  the  upright 
24. 15.  lay  not  wait,  O  wicked  m.  against  dwelling 

Ecrl.  7. 1.5.  a  wicked  m.  that  prolongeth  his  days 
Ezek.  3.13.  the  same  wickcdm.  shall  diein  iniquity 

18.24.  and  dooth  that  which  the  wicked  in.  doclh 
27.when  a  wicked  ///.turnelh  from  his  wickodiii.ss 

33.  8.  when  [  say  lo  wicked,  O  w.  in.  thou  shall 
surely  die,  thai  w.  in.  shall  die  in  his  iniquity 

If'isc  MAN. 
^/•Ti.  41.33.  look  outam.  discreet  and  i;;i«c,  sethim 
1  A7/i^,t2. 9. Solomon  was  zo.m. and  know  what  lodo 
1  CAr.27.  32.  Jonathan  David's  uncle,  was  a  w.  in. 
Job  15.  2.  should  a  wiscm.  utter  vain  knowledge? 
17.  10.  I  cannot  find  one  wise  m.  among  you 

34.  34.  and  let  a  wise  m.  hearken  lo  me 
Prov.  1.  .5.  a  wise  m.  will  hear  and  increase 

9.  8.  rebuke  u  tcise  m.  and  he  will  love  thee 
9.  give  instruction  to  a  wise  in.  he  will  be  wiser 
1 1.  16.  a  wise  m.  feareth,  and  dcpattelh  from  evil 

16.  14.  a  wise  m.  will  pacify  the  wrnlli  of  a  king 

17.  10.  a  reproof  enlcreth  more  into  a  wise  m. 
21.  22.  a  wise  m.  scaleth  the  city  of  the  mighty 

26.  12.  seest  thou  a  m.  wise  in  his  own  conceit? 
29.  9.  if  a  wise  m,  contendelh  with  a  foolish  man 

3C 


MAN 

Prov.  29. 11.  buta  Mise  m.  kcepethit  in  till  afterw 
Keel.  2.  14.  the  wise  m.  eyes  are  in  his  Ijead 
16.  and  how  diuth  the  wise  in.  ?  as  the  lool 
19.  whether  he  shall  be  a  ici.^c  m.  or  a  Ibol? 

7.  7.  surely  oppression  niaketh  a  wise  m.  mad 

8.  1.  who  is  as  tho  wise  m.  and  who  knowelh 

5.  a /disc  m.  heart  discernuth  lime  and  judgment 
17. though  a  wise  //i.lhink  to  know  it,  yei  nol  ablo 

9.  15.  now  there  was  found  in  it  a  poor  wise  n. 

10.  2.  a  wise  vi.  heart  is  at  \i.s  right  hand 

12.  the  words  of  a  wise  m.  niuuth  are  gracious 
Jcr.  9. 12.  who  is  the  wise  m.  that  may  understand? 

23.  let  not  the  wise  m.  glory  in  his  wisdom 
Mat.l.iii.  1  will  liken  him  to  a  wise  in.  who  built 
1  Cor.  6.  5.  that  there  is  nol  a  wise  in.  aniongst  you 
7a//i.3.13.who  is  a  wisein.  endued  with  knowledge 

MAN  joined  with  H  onion. 
Gen.  3.12.  the  m.  said,  the  w.  whom  thou  gavesl  me 
20.  3.  dead  in.  for  the  w.  thou  hast  is  man's  wife 
Eiod.  35.  29.  every  m.  and  w.  whose  heart  made 
3'j.  6.  let  no  m.  nor  woman  make  any  more  vvoii 
Leu.  13.  '20.  if  a  in.  or  woman  have  the  plague 
lis.  if  m.  or  woman  have  in  tho  skin  bright  spots 

15.  18.  the  woman  also  with  \<hoi(i  the  in.  shall  ho 
33.  that  hath  an  issue  of  the  m.  and  woman 

20.  18.  if  ni.  lie  with  a  worn,  having  her  sickness 

27.  a  //;.  or  woman  that  hath  a  familiar  spirit 

JVum.  5.  O.when  in.  or  woman  shall  commit  any  sin 

6. 2.  when  either  vi.  or  w.  shall  separate  theriisel 

31.  17.  kill  w.  that  hath  known  //(.  Judg.  21. 11. 

JJeut.  17.  2.  m.  one.  that  hath  wrought  wicktdn. 

5.  bring  forlh  that  m.  or  woman,  and  stone  them 

22.  5.  the  woman  shall  not  wear  that  pertaineth  lo 

a  m.  nor  shall  m.  put  on  a  woman's  gaiment 

22.  if  a  Jft.  be  found  lying  with  auoman,  both  Ihe 

in.  that  lay  with  the  icoiiiau,  and  tiie  woman 

29. 18.  lest  there  should  be  among  you  in.  or  worn. 

.losh.  6.  21.  utterly  deslroyed  both  m.  and  woman 

1  Sam.  15.  3.  but  slay  both  m.  woman,  and  iulant 

27.  9.  David  left  neither  m.  nor  woman  alive,  11. 

1  Chr.  16.  3.  he  dealt  both  to  in.  and  woman  a  loaf 

2  Chr.  15.  13.  not  seek  Lord,  m.  or  worn,  shall  die 
Esth.-l.  11.  whether  m.  or  jt'o/nan  come  to  theking 
./ir. 44. 7.  lo  cut  oti' from  you,  m.  woman  and  child 

51.  22.  I  will  break  in  j)iec('S  in.  and  woman 
1  Cor.  11.  3.  and  the  head  of  the  womania  Uie  m. 

7.  but  the  woman  is  the  glory  of  the  m. 

8.  the  III.  is  not  of  the  worn,  but  woman  of  the  m 

11.  nor  is  the  m.  without  the  woman  in  the  Lord 

12.  as  worn,  is  of  the  m.  so  is  the  m.  by  the  won. 
1  'J'iin.  5.  16.  if  any  m.  or  woman  have  widows 

Young  MAN. 
Oen.  4.  23.  I  have  slain  a  young  m.  to  my  liurt 
18.  7.  Abraham  gave  it  to  a  young  m.  to  dress  it 
34.  19.  the  young  m.  deferred  nol  lo  do  the  thing 

41. 12.  there  was  with  us  a  young  m.  u  Hebrew 
Exod.  33.  II.  JiKshua  a  young  m.  departed  not  out 
A'uni.ll.27.aad  there  ran  youngin.  and  told  Mosca 
Dcut.  32.  25.  destroy  both  the  young  m.  and  virgin 
./wi/jr.S.H.canghta  ?/«U7i^7/i.of  the  men  ofSucculh 

9.54.Abimelech  called  hastily  to  Ihe  young  m.anA 

his  youngin.  thrust  him  through,  and  he  died 

17.  7.  there  was  a  youngm.  of  Beth-lehem-Judah 

12.  the  young  in.  became  his  priest,  and  was  in 

13.  3.  knew  the  voice  of  the  young  m.  the  Levitt! 

1  Sam.  9.2.Saul  was  a  clio'iceyovng  m.  and  goodly 

14.  1.  Jonathan  said  lo  the  young  m.  that  bare 
17.58.andSanl  said, who.=e son  art  lhou,2/ouno'j7!..? 
20.  22.  but  if  I  say  ihus  lo  the  young  m.  behold 

30. 13.  he  said  to  David,!  am  young  in.  of  Kgypt 

2  Sam.\.i>.  David  said  lo  the  young  m.  liiat  lold,  13. 
14.  21.  go  bring  the  young  in.  Absalom  again 
13.  5. deal  gently  lor  my  sake  with  Ihe  young  m. 

29.  king  said,  is  ihe  young  in.  Absalom  sale  ?  32. 

32.  the  enemies  of  my  lord  be  as  ihalyoungm.  is 
i  Kings  1 1. 28. Solomon  seeing  i/oun^m. industrious 
iliings  6.17.Lord  opened  thecyesof  the  j/r/j/nn'm. 
9.4.SO  Uicyoung  m.even  young  //i. went  lo  llanioih 

1  C/ir.l2.2l  iind  Zadok,  a  youngm.  mighty  cf  vol. 

2  Chr.  36.  17.  and  had  no  compngsion  on  young  m. 
Psal.  119.  9.  wherewith  shall  y.  m.  cleanse  his  way 
Prov.  1.  4.  lo  young  m.  know  Ivdge  and  discretion 

7.7. 1  discerned  u  young  m.  voidofunderslimding 
Eccl.  II.  9.  rejoice,  O  young  m.  in  thy  youtJi 
fsa.  62.  5.  for  as  young  m.  marrioth  a  virgin 
.ler.  51.  22.  break  in  pieces  the  young  m.  and  mnid 
V.eeh.  2.  4.  said  to  me,  run,  speak  to  this  yuun^m. 
Mat.  I9.20.lhe  young  m.  saiil,  all  these  have  I  kept 
Mark  14. 51. there  followed  him  a  ceriiiin  youngm. 

16.  5.  ihey  sawixyoungm.  sitiinson  the  right  S'rie 
AuAf  7.  14.  he  said,  young  m.  1  say  lo  ihoe,  arise 
.'lets  7. 58.  they  laid  their  clothes  at  a  young  m.  feet 

20.9.sai  in  a  window  a  i/ounn- m.  named  Luiychus 

12.  and  ihey  brought  the  y^ung  m.  elive 

23.17.  bring  this  young  m.Ui  the  chief  ceyjlain,  18. 

22.  the  chief  captain  then  let  liie  young  m.  depart 

MANDRAKFS" 

Is  a  kindofplant,whose  root  at  snmrdistaiieefrnm 

its  upper  part,  is  generally  divided  into  tKt 

branches,  which  is  the  reason  that  tliis  root  Kai 


MAN 

tvmething  of  the  figure  of  a  man,  whose  ttco 
,  thiglus  are  represented  by  the  two  branches.  Jl 
IS  said  sometimes  tostupify,  and  cause  phren- 
sy;  some  call  it  a  pruvvcatiue,  and  that  there 
fore  it  was  used  in  philtres;  and  that  this  was 
the  reason  why  Rachel  so  earnestly  desired  tu 
obtain  them  from  Leah,  she  being  very  desirous 
of  having  children.  There  are  two  sorts  of 
Maiidrakca  ;  the  female,  whose  leaves  are  of  a 
very  disagreeable  scetU  :  and  the  insile,  whose 
scent  is  said  to  be  very  pleasant  and  agreeable. 
It  is  reported,  that  in  the  province  of  I'ekjn  in 
China,  there  is  a  kind  of  Mandrake  so  vidua 
lie,  that  a  pound  of  that  root  is  worth  thrice  its 
veight  in  silver:  for  they  say  it  so  wonderfully 
restores  the  sinking  spirits  of  dying  persons, 
thai  there  is  often  lime  for  the  use  of  other 
vieans,  and  thereby  recovering  them  to  life  and 
health.  Those  Mandrakes  which  Heubcn 
brought  home  to  his  mother,  are  by  some  called 
Violets,  by  others  Lilies,  or  JeBsaniin,  by  others 
Citrons.  Some  reckon  them  to  be  such  agreea- 
ble flowers  of  the  field,  whcrewithchildren  were 
pleased ;  Reuben  that  gathered  them  being 
then  only  five  or  six  years  of  age. 
Oen.  !iO.  14.  Reuben  found  m.  give  me  of  thy  m. 

15.  wouldest  thou  take  away  my  son's  m.  also? 
therefore  he  shall  lie  with  thee  for  thy  son's  m. 

10.  I  have  hired  thee  with  my  son's  m. 
Cant.  7.  13.  m.  give  a  smell,  and  at  our  gates  are 

MANGER. 
j[.uA:e2.7.1aid  him  in  a  m.  \\  l'2.sliall  find  him  in  a  m. 

16.  and  thev  found  the  babe  lying  in  a  m. 

RLVNiFKST,  Actively,  Passively, 
r.erl.  3.  1?.  that  God  might  m.  them,  and  that 
John  14.  21.  love  him,  and  m.  myself  to  him 
'2fi.  ni.  thyself  to  us,  and  not  to  the  world  1 
Jicts  4.  16.  the  miracle  is  m.  to  all  at  Jerusalem 
Rom.  1. 19.  what  may  be  known  of  G.  is  m.  in  them 

1  Cor.  4.  5.  who  will  make  m.  counsels  of  hearts 
15.  27.  it  is  m.  that  he  is  excepted  which  did 

2  Cor.  'i.  14.  makes  m.  the  savour  of  his  knowledge 
Gal.  5.  19.  now  the  works  of  the  Hesh  are  m. 
Phil.  I.  13.  so  that  my  bonds  in  Christ  are  m. 
Col.  4.  4.  that  I  may  make  it  m.  as  I  ought 
27'Atss.  1.  5.  am.  token  ofrighteousjudgm.  of  God 

1  Tim.  3.  16.  God  was  m.  in  the  flesh,  justified 

5.  25.  the  good  works  of  some  are  m.  helorehand 

2  Tim.  3.  9.  their  folly  shall  be  m.  to  all  men 
JJeh.  4.  13.  there  is  no  creature  that  is  not  m. 

1  Pet.  1.20.  but  was  m.  in  these  last  times  for  you 

1  John  3. 10.  in  this  the  children  of  God  are  ;«. 

.See  Madk. 

M.ANIFESTATION. 

Rom.  8.  19.  waiteth  for  the  ni.  of  the  sons  of  God 

IfWr.Pi.?.  them,  of  the  Spirit  is  given  to  every  man 

2  Cor.  4.  2.  but  by  m.  of  the  truth  commending 

MANIFESTED. 
Mark  4.22.  for  nothing  is  hid  which  shall  not  be  m. 
70*7:2.11. miracles  did  Jesus,  and  m.  forth  his  glory 

17.  6.  I  have  m.  thy  name  unto  the  men  which 
Horn.  3.  21.  but  the  righteousness  of  God  is  m. 
Tit.  1.  3.  but  halh  in  due  time  m.  his  word 

1  .John  1.  2.  the  life  was  m.  and  we  have  seen  it 

3.  5.  that  he  was  m.  to  take  away  our  sins 
8.  for  this  purpose  was  the  Son  of  God  m. 

4.  9.  in  this  was  m.  the  love  of  God  toward  us 

MANIFESTLY. 

2  Cor.3.3.  arem.  declared  to  be  the  epistle  of  Christ 

MANIFOLD. 
A'f/i.  9.  19.  in  thy  m.  mercies  forsookcst  them  not 
27. according  to  m.  mercies  gavest  them  saviours 
Psal.  104.  24.  O  Lord,  how  m.  are  thy  works 
Jlmos  5.  12.  I  know  your  m.  transgressions  and  .tine 
J.ukc  IH.  30.  who  sliall  not  receive  in.  more 
F.ph.  3.  10.  might  be  known  the  m.  wisdom  of  God 
1  Pit.  l.f).  ye  are  in  heaviness,  tli'o'  m.  temptations 
4.  10.  as  good  Blewariln  of  the  m.  grace  of  God 

MANKIND. 
/,fo.l8.22.shall  not  lie  with  m. as  with  woman- kind 
00.  13.  if  a  man  lie  with  a  m.  as  with  a  woman 
Job  12.  10.  in  whose  hanrl  is  the  breath  of  all  m. 
1  Cor.  0.  9.  nor  nbuKers  of  themselves  with  m. 
1   Tim.  I.  10.  the  law  for  them  that  defile  with  m. 
Jam.  3.  7.  is  tamed,  and  hath  been  tamed  of  m. 

MANNA. 
That  drltctous  food  wherewith  Ood  fed  the  r.hil- 
drm  of  /.•'If/  in  tht.  Jesert.i  of  Arabia,  during 
their  continuance  there  for  forty  years,  from 
their  eighth  encampment  in  the  wilderness  of 
Hin.  It  was  a  Utile  gran,  white  like  hoar 
frost,  round,  and  nf  Ike  bigness  of  coriander- 
seed.  It  fell  every  morning  upon  the  dew,  and 
when  the  dew  wa.i  exhaled  by  the  heat  of  the  sun, 
the  Manna  appeared  alone  luing  upon  the  rocks 
or  the  sand,  Exod.  Ifi.  14.  Num.  11.7.  ft  fell 
every  day,  except  on  the  snbbnth,  and  this  i.nhi 
about  the  camp  of  the  Israelites,  Exod.  16.  5. 
It  fell  in  so  great  quantities  during  the.  whole 
forty  years  of  their  journey  in  the  icildcrncss, 
370 


MAN 

that  it  was  sufficient  to  feed  the  whole  multi 
tude  of  above  a  million  of  souls  ;  en  ry  one  of 
whom  gathered  the  ejuantity  of  an  homer  for 
his  share  every  day,  which  is  about  three  quarts 
o/ English  measure.  H  viaintained  this  vast 
multitude,  and  yet  none  of  them  found  any  in- 
convenience from  the  constant  eating  of  it. 
Kvery  sixth  day  there  fell  a  double  quantity 
of  it;  and  though  it  putrificd  when  it  was  kept 
any  other  day,  yet  on  the  sabbath  it  suffered  no 
such  alteration.  Jind  the  same  Manna  tliat 
was  melted  by  the  heat  of  the  sun,  when  it  was 
left  in  the  field,  was  of  so  hard  a  consistenc 
when  it  was  brought  into  their  tents,  that  it 
was  used  to  be  beaten  in  mortars,  and  would 
even  endure  the  fire,  was  baked  in  pans,  made 
into  paste,  and  so  into  cakes.  Num.  11.  8.  It  is 
called.  Angels'  food,  I'sal.  78.  25.  which  may  in 
sinuate,  either,  thalit  was  made  and  prepared 
by  their  ministry  ;  or  that  angels  themselves, 
ij  they  had  need  of  any  food,  could  not  have 
any  that  was  more  agreeable  tlian  Manna  was; 
it  being  of  a  heavenly  original,  and  nf  singular 
vigour  and  efficacy  for  preserving  and  nourish- 
ing those  who  used  it  according  to  (iod's  ap- 
pointment: Or,  as  it  is  in  the  margin,  eveiy  one 
did  eat  the  bread  of  the  mighty  ;  that  is,  even 
the  common  Israelites  fed  upon  as  delicious 
food,  as  the  greatest  nobles  and  princes  did. 

To  eat  of  the  hidden  Manna, /^cu.  2. 17.  To  par- 
take of  Christ,  and  those  comforts  and  bless- 
ings which  fl 010  from  him  :  It  is  spoken  in  al- 
lusion to  that  bread  wherewith  God  fed  the 
Israelites,  xchich  was  a  type  of  Christ,  who  is 
the  bread  of  eternal  life,  and  was  the  true  bread 
which  came  down  from  heaven  to  give  life  to 
the  world,  John  6.  32,  33,  35. 

Kiod.  10.  15.  they  said  one  to  another,  it  is  m. 
33.  take  a  pot  and  put  a  homer  full  of  m.  therein 
35.  and  Israel  did  eat  m.  forty  years 

J^Tum.  11.  G.  there  is  nothing  bisides  this  m. 

7.  the  m.  was  as  coriander-seed,  and  the  colour 
9.  when  the  dew  fell  on  camp  the  m.  fell  on  it 

Deut.  8. 3.  he  suffered  thee  to  hunger,  and  fed  thee 
with  m.  16.  JV"  A.  9.  20.  Psal.  78.  24 
.Josh.  5.  12.  the  m.  ceased,  they  had  m.  no  more 
John  6.  31.  our  fathers  did  eat  m.  in  the  desert,  49. 
58.  not  as  your  fathers  did  eat  m.  p.id  are  dead 
He.b.  9.  4.  wherein  was  the  golden  pot  that  had  m. 
Rev.".  17.  to  him  will  I  give  to  eat  of  the  hidden  m. 

MANNER 
Signifies,  [1]  Custom, practice,  or  fashion,  1  Sam. 

8.  9,  11.  Ezek.  11.  12.  [2]  Sinful  behaviour, 
and  rebellious  conduct,  Acts  13.  18.  [3]  De- 
portment and  carriage  in  word  and  deed,  1  Cor. 
15.  33.  [4]  IVaijs  and  means,  Ileb.  1.  1.  [5j 
Kind  or  sort,  Exod.  12. 16.  [()]  Order  or  rank. 
Josh.  ().  15.  [7]  The  way  of  service  or  wor- 
ship, 2  Kings  1 /.  26,  27. 

Gen.  25.  23.  two  m.  of  people  shall  be  separated 
40.  17.  was  of  all  m.  of  bake-meals  for  Pharatdi 

Kro(/.1.14.made  their  lives  bitter  in  all  ?«. of  service 
12.  16.  no  in.  of  work  shall  be  done  in  them 
22.  9.  all  in.  of  trespass,  any  m.  of  lost  thing 
31.  3.  in  wisdom,  and  in  all  in.  of  workmanship, 
5.  I  35.  31,  33,  35.  |  36.  1.  1  Chron.  28.  21. 

f.ev.  5.  10.  burnt-ofiering  accord,  to  7/1.  J\"um.  9. 14. 
7.  23.  shall  cat  no  m.  of  fat  of  ox  or  she(.'p 

26.  ye  shall  eat  no  /«.  nf  bloo.l,  27.  |  17.  10,  14. 

14.  .54.  the  law  for  all  m.  of  the  plague  of  leprosy 
23.31.yeshaIldono  j/i.of  work, it  shall  be  a  statute 
24.22.  ye  shall  have  one  m.  of  law,  A''wm.  15.  16. 

J^Tum.  5.  13.  neither  she  be  taken  with  the  m. 

15.  24.  and  his  drink-ottering  according  to  the  m. 
2H.  18.  ye  shall  do  no  m.  of  servile  work 

Drut.i.  15.  for  ye  saw  nora.  of  similitude  in  Ilorcb 
1.5.  2.  and  this  is  the  m.  of  the  release 
27.21.  cursed  he  he  that  lietli  with  any  m.  of  beast 

.hidg.  6.  t  26.  built  an  altar  in  an  orderly  771. 
8.18.  whatm.  of  men  were  they  ye  slow  at  Tabor? 

Huth  4.  7.  no'v  this  was  the  in.  in  former  time 

1  .Vam.  8.  9.  and  shew  them  the  m.  of  the  king,  11. 

10.  25.  Sumuel  told  the  people  them,  of  the  kiiigd. 
21.  5.  anil  the  bread  is  in  a  m.  romnmn 

27.  11.  and  so  will  be  his  771.  all  the  while 

2  ."fam.  7.  19.  is  this  the  m.  of  man,  O  Lord  Ood  ? 
2  icings  1.7.  what  771.  of  man  was  he  who  told  you? 

11.  14.  the  king  Kto<>d  by  a  pillar,  as  the  m.  was 
17.  26.  know  not  the  m.  of  the  God  of  the  lund 

27.  let  him  tench  them  the  in.  of  God  of  the  land 
1  Chron.  2^1.  29.  for  all  m.  of  measure  and  size 
I^sth.  1.  13.  for  so  was  the  king's  m.  toward  all 
Psal.  107.  18.  their  soul  ahhorrelh  all  tn.  of  meal 

144.  13.  earnerg  be  full,  aflording  all  m.  of  store 
Cant.  7. 13.  at  onr  gates  arc  all  m.  of  pleasant  fruits 
Isa.  5.  17.  tlien  the  lambs  shall  fccil  afler  their  m. 

Irr.  22.  21.  this  hath  been  thy  7n.  from  thy  youth 
/'n77.  6.  23.  and  no  m.  of  hint  was  found  on  him 
.Imos  8.  14.  and  the  m.  of  Ileer  shiha  livelh 
Mat.  4.23.  and  healing  all  rti.  of  sickness,  10.  1. 


MAN 

Mat.  5.  11.  sliall  say  all  m.  of  evil  ag.  you  faltcly 
Mat.  8.  27.  what  m.  of  man  is  this,  that  the  windg 
and  the  sea  obey  hiin?  Mark  4.  41.  J^uke  S.  25 
12.  31.  all  171.  of  sin  shall  be  forgiven  to  men 
Mark  13.  1.  see  what  m.  of  stoms  are  here 
J^uke  1.  29.  what  771.  of  salutation  this  should  be 

66.  saying,  what  m.  of  child  shall  this  be  ? 
7.  39.  have  known  w hat  m.  of  woman  this  is 
9.  55.  ye  know  not  what  m.  of  spirit  ye  are  "*" 

11.  42.  ye  tithe  mint,  rue,  and  ail  m.  of  herbs 
24.  17.  what  m.  of  communications  are  these? 

John  7.  36.  what  771.  of  saying  is  this  that  he  said 

19.  40.  as  the  771.  of  the  Jews  is  to  bury 

..lets  17.  2.  Paul,  as  liis  m.  was,  went  in  to  them 

20.  18.  ye  know  after  what  771. 1  have  been  with 
22. 3.  taught  according  to  the  perfect  m.  of  the  law 
25. 16.  it  is  not  m.  of  Romans  to  deliver  any  to  die 
2t).  4.  my  771.  of  life  from  my  youth,  know  Jews 

Rom.  1.  8.  wrought  in  me  all  771.  of  concupiscence 
2  Cor.  7.  9.  ye  were  made  sorry  after  a  godly  in. 

1  'J'hess.  1. 5.  as  ye  know  what  m.  of  men  we  were 
9.  what  77i.  of  entering  in  we  had  unto  you 

2  7'?m.  3.  10.  but  thou  hast  known  my  777.  of  life 
I/eb.  10.  25.  assembling,  as  the  771.  of  some  is 
./a7)i.  1.  24.  forgetteth  what  771.  of  man  he  was 

1  Pet.  1.  11.  what  in.  of  time  the  Sjiirit  of  Christ 
15.  so  be  ye  holy  in  all  m.  of  conversation 

2  Pet.  3.  11.  what  m.  of  i)erson8  ought  ye  to  be 
1  ./ohn  3.  1.  behold  what  777.  of  love  the  Fatiier 
Rev.  11.  5.  he  must  in  this  m.  be  killed 

22.  2.  tree  of  life,  which  bare  twelve  m.  of  fruita 

^ftcr  the  JL^NNER. 
Gen.  18.11.  to  be  with  Sarah  after  them,  of  women 
19.  31. to  come  in  to  us  after  the  in.  of  all  the  earth 
40.  13.  after  the  former  jt:.  when  thou  wast  his 

butler 
F.xod.21.  9.  deal  with  her  after  ^Acm.ofdaugliters 
J\''ii77i.29.  18.  according  to  the  number,  after  the  m. 
Josh.  6.  15.  compassed  the  city  after  the  same  m. 
Judg.  Ih.  7.  careless,  after  the  m.  of  the  Zidonians 

1  .Srt77;.17.30.1ie  turned  and  spake  after  /Af  same  77i. 

2  Kings  17. 33.  a.  the  m.  of  the  nations,  2  CAr.13.9. 
JVlA.  6. 4.  and  I  answered  them  after  the  same  n. 
Isa.  10.  24.  after  the  m.  of  Egypt,  26.  ^77i«s  4.  10. 
/■.'zf A.  20.  30.  polluted  after  the  771.  of  your  fathers 

23.  15.  a.  the  m.  of  the  Babylonians  of  Chaldea 
45.  a,  the  m.  of  adulteresses,  and  a.  the  m.  of 

women  that  shed  blood 

./0A71  2.  6.  after  them,  of  \\ti;  purifying  of  the  Jews 

Jlcts  15.  1.  ye  be  circumcised  a/tfr  ?Aem.  of  Moses 

Roni.  6.  19.  I  speak  after  lite  777.  of  men,  1  Cot. 

t  15.  32.  Gal.  3.  15 

1  Cor.  11.25.  a/fcr  (Ac  same  m. also  h'!  took  tlicrup 
Gal.".  14.  being  a  Jew,live6t  a.  fAcm.of  the  Gent. 

.Sftcr  this  MANNER. 

f?f7i.  18. 25.that  be  far  from  iliee  to  do  after  this  m. 
39.  19.  saying,  afti  r  /Ai.«  m.  did  thy  servant  to  nie 
45. 23.  to  his  fatiier  he  sent  after  this  m.  ten  asscB 

A'ltm.  28.  24.  after  this  in.  ye  shall  ofier  daily 

2  Sam.  17. 6.  Ahithophel  hath  spoken  after  this  m. 
Jer.V^.'.). after  this  m.  will  I  mar  the  priile  of  Judah 
Mat.G.'.Kafter  this  in.  therefore  pray  ye,Our  Father 
1  Ctir.  7.  7.  one  after  this  in.  and  another  after  that 
1  Pet.  3.  5.  after  this  m.'m  old  time,  women  trusted 

See  Like. 

071  this  MANNER. 

f77'77.32.19.saying,o7i  this  vi.  shall  he  speak  to  Esan 

1  4'c77i.  18.  24.  and  the  s«.rvaiits  of  Saul  told  him, 

saying,  071  /A7>  m.  spake  David 

2  .Sam.  15.  fi.  071  this  in.  did  Absalom  to  all  Israel 

1  Kings  22. 20.  one  said  071  this  in.  2  Chron.  18. 19. 

2  Chr.  32.15.  let  nut  Ilr/rk. persuade  you  on  this  m. 

MANNERS. 
Arc.  20. 23.  shall  not  walk  in  llie  m.  of  the  nation* 
2  Kings  17.  34.  they  do  after  the  former  tti. 
F.zek.  11.  12.  Iiavedone  after  the  777.  of  the  heather 
.lets  13.  18.  forty  years  suffered  he  their  m. 
1  Cor.  15.  .33.  evil  communications  corrupt  good  m 
Ileb.  1.  1.  God  in  clivcr«  in.  spake  in  time  past 

MAN  SERVANT. 

F.jod.  20.10.  not  do  work,  thy  m.-terv.  Deut.H.  14 

17.notro\et  thy  neiglibi>ur's77i.-»f7T7.  Dr^t.b.iil. 

21.27.  and  if  he  smite  out  his  m.-*<Ti7a»it'»  tooth 

32.  if  the  ox  shall  push  a  m.-serv.  he  shall  give 

Pent.  12. 18.  must  eat  them,  thou  and  thy  m.-serr. 

16.  II.  shall  rejoice,  thou  and  thy  m.-«rrTn7iJ,  14. 

.hh  31.  13.  if  I  did  despise  the  caii«e  of  my  m.-scrv. 

Jer.  34.9.  every  ninn  'ot  his  ro.-«rra7i£gofrec,  lOl 

MANSIONS. 
.lohn  14.  2.  in  mv  Father's  house  are  many  m. 

MAN-SLAYER. 
J\'nm.  35.6.  six  cities  ye  shall  appoint  for  m.-slayer 

12.  that  Vhem.-slavrrAw  not.  till  he  stand  before 

MANSLAYERS. 
I  TVtti.  1.  9.  that  the  la%v  was  made  for  m.-s(a«er« 

MANTLE. 
.Tutfg.  4.  18.  Jae)  covi'red  Sisera  with  a  tn 
1  .*<77T7i.28.  14.  an  old  man,  and  covered  with  a  fs 
1  Kings  19.  13.  Elijah  wrapped  his  face  in  fiia  n. 
19.  and  Elijah  cast  his  m.  upon  Eliaha 


MAN 

S  Kings-2. 8.  Elijah  took  his  m.  and  smote  waters 
13.  Elisha  took  Elijah's  m.  that  fell  irom  him,  14. 
Ezra  9.3.  and  when  I  heard  this,  I  rent  ray  m.  5. 
Job  1.  20.  tlien  Job  arose  and  rent  his  m. 
2.  12.  and  they  rent  every  one  his  m. 
Psal.  109.  29.  with  their  confusion,  as  with  a  m. 

MANTLES. 
Isa.  3.  22.  I  will  take  away  the  m.  and  wimples 
Van.  3. 1 21.  these  men  were  bound  in  their  m. 

MANY 
Signifies,  [1]  .4  great  number,  Judg.  9.  40.     [2] 
jill  mankind,  Kora.  5.  19.     [3]  The  elect  or  be- 
lievers only,  Mat.  26.  28.  Rom.  5.  19.    [4j  Jill 
the  ungodly  that  perish.  Mat.  7. 13.  [5]  Oreat, 
Psal.  18.  t  16.     [6]    Very  often,  Psal.  78.  38. 
[7]  During  life,  Hos.  3.  3.    [8]  j3  long  time, 
Hos.  3.  4. 
Oen.  17.  4.  my  covenant  is  with  thee,  thou  shalt 
be  a  father  of  m.  nations,  5.  Rom.  4. 17,  18. 
37.  3.  he  made  him  a  coat  of  to.  colours,  23,  32. 
F.xod.  19.  21.  they  gaze,  and  m.  of  thera  perish 
^'um.  10.  36.  when  the  ark  rested,  Moses  said,  re- 
turn, O  Lord,  to  the  m.  thousands  of  Israel 

13.  18.  and  see  whether  they  be  few  or  m. 

26.  54.  to  m.  thou  shalt  give  more  inheritance 
56.  the  possession  be  divided  betw.  m.  and  few 

35.  8.  from  thera  that  have  m.  cities,  shall  give  m. 
Dent.  1.  1.  hath  cast  out  m.  nations  before  thee 

15.  6.  thou  shalt  lend  to  m.  nations,  28.  12. 
31.  17.  and  m.  evils  shall  befall  them,  21. 

Josh.  11.  4.  with  horses  and  chariots  very  m. 
Judg.  9.  40.  771.  were  overthrown  and  wounded 

16.  24.  the  destroyer  which  slew  tti.  of  us 

1  Sam.  2.  5.  she  that  hath  m.  children  is  feeble 
14. 6.  no  restraint  to  the  Lord  to  save  by  m.  or  few 

2  Sam.  24.  t  14.  for  his  mercies  are  771. 
\Kings  4.  20.  Judah  and  Israel  were  m.  as  the  saod 

7. 47.  unweighed,  because  they  were  exceeding  m 

18.  25.  and  dress  it  first,  for  ye  are  m. 
2  Kings  9.  22.  and  her  witchcrafts  are  so  777. 

•  1  Chron-  23. 17.  the  sons  of  Rehabiah  were  very  m 
28.  5.  for  the  Lord  hath  given  me  m.  sons 
2  Chron.  11.  23.  Rehoboam  desired  m.  wives 

14.  11.  nothing  with  thee  to  help  with  m.  or  few 
30.17.  there  were  TO.  in  congregation  not  sanctified 

18.  771.  of  Ephraira  and  Manasseh  not  cleansed 
Ezra  10.  13.  we  are  m.  that  have  transgressed 
JVeA.  5.  2.  we,  our  sons  and  our  daughters  are  m. 
6. 18.  there  were  m.  in  Judah  sworn  to  Tobiah 
7.  2.  he  was  faithful,  and  feared  God  above  777. 

13.  26.  among  m.  nations  was  no  king  like  him 
Esth.  4.  3.  and  m.  lay  in  sackcloth  and  ashls 
Job  4.  3.  behold,  tliou  hast  instructed  m. 

11.  19.  yea,  m.  shall  make  suit  unto  thee 
Psal.  3.  1.  m.  are  they  that  rise  up  against  me 

2.  there  be  m.  that  say  of  my  soul,  4.  6. 
25. 19.  consider  mine  enemies,  they  are  m.  56.  2. 

31.  13.  for  I  have  heard  the  slander  of  tb. 

32.  10.  m.  sorrows  shall  be  to  the  wicked 
34.  19.  771.  are  the  afflictions  of  the  righteous 
37.  J6.  is  better  than  the  riches  of  777.  wicked 
40. 3. 771.  shall  see  it  and  fear,  and  trust  in  the  Lord 
55.  18.  he  delivered,  for  there  were  m.  with  me 
71.  7.  I  am  as  a  wonder  to  777.  thou  art  my  refuge 
119.  157. 777.  are  my  persecutors  and  enemies 

Prov.  4.  10.  and  the  years  of  thy  life  shall  be  tti. 

7.  26.  for  she  hath  cast  down  771.  wounded 

10.  21.  the  lips  of  tlie  righteous  feed  771. 

14.  20.  but  the  rich  hath  777.  friends 

19.  4.  wealth  maketh  777.  friends,  but  the  poor 
28. 2.  for  transgression  771.  are  the  princes  thereof 

27.  he  that  hideth  his  eyes,  shall  have  777.  a  curse 
Eccl.  11.  8.  the  days  of  darkness  shall  be  m. 
Isa.  31. 1.  and  trust  in  chariots  because  they  are  m. 

53.  11.  by  his  knowledge  shall  he  justify  777. 
12.  he  bare  the  sin  of  77?.  and  made  intercession 

66.  16.  and  the  slain  of  the  Lord  shall  be  771. 
Jer.  5.  6.  because  their  transgressions  are  777. 

14.  7.  for  our  backslidings  are  m.  we  sinned 

42.  2.  pray  for  us,  for  we  are  left  but  few  of  771. 

46.  16.  he  made  m.  to  fall,  one  fell  on  another 
Lam.  1.  22.  for  my  sighs  are  777.  my  heart  is  faint 
Ezek.  33.  24.  but  we  are  777.  the  land  is  given  us 
Dan.  8.  25.  and  by  peace  shall  destroy  m. 

11.  14.  there  shall  777.  stand  up  against  the  king 
33.  they  that  understand  shall  instruct  771. 
44.  to  destroy  and  utterly  to  make  away  771. 

12.  2.  771.  that  sleep  in  the  dust  shall  awake 
4.  771.  shall  run  to  anfl  fto,  and  krwwledge  be 

Hos.  8.  11.  Ephraim  hath  made  m.  altars  to  sin 
JV'aA.  1.12.  though  they  be  quiet,  and  likewise  771. 
Zech.  8.  20.  there  shall  come  people,  and  the  in- 
habitants of  777.  cities 
^/a/.  2. 6.  but  did  turn  m.  away  from  iniquity 
Mat.  7.  13.  and  771.  tiiere  be  that  go  in  thereat 
22.  771.  will  say  to  me  in  that  day.  Lord,  Lord 

8.  11.  771.  shall  come  from  the  east  and  the  west 

13.  58.  he  did  not  771.  mighty  works  there 
19. 30.  771.  that  are  first  shall  be  last,  Mark  10.  31. 
80. 16.  for  m.  be  called,  but  few  chosen,  23  14. 

371 


MAN 

JUat.  24.  5.  for  777.  shall  come  in  my  name  and 

shall  deceive  777.  Mark  13.  6.  L,uke  21.  8. 

12.  iniquity  abound,  the  love  of  771.  shall  wax  cold 

20. 28.  blood  shed  for  777.  |{  27. 53.  they  appear  to  771. 

Mark  5. 9.  name  is  Legion,  for  we  are  ih.  L,uke8.'H). 

Luke  1. 16.777.  shall  he  turn  to  the  Lord  their  God 

2. 34.  tliis  child  for  the  fall  and  rising  of  m.  in  Israel 

4.  25.  777.  widows  ||  27.  771.  le|>ers  were  in  Israel 

41.  and  devils  also  came  out  of  777.  crying  out 

7.  47.  her  sins  which  are  777.  are  forgiven 
14. 16.  certain  man  made  great6upper,and  bade  777. 

John  6.  9.  but  what  are  they  among  so  777. .' 
CO.  771.  therefore  of  his  disciples  said,  66. 
10.  41.  and  777.  resorted  to  him,  and  said 
21.  11.  for  all  so  m.  the  net  was  not  broken 

.^cts  9.  13.  I  have  heard  by  777.  of  this  man 

12.  12.  where  777.  were  gathered  tugother 
19.  19.  777.  brought  their  books  and  burnt  them 
26.  10.  777.  of  the  saints  did  I  shut  up  in  prison 

Rom.5. 15.  if  thro'  the  offence  of  one  771.  be  dead,  the 

gift  by  grace  of  Jesus  C.  hath  abounded  to  771. 

19.777.  were  made  sinners,  777.  be  made  righteous 

12.  5.  so  we,  being  777.  are  one  body  in  Christ 

16.2.she  hath  been  a  succourer  of  777. and  of  myself 

1  Cor.  1.  26.  not  777.  wise,  not  777.  mighty  are  called 
4.  15.  yet  have  ye  not  777.  fathers,  lor  in  C.  Jesus 

8.  5.  as  there  be  gods  777.  and  lords  777. 

10.  5.  but  with  777.  God  was  not  well-pleased 
17.  we  being  777.  are  one  bread,  and  one  body 
33.  but  the  profit  of  777.  that  they  may  be  saved 

11.  30.  for  this  cause  777.  are  weak  and  777.  sleep 

12.  14.  the  body  is  not  one  member,  but  77t. 

16.  9.  great  door,  and  there  are  m.  adversaries 

2  Cor.  1.  11.  that  thanks  may  be  given  by  771. 

2.  6.  this  punishment  was  inflicted  of  777. 
17.  we  are  not  as  m.  which  corrupt  the  word 

4.  15.  thro'  thanksgiving  of  771.  redound  to  glory 
6. 10.  as  poor,  yet  making  771.  rich,  having  notiiing 

9.  2.  and  your  zeal  hath  provoked  very  777. 
Gal.  1.  14.  and  profited  above  ?7J.  my  equals 

3.  16.  he  saith  not,  and  to  seeds,  as  of  m. 
Phil.  1.14. 777.  brethr.  waxing  confident  by  my  bonds 

3.  18. 777.  walk  of  whom  1  have  told  you  often 
Heb.  2.  10.  in  bringing  777.  sons  to  glory,  to  make 

7.  23.  and  they  truly  were  777.  priests 
9.28.  Christ  was  once  offered  to  bear  the  sins  of  777. 
11. 12.  sprang  of  one  so  777.  as  the  stars  of  the  sky 
.Jam.  3.  1.  my  brethren  be  not  777.  masters 
2  Pet.  2.  2.  777.  shall  follow  pernicious  ways 

1  John  2.  18.  even  now  are  there  777.  antichrists 

4.  1.  because  777.  false  prophets  are  gone  out  into 
.^fter  MANY. 

Ezod.  23.  2.  speak  in  a  cause  to  decline  after  m. 

.Ss  MANY  as. 
Exod.  35.  22.  and  as  m.  as  were  willing-hearted 
.Judg.  3.  1.  as  m.  as  had  not  known  all  the  wars 

2  60777.  2.  23.  asm.  as  came  to  the  place  stood  still 
2  Chron.  29.  31.  as  m.  as  were  of  free  heart  brought 
Mat.  22.  9.  as  m.  as  ye  find  bid  to  llie  marriage 

10.  and  gathered  together  as  m.  as  they  found 
Mark  6.56.05  777.  as  touched  him  were  made  whole 
Luke  11.  8.  will  rise  and  give  as  m.  as  he  needeth 
John  1. 12.  but  as  m.  as  received  him,  to  them  gave 

17.  2.  give  eternal  life  to  as  m.  as  hast  given  him 
.^cts  2.  39.  even  to  as  m.  as  the  Lord  shall  call 

3.  24.  as  771.  as  have  spoken  have  also  foretold 

5.  n.  fear  came  on  as  m.  as  heard  these  things 
36.  who  was  slain,  and  asm.  as  obeyed  him,  3^ 

10. 45.  were  astonished,  as  m.  as  came  with  Peter 

13.  48.  as  m.  as  were  ordained  to  life  believed 
iJo777.  2. 12.  as  m.  as  have  sinned  without  law,  and 

as  m.  as  have  sinned  in  the  law,  shall  be  judged 
8.  14.  for  as  m.  as  are  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God 
G'a/.  3.  10.  as  m.  as  are  of  the  works  of  the  law 
6.12.  as  777.  as  desire  to  make  a  fair  shew  in  the  flesh 

16.  and  as  m.  as  walk  according  to  this  rule 

Phil.  3.  15.  as  m.  as  be  perfect  be  thus  minded 

Col.  2.  1.  and  for  as  m.  as  have  not  seen  my  face 

1  Tim.  6.  1.  as  m.  servants  as  are  under  the  yoke 

Rev.  2.  24.  but  to  aa  m.  as  have  not  this  doctrine 

3.  19.  asm.  as  1  love  I  rebuke  and  chasten 

13. 15.  cause  that  as  m.  as  would  not  worship  beast 

See  Believed,  Days,  How. 

MANY  people. 

Exod.5.5.  behold,  the;7eo;//f  of  the  land  now  arc  771. 

/>e«<.2.2l.ap<;<7p/c great  and  777. and  tallas  Anakinis 

•Judg.l.l.  ihepeo.  are  too  771.  for  me  ||  4.  yet  too  m. 

1  60777.  6. 19.  the  Lord  had  smitten  777.  of  the  peo. 

^Sam.  1.4.  and  771.  ofthe;70o;)?f  are  fallen  and  dead 

£:ro]0.  13.  hat  the  people  are  771.  and  time  of  rain 

Esth.  S.  17.  m. people  of  land  became  Jewsfor  fear 

/s(7.2.3.777.;jC77/)/cshallgo  and  say,  come  let  us  go 

4.  he  shall  judge  and  rebuke  777.  people 

17.  12.  woe  to  the  multitude  of  tti.  people  which 

Eirk.  3.  0.  not  to  to.  people  of  a  strange  speech 

17.  9.  shall  wither  without  777.  people  to  pluck  it 

32.  9. 1  will  also  vex  the  hearts  of  m. people  when 

10.  I  will  make  »7i.  people  amazed  at  thee 
38.9.  thou,  thy  bands,  and  m.people  with  thee,  15. 

^tc.4.3.he8halljudgc  among  77i.j7ei7;7/c,  and  rebuke 


MAR 

Mic.  4.  13.  and  thou  shalt  beat  in  pieces  m.peopU 
5.7.remnant  of  Jacob  shall  be  in  midst  uha.peoplt 
Zech.  8.  22. 777. p(o;(^e shall  come  and  seek  the  Lord 
Rev.  10. 11.  thou  must  proi)hesy  before  777.  people 

MANY  things. 
Job  16.  2.  Job  said,  I  have  heard  m.  such  things 
23.  14.  and  m.  such  things  are  with  him 
Eccl.  6. 11.  there  be  777.  things  that  increase  vanity 
Isa.  42.  20.  seeing  777.  things,  but  observest  not 
Mat.  13.  3.  he  spake  777.  things  to  them  in  parable* 
16. 21.  and  sutter  771.  things  of  the  elders  and  chief 
priests,  Mark8.  31.  |  9. 12.  Luke'J.ii-2.  \  17.25. 
25.  21. 1  will  make  thee  ruler  over  m.  things,  23. 
27.13.Pilate  saith,  hearest  thou  not  how  m.  things 
they  witness  against  thee  7  Mark  15.  4. 
19.  I  have  suffered  771.  things  this  day  in  a  dream 
Mark5.  20.  sulfered  777.  things  of  many  physicians 

6.  20.  he  did  ?7i.  things,  and  heard  hiin  gladly 

7.  i.m.  things  there  be  as  washing  of  cups,  8, 13. 
15.  3.  the  chief  priests  accused  him  of  771.  things 

Luke  10.  41.  thou  art  troubled  about  m.  things 

11.  53.  to  provoke  him  to  speak  of  777.  things 
John  8.26. 1  have  777.  things  to  say, and  judge,  16. 12. 

21.  25.  there  are  777.  other  things  which  Jesus  did 
j^cts  20.  9.  that  I  ought  to  do  771.  things  contrary 
2  Cor.  8. 22.  we  have  proved  diligent  in  777.  things 
Gal.  3.  4.  have  ye  sutlered  so  777.  things  in  vaiul 
2  7'777i.  1. 18.  in  how  m.  things  he  ministered  to  me 
JfJeb.  5.  11.  of  whom  we  have  777.  things  to  say 
Ja777.  3.  2.  for  in  m.  things  we  offend  all 
2./«A7il2.having  m.things  to  write  to  you,3J<747t  13. 

MANY  a  time. 
PsaZ.78.38.yea,  m.  a  timetuined  he  his  anger  away 

129.  1.  TO.  a  time  have  they  afflicted  me,  2. 

MANY  times. 
1  Kings  22.  16.  liow  777.  times  shall  I  adjure  thee 
M'ch.  9. 28. 771.  times  didst  deliver  them,  Ps.  106. 43. 
See  Waters. 
MANY  years. 
Lev.  25.  51.  if  there  be  yet  m.  years  behind 
Ezra  a.  ll.the  house  that  was  budded  7/1.  j/cars  ago 
J\'eh.  9.  30.  yet  m.  years  didst  thou  forbear  thera 
Eccl.a.J.Ka  man  beget  children,  and  li\e  m.years 

11.8.  if  a  man  live  777. 77ca7-5,  and  rejoice  in  them  all 
Isa.  32. 10.  TO.  days  and  years  shall  ye  be  troubled 
Ezek.  38. 17.  prophets,  which  prophesied  to.  years 
Zecli.  7.  3.  weep,  as  I  have  done  these  so  m.  years 
Luke  12. 19.  thou  hast  goods  laid  up  for  777.  years 

15.  29.  he  said,  lo,  these  777.  years  do  I  serve  thee 
.^cts  24.  10.  thou  hast  been  of  777.  years  a  judge 

17.  now  after  m.  years  1  came  to  bring  alms 
iio77!.  15.23.  agreat  desire  777.  war*  to  come  to  you 

MAR. 
Lev.  19.  27.  nor  to.  the  corners  of  thy  beard 
Ruth  4.  6.  lest  I  m.  mine  own  inheritance 

1  60777.  6.  5.  images  of  your  mice  that  m.  the  land 

2  Kings  3.  19.  and  m.  every  good  piece  of  land 
Job  30.  13.  they  777.  my  path,  they  set  forward 
Jer.  13.  9.  thus  will  1 777.  the  pride  of  Judah 

MARRED. 
Isa.  52.14.  his  visage  was  so  777.  more  than  any  man 
Jer.  13.  7.  girdle  was  m.  ||  18.  4.  the  vessel  was  m, 
JVoA.  2.  2.  emptied,  and  ra.  their  vine-branches 
Mark  2.  22.  wine  spilled,  and  the  bottles  will  be  777. 

MARAN-ATHA 
Signifies,  The  Lord  comes,  or.  The  Lord  is  come. 
It  was   a  form  of  threatening,  cursing,  or 
anathematizing  among  the  Jews,  1  Cor.  16.22. 
If  any  man  love  not  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
let  him  be  anathema,  Maran-atha,  that  is.  Let 
him  be  accursed  in,  or  at  the  coming  of  our 
Lord.     Most  commentators  say,  that  the  Ma- 
ran-atha  is   the  greatest   of   all    anathemas 
among  the  .Jews,  as  if  the  .Apostle  Paul  had 
said.  May  he  be  devoted  to   the  greatest  of 
evils,  and  to  the  utmost  severity  of  God's  judg- 
ments;  may  the   Lord   come  quickly  to  take 
vengeance  on  him.     Others  say,  that  the  word 
may  be  understood  in  an  absolute  sense;  Let 
him  be  anathema :  The  Lord  is  come,  the  Mes- 
siah has  appeared,  evil  to  him  that  receives  him 
not;  the  .'ipostlr  particularly  applying  him 
self  to  the  unbelieving  .Jews. 
MARBLE. 
1  Chron.  29.  2. 1  have  prepared  to.  in  abundance 
Esth.  1.  6.  fastened  to  silver  rings  and  pillars  of 
TO.  pavement  of  red,  blue,  white,  and  black  to. 
Cant.  5.15.  his  legs  are  as  pillars  of  771.  set  on  socket* 
Rev.  16.  12.  the  vessels  of  771.  no  man  buveth 

MARCH. 
Psal.  68. 7.  when  thou  didst  m.thro'  the  wildernesf 
Isa.  27.  t  4.  set  briars,  I  would  777.  again-s^t  thera 
.Jer.  46.  22.  for  they  shall  m.  with  an  army 
.Joel  2.  7.  they  shall  to.  every  one  on  his  ways 
Mah.l.G.  which  shall  TO.lliro'the  breadth  of  the  land 
3. 12.  thou  didst  to.  thrnu!;h  the  land  in  indignation 

MARCHED. 
Exod.  14.  10.  behold,  ilir  Epvptians  to.  after  thera 

MARCHEDST. 
Judg.  5,  4.  when  tliou  m.  the  earth  trembled 


MAR 

MARK,  Substantive. 
(7<n.  4.  15.  Iho  Lurd  set  a  m.  upuii  Cain,  lest  any 

1  Sam.  2C.  20.  1  witl  shuot,  ag  tliuugli  I  eliot  at  a  7/1. 
Jub  7.  iO.  why  bast  thou  set  me  as  a  in.  aguiii!^t 

thee?  le.  1-2.  J.am.J.  IJ. 
£zek.  9.  4.  set  a  m.  on  the  men  timt  sigh  and  cry 

6.  come  nut  Dear  any  man  un  whom  id  the  7fi. 
Fliil.  3.  14.  I  press  toward  the  711.  lor  the  prize 
Jicv.  13.  IG.  he  caused  all  to  receive  a  m. 
17.  none  might  buy,  save  ho  tliat  had  Uie  m. 
J4.  9.  if  any  man  receive  his  vt.  in  his  forehead 
II.  have  no  rest,  whosoever  receiveth  his  777. 
15. 2.  got  victory  over  his  image,  and  over  his  m. 

16.  2.  sore  on  llieni  that  had  the  m.  of  the  beast 
1'.).  20.  he  deceived  Ihcm  that  received  7«.  of  beast 

20.  4.  nor  receivcil  Ins  771.  they  lived  with  Christ 

M.\KK,  nrb. 
RutA  3.  4.  thou  shalt  m.  tlie  place  where  he  shall  lie 

2  Sam.  J3.  '28.  m.  when  .^miion's  heart  is  merry 

I  Kiti^s  20.7.  771.  how  this  man  seeketh  mischief 
22.  the  prophet  said,  m.  and  see  what  thou  does! 
Job  Irt.  2.  7/1.  and  afterwards  we  will  speak 

21.  5. 777.  me  and  be  astonished,  and  lay  your  hand 
33.  31. 774.  well,  O  Job,  hearken  to  me,  [  w  ill  speak 
39.  1.  canst  thou  771.  when  the  hinds  do  calve  7 

Psal.  37.  37. 771.  the  perfect  man,  his  end  is  peace 

48.  13.  m.  ye  well  her  bulwarks,  consider  her 

palaces 

56.6.  they  771. my  steps,  when  they  wait  for  my  soul 

130.  3.  if  thou,  Lord,  shouldest  771.  iniquities 

Ezek.  44.  5. 777.  well,  771.  the  entering  of  the  house 

lium.  16.  17.  771.  them  who  cause  divisions,  avoid 

Fliil.  3.  17.  7K.  them  who  walk  so,  as  ye  have  us 
MARKED. 

1  5a77i.  1.  12.  as  she  prayed,  Eli  771.  her  mouth 

J<74  22.  15.  hast  ihou  711.  the  old  v^'ay  which  wicked 
24.  IG.  which  they  had  7».  in  the  day  time 

Jer.  2.  22.  yet  thine  iniquity  is  771.  before  mo 
H-i.  Id.  who  hath  771.  his  word  and  heard  it 

Z,uke  14.  7.  when  lie  m.  how  they  chose  rooms 
MARKS. 

/,?p.  19.  28.  ye  shall  not  print  any  771.  upon  you 

Gal.  G.  17.  I  bear  in  my  bodv  the  771.  of  the  Lord 
MAKKEriT. 

Job  10. 14.  ifl  sin,  then  tlum  m.  and  wiltnot  acquit 
MARKETII. 

Job  33.  11.  my  feet  in  stocks,  he  771.  all  my  paths 

Isa.  44.13.the  carpenier  771.  it  out  with  the  conipas.s 
MARKET. 

Kze/;.  27.  13.  they  traded  in  thy  m.  17,  19,  25. 

Mat.  20.  3.  he  saw  others  standing  idle  in  the  tji. 

JUark  7.  4.  and  when  they  come  from  the  m. 
12.  39.  and  love  salutations  in  the  771.  places 

J..uke  7.  32.  like  chihiren  silting  in  the  771.  jilace 

Jo/in5.  2. there  isa  pool  at  Jerusa.  by  the  sheep  vt. 

.ids  16.  19.  and  drew  them  into  the  771.  place 

17.  17.  he  disputed  in  the  m.  daily  with  them 

MARKETS. 

Mat.  11.  16.  like  children  silting  in  the  m. 

23.  7.  love  greetiiig.-<  in  the  771.  Luke  11. 43.  I  20.  4C. 
MARRIAGE 

Signifies,  [1]  W  ciiiil  contract,  by  which  a  man 
and  a  woman  are.  joined  together,  which  wa.t 
instituted  by  (rod  for  the  prevention  of  vn- 
cleanness,  the  propagation  of  mankind,  and 
that  the  parties  ko  contracting  might  be  mu- 
tual helps  and  comforUi  to  one  another,  (Jen. 
2.  18,  22,  23.  John  2.  1.  1  Cor.  7.  a.  Hch.  13.  4. 
[2]  That  marriage  covenant  which  ia  between 
(iod  and  his  Church,  even  the  covenant  of 
grace,  wherein  Ood  graciously  promises  to  be 
the  Ood  (if  his  people,  and  to  forgive  and 
sanctify  them  through  the  merits  of  .Jesus 
Christ  and  the  influences  of  his  Spirit,  and  so 
make  them  a  willing  people  to  himself,  Isa.  54. 
5.  J.r.  3.  14.  Ilos.  2.  19,  20.  The  union  be- 
tween hushaiid  and  wife  is  so  near,  that  thereby 
is  represented  the  mystical  union,  the  sacred 
and  spiritual  marriage  of  Christ  with  his 
Church,  Eph.  .'1.  30,  31,  :B. 

F.zod.ii.  10.  her  duly  of  in.  shall  he  not  diminish 

Psal.  7H.  63.  Iheir  maidens  were  not  given  to  m. 

Mat.  22.  2.  n  king  who  made  a  m.  for  his  son 
4.  come  to  the  m.  ||  9.  all  ye  find,  hid  to  the  771. 
30.  in  there>iurrei-iion  not  givi^n  in  t7i.  hut  119  the 
angolg  in  hi-avcn,  ^fark  12.  25.  f.uhe  20.  35. 

24. 3S.  given  in  771.  until  the  dny  that  .Noe  entered 
25. 10.  th.'it  wi:ro  iiMily  went  in  with  him  to  the  m. 

J.iike  17.  27.  they  cat,  they  were  given  in  771.  20.  34. 

John  2.  1.  there  wm  a  m.  in  Cmia  of  (;ulilee 
2.  JesUH  wa.i  called  and  his  dixr-iples  lo  the  m. 

1  Cor.  7.  38.  ho  that  giveili  her  in  7n.  doelh  well, 
b'll  he  that  liivcth  Inr  not  in  m.  doelh  heller 

//r2i.  13   4.  771.  is  lionoiirabli!  in  all,  and  the  bed 

fiet).  19.  7.  for  the  771.  of  the  Lamb  is  come 
9.blc»sed  that  iireraMeil  to  thn  TTi.supperofLanib 
MARRIAORS. 

frcn.  34.  9.  and  make  ye  fti.  wiili  us,  and  give 

De.ut.  7.  3   null  her  Khali  thou  miikc  771.  with  them 

Jodh.  23.  12.  else  if  ho  slinll  make  m.  with  them 
372 


MAR 

MARRY. 
Gen.  38.  8.  go  in  to  thy  brother's  wife,  and  m.  her 
.Yum.  36.  6.  let  them  771.  to  whom  they  think  best, 
only  to  family  of  their  father's  tribe  shall  they  7h. 
JJeut.  25.  5.  the  wife  of  dead  shuU  nut  7/1.  without 
Jsa.  132.  5.  so  shall  thy  sons  771.  thee,  as  biidugroom 
Mat.  5.  32.  whosoever  shall  771.  her  that  is  divorced 
committeth  adultery,  19.  9.  Mark  10. 11. 

19.  10.  if  the  case  be  so,  it  is  not  good  to  in. 

22. 24.  his  brother  shall  7/1.  his  wife  and  raise  seed 

30.  in  the  resurrection  they  neither  m.  nor  are 

given  in  marriage,  Alark  12.  25.  Luke  2U.  35. 

1  Cor.  7.  9.  but  if  tliey  cannot  contain,  let  them 

»7t.  for  it  is  better  to  m.  than  to  burn 

23.  if  thou  771.  if  a  virgin  m.  she  hath  not  sinned 

3t).  do  what  he  will  he  sinnetli  not,  let  them  7/1. 

I'J'im.  4.  3.  lorhidding  lo  m.  and  commanding  to 

5.1 1. they  have  begun  to  wax  wanton,  they  will  771. 

14.  that  the  younger  women  771.  bear  children 

MARRIED. 

f?P7!. 19.14. Lot  spake  lo  them  that  m.  his  daughters 

20.  t  3.  for  the  woman  is  m.  to  a  husband 
Kxod.  21.  3.  if  m.  his  wife  shall  go  out  willi  him 
J.cv.  22.  12.  if  m.  to  a  stranger,  she  may  not  eat 
JVum.  12. 1.  the  Elhiojiian woman  whom  he  had  m. 

36.  3.  if  lliey  be  771.  to  the  sons  of  other  tribes 

11.  were  7/1.  to  their  father's  brothers'  sons 
Lieut.'m.  22.  ifaman  found  lying  with  a  woman  771. 

1  Chron.  2.  21.  whom  he  771.  when  sixty  years  old 

2  Chron.  13.  21.  Abljah  771.  fourteen  wives 
jVeh.  13.  23.  Jews  that  had  771.  w  ives  of  Ashdod 
Prov.  30.  23.  an  odious  woman  when  she  is  771. 
Isa.  54.  1.  more  children  of  desolate  than  of  777. 

fiJ.  4.  Lord  delighteth  in  thee,  thy  land  shall  be  m. 
Jcr.  3.  14.  turn,  O  children,  for  1  am  m.  to  you 
Mai.  2.  11.  hath  771.  the  daughter  of  a  strange  god 
Mat.  22.  25.  the  first  when  he  had  777.  deceased 
Mark  6.  17.  Philip's  wife,  for  he  had  771.  her 

10.  12.  be  771.  to  another,  committeth  adultery 
Luke  14.  20.  I  have  777.  a  wife,  and  cannot  come 

17.  27.  they  did  eat,  they  drank,  they  777.  wives 
Horn.  7.  3.  if  while  her  husband  liveth  she  be  771. 
4.  become  dead,  that  she  should  be  tti.  to  another 

1  Cor.  7.  10.  to  the  771.  I  command,  yet  not  I 
33.  he  that  is  m.  1|  34.  she  that  is  771.  carelli  for 
39.  to  be  VI.  lo  whom  she  will,  only  in  the  Lord 

MARRim'H. 
Isa.  62.  5.  as  a  young  man  771.  a  virgin,  so  shall 
Mat.  19.  9.  and  whuso  771.  her  who  is  put  away, 
doth  commit  adultery,  L.uke  16.  Id. 
MARRYING. 
J^th.  13.  27.  do  this  great  evil  in  771.  strange  wives 
Mat.  24.  38.  they  were  771.  and  giving  in  marriage 

MARINERS. 

Ezek.  27.  8.  the  inhabitants  of  Zidon  were  thy  m. 

9.  the  ships  of  the  sea  with  their  771.  were  in  thee 

i!7.  thy  m.  shall  fall  into  the  midst  of  the  seas 

2J.  the  771.  shall  come  down  from  their  thijis 

Jonah  1.  5.  then  the  7n.  were  afraid,  and  cried 

MARISIIES. 
Ezek.  47. 11.  miry  places  and  7/1.  shall  not  he  healed 

MARRtJW 
Signifies,  J)  soft  oily  sub.^tanre,  contained  in  the 
hollow  of  bones.  Job  21.  24.     To  which  are 
compared,  [1]  The  delicate,  strengthening,  and 
comforting  }irovisions,which  God  has  made  for 
his  church  and  the  people  in  the  gospel  and  his 
ordinances  here,  but  especially  in  heaven  here- 
after,  Psal.  63.  5.  Isa.  25.  6.     [2]    The  most 
secret  thoughts  of  the  heart,  Ileb.  4.  12. 
./ab  21.  24.  his  bones  are  moislcned  with  ?77. 
I'sal.ii'.i.  5.  my  soul  shall  be  satislied  as  wilh  m. 
06.  t  15.  Twill  otfer  burnt  sacrifices  of  in. 
Prov.  3.  8.  it  shall  be  health  and  771.  to  thv  bones 
Isa.  25.  6.  Lord  make  a  feast  of  fat  things  full  of  177. 
Heb.  4.  12.  to  the  dividing  asunder  of  joints  and  771. 

MART. 
Isa.  23.  3.  Tyre,  and  she  is  a  tti.  of  nations 

MARTYR. 
Jlets  22.  20.  the  blood  of  thy  in.  Stephen  was  shed 
Rev.  2.  13.  wherein  Anli|ias  was  my  faithful  m. 

MARTYRS. 

Rev.  17.  6.  woman  drunken  with  blood  of  in.of  Jes. 

MARVEL. 

2  Cor.  11.14.  no  in. fur  Sntnn  himself  is  transformed 

MARVEL. 
Eccl.  5.  8.  if  thou  seesi,  m.  not  at  the  matter 
Mark  5.20.  he  b>-gaii  to  publish,  and  all  men  did  m. 
John  3.  7. 711.  not  that !  said,  ye  must  he  born  again 
5.  20.  shew  him  greiiler  workfi,  that  yo  may  m. 
28  m. not  at  lliis|{  7.21.  done  one  work,  niid  re  m. 
yirts  3.  12.  men  oflsrael,  why  m.  ye  at  thist 
Gal.  1.  6.  I  m.  that  ye  are  so  soon  removed  from 
1  John  3.  13.  jn.  not  if  the  world  hate  you 
liev.  17. 7.  the  angel  said,  wlnrelore  didst  thou  m.? 

MARVELLED. 
Gen.  43.  33.  and  the  men  m.  one  at  nnmher 
Psal.  IH.  .■>.  they  saw  it,  and  .10  llii-y  «i.  ihey  hasted 
.Mnl.  8.  10.  when  Jesui  h(>ard  it,  he  in.  and  said 
27.  the  men  m.  |i  9.  8.  in.  and  glorilied  God,  33. 


MAS 

,Vat.21.20.when  the  discijdes  saw  it, they  jn.  sayinj) 
22.22.  they  7n.  at  him,  Mark  12.  17.  J.uke'iU  2o. 
27.  14.  that  the  governor  i/i.  Mark  15.  5,  44 
Mark  6.  6.  he  m.  because  of  their  unbelief 
Luke  1.  21.  the  people  m.  that  lie  tarried  so  long 
63.  saying,  his  name  is  John,  and  they  m.  all 
2.  33.  Joseph  and  his  mother  m.  at  Lliosc  things 
7.  9.  when  Jesus  heard  these  things  hem.  atluu 
11.  38.  and  when  the  Pharisee  saw  it,  he  m. 
,/(//tH4.27.llledi8Clple^7rt.lle  talked  with  llle^v<Jman 

7.  15.  Jens  771.  how  knowelh  this  man  letters  3 
.lets  2.  7.  7(1.  saying,  are  nut  these  Galileans  } 
4.  13.  they  771.  and  look  knowledge  uf  them 

MARVELLOUS. 
2  Sam.  13.  t  2.  it  was  m.  in  the  eyes  of  Amuon 
.lob  5.  9.  wliu  doelh  m.  ihings  without  number 

iO.  16.  thou  hhewest  thyself  7«.  ujiun  me 
I'sal.  17.  7.  shew  thy  771.  loving-kindness 
31.  21.  he  hath  shewed  me  his  m.  kindness 
78. 12. 711.  things  did  he  in  the  sight  of  liieir  latheri 
98.  1.  O  sing  to  Lord,  for  he  halh  done  7«.  things 
118.  23.  this  IS  the  Lord's  doing,  il  is  m.  in  our 
eyes.  Mat.  21.  •12.  Mark  12.  11. 
I^on.  11.  .36.  shall  sjieak  m.  Ihings  ag.  God  of  gods 
Mic.  7.  15.  will  I  siiew  unto  hini  777.  things 
Zt'cA.  8.  6.  if  il  be  771.  should  it  be  77/.  in  mine  eyes'? 
John  9.  30.  herein  is  a  771.  thing,  that  ye  know  not 
1  Pet.  2. 9.  called  you  out  uf  darkn.  into  his »«.  light 
Rev.  15.  1.  another  sign  in  heaven,  great  and  ni. 

MARVELLOUS  work. 

Isa.  29. 14.  behold,  I  will  proceed  to  do  a  m.  work 

MARVELLtJUS  works. 

1  Chr.  16. 12.  remember  his  711.  works,  Ps.  105. 5. 
24.  declare  his  711.  works  among  all  nations 

Psal.  9.  1.  I  will  shew  lorth  all  thy  171.  works 
139. 14.  great  and  J7irare  thy  works,  liev.  15.  3. 
MARVELLOUSLY. 

2  Chr.  26.  15.  lie  was  7«.  helped  till  he  was  strong 
.lob  37.  5.  God  thundereth  711.  with  his  voice 
Hab.  1.  5.  behold,  and  regard,  and  wonder  tn. 

MARVELS. 
Ezod.  34.  10. 1  will  do  m.  such  as  have  not  been 

MASONS. 
2  Sam.  5. 11.  Hiram  sent  lo  David  m.  1  Chr.  14.  1. 
'i  Kings  12. 12.  they  gave  money  to  771.  and  liewera 
of  stone,  22.  6.  Ezra  3.  7. 

1  Chron.  22.  2.  he  set  vi.  to  hew  wrought  stones 

2  Chron.  24.  12.  they  hired  tti.  to  repair  the  house 

MAST,  S. 

Prov.  23.  34.  as  he  ihat  lieth  on  the  top  of  a  m.   • 

Jsa.  30.  t  17.  left  as  a  711.  on  the  lop  of  a  hill 
33.  2S.  they  could  not  well  strengthen  their  m. 

Ezek.i'i.a.  taken  ccdnrs  from  Lebanon  to  make  m. 
IM  ASTER 

Is  a  title  applied,  [1]  To  Christ,  who  is  the  chief 
J..awgiver,  and  Teacher,  who  only  can  teach 
jiowerfully  and  inwardly,  and  in  matters  of 
faith  and  worship  is  only  to  he  followed.  Mat. 
23.8,10.  [2]  To  preachers  and  ministers  of  the 
word,  Eccl.  12.  11.  [3]  To  such  as  teach  or  edu- 
cate disciples  or  scholars,  lAikf  fi.  40.  [4]  To 
such  as  have  rule  over  serr ants,  Eph.  6.  5.  [5] 
To  such  as  ambitiously  affect  rain  applause,  or 
precedency  and  superiority  above  others.  Mat. 
23.10.  [6]  Tosuehasjudgc,cinsure,orrrproce 
others  rashly  wilhoutground;  rigidly,above  the 
merits  of  the  cause;  uncharitably  aggravating 
their  faults,  and  wresting  things  to  the  worst 
sense,  or  magisterially,  out  of  a  spirit  of 
pride,  ambition,  or  conira'tiction,  Jam.  3.  1. 

^I'cii.  39.  20.  Joseph's  7n.  put  him  in  j'ris(m 

Kiod.  21.  8.  if  she  ple.aso  not  her  771.  who  betrothed 

32.  shall  give  to  iheir  7n.  thirty  shekels  of  silver 

22. 8.  the  Tii.ofthe  house  shall  be  broughi  to  judges 

JJeut.  15.  t  2.  every  wi.  of  the  lending  of  his  liuiiU 

Judg.  19.  22.  and  spake  lo  the  m.  of  the  house 
23.  the  771.  of  the  house  went  out  unto  them 

l.^uni.25.14.David  sent  messengers  to  salute  ourrn. 
17.  for  evil  is  determined  against  our  m. 

26.  16.  because  you  have  noi  kept  your  «t. 

•iSam.  2.  7.  for  your  m.  Saul  is  dead,  and  the  honro 

1  Kings  22.  17.  these  have  no  7n.2  Chron.  18.  16. 

2  h'ings  6.  5.  ho  cried,  alas  hi.  for  it  was  borrowed 
22.  ilipy  may  eat  nnd  drink,  and  go  lo  their  m. 
2;t.  sent  them  away,  and  they  went  to  their  171. 

10.  2.  si'oing  your  Tn.  sons  are  with  you 
3.  look  out  Ihe  hi-st  of  your  m.  suns,  and  eel  him 
6.  lake  Iho  heads  of  your  m.  sons,  nnd  come 

19.  6.  thus  shall  ye  s.iy  lo  your  in.  Isa.  37.  6. 
1  Chron.  15.  27.  and  Chenaninh,  m.  <d'  the  song 
Ectl.  10.  t  IL  a  in.  of  ihc  tongue  is  no  betler 
Isa.  24.  2.  as  wilh  the  servant,  so  wilh  his  m. 

.*>().  tH.  who  is  Ihe  tti.  of  my  ciiu^-e,  let  him  come 
Ilan.  1 .  3.  Ihe  king  spake  to  Ihe  m.  of  the  eunuchs 

4.  9.  O  nelteshazziir,  m.  of  Iho  magicinns,  .5.  IJ, 
.U«/.  1.  fi.  and  if  I  be  a  m.  where  is  my  fear  J 

2.  12.  Ihe  Lord  will  rut  otflhe  in.  and  the  scholar 

.Mat.  8.  19.  m.  I  will  follow  thee  whillieryoevei 

Ihou  gocrt 

9.11.whyealclh  yourni.wilh  publicans  and  sinners 


MAS 

Mat.  10  25.  if  they  have  called  the  m.  Beelzebub 
Vi.  'i6.  m.  we  wuuid  sve  a  sign  I'ruiu  tiiL-o 

10.  27.  the  crumbs  which  lull  Ironi  their  m.  table 
17.  24.  they  said,  doth  not  your  in.  pay  tribute  1 
22.  lli./n.  we  know  that  thou  an  true,  Mark  12.14. 
2;{.  8.  tor  one  is  your  ;n.  even  Christ,  It). 

2iJ.  18.  the  m.  saiili,  my  time  is  at  hand 

2j. w.i.-!  it  1!  II  4y.  hail  m.  and  kissed,  Mark  14.  45. 
.Marie  5.35.  why  truublest  tiiou  the  in.  any  more 

y.  5.  m.  it  is  good  lor  us  to  be  here,  J^uke  'J.  'SJ. 

lU.  IT.  good  in.  what  shall  I  do  I  J.uke  10.  25. 

l;t.  35.  tor  ye  know  not  when  the  m.  cometl! 
ii(ic3.12.the  luiblicaiissaid,  m.  what  shall  we  do'? 

7.  40.  m.  say  on  {|  8.  24.  saying,  in.  we  perish 

8.  49.  thy  daughter  is  dead  ;  trouble  not  the  ni 
IJ.  25.  when  once  I'he  m.  of  the  house  is  risen 

John  3. 10.  art  thou  a  in.  in  Israel,  and  knowest  not 

11.  2H.  the  III.  is  come  and  calleth  for  thee 
13.  13.  ye  call  mo  m.  and  ye  say  well,  for  so  I  am 

14.  if  1  then  your  m.  have  washed  your  feet 
.-Jcta  27.11. the  centurion  believed  the  m.  of  the  ship 
Kj/h.  6.  9.  knowing  your  m.  is  in  heaven,  Col.  4.  1 
2  'jf'2//i.2.21. vessel  sanctified  and  meet  for  the  Jtt.use 

Jfis  M.XSTER. 
Oen.  24.9.  put  his  hand  under  the  thigh  o{ his  m 

10.  look  ten  camels  of  his  iii.  goods  of  Ais  in. 
39.  2.  Josejili  was  in  house  of  his  in.  the  Egyptian 

19.  when  his  m.  heard  the  words  of  his  wife 
Exod.  21.  4.  if  Ai's  m.  have  given  him  a  wife 

6.  his  m.  shall  bore  his  ear  through  with  an  awl 
Deul.~i.l5.  thou  shall  notdeliver  lo  his  jn.  the  ser 
vant  which  is  escaped  from  his  vi.  unto  thee 
Judg:  19.  11.  the  servant  said  to  his  m.  let  us  lod 
j.Sam.2l).38.galhered  the  arrows  and  came  tohisi 
25.  10.  servants  break  away  every  one  from  his  in. 
2il.4.wherewiih  should  reconcile  himself  to  his  m 
2  Kings  5. 1 . Naaman  was  a  great  man  with  his  in 
25.  Gehazi  went  in,  and  stood  before  his  m. 
6.  32.  is  not  the  sound  o(  his  in.  feet  behind  him? 

8.  14.  Hazael  dejiarled  and  came  to  his  m. 

l).  31.  she  said,  had  Ziinri  peace,  who  slew  Ai's  ?n.? 
19.  4.  Ai's  m.  hath  sent  to  reproach  God,  Jsa.  37.  4. 
i  Chron.  12.  19.  saying,  he  will  fall  to  his  m.  Saul 
,/ob  3.  19.  and  the  servant  is  free  from  his  m. 
Prov.  27.'1^.  so  he  that  waitelh  on  his  m.  shall  be 
30.  10.  accuse  not  a  servant  to  his  vi.  lest  he  curse 
thee,  and  thou  be  found  guilty 
Isa.  1.  3.  and  the  ass  knoweth  his  m.  crib 
Mai.  1.  6.  and  a  servant  lionoureth  his  m. 
^'tfuM0.24.thediscii)leisnotaboveAis;rt.jf^MAc6.40. 

25.  it  is  enough  that  the  disciple  be  as  his  m. 
I.ukc  fi.  40.  every  one  perfect  shall  be  as  his  m. 
Horn.  14.  4.  to  his  own  m.  he  standeth  or  falleth 

My  MASTER. 
OC71.24. 12.  O  Lord  God  of  my  m.  Abraham  shew 
kindness  to  my  in.  Abraham,  27.  42,  48. 
1-t.know  that  ihou  hasi  shewed  kindness  to  viym. 
35.  the  Lord  hath  blessed  my  m.  greatly 
44  whom  the  Lord  h;ith  appointed  for  my  m.  son 
49.  if  you  will  deal  truly  and  kindly  with  my  m. 
54.  and  ho  said,  send  me  away  lo  my  m.  515. 
G5.  and  the  servant  had  said,  it  is  my  m. 
39.  8.  belvold,  my  in.  wolteth  not  what  is  with  me 
r.iod.  21.  5.  if  the  servant  shall  say,  I  love  my  in. 
1  Sam.  24. 6.  God  forbid  I  should  do  this  to  viy  in. 
30.  13.  my  m.  left  me  because  I  fell  sick 

15.  nor  deliver  me  into  the  hands  oi my  m. 
2A'inn^s5.18.my  in.goelh  into  the  houseof  Rimmon 

20.  my  in.  hath  spared  iN'aaman  this  Syrian 
22.  7(1  jf  m.  ha!h  .sent  me,  saying,  behold 

6.  15.  and  he  said,  alas,  my  m.  how  shall  we  do? 
10.  9.  behold,  I  conspired  against  mym.  and  slew 
13.  24.  how  then  wilt  thou  turn  away  one  captain 
of  the  least  of  n/y  m.  servants,  Isa.  36.  9. 
27.  hath  rr;ym.  sent  me  to  thy  master?  Isa.  3C.12. 
Isa.  3G.  8.  give  idedges,  I  pray  thee,  lo  my  m. 

Thy  MASTER. 
Oen.  24.  51.  and  let  her  be  Ihy  m.  son's  wife 

1  Sam.  23.  10.  rise  up  early  with  thy  m.  servants 
2-'>'oTO.9.9. 1  gave*.  7/1.  son  all  that  pertained  loSaul 

12.  8.  I  gave  thee  thy  m.  house,  thy  m.  wives 
115.  3.  the  king  said,  where  is  thy  m.  son"? 

2  Kings  2.3.Loril  will  take  aw  ay  thy  m.  to-dav,  5. 

Ifi.  let  them  go  we  pray  thee,  and  seek  Uiijm. 

9.  7.  thou  shall  smite  the  house  of  Ahab  thy  m. 
18.  27.  my  miister  sc'nt  me  to  thy  m.  and  to  thee 

MASTER-nUILDER. 
10)r.3.10.agwise77(.-A7(iMf )- 1  have  laid  foundation 

MASTERS. 
JTxoff  .21.4.'he  wife  and  her  children  shall  be  her  m. 
J'.'al.  123. 2.  as  the  eyc-i  of  servants  look  to  their  m. 
Pnni.  2.5.  \'.\.  for  he  refrcsheth  the  soul  of  his  »7i. 
F.rxl.  12. 11.  as  nails  fastened  by  777.  of  assemblies 
Jrr.  27.  4.  and  command  them  to  say  to  their  m. 
j9mos  4. 1.  which  say  to  their  771.  let  ug  drink 
7-ijik.  1.  9.  who  fdl  their  m.  houses  with  violence 
Milt.  6.  24.  no  man  can  serve  two  tti.  I.iike  16. 13. 
23  10.  neither  be  ye  called  771.  one  is  vour  master 
Acts  16.  16.  who  hrouglit  her  m.  much  gain 
19.  her  ra.  saw  the  hope  of  their  gains  was  gone 
373 


MAT 

EpA.6.5.servants,be  obedient  to  them  that  are  your 

7rt.  Col.  3. 22.  Tit.  2.  <J.  1  fet.  2.  18. 

9.  ye  TO.  do  Ihe  same  things  to  ihein.  Col.  4.  1. 

1  Tim.  6.  1.  count  their  m.  worthy  of  all  honour 

2.  that  have  believing  m.  let  them  not  despise 

Jam.  3.  1.  bietliren,  be  not  many  711.  knowing 

MAST^EKY. 
Exod.  32.  18.  the  voice  of  them  that  shout  for  771. 
Dan.  t).  24.  and  live  hoiis  had  ihe  771.  of  Ihem 

1  Cor.  9.  25.  that  strivelli  l()r  the  m.  is  temperate 

MASTERIES. 

2  Tim.  2.  5.  ifa  man  also  strive  for  m.  not  crowned 

MATE. 
Isa.  34. 15.  vultures  be  gath.  every  one  with  her  tti. 

16.  not  one  shall  fail,  none  shall  want  her  m. 

MATRIX. 

Exod.  13. 12.  set  apart  lo  Lord  all  that  open  tti.  15, 

34.  19,  all  that  openeth  the  m.  is  mine 

JV«77i.  3.12.  instead  of  ihe  hrsl- born  that  open  the  771. 

18.  15.  every  tiling  thai  openeth  the  m.  is  thine 

MATTER. 
Gen.  24.  9.  and  sware  to  him  concerning  that  tti 

30.  15.  is  it  a  sinall  m.  that  thou  hast  taken 
Exod.  5.  1 13.  fullil  a  771.  of  a  day  in  his  day 

18.  16.  when  they  have  a  771.  they  come  to  me 

22.  itshall  be  that  every  great  771. they  shall  brin; 

to  thee,  but  every  small  771.  they  shall  judgi 
26.  but  every  small  m.  they  judged  themselves 

23.  7.  keep  thee  far  from  a  lalse  m. 

J^uin.  Hi.  49.  them  that  died  about  the  771.  of  Korah 
25. 18.  beguiled  you  in  771.  of  I'eor,  in  m.  of  Cozbi 

31.  10.  to  commit  trespass  in  the  7/1.  of  I'eor 
Veut.  17.  8.  if  there  arise  a  in.  too  hard  for  thee 

ly.lo.at  mouth  of  three  witnesses  tti.  be  established 

24.  1 1.  lie  hath  found  a  771.  of  nakedness  in  her 
Jadg.  19. 1 24.  do  not  the  m.  of  this  lolly 

Ruth  3.  18.  till  thou  kno^v  how  the  m.  will  fall  out 

1  Ham.  10. 16.  of  the  771.  of  the  kingdom  he  told  not 
20.  23.  touching  the  7/1.  thou  and  1  have  spoken  of 

39.  only  Jonathan  and  David  knew  the  771. 

2  Sa7TT.  1.  4.  how  went  the  771.  ?  I  pray  thee  tell  rae 

18.  13.  there  is  no  m.  hid  from  the  king 

20.  18.  they  ended  the  tti.  ||  21.  the  m.  is  not  so 
1  Kings  8.  59.  at  all  times  as  the  771.  shall  require 

15.  5.  save  only  in  the  771.  of  Uriah  the  Hiltite 

1  CAT-.  20.  32.  for  every  771.  pertaining  to  God 

27. 1.  their  officers  that  served  the  king  in  any  771, 

2  Chr.  8. 15jleparted  not  from  command  in  any  771 

19.  t  6.  who  is  with  you  in  the  771.  of  judgment 

24.  5.  see  ye  hasten  the  771.  they  hastened  not 
Eira  5.  5.  to  cease,  till  the  771.  came  to  Darius 

10.  If),  and  sat  down  to  examine  the  771. 
JVeh.  6.  13.  they  might  have  771.  for  evil  report 
Esth.  2.  23.  when  inquisition  was  made  of  the  771. 
.Job  19.  28.  seeing  the  root  of  the  t7(.  is  found  in  rae 

32.  18.  I  will  answer,  for  I  am  full  of  ?«. 
Psal.  45.  1.  my  heart  is  inditing  a  good  771. 

64.  5.  they  encourage  themselves  in  an  evil  7?7. 
Prov.  11.  13.  a  faithful  spirit  concealeth  the  777. 

16.  20.  that  handleth  a  tti.  wisely  shall  find  good 

17.  9.  that  repeateth  a  tti.  separateth  very  friends 

18.  13.  that  answereth  a  m.  before  he  heareth  it 

25.  2.  the  honour  of  kings  is  to  search  out  a  771. 
Eccl.  5.  P  if  seest  oppression,  marvel  not  at  the  771. 

10.  20.  that  which  hath  wings  shall  tell  the  /«. 

12.  13.  let  us  hear  tiie  conclusion  of  the  m. 
Jer.  7.  t  22.  concerning  the  in.  of  burnl-otferings 

38.  27.  for  the  771.  was  not  perceived 

52.  t34.  the  «.  of  the  day  in  his  day,  till  death 
£i«A.9. 11.  he  that  had  the  inkhorn,  reported  the  tti. 

16.  20.  is  this  of  thy  whoredoms  a  sinall  tti.  ? 
Dan.  2.  10.  not  a  man  can  shew  the  king's  771. 

23.  thou  hast  made  known  to  us  the  king's  771. 
7.  28.  hitherto  is  the  end  of  the  771.  I  kept  the  tti. 

9.  23.  understand  the  774.  and  consider  the  vision 
Mark  1.  45.  and  began  to  blaze  abroad  the  771. 

10.10.  his  disciples  asked  him  again  of  the  same  m. 
Jicts  1 1.  4.  Peter  rehearsed  the  7/1.  from  beginning 
15.  6.  the  elders  came  to  consider  of  this  771. 

18.  14.  Gallio  said,  if  it  were  a  771.  of  wrong 

19.  .38.  if  Demetrius  have  a  tti.  against  any 
24.  22.  I  will  know  the  uttermost  of  your  m. 

1  Cor.  6.  l.dare  any  of  you  having  a  m.  go  to  law? 

2  Cor.  9.  5.  same  might  be  ready  as  a  m.  of  bounty 
Gnl.  2.  6.  whatsoever  it  were,  it  maketh  no  jti. 

]  Thess.  4.6.  that  no  man  defraud  brother  in  any  tti. 
JaTTi.  3.  5.  how  great  a  771.  a  liille  fire  kindlethi 

This  MATTER. 
/)euf.3. 26.  L.  said,  speak  no  more  to  moot  this  vi. 
22.  26.  asamanslayeih  his  neighbour  so  is  this  m. 

1  Sam.  30.  24.  who  will  hearken  to  you  in  this  m.? 

2  .Sa77i.  19.  42.  wherefore  be  ye  angry  for  this  m.? 
Ezra  5.  5.  Darius  returned  answer  concerning  t.  m. 

17.  send  his  pleasure  to  us  concerning  this  m. 

10.  4.  arise,  for  this  m.  belongeth  to  thee 

9.  the  pi'ople  eat  trembling  because  of  this  m. 

15.  Jonathan,  Asahel,  were  employed  about  t.  m. 
Esth.  9.  26.  they  had  seen  concerning  this  m. 
Dan.  1.  14.  Melzar  consented  lo  them  in  this  m. 
3. 16  we  are  not  careful  to  answer  thee  in  this  m. 


MAY 

Dan.  4. 17.  this  m.  is  by  the  decree  of  the  watchcri 
Jicts  8. 21.  thou  hast  neither  pan  nor  lot  in  (his  vi. 

17.  32.  we  will  hear  thee  again  oft.  t7i.  others  said 
2  Cor.  7. 11.  ye  approved  yourselves  clear  in  this  m. 

MATTJiRS. 
Eiod.  24. 14.  if  any  have  t«.  let  him  come  to  them 
JJfut.  1(5. 1 19.  a  gilt  perverteth  the  t/i.  of  righteoua 

17.8.  if  arise  711.  of  controversy  too  hard  lor  thee 

1  *'a77i.  1(5.  18.  a  son  of  Jesse  llial  is  prudent  in  771. 

2  *ia/7i.  11.  19.  hast  made  an  end  of  tclluig  the  m. 
15. 3.  Absalom  said,  see  thy  tti.  are  good  and  right 
19.  29.  why  speakest  thou  any  inoie  of  thy  iiii/* 

2C'Ar.  19.  11.  Amarioh  chief  priest  over  you  in  m. 
of  the  Lord,  and  Zebadiah  for  all  the  king's  ni. 
Jv'rh   6. 1 19.  and  they  uttered  my  7/1.  to  Tobiali 

11.24. 1'ethahiah  in  all  771.  concerning  the  people 
Esth.  3.  4.  whether  Mordecai'g  771.  would  stand 

9.  31.  the  771.  of  the  fastings,  and  their  cry,  32. 
./oA  33.  13.  he  giveth  not  account  of  his  771. 
Psal.  35.  20.  thus  devise  deceitful  771.  against  them 

6.5.  t  3.  771.  of  iniquities  prevail  against  me 

131.  1.  nor  do  I  exercise  myself  in  great  771. 
Proj;.22.  t  ]2.he  overihrowetii  the  TTi.of  transgressor 

29.  t  iiO.  seest  thou  a  man  that  is  hasty  in  his  771.  ? 
/^an.  1.  20.  in  771.  of  wisilom  he  found  them  better 

7. 1.  he  wrote  the  dream,  and  told  the  sum  of  the  J7i, 
Mat.  2,3.  23.  and  have  omitted  the  weightier  711. 
Jicts  18.  15.  for  I  will  be  no  judge  of  such  771. 

19.  39.  ifye  inquire  any  thing  concerning  other  m. 

25.  20.  and  there  be  judged  of  these  771. 

1  Cor.  6. 2._are  ye  unworthy  to  judge  the  smallest  jb. 
1  Pet.  4. 15.  or  as  a  busy-body  in  other  men's  jti. 

MATTOCK. 
1  Sam.  13.  20.  to  sharpen  every  man  his  a.xe  and  tti. 
Isa.  7.  25.  on  all  hills  shall  be  digged  with  the  m 

JIATTOCKS. 

1  Sam.  13.  21.  yet  they  had  a  file  for  the  m. 

2  Chrun.  34.  6.  thus  did  Josiah  with  their  m. 

MAUL. 
Prov.  25.  18.  that  bearelh  false  witness,  is  a  m. 

MAW. 
Dcut.  18.  3.  to  the  priest  two  clieeks  and  the  m. 

MAY. 
2  Sam.  15.  20.  seeing  I  go  whither  I  711.  return  thou 
Mat.  9.  21.  she  said,  if  I  tti.  but  touch  his  garment 

26.  42.  if  this  cup  m.  not  pass  away  from  me 
Hei.  7.  9.  and  as  I  m.  so  sav,  Levi  paid  tithes 

MAY  be. 
Gen.  12. 13.  that  it  771.  be  well  witli  me  for  thy  sake 
16.  2.  it  771.  he  that  I  may  obtain  children 
Exod.  13.  9.  that  the  Lord's  law  v/i.  be  in  thy  mouth 

20.  20.  that  his  fear  777.  be  before  your  face 
Lev.  11.  34.  of  all  meat  which  771.  be  eaten 

21.  3.  for  his  sister  a  virgin  he  tti.  be  defiled 
23.  21.  that  it  m.  be  a  holy  convocation 

Xum.  10. 10.  they  771.  be  for  a  memorial  before  God 
32.  32.  that  the  possession  771.  be  ours 

Deut.  5.  .33.  may  live,  and  that  it  771.  be  well  with 
you,  6.  3, 18.  I  22.  7.  Ruth  3.  1.  Jer.  1.  23. 
29.  13.  he  771.  be  to  thee  a  God,  as  he  hath  said 
31.  26.  that  it  771.  be  there  for  a  witness  against 

Josh.  22.  27.  that  it  771.  be  a  witness  between  us 

1  5077!.  14.  0.  it  771.  be  the  Lord  will  woik  for  us 

15.  21.  she  771.  be  a  snare,  Philistiiits  771.  be  ag.  him 

2  .S'u77i.  14.  15.  it  TTI.  be  that  the  king  will  perform 

16.  12.  it  T71.  be  Lord  will  look  on  my  afiliclion 

2  Kings  19.  4. 771.  be  L.  thy  God  will  hear,  Isa.  37.4. 
1  Chron.  17.  27.  that  it  777.  be  before  thee  for  ever 
Ezra  9.  12.  that  ye  771.  be  strong,  and  eat  the  good 
Job  1.  .5.  it  TTI.  be  that  my  sons  have  sinned 
P.'.al.  .59.  1.3.  consume  thein,  that  they  771.  not  be 
83.  4.  that  Israel  tti.  be  no  more  in  remembrance 
144. 12.  that  our  sons  tti.  Ae  a.s  plants  grown  up 

13.  that  our  garners  771.  be  full,  affording  store 

14.  that  our  oxen  771.  be  strong  to  labour 
Prow.  22.  19.  that  thy  trust  771.  be  in  the  Lord 
Eccl.  1.  10.  whereof  it  771.  be  said,  see  this  is  new 
Isa.  30.  8.  that  it  tti.  be  for  the  time  to  come 

18.  the  Lord  waiteth  that  he  771.  be  gracious 

46  5.  that  we  771.  be  like  ||  CO.  21. 1  m.  be  glorified 
./er.ll.lO.that  his  name  771.  Ai;  no  more  remembered 

.36.  3.  it  771.  Ac  the  house  of  Judah  will  hear 
7.  it  771.  be  they  will  present  their  supplication 

42.  6.  that  it  TTI.  be  well  with  us  when  we  obey 

51.  8.  take  balm,  if  so  be  she  711.  be  healed 
7,71771.3.29.  mouth  in  dust,  if  so  be  there  771.  Af  hope 
Eiek.  12.  3.  it  771.  be  tliey  will  consider,  though  they 

14.  11.  that  they  771.  Ac  my  people,  and  I  their  God 
Dan.  4.  27.  it  tti.  Ac  a  lengthening  of  tranquillity 
Ifus.8,  4.  they  made  idoi.<,that  they  tti.  Ac  cut  off 
.Imos  5.  15.  it  T7i.  Ac  the  Lord  will  be  gracious 
ZcpA.  2.  3.  it  TTI.  Ac  ye  shall  he  hid  in  Uie  day 
Mat.  5.  45.  that  ye  m.  be  children  of  your  Father 

6. 4.  that  thine  alms  T71.  Ac  in  secret,  and  thy  Falhet 
L,uke  20.  13.  it  771.  Ac  they  will  reverence  him 
14.  kill  him,  that  the  inheritance  771.  Ac  ours 
Inhn  12.  36.  that  ye  tti.  Ac  the  children  of  light 

14.  3.  that  where  I  am,  there  ye  771.  Ac  also 

17.  11.  that  they  tti.  Ac  one,  as  we  are  one, 21, 22 
26.  that  the  love  m.  be  in  them,  and  I  in  them 


ME 

Rom.  1. 1 20.  that  they  m.  be  without  excuse 

1  C(;r.3.]8.ttiat  he  m.  be  wi8e||5.7.  ye  m.be new  lump 

7.  34.  thut  she  m.  be  holy  in  body  and  3|)irit 

14.  10.  there  are,  it  m.  be,  so  many  kind  of  voices 

15.  38.  Son  be  subject,  that  God  m.  be  all  in  all 

16.  6.  and  it  m.  be  that  I  will  winter  with  you 
10.  see  that  hem.  be  with  you  without  fear 

2  Cor.  4.7.  lhee.vcel!ency  of  the  power  m.  Ac  of  God 

8.  II.  so  there  m.  6e  a  performance  alsoout  of  that 
14.  that  your  abundance  m.  be  a  supjily  fur  want 

9.  3.  that,  as  I  said,  you  m.  be  ready 
l^ph.  6.  3.  that  it  vi.  be  well  with  lliec,  and  thou 
Phil.  2.  1.5.  that  ye  m.  be  blameless  and  harmless 

19.  that  I  m.  be  of  good  comfort  when  I  know 
2H.  and  that  I  m.  be  the  less  sorrowful 

1  Tim.  5.  7.  !;ive  charge  that  they  m.  be  blameless 

2  Tim.  3.  17.  tint  the  man  of  God  m.  be  perfect 
Tit.  1.  13.  that  they  m.  be  sound  in  the  faith 
Jam.  1.  4.  that  ye  m.  be  perfect  and  entire 

MAYKST. 

.^<;t«8.37.iflhoubplicvest  with  all  thy  heart  thou  m. 

M.'VYEST  be. 

Oen.  28.  3.  that  thou  m.  be  a  multitude  of  people 
JVum.  10.  31.  tiiou  m.  be  to  us  in.stead  of  eyes 
Deut.  26.  19.  and  that  thou  m.  be  a  holy  peoj)le 
JVeA.  6.  6.  buildest,  that  thou  m.  be  their  king 
Job  40.  8.  condemn  me,  thai  thou  m.  Jc  justified 
Psal.  130.  4.  forgiveness,  that  thou  m.  be  feared 
Isa.  23.  16.  sing  songs,  that  thou  m.  be  remembered 

49.  6.  that  thou  m.  be  my  salvation  to  end  of  earth 
Jer.  4.  14.  wash  thy  heart,  that  thou  m.  Ac  saved 

30.  13.  none  to  plead,  that  thou  m.  be  bound  up 
/.iUke  16.  2.  for  thou  m.  be  no  longer  steward 

ME. 
Gen.  3.  13.  the  serpent  beguiled  me,  and  I  did  eat 

22.  tl.  anil  he  said,  behold  me,t7,tll.  /sn.  65.  1. 

41.  10.  put  in  ward  both  me  and  the  chief  baker 
13.  me  he  restored,  and  him  he  hanged 

42.  36.  me  have  ye  bereaved  of  my  children 
Ezoi.  9.  14.  there  is  none  like  me  in  all  the  earth 

1  Sam.  8.  7.  not  thee,  but  they  have  rejected  me 

2  Sam.  18.  29.  when  Joab  sent  me  thy  servant 
lKiiig.i  1.26.but7n<',evcn  mcthy  servant,  not  called 
/Aa.57.8.  hast  discovered  thyselfto  another  than  me 
•/er.17.18.  be  dismayed,  but  lei  not  me  be  dismayed 

50.44.  who  like  mc,  and  who  will  appoint  me  timel 

Hns.  13.  4.  and  thou  shalt  know  no  God  but  me 

Mat.  10.37.  lovcth  father  and  mother  more  than  vie 

40.  he  that  receiveth  you  recciveth  me,  and  he 

that  receiveth  me,  Mark  9.  37.  .John  13.  20. 

19. 17.  why  callest  thou  me  good?  J.uke  18.  19. 

2t).  11. mc  ye  have  not  al  ways,  jy/nrA:14.7../tt/(n  12.8. 

Jyuke  10.16.  that  despis.  me,  despis.  him  that  sent  me 

John  5. 46. believed  Moses,  ye  would  have  believ.ine 

7.  7.  the  world  cannot  hate  you,  but  me  it  liateth 

8.  19.  ye  neither  know  me,  nor  my  Father 
10.38.lhough  ye  believe  not  me,  believe  the  works 

14.  9.  yet  hast  thou  not  known  me,  Philip  ? 

15.  23.  he  that  hateth  me  hntcth  my  Fatlier 
24.  have  seen  and  hated  both  me  and  my  Father 

16.  3.  they  have  not  known  the  Father  nor  me 

17.  .5.  O  Father,  glorify  thou  vie  with  thyself 
18.21.  why  askest  thou  mc?  ask  ihem  who  heard  me 

23.  hut  if  well,  why  smitest  thou  me? 
19.  II.  helhatdeliveredmetothee,hath  greater  sin 
21. 15.  Simon,  son  of  Jonas,  lovest  thou  me?  16,17. 

Jir.ta  9.  4.  Saul,  why  persecutest  thou  me?  22.  7. 
1  Cor.  15.  32.  what  advantajeth  it  me,  if  the  dead 

.^AoBcME. 
I  .Sam.  2.  29.  and  honriurest  thy  sons  above  me 

About  ME. 
J)nit.  17.  14.  like  the  nations  that  are  about  me 
Job  10.  t  8.  thine  hands  took  pains  about  me 

2i).  5.  when  my  children  were  about  me 
Psal.'.i.  ♦I,  but  thou,0  Lorrl,  art  a  shield  about  me 

88.  17.  they  came  round  aiouUme  daily  like  water 

i;<9. 11.  even  the  night  shall  be  light  abirut  me 
Jonah  2.  6,  the  earth  with  her  bars  was  about  me 
We(<22.6.iherc  shone  a  great  light  aAoutmc,  26. 13. 

After  ME. 
Gen.  31.  36.  thou  hast  so  hotly  pursued  after  me 
Judg.  3.  2^.  he  said  unto  them,  follow  after  vie 
1  .Som.l4.12.«aid  to  armour-bearer,  como  nflrrme 

24.21.  that  thou  will  not  cut  off  my  seed  njler  me 
I  Kingf  1.  13.  Molomon  shall  reiirn  n/^er  me,  17,30. 

24.  hast  said,  Adonijah  shall  reiffn  nftrr  me 
P.ccl.  2.  18.  unto  the  man  that  shall  he  after  me 
I*a.  43.  10.  neither  t^hall  there  he  after  me 
Jer.  2.2.  when  wentt-st  after  me  in  the  wilderness 
Mat.  3.  U.  he  th;it  com<th  after  me  is  miehtier 

than  I,  Mark  1.  7.  .John  1.  15,  27,  30. 

in.38.he  that  followclh  not  nftrr  me,  J.nkr  H.27. 

16.24.thf.  will  come  n.me,.;VnrAR.  34.  /,«Ar9.23 

Jlct.i  13.25.  there  romelh  one  n/rrrme  whoso  shoes 

flom.  10.  20.  manifest  to  them  that  asked  not  a.  me 

Jl gainst  ME. 
^e7i.20.6. 1  withheld  thee  from  sinning  ngainatmr 
42.  3fi.  nil  these  things  are  against  me 
.%0.  20.  but  as  for  you,  ye  thought  evil  against  me 
Eiod.  23.  33.  lost  thev  make  theo  sin  against  me 
374 


ME 

Eio(/.  32.33.  whosohath  sinned  a.mc  him  will  I  blot 
J^ev.  21).  40.  which  they  trespassed  against  me 
JV«m.I4.27.congregation  which  murmur  a^.me,29. 

35.  that  are  gathered  together  against  me 
22.5.  abide  over-aof.melj  34.  thoustoodest  a^.mc 
Deut.  32.  51.  because  ye  trespassed  wainst  y/ieal 
Meribah,  /::eA-.]7«0.|20.27,38.|;iy.  2:1,  26. 
Judg.  6. 39.  let  not  thine  anger  be  hot  against  me 
7.  2.  lest  Israel  vaunt  themselves  against  mc 
11.27.but  thou  doest  me  wrong  to  \\&t  ugainstme 
Ruth  1.13.  hand  of  the  Lord  is  gone  oaXagainst  mc 
1 16.  be  not  against  me  to  leave  thee,  or  to  return 

1  .Sam.  12.  3.  witness  against  me  before  the  Lord 
17.35.  when  he  arose  a  D-.mc  I  caught  him  by  beard 
22.8.  that  all  of  you  have  conspired  ag.  mc,  13. 
26. 19.  if  the  Lord  hath  stirred  thee  up  against  mc 

2  Sam.  24. 17.  let  thy  hand,  I  pray  thee,  lie  ag.  me 
2  Kings  5.  7.  see  how  he  seekelh  a  quarrel  a 
.Job  10. 17.  thou  renewest  thy  witnesses  against  me 

13.  26.  thou  wrilest  bitter  things  against  me 
16.8.  with  wrinkles,  wiiich  is  a  witness  against  me 
19. 19.  they  whom  I  loved  are  turned  against  me 
23.  6.  will  he  plead  ag.  me  with  his  great  power 
30. 21.  with  thy  hand  thou  opposes!  thyself  an-,  mc 
31 .  38.  if  my  land  cry  against  me,  or  the  furrows 
33.  10.  behold,  he  findeth  occasions  against  me 

Psal.  3. 1.  are  many  that  rise  up  ag.  me,  18.  39, 48. 

22.  1 13.  they  opened  their  mouths  against  vie 

27.  12.  false  witnesses  are  risen  up  ag.  me,  .54.  3. 

35.21.  they  opened  their  mouth  wide  against  me 

41.7.  nn-.7nedothey  devise  my  hurt, whisper  a^.  me 

102.  8.  they  are  mad  no-,  me,  they  are  sworn  a^.  me 

119.23.  princes  also  did  sit  and  speak  against  me 

Proj.'.8.3().  but  he  that  sinncth  against  mc  wrongeth 

/.sn.l.2.liave  rebell.  ag.  me,  Kzek.  2.3.  |  20. 8, 13,21. 

.//T.12.8.  it  cried  out  against  me,  therefore  I  hated 

I^am.  3.  3.  surely,  aj^.  mc  he  is  turned,  he  lurneth 

60.  hast  seen  all  their  imaginations  against  me 

Has.  4.  7.  as  they  increased,  so  they  sinned  ag.  mc 

7. 13.  they  transgressed  u^.7n£,  spoken  lies  ag.  mc 

14.  and  they  assemble  and  rebel  against  me 

15.  yet  do  they  imagine  mischief  a^z-ainst  me 
Mic.  6.  3.  O  my  people,  testify  against  me 

7.  8.  rejoice  not  against  me,  O  mine  enemy 
Mai.  3. 13.  your  words  have  been  stout  against  me 
^l/ne.l2.30.thatisnotwithmeisao-.me,/,u/.ell.23 

18.  21.  how  oft  shall  my  brother  sin  against  me? 
.John  13.  18.  hath  lifted  up  his  heel  against  me 

19.  ll.coiildest  have  no  power  at  all  against  me 
Acts  24.  19.  and  object,  if  they  had  ought  ag.  me 

At  ME. 
Psal.  118.  13.  thou  hast  thrust  sore  at  me  to  fall 
./»/j7i  7.23.  are  ye  angry  at  me,  because  I  made  a  man 

Jiff  ore  ME. 
Gen.  6.  13.  the  end  of  all  flesh  is  come  before  me 
7.  1.  for  thee  have  I  seen  righteous  before  me 
17.  ].  walk  before  me,  and  he  thou  perfect,  1  Sam. 
2.  3().  1  Kings  2.  4.  ]  8.  25.  |  9.  4.  2  Chrnn.  7.  17. 
27.  t20.  because  thy  God  brought  it  before  me 
40.  9.  in  my  dream,  behold,  a  vine  was  before  me 
KTorf.20.3.shalt  havenoother  gods  A.me,  Deut.'t.l. 
23. 15.  none  shall  appear  before  me  empty,  34.  20. 
A'um.  22. 32.  bc^cause  thy  way  is  perver.se  beforeme 

1  Sam.  9.  19.  go  up  before  me  to  the  high  place 
10.  8.  and  thou  shalt  go  down  before  me  to  Gilgal 
16.  22.  let  Davirl,  I  pray  thee,  stand  before  me 
25.  19.  go  on  before  me,  behold  I  come  atlcr  you 

2  .Sam.  22. 23.  for  all  his  judgments  were  before  me, 
'Psal.  18.22.  I' 119.  .30. 

lK'/nn'o8.25  as  thou  hast  walked  A.me,2f;Ar.6.16. 
11.36.  David  may  havealiilit//e/V)re7Hein  Jerusal. 
21.  29.  how  Ahab  humblcth  himself  Ae/orc  me 
2  Kings  22.  19.  bee.  hath  wept  A.  me,  2  Chr.  34.  27 
F.ira  4.  18.  letter  hath  been  plainly  read  before  me 
.N'eh.  5.  1.5.  former  governors  that  viere  before  m 
F.sth.  7.  8.  will  he  force  the  queen  also  before  me? 
Job  41.  10.  who  then  is  able  to  stand  before  me? 
Psal.  10.  8.  I  have  set  the  Lord  always  before  mc 
23.  5.  thou  preparest  a  table  before  mc  in  presence 
38.  17.  my  sorrow  is  continually  before  me 
39.1  .keep  my  mouth,  while  the  wicked  is  beforeme 
.50.  8.  ofTi'rinssto  have  been  continually  beforeme 
■51.3.  my  transgressions;  nnd  my  sin  is  ever  Af/.  me 
89.36.  his  throne  shall  endure ns  the  sun  beforeme 
Keel.  1.16.  then  nil  that  have  been  Ae/()remc,2. 7, 9. 
r'ant.8.12.my  vineyard  which  is  mine,  is  before  me 
Isa.  1. 12.  wlien  ye  come  to  appear  before  me,  who 
41.  1.  keep  silence  before  me,  O  islands 
43.in.Ae/oremethere  was  no  god  formed,  nor  aOer 
40.  16.  Ix'hold  thy  walls  are  rontiniiallyAe/orc me 
.57.  16.  for  the  spirit  should  fail  before  me 

65.  6.  behold,  it  is  wrilli-n  before  me,  T  will  not 

66.  22.  shall  remain  before  me,  snilh  ihe  Lord 
.Jer.  2.  22.  yet  thine  iniquity  is  marked  before  me 

6.  7.  before  me  continually  is  grief  and  wounds 

7.  10.  nnd  rom«  nnd  siand  before  me  in  this  house 
15.  I.  tho'  Moses  nnd  Siimuol  sioorl  beforeme,  \r\ 

19.  if  thou  return,  thou  shiilt  stand  before  me 
^.f>.  prophets  ihal  hnvehi>en  Ae/oreme  and  ihoc 
32.  30.  for  Israel  have  only  done  evil  before  mc 


ME 

./er.33.18.  priests  shall  not  want  a  man  A.rae,3o.  19 
34. 15.  ye  had  made  a  covenant  A.  me  in  the  faousa 
49. 19.  shepherd  that  will  stand  before  me,  50.44 
£zci.8. 1.  and  the  elders  of  Judah  sat  Ac/ore  me 
14.  L  then  the  elders  of  Israel  sal  before  me,  20. 1. 
36.17.  their  way  was  before  me  as  the  uncleanncss 
44.  15.  and  they  shall  stand  Af/;Te  me  to  offer 
Dan.  4.  8.  at  the  last  Daniel  came  in  before  me 
Jonah  1.  2.  their  wickedness  is  come  up  before  mt 
J-Iab.  1.  3.  spoiling  and  violence  are  before  me 
Hag.  2.  14.  so  is  this  people  and  nation  before  me 
Mai.  3. 1.  shall  prepare  the  way  A.  m.  Mat.  11.  10. 
l^uke  19.  27.  bring  hither  and  slay  them  Ae/or«  me 
.John  1. 15.  prsferrcd  A.me,  for  ho  was  A.  yne,  27, 30. 
5. 7.  I  am  coming,  another  sleppeth  down  bef.  me 
10.  8.  all  that  over  came  bifore  me  are  robbers 
Acts  25.  9.  there  be  judged  of  these  thing;  bef. vie 
Rom.  16.  7.  who  also  were  in  Cliiist  before  me 
Gal.  1. 17.  to  them  which  were  apostles  before  me 

Behind  ME. 
2  Kings  9. 18.  Jehu  said,  turn  thee  behind  me,  19. 
F.zek.  3.  12.  I  heard  behind  me  a  voice  of  rushing 
Mat.  16.  23.  get  thee  behind  me,  Satan,  thou  art 
an  offence  unto  me,  Mark  8.  33.  Luke  A.  8. 
Beside,  besides  ME. 
I  Kings  3. 20.  she  arose  and  took  my  son  from  b.  m, 
Jsa.  43.11.  Acs.  me  there  is  no  Saviour,  I/os.  13.  4. 
44.  6.  and  besides  me  there  is  no  God,  45.  5,  6,  21. 
47.  8.  that  sayest,  I  am.,  and  none  else  bcs.  me,  10. 

Between  ME. 

Gen.  9. 12.  covenant  I  make  betw.  mc  and  you,  13. 

1.5.  that  is  bctw.  me  andcvery  living  creature,  17. 

13.8.  let  there  be  no  strife  btticcen  me  and  tjiee 

16.  5.  L.  judge  betic.  me  and  thee,  1  Sam.24. 12,15. 

17.  2. 1  make  my  coven,  b.  me  and  thee,  7,  10,  11. 
23.15.  what  is  that  Aft.  me  and  thee'"  Dury  the  dead 
31.  44.  let  it  be  for  a  witness  AeZw.  me  and  thee,  48. 

49.Lord  watch  between  me  and  thee  when  absent 
50.  see,  God  is  witness  between  me  and  thee 
Exod.  31.  13.  my  sabbath  ye  shall  keep,  for  it  is  a 
sign  between  me  and  you,  17.  Ezek.  20. 12,20. 
1  Sam.  14.  42.  cast  lots  between  me  and  Jonathan 
20.  3.  there  is  but  a  step  between  me  and  death 
42.  have  sworn,  saying.  Lord  be  ti.  me  and  thee 
\  Kings  15.19.isaleagueA.mcandthee,2CAr.]6.3. 
/so. .5.3.  judge,  I  pray  you,  bet.  me  and  iiy  vineyard 
F.zek.  43.  8.  and  the  wall  between  me  and  them 

By  ME. 
<Vf7i.  48.7.  Rachel  died  by  tkc  in  the  land  ofCanaan 
F.xod.  33.  21.  behold,  there  is  a  place  by  me 
Kam.  20. 18.  Edom  said,  ihou  shalt  not  |)ass  by  me 
Deut.  5.  31.  as  for  thee,  stand  thou  here  by  me 
.Judg.  9.  9.  wherewith  by  me  they  honour  God 

1  Sam.^.  17.  Lord  hath  done,  as  he  spake  Ay77it 

2  Sam.  2:<.  2.  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  spake  by  me 
1  Kings  2  •.28.Lord  not  spoken  by  mc,  2  Chr.  18.27. 
F.zra  4. 1 19.  by  me  a  decree  is  set,  and  it  is  found 

6. 1 8.  by  7ne  a  decree  is  made,  Dan.  3.  f  29. 
JVeA.  4. 18.  he  that  sounded  the  trumpet  was  by  mt 
.fob  9.  11.  lo,  he  goeth  by  me,  and  I  see  him  not 
Pro?'. 8.15.  by  me  kings  reign  ||  16.  by  me  princes  rule 

9.  11.  by  me  thy  days  shall  be  multiplied 
/.«a.46.3.whichareborne  A;/  mfil54.]5.bul  not  bymi 
Hos.  8.  4.  they  have  set  up  kings,  but  not  Ay  me 
Mat.  15.  5.  niightest  be  profited  Ay  me,  .WarA-7.Il. 
John  6.  57.  that  eatith  nie,  even  he  shall  live  by  me 

10.  9.  I  am  the  door,  by  me  if  any  man  enter  in 
14.6.  no  man  coni-th  to  Ihe  Father  but  by  me 

Acts  27.  23.  an  angel  stood  by  me  this  night 
Horn.  15.  18.  which  Christ  hath  wrought  by  me 
2C«r.1. 19.  Son  of  God  preached  AJ7771C  wasnot  yea 

2.  2.  but  the  same  which  is  made  sorry  by  me 
2  Tim.  4. 17.  that  A 7/  777e  preaching  might  be  known 

Concemcth,  concerning  ME. 
.Tosh.  14.  6.  Lord  said  to  Moses  cone,  me  and  thee 
1  A'77i/!'.s2.4.L.continuehis  word  he  spakccanc.mc 

22.8.  for  he  doth  not  prophesy  good  cone,  me,  18. 
I'sal.  138.  H.  Lord  will  perfect  that  which  foiic.  me 
F.zek.  14.7.comeih  to  a  prophet  loincjuirPcoJic.  me 
I.uke'm.  37.  for  the  things  f<77ieer7i.777ehaveancnd 

24.  44.  which  are  written  in  the  Psalmii  cone,  vif 
Acts  22. 18.  not  receive  tbv  testimony  concern,  me 

For  ME. 
r;e7i.  23.  8.  entreat  for  me  to  Ephron,  F.xod.  8.  OR 

27.  36.  hast  thou  not  reserved  a  blessing /or  me.' 

.30.  31.  if  Ihou  will  do  this  thing  for  me 
33.  HO  shall  my  righteousness  answer /or  me 

.50.  5.  in  my  grave  which  I  have  digged /or  mt 
F.iod.  2.  9.  take  this  child  and  nurse  w  forme 
JVum.  3.  41.  thou  shall  lake  the  Levites/or  me 

1 1.  14.  not  able,  because  it  is  loo  heavy /or  me 
22.  6.  fur  they  arc  too  mighty  J'or  mc 

Drill.  31. 19.  ibis  song  may  he  a  witness /or  me 

.'».sA.24.15.as/ormeand  iny  housi-  we  will  servo  Li. 

.Judg.  7.  2.  people  are  loo  many/or  me  to  give 
1 1.  37.  she  said,  let  this  ihiiig  be  done  for  me 
14.  2.  now  therefore  get  her  fur  me  lo  wife,  3 
19.  19.  there  is  bread  nnd  wine  also  for  me 

1  Sam.  12.  2.3.  as  for  me,  1  TAroji.  22.  7.  |  28  1 
I  29. 17.  Job  21.  4.  Psal.  5. 7.  |  17.  15.  |  33. 13 


ME 

1  Sam.  18. 17.  only  be  tliou  valiant/er  tnt ,  and  fight 
iy.  3.  till  I  know  what  God  will  do  for  me 

8.  there  is  none  of  you  that  is  sorry  for  me 
27.  1.  nothing  better /or  me  than  to  escape 

2  Sam.  3.  39.  sons  of  Zeruiah  lie  too  hard  for  me 
7.  5.  shall  thou  build  a  house /or  me  to  dwell  in 
10.11. if  Syrians  be  too  strong/or  me,  1  Chr.  19.12. 

14.  3i.  good  for  me  to  have  been  there  still 

15.  34.  then  inayest  thou /or  me  defeat  counsel 
2-.  18.  they  were  too  strong /or  7Hf,  Psal.  18.  17. 

t48.Godgiveth  avengenionl/wr  me,  P«o/.18.t47. 
\Kings  13.6.  pray/or  me,  that  my  hand  be  restored 

17. 12.  may  go  in  and  dress  it /or  me  and  my  son 
8  Kings  4.  24.  drive,  slack  not  thy  riding  for  me 

16.  15.  the  brasen  altar  lie /or  me  to  imiuire  by 

22. 13.  inquire  of  the  Lord /or  nie,  2  Chron.  34. 21. 
AVA.  .'>.  18.  which  was  prepared /or  me  daily 
Job  17  1.  the  graves  are  ready /or  me 

23.  14.  performeth  the  thing  appointed /or  me 

29.  23.  they  waited  for  me  as  for  the  rain 
42.  3.  I  uttered  thuigs  too  wonderful /ur  me 

Paal.  3.  3.  thou,  O  Lord,  art  a  shield /or  me 
7.6.awake/or  wif  l|56.9.lhis  I  know, for  G. is/or  me 

31.  4.  the  net  they  have  laid  privily /or  me,  3.5.  7. 

I  119.  no.  I  140.5.  I  141.9.  I  142.3. 
41.  12.  as  for  me,  55.  16.  |  69.  13.  Isa.  59.  21. 
Jer.  17.  16.  |  26.  14.  |  40.  10.  Ezek.  9.  10. 
Dan.  2.  30.  |  7.  26.  |  10.  17. 
57.  2.  to  God,  that  performeth  all  things /or  mc 
61.  3.  for  thou  hast  been  a  shelter /or  me 
73.  16.  to  know  this,  it  was  too  painful /or  me 
94. 16.  rise  up  for  me,  who  will  stand  up  for  me? 
109.  21.  but  do  thou /or  me,  O  God  the  Lord 
1 19.71.  good/,  me  \\  85.  th&proud digged  \nlsf.  me 
95.  the  wicked  have  waited/ir  me  to  destroy  me 
131.  1.  or  in  things  too  high  for  me 
139.  6.  such  knowledge  is  too  wonderful /or  mc 
Prov.  30.  8.  feed  me  with  food  convenient/or  me 

18.  there  be  three  things  loo  wonderful /or  me 
Isa.  38.  14.  I  am  oppressed,  undertake/or  me 
44.  7.  and  who  shall  sot  it  in  order /or  me? 
49.  20.  the  place  is  too  Strait  for  me,  give  place 
23.  they  shall  not  be  ashamed  that  wait  for  me 
60.  9.  surely  the  isles  shall  wait /or  me 

65.  1.  I  am  sought  of  them  that  asked  not /or  me 
.Jer.  29. 13.  search /or  vie  with  all  your  heart 

32.  27.  is  there  any  thing  too  hard /or  me? 
Kiek.  29.  20.  because  they  wrought /or  me 
Hos.  3.  3.  thou  shah  abide /or  me  many  days 
Jonah  4.  3.  better /or  me  to  die  than  to  live,  8. 
Mic.  7.  9.  until  he  execute  judgment /or  jne 
Zech.  9.  13.  when  I  have  bent  Judah  for  vie 
Mat.  17.  27.  that  take  and  give /or  me  and  thee 
Jyuke  23.  28.  weep  not  for  me,  but  for  yourselves 
^e<s8. 24.  Simon  said,  pray  ye  to  the  Lord /or  mc 

10.  29.  for  what  intent  ye  have  sent /or  me 
Rom.  15.  30.  strive  in  your  prayers  to  God /or  me 

1  Cor.  6.  12.  all  things  are  lawful /or  me,  10.  23. 
9.  15.  it  were  belter /or  me  to  die,  than  that 

Gal.  2.  20.  who  loved  me,  and  gave  himself /or  mc 
Epk.G.lO.nnd  f.mc,ihal  utterance  may  be  given  me 

2  Tim.  4. 8.  laid  up  for  me  a  crown  of  righteousness 

Prom  ME. 

Oen.  13.9.  separate  thyself,  I  pray  thee,  from  mc 

22.  12.  hast  not  withheld  thine  only  son  from  me 

31.  27.  wherefore  didst  Ihou  steal  away /rom  me? 

3l.wouldesttake  by  force  thy  daughters ^rom  me 

39.  9.  nor  hath  he  kept  back  any  thing /rom  me 

44.  28.  the  one  went  out /rom  me,  and  he  is  torn 
29.  if  ye  take  this  also /rom  ine,  ye  shall  bring 

45.  1.  cause  every  man  to  go  out /rom  me 
F.xod.  10. 28. get  Ihee/rom  me,  see  my  face  no  more 
./osA.7.19.  tell  me, hide  it  not /rom  mc,  1  Sam.  3. 17. 
Judg.  16.  17.  then  my  strength  will  go  from  me 
lSam.20.2.  why  should  my  Fath.hidethis/romme? 
iSam.  13.9.  Amnonsaid,  have  nut  all  men  from  me 

17.  put  this  woman  out/.7fle||20.20.far  be  it/.  7nc 

1  Kings  12.  24.  return,  for  this  thing  is  from  me 
<&.  24.  went  Spirit  of  Lord  from  me,  2  Chr.  18. 23. 

2  Kings  4.  27.  and  the  Lord  halh  hid  iifrom  me 

18.  14.  saving,  1  have  offended,  return /rom  mc 
JVeA.  13.  2S.  therefore  I  chased  him /rom  me 
Job  6.  13.  and  is  wisdom  driven  quite /rom  me? 

9.  34.  let  him  take  his  rod  away /rom  me 
13.  21.  withdraw  thine  hand  far /rom  mc 

19.  13.  he  hath  put  my  brethren  far  from  me 
21.  16.  the  counsel  of  the  wicked  is  far  from  me 
27.  5.  1  will  not  remove  mine  integrity /rom  me 

Ps.  IS.l.how  long  wilt  thou  hide  thy  fa.ce  from  me? 
18.  22.  I  did  not  put  away  his  statutes /rom  me 
3.5.  22.  thou  hast  seen,  O  Lord,  be  not  fat  from  me 
38.  10.  light  of  mine  eyes,  it  is  gone /rom  me 

30.  10.  remove  thy  stroke  away  from  me 

40.  11.  withhold  not  thy  lender  mercies /rom  me 
51.  11.  and  take  not  thy  Holy  Spirit /rom  me 

66.  20.  nor  hath  turned  his  mercy  /rom  me 

88.  14  Lord,  why  hidest  thou  thy  face /rom  me? 
102.  2.  hide  not  thy  face /rom  me  in  trouble,  143.7. 
119.  19.  hide  not  thy  commandments /rom  me 
Cant.  5. 7.  the  keepers  In  jk  away  my  vail  from  nw 


ME 

Cant.6.5.  turn  thine  eyes  from  me,  for  they  have 
/«a.22. 4.  look  away  /ro7H  7«c,  I  will  weep  biUcrly 
38.  12.  mine  ago  is  removed /rom  me  as  a  tent 
51.  4.  give  ear,  for  a  law  shall  |)roceed  /ro»;i  7;ie 
Jer.  2.  35.  surely  his  anger  shall  turn /rom  7/ie 
3.  19.  and  shall  not  turn  away/ro;jt  7«e 

13.  25.  this  is  the  portion  of  lliy  mcasures/romTne 
38.  14.  I  will  ask  Ihee,  hide  nothing /roi;i  me 
51.  S3,  from  me  shall  spoilers  come  unto  her 

Kzek.  3. 17.  and  give  them  warning /rom  me,Xi. 

14.  5.  because  they  are  all  estranged  from  me 
7.  every  one  that  se]iarateth  hiiiiself/ro7/(  me 
11.  that  Judah  may  go  no  more  astray /root  7hc 

44.  10.  wcHl  astray /rom  7ne  after  their  idols 

15.  when  children  of  Israel  went  astray  from  me 
Da7i.2.5.  the  king  said,  the  thing  is  goi\e  from  mc,  8 
Hos.5.3.1  know  Ephraim,  Israel  is  notliid/rooi  7«( 
7.  13.  woe  unto  ihem,  for  they  have  lied  /rw77t  mi 
11.  7.  my  people  are  bent  to  backsliding /;o7tt  mc 

14.  8.  like  a  Kr-liee, /rom  7;(e  is  thy  fruit  found 
.^mos  5.23.  take  away  from  mc  the  noise  of  songs 
Mat.  26.  39.  O  my  Father,  if  it  be  iiossible,  let  Ihit 

cup  pass/ro;7t  me,  Mark  14.  36.  /^ukc  22.22, 
42.  if  tins  cup  may  nol  pass  away /rom  me 
/.vke  16.  3.my  lord  takelh/romv/ic  the  stewardship 
./0A71 10. 18.  no  man  taketh  iifrom  mc,  I  lay  it  dowi 
2  Tim.  1.  15.  all  in  Asia  be  turned  away  frommc 
See  Depart,  Departed. 
In  ME. 
Gen.  41.  16.  Joseph  answered,  it  is  not  in  me 

1  Sa7H.20.8.  if  there  be  iniquity  in  me,2  Sam.  14.  .32 

2  Sam.  1.  9.  because  my  life  is  yet  whole  in  me 

22.  20.  because  he  delighted  in  me,  Psal.  18.  19. 
Job  0.  13.  is  not  my  help  inme?  is  wisdom  driven? 

19.  28.  the  root  of  the  matter  is  found  in  me 

23.  6.  no,  but  he  would  put  strength  in  me 

27.  3.  all  the  while  ray  breath  is  in  me 

28.  14.  the  depth  saith,  it  is  not  in  me 

33.  9.  I  am  clean,  nor  is  there  iniquity  ill  me 
Psal.  7.  8.  according  to  mine  integrity  in  me 

38.  2.  for  thine  arrows  stick  fast  in  me 

42.  4.  when  I  remember,  I  jiour  out  my  soul  in  mc 
5.  and  why  art  thou  disquieted  in  mc? 

139.  24.  see  if  there  be  any  wicked  way  in  me 
Cant.  5.  t  4.  and  my  bowels  were  moved  in  mc 
Isa.  27.  4.  fury  is  nol  in  me,  who  would  set  briars 

57. 13.  that  putteth  trust  in  me  shall  possess  land 
./cr.  2.  5.  what  iniquity  have  fathers  found  in  m 

39.  18.  because  thou  hast  put  thy  trust  in  mc 
49.  11.  and  lei  thy  widows  trust  771  me 

Lam.  3.  20.  my  soul  is  humbled  in  me 

/)an.  6.  22.  before  him  innocency  was  found  in  mc 

10.  8.  there  remained  no  strength  inme,  17. 
ffos.  12.  8.  they  shall  find  none  iniquity  in  me 

13.9.  hast  destroyed  thyself,  but  in  me  is  thy  help 
Mat.  11.6. shall  nol  be  olfended  in  7»ie,  J.,ukc~.  23. 

15.  6.  litlle  ones  w  hich  believe  ?7(  7;ie,  Mark  9. 42. 
I.uke  22.  37.  must  yet  be  accomplished  in  me 
fohn  6.  56.  he  dwellelh  in  mc,  and  I  in  him 

11.  25.  he  that  believeih  rn  me  shall  live,  26. 
14.1. believe  also  mme  ||  20.  you  inme,  and  I  in  you 

10.  but  the  Father  that  dwellelh  in  vie 
30.  prince  cometh,  and  halh  nothing  in  me 
1.5.  2.  every  branch  in  me\\  4.  abide  in  me 
5.  he  that  abideih  in  mc  \\  7.  if  ye  abide  in  me 
0.  if  a  man  abide  not  in  me  he  is  cast  forth 
10.  33.  spoken,  that  in  7/ieye  might  have  peace 
17.  21.  as  thou.  Father,  art  in  me,  and  I  in  thee 

23.  I  in  lliem,  and  thou  in  me,  that  they  may 
Jlcts^A.  20.  if  they  have  found  any  evil-doing  in  me 

26.  18.  which  are  sanctified  by  faith  that  is  171  mc 
28.  18.  there  was  no  cause  of  death  in  me 
/Join.  1.15.  as  much  as  iii  me  is,  I  am  ready  to  preach 
7.  8.  wrought  in  me  all  manner  of  concupiscence 
W.  sin  working  death  in  7nc  by  what  is  good 

17.  no  more  T,  but  sin  that  dwellelh  in  me,  20. 

18.  I  know  that  in  me  dvvelleth  no  good  thing 
2  Cor.  11.  10.  as  the  truth  of  Christ  is  in  me 

I3.3.sinceyeseeka  proofof  Christ  speaking  in  mc 
Gal.  1.  16.  it  pleased  God  to  reveal  his  Son  in  mc 

24.  and  they  glorified  God  in  mc 

2.8.  the  same  was  mighty  in  mc  toward  Gentiles 

20.  yet  not  I,  but  Chrisi  livelh  in  mc 

Phil.  i.  30.  having  the  same  conflict  which  ye  saw 
in  mc,  and  now  hear  to  be  in  me 

4.  9.  iho  things  ye  have  heard  and  seen  i'ti  me,  do 
Col.  1.  29.  working  which  worketh  in  me  mightily 
1  Tim.  1.  16.  that" in  me  Christ  Jesus  might  shew 

Of  ME. 
Grn.  20.  13.  say  of  mc,  he  is  my  brother 

32.  20.  poradventurehe  will  accept  of  me 
.Judg.  9.  54.  men  say  nol  ofmc,  a  woman  slew  him 
Hul'h  2. 10.  thou  shouldest  take  knowledge  of  mc 

1  .Sam.  27.  1.  Saul  shall  despair  o/7nc  to  seek  me 
28.  16.  wherefore  Ihcn  dost  thou  ask  of  me? 

2  CAron.  11.4.  return,  for  this  thing  is  done  of  me 
Job  42.  7.  not  spoken  of  me  the  thing  that  is  right 
P/ta?.2.8.a«k  o/mc,and  Ishall  give  thee  the  healhen 

40.  7.  in  thy  hook  it  is  written  ofmc,  Hcb.  10.7. 

41.  5.  mine  eneiuiea  speak  evil  of  me 


ME 

Psal.  60.  8.  Philistia,  triumph  Ihoi  because  ofmt 
61.  11.  and  Israel  would  none  of  me 

Isa.  30.  1.  but  doth  not  take  counsel  ef  me 
38. 12.  from  day,  will  llmu  make  an  end  of  me,  13 

43.  22.  thou  bast  been  weary  of  vie,  U  lsia<.l 

44.  21.  thou  shall  nol  ho  forgotten  uf  me 

45. 124.  surely  he  shall  say  of  iiic,  in  ihe  Lord 
54.17.and  their  righteousness  of  mc,  saith  the  Lnid 
58.  2.  they  ask  of  mc  the  ordinances  of  justice 

Jer.  10.  20.  my  children  arc  gone  forth  of  me 
37.7.  say  to  the  king  that  sent  you  toin(|uireo/me 

Kick.  20.  3.  and  say,  are  ye  come  to  in((uiie  of  me  ? 
49.  they  say  of  me,  doth  he  not  speak  parables? 

^V«<.10.37.more  than  me,  is  not  worthy  o/mf  ,37,38. 

11.  29.  and  learn  of  mc,  fori  am  meek  and  lowly 
26.  31.  be  ort'eiided,  because  ofmc.  Murk  14.  27. 

jVar/,-8.38.whiiso  shall  be  asham.  0/ me,  A u At  9.26. 

9.  39.  that  can  lightly  speak  evil  o/7«c 

Juke  8.  46. 1  perceive  that  virtue  is  gone  out  of  me 

22.  19.  saying,  this  do  in  remembrance  of  me 
John  4.  9.  lliou  being  a  Jew,  askest  drink  of  me 

5.  32.  another  that  bearelh  witness  ofmc,  37. 

39.  and  they  are  they  which  testify  uf  me 

40.  have  believed  mc,  for  Moees  wrote  of  me 

12.  30.  this  voice  came  nol  because  of  mc 

15.  26.  the  Comforter  come,  he  shall  testify  0/  me 

18.  34.  or  did  others  loll  it  thee  of  me  ? 

.Ids  1. 4.  wait  for  the  promise  ye  have  heard  of  me 

23.  U.  as  thou  hast  testified  of  me  in  Jerusalem 

1  Cur.  4.  16.  he  ye  followers  ofmc,  11.1.  PAii.3.17. 
11.  24.  this  do  in  remembrance  ofmc,  25. 

15.  8.  last  of  all  he  was  seen  of  me  also 

16.  21.  the  salutation  of  me  Paul,  Col.  4.  18. 

2  Cor.  12.  6.  lest  any  should  think  of  me  above  that 

which  he  seclh  me  or  hcareth  of  mt 
Gal.  1.  11.  that  gospel  which  is  preached  of  me 
Phil.  4.  10.  your  care  of  me  hath  flourished 
2  Tim.  1.  8.  the  testimony  of  me  his  prisoner 
13.  sound  words,  which  thou  hast  heard  0/ me 
2.  2.  things  thai  thou  hast  heard  of  me,  commit 
Hcb.  10. 34.  he  had  compassion  of  me  in  my  bonda 

On  ME,  or  k;>071  ME. 
Gen.  18.27.1  have  la  ken  upon  mc  to  speak  to  L.31. 
20.  9.  that  thou  hast  brought  on  me  a  great  sin 
27. 12. 1  shall  bring  a  curse  vpon  me,  not  a  blessing 
13.  vponme  be  thy  cutse,  my  son,  only  obey  nw 
31.  35.  for  the  custom  of  women  is  vpon  me 
40. 14.  think  on  me  when  it  shall  be  well  with  thc« 
Judg.  15.  12.  ye  will  nol  fall  upon  me  yourselves 

19.  20.  howsoever,  let  all  thy  wants  lie  upon  me 
1  .Saw.  1.3.  12.  Philistines  will  come  down  upon  me 

25.24.  vpon  me,  my  bird,  upoji  me,  let  ibis  iniqui.  be 
2.*ram.I4.9.  iheiniquity  be  071  me,  and  father's  house 
I  Kings  2.  1.5.  that  all  Israel  set  their  faces  on  me 
1  Cliron.  21.  17.  let  ihy  hand,  I  pray  thee,  be  on  me 

28. 19.  understand  in  writing  by  his  hand  vponme 
Kiral.  28.  hand  of  the  Lord  upon  me,  J\cA.2. 8, 18. 
jVeA.  5.  19.  think  upon  mc,  my  God,  for  good 
Job  3.25.  which  I  greatly  feared  is  come  vpon  me 

4. 14. fear  came  vp.me  \\  6.28.be  content, look  vp.me 
7.  8.  thine  eyes  are  upon  me,  and  I  am  not 

10.  16.  thou  shew  est  thyself  marvellous  upon  me- 
16.  14.  he  runneth  upon  me  like  a  ginnt 

19.  21.  have  pity  upon  me,  O  ye  my  friends 
Ps.  4. 1.  have  niercv  upon  me,  6.  2.  |  9. 13.  ]  25  Ifl 
I  27.7:  130.10.  I  31.9.  I  51. 1.1  (-6.  16 
22. 17.  lell  my  bones,  they  look  and  stare  upon  me 
32.4.for  day  and  night  thy  hand  was  heavy  ti;7on  me 
40.  17.  I  am  poor,  yel  the  Lord  Ihinketh  vpon  me 
55.  3.  ihcy  cast  iniquity  vpon  nte,  and  hate  me 
56. 12.  thy  vows  are  upon  me,  I  will  render  praises 
91.  14.  because  he  hath  set  his  love  vpon  me 

15.he shall  call  up.  me  ||  119. 132.  look  ihou  up.  mi 
139.  5.  and  thou  hast  laid  thine  hand  vpon  me 
rant. I. O.look  not  upon  mc,sun  hath  looked  vponme 
Isa.  43. 22.  ihiiu  hast  not  called  upon  me,  O  Jacob 
51.  5.  the  isles  shall  wait  upon  me,  and  shall  trust 
61.  1.  Spirit  of  the  L.  God  is  upon  me,  Luke  4. 18 
.Jer.  13.  22.  wherefore  come  these  things  iz/ion  me? 

15.  t  16.  for  thy  name  is  called  upon  me,  O  Lord 
Lam.  3.  53.  and  they  have  cast  a  stone  vpon  me 
Ezrk.3. 14.  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  strong  iip.  me 

22.  was  there  upoTimc  ||8. 1.  hand  fell  there  vp.me 

11.  5.  Ihe  Spirit  of  the  Lord  fell  vpon  mc,  and  said 
;0. 22.  Iho  hand  of  L.  was  upon  me,  37.  1.  |  40.  1. 

Zrph.  3. 8.  therefore  wait  ye  upon  me  until  the  day 
ZcrA.6.8.thencried  he  upon  me  and  spake  unto  me 

11.  11.  the  poor  of  the  flock  that  waited  vpon  me 

12.  10.  they  shall  look  upon  me  whom  they  pierced 
Mat.  15.22.  have  mercv  upon  me,  thou  son  of  Dav. 

J»/ar4  10.  47,  48.  Luke  1-3.  38,  39. 

26. 10.  wrought  a  good  work  jipon  me.  Murk  14.6. 

I^ke  I.  25.  in  the  days  wherein  he  looked  on  me 

John  6.  35.  hothat  believethonme,47.  |7.  38.  1 12 

44,  46.  I  14.  12 

16.  9.  of  sin,  I)erause  they  believe  nol  on  mc 

17. 20.  who  shall  believe  on  mclhrough  their  word 
.'fctsS.  24.  that  none  of  those  things  come  upoTun* 
Horn.  15.  3.  that  reproached  thee  fell  on  mc 

1  Cor.  9.  16.  for  necessity  is  laid  upon  me 


ME 


ME 


S  Cor.  11.  28.  that  which  cometh  upon  me  daily 
l:i.  y.  that  the  power  ofClirist  may  rest  upun  me 
"hil.  '2.  -2'.  L'cit  Uod  had  mercy  on  inc  also 
lico.  I.  IT.  he  laid  his  right  hand  upun  mc,  saying 
Hee  Call. 
Ooer  ME. 
F.tod.  8.  9.  Moses  said  to  Pliaraoh,  glory  over  me 
JJeut.  17.  14.  shall  suy,  I  will  set  a  Iviiig  over  me 
Jut)  7.  12.  that  thou  setlest  a  watcli  ocer  me 
I'sal.  y.i.  2.  shall  mine  enemy  he  exalted  over  me 
IS).  13.  let  them  not  have  doniin.  over  me,  119. 133. 
2o.  2.  let  not  mine  enemies  triumph  over  me 

41.  Jl.  mine  enemy  doLli  not  triumph  uver  me 

42.  7.  thy  waves  and  billows  are  gone  over  me 
60.  t  8.  Fhilistia,  triumph  thou  over  me 

88.  10.  thy  fierce  wraih  goeth  over  me 
Cant.  2.  4.  and  his  banner  over  me  was  love 
Jonali  2.  3.  thy  billows  and  waves  passed  over  me 

To  or  iiiUo  ME. 
Gen.  4.  10.  thy  brother's  blood  crieth  unto  me 
15.3.  behold,  tu  mc  thou  hast  given  no  seed 
20.5.saidh(jnot  tin.  me  \\  21. 23.  swear  un.  jneby  G. 
24.  30.  saying,  thus  spake  the  man  unto  me 
SW.  27.  wherelore  come  ye  to  me,  seeing  ye  hate 
27.  20.  because  the  Lord  hath  brought  it  to  me 
29.  25.  what  is  this  thou  hast  done  anio  me? 
31.  9.  thus  God  hath  given  them  to  me 
32.9.  L.  which  saidstmtto  ?ne,return  to  thy  country 
34. 11.  what  ye  shall  say  unto  me,  i  will  give,  Mi. 
40.  14.  shew  kindness,  I  pray  thee,  unto  me 
46.  31.  and  my  father's  house  are  come  unto  me 
Kxotl.  3.9.  the  cryol'child.  of  Israel  is  come  u?ito  me 

4.  25.  surely  a  bloody  hushaiid  art  ihou  to  me 

5.  1.  may  hold  a  feast  unto  me  iu  the  wilderness 

6.  7.  and  I  will  tako  you  to  me  lor  a  people 
12.  children  of  Israel  have  not  hearkened  unto  me 

13.  2.  sanctify  unto  me  all  the  first-born 
14.15.  whereforecriestthouM7i(o(7(e?  speak  to  Isr. 
18.16.wlien  they  have  a  matter,  they  come  unto  me 
19.  5.  ye  shall  be  a  peculiar  treasure  unto  me 

6.  ye  shall  be  unto  me  a  kingdom  of  priests 
2iS.  23.  and  they  cry  at  all  uHto  //le,  I  will  hear,  27. 

29.  tirst-horn  of  thy  sons  shalt  thou  give  unto  ;hc 
31.  and  ye  shall  be  holy  men  unto  me,  nor  eat 
Od.  1.  lliiit  he  may  minister  unto  me,  3.  |  29.  1. 
I  30. 30.  I  40. 13.  Jer.  33.  22.  Ezek.  43.  19. 
32.06.let  him  come  Hn.mcl|33.12.thou  sayestun.mt 
34.  2.  present  thyself  theie  to  me  in  the  mount 
Jigv.  25.  55.  for  unto  me  Israel  are  servants 
JJeut.iH.  15.  of  bretli.  like  un.  me,  Jlcts  3. 22.  |  7. 37. 
32.35.eu  mebelongeth  vengeance  and  reconipence 
Judg,  11.7.  why  are  ye  come  unto  me  now,  when 
15.  11.  as  they  did  un.  mc,  so  have  I  done  to  them 

17.  10.  and  be  vnto  me  a  father  and  a  priest 
Hutk  1.  17.  the  Lord  do  so  to  me  and  more  also, 

2  Sam.  3.  3;>.  |  19.  13.  1  Kings  2.  23. 

1  fiam.  9.  10.  because  their  cry  is  come  unto  me 
10.  3.  anoint  K/i<o  me  him  whom  I  name  unto  thee 

18.  8.  and  to  mc  they  ascribed  but  thousands 

2  .Sam.  1. 2().  very  pleasant  hast  thou  been  unto  mc 
12.  23.  go  to  him,  but  he  shall  not  return  to  me 

•  1.5.  4.  that  every  man  might  come  untj)  mc 

1  Kin^s  2.  5.  thou  knowest  what  Joab  did  to  mc 

19.  2.  so  let  the  gods  do  to  me  and  more,  20.  10. 
22.  14.  what  Lord  saith  unto  me  that  will  I  speak 

2  Kings  5. 7.  send  un.  mc  to  rccov.a  man  of  leprosy 
8.  let  him  come  now£o?ne||  0.31.  G.  do  so  to  me 

9.  12.  thus  and  thus  spake  he  to  me,  saying 

10.  0.  and  como  td  me  to  Jezreel  by  to-morrow 
22.  15.  ti'll  man  that  sent  you  to  me,  2  Chr.  34.  23. 

1  Chron.  13.  12.  how  bring  ark  of  God  home  tomel 

2  Chron.  18. 17.  he  would  not  prophesy  good  un.mc 
F.ira  7.  2-1.  and  hath  extended  mercy  unto  me 

9. 4.  then  were  assembled  unto  me  every  one  that 
JVfA.  1.  9.  but  if  ye  turn  un.me  and  keep  my  com. 
Jnti  3.25.  that  which  I  was  afraid  of,  is  come  un.  me 

7.  3.  and  wearisome  nights  are  appointed  to  me 

13.20.  only  do  not  two  things  un.  mc,  then  not  hide 

29.21.  un.mc  gave  caril40.  7.  declare  un.  me,  42.4. 
Ps.  16. 6.  lines  are  fallen  unto  me  in  pleasant  places 

17. 6. 0  G.  incline  thine  oar  un.  me,  31. 2.  |  102.  2. 
M.  16.  turn  thee  un.  me||  28.  1.  be  not  silent  tome 
88.  U.  be  merciful  unto  me,  41.  4,  10.  |  .50.  1. 
1-57.  1.  I  80.  3.  I  119.  ,58,  132. 
40. 1.  he  inclined  un.  me  and  heard  my  cry,  77.  1. 
5<i.  4.  I  will  not  fenr  what  flesh  can  do  unto  me 
II.  not  benfraiil  what  man  can  do  unto  me,118  C 
81.  B.  O  Israel,  if  thou  wilt  hearken  unto  me 
89.20.  he  shrill  cry  vnto  me,  thou  art  my  father 
101.2.  O  when  wiitihiui  comown.  me?  I  will  walk 
122. 1. 1  was  glad  when  they  said  i;n.  me,  let  ua  go 
139.  17.  how  precious  are  thy  thoughts  unto  me  ' 
141.  1.  Lord,  I  cry  iinio  thee,  make  hiisle  iinfomc 
Prnv.  1.  33.  whoso  lienrki^nelh  unto  mr  shall  dwell 
24.  29.  I  will  Ho  on  to  him  as  he  hath  done  to  me 
F.ccl.  2.  1.5.  ns  to  fool,  so  it  hapjicneih  oven  to  mr 
Cant.  1.  13.  bundle  of  myrrh  isniy  helov.  i/n.me,14. 
ha.  1.  13.  incense  is  nn  nhomiiialion  unin  me 

14.  your  new  moons,  they  are  a  trouble  unto  me 
21.  11.  ho  callcth  to  me  out  of  Scir,  watchman 
376 


Isa.  29.  2.  and  it  shall  be  unto  mc  as  Ariel 

44.  22.  return  unto  mc,  for  1  have  redeemed  thee 

45.  22.  look  un.  mc,  and  be  ye  saved,  all  the  ends 
'S3,  unto  me  every  knee  shall  bow,  every  tongue 

50.  8.  mine  adversary,  let  him  come  near  to  me 
54.9.  for  this  is  as  the  waters  of  iNoah  unto  mc 
05.  5.  come  not  near  to  me,  1  am  holier  than  tliuu 

Jer.  4.1.  if  thou  wilt  return,  return  O  Israel  unto  me 
11.11.  tho'  they  shall  cry  unto  me,  1  will  not  hear 

12.  8.  mine  heritage  is  unto  me  as  a  lion,  9. 

13.  11.  that  they  might  be  unto  me  for  a  people 
15.lt).  thy  word  was  unto  me  the  joy  of  mine  heart 

16.  wilt  thou  be  al'ogether  unto  me  as  a  liar  ! 
23.  14.  they  are  all  of  them  unto  me  as  Sodom 

32.  31.  this  city  hath  been  tu  me  a  jirovocation 

33.  9-  it  shall  be  to  me  a  name  of  joy,  u  praise 
49.  4.  that  trusted,  saying,  who  shad  come  unto  me 

51.  35.  the  viuleiicu  done  tu  me  be  upon  Babylon 
Lam.  1.  21.  and  they  shall  be  like  untu  me 

22.  and  do  to  llieni  as  thou  hast  done  unto  mc 
.EzeAr. 16.20.  thy  sons  whom  thou  hast  born  untu  me 

22.  18.  the  house  of  Israel  is  to  mc  become  dross 

23.  38.  moreover  this  they  have  done  untu  me 
2<i.  2.  aha,  she  is  broken,  she  is  turned  unto  me 
44.  13.  to  do  the  office  of  a  priest  unto  me 

15.they  shall  come  near  to  me  to  minister  unto  mc 
Dan.  2.  30.  this  secret  is  not  revealed  to  me 
4.  30.  my  reason  returned  u.me,  lords  sought  u.  me 
Ho.i.  2.  19. 1  will  betroth  thee  unto  me  for  ever,  20. 

23.  and  I  will  sow  her  unto  me  in  the  earth 

3.  2.  so  I  bought  h(!r  to  me  for  fifteen  jiieces 

4.  0.  reject  thee,  thou  shalt  be  no  priest  to  me 
7.7.  there  is  none  among  them  that  calletliu7ito  me 

14.  they  have  not  cried  unto  me  with  their  heart 

8.2.  Isr.  shall  cry  unto  nie,  my  God,  we  know  thee 
Amos  9.  7.  are  ye  not  as  Ethiopians  u7ito  me  7 
J\lic.  5.  2.  out  of  thee  shall  come  forth  unto  me 

7.  8.  when  in  darkness,  L.  shall  be  a  light  unto  me 
Hah.".\.\  will  watch  to  see  what  he  will  say  un.  mc 
Hag.  2.  17.  I  smote  you,  yet  ye  turned  not  to  me 
Zfch.  1.  3.  turn  ye  unto  me,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts 

7.  5.  did  ye  at  all  fast  unto  mc,  even  to  me  ? 
.Vdt. 3.14. baptized  of  thee,  and  comest  thou  to  me 

7. 22.  many  will  say  to  me  in  that  day.  Lord,  Lord 

11.  28.  come  tinto  me  all  ye  that  labour  and  are 
14.18.  bring  them  to  mc,  17. 17.  |  21.2.  Marl;  9. 19. 
19.14. forbid  them  not  to  come  un.me,  JV/«ri  10.14. 
25. 30.  and  ye  came  u.me||40.ye  have  done  it  u.  me 

45.  as  ye  did  it  not  to  these,  ye  did  it  not  to  mc 
28.  18.  all  |)0wer  is  given  untu  me  in  heaven 
Luke  1.  38.  let  it  be  unto  mc  according  to  thy  word 
4.0-  all  this  power,  for  that  is  delivered  unto  me 
0.  47.  whoso  Cometh  to  me,  and  heareth,  14.  2,'. 

10.  22.  all  things  are  delivered  tome  of  my  Father 

18.  13.  God  be  merciful  to  mc  a  sinner 
./tihn  5.  40.  ye  will  not  come  tu  me  to  have  life 

0.35.  he  that  Cometh  to  mesliall  never  hunger,  .37. 

44.110  man  can  come  tu  7nee.\ceptFath.draw,65. 

45.  hath  learned  of  the  Father  cometh  unto 
7.  37.  if  any  thirst,  let  him  come  unto  me  and  drink 

12.  32.  if  lifted  up,  I  will  draw  all  men  unto  me 
.50.  even  as  the  Father  said  unto  me,  so  1  speak 

19.  10.  Pilate  said,  speakest  thou  not  unto  me  ! 
Jicts  1.  8.  and  ye  shall  be  witnesses  uuto  me 

2.  28.  hast  made  known  u7rto  mc  the  ways  of  life 
9.  15.  go  thy  way,  for  he  is  a  chosen  vessel  to  7«c 

11.  ,5.  a  vessel  descend,  and  it  came  even  to  me 
26.  14.  I  heard  a  voice  speaking  uTito  me,  saying 

A'om.7.13.was  thatwhicli  is  good  made  dealliH.r/je? 
12.3.  through  the  grace  given  un.  mr,  1  Cor.  3.  10. 

1  Cur.  ().  12.  all  things  are  lawful  u7jto  7ne,  but  all 
9.  15.  that  it  should  be  so  done  unto  me 

10.  woe  is  unto  me  if  I  preach  not  the  gospel 
17.di3pensaiion  of  the  gospel  is  committed  un.tnc 
14.  11.  and  he  shall  bi;  a  barbarian  unto  mc 
10.9.  an  ellectual  door  is  open.  uti.  »ne,2  Cor.2.12. 

2  Cur.  11.9.  for  that  which  was  lacking  to  me 
f;n?.2.0.wlial  they  were,  it  inakoth  no  matter  to  mc 

4.15.  plucked  out  eyes,  and  have  given  ihein  to  me 
K/)A.3.8.Hntomewho  am  Icsslhan  least  of  all  saints 
Phil.  1.21.  fur  to  me  to  live  is  Christ,  to  die  is  gain 

3. 1.  to  mr  indeed  is  not  grievous,  but  for  you  safe 
7. but  what  things  were  gain  to  me,Ihosc  counted 
Col.  4.  1 1.  which  have  bi;en  a  comfort  unto  me 
2  Tim.  4.8.  not  to  ;neonly  ||  11.  is  profitable  to  mc 
Philem.  II.  but  now  priifitnble  to  thee  and  to  mc 
lO.esperiiilly  to  mr  \\  19.  thou  owesi  to  me  thyself 
//■eft. 10.30. vengeii nee  belongeth  unto  me,  saith  Ld. 

13.  0.  I  will  not  fear  what  man  shall  do  unto  mc 

Toward  MF,. 
^en.  31.  .5.  countenance  is  not  to7rnr(/7ne  as  before 
Psal.  80.  13.  for  great  is  thy  mercy  toward  me 

IIR.  12.  render  for  all  his  henefils  toward  me 
Cant.l.W.  I  am  my  Ilrlovcd's,  bis  desire  is  tow.  mr 
fsii.  29.  13.  their  fear  toward  me  is  taught  by  men 

63.  15.  and  the  sounding  of  thy  bowels  and  mer- 
cies toward  mr 
Dnn.  4.  2.  thai  the  high  God  hath  wrniighl  t.  mr 
2  Cor.  7. 7.  he  tolil  us  your  ferv.Mit  mind  toward  mr 
Phil. '2.  30.  supply  your  lack  of  service  toward  mt 


Under  ME. 
2Sam.22.  37.  enlarged  my  steps  u.  me,  Psal.  18.36 
40.  thou  hast  subdued  under  me,  }'sal.  Id.  39. 
48.  bnnguth  down  the  people  und.  me,  J-'s.  18.47. 
JVe/t.  2.  14.  for  the  beast  that  was  under  mc  Iu  pasi 
Psal.  144.  2.  who  subduelh  my  people  under  me 
Mat.  a.  9.  having  soldiers  under  me,  hulce  7.  8. 

nitk  ME. 
Gen.  12.13.  that  it  may  be  well  with  me  for  thy  sake 
28.20.  if  G. will  be  w.  me  and  kecji  me,  Jush.  14.  12 

30.  29.  thou  knowest  how  thy  cattle  was  with  ma 

31.  5.  the  God  of  my  father  hath  been  with  me 
32.  discern  thou  what  is  thine  with  me,  and  take 

3y.7.and  she  said,  lie  with,  me,  12, 14. 2  ia77t.  13.11. 
43.  8.  send  lad  with  me  \\  44.  34.  lad  be  not  with  me 
Eiod.  17.2.  why  chide  ye  withme,  why  tempt  Ld.1 
20.23.  ye  shall  not  make  with  vie  gods  of  silver 
33.  15.  il  thy  presence  go  not  u;itA  me,  carry  us  not 
J^ev.  20.  t  21.  if  ye  walk  at  all  adventures  with  me 
J^'um.  11.  1.5.  if  thou  deal  thus  with  me,  kill  me 
Drul.  32.  34.  is  not  this  laid  up  in  store  with  mi? 
39.tliat  I,  even  1,  am  he,  and  there  is  noG.  w.  me 
Josh.  8.  5.  I  and  all  the  people  that  are  with  me 
.ludg.  4.  8.  if  thou  wilt  go  with  me  then  I  will  go 
7.  IS.  I  and  all  that  are  witli.  mc,  then  Ijjow  ye 
11. 12.  saying,  what  hast  lliou  to  do  with  me? 

16.  15. 1  love  thee,  when  thy  heart  is  not  with  me 
17.2.behold,  thesilv.  is  with  me\\  lO.dwell  withme 

liuth  1.8.  as  ye  have  dealt  uj.7ne  ||  11.  wliygoic.  7h« 

1  Ham.  9. 19.  go  up,  lor  ye  shall  eat  with  me  to-day 
17.9.  if  he  be  able  to  fight  with  me  and  to  kill  me 

22.  23.  but  with  me  thou  shall  be  in  safeguard 
24.  18.  iiow  that  thou  hast  dealt  well  witli  me 
28. 19.  to-morrow  shalt  thou  and  :hy  suns  be  w.  me 

2  Sam.  19.25.  wli»;refore  wentest  not  thou  ie7tA  7;ic? 
33.  I  will  feed  thee  with  me  in  .lerusalem 

23.  5.  hath  made  with  me  an  everlasting  covenant 

1  Chr.  4.  10.  that  thine  hand  niight  be  with  me 

2  CAr.2.3.even  so  deal  w.mc  ||  7.  are  w.  me  in  Judah 
35.  21.  from  meddling  wiih  God,  who  is  with  mt 

Job  9.  35.  and  not  fear,  but  il  is  not  so  with  me 
2:1.  t  10.  but  he  knoweth  the  way  that  is  with  we 

28.  14.  and  the  sea  saiih,  it  is  not  with  me 

29.  5.  when  the  Almighty  was  yet  with  me 
r.s-.7.4.tliat  was  at  peace  «'.7ne  |]  23.4. Ihou  art  w.mt 

42.  8.  in  the  night  his  song  shall  be  with  me 

50.  5.  those  that  have  made  a  covenant  with  me 

1  11.  the  wild  beasts  of  the  field  are  with  me 
55. 18.  he  delivered,  for  there  were  many  withme 
101.  0.  the  faithful,  that  they  may  dwell  with  vie 
1 19.  98.  thy  commands,  for  they  are  ever  wilA  me 
Proi).8.18.richesand  honour  are  7e.me,yea, durable 
Cant.  4.8.come  70itA  7ne  from  Lebanon,  my  spouso 
Jsa.  27.  .5.  and  he  shall  make  peace  leitA  tne 
,50.  8.  who  will  contend  with  me,  let  us  stand 
63.  3.  of  the  people  there  was  none  with  me 
Jrr.  20.  1 1.  the  Loid  is  with  me  as  a  mighty  one 
26.14.do7r(tA  r/ie  as  seemetli  good  and  meet  to  you 
Dan.  10.  21.  none  holdelh  with  mr  but  Michael 
//«.«.  2.  7.  for  then  it  was  belter  with  me  than  now 
.loel  3.  4.  yea,  und  what  have  ye  to  do  with  mt? 
Mal.'i.  6.  he  walked  with  mc  in  |)race  and  equity 
J/ttt. 12. 30.  he  that  is  not  jeitA  me  is  against  me,  ho 
that  gathereth  not  leitA  7ne,  J.uke  11.  23. 
18. 20  Lord,  have  patience  uJitA  7ne,  I  will  pay, 29. 
20.  13.  didst  not  thou  agree  !citA  mc  for  a  jienny  ? 
20.38.he  said,  tarry  ye  heie,and  wuicli  ujj'tA  J7ie,  40. 
I.uke  11.7.  und  my  children  are  uiitA  me  in  bed 
15.  6.  saying,  njoice  with  me,  9.  Phil.  2.  18. 
31.son,  thou  art  ever  iritA  me  ||  22.  21.  with  me  on 

22.  28.  ye  are  they  which  have  continued  u^itA  me 

23.  43.  to-day  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in  puriirtisu 
.7oA»  8.29.  he  that  sent  me  is  witA  me,  the  Father 

13. 8.  if  I  wash  thee  not,  Ihou  hast  no  part  leitA  mc 
18.  he  that  eutelh  bread  lertA  me  lialli  lifted  up 

15.  27.  have  been  with  me  from  the  beginning 
10.  32.  am  not  alone,  because  the  Father  joitA  7h« 

17.  24.  lh.it  they  also  be  with  me  where  I  am 
Jicts  20.  34.  ministered  to  tlieii\,that  were  leitA  mt 

22.9.  ihey  that  were  joi'tA  Tne  saw  the  light,  11. 
Worn.  7.21. 1  would  do  good,  evil  is  present  leitA  mt 

15.  30.  strive  with  me  in  your  prayers  to  GiwI 

1  Tor.  4.  3.  hilt  with  mi  it  is  a  very  small  thing 
15.  10.  but  the  grace  of  God  that  was  »itA  7ne 
16.4. if  it  be  meet  that  I  go,  Ihey  shall  go  u-itA  nte 

2  Cur.  1.  17.  that  with  me  there  slioiihl  be  yoa,  yea 
Phil.  1. 1  7.  yc  are  all  partakers  jritA  me  ol'grace 

2.  22.  ho  hath  served  with  me  in  the  gospel 

23  so  soon  as  I  shall  see  how  it  w  ill  go  jn'tA  me. 
4.3.  women,  who  laboured  with  mc  in  the  gospei 
15.nochiirrh  communicated  with  me1>ut  yc  only 
2  Tim. 4. 11. only  Lukoisie.7ne||10.  none  stood  ic.  me 
17.  the  Lord  stood  jeitA  7ne  and  strengthened  me 
Philrm.  13.  whom  I  woiilil  have  retained  with  me 
/ter.  3.4.  they  shall  walk  with  mr  in  white,  for  they 

20.  will  come  mid  sup  with  him,  and  he  with  mo 

21.  will  I  grunt  to  sit  with  mr  in  my  'hrv-ne 
22. 12. 1  come  quiiklv,  and  my  reward  is  w.  me 

IVithm  ME. 
Joh  C.  4.  the  arrows  of  the  Almighty  are  U'thin  nu 


MEA 

.'ob  19.27.lliough  my  reins  be  consumed  within  me 
32.  18.  llie  spirit  wit/nit  vie  conHirumelii  mo 
Psal.  3y.  3.  heart  was  hoi  williin  me,  while  musing 
•J2.  ti.  O  my  God,  my  soul  is  cast  down  within  me 

11.  why  art  thou  disquieted  within  me  ?  i',i.  5. 
.51.  10.  O  God,  renew  a  ligiit  spirit  within  me 
94.  19.  in  llie  miiltilude  oliny  tlioughls  within  me 
103.1.  and  all  that  is  within  inc  bless  his  holy  name 
H2.3.my  spiritwas  overwhelmed  within  mc,l4\iA. 
Jsa.  26.  i>.  with  my  spirit  within  me  will  I  seek  thee 
Jcr.  23.9.  my  heart  within  me  is  broken  because  of 
y>ain.l.20.my  lieart  is  turned  within  me,  Hos.  11. 8. 
Jonah  2.  7.  when  mv  soul  tainted  within  me 

Without  ME. 
/>o.  10.  4.  without  me  they  shall  bow  down  under 
John  15.  5.  lor  without  me  ye  can  do  nothing 

MEADOW. 
Gen.  41.2.  came  out  ofa  river,  and  they  fed  in  a  m. 

WEADOWB. 
Judg.  20.  33.  came  even  out  of  the  m.  of  Gibeali 

MEAL-TIME. 
Rutit  2.  14.  at  7n.-time  come  thou  hither  and  cat 

MEAL. 
JVtim.  5. 15.  the  tenth  part  of  an  ephah  of  barley  m. 
2  Kin^s  4.  41.  bring  m.  and  cast  it  into  the  pot 

1  Chron.  12.  40.  they  that  were  nigh  brought  m. 
Isa.  47. 2.  take  the  millstones  and  grind  m.  uncover 
Jios-S.'.  it  hath  no  stalk,  the  hud  shall  yield  no  m. 

See  B.iRREL,  Measures. 
MEAN,  rerb. 
Gev.  21.  29.  what  m.  these  seven  ewe-Iambs'? 
Kzod.  12.  2ti.  what  m.  ye  by  this  service  1 
/)rai.().20.tliy  son  asketli  what  7«.  the  testimonies? 
Josh.  4.  C.  ask,  what  jk.  ye  by  these  stones'?  21. 
Jsa.  3.  15.  what  in.  ye  that  ye  beat  my  people'? 
F.zek.  17.  12.  know  yo  not  what  these  things  in.7 

18.  2.  what  ?«.  ye,  that  ye  use  this  proverb  ? 
.VarA  9.10.  what  the  rising  from  tlii;dead  should  ?n. 
■dcts  10.  17.  doubted  what  this  vision  should  m. 

17.  20.  we  would  know  what  these  things  m. 

21.  13.  what  m.  ye  to  weep  and  break  my  heart 

2  Cot.  8.  13.  I  m.  not  that  other  men  be  eased 

ME.\N,  Adjective. 
Prov.  22.  20.  he  shall  not  stand  before  m.  men 
fsa.  2.  9.  the  m.  man  boweth  down,  the  great  man 
5.  15.  and  the  m.  man  shall  be  brought  down 
31.  8.  the  sword  not  ofa  m.  man  shall  devour 
j?cfs  21.  39.  who  am  a  citizen  of  no  jn.  cily 
Horn.  12.  1  16.  but  condescend  to  in.  things 

MEAN  TIME. 
/.uAe  Vi.l.tn.timc  when  were  gathered  a  multitude 

MEAN  WHILE. 
1  lyings  13.45.  m.  while  the  heaven  was  black  vi'ith 
John  4.  31.  in  the  m.  while  his  discii)les  prayed  him 
Horn.  2.  15.  their  thoughts  the  m.  while  accusing 

,    MEANS. 
F.xod.  34. 7.  will  by  no  vi.  clear  guilty,  J^um.  14. 18. 
Judg.  5.  22.  broken  by  the  m.  of  the  prancings 
10.  5.  by  what  m.  we  may  prevail  ag.Tinst  him 
2.Sa7«.]4.14.yetdotli  he  devise  m.that  his  banished 
1  A'ings  20.  39.  if  by  any  ///.  he  be  missing,  then 
Kzra  4.  IG.  by  this  m.  thou  shalt  have  no  portion 
Fsal.  49.7.  none  can  by  a^'  m.  redeem  his  brother 
I'rov.  0.  2G.  for  by  m.  ofa  whorish  woman  a  man 
Jr.  5.  31.  and  the  priests  bear  rule  by  their  m. 
Mai.  1.  9.  this  hath  been  by  your  m. 
.Vat.  5.  26.  thou  shalt  by  no  m.  come  out  thence 
Jytike  5.  18.  tliey  sought  m.  to  bring  him  in 

10.  19.  and  nothing  shall  by  any  m.  hurt  you 
.hhn  9.  21.  by  what  m.  he  now  seeth  we  know  not 
jicls  4.  9.  if  be  examined  by  what  m.  he  is  whole 

18.21. 1  must  by  all  7«.keep  this  feast  in  Jirnsaleni 
27.  12.  if  by  any  m.  they  might  attain  to  Phenice 
Rom.  1.  10.  if  by  any  m.  I  might  have  a  journey 

11.  14.  by  any  m.  I  may  provoke  to  emulation 

1  Cor.  8.  9.  take  heed,  lest  by  any  m.  this  liberty 
9.  22.  that  I  might  by  all  m.  save  some 

27.1estby  any  m.  when  I  have  preached  to  others 

2  Cor.  1.  11.  by  m.  of  many,  thanks  may  be  given 
4.  t  8.  yet  not  altogether  without  m. 

11.  3.  I  fear,  lest  by  any  m.  as  the  serpent 
GaL  2.  2.  lest  by  any  m.  I  should  run  in  vain 
Phil.  3.  n.  if  by  any  m.  I  attain  to  ihe  resurrection 

1  Thess.  3.  5.  lest  by  some  m.  the  tempter  templed 

2  The.is.  2.  3.  let  no  man  deceive  you  by  any  m. 
3. 16.  G.  of  peace  give  you  peace  always  by  all  m. 

ffcb.  9. 15.  that  by  m.  oideatli  Ihoy  who  ar(!  called 
Rev.  13. 14.  deceiveth  them  hv  m.  of  those  miracles 

MEANEST. 
Crer).  33.  8.  what  m.  thou  by  nil  this  drove  T  met? 
2 Sam.  16.2.  what  m.  thou  by  these?  E:ek.:ri.  18. 
J'o7(aA1.6.  wl>at7n  thou,  O  sleeper,  arise, call  on  G. 

MEANETH. 
Deut.  29. 24.  what  m.  the  heat  of  this  great  anger? 
1  Sam.  4.  6.  what  m.  the. noise  of  this  shoui  7  14. 
15.  14.  whatm.  then  this  bleating  of  ll.e  sheep? 
ha.  10.  7.  liowbcit  he  m.  not  so,  nor  doth  Iliink  so 
J\Iat.  9.  13.  hut  go  ye,  and  learn  what  that  m. 

12.  7.  bat  if  ye  had  known  what  this  m. 

/Hrli  2.  12.  saying  one  to  another,  vhatm.  this? 
377 


MEA 

MEANING 
Dan.  8.  15.  when  1  Daniel  bad  sought  for  the  m. 
1  Cor.  14.  11.  if  1  know  not  the  7ii.  of  the  voice 

MEANING. 

Acts  27.2.  welaunche(l,7;(.toBailby  coasts  of  Asia 
MEANT. 

Oe7i.  50. 20.  but  God  );(.  it  to  good,  to  bring  to  pass 

Luke  15.  26.  and  asked  what  these  things  m. 
18.36.  hearing  muliitudepass  by,  asked  what  it 771. 
MEASUKE 

Signifies,  [1]  Some  certain  vessel  fixed  and  agreed 
upon,  whereby  to  estimate  the  quantity  or  ca- 
pacity of  things,  Prov.  20.  10.  Mic.  6.  10.  ['Z] 
The  hcighth,  breadth,  and  length  of  the  thing 
measured,  Ezek.40.  10.  [3J  Jl  stinted  portion 
or  allowance,  Ezek.  4.  11.  [4]  'J'he  period  or 
end  of  one's  life,  Psal.  39.  4.  [5]  Aloderation, 
Jcr.  30.  11.  1  41).  28.  [6]  Limit  or  boundary, 
Jer.'51.  13.  [7]  A  certain  proportion,  resem- 
blance, or  degree,  F.ph.  4. 13.  [8]  'J'o  take  the 
dimensions  of  land,  cities,  buildings, ^-c.  Num. 
35.  5.  Ezek.  40.  5.  [9]  To  repay,  or  reward, 
Isa.  65.  7. 

F.xod.  26.  2.  the  curtains  shall  have  one  m.  8. 

Lev.  19.  .'is.  ye  shall  do  no  unrighteousness  in  m. 

Deut.  25.  15.  and  a  just  m.  shalt  thou  have 

1  /t'77in's6.  25.cubits  one7n.  ||  7.37.bu6eshadone7H. 

2  Kings!.  1.  a77i.of  fine  fiour  sold  for  ashek.  16,18. 

1  Chr.  11. 1 23.  he  slew  an  Egyptian,  a  man  of  777. 
JV*<7/.  3. 1 11.  Malohijah  repairer!  the  second  771. 
Job  11.  9.  the  m.  thereof  is  longer  than  the  earth 

28.  25.  and  he  weigheth  the  waters  by  771. 
Psal.  39.  4.  make  me  to  know  the  771.  of  my  days 

80.  .5.  thou  givest  them  tears  to  drink  in  great  m. 
Isa.  5.  14.  hell  opened  her  mouth  without  7)7. 

27.  8.  in  771.  when  it  shooteth  forth,  wilt  debate 

40.  12.  comprehended  the  dust  of  earth  in  a  m. 
Jer.  30.  11.  but  I  will  correct  thee  in  777.  46.  28. 

51. 13.  the  end  is  come,  and  777.  of  thy  covetousness 
Kzrk.  4.  11.  thou  shalt  drink  water  by  m.  16. 
Mic.  6.  10.  and  scant  771.  that  is  abominable 
Mat.  7.  2.  with  what  777.  you  mete,  it  shall  be 
measured  to  you  again,  Mark  4.24.  Luke(J.2S. 

23.  32.  fill  ye  up  then  the  771.  of  your  fathers 
Mark  6.  51.  and  they  were  amazed  beyond  m. 

7.  37.  and  were  beyond  7)!.  astonished,  10.  26. 
Luke  6.  38.  good  777.  pressed  down  and  shaken 
John  3.  34.  God  giveth  not  the  Spirit  by  777. 
Rom.  12.  3.  as  God  dealt  to  every  man  the  777. 

2  Cor.  1.  8.  that  we  were  pressed  out  of  777. 

10. 13.  we  will  not  boast  of  things  without  our  7/1. 
but  according  to  the  771.  of  Ihe  rule,  14, 15. 

11.  23.  in  stripe?  above  771.  in  prisons  frei|uent 

12.  7.  and  lest  I  shoukl  be  e.\alted  above  771. 
Oal.  I.  13.  beyond  777.  I  persecuted  the  church 
F.ph.  4.7.  accordmg  I0  the  777.  of  the  gift  of  Christ 

13.  to  the  777.  of  ihe  stature  ofthe  fulness  ofChrist 

16.  the  elfectual  working  in  the  771.  of  every  part 
Rrv.  0.6.  a  voice  saying,  a  m.  of  wheat  for  a  penny 

21.  17.  .according  to  the  m.  ofa  man,  that  is 
MEASURE,  Ferb. 
J\rum.  35.  5.  ye  shall  m.  from  without  the  city 
7Jf7(f.21.  2.  they  shall  m.  to  the  cities  round  about 
Isa.  65.  7.  I  will  777.  their  former  work  into  bosom 
F.zck.  43.  10.  and  let  them  m.  the  pattern 
Zech.  2.  2.  a  measuring-line  to  771.  Jerusalem 
Reij.  II.  1.  rise  and  m.  the  temple  of  God 
2.  the  court  without  leave  out  and  m.  not 
21.  15.  he  had  a  jnlden  reed  to  777.  the  city 

MEASURED. 
Ruth  3.  15.  ho  777.  si.\  measures^  barley 
2  Sam.  8.  2.  771.  with  a  line,  witKwo  lines  771.  he 
1  Kings  17.  t  21.  he  m.  himself  on  the  child 
.lob  7.  t  4.  I  say,  when  shall  the  evening  be  777.? 
Isa.  40.  12.  who  771.  waters  in  hollow  of  his  hand? 
.Irr.  31.  37.  if  heaven  above  can  be  777. 
33.  22.  as  the  sand  of  the  sea  cannot  he  m. 
Ezek.  40.  5.  he  m.  the  brcadih  ofthe  building 
6.  777.  the  threshold  ||  8.  he  777.  also  the  porch,  9. 
11.  he  771.  the  entry  ||  13. 771.  the  gate  ||  24.  posts 

41.  5.  771.  the  wall  ||  13.  he  m.  the  house 
15.  he  771.  the  length  ofthe  building 

42.  16  he  777.  the  east-side  wilh  a  measuring  reed 

17.  ho  m.  north-side  ||  IS.  south  |1  19.  we»t-sidi; 
47.  3.  and  he  777.  a  thousand  cubits,  4. 

//■(7.5.1.10.shall  be  as  sand  of  sea  which  cannot  be  771. 
Jfnb.  3.  6.  he  stood  and  7ft.  the  earth,  he  beheld 
Mat.l  2.with  what  measure  you  mete  it  shall  bo  m. 
to  you  again.  Murk  4.  24.  Luke  6.  38. 
Rev.  21.  16.  he  771.  the  city  ||  17.  he  tti.  the  wall 

MEASURES. 
Oen.  13.  fi.  make  ready  three  777.  of  fine  meal 
Dent.  25,  14.  thou  shalt  not  have  divers  771. 
1  S/J77I.25.  18.  Abigail  took  five  771.  of  parched  corn 
1  Kings  4.22.  Solomon's  provision  for  one  day  was 

thirty  m.  of  flmir,  and  sixty  771.  of  meal 
S.n.Solomongave  Hiram  twcniv  thousand  »7i.  of 
wheat,  and  twenty  777.  of  pure  oil,  2  CAro77.2.]0. 
7.  9.  according  to  the  m.  of  hewed  Btonej,  11. 
18.  32.  m  grsat  as  would  conlain  two  m.  of  seed 
3D 


MEA 

1  Chron.  23.  29.  for  til  manner  of  ?n.  and  sizo 
Lira  7.  22.  it  be  done  to  a  hundred  vi.  of  wheat 
Job  38.  5.  who  hath  laid  the  m.  llieieol,  ilknowesf 
>V(;(7.20.1O.divers  7/1.  are  like  abouiiiiaiiou  to  Lord 
Jer.  13.  25.  this  is  the  portion  of  thy  7«. 

i'ze/i.  40. 24.  Ihe  arches  according  to  these  77»  29 
28.  he  measured  gale  according  lo  Uieue  m.  32 

43.  13.  and  these  are  the  771.  of  llie  altar 

48.  16.  these  are  the  7«.  ot  the  ptolane  place 
hag.  2.  16.  to  a  heap  of  20" 771.  there  were  but  ten 
Mat.  13.  33.  Iiid  in  three  /n.  of  meal,  J.,uke  13.  21. 
Luke  16.  6.  and  he  said,  a  hundred  m.  of  oil 
7.  how  much  owesl?  he  said,  ahuud.j/i.  of  wheal 
dec  Barley. 
MEASURING. 
.7er.  31.  39.  the  7/1.  line  shall  yet  go  forth  on  Gareb 
Ezek.  40.  3.  there  was  a  man  with  u  m.  reed,  5 
42.  15.  now  when  he  had  made  an  end  of  7/1. 
16.  he  measured  with  a  jti.  reed,  17,  18,  19. 
Zech.  2.  1.  a  man  with  a  771.  line  in  his  hand 

2  Cur.  10.  12.  the  j;i.  themselves  by  Ihemselvea 

MEAT 

Signifies,  [1]  Provisions  of  any  sort  for  bodily 
nourishment,  Luke  24.  41.  [2]  Jesus  Christ 
crucified,  when  being  applied  by  faith,  is  the. 
true  and  real  food  which  nourishelh  the  soul  to 
eternal  life,  John  6.  55.  [3]  Spiritual  com- 
fort, that  is  sweeter,  more  pleasant  and  de- 
lightful than  food,  John  4.  32,  34.  [4J  The 
table  whereon  meat  is  sit,  Luke  22.  27.  [5] 
The  product  and  fruits  of  tite  field  which  should 
be  for  food,  Joel  1.  16.  Hub.  3.  17..  [li]  Tka 
doctrines  of  the  gospel,  or  mystifies  of  re 
ligion,  lleb.  5.  14.  [7]  Ceremonial  ordinances. 
Hub.  13.  9. 

Gc7i.  1.  29.  to  you  it  shall  be  for  m. 

30.  to  every  beast  I  have  given  every  lierb  for  171. 
9.  3.  every  moving  thing  shall  be  m.  for  you 

27.  4.  make  me  savoury  7/1.  such  as  1  love,  7. 

31.  Esau  also  made  savoury  771.  and  brought  it 
45.  23.  bread  and  m.  lor  his  lather  by  the  way 

Lev.  11.  34.  of  ail  771.  which  may  be  eaten,  lliat 
22. 11.  that  is  botn  in  his  house,  shall  eat  of  his  771. 

13.  she  shall  eat  of  her  father's  771. 
25. 6.  (he  sabbath  ofthe  hind  shall  be  771.  for  you,  7 
Deut.  2.  6.  ye  shall  buy  771.  of  them  for  money 
28.  thou  shalt  sell  me  mi.  for  money  to  eat 
20.  20.  thou  shalt  destroy  trees  not  for  m. 

28.  t  ,30.  and  shalt  not  use  it  as  a  common  771. 
.ludg.  1.  7.  kings  gathered  their  jti.  under  my  table 

14.  14.  out  of  ihe  eater  came  forth  777.  and  out  of 

1  6a77i.  20.  5.  not  fail  to  sit  with  the  king  at  771 
34.  Jonathan  did  eat  no  m.  the  second  day 

2  Sam.  3.  35.  the  people  came  to  cause  David  to 

oat  771.  while  it  was  yet  day 
11.8.  there  followed  him  a  mess  of  771.  from  the  king 
12.3.  it  did  eat  of  his  own  7/1.  and  drank  of  his  cup 
13.  5.  let  Tamar  dress  the  777.  in  my  sight 
1  Kings  10.5.she  .saw  the  771.  of  his  luble,2  CAr.9.4. 

19.  8.  he  went  in  strenglh  of  theft  771.  forty  days 
1  Chron.  12.  40.  they  that  were  nigh  brought  »n. 
*,'zra  3.  7.  they  gave  771.  and  drink  lo  ihem  ofZidon 
.fob  3.  t  24.  for  my  sighing  comelh  before  mv  »«. 

6.7.  things  my  soul  refused,are  113  my  sorrowful  m. 
12.  11.  doth  not  Ihi!  mouth  taste  his  m.  ? 

20.  14.  yet  his  771.  in  his  bowels  is  turned 
21.  there  shall  none  of  his  711.  be  left 

■!9.  4.  who  cut  juniper-roots  for  their  771. 
33.  20.  and  his  soul  ubhorreth  dainiy  777. 
?i.'*.  the  ear  triolh  words,  as  Ihe  mouth  tasteth  m 
36.  31.  he  giveth  771.  in  abundance 
38.  41.  cry  to  God,  they  wander  for  lack  of  to. 
/'.fa/.  42.3.  my  tears  have  bi^cnniy  77i.day  and  iiighl 

44.  11.  thou  hast  given  us  like  sheep  lor  771. 
59.  15.  let  them  wander  up  and  down  for  m. 
69.  21.  they  gave  me  also  gall  for  my  777. 

74.  14.  Ihou  gavest  him  to  he  777.  to  Ihe  people 
78.  l.'<.  templed  God  by  asking  771.  for  their  lust 

25.  he  sent  them  771.  to  tho  full 

30.  hut  while  their  m.  was  yet  in  their  mouth* 
104.  21.  the  young  lions  seek  their  m.  from  God 

27.  Ihou  mayesl  give  ihcm  their  771.  in  due  season 
107.  18.  their  soul  abhorreth  all  manner  of  m. 
111.  5.  he  lialh  given  771.  lo  Ihem  that  fear  him 
>  14.).  15.  ihou  givest  them  771.  in  due  season 
Priiv.  6.  8.  the  ant  provideth  her  771.  in  Ihe  summer 
23.  3.  his  dainties,  for  they  are  deieilful  7/1. 

30.  22.  and  a  fool  when  he  is  filled  with  771. 
25.  yet  (hey  prepare  their  jii.  in  Ihe  summer 

31.  15.  she  riseth  and  giveth  771.  to  her  household 
Isa.  9.  t5.  this  shall  be  with  burning  and  771.  of  fire 

62.  8.  no  more  give  thy  corn  to  be  771.  for  enemiei 
65.  25.  and  dust  shall  be  the  serpent's  771. 

Lam.  1.11.  have  given  their  pleasant  things  for  m. 

19.  mine  elders  died  while  they  sought  ibeir  m 
4.  10.  sodden  their  children,  they  were  Iheir  m 

Ezek.  4.  10.  and  thy  m.  shall  be  by  weight 
Ki.  19.  my  777.  whicii  I  {rave  Iheo,  Ihou  hast  set  it 
25.  t7.  I  will  deliver  thee  for  771.  lo  the  heathen 

29.  5. 1  liave  given  thee  for  m.  to  beasts,  34.  5,  8 


MEA 

Eiek.  34.  10.  that  they  may  not  be  m.  for  them 

47. 1-2.  oil  bank  shall  grow  trees  form,  fruit  lor  m. 

Z^ait.1.8.  would  noldehie  himself  willi  the  king's  m. 

lU.  king  who  hath  appointed  your  m.  and  drink 

4.  12.  the  fruit  much,  and  in  it  was  m.  for  ail,  21. 

11.  'JtJ.  they  that  feed  of  his  m.  shall  destroy  him 
Hos.  11.  4.  and  I  laid  m.  unto  them 
Jod  1.  16.  is  not  the  m.  cut  ort' before  our  eyes? 
Hal/.l.lG.  because  their  portion  is  fat,  vi.  plenteous 

3.  17.  although  the  Gelds  shall  yield  no  m.  the  Hock 
Hag.  'i.  12.  if  one  do  touch  any  m.  shall  it  be  holy7 
jMal.  1.  12.  in  that  ye  say,  his  vt.  is  contemptible 

3.  10.  bring  all  the  tithes,  that  there  may  be  m. 
Mat.  3.  4.  and  his  vt.  was  locusts  and  wild  honey 

6.  i5.  is  not  the  life  more  than  vi.t  Luke  12.  23. 
d.lO.as  Jesus  sat  at  m.  in  the  house,  2t).  7.  Mark'i. 

15.  I  14.3.  I  l(j.  14.  /,uAe24.  30. 
10.  10.  for  the  workman  is  worthy  of  his  m. 
14.  !).  for  them  that  sat  with  him  at  m. 
15.37.and  they  took  up  of  the  broken  m.  jMarkS.B. 

24.  45.  to  give  them  m.  indue  season,  Luke  12.42. 

25.  35.  I  was  a  hungered,  and  ye  gave  me  m. 
42.  I  was  a  hungered,  and  ye  gave  me  no  m. 

Luke  3.  11.  he  that  hath  m.  let  him  do  likewise 
8.  55.  and  he  commanded  to  give  her  m. 
9.13.except  we  should  go  and  buy  m.for  this  peo(>le 
14.  10.  worship  in  presence  of  them  that  sit  at  m. 
17.  7.  will  say  to  his  servant,  sit  down  to  m, 
22.  27.  whether  greater,  he  that  sitteth  at  m. 
24.  41.  he  said,  have  ye  here  any  m.?  .fohn  21.5, 
John  4.  8.  the  disciples  were  gone  to  buy  m. 
32.  I  have  m.  to  eat  that  ye  know  not  of 
34.  my  in.  is  to  do  the  will  of  him  that  sent  me 
6.27.  labour  not  for  the  m.  which  perisheth,  but  for 
that  m.  which  endureth  to  everlasting  life 
55.  for  my  flesh  is  m.  indeed,  my  blood  is  drink 
Acts  2.  46.  they  did  eat  their  m.  with  gladness 
0.19.  when  he  had  received  m.hc  was  strengthened 
16.  34.  the  jailer  set  m.  before  them  and  rejoiced 
27.  33.  Paul  besought  them  all  to  take  m.  34 
.36.  were  of  good  clieer,Rnd  they  also  took  some  m. 
Rom.  14. 15.  if  thy  brother  be  grieved  with  thy  m 
destroy  not  him  with  thy  m.for  whom  Christ  died 
17.  for  the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  m.  and  drink 
20.  for  m.  destroy  not  the  work  of  (Jod 
1  Qw.3.2.  I  have  fed  you  with  milk,  and  not  with  m. 
6.  H.  but  TO.  commendeth  us  not  to  God 
10.  if  any  man  see  thee  sit  at  m.  in  idol's  temple 
1.3.  if  m.  make  my  brother  to  olFend,  I  will  eat  no 
10.  3.  and  did  eat  the  same  spiritual  m. 
Cul.  2.  16.  let  no  man  judge  you  in  m.  or  drink 
//fiA..5.12.6ucha«haveneedofmilk,notofslrongm 
14.  but  strong  m.  belongeth  to  them  of  full  azo 

12.  16.  who  for  one  morsel  of /n.sold  his  birth-right 

See  Fowls. 
MEAT-OFFERING. 
Krorf.  29. 41.  according  to  m.-o^cri7i /I- of  the  morn. 
.TO.  9.  shall  offer  no  m.-nffering  un  altar  of  incense 
40.29.on  altar  ofburntofTeriiig  offered  m.-offering 
Z<«t3.2.1.when  any  will  offer  a  ?n.-«^<'rin^,4, 5,7,14. 
3.  reinnantof  m.-o/.  shallbe  Aiiron's,  10.  |  5.  13. 

6.  14.  this  is  the  law  of  the  m.-ojfering,  7.  37. 
14.  10.  three  tenth  deals  of  flour  for  a  m.-offering 

J^um.  4. 16.  to  Eleazar  pertaincth  daily  m.-offering 

7.  13.  mingled  with  oil  for  m.offtr.  19.|2H.  12, 13. 
1 5. 6.  for  m.-off.  two  tenth  deals  of  flour,  28.  9, 12. 
2H.  8.  as  the  m.-offering  of  the  morning,  offer  it 

26.  when  ye  bring  a  new  m.-offering  to  the  Lord 
29.6.  bi-sides  his  m.-off.  and  burnt-otrer.22,2.'j,34. 
Joth.  22.  23.  if  altar  to  offer  to.- ofcrin^  save  us  not 
Judg.  6.  t  18.  depart  not,  till  I  bring  my  m.-offering 

13.  19.  Manoah  took  a  kid  with  a  m.-offering 
23.  not  have  received  a  m.-offering  at  our  handu 

Kings  3.20.when  the  m.-offer.  was  offered,  behold 
Ckr.  21.  23.  wheat  for  the  m.-offering  I  give  it  nil 
VeA.  10.  33.  for  continual  m.-offer.  and  burnt-offer. 
'na.  .57.  6.  to  ihem  hast  thou  offered  a  m.-offering 
F.tek.  42.  13.  there  shall  they  lay  the  m.-offering 
44.20.  Iliey  shall  eat  them. -ojfcr.  and  sin-offering 

45.  17.  he  shall  propare  the  m.-offering,  24. 

25.  shall  do  Ihe  like  according  lo  the  m.-offrring 

46.  5.  the  m.-offering  shall  bo  an  epliali  for  a  ram 

7.  a  m.-offrring  and  an  epiiah  for  a  bullock,  II. 
15. tliiii  shall  till  v  prepare  the  to. -n/f^TiniT  and  oil 

Joel  1.9.  the  m.-offir  and  the  drink-offer,  is  rut  off 

I3.thn  m.-offrrtns;  and  drink-offer,  is  williholdcn 

8. 14.  leavo  a  hlcsni?,  evi'n  n  m.-offer.  to  our  God 

MEAT  OFFEIMN(;3. 
Jfiint.  29. 39.  Ihe»e  yo  i-hall  do  for  your  m. -offerings 
JoAh.  22.  29.  turn  to  liuiM  an  allar  for  m.  offerings 
I  Kings  f^.fA.  there  Solomon  offc'rcd  m.-offer.  altnr 
witi  too  little  to  receive  m.-offer.  2  Chr.  7.  7. 
F.ira  7.  17.  buy  sp<wlilv  lambs  wiih  their  m.-offrr. 
ffeh.  13. 5.  chamlwr,  wliorn  Ihey  laid  their  m.-nffr. 
Jer.  17. 26.  comn  from  .Iiidah  to  bring  nt. -offerings 
33. 18.  Tj«vilcsnot  want  a  man  to  kindle  m.-n/Trr. 
F.iek.  4.S.  17.  bo  the  prince's  part  to  ffivn  m.-offer. 
.flmoff. 5. 22.lho' ye  offer  m.-n/T.  I  will  not  accept  you 

MEAT.S. 
"rto.  83.  6.  BeitlMi  deaire  thoa  hii  dainty  m. 
37a 


MEE 

Mark  7.  19.  into  the  draught,  purging  all  nfc 
Mcts  15.  29.  abstain  from  m.  offered  to  idols 
Horn.  14.  t  23.  that  iiutteth  a  diflerence  in  m. 
I  Cor.  6.  13.  TO.  for  the  belly,  and  the  belly  for  m 

1  Tim.  4.  3.  to  abstain  from  r/i.  God  hath  created 
Heb.  9.  10.  which  stood  only  in  m.  and  drinks 

13.  9.  tlie  heart  be  established  witJi  grace,  not  m. 

MEDDLE. 
Deut.  2.  5.  m.  not  with  them  of  mount  Seir 

19.  7«.  not  with  the  children  of  Ammon 

2  Kings  14. 10.  why  m.  lo  thy  hurt  7  2  Chr.  25. 19. 
Proo.  20.  19.  m.  not  with  hlin  that  flatteretli 

24.21.  VI.  not  with  them  that  are  given  to  change 

MEDDLED. 
Pros. 17.14.!cave  off  contention  before  it  be  m.  with 

MEDDLETII. 
ProB.26.17.that  m.  with  strife  not  belonging  to  him 

MEDDLING. 
2  Chron.  35.  21.  forbear  thee  from  m.  with  God 
Prov.  20.  3.  but  every  fool  will  be  m. 

MEDIATOR 
Signifies,  A  person  that  manages,  or  transacts 
between  two  contending  parties,  in  order  to 
reconcile  them,  Gal.  3.  20.  And  is  applied, 
[1]  To  Jesus  Cfirisl,  who  is  the  only  peace- 
maker and  intercessor  between  Ood  and  men, 
1  Tim.  2.  5.  [2]  Moses,  who  came  between  the 
Lord  and  his  people,  to  declare  unto  them  his 
word,  Deut.  5.  5.  Gal.  3.  19. 
Gal.  3.19.  was  ordained  by  angels  in  the  hand  of  m. 

20.  a  m.  is  not  a  ;«.  of  one,  but  God  is  one 

1  Tim.2.  5.  butone  m.betwcen  God  and  men,Jc8U8 

Heb.  8.  6.  he  is  the  m.  of  a  better  covenant 
9.  15.  for  this  cause  he  is  m.  of  the  new  testament 
12.  24.  and  lo  Jesus  the  m.  of  the  new  covenant 
MEDICINE. 

Prov.  3. 1 8.  it  shall  be  m.  to  thy  navel  and  marrow 
17.  22.  a  merry  heart  doeth  good  like  a  m. 
20.  130.  the  blueness  of  a  wound  is  a  purging  m. 

Ezck.  47.  12.  the  leaf  thereof  shall  be  for  m. 
MEDICINES. 

.Ter.  30.  13.  thou  hast  no  healing  m. 
40.  ll.invainshaltthou  use  many  m.  not  be  cured 
MEDITATE. 

Gen.  24.  63.  Isaac  went  out  to  m.  in  the  field 

.Tosh.  1.  8.  thou  shalt  m.  therein  day  and  night 

Judg.  5. 1 10.  m.  ye  that  ride  on  white  asses 

Psul.  1.  2.  in  his  law  dolh  he  m.  day  and  night 
2.  1 1.  and  why  do  the  people  m.  a  vain  thing  ? 
().3.  6.  and  m.  on  thee  in  the  night  watches 
77.  12.  I  will  m.  also  of  all  thy  work 
119.  15.  I  will  7/1.  in  thy  precepts,  78. 
23.  dill  m.  in  thy  statutes  |{  48. 1  will  m.  in  statutes 
148.  night-watches,  that  I  might  m.  in  thy  word 
143.  5.  1  m.  on  all  thy  works,  I  muse  on  the  work 

Isa.'i'i.  18.  thine  heart  shall  m.  terror,  where  scribe? 

/-u/rc21.14.  not  to  m.  before,  what  ye  shall  answer 

1  Tim.  4.  15.  VI.  upon  these  things,  give  thyself 
MEDITATION. 

I  Sam.  1. 1 16.  out  of  the  abundance  of  my  to. 

Psal.  5.  1.  give  ear  to  my  words,  consider  my  tti. 
19.  14.  let  the  to.  of  my  heart  be  acceptable 
49.  3.  the  TO.  of  my  heart  shall  be  of  undersiandins 
90.  t  9.  we  spend  our  years  as  a  to. 
104. 34.  my  TO.  of  him  shall  be  sweet,  be  glad  in  Ld. 
119.  97.  I  love  thy  law,  it  is  my  to.  all  the  day 
99.  than  teachers,  for  thy  testimonies  are  my  m. 
MEEK. 

JVum.  12.  3.  now  the  man  Moses  was  very  m. 

Psal.  22.  26.  the  »«.  shall  cat  and  be  satisfied 
25.  9.  the  TO.  will  ho  guide  in  judgment 
37.  II.  but  the'Ol.  shall  inherit  the  earth 
69.  t  32.  the  m.  shall  see  this  and  be  gl.id 
76.  9.  God  arose  to  save  all  the  m.  of  the  earth 
147. 6.  the  Lord  lifleth  up  the  m.  he  casleth  down 
149.  4.  he  will  beautify  the  m.  with  salvation 

f.ia.  11.4.  reprove  with  equity,  for  the  to.  of  earth 
2!).  19.  the  7n.  shall  increase  their  joy  in  the  Lord 
61.  1.  anointed  lo  preach  good  tidings  to  the  m. 

.'Imos  2.  7.  that  turn  aside  the  way  of  the  m. 

Zejih.  2.  3.  seek  ye  Ihe  F^ord,  all  ye  m.  of  the  earth 

Milt.  .5.  5.  blessed  are  the  m.  ||  11.  29.  for  I  am  m. 
21.  5.  behold,  thy  king  coiiielli  to  tliie  m. 

1  Pet.  3.  4.  the  ornaineni  of  a  m.  and  quiet  spirit 
MEEKNESS 
ignifies,  [1]  .^  temper  of  mind  that  is  not  easily 
provoked,  and  suffers  injuries  without  desire 
of  revenge,  and  quiilly  sulmiit.i  lo  Ihe  trill  of 
God,  (.'ol.  3.  12.  [2|  .^n  humble  submissine 
frame  of  spirit,  ready  to  rrerirc  and  entertaitt 
the  truths  of  God,  Jam.  1.21. 

Psal.  18.  1 35.  with  thy  m.  thou  hast  multiplied  me 
45.  4.  ride  prosperously,  because  of  truth  and  m. 

y.rph.  2.  3.  seek  rigliteou»nes.<,  seek  m.  shall  he  hid 

1  Cor.  4.  21.  shall  I  come  in  the  spirit  of  tn..' 

2  Cor.  10.  1.  I  beseech  you  by  Ihe  m.  of  Christ 
Gal.  5.23.  the  fruit  of  the  S|iirit  is  m.  temperance 

1.  restore  such  tt  one  in  Ihe  spirit  of  ra. 
F.ph.  4.  2.  that  ye  walk  with  all  lowlineiis  and  m. 
Cvl.  3.  12.  put  OD  thcicfuio  m.  tunj-sulTurlng 


MEE 

1  TViji.  6. 11.  follow  after  faith,  lo»e,  patience,  m 

2  Tito.  2. 25.  in  to.  instructing  those  that  oppose 
Tit.  3.  2.  but  gentle,  shewing  all  m.  to  all  men 
Jam.  1.  21.  receive  with  m.  the  ingrafted  word 

3.  13.  let  him  shew  his  works  with  m.  of  wisdom 
1  Pet.  3. 15.  to  give  a  reason  of  your  hope  with  Vk 

MEET. 
GcTi.  2.  18. 1  will  make  a  help  m.  for  him 

20.  there  was  not  found  a  help  to.  for  Adam 
Exod.  8.  26.  Muses  said,  it  is  not  m.  so  to  do 
Deut.  3. 18.  ye  pass  over,  all  that  are  m.  for  war 
Judg.  5.  30.  TO.  for  tiie  necks  of  them  that  take 
Kirai.H.  it  was  not  7n.  to  see  the  king's  dishonour 
.lob  34.  31.  surely  it  is  to.  to  be  said  lo  tied 
Prov.  11.  24.  that  withholdelh  more  than  is  m. 
Jer.  26.  14.  do  with  me  as  seemeth  m.  to  you 

27.5. have  given  earth  to  whom  itseemed  m.  to  me 
F.iek.l^.i.  is  it  m.for  anv  work?  ||  5.  to.  for  no  work 
Mat.  3.  8.  bring  forth  fruits  m.  for  repentance 

]5.2t5.  not  m.  lo  take  children's  bread, ^Wari  7.27. 
Luke  15.  .32.  it  was  7/1.  we  should  make  merry 
Jlcts  26.  20.  and  do  works  771.  for  repentance 
ftw?/i.I.27.receiving  thatrecompence  which  was  m. 

1  Cor.  15.  9.  that  am  not  7/1.  to  be  called  an  apostle 

16.  4.  if  it  be  m.  that  I  go  also,  they  shall  go 
Pliil.  1.  7.  even  as  it  is  to.  for  nie  to  think  ihis 
C<j/.1.12.1iallimade  usm.  to  be  partakers  of  inherit. 

2  Thess.  1.  3.  bound  to  thank  G.  for  you,  as  it  is  7/1. 
2  T'im.  2.  21.  he  shall  be  vessel  m.  for  master's  use 
}Ieb.  6.  7.  herbs  m.  for  them  by  whom  it  is  dressed 
2  Ptt.  1.  13.  yea,  I  think  it  m.  to  stir  you  up 

MEET. 
Gen.  14.  17.  king  of  Sodom  went  out  to  m.  him 

18.  2.  Abraham  saw  them,  and  ran  to  m.  them 

19.  1.  Lot  seeing  them,  ro.-ic  up  to  7/1.  them 
24. 17.  the  servant  ran  lo  m.  Rebekah,  and  said 

65.  what  man  is  this  that  walketh  lo  m.  us? 
29. 13.  Laban  ran  to  m.  Jacob,  and  embraced  him 

30.  16.  Leah  went  out  lo  to.  Jacob,  and  said 
32.6.  thy  brother  Esau  cometli  to  771.  thee,  33.  4. 
46.  29.  Joseph  went  up  to  711.  Israel  his  Father 

Exod.  4.  14.  behold,  Aaron  comeih  forth  to  m.  thee 
27.  Lord  said,  go  into  the  wilderness  to  m.  Moscf 

18.  7.  Moses  went  out  to  m.  his  father-in-law 

19.  17.  brought  forili  the  people  to  m.  with  God 
23.  4.  if  thou  m.  thine  enemy's  ox  going  astray 
25.  22.  there  I  will  m.  with  thee,  and  commune 

with  thee,  29.  42,  43.  |  30.6,  36.  JVu7n.  17.  4. 
jVum.  22.  36.  Balak  went  out  lo  7;i.  Balaam 
23.  3.  peradvcnture  the  Lord  will  come  to  m.  me 
15.  stand  here,  while  I  771.  the  Lord  yonder 

31.  13.  went  forth  to  7ji.  them  without  the  camp 
/osA.2.  16.  Rahab  said,  lest  Ihe  pursuers  m.  you 

9.  11.  take  victuals  with  you,  and  go  to  m.  them 
Judg.  4.  18.  Jael  went  out  to  m.  Sisera,  22. 

6.  35.  to  Zjibulun,  and  they  came  up  to  m.  Gideon 
11.  31.  whTilever  comeih  out  of  the  doors  10  m.  me 
34.  hie  daughter  came  to  m.  him  with  dances 
19.  3.  father  of  the  damsel  rejoiced  to  m.  him 
Ruth  2.  22.  that  they  m.  thee  not  in  any  other  field 

1  Sam.  10.  3.  and  there  shall  to.  thee  three  men 

5.  thou  shalt  m.  a  company  of  prophets  coming 

13.  10.  Saul  went  to  in.  Samuel  to  salute  him 
15.  12.  when  Samuel  rose  up  early  to  to.  Saul 

17.  48.  the  Philistine  drew  nigh  to  to.  David 

18.  6.  the  women  came  to  m.  Saul  with  tabrets 
25.  32.  Lord  which  sent  thee  this  day  to  hi.  me 
30.  21.  men  went  to  m.  David  and  to  to.  people 

2  Sam.  6.  2t).  Michal  came  out  to  to.  David 

10.  5.  David  sent  to  m.  the  men,  1  Chron.  19.  5. 

15.  32.  Ilushai  the  Architc  came  to  to.  him 

19.  15.  Jiidah  ||  24.  Mephiboslielh  to  m.  king 
1  Kings  2.8.  Shimei  came  down  to  m.  mo  at  Jordan 

19.  Solomon  rose  up  to  in.Buth-sheba  his  mother 

18.  16.  Oliadiah  went  to  711.  .A hah,  to  wi.  Elijah 

21.  18.  arise,  go  down  to  m.  Ahab  king  of  I.-raei 

'ZKings  1.3.go  up  lo  TO.messengers  of  king  of  Snma 

6.  there  came  a  man  to  711.  us  and  said  to  us 

7.  what  manner  of  man  came  up  to  m.  you  ? 
2.  15.  the  sons  of  the  prophets  came  to  m.  Elisha 

4.  26.  run  now,  I  pray  thee,  to  m.  her,  and  say 
29.  if  thou  TO.  any  man,  salute  him  not 

5.  21.  he  hghied  from  the  chariot  lo  m.  him,  26. 

8.  8.  go  m.  the  man  of  God  ||  9.  Ilazael  went  to  in. 

9.  17.  take  a  horseman,  and  send  to  m.  them 
18.  there  went  one  on  horsidmck  to  m.  him 

10.  15.  he  lighted  on  Jonadab  coming  lo  m.  him 

16.  10.  Ahaz  went  to  m.  Ihe  kin,":  of  As'ivria 
.WA.  6.  2.  let  us  »«.  toffcther  in  the  plain,  10. 
Job  5. 14.  they  m.  with  darkness  in  the  day-tima 

.39.  21.  the  horse  gocth  on  In  m.  ilio  armed  men 
Prov.  7.  15.  Ihcieforc  cnmo  I  forth  to  m.  Ihco 
17. 12.  let  a  bear  robbed  of  her  whelps  771.  a  man 
'-^2.  2.  the  rich  and  pixir  m.  lojelhrr,  iho  Lord  ia 
29.  13.  the  poor  and  deceitful  man  m.  together 
Ira.  7.  3.  go  forth  lo  m   .Aha/,  ihoo,  and  thy  son 

14.  9.  hell  is  moved  for  '..'lee  10  m.  then  at  thy  ron» 
34.  14.  the  wild  beasts  of  Ihe  desert  slinll  also  m. 
47.  3.  vengeance,  and  I  will  not  to.  Ihoo  ns  a  maG 

Jer.  41.  C.  and  Uhmao)  went  form  to  m.  Uiaiu 


MEM 

*fcr.5I.31.onc  post  and  messenger  run  to  m.  another 
J/os.l3.ii.i  will  m.  them  as  a  bear  burciiv.  of  whelps 
.^mos  4.  1-2.  prepare  to  m.  thy  Goil,  O  Israel 
Zech.  2.  3.  another  angel  went  out  to  m.  him 
Mat.  8.  34.  the  whole  city  came  out  to  m.  Jesus 
25.  1.  and  went  Corlh  to  m.  the  bridegroom 
6.  the  bridegroom  cometh,  go  ye  out  to  ?«.  him 
Mark  14.13.  there  shall  m.  you  a  man,  Luke  22. 10. 
I^ukt  14.31.  he  be  able  with  ten  thousand  to  ;«.  him 
Jokn  12. 13.  people  went  forth  to  in.  him,  and  cried 
Jicts  28.15.tliey  came  to  7«.us  as  far  as  Appii-forum 
1  Thess.  4. 17.  in  the  clouds  to  m.  the  L.  in  the  air 

MEETEST. 
^Kings  10.  3.  look  out  the  to.  of  your  master's  sons 
Jsa.  t)4.  5.  thou  in.  him  that  rejoic.  and  works  right. 

MEETETH. 
Gen.  32.  17.  when  Esau  my  brother  m.  thee 
•/W/«.3o.l9.shall  slav  murderer  when  ho  m.  him,21 

MEETING. 
^um.  24. 1 1.  went  not  to  the  m.  of  enchantments 
1  Sam.  21. 1.  Ahimelech  was  afraid  at  m.  of  David 
Isa.  1.  13.  it  is  iniquity,  even  the  solemn  m. 

MELODY. 
Isa.  23.  16.  make  sweet  m.  sing  many  songs 
51.  3.  joy  shall  be  found  therein,  the  voice  of  m. 
.^mos  5.  23.  I  will  not  hear  the  m.  of  thy  viols 
£p/t.  5.  19.  making  m.  in  your  heart  to  the  Lord 

MELONS. 
JVum.  11.  5.  we  remember  the  m.  and  the  onions 

MELT 
Signifies,  [1]  To  make  hard  bodies  liquid  or  fluid, 
Ezek.  22. 22.   [2]  To  waste  and  be  diminished, 
1  Sam.  14. 16.  [3]  To  faint  and  be  discouraged, 
Josh.  2.  11.  2  Sam.  17.  10. 
Exod.  15.  15.  the  inhabitants  of  Canaan  shall  m. 
Deut.  20.  t  8.  return,  lest  his  brethren's  heart  m. 
Josh.  2.  t9.  the  inhabitants  m.  because  of  you 

11.  when  we  heard  these  things,our  hearts  did  m. 
14. 8.  my  brethren  made  the  heart  of  the  people  m. 
2  Sam.  17. 10.  is  as  heart  of  a  lion,  shall  utterly  m. 
Psal.  39. 1 11.  thou  makest  his  beauty  to  m.  away 
58.  7.  let  them  m.  away  as  waters  which  run 
113.10.  he  shall  gnash  with  his  teeth,  and  m.  away 
Isa.  13.  7.  every  man's  heart  shall  m.  Ezek.  21.  7. 
19  1.  the  heart  of  Egypt  shall  in.  in  midst  of  it 
Jer.  9.  7.  behold,  I  will  in.  them,  and  try  them 
£icA.22.20.to  j/i.it,!  will  leave  you  there  and  m.you 
Jlmos  9.  5.  the  L.  toucheth  the  land,  and  it  shall  m. 

13.  and  all  the  hills  shall  in.  J\'"aA.  1.  5. 
2  Pet.  3. 10.  and  the  elements  shall  m.  with  heat,  12. 

MELTED. 
Exod.  16.  21.  when  the  sun  waxed  hot  it  m. 
Ueut.  1. 128.  our  brethren  have  m.  our  heart 
Josh.  5. 1.  their  heart  m.  \\  7.  5.  hearts  of  Israel  m. 
Judg.  5.  5.  the  mountains  m.  before  the  Lord 

1  Sam.  14.  16.  behold,  the  multitude  in.  away 

2  Kings  22.  f  9.  thy  servants  have  m.  the  money 
Psal.  22.  14.  my  heart  is  m.  in  midst  of  my  bowels 

46.  6.  he  uttered  his  voice,  and  the  earth  m. 
97.  5.  the  hills  in.  like  wax  ||  107. 26.  their  soul  m. 
Isa.  34.  3.  mountains  shall  be  m.  with  their  blood 
64.  t7.  hast  m.  us,  because  of  our  iniquities 
i/'^r.  49.t23.Damascus,  Hamath,  and  Arpad,  arera 
Ezek.  22.  21.  ye  shall  be  in.  in  the  midst  thereof 
22.  as  silver  is  m.  in  the  midst  of  the  furnace 
MELTETH. 
Job  6.  t  H.  to  him  that  m.  pity  be  shewed 
Psal.  58.8.  as  a  snail  which  m.  let  them  pass  away 
C8. 2.88  wax  VI.  60  let  wicked  perish  at  presence 
119.  28.  my  soul  m.  for  heaviness,  strengthen  me 
147.  18.  he  sendeth  out  his  word  and  m.  them 
Isa.  40.  19.  the  workman  m.  a  graven  image 
I  Jer.  6.  29.  bellows  burnt,  the  founder  m.  in  vain 
.tfVaA.2.10.  the  heart  of  Nineveh  m.  the  knees  smite 

MELTING. 
Isa.  64.  2.  as  when  the  m.  fire  burneth,  the  fire 

MEMBER 
Signifies,  [1]  .'inv  part  of  a  natural  body,  1  Cor. 
12.  12,  26.     [2]  .111  the  faculties  of  the  soul, 
together  with  the  parts  of  the  body,  Rom.  6. 13, 

19.  [3]  The  unrcncjced  part  of  man,  which  is 
like  a  body  cojisisting  of  many  members,  and 
putteth  forth  itself  chii fly  in  and  by  the  mem- 
bers of  the  body,  Rom.  7.  23.  [4]  Enenj  sen- 
sual and  sinful  affection.  Col.  3.  5.  [5]  Chris- 
tian or  gospel  believers  in  the  church,  which  is 
Christ's  mystical  body,  Eph.  4. 25.  ]  5.  30.  [6] 
Thoughts,  Job  17. 1 7. 

1  Cor.  12.  14.  the  body  is  not  one  m.  but  many 
39.  if  they  were  all  one  m.  where  were  the  body? 

20.  whether  one  m.  sufler,  one  m.  be  honoured 
Jam.  3.  5.  even  so  the  tongue  is  a  little  m. 

MEMBERS. 
Deut.  23.  1.  he  that  hath  his  privy  m.  cut  off 
.7ob  17.  7.  and  all  my  m.  are  as  a  shadow 
Psal.  139.  16.  in  thy  book  all  my  m.  were  written 
Mat.  5.  29.  that  one  of  thy  m.  should  periah,  30. 
Rom.  6.  13.  neither  yield  your  m.  instruments 

19.  as  ye  yioldod  your  m.  servants  to  sin 
7  5  the  motioni  of  sins  did  work  in  our  m. 
379 


MEN 

Rom.7.23. 1  sne  another  la w  in  my  m.  warring ;  into 
captivity  to  llie  law  of  sin,  which  is  in  my  m. 
12. 4.  for  as  we  have  many  m.  in  one  body,  and  all 
TO.  have  not  the  same  olKce 
5.  we  are  every  one  m.  one  of  another 
1  Cor.  6.15.know  ye  not,  your  bodies  are  the  to.  of 
Christ  ?  shall  1  llieii  take  the  m.  of  Christ? 
12.  12.  the  body  iiath  many  m.  all  m.  are  one  body 
IH.  but  now  hath  God  set  the  m.  in  the  body 
20.  but  now  are  they  many  in.  yet  one  body 
22.  much  more  those  m.  which  seem  more  feeble 

25.  but  that  the  m.  should  have  the  same  care 

26.  one  member  suifer,  all  the  m.  sutler  with  it 

27.  ye  are  the  body  of  Christ,  and  to.  in  particular 
Eph.  4.  25.  for  we  are  vi.  one  of  another 

5.  30.  we  are  to.  of  his  body,  of  his  flesh  and  bones 
Col.  3.  5.  mortify  your  m.  which  are  on  the  earth 
Jam.  3.  6.  so  is  the  tongue  among  our  in.  that  it 

4.  1.  even  of  your  lusts  that  war  in  your  m. 

MEMORIAL. 
Exod.  3.  15.  this  is  my  in.  unto  all  generations 

12.  14.  this  day  shall  be  to  you  for  a  to. 

13.  9.  it  shall  be  for  a  in.  between  thine  eyes 
17. 14.  write  this  for  a  in.  in  a  book,  and  rehearse 

28.  12.  for  stones  of  m.  to  the  children  of  Israel 
29.  for  a  to.  before  the  Lord  continually,  39.  7. 

30.  16.  the  atonement  money  may  be  for  a  m. 
Lev.  2.  2.  the  priest  shall  burn  the  m.  of  it  on  the 

altar,  9.  16.  |  5.  12.  |  6.  15.  JVuto.  5.  26. 

23.  24.  a  TO.  of  blowing  trumpets,  J\rum.  10.  10. 

24.  7.  put  pure  frankincense  on  the  bread  for  a  m. 
JVum.  5.  15.  for  it  is  an  offering  of  ;n.  of  iniquity 

18.  priest  put  the  offering  of  jh.  in  her  hands 
16.  40.  took  brasen  censers  to  be  a  to.  to  Israel 

31.  54.  took  the  gold  of  the  captains  for  a  to. 
Josh.  4.  7.  and  these  stones  shall  be  for  a  m. 
JVeA.2.20.  you  have  no  portion  nor  to.  in  Jerusalem 
Eslh.9.'i6.nur  the  to.  of  them  perish  from  their  seed 
Psal.  9.  6.  their  to.  is  perished  with  them 

.30.  t  4.  at  the  to.  of  his  holiness,  97.  f  12. 

135.  13.  and  thy  m.  throughout  all  generations 
ha.  66.  t  3.  he  that  maketh  a  m.  as  if  he  blessed 
Nos.  12.  5.  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  Lord  is  his  m. 

14.  t  7.  the  TO.  thereof  as  the  wine  of  Lebanon 
Zech.  6.14. crowns  be  for  a  to.  in  the  temple  of  Lord 
Mat.2ty.  13.  this  be  told  for  a  7h. of  her,  Mark  14.9 
Jlcts  10.  4.  prayers  and  alms  are  come  up  for  a  ;« 

MEMORY 
Signifies,  [1]  That  faculty  of  the  mind,  whereby 
it  retains  Or  recollects  the  images  and  remem- 
brances of  the  things  we  have  seen,  imagined, 
or  understood,  1  Cor.  15.  2.     [2]  Memorial, 
name,  or  report,  Prov.  10.  7.  Isa.  26.  14. 
Psal.  109.  15.  that  he  may  cut  off  the  to.  of  them 
145.  7.  they  shall  utter  the  »n.of  thy  great  goodness 
Prov.  10.  7.  the  to.  of  tlie  just  is  blessed 
Eccl.  9.  5.  for  the  m.  of  them  is  forgotten 
Isa.  26.  14.  and  made  all  their  m.  to  perish 
1  C^r.  15. 2.  if  ye  keep  in  m.  what  I  preached  to  you 

MEN. 
Gen.  4.  26.  then  began  m.  to  call  on  the  name  of  L. 
6.  I.  when  to.  began  to  multiply  on  the  earth 

18.  2.  he  looked,  and  lo,  three  m.  stood  by  him 

19.  1.  the  m.  of  the  city,  m.  of  Sodom  compassed 
5  where  are  m.  which  came  into  thee  this  night? 
8.  only  to  these  to.  do  nothing  ||  11.  smote  the  m. 

32.28.  power  with  God  and  m.  and  hast  prevailed 
34.  21.  these  men  are  peaceable  with  us,  let  them 
22.  only  herein  will  the  m.  consent  to  us 
42.  11.  we  are  true  m.  31.  ||  43.  16.  bring  to.  home 
44.  4.  Joseph  said,  up,  follow  after  the  m. 
46.  32.  Jii.are  shepherds,  for  their  trade  to  feed  catt. 

Exod.  1.  17.  but  saved  the  to.  children  alive,  18 
10. 11.  go  now  ye  that  are  hi.  and  serve  the  Lord 
34.  23.  thrice  in  the  year  shall  m.  children  appear 

Jfnm..  1.  17.  Moses  and  Aaron  took  these »«. 
13.  32.  all  the  peojile  are  m.  of  great  stature 
14.37.  those  to.  that  did  bring  evil  report  on  land 
16.  14.  wilt  thou  put  out  the  eyes  of  these  to.  ? 

29.  if  these  to.  die  the  common  death  of  all  m. 
22.  9.  God  said,  what  m.  are  these  with  thee? 

35.  the  angel  said  to  Balaam,  go  with  the  m. 
25.  5.  slay  ye  every  one  his  m.  that  were  joined 
Deut.  1.  35.  not  one  of  these  m.  shall  see  good  land 
32.26.make  remembrance  to  cease  from  among  m. 
33.  6.  let  Reuben  live,  let  not  his  m.  be  few 
JosA.2.2.  there  came  m.  in  hither  to-night  of  Israel 
3.  brinj  forth  the  to.  that  are  come,  1  .Soto.  11.12. 
.Judg.  6.  27.  because  he  feared  the  m.  of  the  city 
8.8.the  m.  of  Penuel  answered  as  the  m.  ofSuccolh 

15.  should  give  bread  to  thy  m.  that  are  weary 
9.  54.  that  in.  say  not  of  me,  a  woman  slew  him 
16.  9.  there  were  m.  lying  in  wait  in  the  chamber 
20.  13.  now  therefore  deliver  us  the  to.  of  Belial 

1  Sam.  2.  21).  was  in  favour  with  the  Lord  and  m. 

t33.  all  the  increase  of  thine  house  shall  die,  m. 
5.  9.  he  smote  the  m.  of  the  city,  small  and  great 

12.  771.  that  died  not  were  smitten  with  emerods 
24.9.1)avid  said,  wherefore hearestlhoum.words? 
25.  15.  but  the  m.  were  very  good  unto  us 


MEN 

2  .faTJi.  3. 39.  these  to.  the  sons  of  Zcruiah  too  hara 
10.  12.  and  let  us  play  the  m.  for  our  people 
19. 28.  were  but  dead  men  before  my  lord  the  king 
23.  3.  he  that  ruleth  overyti.  must  be  just 
20.  slew  two  lion-like  771.  of  Moub,  1  Chr.  11.  22. 

1  Kings  10.  8.  happy  tliy  in.  that  hear  thy  wisdom 
20.  17.  there  are  to.  come  out  of  Samaria 

33.  now  the  771.  did  diligently  observe  whether 

2  Kings  6. 20.  Lord,  open  tlie  eyes  of  these  m.toseo 
12.  15.  they  reckoned  not  with  7/1.  of  the  money 
17.  30.  the  TO.  of  Babylon  made  Succoth-benoth, 

TO.  of  Cuth,  Nergal, m.  of  Ilamalh,  Asliima 

18. 27.  hath  he  not  sent  me  to  the  771.  which  sit  on 

the  wall,  to  eat  their  own  dung?  Isa.  36. 12. 

20.  14.  said  to  him,  what  said  these  ?».?  Isa.  39.  3. 

1  Chron.  11. 19.  shall  I  drink  the  blood  of  these  m.7 

16.  31.  let  TO.  say  among  the  nations.  Lord  reigns 
19.  5.  for  the  in.  were  greatly  ashamed 

^  Chron.  6. 18.  will  God  in  very  deed  dwell  withm.? 
28. 15.  them,  expressed  by  name  took  thecaptives 
34.  12.  and  the  771.  did  the  work  faithfully 

Ezra  1.  4.  let  m.  of  ids  place  help  him  with  silver 
4. 21.  give  commandment  to  cause  these  m.  cease 
6.  8.  I  decree  that  expences  be  given  to  these  to. 

JV>A.  4.  23.  nor  to.  of  the  guard  which  followed 
5.  5.  other  in.  have  our  lands  and  vineyards 

.Job  4.  13.  when  deep  slee])  falleth  on  777.  33.  15. 
19.  1 19.  the  TO.  of  my  secret  abhorred  me 
28.  4.  are  dried  up,  they  are  gone  away  from  m. 
31.  31.  if  the  TO.  of  my  tabernacle  said  not 
37.  24.  TO.  do  therefore  fear  him,  he  respecteth  not 

Psal.  9. 20.  they  may  know  themselves  to  be  but  m. 

17.  14.  from  to.  which  are  thy  hand,  from  to. 
49.  18.  771.  will  i)raise  tliee  when  thou  doest  well 
62.  9.  TO.  of  low  degree  are  vanity,  771.  of  high  a  lie 
68.  18.  ascended,  thou  hast  received  gifts  for  771. 

72.  17.  and  m.  shall  be  blessed  in  him,  all  nations 

73.  5.  they  are  not  in  trouble  as  other  771.  neither 
are  they  plagued  like  other  771. 

82.  7.  ye  are  gods,  but  ye  shall  die  like  in. 

83.  18.  that  771.  may  know  that  thou  an  over  all 
107.8. 0  that  TO.  would  praise  the  Lord,  15,  21,  31. 
119.  t24.  thy  testimonies  are  them,  of  my  counsel 
124.  2.  on  our  side,  when  to.  rose  up  against  us 
145.  6.  771.  shall  speak  of  the  might  of  thy  acts 

Proo.  6.  30.  m.  do  not  despise  a  thief,  if  he  steal 

8.  4.  to  yon,  Om.  I  call  ||  16.  6. to.  depart  from  evil 
20.  6.  most  TO.  proclaim  each  his  own  goodness 
2.').  1.  which  the  in.  of  Hezekiah  copied  out 

27.  BO  for  in.  lo  search  their  own  glory,  not  glory 
28.  28.  when  the  wicked  rise,  m.  hide  themselves 
Eccl.  3.  14.  God  doeth  it  that  m-  should  fear  him 
Isa.  3.  25.  thy  771.  shall  fall  by  the  sword,  thy  mighty 

6.  12.  and  the  Lord  have  removed  to.  far  away 

7.  13.  is  it  a  small  thing  for  you  to  weary  to.  f 
31.  3.  now  the  Egyptians  are  m.  and  not  God 
38.  16.  O  Lord,  by  these  things  771.  live 
43.4.  wherefore  I  will  give  771.  for  thee,  and  people 
45. 24.  even  to  him  shall  in.  come,  and  all  incensed 

46.  8.  remember  this,  and  shew  yourselves  m. 

60.  11.  that  777.  may  bring  (o  thee  the  (brces 

61.  6.  TO.  shall  call  you  the  ministers  of  our  God 
64.  4. 771.  have  not  heard,  nor  perceived  by  the  ear 

Jer.  5.  26.  they  set  a  trap,  they  catch  771. 
6.23.horscssetin  array, as  777.  for  war  against  theo 

9.  10.  neither  can  to.  hear  the  voice  of  the  cattle 

18.  21.  and  let  their  m.  be  put  to  death 
34. 18. 1  will  give  the  771.  that  transgr.  my  covenant 
38.  9.  these  m.  have  done  evil  to  prophet  Jeremiah 
40.  S.  then  came  to  Gedaliah  they  and  their  m. 

47.  2.  then  the  m.  shall  cry  and  shall  howl 
49.  28.  arise  ye,  and  spoil  the  to.  of  the  east 
51.  14.  surely  I  will  fill  thee  with  to.  as  with  caterp, 

I^am.  2.  15.  that  to.  call  the  perfection  of  beauty 
Ezek.  11.  2.  these  are  the  771.  that  devise  mischief 
14.  3.  these  m.  set  up  their  idols  in  their  heart 
14.  tho'  these  three  to.  Noah,  Daniel,  Job,  16, 18. 
23.  40.  that  yo  have  sent  for  771.  to  come  from  far 
2.5.  4.  I  will  deliver  thee  to  the  m.  of  the  east,  10. 
.34.  31.  ye,  my  flock  of  my  pasture,  are  771.  I  God 
35.  8.  I  will  fill  his  mountains  with  his  slain  m. 
.36.  10.  I  will  multiply  to.  upon  you,  37. 
Dnn.  3.  12.  these  771.  have  not  regarded  thee 
22.  fire  slew  those  m.  that  took  up  Shadrach 
27.  saw  these  to.  upon  whose  bodies   the  fire 
had  no  power 
4.  25.  that  they  shall  drive  thee  from  m.  32. 

6.  5.  then  said  these  to.  we  shall  not  find  occasion 
26.  that  771.  fear  before  the  God  of  Daniel 

/A7,9.6.7.buf  they  like  m.  transgressed  the  covenant 
Obad.  7.  TO.  that  were  at  peace  deceived  thee 
t  7.  the  771.  of  thy  peace  have  deceived  thee 
MIc.  2.  8.  that  pass  securely,  as  m.  averse  from  war 

7.  0.  man's  enemies  are  the  m.  of  his  own  house 
Hab.  1.  14.  and  makest  m.  as  the  fi.<ihes  of  the  sea 
Zfch.  3.  8.  thy  fellows,  they  are  m.  wondered  at 

7.  2.  had  .sent  their  771.  to  pray  before  the  Lord 
11.  6.  but  lo,  I  will  deliver  the  77?.  every  one 
Mat.  5.  16.  let  your  light  so  shine  before  to. 

19.  and  shall  teach  m.  so,  shall  be  called  the  leaa 


MEN 

Mat.  6.1.  take  heed  you  do  not  your  alms  before  m. 
Jti.  their  I'uceH,  that  they  may  appear  lo  m.  to  last 

18.  anoint,  lliut  thou  appear  not  unto  m.  to  fast 
7. 12   whiilsoever  ye  would  that  ni.  should  do  to 

you,  do  ye  even  so  lo  them,  J.ukc  (i.  31. 

9.  8.  God  who  had^ivcn  such  power  lo  m. 

10.  3i.  shall  confess  me  before  m.  J^uke  li.  8. 
33.  whoso  shall  deny  me  before  m.  huke  12.  9. 

13.  25  but  while  ra.  slept,  his  enemy  came 

10.  13.  whom  do  m.  say  that  I  am  7  jMark  8.  27. 

23.28.  outwardly  ye  appear  righteous  lo  in. 
Mark  8.  21.  and  said,  I  see  m.  as  trees  walking 

10.  27.  with  m.  it  is  impossible,  Luke  18.  27. 
J.uke  2.  14.  peace  on  earth,  good  will  toward  m. 

5.  10.  from  henceforth  thou  shall  catch  m. 

11.31.  shall  rise  up  witli  the  m.  of  this  generation 

12.  48.  to  whom  m-  have  committed  mucli 

18.  11.  I  thank  thee,  I  am  not  as  other  m.  are 
John  5.  41.  I  receive  not  honour  from  ;;i. 

17.  6.  I  have  manifested  thy  name  to  the  m. 
^(:(.«1.21.ol'these//i.wliichliavecompanied  withus 
2.  13.  others  said,  the.se  m.  are  full  of  new  wine 

4.  Ifi.  saying,  what  shall  we  do  to  these  m.  ? 

5.  4.  thou  hast  not  lied  unto  m.  but  unto  God 
25.  the  m.  ye  put  in  prison  are  in  the  temple 
29.  we  ought  to  obey  God  rather  than  m. 

3.J.  what  ye  intend  to  do,  as  touching  these  m. 
33.  I  say  unto  you,  refrain  from  these  m. 

10.  19.  the  Spirit  said,  behold  three  in.  seek  thee 

14.  15.  we  also  are  vt.  of  like  passions  with  you 

15.  26.  m.  that  hazarded  their  lives  for  Jesus 

16. 17.  these  m.  are  the  servants  of  most  high  God 
35.  sent  the  Serjeants,  saying,  lot  those  m.  go 

19.  37.  for  ye  have  brought  hither  these  m. 
20.30.  also  of  yourselves  shall  m.  arise,  speaking 
24.16.conscience  void  of  ofl'ence  toward  G.  and  in. 

Horn.  1. 27.  m.  with  m.  working,  which  is  unseemly 
12.  16.  but  condescend  to  m.  of  low  estate 

1  Cor.4.9.we  aie  made  a  spectacle  to  angels  and m. 
14.  2.  for  ho  speaketh  not  to  m.  but  to  God 

20.  not  children,  but  in  understanding  be  m. 

21.  with  m.  of  other  tongues  and  lips  will  I  speak 

2  Cor.  5. 1 1.  the  terror  of  the  Lord,  we  persuade  m. 

8.  13.  for  I  mean  not  that  other  m.  be  eased 
Tr'a/.l.lO.doI  now  persuade  m.?  orseek  please  ot.? 
Eph.  4.  8.  he  led  captive,  and  gave  gifts  to  m. 

5. 28.  so  ought  m.to  love  their  wives  as  their  own 

6.  7.  as  to  the  Lord  and  not  to  ?;i.  Cul.  3.  23. 

1  Thcss.  2. 4.  we  speak  not  as  pleasing  m.  but  God 

1  'Am.  2.  8.  I  will  that  m.  pray  every  where 

2  Tim.  3. 2.  m.  shall  be  lovers  of  themselves,  proud 
J/eb.  5.  1.  every  high-priest  taken  from  among  m. 

6.  16.  form,  verily  swear  by  the  greater,  an  oath 

7.  8.  and  here  m.  tliat  die  receive  tithes 

9.  27.  as  it  is  appointed  unto  vi.  once  to  die 
12.  23.  to  the  S|)irils  of  just  m.  made  perfect 

Jam.  3.  9-  therewith  curse  we  m.  wliicli  are  made 

3  Pet.  4. 6.  might  be  judged  according  to  m.  in  llesh 
2  Pet.  1.  21.  but  holy  ni.  of  God  spake  as  moved 
.fude  4.  for  there  arc  certain  m.  crept  in  unawares 
licv.  9.  4.  but  only  those  ?«.  which  have  not  the  seal 

10.  their  power  was  to  hurl  m.  five  months 
14.  4.  these  were  redeemed  from  among  ra. 

16. 18.  such  as  was  not  since  tn.  were  on  the  earth 
21.  3.  behold,  the  tabernacle  of  God  is  with  m. 

Jill  MEN. 
rr>n.l7.27.aZ?them.ofhis  house  were  circumcised 
f;io<i.4.l9.a/i  them,  are  dead  which  sought  iliy  life 
JVum. 16.29. if  these  die  the  common  doatii  ot'atl  m. 
Dcut.  4.  3.  all  the  m.  that  followed  liaal-peor 
S  Sam.  13.9.  Amnonsaid,  have  out  «iim.  from  me 
1  Kings  4.  31.  for  Solomon  was  wiser  than  all  yd. 
Job  37.  7.  that  all  m.  may  know  his  work 
Psal.  64.  9.  all  m.  shall  tear,  and  shall  declare 
89.  47.  wherefore  host  thou  made  all  m.  in  vain  7 
110.  11.  I  said  in  my  haste,  all  m.  are  liars 
Kcct.7.  2.  fur  that  is  the  end  oi  all  m.  and  living 
Ji~r.  42.  17.  HO  with  all  the  m.  thai  set  their  faces 
Zech.H.  10.  1  gel  allm.  everyone  ag.  his  neighbour 
Mat.  10. 2'i.  and  ye  shall  be  hated  of  a/{  m.  for  my 
name's  sake,  Mark  13.  13.  Luke  21.  17. 
19.  Il.a'im.  cannot  rec/'ive  thin  saying,  save  they 
26. 33.  tho'  all  m.  shall  be  ofTended,  yet  will  not  I 
^arA  1.37.  aHm  seek  thei;  II  5.20. aHm. did  marvel 

11.  32.  all  m.  counted  John  a  prophet  indeed 
iuJte 6.26. woe  lo  you  when  a/Zm.spcak  wcllofyou 

13.4.  were  sinners  above  ai/  m.thaldwelt  in  Jerus. 

John  1.7.  that  nil  m.  through  him  might  bclii-vo 
2.  24.  not  commit  himself,  because  he  know  all  m. 
3. 26.  the  same  bapli/.eili,  and  all  m.  come  to  him 
5. 23.  that  all  m.  should  honour  the  Son,  even  us 
11.48.  if  we  let  alone,  all  m.  will  believe  on  him 
12..32.if  I  lifted  up  from  earth, will  draw  a.  ra.  to  me 
13. 35.  by  this  shall  all  m.know  ye  are  my  disciples 

^ctn  1.24.  Loril,  who  knowest  the  hearts  of  nllm. 
4.  21.  all  m.  glorified  (loil  for  what  was  done 
17.  30.  Iiul  now  commniidelh  all  m.  to  re|niit 
31.  whereof  he  bulb  given  nisurnnre  to  all  m. 
19.  7.  and  all  the  m.  wore  abniit  twelve 

19.  and  burnsd  their  booki  bcfuru  all  m. 

380 


MEN 

.^cts  20.  26.  that  I  am  pure  from  blood  u(  all  m. 
22.  15.  for  thou  shalt  be  his  witness  to  all  m. 
Horn.  5.  12.  and  so  death  passed  upon  all  in.  for  all 
18.  judgment  came  on  all  ni.  to  condumnation, 
the  free  gift  came  on  all  m.  to  justilicution 
12. 17.  provide  things  honest  in  the  sigbtof  aZim. 

18.  if  it  be  possible,  live  peaceably  with  all  in. 
16. 19.  your  obedience  is  come  abroad  to  all  m. 

1  Cvr.  7.  7. 1  would  that  all  m.  were  even  us  1 

9.  19.  for  tho'  I  be  free  from  all  ra.  yet  servt.  to  all 
22. 1  am  made  all  things  to  all  in.  may  save  some 

10.  33.  even  as  I  please  all  m.  in  all  things 

15.  19.  we  are  of  all  m.  most  miserable 

2  Cor.  3.  2.  our  epistle  known  and  read  ofall  m. 
Gal.  6.  10.  let  us  do  good  to  all  vi.  especially  to 

household  of  I'ailh 
Eph. 3.9.  to  make  a/Z  m. see  what  is  tiie  fellowship 
P/iil.  4. 5.  let  your  moderation  be  known  to  alt  in. 

1  Thess.  2. 15.  please  not  G.  and  contrary  to  all  in. 
3. 12.  make  you  to  abound  in  love  toward  all  m. 

5.  14.  support  weak,  be  patient  toward  all  m. 

15.  but  ever  follow  that  which  is  good  to  all  vi. 

2  Thess.  3.  2.  for  all  in.  have  not  faith 

1  7Vm.2. 1.  that  giving  of  thanks  be  made  (ox  allm. 
4.  who  will  have  all  in.  to  be  saved  and  to  come 

4. 10.  we  trust  in  God,  who  is  Saviour  o( all  ra. 

2  Tim.  2. 24.  but  be  gentle  to  all  in.  apt  to  teach 

3.9.  for  their  folly  shall  be  made  nianil'esltu  all  m. 

4. 10.  no  man  stood  w  ith  me,  but  all  m.  forsook  me 
Tit.".  11.  the  grace  of  God  hath  appeared  to  allm. 

3.  2.  be  gentle,  shewing  all  meekness  to  all  m. 
Hcb.  12. 14.  follow  peace  with  all  in.  and  holiness 
Jam.  1.  5.  let  him  ask  of  God,  that  givetli  to  all  in. 
1  I'ct.  2.  17.  honour  all  in.  love  the  brotherhood 

3  ./uhn  12.  Demetrius  hath  good  report  of  all  m. 
See  Bretiirisn,  CiiiKr,  Chosen,  Evil,  Great. 

In  MEN. 
1  Cor.  3.  21.  tlierefore  let  no  man  glory  in  in. 
See  Israel,  Jldaii. 
J.ike  MEN. 
1  Sam.  4.  0.  quit  yourselves  like  ra.  1  Cor.  16.  13. 
Psal.  82.  7.  ye  are  gods,  but  ye  shall  die  like  m. 
Hos.  6.7.  but  they  I.  in.  have  transsgiessed  covenant 
Luke  12. 36.  yourselves  ^  ra.  that  wait  for  their  L. 

Mighty  MEN. 
Gen.  6.  4.  m.  m.  which  were  of  old,  men  of  renown 
Kxod.  15.  15.  VI.  VI.  of  Moab  trembling  shall  lake 
Josh.  1. 14.  the  mightij  m.  of  valour  shall  pass  over 

6.  2. 1  have  given  thee  Jericho  and  the  mighty  m 
8. 3.  Joshua  chose  out  thirty  thousand  mighty  in. 

10.  2.  all  the  in.  of  Gibeon  were  mighty 

7.  ascended  from  Gdgal  with  m.  m.  of  valour 

1  .Sam.  2. 4.  the  bows  of  the  mighty  m.  were  broken 

2  Sam.  10.  7.  when  David  heard  of  it  he  sent  Joab 

and  all  the  host  of  the  in.  in.  20.  7. 1  Chron.  19. 8. 

16.  6.  mighty  vi.  were  on  his  right  hand  and  left 
17.8.  and  his  ra.  that  they  be  mighty  and  chafed 
23.8.tlicsel)ethenamcsoftlie  inighlym.l)uvU\  liad 

9.  Eleazar  one  of  the  three  in.  m.  with  David 

16.  the  three  inightij  m.  brake  thro'  the  host,  I 
22.  Uenaiah  had  the  name  among  three  ra.  ra 

1  Kings  1.8.  the  mighty  ra.  were  not  with  Adonijali 

10.  the  mighty  m.  and  Solomon  he  called  not 

2  ftings  15.  20.  exacted  of  all  mighty  in.  of  weahl 
24.  14.  he  carried  away  all  the  m.  vt.  <if  valour 

1  Chr.  5.  24.  were  m.  m.  of  valour,  7. 7,  9,  1 1 ,  40. 
8.  40.  the  sons  of  Ulam,  were  mighty  m.  of  valour 

11.  10.  these  also  arc  tiie  chief  of  the  m.  m.  11. 

12.  1.  they  were  among  the  mighty  m.  heljiers 
21.  were  all  vt.  m.  of  valour,  25,  30.  |  20.  6,  31. 

29.  24.  ra.  m.  submitted  them^^elves  lo  Sol(Mn(Mi 

2  Chron.  13.3.  Jeroboam  set  battle  against  Abijah, 

being  m.  m.  of  valour,  14.8.  |  17.  13,  14,  16. 
25.6.  Amaziah  hired  a  hundred  thousand  in.  in. 
32.  3.  Ilezekiah  look  counsel  with  his  miahty  m. 
21.  an  angel  cut  od'all  the  mighty  m.  of  valour 
JVcA.  II.  14.  and  their  brethren  mighty  m.  of  valour 
.fob  34.  24.  he  shall  break  in  jiieccg  mighty  m. 
Kcci.7.19.wisdom  strcnglhencth  niorellmn  tenin.m. 
Cont.  4.  4.  hang  bucklers,  all  shields  of  rai'wA/y  wi. 
/»a.21.17.  mighty  m.  of  Kedur  shall  be  diminished 
.Ter.  5.16.  an  open  sepulchre,  they  are  all  mighty  m. 
26.  21.  Jehoiakiin  the  king,  with  nil  his  mighty  m. 
41.  16.  Johanan  recovered  Ihe  mighty  m.  of  war 
46.  9.  let  m.  m.  come  forth  ||  48.  14.  wo  nro  m.  wi 
4H.41.  hearts  ofm.7n.  of  Moab,  as  heart  of  woman 

49.  22.  heart  of  mighty  m.  of  Edom  shall  bo  as 

50.  36.  a  sword  is  upon  her  m.  ra.  and  they  shall 
51.30.mi^A«ym.  of  Babylon  have  forborne  lo  fight 

50.  her  m.  m.  are  taken,  their  bows  are  broken 
57.1  will  makedriink  her  I'.'ipininHiind  mightym. 
Lam.  1.  15.  Iiord  hath  troddni  undi-r  foot  my  m.  ni. 
Kirk.  39.  20.  be  fillc-d  nt  mv  laMe  with  mighty  m. 
/Jan.3.20.nommnndcd  mighty  m.Ui  bind  Shadrach 
//■««.  10.  13.  trust  in  the  multiiudc  of  thy  mightym. 
Jiirl  2.  7.  they  shall  run  like  might)/  m.  and  climh 
3.  9.  prepare  war,  wake  up  the  mifhty  m. 
f)''ail.'.).f\\y  raiV/ifi/m.OTi'inan.  shall  be  dismayed 
.Viih.  2.  3.  till'  shiidd  of  bis  miu'hiy  m.  U  made  red 
ZccA.  10.  5.  they  shall  bo  an  mighty  m.  that  tread 


MEN 

Rev.  G.  15.  mighty  m.  hide  themselves  in  the  deir 
I'J.  18.  that  ye  may  eat  the  llesh  of  mighty  m. 

Of  MEN. 
Gen.  6.  2.  sons  of  God  saw  the  daughters  of  m. 

4.  the  sons  of  God  came  in  to  the  daughters  ofm. 
J.et).  27.29.  none  devoted  of  vt.  shall  be  redeemed 
Mum.  18. 15.  whether  it  be  of  ra.  or  beasts,  bu  tliina 
31.  11.  took  all  the  prey  both  ofm.  and  beasts 
■/udg.  S.  18.  what  manner  ofm.  were  they  ye  slewl 

1  Sam.  1. 1  11.  give  to  thy  handmaid  a  seed  of  7tt. 
10.  20.  there  went  with  him  a  band  of  in. 

2  Savt.  7. 14. 1  will  chasten  him  with  the  rod  ofm. 
2  Kings  13.  21.  behold  they  spied  a  band  of  m. 

23. 14.  he  filled  their  places  with  the  bones  of  vi 

1  Chr.  5.  21.  they  took  away  ofvi.  ten  thousand 

2  Chr.  22.  1.  the  band  of  ra.  had  slain  all  the  eldest 
Job  7.  20.  what  shall  1  do,  O  thou  Preserver  of  nt.l 

31.  t  33.  if  I  covered  after  the  manner  of  m. 
33.  10.  then  he  openeth  the  ears  o/ ra.  and  sealctli 
Psal.  17.  4.  concerning  the  works  ofm. 

22.  0.  but  I  am  a  reproach  of  m.  and  despised 
/j>n.2.11.thehaughtines8o/ra. shall  be  bowed  down 

17.  the  haughtiness  o/yn.  shall  be  made  low 
29.  13.  their  fear  is  taught  by  the  i>recept  of  m. 
44.  11.  and  the  workmen,  they  are  of  in. 
51.  7.  fear  ye  not  the  reproach  of  vt.  nor  be  afraid 
•>3.  3.  he  is  despised  and  rejected  of  m.  a  man  of 

Jer.  9.  22.  carca-ses  of  ra.  shall  fall  as  dung  oil  field 
33.  5.  to  fill  them  with  the  dead  bodies  of  ra. 

Fzek  16.  17.  and  rnadest  to  thyself  images  of  rx. 
24.  17.  and  eat  not  the  bread  ofvi.  22. 
27. 13.  they  traded  the  persons  ofm.  in  market 
36.  12.  thou  shalt  no  more  bereave  them  of  vt. 
38.  the  waste  cities  be  filled  wilh  Hocks  of  m. 

Dan.  2.  43.  they  shall  mingle  with  ihe  seed  of  m. 

4.  17.  the  living  may  know  that  the  Most  Hifh 

rulcth  in  the  kingdom  of  vt.  25,  32.  |  5.  21 
and  settelh  up  over  it  the  basest  of  m. 
•Wc.  2. 12.  by  reason  of  multitude  of  vi.  Z.ech.2.4 
Mat.  4.  19.  and  I  will  make  vuu  fishers  of  m. 

5.  13.  to  be  cast  out  and  trodden  under  foot  of  m. 
6.2.  ihey  may  have  glory  of  m.  ||  5.  seen  of  m.  23. 5. 

10.  17.  beware  of  m.  \\  19. 12.  made  eunuchs  af  m. 
15. 9.  for  doctrines,  commandiu.  of  m.  Mark  7.  7. 

16.  23.  but  the  tilings  that  be  of  in.  Mark  8.  3:1. 

17.  22.  shall  be  betrayed  into  the  bunds  of  m. 

Mark  9.  31.  J.ukc  9.  44.  |  24.  7. 
21.  25.  was  John's  baptism  of  heaven  or  of  m.? 
26.  ifwesay  ofm.  Mark  11.  30,  32.  Lukc\Hl4fi. 

22. 16.  regardesl  not  persons  ofm.  Mark  12.  14. 

23.  7.  love  to  be  called  ofm.  Rabbi,  Kabbi 
Mark  7.  21.  out  of  the  heart  of  m.  proceed  evil 
John  1.  4.  and  the  life  was  the  light  of  m. 

12.  43.  they  loved  the  praise  of  in.  more  than 

18.  3.  Judas  having  received  a  band  of  m. 
Jlcts  5.  36.  to  whom  a  number  «/  »/i.  joined 

38.  if  this  work  be  ofm.  it  will  come  to  nought 
14.  11.  the  gods  arc  come  down  in  likeness  of  m. 

15. 17.  the  residue  of  ra.  might  seek  alter  God 
17. 12.  honourable  women,  and  of  m.  not  a  few 

liom.  1.  18.  against  all  unrighteousness  ofm. 

2.  16.  when  God  shall  judge  the  secrets  of  m. 
29.  whoso  praise  is  not  ofm.  but  of  God 

6.  19.  1  speak  after  the  manner  of  in.  because 
14.  18.  that  serveth  Christ  is  approved  of  m. 

1  Cor.  2.  5.  fnith  not  stand  in  the  wisdom  ofm. 
4.  6.  ye  might  learn  in  us  not  tn  think  of  in. 

7.  2;l.  ye  are  bought,  be  not  the  servants  of  m. 
13.1. though  I  speak  with  tontrues  n/rn. and  niisr  Is 
1.5.32.  if  after  the  manner  of  in.  I  have  fought 

2  Cor.  8.  21.  honest  tliiii£s  in  the  sight  of  m. 
Gal.  1.  1.  Paul  an  apostle,  not  of  m.  but  by  Christ 

3.  15.  brethren,  I  speak  after  the  manner  of  m. 
Eph.  4.  14.  wind  of  doctrine,  by  sleight  ofm. 
Phil.  2.  7.  and  was  made  in  the  likeness  ofm. 
Col.  2.  8.  vain  deceit,  after  the  tradition  ofm. 

22.  after  commandments  and  doctrines  of  m. 
1  Thess.  1.5.  ye  know  what  manner  o/m.  we  were 
2.  6.  nor  of  m.  sought  we  glory,  neither  of  you 

13.  ye  received  it  not  as  tho  word  of  m. 
1  Tim.  6.  5.  disputings  of  m.  of  rorrupt  minds 
T;7.1.14.commandmenlgo/m.  thatturn  I'rom  Iriiih 
1  I'rt.i.  4.  disallowed  indeed  ofm.  but  chospn  ofO. 

15.  may  put  to  silence  ignorance  u/fordish  m. 

4.  2.  he  should  no  lonjer  live  to  the  lusts  of  m. 
1  .fuhn  5.  9.  if  we  receive  tho  witness  of  m. 
Hrr.  9.  7.  their  faces  were  as  tho  faces  of  ra. 

15.  iirepared  to  slay  the  third  pan  of  m.  18. 

11.  13.  ill  the  enrth(|uake  were  slain  IP/"  ra.  7O00 

13.  13.  mnkelli  fire  come  down  in  sisht  of  vi. 
18.  13.  niercliundise  of  slaves  and  souls  ofm. 

See  Ciiii.nFKN. 
Son >  of  MEN. 
I's.  4.  2.  O  ye .«.  of  m.  how  ion?  will  ye  turn,  oP.  1. 
31.  19.  tli.it  trust  in  Ihee,  before  the  sons  of  m. 
33.  13.  the  Lord  behnldeth  nil  Ihe  sons  of  m. 
.'•7.  4.  I  lie  Hnions  the  sons  ofm.  whose  teeth  A'e 
1 15.  12.  to  make  known  to.».  i</m.  his  miebly  let* 
/'riir.H.Ml.iindinvdelishls  W"-rc  with  lh''«<>H.fo/i«. 
/•,Vc/.1.13.  travail  God  hath  given  to  tlio«»«w«/ra 


MEN 

Eccl  2. 3.  might  see  what  was  tliat  good  for  s.  ofm. 

8.  and  1  gut  iiiu  the  deli^'lils  of  the  ^ns  of  m. 

3.  iO  travail  which  God  liath  given  to  suns  of  m. 

18. 1  said  concerning  the  estate  of  tlie  sons  uf  m. 

lit.  fur  that  which  befalietii  the  sons  of  m. 

8.  11.  heart  of  sons  of  m.  is  set  iji  tlieni  to  do  evil 

9. 3.  also  the  heart  of  the  sons  of  m.  is  full  of  evil 

lii.  so  arc  the  suns  of  m.  snared  in  an  evil  time 

Isa.  5-J.  14.  and  his  form  more  than  the  sons  of  m. 

Jcr.  32.  IS),  thine  eyes  are  open  uiion  the  sons  of  in. 

Van.  5.  21.  and  he  was  driven  from  the  sons  ofm. 

Jt).  10.  one  like  the  siniiliiude  of  the  sons  of  m. 

Jocll.  1-.  joy  is  withered  away  from  the  »■</««  o/»h. 

Mic.a.l.  tarrieth  not,  nor  waiteth  for  the  sous  of  in. 

Mark  3.  2i:?.  all  sins  shall  be  forgiven  to  sons  of  m. 

JCji/i.'^.o.  which  was  not  made  known  to  sons  of  in. 

See  Old,  Rich,  Rigutkous,  SiNoiNa. 

MEN-SERVANTS. 

Oen.  12.  IG.  Abram  had  m.-s.  and  maid-servants 

20.  14.  Abinielech  gave  jn.-scrvants  to  Abraham 

24.  ;to.  God  hath  given  my  master  m.-s.  and  gold 

30.43.Jacob  had  m.-s.  and  camels,  and  asses,  32.5. 

y.i.od.  21.  7.  she  shall  not  go  out  a^m.  sercants  do 

J)(ilt.  12.12.  rejoice  before  Lord, ye  and  m.-scrv. 

1  6ani.8.  It),  the  king  will  take  you  m.-seruants 

2  Kings  5.  26.  is  it  a  time  to  receive  m.-servants? 
Lulic  12.45.  and  shall  begin  to  beat  the  ni.-striiajits 

.See  Two. 
MExV  of  IVar. 
Ji'nm.  31. 49.  servants  have  taken  sum  of  m.  of  w. 
Dent.  2.  14.  till  all  the  generation  of  the  m.  of  w. 
came  out  ofEgyjit  were  consumed,  16.  Jos/i.5.G. 
Josh.  6.  3.  ye  shall  compass  tlie  city,  ye  m.  of  w. 
Judg.  20. 17.  drew  sword,  all  these  were  m.  of  war 
I  Sam.  16. 5.  and  Saul  set  him  over  the  m.  of  war 

1  Kings  9.  22.  hut  they  were  7ii.  of  war,  and  the 

chief  of  his  captains,  2  Ckron.  8.  9. 

2  Kings  25. 4.  and  all  the  m.  of  war  (led,  Jcr.  52.  7 

19.  took  anoliicer  set  over  m.  of  war,  ytT.52. 25 

1  C'lir.  12.8.  of  Gadiies7n.  of  war  came  to  David 
38.  all  these  m.  of  war  came  to  Hebron  to  make 

2  C'/tr.  13. 3.  Abijah  set  battle  in  array  with  m.  of  w. 
17.  13.  and  the  m.  of  war  were  in  Jerusalem 

Jrr.?&.  4.  tlius  he  weakeneth  the  hands  ofm.  of  w. 
41.3.  slew  wi.o/!c.  1151.32.  m.  o/ie.are  affrighted 
16.  Johanan  took  the  in.  of  war  and  the  women 
49.  2t).  all  the  m.  of  war  shall  be  cut  off,  50.  30. 
y.zclc.  27.  10.  they  of  Piiut  weie  thy  m.  of  war 

27.  all  thy  ?n.  of  war  tha4|,are  in  thee  shall  fall 
39.20.  shall  be  filled  at  my  table  with  m.  of  war 
Joel  2.  7.  they  shall  climb  the  wall  like  m.  of  war 

3.  9.  wake  up  the  mighty  men,  lot  all  the  m.  of 

w.  draw  near,  let  them  come 
/-u/ic23.11.  Herod  with  his  m.«/(o.set  him  at  nought 

MEN  joined  wiih  wicked. 
Gen.  13.  13.  but  the  m.  of  Sodom  were  wicked 
J^'um.  16. 26.  depart  from  tents  ofthcs-e  wicked  m. 

1  .Sam.  30.  22.  then  answered  all  the  wicked  m. 

2  .Sam.  3.  34.  as  a  man  falleth  before  wicked  in. 

4.  H.how  much  more  when  wicked m.hdvc  slain 
Job  22. 15.  marked  old  way  that  to.  in.  have  trodden 

34.  8.  and  which  walketh  with  wicked  m. 

26.  he  etriketh  ihcm  as  wicked  m.  in  open  sight 
36.  because  of  his  answers  for  wicked  m. 

F.ccl.8.  14.  there  be  !OJcA-.  ?«.  to  whom  ithappenetli 
.ff:r.  5.  26.  among  my  people  are  found  wicked  m. 
JIIiU.  21. 41.  will  miserably  destroy  those  wick.  m. 
2  Thcss.  3. 2.  that  we  mav  bo  delivered  from  w.  m. 

Wise  MEN. 
Gen.  41.8.  Pharaoh  called  for  all  w.  m.  F.xod.  7. 11. 
F.Jiod.  36.  4.  all  the  icise  m.  that  wrought  the  work 
JJcnt.  I.  13.  take  ye  wise  m.  and  understanding 

15.  I  took  the  chief  of  your  tribes,  wise  m. 
F.-fth.l.V.i.  king  said  to  wisem.  that  knew  the  times 

6.  13.  then  said  Haman's  wise  in.  and  Zcresli 
.Toll  l.>.  18.  which  w.  m.  have  told  fnirn  their  lathers 

:U.  2.  hear  my  words,  O  ye  wise  m.  and  give  car 
Psal.  49.  10.  he  seetli.that  wise  m.  die,  and  the  fool 
Pror.  10. 14.  jf/stm.  Iny  upknowledge,  but  foolish 

13. 20.  lie  th.Mt  walketh  with  wise  m.  shall  be  wise 

29.  8.  I)iit  wise  m.  turn  away  wrath 
F.ccl.  9.  17.  the  words  of  Kiscm.  are  heard  in  quiet 
/."I.  19.  12.  where  are  thy  leise  in.  let  Ihem  tell 

29.  14.  the  wisdom  of  their  wise  m.  shall  perish 

44.  25.  ihiit  lurnetli  wise  in.  backward 
J-r.  8.  9.  the  wise  m.  arc  ashamed  and  dismayed 

10.  7.  as  among  all  the  wise  m.  of  the  nations 

."iO.  35.  sword  is  upon  Babylon,  and  on  hor  wise  m. 

51.  .57.  and  I  will  ?nake  drunken  her  wise  m. 
F.zck.  27. 8.  thy  wise  m.  O  Tyrns,  were  thy  pilots 

9.  and  the  wise  m.  thereof  were  thy  calkers 
Dan.  2.  12.  to  destroy  all  the  wise  m.  of  Habylon 

27.  cannot  the  wise  m.  shew  unto  the  king 

4.  6.  (  made  a  decree  to  bring  in  all  the  wise  m. 

Ti.  7.  Relshazzar  the  king  spake  to  the  wise  m. 
Ohad.  8.  even  destroy  the  wise  m.  out  of  Edom 
Mai.  2.  1.  came  wise  m.from  the  east  to  Jerusalem 
7.  H«rod,  when  he  had  privilv  called  the  wise  m. 

16.  wa«  mocked  oXicise  m.  |{  23. 34. 1  send  wise  in. 
.  I  Cor.  1. 2().  not  many  iO'>>;  m.  not  noble,  arc  called 

381 


MEN 

1  Cor.  10.15.  speak  as  to  wise  m.  judge  ye  what  I  say 

MEN  joined  with  women. 

F.xod.  35 .22.  both  in.  and  women  brought  bracelets 

i'cut.2.34.  we  utterly  destroyed  the  m.  and  women, 

and  little  ones,  of  every  city.  Josh.  8.  25. 

Judg.  9.  49.  died  about  a  thousand  in.  and  women 

51.  and  thither  lied  all  the  m.  and  women 

16.27.  now  the  house  was  full  of  /«.  and  women, 

were  upon  the  roof  about  3UU0  m.  and  women 

2  Sam.  6. 19.  he  dealt  as  well  to  the  women  as  m. 
JVch.S.2.  brought  the  law  before  »h.  and  women, '3. 
.tcr.  44.  20.  Jeremiah  said  to  the  in.  and  women 
.'lets  5. 14.  were  added  to  Lord  both  m.and  women 

8.  3.  Saul  haling  in.  and  women,  committed  them 

12.  they  were  baptized,  both  m.  and  women 
9. 2.  whotbor  m.  or  w.  he  might  bring  them  bound 
22.  4.  delivering  into  prisons  both  m.  and  women 
Men,  IVomen  and  Children.   See  Childrk.n. 
Ye  MEN. 
Judg.  9.  7.  hearken  unto  inc,  ye  m.  ofShechem 
Job  34.  10.  hearken,  ye  m.  of  understanding 
Mcis  1.  11.2/c/n.  of  Galilee  ||  2. 14.yc  m.  of  Jndea 
5.  35.  yc  III.  of  Israel  ||  17.  22.  yc  in.  of  Athens 
13.  15.  ye  m.  and  brethren,  if  ye  have  any  word 

19.  35.  ye  m.  of  Eiihesus,  what  man  is  there 

Young  MEN. 
Gen.  14.  24.  that  which  the  young  in.  have  eaten 
Exod.ii.h.  Moses  sent  young m.  which  offer,  burnt 
J^um.  11.  28.  Joshua  one  of  the  j/oitn^7n. answered 
.losk.  6.  23.  the  young  m.  that  were  spies  went  in 
Judg.  14.  10.  for  so  used  the  young  in.  to  do 
Rutli  2.  9.  have  I  not  charged  the  young  m.  that 
3. 10.  inasmuch  as  thou  foMowedst  not  young  m 

1  .Sam.  2.17.  the  sin  of  the  young  m.  was  very  great 
8.  lb.  he  will  take  your  goodliest  young  m. 
21.4.  if  the  young  in.  kept  themselves  from  women 

5.  and  the  vessels  of  the  young  m.  are  holy 
25.  8.  ask  thy  young  m.  and  they  will  shew  thee 

25.  thine  handmaid  saw  not  the  young  m. 
26.22.  let  one  of  the  young  in.  come  over  and  fetch 

30.  17.  save  400  young  in.  which  rode  on  camels 

2  Sam.  1. 15.  and  David  called  one  ui'lhcyuung  m. 
2.  14.  let  the  young  m.  arise  and  play  before  us 

21.  and  lay  thee  hold  on  one  of  the  young  in. 
13.32.  not  sujipose  they  have  slain  all  the  young  m. 
18.  15.  and  ten  young  m.  that  bare  Joab's  armour 

1  Kings  12. 8.  Rehoboarn  consulted  with  young  in. 

14. spake  after  counsel  oi'y.  m.  2  Ckron.  10. 8, 14. 

20.  ii.hy  young  m.  of  the  princes  of  thejtrovinces 
^Kingsi.  22.  send,  I  pray  thee,  one  of  the  j/oun^m. 

5.  22.  there  be  come  two  young  m.  of  the  proidiets 

8.  12.  their  ?/o«?(^/«.  wiltihouslay  with  thesivord 

2  C/iro  (1.36.17. who  slew  their  2/(;UH^/"m.  with  sword 
Job  1.  19.  it  fell  ujion  Ihe  young  m.  they  are  dead 

29.  8.  the  young  m.  saw  me,  and  hid  themselves 
Psal.  78.  63.  the  fire  consutned  their  young  m. 

148.  12.  praise  the  Lord,  young  m.  and  maidens 
I'rov.  20.29.  the  glory  of  young  in.  is  their  strength 
fsa.  9. 17.  Lord  shall  have  no  joy  in  their  young  m. 
13. 18.their  bows  also  shall  dash  ?/o«?)^'m.  to  pieces 
23.4.  neither  do  I  nourisii  up  young  m.  nor  virgins 

31.  8.  and  his  young  m.  ehail  be  discomfited 
40.  'M).  and  the  young  in.  shall  utterly  fail 
42.  t  22.  spoiled  in  snaring  all  the  y.  m.  of  them 

.Icr.Ci.  11.  I  will  pour  fury  on  assembly  of  y.  m. 

9.  21.  to  cut  off  the  young  m,  from  the  streets 
11.  22.  the  young  m.  shall  die  by  the  sword 
15.  8.  I  brought  against  the  mother  of  the  y.  m. 
18.  21.  let  their  young  m.  be  slain  by  the  sword 
31.  13.  both  young  m.  and  old  rejoice  together 

48.  15.  his  chosen  young  m.  are  gone  to  slaughter 

49.  26.  her  young  m.  shall  fall  in  her  streeis 
50.30.  therefore  shall  hery.  in.  fall  in  the  streets 
51.  3.  S(iare  ye  not  her  young  m.  destroy  utterly 

Lam.  1. 15.  called  an  assembly  to  crush  uiy  y.  m. 

18.  my  virgins  and  y.  in.  are  gone  into  captivity 

2.  21.  the  young  m.  and  old  lie  on  the  ground 

5.  13.  they  took  the  young  m.to  grind,  children  fell 

14.  the  young  m.  have  ceased  from  their  music 

F.-.ek.  23.  6.  all  of  them  desirable  young  in.  12,  23. 

30.  17.  young  in.  of  Aven  shall  fall  by  the  sword 
.fuel  2.  28.  your  ;/.  m.  shall  see  visions,  Jiets  2.  17. 
.tmus  2.  11.  and  of  your  young  m.  for  Nazarites 

4. 10.  your  young  m.  have  I  slain  with  the  sword 
8.  13.  and  your  young  in.  shall  faint  for  tliirst 
y.ech.  9.  17.  corn  shall  make  the  young  in.  cheerful 
Mark  14.  51.  and  the  young  m.  laid  hold  on  him 
•'lets  5.  6.  and  the  young  m.  arose,  wound  him  up 

10.  the  young  in.  came  in  and  found  her  Head 
Tit.  2.  6.  young  m.  likewise  exhort  to  be  sober 

1  John  2.  13. 1  w rite  to  von,  young  in.  because,  14. 

MEND. 

2  Hir.  24.  12.  brass  to  m.  the  bouse  of  the  Lord 
34.  10.  they  gave  it  the  workmen  to  in.  the  house 

MENDING. 
Mat.  4. 21.  with  Zidiedec  m.  tbeir  nets,  Mark  1. 19. 

MEN-PLEA  SERS. 
Fph.  6.  6.  not  with  eve-servicr,  as  m.-p.  Col.  3. 22. 

MEN-STEALERS. 
1  Tim. 1.10.  the  law  is  made  for  m.-stealers,  for  liars 


MER 

MENSTRUOUS. 

fsa.  30. 22.  thou  shaft  cast  them  away  as  a  m.  cloth 
/,fim.l.l7.JeruBalcm  is  asa  m. woman  among  them 
Eiek.  18.  C.  neither  hath  roine  near  to  a  m.  worean 

MENTION. 
Gen.  40. 14.  and  make  m.  of  me  unto  Pharaoh 
F.xod.  23.13.  make  no  m.  of  other  gods,  .losh.  23. 7 
1  Sam.  4.  18.  when  he  made  in.  of  the  ark  of  God 
fob  28.  18.  no  in.  shall  be  made  of  coral  or  pearlg 
I'sal.  71.  16. 1  will  make  m.  of  thy  righteousness 
87.  4.  I  will  make  in.  of  Raliab  and  Babylon 
fsa.  12.  4.  make  ni.  that  his  name  is  e.\alted 
19.  17.  that  maketh  m.  theieof  shall  be  afraid 
26.  13.  by  thee  only  we  will  make  in.  of  thy  name 
48.  1.  and  make  m.  of  the  God  of  Israel,  but  not 
49. 1.  from  bowels  hath  he  made  m.  of  my  name 
62.6.  ye  that  makcm.  of  tiic  Lord,  keep  not  silence 
./er.4.16.  make  ye  jn.to  nations,  publish  agst.  Jems. 
20.9.  I  will  not  make  m.  of  him,  nor  speak  more 
yimos  6. 10.  we  may  not  make  m.  of  name  of  Lord 
Rom.l-'J.  without  ceasing  I  make  in.  of  you  always 
in  my  prayers,  F.ph.  1.  16.  1  Thcss.  1.  2. 
Phil.  1. 1  3.  I  thank  my  God  on  every  ni.  of  you 
Pkilein.  4.  making  m.  of  thee  always  in  my  jiraycrs 
Heb.  11.22.  Joseph  made  rn.ofthedciiartingol  Isr. 

MENTION. 
/itrt.GS.  7. 1  will  m.  the  loving-kindnesses  of  the  L. 
Jcr.  23.  36.  burden  of  the  Lord  shall  ye  vi.  no  more 

MENTIONED. 
.Josh.  21.  9.  these  cities,  which  are  m.  by  name 

1  Citron.  4.  38.  these  m.  by  name,  were  princes 

2  Ckron.  20.  34.  Jehu  is  in.  in  the  book  of  the  kings 
F.iek.  16.  56.  for  thy  sister  Sodom  was  not  m. 

18.  22.  his  transgiessions  shall  not  be  m.  to  him 
24.  all  his  righteousness  shall  not  be  ra. 

33. 16.  none  of  his  sins  shall  be  in.  unto  him 

MERCHANDISE. 
Deut.  21.  14.  thou  shall  not  make  ni.  of  her 

24. 7.  stealing  his  brethren,  and  maketh  in.  of  him 
I'rov.  3.  14. 5?:.  of  it  is  better  than  the  in.  of  silver 

31.  18.  she  ptrceiveth  that  her  to.  is  good 
Isa.  23.  18.  her  m.  shall  be  holiness  to  the  Lord 

45. 14.  the  m.  of  Ethiopia  shall  come  over  to  thea 
.fer.  14.  t  18.  priest  make  m.  against  a  land 
F.iek.  26.  12.  they  shall  make  a  prey  of  thy  m. 

27.  9.  the  ships  were  in  thee  to  occupy  thy  in. 

15.  many  isles  were  the  ra.  of  thy  hands 

28.  16.  by  the  multituile  of  thy  m.  they  have  filled 
Mat.  22.  5.  one  to  his  farm,  another  to  his  in. 
/o/iH2.16.make  not  my  Father's  house  a  house  ofm. 

2  Pel.  2.  3.  with  feigned  words  make  m.  of  you 
Rcc.  18.  11.  no  man  buyeth  their  m.  any  more 

12.  the  in.  of  gold,  anil  silver,  and  of  pearls 
MERCHANT. 
Gen.  23.  16.  silver  current  money  with  the  m. 
37.  28.  then  there  passed  by  Midianites  m.-men 
1  Kings  10. 15.  besides  that  he  had  of  the  »n.-men 
Prov.  31.  14.  she  is  like  the  m.  ships,  she  brings 

24.  maketh  linen,  and  delivcieth  girdles  to  the  m. 
Cant.  3.  6.  perfumed  with  all  powders  of  the  m. 
Isa.  23.  11.  a  commandment  against  the  m.  city 
F.iek.  27.  3.  which  art  a  m.  of  the  i>coplc  for  isles 

12.  Tarshish  was  thy  in.  by  reason  of  multitude 

16.  Syria  ||  18.  Damascus  ||  20.  Dedan  was  m. 
Hos.  12.7.  he  is  a  ni.  balances  of  deceit  in  his  hand 
Zeph.  1.  II.  for  all  the  m.  people  are  cut  down 
Mat.  13.  45.  like  a  »n.-ninii  seeking  gO'^dly  pearls 

MERCHANTS. 

1  Kings  10.  15.  and  of  the  traffic  ofspiccm. 
28.  the  kinism.  received  linen  yarn, 2  C/ir.  1. 16. 

2  Ckron.  9.  14.  besides  that  which  in.  brought 
JVc/i.  3.  32.  repaired  the  goldsmiths  and  the  m. 

13.  20.  so  the  m.  lodged  without  Jerusalem 
.lob  41.  6.  shall  they  part  him  among  the  in.  ? 
Isn.  23.  2.  whom  the  m.  of  Zidon  replenished 
8.  the  crowning  city,  whose  m.  are  princes 
47.  15.  even  thy  m.  they  shall  wander  every  one 
F.zck.  17.  4.  cropi  the  twigs,  he  set  it  in  a  city  of  m. 
27.  13.  Javan,  Tubal,  and  Me^shech,  were  thy  m. 
1.5.  Dedan  ||  17.  Jiidali  and  Israel  thy  m. 
21.  in  these  were  thy  m.  \\  22.  m.  of  Shebu,  23. 
24.  these  were  thy  m.  in  all  sorts  of  things 
3l>.  ni.  shall  hiss  at  iheo  |{  38.  13.  m.  of 'I'arshish 
SVali.  3.  16.  hast  multiplied  thy  m.  above  the  stars 
lirir.  18.  3.  for  the  in.  of  the  earth  are  waxen  rich 
11.  the  m.  of  the  earth  shall  weep  over  her 
23.  for  thy  m.  were  the  great  men  of  the  earth 
MERCY 
Signifies,  [I]  That  ctscntial  perfection  in  God, 
whereby  he  pities  and  relieves  Ihr  miseries  of 
his   creatures,  Psal.  100.  5.     Tit.  3.  5.     [2] 
Grace,  which  flows  from  mercy  ns  its  fountain , 
Jnde  2.     [3]    Eternal  life  and  huppinrss  in 
heaven,  which  is   the  chief  fruit   of   mercy, 
2  Tim.  I.  18.     [4]  jill  the  blessings  and  bene- 
fits, whether  bodily  or.spirilual,  which  proceed 
from  the  mercy  of  Ghd,  Psal.  106.  7.  |  119.  41. 
[5]    That   pity  and    compa-^sion   which   one 
man  shews  toward  another  that  is  in  misery 
Luke    10.    37.     [CJ    Clemency    and    bounty 


MER 


MER 


Prov.  20. 28.    [7]  All  duties  of  charity  toward  1  Pet.  1.3.  accord,  to  liis  abundant  m.  hath  bepottcn 
9Mr  nfi/Aiott'',  Alal.  9.  13 


[8J  frtlended  o.-ta 
of  mercy,  I'rov.  Vi.  10. 
Gen.  24.  2?.  not  let\  destitute  my  master  of  m.  trull 
■i'i.  14.  and  God  give  you  in.  bol'ore  the  man 
F.jcod  34.  7.  keeping  ;n.  for  thousands,  Dan.  9.  4 
JVuOT.  14. 18.  the  Lord  is  long-sutfering  and  of  great 
OT.  forgiving  iiii(}uity,  I'sal.  103.  11.  1  14a.  8. 
Dnil.  7.  9.  who  kecputh  covi.nanl  and  hi.  12. 
2  .Sum.  7. 15.  but  my  m.  sliall  not  depart  (torn  him, 
1  Chron.  17.  13.  Psal.  89.  24. 
15.  20.  return  thou,  m.  and  truth  be  with  tlieo 
1  Kings  8. 23.  who  kcepest  covenant  and  ;«.  with 
thy  servants,  J\' A.  1.  5.  |  9.  32. 
1   Chron.  16.  34.   his  m.  enduretli  for  ever,  41. 
2  Chron.  5.  13.  |  7.  3,  G.  |  20.  21.  Kira 
3.  11.    Psal.  10(i.  1.  I  1U7.  1.  I  118.  1. 
I  136.  1.  to  the  end,  .fcr.  33.  11. 
Eira  7. 25.  hath  e.xtended  m.  to  me  before  the  king 
y.9.extendedHi.to  usinsight  of  tlie  kings  of  I'ersia 
JWA.  1.  11.  grant  \.'ita  vi.  in  the  siglit  of  this  man 
Job  37.  13.  whether  for  correction  or  for  m. 
fsal.  21.  7.  and  tlirough  the  m.  of  the  Most  High 
23.  6.  surely  goodness  and  m.  shall  follow  me 
25. 10.  all  the  paths  of  the  Lord  are  m.  and  truth 
32.I0.that  trusts  in  Ld.  m.  shall  compass  him  about 
33.  t  5.  the  earth  is  full  of  the  in.  of  the  Lord 

18.  eye  of  the  Lord  is  on  them  that  hope  in  his  m. 
.W.  8.  1  trust  in  the  m.  of  God  for  ever  and  ever 

57.  3.  God  shall  send  forth  his  m.  and  truth 
5!l.  10.  the  God  of  my  in.  shall  jirevent  me,  17. 
61.7.  O  prepare  m.  and  truth  which  may  preserve 
62.  12.  also  unto  thee,  O  Lord,  bclongeth  m. 
66.  20.  which  hath  not  turned  his  m.  from  me 
77.  8.  is  his  m.  clean  gone  for  ever  1  doth  m.  fail  ? 
85. 10.  m.  and  truth  are  met  together,  righteousness 
86.  5.  thou,  Lord,  art  plenteous  in  m.  l.'j.  1 103.  8. 
89.  2.  I  said,  m.  shall  be  built  up  for  ever 

14.  m.  and  truth  shall  go  before  thy  face 
28.  my  m.  wdl  I  keep  for  him  for  evermore 

58.  3.  he  hath  remembered  his  m.  toward  Israel 
100.  5.  the  Lord  is  good,  hia  m.  is  everlasting 

01.  1.  I  will  sing  of  m.  and  juilgment,  to  thee 
103.  17.  the  m.  of  the  Lord  is  from  everlasting 
109.  12.  let  there  be  none  to  e.vtend  wi.  to  him 
j3().  7.  with  the  Lord  there  is  m.  and  redemption 
144. 1 2.  Lord  is  my  m.  and  my  fortress,  and  tower 
147. 11.  takes  pleasure  in  those  thathope  in  his  m. 
I'roD.  3.  3.  let  not  m.  and  truth  forsake  thee 
14.  21.  he  that  hath  m.  on  the  jjoor,  happy  is  he 
22.  m.  and  truth  shall  be  to  them  that  devise  good 
31.  he  that  honourelh  God  hath  hi.  on  the  poor 
36.  6.  by  m.  and  truth  iniijuity  is  purged 

20.  38.  m.  and  truth  preserve  the  king,  and  his 

throne  is  upholden  by  ni.  Isa.  16.  5. 

21.  21.  he  that  followeth  after  m.  findcth  life 
/.<ff.  49. 10.  he  that  lirith  m.  on  themshall  lead  them 

.14.  10.  saith  the  Lord  that  hath  m.  on  thee 
00.  10.  but  in  my  favour  have  I  had  m.  on  thee 

Jer.  6.  2.3.  they  are  cruel,  and  have  no  m. 

//«.•>-.  1. 1 6.  call  her  name,  not  having  obtained  m. 
2.t  l.say  to  brethren  and  sisters,having  obtained  in. 

4.  I.  because  there  is  no  truth,  nor  m.  in  the  land 
6. 1 4.  for  your  m.  is  as  a  morning  cloud,  and  dew 

6.  for  I  desired  m.  and  not  sacrifice 

10.  12.  reap  in  m.  ||  12.  6.  keep  m.  and  wait  on  God 

14.  3.  for  in  thee  the  fatherless  findcth  vt. 
Jonah  2.  8.  they  forsake  their  own  m. 
Mic.  6.  8.  but  to  do  justly,  and  to  love  m. 

7.1H.  retains  not  anger,  because  hedelighteth  in  m. 

20.  thou  wilt  perform  the  m.  to  Abraham 
Hab.'i.  2.  O  Lord,  in  wrath  remember  m. 
Mat.a.T.  blessed  arc  the  merciful,  shall  obtain  m. 
23.  23.  and  have  omitted  judgment  and  m. 
JLuke  1.  !H).  big  m.  is  on  them  that  fear  him 

54.  holpen  Inrael  in  remembrance  of  his  m. 

72.  to  perform  the  m.  promised  to  our  fathers 

78.  liy  remission  through  the  tender  m.  of  our  G. 
Jtom.  9.  23.  the  riches  of  hia  glory  on  vessels  of  m. 

1 1.  30.  have  now  obtained  m.  thro'  their  unbelief 
31.  that  through  your  m.  they  also  may  obtain  m. 

15.  9.  that  Gentiles  might  glorify  God  for  hia  m. 

1  Cor.  7.  2.5.  that  hath  obtained  m.  to  ho  faithful 

2  Cor.  4.  1.  a»  we  have  received  m.  we  faint  not 
Oal.  6.  16.  peace  bo  on  them,  and  m.  and  on  Israel 
F.ph.  2.  4.  God  who  >»  rich  in  m.  hath  fjuiekencd  us 
/'Ai7.2.27.  wa»nightodeath,but  G.harl  wi.  on  him 

1  Tim.  1.2.771.  nndpcacG  from  God  onr  Father,  and 

J.  Christ  our  L.  2  Tim.  1. 2.  Tit.  1.4.2  ./oAti  3. 
13.  but  I  obtained  rTi.  because  I  did  it  ignorantly 
16.  hnwbcit,  for  this  cause  I  olilninod  tti. 

2  Tim.  1.  16.  L.  givom.  to  the  houaenfOncHiphnru^ 

18.  that  he  may  find  771.  of  the  Lord  in  that  day 

7^t.  3.  5.  but  according  to  his  m.  he  aaved  ni 

//eb.  4.  16.  that  we  may  obtain  m.  and  find  grncc 

10.2^.  he  thatdciipiaod  Mowon'  law  died  without  711. 

Jam.  2. 13.  he  shall  have  juilgmi'nt  without  777.  thai 

alieweth  no  771.  and  77i.reJoireth  ngainat  judgment 

3.  17.  tlio  wladom  that  is  from  above  ii  full  of  7/1. 

5.  11.  the  Lord  is  very  pitiful,  and  of  lojidcr  7n. 

382 


2. 10. had  notobtained  nt.butnow  have  ubtanied  m. 

Jude  2. 771.  to  you,  peace  and  love  be  multiplied 

21. looking  lor  the  771.  of  Lord  Jesus  to  eternal  life 

Have  MERCy. 

Psal.  4. 1.  havem.  upon  me,  6.  2.  I  9.  13.  I  25.  16. 

I  27.  7.  I  30.  10.  1  31.  9.  |  51.  1.  \  86.  16. 

102.  13.  Shalt  A.  771.  on  Zion  ||  123.  2.  A.  771.  on  us,  3. 

I'rov.  28. 13. whoso  forsaketh  his  sins  shall  have  m. 

/4a.y.l7.neitlierA.77i.ontheir  fatherless  and  widows 

14.  1.  for  Lord  will  have  m.  on  Jacob,  and  choose 

27. 11.  he  that  made  them  will  notAuue  777.00  them 

30.  18.  be  e.xalted,  that  he  may  have  m.  on  you 
49.  13.  for  God  will  have  m.  upon  hia  afflicted 
54.8.  with  everlasting  kindness  will  1  A.  771.  on  thee 
55.  7.  let  him  return,  and  he  will  have  in.  on  him 

Jcr.  13.  14.  nor  have  m.  but  destroy  them,  21.  7. 
30. 18.  and  I  will  have  m.  on  his  dwelling-places 

31.  20.  I  will  surely  have  m.  on  him,  33. 26.  Kzek 

39.  25.  Hos.  1.  7.  I  2.  23, 

42.12.that  he  may  have  m.  on  you,  and  cause  you 

Hos.  1.  6.  no  more  A.  771.  on  the  house  of  Israel,  2. 4 

Zcch.  1.12.  OLord,  how  long  wilt  thou  not  havem 

lO.ti.  I  will  bring  them  again,for  I  A.  771.  upon  them 

Mat.  9.  13.  1  will  have  in.  and  not  sacrihce,  12.  7. 

27.  thou  Son  of  llavid,  have  m.  on  me,  15.  22. 

i  20.  30, 31.  Mark  10. 47,  48.  Luke  18.  38, 39. 

17. 15.  Lord,Aa7)e  7/1.  on  my  son,  for  he  is  lunatic 

Luke  16.24.  father  Abraham,  A.  jti.  on  me,  and  send 

17.  13.  they  said,  Jesus,  Master,  Aat;e  771.  on  us 

Horn.  9.  15.  1  will  have  in.  on  whom  I  will  A.  m.  18 

11.  32.  all  in  unbelief,  that  he  might  Aaue  7/1.  on  ail 

MERCY  joined  with  shew,  sheiced, 
shewcth,  shewing. 
G'e7i.39.21.  L.  was  with  Joseph,  and  shewed  him  m 
Exod.  20.  6.  shewing  in.  to  thousands.  Dent.  5. 10. 
33.  19.  I  will  she-a  m.  on  whom  I  will  shew  m. 
/>f  7((.7.2.shalt  makono  covenant,nor  j-Acjc  them  777. 
13.  17.  that  the  Lord  may  turn  and  shew  thee  771. 
■fudg.l.  24.  shew  us  city,  and  we  will  shew  thee  777. 
2  .Sam.  22.  51.  shewcth  m.to  his  anointed,  /'.s'.18.50, 

1  A"777 o's  3.6.  Solomon  said,  thou  hast.sAcTrciito  thy 

servant  David,  my  father, great  771. 2  Chron.  1.8. 

2  Chron.  6.  14.  and  shewcst  m.  to  thy  servants 
P*vjZ.37.21.but  the  righteous  sheicetk  m.  and  giveth 

85.7.  shew  us  thy  777.  O  Lord,  and  grant  thy  salvat. 

109. 16.  because  he  remembered  not  to  shew  m. 
Isa.  47.  6.  and  thou  didst  shew  them  no  m. 
Jer.  50.  42.  they  are  cruel,  and  will  not  shew  m. 
Dan.  4.  27.  break  off  thy  sins,  by  shewing  m. 
Zech.  7.  9.  execute  true  judgment,  and  shew  m. 
l.nke  1.  58.  how  the  Lord  shewed  great  771.  on  her 

10.  37.  and  he  said,  he  that  shewed  in.  on  him 
ft»7;(.9.16.not  that  runs,  but  of  God  \.\\Mshewethm. 

12.  8.  he  that  shewcth  m.  with  cheerfulness 
/a7;i.  2. 13.  judg.  without  m.  that  hath  shewed  no  m. 

Thy  MERCY. 
Gen.  10.  19.  and  thou  hast  magnified  thy  m.  to  me 
F.iod.  15.  13.  in  thy  m.  hast  led  forth  the  jicople 
J^uin.  14-  19.  according  to  the  greatness  of  thy  m. 
JVch.  13.  22.  spare  me  according  to  thy  m. 
Psal.  5.  7.  into  thy  house,  in  multitude  of  thy  m. 

6.4.  return,  O  Lord,  save  mo  tor  tA7/7n.sake,31.16. 

13.  5. 1  have  trusted  in  t.  m.  my  heart  shall  rejoice 

2.5.  7.  according  to  thy  m.  remember  thou  me 
31. 7. 1  will  be  glad,  and  rejoice  in  thy  in.  for  thou 
33. 22.  let  thy  in.  O  Lord,  be  ujion  us,  as  we  hope 
.30.  5.  thy  771.  O  Lord,  is  in  the  heavens 

44.  26.  arise,  and  redeem  us,  for  thy  in.  sake 
57.  10.  for  thy  m.  is  great  unto  the  heavens 
59.  16.  I  will  sing  aloud  of  thy  m.  in  the  morning 
69.  13.  in  the  multitude  of  thy  m.  hear  me 
85.  7.  shew  us  thy  m.  O  L.  ||  86. 13.  great  is  thy  m. 
90.  14.  O  satisfy  us  early  with  thy  m.  to  rejoice 
94.18.  my  foot  siippeth,  thym.  O  Lord,  held  me  up 
low.  4.  for  thy  m.  is  great  above  the  heavens 
109.21.  bccauae  thym.  is  good,  deliver  thmi  me 

26.  O  Lord  my  God,  sa.ve  me  according  to  thy  m. 
115. 1.  for  thy  in.  and  for  thy  truth's  sake 
119.  64.  the  earth,  O  Lord,  is  full  of  (Ay  771. 

124.  deal  with  thy  servant  according  to  tliy  m. 
138.  8.  thy  771.  cndureth  for  ever,  forsake  not 
143.  12.  and  of  thii  m.  cut  ntl'mino  onomiei 

"MERCIES. 
den.  32.  10.  not  worthy  of  the  least  of  thv  m. 
2  .■?a77i.  24.  14.  for  his  771.  are  great,  1  CAr.'21.  13. 
2  CAr.  6. 42.  remember  the  771!  of  David  thy  servant 
JWA.  9. 19.  in  thy  manifold  771.  foraookost  them  not 

27. according  to  thy  771  thou  gavest  them  saviours 

2S.  many  times  dirtst  deliver  according  to  thy  171. 

31.  for  thy  tti.  thou  didst  not  consume  them 
/'.t(i/.51.1. according  to  thy77i.hlot  out  my  transgros. 
69.  13.  in  the  multitude  of  thy  771.  hear  me 

16.  turn  unto  mo,  according  to  thy  tender  m. 
89.  1.  I  will  sing  of  the  771.  of  the  Lord  forever 
106.7.  thny  romombered  not  multitude  of  thy  771. 

4.'),  hn  repented  according  to  multitude  of  his  771. 
119.  41.  lot  thy  m.  come  also  to  mo,  O  Lord 
fsn.  54.  7.  with  groat  tti.  will  I  cather  thee 
55.  3.  even  the  sure  771.  of  David,  Acts  13.  34. 


MER 

/j»a.  63. 7.  he  bestowed  on  them  according  to  his  m 

15.  where  13  t)iy  zeal  and  thy  m.  toward  nie  ? 
Jer.  16.  5. 1  have  taken  away  my  771. from  this  peop. 

42.12.  will  shew  77i.to  you,  that  he  may  have  mercy 
J^am.  3.22.  it  ia  of  Lord's  m.  we  are  not  consumed 

32.  have  compassion  according  to  mult,  of  his  771. 
Dan.  2.  18.  would  desire  771.  concerning  this  secret 
9.  9.  to  the  L.  our  G.  belong  771.  and  forgiveness 
18.  not  for  our  righteousness,  but  thy  great  m. 
Hos.  2.  19.  I  will  betroth  thee  unto  ine  in  in. 
Zcch.  1. 16.  I  am  returned  to  Jerusalem  with  m. 
Rom.  12.  1.  I  beseech  you  by  the  771.  of  God 
2  Cor.  1.  3.  the  Father  of  771.  and  God  of  all  comfort 
/'Ai7.2.1. if  there  be  any  f«;llowship,any  bowels  of  m. 
Col.  3.  12.  put  on  therefore  bowels  of  J7i.  kindness 

'Pender  MERCIES. 
Psal.  25.  6.  remember,  O  Lord,  thy  tender  m.  51. 1. 
40.  11.  withhold  not  thy  tender  in.  from  me 
77.  9.  hath  he  in  anger  shut  up  his  tender  m. 
79.  8.  let  thy  tender  m.  sjieediiy  prevent  us 
103. 4.  bless  L.  who  crowneth  thee  witli  tender  m. 
119.77.  let  thy  (CTider  777.  come  unto  me,  that  I  may 
156.  great  are  thy  tender  m.  O  Lord,  quicken  mo 
145.  9.  his  tender  m.  are  over  all  his  works 
Prov.  12. 10.  the  tender  in.  of  the  wicked  are  cruel 

MERCIFUL. 
Gen.  19.  16.  the  Lord  being  777.  unto  Lot 
F.xod.  34.  6.  proclaimed  Lord  God  771.  and  gracious 
Dcut.  21.  8.  be  tti.  O  Lord,  to  thy  people  Israel 
32.  43.  and  will  he  771.  to  his  land  and  people 
2  6(7771.22. 26.  with  the  771.  thou  wilt  shew  thyself  77t. 
with  upright  thyself  upright,  Psal.  18.25. 

1  Kings'in.  31. heard  that  kingsof  Isr.  are  771.  kings 

2  CAr.  30.  9.  Lord  your  God  is  gracious  and  tti. 
JV'cA.  9. 17.  art  G.  ready  to  pardon,  gracious  and  777, 
fiai.  26. 11.  redeem  me,  and  be  771.  to  me,  4 1.4, 10. 

I  56.  1.  1  57.  1.  I  86.  3.  |  119.  58, 132. 
37.  26.  the  righteous  is  ever  771.  and  lendcth 
.59.  5.  be  not  777.  to  any  wicked  transgressors 
67.1.G.be  m.  to  us,  and  bless  us,  and  cause  his  face 
103.  8.  Lord  is  771.  and  gracious,  slow  to  anger 
117.  2.  for  his  771.  kindness  is  great  toward  us 
119.  76.  let  Ihy  771.  kindness  be  for  my  comfort 
Prov.  11. 17.  them,  man  doeth  good  to  his  own  soul 
/.sa.  57.1. 777.  men  aretaken  away,  none  considering 
.h'r.  3.  12.  return,  for  I  am  771.  saith  the  Lord 
.Joel  2.  13.  he  is  gracious  and  771.  slow  to  anger 
Jonah  4.  2.  for  I  knew  that  thou  art  a  771.  God 
Mat.f>.~.  blessed  are  t^k  m.  they  shall  obtain  mercy 
Luke  6.  36.  be  ye  771.  as  your  Father  also  is  771. 

18. 13.  publican  saying,  God  be  771.  to  me  a  sinner 
Heb.  2.  17.  that  he  might  be  a  771.  High-priest 

8.  12.  I  will  be  tti.  to  their  unrighteousness 

See  God. 
MERCY-SEAT, 
Or,  Propitiatory,  teas  the  covering  of  the  ark  of 
the  covenant,  or  of  the  holy  chest,  in  which  the 
tables  of  the  law  were  deposited:  This  corer  was 
of  gold,  and  at  its  two  ends  were  fixed  the  two 
chcrubims  of  the  same  metal,  which  by  their 
■wingscitendcdforwnrd,scnned  to  form  a  throne 
fur  the  majesty  of  God,  who  in  scripture  is  re- 
presented as  sitting  between  the  cherubims.  Pa. 
80.  I.  a7irf  the  ark  itself  was  as  it  were  his  foot- 
stool. It  was  an  eminent  type  of  Christ,  who  by 
his  atonement,  covered  our  sins,  and  bore  the 
curse  for  vs ;  standing  between  God  and  the 
curse  of  the  law  fur  oursukcs,  that  God  might 
look  on  the  law  through  Christ,  as  fulfilled  by 
him   on  our  behalf.  Gal.   3.   10,    13.      Hence 
Christ  is  called  the  Propitiation,  liom.  3.  25. 
Eioi/.  25. 17.  and  thoushaltmakoa77i.-si'(irofgold 
20.cheriib.coveriiig777.-.«fat  with  wings,  y/cA.9.5. 
22. 1  will  commune  with  thee  from  above  m.-scat 
between  the  chcrubims,  I^ev.  16.  2.  JWr/i. 
7.89. 
26.  34.  shalt  put  the  m.-aeat  upon  the  ark,  40.  20. 
37.  6.  and  he  made  the  m.-seat  of  pure  gold 
I.rv.  16. 13.  cloud  of  incense  may  cover  the  m.-srni! 
1  Cftr.28. 11. David  gMveSolom. pattern ofra.-.sfiit 

MERRY. 
Gen.  43.  34.  they  drank  and  were  m.  with  him 
Judg.  9.  27.  they  trode  the  grapes,  and  made  771. 

16.  25.  their  hearts  wel*  771.  they  said,  call  Samson 
19.  6.  larrv  all  night,  and  let  thine  heart  bo  771. 

9.  lodge  here,  that  thine  heart  may  he  tti. 
22.  now  as  they  were  making  their  hearts  771. 
ftuM3.7.  and  when  Boan:  his  heuri  was  771.  he  went 

1  Sam.  25.  36.  Nabnl's  heart  was  m.  within  him 

2  Sam.  13.  28.  mark  when  Amnon's  heart  la  771. 

1  Kings  4.  20.  Judali  and  Inrael  were  making  m. 
21.  7.  arise,  eat  bread,  and  let  thinn  heart  be  m. 

2  CAr.  7.  10.  he  sent  the  peo(i|i'  nwny  »n.  in  heart 
F.sth.  1.  10.  when  the  hi^art  of  the  king  was  771. 
/VoTi. 15.13. 711.  heart  maketh  cheerful  countenance 

15.  days  of  the  afflicted  are  evil:  but  he  that  is 
of  a  777.  heart  hath  a  continual  fea«l 

17.  22.  a  f7i.  heart  doeth  pood  like  a  med  Une 
/>r/.8. 15,hath  notliiiiff  better  than  to  eat  and  be  Pi 

9.  7.  and  drink  thy  wino  witli  a  w.  heart 


MES  ^  MET 

/««.  44.  96.  and  perforuiutli  ihe  counsel  of  hij  m, 
57.  9.  und  thou  didst  send  lliy  m.  aliir  off 

Jer.  '27.  3.  send  by  llio  liaiid  ot  tlie  ;/(.  wliich  come 

Eic/c.  '23.,  Iti.  sent  m.  unlo  tliuru  into  Clialdea 
30.y.  in  that  day  sliall  wi.  go  forth  trom  nic  in  shijis 

JVuA.  '2.  13.  the  voice  of  lliy  ;«,  bo  no  more  heard 

Luke  7.  24.  and  when  the  m.  of  John  were  gone 
y.  5'2.  and  sent  m.  before  hi8  face,  lliuy  went 

2  Cur.  8.  '23.  they  are  tlic  m.  of  tlie  churclies 

Jam.  2.  io.  by  works,  when  Kaimb  liad  received  m. 
MKHS,  or  MESSES. 

Qen.  43.  34.  Joseph  look  and  sent  m.  to  them,  but 
Benjamin'B  m.  five  limes  so  much  as  tlieirs 

2  Som.ll.a.there  fuilowed  Uriah  a  hi.  from  the  kiii 
MESSIAH 

Signifies,  Anointed.  It  is  applied  principally, 
and  by  way  of  eminence,  to  that  sovereign 
Deliverer,  who  was  expected  by  the  .lews,  and 
w/wm  they  vainly  expect  even  to  this  day 
since  he  is  already  cvme  at  the  appointed  lime 
They  tised  to  anoint  kings,  high-priests,  and 
sometimes  prophets.  Saul,  Uavid,  Solomon 
and  Joash,  received  the  royal  unction  :  Aaroi 
and  his  sons  received  the  sacerdotal ;  and 
Elisha,  the  disciple  «/ Elijah,  received  the  pro 
phetic  unction,  at  least  God  ordered  Elijah  to 
give  it,  I  Kings  19.  16.  and  therefore  tlie 
name  Messiah,  or  Anointed,  is  given  to  the 
kings,  1  Sam.  1'2.  3,  5.  and  also  to  the  pa- 
triarchs or  prophets,  1  Chron.  lU.  22.  Psal.  105 
15.  But  this  name  chitjiy  belongs  to  Jesus 
Christ,  by  way  of  excellence,  uho  was  the  object 
of  the  desire  and  of  the  expectation  of  the  saiii/s. 
Hannah,  the  mother  of  !idmue\,  plainly  alludes 
to  Jesus  Christ,  when  at  the  end  of  her  hymn, 
and  at  the  time  when  there  icas  no  king  in 
Israel,  she  says,  The  Lord  shall  give  strengtii 
to  his  King,  and  e.\alt  the  horn  of  his  .Anoint 
ed,  1  Sam.  2.  10.  See  also  Psal.  2.  2.  |  45.  7 
Dati.  9.  25,  26.  /(  is  not  found  any  where 
that  Jesus  Christ  ever  rcceivid  any  sensihlt 
unction;  or  that  the  apostles  anointed  the 
faithful  with  any  particular  or  external  oil 
or  ointment.  The  unction  that  the  prophets 
and  the  apostles  speak  of,  when  Jesus  Christ 
or  his  disciples  are  understood,  is  the  sjiiritual 
and  internal  unction  of  grace  and  of  the 
■ffoly  Ghost,  of  which  the  outward  and  sen- 
sible unction,  with  which  they  anciently 
anointed  kings,  priests,  and  prophets,  was  but 
the  figure  and  symbol. 

^(i7/.9.'25.from  the  commandment  to  build  Jerusa- 
lem, unto  Jil.  the  Prince  shall  be  seven  weeks 

26.  and  after  62  weeks  shall  J\l.  be  cut  off 
John  J.  41.  we  have  foimd  M.  which  is  Christ 

4.  25.  the  woman  saith,  I  know  that  M.  Cometh 

MET. 
Gen.  32.  1.  and  the  angels  of  God  m.  him 
33.  8.  what  meanest  thou  by  this  drove  I  m.  ? 
Eiod.3.  18.  llie  Lord  God  of  the  Hebrews  hath  vi. 
with  us,  let  us  go  to  sucritice  to  the  Lord,  5. 3. 
4.  24.  Ihe  Lord  m.  him,  and  sought  to  kill  him 

27.  Aaron  went  and  m.  Moses  >n  the  mount 
5.20.  they  771.  Moses  and  Aaron  who  stood  in  way 

JV"u7n.23.  4.  God  77i.  Balaam,  and  said  to  him,  16. 
Ueut.  23.  4.  because  they  m.  you  not,  ./VeA.  13.  2. 
25.  18.  Amaiek  m.  thee  by  way,  and  smote  feeble 
Josh.  11.  5.  and  when  all  ihose  kings  were  m. 

1  Sa77i.  10.  10.  a  company  of  prophets  m.  Saul 
'25.  20.  behold,  Abigail  771.  David  and  his  men 

2  Ham.  16.  1.  Ziba  m.  David  with  asses  saddled 
18.  9.  Absalom  771.  the  servants  of  David 

1  Kings  13.  24.  when  he  was  gone,  a  lion  771.  him 
18.  7.  Elijah  771.  Obadiah,  and  he  knew  him 

2  Kings  9.  21.  Joram  and  Ahaziah  tti.  Jehu 
10.  13.  Jehu  771.  with  the  brethren  of  Ahaziah 

Job  4.  t  14.  fear  771.  me  that  made  my  bones  shake 
Psal.  85.  10.  mercy  and  truth  are  771.  together 
Prov.  7.  10.  behold,  there  771.  him  a  woman 
.Smos  5.  19.  flee  from  a  lion,  and  hear  771.  him 
Mat.  8.  '28.  there  771.  him  two  possessed  with  devils 
28.  9.  behold,  Jesus  771.  them,  saying,  all  hail 
Mark  11.  4.  in  a  place  where  two  ways  771. 
I^uke  9.  .37.  much  people  771.  him,  ./0A71  12.  18. 
17.  12.  there  771.  him  ten  men  that  were  lepers 
/0A77  11.20.  then  Martha  went  and  771.  him,  30. 
.Acts  10.  25.  Cornelius  ni.  him,  and  fell  down 

16.  16.  a  certain  damsel  possessed  771.  us 

17.  17.  he  disputed  with  thorn  that  771.  with  him 
27.  41.  falling  into  a  place  where  two  seas  771. 

Ffeb.7 .1.  wh0  7n.  Abraham  returninj from  slauglit. 
10.  in  his  father's  loins,  when  Melchisedec  771.  him 
METE. 
Kzod.  16.  18.  when  they  did  771.  it  with  a  homer 
Psal.  fiO.  6. 1  will  771.  out  valley  of  Surcoth,  103.  7. 
Jfot.  7.  2.  with  whalmcasureyem.  it  shall  be  mea- 
sured to  you  ag:iin,  Mark  4.  24.  Luke  6.  38. 
METED. 
Isa.  18.  2.  go  to  a  nation  771.  out,  trodden  down,  7. 
41).  12.  kod  m.  out  heaven  with  a  span 


MID 


JEceMO.ro.fcast  made  for  laughter,  wine  maketli  i»t. 
/sa.24.7.vine  languisheth,  all  ihoi/iJiearted  do  sigh 
Jer.  30.  19.  the  voice  of  them  that  make  77j. 
3L  4.  in  the  dances  of  them  that  make  771. 
JLuke  12. 19,  take  thine  ease,  eat,  drink,  and  be  771. 

15.  '23.  lot  us  eat  and  be  7/1.  24.  |{  29. 1  might  be  771. 
32.  it  was  meet  we  should  luaku  771.  and  be  glad 

Jam.  5.  13.  is  any  771.  ?  let  him  sing  psalms 
Jiev.  11.  10.  shall  rejoice  over  thoiu  and  make  771. 

MEKRILY. 
Esth.  5.  14.  then  go  thou  in  771.  with  the  king 

MESSAGE. 
JuJff.  3.  20.  Ehud  said,  I  have  a  771.  from  G.  to  thee 
1  Kings  '20. 12.  when  lienhadad  had  heard  this  771. 
Prov.  26. 6.  he  that  sendeih  a  77t.  by  fool  cutteth  off 
Hag.  1.  13.  then  spake  Haggai  in  the  Lord's  711. 
Luke  19.  14.  his  citizens  sent  a  771.  after  him 
\JohH.  1.  5.  this  is  the  7/1.  which  we  have  heard,  3. 11. 

MESSENGEK 
Signifies,  07ie  who  carries  messages  betweenparty 
and  party.  Gen.  32.  3.  |  50.  16.  It  is  applied, 
[1]  To  Christ  Jesus,  called  the  Messenger  of 
ihe  Covenant,  Mai.  3. 1.  IVho,  though  he  be 
one  with  the  Father,  yet  humbled  himself  for 
our  sakes,  to  be  as  a  messenger  from  his  Fa- 
ther, to  declare  his  will  to  us,  to  confirm  the 
covenant  of  grace  by  his  death,  to  reveal  this 
salvation,  with  the  promise  of  the  Holy  Hpirit 
to  work  true  faith  and  repentanceinour  hearts. 
{2]  To  prophets  or  teachers,  who  are  appoint- 
ed by  God  to  declare  his  will  and  commands 
to  his  people.  Job  33.  '23.  Mai.  2.  7.  |  3.  1.  [3J 
To  ambassadors  sent  by  one  prince  to  another, 
2  Kings  16.  7.  [4]  To  spies,  or  such  as  privily 
search  into  the  state  of  places  or  affairs,  Josh. 
6.  17.  Jam.  2.  25.  [5]  To  any  dreadful  pu- 
nishment which  God  infiicts  upon  the  wicked 
for  their  sins,  Prov.  17.  11. 
Gen.  50.  16.  they  sent  a  »7i.  to  Joseph,  saying 
Judg.  2.  t  L  a  771.  of  the  Lord  came  from  Gilgal 

1  Ham.  4.  17.  and  the  771.  said,  Israel  is  fled 

2  Sam.  15.  13.  there  came  a  771.  to  David,  saying 

1  Kings  19.  2.  then  Jezebel  sent  a  771.  to  Elijah 
22.13.the  771.  went  to  call  Micaiah,  2  Chron.  18. 12. 

2  Kings  6.32.  but  ere  the  m.  came  to  him,  when  the 

971.  Cometh,  shut  the  door,  hold  him  fast 
9. 18.  the  771.  came  to  them,  but  cometh  not  again 
Job  1.  14.  there  came  a  hi.  to  Job,  and  said 
33.  23.  if  there  be  a  771.  an  interpreter  of  a  thousand 
Prov.  13.  17.  a  wicked  771.  fallelh  into  mischief 
17.  11.  a  cruel  771.  shall  be  sent  against  him 
'25.  13.  so  is  a  faithful  7/1.  to  them  that  send  him 
/sa.42. 19.  who  is  blind  ordeaf,asrny  771.  that  Isent? 
Jer.  51.  31.  one  771.  shall  run  to  meet  another 
F.zek.  23.  40.  to  whom  a  (7i.  was  sent,  they  came 
Hag.  1.  13.  then  spake  Haggai,  the  Lord's  m. 
Mai.  2.  7.  for  he  is  the  771.  of  the  Lord  of  hosts 
3. 1. 1  will  send  my  777.  even  the  771.  of  the  covenant. 
Mat.  11.  10.  Mark  1.  '2.  Luke  7.  '27. 
2  Cor.  12.  7.  the  771.  of  Satan,  to  buffet  me,  lest  I 
Phil.  2.  25.  my  companion  in  labour,  but  your  771. 

MESSENGERS. 
Gen.  32.  S.Jacob  sent  771.  before  him  to  Esau 
JVu77i.20  H.Moses  sent  771.  from  Kadesh,  Dea£.2.26 
21.  21.  Israel  sent  771.  unlo  Sihon,  saying 
'H.  5.  Ralak  sent  771.  to  Balaam,  the  son  of  Beor 

24.  12.  gpake  I  not  also  to  thy  771.  sent  to  me  ? 
Josh.  6.  17.  Rahub  hid  the  771.  that  we  sent,  '25. 

7.  '22.  so  Joshua  sen!  tti.  to  Achan'a  tent 
Judg.  6.  35  Gideon  sent  771.  through  Manasseh 
Il.l2.Jephthah  gent  771.  to  the  king  of  Ammon,14. 

1  .VaJTi.  11.  4.  then  came  the  771.  to  Gibeah  of  Saul 
16. 19.  Saul  sent  it.  to  Jesse,  and  said,  send  David 
19.  11.  Sanl  sent  771.  to  David,  14,  15,  '20,  21. 

25.  14.  David  sent  771.  to  salute  our  master 
42.  Abigail  went  after  the  771.  of  David 

2  Sa77i.  2.  5.  David  sent  771.  to  Jabesh-gilead 
3.  12.  Abner  sent  171.  to  David  on  his  behalf 

14.  David  sent  771.  to  Ish-boshelh,  Saul's  son 
26.  Joab  sent  Tit.  after  Abner,  which  brought 
5.  11.  Hirarn  sent  771.  to  David,  1  Chron.  14.  1. 

11.  4.  David  sent  m.  to  Bath-sheba,  and  took  her 

12.  27.  Joab  sent  771.  to  David,  and  said,  I  fought 
lAri7t^s2fl.2.Bcnhadad  sent  tb. to  Ahab,  kingoflsr. 
S  Kings  1.  3.  go  up  to  meet  the  771.  of  Ahaziah 

10.  forasmuch  as8cnt7it.to  inquire  of  Baal-zebub 

14.  8.  then  Amaziah  sent  m.  to  Jehoash  llie  son 

of  Jehoahaz,  son  of  .lehu  king  of  Israel 

16.  7.  so  Ahaz  sent  771.  to  Tiglath-pileser  king  of 

17.  4.  Hoshea  had  sent  771.  to  So,  king  of  Egypt 
1ft.  9.  Sennacherib  sent  m.  to  Heickiah,  Isa.  37.9. 

23.  by  thy  771.  hast  thou  reproached  the  Lord 
1  Chren  19.  2.  David  ."cnt  m.  to  comfort  Hanun 
S  Chron.  36.  15.  the  Lord  sent  to  them  by  his  771. 

16.  buttliey  mocked  the  7».  of  God,  and  despised 
Prov.  16.  14.  the  wrath  of  a  king  n  as  7n.  of  death 
fsa.  14.  32.  what  shall  one  answtrr  Tit.  of  thenationt 

18. 2.  eo  ye  swift  771.  to  nation  scattered  and  peeled 
33.  '  7.  behold,  their  771.  shall  cry  without 
37.14  Hecekiah  received  letter  from  m.andread  it 
383 


METE-VAKD. 
Lev.  19.  35.  ye  shall  do  no  unrighteousness  in  v. 

MICE. 
1  Sam.  6.  4.  five  golden  m.  according  to  number,lS. 
5.  ye  shall  make  images  of  your  eiiierods  and  m, 
MID-DA  V. 
1  Kings  18.  29.  when  m.  was  past,  Elijah  said 
J^'eh.  8.  3.  read  therein  from  morning  to  771.  before 
.ids  26. 13.  at  hi.  O  king,  I  saw  in  llie  way  a  light 

MIDDLE. 

Judg.  7. 19.  Gideon  came  in  beginning  of  771.  watch 

9.  37.  there  come  people  by  the  771.  of  the  land 

16.  29.  Samson  took  hold  of  the  two  7h.  pillars 

1  6'a77i.  25. 29.  sling  out,  as  out  of  the  7».  of  a  sling 

2  .SuHi.  10.  4.  cut  off  their  garments  in  the  771. 

1  Kings  8.64. the  king  did  hallow  771. court,2  Chr.l.l 

2  Kings  '20.  4.  afore  Isaiah  gone  into  the  7«.  coui' 
Jer.  39.  3.  all  the  princes  sat  in  the  7rt.  gate 
A:eA.  1. 16.  as  it  were  a  wheel  in  Ihe  th.  of  a  wliee 
Kph.  2.  14.  broken  down  the  771.  wall  of  partitioc 

MIDDLEMOST. 
Ezek.  43.  5.  higher  than  the  771.  of  the  building,  6 

MIDMGHT. 
Exod.  11. 4.  at  m.  will  I  go  into  the  midst  of  Egypi 

12.  29.  at  771.  the  Lord  smote  the  first-burn 
Judg.  16.  3.  Samson  lay  till  771.  and  rose  at  tti. 
Ruth  3.  8.  at  771.  the  mun  was  afraid,  and  turned 
1  Kings  3.  20.  she  arose  at  m.  and  took  my  son 
./ob  34.  20.  the  people  shall  be  troubled  at  771. 
Psal.  119.  62.  at  711.  I  will  rise  to  give  thanks 
Mat.  25.  6.  at  »7i.  there  was  a  cry  made,  behold 
Mark  13. 35.  whether  he  shall  come  at  even,  or  tti. 
J.uke  11. 5.  shall  go  to  him  at  771.  and  say,  lend  me 
Jicts  Hi.  '25.  and  at  771.  Paul  and  Silas  prayed 

20.  7.  Paul  continued  his  speech  till  771. 
MIDST 

Signifies,  [1]  That  part  which  is  equally  distant 
from  the  extremes,  or  the  centre  of  a  circle  or 
sphere.  Num.  35.  5.  Luke  23.  45.  [2]  .Among, 
Deut.  18.  15.  Mat.  10. 16.  [3]  The  Viickcst  of 
a  t/irung,  Luke  4.30.  [4]  'J'he  most  open  or 
public  place,  Deut.  13.  16.  [5]  'The  most  con- 
venient place,  Deut.  19.  2.  [6]  'The  deepest 
part,  Josh.  3.  17. 

Exod.  14.  It),  shall  go  on  dry  ground  through  771. 
ofsea,AV77!.  33.8.  J\^cA.9.  11.  Psal.VJG.H. 
23.  25.  I  will  take  sickness  from  the  771.  of  thee 

I)(ut.  4.11.  the  mountain  burnt  to  the  m.  ofheaven 

13.  5.  shall  put  evil  aw  ay  from  the  771.  of  thee 
18.  15.  thy  God  will  raise  a  Prophet  from  771.  of  theu 

1  Kings  8.  ,51.  from  the  771.  of  the  furnace  of  iron 

2  CAt-.  32.  4.  brook  that  ran  thro'  the  777.  of  the  land 
Cant.  3.  10.  the  771.  thereof  being  paved  with  love 
Isa.  4.  4.  purged  blood  from  tlie  m.  of  .Jerusalem 

30.  28.  brealh  shall  reach  to  the  777.  of  the  neck 

.58.  9.  take  away  from  the  711.  of  thee  the  yoke 
./cr..30.21.the  governor  proceed  from  the  7H.of  them 

48.  45.  a  fianie  shall  come  from  the  777.  of  Sihon 
Eiek.  9.  4.  go  through  the  771.  of  the  city  and  set 

11. '23.  the  glory  of  Lord  went  up  from  m.  of  city 

14.  8.  I  will  cut  him  off  from  vi.  of  my  peojile,  9. 
1 16.  though  these  three  were  in  the  771.  of  it 

15.  4.  the  771.  of  it  is  burnt,  is  it  meet  for  work? 
28.  16.  have  filled  the  771.  of  thee  with  violence 

18.  I  will  bring  forth  a  fire  from  the  771.  of  thee 
Dan.  3.  26.  came  forth  of  the  vi.  of  the  fire 
..Iniosi.  3. 1  will  cut  off  judge  from  the  m.  tliereof 
Luke  4.  .10.  but  he  passing  through  the  771.  of  them 
John  7.  14.  about  Ihe  771.  of  the  feast  Jesus  went 
8. 59.  going  thro'  the  771.  of  them,  and  so  passed  by 
Rev.  8. 13.  an  angel  flying  through  the  771.  ofheaven 

/7i<Ac  MIDST. 
Grn.  1.6.  be  a  firmament  i«  tJie  m.  ofheaven 
2.  9.  the  tree  of  life  in  t/ie  m.  of  the  garden,  3.  3. 
15.  10.  and  Abram  divided  them  in  the  m. 
Exod,  3.  20.  wonders  I  will  do  in  the  m.  thereof 
8.  22.  [  am  the  Lord  tri  the  771.  of  the  earth 
14.  27.  overthrow  Egyptians  in  tJtc  m.  of  the  sea 
'29.walked  on  dry  land  iit  (Ac  tti.  of  the  sea,  )5.19. 
33.  3.  for  I  will  not  go  up  in  the  m.  of  thee,  lest 
Lev.  16.  16.  171  the  m.  of  their  uncleannefss 
jy«77i.2.17.tahcrnacleBCt  forward  171  them,  of  camp 
.V  3.  defile  not  the  camp  I'lt  the  m.  whereof  I  dwell 
.'ij.  5.  and  ihc  city  shall  be  in  the  m.  Ezek.  48.  1.5. 
Ueut.  11.  3.  acts  which  he  did  in  the  m.  of  Egypt 
0.  swallowed  them  up  in  the  m.  of  all  Israel' 
10.2.  separate  three  cities  in  the  m.  of  thy  land 
23.  14.  God  walketh  in  the  m.  of  thy  camp 
.Tosh.  3.  17.  priestsstood  firm  in  tii.of  Jordan,  4.  10. 
4.  9.  set  up  twelve  stones  in  the  771.  of  Jordan 
7.  13.  there  is  an  accursed  thing  iii  Ihe  m.  of  thee 

21.  they  are  hid  in  the  earth  i'ti  (Ac  771.  of  my  tent 

1  Sam.  If).  13.  anointed  him  in  the  m.  of  hreihren 

2  Sam.  18. 14.  lie  was  yet  alive  i7i  the  m.  of  the  oak 
'23.  12.  but  he  stood  171  the  m.  of  the  ground 

20.  slew  a  lion  in  the  m.  of  a  pit  in  time  of  snow 
2  Kings  C.20.behold,they  were  i77  the  m.  of  Samarig 
1  Chron.  19. 4.  and  cut  off  their  garments  in  then 
^feh.  4. 11.  nor  see,  till  we  come  in  the  m.  among 
Job  1. 1 6.  Satan  came  also  in  ihe  m.  of  tliem 


MID 

Jo6  20.t  13.  though  he  keep  sin  in  t.m.ofliia  palate 
J'snl.  'ii.  14.  it  13  meltod  in  the.  m.  of  my  howels 
22. 1  will  declare  thy  name,  in  the  m.  of  the  con- 
gicgation  will  I  praise  thee,  Hib.  2.  12. 

40.  ff*.  yea,  thy  law  is  in  the  m.  of  my  bowels 
4ti.  5.  G.  is  in  the.  m.  of  her,  she  shall  not  be  moved 
Sj.lO.  mischief  in  Wcwi.  ||  11.  wickediiess/ntAem. 
74.  4.  enemies  roar  in  the  in.  of  thy  congregation 

12.  working  salvation  in  the  vi.  of  the  earth 
7t).  2?.  and  he  let  it  fall  in  the  m.  of  their  camp 
102.  24.  take  me  not  away  in  the  m.  of  my  days 
110.  2.  rule  thou  in  the  m.  of  thine  enemies 
1 16. 19.  pay  vows  in  the  m.  of  thee,  O  Jerusalem 
138.7.thou'gh  I  walk  in  the  m.  of  trouble,  thou  wilt 
frov.  4.  21.  keep  them  in  the  m.  of  thine  heart 
.5.14.1  was  in  all  evil  in  them,  of  the  congregation 

8.  20.  I  lead  in  the  m.  of  the  paths  of  judgment 
14.  33.  that  which  is  in  the  m.  of  fools  is  t'ully 
2.3.  34.  as  he  that  lietli  down  in  the  m.  of  the  sea 
30.  19.  the  way  of  a  ship  in  the  m.  of  the  sea 

Iia.  5.  2.  and  I  built  a  tower  in  the  m.  of  it 

6.  5.1  dwell  in  the  m.  of  a  people  of  unclean  lips 
12.  be  a  great  forsaking  in  the  in.  of  the  land 

7.  6.  set  a  king  in  the  m.  of  it,  the  son  of  Tabeal 
12.6.  great  is  Holy  One  in  <.  m.  of  thee, //os.  11.9. 
]ti.  3.  as  the  night  in  the  m.  of  the  noon  day 

in.  24.  even  a  blessing  in  the  m.  of  the  land 

41.  18.  I  will  open  fountains  in  the  m.  of  ihee 
.Jer.ii.  R.  she  is  wholly  oppression  in  the  m.  of  her 

ft.  6.  Ihine  habitation  is  in  the  m.  ofdeceit 
14.9.  thou,0  Lord,  art  in  tAem.  of  us,  leave  us  not 
17.  n.  he  shall  leave  them  in  the  w.  of  his  days 
37. 12.  to  sejiarate  himself  in  the  m.  of  the  people 
f.ain.  4. 13.  shed  blood  of  the  just  in  the  m.  of  her 
Kiek.  3.  5.  I  have  set  it  in  the  in.  of  the  mttions 

8.  I  will  execute  judgment  in  the  m.  of  lliee 
6.  7.  the  slain  shall  fall  in  the  m.  of  you,  11.  7. 
17.  16.  in  the  m.  of  Uabylon  he  shafi  die 

22.  3.  the  city  sheddelh  blood  in  the  in.  of  it 

21.  and  ye  shall  be  melted  in  the  m.  thereof 

22.  as  silver  is  melted  in  the  m.  of  the  furnace 
2.5.they  have  made  many  widows  in  t.  m.  thereof 
07.  her  princes  in  the  m.  thereof  are  like  wolves 

23.  39.  tlius  have  they  done  in  the  m.  of  my  house 

20.  .5.  for  spreading  of  nets  in  the  m.  of  the  sea 
28. 22.  OZidon,  1  will  be  glorified  in  the  m.  ofthce 
36.2?.  which  ye  have  profaned  in  them,  of  them 
37.  20.  will  set  my  sanctuary  in  the  m.  of  them 

28.  when  my  sanctuary  shall  be  iritAem. of  them 
43.  7.  where  I  will  dwell  in  the  m.  of  Israel,  9. 
46.  10.  and  the  prince  in  the  m.  shall  go  in 
I^an.  3.  2.').  four  men  walking  in  the  m.  of  Ihe  fire 

9.  27.  in  the  in.  of  (he  week,  oblation  shall  cease 
//o.?.  .5. 4.  spirit  of  whoredoms  is  in  Z/ie^n.  of  them 
.7oel  2.  27.  ye  shall  know  I  am  in  the  vi.  of  Israel 
Jtmoa  7. 10.  conspired  in  tAe  m.  of  the  house  of  Isrl. 
Mie.  .5. 7.  renniant  be  in  the  m.  of  many  people,  8. 

6.  14.  thy  casting  down  shall  be  in  the  m.  of  thee 
JWiA.  3. 13.  ihv  people  in  the  m.  of  thee  are  women 
Hab.  3.2.  in  the  m.  of  ihe  years  revive  thy  work 
7.eTf)h.  2.  14.  flocks  ?hall  lie  down  in  the  in.  of  her 

3.  .').  just  Lord  is  in  the  m.  thereof,  will  not  do 
12. 1  will  leave  in  the  m.  of  Ihee  a  poor  people 
1.1.  king  of  r.«r.  the  I<ord  is  in  the  m.  of  thee,  17. 

Z.ec.h.  2.  .5.  I  will  be  the  glory  in  the  m.  of  her 
10.  rejoice,  for  I  will  dwell  in  the  in.  of  ihee,  11. 

5.  4.  the  curse  shall  remain  in  the  m.  of  his  house 
7.  a  woman  that  sittrth  in  the  m.  of  ihe  ephah 

8.  3.  and  will  dwell  in  the  in.  of  .lerusalem,  P. 
14.  4.  the  mount  of  olives  shall  cleave  in  the  m. 

Mat.  10. 16. 1  send  you  as  sheep  in  the  m.  of  wolves 
14.24.  ship  was  in  the  m.  of  the  sea,  Mark  6.  47. 
IB.  0.  set  a  liltlc  child  in  t.  m.  of  them,  Mark  9.  30. 
20.  are  gailicred,  there  am  I  in  the  vi.  of  them 

/lUke  2.40.found  him  sitting  in  the  m. of  ihe  doctors 

6.  B.  rise,  nnd  stand  forth  in  Ihe  in.  and  he  arose 

21.  21.  let  ihem  which  are  in  the  m.  of  it  depart 

23.  4.'>.  Ihe  viiil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  the  m. 

24.  36.  Jesus  himself  stood  in  t.  m.  .John  20. 10, 20. 
Jnhn  P.  .3.  and  when  Ihey  had  sel  her  in  the  m.  9. 

19.  13.  on  ''ither  side  out*,  and  Jesus  in  the  m. 
Jleta  1.  IR.  Peter  stood  up  in  them,  of  tlie  disciples 
IP.  Judas  falling  burst  afundi-r  in  the  m. 

17.  22.  then  Paul  stood  up  in  the  in.  of  IMars'  hill 
Phil. 2.  l.'i.  blameless  in  fA/r  m. of  a  crooked  ireneral. 
Rrv.  1. 13.  in  the  m.  of  the  seven  candlesticks,  2.  1. 

2.  7.  which  is  in  the  in.  oflhc  Paradise  of  Ooil 

4.  6,  «nd  in  the  m.  of  Ihn  throne  were  four  heas's 
5. 0.  lo,  in  them,  of  the  thrnn<'  stood  a  Lamb,  7.17. 

Into  the  MinsT. 
F.TOil.  14.  22.  Israel  went  into  Ihe  m.  of  Ihe  sea 

24.  IS.  and  Moses  went  into  the  m.  of  the  cloud 

33. ."J.!  ivilleomo  into  the  m.  of  thee  and  ronsiime 
J^vm.  ll).47.  Aaron  ran  into  the  m.  of  cnnEn-calion 
1  ft'ini/'«2'I. S.'i.  Mood  ran  infn  Ihem.  ofthe  cluiriot 
/!;»fA.4.1.Mordocai  went inrn  Mr m.ofciiyand  cried 
/'.».46.2.  Iho'  moun'ains  he  carried  into  t.  m.  ofsea 

.S7.n.  in/n^Acm.  whereof  they  are  fallen  thrniselv. 
Jer.  21 . 4.  T  will  assemble  them  inin  t.  m.  of  this  city 

51. 03.  cast  it  into  the  m.  of  the  river  Euphratus 
334 


MIG 

Eiek.  5. 4.  cast  them  into  the  m.  ofthe  fire  and  burn 
22. 19. 1  will  gather  you  into  the  m.  of  Jerusalem 
/Jan. 3.6.6hall  be  cast  into  the  ni.of  a  tiery  furnace 
Zcch.5.S.  and  he  cast  it  into  the  7«.of  the  ephah 

Out  of  the  MIDST. 

Gen.  19.29.  sent  Lot  out  ofthe  m.  ofthe  overlhrow 

Eiod.  3.  2.  angel  appeared  out  of  the  in.  of  a  bush 

4.  God  called  to  him  out  of  tAein.  of  bush,  24.lt). 

Deut.  4.  12.  the  Lord  spake  unio  you  out  of  the  in. 

ofthe  fire,  15,  33,  36.  |  5.  4,  22,  24. 

34.  to  take  him  a  nation  out  »/?/«;  in.  of  another 

./o.s/i.4.3.take  out  oft.  in.  of  Jordan  twelve  stones,8. 

".23.  and  they  took  them  «u(  o/</ie7n.  of  the  tent 

Isa.  24.  18.  and  he  that  Cometh  out  of  the  m.  of  pit 

52.n.depart,goo.o//n.  ofher,  Jer.M.%.  \  51.6, 45. 

Ezek.  1 1.7. 1  will  bring  you  forth  out  of  the  m.  of  it 

29.  4. 1  will  bringlhee  out  of  the  m.  of  thy  rivers 

32.  21.  shall  speak  to  him  out  of  the  m.  of  hell 
.Sinos  6. 4.  that  eat  calves  out  of  the  in.  ofthe  stall 
Jilie.  5.  JO.  I  will  cut  off  horses  out  of  the  m.  of  thee 

13.  images  |{  14.  pluck  up  groves  o«i  o/jn.oflhee 
2p;i/i.3.11.  then  I  will  li\kr  aw.iy  out  of  t.  in.  of  thee 

MIDWIFE. 
Gen.  35.  17.  the  in.  said  unto  Rachel,  fear  not 
:{8. 28.  the  in.  bound  on  his  hand  a  scarlet  thread 
Ejcod.  1. 16.  he  said,  when  ye  do  the  otficc  of  a  in. 

MIDWIVES. 

Exod.  1. 17.  hut  the  m.  feared  God,  and  did  not,21. 

.19.  are  delivered  ere  the  ni.  come  unto  llieiii 

20.  therefore  God  dealt  well  with  the  in. 

MIGHT,  Substanli«e. 
Gen.  49.  3.  Reub  ■n,  thou  art  my  first  horn,  my  m. 
J^uin.  14.  13.  broughtest  uji  this  people  in  thy  in. 
Deut.  3.  24.  that  can  do  according  lo  thy  m. 

6.  5.  thou  shall  love  thy  God  with  all  thy  m. 

8.  17.  the  m.  of  mine  hand  hath  gotten  me  wealth 

28.  32.  there  shall  be  no  m.  in  thine  hand 
.Judg.  5.  31.  as  the  sun  goelh  forth  in  his  m. 

0.  14.  go  in  this  thy  j«.  ||  16.30.  bowed  with  hisni. 
2  .Sum.  0.  14.  David  danced  with  all  his  m. 

1  Kiiifrx  15.  23.  the  acts  of  Asa  and  all  his  m. 
16.  5.  B.'iasha  his  in.  \\  27.  Omri  and  his  in. 
22.45.  Jehoshaphat  and  his  m.  that  he  shewed 

2  Kinifs  10.34.  Jehu  hism.  ||  13.8.  Jehoahaz  his  in. 
13. 12.  Joash  II  14. 15.  acts  of  Jehoi'sh  and  his  m. 
14.28.  Jeroboam  ||  20.  20.  Ilezekiah  and  his  m. 

23.  25.  Josiah  turned  to  the  Lord  with  all  his  m. 

24.  16.  the  king  brought  captive  all  the  men  of  r«. 

1  Chron.  12. 8.  men  ofra.  came  to  David  lo  the  hold 

29.  2. 1  prepared  for  the  house  with  all  my  m. 
12.  in  thine  hand  is  power  and  m.  2  C/irun.  20.  0. 
30.  the  acts  of  David  with  his  reign  and  m. 

2  Chr.  20. 12.  we  have  no  m.  against  this  com|iany 
F.sth.  10.  2.  acts  of  Ahasiierus,  his  ))Ower  ami  ?«. 
f.*ni.  76. 5.  none  ofthe  men  ofni.  found  their  hands 

89.  t  13.  thou  hast  an  arm  with  m.  strong  is 
145.  6.  riien  shall  spe.ik  ofthe  ?«.  of  thy  acts 

Pru7^.24.t5.a  man  ofknowledge  slrengiheneth  m. 

Ktci.  9.10.  thy  handfindelh  to  do,  do  it  with  thy  ni. 

Isa.  3.  t  25.  and  thy  in.  shall  fall  in  ihe  war 
11.  2.  Ihespirit  of  counsel  and  in.  shall  rest  on  him 

33.  13.  ye  that  are  near,  acknowledge  my  ni. 
40.  2G.  callelh  them  by  the  greatness  of  his  m. 

29.  to  them  that  have  no  m.hcincreaseth  strength 
.fer.  9.  23.  nor  let  the  mighty  man  glory  in  his  hi. 
10.  6.  thou  art  gretit,  and  thy  name  is  great  in  m. 
16  21.  behold,  I  will  cause  them  to  know  my  m. 
49.  35.  I  will  break  the  chief  of  their  m. 
51.  30.  their  m.  liatli  failed,  they  became  as  women 
Kztk.  32.  30.  they  are  ashamed  of  their  in. 
Dan.^.  20  blessed  be  G. for  wisdom  and  m.  are  his 
23. 1  thank  thee,  O  God,  who  hast  given  nie  m. 

3.  t  4.  he  CI  led  with  in.  4.  t  14.  ]  5.  f  7. 

4.  30.  that  I  have  built  by  the  m.  of  my  power 
Mic.  3.  8.  truly  F  am  full  of  judcment  and  of  in. 

7.  16.  nations  shall  be  conliiunded  at  all  their  m. 
y.rrh.  4.  6.  not  by  m.  nor  by  power,  but  by  my  Spirit 
E/ih.  1.  t  19.  lh(!  working  of  ihe  ni.  of  his  power 

21.  far  above  all  m.  power,  and  dominion 
3.  16.  to  be  strengthened  with  in.  Col.  1.  II. 

6.  10.  be  strong  in  llie  Lord, and  in  powerofhism. 
2  Pit.  2.  11.  whereas  ans'ds  that  are  greater  in  m. 
RfV.  7.  12.  glory  and  in.  bf  unto  our  God  for  ever 

MIGHT  be. 
Gen.  30.  34.  T  would  it  m.  be  according  to  thy  word 
Exod.  36.  18.  to  couple  the  tint,  that  it  in.  he  one 

39.  21.  thill  it  ni.  br  above  the  curious  girdle 
Acii.  26.  45.  brought  forth,  that  I  in.br  their  God 
Devt.  5.  29.  fear  me,  that  it  m.  be  well  with  Ihem 
1  Sam.  18.  27.  that  he  m.  be  Ihe  kiny's  son-in-law 

1  Kings  8.  10.  that  my  name  m.  be  put  therein 

2  A'inn-»  7.2.  would  make  windows,  m.  this  thing  Ac 
15.  19.  gave  silver,  that  his  hand  in.  he  with  liim 

2  CAron.  6. 5.  a  house, that  iny  name  m.  Arthere,6. 
Psal.  78.  8.  m.  not  4c  as  their  falhers,  a  stubborn 

.Irr.  13.  1 1.  that  they  m.  be  unto  me  a  peunio 
Kiek.  17.8.  in  good  soil,  that  it  m.  ben  goodly  vine 
36.  3.  llitit  ye  m.  be  a  pimsession  to  the  heathen 
//».«.  6.  t  .5.  that  thy  judginenis  m.  be  ns  tho  light 

\.Val.  2.  4.  that  my  covcnuot  m.  be  with  Levi 


MIG 

Jl/arA:5.18.pray,that  hem.ie  with  him,  L.uke^.28 
Jjuke 8.  9.  askt-d, -saying,  what  »i.  this  parable  be 7 
John  15.  11.  and  ihat  your  joy  i«.  be  lull 
Hoin.  4. 11.  m.  be  the  lather  of  them  that  believe 
1 6.that  it  m.be  of  grace  ||  14. 9.  »i.  be  Lord  <jl  deud 
2  'J'hcss.  3.  8. 711.  not  be  chargeable  to  any  of  you 
Phi/cm.  8.  though  I  in.  be  much  bold  in  C'iirist 
/hb.  2.  IT.  that  he  in.  be  a  merciful  High-Priest 

12.  10.  thai  we  in.  be  partakers  ot  Jiis  lioliness 

1  J'et.  1. 21.  that  your  lailh  and  hope  m.  be  in  God 

*CC  Fl.'LFILl.Kt). 

WIGHT  Y. 

Gen.  10.  9.  he  was  a  in.  hunter  before  tho  Lord 
18.18.  Abraham  shall  become  great  and  in.  iiiition 
23.6.  hear  us,  thou  ait  a  m.  prince  aiiiuiigst  ud 

Exod.  1.  7.  the  children  of  Israel  waxed  m.  iH). 
9.28.  thatlherebd  noniorein.tliunderiiigs  and  hail 

10.  19.  the  Lord  turned  a  m.  strong  west-wind 
15.  lU.  they  sank  as  lead  in  the  in.  waters 

L,ev.  19. 15.  nor  shall  honour  the  person  of  the  m. 

JVuin.  22.  6.  curse  this  people,  lor  they  are  loo  i/i. 

JJeut.i.'M.iie  brought  thee  out  with  in. power,  9. 29. 
7.  23.  shall  destroy  them  with  a  m.  destruction 
26.5.beeame  there  a  great  nation,  m.and  iioj)uloU3 

./urfa-.  5.13.  L.  made  me  have  dominion  over  the  i«. 
23.  they  came  not  tohelpof  the  L.  agaiiisi  the  m. 

1  Sam.  4.  8.  out  o(  the  hand  of  these  in.  gods 

2  Sam.  1.  19.  how  are  the  in.  fallen  1  25. 

21.  the  shield  ofthe  in.  is  vilely  cast  away 

22.  from  the  blood  of  the  slain,  from  fat  of  the  m. 
2  h'ings'ii.  15.  the  m.  of  the  land  carried  he  captive 

1  Chron.  1.  10.  Ninirod  was  in.  ||  12.  28.  Zadok  jii. 
27.  6.  Ijenaiah  wasm.  1|  2  Chron.  13. 21.  Abljah  m. 

2  CViroii. 26.13.  army  that  made  war  w  itii  in.  ]>ower 
2T.  6.  so  Jotham  became  in.  because  he  prepared 

f;zra4.20.there  have  been  m.  kings  over  Jerusalem 

7.28.hath  extended  mercy  to  me  before™,  piijices 
JVcA.3.16.IS'eliemiah  repaired  to  the  house  ofthe  in. 

9.  II.  thou  tlirewest  a  stone  in  the  in.  waters 
.Job  5.  15.  but  ho  saveth  the  poor  from  Ihe  m. 

6.  23.  or  redeem  me  from  the  hand  of  the  to.  ? 

9.  4.  he  is  wise  in  heart,  and  m.  in  strength 

12. 19.  he  leadetii  princes,  and  he  ovcrihrowelh  jn. 
21.  he  weakeneth  the  strength  of  the  m. 

21.  7.  wherefore  are  llie  wicked  m.  in  power  1 
24.  22.  he  diaweth  also  the  in.  with  his  power 

34.20.  the  m.  shall  be  taken  away  «illiout  hand 
35.  !l.  they  cry  out  by  reason  of  the  arm  ofthe  in. 
41.  25.  he  raiseth  himself,  the  in.  are  afraid 

/■.•.ai. 24.  8.  Lord  strong  and  m.  Lord  in.  in  battle 
29.  I.givelo  the  Lord,  Oye  i«.  glory  and  slreiiglh 
45.  3.  gird  thy  sword  on  thy  thigh,  O  must  in. 
59.  3.  lor  lo,  the  m.  are  gathered  against  me 
68. 33.  doth  send  out  his  voice,  and  tiial  a  m.  voice 
69.  4.  being  mine  enemies  wrongfully  are  ;«. 
74.  15.  thou  driest  up  in.  rivers,  ihe  day  is  thine 
82.  1.  God  standelh  in  the  congregation  of  the  ni. 
89.  6.  who  among  sons  in.  can  be  likened  to  Lord7 
13.  Ihou  l-.ast  a  in.  arm,  strong  is  thy  bund 
19.  I  have  laid  help  upon  one  that  is  m. 
50.  I  biar  in  my  bosom  the  reproach  ofthe  m. 
93.  4.  the  Lord  is  mightier  than  tiie  m. waves  ofsea 
103. 1 20.  bless  the  Lord,  ye  angels  m.  in  strength 
lOfi.  8.  that  he  might  make  his  m.  power  known 
112.  2.  his  seed  shall  he  in.  upon  the  carlli 
120.4. sharp  arrows  of  the  m.  with  coals  ofjuniper 
135.  lU.  who  smote  great  nations,  and  slew  m.kiiig.4 

Prnv.  16.  32.  that  is  slow  lo  anger  is  belter  than  «i. 
18.  18.  the  lot  parteih  between  Ihe  in. 

21.  22.  a  wise  man  scaleth  ihe  city  ofthe  in. 

23.  1 1.  their  liedtem.  is  ni.  shall  plead  their  cuuM 
Isa.  3.  25.  and  thy  m.  shall  fall  in  the  war  . 
5.  22.  woe  to  Ihem  that  are  m,  to  drink  wine 

11.  15.  with  his  in.  wind  shall  he  thake  his  hand 
17.  )2.  a  rushing  like  the  rushing  of  jn.  walcis 

22.  17.  will  carry  thee  away  wilh  a  m.  captivity 
49.  24.  shall  ihe  prey  be  taken  from  the  m.? 

63.  I.  I  ihnt  spi  ak  in  righteousness,  m.  to  save 
,frr.  5.  1.5.  it  is  a  in.  anil  an  niicient  nation,  a  nation 
.''.2.  19.  gri  at  in  connsi  I  and  in.  in  work 
33.  3.  Mild  I  will  shew  theo  great  and  w.  things 
Eirk.  17. 13.  ho  hath  al.-o  taken  ihe  m.  of  the  land 
32.12.  by  theswordsof  ihem.  will  I  make  Ihee  fall 
21.  the  stioni;  among  tho  m.  shall  sprak  to  him 
27.  they  shall  qj^lic  wilh  tho  in.  that  are  fallen 

38.  15.  thou  shall  come  with  a  great  an'd  ni.  aimy 

39.  18.  >o  shall  oat  the  flesh  ofthe  m.  and  diink 
Dan.  4   3.  how  great  and  in.  are  his  wonders ! 

8.24. his  power  shall  be  m.  but  noi  by  \>\>  own  pow. 

11.  3.  a  m.  king  shall  stand  up  that  shall  rule 
25.  shall  be  stir,  up  with  B  very  great  and  m.ariny 
.Imus'i.  14.  neither  shall  the  in.  deliver  himself 

2.  16.  he  thai  iBcourageousanuingihe  in.  shall  fle« 

5.  12.  I  know  your  in.  sins  ||  24.  as  a  ni.  etieam 
.fiinnh  1   4.  there  was  a  m.  lenipesl  in  llio  sea 
y.rch.  II.  2.  howl,  because  the  ni.  aio  spoiled 
jyfiil.  II.  20.  where  most  ofhism.  works  were  done 
21.  if  Ihe  in.  works  which  wiire  done  in  you,  23. 

13.  .54.  whence  hath  this  man  these  ni.  works? 
58.  ho  did  not  many  m.  works  there,  JI/orA  0.  5 


MIL 

^ui.l-l.'J.tliisis  JolinthelJaptistjthcTcforem.works 
do  shew  furtl)  tliRinsclvca  in  him,  MarkG.  14. 
Jilark  (i.  -J.  m.  works  arc  wrought  by  hia  hand 
LiLke  1.  49.  he  that  is  W.  hath  done  great  things 
■  5J.  he  liath  |idt  down  the  m.  from  ihcir  souls 

9.  43.  ilicy  ucie  amazed  at  the  m.  |)owcr  ut'God 
J.i.  14.  there  arose  a  vi.  famine  in  that  hind 

I'J.  1(7.  praiscil  Ood  for  the  m.  works  they  had  seen 
Si4.  19.  who  was  a  prophet  m.  in  deed  and  word 

,/icls  2.2.  sound  from  lieav.  us  of  a  rushing  m.  wind 
7.  22.  iMoSes  was  )h.  in  words  and  in  deeds 
Irf.  24.  Apollos  was  j«.  in  the  scriptures 

Horn.  15.  19.  tlieOontilesobediontthrough  m.  signs 

1  Coi'.  1. 215.  not  many  7;i.not  many  noble,  are  called 
27.God  hath  chosen  weak,  to  confound  things  vi. 

2  Cor.  10. 4. weapons  of  our  warfare  are  m.  Iliro'  G. 
i;).  3.  which  to  you  is  not  weak,  but  m.  in  you 

0«Z.2.8.thc8anie  was  in.  in  mo  toward  the  Gentiles 
iC/»A.1.19.aCcording  to  tlie  working  of  his  m.  ))ower 
87'Af«.«.1.7.  Jesus  shall  be  reveal. with  his  m.  ungels 
liev.  G.  V^.  wlicn  she  is  shaken  of  a  m.  wind 

10.  I.  I  saw  another  m.  angel  come  down,  18.  21. 
Hi.  18.  so  m.  an  earthquake  and  so  great 

IS.  10.  that  m.  city  ||  19.0.  voice  of  m.tlmnderings 

See  Acts,  Gon,  Hand,  Man,  Mkn. 

MIGHTY  one. 

frcnlO.S.Nimrod  began  to  bo  a  wi.'ojic  inihe  earth 

Isa.  1.  24.  therefore  saith  Lord,  Lord  of  hosts,  the 

m.  one  of  Israel,  30.  29.  |  49.  20.  |  CO.  16. 

10.  34.  and  Lebanon  shall  fall  by  m.  one 

28.  2.  behold,  the  Lord  hath  a  m.  and  strong  one 

Ji'.r.  20. 11.  the  Lord  is  with  me  as  a  in.  terrible  one 

Ejc/t.31.11. have  delivered  him  into  hand  of  m.  one 

MIGHTY  ones. 
y,xoi..\^.\  1 1. who  is  like  to  thee  among  the  m.ones? 
Judir.'i.^Zi.  broken  by  |>rancing  of  their  m.  ones 
Jsa.  13.  3. 1  have  called  my  m.  ones  for  mine  anger 
Jcr.  4ti.  .5.  their  m.  ones  arc  beaten  down  and  Hed 
J'oel  3. 11.  thither  cause  tliy  m.  ones  to  come  down 

MIGHTIER. 
Gen.  20.  IG.  for  lliou  art  much  m.  than  we 
F.rod.  1.  9.  ilic  children  of  Israel  are  m.  than  we 
Ji'iim.  14.  12.  a  greater  nation  and  m.  than  they, 
Dent.  4.  38.  I  7.  1.  I  9.  ],  14.  |  11.  23. 
PsalSyX.A.  the  Lord  on  high  is  m.  than  many  waters 
V.ccl.  I).  III.  neither  contend  with  him  that  is  m. 
j'lial.'A.W.  1  baptize  with  water,  but  he  thatconieth 
after  me  i.'*  ?h.  than  I,  Mark  1.  7.  ]^iike  3.  111. 
MIGHTIES. 
1  Chron.  11.  12.  Klea/.ar  was  one  of  the  three  m. 
ill.  these  thing!!  did  these  three  m. 
24.  Benaiah  liad  a  name  among  the  tliree  m. 
MIGHTILY. 
Dent.  6. 3.  observe  to  do  if,  that  ye  may  increase  m. 
Judir.  4.  3..Iabin  m.  oppressed  Israel  twenty  yeiirs 
14.  0.  the  spirit  of  L.  came  m.  on  Samson,  15. 14. 
I.>«ni.l4.t  48.  Saul  wrought  ra.  and  smote  Amalek 
/•>(!.  lU.  \  34.  and  Lebanon  shall  fall  m. 
42.  t  13.  the  Lord  shall  behave  himself /«. 
y.'r.  2.'>.  30.  the  Lord  shall  m.  roar  on  his  habitation 
Jiinnli  3.  8.  let  man  and  beast  cry  m.  unto  God 
JSfah.'i.  1.  watch  the  way,  fortify  thy  power  m. 
•Hcls  18.  28.  for  lie  m.  convinced  the  Jews 
19. 20.  so  m.  grew  the  word  of  God,  and  prevailed 
Col.  1.  29.  his  working,  which  workelh  in  me  m. 
Heo.  18.  2.  he  cried  m.  saying,  Itabylon  is  fallen 

IMILCII. 

Gfn.  32.  l.V  thirty  m.  camels  with  their  colts 

1  Sam.  G.  7.  make  a  new  cart,  take  twom.  kine,  10. 

MILDEW,  .See  Blastinq. 

MfLE. 

J>!at.  5.  41.  shall  compel  thee  to  go  a  m.  go  twain 

MILK 
fiignifies,  J}  liquid  fuodwkich  wehavefrom  cows, 
^■c.  whcreicilk  hntirs  and  children  arc  clii'jii/ 
nouris/ind,  Gen.  18.  8.  Isa.  28.  9.  To  which  are 
Compired,  [I]  'J'/te  weakest,  spiritual  fnod,  or 
the  most  plain  and  easy  truths  of  the  irospcl, 
whereby  youn^  contierls  arc  nonrislirdaiid  riii- 
yfcrf,  ICor.  3.2.  Ili4i.!>.  12.  lPet.2.2.  [2]  .Sw«<, 
acrreci/hlc,  and  edifying  speech,  (.)ant.  4. 1 1 .  [3  ] 
The  graces,  scrnices,  and  obedience  of  the 
godly.  Cant.  5.  I. 
A  land  flowin;:  with  milk  and  honey,  .fo.ih.  ."i.  0.  .^ 
cnnnlryvfexlraiirdinaryferliliLy,  affording  all 
tkinrrs  necessary  for  the  support  and  comfort 
of  life. 
Wine  and  milk,  Isa.  S."!.  1.   Jill  sorts  of  spiritual 

blessings  ami  jirinilrgcs. 
Gen.  IS.  8.  and  Abraham  took  butter  and  m. 
49.  12.  and  his  teeth  shall  be  white  with  m. 
J)eut.  32.  14.  buller  of  kine  an<l  m.  of  sheep 
Judg.  4.  19.  Jael  opened  a  bottle  of  m.  and  gave 
.1.  2.'>.  he  asked  water,  and  she  gave  him  m. 
Joh  10. 10.  hast  thou  not  poured  me  out  as  m.? 
21.24.  his  breasts  are  full  of  m.  his  hones  moistened 
Pron.  27.  27.  thou  shall  have  goats*  m.  for  food 
30.  .33.  the  churning  of  m.  bringetli  forth  butter 
Cant.  4.  11.  honey  and  m.  are  untler  thy  tongue 
5.  I.  I  havo  drunk  my  wine  witli  my  m. 
333 


MIN 

Cant.  5.  12.  his  eyes  washed  with  m.  and  fitly  set 
Jsa.  7.  22.  for  abundance  of  m.  that  tbey  shall  give 
28.  9.  them  that  are  weaned  from  the  m. 
55.  1.  come,  buy  wine  and  m.  without  money 
GO.  IG.  thou  shall  suck  the  hi.  of  the  Gentiles 
J,am.  4.  7.  Iier  Nazarites  weie  whiter  than  m. 
Eiek.  25.  4.  shall  eat  thy  fruit,  and  drink  thy  m. 
.loci  3.  18.  the  hills  shall  flow  with  m.  and  rivers 
1  C«r.3.2.[  have  fed  you  with  m.  and  not  with  meat 
9.7.  who  feedeth  a  Hock,  and  catetli  not  of  the  nj.  ? 
Hcb.  5.12.  ye  are  become  such  as  have  need  of  m.  7 

13.  for  every  one  that  usetli  m.  is  a  bale 

1  Pct.2.2.  new-born  babes  desire  sincere  m.  of  word 

See  Flowino. 

MILK. 

(sa,  66.  11.  tliat  ye  may  m.  out  and  be  delighted 

MILL,  .S. 
F.iod.  11.  .5.  the  maid-servant  that  is  behind  them. 
JSTuni.  II.  8.  the  peojile  ground  the  manna  in  m. 
Mat.  24.  41.  two  women  shall  be  grinding  at  the  m. 

MILLET. 
Eick.  4.  0.  take  lentiles,  ni.  and  make  bread 

MILLIONS. 
Gen.  24.  GO.  be  thou  mother  of  thousands  of  m. 

MILLSTONE. 

Dent.  24.  G.  no  man  shall  take  the  m.  to  pledge 

./udg.{).iJ3.!i  woman  cast  a  piece  of  Ht.  2  Saw/. 11.21. 

./ub  41.  24.  heart  asliaidasa  piece  of  the  nether  m. 

Mat.  18.  G.  it  were  better  that  a  tti.  were  hanged 

about  his  neck,  Mark  9.  42.  J^ukc  17.  2. 

iicu.18. 21.an  angel  look  up  astone  like  a  great  ?h. 

22.  the  sound  of  a  »t.  shall  be  heard  no  more 

MILLSTONES. 

Tsa.  47.  2.  take  the  m.  and  grind  meal,  uncover 

.fer.  25.  10.  L  will  take  away  the  sound  of  tiie  m. 

MINCING. 
Isa.  3. 16.  wanton  eyes,  walking  and  m.  as  they  go 

MINU 
Signifies,  [1]  The  understanding  or  judgment, 
whereby  ice  distinguish  between  good  and  evil, 
laiofnl  and  unlairful,  2  Cor.  3.  14.  Tit.  1.  15. 
[2J  The  regenerated  and  rcnetced  part  of  man, 
Rom.  7.  2.1  [3]  Tlie  heart,  Gen.  2ti.  35.  Dent. 
18.  G.  [4]  The  memory,  Psal.  31.  12.  Isa.  40.  8. 
[5]  F.nd,  design,  or  intention,  I'rov.  21.  27. 
[0]  Thought,  or  imagination,  Isa.  2G.  t3.  [7] 
Hit,  ur  sovniiness  of  mind,  Mark  5. 1.5.  Luke 
8.  35.  [8]  The  will,  1  Peter  5.  2.  [9]  .Affec- 
tion, Acts  17.  11. 
Who  hath  known  the  mind  of  the  Lord,  1  Cur.  2. 
IG.  IVhal  natural,  carnal  man  hath  been 
taught  by  the  Sj/irit,  the  will,  counsel,  and 
purpose  of  God,  and  the  divine  viyslcries  of 
man's  suloalion  ? 
PiUt  we  have  the  mind  of  Christ,  1  C»)-.  2.  10. 
Hut  IOC  who  arc  endued  with  the  Spirit,  have 
an  experimental  knowledge  of  God's  will,  and 
of  spiritual  divine  things,  revealed  to  us  by 
the  .Spirit,  who  is  our  teacher,  and  knows  the 
mind  of  Christ,  and  reveals  it  to  us,  John  10. 
13.  1  Cor.  2.  10. 

MIND,  Substantive. 
Gen.  26.  .35.  which  were  a  grief  of  ra.  to  Isaac 
Ac?;.24.12.tlie  wi.of  the  Lord  might  hoshewerl  them 
Dcut.  18.0.  and  come  with  all  the  desire  of  his  m. 

28.  05.  the  Lord  shall  give  thee  sorrow  ofw. 
30.  1.  shall  call  them  to  m.  among  the  nations 

1  Chron.  28.  9.  and  serve  him  with  a  willing  m. 
JVeh.  4.  G.  for  the  people  had  a  m.  to  work 
./()/;  2.3.  13.  but  he  is  ofone  m.  who  can  turn  him  7 
I'snl.  31.  12.  am  fi-rgotten,  as  a  dead  man  out  of  hi. 
Prov.  21.  27.  he  bringetli  it  with  a  wicked  ;h. 

29.  11.  a  fool  utterelh  all  his  m.  hut  a  wise  man 
/.•>•«.  2r).3.  keep  in  peace,  whose  m.  is  stayed  on  thee 

4<).  8.  brinj  it  again  to  m.  O  ye  transgressors 

05.  17.  and  the  ibrmer  shall  not  come  into  711. 
./cr.3.  10.  the  ark  of  covenant  shall  not  come  to  m. 

22.  t27.  live  land  whereunto  they  lift  their  «i. 

44.  21.  and  came  it  not  into  his  ;«.? 
Dan.  .5.  20.  when  his  m.  was  hardened  in  pride 
flab.  I.  11.  tben  shall  his  m.  change,  and  he  sli.ill 
JIark  5.  15.  silting  in  his  right  m.  J.uke  H.  35. 

14.  72.  Peter  called  to  m.  the  words  of  Jesus 
I.uke  1.  29.  Mary  cast  in  her  7;i.  what  salutation 

12.  2!l.  neither  be  ye  of  doubtful  ni. 
Jlcts  2.  t  G.  the  multitude  were  troubled  in  m. 

12. 1 20.  Ilcrod  bore  a  hostile  m.  against  Tyre 

17. 11.  they  ri'ccived  word  with  all  readiness  of  7H. 

20.  19.  serving  the  Lord  with  humility  ofw. 
Horn.  I.  28.  God  gave  them  up  to  a  rnprobalc  m. 

7.  25.  so  then,  with  the  m.  1  serve  the  law  of  God 

8.  7.  the  carnal  in.  is  enmity  against  God 
27.  he  knowoth  what  is  tlit;  m.  of  tlw  Spirit 

11.  34.  who  hath  known  the  m.  ofllie  Lordl 

12.  10.  be  of  the  same  ni.  one  toward  another 
14.5.  every  man  be  fully  persuaded  in  his  own  m. 

15.  0.  Ilint  ye  may  with  one  in.  glorify  God 

1  Cor.  1.  10.  ye  be  joined  together  in  the  same  m. 
2.  10.  for  who  hath  known  ilie  j»i.  of  the  Lord  to 
instruct  him?  but  we  havo  the  m.  of  Christ 
3E 


MIN 

2  Cor.  7. 7.  when  he  told  us  your  earnest  denifo 
your  mourning,  your  fervent  m.  toward  ma 

8. 12.  for  if  there  be  (irsta  willing  m.  it  is  ucceptid 

13. 11.  brethren,  be  ofone  ?«.  Phil.  1.  27.  |  2.  2. 
Eph.Jl.  3.  fullillmg  the  desires  of  the  llesli  and  7/1. 

4.  17.  as  other  Gentiles  walk  in  vanity  of  their  7/1. 

Phil.  2.  3.  in  lowliness  of  771.  let  each  estec>ti  other 

5.  let  this  771.  be  in  you,wliicli  was  in  Christ  Jesu* 

4.  2.  that  they  be  of  the  same  711.  in  the  Loid 
Col.  2.  18.  vainly  pulfed  up  by  his  lleshly  m. 

3.12.  pulon  kindness,  humbleness  of  7/1.  meekness 
2  Thess.  2.  2.  that  they  be  not  soon  shaken  in  m. 
2  7'i//i.  1.7.  God  hath  given  us  the  spirit  of  sound  771. 
'Pit.  1.  15.  but  their  771.  and  conscience  is  defiled 

3.  1.  put  them  in  771.  to  be  subject  to  jxiwers 
Heb.  8.  10-  I  will  put  my  laws  into  their  7h. 

12.  t  17.  ho  found  no  way  to  change  his  7h. 
1  Pct.'.i.^.  be  ye  all  ofone  711.  having  compassion 

4.  1.  arm  yourselves  likewise  with  the  same  771. 

5.  2.  not  for  filthy  lucre,  but  of  a  ready  771. 
Rev.  17.  9.  here  is  the  771.  w  hicli  hath  wisdom 

13.  these  have  one  771.  and  shall  give  their  power 

See  AtlitNATEn. 

Miiu  or  my  M I N  D. 

J^um.  16. 28. 1  have  not  done  them  of  nijTic  own  m. 

24.  13.  I  cannot  do  gowl  or  ba<l  of  mine  own  m. 

1  Sam.  2.  35.  according  lo  that  which  is  in  my  m. 

1  Chron.  22.  7.  it  was  in  my  m.  lo  build  a  house 
Isa.  21. t4.  mym.  wandered, fearfulm'ss affrighted 
.Icr.  15.  1.  my  m.  could  not  be  toward  this  people 

19.  5.  neither  came  it  into  my  m,  32.  3.5. 

I. am.  3.  21.  this  I  recall  to  my  m.  therefore  hope 
Horn.  7.  23.  another  law  warring  ag.  law  of  »7iw  n. 

7Viy  MIND. 
1 .9a777.9.20.8et  noXlhym.on  the  asscSftbjjy  are  found 

20.  t4.  say  what  is  thy  m.  and  1  will  do  it 
.lob  34.  33.  should  it  be  according  to  thy  m.  ? 
f;zc/i:.38.10.sanie  limeshall  things  come  inuythy  m, 
/.'a7i.  2. 20.  O  king,  thy  thoughts  came  into  thy  m. 
Mat.  22.37.  thou  shall  love  the  Lord  thv  Goil  with 

all  thy  VI.  Mark  12.  30.  J,uke  10.  27. 
Philcm.  14.  without  thy  m.  would  I  do  nothing 

I'oHr  MIND. 
^£77.23.8.  if  it  ho.  your  m.  I  should  bury  my  dead 
.ler.  51.  50.  and  let  Jerusalem  come  into  your  ■n. 
/'zct. 11.5.1  know  the  things  thatcomeinto  j/wHrrrt. 
20.  32.  and  that  which  cometh  into  your  m. 
Horn.  12.2.  be  transformed  by  renewing  or7/oi7r«. 

2  Cor.  8.  19.  and  declaration  of  your  ready  m. 
9.  2.  for  I  know  the  forwardness  of  your  m. 

F.jih.  4.  23.  anil  be  renewed  in  the  s|iirit  oi'yourm. 
Col.  1.  21.  that  were  sometimes  enemies  in  T/owr  171. 
3.  t  2.  set  yonr  m.  on  things  above,  not  on  Ihingi 

1  Pet.  1. 13.  gird  up  the  loins  of  your  m.  be  sober 

MIND,  yerb. 
Pom.  P.  5.  that  are  after  llcsh,7n.  things  of  the  flesh 
12.  10. 7H.  not  high  things,  but  condesceml  lo  men 
Phil.  3.  1().  nevertheless  let  us  771.  the  same  lliinj 

19.  for  many  walk,  who  m.  earthly  things 

MINDED., 
Path  I.  18.  she  was  stedfaslly  771.  lo  go  with  her 

2  Chrnv.'H.  4.  Jnash  was  m.  lo  repair  the  I10U.SO 
Ezra  7.  13.  which  are  ni.  of  their  own  freir  will 
Mat.  1.  19.  Joseph  was  771.  to  put  her  away  privily 
Hum.  8.  0.  for  to  be  carnally  m.  is  dialh,  but  lo  be 

spiritually  771.  is  life  and  peace 
11.  20.  be  no;  liigli-7H.  but  fear 
15.  .5.  grant  you  lo  he  like  m. one  toward  another 
2  Cor.  1.  1.5.  in  this  confidence  I  was  vi.  to  come 

17.  when  I  was  thus  m.  did  I  use  lightness 
Gal.  5.  10.  Ilmt  you  will  be  no  otherwise  777. 
P/iil.  2.  2.  that  ye  be  like  771.  having  the  same  love 

20.  no  man  like  771.  who  will  care  for  your  stale 

3.  15.  let  us,  as  mnny  as  be  perfect,  be  thus  771.  if  in 

any  thing  ye  be  oiherwise  771.  God  shall  reveal 
I  Thrss.  5.  14.  brethren,  romlort  the  feeble  7»i. 

1  7Virt.  0.  17.  charge  that  the  rich  be  not  liigh-771. 

2  Tim.  .3.  4.  for  men  shall  bo  heady,  high-771. 
Tit.  2.  0.  young  men  exhort  to  be  .sidjcr  711. 
./am. 1. 8.  a  iloiible-7».  man  is  unstable  in  all  his  wa)'9 

4.  8.  and  purify  your  hearts,  yc  doublc-7/1. 

MINDFUL. 

1  Chron.  16.  15.  he  yc  771.  always  of  his  covenant 
•W/;.  9. 17.  our  fathers  were  not  m.  of  thy  wonders 
Psal. f^  4.  what  is  man,  that  thou  art  Tn.ofhim,  and 

the  son  of  m.  that  thou  visitest  him  ?  Heb.  2. 6. 
111.5.  he  will  ever  be  771.  of  his  covenant 
1 15.l2.llie  Lord  hath  been  7)i.orus,he  will  bless  us 
h-a.  17.  10.  not  been  771.  of  the  rock  of  thy  slienglh 

2  7V77(.  1.  4.  being  7/1.  of  thy  tears,  lo  be  filled 
ffrb.  11.  l.'i.  If  they  had  been  m.  of  thai  country 
2  Pet.  3. 2.  that  yc'inav  be  7H.  of  the  words  sjioken 

Minds. 

Indg.  19.30.  consider  of  it,  and  pppak  your  m. 
2  .Snm.  17.  8.  and  they  hr  chafed  in  their  777. 
2  Kings  9.  15.  if  it  be  your  m.  let  none  go  forth 
F.tfk.  24.  25.  thai  whereupon  they  set  their  771. 

3li.  .5.  with  de*iiiieful  tti.  lo  cast  it  out  for  a  jirc" 
Jicts  14.  2.  and  made  their  m.  evil  nflccted 

28.  6.  they  cimngcd  their  tji.  said  he  was  a  god 


niN 

S  Cor.  3. 14.  but  their  m.  were  blinded,  veil  untaken 
4  4.  the  god  of  this  world  hath  blinded  the  m 
11.3.8oyour  w.sho'd  be  corrupted  from  simpiicily 

Phtl.  4.  7.  the  peace  of  God  shall  keep  your  m 

1  Tim.  6.  5.  men  of  corrupt  m.  i  Tim.  3.  8. 
Jieb.  JO.  16.  and  in  their  m.  will  I  write  them 

1-2.  3  lest  ye  be  wearied  and  faint  in  your  m. 
iPeL  i.  1. 1  stir  up  your  pure  m.  by  way  of  rememb. 

MINDING. 
.^cU  20.  13.  Paul  m.  himself  to  go  afoot 

MU\E. 
Job  28.  t  1.  surely  there  is  a  m.  for  the  silver 

MINE. 
Oen.  31.  43.  and  all  that  thou  seest  is  m. 
48.  5.  are  m.  as  Reuben  and  Simeon  shall  be  m. 
Eiod.  13.'2.  sanctify  to  me  all  the  first-born, both  of 
man  and  beast,  it  is  m.  34.  lit.  JVu;n.  3.  13. 

19.  5.  for  all  the  earth  is  m.  Psal.  50.  12. 
Lev.  20.  26.  that  ye  should  be  m.  Isa.  43.  1. 

35.  23.  tlie  land  is  m.  for  ye  are  strangers 
J^am.  3.  12.  the  Levitca  shall  be  m.  45.  ]  8.  14. 
8.  17.  the  first-born  of  children  of  Israel  are  m. 

2  .Sam.  14.30.  Absalom  said,  Joab's  field  is  nearm 

1  Kings  2.  15.  knowest  that  the  kingdom  was  m. 
3.  26.  let  it  be  neither  m.  nor  thine,  divide  it 

20.  3.  thy  silver,  and  gold,  and  wives,  are  m. 

2  Kings  10.  6.  if  ye  will  be  m.  and  ifye  will  hearken 
Job  41.  11.  whatsoever  is  under  heaven  is  m. 
Psal.  18.  23.  I  kept  myself  from  ra.  iniquity 

50.  10.  for  every  beast  of  the  forest  is  vi. 
11.  and  the  wild  beasts  of  the  field  are  m. 

60.  7.  Gilead  is  m.  and  Manassi'h  is  m.  103.  8. 
Prov.  8.  14.  counsel  is  m.  and  sound  wisdom 
Cant.  2. 16.  my  beloved  is  m.  and  I  am  his,  6.  3. 

8.  12.  my  vineyard,  which  is  m.  is  before  me 
Jer.  44.  28.  whose  word  shall  stand,  m.  or  theirs 
Fzek.  16.  8.  I  sware  to  thee,  thou  becamest  m. 

18.  4.  behold,  all  souls  are  m.  soul  of  son  is  m. 
23.  4.  and  they  were  m.  ||  5.  when  she  was  m. 
29. 9.  the  river  is  m.  ||  35. 10.  these  countries  be  m. 

Hag.  2.  8.  the  silver  ism.  and  the  gold  is  m. 
Jifal.  3.  17.  they  shall  be  m.  saith  the  Lord 
Jlf(i«. 7.24. that  heareth  sayings  of  T/i.and  doeth  them 
26.hearcth  these  sayings  of  m. and  doeth  them  not 
20. 23.  but  to  sit  on  my  right  hand  and  on  my  left, 
is  not  VI.  to  give,  it  shall  be  given,  Mark  10.  40. 
J^ukc  11.  0.  a  friend  of  m.  in  his  journey  is  come 
John  2.  4.  Jesus  saith,  m.  hour  is  not  yet  come 
7. 16. my  doctrine  is  not  m.  ||  10. 14.  am  known  of  m. 

14.  24.  the  word  which  ye  hear  is  not  m. 

Ifi.  14.  he  shall  receive  of  m.  and  shew  it  you 

15.  all  things  that  the  Father  hath  are  m. 
17.  10.  all  m.  are  thine,  and  thine  are  m. 
Rom.  12.19.  vengeance  is  m.  I  will  repay,  saith  Ld. 
Pkil.  1.  4.  in  every  praver  of  m.  making  request 

MINGLE. 
Jsa.  5.22.  and  men  of  strength  to  m.  strong  drink 

9.  1 11.  the  Lord  shall  m.  his  enemies  together 

19.  t2.  I  will  m.  Egyptians  with  Egyptians 
Van.  2.  43.  they  shall  m.  with  the  seed  of  men 

51INGLED. 
Ezod.  9.  24.  there  was  fire  m.  with  the  hail 
J,eo.  19.  19.  shalt  not  sow  thy  field  with  m.  seed 
Ezra  9.2.holy  seed  have  m .  themselves  with  people 
Job  24.  t6.  they  reap  every  one  his  m.  corn 
Psnl.  102.  9.  and  m.  my  drink  with  weeping 
lOf).  35.  hut  were  m.  among  the  heathen 
Prnv.  9.  2.  killed  her  beasts,  she  hath  m.  her  wine 

5.  and  drink  of  the  wine  which  I  have  m. 
Isa.  19.  14.  the  Lord  h:»th  ni.  a  perverse  spirit 
J'r.  25.  20.  gave  the  cup  to  all  the  m.  people,  24. 

50.  37.  a  sword  on  all  the  m.  people,  Ezfk.  30.  5. 
Mat.  27.  34.  they  gave  him  vinigar  m.  with  gall 
Mark  15.  23.  they  gave  him  wine  m.  with  myrrh 
/.like  13.  1.  whose  blood  Pilate  had  m.  withsacrifi. 
A'f.  8. 7.  there  followed  hail  and  fire  m.  with  blood 

15.  2.  I  saw  as  it  wore  a  sea  of  glass  m.  with  fire 

MIN18H,  EU.' 
Ezod.  5.  19.  ye  shall  not  m.  ought  of  your  task 
P$al.  107.  39.  again  lliey  are  m.  and  brought  low 

MINfSTER 
Signifies,  Ovi:  who  serves^  wait.^  on,  or  attends 
another,  Kxod.  24.  13.  1  Kings  10.  5.  It  is 
a  word  applied,  [1]  To  Christ,  rrho  is  railed, 
A  Minister  of  the  sanctuary,  Heb.  8.  2.  that 
is,  Christ  bring  nnv>  gnnr  up  into  heaven, 
typified  by  the  holy  of  holies,  he  does  there 
minister,  or  ezerutr  the  remainder  of  his  office 
in  his  human  nature,  by  presenting  the  merit 
of  his  sacrifice,  as  the, high-priest  brought  the 
blood  of  the  sin-offering  intn  the  most  holy 
jilace  once  a  year,  E.\od.  30.  II).  Lev.  16.  \!i. 
[2]  To  sneh  as  arc  appointed  to  attend  the 
service  of  Ood  in  his  chureh,  tn  dispense  and 
give  forth  faithfully  and  tcisrhj,  the  jeord, 
sacraments  and  other  holy  things,  I  Cor.  4. 
1.  [3)  To  magistrates, icho  are  God's  officers 
and  deputies  to  punish  suci  ns  transgress 
kis  Ituv,  and    to    defend    the   pniid,   Rom.   13. 

6.  [41    To  the  holy  angels,  Kho  are  alioayt 

3«6 


MIN 

ready  to  execute  the  commands  of  God,  Psal 

104.4. 
Ezod.  24.  13.  Moses  rose  up,  and  his  rn.  Joshua 
./osh.  1.  1.  the  Lord  spake  to  Joshua,  Moses'  m. 
2  Kings  6.  f  15.  when  the  m.  of  Elisha  was  risen 
Mat.  20.  26.  let  him  he  your  m.  Mark  10.  43. 
Luke  4.  20.  he  gave  the  book  again  to  the  m. 
Ms  13.  5.  and  they  had  also  John  to  their  m. 
26.  16.  to  make  thee  a  7/1.  and  a  witness 
Rom.  13.  4.  for  he  is  the  m.  of  God  to  thee,  6. 

15.  8.  Christ  was  a  m.  of  the  circumci:>ion 

16.  I  should  bo  the  m.  of  Jesus  to  the  Gentiles 
Gal.  2.  17.  is  Christ  the  m.  of  sin  ?  God  forbid 
Eph.  3.  7.  whereof  I  was  made  a  m.  Col.  1.23,25. 
6. 21.  Tychicus,  a  faithful  m.  of  the  Ld.  Col.  4.  7. 
Col.  I.  7.  Epaphras,  who  is  for  you  a  faithful  m. 
1  Thess.  3.  2.  Timothy  our  brother  and  m.  of  God 
1  Tim.  4.  6.  thou  shalt  be  a  good  7h.  of  tlirist 
Heb.  8.  2.  a  7/1.  of  the  sanctuary  and  tabernacle 

MINISTER. 
£j:od.28.1.that  he  may  7n.to  me  in  the  priest's  office, 
3,  4,  41.  I  29.  1,44.  I  30.30.  |  31.  10 
I  35.  19.  1  39.  41.  I  40.  13,  15. 
35.  and  it  shall  be  upon  -Aaron  to  m. 
43.  when  they  come  to  altar  to  m.  29.  30.  |  30. 20 
29.  44.  I  will  sanctify  Aaron  to  m.  to  me 
/.e».  7.  35.  in  the  day  he  presented  them  to  m. 

16.  32.  whom  he  shall  consecrate  to  m.  Jfurn.S.  3 
JVara.  8.  26.  but  shall  m.  with  their  brethren 
Deut.10.8,  separated  the  tribe  of  Levi  to  in.  to  liim 

18.  5.  to  stand  to  771.  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  7. 
21.  5.  for  thy  God  hath  chosen  them  to  7;i. 

1  Sam.  2.  11.  the  child  did  m.  to  the  Lonl  before  El 

1  Kings8. 11.  so  that  the  priests  could  not  stand  to 

m.  because  of  the  cloud,  2  Chron.  5.  14. 

1  Chron.  15.  2.  chosen  to  771.  before  him  for  ever 
23.  13.  to  711.  and  to  give  thanks,  2  Chron.  31.  2. 

2  Chron.  13. 10.  priests  which  7/i. are  the  sons  of  Aar. 
Psal.  9.  8.  he  shall  rn.  judgment  to  the  people 
Isa.  60.  7.  the  rams  of  Nebaioth  shall  vi.  to  thee 

10.  and  their  kings  shall  771.  to  thee 

.Ter.  33.  22.  I  will  multiply  the  Levites  that  771. 
Ezck.  40.  46.  which  come  near  to  m.  44.  15,  16. 

44.  11.  they  shall  stand  before  them  to  ?7i. 
^/a(,20.28.to  be  ministered  to, but  to  m.Mark  10.45. 

25.  44.  naked,  or  sick,  ami  did  not  m.  to  thee 
..ficts  24.23.nor  forbid  his  acquaintance  to  m.to  him 
Rom.  15.  25.  but  now  I  go  to  m.  to  the  saints 
27.  their  duty  is  to  m.  to  them  in  carnal  things 

1  Cor.  9.13.  they  which  7n.  about  holy  things,  live  of 

2  Cor.9.10.both  77i.bread  for  your  food,  and  multiply 
Eph.  4.  2il.  that  it  may  77i.  grace  to  the  hearers 

1  Tim.  1. 4.  which  777.  questions  rather  than  edifying 
Heb.  1.  14.  angels  sent  to  m.  to  heirs  of  salvation 

6.  10.  ye  have  ministered  to  the  saints  and  do  777. 
1  Pet.  1.  12.  but  to  us  they  did  777.  the  things 

4. 10.  even  so  m.  the  same  one  to  another,  as  good 

11.  if  any  man  771.  let  him  do  it  as  of  the  ability 

MINISTERED. 
JVuJ7i.  3.  4.  Eleazar  and  Itlmmar  777.  Deut.  10.  6. 

1  i'a77i.2.  18.  but  Samuel  771.  before  the  Lord,  3.  1. 

2  .Sam.  13.  17.  Amnon  called  his  servant  that  771. 

1  Kings  1.  4.  Abishag  7/1.  to  king  David,  15. 

19.  21.  Elisha  went  after  Elijah,  and  7;t.  to  him 

2  Kings  25.  14.  they  took  away  the  pots,  Rniifl;"prs, 

and  all  the  vessels  wherewith  they  m.  ./tr..52.18. 
Ezek.  44.  12.  they  771.  to  them  before  their  idols 
Dan.  7.  10.  thousand  thousands  771.  unto  him 
Mat.  4.11.  angels  came  and  771.  to  him,  Mark  1. 13. 
8.  15.  she  rose  and  m.  unto  them,  Mark  1.  31. 
Ijuke  8.  3.  which  711.  to  him  of  their  substance 
./]cts  13.  2.  as  they  7ji.  and  fasted,  the  Spirit  said 

20.  34.  these  hands  have  7;i.  to  my  necessilies 

2  Cor.  3.  3.  declared  the  epistle  of  Christ  77J.  by  us 

Phil.  2.  25.  and  he  that  771.  to  my  wants 

Col.  2.  19.  having  nourishment  m.  increaseth  with 

1  Tim.  3.  t  13.  that  have  771.  the  office  of  deacon 

2  TVm.  1.  18.  in  how  many  things  he  m.  unto  me 
Philem.  13.  Ihftt  in  thy  stead  he  might  have  7;i. 
Ifeb.  6.  10.  that  ye  have  tti.  to  the  saints,  and  do 
2  Pet.  1.  11.  for  so  an  entrance  shall  be  m.  to  you 

MINISTERETH. 
2  (^r.  9.  10.  now  ho  that  711.  seed  to  the  sower 
Oal.  3.  5.  he  that  tti.  to  voii  the  Spirit,  doeth  he  it 

MINISTERING. 

1  Chron.  9.  28.  Iiad  the  charge  of  the  771.  vessels 
F.zek.  44.  11.  at  the  gates  of  house,  m.  to  the  house 
^/ar.27.55.  many  women  followed  Jesus  711.  to  him 
/io77i.  12. 7.  let  us  wait  on  771.  II  15.  IG.  tti.  thegos|>cl 

2  Cor.  8.  4.  and  take  on  us  the  m.  to  the  sainta 
9.1. for  as  touching  tti. to  the  anints,  itissuporHiinus 

Ileb.  1.14.  ore  they  not  nil  iti.  spirits,  sent  minister 

10. 11.  every  priest  standi'th  daily  777.  and  olTering 

MINISTERS. 

1  Kings  10. 5.  the  allendance  of  his  771. 2  CArrt7i.9.4. 

K:ra  7.24.  not  lawful  to  impose  toll  on  7n.  of  house 
H.  17.  that  they  should  bring  unto  us  771.  for  house 

Psnl.  103.  21.  ve  m.  of  his  that  df)  \i\s  pleasure 
101.4.  whomiikilhhism.n  flaming  fire,  //r*.  1.7. 

Isa.  01.  0.  men  shall  call  you  the  771.  of  our  God 


MIR 

Jer.  33.21.  then  may  also  my  covenant  be  broken 
with  David  my  servant,  and  with  my  m. 
Ezck.  44.  11.  they  shall  be  777.  in  my  sanctuary 

45.  4.  holy  portion  for  the  m.  of  the  sanctuary 
Joel  1.  9.  the  Lord's  771.  mourn  ||  13.  howl  ye  ttj. 

2.  17.  771.  weep  between  the  i)orch  and  the  altar 
Luke  1.  2.  which  from  beginning  were  J7i.  of  word 
Rom.  13.6.  they  are  God's  771.  attending  continually 

1  Cor.  3.  5.  but  771.  by  whom  ye  believed,  as  Lord 

4.  1.  so  account  of  us  as  of  the  m.  of  Christ 

2  Cor.  3. 6.  who  made  us  able  771.  of  the  new  tcstam. 
6.  4.  approving  ourselves  as  the  771.  of  God 

11. 15.  therefore  it  is  no  great  thing,  if  his  771.  also 
be  transformed  as  the  m.  ot  righteousnesi 
23.  are  they  771.  of  Christ?  I  am  more,  in  labours 
MINISTRATION. 
/.7/4«].23.as  soon  as  ihc  days  of  his  771.  were  ended 
j3ct«6.1  .their  widows  were  neglected  in  the  dailym. 
2  Cor.  3.  7.  but  if  the  m.  of  death  was  glorious 
8.  the  771.  of  the  Spirit  be  rather  glorious  ?  9. 
9.  13.  whiles  by  the  experiment  of  this  m. 

MINISTRY. 
JVu77i.  4. 12.  shall  take  all  the  instruments  of  the  m. 
47.every  one  that  came  to  do  llie  service  of  the  n 
2  Chron.  7.  6.  when  David  praised  by  their  771. 
//os.l2.10.have  used  similitudes  by  7«.  of  prophet* 
Acts  1.  17.  for'he  had  obtained  part  of  this  771. 
25.  that  may  take  part  of  this  771.  and  apostleihip 
6.  4.  but  we  will  give  ourselves  to  771.  of  the  word 
12. 25.  returned,  when  they  had  fulfilled  their  771. 
20.  24.  so  that  I  might  finish  my  course,  and  m. 
21. 19.  what  things  God  had  wrought  by  his  m. 
Rom.  12.  7.  or  m.  let  us  wait  on  our  ministering 
ICor.  Ifi.lo.  addicted  themselves  to  the  m.  of  sainti 
2  Cor.  4.  1.  seeing  we  have  this  m.  we  faint  not 

5.  18.  hath  given  to  us  the  7/1.  of  reconciliation 

6.  3.  giving  no  offence,  that  the  77t.be  not  blamed 
Eph.  4. 12.  for  work  of  the  m.  for  edifying  the  body 
Cul.  4.  17.  take  hoed  to  the  771.  thou  hast  rect  ived 

1  Tim.  1.12.  putting  me  into  the  771.  who  was  before 

2  Tim.  4.  .5.  watch  thou,  make  full  proof  of  thy  771. 
11.  for  he  is  profitable  to  me  for  the  771. 

Heb.  8. 6.  now  hath  he  obtained  a  more  excellent  m. 
9.  21.  besprinkled  with  blood  thavesselsof  the  771. 

MINSTREL,  S. 
2  A'iVin-i  3.1  S.but  now  bringmea77i.when  m.  played 
Mat.  9.  23.  when  Jesus  saw  the  771.  and  the  people 

MINT. 
Mat.  23.  23.  ye  pay  lithe  of  tti.  anise,  and  cummin 
Luke  11.  42.  ye  lithe  m.  and  all  manner  of  herb* 

MIRACLE 
Is  a  supernatural  operation  performed  alone  hy 
the  power  of  God,  John  3.  2.  |  9.  16.  Acta 
2. 22.  I  15. 12.  Our  Saviour  confirmed  the  doc- 
trine whichhe  taught  by  a  train  of  incontestable 
miracles  :  Thry  leere  so  great  in  their  nature, 
so  real  anil  solid  in  their  proof,  so  divine  in  the 
manner  of  performing  them,  by  the  power  of 
his  will;  so  holy  in  their  end,  to  confirm  a 
doctrine  most  becoming  the  wisdom  and  other 
glorious  attributes  of  God,  and  for  the  ac- 
compli.'^hment  of  the  prophecies  concerning  the 
Messiah,  lehose  coming  was  foretold  to  be  with 
miraculous  healing  benefits;  that  there  was  the 
greatest  assurance,  that  none  without  the  om- 
nipotent hand  of  God  could  do  them.  The  ma- 
gicians performed  divers  woniters  in  Egypt, 
but  they  were  outdone  by  Moses,  to  convince 
the  spectators,  that  he  was  sent  from  a  power 
infinitely  superior  to  thaJL  of  evil  .spirits.  Real 
miracles  that  are  contrary  to  the  order,  and 
exceed  the  power  of  nature,  can  only  be  produced 
by  erraling  pmcir,  and  are  wrought  to  give 
credit  to  those  who  are  sent  from  God ;  and 
when  God  permits  false  miracles  to  be  done  bp 
seducers,  that  would  thereby  obtain  authority 
and  credit  among  men,  the  deception  is  not  in- 
vincible ;  for  it  is  foretold  fTpressly,  to  gire 
us  warning,  that  the  man  of  trin  shall  come 
with  lying  wonders  after  the  working  of  Satan, 
2  The  «s.  2.  9.  but  the  heavenly  doctrine  of  the 
gospel  has  been  confirmed  by  real  miracles, 
incomparably  greater  than  all  the  strange 
things  done  to  gire  credit  to  doctrines  opposed 
to  it. 
Ezod.  7.  9.  when  Pharaoh  shall  speak  unto  von, 
saying,  shew  a  771. 
2  Chron.  32.  t  24.  and  he  wrought  a  171.  for  him 
Mark  6.  .52.  Ihry  considered  not  the  771.  of  the  loares 

9.  39.  no  man  which  shall  do  a  771.  in  my  name 
/,i;/v-23.8.hopod  to  have  seen  some  Tn.done  bv  him 
John  4.  54.  this  is  the  second  m.  that  Jesus  did 

10.  41.  many  resorted  and  said,  John  did  no  m 
.lets  4. 16.  a  notable  m.  halh  been  done  by  them 

22.  above  40  years  on  whom  this  tti.  was  wrought 
MIRACLES. 
jVuTTi. 14.22. which  have  seen  tti.  which  Thave  dono 
}>rut.  11.3.  your  children,  that  have  not  seen  his  771. 
29.3.  thinf  eyes  have  se>^n  those  signs  and  great  m. 
.ludg.  6.  13.  where  be  all  his  m.  our  fathers  told  u 


MIS 


MIX 


JohnZ.  11.  this  beginning  of  m. did  Jesus  in  Cana 
23.  many  believed,  when  they  saw  tlie  m.  he  did 

3. 2.  no  man  canjo  these  m.  except  G.  be  with  him 

C.i.a  multit.  folio  wed  him,  because  they  saw  his  m- 
26.  ye  seek  me,  not  because  ye  saw  the  m. 

7.  31.  will  he  do  more  m.  than  this  man  dooth? 

9.  It),  how  can  a  man  that  is  asiniier  dosuchm.? 

11.  47.  what  do  we!  for  this  man  doeth  many  m. 

Vi.  37.  though  he  had  done  so  many  m.  bcf  them 
jicts  2.  'iri.  a  man  approved  of  God  by  m.  and  signs 

6.  8.  Stephen  did  great  m.  among  the  people 

Si.  ti.  hearing  and  seeing  the  m.  which  ho  did 

13.  wondered,  beholding  the  m.  which  were  done 
1.5.  Vi.  declaring  what  m.  God  had  wrought 
19.  II.  God  wrought  special  m.  by  hands  of  Paul 

1  Cor.  12.  10.  to  another  the  workmg  of  »n. 
2^.  after  that  m.  \\  29.  are  all  workers  of  m.? 

Gal.  3. 5.  he  that  worketh  m.  doeth  he  it  by  works 

i/c6.2. 4.God  also  bearing  them  witness  with  m. 

/i(«.13.14.deceiveth  them  by  the  means  of  those  ;n. 

16. 14.  for  they  are  the  spirits  of  devils  working  m. 

19.20.the  false  prophet  that  wrought  7n.  before  him 

MIRE 

Signifies,  JIud  or  dirt  troddenunder  foot,iS^m. 
22.43. 

He  hath  cast  me  into  the  mire.  Job  30.  19.  He 
hath,  made  me  contemptible,  filthy,  and  loath- 
some, by  reason  of  my  sores,  my  whole  body 
being  a  kind  of  mire  in  regard  of  the  filth 
breaking  forth  in  all  its  parts. 

The  sow  that  was  washed  turned  to  her  wallow 
ing  in  the  mire,  2  Pet.  2.  22.  .,1s  swine  that 
naturally  love  the  dirt  and  mire,  if  sometimes 
they  be  washed  from  it,  yet  still  retaining  their 
former  dispositions,  return  to  it  again:  So 
likewise  these  persons  here  mentioned,  however 
they  be  washedfrom  the  pollutions  of  the  world, 
and  by  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  brought  off 
from  their  former  sinful  courses,  and  brought 
to  a  profession  of  holiness ;  yet  still  retaining 
their  old  nature  and  corrupt  dispositions,  they 
are  easily  prevailed  upon  and  enticed,  and 
they  relapse  into  their  former  abominations. 

2  Sam.  22.  43. 1  did  stamp  them  as  m.  of  the  street, 

and  spread  them  abroad,  Isa.  10. 6.  Mic.l.  10. 

Job  8.  11.  can  the  rush  grow  up  without  m.  ? 
30.  19.  he  hath  cast  me  into  the  m.  I  am  like  dust 
38.  t  ^?.  when  the  dust  is  turned  into  ?«. 
41. 30.  he  spreadeth  sharp-pointed  things  on  the  to. 

Psal.  69.  2. 1  sink  in  deep  m.  where  is  ne  standing 

14.  deliver  me  out  of  the  m.  let  me  not  sink 
Isa.  57.  20.  whose  waters  cast  up  m.  and  dirt 
Jcr.  38.  6.  in  the  dungeon  was  no  water,  but  m. 

22.  thy  feet  are  sunk  in  the  m.  and  turned 
Zech.  9.  3.  and  fine  gold  as  the  m.  of  the  streets 
10.5.  which  tread  their  enemies  in  m.  of  the  streets 
2  Pet.i.  22.  the  sow  to  her  wallowing  in  the  m 

MIRY. 
Psal.  40.  2.  he  brought  me  out  of  the  m.  clay 
Ezek.  47.  11.  the  m.  places  shall  not  be  healed 
Dan. 2.41.  thou sawest  iron  mi.xed  with  m.  clay,  43. 

MIRTH. 
Oen.  31.  27.  I  might  have  sent  thee  away  with  m. 
J^eh.  8. 12.  the  people  went  a  way  to  make  great  m. 
Job  21.  t  13.  they  spend  their  days  in  m. 
Psal.  137.3.  they  that  wasted  us  desired  of  us  m. 
Prov.  14.  13.  and  the  end  of  that?;!,  is  heaviness 
Eccl.  2.  1.  I  said,  go  to,  I  will  prove  thee  with  m. 
2.  I  said  of  m.  what  doeth  if? 

7.  4.  the  heart  of  fools  is  in  the  house  of  m 

8.  15.  then  I  commended  m.  because  a  man  hath 
/sa.  24.  8.  m.  oftabrets,  the  joy  of  the  harpceaseth 

11.  joy  is  darkened,  the  m.  of  the  land  is  gone 
Jer.  7. 34. 1  will  cause  to  cease  the  voice  of /h.  from 
Judah  and  .lerusalem,  16.  9.  |  25. 10.  Hos.  2. 11. 
£:eA.21. 10.it  is  furbished, shnuld  we  then  make  m.? 

MISCARRYING. 
Hos.  9. 14.  give  them  a  m.  womb  and  dry  breasts 

MISCHIEF. 
Oen.  42.  4.  for  he  said,  lest  some  m-  befall  him 

38.  if  m.  befall  him  by  the  way  ye  go  in,  44.  29. 

Ezod.  21.  22.  her  fruit  depart,  and  yet  no  m.  follow 

32. 12.  for  m.  did  he  bring  them  out,  to  slay  them 

22.  thou  knowest  the  people  that  are  set  on  m. 

1  Sam.  23.  9.  David  knew  that  Saul  practised  m. 

2  Sam.  16.  8.  behold,  thou  art  taken  in  thy  m. 

1  Kings  11.  25.  besides  the  m.  that  Hadad  did 
20.  7.  mark  and  see  how  this  man  sceketh  m. 

2  icings  7.  9.  if  we  tarry,  some  m.  will  befall  us 
JVieA.  6.  2.  but  they  thought  to  do  me  m. 
/:s«A.8.3.Esther  besought  to  put  away  m.of  Haman 
Job  15. 35.  they  conceive  m.  and  bring  forth  vanity 
Ps.  7.  14.  he  conceived  m.  bniught  forth  falsehood 

16.  his  TO.  shall  return  upon  his  own  head 
10.  7  under  his  tongue  is  m.  aiid  vanity 

14.  thou  beholdest  m.  and  spite,  to  requite  it 
2fi.  10.  in  whose  hands  is  m.  their  hand  is  full 
28.  3.  which  speak  peace,  hut  m.  is  in  their  hearts 
36.  4.  the  wicked  deviseth  to.  upon  his  bed 
52.  1  why  boastest  thyself  in  m.O  mighty  manl 
387 


Psal.  55.  10.  m.  and  sorrow  are  in  the  midst  of  it 
62.  3.  how  long  will'ye  imagine  m.  ag.  a  man'? 
94.  21).  the  throne,  which  frameth  m.  by  a  law 
119.  150.  they  draw  nigh  that  follow  after  m. 
140.  9.  let  tlie  m.  of  their  own  lijjs  cover  them 

Prov.  4.  16.  sleep  not,  e.xcept  they  have  done  m. 
6.  14.  he  deviseth  to.  continually,  he  soweth 
18.  feet  that  be  swift  in  running  to  to. 

10.  23.  it  is  a  sport  to  a  fool  to  do  m. 

11.  27.  he  that  secketh  m.  it  shall  come  to  him 

12.  21.  but  the  wicked  shall  be  filled  with  m. 

13.  17.  a  wicked  messenger  falleth  into  m. 
17.  20.  that  hath  a  perverse  tongue  falleth  into  m. 
24. 2.  their  heart  studieth  and  their  lips  talk  of  m. 

16.  but  the  wicked  shall  fall  into  7/1.  28.  14. 
fsa.  47.  11.  therefore  m.  shall  fall  upon  thee 
59.  4.  they  trust  in  vanity,  they  conceive  m. 
Ezek.  7^  26.  ra.  shall  come  upon  ?«.  and  rumour 
11.  2.  said  he,  these  are  the  men  that  devise  m. 
/.)art.ll.27.both  these  kings'  hearts  shall  be  to  do  m 
Hos.  7.  15.  yet  do  they  imagine  m.  against  me 
jMic.  7. 1 3.  the  great  man  uttereth  the  m.  of  his  sou 
Jlcts  13. 10.  O  full  of  all  TO.  thou  child  of  the  devil 

MISCHIEFS. 
Deut.  32. 23.  I  will  heap  m.  on  them,  I  will  spend 
Psal.  52.  2.  thy  tongue  deviseth  m.  like  a  razor 
140.  2.  which  imagine  m.  in  their  heart 

MISCHIEVOUS. 
Psal.  21. 11.  they  imagined  a  to.  device,  not  able  to 
38.  12.  they  that  seek  my  hurt,  speak  m.  things 
Prov.  24.  8.  he  shall  be  called  a  m.  person 
Keel.  10.  13.  the  end  of  his  talk  is  m.  madness 
Ezek.  38.  f  10.  thou  shalt  conceive  a  771.  purpose 
Alic.  7.  3.  the  great  man  uttereth  his  m.  desire 

MISERABLE. 
.fob  16.  2.  Job  said,  m.  comforters  are  ye  all 
1  Cor.  15.  19.  we  are  of  all  men  most  to. 
Rev.  3.  17.  and  knowest  not  that  thou  art  m. 

MISERABLY. 
Mat.  21.  41.  he  will  m.  destroy  those  wicked  men 

MISERY. 
Judg.XO.IG.hK  soul  was  grieved  for  the  m.  of  Israel 
./ub  3.  20.  why  is  light  given  to  him  that  is  in  to.? 
11.  16.  because  thou  shalt  forget  thy  to. 
Prov.  31.  7.  drink,  and  remember  his  m.  no  more 
Eccl.  8.  6.  the  m.  of  a  man  is  great  on  him 
Lam.  3.  19.  remembering  mine  atHiction  and  m. 
Rom.  3.  16.  destruction  and  to.  are  in  their  ways 

MISERIES. 
Lam.  1.7.  Jerusalem  remembered  in  days  of  her  to. 
./am.  5. 1.  howl  for  your  m.  that  shall  come  on  you 

MISS. 
.Tudg.  20.  16.  gling  at  a  hair-breadth  and  not  m. 
1  Sam.  20.  6.  if  thy  father  at  all  m.  me,  then  say 

MISSED. 

1  Sam.  20. 18.  thou  shalt  be  m.  f  thy  seat  will  be  m. 

25. 15.  neither  to.  any  thing  as  long  as  conversant 

21.  nothing  was  m.  of  all  that  pertained  to  him 

MISSING. 

1  Sam.  25.  7.  neither  was  there  ought  to.  unto  them 
lKings20.  39.  if  by  anv  means  he  be  wi.then  thy  life 

MIST. 
Oen.  2.  6.  but  there  went  up  a  tti.  from  the  earth 
Jlcts  13.  II.  imm«;diately  there  fell  on  him  a  m. 

2  Pet. 2. 17.  to  whom  them.of  darkness  is  reserved 
MISTRESS. 

Oen.  16.  4.  Sarah  her  m.  was  despised  in  her  eyes 
8.  I  ilee  from  my  m.  Sarai  H  9.  return  to  thy  m. 

1  Kings  17.  17.  son  of  the  to.  of  the  house  fell  sick 

2  Kings  5.  3.  said  to  her  to.  would  G.  my  lord  were 
Psal.  123.2.  as  eyes  of  a  maiden  to  hand  of  her  771. 
Prov.  30.  23.  and  handmaid  that  is  heir  to  her  m. 
Isa.  24.  2.  shall  he  as  with  the  maid  so  with  her  to. 
JVaA.  3.  4.  TO.  of  witchcrafts,  that  selleth  nations 

MISUSED. 
2  CA7-.  36. 16.  but  thev despised  and  m.  his  prophets 

MITE,  S. 
Mark  12.  42.  a  widow  threw  in  twoTO.  Luke  21.2. 
Luke  12.  59.  till  thou  hast  paid  the  very  last  m. 

MITRE. 
Ezod.  28.  4.  they  shall  make  a  ra.  39.  |  39.  23. 
37.  a  blue  lace  upon  the  77!.  28.  37.  |  39.  31. 
29.  6.  and  thou  shalt  put  the  m.  upon  his  head 
Lev.  8.  9.  he  put  also  the  holy  crown  on  the  m. 
16.  4.  with  the  linen  7;i.  shall  he  be  attired 
Zech.  3. 5.  a  fair  m.  on  his  head,  so  they  set  a  fair  m. 

MIXED. 
Ezod.  12.  38.  a  to.  multitude  went  up  with  them 
JV«m.  11.  4.  the  m.  multitude  fell  a  lusting 
JVfA.  13.3.  they  separated  from  Isr.  all  m.  multitude 
Prov.  23.  30.  they  that  go  to  seek  771.  wins 
fsa.l.  22.  thy  silver  is  dross,  thy  wine  m.  with  water 
/)a77.  2.  41.  thou  sawest  the  iron  771.  with  miry  clay 
Hos.  7.  8.  Ephraim  m.  himself  among  the  people 
Hcb.  4. 2.  not  being  m.  with  faith  in  them  heard  it 

MIXTURE. 
Ezod.  a.  t21.  I  will  send  a  m.  of  noisome  beasts 
12.  \^.  a  great  m.  went  up  also  with  them 


MOL 

Rev.  14. 10.  is  poiared  out  without  m.  into  the  cup 

MOCK. 
Prov.  14.  9.  fools  make  a  777.  at  sin;  but  among 

MOCK 
Signifies,   [1]   To  deride,  scoff,  or  laugh   al,  9 
Chron.  30.  10.     [2]    I'o  speak  merrily,  or  in 
jest.  Gen.   19.  14.     [3]    7'u  deceive  one's  ex- 
pectation, by  departing  from  wonted  obedience, 
Num.  22.  29.     [4]    7'u  beguile  with  words, 
Judg.  16.  10,  13.     [5]    To  ravish,  force,   or 
abuse,  Gen.  39.  17. 
Oen.  39.  14.  saying,  see,  he  hath  brought  in  a  He- 
brew unto  us  to  TO.  us,  17. 
1  5am.  31.  f  4.  lest  these  uneircumcised  come  and 
thrust  me  through,  and  m  me,  1  Chron.  10.t4. 
.fob  13.  9.  as  one  that  mocketh,  do  ye  so  7/1.  him 
21.  3.  and  after  that  I  have  spoken,  to.  on 
Prov.  1.  26.  I  will  m.  when  your  fear  conleth 
Jcr.  9.  t5.  they  will  771.  everyone  his  neighbour 
33.  19.  lest  they  deliver  me,  and  they  m.  me 
I^am.  1.  7.  the  adversaries  did  77t.  at  her  sabbaths 
Kzc/i.22.5.shallm.tlieewho  art  infamous  and  ve.ved 
Mat.  20.  19.  shall  deliver  him  to  Gentiles  to  777.  him 
Mark  10.  34.  they  shall  777.  him  and  scourge  him 
Luke  14. 29.  lest  they  that  behold,  begin  to  m.  him 

MOCKED. 
Oen.  19.  14.  beseemed  as  one  that  to.  to  his  sons 
JV*iim.22.29.  Balaam  said,  because  thou  hast  to.  me 
.Tudg.  16.  10.  hast  771.  me,  and  told  me  lies,  13, 15. 

1  Kings  18.  27.  at  noon,  Elijah  77J.  them,  and  said 

2  Kings  2.23.little  children  out  of  the  city  m.  Elisha 
2  Chron.  30. 10.  they  laughed  them  to  scorn  and  to. 

36.  16.  but  they  m.  the  messengers  of  God 
JVeh.  4.  1.  Sanballat  was  wroth,  and  m.  the  Jews 
.lob  12.  4.  I  am  as  one  to.  of  his  neighbour 
Mat.  2. 16.  when  Herod  saw  that  he  wasm.  he  was 
27.29. they  bowed  the  knee  and  771.31.  Mark  15.20. 
Luke  18.  32.  shall  be  to.  an;?  spitefully  entreated 
22.  63.  and  the  men  that  held  Jesus  m.  hiin 
23. 11.  Herod  m.him  ||  36.  the  soldiers  also  m.  him 
Jlcts  17.32.  when  heard  of  the  resurrection,  some  m 
Gal.  6.  7.  be  noi  deceived,  God  is  not  m. 

MOCKER. 
Prov.  20.  1.  wine  is  a  m.  strcng  drink  is  ra^ng 

MOCKERS. 
.Tob  17.  2.  are  there  not  to.  wlh  me?  and  doth  not 
Psal.  35.  16.  with  hypocritical  771.  in  feasts 
Isa.  28.  22.  be  not  777.  lest  bands  be  made  strong 
Jer.  15.  17.  I  sat  not  in  the  assembly  of  m. 
Jude  iS.  there  should  be  m.  in  the  latter  times 

MOCKEST. 
./o611.3.when  thou  m.shal'i.no  man  make  ashamed ■? 

MOCKETH. 
Job  13. 9.  as  one  m.  another,  do  ye  .'o  mock  him  ? 
39.  22.  he  to.  at  fear,  and  is  not  aflVighted 
Prov.  17.  5.  who  to.  poor  reproacheth  his  Maker 
30.  17.  eye  that  to.  at  his  father,  eagles  shall  eat  it 
Jer.  20.  7.  I  am  a  derision,  every  one  m.  mo 

MOCKING. 
Oen.  21. 9.  and  Sarah  saw  'he  son  of  Hagar  7n. 
Mat.  'OTi.  41.  the  chief  priests  to.  Mark  15.  31. 
Acts  2.  13.  others  to.  said,  these  men  are  full 

MOCKING. 
E2cJt.22.  4.  therefore  I  made  thee  a  to.  to  all 

MOCKINGS. 
Heb.  11.  36.  others  had  trial  of  cruel  m. 

MODERATE. 
1  Cor.  10. 1 13.  no  temptai "nn  but  such  as  is  "i. 

MODERATING. 
Eph.  6. 1 9.  ye  masters  do  the  same,  m.  threatening 

MODERATION. 
Phil.  4.  5.  let  your  m.  be  known  to  all  men 

MODERATELY. 
yoe/2.23.  he  hatli  given  you  the  former  rain  m. 

MODEST. 

1  7'i77i.2.9.  women  adorn  themselves  in  7».  apparel 

MOE,  see  More. 

MOIST. 

JVum.  6.  3.  nor  shall  he  eat  m.  grapes,  or  dried 

MOISTENED. 
Jcb  21.  24.  and  his  honoa  are  m.  with  marrow 

MOISTURE. 
Psal.  32.  4.  my  TO.  is  turned  into  drought  of  summer 
Luke  8. 6.  it  withered  awav,  because  it  lacked  m. 

MOLE. 

Lev.  11.  30.  lizard,  snail,  and  m.  are  unclean 

MOLES,  See  Bats. 

MOLLIFIED. 

Isa.  1.  6.  neither  bound  up,  nor  m.  with  ointment 

MOLTEN. 
Exod.  32.  4.  he  fashioned  it  after  ho  had  made  a 
TO.  calf,  8.  Deut.  9.  12,  16.  JVcA.  9.  18. 
34. 17.  shalt  make  thee  no  771.  cods,  Lev.  19.  4. 
1  Kings  7.  16.  he  made  two  chapiters  of  m.  bras* 
23.  he  made  a  m.  sea  ||  30.  undcrselters  to. 
33.  their  felloes  and  their  spokes  were  all  m. 
.Tob  28.  2.  and  brass  is  m.  out  of  the  stone 
37.  18.  sky  is  stron?,  and  as  a  m.  looking-glass 


Psal.  75;  8.  rher"c  is  a  cup,  Wine  red,  it  is  full  of  to.I  Ezek.  24.  II.  the  filthiness  of  it  may  be  m.  in  it 
John  19.  39.  came  Nicodomus,  and  brought  a  m.\  .Vic.  1.  4.  tlie  mountains  shall  be  m.  under  mm 


MON 

^ah.  3. 1 6  the  palace  of  Nineveh  ihall  be  m. 
See  Imaok. 
MOMEAT. 
Ezod.  33.  5.  will  come  into  the  midst  of  Ihec  in  a  m. 
JVum.  It).  "1.  that  I  may  consume  them  m  a  m.  45. 
ilzra  y.  t  S-  foi  a  m.  grace  hath  been  ehewed 
Job  7.  lej.  lliat  thou  shouldeet  try  him  every  m. 
520.  5.  the  joy  of  the  hypocrite  is  but  for  a  m. 

21.  13.  and  in  a  m.  they  go  down  to  the  grave 
34.  20.  in  a  m.  shall  they  die,  people  be  troubled 

Psal.  30.  5.  for  his  anger  endurelh  but  a  m. 
73.  lU.  the  wicked  brought  into  deuolut.  as  in  a  m. 
Prov.  12.  lU.  a  lying  tongue  is  but  for  a  m. 
Jsa.  20.  20.  hide  thyself  as  it  were  for  a  m. 

27.  3. 1  the  Ld.  do  keep  it,  I  will  water  it  every  w. 
47.  9.  but  these  two  things  shall  come  in  a  vi. 
54.  7.  for  a  small  m.  have  I  forsaken  thee 

8.  I  hid  my  face  from  thee  for  a  vt.  but  with 
Jer.  4. 20.  my  tents  spoiled,  and  my  curtains  in  a  m. 
J.am.  4.  6.  Sodom  that  was  overthrown  in  a  m. 
Kiek.  26. 16.  and  shall  tremble  at  every  m.  32. 10. 
Jjuke  4.5.  devil  shew,  the  kingdoms  of  world  in  a  m. 
\  Cur.  15.  52.  we  shall  all  be  changed  in  a  m. 
2  Cor.  4. 17.  our  affliction,  which  is  but  for  a  m. 

MONEY. 
Gen.  23.  9.  give  it  for  as  much  m.  as  it  is  worth 

13.  I  will  give  thee  m.  for  the  field,  take  it 

31. 15.  and  he  hath  quite  devoured  also  ouim. 

42.25.  Joseph  command,  to  restore  every  man's  m. 
27.  he  espied  his  m.  \\  2d.  my  m,  is  restored 

43. 12.  and  take  double  m.  in  your  hand,  15. 

23.  peace  be  to  you,  fear  not,  I  had  your  m. 
44. 1.  and  put  every  man's  m.  in  his  sack's  mouth 
47.  14.  Joseph  gathered  all  the  m.  in  Egypt 

15.  for  m.  faileth  {|  18.  how  that  our  vi.  is  spent 
Ei-od.  21.  11.  she  shall  go  out  free  without  m. 

21.  for  he  is  his  m.  \\  35.  and  divide  the  m. 

30.  if  there  be  laid  on  him  a  sum  of  m.  then  he 

22.  7.  if  a  man  deliver  to  his  neighbour  m.  to  keej) 
25.  if  thou  lend  m.  to  any  of  my  people 

30. 16.  thou  slialt  take  the  atonement  m.  of  Israel 
/.CO.  25. 37.  not  give  him  m.on  usury,  Deut.  23.  lU. 
.\'um.  3. 40.  and  Moses  took  the  redemption  in. 
Deiil.  2.  6.  ye  shall  buy  meat  and  water  for  m.28. 

14.  25.  turn  it  into  m.  ||  26.  shalt  bestow  that  m. 
21.  14.  thou  shalt  not  sell  her  at  all  for  m. 

Judg.  5. 19.  they  fought,  they  took  no  gain  of  m. 

16.  18.  lords  of  Philistines  brought  m.  to  Delilah 

17.  4.  yet  he  restored  the  m.  to  his  mother 

1  Kings  21.  2. 1  will  give  thee  the  worth  of  it  in  m. 
*  Kings  5.  20.  is  it  a  time  to  receive  m.  and  o.xen? 
12.4.  all  the  m.  of  the  dedicated  things  brought 
7.  now  therefore  receive  no  more  m.  ri. 
10.  they  saw  there  was  much  m.  in  the  chest,  and 
told  the  m.  that  was  found,  2  C/irvn.  24.  11. 
10.  the  trespass  m.  and  sin  m.  was  not  brought 

15.  20.  Menahcm  exacted  the  vi.  of  Israel 

23.  35.  Jehoiakim  gave  m.  to  Pharaoh 

F.ira  3.  7.  gave  tn.  also  to  masons  and  carpenters 

7.  17.  buy  speedily  with  this  m.  bullocks,  rams 
AVA.  5.  4.  we  have  borrowed  m.  for  the  king 

10.  I  and  my  servants  might  exact  of  them  m. 
F.sth.  4.  7.  of  the  sum  of  m.  Haman  had  promised 
Job  31.  39.  If  I  have  eaten  the  fruits  without  m. 
42.  11.  every  man  also  gave  him  a  piece  of  m. 
Psal.  15.  5.  he  that  putteth  not  out  his  r;i.  to  usury 
Prov.  7.  20.  he  hath  taken  a  bag  of  m.  with  him 
Keel.  7.  12.  for  wisdom  and  m.  is  a  defence 
10.  iO.wine  makes  merry,  but  tti.  answers  all  things 
Ita.  52.  3.  ye  shall  be  redeemed  without  m. 
55. 1.  he  that  hath  no  tti.  come,  buy  without  m. 
^  wherefore  spend  ye  m.  for  what  is  not  bread  ? 
Jer.  32.  9.  I  weighed  hin.  the  m.  17  shekels,  10. 
44.  men  shall  buy  fields  for  m.  and  euh.scribe 
J.am.  5.  4.  we  have  drunken  our  water  for  m. 
Mic.  3. 11.  the  prophets  thereof  divine  for  m. 
Mat.  17. 24.  they  that  received  the  tribute  m.  came 
27.thoii  shalt  find  a  piece  of  m. that  take  and  give 
22. 19.  why  ti'mpt  ye  me  ?  shew  me  the  tribute  m. 
25.  18.  dii;ged  in  the  earth,  and  hid  his  lord's  m. 
27.  thou  oughlcit  therefore  to  have  put  my  m.to 
the  exchangers,  and  at  my  coming,  /.uie  19. 23. 

28.  12.  they  gave  large  m.  to  the  soldiers 

15.  lo  ihi-y  rook  m.  and  did  as  they  were  taught 

^fnrtfi.H.thcy  lonk  no  m.  in  their  pursi-,  Luke'J.'i. 

12.  41.  the  |M;oplo  cant  m.  into  the  treasury 

14.  II.  and  promised  to  give  him  m.  I.uke  22.  5. 

jSc<*4.37.brou(jht  the  m.and  laid  it  at  apostles'  feet 

8.  18.  Simon  the  sorcerer  ofTi'n-d  them  ni. 
20.  but  Peter  iiiid,  thy  m.  perish  with  thoo 

24.26.  ho  hop«d  that  m.  shniild  have  been  given 
1  Tim.  6.  10.  the  love  of  m.  is  the  root  of  all  evil 

Srf  nof;oiiT. 

money-chan(;er.s. 

Jt/af. 21. 12.Je«u«  overthrew  tables  of  m.-«ftan;[^frn, 

and  seam  of  them  that  sold  doves,  Mark  11. 15. 

John  2.  14.  Jesus  found  in  temple  m.-rhnnrr.  siliini 

15. ho  poured  out  m.-rAnn. overthrew  their  tables 

MONSTERS. 

J.am  A.  3.  even  the  aea  m.  draw  out  iho  breait 

338 


MON 

MONTH. 
The  Hebrews  tiad  their  Sacred  and  Civil  year;  the 
furvurforlhe  eelcbratiunof  their feails  and  re- 
ligious ceremonies,  which  began  with  the  month 
Nisan,  or  March;  the  latter  for  the  urdering 
of  their  political  or  civil  ajf'air's,  irhicli  began 
in  Tisri,  or  September.  The  ancient  Hebrews 
had  no  particular  names  to  express  their 
Months;  they  said,  the  first,  second,  third,  and 
so  on.  In  Exod.  13.  4.  we  find  Moses  makes 
mention  of  the  month  Abib,  or  the  month  of  the 
young  ears  of  corn,  or  uf  the  new  fruits,  which 
is  probably  the  name  that  the  Egyptians  gaoe 
to  the  month  which  the  Hebrews  afterwards 
called  N'isau,  and  which  was  the  first  uf  the  holy 
year;  every  where  else  Moses  marks  out  the 
months  only  by  their  order  of  s  access  ion,  which 
method  is  continued  in  the  books  of  Joshua, 
Judges,  a?i(i  Samuel.  Under  Solomon,  1  Kings 
6.  1.  we  read  of  the  motith  Zif,  which  is  the  se- 
cond month  of  the  holy  year,  and  which  answers 
to  that  which  afterwards  had  the  name  of  Mm, 
or  April,  /n  the  same  chapter,  verse  38.  we 
read  of  the  month  Bui,  which  is  the  eighth 
of  the  holy  year,  and  answers  to  Marchesvun, 
or  October.  Lastly,  in  1  Kings  8.  2.  we  read 
of  the  month  Ethanirn,  which  answers  to  Tisri, 
or  the  seventh  of  the  holy  year.  The  critics  arc 
■not  agreed  about  the  origin  of  these  7iames  of 
the  months,  or  from  whom  they  were  borrowed. 
Hut  after  the  captivity  of  Babylon,  the  He- 
brews took  the  names  of  the  months,  as  they 
found  them  among  the  Chaldeans  and  Persians, 
among  whom  they  had  lived  so  long  a  time. 
Here  follow  the  names  of  these  months,  and 
the  order  in  which  they  follow  one  another. 
The  names  of  the  Hebrew  months,  according  to 
the  order  of  the  holy  year. 


1.  Nisan, 

2.  Jiar, 

3.  Sivan, 

4.  Thaiumuz, 

5.  Ab, 
C.  Elul, 

7.  Tisri, 

8.  Marchcsvan, 

9.  Chisleu, 

10.  Thebet, 

11.  Snbat, 

12.  Adar, 


March. 

Jipril. 

May. 

June. 

July. 

Ji  tig  list. 

Hrplcmber. 

October. 

J^ovembcr. 

December. 

January. 

February. 


The  names  and  order  of  the  months  in  the  Civil 
year,  are  the  same  as  in  the  preceding  table, 
only  beginning  the  year  with  'I'isri,  or  Seiilera- 
ber,  and  ending  with  Elul,  or  August. 

^t  first  they  measured  their  months  according 
to  the  sun,  and  then  every  month  consisted  of 
thirty  days,  which  appears  by  the  enumeration 
of  the  days  the  flood  was  upon  the  earth,  namely, 
a  hundred  and  fifty  day.',  which  made  five 
months,  Gi:n.  7.  11.  1  8.  4.  But  after  they 
came  out  of  Egypt,  they  measured  their  months- 
by  the  course  of  the  moon,  and  then  the  first 
month  was  of  thirty  days,  the  next  of  twenty- 
nine,  and  so  on  alternately :  That  which  had 
thirty  days  was  called  a  full  or  complete  month: 
and  that  which  had  but  twenty-nine  days  was 
called  incomplete,  or  deficient.  The  new  moon 
was  always  the  beginning  of  the  month,  and 
that  day  (hey  called  Neomenia,  new  Moun,  or 
new  Month. 

When  it  is  said,  that  the  Hebrew  months  an- 
swered to  ours;  that  Nisan,  for  example, 
ansi7(red  to  March,  it  7nust  be  understood  with 
some  latitude  :  for  the  lunar  months  can  never 
be  reduced  exactly  to  solar  ones.  The  vernal 
eguinoz  falls  in  the  month  of  March,  accord- 
ing to  the  course  of  the  solar  year.  Hut  in 
the  lunar  year,  the  new  moon  will  fall  in  the 
month  of  March,  and  the  full  moon  in  the 
month  of  .\\ni\.  .So  that  the  Hebrew  months 
will  commonly  answer  to  two  of  our  months, 
and  partake  of  both. 

The  twelve  lunar  months  making  lint  three 
hundred  and  fifty-four  days,  and  sit  hours,  the 
Jewish  year  was  short  of  the  Roman  by  twloe 
days.  Hut  to  recover  the  equinoctial  points 
again,  from  which  this  difference  of  the  sclar 
and  lunar  year  would  separalr  the  new  moon 
of  the  first  month,  thr.  .fries  took  care  every 
three  years  to  intercalate  a  thirteenth  month 
into  their  year,  which  they  culled  Ve-ndar,  or 
the  second  Adar:  ^nrf  by  this  means  thrir 
lunar  year  equalled  the  solar :  because  in 
thirty-sir.  months,  according  to  the  Sun,  there 
would  be  tliirty-srven   aeenrding  to  the  Moon. 

f^fH.29.  14.  Jacob  abode  with  Liilmn  Kpac.e  of  a  m. 

F.iod.  13.  4.  this  day  came  ye  out  in  the  m.  Abib 
23.  IS.  thou  shalt  keep  the  feast  in  the  m.  Abib 


MON 

Exod.  34.  18.  for  in  the  m.  Abib  thou  earnest  oi« 

from  Egypt,  34.  18.  Deut.  ]fi.  I.  Josh.  5.  10 

Lev.  27.  6.  if  it  be  from  a  m.  old  to  five  years 

A*u/n.  3. 15.  number  of  the  children  of  Levi,  every 

male  from  a  in.  old,  22,  'ifc,  34,  39,  40,  43 

|26.  C2. 

9.  22.  or  a  m.  or  year  that  the  cloud  tarried 
11.  20.  ye  shall  eat  tlesh,  even  a  whole  m.  21. 
IS.  10.  from  a  m.  old  shalt  tliou  redeem 

28.  14.  the  burnt-otfering  of  every  m.  29.  6. 
Deut.  21.  13.  remain  in  thine  house  a  full  m. 
1  Kings  4.  7.  each  man  his  m.  made  provision,  27 

5.  14.  a  m.  they  were  in  Lebanon,  two  at  home 

6.  37.  in  the  m.  Zif  ||  38.  in  the  wi.  Uul 

8. 2.  feast  in  m.  Ethaniin  ||  JWA.  1. 1.  in  m.  Chitleu 
A'VA.  2. 1.  in  m.  Nisan,  Esth.  3.  7.  ||  G.  15.  m.  Elul 
Ksth.  9. 15.  Jews  gathered  in  m.  Adar,  17,  19,  21. 

22.  m.  which  was  turned  from  sorrow  to  joy 
Jer.  2.  24.  in  her  m.  Uiey  shall  find  her 
Hos.5.7.  now  shall  a  m.  devour  them  witli  portioni 
Zech.  11.  8.  three  shepherds  I  cut  otf  in  one  ni. 
Itev.  9. 15.  which  were  prepared  (or  a  day  and  m 

22.  2.  tiie  tree  of  life  yielded  her  fruit  every  m. 
See  First.  * 

Second  MONTH. 
Oen."!.!  1  .in  second  m.lUe  fountains  were  broken  up 

8.  14.  and  in  the  second  m.  was  the  earth  dried 
Kxod.m.  1.  came  to  the  wilderness  of  Sin  in  iec.  in 
J\/'uin.  1.  1.  in  sec.  m.  take  sum  of  the  congregation 

9. 11.  on  sec.  m.  shall  keep  passover,  2  CAr.  30.  2. 

10.  11.  on  sec.  m.  cloud  was  taken  up  from  taberii. 
1  Kings  0.  1.  sfc.  m.  Sol.  began  to  bui1d,2  CAn  3.2. 

1  Chron.  27.  4.  overthecouiseof  .«ec.  m.  wasDodai 
Ezra  3.&.iasccond  m.  began  Zetubbabel  to  appoint 

Third  MONTH. 
Exod.  19.1.  in  third  m.  came  into  wildern.  of  Sinai 
lCAro?t.  27. 5.  third  capt.  for  third  m.  was  Benaiab 

2  Chron.  15. 10.  gathered  at  Jerusal.  in  the  third  vi. 
31.7.  in  third  m.  they  began  to  lay  the  foundation 

£»tA.8.9.  the  king's  scribes  were  called  in  third  m. 
Eiek.  31. 1.  in  third  m.word  of  L.  came  to  Ezekiel 

Fouithuo'srn. 

2  Kings  25.3.in  Ihe fourth  m.  the  famine  prevailed 
1  CAr.27.7.fourth  captain  {»t  fourth  m.  was  Asahel 
Jer.  39. 2.  in  the  fourth  m.  the  city  was  broken  up 
52.  6.  in  fourth  m.  the  famine  was  sore  in  the  ciiy 
F.zek.  1. 1.  H)  fourth  m.  Ezekiel  saw  visions  of  God 
ZccA.  8.  19.  the  fast  of  the  fourth  m.  shall  be  joy 
See  FlITH. 

Siith  MONTH. 
1  CAr.  27. 9.  the  sixth  captain  for  sixth  m.  was  Ira 
Ezek.8.i.\i\  sixth  m.the  elders  of  Jud.  sat  beliire  me 
Nag.l.i.  in  sixth  m.word  of  Lord  came  by  Hagg:ii 
14.  in  sixth  m.  they  did  work  in  house  of  the 
Lord  of  hosis  their  Go>l 
Luke  1. 36.  in  sixth  m.  the  angel  Gabriel  was  sent 
3ti.  this  is  £2xfAni.  with  her  that  was  called  banen 
See  SEVESTir. 
Eighth  MONTH. 
ZccA.l.  1.  in  eighth  m.  came  the  word  of  Zecliariah 

J^inth  MONTH. 

Ezra  10.9.  in  the  ninth  in.  the  people  sat  trembling 

Jer.  36.  9.  in  the  ninth  m.  they  proclaimed  a  fust 

22.  the  king  sat  in  winter  house  in  the  ninrA  in. 

Hag.2.10.  in  ni7i<Am.came  wordofLd.by  Haggai 

18.  even  from  the  ninth  m.  consider  it 
ZccA.  7.  l.tlie  word  came  to  Zichariah  in  ninth  m. 

Tenth  MONTH. 
Ocn.  8.  a.  the  waters  decreased  until  the  tenth  m. 
Ezra  10. 10.  and  sat  down  in  tenth  m.  to  examine 
K.5<A.2.16. Esther  was  taken  to  the  king  in  tenth  m. 
Jer.  39. 1.  tenth  m.  came  Neb.  against  Jcrusal.52.t4. 
/;rfA.24. 1.  in  tenthm.CB.me  word  ofL. to  me,29.1. 
33. 21.  in  the  tenth  m.one  that  had  escajied  told  mo 

Elirenlh  MO.VTH. 
Dent.  1.3.  in  the  eleventh  m.  Moses  spake  to  Israel 
ZicA.1.7.iiici(  (•'"//(  /H.rariKalioword  toZechariah 

Twelfth  .MONTH. 
Esth.  3.7.  cast  lots  brfore  Hainan  to  the  twelfth  in. 

13.  on  the  thirteenth  day  oftwelfth  m.  8.  12.  |  9.1. 
.Trr.  52.31.  in  twelfth  m.  Evil-merodnch  lifted  head 
Kict.32.1.  intwelfthm.  the  word  ofL.  came  tome 

This  MONTH. 
Exod.  12.2.  this  m.shall  be  the  beginning  of  monthg 
3.  this  in.  they  shall  lake  every  man  a  luiiih 
13.5,ki'ep  this  service  in  this  m.M'uin.  9.3.  |  2J<.17. 
JVuin.  29.  7.  ye  shall  have  on  tenth  day  of  Mi*  in. 
a  holy  convocation 
A'cA.  9.  1.  this  m.  Israel  aBsenibhd  with  fasting 

MONTHLY. 
fsa.  47.  13.  lot  the  m.  progiiosticators  stand  up 

MONTHS. 
A'nn.lO.IO.in  beginnings  of  your  m.  blow  triimpctt 
'i"*.  II.  in  beginningB  of  m.  ofler  a  burnt-ofTcring 

14.  IhiB  is  the  burnt-oflering  lliroiigh  the  ra. 
Juile.W.XI.  let  me  alone  two  m.  that  I  may  bewail 

39  nt  the  end  of  two  m.she  ri'iurnod  to  Jcphthall 

19.  2.  bis  concubine  was  with  her  father  four  »n 

20.  47.  and  abode  in  the  rock  Kimnion  four  m. 

1  $am. 6.1. ark  was  in  country  of  Philistines  seven  M 


MOR 

1  Sam.27.7.Dav.wa8  withPliilist.ayearandfourm. 

2  Sam.  2. 11.  Uavid  leigtied  in  Hebruii  uver  Judali 

seven  years  and  six  m.  5.  5.  1  Chron.  'i.  4. 

6.  ll.tlie  ark  was  with  Obtd-edom  three  m. 
24.8.  itiey  came  to  Jerusalem  at  lire  end  ofnine  m. 

1  Kings  5.  14.  and  two  m.  Ihey  were  at  l^ne 
11.  lb.  lor  six  m.  did  Joab  remain  in  Edom 
-  Kings  1.5. 8.  Zacliariali  reigned  over  Israel  si.v  ?n. 
ICAr.  27.1.  month  by  monlli  thro' the  »n.  of  the  year 
£s^i.3.12.at'ier  she  had  been  twelve  m.  purilied,si.« 
m.  with  od  of  myrrh,  six  hi.  with  sweet  odours 
Job  3.  6.  let  it  not  come  into  the  number  of  the »«. 

7.  3.  so  am  I  made  to  possess  m.  of  vanity 
14.  5.  the  number  of  his  m.  are  with  thee 
21.  21.  when  the  number  of  his  m.  is  cut  off 
tin.  2.  O  that  I  were  as  in  m.  pust,  as  in  the  days 
3i).  2.  canst  thou  number  the  7/1.  that  they  fultil? 

£:e/:.39.I2.  seven  m.  Israel  shall  be  burying  ofGoj 

14.  at'ter  the  end  of  seven  hi.  shall  they  search 
47.  12.  shall  bring  new  fruit  accordmg  to  his  m. 
JJan.iMi'.  at  the  end  of  twelve  m.  Nebuch.  walked 
/yu/iel.24. Elisabeth  conceivand  hid  herself  live  m 
4.  25.  many  widows  in  days  of  Elia8,wlien  heaven 
was  shut  up  three  years  and  six  m.  Jam.  5. 17. 
Julin  4.  35.  are  yet  four  m.  then  cometh  harvest 
^^cts  li<.  11.  Paul  continued  there  a  year  and  six  jh. 
fial.  4.  10.  ye  observe  days,  and  m.  and  times 
licB.  9.  5.  they  should  be  tormented  live  m.  10. 
11.2.  holy  city  they  tread  under  foot  forty-two  m. 
lJ.5.po«  er  wasgiven  him  to  continue  forty-twoHi. 
See  Threk. 
MONUMENTS. 
ha.  65.4.  a  provoking  people  which  lodge  in  the  m. 

AIOON 
Is   a  secondary   planet,  which   attends   on   the 
earth  to  give  light  by  night.,  and  which  fur- 
nishes the  fruits  of  the  earth  with  the  moisture 
and  juices  that  nourish  them,  Gen.  1.  It).  Deut. 
33.  14.   Jer.  31.35.    To  which  are  compared, 
[1]  The  church  of  God,  because  of  her  splcn 
dour  and  brightness,  which  she  derives  from 
Christ,  the  Sun  of  righteousness,  as  the  moon 
does  her  light  from  the  sun  ;  and  withal  to  in- 
timate that  the  church,  like  the  moon,   may 
have  h^r  eclipses,  and  be  in  darkness  for  a 
time,   Cant.  6.   10.     [2]    The  world,  and  all 
earthly  tliffigs,  because  of  their  changeable- 
ncss  and  uncertainty.  Rev.  12. 1. 
Deut.  33.  14.  precious  things  put  forth  by  the  m. 
Josh.  10.  12.  stand,  thou  m.  in  the  valley  of  Ajalon 
Judi'.  8.  t21.  took  ornaments  from  them  like  m. 
Job  2.5.  5.  behold  the  m.  and  it  shinelh  not 
Fsal.  8.  3.  when  I  consider  the  m.  thon  ordained 
72.  7.  and  peace  so  long  as  the  m.  endureth 
8ft.  37.  it  shall  be  established  for  ever  as  the  m. 
104.  19.  he  appointeth  the  m.  for  seasons 
Feci. 12.2.  while  the  sun,  m.  ors'.dre,  he  not  darken. 
Cant.  6.  10.  fair  as  m.  clear  as  the  sun,  and  terrible 
Isa.  3.  18.  and  their  round  tires  like  the  m. 
See  Sun. 
J^cw  MOON. 

1  Sam.  90  5.  behold,  to-morrow  is  the  new  m.  18. 

2  Kings  4.  23.  it  is  neither  7iew  m.  nor  sabbath 
Psal.  81.  3.  blow  up  the  trumpet  in  the  new  m. 
Frov.  7.  t20.  and  will  come  home  at  the  new  in. 
Jsa.  60.  23.  that  from  one  new  ni.  to  another 
F.zck.  46. 1.  in  the  day  oi  new  m.  it  shall  be  opened 

6.  in  the  day  of  7ific  m.  oflfer  a  young  bullock 
,fmo.«  8.5.  saying,  when  will  the  new  m.  be  gone? 
Cc<Z.2.16.no  man  judge  voH  in  respect  of  the  new  m. 

J^ew  "MOONS. 
1  Chron.  23.  31.  to   offer  burnt-sacrifices  in  the 


MOR 

Dcut.  7. 17.  if  thou  say,  nations  arc  m.  than  1, 20. 1 

19.  9.  then  shalt  thou  add  three  cities  m.  for  thee 
Josh.  10.  11.  they  were  m.  which  died  with  hail 
Judg.  2.  19.  they  corrupted  themselves  m.  than 

16.  30.  m.  than  they  which  he  slew  in  his  life 
Id.  24.  ye  are  gone  away,  and  what  have  1  m.  ? 
Ruth  1.  17.  Ruth  said,  the  Lord  do  so  to  me  and  m. 
also,  1  Sam.  14. 44.  2  Sam.  3.  35.  |  19.  13. 
3. 10.  thou  hast  shewed  m.  kindn.  in  the  latter  end 

1  Sam.  3.  17.  God  do  so  to  thee  and  m.  also 
18. 8.  what  can  ye  have  jn.  but  the  kingdom  ? 

20.  13.  the  Lord  do  so  and  much  m.  to  Jonathan 

22.  15.  thy  servant  knew  nothuig  less  or  m. 
24.  17.  he  said,  thou  art  m.  righteous  than  1 
25. 22.  so  and  m.  do  God  to  the  enemies  of  David 

36.  she  told  him  nothing  less  or  7n.  until  morning 

2  Sam.  3.  9.  so  do  God  to  Abner,  and  m.  also 
5. 13.  David  took  him  ire.  concubines  and  wives 

6.  22.  and  1  will  yet  be  771.  vile  than  thus 

7.  20.  and  what  can  David  say  m.  unto  thee? 
19.  43.  we  have  also  m.  rijht  in  David  than  ye 

IKings  2.23. God  do  so,  7«.  also,20. 10. 2  Kings  6.31. 
16.  33.  Ahab  did  m.  to  provoke  God  to  anger 
19.  2.  so  let  the  gods  do  to  me,  and  m.  also 

2  Kings  4.  6.  he  said,  there  is  not  a  vessel  m. 
6. 16. 7H.  than  they  that  be  with  them,  2  CA;-.  32.  7. 

21.  9.  Manasseh  seduced  them  to  do  m.  evil 

1  Chron.  21.  3.  Lord  make  his  people  so  many  m. 

24.  4.  and  there  were  m.  chief  men  found 

2  Chron.  10.  11.  I  will  pdt  m.  to  your  yoke 
20. 25.  found  m.  spoil  than  they  could  carry  away 

25.  9.  the  Lord  is  able  to  give  thee  m.  than  this 

28.  13.  ye  intend  to  add  m.  to  our  sins  and  trespass 

22.  Ahaz  did  trespass  yet  m.  against  the  Lord 

29.  34.  the  Levites  were  m.  upright  in  heart 

32.  16.  his  servants  spake  7H.  against  the  Lord 

33.  23.  but  Amon  trespassed  m.  and  771. 
Ezra  7.  20.  whatsoever  m.  shall  be  needful 
JVe/j.  13.  18.  yet  ye  bring  m.  wrath  upon  Israel 
EstJi.  2.  17  Esther  obtained  favour  m.  than  all 

6.  6.  delight  to  do  honour  m.  than  to  myself? 
Job  3.  21.  and  dig  for  it  m.  than  hid  treasures 

23.  12.  his  words  7n.  than  my  necessary  lood 

34.  19.  nor  rcgardelh  the  rich  7«.  than  the  poor 

23.  for  he  will  not  lay  on  man  7«.  than  right 

35.  2.  saidst,  my  righteousness  is  m.  than  God's 

11.  who  teacheth  us  m.  than  the  beasts  of  earth 
42. 12.  Lord  blessed  the  latter  end  of  Job  7n.  than 

Ps.  4.  7. 7H.  than  when  their  corn  and  wine  increas. 
19.  10.  7n.  to  be  desired  are  they  than  gold 
40.  5.  thy  thoughts  are  m.  than  can  be  numbered 

12.  iniquities  are  m.  than  the  hairs  of  mine  head 
52.  3.  thou  lovest  evil  m.  than  good,  and  lying 
69.4.  that  hate  me  are  m.  than  hairs  of  mine  head 
71.  14.  and  I  will  yet  praise  thee  7H.  and  hi. 
73.  7.  they  have  m.  than  heart  could  wish 
78.  17.  and  they  sinned  yet  m.  against  him 
87.2.  gates  of  Zion  m.  than  all  dwellings  of  Jacob 
115.  14.  the  Lord  shall  increase  you  m.  and  m. 
119.99. 1  have  m.  understanding  than  my  teachers 

100.  I  understand  m.  than  the  ancients 
130.  6.  771.  than  they  that  watch  for  the  morning 
Prov.  3.  15.  wisdom  is  711.  preciou.-i  than  rubies 
4.  18.  that  shineth  m.  and  771.  to  the  perJect  day 
11. 24.  there  is  that  withholdeth  7«.  than  is  meet 
17. 10.  a  reproof  entereth  m.  into  a  wise  man 
26.12.tliere  is  771.  hope  of  a  fool  than  of  him,  29.20. 
Eccl.  2.  9. 1  increased  7«.  than  all  before  me 
16.  there  is  no  remembrance  of  wise  777.  than  fool 
25.  or  who  can  hasten  hereunto  m.  than  I? 
4.  2.  the  dead  /«.  than  the  living  that  are  yet  alive 
5. 1.  and  be  m.  ready  to  hear  than  to  give  sacrifice 


MOR 


new  in.  2  Chron.  2.  4.  |  31.  3.  Ezra  3.  5.   Cant.  1. 4.  we  will  remember  thy  love  m.  than  wine 


.Vch.  10.33.  Ezek.ie.3. 
Jsa.  1. 13.  new  m.and  sabbaths  I  cannot  away  with 

14.  yonr  new  m.  and  feasts  my  soul  hateth 
Ezek.  45.  17.  and  drirrk-otferings  in  the  new  m. 
Hos.  2.  11.  I  will  cause  to  cease  her  new  m. 

MORE. 
Gen.  29.  30.  Jacob  loved  Rachel  m.  than  Leah 
36.7.  riches  m.thnn  that  they  might  dwell  together 
37.  3.  [srael  loved  Joseph  771.  than  all  his  children 

.5.  and  his  brethrpn  hated  him  yet  the  m.  8. 
Kxtd.  I.  9.  the  children  of  Israel  are  ire.  than  we 
12.  the  7n.  they  afllictrd  them,  the  m.  they  grew 
.5.  9.  let  there  ire.  work  be  laid  upon  the  men 
9.34. Pharaoh  .sinned  yet  m.and  hardened  his  heart 
1 1.  1.  yet  will  I  bring  one  plague  ire.  on  Pharaoh 
J 6.  17.  thev  srathered  some  hi.  some  less 
30.  15.  the  rich  shall  not  give  ire.  nor  poor  less 
I.'-r.  6.  5.  and  shall  add  the  fifth  part  m.  thereto 
13.  5.  priest  shall  shut  him  up  seven  days  I7i..33,54. 
26. 18.  I  will  punish  you  seven  times  ;re.  21. 
,V»m.  3.  46.  first-born  which  are  m.  than  Levites 
22.  1.5.  sentagain  princes  ire  honourable  than  they 
It*,  beyond  the  word  of  the  Lord  to  do  less  or  in. 
19.  I  may  know  what  the  Lord  will  say  to  me  in. 
26.  .54.  to  many  thou  shalt  give  the  ire.  33.  54. 
Deut.  1.11.  the  L.  make  you  a  thousand  times  m. 
7.  7.  Lord  did  not  set  h>s  love  on  you,  because  m. 
389 


5.  9.  what  is  thy  beloved  in.  than  another?  9. 
Isa.  5. 4.  w  hat  could  been  done  7«.  to  my  vineyard? 
9.  1.  afterward  did  7n.  grievously  afiiicl  her 
15.  9.  for  I  will  bring  771.  upon  Dimon,  lions 
52.  14.  his  visage  so  marred  th.  than  any  man 

54. 1.  for  in.  are  the  children  of  the  desolate  than 
Jir.  3.  11.  Israel  justified  herself  7n.  than  Judali 

46.  23.  because  they  are  m.  than  the  grasshoppers 
Ezek.  5. 6.  changed  my  judgments  into  wickedn.m. 
7.  because  he  multiplied  7n.  than  the  nations 
16.47.  thou  wast  corrupted  m.  than  thev  in  allihy 
ways,  51,  52.  |  23.  11. 
Dun.  2.  30.  not  for  any  wisdom  that  I  liave  ire.  than 
3. 19.  they  should  heat  the  furnace  seven  times  m. 
11.  8.  he  shall  continue  ire.  years  than  the  king 
Hos.  6.6.  knowledse  of  God  ire.  than  bnrnt-olVt  ring 

13. 2.  now  they  sin  7n.  and  7n.  and  have  made  idols 
.Tonah  1. 1 11.  the  sea  grew  in.  and  ire.  tempestuous 
//(lA.l.rJ.wickeddevoureth  man  m.  righteous  than 

2. 1 16.  art  filled  in.  with  shame  than  glory 
Mat.  .5.  37.  what  ism.  than  these  cometh  of  evil 

47.  brethren  only,  what  do  ye  m.  than  others  ? 
6.  25.  is  not  the  life  m.  than  meat?  I.uke  12.  2:1. 
10.31.  of  ire. value  than  many  sparrows,  Luke  12.7. 
37.  he  that  loveth  father  or  mother  m.  than  me 
11.  9.  I  say  unto  you,  and  m.  than  a  prophet 
12.45.  taketh  seven  spirits  ni.  wicked  thau  liiiiiBelf 


Mat.  13.  12.  and  he  shall  have  m.  abundance 
18. 13.  he  rejoiceth  m.  of  that  sheep  than  of  99 

16.  then  take  with  thee  one  or  two  7n. 
20.10.they  sui)posed  they  should  have  received  m 
31.  but  they  cried  the  m.  have  ineicy  on  us,  27. 23. 
Mark  10.  4d.  |  15.  14.  Luke  16.  39, 

26.  53.  give  me  7n.  than  twelve  legions  of  angeU 
Mark  4.  24.  to  you  that  hedrsiiall  7rt.  be  given 

7.  36.  the  7«.  he  charged  thum,  so  much  the  7re. 
12. 43.  poor  widow  cast  in  m.  tlian  all,  /,uAe2l.3 

14.  5.  the  ointment  might  have  been  sold  for  in. 
Luke  10.  35.  what  thou  spendest  7n.  I  will  repay 

12.  48.  committed  much,  of  him  they  will  ask  i/j. 

18.  30.  who  shall  not  receive  manifold  7n. 
John  4.  41.  many  ni.  believed,  because  of  his  word 

5.  18.  the  Jews  sought  the  7«.  to  kill  him 

7.  31.  will  he  do  7n.  miracles  than  these  ? 
12.  43.  they  loved  the  praise  of  men  m.  than 

15.  2.  purgeth  it,  that  it  may  bring  forth  7rt.  fruit 
21.  15.  Simon,  lovest  thou  iiiu  ni.  than  these  ? 

.-icts  4.  19.  to  hearken  to  you  m.  than  to  God 
5.  14.  believers  were  the  ire.  added  to  the  Lord 
9.  22.  but  Saul  increased  the  in.  in  strength 

19.  32.  the  7re.  part  knew  not  why  they  came 
20.35.  it  is  7n.  blessed  to  give,  than  to  receive 
23. 13.  there  were  m.  than  ibrty  who  conspired,  21 

27.  11.  believed  the  master  7«.  than  Paul 
iio;n.l.25.  who  served  the  creature  ih.  than  Creator 

3.  7.  if  the  truth  of  God  hath  7n.  abounded 

8.  37.  in  all  these  we  arc  m.  than  conquerors 

1  Cor.  8.  t  8.  neither  if  wo  eat,  have  we  the  m. 
9.19.niyselfservant  toall,that  1  inlghtgain  the  m 
14.  16.  I  speak  with  tongues  7«.  than  you  all 

2  Cor.  7. 7.  so  I  rejoiced  the  vi.  \\  10.8.1  boast  the  is. 
11. 23. 1  am  m.  in  prisons  in.  fie<iuent,  in  deathsoft 

Gal.  4.  27.  the  desolate  hath  many  m.  children 
Phil.  1.9.  love  may  abound  m.  and  in.  1  Thcss.\.\Q. 
3.  4.  if  he  might  trust  in  the  llesh,  I  i«. 

1  Thess.  4.  1.  in  pleasing  God,  abound  m.  and  m 

2  Tim.  3.4.  lovers  of  pleasure  i«.  than  lovers  of  GoJ 
Philem.  21.  that  thou  wilt  also  do  ire.  than  I  say 
Neb.  11.32.  what  shall  I  say  ni.  time  would  fail 

12.  25.  much  hi.  shall  not  we  escape,  if  we  turn 
26.  yet  once  m.  I  shake  not  the  earth  only,  27. 
fain.  4.  6.  he  giveth  in.  grace,  wherefore  he  saith 
2  Pel.  ].  19.  we  have  a  ire.  sure  word  of  prophecy 
Rev.  2.  19.  and  the  last  to  be  in.  than  the  first 
y.  12.  behold,  there  come  two  woes  in.  hereafter 
See  Abundantly. 
.Sny  MORE. 
Gen.  8.  12.  the  dove  returned  not  again  any  ire. 
21.  I  will  not  curse  the  ground  any  m.  9.  11. 
17. 5.  nor  shall  thy  name  any  m.  be  called  .\brain 
3.5.  10.  not  any  m.  be  called  Jacob,  but  Israel 
Ezod.  8.29.1et  not  Pharaoh  dealdeceitfully  any  m. 

9.  29.  neither  shall  there  be  any  m.  hail 
11.  0.  nor  shall  there  a  cry  be  like  it  any  m. 
36.  6.  let  neither  man  nor  woman  make  any  m. 

Lev.  27.  20.  it  shall  not  be  redeemed  any  m. 
J\rum.  18.  .5.  that  there  he  no  wrath  any  m.on  Israel 
JJcut.5.  25.  if  we  hear  the  voice  of  the  Ld.anjiin. 

18.  16.  neither  let  me  see  this  great  fire  any  m. 
Josh.  5.  12.  neither  had  Israel  manna  any  m. 

7.  12.  neither  will  I  be  with  you  any  m. 
Ruth  1.  11.  are  there  any  m.  sons  in  my  womb  ? 

1  Sam.  27. 1.  Saul  shall  despair  to  seek  me  any  m 

2  Sam.  7.  10.  nor  children  of  wickedn.  afflict  anj/rn. 

10.  19.  feared  to  help  Amraon  any  in.  1  Chr.  19.19. 

19.  29.  why  speakest  thou  any  m.  of  thy  matters 
2  Kings  21. 8.  neither  will  I  make  the  feet  of  Israel 

move  any  m.  out  of  the  land,  2  Chr.  33.  8. 
.fob  7. 10.  nor  shall  his  place  know  him  any  m.  20. 9. 

34.  31.  it  is  meet  to  say,  I  will  not  offend  any  m. 
Eccl.  9.  5.  neither  have  they  any  m.  a  reward 
f.ia.  1.  5.  why  should  ye  be  stricken  any  m.? 

2.  4.  nor  shall  ihey  learn  war  any  m.  Mic.  4.  3. 

30.  20.  nor  shall  thy  teachers  be  removed  any  m. 

62.  4.  nor  shall  thy  land  be  termed  desolate  any  m. 
Jer.  3.  16.  neither  shall  that  be  done  any  m. 

J7.  nor  walk  any  m.  at'ter  imagination  of  heart 
10. 20.  there  is  none  to  stretch  forth  ray  tent  anym. 
20.9. 1  said,  I  will  not  speak  any  m.  in  his  name 

22.  II.  he  shall  not  return  hither  any  m. 

30.  no  man  shall  prosper,  ruling  any  m.  in  Judah 

31.  12.  they  shall  not  sorrow  any  m.  at  all 

40.  it  shall  not  be  thrown  down  any  m.  for  ever 
34.10.should  not  serve  themselves  of  them  any  m 
Eiek.  5. 9.  whereunto  I  will  not  do  any  m.  the  like 
12.28.  none  of  my  words  be  prolongid  any  m, 
16.  41.  thou  also  shalt  give  no  hire  any  m. 

63.  thou  maycst  never  open  thy  mouth  any  m 
21.  5.  my  sword  shall  not  return  any  m. 

23.  27.  thou  shalt  not  remember  Egypt  any  m. 

24.  13.  not  be  purged  from  thy  filthiness  any  m 
27.36.  be  a  terror,  and  never  shalt  he  any  7n.28.19 
29.  15.  neither  shall  it  exalt  itself  nny  7n. 

32.  13.  nor  foot  ofman  trouble  them  any  in. 37.23. 
39. 28.  but  [  have  left  none  of  them  any  m.  there 

29.  nor  will  I  hide  my  face  any  m.  from  them 
lios.  14. 3.  nor  say  any  m.  to  the  work  of  uur  hand* 


MOR 

Hos.  14.8.  what  have  1  to  do  any  m.  with  Idols? 
Joel  3.  17.  no  strangers  puss  through  hor  uny  hi. 
Amos  7. 8. 1  will  not  ugam  pass  hy  them  any  m.  ti.i. 

I'i.  but  prophesy  not  agaui  any  m.  at  Beth-al 
Zfph.  3.  15.  thou  slialt  not  see  evil  any  m. 
Mal.-'2Aii,  nor  durst  any  ask  him  a/ij/  in.  questions 
Mur/i  ti.  14.  they  had  not  any  ;«.  tJian  one  loaf 

y.  8.  they  saw  no  man  any  ;».  save  Jesus  only 
J.uke  iiO.  30.  neither  can  they  die  any  in.  for  they 

ihi,  16.  I  will  not  eat  any  m.  thereof,  until  it  be 
Horn.  14.  13.  let  us  not  judge  one  another  any  m. 
y/(r*.l:i.l9.word  should  not  be  spoken  to  tliem  a.  m. 
iieo.  7.  It),  neither  shall  they  thirst  any  m. 

i-i.  ti.  nor  was  their  place  in  heaven  found  any  m. 

18.  II.  no  man  buyeth  her  merchandise  any  in. 

ai.  4.  neither  shall  there  be  any  m.  pain 

^Vu  MORE. 
Qen.  9.  \'i.  ihe  waters  shall  no  vi.  become  a  flood 

3:2.  -28.  thy  name  shall  be  called  no  m.  Jacob 

38.  •i6.  and  Judah  knew  her  again  no  m. 
44.  il.  ye  shall  see  my  face  no  in.  EMd.  10.  23. 

Erod.  5.  7.  ye  shall  no  m.  give  the  people  straw 
10.  29.  he  said,  1  wdl  see  thy  face  again  no  m. 
14.  13.  ye  shall  see  them  again  no  in.  for  ever 
J.ao.  17.  7.  shall  no  m.  offer  their  sacrifices  to  devils 
A'uin.  8.  "-5.  iVom  age  of  tilly  they  shall  serve  no  m. 
Deal.  3.  20.  speak  no  m.  to  me  of  this  matter 
;">.22.tliese  words  the  Lord  spake,  and  added  ijo  m. 
10.  It),  circumcise,  and  be  no  m.  stiff-necked 
13. 11.  shall  do  no  m.  such  wickedness,  17.  13. 
17.  It),  henceforth  return  no  m.  that  way 
28.  68.  thou  shalt  see  it  no  m.  again,  and  be  sold 
31.2.1  am  120  years,  I  can  no  m.  go  out  and  come  in 
Juslt.  23.  13.  God  will  710  m.  drive  out  these  nations 
Jndg.  8.  28.  so  they  Ufted  up  their  heads  no  m. 
10.  13.  wherefore  I  will  deliver  you  no  m. 

1  Sam.  1.  18.  her  countenance  was  no  m.  sad 
2.  3.  talk  no  m.  so  e.\ce*;ding  proudly 
7.  13.  they  came  no  m.  into  the  coast  of  Israel 
l.'>.  :15.  and  Samuel  came  no  in.  to  see  Saul 
H.  2.  let  him  go  no  m.  home  to  his  father's  house 
2t).  21.  return,  for  I  will  no  in.  do  thee  harm 

27.  4.  and  he  sought  no  m.  again  for  him 

28.  15.  and  answereth  me  no  in.  by  prophets 

2  .Sam.  2.  28.  and  pursued  after  Israel  no  in. 
7.  10. 1  will  plant  Israel,  that  they  may  dwell  in  a 

place  of  their  own,  and  move  no  in.  1  Chi:  17.  'J. 
21.  17.  thou  shalt  go  no  in.  out  with  us  to  battle 

1  Kimj.-i  ll)..i.thero  wasmo/n.spiritin  hcr,2  C/h-.'J.4. 

2  h'uig.i  2.  12.  and  Klisha  saw  Elijah  no  in. 
0.  23.  the  bands  of  Syria  caine  no  m.  into  the  land 
0.  35.  they  found  no  m.  of  her  th.in  the  skull 

1  C/iron.  23. 26.  shall  no  m.  carry  the  tabernacle 
jV(.7(.2.17.  let  us  build,  that  we  be  no  in.  a  reproach 

13.  21.  they  came  710  7/1.  on  the  sabbath 
Eilh.  1.  I'J.  Vashti  came  no  in.  before  the  king 

2.  14.  she  came  ?k»  in.  in  to  the  king,  except 
Joh  7.  7.  mine  eyes  shall  710  m.  see  good 
8.  shall  see  me  710  m.  \\  9.  shall  come  up  no  m. 

10.  he  shall  return  no  m.  to  his  house 

14.  12.  man  riseth  not,  till  the  heavens  be  no  m. 
20.  9.  Ihe  eye  that  saw  him  shall  see  him  no  m. 
24.  20.  he  shall  be  no  m.  remembered 
32.1.5.lhey  were  amazed,  they  answered  no  n.  16. 
34.  32.  if  I  have  done  iniquity,  I  will  do  no  m. 
41.  8.  remember  the  battle,  do  no  m. 

Vsal.  10.  13.  that  man  of  earth  may  no  m.  oppress 

39.  13. 3|iaro  me,  before  I  go  hence,  and  be  7iu  m. 
41.8.  now  that  he  lieth,  he  shall  rise  up  no  m. 
74.  9.  see  not  signs,  there  is  710  m.  any  prophet 
77.  7.  will  he  cast  off,  and  be  favourable  710  771. 
Ki.  4.  that  name  ofIsr.be  710  m.  in  remembrance 
8f<.  5.  the  slain,  whom  thou  rernemherest  »io  m. 

103.  10.  the  place  thereof  shall  know  it  71a  m. 

104.  3.').  and  let  the  wicked  be  no  m. 
Troj'.  10.2.').as  the  whirlwind,Bo  is  the  wicked  710 7n. 

31.  7.  and  remember  his  misery  no  in. 
Feci  4   13.  kin?,  who  will  710  in.  be  admonished 
/.»«.  1. 13.  bring  710  711.  vain  oblat.  incense  abomina. 

10. 20.  shall  no  m.  stay  on  him  that  smote  Ihoni 
J9.  7.  shall  wither,  be  driven  away,  and  he  710  771. 
23.  10.  there  is  710  ?7i.  strength  ||  12. 710  771.  rejoice 
26.  21.  the  earth  shall  710  771.  cover  her  slain 
30. 19.  shall  weep  7IU  771.  ||  38.  II.  behold  man  710  tti. 

32.  5.  Ihe  vile  person  shall  bo  710  771.  called  liberal 
47.  1.  thou  shalt  71a  777.  he  called  tender  and  dclic. 

5.  shalt  710  771.  be  called  the  lady  of  kingdoms 
M.  13.  thou  shalt  7in  771.  drink  it  again 
.Vi.  1.  710  771.  r.omo  into  thee  the  unciroumcised 
(10.  18.  violence  shall  710  m.  be  heard  in  thy  land 

19.  the  sun  shall  ho  710  171.  thy  light  by  day 

20.  thy  Hiin  shall  710  m.  go  down,  nor  thy  moon 
C2  4.  thou  shall  7io  m.  bo  termed  Korsakeii 

8.  I  will  710  771.  give  thy  corn  to  thine  en«niioB 
65.  19.  the  voice  of  weeping  shall  he  710  771.  hoard 

20.  thero  shall  be  710  711.  thence  an  infant  of  days 
JpT.  2.  31.  wo  are  lords,  wo  will  come  710  m.  lo  thee 
3.  16.  Ihev  shall  sny  710  771.  the  ark  of  the  covenant 
7.  32.  it  Mhall  710  771.  bo  call.-d  Tophet,  19.  6. 

11.  IS  that  his  name  may  be  710  771.  remomborcd 

?9d 


MOR 

Jer.16.14.  shall  bc7io77t.  8aid,theLordliveth,23.7. 
22. 10.  shall  return  710  771.  ||  12.  see  this  land  7tu  m. 
2il.  4.  they  shall  fear  710  771.  nor  be  dismayed 
36.tlio  burden  of  the  Lord  shall  ye  mention  710  m. 
25.  27.  fall  and  rise  710  771.  because  of  the  sword 
31. 34.  and  they  shall  teach  7io  771.  every  man  his 
neighbour,  and  I  will  remember  their  sin  710771. 
33.24.  they  should  be  710  in.  a  nation  before  them 

42.  18.  and  yu  shall  see  this  place  no  in. 

44.  26.  my  name  shall  be  710  tti.  named  in  Egypt 
49.7.  thus  saith  Lord,  is  wisdom  710  711.  in  Teiiian  1 
50.  39.  it  shall  710  in.  be  inhabited  for  ever 

Zy(i77i.2.9.the  la  w  is  Tio  7/1.  her  prophets  find  no  vision 
4.  22.  he  will  710  in.  carry  thee  away  into  captivity 
Ezck.  12.  24.  there  shall  be  710  m.  any  vain  vision 

25.  and  my  word  shall  be  no  in.  prolonged 
1.3.  15.  the  wall  is  710  771.  {|  14. 11.  go  710  771.  astray 
21.  and  they  shall  be  110  771.  in  your  hand 
23.  thetelbre  ye  shall  see  710  7/1.  vanity 
16.  42.  1  will  be  quiet,  and  wijl  be  710  771.  angry 

19.  9.  that  his  voice  should  h&no  m.  heard 

20.  39.  but  pollute  ye  my  holy  name  710  7/1. 

21.  13.  it  shall  he  7to  77i.  saith  the  Lord,  27. 

32.  thou  slialt  be  71a  7«(.  remembered,  L.  spoken  it 
24.  27.  and  thou  shalt  speak,  and  be  710  V7i.dnnib 
26.14.  thou  shalt  be  710  in.  built  ||  21.  shalt  be  710  771. 
28. 24.  there  shall  be  no  in.  a  pricking  brier  to  Isr. 

29.  15.  they  shall  7io  in.  rule  over  the  nations 
16.  shall  be  710  m.  the  confidence  of  Israel 

30.  13.  there  shall  be  710  771.  a  prince  of  Egypt 
34.  22.  and  they  shall  be  710  771.  a  prey,  28, 29. 

36.  14.  therefore  thou  shalt  devour  men  7io  771. 

37.  22.  and  they  shall  be  710  771.  two  nations 

43.  7.  my  name  shall  house  of  Israel  no  m.  defile 

45.  8.  my  princes  shall  710  771.  oppress  my  people 
Hos.  1.  6.  1  will  710  771.  have  mercy  upon  Israel 

2.  16.  and  thou  shalt  call  me  710  m.  Baali 
17.they  shall  710  771.  be  remembered  by  their  name 

9. 15.  1  will  drive  them  out,  I  will  love  them  710771. 
Joel  2.  19.  I  will  710  771.  make  you  a  reproach 
-'linos  5. 2.  the  virgin  is  fallen,  she  shall  no  in.  rise 

9.  15.  they  shall  710  m.  be  pulled  out  of  their  land 
Mic.  5.  12.  thou  shall  have  no  m.  soothsayers 

13.  thou  shalt  710  771.  worship  work  of  thine  hands 
JVa/i.  1. 12.  1  will  attiictthee  no  m.  saith  the  Lord 

14.  a  command  that  770  m.  of  thy  name  be  sown 

15.  Iho  wicked  shall  710  11   -van  ibiough  thee 
2. 13.  voice  of  thy  iiv*— ~.»  A.-k  sn>u  .*»>  m.  be  heard 

Z,cpk.  3.  II.  and  then  sAi    wc  K  '*  haughty 
Zcch.  11.  6.  1  will  710  771.  pity  the  innabilants 

13.  2.  and  they  shall  710  711.  be  remembered 

14.  11.  there  shall  he  710  in.  utter  destruction 
21.1)8  710  771.1110  Canaanile  in  the  house  of  Lord 

./VuM9.6.they  are  710  771.  twain,  but  one,  Mark  10.8. 
Mark  7. 12.  and  ye  suffer  him  710  771.  to  do  ought 

9.  25-  come  out  of  him,  and  enter  710  in.  into  him 
14.  25. 1  will  drink  710  in.  of  the  fruit  of  the  vine 

Luke  3.  13.  exact  710  771.  than  what  is  appointed 
9. 13.  we  have  710  771.  but  five  loaves, and  two  fishes 

12.  4.  after  that  have  710  771.  that  they  pan  do 
John  5. 14.  Ihou  art  made  whole,  sin  710  771.  8.  11. 

6.66.many  went  back,  and  walked  710  771.  with  him 

14.  19.  a  little  while  the  world  eeeth  me  710  771. 

15.  4.  710  m.  can  ye,  e.\cept  ye  abide  in  me 

16.  H).  1  go  to  my  Father,  and  ye  see  me  710  777. 

21.  she  remembereth  no  771.  the  anguish,  for  joy 
25.  when  I  shall  710  771.  speak  in  parables 

17.  U.  now  lam  710.771.  in  the  world,  but  these  arc 
Acts  8.  39.  that  the  eunuch  saw  him  710  771.  ' 

13.  34.  now  710  771.  to  return  to  corruption 

20.  25. 1  know  that  ye  shall  see  my  face  710  tti.  33. 
Wo77i.  6.  9.  dieth  710  771.  death  hath  710  m.  dominion 

7. 17.  now  then  it  is  710  771. 1  that  do  it,  but  sin,  20. 

11.6.  ills  710  771.  of  works,  else  grace  is  710  771.  grace, 
but  if  it  be  of  works,  grace  is  710  m.  grace 
2  Cor.  5.  16.  yet  henceforth  know  we  him  710  771. 
Gal.  3.  I'i.  if  of  the  law,  it  is  710  771.  of  promise 

4.  7.  thou  art  710  711.  a  servant,  but  a  son 
Eph.  2.  19.  yo  arc  no  m.  strangers  and  foreigners 

4.  14.  we  he  710  m.  children  tossed  to  and  fro 
23.  let  hiin  that  stole  steal  710  in.  but  labour 
//ri!i.8. 12. their  iniquities  1  will  ri^menib.  710  771. 10. 17. 

10.  2.  shoulil  have  had  710  771.  conscience  of  sins 
18.  thero  is  710  771.  offering  for  sin,  26. 

Reo.  3.  12.  ho  that  overcometh  shall  go  710  m.  out 
7.  16.  shall  hunger  710  771.  neither  thirst  any  more 

18.  14.  Ihou  shall  find  them  710  m.  at  all 

22.  musicians  shall  bo  hoard  710  771.  in  tlico,  23. 
20.  3.  that  he  should  deceive  the  nations  710  m. 
21. 1. 710  771. sea  II 4. 710 771. deal h  II 2-1  3. 710  771.  curses 

Much  MORE. 
Kzod.  36.  5.  the  people  bring  mnnh  m.  than  enough 
I'rov.  II.  31.  77i«cA  m.  thu  wicked  and  the  sinner 
Inn.  .56.  12.  as  this  day,  and  much  m.  abundant 
Mat.  6.  30.  shall  ho  not  7nuc/i  771.  clothe  you  7 
J,ukf5. 15.  so  much  771.  went  a  fame  of  him  abroad 
7.26. 1  say  unto  you,  and  77i«cA  1/1.  than  a  prophet 
Horn.  5.9.  much  m.  being  now  justitied  by  hit  blood 
10.  viiirh  m.  being  reconrilod,  wo  shall  be  saved 
17.  much  m.they  that  receive  abundance  of  grace 


MOR 

J2o)7i.5.20.wbcre  sin  abounded,  grace  tti.  tb.  abound 

2  Cor.  3.9.  TnucAm.dolh  ministration  of  righteousn. 

11.  TTiucA  in.  that  which  remaineth  is  glorious 

8.  22.  but  now  we  have  proved  much  in.  diligent 
Phil.  1.  14.  are  77iucA  771.  bold  to  speak  thereof 

2.  12|^ave  obeyed,  now  jjiucA  m.  in  my  absence 
Hcb.  Iw25.so  7TiiicA  in.  as  you  see  day  approaching 

12.  25.  77mcA  771.  shall  not  we  escape,  if  we  turn 

1  ret.  1.  7.  being  7hucA  tti.  precious  than  of  goM 
MOREOVER. 

Psal.  19. 11.  TTI.  by  them  is  thy  servant  warned 
Isa.  39. 8.  he  said,  m.  there  shall  be  peace  and  trutb 
Ezek.  16.  29.  tliou  hast  tti.  multiplied  fornicatio* 
ZccA.5.6. 7T1.  this  is  their  resemblance  through  earth 
//e6.11.36.of  mockings,  7ti. of  bonds  and  iinprisonni. 

MORNLNG 

Signifies,  [1]    The  beginning-  of  the  day,  or  the 
time  of  the  sun's  rising,  Mark  16. 2.  Luke  24. 1. 
[2]  The  one  part  of  a  natural  day.  Gen.  1.  3. 
The  evening  and  the  morning  make  the  day, 
according  to  Moses,  because  the  ancient  He- 
breios  began  their  day  in  the  evening.    [3]  The 
general  resurrection,  when  the  dead  shall  be 
raised,  Psal.  49.  14.     Death  being  called  the 
night,  .hhn  9.  4.  a7id  compared  to  sleep,  John 
11.  11.  that  day  is  fitly  compared  to  the  morn- 
ing, when  men  awake  out  of  sleep,  and  enter 
upon  that  everlasting  day.     [4]  Early  or  sea- 
sonably, Psal.  5.  3.     [5]  Unseasonably,  Eecl. 
10.  16.     [6]  Huddeiilii,  or  quickly,  or  in  a  short 
time,  Psal.  30.  5.     [7]  Daily,  Psal.  73.  14.     [81 
The  light,  Joel  2.  2. 
Wings  of  the  morning,  Psal.  139.  9.  denote  a 
rapid  flight;  there  being  no  motion  we  know 
of  so  rapid  as  the  diffusion  of  the  beams  of  the 
■    sun  at  the  breaking  of  the  day. 
Gen.  VJ.ia.  when  the  7/i.arose,the  angel  hasten.  Lot 
24.  54.  Abraham  and  servants  rose  up  in  the  771. 
26.  31.  they  rose  betimes  in  the  771.  and  sware 
29.  25.  that  in  the  tti.  behold  it  was  Leah 
32.  t  24.  wrestled  with  him  till  ascending  of  the  tti. 

40.  6.  Joseph  came  into  thera  in  the  771.  were  sad 
49.  27.  in  the  7ti.  he  shall  devour  the  prey 

Exod.  7.  15.  get  thee  to  Pharaoh  in  the  771. 

10.  13.  in  the  7ti.  the  east-wind  brought  loCu.=;t3 
14.27.  the  sea  returned  to  his  strength  in  the  ttt. 
16.  7.  in  the  771.  ye  shall  see  the  glory  of  the  Lord 

8.  shall  give  you  in  the  in.  bread  tirthe  full,  12. 
13.  in  the  tti.  the  dew  lay  round  about  the  bust 
29. 39.  one  lamb  thou  shall  ofler  in  m.  J\^uin.  28. 4 
41.  according  to  the  meat-offering  of  the  tti. 
34.  2.  he  ready  in  the  tti.  and  come  up  in  the  tti. 
25.  nor  shall  the  passover  be  left  to  the  m. 
I.cv.G.W.  the  burning  on  the  altar  all  night  to  the  tti. 
jViiTTi.  9.  21.  the  cloud  was  taken  up  in  the  771. 
22.21. Balaam  rose  in  the  iTi.and  saddled  his  ass,  13. 
Deut,  28.  67.  in  the  7ti.  would  God  it  were  even 
Judg.  6.31.  let  him  be  put  to  death  whilst  it  is  yet  ttj. 

16.  2.  in  the  7ti.  when  it  is  day,  we  shall  kill  him 

19.  27.  her  lord  rose  in  the  in.  and  opened  the  doora 

20.  19.  tlio  children  of  Israel  rose  up  in  the  tti. 

2  Ham.  13.  f  4.  why  art  thou  lean  771.  by  771.  ? 

23.  4.  and  ho  shall  be  as  the  light  of  Ihe  771.  when 
the  sun  riseth,  even  a  tti.  without  clouds 

9i.  11.  for  when  David  was  up  in  the  771.  the 

word  of  llie  Lord  came  unto  Gad 

1  Kings  3.21.  when  I  had  considered  it  in  Uic  ttj. 

18.26.  and  called  on  name  of  Baal  from  tti.  to  noon 
Jfeh.  4. 21.  some  laboured  from  771.  till  starsappear 

8.  3.  he  read  therein  from  )7i.  to  mid-day 
.Job  3.  to.  niir  let  it  see  the  eye-lids  of  the  771. 

7.  21.  thou  shalt  seek  me  in  theni.but  Ishall  notb« 

11.  17.  thou  shalt  shine  forth,  and  he  as  the  771. 
24.17.  for  the  m.  is  to  them  us  the  shadow  of  death 
3^.12.  hast  thou  commanded  the  7ti.  since  thy  days 

41.  18.  his  eyes  are  like  eyelids  of  tho  tti. 

Psal.  5.3.  my  voice  shalt  thou  hear  in  the  7a.  O  Ld. 
in  the  771.  will  I  direct  my  prayer  to  thee 
30. 5.  weeping  for  anight,  but  joy  Cometh  in  the  7ti 
46. 1 5.  God  shall  help  her  when  the  771.  appeareth 
49. 14.  shall  have  dominion  over  them  in  the  m. 
.59.  U).  I  will  sing  of  thy  mercy  in  the  771. 
8H.  13.  in  the  771.  shall  my  prayer  prevent  thee 
90.  .5.  in  the  771.  they  are  like  grass  which  grows  up 
6.  in  the  »7i.  it  llourisheth  and  growcth  uji 
119.  147.  I  prevented  tho  dawning  of  tho  171. 
130.  6.  wails  more  than  they  that  watch  for  tho  m. 
139.  9.  if  1  take  the  wings  of  tho  m.  and  dwell 
143.  8.  to  hear  thy  loving-kindness  in  Iho  m. 
/>fM0.16.thy  king, achildandnrinccscat in  then*. 
U.  6.  in  7)1.  sow  thy  seed,  and  in  the  evening 
Cant.  6.  10.  who  is  she  that  looketh  forth  as  the  th 
/.<rt.l4.12.  how  art  fallen,  O  Lucifer,  son  of  the  mJ 

17.  14.  and  l)ehold,  before  Ihe  771.  he  is  not 

21.  12.  Iho  watchnmn  said,  Iho  771.  Cometh 
2-<.19.for !«.  by  711.  shall  it  pass  over,  by  day  and  n 
.50. 4.  ho  wakenelh  m.  by  tti.  ho  waknnelh  my  car 
.v.  8.  thon  shall  thy  light  break  forth  as  the  tti. 

./rrJ^.i*.  Ihcy  were  as  fed  horses  in  the  7ti.  every  one 
20.  16.  and  let  liim  hoar  tho  cry  in  the  m. 


MOR 

Jer.  21. 12.  execute  judgment  in  the  m.  and  deliver 

£2et.7.7.the  m.  is  come  on  thee,  O  thou  that  dwells 

10.  the  m.  is  gone  forth,  the  rod  hath  blossomed 

12.  8.  in  the  in.,  came  the  word  of  the  Lord 
24. 18.  I  spake  to  the  people  in  the  m.  at  ej|gn  my 

wife  died,  ^  did  in  the  m.  as  I  was  com^nded 
33.22.opened  .y  mouth  until  came  to  me  in  the  ni. 
ilos.  6.  3.  his  eoing  forth  is  prejiared  as  the  m. 

4.for  your  goodness  is  as  aid.  cloud,  as  early  dew 
7.  6.  in  the  m.  it  burneth  as  a  flaming  fire 
10. 15.  in  aire,  shall  the  king  of  Israel  be  cut  ofT 
Joel  2.  2.  as  the  m.  spread  upon  the  mountains 
j?jnos  4. 13.  thatmakelh  tliem.darkn.and  treadeth 

5.  8.  and  turneth  the  shadow  of  death  into  the  m. 
Jonak  4. 7.  God  prepared  a  worm  when  the  m.  rose 
Jilic.  2.  1.  when  the  m.  is  light  they  practise  it 
Mat.  16.  3.  in  the  m.  it  will  be  foul  weather 

27. 1.  when  m.  was  come,  the  elders  took  counsel 
Mark  11.20.  in  the  m.  as  they  passed  by,  they  saw 

13.  35.  watch,  or  at  the  cock-crowing,  or  in  m. 

Early  in  the  MORNING. 
Oen.  19. 27.  Abrah.  gat  up  early  in  m.  21. 14. 1 22. 3. 

20.  8.  therefore  Abimelech  rose  early  in  the  m. 

28.18.  Jacob  rose  up earZy  mm. and  set  up  a  pillar 

31.55.  Laban  rose  early  in  m.kisseA  sons,  daught. 
Kzod.^SlQ.hiL-  said,  rise  up  early  in  ?«. stand,  9. 13. 

24.  4.  Moses  rose  early  in  m.  built  an  altar,  34.  4. 
Josh.  3. 1.  Josh,  rose  early  in  m.  G.  12.  |  7. 16. 1 8. 10. 
Jadg.  6. 28.  the  men  of  the  city  rose  early  in  the  m. 
.33.  Gid.  rose  ear.  in  m.  ||  19. 5.  Levite  ear.  in  in.  8. 
1  Sam.  1.  19.  they  rose  up  early  in  the  m.  29.  11. 
2  rCings  3.  22.  1  19.  35. 2  Chr.  20. 20.  Isa.  37.  36. 

I5.12.Sam.rose  early  in  m.\\  ll.lO.Da.v.early  in  m. 

29.  10.  wherefore  rise  up  early  in  m.  and  depart 
Job  1.  5.  Job  rose  up  early  in  the  m.  and  offered 
Proa-  27. 14.  blesseth  his  friend,  rising  early  in  m. 
Isa.5.\l.v,oe  to  them  that  rise  early  in  m.  to  follow 

37.36.arose  early  in  to.  they  were  all  dead  corpses 
Dan.  6. 19.  then  king  Darius  rose  very  early  in  m. 
Jllal.  20.  1.  who  went  early  in  m.  to  hire  labourers 
Mark  I6.2.early  in  m.came  to  Bepulchre,i?tie24.1. 
lAike  21. 38.  the  people  came  early  in  m.  John  8. 2. 
.Sets  5.21.they  entered  into  the  temple  early  in  m. 
See  EvENiso. 
F.very  MORNING. 
Ezod.  16.  21.  and  they  gathered  manna  every  m. 

.3(1.  7.  shall  burn  thereon  sweet  incense  every  m. 

36.  3.  Jjroiight  unto  him  free-otferings  every  m. 
/^ev.6'.V2.  the  priest  shall  burn  wood  on  it  every  m. 

1  CAr.  9. 27.  opening  every  m.  pcrtaineth  to  porters 
23. 30.  to  stand  every  m.  to  thank  and  praise  Lord 

2  Chron.  13.  11.  tliey  burn  to  the  Lord  every  m. 
Job  7.  13.  that  thou  sliouldest  visit  him  every  m. 
Psal.  73.  14.  and  I  have  been  chastened  every  m. 
Isa.  33.  2.  O  Lord,  be  thou  our  arm  every  m. 
Jjam.  3.  23.  the  Lord's  mercies  are  new  every  m. 
Eiek.  46.  13.  thou  shalt  prepare  a  lamb  every  m. 

14.  meat-off.  every  m.  \\  15.  every  m.  a  burnt-oflf. 
Jlmos  4.  4.  and  bring  your  sacrifices  every  m. 
Zcpk.3.5.  every  in. dolh  he  brinj  judgment  to  light 

Until  the  MORNING. 
£?O(J.12.10.Iet  nothing  of  it  remain  until  the  m.  16. 
19. 1  23. 18.  1  29.  34.  Lev.  7.  15.  JVum.  9.  12. 

22.  none  of  you  shall  go  out  at  the  door  un.  t.  m. 
16.  20.  but  some  of  them  left  of  it  until  the  m. 

23.  lay  up  for  you  \c  be  kept  until  the  m. 
IjCv.  19. 13.  the  wages  shall  not  abide  until  the  m. 
Dcut.  16.  4.  nor  any  of  the  flesh  remain  until  them. 
Judg.  19. 25.  they  abused  her  all  night  until  the  m. 
Ruth  3.13.1iedownun£if  t.77i.||14.shclay  until  t.  m. 
\Sam.2. 15.  and  Samuel  lay  MJiti?  t.m.  and  opened 

19.  2.  therefore  take  heed  to  thyself  «?ti(7  the  m. 

ZKings  10.8.  lay  henils  ofkings  in  two  heaps  un.  m. 

Prov.  7. 18.  let  us  take  our  fill  of  love  until  the  m. 

Isa.  38. 13. 1  reckoned  until  the  m.  that  as  a  lion 

MORNING  light. 

1  Sam.  14.  36.  and  let  us  spoil  them  until  m.  light 
25.  22.  all  that  pertain  to  him  by  the  m.  light 

36.  Abigail  told  him  nothing  until  m.  light 

2  Sam.  17.  22.  they  passed  over  Jordan  by  m.  light 
S  Kings  7.9.  they  said,  if  we  tarry  until  m.  light 

See  Ci.or'D. 
MORNING  star  and  stars. 
Job  38. 7.  when  m.  stars  sang  together,  sons  of  God 
Rev.  2.  28.  and  I  will  give  him  the  m.  star 
22.  16.  I  Jesus  am  the  bright  and  m.  star 

MORNING  watch. 
Ezod. 14.  04.  in  7re.  tratch  the  Lord  said  to  Moses 
1  Sam.  11. 11.  came  into  middle  of  host  in  m.  tsatch 

MORROW. 
(7cn.30. 1 33.  my  righteousness  answer  for  me  fo  m. 
Kio(f.8.  23.  torn,  shall  this  sign  be,  the  Lord  did  so 
9.  5.  to  m.  the  I>ord  shall  do  this  thing  in  the  land 

6.  (he  Lord  did  that  thin::,  on  thn  m.  cattle  died 
13.tl4.askeththcct0TO.  DfHf.6.t20..rflsA.4.t6. 
16.  23.  to  m.  is  the  rest  of  the  holy  sabbath  to  Lord 
19.  10.  go,  and  sanctify  them  to  day  and  to  m. 
32.  5.  Aaron  said,  to  in.  is  a  feast  to  the  Lord 

/..CD  7.16.  on  m.  the  remaindpr  '■hall  be  eaten,  19.  6. 
22.  30.  ye  shall  leave  none  of  it  till  the  m. 
391 


MOT 

Len.  23. 11.  on  m.  after  sabbath  priest  shall  wave  it 

15.  ye  shall  count  from  the  m.  after  the  sabbath 
J^um.  11. 18.  say  thou  to  the  people,  sanctify  your- 
selves against  to  m.  ye  shall  eat.  Josh.  7.  13. 

16.  5.  to  m.  the  Lord  will  shew  who  are  his 

16.  be  thou,  they  and  Aaron  to  in.  before  Lord 
41.  on  the  m.  the  congregation  murmured 

.Josh.  3.  5.  to  m.  Lord  will  do  wonders  among  you 

5.12.  manna  ceased  on  the  m.  after  they  had  eaten 

22.  18.  to  m.  he  will  be  wroth  with  congregation 

124.  to  Ml.  your  children  mightspeak  to  our  cliildr. 

Judg.  19.  9.  to  m.  get  you  early  on  your  way 
20.  28.  go  up,  for  to  m.  I  will  deliver  them 

1  Sam.  11.  9.  to  m.  by  that  time  the  sun  be  hot 
20,  5.  behold,  to  m.  is  the  new  moon,  18. 
28. 19.  to  m.  shah  thou  and  thy  sons  be  with  me 

1  Kings  20.  6.  I  will  send  my  servants  to  thee  to  in. 
'iKingsQ.W.iUyaon  to-day, we  will  eat  my  son  torn. 

7.1. to  m.  a  measure  of  fine  flour  be  sold  for  a  shekel 
8.  1.5.  on  the  m.  he  took  a  thick  cloth,  and  dipt 
10.  6.  come  to  me  to  Jezreel  by  to  ni.  this  time 

2  Chron.  20. 16.  to  m.  go  ye  dow  n  against  them,  17. 
Esth.  5.  8. 1  will  do  to  m.  as  ^he  king  hat*"  said 

12.  to  m.  am  I  invited  to  her  with  the  k\(ig 
Pri)t).3.28.to  m.I  will  give, when  thou  hast  it  by  thee 
27.  1.  boast  not  thyself  to  m.  thou  knowest  not 
fsa.2-2.  13.  let  useat,  for  tom.wodie,  1  Cor.  15.32. 
.56. 12.  and  to  m.  shall  be  as  this  day,  much  more 
Zcph.  3.  3.  they  gnaw  not  the  bones  till  the  m. 
Mat.  6. 30.  to  m.  is  cast  into  the  oven,  Luke  12.  C3. 
34.  take  therefore  no  thought  for  the  m.  for  the 
m.  shall  take  thought  for  the  things  of  itfolf 
Luke  13.  32.  and  I  do  cures  to  day  and  to  m. 

33.  nevertheless,  I  must  walk  to  day  and  to  m. 
Mcts^O.7.  Paul  preached;  ready  to  depart  on  the  m. 
25.  22.  to  m.  said  he,  thou  shall  hear  him 
i/am.4.13.today  ortor/z.  we  will  go  into  such  a  city 
14.  whereas,  ye  know  not  what  shall  be  on  the  m. 
MORSEL. 
Oen.  18.  5.  I  will  fetch  a  m.  of  bread,  comfort  ye 
.Judg.  19. 5.  comfort  thine  heart  with  a  m.  of  bread 
Rut/i2. 14.  eat  bread,  and  dip  thy  m.  in  the  vinegar 
2  Sam.  12.  f  3.  it  did  eat  of  his  own  m.  and  drank 
.Job  31.  17.  or  have  eaten  my  m.  myself  alone 
Prou.n.l.better  is  a  dry  m.and  quietness  therewith 
23.  8.  the  m.  thou  hast  eaten  shalt  thou  vomit  up 
.John  13. 1 26.  he  it  is  to  whom  I  shall  give  a  m. 
Heb.  12.  16.  who  for  one  m.  sold  his  birth-right 
See  Bread. 
MORSELS. 
Psal.  147.  17.  he  casteth  forth  his  ice  like  m. 

MORTAL. 
"Chron.  ll.fll.  let  not  m.  man  prevail  against  thee 
.Job  4.  17.  shall  m.  man  be  more  just  than  God  1 
Rom.  6.  12.  let  not  sin  reign  in  your  m.  body 
8.11.shall  also  quicken  yourm.bodies  by  his  Spirit 

1  Cor.  15.  .53.  this  m.  must  jiut  on  immortality,  54. 

2  Cor.  4. 11.  life  of  Jesus  be  manifest  in  ourm.  flesh 
MORTALITY. 

2  Cor.  5.  4.  that  m.  might  be  swallowed  up  of  life 

MORTALLY. 
Deut.lO.  11.  and  smite  his  neighbourm.that  he  die 

MORTAR. 
Oen.ll.3.brick  for  stone,  and  slime  had  they  for  m. 
Ezod.  1. 14.  they  made  them  serve  in  m.  and  brick 
Z,ei!.14.42.shaH  take  other  m.  and  plasterthe  house 

45.  and  shall  break  down  the  m.  of  the  house 
/sa.41.25.  he  shall  come  upott  princes  as  upon  m. 
Ezek.  13. 10.  one  built  a  wall,  and  lo  others  daubed 
it  with  imtempered  m.  11,  14,  15.  |  22.  28. 
JVaA.  3.  14.  go  into  clav,  and  tread  the  m. 

MORTAR. 
.l^um.  11.8.  grounil  it  in  mills,  or  beat  it  in  a  m. 
Prov.  27.22.  Iho'  thou  shouldrst  bray  a  fool  in  a  m. 

MORTGAGED. 
JVeA.  5.  3.  some  also  said,  we  have  m.  our  lands 

MORTIFY. 
Rom.  8. 13.  butif  ye  TO.  deeds  of  body  ye  shall  live 
Col.  3.  5.  m.  your  members  which  are  on  the  earth 

MOST. 
Prot).20.fi.  TO.  men  proclaim  every  one  his  goodness 
JI/(jM1.20.  wherein  m.  of  mighty  works  were  done 
Luke  7.  42.  which  of  them  will  love  him  m.  7 

43.  I  suppose  that  he  to  whom  he  forgave  m. 
irts  20.38.  sorrowing  7«.  of  all  for  words  he  spake 
1  Cor.  14.  27.  let  it  be  bv  two,  or  at  m.  by  three 

MOTE. 
Mat.  7.  3.  why  beholdest  thou  m.  that  is  in  thy  bro- 
ther's eye,  but  not  beam  in  thyown?  Lvkcfi.4\. 

4.  let  me  pull  out  the  to.  out  of  thine  eye 

5.  first  cast,  and  then  shalt  thou  see  clearly  to  cast 
out  them,  out  ofthv  brother's  eve,  LukeG.42. 

MOTH 
Signifies,  [1]  -^  sort  of  fy  irhich  eats  eloth,  .Tob 
4.  19.  I   13.  28.      [2]   !<ome  secret  curse  and 
judgment  from  Ood,  Isa.  .50.  9. 
.7oi4.  19.  in  them,  which  arc  crushed  before  the  to. 
27.  18.  hfi  huildeth  his  house  as  a  m.  and  booth 
P!tn/.39. 1 1. thou  makest  his  beauty  consume  like  m. 
Jsa.  50.  9.  the  m.  shall  eat  them  up,  51. 8. 


MOT 


Has.  d.  12.  therefore  will  I  be  to  Ephraim  a*  a  m 
Jl/«<.6.19.treasure6,where  m.  aiul  rust  doth  corrupt 
20.  where  neither  m  .nor  rust  corrupt,  Luke  12.  33. 
MOTH  EATEN. 
Job  13.28.  consumeth  as  garment  that  is  m.-caten 
Jam.  5.2.  riches  corrupted,  vour  garments  m.-eaten 

MOTHER 
Signifies,  [1]  ./?  ttoman  vho  has  brought  forth 
a  child,   Exod.  2.   8.      [2]    The   dam   of   the 
beast,  Exod.  23.  19.     It  is  applied,  [1]    7o  the 
true  church,  in  which  true  gospel  believers  are 
begotten  to  and  nourished  up  in  the  faith,  by 
the  dispensation  of  the  icord  and  onlinauces, 
Gal.  4.  26.     It  is  said  to  be  from  above,  be- 
cause its  original  is  from  heaven,  and  its  mem- 
bers have  their  conversation  there,  Phil.  3.  20. 
[2]  7'o  a  valiant  woman,  of  whom  God  made 
use   lo    deliver  his   people,   to   instruct   and 
take  care  of  them   with   a   tender  affection, 
Judg.  5.  7.     [3]   To  matrons  or  aged  women, 
to  whom  we  ought  to  carry  oursilves  respect- 
fully, because  of  their  age,  as  dutiful  children 
do  to  their  mothers,  1  Tim.  5.  2.     [4]  To  all 
true  believers  who  are  more  dear  and  near  to 
Christ,  than  the  nearest  relations  are  to  any 
person.  Mat.  12.  49,  .50.     [5]  To  one  who  ten- 
ders and  loves  another,  ns  a  mother  dues  her 
son,  Rom.  16.  13.     [6]  To  a  female  superior, 
whether  a  mother,mother-in-law,  one  advanced 
in  age,  a  teacher,  or  governess,  Exod.  20.  12. 
.  [7]  To  the  kingdom  of  .Judah,  the  city  of  Je- 
rusalem, or  the  family  of  David,  Ezek.  19. 
2,  10.     [8]    To  a  metropolis,  or  the   capital 
city  of   a   country   or   of   a   tribe,   2    Sam. 
20.  J9. 
Gen.  3.  20.  because  she  was  the  m.  of  all  living 
17.  16. 1  will  bless  her,  she  shall  be  a  m.  of  na- 
tions ;  kings  of  people  shall  be  of  htr 
24.  28.  the  damsel  told  them  of  her  m.  house 
53.  he  gave  to  her  brother  and  m.  precious  things 
60.  be  thou  the  m.  of  thousands  of  millions 
32.  11.  lest  he  smite  the  m.  with  the  children 
Ezod.  2.  P.  the  maid  went  and  called  the  child's  m 
J^ev.  20.14.  to  take  a  wife  and  her  m.  is  wickednct; 
Jud^.  5.  7.  till  that  I  Deborah  arose  a  m.  in  Israel 

28.  the  TO.  of  Sisera  looked  out  at  a  window 
Ruth  1.  8.  go,  return  each  to  her  m.  house 
2  Sam.  17.  25.  Abigail,  sister  to  Zeruiah,  Joab's  m. 

20.  19.  thou  seekest  to  destroy  a  m.  in  Israel 

1  Kings  2.  19.  and  caused  a  seat  to  be  set  for  the 
king's  m. 

3.  27.  give  her  the  child,  she  is  the  m.  thereof 

2  Kings  21.  15.  he  carried  away  the  king's  to. 
Psal.  113.  9.  and  to  be  a  joyful  m.  of  children 
Prov.  30.  11.  a  generation  doth  not  bless  their  to. 
Cant.  6. 9.  my  dove,  she  is  the  only  one  of  her  m. 
Isa.  .50. 1.  where  is  the  bill  of  your  to.  divorce  ? 
Jer.  50.  12.  your  to.  shall  be  sore  confounded 
F.zek.  16.  44.  as  is  the  ri.  so  is  the  daughter 

45.  your  m.  was  a  Hittite,  father  an  Anioritc 

21.  t21.  king  stood  at  the  m.  of  the  way 

23.  2.  were  two  women  the  daughters  of  one  to. 
7/<i.«.2  2.  plead  with  yourm.  for  she  is  not  my  wif^ 

5.  for  their  to.  hath  played  the  harlot 
10. 14.  TO.  was  dashed  in  pieces  upon  her  childrer 
Mie.  7. 6.  daughter  riseth  up  ajainst  her  to.  a  man'i 
enemies  of  his  house.  Mat.  10.  35.  Luke  12.  .53 
Mat.  8.  14.  saw  Peter's  wife  m.  sick,  lAike  4.  38 
14.  8.  she  being  before  instructed  of  her  m. 
11.  and  she  brought  it  lo  her  m.  Mark  6.  28. 
19. 12.  ennuchswereso  born  from  their  m.  womt 
20.  20.  then  came  the  to.  of  Zebcdee's  children 
Lulie  1.  43.  thei/i.  of  my  Lord  should  come  to  me? 
.John  2. 1.  the  m.  of  Jesus  was  lliPrn,  Acts  1. 14. 
Acts  12.  12.  he  came  to  hov;se  of  Mary  m.  of  John 
Gal.  4.  26.  Jerusalem  which  is  the  to.  of  us  all 
Rev.  17.  5.  the  to.  of  harlots  nnd  abominations 
See  Father. 
His  MOTHER. 
Gnt.  21.  21.  AVs  TO.  took  him  a  wife  out  of  Fffvpt 

24.  67.  Isaac  brought  Rebekah  info  A(>m.  Sarah'.i 
tent,  and  wns  comforted  after  the  death  of  A(.t  m. 

27.  14.  Jacob  went  and  brought  them  to  his  m. 

30.  14.  Reuben  brought  mandrakes  to  his  m. 

43.29.  he  saw  his  brother  Benjamin,  his  m.  son 

44.20.  he  alone  is  left  of  his  in.  jiis  father  loves  him 

Ezod  23.  19.  thou  shalt  not  seethe  the  kid  in  his 

TO.  milk,  34.26.  Deut.  14.  21. 

Lev.  20.  17.  shall  take  his  to.  danshter  and  see  her 

24.  11.  hism.  name  was  Shelomith,  tribe  of  Dan 
.Vum.  12. 12.  when  he  Cometh  out  nf  hism.  womb 
/)n(«.27.22.  that  lieth  with  the  danehter  ofhisvi. 
Judg.  9.  1.  Abimelech  went  to  hism.  brethren 

17. 2.  he  said  to  Ai's  to.  ||  3.  he  restored  it  tr)  his  m 
1  Sam.  2.  19.  his  to.  made  him  a  little  coat 

1  Kings  1.  6.  and  his  to.  bare  him  after  Absalom 
15.  )3.  his  TO.  he  removed  from  being  queen 
17.  23.  Elijah  delivered  him  to  his  to.  and  said 
22.  ,52.  Ahaziah  walked  in  the  wav  of  his  m. 

2  Kings  4. 19.  he  said  to  a  lad,  carry  biro  tr  4  .■»  . 


MOV 

1  Chron.  4.  9.  his  m.  called  hU  name  Jnbcz 

i  Clir.'2-2M.his  m.was  hif  coansellor  tu  du  wickedly 

J^^sal.  35.  14.  aa  une  that  mournelli  fur  his  m. 

lU'J.  14.  let  nut  tliu  am  ut' his  m.  be  blutled  out 

131.  -J.  us  a  child  that  is  weaned  ot'Ais  ;n. 
Fruv.  10. 1.  a  I'oolisli  son  in  llio  heaviness  of  his  m. 

]5.  "M.  but  a  I'oulish  man  despiseth  his  m. 

tkl.  15.  a  uhlld  lul't  bringt'th  his  m.  to  shame 

31.  1.  the  |irophecy  thai  his  m.  taught  him 
Hccl.o.  15.  as  ho  came  rorlholAiS  m.  womb,  naked 
Cant.  3.  11.  crown  wherewith  Ai*  m.  crowned  liiin 
/sa.  66.  13.  as  one  whom  his  m.  comlorteth 
Mat.  1. 18.  when  his  m.  was  espoused  to  Joseph 

)i.  13.  take  the  young  child  and  Ai*  m.  and  flee,  iO. 

l-J.4t>./ii»  m.stbod  without,  jMark  3.31.  Lukeii.i'J. 

13.  j.).  carpenter's  son.^ls  not  A(«  w.  called  Mary  ^ 
Luke  l.lS.fillcd  with  Holy  Giiost  from  Ai's  nj.  womb 
W).  A(6-  HI.  said,  he  shall  be  called  John 

2.  43.  but  Joseph  and  his  tn.  knew  not  of  it 
51.  but  his  m.  ke|>t  these  sayings  in  her  heart 

7.  12.  Uie  only  son  ol"  his  in.  and  she  was  a  widow 
15.  he  sat  up,  and  he  delivered  him  to  his  m. 

John  3.4. can  he  eiitt-r  second  time  into  Aii  /n.womb7 

19.  iJJ.  his  m.  stood  by  the  cross  of  Jesus 

26.  when  Jesus  saw  his  m.  he  saith  to  his  m. 
^cti*3."J.ccrlain  man  lame  from  his  m.  womb,  14.8. 
Horn.  lb.  13.  saluie  Rul'us  and  his  m.  and  mine 

jMOTHER-IN-LAW. 
Dfvt.  27.23.cursed  be  that  lielh  with  his  m.-in-lau> 
Jlulh  1.  14.  and  Orpah  kissed  her  vi.-in-lauj 
•1.  11.  all  that  thou  hast  done  to  thy  m.-in-law 
■23.  and  Ruth  dwelt  with  her  m.-in-lam 

3.  6.  according  to  all  that  her  m.-inlaw  bade  her 
17.  for  he  said,  go  not  empty  to  thy  m.-inlaw 

Mie.  7.  6.  the  daughter-in-law  riseth  up  against 

the  m.in-laui,  jVat.  10.  35.  L.ukc  12.  53. 

My  MOTHER. 

Orn.  20.  12.  she  is  not  the  daughter  oC  my  m. 

Juiig-.  S.  I'J.  my  brethren,  even  the  sons  ol"  my  m. 

l(i.  17. 1  have  been  a  Nazarite  from  viy  m.  wonih 

1  Kings  2.  20.  the  king  said  to  her,  ask  on,  viym. 
Job  1.  21.  naked  came  1  out  of  my  m.  womb 

3.  10.  it  shut  not  up  the  doors  oi  my  m.  womb 
IT.  14.  I  have  said  to  the  worm,  thou  art  my  m. 
31.  16.  and  I  have  guided  her  from  my  m.  womb 

Fsal.  22.  9.  make  me  hope,  when  on  my  m.  breasts 

10.  thou  art  my  God  from  my  m.  belly 
51.  5.  and  in  sin  did  my  m.  conceive  me 
6'J.  8.  I  am  become  an  alien  to  my  m.  children 
71.6.  thou  arthe  thaltookmeout  of  my  m.  bowels 
y.i'J.  13.  thou  hast  covered  me  in  my  m.  womb 

ProB.  4.  3.  tender  and  beloved  in  the  sight  of  my  m. 

Cant.  1.  6.  my  m.  children  were  angry  with  me 
3.  4.  until  I  had  brought  him  to. my  m.  house 

8.  1.  my  brother  that  sucked  the  breasts  of  my  m. 
2.  and  I  would  bring  thee  into  my  m.  house 

/»a.40.1.froin  the  bowels  of  my  m.he  made  mention 
Ji-r. I  o.lO.woe  isnie,7ny7n.  that  thou  hast  borne  me 

20.  14.  let  not  the  day  wherein  my  m.  bare  me 
17.  or  that  my  m.  might  have  been  my  grave 

Mat.  12. 48.  Jesus  said,  who  is  my  m.?  Mark  3.  33. 
49.  behold  my  m.  and  my  brethren,  Mark  3.  34. 
J,xike  8.  21.  my  m.  and  my  brethren  are  these 
OaM.15.God, who  separated  me  from  my  m. womb 

Thy  MOTHER. 
Gt^n.  27.  29.  and  let  thy  m.  sons  bow  down  to  thee 
37.  10.  shall  1  and  thy  m.  come  to  bow  to  thee  ? 
7wrB.18.7.nakednes3of«Aym.8halt  thou  not  uncover 

9.  not  uncover  nakedness  of  daughter  of  thy  m. 
13.  not  uncover  nakedn.  of  sister  lA'lhym.  20.19. 

Deitl.  13.  0.  brother,  the  son  o(  thy  m.  entice  thee 
1. Sam. 15.33.so6hall<Aym. be ciiildless  among  worn. 
20.  30.  to  the  confusion  o(  thy  m.  nakedness 

2  Kinirs  9. 22.  as  whoredoms  of  «Ay  7n.are  so  many 
Paal.  50.  20.  thou  slanderest  thine  own  m.  son 
J'roB.  1 . 8.  and  forsake  not  the  law  of  tAy  m.  6.  20. 

23.  22.  and  despi.ie  not  thy  m.  when  she  is  old 
Cant.  8.  5.  there  thy  m.  broi»ght  thee  forth 
Jer.  22.  '2>\.  cast  thoe  out,  and  thy  m.  that  bare  thee 
Ezek.  10.  3.  thy  father  an  Amorile,  thy  m.a.  Hittiie 
45  thnu  art  tliy  m.duught.  th:it  loatheth  her  husb. 

19.  2.  and  say,  what  is  (Ay  m.  ?  a  lioness 

10.  Uiy  m.  IS  like  a  vine  in  thy  blood,  planted 
Jins.  4.  .5.  Ihon  shall  fall,  and  1  will  destroy  thy  m. 
Mat.  12.  47.  one  said  to  hliii,  behold  thy  m.  anifthy 

brethren,  Mark  3.  :^•.  l.ukc  8.  20.  .lokn  19. 27. 
2  Tim.  1.  5.  faith,  which  ilwelt  in  thy  m.  Eunice 

MOTHERS. 
/*(!.  49.  2).  ond  nm^'n-i  xhnll  be  thy  nursing  m, 
Jrr.  in.  3.  snith  the  Jjord,  concerning  Iheir  in. 
J. am.  2.  12.  they  say  to  their  m.  whnre  is  corn  and 
wine?  soul  was  fiourod  out  into  their  m.  bisom 
5.  3.  wc  are  fiithnrlcsi,  our  m   nro  as  widows 
Mark  10.  30.  receive  a  huiidrrd  fohl,  sisters,  m. 
1  Tim.  1.  9.  the  law  is  inadi:  for  innrdtTeri  of  m. 
5.2.but  entreat  the  olilnr  womr-n  ns  m.  Iho  younger 

MOTIONS. 
<R<x».7.5.  the  m.  ofsins  did  w«rk  in  ourmombers 

MOVE 

Signifies.  [1 1  To  stir  out  of  a  plact,  2  Kings  21. 
■JSH 


MOV 

8.     [2]  To  provoke,  Deut.  32.  21.     [3]  To  per- 
suade, Josh.  15.   18.      [4J    To  eicite,  enable, 
and  strengthen,  Judg.   J3.   25.      [5J    V'o   set, 
or  raise  up,   Job  40.   f   !'•      [6]    'J'u  tremble 
and  shake,  Psal.   18.  7.     [7]    To  touch.  Mat. 
23.  4.     [8J    To  deter,  or  discourage  one  from 
doing  a  thing.  Acts  20.  24.     [9]    To  be  sen- 
sibly affected  both  with  wonder  at,  and  com- 
passion  towards,  a  person   under   ajjiiction, 
Kulh  1.  19. 
Kxod.  11.  7.  not  a  dog  m.  his  tongue  against  man 
Leo.  11.  10.  of  all  that  in.  in  the  waters 
Deut.  23.  25.  not  m.  a  sickle  into  neighbour's  corn 
32.  21.  and  I  will  m.  them  to  Jealousy  with  those 
Judg.  13.25.  theijpirit  of  tlie  Lord  began  torn,  him 
2  A'a;n.7.1U.may  dwell  and  m.no  more,2  Kings  ~\.>i. 
2  Kings  5.  t  li-  he  will  m.  his  hand  up  and  down 

23.  18.  let  him  alone,  let  no  man  m.  his  bones 
Jer.  10.  4.  they  fasten  it  with  nails  that  it  m.  not 
JImos  9. 1 9.  I  will  cause  to  m.  the  house  of  Israel 
Mid.  17.  they  sh.  m.  out  of  their  holes  like  worms 
Mat.  2i).  4.  they  themselves  will  not  ;«.  them 
.'i:ts  17.  28.  for  in  him  we  live,  m.  have  our  being 

20.  24.  none  of  these  things  m.  me,  nor  count  1 

MOVEAHLE. 
Prov.  5.  C.  her  ways  are  m.  canst  not  know  them 

MOVED. 
Gen.  1.2.  the  Spirit  of  God  m.  on  face  of  the  waters 

7.  21.  all  flesh  died  thai  >n.  on  the  earth,  of  fowl 
Deut. '.a.  21  they  have  m.  me  to  jealousy  with  that 
./iish.  10.  21.  none  m.  Ins  tongue  agumst  Israel 

15. 18.  m.  him  to  ask  of  father  a  lield,  .ludg.  1. 14. 
liuth  1.  19.  that  all  the  city  was  m.  about  them 

1  Ham.  1.  13.  she  spake  in  her  heart,  only  her  lips  m. 

2  6am.  18.  33.  the  king  was  much  7k.  and  wept 
22.  8.  the  foundations  of  heaven  m.  and  shook 
24.1.  he  m.  David  against  them,  to  say,  go  number 

1  Chron.  10.  30.  fear  before  him,  the  world  shiill  be 

stable,  that  it  be  not  m.  Psal.  93.  1.  |  96.  10. 
17.  9.  they  shall  dwell,  and  shall  be  m.  no  more 

2  Chron.  J8.  31.  God  m.  them  to  depart  from  him 
Ezra  4.  1.5.  they  have  m.  sedition  of  old  time 
Ar,'.7A..5.9. Hainan  saw  that  Mordecai  m.  not  for  him 
.lub  37.  1.  at  this  my  heart  is  m.  out  of  his  place 

41.23.  the  flakes  of  his  flesh,  they  cannot  be  m. 
Psal.  10. 6. 1  shall  not  be  m.  16.  8.  |  30.  6. 1  02. 2, 6. 

13.  4.  those  that  trouble  mo  rejoice  wlum  I  am  m. 
15.  5.  he  that  doeth  these  things  shall  never  be  m. 
17.  t5.  hold  up,  that  my  footsteps  be  not  m. 

IS.  7.  foundations  of  the  hills  7;i.  and  were  shaken 
21. 7. the  kingtrusleth  in  Lord,  and  shall  not  be  m. 
46.  5.  she  shall  not  be  m.  God  shall  hcli>  her 
6.  the  heathen  raged,  the  kingdoms  wore  m. 
.55. 22.  he  shall  never  sufler  the  righteous  to  be  m. 
6i).  9.  and  sufleroth  nut  our  feet  lo  be  m. 
68.  8.  Sinai  was  m.  at  the  presence  of  God 
78..58.  they  m.  him  to  jealousy  with  graven  images 
82.  t  5.  the  foundations  of  Iho  earth  are  m. 
99.  1.  the  liord  reigncth,  let  the  earth  be  m. 
1 12.  0.  surely  he  shall  not  be  m.  for  ever 
121.  3.  he  will  not  suflur  thy  fool  to  bi;  m. 
Prov.  12.3.  the  root  ofthe  righteous  shall  not  bo  m. 
Cant.  5.  4.  and  my  bowels  were  7n.  for  him 
/so.  6.4.  the  posts  of  the  door  m.  at  the  voice  of  him 
7.  2.  his  heart  was  m.  as  trees  are  7n.  with  wind 
10.  14.  and  there  was  none  that  m.  the  wing 

14.  9.  hell  from  beneath  is  m.  for  thee  to  meet  thee 

19.  1.  the  idols  of  Efyptshall  be  m.  ut  his  presence 

24.  19.  earth  is  broken  down,  and  m.  e.\ceediogl)' 
40.  20.  a  graven  image  that  shall  not  be  m.  41.7. 

■fer.  4. 24.  they  trembled,  and  all  the  hills  m.  lightly 

25.  16.  they  shall  drink,  ond  bo  7;i.  and  be  mud 
46.  7.  whoso  watci-s  arc  m.  as  the  rivers,  8. 

49.  21.  the  earth  is  m.  at  the  noise  of  Edoni's  fall 
r^O.  46.  nt  thn  taking  of  liabylon  the  earth  is  m. 

/.»fl7i.  8.  7.  he  was  m.  with  clioler  against  him 
10.  t  10.  touched  mo,  which  m  me  on  my  knees 
11. 11.  the  kingofthe  south  shall  be  m.  with  clioler 

Jlfut.9.36.  be  was  m.  with  compassion  on  tlieln,  14. 
14.  1  18.27.  Mark  1.41.  |  6.  34. 

20.  24.  were  a.  with  indignation  against  brethren 

21.  10.  all  the  city  was  n».  saying,  who  is  this  ? 
Mark  15.  11.  but  the  chief  priesU  m.  the  people 
y?i«*2. 25.  oiimy  righthnnd,  that  I  should  not  be  m. 

7.  9.  patriarchs,  »7i.  with  envy,  solil  Jos.  into  Egypt 
17. 5. bill  the  Jo^*8  m.  willuinvy,  took  lewd  fellows 
21.  30.  the  city  was  m.  and  people  run  together 
Col.  1.  2.3.  b^:  not  m.  from  the  hope  of  the  ijospcl 
1  Thcss.  3.  3.  that  no  man  be  m.  by  these  afflictions 
/Irh.  11.  7.  Noah  m.  witli  fear,  prepared  an  ark 
12.28.WC  recoivirvg  a  kingdom  which  cannot  be  m. 
•2  Pet.  1.21.  they  spake  as  m.  by  the  Holy  Ghost 
/{cB.  C.14.  every  inountnin  and  island  m. out  ofplaco 

MOVEHST. 
,/oi2.3.tho'  thou  m.  me  against  him  without  cause 
./er.  48.  t27.  since  thou  spakcst,  thou  m.  thyself 

MOVER. 
.^c«»  24.  5.  have  found  tin-  6  How  a  m.  oficdilion 

MOVETII. 
(7en.l  .21.God  created  every  living  creature  that  m. 


MOU 

Gen.l.W.  domin  overevery  thing  that  jn. on  earth 

9.2.  the  fear  of  you  shall  be  on  all  thatrft.  on  earth 
J.ev.  11.46.  this  is  the  luwof  every  creature  thaiTn 

20.  t  25.  abominable  by  any  thing  that  m. 
.lob  40.  17.  Behemoth  m.  his  tail  like  a  cedar 
Psal^B.  34.  let  every  thing  that  7»i.  praise  him 
I'rov^i.  31.  not  on  wine  when  it  m.  itself  aright 
Eiek.  47.9.  that  m.  whithersoever  the  rivers  coma 

MOVIiNG. 
Gen.  1.  20.  let  the  waters  bring  forth  m.  creature* 

9.  3.  every  m.  thing  shall  be  meat  for  you 
Prov.  16.  30.  771.  his  lips,  he  bringeth  evil  to  pasa 
}iab.  1. 1 14.  makest  men  as  the  7».  things,  no  ruler 

MOVIiNG,  Substantive. 
.Job  16.  5.  the  m.  of  my  lips  should  aseuoge  grief 
John  5.  3.  blind,  waiting  for  the  771.  of  the  water 

MOULUY. 
TosA. 9.5.  the  bread  of  provision  wasdry  and  m.  12. 

MOUNT,  ING. 
.fob  20.G.though  his  excellency  to. up  to  the  heavens 

;19.  27.  doth  the  eagle  7»i.  up  at  thy  command  ? 
Psal.  107.  2C.  they  m.  up  to  heaven,  they  go  down 
/«u.9.18.  they  shall  m.  up  as  the  litMng  uji  of  smoka 

15.  5.  by  the  m.  up  of  Luhith  shall  they  go  up 

40.  31.  they  shall  m.  up  with  wings,  as  eagles 
Jer.  51.53.  though  Babylon  should  771.  up  to  heaven 
Ezek.  10.16.  when  the  cherubims  lift  up  to  m.up,l'.>. 

MOUNT. 
Gen.  31.  54.  .Tacob  otTered  sacrifice  on  the  m. 
Frod.  18.  5.  where  he  encamped  at  the  tti.  of  God 

19.12.  whuso  toucheth  the  7/1.  shall  be  put  to  death 
14.  Moses  went  down  from  the  771. 32. 15.  |  34. 29. 

16.  a  thick  cloud  upon  them.  24.  15. 

18.7S.  Sinai  on  a  smoke  []  23.  bounds  about  theTTj. 

24.  16.  the  glory  of  the  Ia>xi\  abode  upon  m.  Sinai 

17.  was  like  devouring  tire  on  the  top  of  m. 
31.18.the  Lord  gave  Moses  on  m.  Sinai  two  tables 
32.  19.  and  Muses  brake  them  beneath  the  m. 
34.  %  and  come  up  in  the  morning  to  m.  Sinai 

3.  nor  let  any  man  be  seen  through  all  the  m. 
Jfuin.  10. 33.  they  departed  from  the  m.  of  the  Lord 
20.  22.  from  Kadesh,  and  came  unto  m.  Hor 

25.  bring  upfo  771.  Hor  ||  28.  Aaron  died  in  m.  Hor 
34.  7.  you  shall  point  out  for  you  m.  Hor 
Deut.  1.  6.  ye  have  dwelt  long  enuugh  in  this  m. 

7.  turn  you,  and  go  to  Ihe  7/1.  of  the  Auioriles 
9.  15.  I  came  down,  and  the  jn.  hurued  with  tire 
27.  13.  and  these  shall  stand  upon  7n.  Ebal 

32.  49.  get  thee  to  m.  Nebo,  which  is  in  Moat» 

33.  2.  the  Lord  shineth  forth  from  771.  I'ariin 
■Judg.  4.  6.  go  and  draw  toward  m.  Tahor 

7.  3.  let  him  depart  early  from  7;i.  Gilcad 
9.  48.  Abimelech  got  liini  up  to  771.  Zalmon 
2  Sam.  15.30.  David  went  up  by  Iho  ascent  ofm. 
32.  ihe  top  of  the  771.  where  he  worshippid  God 

1  Kings  19.  8.  Elijah  went  to  Horcb,  Ihe  771.  of  God 

1 1.  go  and  stand  on  the  m.  before  Ihe  Lord 

2  Kings  23-  13.  on  right  hand  the  m.  of  corruption 
.Vih.  8.  15.  go  to  the  m.  and  feich  oiive-branchta 

9.  13.  ihou  camest  down  also  on  m.  Smai 
Cant.  4.  1.  is  as  a  flock  of  goats  from  ;7i.  Gilead 
Isa.  10.  32.  the  m.  of  the  daugliier  of  Zion,  IG.  1. 
14.  13.  I  will  sit  on  the  m.  of  the  congngalion 
27.  13.  shall  worship  in  llie  holy  m.  at  Jerusalom 
29.  3.  and  will  lay  siege  against  thee  with  a  m. 
Jer.  6.  6.  hew  ye  down  trees,  and  cast  a  to.  ngainst 
Jerusalem,  Kick.  4.  2.  |  21.  22.  \  26.  a 
/)a7i.  11.15.  the  king  ofthe  north  shall  cast  upn  vi. 
Obad.  8.eveii  destroy  understanding  out  of  N/.E>au 
21.  saviours  shall  come  to  judge  the  7n.  of  ICsau 
Hub.  3.  3.  and  the  Holy  One  from  jn.  Paruii 
./yc/.»-7.30..there  appeared  in  wilderne.-s  of  771.  Sinai 
r,'aM.21.  the  one  from  the  r7i.  Sinai,  which  is  .Agar 

25.  for  this  Agar  is  771.  Sinai  in  .Arabia 

Hib.  12.  IS.  not  ronic  to  the  m.  might  be  touched 

See  Cab.mkl,  Gkuizim. 

Before  the  MOUNT. 

F.jod.  19.  2.  and  there  Israel  camped  before  them. 

34.  3.  neither  let  the  flocks  feed  before  the  »:. 

Sec  Epiiraim. 

/71,  or  into  the  MOUNT. 

^rri.22.  14.  in  the  m.  of  ihe  Loid  it  shall  be  sivn 

31.  23.  and  lliey  overtook  Jacob  171  the  m.  (Jilend 

.54.  they  did  oat,  and  larriid  all  night  in  the  m. 

F.iod.  4.  27.  he  went  and  met  him  in  the  m.  of  God 

19.  12.  lake  hoed  ye  go  not  up  into  the  m- 

24.I2.Ld.  said  lo  Moses,  come  intom.  /)rvt.'lQ.  1. 

13.  Moses  went  up  in(o  the  m.  of  (Jod,  15,  IH. 

18.  Moses  wua  in  the  m.  forly  dnva  uml  forty 

nighu,  I)eut.\K'^.  |  10.  10. 

25.  40.  look  thou  make  them  after  their  patlein 
shewed  I  hoe  in  Ihe  m.  26.  30.  |  27.  8.  Heb.  8.  .5. 

A^um.  27.  12.  get  thee  up  into  m.  Almrirn  and  see 
/>(■l;^32..'>0.  and  d'leint.m.  as  Aaron  died  in  m.  Hor 
Josh.  8.  30.  Joshua  buili  an  altar  unto  the  Lord 
God  of  Israel  in  m.  Ebal 
2  fi'in/j'.« 23.16. Josiah  spied  lhe«epulcbre^in  them. 
2  Chr.  3.  1.  10  build  the  lnHHe  of  L.  in  m.  Muriah 
/.la.  28.  21.  for  iho  L.  shall  rise  ipas  tv  m.  reran 
.^cts  7.  38.  the  angel  who  .spake  to  liiin  in  m  Sinaj 


MOU 

V  ret  1. 18.  when  we  were  witli  him  in  the  holj  m. 

See  Gir.BOA. 

MOUNT  of  Oliees. 

Zech.  14. 4.  his  feet  ohall stand  on  the  m. of  Olives, 

the  m.  of  Olives  sliall  cleave  iy  the  m\As\  thereof 

^at.21.1.  tlioy  were  come  to  m.  of  Ol.  J^iika^K  2'.). 

24.  3.  and  as  he  sat  upon  m.  of  Olives,  Jl/ar'ft  13.3. 

26.  30.  nnd  when  he  had  eung  a  hymn,  they  went 

out  into  m.  of  Olives,  Marii  14. 26.  Luke  20. 39 

IjUke  19.  37.  he  was  ut  the  descent  of  m.  of  Olives 

21.37. at  night  we  went  out,  and  abode  in  m.  of  01 

John  8.  1.  Jesus  went  unto  the  m.  of  Olives 

Acts  1. 12.  then  they  returned  from  them,  of  Olives 

See  Skir,  Zion. 

MOUNTS. 

Trr.  32. 24.  the  m.  arc  come  to  the  city  to  take  it 

33.4.  the  houses  which  are  tlirown  down  by  the  m. 

Ezc/c.  17. 17.  nor  make  for  him,  hy  casting  up  m. 

MOUNT.MN 
Signifies,  l^]  A  vast  fieap  of  earth  raised  to  a  great 
height,  either  by  nature,  or  art,  Prov.  8.  2.i. 
[2]  The  chure/i  of  God,  whereof  the  temple  built 
on  mount  Sion  was  a  type,  Isa.  2.  2.  [3]  7"Ae 
idolatrous  inhabitants  of  the  mountains, E/.ek. 
6.  2.  [4]  Places  of  power  and  authority  in  a 
kingdom,  Amos  4.  1.  [5]  High plaees,  whereon 
idols  were  worshipped,  Isa.  57.  7.  Ezek.  18.  6. 
[6]  Such  powerful  obstacles  as  hinder  the  pro- 
gress of  the  gospel,  Isa.  40.  4.  |  49.  11.  [7] 
Idols  that  were  worshipped  in  mountains,  or 
high  places,  Jer.  3.  23.  [8]  Tiie  most  lofty 
and  powerful  enemies,  laa.  41.  15. 

A  Catalogue  of  the  most  famous  iftountams  men- 
tioned in  Scripture. 

Mount  Amalek,  in  the  tribe  of  Ephraim,  Judg. 
12.  15. 

.  Mount  Calvary,  whereon  our  Lord  .Tesus  Christ 
Kas  crucified,  north-ivest  from  Jerusalem,  Luke 
23.  33. 

Mount  Carmel,  near  the  Mediterranean-sea 
between  Dora  and  Ptolemais,  Jush.  19.  26. 

Mount  Ebal,  near  to  Gerizim,  Josh.  8.  30. 

The  mountain  of  En-gedi,  near  the  Dead-sea, 
Josh.  15.  0-2. 

Mount  Gaash,  in  tribe  o/ Ephraim,  Josh.  24.30. 

Mount  Gilboa,  to  the  south  of  the  valley  of 
Israel,  2  Sam.  1.  21. 

Jf/ouTit  Gilead,  beyond  Jordan,  Gen.  31. 21 ,23,25. 

Mount  Gerizim,  whereon  was  afterwards  the 
temple  of  the  Samaritans,  Judg.  9.  7. 

Mount  Hermon,  beyond  Jordan,  Josh.  11.  3. 

Mount  Hor,  in.  Idumea,  Num.  20.  22. 

Mount  Horeb,  near  to  Sinai,  in  Arabia  Petrsea, 
Deut.  1.2. 

Mount  Lebanon,  which  separates  Syria  from 
Palestine,  Deut.  3.  25. 

Mount  Moriah,  where  the  temple  was  built, 
2  Chron.  3.  1. 

Mount  Neho,  part  of  the  mountains  of  Aha.iin\, 
Num.  32.  3. 

The  mount  of  Olives,  which  stood  to  the  east  of 
Jerusalem,  and  was  parted  from  the  city  only  by 
the  brook  Kidron,  and  the  valley  o/ Jehoshaphat. 
[t  was  otherwise  called,  The  mou»t  of  Corrup- 
tion, 2  Kings  23.  13.  because  on  it  Solomon  built 
high  places  to  the  gods  of  the  Ammonites  and 
Moabiles,  out  of  complaisance  to  his  idolatrous 
wives,  natives  of  these  nations,  1  Kings  11.  1,  7. 
It  was  from  this  mountain  our  Saviour  as- 
cended into  heaven,  Acts  1.  12. 

Mount  of  Paran,  t'n  Arabia  Pefrsa,  Gen.  14.  6. 
Deut.  1.  1. 

Mount  Pisgali,  beyond  Jordan,  in  the  country  of 
Moab,  Num.  21.  20.  Deut.  34.  1. 

Mount  Scir,  in  Idumea,  Gen.  14.  fi. 

Mount  Sinai,  in  Arabia  retrtea,  Exod.  19.  2. 
Deut.  33.  2. 

Mount  Sion,  near  to  mount  Moriah,  2  Sam.  5. 7. 

Jifou7it  Tabor,  ill  (Ae  lower  Galilee,  to  the 
north  of  the  great  plain,  Judg.  4.  6. 

Oen.  14. 10.  and  ther  that  remained  fled  to  the  m. 

19.17.  escape  to  them.  ||  19.  Icannot  escape  torn. 

F.Tod.^.  1.  and  came  to  them,  of  G.  even  to  Horeb 

12.  people  from  Egypt,  shall  serve  G.  on  this  m. 

19.  3.  the  Lord  called  to  him  out  of  the  m.  saying 

20.  IS.  all  the  people  saw  the  m.  smoking 
Jfitm.  14.  40.  they  gal  them  up  into  top  of  the  m. 
T)eut.  1. 20.  ye  are  come  to  the  m.  of  the  Amoriteg 

2.  3.  ye  have  compassed  this  m.  long  enough 

3.  25.  let  me  see  that  goodly  m.  and  Lebanon 
4   11.  the  m.  burnt  with  fire  to  heaven,  5.  23. 
33.  19.  they  shall  call  the  people  to  them. 
^osh.  2. 16.  get  ye  to  the  m.  and  bide  yourselves 
11.  IB.  Joshua  took  the  plain  and  them,  of  Isr.icl 
14.12.  five  me  this  m.  ||  17.  18.  the  m.shall  be  thine 

Judg.  1  19.  ho  draveout  the  inhabitants  of  the  m. 

34.  Amor'tei  forced  children  of  Dan  into  the  m. 

393 


MOU 

1  Sam.  17.  3.  the  Philistines  stood  on  a  m.  on  the 

one  side,  and  Israel  stood  on  a  m.  on  other  side 
23.  26.  Saul  went  on  this  side  of  the  m.  and  Da- 
vid and  his  men  on  that  nido  of  the  m 

2  Kings  2.  llj.  the  Spirit  halh  cast  hlin  on  some  m. 
6.  17.  the  VI.  was  full  of  horses  and  chariots 

.lob  14.  18.  surely  the  m.  falling  comotb  to  nought 
Psal.  11. 1.  how  say  ye,  flee  as  a  bird  to  your  m.? 
30.  7.  thou  hast  made  my  m.  to  stand  strong 
78.  54.  brought  to  this  m.  his  right  hand  jiurchased 
Isa.  2.  2.  the  m.  of  L.  house  established,  Mic.  4.  1. 
3.  let  us  go  up  to  the  m.  of  tlie  Lord,  Mic.  4.  2. 

30. 17.  until  ye  be  left  as  a  beacon  on  top  of  a  jh. 
29.  as  when  one  goeth  with  a  pipe  to  m.  of  Lord 

40.  4.  every  m.  sliall  be  made  low,  I,uke  3.  5. 
Jcr.  IG.  16.  they  shall  hunt  them  from  every  ni. 
17.  3.  O  my  7;i.in  the  field,  I  will  give  thy  substance 

26. 18.  Zion  plowed  like  a  field,  and  the  m.  of  the 
house  as  high  places  of  the  forest,  Mic.  3. 12. 

50.  6.  my  people  have  gone  from  m.  to  hill 

51.  25.  I  am  against  thee,  O  destroying  m.  saith 

the  Lord,  and  I  will  make  thee  a  burnt  m. 
Lam.5. 18.  our  eyes  are  dim,  because  of  m.  of  Zion 
Ezek.  11. 23.  the  glory  of  the  Lord  stood  on  the  m. 
28  16. 1  will  cast  thee  as  profane  out  of  m.  of  God 
43.  12.  this  is  the  law  of  the  house  on  toji  of  the  lu. 
1 15.  Hariel,  the  m.  of  God,  sliall  be  four  cubits 
Dan.  2.  35.  and  the  stone  became  a  great  vi. 

45.  the  stone  was  cut  out  of  the  m.  without  hands 
Mic.  7.  12.  he  shall  come  to  thee  from  m.  to  m. 
JIag.  1.  8.  go  up  to  m.  bring  wood  and  build  house 
Zech.  4.  7.  who  art  thou,  O  great  /«.  before  Zerubb. 
8.  3.  he  called  the  m.  of  the  Lord,  the  holy  m. 
14.  4.  half  of  7ft.  shall  remove  toward  the  north 
Mat.  5.  1.  and  seeirg  the  multitudes,  he  went  up 
into  a  m.  14.  23.  |  15.  29.  Mark  3.  13.  I  6.  46. 
Luke  6.  12.  ]  9.  28.  John  (».  3,  15. 
8.  1.  when  he  was  come  down  from  the  77?. 
17.  1.  Jesus  bringeth  them  into  a  high  m..  apart 
O.and  as  they  came  down  from  the  m.  Mark  9.9. 

20.  if  ye  have  faith,  as  a  grain  of  mustard,  shall 
say  to  this  m.  remove  hence,  21.  21.  Mark  11.23. 

28.  IC.  went  into  a  m.  where  Jesus  had  appointed 
Luke  8.  32.  and  herd  of  many  swine  feeding  on  m 
Meb.  12.  20.  if  so  much  as  a  beast  touch  the  Jft. 
Rev.  6.14.  every  m.  and  Island  were  removed  fron 
8.  8.  as  it  were  a  great  m.  burning  with  fire 

i/iV/i  MOUNTAIN. 
Isa.  13.  2.  lift  ye  up  a  banner  upon  the  high  m. 
30.  25.  there  shall  be  upon  every  high  m.  rivers 
40.  9.  O  Zion,  get  thee  up  into  the  high  m. 
57.  7.  on  a  lofty  and  high  m.  hast  thou  set  thy  bed 
Jer.  3.  C.  Israel  is  gone  up  upon  every  high  m. 
Ezek.  17.  22.  and  I  will  plant  it  on  a  high  m. 
40. 2.  he  brought  me,  and  set  me  on  a  very  high  m. 
Mat.i.S.  the  devil  taketh  hiniup  into  an  exceeding 
A.  jft.andsheweth  kingdoms  of  world,  Lukei.  5. 
17.  1.  Jesus  taketh  Peter,  James,  and  .John,  ami 
bringeth  into  an  high  in.  a|;art.  Murk  9.  2. 
Rev.  21. 10.  he  carried  me  in  the  Spirit  to  high  m. 
See  Holy. 
In  the,  or  in  this  MOUNTAIN, 
frf  7i.l9.30.Lot  went  fi^mi  Zoar,  and  dwelt  in  the  m. 
Exod.  15.  17.  thou  shalt  bring  them  in,  and  plant 
them  in  the  m.  of  thine  inheritance 
JV«m.l3.i7.Moses  said  unto  them,  go  up  into  them. 
Deut.  32.  49.  get  thee  up  in  this  m.  Abarim,  to  Nebo 
Judg.Z.^I.  he  blew  a  trumpet  in  tlie  m.  of  Ephraim 

1  Sam.  23.  14.  David  remained  in  a  m.  of  Ziph 

2  Chron.  2.  2.  Solomon  told  80,000  to  hew  in  the  m. 
P«a/.48.1.God  is  to  be  praised  in  tAem.  of  holiness 
Isa.  25.  6.  in  this  m.  shall  the  Lord  make  a  feast 

7.  he  will  destroy  in  this  m.  the  face  of  covering 
10.  in  this  m.  shall  the  hand  of  the  Lord  rest 
Ezek.  17.  23.  in  the  m.  of  Israel  I  will  plant  it 
Amos  4.  1.  ye  kine,  that  are  in  tJie  m.  of  Samaria 
6. 1.  woe  to  them  that  trust  in  the  m.  of  Samaria 
John  4.  20.  our  fathers  worshipped  in  this  m. 

21.  neither  in  this  m.  nor  Jerus.  worship  the  Fath. 

MOUNTAINS. 
Oe)i.7.20.m.wore  covered||S.4.  ark  rested  on  the  m. 

8.  5.  in  tenth  month  tops  of  the  m.  were  scon 
Jfum.  33.  4S.  they  departed  from  the  tji.  of  Abarim 
Deut.  12. 2.  ye  shall  destroy  places  on  the  high  m. 
./w.tA. 11.21. Joshuacutofl'the  .Anakims  from  them. 
Judg.  5.  5.  the  m.  melted  from  before  the  Lord 

11.  37.  that  I  may  go  up  and  down  on  the  m. 
38.  she  bewailed  her  virginity  on  the  m. 
2  .Sam.  1.  21.  ye  m.  of  Gilboa,  let  there  be  no  dew 
1  Kings  19.  n.  e  great  and  strong  wind  rent  the  m. 

1  Chron.  12.  8.  were  as  swift  as  the  roes  on  the  jn. 

2  Chr.  18.  16. 1  did  see  all  Isr.  scattered  on  the  m- 
.Toh').  .*;.  which  rcmoveth  the»?7.nnd  they  know  not 

28.  9.  he  overturneth  the  m.  by  the  roots 
40.  20.  surely  the  m.  bring  him  forth  food 
Psal.  36.  6.  thy  righteousness  is  like  Xhg  tlfeat  m. 
46.2. the' the  m. be  carried  into  the  midst  of  the  sea 
.3.  though  the  7n.  shake  with  the  swelling  thereof 
65. 6.  by  his  strength  setteth  fast  the  m. 
72.  3.  the  «i.  shall  bring  peace  to  the  neopU 


MOU 

Pi.  70.  4.  thou  art  more  glorious  than  m.  of  prey 
83.  14.  as  the  Hames  setteth  the  m.  on  fire 
90.  2.  before  the  m.  were  brought  forlli 
1U4.  6.  the  waters  stood  ahuvu  the  m. 
S.  they  go  up  by  the  m.  tlown  by  the  valleys 
114.4.  m.  skijiiied  like  rams,  little  hills  as  lambs,  6. 
125.  2.  as  the  711.  are  round  about  Jerunalem 
133.  3.  as  the  dew  that  descended  on  the  ;7i. 
144.  5.  touch  the  7(i.  and  they  shall  smoke 

147.  8.  who  maketh  grass  to  grow  on  the  in. 

148.  9.  m.  and  all  hills  praise  the  Lord 

Prov.  8.25.  before  the  m.  were  settlud,  before  the 
hills  was  I  brought  forth 
Cant.  2.  8.  behold,  he  conielli  leaping  on  the  m. 

17.  turn,  and  be  thou  like  a  roe  uii  the  m.  8.  14. 
4.  8.  look  from  Amana  and  the  m.  of  the  leopards 
Isa.'i.  14.  the  day  of  the  Lord  shall  be  on  hi^h  nt. 
14.  2.!).  and  on  my  77i.  tread  him  under  foot 
18.  3.  when  he  lit'teth  up  an  ensign  on  the  771. 

34.  3.  the  7ft.  shall  be  melted  with  their  blood 

40.  12.  who  hath  weighed  the  771.  in  scales 

41.  15.  thou  shalt  thresh  the  7«.  and  beat  small 

42.  15.  and  I  will  make  waste  771.  and  hills 
44.  23.  break  forth  into  singing,  ye  771.  4U.  13. 

49.  11.  and  I  will  make  all  iny  7tt.  a  way 

52.  7.  how  lieauiiful  on  the  tii.  arc  feet,  jValt.  1. 15. 
51.  10.  for  the  m.shall  depart,  the  hills  be  removed 
55.  12.  m.  shall  break  forth  before  you  into  singing 
C4.  1.  the  771.  might  flow  down  at  thy  pixsonte,  3. 
65.  7.  which  have  burnt  incense  on  the  »«. 

9.  will  bring  out  of  Judah  an  inheritor  of  my  m. 
.hr.  4.  24.  1  beheld  the  7h.  and  they  trembled 

9.  10.  for  the  7n.  will  I  t;.ke  up  a  weeiiing 

13.  16.  before  your  feet  stumble  on  the  dark  m. 

17.  26.  shall  come  from  the  77i.  bringing  olVcriiigi 

31.  5.  shall  plant  vines  on  the  m.  of  Samaria 

46.  18.  as  Tabor  among  the  7h.  so  shall  yo  come 

50.  6.  they  have  turned  them  away  on  the  771. 
Lam.  4.  39.  our  persecutors  pursued  us  on  the  m. 
Ezek.  6.  2.  set  thy  face  toward  the  ttj.  of  Israel 

3.  and  say,  ye  m.  of  Israel,  hear  the  word  of  Lord 
7. 16.  they  shull  be  on  the  m.  like  doves  of  valleys 

18.  6.  and  hath  not  eaten  upon  the  771.  15. 

11.  but  hath  eaten  on  the  711.  and  defiled 

19.  9.  bis  voice  should  no  more  be  heard  on  the  m. 
22.  9.  and  in  thee  they  eat  -loon  the  m. 

31. 12.  upon  the  /«.  his  branches  are  fallen 

32.  5. 1  will  lay  thy  flesh  on  the  m.  and  fill  valleys 

33.  23.  the  m.  of  Israel  shall  be  desol.ite 
34.6.  my  s!;eep  wandered  through  all  the  771. 

13.  I  will  feed  them  on  the  m.  of  Israel,  14. 

35.  8.  I  will  fill  his  7/t.  with  his  slain  men 

12.  which  thou  bust  spoken  against  the  m.  of  Isr. 
3C.l.pro|iliesy  unto  ihe7n.orisrael,anil  say,  ye  771. 

of  Israel,  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  4. 
8. hut  ye,  Ojn.oflsraelshallshoot  forth  branches 
.37.  22. 1  will  make  one  nation  on  the  m.  of  Israel 
38.  8.  and  is  gathered  out  against  the  m.  of  Israel 
20.  anil  the  m.  shall  be  thrown  down 
21. 1  will  call  a  sword  against  him  thro'  all  my  7B. 
3S(.  2.  and  will  bring  thee  on  the  777.  of  Israel 
4. thou  shalt  fall  on  lbe7n.oMsrael,nnd  all  bands 
17.  even  a  great  sacrifice  on  the  m.  of  Israel 
.Tocl  2. 2.  as  the  morning  spread  tipon  the  771. 

3.  18.  that  the  m.  shall  drop  down  new  wine 
..Imiis  1.  t  1^.  because  they  divided  ilio  711. 

3.9.  assemble  yourselves  on  the  771.  of  Samaria 

4.  13.  he  that  t'brmeth  the  771.  the  Lord  is  his  name 
9.  13.  and  the  m.  shall  drop  sweet  wine 

Mic.  1.  4.  the  m.  shall  he  molten  under  him 
6. 1.  arise,  contend  thou  before  the  171.  let  the  hills 
2.  hear  ye,  O  ye  m.  the  Loid's  controversy 

J^ak.  1.  5.  the  771.  quake  at  him,  the  hills  melt 
3.  13.  thy  people  is  scattered  on  the  tti.  no  man 

//iii.3.6.  the  everlasting  m.  were  scattered,  the  hiila 

10.  the  77!.  saw  thee,  and  they  trembled 
Hag.  1. 11.  I  called  lor  a  drought  on  the  w. 
Zech.  6.  1.  four  chariots  between  the  m.  of  brass 
Mai.  1.  3.  I  haled  Esau,  and  laid  his  m.  waste 
Mat.  18.  12.  and  gnolh  into  the  »7i.  and  seekelh    ' 

1.  16.  let  them  which  be  in  Judea  flee  into  the  m. 
1  Cor.  13.  2.  all  faith,  so  that  I  could  remove  m. 
Rev.  16.  20.  every  island  fled  away,  and  the  m. 
were  not  found 

17.  9.  the  seven  heads  are  stvrn  771.  on  which 

/ntAc  MOUNTAINS. 
Frod-  32.12.  bring  them  out  to  slay  them  7'7t  them. 
JV«77i.33.47.  pitched  in  t.  m.  of  Abarim,  befon-  Neho 
/)fi(f.  2.  37.  thou  camcst  not  to  the  cities  171  JAei7j. 
./o.'jA.lO.O.the  kings  that  dwell  int.m.  are  gathered 
./«rf;r.6.2.Isrnel  made  them  dens  iH<  Arm.  ami  caves 
1  Sam.  20. 20.  as  one  doth  hunt  a  partridge  in  them. 
1  Kings  5.  15.  eighty  thonsnnd  hewers  in  the  m. 
i  CAr.21.11.he  made  high  [daces  in  77,.  of  Judah 

26.  10.  Uzziah  had  vine  dressers  in  the  m. 
Isa.  13.  4.  the  noise  of  a  miillilude  in  the  m.  like 
Mark  5.5.  ni?ht  and  day  he  was  in  the  m.  and  tombs 
//ei.  11.38.  they  wanderi'd  in  deserts  and  in  them 

Of  the  MOUNTAINS. 
G«».8.5.tops  of  tit  m.  weresee.T  in  the  tenth  montli 


MOU 

Oen.  W.  9.  offer  him  on  one  0/  m.  I  will  tell  tliee  of 
A*u/n.  i!3.  7.  Bulak  bio'i  ine  ualof  them,  of  the  cast 
Ocut.  'i-i.  i..  But  on  lire  Ihe  loumiations  of  the  m. 
".i3.  15.  lor  ihe  chief  thiiijj'S  of  the  uneieiit  m. 
JttJrr.y.'Jj.  set  liars  in  wait  for  hini  in  (oi>8  of  the  vi. 
3b.lhuru  come  (leople  down  from  the  lop  of  the  m. 
thouseest  the Bhudowu/Wiem.asifthey  were  men 
2  Kings  19.  ia.  I  am  come  to  height  ufm.  Jsa.'Si .'2*. 
Job  -H.  6.  they  urc  wet  with  ilie  showers  of  the  m. 

:W.  S.  the  riiiige  of  the  m.  in  his  pasture 
Pia/.SO.ll.l  know  ail  the  fowls  u/tAe  m. and  beasts 

7-J.  J(j.  slmh  be  a  liandlul  of  coin  on  top  of  the  m. 
Pruts.  '27.  'ij.  and  herbs  of  the  m.  iiie  gathered 
Jsa.  a.  a.  shall  he  ealablished  in  the  top  uf  the  m. 
J\Uc.  4.  1. 

17.  13.  and  shall  be  cliaaed  as  the  chaW  of  the  m. 

It*.  G.  they  shall  bo  left  to  the  fowls  of  the  m. 

42.  11.  let  them  shout  from  the  lop  of  the  m. 
Jer.  3.  '23.  hoped  lor  from  the  multitude  of  the  m. 

32.  44.  shall  take  witnesses  in  the  cities  of  the  711. 

33. 13.  in  ciiies  of  the  m.  shall  flocks  piiss  again 
Ezek.G.  13.  their  slain  shall  be  in  the  tops  0/  the  m. 

7.  7.  and  not  the  sounding  again  of  the  in. 
Jios.  4.  13.  they  sacritice  on  the  tops  of  the  m. 
Joel  "2. 5.  like  the  noise  of  chariots  on  tops  of  the  m. 
Jonah^i.6.  1  went  down  to  the  buUom  of  the  m. 
y.ech.  14. 5.  and  ye  shall  flee  to  the  valley  of  the  m. 
Reo.  t).  15.  hid  tliemselves  in  the  rocks  of  the  m. 

To  the  MOUNTAIiNS. 
Cant.  4.  6.  I  will  get  me  to  the  m.  of  myrrh 
Jsa.  '22.5.  it  is  a  day  of  trouble  and  crying  to  them. 
Jizeli.  »).3.  thus saiih the  L.  tothem.a.nd  hills,  36.  4. 

3'2.  (i.  I  will  water  with  thy  blood  even  to  the  m. 

36. 1.  son  of  man,  propliesy  to  «Ac  7n.  of  Israel,  6. 
J/os.  lU.  8.  and  they  shall  say  to  the  m.  cover  us 
^VorAS.lI.tbeie  was  nigh  iuiAf  m.  a  herd  of  swine 

13. 14.  that  be  in  Juilea  flee  to  the  ni.  Luke  '21.  21. 
i.uAe '23.30.  begin  tosav  to  m.  fall  on  us,  Rev.6. 16. 

MUL'KN. 
Orn.  03.  2.  Abraham  came  to  to.  for  Sarah 

1  Sam.  10.  1.  how  long  wilt  thou  m.  for  Saull 

2  .Vrt-n.  3.  31.  rend  clothes,  and  hi.  before  Abner 

1  KitifTs  13.'29.  old  prophet  came  into  the  city  to  m. 

14.  13.  all  Israel  shall  m.  for  him,  and  bury  him 
J^eh.  8.  '.t.  this  day  is  holy  to  the  Lord,  7/1.  not 
Job  '2.  11.  he  made  an  ai)iiointment  to  m.  with  him 

5.11.that  those  which  in.  may  be  exalted  to  safety 

14.  '22.  and  his  soul  within  him  shall  m. 
Psal.  .55. 2. 1  m.  in  my  complaint,  and  make  a  noise 
Prov.  5.  1 1.  and  thou  m.  at  the  last,  when  thy  flesh 

211.  2.  when  the  wicked  bear  rule,  the  people  m. 
Keel.  3.  4.  a  time  to  w.  and  a  time  to  dance 
Jsa.  3.  •26.  and  her  gates  shall  lament  and  m. 

Hi.  7.  for  foundations  of  Kir-hareseth  shall  ye  m. 

19.  8.  fishers  shall  m.  \\  38.  14. 1  did  m.  as  a  dove 

59.  II.  we  roar  like  bears,  we  m.  sore  like  doves 

61.  2.  he  hath  sent  me  to  comfort  all  that  m. 
3.  to  appoint  to  them  that  m.  in  Zion,  to  give  to 
them  beauty  for  ashes 

(16.  10.  rejoice  for  joy,  all  ye  tiiat  m.  for  her 
Jer.  4.28.  for  this  shall  earili  m.  and  heavens  black 

12.  4.  how  long  shall  the  land  m.  herbs  wither  7' 

48.  31.  my  heart  shall  m.  for  men  of  Kir-heres 
J^am.  1.4.  ways  of  Zinn  do  m.  because  none  come 
K-.rk.  7. 12.  the  time  is  come,  let  not  the  seller  m. 
'27.  the  king  shall  m.  and  the  prince  be  clothed 

24.  16.  yet  neither  shalt  thou  m.  nor  weep 
23.  ye  shall  pine  away  and  m.  one  toward  another 

31.  15.  1  caused  Lebanon  to  m.  for  him 
//o».  4.3.  therefore  shall  the  land  m.  and  languish 

10.  5.  for  the  people  shall  m.  over  Samaria 
Joel  1.  9.  the  priests,  the  Lord's  ministers  m. 
^mos  1.2.  the  habitations  of  the  shepherds  shall  m. 

8.  8.  and  every  one  m.  that  dwelleth  therein,  9.  5. 
Zech.  12.  10.  and  shall  m.  for  him  as  one  mourneth 

12.  and  the  land  shall  m.  every  family  apart 
J»fat.  5.  4.  blessed  are  they  that  m.  for  they  shall 

9.  15.  can  Ihe  children  of  the  bride-chamber  m.7 
24.  30.  then  shall  all  the  tribes  of  the  earth  m. 

Luke  6. 25.  woe  to  you  that  lau^h,  for  ye  shall  m. 
Ja.m.  4.  9.  be  nfflicled,  and  m.  and  weep 
Rev.  18.  II.  the  merchajits  shall  weep  and  m. 

MDURNED. 
Oen.  37.  34.  .Tn-ob  m.  for  his  son  many  days 
50.  3.  K^yplians  m.  for  Jacub  seventy  days,  10. 
£zad.  33.  4.  and  when  the  people  heard  these  evil 
tidin:;H,  they  m.  jVum.  14.  39. 
JAim.  20.  20.  the  ronifresation  m.  for  Aaron 

1  Sam.  15.  35.  ncvertlwl,.«M,  fnimiel  m.  fur  Saul 

2  Sam.  1.  12.  and  they  m.  for  Saul  and  .lonatlian 

11.  2*1.  IlathHihebn  m.  for  Uriah  her  husband 

13.  37.  David  m.  for  hii  son  Ahsnlimi  evi;ry  day 

14.  2.  ns  one  that  hail  long  time  m.  for  the  dead 
1  KinsTS  13.  30   and  Ih-y  m.  over  thi  man  of  God 

14.  18.  all  Israel  m.  for  J«'robnam'»  scm 
1  rAron.7. 22.  F.phraim  their  filhi-r  m.  manv  davB 
e  Chron.  35,  24.  and  all  Jtidnh  m.  for  Jo-i»li 
F.ira  10.  6.  he  m.  for  the  transgro«aion  of  them 
JiTch.  1.  4.  I  sat  down  ond  m.  certain  davs 
tUek.l.^  when  yam.  and  failcJ,didyaf(u(  tome? 
3M 


MOU 

Mat.  II.  17.  and  saying,  we  have  m.  unto  you,  and 

ye  have  not  lamenltd,  Atiie  7.  32. 

J/arA-16. 10.  and  she  told  them  as  they  m.and  wept 

1  t'cr.  5.  2.  are  putted  u)>,  and  have  not  rather  vi. 

MUUKiNEK. 

2  5a7R.14.  2.  I  pray  thee,  feign  thyself  to  be  am. 

MOUUNKKS. 
Job  29.  25.  I  dwelt  as  one  that  comforteth  the  m. 
Eeel.  12.  5.  and  the  m.  go  about  the  streets 
Isa.  57. 18. 1  will  restore  ('omforts  to  him  and  his  m. 
Uos.  9.  4.  sacriliees  shall  be  to  them  as  bread  of  m. 

MOUUNETH. 
2  Sam.  19.  1.  behold,  the  king  m.  for  Absalom 
Psal.  35.  14. 1  bowed  down  heavily,  as  one  that  m. 
for  his  mother 
88.  9.  mine  eye  m.  by  reason  of  affliction 
Isa.  '24.  4.  the  earth  m.'ftJ.  9.  |{  7.  the  new  wine  m. 
Jer.  12.  11.  my  vineyard  being  desolate  7/1.  to  me 
14.  2.  Judah  m.  and  the  gates  thereof  languish 

23.  10.  for  because  of  swearing  the  land  ;«. 
Joel  1.  10.  the  land  m.  for  the  corn  is  wasted 
ZicA.  12.  10.  as  one  that  m.  for  his  first-born 

MOURNFULLY. 

Mai.  3.  14.  what  profit  that  we  have  walked  m. 
MOURNING 

Signifies,  [I]  .5  godly  sorrow  for  our  own ,  or  for 
the  sins  uf  others,  .Mat.  5.  4.  ['2J  .4  moderate 
sorrow  and  concern  for  the  afflictions  and 
worldly  losses  that  befall  ourselves  or  others, 
Gen.  23.  2.  |  50.  3.  [3J  Exceeding  great  and 
most  grievous  lamentation,  Mat.  24.  30.  [4J 
Judgments  and  calamities,  which  should  cause 
most  hittrr  mourning,  E/.ek.  2.  10. 

The  Hebrews,  at  the  death  of  their  near  friends 
and  relations,  used  great  signs  of  grief  and 
mourning.  'J  hey  wept,  tore  their  clothes,  smote 
their  breasts,  fusted,  and  lay  upon  the  ground, 
and  went  barefoot :  The  time  of  mourning  was 
commonly  seven  days ;  but  sometimes  this  was 
lengthened  or  shortened,  according  to  the  state 
or  circumstances  in  which  they  found  them- 
selves: The  mourning  for  Saul  lasted  but  seven 
days,  1  Sam.  31.  13.  but  those  for  Moses  and 
Aar(m  jccre  prolonged  to  thirty  days.  Num. 
20.  '29.  Ueut.  34.  8.  The  whole  time  of  their 
mourning,  the  near  relations  of  the  deceased 
continued  sitting  in  their  houses,  and  cat 
upon  the  ground;  the  food  they  took  was 
Hiought  unclean,  and  even  thcmsclcrs  were 
judged  impure.  Their  sacrifices  shall  be  to 
them  as  the  bread  of  mourners,  all  that  eat 
thereof  shall  be  polluted,  Hos.  9.  4.  Their 
faces  were  covered,  and  for  all  that  time  they 
could  not  apply  themselves  to  any  labour.  They 
did  not  dress  themselves,  nor  make  their  beds, 
nor  uneov^r  their  heads,  nor  shave  themselves, 
nor  cut  their  nails,  nor  salute  any  body. 

Oe,n.27.4l.l\\e  days  of /«.  for  my  father  are  at  hand 

50.  4.  and  when  the  days  of  his  m.  were  past 
10.  he  ?n.  a  m.  for  his  father  Jacob  seven  days 
ll.tbeCanaanitessaw  the  th. this  is  a  grievous  r^. 

Dcut.H).  14.  I  have  not  eaten  thereof  in  my  771. 

■'(4.  8.  so  the  days  of  m.  for  Mosca  were  ended 
2  Sam.  II.  '27.  when  the  ;«.  was  past  Uavid  sent 

19.  2.  the  victory  that  day  was  turned  into  m. 
F.sth.  4.  3.  there  was  great  771.  among  the  Jews 

9.  22.  was  turned  to  them  from  7/1.  into  a  good  day 
Jab  3.  8.  who  are  ready  to  raise  up  their  jti. 

30.  31.  my  harp  also  is  turned  to  m.  and  mv  organ 
Psal.  30.  II.  thou  hast  turned  my  m.  intodancing 
Eccl.  7.  2.  it  is  better  to  go  to  the  house  of  tti. 

4.  the  heart  of  the  wise  is  in  the  lif/Use  of  m. 
Isa.  22.  1'2.  in  that  day  the  Lord  did  call  to  771. 

51.  11.  and  sorrow  and  m.  shall  flee  away 
til).  20.  and  the  days  of  thy  m.  shall  be  ended 
61.  3.  to  give  to  them  the  oil  of  joy  for  in. 

Jer.  6.  26.  make  thee  m.  as  for  an  only  son 
16.  5.  enter  nof  into  the  house  of  m.  neither  go 

31.  13.  for  I  will  turn  their  m.  into  joy 

/.am.  2.  5.  increased  in  the  daughter  of  Jndah  w. 
5.  15.  joy  is  ceased,  our  dnn'e  is  turned  into  m. 
F.zek.  2. 10.  was  written  lomentatinns,  7n.  and  woe 

24.  17.  no  771.  for  the  dead  ||  31.  15. 1  caused  n  m. 
Joel  2.  12.  turn  ye  to  me  with  weeping  and  m. 
.'twos  5.  10.  thcv  shall  call  Ihe  hilshnndmen  to  771. 

8.  10.  and  I  will  turn  your  feasts  into  771.  and  I 
will  make  it  as  the  7n.  of  an  only  son 
Mic.  1.  II.  came  not  forth  in  the  7it.  of  Beth-cr.cl 
7.erh.\'i  \  l.m.in  J<'rusali"m,  ns  m.'ifHndadrimmnn 
Mat.  2  18.  was  heard  great  m.  Rachol  weeping 
2  Cor.  7.7.  when  he  told  us  vour  desire,  your  »n. 
.fitm.  4.  9.  let  your  IniightiT  be  turned  into  m. 
Ren.  18.  8.  in  one  dnv  death  and  m.  and  famine 

MOUR.N'ING. 
r7r7i.37.  35.  will  godown  to  the  grave  to  my  "on  m. 
2  .50771.  14.  2. 1  pray  thee,  pot  on  m.  npparol 
F.sth.  C.  W.  hut  Haman  liaslcd  to  bin  house  jti. 
.lob  .30  28.  I  went  tii.  wiilioiit  the  sun,  1  stood  up 
Psal.  3S.  6.  I  am  tronblid,  I  go  m.  Till  day  long 

42.9.  why  go  1 ».  bec.ofopprewiion  of  enemy,  43. 2. 


MOU 

Jer.  9. 17.  consider  ye,  and  call  for  the  m.  wc  jicd 
16.  7.  in  77«.  to  comfort  Uiera  for  the  dead 
Kick.  7.  16.  all  of  them  711.  for  their  iniquities 
J)an.  10  2.  in  those  days  1  Daniel  was  m.  3  wceki 
Mic.  1.  8.  1  will  make  a  771.  as  the  owls 

MOUSE. 

/.ec.  11.  £9.  the  weasel  and  771.  shall  be  unclean 
Isa.  00.  17.  eating  the  abomination,  and  the  m. 

MOUTH 
Signifies  [1]  The  part  of  the  body  so  called, 
which  is  an  instrument  of  speech,  I'sal.  115.  5. 
I  135.  17.  ['2]  Speech,  or  words  uttered  by  tht 
viouth.  Job  19.  16.  Psal.  73.  9.  Isa.  49.  2. 
[3]  Just  desires  and  necessities,  Psal.  103.  5. 
[4J  The  palate,  Job  12.  11.  [51  The  throat. 
Psalm  149.  t  0.  [6]  .,3  door,  Daniel  3.  T '26.  [7] 
Freedom  and  boldness  of  speech,  Luke  21.  15 
[8]  Iloasting,  Judges  9.  38.  [9]  Jieproaches 
and  calumnies,  Job  5.  15.  [10]  ./i  testimony, 
Dent.  17.  6. 
If  my  mouth  hath  kissed  my  hand,  Job  31.  27. 
This  was  a  mark  or  token  of  worship  and  ado- 
ration, 1  Kings  19.  18.  Hos.  13.  2.  and  when 
the  idols  were  out  of  the  reach  of  idolaters, 
that  t.'icy  could  not  kiss  them,  they  used  to  kiss 
their  hands,  and  as  it  were  to  throw  kisses  at 
them :  Job  here  iiisinuates,  that  he  had  used 
no  such  idolatrous  practice,  while  he  beheld 
the  sun  or  moon.  To  usk  counsel  at  the 
mouth  of  the  Lord,  Josh.  9.  14.  is  to  consult 
him.  They  set  their  mouth  against  the  heavens, 
Psal.  73.  9.  'J'hty  speak  arrogantly,  inso 
lently,  and  without  the  fear  of  God;  they  bid 
defiance  but)),  to  (iod  and  man,  blaspheming 
(lod's  name,  denying  or  deriding  his  provi 
dence,  reviling  his  servants,  ($-c.  God  ap- 
points, that  his  law  may  be  alw  ays  in  the  mouth 
of  his  people.  Josh.  1.8.  that  is.  That  the  Unvi 
ites  may  commune  frequently  with  one  anothtr 
about  it,  and  that  the  sentence  which  shoJld 
come  out  of  their  mouth,  might  in  all  things  be 
given  according  to  that  rule.  Moses  tells 
us,  that  God  opened  the  mouth  of  Balaam'! 
ass,  JVum.  22.  28.  JJe  made  her  speak  to  htr 
master,  and  reason  the  matter  with  him  for  a 
time.  Out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  th« 
mouth  speake.th,  Mat.  1'2.  34.  Jllen's  dis- 
courses are  the  echo  of  the.  sentiments  of  their 
hearts ;  your  speech  bewrays  the  wickcdnest 
of  your  hearts.  Not  that  «  hich  goeth  into  the 
mouth,  defilcth  a  man,  Mat.  15.  II.  It  is  nei- 
ther meat  nor  drink  that  makes  a  man  unclean 
in  the  sight  of  God, 
Gfn.  8.  ]1.  and  lo,  in  her  m.  was  an  olive-leaf 
24.  57.  call  the  damsel,  and  inquire  at  her  m. 
29.  2.  and  a  great  stone  was  upon  the  well's  m. 
3.  they  rolled  the  stime  from  the  well's  771.  10. 

34.  1 26.  slew  llamor  with  the  m.  of  the  sword 

42.  27.  his  money  was  in  his  sack's  7;i.  43.  12,  21. 

43.  1 7.  we  told  according  to  the  m.  of  these  wordi 
45.  t  21.  Joseph  gave  them  wagons,  according  to 

TO.  of  Pharaok 
Exod.4.1\.l.njH  said,  who  hath  made  man's  m  7 

16.  even  he  shall  be  to  thee  instead  of  a  m. 
JVii77i.  12.  8.  with  him  will  I  speak  m.  to  m. 
16.  30.  the  earth  open  her  m.  and  swallow  them  up 
23.  5.  the  Lord  put  a  word  in  Balaam's  m. 

35.  30.  whoso  kills  any  person,  shall  be  put  to 

death  by  the  m.  of  witnesses,  Dcut.  17.  8.  | 
19.  \^. 
fosh.  9.  t2.  they  gathered  together  with  one  m. 

10. 18.  roll  great  stones  on  the  771.  of  the  cave,  27. 
22.  open  jn.  of  cave,  nnd  bring  out  the  five  kingi 

1  Sain.  1.  12.  as  she  prayed,  Eli  marked  her  m. 

2  .S(i7H.  14.  3.  so  Joab  put  the  words  in  her  771.  19. 

17. 19.  she  spread  a  covering  over  the  well's  m. 

1  Kintrs  19.  18.  every  m.  thai  hath  not  kissed  hin 
22.  1.1.  the  words  otithe  prophets  declare  good  n 

the  king  with  one  7;).  2  CArojr.  18. 1 12. 

2'2. 1  will  go  forth  and  be  a  lying  spirit  in  them 

of  his  pro]  bets, '23.  2  CAroti.  18.21,22 

2  /r7n<!r''T'-t21.wnssnfull,thatthey  stood  771.  lorn 
21.  t  Iti.  lill  lie  Olloil  Jerusalem  from  tti.  to  tti. 

2  Chron.  35.22.  hearkened  not  unto  the  words  of 
N.rho  from  the  m.  ..f  GihI 

36.  21.  to  fulfil  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  the  m. 

of  Jeremiah,  22.  F.ira  1.  1 
F.sth.  7.  8.  ns  the  word  went  out  of  the  king's  m 
Jnh  5.  16.  poor  hath  hope,  iniquity  stoppe th  her  m 

12.  11.  doth  not  the  m.  fasto  his  meat  J  34.  3. 

32.  5.  Ibero  was  no  answer  in  the  m.  of  these  men 
/',«^^H.2.  out  of  m.ofbahes  hast  ordained  strength 

'22. 21.  save  me  from  the  lion's  iti.  for  thou  heardest 

.32. 9.  whose  m.  must  be  held  in  with  hit  and  bridle 

37.  30.  the  m.  of  the  rigbteons  speakelh  wisdom 

38.  14.  nnd  in  whoso  in.  are  no  reproofs 

63.  II.  but  m.  that  spcaketh  lies  shall  bo  stopped 
69.  1.5.  let  n«t  the  pit  shut  her  m.  upon  me 
107.  42.  and  nil  ininiiity  dhall  stop  her  m. 
109. 2  m.  of  w  ickaJ,  *ik  of  doocitful  are  opcnvd 


MOU 

Psal.  120.  3.  then  was  our  m.  filled  with  laughter 
141.  7.  OUT  boDos  are  scattered  at  tlie  grave's  m, 
144.  8.  whose  m.  epeaketh  vanity,  11. 

Prov.  4.  24.  put  away  from  tliee  a  Iroward  m. 
5.  3.  and  her  m.  is  ginooliier  tliaii  oil 
6. 12.  wicked  man  walkelh  with  froward  m.  10.32. 
8.  13.  proud,  and  the  t'ruward  m.  du  1  hate 
10.  ii.  violence  covureth  the  m.  of  the  wicked,  11. 
14.  the  m.  of  the  foolish  is  nuar  destruction 
31.  the  m.  uf  the  just  biingeth  forth  wisdom 
11. 11.  the  city  is  overthrown  by  7n.  of  the  wicked 

12.  6.  the  m.  of  the  upright  shall  deliver  them 

14,  3  i.i  the  m.  of  the  foolish  is  a  rod  of  pride 

15,  2.  the  m.  of  fools  poureth  out  foolishness 
14.  the  m.  of  fouls  feedeth  on  foolisluiess 
28.  the  m.  of  the  wicked  poureth  out  evil  things 

18.  4.  the  words  of  a  man's  hi.  are  as  deep  waters 

7.  a  fool's  m.  is  his  destruction,  and  his  lips 

19.  28.  the  m.  of  the  wicked  devoureth  iniquity 

22.  14.  the  m.  of  a  strange  woman  is  a  deep  pit 
26.  7.  so  is  a  parable  in  the  m.  of  fools,  9. 

28.  and  a  fluttering  m.  worketh  ruin 

30.  20.  she  eateth,  and  wipeth  her  m.  and  saith 

Eccl.  10.  12.  words  of  a  wise  man's  m.  are  gracious 

/sa.  9.  12.  they  shall  devour  Israel  with  open  m. 

17.  an  evil  doer,  and  every  m.  speaketh  folly 

57.  4.  against  whom  make  ye  a  wide  m.  ? 

59.21.  my  Spirit  not  depart  out  of  ?«.  of  thy  seed 
Jer.  32.  4.  shall  speak  with  him  m.  to  m.  34.  3. 

36.4.Baruch  wrotefromm.of  Jerem.27,32.  |45. 1. 

44.  17.  what  thing  goeth  forth  out  of  our  m. 
25.  no  more  named  in  in.  of  any  man  of  Judah 
Lam.  3.  38.  out  of  the  m.  of  Most  High  proceedeth 
Ezek.  21.  22.  to  open  the  in.  in  the  slaughter 

29.  21.  I  will  give  thee  the  opening  of  the  m. 
Dan.  3.  2(5.  came  near  to  the  m.  of  the  furnace 

4.  31.  while  tlie  word  was  in  the  king's  7ii. 

6.]7.astone  brought,  and  laid  on  the  m.  of  the  den 
,7.  5.  It  had  three  ribs  in  m.  of  it  between  teeth 

8.  there  was  a  m.  speaking  great  things,  20. 
Hos.2.  17.  take  the  names  of  Baalim  out  of  her  to. 
Amos  3.  12.  as  a  shepherd  taketh  out  of  the  m 
J^ah.  3.  12.  shall  even  fall  into  the  m.  of  the  cater 
Zech.  5.  8.  cast  the  weight  of  lead  on  the  vi.  of  it 
Mat.  4.  4.  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  m.  of  God 

12.  34.  abundance  of  the  heart  the  m.  speaketh 
15.  II.  what  goeih  into  the  m.  defileth  not 
18.  16.  that  in  the  m.  of  two  or  three  witnesses 
every  word  may  be  established,  2  Cor.  13.  1. 
21. 16.  out  of  the  m.  of  bahes  hast  perfected  praise 
Luke  1.70.  as  he  spake  by  jn.  of  his  holy  prophets 
f^l.  15.  for  I  will  give  you  a  m.  and  wisdom 
Jlcts  1. 10.  Holy  Ghost  spake  by  m.  of  David,  4. 25. 
3.  18.  God  shewed  by  m.  .of  all  his  prophets,  21. 
15.  27.  who  shall  tell  you  the  same  things  by  m. 

23.  2.  commanded  them  to  smite  him  on  the  m. 
Rom.'i.Xi.  whose  m.  is  full  of  cursing  and  bitterness 

19.  that  every  ra.  may  be  stopped,  and  all  world 

10.  10.  with  the  Hi.  confession  is  made  to  salvation 

15.  6.  that  ye  may  with  one  m.  glorify  God 

1  Cor.  9.  9.  thou  shalt  not  muzzle  the  m.  of  the  o.\ 

2  Tim.  4.  17. 1  was  delivered  out  of  m.  of  the  lion 
Jam.  3.  10.  out  of  the  same  m.  proceedeth  blessing 
Rev.  13.  5.  given  to  him  a  to.  speaking  blasphemies 

16.  13.  the  spirits  came  out  of  to.  of  the  dragon 

His  MOUTH. 
Gen.  25.  f  28.  loved  Esau,  for  venison  was  in  his  m. 
JSxod.4.l5.  put  words  in  his  m.  I  will  be  with  his  m. 
JVum.  23. 16.  God  put  a  word  in  his  m.  and  said,  go 
30.2.  accord,  to  all  that  proceedeth  out  o(  his  m. 
Dcut.  18.  18.  and  I  will  put  my  words  in  his  m. 

1  Sam.  14.26.  but  no  man  put  his  hand  to  his  m.  27. 

17.  35.  I  went  and  delivered  it  out  o(  his  m. 

2  .Soto.  17.  fS.  and  let  us  hear  what  is  in  his  m. 

18.  25.  if  he  be  alone,  there  is  tidings  in  his  to. 
a.  9.  and  fire  out  o( his  m.  devoured,  Psal.  18.  8. 

1  Kin^s  B.  15.  3])ake  with  his  m.  to  Dav.2CAr.6.4. 

2  Kings  4.  34.  and  he  put  hia  m.  on  his  to. 
1  Chr.  16.  12.  remember  the  judgments  oihis  m. 
Job  15.  30.  by  the  breath  of  his  m.  he  shall  go  away 

20.  12.  though  wickedness  be  sweet  in  his  m. 

13.  though  he  keep  it  still  within  his  to. 
22.  22.  receive,  I  pray  thee,  the  law  from  his  m. 
23. 12. 1  have  esteemed  the  words  of  his  m.  more 

37.  2.  and  the  sound  that  goeth  out  of  his  m. 
40.  23.  that  he  can  draw  up  Jordan  into  his  m. 
41. 19.  outof  Ai's  m.  go  burning  lamps  and  sparks 

21.  and  a  flame  goeth  out  of  his  to. 
Psal.  10.  7.  his  TO.  is  full  of  cursing  and  deceit 
33.  6.  the  host  of  them  made  by  breath  of  his  m. 
36.  3.  the  words  of  his  to.  are  iniquity  and  deceit 

38.  13.  OS  a  dumb  man  that  opencth  not  his  m. 
55.  21.  words  of  his  m.  are  smoother  than  butter 
105.  5.  remember  the  judgments  of  At>  m. 

Prov.  2.  6.  out  of  his  to.  cometh  knowledge 

11.  9.  hy(K)crite  with  his  m.  destroyelh  neighbour 

12.  14.  satisfied  with  good  by  the  fruit  of  his  to. 
13. 2.  a  man  shall  eat  good  by  the  fruit  of  his  m. 

3.  ho  that  kcepeth  his  to.  keepeth  his  life 
15.23.  a  mau  hath  joy  bv  the  answer  of  hia  m. 


MOU 

Prov.  10. 10.  his  m.  transgrcssoth  not  in  Judgment 

23.  the  heart  of  the  wise  teacheth  Ais  m. 

26.  for  himself,  for  his  m.  craveth  it  of  him 
18.  6.  and  hia  to.  callelh  for  strokes 

20.  shall  be  satisfied  with  the  fruit  of  his  m 
19.24.  will  not  so  much  us  bring  it  to  his  m.  26. 15. 

20.  17.  but  his  to.  shall  be  tilled  with  gravel 

21.  23.  whoso  keepeth  his  to.  keepeth  his  soul 
Eccl.  0.  7.  all  tho  labour  of  a  man  is  for  his  m. 

10. 13.  beginning  of  words  of  Ais  m.  is  foolishness 
CuKt.  1.2.  let  him  kiss  me  with  the  kisses  of  his  in. 

5.  16.  his  m.  is  most  sweet,  this  is  my  beloved 
Isa.  11.  4.  smite  the  earth  with  the  rod  of  his  m. 

53.  9.  neither  was  any  deceit  in  his  vi. 
Jer.  y.  8.  one  speaketh  peaceably  with  his  m. 

20.  and  let  your  eur  receive  the  word  of  his  m. 
36.17.liow  didst  thou  write  all  these  words  at  AiiHi. 
51. 44.  bring  out  of  AiS  ni.that  which  heswallowed 
Lam.  1.  t  la.  for  1  have  rebelled  against  his  m. 

3.  29.  ho  putteth  his  m.  in  the  dust,  if  so  be  there 

4.  4.  the  tongue  cleaveth  to  the  roof  of  A(«  m. 
Zech.  9. 7. 1  will  take  away  his  blood  out  of  Ajs  to. 
Mai.  2.  6.  the  law  of  truth  was  in  his  to. 

7.  and  they  should  seek  the  law  at  Ais  to. 
Luke  1.  64.  and  his  m.  was  opened  immediately 
4.  22.  gracious  words  proceeded  out  of  his  in. 

6.  45.  of  the  abundance  of  heart  Ais  m.  speaketh 

11.  54.  seeking  to  catch  somewhat  out  of  Ais  m. 

22.  71.  ourselves  have  heard  of  Ais  own  m. 
John  19.  29.  filled  a  spunge  and  put  it  to  Ais  m. 
Jicis2i.  14.  and  shouldest  hear  the  voice  of  Ais  »j. 
2  Thcss.  2. 8.  shall  consume  with  the  spirit  of  Ais  to. 
1  Pet.  2.  22.  neither  was  guile  found  in  his  m. 
ft  et).1.16.out  of  Ais  7n.  went  a  sharp  sword,  19.15,21. 

12.  15.  tho  serpent  cast  out  of  Ais  to.  water 

16.  the  flood  which  the  dragon  cast  out  of  Ais  to. 

13.  2.  and  his  in.  was  as  the  moiith  of  a  lion 
See  Lord. 

My  MOUTH. 
Gen.  45. 12.  that  it  is  my  to.  that  speaketh  to  you 
J^um.  23.  38.  the  word  G.  putteth  in  my  m.  23. 12 
Dent.  32. 1.  hear,  O  earth,  the  words  of  my  m.  ' 
1  Sam.  2.  1.  my  m.  is  enlarged  over  mine  enemies 
Job  7.  11.  therefore  I  will  not  refrain  my  m. 
9.  20.  mine  own  m.  shall  condemn  me 

16.  5.  I  would  strengthen  you  with  mym. 
19.  16.  I  entreated  my  servant  with  my  in. 

23.  4.  I  would  fill  my  in.  with  arguments 
31.  27.  or  viy  to.  hath  kissed  my  hand 

30.  neither  have  I  sulfered  my  m.  to  sin 

33.  2.  behold  my  tongue  hath  spoken  in  my  m. 
40.  4. 1  am  vile,  I  will  lay  my  hand  upon  my  m. 

Ps.  17.3.  purposed  that  7HyTO.  shall  nut  transgress 
19.  14.  let  the  words  of  my  m.  be  acce])table 

34.  1.  his  praise  shall  continually  be  in  my  in 
39. 1.  I  said,  1  will  keep  my  in.  with  a  bridle 
40. 3.  he  hath  put  a  new  song  in  my  m.  even  praise 
49.  3.  hear  this,  my  to.  shall  sjieak  of  wisdom 
51. 15.  and  my  m.  shall  shew  forth  thy  praise 

54.  2.  hear  and  give  ear  to  the  words  of  my  in. 
03.  5.  vty  TO.  shall  praise  thee  with  joyful  lips 
66. 14.  my  m.  hath  spoken,  when  I  was  in  trouble 

17.  I  cried  to  him  with  my  m.  he  was  extolled 
71.  8.  let  my  m.  be  filled  with  thy  praise 

15.  my  m.  shall  shew  forth  thy  righteousness 
78. 1.  incline  your  ears  to  the  words  of  my  in. 

2. 1  will  open  my  m.  in  a  parable,  I  will  utter 
89. 1.  with  my  m.  will  I  make  known  thy  faithfuln. 
109.  30. 1  will  greatly  praise  the  Lord  with  my  to. 
119.  43.  take  not  tho  word  of  truth  out  of  my  to. 

103.  thy  words  are  sweeter  than  honey  to  my  m. 

108.  accept  the  frcc-will-oficrings  of  my  m. 
137.  6.  let  my  tongue  cleave  to  the  roof  of  my  m. 
141.  3.  set  a  watch,  O  Lord,  before  my  m. 
145.  21.  my  m.  shall  speak  the  praise  of  the  Lord 
ProH.4.5.  nor  decline  from  tho  words  of  j/ty  m.  5.  7. 
7.  24.  O  children,  attend  to  tho  words  of  my  to. 
8.7.  for  my  m.  shall  speak  truth,  and  wickedness 

8.  the  words  of  my  m.  arc  in  righteousness 
Isa.  6.  7.  and  he  laid  the  coal  on  my  in.  and  said 
30.  2.  go  to  Egypt,  and  have  not  asked  at  my  m 
34.  10.  for  my  m.  it  hath  commanded 
45.  23.  word  is  gone  out  of  my  m.  in  rightcou.^nrss 
43.  3.  the  former  things  went  forth  out  of  my  m. 
49.  2.  he  hath  made  my  to.  like  a  sharp  sword 
55. 11.  so  shall  my  word  be  thatgocth  out  of  my  m. 
Jfr.  1.  9.  Ld.  put  forth  his  hand  and  touched  my  7n. 
]5,19.slialt  be  as  mym.  \\  3(i.  0.  written  from  my  m. 
Ezek.  3.  3.  it  was  in  7ny  to.  like  honey  for  sweetness 

17.  therefore  hear  the  word  at  my  m.  33.  7. 
4. 14.  rmr  came  there  abominable  flesh  into  my  m. 

Dan.  10.  3.  neither  came  flesh  nor  wine  in  my  to. 
Hos.C}.5. 1  have  slain  them  by  the  wordsof  my  m. 
Mat.  13.  35.  I  will  open  my  m.  in  parables 
.^cts  11.  8.  hath  at  any  time  entered  Into  my  to. 

15.  7.  the  Gentiles  by  my  in.  should  hear  the  word 
Eph.  6.  10.  praying  that  I  may  open  my  to.  boldly 
Rev.  2.  16.  I  w-ill  fight  with  tho  eword  of  my  m. 

3.  Ifi.  nor  cold,  nor  hot,  I  will  spue  Iheo  out  of  my  TO.    /.«n.  51.  16. 1  have  put  my'wordsin  thym.  .Tcr.J.9. 

10. 10.  the  book  was  in  my  m.  sweet  as  honey     j   SO.  21.  which  I  put  in  t.  m.  not  depart  out  of  (.  wu 


MOU 

MOUTH  with  opened. 
0(m.4.11.carth  open,  her  m.  to  receive  broth,  blood 
JVum.16.32.  tho  earth  opcncdliKx  m.  and  swallowed 
them  up,  and  their  houses,  26. 10.  iJcut.  11.  6. 

22.  28.  Lord  opened  the  m.  of  the  ass,  and  she  said 
Judg.  11.  35. 1  have  opened  my  m.  to  the  Lord,  3<>. 
Job  3.  1.  opened  Job  his  m.  and  cursed  his  day 

29.23.  anil  they  o;;cnc(i  their »«.  wide,  /'sai. 35.  SI. 

33.  2. 1  pray,  hear,  behold  now  I  have  open,  my  to. 
f  SO/.39.9. 1  was  dumb,  1  opened  not  my  m.  bucuuse 

109.  2.  m.  of  the  deceitful  are  opened  against  me 

119. 131. 1  opened  my  in.  and  panted,  for  1  longed 
Isa.  5. 14.  hell  hath  opened  her  m.  without  measure 

10.  14.  there  wus  none  that  opened  m.  or  peeped 

53.  7.  he  was  oppressed,  yet  he  opened  not  his  m. 
Ezek.  3. 2. 1  open,  my  in.  and  ho  caused  me  to  eat  it 

24.27.  thy  7/1.  be  0.  to  him  whie-h  is  escaped,  33.  SSi. 
A>a«.10.16.  then  1  opened  my  jn.and  spake,  and  said 
jMiU.  5. 2.  bo  opened  his  m.  and  taught  them,  saying 

17. 27.  when  thou  hast  o;>c7i(.(i  his  m.thou  shalt  find 
/,!iA£l.04.hi8  TO.  was  open,  immediately,  and  spake 
Jlcts  8.32.  like  a  lamb  dumb,  so  open,  he  not  his  m. 
35.  Philip  open.  to.  ||  10.  34. 1'eter  open.  in.  said 
2  Cor.  6. 11.  U  Corintliiaiis,  our  to.  is  opened  to  you 
Kcv.  12.10.  earth  opened  her  m.  and  helped  woman 

13.  6.  he  opened  his  7n.  in  blasphemy  against  God 

MOUTH  with  vpeneth. 

Psal.  38.13.  as  a  dumb  man  that  openeth  not  his  m. 

Prov.  24.  7.  a  fool  openeth  not  his  m.  in  the  gate 

31.  26.  she  openeth  her  m.  with  wisdom 

Their  MOUTH. 
Deul.  21.  t5.  by  theirin.  every  controversy  be  tried 
Judg.  7.  6.  lapped,  putting  their  hand  to  their  m. 
EzraS.  f  17.1  sent  them,  and  put  words  in  their  m. 
WcA.O.iO.  withheldest  nut  thy  manna  from  their  m. 
Job  5.  15.  but  he  saveth  tlie  poor  from  their  m, 

16.  10.  they  have  gaped  upon  me  with  their  in, 
29.  9.  the  princes  laid  their  hand  on  their  m. 

10.  their  tongue  cleaved  to  the  roof  of  tAcir  m. 
Psal.  5.  9.  there  is  no  faithfulness  in  their  m. 

17.  10.  with  their  m.  they  speak  proudly 
49.  t  13.  their  posterity  delight  in  their  to. 
58.6.break  their  teeth,0  God,  in  tAeir  to. break  out 
59.  7.  behold  they  belch  out  with  tAcir  771. 

12.  for  the  sin  of  their  in.  and  words  of  their  lips 
62.  4.  they  bless  with  fAcir  to.  but  curse  inwardly 
73.  9.  they  set  (Aeir  7n.  against  the  heavens 
78.  36.  they  did  flatter  him  with  their  in.  and  lied 
149.  6.  let  the  high  praises  of  God  be  in  their  m. 
Tsa.  29. 13.  this  people  draw  near  me  with  tAeir  m, 
Jer.  7.  28.  and  truth  is  cut  off  from  (Acir  ra. 
12. 2.  thou  art  near  in  their  m.  far  from  their  rein* 
7>am.2.16.  enemies  have  open.tAeirm. against  thee 
Ezek.  33.  31.  with  their  m.  they  shew  much  love 
34.  10.  I  will  deliver  my  fluck  from  (Arir  m. 
Mic.  6.  12.  their  tongue  Is  deceitful  in  their  m. 
7.  16.  they  shall  lay  their  hand  on  their  m. 
Zeph.2. 13.  nor  a  deceiiful  tongue  found  in  their  m. 
Zcch.i4.V2.  tongue  shall  consume  away  in  their  m. 
Mat.  15.8.  thispeop.draweth  nigh  to  me  withtA.  jj;. 
Jude  16.  their  m.  speaketh  great  swelling  words 
Rev.  9.  19.  their  power  is  in  ^Acir  m.  and  tails 
11.5.  if  any  hurt  them,  fire  proceedeth  out  of  tA.  m. 

14.  5.  andiin  {Aeir  771.  was  fr>nnd  no  guilo 
•        TAy  MOUTH. 

Kxod.4.\2. 1  will  be  with  thym.  and  teach  thee,  15. 

13.  9.  that  the  Lord's  law  may  be  in  thy  to. 

23.13.m.Tke  no  mention  of  other  gods  out  of  My  to. 
Deut.  23.  23.  keej)  that  hast  |)romised  with  thy  m. 

30. 14.  word  is  nigh  to  thee,  in  tAy  m-  Horn.  10.  8. 
./«sA.  1.8.  book  of  thn  law  not  depart  out  of  tAy  m. 
.ludg.  9. 38.  then  said  Zebul,  w  here  is  now  tAy  m.1 

1 1.  36.  if  thou  hast  ojiened  thy  m.  to  the  Lord 

18.  19.  lay  thine  hand  upon  thy  m.  Prov.  30.  32. 
2  Sam.  1.  16.  thy  m.  hath  testified  against  thee 
Ih'ings  8.24.  thou  spukest  with  thym.  2  CAr.  6. 15. 

17.  24.  the  word  of  the  Lord  in  thy  m.  is  truth 
.Job  8.  2.  the  worjsof  tAy  TO.  bo  like  a  strong  wind 
21.  till  he  fill  thy  m.  with  laughing,  and  thy  lips 

15.  5.  for  tAy  m.  uttereth  thine  iniquity 
6.  thine  own  m.  cnndcmneth  thee,  and  not  I 
13.  that  thou  lettest  such  words  go  out  of  thy'm, 

33.  t  6.  behold,  I  am  according  to  tAy  771. 
39.  t27.  doth  tlie  eagle  mount  up  by  tAy  m.  ? 
/'sa/.  50.  10.  shouldest  take  my  covenant  in  thym. 
19.  thougivest  tAy  TO.toevil  ||  81.  10.  open  tAy //i- 
103.  5.  who  satisfieth  tAy  771.  with  good  things 
119. 13.  have  declared  all  tho  judgments  of  tAy  to. 
72.  the  law  of  thy  m.  is  better  to  me  than  gold 
P8.  so  shall  I  keep  the  testimony  of  tAy  771. 
133.  4.  when  they  honr  the  words  of  tAy  to. 
Proii.O.  2.  thou  art  snared  with  the  words  of  tAy  «. 
27.2.  let  another  praiso  thee, nnd  not  thinrown  m. 
31. 8.  open  tAy  to.  for  the  dumb,  in  tho  cause  of  all 
9.opon  tAy  77J.  judge  righteously,  and  plead  causa 
Eccl.'i.'i.  be  not  rash  with  tAy  771. 10  uttor  any  thin{ 

6.  suffer  not  tAy  m.  to  cause  thy  flesh  to  sin 
Cant.  7.  9.  the  roof  of  tAv  ""•  'il^e  Ibe  beat  wine 


MUC 

Jer.  S.  14. 1  will  niaku  m;  words  in  iky  nt.  ftro 
Eitk.  2.  U.  open  thy  m.  and  eut  that  1  give  tliee 
3. 556.  make  thy  tongue  cleave  to  roof  of  tkij  m. 
27. 1  will  ujicti  thy  m.  and  thou  sliult  t>ay  to  ihei 
Ifi.  5(j.  sisler  Soiioiii  was  not  iiiBiitioued  by  thy  m. 
63.  that  lliou  iiiiiyeBl  never  open  tUy  m.  any  more 
Has.  H.  I.  set  the  trumpet  to  thy  m.  he  sliull  coino 
Mic.  7.  5.  keep  doors  ot"  thy  m.-from  her  that  lietli 
J^uke  Vi.'ii.  out  of  thine  own  m.  will  I  juiii,'(:  tliee 
Rum.  lU.  U.  if  confers  with  thy  in.  tlie  £>urU  Jesu: 
Hev.  lU.  9.  it  shall  Le  in  tUy  m.  sweet  as  honey 

Your  MOUTH. 
.Vum. 32.  24.  do  that  wliitli  pruceerled  outof  y.  m 
1  Sam  2.  3.  let  not  arrogancy  conic  out  of  your  ;n. 
JobH.a.  mark  me,  and  lay  your  liaiiit  on  yuur  m 
F.ick.  :15.  13.  thus  with  your  m.  yc  have  boasted 
Jorl  I.  5.  lor  llie  wine  is  cut  olf  Irorii  your  m. 
Eph.   4. 29.  let  no  corrupt  comiuuiiiealiun  proceed 
out  of  «uui-  /«.  Idit  what  is  edifying,  Cul.  3.  B 
iUOUTIIS. 
Deut.  31.  19.  write  this  song,  i>ut  it  in  their  m.  , 

21.  not  be  forgiittcn  out  of /«.  of  their  seed 
1  Sam.  13.  i  21.  yet  ihey  had  a  file  with  m. 
P^al.  22.  13.  tlity  gaped  ujion  me  with  their  m. 
7c?.  30.  while  their  meat  was  yet  in  their  m. 
115. 5.  tJiey  have  in.  but  they  speak  not,  135. 10. 
135.  17.  neither  is  there  any  breath  in  their  m. 
JiU.il.  1 15.  a  new  Ihresliing  instrument  having  m. 
52.  1.5.  the  kings  shall  shut  their  tn.  at  him 
Jer.  44.  25.  ye  iuid  wives  have  spoken  with  your  m. 
J^am.  3. 46.  our  enemies  opened  their  m.  against  us 
Jian.  6.  22.  my  God  hath  shut  the  lions'  m. 
Mic.  3.  5.  and  he  that  pulteth  not  into  their  m. 
Til.  1.  11.  deceivers,  whose  m.  must  be  stopped 
Jleb.  11.  33.  who  stopped  the  m.  of  lions 
Jam.  3.  3.  behold,  we  put  bits  in  the  horses'  m. 
Hcv.  9. 17.  out  of  their  m.  issued  lire  and  smoke,  18. 

MOWER. 
Psal.  129. 7.  wherewith  the  m.  fillelh  not  his  hand 

MOVVIXGS. 
.Amos  1.  1.  the  latter  growth  after  the  king's  m. 

MOWN. 
Psal.  72. 6.  come  down  like  rain  upon  the  m.  grass 

Mirni. 

(ten.  2fi.  Ifi.  for  thou  art  m.  mightier  than  wc 
F.zod.  12.  42.  it  is  a  night  to  be  vi.  ob.-<erved 
16. 18.  he  that  gathered  m.  2  Cor.  8.  15. 
Lev.  13.  7.  if  the  scab  spread  m.  abroad,  22. 27, 35. 
J'^''am.  21  4.  soul  of  the  people  was  m.  discourajcd 
Deut.  28.  38.  shall  carry  m.  seed  out  into  the  field 
Jo.'ih.  22.  8.  return  with  m.  riches  to  your  tents 
Hitth  I.  13.  ii  grieveth  mo  m.  for  your  sakcs 
1  Sam.  14.:}0.  had  there  been  a  m.  greaierslaughtcr 

18.  3U.  so  that  his  name  was  m.  set  by 

19.  2.  but  Jonathan  delighted  m.  in  David 

26.  24.  us  thy  life  was  r/i.  set  by  this  day,  so  let 
my  life  be  m.  set  by  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord 

1  Kings  4.29. Solom. had  understand,  e.vceediiigwi. 

2  Kings  10.  18.  but  .lehu  Khali  serve  him  m. 

21.  6.  Ahab  wrought  m.  wickedness  in  sight  of  L. 
2  Chron.  27.  3.  on  the  wall  of  Ophel  he  built  7rt. 

'.YX  G.  Maiiasseh  wrought  m.  evil  in  sight  of  Lord 
Kzra  10.  13.  and  it  is  a  lime  of  m.  rain,  not  able 
JV'A.  9.  37.  it  yiel4eth  m.  increase  untathe  kings 
Job  5.  t25.  know  that  thy  seed  shall  Wm. 

31.  25.  because  mine  hand  had  gotten  m. 
Psal.  19. 1 13.  shall  be  iiiiioceiit  from  m.  transgress. 

129. 1 1.  m.  have  they  ufilictcil  me  from  my  youth 
Pron.  17.  7.  m.  less  do  lying  lips  become  a  prince 

19.  10.  m.  less  for  a  servant  to  have  rule  over 
Eccl.  5.12.slecp  is  sweet,  whether  he  eat  little  or  m. 
17.  he  hath  ni.  sorrow  and  wrath  with  sickness 

9.  18.  but  one  sinner  destroycth  m.  good 
Jer.  2.  22.  for  thou^'h  thou  take  thee  m.  soap 
F.zrk.  2:1. 32.  it  containelh  m.  ||  33.31.  shew  m.  love 
J>an.  4.  12.  and  Uie  fruit  thereof  was  /«.  21. 
Mic.  0.  1 10.  doth  m.  keep  the  statutes  of  Omrl 
Ha/r.  1.0.  ye  have  sown  m.  ||  9.  ye  looked  for  m. 
.Vit.  C.  2fi.  are  ye  not  tji.  hctier  than  they'? 

2''>.  9.  this  ointment  might  have  b(;en  sold  for  m. 
.Mark  4.  .5.  w  here  it  had  not  m.  earth.  Mat.  13.  5. 
J.uke  1. 1  28.  hall,  thou  that  art  7/1.  graced 

7.  47.  her  many  sins  are  forgiven,  for  she  loved  m. 

12.  48.  for  to  whom  m.  is  given,  of  him  shall  >n.  be 
required,  to  whom  men  have  committed  m. 

in.  10.  he  that  is  faithful  also  in  »i.  Is  unjimt  in  »i. 
John  12.  24.  it  bringith  forth  m.  fruit,  15.  5. 

14.  30.  liPrcaOer  I  will  not  talk  m.  with  you 
Jtrts\('i.  10.  which  brniijiht  her  inaslers  m.  gain 

^■'.  27.  who  hejiied  thi-m  m.  which  had  believed 

20.24.Fei(tu»iinid,m.learniiigdolh  make  thee  mad 
Rom.  3  2.  »n.  everj  «  ny  ||  10.  12.  laboured  m.  in  L. 
£  Oir.  2.  4.  out  of  m.  affliction  I  wrote  lo  you 
//'/<.  12.  9.  m.  ralli(!r  bo  in  «ubjnction  and  live 

25.  m.  more  shall  not  wo  escapi',  if  we  turn  away 
./«»!.  .'0.  ;•>.  .ViB  prayer  of  ihc  righteous  nvaileth  jii. 
Rev.  5.  4. 1  wept  m.  been  use  no  man  was  found 
JlK  MUCH. 

O'Ti.  2.3.  9.  give  it  for  as  m.  money  an  It  is  worth 

43.  34.  mes*  waa  five  limeK  a$  m.  at  any  of  lliwri 
390 


MUL 

Gen.  44. 1.  fill  sacks  witii  food  as  m.  as  they  carrjr 
Ezod.  16.  5.  twice  as  m.  as  they  gather  daily,  22. 
Ate.  7. 10.  .Aaron's  sons  have  one  as  m.  as  another 
./uih.  17. 14.  for  as  m.  as  tlie  Lord  hath  blessed  ine 

1  Sam.  2.  16.  then  take  as  tn.  as  thy  soul  desireth 

2  Chron.  2. 10.  cut  wood  as  m.  as  tlioushalt  need 
Jobi'i.  10.  the  Ld.  gave  Job  twice  as  in.  as  he  had 
Ps.  119. 14. joy  in  testimonies,  asm.  as  in  all  riches 
Lakt  0.  34.  sinners  lend,  to  receive  as  m.  again 
Jo/iii(i.  11.  likewise  of  fishes  as  m.  as  they  would 
J(o)u.  1. 15.  05  m.  as  in  me  is,  1  am  ready  to  preach 

II.  13.  in  as  m.  as  1  am  the  apostle  of  tliu  Gentiles 
12.18.  as  m.  as  licth  in  you, live  peaceably  with  all 
Phil.  1.  7.  in  as  m.  as  both  in  bonds,  and  in  defence 
Helt.  3.  3.  in  as  m.  as  he  who  bnilded  the  house 
7.  20. in  asm.  us  not  without  an  oath  was  |>riust 

1  /'et.4.13.in  as  m.  asye  are  paitakersofHuflerings 
Sec  How  much,  Uow  much  less,  How  much 

more,  Much  MoRK,  Pkoi-lk. 
So  MUCH. 
F.xod.  14.  23.  remained  not  so  m.  as  one  of  them 
30.  23.  and  of  sweet  cinnamon  half.?!)  m. 
Jjeu.  14.  21.  il  he  he  jHjor  and  cannot  get  so  m. 
IJrut.  2.  5.  not  give,  you  so  m.  as  a  foot-breadth 

2  Sam.  14.  25.  none  to  huso  m.  praised  as  Absalom 

17.  12.  there  shall  not  be  leftso  m.  as  one 

2  Chron.  20.  25.  in  gathering  the  spoil,  it  was  so  m. 
Prov.  19.  24.  will  not  so  m.  us  bring  it  to  his  mouth 

25. 16.  eat  so  m.  as  is  sulFicienl  for  thee,  lest  filled 
./er.2.36.whygadile»tthou5o/rt.lochangt;  thyway? 
«1/uZ.3.13.wfiat  have  we  sjioken  so  in.  against  thee! 
Mat.  15.33.  whence  should  we  have  so  m.  bread? 
Mark  2.2.  was  uo  room,  no  not  «o  m.  as  about  door 

3.  20.  so  that  they  could  not  so  m.  as  eat,  6.  31. 

7.  30.  so  m.  more  a  great  deal  they  published  it 
/^ukc 5.15. so  Hi. the  more  went  there u  lame  abroad 

6.3.liaveye  not  read  iu  Jrt.as  this  what  David  did! 

18. 13.  would  nol  lift  up  so  m.  as  his  eyes  to  heaven 
3U.  he  cried  so  m.  tlie  more,  have  nieicy  on  me 

.^cts  5.8.  if  ye  sold  it  for  so  i/i.  she  said,  yea,  for  so  in. 
7. 5.  no  inheritance,  not  so  m.  as  to  set  his  foot  on 
19.2.  not  so  7n.  as  heard  whether  any  Holy  Ghost 

1  Cor.  5.  1.  not  so  ;«.  as  named  among  the  Gentiles 

iCor.  9.t  5.  bounty  hath  been  so  ;n.spoken  of  before 

JJcb.  1.  4.  being  made  so  m.  better  than  the  angels 
7. 22.  by  60  m.  Jesus  made  surety  of  belter  testam. 
10.  2.>.  and  so  m.  more  as  ye  see  day  approaching 
12.20.  if  so  77!.  as  a  beast  touch  the  mountain 

Heo.  18.  7.  so  m.  torment  and  sorrow  give  her 
Too  MUCH. 

F.xod.  36.  7.  the  stuff  was  sufficient,  and  ton  m. 

J\'"u7n.l6.3.said  to  them,  yc  take  loo  m.  upon  yon,  7. 

Josh.  19.  9.  part  of  children  of  Judah  was  too  m. 

1  Kings  12. 2rf.  loo  m.  for  you  to  go  up  lo  Jerusalem 

F.sth.  1. 18.  thus  shall  there  arise  too  m.  contempt 
rtry  MUCH. 

Ocn. 41.  49.  Jose|)h  gathered  coin  as  sand,  very  m. 

F.xod.  12.  38.  very  in.  cattle  went  up  with  them 

Josh.  13. 1.  remaiiielh  very  in.  land  to  be  possessed 
22.  8.  return  with  very  m.  cattle,  wry  m.  raiment 

1  /t7nn-sl0.2.(jueenofSlieb.T  came  with  ccryjn.gold 
2A'in^rs2l.  lO.Mnnasseli  ulicd  innoc.  blood  I'cryrii 
\Chr.  18.8.  from  Chun  brought  David  verym.  brass 

2  Chron.  14.  13.  ihcy  carried  aw.ty  very  m.  spoil 
32.  2'J.  for  God  hath  given  him  substance  very  m 

30. 14.  the  priests  and  people  transgressed  very  m 
I'sal.  119.  107.  i  am  alHicteil  very  m.  quicken  me 
Jer.  40.  12.  and  gathered  summer-fruits  very  m. 

MUFFLERS. 
fsa.  3.  19.  I  will  take  away  th*-  chains,  the  m. 

MULCERRY'-TREES. 

2  Sam.  5.  23.  thou  shall  not  go  up,  but  come  upon 

them  over-againsl  the  m.-trr.r.s,  1  Chr.  14.  14. 

21.  when  thou  hearest  the  sound  in  tops  of  the 

7n.-/rf  es,  then  bestir  thyself,  1  Chron.  14.  15. 

P$.  84.  to.  who  passing  thro'  the  valley  otm.-trces 

MULE. 
2  Sam.  13.  29.  every  man  gal  him  upon  his  m. 

18.  9.  .Vbsalom  rode  on  a  m.  the  m.  went  away 

1  Kinp.i  1.  33.  cause  Solom.  to  ride  on  my  m.  38.44. 
Psal.  32.  9.  he  not  as  the  horse  or  m.  wliich  have 
ZecA.14.15.eo  shall  be  placue  of  the  horse,  of  Ihc  »i. 

MULES. 
Clen.  36.  2-1.  Annh  that  found  m.  in  tlio  wildcrnost 

1  Kings  4.  t28.  they  brought  barley  for  the  m. 
10. 25.  brought  m.  rale  year  by  year,  2  Chr.  9.  24. 
18.  5.  wp  may  find  grass  to  save  the  771.  alive 

2  A7/i^.«5.l7.lie given  to  thy  servant  twoni.burden 
1  Chron.  12.40.  hroiight  brend  011  camels  and  on  tfi. 
F.ira  2.  60.  their  m.  were  24.5,  JVVA.  7.  08. 
F.slh.  8.  10.  ho  sent  letters  by  riders  on  m.  14. 
/■•in.  00. 20.  they  shall  bring  your  brethren  on  m. 
F.ick.  27. 14.  Togarmah  trailed  in  thy  fairs  with  m. 

MULTIPLY. 
(Vfn.  1.22.  bo  fruilf  and  f»t.2^.  I  8. 17.  19.7.  I  33. 11. 
3.  10.  I  will  m.  thy  sorrow  and  conception 
0.  l.when  men  began  lorn,  on  the  faci- of  the  earth 
10. 10.  r  will  m.  Hiigar's  seed  exceedingly,  17.20. 
17.  2.  nnd  I  will  m.  ihee  exreeilinglv,  48.  4. 
22. 17. 1  will  m.  Uiy  tcod,  3C.  4,  24.  Heb.  6.  14. 


MUL 

Oen.  23.  3.  God  Almighty  bless  thee,  and  m  the.« 
/!;j:od.l.l0.1clusdcal  wisely  with  tliein;leHtthi-j  ni 
7.3. 1  will  m.  my  signs  and  wonders  in  Egypt 
23.29.  lest  the  beast  of  the  lield  m.  against  tiue 
30.  1 15.  the  rich  shall  not  7/1.  half  a  siiekel 
32. 13.  to  whom  thou  saulst,  I  will  m.  your  seedi 
Lev.  20.  9.  Deut.  7. 13.  |  13. 17.  |  2.i.  1.3.  |  30.  5 
Lev.  11.  t  42.  whatsoever  doth  7/1.  feet,  nol  cat 
.Vu/H.  26. 1 54.  lo  many  in.  his  inheritance,  33.  t  54 
y^fur8.1.thatye  may  live  andjTi.  and  go  in,  30. 16 
17.  16.  the  king  shall  not  m.  horses  to  himself 
17.  neither  shall  he  m.  wives,  nor  silver,  and  gold 
2  Sam.  14.  t  H-  revenger  do  not  m.  to  dejiroy 

1  Chron.  4.  27.  neither  did  all  their  family  m. 
Job  2;i.  18.  I  shall  7/1.  my  days  us  the  sand 
ha.  1. 1 15.  when  ye  771.  prayer,  1  will  not  hear 

55.  [7.  ri!lurn  to  God,  for  he  will  tm.  lo  pardon 
.kr.  30.  19.  I  will  m.  them,  they  ^liall  nol  be  few 

33.  22.  so  will  I  m.  the  seed  of  David  my  servant 
F.itk.  10.  7.  I  have  caused  thee  to  771.  as  the  bud 

30.  10.  I  will  771.  men  ||  11.  n.  man  and  beasl 
30.  I  will  771.  the  fruit  of  ihe  tree,  and  increage 

37.  26.  and  I  will  place  them  and  hi.  Iliem 

J? inos  4. 4. come  to  licthel,alGilgal  Hi.trHii^greseion 

2  Cor.  9.  10.  and  7h.  your  seed  sow  n,  and  increabe 

MULTIPLIED. 
Gen.  47.  27.  Israel  grew  and  m.  F.xod.  1.  7,  20. 
F.xod.  1.  12.  the  more  afflicted,  they  m.  and  grew 

11.  9.  that  my  wonders  may  be  771.  in  Egypt 
iJcut.  1.  )0.  the  Lord  your  God  hath  in.  you 

8.  13.  thy  gold  is  m.  and  all  that  thou  hast  la  iti. 

11.  21.  that  your  days  may  be  m.  in  the  land 
Josh.  24.  3.  1  am  his  seed,  and  gave  him  Isaac 
■fuilg.  10. 124.  our  enemy  who  hi.  our  slain 

1  .SV//7!.  1.  I  12.  as  she  m.  lo  pray,  Eli  marked 

2  Sam.  22.  t  30.  and  thy  gentleness  hath  7rt.  mc 

1  rVirw7!.5.y.because  their  cattle  were  m.  in  GUead 

2  Chron.  33.  t23.  but  Amon  m.  trespass 
JW7(.  (i.  f  17.  the  nobles  771.  leiters  to  Tobiah 
Job  27.  14.  if  his  children  be  m.  it  is  for  sword 

.35.6.  if  ihy  transgressions  be  771. what  duest  to  himi 
Psnl.  10.  4.  ihi'ir  sorrows  shall  be  771.  that  hasten 

38.  19.  they  that  hate  me  wrongfully  are  »7i. 
107.  38.  he  hlcsscth  ihcm,  so  that  they  are  m. 

Prov.  9.  11.  for  by  nie  thy  days  shall  be  771. 

29.16.when  wicked  are  7H.iransgression  increaseth 
/.sn.9.3.  thou  liasi  m.the  nation,  and  nol  increased 

59.  12.  for  our  tran.sgressions  are  777.  before  thee 
Jer.  3.  10.  when  ye  be  771.  they  shall  say  no  more 

46. 1 16.  he  m.  the  faller,  one  fell  on  another 
F.zck.  3.  7.  ye  m.  more  than  the  nations  about  you 

11.  6.  ye  have  m.  your  slain  in  this  city 

Hi.  25.  thou  hast  711.  thy  whoredoms,  23.  19. 
29.  m.  fornication  ||  51.  rn.  abominations 
21. 15.  that  their  heart  may  faint,  and  ruins  be  jti. 

31.  5.  his  boughs  were  m.  fj  35.  13.  m.  your  word* 
Dan.  4.  1.  peace  be  m.  to  you,  6.  25.  1  Pet.  1.  2. 

2  I'et.l.'i.  Judel 
7/os.C.  e.  did  not  know  that  I  m.  her  silver  and  gold 

8.  14.  and  Judah  hath  7:1.  fenced  ciiies 

12.  10.  I  have  m.  visinni!,  and  tissrd  similitudes 
J\''ah.2.  IS.  thou  hast  m.  thy  merchants  above  stars 
.^cts  It.  1.  when  the  nuiiihi-r  of  disciples  was  m.  7. 

7.  17.  the  people  grew  and  m.  in  Egypt 

9.  31.  walking  in  Ihe  fear  of  the  Lord  were  n. 
12.  24.  but  the  word  of  God  grew  and  771. 

MULTIPLIEOST. 
A'lA.S.  23.  their  children  also  m.  thou  astbestari 

MULTIPLIETH. 
.Tvb  9.  17.  he  m.  my  wounds  without  cause 

34.  37.  he  m.  his  words  against  God 

35.  16.  he  771.  words  without  knowledge 

Keel.  10.114.  a  fi'ol  also  771.  words,  man  cannot  tell 

MULTIPLYING. 
Gen.  22.  17.  in  m.  I  will  mulliplv,  Ueb.  6.  14. 

MULTITUDE 
Signifies,  [I]  .1  great  companv  or  number  of  per- 
sons or  Ihmgs,  Gen.  30. 30.  |"48.  4.    [2]  The  com- 
mon p'ople.  Milt.  9.  33.     [3]  The  tchole  assem- 
bly, both  common  people  and  senators.  Acts  23. 
7.     [4]  The  church, or  a  company  of  the  faith- 
ful, Acli  15.  12,  22.  I  21.  22.     [5j  Great  store, 
or  plenty,  Jer.  10.  13.     [0]  Much  variety,  Eccl. 
5.  3,  7.    "[7]  Infinite,  Psal.  51.  1. 
6'fn. 10.10.  not  numbered  for  );i.:t2. 12. 1  Kings  3. 8. 
17.  t  4.  thou  shall  be  a  father  of  tTi.  of  nations 
28.  3.  God  7\hiii;'lity  mnko  thee  a  m.  of  people 
30.  30.  and  it  is  now  increased  unto  a  n. 
48.4.1  will  niakcoflhecam.  of  people,  10,  19. 
F.rod.  12.  38.  a  mi.\ed  in.  went  up  also  w  illi  them 
23.  2.  thou  shall  nol  follow  a  ni.  In  do  evil 
/.'■v.  2.5.  10.  according  lo  the  7».  <if  years  increase 
J^iiin.  11.  4.  and  the  mixed  m.  fell  a  hisiiiig 
Deut.  1.  10.  behold,  ye  nro  this  ilav  as  llin  stars 
for  m.  10.  22.  |  28.  02    //eft.  11.  12. 
.fush.  II.  4. nssand  on  sen-shore  for  in..Tudg.l.  12. 
1  Sam.  13.  S.  2  Sam.  17.  11.  ]  ATiii;* 
4.20. 
Judg.  6.  5.  Midianitcs  as  grasshoppers  for  m.  7.  1S< 
1  .Sam.  14.  IG.  behold,  llie  m.  melted  away 


MUL 

S  Sam.  6. 19.  he  dealt  among  the  whole  m.  of  Israel 

1  King^s  7.  ]i~.  uiiweight-d  tor  the  exceeding  m. 
8.  5.  and  oxen  that  could  not  be  told  for  m. 

V  Kings  7.  13.  they  are  as  all  the  m.  that  arc  Ii^ft 

19.  2X  hast  said,  with  the  vi.  of  my  chariots  I  am 
come  up  to  tJic  sides  of  Lebanon,  Isa.'il.iii. 

2  C/tron.  I.  9.  over  a  people  like  the  dust  for  m. 
li.  11.  in  thy  name  we  go  against  this  m. 

20.  ii4.  and  behold,  the  jn.  were  dead  bodies 
3ii  I'i.  lor  a  m.  had  not  cleuUHed  themselves 
'■i'J  7.  be  r.ot  afraid  of  all  the  M.  with  him 

JVf  A.  13. 3.  they  separated  frtmi  Israel  the  mi.ted  m. 
tVJi.  spare  me,  according  to  m.  of  thy  mercy 

i^.t/A.  5.  11   ilanian  told  ot  the  in.  of  his  children 
JO.  3.  Mordecai  accepted  of  t!ie  in.  of  brethren 

Job  4.  f  14.  made  the  m.  of  my  bones  to  shake 
11.  2.  should  not  the  m.  of  words  be  answered? 
32.  7.  and  m.  of  years  should  teach  wisdom 
35.9.  by  reason  of  the  m.  ofo|rpressionsthey  made 
39.  7.  ho  scorneth  the  m.  of  the  city,  nor  regardcth 

Fsal.  5.  7.  i  will  conie  in  the  m.  ot  thy  mercy 

lU.  cast  them  out  in  in.  of  their  transgressions 
33. 16.  there  is  no  king  saved  by  the  m.  of  a  host 
4'i.  i.  I  had  gone  with  the  m.  to  the  house  of  God 
49.  6.  that  boast  themselves  in  m.  of  their  riches 
51.  1.  according  to  the  /«.  of  Ihy  mercies  blot  out 
68.  30.  rebuke  the  m.  of  bulls,  with  calves 
(39. 13.  O  God,  in  the  vt.  of  thy  mercy,  hear  me ! 
Iti.  turn  to  me,  according  to  m.  of  ihy  mercies 
74.  19.  deliver  me  not  to  the  m.  of  the  wicked 
94.  19.  in  the  m.  of  my  thoughts  within  me 
106.  7.  they  remeinbeied  not  in.  of  thy  mercies 
4.5.  and  repented,  according  to  m.  of  his  mercies 
109.  30.  I  will  praise  him  among  the  m. 

Prov.  10.  19.  in  the  vi.  of  words  wanteth  not  sin 

11.  14.  in  the  HI.  of  counsellors  is  safety,  24.  6. 
14.2):i.  in  the  m.  of  people  is  the  king's  honour 
15.  22.  in  m.  of  counsellors  they  are  established 

20.  15.  there  is  gold,  and  a  m.  of  rubies 
Ec(;i.5.3.l'or  adreamcoineth  through  tliem.ofbusi- 

ness,  a  fool's  voice  is  known  by  the  m.  of  words 

7.  in  the  m.  of  dreams  there  are  divers  vanities 

ha.  1. 11.  to  what  purpose  is  the  ?n.  of  sacrifices'? 

5.  13.  and  their  a.  dried  up  with  thirst 

14.  their  m.  and  pomp  shall  descend  into  hell 
17.12.woe  to  m.ofmany  people  which  make  noise 
29.  H.  80  m.  of  nations  be  that  fight  against  Zion 
31.  4.  when  m..of  shepherds  is  called  against  him 
47.  9.  shall  come  on  thee  for  m.  of  thy  sorceries 

12.  stand  now  with  the  m.  of  thy  sorceries 

13.  thou  art  wearied  in  the  m.  of  thy  counsels 
60.  6.  the  in.  of  camels  shall  cover  thee 

63.  7.  according  to  m.  of  his  loving  kindnesses 

tl5.  the  m.  of  thy  bowels,  are  they  restrained  1 
Jcr.  10. 13.  is  a  m.  of  waters  in  heavens,  51.  16. 

12.  6.  yea,  they  have  called  a  in.  after  thee 
30.14.1  have  wuund'.d  thee  lor  in.  of  thine  iniquity 
46.  25.  behold,  I  will  punish  the  m.  of  No 

Lam,  1.  5.  afflicted  her,  for  m.  of  her  tr;insgre.ssions 
3.  32.  compassion  according  to  m.  of  his  mercies 
Ezek.  7.  12.  wrath  is  on  all  the  in.  thereof,  14. 
13.for  the  vision  is  touching  the  wliole  in.  thereof 
14.  4.  answer  him  according  to  the  m.  of  his  idols 
27.  12.  by  reason  of  the  in.  of  riche-;,  18.  33. 
16.  by  reas.-iii  of  the  m.  of  ihy  wares,  18. 

31.  18.  this  is  Pharaoh  and  all  his  m.  32.  32. 

32.  24.  Elam  and  her  m.  \\  26.  Tubal  and  all  her  m. 
39.  11.  they  shall  bury  Gog,  and  all  his  ?tt. 

Dan.  10. 6.  voice  of  his  words  like  the  voice  of  a  m. 

11.  13.  the  king  of  the  north  shall  set  forth  a  m. 
Hos.  9.  7.  the  days  of  recompence  are  come ;  the 

m.  of  thine  iniquity 
10.  13.  thou  didst  trust  in  the  m.  of  mighty  men 
^ah.  3.  3.  there  is  a  m.  of  slain,  they  stumble 

4.  because  of  the  m.  of  the  whoredoms  of  harlot 
7>rch.  8.  f  4.  with  his  staff  for  m.  of  days 
^f(lt.  14.  5.  put  to  ileath,  he  feared  the  in.  21.  46. 
1.5.32. 1  have  compassion  on  the  m.  Mark  8.  2. 
.Mark  5.31.seest  the  in.  thronging  thee,  I^vke  8.  45. 
y,i(A-e2.13.thcrc  wn.s  with  the  angel  a  m.  of  the  host 

12.  1.  were  gathered  together  an  innumerable  in. 
iS.  6.  to  betray  him  in  the  absence  of  the  m. 

47.  and  while  ho  yet  spake,  behold,  a  m. 
23.  1.  and  the  wiiule  in.  of  them  arose,  and  led 
him  to  Pilalo 
John,  5.  13.  a  m.  bping  present  in  that  place 

21.  6.  not  able  to  draw  it  for  the  m.  of  fishes 
Jicti:  4.  32.  the  m.  that  believed  were  of  one  heart 

6.  5.  and  the  saying  pleased  the  whole  m. 
]!').  22.  the  m.  rose  up  together  agaiiist  them 
21.  22.  the  m.  must  needs  come  together 

Kph.  4.  t  8.  he  ascended,  he  h'd  a  in.  of  captives 
Jam.  5.20.  shall  save  a  soul  from  death,  and  shall 
hide  a  m.  of  sins 
1  Pet.  4.  8.  for  charity  shall  cover  the  m.  of  sins 
See  Grk.it. 
MULTITIJDF.S. 
Kick.  32.  20.  draw  her  and  ill  her  m. 
Joel3.  14.  m.  m.  in  the  valley  of  decision 
Mat.  9.  33.  th«  dumb  ipake :  and  the  m.  marvelled 
307 


Mua 

Mat. 9.  3fl.  when  he  saw  the  m.  he  v.'.is  moved 
21.  9.  the  m.  that  went  before,  and  that  follow- 
ed, cried,  saying,  Hosanna  to  Son  of  David 

.^cts  5.  14.  TO.  were  added  both  of  men  and  women 
13.  45.  Jews  saw  m.  they  were  filled  with  envy 

Reo.  17.  15.  the  waters  are  m.  and  nations 
■  See  GRg\T. 
MUNITION. 

ha.  29.  7.  all  that  fight  against  her  and  her  m. 

J^ak.  i.  1.  keep  the  m.  watch  the  way,  fortify 
MUNITIONS. 

fsa.  33.  16.  his  defence  shall  he  the  m.  of  rocks 

Van.  II.  1 15.  the  king  shall  take  the  city  of  in. 
t38.  in  his  estate  he  will  honour  the  God  of  m. 
t  39.  thus  shall  he  do  in  the  fortresses  of  m. 
MURDER 

Signifies,  [1]  Tke  taking  away  of  a  vtan's  life 
unlawfully,  Mark  15.  7.  [2]  Jill  cruelty  in 
tliuught,  word,  or  deed,  Mat.  19. 18.  1  John  3.  15. 

p^oluntary  murder  was  always  punished  with 
death,  but  involuntary  or  accidental  murder, 
among  the  Hebrews,  teas  only  punished  by  lia- 
nishmcnt.  Cities  of  refuge  were  appointed  for 
involuntary  manslaughter,  whithrr  thiij  might 
retire,  and  continue  in  safety,  till  the  death  of 
the  high  priest;  then  the  offender  was  at  liberty 
to  return  to  his  own  city,  and  h  is  own  house,  if 
he  pleased.  But  as  for  the  voluntary  murderer, 
he  was  put  to  death  without  any  remission,  and 
the  kinsmen  of  the  murdered  person  might  kill 
him  with  impunity.  Money  could  not  redeem 
his  life;  he  was  dragged  away,  even  from  the 
altar,  if  he  had  taken  refuge  there,  Num.  35. 
27,  28,  31.  The  ceremony  used  by  the  Israel- 
ites, when  a  dead  body  was  found  in  the  fields 
slain  by  a  murderer  unknown,  as  it  is  recorded, 
Deut.  21.  from  verse  1  to  9,  may  inform  us, 
what  idea  they  had  of  the  heinousnes.i  of  mur- 
der, and  how  much  hori  or  they  conceived  at  this 
crime;  and  also  the  fear  they  were  in,  that 
Ood  might  take  vengeance  for  it  on  the  whole 
country :  and  of  the  pollution  that  the  country 
was  supposed  to  contract,  by  the  blood  that 
was  .^pill  in  it,  unless  it  were  expiated,  or  re- 
venged upon  him  that  was  the  occasion  of  it, 
if  he  could  by  any  means  be  discovered. 

Psal.  10.  8.  in  secret  doth  he  m.  the  innocent 
94.  6.  they  slay  the  widow,  and  m.  the  fatherless 

.Tcr.  7.  9.  will  ye  steal,  m.  and  commit  adultery  ? 

Hos.  t>.  9.  so  priests  m.  in  the  way  by  consent 
MURDER. 

Mat.  19.  18.  Jesus  said,  thou  shall  do  no  m. 

Mark  1.5.7.  one  Barahbas,  who  had  committed  m. 

/juke  23.  19.  and  for  m.  was  cast  into  prison,  25. 

Rom.  1.  29.  full  of  envv,  m.  debate,  deceit 
MURDERER. 

J^um.  35. 16.  if  he  smite  him  he  is  a  m.  the  m.  shall 
surely  be  put  to  death,  17,  18,  51. 
19.  the  revenger  of  blood  shall  slay  the  m.  21. 

30.  TO. shall  he  put  to  death  by  mouth  of  witnesses 

31.  shall  take  no  satisfaction  for  the  life  of  a  m. 
2  Kings  6.32.spe  ho  w  this  son  of  »n.  hath  sent  to  take 
,Tnb  24. 14.  m.  rising  with  the  light,  killeth  the  poor 
7/».e.9.13.Ephiaim  bring  forth  his  children  to  them. 
.Tohn  8.  44.  he  was  a  m.  from  the  beginning 
.^cts  3.  14.  ye  desired  a  m.  to  be  granted  to  you 

28.  4.  they  said,  no  doubt  this  man  is  a  m. 
1  Pel.  4.  15.  but  let  none  of  you  suffer  as  a  m. 

1  'John  3.  15.  whoso  hateth  his  brother  is  a  m.  ye 

know  that  no  m.  hath  eternal  life  abiding 
in  him 

MURDERERS. 

2  Kings  14.  6.  the  children  of  the  m.  he  slew  not 
Isa.  1.  21.  righteousness  lodged  in  it,  but  now  m. 
.Ter.  4.  31.  for  my  soul  is  wearied,  because  of  ?n. 
Mat.  22.  7.  he  sent  forth  and  destroyed  those  to. 
.lets  7.  .52.  of  whom  ye  have  been  now  the  m. 

21.  38.  and  leddest  out  4000  men  that  were  in. 

1  Tim.  1.9.  law  made  for  ?«.  of  fathers  and  mothers 
Rev.  21.  8.  TO.  shall  have  their  part  in  the  lake 

22.  15.  for  without  are  whofemongers  and  m. 

MURDERS. 

.4fat.  15.19.  out  of  the  heart  proceed  m.  Mark7.'i2^. 

Onl.  5.21. the  works  of  the  flesh  are  cnvyings,  m. 

Rev.  9.  21.  neither  repented  they  of  their  m.  nor 
of  theii  sorceries 
MURMUR 

Signifies,  To  repine  at  or  complain  of  some  wrong 
pretended  to  have  been  rrcrined,  E.\od.  Hi. 
2.  St.  Paul  forbids  all  murmuring,  which 
was  so  fatal  to  the  Israelites  that  murmured 
in  the  wilderness,  1  Cor.  10.  10.  and  for 
which  Ood  punished  them  severely.  They 
murmured  at  the  Graves  of  Eust,  and  God 
sent  Ihnn  quails  for  food;  but  hardly  was 
this  meat  out  of  their  mouth.i,  before  the  wrath 
of  the  I,ord  was  kindled  agnin.it  them,  and 
he  destroiicd  three  and  twenty  thousand  of 
them.  Num.  11.  33,  34.  I'sal.  78.  30,  31. 
They  murmured  again  after  the  return  of  the 


MUS 

spies  that  were  sent  to  search  out  and  ui'iw 
the  promised  land;  and  God  punished  them 
by  depriving  them  of  the  happiness  of  evei 
seeing  that  land,  and.  condemned  them  to  die 
in  the  wilderness,  Num.  14.  29, 30.  They  were 
again  punished  for  murmuring  by  the  fiery 
serpents  that  Ood  sent  among  them,  whicJi 
killed  a  great  number  of  thnn,  Num.  21.  4,  5, 
6.  The  murmuring  of  Miriam  the  si.ster  of 
Muses,  was  chastised  by  a  leprosy  that  seiied 
her  whole  body,  and  obliged  her  to  abide  seoen 
days  without  the  camp.  Num.  12.  1,  2,  10, 
15.  Jlnd  the  murmuring  and  rebellion  of 
Korah,  Dathan,  and  Abiram,  was  punished  m 
a  still  more  terrible  manner,  the  earth  open- 
ing and  swallowing  vp  the  authors  of  the  se- 
dition, and  fire  consuming  their  areompliccs. 
Num.  16.  3,  31,  32,  35. 

Kxod.  10.  7.  what  are  we,  that  ye  m.  against  us? 
8.  Lord  hcarcth  murmurings  ye  to.  JVuni.  14.27. 

M'um.  14.31).  the  spies  made  the  congregation  to  m. 

16.  II.  what  is  Aaron,  that  ye  in.  against  him? 

17.  5.  of  Israel,  wlierehy  tlicy  m.  against  vou 
Tjam.  3.  f  39.  wherefore  doth  a  living  man  m.  ? 
John  6. 43.  Jesus  said,  to.  not  among  yourselves 

1  Cor.  10.10.  neither  in.  as  some  of  them  murmured 

MURMURED. 
Exod.  15.  24.  the  people  to.  against  Moses,  17.  3. 

16.  2.  the  whole  congregation  of  Israel  m.  against 
Moses  and  Aaron,  A'um.  14.  2.  |  16.  41. 
JVwOT.  14.  20.  from  twenty  years  old, which  have  m. 
Deut.  1.  27.  and  ye  in.  in  your  tents,  and  said 
Josh.  9. 18.  all  the  congregation  m.  against  princes 
Psal.  106. 25.  they  believed  not,  but  in.  m  their  tents 
rsa.  29.  24.  they  that  m.  shall  learn  doctrine 
JIf(7t.20..11.when  they  hart  received  a  penny,  they  jn. 
Mark  14.  .5.  and  they  ra.  against  her 
/^uke  5.  30.  but  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  to. 

15.  2.  they  in.  saying,  this  man  receiveth  sinners 

19.  7.  TO.  that  he  was-gone  to  be  guest  to  Zaccheus 
.John  6.  41.  the  Jews  m.  at  him,  because  he  said 

61.  he  knew  that  his  disciples  m.  at  it 
7.  32.  the  Pharisees  heard  tlrat  the  people  to. 
1  Cor.  10. 10.  neither  murmur  as  some  of  them  m. 

MURMUKERS. 
Jk(iel6.theseare7n.com|ilainers.walkingafterluBt8 

MURMURING. 
.Tohn  7. 12.  there  was  much  m.  among  the  people 
jSctsG.  l.a.m.  of  Grecians  agiiinst  the  Hebrews 

MURMURINGS. 
Ej-o(f.l6.7.he heareth  your m. 8, 9, 12.  J\rum.li.V. 

8.  your  m.  are  not  against  us,  but  the  Lord 
JSTuin.  17.  5. 1  will  make  to  cease  the  to.  of  Israel 
10.  thou  shalt  quite  lake  away  their  m.  from  me 
Phil.  2. 14.  do  all  thinff.<  without  m.  and  disputinga 

MURRAIN. 
Kiorf. 9.3. therefore  there  shall  be  a  very  grievous  n» 
Psal.  78.  t  50.  he  gave  their  beasts  to  the  m. 

MUSE. 
Psal.  143.  5.  I  TO.  on  the  work  of  thy  hands 

MUSED. 
Luke  3.  15.  all  men  m.  in  their  hearts  of  John 

MUSING. 
Psal.  39.  3.  while  I  was  m.  the  fire  burned 

MUSICAL. 
1  Ckroii.  16.  42.  with  m.  instruments  of  God 
J^Teh.  12.  36.  with  the  m.  instruments  of  David 
Eccl.  2.  8.  as  m.  instruments,  and  that  of  all  sort* 

MUSICIANS. 
ficr.18.22. voice  of  m.sh.nll  be  heard  no  more  in  thee 

HIUSIC. 
1  .Sam.18.6.  women  came  to  meet  king  Saul  with  n. 

1  Chr.  15.  16.  to  he  the  singers  with  instruments 

of  HI.  2  ChroH.  5.  13.  I  23.  13.  |  34.  12. 

2  Chr.  7.  6.  Levites  with  instruments  of  m. 
Ecr.l.  12.4.  daughters  of  in.  shall  be  brought  low 
f.am.  3.  63.  sitting  and  rising,  I  am  their  m. 

5.  14.  young  men  have  ceased  from  their  m. 
Dan.  3.  5.  when  ye  hear  all  kinds  of  to.  7.  10,  15. 

6.  \P.  neither  were  instruments  of  7)i.  brought 
.-^mos  6. 5.  that  invent  instrunientsof  »n.  like  David 
I^uke  15.  25.  his  elder  scm  heard  m.  and  dancing 

MUST 
Denotes,  (I)  Jl  necessity  of  that  thing  to  which  it 
is  applied,  lleh.  9.  10.     [1]  Of  a  good  thing., 
in  respect  either  of  God's  commandment  or 
promise,  Mark  9. 11.  Rom.  13.  5.     [2]  Of  moral 
evil,  or  sin,  in  respect  of  God's  pci-mission  of 
it,  man's  propensity  to  it,  and  Satan's  tug- 
gestion  of  it.  Mat.  18.  7.     (II)  ./?  duty,  and 
that  which  ought  to  he,  2  Tim.  2  C. 
f»f?!.24.5.»n.  I  needs  bring  thy  son  again  to  the  landt 
29.  26.  it  m.  not  be  so  done  in  our  country 
30. 16.  thou  m.  come  in  to  me  ||  43.  ll.tfitTO.beM 
T.rv.  11.  32.  it  m.  be  put  in  water,  so  be  cleansed 
2.3.  6.  seven  days  ye  to.  eat  unleavened  bread 
JJ'um.  6.  iH.  so  he  to.  do  after  the  law  of  separation 

20.  10.  m.  we  fetch  you  water  out  of  this  rock  1 
23. 12.  m.  1  not  take  heed  to  speak  that  the  Lord 

26.  all  that  the  Lord  speaketh  that  I  m.  do 


MYR 

Deut.  1. 22.  bring  us  word  by  what  way  we  hi.  go 
4.  22.  1  m.  die  in  this  land,  I  m.  not  go  over 

12.  J8.  thou  m.  eat  them  btlbre  the  Lord  thy  God 
31. 14.  thy  days  approach  that  thou  ra.  die 

Josh.  3.  4.  may  know  the  way  by  which  ye  m.  go 
Jud(,'.  13.  16.  thou  m.  otfer  it  to  the  Lord 

21.  17.  there  m.  be  un  inheritance  lor  them 
ISam.  14.43.  I  did  but  taste  a  little,  and  lo  1  m.  die 
2  Sam.  23.  3.  he  that  ruletli  over  men  m.  be  just 

7.  that  shall  touch  them  m-  be  fenced  with  iron 
1  Kings  18.  27.  he  sleepeth,  and  rn.  be  awaked 
f-zralO.  12.  as  thou  hast  said,  so  m.  we  do 
Jer.  10.  5.  they  m.  needs  be  borne,  they  cannot  go 
Mat.  26.54.  scriptures  be  fulHIIed,  thai  thus  it  m.  be 
Mark  2. 2-2.  else  the  bottles  will  be  marred,  but  new 
wine  m.  be  put  into  new  buttles,  Lukc5.3S. 

8.  31.  Son  of  manwi.  suffer  many  things,  9.  12. 
9. 11.  why  say  the  scribes  that  Elius  ?«.  first  come? 
13. 7.  when  ye  shall  hear  of  wars,  be  ye  not  trou- 
bled, tor  such  things  m.  be,  Luke  21.  <J. 

10.  "ospel  m.  lirst  be  published  among  all  nations 
Luke'i.  4'J.  I  m.  be  about  my  Father's  business 
4.  43.  I  m.  preach  kingdom  of  God,  for  1  am  sent 

14.  18.  I  bought  ground,  and  m.  go  and  see  it 

19.  5.  Zaccheus,  to-day  1  m.  abide  at  thy  house 

22.  7.  the  day  when  the  passover  m.  be  killed 
37.  the  things  written  »;i.  be  accomplished,  24  44. 

2:<.  17.  he  m.  release  one  to  them  at  the  feast 
24.  7.  Scm  of  man  m.  be  delivered  to  sinful  men 
John  3.  7.  marvel  not  I  said,  ye  m.  be  born  again 
14.  the  serpent,  so  m.  the  Son  of  man  be  lifted  up 
30.  ho  »n.  increase,  but  I  m.  decrease 
4.  4.  and  ho  m.  needs  go  through  Samaria 
24.  G.  is  a  spirit,  m.  worship  him  \a  spirit,  truth 

9.  4.  I  m.  work  the  works  of  him  that  sent  nie 

10.  16.  other  sheep  I  have,  them  also  I  m.  bring 
20.9.  knew  not  he  m.  rise  again  from  the  dead 

Jlcts  1.  16.  this  scripture  m.  have  been  fultilled 
22.  m.  one  be  ordained  to  be  a  witness  with  us 
4.  12.  none  other  name  whereby  we  m.  be  saved 
9.  6.  it  shall  be  told  thee  what  thou  m.  do 
14. 22.  we  HI. thro'  much  tribulation  enter  kingdom 

15.  21.  ye  m.  be  circumcised  and  keep  the  law 
IG.  30.  said,  sirs,  what  m.  I  do  to  be  saved 

Id.  21. 1  m.  by  all  means  keep  this  feast  in  Jerus. 

21.  22.  the  multitude  m.  needs  come  together 

23.  II.  so  m.  thou  bear  witness  also  at  Rome 
27. 24.  fear  not,  thou  m.  be  brought  before  Ciesar 

26.  howbeit  we  m.  be  cast  on  a  certain  island 
Rom.  13.  5.  wherefore  ye  m.  needs  be  subject 

1  Cor.  5   10.  then  m.  ye  needs  go  out  of  the  world 

11.  19.  there  m.  also 'be  heresies  among  ynu 
1.5.  2,5.  for  he  m.  reign  till  he  halh  put  under 

2  Cor.  h.  10.  for  we  m.  all  appear  before  the  judgm. 
11.30.  if  I  m.  needs  glory,  1  will  glory  of  things 

1  7'im.3.2.  a  bishop  thnn  m.  be  blameless,  Tit.  1.  7. 

7.  he  771.  have  a  good  report  of  them  without 

8.  likewise  m.  deacons  be  grave,  not  double- 

tongued,  not  given  to  much  wine 
27V7n.2.6.hu9handman  m.  be  first  partaker  of  fruits 

24.  the  servant  of  the  Lord  m.  not  strive 
Heb.  4.  6.  it  rcmMinelli  that  some  m.  enter  therein 
9.  16.  there  jti.  be  the  death  of  the  testator 
11. 6.  he  that  cometh  to  God,  tti.  believe  that  he  is 

13.  17.  they  watch,  as  they  that  ra.  give  account 
Hev.  4.  1.  shew  thee  things  which  m.  bo  hereafter 

11. 5.  if  any  will  hnrt  he  m.  in  this  manner  be  killed 

20.  3.  after  that  he  in.  be  loosed  a  little  season 

22.  0.  lo  shew  things  which  tti.  shorlly  be  done 

MU3TAKU-SEKI) ;  nee  Grain. 
,  MUSTERED. 

2«'inffj25.19.  took  the  «cril,e  wliich  tti.  .Ter.  52. 25. 

MUSTERETir. 
Isa.  13.  4.  the  Lord  m.  the  host  of  the  battle 

MUTTER. 
ha.  8.  10.  lo  wizards  that  peep,  and  that  m. 

16.  t  7.  for  Kirhareselli  shall  ye  ra. 

MUTTEREb. 
Isa.  59.  3.  your  tonsue  hnth  m.  perversenesg 

MUTUAL. 
Rom.  1.  12.  I  may  bn  romforted  by  the  tti.  faith 

MUZZLE. 
Deut.  2.').4.  thou  shalt  not  m.  the  ox  when  he  tread- 
cth  out  the  corn,  1  Cor.  9.  9.  1  Tim.  5.  18. 
MYRRH. 
Wim. 37. 25.  Ishmaelitcscamc  Iwaringhalm  and  m. 
43.  11.  ciirry  down  the  man  a  present,  m.  nuts 
Kznd.M.  23.  of  pure  m.  five  hunilTn<l  shfkels 
F.Klh.  2.  12.  to  wit,  six  months  with  oil  of  tti. 
I'sal.iH.^-  lliVEiirmentsHrnell  of  m. aloes  and  cassia 
Pruv.  7.  17.  I  have  iierfiimed  my  bed  with  vi. 
Cant.  1.  13.  a  bundle  of  m.  is  my  beloved  to  mo 

3.  6.  perfumed  with  m.  and  IVankinrensn 

4.  H.  I  will  get  me  to  the  mountain  ofm.  and  aloes 
14.  m.  and  aloe*  with  nil  the  chief  spices 

5.  1.  I  have  gathered  my  m.  with  my  spico 
.^.myhandsdropped  with  7n.fingi-rs  with  «w<-et  tti. 
13.  his  lipii  like  lilies, dropping  sweet-smelling  7n. 

Jlfrt(!.2. 11.  they  pri'sented  to  him  sifts,  nold  ami  rn. 
Mark  15.  23.  lo  drink  win«  mingled  wilJi  m. 
398 


MYS 

John  19.  39.  brought  a  mixture  ofTTt.  and  aloea 
MYRTLE. 

JVc/t.  8.  15.  go  forth  and  fetch  m.  branches. 

Jxa.  41.  19.  1  will  plant  in  tlie  wilderness  Ihe  m. 

'  55. 13.  instead  of  brier  shall  come  up  the  m.  tree 
MYKTLE-TKEES. 

Zech.  1.  8.  and  he  stood  among  the  m.  10  11. 
MYSTERY. 

The  word  sig-nijieii  a  secret,  a  mystery  being  a 
thing  kept  secrtt  and  hid  from  our  uudernland- 
ingjliU  iC  bercveaUd  to  us,  1  Cor. 2.7.  We  speak 
the  wisdom  of  God  in  a  mystery,  even  the  hid- 
den wisdom.  Mysteries  are  said  to  be  of  two 
sorts:  one  sort  are  such  as  would  never  have 
becrt  known  without  revelation;  but  when  re 
vealed,  may  be  in  a  good  measure  explained  and 
understood.  .Such  is  the  doctrine  of  the  satis- 
faction of  Christ,  of  the  resurrection  from  the 
dead,  of  the  forgiveness  of  sins  for  the  sake  of 
Christ's  su£'ertitgs,  and  of  eternal  life  in  a  fu- 
ture world.  The  other  sort  of  mysteries  are 
those,  which  when  revealed  to  us,  we  know  the 
existence,  or  reality  and  certainly  of  them,  but 
cannot  comprehend  the  manner  and  mode  how 
they  are.  These  are  the  mystery  of  the  blessed 
I'rinity,  and  the  mystery  of  the  incarnation  of 
Christ ;  or  the  union  of  the  divine  and  human 
natures  in  one  person.  The  calling  of  the  Gen- 
tiles, which  was  hid  and  kept  secret  for  many 
ages,  is  called  a  mystery,  llom.  16.  25.  Col.  1. 
20,  27.  The  spiritual  union  between  Christ 
and  his  church  is  called  a  mystery,  because  it 
exceeds  human  understanding,  and  is  revealed 
only  to  the  children  of  God,  Ejih.  5.  32.  Mark 
4.  11.  The  gospel  is  called  the  mystery  of 
godliness,  1  Tim.  3.  10. 

The  prophecies  concerning  theperson,the  coming, 
the  characters,  the  death  and  passion,  rif  the 
Messiah,  are  to  be  found  in  a  multitude  of  places 
in  the  Old  Testament,  but  after  afigurative  and 
mysterious  manner.  The  actions,  the  words,  thi 
lives  of  theprophets  were  a  continual  and  gene- 
ralprophecy,  which  was  concealed  from  Iheeyes 
of  the  people,  and  sometimrs  from  the  prophet.' 
themselves,  and  was  not  explained  or  discover 
ed,  till  after  the  birth  and  death  of  Christ ;  and 
these  mysteries  were  dispensed  in  so  wondrrfu 
a  method,  and  by  so  wise  a  providence,  that  thi 
first  served  as  a  foundation  for  the  second,  and 
the  succeeding gavi-.nr.w  light  to  those  that  wi  nt 
before.  They  still  improved  in  clearness  and 
evidence,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  dispensed  them  by 
measure,  and  in  due  degrees.  Daniel  /s  more 
explicit  than  the  prophets  before  him;  Haggai, 
Zechariah,  and  Malachi,  speak  of  the  coming 
of  the  death,  and  of  the  priesthood  of  Jesu 
Ohrist,  and  of  the  calling  of  the  Gentiles,  after 
a  more  plain  and  distinct  manner  than  the 
other  prophets  before  them. 

The  mysteries  of  the  Christian  religion,  is  that  of 
the  blessed  Trinity,  the  incarnation  of  Christ, 
his  hypostatieal  union  rvith  his  human  nature, 
his  miraculous  birth,  his  death,  resurrection, 
and  ascension,  thepredestination,  and  reproba- 
tion of  men;  the  grace  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  the 
manner  of  its  opeiation  in  our  hearts ;  the  re 
surrection  of  the  dead,  with  all  the  other  myste- 
ries revealed  to  us  both  in  the  Old  and  JV<?w 
Testament,  are  the  ohjrcts  of  the  faith  of  all 
true  Christians;  and  the  doctrine  of  the  gos- 
pel, and  these  tenets  of  Christianity  were  call- 
ed mysteries,  not  only  because  they  were  secrets 
which  would  not  have  been  known,  if  the  Son 
of  God,  and  his  Holy  .'•spirit  had  not  revealed 
them  to  believers,  but  also  because  thry  wrre 
not  revealed  indifferently  to  every  body.  The 
command  of  our  J^rd  .Icsiis  Christ  to  his  apos- 
tles was^  this  case  put  in  practice,  Give  not 
that  which  is  holy  unto  dogs,  nuilher  cast  ye 
your  pi'arls  before  swine,  Mat.  7.  fi.  T^nj 
preached  the  gospel  only  lo  those  who  seriously 
desired  to  be  instructed  in  it;  nor  did  they 
presently  discover  to  them  all  the  mysteries  of 
religion;  but  in  proportion  as  they  became  ca- 
pable to  receive  them. 

Mark  4.  11.  unto  you  it  is  given  to  know  the  m. 
of  the  kingdom  of  God 

Rom.  11.2.5.  that  ye  should  be  ignorant  of  this  m. 

10.  2'>.  according  to  the  rcv.hilion  of  the  m. 

1  Cor.  2.  7.  wo  speak  the  wisdom  of  God  in  a  tti. 
15.  51.  I  shew  ytiii  ii  tti.  we  shall  not  all  sleep 

Fph.  1.  9.  made  known  to  us  the  tti.  of  his  will 
3.  3.  how  Unit  ho  made  known  lo  mo  ihe  m. 
4.  undersland  my  knowlpdc  in  the  tij.  of  Christ 
9.  make  all  see  what  is  Ihe  fellowship  of  ihii  tii. 
a.  ;R!.  this  is  n  great  tti.  hut  I  speak  of  Christ 
6.  19.  may  open  my  mouth  bohllv,  lo  make  known 
llie  m.  of  the  e«»['>-\,  C<d.  I.  20,  27.  I  4.  3. 
d/.2. 2.  lo  Iho  ncknowlnilginnni  of  the  ra.  ofCnd 

2  Thess.  2. 7.  the  in.  of  iniiioity  doth  already  work 


NAK 

1  TTItti.  3.  9.  holding  m.  qf  faith  in  pure  consciencit 
1  Tim.  3.  16.  great  is  m.  of  godiinesn,  God  was 
manifest  in  flesh 
iffrr.  1.  20.  the  m.  of  the  seven  stars  thou  sawest 
10.  7.  theTTi.  of  God  should  be  finished,  as  declared 
17. 5.  m.  Babylon  Ihe  great  ||  7.  tti.  of  the  woman 
MYSTERIES. 
Mat.  13. 11.  it  is  given  to  you  to  know  the  ra.  of  Iha 
kingdom,  but  to  them  not  given,  Luke  8.  10. 
1  Cor.  4.  1.  and  as  stewards  of  the  ra.  of  God 
13. 2.  and  tho'  1  understand  all  m.  and  knowledga 
14.  2.  howbeit,  in  the  Spirit  he  spcaketh  ra. 


N. 


NAIL. 

Judg.  4.  21.  Jael  took  a  ti.  of  tent,  and  smotfi  the  Ji. 

22.  Sisera  lay  dead,  the  7i.  was  in  his  temples 
5.  20.  she  ]>ut  her  hand  to  the  n.  and  hammer 
Ezra  9.  8.  to  give  us  a  n.  in  his  holy  place 
/5a.22. 23.  I  will  fasten  him  as  a  ti.  in  a  sure  place 

25.  shall  the  n.  that  is  fastened  be  removed 
Zech.  10.  4.  of  him  came  the  7i.  the  battle-bow 

NAILS. 
f.ev.  1. 1  15.  shall  pinch  olfthe  bead  wirii  the  n. 
/.'c»t.2M2.6he  shall  shave  her  head, and  pare  hern. 

1  Chron.  22.  3.  prepared  iron  in  abundance  for  n. 

2  Chron.  3.  9.  the  weight  of  the  71.  was  fifty  shekels 
Hccl.H.W.  n.  fastened  by  the  masters  of  asse/riblies 
Isa.  41.  7.  he  fastened  his  idol  with  ti.  Jer.  10.  4. 
Dan.  4.  33.  bis  7i.  were  grown  like  bird's  claws 

7.  19.  the  fourth  bea.st,  whose  71.  were  of  brass 

John  20.  25.  put  mv  finger  into  the  print  of  the  n. 
NAILING. 

Coi.  2. 14.  betook  it  out  of  the  way,  n.  it  to  his  cross 
NAKED 

Signifies,  [1]  Otis altogethcrunclothed  or micover- 
ed,  (Jen.  2.  25.  |  3.  7.  [2]  Such  as  have  but  few 
clothes  on,  having  put  off  the  greatest  part  of 
them,  1  Sam.  19.  21.  John  21.  7.  [3]  One  void 
of  grace,  that  is  not  clothed  with  the  right- 
eousness of  Christ,  and  so  is  exposed  to  the 
wrath  of  God  for  his  sins,  Rev!  3.  17.  [4]  Such 
as  had  heinously  sinned  and  were  deprived  of 
the  favour  and  protection  of  God,  and  so  might 
be  easily  surprised  by  their  enemies,  Exod.  32 
25.  [5]  One  destitute  of  all' worldly  goods. 
Job  1.  21.  [6]  That  which  is  discovered, 
known,  and  manifest.  Job  20.  0.   Heb.  4.  13. 

The  nakedness  of  a  land.  Gen.  42.  9.  The  weak 
and  ruined  parts  of  it,  where  the  country  lies 
most  open  and  exposed  to  danger,  and  may 
most  easily  be  assaulted  or  surprised. 

To  uncover  the  nakedness  of  any  one,  denotes  a 
shameful  and  unlawful  conjunction,  or  an  in- 
cestuous marriage,  Ijcv.  20.  19. 

The  nakedness  of  .Adam  niirf  Eve  iras  unknown 
to  them  before  they  sinned.  Gen.  2.  25.  'I'hey 
were  not  ashamed  at  it,  because  concupiscence 
and  irregular  desires  had  not  yet  made  the  flesh 
rebel  against  the  spirit ;  and  their  nakednesn 
excited  no  disorder  in  their  imaginations,  nnr 
any  thing  that  was  irregular  or  contrary  to 
reason.  They  were  exempt  from  whatever  in- 
decency might  happen  among  us,  upon  the  oc- 
casion of  the  nakedness  of  the  body. 

Gen.  2.  25.  they  were  n.  and  were  not  ashamed 
3.  7.  and  they  kmw  llmt  Ibey  were  n.  10,  11. 

Ezod.  32.  25.  whi'n  Moses  saw  that  tho  people 
were  71.  for  Aaron  had  made  them  ti.  to 
their  shame 

l.en.  20.  1 18.  he?  hiilh  made  n.  hrr  foiinlnin 

1  Sam.  10.  24.  Saul  lav  down  ti.  all  llinl  diiv 

2  Chton.  28.  15.  with  the  spoil  clothed  all  the  n. 
19.  Aha/,  made  Judah  71.  and  transgressed  soro 

against  the  Lord 
.Tob  1.  21.  Job  said,  ti.  came  I  out  of  my  mother's 
womb,  and  ti.  shall  I  re'urn  llnther 
22.  0.  thou  hast  stripped  the  tt.  of  their  clothing 
21,  7.  they  cause  the  ti.  to  lodge  wilboul,  10. 
20.  0.  Iiclj  is  n.  before  him  and  destruction 
7'j-()r.20.t  18.  where  no  vision,  the  people  Is  made  n. 
Kirl.  5.  1.5.  71.  shall  he  return,  logo  as  he  came 
Isa.  2*3  t  6.  and  Kir  made  71.  the  shield 
.v.  7.  when  Ihoii  seest  Ihe  71.  that  thou  cover  him 
.Trr.  48.  f  0.  bo  like  n  71.  tree  in  thi'  wilderness 
51.  t  .58.  the  walls  of  Pabylon  shall  be  made  ti. 
I. am.  4.  21.  O  Edom,  thou  shalt  make  thyself  71. 
F.irk.  18.  7.  if  he  hath  covered  the  ti.  16. 
}los.  2. 3.  lest  I  strip  her  71.  and  set  hor  as  in  Ihe  d.iy 
.Imos  2.  16.  he  that  is  coiirngeiuiB  shall  flee  nwny 
■n.  in  that  itay,  suith  the  Lord 
M!c.^.S.  therefore  I  will  wail,  go  stripped  and  ii. 

11.  pass  ye  away,  having  Ihy  shame  n. 
5.  t  6.  shall  waste  with  her  own  n.  swords 
Waft.  3.  9.  Ihy  Imtw  was  made  i|uile  n.  according 
.Mat.  25.  30.  I  was  71.  and  ye  clothed  me  not,  4.3. 
38.  when  saw  we  Ihei'  n.  and  clothed  llicel  44 
.Var/>  14. 51.  having  a  linen  cloth  about  his  n.  body 


NAM 

Mark  14.  53.  and  he  lefl  the  linen  cloth,  and  fled 

from  them  n. 

John  21.  7.  Simon  Peter  was  n.  and  did  cast  him- 

Bellinto  the  sea 

.^i:ts  19.16.  they  fled  out  of  that  house  n.  wounded 

Car.  4.  11.  to  this  present  hour  we  are  n. 
"2  Cor.  5.  3.  being  clothed,  wesljall  not  be  (bund  n. 
//eft.  4.  13.  but  all  things  are  n.  to  the  eyes  of  him 
Jam.  2. 1.').  if  n  brother  or  sister  be  n.  and  destitute 
Hev.  3.  17.  miserable,  poor,  and  blind,  and  n. 

16.  1.5.  koepeth  his  garments,  lest  ho  walk  n. 

17.  It),  and  sliall  make  her  desolate  and  n.  and  eat 

Ser.  Rare. 
NAKEDNESS. 
Oen.  9.  22.  and  Ham  saw  the  n.  of  his  father 

23.  and  covered  n.  they  saw  not  their  father's  n. 
42.  9.  to  §ee  the  n.  of  the  land  ye  are  come,  12. 
Ezod.  20. 26.  that  thy  n-  be  not  discovered  thereon 
28.42.  shalt  make  linen  breeches  to  cover  their  n. 
Lev.  18.  6.  none  of  you  shall  uncover  their  n. 

7.  the  71.  of  father  or  mother,  8,  1 1,  15.  |  20.  II. 

O.thc  n.of  thy  sister  ||  10.  n.  of  thy  son's  daughter 

11.  n.  of  father's  wife's  daughter,  she  is  thy  sis- 
ter, shalt  not  uncover  her  n. 

12. 77.  of  father's  sister  |{  13.  mother's  sister,  20.19. 

14.  father's  brother  ||  15.  Ji.  of  daughter-in-law 

16.71.  of  thy  brother's  wife,  it  is  thy  brother's  7i. 

17.  n.  of  a  woman  and  her  daughter  not  uncover 

19.  7t.  of  a  woman  as  long  as  put  apart,  20.  18. 
20.  17.  and  see  his  sister's  n.  nnd  she  see  his  n. 

20.  uncovered  his  uncle's  ji.  ||  21.  brother's  77. 
7>f««.23.t  14.  camp  be  holy,  that  he  see  non.inthee 

24.  1 1.  if  found  matter  of  n.  in  her,  write  a  bill 
28.  48.  shalt  serve  thine  enemies  in  n.  and  want 

1  Sam.  20.  30.  to  the  confusion  of  thy  mother's  n. 
Tsa.  20.  t  4.  buttocks  uncovered  to  the  71.  of  Egypt 

47.  3.  thy  71.  shall  be  uncovered,  yea,  thy  shame 
I,am.  1.  8.  because  they  have  seen  her  71. 
Kirk.  16.  8.  I  covered  thy  71.  yea,  I  sware  to  thee 
36.  71.  discovered  through  tny  whoredoms,  23.18. 

16.  37.  and  will  discover  thy  71.  to  them 

22.  10.  in  thee  they  discovered  their  father's  77. 

23.  10.  these  discovered  her  n.  and  slew  her 
29.  the  71.  of  thy  whoredom  shall  be  niscovered 

Hos.  2.  9.  my  woo'  and  fla.x  civen  to  cover  her  n. 
J\'iih.  3.  5.  and  I  will  shew  l^ne  nations  thy  w. 
y/aft.  2.  15.  tliat  thou  mayest  lOok  on  their  v. 
Rom.  8.  35.  shall  71.  separate  us  from  love  of  God  1 

2  Ou-.  II.  27.  in  fastings  often,  in  cold  and  n. 
Rf!U.3. 18.  that  the  shame  of  thy  71.  do  not  appear 

NAME 

Is  referred  (f)  To  find,  and  sisnifies,  any  thin/r 
whereby  his  nature  and  will  is  made  better 
known  tn  11.=:,  an  [1]  His  titles,  Exod.  3.  13,  14. 
I  6.  3.  [2]  His  attributes,  or  properties,  E.vod. 
33.  19.  I  34.  6,  7.  1  Tim.  6.  1.  [3]  His  will 
and  pnrpnse  coneerning-  salvation  by  Christ, 
John  17.  6,  26.  [4]  His  rielp  and  assistance, 
1  Sam.  17.  45.  Psal.  44.  5.  [5]  His  honour, 
renown,  and  fflory,  Psal.  76.  1.  [6]  His  word, 
Psal.  5.  II.  Acts  9.  15.  [7]  His  o-race,  mercy, 
and  liir.c  to  sinners,  in  sending  Christ  into  the 
Kortd  to  save  them,  Psal.  22. '22.  John  17.  26. 
[S]  His  wisdom,  power,  and  goodness,  as  dis- 
phiyed  in  the  works  of  creation  and  provi- 
dence, Psal.  8. 1,  9.  [9]  His  ^race,  potter,  and 
providence,  Psal.  20.  1,  7.  [10]  His  worship 
a-nd  .service.  1  Kings  5.  5.  Mai.  1.  6.  [11]  Ood 
hirnself,  Psal.  29.  2.  |  34.  3.  |  61.  5.  (11)  To 
CAri.vf,  and  signifies,  [1]  His  deity  and  perfec- 
tions, that  which  he  really  is,  nnd  is  acknnw- 
ledisedtobe,  Isa.  9.  6.  Mat.  I.'j3.  Rev.  19.  13. 
His  name  shnll  be  called  tVonderpil,  the 
miarht'i  Ood :  that  is,  he  is  wonderful,  he  is 
the  mightv  God.  fC]  His  authority  and  com- 
mission. Mat.  7. 22.  Acts  4.  7.  [3]  the  preach- 
ing, or  proffssinrr  of  his  gospel.  Mat.  10.  22. 
I  19.  29.  Rev.  2.  13.  [i\  His  advancement 
above  all  principality  and  power,  to  the  hitrhest 
derrree  of  plory,  honour,  majesty,  and  domi- 
ftinn,  Phil.  2.  9.'  compared  with  Kph.  1.  20,  21. 
(Ill)  TTj  771071*  and  signifies,  [1]  That  particu- 
lar name  hv  which  any  person  is  called,  Luke 
1.  60,fi3.  [2]  The  whole  person,  Luke  10.  20. 
Rev.  3.  4.  [3]  Hrputilinn  or  character,  whe- 
ther ernod  or  evil.  Dent.  22.  14.  Prov.  22.  1. 
[4]  Honour,  frlory,  and  renown,  Dent.  26.  19. 
Zeph.  3.  20.  [5]  .^n  appearance  and  shew  of 
rellirinn  in  the  opinion  of  men.  Rev.  3.  1.  [6] 
The  memory  or  remrmhrance,  Deut.  29.  20. 
[7]  Posterity  or  issue,  Deut.  25.  7.  Isa.  60.  22. 
[8]  Fame  or  renown,  2f'hron.26.  8,  15. 

To  take  the  name  of  God  in  vain,  Krod.  20.  7. 
Tn  swear  falsely,  or  without  occasion,  and  to 
minffle  the  name  of  God  in  our  discourses,  or 
our  oaths,  either  falsely,  or  rashly,  or  wan- 
tonly, or  unnecessarily,  or  presumptuously. 
Ood  forbids  to  make  mention  of  the  names  of 
other  gods,  F.zod.  23.  13.  He  would  not  so 
muck  as  have  them  named,  or  their  names  pro- 
399 


NAM 

nounced.  TTie  gods  of  the  heathen  are  nothing 
at  all,  therefore  the  Israelites  were  to  shew 
nothing  but  contempt  for  them:  They  hardly 
ever  pronounced  the  name  Baal,  they  di.\fi 
gured  it,  for  example,  by  saying,  Mephibo- 
sheth,  or  Meribosheth,  instead  of  Mephibaal, 
or  Meribaal ;  where  Bosheth  signifies  some- 
thing shameful,  or  contemptible. 

To  give  a  name,  js  a  token  of  command  and  au- 
thority. The  father  gives  names  to  his  chil- 
dren and  slaves.  Jt  is  said,  that  Adam  gave 
a  name  to  his  wife,  and  to  all  the  animals,  and 
that  the  name  he  gave  them  became  their  true 
name.  God  changed  the  name  of  .\hr:im,  Ja- 
cob and  Sarai;  which  expresses  his  absolute 
dominion  over  all  men,  and  his  particular 
benevolence  towards  those  whom  he  receives 
more  especially  into  the  number  of  his  own: 
Hence  it  was  that  he  gave  a  name,  even  before 
their  birth,  to  some  persons  whom  he  appoint- 
ed for  great  purposes,  and  who  belonged  to 
him  in  a  particular  manner  ;  such  as  to  Jedi- 
diah  or  Solomon,  son  of  David  ;  to  the  Mes- 
siah, to  John  the  Baptist,  &c. 

To  know  any  one  by  his  name,  I  know  thee  by 
naine,  Exod.  33.  12.  expresses  a  distinction,  a 
friendship,  a  particular  familiarity.  It  is 
spoken  perhaps  in  allusion  to  the  manner  of 
the  kings  of  the  east,  who  had  very  little  con- 
versation with  their  subjects ;  they  saw  them 
hut  seldom,  and  hardly  ever  appeared  in  pub- 
lic :  So  that  when  they  knnv  any  one  of  their 
servants  by  name,  when  they  vouchsafed  to 
speak  to  them,  to  call  them,  and  to  admit  them 
into  their  presence,  it  was  esteemed  as  a  very 
great  mark  of  favour. 

Oen.  2. 19.  what  Adam  called,  that  was  71.  thereof 

4.  17.  call  the  n.  of  the  city  after  the  n.  of  his  son 

5.  2.  he  blessed  them,  and  called  their  n.  Adam 
II.  4.  let  us  make  us  a  71.  lest  we  be  scattered 
19.  22.  therefore  the  71.  of  the  city  is  Zoar 
28.  19.  the  n.  of  the  city  was  Luz  at  the  first 

48.6.  shall  be  called  after  the  n.  of  their  brethren 
Exod.  34.  14.  the  Lord,  whose  71.  is  Jealous,  is  a 

jealous  God 

Lev.  18.  21.  neither  shalt  thou  profane  the  71.  of  thy 

God,  saith  the  Lord,  19.  12.  |  21.6.  1  22.  2,32. 

J^um.  11.  26.  77.  of  one  Eldad,ofthe  other  Medad 

17.  2.  write  thou  every  man's  71.  upon  his  rod 
25.  14.  the  71.  of  the  Israelite  that  was  slain 

15.  71.  of  Midianitish  woman  slain  was  Cozbi 
27.  4.  why  should  71.  of  our  father  be  done  away? 
32.  42.  and  called  it  Nobah,  after  his  own  77. 
7)f7/£.7.24.shall  destroy  their  77.  from  under  heaven 
9.  14.  and  blot  out  their  77.  from  under  heaven 
22.  14.  bring  up  an  evil  77.  on  her,  and  say 

19.  he  hath  brought  up  an  evil  71.  on  a  virgin 

25.  6.  first-born  shall  succeed  in  77.  of  his  brother 
7.  to  raise  up  to  his  brother  a  77.  in  Israel 

26.  19.  to  make  thee  high  in  77.  and  in  honour 
28.58.  thou  mayest  fear  this  glorious  and  fearful 

71.  THE    LORD   THY    GOD 

.Tosh.  23.  7.  nor  make  mention  of  71.  of  their  gods 
Ruthi.  19.  man's  71.  with  whom  I  wrought  is  Boaz 

4.  5.  to  rai.^e  up  the  77.  of  the  dead,  10. 

17.  the  women  her  neighbours  gave  it  a  71. 

1  Sam.  25.  3.  the  71.  of  the  man  was  Nabal 

9.  they  spake  to  Nabal  in  the  71.  of  David 

2  .Sar7t.6.  2.  whose  7t.  is  called  by  the  71.  of  (he  Ld. 

7.  9.  I  have  made  thee  a  great  71.  like  the  n.  of 

the  great  men  in  the  earth,  1  Chron.  17.  8. 
23.  God  redeemed  to  make  him  a  71. 1  Chr.  17.  21, 

8.  13.  David  gat  him  a  71.  when  he  returned 

14. 7.  shall  not  leave  to  my  husband  neither  7t.  nor 
23. 18.  Abishai  had  the  71.  among  three 

22.  these  things  did  Benaiah,  and  had  the  77 
among  three  mighty  men,  1  CAr.  11.20, 24 

1  Kings  1.  47.  God  make  the  77.  of  Solomon  bitter 

than  thy  71.  and  his  throne  greater  than  thy 
14.  21.  chnse  to  put  his  71.  there,  2  Chron.  12.  13. 

18.  24.  call  ye  on  the  n.  of  your  gods,  25. 
21.  8.  so  Jezebel  wrote  letters  in  Ahab's  77. 

2  firi7iir'14. 27.  would  not  blot  out  the  77.  of  Israel 
Kz7-n2.61.  and  was  called  after  their  71.  JV/ft.  7.  6,3. 

5.  1.  pruphosied  in  the  77.  of  the  God  of  Israel 
J^'eh.  9.  7.  and  gavest  him  the  71.  of  Abraham 

10.  so  didst  thou  get  thee  a  71.  as  it  is  this  day 
Esth.  2.  22.  ond  Esther  certified  the  king  thereof 

in  Morder.ni's  71. 

8.  8.  write  ye  also  for  the  Jews  in  the  king's  71. 
Job  18.  17.  he  shall  have  no  71.  in  the  street 

30.  t  8.  they  were  children  of  men  of  no  71. 
Psal.  9.  5.  thou  halt  put  out  their  n.  for  ever 

20.  1.  the  71.  of  the  God  of  Jacob  defend  thee 
5.  in  the  71.  of  God  we  will  set  up  our  banners 

44.  20.  if  we  have  forgotten  the  n.  of  our  God 
69.  30.  I  will  praise  the  n.  of  God  with  a  song 
63.  4.  the  71.  of  Israel  be  no  more  in  remcmbranre 

18.  whose  n.  alone  is  Jehovah,  art  most  high 
99.  3.  let  them  praise  thy  great  n.  for  it  is  holy 


NAM 

Psal.  109.  13.  and  let  their  7».  be  blotted  out 
113.  3.  the  T^ord's  71.  is  to  be  praised 
Prov.  10.  7.  but  the  7».  of  the  wicked  shall  rot 

18.  10.  the  71.  of  the  Lord  is  a  strong  tower 
22.  1.  a  good  71.  is  rather  I0  be  chosen  than  riche* 
30.  9.  leet  I  take  the  77..  of  my  God  in  vain 

Ecci.  7.1.  a  good  77.  better  than  precmus  ointment 
Isa.  14.  22.  I  will  cut  oft"  from  Babylon  the  71. 
55. 13.  it  shall  be  to  the  Lord  for  a  71.  for  a  sign 
.56.  5.  I  will  give  them  a  71.  an  everl.iRling  71. 
57.  15.  whose  ?i.  is  holy  ||  62.2.  called  by  a  new  n 
63.  12.  to  make  himself  an  everlasting  71. 
14.  lead  thy  people,  to  make  thyself  a  glorious  71. 

65.  15.  ye  shall  leave  your  71.  for  a  curse  to  my 
chosen,  and  call  his  servants  by  another  71. 

66.  22.  so  shall  your  seed  and  your  71.  remain 
Jer.  r,).  11.  tliat  they  might  be  to  me  for  a  71.  33. 9. 

32.  20.  which  hast  made  thee  a  7t.  Van.  9.  t  15. 
.33.  16.  this  is  the  71.  wherewith  she  shall  he  called 
40.  18.  as  I  live,  saith  the  King,  whose  7«.  is  the 
Lord  of  hosts,  48.  15.]  51.  .57. 
Krrt.  20.  29.  nnd  the  ?7.  thereof  is  called  Bamah 

22.  t  5.  mock  thee  which  art  polluted  of  7i. 

23.  t  10.  and  she  became  a  71.  among  women 

24.  2  son  of  man,  wr'te  thee  the  71.  of  the  day 
48..')5.the  71.  of  the  city  shall  he,  The  Lord  is  there 

75 071.2.20. blessed  be  the  7i.of  God  for  ever  and  ever 

4.  8.  Daniel  came,  according  to  the  71.  of  my  god 
Hos.  1.  6.  God  said  10  him,  call  her  77.  Lo-ruhaniah 

2.17.  they  sliall  no  more  be  remcndiered  by  their  71. 
.flmosh.'il.  saith  Ld.  whose  77.  is  the  God  of  hosts 
Mic.  4.  5.  for  all  people  walk  every  one  in  the  n. 
of  his  god,  we  wdl  walk  in  the  71.  of  our  God 
Zeph.  1.  4.  I  will  cut  oft' the  71.  of  the  L'hemarims 
3.  20.  I  will  make  you  a  71.  and  a  praise 
Z,cch.  6.  12.  the  man  whose  71.  is  the  Br.^NTH 
Mat.W.Al.  rcceiveth  prophet  in  the  71.  of  a  prophet, 
a  righteous  man  in  n.  of  a  righteous  man 
42.  shall  give  a  cup  of  water  only  in  7!.of  discipis 
28.  19.  baplii;ing  them  in  the  71.  of  the  Father 
Luke  1.61.  none  of  thy  kindred  is  called  by  this  71. 

63.  and  he  wrote,  saying,  his  71.  is  John 
6.  22.  blessed,  when  shall  cast  nut  your  ti.  as  evil 
.John  1.6.  a  man  sent  from  God,  whose  71.  was  John 
3.  18.  not  believed  in  the  77.  of  the  only  begotten 

5.  43. 1  am  come  in  my  Father's  n.  and  ye  receive 
10.  25.  the  works  that  I  do  in  my  Father's  71. 

Jlcts  2.38.  be  baptized  in  the  71.  of  the  Lord  Jesui 

3.  6.  in  the  71.  of  Jesus  Christ,  rise  up  and  walk 

4.  7.  by  what  power  or  71.  have  ye  done  this? 
12.  there  is  none  other  71.  under  heaven  given 
17.  speak  henceforth  to  no  man  in  this  71.  18. 
30.  that  wonders  may  be  done  by  the  71.  of  Jesus 

5.  28.  that  you  should  not  teach  in  this  71.  40. 
8. 12.  preachinj,  concerning  the  7J.  of  Jesus 
9.  21.  that  destroyed  them  that  called  on  this  7t. 

27.  he  had  preached  hoMly  in  the  71.  of  .lesus 
15.26.have  hazarded  their  lives  for  the  71.  of  Jesus 
16.  18.  saifl,  in  the  77.  of  Jesus  come  out  of  her 

19.  5.  they  were  baptized  in  the  77.  of  .Tesus 
26.9.  to  do  contrary  to  the  77. of  Jesus  of  Nazareth 

Rom.  2.  24.  for  the  n.  of  God  is  blasphemed 

1  Car.  1.  13.  were  ye  baptized  in  the  71.  of  Paul  t 

5.  4.  in  the  71.  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  F.ph.  5.  20. 

6.  11.  are  justified  in  the  71.  of  the  Lord  Jesug 
Eph.  1.  21.  far  above  every  n.  that  is  named 
Phil.  2.  9.  hath  given  him  a  71.  above  every  «. 

10.  at  the  71.  of  Jesus  every  knee  should  bow 
Col.  3.  17.  do  all  in  the  71.  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
1  Tim.  6.  1.  that  the  77.  of  God  be  not  blasphemed 
^Tim.'i.  19.  the  ».  of  Christ,  depart  from  iniquity 
Heh.  1.  4.  he  hath  <ibtnine<l  a  more  excellent  «. 
.Tam.  2.  7.  do  not  they  blaspheme  that  wnfthv  71..' 
1  Pet.  4.  14.  if  reproached  lor  the  7«.  of  Christ 
1  John  3.  23.  we  should  believe  on  the  v.  of  hia 
Son,  Jesus  Christ,  5.  13. 
Rep.  2.  17.  a  71.  written,  which  no  man  knnweth 
3.  1.  thou  hast  a  n.  that  thou  livest,  and  art  dea?I 

12.  1  will  write  on  him  the  n.  n(  my  God 

8.  11.  the  71.  of  the  star  is  called  Wormwood 

9.  II.  whose  71.  in  the  Hebrew  toijsne  is  Abaddon 
1.3.  1.  nnd  on  his  heads  the  71.  of  blasphemy 
14.1.  his  Father's  71.  written  in  their  foreheads 

16.  9.  and  men  blasphemed  the  71.  of  God 

17.  5.  on  her  forehead  was  a  71.  written,  Mystery 
19.  12.  a  71.  written  no  man  knew  hut  himself 

10.  on  his  thigh  a  71.  written,  King  of  kings 

See  Oam-eti. 

By  NAME,  or  by  the  NAME. 

Exod.  a.  3.  I  appeared  by  the  n.  of  God  .Mmighty 

31.  2.  I  have  called  by  n.  Fezaleel,  .35.  30. 

.13.  12.  yet  thou  hast  said,  I  know  thee  by  n.  17 

JiTum.  4.  32,  by  n.  ye  shall  reckon  the  instrumente 

■fosh.  21.  9.  thev  gave  these  cities  mentioned  ft;/  n. 

1  Sam.  17.  23.  Philistine  of  Galh,  Goliath  by  h. 

2  Sam.  20. 21.  Shcba.  son  of  Bichri  by  n.  hath  lifted 
1  Kings  13.  2.  a  child  shall  he  born,  Josiah  hyn. 
I  Cltr.  4.  41.  these  written  by  n.  cnme  and  smote 

12.  31.  expressed  by  n.  to  come  and  make  David 
king,  10.  41.  2   CArc»t.  28.  15.  |  31.  10 


NAM 

F-ith.  2. 14.  except  that  she  were  called  ty  n. 
tja.  44. 5. shall  cull  liiniself  by  the  n.  of  Jacob,  an.l 
Burname  U'lmacW  by  the  h.  of  Israel,  iS.l. 
45.3.  I  the  Lord  which  call  thee  by  thy  ». 
John  10.  ;t.  and  he  calleth  his  own  sheoj)  Ay  n. 
Jicts  4.  10.  by  the  n.  of  Jesus  this  man  is  whole 
1  iiir.  ).  10.  1  beseech  you  by  the  n.  of  our  Lord 
'iJukn  14.  our  friends  salute  thee,  greet  friends  by  n. 

See  E.XPRESSED. 

Uia  NAME. 
F-xod.  3. 13.  shall  say,  what  is  his  n.  7  Prov.  30.4. 
la.  3.  the  Ld.  is  his  n.  Jt.  Xi.  -2.  .Imos  5.  8.  |  !•.  6. 

20.7.  guiltlcis  that takcth  his  n. in  vain,  Jieut.H.li. 
28.  21.  every  slone  with  hisn.  shall  they  be,  39. 14. 

Deut.  3.  14.  Jair  railed  them  afttr  his  own  Ji. 
«.  13.  shftlt  scr\'u  hiMi,and  shall  swear  by  his  n. 

10.8.  lo  bless  in /lis  M.to  this  day,  lCVir.23.  13. 
12.  5.  the  Lord  yuur  God  shall  choose  to  put  his 

n.lhere,  21.  1  Kings  14.21.  2CAr<m.  12. 13. 
11.  shall  choose  to  cause  his  n.  to  dwell  there 
14. 2;J.  choose  to  place  his  n.  there,  16. 6, 11. )  2(5.2. 
21.  the  Lord  shall  choose  to  set  his  n.  there 
2j.  0.  that  hia  n.  be  not  put  out  of  Israel 

10.  and  his  n.  shall  be  called  in  Isiael 
2"J.  20.  L.  shall  blot  out  his  n.  from  under  heaven 
Ju'lir.  13.fi.  1  a.sked  not,  neither  told  he  inc  his  n. 
Kullii.  14.  that  his  n.  may  be  famous  in  Israel 
1  Sam.  12.  22.  for  his  n.  sake,  Psal.  23.  3.  |  100. 8. 
l./6/m2. 12.  Syo.'m". 
18.  30.  so  that  his  n.  was  uiurh  set  by 
25.  25.  as  his  n.  is,  so  is  he,  Nabal  is  his  n. 
1  Chr.  lli.  8.  give  thanks  to  Lord,  call  upon  his  n. 
make  known  his  deeds,  Fs.  10.j.  1.  tsa.  12.  4 
20.  give  the  glory  due  to  his  n.  /'5.29.  2.  |  96.8. 
F.zra  ti.  12.  God  that  caused  his  it.  dwell  there 
Psal.  34.  3.  let  us  exalt  his  n.  together,  66.2. 
41.  5.  when  shall  he  die  and  his  n.  perish? 
fiH.  4.  that  rideih  on  the  hravens  by  his  n.  Jaii 
fi9.  36.  they  that  love  his  n.  shall  dwell  ihereirx 
'^2. 17.  A«»  71. shall  endure  for  ever,  as  long  aa  sun 

19.  and  blessed  be  his  "lorious  n.  for  ever 
Tfi.l.Ats  n.  is  great  iu  Iir.  ||  90. 2.  blc^a  his  n.  100. 4. 
99.  6.  Samuel  among  them  that  call  on  his  n. 
111.9.  holy  and  reverend  is  his  n. 
1.3.5.  .1.  sing  praises  to  his  n.  for  it  is  pleasant 
148. 13.  praise  hia  n.  for  his  n.  alone  is  e.tcellent 
149.  3.  let  thern  praise  his  n.  in  the  dance 
ProB.  21.24.  proud  and  haughty  scorner  is  his  n. 
Fxcl.  6.4.  kia  n.  shall  be  covered  with  darkne-s 
Jsa.l.  14.  shall  call  his  n.  Immanuel,  Mat.  1.  23. 
!r6.  and  hia  n.  shall  be  called  Wonderful 


J2.  4.  make  mention  that  his  n.  if  exalted 

47.  4.  the  Lorrl  of  hosts  is  AiV?!.  the  Holy  One  of 

Israel,  48. 2,  |  51.  15.  |  54.5.  ./er.  lO.JO.  | 
31.  35.  I  32.  18.  1  50.  34.  |  51.  19. 

48.  19.  Ms  n.  should  not  have  been  cut  ofT 
Jrr.  11.  19.  his  n.  may  be  no  more  remembered 

20.  9.  I  will  not  speiik  any  morff  in  his  n. 
2:).  6.  this  is  his  n.  whereby  he  shall  be  callrtl 
43. 17.  all  ye  that  know  his  n.  say, how  is  staff 

JImiis  4. 13.  the  Lord,  the  God  of  hosts  is  his  n. 
'/.ech.  10.  12.  Ihey  shall  walk  upaiid  down  \nhis  n. 

It.  9.  in  that  day  shall  beone  I.ord,  and  hisn.  one 
Mai.  3. 16.  for  them  that  thought  on  his  n.  a  book 
Mat.  1.25.  he  called /i/s  71.  Jesus,  AuAe  1.31.  [2.21. 

12.  21.  in  hia  n.  shall  the  Gentiles  trust 
Marki'i.  14.  for  his  v.  wius  spread  abroad 
y.ii'.r  1.  13.  and  thou  shalt  call  his  n.  J.)hn 

21.  47.  remission  of  sins  should  be  preached  inA.  n. 
^lAii  1. 12.  even  to  llicin  that  believe  on  his  n. 

2.  23.  many  believed  in  his  v.  when  they  saw 

.';.  43.  If  another  fhHll  come  in  kia  own  71. 

2<).3I.  that  believing  ye  might  have  life  thro'  Ai3  n. 
.^rls  3. 10.  Aio  71.  through  f«ith  in  his  v.  hath  made 

5.  41.  they  were  counted  worthy  losufTer  for  liis  n. 

10.  43.  thro'  Ais  n.  shall  receive  remission  of  sins 
*13.  8.  Klyman  the  sorceier,  for  co  is  Ai>  7i. 

I.'i.  14.  to  InkiMMil  of  Ihr-m  a  pcuiple  for  Ai>  7». 
Hiim.  1. .').  to  the  fdilli  among  all  nation.!  for  /ii«  71. 
Ileb.  6. 10.  of  love  which  ye  shewed  toward  Ais  11 

13.  15.  let  us  ofTr  praise,  giving  thanks  to  his  v 
Hm.W.h.  nnl  liliil  nut  Ai.on.  bill  will  cnnH-SH  Ai»  7j. 

0.  H.  and  Arm.  ih"t  «ui  on  him  wns  Death 

9.  II.  in  the  (;reek  tongue  hath  Aisn.  Apollyon 

i:i,«.lol>la«pliBincA/.«n.||  17.niiiiil><jr  of  A.  71.  15.2. 

14.  II.  wlio«>ever  rT<>ivfih  llio  mark  of  Ai..'  71. 

22.  4.  and  his  n.  bIimII  \>v  In  their  foreheads 

See  Holy,  Lord. 
M,j  NAMR. 
f7r7».30.29.  why  i' it  that  thou  dost  nsk  a(\r-rm7/7i. 
48  16.  let  my  71.  be  named  on  them, let  them  grow 
f'jdrf.  3. 15.  tiiin  is  my  71. 1'nrever,  ami  my  ninmoriiil 
9.  16.  raised  tl.ee  up,  ihnt  myn.  may  be  declared 
20.  24.  whore  1  reenrd  Tnr/  n.  I  will  rome  iinio  thee 

23.  21.  provoke  hiin  noi,  for  mi/  n.  is  in  him 
/.CI'.  19.  12.  ye  shall  not  swear  hy  ?ny  71.  falsely 

20.  3.  his  seed  unto  Molerh,  to  profane  t»v  holy  n. 
^iim.6.  27,  pill  my  n.  on  ihe  rhildrrn  of  lurmd 
/)ri(f.  18.10.  which  he  nhall  njienk  in  mvn.  20. 
Jii't".  I'J.  18.  why  askc^l  Ihou  thus  aflcr  nijf  n.  T 
4tlU 


NAM 

1  ."7(1771.24. 21.  swear  thou  wilt  not  destroy  my  ji. 
2.1.  5.  and  go  to  IS'iibal,  and  greet  him  in  my  n. 
2Aam.7.13.  he  shall  build  a  house  for  7Hy  n.  1  h'in<;s 
5.  5.  I  8.  18,  19.  1  Chroii.  22.  10. 
12.  28.  lost  the  city  be  .-ailed  alter  7Hy7i. 
18.18. 1  have  no  son  to  keep  viy  71. in  remembrance 
I  ICinirs  8.  Ki.  that  mtfn.  might  be  llierein,  29.  |  11. 
36.  2  Kings  21.  4, 7.  2  Chrvn.  0. 5, 6. 
I  7. 16.  I  Si.  4,  7. 
9.  7.  this  house  which  I  have  hallowed  for  my  71. 

1  CAr.  22. 8.  shall  not  build  a  house  to  my  n.  28.3. 

2  CAr.  6.  8.  in  heart  to  build  a  bouse  lot  my  n. 
9.  Solomon  shall  build  the  house  for  my  11. 

7. 20.  this  house  which  I  have  sanctified  lor  vy  11. 
JVch.\.\).  I  have  chosen  to  set 7«y  «.theie,  ./cr.  7. 12. 
P.'.al.  89.24.  in  myn.  shall  his  horn  be  c.\altcd 

91.  14.  because  he  hath  known  my  n. 
/su.29.  23.  they  shall  sanctify  my  n.  and  fear 

41.25.  from  rising  of  the  sun  sbad  he  call  on  my  >i. 

42.  8.  I  am  the  Lord,  that  is  my  n.  and  my  glory 

48.  9.  for  77iy  71.  sake  will  I  defer  mine  anger 
11.  for  how  should  77iy  71.  be  polluted  7 

49.  1.  hath  he  made  incntion  ofmy  n. 
52. 5.  viy  71.  Continually  every  day  is  blasphemed 

6.  therefore  my  people  shall  know  my  n. 
66.  5.  brethren  that  cast  you  out  for  my  n.  sake 
.Tcr.  14. 14.  they  prophesy  lies  in  771^71.  15.  |  23.25. 
16.  21.  they  shall  know  that  7iiy  71.  is  the  Lord 
23.27.  they  think  to  cause  my  peojile  to  foiget  my 
71.  US  their  fathers  have  forgotten  nijTi.for  Daal 
27.  15.  they  prophesy  a  lie  in  my  n.  29.  9,21,23. 
;<4.  Ki.  but  ye  turned  and  polluted  7«y  n. 

44.20.  sworn  by  7«y  great  71.  myn. 'no  more  named 
F.ZFk.  20,j0.  but  I  w  rouglit  for  my  n.  14.  22,  44. 

30.  23.  and  I  will  sanctify  my  great  71. 
Zcch.  13.  9.  they  shall  call  on  my  v.  I  will  hear 
Mul.  1. 6.  to  you,  O  priests,  that  desjiise  v:y  n. 
11.  for  my  71.  shall  be  great  among  Gentiles,  and 
in  every  place  incense  shall  beolfi  led  to7«y  7». 
14.  7ny  71.  is  dreadful  among  the  heathen 
2.2.  lay  it  to  heart,  to  give  ghjry  iinio  Tny  71. 
5.  he  feared  mo,  and  was  afraid  before  myn. 
4.  2.  to  you  that  fear  77iy  71.  shall  the  sunof  riglite 
Mat.  10.22.  ye  shall  be  hated  of  all  men  for  my  n 
sake,  24.9.  Mark  13.  13.  J^vke  21. 17. 
18.5.  rece.  a  child  in /ny  71.  Mark^.'Xi.  Luked. 48. 
20.  two  or  three  arc  gathered  together  in  my  71. 
19.  29.  that  hath  forsaken  houses  for  TTiy  71.  sake 
24.  5.  for  many  shall  come  in  my  n.  and  shall  de- 
ceive many,  Mark  13.  6.  Luke  21.  8. 
Mark  5.  9.  he  answered,  saying,  77iy  71.  is  Legion 
9.  39.  no  man  which  shall  do  a  miracle  in  7«y  71. 
41.  give  you  a  cup  of  water  to  drink  in  my  n. 
16.  17.  in  7ny  71.  shall  Ihey  cast  out  devils 
AuA-c  21. 12.  brought  before  rulers  for  7;iy7i.  sake 
.To.'tn  14. 13.  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  77(y  11.  that 
will  I  do,  14. 1  15.  10.  I  10.  23,  21,  20. 
26.  the  Comforter  wham  he  will  send  in  Tiiy  71. 

15.21.  these  things  will  they  do  for  77iy  n.  sake 
Acts^.  15.  he  is  a  chosen  vessel  to  bear  my  n. 

16.  great  things  he  must  sufl'er  for  my  71.  sake 
15. 17.  Ihe  Gentiles  upon  whom  7/17/  71.  is  called 
Rnm.  9.  17.  and  that  my  71.  might  be  declaied 

1  Cur.  1. 15.  lest  any  say,  I  baptized  in  mfHCown  n. 
Her.  2.  3.  and  for  my  n.  sake  hast  laboured 

13.  thou  boldest  fast  77iy  n.  and  hast  not  denied 
3.8.  haul  kept  my  word,  and  hast  not  denied  my  n. 

Sec  Cali.ko. 
77;y  NAMF,. 
Clm.  12.  2.  I  will  bless  thee,  and  make  thy  n.  gi*at 
17.5.  thin.  Ahrain,but  £A// 71.  shall  he  .Ahrahnrn 
y,'.27.ea"id  to  him,  what  is  My  71.?  29.  ./«(/"■•  13.  17. 
28.  he  said,  tAy  71.  shall  be  no  more  calleil  Jacob, 
but  Israel,  35.  10.  1  Kinps  18.  31. 
F/(»rf.5.23.since  came  to  I'lmraoh  to  speak  in/Ay  Ji 
.lush.  7.  9.  what  will  Ihou  do  10  thy  great  71.  ? 

2  .Srt7K.  7.  20.  let  Ikv  71.  b.'  mamiified  for  ever 
22.  50.  I  will  sing  "jiraisc  to  thy  n.  Psal.  9.  2.  I  18. 

49.  I  01.  K.  I  06.4.  1  92.  I. 
1  fi'in;rrg  1.  47.  nanienf  Sdlomiiii  better  limn  thy  v. 

8.  33.  turn  an.l  confess  llnj  n.  2  CAr«'i.  6.24,  2I>. 

41.  hill  roiin-lh  for  Ihy  v.  si.ke,  2  CArn7i.  fi.  32. 

42.  for  Ihev  shall  hear  of ///y  sieal  71. 

43.  that  nil  people  of  the  earth  niiiv  know  thv  v. 
this  house  it  called  hvlhyn.  2  CA'-.6;33. 

44.  house  I  built  for  Ihyn.iS.  2" CAr.  6.34,  38. 
1  Chriiv.  17.  24.  Ihy  71   m«v  be  mngiiified  for  ever 

29.  13.  we  thank  and  praise  /A»,  71.  Psal.  44.  8. 
2CAr.  6.  20.  that  thou  woiildeHlpiil  fAy  71.  there 

14.  11.  in  (Ay  71.  we  go  aeainst  this  multitude 
20.  8.  have  built  th.'e  n  sanctuary  for  thpv. 

9.  bnfiirn  Ibis  hniiso,  for  Ihy  n.  is  in  Ibis  house 
.V.-A.  1.11.  servant",  who  desin-  to  fenr  Ihy  n. 

9.  5.  bleiised  be  thy  glorious  71.  which  is  enallcd 
Psal.^i.  11.  let  them  that  love  thu  n.  be  joyful 

8.  I.  how  excellent  is  Ihii  n.  in  all  Ihe  earth  !  9. 

9.  10.  they  that  know  /Aw  71.  wdl  Iriist  in  thee 
22.22.  I  willdeclniefAyn.  tobrelhren, //f«>.2. 12 
25.  II.  for  tAy  71.  sake  pardon  mine  iniquity 
31  3.  for  (Ay  11.  sake  lead  mc  and  guide  roe 


NAM 

Psal.  44.5.  tlirough  thy  71.  will  we  tread  them  undet 
4.'>.  17.  1  will  make  thy  n.  to  be  remembered 
4^.  10.  according  to  thy  71.  so  is  thy  piuise 
52.  9. 1  will  wail  on  Ihy  7i.|i54. 1.  save  me  by  thy  n 
01.  .5.  given  the  heritage  of  those  that  fear  thy  «. 
03.  4.  will  bless,  I  wUI  lift  up  my  hands  in  thy  n. 
74. 7.  they  have  defiled  the  dwelling  place  of  thy  71 

10.  shall  the  enemy  blaspheme  tliy  71.  for  ever  J 
18.  the  foolish  people  have  blasphcnicd  thy  «. 
21.  let  the  poor  and  needy  praise  thy  7». 

75. 1.  for  that  thy  71.  is  near,  thy  works  declare 
79.  G.  tliat  have  not  called  on  iliy  71.  Jcr.  10.  25. 
9.  help  lis,  O  G.  of  salvation,  for  the  glory  of  thj 
71.  and  jiurge  away  our  sins  for  ihy  n.sakis 
80. 18.  quicken  us,  and  wowill  call  upon  thy  11. 
83. 16.  that  they  may  seek  thy  71.  U  Loid 
SO.  9.  all  nations  shall  come  andgloiily  ihy  71.12 

11.  teach  me,  unite  my  hcait  to  Tear  thy  n. 
89.  12.  Ilernion  shall  rejoice  in  thy  n.  10. 

109.  21.  do  thou  for  nic,  O  Lord,  lor  thy  71.  sake 

115. 1.  not  unto  us,  but  unto  Ihy  )i.  give  glory 
119.  .55.  I  have  remembered  thy  71.  in  the  rflght 

132.  as  thou  use^t  to  do  to  those  that  love  thy  n. 
1.35.  13.  tl-.y  7i.  O  Lord,endureth  for  ever 

138.2.  I  will  praise  thy  ;i.  for  thy  loving  kindness, 
thou  hast  magnified  thy  word  above  all  thy  71. 

139.  20.  and  ihiiie  enemies  take  thy  n.  in  vuiu 

140.  13.  the  righteous  shall  give  thanks  to  thy  71. 
142.  7.  out  of  prison,  that  I  may  praise  thy  n. 
1(3.  11.  quicken  me,  O  Loril,  lor  thy  71.  sake 
145.  1.  I  will  bless  thy  71.  for  ever  and  ever,  2. 

2.  and  1  will  praise  Ihy  n.  litirevcr,  Isa.  25.  1. 
Cant.  1.3.  thy  Ti.is  as  ointment  poured  forth 
Isa.  20.  8.  the  desire  of  our  soul  is  to  thy  n. 

13.  by  thee  we  will  make  nieiilion  of  ihy  n. 

03.  10.  O  Lord,  thy  71.  is  from  everlasting 

04.  2.  make  thy  71.  known  to  thine  ad>e;»arics 
7.  there  is  none  that  calleth  on  tl.y  71. 

./cr.  10.0.  thou  art  great  and  thy  71.  isgicat  itvmight 
11.  16.  the  Lord  called  thy  7t.  a  green  olivo-lri-c 

14.  7.  do  thou  it  for  thy  71.  sake,  we  have  sinned 
21.  do  not -abhor  us  lor  thy  71.  sake,  remember 

29.25.  sent  letleis  in  Ihy  7i.  to  all  people  in  Jerusa. 
Aam.  3. 55. 1  called  upon  thy  71.  out  ol  Ihe  dungeon 
Dan.9.G.  the  prophets  spake  in  thy  71.  to  our  kingd 
A[ic.  6.  9.  and  Ihe  man  of  wisdom  shall  see  thy  n. 
jVn,A.  1. 14.  that  nc  more  of  Ihy  71.  be  sown 
Mai.  1.  6.  wherein  have  we  despised  thy  71. 
Mat.  0.  9.  hallowed  be  thy  71.  J.uke  11.2. 

7.  22.  ill  tliy  71.  have  we  cast  out  devils 
Mnrk5.9.  he  asked  him, what  is  thy  71.  ?  Lukr.  6.30. 

9.  38.  casting  oul  devils  in  thy  w.  I.uke  9.  49. 
Luke  10.  17.  the  devils  are  subject  through  thy  i> 
Jiihn  12.28.  Father,  cloiify  thy  n.ihen  came  a  vo:c< 

17.  6.  I  have  manifeslcd  thy  71.  to  the  men,  26. 
11.  holy  Father,  keep  through  thine  own  71.  12 
.flets^.  14.  authority  to  bind  all  that  call  on  Ihy  t 
Horn.  15.9.  I  will  confess,  and  sing  unto  thy  71. 
Jlrv.  11.  18.  give  reward  to  them  llnit  fear  iliy  r. 

15.  4.  who  shall  not  fear  anil  glorify  thy  n.  ? 

See  Called. 

NAME,  yetb. 

1  Sam.  1S.3.  thou  shalt  anoint  to  me  him  "  hr>m  I  n. 

2f*.  8.  bring  him  up  whom  I  sluill  71.  unio  thee 

fsa.  62.  2.  which  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  shall  n. 

NAMED,  ETH. 
(7/'7i.23. 16.  Abrah.  weighed  silver  which  he  had  n. 
27.  36.  he  saiil,  is  not  he  rightly  71.  Jacob  1 
48.  16.  and  let  iny  name  be  71.  on  ihem 

1  .Sam.  4.21.  she  71.  the  child  I-chabod,  saying 

2  Kings  17.  34.  the  chihlren  ofJac.  whom  he  71.  Isf. 
1  CAr.m.  23.  14.  Jloses' sons  7«.  ofthe  tribe  of  Lev- 
Feci.  0.  10.  what  hath  been  is  71.  already 
Isa.ai.  0.  ye  shall  l.c  71.  the  prirgs  ofthe  I^jrd 
,frr.  44.  20.  my  name  shall  no  more  be  71.  in  iiio'jtii 
.Imos  ().  1.  whi<  h  are  71.  chief  of  the  naliciis 
Mir.  2.  7.  O  ihou  that  iirt  71.  ofthe  house  of  JacoH 
I.vkr  2.  2  I.Jesus  was  so  »i.  ofthe  angel  before  coo. 

0.  13.  he  i-liose  twelve,  whem  he  n.  apostles 
Hum.  15.  20.  to  preach,  not  where  Christ  was  »i. 

1  Cur.  5. 1.  such  furnication  not  f.  nmorg  Gentilei 
Fph.  1.21.  far  above  every  name  that  is  n. 

3.  15.  the  whole  family  in  heaven  and  epflh  is  n. 
5.  3.  coveiousness.lcl  it  not  be  once7i.Bmone  yoii 

2  Tim.  2.19.  let  everv  one  that  71.  the  name  of  Christ 

NAMELY. 
Fed.  5.  13.  sore  evil,  71.  riches  kept  for  Ihe  ownerg 
ha.  7.  20.  Lord  shave  with  n.  rnior,  71.  by  A««yrin 
.War*  12.  31.  the  second  is  like,  7i.  this,  shalt  lovo 

NAMES. 
flen.'i.  20.  Adam  gave  71.  to  nil  entile,  and  to  fowl 
2().l8.ciilled  their  71.  after  71. his  father  called  ihnm 
f'7ad.23. 13.  Iiecircuinspecl  ami  tnnkc  no  mention 
ofthe  71.  of  other  gods,  Devi   12.  3. 
2H.  9.  crave  on  them  the  71.  of  children  of  Isr.  21. 
12.  Anron  shnll  bear  iheir  71.  before  the  Ld.  29. 
JVi/771.  1.  2.  Ihe  number  of  ihcir  71.  by  Iheir  poll 
5.  ihe  71.  ofthe  men  thnt  shall  sinnd  with  yon 
3.  43.  numb.  of».  of  the  l.eviies  from  a  month  old 
13.  16.  the  n.  ofthe  men  which  Mosm  ■enttospj' 


NAT 

JVunt.  34. 17.  n.  of  men  which  shall  divide  the  land 
8  Sam.  23.  8.  the  n.  of  mughty  men  whom  Dav.  had 
Ezra  5. 4.  what  are  their  n.  who  make  this  building 
Psal.  16.  4.  nor  take  up  their  n.  into  my  lips 

49.  11.  they  call  iheir  lands  atlnr  their  own  n. 

147.  4.  the  stars  he  callfth  them  by  n.  Isa.  40.  26 
Ezek.  23.  4.  the  n.  of  them  were  Aholah  tho  elder 
Has.  2.  17.  for  I  will  take  away  the  n.  of  ISaalim 
ZcchA3  2.  cut  otr  the  n.  of  the  idols  out  of  the  land 
JLuke  10.  20.  rejoice,  your  n.  arc  wriiten  in  heaven 
jicts  1. 15.  the  number  of  the  n.  together  were  IQO 

18.  15.  if  it  be  question  of  word.^  and  n.  look  to  it 
Phil.  4.  3.  whose  ii.  arc  in  the  book  of  life 
Jlev.  3.  4.  thou  hast  a  few  n.  in  Sardis,  not  defiled 

11.  t  13.  were  slain  n.  of  men  seven  thousand 

13.  t  1.  and  on  his  heads  the  n.  of  blasptiemy 
8.  whose  n.  are  not  written  in  book,  17.  8. 

17.  3.  1  saw  a  woman  full  of )(.  of  blasphemy 
21. 12.  n.  written  thereon,  n.  of  tho  twelve  tribes 

14.  in  them  the  n.  of  twelve  apostles  of  the  Lamb 

I\APKL\. 
Luke  in.  20.  thy  pound  which  I  have  kept  in  a  n. 
John  11.  44.  his  face  was  hound  about  with  a  n. 
20.  7.  tho  n.  that  was  about  his  head  not  lying 

N.-VKD. 
Jtlark  14.  f  3.  a  woman  having  a  bo.x  of  pure  n. 

N.^RROVV. 
JVum.  22.  20.  angel  of  the  Lord  stood  in  a  n.  way 
Josh.  17. 15.  cut  down,  if  mount  Ephraim  beloojt. 
IKings  6.4.for  house  he  made  wmdows  ofw.  lights 
Prov.  23.  27.  and  a  strange  woman  is  a  n.  pit 
24.  1 10.  if  thou  faint,  thy  strength  is -71. 
/3-a.49.19.tho  land  of  thy  destruction  shall  be  too  n. 
Mat.  7.  14.  n.  is  the  way  which  leadeth  to  life 

N.ARKOWED. 
\Kings  6.  6.  in  wall  of  house  made  n.  rests  round 

AARROWER. 
/s-a.28.20.thc  coverinj  n.  than  ho  can  wrap  himself 

NARROWLY. 
Job  13.  27.  thou  lookest  n.  to  all  my  paths 
Isa.  14.  16.  that  see  thee,  shall  n.  look  upon  thee 

NATION 
Signifies,  [1]  Ml  the  inhabitants  of  a  particular 
couiUry,  Deut.  4.  34.  [2]  .1  country  or  king- 
dom, Exod.  34. 10.  Rev.  7.  9.  [3]  Country  mm, 
natives  of  the  same  stock,  Acts  26.  4.  [4] 
The  father,  hcail,  and  original  of  a  nation  or 
people,  Gen.  25.  23.  [.5]  TJie  heathen  or  Gen- 
tiles, Isa.  55.  5. 
Oen.lj.  14.  and  also  Ihatn.  they  serve  will  I  judge 

20.  4.  Lord,  wilt  thou  slay  al.^o  a  righteous  n.  ? 

21.  13.  of  the  bond-woman  I  will  make  a  n. 
35.  11.  a  71.  and  king  shall  come  of  thee 

F.xod.  9.  24.  in  all  Egypt,  since  it  became  a  n. 

19.  6.  ye  shall  be  unto  me  a  holy  7i.  1  Pet.  2.  9. 
21.  8.  to  sell  her  to  a  strange  n.  have  no  j)ower 
33.  13.  and  consider  that  this  n.  is  thy  people 
34. 10.  have  not  been  done  in  any  n.  do  with  thee 

/-w. 18.26.  nor  any  of  your  n.  commit  abomination 

20.  23.  shall  not  walk  in  the  manners  of  the  71. 
^'"urjz.  14. 12.1  will  make  ofthee  a  great  )i.Dcu«.9.14. 
Dent.  A.  34.  or  hath  God  assayed  to  take  him  a  n. 

I'roin  the  midst  of  another  71.  by  wonders? 
28.  33.  the  fruit  of  thy  land  shall  a  n.  eat  up 
36.  thcLd.  shall  bring  thee  ami  thy  king  to  a  71. 

49.  Lord  shall  bring  a  n.  against  thee  from  far 

50.  a  n.  of  fierce  countenance  shall  not  regard 
32.  28.  are  a  n.  void  of  counsel,  no  understanding 

2.<a7n.7.23  what  71.  like  thy  peoplel  lCAr.17.21. 

I^i«^3l8.  10.  there  is  no7J.  whither  my  Lord  hath 

not  sent  to  seek  thee,  he  took  an  oath  of  that  n. 

2  icings  17.  29.  every  n.  made  gods  of  their  o«  n 

1  Chr.  16.  20.  and  when  they  wi:nl  from  71.  to  7i. 

2  Chr.  1.5. 6.  n.  was  destroyed  of  71.  and  city  of  •city 
32.  15.  no  god  of  any  71.  or  kingdom  was  able 

Job  34.  29.  it  be  done  against  a  71.  or  a  man  only 
Ps.  33. 12.  blessed  is  the  77.  whose  God  is  the  Lord 

43.1. 0  God  plead  my  cause  against  an  ungodly  n. 

8.3.  4.  come,  let  u.s  rut  them  oft"  from  being  a  n. 

105.  13.  they  went  from  one  71.  to  another 

106.  5.  thatj  may  rejt>icein  thegladnessof  thy  71. 
147.  20.  he  hath  not  dealt  so  with  any  n. 

Prov.  14.  34.  righteousness  e.\alteth  a  n.  but  sin  is 
Asa.  1.4.  ah,  sinful  71.  a  people  laden  with  iniquity 
2.  4.  71.  shall  notlift  up  sword  against 71.  J\Iie.  4.3. 

9.  3.  thou  hast  multiplied  the  71.  not  increased  joy 

10.  6.  I  will  send  him  against  a  hypocritical  77. 

14.  .32.  what  answer  the  messengers  of  the  n.'i 
18.2.  go,  ye  swift  messengers,  to  a  71.  scattered  and 

peeled,  a  7i.  meted  out  and  trodden  down,  7. 
26.  2.  open  thai  the  righteous  ti.  may  enter  in 

15.  thou  hast  increased  the  7(.  O  Lord,  the  71. 
49.  7.  siiifh  the  L.  to  him  whom  the  71.  abhoireth 
51.  4.  hearken  and  gi\'t;  ear  to  me,  O  my  71. 

55.  5.  Ihou  shalt  call  a  n.  thou  knowest  not 
58.  2.  seek  me,  as  a  ti.  that  did  righteousness 
60. 12.  the  71.  that  will  not  serve  thee  shall  perish 
22.  and  a  small  one  shall  become  a  strong  ti. 
.65.  1.  a  71.  that  was  not  called  by  my  name 
66.  8.  or  shall  a  it.  be  born  at  ooce  ? 
401 


NAT 

.Ter.  2.  11.  bath  a  n.  changed  their  gods? 
5.  9.  my  soul  be  avenged  on  such  a  71.  29.  |  9.  9. 
15.  I  will  bring  a  71.  on  you  from  far,  O  lious'' 
of  Israel,  it  Is  a  mighty  71.  it  is  an  ancient  71. 
7.28.  a  7i.  thalobeyeih  not  the  voice  of  the  Lord 
12. 17.  I  will  utterly  pluck  up  and  destroy  that  ii. 
18.  7.  speak  concerning  a  71.  to  pluck  it  up,  9. 
8.  if  that  71.  against  whom  I  have  pronouni^ed 

25.  12.  punish  that  71.  for  their  iniquity,  27.  8. 
.32.  behold,  evil  shall  go  forth  from  71.  to  71. 

27.8.71.  which  will  not  serve  Nebuchadnezzar,  13. 
31.  36.  then  Israel  cease  fmni  bi'ing  a  71.  33.  24. 

48.  2.  let  us  cut  offMoab  from  being  a  71. 

49.  31.  arise,  get  you  up  to  the  wealthy  71. 

3t'i.  shall  be  no  71.  whither  Elam  shall  not  come 

50.  3.  out  of  the  north  cometh  a  71.  against  her 
/,rew. 4. 17.have  watched  fora7i.lhatcoiild  not  save 
F.zek.  2.  3.  I  .send  thee  to  Israel,  a  rebellious  71. 

37.  22.  I  will  make  them  one  71.  in  the  land 
Dan.  8.  22.  four  kingd.  shall  stand  up  out  of  the?!. 

12.  1.  trouble,  such  as  never  was  since  was  a  71. 
.Joel  1.  6.  for  a  77.  is  come  up  upon  my  land 
Jlmos  6.  14.  behold,  1  will  raise  up  a:;ainstyoua  77. 
J\Hc.  4.7.  I'll  make  her  that  wiis  cast  olfa  stroiigTi. 
Hab.  ].  6.  the  Chaldeans,  that  hitter  and  h.-xsty??. 
Zcph.  2.  1.  gather  togithcr,  O  77.  not  dusited 

5.  woe  to  the  77.  of  the  Clicrethites 
Hag.  2.  14.  so  is  this  peojile  and  77.  before  me 
M(lI.  3.  9.  even  this  whole  71.  have  robbed  me 
Mat.  21.  43.  the  kingdom  of  God  given  to  a  7t. 

24.7.  71.  shall  rise  ag.  71.  Markr.i.ii.  LnkeMLlVl. 
Ijuke  7.  5.  for  he  loveth  our  71.  and  hath  built  us 

23.  2.  we  found  this  fellow  perverting  the  71. 
.hhn  11.48.  the  Romans  shall  come  and  take  our?i 

.50.  one  man  die,  that  the  whole  71.  perish  not 

51.  prophesied  that  .Tesus  should  die  for  that  n 

52.  and  not  for  that  77.  only,  but  that  also  he 
18.  35.  thine  own  77.  hath  delivered  thee  to  me 

jicts  2.  5.  Jews,  devout  men  out  of  every  n. 
7.  7.  the  71.  to  whom  they  shall  be  in  bondage 
10. 22.  of  good  report  among  all  the  77.  of  the  Jews 

"S.  it  is  unlawful  to  come  to  one  of  another  71. 

35.  but  in  every  71.  he  that  feareth  him 

24.  2.  that  very  worthy  deeds  are  done  to  this  n. 
10.  I  know  that  thou  ha.st  been  a  judge  to  this  77 
17.  I  came  to  bring  alms  to  my  71.  and  oflerings 

26.  4.  my  life  was  at  first  among  mine  own  n. 
28.  19.  not  that  I  had  ought  to  accuse  my  71.  of 

Gal.  1. 14.  profited  above  my  equals  in  my  own  n. 
Phil.'i.  15.  in  midst  of  a  crooked  and  perverse  A. 
Rev.  5.  9.  thou  hast  redeemed  us  out  of  every  ti. 
14.  6.  having  the  gosjiel  to  preach  to  every  71. 
.Sfe  Foolish. 
NATIONS. 
Grn.  10.  32.  and  by  these  were  the  ti.  divided 

14.  1.  Tidal  king  of  77.  made  war  with  Bera,  9. 
17.4.  shalt  be  a  fatherof  many  71.5.  Rom.  4.  17,18. 

6.  and  I  will  make  n.  of  thee,  35.  11.  |  48.  19. 
IC.  I  will  bless  Sarah,  she  shall  be  a  mother  of  n 

25.  23.  the  Lord  said,  two  k.  are  in  thy  womb 

27.  29.  and  let  71.  bow  down  to  thee 

F.xod.  34. 24.  I  will  cast  out  the  71.  before  thee,  and 
enlarge  thy  borders,  Dnit.  4.  38.  |  7. 22.  |  8.  20, 
7,^).  18. 24.  the  7!.  are  defded  ||  28.  as  it  spued  out  71. 
JVi/Hi.  23.9.  and  shall  not  be  reckoned  among  the  71. 
24.  8.  Israel  shall  eat  up  the  n.  his  enemies 
20.  Amalok  was  the  first  of  the  71.  but  latter  end 
Deut.  2.  25.  I  will  put  tlie  fear  of  thee  on  the  n. 

4.  G.  this  is  your  wisdom  in  sight  of  the  77. 
27.L01  d  .shall  sr.alter  you  among  the  71.  .VcA.  1. 8. 

7.  1.  Lord  hath  cast  out  many  71.  before  thee 
9.  1.  to  possess  71.  greater  than  thyself,  11.  23. 
12.  29.  when  God  shall  cut  off  the  71.  19.  1. 

15.  6.  thou  shalt  lend  to  many  71.  28.  12. 

28.  1.  the  Lord  will  set  thee  on  h'gh  above  all  ti. 
32.8.Most  High  divided  to  the  71.  their  inhnntanoe 

43.rejuice,0  ye  71.  with  his  people,  he  will  avenge 
■  Jiidg.  2.  23.  therefore  the  Lord  left  those  71. 
2  .Sam.  7.  23.  which  thou  redeemedst  from  the  71. 

1  Kings  11.2.of  the  71.  concerning  which  the  L.  said 
"Kings  17.  33.  served  gods  after  the  manner  of  77. 

18.  33.  hath  any  of  the  gods  of  the  71.  delivered, 
19.  12.  2  CAioTi.  yi.  13,  14.  Isa.  36.  18. 
lCAr.16. 31.  say  among  the  71.  the  Lord  roigne'h 
17.  21.  by  driving  out  n.  from  before  thy  people 

2  Chr.  13.  9.  made  priests  after  the  manner  of  71. 
J^ch.  13.  26.  among  many  71.  was  no  king  like  him 
.Tub  12. 23.  he  increaseth  the  ?!.  he  enlargcth  the  n. 
Psal.  9.  20.  that  the  71.  may  know  themselves 

22.  27.  all  the  kindreds  of  n.  shall  worship  thee 
CH.  the  Lord  is  governor  among  the  71. 
47.  3.  he  shall  subdue  the  71.  under  our  f-et 
57.  9.  I  will  sins  to  thee  among  the  71.  10?.  3. 
06.7.hi3  eyes  behold  the  71. ||  67.4.  let  the  71.  be  glad 
96.  5.  for  all  the  gods  of  the  71.  are  idols 
106.  27.  to  overthrow  their  seed  among  the  n. 
34.  thev  did  not  destroy  the  n.  Lord  commanded 
Prov.  24.24.  tho  people  curse,  r.  shall  abhor  him 
Tsa.  2.  4.  and  he  shall  judge  among  the  n. 

5.  20.  he  will  lift  up  an  ensign  to  the  n.  from  far 

3G 


NAT 

Isa.  10.  7.  it  is  in  his  heart  to  cut  off  71.  not  a  few 

11.  12.  he  shall  set  up  an  ensign  for  the  n. 

14.  6.  helhatrulcd  the  71.  in  anger,  is  persecuted 
12.  how  cut  down,  which  ilid  weaken  the  n.  / 
18.  all  the  kings  of  the  71.  lie  in  glory 
23.  3.  tlie  seed  of  Sihor,  she  is  a  mart  of  7t. 
33.  3.  at  thy  lifting  up  the  71.  were  scattered 
31.  1.  come  near,  ye  71.  to  hear,  .fer.  31.  10. 
40.  15.  behold,  then,  arc  as  a  drop  of  a  bucket 
52.  15.  so  shall  he  sprinkle  many  71. 
.').').  5.  71.  that  knew  not  tine,  shall  run  to  thee 
00.  12.  yea,  those  71.  shall  be  utterly  wasted 
64.  2.  that  the  ti.  may  tremble  at  thy  presence 
66.  19.  I  will  send  those  that  escape  to  the  71. 
Jer.  1.  5.  and  ordained  thee  a  prophet  to  the  7t. 

10.  see,  1  have  this  day  set  thee  over  the  71. 

4.  2.  71.  shall  bless  themselves  in  him,  and  glory 
16.  make  ye  mention  to  7!.  publish  ag.  Jerusalem 

6.  18.  theiefore  hear  ye  71.  and  know,  31.  10. 

10.  7.  who  would  not  fear  thee,  O  King  of?!.? 
lO.tliu  ji.shall  not  be  able  to  abide  his  indignation 

22.  8.  many  n.  shall  pass  by  this  city,  ::r.u  say 

25.  14.  71.  shall  serve  themselves  of  them,  27.  7. 
31.  the  Lord  hath  a  controversy  with  the  n. 

46.  12.  the  71.  have  heard  of  thy  shame,  thy  cry 
50.  2.  declare  ye  among  the  71.  Babylon  is  taken 
12.  hiiidermost  of  the  71.  shall  be  a  wilderness 
46.  and  tho  cry  is  heard  among  the  ti. 
51.7.  the  71.  have  drunken  of  her  wine,  71.  are  mad 
20.  wiih  thee  will  I  break  in  pieces  the  71. 
27.  prepare  the  71.  against  her,  call  together 
41.  Babylon  is  an  astonishment  among  the  71. 
44.  the  71.  shall  not  flow  together  any  more 
I. am.  1.  1.  the  cily  that  was  groat  among  the  77. 
Ezfk.  5.  6.  into  wickedness,  more  than  the  71.  7. 

14.  I  will  make  thee  a  reproach  among  the  ti. 
6.8.  the  remnant  shall  escape  among  the  71. 

9.  that  escape  shall  remember  me  among  the  n.f 

12.  15.  ivlun  I  shall  sratter  them  among  the  71. 

19.  4.  llie  71.  also  heard  of  him,  he  was  taken 
8.  then  the  ti.  set  against  him  on  every  side 

26.  3.  I  will  cause  many  7t.  to  come  against  thee 
5.  and  it  shall  become'a  fpoil  to  the  71. 

23.7.  b''hold,  therefore.  I  will  bring  strangers  upon 

thee,  the  terrible  of  tho  71.  30.  11.  |  31.  12. 

29.  12.  I  will  scatter  Egyptians  among  71.  30.  23. 

15.  that  they  shall  no  more  rule  over  the  71. 

31.  16.  I  made  n.  shake  at  the  sound  of  his  fall 

32.  2.  thou  art  like  a  lion  of  the  n.  as  a  whale 

16.  the  daughters  of  the  n.  shall  lament  her,  18. 

35.  10.  Ihou  hast  said,  these  two  71.  shall  be  niins 

36.  13.  thou  land  ha^t  bereaved  thy  71. 

37.  22.  and  they  shall  be  no  more  two  77. 

38.  8.  it  is  brought  forth  out  of  the  77.  12. 
23.  I  will  be  known  in  the  eyes  of  many  n. 

.39.  27.  and  am  sanctified  in  the  sight  of  many  n. 
Has.  8.  10.  though  they  have  hired  among  the  n. 

9.  17.  they  shall  be  wandiircrs  among  the  n. 
Joel  3.  2.  whom  they  have  scattered  among  the  ?i. 
Jimos  6.1. woe  to  them  which  are  named  chief  of  n. 
Mic.  4.  2.  many  71.  shall  come  and  say,  let  us  go 

3.  be  shall  rebuke  strong  71.  afar  ofi^,  and  beat 

11.  now  also  luanyTT.  are  gatliered  against  thee 
7.16.  the  71.  shall  sec,  be  confounded  at  their  might 

.Vi/i.  3.  4.  that  sellclh  77.  through  her  whoredomi 

5.  I  will  show  the  71.  thy  nakedness  and  shame 

//'aJ.l.n.sliallthey  not  spare  continually  toslayTi. 

2.  8.  because  thou  hast  spoiled  many  71. 

3.  6.  he  beheld,  and  drove  asunder  the  ti. 
Zfp.^.3.6.I  have  cut  otTthen.  their  towers dtsolate 

8.  for  my  dfterminaiion  is  to  gather  the  77. 
7.nch.  2.  11.  many  ti.  shall  be  joined  to  the  Lord 
8.  22.  and  strong  71.  shall  come  to  seekthe  Lord 
23.  take  hold  out  of  all  the  languages  of  the  n. 
I, like  12.  30.  these  things  do  the  71.  seek  after 
21.  25.  and  upon  the  earth  shall  be  distress  of  ». 
.licts  13.19.whcn  he  had  dcstr.  seven  Ti.inChanaan 
Pev.  2.  26.  to  him  will  I  give  power  over  the  n. 

10.  11.  thnu  must  prophesy  before  many  7?. 

11.  9. 71.  pliall  see  Iheir  dead  bodies  three  daya 
18.  and  the  71.  were  angry,  thy  wrath  is  coirie 

13.  7.  and  power  was  given  him  over  all  71. 

16.  19.  ciiiesof  thcTi.  fell  ||  17. 1,5.  waters  are  n. 

20.  3.  that  he  should  deceive  the  71.  no  more 
21.24.  thon.of  them  which  are  saved  shall  walk 

26.  they  shall  bring  the  honour  of  the  »i.  into  it 
J2.  2.  the  leaves  were  for  the  healing  of  the  n. 
f!re  Grk\t. 
Ml  NATIONS. 
Deuf.  4. 19.  which  the  Lord  hath  divided  to  all  n. 
26.  19.  and  to  make  thee  high  above  all  n.  28. 1. 
28.  37.  shnll  become  a  by-word  among  all  n. 
1  Kings  4.  31.  his  fame  was  in  all  n.  round  about 
^Chr.  14.  17.  brought  the  fear  of  David  on  all  n. 
16.24.  declare  his  marvellous  works  among  alln 
iChr.  32.  23.  Hezekiah  majnified  in  sight  of  aW  71 
Psnl.  67.  2.  thy  saving  health  amo!^g  e.U  n. 
72.  11.  kings  fall  down,  all  n.  shall  96rve  him 

17.men  blessed  in  him, aW  71  shall  call  him  hlessed 
82.  8.  atiae,  O  God,  for  thou  shall  inheru  all  n. 


NAT 

P«.86. 9.  a2i  n.  shall  come  and  worEhip  before  thee 
1 13.4.  L.  19  high  above  all  n.  glory  above  heavcas 
J17. 1.  praise  the  Lord,  all  ye  n.  praise  him 
118.  10.  all  71.  compassod  nic  about,  but  in  name 

Ua.  2.  2.  and  all  n.  bha.ll  flow  unto  it 
23.  7.  he  will  'leslroy  the  vail  that  \b  over  all  n. 
34.  2.  the  indifc'Uttlion  of  the  Lord  is  on  all  n. 
4t1.n.  all  n.  bel'orc  him  are  as  nothing,  and  vanity 
f>6.18. 1  will  gather  alln.  and  languages,  ^ofH.  )i. 
'JO.  lliey  shall  bring  your  brethren  out  u(  all  n. 

Jtr.  27.  7.  and  all  n.  shall  serve  him,  Van.  7.  J4. 

.^mos  9.9. 1  will  sift  the  house  of  Israel  among  a.n. 

JIab.  2.  5.  but  gathcteth  to  him  all  n.  and  people 

Hag.  2. 7. 1  will  shake  all  n.and  the  desiru  u( till  n. 
(hall  come;  and  I  will  fill  this  house  with  glory 

Zech.  14.  2.  I  will  gather  all  n.  against  Jerusalem 
19.  the  punishment  of  all  n.  that  come  not  up 

JMal.  3.  12.  and  all  n.  shall  call  you  blessed 

J\Iat.  24. 9.  ye  shall  he  hated  of  all  n.  for  my  sake 
J4.  this  gospel  of  kingdom  shall  be  preached  to 
all  n.  Mark  13. 10.  Luke  24.  47.  Rom.  16.20. 
25.  32.  before  him  shall  be  gathered  all  n. 
2.^.  19.  go  ye,  and  teach  all  n.  ba[itizing  them 

Mark  11.  17.  be  called  ofu//7i.  the  liouse  of  prayer 

J.uke  21.  24.  shall  be  led  away  captive  into  all  ji. 

i^cts  14. 16. who  suffered  a/Z  n.  to  walk  in  their  ways 

17.  2G.  hath  made  of  one  blood  all  n.  of  men 
Horn.  1.  5.  for  obedience  to  the  faith  among  all  n. 

16.20.  made  known  to  alln.  for  obedience  of  faith 
fral.  3.  8.  saying,  in  theo  shall  all  n.  be  blessed 
Heo.  7.  9.  a  multitude  of  all  n.  stood  before  throne 

12.5.  a  man-child,  who  was  to  rule  a.  n.  with  a  rod 

14.  8.  she  made  all  n.  drink  of  the  wine,  18.  3. 

15.  4.  for  a.  Ji.  shall  come  and  worship  before  thee 
IS.  23.  for  by  thy  sorceries  were  all  n-  deceived 

All  the  NATIONS. 
Oen.iai3.aZ2  Mi.of  eartli  be  blessed,  22. 18.  1 26.  4. 
Dcut.  14.  2.  chosen  thee  above  ail  the  n.  on  earth 
17.14.sct  a  king  over  me,  as  a.  t.  n.  I.Sam.  8.  5,20. 

30.  1.  thou  shall  call  them  to  mind  among  all  t.  v. 

3.  the  Liird  will  gather  thee  from  all  lite  n. 
rsa..9. 17.  into  hell,  and  a»  the  ;i.that  furjret  God 
Jsa.  14.  26.  hand  that  is  stretched  out  on  all  the  n. 

29.  7.  the  multitude  t>t  all  the  n.  that  fight,  H. 
37.  18.  laid  waste  all  the  n.  and  their  countries 
43.  9.  let  alt  the  n.  be  g'athered  together,  and  let 
52.10.L.  made  bare  his  holy  arm  in  eyes  ol'all  t.  n. 
fil.  11.  cause  praise  to  spring  forth  before  all  the  n. 
Jtr.  3.  17.  and  all  the  n.  shall  be  gathered  unto  it 
25.  13.  Jeremiah  prophesied  against  all  the  n. 

15.  ciuse  all  n.  lo  drink  it  ||  17.  made  all  n.  <lriiik 
2fi.  fi.  make  this  city  a  curse  to  all  t.  n.  of  the  earth 
29   14. 1  will  gather  you  (mm  all  the  n.  and  places 

16.  a  reproach  among  all  the  n.  of  the  eanh,  44.8. 
33.  9.  name  of  joy  and  honour  before  all  the  n. 
46.  23.  for  I  will  m.ike  a  full  end  of  a«  the  n. 

y.ech.  7.  14.  but  I  scattered  them  among  a// tAen. 

12.  9.  destroy  all  the  n.  that  come  against  Jerus. 

J4.  16.  left  of  o/ZtA^n.  that  came  against  Jerus. 

These  NATIONS. 

Deiit.  1.  17.  if  thou  say,  these  n.  are  more  tlian  I 

9.  4.  for  wickedness  of  these  n.  Ld.  doth  drive,  5. 
11.  23.  then  will  iho  Lord  drive  out  all  these  n. 

10.  .TO.  Faying,  how  did  these  n.  serve  their  gods 

18.  14.  these  n.  hearkened  lo  observers  of  times 
20.  15.  thus  do  to  the  cities  which  are  not  oft.  ti. 

28.  6.5.  among  these  n.  shalt  thou  find  no  ease 

29.  18.  lest  any  among  you  serve  the  gods  of  t.  n. 

31.  3.  the  Lord  will  destroy  these  n.  before  thee 
Jo.th.  2,3.  3.  seen  what  thn  Lord  hath  done  to  t.  n. 

A.  I  have  divided  to  you  hy  lot  t.  n.  that  remain 
7.  that  ye  come  not  among  these  n.  that  remain 

10.  if  yo  cleave  to  the  remnant  of  these  n. 

13.  God  will  no  more  drive  out  any  of  these  n. 
Judg.  3.  1.  these  n.  the  Lord  left  to  prove  Israel 
HKimrn  17.41.  so  t.  n.  feared  L.  and  served  images 
Jtr.  9.  26.  for  all  these  n.  are  uncircumcised 
25.  9.  bring  Ihem  against  these  n.  round  about 

11.  these  n.  shall  serve  the  king  of  Babvlon 
SP.  14.  I  have  put  yoke  of  iron  on  neckof  tAejcn. 

NATIVE. 
Jer.  23.  10.  he  ihall  no  more  8*e  his  n.  country 

NATIVITY. 
Om.  11.  28.  Ilarnn  dii'd  in  the  land  of  his  n. 
Ruth  0.  1 1,  how  thou  hast  left  the  land  of  thy  n. 
/or.  4l>.  16.  arise,  let  u<  go  to  the  land  of  our  n. 
Ezek.  16.  3.  thy  n.  is  of  the  land  of  Canaan 

4.  nt  for  thy  n.  in  the  d  ly  thou  wast  burn 

31.  ;«).  I  will  judg.'  ll i:j  the  lanil  of  ihy  n. 

23.  M.  IhoniBimer  of  ('IihMi-h,  the  land  of  their  7i. 

NATITRE 
BiCT'fio",  [1]  T"*'  'natural  mrthoii  and  cntirse  nf 
things  tslnbliahed  in  the  irnrld  by  Qod  its 
Creator,  Rom.  1.  26,  27.  [21  nensnn,  or  the 
Vght  implanted  in  the  min/t,  Rom.  2.  14.  [3] 
Pirth,  or  natural  desrrnt.  Gal  2.  1.5.  [4]  Com- 
mon .•cTi."'.  and  the  cu.ttom  of  all  nations,  1  Cur. 
11.  14.  [5]  .fulistanee,  or  essence,  Ilcb.  2.  16. 
(61  Our  corrupt  and  .linful  estate  byourhirth, 
itinr  naturalla  inclined  to  all  sorts  of  evil, 
*  MO 


NAU 

Eph.  Q.  3.  [7]  IToly  and  divine  qualities  and 
dispositions,  which  express  and  resemble  the 
perfections  of  God,  2  Peter  1.  4.  [8J  In  truth 
and  vcnj  deed,  Gal.  4.  8. 

A  natural  body,  ICor.  15.  44.  Jl  body  which  has 
nothing  but  what  its  soul  can  bestow  upon  it 
in  a  natural  way,  which  is  maintained  in  life 
by  natural  and  ordinary  means,  as  meat,  drink, 
sleep,  &rc.  and  is  subject  to  natural  affections 
and  operations,  as  generation,  augmentation, 
motion,  &-c.  A  Sjiiritual  body,  ibid.  Spiritual, 
7iol  as  to  the  substance  of  it,  but  in  respect  of 
the  qualities  and  conditions  vf  it:  a  body  that 
is  beautiful,  incorruptible,  free  from  injirmi- 
ties,  not  subject  to  hunger  or  thirst,  or  injuries 
from  colli,  heat,  iVc.  not  using  meat,  drink, 
clothes,  physic;  but  free,  acticc,  and  nimble,  as 
spirits;  it  is  likewise  a  spiritual  body,  as  it  is 
perfectly  subject  to  the  Spirit  of  God,  without 
any  rebellious  motions;  it  is  immediately  sup- 
ported by  the  Spirit,  without  any  corporeal 
means;  and  does  most  wonderfully  contribute 
to  the  most  lively,  divine,  and  enlarged  vital 
vperatio7is  of  the  soul  herself. 

The  natural  man,  1  Cor.  2.  14.  The  unrcncjced 
person;  one  that  hath  nothing  but  a  principle 
of  reason,  though  he  be  one  of  the  most  ex- 
quisite natural  accomplishments,  and  has  im- 
proved his  reason  to  the  highest  pitch. 

Rom.  1.  26.  women  did  change  to  that  against  7i. 

2.  14.  do  by  7i.  the  things  contained  in  the  law 
27.  shall  not  uncircumcision  by  71.  judge  thee? 

11.  24.  if  thou  wert  cut  out  of  the  olive-tree,  which 
is  wild  by  n.  and  wertgraffcd  contrary  to  71. 

1  Cor.  11.  14.  (loth  not  even  7!.  itself  teach  youl 
Gal.  2. 15.  who  are  Jews  by  71.  and  not  sinners  of 

4. 8. did  service  unto  them,  which  by  71.  are  no  gods 
F.ph.  2.  3.  and  were  by  71.  children  of  wralli 
//fi.  2.  16.  he  took  not  on  him  the  71.  of  angels 
Jam.  3.  6.  tongue  setleth  on  fire  the  course  of  71. 
t  7.  71.  of  beasts  halh  been  lamed  by  71.  of  men 

2  Vet.  1.  4.  ye  might  be  partakers  of  the  divine  71. 

NATURAL. 
Deut.  34.  7.  eye  not  dim,  nor  his  71.  force  abated 
Rom.  1.  26.  even  women  did  change  the  7J.  use 
27.  also  men  leaving  the  n.  use  of  the  woman 
31.  without  71.  all'ection,  2  Tim.  3.  3. 
11.  21.  if  God  sjiarcd  not  the  n.  branches,  24. 
lCwr.2.  14. 71.  man  rcceivethnotthingsof  Sp.  ofG. 
15  4  4.  it  is  sown  a  71.  body,  there  is  a  71.  body 
46.  hut  thai  which  is  71.  was  first,  and  aflerward 
Jam.  1.  23.  a  man  beholding  his  71.  face  in  a  glass 

3.  t  15.  this  wisdom  is  earthly,  71.  devilish 

2  Pet.  2.  12.  these  as  7i.  brute  beasts  speak  evil 

NATURALLY. 
Phil.  0.  20.  who  will  71.  care  for  your  state 
Jude  10.  but  what  thnv  know  71.  as  brute  beasts 

NAVliL. 
.Tudg.  9.  t  37.  come  down  by  the  71.  of  the  land 
.lob  40.  16.  his  force  is  In  the  71.  of  his  belly 
Prov-  3.8.  it  shall  he  health  to  thy  71.  and  marrow 
Cant.  7.  2.  thy  71.  is  like  a  round  goblet 
/.":eA. 16.4. when  thou  wast  horn,  thy  71.  was  not  cut 

NAVES. 
y  Kings  7.  33.  their  71.  and  spokes  were  all  molten 

NAUGHT,  or  NOUGHT. 
^C7i.29. 15.  shouldest  thou  theref.  serve  mefor  ti.? 
Drut.  13.  17.  shall  cleave  n.  of  the  cursed  thing 
15.  9.  thy  poor  brother,  and  thou  givest  him  n. 

28.  63.  the  Lord  will  rejoice  to  bring  you  lo  71. 
iKings  2.  19.  the  city  Is  pleasant,  but  the  water  11. 
JVrA.  4.  15.  God  brought  their  counsel  to  ti. 

.lab  1.  9.  Salan  said,  doth  Job  fear  God  for  71.? 

8.  22.  the  place  of  the  wicked  shall  come-  lo  71. 

14.  18.  surely  the  mountain  fulling  Cometh  to  7t. 

20.  6.  hnst  taken  a  pledge  from  thy  brother  for  71. 
Ps.  33. 10.  Lord  bringcth  counsel  of  heathen  to  n. 

44.  12.  llioii  .nellest  Ihy  Jieople  for  71. 
Prov.  1.  25.  but  yc  have  sot  at  71.  all  my  counsel 

20.  14.  it  is  71.  it  is  n.  sailh  the  buyer 
Ami.  8. 10.  lake  Counsel,  it  shall  come  to  n. 

29.  20.  for  Iho  terrible  one  i»  brought  to  n. 
21.  that  turn  aside  the  just  for  a  thing  of  71. 

41.  12.  they  shall  be  xn  nolliing,  as  a  Oiin"  of  71. 

21.  ye  are  of  notion;:,  anil  your  work  of  71. 
49.  4.  I  have  spent  my  strength  for  »!.and  in  vain 
52.3.  saith  till-  Lord,  yo  have  sold  yourselves  for  n. 

5.  thai  my  people  is  inkcn  away  for  71. 
Jrr.  14.  14.  a  false  vision,  and  a  thing  of  n. 
.Imos  5.  5.  and  Ueth-el  shall  come  to  n. 
6.  13.  yn  which  rejoice  in  n  thing  of  n.  who  say 
^VaM.iO.who  is  there,  would  shut  the  doors  for  n.? 
n<Mlher  do  ye  kindle  fire  on  mine  altar  for  n. 
.Mnrk  9.12.muHl  suffer,  and  be  set  at  71.  /,uA'23.1 1. 
.lets  4. 11.  ihisislhesloncset  at  n.  of  you  builders 
5.  36.  all  wernHCallcred  and  brought  to  7t. 
3^.  iniilH  work  bo  of  men,  it  will  come  lo  n. 
19.  27.  our  craft  is  in  danger  to  ho  sot  at  n. 
Horn.  14.  10.  why  dost  thou  set  at  71.  thy  brother? 
1  Cjr.  1.  28.  to  bring  lo  7i.  things  that  ar« 


NEA 

1  Cor.2.6.the  wisdom  of  this  world  that  comcthtow. 
'i'i'hess.'i.  8.  nor  did  we  eat  any  man's  bread  for  n 
Rev.  18.  17.  in  one  hour  so  great  riches  come  tun 

NAUGHTY. 
/'rot;.6.12.a  71. person  w  alkelh  with  froward  moutb 
17.  4.  and  a  liar  giveth  ear  lo  a  71.  tongue 
JcT.  24.  2.  the  other  basket  hud  very  71.  figs 

NAUGHTINESS. 
15a7n.l7.  28. 1  know  thy  pride,  and  71.  of  thy  heart 
Prov.  11.  6.  transgressors  be  taken  in  their  own  71. 
J(i77i.l.  21.  lay  apart  all  filthin.  and  superfluity  of  11 

NAVY. 

I  A'iHn-«9.26.SoIom.  made  a  71.  of  ships  in  Ezion-g. 

27.  Ilirum  seni  in  the  n.  his  servants,  shipmen 

10.  11.  the  71.  of  Hiram  brought  gold  from  OpIiir 

22.  king  Solomon  had  at  sea  a  71.  of  Tarehish 

NAY. 

1  Kings  2.  17.  speak,  for  he  will  not  say  thee  n. 

20.  say  me  not  71.  for  I  will  not  say  thee  n. 
Mat.  5.  37.  but  let  your  communication  be  yea, 
yea,  71.  71.  more  cometh  of  evil.  Jam.  5. 12. 
Luke  12.  51.  I  tell  you  71.  but  rather  division 
13.  3.  I  tell  you  7t.  but  except  ye  repent,  5. 
16.  30.  and  he  said,  71.  father  Abraham,  but  if  one 
jlcts  16.  37.  71.  verily,  but  let  them  come  and  fetch 
Rom.  3.  27.  by  law  of  works?  71.  hut  by  law  of  faith 
9.  20. 71.  hut  O  man,  who  art  thou  that  repliest? 
2Co7-.  1. 17.  with  ine  there  should  be  yea,  yea,  71.  n 

18.  our  word  toward  you  was  not  yea  and  n. 

19.  the  Son  of  God  Jesus  Christ  was  not  yea,  71. 

NAZAKITE 

Denotes,  A  man,  or  woman  who  engaged  thcm- 
silvis  by  a  vow  to  abstain  from  wine  and  all 
intoiicating  liquors;  to  let  their  hair  grow 
without  cutting,  or  shaving;  nut  lo  enter  into 
any  house  that  was  polluted  by  having  a  dead 
corjise  in  it,  nor  to  be  present  at  any  funeral  : 
JJnd  if  any  one  should  have  died  very  suddenly 
in  their  presence,  they  began  again  the  whole 
ceremony  of  their  consecration  and  .Yaiarite- 
ship,  tchich  ceremony  lasted  generally  right 
days.  H'hen  the  time  of  their  J\:'azaritr.<hip  was 
accomplished,  the  priest  brought  the  person  to 
the  door  of  the  tiibernaclt;  who  there  offered  to 
the  Lord  a  helamh  fur  a  burnt-offering,  a  she- 
lamb  fur  an  expiatory  sacrijiee,  and  a  ram  for  a 
peacc-ojfering;  hy  whirh  sacrifices  they  nut  only 
gave  thanks  to  God  whohnd givni  them  grace  lo 
make,  and  in  some  measure  to  keep  such  a  row; 
but  al.fo  confessed  and  hewaiUd  their  frailties 
and  miscarriages,  notwilhstmiding  the  strict- 
ness of  their  vuw,  and  all  thediligtnce  and  care 
they  could  use,  andeuusequentlu  acknowledged 
their  need  of  the  grace  nf  God  inChr'ist  Jvstti',the 
true^iizixr'ile.  ..^ftcr  these  sacrifices  were  offered 
to  the  Lord,  t  he  priest,  or  some  other ,  .^havf  d  thf 
h  e  ad  of  tile's  :\z:\n\e  at  the  door  of  the  taberna- 
cle; whichwas  done  so  publicly, that  itmighl  be 
known  that  his  vow  was  ended,  and  theref  ore  he 
was  at  liberty  as  to  those  things  from  which  he 
had  restrained  himself  for  a  season, otheririse 
somemight  havebern  scandalized  at  his  liberty; 
after  which  his  hair  irn,*  burnt,  being  thrown 
upon  the  fire  on  which  the  flrsh  of  the  peace- 
offering  was  boiled:  then  the  priest  put  into 
the  hands  of  the  Naznriie  tli/-  shoulder  of  the 
ram  boiled,  with  a  loaf  and  0.  rake,  which  the 
N'azarile  returning  into  the  hands  of  the  priest, 
he  offered  them  to  the  Lord,  lifting  them  up  in 
the  presence  nf  the  xVazarite.  .,1nd  from  this 
time  he  might  again  drink  wine,  his  JVatarite- 
ship  being  now  accomplished. 

Some  obliged  theniselres  only  for  n  time,  as  those 
mentioned  in  Num.  6. 13.  others  for  their  whole 
life,  as  Samson,  John  the  Baptist,  S,c.  Judg 
16. 17.  Luke  1. 15.  Their  principal  design  was 
to  sequester  themselves  in  a  srent  part  from 
worldly  employments  and  rnjoynunts,that  they 
might  di  Vote  themselves  tn  the  service  of  God. 
Nazarite  signifies,  sanctifud,  or  consecrated. 

.Vin;i.  6.  2.  a  vow  of  a  71.  lo  separate  ihemsclvc* 
13.  and  this  is  Ihe  law  of  the  n.  when,  VI. 

18.  the  71.  shall  shave  the  head  of  his  separation 

19.  and  s.hall  put  them  on  Ihe  bonds  of  the  71. 

20.  and  alter  that  the  n.  may  drink  wine 
.rudg.n.5.  the  child  shall  be  n  n.  to  God,  7.  1 16. 17. 

NAZARITES. 
T.am.i.  7.  her  71.  purer  than  snow,  whiter  than  milk 
Jlmos  2.  II.  I  raised  up  of  your  young  men  for  »i 
12. hut  ye  gave  Iho  n.wine  to  drink,  and  prnnhett 
^    ''  NEAR. 

Gen.  19.20.  thisrity  is  ?i.  to  flee  lo,  it  is  a  little  one 
27.  22.  Jacob  went  71.  lo  Isaac  his  father 
25.  bring  it  71.  he  brought  it  71.  and  ho  did  cat 
2".l.  10.  Jacob  went  n.  and  rolled  the  stone 
45.10,lhou  Bliall  be  n.to  me,  thou  and  thy  children 
•18.  10.  he  brought  ihem  71.  and  kissed  ihem 
Kioii.l3.17.tliolHndofPliilistlnPs,nllho'that  warn 
Lev.  18.  fi.  not  approach  to  any  that  is  n.  of  kin 
12.  she  is  thy  father's  h.  kiDgwoman 


NEa 

Lev.  18.  13.  for  alio  is  thy  mother's  n.  kinswo.  17. 
20. 19.  for  he  uncoverelh  his  n.  liin 
21.2.  but  lor  his  kin  n.  to  him  he  maybe  defiled 
«Vttm.3.tJ  bring  the  tribe  of  Levi  n.  and  present 
5. 16.  bring  her  7i.  and  set  her  before  the  Lord 
16.9.  touring  you  n-  to  himself,  10. 
17.  13.  whoso  Cometh  71.  the  tabernacle  shall  die 
2U.  3.  Muses  spake  in  plains  of  Moab,  n.  Jericho 

Deul.  5. 27.  go  thou  n.  and  hear  all  God  shall  say 
16. 21.  not  plant  a  grove  of  trees  «.  altar  of  Lord 

Judg.  18.22.  the  men  n.  Micah's  house  gathered 
2U.  34.  they  knew  not  that  evil  was  71.  thura 
/<utA2. 20.  the  man  is  ;i.  of  kin  to  us,  ne.xt  kinsman 
3.  9.  spread  skirt,  for  thou  art  a  n.  kinsman,  12. 

2  Sam.  14.31).  see,  joab's  field  is  n.  mine,  set  on  fire 
19.  42.  becau.<e  the  king  is  71.  of  kin  to  us 

1  Kings  8.  46.  land  of  enemy  far  or  71.  2  Clir.  6.3G. 
21.2.  thy  vineyard,  because  it  is  7t.  to  my  house 

Job  41.16.  one  is  so  n.  another,  no  air  can  come 

Psal.  22. 11.  for  trouble  is  71.  ||  75. 1.  thy  name  is  n. 
119. 151.  thou  art  71.  O  Lord,  thy  comm.  are  truth 
148. 14.  the  horn  of  Israel,  a  people  n.  to  him 

Prov.  7.  8.  passing  through  the  street,  71.  her  corner 
10.14.  but  the  mouth  of  the  foolish  is  ?i.destruction 
27.10.betler  is  a  neighbour  that  is  7i.than  a  brother 

Isa.  33. 13.  ye  that  are7i.  acknowledge  my  might 
45.  21.  tell  ye,  and  bring  them  71.  yea,  let  them 
46. 13.  I  bring  71.  my  rigliteousness,  not  far  off 
50.8.  he  is  n.  that  justifieth  me,  who  will  contend? 
51.  5.  my  righteousness  is  71.  my  salvation 
55.  6.  call  upon  the  Lord  while  he  is  n. 
56.1.  my  salvation  is  71. to  come,  and  my  righteous. 
57. 19.  peace  be  to  him  that  is  n.  saith  the  Lord 

Jer.  12.  2.  thou  art  n.  in  their  mouth,  and  far 
25.26.  all  kings  of  the  north  far  and  ?!.  shall  drink 

Ijam.  4. 18.  our  end  is  71.  our  days  are  fulfilled 

£:e4. 6. 12.  he  that  is  7i.  shall  fall  by  the  sword 
7.7.  the  time  is  come,  the  day  of  trouble  is  ;i.  30.3. 

11.  3.  who  say,  it  is  not  n.  let  us  build  houses 
22.5.  thosethatbe7i.  and  far  shall  mock  thee 

/JflTi.  9. 7.  confusion  belongs  to  Israel  that  are  n. 
Obad.  15.  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  71.  Zech.  1.  14. 
^Wut.24.  33.  know  that  it  is  7!.  even  at  the  doors 
Mark  13.  28.  ye  know  that  summer  is  n. 
jicts  10. 24.  Cornelius  called  together  hisTi.  friends 
See  Came,  Come,  Draw,  Drew. 
NEARER. 
Ruth  3. 12.  bowbeit,  there  is  a  kinsman  71.  than  I 
y<i/;/i.l3.1J.our  salvation  71.  than  when  we  believed 

NECESSARY. 

Job  23. 12.  I  esteemed  his  words  more  than  71.  food 

.^cts  13.  46.  was  n.  the  word  first  be  spoken  to  you 

15.28.  to  lay  no  greater  burden  than  these  77.  things 

28.  10.  they  laded  us  with  such  things  as  were  71. 

1  Cor.  12. 22.  the  members  which  seem  feeble  are  n. 

2  Cor.  9. 5.  I  thought  it  n.  to  exliort  the  brethren 
Pkil.  2.  25.  I  supposed  it  71.  to  send  Epaphras 
Tit.  3. 14.  to  maintain  good  works  for  71.  uses 
flr£4.9.2J.  71.  patterns  should  be  purified  with  these 

NECESSITY 

•lignifipB,  [1]  The  state  of  a  thing  thatmust  needs 
be,  when  it  is  contrary  to  its  very  nature  and 
principles  to  be  otherwise.,  Heb.  9. 16.  [2]  Po- 
verty, or  want  of  temporal  good  things,  Rom. 
12.  13.     [3]  Force  or  constraint,  2  Cor.  9.  7. 

The  word  necessary,  or  such  as  are  equivalcntlo 
it,  as  must,  must  needs,  do  not  always  denote 
an  absflute  necessity,  but  a  necessity  of  de- 
cency;  or  of  duly,  or  merely  something  useful 
and  advantageous ;  as  for  example,  Luke  14. 
Ir",  I  have  bought  a  piece  of  ground,  and  I  must 
needs  go  and  see  it;  that  is,  It  is  convenient 
that  I  go  and  sec  it.  Rom.  13  5,  Ye  must  needs 
be  suhjeet ;  that  is,  it  is  your  duty.,  as  well  as 
interest,  so  to  be.  .^nd,  Luke  23.  17,  Of  ne- 
cessity he  must  release  one  at  the  feast; 
that  is,  it  has  been  a  custom  observed  among 
us  for  a  long  time,  and  it  is  proper  to  have  it 
continued. 

tuie23.17.forof  71.  he  must  release  one  at  the  feast 

Ram.  12.  13.  distributing  to  the  71.  of  saints 

1  Cur.  7.  37.  having  no  7t.  and  hath  so  decreed 
9. 16.  for  71.  is  laid  upon  me,  yea,  woe  is  to  me 

2Cor.n.  7.  so  let  him  give,  not  grudgingly,  or  of  71. 

Phil.  4. 16.  ye  sent  once  and  again  to  my  71. 

Philem.  14.  not  be  as  it. were  of  71.  but  willingly 

JUb.l.  12.  there  is  made  of  71.  a  change  of  the  law 

8.  3.  it  is  of  71.  this  man  have  somewhat  to  oflfer 

fl.  16.  there  must  of  71.  bo  the  death  of  the  testator 

NECES.SITIE.S. 

.4rjs20.  34.  these  hands  have  ministered  to  my  71. 

2  Cor.  6.4.  as  the  ministers  of  Ood  in  tj. 

12.  10.  I  take  pleasure  in  77.  in  persecutions 

NECK 
Signifies,  [1]  That  part  of  the  body  between  the 
head  and  shoulders,  Genesis  27."l6.  [2]  The 
head,  Deut.  21.  4.  [3]  The  irhole  man,  Dnul. 
28.  48.  Jer.  27.  8,  11.  [4]  The  heart,  Neh. 
9.  29.  Prov.  29.  1.  [5]  The  hand  or  body, 
Neh.  3.  5. 

403 


NEE 

G«7i.  27.  16.  put  the  skins  on  the  smooth  of  his  71. 

40.  thou  shall  break  the  yoke  from  off  thy  n. 
33.  4.  Esau  fell  on  his  7t.  and  kissed  him 
41.  42.  Pharaoh  put  a  gold  chain  about  Joseph's  71. 
Ezelc.  16. 11.  JMn.5.7, 16,29. 
45.  14.  Joseph  fell  on  Benjamin's  n.  and  wept 
46. 29.  he  full  on  Jacob's  n.  he  wept  on  his  71. 
49. 8.  thy  hand  shall  be  on  the  n.  of  thine  enemies 

F.iod.  13. 13.  if  not  redeem  it,  break  his  tj.  34.  20. 

Lev.  5.  8.  and  wring  otf  his  head  from  liis  ji. 

Deut. '■21.  4.  strike  otf  the  heifer's  71.  in  the  valley 
28.48.  he  shall  put  a  yoke  of  iron  upon  thy  71. 

1  Sam.  4.  18.  and  his  71.  brake,  and  ho  died 

2  C/tron.  29.  f  6.  our  fathers  have  given  the  ?i. 
36.13. Zedekiahstiffencd  his  Ti.liarduned  his  heart 

JVeh.  9.29.  hardened  their  71.  and  would  not  hear 
.Job  15.  20.  he  runneth  on  him,  even  on  his  71. 

16. 12.  he  hath  taken  me  by  the  u.  and  shaken  me 

39. 19.  hast  thou  clothed  his  71.  with  thunder? 

41.22.  in  his  7i.remaineth  strength,  and  sorrow 
P.sal.  75. 5.  lift  not  up,  speak  not  with  u  stiff  7;. 
Prov.  1.  9.  for  they  shall  be  chains  about  thy  n. 

3.  3.  bind  them  about  thy  71.  write  them,  G.  21. 

22.  so  shall  they  be  life  and  grace  to  thy  77. 

Cant.  1.10.  thy  71.  is  comely  with  chains  of  gold 

4. 4.  thy  7t.  is  like  the  tower  of  David 
9.  hast  ravished  my  heart  with  one  chain  of  thy  71. 

7.4.  thy  77.  is  a  tower  of  ivory,  thine  eyes 
Isa.  8.  8.  he  shall  reach  even  to  the  71. 

10.  27.  his  yoke  shall  be  taken  from  off  thy  7t. 

30.  28.  shall  reach  to  the  midst  of  the  71. 

48.  4.  thy  n.  is  an  iron  sinew,  thy  brow  brass 

52.  2.  loose  thyself  from  the  bands  of  thy  71. 

66.  3.  that  sacrificeth,  as  if  ho  cut  off  a  dog's  71 
Jer.  2.  t  27.  turned  the  hinder  part  of  the  71.  to  me 

17.  23.  but  they  obeyed  not,  made  their  n.  stiff 

27.  2.  make  thee  yokes,  and  put  them  on  thy  71. 
8.  will  not  put  71.  under  yoke  of  king  of  Babyl.  11 

28.  10.  took  the  yoke  from  off  Jeremiah's  77.  12. 
14.  I  have  put  a  yoke  on  the  71.  of  these  nations 

30.8.  I  will  break  his  yoke  from  off  thy  71. 

48.  t39.  RIoab  hath  turned  the  71.  with  shame 
Lam.  i.  14.  my  tr.insgressions  are  come  upon  my  77. 
Hos.  10.  11.  but  I  passed  over  on  her  fair  77. 
Hab.  3.  13.  discovering  the  foundation  to  the  71. 
Mat.  18.  6.  it  were  better  that  a  millstone  were 
hanged  about  his  71.  JV/aj-i  9.  42.  Lukel7.2. 
Luke  15.  20.  his  father  fell  on  his  71.  and  kissed  him 
Jlcts  15. 10.  put  a  yoke  on  the  77.  of  the  disciples 

20.  37.  they  full  on  Paul's  71.  and  kissed  him 
See  Harden. 
NECKS. 
Josh.  7.  t8.  when  Israel  turncth  their  7t. 

10.  24.  put  your  feet  on  the  n.  of  these  kings 
7ttf/^.  5.30.  for  the  77.  of  them  that  take  the  spoil 

8. 21.  ornaments  thatwereon  their  camel's  71.26. 
2  Sam.  22.41.  given  me  77.  of  enemies,  Psal.  18. 40. 
2  CAr«7i.30. 1 8.  harden  not  your  71.  as  your  fathers 
JVVA.  3. 5.  the  nobles  put  not  their  7t.  to  the  work 
Isa.3. 16.  and  walk  with  slretrhcd-forlh  n. 
Jer.  27. 12.  bring  your  71.  under  yoke  of  Babylon 
Lam.  5. 5.  our  71.  are  under  persecution,  we  labour 
Eie/i:.  21.29.  to  bring  thee  on  the  71.  of  the  slain 
J\tfh.  2.3.  from  which  ye  shall  not  remove  your  71. 
Rom.  16.4.  who  for  my  life  laid  down  their  ownTt. 

NECROMANCER. 
Deut.lS.lX.thete  shall  not  be  found  among  you  a  n. 

NEED. 
Deut.  15. 8.  thou  shalt  lend  him  snfTicient  for  his  71. 

1  .Sa77i.  21. 15.  havel?!.  of  madmen,  that  ye  brought 

2  Chron.  2. 16.  cut  wood  as  much  as  thou  shalt  71. 

20.  17.  ye  shall  not  71.  to  fight  in  this  battle 
Fira6.9.  and  let  what  they  have  7t.  of  be  given 
Prov.  31.  11.  so  he  shall  have  no  77.  of  spoil 
Mat.  3.  14.  I  have  71.  to  be  baptized  of  thee 

6. 8.  for  your  father  knoweth  what  things  ye  have 

77.  of  before  ye  ask  bim,  32.  Luke  12.30. 

9.  12.  they  that  be  whole  n.  not  a  physician,  but 

they  that  are  sick,  Markl.  17.  Luke  5.31 

14. 16.  they  71.  not  depart,  give  ye  them  to  eat 

21.  3.  the  Lord  hath  77.  of  them,  and  he  will  send 
them,  Mark  11.  3.  Luke  19.  31,  34 

26.  65.  the  hijh-priest  said,  what  further  n.  have 
wecf  witnesses  ?  Markli.G'i.  /,i<ic23.71 
MarkH.  2.5.  read  what  David  did  when  he  had  71. 
/,7/A(!9.  jl.  and  healed  them  that  had  n.  of  healing 

15.  7.  over  just  persons  which  n.  no  repentance 
.Tohn  13.  29.  buy  those  things  we  have  7i.  of 
.^cts  2.  45.  parted  them  as  every  man  had  n.  4.  35. 
Rnm.  16.  2.  that  ye  assist  her  in  what  she  hath  71. 
1  Cor.  7.  36.  if  n.  »o  require,  let  him  do  what  he  will 

12.21.  cannot  say  to  the  hand,  I  have  no  71.  of  thee 

24.  for  our  comely  parts  have  no  7t.  but  God 

2C«r.3.1.  or  Ti.we  epistles  of  commendation  to  you? 

Phil.  4. 12.  I  know  how  to  abound  and  to  suffer  71. 

19.  my  G.  shall  supply  all  your  71.  by  Christ  Jesus 

1  Thess.  1.  8.  so  that  we  71.  not  speak  any  thing 

4.  9.  of  brotherly  love  ye  n.  not  that  I  write 

.5.  1.  of  the  times  ye  have  no  71.  that  I  write 
Heb.  4. 16.  and  find  grace  to  help  in  time  of /t. 


NEQ 

Heb.  5.12.  n.  one  teach  you,  such  as  hare  n.  of  milk 
7. 11.  what  71.  that  another  priest  should  rise 
10.  36.  for  ye  have  77.  of  patience,  lliat  after 

1  Pet.  1. 6.  though  now,  if  77.  be,  ye  are  in  heaviness 

1  John  2.  27.  ye  71.  not  that  any  man  teach  you 
3.17.  whoso  hathg(iods,andseehis  liruther haver;. 

Rev.'i.  17.  I  am  rich,  and  have  n.  of  nothing 

21.  23.  the  city  had  no  71.  of  sun  or  moon 

22.  5.  and  they  71.  no  candle,  nor  lightof  the  sun 
NEEDED. 

.John  2.  25.  he  77.  not  that  any  should  testify  of  man 
•4c£s  17.  25  as  tho'  he  71.  any  thing,  seeujg  he  gives 

NEEUEST,  ETH. 
f?f77.33.15.  Jacob  said,  what  n.  it,  let  me  find  grace 
Luke  11.  8.  he  will  give  him  as  many  as  he  n. 
.hhn  13.  10.  is  washed, 71.  not  save  to  wash  his  feet 

16.  30.  and  n.  not  that  any  man  should  ask  thee 
Fph.  4.28.  that  he  may  have  to  give  to  him  that  71. 

2  Tim.  2.  15.  a  workman  that  71.  not  to  be  ashamed 
Heb.  7.  27.  who  n.  not  daily  to  offer  up  sacrifice 

NEEDFUL. 
Fzra  7.  20.  shall  be  71.  for  the  house  of  thy  God 
I.,uke  10.  42.  one  thing  is  7J.  and  Mary  hath  chosen 
.■lets  15.5.  that  it  was  77.  to  circumcise  them 
Phil.  1.  24.  to  abide  in  the  flesh  is  more  h.  for  you 
.lam.  2.  16.  these  things  which  are  77.  for  the  body 
.Jude  3.  beloved,  it  was  71.  for  me  to  write  to  you 

NEEDLE. 
Mat.  19.24.  it  is  easier  for  a  camel  to  go  though 
the  eye  of  a  w.  Mark  10.  25.  Luke  18.  25. 
NEEDLE-WORK. 
Eiod.  26.  36.  thou  shalt  make  a  hanging  wrought 
with  77.  27.  16.  I  36.  37.  |  38.  IS. 
28.  39.  thou  shalt  make  the  girdle  of  71.  39.  29. 
.Iudg.5.  30.  toSisera,  a  prey  of  divers  coloursof  77. 
Psal.  45.  14.  she  shall  be  brought  in  ramieutof  74. 

NEEDS. 
Oen.  17.  13.  he  must  71.  be  circumcised 

19.  9.  they  said,  this  one  fellow  will  71.  be  a  judge 

24.  5.  must  I  71.  bring  thy  son  again  to  the  land? 
31.30.  and  now  though  thou  wouldest  71.  be  gona 

2  Sam.  14.  14.  we  must  71.  die,  and  are  as  water 
spilt  on  the  ground 
Jer.  10.  5.  must  n.  be  born,  beoause  they  cannot  go 
Mat.  18.  7.  it  must  71-  be  that  offences  come 
Mark  13^7.  for  such  things  must  71.  be,  and  not  yet 
Luke  14.18.  bought  ground, and  I  must  71. go  and  see 
■lohn  4.  4.  and  he  must  71.  go  through  Samaria 
Jicts  1 .  16.  this  scripture  must  71.  ha  ve  been  fulfilled 

17.  3.  that  Christ  must  71.  have  suffered 
21.  22.  the  multitude  must  n.conie  together 

iio77i.  13.  5.  wherefore  ye  must  71.  be  subject 

1  Cor.  5. 10.  then  must  ye  77.  go  out  of  the  world 

2  Cor.  11.  30.  if  I  must  71.  elory,  I  will  glory 
NEEDY. 

Deut.  15. 11.  thou  shalt  open  thy  hand  to  the  it. 
21.  14.  a  hired  servant  that  is  poor  and  71. 

.lob  21.  4.  they  turn  the  71.  out  of  the  way 
14.  the  murderer  killelh  the  poor  and  n. 

Psal.  9. 18.  the  77. shall  not  always  be  forgotten 
12.  5.  for  the  sighing  of  the  71.  now  will  I  ariro 
35.  10.  which  deliveresl  the  poor  and  71.72.  '4,  IX 
37.  14.  have  bent  their  bow  to  cast  down  the  71. 

40.  17.  I  am  poor  and  71.  make  no  tarrying,  70.  3. 
72.  12.  for  he  shall  deliver  the  71.  82.  4. 

13.  he  ehall  spare  the  poor  and  71.  save  the  n 
74.21.  let  the  pi<oT  and  71.  praise  Ihy  name 
82.  3.  do  justice  to  the  afflicted  and  71. 
4.  deliver  the  poor  and  71.  rid  from  the  wicked 
86.  1.  hear  me,  for  I  am  poor  and  71.  109.  22. 
109.  16.  but  persecuted  the  poor  and  71.  man 
113.  7.  he  lifleth  the  n.  out  of  the  dunghill 
Prov.  30. 14.  devour  the  71.  from  among  men 

31.  9.  and  plead  the  c.Tuseof  the  poor  and  71. 

20.  she  renchcth  forth  hor  hands  to  the  77. 
Isa.  10.2.  to  turn  aside  tho  71.  from  judgment 

14.  30.  and  the  71.  shall  lie  down  in  safety 

25.  4.  been  a  strength  to  the  77.  in  his  distress 

26.  6.  the  steps  of  then,  shall  tread  it  down 

32.  7.  even  when  the  7».  speaketh  right 

41.  17.  when  the  poor  and  7t.  seek  water 
.ler.  5.  28.  and  the  right  of  71.  do  they  not  judge 

22. 16.  he  judged  Ihecnuso  of  the  poor  and  n. 

Fzrt.  16.  49.  nor  strengthen  the  hands  of  the  71. 

18.  12.  he  hath  oppressed  the  poor  and  n. 

22.  29.  the  jicople  have  vexed  I  he  poor  and  71. 

.'3mns  4. 1.  ye  kine  of  Bashan,  which  crush  the  7t. 

8.  4.  hear  this,  O  ye  that  swallow  up  the  77. 

6.  that  we  may  buy  the  71.  for  a  pair  of  shoes 

NEESED,  or  SNEEZED. 

2  ICings4.35.  the  child  71.  seven  times,  and  opened 

NEESINGS. 
.Tob  41. 18.  by  his  77.  a  light  doth  shine,  his  eyee 

NEGLECT. 
Mat.  18.  17.  and  if  he  shall  71.  to  hear  them,  tell  it 
to  the  church,  Imtif  he  71.  tohear  th«  church 
1  TtTTj.  4.  14.  7«.  not  the  gift  that  is  in  the« 
Heb.  2. 3.  ho  w  shall  escape,  if  71.  so  great  salvation  ? 

NEGLECTED. 
.^ct*  6. 1.  their  widows  were  n.  in  the  miniatratioa 


NEI 

NEGLECTING. 

Col.2  23.  n.  the  body,  not  in  any  honour  to  the 
NEGLIGENT. 

2  Chr.  29.  11.  my  sons,  be  not  now  n.  for  Lord 

S  I'eC.  1.  1>.  001  bo  n.  to  put  you  in  leiuuiubiauce 
NEIGHBOUR 

Signifies,  [\]  One  jcho  diciUs  or  is  seated  near  to 
another,  '■2  Kings  4. 3.  [2]  Every  man.,  to  ic/mm 
wcfiava  an  ojiportxinity  of  doing  good, i\^\..^ii- 
3'J.  13]  A  fellow-labourer,  of  one  and  ike  same 
people,  Acts  7.  27.  [4]  One  who  does  u*  gooJ, 
and  who  pities  and  relieves  us  in  distress, 
thoiigfi  at  a  distance  from  us,  Luke  lU.  3t). 
[rij  One  that  stands  in  need  uf  help,  Prov.  3. 
■Z!i.  [6]  A  friend,  J,>b  16.  f  21. 

-9£  the  time  of  our  Sj.riuur,  the  Pharisees  had 
restrained  the  word  Neighbour  to  signifi/  those 
of  their  own  nation  only,  or  their  own  friends  • 
being  of  opinion,  that  to  hate  L'teir  enemy  was 
not  forbidden  by  their  law  ;  but  our  Saviour 
informed  them,  that  the  whole  world  leere  their 
nei'ihbuurs ;  that  they  ought  not  todo  to  another 
V)hat  they  would  not  have  done  to  themselves ; 
and  that  this  charity  ought  to  be  extended  even 
to  their  enemies,  Mat.  5. 4;t.  Luke  111.  2'J.  .<-o. 

F.iod.  3.  22.  every  woiyan  borrow  of  her  n.  11.  2. 

1  Sam.  15.  28.  and  hath  given  it  to  a  n.  of  thine 
Prov.-~- 10.  better  is  a  71. that  isncarjthan  a  Brother 
Jir.  0.  21.  the  n.  and  his  friends  shall  perish 

9.  20.  and  teach  every  one  her  n.  lamentation 
Luke  10. 30.  wasn.  lo  him  that  fell  among  thieves 

NEIGHBOUR,  adjective. 
Jcr.40.  19.  as  in  the  overthrow  of  Sodom  and  Go- 
morrah and  the  n.  cities  thereof,  50.  40. 
//i>  NEIGHBOUR. 
Etod.  12.  4.  let  him  ami  his  n.  take  a  Iamb 
•21.  14.  but  if  a  man  come  on  his  n.  to  slay  him 
!^2.  7.  if  a  man  deliver  lo  his  n.  money  or  stiitf 

8.  whether  he  put  his  hand  to  his  n.  goods,  11. 
10.  if  a  man  deliver  to  his  n.  an  ass  or  ox 

14.  if  borrow  ought  of  Ai5n.  and  it  be  hurt  or  die 
32.27.  go  through  the  camp,  shy  every  man  his  n. 
Lev.  6.  2.  and  lie  unto  or  halhileceived  his  n. 

20.  10.  he  that  committcth  adultery  with  his  n. 
wife,  shall  surely  be  put  to  death,  Deut.  22.24. 

24.  19.  and  if  a  man  cause  a  blemish  in  his  n. 
T^eutAAQ.  which  should  kill  his  n.  unawares,  19.4. 
15.  2.  every  creditor  thnt  lendoth  ought  to  his  n. 
lie  shall  not  exact  of  Ai.5  n.  or  his  brollier 

10.  11.  if  any  hate  his  n.  and  lie  in  wait  for  him 
22. 2fi.  a  man  ris!;tli  against  his  n.  and  slayclli  him 
27. 17. cursed  be  he  that  removcth  Aisn.land-mark 

24.  cursed  be  he  that  smileth  his  n.  necrutly 
Ru«A4.7.man  plucked  off  his  shoo,  and  gave  to  A.  n. 
J  Kings  f>.  31.  if  a  man  trespass  a^.his  n.  an  oitli 

2  C'Ar.6. 22.  if  a  man  sin  against  his  n.  and  an  oath 
Job  12.  4.  I  am  as  one  mocked  of  his  n. 

Ifi.  21.  plead  with  G.  as  a  man  pleadeth  for  his  n. 

P^al.  12.  2.  they  speak  vanity  each  with  his  n. 
15.  3.  nordoelh  evil  to  his  n.  taketh  up  a  reproach 
101.5.  whoso  privilysiandcreth  A!sn.  will  cut  off 

Prov.  fi.  29.  so  he  that  gneth  in  to  his  n.  wifo 

11.  9.  a  hypocrite  with  his  mouth  destroyeth  Ai.fJi. 
12.  who  is  void  of  wisdom  despisetliAi.f  n.  14.21. 

12. 2'i.  the  righteous  is  more  excellent  than  his  n. 
H.  20.  the  poor  is  hated  even  of  Ais  n. 
10.29.  a  violent  man  cntlcinh  his  n.  and  lii.idcth 
18.  17.  hut  Ais  n.  Cometh  and  searcheth  him 
10.  4.  but  the  poor  is  separated  from  Ai.5  »i. 

21.  10.  his  n.  fitidcth  no  favour  in  his  eyes 
25.lS.man  thai  heareth  false  witness  again.=;t  A/.i  n. 
2*i.  19.  so  19  the  man  that  deceiveth  his  n. 
29..').that  flnttercth  h.n.  spreadcth  a  net  for  his  feet 

F.eclA.  4.  that  for  this  a  man  is  envied  of  Aik  n. 
Jsa.  3. 5.  shall  he  oppressed  every  one  by  his  n. 

19.2.  they  shall  fight  every  one  against  his  n. 

41.6.  they  helped  oveiy  one  his  n.  and  said 
J>-r.  5.  R.  every  one  mighed  after  his  n.wife 

7.  5.  execute  judgment  between  a  man  and  his  n. 

9.  4.  lake  ye  heed  every  one  of  his  n.  trust  not 
5.  anil  tlicy  will  deceive  every  nne  his  n. 

8.  speak  pea'"eahly  to  his  n.  with  his  mouth 

22.  S.  ihi-y  shall  say  every  man  to  his  n.  23.  3.5. 
13.  ihit  nsfth  his  n.  service  without  wages 

Jir.  23. 27.  dreams  llicy  tell  every  one  to  Ai's  ?!. 
30.  that  iiteiil  my  words  every  one  from  his  n. 
31.  34.  tench  no  moreevnry  man  his  n.  Ile.h.  8.11. 
34.  l.'i.  ill  proclaiming  fibertv  to  his  n.  17. 
F.ieh.  IP.  0.  nni'h-r  hath  dcfil-d  his  n.  wife,  15. 

11.  hath  defiled  his  n.  wilV,  22.  11.  |  33.  2;. 
Jfnb.  2.  1.5.  woe  111  him  ihnt  givi'lh  his  n.  drink 
Z<T/i.3.10.«hall  cnll  every  mnn4i»  ii.  iindor  the  vine 

8.  10.  for  I  gft  all  men,  every  'me  ng.iinot  his  n. 
Ifi.  speak  ye  every  man  the  truth  (n  Ai»  n. 

17.  let  none  of  von  iningini!  evil  against  his  n. 
Mark  12.  33.  and  to  love  his  n.  us  himwlf,  i<  mi.r 
,/lcts  7.  27.  he  that  did  his  n.  wrong,  IhiUst  him 
J!nm.  13.  10.  love  workclh  n"  evil  lo  his  n. 
1.5.  2.  let  every  ime  please  A».t  n.  fur  his  lond 
r.ph.  4. 25.  ipeak  everv  man  truth  with  ii>  ■». 
404 


NET 

JIfj  NEIGHBOUR. 
Job  31.  9.  or  if  I  have  laid  wait  at  my  n.  door 
Luke  10.  29.  but  he  said  to  Jesus,  who  is  my  n.  ? 

Thy  NEIGHBOUR. 
Exod.  20.  16.   Ihuu  shult  not  bear  false  witness 
against  thy  n.  Deut.  5.  20. 

22.  20.  if  thou  take  Ihy  n.  ruiineiit  to  pledge 
Lev.  18.  20.  ehalt  not  lie  carnally  with  thy  n.  wife 

19.  13.  thou  blmlt  nut  defraud  thy  n.  nor  rub  him 
15.  in  righteousness  shalt  thou  judge  thy  n. 
lU.iior  slult  thou  stand  against  the  blood  of  thy  n. 

17.  thou  shall  in  any  wise  rebuke  thy  n. 

18.  but  thou  shalt  love  thy  n.  as  thyself 
25. 14.  if  sell  to,  or  buyest  ought  of  thy  n.  15. 

/^€u<.5.21.thou  shalt  notdesireor  covet  iAy  n.wife 

19. 14.  thou  sJialt  not  remove  thy  n.  land-mark 

23.  24.  when  thou  comest  into  thy  n.  vineyard 

1  .Sam.  2"?.  17.  rent  kingdom,  and  given  it  lo  thy  n. 
2Sam.  12.  II.  take  wives,  and  give  them  lo  thy  n. 
Prov.  3. 28.  say  not  to  thy  n.  go,  and  come  again 

29.  devise  not  evil  against  thy  n.  seeing  he  dwells 

24.  28.  bu  not  witness  against  thy  n.  without  cause 

25.  8.  when  thy  n.  hath  put  thee  to  shame 
9.  debate  thy  cause  with  thy  n.  himself 
17.  withdraw  thy  foot  from  thy  n.  house 

Mat.  5.  iJ.  thou  shalt  love  thy  n.  19.  19.  |  22.  39. 

Mark  12. 31.  Luke  10.  27.  Horn.  13.  9. 

Gal. 5.  14.  .ram.i.H. 
NEIGHBOURS. 
■Tosh.  9. 16.  they  heard  that  they  were  their  n. 
Ruth  4.  17.  the  women  her  n.  gave  it  a  name 

2  Kings  4. 3.  go  borrow  vessels  abroad  of  all  tiiy  n. 
P.MZ.23.3.who  speak  peace  to  their  n.  but  mischief 

31.  11.  I  was  a  reproach  among  all  my  n. 
44.  13.  thou  rnafcest  us  a  reproach  to  our  n. 

79.  4.  we  are  become  a  reproach  lo  our  n. 

12.  render  lo  our  n.  seven  fold  into  their  bosom 

80.  fi.  thou  makest  us  a  strife  to  our  n. 
89.  41.  spoil  him,  he  is  a  reproach  to  his  71. 

.Jrr.  12. 14.  thus  saiththe  Ld.  against  all  my  evil  71. 
29.23.  have  committed  adultery  with  their  r. wives 
49.  10.  his  seed  isspuileil  and  his  71.  and  he  is  net 

Kick.  10.215.  commit  fornication  with  Egypt,  thy  n. 
22. 12.  thou  hast  gained  of  thy  71.  by  extortion 
23.  5.  she  doted  on  the  Assyrians  her  n.  12. 

Luke  1.  53.  herii.  and  her  cousins  heard  how  Lord 

14.  12.  when  makest  a  sujiper,  call  not  thy  rich  71. 

15.  fi.  he  calletli  together  his  fiiends  and  71.  9. 
John  9.8.71. and  they  who  hnfnre  had  seen  him  blind 

NEIGHED. 
Jer.  5.  8.  every  one  71.  after  his  neighbour's  wife 

NEIGHING. 
Jer.  8. 10.  land  trembled  at  the  71.  of  his  strong  ones 

NEIGHINCS. 
Jer. 13.  27.  I  have  seen  thine  adulteries  and  71. 

NEITHER. 
Oen.  3.  3.  the  tree,  71.  shall  ye  touch  it,  lest  ye  die 
1  K'i7in-^22.31.  fight  71. with  small  nor  greal,but  with 
.!\Iat.  21.  27.  n.  tell  I  you  bv  what  authority  I  do 

NEPHEW. 
.Ti)h  18. 19.  he  shall  neither  have  son  nor  71. 
!sa.  14.  22.  I  will  cut  olf  from  Babylon  son  and  ?i. 

NEPHEWS. 
Juiig.  12. 14.  Ahdon  had  forty  sons  and  thirty  7t. 
1  Tim.  5.  4.  if  any  widow  Imve  children  or  71. 

NEST 
Signifies,[1] .?  little  lodgment  in  which  birds  hatch 
anlhrcedlhriryoung,l'!sa\.i*i.3.  [2]  The  birds 
in  the  nest,  Ueut.32.  II.  Isa.  10.  14.  [3]  .,1  very 
high  habitation,  seemingli/  serure,  and  without 
disturbance,ObR(].  4.  Hah.  2.9. 
.\"h7h.  24.  21.  and  thou  pnllrsl  thy  ;i.  in  a  rock 
Deut.  22.  6.  ifa  bird's  71.  chance  to  be  before  thee 

32.  11.  as  an  c.agle  stirreth  up  her  71. 

Job  29.  1.8.  then  I  said,  I  sbftll  die  in  my  71. 
39.C7.dotheagleatlhy  command  make  n  on  high? 
Psal.  84.  3.  the  swallow  hath  found  a  n.  for  herself 
Prov.  27.  8.  as  a  bird  that  waiideretli  from  her  n. 
Isa.  10.14.  bath  found  as  71.  the  riches  of  the  people 

16.  2.  as  a  wandering  bird  cast  out  of  the  71. 

34. 15.  there  shall  the  groat  owl  make  her  71. 
Jer.  22.  23.  that  makest  thy  71.  in  the  cellars 

48.2*^.  the  dovo  makes  her  71.  in  the  sides  of  holes 
49.  It),  tbo'  thou  make  Ihy  71.  as  high  a.?  the  eagle 
Obad.  4.  though  thou  set  ihy  71.  among  the  slara 
Hab.  2.  9.  that  he  may  set  his  71.  on  high 

NESTS. 
fTC7i.6.  t  14.  n.  shall  thou  make  in  the  ark 
Psal.  10  J.  17.  where  the  birds  make  their  n. 
/;:»•<•.  31.0.  nil  the  fowls  of  h-iivi-n  Tniiile  Iheir  n. 
Jlfn«.8.20.and  the  birds  of  the  air  have  n.  /.i(/.f9..5.''. 

NET 
Signifies,  [1]  .^n  instrument  for  catching  fsh. 
birds,  or  wild  beasts,  Isa.  .')!.  20.  Mat.  4.  18. 
f2)  .IrtiHrial  work  irrnught  like  a  net,  1  Kings 
7. 17.  f31  .Mischief  cunninghi  d'rised,  Psal.9 
I.-..  Mic.  7.  2.  [41  J?  fortress,  Pmv.  12.  t  12 
[5]  Inextricable  difRcuities,io\^  18.8.  [6J  Tni- 
ing  affiictinns,  Kkertwitk  Ood  ckastitcth  his 
people.  Job  19.  0. 


PJEV 

They  sacrifice  unto  their  net,  Hob.  1. 16.  TTiey  at- 
cribe  the  praise  of  their  victories,  and  acquired 
glory  to  their  own  contrivances,  diligence,  ana 
power  ;  as  if  the  jisherman  should  make  his  net 
his  god,  and  offer  sacrijiccs  thereto,  because  it 
had  inclosed  a  good  draught  of  fishes. 
Job  18.  8.  he  is  cast  into  a  7i.  by  ins  own  feet 

19.  6.  God  hath  compassed  me  with  his  71. 
I'sal.  9. 15.  in  the  Ji.  they  hid,  is  their  foot  taken 
10.  9.  when  he  drawetb  him  into  his  71. 
25. 15.  he  shall  pluck  my  feet  out  of  the  71.  31.  4, 
35.  7.  they  have  hid  for  me  their  n.  in  a  pit 
8.  let  his  n.  that  he  hath  hid  catch  himself 
57.  ti.  they  have  prepared  a  71.  for  my  steps 
(iO.  11.  thou  broughtest  us  into  the  71. 
140.  5.  they  have  sjiread  a  71.  by  the  way-side 
Frov.  1. 17.  surely  in  vain  the  71.  is  spread  in  sight 
12.  12.  the  wicked  desireth  the  71.  of  evil  men 

29.  5.  a  man  that  flatterelh  spreadelh  a  71. 
Keel.  9.  12.  as  the  fishes  are  taken  in  an  evil  71. 
Isa.  51.20.  thy  sons  lie,  as  a  wild  bull  in  a  71. 
/.iiin.  1.  13.  he  hath  spread  a  71.  for  my  feet 
F.zek.  12. 13.  uiy  71.  will  I  spread  on  him,  17.30. 

19.  8.  the  nations  shall  spread  their  71.  over  him 
32.  3.  I  will  spread  out  ray  71.  over  thee 

H0S.3. 1.  ye  have  been  a  71.  spread  upon  Tabor 
7. 12.  when  they  go,  I  will  spread  my  «.  upon  them 

Jific.  7.  2.  hunt  every  man  bis  brother  with  a  n. 

IJab.  1.  15.  they  catch  them  in  their  71. 

16.  therefore  they  sacrifice  lo  their  n.  and  burn 

17.  shall  Ihey  therefore  empty  their  n.  7 
.llat.  4.  16.  casting  71.  iiilo  the  sea,  Mark  1.  16. 

13.47.  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  a  7t.  cast 
I^uke  5.  5.  at  thy  word  I  will  let  down  iho  tj. 

0.  a  great  multitude  of  fishes,  and  their  7r.  brake 
.John  21.  C.  cast  the  71.  on  the  right  side  of  llie  ship 
8  came  in  a  ship,  dragging  then,  wilh  the  fi^he• 
11.  drew  then,  to  land,  vet  was  not  tlie  71.  broken 
NETS. 
1  Kings  7.  17.  n.  of  chenuer-work  and  wreaths 
Psal.  141.  10.  lei  the  wicked  fall  into  their  own  Ti. 
Keel.  7.26.  the  woman  whoie  heart  is  snares  and  71. 
Isa.  19.  8.  they  that  spread  n.  shall  languish  • 
Ezc.k.  20.  5.  spreading  of  n.  in  the  midst  of  the  sea 

14.  it  shall  be  a  place  to  spread  n.  on,  47.  lU. 
Mat.  4.  21.  he  saw  James  and  John  mending  their 
71.  and  he  called  them,  Mark  1.  19.  /.uke5.  '2. 
Mark  1.  18.  tliey  forsook  their  7».  and  followed  him 
Luke  5. 4.  and  let  down  your  n.  for  a  draught 

NETHER. 

Kxod.  19.17.  they  stood  at  the  71.  pan  of  the  moun* 

Deut.  216.  no  man  shall  take  71.  millstone  to  pledge 

Josh.  15.  19.  and  he  gave  her  the  upper  sprirgl 

and  the  71.  springs,  .ludg.  1. 15. 

1  Kings  9. 17.  and  Solomon  buill  (ie/.er  and  Beih- 

horon  the  n.  1  C'hron.7.  24. 

.7i)/(41.24.  his  heart  hard  as  a  piece  of  71.  millslona 

Elf  A.  31.14.  they  are  delivered  to  death  ton.  parts 

16.  shall  he  comforted  in  the  71.  parts  of  the  earth 

18.  shalt  be  brought  down  ton.  partsof  the  earth 
32.  18.  cast  them  down  tothon.  partsof  thoearth 

24.  Elam  gone  down  to  the  n.  partsof  llie  earth 
NETHERMOST. 
1  Kings  6. 6.  the  7i.  chamber  was  five  cubits  broad 

NETTLES. 
.Tub  30.7.  under  the  11.  they  were  gathered  together 
Prov.  21.31.  and  n.  had  covered  the  face  thereof 
Isa.  34. 13.  n.  and  brambles  in  Iho  fortresses  thereof 
Uos  9.6.n.  shall  possess  the  pleasantplacesfor  silv. 
Zeph.  2.9.  surely  MoMb  'hall  be  the  breeding  of  ». 

"NETWORK. 

F.Tod.  27. 4.  shall  make  a  grate  of  n.  of  brass,  .38. 4. 

1  Kines  7.  li^.  two  rows  riiiuul  about  on  7».  42. 

.ler.  52.  22.  with  71.  on  the  chapiters  round  about 

23.  all  the  pomenraiiates  on  71.  were  a  hundred 

NET- WORKS. 

1  Kings  7.41.  th'^  iwo  71.  upon  th'e  chaiiilers 
42.  four  hundred  pomegranates  for  the  two  ji. 

/.-■a. 3.  t  l.-i.  the  Lord  will  lake  away  their  n. 
19.9.  thev  that  weave  71.  shall  ho  confounded 

NEVER. 
Gen-AI.  19.  kine,  such  as  I  n.saw  in  all  Egypt 
l.rr.  fi.  13.  the  fire  on  the  altar  shall  n.  go  out 
.Vum.  iTt.  2.  a  nil  heifer,  upon  which  n.  came  yoke 
Dnil.  15. 11.  the  poor  shall  n.  cease  out  of  the  land 
.Tiidg.  2.  1.  I  will  71.  break  my  covenant  with  yim 

14.  3.  is  there  k.  a  woman  among  all  my  people  1 
16.7.  wilh  seven  greon  wilhs  thai  were  n. dried 

11.  if  bind  wilh  now  rnpi-sthnt  71.  wereoccupied 
2.'>(7ni.]2.10.ihe'^wordshalln.deparlfri)mlhy  houso 

2  Chron.  1''. 7.  he  11.  propbesietli  good  unto  mo 
21.  17.  there  was  n.  a  son  left  him,  save  Johonhaa 

.;../<  3.  in.  as  infmils  which  71.  saw  light 
9.  30.  and  ifi  make  my  hands  n.  ho  clean 
21.25.  another  71.  eafeth  wilh  pleasure 

Psal.  10.  6.  hath  said,  for  1  sbnll  n.  he  in  adversity 
11.  he  hideth  his  fhcc,  he  will  71.  see  it 

15.  5.  he  that  doelh  these  things  shall  7>.  ho  moved 

30.  6.  in  p'osperiiy  I  said,  I  shall  n.  be  moved 

31.  1.  in  tlieu  do  I  trust,  let  mu  n.  bv  ashamMi 


NEV 

Peal.  49.  19.  shall  ?o  to  fiilhcrs;  they  slinll  n.  sec 
55.22. L<ii'(l  will  ?(.Kun'cr  Ihu  rigliteous  lo  bo  nioveil 
71.  1.  O  Lord,  lut  me  ii.  be  jiut  to  conrusioii 
119.  yU.  1  will  n.  I'orgct  lliy  precepts,  for  willi  ihcin 

Prov.  10.  SO.  the  rijjiiteoiis  shall  n.  bo  removed 
27. 20.  hell  and  dcslruclioi)  are  n.  full,  so  the  eyes 
of  a  mail  are  n.  natislitd 
30.  15.  there  are  three  tliiiii,'s  that  are  H.satisticd 

ha.  13.  £0.  Babylon  n.  bo  inhabited  nor  dwelt  in 
14. 2U.  the  seed  of  evil  doors  sliallit.bu  renowned 
25.  2.  to  be  no  city,  it  shall  n.  be  built 
5G.  11.  are  greedy  dogs  which  can  n.  have  enough 
C2.  G.  w-atchinen  that  shall  n.  hold  their  poaco 
G;!.  19.  wo  are  thine,  thou  a.  barest  rule  over  them 

Jrr.  20.  II.  their  confusion  shall  n.  bo  forgotten 
;13. 17.  David  shall  n.  want  a  man  to  sit  on  throne 

F.zek.  10.  G3.  and  n.  open  thy  mouth  any  more 
2G.  21.  Tyrus  shall  n.  bo  found  again,  sailh  Lord 
27.  3G.  a  terror  and  ?t.  shall  be  any  more,  28.  19. 

Da7i.  2.  44.  a  kingdom  that  shall  n.  be  destroyed 

12.  1.  there  shall  be  trouble,  Euch<ts  n.  was 
Jy(i2. 20.  and  my  people  sliall  7i.  be  ashamed,  27. 
Jimos  8.  7.  I  will  n.  forget  any  of  their  works 

14.  even  they  shall  fall  and  n.  rise  up  again 
Hab.  1.  4.  and  judgment  doth  n.  go  forth 
^/n«.  7.2U.  1  will  profess  unto  them  I  n.  knew  you 

9.  3H.  saying,  it  was  n.  so  seen  in  Israel 

21.1G.Jesus  saith,  have  yo  7i.read,out  ofthe  mouth 
of  babes  hast  perfected  praise,  42.  Mark'H.'ij. 

2fi.  33.  Peter  saiil,  yet  will  I  n.  be  olVended 

27.  14.  and  he  answered  him  to  ?i.  a  word 
Htark2. 12. saying,  wo  n.  saw  it  on  this  faslfum 

3.29.shall  blaspheme  ag.  Holy  Ghost,  hath  7(.forg. 

9.  43.  into  lire  that  71.  shall  be  quenched,  4.>. 

II.  2.  colt  tied,  whereon  ?i.  man  sat,  J,ulie  19.  .30. 

14.  21.  good  for  that  man  if  he  had  n.  been  born 
Ltilce  15.  29.  yet  thou  77.  gavcst  mo  a  kid  to  make 

23.  29.  blessed  are  the  wombs  that  n,  bare 
H'.i.  wherein  71.  man  before  was  laid,  Jo/m  19.  U. 

Jo/i77  4. 14.who  drinks  of  water  igivo,shall  }i.  thirst 
fi.  35.  he  that  cometh  to  me  shall  n.  hunger,  ami 
he  that  bi-lieveth  on  me  shall  71.  thirst 
7. 15.  how  knowcth  this  man,  having  7).  learned  ? 
4G.  the  odicers  said,  11.  man  spake  like  this  man 
6.  33.  and  we  were  ?i.  in  hondase  to  any 
.51.  he  shall  71.  see  death,  .t2.  |  10.  28.  |"ll.  26. 

13.  8.  Peter  saith,  thou  shall  77.  wash  my  feet 
^cls  10.  14.  I  have  n.  eaten  any  thing  common 

14.  8.  being  a  cri|)plo,  who  7i.  had  walked 

1  r()r.l3.8.charity7/.failcth,  hnt  whether  prophecies 

2  Tim.'.i.T.  n.  able  to  come  to  knowledge  of  truth 
Neb.  10. 1.  can  n.  with  those  sacrifices  make  perl. 

11. the  same  sacriliceswiiicli  canH..tako  a  waysins 

13.  5.  I  will  71.  leave  thee,  nor  forsake  thee 
2  Pet.  1.  10.  if  ve  do  these  things  ye  shall  71.  fall 

NEVER  so. 
Psal.  58.  5.  to  charmers,  chai^ning  77.  so  wisely 

NEVER  so  muck. 
Gen.  34. 12.  ask  me  77..'!n  ni.dowiv,  and  I  will  give 

NEVERTHELESS. 
J^iorf.  32. 34. 71.  in  the  day  when  I  visit,  I  will  visit 
I.eij.  11.  4.  77.  these  ye  shall  not  eat,  Dent.  14.  7. 

.36.71.  a  fountain  or  pit  shall  be  clean 
.V«7H.  13.  28.  71.  the  people  be  strong  that  dwell 

14.  44.  7i.  the  ark  ofthe  covenant  departed  not 
18. 1.5. 77.  the  first-born  of  man  shall  thou  redeem 

24.  22. 71.  the  Kcnite  shall  be  wasted,  until  Ashnr 
31.23. 71.  it  shall  be  purified  with  water  of  separat. 

Dnit.  23.5.71.  the  Iiord  thy  God  would  not  hearken 
Josh.  13. 13. 71.  children  of  Isr.  expelled  not  Goshur 

14.  8.  77.  my  brethren  that  wont  up  with  mo 
Juil<r.  1..33.  71.  the  inhabitants  of  Betli-shemosh 

2.  It),  n.  the  Ld.  raised  up  judges  to  deliver  then. 

1  Sum.  8. 19. 7;.  the  people  refused  to  obey  Samuel 
15. 35.  to  see  Saul,  77.  Samuel  mourned  for  Saul 

20.  2().  77.  Saul  spake  not  any  thing  that  day 

29.  G.  said  to  Havid,  77.  the  lords  favour  thee  not 

2  . 'fa 777.  5.  7. 77.  David  look  the  strong  hold  of  Zion 
17.  18.  71.  a  lad  saw  them  and  told  Absalom 
23.  16.  77.  he  woiikl  not  drink  thereof,  poured  out 

1  Kin<rs  8.  19.  77.  thou  shall  not  build  the  house 

15.  4.  71.  for  David's  sake  did  the  Lord  give 
14.  n.  Asa  his  heart  was  perfect  with  the  Lord 
23.  71.  in  his  old  age  he  was  diseased  in  his  feet 

22.  43. 77.  the  high  places  were  not  taken  away 

2  ICinn-s  2. 10.  71.  if  thou  see  me  when  I  am  taken 
.1  3  n.  he  cleaved  to  the  sins  of  .leroboam 
13. 6. 71.  Ihcy  di'partcd  not  from  the  sins  of  .lerob. 
23.9.  n.  the  priests  of  the  hiih  places  came  not 

1  Chron.  II.  5.  ri.  David  took  the  casllc  of  Zion 

21.  4.  77.  the  king's  word  prevailed  against  Joab 
9  Chron.  12.  8.  71.  they  shall  be  his  servants 

15. 17. 71.  the  heart  of  Asa  was  perfect  all  his  days 
19.  .3.  77.  there  are  good  things  found  in  thee 

30.  11.  77.  divers  of  .Asher  humbled  thomselves 
33. 17. 77.  the  people  diil  sacrifice  in  the  high  places 
35.  22.  77.  Josiah  would  not  turn  from  him 

JVWf.  4.  9.  71.  we  made  our  prayer  to  our  God 
9.  26. 77.  they  were  disobed.  and  rebelled  ag.  thee 
•il.n.fur  tliymcrcies'sake  thou  didst  not  consume 
405 


NEW 

JW/i.l3. 26. 77.  him  did  outland.  women  cause  to  sin 
Kflh.  5.  lO.  77.  Hamau  refrained  himself 
Pi<al.  31.  22.  ?7.  thou  hcarilesl  my  supplication 
49.  12.  71.  man  being  in  honour,  abideth  not 
73.2.3.71.1  am  continually  with  thee,  hast  hoiden 
78.  30. 71.  Ihcy  did  tiatter  him  with  their  mouth 
89.  3.3.  71.  my  loving-kindness  not  take  from  him 
lOG.  8. 71.  he  saved  them  lor  his  namo's  sake 
44.71. he  regarded  their  alliictions,  hoard  their  cry 
Prov.  19. 21. 71.  the  counsel  of  llu!  Lord  shall  stauil 
Kccl.O.  16.71.  the  poor  nun's  wisdom  isilcsjiiscd 
/.V7(.9. 1.  u.  the  dinuicss  shall  not  be  such  as  was 
Jer.5.  18. 71.  in  tlioscdaysl  will  not  make  a  full  end 
2().  24.77.  tlio  hand  of  Aliik;nn  was  with  .leremiah 
28.7. 71.  hear  thou  tliis  word  that  1  speak  in  thy  car 
36.25. 77.  EInatlian  and  Delaiah  made  intercession 
Kick.  3.  21.  71.  if  thou  warn  the  righteous  man 
16.60. 71.  i  will  remember  my  covenant  with  thee 
20.  17.  71.  mine  eye  spare<l  them  from  destroying 
22.  71. 1  withdrew  my  hand,  and  wrought  for  my 
33.  9.71.  if  thou  warn  the  wicked  of  his  way 
IJun.  4. 15. 71.  leave  the  stump  of  his  roots  in  earth 
.hinak  1. 13. 71.  the  men  rowed  hard  lo  bring  lo  land 
Mai.  14.9. 71.  for  lliu  oath's  sake,  he  commanded  it 
26.39.  from  me,  7i.  not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  will 
64. 77.  hereafter  yo  shall  sec  the  Son  of  man  com. 
Mark  14.  36.  71.  not  what  I  will,  J.uke  22.  42. 
Luke  5.  5.  71.  at  thy  word  I  will  hi  down  the  net 
13.  33.  71.  1  must  walk  to-day,  and  to-morrow 
18.8.77. when  Souof  nnm  cometh  shall  he  find  faith 
,/o/i7i  11.  15.  Lazarus  is  dead,  71.  let  us  go  to  him 
12.  42.  77.  among  the  chief  rulers  many  believed 
16.  7. 71. 1  tell  you  the  truth  it  is  expedient  for  you 
Jicls  14.17.  71.  he  loft  not  himself  without  witness 
27. 1 1.  »i.  the  centurion  believed  the  master  of  ship 
Rum.  3.  14.77.  death  reigned  from  Adam  to  Moses 
15.  15.  71.  I  have  written  more  boldly  to  you 

1  Cor.  7.  2. 71.  to  avoid  fornicat.  let  every  man  have 
28.  71.  such  shall  have  trouble  in  the  flesh 
37.  71.  he  that  slanileth  stedfast  in  his  heart 

9.  12.  71.  we  have  not  used  this  |)ower 

n.  11.  71.  neither  is  the  man  without  the  woman 

2  Cor.  3.  16.  71.  when  it  shall  turn  to  the  Lord 
7.6.77.  G.  that  comforteth  those  that  are  cast  down 
12.  If).  71.  being  crafty,  I  caught  you  with  guile 

Gal.  2.  20.  71.  I  live,  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  in  me 
4.  30. 71.  whatsaithscripture,  cast  out  bond-wom. 
7','p/i..5.33.jt.let  everyone  so  lov(!  his  wife  as  himself 
Phil.  1.24.71.  to  abide  in  the  flesh  is  more  needful 
3.  16.  77.  whereto  we  have  already  attained 
2  7'im.I.12. 77. 1  am  not  ashamed,  for  1  know  whom 
2.  19.  71.  the  foundation  of  God  standeth  sure 
Hih.  12.  11.  71.  it  yieldeth  peaceable  fruit  of  right. 
2  /V(.3. 13.71.  we  look  for  new  heavens  and  eartl 
Rcu.  2.  4.  71.  I  have  sumewhat  against  thee 

NEW  * 

Signifies,  [1  ■)  That  which  is  fresh,  or  of  late  date, 
Josh.  9.  13.     [2]  'JliHt  which  was  iirvcr  iiscd, 
or  worn  before.,  1  Kings  11. 29.     [3]  That  which 
is  cxiraorilioanj  and  innigiKil,  Nnm.   16.  30 
[4]   07ifi  mho  is  re^rnicratcd,  and  endued  leith 
new  qualities,  new  ajinrehrn.sions  and  inclina 
tions,  2  Cor.  5.  17.    Gal.  6.  15.     [5]   Stravfrr 
and    unUiiown,   Mark    16.   17.     [6]  .Another, 
Exod.  1.8. 
Kcod.  1.  8.  there  arose  np  a  77.  king  over  Egypt 
hrv.  23. 16.  oiler  a  77.  meal-ollering,  JVnm.  2H.  26. 
26. 10.  shall  bring  forth  the  old,  because  ofthe  71. 
.V«77?.  16.  30.  but  if  the  Lord  make  a  77.  thing 
Dent.  20.  5.  what  man  hath  built  a  77.  house,  22.  8. 
24.  5.  when  taken  a  71.  wife,  hi;  shall  not  go  to  war 
32.  17.  they  sacrificed  to  devils,  lo  71.  gods 
.Tosh.  9.  13.  and  these  bottles  of  wiiio  wore  j7. 
./Hf/n'.5.8.they  chose  71.  gods,  then  was  war  in  gates 
1.1.  13.  they  bound  him  with  77.  cords,  16.  11,  12. 

1  Sam..  6.  7.  make  a  71.  cart,  and  take  two  kino 

2  Satri.  6.  3.  set  the  ark  on  a  77.  cart,  1  Chron.  13. 7. 
21.  16.  he  being  girded  with  a  71.  sword  thought 

1  Kinsrs  11.29.  Jeroboam  clad  with  a  ?i.  garment 
30.  Ahijah  caught  the  71.  garment,  and  rent  it 

2  A777n-.«  2.  20.  bringaii.  cruse,  and  put  salt  therein 
2  Chron.  20.  5.  Jehoshaphat  stood  in  the  77.  court 

Tnh  32,  19.  it  is  readv  to  burst  like  77.  holllfs 
Psal.  33.  3.  sing  to  him  a  ?7.  song,  96.  1.  |  98.  1. 
I  144.9.  I  149.  1.  /sa.  42.  10. 
40.3.hohath  put  a77.songinmy  miiuth,evcn  praise 
Eccl.  1.  9.  there  is  no  »i.  thing  under  the  sun 

10.  is  nnv  thing  whereof  may  be  said,  this  is  71. 7 
Cant.  7.  13.  are  all  pleasant  fruits-,  77.  anil  olil 
Isa.  42.  9.  behold  71.  things  do  I  declare,  48.  6. 
43.  19.  behold,  I  will  do  a  7».  thing,  make  a  way 
62.  2.  and  thou  shall  be  called  by  a  71.  name 
(i5.  17.  I  create  71.  heavens  and  a  n.  earth,  l'>6.  22. 
.7rr.26.  10.  the  77.  gate  ofthe  Lord's  hon.se,  36. 10. 
31.22.  the  L.  hath  created  a  71.  thing  in  the  earth 
Lam.  3.  23.   the  Lord's   mercie.i   are  71.  every 
mornina  :  great  is  thy  faithfulneso 
Kzrh.  11. 19. T  will  put  a  71.  spirit  within  you, 36.  26. 
18.  31.  and  make  vou  a  71.  heart  and  a  71.  spirit 
47.  12.  trceg  wliicji  vhull  brui|;  forth  n.  fruit 


NIG 

Mat.  9.  10.  no  man  putteth  a  piece  of  n.  Cloth  to 

an  old  garment,  Mark  2.  21.  Luke  5.  36. 

17.  but  they  put  71.  wine  into  ?i.  bottles,  and  liuth 

are  ).reserved,  Mark  2.  22.  J.uke  5.  38. 

13.52J)ringctli  out  of  Ins  treasure  things  71.  and  old 

26.  28.  for  tills  is  my  blood  of  the  ji.  testament^ 
Mark  14.  24.  J.uke  22.  20.  1  Cor.  II.  25. 

29.  until  I  drink  it  n.  with  you,  Mark  14.  25. 

27.  60.  Joseph  laiil  the  body  in  his  own  11.  tomb 
Mark  1.  27.  saying,  what  ii.  doctrine  is  this  1 

16.  17.  they  shall  sjieak  with  11.  tongues 
/0/171  13.  34.  a  71.  commandment  give  I  unto  you 
19.41.  a  71.  sepulchre,  wherein  was  never  man  laid 
Ids  17. 19.  may  we  know  what  this  ?i.  doctrine  isl 

21.  but  either  to  toll  or  lo  hear  some  h.  thing 
1  Cor.  5.  7.  purge  out,  that  ye  may  be  a  ?i.  lump 
2rn7-.3.6.  made  us  able  ministers  ofthe  7i.  testament 
5. 17.  if  any  man  be  in  (,'hrist,  he  is  a  w.  creature  ; 
behold,  all  things  are  become  71 
Oal.  6.  15.  nor  uncircumcision,  but  a  71.  creature 
F.ph.  2.  l.j.  of  twain,  cuic  11.  man,  so  making  peace 

4.  24.  and  that  ye  put  on  the  n.  man,  Cul.  3.  10 
Hcb.  9.  15.  he  is  the  Mediator  ofthe  71.  testament 

10.  20.  by  a  n.  and  living  way  hath  consecrated 

1  Pet.  2.2.  as  71.  born  babes  desire  the  milk  of  word 

2  Pet.  3. 13.  we  look  for  71.  heavens  and  a  v.  earth 

1  .John  2.  7.  I  write  no  71.  commandment  unto  you 
8.  a  71.  commandment  I  write  unto  ymi 

2  .lohn  5.  not  as  though  1  wrote  a  ?i.  commandment 
Hcv.  2.17. 71.  name  written,  which  no  man  knoweth 

3. 12. 71.  Jerusalem,  21.2.  ||  3. 12.  write  niyn  nama 

5.  9.  and  they  sung  a  71.  song,  saying,  14.  J. 

21.  1.  1  saw  a  71.  heaven  and  a  71.  earth 

5.  he  said,  behold,  I  make  all  things  7t. 
.Sec  COVKNANT,  Moo.N. 

NEW    /I'177C. 

J\rfh.  10.  39.  shall  bring  otforing  ofthe  71.  wine 

13.5.prepnr.aclnUMbcr  where  the  7t.7i;iH(;  was  laid 

12.  brought  tithe  of  Ji.  wine  unto  the  treasuries 

Pio7>.3. 10.  thy  presses  shall  hurstout  with  71.  icnie 

/.S(7.24.7.thc7i.!f  iiicmourneth.  the  vine  languisheth 

49.  t  26.  drunken  with  their  blood  as  with  71.  wine 

65.  8.  as  the  77.  inne.  is  found  in  the  cluster 

Uos.  4.  II.  wine  and  71.  wine  take  away  the  heart 

9.  2.  and  the  71.  vnvc  shall  fail  in  her 

./»fZ1.5.the7(.7('iHe  iscut  olf  II  lO.n.  iciMz-isdricdup 

■  3. 18.  mountains  shall  drop  71.  wine,  .>}nioS  9. 1 1.3. 

f^nrr.  1.  11.  I  called  for  a  driutght  on  the  n.wine 

7,cch.  9. 17.71. 7r(7it' shall  majte  the  maids  cheerful 

Mat.^.  17.  nor  do  men  put  71.  wiiic  into  old  bottles, 

but  n.  wine  into  n.  hot.  Murk  2.  22.  /,77/ic  5.  37. 

.Sets  2.13.  others  said,  these  men  arc  full  of  7!.  wine 

NEWS. 
Prov.  25.  25.  so  is  good  w.  I'rom  a  far  country 

NEWLY. 
Dcnt.3".  17.  sacrificed  to  new  gods  that  came  n.up 
.hiilir.  1.  19.  they  had  but  77.  set  the  watch 
2.S'«m.  24.  t  6.  they  came  to  the  land  71.  inhabited 
1   Tim.  3.  t  6.  not  one  n.  come  lo  the  faith 

NEWNESS. 
Hr.m.^.  4.  even  so  we  also  should  walk  in  ?i.  of  life 
7.  G.  that  wc  should  serve  in  71.  of  spirit,  not  oldnees 

NEXT. 
<7r7i.  17. 21.  Sarah  shall  bear  at  I  his  set  time  tj.  year 
K/o(/.12.4.let  him  and  his  neighbour  77.  take  a  lamb 
.V«m.  11.  32.  siood  up  all  the  71.  day  and  galherad 
27. 11.  ye  shall  give  inheritance  to  his  kinsman  ji. 
Dent.  21.  3.  the  city  which  is  71.  to  the  slain  man 

6.  the  elders  of  the  city  77.  to  the  slain  man 
25.  t  5.  her  71.  kinsman  shall  lake  her  to  wife 

Ruth  2.  20.  the  man  is  one  of  our  «.  kinsmen 

1  .S"n7n.23.  17.  thou  king,  and  t  shall  he  7t.  lo  thco 

30.  17.  David  smote  them  to  the  evening  of  71.  day 

2  Chron.  28.  7.  Elkanah  that  was  71.  to  the  king 
Esth.  10.  3.  Mordecai  was  77.  to  king  Ahasneius 
.Tnnah  4.  7.  a  worm  the  71.  day  smote  the  gourd 
.Vaf.27.62.  the  7t.  day  that  followed  the  preparation 
.Mark  1.  38.  he  said,  let  us  go  into  the  71.  towns 
./()/i77  1.  29.  the  71.  day  John  seeth.Jesus  coining 
.^cts  4.  3.  they  put  them  in  hold  unto  the  71.  day  ^ 

7.  26.  the  77.  day  Mopes  shewed  liim.«clf  to  them 

13.42.that  these  words  be  preached  n.  sabbath,  44. 

NIGH. 
Lev.  21.  3.  for  his  sister  a  virgin  that  is  7).  lo  him 

2.5.  49.  any  that  is  77.  of  kin  may  redeem  him 
.VI177I.24.  17.  I  shall  behold  him,  hot  not  71.  a  star 
/>7iA.4.7.whal  nation, who  hath  God  so  71.  to  them'? 

13.  7.  entice  thee  to  sods  of  the  peopli-  77.  to  thee 

22.  2.  if  thy  brother  be  not  77.  unto  then 
30.  14.  the  word  is  7!.  unto  thee,  Kom.  10.  8. 

2. <fn 777. 11.20.  wherefore  approached  ye  =0  77. ?  21 
1  Kinps  8.  59.  let  these  mv  words  ho  71.  to  the  I.,ord 
Psal.  34. 18.  L.  is  71.  themwho  are  of  hroki'n  heart 
8.5.  9.  his  salvation  is  71.  them  that  fear  him 
14.5.  18.  the  Lord  is  77.  to  all  that  call  on  him 
.Torli.  1.  the  day  of  the  T,ord  Is  77.  at  Inind 
Mat.'i4.  32.  ye  know  that  summer  is  71.  /.7(/.c  M.  30. 
Mark  13.  29.  know  that  it  is  71.  even  nt  the  doors 
'  Lvke^X.^O.  knowlhat  the  desolation  thereof  is  m. 
28.  look  up,  for  your  rodomjition  drawcth  a. 


NIG 

Luke  21. 31.know  that  the  kinj.  o'  C.  b  n.  at  hand 
John  G.  4.  and  tin;  pahsover,  a  tcas^  jf  Ji;%va  w  as  n. 

11.  55.  the  Jews'  passover  was  n.  at  Uaail 
I'J.  42.  for  the  sepulchre  was  n.  at  haiiil 

£/>A.  2.  13.  ye  are  made  n.  by  the  bluoJ  of  Christ 

IT.cujne  and  preached  jience  to  thuiii  tJiatwi^ren 

Phii.  ii.  27.  for  he  was  sick,  n.  unto  death,  30. 

Hcb.G.Q.  is  rejected,  i;>  n.uiito  cursinjj,  to  be  burned 

Ace  Camk,  Draw. 

NIGHT 

Signifies,  [1]  That  time  vhiU  the  sun  is  ahsent 

and  btluw  our  horizon,  Kxotlus  12.  30,  31.  Matt. 

27.64.     [21  Huddrnly  and  unezpcctcdli/,  Isaiah 

15.  1.  Lulte  12.  20.  [31  ^1  time  of  igvorance 
and  unbelief,  Romans  13.  12.  [i]  Adversity 
and  affliction,  Isa.  21.  12.    [5]  Death,  John  9. 4. 

0<r«.1.5.tiie  light  day. and  the  darkness  he  called  n. 
14.  K-t  there  be  lighbi,  to  divide  tiio  day  from  n. 

16.  he  made  the  lesser  light  to  rule  the  )i. 
ID.  2.  tarry  all  n.  ^'um.  2-2.  19.  Judff.  19.  6,  9. 

5.  where  are  men  which  came  in  to  thee  this  n.? 
33.  they  made  him  drink  wine  that  n.  34,  35. 

21.  .^4.  tarried  all  n.  23.  11.  j  31.  54.  |  32. 13,  21. 
21').  24.  the  Lord  appeared  to  Isaac  the  same  n. 
30  15.  Rachel  said,  he  shall  lie  with  thee  to  n.  IH. 
40  5. dreamed  each  man  his  dream  in  one  71.41. 11. 
46  2.  Ciod  spake  to  Israel  in  vi.sions  of  the  n. 
4'J  27.  and  at  n.  he  shall  divide  the  sjioil 

Ei<d.  12.  8.  eat  the  flesh  that  n.  roast  with  fire 

12.  I  will  pass  through  the  land  of  Kgypt  this  n. 
42.  it  is  a  71.  to  be  much  observed  to  tlie  Lord, 

this  is  tl'.at  n.  of  the  L.  to  be  observed  of  Israel 
H.  20.  the  one  came  not  near  the  other  all  n. 

Lev.  6.  9.  the  burning  on  the  altar  all  n. 
I'.l.  13.  the  wagi'S  shall  not  abide  with  thee  all  n. 

jVam.  11.  .32.  the  people  stood  up  all  that  n. 

11. 1.  and  the  people  wepi  that  n.  and  murmured 

22.  8.  he  said  to  tliem,  lodge  here  tliis  71.  19. 
20.  God  came  to  Bahiam  at  n.  and  said  to  him 

Z>ffuMC.4. there  shall  no  leaven.bread  remain  all  n. 
SI.  23.  his  body  shall  not  remain  all  71.  on  the  tree 
Jjsh.  2.  2.  there  came  men  in  hither  to  n.  of  Israel 
Judg.iJAO.  G.  did  so  that  71.  lor  it  was  dry  on  fleece 

16.2.  laid  wail  for  him  all  n.  and  were  quiet  all  71. 
19.  10.  but  the  man  would  not  tarry  that  n. 

2-3.  and  abused  her  all  the  n.  until  the  morning 
Kuth  1. 12.  if  I  should  have  a  husband  also  to  n. 

3.  2.  behold,  Boaz  winnowelh  barley  to  71. 

1  Sam.  15.  II.  anil  .Samuel  cried  to  the  Lord  all  71. 
16.  tell  what  the  Lord  hath  said  to  me  this  n. 

19.  10.  and  David  fled  and  escaped  that  71. 
11.  saying,  if  tliOU  save  not  thy  life  to  n. 
2d.  25.  Saul  rose  up  and  went  away  that  n. 
31.  12.  the  men  of  Jabesli  went  all  71.  and  took 
i  .Sam.  2.  29.  Abner  and  his  men  walked  all  n. 
?,i.  .lonb  and  his  men  went  all  71.  and  name 

4.  7.  and  gat  them  away  through  the  plain  all'Ti. 
12.  16.  David  went  and  lay  all  ;(.  on  tlie  earth 
17.  1.  I  will  arise  and  pursue  after  David  this  71. 

16.  saying,  lodge  not  this  7t.  in  the  plain 
10.  7.  there  will  not  tarry  one  with  thee  this  n. 
"  Kings  in.  ;{.>.  that  71.  the  angel  of  the  Lord  smote 

2  (:hron.  1.  7.  that  71.  did  God  appear  to  Solomon 
F..ilh.  6.  1.  on  tliat  n.  could  not  the  king  sleep 
Job  3.  3.  let  the  71.  perish  io  which  it  was  said 

".let  that  71.  be  siilitary||4. 13.  the  visions  of  the  7t. 
7.  4.  when  shall  I  arise,  and  the  71.  be  gone? 

29.  19.  and  ihe  dew  lay  all  71.  on  my  branch 

30.  t  3.  for  want  and  famine  they  were  dark  ag  7t. 
36.  20.  desire  not  the  n.  when  people  are  cut  ofl" 

Fial.  6.  C.  all  the  n.  make  I  my  bed  to  swim 

19.  2.  and  71.  unto  n.  shcweth  knowledge 
30.  5.  weepinir  may  endure  for  a  n.  but  joy 
5J.r  15.  if  thi-y  be  not  satisfied  they  will  stay  all  71. 
"S.  14,  he  led  them  all  71.  with  a  light  of  lire 
Vi.  2.  to  shew  fortii  thv  faithfulness  every  n. 
IfM.  20.  thou  makest  darkness,  and  it  is  n. 
13!).  II.  evi-n  the  7t.  shall  be  light  ntmiit  mo 

Pror.  7.  !l.  pmsing  in  the  bhirk  and  d  irk  71. 
^.11.  15.  »hn  arinnih  also  while  it  is  yi't  71. 
Ca<i'.  I.  13.  he  shall  lie  all  71.  hftween  my  breasts 
a.  2.  and  my  lo'ks  with  the  drops  of  the  71. 
//(U.S.  1 1,  continue  until  n.  till  wine  indaiiie  them 
16.  3.  take  coiinsrO,  iniike  thy  -ilindow  na  the  71. 
21.  4.  the  71.  of  my  pleasure  he  turned  into  fear 
t  8.  and  I  am  set  in  iny  ward  every  71. 

11.  watrhmnn,  what  of  the  71.?  what  of  the  n.? 

12.  the  morning  rornclli,  and  niao  Ihe  71. 

20.  7.  shall  he  n«  n  dreiim  of  a  71.  vision 
Jrr.  14.  8.  that  lurnelh  aside  to  tarry  for  a  ti. 
l>an.  2.  19.  the  wrrel  wn»  reveali'd  in  o  71.  vision 

5.  30.  in  thai  71.  wan  Itelihaz/ar  the  king  slain 
fi.  Ir*.  then  the  king  pa<«ed  Ihe  n.  fasting 

Jfos.  7.  6.  their  baker  sleepelh  all  the  71. 
Jo'-l  I.  13.  howl,  pome,  lin  nil  71.  in  Bnrkeloth 
,lmos  .">.  fl.  that  makeih  iho  day  dark  wllh  71. 
Jonah  1. 10.  which  came  up  in  a  n.  perisln-d  in  a  71. 
.Mic.  3. 6.  therefore  n.  shall  be  lo  you,  abnll  bo  dark 
Mit.  M.  25.  in  the  foiiilh  wnlrh  of  n.  Jemn  went 
lo  ihum  wuliliuc  on  the  aea,  .Mark  0.  4d. 


NIG 

Mat.  2(5.31.  then  Jesus  saith  to  them,  all  ye  shall  be 

olfeiided  because  of  me  this  ;i.  Mark  14.  27. 

34.  this  71.  before  cock  crow,  thou  shall  deny  me 

Au/i£  5. 5.  we  have  toiled  all  71.  and  taken  nothing 

6.  12.  he  continued  all  71.  in  prayer  to  God 

12.  20.  this  71.  thy  soul  shall  be  required  of  thee 
17.  34.  in  that  n.  two  shall  be  in  one  bed 
21.  37.  at  71.  he  went  out  and  abode  in  tl»e  mount 

./oA7j  9. 4.  the  71.  comelh  when  no  man  can  work 

13.  30.  he  immediately  went  out,  and  it  was  a. 
21.  3.  and  that  n.  they  caught  nothing 

.'ids  12.  6.  the  same  71.  Peter  was  sleeping,  bound 
16.  .33.  he  took  them  the  same  hour  of  the  71. 
23.  11.  tlic  71.  following  the  Lord  stood  by  him 
23.  make  ready  soldiers  at  third  hour  of  the  71. 

27.  23  stood  by  me  this  71.  the  angel  of  God 
Rom.  13.  12.  the  71.  is  far  si>ent,  the  day  is  at  hand 
1  Cvr.  11. 23.  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  same  n.  in  which 

he  was  betrayed,  took  bread 
1  The.is.  5.  5.  we  are  not  of  the  ?i.  nor  of  darkness 
fiev.  21.  25.  there  shall  be  no  71.  Uiero,  22.  5. 

/JyMGHT. 
Op7i.20.3.God  came  to  Abiinelech  in  a  dream  Jy  77. 
31.  24.  God  came  to  Laban  in  a  dream  by  n. 

39.  whether  stolen  by  day,  or  stolen  Aj/  71. 

40.  the  drought  consumed  me,  and  the  Irost  byn. 
F.zod.  12. 31.  he  called  for  Moses  and  .Aaron  byn. 

13.  21.  the  Lord  went  before  them  hyn.  in  a  pillar 
of  fire,  22.  |  14.  20.  |  40.  :J8.  JVrA.  9.  12. 
JV'u77i.  9.  16.  and  the  appearance  of  fire  by  71. 

21.  whether  cloud  was  taken  up  by  day  or  byn. 
Deut.  1.  33.  in  lire  by  n.  to  shew  you  the  way 

16.  1.  God  brought  you  fortli  out  of  Kgypt  by  n. 
23.  10.  by  uncleanness  that  chancctii  him  by  n. 

.Tosh.  8.  3.  and  Joshua  sent  them  away  by  n. 

.Tudg.  6.  27.  and  so  it  was  that  he  did  it  by  n. 
9.  32.  up  hy  n.  thou  and  thy  people  with  theo 
20.  5.  and  beset  the  house  round  about  by  n. 

1  Sam.  14.  .36.  go  down  aller  the  Philistines  by  n. 
26. 7.  David  and  Abishai  came  to  the  people  by  n. 

28.  8.  Saul  came  lo  the  woman  by  n.  and  said 

2  Sam.  21.  10.  nor  the  beasts  of  the  field  by  n. 
1  Kings  3.5.  Ld.  appeared  to  Sol.  byn.^  Chr.  7.12. 
^  Kings  G.  14.  came  by  n.  and  compassed  the  city 

8.  21.  rose  by  n.  and  .sinote  KdomitcB,  2  Chr.  21.  9. 

25.  4.  all  the  men  of  war  tied  by  n.  .hr.  52.  7. 
Psal.^X.^.  thou  shall  not  be  afraid  of  terror  iy  71. 

121.  6.  nor  shall  the  moon  smile  thee  by  n. 

134.  1.  that  by  «.  stand  in  the  house  of  the  Lord 

136.  9.  moon  and  stars  to  rule  by  n.  Jcr.  31.  35. 
Prov.  31.  18.  her  candle  goeth  not  out  by  n. 
Cant.  3.  1.  by  n.  on  my  bed  I  sought  him  whom 
Isa.  4.  5.  the  shining  of  a  flaming  fire  by  n. 
.Irr.  6.  5.  let  us  go  by  n.  and  destroy  her  palaces 

39.4.  they  fli'd,  and  went  forth  out  of  the  city  by  n. 

49.  9.  if  thieves  by  v.  they  will  destroy  till  have 
Dan.  7.  2.  I  saw  in  my  vision  by  v.  and  behold 
Oia(/..5.ifthievescameto  thee, if  robbersi?/ 71. would 
they  not  have  stolen  till  they  had  enough  7 
JI^^^2.^4.took  the  young  child  and  his  mother /;y  71. 

27.t)4.  lest  hisdiscipleseomciy  7i.and  steal,  2fl.  13. 
f.nke  2.  8.  keeping  watch  over  their  flock  by  71. 
.Tohn  3.  2.  Nicodemus  came  to  Jesus  by  n.  19.39. 
./IcLi  .5.  19.  the  nngel  hyn.  opened  the  prison-doors 

9.  25.  they  took  Paul  by  n.  and  let  him  down 

17.  10.  sent  away  Paul  and  Silas  by  n.  to  Uerea 
See  Day. 

In  the  NIGHT. 
7'riorf.l2.30.Phnraoliand  his  servants  rose  tn  tAe  71. 
JVurn.  11.9.  when  the  dew  fellon  thecamp  in  (Ac  71. 

1  Kings  3.19.  and  this  woman's  child  died  171  the  n. 

2  Kings!.  12.  and  the  king  arose  171  then,  and  said 
jVrh.  2. 12. 1  arose  in  the  n.  ||  1.5. 1  went  up  in  the  71. 

4.  22.  that  i«  the  n.  they  may  bo  a  guard  to  us 
C.  10.  yea,  in  the  n.  will  they  come  to  slay  thee 

.Tab  5.  14.  and  grope  in  the  noon-day,  as  in  the  n. 
24.  14.  in  the  n.  the  nuirderer  is  as  a  thief 
27.  20.  a  li'm|ipst  slealelh  him  away  in  Ihe  n. 
34.  25.  and  ho  overturnetb  llwrn  in  the  n. 
.35.  10.  where  is  God,  who  givi'th  soni.'s  in  the  n.7 

Psal.  16.7.  my  reins  in.atrucr  me  in  Ih'  n.  eensons 

17.3.  thou  bast  visited  me  tn  the  n.  and  tried  me 
22.  2.  I  crv  in  Ihe  n.  sea.Hon,  niid  am  not  silent 
42.  8.  and  in  the  n.  his  song  shall  be  wilh  mo 
T7.  2.  my  sore  ran  in  the  n.  and  ceased  not 

6.  I  call  lo  rrmembrancc  my  song  in  the  n. 

90.4.  a  Iho'isnnd  years  are  but  as  n  watch  in  then. 
105.  39.  he  spread  n  fire  to  givf  light  /71  the  71. 
119.  an.  1  have  remi'mbered  thy  name  in  the  n, 

F.ccl.  2.  23.  his  heart  taketh  not  rest  in  the  n. 
Cant.  3.  8.  hnth  his  sword,  hi-nwwn;  o(  (rar  in  then. 
!sn.\Tt.  I.  in  (Arn.Ar  and  K ir of  Moab  inlaid  waste 

26.  9.  with  mv  soul  have  I  d»>siri>d  thee  in  the  n. 
30.  29.  ye  shall  have  n  song  n«  in  the  n. 
.59.  10.  we  Hliimble  at  noon-dny  as  in  Ihe  n. 

.'/•r.36.  30.  «lmll  bo  cast  out  in  the  n.  to  the  frost 
/.rtm.1.2.  she  weep,  sore  in  /A'n.!|2.19.  cryout  in  n. 
Kns.  A.  ^.tUo  prophet  shall  fall  wilh  theo  in  the  n. 
.^"An  11.  10.  If  a  man  walk  in  Ifi-  n.  he  slnmblelli 
.lets  10. 0.  a  vision  ap[)oared  to  Paul  iTi  the  n.  18. 9. 


NO 

17%M»..').2.daycomethaB  a  thief  in  thev.ZPet3.Vi. 

7.they that  8leep,sleep  in  the  n.are  drunk.in  the  n 

NIGHTS. 

fi^fn.7.  4.1will  cau.se  it  rain  forty  days,  forty  7t.  12. 

./ob  7.  3.  wearisome  n.  are  appoi:itvd  to  me 

Isa.  21.  8.  and  I  am  set  in  my  ward  whole  71. 

.See  Day.s. 

NIOIIT-KAWK. 

Lev.il.  16.  owl  and  n.  ve  shall  not  eat,  DruM4.I5. 

MGHT-fWATC'HES. 
Psal.  63.  6.  when  1  meditate  on  thee  in  the  n  -n 
119. 148.  mine  eyes  prevent  the  ti.-ic.  lo  meditate 
NINE. 
JVum.  29.  26.  on  fifth  day  n.  bullocks,  two  rama 
34.13.whicbthe  Lord  commanded  togivetothe  n. 
tribes  and  half  tribe.  Josh.  13.  7.  |  14.  2. 
Deut.  3.  11.  "g's  bedslead  was  n.  cubits  in  length 
2Sani.  24.8.  Joab  came  to  Jerus.at  end  of  n.  monOia 
jVtA.  11.  1.  and  ti.  parts  to  dwell  in  other  cities 
Luke  17.  17.  ten  cleansed,  but  where  are  Ihe  n.7 
See  Ht-NDRFD. 
NINETKF.N. 
2.Sam.2.30.  there  lacked  of  l);ivid's  servants  n.  men 

NINETLKNTH. 

2  £'ino-s  25.8.  in  the  n.  year  of  NebiichadncTizar  tha 

house  of  the  Loril  was  burnt,  Jer.  52.  12. 

NINETV. 

fren.  5.  9.  Tnos  lived  n.  years,  and  begat  Cainaa 

17.  17.  shall  Sarah,  that  is  n.  years  old,  bear? 

Ezek.  41.  12.  the  length  of  the  building  n.  cubitf 

NLNETY-FIVE. 
E:ra2.  20.  the  children  ofGibbar  n.-/re 
A'VA.  7.  25.  the  children  of  Gihron  n.-fve 

NINETV-SI.X. 
F.zra  8.  35.  offered  for  all  Israel  n.-.iiz  rams 
.fer.  52.  23.  were  n.-sir  pomegranates  on  a  8id« 
NINKTY-EIGHT. 

1  Sam.  4.  15.  now  Kli  wat  n.-eight  years  old 
EzraS.ie.  the  children  of  Ater  n.-eight,  J^eh.  7.2L 

NINETVMNE. 

Gfn.l7.1.Abramwasn.-ninr  years  old,L.appeare<i 

24.wasn.-»ine  years  old whenhewas circumcised 

.^/at.l8.12.doth  hoiiotleavelhen.-ninfjnndseekotli 

that  which  is  gone  astray?  13.  LuHe  15.  4,7. 

NINTH. 

Lev.  25. 22.  ye  shall  eat  of  old  fruit  till  the  *i.  year 

2  Kings  17.  6.  in  n.  of  Ilosh.  Samaria  taken,  18. 10. 

25.  I.  inthen.ycarof  Zedokiah,  Nebuchadnezzar 
came  up,  Jer.  39.  1.  |  52.  4.  F.zek.  24.  I. 

1  Chr.  12. 12.  Elzahad  the  71.  captain  of  the  Gadite* 
24.  11.  the  71.  lot  came  forth  to  Jeshuah 
27.  12.  n.  captain  for  the  n.  month  was  .Abiezer 
/lfrt«.20. 5.he  went  out  about  the  sixth  and  n.hout 
27.  45.  from  sixth  hour  there  was  darkness  over 
all  the  land  unto  the  n.  hour,  .Mark  15.  ,33. 
46.  n.  hour  Jesus  gave  up  tlie  ghost, .1/arA  15. 34. 
.lets  ,3.  1.  at  the  hour  of  prayer,  being  the  71.  hour 
10.3.Corneliiis  saw  a  vision  about  the  n.  hour,  30. 
Rev.  21.  20.  the  n.  foundation  was  a  topaz 
See  Day,  Month. 
NITRE. 
Prov.  25.  20.  as  vinegar  upon  n.  so  is  be  sing,  songi 
Jer.  2.  22.  though  thou  wash  thee  with  71.  and  soap 

NO. 
Gen.  13. 8.  let  there  be  no  strife  betw.  me  and  the« 

15.  3.  behold,  to  me  thou  hast  given  no  seed 

26.  29.  hi!  an  oath  that  thou  wilt  do  us  no  hurt 

37.  22.  shed  no  blood,  and  Iny  710  hand  upon  him 

38.  21.  there  was  no  harlot  in  this  place,  22. 
40.Rno  interpreter  ||  42.  11. we  are  no  sjiies,  31,34. 
47.  4.  thy  servant*  have  7/«  jiaalure,  Lam.  1.  6. 

F.zod.  5.  16.  is  no  straw  given  to  thy  servants,  18. 
8.22.  that  no  swarms  of  flics  shall  be  there 
12. 16.  no  work  shall  be  done,  Lev.  16.  29.  |  23. 3, 
7,  21,  28,  31.  A-nni.  29.  1.  Dnit.  16.  8. 
19.  seven  diiys  no  leaven  shall  be  found,  1.3. 3,  T 
14.  11.  becaiiRc  (here  were  no  graves  in  Egypt 

16.  19.  he  thai  gathered  little  had  no  lack 

21.  22.  hint  a  woman,  and  no  misohief  follow 

22.  2.  there  slmll  no  blood  be  shed  for  him 

23.  8.  thiiii  Shalt  take  no  gift,  gift  blindeth  the  wIm 
32.  thou  shiilt  make  no  covenant  with  them 

30  0.  ye  iihall  offer  no  strange  incense  thereon 
12.  that  there  be  no  plaaue  amongst  them 

34.  14.  for  thou  shall  worship  no  other  god 
17.  thou  shall  make  thee  no  molten  gods 

35.  3.  ye  shall  kindle  no  fire  in  your  habilationi 
Lrr.^.  11.  ye  shall  burn  no  leaven  in  any  ofTcrinj 

5.  11.  put  no  oil  upon  it  ||  7.23.  ve  shall  eat  no  fat 
7.  2f.   yc  shall  eat  no  manner  ol'  bloo.l,  17. 12,  14. 

12.  4.  ye  shall  touch  no  hallowed  ihiiig 

13.  "l.'nnd  there  be  no  while  hairs  therein,  26. 
31.  no  black  hair  ||  .32.  there  be  no  yellow  hair 

19.  15.  do  no  unrighlooiisness  in  judgment,  35. 

20.  14.  that  there  ho  no  wickedness  among  you 
22.  13.  but  there  shall  no  stranger  eat  thereof 

21.  there  shall  be  no  blejni>h  therein 
2.'>.31.the  houses  which  have  nowalls  roundabout 

36.  take  thou  no  usury  of  him,  or  increase 
20.1.  ye  shall  make  yuu  no  idols  nor  graven  imifi 


NO 

Aei;.27.'28  Kodevoted  thing  shall  he  sold  or  redeem. 
A'uwi.J.  8.  it'lhe  man  have  no  kinsm.  to  recompense 
13.  and  there  be  no  witness  against  her 

6.  3.  and  shall  drink  no  vinegar  of  wine 

5.  there  shall  7to  razor  conic  upon  his  head 

6.  he  shall  come  at  no  dead  body 

\6.  40.  that  no  stranger  come  near  to  offer  incense 
iG.33.  Zclophehad  had  no  sons,  but  daughters,  27. 
3,  4.  Josh.  17.  3.  1  ChroH.  23.  22.  ]  24.  28. 
5J7  S.ifa  man  die  and  have  no  son  then  cause 
0.  and  if  he  have  no  daughter,  yo  shall  give 
17.  congregation  of  Ijord  be  not  as  sheep  that 
have  no  shepherd,  Kirk.  34.  5.  .Mat.  9.  36. 
35.31.  no  satisfaction  for  the  life  of  a  murderer,  32. 
Deut.  4. 12.  ye  heard,  but  saw  no  similitude,  15. 

7.  It),  thine  eye  shall  have  no  pity  on  them 

10.  9.  Levi  hath  nn  part  with  his  brcthien,  14. 
27,  29.  I  18.  1.  Josh.  14.  4.  1  18.  7. 
13.  4.  when  there  shall  be  no  poor  among  you 

20.  12.  it"  it  will  make  no  peace  with  thee 
28.  32.  there  shall  be  no  might  in  thy  hand 

65.  among  these  nations  thou  shalt  find  710  ease 
32.  20.  they  are  children  in  whom  is  710  faith 

Josh.  10.  14.  there  was  710  day  like  that  before 
22.  25.  ye  liave  no  part  in  the  Lord,  27. 

Judff.i'i.ti.  there  was  710  king  in  Israel,  18.1.  |  21.25. 

18.  7.  there  was  710  magistrate  ||  28.  710  deliverer 
JO.  where  there  is  no  want  of  any  thing,  19.  19, 
.Sum.  2.  24.  for  it  is  7io  good  report  that  I  hear 

3. 1.  word  was  precious,  there  was  710  open  vision 

21.  9.  take  it,  for  there  is  710  other,  save  that  here 
2  ■'iam.  12.  6.  shall  restore,  because  he  had  }io  pity 

13.  12.  no  such  thing  ought  to  be  done  in  Israel 

15.  26.  if  he  say,  I  have  no  delight  in  thee 

18. 18. 1  have  na  son  to  keep  my  name  in  remembr 

20.  1.  Sheba  said,  we  have  no  part  in  David 
KinffsB.  23.  there  is  no  God  like  thee  in  Iieaven 

C2. 18.  he  would  prophesy  710  good  concerning  me 
iKin^s  1.16.  is  it  not  because  there  is  710  God  in  Isr. 
17.  necause  Ahaziah  had  no  son 
10.  31.  Jehu  took  710  heed  to  walk  in  the  law 

1  CAr.  2. 34.  now  Sheshan  had  710  sons,  but  daugh. 
]G.  22.  do  mv  prophets  710  harm,  PSal.  105.  15. 

2  Chron.  18. 1'fi.  that  have  710  shepherd,  Zech.  10. 2 

19.  7.  there  is  710  iniquity  with  the  Lord 

20.  12.  we  have  710  might  against  this  company 

21.  19.  his  people  made  710  burning  for  him 

35.  18.  there  was  no  passover  like  to  that 
.36.  16.  thi'y  mucked  till  there  was  710  remedy 

Ezra  9.  14.  so  that  there  should  be  770  remnant 
JVfA.  2.  20.  ye  have  710  portion  in  Jerusalem 

13.  26.  there  was  720  king  like  Solomon 
Job  4.  IS.  he  put  710  trust  ui  his  servants 
5.  19.  in  seven  there  shall  no  evil  touch  thee 
9. 25.  see  710  good  ||  10.  IS.  that  no  eye  had  seen  me 

12.  14.  he  shutteth,  and  there  can  he  »i«  openin 
24.  causeth  to  wander  where  there  is  7»o  way 

13.  4.  ye  are  all  physicians  of  no  value 

16.  18.  O  earth,  let  my  cry  have  710  place 

18.  17.  he  shall  have  no  name  in  the  street 

19.  16. 1  called  my  serviint,  he  gave  me /in  answer 
24. 15. 7!o  eye  shall  see  me  |1  30. 13.  have  7jo  helper 
^sal.  3.  2.  there  is  no  help  for  him  in  God 

32.  2.  in  whose  spirit  there  is  no  guile 

34.  0.  there  is  no  want  tn  them  that  fear  him 

36.  1.  there  is  tio  fear  of  God  before  his  eyes 
51.  5.  they  were  in  fear  where  7io  fear  was 
55.  19.  because  they  have  710  changes 

84.  11.  710  good  will  he  withhold  from  them 
.ni.  ID.  there  shall  no  evil  befall  thee 
92.  15.  there  is  71a  unrighteousness  in  him 
1 10.  3.  they  do  no  iniquity,  they  walk  in  his  ways 
146.  3.  son  of  man,  in  whom  there  is  no  help 
Prnv.  12. 21.  there  shall  no  evil  happen  to  the  just 
17. 16.  to  get  wisdom,  seeing  he  hath  n8  heart  to  it 

21.  30.  there  is  nn  wisdom  against  the  Lord 
Fr.rl.A.X.wPTP  oppressed, and  theyhad  no  comlbrter 

9.  10.  for  there  is  no  work  in  the  grave 
Cant.  4.  7.  my  love,  there  is  710  spot  in  tboo 

8. 8.  we  have  a  little  sisler,  and  she  hath  no  breasts 
ha.  1.  6.  there  is  nn  soundness  in  it,  but  wounds 

5.  8.  join  field  (o  field,  till  there  be  no  place 

8.  20.  it  is  because  there  is  710  light  in  them 

9.  7.  of  his  government  there  shall  be  no  end 

34. 1'i.  no  one  of  thitse  shall  fail,  none  shall  want 
40.  29.  and  to  them  that  have  no  might 

,  43.  11.  and  besides  me  there  is  770  Saviour 
4S.  SJ2.  there  is  no  peace  to  the  wicked,  57.  21. 
.50. 10.  that  walfceth  in  darkness,  and  hath  no  light 
53.2.  he  hath  no  form,  nor  comeliness,  norbeauly 
.54.17.nowpapon  formp<l  against  thoe  shall  prosper 
.55. 1.  and  he  that  hath  no  money,  come  ye,  bnv 
.57. 10.  thou  saidst  not,  there  is  no  hope,  .7er.  2.25. 
59.  8.  there  is  no  judgment  in  their  goings 
16.  he  wondered  that  there  was  no  intercessor 

Jfr.'i.M.  changed  thei  r  sods,  which  are  yet  no  gods 
30.  your  children  received  710  correction 

6.  14.  peace,  peace,  when  there  is  no  peace,  8. 11. 
23.  th"y  are  rrn»I,  anil  have  no  mercy 

8.15.  we  looked  for  peace,  but  no  good  came,14.19. 
40T 


NO 

.Tcr  10. 14.  and  there  is  no  breath  in  them,  51.  17. 
22.  28.  a  vessel  wherein  is  710  pleasure,  48.  33. 
25.  6.  provoke  me  not,  I  will  do  you  no  hurl 
39.  12.  do  him  no  harm  ||  42. 14.  shall  see  no  Kvnr 
48. 8.  spoiler  shall  come,  and  710  city  shall  escape 
49.  1.  hath  Israel  no  sons  1  hath  he  ?io  heir  ? 
Lain.  1.  9.  she  came  down,  she  had  no  comforter 
Kzik.  13.  10.  peace,  and  there  was  710  peace,  16. 
18.  .32. 1  have  no  pleasure  in  death  of  him,  33. 11. 
29.  18.  yet  had  he  7io  wages,  nor  his  army 
/)nn.3.2y.  because  there  is7io  other  god  can  deliver 
Hos.  4.  1.  because  there  is  710  truth  nor  mercy 
6.  reject  ihcc,  that  thou  shalt  be  no  priest  to  me 
10.  .3.  now  they  shall  say,  we  have  no  king 
.Imos  7. 14. 1  was  no  prophet,  neither  prophet's  son 
Jilic.  3.  7.  their  lijjs,  for  there  is  7io  answer  of  God 
4.9.whydoBt  thou  cry  out?  is  there  no  king  in  thee? 
JVaA.  3.  19.  there  is  tio  healing  of  thy  bruise 
Hah.  1. 14.  as  the  creeping  things  that  have  no  ruler 
Zeph.  3.  5.  but  the  unjust  knoweth  7to  shame 
Zec/i.  8.  17.  love  no  false  oath  ||  9.  8.  770  oppressor 
Mai.  1. 10. 1  have  no  pleasure  in  you,  saith  the  Ld. 
JUat.  5.  20.  yo  shall  in  no  caso  enter  into  heaven 
26.  thou  shalt  by  7io  means  come  out  thence 

6.  34.  take  therefore  no  thought  for  the  moriow, 
10.  19.  .Mark  13.  11.  Luke  12.  11,  22. 

22.  23.  which  say  that  there  is  no  resurrection, 

Mark  12. 18.  .^cts  23.  8.  1  Cor.  15. 12, 13. 

Mark  13.20.  shortened  those  days,7io  fiesh  be  saved 

/,7(At  15.7.  just  persons,  which  need  no  repentance 

23.4. 1  find  no  fault  in  h1m,14..^An  18.38.  |  19.  4,  6. 
John  4.17.1  have  no  husband  1|  6.  .53.  ye  have  no  life 

7.  .12.  search,  for  out  of  tJalilee  ariseih  770  prophet 
9.  41.  if  ye  were  blind,  ye  should  have  no  sin 
ll.lO.he  stumbletli,because  there  is  no  light  in  him 
13.  8.  if  I  wash  thee  not,  thou  bast  no  part  with  me 
15.  22.  now  tliiy  have  no  cloak  for  their  sin 
19.15. priests  answered,  we  have  710  king  but  Cesar 

.Ocis  15. 9.  put  no  difference  between  us  and  them 
18.  15.  for  I  will  be  no  judge  of  such  matters 
21.  25.  written  that  they  observe  770  such  thing 
25.  10.  to  the  Jews  have  I  done  710  wrong 
28.  2.  the  peo|ile  shewed  us  7(o  little  kindness 

Wo7n.3  22.  all  that  believe,  for  there  is  no  difference 
4. 15.  for  where  710  law  is,  no  transgression,  5.  13. 

7.  18.  that  in  my  flesh  dwelhth  no  good  thins 
111.  19.  to  jealousy  by  them  that  are  710  people 

13.  10.  love  worketh  no  ill  to  his  neighbour 

1  On:  1.  29.  that  710  flesh  glory  in  his  presence 
4.  11.  and  have  770  certain  dwelling-place 
8. 13. 1  will  eat  no  flesh  while  the  world  standeth 
10.13.tliere  halh7/o  temptation  taken  you  but  such 
11. 16.  we  have  770  such  custom,  nor  the  churches 

12.  21. 1  have  tio  need  of  thee  |{  13.2.  710  charity 

14.  28.  if  there  be  no  interpreter,  let  him  keep 

2  C<(7-.  5.21.  made  him  sin  for  us,  who  knew  no  sin 
6.  3.  giving  no  oftence  in  any  thing,  that  ministry 

13.  7.  now  I  pray  to  God  that  ye  do  no  evil 
finl.  5. 23.  meekness,  against  such  there  is  no  law 
F.ph.  5. 11.  liave  7to  fellow.^hip  with  works  of  dark- 
ness, but  rather  reprove  them 

Phil  2.  7.  but  made  himself  of  no  reputation 
3.  3.  and  have  710  confidence  in  the  flesh 

1  Thcss.  4. 13.  even  as  others  which  have  no  hope 

2  Thess  3.  14.  and  have  no  company  with  him 
2  Tim.  .3.  9.  but  they  shall  proceed  no  further 
Heh.  6. 13.  because  he  could  swear  by  710  greater 

8.  7.  770  place  have  been  sought  for  the  second 

9.  22.  without  shedding  of  blood  is  no  remission 

10.  38.  my  soul  sliail  have  no  pleasure  in  him 
12.11. nochastcning  for  the  present  seemelh  joyous 

17.for  he  found  nn  place  ofrenrnlance,  though  he 
13.  14.  here  have  we  no  continuing  city,  but  seek 
.7am.l.l7.witli\vhoiTi  is  novariablene?s,nor  shadow 

1  Pel.  2.  22.  who  did  710  sin,  nor  was  guile  found 

2  Prt.  1.20.  no  prophecy  of  private  interpretation 
1  ./(i/;n  1.  5.  and  in  him  is  no  darkness  at  all 

8. if  we  say,  we  have  no  -in,  we  deceive  ourselves 
3.  5.  in  liim  is  710  sin  ||  4. 18.  there  is  no  fear  in  love 

3  .Tohn  4.  I  have  no  greater  joy  than  to  hear 
lien.  14.  5.  in  their  mouth  was  found  no  guile 

17.  12.  which  have  received  no  kingdom  as  yet 

18.  7.  I  am  710  widow,  and  shall  see  no  sorrow 
20  11.  and  there  was  found  no  place  for  them 
21.  22  no  temple  therein  ||  23.  no  need  of  tlie  sun 

25.  no  nighl  there,  they  need  no  candle,  22.  5. 
.'<ee  Breap,  Child,  Ciiii.drkn,  Inhekitanck, 
KNOWLKnoE,  Man,  Power. 
NO  Rain. 
Dent.  11. 17.  ho  shut  up  the  heaven,  that  there  be 
no  rain,  1  A7no-.«R.35.  2  Chmn.  6.26.  ]  7. 13. 
I  KiniTS  17.7.  there  had  been  nn  r.  in  land,  .Trr.  14.4. 
f.'a.  5.  6.  clouds,  that  tliev  rain  no  roiii  upon  it 
/cr.  3.  3.  and  there  hath  been  no  tatter  rain 
Zrrh.  14.  17.  even  upon  them  shall  be  710  rain 
18.  and  if  Kgypt  th.-it  have  no  rain  come  not 
NO  rest. 
Gen.  8.  9.  but  the  dove  found  no  rest  for  her  foot 
.Tub  30.  17.  and  my  sinews  take  no  rest 
Prov.  29.  9.  whether  he  rage  or  laugh  there  is  iu>  r. 


NOI 

If  a.  23.  13.  there  also  shalt  thou  liavc  no  rest 

62. 7.  and  give  him  no  r.  till  he  establish  Jerusalem 
.Icr.  45.  3.  I  laintcd  in  sighing,  and  find  no  rat 

JjOin.  1.  3.  among  the  huatluii  she  tiiideth  7iO  rcft 

2. 18.  give  thyself  no  rest  \\  5.  5.  we  have  no  rest 
2  Cor.  2.  13.  I  had  no  rest  in  my  spirit,  because 

7.5.when  come  intoMacedonia,our  flesh  had  no  r 
liev.  14.  11.  they  have  no  rest  day  nor  night 

NO  strength. 

1  Sam.  28.  20.  and  there  was  no  strength  in  Saul 

./o426.2.how  savest  thou  arm  that  hath  no  strength 

Psal.  88.  4.  I  am  as  a  man  that  hath  no  strength 

Dan.  10.  8.  and  there  remained  no  str.  in  me,  17. 

16.  are  turned  on  mc,  I  have  retained  no  strength 

fleb.  y.  17.  otherwise  it  is  of  no  strength  at  all 

Sec  VVatbr,  Wrath. 

NO,  ..Iclverh. 

Exod.2. 19.  not  let  yuu  go,  no  not  by  a  mighty  hand 

16.  4.  whether  walk  in  my  law  or  no,  JJeut.  8.2. 
.Tudg.  4.  20.  is  any  man  here,  thou  shalt  say,  no 

15. 13.  HO,  but  wo  will  bind  thee,  and  deliver  thee 
1  Sam.  1. 15. 710,  my  lord,  I  am  of  a  sorrowful  spir. 

20. 15.no,  not  when  the  Lord  hath  cut  ofl"  enemies 
.Inh  23.  6.  no,  but  he  would  put  strength  in  ine 

36.  19.  no,  not  gold,  nor  the  forces  ol  strength 
Psal.  14. 3.  none  that  docth  good,  no  not  one,  53.3. 
Eeel.  10.  20.  curse  nflt  kin",  710  not  in  thy  thought 
Tsa.  30  16.  no,  for  we  will  flee  upon  horses 
Jcr.  2.  25.  no,  for  I  have  loved  strangers,  and  after 
them  will  I  go 

42.  14.  no,  but  we  will  go  into  the  land  of  Egypt 
.;9;;!0«6. 10.  is  there  any  with  thee?  he  shall  say,  no 
Hag.  2.  12.  the  jincsts  answered  and  said,  no 
Zech.  4.5.  knov.est  what  these  be,  I  said,  no,  13. 
Mat.  8. 10.  so  great  faith,  no  not  in  Isr.  I.Tike  7.  9. 

24.  21.  to  this  lime,  no,  nor  ever  shall  be 

36.  no  not  the  angels,  but  my  Father  only 
.Vai7i2.2.no  room, no  not  so  much  as  about  the  door 

5.  3.  no  inan  could  bind  him,  jio  not  with  chains 
Luke  20.  22.  for  us  to  give  tribute  to  Cesar,  or  no? 

23.  15.  no  nor  yet  Herod  :  fur  I  sent  you  to  him 
.John  1.  21.  art  thou  that  prophet?  he  said,  no 

9.  25.  whether  he  be  a  sinner  or  no,  I  know  not 
21.  5.  have  ye  any  meat?  they  answered  710 

.lets  7.  5.  no  not  so  much  as  to  set  his  foot  on 
Ro7n.  3.  9.  are  wc  better  than  they  ?  no,  in  no  wis^ 

10.  there  is  none  righteous,  no  not  one,  12. 
1  Cor.  5.  11.  with  such  a  one,  no  not  to  eat 
6.5.  no,  not  one  that  ehall  be  able  to  judge  between 
Gal.  2.  5.  place  by  subjection,  710  not  for  an  hour 

NO  ichere. 

lSa7rt.l0.14.  when  we  saw  that  they  were  no  v:he7  e 

Sec  JfoRE,  Wise. 

NOBLE 

.Signifies,  [1] ./?  person  hononrahle,  either  by  his 

birth  or  7ncrit,  Neh.  6.  17.     Acts  24.  3.     [2] 

Such  as  are  of  a  more  tractable  disposition,  of 

a  more  excellent,  divine,  commendable  temper 

than  iithers,  Acts  17.  11.     [3]   Faliant  ones, 

Nah.  3.  t  18.     [4]  j1  courtier,  or  ruler,  John 

4.  t  -le. 

Ezra  4.  10.  whom  the  n.  Asnapper  brought  over 
Eslh.  6.  9.  one  of  tlie  king's  most  n.  jirinces 
Jer.  2.  21.  I  had  planted  tliee  a  n.  vino 
Luke  19.  12.  a  n.  man  went  into  a  far  country 

hhn  4.  46.  there  was  a  n.  man  whose  son  was  sick 

49.  n.  man  saith,  sir.  come  down  ere  my  child  die 

.lets]'. ll.liie  Cereans  more  n.  than  Thcssatonians 

21.  3.  we  accept  it  always,  most  n.  Feli.v,  26.  25. 
1  Cor.  1.  26.  how  that  not  tnaiiy  n.  are  called 

NOBLES. 
Eiod.  24.  n .  on  the  n.  of  Lrael  he  laid  not  his  hand 
.Vinn.  21.  18.  the  n.  of  the  people  digged  it 
Todg.  5. 13.  dominion  over  the  n.  among  the  people 

1  Kings  2!  .8.  Jezi'hcl  sent  letters  to  the  ».  in  his  city 

2  Chmn.  23. 20.  Jeho'ada  took  the  n.  of  the  pcoplis 
.\'ih.  2.  16.  nor  had  I  as  yet  told  it  to  the  77. 

3.  5.  the  77.  put  not  their  necks  to  the  work 

5.  7.  and  I  rebuked  the  n.  and  the  rulers 

6.  17.  the  n.  of  Judah  sent  letters  to  Tobiali 

7.  5.  God  put  into  mine  heart  to  gather  the  n. 

10.  29.  <hey  clave  to  their  brethren,  their  71. 
13.  17.  I  contended  with  the  71.  of  Judah 

.Tub  29.  10.  the  n.  held  'heir  peace 

Vsal.  ?3.  11.  make  their  n.  liic  Oreb  nnd  Zecb 
149.  8.  to  hind  their  n.  withTelfers  of  iron 

Pror.  8.  16.  by  me  princes  rule,  and  n.  all  judges 

Ecel.  10.  17.  when  thy  ki«g  is  the  son  of  n. 

Tsa.  13.  2.  they  may  go  into  the  gates  of  the  n. 
34.  12.  thev  shall  call  the  n.  to  the  kingdom 
43.  14.  and  have  brouaht  down  all  their  n. 

.Jer.  14.  3.  tlie  n.  sent  their  little  ones  to  the  wnfers 
27.20.Ncbuchadnezzarcarricdcaptiven. of  Judah 
30.  21.  and  their  n.  shall  be  of  themselves 
39.6.  the  king  of  Babvlon  slew  .ill  the  n.  of  Judah 

.Tnnah  3.  7.  by  the  decree  of  the  kin?  and  his  n. 

JJ'ah.  3.  18.  Assyria,  thv  n.  shall  dwell  in  the  duet 
NOISE. 

F.zod.  20. 16.  the  people  heard  the  77.  of  the  trumpe* 
32.  17.  he  said,  there  is  a  n.  of  war  in  the  camp 


NON 

Exod.  32. 18.  but  thn  n.  of  them  that  sing  do  I  hear 
,hsh.  6.  10.  ye  shall  not  shout  nor  make  any  n. 
Judg.  5.  11.  are  delivered  from  the  n.  of  trchcra 
1  Sam.  4.  G.  what  mcanelh  the  n.  of  this  uhout?  14. 
14.  I'J.  the  n.  in  the  host  of  Philiitincii  increased 

1  Kings  1.  41.  wherefore  is  this  n.  of  tiie  city  1 
45.  this  is  the  n.  that  ye  havu  hoard 

13.  t  41.  there  is  a  n.  of  abundance  of  rain 

2  Kings  7. 6.  tlie  n.  of  chariots,  and  a  n.  of  horses 
11. 13.  Athaliah  heard  n.  of  guard,  -  Chron.  -Si.V-i. 

1  Chron.  15.  23.  making  a  n.  with  psalteries 
Ezra  3. 13.  not  discern  n.  ol'joy,  from  n.  of  weeping 
yo6  36.2i).  any  understand  ihura.  of  his  tabernacle 

33.  the  n.  thereof  shcweth  concerning  it 
37.  2.  hear  attentively  the  n.  of  his  voice 
Psal.  33.  3.  play  skilfully  with  n  loud  n. 
40.  t  2.  he  brought  me  up  out  of  a  pit  of  n. 
42.  7.  deep  calleth  at  the  n.  of  thy  water-spiiuls 
55.  2.  I  mourn  in  my  complaint,  and  make  a  n. 

59.  6.  they  make  a  n.  like  a  dog,  14. 

65.  7.  who  stilleth  the  n.  of  the  seas,  n.  of  waves 
66. 1.  make  a  joyful  n.  to  God,  all  ye  lands,  HI.  1. 

I  95.  1,  2.  I  98.  4,  6.  [  100.  1. 
93.  4.  the  Lord  is  mightier  than  the  n.  ol  waters 
Isa.  9.  5.  for  every  battle  is  with  confused  n. 

13.  4.  the  ji.  of  a  multitude, in  the  mountains,  a 

tumultuous  n.  of  the  kingdoms  of  nations 

14.  11.  the  71.  of  thy  viols  is  brought  down 

17.  12.  which  make  a  n.  like  the  n.  of  the  seas 

24.  8.  the  n.  of  them  that  rejoice  endeth 
18.  he  who  fleeth  from  the  n.  of  fear 

25.  5.  thou  shalt  bring  down  the  71.  of  strangers 
29.  6.  shall  be  visited  of  the  Lord  with  great  71. 
31.  4.  nor  abase  himself  for  the  n.  of  them 

33.  3.  at  the  71.  of  the  tumuli  the  peo|)le  Hed 

60.  t  5.  the  n.  of  sea  sliall  be  turned  toward  thee 

66.  6.  a  voice  of  H.  from  the  city  and  temple 
Jcr.  4.  19.  my  heart  maketh  a  71.  in  me 

29.  the  city  shall  fiee  for  the  v.  of  horsemen 

10.  22.  behold,  the  n.  of  the  bruit  is  como 

11.  16.  with  the  n.  of  a  great  tumult  he  kindled 
TJ5.  3).  a  71.  shall  come  to  the  ends  of  the  earth 

46.  17.  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt  is  but  a  71. 

47.  3.  at  the  71.  of  the  tramjiling  of  his  horses 

49.  21.  the  earth  is  moved  at  the  71.  of  their  fall, 

at  the  cry  the  71.  was  heard  in  the  Red-sea 

50.  46.  at  the  n.  of  taking  of  Babylon 

51.  o.l.  a  71.  of  their  voice  is  uttered 

7,0771.2. 7.  the  enemy  madcTi.  in  house  of  the  Lord 
Kiek.  1.  24.  when  they  went,  I  heard  the  71.  of  their 
wings,  like  the  77.  of  great  waters,  43.  2. 
3. 13.  the  71.  of  the  wheels,  then,  of  a  great  rushing 
19.7.  tne  land  was  desolate  by  the  77.  of  his  roaring 
26. 10.  thy  walls  shall  shake  at  the  71.  of  horsemen 

13.  I  will  cause  the  71.  of  my  songs  to  cease 
37.  7.  and  ns  I  prophesied,  there  was  a  7t. 
Joeli.  5.  like  the  77.  of  chariots,  like  the  71.  of  fire 
./Imos  5.  23.  take  from  me  the  71.  of  thy  songs 
Jific-  2.  M.  they  shall  make  a  great  77.  by  reason 
A"aA.  3.  2.  ihc  7t.  ofa  whip,  77.  of  rattling  wheels 
y.rph.  1.  10.  Ihc  71.  ofa  cry  from  the  fish-gale 
y.'ch.  9.  15.  they  shall  drink  and  make  a  71. 
.Mat.  9.  23.  he  saw  the  people  making  a  71. 

2  Pel.  3.  10.  hcavi-:ns  shall  pass  away  with  great  7t. 
lUv.  6.  1.  I  heard  as  it  were  the  77.  of  thunder 

xmsr.i). 

/u»/*.6.27..Ioshua,  his  fame  was  77. thro'  Ihe  country 
Mark  2.  I.  i!  was  71.  that  he  was  in  the  house 
I.uke  1.  6,i.  all  these  savings  were  7<.  abroad 
./Jets  2.  6.  now  when  this  was  77.  abroad 

NOISOMK. 
T'.rnd.  8.  t21.  I  will  send  a  mi.vturc  of  71.  beasts 
J'lh  31.  t  40.  77.  weeds  grow  instead  ofbarlny 
P.int.  ni.  3.  sh:ill  deliver  thee  from  the  77.  pestilence 
r-.rli.  It.  21.  whc:n  I  send  the  sword  and  77.  beast 
/2-B.  1(1.  2.  fell  a  77.  and  grievous  sore  on  the  men 

KOXE. 
Oen.  23.  IT.  this  is  77.  other  but  the  house  of  Ood 
Ftii'I.  12.  2'.  77.  of  you  shall  go  out  at  the  door 
]').  26.  I  will  pul7i.  of  these  diseases  upon  Ihee 
16.  26.  on  the  seventh  day,  in  it  there  shall  be  77. 
27.  some  went  to  gather,  and  they  fouinl  71. 
20. 3.«lialthavo  77.  other  goils  before  me,  Dciit.Tt.". 
23.  l.'>.  77.  shall  np|i>'nr  befure  mo  empty,  34.  20. 
J.rv.  13.  6.  71.  nlmll'^ipproaeh  to  any  near  of  kin 
21. 1.  there  sh.ill  11.  be  defiled  lor  the  dead 
32.30.shall  leave  71.  ofil  until  morrow,  .Vi/ni.  9. 12. 
25.  26.  n/id  if  the  man  have  77.  to  redeem  it 
26.6.  shall  liiMlown,  and  71.  shall  make  you  afraid 

17.  ye  shall  flee  when  71.  piirsucih,  36,  37. 
fi'iim.  7.  9.  but  to  the  sons  ofKohath  he  gave  77. 
.32. 1 1. 71.  that  came  (Mil  of  Egypt  shall  see  the  lanil 
Deut.  2.  31.  we  iTe«lroved,  nnd  h'ft  n.  to  remain, 
3.  3.  .rosh.  8.  22.  1  10.  2P,  30,  :13.  ]  II.  H. 
7. 15.  will  put  71.  of  the  diseases  of  Egypt  on  you 
2fi.  31.  thy  sheep  shall  be  given,  and  17.  to  rescue 

66.  thou  shall  have  7i.  assiirani-o  of  thy  liTo 
/o.ih.  6.  I.  n.  went  out  of  Jericho,  71.  cnino  in 
9.  23. 77.  oTyoii  be  freed  from  being  bond-mon 
10.21.71.  moved  hi*  tongnc  against  any  of  Israel 
408 


NON 

.Tutlg.  21. 8.  there  camo  71.  to  the  camp  from  Jabcsh 

1  Sum.  2.  2.  there  is  71.  holy  as  the  Lord 

3.  19.  let  71.  of  his  words  fall  to  the  ground 

2  Satn.  13. 12.  beware  that  71.  touch  the  young  man 

1  Kings  10.  21. 77.  were  of  silver,  2  Chron.  9.  20. 
15.22.Asa  made  a  proclamation,  71.  was  e.xempted 

2  Kings  5. 16.  as  the  Lord  liveth,  I  will  receive  n. 

6.  12.  71.  but  Elisha  tells  the  king  of  Israel 

9.  10.  and  there  shall  be  71.  to  bury  Jezebel 

15.  Iut7i.  go  forth  or  escape  outof  the  city,  10.25. 

10.  11.  till  Jehu  left  Ahab  71.  remaining 

19.  the  pro])hets  of  IJaal,  let  71.  bo  wanting 

23.  look  there  be  77.  of  the  servants  of  God  there 

1  C7(ron.l5.2.77.ought  to  carry  ark  of  G.  but  Lc^vitcs 

2  Chron.  1. 12.  honour,  such  as  77.  of  the  kings  had 

16.  1.  he  might  let  71.  go  out  or  come  in  to  Asa 
20.  6.  so  that  71.  is  able  to  withstand  thee 

24.  they  were  dead  bodies  fallen,  71.  escaped 
2;i.  19.  77.  which  was  unclean  should  enter  in 

Kzra  8.  15.  I  found  there  71.  of  the  sons  of  Levi 
.VeA.  4.23. 71.  of  us  put  off  our  clothes,  saving  that 
Ksth.  1.8.  drinking  according  to  law,  77.  did  eom|)el 

4.  2.  77.  might  enter  the  king's  gate  in  sackcloth 
.hb  2.  13.  sat  down,  and  71.  spake  a  word  to  him 

3.  9.  let  it  look  for  light  but  have  77. 

ll.lO.shalt  lie  down,  and  71.  shall  make  thee  afraid 

18.  15.  in  his  tabernacle,  because  it  is  71.  of  his 

20.  21.  there  shall  71.  of  his  meal  be  left 

2!).  12.  delivered  him  that  had  71.  to  hel])  him 

35.  10.  but  71.  saith,  where  is  God  my  Maker? 

12.  there  they  cry,  but  71.  giveth  answer 
Ps.  10. 15.  seek  out  his  wickedness  till  thou  find  n. 
22.  29.  and  71.  can  keep  alive  his  own  soul 
25.  3.  let  71.  that  wait  on  thee  be  ashamed 
.34.  22.  71.  that  trust  in  him  shall  be  desolate 
37.  31.  law  in  his  heart,  77.  of  his  steps  shall  slide 

49.  7.  77.  of  them  can  redeem  his  brother 

50.  22.  lest  I  tear  you,  and  there  be  77.  to  deliver 
69.  20.  1  looked  for  comforters,  but  found  71. 

25.  and  let  77.  dwell  in  their  tniits 

76.  5.  71.  of  the  men  of  might  found  their  hands 
81.  11.  not  hearken,  Israel  would  77.  of  mo 
109.  12.  let  there  be  77.  to  extend  mercy  to  him 
Prnv.  I.  25.  and  ye  would  77.  of  my  reproof 

30.  they  would  71.  of  my  counsel,  they  despised 

2.  19.  77.  that  go  unto  her  return  again,  nor  take 

3.  31.  envy  not,  and  choose  71.  of  his  ways 
Cant.  4. 2.  boar  twins,  and  71.  is  barren  among  them 
I.<sa.  1.  31.  they  shall  burn  and  77.  shall  quench  them 

.5.  27.  71.  shall  be  weary,  77.  shall  slumber 

29.  carry  it  away  safe,  and  71.  shall  deliver  it 
14.  6.  he  is  persecuted,  and  77.  hindereth 

31.  77.  shall  be  alone  in  his  appointed  times 

17.  2.  77.  shall  make  them  afraid,  Zcph.  3.  13. 

22.  22.  he  shall  open,  anil  77.  shall  shut,  71.  open 
34.  10.  77.  shall  pass  through  it  for  ever  and  ever 

12.  they  shall  call  the  nobles  but  77.  shall  be  there 
10.  no  one  shall  fail,  77.  shall  want  her  mate 
42.  22.  77.  dilivrreth,  and  71.  saith,  restore 
44.  19.  71.  consideroth  in  his  heart,  nor  is  there 
47. 8.  that  sayest,  I  am,  and  71.  else  besides  me,  10. 

10.  77.  seelh  me  |{  15.  77.  shall  save  thee 
.57.  1. 71.  considering  that  righteous  is  taken  away 
59. 4.71.  calleth  for  justice,  nor  pleadeth  for  truth 
66.  4.  because  when  I  called,  71.  did  answer 
.Trr.  4.  4.  and  burn,  that  7?.  can  quench  it,  21.  12. 

7.  33.  for  the  bi^asts,  and  71.  shall  fray  (hem  away 
9.  10.  burnt  up,  so  that  71.  can  pass  through  tlieiii 

12.  burnt  like  a  wilderness  that  v.  passelh  thro' 
22.  shall  fall  as  dung,  nnd  77.  shall  gather  them 
13. 19.  cities  shall  be  shut,  and  77.  shall  open  (hem 
14.  16.  cast  onl,  nnd  shall  have  71.  to  bury  them 

23.  14.  that  77.  doth  return  from  his  wickedness 

30.  10.  and  71.  shall  make  him  afraid,  46.  27. 

34.  9.  that  77.  should  servo  himself  of  them 
10.  (hat  71.  should  serve  themselves  of  them 

35.  14.  to  this  day  they  drink  71.  but  obey  father's 
36.30.  shall  have  77.  to  sit  on  the  throne  of  Pavld 
42.  17   71.  shall  rPTnain  or  escape 

44   11.  77.  shall  return,  but  such  ns  escape 

48.  33.  71.  shall  tread  with  shouting,  no  shouting 

49.  5.  71.  shall  gather  up  him  (hat  wnndcrelh 

50.  3.  land  ilif<date,  nnd  71.  shall  dwell  therein 
9.  their  arrows,  77.  shall  return  in  vain 

20.  iniipiily  sought  for,  and  there  shall  bo  71. 
29.  camp  against  i(,  let  71.  thereof  escape 

32.  the  protid  shnll  fall,  nnd  71.  sbnll  raise  him  up 

51.  62.  that  71.  shall  remain  in  i(,  Kzet;.  7.  11. 
J^am.  I.  2.  she  hath  77.  to  cninfort  her,  17. 

4.  because  77.  come  to  (he  solenm  feasts 
7.  when  her  people  fell,  and  77.  did  help  her 

21.  heard  that  I  sigh,  there  is  71.  (o  comfort  me 
F.iik.  7.  14.  but  71.  goclh  to  the  battle 

25.  they  shall  seek  peace,  and  there  shall  be  77. 
12.28. 71.  ofmy  words  shall  be  prolonged  any  more 
16.  31.  71.  foUoweth  thee  to  commit  whoredoms 

18.  7.  Iia(h  spoiled  n.  by  violence,  given  bread 
22.  30.  I  sought  for  a  man,  but  found  71. 

^3.  10.  77.  of  his  sins  s'oall  be  mendonod  to  him 
2S.  mojutnins  desolate,  that  n. shall  pRS*  throui,')i 


NON 

F.zek.  34.  6.  and  n.  did  search  or  seek  after  them 

28.  shall  dwell  safely,  and  77.  shall  make  tliem 

afraid,  39.  26.  Mic.  4.  4.  ,\ah.  2.  11. 

39.  28.  and  have  left  71.  of  them  any  more  there 
Dan.  1.  19.  77.  found  like  Daniel  among  them  all 

4.35. 71.  stay  hand,  or  say  to  him,  what  doesl  thou? 

8.27.  astonished  at  the  vision,  but  71.  understood  it 

11.  16.  77.  shall  stand  before  him,  he  shall  stand 
45.  shall  come  to  his  end,  and  71.  shall  help  him 

12. 10.77. ofthe  wicked  sh.  understand,  but  tl^e  wiso 
//us.2. 10. 71.  shall  deliver  her  out  ofmy  hands,  5.14 

11.7.  thcugh  they  called,  71.  at  all  would  exalt  hira 
Joel  2.  27.  I  am  the  Lord  your  God,  and  77.  else 
JImos  5.  6.  there  be  71.  to  quench  it  in  Bethel 
Mic.  2.5.  shall  have  71.  that  shall  cast  a  cord  by  lot 

3.  11.  they  will  say,  71.  evil  can  como  upon  us 

5.  8.  he  teareth  in  jiieces,  niffi  n.  can  deliver 
A'aA.  2.  8.  they  cry,  stand,  but  71.  shall  look  back 
Zeck.  7.  10.  lei  n.  of  you  imagine  evil,  8.  17. 
.1/a/.  2. 15.  let  77.deal  treacherously  against  the  wife 
Mat.  12.43.unclean  spiritwalketh  thro'  dry  places 
seeking  rest  and  findeth  77.  l.vke  11.  24. 

20.  CO.  witnesses  came,  yet  found  77.  Mark  14.  55. 
Luke  3.  11.  let  him  impart  to  him  that  hath  71. 

4.26.  tOTi.of  them  was  Elias  sent,  save  to  .Sarepfa 
27. 71. of  them  was  cleansed  savcNaaman  theSyr. 

14.  24. 71.  of  them  shall  taste  ofmy  supper 
18.  19.  71.  is  good,  save  one,  that  is  God 

./o/(7i  7.  19.  and  yet  77.  of  you  keepeth.lhe  law 

15.  24.  if  I  had  not  done  the  works  71.  other  did 

17.  12.  77.  is  lost  but  the  son  of  perdition 

18.  9.  of  (hem  thou  gavest  me,  I  have  lost  71. 
.lets  3.  6.  Peter  said,  silver  and  gold  have  I  71. 

8.  16.  for  as  yet  he  was  fallen  on  71.  of  them 
24.  pray,  that  n.  of  these  things  come  on  me 

11.  19.  preaching  the  word  to  71.  but  to  the  Jewi 
18.  17.  Gallio  cared  for  71.  of  these  things 
20.  24.  but  77.  of  these  things  move  me 

24.  23.  he  should  forbid  n.  of  his  acquaintance 

25.  11.  if  there  be  77.  of  these  things  they  accuse 

26.  22.  saying  77.  other  than  the  prophets  did  say 
fio7i7.8. 9.  if  any  have  not  the  Spiiii,  he  is77.of  hii 

14.  7.  71.  of  as  liveth,  and  77.  dietli  to  himself 
1  Cnr.  1.  14.  I  thank  God,  T  baptized  71.  of  you 
2.  8.  whom  77.  of  the  princes  of  this  world  knew 
7. 29.  they  (hat  have  wives  he  as  tho'  they  had  n, 

9.  15.  but  I  have  used  71.  of  these  things 

10.  32.  give  77.  offence  to  the  Jews  nor  Gentile* 

11.  10.  and  71.  of  them  is  without  signification 
Gnl.  1.  19.  but  other  of  the  apo»tbs  saw  I  71. 

1  Thess.  5.  15.  see  that  n  render  evil  for  evil 
1  Tim.  5.  14.  give  77..  occasion  to  the  adversary 
1  Prt.  4.  15.  let  77.  of  you  suffer  as  a  murderer 
Rcv.2.  10.  fear  77.  of  these  things  thou  shall  suffer 
See  Effktt,  Like. 
There  is  NONE. 
Gen.  39.  9.  there  is  n.  greater  in  (his  house  than  1 
41.  15.  and  there  is  n.  that  can  interpret  it 
39.  there  is  77.  so  discreet  and  wise  as  thou  art 
Deut.  4.  35.  (he  Lord  is  God.  there  is  ■?.  else,  39. 
1  Kings  8.  m.  /sa.  45.  5  6,  14,  18,  22 
J  46.  9.  Mark  ,'..  J2. 
Ruth  4.4.  for  there  is  77.  to  redeem  it  besides  thee 
I  Sam  '}. ^. I  here  is  v.ho\y  as  the  L.Merf/.?  77. besides 
22.K.;/(rrc  7.'!  77.shewctli  me,  there  is  71.  that  is  sot" 
1  r7(r.2!l.l5.days  are  as  a  shadow  t4«-^«7»*.ahiding 
.Tob  10.7.  r/irm>77.  that  can  deliver,  Ps.'.-i.  1 71.11. 
Fsal.  14.  h  they  are  corrupt,  there  is  n.  that  doeth 
eood,  3.  I  5.3.1,3.  Rom.3.K. 
22.  n.  for  trouble  is  near,  for  there  is  n.  to  help 
73.  25.  there  is  71.  on  earth  I  desire  besides  thee 
A.-o.  41.  17.  when  the  needy  seek  water,  there  isn. 
26.  there  is  77.  sheweth,  there  is  77.  that  ileclareth 
43. 1:1. 7/icrp7.s77.lha(  can  deliver  out  ofmy  hanil 
51.  IK.  and  there's  n.  to  guide  her  among  her  sons 
.59.  11.  we  look  for  judgment,  but  there  is  n. 
64.  7.  nnri  there  is  77.  that  calleth  on  thy  name 
.frr.  10.  20.  there  i.s  77.  to  stretch  forth  my  tent 
30. 13.  there  is  71.  to  plead  thy  cause,  that  thou 
F.nm.  5. 8.  there  is  77.  that  doth  deliver  us  from  hand 
/)n7i.l0.21.rAfri?7'«7i.that  holdeth  with  me  in  theso 
Ifii.i.  7.  7.  there  is  n.  of  them  that  calleth  on  mo 
.tmos  5.2.  she  is  forsaken,  there.is  71.  to  raise  her  up 
.Wf.7. 2.  there  is  n.  upriffht  among  men,  thrv  all  lie 
/^rp/i.2.15.tha(  said, I  am,  nnd  there  is  i7.liesii|es  me 
liiitr.  1.  6.  yp  clothe  you,  but  there  is  n.  warm 
Mat.  19.  Xl.  there  is  n.  good  but  one,  that  is  God 
Mark  10.  IH 
.^fnrkK.'^\ .there is n.  other commnndnieni  greater 
I.nke  1.  61.  there  is  n.of  thy  kindred  that  is  called 
.'?'-/.<[1.12.fArr(;i»  77 .other  name  under  heaven  given 
P.om.  3.  III.  there  is  fi.  righteous,  no,  not  one 

W.there  i««.nnderstnnde!h,rAcr/-  i-i  Ti.Bcekcth  0. 
1  Cor.  8.  4.  and  there  is  v.  oIImt  God  but  one 

There  was  N().\E. 
f7c77.39.  II.  there  irns  n.ofnwn  ofthe  house  witkln 
41.  P.  there  teas  n.  that  coiilil  int<»rpret  them 
04.  but  there  irs*  11.  that  could  declnre  il  to  tna 
.V«777.  21.  35.  until  Ikerr  tm.^  v.  left  htm  nlive 
Deut  22.27.  damsel  cried,  and  f*cr«tca*7i.tosaT« 


NOR 

t  Sam.  14.6.  they  strove,  and  th. was  71. to  part  ihem 

■    SS.tAire  teas  n.to  be  no  iiiucli  praised  aa Absalom 

22. 42  they  looked, but  there  teas  n.  to  savu,  Psal 

18.  41. 
1  JTi'ij  n'.';12.20.  there  was  n.  that  followed  the  house 
of  Uav.  but  tribo  ofJuJah  only,  2  Kings  17.1o. 
Ps.69.20. looked  some  to  have  piiy, but  there  was  n. 
79. 3.  shed  their  blood,  and  tU.  was  n.to  bury  them 
107.  ]2.  they  fell  down,  and  there  was  «.  to  help 
139.  16  when  as  yet  there  was  «.  o''thiMn 
Isa.  10. 14.  there  was  n.  moved  the  wing  or  pooped 
50.  2.  when  I  cnlled,  there  was  n.  to  answer 
03. 3. 1  have  trodden  the  wins-press  alone,  and  of 
the  people  there  was  n.  with  me,  1  will  tread 
5.  and  1  wondered  that  there  was  n.  to  uphold 
Dan.  b.  7.  there  was  n.  that  could  deliver  tho  ram 

NOON 
Signifies,  [1]  The  mid  day  between  morning  and 
night,  1  Kini,'3  18.  2i5,  27.  Psal.  55.  17.  [2J 
^  time  of  clear  light,  Job  5.  14.  [.'t]  Clearly 
and  manifestly,  Psal.  37.  6.  [4]  H'iihont  de- 
lay, vr  fear,  Jeremiah  C.  4.  |  15.  8.  [5]  .^ 
time  of  great  prosperity  and  imaginary  sccu 
rity,  Amos  8.  'J. 
Tell  me  where  thou  makest  thy  nock  to  rest  at 
noon,  Cant.  1.  7.  Disconer  to  me  by  thy  word 
and  Spirit,  which  are  those  assemblies  where 
thou  art  present,  and  to  whom  thuu  ajfordest 
comfort  and  refreshing  under  scorching  perse 
cutions  and  trials.  It  is  spoken  in  allusion  to 
the  custom  vf  shepherds  in  hot  countries,  who, 
in  the  heat  of  the  day,  used  to  carry  their  jiocks 
into  shadowy  places. 
Orn.  43.  lb.  these  men  shall  dine  with  mo  at  n. 

25.  the  present  against  Joseph  came  at  n. 
Judg.  19.  8.  and  they  tarried  until  aftern. 
2  Sam.  4.  5.  Tsh-bosheth,  who  lay  on  a  bed  at  n. 

1  Kings  13.  26.  they  called  on  Baal  even  until  a. 
27.at  n.  Elijah  mocked  them,  and  said,  cry  aloud 

20. 16.  he  numbered  them,  and  they  wentout  at7j. 

2  fCingsA.  20.  he  sat  on  her  knees  till  71.  and  died 
Psal.  55.  17.  at  71.  will  I  pray,  and  he  shall  hear 
C'a7i£.  1.  7.  thou  raakest  thy  flock  to  rest  at  77. 
Jer.  6.  4.  prepare  war,  arise,  lot  us  go  up  at  71. 
Amos  8.  9.  I  will  cause  the  sun  to  go  down  at  71. 
Atts  22.6. about  77. there  shone  great  light  round  me 

^    NOON  DAV. 
/)eK<.  23.29.  tiTou  shall  grope  at  n.-daya  the  blind 
Job  5.  14.  they  grope  in  the  n.-day  as  in  the  night 

11.  17.  thine  age  shall  be  cU-arer  than  the  n.-day 
PiSal.  37.  6.  he  shall  bring  forth  judgment  as  n.-day 

91.  6.  for  the  destruction  that  wasteth  at  n.day 
fsa.  16.  3.  shadow  as  the  night,  in  midst  of  n.-day 

58. 10.  thy  darkness  shall  be  as  the  n.-day 

59.  10.  we  stumble  at  n.-day  as  in  the  night 
./er.  15.  8.  I  have  brought  a  spoiler  at  n.-day 
Zeph.2.i.  they  shall  drive  out  Ashdod  at  n.-day 

NOON-TIDE. 
Jer.  20.  16.  let  him  hear  the  shouting  at  n.-tide 

NOPvTH. 
(ten.  28.  14.  thou  shalt  spread  abroad  to  the  n. 
I  Kingsl.'iTi.  a  molten  sea  stood  upon  twelve  o.xen 
three  oxon  looking  toward  the  71.  2  Chron.  4. 4 
I  Chron.  9.  24.  the  porters  were  toward  the  ti. 
/ob  20. 7.  he  stretcheth  out  the  71.  over  empty  place 

37.  9.  and  cold  cometh  out  of  the  n. 

32.  fair  weather  Cometh  out  of  the  71.  with  God  is 
Psal.  48.  2.  on  the  sidesof  71.  the  city  of  great  Kin; 

89.  12.  71.  and  south  thou  hast  created  them 
F.ccl.  1.  G.  the  wind  turneth  about  to  the  71. 

11.  3.  if  the  tree  fall  toward  the  ?!.  there  itshallbi 
l.fa.  14.  13.  I  will  sit  in  the  sides  of  the  71. 

43. 6.  I  will  say  to  tho  71.  give  up ;  and  to  the  south 

'jr.  1.  13.  the  pot's  face  is  toward  the  n. 

14.  out  of  71.  an  evil  break  forlh,  4.  6.  J  46.  20. 

15.  all  the  families  of  tho  kingdoms  of  the  n. 
3. 12.  go  and  proclaim  these  words  toward  the  xt 

18.  shall  come  together  out  of  the  land  of  then. 
6.  1.  for  evil  appeareth  out  ef  the  71.  and  great 
23.  8.  whiih  led  Isr.  out  of  the  71.  country,  31.  8. 
2.1.  9. 1  will  send  and  take  all  the  families  of  the  71. 

26.  aIlth«king3of  thon.far  and  near,  shall  drink 

46.  6.  they  shall  stumble  and  fall  toward  the  71. 
10.  Ld.  of  hosts  hath  a  sacrifice  in  the  71.  country 
24.  she  shall  be  delivered  to  the  people  of  tho  71. 

47.  2.  behold,  waters  rise  up  out  of  the  77. 
30.  3.  out  of  the  n.  cometh  up  a  nation  against  her 

F.zek.  1.4.  behold,  a  whirlwind  came  out  of  the  71. 

8.5. 90  I  lifted  up  mine  eyes  the  way  toward  the  n. 

14.tnward  thc7i.sat  women  weeping  forTammuz 

20.  47.  all  faces  from  south  to  71.  shall  be  burnt 

21.  4.  all  flesh  from  south  to  71.  will  I  cut  off 
^2.  30.  (here  bo  the  princes  of  the  71.  all  of  them 

40.  44.  having  tho  prospect  toward  the  71,  46. 

41.  11.  one  door  was  toward  the  7t.  42.  4. 
42.1. brought  into  court  and  building  toward  the  71. 

4.  their  (Iqots  n.  \\  11.  chambers  toward  the  »i.  13. 
46.  19.  the  holy  chambers  looked  toward  the  7t. 
4''  10.  for  priests  be  this  holy  oblation  toward  71. 

17.  the  suburbs  o'  the  city  shall  be  toward  the  n. 
409 


NOT 

Da7i.  11.6.  of  south  shall  como  to  the  king  of  77. 
8.  continue  more  years  than  the  king  ol  tho  ;i. 
11.  shall  como  and  tight  with  the  king  of  the  77. 
13.  for  tho  king;  of  tho  «.  shall  return  and  set  forlh 
15.  the  king  of  tho  71.  shall  cast  up  a  niouiil|40. 
44.  but  tidings  out  of  the  71.  shall  trouble  Inm 
Zcph.'i.  13.  he  will  stretch  his  hand  against  the 7i. 
y.cch.  0.  6.  black  horses  go  into  the  71.  country 
8.  have  quieted  my  B|)irit  in  tho  7j.  country 
14.  4.  tho  mountain  shall  removo  toward  tlio  71. 
Rev.  21.  13.  and  on  the  71.  wore  three  gales 

From  the  NORTH. 

Psal.  107.  3.  gathered  /ru7/i  the  n.  and  the  south 

Isa.  49.  12.  Jer.  16.  15.  |  23.  8. 

Isa.  14.31.  forthere  shall  conie/7077*  then.  a.  smoke 

41.  25. 1  raised  up  one /ro77»  tlie  n.  ho  shall  como 

Jer.  4.6. 1  will  bring  evil/ronitAe  71.  and  great  do- 

slruttion,6.22.  |  10.22.  |  50.  9,  41.  |  51.48. 

Eiek.  26.  7. 1  will  bring  a  king  of  kings /r»;/i  then. 

3SI.2.I  will  cause  thee  to  como  up/rom  the  n.  parts 

.  Jmoi3.12.thcy  shall  wander/ri7;«  the  n.  to  Ihe  east 

Zech.  2.  6.  and  Ace  from  the  land  of  the  n. 

Lukel'J.i'J.comefrom  the  n.  and  sit  down  in  kingd. 

NORTH  border. 
JVu77i.  34.  7.  and  this  shall  bo  your  n.  border,  9. 

NORTH  QUARTER. 
./(7.TA.15.5.  Judah's  border  in  n.-quar.  was  from  sea 
Ezeh.  33.  u.  Togaimah  ofn.-guarter  and  his  bands 

NORTH  side. 
E3;o{f.26.20.tabernacle  on  tho  n.side  twenty  boards 

35.  thou  shall  put  the  table  on  the  71.  side 
27.  11.  for  n.-side  hangings  of  100  cubits,  38.  11. 
A-HHi.  2.25.  the  cuinp  of  Dan  shall  bo  on  the  71.  side 
.Josh.8.11.  people  of  war  pitched  on  tho77.s7d«of  Ai 
Jiidg.7. 1.  Midianites  were  on  the  71.  sj/i«  of  them 
21.  19.  there, is  a  feast  on  the  71.  side  of  Beth-el 
2  Kings  16.  14.  put  brasen  altar  on  71.  side  of  ahar 
Eiek.  42.  17.  he  measured  tlie  n.  side  500  roods 
43.  30.  the  goings  outof  tlio  city  011  the  77.  side 
NORTHERN. 
.^cr.  15.  12.  brenk  the  77.  iron,  and  the  steel 
./ocl  2.  20.  1  will  remove  from  you  the  71.  army 

NORTHWARD. 
Oen.  13.  14.  look  7t.  and  eastward,  Tieut.  3.  27. 
/iZ'}d.  40.  22.  tabernacle  71.  without  tho  vail 
/>e«.  1.  11.  kill  it  on  Ihe  sido  of  the  altar  ?i. 
Deut.  2.  3.  ye  compassed  mountain,  turn  you  77. 
1  5a77i.  14.  5.  front  of  one  rock  was  situate  71. 

1  Chron.  26.  14.  Zecharias'  lot  came  out  71. 
17.  and  71.  were  four  Leviles  a  day 

Rzek.  8.  5.  71.  was  this  imago  ofjealousy 
47.  2.  then  he  brought  mo  out  of  the  gate  71. 
43.  31.  three  gates  71.  one  gate  of  Reuben 
NOSE. 

The  Hebrews  commonly  place  anger  in  the  nose. 
There  went  up  a  smoke  out  of  his  nostrils,  2 
Sam.  22.  9.  .^nd.  Job  41.  20,  Out  of  his  nostrils 
goetli  smoke.  'J'hc  coitcrn  women,  in  several 
places  j)ut  gulden  rings  to  one  of  their  nuslrils  : 
Solomon  alludes  to  this  custom,  Prov.  11.  22, 
As  a  jewel  of  gold  in  a  swine's  snout,  so  is  a 
fair  woman  without  discretion.  They  also  put 
rings  in  the  nostrils  of  oxen  and  camels,  ti> 
guide  them  by ;  hnjce  is  that  metaphorical 
speech  borrowed,  2  Kings  19.  28.  I  will  put  my 
hook  in  thy  nose,  and  my  bridle  in  thy  lips,  and 
I  will  turn  thee  back. 

r.ev.  21.  18.  that  hath  a  flat  n.  shall  not  offor 

Dent.  33.  t  10.  they  shall  put  incense  at  thy  77. 

2  A'777^s  19.  28.  put  my  hook  in  thy  71.  /sa.  37. 29. 
■fob  40.  24.  his  v.  pierceth  through  snares 

41.  2.  canst  thou  put  a  hook  into  his  71. 1 
Prov.  30.  33.  the  wringing  of  the  77.  bringeth  blood 
Cant.  7.  4.  thy  71.  is  as  the  tower  of  Lebanon 

8.  and  the  smell  of  thy  77.  like  apples 
Isa.  65. 5.  these  are  smoke  in  my  71. a  tire  that  burns 
F.zek.  8.  17.  they  put  the  branch  to  their  71. 
23.  25.  they  shall  take  away  thy  71.  and  ears 

NOSES. 
Psal.  115.  6.  n.  have  they,  but  they  smell  not 
Ezek.  39.11.  it  shall  sto|)  the  71.  of  the  passengers 

NOSE- JEWELS. 
Isa.  3.21.  in  that  day  the  Lord  will  take  away  thei 
tinkling  ornaments,  the  rings  and  n.- jewels 
•  NOSTRILS. 

(rcn.  2.  7.  God  breathed  into  man's  »7.  the  breath 
7.  22.  all  in  whose  71.  was  breath  of  life,  died 
F.zod.  15.  8.  with  blast  of  thy  71.  waters  galhered 
J\rum.  11.  20.  eat  till  it  come  out  at  your  7t. 
2  *'a777. 22. 9.  wont  a  smoke  of  his  71.  Psal.  18.  8. 

16.  the  blast  of  the  breath  of  his  n.  Psal.  18.  15. 
.Tob  4.  9.  by  breath  of  his  71.  they  are  consumed 
27.  3.  and  the  Spirit  of  God  is  in  my  71. 
39.  20.  the  glory  of  hia  71  is  terrible 
41.  20.  out  of  his  71.  goeth  smoke,  as  out  of  a  pot 
Isa.  2.  22.  from  man,  whose  breath  is  in  his  n. 
Lam.  4.  20.  the  breath  of  our  71.  was  taken 
.^77i<7s4. 10.  stink  of  your  camps  come  into  your7t. 

NOT 

la  a  pa.'-ticle  of  denying,  [1]  Absolutely,  Ezod. 

3H 


NOT 

20.  13,  17.     [2]  Conditionally,  Galatian*  5  31. 
[3]  Ormparatiuely,  ICor.  1.  17 
1  Kings  II.  39.  I  will  alllict,  hiH  ji.  for  ever 
Job  7.  8.  thine  eyes  are  upon  me,  and  I  um  n. 

14.  2J.  coMie  to  honour,  ho  knoweth  it  7i.  35.  15 
Psul.  115. 1.  7j.  unto  us,  O  Lord,  71.  to  us  bo  glory 

1)9.36.  to  thy  teatinionios,  and  71.  to  covolou.neBi 
Prov.  12.  7.  the  wicked  are  71.  ||  23.  23.  sell  it  n. 

27.24.  for  riches  are  71.  for  ever,  doth  crown  endure 
Isa.  3. 7.  1  will  77.  be  a  healer,  make  me  71.  a  ruhir 

10.  11.  shall  1  71.  as  I  havedono  toSamuria,  sodo 
16.  6.  pride  of  Muab.  hut  his  lies  shall  71.  lie  so 

30.  I.  tako  counsel,  out  77.  of  me,  71.  of  my  t^pirit 
41. 9. 1  have  chosen  tlieo,  and  71.  cast  Ihoo  away 

44.  21.  thou  shall  71.  bo  forgotten  of  me 

45.  13. lot  go  my  captives,  71. toi  a  price  nor  reward 
43.  1.  but  n.  in  truth  and  righteousness 
49.  15.  they  may  tbrgel,  yet  will  1  71.  torgot  thee 
57.  11.  1  held  my  peace,  and  thou  foaresl  jue  ;i. 
65.  1.  I  am  found  of  them  that  sought  nie  71. 

./(T.  4.  11.  a  wind,  71. lo  fan  ||  10. 20.  a"iid  they  are  71. 

11.  8.  1  coinmniided,  but  they  did  them  v. 
14.  y.  leave  us  71.  ||  21. 10.  and  77.  for  good,  39. 16. 

14. 1  sent  them  H.ni:ilhcr  have  commanded  them, 
15.  I  23.  32.  I  29.  9,  31.  |  Fzek.  13.  6. 
23.  16.  and  71.  out  of  the  mouth  of  ihe  Lord 
2'J.  11.  of  peace,  and  71.  of  evil  i|  30.  5. 71.  of  peace 

31.  J,),  because  Ihey  were  77.  Mat.  2.  18. 
/,a(H.3. 2.  brought  into  darkness,  but  71.  into  light 

5.  7.  our  futheia  have  s. lined,  and  are  71. 
Ezek.  Hi.  10.  Ihe  like  things  alial'  71.  como 
61.  I  will  give  them,  but  71.  by  Ihy  covenant 

20.  44.  77.  according  lo  your  wicked  ways 

23.  2.  yet  thou  art  a  man,  and  ji.  God 

33.  31.  th.y  hoar,  hut  they  will  71.  <!o  them,  32. 

36.  22.  I  ilo  77.  this  for  your  sirkes,  O  Israel,  32. 
IJan.  8.  24.  ahull  be  inighly,  but  77.  by  his  power 

0.  20.  but  n.  for  himself  H  11.  25.  shall  71.  sland 
Has.  1.  9.  yo  are  71. my  people,  I  will  71.  be  your  God 

7.  16.  they  return,  but  71.  to  ihe  Most  High 
Amos  7.  3.  it  shall  71.  be,  saitli  the  Lord,  6. 
Hub.  2.  3.  at  tho  end  it  shall  speak,  and  71.  lie 
JCech.  1.  4.  bo  yo  71.  as  your  fathers,  to  whom 

4.  6.  77.  by  might  nor  power,  but  by  my  Spiiit 
Jial.  3.  6.  for  1  am  the  Lord,  I  change  71. 
jyiat.  6.  5.  be  n.  like  the  hypocrites,  8,  1(>. 

7.  25.  and  it  fell  77.  ||  26.  and  d.ieth  ihem  71. 
29.  for  he  tauglit  77.  as  Ihe  scribes,  Mark  1.  22. 

9.  13.  I  will  have  mercy,  and  7/.  sacrilice,  12.  7. 
12. 31.  shall  77.  be  forgiven  to  men,  32.  J^uke  12.10. 
16.  22.  saying.  Lord,  this  shall  77.  be  unio  thee 

20.  26.  but  it  shall  77.  be  .so  among  you,  whoso  will 
23.  the  Sun  oi'man  came, 71. to  be  ministered  unto 

21.  .30.  the  second  said,  I  go,  sir,  and  went  71. 

23.  3.  but  do  n.  ye  after  their  works 
23.  to  have  done, and  71.  lo  leave  the  other  undone 

24.  6.  the  end  is  71.  yet  |{  17.  let  him  71.  come  down 

25.  43.  ye  clothed  mo  71.  ye  visited  me  ti. 
45.  did  it  H.  lo  one  of  these,  did  it  7i.  lo  me 

20.5. 71.  on  the  feast  day,  lost  there  ho  an  uproar 

39.  71.  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  will,  Mark  14.  3(5. 

jWar/c8.13.3ee  ye  77..'  hear  ye  71.?  do  ye  71..'  rcmeiu.? 

10.  43.  but  80  it  shall  71.  be  among  you 
14.  7.  the  poor  ye  have,  but  me  yo  have  71.  alwayi 

Luke  3.  15.  whether  he  were  the  Christ  or  7j. 
13.  14.  be  healed,  and  n.on  ihc  sabbath-day 
18.  II.  that  I  am  71.  as  other  men  are 

22.  57.  woman,  I  know  him  n.  I|  58.  man,  I  am  ru 
John  1.20.  he  confessed,  I  am  71.  the  Christ,  3. 28. 

4.  42.  we  helieve,  77.  because  of  ihy  saying 

5.40.  ye  will  Ti.como  to  me,  that  ye  might  have  life  ' 

42.  I  know  ye  have  71.  the  love  of  God  in  you 
6.20.  ye  seek  me  71.  because  ye  saw  the  miiaclos 

38.  I  came  down,  n.  to  do  mine  own  will 
8.16.  myjudgment  is  true,  (oj  I  am  77.  aIone,16.32. 

23.  I  iiniTi.oftlriKworhl  ||  10. 12.71.  tho  shepherd 
10.  26.  ye  believe  71.  because  ye  are  n.of  my  sheep 
11.40.  said  I  Tt.unto  thee,  if  thou  woiildcst  believe 

51. this  spake  he,  n.of  himself,  but  bein?  highpr. 

.'J2.  and  77.  for  that  nation  only,  but  that  also 

12.  6.  this  he  said,  71.  that  he  cared  for  the  poor 
47. 1  judge  him  71.  for  I  came  71.  to  judge  world 

13.  9.  Lord,  71.  my  feet  only,  but  also  my  hands 
10.  yo  are  clean,  but  71.  all  ||  14.2.  if  it  were  71.  so 

14.  ^.  Judas,  71.  Iscariot,  and  n.  to  the  world 
27.  71.  as  the  world  giveth,  give  I  unto  you 

1^  15.  I  rail  you  71.  servants,  but  friends 
1().  7.  if  I  go  71.  away,  the  Comforter  will  71.  como 
13.  for  he  shall  n.  speak  of  himself 
18.  40.  saying,  n.  this  man  ||  20.  17.  touch  mo  7t. 
Acts  4.  18.  71.  lo  speak  nl  all  in  the  name  of  Jesus 
7.53.have  71. kept  it  ]|  8.  :12.  he  opened  n.  his  mouth 
10.  41.  and  shewed  him,  71.  to  all  the  people 

12.  22.  it  is  the  voice  of  a  pod,  and  71.  of  a  man 

13.  25.  I  am  71.  he  ||  18.  9.  hold  71.  thy  peace 
17.  27.  though  he  be  n.  far  from  every  one  of  us 

20.  22.  71.  knowing  the  things  that  shall  befall 
29.  shall  wolves  enter  in  71.  sparing  the  flock 

21.  13.  for  I  am  ready  71.  to  be  liouud  onlv 
Acts  23. 5.  I  wist  n.  that  be  was  the  lugh-priMft 


NOT 

Kom.  S.  13  n.  the  hearers  of  the  law  are  jiut 
14.these  havingn.tnelaw,iire  alaw  to  tliui.-i8clvcs 
Va.  uiiil  It.  Ill  liitt  luller  |i  4.  i.  but  n.  bclurc  God 

4.  5.  bul  lo  hiiii  tliat  worktOi  n.  but  bulioveth 
lU.  n.  in  circuincihion,  but  uncircuiiicli^ioii 

5.  16.  and  ».  an  it  wuii  by  uue  tliat  Hiiined 
"}.  15.  1  nilovv  R.  what  I  would,  that  do  1  n. 

f.  U.  but  yc  are  n.  io  the  Bcsh,  but  in  tlic  t^pirit 
j-2.  Iiow  hIiuU  he  n.  with  him  give  us  all  things! 
S.  '.^4.  n.  ol'tlie  Jews  only,  but  ol'the  (jeniiltii 

20.  where  it  was  said,  ye  are  n.  my  people 
rj.  18.  have  they  n.  heard  7  yes,  verily 

I-.'.  3.  n.  to  think  ofhiiusell'more  highly  than 
l.j.  1.  ought  to  btur,  and  «.  to  pleaso  ouraelvea 
•JO.  to  preach  «.  where  Clirist  was  named 
1(5.  4.  to  whom  «.  onlj^  I  give  thanki*,  but  also 

1  Cor.  1.  -J?".  Ii.ith  chos.»Ji  the  things  which  are  /(. 
i£.  U.  eye  hath  n.  seen,  nor  car  heard,  nor  entered 
3.  2  n.  with  inc.it  |!  7.  10.  yet  n.  I,  but  the  Lord 

'.i.  aie  ye  n.  curniil,  and  walk  as  men,  4. 
4  t).  n.  lo  lliiiik  of  men  above  that  is  written 

iV.  and  1  will  know,  n.  the  6|«;echot'them  which 
5.  y.  H.  willi  ohi  leaven  ||  G.  1.  ti.  before  the  saints 

7.  12.  but  lo  tne  rest  sjieak  I,  n.  the  Lord 
y.l.ani  I  n.an  apuslle?  am  In.  I'reul  havel  n.  seen 

■J(i.  1  iJierefore  bo  run,  «.  as  uncertainly 
H).-29.cini8cicnce,I  say,  yi.  thine  own, but  of  others 

11.  a2.  have  ye  n.  houses  to  eat  and  drink  in  ? 
l:i.  Hi.  because  n.  the  ey;,  I  am  n.  of  the  body 
1.5.  10.  yet  71.  I,  but  the  grace  of  (>od  with  me 

2  l.'vr.  2.  17.  fur  we  areii.  us  many  which  eoriupt 
3.  3.  11.  Willi  ink,  n.  in  tabhs  of  stone 

5.  n-  that  we  are  sufficient  of  ourselves 

13.  71.  as  Moses,  wliicli  jiut  a  vail  over  his  face 

4. 1.  We  faint  n.  10.  'i|7.  may  be  of  Uoil,  and  7i.of  us 
y.  7t.  liirsakt-n,  ca-l  down,  but  n.  destroyed 

5.  I.  we  have  a  house  n.  made  with  hands 

7.  we  walk  by  faitii,  n.  by  .  iglit  |{  12. 71.  in  heart 
'.  7.  Uod  coinforied  us,  a.  by  his  coming  only 
9.  I  rejoice,  n.  that  ye  were  made  sorry 
M.l  did  it  ?t.  for  Ills  cause  that  had  done  wrong 

8.  J.  and  this  they  did,  7t.  as  we  hoped,  but  first 
)i.  and  K.  according  to  that  he  hath  n. 

10.  l;!.>vc  dare  it.  make  ourselves  of  the  number 
1:2.18. walked  we  ti.  in  the  same  sjiiril,  same  sti-jis? 

(id.  1.  1.  I'aul  nil  apostle,  n.  of  men,  nor  by  man 
'2.  'Jf.t.  I  live,  yet  7t.  1  ||  0.  4.  and  71.  in  aiiotlier 

h  p/l.  '2.  i*.  tiirongh  faitli,and  that  n.  of  yourselves 
9.  II.  of  works  il  5.  lo.  n.  as  fools,  hut  iis  wise 

6.  7.  doing  B.;rvice  as  to  the  Lord, and  7t.  to  men 

12.  for  we  wre8i:c  n.  against  Itesh  and  blood 
f'A'l.  1.  •J'J.  it  is  given  to  you,  n.  only  to  believe 

2.  12.  have  oliyycd,  n.  as  in  my  presence  only 
27.  and  n.  on  hiio  only,  but  on  me  also 

3.0. found  in  him,  11.  havingmineownriglitcou'in. 

12 n.as  though  I  h  id  already  attained,  or  perfect 

Col.  2. 1'J.n.  holding  the  head,  from  which  the  body 

21.  touch  n.  taste  n.  handle  n.  all  to  perish 

3.  2.  on  things  atHive  n.  on  things  on  the  earth 
2.3.  do  heartily,  as  to  the  Lord,  and  71.  to  men 

i  Theg.i.  2.  1.  our  entrance,  ihat  it  was  n.  in  vain 
13.yc  received  it  n.as  wordof  men,hutwordofG. 
5.  ().  therefore  let  us  n.  sleep  as  do  others 
S  'J'hess.  3.  2.  for  all  men  have  7t.  faith 

9.  71.  beciiiise  wo  have  71.  power,  but  to  make 
1  7'im.  3.  3.  n.  gu/cn  to  wine,  7i.  greedy  of  lucre 
S  7'«iii.  I.  9.  71.  according  to  our  works,  'J'lt.  3.  5. 

4.  8.  and  7t.  to  nie  only,  bul  to  them  that  love 
Tit.  2.  y.  to  plca«o  t.hcm,  7t.  answering  again 
fAtt«/i.lt).n.now  asaservant,  bul  above  a  servant 
tieb.  7.211.  n.  without  an  onih,  he  was  made  pri>'Hl 

8.2.  which  the  Lord  pitched,  and  7i.  man 
9.".7i.wiilioul  bhiocl,  which  he  offered  for  himself 

11.  71.  made  with  hands,  n.  of  this  building 
31.  1.  f.iith  is  the  evidence  of  things  71.  seen 

13.  died,  71.  having  rcceivHd  the  promises 

40.  they  wiihout  lis  should  n.  be  made  iierfect 

12.  8.  bastards,  n.  sons  ||  I'.I.  17.  n.  with  grief 
Jam.  I.  23.  if  any  man  he  a  hearer,  and  n.  a  doer 

2.  14.  and  havc^  n.  works,  can  faith  save  hinil 
24.  71.  by  faith  ordv  ||  3.  2.  ofTnd  71.  in  word 

4.  2.  yet  we  have  n.  ||  17.  and  doeth  it  77.  it  is  sin 

1  Pft.  2.  10.  71.  a  people,  had  71.  obtained  mercy 
18.  be  siihjert,  11  only  to  the  good  and  gentle 
23.  who  reviled  71.  again,  he  threitcncd  n. 

2  Prt.  2.  21.  belter  lor  them  71.  to  hnve  known 
1  .fohn  2.  2;i.  the  same  hath  n.  the  Father 

3.  12. 7t.  as  t'ain  ||  4.  10.  7t.  that  we  loved  Rod 
!>.  12.  he  that  hath  n.  the  Son,  hath  71.  life 

17.  and  there  is  a  sin  71.  unto  rlenth 
Jurle  10.  these  be  gensiia!,  hnvin?  n.  the  Spirit 
/?rp.2.  9.  which  say, 'hey  are  apostles,  and  are 71. 0. 
19.  10.  he  said  unto  me,  see  thou  do  it  71.  22.  0. 
Sef.    Ahi.k,   Akwald,     ,\shamet),     Anhwerkd, 
Rr.i.iKVK,     CoNKoHNDKn,     I)kp«rtkii,     Dk- 
sTRov,    r»ii!.    Eat,     F'-ntkr,    H'kar,    Kkw, 
Kino,     Forsaken,     Give,     Given,     IIkar, 
Hkarken,  Hid. 

If  NOT. 

Ocn.  18. 21.  I  will  go  down,  and  ifn.  I  will  know 

410 


NOT 

den.  34.  49.  and  if  n.  tcII  me,  that  1  may  know 
Kzod.  32.  32.  1/  71.  blot  me,  1  pray,  out  of  thy  book 
.ludg.  9.  10.  if  n.  let  fire  come  out  of  heaven,  20. 

1  .bam.  2.  16.  and  1/  n.  I  will  take  it  by  force 
G.  9.  bul  if  n.  Ihuu  we  shall  kuuw  that  il  is  not 

2Sa77i.l3. 20.  i/ti.  letAmnongc||  17. 6. 1/ 71.  speak 

2  Kings  2.  10.  but  //  71.  it  shiill  not  bo  so 
.fuO  y.  24.  if  II.  where,  and  who  is  he  ? 

33.  33.  1/  n.  heaiken  to  mc,  hold  thy  peace 
jitck.  11.  12.  give  me  my  price,  and  if  n.  forbear 
J.iike  10.  G.  (/  It.  it  shall  turn  to  you  agiiin 

13.  9.  and  1/71.  then  thou  shall  cut  it  down 
Hce   Is,   Knkw,    K.now,  Ao,   Ouev,   Oueved, 

PASSitU,  tiliE,  SttK,  So,  VVlLL,  WuL'LD. 

Or  iNOT. 
^»'7i.24.21.Lord  made  his  journey  proeperouswr/i. 
Kxuii.  17.  7.  saying,  is  the  Lord  aiiiuiig  us,  urn.? 
.Vuiii.  II.  2:1.  wlietber  my  word  tome  to  pass  urn. 

13.  20.  whether  there  be  wood  therein  or  n. 
Judff.  2.  22.  as  their  fathers  did  keep  it,  or  n. 

NOTAULE 

Signifies,  [1]  Conspicvoiis,  or  nightly,  Dan.  8.  5. 
12]  jVvturiuus,  Mai.  27.  10.  [3]  Terrible,  Acts 
2.  20.     [41  Known,  or  apparent,  Acts  4.  IG. 

Dan.fi.  .5.  the  goat  had  an.  horn  hitweim  his  eyes 
8.  for  it  came  up  four  n.  ones,  toward  four  winds 

.Mat.  27.  IG.  and  ihey  had  then  a  )(.  prisoner 

Mcls  2.  20.  before  that  n.  day  of  the  Lord  come 

4.  10.  a  71.  miracle  hath  been  done  by  ihem 

NOTE,  EI). 

Isa.  30.  8.  now  go,  write  it,  and  71.  it  in  a  book 

Dan.  10.  21.  that  is  7i.  in  the  scripture  of  truth 

2  Thess.  3. 1-1.  n.  that  man,  and  have  no  conipuny 
NOTE. 

Rum.  10.  7.  who  arc  of  n.  among  the  apostles 
NOTIITNG 

Signifies,  [1]  JV"o«  any  tiling,  Gen.  19.  6.  [2]  For 
no  use  or  service,  .\!at.  ."i.  13.  [3]  Of  vo  force 
tu  bind  or  oblige.  Mat.  23.  IG,  18.  [41  A"u  good 
works  Ikat  arc  acceptable  to  God,  John  l.'i.  5. 
[r,]  False  andgr,vndle.t.f,Ar\a  21.  24.  [G]  jVo 
other  vican.t,  Mark  9.  2U  [7]  J^o  reicard  or 
ir,a^c.<!,  3  John  7.  [8]  JVo  veio  doctrine  pertain- 
ing lo  .salvation.  Gal.  2.  6.  [9]  JVw  sin  or 
gnilt,  John  14.  30.  [10]  A'o  dioine  power,  no 
(iod,  1  Cor.  8.  4. 

It  is  taken,  [1]  .Ib.^olutcl;/,  Job  2(i.  7.  Pfal.  49. 
17.  [2]  Coinparatindij,  Psiil.  '.i'.t.  5.  Isa.  40. 
17.  [3]  In  a  person'.i  estimation  of  himself, 
2  Cor.  12.  11.  [4]  Xut  in  the  matter,  but  in 
the  manner,  as  being  of  nn  use  or  sirvice,  1  Cor. 
7.  19.  Thus  ciriuinciiivn  is  c«//frf  nothing,  be- 
cause it  anail.i  nothing,  in  point  of  acceptation 
with  (rod  now  in  gospel-times. 

(Iru.  II.  (i.  now  n.  will  be  restrained  from  them 

19.  8.  only  unto  these  men  do  n.  for  they  came 
2(i.  29.  as  we  have  done  to  thee  n.  but  good 
40.  1.5.  and  here  also  have  I  done  n.  to  put  me 

F.iml.  9.  4.  71.  die  that  is  the  children's  of  Israel 
12.  10.  let  n.  of  it  remain  until  morning* 
20.  yc  shall  cat  71.  leavened  in  your  habitations 
Ifi.  18.  gathered  much,  had  ».  over,  2  Cor.  8.  15. 
22.3. if  he  have  71.  then  he  shall  be  sold  for  liisthelt 
53.  20.  there  shall  n.  cast  their  young 

.Kvm.  0.  4.  eat  ?t.  that  is  made  of  the  vine-tree 
IG.  2G.  touch  n.  of  theirs,  lest  ye  be  consumed 
2.i.  10.  let  n.  hinder  thee  from  coming 

F)eut.  2.  7.  Ihou  hasl  lacked  71.  JVVA.  9.  21.  " 

20.  Ifi.  thou  shalf  save  alive  71.  that  brcathcti 
22.  20.  to  the  damsel  thou  shall  do  71. 
2H.  .5.5.  heciiiipe  he  IihIIi  7i.  lefl  him  in  the  siege 

./e.»A.  II.  15.  Joshua  left  n.  communded  undone 
.hidg.  2.  t  19.  let  n.  fall  of  their  own  doings 
M.  2.  at  least  sncli  as  befi)re  knew  71.  thereof 

14.  6.  he  rent  him,  and  had  n.  in  his  hand 
I  Ham.  3.  18.  Samuel  told,  and  hid  71.  from  him 

20.  2.  my  father  will  do  71.  but  will  shew  it  me 
2'2.  15.  thy  servant  knew  71.  of  all  this 
25.  21.  so  that  11.  wiis  missed  of  all,  30.  19. 
.30.  she  told  him  ».  less  or  more  until  morning 
2 'Vim.  12.3.  till!  poor  manliad7t.8avcoiie  ewe-lcnib 
24.  24.  not  offer  of  that  which  doth  cost  me  71. 
\King.i  4.  27.  provided  victuals,  they  lacked  »i. 
8.  9.  there  was  71.  in  the  ark  save  the  two  lubles 
10.21. silver  was  11.  accounted  of  in  daysof  Solom. 
11.  22.  and  ho  answered  71.  J.uke  22.  3.5. 
22.  10.  tell  me  71.  but  truth,  2  Chrnv.  18.  15. 
^  Kings  in.  10.  fallTi.lo  earth  of  word  of  the  Lord 
20.  13.  n.  in  his  house  that  he  shewed  not 
17.  bo  carried  away,  71.  shall  be  left,  ha.  39.  2, 0. 
2rAr.  9. 2. 71.  hid  fiom  Solom.  which  he  told  her  not 
F.ira  4.  3.  yc  have  n.  lo  do  with  us  in  building 
JWA.  5.  8.  then  they  found  n.  to  answer 
12.  we  will  restore,  and  reqiiiii'  71.  of  ihem 

8.  10.  send  portiims  for  whom  71.  is  prepared 

9.  21.  sustained  them,  so  that  they  lacked  71. 
r.ilh.  2.  15.  now  Esther  reipiired  n.  bill  what 

5.  i;t.  yel  all  this  availeth  mo  n.so  long  8S  1  gee 
0.  10.  let  71.  fail  of  all  that  thou  hast  spoken 

.lob  G.  Vi.  Uioy  20  ton.  and  pciish  ||  21.  for  ye  trc  n. 


NOT 

Job  8.  9.  wo  arc  but  of  yesterday,  and  know  /^ 
24.  25.  who  will  make  my  speech  11.  worth 
2G.  7.  and  he  hangcth  the  earth  upon  n. 
34.  9.  for  he  hath  said,  it  profiteth  a  man  n.  tl:at 
he  should  delight  himself  with  God 

Psal.  17.  3.  Ihou  hast  tried  me  and  slialt  find  11. 

39.  5.  and  mine  age  Is  as  71.  before  thee 

49.  17.  when  he  dielh,  lie  shall  carry  71.  away 
1 19.lli5.who  love  thylaw,and  71. shall  otfcnd  llienj 

P7'ui-.9.13.  a  foul,  woman  is  siini>le,ar  1  kiiowulb  x. 
10.  2.  treasures  of  wickedness  profit  11. 

13.  4.  the  sluggard  desiteth,  and  hath  n.  20.  4. 
7.  there  is  that  maketh  hiiuiself  rich,  yethaliin. 

22.  27.  if  thou  hast  7t.  to  pay,  why  should  he  take 
/'.cci.3.14.HhaUoever  God  docth,7i.can  be  put  to  it 

5.  15.  and  he  shall  take?!,  of  his  labour 
C.  2.  so  that  he  wanleth  7i.  for  his  soul  of  all 
7.  14.  to  the  end  that  man  should  find  71.  alter  him 
y«a.34.12.iioiie  there,  and  all  her  princes  shall  be  11. 

40.  17.  all  nations  before  him  are  as  71.  they  are 
counted  to  him  less  than  n.  and  vanity,  41.  29. 

23.  that  bringeth  the  princes  to  71.  41.  11,  12. 
43.  t  10.  before  me  there  was  71.  formed  of  God 

Jir.  10.  24.  not  in  anger,  lest  thou  bring  me  to  ri. 
32.  2:i.  done  )i?of  all  that  thou  comniandestihem 
38.  14.  I  will  ask  thee  a  thing,  hide  71.  from  me 
39. 10.  left  of  the  poor  which  had  7t.  in  Juduh 
42.  4.  I  will  kccii  71.  back  from  you 

50.  26.  destroy  her  utterly,  let  71.  of  her  be  left 
l.ain.  1.  12.  is  it  71.  to  yon,  all  ye  that  pass  by  ? 
F.zeh.  13.  3.  woe  to  the  prophets  that  have  seen  n, 
/Jan. 4. 35.  all  the  inhabitants  of  earth  reputed  as  n. 

9.  t  26.  Messiah  be  cut  off,  but  shall  have  7t. 
Jnel  2.3.a  wildernfhs,yea,  and  71.  shall  escape  them 
.'/rncs  3.  4.  will  young  lion  cry  if  he  havetaken7j.7 

5.  taken  up  snare,  and  taken  7(.  |i  7.  Ld.  willdo7t. 
Hog.  2.  3.  is  it  not  in  comparison  of  it  as  n.  ? 
7.ech.  8.  t  10.  the  hire  of  atiian  became  n. 
Mat.  15. 32.  thi;y  have  n.  to  eat,  j>/arA6.36.  |  ft  1, 2. 
17.  20.  n.  shall  be  impossible  to  vou,  l.uke  1.  37 
21.19.he  found  n. thereon  but  leaves,  Mark  11. 13. 
2(i.62.an3wcr(  stthou  71..'  what  is  it  liicse  witnefsl 
27.12.  he  answered  ji.  Mark  14. 00,61. ]  15.  3,4,5. 
19.  have  Ihou  71.  to  do  with  that  just  man 

24.  W'lien  Pilate  saw  that  he  could  prevail  71. 
Mark  1.  44.  see  thou  say  ;;.  to  any  man,  but  go 

5.  26.  and  had  spent  all,  and  was  n.  bettered 
C.8.thcy  should  lake  n.tbr  thcirjoumey, /^u/.c9.3. 
9.29.  this  kind  can  come  forth  by  n.  bni  byjirayer 
J.uke  4.  2.  and  in  those  days  he  did  eat7t. 
5.  .5.  have  toiled  all  night  and  taken  n.  ./0A71 21.  3 
7.  42.  they  had  v.  to  pay,  he  frankly  forgave  them 

10.  19.  and  71.  shall  by  any  means  hurt  you 

11.  G.  and  I  have  n.  to  set  befiire  him 

23.  15.  and  lo,7i.  worthy  ofdeath  is  done  toliim. 
.lets  2:).  29.  I  25.  25.  |  2G.  31. 

41.  hut  this  man  hath  done  71.  amiss 
,Tohv'.i.  27. man  can  receive  71. except  it  bcpivfn  him 

5.  19.  verily  the  Son  can  do  71.  of  himself,  30. 

6.  12.  gather,  that  71.  be  lost  ||  39.  I  should  lose  tj. 
63.  the  Spirit  quickcncth,  tlic  flesh  profiteth  n. 

7.  26.  thev  say  n.  ||  8.  28.  I  do  71.  of  myself 

9.  33.  he  could  do  «.  ||  11.  49.  ye  know  71.  at  aD 

12.  19.  perceive  ye  how  ye  prevail  71.  ?  behold 

14.  30.  the  prince  of  this  world  hath  71.  in  me 

15.  5.  I  am  the  vine,  for  without  me  ye  can  do  71. 

16.  23.  and  in  that  day  ye  shall  ask  me  n. 
".'  I  •7,4.  hitherto  hove  yc  asked  71.  in  my  name 

'y^'    "20.  I  spake  openly,  in  secret  have  I  said  n. 
A  ,0  4. 14.  they  could  say  71.  against  it 
21.  finding  77.  how  they  might  punish  ihem 

10.  20.  and  go  with  Ihem,  doubling  71.  11.  12. 

19.  .36.  ye  ought  lo  be  quiet,  and  do  71.  rashly 

20.  20.  I  kejrt  back  71.  that  was  profitable  to  you 

21.  24.  all  may  know,  that  ibo.^o  things  are  n. 
23.  14.  we  w  ill  eat  n.  until  we  have  sloin  Paul 
27.  33.  ye  have  continued  fasting,  having  taken  n 

1  fur.  1.  19.  bring  to  71.  the  understand,  of  prudent 
4.4.  I  know  71.  by  inys.||  5.  judge  71.  before  the  time 

8.  2.  he  knowelh  11.  yet  as  he  ought  to  know 

9.  16.  for  though  I  preach,  I  have  71.  to  glorr  of 

13.  2.  and  have  no  charity,  I  am  77.  2  Cor.  12.  11. 
3.  and  have  not  charily,  il  |)rofilelh  me  71. 

2  Cor.  0.10.  as  having  71.  yet  possessing  all  thiiigi 
13.  8.  for  we  can  do  h.  against  the  truth 

(/at.  2.  6.  they  in  conference  added  ti.  lo  me 

4.  I.  heir  when  a  child,dlfl'('relh7i.  from  s  servsrrt 

5.  2.  I  «ny  iinio  you,  Christ  slinll  profit  you  77. 
I'hil.".  3.  let  71.  be  done  through  strife  or  vain-elnr? 
1  7'im.  4.  4.  every  creature  is  good,  71.  to  he  refused 

5.21.  doing  71. by  partiality  II  6.4. proud, knowinif  ti 

6.  7.  for  we  brought  n.  and  we  can  carry  7i.  out 
Tit.  3.  13.  Ihnf  77.  he  wanting  unto  them 
Vhilrni.  14.  without  thy  mind  would  1  do  tt.   . 
Heh.  2.  H.  he  left  71.  that  is  not  put  under  him 

7.  14.  Moses  spake  71.  concerning  priesthood 
19.  for  the  law  made  71.  perfect,  but  bringing  in 

.Jam.  1.  4.  be  |iorfict  and  entire,  wanting  n. 

6.  but  let  him  ask  in  faith,  71.  wavering 
3.'i;An7.  they  went  forth,  taking  71.  of  the  G«ntilpi 


NOW 

For  NOTHING. 
Er»(i.21.2.in  ihe  seventh  lie  sliall  go  oul  free /or  jiJ 
laa.  44.  10.  an  image  that  is  prolitable/or  n. 
Jer.  1:J.  7.  the  girdle  was  protitable/ur  n.  10. 
JI/a£.5.13.un3avourj  salt  is  good/.  7t.  to  bociistout 
L.uke  0.  33.  do  good  and  loud,  hoping /urn.  again 
PkUA.^.ito  careful/o;-  n.  but  by  prayof  and  suppl. 

In  NOTHhNti. 

Hcts  17.  21.  Athenians  spent  their  time  in  n.  else 

2  G<r.  7.  9.  yo  niiglit  receive  damage  by  us  in  n. 

li.  11.  in  n.  am  1  behind  ciiiefest,  though  1  ba  )i. 

Phil.  i.  20.  and  my  hope,  that  in  n.  1  shall  be  asha. 

M.  and  in  n.  tuirilied  by  your  adversariud 

Is  NOTHING. 
.Vitni.  11.  6.  there  is  n.  at  all  buiidea  this  manna 
Judg.l.  14.  this  isn.  else  save  the  sword  ot'Gideon 
1  Sam.  27. 1.  there  is  n.  better  than  to  go  to  I'hUist. 

1  Kmgs  IM.  43.  he  looked,  and  said,  there  is  n. 
ZKtngs  20.1.5.  there  li  n.amongmy  trea3./sii.3y.4. 

2  Cfir.  14.  II.  it  t.>-  rt.  with  thee  to  help  with  [nany 
jVcA.  2.  2.  this  ii  n.  else  hut  sorrow  ol' heart 
Kslh.  li.  3.  they  said,  there  is  n.  done  for  him 
I'sal.  19.  G.  there  is  n.  hid  from  the  heat  thereof 
I'rov.  8.  8.  there  is  n.  froward  or  perver.se  in  them 
Keel.  2.  24.  there  is  n.  belter  for  a  man,  3.  22. 

5.  14.  begetteth  a  son,  and  lliere  is  n.  in  his  hand 
Jfr.  32.  17.  there  i;>-  n.  too  hard  for  thee 
Mat.  10.  26.  for  there  is  n.  covered  that  shall  not 
bo  revealed,  Mark  4.  22.  Luke  12.  2. 

23.  16.  whoso  shall  swear  by  the  temple,  it  is  n. 

16.  whoso  shall  swear  by  the  altar,  it  is  n. 
Mark!.  15.  there  isn.  from  without  a  man  detileth 
JohnS.  5i.  if  I  honour  myself,  my  honour  is  n. 
Rom.  14.  14.  that  there  is  n.  unclean  of  itself 
lCur.7.  19.  circuini^sion  is  n.  nncircumcleionisit. 

y.  4.  we  know  that  an  idol  is  n.  in  the  world 
Oal.  6.  3.  when  he  is  n.  ho  deccivcth  himself 
Tit.  1.  15.  to  them  that  are  defiled  is  n.  pure 

Of  NOTHING. 
Isa.W.  24.  behold,  ye  are  of  n.  your  work  nought 
1  TScss.  4.  12.  and  that  ye  may  have  lack  of  n. 
RcB.'i.i'.  I  am  rich,  increased,  and  have  need  of  n. 

NOTVVITHST.ANDING. 
Ezod.  16.  20.  n.  they  hearkened  not  to  Moses,  but 
some  left  of  it,  1  Sam.  2.  25.  'J  Kings  17.  14. 

21.21.  n.  if  hecouLtnue  a  day  or  two  nut  punished 
f).-ut.  1.  2a.  n.  ye  wonid  not  go  up,  but  rebelled 
1  Ki:igs  11.  12.  rt.  in  thy  days  1  will  not  do  it 
Jer.  35.  14.  n.  I  have  spoken  unto  you,  rising  early 
Jilal.  2.  22.  n.  being  warned  of  God  in  a  dream' 

11.  11.  n.  he  that  is  least  in  kingdom  is  greater 
17.  27.  n.  lest  we  should  otfend,  go  to  the  sea 

Luke  IC.  11.  It.  be  sure  of  this  that  kingdom  is  come 

20.  n.  in  this  rejoice  not  that  spirits  are  subject 
Phil.  1. 18.  n.  whether  in  pretence  or  truth  Clirist  is 

4.14.n.  have  well  done, that  ye  communicate  with 

1  THin.  2.  15.  n.shesliallbesaved  in  child-bearing 

2  Tim.  4.  17.  n.  L.  stood  with  me,  and  strengthened 
Jam.  2.  16.  n.  ye  gi%"e  not  those  things  nee  Iful 
Kev.  2.  20.  71.  1  have  a  few  things  against  theo 

NOUGHT,  .^'e  N.^uoht. 
NOVICE. 

1  Tim..  3.  6.  not  a  n.  lest  being  lifted  up  with  pride 

NOURISH 
Bignifics,  [1]  To  feed  or  maintain,  Gen.  47.  12. 
[2]    'To  educate  or  bring  vp,  Acts  7.  21.     [3] 
To  cause  to  grots,  Isa.  44.  14.  [4]  To  instruct, 
1  Tim.  4.  6.  [5]  To  ekcrishand  comfort,  Buth 
4.  l.~i.  Jam.  5.  5. 
Oen.  45.  11.  and  there  will  I  n.  thee,  50.  21. 
fia.7.21.tliat  man  ahalln. young  cow  and  two  sheep 
23.4.nor  do  In.up  young  men, nor  bring  up  virgins 
44.  14.  he  plantcth  an  a.5h,  the  rain  doth  n.  it 

NOURISH  hlD. 
Oen.  47.  12.  Joseph  n.  his  father  and  brethren 

2  Sam.  12.  3.  a  lamb  which  he  bought  and  ti.  up 
Isa.X.  2. 1  have  K.and  brought  upchildren,and  they 
Kiek.  19.  2.  she  n.  her  whelps  among  young  lions 
Jicts  7.20.  and  n.  in  his  father's  lioiiss  throe  months 

21.  Pharaoh's  daughter  n.  him  for  her  own  son 

12.  20.  their  country  wasTi.  by  the  king's  country 
I  Tim.  4.0.  n.  up  in  words  offaitli  and  good  doctr. 
Jam.5. 5.  have  n.  your  hearts  as  in  day  of  slaughter 
Rev.  12  14.  71.  for  a  time,  time.i,  and  half  a  time 

NOURISHER,  S. 
Ruth  4.15.  women  said,  he  shall  be  Ti.of  thy  old  age 
iKing.i  10.  tl.  Jehu  sent  to  the  ti.  of  Allah's  cliildr. 
Isa.  49.  t23.  and  kings  shall  be  thy  n.  and  queens 
Jer.  46.  (25.  I  will  punish  the  n.  of  No 

NOURISHETH. 
F.ph.  5. 29.  but  n.  his  flesh,  as  the  Lord  the  church 

NOURISHING. 
Dan.l.S.so  Ji.them  three  years  tostand  before  king 
AVjA.  3.  t8.  art  thou  better  than  n.  No  1 

NOURISHMENT. 
Cv2.2.19.all  the  body  by  joints  and  bands  having  n. 

NOW. 

Oen.  2. 23.  Adam  said,  this  is  ti.  bone  of  my  bones 

IR  21.  I  will  go  down  n.  and  see  whether  thojr 

19.  9.  n.  will  .we  deal  worse  with  ihea  than 

411 


NOW 

<7eTi.  22.  19.  for  ti.  I  know  that  thou  {barest  God 

26.  29.  thou  art.n.  the  blessed  of  the  Lord 

27.  37.  what  shall  I  do  71.  to  theo,  my  son  ? 
29.  35.  she  said  71.  will  I  praise  the  Lord 
32.4.sojouine(J  with  Laban,and  stayed  there  till  n. 
4.J.  11.  Israel  ^aid  to  them,  if  it  bo  so  n.  do  this 
45.  8.  so  n.  it  was  not  you  that  sunt  mo  hither 
46.34. trade  hath  boon  about  catt.liom  youth  tiltii. 

/ixii(i.  9. 18.  not  such  hail  been  in  Egypt  even  tilln. 

10.  11.  go  71.  ye  that  are  men,  and  serve  the  Lord 

32.  32.  yet  n.  if  thou  wilt  forgive  their  sin 
jVrt/M.  12.  1.3.  heal  her  n.  O  Goil,  I  beseech  thee 

14.  19.  hast  forgiven  this  people  from  Egypt  till  71. 

24.  17.  Ishall  see  him,  butnutii.  shall  beholil  him 
v/osA.5.14.butas  captainof  Lord's  host  am  In.come 

7.  19.  tell  me  n.  what  thou  hast  done,  hide  it  not 
Judg.  11.  7.  why  aieye  come  to  mo  71.  in  distress  ? 

17.  13.  71.  I  know  that  the  Lord  will  do  me  good 

1  Sam.  2.  16.  nay,  but  thou  shall  give  it  me  11. 
30.  but  71.  the  Lord  saith,  be  it  far  from  me 

15. 30.  honour  me  n.  I  pray  thee,  before  the  elders 
17. 29.  what  have  I  n.  done?  is  there  not  a  cause .' 

2  Sam.  13.  25.  nay,  my  son,  let  us  not  all  71.  go 

1.5.  34.  so  will  I  71.  also  be  thy  servant 

24.  14.  let  us  7j.  fall  iiilo  the  hand  of  the  Lord 

\  Kings  14. 14.  who  shall  cutotf,  but  whaf!  even  71. 

19.  4.  it  is  enough,  71.  O  Lord,  take  away  my  lite 

2  Kings  1.  5.  he  said,  why  are  yo  11.  turned  backl 

8. 6.  restore  all  that  was  lier's  since  she  went  till  n. 
10.  10.  know  n.  there  shall  fall  to  earth  nothing 
18.25.  .am  Iti.  come  up  without  Lord,  /sa.36. 10. 

19.  25.  Tl.  have  I  brought  it  to  pass,  Isa.  37.  26. 

20.  3.  remember  71.  how  1  have  walked,  Isa.  33.  3. 
Kzra  4.  13.  be  it  n.  known  to  the  king,  if  city  built 

S.lii.even  till  ii.  hath  it  been  building,  not  finished 
9.8. 71. for  little  space  grace  been  shewed  from  Lord 

10.  2.  Tl.  there  is  hope  in  Isr.  concerning  this  thing 
.Job  I.  11.  put  forth  thy  hand  71.  and  touch,  2.  5. 

4.  .5.  n.  it  is  come  upon  thee,  and  thou  faintest 
6.21.  for  n.ye  are  nothing,  yo  see  my  ca.stingdown 
17.  3.  lay  down  h.  ||  24.  25.  and  if  it  be  not  so  71. 
lo.where  is  n.  my  hope7|{30. 9.71.  am  1  their  song 
42.  5.  have  heard  of  ihoe,  but7i.  my  eye  seetli  thee 
Psal.  12.  5.  71.  will  I  arise,  saith  the  Lord 

20.  6. 71.  know  I  that  the  Lord  saveth  his  anointed 
39.  7.  71.  Lord,  what  wait  I  for,  my  hope  is  in  thee 
115.  2.  why  heathen  say,  where  is  11.  their  God  ? 
1 18. 25.  save  71. 1  beseech  thee,  O  Lord,  send  now 
119.  67.  but  71.  have  I  kept  thy  word 

Prov.  6.  3.  do  this  n.  my  son,  and  deliver  thyself 
7.  12.  TI.  she  is  without,  n.  in  the  streets,  and  lieth 
Eccl.  2.  1.  go  to  71.  II  3.  15.  what  hath  been  is  ti. 

16.  that  which  Ji.  is  shad  all  be  forgotten 
Cant.  3.  2.  I  will  rise  ti.  and  go  about  the  city 
Isa.  5.  5.  71.  go  to,  I  wiil  tell  you  what  I  will  do 

16.  14.  but  71.  the  Lord  halh  spoken,  saying 
19.  12.  thy  wise  men,  let  them  tell  thee  w. 
22.1. what  aileth  thee  71.  that  thou  art  wholly  gone 
33. 10.  Tl.  will  I  rise,  71.  will  I  lift  up  myself 

64.  8.  but  n.  O  Lord,  thou  art  our  Faliier 
Jer.  2. 18.  ti.  what  hast  thou  to  do  in  way  of  Egypt? 
4.  12.  Tl.  will  I  give  sentence  against  them 

17.  15.  the  word  of  the  Lord  let  it  71.  come 

25.  5.  turn  71.  every  one  from  his  evil  way 
30.6.  .ask  ye  7i.and  see  whether  a  man  doth  travail 

34.  15.  ye  were  71.  turned,  and  had  done  right 

35.  15.  return  yo7i.  every  man  from  his  evil  way 
45.  3.  woe  is  me  ?i.  the  Lord  hath  added  grief 

Dan.  10.  II.  O  Daniel,  to  thee  am  I  71.  sent 
Hos.  2.  7.  for  then  was  it  better  with  me  than  71. 

13.  2.  and  71.  they  sin  more  and  more,  and  made 
ZccA. 1.4.  turn  yon.from  your  evil  ways  and  doings 

9.8.  for 71.  have  I  seen  with  mine  eyes 
Mai.  3.  10.  prove  me  11.  herewith,  sailh  the  Lord 
Mat.  1.  22.  71.  all  this  was  done,  that  it  might  be 

11.  12.  from  the  days  of  John  the  Baptist,  till  «. 

26.  45.  sleep  on  ti.  |i  27.  43.  let  him  deliver  him  ti. 
53.  Ihinke.st  that  I  cannot  ti.  pray  to  my  Father  ? 

27.  42.  let  him  ti.  come  down  from  the  cross 
Mark  4.  37.  so  that  the  ship  was  ti.  full  of  waves 
/^uA-c  2.29.  Lord,  n.lcttest  thy  serv.  depart  in  peace 

10. 36.  which  Ti.the<ifi  three  was  neighlwur  to  him? 

14.  17.  come,  for  all  things  are  ii.  ready 

22.  36.  but  71.  he  that  hath  a  purse,  let  him  lake  it 
Johni.  8.  draw  out  n.  and  bear  to  governor  offcast 

10.  but  thou  hast  kept  the  good  wine  until  «. 
4.  18.  he  whom  thou  ti.  hast  is  not  thy  husband 

23.  but  the  hour  cometh,  and  n.  is,  5.  25. 
0.10. who  was  born  blind,  how  then  doth  he  n.see? 
13.7.what  Idothou  knowest  not  ii.butshalt  know 

16.  12.  many  things,  but  ye  cannot  bear  them  71. 
22.  ye  71. therefore  have  sorrow,  but  I  will  see  you 
29.  lo,  li.  speakest  thuu  plainly,  and  no  proverb 
.30.  71.  we  are  sine  ||  31.  do  ye  n.  bulieve  ? 

17.  13.  I  kept  them,  and  71.  come  I  to  thco 

21.  14.  this  is  71.  tlie  third  time  that  Jesus  shewed 
Acts  2.  33.  shed  forth  this  which  ye  71.  see  and  hear 

37.71. when  they  heard  this,  were  pricked  in  heart 
4.  29.  and  n.  Lord,  behold  their  threatenings 

12.  11.  M.  I  know  of  a  surety  Lord  sent  his  angel 


NUM 

Acts  12.18.n.  as  soon  as  it  was  day,  there  was  a  st!r 
22. 16.  and  ti.  why  tarriesl  thou,  arise,  be  baptize-l 
26.  17.  the  Gentiles,  to  whom  n.  1  send  thee 

Rom.  0.  22.  but  ti.  being  made  free  from  sin 
7.  17.  71.  then  it  is  no  more  I  that  do  it,  but  sin 

13.  11.  Tl.  it  is  high  time  to  awake  out  of  sleep 
1  Cor.  4.  8.  Tl.  ye  are  full,  ti.  ye  are  rich 

7.  14.  Tl.  are  they  holy  ||  13.  12.  ti.  I  know  in  part 
16.  7.  for  1  wiil  not  see  you  n.  by  the  way 
Gal.  1.  9.  us  we  said  before,  so  say  I  n.  again 
10.  for  do  I  71.  persuade  men  or  God  ? 

2.  20.  the  life  which  1 71.  live  in  thcticsh,Ilivo  by 

3.  3.  are  yo  71.  made  perfect  by  the  lUsh  ? 

4.20. 1  desire  to  be  |)resent  with  you  n.  and  change 

29.  but  as  then,  even  so  it  is  n. 
Eph.  3.  10.  to  the  hitent  that  71.  to  principalities 

.5.  8.  were  darkness,  but  71.  are  ye  light  in  the  Lord 
Phil.  1.5.  your  fellowship  from  the  lirstday  until  ti 

2.  12.  obeyed,  but  n.  much  more  in  iny  absence 
Col.  3.  8.  but  n.  ye  al.^o  put  ott'all  these,  anger 
1   TItcss.  3.  8.  II.  we  live,  if  ye  stand  fast  in  the  L. 

1  Tim.  4.  8.  having  the  promise  of  the  life  that  71.  is 

2  Tim.  4.  6.  for  1  am  ji.  ready  to  be  ottered 
P/iilem.l^.  not  »i.  as  a  servant,  but  above  a  servant 
Ilcb.i.  8.  Tl.  we  see  not  yet  all  things  i)nt  under  him 
./a«i.4.13.go  toil,  ye  that  say,  to-day  or  lo-morrow 

5.1.  goto  71.  rich  men,  weep  and  howl  for  mieeriei 
1  Pet.  1.  8.  though  ti.  ye  see  him  not,  yet  believing 

2.  10.  but  are  71.  the  people  of  G.  had  not  obtained 

1  John  2.  8.  becau.se  the  true  light  71.  shineth 

3.  2.  TI.  are  we  tliesonsof  God,  itdoth  not  ap[)eaf 

4.  3.  and  even  n.  already  is  it  in  the  world 

See  Behold,  Hear,  If. 
NOW  therefore. 
Gen.  20.  7.  ti.  therefore  restore  the  man  his  wife 
29.  32.  71.  therefore  my  husband  wiil  love  me 
37. 20.  come  71.  tkcrcf..im\  let  usslay  him, and  cast 
Josh.  24.  14.  71.  thxrefure  fear  Lord,  and  serve  him 
li'ttm. 12.13.  n.  theref.  behold  king  ye  have  choaei. 
16.  71.  therefore  stand  and  see  tins  great  thing 

2  Sam.  4.  11.  shall  I  not  th.  n.  require  his  blood  ? 
2  Kings  1.  14.  Tl.  theref.  let  my  life  be  precious 

1  Chr.  21. 12.  71.  theref.  advise  thyself,  what  word 
2Chr.  2.  7.  send  me  71.  theref.  man  cunning  to  work 
jVeA.  6.  9.  71.  theref.  O  God,  strengthen  my  hand* 
,/ob  6.  28.  Tl.  therefore  be  content,  look  upon  mn 
Ps.  2.  10.  he  wise  ti.  th.  O  ye  kings,  be  instructed 
Isa.  28.  22.  ti.  th.  be  not  mockers,  le.st  your  bands 
52.  5.  Tl.  theref.  what  have  I  here,  saith  the  Lord 
./er.  26.  13. 71.  theref.  amend  yonr  ways  and  doingi 
29.  27.  71.  therefore  why  hast  thou  not  reproved 
42.  22. 71.  there}',  know  certainly  that  ye  shall  die 
IJaii.  9.  17.  71.  theref.  O  our  God,  hear  the  prayer 
■foel  2.  12.  theref.  also  71.  saith  the  Lord,  turn  ye 
.'Imos  0.  7.  therefore  n.  shall  thsy  go  captive  first 

7.  16.  71.  therefore  hear  thou  word  of  the  Lord 
JletsW.  33. 71.  theref.  are  we  all  present  before  God 
15. 10.  71.  theref.  why  tempt  ye  God,  to  put  a  yoke 
16.  36.  71.  therefore  depart,  and  go  in  peace 

1  Cor.  6. 7. 71.  therefore  there  is  a  fault  among  you 

2  Cor.  8.  11.  71.  therefore  perform  the  doing  of  it 
Eph.  2.  19.  71.  therefore  ye  are  no  more  strangers 

NUMBER,  Substantive, 
Signifies,  [1]  j3  small  number,  such  as  is  easy  lo 
reckon.  Gen.  34.  :iO.  lleut.  4.  27.     [2]  A  great 
number,  or  multitude,  which  no  man  canrcckon 
or  number,  Psal.  147.  4.     [3]  Society,  or  com- 
pany, huku 'Hi.  3.    Acts  1.  17.     The  number 
of  the  beast,  or  the  number  of  the  name  of 
the  beast.    Rev.    13.    17,    18.   stands  for   the 
7iumerical  value  of  the  letters  that  compost  his 
name. 
Gen.  34.  30.  I  being  few  in  n.  they  shall  slay  me 
41.  49.  very  much,  for  it  was  without  71. 
Exod.  12.  4.  take  the  lamb  according  to  71.  of  soals 
16.  16.  gather  manna,  according  to  n.  of  persons 
23.  26.  nothing  barren,  ».  of  thy  days  I  will  fultii 
Lev.  25.  15.  the  71.  of  years  after  the  jubilee,  the  t>. 
of  years  of  the  fruits  he  shall  soil,  16,  .50. 
26.  22.  beasts,  which  shall  make  you  few  in  71. 
J^um.  1.  2.  with  the  ji.  of  their  names,  18,  22. 
3.  22.  71.  of  males  from  a  month  old,  28, 34,  40, 43. 
48.  odd  Tl-  of  tliem  is  to  be  redeemed  to  Aaron 

14.  29.  your  whole  71.  from  twenty  years  old 
34.  after  tho  «.  of  days  ye  searched  the  land 

15.  12.  according  to  ti.  yu  shall  prepare,  so  shali 

yo  do  to  every  one  according  to  their  ti. 

23.  10.  who  can  count  the  m.  of  fonrtli  partof  Isr 

29. 18.  their  olferings  shall  be  according  to  tlioirn. 

,  21,  24,  27,  30,  33,  37. 

31.  36.  the  half  of  their  portion  was  in  n. 
Deut.  4.  27.  left  few  in  ti.  among  heathen,  28.  62. 

7.  7.  because  yc  were  more  in  11.  than  any  people 
25.2.judgecauseliim  to  be  beaten  by  a  certain  n 

32.  8.  he  set  bounds  according  to  tho  n.  of  Israel 
.Tosh.  4.  5.  every  man  ofyou  a  stone,  accord.t0  7i.8. 
.Tudg.  6.  5.  they  and  their  camels  without  n.  7.12. 

7.  6.  the  TI.  of  them  that  lapped  wore  .300  men 
21.  23.  according  to  the  71.  of  them  that  danced 
1  Sam.  G.  4.  the  n.  of  the  lords  oftlie  Philislines 


NUM 

1  Sam.  6.  18.  to  the  n.  of  all  the  ciflei  of  Philistines 
27.  t7.  n.  of  <lays  David  dwelt  in  country  olPhiliut 

2S'am.2.  15.  there  arose  and  went  over  by  n.  twelve 
21.  '20.  hud  fingers  and  toes  twenty-four  iu  n. 

24.  2.  that  1  m:iy  know  the  n.  of  the  ^jcople 
J*.  Joab  gave  up  the  sum  of  the  n.  ol  itie  people 

\Kni';s  18.31. Elijah  took  l-islones.accordwiK'i'n- 

1  Ckron.  7.  'i.  whose  n.  was  in  the  days  of  Oavid 
\>.  the  «.  of  them  niter  their  genealofiy,  40. 

J).  II.  then,  of  mighty  men  whom  Uavid  had 
Ki.  t  19-  when  ye  were  hut  int;n  of  n.  even  a  few 
2-2.  16.  of  the  gold  and  silver,  there  is  no  n. 
23.  a.  their  n.  by  their  polls,  muu  by  man 
1 27.  the  Lcviicis  ».  from  twenty  and  above 
HI.  set  fuusls  by  n.  ||  2o.  1.  n.  o'f  the  workmen 
2.1.  7.  Iho  71.  thai  were  instructed  iu  the  songs 
27.  23.  but  David  took  not  llie  n.  of  them 

2  Ckr.  12.  3.  the  people  were  without  n.  that  came 
2t>.  12.  the  whole  7i.  of  the  chief  of  the  lathers 

29.  32.  the  n.  uf  the  hurnt-otterings,  bullocks 

30.  21.  a  great  n.  of  priests  sanctilied  themselves 
Bira  1.  9.  and  this  is  the  n.  of  the  ves-scls 

2.  2.  the  w.  of  the  men  of  the  people  of  Israel 

3.  4.  and  offered  the  daily  burnt-otferings  by  n. 
6  17.  twelve  he-gnats,  accordmglo  then,  of  tribes 

8.  34.  bv  n.  and  by  weight  of  every  one 
£*tA.9.1 1 .the/i.of those sliiin  in  Shushan  the  palace 
Job  1.5.  Job  offered  according  to  the  n.  of  them  all 

3.  6.  lei  It  not  come  into  the  n.  of  the  months 
5.  9.  marvellous  things  without  ti.  9.  10. 

14.  5.  the  n.  of  his  months  are  with  thee 

15.  20.  then,  of  years  is  hidden  to  the  oppressor 

10.  t  22-  when  years  of  n.  are  come,  I  shall  go 

25.  3.  is  there  any  n.  of  his  armies? 

31.  37.  I  would  declare  to  him  the  it.  of  my  steps 
.■W.24.«hall  break  in  pieces  mighty  men  without  n. 
3(i.  26.  neither  can  the  n.  of  his  years  be  searched 
3.S.  21.  because  the  n.  of  thy  days  is  great 

Psal.  105.  12.  when  they  were  but  a  few  men  in  7t. 
'M.  c.Tterpillars,  and  that  without  n. 
139.  18.  they  are  more  in  n.  than  the  sand 
147.  4.  he  telleth  the  7i.  of  the  stars,  calleth  them 
t5.  uf  his  undi-rstanding  there  is  no  7i. 

F.ccl.  2.  t3. 7i.ofday8oftheirlife,5.tl8.  |  6.  f  12. 

C"a7i<.  6.  8.  there  are  queens  and  virgins  without  ti. 

ha.  10.  1 19.  the  rest  of  the  trees  shall  be  n. 
21.  17.  the  residue  of  the  71.  of  archers,  mighty  men 
411.  26.  that  bringeth  out  their  host  by  7t. 
65.  11.  that  furnish  the  drink-offering  to  that  n. 

Jtr.i.  2.-<.  as  It.  of  thy  cities  are  thy  gods,  O  Judah 
:{2.  my  people  have  forgotten  me  days  witiiout  n. 
1 1.13.  according  to  the  n.  of  thy  cities,  Ti.of  streets 
44.28.yelasmall  n.  that  escape  sword  shall  return 

F.zek.  4.  4.  according  to  the  7i.  of  the  days,  5,  9. 
5.  3.  thnii  shall  take  a  few  in  7i.  and  bind  them 
12.  t  16.  I  will  leave  men  in  7t.  from  the  sword 
43.  t  10.  anil  let  them  measure  the  n. 

Jjaii.  9.  2.  I  understood  by  books  the  7i.  of  years 

Hon.  1.  10.  n.  oflsr.  shallbeasthesand,  Ilom.^.'il. 

JiirA  1.  6.  p  nation  is  come  up  strong  and  without  7i. 

A'rt/i. 3.3. there  is  a  great  rt.of  carcases, they  stumble 

I, like.  22.  3.  Judas,  being  of  the  7i.  of  the  twelve 

./.<A«  fi.  10.  the  men  sat  down,  in  7i.  .5000,  Jicta  4.  4. 

Ada  1.  15.  the  7i.  of  the  names  together  were  120 

5.  .36.  to  Theudos  a  ti.  of  men  joined 

6.  1.  when  the  7i.  of  disciples  was  muUi[ilicd,  7. 

11.  21.  a  great  71.  believed  and  turned  to  the  Lord 
If).  5.  the  churches  were  increased  in  ti.  daily 

"0>r.  10.  12.  for  we  dare  not  make  ourselv. of  then. 
1  Tim.  5.  9.  let  not  a  widow  be  taken  into  the  n. 
Urn  .5. 11.  the  n.  of  them  was  10,000  limes  10,000 

7.  4.  [  heard  the  n.  of  them  which  were  sealed 

9.  16.  the  n.  of  the  army  of  the  horsemen 
J3.  17.  71.  of  his  name  ||  16.  count  the  n. 

If*,  it  is  the  n.  of  a  man,  and  his  7i.  is  066 
15.  2.  I  iiaw  them  that  had  victory  over  n.  of  beast 
29.  8.  n.  of  Gog  i'  a«  the  sand  of  the  sea 

NU.MRKR,   Verb. 
Gm.  13.  16.  if  a  man  can  n.  the  dust  of  the  earth 

15.  5.  tell  the  statu,  if  ihnu  he  able  to  7t.  them 
I.rr.  15.  13.  he  iihall  n.  seven  days  for  his  cleansing 

2-<.  then  she  shall  n.  to  herself  seven  days 
23.16.  af^er  the  seventh  <ihI>Ii.  shall  yen.  fifty  days 
2.5.>i.thi>u  "hall  n.s"ven  sabbaths  of  years  to  Ihco 
A'um.  1.  3.  Aaron  shall  n.  them  by  their  armies 
40.  only  ihon  shall  not  n.  Ihe  Inbe  of  I^evi 

3.  15.  n.  the  cliildren  of  Levi  from  a  month  <dil 
40.  n.  all  the  first  born  of  the  malis  of  Israel 

4.  a.3.  until  fifty  years  old  shall  thou  n.  them,  .30. 
29.  as  for  thf  sons  of  Merari  iIkhi  shall  n.  them 
37.  which  .Moses  and  Aaron  did  n.  41. 

Drul.  16.  n.  seven  weeks  shnit  thou  n.  begin  ton. 

1  Sam.  14.  17.  n.  and  seewlio  is  gone  from  us 

2  .Snin.  24.  1    to  say,  go  n.  Isinfl  and  Jiidnh 

2.  JO  now  and  n.  the  iwopin,  4.  1  Chrnn.  21.  2. 
1  Kin<T»  20.  25.  It.  then  an  arinv  like  the  army  lost 
1  Chrnn.  21.  1.  .""alnn  provoked  David  ton.  Israel 
27.  21.  .loah  began  to  n.  but  he  finished  not 
./.A  3".  37.  who  can  n.  the  clouds  in  wisdom  ! 
39.  !.  canst  thou  n.  the  inonlhs  thai  they  fulfill 
413 


OAK 

Pj.  00.  12,  so  teach  as  to  n.  our  days,  that  we  may 

ha.  65.  12.  therefore  will  I  n.  you  to  the  sword 

Rev.  7.9.  a  great  multitude  whicb  no  man  could  n. 

NUMBERS. 

1  Ckron.  12.  23.  these  are  the  n.  of  Ihe  bands 

2  Chron.  17.  14.  tliese  are  the  ti.  of  them,  accord. 
I'sal.  71.  15.  for  1  know  not  the  n.  thereof 

NUMBERED. 
Gen.  13.  16.  then  shall  thy  seed  also  be  n. 
16.  10.  it  shall  not  be  n.  for  multitude,  32.  12. 
A'z9(/.30.i3.thul  passeih  among  them  that  are  n.l4. 
3ri.  25.  them  that  were  n.  of  the  congregation,  26. 
jViim.  I.  19.  he  n.  them  in  the  wilderness  of  Sinai 
21.  those  that  were  7i.  of  them,  23, 44,  40.  |  2.  4, 
13,  15, 19,  21 ,  23,  20, 2H,  30. 
47.  the  Levitea  were  not  n.  among  them,  2.  33. 

2.  9.  all  that  were  n.  in  the  camp  of  Judah 
16.wcre7i.in  campof  Reuben  ||  2J.7l.of  Ephraim 
31 .  n.  in  camp  of  Dan  ||  3.  IU.  Moses  n.  tliem,  42. 

3.  39.  all  that  were  n.  of  the  Levites  were  22,000 

4.  'M.  they  7i.  of  the  sons  of  the  Kohathitcs,  37. 
38.  those  that  were  n.  of  the  Gcrshonites,  41. 
42.  those  that  were  n.  of  the  sons  of  Merari,  45. 
45.  these  whom  Moses  and  .Aaron  n. 

7.  2.  who  were  princes  and  over  them  that  were  n. 

14.29.  cai'cases  fell  in  wilderness,  all  that  were  n. 

2ti.  51.  these  were  n.  of  the  children  of  Israel 
57.  n.  of  the  Levites  ||  03.  Moses  and  Eleazar  n. 
.fii.>h..  8.  10.  Joshua  rose  early  and  n.  the  people 
Judg.  20.  15.  the  children  of  Benjamin  were  7i. 
I  Sam.  11.8.  and  when  he  n.  them  in  Bezck 

15.  4.  Saul  n.  people  in  Telaim  200,000  f.iotmen 
2.S'am.lH.l.  David  n.  the  people  that  were  with  him 

24.  10.  David's  heart  smote  him  after  he  had  n. 

1  R'inirs  3.  y.  a  great  people  that  cannot  be  n. 
8.5.siiccp  and  oxen  that  could  not  be  n.  2  CAr.5  6. 
20.  15.  then  he  n.  the  princes  of  the  provinces 

2li.at  return  of  the  year  Uen-hadad  /t.the  Syrians 
27.  Israel  were  ii.  and  were  like  two  flocks 

2  Kings  3.  6.  and  king  Jehoram  n.  all  Israel 

1  Chron.  21.  17.  I  commanded  the  people  to  be  n. 
23.3.no  w  the  Levites  were  n.  from  thirty  years,27. 

2  Chr.  2.  17.  Solomon  n.  all  the  strangers  in  Israel 
25. 5.  he  n.  them  from  twenty  years  old  and  above 

Ezra  1.  8.  Cyrus  n.  the  vessels  to  Shcshbazzar 
Psal.  40.  5.  they  are  more  than  can  be  n. 
Reel.  1.  15.  that  which  is  wanting  cannot  be  n. 
Isa.  22.  10.  ye  have  n.  the  houses  of  Jerusalem 
53. 12.  he  was  n.  with  Iransgressors,  j\fark  15.  28. 
Jer.  33.  22.  as  the  host  of  heaven,  cannot  be  ti. 
Oan.5.26.  God  hath  n.  thy  kingdom, and  finished  it 
//oi.l.IO.as  the  sand  of  the  sea,  which  cannot  be  n. 
,V«<.  10.30.  hairs  of  your  head  are  all  n.  Luke  12.  7. 
.rids  1.  17.  for  he  was  n.  with  us,  and  obtained  part 
26.  Matthias  was  n.  with  the  eleven  apostles 
NUMBEREST. 
Exod.  30.  12.  shall  give  every  man  a  ransom  when 
tlioun.  lliattherebeno  plague  when  thou  n. 
Job  14.  16.  for  now  Ihoii  n.  my  steps,  dost  not  thou 

NUMBERING. 
Grn.  41.  49.  Joseph  gathered  corn  until  he  h-fl  n. 
2  Chron.  2. 17.  after  the  n.  wherewith  David  numb. 

NURSE 

Signifies,   [1]   .4   moman   who   suckles  a  child, 

Exod.  2.  7.  [2]  One  that  assists  in  bringing  up 

of  children,  Ruth  4.  16.     It  is  applied,  [I]     To 

godly  kings  and  queens,  who  hiive  a  sincere 

affection  and  tender  regard  to  the  church,  Isa. 

49.23.  [2]  To  faithful  ministers  of  the  gospel, 

who  are  mild  and  obliging,  u.<!ing  all  kind  and 

winning  expressions,  as  nurses  do  to  please 

children,  1  Thcss.  2.  7. 

Gen.  24.  .59.  they  sent  away  Rrbckah  and  her  n. 

35.  H.  D,-borah,  Rchckah's  n.  died,  and  was  bur. 

Kxorf.2.7.shall  I  call  to  thee  a  ;i.of  Tlohrew  women? 

lluth  4.  16.  Naomi  took  the  child,  and  became  n. 

2  .SViin.  4.  4.  h\i.n.  took  him  up  and  fled,  and  he  fill 

2  Kings  11.2.thcy  hid  him  and  hisn.  2  Chr.  22.  II. 

Ids  13. 1 18.  he  suffered,  as  a  n.  benreth  the  child 

1 7'Af.«j.2.7.  were  gentle, as  a  n.cherishetliher  child. 

NURSE. 

E/:od.  2.  7.  that  she  may  n.  the  child  for  thee 
9.lako  this  child  awav.and  n. it  for  me,  I  will  give 
NURSED. 
F.ind  2.  9.  the  woman  took  the  child,  and  n.  it 
fsa.  60.  4.  thy  daiiehtiTS  shall  be  n.  at  thy  side 

NURSING. 
.Vum.  11. 12.cn rry  them  in  thy  bosom,  as  a  n.  father 
/'»n.49.23.king«  be  n.  fathers,  i|iiiens  thy  n.mothers 

NURTURE. 
F.ph.  6.  4.  bring  thoni  up  in  the  n.  of  the  Lord 

NUTS. 
Gen.  4^.  11.  carry  down  a  pmsent,  n.  and  almonds 
Cant.  6.  11. 1  went  down  into  the  garden  ofn. 

o. 

OAK. 

f7f7i.35.  4.  Jacob  hid  the  gods  iind.'r  tlie  o.  by  Shoe. 
b.Dubor.Rebukah'i  nurse, was  buried  under  aiio. 


OAT 

Josh.  24.  26.  and  set  it  up  there  under  an  a. 

Judg.  a.  11.  an  angel  of  the  Lord  sat  under  an  o 
9  1 6.  made  Abimelech  kingby  theo.  of  ihe  jiillar 

2  iiam.  18.  9.  Absalom's  mule  went  under  an  o. 
10.  Absalom  hanged  inano.  {{  14.  aliveintbeo. 

IKings  13. 14. he  found  the  man  of  God  under  an  o 

1  Chr.  10.  12.  buried  their  bones  under  o.  inJabesh 

Isa.  1.  30.  ye  shall  be  as  an  o.  whose  leaf  fadeth 
6. 13. as  tcil  tree,  or  o.  whose  substance  is  in  them 
44. 14.  he  tukexii  the  cypress  and  o.  to  make  a  god 

Ezck.  6.  13.  among  tjieir  idols  uiidci  every  thick  o. 
OAKS. 

/ia.1.29. shall  be  ashamed  of  the  o.  which  ye  desired 
2.  13.  the  day  of  the  Lord  on  all  the  o.  of  Bashan 
57.  t  5.  iiiHainiiig  yourselves  among  the  o. 

K:ei.27.0.of  o.of  Bashanhave  theymade  thine  oari 

Hos.  4. 13.  and  burn  incense  upon  the  hills  under  o. 

.'Imos  2.  9.  the  .Araorile  was  strong  as  the  o. 

jCcch.  11.  2.  bowl,  tir-tree,  howl,  U  ye  o.  of  Bashan 
OAR. 

Ezck.  27.  29.  all  that  handle  the  o.  shall  cry 
OARS. 

Asa.  33.  21.  wherein  shall  go  no  galley  with  o. 

F.ie.k.  27. 6.  of  the  oaks  of  Rashan  they  made  thy  o 
OATH 

Is  a  solemn  action,  whereby  ire  call  upon  God,  the 
searcher  of  hearts,  to  witness  the  truth  of  what 
we  ajirm,  for  the  ending  of  strife  or  contro- 
versies, Heb.  6.  16.  It  is  spoken,  (1)  Of  God 
tlie  Father,  who  swarc,  [1]  To  his  Hon,  the  Lord 
Messiah,  the  Mediator  of  the  new  covenant, 
that  Christ  should  be  his  only  and  eternal 
I'riest,  hereby  honouring  his  Son,  and  giving 
strong  consolation  to  his  people,  in  such  a 
lioyal  High-priest,  who  should  effectually 
vianage  all  their  concerns  with  l.im  fur  ever, 
Psal.  llO.  4.  Hebrews  7.  21.  [2]  To  men,  either 
in  love  or  wrath,  hereby  assuring  them  of  the 
immutability  of  his  purposes,  that  the  blessings 
he  promised  .'should  be  bestowed,  and  that  thi 
judgments  he  threatened  should  be  inflicted, 
Gen.  22.  16,  17.  Psal.  95.  11.  Heb.  6.  17.  (II) 
Of  men,  who  when  necessity,  or  Ute  importance 
of  a  matter  requires  it,  ought  to  swear,  [1] 
Jiiligiously,  by  God  only,  Dent.  6.  13.  [  10.20. 
[2]  Rivercntlij,  and  with  fear,  Eccl.  9.  2.  [3' 
Cautiously,  Genesis  24.  .5,  8.  Joshua  2.  ^T. 
[4]  Sincerely,  faithfully,  and  justly, 4eiemiaih 
4.2. 

Men  must  not  sware,  [1]  Idnlatrously,  in  the 
name  of  any  false  gods,  or  in  the  name  of  in- 
animate things.  Josh.  23.  7.  Jam.  5.  12.  [2'' 
Deceitfully,  Jer.  42.  5,  20.  [3]  Falsely,  Lev'. 
6.  3.  I  19.  12.  [4]  Rashly,  Lev.  5.  4.  Mat. 
14.  7. 

Gen.  24.  8.  thou  shall  be  clear  from  this  my  o.  41. 

26.  3.  I  will  perform  the  o.  which  I  sware  to 

Abraham,  Deut.  7.8.  Psal.  105.9.  ./«r.  11.5. 

28.  let  there  be  now  an  o.  betwixt  us  and  thee 

.50.  25.  Joseph  took  ano.of  thechildren  of  Isiael 

Find.  22. 1 1.  an  o.  of  the  Lord  shall  be  between  us 

Lev.  5.  4.  that  a  man  shall  pronounce  with  an  o. 

J^um.  5.  19.  the  priest  shall  charge  her  by  an  o. 

21. Ld. make  thee  acurse  and  an  o.  among  people 
30.  2.  if  a  man  swear  an  o.  to  bind  his  soul,  10. 

13.  every  vow,  nnd  every  binding  o.  afflict  sou! 
/.)tut.29.12.his<T.which  the  Lord  makethwiiii  thoe 

14.  neither  with  you  only  do  I  make  'his  o. 
.lush.  2.  17.  we  will  be  blameless  of  this  thine  o. 

9.  20.  lest  wrath  be  on  us,  because  of  the  o. 
.fudg.  21.  5.  for  Israel  had  made  a  great  o. 
1  Sam.  14.  26.  for  the  people  feared  the  o. 

27.  when  Saul  charged  them  with  the  o.  28. 
2*''im.  21.7.  king  spared  Mephihosheth,  bee.  of  9. 

1  Kings  2.  43.  why  then  hast  thou  not  kept  the  o.  ? 
8. 31'.  and  an  0.  be  laid  on  him,  and  the  0.  come  be- 
fore thine  altar  in  this  house,  2  Chr.  6. 22. 

18.  10.  he  look  an  0.  of  Ihe  kingdom  ami  nation 

2  Kings  11.  4.Jehoindn  took  nno.  of  them  in  house 

1  Chr.  16.  16.  h"  mindful  of  his  0.  to  Isaac 

2  Chr.  15.  15.  all  Judah  rejoiced  at  the  0. 

JVch.  5.  12.  and  Nchciniah  took  an  n.  of  the  priests 
10.29.they  entered  inlo  an  0.  to  walk  in  God's  law 

F.ccl.  8.  2.  and  that  in  regard  of  the  o.  of  (Jod 
9.  2.  he  that  swcarcth,  as  ho  that  fenreth  an  o. 

F.zek.  16.  .59.  vhichhast  desi^ised  the  0. 17.  18, 19. 
17.  13.  a  covenant,  and  hath  taken  an  o.  of  him 

16.  that  mado  him  king,  whose  o.  he  despised 
/)aii.9.1  l.curse  is  poured  on  iis,  and  o.  w  rill,  in  law 
y.ech.  8.  17.  lovo  no  false  0.  for  this  I  bale 

Mat.  14.  7.  ho  promised  with  nn  0.  10  give  her 
9.  nevertheless,  for  the  o.  sake,  Mark  <i.  26. 

26.  72.  again  he  denied  with  ann.  I  know  not  man 
Luke  1.  73.  the  o.  which  he  sware  to  our  father 
.lets  2.  30.  that  God  had  sworn  with  an  0.  to  him 

2.3.  21.  which  have  bound  themselves  with  an  n. 
//fA.6.16.an  o/for  confirmation  is  an  end  of  all  strife 

17.  God  confirmed  it  by  an  n.  that  hv  twolhings 
7. 20.  as  not  without  an  o.  he  was  mado  priest,  31 

88.llica.which  wasiinc^ithu  Uw,initkclhlhaSoA 


OBE 

Jam.  5. 12.  swear  not  by  the  earth,  nor  any  other  o. 
OATHS. 

Riek.  21. 23.  divination  to  them  that  have  Bworn  o. 

JiaJ).  3.  9.  thy  bow  made  naked,  according  to  the  o, 

Mai.  5.  33  shall  perlorm  to  the  Lord  thino  o. 
OBEDIENCE 

Is  twofold,  (I)  That  ickick  is  given  to  God,  and 
is  spoken,  [1]  Of  Christ  the  great  Redeemer's 
perfect  obedience  to  the  icill  of  his  Father,  both 
in  doing  and  suffering,  by  the  vierit  of  xthich 
sinners  are  justified  before  God,  Rom.  .5.  19. 
[2]  Of  that  voluntary,  free,  and  cheerful  obe- 
dience, which  tha  angels  i?i  heaven  yield  to  the 
commands  of  God,  I'sal.  UVJ.  20.  Mat.  (">.  Jll. 
[3]  Of  that  incoluiitary  obedience  xchich  devils 
and  wicked  men  are  forced  to  yield  to  the  com- 
mands of  God,  Exod.  II.  1.  I  12.  31.  Mark  1. 
27.  Luke  4.  30.  [4]  Of  the  obedience  of  good 
men,  which  consists,  [Ij  /«  believing  and  em- 
bracing the  gospil,  and  subjecting  themselves 
thereunto;  whence  it  is,  that  obt'diencc  is  put 
for  faith,  Horn.  16.  19.  coiniiarcd  with  Rom. 
1.8.  [2]  Tn  a  conformity  of  oar  affections  and 
actions  unto  the  will  of  God  rcvoaled  in  his 
word,  which  is  begun  in  this  life,  but  is  to  be 
perfected  in  heaven,  Rom.  6.  16.  1  Pet.  1.  14. 
[5]  Of  the  sutjection  of  all  creatures  to  the 
command  of  God,  Psal.  105.  30,  31.  ~9t  his 
command  the  ravens  did  feed  Elijah,  1  Ki?igs 
17.  4,  (i.  The  Jish  vomited  out  Jonah,  chup. 
2.  10.  The  leinpestuvus  sea  became  calm.  Mat. 
8.  26,  27.  He  spake,  and  there  came  frogs, 
flies,  lice,  hail,  locusts,  &-c.  upon  Egypt,  Psal 
105.  30,  31,  32,  34.  (II)  That  which  is  due,  or 
performed  to  man,  cither,  [1]  By  the  unrea- 
sonable creatures.  Jam.  3.  3.  Or,  [2]  By  in- 
feriors to  their  superiors  :  as,  by  wives  unto 
their  husbands,  Tit.  2.  5.  Children  to  their 
parents,  F.ph.  0.  1.  Servants  to  their  masters, 
Kph.  6.  5.  Sul'jects  to  their  princes  or  magis- 
trates, Rom.  13.  1.  ,ind  by  people  to  their 
jiastors,  Heb.  13.  17. 
2  Sam.  22.  t45.  strangers  shall  yield  feigned  o.  unto 
me  as  snon  as  they  hear,  Psnl.  16. 1 44.  |  GG.t3. 

Rom.  1.  5.  fur  o.  to  the  faith  among  all  nations 

5.19.  by  the  0.  of  one  shall  many  he  made  righteous 
6.  16.  of  sin  to  death,  or  of  o.  imto  righteousness 
16.  19.  your  o.  is  come  abroad  unto  all  men 

26.  m.ule  known  to  all  nations  for  the  o.  of  faith 

1  Cor.14.34.  women  are  commanded  to  be  under  o. 

2  Cor.  7.  15.  he  remembereth  the  o.  of  you  all 
10  5.  bringing  every  thought  to  the  o.  of  Christ 

6.  all  disobedience,  when  your  o.  is  fulfilled 
Ph'lhn.  21.  having  confidence  in  thy  o.  I  wrote 
Heb.  5. 8.  yet  learned  he  o.  by  the  things  he  suffered 

1  Fet.  1.2.  through  sanctification  of  the  Spirit  to  o. 

OBEDIENT. 
F.zod.  24. 7.  Lord  hath  said,  we  will  do,  and  be  o. 
J\rum.iti.  20.  put  honour  on  him,  that  Isr.  may  be  o. 
Deut.  4. 30.  if  turn  to  L.  and  shall  be  o.  to  his  voice 

8.20.  ye  shall  perish,  because  ye  would  not  be  o. 

2  Sam-  22.  45.  straogers  shall  be  a.  unto  me 
Prov.  25.  12.  so  is  a  wise  reprover  upon  an  o.  ear 
Isa.  1.  19.  if  0.  ye  shall  eat  the  good  of  the  land 

42.  24.  neither  were  they  o.  to  his  lavv 
.lets  6.  7.  the  priests  were  o.  to  the  faith 
Horn.  15.  18.  to  make  Gentiles  o.  by  word  and  deed 
2Cor.2.9.  might  know  whetheryebe  o.  in  all  thing? 
F.ph.  6.  5.  servants,  be  o.  to  your  masters,  Tit.  2.  9. 
Phil.  2.  8.  Christ  became  o.  unto  death  of  the  cross 
Tit.  2. 5.  wives,  be  o.  \\  1  Pet.  1. 14.  children,  be  o. 

OBEY. 
Oen.  27.  8.  therefore,  my  son,  o.  my  voice,  13,  43. 
F.zod.  5.  2.  who  is  the  Lord,  that  I  should  o.  him? 

19.  5.  now  if  ye  will  o.  my  voiee  indeed 

23. 21. 0.  his  voice  ||  22.  if  shall  indeed  o.  his  voice 

Deut.  11.27.  a  blessing,  if  ye  o  commands  of  L<>r<l 

13.  4.  o.  hi?  voicr,  27. 10.  |  30. 2, 8.  1  Sam.  12. 14. 

30.  20.  and  that  thou  mayest  o.  his  voice 
.Tosh.  24.  24.  the  Lord's  voice  will  we  o. 
l.">am.8.I9.  the  people  refused  to  o.  voice  of  Samuel 

13.  22.  behold,  to  o.  is  better  than  sacrifice 
•VfA.  9.  17.  and  tefu>ed  to  o.  neither  were  mindful 
.Tob  .16.11.  if  they  o.  and  serve  him,  they  shall  spend 
Psal.  IS.  44.  ,as  soon  as  they  hear,  they  shall  o.  me 
Prov.VQ.Vl.  the  eve  that  despiselh,  to  o.  his  mother 
Isa.  II.  14.  the  chihlren  of  Ammon  shall  o.  them 
Jcr.  7.  23.  0.  my  voice,  and  I  will  be  your  God, 
and  ye  shall  be  my  people,  11.  4,  7. 

26.  13.  amend  your  ways,  and  o.  the  voice  of 
the  Lord  your  God,  38.  20.  Zech.  6.  15. 

35.  l4.Rcchribiteso.  their  father's  commandments 

42.  6.  we  will  o.  the  voice  ofljord  our  Cod,  that 
it  may  be  well  with  us  when  we  o.  the  Lord 
Dan.  7. 27.  and  all  dominions  shall  serve  and  o.  him 
Mat.  8.  27.  what  manner  of  man  is  this,  that  even 
winds  and  sea  o.  him?  J/ar4  4. 41.  /,iiAre8.25. 
Mark  1.  27.  even  the  unclean  spirits  o.  him 
/  uke  17.  6.  be  thou  plucked  up,  and  it  shall  o.  you 
A  -is  5.  29.  we  oujht  to  o.  God  rather  than  men 
413 


OBL 

.^cts  5. 32.  whom  G.  hath  given  to  them  that  o.  him 
Rom.  2.  8.  but  to  them  that  o.  unrighteousness 
t).  12.  that  ye  should  o.  it  in  the  lusts  thereof 
16.  know  ye  not,  to  whom  ye  yield  yourselves 
servants  to  o.  his  servants  ye  are  to  whom  ye  a. 
F.ph.  6.  1.  children,  o.  your  parents.  Col.  3.  20. 
Col.  3.  22.  servants,  o.  m  all  things  your  iiiaaters 
Tit.  3.  1.  put  them  in  mind  to  o.  magistrates 
y/t4.5.y.authorof  eternal  salvat.  to  all  thato.  him 

13.  17.  0.  them  that  havt^the  rule  over  you 
JaHi.3.3.pui  bits  in  hor.<cs'  mouths,  I  hat  they  may  o. 

M-ut  OBEY,  OBEY  not. 
Dcut.ll.-S.  a  curse,  if  ye  will  not  o.  the  command- 
ments of  Lord  your  God,  28.  62.  1  .Sam.  12. 
15.  ./ob  .3ti.  12.  Jer.  12.  17.  |  18.  10. 
21.  IS.  who  will  not  o.  the  voice  of  his  father,  20. 
1  Sam.  1.5.  19.  wherefore  then  didst  thou  not  o.? 
Jcr.  42.  13.  but  if  ye  say,  we  will  yiot  o.  the  Lord 
J)an.  9.  11.  that  they  might  not  u.  Ihy  voice 
.'lets  7.  39.  to  whom  our  fathers  would  not  o. 
Rom.  2.  8.  that  are  contentions,  and  do  not  o.  truth 
(Vui.3.1.  who  bewitched  you,that  should  Tioio.?  5.7. 
27'hcss.t.S.  lakingveng.  on  theiu  that  o.no£ gospel 
3.  14.  if  any  man  o.  not  our  word,  note  that  man 
1  Pet.  3. 1.  if  any  o.  not  the  word,  they  may  be  won 
4. 17.  whatshall  end  be  of  them  thato.  rio^  gospel  7 

OBEYED. 
Grn.  22. 18.  be  blessed,  because  thou  hast  o.  2G.  5 
28.  7.  that  Jacob  o.  his  father  and  his  mother 
Josh.  22. 2.  have  o.  my  voice  in  all  1  command,  you 
iSam.  15.  20.  Saul  said,  I  have  o.  the  voice  of  Lord 
24.  because  I  feared  the  people,  and  o.  their  voice 

28.  21.  behold,  thine  handmaid  hath  o.  thy  voice 

1  Chron.  29.  23.  then  all  Israel  o.  Solomon 

2  Chron.  11.  4.  they  o.  the  words  of  the  Lord 
.Tcr.  34.  10.  then  they  o.  and  let  them  go 

35.  8.  thus  have  we  o.  the  voice  of  Jonadab,  10. 
18.  because  yeo.  the commandmentof  your  tath 
/>an.9.I0.  neither  have  we  o.the  voice  of  the  Lord 
ffag.  1.  12.  the  people  o.  the  voice  of  the  Lord 
Jlcts  5.  .36.  many  as  o.  Theudas  were  scattered,  37. 
ftom.fi.  17.  tiaveo.  from  heart  that  furmofdoetrine 
Phil.  2.  12.  ye  have  o.  not  in  my  presence  only 
Hcb.  11.8.  hy  faith  Abraham  o.  and  went  out 
1  Pet.  3.  6.  Sarah  o.  Abraham,  calling  him  lord 

J^ot  OBEYED. 
Josh.  5.  6.  were  consumed,  because  they  a.  not 
.Tudg.  2.  2.  but  ye  have  nut  o.  my  voice,  6.  10. 

1  Kings  20.  36.  thou  hast  not  o.  the  voice  of  Lord 

2  Kings  18.12.  because  ihey  o.  not  the  voice  of  Ld. 
Prof. 5.13.and  have  not  o.the  voice  of  my  teachers 
Jer.  3. 13.  ye  have  not  o.  my  voice,  saith  the  Lord, 

25.  I  42.  21.  I  43.  4,  7.  I  44.  2;t. 

9.  13.  they  have  not  o.  my  voice,  11.  8.  |  17.  23. 

1 .32.  23.  I  40.  3.  Dan.  9.  10,  14. 

Zrph.  3. 2.  she  o.  not  the  voice,  she  drew  not  near 

Rom.  10.  16.  but  they  have  not  all  o.  the  gospel 

OBEYEDST. 
1  Sam.  28. 18.  because  thou  o.  not  the  voice  of  Ld. 
.fcr.  22.  21.  thy  manner  that  thou  o.  not  my  voice 

OBEYETH. 
Prov.  15.t32.  that  o.  reproof  getteth  understanding 
fsa.  50.  10.  who  that  o.  the  voice  of  his  servant  ? 
.Ter.  7.  28.  this  is  a  nation  that  o.  not  the  Lord 
11.  3.  cursed  be  the  man  that  o.  not  the  words  of 

OBEYING. 
.fudg.  2.  17.  your  fathers  o.  but  they  did  not  so 
1  .Sam.  15.22.  in  sacrifice,  as  ino.  the  voice  of  Lord 

1  Pet.  1. 22.  have  purifieil  your  souls  in  o.  the  truth 
OBEISANCE. 

Gen.  37.  7.  your  sheaves  made  o.  to  my  sheaf 
9.  the  sun,  moon,  and  eleven  stars  made  o.  to  me 
43.  28.  thej-  bowed  and  made  o.  to  Joseph 
F.iod.  18.  /.  Moses  did  o.  to  his  father-in-law 

2  Sam.  1.  2.  the  Ainalekite  did  o.  to  David 

14.  4.  the  woman  of  Tekoah  did  o.  to  the  king 

15.  5.  when  any  man  came  nigh  to  do  him  o. 

1  Kings  1.  16.  Batlj-sheba  did  o.  to  king  David 

2  Chr.  24. 17.  princes  of  Judah  made  o.  to  the  kin; 
OBJECT. 

Jicts  24.  19.  and  o.  if  thev  had  ought  against  me 

OBLATION. 
f.cv.2.  4.  an  o.  of  a  meat-oflfering  baken,  5,7, 13 
12.  as  for  o.  of  the  first-fiuits,  ye  shall  offer  then) 
3.  1.  if  his  o.  he  a  sacrifice  of  peace-offering 
7.  14.  he  shall  offer  one  out  of  the  whole  o. 

29.  he  shall  bring  his  o.  to  the  Lord,  of  sacrifice 
22.  18.  that  will  offer  his  o.  for  all  his  vows 

JVum.  18.  9.  every  o.  of  theirs  shall  be  most  holy 

31.  .50.  we  have  brought  an  o.  for  the  Lord 
fsa.  19.  21.  the  Egyptians  shall  do  n.  to  the  Lord 

40.  20.  that  is  so  impoverished  that  he  bath  no  n. 

66.3.thatoffereth  an  o.as  if  he  offered  swine's  flesh 
.Tcr.  14.  12.  wdien  they  offer  nn  o.  I  will  not  acce])t 
F.zek.  44.  30.  and  every  o.  shall  be  the  priest's 

45.  1.  when  ve  shall  divide  the  land,  offer  an  o. 
1.3.  this  is  the  o.  ye  shall  offer,  48.  9,  20,  21. 

16.  shall  give  this  o.  for  the  prince  in  Israel 
Dan.  2.  46.  that  they 'should  offer  an  o.  to  Daniel 

9.21. time  of  the  even  o.  ||  27  shttll  cause  o.  to  cease 


OBT 

OBLATIONS. 
Lev.  7.  33.  he  commanded  Israel  to  offer  their  • 
2  Chron.  31.  14.  to  distribute  the  o.  of  the  Lord 
Prov.  29.  t4.  but  a  man  of  o.  overtbrowcth  it 
Isa.  1.  13.  bring  no  more  vain  o.  unto  me 
'F.zck.  20.  40. 1  will  require  the  first-fruits  of  your  « 
44.  30.  every  sort  of  your  o.  shall  bo  the  priest's 

OBSCURE. 
Pro».20.20.hislamp6ball  be  putout iiio.darkncn* 

OBSCURITY. 
By  obscurity,  or  darkness,  all  kinds  of  adversity 
and  calamity  are  resembled,  as  happiness  and 
prosperity  arc  by  light,  Isa.  58. 10.     It  is  said, 
that  the  Jews,  after  they  were  delivered  front 
their  dark    and  calamitous   condition  in  the 
Btibylonish  captivity,  observed  a  feast,  which 
they  called,  The  feast  of  lights;   because  so 
great  a  happiness  of  being  delivered  from  bon- 
dage, and  of  having  the  service  of  the  temple 
re-established,  broke  forth  upon  them  beyond 
their  hope,  as  the  rays  of  the  sun  dart  them- 
selves through  the  clouds.   Obscurhy  also  sig- 
nifies spiritual  ignorance  and  blindness,  from 
which  God  delivers  his  people,  when  he  bestows 
upon  them  the  clear  and  saving  knowledge  of 
the  truth.,  Isa.  29.  18. 
Isa.  29. 18.  the  eyes  of  the  blind  shall  see  out  of  o. 
5.H.  10.  then  shall  thy  light  rise  in  o.  and  darkness 
53. 9.  we  wail  for  light,  but  behold  o.  for  brightness 

OBSERVATION. 

The  kingdom  of  God  cometh  notwith  observation, 

J.uke  17.  20.     That  kingdom  which  God  will 

set  up  in  the  world,  will  not  become  conspicw 

oris  and  remarkable  by  an7j  outward  splendour, 

or  worldly  pomp,  but  by  its  inwardpower  and 

efficacy  upon  the  hearts  and  minds  of  men. 

Mai.  3.  1 14.  what  profit  that  we  have  kept  hiso..^ 

Luke  17.20.the  kingdom  of  (jod  romelh  notwith  o. 

OBSERVATIONS. 
F.zod.  12.  t  42.  it  is  a  night  of  o.  unto  the  Lord 
jVeh.  13.  t  H.  niy  deeds  done  for  the  o.  thereof 

OBSERVE. 
Ezod.  12.  17.  ye  shall  o.  the  feast  of  unleavened 
bread,  fi.ir  I  brought  your  armies  out  of  the 
land  of  Egvnt,  21.  Dcut.  16.  1. 
31.  16.  0.  the  sabbath  ||  34.  22.  o.  feast  of  weeks 
34.  11.  0.  thou  that  which  I  command  thee  thit 
day,  Deut.  12.  28.  ]  24.  8. 
Lev.VJ.  26.  nor  shall  ye  use  enchantments,  o.  timei 
37.  ye  shall  o.  all  my  statutes,  2  Chron.  7.  17. 
J\'-eA.  1.  5.  Psal.  10.5.  4.5.  Eiek.  37.  24. 
JV"«m.  28.  2.  my  sacrifice  shall  ye  o.  to  offer  me 
Deut.  16. 13.  0.  the  feast  of  tabernacles  seven  dayi 
1  Kings  20.  33.  now  the  men  did  diligently  o. 
Psal.  5.  t8.  because  of  those  which  o.  me,  27.  f  11. 
54.  t  5.  he  shall  reward  evil  to  those  that  o.  me 
7]  .110.  they  that  o.  my  soul  take  counsel  together 
107.  4^3.  whoso  is  wise,  and  will  o.  these  things 
119.  34.  I  shall  o.  it  with  my  whole  heart 
I'rov.  23.  26.  and  let  thine  eyes  o.  my  ways 
■Tcr.  8.  7.  the  crane  and  swallow  o.  the  lime 
F.zek.  20.  18.  neither  o.  their  judgments  nor  defile 
IIos.  13.  7.  as  a  leopard  by  the  w  ay  will  I  o.  them 
./07I.2.8.  that  0.  lying  vanities,  forsake  their  mercies 
Jlfat.28.20.  leaching  them  to  o.  all  things  whatever 
Jlrts  16.21.  customs  not  lawful  too.  being  Romans 
21.25.  concluded  that  the  Gentiles  o.  no  such  thing 
Gal.  4.  10.  ye  o.  days,  and  months,  and  times 

1  Tim.  5.21.  then  o.  these  things  without  preferring 
See  Do. 

OBSERVED. 
Gen.  37.  11.  but  his  father  o.  the  saying 
F.zod.  12.42.  it  isa  night  to  be  much  o.  to  the  Lord 
A'H»n.l.5. 22.  have  erred,  and  noto.  commandments 
T')ciit.  33.  9.  Levi  o.  thy  word,  kept  thy  covenant 
•2  Sam.  11. 16.  when  Joabo.  city,  he  assigned  Uri.ih 

2  Kings  21.6.  Manassch  o.  times,  2  CAron.  33.  6. 
Hos.  14.  8.  I  have  heard  him,  and  o.  him 
Mark  6.  20.  for  Meroil  feared  John  and  o.  him 

10.  20.  all  these  have  I  o.  from  my  youth 

OBSERVER. 
DaU.  18. 10.  thereshiiU  not  be  found  an  o.  of  times 

OBSERVERS. 
Dent.  18.  14.  these  nations  hearkened  to  o.oftimcs 
Vs.  59. 1 10.  God  shall  let  me  sef>  my  desire  on  my  o 

OBSERVEST. 
.Job  13.  t27.  thou  0.  all  my  paths,  settest  a  print 
Isa.  42.  20.  secins  many  things,  but  thou  o.  not 

OBSERVETH. 
EccU  11.  4.  ho  that  o.  the  wind  shall  not  sow 

OBSTINATE. 
Deut.  2.  30.  the  Lord  thy  God  made  his  heart  o. 
Isa.  48.  4.  because  I  knew  that  thou  art  o 

OBTAIN. 
Gen.  Ifi-  2.  it  may  bo  I  may  o.  children  by  her 
1  Chr.  29. 1 14.  that  we  should  o.  strenfflh  to  offer 
Prov.  8.  35.  and  shall  o.  favour  of  the  Lord 
Isa.  35.  10.  they  shall  o.  joy  and  gladness,  .51.  II. 
Dan.  11.  21.  he  shall  o.  the  kingdom  by  flntterie? 
Luke  20. 35.  be  accounted  worthy  to  o.  that  world 


OFF 

Rnm.  11.  31.  ihro'  your  mercy  they  may  o.  mercy 
I  Cor.  a.  -24.  B.J  f  ua  that  ye  may  o. 
25.  liicy  do  It  to  o.  a  corruiiiiljle  crown,  but  wo 

1  J'Aess.b.  'J.  but  to  o.  salvation  by  our  L.  Jen.  Chr. 

2  'J'liii.  -2.  10.  may  w.  salvation  which  iu  m  Clir.  Jc». 
iV.-A.  4.  It),  that  we  may  o.  niurcy,  and  rind  grace 

1 1.  ;J5.  that  they  might  o.  a  butter  resurrection 
Jam.  4.  -J.  yc  kili,  Ve  desire  to  have,  a.id  cannot  o. 

OBTAINED, 
a  Chron.  2.  t  6.  but  wJio  hath  o.  strength  to  build 
»Vf/».  J  J.  0.  aTler  certain  day>  I  o.  leave  of  the  king 
AV/Zi.  ti.  !).  Ksihtr  0.  kindncas  t|  il-  she  o.  grace 
y/o.v.a.  :i:{.  have  inercy  on  her  that  had  not  o.  mercy 
Wcii  i.  17.  a:id  had  o.  part  of  this  ministry 
■.i-2.  iie.  with  a  great  sum  o.  I  this  freedom 
iiS.  Shi.  haviii"  0.  helj)  of  (i.  1  continue  to  this  day 
'J7.  13.  supposing  that  thiy  had  o.  llieir  purpose 
iivm.  II.  7.  what  thenl  Israel  hathnot  o.  wliallic 
Beeketh  for,  but  the  election  hath  o.  it 
30.  ye  liave  now  o.  mercy  through  their  unbelief 
1  Cor.  T.  -23.  as  one  that  hiitli  o.  mercy  of  the  L.ord 
Kp/i.  1.  li.  in  whom  we  have  u.  an  inheritance 

1  7'(/n.M3.I(J.inercy,because  I  did  it  igiioraiitly,IG. 
i/rb.  i.  4.  0.  a  more  excellent  name  than  they 

O.IS.  he  had  pitiently  endured,  lieo.  the  promises 
a.li.he  bath  o.  a  more  excellent  ministry  than  they 
!».  12.  having  o.  eternal  redemption  for  us 
il.  a.  by  it  tiie  ciders  «.  a  good  report,  :J9. 
4.  Abel  o.  witness  that  he  was  righteona 
:ij.  who  o.  promises,  stopped  mouths  of  lions 
il^it.±  lO.which  had  nolo. mercy, but  now  haveo. 
*  i'et.  1.  1.  that  have  o.  like  precious  faith  with  ua 
.S>«  rAVOUR. 
OBTALMNG. 

2  TAf  js.  2. 14.  to  0.  ofthc  glory  of  our  L.  Jei.  Chr. 

OCCASION. 
(•'/•n.  43. 18.  that  lie  may  seek  o.  against  us  and  fall 
Jiiitn.M.  33.  iiiuy. do  as  thou  shall  tindo.l5an;.I0.7. 

14.  4.  S^imsiiii  sought  o.  against  the  Philislincs 

S;.ya/n. 12.14.  given  great  o. to  enemies  to  blaspheme 

t.zra  7.  2U.  which  Ihou  shall  have  o.  to  bestow 

.)•>.  2.  24.  in  her  o.  who  can  turn  her  away? 

I'.-.rk.  18. 3.  shall  not  have  o.  any  more  lo  use  prov. 

j)an.  t>.  4. sought  to  find  o.  and  could  tind  noiieo.5. 

Horn.  7   3.  Bin  taking  o.  by  Ihccommiindnirnt,  11. 

14.  13.  put  not  an  o.  to  fall  in  his  brother's  way 

2  Cur.  5.  12.  we  give  you  o.  to  glory  on  our  behalf 

.■^.  8.  J  speak  by  o.  of  ihe  forwardness  of  others 

11.12.tiiat  Imaycut  offu.from  them  whichdesiieo. 

dal.  5.  in.  only  use  not  liberty  for  an  o.  to  the  flesh 

1  7'i/7i.  5.  14.  younger  give  none  o.  to  (he  adversary 

1  Jukn  2.  10.  there  is  none  o.  of  stumbling  in  him 

GCCASIOiVED. 
1  .Sam.  22.  22. 1  liave  n.  the  death  of  all  ihe  persons 

OCCASIONS. 
J)eut.  2-2.  14.  and  give  o.  of  speech  against  her,  17. 
Jul>  33.  lU.  behold,  he  tindoih  o.  against  ine 

OCCUPATION. 
Oe?i.4G.33.  shall  9ay,what  is  your  o.?47.3..^7(. 1.8. 
./lets  18.  3.  for  by  o.  they  were  tcnt-mukers 
lU.2j.whombc  called,  wiih  the  workmen  of  like  o. 

OCCUPY. 
Kzfk.  27.  9.  with  mariners  to  o.  thy  merchandise 
/,ukc  19.  13.  he  saidio  his  servants,  o.  till  I  come 

OCCUPIF.n. 
J'.rnd.  3P.  24.  the  gold  that  was  o.  for  the  work 
./uf/n'.lfi.ll.ifbind  wi:h  new  ropes  that  uev.  wereo. 
J-izr'k.  27.  16.  Syria  o.  ||  19.  Dan  and  Javan  u. 

21.  Arabia  o.'\\  22-  Sheha  o.  in  thy  t'airs 
JJch.  13.  9.  meats  not  profited  them  that  have  o. 

OCCUPIERS. 
L-.ek.  07.  27.  the  o.  of  thy  m-rchandise  shall  fall 

OCCUPIETll. 
I  Cor.  14.  16.  he  that  o.  the  room  of  the  unlearned 

OCCURRENT. 
I  A.'in''»5.  4.  there  is  neither  adversary  nor  evil  o 

ODD. 

Vum.  3.4?.  the  o.  number  of  them  is  to  be  redeemed 

ODIOUS. 

1  Chrov.  in.fi.  the  Aminonitrs  m.nde  thnmseK'CSo. 
I'rav.  30.  23.  for  an  o.  woman  when  she  is  married 

ODOUR. 
.John  12. 3.  house  wnsfilh-d  with  o.oftlie  ointment 
Phil.  4.  18.  an  o.  of  sweet  smell,  a  Baerilicc 

ODOURS, 
/.f  r.26.31  .will  not  smell  the  savour  ofyour  sweeto. 

2  Ckran.  Ift  14.  Asa  was  laid  in  a  bed  of  sweeto. 
^■«f/i.2.l2.«ix  months  with  oil  of  myrrh  and  sweeto. 
.Jrr.  34.  .V  so  slmll  thi;y  burn  o.  fur  thee  and  lament 
/>a«.2.4'?. Ihnt  they  shmild  off.T  swret  o.  to Dnniol 
Rru.  'i.  H.  havinj;  harps  and  g.ilden  viiils  full  of  o. 

13.  13.  110  man  buv'h  tli'ir  o.  and  ointments 
OFFENCE 
S. unifies,  .4ny  thintr  thai  a  man  Jlnrh  in  his  way, 
that  iitati  occasion  hi  into  slum  lilr  or  fall :  Thus 
Mo^CJ  forbids,  To  put  a  stumbling  block  {or  an 
uffriirr)  before  the  blind,  l.rv.  1(1.  14.   Ihnt  is, 
iiril.hcr  wood,  slant,  nor  nnv  thing  else  that 
may  make  him  sitimhif  or  fall.  It  was  prnphr- 
tied.  That  Cliiis'.  Jesii* should  be  for  astor.o  of 
414 


OFF 

stumbling  and  rock  of  oflence  tobotli  the  houses 
of  Israel,   Isa.    S.  14.     His    humiliation,  his 
poverty,  his  birth,  death,  and  cross,  were  rocks 
against  which  the  Jews  struck,  and  npun  which 
thaj  have  fallen  and  are  broken  ;  because  they 
could  not  be  convinced,  that  such  humble  ijuali- 
Jicaliuns  could  belong  to  the  Messiah   they  ex- 
pected.    .Hnil     the     apostle    Paul    exhorts  the 
Corinthians,  To  give  none  ofl'ence  to  Jews  or 
Gentiles,  1   Cor.  JO.  ;J2.  that  is,  jYot  tohiadtr 
them  in  their  way  to  heaven,  or  induce  thim  to 
act  icith  a  doubting  conscience,  by  an  unseason- 
able use  of  Christian  liberty. 
In  a  moral  sense,  there  is  an  active  and  passice 
scrtiiilal  or  olfenoe.     'I'hc  first  is  that  which  we 
gioc  to  others  by  our  words,  or  actions  ;  and  the 
second  is  taken  from  others,  by  seeing  their 
teil  words,  or  actions.     It  signifies,  1,1]  Wn 
impediment.  Mat.  16.  2^1.     [2]  .Sin,  Horn.  4.  25. 
[3J  Contempt,  Mat.  Id.  7. 
1  ^'am.25.31.  this  shall  be  noo.  of  heart  to  my  lord 
Isa.  ti.  14.  but  a  rock  of  o.  to  both  the  houses  of  Isr. 
//o.v..').)5.iill  theyacknowledge  their  o.andseek  me 
Mat.  16.  23.  get  behind  me,  Satan,  Uiou  art  u.to  ine 

18.  7.  woe  to  that  mull  by  whom  the  o.  cumeth 
yicts  24.  Iti.  a  conscience  void  of  o.  toward  God 
Rom.  5.  1.').  but  not  as  the  o.  so  also  is  the  free  gift, 
for  if  through  the  o.  of  one  many  be  dead,  lb. 
17.  for  if  by  one  man's  o.  death  reigned  by  one 
20.  Ihe  law  entered  that  the  o.  might  abimnd 
9.33.1  lay  in  Sinn  a  stumbling-»tone,und  rock  of  o. 
14.  20.  it  is  evil  for  that  man  who  eateth  with  o. 
I  Cor.  10.  32.  give  none  o.  in  any  thing,  2  Cor.  6.  3. 
2Cor.ll.  7.  have  I  commit. an  o.  in  abasing  myself? 
Gal.  5.  II.  then  is  the  o.  of  llie  cross  ceased 
Phil.  1.  10.  may  be  without  o.  till  the  day  of  CJhrist 
1  Pit.  2.  8.  a  rock  of  o.  to  them  which  alumble 

OFFENCES. 
Feci.  10.  4.  for  yielding  pacilicth  great  o. 
Mat.  18.  7   woe  to  the  world  becau.sc  of  o.  for  it 
must  nec-ds  be  that  o.  come,  I.ukc  17.  1. 
/Jam. 4. 25.  who  was  delivered  for  our  o.  and  raised 
5.  )6.  but  the  free  gift  is  ofniany  o.  to  justilicalioii 

16.  17.1  beseech  ynu,  mark  them  which  cause  o. 

OFFEND 

Signifies,  [1]  Tocommit  any  sin  in  thought,  irord, 
or  deed.  Jam.  3.  2.  [2]  To  draw  one  to  eoil,  or 
be  a  let  and  hiiideraitce  to  that  wliick  is  good, 
Mat.  5.  29,  30.  [3]  7'«  take  occasion  of  sinning 
when  none  i.i givrn,thus  the  Pharisees  were  of- 
fended at  Christ,  Mat.  15.  12.  that  is,  they 
iceremore  alienated  from  his  person  and  doc- 
trine. [4]  To  be  scandalized,  or  stuvililed  by 
the  example  of  another,  1  Cor.  8.  13.  [5J  To 
act  vnjvsthj,  or  injuriously,  Acts  25.  8.  [(jj 
To  tcrong,  Psal.  73.  15. 

.Toh  34.  31.  It  is  meet  to  say,  I  will  not  o.  any  more 

Ps.  73. 15. 1  should  o.  against  general.of  Ihy  cliildr. 
119.  165.  thit  love  thy  law,  nothingshall  o.  Ihem 

./f  r.2. 3.  all  that  devour  him  shall  o.  evil  shall  come 
.50.  7.  and  their  adversaries  said,  we  o.  not 

I/os.i.  15.  tho'Israel  playtheharlot,let  iiotJudah  o. 

//ab.  1.  11.  and  he  shall  pass  over  and  o.  imputing 

Jifat.  5.  29.  if  tliv  right  eyo  o.  thee,  pluck  it  out 
30.  if  thy  band'o.  thee,  18.  8, 9.  Mark  9. 43, 45, 47 
13.  41.  they  shall  gather  all  things  that  o. 

17.  27.  lest  we  sliuukl  o.  them,  so  to  the  sea 
18.6.whoso  0.  one  of  the.-e,  MarkO.  42.  /-H/.rl7.2 

John  6.  01.  he  said  to  ihem,  doth  this  o.  you  ? 

1  CJor.  8.  13.  if  meat  make  thy  brother  o.  lest  ho  o. 
.lam.  2.  10.  yet  o.  in  one  point,  hi;  is  guilty  of  all 

3.2.  in  many  things  we  o.  all,  if  any  man  o,  not 

offeni)i;d. 

Cev.  20.  9.  and  what  have  1  o.  Iliee  ?  .Jrr.  37.  18. 
40.  1.  the  but!er  and  baker  had  o.  tlieii  lord 

2  Kinis  \x.  14.  K;iying,  I  have  o.  return  from  me 
2CAron. 28.13.  we  have  o.  ugaiiiBl  the  Lord  already 
F.zra  10.  t  13.  for  wo  have  grimily  o.  in  lliiM 
Prov-  18.  19.  a  brother  o.  is  h»rder  to  be  won  tlian 
F.zrk.  25.  12.  because  Edoni  liaili  greatly  o. 
//«j».  13.  I.  when  F.phrnim  o.  in  Baal,  lie  died 
J(/aM1.6.bleBsedishrwhc»ilmllnotheo./,w;r7.23 

13.  21.  w  li"'n  tribiilaliiiii  or  persecution  nrisoth  be- 
cause of  Ihi!  w  ord,  by  and  by  he  is  o.  Mark  4. 17. 
57.  nnd  they  were  0.  in  him,  Mark  C.  3. 
15.  12.  the  Pbnrisees  were  o.  nfter  they  heard 
21.10.tlKn  shall  ninny  be  o.aml  betray  one  another 
26.  31.  all  ye  shall  be  o.  because  of  me  thisnicht 
33.  Peter  said,  thniijh  nil  men  shall  he  o.  ne- 
criuse  of  thee,  yel  will  1  never  bu  o. 
Mark  14.  2'.). 
.Mm  IR.  1.  I  have  spoken,  Ihnt  yo  should  not  heo 
.lets  25.  R.  nor  yel  atfuinsl  Cesar  have  I  o.  at  all 
A.'(»in.l4.21.wheroby  thy  brother  is  o.  or  made  weak 
2  Cor.  II.  29.  who  is  n.  nnd  I  hum  not? 

OFFE.N'DEK. 
Isn.  09.  21.  Ihnt  make  a  mnii  nn  o.  for  a  word 
y/c«.s25.11.ifl  be  nn  n.nr  have  rominilted  any  thing 

OFFENDERS. 
IKingsX.m.l  and  myson  Solom.tliall  bo  eountodo 


OFF 

OFFER. 

F.zod.  22.  29.  not  delay  to  o.  the  first  of  the  fruiU 
2;<.  18.  thou  shall  not  o.  the  blood,  34.  25. 
2bi.36.lhou  shult  o.every  day  a  bullock  for  atonem. 
lis.  thou  shall  c.  on  altar  two  lambs  ollirst  year 
39.  one  lamb  thou  shall  o.  in  the  morning,  and 
the  other  lamb  at  even,  41.  A'um.  28.  4,  b, 
30.  9.  ye  shall  o.  no  Btriuige  incense  thereou 
35.  24.  every  one  that  did  o.  silver  and  biass 
y^f  0.1.3.  0.  a  male  without  blemish,  3.6  1 22. 19,20. 

2.  I.  and  when  any  will  o.  a  meat  olleriiig  lu  the 

Lor.l,  14.  I  23.  16.  jV«?n.  6.  U 

13.  with  all  thine  offerings  Uiou  shall  o.  sail 

3.  l.if  he  0.  a  peace-otferiiig  , he  shall  o.  it  without 

blemish  before  the  Lord,  6.  |  9.  2.  |  19.  5. 

7.  if  he  0.  a  lainb  for  his  oil'ering,  14.  12. 
12.  the  goat  he  shall  u.  before  the  Lord 

4. 14. congregation  o.a  young  bullock,  A'uin.15.24. 
.5.  8.  0.  that  for  Ihe  siii-olfering  first,  U.  7. 
6. 14.  thesons  of  Aaron  shall  o.  it  before  the  Lord, 
22.  I  14.  19.  I  15.  15,  30.  JVam.li.ll. 

7.  3.  he  shall  o.  of  it  all  the  fat  thereof 
12.  if  he  0.  il  I'or  a  thanksgiving,  22.  29. 

38.  Israel  to  o.  their  oblations  to  the  Lord 
17.7.  ihey  shall  no  moreo.  their  sacrifices  lodevila 
9.  bringclh  il  not  lo  the  door  to  o.  itlo  iheLoid 
19.  6.  il  shall  be  eaien  ihe  same  day  ye  o.  it 

21.  6.  and  the  brgad  of  their  God  they  doo. 

21.  that  hath  a  blemish  shall  not  come  nigh  too. 

22.  23.  thou  mayest  o.  for  a  free-will  offering 
JV"u7«.  7.  11.  they  o.  their  otfering  each  liriuce 

8.  11.  Aaron  shall  o.  the  Levites,  13,  15. 

9.  7.  why  are  we  kepi  back,  thai  we  may  noto.? 

15.  7.  shall  0.  the  third  part  of  a  bin  of  wine 

14.  if  a  stranger  will  o.  an  ottering  made  by  fire 
19.  shall  0.  a  heavc-otlering,  18.  24,  26,  23,29. 

16.  40.  that  no  stianger  come  near  to  o.  iucense 
28.  2.  shall  yc  observe  to  o.  to  me  in  their  seaton 

11.  in  ihe  beginnings  of  your  monllisye  shall  o. 

24.  nflcr  iMs  manner  ye  shall  o.  daily  the  meat 

J)eut.  12. 14.  the  place  llieLd.  shall  choose,ihere  o. 

18.  3.  shall  be  the  [iriest's  due  fioni  Ihem  ihfit  o. 

33.19.shall  o. sacrifices  of  iiglileoirtiie)-s,/'suZ.  4.5. 
Jadg.  3.  18.  w  hen  he  made  an  end  to  o.  the  present 

16.  23.  to  0.  a  great  sacrifice  lo  Dagon  their  god 
1  Nam.  1.  21.  Elkaiiah  went  up  to  o.  to  the  Lord 

2.19.1Iannnli  came  with  her  husband  lo  o.sacrifiea 
28.  did  I  choose  him  my  priest  lo  w.  on  mine  altar 
2.Som.24.12. 1  o.  thee  three  things,  1  CAron.21. 10. 
I  Kings  13.  2.  on  thee  shall  o.  priests  of  high  place* 
1  Chron.  29. 14.  should  be  able  to  o.  so  willingly,- 17. 
2CA7-.24. 14. whereof  weie  made  vessels  to  o.  wiihal 
Ezra  6.  10.  to  o.  sacrificesof  sweet  savours  lo  God 
Psal.  16.  4.  drink  ofTerings  of  blood  will  I  not  o 

27.  G.  thereliiru  will  I  o.  in  his  tabernacle  sacrificed 

50.  14.  0.  to  God  iliank.sgiving,  pay  iliy  vowsioL. 

51.  19.  llien  shall  tht-y  o.  bullocks  on  thine  altar 
(ili.lS.I  will  0.  to  thee  burnl-sacrifices  and  fallings 
72.  10.  the  kings  of  Slieba  and  Seba  shall  o.  gilli 
116.  17.  I  will  o.  the  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving 

fsn.  .57.  7.  Ibiiher  wenlest  Ihnii  up  lo  u.  suirillee 
.Jer.  ]  1.  12.  cry  to  the  gods  to  w  lioiii  they  o.  incense 
Kick.  20.  31.  when  ye  o.  your  gil"ls,  ye  pullule 
44.7.when  ye  o.  my  bread,  ihe  fiit  and  the  blood 

15.  Ihey  shall  o.  to  me  Ihe  fat  and  the  blood 
45.1.  ye  shall  o.  an  oblation  to  the  Lord, 13.  |  48.  9 

/^u?(.2.4G.  that  they  should  o.  an  oblniion  to  Dnniel 
f.'os.  9.  4.  they  shiill  not  o.  wine-offeiings  lo  Lord 
.■?7Hos4.5.  o.a  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving  with  leavtu 
Nag.  2.  14.  that  which  they  o.  there  is  unclean 
jllal.  1.  7.  ye  o.  polluted  bread  upon  mine  altar 

8.  if  ye  o.  the  iihiiil,  o.  it  now  lo  thy  governor 
3.  3.  o.  to  Ihe  Lord  nn  oflVringin  righlenu.«nesa 

Mat.  5.  24.  and  then  come  and  o.  Ihv  gill 
P.4.o."ift  Mos.eoiiiiiianiled,jVii/-*  1.44. /.iiAf 5.14. 

I.uke  6.  29.  smiteth  on  one  cheek,  o.  also  the  other 
ll.l2.ifsliall  ask  an  egg,  will  heo.  him  a  scorpionT 

1  7'im.  3.  t  3.  not  ready  lo  o.  wrong,  as  one  in  wina 

///■AS. I.  Ihnt  he  may  o.  bothgiftsand  sacrifi.fnr  sin 
3.  he  oui'ht  for  himself  to  o.  lor  fins 

7.  27.  needeth  not  lo  o.  sacri.  fiist  for  his  own  siiii 

8.  3. (every  high  piiist  isordaineil  too.  it  is  ol'ni-- 

cessily  that  this  man  have  Bomewhnt  also  lo  o. 

9.  25.  nor  vet  that  he  should  o.  himself  oflen 
13.  15.  bv  liiin  let  us  o.  sacrifice  ofiirai'e  to  Hon 

I  Pit. '2.  5.  by  .fesus  Christ  too.  spirlliinl«acrifire» 
/icu.  8.  3.  he  should  o  ilwilh  prayers  of  all  saint* 

Ste  Bl'RNT  OIFKRINOS. 

OFFERED. 
<7cti.31.  5-1.  Jacob  o.  sacrifice  on  themouirt,46. 1 
I'.T.od.  .35.  22.  every  man  o.  an  ofltrins  of  gold 
/.(■11.  9.  15.  he  slew  Ihe  goni,  nnd  o.  it  for  sin 

10.  I.  Nndttbiinil  Ahihiio.  strnnee  fire,  nnd  fire  du- 
voured  them  and  thoydied,l6.1.Auni.3.4. 1 26.61. 

JWm.  7.  2.  the  princes  o.  fiir  the  dedication,  10. 
8  21.  Anron  o.lheni  ns  nn  otTering  before  the  Lord 
IR.  35.  two  hundred  nnd  fillv  men  Ihul  o.  iiirense 
22.  40.  Bnlnk  o.  o^en  nnd  sheep,  23.  2,  4,  14,  30. 

.hi'Ig.  5.  2.  Ihe  jx-ople  willin;.'ly  o.  Ihemsilvi  »,  9. 
;3.  19.  Manonh  look  a  kid  and  o.  it  un  a  rock 


OFF 

Som  1.  4.  when  tho  time  wns  tliat  Elkanali  a. 

2.  13.  when  any  o.  the  priest's  servant  came 
S  Sam  6.  17.  David  o.  peace-olFuriiigs,  24.  25. 
1  Kings  8.  C2.  Solomon  and  all  Isr.iel  v.  63. 

12.  32.  Jeroboam  o.  in  Betli-el  to  tlie  calves,  33, 

22.  43.  the  people  n.  yet  in  the  high-places 
2Ar(«^rs3.20.\vlien  niHat-oft'cring  was  o.  water  came 

1().  12.  Aha/,  approached  to  tho  altar  and  o. 

1  (Aran.  29.  6.  the  captains  with  the  rulers  o. 

9.  the  people  rejoiced  for  that  they  o.  willingly 

2  Chrun   !.■>.  11.  Asa  o.  to  the  Lord  of  the  spod 
17.  IC.  Amaziah  willingly  o.  himself  to  the  Lord 

F.zrn  1.  6.  besides  all  that  was  willingly  o. 
2.  G3.  some  of  lathers  0.  freely  for  the  houflCofG. 
fi.  VL  0.  at  the  dedication  of  this  hoti.se  of  God 
7. 15.  his  coUDScllois  freely  o.  to  the  God  of  Israel 

8.  25.  the  king  and  all  Israel  there  present  had  o. 
10.  19.  they  o.  a  ram  of  the  flock  for  their  trespass 

.WA.  1 1.2.  willingly  a.  themselves  tu  dwell  at  Jerus. 

12.  43.  that  day  lliev  o.  great  sacritircs  and  rcjoic. 
Ira.  57.  6.  to  thcin  ihou  hast  o.  a  meat-offerin» 

CG.  3..ofiere(li  an  oblation,  as  if  he  o.  swine's  blood 
J>;r.  32.  2i).  they  have  o.  incense  unto  Baal 
F.zek.  20.  28.  tliey  o.  there  their  sacrifices 
Dan.  11.  IS.  cause  the  reproach  o.  by  him  to  cease 
.^rno.?  .5.2.i.have  ye  0.  to  me  sacrifices  and  ufPeringa'! 
Jonah  1.  16.  tho  men  feared,  and  o.  a  sacrifice  to 
the  Lord,  and  made  vows 
Mai.  1. 11.  in  every  place  incense  be  o.  to  my  name 
.iets  a.  18.  Simon  o.  them  money,  saying,  give  me 

J.').  20.  abstain  from  merits  o.  to  idols,  21.  25. 

21 .26.an  offering  should  be  o.for  every  one  of  them 

1  O/r.  8.  1.  things  o.  to  idols,  4.  7,  10.  ]  10.  10,  28. 
Ph'l.  2.  17.  if  I  he  n.  on  the  service  of  your  faith 

2  Tim.  A.  6.  for  I  am  now  ready  to  bfe  o.  the  time 
Ileb.Jt.  1.  when  ho  had  o.  up  prayers  and  siipplicat. 

7.  27«  this  he  did  once,  when  ho  o.  up  himself 

9.  7.  not  without  blood,  which  he  o.  for  himself 
9.  were  0.  gifts  1|  14.  o.  himself  without  spot  to  G. 
23.  Christ  wns  once  o.  to  bear  the  sins  of  many 

11. 4.  by  faith  .\bel  o.  to  G.  a  more  excellent  sacr. 
17.  bv  fiiih,  ,\brahaiji,  when  tried,  u.  up  Isaac 

Jam.  2. 21.  Abraham  justified  by  works  when  he  o. 
OFFERETH. 

T.cp.  6.  26.  the  priest  that  o.  it  fur  sin  shall  eat  it 
'.  18.  neither  shall  it  be  imputed  to  him  llial  o.  it 
2).  a  for  he  o.  the  bread  of  lliy  God,  shall  be  holy 

r.vni.  .'50.  23.  whoso  o.  praise  glorifieth  me,  to  him 

fiu.(J<5.3.he  that  o  oblation  as  ifoifered  swine's  flesh 
OFFERING. 

The  Hebrews  had  several  kinds  of  offerings, 
ickick  they  presented  at  the  tnhcrnnclc  and 
temple.  Some  were  free-will  uffiring:i,  and 
others  were  of  obli<Tntion.  The  fist  fruits, 
the  Tenths,  the  S i n- offer ini^s,  were  of  nhliga- 
tioH ;  the  Peace-offerings,  Vujcs,  off/  rings  nf 
wine,  oil,  bread,  and  other  things  which  were 
viade  to  the  temple,  or  to  the  viinistcrs  of  the 
Jjord,  v>ere  offiriugs  nf  Jecntion.  The  He- 
brews called  all  offerings  in  general,  Corhan 
But  the  offerings  of  I/read,  salt,  fruits,  and 
li'juors,  as  trine,  and  oil,  which  were  presented 
to  the  fmplc,  they  called  Mim^ha.  The  offer- 
ings of  grain,  meal,  bread,  cakes,  fruits,  wine, 
salt,  oil,  were  common  in  the  temple  and  taber- 
nacle. Sometimes  these  offerings  were  alone, 
and  sometimes  they  accompanied  the  sacrifices. 
Tliere  were  five  sorts  of  these  offerings,  called 
j»  Hebrew,  Mincha.     1.  Fme  fluur  or  vical. 

2.  Cakes  of  sci^eral  sorts,  baked  in  an  uveii. 

3.  Cakes  baked  upon  a  plate.  4.  ..Another  sort 
of  cakes  baked  upon  a  gridiron,  or  plate  with 
holes  in  it.  5.  The  first-fruits  of  the  new  corn, 
which  were  offered  either  pure  and  irithuul 
■mixture,  or  roasted  or  parched  in  the  ear,  or 
out  of  the  ear. 

Tlie  cakes  were  kneaded  with  oil-olitje,  or  fried 
in  oil  in  a  pan,  or  only  dipped  in  oil  after  tlinj 
were  baked.  T/ie  bread  offered  to  te  prrsented 
upon  the  altar,  was  to  be  without  leaiien,  fur 
learen  was  never  offered  upon  tlie,  altar,  iinr 
with  the  sncrifices ;  partly  to  put  them  in  mind 
of  their  deliverance  out  of  Egypt,  when  they 
were  forced  through  haste  to  take  away  their 
meal  iinleaBened ;  partly  to  signify  what  Christ 
would  be,  and  what  Ihry  should  be,  pure  and 
free  from  nil  error  in  the  faith  and  worship 
of  Clod,  and  from  all  hypocrisy  and  malice,  or 
wickedness,  all  which  ore  signified  by  leaven, 
JUat.  16.  12.  Mark  8.  15  1  Cur.  5.  8.  (hd.  5.  9. 

The  offerings  now  mentioned  7ijere  appointed  in 
favour  of  the  poorer  sort,  who  could  not  go  to 
the  charge  nf  sacrificing  animals:  .Ind  even 
those  that  offered  living  victims  were  not  ez- 
cnsed  from  giring  meal,  wine,  and  salt,  tchich 
was  to  go  along  with  the  greater  sacrifices: 
.^nd  also  those  that  offered  only  oblations  of 
bread,  or  of  tneal,  offered  also  oil,  incense,  salt, 

.and  wine,  which  were  in  a  manner  the  season- 
ing of  it:  In  all  thy  offcrinrs  thou  shalt  offer 
415 


OFF 

Bait,  Lev.i.  13.  noting,  incorruptlon,  or  sound- 
ness of  mind,  and  sincerity  of  grace,  which  in 
scripture  is  signified  by  salt,  Mark  9.  49.  Col 
4.  t).  and  which  is  necessary  in  all  them  that, 
would  offer  an  acceptable  offering  to  (lod;  or 
in  testimony  of  that  communion  which  they 
had  with  God  in  these  exercises  of  his  worship; 
salt  being  the  great  symbol  of  friendship  in 
nil  nations  and  ages.  The  priest  in  wailing 
reecired  the  offerings  from  the  hand  of  him 
that  offered  them,  laid  a  part  of  them  upon  the 
altar,  and  reserved  the  rest  for  his  own  sub- 
.■tistencc:  That  was  his  right  as  a  minister  of 
the  J^ord:  J^othing  was  quite  burnt  up  but 
the  incejise,  of  which  the  priest  kept  back  no- 
thing for  his  own  share. 

When  an  Israelite  offered  a  loaf  to  the  priest,  or 
a  whole  cake,  the  priest  broke  the  loaf  or  cake 
into  tioo  parts,  setting  that  part  aside  that  he 
reserved  to  himself,  and  broke  the  other  into 
crumbs,  poured  oil  upon  it,  salt,  iciiie,  and  in- 
cense, and  spread  the  whole  upon  liii  fire  of  the 
altar  :  If  these  offerings  were  accompanied  by 
an  animal  for  a  sacrifice,  it  was  ail  thrmcn 
upon  the  victim,  to  be  consumed  along  with  it. 

If  these  offerings  were  the  ears  of  new  corn, 
either  of  wheat  or  barley,  these  ears  were 
parched  at  the  fire,  or  in  thefiame,  and  rubbed 
in  the  hand,  and  then  offered  to  the  priest  in  a 
vessel;  over  which  he  put  oil,  incense,  wine, 
and  sait,  and  then  burnt  il  upon  the  altar, 
first  having  taken  as  much  of  it  as  of  right 
belonged  to  himself. 

The  greatest  part  of  these  offerings  were  volun- 
tary, and  of  pure  devotion.  But  when  an 
animal  was  offered  in  sacrifice,  they  were  nut 
at  liberty  to  omit  these  offerings :  Every  thing 
was  to  be  supplied,  that  was  to  accompany  th, 
sacrifice,  and  which  served  as  a  seasoning  to 
the  victim. 

The  Hebrews  had  properly  but  three  sorts  of 
sacrifices,  which  were,  the  Buint-oflering,  nr 
Holocaust ;  the  Sacrifice  for  sin,  or  the  Sacri- 
fice of  Expiation  ;  and  the  Pacific  sacrifice,  or 
Sacrifice  of  Thanksgiving. 

The  Holocaust  was  offered  and  quite  burnt  vp 
on  the  altar  of  burnt-offerings,  without  any 
reserve  to  the  person  thai  gave  the  victim,  or 
to  the  priest  that  killed  and  sacrificed  it ;  only 
the  priest  had  the  benefit  of  the  skin  :  for  be- 
fore the  sacrifices  were  offered  to  the  Lord, 
their  skins  were  flayed  off,  and  their  feci  and 
entrails  were  washed.  Lev.  7.  8. 

The  sacrifice  for  sin,  or  for  expration,  or  the  pu 
rifieatiun  of  a  man  who  had  fallen  into  any 
offence  against  the  law,  was  not  entirely  con- 
sumed upon  the  fire  of  the  altar.  JVothing  of 
it  returned  to  him  that  had  given  it,  but  the 
sacrificing  priest  had  a  share  in  it,  and  these 
are  the  particulars  that  were  observed  in  this 
case:  ff  it  were  the  high-priest  who  had  of- 
fended through  ignorance,  he  offered  a  calf 
without  blemish;  He  brought  it  to  the  door  of 
the  tabernacle,  put  his  hand  upon  the  head  of 
the  sacrifice,  confessed  his  sin,  asked  pardon 
for  it,  killed  and  stuck  the  calf,  carried  its 
blood  into  the  tabernacle,  with  his  finger  made 
seven  aspersions  towards  the  vail  that  sepa- 
rated the  holy  place  from  the  sanctunry,  put  a 
little  of  this  blood  xipon  ike  altar  of  incense, 
and  afterwards  poured  out  all  the  rest  at  the 
fool  of  the  altar  of  burnt-offerings:  jlfter 
this  he  took  away  the  fat  that  covered  the  kid- 
neys, the  .liver,  and  the  bowels;  he  pi't  the 
whole  upon  the  fire  of  the  altar  of  bunU-sacri- 
fires ;  and  as  to  the  skin,  the  feet,  the  bowels, 
and  the  flesh  of  the  sacrifice,  he  caused  them 
til  be  burnt  out  of  the  camp,  in  a  clean  place, 
where  they  used  to  put  the  ashes  that  were 
taken  away  from  the  altar  of  burnt-sacrifices. 
Lev.  4.  3,  4,  ,W. 

Ff  it  were  the  whole  people  that  had  offended, 
they  loere  to  offer  a  enlf  in  like  manner:  The 
etdirs  brought  it  to  the  door  nf  the  tabernacle, 
put  their  hands  upon  its  head,  and  confessed 
their  offence  ;  after  which  the  priest  stuck  the 
victim,  and  did  with  it  as  has  been  said  of 
the  sin-offering  of  the  high  priest,  Lev.  4.  1.1, 
14,  cW. 
If  a  prince  or  ruler  had  offended,  he  offered  a 
goat,  brought  it  tn  the  door  of  the  tabernacle, 
put  his  hand  upon  its  head,  and  confessed  his 
sin.  The  priest  sacrificed  it,  put  nf  the  blond 
of  the  victim  upon  the  horns  of  the  nltnr  of 
burnt-offerings,  poured  out  the  rest  of  the 
blood  nt  the  bottom  of  the  savre  altar,  and  the 
rest  of  the  sacrifice  was  for  himself :  He  was 
obliged  to  eat  it  in  the  tabernacle,  and  was  not 
allowed  to  carry  any  of  it  without,  Lev.  4.  22, 
23,  i-c. 


OFF 

Tf  it  was  only  a  private  person  who  had  com- 
mitted an  off'-nce,  he  offered  a  shiep,  or  a  ehe- 
gnat  without  blemish.  If  he  wot  not  of  ability 
to  offer  a  slieep  or  a  she-gnat,  he  offered  two 
turtles,  or  two  young  pigeons,  one  fur  his  sin, 
the  other  fnr  a  burnt-uffrring.  tint  if  he  wax  . 
so  poor,  as  that  he  could  not  afford  to  offer  "' 
either  of  these,  he  might  offer  the  tenth  part 
of  an  ephah  of  meal,  that  is,  a  Utile  more 
than  a  gallon,  without  oil  or  spice.  He  pre- 
sented It  to  the  priest,  who  took  a  handful  nf 
it,  and  threw  it  upon  the  fire,  and  the  rest  ions 
_  for  himself,  I.CV.  5.  6,  7,  .W. 
'The  Peacc-ot^ering  was  offered  to  return  thnnhs 
to  fiod  for  his  benefits,  or  to  ask  favours  from 
him,  or  to  satiny  any  OJie's  private  iU><ulion, 
or  for  the  honour  of  Oud  only.  Th'  Israelilm 
offered  them  when  they  pleased,  and  th^rc  was 
no  law  that  obliged  them  to  it.  It  was  free 
to  them  to  present  what  animals  they  would, 
provided  they  were  such  as  it  was  allowed  them 
to  sacrifice.  In  these  sacrifices  no  distinrtio't 
was  observed  either  of  the  age  or  sez  of  4/te 
victim,  as  was  required  in  the  burnt  sacrifices, 
and  the  sacrifice  for  sin,  the  law  only  required 
that  their  victims  s/iould  be  without  blemish, 
I-ev.  3.  1.  He  that  presented  them  came  to 
the  door  of  the  tabernacle,  put  his  hand  vpun 
the  head  of  the  victim  and  killed  it.  The  priest 
poured  out  tlie  blood  ajioiit  the  altar  of'burnl- 
vfferings  ;  burnt  upon  the  fire  nf  the  altar  the 
fat  which  covers  the  kidneys,  the  liver,  and 
bowels ;  and  if  ii  were  a  lamb,  or  a  ram,  he 
added  to  it  the  rump  of  the  animnl,  which  in. 
that  country  is  always  very  fat.  Before  these 
things  were  set  in  ordir  upon  the  fire  of  the. 
altar,  tlie  priest  put  them  into  the  hands  of  the, 
person  that  provided  the  victim,  then  made  him 
lift  them  up  on  high,  and  wave  them  towards 
tlie  four  quarters  of  the  world,  the  priest  sup- 
porting and  directing  his  hands.  The  brea.it 
and  the  right  shoulder  belonged  to  the  priest 
that  performed  the  service  ;  all  the  rest  nf  the 
sacrifice  belonged  to  him  that  presejited  it  to 
the  priest,  and  he  mi"ht  eat  it  with  his  family 
and  friends,  as  any  other  meat. 
Those  sacrifices,  in  inhieh  they  set  at  liberty  a 
bird,  or  goat,  were  not  properly  Sacrifices; 
because  there  was  no  shedding  of  blood,  (inii 
the  victim  remained  alive  and  sound.  It  was 
thus  they  set  at  liberty  the  sparrow  that  was 
offered  for  the  purification  of  a  leper,  or  of  a 
house  spotted  with  leprosy.  They  presented 
tn  the  priest  a  couple  (»/ sparrows,  trr  two  el/aii 
birds,  with  a  bundle  7nade  up  of  eedarwnod 
and  hyssop,  and  tied  icith  a  scarlet  string  : 
The  priest  killed  one  df  the  birds  over  run- 
ning water,  which  was  in  a  cleoH  rissel  nf 
fresh  earth ;  afterwards,  tying  the  living 
sparrow  to  the  bundle  of  cedar  and  hyssop, 
with  the  tail  turned  towards  the  handle  of  the 
v.'sscl,  he.  plunged  it  in  th.-,  water  drniehcd 
with  the  blond  of  the  first  sparrow,  .tprinklrd 
the  leper  or  the  house  with  it,  then  set  the  liv- 
ing sparrow  at  liberty,  and  let  it  go  where  it 
ph-m^ed.  Lev.  14.  4,  5,  ,W. 
The  other  sort  of  animal  that  was  set  at  llhrrly 
was  a  goat;  atid  this  is  the  occasion  upon 
w.hii-h  il  tens  done:  On  the  day  of  solemn  ex- 
piation, the  mnltitiidc  of  the  children  nf  Israel 
presented  tn  the  high-priest  of.  the  door  of  the 
tiihrriiiiele  two  goats  fur  a  sln-ofreriiig.  The 
high-priest  then  cast  lots  upon  (he  two  goats 
which  should  be  sncrifeed  tn  the  Lorif,  and 
which  s'iould  be  set  at  lihrriy,  or  be  the  Scape- 
goat, the  Azazel,  as  the  Hehrews  call  it.  He 
that  was  determined  by  lot  to  be  sacrificed, 
was  put  to  death,  and  nffr-red  for  the  sins  of 
thepenjilc:  He  that  was  to  be  set  at  liberty 
was  brought  alive  before  the  Lord.  The  high- 
priest  said  over  him  certain  prayers,  laid  his 
two  hands  upon  his  head,  confissed  the  sins 
of  the  whole  congregation,  charged  therewith 
the  head  of  the  goat  icith  impr'caiions,  then 
sent  him  into  the  wilderness  by  a  man  op- 
pointed  for  that  office.  Lev.  16.  5,  i-c.  Tho 
scape-goat  did  bear  upon  him  all  their  initjui- 
tje?,  to  a  land  not  inl.abifcij.  Both  the  birds 
and  goats  typified  Christ;  those  that  w-re 
killed  prefigured  his  death,  and  those  that 
were  saved  aline  his  resurrection. 
Such  were  the  sacrifices  of  Ihy  Hebrews :  Sneri. 
ficeg  very  imperfect,  and  oHogelhrr  InenpabU 
of  themselves  to  purify  the  d  filem'vts  nf  the 
sovl.  The  apostle  Paul  has  comprehended  the 
sacrifices  and  the  other  reremnnies  of  the  law, 
under  the  character  nf  weak  nnd  beggarly  <>|p- 
ments,  (ral.  4.  9.  Thrj/  represented  grace  ttna 
purity,  but  they  did  nnt  enmrrnnicate  it.  TTtey 
convinced  the  tinner  of  thi  necs.'l'i'  thai  it»9 
I 


OFF 

tncumbent  on  him,  to  purify  himself,  and  of  a 
taliitftiction  tu  be  iiiaUe  tu  (iud;  but  thry  did 
not  iiiij/art  grace  tu  him.  Hut  all  these  tjacri- 
nccs  were  no  uther  than  prophecies  and  figures 
of  Christ  Jesus,  the  true  CliriHiian  SiuriH'c, 
which  eminently  includes  all  the  virtues  and 
qualities  of  the  othi  r  »;\ctif\F,ca  \  being  at  the 
iame  time  an  Hulucaust,  a  Sacrifice  fur  Sin, 
and  a  Sacrifice  ol' TliaKk.iyiviiig ;  but  icilh 
this  difference,  that  it  contains  the  whvlr 
rubitatice  and  ejjicacy,  uf  which  the  ancient 
sacrifices  were  only  the  shadow  and  reprcscn- 
taltoK. 

Ccn.  i.  3.  Cain  brought  an  o.  unto  the  Lord 
4.  the  Lonl  had  resjiecl  lo  Abel  and  lo  liis  o. 

£rod.25. 2.  bring  me  an  o.  ofe  very  man,  take  inyo. 
3.  this  is  the  u.  uHiich  ye  shail  lake,  'X>.  3. 

30.  )3.  H  halt' shekel  shall  be  the  o.  ul'the  Lord 
15. a  o.lo  iheL.lomako  atonement  for  your  souls 

J.en.  1.  2.  ye  shall  briii^  your  <;.  oCthe  cattle 

14.  o.  'M  Lord  be  of  lowls  ||  2.  I.  o.  of  tine  flour 
2.  ILnjmcato.  shall  be  made  with  leaven 
y.  2.  he  shall  lay  his  hand  on  the  head  of  his  o.  8. 
7.  if  he  otler  a  lamb  for  his  o.  .Vura.  G.  14. 

12.  and  if  his  o.  be  a  goal,  4.  23,  28. 

(j.  20.  this  is  the  o.  of  Aaron  and  of  his  sons 
7.  It),  if  his  0.  be  a  vow,  or  a  volliiilary  o. 
JS'um-  5.  15.  an  o.  of  jealousy,  an  o.   >f  memorial 

7.  10.  the  princes  oll'ered  their  o.  beK  'e  the  allar 
II.  they  shall  offer  their  o.  each  prince  on  hisday 

8.  11.  shall  ofljr  Lcvites  before  the  L.  for  an  o.21. 
!•.  13.  the  0.  of  the  Lord  in  his  appointed  season 
I'i.  15.  Moses  said,  respect  not  thou  their  o. 

1  .Saw.  2.  211.  wherefore  kick  ye  at  mine  o.? 

3. 14.  shall  not  be  purged  with  sacrifice  nor  o. 

26.1'J.  hear  the  words  of  thy  servant,  if  thcL.have 
stirred  thee  op  against  me,  let  hiiu  accept  an  u. 
1  h'ingsKM'i.  prophesied  till  o.  of  evening  sacrifice 
1  Chron.  lf>.  2i>;  bring  on  o.  and  c-oine,  f'sal.'M.  8. 
JVelt.  10.  39.  Israel  shall  bring  the  o.  of  the  corn 
y.'((i.43.23.lhave  notcaused  thee  to  serve  wii'.i  ano. 

53.  10.  thou  shult  make  his  soul  an  o.  for  sin 

(jli.  20.  they  sh.ill  bring  your  breihron  for  an  o. 
F.'.rk.  20.2^.  they  presented  provocation  of  their  o. 
Zz-pA.S.IO.thc daughter  oftiiy  dispersed  bring  inyo. 
^Iiil.  I.  10.  nor  will  I  accept  an  o.  at  your  hand 

13.  thus  ye  hrnnghl  an  o.  should  1  accept  this? 

2.  I  J.  that  ho  rejardeth  not  the  o.  any  more 

3.  3.  offer  to  the  Lord  an  o.  in  righteousness 
Aom.  1 5. 16.  that  the  o.  up  of  Gentiles  be  acceptable 
J-'./ih.  5.  2.  an  o.  and  a  sacrifice  to  God  for  us 
Hrb.  10.  5.  sacrifice  and  o.  thou  wouldest  not,  8. 

lO.fhrough  iheo.ofthe  body  of  Jesus  once  for  all 
14. by  one  o.  he  hath  perfected  for  ever  sanctified 
IS.wberc  remission  i>,  there  is  no  more  o.  for  sin 
See  BfR.sT,  Drink,  Frkk. 
Meavr-Oh'h'ElllNG. 
/Tiorf.  29.  27.  Banctify  the  shoulder  of  the  Aennco. 
J,er.7.  14.  outof  thrr  whole  oblation  for  a  heuve-o. 
Jfani.  15.  19.  ye  shall  offer  up  a  heave-o.  20. 
21.  of  first  of  doujh  give  a  hcarc-o.  to  the  Lord 
IH.  24.  the  tithes  which  they  offer  as  a  heareo. 
28.  give  the  Lord's  heave-o.  to  Aaron  the  priest 

31.  2!).  give  it  toElcazar  for  a  hearc-o.  of  the  Lord 
4L  the  tribute  which  was  the  Lord's  Arari^-o. 

ib'ee  Made,  Maxk,  Fikk,  \\vv.ni- Offering. 

Pencr  OFFKRING. 

Lev.  3. 1.  ifoblation  he  sacrifice  nfpcacc-o.3,  6,9. 

iV7/-(lFKP:KlNG. 
Axorf.Sn.  14.  the  flc»h  of  hiilh.ck  shall  thou  burn, 
it  IS  a  .oin-o.  Lev.  4.  21,  24.  |  5.  'J,  II,  12. 
30.  10.  the  blood  of  the  sino.  of  alonemciita 
Lit.  4.  3.  let  him  bring  a  young  bullock  without 
blemish  for  a  sino.  16.  3,  27.  JVum.  8.  8. 
2.5.  the  priest  shall  take  of  the  blood  of  sin-o.  5.!*. 
2'J.shall  lay  his  hand  on  the  head  iifthe  .vin-o.33. 
slay  thf.iino.inthc  place  of  the  burnt-offering 
32.  if  he  briiig  a  lamb  for  a  sino.  A'«m.  6.  14. 
S.  6.  ho  shall  bring  a  lamb  or  a  kid  of  goats  for 
n  .-i-T.,,.  n.  3.   I  Ifi.  5,  1.5,27.  |  2.3.  19. 
B.priest  shall  offer  llnil  which  is  for  the  sin-o.firal 
11.  he  «hall  bring  fine  flour  for  a  sin-o.  \ 

B.  2.».  saying,  thi."  is  the  Inw  of  the  sino.  7.  37. 
7.  7.  AH  the  ."in-o.  i^,  so  is  trespass-offering,  14. 1.3. 
!'.  2.  take  thee  a  youngcalf  for  a  sin  o.  anil  a  ram 
lO^lfl.  Mo-ici  j.j'ught  the  goat  of  the  sin-o. 

".why  have  ye  not  eaten  «in-o.  in  ihc  holy  place 
12.11.  »he  shall  bring  a  turtle  dove  for  a  sin-o. 
111.  25.  fat  of  lhc»i/7?  0.  hhail  be  burnt  on  the  allar 
.^'iinu  7.  lt>.  one  kid  of  the  5<>a's  for  a  .sia-o.  22, 
28.  I  I.'..  24.  I'M.  15.129.5. 
2'"7,r.29  24.  Ih"  sin-o.  should  lir  mad-  for  all  Israel 
F.ira  H.  35.  off'-red  lwo|vi>  he  gonln  for  a  sin  o. 
Psal.  40.  fi.  and  Air  ".  hiist  tlmu  not  riipiired 
F.-.ek.  43.  19.  give  the  prii«t  a  bullock  f.ir  a  sino. 
!K'.  nil  thu  second  day  offer  a  kid  fur  a  sin-o. 
25.  pri'pare  every  day  a  romI  for  a  sin  o. 
44.  27.  into  sanctusry,  he  shall  offer  his  sin-o. 
20.  they  shull  eat  the  mcal-offoring  and  sino, 
lti.20.lhis  IS  the  place  wliero  priest  bhull  bull  Jl'n  o. 
410 


OFF 

Tropass-OVVERISG. 

/.ev.S.G.  he  shall  bring  his  trespass-o.  to  the  I..ord 

15.shall  bring  lamb  without  blem.fortr(;.«/>nA-ji'0. 

Hi.  aloiiem.  with  ram  t.-o.  18.  |  0.  6.  1  19.  21,  22. 

6.  6.  heihall  give  it,  in  the  day  of  Ins  trespass-o. 

7.  37.  law  of  tres.-o.  14.  13.  tres.-o.- ia  most  holy 
14.  12.  ho-lamb  for  tres.-o.  21. 24, 25.  J^'um.  6. 12. 

1  .b'uni.U.  3.  but  ill  any  wise  return  him  a  trcspass-o. 
4.  they  said,  what  shall  be  the  trcspass-o.?  8,17. 
A":r4.40. 39.  two  tables  lo  slay  the  fr.-o.  on,  42.  13. 
44.  29.  eatliie  tre.ip..o.uitii  every  dedicated  thing 
4li.  20.  H  liere  the  priests  shall  boil  the  trespass-o. 

nnve-OFFElUSO. 
iCzo<f.2y.24.  wave  them  tor  a  waei-o.^G.  I.cv.  7.:iO. 
8.27,29.  I  9.21.  |  10.  15.  1  14. 12,24. 
23.  20.  .;Vu//i.  6.  20. 
27.  thou  shalt  sanctify  the  breast  of  the  tcacc-o. 
Lev.  23.  15.  ye  brought  the  sheaf  of  the  wavc-o. 

Woud-OFFEIUNG. 
-Ve.'i.  10.  34.  cast  lots  for  the  tcood-o.  to  bring  it 
13.  31.  and  for  the  irvud-u.  at  the  limes  appointed 
V   OFKEKINt;. 

1  Sam.  7. 10.  as  Samuel  was  o.  flic  burnt-offering 

2  Sam.  0. 18.  Uavid  made  an  end  ofo.  1  C7tr.  lU.  2. 
2A'jnn-.';I0.25.as  soon  as  Jehu  had  made  an  end  ofi<. 
2CAr.H.l3.o.  according  to  commandment  of  Moses 

29.  29.  made  an  end  ut'  o.  the  king,  and  all  bowed 

30.  22.  tliey  did  eat  seven  days,  o.  peaceoffuring.>i 
35.  14.  the  sons  of  Aaron  were  busied  in  o. 

Ezra".  16.  priests u.  willingly  for  the  house  ofGoil 
./cr.  11.  17.  to  provoke  me  to  anger  .in  o.  lo  Uaal 
J.uke  23.  36.  coming  to  him  and  o.  him  vinegar 
ilcb.  10.  ll.every  priest  u.  ol\en  the  same  sacrifices 

OFFERINGS. 
Lev.  1. 10.  if  his  o.  bo  uf  the  Hocks,  sheep,  or  goats 
2.  13.  with  all  thy  o.  thou  shalt  otTer  aa'.t 

1  Sum.  2.  29.  to  make  fat  with  chief  of  all. the  0. 

2  Sam.  1.  21.  let  there  bono  dew  nor  fields  ofo. 
2  Chron.  31.  12.  the  people  brooght  in  the  o. 

35.  8.  people  gave  lo  thu  priests  for  passover  o.  9. 
13.  hill  tlie  other  holy  o.  sod  they  in  pols 
jVeh.  10. 37.  should  bring  the  first  fruils  ofo.  12.  44. 
I'sal.  20.  3.  the  Lord  remember  all  thy  o. 
.ler.  41.  5.  with  o.  and  incense  in  their  hands 
Kxfk.  20.  40.  there  will  I  reriuiie  your  «. 
Hos.  8.  13.  they  sacrificed  flesh  for  mine  o. 
.^mos5.  25.  have  ye  offered  me  o.  forty  years? 
J/a/.3.4.tlieno.of  Judah  andJerusalem  be  pleasant 
8.  wherein  have  wc  robbed  thcc?  in  tithes  ando. 
/,7;/.c2I.4.of  their  abundance  cast  in  unto  the  ( 
.9c(4-24.17.lcame  to  bring  alms  to  my  nation  and  o. 
See  Burnt,  Drink,  Fkee. 
Made  by  Fire. 
//rnrc-OFFEKlNGS. 
JVum.  18.  8.  given  the  charge  of  mine  Acncc-o. 
iJeut.  12.  6.  thither  ye  shall  bring  your  heace-o. 

OFFERINGS  of  the  Lord. 
1  Sam.  2. 17.  for  men  abhorred  Ihc  o.  of  the  Lord 
See  Me.*.t. 
rcflff-OFFERINGS. 
F.Tod.  20.  24.  shalt  sacrifice  thereon  thy  peacc-o. 
24.  5.  sacrificed /(tacc-o.  of  oxen  lo  the  Lord 
29.  28.  it  is  a  hoavc-oflVring  of  the/icarr-o. 
32.6.  people  broughtpcacc-u.  and  sat  down  lo  cat 
Lrr.  4.  10,  ns  taken  from  th>-  bullock  ofprare-o. 

2fi.  shall  burn  as  fat  i>(pcarc-o.  31,  35.  |  6. 12. 
7.  11.  this  is  the  law  of  sacrifice  of  pfacf-o.  13,  37. 

9.  4.  also  a  bullock  and  a  ram  for  peare-o.  IH. 

10.  14.  are  given  out  of  the  sacrifice  of  peare-o. 
17.  5,offer  them  for  peace-o.  lothe  Lord,  23.  19. 
19.  5.  if  ye  oiler  a  sacrifice  of  ueace-o.  22.  21. 

JVum.li.l4.  a  lamb  forpz-acr-o.  l]  l".a  ram  forp.-o. 

7. 17.  for  sacrifice  ofpcacc-o.  two  oxen,  five  lambs 
of  the  first  year,  2.3,  29,  35,'4I.  |  29.  39. 

10.  10.  blow  over  the  sacrifice  of  your  prucr-o. 

fosh.  8.  31.  Joshua  sacrificed  peacr-o.  to  the  Lord 

22.  23.  if  to  offer  pcacc-o.  let  the  Lord  reijuire  it 
./i/rf/T.20.  20.  nil  Israel  olUrerl  pcacc-o.  21.  4. 

1  Sam.  10.  8.  I  will  romc  and  offer  prace-o.  1 1.  15. 

2  Sum.  6.  17.  David  offered  p. -u.24.'25.  U'Ar.2I.2(). 
1  Kings  3.  15.  .Solomon  offrred  peace  o.  8.  63. 

9.  25.  thrice  in  a  year  Solomon  offered  peaceo. 
2CAro7i.31.2.  Ilezckiah  appointed  prie«t8#)r;i.-o. 
33.  16.  Manassrh  offered  praer-o.  on  the  altar 
Prov.  7.  14.  she  said  to  him,  I  have;).-o.  with  mc 
F.ifk.  45.  15.  prnr.eo.  lo  make  reconciliation,  17. 
40.  2.  priest  prepare  peaer-o.  \\  12.  prince  hi»;».-o. 
.^mos  5.  22.  not  regard  prnrr  n.  of  your  fat  things 

Sm-OFFERI.NGS. 
JVeA.  10. 33.  .»in-n.loniMk.'  an  iitoncment  for  Israel 

TAanA  OFFKKINtJS. 

20Ar.29.3l.  comrnrar  and  bnng  fAan/'O.  to  house 

33.  16.  the  altar,  and  sacrifiird  thereon  thank-o. 

/f'aiJf-OFFERINGH. 
AVim.  18.  11.  all  the  ware  o.  I  have  given  to  thee 

IfiiKOFFERINtJfl. 
Hot.  9.  4.  not  offi^r  winr-o.  to  bo  plcaslllg  to  God 

OFFICE. 
Ofn.4I.13.mc  he  restored  lo  mineo.him  ho  hanged 
F.xod.  \   10.  when  y«  do  tho  o.  of  a  midwife 


OFF 

•Yum.  3.  t  36.  under  theo.  of  the  sonaof  Mer«i 

4.  16.  to  the  0.  of  Eleazar  the  son  of  Aaron 

1  Chron.  6.  32  and  tlien  they  waited  on  their  o 
9.  22.  whom  David  did  ordain  in  their  set  o. 
26.  llie  four  chief  porters  were  in  their  set  o. 
iChron.  24.  II.  chest  was  brought  to  the  king's  o. 
31.  18.  in  their  seto.  they  sanctified  thenisclvea 
•ViA.  13.  13.  their  o.  was  to  distribute  to  brellireo 
Psal.  109.  8.  and  let  another  take  Ins  o. 
F.zek.  44.  13.  shall  not  come  neat  lo  do  o.  of  priest 
Horn.  11.13.  lam  apos.  of  Geiiiilcs,!  magnify  my  o 
12.  4.  all  members  have  not  the  same  a. 

1  7Vm.  3.  1.  if  a  man  desire  the  o.  of  a  bishop 
10.  let  them  use  the  o.of  a  deacon,  13. 

Hcb.  7.  5.  who  receive  the  o.  of  the  priesthood 

Priest's  OFFICE. 
Exod.  28.  1.  that  be  may  urinisler  lo  mc  in  tha 
priest's  0.  3,  4,  41.  |  29.  1,44.  |  30.  30. 
1 35. 19. 1  40.  13, 15.  Lev.  7.  35.  |  16. 32. 
wVum.  3.  3. 
29.  9.  l]>p  priitl's  0.  shall  be  theirs  for  a  statute 
31.  10.  to  minister  in  tlie^rif?/'»  o.  39.  41. 
A'um.  3.  4.  Ithainur  ministered  in  lUu priest's  o. 

18.  7.  thou  and  thy  sons  keep  your  priest's  o. 
Deut.\0.ti.  Eleazar  his  son  ministered  in  Ihup.'s  o 
lCAr.6.  10.  Azariahe.\eciited;)Wfi,<'s  0.  in  temple 

2  t7ir.  II.  14.  cast  them  off  from  executing  p. 'i  o 
AuAel.S.whilc  Zacharias  executed  lUe priest's o. 

OFFICES. 

1  Sam.  2.  36.  put  me  into  one  ofthc  priest's  o. 
ICAr.  2t. .'[.  Da  v.  distrihiiled  prie.«to  according  to» 

2  Chron.  7.  6.  and  the  jiriests  waited  on  their  o. 
JVch.  13.  14.  wipe  not  on!  my  good  detntg  tot  o. 

OFFICER. 
Gen.  37.  36.  ^ntiphar  an  «.  of  Pharaoh,  19.  1. 
.fudg.^.^.  is  not  he  son  of  Jerubb.andZeboI  hiso.7 

1  h'lvvsi.  t  2.  A/ariali,  son  ot  Zadok,  the  chief  u. 

5.  Zabud,  son  of  Nathan,  was  tho  principal  o. 
19.  Geber,  son  of  Uri,  was  the  only  o.  in  the  land 

22.9..\hab  called  an  o.  and  said,  hasten  hilher 

2  Kings  8.  6.  the  king  appointed  an  o.  to  rest*  .o 
25.  19.  Nibiizaradan  took  an  o.  out  of  the  city 

.Mat.  5.  25.  the  judge  deliver  thecjo  tlie  o.  and  ito 
o.  cast  thee  into  prison,  Luke  12.58. 
OFFICERS. 
Gen.  40.  2.  Pharaoh  was  wroth  with  two  of  hi-:  o. 
7.  Josejib  asked  Pharaoh's  o.  whyh>okye  sad  1 
41.  34.  let  Pharaoh  appoint  o.  ovei  the  lai^i 
Eiud.  5.  1.5.  the  o.  of  Israel  cried  lo  Pharaoh 
19.  the  o-  did  see  that  they  were  in  evil  case 
Xum.  11.  16.  gather  unio  me  Ine  o.  Dcut.  31.  23. 
Drut.  I.  15.  I  made  iJi°m  o  among  your  tribes 
16.18.  judges  nnri  >  slialt  thou  make  Ihce  in  galea 

20.  5.  the  0.  shall  speak  lo  the  people,  8. 

1  Sam.  8.  1.5.  take  vineyards  and  give  lo  his  o. 

1  Kings  4.  5.  .Azariah,  son  of  Nathan,  over  theo. 
7.  Solomon  had  twelve  o.  over  all  Israel 

2.^.  brought  they  to  the  place  where  the  o.  were 
5. 16.  besides  the  chief  of  Solomon's  o.  9.  23. 

2  Kings  II.  15.  Jehoiada  commanded  Ihe  o. 

18.  appointed  y.  over  the  hou.se,  2  CAroH.  23. 18. 
24.  12.  Jehoiaehin  went  out  with  his  o. 
1.5.  the  0.  and  mighty  men  carried  he  away 

1  Chron.  23.  4.si.\  thoii.sand  were  o.  and  jnrlgci 
2ti.29.Cheniiniahnndhi3  Sons  were  foro. and  judges 

2  Chron.  8.  10.  Solomon's  o.  250  that  bare  rule 

19.  11.  also  the  Leviles  shall  he  o.  before  you 
F.sth.  9.  3.  Iheo.  of  the  king  helped  the  Jews 
[sa.  60,  17. 1  will  make  thine  o.  peace,  and  exact 
.hr.  29.  20.  should  be  o.  in  the  house  of  the  Lord 
John  7.  32.  Ihe  chief  priests  sent  o.  lo  take  him 

4fi, theo. answered, never  man  spake  like  Ibis  man 

IS.  3.  Judas  having  received  a  band  of  men  and 

0.  ciimelh  with  lantern* 

12,  0.  look  Jesu.i  II  22.  one  of  the  o.  struck  Jesua 

..^cts  5.  22.  the  o.  found  them  not  in  tho  prison 

OFFSCOURING 
/.nm.  3. 45,  thou  hast  made  us  as  the  o.  and  rofiiM 
lCnr.4.  13.  and  are  Ihe  o.  of  all  things  lothisdaj 

OFFSPRING 
Signifies,  That  which  is  sprunir  nf  or  produced  by 
another,  as  children,  plants,  and  fruits,  Job 
31.  8,  lHa.48.  19. 
I  am   the  Root  and  Offspring  of  David,  Rev.  22. 
16.  I  nin  David','  Lord,   and  yet  his  .Son  :  His 
Roof,  as  I  am   flod,  and  gave  a  bring  to  his 
family,  and  to  all  the  families  of  the  earth, 
and  yet,  as  to  my  human  nature,  I  am  his  Son, 
R  Rranch  out  of  the  root  o/ Jesse. 
Job  5.  25.  and  thy  «.  ns  the  grass  ofthr  nnrlh 

21.  8.  their  o.  is  estBhlishrd  before  their  eyei 

27  II.  and  his  n.  shall  not  be  satisfied  withbrcftd 
31.  8,  yea,  let  my  o,  be  rooted  out 

Isa.  22.  24.  they  shall  hang  on  him  theo.  andisaiM 
44.  3.  I  will  pour  my  bles-ing  upon  thine  o. 
4H,  19.  tho  0.  of  thy  bowels  like  thegrnvel  thereof 
01.  0.  their  o.  shall  be  known  among  the  people 
05.  23.  the  seed  of  the  ble^spd,  and  o.  with  them 

./lets  17.  28.  for  we  are  «li"o  his  o.  29. 

licv.  22.  10.  (  am  the  Root  and  the  0  of  Daviil 


OIL 

OFT. 

8  Kings  4.  8.  as  o.  as  he  passed  by,  he  turned  in 
Job  21.17.how  o.cometh  their  destruction  on  them? 
Psoi. 78.40.. how  0.  did  provoke  him  in  wilderness? 
Mat.  9.  14.  why  do  we  and  the  Pharisees  fast  o.? 

17.  15.  my  son  is  sore  vexed,  lor  o.  times  he  talleth 
into  the  fire,  and  o.  into  the  water,  Mark  9.  22. 

J6.  21.  how  0.  shall  my  brother  sin  against  mel 
Mark  7.  3.  the  Jews,  except  they  wasli  o.  eat  not 
j9c(s26.  11. 1  punished  them  o.in  every  synagogue 

1  Cor.  11.25.  this  do  ye  as  0. as  ye  drink  it  in  rcnieinb. 
'2  Car.  11.  23.  in  prisons  t'lequent,  in  deaths  o. 

2  Tim. 1. 16. foro. refreshed  me, not  ashamodof  bonds 
Heb.  6.  7.  the  earth  drinketh  up  rain  thatcometh  o. 

OFTEN. 
Prov.  29.  1.  he  that  being  o.  reproved,  hardenetb 
Mai.  3.  16.  they  that  feared  the  Lord  spake  *. 
Mat.  23.  37.  how  o.  would  I  have  gathered  thy 
children  as  a  hen  gatbcrelli,  J^uke  13.  34. 
Mark  5.4. had  been  o.bound  with  fetters  and  chains 
J^uke  5.  33.  why  do  the  disciples  of  John  fast  o.  ? 

1  Cor.  11.26.  for  as  o.  as  ye  eat  this  bread  and  drink 

2  Cor.  11.  26.  in  journeyings  o.  in  perils 

27.  I  have  been  in  watcliings  o.  in  fastings  o. 
Phil.  3. 18.  many  walk,of  wlioin  I  have  told  you  o. 

1  7Vm.  5. 23.  use  a  little  wine  for  thy  o.  infirmities 
.tfeft.  9. 25.  nor  yet  that  he  should  otfer  himself  o. 

26.  then  he  must  o.  have  surtered  since  foundat. 
Rev.  11.  6.  to  smite  the  earth  as  o.  as  they  will 

OFTENTIMES. 
Job  33.29.  these  things  worketh  God  o.  with  man 
Eccl.  7.  22.  for  o.  also  thine  own  heart  knowcth 
/.utc8.29.for  o.it  had  caught  him,  was  kept  bound 
Jo\n  18.2.  for  Jesus  0.  resorted  thither  with  discip. 
Rom.  1.  13.  that  o.  I  purposed  to  come  to  you 

2  Cor.8. 22.  have  o.  proved  diligeni  in  many  things 
Heb.  10.  11.  and  o.  offering  the  same  sacrifices 

OFTENER. 
^ets  24. 26.  Felix  sent  for  him  o.  to  commune  with 

OIL 
Signifies,  [1]    TTie  juice  of  olives,  cS-c.  Psalm  104. 

15.  [21  I'hat  oil  covfected  by  God's  appoint- 
ment, Exod.  .30.  25.  to  unnivt  the  prir.its,  their 
garments, and  hoUj  things  almut  the  tabernacle, 
which  siunijicd  the  separation  of  those  Ihinirs  tn 
the  service  of  God,  and  the  inward  qualifica- 
tions requisite  far  the  office  of  the  kiph-priest, 
vamcly,the  ififts  andgracisofthe  Holii Spirit, 
which  elsewhere  in  scripture  are  set  forth  by 
oil.  Mat.  25.  4.  It  was  also  typical  nf  those 
pifts  leith  which  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  beyond 
measure,  and  by  him  his  members  in  measure, 
should  be  furnished. 

God  hath  anointed  thee  with  the  oil  of  gladnes?, 
Psal.  45.  7.     God  hath  raised  and  advanced 
thee  far  above  all  wen  and  a^igcls,  to  a  state  of 
joy  and  endless  glory  at  his  right  hand:  Thus 
at)Oinf\r\gsignifics  the  desigvntiun  nr  inaugura- 
tion of  n  person  to  some  high  dignity  or  employ- 
ment, Ezek.  28.   14.     Or,  God  hnth  endowed 
thee  with  all  the  gifts  and  graces  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  in  an  eminent  and  peculiar  manner,  to 
the  comfort  and  refreshment  of  thine  own,  and 
all  thy  people^s  hearts  :  and  hath  solemnly  call- 
ed thee  to  be  the  Priest,  Prophet,  and  King  of 
his  church. 
Gen.  28.  18.  Jacob  poured  o.  on  the  top  of  it,  35.14. 
F.jod.  25.  6  take  o.  for  the  light,  3.i.  14.  |  39.  37. 
2").  2.  cakes  unleavened,  tempered  with  o.  40. 
30.  25.  shalt  make  it  an  o.  of  holy  ointment 
I.ev.  2.  1.  and  he  shall  pour  o.  upon  it,  0. 

4.  ^kes  of  fine  flour  mingled  with  n.  5.  ]  14. 10, 
21.  1  2.3.  13.  .N-um.  6.  1.5.  |  7.  13,  19,  25,  31, 
37, 43,  49,  T,5,  61,  67,  73,  79.  I  8.  8.  I  28. 13. 
I  29.  3,  9,  14. 
J5.  tliy  moat-ofTering  put  o.  upon  it,  6.  21. 

16.  the  priest  shall  burn  part  of  the  o.  thereof 
5.  11.  he  shall  put  no  o.  on  it,  .N'um.  5.  15. 

7. 10.  meat-ofTiring  mingled  with  o  9. 4.  j  14.10. 
12.  shall  offer  cakes  minsried  with  o.  J\''um.  6. 15. 

14. 16.  the  priest  shall  dip  his  right  finger  in  the  o. 

17.  rest  of  the  o.  that  is  in  his  band,  19,  29. 
JV«m.4.9.  all  the  «. vessels  wherewith  they  minister 

11.  8.  the  taste  ot"it  vv.is  as  the  taste  nf  fresh  o. 

1.5.  4.  mingled  with  fourth  part  of  a  htn  of  o. 
6.  mirgled  with  the  third  part  of  a  hin  of  o. 

28.  12.  (I.  for  one  bullock,  and  o.  for  one  ram 
Deut.  28.  40.  shalt  have  olive  trees,  but  abalt  not 
anoint  thyself  wirh  o.  2  Sam.  14.  2  Mie.  6.  15. 

32.  13.  made  him  suck  o.  out  of  the  flinty  rock 

33.24.1e1  Asberbe  acceptable, and  dip  his  foot  in  o. 
1  .Sam.  10.1.  Samueltook  a  vial  of  o.  and  pourcdit 

16.  1.  fill  thy  horn  with  o.  and  go,  13. 
1  Kings  1.  39.^Zadok  the  priest  took  a  born  of  o. 

5.11.  Solomon  gave  Hiram  twenty  measures  ofo. 
17. 12.  o.  in  a  cruse  |1  14.  nor  cruse  ofo.  fail,  16. 

t  Kings  4.  2.  nothing  in  the  house  save  a  pot  ofo. 

6.  the  o.  Ft.nyed  ||  7.  go  sell  the  o.  and  pay  thy  debt 

9.  1.  take  this  box  ofo.  go  to  Ramoth-gilead,  3. 

6Jie  poured  the  o.  on  his  head,  and  said  to  him 

417 


OLD 

J  Oiron.  27.  28.  over  the  cellars  ofo.  was  Joash 
Ezra  3.  7.  gave  drink  and  o.  to  them  o(  Zidon 
Esth.  2.  12.  six  months  with  o.  of  myrrh 
Job  24.  11.  which  make  o.  within  their  walls 
29.  (i.  and  the  rock  poured  me  out  rivers  ofo. 
Psal.  23.  5.  thon  anointcst  my  head  with  o. 
55.21.  words  were  softer  ihano.  yetdrawn  swords 
104.  15.  and  o.  to  make  his  luce  to  shine 
109. 18.  let  it  come  like  o.  into  his  bones 
141.  5.  it  shall  be  a  kindness,  an  excellent  o. 
Prov.  5.  3.  her  mouth  is  smoother  than  o. 
21.  20.  and  o.  in  the  dwelling  of  the  wise 
Is  a.  5.  t  1.  a  vineyard  in  the  horn  of  the  son  ofo. 
61.  3.  to  give  to  them  iJie  o.  of  joy  for  mourning 
,Ter.  41.  8.  shiy  us  not,  we  have  treasures  ofo. 
Eick.16.  13.  thou  didst  eat  flour,  honey,  and  v.  19. 
18.  hast  set  mine  o.  and  incense  before  them 

27.  17.  Judah  traded  in  honey  and  o.  and  balm 
32.  14.  1  will  cause  their  rivers  to  run  like  o. 
45.  14.  concerning  the  ordinance  ofo.  bath  of  o. 

24.  ephah  for  a  ram,  a  hin  of  o.  fi>r  an  ephah 
//o.?.2. 5.  my  lovers  that  give  me  my  bread  and  o. 
12. 1.  with  Assyrians,  and  o  is  carried  into  Egypt 
Mic.{y.'.  will  L.  be  pleased  with  10,000  rivers  ofo..' 
Zech.  4. 12.  empty  the  golden  «.  out  of  ihemselves 

t  14.  the  two  sons  of  <^  stand  by  the  Lord 
j\Iat.  25.  3.  the  foolish  took  no  o.  with  tbeni 
4.  the  wise  took  o.  |{  8.  give  us  of  your  o. 
Juke  7.  46.  my  head  with  o.  thou  didst  not  anoint 
16.  6.  he  said,  a  liundred  measures  ofo. 
■See  Anointed,  Anointino,  Beaten,  Log. 
IVine  with  OIL. 
J\''um.  18.  12.  best  of  the  o.  and  w.  they  shall  oflJer 
f)eut.  7.  13.  the  Lord  will  bless  thy  w.  and  thy  o. 

11.  14.  that  thou  mayest  gather  thy  loine  and  o. 

12.  17.  not  eat  the  tilheof  thy  wine  and  o.  14.  2.3. 
18. 4.  the  first-fruits  of  rcine  and  o.  2  CAro?i.  31.  5. 

28.  51.  who  shall  not  leave  thee  either  wine  or  o. 

1  Chron.  9.  29.  some  to  oversee  the  wive  and  o. 

12.  40.  they  that  were  nigh  brought  wine  and  o. 

2  C7ir.2. 10.  give  serv.  20,000  baths  of  w.  and  «.  15. 
11. 11.  Rehobonmpnt  in  strong  holds  o.  and  7rine 
32.28. Hezekiah  made  store-houses  for  wine  and  o. 

Ezrrt6.9.givercmfland  o. according  to  nppointment 
7.  22.  to'lOO  batlis  of  wine,  and  100  baths  ofo. 

A>A.5.11.  restore  Mnie  and  o.  that  ye  exact  oftbem 
10.  37.  should  bring  the  first- tVuits  of  wine  and  o. 
.39.  ofl"ering  of  the  corn,  new  wine  ami  o. 

13.  5.  laid  the  tithes  of  corn,  new  wine  and  o.  12. 
PrH»).21.l7.  til  at  loveth  rrj'neando.sball  not  be  rich 
./fr.31.  12.  Ihoysliall  flow  to  Lord  for  wine  iind  o 

40. 10.  cather  ye  wine  and  summer-fruits  and  o. 
Hug.}. ll.l  called  for  a  drought  on  new  wine  nni]  o. 
2   12.  tomb  bread,  wine  or  o.  shall  it  be  holy? 
/yii/ic  10.34. bound  up  his  wounds,  pour. in  o. and  70 
Hrv.  6.  6.  see  thou  hurt  not  the  wine  and  the  0. 
18. 13.  no  man  buyeth  ibnir  wine  and  0.  any  more 

OILED. 
Ezod.  29.  23.  one  cake  of  n.  bread.  Lev.  8.  26. 

OIL-OLIVE. 
Exod.  27.  20.  pure  n.  olive  beaten  for  the  light 
30.  24.  take  thon  unto  ihee  of  o.-olivc  a  hin 
/.CM.  24.  2.  that  they  bring  unto  ihee  pure  o.-olirc 
/?eut.8.8.land  of o.-o/(t'f,and  honey, "Kings  18.32. 

OIL-TREE. 
Asa.  41. 19.1  will  plant  ii  llic  wilderness  ihe  o.-tree 

OINTMENT, 
/^loi.  30. 25.  make  oil  of  holy  o.  an  0.  compound 
2  AVn^.9  20.]3.Hezekiiih  shewed  them  the  house  of 
his  precious  things  and  precious  o.  A.?a.  39.  2. 
1  Chr.  9.  30.  the  jiriest  nitu'e  the  0.  of  the  sjiices 
.Tab  41.  31.  he  maketh  the  sea  to  boil  like  pot  of  0. 
Psal.  133.  2.  it  is  like  the  precious  0.  on  the  head 
Prov.  27.  9.  o.  and  perfume  rejoice  the  heart 
16.  the  0.  of  his  right  hand  bewrayelh  it.«elf 
Eccl.  7.  1.  a  good  name  is  better  thiin  precious  0. 
9.8.  giirmrnts  be  white,  and  let  thy  head  lack  no  o. 
10. 1.  drad  flies  ci\  use  tbe  0.  of  apothecary  to  stink 
ranM.3.  thy  name  is  as 0. poured  forth, virgins  love 
Isa.  1.  6.  nor  bound  up,  nor  mollified  with  n. 
,57.9. thou  wentest  to  the  kinff  with  o.and  increased 
Mat.  26.7.  n  box  of  prec.  0.  Mark  14.3.  Luke  7. 37. 
9  tliisw.might  biive  been  sold  for  mneh, .lohn  12.5. 
12. in  that  she  bath  poured  out  this  0.  on  iny  body 
Mark  14.  4.  why  was  this  waste  of  the  0.  made? 
Luke  7.  38.  nnd  anointed  his  feet  with  o.  46. 
.John  11.  2.  Mary  anointed  tbe  Lord  with  n. 
12.  3.  M.Try  took  pound  ofo.  and  anointed  the  feet 
of  Jesus, bouse  was  filled  with  the  odour  of  theo. 
OINTMENTS. 
Cant.  1.  3.  because  of  the  savour  of  thy  good  0. 
4.  10.  tbe  smell  of  thine  o.  is  better  than  all  spices 
^mo.»fi  6.  and  anoint  themselves  with  the  chief  0. 
Juke  23.  .56.they  returned,  prepared  spices  and  o. 
Rev.  18.  13.  no  man  buyeth  their  odours  and  o. 
OKE,  See  Oak. 
OLD. 
f?!^. 5. 32. Noah  was 500 years  o.and  begat  Shem 
7. 6.  NoM  h  was  600  years  0.  when  tbe  flood  came 
ll.lO.Shem  wa»  100 years  0.  and  begat  Arphazad 
3  I 


OLD 

Gen.  12. 4.  Abr.75year8o.  when  depart,  from  Har. 
15.  9.  take  a  heifer  and  a  ram  of  three  years  o. 
10. 16.  and  Abram  was  fourscore  and  six  years  u. 
when  Hagur  bare  Ishmael  to  Abram 
17. 12^  he  that  is  eight  days  u.  shall  be  circumdised 
17.  achildborn  tohiui  that  is  u  hundred  years  0. 
24.Abrahamyyyearso.wlienhe  was  circumcised 

25.  Ishmael  thirteen  years  0.  w  hen  circumcised 

18.  11.  now  Abraham  and  Sarah  were  0. 
12.  after  1  am  wa.xed  a.  my  Lord  being  o.  also 
13.Sar.said,  shall  ofsurety  bear  child,who  am  0..* 

19.4.  men  of  city  compass,  the  bouse,  o.and  young 
31.  our  father  is  0.  ||  24.  1.  Abraham  was  0. 

21.  4.  Abr.  circumcised  Isaac  when  eight  days  o. 
5.  Abraham  100  years  0.  when  Isaac  was  born 

23. 1.  Surah  was  127  years  o.  the  years  of  her  life 
25. 20.  Isaac  40  yeai  so.  when  he  look  Rebek. to  wife 

26.  Isaac  was  00  years  0.  when  she  bare  thetn 

26.  31.  Esau  forty  years  o.  when  ho  took  Judith 

27.  1.  it  came  to  pass  when  Isaac  waso.2.  |35.29. 
37.  2.  Josejih  being  17  years  0.  was  feeding  flock 
47.  8.  I'haruoh  said  to  Jacob,  how  0.  art  iTiou? 
49.9.  Couch,  as  an  0.  lion,  who  shall  rouse  hiiu  up? 
50.  26.  Joseph  died,  being  110  years  o. 
Ea-o(/.7.7.Moscs  was  eighty  yrs.  o.and  Aar.  eighty. 

three  years  o.  when  ihey  spa.ke  lo  Pharaoh 

10.9. we  will  gowiih  our  young  and  oiiro.wilhsoni 

^0. 14.  every  one  that  are  numbt-red  from  twenty 

years  0.  nnd  above,  38.  26.  JVhot.  1.  3,  18. 

I  14.  29.  1  Chron.  23.  27.  2  Chron.  25.  0. 

I  31.  17.  F.ira  3.  8. 

Lev.  13.11.  it  is  an  0.  leprosy  in  the  skin  of  his  flesh 

2.5.  22.  shall  eat  0.  fruit  ||  26. 10.  shall  eat  0.  store 

27. 3.  the  male  from  20  years  o.  even  to  60  years 

5.  and  if  it  be  from  five  even  to  twenty  years  0. 

6.  if  it  he  from  a  month  0.  to  five  years  0. 
JV«;n .3. 15. every  male,fiom  a  month  o.und  upward 

shalt  tliou  number,  22,  28,  34,  39,  40,  43. 

4.  3.  from  thirty  years  0.  to  filty  from  among  the 
sons  of  Levi,  23,  30.  1  Chron.  23.  i 

8. 24.theLevites  from  25  years  0.  and  ujiward 
18.1  fi.those  that  are  10  be  redeemed,  from  a  month 
0.  shall  thou  redeem 
26.62.  numbered  23000  from  month  o.and  upw. 

33.  39.  Aaron  was  123  years  old  when  he  died 
Deut.S.4.  thy  raiment  waxed  noto.29.  5.  JV(A.9.21. 

28.  50.  which  shall  not  regard  the  person  of  the  0. 

31.  2.  Muses  said,  I  nm  liO years  0.  this  day 

34.  7.  Moses  was  a  120  yea  s  n.  when  he  died 
.fnsh  5.  II.  and  Ihey  did  cat  of  the  0.  corn,  12. 

6.  21.  utterly  destroy,  men  and  wom.  young  ando 
9.  4.  they  took  o.sacks  |1  S.o.shoes  on  their  (eel,  13 

13.  I.Joshua  waso.and  stricken  in  years,  23.  1,2 

14.  7.  forty  years  o.  wna  I,  wlien  Mo.se.s  sent  me 
10.  and  now,  lo,  lam  this  day  eighty-five  years  0. 

24.  29.  Joshuadied,  being  110  years  0.  .ludg.  2.8. 
Hnth  1.  12.  for  I  am  too  o.  to  have  a  husband 

1  Sn7n.  2.22.  now  Eli  was  very  0.  and  heard  all 
4.15.F.li  wasninety  and  eight  yearso.  hiseyesnim 
8.  1.  when  Samind  was  0.  he  made,  5.  ||  12.  2. 

2  Sam.  2. 10.  Saul's  son  was  forty  years  0.  when 
4.4.  Mojihibosbeth  was  lume,  and  five  years  o. 

5.  4.  David  thirty  years  0.  when  he  began  to  reign 

19.  32.  now  Barzillai  was  eighty  years  0.  35. 

1  Kings  1.1.  king  David  was  0. 15.'  1  Chron.  23.  1. 

11.4.  when  Sol.  was  0.  his  wives  turned  his  heart 
13.  11.  there  dwelt  an  n.  prophet  in  Beth  el 

2  Kings  4. 14.  she  hath  no  child,  and  her  hush  iso. 

1  Chron.  2. 21.  Hezron  married  w  hen  sixty  years  0. 

2  C/iron.31.1fi.  males  from  three  yrs.  o.and  upward 
J5.<M.3.13.sent  to  destroy  all  the  Jews,yonng  and  0. 
Job  21.  7.  why  do  tbe  wicked  live,  become  0.? 

32.  6.  Elihu  said,  I  am  young,  and  ye  are  very  0. 
Psal.  .32.  3.  my  bones  waxed  0.  through  my  roaring 

37.  25.  I  have  been  young,  and  now  am  0. 
71. 18.  now  when  I  am  o.  O  God,  forsake  me  not 

Prov.  22.  6.  when  0.  he  will  not  depart  from  it 
23.  10.  remove  not  0.  land-mark,  enter  not  fieldg 

22.  and  despise  not  thy  mother  when  she  is  0. 
F.crl.  4.  13.  belter  is  a  wise  child  than  an  0.  king 
Cant.l.\3.  all  manner  of  pleasant  fruits  new  and  0 
Isa.  15.  5.  a  heifer  of  three  years  0.  Jcr.  48.  34. 

20. 4. captives,  young  and  o.'naked  and  bare-foot 
.50.  9.  Ihey  shall  wax  0.  as  garment,  nioih  eat  them 
58.  12.  Ihey  shall  buihUhe  o.  waste  places,  61.4 
65.  20.  for  the  child  shall  die  100  years  0.  but  the 
sinner  being  100  years  o.  shall  be  accursed 
Jir.  6.  Ifi.  Lord  said,  see  and  ask  for  the  0.  paths 

38.  1 1.  F.bedmel.  look  thence  0.  clouts,  0.  rags,  12. 
51.22.with  Ihee  I  will  break  in  pieoes  young  and  0. 

Jam.  2.  21.  the  young  and  0.  lie  on  the  ground 
3.  4.  my  flesh  and  my  skin  hath  he  made  0. 

K:cAr.9.6.sl3y  utterly  o.and  young.maidsand  child. 
23.  43.  and  I  said  to  her  that  was  0.  in  adulteries 
25.  1.5.  vengeance  to  destroy  it  for  the  0.  hatred 
36.  11.  I  will  settle  you  afler  your  0.  estates 

T)an.  5.31.  Darius  took  kingdom,  being 62 yearso. 

Jlf/f.6. 6. shallTcomc  before  him  with  calves  of  yr.o. 

Mat.  2.16.  Herod  slew  tbe  children  from  two  yrs.o 
9. 16.  no  man  putteth  new  cioth  to  an  0  goimoat 


OLD 

Mat.  0.  17.  neither  do  men  put  new  wine  into  o. 
bottles,  ^fark  2.  21,  22.  f.uke  5.  3<j,  a7. 

13.52.  bringeth  Ibrtli  of  treasure  things  new  and  o. 
£,u/<e2.42.  Jueus  twelve  years  o.  went  to  Jeruaulein 

5.  39.  for  he  snith,  the  o.  wine  i.s  better 

9.8.  it  was  said,  that  one  of  the  o.  prophets  is  risen 
Jo/in  3.  4.  how  can  a  man  be  born  when  he  is  o.? 

8. 57.  ihou  art  not  yet  fifty  years  o.  hast  seen  Abr.? 

2l.l8.when  thou  shall  be  ». another  shall  lead  tliee 
^cts  4.  22.  the  man  was  above  forty  years  o. 

7.  23.  when  Mines  was  full  forty  years  o. 

21.  16.  brought  Mnason  of  Cyprus,  an  «.  disciple 
Rom.  4.  19.  Abraham  went  about  100  years  o. 

1  Cor.  5.  7.  purge  out  therefore  the  o.  leaven 
8.  let  us  keep  the  feast,  not  with  o.  leaven 

2  Cor.  3.  14.  in  the  reading  of  the  O.  Testament 
5.  17.  0.  things  are  past  away,  all  things  are  new 

1  Tim.  4.  7.  refuse  profane  and  o.  wives'  fables 
5.  9.  widow  not  be  taken  under  si.xty  years  o. 

HeB.S.13.  a  new  covenant,  he  hath  made  the  first  o. 
whatdecayeih  and  waxo.is  readytovanish  away 

2  Pet.  I.  9.  tliat  he  was  purged  from  his  o.  sins 

2.  .5.  if  Ood  spared  not  the  o.  world, but  saved  Noe 
1  .fuhn  2.  7.  0.  commandm.  is  word  from  beginning 
/{rp.Ii.it.that  o.serpent,  called  the  devil  and  Satan 

20.  2.  he  laid  hold  on  the  dragon,  that  o.  serpent 

OLD  j9ge. 
Oen.  15.  15.  thou  shall  be  buried  in  a  good  o.  age 

21.2.  Sarah  bare  Abraham  a  son  of  his  o.  age,  7. 

2.%  8.  Abraiiam  died  in  a  good  o.  age,  an  old  man 

37.  3.  Joseph  was  the  son  of  his  o.  age,  44.  20. 
Judg.  8.  32.  and  Gideon  died  in  a  good  o.  age 
Ruth  4. 15.  he  shall  be  a  nourisher  in  thine  o.  age 
1  King.'i  1.5.23.  Asa  in  o.age  was  diseased  in  his  feet 
1  Chr.  29.  28.  Dav.  died  in  good  o.  age,  full  of  days 
Job  30.  2.  in  whom  o.  age  was  perished 
Fsal.  71.  0.  cast  me  not  off  in  the  time  of  o.  age 

92.  14.  they  shall  bring  forth  fruit  in  o.  age 

Isa.  46.  4.  and  even  to  your  o.  age  I  am  he 

Luke  1. 36.  Elisabeth  conceived  a  son  in  her  o.age 

Days  nf  OLD  ;  see  of  OLD. 

OLD  dale,  see  Gate. 

OLD  Man. 

(Jen.  25.8.  Abrahim  died  an  o.  man  full  of  years 

4.1.  27.  the  0.  man  of  whom  ye  spake,  is  he  alive? 

44.  20.  and  said,  we  have  a  father,  an  o.  man 
/j-r.  19.32.  thou  snalt  honour  the  face  of  the  «.  man 
Judg.  19. 16.  there  came  an  o'man  from  his  work 
17.  the  o.man  said, 20.  ||  22.  spake  to  the  o.  man 

1  Sam.  2. 31.  shall  not  be  iin  o.  m.  in  thy  house,  32. 
4. 18.  Eli  was  an  o.  m.  ||  17. 12.  Jesse  was  an  o.  m 
28.  14.  an  o.  man  cometh  up,  and  is  covered 

2  CAron.36. 17.  and  had  no  compassion  on  o.  man 
I.'a.  65.  20.  nor  o.  man  that  haih  not  filled  his  days 
J.uke  1.  18.  I  iim  an  o.  mon,my  wife  strick.in  years 
Rom.  6.  6.  iMir  o.  man  is  crucified  with  him 
F.ph.  4.  22.  put  olTthe  o.  man  which  is  corrupt 
Co/.  3. 9.  ye  have  put  "ffthe  0.  mart  with  his  deeds 

OLD  men. 

1  Kings  12.G.Rehoboam  consulted  with  the  o.  men 

8.  forsook  counselor o.m.  13.  2  Chr.  10.6,8, 13. 

P.'id.  118.  12.  o.mcrt  and  children,  praise  the  Lord 

Pror.  17.6.  children's  children  the  crown  of  o.  men 

20.  29.  the  beauty  of  o.  men  is  the  grey  head 
.Trr.  31.  13.  rejoice  in  the  dance,  young  men  and  o. 
Joel  1.  2.  hear  this  ye  o.  men,  and  give  ear  all  ye 

2.28.  0.  men  shall  dream  dreams,  Acts  2.  17. 
Zcch.  8.4.  0.  men  and  women  dwell  in  the  streets 

O/OI.D. 
Oen.  6.  4.  which  were  of  o.  men  of  renown 
1  .'fnm.27.8.tho3e  nations  were  o/». the  inhabitants 
1  Cliron.  4.  40.  they  of  Ham  had  dwelt  there  o/o. 
JWA.  12.  46.  of  0.  there  were  chief  of  the  singers 
.fob  20.  4.  knowcst  thou  not  this  of  o.  since  man 
Pf.  25.  6.  lliy  lender  mercies  have  been  ever  of  o. 

44.  1.  what  work  ihoii  didst  in  the  times  of  o. 

55.  19.  alTlict  them,  even  he  that  nbidelh  of  n. 

68.  33.  upon  heaven  of  heavens  which  were  of  0. 

74.2.  thy  congregntion  which  hast  purchased  ofo. 
12.  for  Ood  is  my  king  of  n.  working  salvation 

77.  5.  I  have  considered  the  dnyii  of  o.  the  years 
II.  Biirelv  I  will  remember  thy  wonders  of  o. 

78.  2.  I  will  niter  dark  sayings  ofo. 

93. 2.  Ihy  lhron<>ise«ial)lished  of  o.  from  everlast. 
102.  2.5.  ofo.  hast  laid  the  foundation  of  the  earth 
119.  52.  I  remembered  ihy  judgments  of  o.  O  Lil. 

152.  thy  testimoiiieB  I  have  known  ofo. 
143.  5.  I  rTiieinhMr  the  ilnvs  ofo.  fsa.  63.  11. 
Pro»).H.22.LorH  posscsed  inc  before  his  worksn/o. 
A<a.95.1.  Ihv  counsels ofn.  are  faillifnln.  an  I  Iru'h 

30.  33.  liir  T.vph<t  is  or.lained  of  o.  f,e  hath  made 
43.  18.  neither  consider  the  things  of  o. 

46.9.  remember  llie  former  ihingi  of  o.  T  am  Clod 
51.  0.  awake,  awake,  ns  in  the  itenerniionH  n/"  o. 
57.  11.  have  not  !  hrld  mv  pnace  evrm  o/o.? 
63.  9.  and  earri'd  them  all  the  davs  nf  o. 
Jrr.  28.  8.  the  prophets  before  mn  and  thee  of  o. 

31.  3.  the  Lord  hath  npi)eared  nf  o.  to  me 
46.26.  afterward  shall  he  inhabited  as  in  days  ofo. 
Ijatn.  1. 7.  pleasant  thines  >he  had  in  the  days  of  o. 


OLl 

T.am.i.  17.  word  that  he  commanded  in  days  o/o. 

3.6.8et  me  in  dark  places,a3they  that  be  dead  ofo 

5.  21.  turn  us,  O  Lord,  renew  our  days  as  of  o. 

Kzek.'26.'20.  shall  bring  theedown  with  people  ofo. 

35.  t  5.  because  thou  hast  had  hatred  of  o. 
.Imos  9.  11.  I  will  build  it  as  in  the  days  ofo. 
J\iic.  5. 2.  whose  goings  forth  have  been  from  of  o 

7.  14.  let  them  leedin  Bashan,  as  in  the  days  o/o 
20.  hast  sworn  to  our  fathers  from  the  days  of  o 
JVah.  2.  8.  Nineveh  is  ofo.  like  a  pool  of  water 
Jl/a/.3.4.be  pleasant  to  the  Lord, as  in  the  days  ofo 
■2  Pet.  3.  5.  by  word  of  God  the  heavens  were  of  u 
Judei.  who  were  o/o.  ordained  to  condemnation 

OLD  time. 
A?cjif.2.20.giants  dwell  therein  o.  t.  Zamzummims 

19.  14.  they  ofo.  time  set  in  thy  inlieritance 
Jvsh.  24. 2.  your  fathers  dwelt  on  other  side  in  o.  t 
2  Sam.  20.  18.  they  were  wont  to  speak  in  o.  time 
Ezra  4.  15.  they  have  moved  sedition  of  o.  time 
Keel.  1.  10.  it  hath  been  already  ofo.  time 
./er.  2.  20.  for  ofo.  time  I  have  broken  thy  yoke 
£2eA-.20.20.  bring  thee  down  with  people  ofo.  time 

38.  17.  he  of  whom  I  have  spoken  in  o.  time 
Mat.  5,  21.  it  was  said  by  them  ofo.  time,  27,  33. 
.'lets  15.  21.  Moses  ofo.  time  hath  in  every  city 

1  /'e(.3.  5.  in  o.  time  holy  women  also  adorned 
2Pet.l.21.  the  prophecy  came  not  in  o.  lime  by  man 

•Sec  Wa.x. 

OLD  h'aii. 

./o622.15.lheo.  w.  which  wickad  men  have  trodden 

OLDNESS. 
/iom.7.G.  that  we  should  not  serve  in  o.  of  the  letter 

OLIVE 

Is  a  tree  fvll  of  fatness,  which  yields  plenty  of 
oil.    The  church  of  the  Jews  is  compared  to  an 
Olive-tree,  ./cr.  11.  16.      HTieji   God  brought 
them  into  Canaan,  he  fixed  them  in  a  Jlouri.th 
ing  and  prosperous  state  andcundilwv,  so  that 
they  were  in  a  capacity  both  to  have  done  much 
good  to  thenLvehes,  and  to  have  brought  him 
yiiuch  glory,  like  a  beautiful  green  olive-tree 
fit  to  bear  fair  and  goodly  fruit. 
There  are  two  kinds  o/ Olive-trees,  the  wild  and 
natural,  and  those  that  require  care  and  cul- 
ture.     The  culticatid  Olive-tree  15  of  a  mode- 
rate   h'ight,  its    trunk    is    knotty,    its    bark 
smooth,  and  of  an  ash-colour,  its  wood  is  solid 
and  yellowish,  the  leaves  are  oblong,  and  al- 
most like  those  of  the  willow,  of  a  green  colour, 
dark  on  the  tipper  side,  and  white  on  the  under 
side.     In  the  month  «/ June  it  puts  out  white 
flowers  that  grow  in  bunches :  F.ach  flower  is 
of  one  piece,  widening  %ipwards,  and  dividing 
into  four  parts,    .^fter  the  flower  succeeds  the 
fruit,  which  is  also  oblong  and  plavip :  h  is 
first  green,  then  pale,  and  lastly  black,  lehen 
it  is  f/uite  ripe:  In  the  flesh  of  it  is- enclosed 
a  hard  stone,  full  of  an  oblong  seed.    The  wild 
Olive  differs  from  this,  in  that  it  is  smaller 
in  all  its  parts. 
Gen.  8.  1 1.  and  lo,  in  her  mouth  was  an  o.  leaf 
Dent.  28.  40.  for  thine  o.  shall  cast  her  fruit 
JW/i.  8. 15.  gc)  to  the  mount,  and  fetch  o.  branches 
./nb  15.  33.  he  shall  cast  off  his  Hower  as  the  o. 
/'»■.  128.3.  thy  children  like  0.  plants  round  thy  table 
Hab.  3.  17.  although  the  labour  of  the  o.  shall  fail 
ZecA.  4. 12. 1  said,  what  be  these  two  o.  branches? 
.Jam.  3.  12.  can  fig-tree,  my  brethren, bejir  o.berrics? 
See  On,. 
OLIVES. 
.Judg.  15.5.  the  fo.ves  burnt  up  the  vineyards  and  o. 
.l/ic.6. 15. shall  tread  the  o.  but  shall  not  anoint  thee 
See  Moi'NT. 
OLIVET. 

2  .Vnm. 15.30.  David  went  up  by  a.scent  to  mount  0. 
.Icti  I.  12.  they  returned  fri>m  the  mount  called  0. 

■     OLIVE-TIIEE. 
Dfut.  24.  20.  when  thou  bcatest  thine  o.-tree 
Judg.  9.  8.  iliey  said  lo  the  o.tree,  reign  over  us 

9.  the  0. -free  said,  should  I  leave  my  fatness? 
1  Kings  6.  23.  he  made  two  cheruhims  of  o.-tree 

31.two  doors  were  of  o.-tree, 32. II  .33.  posts  of  o.-t. 
Psal.  .52. 8.  like  a  green  o.-tree  in  the  house  of  God 
tsa.  17.  6.  ns  the  shaking  of  an  o.-lrce,  24.  13. 
.hr.  11.  16.  the  Lord  called  thyname  n  green  o.-tree 
Hos.  14.  6.  his  beauty  shall  be  ns  the  o.-tree 
ffag.'i.  19.  nsyet  the  o.-tree  hath  not  brought  forth 
Rom   11.  17.  thou  partakest  of  the  fntiiesii  of  o.-tree 

24.  cut  out  of  the  o.-tree,  EnifTed  in  a  good  o.-tree 
OLIVE-TREES. 
Kxoif.23.tll.  thiisshalt  Ihou  do  with  thine o.-freejt 
Deul.  6.  11.  and  o. -trees  which  thou  plantest  not 
8,t8.a  land  of  vines  and  n.-trees,  of  oil,  and  honz-y 
28,40  thou  shall  have  o. -trees, bul  shall  not  anoint 
1  CAron.27. 28.  over  the  o.-trees  was  Ranl-hnnan 
.'7mo.<tl.9.r).-tree.?  increased,  palmer-worm  devour. 
ZeeA.  4.  3.  two  o.-trees  by  it  rm  the  right  ami  left 
Wen.l  1.4.  these  are  the  two  n.-tree»  standing  before 

mid  OLIVE-TREE. 
'Rom.ll.  17.  Ihou  being  wUd o.-tree  wort  jraflcd  in 


ONE 

OLIVE-YARD. 

Eiod.  23.  11.  thus  shall  ihou  do  with  thy  o.  yard 

OLIVE-VARDS. 
JoaA.24.13.cilie3  ye  huill  nol,of  vineyards  and  o.-y 
which  ye  planted  not,  do  ye  eat,  JVcA.  9.  25 

1  Sam.  8.  J4.  the  king  shall  lake  your  o.-yartts 

2  Kings  526.  a  time  lo  receive  money  and  o.-yardt 
JVeh.  5.  11.  restore,  I  pray,  to  them  their  o.-parda 

OMITTED. 
Mat.  23. 23.  have  o.  weightier  matters  of  the  law 

OMNIPOTENT. 
Rev.  19.6.  Alleluia,  for  the  Lord  God  o.  reigneth 

ONCE. 
Gen.  18.  32.  he  said,  I  will  speak  yet  but  this  o. 
Kiof/.lO.n.forgivc  my  sin  only  this  o.entrcai  Lord 
30.10.Aaron  shall  make  an  atonement  on  horns  of 
altar  of  incense  o.  a  year,  Tier. 16.34.  i/eA.9.7,12. 
.\"u7n.  13.  30.  let  us  go  up  at  o.  and  possess  it 
JJeut.  7.  22.  thou  mayest  not  consume  them  at  o. 
.Josh.  6.  3.  ye  shall  go  round  the  city  o.  11,  14. 
.Judg.  6.  39. 1  will  speak  but  Ihis  o.  prove  but  this  o. 
16. 18.  come  up  0.  ||  28.  strengthen  me  this  o. 
1  .Sam.  26. 8.  let  me  smile  him  lo  the  earth  at  o. 
1  Kings  10.  22.  o.  in  three  years  came  the  navy  of 
Tarshish,  bringing  gold  and  silver,  2  CAr.  9.  21. 
•2  Kings  6.  10.  he  saved  himself  not  o.  or  twice 
A*eA..5.18.  0.  in  ten  days  all  store  of  wine  wasprepa 
13.  20.  lodged  without  Jerusalem  o.  or  twice 
./oA33. 14. G. speaks  o.  yea  twice, man  perceives  not 
40.  5.  o.  have  I  spoken,  but  I  will  not  answer 
fa'fl/. 62.11.  God  hath  spoken  o.  twice  I  have  heard 
74.  6.  they  break  down  the  carved  work  at  o. 

76.7.  who  may  stand  in  sight  when  o.  art  angry? 
89.  35.  0.  have  I  sworn  by  my  holiness,  I  will  not 

Prov.  28.  18.  lie  that  is  perverse  snail  fall  at  e. 
Isa.  42.  14.  I  will  destroy  and  devour  at  o. 

66.8.  in  one  day,  or  shalF  a  nation  be  born  at  o.? 
.Jer.  10.  18.  I  will  sling  out  the  inhabitants  at  o. 

13.  27.  wilt  thou  not  be  clean?  when  shall  it  o.  be? 

16.21.  behold,  I  will  this  o.  cause  them  to  know 

Nag.  2.  6.  yet  o.  it  is  a  little  while,  and  I  will  f  hake 

the  heavens,  and  the  earth,  and  sea,  Heb.  12. 26. 

J.ukc  1.3.25.  when  o.  the  master  of  house  is  risen  up 

2;}.  18.  they  cried  all  at  o.  saying,  not  this  man 
Rom.  6.  10.  in  that  he  died,  lie  died  unto  sin  <).. 

7.  9.  for  I  was  alive  without  the  law  o.  but  when 

1  Cor.  15.  6.  was  seen  of  above  500  brethren  at  o. 

2  Cor.ll.25.lhrice  beaten  with  rods,  o.  waslsloned 
Gal.  1. 23.  now  preacheih  the  faiih  he  o.  deslioyed 
F.ph.  5.  3.  but  fornication,  let  it  not  be  o.  named 
Phil.  4.  16.  ye  sent  o.  and  ngain  to  my  necessity 

I  7'Ae«.2.18.  would  have  come  to  you  o.  and  again 
Jleb.  6.  4.  those  who  were o.  enlightened  and  lasted 
7.27.  for  this hedid  0.  when  heotTercd  up  himself 

9.  26.  but  now  o.  in  end  of  the  world  he  appeared 
27.  as  it  is  appointeil  to  men  o.  lo  die,  after  this 
28.Chr.w.as  o.olTered  lo  bear  sins  of  many,  10. 10. 

10.  2.  because  that  tlie  wnrshippeis  o.  purged 
12. 27.  yet  0.  moresignifieth  the  removing  of  thoso 

1  Pet.  3. 18.  for  Christ  hath  suffered  o.  for  our  sins 
20. o. long-suffering  of  God  waited  in  days  of  Noc 

.Jude  3.  contend  for  the  faith  o.  delivered  to  saints 
5. put  yoa  in  remembrance, though  yeo.knew  Ihis 
ONE 

Signifies  [1]  One  nnly,  so  that  there  is  no  other  of 
that  kind,  1  Tim.  2.  5.  Heb.  10.  14.  [21 
The  rery  same.  Gen.  11.  1.  t  40.  .5.  [3]  P'ery 
few,  Deul.  32.-30.  Josh.  23.10.  [4]  The 
like,  1  Sam.  6.  4.  [5]  Some  body,  any  one, 
2  Sam.  2:t.  15. 

That  lliey  all  may  be  one,  .TohTfVi.  21.  May  be 
one  in  mind,  love,  design,  and  interest;  being 
first  united  by  faith  to  me,  and  by  me  ik  thee, 
that  so  their  union  may  in  some  sort  resembU 
Ihatineipressible  union  betwcenthyself  andme. 

That  they  may  be  one  in  us,  [1]  Ry  the  com- 
munication  and  inhabitation  of  the  Spirit  that 
proceeds  from  us.  [2]  In  ways  of  holiness. 
[3]  Ry  keeping  eomtntinion  with  us.  f4]  By 
following  our  example.  [5]  Reing  united  to  us 
by  faith,  they  may  be  united  to  one  another  ty 
hire. 

Ill  one  day,  Rev.  18.  8.  tAat  is,  suddenly  and 
uneiprejedly. 

One  thing  is  needful,  T.uke  10.  42.  .Ittendance 
upon  the  means  of  grace,  and  a  right  use  of 
them,is  ah.<!olutehi  neeessnry  in  ordt-r  to  the  sal- 
vation of  the  soul.  Mary  chose  to  take  the  ad- 
rantage  of  Christ's  company,  and  rather  to 
spend  an  Iwur  or  two  in  hearing  him,  than  in 
preparing  a  supper  for  him  ;  she  was  taking 
care  of  her  soul  with  reference  to  eternity, 
whirh  is  the  one  thing  needful. 

tVen.  2.  24.  n  man  shall  chtiivi'  to  his  wife,  and  ihey 
shall  be  o.  flesh,  Jir(it.l9..5..WarA  l».a.  1  Ctor.a.lC 
27.  38.  hnsl  thou  but  o.  Iiles.sini;,  mv  father? 
34. 14.  not  give  our  sister  too.  that  is  imcircume. 
42.  13.  0.  is  not.  32.  ||  44.  28.0.  went  oul  from  mo 

F.xod.\\.\.yei  will  bringo. plague  moreon  Pharaoh 
10. 46.  in  0.  house  shall  it  be  eaton,  not  carry  forth 


ONE 

Czo(i.l2.49.o.1a w  shall  be  to  him  that  is  homeborn, 
and  stranger,  Lev.  24.  22.  JVum.  i5.  IB,  29. 
23.  29.  I  will  not  drive  them  out  in  o.  year 
26.2.every  curtain  shall  have  o.  measure,  36. 9,15. 
6.  and  it  shall  be  o.  tabernacle,  36.  13. 
39.  23.  0.  loaf  of  bread,  o.  cake,  and  o.  wafer 
Lev.  5.  4.  he  shall  be  guilty  in  o.  of  these,  5,  13. 
16.  29.  whether  o.  of  your  own  country,  17.  15. 
26.26.  ten  women  shall  bake  your  bread  in  o.  oven 
fiTum.  10.  4.  if  they  blow  but  with  o.  trumpet 

16.  15.  1  have  not  taken  o.  as  from  them 

17.  3.  0.  rod  shall  be  for  the  head  of  the  house 
36.  8.  of  the  tribe  shall  be  wife  to  o.  of  the  family 

Deut.  1.  23.  I  took  twelve  men,  o.  of  a  tribe 
4.  42.  that  tieeing  to  o.  of  these  cities,  19.  5, 11. 

19.  15.  0.  witness  shall  not  rise  up  against  a  man 
24.  5.  but  he  shall  be  free  at  home  o.  year 

32.  30.  how  should  o.  chase  a  thousand  ? 
Josh.  10.  42.  all  these  Joshua  took  at  o.  time 

12.  9.  the  king  of  Jericho  o.  the  king  of  Ai  o. 
10.  the  king  of  Jerusalem  o.  king  of  Hebron  o. 
17. 14.  wjiy  hast  given  me  but  o.  lot  and  o. portion? 
17.  a  great  people,  thou  shalt  not  have  o.  lot  only 
Judg.^.'i.  whether  is  better,  that  o.  reign  over  you'? 
21.8.  what  0.  is  there  of  the  tribes  of  Israel? 
lSam.6.4.foro.[i!ague  was  on  you  alland  your  lords 
17.  for  Ashdod  o.  for  Gaza  o.  for  Ashkelon  t. 
11.  7.  and  they  came  out  with  o.  consent 

18.  21.  this  day  my  son-in-law  in  o.  of  the  twain 
2  Sam.  7.23.  what  o.  nation  is  like  thy  people? 

8.  2.  and  with  o.  full  line  to  keep  alive 

19.  7.  there  will  not  tarry  o.  with  thee  this  night 

23.  8.  whom  he  slew  at  o.  time,  1  Chron.  11. 11. 
15.  O  that  0.  would  give  me  to  drink  of  the  svater 

of  the  well  of  Bethlehem,  1  Oiron.  11.  17. 

1  Kings  1.  48.  given  me  o.  to  sit  on  my  throne 

2.  16.  I  ask  0.  petition  of  thee,  deny  me  not 

6.  25.  the  cherubims  were  of  o.  measure,  o.  size 
8. 56.  there  hath  not  failed  o.  word  of  his  promise 

11.  13.  I  will  give  o.  tribe  to  thy  son,  32,  36. 

22. 13.  behold  now  words  of  the  prophets  declare 
good  to  the  king  with  o.  mouth,  2  Chron.  18. 12. 

2  Kings  17.  27.  carry  thither  o.  of  the  priests 
28.  0.  of  the  priests  came  and  dwelt  in  Bethel 

18.24.  will  turn  away  face  ofo.  captain,  fsa.  36.9. 
ICAroK. 10. 13. for  asking  counsel  of  o. that  had  fame 

12.  14.  o.  of  the  least  was  over  a  hundred 
\LChron.  32.  12.  he  shall  worship  before  o.  altar 
Nek.  1.  2.  Hanani,  o.  of  my  brethren,  came 

11.  1.  bring  o.  often  to  dwell  in  Jerusalem 
Job  9.  3.  he  cannot  answer  him  o.  of  a  thousand 
t33.  neither  is  there  o.  that  should  argue 
21.  23.  0.  dietli  in  his  full  strength,  at  ease 
5J3.  13.  he  is  in  o.  mind,  and  who  can  turn  him? 

33.  23.  if  an  interpreter  n.  among  a  thousand 
Psal.  22.  t  20.  deliver  my  only  o.  from  the  dog 

35.  1 17.  rescue  my  only  o.  from  the  lions 
49.  16.  be  not  afraid  when  o.  is  made  rich 
72.  t  15.  0.  shall  3ive  him  of  the  gold  of  Sheba 
82.  7.  and  shall  fall  like  o.  of  the  princes 
86.  t  2.  for  I  am  o.  whom  thou  favourest 
89.  19.  I  have  laid  help  on  o.  that  is  mighty 
137.  3.  saying,  sing  us  o.  of  the  songs  of  Zion 
Vrov.  1. 14.  cast  in  thy  lot,  let  us  all  have  o.  purse 

26.  17.  is  like  a.  that  taketh  a  dog  by  the  ears 
Kccl.X.  4. 0. general,  passeth  away, another  cometli 

2. 14.  I  perceived  thato.  event  happen,  to  them  all 

3.  19.  yea,  they  have  all  o.  breath,  all  is  vanity 

20.  all  go  unto  o.  place,  all  are  of  dust,  6.  6. 
4.9.  two  belter  than  o  \\  11.  how  can  o.  be  warm? 

12.  ifo.  prevail  against  him, two  shall  withstand 

7.  27.  counting  o.  by  o.  to  find  out  the  account 

9.  18.  but  0.  sinner  destroyeth  much  good 

12. 11.  words,  which  are  given  from  o.  shepherd 

Cant.4.9.thou  hast  ravished  my  heart,my  sister,my 

spouse,  Witho. of  thy  eyes, witho.chainof  thy  neck 

6.  9.  my  undefiled  is  bul  o.  she  is  the  only  o. 
fsa.  5. 10.  ten  acres  of  vineyard  shall  yield  o.  bath 

14.  32.  what  shall  o.  answer  messengers  of  nation? 

19.  18.  a.  shall  be  called  the  city  of  destruction 

23.  1.5.  according  to  the  days  ofo.  king 

27.  12.  ye  shall  be  gathered  o.  by  o.  O  Israel 
30.  17.  0.  thousand  shall  flee  at  the  rebuke  ofo. 
34. 16.no  0.  of  these  shall  fail,  none  want  her  mate 
41.  25.  I  have  raised  up  o.  from  the  north 

27. 1  will  give  Jerus.  o.  that  bringethgood  tidings 
44.  5.  0.  shall  say  I  am  the  Lord's  and  another 
45. 24.  surely  shall  a.  say,  in  L.  have  I  rightenusn. 
65.  8.  0.  saiih,  di^stroy  it  not,  a  blessing  is  in  it 
Ezek.  1. 16.  they  four  had  o.  likeness,  and  a  wheel 
19.  3.  she  brought  up  o.  of  her  whelps,  it  became 
21. 19.  botn  twain  shall  come  forth  out  of  o.  land 
23.  13.  then  f  saw  that  they  took  both  o.  way 
33.  21.  that  0.  that  had  escaped  came  unio  ma 

24.  .Abraham  was  o.  ]|  32.  as  a  lovely  song  ofo. 
34.23.  I  will  set  up  o.  shepherd  over  them,  37.24. 
37.  17.  and  they  shall  oecome  o.  in  thy  hand 

19.  make  them  o.  stick  {|  22.  o.  nation,  o.  kiijg 
48.  31.  0.  gatcof'Reuben  ||  32.  o.  gate  of  Joseph 
Dan-  2.  0.  there  U  but  o.  decree  for  you 
419 


ONE 

Dan.  4. 19.  then  Daniel  was  astonied  for  o.  hour 

7.  13.  behold,  o.  like  the  Son  of  man,  10.  16,  18. 
«.  27.  he  shall  contirm  the  covenant  for  o.  week 

11.  7.  out  of  a  branch  of  her  roots  shall  o.  stand 
lO.o.  shall  certainly  come  and  overflow, and  pass 
27.  they  shall  speak  lies  at  o.  table,  not  prosper 

Nos.  1. 11.  Israel  shall  appoint  themselves  o.  head 
Amos  4.  S.  two  or  three  cities  wandered  to  o.  city 

6.  9.  if  there  remain  ten  men  in  o.  house 
Zeph.  3.  9.  to  serve  the  Lord  with  o.  consent 
Zech.  3.  9.  behold,  on  o.  stone  shall  be  seven  eyes 

11.  8.  I  will  cut  otF  three  shepherds  in  o.  month 
14.  9.  there  shall  be  o.  Lord,  and  his  name  o. 

Mai.  2. 15.  did  he  not  make  o.7  and  wherefore  o.l 

Mat.  3.  3.  the  voice  ofo.  crying  in  the  wilderness, 

Mark  1.  3.  Luke  3.  4.  John  1.  23. 

5. 18. 0.  jot,  or  0.  little  shall  not  pass  from  the  law 

19.  whoso  shall  break  o. of  these  leastcommand. 

29.  thato.  of  thy  members  should  perish,  30. 

36.  thou  canst  not  make  o.  hair  white  or  black 

6.27.  which  of  you  can  add  o.  cubit  to  his  stature? 

29.  was  not  arrayed  like  o.  of  these,  Luke  12.  27. 
10.  42.  shall  give  to  drink  to  o.  of  these  little  ones 

12. 11.  what  man  among  you  shall  have  o.  sheep? 

16.  14.  Elias  and  Jeremias,  or  o.  of  the  prophets, 
Mark  6.  15.  |  8.  23.  Luke  9.  8,  19. 

17.  4.  three  tabernacles,  o.  for  thee,  o.  for  Moses, 
and  0.  for  Elias,  Mark  9.  5.  Luke  9.  .33. 

18.6.shall  ofTend  o.  of  these,  Jtfarit9.42.Li(/ce  17.2. 
10.  take  heed  ye  despise  not  o.  of  these  little  ones 
14.  that  0.  of  these  little  ones  should  perish 
16.  if  not  hear,  then  take  with  thee  o.or  two  more 

19. 17.  none  good  but  o.  Mark  10. 18.  Ltike  18. 19. 

20. 12.  saying,  these  last  have  wrought  but  o.hour 

21.  35.  they  beat  o.  and  killed  another,  and  stoned 

22.  5.  they  went  their  ways,  o.  to  his  farm,  another 

23.  4.  but  they  themselves  will  not  move  them 
with  o.  of  their  fingers,  Lxike  11.  46 

8.  for  o.  is  your  Master,  even  Christ,  10. 
9.0. is  your  Father  ||  25.40.as  ye  have  done  it  to  o 

25.  15.  he  gave  to  o.  five  talents,  to  another  two 
18.  but  he  that  had  received  the  o.  24. 
45.  as  ye  did  it  not  to  o.  of  the  least  of  these 

26.21.  Jesus  said,  verily  I  say  to  you,  thato.  of  you 
shall  betray  me,  Mark  14.  18.  John  13.  21 

40.  could  ye  not  watch  o.  hour  ?  Mark  14.  37. 
Mark  8.  14.  nor. had  they  more  than  o.  loaf 

9.  37.  whoever  shall  receive  o.  of  such  children 
38.  we  saw  o.  casting  out  devils,  Luke  9.  49. 

11.29.1  will  also  ask  of  you  o.  question, answer  m( 

12.  6.  having  yet  o.  son,  he  sent  him  also  to  them 

14.  19.  and  they  began  to  say  o.  by  o.  is  it  I? 

15.  6.  at  the  feast  he  released  o.  Luke^X  17. 
iMke.  3.16.  John  said,  but  o. mightier  than  I  cometh 

7.  8. 1  say  to  o.  go,  and  he  goeth,  and  to  another 
8. 42.  he  had  o.only  daughter,  and  she  lay  a  dyin 

12.  52.  there  shall  be  five  in  o.  house  divided 
15.7.j«ym  heaven  over  o.sinner  that  repentetli,10. 
16. 17.  to  pass,  than  o.  tittle  of  the  law  to  fail 

30.  nay,  but  ifo.  went  from  the  dead,  31. 

17. 22.  to  see  o.  of  the  days  of  the  Son  of  man 
22.  30.  let  him  sell  his  garment,  and  buy  o. 

■John  1.  26.  but  there  standeth  o.  among  you 
6.70.  0.  of  you  is  a  devil  ||  7.21.  have  done  o.work 

8.  9.  went  out  o.  by  o.  beginning  at  the  eldest 
18.  I  am  0.  that  bear  witness  of  myself 

41.  they  said,  we  have  o.  Father,  even  God 

10.  16.  and  there  shall  be  o.  fold,  and  o.  shepherd 
30.  I  and  my  Father  are  o. 

11.  52.  should  gather  in  n.  the  children  of  God 

12.  48.  he  hath  o.  that  judgeth  him,  the  word 
17.  11.  that  they  may  be  o.  as  we  are,  21,  22. 

23.  that  they  may  be  made  perfect  in  o. 
18. 17.  art  thou  not  o.  of  this  man's  disciples?  25. 
^cfsl.22.musto. be  ordained  to  be  witness  of  rcsur. 
4.  32-  believed,  were  ofo.  heart  and  o.  of  soul 

9.  11.  go  and  inquire  for  n.  Saul  of  Tarsus 

13.  25.  there  cometh  o.  after  me,  whose  shoes 
17.  7.  saying,  that  there  is  another  king,  o.  Jesus 

26.  God  hath  made  ofo.  blood  all  nations 
24. 21.  except  it  be  for  this  o.  voice,  of  resurrect  ion 
2.5.  19.  had  questions  of  o.  Jesus,  who  was  dead 
28.  25.  after  that  Paul  had  spoken  o.  word 

/Jom.5.7.forscarcely  for  a  righteous  man  will  o.die 

15.  for  if  through  the  offence  ofo.  many  be  dead 

16.  and  not  as  it  was  by  o.  that  sinned,  for  the 
judgment  was  by  o.  to  condemnation 

17.death  reigned  by  o. shall  reign  in  life  by  o.J.C. 

18.  by  the  offence  of  o.  so  by  righteousness  ofo. 

19.  so  by  obedience  of  0.  shall  many  be  righteous 
9.10.  but  when  Rebekah  also  had  conceived  by  o. 

I  Cor.  3.  4  for  while  o.  saith,  I  am  of  Paul 
8.  he  Ihalplantcthand  ho  that  watereth  are  o. 
5. 1.  such  fornication,tliat  o.  have  his  father's  wife 
8.  4.  and  thai  there  is  none  other  God  but  o. 
6.  to  us  there  is  but  o.  God,  and  o.  Lord  Jesus 
9.24.  all  run,  but  o.  receiveth  the  prize 

10.  17.  we  being  many  are  o.  bread  and  o.  body 

11.  21.  0.  is  hungry  ||  14.  27.  let  o.  interpret^ 

12.  8.  to  0.  is  given  by  Spirit  the  word  of  wiadom 


ONE 

1  Cot.  13.  13.  by  o.  Spirit  are  baptized  into  o.  body 
14.  24.  there  come  in  o.  that  bclieveth  not,  or  o 

unlearned,  he  is  convinced  of  all,  judged  of  all 
31.  for  ye  may  all  prophesy  o.  by  o.  that  all  may 
]5.8.it  was  seen  of  me  as  ofo.  born  out  of  due  time 

2  Cor.  5.14.  ifo.  died  for  all,  then  were  all  dead 
11.  2.  for  I  have  espoused  you  to  o.  husband 

24.  five  times  received  I  forty  stripes  saveo. 
13.ll.be  perfect,  be  of  good  comfort, be  ofo.  mind, 
Fhil.  2.2.  1  Pc^3.8.  Rev.  17.  13. 
Oal.3. 16.  but  as  ofo.  ||  28.  ye  are  all  u.  in  Christ 
5.  14.  for  all  the  law  is  fulfilled  in  o.  word 
F.ph.  1. 10.  he  might  gather  together  in  o.  all  things 

2.  14.  who  hath  made  both  o.  ||  15.  o.  new  man 
18. through  him  we  both  have  access  by  o.  Spirit 

4.  4.  as  ye  are  called  in  o.  hope  of  your  calling 
5.  0.  faith,  0.  Lord,  o.  baptism  ||  6.  o.  God 

PAiZ.1.27.that8tand  fast  with  o.  spirit,with  o.  mind 
1  Tim.  3.  2.  the  husband  ofo.  wife,  Tit.  1.  6. 
4.  a  bishop,  o.  that  tuletli  well  his  own  house 

3.  12.  the  deacons  be thehusbandsafo.  wife 
Tit.  1.  12.  0.  of  themselves,  even  a  prophet,  said 
Ueb.  2.  6.  but  o.  in  a  certain  place  testifieth 

11.  and  they  that  are  sanctified  are  all  ofo. 

5.  12.  ye  have  need  that  o.  teach  you  again 
10. 12. but  this  man  after  he  had  offeredo.  sacrifice 

14.  for  by  o.  offering  he  hath  perfected  for  ever 

11.  12.  therefore  sprang  there  even  ofo.  so  many 

12.  10.  for  0.  morsel  ot  meat  sold  his  birth-right 
13.14.here  wehavenocity,but  we  seeko.  to  come 

Jam.  2. 10.  yet  offend  in  o.  point,  he  is  guilty  of  all 
5.  19.  if  any  of  you  err,  and  o.  convert  him 
1  .fohn  5. 7.  these  three  are  o.  ||  8.  these  agree  in  o. 
KeD.9.12.0.  woeis  past,  there  come  two  woes  mute 

13.  3.  I  saw  0.  of  his  heads  as  wounded  to  death 
14. 14. on  the  cloud  o.  sat  like  unto  the  Son  of  man 
17.12.receive  power  as  kingso.hour  with  the  beast 
18.  10.  for  in  o.  hour  is  thy  judgment  come 

17.  in  o.  hour  so  great  riches  come  to  nought 
19.thatgreat  city, for  in  o.hour isslie  made  desol. 
21.  21.  every  several  gate  was  of  o.  pearl 
See  Accord,  Another,  Man,  God. 
As  ONE. 
Gen.  3.  22.  behold,  the  man  is  become  as  a.  of  ug 
19.14.  but  beseemed  a^  o. that  mocked  to  his  sons   ■ 
49. 16.  Dan  shall  judge  as  o.  of  the  tribes  of  Israel 
Exod.  12. 48.  be  circumcised,  and  he  shall  Le  as  o. 
that  is  born  in  the  land,  Lev.  19.  34.  I 
24.  22. 
JViiWi.l2.  12.  let  her  not  be  as  o.  dead,  of  whom 
.Josh.  10. 2.  Gibeon  a  great  city,  as  o.  of  royal  cities 
./iirf^.  17.11. young  man  was  to  him  as  o.  of  his  sons 

1  Sam. 17.  36.  uncircum.  Philistine  be  a.50. of  them 
20.  20.  as  when  o.  doth  hunt  a  partridge  in  mount. 

2  Sam.  6. 20.  uncovered  as  o.  of  the  vain  fellows 
9.  11.  he  shall  eat  at  my  table  ns  o.  of  king's  sons 
13.  13.  thou  shalt  be  as  o.  of  the  fools  in  Israel 
14  13.  the  king  speaketh  this  as  a.  that  is  faulty 
17.  12.  there  shall  not  be  left  so  much  as  o. 

'iKings  fi.S.butas  o.wasfelling  a  beam,axcheadfell 
2  CAr.  5. 13.  the  trumpeters  and  singers  were  as  o. 
Job  2. 10.  thou  speakest  as  o.  of  the  foolish  women 
12.  4.  I  am  as  o.  mocked  of  his  neighbour 
19. 11.  hecounteth  me  to  him  as  o.  of  his  enemies 
Psal.  35.  14.  as  o.  that  mourneth  for  his  mother 
78.  65.  then  the  Lord  awaked  as  o.  out  of  sleep 
89. 10.  thou  hast  broken  Rahab,  as  o.  that  is  slain 
119. 162.  I  rejoice  as  o.  that  findelh  great  spoil 
Pro?).  6.11.  thy  poverty  as  o.  that  travaileth,  24.3. 
Feci.  3.  19.  as  the  o.  dieth,  so  dieth  the  other 
Cajii!.  1.  7.  for  why  should  I  be  as  o.  lurneth  aside'? 
8.10.then  I  was  in  his  eyes  os  o.  that  found  favour 
Jsa.  10.  14.  as  o.  that  gathereth  eggs  that  are  left 
29.  4.  thy  voice  as  o.  that  hath  a  familiar  spirit 
66.  13.  as  0.  whom  his  mother  comforteth 
,/fr.lO.ll.I  will  break  aso. breaketh  potter's  vessel 
7.ech.  12.  10.  mourn  aso.  in  bitterness  for  first-bora 
Mat.  7.  29.  as  o.  having  authority,  Mark  1.  22. 
./l/ari6.I5.  oroso.of  the  prophets  ||  9.26.  os  o.dead 
Luke  15. 19.  make  me  as  o.  of  thy  hired  servants 
2.3.  14.  this  man  as  o.  that  pervorteth  the  people 
1  Cor.  7. 25.  OS  0.  that  hath  obtained  mercy  of  Lord 
9.  26.  so  fight  I,  not  as  o.  that  beateth  the  air 
See  Day,  Heart,  Every. 
Is  ONE. 
Gen.  11.6.  the  people  is  n.\\  4I.25.thcdreamiso.26. 
F.zod.  2.  6.  this  is  o.  of  the  Hebrew  children 
/)ett«.6.4.the  Lord  our  God  is  o.Lord,  Jt/arA  12.29. 
Tiuth  2.  20.  Boaz  is  o.  of  our  next  kinsmen 
Jfat.l'i.G.  in  this  place  IS  0. greater  than  the  temple 
Mark  14.  20.  it  is  o.  of  the  twelve  that  dippeth 
liom.  2.  OS.  he  is  not  a  Jew  that  is  o.  outwardly 
29.  but  he  is  a  Jew  who  is  o.  inwardly 
3.  30.  seeing  it  is  o.  God  who  shall  justify 
lOr.  6.  17.  that  is  joined  to  the  Lord  is  o.  spirit 
12. 12.  for  as  body  is  a.  and  hath  many  members 
15.  40.  but  the  glory  of  the  celestial  is  o.  and  glory 
«7ai.3.20.  is  not  a  mediator  of  one,  but  God  iso. 
Col.  4.  9.  with  Onesimus,  who  is  o.  of  you,  12. 
See  Little,  Man. 


ONE 

J^ot  ONE. 
(Ten.  2t.  41.  if  they  give  not  thee  o.  shall  be  clear 
Ezod.  8.  31.  there  remained  nut  o.  10.  19. 

9.  6.  but  of  the  cattle  of  Israel  died  not  o.  7. 

12.  30.  not  a  house  where  there  was  not  o.  dead 
7?eut.  1.35. shall  n.o.of  these  men  see  that  good  laud 

2.  3R.  thore  was  not  o.  ciiy  too  strDng  tor  us 
2  .Sa/rt.  13.  30.  and  there  is  not  o.  of  them  left 

IT.  13.  till  there  be  not  o.  small  stone  found  there 
XKin^'s  16. 11.  he  left  him  n.  o.  that  |)is9elli  a?,  wall 
Jo6  14.  4.  a  clean  thing  out  of  an  unclean,  not  o. 

31.  15.  and  did  not  o.  fashion  ue  in  the  womb? 

41.9.  shall  n.  o.  be  east  down  at  the  siaht  of  him? 

Psal.  14.  3.  ore  altogelher  become  filthy,  there  is 

none  that  doeth  good,  not  o.53.  3.  Hom.Z.  12. 

105.  37.  there  was  n.  o.  feeble  person  among  them 
/sa.40.2t).for  thathe  isstroiigin  power,  n.o.  failctli 
iVat.l.-'.lO.takc  heed  ye  desp. n.o.of  these  little  ones 
Rom.  3.  10.  there  is  none  righteous,  no  7iot  o. 
1  Cor.  6.  5.  no  not  o,  that  shall  be  able  to  judge 

12.  14.  for  the  body  is  not  o.  member,  but  many 

See  MiOHTY. 

ONE  in  reference  to  other. 

^cn.4.19.  the  name  ofo.  was  Adah,  of otAerZillah 

13.  11.  they  separated  the  o.  from  the  other 
47.  2r.  fiom  the  o.  end  of  Egypt  to  the  other 

F.zod.  1.15.  name  ofo.  Sbiphrah,  oftheotA^r  Puah 

14.  20.  so  that  the  o.  came  not  near  the  other 
17. 12.  stayed  up  his  hands  on  o.side,  and  the  otAfr 
18.3.  nameof  theo.  Geishom,of  the  other  Eliezcr 

iy«o.5.7.  two  pigeon.s,  o.  for  a  sin-offering,  thcotAcr 
foraburntomriiig,  12.  8.  JVum.  6. 11.  ]  8.  V 

16.  8.  o.  lot  for  the  Lord,  otAcr  tor  the  scape-goat 
J\'um.  11.26.  name  of  the  o.  Eldad,theolAfrMedad 

28.  4.  0.  lamb  in  the  morning,  the  other  at  even 
Deut.  4.  32.  ask  from  o.  side  of  heaven  to  the  other 

13.  7.  from  the  o.  end  of  the  earth  to  other,  2S.  64. 
.Judg.  16.29.  took  hold  ofo.  pillar  and  of  the  other 
Kiitli  1.4. name  of  theo.  was  Orphali,  of  otAcr  Ruth 

1  Sam.  1.2.  name  ofo.  Hannah,  the  otA^r  Peninnah 

2  Sam.  4. 2.  name  of  o.  Baanah,  of  the  otA.  Rechab 
12.  1.  there  wtrc  two  men,o.  rich,  the  otAcr  poor 

1  A'in "'■'•■  3.  23.  o.saitli,  this  Is  my  son,  the  otAfrsaith 
25.  give  half  to  the  o.  and  half  to  the  otAer 
20.29.  tliey  pitched  o.  against  the  ot  Af?-  seven  days 
AV;A.4  17.  0.  hand  wrought,  with  of  A.  held  weapon 
Eccl.  3.  19.  as  the  o.  dii;lh,  so  dieth  the  otAer 
7. 14.  God  haili  sot  the  o.  over-against  the  otAer 
Jer.  12.  12.  for  the  sword  of  the  Lord  shall  devour 
fromo.  end  of  the  land  to  the  otAer  end,2.i.  33. 
24.2.0.  b.i.sket  had  good  figs,  otAer  basket  had  bad 
.KieA.21. 16  go  thceo.  way  or  otAer  on  right  or  left 
f)an.  B.  3.  but  o.  horn  was  higher  than  the  otAer 

12.  5.  o.  on  this  side  of  river,  the  other  on  that  side 
Z.ech.  1 1.  7.  the  o.  I  called  Beauty,  the  other  Bands 
Mat.  6. 24.  he  will  bate  the  o.  and  love  the  other,  or 
hold  to  theo.  and  despise  the  otAer,  /.nice  16.13. 
20.  21.  my  two  sons  may  sit,  the  o.  on  thy  right 
hand,  and  the  otAer  on  thy  lofk,  Mark  10.  37. 
24.  31.  gather  from  o.  end  of  heaven  to  the  otAer 

40.  o.  taken,  the  otA.  left,  41.  Lvke  17.  34,  35,36. 
Mark  15.  27.  they  crucify  two  thieves,  the  o.  on  his 

right  hand,  the  otAer  on  his  left,  I.ttke  23.  33. 
AuA-eG.29.  if  smite  thee  on  o.  cheek,  offer  the  other 

7.  41.  the  o.  owed  500  ponce,  the  otAer  fifty 

J7. 24.  lightning  out  ofo.  part,  sliineth  to  the  otAer 
18.  10.  the  o.  a  Pharisee,  the  other  a  publican 
7oAn  20.  12.0.  angd  at  the  head,  other  at  the  feet 
Jict-ilT).  39.  that  they  departed  asunder  o.  from  otA. 
23. 6.  the  0.  part  Sadducecs,  the  otAer  Phari.sees 

1  Cor.  7. 5.  defraud  ye  not  o.  the  otAer,  except  it  be 

2  Cor.  2. 16.  to  0.  thesavour  of  life,  tootAerofdeath 
C/al.  4. 22. 0.  by  bond-maid,  otAer  by  a  frire- woman 

5.  17.  and  these  are  contrary,  the  o.  to  the  otAer 
Jiev.  17.  10.  and  o.  is,  the  other  is  not  yet  come 
Sec  Pkople. 
rAere  in  ONE. 
/,ep.7.7.  trespass-offering,  tAere  i>o.law  for  them 
Jadp.  21.  6.  tAere  is  o.  tribe  cut  off  from  Israel 
Esth.  4.  11.  tAere  MO.  law  of  his  to  put  him  to  death 
Eccl.i.H.  there  is  o.  alone,  and  there  is  not  a  second 
9. 2.  tAere  i»  o.  event  to  righteous  and  the  wifked 

3.  this  ill  an  evil,  that  tAere  Is  o.  event  to  all 
7>on.  2. 9.  if  yo  will  not,  tAere  is  o.  decree  for  you 
A'oA.  I.  II.  tA.  IS  o.  come  out  of  thee  imaginetlievil 
Mark  12.32.  tA.  is  o.  God,  1  Tim.  2.  5.  ./,iw.2. 19. 
John  5.  45.  tAerr  is  o.  that  acniselh  you,  even  Mos. 

8.  50.  tAere  is  n.  that  seekelh  and  jiidgeth 

1  Cor.  l5.39.tA.i.'o.  kiiidorfleKhofnifn.anoth.of 

41.  tArre  m  o.  glory  of  mm,  imothr'r  of  moon 
Jam.  A.  12.  tAcrcMo.  Inw-giver,  who  is  able  to  save 

ONEo/  them. 
Oen.  42.27.  oio.  o/tAemopennd  hissack  in  the  inn 
Ezod.  14.28.  there  remained  notsomurhas  o.  ofth. 
JVum.  If).  15.  neitli<"r  have  I  hurt  o.  of  them 
/)ein.'23  5  if  0.  ofthim  die,  and  have  no  child 
Juiiff   n.  35.  thou  art  o.  nf  thrni  that  trouble  mo 

1  ^am.  17.  36.  this  Philistine  .Inll  be  as  u.  of  (Ann 

2  .'^ain.  17. 22.  lacked  n<it  o.  o//A.wa«  not  over  Jord. 
20.  ]{«.  I  uin  o.  o/  tAcm  that  arc  ncaceabia  in  Israel 

4::0 


ONL  , 

2.'?nii.24.12.3lhings,chooseo.o/t*.  1  CAr.  21. 10. 
1  A'lHi'.s  18.40.  prophets  of  Baal,  let  not  0.0/ tA.CBca. 

19.2.  if  I  make  not  thy  life  as  the  hie  ot'o.vf  them 
22.  13.  let  thy  word  be  like  the  word  of  o.  of  them 

Ps.  34. 20.  keep,  his  bones,  not  o.  of  them  is  broken 

53. 3.  every  o.  ofth.  is  gone  back,  none  doeth  good 
58.  8.  as  a  snail  let  every  o.  of  them  puss  away 
64.  6.  inward  thought  of  every  o.  of  them  is  deep 
84.  7.  every  o.  of  them  in  Zion  ajipearelh  before  G. 
106. 1 1 .  their  enemies,  there  was  not  o.  of  them  left 

Proi'.22.26.be  not  thou  o.  of  them  that  strike  hands 
KccMO.lS.labourof  foolish  wearielh  every  o.  ofth. 
Jer.  15.  10.  yet  every  o.  of  them  doth  curse  ine 
Exek.  11.  5.  for  I  know  the  things,  every  o.  of  them 
Dan.  8.  9.  out  of  o.  of  them  came  forth  a  little  horn 
Obad.M.  and  cast  lots,  even  thou  wastas  o  o/tAem 
^fat. 10.29.twosparrows,ando.o/tAemshall  not  fall 
on  the  ground  without  your  Father,  f.ukc  12.  6. 
18.12.have  sheep,  o.  o/t.be  gone  astray,  AuAe  15.4 
26. 73.  surely  thou  art  o.  of  them,  Mark  14.  69,  70 
/yuAe  17.15.0.0/ tA.when  he  saw  that  he  was  healed 
./ohn  6.  7.  that  every  o.  of  them  may  lake  a  little 
7.  50.  that  came  to  Jesus  by  night,  being  o.  of  them 
12.  2.  Lazarus  was  o.  of  them  that  sat  at  the  table 
.^cts  7.  2-1.  and  seeing  o.  of  them  suffer  wron,^ 

11.  28.  and  there  stooil  up  o.  of  them  named  Agab. 

ONE  tAinor. 
./bsA.23. 14.  not  o.  tAin^  hath  failed  of  all  the  good 
.fob  9.  22.  this  is  «.  thing,  therefore  I  said  it 
Psal.  27.  4.  0.  tAi'n^  have  I  desired  of  the  Lord 
Keel.  3.  19.  even  o.  thing  befalleth  them 
Mat.lX  .24.1  will  ask  you  o.  thing,  Luked.  9.  ]  20.3. 
Mark  10.  21.  o.  thing  thou  lackest,  Luke  18.  22. 
liuhe  10.42.thou  art  careful,  but  o.  thing  is  needful 
.fohn  O.'i^.o. thing  I  know,that  whereas  I  was  blind 
.^et.s  19.32.some  cried  o.tA;n/7-,3onie  another,21.  34. 
rA(7.3.13.  but  this  o.tA^i^  I  do,  I  press  toward  mark 
2  Pet.  3.  8.  but  be  not  ignorant  of  this  o.  thintr 

Wicked  ONE. 
Mat.  13.19.  then  comelh  the  wicked  o.and  catchelh 

.38.  the  tares  are  the  children  of  the  wicked  o. 
l./oAn2.I3.bccauseye  have  overcome  wicked o.\i. 
3.  12.  not  as  Cain,  who  was  of  that  wicked  o. 

5.  18.  and  that  wicked  o.  toucheth  him  not 

ONES. 

/ia. 13.3.1  have  commanded  my  sanrtifiedo.I  have 

also  called  my  mighty  o.  for  mine  anger 

Dan.  8.  8.  and  for  it  came  up  four  notable  o. 

11.17.  Sethis  face  toenter,  and  uprighto.  with  him 

ONLY. 

t7en.6.5. thoughts  of  his  heart  are  o.evil  continually 

7.  23.  Noah  o.  remained  alive,  and  those  in  the  ark 
19.  8.  0.  to  these  men  do  nothing 
22.2.take  now  thy  son, thine  o.  son  Isaac,  thou  lov. 

12.thou  hast  not  withheld  thy  son,  thine  o.son,  16. 
24.  8.  0.  bring  not  my  son  thither  again 
27.  13.  0.  obey  my  voice,  and  go  foirh  me  them 
34.  22.  0.  herein  will  the  men  consent  to  us,  23. 
41.  40.  0.  in  the  throne  will  I  be  greater  than  thou 
47.  22.  0.  the  land  of  priests  bought  he  not,  26. 
F.zod.  8.  9.  they  may  remain  in  the  river  o.  11. 

28.  f  will  let  you  go,  o.  you  shall  not  go  far  away 
10.  17.  now  forgive  my  sin,  I  pray  thee,  o.  this  once 

that  he  may  lake  away  from  me  this  death  o. 
21.  0.  let  your  flocks  and  your  herds  be  stayed 
12.16.ev. man  must  eat,  that  o.  may  be  done  ofyou 

21.  19.  0.  he  shall  pay  for  the  loss  of  his  time 
22.20.  that  sacrificeth  to  any,  save  lo  the  Lord  o 

57.  fiir  that  is  his  covering,  o.  it  is  his  raiment 
Ae«.  21.  23.  0.  he  shall  not  go  in  unto  the  vail 
27.  26.  0.  the  firstling  of  the  beasts,  it  is  the  liord's 
.Vum.  1.  49.  0.  thou  shall  not  number  tribe  of  Levi 

12.  2.  hath  the  Lord  indeed  o.  spoken  by  Moses? 
14.  9.  rebel  not  yo  against  the  Lord  o. 

18.  3.  0.  they  shall  not  come  nigh  the  vessels 
20.  19.  I  will  n.  go  through  on  my  feet,  Dexit.  2. 28. 

22.  35.  o.  the  word  that  I  shall  speak  lo  thee 
31.  22.  o.  the  gold  and  the  silver,  the  bra>8 
36.  6.  o.  marry  lo  the  family  of  their  father's  tribe 

Deut.  4.  9.  o.  take  heed  to  ihysi'll",  keep  thy  soul 
12.  ye  saw  no  similitude,  o.  yo  heard  a  voice 

8.  3.  know  that  man  doth  not  live  by  bread  o. 
10.  15.  o.  the  Lord  hud  a  delight  in  thv  fathers 
12.  16.  o.  ye  shall  not  eat  the  blood,  23.  |  15.  2.3. 
22.  25.  the  man  o.  that  lay  with  Iht  shall  die 
2^.  13.  thou  shall  be  above  o.  not  be  bcnealh 

29.  Iliou  shall  be  o.  oppressed  ami  spoili'd,  33. 
29.  14.  nor  with  you  o.  do  I  muke  jhis  covcnnni 

Josh.].7  o.  he  Ihou  strong  arid  very  cournceou',  18. 

17.  o.  Lord  thy  God  he  with  thee  as  with  Moses 

n.  15.  o.  that  day  compaBsod  the  cily  seven  times 

17.  o.Rahab  shall  live  ||  11.  13,  burned  llazor  o. 

17.  17.  thou  shall  not  have  olio  lot  o. 

Jude.^.t.  lliey  might  o.  know  to  tfaeh  them  war 

6.  37.  if  dew  be  on  Iho  fleece  o.  and  dry  on  cartli 
39.  let  it  not  bo  dry  o.  upon  lb.'  fleece,  40. 

10.  15.  deliver  us  o.  we  pray  ihoe,  this  day 

11.  34.  came  lo  meet  him,  and  she  was  hiso.  child 
16.  ^3.  Btreiiethen  mo,  I  pray  thee,  o.  this  once 

19.  20.  the  man  said,  o.  lodjo  not  in  the  street 


ONL 

1  S<im.l.l3.  Han.  0.  nnoved  her  ips,Toiec  not  heard 
23.  0.  the  Lord  establish  his  word 

5.  4  0.  the  stump  of  Uagon  was  left  to  him 
7.  3.  and  serve  him  o.  4.  Mat.  4.  10.  J.,uke  4.  8. 
12.  24.  o.  fear  the  Lord,  and  serve  him  in  truth 

18.  17.  0.  be  thou  valiant  for  me,  and  fight  battlet 
20.  14.  not  0.  while  I  live,  shew  mc  kindness 

39.  0.  Jonathan  and  David  knew  the  matter 

2  .Sam.  13.  32.  Jonadab  said,  o.  Ainnon  is  dead,  33. 
17.  2.  the  people  flee,  and  I  will  smite  the  king  o 

20.  21.  deliver  him  o.  and  1  will  depart  from  city 
23. 10.  the  people  returned  after  him  o.  to  spoil 

IS'iin^s  3.2.0. the  people  sacrificed  in  high  places,  3. 
4. 19.  Gebar  was  the  o.  othcer  who  was  in  the  land 

12.  20.  none  followed  David,  but  Judah  o. 

14.  8.  David  did  thato.  which  was  right  in  my  eyes 
13.  he  0.  of  Jeroboam  shall  come  to  the  grave 

15.  5.  save  o.  in  the  matter  of  Uriah  the  liiitite 

19.  10.  I  o.  am  left,  and  they  seek  my  life,  14. 
22.  31.  fight  not,  save  o.  with  the  king  of  Israel 

2  Kings  10.  23.  but  the  worshippers  of  Baal  o. 
17. 18.  there  was  none  left  but  the  tribe  of  Judah  o. 
19.  19.  thou  art  the  Lord,  even  thou  o.  Isa.  37.  20. 

1  Chron.  22.  12.  o.  the  Lord  give  thee  wisdom 

2  Chron.  2.  6.  save  o.  to  burn  sacrifice  before  him 
6. 30.  thou  o.knowest  the  hearts  of  children  uf  men 
33.  17.  did  sacrifice,  yet  to  the  Lord  their  God  e. 

KitA.l. 16. the  queen  hath  not  done  wrong  to  kingo. 

.fob  1.  12.  o.  on  himself  put  not  forih  thy  hand 
15.  I  o.  am  escaped  lo  tell  thee,  16,  17,  19. 
13. 20.  0.  do  not  two  things  lo  me,  then  will  I  not 
34. 29.  whether  done  against  a  nation  or  a  man  o. 

Psal.  4. 8.  thou.  Lord,  o.  makest  me  dwell  in  safety 
51.  4.  against  Ihee,  thee  o.  have  I  sinned 
62  2.  he  0.  is  my  rock  and  my  salvation,  6.       » 

4.  0.  consult  to  cast  him  down  from  excellency 

5.  my  soul,  wait  thou  o.  upon  God 

71.  16.  mention  thy  righteousness,  even  thine  o. 

72.  18.  God  of  Israel  o.  doth  wondrous  things 
91.  8.  0.  with  thine  eyes  shall  thou  behold  and  see 

Prov.  4.3.  tender  and  o.  beloved  in  sight  of  mother 

5.  17.  let  them  be  o.  thine  own,  and  not  strangers 

11.  23.  ihe  desire  of  the  righteous  is  o.  good 

13.  10.  0.  by  pride  cometh  contention 

14.  23.  the  talk  of  the  lips  tendeth  o.  to  penury 
17.  11.  an  evil  man  see^eth  o.  rebellion 
21.  5.  tend  o.  to  plenteousness,  o.  lo  want 

KecZ.  7.29.  this  0.  have  I  found,  that  God  made  roan 
Cant.  6.  9.  she  is  the  o.  one  of  her  mother 
Isa.  4.  1.  0.  let  us  be  called  by  thy  name 

26.  13.  we  will  o.  make  meniion  of  thy  name 
28.19.il  shall  be  a  vexation  o.  to  nndcisland  report 

./er.  3.  13.  0.  acknowledge  thine  iniquity 

6.  26.  make  mourning  as  ftir  an  o.  son,  ./imos  8. 10, 
32.  30.  o.  done  evil,  o.  provoked  me  lo  anger 

Eiek.  7.  5.  and  evil,  an  o.  evil,  behold,  is  con)e 

14.  16.  they  o.  shall  be  delivered,  18. 

44.20.  they  shad  o.  poll  their  heads 
.■9mo.«3.2.  you  0. have  Iknownofall  famil.  of  earth 
J/<7t.5.47.  if  ye  salute  your  brolhreno.  what  do  you 

8.  8.  the  centurion  said.  Lord,  speak  the  word  c, 

10  42.  shall  give  a  cup  of  cold  water  o.  in  name 

12.  4.  not  lawful  for  him  lo  eat,  but  o.  for  priests 
14.  .36.  they  might  o.  touch  hem  of  his  garment 
17. 8.  they  saw  no  man,  sav,o  Je^us  o.  Mark  9.  8. 
21.  19.  they  found  nothing  thereon  bul  leaves  o. 

21.  shall  not  0.  do  this  which  is  done  lo  fig-tre« 
24. 36.  not  Ihe  angels  in  heaven,  but  my  Father  o. 

Mark  2.  7.  who  can  forgive  sins,  but  God  o.  ? 

5.36.  Jesus  sailh, be  not  afraid, 0. believe,  AuAe 8.50. 

6.8.shoulil  take  nothing  for  journey,  save  a  stafTo. 
I.vke  7.  12.  was  a  dead  man,  o.  son  of  his  mother 

8.  42.  one  o.  daughter  ||  9.  38.  he  is  my  o.  child 

24. 18.  an  thou  o.  a  stranger  in  Jerusal.  not  known 

,/oAn  5.  18.  not  o.  because  he  had  broken  sabbath 

44.  and  seek  not  honour  that  cometh  from  God  0. 

II.  52.  that  Jesus  shoiilii  die,  not  for  that  natipno. 

12.9.came  not  for  Jesus' sake  o.butlosee  LazariM 

13.  9.  Lord,  not  my  feet  o.  bul  also  my  hands 
17.  3.  that  they  might  know  thee  the  o.  Irue  God 

./Irlst^.  16.  0.  they  were  baptized  in  name  of  Jeans 
11.  19.  preaching  the  word  to  none  but  Jews  o. 
18.25.  Apollos  tnuelil,  knowing  o.  bapl.  of  John 
19. 27.  not  o.  our  crafi  is  in  dniiger  lo  ho  al  nought 
21.13.  rendy  not  lobe  boun<l  o.  bul  Iodic  for  Jesus 
25.  o.  that  they  keep  iheins.  from  things  otfcred 
26.  2<l.  I  would  to  God,  that  not  o.  thou,  bul  all 

Horn.  1.32,  nolo,  do  same,  bul  have  pleas,  in  them 
3.  29.  is  lie  God  of  Jews  o.?  is  ho  not  of  Geiililcsl 
4.9.  cometh  this  blesBcdn.  on rircumrisioii  o./  13. 

Hi.  not  lo  thai  o.  which  is  of  law,  but  lo  faith 
5.  3.  not  o.  BO,  1 1.  II  8.23.  nnl  o.  they,  bul  ourselves 
9.24  whom  becalled.nolofjewso.  but  ofGentUes 
13. .%.  ye  must  besuhjeol,  not  o.  for  wrath,  bul  also 
16.  .1.  io  whom  not  o.  I  give  ihniiks,  lint  churches 

27.  lo  (Jod  o.  wise  beglorv,  1  Tim.  1. 17.  ./urfe25. 

1  Tor.  7.  39.  o.  in  the  Lord  ||9. 6.  I  o.  iind  Barnabas 
14.:)fi.  came  wordofOod  ftom  you  o.  or  to  youo.? 
15.19  ifin  thin  lifno.wchave  hope, most  miscra'bis 

2  Cor.  7. 7.  God  comforted  us,  not  by  1i:b  coming  • 


OPE 

S  Cor.  8. 10.  have  begun  not  o.  to  do  (j  19.  not  that  o. 

21.  not  o.  in  sight  of  Lord  but  in  siglit  of  men 
Gal.  1. 23.  heard  o.  he  who  persecuted  in  times  paet 

2.  10.  o.  would  that  we  should  remember  the  poo: 

3.2.  this  o. would  I  learn  of  jou,  received  ye  Spirit? 

4.  18.  and  not  o.  when  1  nm  present  with  you 

5. 13;  0.  use  nc  t  liberty  f<ir  an  occasion  to  the  tiesh 

6. 12.  0.  lest  tliny  should  sutler  persecution  lor  Chr 

F.ph.  1.  21.  every  name  named,  not  o.  in  this  world 

PAi7.1.27.  0.  let  your  conversat.be  as  becomes  gosp 

29.  is  given  not  o.  to  believe  ort  him  but  to  sutler 

2. 12.  as  ye  obeyed, not  in  my  presence  o.but  in  abs. 
27.  God  had  mercy  not  on  him  o.  but  on  nie 

4. 15.  no  church  communicated  with  me,  buiye  o. 
Col.  4. 11.  these  o.  are  my  fellow- workers  lo  kingd. 
1  TAcss. 1.5. gospel  came  not  in  word  o.but  in  power 

2.  8.  to  have  imparted  lo  you  not  gospel  of  God  o. 
S  'J'liess.'i.l.  o.he  who  now  letteth  will  let,  till  taken 
1  Tim.5.13.  not  o.  idle,  but  tattlers  and  busy-bodies 

6.  15.  is  blessed  and  o.  Potentate,  King  of  kings 
16.  who  o.hath  immortality,  dwelling  in  light 
fl  Tim.  4.  8.  not  to  me  o.  \\  11.  o.  Luke  is  with  me 
Heb.  9.  10.  which  stood  o.  in  meats  and  drinks 

12.26.  once  more  I  shake  not  earth  o.  but  heaven 
Jam.  1. 22.  be  ye  doers  of  word,  and  not  hearers  o. 

2. 24.  a  man  is  justitied  by  works,  and  not  faith  o. 
1  Pel.^.  18.  noto.  lo  good  and  gentle,  butfroward 

1  .lohn  2.2.  not  for  our  sins  0.  ||  a.  ti.  not  by  water  o. 
ZJohn  1.  whom  I  love  in  the  truth,  and  not  I  o. 
yude4.  denying  tire  o. Lord  God  and  our  Lord  Jesus 
Heo.  9.  4.  but  0.  those  which  have  not  seal  of  God 

15.  4.  who  shall  not  fear  thee  1  for  thou  o.  art  holy 
See  Begotten. 
ONlOiVS. 
JVAn.  11. 5.  we  remember  the  o.  and  the  garlick 

ONWARD. 
Ezod.  40.3().  when  cloud  was  taken  up,  Isr.  went  o. 

ONYCHA. 
Exod.  30.  34.  take  thee  spices,  o.  and  galbanum 

ONYX. 
Ezod.  28.  20.  fourth  row  a  beryl  and  an  o.  39. 13. 
Job  28. 16.  wisdom  cannot  be  valued  with  the  o. 
£ze/«.28. 13.  the  topaz  and  the  o.  was  thy  covering 
5ec  Stones. 
OPEN,  .adjective. 
Gen.  1.20.  and  foul  that  may  tly  in  o.  firmament 
38.14.Tamar£atinano.  place  by  way  ofTimnalh 
JVum.  19. 15.  every  o.  vessel  not  covered  is  unclean 
24.  3.  the  man  whose  syes  are  o.  hath  said,  4.  15. 
Joi^h.  8. 17.  they  left  .\\  o.  and  pursued  after  Israel 
IJSam.  3. 1.  word  of  Lord  precious,  was  no  o.  vision 
IKings  6.18.  cedar  carved  with  o.tlowrrs,2y.32,35. 
8. 29.  that  thine  eyes  ni.iv  be  u.  toward  this  hou.su 
nisht  and  day,  52.  2  Chron.  6.  20,  40.  | 
7.15. 
JVVA.  1.6.  let  thine  eyes  be  o.  ear  attentive  to  hear 
6.  5.  Sanballat  wilh  an  o.  letter  sent  his  servant 
Job  34.  26.  as  wicked  men  in  the  o.  sight  of  others 
Psal.  5.  9.  their  throat  i.-i  an  0.  sepulchre,  i?om.  3.13. 
34.  15.  the  righteous,  his  ears  are  o.  to  their  cry 
Pniv.XX  16.  but  a  fool  layeih  o.  his  folly 
27.  5.  o.  rebuke  is  belter  than  secret  love 
Isa.  9.  12.  they  shall  devour  Israel  with  o.  mouth 
24.  IH.  for  the  windows  from  on  high  are  o. 
60.  II.  thy  gates  shall  be  o.  continually,  not  shut 
Jir.  5.  16.  quiver  is  ano.  sepulchre,  are  mighty  men 
32. 11.  look  evidence,  both  what  was  t-ealed  and  o. 

19.  thine  eyes  are  o.  on  all  the  ways  of  men 
Eick.  37. 2.  there  were  many  bones  in  the  o.  valley 
/)att.6.10.his  windows  being  o.  in  chamber  to  Jeru. 
A''ah.  3. 13.  gate?  of  thy  land  shall  beset  wide  o. 
Jiihn  1.51.  hereafter  ye  shall  see  heaven  o.  angels 
.^cls  16.27.  seeing  prison-doors  o.  drew  his  sword 
19.  38.  ihe  law  is  o.  and  there  are  deputies 

2  Cor.  3. 18.  we  all  with  o-  face  beholding  as  in  glass 
6. 11.  our  mouth  iso.  to  you,  our  heart  is  enlarged 

1  Tim.  5.24.  some  men's  sins  are  o.  beforehand 
Heb.  6.  6.  seeing  they  put  him  to  an  o.  shame 
1  Pet.  3.  12.  his  ears  are  o.  to  their  praj-ers 
Rev.  3.  8.  behold  I  have  set  before  thee  an  o.  door 
10.  2.  he  had  in  bis  hand  n  little  book  o.  8. 
See  Field,  Fields. 
OPEN,  Verb, 
Signifies,  [1]  To  unlock  that  which  was  fastened 
and  made  sure,  Act*   16.  26.   [2]    To  inter- 
pret, unfold,  or  explain,   Luke  24.  32.     [3] 
■  To  receive  an   an.swcr  to  our  jirnyers.  Mat. 
7.  7.     [4]     To   receive  Christ  into  the  heart 
by  faith   and  love.   Cant.   5.  2.     Rev.  3.  20. 
[5]    To  uncover   or  lay  open,  Exod.  21.  33. 
[6]     To  cleave,  rend,  or  divide.  Num.  16.  32. 
Ezek.  1.  1. 
To  open  the  book,  lie  v.  5. 3, 0.  To  unseal  the  book, 
by  declaring  and  revealing  lo  John,  and  by  him 
to  the  church,such  secret  mysteries  as  were  be- 
fore hidden  in  God's  counsel :  This  no  creature 
could  do ;  Christ  the  Mediator  of  the  new  cove- 
nant v:as  only  able  to  do  it,  for  he  came  out  of 
the  Father's  bosom  to  reveal  his  will  lo  its. 
To  open  their  eyes,  .4£«»  20. 18.  To  preach  the  gos- 
431 


OPE 

pel  to  them,  whereby  they  may  attain  to  a  spi- 
ritual understanding,  and  embrace  the  gospel. 
To  open  the  heart,  jJcts  JO.  14.     To  rnlighlcnthe 
■understaHding,  rencio  the  will  and  aff(ctio7is, 
and  incline  a  person  to  embrace  the  gospel. 
To  open  the  lips,  Psal.  51. 15.     To  give  occasion 
and  ability,  both  of  heart  and  tongue,  to  praise 
God. 
Exod.  21.  33.  if  a  man  shall  o.  a  pit  or  dig  a  pit 
J^um.  8. 16.  given  instead  ofsuch  aso.  every  womb 

16.  30.  If  earth  o.  her  mouth,  and  swallow  ihem 
/)cut.  15.8.  thou  Shalt  o.  thy  hand  wide  to  him,  11. 
20.  11.  if  it  make  answer  of  peace,  and  o.  to  thee 
28. 12.  Lord  shall  o.  to  thee  his  good  treasure 
.rosh.  10.22.  0.  mouth  of  cave  and  bring  out  5  kings 
2  Kings  9.  3.  then  o.  door  and  flee,  and  tarry  not 

13.  17.  and  he  said,  o.  the  window  eastward 
Job  11.5.  oh  that  God  would  o.  his  lips  against  thee 
32.  20.  I  will  0.  my  lips,  and  answer 
35.  16.  therefore  doth  Job  o.  his  mouth  in  vain 
41.  14.  who  can  o.  the  doors  of  hie  face  1 
Psal.  22. 1 7.  all  they  that  see  me,  o.  the  lip 

49.  4.  I  will  0.  my  dark  saying  upon  the  harp 
78.2. 1  will  0.  mouth  in  parable,  utter  dark  sayings 
81.  10.  0.  thy  mouth  wide  and  I  will  fill  it 

118.  19.  0.  to  me  the  gates  of  righteousness 
Proa.  31.  8.  o.  thy  n]onili  for  dumb  in  the  cause 
9.  0.  thy  mouth,  judge  righteously,  plead  cause 
Cant.h.  2.  o.  to  me,  my  sister,  my  love,  my  dove 

5.  I  rose  up  lo  o.  to  my  belov.  hands  dropt  myrrh 
Isa.'ii,.'-J2.o.  none  shall  shut,  shut  and  none  shall  o. 
26.  2.  0.  the  gates,  that  the  righteous  nation  enter 
28.24*  doth  he  o.  and  break  clods  of  his  ground? 
41.  18.  I  will  0.  rivers  in  high  places,  and  fountains 
42  7.  to  0.  blind  eyes,  to  bring  out  the  prisoners 

45.  1.  to  o.  before  him  the  two-leaved  gates 

8.  let  the  earth  o.  let  them  bring  forth  salvation 
Jer.  13. 19.  the  cities  shall  be  shut  up,  none  shall  o. 

50.26.  o.  her  store-bouses,  cast  her  upas  heaps 
Ezek.  2.  8.  o.  thy  mouth  and  eat  that  I  give  thee 
3.27. when  I  speak  with  thee,  I  will  o.  thy  month 
16.63.  mayesl  be  confounded  and  never  o. mouth 

21.22.  too.  the  mouihin  the  slaughter  to  lift  up 
25.  9.  behold,  I  will  o.  side  of  Moab  from  cities 
37.  12.  I  will  0.  your  graves,  cause  you  come  up 

46.  12.  one  shall  o.  him  the  gate  toward  the  east 
.^mos  8.  t  5.  and  thesabbaib,  that  we  mayo,  wheat 
Zech.W.  1.  o.thy  doors, O  Lebanon,  that  fire  devour 
J\lal.  3. 10.  if  I  will  not  o.  yon  windows  of  heaven 
Mat.  13.  35.  I  will  o.  my  mouth  in  parables 

25.11.  saying.  Lord,  Lord,  o.  tons,  Jjuke\2.'25. 
I. tike  12.  36.  when  hecoincth  and  knockelh  mayo. 
Jlcts  18.  14.  when  Paul  was  about  too. his  mouth 
Eph.  6.  19.  praying,  thai  I  may  o.  my  mouth  boldly 
GjZ.  4.3.  that  God  would  o.  to  us  drior  of  utterance 
fiti).5.2.  who  is  worthy  too.  the  book  and  seals? 

3.  no  man  in  heaven  or  earth  was  able  too.  book 

4.  no  man  was  found  worthy  to  o,  and  read  book 

5.  behold,  the  root  of  David  prevailed  to  o.  book 

9.  thou  art  worthy  to  take  the  book,  and  o.  seals 

'See  Eyes. 
OPENED. 
Gen.1. 11.  same  day  windows  of  heaven  were  o. 
8.  6.  Noah  o.  Ihe  window  of  the  ark  he  had  made 
29. 31.  God  0.  Leah's  womb  ||  30.22.  he  o.  Rachel's 
41.56.  Joseph  0.  all  store-houses  and  sold  lo  Egypt 
12.  27.  one  of  them  o.  his  sack,  43.  21.  |  44.  ll". 
Exod.  2. 6.  when  she  had  o.  ark  she  saw  the  child 
J^inn.  16.  32.  the  earth  o.  bet  month, and  swallowed 
up  Korali,  Dathan,  and  Abiratn,  Psal.  106.17. 
.Tndg.  3.  25.  he  o.  not  the  doors,  they  o.  them 
4.  19.  she  0.  a  hotile  of  milk  and  gave  him  drink 
19.  27.  her  lord  o.  doors,  went  out  to  go  his  way 
2-Sa»rt.7.t27.  thou,  O  Lord,  hast  o.  ear  ofthv  servant 
2  Kings  9. 10.  and  Elishao.  the  door  and  fled 

15.  16.  they  o.  not  to  him,  therefore  he  smote  them 
2  Chron.  29.  3.  Hezekiah  o.  doors  of  Lord's  house 
JVcA:  7.  3.  I  said,  let  not  gates  of  Jerusalem  he  o. 

8.  5.  Ezra  o.  book,  when  he  o.  it  people  stood  up 

13.19.  charged  gates  not  lobe  o.  till  after  sabbalh 
.Tnl)  29.  t  19.  my  root  was  o.  by  Ihe  waters 

31.  32.  but  I  0.  my  doois  lo  the  traveller 

32. 1 19.  behold,  my  belly  as  wine  which  is  not  o. 

38. 17.  have  the  gates  of  death  beeno.  to  thee? 
Psal.  22. 1 13.  they  o.  their  mouths  against  me 

40.  6.  sacrifice  not  desire,  mine  ears  hast  thou  o. 

66. 1 14.  I  will  pay  my  vows  that  my  lips  haveo. 

73.23.  though  Tie  had  o.  the  doors  of  heaven 
105.  41 .  he  0.  the  rock,  and  the  waters  gushed  out 

Cant.  5. 6.  I  o.  lo  my  beloved,  but  he  was  gone 
Isa.  14.17.  that  o.  not  the  house  of  his  prisoners 
48.8.  from  that  time  that  thine  ear  was  not  o. 

50.  5.  liOrd  God  hath  o.  mine  car,  not  rebellious 
.Jer.].  n4.  out  of  the  north  an  evil  shall  be  o. 

20. 12.  for  to  thee  have  I  o.  my  cause 

.50.25.  Lord  hath  o.hisarmnur'v  and  brought  forth 

Eiek.  1.  1.  that  the  heavens  were  o.  Mot.  3.  16. 

Mark^.  10.  I.uke  3.  21.  Jicts  1,  56. 

16.  25.  thou  hast  o.  thy  feet  to  everyone  passer!  by 
37.  13.  when  I  have  o.  your  graves,  O  my  people 


OPP 

Ezek.  44. 1.  gale  shall  not  he  o.  no  man  enter  by  it 
46. 1,  but  on  sabbath  and  new  moon  it  shall  beo 
Dan.  7. 10.  the  judgment  was  set,  Ihe  books  were  o 
JVuA.  2.6.  the  gates  of  the  ri  vers  shall  be  o.ptlace  be 
Zech.  13.  1.  fountain  shall  be  o.  to  house  of  David 
Mat.  2.11.  when  they  had  c.  their  treasures 
7^7.  knock,  it  shall  beo.  to  you,  I^ke  11.9,  10. 
27.52.  graves  were  o.  many  bodies  of  saints  aruie 
Mark  7.  34.  that  is,  be  o.  \\  35.  his  ears  were  o. 
Luke  4. 17.  when  he  had'o.  book  he  found  the  place 
24.  32.  while  he  o.  to  us  the  scriptures 

45.  then  o.  he  their  understand,  to  underst.  script 
Jicts  5. 19.  the  angel  by  night  o.  the  prison-doors 
23.  but  when  we  had  o.  we  found  no  man  within 
10.1  l.Pelersawheaveno.  and  a  vessel  descending 
12. 10.  iron  gate  o.  ||  14.  o.  not  the  gate,  but  ran  in 

16.  when  they  had  o.  the  door  and  saw  him 
14. 2T.  how  he  had  o.  the  door  of  faith  to  Gentiles 
16.  14.  Lydia,  whose  heart  Lord  o.  she  attended 
26.  the  pris(m  doors  were  o.  bands  were  loosed 
1  Cor.  16.9.  for  a  great  door  and  effectual  is  o.  unto 
me,  there  arc  many  adversaries,  2  Cor.  2. 12. 
Heb.  4.  13.  all  things  are  naked  and  o.  to  him 
Rev.  4.  1.  behold,  a  door  was  o.  in  heaven 
6.  1.  [  saw  when  the  Lamb  o.  one  of  the  seals 
3.  had  0.  the  second  ||  5.  Ihe  third  ||  7.  ihu  fourth 
9.o.the  filih  seal  II  12.  thcsi.xth  ||8.1.  the  eeventh 
9.  2.  he  0.  the  bottomless  pit,  and  there  arose 
11.  19.  the  temple  of  God  was  o.  in  heaven 

15.  5.  the  tabernacle  of  the  testimony  was  o. 

19.  II.  I  saw  heaven  o.  and  behold  a  while  horse 

20.  12.  the  books  were  o.  the  hook  of  life  was  o. 

Sec  Days,  Mouth. 

OPENEST. 

P.<taM04.28.  thou  o.thy  hand,  are  filled  with  good 

145.16.thou  o.  thine  hand  and  satisfieih  the  desire 

OPENETH. 
Exod.  13. 2.  sanctify  to  me  whatsoever  o.  the  womb 
12.lhou  shall  set  apart  all  that  o.  Ihe  matrix,  15. 
I  34.  19.   jYum.  3.  12.  |  18. 15.  Lxtke  2.  23. 
Job  27.  19.  the  rich  man  o.  his  eyes,  and  he  ie  not 
33.  16.  he  0.  ears  of  men,  and  sealeth  instruction 
36. 10.  he  0.  their  ear  to  discipline  and  conimanda 
15.  he  delivers  poor,  o.  their  ears  in  oppression 
Psal.  38.13.  las  a  dumb  man  that  o.not  hiemouth 
Proj). 13.3.  he  that  0.  wide  his  lips  have  destruction 
24.  7.  he  0.  not  his  mouth  in  Ihe  gale 
31.26.sheo.  her  mouth  with  wisdom,  in  her  tongue 
/sa.  53.7,bronght  as  a  lamb,  so  he  o.  not  his  mouth 
Ezek.  20.  26.  to  pass  thro'  the  fire,  all  that  o.  womb 
Jofin  10.  3.  to  him  the  porter  o.  sheep  hear  his  voico 
Rev.  3.7.  hethathathkey  of  David,  he  that  o.  and 
no  man  shuttcth,  and  shiitteth  and  no  man  o. 
OPENING. 
Isa.  42.  20.  0.  the  ears,  but  he  hearelh  not 
Jlcts  17.  3.  o.and  alleging  Christ  must  have  suffered 
OPENING,  S. 

1  CAr.  9.  27.0.  of  house  of  God  pertained  to  them 
.hb  12.  14.  he  f  hutteth  up  a  man,  there  can  be  no  o. 
Prov.  1.  21.  in  the  o.  of  Ihe  gates  wisdom  crieth 

8.  6.  and  the  o.  of  my  lips  shall  be  riffht  things 
Isa.  61.1.  proclaim  the  o.  of  Ihe  prison  lo  the  bound 
Ezek.  29.  21.  I  will  irive  thee  the  o.  of  the  mouth 

OPENLY. 
Of;t.38.21. where  harlotlhat  was  o.by  the  way-side 

2  Sam.  6. 1 20.  as  a  vain  fellow  o.  uncovers  himselt 
Psal.  98.2.  his  riffbleousness  hath  lie-o.  shewed 
Mat.  6.  4.  thy  Father  shall  reward  thee  o.  6.  18. 
Mark  8.  32.  and  he  spake  that  saying  o. 

John  7.  4.  he  himself  seeketh  to  be  known  o. 

10.  then  wenl  he  to  Ihe  feast,  not  o.  but  in  secret 

13.  no  man  spake  of  him  o.  for  fear  of  Ihe  Jews 

11.  54.  Jesus  walked  no  more  o.  amons  the  Jews 

18.  20.  Jpsiis  said,  I  spake  o.  to  the  world 

..lets  10. 40.  him  God  raised  up, and  shewed  him  o, 

16.  37.  Ihoy  have  beaten  us  n.  uncondemnod 
C<d.  2.  15.  he  made  a  shew  of  them  o.  triumphing 

OPERATION. 
Psal.  28.  5.  they  repard  not  the  o.  of  his  hands 
Isa.  ti.  12.  nor  con.aider  the  o.  of  his  hands 
Col.  2.  12.  risen  thrnueh  the  faith  of  the  o.  of  God 

OPERATIONS. 
1  Cor.  12. 6.  there  are  diversilv  of  o.  but  same  God 

OPINION. 

.Tob  32.6.  was  afraid,  and  durst  not  shew  you  mineo. 

10.  hearken  to  me,  I  also  will  shew  you  mine  o. 

OPINIONS.  [17 

1  Kings  18.21.  how  long  halt  ve  between  two  0.? 

OPPORTUNITY. 
I.er.  16.  t21.  send  the  scape-gooi  by  a  man  of  o. 
Mat.  26.16.  he  sought  o.to  belrav  him,  I.vke  22.6. 
Gnl.  6.  \0.  as  we  have  o.let  us  do  pood  to  all,  but 
PAiV.  4.10.  ye  were  also  careful,  hut  ye  lacked  «. 
//f6.11.15.they  mieht  have  had  o.  to  have  returned 

~  OPPOSE. 
2Ttm.  2.  25.  instructing  those  that  o.  thcmselve* 

OPPOSED. 
»9cU18.6.when  thev  r,.  themsf  Ives  and  blasphemed 

OPPOSEST. 
Job  30.  21.  with  thy  strong  hand  thou  o.  thyself 


OPP 

0PP08ETII. 

87Vk«si.  2. 4.  whoo.iind  exalteih  himself  above  all 

OrPOSlTIOxNS. 
ITi'm.  6.20.  avoiding  o.  of  scieuce  falsely  so  called 

OPPRESS. 
Eiod.  3.  9.  wherewith  the  Egyptians  o.  thuin 

22.  21.  neither  ve.x  nor  o.  a  stranger,  '.'3.  \i. 
Lev.  25.  H.  ye  shall  not  o.  one  another,  17. 
Veut.  23.  16.  shall  not  o.  servant  that  i.<  escaped 

24.  14.  thou  shall  not  o.  a  hired  servant,  poor 
Judg.  10.  12.  Moubiies  did  o.  you,  ami  ye  cried 
Job  10. 3.  is  it  good  to  thee  that  thoushouldcst  «.? 
Psal.  10.  18.  thai  the  man  of  earth  n)ay  no  more  o. 

17.  9.  hide  me  from  the  wicked  that  o.  me 

119.  12-2.  be  surety  fi)r  good,  let  not  proud  o.  me 
Prov.  22.  22.  nor  v.  the  alHicted  in  the  gate 
/so.49.26.v/ill  feed  ihein  ihato.thee  with  their  flesh 
Jer.  7.  6.  if  ye  o.  not  the  stranger  and  the  widow 

30.  20.  and  I  will  punish  all  that  o.  them 
F.zek.  45.  8.  princes  shall  no  more  o.  niy  people 
Hos.  12.  7.  he  is  a  merchant,  he  loveth  lo  o. 
jimon  4.  1.  ye  kinc  of  Baslian  which  o.  the  poor 
Jl/ic.  2.  2.  they  o.  a  man  and  his  house,  even  a  man 
Zech.  7.  10.  0.  nol  the  widow  nor  the  fatherless 
Jl/u/.  3.5.  will  be  swiftwilness  against  those  thato. 

1  Thess.  4.  t  6.  no  man  o.  his  brother  in  any  matter 
Jam.  2.  6.  do  not  rich  men  o.  you  and  draw  you? 

OPPUESSEU. 
/>fu«.28.29.  thou  shall  be  only  o.  and  spoiled,  33. 
Judir.  2.  18.  by  reason  of  them  that  o.  and  vexed 
4.  S.  Jabin  o.  Israel  ||  10.  8.  Philist.  and  Ammnii  o. 
6.9. 1  delivered  you  out  of  the  hand  of  the  Egyp- 
tians, and  of  all  that  o.  you,  1  Sam.  10.  18. 
15am.l2.3.whoseo.T  have  I  taken  1  whom  have  I  o. 
4.  thou  hast  not  defrauded,  nor  o.  us,  nor  taken 
2Kings  13.4.  Assyria  o.  them  ||  22.  king  of  Syria  u. 

2  CAron.  16. 10.  Asa  0.  some  of  the  people  same  time 
Job  20.19.  because  he  hath  o.  and  forsaken  the  poor 

:15.  9.  by  oppressions  ihey  made  the  o.  to  cry 
Psal.  9.  9.  the  Lord  will  be  a  refuge  for  the  o. 
10. 18.  judge  the  fatherless  and  o.  103.  6.  ]  146.  7, 
74.  21.  O  let  not  the  o.  return  ashamed 

106.  42.  their  enemies  o.  them,  brought  lo  subject 
Eccl.i.  I.  and,  behold,  the  tears  of  such  as  werew. 
J»a.  1.17.  learn  lo  do  well,  seek  judgment,  relieve  o. 

3.  5.  the  people  shall  be  o.  every  one  by  another 
23. 12.  O  thou,  o.  virgm,  daughter  of  Zidon,  arise 
38.  14.  O  Lord,  I  am  o.  undertake  fur  me 

52.  4.  the  Assyrian  o.  them  without  cause 

53.  7.  he  was  o.  and  afflicted,  yet  he  opened  not 
58.  6.  is  not  this  the  fast  ?  to  let  the  o.  go  free 

Jer.  50.  33.  Israel  and  Judah  were  o.  together 
Ktek.  18.  7.  hath  nut  o.  any,  but  hath  restored,  10. 

12.  because  he  lialh  o.  ||'l8.  he  cruelly  o. 
22.  29.  they  have  o.  the  stranger  wrongfully 
Hon.  5. 11.  Flphraim  is  o.  and  broken  in  judgment 
j}mo8  3.  9.  behold  the  o.  in  the  midst  thereof 
J}cls  7.  24.  Moses  avenged  him  that  was  o. 
10.  38.  Jesus  henled  nil  that  were  o.  of  the  devil 
OPPKESSETII. 
A^um.  10.9.  if  ye  go.to  war  against  him  that  o.  you 
Job  40.  t2;i.behold,  Behemoth  o.a  river,  hasteth  not 
P3al.  50.  1.  be  merciful,  he  fighting  daily  o.  me 
I'rov.  14.31.  he  thill  0.  the  poor  reproacheth,  22.10. 
28.  3.  a  poor  man  that  o.  the  poor,  is  like  rain 

OPPKESSING. 
Jer.  46.  16.  arise,  let  us  go  from  the  o.  sword 
50.  16.  for  fear  of  the  o.  sword,  they  shall  turn 
ZctA.  3.  1.  woe  lo  o.  ciiy,  she  obeyed  not  the  voice 

OPPRESSION 
li  the  npoiliTtg  or  taking  away  of  men's  goods  or 
tslale.i  by  cnnslraint,  terror,  or  force,  without 
having  any  right  thereto  ;  working  vpon  the 
ignorance,  weakness,  or  fearfalness  of  the  op- 
pressed.    Men  arc  guilty  of  0\t[tresa\on,  when 
they  offer  any  violence  to  men's  bodies,  estates, 
or  conscicncc.i ;  when  they  crush  or  ooerburden 
Others,   as   the  Egyptians    did  the   Hebrews, 
Exod.  3.  9.  when   ihey  impose  vpon  the  con- 
$eiencr  of  men,  and  persecute  them  merely  be- 
cause they  are  of  a  persuasion  different  from 
theirs  ;  St.  Paul  acknowledges  that  he  had  been 
one  of  this  smt  of  oppressors,  1  Tim.  1.  13. 
Jind  when  ihi  y  commit  adultery  or  fornication, 
toherehy  the  innocent  is  robbed  of  his  right  in 
his  wife,  daughter,  .t-c.  1  Tliess.  4.  6. 
Kiod.^.^.l  hnve  seen  o.  wherewith  the  Egyptians 
/^^u(.  20.  7.  the  Lord  heard  and  looked  on  our  o. 
2  Kings  13.  4.  the  Lord  saw  the  0.  of  Israel 
Job  36.  15.  and  he  openoih  their  oars  in  o. 
Psal.  12.  5.  for  the  o.  of  the  poor  will  I  arise 
42.9.  bocausc  of  the  n.  of  the  enemy,  43.2.  |  .55.  3. 
44.  24.  forgrlf'st  our  n.  ||  62.  10.  trust  not  in  o.  ' 
73.  8.  and  they  speak  wickedly  concerning  ». 

107.  39.  again  they  ore  br<iuKlit  low  through  o. 
119.  134.  deliver  mo  from  the  o.  of  man 

/;r<,7.5.''.ifthousee»ttheo.of  Ihe  poor,  iind  violnni 
7.  7.  Buridy  o.  makelli  a  wise  man  mad,  and  a  elft 

Isa.  .5.7.  but  bfhold  o.  1|  30.  12.  becausi^  ye  trust  in  o. 
30. 1 30.  though  lh«  Lordgivc  you  the  water  of  «. 


ORA 

7.9(1.54.14.  thou  shall  be  far  frono  o.  ||  59. 13.  (peak  o. 

Jer.  6.  6.  she  is  wholly  o.  in  the  midst  of  her 
2J.  17.  but  thine  eyes  and  heart  are  for  o. 

F.rek.  22.  7.  they  dealt  by  o.  with  tlie  stranger 
2i).  the  peoj>le  of  the  land  have  used  o. 
46. 18.  the  prince  shall  not  take  inheritance  by  o. 
OPPRESSIONS. 

■/ob  3.5.  9.  by  reason  of  iho  multitude  of  o 

f'.ccl.  4.  1. 1  considered  the  o.  done  under  the  sun 

Isa.  33.  15.  he  that  despiseth  the  gam  ol'o. 

Amos  3.  t  9-  behold  the  o.  in  the  midst  thereof 
OPPRESSOR. 

Ksth.  3.  1 10.  the  king  gave  his  ring  to  the  Jews'  o. 

Job  3.  18.  they  hear  nol  the  voice  of  the  o. 
15. 20.  the  number  of  years  is  hidden  to  the  o. 

Psal.  72.  4.  lie  shall  break  in  pieces  the  o. 

Prov.  3.  31.  envy  not  o.  choose  none  of  his  ways 
28.  16.  prince  thatwantelh  understanding  is  an  o. 

Isa.  9.  4.  for  thou  hast  broken  the  rod  of  his  o. 
14.  4.  and  say,  how  hath  the  o   ceased  I 
51.  13.  hast  feared  because  of  the  fury  of  the  o. 

Jer.  21.  12.  O  house  of  David,  didiver  him  that  i 
spoiled  out  of  llie  hand  of  the  o.  2'J.  3. 
25.  38.  because  of  the  fierceness  of  the  o 

ZfcA.9. 8.  no  o.  shall  pass  through  them  any  more 
10.  4.  out  of  him  came  every  o.  together 
OPPRESSORS. 

.Job  27. 13.  this  is  heritage  of  o.  they  shall  receive 

Ps.  54.3.  strangers  risen  and  o.  seek  after  my  soul 
119. 121.  have  done  judg.  leave  me  nol  to  mine  o. 

F.ccl.  4. 1.  on  the  side  of  their  o-  there  was  power 

/.•>-«.3.12.children  are  their  o.  women  rule  over  them 
14.  2.  and  they  shall  rule  over  their  o.       t 
16.  4.  the  0.  arc  consumed  out  of  the  land 
19.  20.  they  shall  cry  lo  the  Lord  because  of  the  o. 
ORACLE 

Is  by  some  taken  for  the  Propitiatory,  or  Mercy- 
seat,  by  translating  the  Hebrew  word  Capho- 
reth,  £j-orf.  25.  18,  20,  iy  Oracle :  This  word 
comes  from  the  verb  Capliar,  which  signifies 
to  expiate,  to  pardon  sins,  to  cover:  It  may 
he  rendered  by  a  Covering, /or  it  was  the  cover 
of  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  or  of  the  sacred 
chest  in  which  the  laws  of  the  covenant  were 
shttt  up.  .jind  perhaps  by  translating  Capho- 
reth  by  propitiatory  or  mercy%eat,  it  may  be 
insinuated  that  from  thence  the  Lord  heard 
the  vows  and  prayers  of  his  people,  and  par- 
doned them  their  sins.  .Ind  by  translating  it 
Oracle  they  wuuld  sheio,  that  it  was  from 
thence  that  God  manifested  his  will  and  plea- 
sure, and  gave  responses  to  Moses. 

Oracle  (V  taken  for  the  sanctuary,  or  for  the  most 
holy  place,  wherein  the  ark  of  the  covenant  was 
deposited,  1  Kings  6.  5,  16-19 

It  is  taken  also  for  the  Oracles  of  false  gods  ; 
the  most  famous  of  which  in  Palestine  was  that 
of  Baal-zebub,  the  god  of  Ekron,  which  Ih 
Jews  themselves  often  went  to  consult,  2  King 
1.  2,  3,  6,  16.  There  were  also  Teriiphini,  a* 
that  o/Micah,  mentioned,  Judg.  17.  5.  and  the 
false  gods  adored  in  the  kingdom  of  Samaria, 
which  had  their  false  prophets,  and  conse- 
quently their  oracles,  whether  these  oracles 
were  really  delivered  by  the  assistance  of  the 
devil,  or  that  the  priests  and  false  prophets 
imposed  upon  the  people,  making  them  believe 
they  were  inspired,  though  they  only  spoke  by 
their  own  seducing  spirit. 

Some  have  ascribed  to  Demons,  all  the  oracles 
of  antiquity  ;  others  have  imputed  them  to  the 
knavery  of  the  priests ;  and  others  have  pre- 
tended, that  there  were  several  kinds  o/oracles; 
Some  were  illusions  and  tricks  of  the  devil  ; 
others  were  the  effects  ofthejusTgUng  and  con- 
trivance of  the  priests.  The  Scripture  affords 
examples  of  these  sorts  of  oracles.  Ilalaam,  at 
the  instigation  of  his  own  spirit,  and  urged 
on  by  his  avarice,  fearing  to  lose  the  rrcom- 
pcnce  that  he  was  promised  by  Italak,  Arin;iir  of 
the  Moabites,  suggests  a  diabolical  expedient 
to  this  prince,  of  making  the  Israeliles  to  fall 
into  idolatry  and  fornication,  by  which  he  as- 
sures him  of  a  certain  victory,  or  at  least  of  n 
considerable  advantage  against  the  people  of 
God,  Num.24.  14.  |3I.  16. 
Micaiah,  the  son  of  Imlnh,  a  prophet  of  the  Lord, 
says,  "  That  he  saw  the  .llmighty  silting  upon 
his  throne,  and  all  the  host  of  heaven  round 
about  him ;  and  the  Lord  said,  who  shall 
tempt  .Ahab,  king  of  Israel,  that  he  may  go  to 
war  against  Ramoth-gilcail,  and  fall  in  the 
battle?  One  answered  after  one  manner,  and 
another  in  another.  .It  the  same  time  an  evil 
spirit  presented  himself  before  the  Lord,  and 


ORD 

proves  these  two  things :  First,  that  the  dertl 
could  do  nothing  by  his  oien  power:  andae- 
condly,  that  with  Ike  permission  of  Ood  he 
could  i7ispire  the  false  prophets,  sorcerers,  and 
magicians,  and  make  them  deliver  false  ora 
cles. 
Jlmong  the  Jews  there  were  several  sorts  of  real 
oracles.  [1]  They  had  oracUs  that  were  deli- 
vered viva  Noce,  oj*  when  (iod  .--puke  to  Mosei 
face  to  face,  and  as  one  friend  speaks  to  an- 
other. Num.  12.  8.  [2]  Prophetical  dreams 
sent  by  (iod ;  as  the  dreams  which  Cod  sent 
to  Joseph,  and  which  foretold  his  future  great- 
ness. Gen.  37.5,6.  [3j  Visions:  as  when  a 
prophet  in  an  exta»y,  being  neither  properly 
asleep  nor  awake,  bad  supernatural  revela- 
tions, Gen.  15.  1.  \  46.  2.  Num.  12.  6  [4]  The 
oracles  of  Urim  and  Thummim,  which  icas  iw 
the  Epiiod,  «r  Pectoral,  worn  by  the  high-priest, 
and  which  Ood  endued  with  the  gift  of  fore- 
telling things  to  come.  This  manner  of  in- 
quiring of  the  Lord  7cas  often  made  use  of, 
from  Joshua's  time,  to  the  erection  of  the  tem- 
ple at  .ferusalcm,  1  Sam.  23.  9.  |  30!  7.  [5] 
.ifter  the  building  of  the  temple,  they  gene- 
rally consulted  the  prophets,  who  were  fre- 
quent in  the  kingdoms  of  Judah  and  Israel. 
These  oracles  of  truth  had  no  necessary  con- 
nection cither  with  time,  or  place,  or  any 
other  circumstance,  or  with  the  personal  quali 
f  cations  and  merit,  of  the  person  by  tehom 
they  were  uttered :  The  high-priest  clothed 
with  the  F.phod  and  Pectoral  gave  a  true  an- 
swer, whatever  was  the  manner  of  his  life. 
Sometimes  he  gave  an  answer  without  knmic- 
ing  clearly  himself  what  was  the  subject  of 
the  question  he  was  consulted  about.  Caia- 
phas  pronounces  an  Oracle  relating  to  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  whom  he  hated,  and  whose 
destruction  he  desired,  and  an  oracle  which  he 
understood  not  himself.  John  11.  49,  50,  51, 
Ye  know  nothing  at  all,  nor  consider  that  it  is 
expedient  for  us,  that  one  man  should  die  for 
the  peo|)le,  and  that  the  whole  nation  perish 
not.  To  which  is  added.  And  this  spake  he 
not  of  himself,  but  being  high-priest  that  year, 
he  prophesied  that  Jesus  should  die  for  that 
nalion.  • 

Jit  the  time  of  the  planting  of  the  Christian 
church,  the  gifts  of  prophecy  and  inspiration 
were  very  common  :  Christ  Jesus,  our  great 
Prophet  and  High- Priest  has  himself  taught 
■us  the  mind  and  will  of  Ood  about  the  way  of 
our  salvation,  and  by  his  Holy  Spirit  has  in- 
spired persons,  chosen  on  purpose,  to  pen  the 
doctrine  lehich  he  taught  in  the  Scriptures  of 
the  jVew  Testament,  and  to  open  and  unfold 
the  mysteries  of  the  Old:  These  revelations 
arc  the  oracles,  which  Christians  are  to  con- 
sult at  all  times,  especially  in  all  matters  of 
moment  and  difficulty,  and  in  the  great  affairs 
relating  to  their  souls  and  another  life,  lleb. 
5.  12. 
'iSam.  16.23.  as  if  one  had  inquired  at  theo.  of  God 

1  Kings  6. 16.  he  built  ihi-m  for  it  within,  for  the  o. 
8.6.  the  priests  brought  the  ark  of  Ld.  into  Ihoo. 

2  Chr.  4.  20.  should  burn  before  the  o.  of  pure  gold 
Ps.  28.2.  when  Ilifl  up  mv  hands  toward  thy  holy  o. 

ORACLES. 
.Irtsl.  3R.  who  received  the  lively  o.  to  give  to  us 
Horn.  3.  2.  to  them  were  committed  the  o.  of  God 
Ifcb.  5.  12.  the  first  principles  of  the  o.  of  God 
1  Pet.  4.  11.  ifspeak.  let  him  speak  as  the  o.  of  God 

ORATION, 
.-fcfi  12.21. upon  a  set  dav  Herod  made  ana. to  them 

OR.ATOR. 
A«n.3.3.  L.  laketh  away  from  Judah  thi-  eloquent  o. 
Jicts'ii.  1.  and  with  a  certain  o.  named  Tcrtullus 

ORCHARD. 
Cant.  4.  13.  thy  plants  are  an  o.  of  pomcgranatef 

ORCHARDS. 
F.ccl.  2.  5.  I  made  me  jardens  and  o.  and  planted 

ORDAIN 
Signifies,  [1]  To  command  or  enjoin,  1  Cor.  9. 14. 
[3]  To  appoint  or  design  to  a  certain  end  or 
use,  Rom.  7.  10.     [:i]  To  choose  or  set  apart 
for  an  offiee  or  employment,  Mark   3.  14.     [4] 
To  fore-ordain.  Acts"  10.  42.  I  13.  4S.     fS]  To 
found,  1  Chr.  9.  t  22.  Psal.  8.  f  2.  (6]  To  give, 
J.r.   1.  t  5.     [7]  To  order,   Rom.   13.  t  1.     [8] 
To  prqmre,  Isa.  30.  33.  Ej.h.  2.  t  10. 
1  CArim.O.  22.  whom  David  and  Snmuel  Ihn  spor 
did  o.  in  their  set  office 
17.  9.  [  will  0.  a  plaoo  for  my  penple  Israel 
Isn.  2ri.  12.  Tiord,  thou  will  o.  ponce  for  us,  for  thoo 


said,  twill  seduce  him  :  .Ind  the  Lord  ttskeil\\  Cor.  7.  17.  and  so  o.  I  in  nil  churches 

him, how?   To  which  Satan  answered,  I  jriV/   7';M.  5.  that  thon  shnuldrsi  o.  elders  in  every  city 

go  and  be  a   lying  spirit   in  the    mouth  of  his\  ORD.MNED. 

prophets,     .find  t~he  Lord  said,  flo,  and  thou  \.\"om.  28.  6.  nn  offering  that  wns  o.  in  mount  Sinai 

Shalt  prevail,"   1  Kings  22.      This   dialoguell  Kings  12.  32.  nnd  Jeroboam  o.  a  foa«l.  33 


ORD 

S  Kings  23.5.  and  he  put  down  idolatrous  priests  o. 
8  CAron.  U.  15  Jeroboam  o.  priests  for  high  places 
S3.  18.  to  oU'cr  the  oH'erings,  as  it  was  o.  Iiy  David 
2S).  27.  the  iiistruineiils  o.  by  David,  king  of  Israel 
Ksth.  9.  'J7.  the  Jews  o.  ihe  foaoU  of  Purim 
Psal.S.'i.  out  of  the  mouth  of  babes  hast  o.  strength 

3.  the  moon  and  the  stars  which  thou,  hast  o. 
81.  5.  this  he  o.  in  Joseph  for  a  testimony 
13'J.  17.  I  have  o.  a  lamp  for  mine  anointed 
Isa.  30.  33.  Tophct  is  o.  of  old,  he  made  it  deep 
Jcr.  1.  5.  I  0.  tliee  to  be  a  prophet  to  the  nations 
J)an.  2.  24.  the  king  had  o.  to  destroy  the  wise  men 
Hab.  1. 12.  O  Lord,  thou  hastu.  them  for  judgment 
Murk  3.  14.  Jesus  o.  twelve  to  be  with  him 
John  15.1G.1  have  o.that  ye  should  bring  forth  fruit 
^<;tsl.22.oneo.to  bo  witness  with  us  of  resurrection 
10. 42. 0.  of  God  to  be  the  judge  of  quick  and  dead 
13.  48.  OS  many  as  were  o.  to  eternal  life  believed 
14.23. when  theyhad  o.thein  elders  in  every  church 
16.4.the  decrees  that  were  o.  of  apostles  and  elders 
'  17.31.  will  judge  world  by  that  man  whom  hatho. 
Rom.  7.  10.  the  commandment  which  was  o.  to  life 

13.  1.  the  powers  that  bo,  are  o.  of  God 

1  Cor.  2. 7.  we  speak  hidden  wisdom  which  Godo. 
9.  14.  Ihe  Lord  hath  o.  that  they  which  preach 

Oal.  3.  lU.  the  law  was  o.  by  angels,  in  the  hand 
£pA.2.10.  to  good  works,  which  God  hath  before  o. 
17't(n.2.  7.  [  urn  o.  preacher  ami  apostle  to  Gentiles 
Jlcb.  5.  1.  for  every  high  priest  is  o.  for  men,  8.  3. 
9.  6.  now  when  these  things  were  thus  o.  priests 
Jade  4.  who  were  of  old  o.  to  this  condemnation 

ORDALVETH. 
Psal.  7. 13.  he  o.  his  arrows  against  the  persecutors 

ORDER. 
Jad^.  17.  t  10.  I  will  give  thee  an  o.  of  garments 

2  Kings  23.  4.  king  commanded  priests  of  second  o. 
1  CAroii.  t).  32.  they  waited  according  to  their  o. 

15.  13.  tor  we  sought  hinj  not  after  the  due  o. 

23.  31.  the  0.  commanded  to  them  before  the  L. 

25. 2.  accord,  to  the  o.  of  David,  6.  2  Cliron.  8. 14. 
Job  10.  22.  a  land  of  darkness,  without  any  o. 
Psal.lVi.  4.  thou  art  a  priest  forever,  after  the  o.  of 
Melchizedek,  Heb.  5. ti,  10.  ]  6. 20. 1  7. 1 1,  17,  21. 

1  Cor.  16. 1. 1  have  given  o.  to  churches  of  Galatia 
CW.2.5.  joy  ing  and  beholding  your  o.  and  stedfastn. 
Ueb.  7^il.  and  not  be  called  after  the  o.  of  Aaron 

/rt  ORDER. 
<?en.22.9. .\braham  laidwi>odin  o.and  bound  Isaac 
Ezod.-i^.n.  two  tenons  i«o.  ||  39.37.1amp3  set  tno. 
40.  4.  thou  shalt  set  in  o.  the  things  that  are  to 
be  set  in  o.  J.ce.  1.  7,  6,  12.  |  G.  12.  |  24.  8. 
23.  and  he  set  bread  in  o.upon  it  before  the  Lord 
Josh.  2.6.  stalks  of  lia.>;  she  had  laid  in  u.  upon  roof 

2  i'arn.  17.  23.  Ahiihophel  put  his  house  in  a. 

1  Ari«o-sl8.33.Elijah  put  wood  in  o.and  cut  bullock 

2  Kinijrs  20.  1.  set  thine  house  ni  o.  Jsa.  38.  1. 

2  Chron.  13. 11.  the  shew-bread  also  set  they  ino. 

2'J.  3.').  the  service  of  house  of  the  Lord  set  in  o. 
Job  33.  5.  set  thy  words  in  o.  before  me,  statid  up 
Psal.W.  5.  they  cannot  be  reckoned  up  i«  o.  to  thee 

50.  21.  I  will  set  them  in  o.  before  thine  eyes 
Keel.  12.  9.  the  preacher  set  in  o.  many  proverbs 
y.<a.44. 7.  who  declare  it,  and  set  it  in  o.  before  me? 
Ezek.  41.  6.  the  side-chambers  were  thirty  in  o. 
Liulcc  1.  1.  have  taken  in  hand  to  set  forth  in  o.  3. 

8.  Zacharias  served  before  God  in  his  o. 
..^cts  18.23.  he  went  over  country  of  Phrygia  in  o. 
1  Cor.  11.  34.  the  rest  will  I  set  in  o.  when  I  come 

14.  40.  let  all  things  be  done  decently  and  in  o. 
l.>.  2t.  but  every  man  shall  rise  in  his  o.  Christ 

Tit.  1.5. 1  left  thee  to  sot  in  o.  the  things  wanting 

ORDER. 
Kznd.ll.H.  Aaron  and  sons  shall  o.  it,  /,«».  24.3,4. 
Jalir.  13.  12.  he  said,  how  shall  we  o.  the  child? 

1  Kill  ITS  20.  14.  then  he  said,  who  shall  o-  the  battle? 
Jab  23.  4.  I  would  o.  my  cause  before  him 

37.  19.  teach  us,  for  we  cannot  o.  our  speech 
Psal.  40.  t  5.  thy  thoughts  none  can  o.  them  to  thee 

78.  t  19.  can  God  o.  a  table  in  the  wilderness? 

119.  133.0.  my  steps  in  thy  word,  let  not  iniquity 
Isa.  9.  7.  on  throne,  and  upon  his  kingdom  to  o.  it 
Jcr.46.3.  0.  ye  the  buckler  and  the  shield,  and  draw 

ORDERED,  ETH. 
Jadg.  fi.  2fi.  build  an  altar  to  Lord  in  the  o.  place 

2  .Sum.2.3. 5.  made  everlasting  covenant  o.  and  sure 
Job  13.  18.  behold  now,  I  have  o.  my  cause,  I  know 

32.  t  14.  he  hath  not  o.  his  words  against  me 
PscU.  37. 23.  steps  of  a  good  man  arc  o.  by  the  Lord 
50.  23.  to  him  who  o.  his  conversation  aright 
Proo.  4.  t  26.  let  all  thv  ways  be  o.  aright 

ORDERINGS. 
1  Chron.  21.  19.  these  were  their  o.  under  Aaron 

ORDERLY. 
Acts  21.24.  thou  walkest  o.  and  keepestthe  law 

ORDINANCE 
Signifies,  [1]  .Iny  decree,  statute,  or  law,  made  by 
civil  governiirs,  1  Pet.  2.  13.  [2]  The  laws, 
statutes,  an  I  commandments  of  God,  Lev. 
18.  4.  [31  .Appointment,  decree,  and  dUermina- 
tion,  Psal.  119.  91.  [41  Laics,  directions, 
423 


OST 

rttes,  institutions,  and  constitutions,  in  the 
worship  of  God,  Ueb.  9.  1,  10. 
Ezod.  12. 14.  ye  shall  keep  to  Lord  the  feast  of  the 
passover,  for  an  o.  for  ever,  24,  43.  |  13.  10 
15.  25.  there  he  made  for  them  a  statute  and  un  o. 
Lev.  5.  flO.  otVer  according  to  the  o.  9.  \Vi. 
jVitm.9.14.  according  to  o.of  passover,  2  C/tr.35.13. 
10.  8.  they  shall  bo  to  you  for  an  o.  for  ever 
15. 15.  one  o.  shall  be  lor  you  in  your  generations 

18.  8.  and  to  thy  sons  by  an  o.  for  over,  2  Chr.  2. 4. 

19.  2.0.  of  the  law  the  Lord  commanded,  ;JI.21. 
Josh.  24.  25.  and  he  set  them  an  o.  in  ShecJiem 

1  Sam.  30.  25.  ho  made  it  an  o.  for  ever  to  this  day 

1  Kings  C.  t  38.  house  was  finished  with  all  the  o. 

2  Chron.  35.  25.  and  made  them  an  o.  ia  Israel 
Ezra  3.  10.  after  the  o.  of  David  king  ot^  Israel 
JVcA.  11.  t  23.  that  a  sure  o.  be  for  the  smgors 
/«a.24.5.  have  transgressed  the  law,  changed  the  o. 

58.  2.  and  forsook  not  the  o.  of  their  God 
Ezek.  40.  f  45.  for  the  priests  that  keep  the  o. 

45.  14.  concerning  the  o.  of  oil,  the  bath  of  oil 

46.  14.  an  offering  by  a  perpetual  o.  unto  the  Lord 
Mal.'i.M.  what  profit  is  it  that  we  have  kept  hiso  ? 
/Jom.  13.2.  whoso  resisteth  the  power  resists  o.  ofG. 

1  Pet.  2.  13.  submit  yourselves  to  every  o.  of  man 

ORDINANCES. 
Ezod.  18.  20.  thou  shalt  teach  them  o.  and  laws 
Lev.  18.  3.  neither  shall  ye  walk  in  their  o. 

4.  ye  shall  keep  mine  o.  30.  \  22.  9.  2  Chron.  33. 

8.  Ezek.  11.  20.  |  43.  11.  1  Cor.  11.  2. 
J\rum.  9. 12.  according  to  the  o.  of  the  passover,  14. 

2  Kings  17.  34.  neither  do  they  after  their «. 
.37.  the  0.  which  he  wrote  for  you,  observe 

JVeA.IO.  32.  also  we  madeo.  for  us  to  charge  oursel. 
./ob  38.33. canst  thou  guide,\rcturus?  knowest  thou 
the  o.  of  heaven?  ./er.  31.  35.  |  33.  25. 
Psal.  99.  7.  they  kept  the  o.  that  he  gave  them 

Hit.  91.  they  continue  according  to  thine  o. 
Isa.  58.2.  they  ask  of  me  the  o.  of  justice,  delight 
./cr.  10.  t  3.  the  o.  of  the  people  are  vanity 

31. 36. if  those  o.  depart  from  before  me,  saith  Lord 
Ezek.  43.  18.  he  said,  these  are  the  o.  of  thealtar 

44.  5.  concerning  the  o.  of  the  house  of  the  Lo.-d 
.1/.;/.  3.  7.  ye  are  gone  away  from  mine  o.  not  kept 
Luke  1.  6.  Zacharias  and  Elisabeth  walking  in  all 

the  commandments  and  o.  of  the  Lord,  blameless 
Eph.  2.  15.  law  of  commandments  contained  in  o. 
Col.  2.  14.  blotting  out  the  hand- writing  of  o. 

20.  why,  as  though  in  world,  are  ye  subject  too.? 
Heb.  9. 1.  the  first  covenant  hado.  of  divine  service 

10.  whicli  stood  in  carnal  «.  imposed  on  them 
ORDINARY. 
Ezek.  16.  27.  I  have  diminished  thine  o.  food 
Acts  19.t39.  it  shall  be  determined  in  an  o.  assembly 

ORGAxN,  S. 
Gen. 4.  21.  Jubal,  the  father  of  such  as  handle  theo. 
Job  21.  12.  they  rejoice  at  the  sound  of  the  o. 
.30.31.  my  o.  turned  into  voice  of  them  that  weep 
Psal.  150.  4.  praise  him  with  the  timbrel  and  o. 

ORNA.MENT. 
Proi).  1.  9.  they  shall  be  an  o.  of  grace  to  thy  head 
4.  9.  she  shall  give  to  thine  head  an  o.  of  grace 
25. 12.  as  an  o.  of  fine  gold,  so  is  a  wise  reprover 
[sa.  30. 22.  ye  shall  defile  o.  of  thy  molten  images 
49.  18.  shalt  clothe  thee  with  them  all  as  with  an  o. 
Ezek.  7.  20.  the  Beauty  of  his  o.  he  set  it  in  majesty 
Dan.  II.  t  It),  he  shall  stand  in  the  land  ofo. 

1  Pet.  3.  4.  even  the  o.  of  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit 

ORNAMENTS. 
Ezod,  33.  4.  and  no  man  did  put  on  him  his  o. 

5.  therefore  now  put  otTthy  o.  from  thee,  G. 
./u(i<f.8.21.Gideontooko.thatwere  on  camels'necks 

26.  gidden  ear-rings  that  he  requested,  beside  o. 

2  Sam.  1.  24.  weep  over  Saul,  who  put  o.  on  your 
/sri.3.18.  shall  take  away  tinkling  o.  about  their  feet 

f  19.  the  chains,  the  bracelets,  and  thespangledo. 
20.  bonnets,  and  the  o.  of  the  legs,  head-bands 
61.  10.  as  a  bridegroom  decketh  himself  with  o. 
./er.2.  32.  can  maid  forget  her  o.  or  bride  her  attire? 
4.  30.  though  thou  deckest  thee  with  o.  of  gold 
Ezek.  16.  7.  and  thou  art  come  to  excellent  o. 
11. decked  thee  with  o.  put  bracelet.s  on  thy  hands 
t  39.  and  shall  take  instruments  of  thy  o. 
23.  40.  for  whom  thou  deckest  thyself  with  o. 

ORPHANS. 
Lam.  5.  3.  we  arc  o.  our  mothers  are  as  widows 

OSPREY,  O.SSIFRAGE. 
£,ep.ll.l3.eagle,«.?/».and  o.?.«i/.notoat,  /)cut. 14. 12. 

OSTRICH. 
This  animal  is  ranged  among  birds:  Moses /or- 
bids  the  use  of  it  to  the  Hebrews,  /^ev.  II.  13.  It 
is  very  lar^re,  has  very  Ions'  legs,  its  wings 
very  short, thencck  about,  the  length  of  four  ur 
five  spans.  The  feathers  of  its  wings  are  in 
great  esteem,  and  are  used  as  an  ornament  for 
hats,  beds,  and  canopies :  They  are  stained  of 
several  colours,  and  made  into  very  pretty 
tufts :  They  are  hunted  by  way  of  course,  for 
they  never  fly;  but  they  use  their  wings  to 
assist  them  in  running  more  swiftly. 


OTH 

mi  bird  is  made  the  symbol  of  cruelty  and  for- 
getj'ulncss.  Job  39.  13,  14;  Ac.  Lam.  4.  3.  IVe 
are  told  of  it,  that  it  lays  its  eggs  upon  the 
ground,  hides  them  under  ihe  sand,  and  the  sun 
/latches  them.  As  the  Ostricli  is  cxtremtlij  large 
and  heavy,  she  would  break  her  eggs  if  sht 
were  to  sit  upon  Uiein  like  other  birds  ;  she 
therefore  hides  them  in  the  sand,  watches  them, 
and  hatches  them,  as  it  were,  with  her  eye.  The 
male  and  female  stay  with  them  altirnatcly, 
and  while  one  of  them  goes  to  seek  its  provision, 
the  other  does  not  leave  sight  of  them:  Jiowcver, 
if  eitlier  of  them  should  be  driven  away,  or  go 
too  far  from  their  nest,  they  could  not  find 
their  eggs  again:  And  it  is  pruhahlij  this,  that 
has  given  occasion  to  what  is  said  of  their 
cruelly  and  forgetfulncss. 

Job  39.  13.  gavest  thou  wings  and  feathers  to  o.? 
OSTRICHES. 

Job  30.  t  29.  and  I  am  a  companion  to  o. 

Lam.  4.  3.  become  cruel,  like  o.  in  the  wilderness 
OTHER. 

Gen.  8.  10.  Noah  stayed  yet  o.  seven  days,  12 

28.  17.  this  is  none  o.  but  the  house  of  God 

29.  27.  shalt  serve  with  me  yet  o.  seven  yearn,  30. 

31.  ,50.  if  shalttake  o.  wives  besides  mydaughiers 

32.  8,  then  the  o.  company  that  is  left  shall  escape 
41.  3.  behold,  seven  o.  kiiie  came  up,  19. 

43.  14.  that  he  may  send  away  your  o.  brother 

22. 0.  money  have  we  brought  down  to  buy  food 
£a;o(/.4.7. behold,  it  was  turned  again  ashiso.fleiih 
18.  7.  they  asked  each  o.  of  their  welfare 

29.  41.  the  o.  lamb  offer  thou  at  even,  J\rum.  28. 8. 

30.  32.  ye  shall  not  make  any  o.  like  that  oil 
/^ev.  6.  11.  and  he  shall  put  off  his  garments,  and 

put  on  0.  garments,  Ezek.  ii.  14.  1  44.  19. 
7.  24.  and  the  fat  may  be  used  in  any  o.  use 
14.  42.  they  shall  take  p.  stones  and  o.  mortar 
18.  18.  nor  take  a  wife  besides  the  o.  in  her  lifo 
20.  24.  I  have  separated  you  from  o.  people,  26. 
jVuin.  10.  21.  and  the  o.  did  set  up  the  tabernacle 
24. 1.  he  went  not  as  at  o.  limes  to  seek  enchantm. 
32.  33.  they  gave  o-  names  to  the  cities  they  built 
36.  3.  if  they  be  married  to  any  of  the  o.  tribes 
Josh.  11.  19.  all  0.  cities  they  look  in  battle 
,/udg.  13.  10.  the  man  that  came  to  me  the  o.  day 
16.  17.  and  be  like  anyo.  man  ||  20.  as  ato.  times 
20.  31.  and  they  began"' to  kill  as  at  o.  times 

1  Sam.  3. 10.  the  Lord  called  as  at  o.  times,  Samuel 
18.  10.  David  played  with  his  hand  as  at  o.  times 

20.  25.  Saul  safon  his  seat  as  at  o.  times  by  wall 

21.  9.  take  it,  for  there  is  no  o.  save  that  here 

2  Sam.  13.  16.  this  evil  is  greater  than  o.  ihou  didst 
2  Chron.  30. 23.  took  counsel,  to  keep  o.  seven  days 

.32.  22.  Lord  saved  Hezekiah  from  hand  of  all  o. 
.Veh.  4. 16.  the  o.  half  of  them  held  both  the  siiearg 

5.  5.  for  0.  men  have  our  lands  and  vineyards 
.7ub  8.  12.  the  llag  withereth  before  any  o   herb 

21.  24.  they  are  taken  out  of  the  way,  as  all  o. 
Psal.  Ti.  5.  the  wicked  are  not  in  trouble  as  o. 
men,  neither  are  they  plajjucd  like  o.  men 

85.  10.  rightcou.^iiess  and  peace  kissed  each  o. 
Eccl.  6.  5.  this  hath  more  rest  than  the  o. 
fsa.  26.  13.  0.  lords  have  had  dominion  over  ug 

49.20.  thou  shalt  have,  after  thou  hast  lost  the  o 
Ezek.  16.  34.  the  contrary  is  in  thee  from  o.  wonica 
Dan.  2.  11.  none  o.  can  shew  it  before  the  king 

44.  the  kingdom  shall  not  be  left  to  o.  peoule 
Hos.  9.  I.  rejoice  not  for  joy,  O  Israel,  as  o.  people 

13.  10.  where  is  any  o.  to  save  tliee  in  thy  cities? 
Mat.  4.  21.  and  goin"  on  he  saw  o.  two  brethren 

5.  39.  on  the  right  cheek,  turn  to  him  the  o.  also 
12.  13.  restored  whole  as  o.  Mark  3. 5.  Luke  6. 10. 

45.  then  he  taketh  seven  o.  spirits,  /.uke  11.  2fi. 
13.8.o.fell  into  good  ground,  JJ/arA-4.8.  LukeS.S. 

21.  36.  again  be  sent  o.  servants  more,  22.  4. 

41.  he  will  let  out  his  vineyard  too.  husbandmen 
23.  23.  and  not  to  leave  o.  undone,  /.uke  11.  42. 
25.  11.  afterward  came  also  the  o.  virgins,  saying 

16.  lie  traded,  and  made  them  o.  five  talents 
Mark  4.  19.  and  the  lusts  ofo.  things  entering  in 

7.  4.  and  many  o.  things  there  be  they  hold,  8. 
12.31.  none  o.  commandment  is  greater  than  these 

.32.  there  is  one  God,  and  there  is  none  o.  but  he 
Luke  4. 43. 1  must  preach  kingd.  of  God  to  o.  cities 
10.  I.  the  Lord  appointed  o.  seventy  also,  and  sent 

14.  32.  or  else  while  the  o-  is  yet  a  great  way  off 
18.  1 1.  I  thank  thee,  that  I  am  not  as  o.  nun 

14.  ho  went  down  justifi(!il  rallier  ih.m  the  o. 

22.  65.  0.  things  blasphcmonslv  spake  they  a". him 
John  4. 38.  0.  men  laboured  l|  10. 16.  o.  sheep  1  have 

15.  24.  if  I  had  not  done  works  none  o.  man  did 
13.»16.  then  went  out  that  o.  disciple,  spake  to  her 
21.  25.  there  are  many  o.  things  which  Jesus  did 

.^cts  2.  4.  they  began  to  speak  with  o.  tongues 
40   and  with  many  other  words  did  he  testify 
4.  12.  neither  is  there  salvation  in  any  o.  none  9 
name  under  heaven  whereby  wc  must  be 
saved 

8.  Jl.  speaketh  ho  of  himself,  or  of  some  3.  man 


OVE 

Fom.S.  39.  nor  o.  creature  shall  be  able  to  aepirate 
13.  9.  and  it"  there  be  any  o.  commandment,  it  is 

1  Cor.  1. 10. 1  know  not  whether  I  baptized  any  o. 

3.  II.  0.  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than  is  laid 
9.5.power  to  lend  about  sister, asweli  as  o. apostles 
11.  21.  for  in  eating  every  one  taketh  before  o. 
14. 17.  thou  givest  thanks,  but  the  o.  is  not  edified 

21.with  men  of  o.  tongues  and  o.  lips  I  will  speak 
29.  let  the  prophets  speak,  and  let  the  u.  judge 
15.  37.  it  may  chance  of  wheat,  or  some  o.  grain 

2  Cor.  8.  18.  tor  I  mean  not  that  o.  men  be  cased 

10.  15.  not  boasting  of  o.  men's  labours 

11.  8.  I  robbed  o.  churches  to  do  you  service 

13,  2. 1  write  to  them  and  to  all  o.  that  if  I  come 
Oal.  1.  19.  0.  apostles  saw  I  none,  save  James 

2.13.and  the  o.Jows dissembled  likewise*\vith  him 
F.ph.  3.  5.  which  in  o.  ages  was  not  made  known 

4.  17.  that  ye  walk  not  as  o.  Gentiles  walk 
Pliil.  1.  17.  but  tlie  0.  preach  Christ  of  love 

2.  3.  let  each  esteem  o.  better  than  themselves 

3.  4.  if  any  0.  thinkelh  that  he  might  trust  in  flesh 

4.  3.  with  Clement  and  o.  my  fellow  labourers 

2  Thess.1.3.  and  charity  toward  each  o.  aboundeth 

I  Tim.  1.  3.  charge  that  they  teach  no  o.  doctrine 

10.  be  any  o.  tlimg  contrary  to  sound  doctrine 

5.  22.  neither  he  partaker  of  o.  men's  sins 
Jam.  5.  12.  neither  swear  by  any  o.  oalh,  but  let 

1  Pet.  4.  15.  as  a  busy-body  in  o.  men's  matters 

2  Pet.  3.  16.  they  wrest,  as  they  do  o.  scriptures 
Jiev.  2.  24.  I  will  put  on  you  none  o.  burden 

8. 13.  by  reason  of  o.  the  o.  voices  of  the  trumpet 
See  God,  Gons,  One,  Side. 
OTHERS. 
Job  8.  19.  and  out  of  the  earth  shall  o.  grow 
31.  10.  and  let  u.  bow  down  upon  her 
34.  24.  and  he  shall  set  o.  in  their  stead 

26.  he  striketh  them  in  the  open  sight  of  o. 
Psal.  49.  10.  they  die,  and  leave  their  wealth  to  o. 
Prov.  5.  9.  lest  thou  give  thine  honour  to  o. 
F.ccl.1. 2i.  that  thou  thyself  likewise  hast  cursed  o. 
Isa.  56.  8.  yet  will  I  gather  o.  to  him,  besides  those 
Jer.  6.  12.  their  houses  shall  be  turned  to  o. 
8.  10.  I  will  give  their  wives  unto  o.  and  fields 
Enek.  13.  6.  and  they  have  made  o.  to  hope 

10.  and  0.  daubed  it  with  untempered  mortar 
£>an.7.19. fourth  beastwhichwas  diverse  from  allu. 
11.  4.  for  bis  kingdom  shall  be  plucked  up  for  o 
Mat.  5.  47.  what  do  ye  more  than  o.? 
16. 14. 0.  say,  that  thou  art  Jeremias,  or  one  of  the 
old  prophets,  Mark  6. 15.  |  8. 28.  Luke  9.  8, 19 
20.  3.  he  saw  o.  standing  idle  in  the  market 
21.8. 0.  cut  down  branches  from  trees,  JI/arA- 11.8 
26.  67. 0.  smote  him  witlr  the  palms  of  their  hands 
Mark  Vi.  9.  will  give  vineyard  to  o.  Luke  20.  10. 
15.  31.  saved  o.  himself  he  cannot,  J^ukc  23.  35. 
iMke  8.  3.  and  many  o.  which  ministered  to  him 
John  18.  31.  or  did  o.  tell  it  thee  of  me? 
1  Cor.  9.  2.  if  I  be  not  an  apostle  to  o.  yet  to  you 
12.  if  0.  be  partakers  of  this  power  over  you 
27.1est  wlien  I  have  preached  to  o.  I  be  cast-away 

10.  29.  conscience,  not  thine  own,  but  of  the  o. 

14.  19.  that  by  my  voice  I  might  teach  o.  also 
2Ci)r.3.1. or  need  we,as  some  o.ppistles  of  commend. 

8.  8.  but  by  occasion  of  the  forwardness  of  o. 

F.ph.  2.  3.  we  were  children  of  wraih,  even  as  o. 

Phil.  2.  4.  but  every  man  also  on  the  things  of  o. 

1  Thess.  2. 6.  neither  of  you,  nor  yet  of  o.  sought  we 
4. 13.  that  ye  sorrow  not,  as  o.  which  have  no  hope 
5.  8i  let  us  not  sleep  as  do  o.  but  let  us  watch 

1  Tim.  5. 20.  them  that  sin  rebuke,  that  u.  may  fear 

2  Tim.  2.  2.  who  shall  be  able  to  teach  o.  also 
H'b.  9. 25.  entered  every  year  with  the  blood  of  o. 

11.  35. 0.  were  tortured,  not  accepting  deliverance 
36.  o.  had  trial  of  cruel  inockings  and  scourgings 

.TiuXe  23. 0.  save  with  fenr,  pulling  them  out  of  fire 

OTHERWISE. 

8Sani.l8.13.o.  I  should  have  wrought  falsh.  against 

mine  own  lifi',  for  no  matter  is  hid  from  the  king 

\Kin)r/i  1.21.0.1  and  my  son  Sol.  bo  counted  offend. 

2CAr.  30.  Ir^.  ihey  eat  passovcro.  than  was  written 

Ptal.  3rt.  10.  hear  me,  lest  o.  should  rejoice  over  me 

^at.C.l.o.havc  no  reward  ofyour  Father  in  heaven 

Rom.  11.6.  not  of  works,  o.  grace  is  no  more  grace; 

then  no  more  of  grace,  o.  work  is  no  more  work 

K.lowaril  thee  goodn.o.thoii  shalt  also  he  cut  otT 

S  Cor.  11. 10.  if  «.  yet  as  a  fool  receive  mo  to  boast 

Gal.  5.  10.  that  you  will  bo  none  o.  minded 

Phil.  3.  15.  and  if  in  any  thing  you  be  o.  minded 

ITi'm.  5.  25.  and  tijev  that  are  o.  cannot  bo  hid 

6. 3.  if  any  man  teach  o.  ami  consent  not  to  words 

7^64.9.17.0.  itisof  noslri-iisth  at  all  whilst  testator 

onciiES. 

Exod.  28.  11.  set  the  slone»  in  n.  of  gold,  39.  6, 13. 

l.l.slinlt  make  o.  of  gold  ||  25.  fasten  in  the  two  o, 

14.  and  fasten  wrcathon  chains  to  the  o.  39.  18 

OVEN 

b  a  place  for  baking.  Lev.  2.  4.     To  which  are 

compared,   [I]    Prraonii   inflamed  vith  lu^ts; 

who,  by  yielding  t"  the  lemplalionn  nf  .fata- 


OVE 

the  whole  man,  both  the  understanding,  leill, 
ajfeetions,  an(^  members ;  as  a  baker  doCh  by 
a  continual  supply  of  fuel  heat  his  oven  to  the 
highest   degree,   Hos.  7.  4.     [2]    Sucli   as    are 
ene7nics  to  God,  upon  whom  he  will  bring  un- 
avoidable destruction:  as  wood,  when  it  is  cast 
into  the  fire,  is  quickly  dissolved,  Psal.  21.  9. 
[3]   The  day  of  judgment,  when  the  judgment 
of  God  will  fall  dreadfully  and  terribly  upon 
the  wicked  and  ungodly,  Mai.  4.  1. 
Lev.  2.  4.  of  a  meat-oH'eriiig  baken  in  the  o.  7.  9. 
11.  35.  be  unclean,  whether  it  be  o.  or  ranges 
26. 20.  ten  women  shall  bake  your  bread  in  oneo. 
Psal.  21.  9.  thou  shalt  make  them  as  a  fiery  o. 
Lam.  5. 10.  our  skin  was  black  like  an  o.  for  (amine 
Uos.  7. 4.  adulterers,  as  an  o.  heated  by  the  baker 
0.  they  have  made  roaily  their  heart  like  an  o. 
7.  are  all  hot  as  an  o.  have  devoured  their  judges 
Mai.  i.  1.  the  day  cometli  that  shall  burn  as  an  o. 
J/a(.6. 30.  to-morrow  is  cast  into  o.  Luke  12.  28. 

OVENS. 
Exod.  8.  3.  the  frogs  shall  come  into  thine  o. 

OVER. 
Gen.  25.  2.5.  first  red,  all  o.  like  a  hairy  garment 
27.29.  be  lord  o.  thy  brethren  let  them  bow  to  thee 
41.  40.  I'liaraoh  said,  thou  shall  be  o.  my  house 
£iO(i.l6.18.gathered  much  had  noth.  o.  2  Cwr.8.15. 
23.  what  remaineth  o.  lay  up  until  the  morning 
30.  6.  the  mercy-seat  o.  the  testimony,  J/eb.  9.  5. 
37.  9.  the  cherubims  covered  o.  the  mercy-seat 

40.  30.  the  cloud  was  taken  up  from  o.  the  tabern. 
Lev.  14.  5.  one  be  killed  o.  running  water,  6.  50. 
JVum.l.SO.thou  shall  appoint  Leviteso.  tabernacle 

3.  49.  0.  and  above  Ihem  that  were  redeemed 
10.  10.  blow  with  trumpets  o.  the  burnt-offerings 
27.  10.  let  the  Lord  set  a  man  o.  the  congregation 
Judg.  5. 13.  dominion  o.  the  nobles,  o.  the  mighty 
9.  9.  and  go  to  be  promoted  o.  the  trees,  11.  13. 
2  Sam.  1.  17.  o.  Saul  and  Jonathan  his  son,  24. 
2.  9.  he  made  Ish-bosheth  king  o.  Gilead,  o.  Ash- 
urites,  o-  Jczreel,  o.  Ejrhraim,  and  o.  Benjamin 
2  Kings  8.  20.  Edom  made  a  king  o.  themselves 
1  Chron.  29.  3.  o.  and  above  all  I  have  prepared 
Ezra  9.  0.  our  iniiiuities  are  increased  o.  our  heads 
Job  14.  16.  dost  thou  not  watch  o.  my  sin? 

41.  34.  he  is  a  king  o.  the  children  of  pride 
Psal.  23.  5.  anoinlest  my  head,  my  cup  runneth  o. 

27.12.deliver  me  nolo,  to  the  %vill  of  mine  enemies 

118.  18.  but  he  hath  not  given  me  o.  to  death 

145.  9.  his  tender  mercies  are  o.  all  his  works 
Cant.  2.  II.  for  lo,  winter  is  past,  rain  is  o.  and  gone 
Jcr.  1.  10.  set  thee  o.  the  nations  and  o.  kingdoms 
Dan.  4.  17.  he  setteth  up  n.  it  the  basest  of  men 

0.  3.  king  .;hought  to  set  him  o.  the  whole  realm 
/^o.5.10.5.  for  the  people  shall  mourn  o.  it  and  priest 
Mic.  3.  6.  and  the  day  shall  be  dark  o.  them 
Mat.  25.  21.  I  will  make  thee  ruler  o.  many,  23. 
/-«/a'6.38.ine;isure  shaken  together,  and  running  n 

1,5.  7.  more  joy  o.  one  sinner  that  repenteth,  10. 

19. 14.  we  will  not  have  this  man  to  reign  o.  us 

17.  been  faithful,  have  thou  authority  o.  tencilies 

41.  come  near,  he  beheld  city,  and  wept  o.  il 

.tcts  6.  3.  whom  we  may  appoint  o.  this  business 

Rom.  7.  1.  that  the  law  hath  dominion  o.  a  man 

9.  21.  hath  not  the  potter  power  o.  the  clay? 
K7)/(.4.19.have  given  themselveso.to  lasciviousncss 
I  Tim.  2.  12.  not  usurp  authority  o.  the  man 
1  Pet.  3.  12.  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  o.  the  righteous 
/icii.2. 20.  to  him  will  I  give  power  o.  the  nations 

OVER-AGAINST. 

F.iod.'HS.  35.  candleslick  o.-against  table,  40.  24. 

A''um.8.2.larnp8give  lighto.-n^>-nin.'»«candlestick,3. 

.Snm.5.23.  fetch  a  compass  behind  them,  come  on 

them  0.  against  mnlberry-trees,  1  Chr.  14. 14. 

1  Kings  20. 21).  they  pitched  one  o.-against  other 
JVf/i.7^3.  appoint  every  one  to  be  o.-against  house 
Eccl.  7.  14.  God  hath  set  one  o.-against  the  other 
./cr.  31.  39.  the  line  shall  yet  go  forth  o.-againstil 
.Vn<.21.2.  go  into  village  o.-against  you,  and  ye 

shall  find  an  ass  tied,  ^/nr*  11.2.  Lukc\9.30 
27.01.  and  Mary  sitting  o.-against  the  sepulchre 
See  .All,   Him,  Joiidan,  Israel,  Mk,  Thke, 
TiiKM,  Us,  Yon. 

OVERCAMI 

.^cts  19.10. man  in  whom  the  evil  spirit  was,  o.them 

Jien.  3.  21.  even  as  I  also  «.  and  am  set  down  at 

12  11.  and  they  o.  him  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb 

OVERCIIARtJE. 

2  Cor.  2.  5.  but  in  pert,  llint  I  may  nolo,  you  all 
OVERCHARGED. 

Luke  21.  34.  lest  your  hr'arts  be  o.  with  surfeiting 

OVERCOME. 
Kiod.  32.  18.  voice  of  thrm  that  cry  for  being  o. 
Isa.  28.  1.  the  bend  of  them  that  are  o.  with  win 
Eph.  K.  1 13.  withstand,  and  having  o.  all  lo  Bland 
2  /'(!t.2.19.ofwhommaniso.  of  snmo  is  he  brought 
20  for  if  they  ore  again  enliingled  therein  and  o. 

OVERCOME 


__^_      ^  ^  ^  r7fn.  49.19.  troop  shall  0.  him,  but  hn  shall  o.  at  last 

andenco'ura<'ing  them,  suffer  sin  to  s'eize  upon\j^um.  13.  30.  go  up,  for  we  uro  well  able  to  o.  it 
"434 


OVE 

.Vum.22.  ll.peradvcnturelshallbeableto''.  thfin 
•2  Kings  16  5.  they  bcsitgedAhaz,  could  nolo  him 
Can^O.5.  turn  away  thine  eyes,  for  they  have  o.  me 
Jcr,  23.  9,  like  a  man  whom  wine  hath  o. 
Luke  11.  22,  bat  when  a  stronger  shull  o.  him 
fokn  10. 33.  be  of  good  cheer,  I  have  o.  the  world 
Honi.  3.  4.  that  mightesl  o.  when  thou  art  judged 

12.  21.  he  not  o.  of  evil,  but  o.  evil  with  good 
l.fvhn'2. 13.  because  ye  haveo.  the  wicked  ooe,14. 

4.  4.  ye  are  of  God  and  have  o.  them,  because 
Kcv.  11.7.  beast  shall  o.  the  witnesses  and  kill  them 

13. 7.  to  make  war  with  the  saints,  and  to  o.  them 

17. 14.  shall  make  war,  and  Lamb  shall  o.  them 
OVERCOMETH. 

1  John  5.  4.  who.soever  is  born  of  God,  o.  the  world, 
this  is  victory  that  o.  world,  even  our  faith 

5.  who  is  he  that  o.  world,  but  he  that  believeth 
Reu.  2.  7.  to  him  that  o.  will  I  give  of  tree  of  lite 

11.  he  that  o.  shall  not  be  hurt  of  second  death 
17.  to  him  that  o.  will  I  give  to  eat  hidden  manna 

20.  to  him  that  o.  will  I  give  power  over  nationa 
3.  5.  he  that  o.  shall  be  clothed  in  while  raiment 

12.  him  that  o.  will  I  make  pillar  in  temjile  of  G. 

21.  to  him  that  o.  will  I  grant  to  sit  with  me 
21.  7.  he  that  o.  shall  inherit  all  things,  1  his  God 

OVERDRIVE. 
Gen.  33. 13.  if  men  should  o.  them  all  flock  will  die 

OVERFLOW. 
Deut.  11.  4.  he  made  water  of  Red-aea  to  o.  them 
Psal.  69.  2.  I  am  come  where  the  floods  o.  me 

15.  let  not  water  floods  o.  me,  nor  deep  swallow 
/sa.8.8.  he  shall  pass  through  Judah,  o.  and  go  over 
10.  22,  consumption  decreed  shall  o.  w  ith  righteo. 
28.  17.  the  waters  shall  o.  the  hiding-place 
43.  2.  and  through  the  rivers  they  shall  not  o.  thee 
./cr.  47.  2.  waters  of  the  north  shall  o.  the  land 
Dan.  11. 10.  one  shall  certainly  come  and  o.  26.40. 
.hcl  2.  24,  fats  shall  o.  with  wine  and  oil,  3.  13, 

OVERFLOWED. 
Psal.  78.  20.  he  smote  the  rock,  and  streams  o. 

2  Pet.  3.  6.  world  being  o.  with  water,  perished 
OVERFLOWETH. 

Josh.  3,  15,  in  harvest  Jordan  o.  all  his  banks 

OVERFLOWING. 
Job  28,  11.  he  bindelh  the  floods  from  o. 
38.25. who  divideth  a  water  course  for  o.  of  waters 
Isa.  28.2.  which  as  a  flood  of  mighty  w.iters  o. 
15.  when  the  o.  scourge  shall  pass  through,  18. 

30.  28.  his  breath  as  an  o.  stream  shall  reach 
.fer.  47.  2>out  of  the  north  shall  be  an  o.  flood 
F.zek.  13.  11.  there  shall  be  an  o.  shower,  13. 

38.  22. 1  will  rain  on  him  an  o.  rain  and  hailstones 
Hab.  3. 10.  the  o.  of  the  water  passed  by  the  deep 

OVERFLOWN. 
1  Chron.  12.  15.  went  over  Jordan  when  il  had  o. 
.lub  22.  16.  whose  foundation  was  o.  with  a  flood 
Dan.  11.  22.  with  arms  of  a  flood  shall  ihuy  be  o. 

OVERLAY. 
iCiorf.25.  II.  slialt  0.  ark  with  pure  gold,  21. 1 30, 3. 
27.  2.  0.  the  horns  of  the  altar  with  brass,  38.  2, 

OVERLAID. 
Ezod.  26.  32.  pillars  of  shittim-wood  o.  with  gold 
38.  0.  he  o.the  staves  of  shittim-wood  with  brass 

1  Kings  3.  19.  her  child  died,  because  she  o.  it 

2  Chrun.  4.  9.  ho  o.  the  doors  of  them  with  brass 
CaH£.5. 14.  belly  is  as  bright  ivorv  o.  with  sapphires 

OVERLAYING.         [^«;er  Gold. 
Exod.  38.  17.  the  o.  of  their  chapiters  of  silver 
19.  and  o.  of  their  chapiters  and  fillets  of  silver 
OVERLIVED. 
Josh.  24.  31.  the  davs  of  the  elders  that  o.  Joshua 

OVERMUCH. 
Eccl.l.Xf).  be  not  righteous  o.  \\  17.  be  not  o.  wicked 
2  C«r.2. 7.  lest  suchbeswnllowed  up  with  o. sorrow 

OVERPASS. 
Jcr.  5. 23.  they  shine,  ih'v  o.  the  deeds  of  wicked 

OVERPAST. 
Psal.^1.  1.  make  refuge  until  these  calamities  be*. 
ha.  26.  20.  hide  thyself  until  indignation  be  o. 

OVERPLUS. 
Lev.  25.  27.  let  him  resioie  the  o.  to  the  man 

OVERRAN. 
2  Sam.  18.  23.  Ahiniaaz  riin  by  p'ain  and  o.  Cushi 

OVERRUN.NING. 

A'liA.  1.  8.  with  an  o.  flood  he  wid  make  an  end 

OVERSEE. 

1  Chron.  9.  29.  some  appointed  lo  o.  the  vessels 
15.  f  21.  with  hoj-pe  on  the  eighth  to  o. 
23.  t  4.  of  which  24,000  were  to  o.  the  work 

2  CAr.  2. 2.  three  thousand  six  hundred  lo  o.  tbera 
OVERSEER. 

Gen.  39.  4.  he  made  him  o.  over  his  house,  5. 
Xrh.  11.9.  Joel  was  their  o.  ||  1 1.  Z.alidiel  was  o. 
22.  o.  of  Leviles  was  U/.zi  ||  12.  42.  Jerrahiah  o 
Prov.  6.  7.  the  ant  hnvinj  no  guide  o.  or  rulei 

OVERSEERS. 
Grn.  41.  34.  let  Pharaoh  appoint  o.  in  the  land 
2  Chron.  2.  18.  Solomon  set  3,000  o.  of  the  work 

31.  13.  Ihey  were  <>.  under  the  hand  ofConaniab 
34.  13.  the  0.  of  all  them  that  wrought,  13. 


OVE 

iChrMAT.have  delivered  moncyinto  thohand  of<j. 
Jicts  -20.  '28.  the  Holy  Ghost  hath  made  you  o. 

OVERSHADOW. 
I^ke  1.  H.5.  the  power  of  the  Highest  shall  o.  thee 
Jlcts  5.  1.5.  tiiat  shadow  of  I'eler  might  o.  Uiora 

OVERS  H.M30WEL). 
Mat.  17.  .5.  a  cloud  o.  them,  .Wori  9. 7.  Luke  9.  34. 

OVERSKJHT. 
(rfn. 43.12.  carry  it  again,  pciad  venture  it  was  ano. 
J^um.  a.  Ifi.  have  the  o.  of  them  that  keep  charge 

4.  16.  pertaineth  tlio  o.  of  all  the  tabernacle 
i  Kin:rs  12. 11.  of  them  that  had  the  o.  of  the  house 
of  the  Lord,  2-2.  5,  9.  2  C/iron.  M.  10. 
1  Chron.  9.  23.  had  the  o.  of  the  gates  of  the  house 
JVeA.  11.  16.  had  the  o.  of  the  outward  business 
13.  4.  the  0.  of  the  chamber  of  the  house  of  God 
I  Pet.  5.2.takins  o.  not  by  constraint,  but  willingly 

"OVERSPREAD. 
Oen.  9.  19.  and  of  them  was  the  whole  earth  o. 

OVERSPREADING. 
Dan.  9.  27.  for  the  o.  of  abominations  be  desolate 

OVERTAKE. 
<7en.44.4.  up,  when  thou  dost  o.  them,  say  to  them 
Exod.  15.  9.  enemy  said,  I  will  pursue,  I  will  o. 
Deat.  19. 6.  lest  the  avenger  of  blood  o.  the  slayer 

28.  2.  all  these  blessings  shall  come  and  o.  thee 
15.  that  all  these  cur.^es  shall  o.  thee,  45. 

Jnsh.  2.  5.  pursue  after  them,  for  ye  shall  o.  them 

1  Sam  30.8.3hall  I  o.  them, thou  shalt  surely  o.  them 

2  .Sam. 15. 14. lest  Absalom  o.  us  suddenly,  and  bring 
ha  59. 9.  judgment  is  far,ncither  doth  justice  o.  us 
Jcr  42.  1(5.  the  sword  ye  feared  shall  o.  yoii 
Hos^l.l.  shall  follow,but  she  shall  not  o.  her  lovers 

10.  9.  the  battle  in  Gibcah  did  not  o.  them 
Amos  9   10.  the  evil  shall  not  o.  nor  prevent  us 

13.  behold,  the  plowman  shall  o.  the  reaper 
ZccA.  1.16.  my  words, did  they  not  o.  your  fathers  ?_ 
1  Thess.  5.  4.  that  that  day  should  o.  you  as  a  thief 

OVERTAKEN. 
Ps.  18.37. 1  have  pursued  mine  enemies  and  o.  them 
Gal.  6.  1   brethren,  if  a  man  be  o.  in  a  fault 
OVERTAKETH. 

1  Chron.  21. 12.  flee  three  months,  till  sword  o.  thee 

OVERTHREW. 
Gen.  19.  25.  <Tod  o.  these  cities  and  the  plain,  29. 
F.xod.  14.27.  Lord  o.  the  Egyptians,  Psal.  136.  15. 
Deut  29. 23.  which  Lord  o.  in  his  anger  and  wrath 
r»a. 13.19.Babylon  shall  be, as  when  God  o.  Sodom 

and  Gomorrah,  ./fr.  50.  40.  Amos  4.  11. 
Jer.  20.  10.  let  that  man  be  as  the  cities  Lord  o. 
jVfut.  21. 12.  JesuH  0.  tables  of  the  money-changers 

in  the  temple,  Mark  11.  15.  John  2.  15. 

OVERTHROW. 

<7fn. 19.21. 1  have  accepted  lhee,will  not  o.  this  city 

Ezod.  23.  24.  but  thou  shalt  utterly  a.  their  gods 

Deut.  12.3.  ye  shall  o.  their  altars,and  break  pillars 

2  Saw.  10.3.  hath  not  David  sent  to  spy  it  out  and  o. 

11.  25.  make  thy  battle  more  strong,  and  o.  it 

1  Chr.  19. 3.  David  hath  sent  to  o.  and  sjiy  the  land 
Psal.  106.  25.  his  hand  to  o.  tliem  in  the  wildorneas 

27.  to  0.  their  seed  also  among  the  na'ior^s 
140.  4.  Avho  have  purposed  to  o.  my  goings 

11.  evil  shall  hunt  the  violent  man  to  o.  him 
Prov.  18. 5.  not  good  to  o.  righteous  in  judgment 
Hag.  2.  22.  I  will  o.  the  throne  of  kingdoms,  I 
will  0.  the  chariots  and  those  that  ride  in  them 
Acta  5.  39.  but  if  it  be  of  God,  ye  cannot  o.  it 

2  Tim.  2.  18.  have  erred,  and  o.  the  faith  of  some 

OVERTHROW. 
(?f«.19. 29.  God  sent  Lot  out  oftha  midst  of  the  0 
Deut.  29.  23.  as  in  the  o.  of  Sodom,  .Jtr.  49.  18. 
2  Pet.  2. 6.  condemned  the  cities  with  an  o.  making 

6VERTHROWETH. 
Job  12.  19.  he  leadcth  princes,  and  o.  the  mighty 
Prov.  13.  C.  but  wickedness  o.  the  sinner 

21.  12.  God  0.  the  wicked.for  their  wickedness 

22.  12.  he  0   the  words  of  the  transgres.sor 

29.  4.  but  he  that  roc.-iveth  gifts  o.  the  land 

OVERTHROWN. 
F.zod.  15.7.  hast  o.  them  that  rose  up  against  thee 
Jxidg.  9.  40.  and  many  were  o.  anil  wounded 
2  Sam.   17.  9.  when  some  of  them  be  o.  at  the  first 
2  Chron.  14.  13.  and  the  Ethiopians  were  o. 
Job  19.  6.  know  now  that  God  hath  o.  me 
Pgal.  141.6.when  their  judges  are  o.  in  stony  places 
Prov.  11. 11.  city  is  o.  by  the  mouth  of  the  wicked 
12.7.  wicked  arc  o.  \\  14.  11.  house  of  wicked  o 
Isa.  1.  7.  your  land  is  desolate  as  o.  by  strangers 
Jer.  18.  23.  but  let  Ihem  bo  o.  before  thee 
Ijam.  4.6.  sin  of  Sodom,  that  was  o.  as  in  a  moment 
Dan.  11.  41.  and  many  countries  shall  be  o. 
Amos  4.  11.  I  have  o.  some  of  you,  as  Sodom 
Jonah  3.  4.  yet  forty  days  and  Nineveh  shall  be  o 
1  Cor.  10.  5.  for  they  were  o.  in  the  wilderness 

OVERTOOK. 
Oen.  31.  23.  they  o.  Jacob  in  the  mount  Gilead 

25.  Laban  o.  Jacob  ||  44.6.  the  steward  o.  them 
Kxod.  14.  9.  Egyptians  o.  them  encamping  by  |pa 
Tvidg.  13.22.  Micah  o.  th6  children  of  Dan 
20.  42.  but  the  battle  o.  the  men  of  Benjamin 


OUG 

2  Kings  25.  3.  the  army  of  Chaldoes  o.  Zedekiah 

in  the  plains  of  Jericho,  Jcr.  39.  5.  |  5>.  8. 

Lam.  1.3.  all  her  persecutors  o.  her  between  straits 

OVERTURN. 
.Job  12.  15.  he  scndeth  out  waters,  they  o.  earth 
Exek  21.  27.  1  will  o.  o.  o.  it,  untd  he  come  whose 

OVERTURN  ETH. 
Job  9.  5.  which  o.  the  mountains  in  his  anger 
28.  9.  he  o.  the  mountains  by  the  roots 
34.25.  knows  their  works,  and  o.  them  in  night 

OVERTURNED. 
Judg.  7.  13.  smote  the  tent  that  it  fell  and  o.  it 

OVERWHELM. 
Job  6. 27.  ye  o.  fatherless,  dig  a  jiit  for  your  friend 

OVERWHELM  i:D. 
Psal.  55.  5.  trembling  came,  and  horror  hath  o.  me 
01.  2.  when  my  heart  is  o.  lead  me  to  the  rock 
77.  3.  and  my  sjiirit  was  o.  142.  3.  ]  143.  4. 
78.53.  h?  led  them  on,  but  the  sea  o.  their  enemies 
124.  4.  then  the  waters  had  o.  us  stream  gone  over 

OVER  WISE. 

Ecol.l. \%.noi  right,  overmuch,  nor  make  thyselfo. 

OUGHT;  see  Owed. 

OUGHT. 

Gen.  20. 9.  that  o.  not  be  done,  34.  7.  Lev.  4. 2, 27. 
2  Sam.  13. 12.  no  such  thing  o.  to  be  done  in  Israel 

1  Citron.  12.  ;i2.  to  know  what  Israel  o.  to  do 
15.  2.  none  o.  to  carry  the  ark  but  the  Levites 

2  Chr.  13. 5.  o.  ye  not  to  know  Lord  gave  kingilom 
Jfch.  5.  9.  0.  ye  not  to  walk  in  the  fear  of  God  "! 
Psal.  76. 11.  bring  presents  to  him  who  o.  be  feared 
Mat.  23. 23.  these  o.  ye  to  have  done,  7>aA-c  11.  42. 
Mark  13.  14.  desolation  standing  where  it  o.  not 
J^uke  12.  12.  in  the  same  hbur  what  ye  o.  to  say 

13. 14.  there  are  six  days  in  which  men  o.  to  work 
16.  0.  not  this  woman  to  be  loosed  from  this  bond 
18. 1.  that  men  o.  always  to  pray,  and  not  to  faint 

24.  26.  O  fools,  0.  not  Christ  to  have  suffered'? 
John  4.  20.  the  place  where  men  o.  to  worship 

13.  14.  ye  also  o.  to  wash  one  another's  feet 
19. 7.  we  have  a  law,  and  by  our  law  he  o.  to  die 
Acts  5.  29.  wo  0.  to  obey  Gi>d  rather  than  men 
17.  29.  we  o.  not  to  think  the  Godhead  like  gold 
10.36.  ye  o.  to  be  quiet,  and  to  do  nothing  rashly 
20. 35.  how  so  labouring  ye  o.  to  support  the  weak 
21.21.  that  they  o.  not  to  circumcise  their  children 
24. 19.  who  0.  to  have  been  here  before  ihee 

25.  10.  judgment  seat,  where  I  o.  to  be  judged 
24.  crying,  that  he  o.  not  to  live  any  longer 

20.  9.  that  1 0.  to  do  many  things  contrary  to  Jesus 
Rnm.  8.  26.  we  know  not  what  to  pray  for  as  we  o. 

12.3.  not  think  of  himself  more  highly  tlian  he  o. 

15.  1.  we  0.  to  bear  the  infirmities  of  the  weak 
1  Cor.  8.  2.  he  knoweth  nothmg  as  he  o.  to  know 

11.  7.  for  a  man  indeed  o.  not  to  cover  his  head 
10.  the  woman  o.  to  have  power  on  her  head 

2Cor.2.3.suri  ow  from  them,  of  whom  I  o.  to  rejoice 
7.  ve  0.  rather  to  firgive  him  and  comfort  him 

12.  il.  for  I  o.  to  have  been  commended  of  you 
14.  the  children  o.  not  to  lay  up  for  the  parents 

FpA.5.28.so  o.men  to  love  theirwives  as  theirbodios 
0. 20.  may  speak  boldly,  as  I  o.  to  speak,  Col.  4.  4. 
Col.  4.  6.  know  how  ye  o.  to  answer  every  man 

1  Thess.  4.  1.  ye  received  of  us  how  ye  o.  to  walk 

2  TAe.>.i.3.7. yourselves  know  how  ye  o.  to  follow  us 

1  Tim.  5.  13.  speaking  things  which  they  o.  not 
Tit.  1.  11.  teaching  things  which  they  o.  not 

^cb.  2.  1.  we  o.  to  give  the  more  earnest  heed 
5.3.ho  o.for  people  and  for  himself,to  offer  for  sins 
12.  for  when  for  the  time  ye  o.  to  be  teachers 

.Tatn.  3.10.  my  brethren,  these  things  o.  not  so  to  be 
4.  15.  for  that  ye  o.  to  say,  if  the  Lord  will 

2  Pet.  3  11.  what  manner  of  persons  o.  ye  to  be 

1  .Tohn  2.  6.  o.  himself  also  to  walk  as  he  walked 
3.  10.  0.  to  lay  down  our  lives  for  the  brethren 
4. 11.  if  God  loved  us,  wee  also  love  one  another 

3  ./ohn  8.  we  therof ire  o.  to  receive  such 

OUGHT,  Substavlire. 

Gen.  3^).  6.  he  knew  not  o.  that  he  had,  save  bread 
47.18.  Ihero  is  not  o.  left,  but  our  bodies  and  lands 

F.jod.a.S.  ye  shall  not  diminish  o.  thereof,  11.19. 
12.  46.  thou  shalt  not  carry  forth  o.  of  the  Hesh 
22.  14.  if  a  man  borrow  o.  of  his  neighbour 
29.  34.  if  0.  of  Hesh  of  the  consecrations  remain 

Lev.  11. 25.  whoso  be:irelh  o.  of  carcase  is  unclean 

19.  0.  if  o.  remain  unto  third  day,  shall  be  burnt 
25.14. if  thou  sellest  o.  or  buye.st  o.  from  thy  neigh. 
27.  31.  if  a  man  will  redeem  o.  of  his  tithes 

A'um.  15.  24.  if  o.  be  committed  by  ignorance 
30.  the  soul  that  doeth  o.  presumptuously 

30.6.when  she  vowed,  or  uttered  o.  out  of  her  lips 
Deut.  4.  2.  ye  shall  not  add  or<liminish  n.  from  it 

15.  2.  creditor  that  lendeth  o.  to  his  neighbour 

20.  14.  neither  have  I  taken  o.  in  my  mourning 

for  any  unclean  use,  nor  given  o.  tliereof 
for  dead 
.rosh.  21.  45.  there  failed  not  o.  of  any  good  thing 
Ruth.  1.  17.  if  0.  but  death  part  thee  and  me 
15a7n.l2.4.nor  hast  thou  taken  o.of  any  man's  hand 
5.  tliat  ve  have  not  found  out  p.  io  b*^  '^•nd 
3K 


OUT 

t  Sam.  2.5.  7.  neither  was  their  o.  missir.g  to  thorn 

30.  22.  v.-e  \vill  not  give  them  o.  of  tiie  ajioil 
2.S«»i.3.35.if  I  taste  bread  or  o. else, till  sun  ho  dowa 

14.  10.  whoso  saith  o.  to  thee,  brin"  him  to  me 
19.  none  can  turn  from  o.  my  lord  hath  spoken 
Mat.  5.  23.  that  thy  brother  hath  o.  against  tliea 

21.  3.  if  any  man  say  o.  to  you,  ye  shall  say 
Mark  7.  12.  and  ye  sufier  him  no  more  to  do  o. 

8.23.hc  took  blind  man  and  asked  him  if  he  saw*. 

11.25.  forgive,  if  ye  have  o.  against  any 
John  4.  .33.  hath  any  man  brought  him  o.  to  cat  1 
Acts  4.  32.  neither  said  any  that  o.  was  his  own 

24.  19.  and  object,  if  they  had  o.  against  me 

28.  19.  that  I  had  o.  to  accuse  my  nation  of 
Philcm.  IB.  if  he  oweth  thee  o.  put  to  my  account 

OUGHTEST. 
lKivgs2.9.  and  knowest  what  thou  o.  to  do  to  him 
jMat.  25.  27.  thou  6.  to  have  put  my  money  to 
Acts  10.  0.  he  shall  tell  thee  what  thou  o.  to  do 
1  Tim.  3.  15.  how  thou  o.  to  behave  thyself 
OUR  ;  see  Brother,  Father,  Lord. 
OURS. 
Grn.  26.  20.  did  strive,  saying,  the  water  is  o. 

31.  10.  God  hath  taken  from  our  father  that  ii  o. 
154.  23.  shall  not  every  beast  of  theirs  be  o.  ? 

jV(n/i.32.32.i)08se9Bion  on  this  side  Jordan  maybe  <?. 
1  King.'i  22.  3.  know  that  Ramoth  in  Gilead  is  o. 
Eirk. '31^.2.  ancient  high  places  areo.  in  jjossession 
Mark  12.7.  and  inheritance  shall  be  o.  Luke  20.14. 

1  Cor.  1.2.  all  tliatcall  on  Jesus,  both  theirs  and  o. 

2  Cor.  1. 14.  as  ye  also  are  a,  in  the  day  of  the  Lord 
Tit.  3.  14.  let  0.  learn  to  maintain  good  works 

OUT. 

Ge7).2.9.o.of  ground  made  Lord  to  grow  every  tree 

23.  Woman,  because  she  was  taken  o.  of  man 

3.  19.  for  n.  of  it  wast  thoU  taken  ;  dust  thou  art 

M'lim.  32.  23.  and  be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  o. 

Job  28.  5.  as  for  the  earth,  o.  of  it  comelh  bread 

Psal.  8.  2.  r.  of  the  moutli  of  babes  and  sucklings 

82.  5.  fou  illations  of  the  earth  are  o.  of  course 

94.  12.b'd3sed,  whom  thou  teachest  o.  of  thy  law 

118.26  we  have  blessed  you  o.  of  house  of  Lord 

Prov.  4.23.  keep  heart  for  o.  of  it  are  i.ssues  of  life 

31. 18.  her  candle  goetji  not  o.  by  night 

Isa.  13.9.  he  shall  destroy  sinners  thereof  o.  of  it 

29^18.  eyes  shall  see  o.  of  obscurity,  o.  of  darknesa 

Jer.  30.  7.  but  he  shall  be  saved  o.  of  it 

19.  and  o.  of  them  shall  proceed  thanksgiving 
Kiek.  34.  11.  behold  I  will  seek  o.  my  sheep 
40.  20.  that  they  bear  them  not  o.  into  the  court 
Mic.  5.  2.  yet  o.  of  thee  shall  he  come  forth  to  me 
that  is  to  be  ruler  in  Israel,  Mat.  2.  6. 
7.ech.  10.  4.  o.  of  him  came  forth  the  corner 
Mat.  12.  34.  o.  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart 
35.  0.  of  good  treasure,  o.  of  the  evil  treasure 

15.  19.  0.  of  the  heart  proceed  evil  llioughts 
Mark  10.  20.  they  were  astonished  o.  of  measnre 

13.  15.  nor  enter  to  take  any  thing  o.  of  his  house 

16.  0.  0.  of  whom  he  had  cast  seven  devils 
7,i(/.e  19.22. 0.  oflliine  own  mouth  will  I  judge  thee 
.John  15. 19.  but  I  have  chosen  you  o.  of  the  world 
j?e(a-2.5.devout  men,o.  of  every  nation  under  heav. 

28.  23.  both  o.  of  the  law,  and  o.  of  the  prophets 

1  Cor.l5.S.  seen  of  me,  as  of  one  born  o.  of  due  time 

2  Cor.  2.4.  for  0.  of  much  aflliction  I  wrote  to  you 
8. 11.  be  a  performance  o.  of  that  which  ye  liave 

2  Tim.  2. 26.  recover  themselves  o.  of  snare  of  devil 

3.  11.  but  o.  of  them  all  the  Lord  delivered  me 

4.  2.  be  instant  in  season,  o.  of  season,  rejjrove 
.lam.  3.  10.  0.  of  same  mouth  i)roceedelli  blessing 
See  Camp,  Captivity,  City,  Darkness,  Way, 

ZlON. 

OUTCAST. 
./er.30.17.saithLord,becn  use  they  called  thoe  ano. 

OUTCASTS. 
Psal.  147.  2.  he  gathereth  n.  of  Israel,  Isa.  5(j.  ? 
Isa.  11.  12.  he  shall  assemble  the  o.  of  Israel 
16.  3.  hide  the  o.  \\  4.  let  my  o.  dwell  with  thee 
27.  13.  the  0.  in  the  land  of  Egypt  shall  worship 
.7cr.  49.  30.  whither  the  o.  of  Elani  shall  not  coma 

OUTER. 
Ezrk.  40.  21.  he  brought  me  into  the  o.  court 
47.  2.  he  led  me  the  m  ay  without  to  the  o.  eats 
Mat.  8. 12.  be  cast  into  o.  darkness,  22. 13. 1  25.  30. 

OUT-GOINGS. 
./o.5A.  17.  9.  the  0.  of  it  were  at  the  sea,  19.  29. 
18.  and  the  o.  of  it  shall  be  thine 
18.  19.  the  0.  of  the  border  were  at  the  north 
)9.14.theo.thereofare  in  the  valley  of  Jiphthnh.«' 

22.  the  0.  of  their  border  were  at  Jordan,  33. 
Psal.  r>5. 8.  tliou  makest  the  o.  of  tlie  mornin)^ 

OUTLANDISH. 
JVeA.  13. 26.  even  o.  women  caused  Solomon  latSm 

OUTLIVED. 
Judg.  2. 7.  all  the  days  of  the  elders  that  o.  Joihfla 

OUTRAGEOUS 
Prov.  27  4.  wrath  is  cruel  and  anger  is  a. 

OUTRUN. 
John  20. 1  Uiej  tan  both  together,  and  the  othai 
diicipU  did  «.  P««( 


OWN 

OUTSIDE. 

Judg.  7.  11.  Gideon  went  to  o.  of  tJie  armed  men 
17.  and  when  1  come  to  tRe  o  of  tlie  camp 

19.  80  they  came  to  the  o.  of  the  camp 
1  Kings  7.  9.  and  80  on  o.  toward  the  great  court 
Eiek.  40.  5.  behold  a  wail  on  the  o.  of  the  house 
Mat.  23.  25.  make  clean  o.  of  the  cup,  Luke  11.  J9. 

20.  tJiat  the  o.  of  them  may  be  clean  aldo 

OUT-STKKTCIIED. 
Deut.  2G.  8.  Lord  brouglit  uh  out  with  an  o.  arm 
Jer.  21.  5.  I  will  tight  against  you  with  an  o.  hand 

27.  5.  I  have  made  the  earth  by  my  o.  arm 

OLTW.^KD. 
1  Sam.  IG.  7.  for  man  looketh  on  o.  appearance 
1  Chrvn.  26.  29.  Chenaniah  for  the  o.  businesa 
JVtA.  11. 10.  the  chief  of  Uie  Levitesfor  o.  business 
Ksth.  6.  4.  Human  was  come  into  the  o.  court 
Kzek.  40.  17.  he  brought  me  into  the  o.  court 
Mat.  •2'.i.  27.  which  indeed  appear  beautiful  o. 
Kotiui.'iB.  nor  circumcision,  which  is  o.  in  the  flesh 
S  Cor.  4.  16.  but  though  our  o.  man  perish,  yet  our 
10. 1 1.  who  in  o.  appearance  am  base  among  you 
7.  do  yo  look  on  thing-i  after  the  o.  appearance? 
1  Pet.  3.  3.  not  that  o.  adorning  of  plaiting  hair 

OUTVVARULY. 
Mat.  23.  23.  ye  o.  appear  righteous  unto  men 
Rom.  2.  28.  for  he  is  not  a  Jew  which  is  one  o. 

OUTWENT. 
Mark  6.  33.  many  ran  afoot  thither,  and  o.  them 

OWE. 
Rom.  13.  8.  0.  no  man  any  thing,  but  to  love 

OWED. 
Mat.  13.  24.  one  which  o.  him  10,000  talents 

23.  and  found  one  which  o.  him  a  hundred  pence 
Luke  7.  41.  tlie  one  o.  .500  pence,  and  the  alher  50 

OWEST. 
•^fat.l8.28.hc  took  him,  saynig,pay  mc  that  thou  o. 
Luke  16.  5.  bow  much  o.  tliou  unto  my  lord  ?  7. 
PA<7em.l9.thou  o.to  me  even  thine  own  self  besides 

OWETH. 
PAi7em.l8.if  he  hath  wronged  thee,  or  o.thee  aught 

OWL. 
ieclLlO.  0.  and  cuekow  unclean,  Deut.li.\5,l6. 
17.  the  little  o.  and  cormmiwu.  ha.  34.  11,  15. 
Psal.  102.  6.  I  am  like  «  ■  o.  of  the  desert 

OWLS. 
»7oJ  30.29. 1  am  a  companion  to  o.  a  brother  to  drag. 
Isa.  13.  21.  the  wild  beasts  shall  lie  there,  and  o. 
shall  dwell  there,  34.  13.  Jer.  50.  39. 
43.  20.  the  dragons  and  o.  shall  honour  me 
Mic.  1.  8.  I  will  make  a  mourning  as  the  o. 

OWN. 
Oen.  1.  37.  God  created  man  in  his  o.  image 
5.  3.  .Adam  begat  a  son  in  his  o.  likeness 
15.  4.  shall  come  of  thine  o.  bowels  ahall  be  heir 
30.  25.  send  me,  that  I  may  go  to  mine  o.  place 
47.  24.  four*  parts  shall  be  your  o.  for  seed  of  field 
Ezoil.  21.  30.  ox  for  ox,  and  dcail  shall  be  his  o. 
22.  .■).  of  best  of  his  o.  field  shall  make  restitution 
Lev.  1.  3.  he  shall  offer  it  of  his  o.  voluntary  will 
7. 30.  his  0.  hands  shall  bring  the  offering  of  Lord 
14  15.  pof.r  it  into  the  palm  of  his  o.  left  hand,  20. 
18.  10.  for  theirs  is  thine  o.  nakedness 
26.nor  any  of  your  o.  nation,  nor  strangers  among 
you  shall  commit  any  of  these  abnminationa 
25.  5.  that  which  growcth  of  its  o.  accord 

41.  and  he  shall  return  to  his  o.  family 
JVum.  1.52.  each  by  hiso.  camp,  by  his  o.  standard 
10.!W.  have  not  done  them  of  mine  o.  minil,  24. 1.3. 
38.  these  censers  of  sinners  against  their  o.  souls 
30.  42.  he  called  it  after  his  o.  name,  Ijciit.  3. 14 
38.  9.  shall  keep  himself  to  hia  o.  inheritance 
Deut.  23. 24.  mayest  cat  grapes  at  thine  o.  pleasure 
24.13.  that  he  may  sleep  in  hiso.  raiment,and  bli 
16.  not  children  for  fathers,  every  man  shall  be 
put  to  death  for  o.  sin,  2  Kings  14.0. 2  CAr.25.4. 

28.  53.  thou  shalt  cat  the  fruit  of  thine  o.  body 
33.  9.  nor  knew  he  his  a.  children 

Josh.l.W.rhe^  hn\c  put  it  even  among  their  o.  stuff 

Judg.  2. 19.  they  ceased  not  from  their  o.  doings 
7.  2.  saying,  mine  o.  hand  hath  saved  me 

1  Sam.  2.  20.  and  they  went  to  their  o.  home 
5.  11.  let  the  ark  go  again  to  his  o.  place 
15.  17.  when  thou  wast  little  in  thine  o.  sight 
25.  26.  from  avenging  with  thine  o.  hand 

i  Sam.  6.  22.  I  will  be  base  in  mine  o.  sight 
7.  10.  that  they  may  dwell  in  a  place  of  their  o. 
19.3.  did  eat  »f  his  o.  meat,  nnd  drink  of  his  cup 
17.  11.  that  Ihou  go  to  battle  in  thine  o.  person 
18.13.  have  wrought  falsehood  against  mine  o.lifc 

1  King'  2.23.  spoken  this  word  against  his  o.  life 

32.  shall  return  his  blood  on  his  o.  head,  37. 
13.  30.  he  laid  his  carcase  in  his  o.  grave 
17.  19.  and  Elijah  laid  him  upon  his  o.  bed 

2  Kings  17.  29.  every  nation  mode  gods  of  their  o. 
\  Chr.  29.  14.  nnd  of  thine  o.  have  we  given  iheo 

16.  all  iliis  store  wo  prepared,  is  all  tliine  o. 
2  C/ir.  6.  23.  recompensing  his  way  on  his  o.  head 
J^eh.  4.  4.  turn  their  reproach  on  their  o.  head 
Ettk  9  25  wicked  device  should  return  on  o.  bead 
434 


OX 

Job  20.  7.  he  shall  perish  for  ever  like  his  o.  dung 
fsal.  5.  10.  let  them  lall  by  their  o.  counsel 

12.  4.  our  liiw  are  our  o.  who  is  lord  over  us? 
07.  0.  God,  even  our  o.  God,  shall  bless  us 

7i!.  29.  were  tille<l,  for  he  gave  tlieni  their  o.  desire 
81.  12. 1  gave  them  up  to  tlieir  o.  hearts'  lust 
94.23.  he  shall  bring  on  them  tlieir  o.  iniipiily,  and 
shall  cut  them  otf  in  their  o.  wickedness 
Prov.  5.  17.  let  them  be  only  thy  o.  not  strangers 
Isa.  37.  35.  for  mine  o.  sake,  43.  25.  1  48.  II. 
53. 13.  not  findnig  lliine  u.  jileasure,  nor  o.  words 
Eiek.  29.  3.  whicli  hath  said,  my  river  is  mine  o. 

33.  13.  if  he  trust  to  his  o.  righteousness 
Hos.l.'i.  now  their  o.  doings  have  beset  them  about 
Joiiak  2.  3.  they  forsake  ihcir  o.  mercy 

Mat.  20. 15.  lawful  to  do  what  I  will  with  mineo. 
l.tike  14.  26.  if  any  man  hate  not  his  o.  life  also 

10.  12.  who  shall  give  you  that  which  is  youro. .' 
Jokn  1.11.  he  came  to  his  o.  his  o.  received  him  not 

6. 44.  when  he  speakelh  a  lie,  he  speaketh  of  his  o. 

10.  12.  a  hireling,  whose  o.  the  sheep  are  not 

13.  1.  having  loved  his  o.  that  were  in  the  world 
15.  19.  if  of  the  world,  world  would  love  his  o. 
10.  32.  ye  shall  be  scattered  every  man  to  his  o. 

jlcts  3.  12.  as  though  by  our  /).  power  or  holiness 
5.4. was  It  not  thine  0.?  was  itnotin  thineo.power.' 
20.  23.  which  he  purchased  with  his  o.  blood 

Horn.  4. 19.  he  considered  not  his  o.  body  now  dead 
3.  32.  he  that  spared  not  his  o.  Son,  but  delivered 

14.  4.  to  his  0.  master  he  standeih  or  falleth 

1  Cor.  0.  19.  ye  are  not  your  o.  for  ye  are  bought 
7.  2.  nevertheless,  let  every  man  have  his  o.  wife 
10.  24.  let  no  man  seek  his  o.  but  another's  wealth 
29.  conscience,  I  say,  not  thine  o.  but  others 
13.  5.  charity  seeketh  not  her  o.  is  not  easily 
Pkil.  2. 21.  for  all  seek  their  o.  things,  not  Christ's 
3.9.found  in  him, not  having  mine  o.  righteousness 
ITim.  5.  3.  but  it  any  provide  not  tor  his  o,  his  o. 
Tit.  1.  12.  a  prophet  of  thair  o.  said,  tlic  Crctians 
Neb.  9.  12.  but  by  his  o.  blood  he  entered  in  once 
hen.  1.5.  washed  us  tVom  our  sins  in  his  o.  blood 
See  Counsel,  Country,  Eyes,  Heart,  House, 
Land,  People,  Self,  Selves,  Soul,  Way, 
Ways,  Will. 

OWNER. 
Exod.  21.  28.  but  the  o.  of  the  ox  shall  be  quit 

29.  it  hath  been  testified  to  his  o.  his  o.  shall  die 
34.  the  0.  of  the  pit  shall  make  it  good 

30.  and  his  o.  hath  not  kept  him  in,  ox  for  ox 
22.  11. 0.  of  it  shall  accept  thereof,  not  make  good 

12.  he  shall  make  restitution  to  the  o.  thereof 

14.  0.  thereof  not  being  with  it,  make  it  good 

15.  but  if  o.  thereof  be  with  it,  not  make  it  good 
1  Kings  10.  24.  after  name  of  Shenier,  o.  of  the  hill 
Prov.  3.  t27.  withhold  not  good  from  the  o. 
Isa.  1.  3.  the  ox  knoweth  his  o.  the  ai-s  his  crib 
Jlcts  27.  11.  centurion  believed  the  o.  of  the  ship 

OWNERS. 
.Fob  31.  39.  or  have  caused  the  o.  to  lose  their  lives 
Prov.  1.  19.  which  tak(5tli  away  lite  of  c  thereof 
Eccl.  5.  11.  what  good  is  there  to  the  ».  thereof  1 

13.  A  sore  evil,  riches  kept  for  o.  to  their  hurt 
Luke  19.  33.  the  o.  said,  why  loo.se  ye  the  coll? 

OWNET'll. 
Lev.  14.  3.5.  ho  that  o.  the  hou.^e  shall  tell  priest 
^ctA' 21. 11.  Jews  shall  bind  man  that  o.  this  girdle 

OX. 

f;rod.20.I7.shaltnotcov.thyneighb.or,  7>cut.5.21. 

21.23.  if  01  gore  a  man,  hesliall  be  stoned,  29, 32. 

29.  if  oz  were  wont  to  \nt!ih  with  his  boros,  30. 

'.12.  if  or  push  a  man-siirvaiit  or  maid>ervant 

33.  if  an  ox  or  ii«s  shall  fall  into  a  pit,  the  owner 

22.  1.  if  a  man  shall  steal  an  ox  or  a  sheep 

4.  wlif-thcr  it  bo  ox  or  ass,  he  shall  restore  double 

9.  Ire^pa.s8  for  an  oi  ||  10.  deliver  an  oz  to  keep 
2.3.  4.  if  Ihou  meet  thine  enemy's  ox  going  astray 

12.  that  thine  ox  and  thine  ass  may  rest 

34.  19.  every  firstling  of  an  ox  or  sheep  is  mine 
Aci'.7. 23.  shall  cat  no  manner  of  fat  of  ox  or  sheep 

17.  3.  what  man  soever  killeth  an  oz  or  lamb 
JVum.  7.  3.  they  brought  for  each  of  princes  an  oz 
22.  4.  as  the  or  lickcth  up  the  grass  of  the  field 
Drill.  5.  14.  thine  oz  shall  do  no  work  on  sabbath 
14.  4.  the  or,  the  Bliecp,  and  goat,  ye  may  cat 
13.  3.  the  priest's  due,  whether  it  be  oi  or  sheep 
22.1.  thou  shall  not  see  thy  brother's  01  go  astray 
4.  Ihou  whull  not  see  thy  brother's  oi  tall  down 

10.  shalt  not  plow  with  an  oi  nnd  ass  together 
25.4.  Ihou  shnit  not  muzzle  I  he  or  when  he  trcnd- 

eth  out  the  corn,  1  Cor.  9.  9.  1  T\m.  5.  18. 

28.  31.  thine  or  shall  ho  slain  before  thine  eyes 
./b.?A.6.2l. I  hey  destroyed  ox  and  sheej),l  Sam. 15.15. 
./Hrf/T.3.3I.Plmmgar8lewti0O  men  with  nn  ox-goad 

0.  4.  they  lefl  neither  sheej)  nor  ox  for  Israel 
l.V(im.l2.3.Sam.Bnid, whose  ox  or  ass  have  Ilnkcn? 

14  34.  bring  me  hitherevory  man  his  ox  and  sheep 
AT-A.  5.  18.  prcpored  for  mo  daily  one  ox,  six  sheep 
.fol)  R.  5.  or  lowelli  the  nx  over  his  fodder? 

24  3.  they  take  the  widow'n  oi  for  a  pledge 

40.  15.  behold.  Behemoth  eateih  grass  as  an  oz 


PAI 

PiaZ.69.31.this  shall  please  Lord  better  than  an  o» 
J0C.20.chaiiged  their  glory  intosimilitude  of  an  ox 
/'roc.7.22.goeth  after  boras  an  ox  goethto  slaughL 
14.  4.  but  increase  is  by  the  strength  of  the  ox 
15.17.better  than  a  stalltd  ox, and  hatred  therewith 
Jsa.  1.  3.  the  ox  knoweth  his  owner,  ass  his  crib 
11.  7.  and  the  lion  shall  eat  straw  like  the  oz 
32.  20.  that  send  forth  thitlier  the  feel  of  the  ox 
66.  3.  that  killeth  an  ox,  as  if  he  slew  a  man 
Jer.  11.19.  bull  was  Uke  a  lamb  or  an  ox  brought 
Ezek.  1.  10.  they  four  had  the  face  of  an  ox 
Z-utel3.15.doth  not  each  of  you  loose  his  ox.  on  sab. 

14.  5.  shall  have  an  ox  or  an  ass  fallen  into  a  pit 

mid  OX. 
Deut.  14.  5.  the  wild  oz  and  chamois  ye  may  eat 

OXEN. 
Oen.  12.  16.  Abram  had  sheep,  «nd  o.  and  asset 

20.  14.  Abimclech  gave  Abraham  sheep  and  o. 

21.  27.  Abraham  gave  Abimelech  sheep  and  o 
32.  5.  Jacob  said  thus,  I  have  o.  and  asses 

34.  23.  the  sons  of  Jacob  took  Shechem's  o. 
Ezod.  9.  3.  the  hand  of  the  Lord  is  upon  the  o, 

20.  24.  thou  shalt  sacrifice  thereon  thine  o. 

22.  1.  he  shall  restore  five  o.  for  one  ox,  and  foui 
30.  likewise  shalt  thou  do  with  thine  o.  and  sheep 

.Vum.  7.  3.  and  the  princes  brought  twelve  o. 

7.  four  0.  he  gave  to  the  sons  of  Gershora 

8.  and  eight  o.  he  gave  to  the  sons  of  Merari 
22.40.  Balak  offered  o.  and  sheep,  and  sent  to  Bal. 

23.  1.  prepare  me  here  seven  o.  and  seven  rami 
7.><:ut.l4.2e.shalt  bestow  that  money  for  o.  or  sheep 
.Josh.  7.  24.  Joshua  took  Achan,  his  o.  and  sheep 

1  Sam.  11.7.  Saul  hewed  a  yoke  of  o.  in  pieces,  and 
sent  them  thro'  Israel,  so  shall  it  be  done  to  his  o. 

14. 14.  acre  of  land,  which  yoke  of  o.  might  plow 
32.  the  people  took  sheep  ond  c.  and  slew  them 

15.  9.  Saifl  spared  Agag  and  the  best  of  the  o. 

14.  what  meaneth  lowing  of  o.  which  I  hear? 

15.  the  people  spared  thcliest  of  the  sheep  and  o. 
22.  19.  Doeg  smote  the  o.  and  sheep,  and  asses 
27.9.  David  took  away  the  sheep,  and  o.  and  asset 

2  Sam.  6.  6.  Uzza  took  hold  of  it,  for  o.  shook  it 

13.  Bf^vid  sacrificed  o.  and  fallings 

24.  22.  behold,  here  bo  o.  lor  burnt-sacrifice 

24.  so  David  bought  the  threshing-floor  and  o. 

1  Kings  1.  9.  Adonijah  slew  sheep  and  o.  19,  25. 
4.23.Solomon's  daily  provision,  10  fat  o.  100 sheep 

7.  25.  one  sea,  12  o.  under  it,  44.  ^Chr.  4.  4, 15. 

8.  5.  with  him  before  ark,  sacrificing  sheep  and  o. 
63.  Solomon  offered  a  sacrifice  to  the  Lord  ol 

22,000  0.  and  120,000  sheep,  2  CAron.  7.  5. 
19. 19.  Elisha  was  plowing  with  twelve  yoke  of  o. 

20.  Elisha  left  the  o.  and  ran  after  Elijah 

21.  he  took  a  yoke  of  o.  and  slew  them 

2  Kings  5.  20.  is  it  a  time  to  receive  sheep  and  o.f 

1  Ckron.  12. 40.  brought  bread  on  mules  and  on  «. 

2  Chron.  15.  11.  they  offered  of  the  spoil  700  o. 
18.  2.  Ahab  killed  sheep  and  o.  for  him  nnd  people 

29.  33.  consecrated  things  were  600  o.  3000  sheep 
31.6.  they  brought  in  the  tithes  of  o.  and  sheep 

35.  3.  princes  gave  for  pnssover  three  hundred  o. 
./oil.S.his  substance  was3000camcls,500  yoke  of  0. 

14.  the  0.  were  plowins,  and  the  asses  Ireding 
42. 12.  Lord  gave  him  1000  yoke  of  o.  1000  asses 

PsaLS.!.  \hou  niadest  him  to  have  dominion  over  a. 

144. 14.  that  our  o.  may  bo  strong  to  labour 
Prov.  14.  4.  where  no  o.  are  the  crib  is  clean 
Isa.  7. 25.  but  it  shall  be  for  ihe  sending  forth  of  ». 

22.  13.  and  behold,  joy  and  gladness,  slaying  o. 

30.  24.  the  o.  and  Ohsos  shall  eat  clean  provender 
Jer.  51.  2;i.  I  will  break  the  husbandman  and  hie  o. 
/.>a7i.  4.  25.  make  thee  cat  grass  aso.32,  Xi.  |  5.21. 
j?THos  6.  12.  will  one  plow  tljere  with  o.  ? 

.,1/at.  2'2.  4.  my  o.  and  my  fallings  are  killed 

Luke  14.  19.  I  have  bought  five  yoke  of  o. 

./ohn  2.  14.  found  in  the  temple  those  that  sold  o. 

15.  he  drove  them  all  out,  the  sheep  and  the  o 
.-ids  14.13.iiriest  of  Jupiter  brought  o.  nnd  garlands 

1  Cor.  9.  9.  doth  God  take  en  re  for  o.  ? 

OYL,  ice  Oiu 

P. 

PACES. 

2  Sam.  6.  13.  when  gone  six  p.  he  sacrificed  oxon 

PACIKY,  ED,  ETH. 
/:sfA.7.10.hangcd  Haman.then  was  king's  wrathf. 
Pror.  16.  14.  a  w  ise  man  will;),  the  wrath  of  u  king 

21.  14.  a  gift  in  secret  p.  anger,  nnd  a  reward 
Feet.  10.  4.  for  yielding;!,  great  offences 

Kick.  16.  03.  for  thy  shame,  when  I  am  p.  towaia 

PA  DOLE. 
Dcul.23. 13.  thon  shalt  have  a  p.  nn  thy  woapo4 
PAID,  see  after  PAY. 
PAIN 
Signifies,  [11  J*ny  bodily  disease  or  distemper 
Job  33.  19.     [2]   I'isquiel,  or  unrasivrst  of 
mind,    Psal.  2.5.  18.  [  .5.5.  4.      [3]    7>arni7  in 
chitd-birlh,  1  Sam.  4. 19.   [4J  f)ear,  Ez^k.  3a  4. 


PAL 

The  wicked  man  travailelh  with  pain  all  his  days, 
Job  15.  'JO.     He  lives  a  life  of  care,  fear,  and 
grief,  by  reason  of  God's  wrath,  and  the  tor- 
ments of  his  own  mind,  and  his  manifold  and 
dreadful  outward  calamities 
They  blasphemed  the  God  of  heaven,  because  of 
tiieir  puins,  Mev.  16.  11.     Ho/nc  observe  from 
hence  the  contrary  effects  that  trouble  produces 
in  the  godly  and  in  the  wicked;  the  one  bless- 
cth,  the  other  blasphemeth  the  Lord.     In  tri- 
bulation the  godly  rejoice,  the  wicked  rage; 
for  the  one  in  suffering  communicates  with  the 
cross  of  Christ,  the  other  with  the  curse  of 
Adam.     Stars  shine  in  the  night,  which  in  the 
day  arc  not  seen;   and  grace  is  manifested 
.  by  trouble,  which   in  prosperity  lies   secret. 
Trouble  tries  true  religion  from  false,  and 
discerns  grace  from  nature. 
Job  14.  2-2.  but  his  flesh  on  him  shall  have  p. 
15.  20.  the  wicked  man  travailelh  witli;;. 
33.  19.  he  is  chastened  also  with  p.  on  his  bed 
Psal.  25.  18.  look  on  mine  atlhction  and  my  p. 
48.  6.  p.  as  a  woman  in  travail,  Isa.  13.  8.  |  2ti.  17. 
139.  1 24.  see'  if  there  be  any  way  o( p.  in  me 
Isa.  21.  3.  therefore  are  my  loins  filled  with  p. 
2<).18.\vo  have  been  with  child, we  have  been  in^. 
(56.  7.  before  her;?,  came,  she  was  delivered 
Jer.  6.  24.  anguish  hath  taken  hold  of  us,  and 
p.  as  of  a  woman  in  travail,  22.  23.  Mark 
13.  1 6. 
]2.  1.").  put  themselves  top.  but  shall  not  profit 
1.5.  18.  why  is  m\  p.  perpetual,  wound  incurable 
30. 23.  it  shall  fall  with  p.  on  head  of  the  wicked 
51.  8.  howl  for  Babylon,  take  balm  for  hor;7. 
E:/;*.  30.  4.  great  p.  shall  be  in  Ethiopia,  9. 

16.Sin  shall  have  great  p. No  shall  be  rent  asund 
^f/c.4.10.  be  in  p. and  labour  to  bring  forth,  O  Zion 
JVaA.2.10.  much^^.isinall  loins,faces  gather  black 
Kom.  8.  22.  the  whole  creation  travaileth  in  p. 
Rev.  l(j.  10.  they  gnawed  their  tongues  for/). 
21.  4.  nor  sorrow,  nor  shall  there  Lie  any  more/). 
See  Pangs. 
PAINED. 

Psal.a^.i.  my  heart  is  sore;;,  within  me,  and  terror 
Isa.  23.5.  they  shall  be  sorely/),  at  report  of  Tyre 
Jer.  4.  19.  my  bowels,  I  a.mp.  at  my  very  heart 
Joi-li.  6.  before  their  face,  people  shall  be  muchp. 
Het'.\'i.2.  travailing  in  birth,  and  b.  to  be  delivered 
PAINS. 

1  .?ani.4.19.  she  travailed,  for  her  p.  came  upon  her 
Psal.  116.  3.  and  the  p.  of  hell  gat  hold  on  me 
jSc«s2.24.  God  raised  up,  having  loosed /).of  death 
Heo.  16.  11.  they  blasphemed,  because  of  their  o. 

PAINFUL. 

Psal.  73.  16.  tcknow  this,  it  was  too  p.  for  me 

PAINFULNESS. 

2  Cor.11.27.  in  weariness  and;;,  in  watchings  oflen 

PAINTED. 
2  Kings  9.30.  Jezebel  p.her  face,  and  tired  her  head 
^cjr.  22. 14.  ceiled  with  cedar,  and/).with  vermilion 

PAINTEDST. 
£:«i-. 23.40.  thou/),  thy  eyes,  and  deckedst  thyself 

PAINTING. 
2  FTings  9.t30.  Jezebel  put  her  eyes  in  p. tired  head 
Jer.  4.  30.  tho'  thou rendest  thy  face  withp.  in  vain 

PAIR. 
Lvkc  2.  24.  to  offer  a  p.  of  turtle  doves  or  pigeons 
Rev.  6.  5.  he  had  a  p.  of  balances  in  his  hand 

PALACE 
Signifies,  [1]  .3  royal  dwelling  or  mansion-house, 
Isa.  39.  7.  [2]  The  temple  of  God  at  Jeru- 
snh-m,  1  Chr.  29.  1,  19.  [3]  Stately  and  mai'- 
nificcnt  buildings,  2  Chron.  36.  19.  [41  The 
high-priist's  houje.  Mat.  26.  58.  [5]  The 
church,  Psal.  48.  13. 

1  King.^  16.  18.  Zimti  burnt  the  king'sp.  and  died 
21.  1.  Naboth  had  a  vineyard  hard  by  tlie  p. 

2  Kings  15.  25.  Pekah  smote  Pekaiah  in  the  p. 
20.  18.  they  shall  be  eunuchs  in  thep.of  the  king 

of  Babylon 

1  Chr.  29.  1.  />.  is  not  for  man,  but  for  Lord  God 
19.  give  Solomon  a  perfect  heart  to  build  the  p. 

2  Chr.  9.  11.  he  made  terraces  to  the  king's  p. 
"F-zra  4.  14.  we  have  maintenance  from  the  p. 

6.  2.  there  was  found  at  .Vchmetha,  in  p.  a  roll 
JWA.I.l.itcame  to  [lass,  as  I  was  in  Shushan  the/). 
'  2.  8.  timber  to  make  beams  for  the  gates  of/). 

7.  2. 1  gave  Hanani,  ruler  of  p.  charge  over  .Terus. 
F.sth.  2.  3.  may  gather  all  young  virgins  to  the/). 

3.  1.5.  decree  was  given  in  Shushan,  the  /).8. 14. 
9.  12.  Jews  destroyed  500  mi'n  in  Shushan  the/). 
Psal.  45.  15.  they  shall  enter  into  the  king's  p. 
69.  t2.5.  let  their/),  be  desolate,  let  none  dwell 
144.  12.  polished  after  the  similitude  of  a  p. 
Cant.  8.  9.  we  will  build  on  her  p.  of  silver 
Isa.  25. 2.  hast  made  a  p.  of  strangers  to  be  no  city 
Dan.  4.  4.  I  was  at  rest,  and  flourishing  in  my  p. 
6. 18.  king  went  to  his  p.  passed  the  night  fasting 
11  45.  he  shall  plant  his  p.  between  the  seas 
Smos  4.3.  ye  shall  cast  them  intop.  saitli  the  Lord 
427 


PAL 

Xnh.  2.  6.  gates  opened,  and  p.  shall  be  dissolved 
Mat.  2t).  58.  Peter  followed  Jesus  afar  ofl  to  the 
high-priest's  p.  and  went  in,  Mam.  14.  54. 
lAike  11.  21.  when  a  strong  man  keejieth  his  p. 
I'hil.  1.  13.  my  bonds  are  numilest  in  all  the  ». 

PALACES. 
2  Chron.  36.  19.  and  burnt  all  the  p.  with  fire 
i^s.  45.  8.  garments  smell  of  myrrh,  out  ofivoryp. 

4e.  3.  God  is  known  in  her  p.  for  a  refuge 
13.  mark  well  her  bulwarks,  consider  her  p. 

78.  69.  he  built  his  sanctuary  like  high  p. 

122.  7.  peace  and  prosperity  within  lhyi»- 
Prov.  30.  28.  sjiider  lakes  hold,  and  is  in  king's  p. 
l.-ia.  13.  22.  dragons  shall  cry  in  thy  pleasant  p. 

32.  14.  because  the  p.  shall  be  forsaken 

34.  13.  thorns  shall  come  up  in  her  p.  nettles 
Jer.  6.  5.  arise,  and  let  us  destroy  her  p. 

9.21.  for  death  is  come  and  is  entered  into  our  p. 

17.  27.  fire  shall  devour  the  p.  of  Jerusalem 

49.  27.  it  shall  consume  the  p.  of  Benliadad 
I.,am.  2.  5.  he  hath  swallowed  up  all  her  p. 
Eiek.  19.  7.  and  he  knew  their  desolate  p. 

25.  4.  they  shall  set  their  p.  in  thee,  and  make 
Amos  3.  9.  publish  in  p.  at  Ashdod,  in  p.  of  Egypt 

10.  who  store  up  violence  and  robbery  in  thcirp. 

11.  ihyp.  shall  be  spoiled  ||  6.  8.  I  hate  his  p. 
»Ujc.5.5.  when  he  shall  tread  in  ourp.thpn  shall  raise 

-See  Devour. 
PALE. 
[sc.  20.  22.  neither  shall  his  face  now  wax  p. 
yjcij.U.S.I  looked, and  behold  a  p.horse,name  Death 

PALENESS. 
Jer.  30.6.  as  a  woman,  and  all  faces  turned  intop. 

PALM. 
I^ev.  14.  15.  pour  it  into  p.  of  his  left  hand,  26. 
Isa.  48.  1 13.  p.  of  my  hand  spread  out  heavens 
John  18.  22.  struck  Jesus  with  the  p.  of  his  hand 

PALM-BRANCHES. 
JVeA.  8.  15.  go  forth  to  the  mount  and  fetch  p. 

PALMER-WORM. 

.Toel  1.  4.  what  the  p.  left,  the  locust  hath  eaten 

2.  25.  I  will  restore  the  years  that  p.  hath  eaten 

Amos  4.  9.  your  fig-trees,  the  p.  devoured  them 

PALMS. 

1  Sam.  5.  4.  both  the  p.  of  his  hands  were  cut  off 

2  Kings  9.  35.  they  found  skull  and  p.  of  her  hands 
Isa.  49.  16.  i  have  graven  thee  on  p.  of  my  hands 
Dan.  10.  10.  which  set  me  on  the  p.  of  my  hands 
Mat.  26.  67.  they  spit  in  his  face,  others  smote  him 

with  the  p.  of  their  hands.  Murk  14.  65. 

Rev  7.  9.  with  winte  robes,  and  p.  in  their  hands 
PALM-TREE 

Is  an  upright,  tall,  fruit-bearing,  flourishing, 
and  shadowy  tree.  Peal.  92.  12.  Cant.  7.  7,  8.  Jer. 
10.  5.  It  grows  by  the  sweet  springs  of  waters, 
and  continues  long.  It  will  not  be  pressed  or 
bound downward,or grow  crooked, thoughhiavy 
weights  be  laid  un  it.  This  tree  is  one  of  the 
most  famous  of  all  the  forest,  and  is  the  usual 
emblem  of  constancy,  fruitfulnessj  patience, 
and  victory  ;  which  the  more  it  is  oppressed, 
the  more  it  flourisheth  ;  the  higher  it  grows, 
the  stronger  and  broader  it  is  in  the  top.  Some 
think  it  is  the  same  with  the  Date-tree,  which 
is  not  only  of  a  beautiful  aspect,  but  of  a  de- 
lightful taste,  and  is  ft  both  for  food  and 
drink;  and  this  was  perhaps  the  reason  why 
the  children  of  Israel  pitched  their  camp  at 
F.lim,  Num.  33.  9.  because  there  were  not  only 
twelve  fountains  of  water  i/cre,  A«<  also  three- 
score and  ten  Palm-trees.  The  Hebrews  called 
it  Thamar,  and  the  Greeks,  Phoeni.t :  The 
flnest  and  best  Palm-trees  were  about  Jericho, 
En-gedi,  and  along  the  banks  of  Jordan. 
Palm-trees,  from  the  satne  root,  produce  a 
great  number  of  suckers,  which  form  upwards 
a  kind  of  forest  by  their  spreading.  It  was 
under  a  little  wood  of  Palm-trees  of  this  kind 
that  the  prophetess  Deborah  dwelt  between 
Ramah  and  Beth-el,  Judg.  4.  .5. 

It  was  probably  to  this  multiplication  ofthePalm 
tree  that  the  prophet  makes  allusion,  when  he 
says.  The  riglitcous  shall  flourish  like  the  Palm- 
tree,  Psal.  92.  12.  Or,  it  is  made  an  emblem 
of  a  just  man's  person  and  condiiinn,  because 
it  is  constantly  green  Jlourishing,and  fruitful. 

The  Palm-tree  is  a  symbol  of  victory,  Rev.  7.  9. 
And  the  spouse  is  compared  to  a  palm-tree, 
Cant.  7. 7.  because  it  is  tall,  and  grows  directly 
upward  and  rn  spite  of  all  pressures. 

.Judg.  4.  ,5.  she  dwelt  under  the  p.  of  Deborah 

Psal.  92. 12.  the  righteous  shall  flourish  like  the  p. 

Cant.  7.  7.  this  thy  stature  is  like  to  a  p. thy  breasts 
8.  I  said,  I  will  go  up  to  the  p.  I  will  take  hold 

.Ter.  10.  5.  they  are  upright  as  the  p.  that  speak  not 

F.iek.  41. 19.  the  face  of  a  man  was  toward  ihep. 

Joel  1.  12.  the  p.  and  the  npple-treo  are  withered 
PALM-TREES. 

Exod.  1.5.27.  came  to  Elim,  where  were  seventyp. 

Lev.  23.  40.  yc  shall  take  you  branches  of  p. 


I 


PAR 

Deut.  34. 3.  Lord  shewed  him  city  of  p.  unto  Zoaj 

Judg.  1. 16.  the  Kenite  went  out  of  the  city  of  p. 

3. 13.  Moab  smote  Israel,  and  possessed  city  ol^p 

1  Kings  6.  29.  he  carved  with  carved  figures  ofp 

32.  35.  I  7.  36.  2  Chron.  3.  5.  F.iek.  40.  16 

2  Chron.  28.  15.  and  brought  them  to  the  city  ofp 
John  12.  13.  people  took  branches  ofp.  went  forti 

PALSY. 
This  distemper  is  a  preclusion  or  stoppage  in 
one  or  more  of  the  limbs,  which  deprives  them 
of  motion,   and  makes   them  useless   to   tht 
patient.    There  are  some  Palsies  tliat  are  very 
painful,   and  others  not  so  much,  from  the 
nature  of  the  humours  that  cause  ikem.     Our 
Saviour  cured  several  Paralytics  by  his  word 
alone,  Mat.  4.  24.  |  8.  6,  7.  1  9.  2.     'J'he  word 
Paralytic   is   derived  from   the  Greek   word, 
Paraluo,  mAz'cA  signifies  to  resolve,  or  relax  ; 
as  if  it  was  to  shew,  that  the  Palsy  is  a  relax- 
ation of  the  nerves:  But  it  may  be  produced 
by  other  causes. 
Mat.i.'i4.thny  brought  to  him  those  that  had  thep 
he  healed  them,  9.  2.  Mark  2.  3.  I.ukc  5.  18. 
8.  6.  my  servant  lieth  at  home  nick  of  thep. 
9.2.  Jesus  seeing  their  faith,  said  to  the  sick  of  the 
p.  son,  thy  sins  be  forgiven  thee,  Mark  2.  5 
Mark  2.10.Jesu5  saith  to  sick  ofp. arise,  V.u/tC  5.24 
Acts,'J.  33.  he  found  Eneas,  who  was  sick  of  thep 

PALSIES. 
.^cts  8.7.  many  taken  with  p. and  lame  were  healed 

PAN. 
Lev.  2.  5.  if  it  be  a  meat-offering  baken  in  a  p. 
6.  21.  in  a  p.  it  shall  be  made  with  oil, when  bakcn 
7.9.  all  that  is  dressed  in  p.  shall  be  the  priest's 
1  Sam.  2. 14.  the  priest's  servant  stuck  it  into  Ihcp. 
2. Sam.  13. 9. Tamar  look  ap.and  poured  them  out 
Ezek.4.'i.  take  unto  thee  an  iroup.selit  for  a  wall 

PANS. 
Exod.  27. 3.  thou  shalt  make  p.  to  receive  his  ashea 
JVum.11.8.  they  baked  manna  in  p.aiid  made  cakes 

1  Chron.  9.31.  over  the  things  made  in  thep.  23.29. 

2  Chron.  35. 13.  other  holy  otTerings  sod  they  in  p. 

PANGS. 
2  Sam.  22. 1 5.  when  the  p.  of  death  compassed  me 
Asa.  13.  8.  p.  and  sorrows  shall  lake  hold  of  them 
21.  3.  p.  have  taken  hold  on  me,  asp.  of  a  woman 
26. 17.  as  a  woman  crieth  out  in  herp.  so  have  we 
.Icr.  22.  23.  gracious  shalt  thou  be  when  p.  come 
48.  41.  as  the  heart  of  a  woman  in  her  p.  49.  22. 
50.  43.  andp.  as  of  a  woman  in  travail,  Mic.  4.  9. 

PANNAG. 
EzcAr .27.17.  Jud.  traded  in  thy  market,/). and  honey 

PANT. 
Amos  2.  7.  that  p.  after  the  dust  of  the  earth 

PANTED. 
Psal.  119. 131.  I  opened  my  mouth  and  p.  I  longed 
ha.  21.  4.  at  the  crievous  vision  my  heart  p. 

"PANTETH.  . 
Psal.  38.  10.  my  heart  p.  my  slrengtli  faileth  me 
42.  1.  as  hart  p.  so  p.  my  soul  after  thee,  O  God 
PAPER. 
Is  a  plant,  or  kind  of  bulrush,  which  grows  in 
Egypt  ?(p«7i  the  banks  of  the  Nile;    7Vic  Egyp- 
tians applied  it  to  several  uses,  as   to  make 
baskets,  shoes,  clothes,  little  boats  to  swim  in 
upon  the  Nile,  and  paper  to  write  on;  it  was 
of  this  that  the  little  ark  was  made,  in  which 
the  parents  of  Moses  exposed  him  upon  the 
banks  of  the  Nile. 
As  to  the  writing-paper  made  use  of  by  the  an- 
cients, it  was  very  different  from  that  in  use 
amongst  us,  and  was  composed  of  the  leaves  of 
tAc  papei-neds, /ro7/i  whence  it  has  its  name. 
This  is  said  to  be  their  manner  of  working  it. 
The  trunk  of  this  plant  is  composed  of  several 
leaves  or  films  placed  one  over  another,  which 
were  peeled  iff,  and  separated  with  a  needle: 
They  were  afterwards  stretched  out  upon  a  wet 
table,  to  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  intended 
leaf  of  paper:  Over  the  first  layer  of  the  leaves 
of  paper  they  put  some  thin  paste,  or  only  soma 
of  the  muddy  water  of  the  Nile  a  little  warmed, 
upon  which  they  spread  a  second  layer  of  the 
leaves  of  the  plant :  Then  thiy  let  it  dry  by  the 
sun.   The  Egyptians  applied  the  paper-reeds  to 
several  uses,  as  to  makebaskits, shoes, clothes, 
little  boats  to  swim  in,  and  paper  to  write  on. 
Isa.  19.  7.  the  p.  reeds  hy  the  brooks  shall  wither 
'iJohn  12.  I  would  not  write  wthp.  and  ink 

PAPS. 
F.iek.  23.  21.  lewdness  for  thep.  of  thy  youth 
/,«*/■  11.27.  blessed  arep.  which  thou  hast -sucked 
23.29.  blessed  are  thep.  which  never  gave  suck 
Rev.  1.  13.  and  girt  about  p.  with  a  golilun  girdle 

PAR. ABLE. 
This  word  it  formed  from  the  Greek,  Parahole, 
which  comes  from  theverb  Parahalloiri,  S'gnifij- 
ing  to  compare  tkins's  tog'  ther.  It  i.i  a  simili 
tude  taken  from  natural  things,  to  instruct  vl 
in  the  knowledge  of  things  spiritual.     Tf> 


PAR 

parabolical,  enigmatical,  figuralim,  and  scn- 
tentwui  icay  vj  epcaking,  teas  tlu  Language 
iif  t/ie  easltrn  Ssages,  and  Uarncd  men  ;  and 
not/ling  icas  mure  insuppurlahle  than  to  hear 
a  fool  utter  i'urubles,  fruv.  ili.  7.  The  li'^'s  of 
Uia  luiiiu  uru  nul  e(|ual,  Bu  ii  a.  purable  in  the 
iiiuutli  of  loolii;  l/tat  is,  As  it  is  uncomely  and 
ridiculous  to  see  a  lame  man  dancing ;  no  less 
absurd  and  indecent  are  wiseandpious  spctckes 
from  a  foolish  and  ungodly  man,  ichuse  actions 
grossly  contradict  them,  whcrebij  he  makes 
them  contemptible,  and  himself  ridiculous. 

1'lie  prophets  made  use  of  I'urublos,  to  gice  a 
stronger  impression  to  prince  and  people, of  the 
tkrealenings,  or  of  the  promises  they  made  to 
them.  Nulliuii  reproved  David  under  the  para- 
ble of  a  rich  man  that  had  taken  away  and  kill- 
ed the  Limb  of  a  poor  man,  2  Sam.  12  -2,  3,  Ac. 
The  woman  uf  Xekoah,  that  was  hired  by  Joab 
to  reconcile  the  mind  of  the  same  prince  toward 
his  son  Al>a:\\oin^ proposed  tohim  the parableof 
her  two  sons  that  fought  together  in  the  field, 
and  one  uf  which  having  killed  the  other,  thfy 
were  going  to  put  the  mardi  rirto  death,  and  so 
to  deprive  her  of  both  her  sons  at  once,  2  Sam. 
14.  '2,3,  4-c.  Jotham,  son  of  Uiiluoii,  proposed  to 
Vie  men  of  iihucU(;m,thcparable.of  the  bramble, 
whom  the  trees  had  a  mind  to  choose  for  their 
klng,^^l^^f•.'J.'! ,S,\-c.  Theprophtts oftenrcproce 
the  infidelity  of  Jirusalcm  under  the  parable  of 
an  adulterous  wife.  They  describe  the  violevce 
of  such  princes  as  are  enemies  to  the  people  of 
Ootl,under  the  names  oflions,eagles,bears,i\c. 

Our  Saviour  in  the  gospel  often  speaks  to  the 
people  in  parables,  Mat.  13.  ]0,13,i\-c.  Me  made 
use  of  thim  to  verify  the  prophecy  of  Isaiah, 
loho  foretold,  thai  the  people  should  sec  with- 
out knowing,  and  hear  without  understanding, 
and  should  continue  in  their  blindness  and 
hardness  of  heart,  in  the  midst  of  the  instruc- 
tions they  should  receive,  Isa.  6.  II,  JO.  'J'hcre 
arc  some  parables  in  the  J\''rw  Testament, 
trhich  are  siipjio.ird  to  be  true  histories  ;  there 
arc  others  in  which  our  Saviour  seems  to  allude 
to  some  particular  events  of  those  times. 

JV"u;«.23.T.  iSalaam  took  up  hisp.  anrl  salil,  Balak, 
kirti,'  of  Moab,  24.  3,  15,  20,  21,  23. 
18.  took  up  his  p.  risii  up,  Balak,  and  bear 

Job  27.  1.  Job  continued  bin  p.  and  said,  29.  1. 

I'sal.  49.  4.  I  will  incline  mine  ear  to  a  p. 
"ir^.  2.  I  will  open  my  mouth  in  a  p.  I  will  utter 

ProB.  2G.  7.  (io  is  a  p.  in  tlie  mouth  of  fools,  9. 

y.iek.  17.  2.  and  fprak  a  p.  to  the  house  of  Israel 
'2i.  3.  utter  a  p.  to  the  rebellious  house,  and  say 

Mic.  2.  4.  one  shall  tnke  up  a  p.  aijainst  you 

//uA.2.6.  shall  not  all  Uiesetake  up  ap. against  him 

Mat.  13.  18.  hear  ve  iherefore  the  ».  of  the  sower 
24.  another  p.  put  he  forth,  31,  33.  |  21.  33. 
34.  without  u/; .spake  he  not  to  them,  Mark  4.34. 
36.  declare  to  us  the;j.  of  the  tares,  15. 15. 
21.32.  now  learn  a  p.  of  the  fig-tree,  when  hrnnrh 
putttth  forth  leaves,  Mark  13.2-j.  Luke  21 .29. 

Mark  4.10.  they  asked  him  of;/.  7.  17.  LukeS.'J. 
13.  ho  said  to  them,  know  ye  not  this  p.  ? 
12.12.  he  had  spoken  p.  against  them,  /^kAc  20.19. 

Luke  5.  3fi.  he  spake  a  p.  to  them,  fi.  39. 1  8.4. 1  12. 
1«.  I  13.  (i.  I  14.  7.  I  1,5.  .3.  I  IH.  1,  9.  1  19. 11. 
I  20.  y.  121.29.  .fohn^O.i). 
12.41.  LordjSpoakest  ihdM  Ihisw.lo  us,  or  to  all? 
PAR.\BLES. 

F.iek.'2n,40.  Ihey  say  of  me,  doth  he  not  speak  p.? 

Mat.  13.  3.  he  spake  many  things  to  them  in  p.  13. 
34.  I  22.  1.  Mark  3.  23.  I  4.  2, 13, 33.  |  12. 1. 

Mark  4.  13.  how  then  will  yo  know  nil  p.  ? 

y,«4f  8.10.  hut  othersinp.lhatseelng  might  notBce 

John  10.  t2o.  when  I  shall  no  more  speak  in  p. 
P.MlAniSE. 

/.uke  23.  43.  to-day  shall  thou  he  with  mo  in  p. 

2  Cor.  12.  4.  how  ihat  he  was  caui,'lit  up  into  p. 

Rev.  2.  7.  which  is  in  the  mid-l  of  the  p.  of  God 
PARAMOURS. 

JEzei.  23.20.  for  she  doted  npim  thcirp. whose  flesh 
PARCKli. 

Oen.  33.  19.  Ja'-oli  bought  a  p.  of  n  field  of  the 
children  of  lliimor,  .Tosh.  24.  .32.  .fohn  4.  !>. 

Ruth  4.  3.  Naomi  s.lleth  a  p.  of  lan.I,  niinndech's 

1  Chr.  11.  13.  was  a  p.  .)f  Brouiid  full  of  barley,  14. 
PARCIIKD. 

I.ia.  3.5.7.  th«  p.  ground  shall  become  a  pool 

Jer.  17.  6.  but  bo  slmll  inhabit  the  p.  places 

Srr  PoRV. 

rAIUllMRNTS.      • 

iTim.  4.  13.  bring  lb"  I U^,  hut  especially  the  p. 

PAIU»i».\. 
F.rod.^.  21.  he  will  not  p.  your  trnnsffroKsions 
34.  9.  p.  our  inifpiily  and  our  sin,  .Vu/ii.  14.  19. 

1  .fam.  I.'i.  2-1.  Iherc-liiri',  I  prav  thw.  p.  mv  Kin 

2  Kings  a.  IS.  in  this  the  Lord  p.  thy  nervanl 
31.  4.  innof-enl  blood,  which  Lord  would  not  p. 

2  Chron.  30.  18.  tha  good  I.iordp.  wrery  ono 
42d 


PAR 

J^eh.  0. 17.  but  thou  art  a  God  ready  to  p.  gracious 
Job  7.  21.  why  dost  thou  nut  p.  my  transgrcssiuu? 
I'sal.  25. 11.  for  thy  name's  sake  p.  mine  iniquity 
Isa.  55.  7.  return  to  Lord,  for  he  will  abundaiilly  p. 
Jer.  5.  1.  and  I  will  p.  it  ||  7.  how  shall  I  p.  thee 
33.  S.  I  will  p.  all  their  iniquities,  whereby  siuned 

50.  20.  for  I  will  p.  them  whom  1  reservo 

PARDONED. 
J\'u7n.l4.20.L.  said,  I  have  p. according  to  thy  word 
Isa.  40.  2.  tuJl  licr  that  her  iniquity  is  p. 
Lam.  3.  42.T¥e  liave  rebelled,  tliou  liast  not  p. 

PARDOxNETH. 
Mid. IB.w^o  is  a  God  like  to  thee,  tliatp.iniquity? 

PARDU.\S. 
JVeh.  9.  1 17.  thou  art  a  God  of  p.  slow  lo  anger 

PARE. 
i.>(.-uf.2I.12.she  shall  shave  her  head  andp.hcr  nails 

PARENTS. 
Mat.  10.  21.  children  shall  rise  up  against  thcirp. 
and  cause  them  to  be  put  to  dcilli,  Mark  13.12. 
/.«ic2. 27.  when  the  p.  brought  in  the  child  Jesus 
8.50.  Iierp.  were  astonished,  but  he  charged  them 
18.  29.  there  is  no  man  that  hath  left  p.  or  wife 
21.1f).  ye  shall  bo  betrayed  both  byp.and  brethren 
.luhn  9.  2.  Master,  u  ho  did  sin,  this  man  or  iiis  p.? 
'.^2.  these  words  spake  p.bi!cause  feared  Jews,23. 
Rom.  1.  30.  j>roud,  disobedient  top.  'i.Tim.  3.2. 
2  Cur.  12. 14.  children  ought  not  to  lay  up  for  tiiep. 
F.ph.  C.  1.  children,  obey  your  p.  Col.  3.  20. 
1  Tim.  i.  4.  let  them  leurn  to  requite  their  p. 
//cA.  11.  23.  Moses  was  hid  three  mouths  of  his  p. 

PARLOUR. 
•Judg.  3.  20.  Eglon  was  sitting  in  a  summer  p. 
23.  Ehud  shut  the  doors  of  the  p.  upon  hiiii 
1  •'^am.  9.  22.  Samuel  brought  tbem  into  the  p. 

PARLOURS. 
1  CAron.28.11.  David  gave  Solomon  a  pattern  ofp. 

PART. 
F.xod.  19.  17.  they  stood  at  nelher  p.  of  mountain 
29.  2ti.  ihou  shall  take  the  breast,  it  shall  be  tliyp. 
7/611.  2.  10.  p.  of  the  beaten  corn,  p.  of  oil  thereof 
7.  33.  he  slmll  have  the  right  sliouliler  for  his  p. 
P.  29.  the  breast  of  coofeeraiion  was  Moses' p. 
11.  37.  if  any  p.  of  their  carcase  fall  thereon,  o8. 

13.  41.  his  hair  fallen  otl'from  the  p.  of  his  head 
J\'um.  18.  20.  neilher  .shall  thou  have  anyp.  among 

them,  ])cut.  10.  9.  ]  12.  12.  ]  14.  27,  29.  | 

18.  1.  ./oiA.  14.  4.  I  18.  7. 

I  am  thy  p.  and  thine  inheritance  in  Israel 
22.  41.  might  sec  utmost  p.  of  the  people,  23. 13. 
JJeut.  .33.  21.  he  provided  the  first  p.  for  himself 
.Tosh.  19.9.  the  p.  of  Judali  was  too  nnicli  for  them 

22.  25.  ye  have  nop.  in  the  Lord, 27. 

Ituth%  3.  her  hap  was  to  light  on  a  p.  of  llic  field 
3.  13.  if  he  will  perform  to  thee  p.  of  a  kinsman 

1  Sam.  5.  t  4.  only  the  fishy  p.  was  left  to  Dagon 

14.  2.  Saul  tarried  in  the  utmost  p.  of  the  camp 

23.  2(1.  ourp.  shall  be  to  del.  him  into  king's  band 
30.24.ashisp.is  thatgoetli  down  to  battle, .«o  shall 

hisp.  be  that  tarrietli  by  stuff,  shall  part  alike 

2  Sam.  20.  1.  Sheba  said,  we  have  nop.  in  David 
2/\'ings  7.5.lhe  lepers  were  come  to  uppermost  p.8. 

l-'.  23.  if  able  on  thy  p.  to  set  riders,  Isa.  36.  8. 
22.  t  14.  dwelt  in  the  second  p.  2  Chron.  34.  t  22. 

1  Chron.  12.  29.  greatest  p.  had  kept  house  of  Saul 

2  Chron.  29.  10.  the  priesis  went  into  the  inner  p. 
JVeh.  1.  9.  cast  out  to  the  uttermost  p.  of  heaven 

5.  11.  restore  the  hiindredlhp.  of  the  money 
.lob  32.17. 1  will  answer  myp.will  shew  my  opinion 
Psnl.  ,').  9.  their  inward 71.  is  very  wickedness 

16.  t  5.  the  Lord  is  the  portion  of  my  p. 

51.  ().  in  hidilen  p.  shall  make  mc  know  wisdom 
118.  7.  Loril  takes  my  p.  with  them  that  help  me 

/Vor.8. 26.  nor  highest  p.  of  the  dust  of  the  world 
31.  rejoicing  in  the  habitable  p.  of  his  earth 
17.2.  shall  have  p.  of  inherilanre  among  brethren 
Isn.  7.  18.  hiss  for  the  fly  tiiat  is  in  the  utmost  p. 

24.  16.  from  utmost  p.  of  earth  we  heard  songs 

44.  16.  he  burnetii  p.  thereof  in  the  fire,  with  p. 
thereof  lie  eateth  tlosh,  he  warmelh  himself,  19. 

F.zek.4.  11.  thou  shall  drink  ihe  sixtlip.  of  a  bin 
39.2.  leave  but  the  sixth  p.  ofthee,  and  cause  tiiec 

45.  13.  sixth  p.  of  an  opliali  of  a  lioincr  of  wheat 
17.  it  shall  be  the  princes'  p.  lo  give  offerings 

46  14.  a  meal-oflering,  Ihe  sixth  p.  of  an  pphiih 
Dan.  2.  33.  bis  feet  p.  of  iron,  and  p.  of  clay,  41, 42. 

5.  .'5.  the  king  saw  p.  of  the  hand  that  wrote,  24. 

11.  31.  arms  shall  stand  on  his  p.  I  he  v  shall  pollute 
.'lmosl.4.  it  devoured  great  deep,  did  cat  up  a  p. 
Mark  4.  38.  he  was  in  the  hinder  p.  of  the  ship 

9.  40.  he  that  is  not  agninst  iis,  is  on  our  p. 
Luke  10.  42.  and  Mary  hath  chinen  thai  good  p. 

1 1.39.  your  inward  p.  is  full  of  ravening  und  wick. 

17.  24.  as  lightning  thai  ligblenetli  out  of  one  p. 
shining  to  other  p.  under  heaven,  so  Son  of  man 

.John  13.8.  if  I  wash  Ihee  nfit,  hast  nop.  with  me 
19.23.BoldierB  made  four  pnrH,to  every  soldier  a  p. 

Jlrls  1.  17.  and  had  obtained  p.  of  this  minialry 
25.  llinl  he  may  lake  p.  of  tliis  ministry 
5.  3.  but  .\naiiiu«  kept  back  p.  of  the  prico,  and 


PAR 

brought  a  ccrtainp. and  laid  it  at  apostles'  fear  ,3 
Acts  8.21.  thou  hast  neither  p. nor  lot  in  this  mat  tor 

14.  4.  p.  held  with  the  Jews, p.  with  the  apostlua 

16.  12.  the  chief  city  of  that  p   of  Macedonia  , 

19.  32.  more  p.  knew  not  win  tfore  they  came 
23.  6.  perceived  that  the  one  p.  were  Sadduceea 
27.  12.  the  more  p.  advised  to  depart  thence 

1  Cor.  12.  24.  honour  to  that  p.  which  lacked 

15.  6.  of  whom  the  greater  p.  remain  lo  this  day 
16. 17.  what  was  lacking  on  yourp.  they  supplied 

2  Cor.  6. 15.  what  p.  he  thai  believelh  witli  iiitidel? 
E.ph.4. 16.  the  working  in  llie  measure  of  every  p. 
Ttt.'2.8.  that  he  oftheconlraryp.  may  buashanieo 
Hcb.  2.  14.  himself  likewise  look  p.  uf  the  same 
iy-'ct.4.14.  Spirit  of  God  restsouyou;  on  llieirp.lie 

is  evil  spoken  of,  but  on  your  p.  he  is  glorilied 
Hcb.  20.6.  holy  that  hath  p.  in  the  first  resurrccliou 

21.  8.  all  liars  shall  have  their  p.  in  the  lake 

22.  19.  God  shall  lake  away  his  p.  out  of  book 

Jn  PART. 
Rom.  11.  25.  blindness  in  p.  is  happened  to  Israel 

1  Cor.  13.  9.  we  know  in  p.  and  we  prophesy  in  p. 
10.  then  that  which  is  tn  p.  shall  be  done  away 
12.  I  know  in  p.  but  then  shall  1  know  as  1  am 

2  Cur.  1. 14. as  also  ye  have  acknowledged  us  inp. 
2.  5.  caused  grief,  it  hath  not  grieved  me  but  in  p. 

Third  PARI". 
^unt.l5.6.fora  ram,Hour  mingled  with  the  third p 
of  a  hin  of  oil,  28.  14.  Ezek.  46.  14. 

7.  thou  shall  olfer  the  third  p.  of  a  bin  of  wine 
2  Sam.  18.  2.  David  sent  a  third  p.  of  the  people 
'2h'ings  11.5.  a  third p.l\ml  enter  in  on  the  sabbatb 
2  Chrov.  23.  4.  a  third  p.  of  you  shnll  be  porters 
AVA.  10.32.  charge  ourselves  with  (/nirfp. of  shekel 
Kzek.  5.2.  burn  with  fire  a  thirdp.  a  third  p.  smite 

about  i(,'a  thirdp.  scatter  in  the  uiiid,  12 
Zech.  13.  8.  but  the  third  p.  shall  be  left  therein 

9.  I  will  bring  llie  third  p.  through  ihe  fire 
Rev.  8.  7.  thirdp.  of  the  trees  was  burnt  up 

8.  and  the  thirdp.  of  the  sea  became  bl.iod 

9.  third  p.  of  the  creatures  died,  thirdp.  uf  ships 

10.  and  it  fell  upon  the  thirdp.  of  the  rivers 

11.  the  t/«></p.ofthe  waters  became  wormwood 

12.  the  third  p.  of  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars,  was 
smitten,  the  day  shone  not  for  a  third  p.  of  it 

9. 15.  were  prepared  for  to  slay  the  t/izrJ  p.  of  men 
18.  by  these  three  was  the  third  p.  of  men  killed 
12. 4.  his  tail  drew  third  p.  of  the  stars  of  heaven 

Fourth  PART. 
Ezod.  29.  40.  flour  mingied  with  the  fourth  p.  of 
a  hill  of  beaten  oil,  jVum.  15.  4.  |  28.  5. 
fourth  p.  of  a  hin  of  wine  for  a  drink-offer- 
ing. Lev.  23.  13.  jVum.  15.  5.  |  28.  7,  14. 
1  .Sam.  9.  8.  I  have  here  the  fourth  p.  of  a  shekel 

1  Kings  6.  33.  posts  of  olive-tree /ijurt/j  p.  of  wall 

2  Kings  6.2.5.  Iho  fourth  p.  of  a  cab  of  doves' dung 
JVcA.9.  3.  readone/ourZAp.  another/uurlAp.tbcy 
Rev.  0.  8.  power  was  given  over /our(«  p.  of  earth 

FifUi  PART. 
Oen.  41.  34.  take  upffth  p.  of  the  land  of  Egvpl 
47.  24.  ve  shall  give  the  fifth  p.  to  Pharaoh,  26. 
Lev.  5. 16.  and  shall  add  the  fifth  p.  thereto,  6.  .5. 
)  22.  14.  I  27.  13,  19,27,31.  A'Km.  5.  7. 
1  Kings  6.31.  lintel  and  side  posts  were  &  fifth  p. 

Tenth  PART. 
F.fod.  16.  36.  a  homer  is  the  tenth  p.  of  an  cphuh 
I XV.  5.  ll.sh'iil  bring  for  his  otl'vring  Ihe  tenth  p. 
of  an  ei.bah  of  fine  flour,  6.  20.  JVum.  28.  5. 
.Vi/m.5.15.  the  ttnthp.  ofanejdiahof  barley-meaJ 
18.  26.  ye  shall  oiler  even  the  tenth  p.  of  the  tithe 
F.zek.4t).  II.  bath  and  ejihah  may  contain  ti  nthp. 

14.  ye  shall  otlcr  the  tenth  p.  of  a  bath  of  oil 
Ifeb.  7.2.  to  whom  .Abraham  gave  a  tenth  p.  of  al 
Ren.  11.  13.  and  the  tenth  p.  of  the  city  fell 

PARTS. 
Oen.  47.  21.  and  four  p.  shall  be  your  own  ^ 

Lev.  1.  8.  .Aaron's  sons  shall  lay  the  p.  in  order 
22.  23.  that  hath  any  thing  lacking  in  his  p. 
J^Tum.  31. 27.  and  divide  the  ptey  into  two  p. 
Diut.  19.  3.  divide  coasts  of  the  land  into  lhrc«p 

30.  4.  if  any  be  driven  to  the  utmost  p.  uf  hoavon 
./n.s-A.  18.  .I.  they  shall  divide  it  into  seven  p.  6.  9. 

1  Sam.  5.  9.  they  had  emorods  in  Iheir  secret  p. 

2  Snm    19.  43.  we  have  ten  p.  in  the  king 

1  Kings  16.  21.  Israel  were  divided  into  Iwop. 

'■2  Kings  II.  7.  two  p.  keep  watch  alioni  the  king  /• 

-WA.  II.  1.  and  nine  p.  to  dwell  in  oilier  cities 

./lib  26.  II.  lo,  theso  are  p.  of  his  ways,  how  liltlo 

41.  12.  I  will  not  conceal  bis  p.  nor  his  power 
/Vrt/.  2. 8.  uttermost  p.  of  earth  for  thy  possession 

63.  9.  shall  go  into  lower  p.  of  the  enrlli 

65. 8.  that  dwell  in  utmost  p.  ufraid  al  thy  tokcni 

136.  13.  which  divided  Ihe  Red  sea  into  p. 

139.  9.  if  I  dwell  in  Ihe  utmost  p.  of  Ihe  sea 
I'rov.  1**.  8.  thev  go  down  into  innermost  p.  26.22. 
l.-a.  3.17.  and  the  Lord  willfliscover  Ih^  ii  sccrctp 

41.23.  shoni,  yn  lower  p.  of  the;  earth 
.Irr.  34. 18.  and  passed  U'lwei'ii  the  p.  thereof,  19 
Fzrk.  26. 20.  and  set  thee  in  the  low  p.  of  earth 

31.  14.  are  delivered  to  the  iictlierp.  of  eartli,  18. 


BAA 

Ezt!k.  31.16.  comfort,  in  netlicrp.ofearth ,32.18,2-1. 

37.  11.  hope  is  lest,  we  are  cut  oil' for  our  p. 

38.  15.  from  thy  place  out  of  the  iiortli  p.  39.  2. 
48.  8.  oflcring  in  length  as  one  of  the  other;;. 

ZecA.13.8.  said  Lord,two  p.  therein  shall  be  cut  off 
Mat.  2.  22.  he  turned  aside  into  the;;,  of  Galileo 
12.  42.  she  came  from  uttermost  p.  Luke  11.  31. 
Jnhti  19.  23.  took  his  garments  and  made  four;;. 
Acts  20.2.  when  ho  hjd  gone  over  those/). he  came 
Rom.  15.  23.  having  .10  more  place  in  those;?. 
1  Cor.  12.  23.  uncom.^ly  p.  have  more  comeliness 

24-  for  our  comely;),  have  no  need,  but  God 
Eph  4.  9.  he  descended  first  into  lower  p.  of  earth 
Reo.  10. 19.  the  great  city  was  divided  into  three  p. 
SeeBiCK,  FIindkr,  Inward. 
PART,  rcrb. 
Lev.  2.  6.  thou  shalt  j9.  the  meat-offering  in  pieces 
Ruth  1.  17.  if  ought  but  death;;,  thee  and  me 
1  Sam.  30.  24.  they  shall  p.  alike,  and  it  was  so 
S  Sam.  14.  6.  and  there  was  none  to  p.  them 
Job  41.  6.  shall  ihey  ;;.  him  among  the  merchants? 
Psal.  22.  18.  they;),  mv garments  among  them 

PARTED. 
Oen.  2.  10.  the  river  was  p.  into  four  heads 
£  Kings  2.  11.  a  chariot  ju.  them  both  asunder 

14.  the  waters;),  hither  and  ttiither,  he  went  over 
Job  38.  24.  by  what  way  is  the  light;;.? 
Joel  3.  2.  whom  they  scattered,  and  ;;.  my  land 
Mat.  27.  35.  they  crucitii3<l  him,  and  ;;.  his  gar- 
ments, Mark  15.  24.  Luke  23.  34.  .Tohii  19.24. 
Luke  24.  51.  while  he  blessed  them,  was  p.  from 
dcts  2.  45.  p.  tliem  to  all  men,  as  each  had  need 

PARTETH. 
Lev.  11.  3.  whatsoever ;;.  the  hoof,  Dcut.  14.  6. 
Prov.  18.  18.  the  lot ;;.  between  the  mighty 

PARTAKER. 
Psal.  50.  18.  and  hast  been  p.  with  adulterers 

1  Cor.  9.  10.  that  he  should  hep.  of  his  hope 
23.  that  I  might  be  p.  thereof  witli  you 

10.30.  if  I  by  grace  be;;. why  ami  evil  spoken  of  ? 
1 '/Vne.  5.  22.  neither  be  p.  of  other  men's  sins 

2  7'i;;).  1.  8.  but  be  thou  p.  of  afflictions  of  gospel 

2.  6.  the  husbandman  be  first ;;.  of  the  fruits 

1  Pet.  5.  1.  who  am  also  a;;,  of  the  glory,  which 

2  John  11.  biddeth  God  speed,  is  ;;.  of  his  evil  deeds 

PARTAKERS. 

^ai.  23.30.  would  not  been  ;;.  in  blood  of  prophets 

Rom.  15.27.  if  Gentiles  have  been  made;;,  of  their 

spiritual  things,  theii  duty  to  minister  in  carnal 

1  Cor.  9.  12.  if  others  be  p.  of  this  power  over  you 

13.  who  wait  at  the  altar,  are;),  with  the  altar 
10.  17.  for  we  are  all  p.  of  that  one  bread 

18.  are  not  they  which  cat;),  of  the  altar  1 

21.  cannot  be;;,  of  the  Lord's  table,  and  devils' 

2  Cor.  1.7.  as  you  are;;,  of  the  sufferings, so  sliall  be 
Eph.  3.  6.  and  p.  of  his  promise  in  Christ  by  gospel 

5.  7.  be  not  ye  therefore  p.  with  tliem 
P/iU.l.~.  in  defence  of  gosp.ye  all  are  jw.ofmy  grace 
Col.  1.12.  hath  made  us  meet  to  be  p. of  inheritance 
1  Tim.  6.  2.  because  they  are  p.  of  the  benefit 
Heb.  2.  14.  as  the  children  are  p.  of  flesh  and  blood 

3.  1.  holy  brethren,  p.  of  the  heavenly  calling 

14.  for  we  are  made  p.  of  Christ,  if  we  hold 

6.  4.  and  were  made  p.  of  the  Holy  Ghost 

12.  8.  if  without  chastisement,  whereof  all  are  p. 
10.  that  we  might  be  p.  of  his  holiness 

1  Pet.  4.  13.  as  ye  are  ;;.  of  Christ's  sufferings 

2  Pet.  1.  4.  ye  might  be  p.  of  the  divine  nature 
Rev.  18.  4.  come  out  of  her,  that  ye  be  not  p.  of  her 

PARTAKEST. 
Rom.  11.  17.  and  with  Ihem  p.  of  root  and  fatness 

PARTIAL. 
Mal.%9.not  keep  my  ways,  but  have  been  p.in  law 
Jam.  2.  4.  are  ye  not  then;;,  in  yourselves? 

PARTIALITY. 
1  Tim.5. 21.  observe  tliese  things,  doing  noth.  by  p. 
Jam.  3.  17.  without  p.  and  without  hypocrisy 

PARTICULAR. 
1  Cor.  12.  27.  ye  are  body  of  Christ,  memlters  in  ;;. 
Eph.  5.33.  let  everyone  of  you  in  p.so  love  his  wife 

PARTICULARLY. 
.^cts21.19.Paul  declared  p. wiiat  things  G. wrought 
fi'e6.9.5.mercy-6eat,which  we  rannotnow  speak  p. 

PARTIES. 
.Ezo(i.22.9.cau3e  of  both  p.sha  II  come  before  judges 

PARTING. 
£ze/c.21.21.  king  of  Bahvlon  stood  at  n.  ofthe  way 

PARTITION. 
1  KinjT.i  6.  21.  and  he  made  a  p.  by  chains  of  gold 
£pA.2.14.who  hath  broken  down  middle  wall  of  p. 

PARTLY. 
Dan.  2.42.  the  kingdom  shall  bop.strong,p.broken 

1  Cor.  11.  18.  I  hear  there  be  divisions,  I  p.  be- 

lieve it 

Heb.  10.  33. p.  whilst  yo  were  made  agazing-stock 

by  afflictions,p.  whilst  ve  became  companions 

PARTNER. 

Prov.  29.24.  whoso  is  p.  with  thief  hateth  his  soul 

2  Cor.  8.  23.  Titus,  he  is  my  p.  nnd  fellow-helper 
I'Julem.  17.  if  count  mo  a  p.  receive  him  as  myself 

429 


PAS 

PARTNERS. 

Luke  5.  7.  they  !)eckoned  to  their  p.  to  help  tliem 

10.  James  and  John  who  werep.  with  Simon 

PARTRIDGE. 

1  Sam.  26. 20.  as  when  one  doth  hunt  ap.in  mount. 

Jcr.  17. 11.  OS  p.  sittethon  eggs,  hatcheth  them  not 

PASSAGE. 
jVum.20.21.Edom  refused  to  giyclsr.p.thro'border 
./osh.  22.  11.  have  built  an  altar  at  tliep.  of  Israel 
1  Sam.  13.  23.  garrison  of  Pliilistines  went  out  to;;. 
Jsa.  10.  29.  tliey  are  gone  over  p.  Ramah  is  afraid 

PASSAGES. 
Judg.  12.  6.  took  and  slew  him  at  the  p.  of  Jordan 
1  A'am.14.4.  between  the  p.  there  were  sharp  rocks 
.Jer.  ^li.  20.  lift  up  thy  voice,  and  cry  from  the  p. 

51.  32.  to  shew  llabylon  that  the  p.  are  stopped 

PASS. 
Oen.XS.^.l  will  fetch  bread,aftcr  that  ye  shall  p.on 

41.  32.  and  God  will  shortly  bring  it  to  p. 
Ezod.'SA.Vd.l  will  make  my  goodness  p.before  thee 
JV«»i.  27.  7.  inherit,  of  their  father  to  p.  to  ihem,  8. 
Josh.  1.  14.  ye  shall  p.  before  your  brethren  armed 

G.  7.  he  said  to  people,  p.  on,  and  compass  the  city 
X-Sam.  9.  27.  bid  the  servants  p.  on  before  us 

16.  8.  Jesse  made  Abinadab  p.  before  Samuel 
10.  Jesse  made  seven  of  his  sons  p.  before  him 
jVcA.  2.  14.  there  was  no  place  for  the  beast  tap. 
Job  6.  1.5.  as  a  stream  of  brooks  they  p.  away 

11.  Ifi.  and  remember  it  as  waters  that  p.  away 

34.  20.  the  people  shall  be  troubled,  and  p.  away 
Psal.  58.8.  as  snail  which  mclteth  let  them  p.away 

7:i.  t  7.  they  p.  the  thoughts  ofthe  heart 

119.t37.  make  top. mine  eyes  from  beholding  van. 
ProB.  It).  30.  moving  his  lips  he  bringefh  evil  top. 

22.  3.  the  simple  p.  on  and  are  punished,  27.  12. 
Isa.  2.  t  18.  the  idols  shall  utterly  p.  away 

30.32.  in  every  place  where  grounded  stafi'shall  p. 

31.  t  9.  his  rock  shall  p.  away  for  fear 

33.  21.  no  galley  nor  gallant  ship  shall  p.  thereby 
37.  2(>.  dried  up  rivers,  now  have  1  brought  ittop. 

.fer.  8.  13.  the  things  I  have  given  shall  p.  away 
15.  14.  I  will  make  thee  to  p.  with  thine  enemies 
33.  13.  the  flocks  shall  p.  again  under  the  hands 
of  hiin  that  teileth  them,  saith  the  Lord 
51.  43.  nor  doth  any  son  of  man  p.  thereby 

Kiek.  5.  1.  cause  barber's  razor  top. on  thine  head 
20.  37.  I  will  cause  7ou  to  p.  under  rod,  and  bring 

32.  19.  whom  dost  thou  p.  in  beauty  ?  go  down 
Amosfi.  2.  p. ye  unto  Calneh  and  sec, go  to  Hamutli 
Mic.  1.  11.  p.  ye  away,  thou  inhabitant  of  Saphir 

2.  13.  and  their  king  shall  p.  before  them 
Zeph.  2.  2.  before  decree  bring  forth,  the  day  p. as 
ZecA.3.4.I  have  caused  thy  iniiiuity  top.  from  thee 
Jl/ut.5.18.heaven  and  earth  shall  p. one  tittle  not  p. 

2b.39.Father, let  this  cupp.from  me,  Mark  14.  35. 

jLuAcH5.2(5.so  that  they  which  would  p. from  hence 

to  you  cannot;  nor  can  they  p.  to  us  from  you 

19.  4.  he  ran  to  see  him,  for  he  was  top.  that  way 
1  Cor.  7.3(5.  if  she  p.thotlower  of  her  age,  and  need 
.lam.  1.  10.  as  flower  ofthe  grass  he  shall  p.away 

1  Pet.  1.  17.  p.  time  of  your  sojourning  here  in  fear 

2  Pet.  3.  10.  in  which  the  heavens  shall  p.  away 

PASS  by. 
Exod.  33.22.  cover  thee  with  my  hand  w  bile  Ip.btj 
Deut.  2.  ."iO.  Sihon  would  not  let  us  p.  by  him 

1  Sam.  16.  9.  then  Jesse  made  Shanimah  to  p.  by 
Psal.  80.12.  alltliey  thatp.iy  the  way  do  pluck  her 

89.  41.  all  that  p.  by  the  way  sjioil  him,  he  is  at 
.hr.  22.  8.  many  nations  shall  /;.  by  this  city 
J^am.  1.  12.  a'.l  ye  that  p.  by,  behold  and  see 

2.  15.  all  that  p.  by  clap  their  hands  at  thee 
Eiek.  5.  14.  a  reproach  in  siglit  of  all  that  p.  by 

37.  2.  and  caused  me  top.  by  them  round  about 

4t).  21.  caused  me  to p.by  four  corners  ofthe  earth 
Amos  7.8. 1  will  not  a^dinp.by  them  any  more,  6.2. 
Mtr.  2.  8.  ye  pull  ofTgarmeiiisof  them  thatp.  by 
Mat.  8.  28.  that  no  man  might  p.  by  that  way 
Luke  18. 30.  hearing  the  multitude  p.  Aj/,  he  asked 

2  Cor.  1.  16.  and  to  p.  by  you  into  Macedonia 

See  Camk,  Come. 

JVot  PASS. 

JVion .20.17. we  vvillnot  p. through  the  fields  or  vine. 

18.  and  Edom  said,  thou  shalt  not  p.  by  me 
Z>f  i/i.24.t5.  when  a  man  bath  taken  a  now  mje,lic 
shall  not  go  out  to  war,  noi  any  tliingp.on  him 
Job  14.  5.  liast  appointed  his  bounds  he  cannot  p. 

19.  8.  he  hath  fenced  my  way,  that  I  cannot  p. 
Psal.  148.  6.  he  made  a  decree,  which  shall  7iot  p. 
Prov.  8.  20.  waters  should  not  p.  his  commandm. 
Jcr.  5.  22.  by  a  perpetual  decree,  that  it  cannot  p. 
/)an.7.14.evprlast.dominion  ihatshall  notp.awav 
jl/a«.24.34.  this  generation  shall  not  p.awav,  fill  all 
these  things  be  fulfilled,  .UarA1.3.3fJ.  Luke^WH. 
35.  heaven  and  earth  shall  p.  away,  but  my  word 
shall  not  p.  away, Mark  13.  31.   Luke  21.33. 
PASS  not. 
Oen.  16.  3.  my  lord,  p.  not  away  from  thy  servant 
2  Kinirs  0.  9.  beware  that  thou  /;.  not  such  a  place 
Prov.  4.  15.  avoid  it,  p.  not  by  it,  turn  aside 
Amos  5.  5.  seek  notBclli-el,p.  not  to  Becr-theba 


PAS 

PASS  over. 
Oen.  8.  1.  God  made  a  wind  to  p.  over  the  cartfc 

31.  52.  tliat  I  will  not  p.  over  this  heap  to  thee 

32.  10.  p.  oDcr  before  me,  and  put  a  space  betwixt 
t  23.  he  caused  them  to  p.  over  the  brook 

33.  14.  let  my  lord  p.  over  before  thy  servant 
£i(;d.l2.13.when  I  see  blood,!  willp.  over  you,23 

13.  f  12.  cause  top.  oucr  to  the  Lord  all  thatopcn 

15_.  10.  as  still  as  a  stone,  till  thy  people  p.  oven- 

JViim.  .32.  27.  but  thy  servants  willp.  over,  29,  32 

30.  if  they  will  not  p.  over  with  you  armed 

Z)eut.  2. 18.  thou  art  to  p.  ouer  through  Ar  tliisday 

24.p.  over  Ariion||29. until  I  shallp.  outr  Jordan 

3.  18.  ye  shallp.  ooer  armed  before  your  bretliren 

0.  t  1.  might  do  them  in  land  whither  yep.  over 

9.  1.  thou  art  to  p.  over  Jordan  this  dav,  11.  31. 

I  27.  2.  Josh.  1.  11.  1  3.  0,  14.  |  4.  5. 

Josh.  22.19.  then  p.oBcrinto  the  land  of  possession 

Judg.  3.  28.  and  suffer  not  a  man  top.  over 

19.  12.  his  inaster  said,  we  will  p.  ooer  to  Gibeah 

1  Sam.  14.  8.  behold,  wo  will  p.  over  to  these  men 

2  Sam.  15.  22.  David  said  to  Ittai,  go  and  p.  obit 
17.  10.  lodge  not  in  |)lains,  but  speedily  p.  over 

Psal.  104. 9.  set  a  hound,  that  they  may  notp.  over 
141. flO.  let  the  wicked  full,  whilst  that  I  p.  over 
Proc.  10. 11.  it  is  a  glory  to  p.  over  a  transgression 
/sa.  23. 6. p.  oucr  to  Tarshieh,  howl  ye  inhabitants 
12.  p.  o.to  Chittim||28.  19.  by  morning  shallp.  0. 
31.  9.  he  shallp.  over  to  his  strong  hold  for  fear 
35.  8.  the  way  of  holiness,  unclean  sJiall  notp.  0. 
47.  2.  uncover  the  thigh,  p.  over  the  rivers 
51.  10.  the  depths,  a  way  for  ransomed  to  p.  over 
Jer.  2. 10.  for  p.  over  the  isles  of  Chittim  and  see 
5.  22.  though  they  roar,  yet  can  they  notp.  0.  it 
Eiek.  47.  5.  it  was  a  river  that  I  could  not  p.  over 
Dan.  4.  10.  and  let  seven  times  p.  over  him,  25. 
11.  t  20.  one  that  causeth  an  exactor  top.  over 
40.  the  king  ofthe  north  shallp.  over 
Hub.  1.  11.  his  mind  shall  change,  he  shall  p.  over 
Luke  11.  42.  and  p.  0.  judgment  and  love  of  God 

PASS  through. 

Oen.  30.  32.  I  willp.  through  all  thy  flock  to-dav 

Exnd.  12.12. 1  willp.JAro'  land  of  Egypt  this  night 

23.  the  Lord  will  p.  thro'  to  smite  the  Egyptians 

Lev.  18.  21.  shalt  not  let  any  of  tliy  seed  p.  thro^ 

the  fire  to  Molech,  Dcut.  18. 10.  2h'ivgs  17. 17. 

JVum.  20.17.  let  us  I  pray  theep.  thro'  thy  country 

21.  22.  let  me  p.  through  thy  land,  LJatt.  2.  27. 

23.  Sihon  not  suffer  Israel  top.  t.  Judg.  11.  20. 

Deut.  2.  4. ye  are  top.  through  the  coasts  of  Edom 

28.  water  to  drink,  only  I  will  p.  thro'  on  my  feet 

.Tosh.  1.  11. p.  t.  the  host  and  command  the  people 

2  .9(1771.  12.  31.  and  made  them  p.  thru'  brick-kiln 

1  Kings  18.  6.  they  divided  the  land  to  p.  thro'  it 

2  Kings  10.  3.  to  p   thro'  the  fire,  21.  0.  |  2:1.  10. 

2  Chr.  33.  6.  Jcr.  32.  35.  Ezek.  20.  26,  31. 
Pifa?.78.13.  caused  them  top.  Mro' thcsea,  130  14. 
Isn.  8.  8.  he  shallp.  through  Judah,  and  go  over 
21.  shalbp.  thro'  it  hardly  bestead  and  hungry 
21.  1.  as  whirlwinds  in  the  southp.  thro',  so  it 
23.  10.  p.  t/i7-o'  thy  land  as  a  river,  O  Tarshieh 

28.  1.5.  the  overflowing  scourge  shall  p.  tAro',18. 
34.  10.  none  shall  p.  through  it  for  ever  and  ever 

./fr.9.10. burnt  uii,solhat  none  can p.Mroun^A  them 
Lam.  3.  44.  that  our  prayers shoiilil  not  p.  through 

4.  21.  the  Clip  nho  shall  p.  through  to  thee 
Ezek.  5.  17.  pestilence  and  blood  shallp.^Aro'theo 

14. 15.  iff  cause  noisome  beasts  p.  thro'  land  that 
no  'man  may  p.  thro'  for  beasts,  20. 11.  |  33.  28. 

39.  15.  the  passengers  that  p.  through  the  land 
Dan.  11. 10.  one  shall  come,p.tAr()',and  overflow 
.loH  3.  17.  no  stronger  shall  p.  Ihro'  her  any  more 
Amos  5.  17.  I  will  p.  through  thee,  eaiih  the  Lord 
JV«A.  1.12.  shall  be  cut  down, when  he  shallp. tAro 

1.5.  the  wicked  shall  no  more  p.  through  thee 
ZfcA.  9.  8.  and  nooppressor  shallp.  through  them 
1  Cor.  16.  5.  when  I  shall  p.  through  Macedonia 

PASSED. 
Oen.  15.  17.  a  lamp  thatp.  between  those  pieces 
J^um.  20.  17.  until  we  have  p.  thy  borders 
.fosh.  3.  4.  ye  have  notp.  this  way  heretofore 

0.  8.  the  seven  priests  p.  on  before  and  blew   - 

24. 17.  Lord  our  God  preserved  us  in  all  the  way 

we  went,  among  all  people  through  whom  wep. 

.Judg. 3.  20.  Ehnd  escaped  and  p.  beyond  quarridi 

1  Sam.  15.  12.  Saul  is  gone  about  and  p.  on 

29.  2.  the  lords  of  Philistines  p.  on  by  hundreds 

2  Sam.  1.5.  18.  David's  servants  p.  on  beside  him 
2  Kings  4.  8.  it  fell,  that  Elishap.  to  Shunera 

31.  Gehazi  p.  on  before  them,  and  laid  the  staff 
2  Chron.  9.  22.  Solomon  p.  all  the  kings  in  wisdom 
Job  4.  lij.  then  a  spirit  p.  before  my  fice 
9.  2fi.  my  days  are  p.  away,  as  the  swift  ships 
15.  19.  and  no  stranger  p.  among  them 
Psal.  18.  12.  at  the  brightness,  his  thick  clouds;;, 
37.  36.  yet  he  p.  away,  and  lo,  he  was  not 
81.  t  6.  his  hands  p.  away  from  the  pots 
90.  9.  all  our  days  are  p.  away  in  thy  wratn 
Cant.  3.  4.  it  was  but  a  little  that  I  p.  fnim  them 
Isa.  10. 28.  he  is  come  to  Aiatli,  he  is  p.  to  Misron 


PAS 

faa.  41.  3.  ne  puvsued  them,  ana  p.  safely 
Jcr.  11.  15.  and  the  holy  flesh  in  p.  ffoiii  thee 

34.  18.  and^.  between  tlie  parts  thereof,  19. 

46.  17.  he  hath/>.  the  time  appointed 
Dan.  3.  i!7.  nor  the  smell  of  tire  had  ;;.  on  them 

6.  18.  the  king  went  and  p.  the  night  fasting 
A'aA.S.l'.l.  hath  not  thy  wickednrss  p.  CDntinually? 
Mark  ti.  35.  a  desert  place,  now  the  time  is  fur  p. 
John  5.  "4.  but  is  p.  from  dealh  to  life,  1  John  3. 14. 
Jioiii.  5.  li.  so  death  p.  on  all  men,  all  have  sinned 
/Jeb.  4. 14.  great  high-priest  iliat  is  p.  into  heavens 
Jtev. 21.1.  tirst  heaven  and  tirst  earth  were^.  away 
4.  for  Uie  former  things  are  p.  away 
PASriEI)  by. 
Oen.  37.  28.  there  p.  by  Midianites,  merchantmen 
F,zod.'Ai.&.  Lord;;,  it/ before iiim,  and  proclaimed 
Deut.  29.  It),  through  the  nations  which  ye  p.  by 

1  Kings  13. 25.  behold,  men  p.  by  and  saw  the  lion 

19.  11.  the  Lord  p.  by  \\  VJ.  Elijah  p.  by  Elisha 

20.  39.  as  the  king;;,  by  he  cried  to  the  king 

2  Kjiigs  4.  8.  that  as  oft  as  he  p.  by  he  turned  in 
6.  jO.  the  king;;,  by  on  the  wall,  people  looked 
14. 9.  and  there;;,  by  a  wild  beast,  2  Chron.  25. 18. 

Job  28.  8.  nor  hath  the  tierce  lion  p.  by  it 
Psal.  48.  4.  for  lo,  the  kings  ;;.  by  together 
Eiek.  16.  6.  when  I  p.  by  and  saw  thee  polluted,  8. 
15.  poured  forriicat.  on  every  one  that  p.  by,  25. 
3().  31.  it  lay  desolate  in  sight  of  all  that/;,  by 
Hob.  .'!.  10.  »lie  overflowing  of  the  waters/;,  by 
Mat.  20.30.  when  heard  that  Jesus/;,  by,  they  cried 
27.  39.  they  that/;,  by,  reviled  hi;n,  Mark  15.  29. 
i^/arA2.14.ashe/;.fry  he  saw  Levi  sitting  at  receipt 
6.  48.  he  Cometh,  and  would  have/;,  by  them 
11.  20.  in  morning  as  they  p.  by,  they  saw  lig-tree 
15.  21.  they  compel  one  Simon  who/;,  by  to  bear 
J^nke  10.  31.  he  p.  by  on  the  other  side,  32. 
JohnS.  59.  going  ihro'  midst  of  them,  and  so  p.  by 
Acts  17.  23.  as  I  p.  by  and  beheld  your  devotion 

PASSED  over. 
Gen.  31.  21.  .Jacob  rose  uji,  and  p.  over  the  river 
;J2.  10.  for  with  my  staff  I  p.  orcr  this  Jordan 
Exod.  12.27.  who  p.  ooer  housesof  Israel  in  Egypt 
JVu;n.33.51.whcn  ye  arep.oi.'er  Jordan,  JJeut.H.'i. 
Josh.  3.  10.  they  p.  over  right  against  Jericho 
17.  all  the  Israelites  p.  over  on  dry  ground 
4.  1.  when  all  people  were  clean  p.  over,  11. 
10.  people  hasted  and  p.  oBCr  ||  11. the  ark  p.ore.r 
12.  Reuboiiiles  and  (iadites/;.  over  armed  before 
Judg.  8.  4.  Gideon  p.  over  and  300  men  with  him 

10.  9.  the  children  of  Amnion  p.  over  Jordan 

11.  29.  Jephthahp.  ocer  to  tight  witli  Amnion,  32. 

1  Sam.  14.  23.  the  battle  p.  over  to  Beth-aven 
27.  2.  David/;,  over  with  600  men  unto  Achish 

2  .Soni.  2.  29.  Abner  and  his  men  p.  over  Jordan 
15. 22.  Ittai  p.  over  \\  23.  king  and  people  p.  over 

Lia.  40.  27.  my  judgment  is  p.  over  from  my  God 
F.iek.  47.  5.  a  river  that  could  not  be  p.  over 
Hos.  10.  11.  but  I  p.  over  upon  lier  fair  neck 
Jonah  2.  3.  all  thy  billows  and  waves  p.  over  me 

PASSED  through. 
Gen.  12.  6.  Abrain  p.  through  the  land  to  Sichein 
jVum.l4.7.1and  which  we  p.  thro'  to  search  is  good 
33.8.  they  p.  thro'  midst  ofthe  sua  into  wilderness 

1  Sam.  9.1.Saulp.  t.  mount  Ephraim  and  Shalisha 

2  Chron.  30.  10.  posts  p.  thro'  country  of  Ephraim 
.A//c.2.13.breaker  is  come,  ihoy  p.through  tlie  gate 
y.ech.  7.  14.  land  wasde.^olate,  that  no  manp.  thro' 
J.uke  17. 11. that  he/;,  thro'  the  midst  of  Samaria 
.?(;(«  9.32.as  Peter  p.  thru'  all  quarters,  came  down 

12.  10.  they  went  out,  and  p.  through  one  street 

1  Cor.  10.  1.  all  our  fathers  p.  through  the  sea 
Heb.  11.  2;).  by  faith  they  p.  through  the  Rwd-sea 

PASSEDS'l'. 
Judg.  12,1.  wbyp.  thou  ovi-r  to  tight  ag.  Ammon? 

■•  PASSENGKRH. 

Pron.0. 15.  ehe  standelh  (o  call  p.  who  go  right  on 
Ezek.  39.  11.  I  will  give  Gog  valley  of  p.  it  shall 
stop  iiosi-s  of  the  p.  there  shall  they  bury  Gog 

14.  to  bury  with  p.  those  that  reinaiii  on  earth 

15.  when  p.  see  a  man's  bone,  they  set  a  sign  by  it 

PASS  EST. 

Z>r«f.3.21.HoT,.do  to  all  kingrloms  whither  thou  p. 

30.  IH.  on  land  whilher  thou  p.  over  to  possess 

2  Sam.  1.1.  ;<3.  if  p.  on,  thou  shalt  be  a  burden 

1  King»i.  37.  day  ihoii  p.  over  the  brook  Kidron 
Isa.43.  2.  wlieiip.  thro'  waters,  I  will  be  with  thee 

P.ASSETH. 
F.Tod.  30.  13.  every  one  llml  p.  among  them,  14. 
33.  22.  I  will  rover  th.e,  while  my  glory  p.  by 
/,r».  27.  3'2.  whatsoever  p.  under  the  rod,  the  tenth 
.fo.ih.  3.  11.  fivc-n  the  Lord  p.  over  before  you 

1  Kings  0.  8.  nl  this  house  cvitv  one  that' p.  by  it 

shall  be  astonished,  and  nhnlf  hisii,  2  TAr.  7.21. 

2  Kings  4. 9.  is  n  holy  man  of  (Jnd,  whii-h  p. by  us 
12.  4.  money  ofevery  one  that  p.  the  neconnt 

Job  9.  11.  he  p.  on  also,  but  I  perceive  him  not 
14.  20.  thou  prevailest  against  him,  and  ho  p. 
30.  15.  and  my  welfare  p.  away  as  a  cloud 
37.  91.  bill  the  wind  p.  and  clennsolh  them 

P»a/.8.8.  dominion  over  whatevcrp.  thro'  the  soru 
430 


»       PAS 

Ps'S.  39.  are  a  wind  that  p.  awj  y,  comes  not  again 
103.  16.  for  the  wind  p.  over  it,  and  it  is  gone 
144.  4.  his  days  are  as  a  shadow  tnat  p.  away 

Prov.  10.  25.  as  whirlwind  p.  so  is  wicked  no  more 

26.  17.  he  that/;,  by  and  meddlelh  with  strife 
F.ccl.l.i.one  general. p.away,  and  another  cometh 
/sa.  29. 5.  tlie  terrible  shall  be  as  chaff  that/;,  away 
Jcr.  2.  6.  a  land  that  no  man  p.  through,  9.  12. 

13.  24.  scatter  them  as  stubble  that  p.  away 
18. 16.  every  one  that/;,  shall  be  astonished,  19.  8. 
Ezek.  35.  7.  I  will  cut  oft' from  it  him  that/;,  out 
Has.  13.3.  they  shall  be  as  early  dew  that  p.  away 
Mic.  7. 18.  G.  that/;,  by  transgression  of  remnant 
Zeph.  2.  1.5.  every  one  that  p.  by  her  shall  hiss 
3.  6.  I  made  their  streets  waste,  tliat  none  p.  by 
Zech.  9.8. 1  will  encamp,  because  of  him  that/;,  by 
Luke  18.  37.  they  told  him  that  Jesus  p.  by 

1  Cor.7. 31. fashion  ofthis  worldp.away,l./y/j;i2.17. 
Kph.  3.  19.  the  loveof  Christ  which /;.  knowledge 
Phil.i.l.  the  peace  of  God  which  p.  understanding 

PASSING. 
.Judg.  19.  18.  we  are/;,  from  Betli-lehem-judah 

2  Sam.  1.  26.  thy  love  to  me/;,  love  of  women 
15.  24.  the  people  had  done/;,  out  of  the  city 

2  Kings  6. 2t).  as  king  of  Israel  wm  p.  by  on  wall 
Psai.  84.6.  p.  thro'  the  valley  of  Baca  make  a  well 
ProB-  7.  8./;.  through  the  street  near  the  corner 
Isa.  31.  5.  and  p.  over  he  will  preserve  Jerusalem 
F.iek.'Xi.  14.  p.  thro'  land  to  bury  those  that  remain 
Luke  4.  30.  he  p.  thro'  midst  of  them,  went  his  way 
Acts  5.  15.  at  the  least  the  shadow  of  Peter  p.  by 
8.40.  Philip/;,  through,  preached  in  all  the  cities 
10.  8.  they/;,  by  Mysia,  came  down  to  Troas 

27.  8.  and  hardly  p.  Crete  we  came  to  fair  havens 

PASSION 

Signifies,  [1]  The  sufferings  and  death  of  Christ, 
.■\ctsl.3.  IPetl.  11.  [2]  The  sufferings  which 
Christ's  members  endure  for  his  sake,  Col.  1. 
24.  Heb.  10.  32.  1  Pet.  4.  13.  [3]  Natural  and 
sinful  infirmities.  Acts  14.  15.  Jam.  5.  17.  [4] 
Shavtrful  passions,  to  ichich  persons  arc  given 
up,  whom  God  abandons  to  their  own  desires, 
Rom.  1.  26.  [5]  The  passions,  or  motions  of 
sin  which  act  in  our  members,  to  bring  forth 
the  fruit  of  death,  Rom.  7. 5.  [6]  Tlie  passions, 
or  desires,  our  evil  inclinations,  the  motion, 
of  concupiscence,  to  which  tlie  heathen,  without 
any  scruple,  abandoned  themselves,  1  Thess. 
4.5. 

Most  of  the  passages  of  scripture  here  cited  are 
otherwise  rendered  in  our  translation,  but  the 
wordsin  theoriginalare,Tla^o;andna^'>i/uii, 
which  words  are  often  translated  by  passions. 

Acts  1.3.  to  him  he  shewed  himself  alive  after/;. 
PASSIONS. 

^cts  14.  15.  we  also  are  men  of  like/;,  with  you 

Jam.  5. 17.  Elias  was  a  man  subject  to  like/;,  as  we 
PASSOVER. 

This  word  comes  from  the  Hebrew  verb,  pasach, 
which  signifies  to  pass,  to  leap,  or  skip  over. 
They  gave  the  name  of  Passover  to  the  fkast 
which  }riis  established  in  commemoration  of  the 
coming  forth  out  of  Egypt,  because  the  night 
before  their  diparture,  the  destroying  angel, 
who  sine  the  first-born  of  the  Egyptians,  passed 
over  the  Israelites,  because  thry  were  mark'-d 
with  the  blood  of  the  lamb  which  was  killed  the 
evening  before ;  and  which  for  this  reason  icas 
called  the  Paschal  Lamb. 

It  was  typical  of  the  justice  of  God's  passing 
over  and  sparing  such  who  are  sprinl.ledwith 
the  blood  of  CUnst.  1  Cor.  5.  7.  As  the  destroy- 
ing angel  passed  over  the  houses  marked  with 
the  blood  of  the  paschal  lamb,  so  the  wrath  of 
God  passes  over  them  whose  soul.i  arc  sprin- 
kled with  the  blood  of  Christ.  The  paschal 
lamb  was  killed  before  Israel  was  delivered; 
so  it  iras  nrrrssary  Christ  should  suffer  before 
we  could  be  redeemed.  It  was  killed  before 
Moses'  laie,  or  Aaron's  sacrifices,  were  en- 
joined ;  to  shew,  that  dilivrranre  comes  to 
mankind  by  none  of  them,  but  only  by  the  true 
Vttfovvr,  that  Lamb  of  (lod,  slain  from  the 
foundation  of  the  world,  Rom.  3.  25.  Ileh.  9. 
14.  It  was  killed  the  first  month  of  the  year, 
which  prefigured  that  Christ  shniild  suffer 
death  in  that  month,  John  18. 'J8.  It  was  kilted 
in  the  evening,  Exod.  12  6.  So  Christ  suffered 
in  the  last  days,  and  at  that  time  of  the  day,' 
Mat.  27.  40.  Ibdi.  1.  2.  .Ht  enrn  also  the  sun' 
sets,  which  sh'WS,  that  it  was  the  Sun  (>f| 
righteoiiine-is  whn  was  lo  suffer  and  die;  nnd\ 
that  at  his  passion  universal  darkness  should\ 
he  upon  the  whol'  earth,  Luke  23.  44.  'I'hr 
passovcr  jrns  roast  with  fire,  to  note  the  sharji 
and  dreadful  pains  which  Chuot  should  suffer, 
not  onhf  from  mm.  hut  from  God  also.  It 
was  to  he  eaten  with  biltrr  hrrhs,  Exod.  12.  8. 
not  only  In  put  them  in  rrmemhrancr  of  their 
bitter  bondage  in  Egypr,  but  also  to  testify 


PAS' 

our  mortification  to  sin,  and  readiness  to  un 
dcrgo  afflictions  for  Christ,  Col.  1.  24.  and 
likewise  to  teach  us  the  absolute  necessity  of 
true  repentance  in  all  that  would  profitably 
feed  on  Christ. 

Eiod.  12.11.  it  is  Lord's  p.  ye  shall  cat  it  with  your 
loins  girded,  27.    Lev.  23.  5.  A"um.  28.  16 
21  kill  the/;.  ||  43.  this  is  ordinance  ofthe/;. 

JVum.  9.  5.  they  kept  the  p.  at  even.  Josh.  5. 10. 
33.  3.  on  the  morrow  of  the/>.  Josh.  5.  11. 

Deut.  16.  2.  thou  shall  sacrifice  the  p.  to  Lord,  6. 
5.  thou  mayest  not  sacrifice/;,  within  thy  gates 

2  Kings  23. 22.  was  not  holden  such  u  p.  from  daya 
of  judges,  nor  in  days  of  kings  of  Israel  or  Judah 
23.  wherein  this  p.  was  holden  to  the  Lord 

2  CAro;i.  30.15.  then  they  killed/),  in  second  month, 
35. 1,  11.  Eira  6. 20.  Mark  14. 12.  Luke  22.  7. 

18.  yet  did  they  eat/;,  otherwise  than  written 
35. 1.  Josiah  kept  a  ».  to  Ld.  17.  19.  Ezra  6. 19. 

7.  Josiah  gave  all  for  the  p.  otrerings,  8,  9. 

13.  they  roasted/;. with  fire,  accord,  to  ordinance 

Ezek.  45. 21.  ye  shall  have  p.  a  feast  of  seven  days 

.1/u£.26. 17. where  wilt  thou  that  we  prepare  for  tbee 

to  cat  p.  ?  Murk  14.  12.  AuAe  22.  8,  11. 

19.  discijiles  did  as  Jesus  appointed  them,  and 
they  made  ready/;.  Mark  14. 16.  Luke  22. 13. 

Luke  22. 15.  with  desire  I  have  desired  to  eat  this  p. 

John  2.  13.  and  the  Jew;s'  p.  was  at  hand,  11.  53. 
23.  now  when  he  was  in  Jerusalem  at  the  p. 
11.55.  many  went  to  Jerusalem  before/;,  to  purify 
12.  1.  Jesus  came  si.\  days  before  p.  to  Bethany 

18.  28.  lest  defiled,  but  that  they  might  eat  the  p. 
39.  that  I  should  release  to  you  one  at  the  p. 

19.  14.  and  it  was  the  preparation  ofthe/;. 

1  Cor.  5.  7.  Christ  our  p.  is  sacrificed  for  us 
Heb.  11.28.  through  faith  he  kept  the/;,  lest  he  thai 

See  Feast,  Kekp. 
PASSOVERS. 

2  Chron.  30. 17.  Lovites  had  charge  of  killing  of/». 

PAST. 
fie«.50.  4.  days  of  mourning  were/;.  2  Sam.  11.27. 
.Kj-od.21.29.lf  o.\  wont  push  with  horn  in  timep.36. 
JVitm.  21.  22.  go  along,  until  we  be  p.  thy  borders 
Deut.  2.  10.  the  Emims  dwelt  therein  in  times  p. 
4.  32.  for  ask  now  of  tlie  days  which  are  /;. 
42.  and  haled  him  not  in  times/;.  19.  4,  6. 

1  Sam.  1.5.  32.  Agagsaid,  bitterness  of  death  lap. 
19.  7.  fie  was  in  his  presence  as  in  times/;. 

2  i'o?;i.3.17.  ye  sought  for  Dav.  intimep.to  be  king 
.5.  2.  also  in  time  p.  when  Saul  was  king  over  us 
16. 1.  David  was  a  little  p.  the  top  of  the  hill 

1  Kings  18.  29.  when  mid-day  wasp,  was  no  Aoica 

1  Chron.  9.  20.  Phinehas  was  ruler  in  time  p. 
Jobd.  10.  which  doeth  great  things  p.  finding  out 

14. 1,3.  keep  me  in  secret,  until  thy  wrath  be  p. 
17.  11.  my  days  are  p.  my  purposes  broken  otf 
29.  2.  O  that  1  were  as  in  montlis  p.  in  the  days 
Psal.  90.  4.  years  are  but  as  yesterday  when  it  isp 
Eeel.  3.  15.  and  God  rcquireth  that  which  is  p. 
Cant.  2. 11.  for  lo  the  winter  is  p.  the  rain  is  ovei 
.ler.  8.  20.  the  harvest  is  p.  the  summer  is  ended 
Mat.  14.  15.  the  time  is  new  p.  send  them  awny 
Mark  16.  1.  and  when  the  sabbath  was  p.  Mary 
LukeQ.  36.  when  the  voice  was  p.  Jesus  was  alonfl 
Acts  12.  lO.when  they  were  p. first  and  second  ward 
14. 16.  who  in  times  p.  suffered  all  nations  to  walk 
27.  9.  because  the  fast  was  now  already  p.  Paul 
Rom.  .3.2.5.  his  right,  for  remission  of  sins  that  are  p. 
11.30.  lor  as  ye  in  times  p.  have  not  believed  God 
33.  his  judgments  and  his  ways  are  p.  finding  out 

2  Cor.  5. 17.  <dd  things  p.  away ;  all  things  aro  new 
On/. 1.13.  have  heard  ofmy  conversation  in  timep. 

23.  he  which  persecuted  us  in  times  p.  preachelh 

5.21. 1  tell  you,  as  I  have  also  told  you  in  timop 
F.ph.  2.2.wherein  in  time  p.  ye  wnlkeil  afler  course 
3.  we  all  had  our  conversation  in  times  p, 

4. 19.  who  beiiigp.  feeling  have  given  ihemselves 
2  Tim.  2.  18.  savins  that  resurrection  is  p.  already 
Hhilrm.  11.  who  in  timep.  was  lolliee  uiiprofitalila 
llrb.  1.  1.  w  ho  spake  in  time  p.  to  the  fathers 

11. 11.  strength  to  conceive  seed,  whim  she  wasp. 
I  Pel.  2.  10.  which  in  timep.  were  not  a  people 

4.  3.  for  the  lime  p.  of  our  life  may  suffice  us 

1  .lohn  2.8.  because  darkness  isp.  true  lightshincth 
/<«u.9.12.  onowoeisp.llll.  14.  the  second  woe  isp 

P.\STE. 

2  Sam.  13.  t  8.  Tnmar  took  p.  mid  kneaded  it 

PASTOli,  or  SHEPHERD, 
SiKiiifies,  One  who  lakes  care  of  o  flock  nfshrfp, 
nut  nvltithat  thru  feed  in  good  post  ure, hut  also 
that  ttini  he  not  torn  by  wild  beasts,  or  hHri 
ami  other  way,  Gen.  47.3.  Luke  2.8.  It  i« 
Kpoki'ii,  fl]  Of  God,  who  performs  the  offire of 
a  faithful  shepherd  to  hif  penjilr,  by  lending, 
frriling,  preserving,  and  healing  them,  Psal. 
'Si.  1.72]  Of  Christ,  who  not  only  rrposed 
and  adventured  his  life,  but  also  willingly 
laid  it  down,  for  his  sheep,  and  whn  takes  tht 
charire,  enre,and  oversight  of  them,  lo  disprnst 
all  things  necessary  for  their  welfare,  Joho 


PAT 

10.  11.  1  P,  ler  2.  25.  [3]  Of  ministers  of  the 
ffospel,  iclio  should  feed  their  peopcc  with 
knowledge  and  undtTstanding.,  Jer.  3.  15.  Eph 
4.11.  [4]  Of  civil  and  political  rulers,  Jet. 
12.  10-2o.  34. 
Jer.  17.  16.  I  liave  not  Imstencd  from  being  an. 

PASTORS. 

Jcr.2.9.p.  also  transgressed  aguinstme,andproph. 

3.  15.  I  will  give  you  p.  according  to  mine  heart 

10.  21.  for;*,  are  become  brutish,  not  sought  Lord 

12.  10.  many  p.  have  destroyed  my  vineyard 
5J2.  22.  wind  shall  eat  up  all  thy  p.  and  iliy  lovers 
23.  1.  woe  to  the  ;;.  that  destroy  and  scatter  sheep 

2.  thus  saith  Lord  against  p.  that  feed  my  people 
Eph.  4.  11.  and  he  gave  some  p.  and  teachers 

PASTURE 
Signifies,  [1]  Unplowed  laiid,kcpt  for  feeding  of 
cattle,  1  Chron.  4.  4U.  Job  31*.  8.     [2J  The  land 
of  Canaan,  in  ichich  God  placed  his  people,  as 
sheep  ill  a  pasture,  Hos.  13.  li.     [3]  .■111  neces- 
sary and  delightful  provisions  both  for  soul 
and  body,  Psal.  23.  2.  Jolm  10.  9. 
Gen.  47.  4.  thy  servants  have  no  p.  for  their  flocks 
1  Chron.  4.  39.  they  went  to  seek  p.  for  (heir  Hocks 
40.  they  found  fat  ;;.  ||  41.  because  there  wasp. 
Job  39.  8.  the  range  of  the  mountains  is  hi8;>. 
I'sal.'!4.1.  thy  angersmoke  against  sheep  of  thy  p. 
79.  13.  so  weshecp  of  thy;;,  will  give  thee  thanks 
95.  7.  we  arc  the  people  of  his  p.  100.  3. 
Isa.  32.  14.  a  joy  of  wild  asses,  a  p.  of  flocks 
yer.23.1.  woe  to  pastors  that  scatter  sheep  of  my;?. 
25.  36.  for  the  Lord  hath  spoiled  their;). 
/^am.  1.  6.  princes  become  like  harts  that  find  no;;. 
Kzek.  34.  14.  I  will  feed  thom  in  a  good;),  a  fat/;. 
IS.seemeth  it  a  small  thing  to  have  eaten  good;;. 
31.  ye  my  flock,  flock  of  my  p.  are  men,  I  God 
Hos.  13.  6.  according  to  their;/,  so  were  they  filled 
Joel  1.  18.  beasts  groan,  because  they  have  no;;. 
John  10.  9.  he  shall  go  in  and  out  and  find  p. 

PASTURES. 
1  Kings  4.  23.  Solomon  had  twenty  oxen  out  of  p. 
Psal.  23.  2.  he  maketh  me  to  lie  down  in  green  p. 
65.  12.  they  drop  upon  the;;,  of  the  wilderness 

13.  p.  are  clothed  with  flocks,  valleys  covered 
/.<;<i.30.23.in  that  day  ihy  cattle  shall  feed  in  large;;. 

49.  9.  and  their  p.  shall  be  in  all  high  places 
F.zek.  34. 18.  but  ye  tread  down  residue  of  your  p. 
4.5.  15.  one  lamb  out  of  flock  of  fit;:),  of  Israel 
Joel  1.19.forfire  hath  devoured  p. of  wildernesS|20. 
2.  22.  Cor  the;;,  of  the  wilderness  do  spring 

PATE. 
Ps.  7. 16.  his  dealing  shall  come  down  upon  ov/np. 
PATERX.     .SccPattbrn. 
PATH 
Is  spoken,   (L)  Of  Ood,  and  signifies,   [1]  ffis 
precepts.  Psalm  17.  5.     [2]  His  dealings)  and 
dispensations,  Psalm  25.  10.     [3]   The  clouds 
ichich  distil  the  rain,  Pssdm  Go.  l\.     (If.)    Of 
good  men,  and  signifies,  [1]  Their  holy  conver- 
sation and  good  pr.ample,Frov.i.W.    [2]   The 
affairs  they  undertake,  Prov.  3.  6.     [31    Their 
actions  and  course  of  life,  .lob  13.  27.  |  33.  11. 
(III.)  Of  viclicd  men,signifying  their  ungodly 
practices,  Isa.  59.  7. 
r?f7).49.17.Dan  a  serpent,  an  adder  in  ;).that  biteth 
.Vum.  22.  24.  the  angel  of  the  Lord  stood  in  a.  p. 
Job  23.  7.  th'Te  is  a;i.  which  no  fowl  knoweth 
30.  13.  mai*ny/).  they  set  forward  my  calamity 
41.  32.  he  maketh  a;;,  to  shine  after  him 
Psal.  16.  11.  thou  wilt  shew  me  the  p.  of  life 
27.  11.  teach  me  thy  way,  lead  me  in  a  plain  p. 

77.  19.  thy  way  in  sea,  thy  p.  is  in  great  waters 

78.  t50-  lie  weighed  a  p.  to  his  anger 

1)9.  35.  make  me  to  go  in  p.  of  thy  commands 
105.  thy  word  is  a  lamp,  and  a  light  to  my  p. 
139.  3.  thou  compassest  my  p.  and  lying  down 
142.3.8piritoverwlielmed,thPn  thou  kne  west  myp. 
Prov.  1. 15.  my  son,  refrain  thy  foot  from  their  p. 
2.  9.  then  thou  shalt  understand  every  good  p. 

4.  14.  enter  not  into  the  p.  of  the  wicked 
18.  the  p.  of  the  just  is  as  the  shining  light 
26.  ponder  the  p.  of  thy  feet,  and  lei  thy  ways 

5.  6.  lest  thou  shouldest  ponder  the  p.  of  life 
ha.  26.  7.  thou  dost  weigh  the  p.  of  the  just 

30. 11.  get  ye  out  of  the  way,  turn  aside  out  of  p. 

40.  14.  and  taught  him  in  the  p.  of  judgment 

43.  16.  which  maketh  a  p.  in  the  mighty  waters 
Jocl2.  8.  they  shall  walk  every  one  in  his  p. 

PATHWAY. 
Prov.  12.  28.  in  the  p.  thereof  there  is  no  death 

PATHS. 
Job  6.  18.  the  p.  of  their  way  are  turned  aside 

8.  13.  so  are  the  p.  of  all  that  forget  God 

13.  27.  thou  lookest  narrowly  to  all  my  p. 

10.  8.  he  hath  set  darkness  in  niy  p. 

24.  13.  neither  abide  they  in  the  p.  thereof 

33.11.  pultelh  my  feet  in  stocks,  marketh  all  my  p. 

38.  20.  that  thou  shouldest  keep  the  p.  of  house 
P.^al.SS.  whatsoever  passelh  through  thep.ofseas 

17.  4.  I  have  kept  me  from  the  p.  of  deetroyer 
431 


PAT 

Ps.  17.  5.  hold  up  my  goings  inp.  that  foots,  slip  not 
23.  3.  he  leadeth  me  in  the  p.  of  righteousness 
25.  4.  shew  me  thy  ways,  O  Lord,  teach  me  thy  p. 

10.  all  the  p.  of  the  Lord  are  mercy  and  truth 
65. 11.  and  ihyp.  drop  fatness,  upon  the  i)a8tures 
Prow.2.8.he  keepethn.  of  judgment,  and  preserveth 

13.  wiroleavep.of  upriglilnesR  to  walk  in  darkn. 

15.  ways  crooked,  and  they  fro  ward  in  their  p. 

18.  and  her  p.  incline  unto  the  dead 

19.  neither  take  they  hold  of  the  p.  of  life 

20.  thou  mayest  keep  the  p.  of  the  righteous 

3. 6.  he  shall  direct  thy  p.  ||  17.  all  herp.  are  peace 

4.  11.  I  taught  thee,  1  have  led  thee  in  right  p. 
7. 25.  go  not  astray  in  her  p.  ||  8.  2.  in  places  ofp. 
8.  20.  I  lead  in  the  midst  of  the  p.  of  judgment 

fsa.  2.  3.  and  we  will  walk  in  his  p.  Mic.  4.  2. 

3.  12.  they  destroy  the  way  of  thy  p. 

42. 16. 1  will  lead  thom  in  p.  they  have  not  known 
•  58.  12.  be  called,  the  restorer  ofp.  to  dwell  in 

59.  7.  wasting  and  destruction  are  in  their  p. 

8.  they  have  made  them  crooked  p. 

Jer.  6. 16.  stand  ye  in  the  way,  and  ask  for  old  p. 
18.15.from  ancientp.to  walk  inp.in  a  way  not  cast 

/jam.  3.  9.  he  hath  made  my  p.  crooked 

Hos.  2.  6. 1  will  make  a  wall,  she  shall  not  find  p. 

Mat.'S.'S.  make  hisp.  straight,  Mark  1.3.  Luke  3.4. 

Heb.  12.  13.  and  make  straight  p.  for  your  feet 
PATIENCE 

Signifies,  [1]  Tli.at  grace  which  enables  us  to 
bear  afflictions  and  calamities  with  constancy 
and  calmness  of  mind,  and  with  a  ready  sub- 
mission to  the  will  of  God,  Rom.  5.  3.  2  Tim. 

3.  10.  [2]  ./?  bearing  long  with  such  as  have 
greatly  transgressed,  expecting  their  refor- 
mation. Mat.  18.  26,  29.  [3]  A?i  humble  and 
submissive  waiting  for,  and  expectation  of 
eternal  life,  and  the  accomplishment  of  God^s 
promises,  Rom.  8.  25.  Heb.  10.  36.  [4]  Perse- 
verance, James  5.  7,  10,  11. 

Mat.  18. 26.  servant  worshipped  him,  saying.  Lord 
have  p.  with  me,  and  I  will  pay  thee  all,  29. 
I.tikeS.  15.  are  they  who  bring  forth  fruit  with  p. 
21.  19.  in  your  p.  possess  ye  your  souls 
liont.  5.  3.  knowing  that  tribulation  workethp. 

4.  and  p.  e.\perience,  and  e.xperience  hope 

6.  25.  we  see  not,  then  do  we  with  p.  wait  for  it 
15.  4.  that  we  thro'  p.  and  comf.  might  have  hope 

5.  the  God  ofp.  grant  you  to  be  like  minded 

2  Cor.6.4.  ourselves  as  ministers  of  God  in  much  p. 

12.  12.  signs  were  wrought  among  you  in  all  p. 
Col.  1.  11.  strengthened  with  all  might  to  all  p. 
IThess.  1.3.  remembering  your  p.  of  hope  in  Jesus 
2Thess.  1.  4.  so  that  we  glory  in  you  for  your  p. 

3. 15.  Lord  direct  your  hearts  into  thep.  of  Christ 
ITim.  0.  11.  and  follow  after  love,  p.  meekness 
2Tim.  3.  10.  but  thou  hast  fully  known  my  p. 
Tit.  2.  2.  that  aged  men  be  sound  in  faith,  in  p. 
Weft. 6.12. who  through  faith  and  p. inherit  promises 

10. 36.  ye  have  need  ofp.  that  after  ye  have  done 

12.  1.  let  us  run  with  p.  the  race  set  before  ns 
.Jam.  1.  3.  that  the  trying  of  your  faith  workethp. 

4.  but  let  p.  have  her  perfect  work,  that  ye  may 

5.  7.  behold,  the  husbandman  hath  long  p.  for  it 
10.  for  an  exam.  ofp. Ull. have  heard  ofp.  of  Job 

2  Pet.  1.6.  add  to  temperance  p.  top.godhness 
Rev.  1.  9.  who  am  your  companion  in  p.  of  Jesus 

2.  2.  I  know  thy  p.  19.  ||  3.  and  tliou  hast  p. 

3.  10.  because  thou  hast  kept  word  of  my  p. 

13.  10.  here  is  the  p.  of  the  saints,  14.  12. 

PATIENT. 

Feci.  7.  S.  p.  in  spirit  is  belter  than  proud  in  spirit 
Rom.  2.  7.  who  by  p.  continuance  in  well-doing 
12.  12.  rejoicing  in  hope,  p.  in  tribulation 
1  Thcss.  5.  14.  brethren  be  p.  toward  all  men 
IThess.  3.  5.  and  into  thep.  waiting  for  Christ 
1  Tim.  3.  3.  not  greedy  of  lucre,  butp.  2Ti.m.  2. 24. 
.Tarn.  5.  7.  be  p.  brethren  1|  8.  be  ye  also  p. 

PATIENTLY. 
Psal.  37.  7.  rest  in  the  Lord,  and  wait  p.  for  him 
40.  1.  I  waited  p.  for  the  Lord,  and  he  heard  me 
.^cts  26. 3.  wherefore  I  beseech  thee  to  hear  me  p. 
Heb.  6.  15.  after  he  hadp.  endured,  obtained  prom. 
lPc«.2.20.  if  when  ye  be  buffeted  for  faults  yetake 
itp. ;  but  if  ye  do  well  and  suflier,  ye  take  itp. 
PATRIARCH. 
This  name  is  given  to  the  fiends,  or  princes  of 
the  family,  chiefly  to  those  that  then  lived  be- 
fore Moses,  05  Lamech,  Noah,  Shem,  Phaleg, 
Heber,  Abraham,  Isaac,  Jacob,  Judah,  licvi, 
and  the  other  sons  of  Jacob,  and  the  heads  of 
the  twelve  tribes.     The   Hebrews   call   them 
Princes  of  thefribes,  or  heads  of  the  fathers, 
Roshe   Aboth.      The  name  Patriarch   comes 
from  the  Greek  word,  Patriarcha,  which  signi- 
fies Head  of  a  family. 
.^cts  2.  29.  let  me  freely  speak  of  the  p.  Da%'id 
Heb.  7.  4.  to  whom  the  p.  Abraham  paid  tithes 

PATRIARCHS. 
Jlcts  7.  8.  and  Jacob  begat  the  twelve  p. 

9.  p.  moved  with  envy  sold  Joseph  into  Egypt 


PLA 

patrimony. 

Dsut.  18. 6.  besides  that  comelh  from  sale  of  his  ■ 

PATTERN. 
Ejcod.  25.  9.  after  thep.  of  all  the  instnumenta 
40.  look  that  thou  make  them  after  tiieirp. 
J^um.  8.  4.  the  candlestick  was  made  after  thep 
Josh.  22. 28.  behold  the  p.  of  the  altar  of  the  Lord 
2  Kings  16. 10.  Ahaz  sent  to  Urijah  thep.  of  altar 
1  Chr.  28.  11.  David  gave  Solomon  p.  12,  18,  19. 
Kiek.  43.  10.  let  them  measure  the  p. 

1  Tim.  1.16.  that  in  me  first  J.  Christ  might  shew  p. 
Tit.  2.  7.  shewing  thyself  a  p.  of  good  works 
Heb.  8. 5.  according  to  p.  I  shewed  thee  in  mount 

PATTERNS. 
Heb.  9. 23.  it  was  necessary  that  the  p.  of  things 

PAVED. 
Exod.  24.  10.  under  his  feet  as  it  were  a  p.  work 
Cant.  3.  10.  the  midst  thereof  being  p.  with  love 

PAVEMENT. 

2  Kings  16.  17.  he  put  the  sea  on  a  p.  of  stones 

2  Chron.  7.  3.  all  Israel  bowed  themselves  uponp. 
Esth.  1.  6.  the  beds  were  on  a  p.  of  red  and  blue 
iL'zf/f.40.17.there  were  chambers  and  a  p.  made  for 
the  court,  thirty  chambers  were  upon  thep. 
18.  p.  by  the  side  of  the  gates,  was  the  lower  p. 
42.  3.  over  against  p.  was  gallery  against  gallery 
John  19.  13.  Pilate  sat  in  a  i)lacc  called  thep. 

PAVILION,  S. 
2  Sam.  22. 12.  he  made  darkness  hisp.  Psal.  18.11. 

1  Kings  20.  12.  Benhadad  and  kings  drinking  in  p. 

16.  lienhadad  was  drinking  himself  drunk  in  p. 
PsaLiLS.  in  secret  of  his  tab. he  shall  hide  me  in  p. 

31.  20.  thou  shalt  keep  them  secretly  in  a  p. 
Jer.  43.  10.  Nebuchadnezzar  spread  his  royal  p. 

PAW. 
lSam.17.37.  Lord  delivered  me  out  ofp.  of  the  lion 

PAWS. 
Z,ec.ll.27.whatsoevergoeth  onp. these  areunclean 

PAWETH. 
Job  39. 21.  the  horse  p.  in  the  valley  and  rejoiceth 

Exod.  21.  19.  only  he  shffllp.  for  loss  of  his  time 
22.  and  he  shall  p.  as  the  judges  determine 
36.  he  shall  surely  p.  ox  for  o.\,  the  dead  his  own 
22.  7.  if  thief  be  found,  let  him  p.  double,  9. 

17.  he  shall  p.  according  to  the  dowry  of  virgins 
JVam.  20.  19.  if  I  drink  thy  water  I  will  p.  for  it 
/Jeut.  23.  21 .  shall  vow  a  vow,  shall  not  ^lack  top. 

2  Sam.  15.  7.  let  me  go  and  p.  my  vow  in  Hebron 

1  K^ings  20.  39.  else  thou  shalt  p.  a  talent  of  silver 

2  Kings  4.  7.  he  said,  go  sell  oil,  and  p.  thy  debt 
iChron.  8.8.  tjiem  did  Solomon  make  top.  tribute 

27.5.  so  much  did  children  of  Ammonp.  to  him 
Ezra  4.  13.  then  will  they  not  p.  toll  and  custom 
Esth.  3.  9.  I  will  p.  10,000  talents  of  silver,  4.  7. 
.fob  22.27.  shalt  make  praver,  and  shaltp.thv  vows 
Psal.  22.  25. 1  will  p.  my  vows,  66. 13.  |  1  ]6.'l4, 18. 
50.  14.  and  p.  thy  vows  to  the  Most  High 
76.  11.  vow  and  p.  to  the  Lord  your  God 
Prov.  19.  17.  that  he  hath  given,  will  hop.  again 

22.  27.  if  hast  nothing  top.  why  should  he  take 
F.ccl.  5.  4.  defer  not  to  p.  it,  p.  that  h.ist  vowed 

5.  not  vow,  than  thou  shouldest  vow  and  not  p. 
.Tonnli  2.  9.  I  will  p.  that  which  I  have  vowed 
Mat.  17.  24.  doth  not  your  master  p.  tribute? 
18.  25.  had  not  to  p.  he  forgave  him,  T.uke  7.  42. 
26.  f  will  p.  thee  all,  29.  H  2S.p.  that  thou  owesl 
30.  but  cast  into  prison,  till  he  should  p.  debt 
34.  till  he  should  p.  all  that  was  duo  to  him 

23.  23.  for  yep.  lithe  of  mint,  anise,  and  cummin 
Rom.  13.  6.  for  this  cause  p.  ye  tribute  also 

PAID. 
Kirn 4.  20.  toil,  tribute,  and  custom,  wasp,  them 
Prov.l.lA.  peace-otferings,  this  day  have  I  p.  vows 
•Jonah  1.  3.  so  he  p.  fare  thereof,  and  went  into  it 
Mat.  5. 26.  thou  shalt  not  come  out  thence  till  thou 
hast  p.  the  uttermost  farthing,  lAike  12.  59. 
//eJ.7.9.Levi,who  received  tithes, p.  tithes  in  Abr. 

PAYETH. 
Psal.  37.  21.  the  wicked  borroweth  and  p.  not 

PAYMENT. 
Mat.  18.25.  all  to  be  sold,  and  p.  to  be  made 

PEACE. 
Mark  4. 39.  he  arose  and  said  to  the  sea,  p.  be  etill 

PEACE. 
TTiis  mord  is  used  in  the  scripture  in  different 
ways,  as,  (I)  There  is  peace,  or  rccovciliaticn 
with  God:  [1]  Ry  satisfaction  for  sins  ramr 
mitted  against  him  ;  this  is  done  by  the  suffer- 
ings and  merits  of  Christ,  Eph.  2.  14.  (II) 
There  is  peace  with  ourselves  or  our  own  con- 
sciences; this  arises  from  a  sense  of  onr  recon- 
ciliation to  God,which  is  the  gift  o/Chr^t,  and 
wrought  in  vs  by  his  .Spirit,  Rom.  14. 17.  Phil. 
4.  7.  [21  Submission  to  the  will  of  God,  Job 
22.21.  (Ill)  Peace  with  men  ;  [\\Mutualcon- 
cord  and  agreement  with  Christian  brethren, 
Psal.  34.14.  Gal.  5. 22.  [2]  Deliverance  or  safety 
from  such  as  are  our  enemies,  Prov.  16. 7. 
Peace  is  eppoted  t«  war,  uiken.  a  slate  or  kingdom 


PEA 

enjoys  a  public  tranquillity,  when  they  are  free 
fr,>m  fiiicigii  and  cit:it  loars,  2  Kiugs  20.  I'J. 
Jl  IS  liiicwiiic  la/ienfor  the  public  tranquillity 
and  quiet  state  of  the  church,  when  it  id  not 
troubled  loiUun  by  schisms  and  heresies,  or 
wittioat,  by  persecuting  tyrants,  filling  all 
with  tumiUts.  slaughters  and  bloody  wars, 
I'sal.  li-J.  (i.  Acta  U.  31.  Uev  tj.  4.  Soiiietimes 
it  signijirs  a  league  or  covenant  between  one 
prince  and  another,  1  Kings  5.  li.  and.  some- 
times only  a  cessation  of  hostilities,  Judg.  4. 
17.  The  apostle  Paul,  in  tlic  titles  of  his  epis- 
tles, generally  wishcth  for  grace  ana  peace  to 
the  faithful  to  whom  he  writes,  Rom  1.7.  1  Cor. 

I.  '.i.  This  is  both  a  c/iristian  salutation,  and 
an  apostolical  ministerial  benediction;  that  is, 
I  wish  that  the  free,  undeserved  love  and  fa- 
vour of  Hod,  and  a  lively  sense  thereof  in  your 
souls,  mail  be  continued  to,  and  incrfascd  in 
you;  and'tUat  as  a  fruit  of  this,  you  may  enjoy 
all  blessings,  both  inward  and  outward,  espc 
daily  peace  of  conscience,  and  a  secure  enjoy- 
ment of  the  love  of  God.  Lastly,  pence  is  put 
for  that  perfect  rest,  joy,  and  felicity,  which 
the  saints  enjoy  in  heaven,  where  they  are  out 
of  the  reach  of  enemies  to  disturb  or  molest 
them,  Isa.  57. '2.  2  Pet.  3.  14. 

Gen.  2^.  t  <>.  he  said  to  tliem,  is  there  p.  to  liiiii  ? 

37.  t  14.  go  sec  the  p.  of  thy  brethren 

41.  16.  God  shail  give  Pliaraoh  an  answer  oip. 
Exod.  18.  t  7.  they  asked  each  oilier  ofthoirp. 
I,eo.  2l5. 6. 1  will  give  p.  in  land,  none  make  al'raid 
JV'itm.  6. 2G.  Lord  lift  up  countcn.  and  gi%e  thee  p. 

25.  12.  beholil,  I  give  to  him  my  covenant  ofp. 
DeutM.2ii.  sent  raeBHcng.  to  Sihon  with  words  ol'p. 

20.  10.  when  comcst  nigh  city,  proclaim  p.  to  it 

II.  if  it  make  thee  answer  o(p.  and  open  to  thee 
12.  if  it  will  make  nop.  with  thee,  then  hcBiege 

23.  G.  thou  shalt  not  seek  their  p.  nor  prosjicrity 

29.19. 1  shall  have /j.thou^h  walk  in  imag. of  heart 
JaJrr.i.  17.  there  waspjjjetween  Jabin  and  Fleber 

6.  f24.  Gideon  called  the  altar,  the  Lord  si-ritp. 

18.  1 15.  they  came  and  asked  the  I.eviie  otp. 
l.Vain.7.14.  then;  wasp. between  Isr.  and  Amoritos 

10. 1 4.  tlicy  will  ask  of  thoe  p. and  give  thee  loaves 

17. 1 22.  Uavid  came  and  asked  his  brethren  of  p. 

20.  7.  if  he  say,  it  is  well,  servant  shall  have  p. 
21.  come  thou,  for  there  is  p.  to  thee,  no  hurt 

25.  t  5.  go,  ami  ask  Nabal,  ofp.  in  my  name 

1  R'ings  2.  33.  but  on  his  throne  shall  there  be  p. 

4.  24.  Solomon  had  p.  on  all  sides  round  about 

5.  12.  there  wasp,  between  Hiram  and  Solomop 
20.  18.  whether  they  come  for  p.  take  them  alive 

2  Kings  9.  17.  and  let  him  say,  is  it  p.  Jehu  ?  18. 
I'J.  what  hast  thou  to  do  with  p.  ?  turn,  22. 
22.whatp.so  long  as  her  witchcrafts  are  so  many? 

31.  she  said,  had  Zimri  p.  who  slew  his  master? 
20.]it.  is  it  not  good,  ifp.  be  in  my  days?  Isa.  39.8. 

1  Ckr.ii.'X  I  will  give  p.  to  Israel  in  his  days 

2  Chr.  15.  .5.  in  those  times  there  was  no  p.  to  him 
F.zra  4.  17.  and  to  the  rest  bi  ycmd  the  river,  p. 

5.7.  to  Darius  king,  all  p.  ||  7.  12.  to  Kzra  pcrf.p. 
!>.  12.  nor  seek  their  p.  or  their  wealth  for  ever 

F.sthM.Hl.  Mordncai  walked  to  knowp.  of  Esther 
9.30.  Mord.  sent  letters  with  words  ofp.  and  truth 
10.  3.  Mordecai  speaking  p.  to  all  his  seed 

.J.ib  .5.  21.  beasts  of  field  shall  bo  at  p.  with  thee 
21.19.  houses  are  p.  from  fear,  nor  rod  on  them 
Hi.  21.  acquaint  thyself  with  him,  and  be  at  p. 
2.').  2.  lie  m  ikoth  p'  in  his  high  places 

Psal.T.4.  if  I  have  evil  to  liiin  that  was  atp.  with 
2^.  3.  which  spake  p.  to  neighbours,  but  niischn.-' 
20.  II.  the  Lord  will  bless  his  people  with  p. 
'M.  14.  do  good,  seek  p.  and  pursue  it,  iPct.  3.  11 
Uri.  2(J.  they  speak  not  p.  but  they  devise  matters 
37.11. meekdelight  themselves  in  abundance  ofp 

37.  for  the  end  of  the  -jpright  man  is  p. 
41.  t9.  man  of  my  p.  hath  lilt  up  heel  ag-iinst  me 
5.).  20.  put  forth  against  such  as  bo  at  p.  with  him 
72.  3.  the  mountains  shall  bring  p.  to  the  people 
7.in  days  abimdanro  ofp.solcmgas  mnonendnr 
83.  H.  he  will  speak  p.  to  his  people  and  his  sninls 
10.  rightcoiisnens  and  p.  have  ki.ssed  earh  other 

119.  16.5.  groat  p.  have  thev  which  love  thy  law 

120.  6.  hatli  long  dwelt  with  him  that  lialelh  p. 
7. 1  am  for  p.  but  when  I  spcalf  tliey  ate  for  war 

122.6.  pray  for  p.  of  Jerusalem,  prosper  that  love 

12.5.  5.  but  p.  shall  be  upon  Israel 

12S.  (>.  yea,  thou  shall  seep,  upon  Israel 

147. 14.  111!  nink"lh  p.  in  thy  borders,  and  filloth 

Prnr.3.  17.  wisdom's  waynploasantn.  and  pathsp. 
12.  20.  bul  to  the  counsellors  ofp.  is  joy 
16.  7.  he  makcth  his  cnemic  to  tin  at  p.  with  him 

F^cl.  3.  P.  d  time  of  war,  and  n  time  of  p. 

Isn-  9. 6.  Prince  ofp.  jj  7.  increase  of  his  ;>.  no  end 

26.  12.  I>ord,  thou  wilt  ordain  p.  for  no,  for  thou 

27.  5.  he  make  p.  with  me,  and  h"  shall  make  p. 

32.  17.  tho  work  of  righteousness  shnli  bn  p. 

33.  7.  the  ambassadors  ofp.  shTll  weep  bitterly 
38  17.  be'iold,  for  p.  I  hnd  great  bitternem 

432 


PEA 

/i/z.  4.5.7.  makep.  and  create  evil,  I  do  these  things 
4ri.  18.  then  had  tliyp.been  oa  river,  righteousness 
22.  there  is  no  p.  to  the  wicked,  57.  21. 

52.  7.  feet  of  him  that  publishctli  p.  JsTah.  1.  15. 

53.  5.  the  chastic'cment  of  our  p.  was  ujion  him 

54.  10.  nor  shall  covenant  of  ni^'  p.  be  removed 
13.  and  great  shall  be  tliep.  of  thy  children 

5.5. 12.  ye  shall  go  out  with  joy,  led  forth  with  p. 
57.  2.  he  shall  enter  into  p.  they  shall  rest  in  beds 

19.  I  create  the  fruit  of  the  lips,  p.  p.  to  him 
59.  8.  the  way  ofp.  they  know  not,  Horn.  3.  17. 
00.  17.  I  will  make  thine  otlicersp.  and  exactors 
GG.  12.  behold,  I  will  extend  p.  to  her  like  river 
Jer.  4. 10.  ye  shall  havep.  whereas  sword  reaches 
G.  14.  saying,  p.p.  when  there  is  nop.  8.  11. 
8. 15.  we  looked  for  p.  but  no  good  came,  14. 19. 

12.  5.  if  in  land  ofp.  they  wearied  thee,  tiien 

12.  for  sword  shall  devour,  no  flesh  shall  havep. 
14. 13.  but!  will  give  you  assured  p.  in  this  place 

15.  15.  who  shall  go  aside  to  ask  of  thy  p. 

JG.  5.  1  have  taken  away  my  p.  from  this  people 
21).  1 10.  every  man  ofp.  watciicd  lor  iny  halting 

28.  9.  the  prophet  which  prophesied  ofp. 

29.  7.  and  seek  p.  of  the  city  whither  I  caused 
11.  I  think  toward  you  thoughts  ofj<.  not  evil 

30.  .5.  we  have  heard  a  voice  ol'  fear,  and  not  ofp. 
33.  C.  reveal  to  them  abundance  ofp.  and  truth 
38. 1 22.  men  of  thy  p.  have  prevailed  against  lliec 

Lam.  3. 17.  thou  hast  removed  my  soul  far  from  p. 
Ezck.'i.  25.  .they  shall  seek  p.  there  shall  be  none 

13.  10.  saying  p.  and  there  was  no  p.  IG. 
34.25.  wdl  make  with  thern  a  covenant  ofp.  37.2G. 

[Jan.  d.  25.  and  by  p.  he  shall  destroy  many 
Obad.  7.  men  at  p.  with  thee  have  deceived  thee 
Mic.  3.  5.  that  bite  with  their  teeth  and  cry  p. 

5.  5.  this  man  shall  be  p.  when  Assyrian  coine 
tlag.'iM.  and  in  this  place  1  willgivep.saith  Lord 
Zcch.  6.13.  the  coun.sel  ofp.  bo  between  them  both 

8.  10.  nor  was  there  any  p.  to  him  that  came  in 
1 12.  for  seed  shall  be  ol  p.  vine  give  her  fruit 

16.  execute  judgment  of  truth  andp.H  19.  love  p. 

9.  10.  and  he  sliiiU  speak  p.  to  the  heathen 
J\l<il.  2.  5.  my  covenant  was  with  him  of  life  andp. 
Jl/(i:. 10.13.  and  if  liouse  be  worthy, let  yourp.como 

upon  it ;  if  not,  let  your  p.  return  to  you 
34.  think  not  that  1  am  come  to  send  p.  on  carlJi 
Mark  9.  50.  and  have  p.  one  with  another 
Luke  1.  79.  to  guide  our  feet  into  the  way  ofp. 
2.  14.  and  on  earth  p.  good  will  toward  men 

10.  6.  if  son  ofp.  be  there,  your  p.  shall  rejit  on  it 
12.  51.  that  I  am  come  to  give  p.  on  the  earth  ? 

14.  32.  he  sendeth  and  dosireth  conditions  ofp. 
19.  '.]S.p.  in  heaven,  and  glory  in  the  highest 

42.  if  known  the  things  which  belong  to  thy  p. 
Jc^n  14.  27.  p.  1  leave  with  you,  my  p.  I  give  you 

16.  33.  that  in  me  ye  might  have  ji.  in  world  trib. 
/lets  10.  3t).  preachingp.  by  Jesus  Chr.  he  L.  of  all 

12.20.  having  made  Blastustheir  friend  desired  p. 

Rom.  1.  7.  p.  from  God  the  Father,  1  Cor.  1.  3. 

2  Cor.  1.  2.  Gal.  1.  3.  Eph.  1.  2.  Phil.  1.  2. 

2.  10.  but  p.  to  every  man  that  worketh  good 
.5.1.  justified,  wehavep.with  God,  through  Christ 
8.  G.  but  to  bo  spiritually  minded  is  life  and  p. 

10.  15.  feet  of  them  that  preach  the  gospel  ofp. 

14.  17.  for  the  kingdom  of  God  is  joy  andp. 
19.  let  us  follow  the  things  that  make  for  p. 

15.  13.  fill  you  with  all  joy  and  p.  in  believing 
1  Car.  7.  15.  but  God  hath  called  us  top. 

14.  33.  but  author  ofp.  as  in  churches  of  saints 
Gal.  5.  22.  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  p. 
Eph.  2.  14.  for  he  is  our  p.  ||  1.5.  so  making  p. 

17.  Chrirtt  came  and  preached  p.  to  yon  afar  ofl" 
4.  3.  to  keep  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the  bond  ofp. 

6.  1.5.  fi;et  .ihod  with  preparation  of  gospel  ofp. 
Fhil.i.l.  p.  of  God,  which  passcth  understanding 
Col.  1 .2.grace  and  p. from  Go«d  our  Father,  1  Thess. 

1.  1.  '■iThess.  1.  2.  irini.,1.  2.  27'im.  1.  2. 
Tit.  1.  4.  mieni.  3.  2  Jo/in  3. 

3.  15.  let  tbo  p.  of  God  rule  in  your  hearts 

1  Thess.  5.  3.  for  when  they  shall  say  p.  and  safely 

13.  and  be  at  p.  among  yourselves 

'iThrss.  3.  16.  now  Lord  ofp.  give  voii  p.  always 
27Vm.  2.22.  follow  p.  with  all  men,"  Hrb.  12.  14. 
//eft.  7.  2.  the  king  of  Salom,  that  is,  king  ofp. 

11.  31.  Rahab  bilioved  and  received  spi.s  in  p. 
./aw.  3.  18.  is  sown  in  p.  of  them  that  make  p.  ? 
Htv- 1.  4.  p.  from  him  that  is,  was,  and  is  to  come 

6. 4.  power  was  given  to  him  to  take  p.  from  earth 

PKA(MC  be. 
Oen.  43.  23.  and  ho  said,  p.  be  to  you,  fear  not 
.ludg.  6.  23.  the  Lord  said,  p.  be  to  thro,  fear  not 
19.  20.  and  the  old  man  s.iid,  p'hc  with  tliee 
I  .Vam.  2.5.  f\.p.he  to  thee,  p.  be  to  house,  p.  be  to  all 
2.V«m.  18.  t28.  Ahimaaz  saiil,  p.  be  to  thee 
1  Chr.  12.  18.  p.  he  tn  thee  and  p.  bt  to  lliy  helpers 
Psnl.  122.  7.  p.  be  within  thy  walla,  and  prosperity 

8.  I  will  now  say,  p.  be  %vitliin  theo 
f)an.  4.  1.  p.  be  multiplied  to  you,  6.  25.  1  Pet. 
1.2.  2/V«.  1.2.  ./ude2 
10.  19.  p.  be  lo  thco,  b«  strong,  yea,  be  strong 


PEA     - 

T^ukc  10.  5.  first  sav,  p.  be  to  this  hotise 
24.  36.  he  saith,  p' be  to  you,  John  20. 19, 21, 26. 
Oal.d.  IG.p.fteon  them,  and  mercy  on  Isr.  of  God 
Eph.  6.23.  p.  be  lo  brelliren,  and  love  wil'.i  faith 

1  Pet.  5.  14.  p.  be  with  you  all  that  are  in  Christ 
3  John  14.  p.  be  to  thee,  our  friends  salute  thee 

G'odo/ PEACE. 
Rom.  15.33.  the  God  ofp.  be  with  you  all,  ameo 

16.  20.  tJie  God  of  p.  shall  bruise  Satan  shortly 

2  Cor.  13.11.  God  ofp.  shall  be  with  you,  PAi/.4.9. 
1  Thess.  5. 23.  very  God  of  p.  sanctity  yon  wholly 
//eft.  13.  20.  now  the  God  ofp.  make  you  perfect 

See  Held,  Hold. 
In  PEACE. 
Gen.  26.  29.  and  we  have  sent  thee  away  in  p. 

31.  and  they  departed  from  Isaac  in  p. 
28.  21.  so  that  I  come  to  my  father's  house  in  p. 
44. 17.  as  for  you,  get  you  up  in  p.  to  your  father 
Josh.  10.  21.  came  to  Joshua,  at  Makkedah,  in  p. 
.Jvdg.8.9.  when  I  come  again  in  p. will  break  down 
11.  31.  when  I  return  in.p.  whatever  meet  me 
2.Sani.3.21.  Abner  went  in  p.22.1|23.he  is  gone  inp 
15. 27.  return  to  the  city  in  p.  and  your  two  sons 

17.  3.  80  all  the  people  shall  be  in  p. 

19.  24.  king  departed,  until  the  day  he  came  in  p. 
30.  as  my  lord  the  king  is  come  again  in  p. 

1  Kings  2.  .5.  Joab  shed  the  blood  of  war  in  p. 
22.  17.  return  every  man  inp.  2  Chron.  18.  16. 

27.  in  [irison  until  I  come  in  p.  2  Chron.  18.  26. 

28.  if  thou  return  at  all  in  p.  2  Chron.  18.  27. 
2A'in^s22.20.behold  therefore  shall  be  gathered  to 

thy  grave  in  p.  not  see  evil,  2  Chron.  34.  28. 

2  Chron.  19.  1.  and  Jehoshajihat  returned  in  p. 
.fob  5.24.  shalt  know  thy  tabernacle  shall  be  in  p. 
Psal.  4.  8.  I  will  l.iy  me  down  in  p  and  sleep 

55.  18.  he  hath  delivered  my  soul  in  p.  from 
the  battle 
Prov.  13. 1 13.  feareth  commnndmcnt  shall  be  inp 
Isa.  26.  3.  thou  wilt  keep  him  in  perfect  p. 

41.  t  3.  he  pursued  them,  and  passed  in  p. 
Jer.  2t».  7.  in  the  p.  thereof  shall  ye  have  peace 

34.  5.  but  thou  shall  die  in  p.  they  will  lament 
.Mat.  2.  6.  he  walked  with  me  in  p.  and  equity 
Luke  2.29.now  Idlest  thou  thy  servant  depart  inp. 

11.  21.  keepcth  his  palace,  his  goods  are  in  p. 

1  Cor.  16.11.  but  conduct  liim  fortli  inp.may  como 

2  Cor.  13. 11.  be  perfect,  be  of  one  mind,  Jive  in  p. 
Jam.  2. 16.  depart  in  p.  be  ye  warmed  and  filled 

3.  18.  the  fruit  of  righteousness  is  sown  in  p. 
2  Pet.  3.  14.  that  ye  may  be  found  of  hmi  in  p. 
See  Go,  Made,  Ofkeri.ngs. 
PEACEABLE. 
Gen.  34.  21.  saying,  these  men  are  p.  with  us 
2  .Sa»i.  20.  19. 1  am  one  of  them  that  urep.  in  Israel 
1  Chron.  4.  40.  the  land  was  wide,  quiei,  and  p. 

22.  t  9.  a  man  ol'rest,  for  his  name  shall  bop. 
fsa.  32.  18.  my  people  dwell  in  a  p.  liulitaiion 
./('»■.  2.5.  37.  the  p.  habitations  are  cut  down 

1  y'lHi.  2.  2.  that  we  may  lead  a  quiet  and  p.  life 
//(■A.  12.  11.  it  yieldeth  thep.  fruit  of  righteousnciw 
Jam.  3.  17.  wisdom  from  above  is  pure,  p.  gentle 

PEACEABLY. 
Gen.  '.U.  4.  they  could  not  speak  p.  to  him 
Judg.  II.  13.  therefore  restoic  those  hinds  againp. 
21.  13.  send  some  to  call  p.  to  the  llenjiimiles 
lA'ani. 16.4. com  tlioHp.?]l5.hesaid,p.  lJtin,fs2.13. 

2  .Sam.  3.  f^"-  Joab  look  Abner  aside  to  speokp 
1  Chr.  12.  17.  if  ye  bo  come  p.  to  me,  to  help  mo 
.Ter.  9.  8.  one  Bpeikeibp.  lo  bis  neighbour 
Dan.  11.  21.  he  shall  come  inp.  and  obtain,  24. 
Rom.  12.  18.  if  possible,  live  p.  with  all  men 

PEACE-MAKEKS. 

Mat.  5. 9.  blessed  are  p.  for  they  shall  be  children 
PEACOCKS. 

1  Kings  10. 02.  navy  came,  bringing  p.  2  Chr.  9. 21 

./o&39.  13.  gavesl  thou  the  goodly  wings  top.  7 
PEARL 

Is  a  gem  or  jewel  found  in  a  testaceous  Jish. 
The  finest  pearls  are  fished  up  in  the  Persian 
gulf,  now  called  the  sea  of  Cntif :  Th^A/  fish 
for  thi-m  also  in  the  island  nf  Kis,  and  upon 
the  cna.^t  of  Bahrein,  so  called  from  the  city 
of  tliat  name,  which  lies  upon  the  borders  of 
Arabia.  Idumen,  and  Pahwline,  bring  not  far 
from  this  sea,  it  is  not  to  be  vemdrrtd  at, 
thai  Pearls  were  so  well  known  lo  Job  and  the 
Hebrews,  .Job  28.  18. 

Christ  Jesus  forbids  his  apostles  to  rnst  their 
pearls  bi'fore  swine.  Mat.  7.  6.  That  is  to  say, 
rjpose  not  the  sacred  truths  and  viyslrries  »f 
the  gospel  to  the  raillery  of  profane  librrtinea 
andhnrdened  atheists:  preach  not  Ihe  gospel  to 
those  that  persecute  you  for  your  message;  and 
apply  not  the  promises  to  the  profane.  Tko 
t  rn  use  end  en  trzectlmey  of  Christ  and  his  gr  act 
made  known  and  offered  in  the  gospel,  is  com- 
pared to  a  pearl  of  grcni  pnce,  .Mat.  13.  46. 
./}nd  the glorioxn  state  of  Ihe  saints  in  A'anen, 
vhich  will  yield  un.<peiikabtr  satisfaction  to 
such  as  shall  btadmilLed  into  thtm,is  shadaved 


PEO 

out  by  petith^and  other  rich  things  in  fJu  world, 
loMcIt  please  the  outward  senses,  Rev.  21.  19. 
Mat.  13.  46.  when  he  found  ono  p.  of  great  price 
Rev.  21.  21,  every  several  gale  was  of  one  p. 

FEARLS. 
Job^.18.  no  mention  shall  be  madeofcuralor  ;>. 
Jilat.  7.  6.  neither  cast  ye  your  p.  before  swiue 
13.  45.  like  a  merchant-man  seeking  goodly  p. 
1  Tim.  2. 9.  not  with  gold,  or  p.  or  costly  array 
Rev.n.i-  the  woman  was  decked  with  gold  and  p. 
18. 12.  no  man  buyeth  the  merchandise  ofy.  1(5. 

21.  21.  and  the  twelve  sa'cs  were  twelve^. 

PECUL.I.\R. 
Kzod.  19.  5.  then  ye  shall  be  up.  treasure  to  me 
Osut.  14.  2.  to  be  a  p.  people,  20.  18.  1  Fct.  2.  9. 
f  s.135.4.  Ld.  hath  chosen  Israel  for  his  p.  treasure 
Eccl.  2.  8.  I  gathered  the  p.  treasure  of  kings 
J'it.  2.14.  tliat  he  might  purify  to  himself^,  people 

PEDIGREE,  S. 
JV*«m.l.l8.they  declared  lheir;<.after  their  families 
Ezra  2.  t59.  could  not  shew  their ;;.  JVtA.  7.  f  61- 
JJeb.  7.  fS.  without  father,  mother,  without/), 
t  C  he  whose  p.  is  not  counted  from  Ihem 
PEELED, 
/so.  18.  2.  go  ye  to  a  nation  scattered  and  p.  7. 
Ezek.W.  18.  head  bald,  and  every  shoulder  was^ 

PEEP. 
Isa.  8.  19.  to  wizards  that  p.  and  that  mutter 

PEEPED. 
Isa.  10.  14.  none  that  opened  the  mouth  or  p. 

PELICAN. 
JLev.  11.  18.  swan  aijd  p.  unclean,  T)eut.  14.  17. 
rsal.  102.  6.  I  um  like  a  p.  of  the  wilderness 
lia.  34. 1 11.  the  p.  shall  possess  it,  Zeph.  2.  f  14. 

PEN. 
Jadg.  5.  14.  of  Zebulun,  they  that  handle  the;*. 
Job  19.  24.  they  were  graven  with  an  iron/?. 
Psal.  45. 1.  my  tongue  is  the/;,  of  a  ready  writer 
/.*a.  8. 1.  take  a  roll,  and  write  in  it  with  a  man's /> 
Jer.  8.  8.  he  made  it,  p.  of  the  scribes  is  in  vain 
17.1.  the  sin  of  Judah  is  written  with  np.oi'uon 
3  John  13.  I  w  ill  not  with  ink  and  p.  write  to  thee 

PENCE. 
Mat.  18.  28.  one  who  owed  him  a  hundred /j. 
Mark  14.  5.  sold  for  more  than  300 /i.  ./o/in  12.  5. 
Jyuke  7.  41.  the  one  owed  500  p.  the  other  fifty 
10.  35.  on  morrow  he  took  out  two  p.  and  gave 
PENKNIFE. 
Jer.  36.  23.  Jehudi  cut  roll  with  up.  and  cast  it 

PENTECOST. 
Jfiis  word  is  dcrined  from  the  Greek  word  Pen- 
tecoste,  which  signifies  the  fiftieth,  because  the 
feast  of  Penioccist  was  celebrated  the' fiftieth 
day  oj'ter  the  sixteenth  o/Nisan,  which  was  the 
second  daii  of  the  feast  of  the  passooer.  The 
Hebrews  call  it  the  Fea.st  of  Weeks,  Kxod.34. 

22.  because  it  was  kept  seven  weeks  after  the 
passovcr. 

On  the  sixteenth  day  of  the  month  Nisan,  or 
March,  Vie  wave-ojfcring  of  the  first  sheaf 
was  to  be  made,  to  implore  the  divine  blessing 
upon  the  ensuing  harvest,  which  began  about 
that  time;  that  climate  being  so  much  warmer 
and  forwarder  than  ours:  Jlnd  fifty  days  being 
allowed  with  that  for  the  getting  in  all  their 
corn;  that  is,  the  remaining  fifteen  in  Nisan. 
{Jifarch)  and  twenty-nine  in  Jair  or  Zif, 
(.April)  the  sixth  n/Sivan,  {May)  would  be  the 
day  of  Pentecost :  When  they  were  to  hold  the 
solemn  festinal  of  thanksgiving,  for  their  par- 
ticipation of  the  harvest,  together  with  a  grate- 
ful commemoration  of  their  being  delivered 
from  Egyptian  servitude,  and  enjoying  their 
properly,hy  reaping  the  fruits  of  their  labours. 
Lev.  23.  10,  1 1,  &c.  The  learned  have  observ- 
ed, that  the  very  day  of  Pentecost  was  the 
same  day  on  which  God  delivered  the  law  from 
mount  Siniii,  F.rod.  10.  11.  as  it  was  that,  on 
which  the  apostles  were  filled  with  the  Holy 
Ohost,  and  the  gospel  was  attended  with  re- 
markable succrss,  Acts  2.  1. 

^cts  2.  1.  when  the  day  of  p.  was  fully  come 
20.  16.  he  hasted  to  be  at  Jerusalem  the  day  of  p. 

1  Cor.  16. 8.  but  I  will  tarrv  at  Ephesus  until  p. 
PENURY. 

Prov.  14.  23.  talk  of  the  lips  tcmloth  only  to  p. 

/^u/lc21.4.but  eheof  her  p.  hath  cast  in  all  she  had 
PENNY. 

jM'at.20.2.  when  had  agreed  with  labourers  for  a  p. 
9.  when  they  came,  they  received  every  man  a  p. 
13.  friend,  didst  thou  not  agree  with  mefora/j.? 
22.  19.  and  they  brought  unto  him  a  p. 

Mark  12.  15.  he  said,  bring  me  a  p.  Luke  20.  24. 

Jt«c.6.  6. 1  heard  a  voice  say,  a  measure  of  wheat 
for  a.  p.  and  three  measurps  of  barley  for  a  p. 
PENNY-WORTH. 

JWorA:6.37.andbijy  two  hundred  p.-MortA  of  bread 

John  6.  7.  two  hundred  p.-worth  is  not  sufficient 
PEOPLE 

Uiga\t^[\\Tkt ^ohoUbody  of  ptrsont  that  make 


PEO 

up  a  nation,  being  governed  by  a  certain  ma- 
gistrate, and  regulated  by  the  same  laws.  Gen. 
41.  40.  1  Sam.  15.  30.  [2]  (iodly  progenitors 
and  forefathers  departed  this  life.  Gen.  25.  8. 
Deut.  32.  50.  [3]  'J'he  vulgar,  or  inferior  sort 
of  persons  in  a'  city,  or  nation,  Mark  12  37. 
Luke  23.  14.  [4]  Jacob's  children  and  poste- 
rity. Gen.  50.  20.     [5J  The  Gimtilcs,  PsaJ.lI7. 

I.  [6]  Both  Jews  and  Gentiles,  Luke  2.  10. 
[7]  'J  he  army,  or  soldiers  of  the  Koinans. 
Dan.  9.  26.  Jt  is  also  applied  to  unreasonable 
creatures,  Prov.  30.  25. 

G«n.27.29.letp.scrve  thce,and  nations  bow  to  thee 

48.  19.  he  also  shall  become  a  p.  and  be  sreat 
Exod.  6.  7. 1  will  take  you  to  ine  for  a  p.  and  be  lo 
you  a  God,  Deut.i.'iO.  2  Sam. 7.24.  Jcr.Vi.U. 

33.3.lhou  art  astift-necl;ed;;.5.  |  34.  9.  Deut.  9.0. 
Lev.  20.  24.  1  separated  you  from  other  p.  213. 
JM'iini.  21.  29.  thou  art  undone,  O  p.  of  Chemosh 

22.5.behold,  there  is  ap.come  out  from  Egypt,  11. 

25.  15.  he  was  head  over  a  p.  in  Midian 
/>eu<.4.33.did  ever  p.hear  voice  of  God  out  of  fire? 

7.G.Ld.thy  God  hath  chosen  thee  to  be  a  special  p. 

14.2.  the  Lord  hath  chosen  tliee  to  be  a  peculiarp. 
20. 1.  a/?,  mote  than  thou,  be  not  afraid  of  them 
23.  32.  ihy  sons  shall  he  given  to  another  p. 

29.  13.  that  he  may  establish  thee  for  p.  to  Limself 

32.  21.  will  move  them  with  those  that  are  not  a  p. 

33.  29.  who  is  like  to  thee.  Op.  suved  by  Lord! 
Ruth  1.  15.  thy  sister  is  gone  back  to  her  p. 

1  Sa»i.2. 24.  ye  make  the  Lord's  p.  to  transgress 
5  10.  have  brought  ark  to  us,  to  slay  us  and  ourp. 

II.  let  it  go,  that  it  slay  us  not,  and  our  ;;. 

2  Sam.  7.  23.  whom  God  went  to  redeem  for  a  p. 

22.  26.  afflicted  p.  thou  wilt  save,  Psal.  18.  27. 
44.  ap.  I  knew  not  shall  serve  nje,  Psal.  18. 43. 

1  Kings  22.  28.  hearken.  Op.  every  one  of  you 

2  Kings  11.  17.  shall  be  Lord's  p.  2  Chr.  23.  10. 

1  Chr.  16.20.  they  went  fiom  nation  to  nation,  from 

one  kingdom  to  another  p.  Psal.  105.  13. 
19.  13.  let  us  birhave  ourselves  valiantly  for  our  p. 

2  Chron.  1.  9.  thou  hast  made  me  king  over  a  p. 
Esth.  1.  22.  for  he  sent  letters  to  every  p.  afler 

their  language,  3.  12.  |  8.  9.  J^ch.  13.  24. 

2.  10.  Esther  had  not  shewed  her/),  nor  kindred 

3.  8.  there  is  a  certain  p.  scattered  abroad 

4.  8.  go  in  to  make  request  before  him  for  her  p. 
.Job  3li.  20.  when  p.  are  cut  off  in  their  pla';e 
Psal.  62.  8.  ye  p.  pour  out  your  hearts  before  him 

66.  8.  hler-sour  God,  yep.  H  './5. 10.  a  p.  thatdoorr 
114. 1.  went  out  from  a  p.  of  a  strange  language 
144. 15.  happy  is  ihai/i.  ||  148.  14.  a  p.  near  to  hmi 
Prov.  14.  34.  but  sin  is  a  reproach  to  any  p. 

23.  15.  so  is  a  wicked  ruler  over  the  poor  p. 

30.  25.  ants  are  a  p.  nnt  strong,  yet  prepare  meat 
/Aa.l.4.ap. laden  with  iniquity,  a  seed  of  evil  doers 

10.  give  ear  to  the  law,  ye  p.  of  Gomorrah 

7.  8.  Ephraim  shall  be  broken,  that  it  be  not  a  p. 

8.  19.  should  not  a  p.  seek  unlo  their  God? 
27. 11.  for  it  is  a  p.  of  no  understanding,  therefore 
30.9.  write,  that  (his  is  a  rebellious/).  65.  2. 
43.  4.  therefore  I  will  give  p.  for  thy  life 

8.  bring  forth  the  blind  p.  that  have  eyes 

65. 3.  a  p.  that  provoketh  nio  to  anger  to  my  face 
13.1  create  Jerusalem  a  rejoicing,and  her/). a  joy 

Jer.  6.  22.  a  p.  conieth  from  the  north,  50  41. 
48.  42.  Moab  shall  be  destroyed  from  being  a  p. 
T^am.\.~.hex  p.  fell  into  the  hand  of  the  enemy 
Hos.  4.  9.  and  there  shall  he  like  p.  like  priest 

9.  1.  rejoice  not,  O  Israel,  for  joy  as  other  p. 
.Jonah  1.  8.  tell  us,  of  what  p.  ait  thou? 
J\lic.i.\.  it  shall  be  exalted,  and  p.  shall  flow  unto  it 
Zcch.  8.  20.  there  shall  come  p.  and  inhabitnnts 
I.,uke  1.  17.  to  mnke  ready  a  p.  prepared  for  Lord 
Jlcts  15. 14.  to  take  out  of  tliem  a  p.  for  his  name 
/ioTTi.lO.  19.  provoke  to  jeal.  by  them  that  are  nop. 
Tit.-.  14.  he  miglii  purify  to  himself  a  peculiar  p. 
//fi.S.lO.to  thern  aGo<l,and  theyshall  be  to  m"  a  p. 
1  Pit.  2.  9.  but  yo  are  n  peculiar  p.  to  shew  forth 

10.  p.  of  God,  in  time  pa*t  were  not  i>  p.  now 
Rev.  5.  9.  thou  imst  re'lcimed  m  out  of  every  p. 

.Ill  PEOPLE. 
Ezod.  19. 5.  ye  shall  be  a  peculiar  treasure  above 
all  p.  Deut.  7.  0, 14.  |  10.  15.  PsaU  99.  2. 
Deut.  7.  7.  for  ye  were  the  fewest  of  all  p. 
28.  64.  the  Lord  shall  scatter  thee  among  all  p. 
I  Kings  4.34. came  of  all  p.  to  hear  wisdom  of  Sol. 
8.43.  all  p.  may  know  thy  name,  2  Chron. .G.  33. 
9.  7.  ?hall  bo  a  proverb  and  by-word  anion?  all  p. 
Esth.  3.8.  and  their  laws  are  diverse  from  all  p. 

14.  copy  of  writing  was  published  to  a?/ p.  8.13. 
9.  2.  for  the  fear  of  them  fell  upon  all  p. 
Pj.  47. 1.  O  clap  your  hands,  all  ye  p.  shout  to  G. 
96.  3.  declare  his  wonders  among  all  p. 
117.  l.O  praise  Ld.  all  ye  nations,  praise  him,  all 
ye  p.  for  hie  kindness,  148. 11.  Rom.  15. 11. 
/so.  25.6.  LordmaketoaMp.  a  feast  of  fat  things 
7.  the  face  of  the  covering  cast  over  all  p. 
56.  7.  my  house  be  called  house  of  prayer  for  allp 
Lam.  I.  11.  all  her  p.  sigh,  they  geek  bread 
3L 


PEO 

Lam.  1. 18.  hear,  I  pray  you,  allp.  belioId,3f/c.l.2. 
Dan.  5. 19.  all  p.  and  nations  feared  before  him 

7.  14.  that  all  p.  and  nations  should  serve  him 
Mic.  4.  S.all  p.  will  walk  each  in  name  of  his  god 
Ilab.  2.  5.  because  he  heapeth  unto  him  allp. 
Zeph.'S.iO  makujou  a  praise  among  a/^p. of  earth 
ZtcA.12.3.inake  Jeru.a  burdensome  stone  for  all  p. 
/,»;i-c2. 10.  tidings  of  joy,  which  shall  bo  U  at\  p. 
31.  thou  hast  prepared  btdore  the  face  of  allp. 
Ml  the  PEOPLE. 
<7fn.l9.4.  all  the  p.of&oiiom  compass.  Lot's  house 

3.5.').Jacob  came  lo  Liiz,he  and  ullthep.vtith  him 

42.6.Joseph,  he  it  was  that  sold  to  all  the  p. of 'E^y. 
Ea-od.ll.S.get  thee  out,  and  all  t. p. that  follow  thca 

18. 14.  all  the  p.  stand  by  Ihee  from  morn,  lo  even 
21.  ihou  shall  provide  out  of  all  the  p.  able  men 

19.8.  all  the  p.  answered  together  and  said,  24.  3. 
11.  Lord  wiil  come  down  in  sight  of  uii  the  p. 

20.  18.  all  the  p.  saw  thunderings  and  lightnings 
Lev.  9.  23.  glery  of  the  Lord  appeared  to  all  the  p. 

10.  3.  and  before  all  the  p.  I  will  be  glorified 
-Vhw.  11.  29.  that  all  the  Lord's />.  were  piophcta 

13.32.  and  all  i.p.we  saw  are  men  of  great  statura 

15.  26.  seeing  all  the  p.  were  in  ignorance 
Dejit.  1.3.  9.  afterwards  the  hand  of  aUtAep.  17.7. 

17. 13.  all  t.p.  shall  hear  and  fear,  and  do  no  more 

27.  15.  and  all  the  p.  shall  say,  amen,  16,  17,  18, 
19,20,21. 

28. 10.  all  the  p.  of  the  earth  shall  see  that  thou 
.Josh.  4.  24.  that  all  the  p.  of  the  earth  might  know 

5. 4.  all  the  p.  that  came  out  were  circumcised,  5. 

6.5.  uHjAcp.  shall  shout  ||  7.3.  let  not  ai/ Me/),  go 
24.  13.  Lord  draveout  fiom  before  us  all  the  p. 

Judg.  16.30.  the  house  fell  upon  all  the  p.  therein 

20.  8.  and  all  the  p.  arose  as  one  man,  s:iyiiig 
iHam.  10.24.  there  is  none  like  him  B.mong  all  the p . 

11.4.  allthip.weiit  \\  12.18. oZi  the p.feaTeil  greatly 

30.  6.  because  the  soul  of  aW  the  p.  was  grieved 
2  Sinn.  2. 28.  all  the  p.  stood,  and  pursued  no  more 

3.32. king  wept  at  Abner'sgrave,and  allp.v/ept. 
36.  and  all  the  p.  took  notice  of  it,  it  pleased 

17.  3.  and  I  will  bring  back  all  the  p.  unto  thee, 
so  all  the  p.  shall  be  in  peace 

19.0.  ar\i  all  the  p.  were  at  strife  through  all  ler. 

20.  22.  woman  went  io.aH  the  p.  in  her  wisdom 

1  Kings  8.  .53.  did.^t  separate  them  from  all  the  p 

60.  that  all  the  p.  of  the  earth  may  know  that 

20.  10.  not  suflice  for  handfuls  for  all  the  p. 
~  Kings^i.  3.  and  all  the  p.  stood  to  tlie  covenant 

1  Chr.  16.  36.  and  all  i!Acp.said,  ameu,  and  praised 

28.  21.  all  the  p.  will  be  wholly  at  thy  command 

2  Chron.  7.  4.  king  and  all  thcp.  otTered  siicrificca 
F.zral.  25.  Sr't  judges,  which  may  judge  fl/i  the  p. 
J\V/(.8.5.in  i-iglit  iif  all  thep.for  he  was  above  allp. 

il.so  thp  Levites  stillf^d  alt  the  p.  s^ayim:,  hold 
Psal.  67.  3.  O  God,  let  nil  the  p.  praise  lliee,  5. 
97.G.heavcns  declare  right.nndaW  t.p.sce  his  glory 
106.48. blessed  be  Ld.  God,  lei  all  thep.any,  amen 

Eccl.  4.  16.  there  is  no  end  of  all  the  p.  even  of  all 

./^r.26.S.  Ld.  commanded  him  tospoiikloa/ZMep. 
9.  all  the  p.  were  gathered  against  Jeremiah 
34.  1.  and  all  the  p.  fought  against  Jerusalem 
8.  Zedekiah  made  a  covenant  with  all  thep.W. 
"8.  4.  thus  he  weakencti)  the  hands  of  all  the  p. 
4.'?.  4.  all  the  p.  obeyed  not  the  voice  of  the  Lord 

Ezck.  31. 12.  all  the  p.  are  gone  from  his  shadow 

Dan. 3.7.  when  all  thcp.  heard  thesound  of  cornet 

/^MA.ll.lO.brcak  my  covennnti  made  with  all  t.p. 
12.2.  Jerusalem  a  cup  of  trembling  to  all  the  p. 
14.  12.  the  Lord  will  smite  allthep.  that  fought 

Mai.  2.  9. 1  also  made  you  base  before  all  the  p. 

Xa4f  8. 47.  she  declared  unto  him  before  nH  the  p. 
13.  17.  all  the  p.  rejoiced  for  the  glorious  things 
I8.43.0//  (Af  p.when  they  saw,  gave  praise  to  God 
19.  48.  all  Ihep.  were  very  attentive  to  hear  him 
20.6.  hut  if  we  say,  of  men,  nllthep-wiW  stone  us 

.l.-.t.i  2.  47.  and  having  favour  with  all  the  p. 
5.  .'M.  Gamaliel  had  in  reputation  among  all  thep 
10. 41.  not  to  all  thep.  but  unto  wi'nessis  chosen 
13.  24.  the  baptism  of  repentance  lo  all  thcp. 
21.27.  stirred  up  all  the  p.  and  laid  hands  on  him 

//i4.9.19.when  Moses  had  spoken  every  precept  to 
all  the  p.  he  sprinkled  both  bnok  and  all  thep. 
.among  the  PEOPLE. 

Lev.  18.  29.  shall  l»e  cut  off  from  among  the  p. 

A'um.  5.57.  woman  shall  be  a  curse  among  the  p. 

1  .Sam.  14.  34.  disperse  yourselves  among  th'' p. 

Psal.  94.  8.  understand,  ye  brutish  among  the  p 

i':zfA.28.19.all  that  know  thefamong  thrp.ahn]\  be 

Dan.  11.33.  and  they  that  understand  among  thep 

.Tori  2. 17.  wherefore  should  they  say  nmona  th(p. 

Zech.  10.  9.  and  I  will  sow  them  among  the  p. 

Mat.i.23.  all  mannerof  disease  amon^  thep.  9.  35 
26.5.feastday,lestthcrebean  uproar  amongthep 

JohnT.  12.  there  was  murh  murniurin?nmon/r '-p- 
43.  was  a  division  among  the  p.  becnuse  of  him 

JJeLiX'23.  shall  be  destroyed  from  among  the  p. 
4.  17.  that  it  spread  no  further  among  the  p. 
5. 12.  many  wonders  were  wrought  am.thep  6.8 
I   14.  14  Barnabaa  and  Paul  ran  io  among  the/. 


PEO 

S  Prt.2. 1.  there  were  faluc  prophets  olso  am.  thep. 

See  Common,  rooi.ii^ii. 

I'EOI'LE.'/C-rW. 

Jadg.  20.  2.  presently  in  iisst-mlily  of  the  p.  of  Ood 

2Sam.l4.IM.lh<)Ughlsuch  n  thing  ag.iinai  p.of  Oud 

rsAl.9.  even  p.  w/lhe  r/orfot' Aliriihani,  galhercd 

Heb.  4.9.  there  remuincth  n  rest  lo  the  p.  of  God 

11.23.  choosing l4i  suflV-r  affliciinn  \vilh;».o/  God 

lPe<.2.  lO.was  nul  a  |ic'oph',but  Ate  now  p.of  God 

See  Great. 

His  PnoPI-E. 

Gfn.  17.  U.  be  cut. .IT  from  his  p.  Find.  30.  33,38. 

31.  14    /.ev.  7.  20,  21,  2.'.,  27.  |  17.  4.  9. 

I  19.  8.  I  23.  29.  J^iim.  9.  13.  |  I'l.  30. 

25.  8.  thc'n  Abrohairi  was  gathered  to  his  p. 

17.  Uliiniiel  was  gathered  lo/iisp.  1|  35. 2!l.  Isaac 
49. 16.  JIan  Khali  judge  hisp.  as  one  oftribee,  33, 
Kxod.  8.  29.  that  flies  may  depart  from  Ai*  p.  31. 
17.  13.  .loshua  disconifitcd  Ainaick  and  his  p. 
18.1.  God  had  done  for  Moses  and  for  Israel  hisp. 
Lev-  17.  10.  that  soul  that  eatelli  blood,  I  will  rut 
him  oil" from  among  his  p.  20. 3,  ti.  |  23. 30. 
21. 1.  none  be  dctilcd  for  the  dead  among  his  p. 

15.  nor  shall  he  profane  his  seed  among  his  p. 
.V«m.  20.  24.  Aaron  shall  he  gathered  to  his  p.  2(). 

21.34. fear  not,  Ogof  liaslian,!  have  delivered  him 
into  thy  hand,  and  all  his  p.  35.  Vent.  2.33. 
Dcut.  3.  2.  I  will  deliver  Og  and  all  hisp.  3. 
20.  18.  Lord  avouched  thee  to  he  his  peculiar  p. 

32.  9.  for  Lord's  portion  is  his  p.  Jacob  the  lot 
3G.  the  Lord  shall  judge /k.v  ;>.  Psal.  135.  14. 
43.  rejoice,  O  ye  nations,  with  his  p.  he  will  be 

merciful  to  his  land  and  his  p.  Rum.  15.  10. 
50..\ar()ndii'd  in  mount  Hor. was  gather. to /t/«'^. 

33.  7.  hear.  Lord,  and  briiig  Judah  to  his  p. 
Josh.8. 1.  I  have  given  thee  A  i,  the  king  and  his  p. 
Judff.  11.23.  hath  dispossessed  Amorites  bcf /*»>/;. 
Ruth  I.  6.  heard  how  the  Lord  had  visited  his  p. 

1  &'am. 12.22. Ld.  will  not  forsake  hisp.  for  his  great 

name's  sake,  pleased  the  Ld.lomakc  you  his  p. 
15.  1.  to  anoint  thee  to  be  king  over  all  his  p. 
27.  12.  made  his  p.  Israel  utterly  to  abhor  him 

2  Sam.  8.  15.  David  reigned  over  all  Israel,  David 

e.Tecutcd  justice  to  all  hisp.  1  Chr.  18.  14 
1  Kings  20.  42.  and  thy  people  shall  go  for  his  p 

1  CAr.  21.3.  Joab  aiiswcrcil,  the  Lord  mnko  hisp 

a  hundred  times  <o  many  more  as  they  her 
22. 18.  the  land  is  subdued  before  Lord  and  Ins  p 
23.  25.  the  God  of  Israel  hath  given  rest  to  his  p. 

2  CAr.  2. 11.  because  the  Lord  halh  loved  his  p. 
31.  10.  for  the  Lord  haih  blessi'd  his  p. 

32.14.  «hc  was  there  that  lould  deliver  his  p.?  15. 
33.  10.  the  Lord  spalto  to  Manassch  and  his  p. 
36.  15.  because  he  had  compassion  on  A/5  p. 
Ifi. mocked, until  wrath  of  Ld. arose  against /ii.<;). 
23.wlio  anion;;  you  of  all /ii.5p.  go  up,  F.zra  1.3. 
F.-^lh.  10.  3.  Mordccai  seeking  the  wealth  of  A/>  p. 
.Job  IB.  19.  not  haveson  nor  ne])hew  nmon;'  hisp. 
Psal.  14.7.  bringcthbick  captivity  of  A('»;».  53.  (i. 

29.  11.  the  Lord  will  give  strength  to  his  p.  the 

FiOrd  will  bless  his  p.  with  pewe,  tJ8.  .35. 
50.  4.  he  shall  call,  that  he  may  judge  A/>  p. 
73.  10.  therefore  his  p.  return  hither,  and  waters 
78.  20.  they  said,  can  he  provide  flesh  fur  his  p.? 

C2.  he  gave  his  p.  over  also  to  the  sword 

71.  he  brought  him  lo  feed  Jacob  Ai.?  p. 
85.  8.  for  he  will  speak  peace  to  Ar's  p.  and  saints 
94.  14.  for  the  Lord  will  not  cast  ntVhis  p. 
100. 3.  we  are  A/>  p.  ||  I0.-).43.  br.iught  fi.rlhA(.?p. 
105.  24.  he  incrcas'd  his  p   greatly,  made  them 

25.  he  tnrne<l  their  heart  to  hate  his  p.  to  deal 
100.  40.  the  wrath  of  the  Ld.  kindled  against  his 
p.  that  he  abhorred  his  inheritance,  fsa.  5.  25. 
111.  fi.  he  shewed  his  p.  the  power  of  his  works 

9.  he  still  redemption  to  Ai's  p.  holy  is  his  name 
113. 8.  he  may  sot  him  with  the  princes  ofAi's;). 
116.  14.  now  in  the  presence  of  all  his  p.  18. 
125. 2.  BO  is  thr  Ld.  round  about  his  p.  henceforth 
13<i.  It),  him  who  led  hisp.  through  the  wilderness 

148.  14.  hr  alio  c.xalteth  the  horn  of  Ai>  p. 

149.  4.  Lnrd  takclh  pleasure  in  his  p.  beautify 
Jia.  3.  14.  into  jud;rnent  with  theancirntsof  Am;». 

7.2.  hit  heart  was  moved,  and  Ihe  heart  of  his  p. 
11.  II_.  to  recover  the  remnant  of  his  p.  lefl 

16.  ho  n  high  wnv  for  the  rftmnnnt  of  Ai>  p. 
14.  32.  Ihe  iioor  or  A/>  p.  shall  trust  in  liim 
25.  8.  the  rihuke  of /lisp,  shall  li>-  lake  away 
2K.  5.  for  a  diadem  of  lioaiiiy  to  re^^iilMe  itf  his  p. 

30.  2fi.  in  day  Lord  hirideih  up  breach  of  his  p. 

49.  13.  for  God  hath  comforted  his  p.  .52.  9. 

.M.  22.  Ihy  G..d  that  pl!>adeth  Ihe  raoso  of  Aij?  p. 
Sfi.  3.  Ihe  Lord  hath  sepnrnted  mi-  from  his  p. 
63.11. he  reinenibere<lday«oro|il,  Moses  and  h.p. 
Jrr.  27.  12.  and  serve  him  anil  Ai>  p.  and  live 

50.  in.  Ihry  shall  re'urr  every  <me  lo  his  p. 
fTjcA.IH.IH.  and  did  what  is  not  good  among  Ai.t  p. 

30.  11.  he  and  Ai>7>.  with  him  shall  he  brought 
Jueii.  18.  then  will  Lord  be  jealnus  urn!  pity  hisp 
19.  the  Lord  will  answer  and  sav  lo  hup. 
3.  It  the  Lord   Till  be  the  |io|>«  of  hii p. 


PEO 

Mie.  6. 2.  Ihe  Lord  hath  a  controversy  wllh  his  p. 
y.ech.  9. 115.  Lord  shall  save  them  as  dock  of  Ai*  p. 
.VuM. 21.  Jesus,  lie  shall  save  his  p.  from  their  sine 
J,i(ke  i.liH.  for  he  halh  visited  and  redeemed  hisp. 
77.give  knuwl.ofsalvation  to  his  p.\iy  remission 
7.1t).proiihct  risen.and  that  God  halh  visited  hisp. 
hnm.  II.  I.  hath  God  castaway  Ai's  ;;.?  God  forbid 
2'  God  hath  not  cast  away  his  p.  he  foreknew 
Heb.  10.  30.  again,  the  Lord  shall  judge  his  p. 
Rev.  21. 3.  they  shall  be  hisp.  God  himself  their  G. 
See  H(ii,v,  Isk\ki,,  Many,  BIkn. 
PEOPLE  of  the  land. 
Gen.  23.7.  Abrah.  bowed  himself  lo  ;).  of  the  1. 12. 
42.6.  it  was  Joseph  that  sold  to  all  ;;.  of  the  land 
F.iod.  5.  5./*  of  the  I.  arc  many,  ye  make  them  rest 
Lev.  20. 2.  p.  of  the  I.  shall  st.one  him  with  stont.'s 
4    \f p.  uf  the  landi\o  hide  Iheir  eyes  from  him 
J^iim   14.  9.  rebel  not,  neither  fear  ye  p.  of  the  I. 
2  Kings  11.  14.  Mp.  of  I.  rejoiced  anil  blew,  20. 
15.  5.Jolham  judged  p.of  the  land,  2  CAr.  20.  21. 
21.  24.  p.  of  the  I.  slew  that  had  killed  Amon,  and 
p.  of  the  I.  made  Josiah  king,  2  Chr.  33.  25. 
2.3..30.p.  o//.took  Jehoaha/.hi3Bon,2  CAr.30.  I. 
25.  3.  there  was  no  bread  for  p.  of  the  I.  ./er.  52.fi. 
19.  Nebuchadn.  took  him  that  mustered;!,  of  the 
I.  and  si.vly  men  of  p.of  the  land,  .Jrr.  52.25. 

1  CAr.  5.  2.5.  went  after  the  gods  of  p.  of  the  land 
F.ira  4.4.  p.of  the  I.  weakened  hands  of  builders 

10.  2.  and  taken  strange  wives  of  the  p.  of  the  I. 
II.  separate  yourselves  from  the  p.  of  the  land 

.Vch.  10.  30.  not  give  our  daughters  to  p.  of  the  I. 
31.  if  the  p.of  the  I.  bring  ware,  iir  any  victuals 
K»fA.8.  17.  many  of  the  p.  of  the  I.  became  Jews 
./(■r.l.lH.made  thee  an  iron  pillar  against  p.  «//Ae/. 
34.19.  all  the  p.  of  the  land  which  passed  between 
Fzrk.  7.  27.  hands  of  p.  of  the  I.  shall  be  troubled 
22.29.p.o/(Ac  I.  have  used  oppression  and  robbery 
3:!.2.if  p.  of  the  land  take  man  lo  he  a  watchman 
3'.l.  13.  and  all  the  p.  of  the  land  shall  bury  them 
45.IG.all  the  p.  of  the  land  shall  give  this  oblation 
22. that  day  the  prince  prepare  for  p.  of  the  land 
40.3.  p.(i////e  /.  shall  worship  at  door  of  this  gate 
9.wlu-n  p.of  the  land  shall  come  in  solemn  feasts 
/)aii.9.(>.prophels  winch  spake  lo  I  hep.  of  the  land 
ffag-^.4.  be  strong,  all  yep  of  the  land,  anif  work 
i^fcA.7. 5.  speak  lo  all  thep.  of  the  land  and  priests 

JI/hc/i  PKOPLK. 
JVi/ni.  20.20.  Eilnm  came  out  ag.  hiin  withmHcAp. 
./(i.v'i.l  1.4.  they  went  with  mvchp.  even  as  the  sand 
"Sum.  13.31.  there  came  mwcAp.  by  way  of  I  he  hill 

2  Chr,  31).  13.  there  assembled  at  jerusa.  niuchp. 
.32.  4    so  there  was  gathered  ttikcA  p.  together 

I'sal.  3.5.  IP.  I  will  praise  thee  among  wnch  p. 
J/<irA5.21.  mwfA p.  gathered  unto  him  nightliesea 

24  .lesiis  went  with  him,  and  »nj(. p. followed  him 
6.34.Jesu3  saw  much  p. was  moved  with  compass. 
./uAii  12.  9.  much  p.  of  Jews  knew  thai  he  was  there 

12.ne.\l  day  much  p.  took  braiiehcs  of  palm-trees 
Jlcts  5.  37.  and  drew  away  wnch  p.  after  him 

11.  24.  and  much  p.  was  addi^d  unto  the  Lord 
IS.  10. 1  am  with  thee,  lijr  I  have  mn.p.  in  thiscily 
19.  21).  this  Paul  hath  turned  away  much  p. 

Rev.  19.  1.  I  hcaid  a  voice  of  mwrAp.  in  heaven 

Mij  PEOPLE. 
r?eii.23.11.  in  presence  of  the  sons  of  injp.give  I  it 
41.  40.  to  thy  word  shall  all  viy  p.  he  ruled 
49.  29.  I  am  to  be  gathered  lo  vnj  p.  bury  mc 
Fxud'i.l.  I  havesren  affliction  of  mt/p.  jjrf.?  7.34. 

10.  that  thou  mavest  Ining  forth  my  p.  7.  4. 
.5.  Met  wf/p.go,  7.  1(1. 18.  1,20.  1 9.  1,  n.jlO.  3. 
8  8.  take  away  the  frogs  from  me  and  from  mt/p 
21.  else  if  thou  wilt  not  let  my  p.  go,  10.  4. 
22. 1  will  sever  the  land  in  which  my  p.  are,  23. 
9.  17.  as  yet  e.vallest  thou  thyself  against  my  p. 
27.  Lord  is  righteous,  I  iinil  viy  p.  are  wicked 

12.  31.  Olid  get  you  forth  from  among  my  p. 
22.  25.  if  thou  lend  monev  to  any  of  mi/  p. 

I.rv.  2r..  12.  vc  shall  be  my'p.  .Jrr.^\.  4.  |'30.  22. 
J^Tuiii.  24.  14.  and  now  heholil  I  go  unto  my  p. 
.luilg.  12.  2.  I  and  my  p.  were  at  great  strife 

14.3.  is  there  never  a  woman  among  all  my  p.? 

I'l.  Iiasi  iml  forth  n  riddle  lo  children  of  my  p. 

Unlh  1 .  10.  thy  people  shall  he  my  p.  God  my  God 

3.  II.  for  all  the  city  of  my  p.  dulli  know  that 

1  Sam.  9.  10.  shall  anoint  him  to  be  captain  over  my 

p.  that  he  ninv  serve  Tn7/p.  I  looked  on  my  p. 

2  .<Jnm.3. 18.  by  the  hand  of  David  I  will  save  m'yp. 
7.  8.  I  look  thee  to  be  ruler  over  my  p.  2  CAr.  fi.  ."i. 

\  Kings  22.4. 1  am  as  thou  art,  my  p.  as  thy  peo]de, 
my  horses  nsthy  horsi'S,  2  A'iT(/r,»  3.7. 2(  Ar.I8.3. 
2  King."^.  5.  tell  Ilezekiah,  Ihe  captain  of  my  p. 

1  r"Ar.  17.  0.  whom  I  commnmled  lo  feed  my  p. 
2*^.  2.  David  Blood  and  said,  hearmc,  my  p. 
29.14.  who  am  I,  and  what  myp.lo  beahlc  lo  offer 

2  P/ir.  1.  II.  wisdom,  I  lint  thou  innyest  judge  tnr;  p 
0. 5.  since  day  I  brought  forth  my  p.  out  of  Eg)  pt 
7.  13.  or  iff  send  pestilence  among  my  p. 

14.  if  my  p.  shall  humble  Ihemselven  nn'i  pray 
F.slh.  7.  3.  let  my  p.  be  given  me  al  iny  reipiesi 
4.  for  we  arc  sold,  I  and  my  p   lo  be  dcstroyeil 


PEO 

Kst.9.Ci.  how  endure  to  see  evil  shall  come  to  my  p 
Ps.  14.4.  who  cat  up  my  p.  as  they  eat  bread,  53.  4. 

50.  7.  hear,  O  my  p.  1  will  ipeak  and  testily,  81.  8. 
59.ll.slay  them  not,  lesl  my  p. forget,  scalier  them 
68.  22.  I  will  bring  my  p.  again  from  Ilashan 
78.1.givccar,0  my  p.  lo  my  law,  incline  your  car* 
81.  11.  but  my  p.  would  not  hearken  to  my  voico 

13.  O  that  my  p.  had  liearkeiied  unto  me 
144. 2.  my  shield,  who  subdued  my  p.  under  mo 
/«a.1.3.but  Israel  not  know, my  p. doth  not  consider 
3.  12.  as  formyp.  cli(<ilren  are  ihciropprcssors,  O 
my  p.  they  which  lead  thee  cause  ihcc  to  err 

15.  what  mean  ye  that  yc  beat  my  p.  lo  )iieccs1 
5.  13.  ray  p.  are  gone  into  captivity,  because 
10.2.10  take  away  the  right  from  jioor  of  my  p. 

24.  O  my  p.  that  dwellest  in  Zion,  be  not  afraid 
19. 25.  blessed  be  Egypt,  my  p.  and  Assyria,  Israel 
26.  20.  come,  my  p.  enter  Ihou  into  thy  rliamkcr* 
32. 18.  my  p.  shall  dwell  in  a  jieaceable  habitation 
40.  I.  comfort  ye,  comfort  yemyp.sailhyourGod 
43.  20.  to  give  drink  to  my  p.  my  chosen 
47.6.  I  was  wroth  with  my  p.  I  have  polluted 

51.  4.  hearken  unto  me,  7ny  p.  and  give  ear  to  me 

16.  and  say  to  Zion,  thou  art  my  p. 

.52.4.  my  p.  went  down  into  Egypt  to  sojourn  there 

5.  sailh  Ld.  that  viy  p.  is  taken  away  for  nought 

6.  therefore  my  p.  shall  know  my  name 

.53.  8.  for  transgression  of  my  p.  was  he  stricken 
57.  14.  take  stuinbling-hliick  out  of  way  of  my  p. 
58. Land  shew  myp. their  transgression, and  Jacob 
63.8.  for  he  said,  surely  they  are  my  p.  children 
65.10.Sliaron  a  fold  for  myp.  that  have  sought  me 
19.  I  vN'ill  rejoice  in  Jerusalem,  and  joy  in  myp. 
22.  for  as  the  days  of  a  tree,  are  the  days  of  my  p. 
./er.2.  11.  but  my  p.  have  changed  their  glory  for 
I3.for  myp.  have  committed  two  evils,  forsaken 
31. why  say  my p.we  are  lords,  will  come  no  mora 
32.  yet  my  p.  have  forgotten  me,  18.  15. 
4.'J2.for  my  p. is  foolish,  ihey  have  not  known  me 
5.  20.  for  among  my  p.  ore  found  wicked  men 

31.  myp.  love  to  have  it  so,  what  will  ye  dol 

0.  27.  I  have  set  thee  for  a  fortress  among  my  p. 

7.  23.  obey  my  voice,  and  yc  shall  be  my  p. 
8.7.  my  p.  know  not  the  judgment  of  the  Lord 
9  2.  that  I  might  leave  my  p.  and  go  from  ihem 
12.  16.  if  they  will  diligently  lenrn  the  ways  ol 

my  p.  as  they  taught  my  p.  to  swear  by  Baal 

15.  7.  I  will  destroy  my  p.  since  Ihey  return  not 
23.  2.  sail h  Ld.  against  the  pastors  that  feed  my  p 

22.  if  they  had  cau'^ed  my /).  lo  hear  my  words 
27.  who  think  lo  cause  my  p.  lo  foigcl  my  name 

32.  cause  my  p.  to  err  by  their  lies  and  lighlnest 
24.7.they  shall  t)em7/p.31.I,:a  |  32.38.  F.iek.U. 

20.  I  36.  28.  I  37.  23,  27.  Kec A.  8.  a 
29.  32.  nor  behold  good  that  I  will  do  for  myp. 
31.  14.  my  p.  shall  he  satisfied  with  my  goodness 
33. 24.  thus  ihey  have  despised  myp.  not  a  nation 
50.  6.  my  p.  hath  been  lost  sheep,  ihey  have  gone 
51.45.  myp.lo  ye  out  of  midst  of  her,  RcK.  18.  4. 
J. am.  3.  14.  I  was  a  derision  to  all  my  p.  and  song 
Kick.  13.  9.  they  shall  not  he  in  assembly  of  my  p. 

10.  have  seduced  my  p.\\  18.  hunts  souls  of  my  p 
19.  ye  pollute  me,  among  my  p.  by  lying  to  my  p. 
21.  I  will  deliver  my  j>.  out  of  your  hand,  23. 

14.8.  I  will  cut  him  off  from  Ihe  midst  of  my  p. 

11.  hut  that  they  may  he  my  p.  and  I  Iheir  God 
21.  12.  terrors  by  the  sword  shall  be  upon  my  p. 
.34.  30.  even  house  of  Lrael  are  my  p.  saiih  I,<ird 
37.12.liehip|d,  O  my  p.  I  will  open  your  graves,  13 
38.  16.  thou  shall  come  up  against  myp.  Israel 
44.  23.  they  shall  leaeh  my  p.  the  dillcrence 

4.5.  8.  my  princes  shall  no  more  oppress  my  p. 
9. lake  away  your  exactions  from  viy  p.  saith  Ld 
46.18.  that  myp.  he  not  scattered  from  possession 
Has.  1 .  9.  then  said  God,  yc  an-  not  viy  p.  10. 
2.  t  1.  say  unto  your  brethren,  myp.  and  sistert 
23.  say  lo  them  which  were  not  myp. 
4.  6.  myp.  are  destroyed  for  lack  ol' knowledge 

8.  Ihey  eat  up  the  sin  of7ny  p.  and  they  set 

12.  myp.  ask  counsel  at  iheir  slocks,  and  staff 
0.  II.  when  I  relumed  the  captivity  of  my  p. 

J  1.7.  myp.  are  hent  lo  backsliding  fiom  mc 
.tnrl  2.  2'i.  my  p.  shall  never  be  ashamed,  27. 

3.2.  and  will  plead  with  them  there  for  myp, 
3.  and  Ihey  have  cast  lots  for  my  p.  and  sold 
./IniosO.  10.  sinners  of  my  p.  shalldie  by  the  sword 
OAni/.  13.  not  have  entered  into  the  gale  of  my  p. 
.Mic.  1.  9.  he  is  come  lo  the  gale  of  viy  p.  even 

2.  4.  lie  halh  changed  llie  portion  of  my  p. 

8.  of  Inte  my  p.  is  risen  up  as  an  enemy 

9.  the  women  of  my  p.  have  ye  cast  out 

3  3.  who  also,eat  the  flesh  of  711)/  p.  and  fla_T 
5.  ciincerning  prophets  thnt  iiiiike  myp.  err 
0.3.  n  myp.  what  have  I  dune  iiiilo  iher?  5. 

16.  thercfiireyeshall  hear  ihe  reproach  ofmy  / 
Zrph.  2.  8.  whereby  they  repronched  7My  p. 

9.  the  residue  of  my  p.  shall  spoil  thi'm 
ZffA.2.  II.  and  ninny  iintions  sIihII  be  my  p. 
8.  7.  I  will  savi>  III);  p.  from  the  east  cnunlry 
13.  9.  I  will  say,  it  i>  my  p.  nnd  lltry  shall  taj- 


PEO 

it«m.0. 35.  call  them  my  p.  which  were  not  my  p. 
26. in  the  place  where  it  was  8aid,yo  are  not  my  p. 
S  Cor.  6.  16.  I  will  be  their  G.  they  ahull  bo  my  p. 
See  Daughter. 
Of  the  PEOPLE. 
Gen.  25.  23.  two  manner  of  p.  shall  be  separated 
26.  10.  one  of  the  p.  might  lightly  have  lien 
49.  10.  to  him  shall  the  gathering  of  the  p.  be 
J^um.  25.  4.  take  all  the  heads  of  the  p.  and  hang 
26.  4.  take  the  sum  of  the  p.  from  20  years  old 
Josh.  4.  2.  take  you  twelve  men  out  of  the  p. 

1  Sam.  9.2.  he  was  higher  than  any  of  the  p.  10. 23. 

12.  for  there  is  a  sacrifice  vf  the  p.  to-day 

14.  24.  so  none  of  the  p.  tasted  any  food 

23.  then  answered  one  of  the  p.  and  said 
26.  lf>.  there  came  one  of  the  p.  to  destroy  king 

2  Kings  13.7.  nor  did  he  leave  ofthep.  to  Jehoahaz 
Ezra  3.  3.  because  of  the  p.  of  those  couniries 
JVeA.5.1.  there  wasgreatcryo/r.;;.  and  their  wives 

7.  73.  and  some  of  the  p.  dwelt  in  their  cities 
Psal.  65.  7.  which  stilleth  the  tumult  of  the  p. 

72.  4.  lie  shall  judge  the  poor  ofthep.  and  save 

89.  ID.  I  have  e.valted  one  chosen  out  of  the  p. 
Isa.  18.  7.  a  present  of  a  p.  scattered  and  peeled 

42.  6.  I  will  give  thee  for  a  covenant  of  the  p. 

51.  4.  n^  judgment  to  rest  for  a  light  of  the  p. 

63.  3.  ana  of  the  p.  there  was  none  with  me 
Ezek.  46.  IS.  prince  not  take  of  the  p.  inheritance 

24.  the  ministers  shall  boil  the  sacrifice  of  the  p. 
John  7.  31.  and  many  of  thef.  believed  on  him 

11.  42.  because  of  tlie  p.  that  stand  by,  I  said  it 
^c(j  4.21. how  they  might  punish,  because  ofthep. 
Heb.  9.  7.  he  otfered  for  himself,  and  errors  of  the  p. 
Rev.  11. 9.  they  ofthep.  shall  see  their  dead  bodies 
See  Ears,  Elders. 
One  PEOPLE. 
Oen.  25.  23.  one  p.  shall  be  stronger  than  the  other 
34.  16.  we  will  dwell  with  you,  and  become  one  p. 
22.  will  consent  to  dwall  with  us,  to  be  one  p. 
Own  PEOPLE. 
Exod.  5.  16.  but  the  fault  is  in  thine  otcn  p. 
JLev.  21.  14.  he  shall  take  a  virgin  of  his  own  p. 

1  Chron.  17.21.  God  went  to  redeem  to  be  his  own  p. 

2  Chron.  25.  15.  that  could  not  deliver  their  own  p. 
Psal.  45.  10.  O  daughter,  forget  also  thy  own  p. 

78.  52.  but  made  his  own  p.  to  go  forth  like  sheep 
tsa.  13.  14.  shall  every  man  turn  to  his  own  p. 
Jer.  46.  16.  arise,  let  us  go  again  to  our  own  p. 

The  PEOPLE. 
Gen.  11.  6.  the  Lord  said,  behold  the  p.  is  one 
Exod.  .5.  4.  why  do  ye  let  the  p.  from  their  work  ? 

5.  behold,  the  p.  of  the  land  now  are  many 
12. 27.  and  the  p.  bowed  the  head  and  worshipped 

13.  ISrGod  led  £Ae;).||  14.5.  was  told  that  the  p.  tied 

14.  31.  the  p.  feared  Lord,  and  believed  the  Lord 
'  15. 14.  the  p.  shall  hear  and  be  afraid,  sorrosv  take 

16. till  thep. punS  over  which  thou  hast  purchased 
24.tAe p. murmured,  say'ng,  what  shall  we  drink? 

16.  30.  so  the  p.  rested  on  the  seventh  day 

17.  1.  there  was  no  water  for  the  p.  to  drink 
2.  t/iep.  did  chide  with  Moses,  JSTuin.  20.  3. 

6.  shall  come  water  outof  it,  that  ZAe  p. may  drink 

18.  19.  be  thou  for  the  p.  to  God-ward,  to  bring 
19. 9.  that  the  p.  may  hear  when  I  sjieak  with  thee 

17.  Moses  brought  forth  the  p.  out  of  the  camp 
21.  charge  t/iep.  1124.  let  not  «Aep.  break  through 

20.  18.  when  the  p.  saw  it,  they  stood  afar  off,  21. 
24.  2.  neither  shall  the  p.  go  up  with  him 

8.  Moses  look  blood  and  sprinkled  it  on  the  p. 
Lev. i).~. make  an  atonement  for  thyself  and  the  p. 

15.  the  sin-offering  for  the  p.  18. 1  16.  15. 

23.  blessed  thep.  \\  JVum.ll.l.thep.  complained 
A*um.  11.  2.  thep.  cried  to  Moses,  and  he  prayed 

13.  l'^.  and  see  thep.  that  dwelleth  therein 
28.  thep.  be  strong  |1  30.  Caleb  stilled  the  p. 

14.  1.  the  p.  wept  that  night  ||  39.  thep.  mourned 

21.  5.  t/ie  p.  spake  against  God  and  against  Moses 
23.  9.  lo,  the  p.  shall  dwell  alone,  not  reckoned 

24.  bi'hold,  the  p.  shall  rise  up  as  a  great  lion 
Deut.  4.10.  the  Lord  said,  gather  me  thep.  together 

18.  3.  this  ahull  he  the  priest's  due  from  the  p. 
33.3.  yea,  he  loved  thep.  ||  17.  ho  shall  push  thep. 

19.  Ihey  shall  call  the  p.  to  the  mountain 
Josh.  4.  10.  and  the  p.  hasted  and  passed  over 

6.  20.  so  thep.  sliouied  1|  24.  28.  let  the  p.  depart 
Juds.l.^.thep.  that  are  with  thee  are  too  many,  4. 
9.  32.  up  Ihou,  and  the  p.  that  are  with  thee 

1  Sam.  2.  13.  the  priest's  custom  with  thep.  was 
4.  4.  go  thep.  sent  to  Shiloh  to  bring  the  ark 
6. 6. did  they  not  let  thep.  go,  and  Ihey  departed 

8.  19.  the  p.  refused  to  obey  the  voice  of  Samuel 

9.  13.  for  the  p.  will  not  eat  until  he  come 

14.  45.  the  p.  said  to  Sanl,  shall  Jonathan  die?  so 

tliep.  rescued  Jonathan,  that  he  died  not 

15.  15.  for  thep.  spared  the  best  of  the  sheep 
21.  but  the  p.  took  of  the  spoil  sheep  and  oxen 

17.  27.  the  p.  answered  after  this  maimer,  30. 
30.6.Dav, distressed, for  t/tcp. spake  of  stoning  him 

2  Sam.  I.  4.  that  the  p.  arc  fled  from  the  battle 
14.  15.  it  is  because  the  p.  nave  made  me  afraid 

435 


PEO 

2  Sam.  15.  12.  for  the  p.  increased  with  Absalom 
IKings  1.40.and  tAey  .piped  with  pipes  and  rejoiced 
12.  30.  for  thep.  went  to  worship  before  the  one 
16. 22.  the  p.  that  followed  Omri  prevailed  against 
thep.  that  followed  Tibni,  son  of  Ginath 
18.  21.  and  the  p.  answered  him  not  a  word 
2  A'lHFS  4.41.  pour  out  for  the  p.  that  they  may  eat 
^43^he  said,  give  the  p.  that  they  may  eat 
7.  17.  and  thep.  trode  upon  him  in  the  gate 
11.17.  made  a  covenant  between  king  and  the  p 

12.  3.  as  yet  the  p.  did  sacrifice,  14.  4.  |  15.  4,  35. 
18.  36.  the  p.  held  their  peace,  and  answered  not 
22.  1.3.  inquire  of  the  Lord  fur  me  and  for  the  p. 

2  Chr.  12.  3.  the  p.  were  without  number  that  came 
20.  33.  as  yet  t/ie  p.  had  not  prepared,  30.  3. 
27.  2.  and  thep.  di<l  yet  corruptly 

30.  20.  Ld.  hearkened  to  Hezek.  and  healed  thep. 

31.  10.  since  the  p.  began  to  bring  offerings 
32.8.  thep.  rested  on  the  words  of  Hezekiah 
36.  14.  and  the  p.  transgressed  very  much 

Ezra  10.  13.  but  the  p.  are  many,  and  it  is  rain 
JVeA.  4.  6.  for  the  p.  had  a  mind  to  work  ' 

5.  13.  and  the  p.  did  according  to  this  promise 

7.  4.  city  was  large,  but  thep.  were  few  therein 

8.  7.  and  the  p.  stood  in  their  place 

16.  so  the  p.  went  and  brought  palm-branches 
11.  2.  the  p.  blessed  all  that  offered  willingly 

Esth.  3.  6.  they  had  shewed  him  thep.  of  Mordecai 
11.  the  p.  also,  to  do  with  them  asscemeth  to  thee 

4.  11.  thep.  of  the  king's  provinces  do  know 
.fob  12.  2.  Job  said,  no  doubt  but  ye  are  the  p. 

34.  30.  hypocrite  reign  not,  lest  tAe  p.  be  ensnared 
Psal.  2.  1.  why  do  tlte p.  imagine  a  vain  thing? 

33.  12.  blessed  are  thep.  whom  he  hath  chosen 

44.  2.  we  heard,  how  thou  didst  afflict  thep. 

45.  5.  arrows,  whereby  the  p.  fall  under  thee 

17.  therefore  shall  the  p.  praise  thee  for  ever 
56.  7.  in  thine  anger  cast  down  the  p.  O  God 
67.  3.  let  thep.  praise  thee,  O  God,  5. 
89. 15.  blessed  is  thep.  that  know  the  joyful  sound 

95.  7.  and  we  are  thep.  of  his  pasture 

96.  13.  he  shall  judge  the  p.  with  his  truth 

98.  9.  and  he  shall  judge  the  p.  with  equity 

99.  1.  the  Lord  reigneth,  let  the  p.  tremble 
105.  1.  make  known  his  deeds  among  the  p. 

Prov.  11.  14.  where  no  counsel  is  thep.  fall 
26.  withholds  corn,  tAe;;.  shall  curse  him, 24.  24. 

29.  2.  in  authority,  the  p.  rejoiced,  thep.  mourn 

18.  where  there  is  no  vision,  tAe  p.  perish 
fsa.'.i.5.  thep.  shall  be  oppressed,  every  one  by  ano. 

9.  2.  tAep.  that  walked  in  darknrss  have  seen  light 

13.  the  p.  turneth  not  to  him  thai  srnitelh  them 

19.  and  the  p.  shall  be  as  the  fuel  of  the  fire 

10.  6.  and  against  the  p.  of  my  wrath  will  I  give 
14.  2.  and  the  p.  shall  take  them  and  bring  them 
24.  2.  it  shall  be  as  with  the  p.  so  with  the  priest 

30.  19.  for  the  p.  shall  dwell  in  Zinn  at  Jerusalem 

33.  24.  the  p.  shall  be  forgiven  their  iniquity 

34.  5.  my  sword  shall  come  on  the  p.  of  my  curse 
40.  7.  surely  iAc  p.  is  grass,  the  grass  withereth 
51.  7.  the  p.  in  whose  heart  is  my  law,  fear  yo  not 
63.  6.  1  will  tread  do^/n  tAe  p.  in  mine  anger 

18.  thep.  of  thy  holiness  have  possessed  it 
/er.  23.34.  tAep.thatshall  say,  the  burthen  of  Lord 

31.  2.  thep.  which  were  left  of  sword  found  grace 
.37.4.Jcrem!ah  came  in  and  went  out  among  thep. 

39.  14.  carry  him  home,  so  he  dwelt  among  thep. 

40.  5.  go  hack  and  dwell  with  him  among  iJie p.  6. 
48. 46. woe  to  lhec,0  Moab,  t.p.of  Chemosh  perish 
51.58.and  ihep.  shall  labour  in  vain,  and  be  weary 

Kzck.  11.  17.  1  will  even  gather  you  from  the  p. 
20.  34.  I  will  bring  you  out  from  the  p.  34.  13. 
25.  7.  and  1  will  cut  thee  off  from  tAe  p. 
26.20.  will  bring  thee  down  with  tAcp.  ofold  time 
33.  6.  see  sword  come,  and  thep.  be  not  warned 
31.  and  they  come  unto  thee  as  tAe  p.  comcth 
36.  20.  they  said,  these  are  tAe  p.  of  the  Lord 
39.  4.  thou  shalt  fall,  and  tAe  p.  that  is  with  thee 
42.14.  approach  to  those  things  which  are  for  tAcp. 
44.  U.  they  shall  slay  the  sacrifice  for  tAe  p. 

19.  shall  not  sanctify  thep.  with  their  garments 
Da7i.  9.  26.  tAe  p.  of  the  prince  that  shall  come 

II.  32.  tAcp.  that  know  their  God  shall  he  stron, 
Uos.  4.14.  tAe  p.  that  doth  not  understand,  shall  fall 

10.  5.  for  tAe  p.  thereof  shall  mourn  over  it 
10.  and  tAe  p.  shall  be  gathered  against  them 
.Toel  2.  6.  before  them  tAep.  shall  be  much  pained 
.^mos  1.  5.  tAcp.  of  Syria  shall  go  into  captivity 

3. 6.  shall  trumpet  be  blown,  and  thep.  not  afraid? 
Jonah  3.  5.  so  thep.  of  Nineveh  believed  God 
Hab.i.  13.  that  tAcp.  shall  labour  in  the  fire,  and 
thep.  shall  weary  them.sclves  for  very  vanity 
ZepA.  2. 10.  magnifiedlhemselvesag.  tAcp.  of  Lord 
Hag.  1.  12.  and  (Ac  p.  did  fear  before  the  Lord 
^Vrt/.l. 4.  tAe  p. against  whom  Lord  hath  indignation 
Mat.  4.  16.  tAcp.  that  sat  in  darkness  saw  light 

21.  26.  if  we  shall  say,  of  men,  we  fear  the  p.  for 
all  hold  John  as  a  prophet,  Mark  11.  32. 
T.uke  1.  21.  and  tAe  p.  waited  for  Zacharias 

3. 15.  ai  thep.  were  in  expaclat.  and  all  men  mused 


PEO 

Lukei.A'i.thep.  sought  him  ||  5.1.  thep.  prMsed  oa 
8.  40.  when  returned,  tAcp.  gladly  received  him 
9. 18.  he  asked  them,  whom  say  tAcp.  that  I  am' 
20.  19.  feared  tAcp.  22.  2. 1|  23. 5.  slirieth  up  thep 
23.14.  brought  this  man,  one  that  pervertelh  tAep. 

JoAn  6.24. when  tAcp.saw  that  Jesus  wusnot  there 
7.  12.  others  said,  nay,  but  he  deceiveth  tAcp. 
11.  .50.  that  one  man  should  die  for  tAep.  18. 14. 

.lets  5.  13.  but  tAcp.  magnified  them 
8.6.tAcp.with  one  accordgaveheed  to  tho^  things 
12. 22.  tAcp.  gave  shout,  saying,  it  is  voice  of  God 
14.  11.  and  when  tAe  p.  saw  what  Paul  had  done 

18.  with  these  sayings  scarce  restrained  they  l.p. 
19._who  persuaded  tAcp.  and  stoned  Paul 

26. 17.  delivering  thee  from  tAep.  and  the  Gentiles 

28. 17.  though  1  committed  noiliing  against  tAe  p 
Heb.  5.  3.  as  for  tAcp.  so  also  for  himself,  7.  a". 

7.  11.  for  under  it  tAep.  received  the  law 
13. 12  that  he  might  sanctify  tAe  p.  with  his  blood 
■Jude  5.  how  that  the  Lord  having  saved  tAcp. 

This  PEOPLE. 

Exod.  3.  21.  I  will  give  tAi's  p.  favour  in  sight  of 

5.  22.  why  hast  thou  so  evil  entreated  this  p. 1 

23.  for  Pharaoh  hath  done  evil  to  this  p. 

17.4. Moses  critd,saying,  what  shall  I  do  to  this  p.? 

18. 18.  thou  wilt  wear  away,  both  thou  and  tAi'^p. 
23.  all  this  p.  shall  also  go  to  their  place  in  peace 

32.9.1  have  seen  tAisp.||21.  what  did  thisp.lu  ihue 
31.  oh,  this  p.  have  sinned  a  great  sin 

33.  12.  see,  thou  savest  to  me,  bring  up  this  p. 
JVim.  11.11.  layest  the  burden  of  all  (Ai;*  p.  on  me 
12.  haTe  I  conceiv.all  tliisp.?  ||  13.  flesh  to  this  p. 
14.  I  am  not  able  to  bear  all  this  p.  alone 

14.11. Lord  said,  how  long  will  tAi*  p. provoke  met 
14.  they  heard  that  thou  art  among  this  p. 
1.5.  if  thou  shalt  kill  all  tAi>  p.  as  one  man 
16.  was  not  able  to  bring  this  p.  into  the  land 

19.  pardon  tAis  p.  as  thou  hast  forgiven  tAi>p 

21.  2.  if  thou  wilt  indeed  deliver  this  p. 

22.  6.  come  now,  I  pray  thee,  curse  this  p.  17. 
24.  14.  what  tAisp.  shall  do  to  thy  people 

32.  15.  and  ye  shall  destroy  all  this  p. 
Deut.  3.  28.  Joshua  shall  go  over  before  tAi>  p. 

5.  28.  I  have  heard  voice  of  the  words  of  this  p. 
9.  13.  the  Lord  spake,  saying,  I  have  seen  this  p. 
27.  look  not  to  the  stubbornness  of  this  p. 
31.  7.  be  slrong,  for  thou  must  go  with  this  p. 
16.  this  p.  will  rise  U]>  and  go  whoring  after  gods 
.fosh.  I.  6.  to  this  p.  thou  shalt  divide  the  land 
Judg.  2.  20.  because  this  p.  have  transgressed 
9.  29.  would  to  God  this  p.  were  under  my  hand 
38.  is  not  this  the  p.  thou  hast  despised  ?  go  out 

1  Sam.  2.  23.  I  hear  of  your  evil  doings  by  this  p. 

2  Sam.  16.  18.  but  whom  Lord  and  this  p.  choose 

1  Kings  12. 6.  that  I  may  ans  this  p.  9. 2  CAr.10.6,9. 
7.  if  thou  will  be  a  servant  to  this  p.  this  day 
27.iftAi>p.go  up  to  do  sacrifice  at  Jerusalem, then 

the  heart  oft.  p.  shall  turn  again  to  Rehoboam 
14.  2.  who  told  me  that  I  should  be  king  over  f.p. 
18.  37.  hear  me,  O  Lord,  that  this  p.  may  know 

2  Kings  G  18.  I  pray,  smile  this  p.  with  blindness 
2  C'Ar.l.  10. 1  may  go  out  and  come  in  before  tAisp. 
JVcA.  5.  18.  the  bondage  was  heavy  on  this  p. 

19.  according  to  all  that  1  have  done  for  this  p. 
fsa.  6. 9.  go  and  tell  this  p.  hear  ye  indeed,  but  not 

10.  make  the  heart  of  this  p.  fat,  ears  heavy,  and 
shut  their  eyes,  Mat.  13.  15.  .^cts  28.  26,  27. 

8.  6.  this  p.  refuseth  the  waters  of  Shiloah 

11.  I  should  not  walk  in  the  way  of  this  p. 

12.  lo  whom  this  p.  shall  say,  a  confederacy 

9.  16.  the  leaders  of  this  p.  cause  them  to  err 
23.  13.  tAe.9  p.  was  not  till  the  Assyrian  founded  it 

28.  11.  with  another  tongue  will  speak  to  this  p. 
14.  hear,  ye  scornful  men,  that  rule  this  p. 

29.  13.  tAi.s  p.  draw  near  me  with  their  mouth 
14.  lo  do  a  marvellous  work  among  this  p. 

42.  22.  but  tAi>is  a  p.  robbed  and  spoiled 

43.  21.  (A(s  p.  have  I  formed  for  myself 
Jer.  4.  10.  Ihou  hast  greatly  deceived  this  p. 

5.  14.  will  make  my  words  fire,  and  this  p.  wood 

23.  but  this  p.  hath  a  revolting  heart 

6.  19.  behold,  I  will  bring  evil  on  this  p. 
21.  I  will  lay  sluiiibling-'blocks  before  this  p. 

7.  16.  pray  not  thou  for  this  p.  11.  14.  |  14.  11. 

33.  carcases  of  this  p.  meat  for  fowls  of  heaven 

8.  5.  why  is  tAi>  p.  of  Jerusalem  slidden  back? 

9.  15.  I  will  feed  even  this  p.  with  wormwood 
13.  10.  this  evil  p.  who  refuse  to  hear  my  wordl 

15.  1.  yet  my  mind  could  not  be  toward  this  p. 

16.  5.  I  have  taken  away  my  peace  from  this  p. 
19.  11.  even  so  will  I  break  this  p.  and  this  city 
23.  32.  they  shall  not  profit  this  p.  at  all 

33.  and  when  this  p.  shall  ask  thi'e,  saying 

28.  1.5.  Ihou  mnkest  this  p.  to  trust  in  a  lie 

29.  32.  shall  not  have  a  man  to  dwell  among  t.p, 
.32.  42.  brought  all  this  great  evil  upon  »Ais  p. 
.3.3.  24.  consideresl  not  what  this  p.  have  spoksa 
3.5.  16.  but  this  p.  have  not  hearkened  unto  me 
36.7.  great  is  ihe  anger  pronounced  against  tAi#^ 
37.  18.  what  have  I  offended  againit  thisf  t 


P£0 

^e»-.33.4.  this  man  scf  keth  not  the  welfare  of  this  p. 

Mic.  i.  1 1.  he  Bhall  be  the  prophet  o(  ikis  p. 

Hav.  1.  !i.  this  p.  say,  the  time  is  nol  come 
'2.  14.  ilaggai  Baid,  so  is  tfiis  p.  before  nic 

Zech.  8.  G.  in  the  eyes  of  the  remnant  of  this  p. 
11.  I  will  not  be  to  this  p.  as  in  former  days 
12. 1  will  cause  the  remnant  of  tAis  p.  to  possess 

Mut.l').ii.  this  p.  iiia.v,'ulh  nigh  with  their  inoulh 

Mark  T.  G.  this  p.  Iiotjourulh  me  with  their  lips 

Luke  y.  13.  except  we  should  buy  meat  for  this  p. 

21.  23.  for  there  shall  be  wralh  upon  this  p. 
John  7.  49.  but  this  p.  who  kiioweth  not  the  law 
.icts  13.  17.  the  God  o(  this  p.  chose  our  fathers 

1  Cor.  14.21.  with  other  lips  I  will  speak  to  this  p. 

Thy  PEOI'LE. 
Exod.  5.  23.  neither  hast  thou  delivered  thy  p. 

8.  3.  frogs  on  thy  p.  4.||21.  swarms  of  Hies  on  thy  p. 

U.  14.  for  I  will  send  all  my  plagues  on  thy  p. 

15.  thai  I  may  smite  thee  and  <A(/p.  with  pestilen. 
15.  IG.  they  shall  besiill,  till  th^p.  pass  over,  O  L. 

22.  28.  nor  shult  curse  ruler  ol  thy  p.  .'lct^23.  5. 

23.  11.  let  it  rest,  that  the  poor  of  thy  p.  may  eat 

33.  13.  and  consider  that  this  nation  is  thy  p. 

16.  I  and  thy  p.  have  found  grace  in  thy  sight 

34.  10.  I  make  a  covenant  before  all  thy  p. 
/>ei>.]y.  IG.  shalt  not  go  as  tale-bearer  among  thy  p. 
JWtm. 5.21. make  thee  a  curse  and  oath  amongtAyp. 

24. 14.  what  this  peo.  shall  do  thy  p.  in  latter  days 
27.13.shalt  be  gathered  to  thy  p.  31.2.  /Jcur..32.50. 

Deut.  9.  12.  for  thy  p.  have  corrujiled  themselves 

2G.  destroy  nolthy  p.  \\  Ilulh  1.  IG.  thyp.  my  peo. 

29.yet  Ihey  arc  (Ay  p. and  inheritance,  JVeh.  1. 10. 
Ruth  1.  10.  we  will  return  with  thee  to  thy  p. 
2  Sam.  7.  23.  what  nation  like  thyp.?  1  Chr.  17.  21. 

before  thyp.  which  thou  reileemedst  from  Egypt 
1  Kinjss  3.  tf.  thy  servant  is  in  the  inidsl  of  thy  p. 

Q.uiiderstanding  heart  to  judge  thy  p. 2  Chr.  1.10. 

6.  44.  \S  thy  p.  go  out  to  battle,  anil  shall  pray 
SO.forgivc  thyp.  that  have  sinned,  2  CAr.G.34,:i9. 
51.  they  be  Uiy  p.  \\  20.  42.  £A//  p.  for  his  people 

^2.  4.  he  said,  1  am  as  thou  art,  my  people  as  thy 

p.  my  hordes  as  thy  horses,  2  Ktitgs  3.  7. 

]  Chron.  21.  17.  but  let  not  thy  hand  be  on  thy  p. 

29.  18.  keep  this  in  the  thoughts  of  heart  of  thy  p. 

a  Chron.  21.  14.  with  a  plague  will  the  Lord  smite 

thy  p.  Ihy  children,  thy  wives,  and  thy  goods 

Psai.3. 8.  salvation  to  L.  thy  blessing  is  upon  tityp. 

28. 9.  save  thy  j>.  and  bless  thine  inherit.  Jer.  31.  7. 
44.  12.  thou  sellcst  thy  p.  for  nought 

*'.60.  3.  thou  hast  shewed  thy  p.  hard  things 
68.  7.  when  thou  wenlest  forth  before  thy  p. 
72.  2.  he  shall  judge  thy  p.  with  righteousness 

77. 15.  thou  hast  with  thine  arm  redeemed  thyp. 
2O.1I10U  leddest  (Ayp.asHock  hyMosesandAaron 

79.  13.  so  we  thy  p.  will  give  thee  thanks 
80. 4.  how  long  be  angry  against  prayer  of  (Ay  p.? 
83.3.  they  have  taken  crafty  counsel  against  thyp. 
85.  2.  thou  hast  forgiven  the  iniijuily  of  thy  p. 
G.  revive  us,  that  thyp.  may  rejoice  in  thee 
94.  5.  they  break  in  pieces  (Ay  p.  O  Lord 
106.  4.  the  favour  (hat  thou  bearest  to  thyp. 
110.  3.  (Ay  p.  shall  be  willing  in  the  day  of  power 
Isa.  2.  6.  thert-fore  thou  hast  forsaken  thyp. 

7.  17.  the  Lord  shall  bring  on  thee  and  thy  p.  days 
14.  20.  thou  hast  destroyed  thy  hind  and  (Ay;). 
CO.  21.  (Ay  p.  shall  be  all  righteous,  shall  inherit 
63.14.  so  didst  thou  lead  thy  p.  \\  C4.9.wc  are  t/typ 

Jer.  22.  2.  hear,  thou  and  thy  p.  that  enter  in 
27. 13.  why  will  ye  die,  thou  and  thy  p.  by  sword? 

Eiek.  3.  11.  get  thee  to  (Ay  ;j.  and  speak  to  them 
13.  17.  set  thy  face  against  the  daughters  of  thy  p. 
20.  II.  he  shall  slay  (Ay  p.  with  the  sword 
33.  2.  speak  to  the  children  of  thy  p.  and  say,  12. 

17.  yel  children  of  thy  p.  say,  way  is  not  equal 
30.  the  children  of  thy  p.  still  are  talking 

37.  18.  when  the  children  of  (Ay  p.  shall  speak 
Dan.  9.  IG.  (Ay  p.  are  become  a  reproach  to  all 
19.  thy  city  and  (Ay  p.  are  called  by  thy  name 
24.  pevenly  weeks  are  determined  upon  thy  p. 
10.  M.  to  underHtand  what  shall  befall  thy  p. 
12.1.  .Michael,  who  standeth  for  the  children  of  (Ay 
p.  and  at  that  time  thy  p.  shalt  be  delivered 
J/oi.A.i.  thy  p.  as  llicy  ihalstiivo  with  the  priest 
10.  14.  idiall  a  tuimilt  arise  among  (Ay  p.         ' 
Joel 2.  17.  spare  thyp.  ||  Mic.  7.  14.  feed  thyp. 
.Vah.  3.  13.  thy  p.  in  iho  midst  of  thee  are  women 

I>8.  thy  p.  is  scattered  on  the  mountains 
Hab.2. 13.  thou  wontrst  forth  for  salvation  of  (Ayp. 

To  or  unto  tka  PEOPLE. 
Kiod.  4.  IG.  and  liu  shall  bi'  siiokeaman  to  thr,  p. 
18.  14.  when  Jcthro  saw  nil  that  he  did  to  the  p. 
what  is  this  thing  that  thou  docsl  to  the  p.? 
jn.l0.go(«  (Ac 7;.||12.thou  shall  sot  hoim(ls(u(/ir;). 
14.  Moses  wont  down  from  niount  to  the  p.  2.5. 
Deut.  20.  2.  thai  the  prifsl  shall  spi'ak  to  the  p. 

5.  and  the  olliiv^rs  shall  speak  In  thr  p.  8. 
J«(/^.  8. 5.  give,  I  pray,  loaves  of  brcaJ  (u  the  p. 

18.10.  when  yc  go,  yi;  shall  come  tun  p.  Kecnre,27. 
Rufh  2.  1 1,  and  art  com"  In  a  p.  Ihou  kiiowiv^t  nol 
1  6'am.  8.  10.  3amuoI  loM  all  tha  wurJ<  to  the  p. 

436 


PER 

1  5am.  26. 7.  David  and  Abishai  camo  (0  the  p.  by 

14.  IJavid  cried  to  the  p.  and  to  Abncr,  saying 
30.21.  when  David  came  near  totlie  p.  he  saluted 

2  ^am.  24.  3.  now  the  Lord  thy  God  add  to  the  p. 

1  Kings  12.  15.  the  king  hearkened  not  to  the  p. 

18.  21.  Elijah  came  to  the  p.  and  said,  how  long 

19.  21.  Elisha  gave  to  the  p.  and  they  did  eat 

2  KiniTs  4.  42.  he  said,  give  to  p.  that  they  may  eat 
11.  13.  Athallah  came  to  the  p.  2  Chron.  23.  12, 


PER 

John  12.  19.  Phar.  said,  p.  ye  prevail  nothio; 

Jicts  8.  23.  \  p.  thou  art  in  the  gall  of  bitterness 
10.34.of  a  truth  I  p.  God  is  no  respecter  of  personf 
17.  22.  I  p.  in  all  things  ye  are  loo  superstitious 

2  Cor.  7.  8.  I  p.  the  same  epistle  made  you  sorry 

1  John  3.  IG.  herebv  p.  we  the  love  of  God 
PEUCEIVED. 

Gen.  19.  33.  he  p.  not  when  she  lay  down,  35. 

Judg.  G.  22.  when  Gideon  p.  he  was  an  angel 


1  Chron.  10.9.  Philisl.  sent  to  carry  tidings  to  thep.   1  Sam.  3.  8.  Eli  p.  that  Lord  had  called  the  child 


2  Chrun.  35. 7.  Josiah  gave  to  the  p.  lambs  and  kid 

8.  his  princes  gave  willingly  to  the.  p.  to  priests 

JVtA.  4.22.  at  Ihe  same  time  said  I  to  thep.  lodge 

5.  15.  former  governors  were  chargeable  to  the  p. 
Psal.  9.  8.  he  shall  minister  judgment  to  the  p. 

72.  3.  the  mountains  shall  bring  peace  to  the  p. 
Isa.  42.  5.  he  that  giveth  breath  to  the  p.  upon  it 

49.  22.  and  I  will  set  up  my  standard  tu  the  p. 

55.  4.  behold,  I  have  given  him  for  a  witness  to 
thep.  a  leader  and  commander  to  thep. 
Eick.  24.  18.  so  I  spake  to  thep.  in  the  morning 
Dan.  7. 27.  kingdom  be  given  to  the  p.  of  the  saints 
.loci  3.  8.  they  shall  sell  them  to  the  p.  far  off 
//«i.3.16.  when  he  Cometh  up  (o(.  p.  lie  will  invade 
'/.iph.  3.  9.  I  will  turn  to  thep.  a  pure  language 
//«o-.1.13.theii spake  Hag.theL.'s message  (o(Ae p. 
Mat.  12.  46.  while  he  yet  talked  to  the  p.  behold 

27.  15.  was  wont  to  release  to  the  p.  a  prisoner 
/.«Ae7.24.he  began  tosjwak  («(Acp.concern.Johii 
.ict.<  4. 1.  as  they  spake  to  the  p.  the  priests  came 

5.  20.  speak  in  the  temple  to  the  p.  all  the  words 

10. 2.  which  gave  alms  to  thep.  and  prayed  to  God 
42.  and  he  commanded  us  to  preach  to  thep. 

12.  4.  intending  to  bring  Peter  forth  to  the  p. 

13.31.  seen  of  them  who  are  his  witnesses  tu  thep. 

17.  5.  the  Jews  sought  to  bring  them  out  to  the  p. 

19.  30.  when  Paul  would  have  entered  in  to  t/ie  p. 
33.  and  would  have  made  his  defence  to  the  p. 

21. 39. 1  beseech  thee  sutTer  ine  to  sjieak  to  the  p. 
40.  Paul  beckoned  wiih  the  hand  to  the  p. 
20. 23.Christ6hould  siitrer,;in(l  shew  light  (»  (Aep. 

PEOPLES. 
Uev.  10.  11.  thou  must  [irophesy  before  many  p. 
17.  15.  waters  thou  sawest  are  p.  and  multitudes 

PERADVENTURE. 
Gen.  18.  24.  p.  there  be  fifty  righteous  within  city 

28.  p.  there  shall  lack  five  of  the  fifty  righteous 

29.  p.  there  be  forty  ||  30.  thirty  ||  31.  twenty 
32.  1  will  speak  this  on'-e,  p.  ten  shall  be  found 

24.  5.  p.  Ihe  woman  will  not  be  willing,  39. 
27.  12.  Jacob  said,  my  father  p.  will  U:v\  me 
31. 31. p.  thou  wouldesttakeby  force  Ihy  daughters 
■32.  20. 1  will  see  his  face,  pj  he  will  accept  of  me 

42.  4.  for  he  said,  lest  p.  mischief  befall  him 

43.  12.  carry  it  again,  p.  it  was  an  oversight 

44.  34.  lest  p.  I  see  evil  shall  come  on  my  father 
.50. 15.  Joseph  will  p.  hate  us,  and  will  requite  us 

Eiud.  13.17.  lest  p.  the  people  repent  when  see  war 
32.  30.  p.  I  shall  make  an  atonement  for  your  sin 

.\'um.  22.  6.  curse  this  people,  p.  I  shall  prevail,  11. 
23.  3.  p.  the  Lord  will  come  to  meet  me 
27.  p.  it  will  please  God  that  thou  curse  me  them 

.Tosh.  9.  7.  men  of  Israel  said,  p.  ye  dwell  among  us 

1  .Suni.fi.  5.  p.  he  will  lighten  his  hand  from  off  you 
9.  6.  p.  he  can  show  us  our  way  thai  we  should  go 

1  Kings  18.  5.  p.  wo  may  find  grass  to  save  hoisoi 
27.  or  p.  he  sleepelh,  and  must  be  awaked 

20.  31.  go  to  Iho  king,  p.  he  will  save  thy  life 

2  Kings  2.  16.  lest  p.  Spirit  of  Lord  halh  cast  hirr 
./(•r.20. 10.  watched  for  halting,  p.  he  will  be  enticed 
Rum.  5.1.  p.  for  a  good  man  some  would  dare  to  die 
2  Tim.  2.  25.  p.  God  will  ^'ive  them  repentance 

PEfeCElVE 

Signifies,  [1]  To  discnorr,  or  find  out, 2Sam.  14. 1. 
Jer.  38.  27.  [2]  Spiritually  to  discern  and  con- 
sider things,  so  as  to  make  a  good  use  and  im- 
pri/vcme7it  uf  them,  Dctil.20.i.  [3]  To  know, 
2  Kings  4.9. 

He  piisselh  on,  but  I  perceive  him  not,  .Tob  9.  11. 
God  continues  to  loork  by  his  providence  in 
icays  of  mercy  or  judgment:  but  though  I  see 
the  effects,  /cannot  understand  the  causes  or 
grounds  of  his  actions,  because  they  are  in- 
comprehensible by  tne,  or  by  any  other  man. 

Deut.  29. 4.  Lord  hath  not  given  you  a  heart  to  p. 

.Tosh.  22.  31.  this  day  we  p.  the  f^ord  is  among  us 

1  Sam.  12.  17.  that  ye  may  p.  your  wickedness 
'2Sanl.V^.('■t.lp.  ifAhsaloin  hail  lived,  and  we  died 

2  Kinirs  i.  9.  I  p.  that  this  is  a  holy  man  of  God 
./«4  9.  II.  but  I  p.  him  not  ||  23.  8.  I  cannot  p.  him 
Prov.  1.  2.  to  p.  the  words  of  understanding 
Eccl.  3.  22.  I  p.  thai  there  is  nothing  bettor  than 
fsa.  fi.  9.  and  see  ye  indeed,  lint  p.  not 

33.  lil.  of  n  deeper  speech  than  Ihou  canst  p. 
jl/ij(.I3.14.shall  hear  and  not  iindersland,  seeing.ve 
shall  see,  and  shall  nol  p.  Marki.]'i..ncts-2f>.^6. 
.Markl.  )8.  doyenotp.thal  whatsoeverenterethin 

^.  17.  he  said,  p.  yo  not  yet,  neither  understand? 
T.nke  8.  40.  I  p.  lliM  virtue  is  gone  out  of  mo 
John  l.l9.wiiinan  8aitli,Ip.  Ihul  thou  art  a  prophet 


2H.14.and  Saul  p.  that  it  was  Samuel,  and  stooped 
2  Sam.  5.  12.  and  David  p.  thai  the  Lord  had  esta- 
blished him  king  over  Israel,  1  Chron.U.% 

12.  19.  David  p.  that  the  child  wa.s  dead 

14.  1.  Joab  p.  the  king's  heart  was  lo  Absalom 
1  Kings'ii.  33.  when  the  captains  of  rhariolsp.  that 
it  was  not  king  of  Israel,  2  Chron.  18.  32. 
JWA.  6.  12.  lo,  1  p.  that  God  had  not  sent  him 
16.  they  p.  that  this  work  was  wrought  of  Gdd 

13. 10.  I  p.  portions  of  Leviles  had  not  been  given 
Esth.  4.  1.  when  Mordecaip.  all  that  was  done 
.Job  38.  18.  hast  thou  p.  the  breadth  of  the  earth  ? 
F.ccl.  I.  17.  I  p.  thai  this  also  is  vexalion  of  spirit 

2.  14.  I  myselfp.  thai  one  event  happenelh  lo  all 
/.'!a.G4.4.  norp.by  theear  what  God  hath  prepared 
.)er.  23.  18.  and  who  hath  p.  and  heard  his  word 

.38.  27.  they  left  off,  for  the  matter  wa^ot  p. 
Mat.  21.  45.  p.  that  he  spake  of  them,  J.vke'iO.  19. 

22.  18.  but  Jesus  p.  their  wickedness  and  said 
.-W«rA2.8  Jes.p.in  spirit  thai  ihi'y  reasoned  among 
/^ukc  1.  22.  Ihey  p.  that  he  had  seen  a  vision 

5.  22.  but  when  Jesus  p.  iheir  thoughts 
9.  45.  the  saying  was  hid,  that  Ihey  p.  it  not 
20.23.  hut  he  p.  their  craftiness,  and  said  lo  them 
John  6.  15.  Jesus  p.  they  would  make  him  a  king 
.fJets  4.  13.  when  Ihey  p.  that  they  were  unlearned 

23.  G.  when  Paul  p.  that  one  pari  were  Pharisee* 
Gal.  2.  9.  when  James  p.  the  grace  given  to  me 

PERUEIVESr. 

Prov.  14.  7.  wlicn  thou  p.  nol  in  him  lips  of  know). 

An/teG.  41:bulp.  not  beam  that  is  in  thine  own  eye 
PERCEIVETH. 

,Tob  14.21.  are  brought  low,  but  hep.  it  nol  of  them 
3.3.  14.  God  speakelh  once,  yet  man  p.  it  not 

Prov.  31.  18.  she  p.  that  her  merchandise  is  good 
PERCEIVING. 

Mark  12.  28.  p.  that  he  had  answered  them  well 

AmAc  9.  47.  Je.siis  p.  Ihe  thought  of  their  heart 

.^cts  14.  9.  and  p.  he  had  faith  to  be  healed 
PERDITION 

Signifies,  Utter  ruin  or  destruction,  Rev.  17.  8. 
The  son  of  perdition.  Judas  ;'.*  culled  by  this 
name,  .lohn  17.  12.  because  [1]  Tfe  was  most 
worthy  to  be  destroyed  having  brought  himsclj 
into  a  state  of  destruction.  [2]  J/e  was  or- 
dained and  appointed  by  God  to  destruction 
for  his  sins.  [3]  I/e  was  one,  who  by  reason 
of  the  horridness  of  his  crime,  is  mentioned 
as  the  most  dreadful  instance  of.  God's  irre- 
vocable doom  to  eternal  perdition.  Antichrist 
is  likewise  called  by  this  name,  2  Thess.  2.  3. 
because  he  brings  destruction  upon  others,  and 
is  himself  devoted  to  perdition. 

■Tolin  17.  12.  none  of  them  lost  but  the  son  of  p. 

Phil.  1. 28.  which  is  lo  them  an  evident  token  of  p. 

2  Thess.  2.  3.  that  man  of  sin  be  rcvealerl,  son  of  p. 

1  Tim.fy.  9.  which  drown  men  in  destruction  and  p. 
Heb.  10.  39.  are  not  of  them  who  draw  back  top. 

2  Pet.  3.  7.  day  of  judgment,  and  p.  of  ungodly  men 
Rev.  17.8.  beast  was  and  is  nol,  and  goeth  intop.  11 

11.  beast  is  eighth,  and  of  seven,  goeth  intop. 
PEREEOT 

Is  applied,  fl]  To  God.  who  is  absolutely  perfect, 
Mai.  5.  48.  fl  I  ]  Toth ings,  as  weight,  measure, 
<?■<-.  Deut.  2.5.  15.  [Ill]  To  man,  who  is  ac 
counted  so,  [I]  liy  Chrlst'srighteousness  being 
imputed.  Col.  1.  28.  [2]  Comparatively,  when 
compared  with  others  who  are  partial  in  their 
nbedienre  lo  God's  commands,  JohS."0.  |  9.  22. 
[3]  ./is  being  upright  and  sincere  in  heart,  and 
unblamenble  in  the  course  of  his  life.  Gen.  6.  9. 
I  17.  1.  [4]  .Is  carrying  himself  innoeei'lly  ana 
harmlessly  towards  his  enemies,  Psal.  64.  4.  [5 
.^s imitating  God,  in  loving  and  doing  good  Ic 
others,  Malfs.  48.  f6]  Jls  bring  joined  together 
in  judgment,  affections,  and  conversation,  lair- 
ing aside  all  factions  and  divisions,  2  Cor.  13 
II.  [7]  .Is  having  a  good  degree  of  under 
standing,  1  Cor.  i.  6. 

Gen.  6.  9.  Noah  was  p.  ||  17.  1.  and  he  thou  p. 

T.en.  22.  21.  Ihe  free-will-ofTering  slinll  hep. 

/lent.  18. 13.  Ihou  shalt  be  p.  with  the  Lord  ihy  G. 

2.5.  1.5.  Ihou  shall  have  a  p.  weieht,  a  p   measure 

1  .SrtOT.  14.  41.  foul  said  lo  Ihe  Lord.  L'ive  a  p.  lot 

2  .S,im.  22.  33.  ho  mnkelh  my  way  p.  PsnI.  18.  32. 
2  CAr.  4.  21.  lamps  and  longs  made  lie  of  p.  gold 
Ezra  7.  12.  Artax.  king  of  kin^s,  lo  Ezrn,  p.  penca 
./('(<  1.  1.  that  man  was  p.  and  upright,  8.  |  2.  3. 

8.  20.  God  will  nol  cast  away  a  p.  man 

9.  20.  if  I  say,  I  amp.  |1  21.  lliouyh  1  wore;i. 


PER 

fib  9.  22.  he  destroyetli  the  p.  and  the  wicked 

2i  3.  is  it  gain  to  liim,  tliou  makest  tliy  ways  p.?' 
Psal.  .'n.  37.  mark  the  p.  man,  his  end  is  peace 

64.  4.  that  they  may  shoot  in  secret  at  the/). 

101.  2.  I  will  behave  myself  wisely  in  a  p.  way 
6.  he  that  walketh  in  up.  way  shall  serve  me 

119. 1 1.  blessed  are  the  p.  in  the  way 

13U.  22.  I  hate  them  witli/).  haired 
Prov.  2.  21.  and  the  p.  fhall  remain  in  it 

4. 18.  path  of  jusl  sliin^.h  more  and  more  lop.  day 

ll.o.r]ghttousIle^e  of  ilie  p.  shall  direct  his  way 
Isa.  26.  3.  thou  wilt  keep  him  in  p.  peace,  whose 
Ezek.  16.  H.  for  it  was^.  through  my  comeliness 

27.  3.  tliou  hast  said,  1  am  ol'p.  beauty 
11.  they  have  made  thy  beauty  p.  28.  12. 

28. 15.  lliou  wast  p.  in  thy  ways,  from  the  day 
JUal.  5.  43.  be  ye  p.  even  as  your  Father  is  p. 

19. 21.  if  lliou  will  bop.  go  and  sell  that  thou  hast 
JLukc  1.  3.  having  had  ^.  understanding  of  things 
John  17.  23.  that  they  may  be  made  p.  in  one 
jJcts  3.  16.  hath  given  him  this  p.  soundness 

22.  3.  taught  according  to  the  p.  manner  of  law 

24.  22.  having  more/),  knowledge  of  that  way 
Rom.  12.2.  may  prove  what  is  ihat  p.  will  of  God 

1  Cor.  2.  6.  S|ieak  wisdom  among  them  that  are  p. 
14.  t  20.  but  in  understanding  be  p. 

2  Cor.  ift  9.  my  strength  is  made  p.  in  weakness 
13.  n.be|).  be  of  good  comfort,  be  of  one  mind 

Gal.  3.  3.  begun  in  Spirit,  are  ye  madep.  by  flesh? 

Eph.i.  13.  till  wecometo;5.man,to  fulne.^s  of  C. 

Pkil.  3.  12.  not  as  though  I  were  already  p. 
15.  let  us,  as  many  as  be  p.  be  thus  minded 

Col.  1.  28.  we  may  present  every  man  p.  in  Christ 
4.  12.  may  stand/),  and  complete  in  will  of  God 

1  T/iess.  3.  10.  might  p.  which  is  lacking  in  your 

STiin.  3.  17.  that  the  man  of  God  may  be  p. 

Ifeb.  2.  10.  to  make  Captain  of  their  salvation  p. 
5-9.  being  made  p.  he  became  Author  of  salvation 
7.  19.  for  law  made  nothing  p.  but  bringing  in 
9.9.  could  not  make  him  that  did  the  service  p. 

11.  by  a  greater  and  morep.  tabernacle  not  made 
10.1.  la  w  can  never  make  the  comers  thereunto  p. 

11.  40.  they  without  us  should  not  be  made  p. 

12.  23.  and  to  the  spirits  of  jusl  men  made  p. 

13.  21.  God  make  you  p.  in  every  good  woik 
Jam.  1.  4.  but  let  palience  have  her  p.  work,  that 

ye  may  be  p.  and  entire,  wanting  nothing 
17.  every  good  andp.  gift  is  from  above 
25.  whoso  lookelh  into  the  p.  law  of  liberty 
Jam.  2.  22.  aud  by  works  was  faiih  made  p. 

3.  2.  if  any  olfend  not  In  word,  same  is  a  p.  man 
1  Pet.  5.  JO.  after  ye  have  suft'ered,  make  you  p. 

1  John  4.  17.  herein  is  our  love  made  p.  that  we 
IS.butp.  love  casteth  out  fear,  because  fear  hath 

torment;  he  that  feareili  is  not  madep.inlove 
Hce  Heart. 
Is  PERFECT. 
Dfut.  32.  4.  is  the  rock,  his  work  is  p.  his  wavs 

2  50)71.22.  31.  as  for  God,  his  way  is  p.  Psal.  13..30. 
Job  3t).  4.  he  that  is  p.  in  knowledge,  37.  IG. 
Psal.  19.  7.  law  of  the  Lord  is  p.  converting  soul 
Tsa.  18.5.  behold  the  harvest,  when  the  bud  is  p. 

42. 19.  who  is  blind  as  he  that  is  p.  and  blind  as 

the  Lord's  servant 

Jltat.  5.  48.  as  yom  Father  which  is  in  heaven  is  p. 

J.ukeb.in.uvaiy  one  that  isp.shall  be  as  his  master 

1  Cor.  13. 10.  when  that  v;hich  is  p.  is  come,  then 

PERFECTED. 

2  Chron.  8.  10.  so  the  house  of  God  was  /). 

24. 13.workm.  wrought,  and  work  wasp,  by  them 
Kzek.  27.  4.  thy  builders  have  p.  thy  beauty 
,fl/af.21.16.out  of  mouth  of  babrjs  thou  liastp. praise 
J^uke  0.  t  '10.  every  one  shall  be  p.  as  his  master 

13.  32.  and  the  third  day  I  shall  be  p. 
/fel).  7.  t28.  makelh  Son,  who  is  p.  for  evermore 

10.14.byone  otfering  he  hathp.  for  ever  sanctified 

1  John  2.  5.  in  him  verily  is  the  love  of  God  p. 

4. 12.  if  JVC  love  one  another,  his  love  is  p.  ia  us 
PERFECTING. 

2  Cor.  7.  1.  p.  holiness  in  the  fear  of  God 

£pA.  4. 12.  forp.  of  the  saints,  for  edifying  of  body 
PERFECTION 

Signifies,  [1]  The  highrst.  degree  or  greatest  ac- 
C'lmpUshinrnl.  of  a  thing.  Job  11.7,  Canst  thou 
find  out  the  Almighty  unto  perfection  ?  that  is, 
Canst  thou  knoin  him  and  his  counsels  per- 
fectlij?  Canst  tltou  thoroughly  understand 
tohai  he  aims  at  in  afflicting  tAr;?  [2]  FuN 
prnuith,  maturity,  or  ripeness,  Luke  8. 14.  [3] 
TAat  good  order  ichich  by  the  word  of  God  is 
settled  in  any  church,  when  alt  the  members 
thereof  keep  their  due  place,  and  perform  their 
office  duly,  2  Cor.  13.  0.  [4]  The  deep  myste- 
ries of  the  gospel,  or  greater  degrees  of  know- 
ledge and  grace,  Heb.  6.  1.  [5]  Justif  cation, 
fanctification,  aud  consequently  salvation, 
Heb.  7.  11. 

I  hive  seen  an  end  of  all  perfection,  Psal.  119. 

96.   /  have  observed  by  my  experience,  that  the 

greatest  and  most    perfect  accumplishments 

437 


PER 

and  enjoyments  in  this  world,  and  the  greatest 
glory  and  riches,  puiccr  and  wisdom,  are  too 
narrow  and  short-Uccd  to  make  men  happy. 
Job  J  1.7.  canst  ihou  find  out  the  Almighty  lop.? 

15.  29.  nor  shall  he  prolong  thep.  thereof  on  earth 

21.  t  23.  one  dielh  in  the  strength  of  his  p. 

28.  'i.  selteth  an  end  to  darkn.  he  search,  out  all  p. 
Ps«/.50.2.outof  Zion,  thep.of  beauty,  God shined 

119.96. 1  have  seen  an  end  ofp.  but  thy  command. 
fsa.  47.  9.  they  shall  come  upon  thee  in  their  p. 
/^a))i.2. 15.  the  city  that  men  call  thep.of  beauty 
Luke  8.  14.  are  choked,  and  bring  no  fruit  top. 
2  Cor.  13.  9.  and  this  also  we  wish,  even  your  p. 
Heb.  0. 1.  leaving  the  principles,  let  us  go  on  to  p. 

7.  11.  ifp.  were  by  the  Levitical  priesthood 

PERFECTLY. 
Jer.  23.  20.  in  the  latter  days  ye  shall  consider  it  p. 
jUat.l4.3(i.a3  many  .is  touched  were  niadep. whole 
j/cts  18.  26.  and  expounded  way  of  God  morep. 

23.  15.  ye  would  inquire  sometliing  more  p.  20. 
1  Cor.  1.  10.  but  be  p.  joined  together  in  same  mind 

1  '/'Acss.5.2.for  yourselves  knowp.  that  day  of  Ld. 

PERFECT,  l^erb. 
Psal.  138.  8.  the  Lord  will  p.  what  concerneth  me 

PERFECTNESS. 
Col.  3.  14.  put  on  charily,  which  is  the  bond  ofp. 

PERFORMANCE. 
Luke  1.  45.  fur  there  shall  be  a.  p.  of  those  things 

2  Cur.  8.  11.  so  may  be  a  p.  also  out  of  that  ye  have 

PERFORM 
Signifies,  [1]  To  put  in  ezecution,  Job  5.  12.     [2] 
To  fulfil  or  make  good,  Deut.  9.5.  Jer.  28.  0. 
[3]  To  grata  or  yiild  to,   Esth.  5.  8.     [4]  To 
keep  and  observe,  Psal.  119. 112.  [5]  To  finish, 
Phil.  i.fe. 
Gen.  26.  .3.  I  will  p.  the  oath  which  I  sware  to 
Abraham  thy  father,  Deut.  9.  5.  Luke  1.  72. 
Exod.  18. 18.  thou  art  not  able  top.  it  thyself  alone 
JVh))(.  4.  23.  all  that  enter  in  top.  the  service 
Deut.  4.  13.  his  covenant  he  commanded  you  to  p. 
23.  23.  that  which  is  gone  out  of  thy  lips  slialt  p. 
25.  5.  andp.  duty  of  a  luisband's  brother  to  her 
7.  he  will  not  p.  duly  of  my  husband's  brother 
Ruth  3.  13.  if  he  will  /).  the  part  of  a  kinsman 
lSa)7).3.12.in  thatday  I  willp.ag.  Eli  things  spoken 
2  .Sam.  14.  15.  that  the  king  will  p.  the  request 

1  Kings  6.  12.  then  I  will  p.  my  word  with  thee 
12.  15.  that  he  miglitp.  his  saying,  2  Chr.  10.  15. 

2  Ki7tgs  23.  3.  to  /).  the  words  of  this  covenant,  to 

keep  God's  commandments,  24.  2  Chr.  34. 31. 
Esth.  5.  8.  if  it  please  the  king  to  p.  my  request 
.fob  5.  12.  their  hands  cannot  p.  their  enterprise 
P.<a/.2I.l].  a  device  which  they  are  not  able  top. 
61.  8. 1  will  sing  praise,  tliiit  I  may  daily  p.  vows 
119.  10(5.  I  have  sworn,  and  I  will  p.  it,  to  kee|) 

112. 1  have  inclined  my  heart  lop.  thy  statutes 
Isa.  9.  7.  the  zeal  of  the  Lord  r)f  hosts  will  p.  this 
19.21. they  shall  pay  a  vow  to  the  Lord,  and  p.  it 
44.28.Cyrus  my  shejiherd  shallp.  all  my  pleasure 
.fer.  1.  12.  for  1  will  hasten  my  word  top.  it 
11.  5.  I  may  p.  the  oath  which  I  have  sworn 

28.  6.  Lord  p.  thy  words  thou  hast  prophesied 

29.  10.  I  will  p.  my  good  word  toward  yon,  33.14. 
44.25.  ye  will  surely  accomplish  and  p.  your  vows 

Eick.  12.  2.5.  I  will  say  the  word,  and  will  p.  it 
Mie.  7.  20.  thou  wiltp.  the  truth  to  Jacob 
J\^ah.^.  15.  keep  thy  solemn  fea.*ts,p.  thy  vows 
Jfat.  5.  33.  thon  shah  p.  to  the  Lord  thine  oaths 
Rom.  4.  21.  what  he  promised,  he  was  able  top. 
7.  18.  how  to  p.  that  which  is  good,  T  find  not 
2  Cor.  6.  11.  now  therefore  p.  the  doing  of  it 
P/ii7. 1.6.  he  willp.  it  until  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ 
PERFORMED. 

1  .Sam.  15. 11.  Saul  hath  not  n.  my  commandments 
13.  I  have  p.  the  comninndment  of  the  Lord 

2  Sam.  21. 14.  they  p.  all  that  the  king  commanded 
1  Kings  8.20.  Lord  hiith  p. his  word,  and  I  am  risen 

up  in  room  of  David,  2  Chr.  6.  10.  JVcb.  9.  8. 
Esth.  1.15.  Vaslili  hath  not  p.  commandm.of  king 
5.  6.  to  half  of  the  kingdom  it  shall  be  p.  7.  2. 
Psal.  65.  1.  and  unto  thee  shall  the  vow  hep. 
Isa.  10.  12.  when  Lord  hath  p.  his  whole  work 
Jer.  23.  20.  till  he  have  p.  the  thoughts,  30.  24. 

34.  18.  who  have  not  p.  words  of  llie  covenant 

35.  14.  the  words  of  Jonadah  are  p.  16. 

51.  29.  for  every  purpose  of  the  Lord  shall  be  p. 
Kzek.  37.  14.  have  spoken  and  p.  it,  saiili  Lord 
Luke  i.'iO.  till  the  day  that  these  things  shall  be  p. 

2. 30.  when  th(>y  had  p.  all  things  hv  law  of  r,ord 
/Jom. 15.28. when  I  have  p. this,  I'will  come  to  Sjiain 

PERFORMETH. 
JN'eh.  5.  13.  every  man  that  p.  not  this  promise 
.Toh  23    14.  he  p.  thing  that  is  iippointed  for  me 
Ps.  57.  2. 1  will  cry  to  God  that  p.  all  things  for  me 
Isa.  41.  26.  that  p.  the  roiinsi-l  of  his  messengers 

PERFORMING. 
JV*u))i.  15.  3.  an  offorieg  or  sacrifice  in  p.  a  vow,  8. 

PERFUME,  S.     • 
F.Tod.  30.  35.  «nd  thou  shall  make  it  a  p.  37. 
Prov.  27.  9.  ointment  andp.  rejoice  the  heart 


PER 

Cant.  5.  t  13.  his  cheeks  are  as  towers  ofp. 
Isa.  57.  9.  thou  didst  increase  ihy  p.  and  send 

PERFUMED. 
Prov.l.  17. 1  have  p.  my  bed  with  myrrh,  aloeg 
Cttjif.  3. 6.  who  is  this  that  Cometh  p.  with  myirh? 

PERHAPS. 
Jlcts  8.  22.  ifp.  thy  thought  may  be  forgiven  the« 
2  Cor.  2.  7.  lest  p.  such  a  one  be  swallowed  up 
Philcm.l5.foTp.  he  therefore  departed  for  a  seasoB 

PERIL. 
i.am.5.9.we  get  our  bread  with  the  p.  of  our  livei 
liom.  8. 35.  shall  famine, p.  or  sword,  separate  us? 

PERILS. 
2  Cor.  11.  26.  in  p.  of  waters,  in  p.  of  robbers,  in 
p.  by  countrymen,  in  p.  by  heathen,  in 
p.  in  city,  in  p.  in  wilderness,  in  p.  io 
sea,  in  p.  among  false  brethren 
PERILOUS. 
iTim.  3.  1.  in  the  last  days  p.  times  shall  come 

PERISH 
Sigiiifles,   [1]  To  die,  or  lose   life,   Jonah  1.  6. 
L2]  To  be  rooted   out,    2  Kings  9.  8.     [3]  To 
starve,  Luke  15.  17.  [4]  To  be  damned,  2  Cor. 
2.  15.   2  Pet.  2.  12.     [5]  To  be  taken   away, 
Mic.  7.  2.    [61  To  be  deprived  of  being,  1  Cor. 
15.  18. 
Gen.  41. 36.  that  the  land  p.  not  through  famine 
Exod.  19.21.  lest  they  gaze,  and  many  of  ihemp. 
21.20.  if  a  man  smite  eye  of  his  maid,  that  it  p. 
jV«))i.  17.  12.  behold,  we  die,  we  p.  we  all  p. 
24.  20.  but  his  latter  end  shall  be  that  p.  for  over 
Deut.  11.  17.  lest  ye  p.  quickly  from  the  land 

26.  .5.  a  Syrian  ready  top.  was  my  father 

28.  20.  until  thou  p.  quickly,  22.  Josh.  23.  13. 
Judg.  5.  31.  let  all  ihine  enemies  p.  O  Lord 

1  S«)/i.26. 10.  he  shall  di'scond  into  battle,  and  p. 
Esth.  3.  13.  and  to  cause  to  p.  all  the  Jews,  7.  4. 

4.  16.  and  if  Ip.Ip.  ||  8.  11.  to  cause  top.  all  power 

9.2-*.  nor  the  memoiial  of  them  p.  from  their  seed 
.loll  3.  3.  let  the  day  p.  wherein  I  was  horn 

4.9.  by  the  blast  of  God  they  p.  by  the  brea'h 
20.  they  p.  for  ever,  without  any  regarding  it 

6.  18.  paths  of  their  way  go  to  nothing  and  p. 

29.  13.  the  blessing  of  him  that  was  ready  to  p. 
31. 19.  if  I  have  seen  any  p.  for  want  of  clothing 

Psal.  2. 12.  lest  he  be  angry,  and  ye  p.  from  way 
9.  18.  the  expectation  of  the  poor  shall  not  p. 
49.  10.  likewise  the  fool  and  the  brutish  person  p 
12.  man  in  honour  is  like  the  beasts  that  p.  20. 
63.  2.  as  wa.i  meltcth,  so  let  wicked  p.  83.  17^ 
80.  16.  they  p.  at  the  rebuke  of  thy  countenance 
146.  4.  not  trust,  in  that  very  day  his  thought*/. 

ProB.  11. 10.  when  the  wicked  p.  28.  28. 
29. 18.  where  there  is  no  vision,  the  people  p. 
31.  6.  give  strong  drink  to  him  that  is  ready  to  f 

Ecel.  5.  14.  but  those  riches  p.  by  evil  travail 

Isa.  26. 14.  and  made  all  their  memory  to  p. 

27.  13.  they  shall  come  which  were  ready  lop. 
Jer.  18.  18.  the  law  shall  not  p.  from  the  priejt 

25. 1 10.  1  will  cause  to  p.  the  voice  of  mirth 
27.  10.  that  I  drive  you  out,  and  ye  should  p.  15. 
40.  15.  that  the  remnant  in  Judah  should  p. 
Kzct.  25. 7. 1  will  cause  thee  to  p.  out  of  countries 
Dan.  2.  18.  that  Daniel  and  fellows  should  not  pi 
Jonah  1.6.  God  wi!l  thinly)n  us  thai  wep.  not,  3.  9 

14.  O  Lord,  let  us  not",  for  this  man's  life 
Mat.  5. 29.  that  one  of  thy  members  should  p.  30 

8.  25.  saying,  Ijord,  save  us,  wep.  I.vkeS.  24. 

9.  17.  the  wine  runneth  out,  and  the  bottles  p. 
18.  14.  that  one  of  these  little  oms  should  p. 

MiirkA.  38.  Master,  carest  thou  not  that  we  p.? 
Luke  13.  33.  that  a  prophet  p.  out  of  Jerusalem 

15.  17.  have  hrend  enough,  and  I  p.  with  hunger 

21.  18.  there  shaH  not  a  hair  of  your  head  p. 
.fii^n  3. 15.  whoso  hclievefh  in  him  should  notp.  16. 

11.  .50.  and  that  the  whole  nation  p.  not 
.'iets  8.  20.  thy  money  p.  with  thee,  because  thou 

13.  41.  behold,  ye  despiscrs,  and  wonder,  and  p. 

1  Cor.l.18.for  preaching  of  the  cross  is  to  them  that 

p.  foolishness,  but  to  us  saved,  power  of  God 

2  Cor.  2.  15.  a  savour  of  Christ  in  them  that  p. 

4.  16.  but  tho'  outward  man  p.  inward  is  renewed 
Col.  2.  22.  which  all  are  to  p.  with  the  using 
27'Afs.s-.2. 10.  of  unrighteousness  in  them  that  p. 
2  Pet.3.9.  not  willing  that  anv  should  p.  but  that  all 

SAa»  PERISH. 
Lev.  26.  38.  and  ve  shnUp.  among  the  heathen 
J^um.  24.  24.  ani3  he  also  shallp.  for  ever 
ficu(.4.26.  ye  shallsoon  uticrlyp.ye  thall  not  pro- 
long your  days,  8. 19,  20.  |  'iO.  18.  .Tosh.  23.  16. 

1  Sam.  27.1. 1  shall  one  dayp.  by  ihe  hand  of  Saul 

2  Kings  9.  8.  the  whole  house  of  Ahab  shallp. 
.Toh  8.  13.  and  the  hypocrite's  hope  .ifiall p. 

1 1,  t  20.  and  fW^hl'shnll  p.  fr.un  the  wirked 
18. 17.  his  remembrance  shallp.  20.  7  I  36. 12. 
34. 1,5.  all  flesh  shall  p.  tog'^ther,  una  man  return 
Psal.  1.  6.  hut  the  way  of  the  ungodly  shallp. 
37.20. wicked  shallp.]\^'i.9.thmr  i  nemies  shallp. 
73.  27.  thev  that  are  far  from  ih-^e  .sAa«  p. 
102.  26.  lliL-y  shallp.  but  thou  shall  endure 


PER 

Ptal.  112.  10.  the  desire  of  the  wicked  shallp. 
/"rer.lO.SS.  e-xjiectation  of  wicked  shallp.  11.  7. 

19.  9.  and  he  that  speaketh  lies  shall  p. 

21.  28.  a /also  witness  shallp.  but  the  man 
Isa.  29  14.  the  wisdom  of  their  wise  men  shall  p. 

41  n.  they  that  strive  with  Ihee  shallp. 

60. 12.  kingdom  that  will  not  serve  thee  shall  p. 
Jer.  4.  9-  that  the  heart  of  the  king  shall  p. 

fi.21.fr\jnd.sAa«/).||  10.11. gods  .vA«///).  15. 1 51.18. 

25.  t35.  and  flight  shallp.  t'mm  the  sliei)herds 

48.3.  valley  also  shall  p.  and  the  jilain  destroyed 
Ezck.  7.  2lj.  but  the  law  shall  p.  from  the  jiriest 
^mos  l.athercmnaut  of  the  Philistines  sAa//;;. 

2.  14. therefore  the  flight  shall p.dom  the  swift 

3.15.and  the  houses  of  ivory  shall  p.  great  houses 
Zech.  9.  5.  and  the  king  shallp.  from  Gaza 
^/a«.2o..'J2.that  lake  the  sword  shall  p.  with  sword 
J^ukeS.'i'. new  wine  be  spilled,  and  bottles sAai/;j. 

13.  3.  excei)t  ye  repent  ye  shall  all  likewise  ;;.  5. 
JbA7il0.2o.sheep.9Aa// never;),  nor  any  pluck  them 
/iom.2.12.  sinned  without  law,  sAaZi/). without  law 
ICor.S.li. shall  weak  brother/),  for  whoinCh.died 
//eft.  1.  11.  they  shall  p.  but  thou  remiiinest 
2  Pet.  2. 12.  ami  shall  p.  in  their  own  corruption 

PERISHED. 
JViim.  10.  33.  and  they  p.  from  the  congregation 

21.  30.  Ilcslibon  is  p.  even  to  Diboii,  laid  waste 
Josh.  22.20.  that  man  p.  not  alone  in  his  iniquity 
2  Sam.  1.  27.  and  how  are  the  weapons  of  war  p. 
Job  4.  7.  remember,  whoever/),  being  innocent 

30.  2.  might  profit  me,  in  whom  old  age  was/). 
Psal.  9.  0.  their  memorial  is  p.  with  them 

10.  16.  the  heathen  arc  p.  out  of  his  land 
83. 10.  as  Sisera  and  Jabin,  which  p.  at  En-dor 
119.  92.  I  should  have  p.  in  mine  affliction 
142. 1 4.  none  w  ould  know  me,  refuge  p.  from  me 
Keel.  9.  6.  their  envy  is  p.  ||  .Ter.  7.  28.  truth  is  p. 
Jer.  48.  36.  the  riches  that  Ijath  gotten  are  p. 
49.  7.  is  tounsel  p.  from  the  prudent?  is  wisdom 
f^am.  3.  18.  I  said,  my  strength  and  hope  is  p. 
Joel  1.  11.  because  the  harvest  of  the  field  is  p. 
Jonah  i-  10.  whiih  came  up  and  p.  in  a  niijht 
JUic.  4.9.  whydostthoucry7  is  thy  counsellor/).? 
7.  2.  the  good  man  is  p.  out  of  the  earth 
Mat.  8.  32.  herd  of  swine  ran  and  p.  in  the  waters 
/.ukeM.m.  which/),  between  the  altar  and  tetnple 
/ids  5. 3".  he  also  p.  and  as  many  as  obeyed  him 
1  Cor.  15.18.  then  thcv  fallen  asleep  in  Christ  are/). 
J^.    11.  31.  by  faith' the  l^arlot  Raliab/).  not 
^Wet.  3.  6.  world  biii.^  overflowed  with  water/). 
Jude  11.  and  /).  in  th<'  jiaiiisaying  of  Core 

PERISHETH. 
Job  4.  11.  the  old  lion  p.  for  lack  of  prey 
Psal.  31.  t  12.  I  am  like  a  vessel  that/). 
Prov.  11.  7.  and  the  hope  of  unjust  men  p. 
Keel.  7. 15.  there  is  a  just  man  that/;,  in  hisrighte. 
Isa.  ,57.1.  righteous  p.  and  no  man  layeth  it  to  heart 
Jer.  9.  12.  for  that  the  land  p.  and  is  burnt  up 
48.  4H.  O  Moab,  tfie  jieople  of  Chemosh  p. 
John  6.  27.  lal>our  not  for  the  meat  which  p. 
Jam.  1.  11.  and  the  grace  of  the  fashion  of  it  p. 
1  Pet.  1.7.  trial  of  faiili  more  precious  than  gold/). 

PERISHING. 
Job  33.  18.  and  his  life  from  p.  by  the  sword 

PER.irRED. 
1  Tim.i.  10.  law  i<i  made  for  liars  and  p.  persons 

PERMISSION. 
1  Or. 7.6.1  speak  this  iivp.  not  by  commandment 

PERMIT. 
1  Cor.  16. 7.  1  trufit  to  tarry  awhile,  if  the  Lord  p. 
Heb.  6.  3.  and  this  will  we  do,  if  God/). 

PERMITTED. 
Jlrls  26.1.Agrippa»aid,thou  artp.  to  speak  for  thys. 
1  Cot.  14.  34.  for  it  is  not  p.  to  women  to  speak 

PERNICIOUS. 
8  Pet.  2.  2.  and  mnnv  fhall  follow  their/),  ways 

PERPETUAL 
8i|;ni6e>,  fl')  Continual, or  uninterrupted.,  Ezek. 
35.  5.     (2)  h'.vrrlastiiig  or  endless,   Psal.  9.  fi. 
[3]  The   duratiim    of  lime   to  the   end   of  the 
taorld,  Gen.  il.   12.     [4]  During'  the   continu- 
ance of  the  Ir^al  di.ipcnsation,  Exod.  29.  9.  | 
30.  8.  [5]  .'/  set  space  of  time,  Jer.  25.  9,  12. 
f?fn.9.12.  lokenof  iIk;  covenant  for  p.  generations 
£ro(i.  29.9.  the  prieiit'.^olTice  be  I heim  for  a  p.  sin- 
lute;  and  thou  »hall  con»ecrale 
30. 8.  a  p.  incense  before  the  L<l.  for  generationg 

31.  Ifi.  keep  the  sahtmih  for  a  p.  covenant 
J.ev.  3.  17.  a  p.  i>talute  not  to  cat  fat  or  blood 

6.  20.  n  p.  meat-offering  for  .\nron  and  his  sons 

24.  9.  the  nhew-bread  be  Anron'H  by  a  p.  slalutc 

35.  34.  may  not  be  s(dd,  fur  it  is  their  p.  |M>H»eR)'ion 
JVum.  19.  21.  a  p.  malutc,  that  he  that  sprinklcth 
Psal.  9.  6.  deslruclionR  are  romo  to  n  p.  end 

74.  3.  lift  up  thy  feel  to  the  p.  desolations 

78.  66.  he  put  tiiem  lo  a  p.  reproach 
Jer.  a.  22.  by  a  p.  decree,  that  it  cannot  pn«»  it 

8. 5.  why  people  Blidden  hack  by  a  p.  hnrkulidlng? 

1.'  18.  why  is  my  pain  p  and  my  wound  incurable? 

18  16  to  make  their  land  deiolateond  p.  hilling 
438 


PER 

Jer.  23. 40.  and  I  will  bring  upon  you  a  p.  ihame 

25.  9.  and  make  them  p.  desolations,  12. 

49.  13.  the  cities  thereof  shall  be  p.  wastes 

50.  5.  let  us  join  to  the  Lord  in  a  p.  covenant 

51.  39.  that  they  may  sleej)  up.  sleep,  57. 
Ezek.  35.  5.  because  thou  hast  had  a  p.  hatred 

9.  1  will  make  thee  p.  desolations,  Zeph.^.  9. 
46.  14.  by  a  p.  ordinance  to  the  Lord 
Hab.  3.  G.  he  beheld,  and  the  p.  hills  did  bow 
PERPETUALLY. 

1  Kin/rs  9.3.  my  heart  shall  be  there  p.  2  Chr.  7. 16. 
.'Smos  1.11.  his  anger  did  tear  p.  and  kept  wrath 

PERPLEXED. 
Esth.  3.  15.  but  the  city  Shushan  wasp. 
Joel  1.  18.  the  herds  of  cattle  are  p.  no  pasture 
Luke  9.  7.  Herod  was  p.  ||  24.  4.  as  they  were  p. 

2  (^r.  4.  8.  we  are  p.  but  not  in  despair 

PERPLEXITY. 
Tsa.  22.  5.  for  it  is  a  day  of/),  by  the  Lord  God 
jyiie.  7.  4.  the  day  cometh,  now  shall  be  their  p. 
Luke  21.25.  on  earth  distress  of  nations,  with/). 

PERSECUTE. 
Job  19.  22.  why  do  ye  p.  me  as  God,  and  are  not 

26.  why/),  we  him,  seeing  the  root  is  in  me? 
Psal.  7.  l.save  me  from  all  them  that  p.  me 

5.  let  the  enemy/),  my  soul,  and  take  it 

10.  2.  the  wicked  in  his  pride  doth  p.  the  poor 
31. 15.  deliver  me  from  them  that/),  me 
35.  3.  stop  the  way  against  them  that  p.  me 

6.  and  let  the  angel  of  the  Lord  p.  them 
69.  26.  they  p.  him  whom  thou  hast  smitten 
71. 11. p.  and  lake  him,  there  is  none  to  deliver 
83.  15.  sop.  them  with  thy  tempest,  and  make 
HO.  84.  execute  judgment  on  them  that/),  me 

86.  they  p.  me  wrongfully,  help  thou  me 
Jer.  17.  18.  let  them  be  confounded  that/),  me 

29.  18.  I  will  p.  them  with  tlie  sword 
Lam.  3.  66.  p.  and  destroy  them  in  anger 
Mat.  5. 11.  blessed  are  ye,  when  men  shall  p.  you 
44.  and  pray  for  them  w  hich  p.  you 

10.23.  when  theyp.you  in  one  city,  Hee  to  another 

23.  34.  ye  shall  p.  them  from  city  to  city 
Luke  11.  49.  some  of  them  they  shall/).  21.  12. 
John  5.  16.  and  therefore  did  the  Jews  p.  Jesus 

15.20.  if  have  |)ersecuted  me,  they  will  also/),  you 
Rum.  12.  14.  bless  them  which  p.  you,  curse  not 

PERSECUTED. 
Dent.  30.  7.  will  put  curses  on  them  that  p.  thee 
Psal.  109.  16.  because  he  p.  the  poor  and  needy 

119.  161.  princes  have/),  me  without  cause 

143.  3.  for  \.\w  enemy  hath  p.  my  soul 
Isa.  14.  6.  he  that  ruleth  nations  in  anger  is  p. 
Aa))i.3.43.thou  hast  covered  with  anger,  and  p.  ui 
.Mat.  5.  10.  blessed  which  are/),  for  righteousness 

12.  so  p.  they  the  prophets  before  you 
./oA»i  15.  20.  if  they  have  p.  me,  they  will  you 
Jlcts  7. 52.  which  prophets  have  not  your  fathers/). 

22.  4.  and  I  p.  this  way  unto  the  death 

26.  11. 1  p.  them  even  to  strange  cities 

1  Cor.  4. 12.  reviled,  we  bless;  being  p.  we  suffer  it 
J.-.  9.  because  1  p.  the  church  of  God,  (ial.  1.  13. 

2  Cor.  4.  9.  we  are  p.  but  not  forsaken,  cast  down 
Gal.  1.  23.  that  he  which  p.  us  in  limes  past 

4.  29.  he  that  was  born  after  the  flesh  p.  him 
X'Phess.'i.  15.  who  have  killed  the  Lord  and /).  us 
licv.  12.  13.  dragon  p.  woinnn  thnt  brought  forth 

PERSECUTEST. 
Mcls  9. 4.  Saul,  Saul,  why  p.  thou  me?  22.7.J  2G.14. 
5. 1  am  Jesus  whom  thou  p.  22.  8.  |  26.  15. 
PERSECUTING. 
Phil.  3.  6.  concerning  zeal,  p.  the  church 

PERSECUTION. 

Lam.  5.  5.  our  necks  are  under  p.  we  have  no  rest 

Mat.  13.  21.  for  when  p.  ariseth,  Mark  4.  17. 

.^cts  8.1.  at  that  lime  there  was  great  p.  ng.  church 

11.19.  they  which  were  8cattere<l  abroad  on  the  p. 

13.  50.  and  raised  p. against  Paul  and  Rarnabas 

/.i«);i.8.35.shall  p.  or  sword,  separate  us  from  Chr.? 

<'»'«Z..5.11.if  I  preach  circum. why  do  I  yet  suffer  p.? 

6.  12.  lest  they  should  suffer  p.  for  cross  of  Christ 

•2'nm.3.  12.  all  thnt  will  live  godly  shall  suffer/). 

PERSECUTIONS. 
Mark  10.30.  shall  have  in  this  world  lands  with  p. 
2  Cor.  12.  10. 1  lake  pleasure  in  p.  for  Christ'ssake 
'iThess.  1.  4.  wo  glory  for  your  faith  in  all  yourp. 
27'im.3.11.know  mvp.ai  Antioch,  whatp.  endured 

PEllSEI^UTOR. 
ITim.  1.  13.  who  was  before  a  p.  nod  injurious 

PERSECUTORS. 
JVfA.  9. 11.  their  p.  thou  Ihrewest  into  the  deepi 
Psal.l.  13.  he  ordainclh  his  nrrowa  against  the/). 
119.  1.57.  mnny  are  myp.  ||  142.  6.  deliver  from/). 
.ler.  15. 15.  OLd.vi8ilme,and  revenge  me  of  my  p. 
20.  11.  therefore  my  p.  shall  stumble,  not  prevail 
J^nm.  1.  3.  all  her  p.  overlook  her  between  strails 
4. 19.  our  p.  are  swifter  than  the  eagles  of  heaven 

PERSEVERANCE. 
KpA.  6.  18.  and  wafhine  thereunto  with  all/). 

PERSON 
Signifioi,  [1]  A  particular  individual  man  or 


PER 

woman,  Gen.  14.  21.  Job  22.  29.    [2]  The  nt 

vjard  qualities  and  conditions  of  men;  such 

as  counlry.riches,  friends,  poverty,  and  the 

like,  Luke  20.  21.  Acts  10.  34.  Rom.  2.  11.  [3] 

Sight,  name,  or  authority,  2  Cor.  2.  10. 

O01.39.6. Joseph  was  a  goodlyp.and  well  favoured 

Kxod.  12. 48.  no  uncircumcised  p.  shall  eat  thereol 

Lev.  19.  15.  nor  honour  the  p.  of  the  mighty 

A'lun.  5.  6.  when  commit  any  sinthatp.be  guilty 

19.  17.  for  an  unclean  p.  shall  take  of  the  ashes 

18.  clean  p.  shall  take  hyssop  and  dip  it  in  water 

22.  whatsoever  unclean  p.  toucheth,  be  unclean 

31.  19.  whosoever  hath  killed  any  p.  or  touclied 

any  slain,  35.  11, 15,  30.  Josh.  20.  3,  9. 

35.  30.  one  w  ilncss  shall  not  testify  against  any  p. 

y>cut.l5. 22.  unclean  and  clean/),  shall  eat  it  alike 

27.  25.  that  takelh  reward  to  slay  ai:  innocent/;. 

28.  50.  shall  not  regard  tlie  p.  of  old  or  young 
1  Sam.  9.2.  there  was  not  a  goodlier  p.  than  he 

16.  18.  David  a  comely  p.  |{  25.  35.  accepted  thy  p 
2Sam.  4. 11.  have  slain  a  righteousp.inhis  house 

14.  14.  neither  doth  God  res]iect  any  p. 

17. 1 1,  and  that  thou  go  to  battle  in  thine  own/). 
Job  22.  29.  and  he  shall  save  the  humblej). 
Psal.  15. 4.  in  whose  eyes  a  vile  /;.  is  contemned 

49. 10.  likewise  the  fool  and  the  brutish j).  perish 

101.  4.  I  will  not  know  a  wicked  p.      * 

105. 37.  was  imt  one  feeble  p.  among  their  tribes 
ProiK  6. 12.  naughty  p.  walks  with  froward  mouth 

24.8.deviseth  evil,  shall  be  called  mischievous/). 

2."*.  17.  that  doeth  violence  to  the  blood  of  any/), 
/sa.  32.  5.  the  vile/),  shall  be  no  more  called  liberal 

6.  for  the  vile/i.  will  speak  villany,  and  his 

43.  t4.  therefore  I  will  give  people  for  thy  p. 
Jer.  43. 6.  Johanan  took  every  p.  that  was  left 

52.  25.  he  took  seven  that  were  near  the  king's/). 
Ezek.  16.  5.  was  cast  out  to  the  loathing  of  thy  p. 
33.  6.  if  sword  come  and  take  any/),  among  them 

44.  25.  the  priests  shall  come  at  no  dead  p. 
JJan.  II.  21.  in  his  estate  shall  stand  up  a  vilc/>. 
Mat.  22. 16.  regardest  not  p.  of  men,  Mark  12. 14. 

2?.  24.  1  am  innocent  of  the  blood  of  this  just  p. 

1  Cor.  5.  13.  put  away  from  you  that  wicked/). 

2  Cor.  2.  10.  forgave  I  it  in  the/),  of  Christ 
Eph.  5.5.  nor  unclean/),  hath  inheritance  in  kingd. 
Heb.  1.  3.  and  the  exi)ress  image  of  his  p. 

12.  l(i.  or|)rofanep.  as  Esau,  who  sold  his  birth-ri. 
2  Pet.  2.5.  butsaved  Noah,  the  eighth  p.  a  preacher 

PERSONS. 
(VfTi.  14.21.  give  me  p.  and  take  the  goods  to  thyself 
Kzorf. 16. 16. gather  according  to  number  of  your/), 
y-fii.  27. 2.  p.  shall  be  for  the  Lord  by  estimation 
JVum.  19.  18.  clean  person  shall  s|)rinkle  it  upon/). 
31.  28.  both  of  the  p.  beeves,  asses,  and  sheep 

35.  thirty  and  two  thousand  p.  in  all,  of  women 

Drut.  10.  17.  God  of  gods,  which  regardelh  not  p. 

22.falhers  went  down  into  Egyjil  wiih  seventy  p. 

Jm(/^.  9.2.  the  sons  of  Jerubbaal  which  were  70  u. 

4.  Abimelecli  hired  vain  and  light  p.  followed 

.5.  he  went  and  slew  threescore  and  ten  p.  18. 

20.39. Benjamin  began  to  kill  of  Israel  about  30;?. 

1  .Su/rt.9. 22.  those  hidden,  which  were  about  30 p. 
22.  18.  and  Doeg  slew  on  that  day  85/). 

22.  I  have  occasioned  the  death  of  all  the  p. 

2  Kings  10.  6.  now  the  king's  sons  being  10  p. 

7.  they  took  the  king's  sons  and  slew  70 p. 

Ps.  26.4. 1  have  not  sat  with  vain  p.  nor  dissembler* 
Prov.  12.  11.  he  that  followeth  vain  p.  28.  19. 
./(T..52.29.he  carried  cu|)tivcfrom  Jerusalem  832 /» 

30.  he  carried  away  captive  of  Jews  745  p. 
Ezek.  7.  t  11.  nor  of  any  of  their  tumultuous  p. 

17.  17.  and  building  forts  to  cut  off  many  p. 
27.  13.  they  traded  the  p.  of  men  in  thy  market 

Jonah  4.  II.  wherein  are  more  than  120,000 p. 
y.eph.  3.  4.  her  prophets  are  treacherous  p. 
Luke  15.  7.  joy  more  than  over  ninety-nine  just  p. 
.ids  17.  17.  Paul  disputed  with  the  devout  p. 
2rer.l.ll.eift  bestowed  on  us  by  means  of  many  p. 

1  Tim.  1.  10.  the  law  is  made  for  perjured  p. 

2  Pet.  3.  11.  what  manner  of  p.  ought  ye  to  be 
/u(/cl6.having  men'sp.in  Bdn)iralion  ofadvantage 

See  Rksi-kpt. 
PERSUADE 

Signifies,  [\]To convince  and  convert,  Gcn.9.t27. 
Luke  16.  31.  [21  To  be  assured  or  satisfied, 
Rmn.  8.  38.  |  14.  f  5.  [3]  To  advise,  or  put  one 
upon  doing  any  thing,  2  Cliron.:i2.  11.  [4)  7*0 
decrivr,  I  Kings  22.  20.  [5]  To  jmeifv,  Prov. 
2.V  15.  [6]  To  trust  or  hope  for,  Heb.  6.  9.  [7j 
To  provoke,  or  stir  up.  Acts  14.  19. 

Oen.M  t  27.  God  shall  p.  Japhet,  nml  ilwell  in  tenU 

1  h'ings'H.  20.  whoshallp.  .Miab,  lo  go  uj)  and  fall 
21. 1  will  p.  him  ||22.ihoushaltp.  him  and  prevnil 

2  Chron.  '.fi.  11.  doth  not  Ile/ekiah  p.  you  to  (jive 
Isn.  36.  18.  bewnro,  lest  Hezekiahp.  you,  saying 
Mm.  28.  14.  wo  will  p.  him  and  secure  you 

2  Cnr.  5. 11.  we  p.  men  ||  <7fl/.l.I0.do  I  now  p. men? 

1  ./oAn3.  t  19.  and  shall  p.  our  hearts  before  him 

PERSlADEll. 

2  Chr.  18.2.  Ahabp.  Johushaphat  to  go  with  him 


PER 

frov.  B5. 15.  by  long  forbearing  is  a  prince  p. 
Mil!-  27,  20.  the  cliief  priests;),  tlie  niuhitude 
L,uke  16,  31.  will  not  be;>.  if  one  rose  from  dead 

2U.  6.  for  tliey  l)e  p.  tiiut  John  was  a  prophet 
^tts  13.  43.  p-  tliuni  to  continue  in  grace  of  God 

14. 19.  who  p.  the  people,  and  having  stoned  i'aul 

18.  4.  Paul  p.  the  Jews  and  the  Greeks 

19,  26.  this  Paul  hath;;. turned  away  much  people 
21.  14.  when  he  would  not  be;;,  wo  ceased 

26.  26.  I  am  ;;.  none  of  these  things  are  hid  from 
Ram.  4.  21.  being  p.  that  what  he  liad  promised 
8. 38. 1  am  p.  that  nothing  can  separate  us  from 

14.  5.  let  every  man  be  fully  ;;.  in  his  mind 

14.  I  know  and  am  p.  there  is  nothing  unclean 

15.  14.  I  myself  also  am;;,  of  you,  my  brethren 
2  TXttu  1.  5.  and  I  amp.  that  in  thee  also 

12.  lamp.that  hoisahle  to  keep  what  I  commit. 

Jisb.6.9.  we  arep. better  things  of  you, though  thus 

11. 13.  having  seen  (hem  afar  off,  were  p.  of  them 

PKRSUADEST. 

Acts  26.  28.  alniast  thou  p.  me  to  be  a  Christian 

PERSU.'\DETH. 
Q  Kings  18.  32.  when  Hezekiahp.  you,  saying 
Acts  18. 13.  Paul  p.  men  to  worship  contrary  to  law 

PERSUADING. 
Ads  19.  8.  p.  things  concerning  kingdom  of  God 
28.23.  B.  them  concern.  Jesus  from  law  and  proph. 

PERSUASION. 
Gal.  5. 8.  thisp.  cometh  not  of  him  that  calleth  you 

PERTAIN. 
Lev.  ?.  20.  sacrifice  of  peace-ofFeringsp.  to  Lord 
21.  and  eat  of  the  sacrifice  wliichp.  to  the  Lord 
1  Sam.  25.  22.  if  I  leave  all  that  p.  to  him 
Rom.  15.  17.  in  those  things  which  p.  to  God 
1  Cor.  6.  3.  how  much  more  things  p.  to  this  life 
SPet.  1.  3.  hath  given  us  all  things  that  p.  to  life 

PERTAINED. 
JVum.  31.  43.  the  half  that  p.  to  the  congregatron 
Josk.  24.  33.  Eleazar  was  buried  in  a  hill  that  p. 
Judg.  6. 11.  angel  sat  under  an  oak  thatp.to  Joaeh 
lSam.2.').  21.  nothing  missed  of  all  that  p.  to  Nabal 
S5ajn.  2.  15.  which  p.  to  Isli-boshelh,  son  of  Saul 
6.  12.  God  blessed  all  that  p.  to  Obed-edom 
9.  9.  have  given  master's  son  all  that  p.  to  Saul 

16.  4.  thine  are  all  that  p.  to  Mephibosheth 
\Kings  7.48.  Solomon  made  vessels  thatp.to  house 
Z  Kings  24.  7.  all  that  p.  to  the  king  of  Egypt 
ICkron.  9.  27.  opening  every  morning  p.  to  them 
SChron.  12.  4.  betook  the  cities  whichp.  to  Judah 

^.33.  Josiah  took  awav  abominationsp.to  Israel 

pertAineth. 

Lev.  14.  32.  to  get  that  which  p.  to  cleansing 
JVum.  4.  16.  to  the  office  of  Eleazar  p.  the  oil 
/>eut.22.5.  woman  shall  not  wear  whatp.  to  a  man 

1  Sam.  27.  0.  Ziklagp.  to  the  kings  of  Judah 

2  Ckron.  2t>.  18.  it  p.  not  to  thee,  Uzziah,  to  burn 
Rom.  9.  4.  to  whom  p.  the  adoption  and  the  glory 
WeA.  7. 13.  hep.  to  another  tribe,  of  which  no  man 

PERTAINING. 
Josk.  13.  31.  half  Gilead  and  cities  p.  to  Machir 
1  Chron.  26.  32.  rulers  for  every  matter  p.  to  God 
AUs  1.3.  speaking  of  things  p.  to  kingdom  of  God 
1  Cor.  6.  4.  hive  judgment  of  things  p.  to  this  life 
Heb.  2. 17.  merciful  High-Priest  in  thingsp.  to  God 
5.  1.  is  ordaine.l  for  men  in  things  p.  to  God 
9.  9.  not  make  him  perfect,  asp.  to  conscience 

PERVERSE. 
AVm.  22.  32.  because  thy  way  is  p.  before  me 
Dcut.  32.  5.  they  are  a  p.  and  crooked  generation 

1  Sam.  20.30.  thou  son  of  the  p.  rebellious  woman 
Job  6.  30.  cannot  my  taste  discern  p.  things  1 

9.  20.  my  mouth  shall  also  prove  me  p. 
Prov.  4.  24.  and  p.  lips  put  far  from  thee 
8.  8.  there  is  nothing  froward  or  p.  in  them 
12.  8.  he  that  is  of  a  p.  heart  shall  be  despised 

14.  2.  he  that  is  p.  in  his  ways  despiseth  him 

17.  20.  that  hnlh  a  p.  tongue  falleth  into  mischief 
19.  1.  than  he  that  is  p.  in  his  lips,  and  is  a  fool 
23.  33.  and  thine  heart  shall  utter  p.  things 

28.  6.  than  he  that  is  p.  in  his  ways,  though  rich 

18.  he  that  is  ;;.  in  his  way  shall  fall  at  once 
Jsa.  19.  14.  the  l.,nrd  hath  mingled  a  p.  spirit 
Jilat.  17.  17.  O  p.  generation,  Luke  9.  41. 
Acts  20.  30.  shall  men  arise,  speaking  p.  things 
Pkil.  2.  15.  blameless  in  the  midst  of  a  p.  nation 
ITim.  6.  5.p.  dispiitin;;?  nf  men  of  corrupt  minds 
PERVERSELY. 

2  Sam.  19.  19.  nor  remember  what  servant  did  p 
1  Kings  8.  47.  we  hive  sinned  and  have  done  p. 
Psal.  119.  78.  thev  dealt  p.  with  me  without  cause 

PERVERSENESS. 
A'um.  23.  21.  neither  hath  he  seen  p.  in  Israel 
Prov.^  1 .3.but  p.of  li  ansgresRors  shall  destroy  them 

15.  4.  but  p.  therein  is  a  breach  in  the  spirit 
Tsa.  30.  12.  ye  trust  in  p.  and  stay  thereon 

59.3.1i  ps  Upoken  lies, your  tongue  hai  h  muttered  p. 
Eiek.  9.  9  the  land  is  full  of  blood,  and  city  of  p. 

PERVERT. 

Dent.  16.  19.  a  gift  doth  p.  words  of  the  righteous 

34. 17.  thou  shall  not  p.  the  judgment  of  stranger 

439 


<PHA 

Jab  8  3.  doth  God  p.  judgment  or  justice  ? 
34.  12.  nor  will  the  Almighty  p.  judgment 
Piov.  17.  23.  to  p.  the  ways  of  judgment 

31.  5.  and  p.  the  judgment  of  any  of  the  alllicled 
Mic.  3.  9.  hear  lliis,  I  pray  you,  ye  that  p.  eciuity 
.^/ct«]3. 10.  wilt  not  cease  top.  right  ways  of  Lord? 
Gal.  1.  7.  and  would  p.  the  gospel  of  Christ 

PERVERTED. 
1  Sam.8. 3.  Samuel's  sons  took  bribes, p.  judgment 
Job  33.  27.  if  any  say,  I  have  p.  what  is  right 
Isa.il.  10.  thy  wisdom  and  knowledge,  it  hath  p. 
Jer.3.21.  they  havep.  their  way,  and  forgotten  Ld. 
23.  36.  ye  havep.  the  words  of  the  living  God 

PERVERTETH. 
Ezod.'iS.  8.  the  gift  p.  the  words  of  the  righteous 
yjeut.27.19.  cursed  be  he  thatp.  judgin.  of  strangei 
Prov.  10.  9.  but  he  that  p.  his  ways  shall  be  known 
19.  3.  the  foolishness  of  a  man  p.  his  way 
Isa.  24.  1 1-  the  Lord  p.  the  face  of  the  earth 
/yuAc23.14.  brought  this  man  as  one  thatp.  people 

PERVERTING. 
Eccl.  5.8.  if  thou  seest  the  violent  p.  of  judgment 
Luke  23.  2.  found  this  fellow  p.  the  nation 

PESTILENCE. 
Exod.  5.  3.  lest  he  fall  on  us  with  p.  or  sword 
9. 15.  that  I  may  smite  thee  and  thy  jieople  with  p. 
Lev.  26.  25.  I  will  send  the  p.  among  you 
JVum.  14.  12.  I  will  smite  them  with  the  p. 
Deut.  28.  21.  the  Lord  shall  make  p.  cleave  to  thee 
26'am.  24. 13.  there  be  three  days'  p.  1  CAr.  21. 12. 

15.  the  Lord  sent  a  p.  on  Israel,  1  Chr.  21.  14. 
1  Kings  8.  37.  if  there  be  in  the  land  famine,  p. 
blasting  locust,  2  Chr.  6.  28.  |  7.  13.  |  20.  9. 
Psal.  78.  50.  he  gave  their  life  over  to  the  p. 
91.  3.  he  shall  deliver  thee  from  the  noisome  p. 

6.  nor  for  the  p.  that  walketh  in  darkness 

Jer.  14. 12. 1  will  consume  them  by  p.  24. 10. 1 27. 8. 
21.  6.  the  inhabitants  of  this  city  shall  die  by  p. 

7.  I  will  deliver  Zedekiah  from  the  p. 

9.  he  that  abideth  in  city  shall  die  by  p.  38.  2. 

27.  13.  why  will  ye  die  by  the  sword  and  p.? 
28. 8.  prophets  of  old  prophesied  of  war  and  of  p. 
29.  17.  behold,  I  will  send  upon  them  the  p. 

18. 1  will  persecute  them  with  the  famine  andp. 

32.  24.  the  city  is  given  because  of  the  p.  36. 
34.  17.  I  proclaim  a  liberty  for  you  to  the  p. 

42. 17.  they  thatgo  to  Egyiit  shall  die  by  the  p.  22. 
44.  13.  as  I  have  punished  Jerusalem  by  the  p. 
Ezek.  5.  12.  a  third  part  shall  die  with  the  p. 

17. p.  and  blood  shall  pass  thro'  thee,L.  spoken  it 
6. 11.  they  shall  fall  by  sword,  famine,  and  the  p. 

12.  he  that  is  far  off  shall  die  by  the  p. 

7.  15.  a  sword  without,  p.  and  famine  within 
12. 10. 1  will  leave  a  few  men  of  them  from  thep. 
14. 19.  or  if  I  send  a  p.  into  that  land,  and  pour  out 
21.  when  I  send  the  p.  to  cut  off  man  and  beast 

28.  23. 1  will  send  to  her  p.  and  blood  into  streets 

33.  27.  they  that  be  in  caves  shall  die  of  the  p. 
38.  22. 1  will  plead  against  him  with  p.  and  blood 

Amos  4.  10.  I  have  sent  among  you  the  p. 
Hab.  3.  5.  before  him  went  the  p.  and  burning 

PESTILENCES. 
Mat.  24.  7.  and  there  shall  be  p.  Luke  21.  11. 

PESTILENT. 
Acts  24.  5.  we  have  found  this  man  a  p.  fellow 

PESTLE. 
Prov.  27.  22.  bray  a  fool  in  a  mortar  with  a  p. 

PETITION. 
1  Sam.  1.  17.  the  God  of  Israel  grant  thee  thy  p. 
27.  Lord  hath  given  me  my  p.  which  I  asked 
t28.  he  whom  I  obtained  by  p.  shall  be  returned 
2.  t  20.  Lord  give  thee  seed,  for  the  p.  she  asked 
\Kingsi.  16.  now  I  ask  one  p. of  thee,  deny  me  not 
20. 1  desire  one  small  p.  of  thee,  say  me  not  nay 
fXA.  5.  6.  the  king  said,  what  is  thy  p.?  7. 2.  [9.12. 

7.  then  Esther  said,  my  p.  and  request  is 

8.  if  it  please  the  king  to  grant  my  p.  and  request 
7.3.  let  my  life  be  given  me  at  my  p. and  my  people 

Isa.  7.  1 11.  ask  thee  a  sign,  make  thy  p.  deep 
/>an.  6. 7.  whosoever  shall  ask  a  p.  of  any  god,  12. 

13.  but  maketli  his  p.  three  limes  a  day 

PETITIONS. 

Psal.  20.  5.  the  Lord  fulfil  all  thy  p. 

1  John  5. 15.  we  know  we  have  thep.  we  desired 
PHARISEE. 

This  sect  was  one  of  the  most  ancient  and  most 
considerable  among  the  Jews,  and  its  original 
is  not  very  well  known,  some  placing  the  be- 
ginning of  the  Pharisees  sooner,  others  latrr : 
They  take  their  name  from  a  Hebrew  word, 
which  signifies  Division,  or  Separation,  because 
they  distinguished  themsclres  from  the  other 
Israelites  by  a  more  strict  manner  of  life,  of 
which  they  made  profession  :  They  were  very 
numrrons,  andfar  extended:  Thry  substituted 
human  traditions  in  the  room  of  God's  word, 
affected  to  make  a  great  shew  of  religion  in 
outward  things ;  bui  were  proud,  covetous, 
unjust,  superstitiotts,  and  hypocritical. 

fVhen  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  appeared  in  Ju- 


PHA 

dea,  the  Pharisees  were  then  in  great  credit 
among  the  people,  because  of  the  opinion  t4cy 
had  conceived  of  their  great  learning,  sanctity 
of  manners,  and  exact  observance  uf  the  law. 
They  fasted  often,  made  lung  prayers,  paid 
their  tithes  scrupulously,  distributed  much 
alms  :  But  all  this  was  vitiated  and  corrupted 
by  a  spirit  of  pride,  ostentation,  hypocrisy,anU 
self-love.  Like  to  whitened  sepulchres,  they 
appeared  beautifulwithout,  whilst  within  was 
nothing  but  corruption  and  deformity,  Mat.  23. 
27.  They  wore  large  rolls  of  parchment  upon 
their  foreheads  and  wrists,  on  which  were 
■  written  certain  words  nf  the  law ;  and  affected 
to  have  fringes  and  borders  at  the  corners  and 
hems  of  their  garments,  broader  than  the  other 
Jews  wore,  as  a  badge  of  distinction,  and  as 
greater  observers  of  the  law  than  others. 

In  matters  of  religion,  tlie  traditions  of  the  an- 
cients were  the  chief  subject  of  their  studies; 
and  to  these  they  made  additions  of  thiir  own, 
as  they  thought  fit,  making  their  own  opinion 
to  pass  for  traditions  of  the  ancients.  By  this 
means  they  had  overburdened  the  law  of  Ood 
with  a  vast  number  of  trifling  observances, 
that  were  useless  and  disgusting,  and  which 
made  it  a  heavy  and  insupportable  yoke.  They 
had  even  altered  and  corrupted  it  in  important 
articles,  by  their  own  perverse  interpretations 
of  it,  as  our  Saviour  in  his  gospel  reproaches 
them  with  :  for  example,  the  law  commands  us 
to  honour  our  father  and  mother :  Tlie  Phari- 
sees taught,  that  if  we  say  to  our  parents  that 
are  in  necessity ;  "Father,  or  mother,  the  thing 
you  ask  of  me  is  dedicated  to  Cod,  it  is  no 
longer  in  my  power,  but  you  shall  hare  a  part 
in  the  merit  of  my  offering,  xchieh  will  do  you 
as  much  good  as  if  I  had  given  it  to  you;" 
they  icerc  then  freed  from  the  obligation  of 
succouring  their  parents.  Mat.  15.  4,  5,  C. 

The  observation  of  the  sabbath  is  another  point 
they  had  refined  upon,  and  our  Saviour  often 
argued  with  them  upon  this  head.  They  main- 
tained, that  upon  this  day  it  was  not  so  much 
as  allowed  to  heal  a  sick  person,  thoughCh:)st 
did  it  only  with  a  wordspeaking,  Luke  6.7,8. 
They  found  fault,  that  upon  this  day  thepeo- 
pie  brought  their  sick  to  be  healed.  They  were 
scandalized,  that  a'  man  carried  away  his  bed 
upon  the  sabhath-day,  after  he  had  been  cured 
of  a  palsy,  John  5.  8,  0,  10.  From  all  which 
they  concluded,  that  our  Lord  and  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ  could  not  be  a  7iian  sent  from 
God,  because  he  so  little  ohsci'ved  that  pro- 
found rest,  that  they  thought  was  to  be  kept 
on  this  day,  John  9.  16. 

Our  Saviour  upbraids  them  with  making  long 
prayers,  standing  up  in  the  synagogues,  or  at 
the  corners  of  the  streets,  and  under  pretence 
of  prayer  to  consume  widows'  houses,  either  by 
entertaining  them  on  account  of  their  prayfrs, 
or  by  persuading  these  shallow  widows  to  in- 
trust them  with  their  estates,  and  then  defraud- 
ing them  of  the  same.  Mat.  23.  14.  he  also 
reproaches  them  with  compassing  sea  and  land 
to  make  a  proselyte,  or  to  convert  a  Gentile: 
and  after  that  to  make  him  still  a  greater  sin- 
ner than  he  was  before,  I  y  teaching  him  a  per- 
nicious doctrine,  anil  making  him  more  oppo- 
site to  the  gospel,  instead  nf  shewing  him  the 
true.paths  to  piety.  Mat.  23.  15.  He  says,  they 
affect  to  build  up  the  tombs  of  the  old  prophets, 
and  openly  to  declare,  that  thry  disapprove  of 
the  actions  of  their  forefathers  who  persecuted 
them,  while  they  themselves  were  actuated  by 
the  same  spirit,  and  opjiose  alt  those  that  would 
reclaim  them  from  their  enormities,  Mat.  23. 
29.  Luke  11.  47,48. 

The  Pharisees  believed  the  soul  to  he  immortal, 
and  acknoicledgcd  the  existence  of  angels  and 
spirits.  Acts  23.  8.  They  likewise  admitted 
a  kind  of  transmigration  of  the  souls  of  good 
men,  which  might  pass  from  one  body  to 
another;  whereas  those  of  wicked  men  were 
condemned  to  dwell  for  ever  in  prisons  of 
darkness:  It  was  in  ronsee/uence  of  these 
principles,  that  some  of  the  Pharisees  said, 
that  Jesus  Christ  was  John  the  Baptist,  or 
Elias,  or  some  one  of  the  old  prophets.  Mat.  16. 
14.  that  is,  that  the  soul  nf  one  of  'kese  great 
men  had  passed  into  the  bndy  of  our  Saviour. 
They  believed  also  the  resurrection  of  the 
dead,  and  admitted  nil  the  consequences  of  it, 
against  the  Sadducecs  who  rejected  it.  Mat 
22.  23.   Acts  23.  8. 

Mat.  23.  26.  thou  blind  p.  cle.nnse  first  within 

Luke  11.  37.  a  certain  p.  bescught  him  to  dine 
18. 10.  went  to  pray,  one  a  p.  the  other  a  publican 
11.  the  V.  stood  and  prayed  thus  with  himself 

Acts  5.  34.  then  stood  up  one  in  the  council  a  p. 


PIE 

Acts  23. 6.  Paul  cried  out,  I  am  ap.  the  son  of  a  p. 
36.  5.  after  strictest  sect  of  our  religion  I  lived  ap. 
PAii.3.5.Hebtew  of  Hebrews,  as  toucliingluw,  tip. 

PHARISEES. 
J\fat.  5.  20.  exceed  the  righteousness  of  the  p. 
9. 14.  why  do  we  and  tlie  p.  fast  oft  1  Mark  2. 18. 
34. p.  said,  he  casteth  out  devils  by  prince  ofdev. 

15.  12.  knowest  thou  that  the/».  were  offended 

16.  6.  take  heed  and  beware  of  the  leaven  ofthep. 

and  Sadducees,  11.  Jfark  8.  15.  I.ukc  12.  1. 

19.  3.  the  p.  alio  came  to  him,  tempting -him 

23.  2.  saying,  the  scribes  and  p.  sit  in  Moses'  seat 

13.  woe  to  you  scribes  and  p.  hypocrites,  14,  15, 

23,  25,  27,  2<J.  Luke  U.  42,  43,  44. 

Luke  5.  30.  the  scribes  and  p.  murmured,  15.  2. 

6.  7.  the  scribes  and;;,  watched  him,  whether 

7.  30.  but  liip  p.  rejected  the  counsel  of  God 

11. 39.  now  do  ye  p.  make  clean  outside  of  the  cup 
16. 14.  p.  who  were  covetous,  heard  these  things 

John  1.  24.  they  wliich  were  sent  were  of  the;>. 

3.  1.  there  was  a  man  of  the  p.  named  Nicodeinus 

7.  32.  the  p.  and  priests  sent  officers  to  take  him 
48.  have  any  of  the  rulers  or  p.  believed  on  him? 
11.  47.  then  the;?,  gathered  a  council,  and  said 
57.  now  the  p.  had  given  a  commandment 

ids  15.  5.  there  rose  up  certain  of  sect  of  the  p. 

23.  7.  there  arose  u  dissension  between  the  p. 
and  the  Sadducees 
8.  there  is  no  resurrection,  but  Ihep.conl'ess  both 
PHILOSOPHY, 

The  love  of  wisdom.  It  conies  fmm  the  Greek 
word  Philos,  a  lover,  anrf  Sophia,  wisdom.  The 
apostle  Paul  bids  the  Colossians  beware,  lest 
any  man  spoil  them  through  Philosophy,  Cul. 
2.  8.  .^nd  in  the  Acts,  St.  Luke  relates,  that 
lehen  St.  Paul  came  to  Athens,  he  there  found 
Epicurean  and  Stoic  philosophers,  v>ho  made  a 
jest  of  his  discourses ;  and  no  wonder,  seeing 
they  placed  the  chief  happiness  in  pleasure,  and 
denied  the  providence  of  God,  Acts  17. 18.  The 
same  apo.itle,  in  many  places  of  his  epistles, 
opposes  the  false  wisdom,  and  wise  mm  of  the 
age,  which  is  nothing  else  but  the  Pagan  Philo- 
sophy, always  contrary  to  the  wisdom  o/ Christ, 
and  the  true  religion;  which  in  the  notion  of 
the  philosophers  and  sophists  of  this  world 
seemed  to  be  mere  folly,  being  built  neither  upon 
evidence,nor  the  eloquence  and  suhlilty  of  those 
that  preached  it,  but  upon  the  power  of  God 
and  his  single  authority,  upon  the  operation  of 
the  Hnlij  Ghost,  which  influenced  the  hearts  and 
minds  of  those  whom  he  called  to  the  faith. 

Cp^2.8.  bewarn,  lest  any  man  sp(>il  you  through  p. 
PHILOSOPHERS. 

JJct*17.18.thfin  certain //.encDuntered  him, and  said 
PHYL.VCTERIES. 

This  word  comes  from  the  Greek,  and  signifies, 
Thinga  to  be  especially  oliscrved.  These  Phy- 
lacteries were  cirtain  little  boxes,  or  certain 
rolls  of  parchment,  wherein  were  written  cer- 
tain words  of  the  law.  These  the  Jews  wore 
upon  their  foreheads,  upon  their  wrists,  and 
the  hem  of  their  garments,  -which  custom  is 
founded  upon  what  you  read  in  Exod.  13.  9, 
16.  and  in  Num.  15.  38,  39.  The  Pharisees 
effected  to  haun  their  Phylacteries  broader 
than  the  other  Jews  wore,  as  a  badge  of  dis- 
tinction, and  through  ostentation,  which  is 
that  our  .Saviour  reprehends  them  for. 

Mat.  23.  5.  they  mnki-  broad  their/),  and  enlarge 
PHYSICIAN 

Signifies,  [11  One  who  professes  and  practises 
the  art  of' Physic,  Maik  5.  26.  [2]  Emhalmcrs 
of  dead  bodies,  Gen.  .50.  2.  [3]  Comforters  or 
healers  by  advice  and  counsel,  Job  13.  4.  [4] 
Prophets  and  teachers,  as  instruments  of 
eurint'  hard-hearted  sinners,  Jor.  8.  22.  [5) 
JcKUS  ("hriMt,  the  great  Physician  of  value,  the 
only  snrereign  /'Aj/'wcinn  of  the  soul,  who  by 
his  blood  and  .Spirit  cures  all  our  spiritual 
sicknesses.  Mill.  9.  12. 

./er.8. 22.  is  no  biihn  inOilead?  is  there  no  p.  there? 

Mat.  9. 12.  Jp^uH  sriiil,  ihcy  that  bo  whole  need  not 
a  p.  but  the  «irk,  ^fark  2.  17.  /.uke  .5.  31. 

/,«*«4.23.p.  hoiilthvHelfll  Col.  4.  14.  Luke  then. 
PHYSICIANS. 

Oat.  50.  2.  Joseph  commanded  the  p.  his  servants, 
to  embalm  his  father;  Ihc  p. embalmed  Israel 

a  Ckr.  in.  12.  Asa  sought  n.it  to  Ihe  Lord,  hut  p. 

Job  13.  4.  forgers  of  lies,  ye  are  all  p.  of  no  vnlne 

^orA5.2(i.:ind»uffer.mi\iiv  things ofn.  I,ukeS.4X 
PICK. 

Prov.  30.  17.  thp  rnven<  of  Ihf  valley  shall  n.  it  out 
riCTORES. 

J^um.  33.  .52.  shall  destroy  nil  their  p.  and  images 

Pron.  25.  II.  like  H\t\>U-i>  ofgtdil  in  p.  of  silver 

isa.  2.  16.  the  day  of  ihn  Lord  on  all  pleasant ». 
PIECE. 

Oen.  15  10.  ho  laid  one  p.  ngainst  another 

Etod.  37. 7.  made  2  cherubim*  beaten  out  of  one  p. 
440 


PIE 

JVum.  10. 2.  tnake  thee  two  trumpets  of  a  whole  p. 
Judg.  9.  53.  a  certain  woman  cast  a  p.  of  a  mill- 
stone upon  Abimelech's  head,  2  Sam.  11.  21. 

1  Sam.  2.  36.  shall  come  and  crouch  to  hiir;  for  a 

p.  of  silver,  that  I  may  eat  a  p.  of  bread 
30.  12.  they  gave  him  a  p.  of  a  cake  of  figs 

2  Sam.  6. 19.  to  every  one  a  p.  of  flesh,  1  Chr.  16.3. 

23.  11.  where  was  a  p.  of  ground  full  of  lentiles 
2  Kings  3.  19.  and  mar  every  good  p.  of  land,  25. 

5.  t  19.  Naaman  departed  a  little  p.  of  ground 
.VfA.  3.  11.  and  Hashub  repaired  the  other  p. 
19.  next  Ezer  another  p.  20,  21,  24,  27,  30. 
■Job  41.  24.  as  hard  as  a  p.  of  the  netlier  millstone 

42.  11.  every  man  also  gave  him  a  p.  of  money 
Prov.  f>.  26.  a  man  is  brought  to  a  p.  of  bread 

28.  21.  for  a  p.  of  bread  that  man  will  transgress 
Cunt. 4. 3.  thy  Icmjiles  are  np.  of  pomegranate,  6.7. 
Jer.  37.  21.  should  give  him  daily  a  p.  of  bread 
£:c/c.24.4.  every  good  p.  the  thigh  and  the  shoulder 

6.  bring  it  out  p.  hyp.  let  no  lot  fall  upon  it 
j3mo.9  3.  12.  out  of  the  mouth  of  lion  a  p.  of  an  ear 

4.  7.  one  p.  was  rained  on,  and  the  p.  whereon 
y.ech.  5.  t  7.  there  was  lift  up  a  weighty  p.  of  lead 
Mat.  9.  16.  no  man  pultcth  a  p.  of  new  cloth  to 

an  old  garment,  Mark  2.  21.  I.uke  5.  36. 

17.  27.  thou  shalt  find  a  p.  of  money,  that  take 
Luke  14.  18.  I  have  bought  a  p.  of  ground 

15.  8.  if  she  lose  one  p.  she  doth  light  a  candle 
9.  for  I  have  found  the  p.  that  I  had  lost 

24.  42.  they  gave  him  a  p.  of  a  broiled  fish 

PIECES. 
Gen.'ih.Yl.  a  burning  lamp  passed  between  thoscp. 
20.  J6.  I  have  given  thy  brother  1000  p.  of  silver 
33.  19.  bought  for  100  p.  of  money.  Josh.  24.  32. 
37.t23.  they  stripped  Joseph  of  his  coat  of  many  p. 
28.  they  sold  Joseph  for  twenty  p.  of  silver 
33.  Joseph  without  doubt  Is  rent  in  p.  44.  28. 
45.  22.  he  gave  to  Benjamin  thirty  p.  of  silver 
Ezod.  22.  13.  if  it  be  torn  in  p.  let  him  bring  it 
28.  7.  the  ephod  shall  have  the  two  shoulder  p. 

25.  put  two  chains  on  the  shoulder  p.  39.  4,  18. 
Lev.  2.  6.  thou  shall  part  the  meat-offering  in  p. 

8.  20.  Moses  burnt  the  p.  and  fat  of  the  ram 

9.  13.  they  presented  burnt-offering  with  the  p. 
.Iudg.0.4.  they  gave  Abimelcch  seventyp.  of  silver 

11).  5.  we  will  give  thee  llOOp.  of  silver 

19.  29.  he  divided  his  concubine  into  twelve  p. 

1  .Sam.  II.  7.  Saul  hewed  a  yoke  of  oxen  in  p. 

15.  33.  Samuel  hewed  .Agag  in  p.  before  the  Lord 
lA'(Vin'«l].30.Ahijah  rent  new  garment  in  twelvep. 

31.  Ahijah  said  to  Jeroboam,  take  thee  ten  p. 
19.  II.  a  strong  wind  brake  in  p.  the  rocks 

2  Kings  2.  12.  Elisha  rent  his  clothes  in  two  p. 

5.  .5.  Naaman  took  with  him  6000.  p.  of  gold 

6.  25.  an  ass's  head  was  sold  foreightyp.  of  silver 
11.  IS.  and  brake  the  images  of  Baal  in  j>.23. 14. 

18.  4.  brake  in  p.  the  brasen  serpent  Moses  made 
2C/(r.  23.  17.  went  to  the  house  of  Baal,  and  brake 

the  images  in  p.  31.  1.  |  34.  4.  Mic.  1.  7. 
.foil  4.  t  20.  they  are  beaten  in  p.  from  morning 

16.  12.  and  he  hath  also  shaken  me  in  p. 
40.18.  his  bones  asstrongp.ofbrass,  asbarsofiron 
41.  1 15.  strong  p.  of  shields  are  his  pride 

t  30.  sharp  p.  of  the  potsherd  are  under  him 

Psal.  7.  2.  rending  it  in  p.  while  none  to  deliver 
.50.  22.  consider  this,  lest  I  tear  you  in  p. 
68.  30.  till  every  one  submit  with  p.  of  silver 
74.  14.  thou  brakest  the  heads  of  leviathan  in  p. 

Cant.  8.  11.  every  one  for  the  fruit  bring  1000  p. 

/.sa.3.15.  what  mean  ye  that  ye  beat  my  people  top. 

./er.  5.  6.  every  one  that  goeth  out  shall  be  torn  in  p. 

23.  29.  a  hammer  that  brcaketh  the  rock  in  p. 
Lam.W.  \\.  he  hath  turned  aside  and  pulled  me  in  p. 
F.iek.  4.  14.  have  not  eaten  that  which  is  torn  in  p. 

9.  t  2.  eviTy  man  a  weapon  of  bis  breaking  in  p. 
13.  19.  and  will  ya  pollute  me  for  p.  of  bread? 

24.  4.  jjatlier  the  p.  thereof  into  the  pot 
/Jan. '2.  34.  which  brake  tin-  image  in  p.  45. 

4l).forasinuch  as  iron  brcaketh  inp.andsiibducth 

6.  24.  the  lions  brake  all  their  bones  in  p. 

7.  7.  tho  Iburlli  beast  devoured  and  brake  in  p.  19. 
ffos.  3.  2.  I  bought  her  lo  me  for  fifteen  p.  of  silver 
Mic.  3.  3.  who  chop  my  people  in  p.  as  for  the  pot 

4.  i3.  and  thou  shnlt  bent  in  p.  many  people 

5.  8.  as  a  lion  teanth  in  p.  and  none  can  deliver 
JV*«A.  2.  12.  lion  did  tear  inp.  enough  for  his  wholps 
Zerh.  II.  12.  they  weighed  for  my  price  thirty  p. 

13.  I  look  the  thirty  p.  of  silver.  Mat.  27.  ti,  9. 
f.uke  15.  H.  what  woman  having  ten  p.  of  silver 
Jlcts  19.  19.  thev  found  iho  price  50,000p.  of  silver 
23.  10.  lest  Paid  should  be  pulled  in  p.  of  them 
27.  44.  and  some  on  broken  p.  of  the  ship 
.See  Break,  Urokkn,  (^rr,  Dash,  IlASUcn. 
PIERCE. 
JVum.  24.  8.  he  shall  p.  them  through  with  arrows 
2  Kings  18.21.  on  whirh  ifn  man  lean,  it  will  go 
into  his  hanil  and  p.  Il,  fsa.  30.  6. 
fjuke^.  35.  a  iword  shall  p.  through  thy  own  (oul 

PIER(;ED. 
Judg.  S.  26.  when  ihe  had  p.  through  bii  temploa 


PIL 

Job  30. 17.  my  bones  are  p.  in  me  in  the  night 
['sal.  22.  16.  they  p.  my  hands  and  my  feet 
Hag.  1. 16.  earneth  wages,  to  put  into  bagp  thro' 
ZtcA.12.10.  th&y  shall  look  on  me  whom  tney  have 
p.  and  shall  mourn  for  him,  John  19.  37. 
.Tohn  19.  34.  one  of  the  soldiers  p.  his  side 
1  Tim.  6.  10.  andp.  themselves  with  many  sorrows 
Rev.  v.  7.  they  also  which  p.  him  shall  »ee  him 

PIEKCETH. 
Job  40.  24.  Behemoth's  nose  p.  through  snares 

PIERCING. 
Isa.  27.  1.  the  Lord  shall  punish  the  p.  serpent 
Jieb.i.  12.  word  of  God  is  quick, p.  to  the  dividing 

PIERCINGS. 
Prov.  12. 18.  that  speaketh  like  the  p.  of  a  sword 

PIETY. 

ITim.  5.  4.  let  them  learn  to  shew  p.  at  home 

PIGEON,  see  YouNO. 

PILE. 

Isa.  30.  33.  Ihe  p.  of  it  is  fire  and  much  wood 

Eiek.  24.  9.  I  will  even  make  the  p.  for  fire  great 

PILGRIMAGE. 
f?cn.47. 9.  thedaysofyeais  of  my  p.  are  130  years, 
I  have  not  attained  to  years  in  the  days  of  theirp. 
F.xod.  6.  4.  to  give  them  the  land  of  theirp. 
Psal.  119.  54.  been  my  songs  in  the  house  of  my  p. 

PILGRIMS. 
Ileb.  11.  13.  confessed  they  were  strangers  and  p. 

1  Pct.^.  11.  I  beseech  you  as  p.  abstain  from  lusts 

PILLAR 

Signifies,  [1]  That  which  supporteth  a  house  or 
building,  Judg.  16. 25,  26,  29.  [2]  j?  monument 
raised  in  memory  of  some  person  or  action,Gea, 
35.  20.  2  Sum.  18.  18.  [3]  The  cloud  in  the  wil- 
derness, which  resembled  a  pillar,  Exod.  13. 21. 

A  pillar  of  cloud,  a  pillar  of  fire,  a  pdlar  of  smoke, 
Kzod.  13.  21.  Judg.  20.  40.  signify  a  cloud,  a 
fire,  a  smoke,  which  are  raised  up  towards 
heaven  in  the  form  of  an  irregular  pillar. 

The  pillars  of  heaven,  Job  26.  11.  and  the  pil- 
lars of  the  earth,  .lob  9.  6.  are  metaphorical  ex- 
pressions, that  suppose  the  heavens  and  the 
earth  to  be  as  an  edifice,  raised  by  the  hand  of 
God,  and  founded  upon  its  basis  or  founda- 
tion;  which  appears  from  those  words  in  Job 
38.  4,  5,  6,  Wliere  wast  thou  when  I  laid  the 
foundations  of  the  earth?  declare,  if  thou  hast 
understanding.  The  ancients  imagined  the 
earth  to  lie  upon  a  flat,  and  that  the  heavens 
rested  upon  its  extremities. 

The  church  is  culled  the  pillar  of  truth,  1  Tim. 
3.  15.  It  holds  forth  the  mind  of  Christ,  as  a 
pillar  does  an  edict,  or  proclamation,  that  all 
may  take  notice  of  it;  so  that  the  truths  of 
God  are  published,  supported,  and  kept  from 
sinking  by  it,  but  do  not  derive  their  authority 
from  it.  In  which  sense  teachers,  prophets, 
and  apostles,  arc  likewise  called  pillars,  Prov. 

9.  1.  ./er.  1.  18.  Gal.  2.  9. 

Oen. 1 9.26.  she  looked  back, and  became  ap.ofsalt 
28.  18.  Jacob  set  it  up  for  a  p.  22.  |  35.  14. 
31.  13.  Beth-cl,  where  thou  anoinledst  the  p. 
51.  behold  this  p.  ||  52.  and  this  p.  be  witness 
35.20.  Jacob  set  p.  on  Rachel's  grave, thai  is  thep. 

Ezod.  33.  9.  cloudy  p.  descended  and  stood  at  door 

10.  ihe  people  saw  the  cloudy  p.  stand  at  door  of 
Lev.  26.^  1.  ye  shall  not  rear  up  a  p.  Deut.  16.  t22. 
Judg.  9. 6.  made  Abimelcch  king  by  plain  of  thep. 

20.  40.  the  flame  arose  with  a  p.  of  smoke 

2  Sam.  18.  18.  Absalom  reared  up  a  p.  called  thep. 

1  Kings  7. 21  ."olomon  set  up  Ihe  right  p.  Ihe  left  p. 

2  A'trti-i  1 1 . 1 4 .  k  i  ng  stood  by  p .  2:).  3.  2  C/ir.  23. 1 3. 
.'V(A.9.  12.  thou  leddest  them  in  dayljy  a  cloudyp. 
Psal.  99.  7.  he  spake  to  them  in  tlie  cloudy  p. 
Isa.  19. 19.  and  a  p.  at  tho  border  thereof  lo  Lord 
.fer.  1.  18.  I  have  made  thee  this  day  an  iron  p. 

.52.  21.  the  height  of  one  p.  was  eighteen  cubits 
1  7'i7n.  3. 15.  church,  the  p.  and  ground  of  the  truth 
Ilev.  3.  12.  him  that  overcometh  will  I  make  a  p. 
See  Cloi'd,  Firb. 
PILLARS. 
F.zod.  24.  4.  Moses  built  an  altar  and  twelvep. 
26.  32.  thou  shalt  hang  the  vail  upon  four  p. 
37.  thou  shall  make  for  the  hangine  fivi'  p.  36.,T8, 
27. 10.lwenlvp.liooksoflhep.il.  1:18.10,1 1,12,17. 
12.  p.  ten  II  14.  theirp.  three,  15.  |  •.»>.  14,  15. 
in.  p.  four  II  .38.  17.  sockets  for  p.  were  of  brass 
lieut.  7.  t  5.  yo  shall  break  down  their  p.  12.  3.   . 
.ludg.  16.  25.  they  set  Samson  betwrcn  the  p. 
I  .Sam.  2.  8.  the  p.  of  the  earth  are  Ihe  Lord's 

1  h'i^gs  7.  15.  he  cast  two  p.  of  brass  of  18  cubits 
10.  12.  the  king  made  of  the  almng-trees  p. 

2  Kings  18. 16.  Ilezekiah  cut  off  gold  from  thep. 
25. 13.  Ihe  ('haldecB  brake  in  pieces  Ihc  p. of  brass, 

and  carried  brass  to  Babylon,  16.  .Jer.  52. 17,20. 
K.<M.1.6.hangings  fastened  to  rings  and  p. of  marble 
.hb  9.  6.  and  thep.  thereof  tremble,  26.  II. 
r«nl.  75.  3.  earth  is  dissolved,  I  bear  up  thep.  of  il 
Prov  9.  I.  she  hath  hewn  out  her  seven  p. 
Cant.  3.6.  that  comelh  like  p.  of  smoke  pcrfuroeil 


PIT 

Canf  .3.10.  madn  p.  thereof  of  silver,  botlom  of  gold 
5.15.1egs8re  aep.  of  marble  set  on  sockets  of  gold 
Joel  2.  Ju.  I  will  shew  blood,  lire,  and  p.  of  smoke 
Oal.  2.  9.  John  und  Cephas  who  seemed  to  be  ;;. 
Rev.lO.l.  face  as  the  sun,  his  feet  were  as  ».  of  tire 

PILLED. 
Ocn  30.  37.  Jacob  p.  white  slrakes  in  the  rods 
38.  ho  set  rods  which  he  had  p.  before  the  tlocks 
riLLOVV,  s. 
It  signifies,  [1]  Properly,  a  sort  of  cushion  to  lie 
under  one's  head  in  bed,  Mark  4.  38.   [2]  Figu- 
ratively, it  betokens  ease,  rest,  and  quietness; 
rueh  did  the  false  prophetesses  make,  that  they 
might  be  signs  to  the  people  of  ease  and  rest; 
and  they  thus  endeaooured  to  render  them  se- 
cure, E/ek.  13.  18,  20. 
Gen.  28.  11.  and  Jacob  put  stones  for  his  p. 

18.  Jacob  took  the  stone  that  he  had  put  for  h\sp. 
1  Sam.  19.  13.  Michnl  put  a  p-  of  goats'  hair,  1(5, 
£zcA. 13.18. woe  tothewomeii  that  sewp.aiid  make 

20.  wherefore,  behold,  I  urn  against  your  p. 
Mark  4.  38.  Jesus  was  in  the  ship  asleep  on  a  p. 

PILOTS. 

Eiek.  27.  8.  thy  wise  men,  O  Tyrus,  were  thy  p. 

23.8uburbs  shake  at  the  sound  of  the  cry  of  thy  p 

PINNACLE. 

Mat.  4.  5.  settetli  him  on  a  p.  of  temple,  Luke  4.  9. 

PINE. 
Lev.  26. 39.  they  that  are  left,  of  you  shall  p.  away 
in  iniquities  of  their  fathers  shall  they;;,  away 
Lam.  4.  9.  these  p.away,  stricken  through  for  want 
Ezek.  24.  23.  ye  shall  p.  away  for  your  iniquities 
33. 10.  if  sins  be  upon  us,  and  we  p.  away  in  them 

PINE. 
JVeh.  8. 15.  fetch  olive  and  p.  branches  for  booths 

PINE-TREE. 
fsa.  41.  19.  I  will  plant  p.  and  box-tree  together 
60.  13.  the  p.  and  bo.i-tree  shall  come  to  thee 

PINETH. 
Mark  9. 18.  gnasheth  with  his  teeth,  and  p.  away 

PINING. 
Isa.  38. 12.  he  will  cut  me  off  with  p.  sickness 

PIN. 

Judg.  16. 14.  Delilah  fastened  it  with  a  p.  Samson 

awaked  and  went  away  with  the  p.  of  the  beam 

Ezra  9.  t  8.  and  to  give  us  a  p.  in  his  holy  place 

Eiek.  15.  3.  will  men  take  a  p.  of  the  vine-tree7 

PINS. 
.Ezod.  27. 19.  make  all  thep.  of  the  tabernacle  and 
court  of  brass,  35.  18.  |  3S.'2U,3L  |  39.  40. 
JVuTTJ.  3. 37.  under  the  custody  of  Merari,  p.  4. 32. 

PIPE,  S. 
1  Sam.l0.5.shalt  meet  company  of  prophets  with  p. 
IKings  I.  40.  the  people  piped  withp.  and  rejoiced 
Psal.  149.  t3.  praise  his  name,  with  a  p.  150. 14. 
Isa.  .'>.  12.  the  harp  and  p.  are  in  their  feasts 
30. 2!^.  have  a  song,  as  when  one  goeth  with  ap. 
Jfer.  48.  36.  mine  heart  shall  sound  lor  Moab  like  p. 
Kzek.  28. 13.  workmanship  of  thy  p.  was  prepared 
Zech.  4.  2.  and  seven  p.  to  the  seven  lamps 

12.which  through  the  goldenp. empty  themselves 
1  Cor.l4.7.things  without  life,  whether  p.  or  harp 

PIPED. 
1  Kings  1.  40.  people  p.  with  pipes  and  rejoiced 
.Afat.l1.17.saying,  we  have  p.  unto  you,  AuAeT.32. 

1  Cor.  14.  7.  how  shall  it  he  known  what  isy.? 

PIPERS. 
Rev.  18.  22.  voice  of  p.  shall  be  heard  no  more 
PISS. 

2  Kings  18.  27.  drink  own  p.  with  you,  Ua.  36.  12. 

PISSETH,  Hee  Wall. 
PIT,  S, 
Signifies,  [1]  J]  hole  in  the  earth,  Isa.  30.  14.  [2] 
J]ny  mischief,  or  evil,  for  ensnaring  a  person, 
Psal.  7.  15.     [3]  The  grave,  Psal.  28.  1. 1  30.  .3. 
[4]  Trouble,   Psal.  40.  2.    [5]  ."Vbraham  and 
Sarah,  from  whom  the  Israelites  sprang,  enen 
when  their  bodies  were  like  a  rock,  or  pit,  Isa. 
5).  1,  2.  [6]  Hell,  R(iv.  9.  2.  I  20.  1. 
'?en.14.10.  the  vale  of  Siddim  was  full  of  slime  p. 
37.  20.  come,  let  us  cast  him  into  somep.  24. 
Ezod.  21.  34.  owner  of  the  p.  shall  make  il  good 
f.ev.  11.  36.  a  p.  wherein  is  water,  shall  be  clean 
iN'um.  16.  .30.  they  go  down  quick  into  the  p.  33. 

1  Sam.  13.  6.  the  Israelites  hid  themselves  ni  p. 
S  .Sam.  17.  9.  bphold,  he  ii  now  hid  in  somep. 

18.  17.  cast  Absalom  in  a  great  p.  in  the  wood 

23.  20.  Benaiah  slew  a  lion  in  a  p.  1  Chr.  11.  22. 

2  Kings  10.  14.  and  Jehu  slew  them  at  the  p. 
18.  t  31.  drink  every  one  the  waters  of  his  p. 

/ob  17.  16.  they  shall  go  down  to  the  bnrsofp. 
33.18.he  keepeth  back  hi?  sonl  from  the  p.  30. 

24.  deliver  him  from  going  down  in'o  the  p.  28. 
Psal.  9.  1.5.  heathen  are  sunk  down  into  the  p. 

28.  1.  become  like  them  that  go  down  into  p. 
30.  3.  that  I  should  not  go  down  to  the  p. 

9. what  profitin  my  blood,  when  1  go  down  top.? 
35  7.  they  have  hid  from  me  their  net  in  a  p. 
40.  2.  he  hroueht  me  up  out  of  a  horrible  p. 
66.  23.  briog  tbetn  to  the  p.  of  dcstructioo 
441 


PIT 

Psal.  69.  15.  let  not  the  p.  shut  her  mouth  on  me 
88.  4.  I  am  counted  with  them  that  go  into  p. 
6.  thou  hast  laid  me  in  the  lowest  p. 
119.  85.  the  proud  liave  digged  p.  for  me 
140.  10.  let  them  be  cast  into  deep  p.  not  to  rise 
143.  7.  like  them  that  go  down  into  p.  Frov.  1.12. 
Prov.'H.  14.  mouth  of  si  range  women  is  a  deepp. 
23.  27.  and  a  strange  woman  is  a  narrow  p. 
28.  10.  he  shall  fall  himself  into  his  own  p. 

17.  ho  shall  tiee  to  the  p.  let  no  man  stay  him 
Isa.  14. 15.  be  brought  down  to  the  sides  of  the  p. 

19.  that  go  down  to  the  stones  of  the  p. 
24. 17.  fear,  and  the  p.  and  the  snare  are  on  thee 

18.  Cometh  out  of  midst  of  p.  .Jer.  48.  43,  44. 
2-2.  he  gathered,  as  jjiisoners  are  gathered  in  p. 

30.  14.  a  sherd  to  take  water  withal  out  of  the  p. 
38. 17.  hast  delivered  it  from  the  p.  of  corruption 

18.  they  that  go  down  to  p.  cannot  hoi)e 
51. 14.  hasteneth,  that  he  chould  not  die  in  the  p. 
./fr.2.  6.  the  Lord  that  led  us  through  a  land  of  p. 
14.  3.  they  came  to  the  p.  and  found  no  water 
41.  7.  and  cast  them  inio  the  midst  of  thep. 
9.  the  p.  which  Asa  made  for  fear  of  Baasha 
iant.  4.20.  anointed  of  Lord  was  taken  in  their  p 
F.zek.  19.  4.  nations  heard,  he  was  taken  in  p.  8. 
26.  20.  with  them  that  descend  into  the  p.  28.  8. 
I  31.  14,  16. 1  32. 18,  24,  25,  29,  30. 

32.  23.  whose  graves  are  set  in  the  sides  of  thep. 
■Jonah  2.  fO.  yet  hast  thou  brought  my  life  from  p. 
ZfpA.  2.  9.  even  the  breeding  of  nettles  and  salt  o. 
Zech.  9. 11. 1  have  sent  thy  prisoners  out  of  the  p. 
JI/aM2.11.if  it  fall  into  ap.on  sabbath,  Luke  14.5. 

See  Bottomless,  Dig,  Diogkd. 

PITCH. 

Gen.  6.  14.  p.  it  within  and  without  with  p. 

Exod.  2.  3.  she  daubed  it  with  slime  and  with  p. 

Isa.  34.9.  streams  thereof  shall  be  turned  top.  and 

the  land  thereof  shall  become  burning  p. 

PITCH. 

JVmot.  1.  52.  Israel  shall  p.  every  man  by  his  camp 

53.  the  Levites  shall  p.  round  the  tabernacle 

2.  2.  every  man  shall  p.  by  his  own  standard 
3.  cam])  of  Judah  p.  ||  3.  23.  the  Gershonites  p. 

3.  29.  sons  of  Kohaihp.  ||  35.  Merari  shall  p. 
Deut.  1.  33.  to  search  you  out  a  place  to  p.  in 
■  Josh.  4.20.  Joshua  did  p.  twelve  stones  in  Gilgal 
ha.  13.  20.  neithershall  the  Arabian  p.  tent  there 
./er.  6.3.  shepherds  shall  j>.  their  tents  against  her 

PITCHED. 
Gen.  12.  3.  Abram  p.  his  tent,  and  built  an  altar 
13.  12.  Lot  p.  II  26.  17.  Isaac  p.  in  valley,  25. 
31.  25.  Jacob  p.  in  mount,  Laban  p.  in  Gilead 

33.  18.  Jacob  p.  his  lent  before  the  city  Shalem 
Exod.  17.  1.  from  Sin,  Israel  p.  in  Rephiilim 

19.  2.  were  come  to  de.-iert,  and  had  p.  in  wildern. 

33.  7.  Moses  took  tabernacle,  p.  it  without  camp 

JV«m.l.51.  when  tabern.  is  p.  Levites  shall  set  it  up 

2.34.  so  they  p.  by  ih'ir  standards  and  set  forward 

9.  IS.  at  the  commandment  of  the  Lord  Iheyp. 

12.  16.  the  people  p.  in  the  wilderness  of  Paran 

21.  10.  Israel  p.  in  Ohoth  ||  11.  p.  in  Ije-abarim 

33.  5.  Israel  p.  in  Succoth  ||  6.  they  p.  in  Ethani 

.Josh.  8. 11.  the  ambush  p.  on  tlie  north  side  of  Ai 

2  Sam.  6.  17.  set  ark  in  tabernacle  David  had  p. 

17.  26.  Israi'l  and  Absalom  p.  in  land  of  Gilead 

1  Kings  20.  27.  nnd  Israel  p.  before  them,  29. 

2  Kings  ^^^  1.  Nehnohadn.p.  against  it,  .Jrr.  52.  4. 
1  Chron.  15.1.  David  prepared  a  place  for  the  ark, 

and  p.  for  it  a  tent,  16.  1.  2  Chmn.  1.  4. 
Ezra  8. 1 15.  there  p.  we  by  the  river  Ahava 
Hcb.  8.2.  of  the  true  tabernacle  which  Lord  p. 

PITCHER,  S, 
Signifies,  [1]  A  vessel  with  a  handle,  for  contain- 
ing li(juors.  Gen.  24. 14,  15.     [2]  .Such  vessels 
in  the  human  body  as  convey  vital  supplies 
into  the  several  parts  of  it,  as  the  i^rins  and 


PLA 

Job  19.  21.  have  p.  on  me, p.  on  mo,  Omy  friendt 
A'»tti.69.20.looked  for  some  to  takep.  but  was  none 
Prvv.  19.  17.  that  hath  p.  on  poor,  lendeth  to  Ld. 
Isa.  13. 18.  they  shall  have  no  p.  on  fruit  of  womb 
63.  9.  in  his  love  and  in  his  p.  he  redeemed  them 
Jer.  15. 5.  for  who  shall  have  p.  on  thee,  O  Jerusal. 
21.  7.  he  shall  not  spare,  nor  have  p.  nor  mercy 
£2cA.  5.11.  nor  will  1  have  p.  7.  4,9,  |  8. 18.  |  9.  10. 
y.  5.  let  not  your  eye  8|)are,  neither  have  ye  p. 
24.  t21.  behold,  I  will  profane  thep.  of  your  soul 
36.  21.  but  I  had  p.  for  mine  holy  name 
./imoa  1.  11.  because  Edom  did  cast  off  all  p. 
Jonah  4.  10.  thou  hast  had  p.  on  the  gourd 
Jilat.  18.  33.  have  had  compassion,  as  I  had  p.  on 
PITY.  [thea 

Oetit.  13, 8.  nor  shall  thine  eye  p.  him,  19.  13, 21. 
25.12.  shah  cut  oft' her  hand,  thine  eye  shall  not  p. 
Pro  I).  28.  8.  shall  gather  for  him  that  will  p.  poor 
./er.  J3.  14.  I  will  not  p.  nor  spare,  but  destroy 
.Joel  2.  18.  then  the  Lord  will  p.  his  people 
Zech.  11.  5.  their  own  shejiherdsp.  them  not 
6.  for  I  will  no  more  p.  inhabitants  of  the  land 
PITIED. 
Psal.  106. 46.  ho  made  them  also  to  be  p.  of  all 
Aam. 2. 2. and  the  Lord  hath  notp.  17,21.  |3.43. 
Ezek.  16.  5.  none  eye  p.  thee,  to  do  any  of  these 

PITIETH. 
Psal.  103.  13.  like  as  a  father  p.  his  children,  to 
the  Lord  p.  them  that  fear  him 
Ezek.  24.  21.  I  will  profane  what  your  soul  p. 

PITIFUL. 
/,om.4.)0.handB  ofp. women  havesodden  children 
Jam.  5.  H.ye  have  seen  that  the  Lord  is  very  p. 
1  Pet,  3.  8.  love  as  brethren,  be  p.  be  courteous 

PLACE 
Signifies,  [1]  The  space,  or  room  in  which  a  per- 
son, or  tiling  it.  Gen.  40.  3.     [2]  Jl  city,  tent, 
or  dwelling.    Gen.  18.  26,  33.     [3]  Lot,  state, 
or  condition.  Job  18.  21.     [4]  Itoom,  or  stead. 
Gen.  .50.  19.     [5]  Acceptation,   kind  welcome, 
or  entertainment,  John  8.  37.  [6]  .1  portion, 
or  text  of  scripture.  Acts  8.  32.     [7]  Advan- 
tage,  occasion,   or  opportunity,  Eph.   4.  27. 
[8J  An  office,  or  employment,  Gen.  40.  13. 
Gen.  13.  14.  Lord  said,  look  fromp. where  thou  art 
18.  24.  wilt  thou  destroy  and  not  spare  thep.? 
26.  I  will  spare  thep.  for  their  sakes 
20.  13.  the  kindness  thou  shalt  shew  at  every  p. 
22.  4.  the  third  day  Abraham  saw  the  p.  afar  off 
30.  25.  send  me  away,  I  may  go  to  mine  own  p. 
40.  3.  into  prison,  the  p.  where  Joseph  was  bound 
K3:orf.3.5!p. where  thou  standest  is  holy,  ./osA.5.15. 
18.  23.  this  people  shall  go  to  their  p.  in  peace 
2;}.  20.  to  bring  thee  into  thep.  I  have  prepared 
Lev.  1.  16.  he  shall  cast  ithy  thep.  of  the  ashes 
JVum.10.14.  in  the  first  p.  went  standard  of  Judah 
18.31.  ye  shall  eat  it  in  every  p.  ye  and  household* 
Deut.  11.  24.  every  p.  whereon  the  soles  of  youi 
feet  shall  tread  shall  be  yours,  .Josh.  1.  3 
12.  .5.  p.  the  Lord  God  shall  choose,  14. 1 16. 16. 
13.  offer  not  thy  burnt-offerings  in  every  p. 
21.  if  thep.  be  too  fur  from  thee,  14.  24. 
.Judg.W.  19.  let  uspassihroughthy  land  to  my  p. 
20.  36.  men  of  l.srael  gave  p.  to  the  Benjamite* 
Ruth  3.  4.  thou  shalt  mark  the  p.  where  he  lieth 

1  Sam.  10.  12.  anil  one  of  the  same  p.  answered' 

14.  46.  the  Philistines  went  to  thtir  own  p. 
20.  2.5.  and  David's  p.  was  empty,  27. 

2  Sam.  2.  23.  he  fell  down  nnd  died  in  the  same  p, 

15.  21.  in  what  p.  my  lord  the  king  shiill  be 

17.  9.  he  is  hid  in  some  pit,  or  in  some  other  p. 
12.  so  shall  we  come  upon  him  in  some  p. 

18.  18.  it  is  <alle<l  lo  this  day  Absalom's  p. 

1  Kings  8.  29.  thine  eyes  may  be  open  toward  p. 

2  Kinirs  5.  11.  and  strike  his  hand  over  the  p. 
6. 1.  behold,  p.  where  we  dwell  is  too  slrait  for  ut 


arteries;    especially    the   artrrious   vein,    Ay  1 1  CAron.  21.  22.  grant  me  the  p.  of  threshing-floor 
which  the  blood  is  conveyed  to  the  lungs,  andl   25.  David  gave  to  Oman  for  thep.  fiOO  shekels 
thence  to   the  lift  ventricle  of  the  heart,  and  2  Chr.  30.  16.  the  priests  stood  in  their  p.  3.5.  10. 
then  by  the  pulse  thrust  out  into  the  great  ar- 1   35.  1.5.  singers,  sons  of  Asaph,  were  in  iheir  p. 
tery,  called  .Arteria  aorta;  and  by  its  branches  .WA.2.3.  p. of  my  father's  sepulchre  lieth  waste 
dispersed  into  all  the  ports  of  the  body ;  which  \      14.  there  was  no  p.  for  beast  under  me  to  pa«« 
bring  done,  the  residue  of  th';  blood  is  carried    4.20.  in  what  p.  ye  hear  sound  of  the  trumpet 
back  into  the  right  ventricle,  whence  it  is  dis- 1    13.  11.  I  set  singers  and  Levites  in  their  p. 
posed  as  has  been  mentioned,   and  so  runs  a   Eslh.  2.  9.  Esther  and  her  maids  to  the  best  p. 
perpetual  round,    Eccl.  12.  6.  which  may  be    4.  14.  shall  deliverance  arise  frftm  another  p. 
said  to  he  broken,  when  they  become  useless  and  .Job  6.  17.  they  are  consumed  out  of  their  p. 
insufficient  for  the  performance  of  their  3eve-\   9.  6.  which  shake  the  earth  out  of  her  p. 


ral  functions 
Cr7i.24.14.lel  down  p.  T  pray  tliee,  that  I  may  drink 

15.  behold,  Rebekah  came  with  her  p.  4.5. 
.Judg.  7.16.  with  empty  p.  and  lamps  within  the  p. 

19  tliev  brake  p.  that  were  in  their  hands,  20. 
Eccl.  12.  6.  or  the  p.  be  broken  at  the  fountain 
/,a77?.4.  2.  how  are  ihcy  esteemed  as  carilicn  p..' 
Mark  14. 13.  man  bear,  a  p.  of  water,  Luke  22. 10. 

PITY. 
Deut.  7.  16.  thine  eve  shall  have  no  p.  on  them 
2  .Som. 12.6. restore  'he  lamb,  because  he  had  nop. 
Job  6. 14.  to  the  afHicted  p.  should  be  shewgd 
SM  • 


16. 18.  cover  not  my  blood, let  my  cry  have  nop. 
28.  12.  where  is  thep.  of  understanding?  20. 
2.3.  nnd  he  knowetli  thep.  thereof 
36.  20.  when  people  are  cut  offin  theirp. 
;f8.  19.  as  for  darkness,  where  is  the  p.  thereof? 
40.  12.  and  tread  down  the  wicked  in  theirp. 
Psal.  26.  8.  the  p.  where  thine  honour  dwelleth 

12.  my  foot  standelh  in  an  even  p. 
.32.  7.  thou  art  mv  hiding  p.  119.  114. 
33.  14.  from  thep.  of  his  habitulion  he  looketh 
upon  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  ea7tk 
103.  16.  thep.  thereof  shall  koow  it  noraore 


PLA 

Eccl.  3.  16.  the  p.  of  judgment,  p.  of  righteousness 

2(J.  all  go  to  one/),  all  are  oftlie  dust,  0.  ti. 
Jia.  5.  8.  that  lay  field  to  field,  till  tliere  be  no;;. 

13.  IX  the  earth  shall  remove  out  ofhtr/i. 

14.  "2.  shall  take  them,  and  bring  them  to  their/). 
28.8.  full  of  liltliiness, so  that  there  is  no/),  clean 

25.  the  a])i)ointed  barley  and  fye  in  their/). 
30.  3-.  in  every  p.  where  grounded-stati'shall  pass 

49.  20.  the  p.  is  loo  strait  for  ine,  give  p.  to  me 
54.  2.  enlarge  the/),  of  thy  tent,  sjiare  not 

GO.  13.  1  will  make  the/),  of  my  feet  ^'lorious 
fit).  1.  and  where  is  tlie/).  of  my  rest'? 

Jer  .7.1-2.  go  toniy /).  ||  32.  till  there  be  no  p.  19.11. 
17. 12.  glorious  throne  is  the/),  of  our  sanctuary 
18.  14.  the  llowing  waters  come  from  another/). 

Hiek.6. 13.  there  slain  be  on /(.where  tliey  ollered 
43.7./).  of  my  throne  shall  Israel  no  more  delile 

31.  he  shall  hum  it  in  the  appointed  p.  of  house 
Pan.  2.  35.  iliat  iw  p.  was  found  for  them 

8.  11.  the/),  of  his  sanctuary  was  cast  down 
Hos.iAb.  1  will  go  and  return  to  my^.  till  they 
Joel  3.  t  If>-  the  I^ord  will  bo  the/),  ol  repair 
^mos  2.  t  13.  press  your  p.  as  a  cart  is  pressed 

8.3.  tlierc  shall  be  many  dead  bodies  in  every/). 
J\'VzA.  3.  17.  their/),  is  not  known  where  they  are 
Zeck.  10.  10.  and  p.  shall  not  be  found  for  them 

12.  6. shall  he  inhabited  again  in  her  own/).  14. 10 
Jilal.  1.  11.  incense  shall  be  offered  in  every/). 
JUat.  28. 6.  sec  the  /).  where  Lord  lay ,  Alark  Iti.  16. 
Jilark  6. 10.  in  what  p.  soever  ye  enter  into  a  houst 
J^uke  4.  17.  he  found  the/),  where  it  was  written 

10. 1.  Lord  sent  them  two  and  two  unto  every  p- 

32.  a  Levite,  when  he  was  at  the  p.  passed  by 
14.  9.  and  say  to  thee,  give  this  man  /). 

John  4.20.  Jerusalem  is  the  p.  of  worship 
8.  37.  because  my  word  hath  nop.  in  you 
11.  6.  he  abode  two  days  still  in  the  same  p. 

48.  Romans  shall  take  away  our  p.  ami  nation 
18.  2.  Judas  which  betrayed  him,  knew  the  p. 

^cts  2.  1.  they  were  with  one  accord  in  one/). 
4.  31.  when  they  had  prayed,  the  p.  was  shaken 
7.  33.  the  p.  whereon  thou  standest  is  holy 

49.  or  wjiat  is  the/),  of  my  rest? 

8. 32.  thep.of  scrijiture  which  he  read  was  this 
Horn.  12. 19.  avenge  nut,  but  rather  give/),  to  wrath 

15. 2^<.  but  now  having  no  more  p.  in  these  parts 
1  Csr.1.2.  with  all  that  in  every  p.  call  on  Jesus  Chr. 

11.  20.  when  ye  come  together  into  one  /). 

14.  23.  the  whole  church  be  como  into  one  p. 
S  Cor.2.14.tlie  savour  of  his  knowledge  in  e\ery /). 
Oal.%5.  whom  gavd /).  by  subjection  not  aii  hour 
Eph.  4.  27.  neither  give  p.  to  the  devil 
I  Thess.l.P.ln  everyp.yourfdithGod-ward  isspread 
1  Tim.  2.t  2.  prayers  for  kings  and  all  in  eminent  p. 
/feb.  5.G.  ashesaith  also  in  another/),  thou  a  priest 

8.7.  no  p.  should  have  been  sought  for  the  second 

12. 17.  he  found  no  p.  of  repentance  though  scmghi 

Jam.  3.  11.  at  the  same  p.  sweet  water  and  bitter 

i?fc.l2.8.nor  was  there/). found  any  more  in  heaven 

14.  that  she-might  fly  into  wilderness  to  her  p. 

20.  11.  and  there  was  found  nop.  for  them 

J*  PLACE. 
Sen.^O.OO.np.  where  king's  prisoners  were  bound 
F.zod.  21.  13.  then  I  will  appoint  thee  a  p.  to  flee 

33.21.  the  Lord  said,  behold,  there  is  a  p.  by  mo 
/Turn.  32. 1.  behold,  the  place  was  a  p.  for  cattle 
/)cu£.1.33.  search  you  out  ap.to  pitch  yonr  tents  in 

23.  12.  thou  shalt  have  ap.  without  the  camp 
Josh.  20.  4.  they  shall  give  him  a  p.  in  the  city 
Judg.  17.  8.  to  snjourn  where  he  could  find  a  p. 

18. 10.  a  p.  where  is  no  want  of  any  thing 

1  Sam.  15.  12.  Saul  sent  him  up  a  p.  and  is  gone 

21.2.  I  have  ap|iointed  my  servants  to  such  a  p. 
27.  5.  let  them  give  mo  a  p.  in  some  town 

2  Sam.  7.10.  I  will  appoint  a  p.  for  Israel,  they  may 
dwell  in  (I  p.ofth. own, move  no  more,  I  Chr.  17.9. 

II.  16.  Joah  assigned  Uriah  to  ap.  where  valiant 
1  A7n^«8.  2l.lBet  there  a  p.  for  ark,  1  Chr.  15.  1. 
8^iB^»fi.2.1it  usmako  usap. where  wemaydwell 

8.  in  such  and  such  a  p.  shall  he  my  camp 

9.  man  off!,  bi  id,  beware  thou  pass  not  such  a  p. 
S  Chron.  0.  2.  I  have  built  a  p.  for  thy  dwelling 
Job  28.  1.  there  is  up.  for  gold  where  Ihev  fine  it 
Pial.  132.  ."i   until  I  find  out  a  p.  for  the  Lord 
Prov.  14.  20  iind  h  »  'hildnm  have  a  p.  of  refuge 
Jsa.  4.  a.  Hhall  Ix^for  a  p.  of  refuge  from  rain 

33.  21.  thi>  Lord  will  ho  tons  a  p.  of  broad  rivers 

34.  14.  anil  find  for  liernolf  ap.  of  rest 

50.  5.  and  within  my  wnl!s  a  p.  and  a  name 
65.  in   Achor  a  p.  h>r  the  herds  to  lie  down  in 

F.iek.  2fi.  5.  a  p.  for  the  ipreading  of  nets,  14. 
39.  11.  Iwillgive  loOog,  np.  ofgraveain  Fsriicl 

ZfpA.2.15.  she  is  bicome  a  p. for  heasls  to  lii'  diiwn 

JUat.  27.  33.  ihnt  in  a  p.  of  a  scull,  .Tohn  19.  17. 

Mark  11.4.  foiinil  mil  in  a  p.  where  two  ways  met 

John  11.  2.  I  go  lo  prepare  a  p.  for  vou,  3. 

JM.  2.  fi.  one  in  a  certain  p.  testified,  saying 
4.  4.  he  spake  'n  a  O'rtnin  p.  of  the  sevenih  dny 
11.  8.  when  c  died  to  go  out  into  a  p.  he  obi-ycd 

Rev.  12.0.  when'  shu  hutli  no  prei'i/od  of  Cud 


PLA 

/itu.lG.lO.gather  them  into  ap.called  Armageddon 

Hce  Choose:,  Uwellinu. 

Jli/rh  I'LACK. 

.Vum.  23.  3.  and  Ualaam  went  up  to  a  high  p. 

I  -Sa:!!.  9.  12.  there  is  a  sacrihce  to-day  in  high  p. 

lU.  5.  shalt  meet  jirophets  coming  from  high  p. 

13.  when  had  made  an  end,  i^jaul  callie  lijhighp. 

1  A'))i»-a-3.4.  that  was  great  A/^'A  p.  1  Chi  oh.  10.39. 
11.7.  Solomon  built  a  high  p.  lor  Chemosh 

i  Kings  '23.  15.  high  p.  that  Jeroboam  had  made, 
Joaiah  brakedown  the  Aii'A  /).  burnt  theAfVAp. 

2  Chrvn.  1.  3.  so  Solomon  went  to  the  hi/jh  p. 
13.  come  from  his  journty  lo  A(,vA  p.  at  Gibeon 

P.va/.  9.t9.  Lord  will  Uiidhighp.  for  the  oppressed 
-20.tl.  name  of  God  of  Jacob  set  iheeon  a  Ai^'Ap. 
41).  t  7.  the  God  of  Jacob  is  a  A(^'A  p.  for  us 

/-.-a.  10.  rj.  that  Moab  is  weary  oa  the  Ai'^'A  p. 

F.zci>'.  Hi.  24.  made  Ai^'Ap.  in  every  street, -25.  31. 

20.  29.  what  is  the  Ai^'A  p.  wliereunto  ye  go  ? 

//(«  I'LACE. 
(ien.  18.  33.  and  Abraham  returned  to  his  p. 

31.  55.  Laban  rose  up  and  relumed  to  his  p. 
F.xod.M.'i'.i.  neither  rose  from  his  p.  tor  three  days 

10.29.  abide  ev.  manin  Aiip.  none  go  out  of  Arsp. 
/.ei:.  13.  23.  but  if  the  bright  spot  stayinAi'sp. 
jYuin.'i.  17.  every  man  in  Ala'  p.  by  their  stanrlards 

21.  2j.  Ualaam  rose  up  and^eturned  to  his  p. 
Dcut.  21.  19.  and  bring  him  to  the  gate  of  Aiip. 
liuth  4.10.name  of  dead  be  not  cut  oif  from  Am  p. 

1  Sam.  3.  2.  when  Kli  was  laid  down  in  A/»-p. 
9.  so  Samuel  went  and  lay  down  in  his  p. 

5.  3.  and  they  set  Dagon  in  Ais  p.  again 
11.  lut  the  ark  go  down  to  his  own  p.  0.  2. 

•23.  S2.  go  and  see  his  p.  where  his  haunt  is 
-26.25.  David  went  on,  and  Saul  returned  to  his  p. 
29. 4.  send  David,  that  he  may  go  again  to  his  p. 

2  Sam.  G.  17.  they  set  the  ark  of  the  Lord  in  his  p. 

19.  39.  Barzillai  returned  to  his  own  p. 
1  Kings  8.0.  (iriests  brought  ark  lohisp.  2  CAr.  .5. 7. 

■20.  21.  take  kings  away,  every  man  out  o(  his  p. 

1  CAr.  15.3.  to  bring  the  ark  of  the  Lord  to  his  p. 
II).  27.  strength  and  gladness  are  in  his  p. 

2  Chrnti.  21.  11.  carried  the  chest  lo  his  p.  again 
34.  31.  king  stood  in  A(6-  p.  and  made  a  covenant 

Ezra  1.  4.  let  men  of  his  p.  help  him  with  silver 
2.  G8.  for  house  of  God  to  set  it  in  Ai*  p.  5. 15.|  G.  7. 
.Toh  2.  II.  they  came  every  one  from  his  ownp. 

7.  10.  neither  shall  his  p.  know  him  any  more 

8.  18.  if  he  destroy  him  from  his  p.  it  shall  deny 
H.  18.  and  the  rock  is  removed  out  of  his  p. 
18.  4.  and  shall  the  rock  bo  removed  out  of  his  p.? 

20.  9.  nor  shall  his  p.  any  more  behold  him 
27.  21.  and  as  a  storm  hurleth  him  out  of  his  p. 

23.men  shall  rlap  hands  and  hiss  him  outof  Ai«p. 

37.  1.  and  my  heart  is  removed  out  of  A;*  p. 

38.  12.  and  caused  the  day-spiing  to  know  his  p. 
Hsal.  37.  10.  thou  shalt  diligently  consider  his  p. 
Prov.  27.8.  so  is  a  m;in  that  wandereth  from  Ais  p. 
F.ccl.i.5.  the  sun  hasteth  to  his  p.  where  he  arose 
Isn.  2f).  21.  Lord  cometli  out  of  his  p.  to  punish 

.33.10.  his  p.  of  defom-e  shall  be  munition  ofrocks 
40.7.  set  him  in  his  p.  shall  not  remove  from  A/a-  p. 
.Jcr.  i.  7.  he  is  gone  from  Ala"  p.  to  make  desolate 

6.  3.  they  shall  feed  every  one  in  his  p. 
F.iek.'.i.\i.  blessed  be  the  glory  of  Lord  from  Ai'a-p. 
Mic.  1.  3.  behold,  the  Lord  Cometh  out  of  his  p. 
y.rpji.2.]\.  men  shall  worship  every  one  from  his  p. 
Zrrh.  0.  12.  and  he  shall  grow  up  out  of  his  p. 
Mat.  2f).  52.  put  up  again  thysw-ord  into  his  p. 
Jir.ts  1.  2.").  that  he  might  go  to  Ais  own  p. 
liev.  2.5.  remove  thy  candlestick  out  of  A)a'p. 

See  Holy,  Most  II.ily. 

In  the  PLA<"i:. 

^^..^l. 19. Jos.  said,fi;ar  not,  tarn  in  Ihf.p.  of  God 

F.Lud.  1.5.  17.  plant  them  in  the  p.  thou  hast  mad 

Acii.  4.21.  kill  it  in  (Ac  p.  where  ihev  kill  hurnt- 

olfering  before  the  Lord,  29,  33.  I  fi.  25.  1 7. 2. 

13. 19.  in  the  p.  of  the  boil  ihere  be  white  rising 
JVitni.  9.  17  in  the  p.  where  cloud  abode,  tliere  fsr. 

33.54.  inheritance  be  in  the  p.  where  his  lot  fallelh 
.fnsh.  4.  9.  Joshua  set  up  twelve  stones  in  the  p. 
1  h'inirs  13. 2-2.  because  hast  drunk  water  in  the  p. 

•ii. \0.inthr  p.  where  dogs  licked  blood  ofNabolh 
2('^Aron.  3.  1.  in  Ihcp.  that  Havid  had  prepared 
Jol)  34.t20.  strikelh  them  in  the  p. of  beholders 
/'.««/.44. 19. hast  sore  broken  us  in  thep.  of  dragons 
ProiJ.  25.  (i.  and  stand  not  in  the  p.  of  great  men 
^>rMI.3.  infA'p.  whnrc-ih.triifalhth  it  shall  bo 
./  r.22.  12.  bill  h' shall  die  in  the  p.  :W.  9.  |  42.  2-2. 
F.zrk.  17.  10.  in  (Ar  p.  where  the  king  dwelleth 

21.  30.  jiid;e  thee  in  I.  p.  where  lliou  wap'  created 
Ifii.i.  1.  10.  that  in  the  p.  whore  it  was  said,  ye  are 

no'  niv  pi'opic,  shall  b<"  sons  ofGod,  Koni.9.  2(i. 
13.  13.  not  slay  long  in  fAf  p.  of  breaking  forth 
>ohn  19.4 1. in  Ikep  whc"-  oriicifiod,  was  a  garden 

Ofthe]'U.\CF.. 
Den.  2"i.  7.  men  of  p.  asked  liirn,  lest  men  of  p.  kill 
29.  22.  Lnhin  gathered  all  the  men  of  the  p. 
32  30.  Jnroh  cnlled  t|io  nam-  of  the  p.  I'eninI 
33.17.(lame  o/p.  Succolh  |1  35.1  j.nio/p.  Bolh-cl 


PLA 

'  F.iod.  17.   7.  and  he  called  name  of  the  p.  Mauan 
A'u)n.ll.3.  n  .me  of  the  p.  Taberah  ||  21.3.HormaM 
Josh.  4.  3.  take  ye  out  of  the  p.  twelve  Btonea 
5.  y.  name  of  the  p.  Gilgal  i|  7. 20.  va  ley  of  Achor 
•ludg.  19.  10.  the  men  of  thep.  were  Benjamitei 
Ruth  1. 7.  Nuumi  went  forth  out  of  the  p.  where 
2*am. O.S.David  called  name  of  thep.  IVrez-uzzah 

1  CAron.  28. 11.  pattern  o/tAep.  ofthe  mercy-seat 

2  Chron.  20.  20.  name  of  the  p.  valley  of  Uerachah 
F.zek  41. 11.  breadth  of  thep.  left  was  five  cubits 
Joeli  7.  raise  them  out  of  the  p.  whither  ye  sold 
JVuA.  I.  8.  make  an  utter  end  of  thep.  thereof 

That  PLACE. 

r.Vn.21.31.  Abraham  called  that  p.  Beer-shcba 
22. 14.  tAa<p.  Jehovah-jireh  ||28.  19.  Belh-ef 
32.  2.  Mahanaim  |{  38.  21.  asked  men  of  that  p. 

JVum.  11.  34.  name  of  that  p.  Kibroth-hattaavah 

Drut.  12.  3.  destroy  names  of  them  out  of  Utat  p 
17.  10.  the  sentence  they  of  tAatp.  shall  shew 

.fudg.2.  5.  they  called  name  of  tAutp.  Bochim 

15.  17.  that  p.  Ramath-lehi  ||18. 12.  Mahancli-dan 

1  Sam.  23.  -28.  called  thutp.  Selah-hammah-lckolh 

2  .Sam.  2.  16.  that  p.  was  called  Helkath-hazzurim 
5.20.  called  that  p.  Baal-perazim,  1  Chron.  14.11. 

1  Chrun.  13.  11.  that  p.  is  called  Perez-uzzah 
Mat.  14.  35.  men  of  that  p.  had  knowledge  of  him 
Mark  G.  10.  there  abide  till  ye  depart  from  that  p. 
John  5.  13.  a  mulliiude  being  in  that  p. 

11.30.  but  was  in£Aa*p.  where  Martha  met  him 
.^cts  21. 12.  both  wc  and  they  of  (Aat  p.  besought 

This  PLACE. 
Oen.  10.  12.  thy  sons  bring  them  out  of  this  p. 
13.  we  will  destroy  this  p.  |{  14.  get  out  of  tAis  p 

20.  11.  surely  the  fear  of  God  is  not  in  (Ai«  p. 

28. 10.  Lord  is  in  this  p.  ||  17.  dreadful  is  this  p. 
38. 21.  there  was  no  harlot  in  (Ai*  p.  22. 
48.9.  are  sons,  whom  God  hath  given  me  in  this  p. 

Eiod.l3.^.  the  Lord  brought  you  out  from  this  p. 
J\ru7n.  20.  5.  to  bring  us  unto  this  evil  p. 
Deut.  1.  31.  bore  thee  in  all  the  way  that  ye  went, 
till  ye  came  to  this  p.  9.  7.  |  11.  5. 
20.  9.  and  he  hath  brought  us  into  this  p. 

23.7.  when  ye  came  unto  this  p.  Sihon  came  out 
Judg.  18.  3.  and  what  makest  thou  in  this  p.? 

1  A'in^s  8.  29.  hearken  to  prayer  toward  this  p. 
30,  35.  2  CAron.  6.  20,  21,  26,  40.  1 7.  15. 

13. 8.  nor  eat  bread,  nor  drink  water  in  fAi«p.l6. 

2  Kings  18.25.  come  not  without  L.  against  this  p. 

22.  16. 1  will  bring  evil  on  this  p.  anrl  inhabitants 
thereof,  17,20.  2  CAt-oh.  34.  24,25,28 

2  Chron.  7. 12.  and  have  chosen  this  p.  to  myself 

Job  18.21.  this  the  p.  of  him  that  knows  not  God 

Jer.  7.  6.  and  shed  r.ot  innocent  blood  in  this  p. 

20.  my  fury  shall  be  poured  out  on  this  p. 

14. 13.  I  will  give  you  assured  peace  in  this  p. 

16.  2.  neither  have  sons  nor  daughters  in  this  p. 
9.  cause  to  cease  out  of  tAi*  p. the  voice  of  mirth 

19.  3.  behold,  I  will  bring  evil  upon  this  p. 
4.  they  estranged  this  p.  filled  this  p.  with  blood 
6.  that  this  p.  shall  no  more  be  called  Tophet 
12.  thus  will  Ido  to  (Ais  p.  sailh  the  Lord,  40.  2. 

22. 11.  which  went  forth  out  of  Mis  p.  24.  5. 
27.22. and  1  will  restore  them  to  (Ais p.  3-2.  37. 

28.  3.  I  w;ill  bring  to  (Ais  p.  all  the  vesselg,  6. 
4. 1  will  bring  again  to  this  p.  Jeconiah 

29.  10.  in  causing  you  to  return  to  this  p. 
3.3.  10.  again  be  heard  in  (Ai.i  p.  the  voice  of  joj 
42.  18.  and  )-e  shall  see  this  p.  no  more 
44.  29.  that  I  will  punish  you  in  this  p. 
51.  02.  O  Lord,  thou  hast  spoken  against  this  p. 

F.zrk.  Mi.  20  (Ais  is  p.  where  the  priests  shall  boil 
ZrpA.  1.4.  cut  olflhe  remnant  of  Baal  from  (Ais  p. 
Mag.  2.9.  in  (Ais  p. will  I  give  peace,  sailh  the  Lord 
Jfat.  12.fi.  in  this  p.  one  greater  than  the  temple 
/.«/,-.'  10.  28.  lest  tlicy  como  into  (Ais  p.  of  torment 

23.  5.  teaching,  beginning  from  Galilee  to  (Ais  p. 
./lets  0. 14.  Jesus  of  Nazareth  shall  destroy  this  p. 

7. 7.  they  shall  come  forth  and  serve  me  in  thi.i  p 

21.2^.  that  toachcth  against  the  law  and  (Aisp 
Jleh.  4.5.  and  in  /Ais  p.  again,  if  Ihey  shall  enter 

Thy  PLACE. 
Orn.  40.  13.  Pharaoh  shall  restore  thoo  to  ihy  p. 
J^um.  21.  II.  therefore  now  fire  thou  to  tJiy  p. 
2  Sam.  I.").  19.  return  to  (Ay  p.  and  abide  with  king 
F.crl.\i).i.  if  ruler  rise  against  thi  e,  leave  not  thyp. 
Kzek.  12.  3.  thou  shalt  remove  from  (Ay  p.  38.  IS. 

To  or  unto  the  PLACE. 
Cini.  13.3.  .\bram  weni  unto  (.  p.whrrc  his  lent,  4. 

22.3.  went  imto  (Acp.  of  which  Gnd  lold  him,  9. 
/•;r»</.3.8.  til  bring  you  ««(<)  (.  p.  ofthe  Ciinaanite 

32.  34.  le'id  people  unto  the  p.  of  which  I  spake 
.^'iim.  10.  29.  we  are  journeying  to  the  p.  of  which 

14.  10.  ffo  up  fo  (Acp.  which  Lord  hatli  promised 
Ai.'.-A.4.P.corried  stones  to  the  p.  where  they  lodged 

1  S'nm.  20.19.  coine(o  t.p.  where  ihou  hide  thyself 
2.S'(im.2.  23.  as  many  n»  came  to  thep.  stood  slill 

2  A'i/in'.vfi.  10.  eonl/o(Acp.  which  man  ofGorltold 
1  Clir".  1.5.  12.  hrln;  ark  to  thr  p.  that  I  prcpare<l 
.V'A.1.9.[  will  bring  them  to  the  p.\  have  chosen 
Psal.  104.8.  they  go  to  £  p.  tlml  thou  hoat  founded 


PLA 

Tsa.  18.7.  present  brought  to  the  p.  of  name  ofLd. 
Jcr.  7. 14. 1  will  do  to  the  p.  wIikjIi  I  gave  to  you 

29.14.  will  bring  you  again  to  t.p.  wliuiicc  I  caused 
^cts  2.5. 23.  and  was  entered  into  the  p.  of  hearing 

■     PLACE,  yerb. 
Gen  :J3.t  15.  let  me  p.  some  ol"  the  folk  with  thco 
Kxod.  lli  21.  and^.  such  over  thuni  to  be  rulers 
IJcv.t.  14.  23.  in  the  p.  which  lie  shall  choose,  to 
p.  his  name  there,  lU.  2,  •>,  11.  |  2U.  2. 
1  Kivgs  20.  t  1--  Benhadad  said,  p.  the  engines 
Kira  tj   1   and/),  them  in  the  house  of  God 
Isa.  I(i.l3.  and  1  will/). salvation  in  Zion  for  Israel 
Kzek.  37.  14.  I  shall  p.  you  in  your  own  land,  26. 
Jjan.  H.  31.  aiwl  they  shall/),  the  abomination 
Hos.  11.11. 1  will/),  them  in  tlieir  houses,  saith  Ld. 
ZetA.  10.  6.  I  will  bring  thorn  again  lop.  them 

PLACED. 
Gen.  3.21.  God  /j.at  east  of  the  garden  cherubims 

47.  11.  .loseph  p.  his  father  and  his  brethren 

1  Kings  12.  32.  Jeroboam/),  in  Beth-el  priests 

2  Kings  17.  6.  and  p.  them  in  Halah  and  in  Habor 
24.  and  p.  them  in  the  cities  of  Samaria,  20. 

2  Chron.  1.  14.  which  hep.  in  the  clmriot  cities 
4.  8.  he  made  tables,  p.  them  in  the  temple 
17. 2.  he  /).  forces  in  all  the  fenced  cities  of  .Judah 
Job  21).  4.  of  old,  since  man  was  p.  upon  earth 
Psal.  78.  (iO.  the  tent  which  be  had  p.  among  men 
Cant.  5. 1 12.  his  eyes  as  the  eyes  of  doves  fitly  p. 
Jsa.  5.  eJ.  that  they  may  hop.  alone  in  the  midst 
Jer.  5.  22.  which  p.  sand  for  the  bound  of  the  sea 
Kzek.  17.  5.  the  eagle/),  it  by  the  great  waters 

PLACES. 
Gen.  28. 15. 1  am  with  thee,  will  keep  thee  in  all  p. 
Ezod.  20.  24.  in  all  p.  where  1  record  my  name 
y.)e«M2. 2.shall  utterly  destroy  all  the  p.  wherein 
Josh.  5.  8.  abode  in  their/),  till  they  were  whole 
Judg.  5.  11.  delivered  in  the/),  of  drawing  water 
19. 13.  let  us  draw  near  to  one  of  these /).tx>  lodge 

1  Sam.  7.  16.  Samuel  judged  Israel  in  all  those/). 
30.  31.  David  sent  presents  to  all  the/). 

2  Sam.  7.  7.  in  all  the  p.  spake  I  a  word  with  any 
2A'm^jf23.5.putdown  i)rie8ts  in/). about  Jerusalem 

14.  he  filled  their/),  with  the  bones  of  men 
JVeA.  4.  12.  from  all  p.  whence  ye  shall  return 
13.  I  set  the  people  in  lower/),  and  on  higher/). 

12.  27.  they  sought  Levites  out  of  all  their /7. 
Job  21.  28.  where  are  dwelling  p.  of  the  wicked 

37.  8,  beasts  go  into  dens  and  remain  in  their/). 

Psal.  10.8.  he  sitteth  in  lurking/),  of  the  villages 
16.  6.  the  lines  are  fallen  to  me  in  pleasant/). 
18.  45.  and  be  afraid  out  of  their  close/). 
73.  18.  thou  didst  set  them  in  slippery  p. 
74.20.  the  dark  p.  of  the  earth  are  full  of  cruelty 
103.  22.  bless  the  Lord,  all  his  works,  in  all  p. 
105.  41.  they  ran  in  the  dry  p.  like  a  river 
110.6.  he  shall  fill  the  p.  with  the  dead  bodies 

Frov.  8.  2.  sho  standelh  in  the  p.  of  the  paths 

Cant.  2.  14.  O  my  dove,  that  art  in  the  secret/). 

Isa,  32. 18.  my  people  shall  dwell  in  quiet  resting  /). 
40.  4.  crooked  made  straight,  and  rough  p.  jilain 
4.5.2. 1  will  make  the  crooked/),  straight 

Jer. 4.  12.  a  wind  from  those/),  shall  come  to  me 
8.  3.  in  all  p.  whither  I  have  driven  them,  2'J.  14. 
17.26.  they  shall  come  from  p.  about  Jerusalem 
24.  9.  to  be  a  taunt  and  a  curse  in  all  p.  I  drive 
33.  44.  take  witnesses  in  the  p.  about  Jerusalem 
40. 12.  all  the  Jews  returned  out  of  all  p.  whither 

45.  5.  thy  life  I  will  give  for  a  prey  in  all  p. 
//om.  2.  6.  he  hath  destroyed  his  p.  of  the  assembly 
Ezek.  34.  12. 1  will  deliver  them  out  of  all  p. 

26.  I  will  make  the  p.  round  my  hill  a  blessing 

46.  24.  he  said  these  are  the  p.  of  them  that  boil 
47. 11.  but  the  miry  p.  thereof  shall  not  be  healed 

.^mos  4.  6.  and  want  of  bread  in  all  yourp. 
Z.ech.  3.  7. 1  will  give  theep.  to  walk  among  these 
J^at.  12.43.  he  walketh  through  dryp.  Luke  1 1 .  24. 

13.  5.  some  fell  on  stony  p.  and  sprung  up,  20. 
24.7.and  there  shall  be  famines  and  earthquakes  in 

divers  p.  Mark  U.S.  J.uke2l.  11. 
^cts  24.  3.  we  accept  it  in  al!  p.  most  noble  Felix 
Eph.  1.  3.  who  hath  blessed  us  in  heavenly  p. 
20.  set  him  at  his  own  right  hand  in  heavenly  p. 

2.  6.  hath  raised  us  up,  and  made  us  sit  togoiher 

in  heavenly  p.  in  Christ  Jesus 

3.  10.  to  powers  in  heavenly  p.  might  be  known 
Phil.  1. 13.  mv  bonds  in  Christ  are  manil'estin  allp. 
fic».6.14. mountain  and  island  moved  outof  theirp. 

See  De30i,.4TE,  Holy. 
WiVA  PLACES. 
Lev.  26. 30. 1  will  destroy  your  A)VA  p.  and  images 
J^um.  21.  28.  consumed  lords  of  hi!,'h  p.  of  Arnon 
22.  41.  brought  him  up  into  the  hinhp.  of  Baal 
33.  52.  and  quite  pluck  down  all  their  Ai^A  p. 
/)«/<.  32.  13.  made  him  ride  on  highp.  of  the  earth 
33.  29.  and  thou  shalt  tread  upon  tbf'ir  hiahp. 
Judg.  5.  If.  jeoparded  their  lives  in  the  Ai'^-A  p. 

1  Sam.  13.  6.'the  people  hide  themselves  in  highp. 

2  Savi.  I.  19.  the  beauty  of  Israel  slain  in  highp. 
25.  Jonathan,  thou  wast  slain  in  thy  AiirA  p. 

82. 34.  and  selteth  mo  on  mv  high  p  Psal.  18. 33. 
443 


PLA 

1  Kings  3.  2.  only  the  people  sacrificed  in  AigA  p. 

2  Kings  17.  32.  2  Chron.  .13.  17. 

3.  sacrificed  and  burnt  incense  in  high  p.  22.  43. 

2  Kings  12.  3.  ]  15.  4,  :».  |  16.  4.  ]  17.  11. 

12.  31.  Jeroboam  made  a  house  ot' Ai'^A  p. 

32.  lie  placed  in  Buth-el  the  priests  of  highp. 

13.  2.  he  shall  offer  the  priests  of  the  high  p. 
.32.  he  cried  against  all  ihe  houses  of  the  high  p. 

1  Kings  13.33.  Jeroboam  made  of  the  lowest  of  the 

people  priests  of  the  high  p.  2  Kings  17.32. 

15. 14.  but  the  A/^'A  p.  were  not  removed,  22. 43. 

2  Kings  12.  3.  |  14.  4.  |  15.  4,  a."). 

2  Kings  17.  20.  put  their  gods  in  houses  of  high  p. 
18.  4.  Ilezekiali  removed  the  highp.  22. 

23.  5.  had  ordaimd  to  burn  incense  in  tlie  liigh  p. 

8.  defiled  the  highp.  and  brake  down  the  A(>A 

p.  13.  2  CAro.)).  31.  1.  )  32. 12.  /.s<i.  3ii.  7. 

9.  priests  of  high  p.  came  not  up  to  aliar  of  Ld. 

20.  he  slew  all  the  priests  of  the  highp. 

2  CAr.11.1  j.Rehoboam  ordained  priests  lor  AVg-A  p. 

14.  3.  Asa  took  away  the  high  p.  am\  images,  5. 

15.  17.  the  high  p.  were  not  taken  away,  20.  33. 
17.  6.  Jehoshaphat  took  awav  the  high  p. 

21.  11.  Jehor.  made  high  p.\\  28.  25.  Ahaz  high  p. 

34.  3.  Josiah  did  purge  Jerusa.  from  the  high  p. 
Job  25.  2.  he  maktjb  peace  in  bis  high  p. 
Psal.  78.  58.  they  i^loked  him  wiih'their  highp. 
Prov.  8.  2.  she  staWeth  on  the  top  of  the  high  p. 

9. 14.  sitteth  on  a  seat  in  the  high  p.  of  the  city 
Isa.  15.2.  he  is  gone  up  to  the  high  p.  to  weep 

41. 18. 1  will  open  rivers  in  high  p.  and  fountains 

49.  9.  their  pastures  shall  be  in  all  high  p. 

58. 14.  cause  thee  to  ride  on  high  p.  of  ibe  eartl 
Jer.  3.  2.  lift  up  thine  eyes  to  the  high  p.  and  see 

21.  a  voice  was  heard  on  the  high  p.  weeping 
4.  11.  a  dry  wind  in  the  highp.  of  the  wilderness 
7.  29.  and  take  up  a  lamentation  in  the  high  p. 
12. 12.  the  spoilers  are  come  up  on  all  tbehigh  p. 
14.  6.  the  wild  asses  did  stand  in  the  Aj'^A  p. 
17.3.1  will  give  thy  highp.  for  sin,  through  borders 
26. 18.  and  the  mountain  of  the  house  shall  become 

as  the  high  p.  of  the  forest,  J\Iic.  3.  12 
4S. 35. to  cease  in  Moab  him  that  ofTereth  in  highp. 
Ezek.  6.  3.  behold,  I  will  destroy  your  highp. 

16.  16.  deckedst  thy  highp.  with  divers  colours 
.39.  and  they  shall  break  down  thy  highp. 

36.  2.  the  ancient  highp.  are  ours  in  pos.session 
Hos.  10. 8.  the  hi(.'h  p.  of  A  ven  shall  be  destroyed 
.^imos  4. 13.  treadelh  on  highp.  of  earth,  Mic.  1.3. 

7.  9.  the  Ai'^A  p.  of  Isaac  shall  he  desolate 
Mic.  1.  5.  and  what  are  the  high  p.  of  Judah  ? 
Hah.  3. 19.  will  make  ine  to  walk  on  mine  highp. 
Eph.  C.  12.  against  spifiiual  wickedness  in  high  p. 
See  Rl'ILT. 
iya.stc  PLACES. 
fsa.  5. 17.  waste  p.  of  fat  ones  shall  strangers  eat 

51.  3.  the  Lord  will  comfort  all  her  waste  p. 

52.  9.  sing  together,  yc  waste  p.  of  Jerusalem 
58.  12.  and  they  shall  build  the  old  waste  p. 

PLAGUE. 
Psal.  89.23.  and  I  will  p.  them  that  hate  him 

PLAGUE,  Substantive. 
Exnd.  11.  1.  yet  I  will  bring  one  p.  on  Pharaoh 
12.  13.  Ihe  p.  shall  not  be  on  you  to  destroy  you 
30.  12.  that  there  be  no  p.  among  them 
I.,en.  13.  3.  when  hair  in  the  p.  is  turned  while,  17. 
5.  if  the  p.  spreail  not  in  the  skin,  6.  |  14.  48. 
30.  if  a  manor  woman  hath  a  p.  then  priest  shall 
see  the  p.  31,  32,  50,  51,  55.  |  14.  37. 
44.  he  is  a  leprous  man,  his  p.  is  in  his  head 
50.  and  shut  up  it  that  hath  the  p.  seven  days 
.57.  if  it  app.  in  warp  or  woof,  it  is  a  spreading  p. 
58.irp.bedepartcd  from  them,  it  shall  bo  washed 
14.  35.  there  is  as  it  were  a  p.  in  the  house 
J\riim.  8.  19.  that  there  be  nop.  among  Israel 
II.  33.  Lord  smote  people  with  a  very  great  p. 
14.  37.  those  men  died  by  the  p.  before  the  Lord 
16.  46.  wrath  is»gone  out,  the  p.  is  begun,  47. 

48.  anil  the  p.  was  stayed,  .50.  ]  25.  8. 

49.  now  they  that  died  in  the  p.  were,  25.  9. 
De?(f.  28. 61.  every  p.  which  isnot  wri'ten  in  book 
.7rt.'(A.22.17.  we  are  not  cleansed,  altho'  there  wasp. 

1  .Va')i.6. 4.  one  p.  was  on  you  all  ami  your  lords 

2  .9(77)1.  24. 21.  that  p.  maybe  stayed,  rCAr.21.22. 

1  Kimrs  8.  37.  whatever  p.  or  sickness  there  be 
38.  shall  know  every  man  the  p.  of  his  own  heart 

2  CAr.  21.  14.  with  a  great  p.  will  the  Lord  smite 
Psal.  91.  10.  nor  any  p.  come  nigh  thy  dwelling 

106.  29.  and  the  p.  brake  in  upon  them 
30.Phinehas  executed  judgment,  so  p.  was  stayed 
Zreh.  14.12.  this  shall  be  p.  the  Lord  will  smite,  18. 
Mark  5. 29.  she  fell  that  she  was  healed  of  that  p. 

34.  so  in  pi'ace,  and  be  whole  of  thvp. 
Rev.  16.  21.  blaspbenvvl  becanse  of  the  p.  of  hail 

PLAGUED. 
GrTi.  12.  17.  tbe  Lord  p.  Pharaoh  and  his  house 
F.rnd.  32.  35.  I,ord  p.  the  people  for  making  calf 
.^o.tA.24.5.  p.  Egypt,  and  afterwards  brought  you 
1  CAr.  21.17.  not  on  people,  that  they  should  be  p. 
Psal.  73.  5.  nor  are  they  p.  like  otlier  men 


PLA 

Psal.li.li.  all  the  day  have  I  been  n.and  chasteoed 

PLAGUES. 
Gen.  12.  17.  Lord  plagued  Pharaoh  with  great  ;> 
Exod.  9.  14.  I  will  at  this  time  send  all  my  p. 
y,e».26.  21. 1  will  bring  seven  times  more  p.  on  you 
Oeut.  28.  59.  the  Ld.  will  make  thy  p.  wondiiffiU 
29.  22.  when  they  see  the  p.  of  that  land 
1  Sam.  4.  8.  gods  that  smote  the  Egyptians  witti  p. 
.Job  10.  t  17.  thou  renewest  thy  p.  against  me 
.fcr.  19. 8.  hiss,  because  of  the  p.  411. 17.  |  50.  13. 
Ezfk.  39.  t  2.  I  will  strike  thee  with  si.\  p. 
f/fis.  13.  14.  O  death,  1  will  he  thy  p.  O  grave 
./VurA  3.10.  pressed  to  touch  him  as  many  as  hadp 
J.vkc'i.  21.  same  hour  ho  cured  nianyof  their  p 
WfD.0. 20.  rest  which  wore  not  killed  by  these y. 
11.  6.  these  have  power  to  smite  earth  withp 
16.9.  name  of  God,  who  hath  power  over  these  p. 

18.  4.  and  that  ye  receive  not  of  her  p. 

8.  therefore  snail  her  p. come  in  one  day,  death 

22.  18.  God  shall  add  to  him  the  p.  written 

See  Sevkn. 
PLAIN. 
Gtji.25. 27.  Jacob  was  a  p.  man,  dwelling  in  tent* 
Psal.  27.  11.  teach  me,  and  lead  me  in  a  p.  path 
Pruv.  8.  9.  they  are  p.  to  him  that  understandeth 
1.5.  19.  but  the  way  of  the  righteous  is  made/). 
As-rt.  28.2.5.  when  be  made  /).  the  face  thereof 
40.  4.  crooked  made  straight,  and  rough  places/). 
.ler.  48.  21.  judgment  is  come  on  the  p.  country 
Hab.  2.  2.  write  the  vision,  make  it  p.  upon  table* 
Mark  7.  35.  tongue  was  loosed,  and  he  spake  ». 

PLAIN. 
Gen.  11. 2.  they  found  ap.in  the  land  ofShinar 
13.  10.  and  Lot  beheld  all  the  p.  of  Jordan 

11.  then  Lot  chose  him  all  thep.  of  Jordan 

12.  Lot  dwelled  in  cities  of  thep.  toward  Sodom 
18.  .\bram  came  and  dwelt  in  the  p.  14.  13. 

19.  17.  nor  stay  thou  in  all  p.  escape  to  mountain 
2.5.  he  overthrew  those  cities  in  all  thep. 

Jii.<:h.  11.  16.  Joshua  took  the  valley  and  thep. 
Judg.  9.  fi.  made  Abiinelech  king  by  p.  of  pillar 
11.  33.  Jephthah  smute  the  Amnionitcs  to  thep 

1  Satn.  10.  3.  thou  shalt  come  to  the  p.  of  Tabor 

23.  24.  David  and  his  men  were  in  the  p. 

2  Sam.  2.29.  A  bner  and  his  men  walked  through  p. 

4.  7.  Baanah  and  Itechab  gat  thein  ibrough  thep. 

5.  t  20.  he  called  that  place  Ihe  p~  of  breaches 

15.  28. 1  will  tarry  in  the  p.  till  I  hear  from  you 
18.23.  then  Ahimaa/  r;in  by  the  way  of  thep. 

1  Kings  7.  46.  in  p.  of  Jordan  did  king  cast  them 

20.  23.  let  us  fight  against  them  in  thep.  25. 

2  Kings  25.  4.  king  went  toward  (hop.  ./cr.  52.7. 
jVc  A.  3.  22.  after  him  repaired  Ihe  priests  of  thep. 
■  /er.  17.26.  shall  come  from  p.  bringing  offerings 

21.  13.  I  am  against  thee,  O  rock  of  the  p. 

48.  P.  p.  shall  be  destroyed,  as  Lord  haih  spoken 
Ezek.  3.  22.  he  said,  arise,  go  forih  in  the  p.  23. 

8.  4.  according  to  the  vision  that  I  saw  in  the  p. 

PLAINS. 
(?c7i.l8.1.  the  Lord  appeared  in  thep.  ofMamre 
.V«m.  22. 1.  Israel  pitched  in  p.  of  Moab,  33.  48. 

26,  63.  who  numlx^red  Israi  I  in  thep.  of  Moab 

31.  12.  they  brought  spoil  uniothecimp  in  thep. 

33.  .50,  Ihe  Lord  spake  to  Moses  in  the  p.  .35.  1. 

36.  13.  the  Lord  commanded  in  the  p.  of  Moab 
Deut.  34.  1.  Moses  went  up  from  the  p.  of  Moab 

8.  Israel  wept  for  Moses  in  the  p.  forty  days 
2  Sam.  17. 16.  lodge  not  in  Ihe  p.  of  the  wilderness 
2  Kings  2.5.  5.  the  army  of  the  Chaldees  overtook 
hirn  in  thep.  of  Jericho,  Jer.  39.  .5.  |  52.  8. 

1  Chron.  21.  28.  over  svcamore-trees  in  the  low  p. 

2  CAr.  9.  27.  made  cedars  as  sycamore*  in  low^ 
26.  10.  Uzziah  had  much  cattle  in  thep. 

PLAINLY. 
F.iod.  21.5.  if  the  servant  p.  say,  I  love  my  master 
/>fu(.  27. 8.  write  the  words  of  this  law  very  p.  ' 

1  .'N(im.2. 27.did  Ip.appear  to  house  of  thy  father  ■• 
10.  16.  he  told  us  p.  that  Ihe  asses  were  found 

2  Snm.  20.  t  18.  they  p.  spake  in  the  beginning 
Ezra  4.18.  the  leticr  hath  been  p.  read  before  me 
Isa   32.  4.  the  tongue  of  the  stammerers  shall  he 

ready  to  speak/). 
.Tnhn  10.  24.  if  thou  be  the  Christ,  tell  us  p. 
11.14.  then  Jesus  said  to  them  p.  Lazarus  is  dead 

16.  25.  but  I  shall  shew  you  p.  of  the  Father 
29.  nowspeukest  thou/). and  spenkestno  proverb 

Heb.  11.  14.  for  they  that  say  suchthings  declarep. 

PLAINNESS. 
2Cor.3.12.havc  such  hope,  we  use  greatp. of  speech 

PLAITING. 
1  Pet. 3.3.  whose  ailorning  let  itnotbep.  ofhair 

PLANES. 
/»a.  44.  13.  thecariienterfi'teth  the  image  witfcp. 

J>LANF,TS. 
2A'm'r«23.  5.  that  burnt  incense  to  sun,  moon, p 

PLANKS. 
1  Kinss  6. 15.  he  covereil  the  floor  with  p.  of  fir 
Ezek.il.  25.  were  thick  p.  rni  face  of  the  porch 
26.  on  tho  sides  of  the  porch,  and  upon  Ihe  «idt 
chambers  of  the  house,  and  thick  p 


PLA 

PI  \NT,  Substantive. 

Ofn.  2. 5.  the  Lovil  God  made  every  p.  of  the  field 

Job  U. 'J.  will  bud  and  bniig  lortli  boughs  like  p. 

/aa.  5.  7.  and  tlie  men  of  Juilah  IiIh  pleasantp. 

17. 11.  in  the  day  thou  shall  make  thy  p.  grow 

53.  2.  he  shall  grow  before  him  as  a  tejiderp. 

Jer.i.'il.how  art  thou  turned  into  degenerate;). 

E2ek.  34.  29.  raise  up  for  iheni  a  p.  of  renown 

Mat.  1j.  13.  everyp.  my  Father  hath  not  planted 

PL.\iNTS. 

1  Chr.  i.  23.  those  that  dwell  among  p.  and  hedges 
Psal.  ]2S.  3.  thy  ehildren  like  olive  /).  round  table 

144. 12.  that  our  sons  may  be  as  p.  grown  up 
Cant.  4. 13.  thy  p.  as  an  orchard  of  pomegranates 
Jsa.  IG.  8.  have  broken  down  principal  ;;.  thereof 

17.  10.  therefore  eiiiill  thou  plant  pleasant  p. 
Jer.  4S.  32.  thy  p.  are  gone  over  sea,  they  reach 
i::cA.  31.  4.  with  rivers  running  round  about  his  p. 

¥h.\Nr 
Signitie6,[l]  To  set  trees  or  kerbs,  Oen.9.20.  [2]  To 
brill  ir  a /It  uple  from  one  country  into  another, 
there  to  place  and  settle  then,  Psal.  44. 2.  |  80.8. 
[3]  To  be  made  real  and  living  members  of  the 
church  of  God,  rsal.i)2.I3.  [4]  To  lay  the  first 
foundation  of  Christianity  among  a  people, 
and  be  instrumental,  by  the  preaching  of  the 

fospel,  in  converting  them  to   Christ,  1  Cor. 
,6. 
'  F.Lod.  15.  17.  p.  them  in  mount  of  thy  inheritance 
lieut  Hi.  21 .  thou  shalt  not  p.  a  grove  of  any  trees 
2S.  30.  ihou  shalt  p.  a  vineyard,  and  not  eat,  3!). 

2  Sam.  7.  10.  moreover,  I  willp.  them,  1  Chr.  17.  9. 
2  Kings  19.29.  p.  vineyards  and  eat,  Isa.  37.  30. 
I'sal.  107.  37.  soxv  the  fields,  and  p.  vineyards 
Isa.  17.  10.  therefore  thou  shalt  p.  pleasant  plants 

41.  19.  I  wdlp.  in  the  wilderness  the  cedar 
51.  11).  ih.il  I  inayp.  heavens,  and  lay  foundations 
65.  21.  they  shall  p.  vineyards,  eat  fruit  of  them 
22.  they  shall  not  p.  and  another  eat 
Jer.  1.  10.  I  have  set  thee  to  build  and  to  p. 

18.  9.  concerning  a  kingdom  to  build  ami  to  p. 
24.  f).  I  will  p.  and  not  pluck  them  up,  42.  10. 
29.  5.  p.  gardi'ns,  and  eat  the  fruit  of  them,  28. 
31.5.  sh.i  II  p.  vines  on  the  mountains  of  Samaria 

28.  I  will  watch  over  them  to  build  and  top. 

32.  41.  I  will  p.  them  in  this  land  assuredly 

35.  7.  nor  shall  you  sow  seed,  nor  p.  vineyard 
F.irk.  17.  22.  I  wdl  p.  it  on  (.  high  mountain,  23. 

28.  2ii.  ihey  shall  p.  vineyards,  and  dwell  safely 

3r>.  31).  hiird  build  and  p.  that  that  was  desolate 
Dan.  11.  4.').  he  shall  p.  liibcrnaides  of  his  palace 
Amoe  9. 14.  they  shall  p.  vineyards  and  drink  wine 

15.  I  will  p.  tiiem  upon  their  land,  saith  Lord 
Zeph.  1.  13.  ihev  shall  p.  vineyards  but  not  drink 
rL.\NTATION.  [wine 

Kick.  17.  7.  might  water  it  bv  furrows  of  her  p. 

PL.\NTEb. 
Oen.1  8.  the  Lord  God  p.  a  garden  eastward 

9.20.  .Noah  p.  vineyard  ||  21.  33.  .Abr^imp.  a  grove 
Xum.  21.  fi.  as  trees  which  the  Lord  hath  p. 
I)rut.  20.  fi.  what  man  is  he  that  hath  p.  a  vineyard 
Josh.  21.  13.  of  olive-yards  yep.  not,  do  ye  cat 
P-ial.  1.  3.  like  a  treep.  by  the  rivers,  .Ter.  17.  8. 

80.  8.  thou  hast  east  out  heathen,  and  p.  the  vine 
1.5.  the  vini.'yard  which  thy  right  hand  hath  p. 

92. 13.  those  that  be  p.  in  the  house  of  the  Lord 

94.  9.  he  ihat  p.  the  ear,  shall  he  nut  hear? 

104.  I'i.  the  cedars  of  Lebanon  which  he  hath  p. 
F.rcl.  2.  4.  I  p.  me  vineyards  ||  5.  I  p.  trees 

3.  2.  and  a  time  to  pluck  up  that  which  is  p. 
/«a.  5.  2.  and  p.  it  with  the  choicest  vine 

40.  24.  yea,  they  shall  not  be  p.  nor  be  sown 
J/r.  2.  21.  yot  I  had  p.  thee  a  nohle  vine 

11.  17.  for  the  Lord  of  hosts  that  p.  thee 

12.  2.  thou  hast  p.  them,  Ihey  have  taken  root 
45.  4.  what  I  have  p.  I  will  pinck  up 

Eiek.  17.  5.  and  p.  it  in  a  fruitful  field,  8. 
10.  yen,  hcholrl,  being  p.  shall  it  prosper? 

19.  10.  p.  Iiy  the  waters  she  was  fruitful 
13.  and  now  she  is  p.  in  the  wilderness 

\liiii,  9.  13.  r.phrniin  is  p.  in  a  pleasant  place 

Jlwos  5.  11.  ye  have  p.  pleasant  vineyards 

Mat.  15.13.  plant  my  heavenly  Father  hath  not  p. 

21. 33.  man  p.  a  vineyard,  ^fark  12. 1.  I.ukeW.  9. 

/,uJI[^13.r).rerlain  man  had  a  fig  treep.  in  vineyard 

17.  fi.  be  plucked  np,  and  be  Ihou  p.  in  the  sea 

28.th(vhougiil,lhey  Bold,  they  p.  they  buihied 

Ham.  fi.  f>-  ifwe  have  liReii  p.  log^lher  in  his  death 

lQ)r.3.fi.  I  have  p.  Apollox  wiitered,God  increase 

PLANTF.nST. 
r)ent.  fi.  11.  and  olivi'  tribes  whied  thou  p.  not 
PtalA4.  2. didst  drive  out  heathen  and  p.  them 

PLANTF.RS. 
Jer  31.5.  p.  bHrII  plant,  and  cat  them  as  common 

PLANTF.TH. 
;'r(JB.3Mfi.  with  fruit  of  her  hands  ahe  p.  vinevard 
Tsa.  44.  14.  he  p.  an  ash,  ami  the  r.iin  rlnth  nourish 
1  Cor.  3.  7  ni^ilher  is  he  that  p.  any  thing 
8.  he  Ihat  p.  ami  he  that  wnlerelh  are  one 
9.  7.  who  p.  a  vineyard  and  oatclh  not  Iho  fruit 
414 


PLE 

PLANTING. 
Isa.  GO.  21.  branch  of  my  p.  work  of  my  hands 
01.  3.  they  might  be  called  the  p.  of  the  Lord 

PLANTINGS. 
Jl/ie.  1 . 6. 1  will  make  Samaria  as  p.  of  a  vineyard 

PLASTER. 
ha.  38.  21.  a  lump  of  figs,  lav  it  for  up.  on  boil 

PLASTER. 
Lev.  14.  42.  shall  take  mortar  and  shall  p.  house 
Dcut.  27.  2.  great  stones,  and  p.  them  with  p.  4. 
Dan.5.5.  wrote  on  the  p.  of  the  wall  of  palace 

PLASTERED. 
Lev.  14.  43.  if  the  plague  come  again  after  it  is  p. 
48.plague  hath  not  spread  after  the  house  wasp. 
PLAT. 
2  Kings  9.  26.  I  will  requite  thee  in  this  p.  now 
take  and  cast  him  into  the  p.  of  ground 
PLATE. 
Rzod.  28.  36.  thou  shalt  make  a  p.  of  pure  gold 
39.  30.  they  made  the  p.  of  holy  crown  of  gold 
I^ev.  2.  fS.  n)eat-offering  taken  in  ap.7.t9. 
8.  9.  on  his  fore-front  he  put  the  golden  p. 
Ezek.  4.  f  3.  take  a  flat  p.  set  it  for  a  wall 

PLATES. 
Exod.  39.  3.  they  did  t)eat  gold  into  thin  p. 
JVum.  10.  '.m  let  them  make  of  censers  broad  p. 
39.  were  made  broad  p.  fo^  covering  of  altar 
I  Kings  7.30.  and  every  basBadp.  of  brass 
Jec.10.9.  silver  spread  intop.iWrought  from  Tars. 

PLATTED. 
/Vaf.27.29.whenthey  hadp.a  crown  of  lhorns,they 
put  it  on  his  head,  Mark  15. 17.  John  19.  2. 
PLATTER. 
Mat.  23.  25.  ye  make  clean  outside  of  the  p.  but 
within  full  of  e.\tortion  and  e.xcess,  Luke  11.39. 
PLAY. 
The  Hebrew  word,  Zacliak,  which  signifies  to 
play,   t*   also    commonly  used  for   laughing, 
m.ieking,  insulting.     IVheii  Sarah  saw  Ishmael 
piny  with  her  son  Isaac,  she  was  offended  at  it, 
Gen.  21.  9.     It  was  a  play  of  mockery,  or  in- 
sult, or  perhaps  of  squabbling,  us  the  word  is 
used,  2  Sam.  2.  14,   Let  the  young  men  now 
arise  and  play  before  us :  let  them  fight  as  it 
were  by  way  of  play.     But  the  event  shews 
that  they  fought  in  good  earnest,  since  they 
were  all  killed.    IVefind  play  taken  in  another 
sense  in  Exod.  32.  6.     IVken  the  Israelites  had 
set  up  the  golden  calf,  they  began  to  shout,  to 
sing,  and  dance  about  it,  and  to  divert  them- 
selves ;  The  people  sat  down  to  eat  and  drink, 
and  rose  up  to  play. 
F.zod.  32.  fi.  the  people  rose  up  to  p.  1  Car.  10.  7. 
Deut.  22.  21.  to  p.  the  whore  in  her  father's  house 

1  Slim.  16.  16.  that  he  shall  p.  with  his  hand 

17.  provide  me  now  a  man  that  can  p.  well 
21.  15.  have  brought  this  fellow  to  p.  madman 

2  Sam.  2. 14.  let  young  men  arise  and  p.  before  us 
0.  21.  therefore  will  I  p.  before  the  Lord 

10.  12.  anil  let  us  p.  the  men  for  our  peo|)lo 
.Job  40.  20.  where  all  the  beasts  of  the  field  p. 

41.  5.  wilt  thou  p.  with  him  as  with  a  bird  7 
Psal.  33.  3.  p.  skilfully  with  a  loud  noise 

104.26.  leviathan  whom  thou  madest  top.  therein 
/;«a.  11.8.  sucking  child  shall  p.  on  lii)le  of  the  asp 
Eiek.  33.  32.  and  can  p.  well  on  an  instrument 

PLAYED. 
./^ui^n-.  19.2.  and  his  coneubine  p.  the  whore 

1  Sam.  16.23.  David  p.  with  his  hand,  18.10  |  19. 9. 

18.  7.  the  women  answered  one  another  as  Iheyp. 
26.21.1  havep.  fool,  and  have  erred  exceedingly 

2  Sam.  6.  5.  David  and  all  Israel  p.  1  Chr.  13.  8.' 
2  Kings  3. 15.  it  came  to  pass  when  the  minstrel  p. 
Kzet.  16.28.  hast  p.  the  whore  with  the  Assyrians 

See  IIari.ot. 
PLAYER. 
1  Sam.  16.  IS.  who  is  a  cunning  p.  on  a  harp 

PLAYERS. 
Psnl.  68.25.  the  p.  on  inslrumenis  followed  after 
87.7.  as  well  the  singers  as  the  p.  on  instruments 

PLAYETII. 
1  Sam.  21. 1 14.  you  seo  the  man  p.  the  madman 
Eiek.  23.  44.  as  to  n  woman  that  p.  the  harlot 

PLAYING. 
l.Sam.l6.1R.have«nen  a  son  of  Jesse  cunning  in  p. 
1  Chron.  15.29.  Michiil  saw  David  dancing  and  p. 
Psal.  6>^.  25.  among  Ihcm  were  the  damsels  p. 
7.rch.  8.  5.  boys  and  girls  p.  in  the  streets  tliereuf 

PLEA. 
/Jcut.  17.8.  if  a  matter  too  hard  bctwoenp.andp. 

PLEAD. 
./urf/r.fi.Sl.will  ye  p. for  Itaal?  he  Ihat  will  p. for  him 

32.  saying,  let  Haal  p.  against  him,  because  he 
./fl/)9.19.if  ofjudgm.  who  shall  set  me  a  time  top.? 
13.  19.  who  is  ho  that  will  p.  with  mo? 
16.  21.  O  that  one  miglit  p.  for  a  man  with  God 

19.  5.  if  he  will  p.  against  me  my  reproach 

23.  6.  will  he  p.  against  me  with  his  great  power? 
fsa.  1.  17.  seek  judgment,  p.  for  th<-  widow 
3. 13.  Lord  stanilolh  up  top.  and  jmlge  the  people 


PLE 

Isa.  43.26.  let  usp.  toge.  declare  thou  to  he  Justified 

(i6.  16.  by  fire  will  the  Lord  p.  with  all  tiesh 

Jer.  2. 9.  wherefore,  I  will  yet  p.  with  you,  35.  aud 

with  your  children's  children  will  I  p. 

29.wherefore  will  yep.  with  me?  all  transgressed 

12.  1.  righteous  art  thou,  OLd.  when  Ip.wuhiliee 

25.31.  Lord  willp.  with  all  flesh,  saith  the  Lord 
50.  t  44.  and  who  will  convent  me  top.? 

Eiek.  17.  20.  and  I  will  p.  with  him  there 
20.  t  4.  wilt  thou  p.  for  them  ?  IS.  f  2.  ]  23.  t  36. 

35.  and  there  wdl  I  p.  with  you  face  to  face 

36.  so  will  I  p.  with  you,  saith  the  Lord  God 
38.  22.  I  will  p.  against  him  with  pestilence 

//o.«.2.2.p.  with  your  mother,p.  she  is  not  my  wife 
5.  t  13.  Ephraim^nt  to  the  king  that  should  p. 
Joel  3. 2.  and  I  will  p.  with  them  lor  my  peoj)le 
Mic.  6.  2.  and  the  Lord  \yllp.  with  Israel 
See  Cause. 
PLEADED. 
1  Sam.  25.  39.  blessed  be  the  Ld  that  p.  the  cause 
J.ain.'.i.  58.  C)  Lord,  thou  hast  p.  causes  of  my  soul 
.Kzc4.20.36.like  as  I  p. with  your  fathers  in  wildein. 

PLEADETH. 
.fob  16. 21.  wi^h  God,  as  a  manp:^r  his  neighbour 
/.<t«.  51.22.  saith  thy  God,  that  p. cause  of  his  people 
59.  4.  none  callelh  for  justice,  nor  any  p.  for  truth 

PLEADING. 
.Job  13.  6.  hear  and  hearken  to  the  p.  of  my  lipB 

PLEASANT. 
Gen.  2.9.  God  made  every  tree  grow  that  is  p. 
3.  6.  was  p.  lo  the  eyes,  and  a  tree  to  be  desired 
49.  15.  Is>achar  saw  the  land  that  it  was  p. 
2i'am.l.23.Saul  and  Jonathan  werep.  in  their  livei 
26.  J<mathan,  very  p.  hast  thou  been  to  me 

1  Kings  20. 6.  whatever  is  p.  they  shill  take  away 

2  A")?! ^',5  2.19.  behold,  the  situation  of  this  city  isp. 
2  Chron.  32.27.  he  made  treasuries  for  p.  jeweln 
Psal.  16.  G.  the  lines  are  fallen  to  me  in  p.  places 

81.2.  bring  hither  the  p.  harp  with  the  psaltery 
106.24.  yea,  they  despised  thep. land,  believed  not 
133.  1.  how  p.  for  brethren  to  dwell  toge.  in  unity 
135.  3.  sing  praises  to  his  name,  for  it  is  p.  147.  1. 
Prov.  2.  10.  when  knowledge  is  p.  to  thy  soul 
5. 19.  let  her  bo  as  the  loving  hind  and  p.  roe 
9. 17.stolcn  waters  sweet, bread  eaten  in  secret  lap. 
15.26.  but  the  words  of  the  pure  are  p.  words 
1().  24.  p.  words  are.ns  honey-comb,  sweet  to  soul 

22.  18.  for  it  isp.  if  thou  keep  them  wiihin  thee 
24.  4.  the  chambers  shall  be  filled  w  illi  all  p.  richeii 

F.eel.  11.7.  p.  it  is  for  the  eyes  to  behidd  the  sun 
Cant.  1.  16.  thou  art  fair,  my  beloved,  yea  p. 
4. 13.  thy  plants  arc  an  orchard  with  p.  fruits 
16.  let  my  beloved  come  and  eat  hisp.  fruits 
7. 6.  how  fair  andp.  art  thou,  O  love,  for  delightt 

13.  at  our  gales  are  all  manner  of  p.  fruits 
fsa.  2,  16.  the  day  of  the  Lord  upon  all  p.  picturei 
5.  7.  and  the  men  of  Judah  his  p.  plant 

13.  22.  and  drtigons  shall  cry  in  their  p.  palaces 
17.  10.  therefore  shalt  thou  plant  p.  plants 

32.  12.  they  lament  for  p.  fields,  for  fruitful  vipo 
.54. 12. 1  will  make  all  thy  borders  of  p.  stones 
64.  1 1.  and  all  our  p.  things  are  laid  waste 
./rr.  3.  19.  how  shall  I  give  thee  a  p.  land  ? 
12. 10.  made  my  p.  poriion  a  desolate  wildernctg 

23.  10.  p.  places  of  the  wilderness  are  dried  up 
2.").  34.  and  ye  shall  fall  like  a  p.  vessel 

31.20.  is  Ephraim  my  dear  son  ?  is  he  a  p.  child  ? 
Lam.  1.  7.  she  remembered  all  her  p.  things  of  old 

10.  ailvers.  hath  spreail  his  hand  on  her  p.  things 

1 1.  Ihey  have  given  their  p.  things  for  meat 

2. 4.  slew  alllhatwerep.tolheeyein  tabernacle 
Eiek.  20.  12.  they  shall  destroy  thy  p.  houses 

33.32.  very  lively  song  of  one  that  liaih  p.  voice 
/?rtn.8.9.  waxe<l  exceedingly  great  tow.  thep.  land 

10.3. 1  ale  nop.  bread,  nor  came  flesh  in  my  mouth 
11.  38.  ho  shall  honour  a  god  with  p.  things 
Hos.  9.  6.  the  p.  places  nettles  shall  possess  them 
13.Ephraim  is  planted  inap.  place, hut  Ephrnim 
.Toel'.i.  5.  have  carried  into  your  temp,  my  p.  things 
J)inos5. 11.  yeplantedp.  vineyards,  shall  not  drink 
.Vic  0. 9.  women  have  ye  cast  out  from  p.'  houses 
JV"(iA.  2.  9.  and  glory  out  of  nil  the  p.  furniture 
y.erh.  7.  14.  for^hev  laid  thep.  land  desolate 
Mai.  3.  4.  ollering  of  Jerusalem  he  p.  lo  the  Lord 

PLEASANTNESS. 
Prov.  3.17.  her  wnvsare  ways  of  p.  her  pn'hs  peoc» 

1.5.  t  26.  the  words  of  the  pure  are  words  of  p. 

PLEASE 
U  spoken,  (X)  Of  God,  pleasing  himsrif,  and  de- 
notes, [1]  J/is  will  and  good  pleasure,  Isa.  .15. 
U.  ICnr.  1.21.  [2]  His  drrree  and  purpose, 
Peal.  1 15.  3.  I  13.5.  fi.  (II)  Of  Christ  pleastn/r 
God,  and  signifies.  That  God  the  Father  did 
prrfrrtly  accept  of  Christ  as  a  MriUntor,  ana 
had  a  singular  enmplarrnry'tind  salisfaelion 
in  bis  undertaking,  and  in  all  he  should  door 
suffer  in  the  aecomplishmnit  of  man's  redemp- 
tion, Mat.  3.  17. 1  17.  5.  John  8.  29.  (Ill)  Of 
man,  who  plrnurs,  [1]  God,  i\i'noi\ns  a  being 
approved  and  accepted  of  God,\lch.  11.5.|13.  lu. 


PLE 

[2]  Himself y  1.  In  things  sinful,  lea.  3.  6.12. 
Jn  things  lawful,  Acls  15.  34.    [3J  hlis  neigh- 
bour, which  is,  first,  Lawful,  to  endeavour  to 
comply  with  his  weakness  in  things  indiffer- 
ent, or  that  tend  to  edijicalion,  Rum.  15.  2.  1 
Cor.  10.  33.     Secondly,  Hinful,  to  flatter  him, 
or  suit  one's  doctrine  to  his  humour,  conceal- 
ing some  necessary  truth,  Gal.  1.  10. 
Ezod.  21.  8.  if  she  p.  not  her  master,  wlio  betrothed 
JVuTO.  23.27.  peradveiiture  It  will;).  God  thou  curse 
1  i'am.20. 13.  if  it  p.  my  lather  to  do  thee  evil 
S  Satn.  1. 29.  let  it  p.  thee  to  bless  the  house  of  thy 
servant,  that  it  ni;iy  coniiime,  1  Chron.  17.27. 
1  Kingsil.a.il'itp.  1  will  give  thee  another  viney. 
tChr.  10.  7.  if  thou  p.  they  will  be  thy  servants 
JVeA.2.5.if  itp.  king,  and  thy  servant  found  favour, 
7.  EslhA.  ly.  |3.y.  |5.8.|7.3.  |a5.|9.J3. 
Job  0.  9.  that  it  would  p.  God  to  destroy  me 
20.  10.  his  children  shall  seek  Ut  p.  the  poor 
Psal.  69.  31.  this  also  shall  p.  the  Lord  better 
Prov.  16.  7.  vvhen  a  man's  ways  p.  the  Lord 
Cant.  2. 7.  nor  awake  my  love  till  he  p.  3.  5.  |  8.  4 
Isa.  2.6.  they/),  themselves  in  childieivof  strangers 
55. 11.  it  shall  accomplish  that  which  I  p. 
56.  4.  and  choose  the  things  that  p.  me 
John  8.  •£).  I  do  always  those  things  that  p.  him 
Horn.  8.  8.  they  that  are  in  the  Hesh  cannot  p.  God 
15.  1.  we  ought  to  bear,  and  not  to  p.  ourselves 
2.  let  every  one  p.  his  neighbour  for  his  good 
1  Or.  7.  32.  careth  how  he  may  p.  the  Lord 
33.  p.  his  wife  ||  34.  how  she  may  p.  her  husband 
10.  33.  even  as  1  p.  all  men  in  all  things 
Oal.'  1.  10.  do  I  persuade  men?  do  I  seek  to  p.  men? 
1  Thess.  2. 15.  they  p.  not  G. are  contrary  to  all  men 

4.  1.  how  ye  ought  to  walk  and  to  p.  God 
27^01.2.4.  that  may  p.  him  who  hath  chosen  him 
Tit.  2.  9.  and  to  p.  them  well  in  all  things 
Heb.  11.  6.  without  faith  it  is  impossible  to  p.  God 

PLEASED. 

Gen.  28.8.  Esau  seeing  daugh.  Canaan  p.  not  Isaac 

33. 10.  have  seen  thy  face,  thou  wast  p.  with  me 

34.  18.  and  their  words  p.  Hanior  and  Shechem 

45.  16.  it  p.  Pharaoh  well  and  his  servants 

.ATum.  24. 1.  Balaam  saw  it  p.  Lord  lo  bless  Israel 

Deal.  1.  23.  the  siiying  p.  me  well,  I  took  12  men 

J^?sA.22. 30.  what  children  of  Gad  spake  itp.  them 

Judg.  13.  23.  if  the  Lord  wore  p.  to  kill  us 

14. 7.  he  talked  wiih  her,  and  she  p.  Samson  well 

1  Sam.  12.  22.  it  p.  Lord  to  make  you  his  people 

18.  20.  itp.  Saul  that  Michal  loved  David 
26.  itp.  David  to  be  tlie  king's  son-in-law 

2  Sain.  3.  36.  what  the  king  did  p.  all  the  people 
17.4.3aying,  p.  Absalom  well,  and  elders  of  Israel 

19.  6.  if  all  we  had  died,  then  it  had  p.  thee  well 

1  King.i  3.  10.  Solomon's  speech  p.  the  Lord 
9.  12.  the  cities  Solomon  give  p.  not  Hiram 

2  Chron.  30.  4.  the  thing  f.  the  king  and  all  the 

congregation,  JVeA.  2.  6.   Eslh.  1.21.  |  2.4 
Esth.  2.  Hl^he  maiden  p.  ihe  king,  and  she  obtained 

5.  14.  the  thingp.  Haman,  he  caused  the  gallows 
Psal.  40.  13.  be  p.  O  Lord,  lo  deliver  me 

51.  19.  then  shall  thou  be  p.  with  sacrifices 
115.  3.  our  God  is  in  the  heavens,  he  hath  done 
whatsoever  be  p.  135.  6.  .Tonah  1.  14 
Isa.  53.  10.  yet  it  p.  the  Lord  to  bruise  him 
Dan.  6.  1.  it  p.  Darius  to  set  over  the  kingdom 
Mic.  6.  7.  will  Ld.  be  p.  with  thousands  of  rams  ? 
Mai.  1.  8.  offer  it,  will  he  be  p.  with  thee? 
^/at.14.6.  on  Herod's  birth-day  daugh.  of  Herodias 
danced  before  them,  and  p.  Herod,  Jlfar4C.22. 
Jicts  ^.  5.  the  saving  p.  the  whole  multitude 
12.  3.  because  Herod  saw  itp.  the  Jews 
Rom.  15.  3.  for  even  Christ  p.  not  himself 

26.  for  it  hath  p.  them  of  Macedonia,  27. 
1  Cor.  1.21.  itp.  God  by  foolishness  of  preaching 
7.  12.  and  she  be  p.  to  dwell  with  him,  let  him  not 
13.  and  if  he  hep.  to  dwell  with  her,  let  her  not 
12. 18.  God  hath  set  members  as  it  hath  p.  him 
15.  33.  God  givetli  it  a  body  as  it  hath  p.  him 
Oal.  1. 10.  for  if  I  yet  p.  men,  I  should  not  be  serv. 

15.  when  it  p.  God  to  reveal  his  Son  in  me 
Co/.  1.19.  it  p.  Father  that  in  him  all  fulness  dwell 
Neb.  11.5.  he  had  this  testimony,  that  hep.  God 

fP'eH  PLEASED. 
Psal.  85.  t  1.  thou  hast  been  well  p.  unto  thy  land 
Isa.  42.  21.  the  Lord  is  well  p.  for  his  righteous- 
ness' sake  ;  he  will  magnifv  the  law 
^fa(.3.17.heloved  Son,  in  whom  lam  wrllp.  12.18. 
I  17.  5.  Mark\.  11.  Lukr  3. 22.  2  Pet.  1. 17. 
1  Cor.  10.  .5.  with  many  of  Ihcm  G.  was  not  well  p. 
Heb.  13.  16.  with  such  sarrifices  God  is  well  p. 

Men  PLEASERS. 
F.ph.^.fy.  not  with  eve-service,  as  men  p.  Col.  3. 22. 

PLEASETH. 
Oen.  IB.  fi.  Abraham  said,  do  to  her  as  it  p.  thee 
20.  15.  behold  my  land,  dwell  where  it  p.  thee 
Judj.  14.  3.  get  her  for  me,  for  she  p.  me  well 
Esth.  2.  4.  let  maiden  which  p.  Ihe  king  be  queen 
F.'-cl.  7.  26.  whoso  p.  God  shall  escape  from  her 
8. 3.  stand  not  in  evil,  ho  doeth  wliatsoev^r  p.  him 
Hi 


PLE 

PLEASING. 

Esth.  8.  5.  and  if  I  be  p.  in  his  eyes  let  it  be  written 
Uos.  9.  4.  neither  shall  they  be  ^.  lo  him 
CuM.  10.  might  walk  worthy  of  the  Lord  to  all  p. 
1  'J'hess.  2.  4.  so  we  speak,  not  as  p.  men,  but  God 
1  John  3.^22.  do  those  things  that  are  p.  in  his  sight 

^t'ell-P  LEASING. 
Phil.i.  18.  a  sacrifice  acceptable,  well-p.  to  God 
Col.  3.  20.  obey,  for  this  is  well-p.  to  the  Lord 
Wei. 13.21.  working  in  you  whatisaj.-p.  in  hissight 

PLEASURE 

Signifies,  [1]  Delight  or  joy,  Psal. 102.14.  [2]  Pur 

pose,  intention  or  resolution,   Ezra.  5.  17.  [31 

Commands,  Psal.  103.21.  [4]  Lawful  delights, 

Eccl.  2. 1.  [5]  M  kindness  or  favour,  Acts  25.9. 

[(:'.]  Voluptuous  and  sinful  ways,    1  Tim.  5.  6. 

Oen.  18.  12.  after  I  am  wa.xed  old,  shall  I  have  p.7 

Deut.  23.  24.  inayesteat  grapes  thy  fill  at  own  p. 

1  Chr.  29. 17.  1  know  thou  hast  p.  in  uprightness 

Ezra  5.  17.  and  let  the  king  send  his  p.  to  us 

10.  11.  make  confession  to  Ld.  God,  and  do  his  p. 

JVeA. 9. 37. have  dominion  over  our  cattle  at  llieirp. 

Esth.l.S.  should  drink  according  to  every  man's  p. 

Job  il.  21.  what  p.  hath  he  in  his  house  after  him  ? 

25.  another  dieth,  and  never  eateth  with  p. 
22.3.is  it  any  p. to  Almighty  that  thou  art  righteous 
Psal.  5.  4.  art  nut  a  God  that  hath  p.  in  wickedness 
35.27.  which  hath  p.  in  the  prosperity  of  his  serv. 
51.  18.  dogood  in  thy  good  p.  to  Zlon,  build  walls 

102.  14.  for  thy  servants  lake  p.  in  her  stones 

103.  21.  bless  L.  ye  ministers  of  his,  that  do  his  p. 
105.  22.  to  bind  his  princes  at  his  p.  and  teach 
111.2.  sought  out  of  all  them  thai  have  p.  therein 
147.  10.  he  taketh  not  p.  in  the  legs  of  a  man 

11.  the  Lord  taketh  p.  in  them  that  fear  him 
149.  4.  for  the  Lord  taketh  p.  in  his  people 
Prov.  21. 17.  he  that  loveth  p.  shall  be  a  poor  man 
Eccl.  2.  1.  enjoy  p.  ||  5.  4.  he  hath  no  p.  in  fools 
12.  1.  thou  shall  say,  I  have  nop.  in  them 
Isa.  21.  4.  the  night  of  my  p.  he  turned  to  fear 
29.  1 9.  slay  and  wonder,  take  your  p.  and  riot 
44.  28.  Cyrus  my  shepherd  shall  perform  all  myp. 
46.  10.  my  counsel  shall  stand,  I  will  do  all  my  p. 
48. 14.  he  will  do  his  p.  on  Babylon,  and  his  arm 
53.  10.  and  p.  of  the  Ld.  shall  prosper  in  his  hand 
58.  3.  behold,  in  the  day  of  your  fast  ye  find  p. 
13.  from  doing  thy  p. on  my  holy  day,  and  call  the 
sabbath  a  delight,  not  finding  thine  own  p 
./er.  2.  24.  she  snuffeth  up  the  wind  at  her  p. 
22.  28.  is  he  a  vessel  wherein  is  nop.? 
34. 16.  whom  had  set  at  liberty  at  theirp.  lo  return 
48.  .38.  broken  Moab  like  a  vessel  wherein  is  nop. 
Ezek.  16.  37.  with  whom  thou  hast  taken  p. 
18.  23.  have  I  any  p.  that  wicked  die,  saith  Lord, 
and  not  that  he  should  return  ?  32.  |33.  11. 
Ifos.  8.  8.  Israel  as  a  vessel  wherein  is  no  p. 
Hag.  1.8.  build  the  house,  and  I  will  take  p.  in  it 
Mai.  1.  10.  I  have  no  p.  in  you,  saith  the  Lord 
I^uke  12.32.Falher'6  good  p.  to  give  you  Ihekingd. 
./fc<.'(24.27.Felix,  willing  to  do  Jewsp.lefl  P. bound 
25.  9.  but  Festus  willing  to  do  the  Jews  ap.  said 
Rom.  1.  32.  bul  have  p.  in  them  that  do  them 
2  Cor.  12.  10.  therefore  I  take  p.  in  infirmities 
Eph.  1.  5.  according  to  the  good  p.  of  his  will,  9. 
Phil.  2. 1.3.  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  good  p. 
2Thess.  1.  11.  fulfil  the  good  p.  of  his  goodness 
2.  12.  believed  not,  but  had  p.  in  unrighteousness 
1  Tim.  5.  6.  but  she  that  livetli  in  p.  is  dead 
Heb.  10.  6.  in  sacrifices  thou  h.ist  had  no  p.  8. 
38.  if  draw  back,  mysoul  shall  have  nop.  in  him 
12.  10.  they  chastened  us  after  their  own  p. 
■fam.  5.  5.  ye  have  lived  in  p.  on  earth,  in  day-time 
2P(!(.2.13.as  they  thalcount  it  p. to  riot  in  day-time 
Rev.  4.  11.  for  tliv  p.  thev  are  nnd  were  created 

PLEASURES. 
.fob  36.  11.  they  shall  spend  their  years  in  p. 
P..taZ.16.11.  at  lliy  right  hand  arep.  for  evermore 
36.8.  shall  make  them  drink  of  river  of  thy  p. 
Isa.  47.  8.  hear  this,  thou  that  art  given  to  p. 
Lukr.  8.  14.  are  choaked  with  the  p.  of  this  life 
'iTim.  3.  4.  lovers  of  p.  more  than  lovers  of  God 
Tit.  3  3.  deceived,  serving  divers  lusts  and  p. 
Heb.  11.  25.  than  to  enjov  the  p.  of  sin  for  a  season 

PLEDGE. 
Gen.  38.  17.  Tamar  said,  wilt  thou  give  me  a  p.? 
18.  what  p.?  II  20.  Judah  sent  to  receive  his  p. 
Ezod.  22.26.  if  thou  take  a  neighbor's  raiment  lo  p. 
Dent.  24. 6.  no  man  shall  take  the  nelher  or  upper 
millstone  to  p.  for  he  taketh  a  man's  life  to  p. 
10.  shall  not  go  info  his  house  to  fetch  his  p.  11. 
12.  if  poor,  thou  shall  not  sleep  with  his  p.  13. 
17.  nor  shall  fake  a  widow's  raiment  lo  p. 
1  Sam.  17. 18.  how  thy  brethren  fare,  take  theirp. 
fob  02.  fi.  thou  hast  taken  a  p.  from  thy  brother 
24.  3.  they  take  the  widow's  ox  for  a  p. 
9.  and  they  take  a  p.  of  the  poor 


PLU 

Amos  2.  8.  on  clothes  laid  to  p.  by  ever*  attar 

PLEDGES. 
iKings  18.23.Isay,  givep.  king  of  As»y.  ha.  36.8 

PLEIADES. 
They  are  seven  stars,  beyond  the  Bull,  which  ap- 
pear at  the  beginning  uf  the  spring.     The  He- 
brew reads,  Chiina,  ./oO  38.  31,  Canst  thou  bind 
the  sweet  influences  of  the  Pleiades,  or  Chima? 
Canst  thou  hinder  them  from  rising  in  their 
season;  or  canst  thou  hinder  or  shut  up  tAt 
earth  when  they  open  it  ? 
Job  9,9.which  maketh  Arcturus,  Orion,  and  P. 
38. 31.  canst  thou  bind  the  sweet  influences  of  P  / 

PLENTEOUS. 
Oen.  41.  34.  take  the  fifth  part  in  the  p.  years 

47.  in  the  p.  years  the  earth  brought  forth 
Deut.  28.  11.  the  Lord  shall  make  thee  p.  30.  9 
2  Chr.  1.  15.  Solomon  made  gold  asp.  as  stones 
Psal.  86.  5.  art  p.  in  mercy  to  all  call  on  thee,  15 
103.  6.  Ld.is  merciful,  gracious,  andp.  in  mercy 
130.  7.  and  with  him  is  p.  redemption 
Isa.  30.  23.  the  bread  shall  be  fat  and  p.  in  that  day 
Hab.  1. 16.  their  portion  is  fat,  and  their  meat  p. 
Mat.  9.37.  the  harvest  truly  isp.  but  labourers  few 

PLENTEOUSNESS. 
Oen.  41.  53.  the  seven  year.s  of  p.  were  ended 
Prov.  21.  5.  the  thoughts  of  the  diligent  tend  top. 

PLENTY. 
Gcji.27. 28.  God  give  thee  p.  of  corn  and  wine 
41.  2i(.  behold,  there  come  seven  years  of  great  p. 

30.  all  the  p.  shall  be  forgotten  in  land  of  Egypt 

31.  and  the  p.  shall  not  be  known  in  the  land 
Lev.  11.  36.  a  pit,  wherein  there  isp.  of  water 

1  Kings  10. 11.  bro't  infromOphirp.ofahnug-tree« 

2  Chron.  31. 10.  we  had  enough  to  eat,  have  left  p. 
Job  22.  25.  and  thou  shall  have  p.  of  silver 

37.  23.  he  is  excellent  in  power  ajid  p.  of  justice 
Prov.  3.  10.  so  shall  thy  barns  be  filled  with  p. 
28.19. he  that  tilleth  his  land  shall  have  p.of  bread 
./er,  44.  17.  for  then  had  we  p.  of  victuals,  and  well 
Joel  2. 26.  shall  eat  in  p.  and  praise  Lord  your  God 

PLENTIFUL. 
Psal.  68.  9.  thou,  O  God,  didst  send  a  p.  rain 
Isa.  16.  10.  joy  is  taken  out  of  the  p.  field 
Jer.  2.  7.  and  I  brought  you  to  a  p.  country 
48.  33.  joy  and  gladness  is  taken  from  the  p.  field 

PLENTIFULLY. 
■lob  26.  3.  how  hast  p.  declared  the  thing  as  it  is? 
Psal.  31'  23.  and  p.  rewardeth  the  proud  doer 
Luke  12. 16.  ground  of  a  rich  man  brought  forth  p. 

PLOTTETH. 
Psa/.37.12.the  wicked  p.  against  the  just,  gnasheth 

PLOUGH. 
Luke  9.  62.  no  man  having  put  his  hand  to  the  p. 

PLOW 
Signifies,  [1]  To  till  and  break  up  ground  with 
a  plough,  Deut.  22.  10.     [2]  To  labour  in  any 
calling,    1  Cor.  9.  10.     [3]  To  contrive,  plot, 
and  practise.  Job  4.  8.  Hos.  10.  13.     [4l  Cru- 
ellij  to  torment,  wound,  and  mangle,   Psaim 
129.  3. 
To  put  the  hand  to  the  plough,  Luke  9. 62.   To  ejt- 
gagc  one's  self  in  the  service  of  God,  or  work 
of  the  ministry,  or  preaching  of  the  gospel. 
/><(«<. 22.10.  shall  nolp.with  an  ox  and  ass  together 
1  Sam.  14.  14.  which  a  yoke  ofo.ven  might  p. 
.fob  4.  8.  ihey  that  p.  iniquity,  reap  the  same 
Prov.  20.  4.  sluggard  will  not  p.  by  reason  of  cold 
Isa.  28.  24.  doth  the  plowman  p.  all  day  to  sow 
Ho.'i.  10.  11.  Judah  shall  p.  Jacob  break  his  cloda 
.Inios  6.  12.  will  one  p.  there  with  oxen? 
1  Cor.  9. 10.  he  that  ploweth  should  p.  in  hope 

PLOWED. 
Judg.  14.  18.  if  ye  had  not  p.  with  my  heifer 
Psal.  129.  3.  the  plowersp.  on  my  back 
ler.  26.  18.  Zion  shall  be  p.  as  a  field,  Mic.  3.  12. 
Hos.  10.13.  ye  have  p.  wickedness,  reaped  iniquity 

PLOWETH. 
1  Cor.  9.  10.  that  he  that  p.  should  plow  in  hope 

PLOWING. 
1  Kings  19. 19.  Elijah  found  Elisha,  who  was  p. 
.lob  1. 14.  the  oxen  were  p.  and  the  asses  feeding 
Luke  17.  7.  which  of  you  having  a  servant  p. 

PLOWING. 
Prov.  21.  4.  and  the  p.  of  the  wicked  is  sin 

PLOWMAN. 
Isa.  28.  24.  doth  the  p.  plow  all  day  to  sow  ? 
Jimos  9.  13.  the  p.  shall  overtake  the  reaper 

PLOWMEN. 
Isa.&\.  5.  the  sons  of  the  aliens  shall  be  yourp 
.Tcr.  14.  4.  the  p.  were  ashamed,  they  covered 

PLOW-SHARES. 
ha.  2.  4.  shall  beat  their  swords  into  p.  Mic.  4.  3 
./o' n.lO.bea!  your p.intn  swordSjhooks  into  spearf 

PLUCK. 
Lev.  1. 16.  shall  p.  away  his  crop  wifh  his  feathers 


Prov.  20.  16.  take  p.  for  a  strange  woman,  27. 13.  JVitm.  33.  .52.  and  quite  p.  down  their  high  place* 
Etek.  18.  7.  hath  restored  to  the  d.-btor  his  p.  16.     Deut.  7.  1 22.  thy  God  will  p.  off  those  nations 

12.  hath  not  restored  the  p.  shall  ho  then  live?   |   23.25.  Ihpn  thoiimavestp.  the  cars  with  thy  hand 
33.  15.  if  wicked  restore  the  p.  he  shall  not  die    1 2  Chr.  7. 20.  then  will  I  p.  them  up  by  the  rooU 


POL 

M  84.  9  *hcy  p.  the  Tatherless  from  the  breaat 
I'sal.  '-JJ-  1  j-  lie  shall  p-  '"X  I"';'-''  ""'  "'  '''e  net 
5a.  5.  and  p.  ihee  oui  ot'ihy  dwellmg-pUice 
74.  Jl.  iliy  right  hand,  p.  it  out  of  thy  bosom 
80.  liJ.  lliuy  which  pma  by  thu  way  doy.  her 
Keel-  '.i.  '-i.  and  a  time  to  p.  up  what  is  piunted 
Jer.  1-2.  14.  p.  out  the  house  ol' Judah  froui  them 
17. 1  will  utterly  p-  up  and  destroy  that  nation 
18.  7.  I  speak  concerning  a  kingdum,  to  p.  it  up 
•Ji.  24.  on  my  hand,  yet  would  1  p.  tiiee  thence 
:i4.  C.  will  plant  them,  and  not;/,  them  up,  43^.  10. 
31.  28.  as  1  have  watched  over  them  to  p.  up 
45.  4.  that  which  1  have  planted  I  will  p.  up 
*;jf*.17.9.  without  many  peo|)le  lop.  it  up  by  roots 
iJ.  34.  thou  shalt;;.  otV thine  own  breasts 
•Wie.  3.  2.  who/>.  otf  the^kin  from  ofl"  them 
5.  14.  I  will  p.  up  thy  groves  out  of  Ihee 
Jtat.  5.  2«.  if  thy  ri^lit  eye  oHend  thee,  p.  it  out, 
and  cast  it  from  thee,  18.  9.  Murk  9.  47. 
1-2.  1.  be^an  to  p.  the  ears  of  corn,  Mark  2.  23. 
John  10.  -Iri.  nor  shall  any  p.  them  out  of  my  hand 
!M)  no  mtt.'i  isabie  toyj.themoutofFather'shand 
1'L.L'CKED. 
Oen.  8.  11.  in  her  mouth  was  an  olive  leaf  p.  oil" 
Kzud.  4.  7-  and  \ie  p.  his  hand  out  of  his  bosom 
J)eut.  28.  l>3.  ye  shall  be  p.  from  off  the  land 
Josh.  4. 1 18.  the  soles  of  the  priests'  leet  were  p. up 
Jiitth  4.  7.  a  man  ;;.  off  his  shoe,  and  gave  it 
2  A'am.  2:1.21.;;.  the  spear  out  of  Egyptian's  hand, 
and  slew  him  with  his  spear,  1  C/iron.  11.23 
Ezra  9.  3.  I  p.  off  the  hair  of  my  head  and  beard 
Mh.  13.  25.  I  cursed  them,  and  ;;.  off  iheir  hair 
Job  2J.  17.  and  ;;.  the  spoil  out  of  his  teeth 
Prov.  2.  T  22.  the  transgressors  shall  be  p.  up 
ha.  50.  6.  ray  cheeks  to  them  that  p.  off  the  hahr 
Jer.  6.  29.  for  the  wicked  are  not  p.  away 
12.  15.  after  I  have;),  them  out,  I  will  return 
31.  40.  it  shall  not  be  p.  up,  nor  thrown  down 
Kiek.  19.  12.  but  she  was  p.  up  in  fury,  and  cast 
JJan.T.i.  I  beheld  till  the  wings  thereof  were  p. 
8.  three  of  the  fir.xt  horns  p.  up  by  the  roots 
11.  4.  for  his  kingdom  shall  be  p.  up  for  others 
.linos  4. 11.  as  a  tirebrand  p.  out  of  the  burning 
Zech.  3.  2.  is  not  this  a  brand  p.  out  of  the  fire  ! 
.Mark  5.  4.  the  chains  had  been  p.  asunder  by  him 
J,uke  6. 1.  his  disciples;),  ears  of  corn  and  did  eat 
17.  b.  be  thou  p.  up  by  the  root,  it  should  obey 
Oal.  4.  13.  ye  would  have  p.  out  your  own  eyes 
Jude  12.  twice  dead,  p.  up  by  the  roots 

PLUCKETH. 
Prov.  14.  1.  the  foolish  p.  it  down  with  her  hands 

PLUMBLINE. 
.Imos  7. 7.  he  shewed  me,  and  behold  the  Ld.  stood 
on  a  wall  m.ide  by  a  p.  with  a  p.  in  his  hand 
8.  Amos, what  secst  thou?  and  I  said,  a;;,  behold, 
I  will  set  a  p.  in  the  midst  of  my  jieople  Israel 
PLUMMET. 
S  /irinws2l.l3. 1  will  stretch  over  Jerusalem  the;;. 
Jsa.  &.  17.  I  will  lay  righteou.5nes8  to  the;;. 
Zeck.i.  10.  shall  see  the  p.  in  hand  of  Zerubbabel 

PLUNGE. 
7o69. 31.yclBhaUlhou  p.  me  in  the  ditch  and  my 

.  POETS. 

Mts  17.  23.  as  certain  also  of  your  own  p.  said 

POINT. 
.Vum.  34.  7.  ye  shall  p.  out  for  you  mount  Hor 
8.  B.  out  your  border  II  \0.p.  out  your  east-border 
POINT. 
rten.25.32.  Esau  said,  behold,  I  am  at  the  p.  to  die 
.7i-r.  17.  1.  is  written  with  the  p.  of  a  diamond 
Mark  5.  23.  my  daughter  lieth  at  the  p.  of  death 
.lohn  4.  47.  for  he  was  at  the  p.  of  death 
James  2.  10.  and  yet  off.jnd  in  one  p.  is  guilty 

POINTS. 
F.ecl.  .').  IG.  in  all  p.  as  ho  came,  so  sl^all  ho  go 
Jleb.  4.  15.  but  was  in  all  p.  teinpied  like  as  we  are 

POINTED. 
Job  41. 30.  ho  spreadeth  sharpp.  things  on  the  mire 

POISON. 
j)eut.  32.  24.  with  the  p.  of  serpents  of  the  dust 

.13.  their  wine  is  p.  ofilragons  and  venom  of  asps 
Jok  6.  4.  the  p.  whereof  drinketh  up  my  spirit 
20.  Ifi.  ho  shall  sink  p.  of  asps,  viper's  tongue  slay 
Psal.  ."iH.  4.  Iheir  p.  is  like  the  p.  of  serpents 
140.3.  Iik<-  a«.Tpi-ni,addere'p.  is  under  their  lijis 
Jn:  8.  t  14.  he  huth  given  us  p.  to  drink 
y.rch.  12.  t  2.  I  will  make  Jerusalem  a  cup  of  p. 
Horn.  3.  13.  the  p.  of  asps  is  under  their  lips 
Jam.  3.8.  Iheir  tongu"  in  an  evil,  full  of  deadly  p. 

POLK. 
^Vuin.21.8.  sclilupon  np.  |1  9.  Moses  i)Ut  it  on  a  p. 

POLICY. 
/)an.8.25.  thro'  his p.hc  "hiill  rauHC  ci  all  to  prosper 

POLISHED. 
7'»(iJ   1 14.  12.  p.  aficr  the  similitude  of  a  palace 
Jsa    18  t  2.  to  a  niitiun  outspread  and  p.  t7. 
49  2.  he  halh  made  ino  a  p.  shall,  he  hid  nio 
J)an.  10.  6.  his  feet  like  in  colour  top.  brau 

POLISHING. 

Lam.  4.7.  Nazariles  piin-r,  tlieirp.was  of  sapphire 

446 


POM 

POLL,  S. 

Ezod.  16.  1 10-  gather  of  it  a  homer  for  every  p. 

JViiT/i.  1.  2.  with  ihe  number  of  their  names  every 

male  by  their  p.  18.  20, 22.  1  Chron.  23.  3,  24. 

3.47.thou  shall  take  five  shekels  a-piece  by  their;). 

POLL. 
F.iek.  44.  20.  they  shall  only  p.  their  heads 
Mtc.  1. 10.  make  thee  bald,  and  p.  thee  for  children 

POLLED. 
25a/;t.l4.2G.  when  he  p. his  head,  alyear'send  hep. 
Jtr.  9.  t  2ti.  having  corners  ot  their  hair  p.  that 
dwell  in  the  wilderness,  25.  f  23.  1  49.  t  32. 
POLLUTE. 
JVuOT.  18.  32.  neither  shall  yep.  the  holy  things 
35.  33.  so  shall  ye  not  p.  the  kinil  wherein  ye  are 
/j(a.23.t9.  Lord  purposed  top.  the  pride  of  all  glory 
Jer.  7.  30.  in  the  house  called  by  name,  to  ;;.  it 
Eiek.  7.  21.  they  shall  p.  my  secret  place,  22. 

13.  19.  will  ye  p. me  among  my  pcojile  for  handfuls 
20.  31.  yep.  yourselves  with  idois,  23.  30.  |  30. 18. 

3J.  but  p.  ye  my  holy  name  no  more,  39.  7. 

44.  7.  struiig^'rs  to  be  in  my  sanctuary  top.  it 
iiun.  11.  31.  theyshullp.  the  sanctuary  of  slrcngtii 

POLLUTED. 
Ezod.  20.  25.  if  lilt  thy  tool  upon  it,  thou  hastp.  it 
2  Kings  23.  Hi.  Josiali  p.  the  altar  at  Beth-el 
2  Chr.  30. 14.  the  priests  p.  the  house  of  the  Lord 
Ezra  2.  02.  therefore  were  they  us  p.  JV<7i.  7.  04. 
Psal.  100.  38.  and  the  land  wasp,  with  blood 
Isa.  47.  0. 1  was  wroth,  1  have  p.  mine  inheritance 

48.  11.  fur  how  should  my  name  be  p. 
Jer.  2.  23.  how  canst  thou  say,  I  am  not  p.? 

3.  1.  shall  not  that  land  be  greatly  p.?  2. 
34.  10.  but  ye  turned  and  p.  my  name 

Lam.  2.  2.  he  hath  p.  the  kingdom  and  princes 

4.  14.  they  have  p.  themselves  with  blood 

t  15.  they  cried,  depart  ye  p.  depart,  touch  not 
F.zek.  4.  14.  behold,  my  soul  hath  not  been  p. 

14.  11.  nor  be  p.  with  all  their  transgressions 
10.  6.  1  saw  thee  p.  in  thine  own  blood,  22. 

20.  9.  I  wrought  for  my  name's  sake,  that   ii 
'should  not  be  p.  II,  22. 
13.  my  sabbaths  they  greatly  p.  10,  21,  24. 
20.  and  I  p.  them  in  their  own  gifts 
30.  are  ye  p.  after  the  manner  of  your  fathers  1 

22.  15.  shall  mock  thee  which  art  p.  in  name 

23.  17.  and  she  wasp,  with  the  Babylonians 
Has.  0.  8.  Gilead  is  a  city  that  is  p.  with  blood 

9.  4.  all  that  cat  thereof  shall  be  p. 
Jlmos  7.  17.  an(i.thou  shall  die  in  a  p.  land 
Mic.  2.  10.  this  is  not  your  rest,  because  it  is  p. 
Zeph.  3.  1.  woe  to  her  that  is  filthy  and  p. 

4.  her  priest.s  have  p.  sanctuary,  done  violence 
Mai.  1.  7.  ye  offered  p.  bread  upon  mine  altar,  and 
say,  wherein  have  we  p.  tliee  ! 
12.  that  ve  say,  the  table  of  the  Lord  is  p. 
.^cts  21.  28.  and  halh  p.  this  holy  place 

POLLUTING. 
Isa.  56.  2.  that  keepeih  the  ^abbath  from  p.  it,  C. 

POLLUTION. 
£zfit.22. 10.  have  humbled  her  that  was  apart  for  p. 

POLLUTIONS. 
Jicts  15.  20.  w  ill  that  they  abstain  from  p.  of  idols 
2fc£.  2.20.  if  after  having  escaped  p.  of  the  world 
POLLUX,  seeStoti. 
POMKGK.^NATE 
Is  0  kind  of  apple,  conerid  without  tcitk  a  reddi.-ih 
rind,  and  red  within,  which  opens  length- ways, 
and  shews  red  grains  within,  full  of  juice  liki. 
wine,  with  Utile  kernel.-,:     Cod  gave  orders  to 
Moses  to  put  embroidered  pinnegranalrs,  with 
golden  bells  between,  at  the  bottom  of  the^  high- 
priest's  blue  robe  or  ephod,  E.xod.  2.8.  33,  34. 
Pomegranates  being  very  common  in  Palestine, 
and  being  a  very  beautiful  fruit,  the  .^cripturcs 
make  vsl:  of  similituiles  taken  from  the  ponie- 
.  eranate.   The  blo:!Soms  of  the  tree  or  shrub  that 
bears    this  fruit,  are  call'd  Balausts  by  the 
./lpothrcarie.8.     They  are  astringent,  and  itrry 
good  in  a  Dysentery,  Diarrhita,  and  l.ientery. 
Ezod.^lH.  34.  a  golden  bell  and  a  p.  upon  the  hem 
of  the  robe  round  about,  39.  20. 
1  .Sum.  14.  2.  Saul  tarried  under  a  p.  tree 
Cant.  4.  3.  thy  ttmiples  arc  like  a  piece  of  p.  6.  7. 
8.  2.  would  cause  ihoe  lo  drink  of  juice  of  my  p. 
.Joel  1.  12.  the  p.  tr>e  and  all  trees  are  withered 
Hag.  2.  19.  as  vet  the  ;..  halh  not  brought  forth 

POMEGR.ANATES. 
F.jod.  08. 33.  thou  shall  make  p.  of  blue,  39. 24, 25. 
J^um.  13.  23.  Ih-'V  brought  of  the  p.  and  figs 
20.  .V  It  is  no  place  of  »ei>d,  figs,  vines,  or  p. 
Drul.  8.  8.  into  a  land  of  p.  oil-olive,  and  honey 

1  Kini'sl.  18.  to  cover  Ihe  clmpiters  on  top  with  ;>. 

'  2  Kings  25.  17.  2  rAn.ii.  3.  10.  .hr.  52.  W. 
Cinf. 4. 13.  thv'pliinlsnreitnntchnrdofp.wi'hfruiti' 
6.  11.  I  went  to  see  whether  llie  p.  budded,  7.  12. 
POMMELS. 

2  Chr.  4.  12.  the  pillars  and  p.  of  the  clinpiters 

POMP. 
ha.  5.  14.  and  their  p.  »hall  descend  into  hell 


POO 

ha.  14.  11.  thy  p.  is  brought  dowti  to  the  grave 
Eiek.l.  24. 1  will  make  thep.  of  the  strong  to  cea«e 
30.  18.  thep.  of  her  strength  shall  cease,  33,  28. 
32.  12.  ami  they  shall  spoil  the  p.  of  Egypt 
-4c£4 25.23. Agrippa  and  Bernice  come  with  greatp. 

PONDER. 
Prov.i.  26.  p.  the  path  of  thy  feet,  and  let  thy  way* 
5.6.  lest  ihou  shuuklestp.thepalii  of  hfe,  her  way* 

PONDEKLD. 
Lukt'i.Vi.  but  Mary  p. them  in  her  heart,  and  kepi 

PON  DEKETH. 
Prov.  5.21.  wa}s  of  man,  the  Lord  p. all  his  goings 
21.2.  Lordp.thcheait  {|  24. 12. he  thaip.thu  hearl 

PONDS. 
Ezod.  7.  19.  stretch  out  thy  hand  on  iheir  p.  8.5. 
ha.  19.  10.  be  broken  in  purposes,  that  make  p. 

POOL. 
2  5om.2. 13.  the  one  set  on  the  one  side  of  the7>. 
4. 12.  they  hanged  them  up  over  the  p.  at  Hebruu 
\  Kings  22.38  one  washed  chariot  in  p.  of  Samaria 
2  Kings  18.  17.  and  when  they  were  come  up,  they 
came  and  stood  bv  llie  conduit  of  the  uppei 
p.  /su.  7.  3.  I  30.  2. 
20.  20.  and  how  he  made  a  p.  and  conduit 
JV'eh.  2.  14.  then  I  went  on  to  the  king's  p. 
3.  15.  Shallum  repaired  the  wall  of  thep. 
Jsa.  22.  9.  ye  gathered  the  waters  of  the  lower  p. 

11.  ye  made  a  ditch  for  the  water  of  tlie  old  p. 
35.  7.  the  parched  ground  shall  become  a  p. 

41.  18.  I  will  make  the  wilderness  a  p.  of  water 
JVaA.  2.  8.  Nineveh  of  old  is  like  a  p.  of  water 
John  5.  2.  there  is  at  Jerusal.  by  sheep  market  a  p. 

4.  an  angel  went  down  into  the  p.  and  trou^bled 

7.  he  said,  [  have  no  man  lo  put  me  into  thep. 
9.  7.  he  said,  go  wash  in  the  p.  of  Siloain,  11. 

POOLS. 
Ezod.  7. 19.  take  rod,  stretch  thy  hand  on  all  their^. 
Psal.  84.  6.  make  it  a  well,  rain  also  filleih  the  p. 
Eccl.  2.  6. 1  made  mop. of  water  to  waler  the  wood 
Isa.  14.  23.  1  will  also  make  it  for  the  p.  of  water 

42.  15.  and  I  will  dry  up  thep.  and  herbs 

POOR 
Signifies,  [1]  Indigent,  ni-edy,  or  necessitous,  Mat. 
20.  11.  [2]  Such  as  are  sensible  of  their  lost 
and  undone  condition  by  sin,  and  discern  their 
poverty  and  inability  ill  spiritual  things,  and 
fly  to  the  free  grace  of  God,  and  the  righteous- 
ness of  Christ,  for  pardon  and  acceptance.  Mat. 

5.  3.  Luke  6.  20.     [3]  .Such  as  arc  void  of  true 
saving  grace,  or  spiritually  poor,  Kev.  3.  17. 

Gen.  41.  19.  came  up  after  them  seven  p.  kino  , 

F.zod.  23.  11.  thai  the  p.  of  thy  people  may  cat 

30. 15.  thep.  shall  not  give  less  than  half  a  shekel 
I.cv.  14.  21.  if  he  be  p.  and  cannot  get  so  much        _ 

19.10.  thou  shall  leave  them  for  thep. and  stranger     * 
15.  Ihou  shall  not  refpect  the  person  of  thep. 

25.  25.  if  thy  brother  be  wa.ven  p.  35,  39,  47. 
Deut.  15. 4.  save  when  there  be  no  p.  among  you 

11.  for  the  p.  shall  never  cease  out  o||he  land 
fiut/j3.10.thou  Ibllowedstnot  young  men. p.or  rich 

1  Sam.  2.  7.  the  Lord  makethp.  and  makelh  rich 

8.  heraiseth  up  the  p.  out  of  ihe  du«l,  Ps.  113.7. 

2  Sam.  12. 1.  two  men,  one  rich,  and  the  other  p. 
2A'in^«25.  12.  but  ihe  captain  of  the  cuard  left  of 

thep.  of  the  land,  .Jer.  30. 10.  ]  40.7.  |  .52.1.5,16. 
Job  5.  1.^.  but  ho  savcth  the  p.  from  ihe  sword 
IG.  so  thep.  Ii.ith  hope,  anil  iniquity  .•^toiu'eth 
20.  10.  his  children  shall  seek  to  please  thep. 

19.bec:iU8e  he  liath  oppressed  and  forsaken  thep. 
24.4.  the  p.  of  the  earth  hide  themselves  together 

9.  and  they  take  a  pledge  of  Ihe  p. 

14.  Ilie  miirderi  r  killeth  the  p.  and  needy 
20.  12.  bocuu>c  I  ilelivircd  ihe  p.  thai  cried 

30.  25.  was  not  niv  soul  grieveil  for  thep.? 

31.  10.  if  1  withheld  thep.  from  their  desire 
19.  or  if  I  have  seen  any  p.  wilhoiit  covering 

34.  19.  nor  ng.irdelh  the  rich  more  Ih.tn  Ihe  v. 

28.  they  cause  the  cry  of  the  p.  to  come  to  him 
36. 15.  he  .Ichverelh  the  p.  in  uffliclion,  }'s.  72.  12. 
Psal.9. 18.  Ihe  e.xpeclntion  of  the  p. shall  nol  perish 
1".  2.  the  wicked  in  his  pride  doih  persecute  the  p. 

8.  his  eyes  arc  privily  set  againsi  the  p. 

9.  he  hclli  in  wait  secretly  to  calch  the  p. 

10.  that  ihe  p.  may  fall  by  his  strong  ones 

14.  thep.  rominitlelh  himself  to  then,  thou  art 

12.  5.  fo'  Ihe  oppressii'n  of  the  p.  I  will  arise 
14.  fi.  yo  have  shamed  Ihe  couni-pl  of  Ihe  p. 
35.10.  who  delivcroih  Ihe  p.  from  him  (hat  spoilPtk    V 
37.  14.  Iinvo  bent  their  bow  to  cnsi  ilown  the  p. 

40.  17.  but  I  am  p.  09. 29. 1  70.  .5.  ]  80.  1.  |  109.22. 

41.  1.  hiessril  is  he  that  considinth  ihc  p. 

411.  2.  both  low  and  high,  rich  and  p.  t'lffclhcr 
08.  10.  hast  prepiircd  of  thy  goodness  for  Ihe  p. 
09. 33.  Lord  heiirelh  p.  and  dc^piseih  not  prisoner! 
72.  4.  he  fhnll   judge  (he  p.  of  the  pi  <iplc 

13.  he  shall  spare  the  p.  ||  82.  3.  defend  the  p. 
74.  21.  let  the  p.  and  ni-edv  prai-e  lh>  immo 
82.  4.  deliver  the  p.  nnd  nee.lv,  rid  ih-MH  out  of 
107.  41.  yet  seiiolh  he  p.  nn  liifh  from  nflhclion 
109.31.  ho  shalUtand  at  the  right  hand  of  thep 


POO 

P».132.13.will  satisfy  her  p.  witli  bread,  will  clothe 

1-lU.  Vi.  and  will  muiiitaiii  Uie  right  ot°  the  p. 
Prov.H)A.i}vcointi\.ii  p.lUal  deuleth  with  a  vlack 
15.  the  destructiuii  of  the/*,  u  their  puverty 

13. 7.  there  in  that  maketh  himself^,  hath  riches 

6.  his  riclied,  but  tlie^.  iieareth  nut  rebnke 
23.  much  fuud  is  iu  the  tillage  of  the^i.  but  there 

14.  20.  tlie  p.  is  hated  even  of  lug  neiglihour 
a.  he  tint  hath  mercy  on  Ihep.  happy  is  he 

31.  he  that  oiipreasetli/).  repiuaciietli  his  maker: 
he  that  hoiiuureili  liiiii  lialli  mercy  on  tiic^. 

17.3.  whoso  mocketh  the/i.rupruacheth  his  maker 
Id.  23.  the/>.  uaetli  entreaties,  but  the  rich 
19.  4.  tiic  p.  IS  eejiaratcd  from  liis  own  neighbour 

7.  all  breliireii  o(  the  p.  do  liale  him,  how  much 
21.  13.  whoso  stuppcth  his  ears  at  the  cry  of  the;>. 
2~.  2.  the  rich  and  p.  meet  togutlier,  Lord  is  maker 

7.  the  rich  ruleth  over  the  p.  and  the  borrower  is 
16.he  that  oppresseth  they;,  to  increase  his  riches 

28.  8.  shall  gather  it  for  hiiu  that  will  pity  the  p. 
11.  the  p.  that  liatl".  'oixi  vstaiid.  searcheth  hiiii 
1^.  so  is  a  wickcv  rulei  <>ver  the;;,  people 

29.  7.  righteous  coiiside(elli  the  cause  of  the  p.  13. 
14.  Ihe  king  that  fairh&lly  judgeth  the  p. 

30.9.  lest  I  be  p.  and  steal,  and  take  name  of  God  jl  Cor.  13.3. 1  bestow  all  my  goods  to  feed  thep'. 

14.  whose  teeth  are  as  swords,  to  devour  the  p.    ./aj«,3.3.aiid  say  to  f.;;.  stand  thouthere,  or  sit  here 
31.  9.  and  plead  the  cause  of  the  p.  and  needy       |  T/ii/  POOR. 

iicc/.4.14.  that  is  born  in  hiskingdum,  becomcthy.   Kxo^i.  23.  6.  slialt  nut  wrest  the  judgment  o(  thijp. 

j.  8.  if  thou  .""eest  the  oppression  of  the  ^.  i^-..  i-  -r         -i :  !_    •  _     .  .- 

6.  8.  what  hath  the;;,  that  knoweth  to  walk 
/>■«.  3.  14.  the  spoil  of  the  p.  is  in  your  houses 

15.  what  mean  ye  that  ye  grind  faces  of  thep.? 
10.  2.  and  to  take  away  the  right  from  thep. 

30.  cause  it  to  be  heard  to  Laish,  O  p.  Anathoth 

11.4.  with  rigliieousness  shall  he  judge  thep. 
14.  30.  the  lirst-born  of  thep.  shall  feed  in  it 

32.  and  thep.  of  lus  people  shall  trust  in  it 
26.  6.  even  the  feet  of  thep.  shall  tread  it  down 


POR 

Prov.  28. 3.  a  p.  man  that  oppresseth  poor  is  like 

29. 13.  thep.  and  deceitful  man  meet  together 
£cc/.9.15.  now  there  was  found  in  it  a  p.  wise  man, 
yet  no  man  remembered  that  samep.  ma/t 
le.the  p.jnen's  wisdom  is  despised  and  not  heard 
JaiH.'i.  2.  there  come  in  a  p.  man  in  vile  raiment 

To  the  I'OOR. 
/-eB.23.22.thou  shalt  leave  them  to  tAep. and  stran 
Ksth.\i.'i'i.m&ke  them  days  of  sending  git'ls  to  thep. 
Job  29.  It).  I  was  a  father  to  the  p.  and  feel  to  lame 

36. 6.  of  the  wicked,  but  he  giveth  right  to  the  p. 
I'sal.  112.  9.  he  hath  given  to  the  p.  2  Cor.  9.  9. 
Prov.  22.  9.  for  he  giveth  of  his  bread  to  thep. 

28.  27.  he  that  giveth  to  thep.  shall  not  lack 

31.  20.  she  stretcheth  out  her  hand  to  thep. 
Isa.  25.  4.  thou  hast  been  a  strength  to  the  p. 
/>'a«.4. 27. break  oll'sins,  by  shewing  mercy  to  thep. 
Mat.  19.  21.  sell  all,  and  give /o^Acp.  Mark  10.  21. 

26.9.this  ointment  miglii  have  been  sold  for  much, 
and  given  to  the  p.  Mark  14.  5.  John  12.  5. 
Luke  4.  IS.  to  preich  the  gospel  to  thep.  7.  22. 

18.  22.  sell  all  thou  hast  and  distribute  to  the  p. 

19.8.  behold,  the  half  of  my  goods  I  give  to  the  p. 
John  13.  29.  that  heehould  give  something  to  thep 


Deal.  15.  7.  nor  shut  thine  hand  from  t/ii/p.  brother 

9.  and  thine  eye  be  evil  against  thy  p.  brother 

11.  thou  shalt  open  thine  hand  wide  to  thy  p. 

Psal.72.2.  he  shall  judge  thy  p.  with  judgment 

74.19.  forget  not  thecongregat,  oi'  thy  p.  {ot  ever 

rOOllER. 
LcD.  27. 8.  if  he  bep.  than  thy  estimat.  shall  present 

POGREtiT. 

2A7Hg's24.14.none  remained,  savep.  sortof people 

POPL.VR,  S 


29.19.even  p. among  men  shall  rejoice  inHoly  One  '  Oen.30.37.Jacob  took  rods  of  green  p. and  of  hasel 


32.  7.  to  destroy  ihep.  with  lying  words 
41.  17.  when  thep.  and  needy  seek  water 
58.  7.  tiial  thou  bring  the  p.  that  are  cast  out 
Jer.  2.  34.  is  found  the  blood  of  thep.  innocents 
5.  4. 1  said,  surely  these  are  p.  they  are  foolish 
20.  13.  for  he  hath  delivered  the  soul  of  thep. 

22. 10.  he  judged  the  cause  of  thep.  and  needy 
Ezek.  10.  49.  nor  did  she  strengthen  hand  of  thep. 

\i.  12.  halli  oppressed  p.  and  needy,  hath  spoiled 

17.  that  hath  taken  otThis  hand  from  thep. 
22.  29.  and  ihey  have  vexed  the  p.  and  needy 
Amos  2.  6.  they  sold  the  p.  for  a  pair  of  shoes 

7.  that  |(ant  after  the  dust  on  the  head  of  thep. 
4. 1.  which  oppress  the  p.  and  crush  the  needy 
Sb  11.  forasmuch  as  your  treading  is  on  thep. 

12.  and  they  turn  aside  the  p.  in  the  gate 
8.  4.  even  to  make  thep.  of  the^and  lo  fail 

6.  that  we  may  buy  the  p.  for  silver,  and  needy 
Hab.'i.  U.  their  rejoicing  was  tu  devour  thep. 
Z,eph.  .3.  12.  the  p.  people  shall  trust  in  the  Lord 
ZtcA.  7-  10.  and  oppress  not  the  widow  nor  p. 
11.  7.  I  will  feed  even  you.  Op.  of  the  (luck 
11.  the  p.  of  the  flock  that  waited  upon  mo 
Mat.  5.  2.  bless  ;d  are  the  p.  in  spirit,  for  theirs  is 
11.  5.  the  p.  have  the  gospel  preached  to  them 

20. 11.  for  ye  have  the  p.  always  with  yuu,  but  me 
ye  have  nut  always,  Mark  14.  7.  John  12.  8. 

Mark  \i.  42.  there  came  a  certain  p.  widow 
43.  ihis  p.  widow  cast  more  in,  J^ake  21.  .3. 
l^ukcQ.  20.  blessed  be  ye  p.  your's  is  the  kingdom 

14.  13.  call  the  p.  the  iniimed,  the  lame,  21. 
Joka  12. 6.  this  he  said,  not  that  he  cared  fur  thep. 
Rom.  1.5.  26.  to  make  acontribuiion  fur  thep. 
2  Cor.  ij.  1^  a.-i  p.  yat  making  many  rich 
8.  9.  though  rich,  yet  for  your  sakes  he  became  p. 
fial.  2.  10.  that  we  sliuukt  remember  the  p. 
Jaw.  2..').  hath  not  God  chosen  thep.  ofthis  world 
6.  hut  ye  have  despised  the  p.  rich  oppress  you 
Rev.  3.  17.  and  knowest  not  that  thou  art  p. 
13. 10.  he  causcth  rich  and  p.  to  receive  a  mark 

Is  POOR. 
Kzod.  22.  2.1.  if  lend  to  any  of  my  people  that  is  p. 
Dent.  24.14.  shall  not  oiiprcsshi'ed  servl.  that  is  p. 

15.  for  he  is  p.  and  sdtctli  h  3  heart  upon  it 
Jiidg.  6.  15.  behold,  my  family  is  p.  in  Manasseh 
Prov.  19.  1.  better  1.5  the  p.  that  walkeih  in  his  inte- 
grity, than  he  that  is  perverse  in  his  lips,  28.  fi. 
K.  22.  rob  not  poor  because  he  is  p.  nor  o;:presa 
iCcrM.13.  better  1.9  ap.  and  wise  child,  than  an  old 
/.sa.  60. 2.  to  him  iha'  is  p.  an  1  of  a  contrite  heart 

POOR  man. 
Eioii.23.  3.  norcounienaiice  a  p.  ntdu  in  his  cause 
Deut.  15.7.  if  a  p.  man  ha'd  n  not  thy  heart 
24.  12.  if  a  p.  man  sleep  not  with  his  pledge 
1  .Sam.lS.  23.  to  he  king's  son,  seeing  I  am  a  p.  man 
2Sam.12.3.p.  man  had  noihing,save  one  ewe-lamb 
4.  but  took  thep.  man's ewe-Ianih  and  drt-ssod  it 
Psid.  34.  n.  this  p.  man  cried,  and  ihe  T/ord  heard 
109.  16.  bii'  persecuted  the  p.  and  needy  man 
Prov.  19.  22.  and  a  p.  man  is  belter  than  a  liar 
21  17.  hetJiatloveth  nlr^ajure  shall  be  an.  man 
447 


^os.4.13.  and  they  burn  incense  under  oaks  and  p. 

POPULOUS. 
Deut.  26. 5.  became  a  nation  great,  mighty,  and  p. 
JVitA.  3.  8.  art  thou  better  than  p.  Nul 

PORCH. 
.fudff.  3.23.  then  Ehud  went  forth  through  thep. 

1  C/tron.  28. 11.  David  gave  Solomon  pattern  of  p. 

2  CAr.  29.  7.  they  have  slnu  up  the  doors  of  the  p. 
17.  eighth  day  of  the  month  came  they  to  thep. 

Eick.  8.  16.  between  the  p.  and  altar  were  25  men 
44.  3.  shall  enter  by  way  of  p.  of  the  gate,  46.  2, 8. 
.foel  2.  17.  let  priests  weep  betwecnp.  and  the  altar 
Mat.  26.  71.  when  he  was  gone  out  into  the  p. 
Mark  14.68.  he  went  out  into  thep.  and  cock  crew 
.fuhn  10.23.Jesu3  walked  in  temple  in  Sulomon'sp. 
.lets 'i.\l.  the  peopleran  together  in  Solomon's  p. 
5.12.they  were  all  with  one  accord  in  Solomon'sp. 

PORCHES. 
Eick.  41.  15.  with  the  temple  and  p.  of  the  court 
.John  5.  2.  a  pool  called  Heihcsda,  having  five  p. 

PORTER. 
2  Sam.  18.  26.  watchman  called  to  the  p.  and  said 
2  Kings  7.  10.  lepers  called  to  the  p.  of  the  city 

1  Chr  9.21.Zoi;hariah  uasp.  of  door  of  tabernacle 

2  C'Aron.Sl.  14.  and  Kore  the  p.  toward  the  east 
Mark  13.  34.  and  commanded  the  p.  to  watch 
■John  10.3. to  him  thep.  np.'nedi,  the  sheep  hear 

PORTKRS. 


POS 

2  C/tr.  28.21.  Ahaz  took  op.outofhot.sc  of  Lord 
31.3.  Hezekiah  appointed  king's  p.  for  oU'eriiigs 
4.10  give  thep.  of  the  priests  and  Lovitcs,  lli. 

Eira  4.  16.  shalt  have  no  p.  on  this  side  the  river 

JVeA.  2.20.  but  ye  have  nop.  nor  right  in  Jofusalcm 
11. 23.  that  a  certain  p.  should  be  for  the  singers 
12.  47.  gave  singers  and  porters  every  day  liisp. 

Joh  20.29.  this  is  the  p.  of  a  wicked  man  from  God 
23. 1 1"2.  his  words  more  than  my  appointed  p. 
24.  18.  their  p.  is  cursed  in  the  earth 
26.  14.  but  how  little  a  p.  is  heard  of  himl  27.13. 
31.2.  for  what  p.  of  God  is  there  from  above  J 

Psal.  II.  6.  this  shall  be  Ihep.  of  tlieir  cup 
16.  5.  the  Lord  is  thep.  of  mine  inheritance 
17. 14.  from  men  who  have  their  p.  in  this  life 
03.  10.  shall  be  a  p.  for  foxes  ||  73.  20.  God  is  my  ^ 
119.  57.  thou  art  iny  p.  O  Lord,  142.  5. 

Prov.  31.  15.  and  giveth  a  p.  lo  her  maidjsns 

Eccl.  2. 10.  and  this  was  my  p.  of  all  my  labour 
21.  yet  to  a  man  shall  he  leave  it  for  his  p. 

3.  22.  should  rejoice,  for  that  is  hisp.  5. 18.  |  9. 9. 
5.  19.  God  hath  given  him  power  lo  take  hisp. 
9.C.nor  have  they  any  morep. forever  in  any  thing 

11.  2.  give  a  p.  lo  seven,  and  also  to  eight 
Lsa.  17.  14.  this  is  Ihep.  of  them  that  spoil  us 

53.  12.  I  will  divide  him  a  p.  with  the  great 
57.  6.  among  siiiuoth  stones  of  the  stream  is  thy  p. 
61.7.  for  confusion,  they  shall  rejoice  in  their  p. 
Jer.  10.  16.  thep.  of  Jacob  is  not  like  them,  51. 19. 

12.  10.  Ibey  have  trodden  my  p.  under  foot,  they 
have  made  my  pleasant  p. a  desolate  wilderncs* 

13.  2-1.  this  is  the  p.  of  thy  measures  from  me 
52.  34.  every  day  a  p.  until  the  day  of  bis  death 

Lam.  3.  24.  the  Lord  is  my  p.  saith  my  soul 
Eick.  45. 1.  shall  offer  a  holy  p.  of  the  land,  4. 
7.ap.  shall  be  for  prince  on  one  side  and  othei 
48.  1.  to  the  coast  of  Hethlon,  a  p.  fur  Uan 

2.  by  the  border  of  Dan  a  p.  for  Asher 

3.  a  p.  for  Naphtali  ||  4.  a  p.  for  Manasseh 
Oan.l.S.not  defile  himself  with  p.  of  king's  meal 

4.  15.  and  let  hisp.  be  with  the  beasts,  23. 
11.26.  yea,  they  that  feed  of  thep.  of  his  meat 

Mic.  2.  4.  he  hath  changed  thep.  of  my  people 
Hab.l.K.  bjcause  by  them  their  p. is  fat,  and  meat 
Zcch.  2.  12.  the  Lord  shall  inherit  Judali  hisp. 
J/a^24.51. shall  appoint  him  hisp.  with  hypocrite* 
l^uke  12.  42.  to  give  them  their  p.  in  due  season 
46.  will  api)oint  him  hisp.  wiih  unbelievers 
15. 12.  give  me  thep.  of  goods  that  falleth  lo  ipe 

PORTIONS. 
OcuMS.8.  they  shall  have  likep. to  eat  besides  that 
.Tosh.  17.  5.  there  fell  ten  p.  to  Manasseh 

1  Sam.  1.  4.  he  gave  her  sons  and  daughters  p. 

2  Chriin.  31.  19.  to  give  p.  to  all  the  males 
.Vr/j.  8. 10.  eat  the  fat,  and  send  p.  to  them,  12. 

12.  44.  p.  for  the  priests  ||  47.  p.  of  the  singers 
13. lO.tbaf  thep.  of  the  Levites  had  nolbeen  given 
Ksth.  9. 19.  a  day  of  sending  p.  to  one  another,  22. 
Eirk.  47.  13.  Joseph  shall  have  two  p. 
i   48.  21.  over-ag.iinst  the  p.  for  the  prince 
IIos.  5.  7.  a  month  shiill  d.  vour  them  with  tlieirp 

POSSESS. 
Ocn.  22.  17.  thy  seed  shall  p.  the  gate,  24.  CO. 
jVum.  13.  30.  let  us  go  up  at  once  and  p.  it,''for  we 
are  well  able  to  overcome  it,  Deut.  1.  21. 
27.  n.  and  his  ne.xt  kinsman  f  hall  p.  it 
Dnit.  1.  39.  tu  them  will  [give  it,  they  shall  p.  it 


1  CAr.  9. 17.  thep.  were  Shullum,  .\kkub,  Tilinon;   2.  31.  begin  tu  p.  that  thou  maytst  inherit  his  land 


1.5.  18.  and  Obed-edom,  and  Jehiel  thep. 
16.  .38.  Hosah  ||  42.  the  sons  of  Jedulhun  were  p. 
23.  5.  moreover,  four  thousand  were  p. 
26.  1.  concerning  the  divisions  of  the  p.  12.  19. 
2  Chron.  8. 14.  the  p.  by  their  cuurses  at  every  gate 
35.  15.  and  the  p.  waited  at  r^ery  gate 
Ezra'."!,  p.  and  Ne'l.inims  \rPnt  up  to  Jerusalem 
JV'eA.  7.  73.  the  Levites  and  p.  dwell  in  their  cities 

PORTION. 
Ocn.l4."l.  Aner,  E6hcol,l>^f  them  take  ihe'rp. 
31.14.  is  there  yet  luiy p.  or  inh'  ri'ance  for  us? 
47.22.  i>riest  had  ap.Tiss'g:ied,and  didcat  their  p. 
4^.  22. 1  have  given  thee  one  p.  above  thy  bretliren 
Erod  I6.+  4.  i-hall  gather  the  p.  of  a  day  iti  his  day 

1 15.  what  is  this  7  it  i.s  a  p.  fur  they  wi.-!t  not 
Aeii.fi.  17.  have  given  them  it  forp.of  mv  offerings 
7.  35.  this  is  the  p.  of  thn  auointmg  of  .\aron 
JVh'».31.  30.  of  Israel's  hilf  t;ike  thuu  oncp.  36. 

47.  Moses  took  onn  p.  of  fifty  for  th;^  Levit'-s 
Dnut.\l\.n.  by  giving  him  a  double  p.  of  all  he  hath 
32. 9.  for  Lord's  p.  is  his  peopl*',  Jacob  is  the  lot 
3.3.  21    in  a  p.  of  the  lawgiver  w.as  he  seated 
.fiish.  17.  14.  why  hastthuu  iriven  me  but  on"  p.? 
1  .Sam.  I.  5.  but  lo  Hannah  he  give  a  worthy  p. 
9.23.  Simiielsaid,  bring  thep.  wh'ch  I  gave  t.'ieo 
\  Kings  12.16.  what  p.  have  we  in  Dav'd,  nor  inhe- 
ritance in  Ihe  «on  of  Jesse,  2  Chron.  10. 16. 
0  Kinrrs  0.9  let  a  double  v.  uf  thy  op  rit  be  on  me 
9  lO.do^s  shall  eat  Jezcb-l  in  p.  of  Jozroel,  36,  37. 
2I.JorMm  met  him  inp  of  ."Viho'h  fhe-Ie^reolite 
25.  tnkc  iin,cHSt  him  in  thep.  of  N.Tboth's  field 
1 20. 1  will  requite  thee  in  thisp.  sailh  tbo  Lord 


11.  23.  ye  shall  p.  greater  nations,  and  mightier 
than  vourselves,  12.  2,  29.  j  18.  14.  |  31.  3. 

28.  t42.  the  fruit  of  thy  land  shall  the  locust  p. 

30.  18.  thon  passest  over  Jordan  to  p.  it,  31.  13. 
Jiish.  24.  4.  I  gave  to  Esau  mount  Seir  lop.  it 
Jadir.  11.  23.  and  shouldest  thon  p.  it? 
2-!.  w;lt  not  thou  p.  what  Chemo-h  giveth  thee  ? 

It.  1 1-5.  hive  ye  '■ailed  us  to  p. us?  is  it  not  so 
1  Kings -2} .  18.  he  is  gone  down  top.  the  vineyard 
.Tn//  7.  3.  I  am  made  to  p.  months  of  vanity 

13.26  thou  makest  mep.  iniriuities  of  rhy  youth 
l.<(t.34.11.lhecorniornnt  and  bittern  shall  p.  it,  17. 
Eirk.  7.  24.  and  they  sh.ill  p.  their  houses 

3ri.l0.thC3e  two  cotintries  shall  be  mine,  we  wlllp. 

36.  12.  [  will  cause  my  people  Israel  lo  p.  thee 
Dtm.  7. 18.  the  saints  shall  p.  the  kingdoii  fur  ever 
7^)9.9.6  pleasant  (daces  for  silver,net'les  shallp. 
..ImosO.  12.  that  they  mayp.  the  remnant  of  Rdom 
Oft<7'i.l7.thc  house  of.Tac.  shall  p. I  heir  pos.aession* 
19.shallp.  mount  Es.iu,  and  benjamin  p.  Gilead 

CO.  captivity  of  Isr.  shall  p  that  of  rnnaanifos; 
anil  Jr>tusTlem  shall  p.  the  cities  of  Ihe  .south 
frab.  1.  6.  Ihe  Chaldeans  to  p  that  is  not  theirs 
Z'-ph.  2.  9.  the  remnant  of  mv  people  shall  p. them 
ZrrJi.P.  12.  twill  raii-e  rnmn.  tup. nil  th.se  things 
r.<ike  18.  12.  I  fast.  T  give  tithes  of  all  that  I  p. 

21    19.  in  your  patience  p.  yeyuur  souls 
1  7'Af.ss.4.4.everv  one  should  know  how  top.vesee) 

POSSESS  with  land. 
/,CB.  20.  24. 1  will  sive  you  the'r  land  fop.  JWm 
33.  .53.   Oeut.X  If.  |  .5.  31.  •  17.  14 
.Vum.  14. 24.  soed  shall  p.  it,  I  will  bring  into  land 


POS 

Peut.  1.  8.  go  In  and  p.  the  land,  4. 1.  |  8.  18.  |  8. 

1.  I  U.  5,  23.  I  ]0.  11.  I  11.  31.  Josh.  1.  U. 

i.  5.  land  whitiier  ye  go  to  p.  it,  14,  26.  |  5.  'Xi.  \  6. 

1.  I  7.  1.  I  11.  10,  11,  2'J.  1  2J.  20. 

32.  but  ye  shall  go  over  uiiU  p.  that  good  land 
9.  4.  the  Lord  hath  brought  me  tu^.  this  lajid 

6.  gives  not  this  land  lo  p.  for  thy  rightfousncss 

11.  8.  that  ye  may  be  strong  and  p.  the  larid 
12. 1.  {an<<  which  Lord  Uod  of  thy  falhera  giveth 

thee  to;>.  15.  4   1  19.  2,  14.  |  21.  1.  1  25.  19. 
28.  21.  have  consumed  from  oft'/,  thou  goest  lo  p. 
1)3.  plucked  from  oH'  the  land  tliou  goest  lo  p. 
Josh.  18.  3.  how  long  are  ye  slack  to  p.  the  land 

23.  5.  drive  them  out,  and  ye  shall  p.  their  land 

24.  8.  1  gave  them,  that  ye  might  p.  their  land 
Jtidg.  2.  tj.  Israel  went  every  man  to  p.  the  land 

18.  9.  be  not  slothful  to  enter  to/),  the  land 
1  C/iron.  23.  S.  that  ye  may  p.  this  good  land 
Ezra  9.  1 1.  the  land  ye  go  to  p.  is  an  unclean  land 
JV"<A.  9. 15.  promisedst  that  they  should ;;.  Ihe  land 

23.  thou  broughtcst  them  in  to;;,  the  land 
/.9a.  14.2.  Israel  sliall/).  them  in  the/a7j(/of  iho  Ld. 
21.  that  they  do  not  rise  nor  p.  the  land 
57.  13.  that  puttelh  trust  in  me  shall  p.  the  land 
61.  7.  in  their  land  shall  they  p.  the  double 
Jer.  30.  3.  cause  them  to  return  to  land  and  p.  it 
i^2eA-.33.25.ye8hed  blood, shall  yep.  the  land?  20. 
Amos  2.  10.  I  brought  you  top.  land  of  Amorite 

POSSESSED. 

JVum.  21.24.  Israel  p.  Sihon's  land  from  Arnon  lo 

35.  they  smote  Og,his  sons,  and  people,  and  have 

p.  the  land,  Dcut.  3.  12.  |  4.  47.  JVrA.  9.  22. 

Deut.  30.  5.  will  bring  thee  to  land  thy  fathers  ;;. 

Josh.  1.  15.  until  your  brethren  have;;,  the  land 

12.  1.  they  p.  their  land  on  the  other  side  Jordan 
13. 1.  there  remaineth  yet  very  much  land  to  he  p. 

19.  47.  the  children  of  Dan  took  Loshern  and  p.  it 
21.  43.  they  p.  it  and  dwelt  therein,  22.  9. 

Judg.  I.  1 19.  and  Judah  p.  the  mountain 
3. 13.  Eglon,  king  of  Moab,  p.  city  of  i)alm-trccs 
11.  21.  Israel  p.  all  the  land  of  the  Amorites,  22. 
i  Kings  17.  24.  men  of  Ava  p.  Samaria  and  dwell 
Psal.  139.  13.  for  thou  hast  p.  my  leins,  thou  hast 
Prov.  8.22.  Lord  p.  nic  in  the  beginning  of  his  way 
Isa.  63.  18.  people  of  thy  holiness  hath  p.  it  a  little 
Jer.  32.  15.  vineyards  shiiirbe  p.  again  in  this  land 

23.  they  came  in  and  ;;.  it,  but  obeyed  not 

Dan.l.  22.  time  came  that  saints/),  the  kingdom 

y,uAe8.36.  by  what  mean^hethut  was/). was  cured 

Ads  4.  32.  none  said  that  ought  he  p.  was  his  own 

16.  16.  a  damsel  p.  with  a  spirit  of  divination 

1  Cor.  7.  30.  they  that  buy  as  though  thi'yp.  not 

See  Dkvils. 

POSSESSEST. 

Deut.  26.  1.  when  thou  comest  into  land  andp.it 

POSSESSETH. 

^am.  36. 8.  every  daughter  that  p.  an  inheritance 

/,uA°e  12.  15.  a  man's  life  consists  not  in  things  hep. 

POSSESSING. 

0  Cor.  G.  10.  as  having  nothing,  yet  p.  all  things 

POSSESSION 
Signifies,  [  1  ]  The  posses-iing  or  actual  enjoyment 
of  any  thing,  1  Kings  21.  19.  [2j'  Lands, 
houses,  or  habitations,  Obad.  17.  [3]  King- 
dom, or  dominion.  Gen.  36.  43.  [4]  liiehis, 
vihelher  in  lands,  goods,  servants,  or  cattle, 
Eccl.  2.  7.  Mat.  19.  22.  [5]  The  land  of 
Canaan,  which  wns  possessed  by  the  Geniiles, 
Ar.U  7.  45.  [()]  That  people  which  Christ  has 
furchased  with  his  blood,  to  be  his  peculiar 
p.iasession,  Eph.  1.  14. 

1  am  their  possession,  F.zefi.  44.  28.  That  por- 
tion which  I  have  reserved  for  myself  out  of 
the  offerings  I  have  bestowed  on  them ;  or,  I 
have  appointed  them  a  liberal  maintenance 
out  tf  mij  oblations. 

Oen.  17.  8. 1  will  give  all  the  land  of  Catinnn  for  nn 
everlasting  p.  and  I  will  be  their  (!od,  4H.  4. 

23.  4.  give  me  a  p.  of  a  bnrying-)il;ice  to  biirv  my 
dead  out  of  my  sight,  9,  lH,i20. 1  49. 30.  |  .W.  13. 

28.14.  Isaac  hmlp.offloc-ks,  of  herds,  and  .servants 

M.  43.  the  dukes  of  Edom  in  the  himl  of  their  p. 

47.  U.  and  save  thim  a  p.  in  the  land  of  Egypt 
Lev.  14.  34.  Canaan,  which  I  give  to  you  for  a  p. 

35.10.  it  shall  be  n  jnbil.  to  yon, and  yosliall  return 
every  man  to  liis  p.  13, 27, 28,  41.  Deut.  3.  20. 

35.  if  thy  brother  hath  sold  away  some  of  his  p. 

33.  the  fjeviiis'  p.  nhall  go  out  in  the  jubilee 
45.  the  strangers  shull  he  your  p.  46. 

27.  IG.  if  a  man  shall  fanrtify  some  part  of  hii  p. 

21.  tho  p.  thereof  nhall  be  the  prii«l'c 

24.  return  to  whom  the  p.  of  the  land  did  belong 
Kum.  24.  18.  Edom  shi.ll  be  n  p.  Seir  also  a  p.  ' 

26.  5(i.  according  lo  the  lot  shall  the  n.  he 

27.  4.  give  us  a  p.  amonj  brethren  of  our  fathers 
7.  to  the  daughters  of  Zelophehnd  give  n  p. 

32.  5.  let  this  land  bn  given  to  thv  sc'rvan's  for  p. 

22.  this  land  shall  be  your  n.  before  tho  Lord 
3S.  2.  give  to  the  Levites  of  their  p.  cities,  H. 

36.  the  iluyor  shall  return  to  tho  land  of  hiip. 

44S 


POS 

Deut.i.S.l  have  given  mount  Seirlo  Esau  for  ap. 

9.  because  1  have  given  Ar  to  Lot  lor  a  p.  19. 

12.  as  Israel  did  in  land  of  his  p.  Lord  gave  them 
IJ.  6.  the  earth  swallowed  up  all  in  their  p. 
32.  49.  Canaan,  which  I  gave  Israel  lor  a  p. 
Josh.  12.  6.  Moses  gave  it  lor  a  p.  to  Kcubeniles 
22.  4.  return  ye,  get  ye  into  the  land  of  your  p. 

7.  tohalf  tribe  oiManasseh  Moses  had  given  ap. 

9.  they  returned  to  the  land  of  their  p. 

19.  if  your  p.  bo  unclean,  take  p.  among  us 

1  Kings  21. 15.  take  p.  of  the  vineyard  ol  Nabotli 

19.  hast  Ihou  killed,  and  also  taken  p.? 

2  Chron.  20.  11.  to  come  to  cast  us  out  of  thy  p. 
JVcA.  11.  3.  in  Judah  dwelt  every  one  iu  !iisp 
Psal.  2.  8.  the  uttermost  pans  olearLt  fir  '.hy  p. 

44.  3.  got  not  the  land  in  p.  by  their  own  sword 

()9.  35.  that  they  may  dwell  and  have  it  in  p. 

83.  12.  let  us  take  the  houses  of  God  in  p. 
Prov.  28.  10.  the  upright  have  good  ihmgs  in  p. 
Isa.  14.  23.  I  will  make  it  a  p.  for  the  bittern 
Kick.  11.  1.5.  lo  us  is  this  land  given  in  p. 

25.  4. 1  will  deliver  thee  to  men  of  the  east  for  p. 

36.  2.  even  the  ancient  high  (daces  ore  ours  in  p. 
5.  which  have  appointed  my  land  into  their  p. 

44.  28.  give  them  nop.  in  Israel,  I  am  their  p. 

46.  18.  his  son's  iiiheiitance  out  of  his  own  p. 
Acts  .5.  1.  Ananias  with  Sapi)hira  sold  a  p. 

7.  5.  that  he  would  give  it  to  him  for  a  p. 
45.  brought  in  with  Jesus  into  p.  of  the  Gentiles 
Eph.  1. 14.  till  the  redemption  of  the  purchased  p. 

POSSESSIONS. 
Gen.  34.  10.  dwell  and  trade,  and  get  you  p.  therein 

47.  27.  Israel  had  p.  therein  and  niulliiilied 
JVum.  32.  30.  they  shall  have  p.  among  you 
.fosh.  22.  4.  get  you  to  the  land  of  your  p. 

1 6"a 7)1.25.2.  a  man  in  Maon,  whosep.were  in  Carmel 

1  CAron.9. 2.  the  inhabitants  that  dwelt  in  their  p. 

2  Chron.  II.  14.  for  the  Levites  left  their  p. 

32.  29.  Hezekiah  proviiledp.  of  flocks  and  herds 
F.ccl.  2.  7.  I  had  great  p.  of  great  and  small  cattle 
Obad.  17.  the  house  of  .lacob  shall  possess  theirp. 
Mat.  ill.  22.  for  he  had  great  p.  Mark  10.  22. 
Acts  2.  45.  and  sold  theirp.  and  parted  them 
28.  7.  in  the  same  quarters  were  p.  of  Publius 

POSSESSOR. 
f7 ("71. 14. 19.  most  high  God,p.of  heav.  and  earth,22. 
.ludir.  18.  t  7.  and  there  was  no  p.  in  the  land 

POSSESSORS. 
ZccA.ll. 5.  whose  p.slay  them,  and  hold  themselves 
Acts  4.  34.  as  many  as  were  p.  of  lands  sold  them 

POSSIBLE 
Signifies,  [1]  That  which  maybe  done  or  effected, 
Mark  9.  23.  Rom.  12.  18.    [2]  Profitable  or  ne- 
cessary, Gal.  4.  15.     [3]  Agreeable  to  the  will 
of  God,  Mat.  26.  39.    Acts  20.  16. 
Mat.  19. 26.  with  God  all  things  are  p.  Mark  10.27. 
24.24.  ifp.  shall  deceive  the  elect,  Mark  13.  22. 
26. 39.  ifp.  let  this  cuppass  from  me,  Mark  14.35. 
Mark  9.  23.  all  things  are  p.  to  him  that  believelh 

14.  36.  all  things  are  p.  to  thee,  J.uke  18.  27. 
Acts  2.  24.  was  not  p.  he  should  be  holden  of  it 
2U.  16.  ifp.  be  at  Jerusalem  the  day  of  Pentecost 
Rom.  12. 18.  if  it  be  p.  live  peaceably  with  all  men 
2  Cur.  12.  t  4.  which  is  not  p.  for  a  man  to  utter 
C?n/.4.I5.  ifp. ye  would  have  plucked  out  your  eyes 
Heb.  10.  4.  notp.  the  hiood  of  bulls  take  away  sins 

POST.  " 

Job  9.  25.  now  my  days  are  swifter  than  a  p. 
Jer.  51.  31.  one  p.  shall  run  to  meet  another 

POSTS. 
2  Chron.  30.  6.  so  the  p.  went  with  the  letters  from 
tho  kingand  his  princes,  Fsth.ll  13, 15.  |  8.10. 
Ksth.  H.  14.  p.  rode  on  mnlf  8  and  camels  went  out 

POST. 
1  Sam.  1.  9.  Eli  sat  on  a  scat  by  a  p.  of  the  temple 
Kzek.  40.  16.  and  on  each  p.  were  palm-trees 

POSTS. 
l^eut.  It.  9.  shall  write  lliem  on  the  p.  of  thy  house 
./M(/n'.16.3.  Samson  took  tho  two  p.  and  went  awny 
1  Kings  7.  5.  all  ihe  doors  and  p.  were  square, 
I'roi'.  8.  34.  waiting'  at  the  p.  of  my  doors 
fsn   6.  4.  the  p.  of  the  door  moved  nt  the  voice 
.'>7.  8.  behind  the  p.  thou  set  u|<  thy  remembrnnre 
Fiek.  40.  10.  the  ;;.  hail  one  mensiire  on  this  side 
43.  H.  in  their  settiii!;  of  their  p.  hy  my  p. 
AviosQ.  1.  smile  the  lintel,  that  tho  p.  mav  shake 
.See  Door. 
.<;,-,/^-POHTS. 
Find.  12.  7.  strike  ihr  blood  on  Ihe  two  side-p.  22. 

23.  when  ho  seelh  the  blood  on  the  side-p. 
»  Kings  6.  31.  lintel  and  sidr-p.  were  a  fifth  part 

POSTERITY. 
Gen.  45.  7.  lo  preserve  V'U  a  p.  in  tho  earth 
.N'um.  9.  10.  or  if  any  of  your  p.  be  unclean 
I  Kines  16.  3.  I  will  lake  away  the  ».  of  Baasha 
21.  21.  I  will  take  away  the  p.  of  Ahnb 
Psal.  49.  13.  yet  their  p.  approve  thi'ir  sayings 
109.  13.  lot  bio  p.  be  cut  oifand  blotted  out 
/>an.  11.4.  kingdom  shall  not  be  divided  lo  hif  p. 
Arnct  4.  2.  and  take  your  p.  with  fi(h-liook« 


POV 

POT 

Is  a  vessel  of  earth  or  metal  for  uses  in  «  family^ 
2  Kings  4.  38. 

Though  ye  have  lien  among  the  pots,  Psal.  68. 13. 
'J'hough  ye  have  endured  great  hardships  in 
Egypt,  ajnl  have  been  in  an  a£licted  rontempt- 
iblt  condition  there.  It  is  a  metaphor  taken 
from  scullions  that  commonly  lie  down  in  the 
kitchen  among  the  puts,  or  upon  the  heatth- 
atones,  whereby  they  arc  very  much  discoloured 
and  deformed.  In  Psal.  81.  6.  it  is  said,  Hi» 
hands  were  delivered  fiom  the  pots;  icAcrepots 
7)iaj;  note  all  those  vessels  wherein  ikcy  carried 
v%ter,  lime,  straw,  bricks,  Ac.  The  meaning 
is,  J  delivered  him  from  kis  slavery  and  bond- 
age in  Egypt.  And  in  Ezek.  24.  3,  6.  by  the 
similitude  of  a  boiling  pot,  are  shewed  tht 
miseries  and  cahimitiis  whircwith  ihe  inha- 
bitants of  Jerusalem  should  be  afflicted  a?td 
•  consumed. 

Exod.  16. 33.  take  a  p.  and  put  a  homer  of  manna 

/.ev.  6.  2.^.  and  if  it  be  sodden  in  a  brasenp. 

Judg.  6.  19.  Gideon  put  the  oioth  in  a  p. 

1  Sam.  2.  14.  he  sti'uck  it  into  the  caldron  oi  p. 

-i  Kings  4.  2.  hath  not  any  ihing,  save  n  p.  of  oil 

38.  set  on  great  p.  ||  40.  there  is  death  in  the  p 
41.  he  cast  meal  into  the  p.  no  harm  in  Ihe  p. 

Job  41.  20.  goeth  smoke,  as  out  of  a  seething  p. 

31.  he  makelh  the  deep  lo  boil  like  a  p. 
Proa.  17.  3.  Ihe  fining  p.  is  for  silver,  27.  21. 
.Jer.  1.  13.  what  seest  Ihou  7  I  see  a  seething  p. 
Ezek.  24.  3.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  set  on  a  p. 

6.  woe  to  bloody  city,  lop.  whose  scum  is  therein 
.Joel  2.  t  6.  all  faces  shall  gather  p. 

Mic.  3.  3.  they  chop  them  in  piects,  as  for  thej>. 
Zech.  14.21.  every  p.  in  Jerusalem  shall  be  holines* 
Neb.  9.  4.  wherein  was  Ihe  golden  p.  with  manna 

h'ater  POT. 
John  4.  28.  the  woman  then  left  her  water-p. 

POTS. 
Exod.  38.  3.  Bezaleel  made  Ihe  p.  and  shovels 
/>ev.  11.  3.5.  whether  it  be  oven,  or  ranges  for  p. 

1  Kings  7.  45.  p.  and  shovels  of  brass,  2  CAr.  4. 16. 

2  Chron.  4.  11.  Huram  made  the  p.  and  shovels 
35.  13.  hut  the  other  holy  ofliiirings  sod  they  in  p. 

Psal.  58.  9.  before  your  p.  can  feel  the  thorns 
68.  13.  though  ye  have  lien  among  ih«  p. 
81.  6.  his  hands  were  delivered  from  tliep. 
./pr. 35  5. 1  set  before  the  I'echahiiesp.  full  of  wine 
Mark  7.  4.  as  the  washing  of  cuj)s  and  p.  8. 
.See  Fl.KSH. 
H'uf  cr-POTS. 
John  2.  6.  there  were  set  there  si.x  water-p. 

7.  Jesus  saith  to  ihem,  fill  icater-p.  with  wa<er 

POTENTATE. 
17'i7n.  6.  15.  who  is  the  blessed  and  only  P. 

POTSHERD,  S. 
Job  2.  8.  he  took  him  a  p.  lo  scrape  himself 
41.  t30.  shar()  pieces  of  p.  are  under  him 
Psal.  22.  15.  my  strength  is  dried  up  like  a  p. 
/"rop.  26.23.  are  like  a  p.  covered  with  silver  dross 
Isa.  45.  9.  let  the  p.  strive  with  p.  of  the  earth 

POTTAGE. 
Gen.  2.5.29.  Jacob  sod  n.and  Esau  came  from  field 

30.  feed  me  with  p.  0  ■'4.  Jacob  gave  E^au  p. 
2  Kings  4.  ;18.  seethe  p.  for  sons  of  the  prophets 

39.  and  came  and  shred  Ihem  into  ihe  pot  ofp 

40.  as  they  were  eating  the  p.  they  cried  out 
//air  .2.12.  if  one  with  his  skirl  do  touch  bread  or^. 

POTTER. 

Frequent  mention  is  made  of  the  Poller  in  scrip- 
ture. H'hen  dud  would  shew  his  abs  tlute  do- 
minion over  men,  and  his  irresistible  po:oer 
over  their  hearts,  he  has  often  recourse  to  the 
similitude  of  a  Poller,  who  makes  vhat  he 
pleases  of  his  clay;  sometimes  a  vessel  of  ho- 
nour, and  .•'ometimes  of  dishonour  ;  now  form- 
ing it,  and  then  breaking  it ;  now  preserving 
it,  and  Ihm  rejecting  it,  Psal.  2.  9.  Rom.  9.  21. 

r»a/.  2. 9.  shall  dash  ihem  in  pieces  like  a  p.  vessol 

Isa.  30. 14.  he  shall  break  it  as  Ihe  breaking  of  Ihil 
p.  vessi  I,  .ler.  19.  11.  Rev.  2.  27 

.fer.  18.  2.  arise,  go  down  lo  the  p.  house 

19.  1.  go  and  gel  a  p.  earthen  bottle  and  take 
/.am.  4.  2.  the  work  of  the  hands  of  Ihe  p. 
Zerh.  11.  13.  the  Lord  said,  cast  il  unto  the  p. 
Mat.  27.  10.  and  gave  Ihem  for  the  p.  field 

POTTERS. 

1  CAr.  4. 23.  these  were  tho  p.  and  those  that  dwell 

See  Ci,»v. 

POVERTY. 
Gen.  45. 11.  lest  thou  and  nil  thou  hnsi  come  top. 
1  CAr.  22.  tl4-  in  my  p.  I  prepared  for  the  house 
/Vor.fi.  11.  so  thy  p.  corneas  an  armed  man, 24.34. 

10.  15.  the  destruction  of  the  poor  is  theirp. 

1 1.  24.  that  williholdeih,  bnl  it  lendeth  lo  p. 
13.  18.  p.  be  lo  him  that  refuselh  instruction 

20.  13.  love  not  sleep,  lest  thou  come  top. 
23.  21.  the  dtnnkani  and  glutton  come  lop. 
28.19.  followeth  vain  pe;sun9,shall  havep.enoufh 


POW 


POW 


<'r<7».2J.22.  considereth  not/i.slmll  come  upon  fiitn  \J\'ch.  5.  5.  nor  is  it  in  our  p.  to  redeem  them 
30.  8.  give  ine  neither/),  nor  riches,  teed  me  \vithhK«<A-1.3.  henmdea  l'easUo».of  I'ersia  and  Hfed 

•*  I    "^    t..>  k:...  j-:„ I.  »...!  *',. ....^t  K;„  ,. 1  i ^    i  i    •,.  —  ......  .^  :  .i.  .1  ...  1  ■ 


Hi.  7. let  liini  drink  and  forget  his/). and  remember 

SCor.S.i.  their  deep/).ahounded  to  ricliea  ofliherul. 

9.  became  poor,  tliat  ye  thro'  Utsp.  might  he  rich 

Rev.  2.  9.  I  know  tliy  works  and  p.  thou  art  rich 

FOUND,  S. 
1  h'inffs  10. 17.  three/),  of  gold  went  to  one  shield 
E:ra -.t'9.  they  gave  to  treasure  5U00/).  of  silver 
AVA.  7.  71.  gave  to  the  treasure  S-.OU/).  of  silver 

'•Z.  the  rest  gave  2000  p.  of  silver  and  gold 
Luke  19.  13.  and  delivered  to  liis  servants  ten  p. 
It),  second  said.  Lord,  thy  p.  hath  gained  ten/?. 
18.  hath  gained  five  p.  ||  20.  behold,  here  is  thy  p. 
21.  take  from  him  (hep.  \\  2.i.  he  halh  ten/). 
John  12.  3.  then  Mary  took  a/),  of  ointment 
19.  39.  and  of  aloes  about  a  100  p.  weight 

FOURTR.W. 
Eiek.  4.  1.  and/),  upon  it  the  city  of  Jerusalem 

rOUKTKAYEU. 

Ezek.  8.  10.  all  the  idols  of  Israel  p.  on  the  wall 

23. 14.  for  when  she  saw  men  p.  on  the  wall,  the 

images  of  the  Chaldeans/),  with  vermilion 

POWDER. 

F.iod.  32.  20.  Moses  burut  calf  and  ground  it  to  p. 

Deut.  28.  24.  Lord  shall  make  rain  of  thy  land  p 

S  Kings  23.  6.  stamped  the  grove  to  p.  cast  the  p. 

15.  he  stamped  the  altar  top.  'iChron.  34.  7. 
Mat.  21.  44.  it  will  grind  him  to  p.  Ijuke  20.  18 

POWDERS. 
Cant.'i.  6.  perfumed  with  all  the  p. of  the  merchant 

POWER 
Signifies,  [1]  That  attribute  or  perfection  of 
God,  whereby  he  can  do  whatsoever  he  hath 
purposed  to  do,  and  hinder  what  he  will  not 
have  done,  Mat.  6.  13.  [2]  Absolute  right  and 
authority.  Mat.  9.  6,  Tiie  Son  of  man  hath 
power  on  earth  to  forgive  sins ;  that  is,  he 
that  is  the  Sun  of  man,  being  Gfd,  hath  this 
power.  [3]  Right,  or  privilrge,  John  1.  f  12. 
[4]  three,  violence,  or  compvhion,  Ezra  4.  23. 
[5]  Liberty,  or  freedom,  1  Cor.  9.4,5.  [0]  The 
effectual  andpowerful  work  of  the  Noly  'Spirit, 
in  regenerating  and  carrying  on  the  work  of 
grace  in  believers,  against  all  opposition, 
from  one  degree  to  another,  till  it  be  perfected 
in  glory,  Eph.  1.  19.  [7]  The  means,  or  in- 
strument, which  by  God's  power  is  made  effec- 
tual to  bring  to  salvatio7i,  Rom.  1.  ]fi.    1  Cor. 

I.  Ifi.  [8]  ji  veil,  or  covering,  in  token  that 
one  is  under  the  power  of  a  superior.     1  Cor. 

II.  10,  The  woman  ought  to  have  power  on  her 
head ;  that  is.  She  ought  to  wear  a  covering, 
or  veil,  in  token  that  she  is  under  the  power 
of  her  husband :  or  she  ought  to  reckon  and 
acknowledge  power  to  be  in  her  head,  that  is, 
in  her  husband,  who  is  her  head,  Eph.  5.  23. 

■  [9]  Good,  or  evil  angels,  Col.  1.  Ifi.  Eph.  6. 
12.  [10]  Ci»i7  governors,  or  magistrates, 
Rom.    13.  1.      [11]    Excellency,    beauty,  and 

flory,  1  Cor.  15.  43. 
power  is  given  unto  me  in  heaven  and  in 
earth,  Mat.  28.  18.  Supreme  and  absolute 
authority  and  ability  is  given  me  in  heaven, 
so  as,  [1]  To  prevail  with  God  to  be  recon- 
ciled to  man.  [2]  To  scud  the  Holy  Ghost, 
Acts  2.  33.  [3]  Over  angels.  Col.  1.  16.  Huh 
1.  4.  [4j  To  give  heaven  to  all  that  believe  in 
me.  Mat.  25.  34.  Power  is  also  given  me  in 
earth,  to  prevail  with  men  to  be  reconciled  to 
God,  and  so  to  gather  a  church  out  of  all  na- 
tions, Mark  16.  15,  16.  and  to  rule,  govern, 
and  dffcnd  the  same  against  all  its  enemies. 
Acts  10.  36,  38,  42.  Eph.  1.  20,  21. 
ilie  bo'ly  is  raised  in  power,  1  Cor.  15.  43.  It 
will  be  able,  [1]  To  attend  the  soul  in  the 
highest  operations.  [2]  To  be  continually  ex- 
ercised in  the  highest  employments  without 
weariness.     [3]   To  bear  the  weight  of  glory. 

f4]  To  do  whatsoever  the  soul  would  have  it. 
5]  It  will  be  above  the  reach  of  inward  in- 
firmities, or  outward  dangers. 
Gni.  32.  28.  as  a  prince  hast  thou  p.  with  God 
49.  3.  the  excellency  of  dignity,  e.xcellency  of/). 
Lev.  26.  19.  I  will  break  the  pride  of  your/). 
J<fum.  22.  38.  have  I  now  any  p.  to  say  any  thingl 
7J(!i(t.3.tl8.  ye  shall  pass  over  all  that  are  sons  of  p. 
4.  .37.  brought  thee  with  his  mighlyp.out  of  Egypt 
H.  18.  it  is  he  that  giveth  thee  p.  to  get  wealth 
32.  36.  when  he  seeth  that  their  p.  is  gone 
Huth  4.  t  II.  and  get  thee  p.  in  Ephratah 
2  Sam.  22.  33.  God  is  my  strength  and  p. 
t  Kings  19.  2G.  the  inhabitants  were  of  small  p. 

1  Chron.  20.  1.  Joab  led  forth  the  p.  of  the  army 
29.  U.  thine  is  the  p.  and  the  glory,  Mat.  6.  13. 

12.  in  thine  hand  is  p.  and  might,  2  Chron.  20. 6. 

2  Chron.  25.  8.  God  hath  p.  to  help,  and  cast  dow n 
32.9.Sennacheriblaid  siege, and  all  hisp.with  him 

Ezra  4.  23.  and  made  them  cease  by  force  and  p 


8.  11.  to  cause  lo  perish  the  p.  of  the  people 

9.  1.  the  Jews  hojitd  to  have  p.  over  them 
Job  5.  20.  redeem  in  war  from  the  p.  of  the  sword 

24.  22.  he  draweth  also  the  mighty  with  his  p. 
26.  2.  how  hast  thou  helped  him  that  is  without  p. 

12.  he  divided  tlie  sea  with  his  p. 

14.  the  thunder  of  his  p.  who  can  understand  ? 
36.  22.  behold,  God  e.xalteth  by  his  p. 
41.  12.  I  will  not  conceal  his  parts  nor  hisp 
Psal.  22.  20.  my  darling  from  the  p.  of  the  dog 
49.  15.  redeem  my  soul  from  the  p.  of  the  grave 
62.  II.  I  heard,  that  p.  belongeth  unto  God 

65.  6.  who  setteth  fust  mountains  girded  with  p. 

66.  7.  he  rulelh  by  his  p.  for  ever.  Ins  eyes  behold 
68.  35.  he  giveth  strength  and  p.  to  his  people 
78.  26.  by  hisp.  he  brought  iu  the  soLth-wind 
90.  11.  who  kiioweth  the  p.  of  thine  anger  7 
106.  8.  might  make  his  mighty  p.  to  he  known 
111.  6.'he  shewed  his  people  Ihep.  of  his  works 
150.  1.  praise  him  in  the  tirmameut  of  hisp. 

Eccl.  4.  1.  on  the  side  of  oppressors  there  wasp. 

5.  19.  and  hath  given  him  p.  to  eat  thereof 

6.  2.  God  giveth  him  not  p.  to  eat  thereof 
8.  4.  where  the  word  of  a  king  is,  there  is  p. 

8.  there  is  no  man  hath  p.  over  the  sjiirit 

Isa.  37.  27.  their  inhabitants  were  of  small  p. 
40.  29.  he  giveth  p.  to  the  faint,  and  to  them 
43.  17.  which  hringelh  forth  the  army  and  p. 
47.  14.  shall  not  deliver  from  the  p.  of  the  flame 

./er.  10.  12.  he  made  the  earth  by  hisp.  51.  15. 

F.iek.  22.  6.  were  in  thee  to  their  p.  to  shed  blood 
30.  6.  and  the  pride  of  her  p.  shall  come  down 

Dan.  2.  37.  God  hath  given  thee  p.  and  glory 
6.  27.  who  delivered  Daniel  from  the  p.  of  lions 
8.  6.  ran  in  fury  of  hisp.  ||  22.  but  not  in  hisp. 

24.  hisp.  shall  be  mighty,  hut  not  by  hisp. 

11.  6.  but  she  shall  not  retain  the  p.  of  the  arm 

25.  he  shall  stir  up  hisp.  and  his  courage 
4.3.  but  he  shall  havep.  over  the  treasures  of  gold 

12.  7.  lo  scatter  the  p.  of  the  holy  people 
Hos.  12.  3.  by  his  strength  he  had  p.  with  God 

4.  yea,  he  had  p.  over  the  angel,  and  jirevailed 
13.14.  I  will  ransom  them  from  ihcp.  of  the  grave 

Mic.  2.  1.  because  it  is  in  the  p.  of  their  hand 
3.  8.  I  am  full  of  p.  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord 

Uab.  1.  11.  imjiuting  this  hisp.  to  his  god 
2.;?.  that  he  may  be  delivered  from  the  p.  of  evil 

3.  4.  and  there  was  the  hiding  of  his  p. 
Zfc/t.4.6.not  by  might,  nor  by  niyp. lint  by  my  Spirit 

9.4.  behold,  the  Lord  will  smite  her  p.  in  the  sea 

Mat.d.  6.  may  know  Son  of  man  h.ith  p.  on  earth 

to  forgive  sins,  Mark  2.  10.  /.ukc  5.  24. 

8.  glorified  (iod.  who  bad  given  such  p.  lo  men 

10.  1.  gave  p.  against  unclean  spirits,  I.uke  9.  1. 

24. 30.  coming  in  the  clouds  with  p.  iMke  21.  27. 

26.  64.  silting  on  right  hand  with  p.  Mark  14.  62. 

28.  18.  all  p.  is  given  to  me  in  heaven  and  earth 
Mark  3.  15.  and  to  havep.  to  heal  sicknesses 

9. 1.  have  seen  the  kingdom  of  God  come  withp 
Luke  l.35.p.of  ihe  Highest  shallovershadow  thee 

4.  6.  the  devil  said,  all  this  p.  will  I  give  thee 
32.they  were  astonished  for  his  word  was  withp. 
36.  with  p.  he  commandelh  unclean  spirits 

5.  17.  the  p.  of  the  Lord  was  present  to  heal  them 
10. 19. 1  give  you  p.  to  treail  on  serpents,  and  over 

all  Ihe  p.  of  the  enemy,  nothing  shall  hurt  you 
12.  5.  fear  him  that  hath  p.  to  cast  into  hell 
20.  20.  they  might  deliver  him  top.  of  governor 
22.  53.  this  is  your  hour,  and  the  p.  of  darkness 
24.  49.  until  ye  be  endued  with  p.  from  on  high 

.John  1. 12.  to  them  gave  hep.  to  become  sons  of  G. 
10. 18.  I  have  p.  to  lay  it  down,  and  p.  tn  take  it 
17.  2.  thou  hast  given  him  p.  over  all  flesh 
19. 10. 1  have  p.  to  crucify  thee, p.  to  release  thee 

.lets  1.7.  seasons  the  Father  halh  put  in  his  own  p. 
8.  shall  receive  p.  after  II.  Ghost  is  come  on  you 
3. 12.  as  though  by  our  own  p.or  holiness  we  made 

4.  7.  they  asked,  by  what  p.  have  ye  done  this? 

5.  4.  after  it  was  sold,  was  it  not  in  thine  own  p.? 

6.  8.  Stephen  full  of  failh  and  p.  did  great  wonders 
8.19.saying,givemeal30tliisp.on  whom  layliands 
10.38. how  G.  anointed  Jesus  with  II.  Ghost  andp. 
26.  18.  to  turn  them  from  the  p.  of  Satan  lo  God 

/Jo))i.l.4.and  declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God  withp. 

20.  clearly  seen,  even  his  eternnlp.  and  Godhead 
9.  21.  hath  not  the  potter  p.  over  the  clay? 

22.  what,  if  God,  willing  to  make  his  p.  known 
13.2.  whosoever  therefore  resisteth  thep.  rcBisteth 

3.  wilt  thou  then  not  be  afraid  of  Ihe  p.? 
15. 13.  abound  in  hope,  thro'p.  of  the  Holy  Ghost 

19.  wonders,  by  the  p.  of  the  Spirit  of  God 
16.  25.  now  to  him  that  is  of  p.  to  establish  you 
1  Cur.  2.  4.  in  demonstration  of  the  Spirit  andp. 
4.  19.  I  will  not  know  their  speech,  hut  thep. 
.5.  4.  with  the  p.  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
6.  12.  I  will  not  he  brought  under  thep.  of  any 


14.  and  will  also  raise  us  up  by  his  own  p 
6  22.  hiss. and  wrath  against  all  that  forsake  him  I  7.4.  the  wifa  and  husband  have  notp. of  their  body  Ezod.  21.  8.  to  sell  her,  ho  shall  have  nop 
449  3  N 


POW 

1  Cor.T.ST.  but  hathp.over  his  own  will,  so  desreed 

9.  4.  have  not  we  p.  to  eat  and  to  drink  ? 

5.  have  we  notp.  to  lead  about  a  sister,  a  wifet 

6.  have  wo  notp.  to  forbear  working? 

12.  if  others  be  partakers  of  thisp.  over  you,  we 
have  not  used  thisp.  but  sullcr  all  Urigs 

11.  10.  the  woman  ought  to  havep.  on  her  head 
15.  24.  he  hath  put  down  all  authority  and  p. 

2  Cor.  4. 7.  that  the  e.xcellency  of  p.  may  b  j  cf  G«c 
8.  3.  to  their  p.  yea,  and  beyond  their  p. 

12.  9.  that  thep.  of  Christ  may  rest  ujion  me 

13.  10.  according  to  thep.  God  hath  given  me 
£pA.  1. 19.  the  exceeding  greatiiessof  hisp.  toward 

us,  according  lo  the  working  of  his  mighty  r 
21.  far  above  all  principality,  p.  and  might 

2.  2.  according  to  the  prince  of  thep.  of  the  air 

3.  7.  given  to  me,  by  the  ertectual  working  ofhisp. 
20.  according  to  thep.  that  worketh  in  us 

Phil.  3.  10.  I  may  know  the  p.  of  his  resurrection 
Col.  1.11.  strengthened  according  to  his  gloriousp. 

13.  who  hath  delivered  us  from  thep.  of  darkness 
2.  10.  who  is  head  of  all  principality  and  p. 

2  Thess.  1.9.  bo  punished  from  the  glory  ot'hisp 

11.  and  fulfil  the  work  of  taith  withp. 

2.  9.  after  the  working  of  Satan  with  all  p. 
3.9.  not  because  we  have  notp. but  to  make  oursel. 

lTi))i.6. 16.  whom  be  honour  andp.  evcrlaet.  amen 
2  77)«.  1.7.  God  hath  given  us  sjiirilofp.  and  love 

3.  5.  having  a  form  of  godliness,  butdenying  thep. 
Heb,  1.  3.  upholding  all  things  by  word  ofhisp. 

2.  14.  he  might  destroy  him  that  hadp.  of  death 
7.  16.  but  after  the  p.  of  an  endless  life 
2  Pet.  1. 3.  as  his  divine  p.  hath  given  us  all  things 

16.  when  we  made  known  thep.  of  our  Lord 
.Jude  25.  lo  only  wise  G .  our  Saviour  be  glory  and  p 
Rev.  2.  26.  to  him  will  I  give  p.  over  the  nationa 
4  1 1.  thou  art  worthy  to  receive  honour  and  p. 5.12. 

5.  13.  blessing,  honour,  glory,  and  p.  be  to  him 

6.  4. p.  w  as  given  to  him  that  sat  on  the  red  horsa 
8.  p.  was  given  them  over  fourth  part  of  earth 

7.  12,  honour,  p.  and  might  be  given  to  our  God 
9.  3.  lo  them  was  given  p.  as  scorpions  have  p. 

10.  and  their  p.  w  as  to  hurt  men  five  months 
19.  for  their  p.  is  in  their  mouth  and  their  tails 

11.  3.  1  will  give  p.  to  my  two  witnesses 
6.  these  havep.  to  shut  heaven,  p.  over  waten 

12.  10.  now  is  thep.  of  his  Christ  come 

13.  2.  the  dragon  gave  him  p.  and  his  seat,  4. 
5.  p.  was  given  unto  him  to  continue,  7. 

12.  he  e.xerciseth  all  thep.  of  the  first  beast 
15.  had  p.  to  give  life  ||  14.  18.  had  p.  over  fire 

15.  8.  the  tem|>le  was  filled  with  smoke  from  hisp. 

16.  8.  p.  was  given  him  to  scorch  men  with  fire 
9.hlaiiphemedGod  who  hathp.over  these  plagues 

17. 12.  but  receive  p.  as  kings  one  hour  with  benst 

13.  shall  give  their  p.  aud  strength  to  Ihe  beast 
19.  I.  glory,  honour,  and  p.  to  the  Lord  our  God 

POWER  of  God. 
J)/a^.  22. 29.  Jesus  said,  ye  do  err,  not  knowing  the 
scriptures,  nor  the  p.  of  God,  Mark  12.  24. 
/.7iif  9.43.were  all  amazed  atthe  m\gh{y  p. of  God 
22.  69.  the  Son  sit  on  the  right  hand  of  p.  of  God 
Jicts  8. 10.  saying,  this  man  is  the  great  p.  of  God 
liom.  1. 16.  the  gospel  is  thep.  of  God  to  salvation 

1  Cor.l.l8.tous  which  are  saved,  it  is  the  p. of  God 
24.  Christ  thep.  of  God  and  wisdom  of  God 

2.  5.  failh  shouM  not  stand  but  by  thep.  of  God 

2  Cor.  6.  7.  by  the  word  of  truth,  by  the  p.  of  God 
13.4.  iho' crucified  thro'  weakness, yei  helivethbr 

pof  G.  but  we  shall  live  with  him  by  p.of  God 
2  Tim.  1.  8.  but  be  thou  partaker  of  the  afflictions 
of  the  gospel,  according  to  the  p.  of  God 
IPct.  I.  5.  who  are  kept  by  the  p.  of  God  thio'  faith 
See  Great. 
In  POWER. 
Grn.  31.  29.  it  is  in  p.  of  my  hand  to  do  you  hurt 
Kxod.  15.6.  thy  right  hand  is  become  glorious  171  p. 
.Job  21.  7.  why  are  Ihe  wicked  mighty  in  p.? 

.37.  23.  he  is  excellent  in  p.  and  in  judgment 
Psal.  29.  t  4.  the  voice  of  the  Lord  is  in  p. 
Prov.  3.  27.  when  it  is  in  p.  of  thy  hand  to  do  it 

18.  21.  death  and  life  are  in  thep.  of  tho  fnngufl 
Isa.  40.  26.  that  he  is  strong  in  p.  not  one  faileth 
.\"«/i.  1.  3.  the  Lord  is  slow  to  anger,  great  in  p. 
Luke  1.  1".  shall  go  before  him  in  thep  ofEliaa 

4.  14.  Jesus  returned  in  thep.  of  the  Spirit 
1  Cur.  4.20.  kingdom  of  God  not  in  word,  hut  I'ip. 

15.  43.  it  is  sown  in  weakness,  it  is  raised  in  p. 
EpA.6.10.  be  strong  in  the  Lord  andp.  of  his  might 

1  TAcs.?.1.5.butourgos.cnme  in  word, and  also  irtp. 

2  Pet.".  11.  angels  who  are  greater  inp.  and  might 
My  POWER. 

(Ten.31.6.  with  all  myp.l  have  served  your  father 
Exod.  9.  16.  I  raised  thee  to  shew  in  thee  my  p. 
Deut.^.Yl.  savest,  my  p.  nai.ii  gotten  me  this  wealth 
Dan.  4.  30.  Babylon  built  by  the  might  of  my  p. 
Rom.  9.  17.  that  I  might  shew  my  p.  in  thee 
1  Cor.  9.  18.  that  I  abuse  not  my  p.  in  the  gospel 
JVo  POWER. 


POU 

2,«o.26.37.  sliall  have  no  p.  to  stand  before  enemies 
Josli.  8.  '20.  men  of  Ai  had  no  p.  lo  Ike  this  wuy 

1  ium.  30.4.  till  Uavid  and  peo.  Iiad  nop.  lu  weeji 

2  C/iiuii.  14.  U.  to  help  wilii  Iheiu  thulliuth  nu p. 
2i.  9  liooseof  Ahuziah  had  nop.  lokeeji  kiui'doiii 

/sa.oO.-J.or  have  I  nop.  todehver!  belmld  I  dry  uji 
Van.  3.  il.  on  whose  bodies  tiie  lire  liad  no  p. 
8. 7.  there  was  nop.  in  the  rain  to  stand  before  him 
John  19.  11.  711*  p.  against  me,  except  it  were  given 
Jioin.  13.  1.  for  there  is  no  p.  but  of  God 
Hev.  20.  tj.  on  sueh  the  second  death  hatli  no  p. 

Tkij  I'UWKK. 
Deat.  9.  -29.  thou  broughtest  oot  by  thy  mighty/;. 
.lob  1.  1-2.  btliold,  all  tliat  he  haih  is  in  thy  p. 
fsaldtll.  13.  so  will  we  sing,  and  praise  t/iy  p. 
.VJ.ll. scatter  ihein  by  «/iy  ;y.||lt>.willsiiig  ol  l/iyp. 
63.  -2.  lo  see  thy  p.  and  ttiy  glory,  as  1  have  sevii 
tiO.  3.  Ihrough  greatness  of  t/iy/;.  enemiei  submit 
71.  18.  and  thy  p.  to  every  one  that  is  to  come 
79.  11.  ucconliiig  to  the  greatness  of  £Aj^  p. 
1 10.  3.  thy  people  shall  be  willing  in  day  of  thy  p. 
145.  11.  anil  ilay  shall  talk  of  thy  p. 
JVttA.  -2.  1.  walch  the  way,  fortify  t/iy  p.  mightily 

POWERFUL. 
/'sai.29.4.  ihe  voice  of  the  Lord  is;>.full  of  majesty 
2  Cor.  10.  10.  for  his  letters,  say  tliey,  are  p. 
Hcb.i.  1'2.  ihe  word  of  God  is  ([uick,/).  and  sharper 

FOVVKKri. 

Mat.  24.  29.  the  stars  shall  fall  from  heaven,  p.  of 

heaven  shall  be  shaken,  Mark  13.i;.).  Luke  '21  .iHi. 

/>u/tel-2. 11. when  brought  before;),  take  no  thought 

hvtn.  8.  36.  nor/),  can  separate  from  love  of  God 

13.  1.  the/),  that  be  are  ordained  of  God 

1  Cor.  1'2.  T  '-9.  are  all  teachers  7  are  all  p.  ? 
Ep\  3.  10.  that  now  to  p.  in  heavenly  places 

6.  12.  we  wrestle  against  principalities  and  p. 
Cui.  1.  It),  p.  were  created  by  him  and  for  him 

2.  1.').  having  spoiled  p.  he  made  a  shew  openly 
Ttt.  3.  1.  put  them  in  mind  to  be  subject  lo  p. 
Heb.  (J.  5.  tasted  the/j.  of  the  world  locome 
1  Pet.  3.  22.  who  is  on  the  right  hand  of  God, />. 

POUU. 
Ezod.  4. 9.  sliall  take  and  p.  water  on  the  dry  land 

a.  7.  shall  /).  the  anointing  oil  on  his  head 
12.  thou  shalt  p.  the  blood  of  the  bullock  beside 
the  bottom  of  altar.  Lev.  4.  7,  18,  25,  30,  34. 

30.  9.  neither  shall  ye  p.  drink-offerings  thereon 
L<v.  2.  1.  he  shall/),  oil  on  the  meat-otferings,  ti. 

14.  15.  /).  it  into  the  palm  of  his  own  left  hand,  2(). 
18.  p.  it  on  head  of  him  that  is  to  be  cleansed 
41.  they  shall/),  out  the  dust  that  they  scrape  off 

17.  13.  he  shall/),  out  blood  thereof  and  cover  it 
.Vu/;i.  5.  15.  he  shall/),  no  oil  upon  her  offering 

24.  7.  he  sliall  p.  water  out  of  his  buckets 
Deut.  12.  Hi.  p.  blood  out  as  water,  24.  |  15.  23. 
JiLdjr.  6.  20.  take  the  ftesh,  and/),  out  the  broth 

1  Kings  18.  33.  p.  water  on  the  burnt-sacrifice 

2  Kings  4.  4.  p.  out  the  oil  into  those  vessels 
41.^.  out  for  the  people,  that  they  may  eat 

9.  3.  and  p.  the  oil  on  Jehu's  head,  and  say 
.Job  3I>.  27.  they  p.  down  rain  according  to  vapour 
Psal.  42.  4.  when  I  remember,  I/),  out  my  soul 

62.  8.  ye  people,  p.  out  your  heart  before  him 

09.  24.  p.  out  thine  indignation  on  them 

79.  6.  p.  out  thy  wrath  on  the  heathen,  not  known 
Vrov.  1.  23.  I  will  p.  out  my  Spirit  unto  you,  Isa. 
44.  3.  .hel  2.  28,  29.  ^cts2.  17,  18. 
Ist.  44.  3.  I  will  p.  water  on  him  that  is  thirsty 

4.).  8.  lot  the  skie.s  p.  down  righteousness 
Jcr.  6.  f  6.  p.  out  engine  of  shot  against  Jerusalem 

6.  11.  I  will  p.  it  out  on  the  children  abroad 

7.  18.  and  to  p.  out  drink-olfurings  to  other  gods 

10.  25.  p.  out  thy  fury  on  heathen,  know  thee  not 
14.  It).  I  will  p.  their  wickedness  upon  them 

18.  21.  p.  out  their  blood  by  force  of  the  sword 
44.17.to  p. out  driiik-offerinfjs  to  the  queen  of  hea- 

Ten,  as  we  and  fathers  have  done,  18,  19,  25. 

T,am.2.  I'.l.p,  oiittliine  heart  like  water  before  Ld. 

Kiek.  7.  8.  now  wdl  I  shortly  p.  out  my  fury  upon 

thee,  14.  19.  1  20.  8,  13,  21.  |  30.  15. 

21.  31.  I  will  p.  out  mine  imlignation,  Zeph.3.  8. 

24.  3.  set  on  Ihe  pot  and  p.  water  into  it 
Hos.  5.  10.  I  will  p.  out  my  wrath  like  water 
Mic.  1.  6.  I  will  p.  down  the  stones  thereof  into 
y.ech.  12.  10. 1  will  p.  on  house  of  Uavid  the  Spirit 
Mai.  3.  10.  if  I  will  not  p.  you  out  a  blessing 
Jiev.  16. 1.  n.ou;  the  vials  of  wrath  of  God  on  earth 

roURKD. 
Grn.  28.  18.  Jacob  p.  oil  on  the  lop  of  the  stone 

35.  14.  Jacob  p.  n  drink-olTering  thereon 
F.iod.  9.  33.  thi!  rain  was  nol  p.  on  Ihu  earth 

30.  32.  upon  man's  flesh  shall  it  not  bo  p. 
/,(•».  4.  12.  where  ashes  aro^.  ho  shall  be  burnt 

8.  12.  Moses  p.  anointing  oil  on  .\aron's  head 
15.  he  p.  the  blood  ftt  the  bottom  of  altar,  9.  9. 

21.  10.  on  whose  head  the  nnointin*  oil  wa-tp. 
JVitm.  28.7.  to  he  p.  to  Iho  Lord  for  a  drink-offrrin? 
DeuU  12.27.  blood  of  thy  Bartifice<  shall  hop.oui 
.hih.  7.  \  23.  and  p.  them  out  before  \\\i-  Lord 
1  ^am.  1.15.  butl  have  p.  out  ray  soul  bofurc  Lord 
450 


PRA 

1  Sam.  7.  6.  drew  water,  and  p.li  out  before  the  L. 
10.1. Samuel  p.  oil  on  Saul's  head,  and  kissed  him 

2  ^ain.  13.  9.  Taniarp.  ilieiu  out  before  liiiii 
•23.1t).neverthele68, Uavid  would  not  drink  thereof 

but/),  it  out  unto  the  Lord,  1  Chron.  11.  18. 

1  Kings  13.  3.  altar  shall  be  rent,  uiid  ashes  p.out,5. 
•iKings  3. 11.  who/),  water  on  the  hands  ot  Elijah 

4. 5.  who  brought  tlie  vesstis  lo  her,  and  she  /).  out 
40.  so  they  p.  out  for  the  men  to  eat 
It).  13.  and  Aliaz/i.  his  driiik-offeriiig 

2  Chr.  12.  7.  my  »  rath  not  be  p.  out  on  Jerusalem 
34.  21.  great  is  the  w  raih  ol  Loid,  p.  out  on  us 

25.  therefore  my  wrath  sliall  be/),  out  on  this  pi. 
.Job  3.  '24.  my  roarings  are  p.  out  like  the  wuleis 
lO.lO.hast  not  thou/),  me  out  as  milk, and  curdled 
22.  t  IG.  a  Hood  wasp,  on  their  foundation 

29.  6.  when  the  rock  p.  me  out  rivers  of  oil 

30.  16.  and  now  my  soul  is  p   out  upon  me 
I'sal.  '22.  14.  1  am  p.  like  waier,  bones  out  of  joint 

45.2.grace  isp.into  thy  lijis,  therefore  God  blessed 
77.  17.  clouds  p.  out  water,  skies  sent  out  a  sound 
142.  2.  1/).  out  my  complaint  before  him 

Cant.  I.  3.  thy  name  is  as  ointment//,  forth 

/«a.2().U).p.out  a  prayer,  when  chastening  on  them 
29.  10.  Lord  hath/),  on  you  the  spiril  of  deep  sleep 
32.  15.  till  the  Spirit  hep.  on  us  from  on  high 
42.  25.  he  hath  /).  on  bun  the  fury  of  his  anger 
53.  12.  because  be  liallip.  out  his  soul  to  death 
57.  6.  to  them  thou  hast  p.  out  a  drink-offering 

Jer.  7.  20.  my  fury  shall  be  p.  out  on  this  place 
19.  13.  they  have/),  out  drink-offerings,  32.  29. 
42.  18.  as  fury  hath  been,  so  shall  it  be  p.  out 
44.  6.  my  fury  and  mine  anger  was/),  forth 
19.when  wep. drink-offerings  to  queen  of  heaven 

Lam.  2.  4.  be/),  out  his  fury  like  tire,  4.  11. 

11.  iny  liver  is  p.  on  earth  {|  12.  their  soulp.  out 
4.  1.  the  stones  of  the  sanctuary  are/),  out 

F.H'k.  )().  36.  because  thy  lillhiness  was/),  out 
'20.  '28.  nnd  p.  out  their  drink-offerings 
33.  with  fury  p.  out  will  1  rule  over  them,  34. 

22.  22.  that  1  the  Lord  have  p.  out  my  fury 

31.  llieiefore  \p.  out  mine  indignation  on  them 

23.  8.  they/),  their  whoredom  upon  her 

24.  7.  she  p.  it  not  on  the  ground  to  cover  it 
.36.  18.  wherefore  1  p.  out  my  fury  upon  them 
39.  '29.  I  p.  out  my  Spirit  on  the  house  of  Israel 

J)an.  9. 11.  therefore  the  curse  is/),  on  us,  and  oath 

27.  and  that  determined  shall  be  p.  on  desolate 
Mic.  1.  4.  as  waters  that  are  p.  down  a  steep  place 
oV((A.I.6.  fury  isp.  out  like  lire,  rocks  thrown  down 
y.rph.  1.  17.  their  blood  shall  be  p.  out  as  dust 
.Uut.26.  7.  p.  ointment  on  his  head,  12.  Mark  14.3. 
.lohn  2.  15.  and  he  p.  out  the  changers'  money 
.lets  10.  45.  on  the  Gentiles  wasp,  out  the  gift 
l'hil.2.  1 17.  if  1  be  p.  forth  on  service  of  your  faith 
l{ro.  14. 10.  wine  of  wrath  of  G./).  without  mixture 

16.  2.  went  and  p.  out  his  vial,  3,  4,  8,  10, 1'2,  17. 

FOUREUST. 
F.zck.  16.  15.  p.  out  thy  fornications  on  every  one 

POURETH. 

.Job  12.21.  hep.  contempt  on  princes,  Psal.  107.  40. 

16.  13.  hep.  out  my  gall  upon  the  ground 

20.  but  mine  eye  p.  out  tears  unto  God 

Psal.  75.8.  wine  is  red,  and  hep.  out  of  the  same 

Prov.  15.  2.  but  mouth  of  fools  p.  out  foolishness 

28.  the  mouth  of  the  wicked  p.  out  evil  things 
Jlmos  5. 8. p.  out  waters  on  the  face  ofearth,9.  6. 
./o/in  13.  5.  after  that,  he  p.  water  into  a  basin 

POURING. 
/.ev.  4.  t  12.  he  shall  be  burnt  at  the  p.  out  of  ashes 
/•;zf/i.9.8.wiltthoudtstr(.y  all  iiip.  fiiry  on  Jerusal. 
Luke  10.  34.  he  bound  up  his  wounds,  p.  in  oil 

PRACTUM'.S. 
2  Pet.  2.  14.  a  heart  exercised  with  covetous  p. 

PRACTISE. 
Psal.  141.  4   not  top.  wicked  works  with  men 
Pron.  3.  t  29.  p.  no  evilasaiiislthy  neighbour 
Jsa.  32.  6.  the  vile  person  shall  p.  hypocrisy 
J)an.  8.  24.  a  king  shall  destroy,  prosper,  and  p. 
Mic.  2.  1.  when  the  niornins  is  light,  they  p.  it 

PRACTISED. 
l.S)im.23.9.  Dav.  kmw  that  Saul  secretly  p. misch. 
Dan.  8.  12.  the  little  horn  p.  nnil  prospered 

PRAISE 
Signifies,  [1]  Jt  cnnfrssion  and  dur  acknowlrdg- 
virnt  of  the  great  and  loondrrful  ricrllrnrirs 
and  perfections  that  be  in    f,'od,  Psal.  138.   I. 
Rev.  19.  5.  ['i].^  speaking  forth  and  commend- 
ing the  good  (juntifirntions  that  be  in  nlher.t^ 
Prov.  27.  2.  [3]  The  ohjtcl,  maltrr,  nndijrvund 
of  praise,  Oenl.  10.20.  P.sal.  118.  14.  \i]  Com- 
mendation,   rncouragemrnt     and    prntrrtion, 
Rom.  13.  3. 1  Pet.  2.  14.  [5]  Orcat  and  praisr- 
jnorthi/  aiJions,  Psal.  lOH.  '2. 
f.-rii.  29."  t  ^5.  Iheroforc  she  .  nihd  his  name  P. 
Dent.  10.  21.  he  Is  thvp.  ■led  he  is  ihv  God 
'26.  19.  to  make  thee  high  ii  p.  and  in  name 
Juds.  5.'3. 1  will  sing  p.  lo  ti.e  Lord  Ond  of  Tsrnrl, 
Psal.  7.  17.  I  9.  2.  |  57.  7.  |  61.  8.  |  104.  33. 
ICAron.  16. 35.  deliver,  iliutwi' may  glory  in  thy  p. 


PRA 

2  Chr.  23.  13.  and  such  as  taught  to  sing  ;>. 

JVVA.  9.  5.  whi  is  exulted  above  all  blessing  and  p 
12.  46.  in  the  days  of  David  were  songs  of  p. 

Psal.  9.  14.  that  1  may  shew  forth  all  thy  p. 
22.  '25.  my  p.  shall  be  of  thee  in  the  congregalior 
30. 12.  that  my  glory  may  sing/),  to  thee 

33.  1.  for/),  is  Comely  for  the  ujiright 

34.  1.  his  p.  shall  be  continually  in  my  mouth 

35.  28.  my  tongue  shall  speak  of  thy/),  all  day  long 
40.  3.  even  p.  to  our  God  |{  42.  4.  w  itli  voice  of /> 
48.  10.  so  is  thy  p.  to  the  ends  of  the  earth 

50.  23.  whoso  olfereth/).  gloritieth  iiie 

51.  15.  and  my  mouth  shall  shew  forth  thy/). 

65.  1.  p.  w  aitetb  for  thee,  O  God,  in  Sioii 

66.  2.  sing  forth  his  honour,  make  his/),  glorioui 
8.  and  make  the  voice  of  his/),  to  be  heard 

71.  6.  my  p.  shall  be  continually  of  thee 
8.  let  my  mouth  be  filled  with  thy  p.  and  honor 
79.  13.  we  will  shew  forth  thy  p.  \\  98.  4.  sing  p. 
100.  4.  and  enter  into  his  courts  w  ith  p. 
102.  21.  and  lo  declare  his  p.  in  Jerusalem 

106.  2.  who  can  shew  forth  all  his/).  ? 

12.  then  they  sang  his  p.  \\  47.  triumph  in  thy  p. 

108.  1.  I  will  sing  and  give/),  with  my  glory 

109.  1.  O  Godof  my/).  II  111.  10.  his  p.  endureth 
119.  171.  lipsshall  utter/),  when  thou  hast  ta'ight 
138.  1.  before  the  gods  will  I  sing  p.  to  thee 
145.  21.  my  mouth  shall  speak  the  p.  of  tho  '^ord 

147.  1.  p.  is  comely  ||  7.  sing  p.  on  the  harj 

148.  14.  he  cxalteth  the  p.  of  all  his  saints 

149.  1.  sing  his  p.  in  the  congregation  of  saint,* 
Prov.  27.  21.  as  the  furnace,  so  is  a  man  to  hup 
Isa.  42.  8.  I  will  not  give  my  p.  to  graven  imagei 

10.  sing  his  p.  from  the  end  of  Ihe  earth 
12.  let  them  declare  his  p.  in  the  islands 
43.21.  this  people,  they  shall  shew  forth  myp 
Ai.  9.  and  for  my  p.  will  1  refrain  for  thee 
60.  18.  but  thou  shalt  call  thy  gates  P. 
61.3.  the  garment  of  p.  for  the  spirit  of  heavine»» 
ll.L.willcaiise  tighteousn.andp.  to  spring  forth 

62.  7.  till  he  make  Jerusalem  a  p.  in  the  earth 
.Jer.  13. 11.  that  they  might  be  to  me  for  a  p. 

17.  14.  save  me,  O  Lord,  for  thou  art  my  p. 
26.  bringing  sacrifices  of  p.  to  house  of  L.  33. 11. 
33.  9.  it  shall  be  to  me  a  joy,  a  p.  nnd  an  honour 

48.  2.  there  shall  be  no  more  p.  of  Moab 

49.  25.  how  is  the  city  ofp.  not  left,  city  of  joy? 
51.  41.  bow  is  the  p.  of  whole  earth  surfirised  ? 

Hab.  3.  3.  and  the  earth  was  full  of  his  p. 
Zeph.3. 19. 1  will  get  them  p. and  fame  in  every  land 
20.  make  you  a  p.  among  all  people  of  the  earth 
Mat.  21.  16.  of  sucklings,  thou  hast  perfected  p 
LukelS.  43.  people,  when  they  saw  it,  gave  p.  to  & 
./ohn  9.  24.  give  God  the  p.  this  man  is  a  sinner 

12.  43.  they  lovedp.  of  men  inorethanp.  of  God 
Horn.  2.  29.  whose  p.  is  not  of  men,  but  of  God 

13.  3.  do  what  is  good,  thou  shalt  have  p.  of  same 

1  Cor.  4.  5.  then  shall  every  man  have  p.  of  God 

2  Cor.  8.  18.  the  brother,  whose  p.  is  in  the  gospel 
F.jih.  1.  6.  predestinated  top.  of  glory  of  his  grace 

1'2.  to  p.  of  glory  who  fiist  trusted  in  Christ,  14. 
Phil.  1.  11.  by  Jesus  Christ,  to  p.  and  glory  of  God 

4.  8.  if  there  be  any  p.  think  on  these  things 
Heb.  2.  12.  in  midst  of  the  church  will  I  sing  p. 

13. 15. by  him  let  us  offer  sacrifice  ofp.  continually 
1  Pet.  1.  7.  trial  of  your  faith  might  be  found  top. 

2.  14.  and  for  the  p.  of  them  that  do  well 

4.  11.  to  whom  be  p.  and  dominion  for  ever 

PRAISE,   f'erb. 
<7en.49.  8.  thou  art  he  whom  thy  brethren  shall  p. 
Lev.  19.  '24.  the  fruit  thereof  holy  lo  p.  the  Lord 
J)cut.  32.  t  •'•'•  p.  his  people,  ye  nations 
2Sam.  14. 1 25.  as  .Ibsalom,  not  a  man  to  p.  greatly 

1  Ckr.  23.  5.  instruments  I  made  to  p.  therewith 

29.  13.  we  thank  and  p.  thy  glorious  mime 

2  Chrnn.  8.  14.  Levites  top.  before  the  priests 
20.  21.  that  should  p.  the  beauty  of  holiness 

22.  and  when  they  began  lo  sing  nnd  lo  p. 
31.  2.  nnd  to  p.  in  the  gales  of  the  tents  of  Lord 
Psal.  21.  13.  so  will  we  sing  and  p.  thy  power 
22.  23.  yi'  that  fenrllie  Lord, p.  him,  seaitif  Jacob 

30.  9.  when  I  go  to  the  pit,  shall  the  dust  p.  thee? 
42.  S.hope  in  G<rd,  for  I  shall  yet  p.  him,  1 1.  |  43.  5. 

44.  8.  ill  God  we  bonst,  nnd  p.  thy  name  for  ever 

45.  17.  therefore  shall  the  people  p.  thee 

49.  IP.  men  w  illp.  thee,  when  doesi  well  to  Ibv-ielf 

63.  3.  n.y  lips  shall  p.  thee  ||  .">.  mouth  shall  p.  the* 

67.  3.  let  people  p.  Ihce  ||  5.  let  nil  people  p.  thee 
(59.  34.  let  ih.-  heaven  nnd  (he  earth  p.  him 

71.  14.  I  will  yet  p.  thee  more  and  more 
74.  21.  lei  the  poor  and  nep<Iy  p.  thy  name 
7li.  10.  surely  the  wrath  of  man  shall  p.  thee 
P8.  10.  shall'the  dead  niisn  nnd  p.  thee? 
89.  5.  the  hiiiven  sliiill  p.  thy  wonders,  O  Lo'il 
!i9.  3.  1(1  Iheni  p.  Ihy  great  and  Icrriblf  nnine 

107.  32.  p.  him  in  il  n  nsseinlilv  of  tho  elders 
113.  1.  p  him,  O  ye  servants  (if  Ihe  Lord,  IJ.V  1 
115.  17.  the  dead  p.  not  Ihe  Lord,  nor  nny  thai 
119.  164.  seven  times  n  day  do  I  p.  thee 

175.  let  my  i>oul  live  and  it  shall  p.  thee 


PRA 

Pi.  138.2. 1  willp.  thy  namefortliy  loving  kindness 
4.  all  the  kings  of  tlic  eartli  sliiill  p,  thee 
1-hJ.  7.  bring  out  of  prison  that  I  may/),  thy  name 
14.5. 4. one  generation  ahallp.  thy  works  to  another 
10.  all  thy  works  shall  p.  thee,  O  Lord 
l47.J'i. /).  the  Lord,  Jerusalem, p.  Ihy  God,OZion 

148.  \p.  ye  the  Lord,  p.  him  in  the  heights 
2./).  him,  all  his  angels,  p.  him,  ye  his  hosts 
'i.  p.  Ilim,  sun  and  moon,  p.  Iiim,  all  ye  stars 

4.  p.  him,  ye  heaven  of  heavens,  and  waters 

149.  3.  let  them  p.  his  name  in  the  dance 
150. 1.  p.  God  in  his  sanctuary,  p.  him  in  firmam. 

2.  p.  him  for  his  mighty  acts, p.  him  for  greatness 

3.  p.  him  with  trumpet  {|  4.  p.  him  with  timbrel 

5.  p.  him  upon  the  loud  and  sounding  cymbals 
Prot).  27.  2.  let  another  man  p.  thee,  a  stranger 

28.  4.  they  that  forsake  the  law  p.  the  wicked 
31.  31.  let  her  own  works  p.  her  in  the  gates 
/so.  38.  18.  the  grave  cannot  p.  thee,  death  cannot 

19.  the  living  he  shall  y.  thee,  as  I  do  this  day 
Jer.  31.  7.  publish,  p.  ye  and  say,  U  L.  save  people 
/>a7!.2.23. 1  thank  and  p.  thee,  O  God  of  my  fathers 

4.  37.  1  p.  e.Mol,  and  lionour  the  king  of  heaven 
Joel  2.  'J(5.  p.  the  name  of  the  Lord  your  God 
/,uAein.37.disciplesbegantop.  G.  with  loud  voice 
1  Cor.  11.  2.  now  I  p.  you  that  ye  remember  me 

17.  m  this  that  I  declare,  I  p.  you  not,  22. 
Rev.  ly.  5.  saying,  p.  our  God,  all  ve  his  servants 

I  will,  ox  will  /PRAISE. 
Oen.  29.  35.  Leiih  said,  now  icill  I  p.  the  Lord 
Ps(U.  7. 17.  Iwillp.  Ld.  according  to  bis  righteous. 
9.  1.  /  will  p.  thee,  O  Lord,  with  my  whole  heart, 
will  shew  forth  thy  works.  111.  1.  |  138.  1. 
22.22.  in  midst  of  the  congregation  2C(7i  /p.  thee 
28.  7.  therefore  with  my  song  will  I  p.  him 
35.13. 1  will  give  thee  thanks,  I willp.  theeamon 

much  people,  57.  9.  ]  108.  3.  ]  109.  30. 
43.  4.  on  the  harp  will  I  p.  thee,  O  God 
52.9.  I  will  p.  ibee  for  ever,liecause  thou  hast  done 
54.  0.  /  will  p.  thy  name,  O  Lord,  for  it  is  good 
56. 4.  in  God  /  will  p.  his  word,  in  God  I  trust,  10 
69.  30.  I  willp.  the  name  of  God  with  a  song 
71.  22.  I  will  also  p.  thee  with  the  psaltery 
86.  12.  /  willp.  thee,  O  Lord  my  G.  with  my  heart 

118.  19.  /  will  go  into  them,  and  will  p.  the  Lord 
21.  I  willp.  thee,  for  thou  hast  heard  me 
28.  thou  art  my  God,  and  I  willp.  thee 

119.  7.  [willp.  thee  with  uprightness  of  heart 
130.  14.  I  will  p.  thee,  for  I  am  wonderfully  made 
145.  2.  /  will  p.  thy  name  for  ever  and  ever 

Isa.  12.  1.  /  will  p.  thee,  though  thou  wast  angry 

25.  1.  /  will  p.  thy  name,  thon  hast  done  wonders 

PRAISE  7je  the  Lord,  or  PRAISE  the  hard. 

Judij.  5.  2.  p.  ye  the  Lord,  for  the  avenging  of  Israel 

1  Chr.  16.  4.  he  appointed  Lcvites  to  p.  the  Lord 
23.  30.  to  stand  every  morning  to  p.  tlie  Lord 
25.  3.  who  prophesied  with  a  har|)  to  p.  the  Lord 

2  Chr.  20.  19.  the  Levites  stood  up  to  p.  the  Lord 
21.  p.  tlie  Lord,  for  his  mercy  endureth  for  ever 

Eira'i.  10.  set  Levites  with  cymbals  top.  (Ac  Lord 

Psal.  22.  26.  they  shall  p.  the  Lord  that  seek  him 

33.  2.  p.  the  J^ord  wiih  harp,  sing  unto  him 

102.18.  people  that  shall  be  created  shall  p.  the  L. 

104.  35.  p.  ye  Lord  106.  1,  48.  |  111.  1.  I  112.  1. 

I  113.  1,9.  1  115.  18.  I  116.  19.  I  117.2. 

I  135.  1.  I  146.  1,  10.  I  147.  20.  )  148. 

1,  14.  I  149.  1,9.  I  150.  1,  6.  ./cr.20.  13. 

107.  8.  Oh  that  men  would  p.  the  L.  15,  21,  31. 

109.  30. 1  will  greatly  p.  the  Lord  with  my  mouth 

118.19. 1  willp.  the  L.  II  135.3.  p.  L.  for  he  is  good 

140.  2.  while  I  live  will  I  p.  the  Lord,  I  willsing 

147.  \.p.ye  the  Lord,  for  it  is  good  to  sing  prai.se 
12.;).  (Ae  L.  O  Jerusalem,praisethyGod,OZion 

148.  7.  p.  the  Lord  from  the  earth,  ye  dragons 
7.5(1.12.4.  shall  sav,  p.  the  Lord,  call  upon  his  name 

62.  9.  but  they  shall  eat  it,  and  p.  the  Lord 
.7cr.33.U.p.tAe  Z^ordof  ho-ts,  for  the  Lord  is  good 
Rom.  15. 11.  and  again,p.  </««  Lord,  all  ye  Gentiles 

PRAISED. 
Judg.  16.  24.  the  people  p.  their  god  Dagon 
S  Sam.  14.  25.  none  to  be  so  much  p.  as  Absalom 

22.  4.  the  Lord  is  worthy  to  be  p.  Psal.  18.  3. 
1  Chron.  16.  25.  for  the  Lord  is  great  and  greatly 

to  be  p.  Psal.  48.  1.  |  96.  4.  1  145.  3. 
36.  all  the  peopU'p.  the  Lord,  and  said,  amen 

23.  5.  four  thousand  were  porters,  and  four  thou- 

sand p.  the  Lord,  2  Chron.  7.  3.  JVeh.  5.  13. 

3  Chron.  5.  13.  with  instruments  of  musicp.  Lord 
7.  6.  when  David  p.  by  their  ministry 
30. 21.  Levites  and  priests  p.  the  Lord  day  by  day 

F.zra  3. 11.  a  great  shout  when  they  p.  the  Lord 
Psal.  72. 15.  prayer  for  him,  and  daily  shall  he  hep. 
113.  3.  from  rising  of  sun  Lord's  name  is  to  bep. 
Prov.  3 1 .  30.  a  woman  that  fearet  h  Lord  shall  be  p. 
Keel.  4.  2.  wherefore  I  p.  the  dead  more  than  living 
Cant.  6.  9.  yea,  the  queens  and  concubines  p.  her 
Isa.  64.  U.  our  house,  where  our  fathers  p.  thee 
7>on.4..34.  Ip.  and  honoured  him  that  liveth  for  cv. 

5.  4.  iind  they  p.  the  gods  of  gold  and  silver,  23. 
Luke  1.  64.  and  Zacharias  spake  and  p.  God 

451 


PRA 

PRAISES. 
Exod.  15.  11.  who  is  like  thee,  fearful  in  p.? 
2  Sam.  22.  50.  I  will  give  thanks  and  sing  p.  to  Ihy 
name,  Psal.  18.  49.  |  92.  1.  |  135.  3. 
2  Chron.  29.  30.  commanded  the  Levites  to  sing  p. 
to  the  Lord,  and  they  sang  p.  with  gladness 
Psal.  9.  11.  sing  p.  to  Lord  that  dwelleth  in  Zion 

22.  3.  art  holy,  O  thou  that  inbabilest  p.  of  Israel 
27.  6.  I  will  sing,  yea  I  will  sing  p.  to  God,  47.  6. 

I  68.  32.  I  75.  9.  j  108.  3. 
47.  7.  God  is  king,  smg  yep.  with  understanding 
56.  12.  I  will  render  p.  unto  thee,  144.  9. 
(i8.  4.  sing  to  God,  sing  p.  to  his  name,  extol  him 
78.  4.  shewing  to  generation  to  come  p.  of  Lord 

146.  2. 1  will  sing  p.  to  my  God  while  I  have  being 

147.  1.  for  it  is  good  to  sing  p.  to  our  God 
149.  3.  let  them  sing  p.  to  him  with  the  timbrel 

6.  lot  the  high  p.  of  God  be  in  their  mouths 
Isa.  60.  6.  they  shall  shew  forth  the  p.  of  Lord 
63.  7.  I  will  make  mention  of  the  p.  of  the  Lord 
.Hcts  16. 25.  Paul  and  Silas  prayed  and  sungp.  to  G . 

1  Pet.  2.  9.  show  forth  the  p.  of  him  who  called  you 
PRAISETH. 

Prov.  31.  28.  her  husband  also,  and  hep.  her 
PRAISING. 

2  Chr.  5.  13.  to  make  one  sound  to  be  heard  in  p.  L. 

23.  12.  Alhaliah  heard  the  people  p.  tlie  king 
Ezra  3.  11.  they  sang  by  course  in  p.  the  Lord 
Psal.  84.  4.  they  will  be  still  p.  thee 
Lnkel.  13.  a  multitude  of  the  heavenly  host  p.  God 

20.  the  shepherds  returned  p.  God  for  all  things 

24.  53.  they  were  continually  in  the  temple  p.  God 
.Ids  2.  46.  they  did  eat  with  gladness,  p.  God 

3.  8.  walking,  and  leaping,  and  p.  God,  9. 
PRANCING. 
JVaA.  3.  2.  the  noise  of  the  p.  horses  and  chariots 

PRANCINGS. 
■ludg.  5.  22.  horse-hoofs  broken  by  means  ofp. 

PRATING. 
Prov.  10.  8.  but  a  p.  fool  shall  fall,  10. 

3  John  10.  p.  ag'iinst  us  with  malicious  words 
PRAY. 

Oen.  20.  7.  he  is  a  proi)hel,  and  shall  p.  for  thee 
24.  t63.  Isaac  went  out  top.  in  the  field 

1  Sam.  1.  tl2.  as  Hannah  multiplied  top.  before  L. 
7.  5.  Samuel  said,  I  will  p.  for  you  to  the  Lord 

12.  19.  p.  for  thy  servants  to  the  Lord  liiy  God 
23.  that  I  should  sin  in  ceasing  top.  for  you 

2  Sam.  7.  27.  found  in  his  heart  to  p.  1  Chr.  17.  25 
IKingsS  30.hearken  thouwben  theyshallp.loward 

this  place,. 35,  42,  44,  48.  2  Chron.  6.  26,  34, 38. 

13.  6.  p.  that  my  hand  may  be  restored  again 
2  CAron.  6.  24.  shall  p.  and  make  sup|ilicatlon,32. 

37.  and  turn  and  p.  in  the  land  of  their  captivity 

7.  14.  if  my  peo|)le  shall  p.  and  seek  my  face 
Ezra  6.  10.  and  p.  for  the  life  of  the  king  and  sons 
JW  A.I.6.hear  the  prayer  which  Ip.  before  thee  now 
./«/)  21. 15.  what  profit  should  we  have  if  p.  to  himl 

33. 26_.  p.  to  God,  and  be  »yill  be  favourable  to  him 

42. 8.  my  serv.  Job  shall  p.  for  you,  him  will  accept 
P.'.  5.  2.  my  King,  my  God,  for  to  thee  will  I  p. 

55.  17.  evening,  morning,  and  at  noon  will  I  p. 

122. 6.  p.  for  peace  of  Jerus.  prosper  that  love  thee 
Isa.  16.  12.  he  shall  come  to  his  sanctuary  to  p. 

45.  20.  and  p.  to  a  god  that  cannot  save 
.Jcr.l.  16.  p.  not  thou  for  this  people,  11. 14. 1 14.  11. 

29.  7.  seek  peace  of  the  city,  p.  to  the  Lord  for  it 
12.  ye  shall  p.  to  me,  and  I  will  hearken  to  you 

37.  3.  p.  now  to  the  Lord  our  God  for  us,  42.  2, 20, 

42.  4.  behold,  I  will  p.  to  the  Lord  your  God 
Zcch.l.  2.  they  sent  men  top.  before  the  Lord 

8.  21.  go  speedily  to  p.  before  the  Lord,  22. 
Mat.  5.44.  and  p.  for  them  that  despitefully  use  you 

and  persecute  you,  Luke  6.  28.  |  16.  27. 
6.  5.  for  they  love  to  p.  standing  in  the  synagogues 
6.  p. to  thy  Father  which  is  in  secret,  shall  reward 
7.when  ye  p. use  notvain  repetitions  as  heathen  do 

9.  after  this  manner  p.  ye.  Our  Father  who  art 

9.  38.  p.  the  Lord  of  the  harvest,  Luke  10.  2. 

14.  23.  he  went  up  into  a  mountain  apart  to  p.  and 
was  alone,  Mark  6.  46.  Luke  6. 12.  ]  9.  28. 

19.13.  that  he  should  put  his  hands  on  them  and  p. 
24.20.  p.  your  flight  be  not  in  winter,  Mark  13. 18. 
26.36.  Jesus  saith  to  the  disciples,  sit  ye  here  while 
I  go  and  ;).  yonder,  Mark  14.  .32. 
41.  watch  and  p.  that  ye  enter  not  into  temptation, 
Mark  13. 33.  |  14. 38.  /.u)t«21. 36J  22.  40,  46. 
53.  thinkest  thou  I  cannot  p.  to  my  Father? 
Mark  .5.  17.  and  they  began  to  p.  him  to  depart 
11.  24.  what  things  soever  ye  desire  when  yep. 
Luke  11.  1.  Lord,  teach  us  to  p.  as  John  taught  hie 
2.  he  said  to  them,  wh^n  ye  p.  say,  Our  Father 
18.  1.  that  men  ought  always  to  p.  and  not  to  faint 

10.  two  men  went  up  into  the  temple  to  p. 
.lohii  14.  16.  and  I  will  p.  the  Father,  16.  2^ 

17.  9.  I  p.  for  them,  I  p.  not  for  the  world 
15. 1  p.  not  that  thou  take  ihem  out  of  the  world 
20.  nor  p.  I  for  these  alone,  but  for  them  also 
;3e(j8.22.  p.  God,  if  perhaps  the  thought  of  heart 
24.  Simon  said,  p.  yo  to  the  Lord  for  me 


PRA 

Jlets  10.  9.  Peter  went  up  on  the  house-top  top. 
/iom.  8. 26.  for  we  know  not  what  we  should  p.  lot 
ICur.l  1.13  is  it  comely  that  a  woman  p.  uncovered? 
14. 13.  wherefore  let  him  p.  that  he  may  interpret 

14.  for  if  I  p.  in  unknown  tongue,  spirit  prayeth 

15.  I  willp.  with  Spirit, p.  with  understanding 
2  Cor.  5.  20.  we  are  amh.issadors  for  Christ,  we  p. 

you  in  Christ's  stead,  be  ye  reconciled  to  God 
13.  7.  now  I  p.  to  God,  that  ye  do  no  evil 
Phil.  1.  9.  this  I  p.  that  your  love  may  abound 
Col.  1.  9.  for  this  cause  we  do  notecase  lop.  for  you 

1  Thess.  5.17.  rejoice  evermore, p.  without  ceasing 
23.  I  p.  God  your  whole  spirit  be  preserved 

25.  brethren  p.  for  us,  2  Thcss.  3.  1.  Heb.  13.  18. 

2  Thcss.  1.  II.  wherefore  we  p.  always  for  you 

1  Tim.  2.  8.  I  will  that  men  p.  every  where 

2  'Tim.  4. 16. 1  p.  God  it  be  not  laid  to  their  charge 
Jam.  5.  13.  is  any  among  you  dfflictpd?  let  him  p. 

14.  and  let  ihem  p.  over  him,  anointmg  him 
If),  confess  your  faults,  and  p.  one  for  another 
1  ./ohn  5.  16.  I  do  not  say  that  he  shall  p.  for  it 
3./uAw  t2.lp.  that  thou  mavest  prosper  and  in  health 

PRAYED. 
^c7!.20.17.Abrahamp.  and  God  healed  Abimelech 
JVwm.  11.2.  when  Moses  p.  the  fire  was  quenched 

21.  7.  and  Moses  p.  for  the  people,  Detit.  9.  26. 
Dent.  9.  20.  I  p.  for  Aaron  also  the  same  time 

1  .SVini.  1.  10.  Hannah,  p.  to  Lord  and  wept  sore,  21. 
27.  forthischild  I  p.  ||8.  R  Samuel  p.  to  the  Lord 

2  h'imrs  4.  33.  Elisha  p.  to  the  Lord,  6.  17,  18. 

19. 15.  Hezekiah  p.  20.  2.  2  Chron.  30. 18.  |  32. 24. 

20.  that  which  thou  hast  p.  to  me,  Isa.  37.  21. 
2  CAron.  32.  20.  Isaiah  p.  \\  33.  13.  Manasseh  p. 
EzraW.  1.  now  when  Ezra  had  p.  .JVcA.  1.  4.  |2.4. 
Job  42. 10.  Lord  turned  the  captivity  when  Job  p. 
./cr.  32.  16.  Jeremiah  p.  1|  .Jimah'i.  I.Jonah  p.  4.  2. 
Dan.  0.  10.  Daniel  p.  three  times  a  day,  9.  4. 
Jl/((<.26.39.  Jesus  fell  on  his  face  and  p.  let  this  cup 

pass  from  me,  42,44.  Mark  14. 35, 39.  Luke  22.41. 
Mark  1.  35.  he  went  into  a  solilary  place  and  p. 
5.  18.  hep.  him  that  he  might  be  with  him 
/y«Ae  5.3.  Jesus  p.  him  he  would  thrust  out  a  littlo 

16.  he  withdrew  into  the  wilderness  and  p. 
9.  29.  as  he  p.  his  coimtenance  was  altered 

18. 11.  the  Pharisee  stood  andp.  thus,  Iihankthce 

22.  32.  but  I  have  p.  that  Ihy  faith  fail  not 
44.  being  in  an  agony  he  /).  more  earnestly 

John  4.  31.  his  disciples  p.  him.  Master,  eat 
.Sets  1.  24.  the  disciples;),  nnd  said,  thou  Lord 
4.31.  when  they  p.  they  laid  their  hands  on  thcra 

8.  15.  Peter  and  .fohn  when  come  p.  for  them 

9.  40.  Peter  p.  ||  10.  2.  Cornelius  p.  alwayi!,  30. 

10.  48  then  they  p.  him  to  tarry  certain  days 
13.  3.  and  when  they  bad  fasteil  andp.  14.  2.3. 
16.  9.  p.  him,  savin?,  Come  "ver  into  Macedonia 

25.  at  midnight  Paul  and  Silas  p.  and  sang 
20.36.  Paul  kneeled  down  andp.  with  them  all 
21.  5.  we  kneeled  down  on  the  shore  and  p. 

22. 17.  while  I  p.  in  the  temple,  I  was  in  a  trance 

23. 18.  Paul  p.  me  to  bring  this  young  man  to  thee 

28.  8.  to  whom  Paul  enlereiMn  and  p. 
Jam.  5.  17.  Eliasp.  that  it  might  not  rain 

18.  and  he  p.  again,  and  the  heaven  rave  rain 
PRAYER  "   . 

Is  an  offering  vp  of  our  desires  to  God  for  things 
lawful  and  needful,  tritli  nn  humble  cnnfdrnce 
to  obtain  them  through  the  alone  mediation  of 
Christ,  to  the  prnise  of  the  mem/,  truth,  and 
power  of  God,  Mat.  0.  6.  John  16.  23,  24,  26. 
It  is  either  mental,  or  vocal,  ejartilatury,  or 
occasional,  either  private,  or  public:  for  our- 
selves, or  others;  for  the  procuring  of  good 
things,  or  theremoving,or  preventing  of  things 
evil,  1  Tim.  2.  1,  2.  ./?.?  God  is  (he  only  ob- 
ject of  prayer,  Psal.  50.  15.  and  as  we  must 
pray  for  others,  as  well  as  for  ourselves.  Jam. 
5.  16.  so  we  are  to  pray  fervently.  Col.  4.  12. 
.sincerely,  P<al.  17.  1.  constantly.  Col.  4.  2. 
with  faith.  Jam.  5.  15.  and  not  without  repen- 
tance, Psal.  66.  18.  Jer.  36.  7.  aud  by  the  help 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  Rom.  8.  26.^ 

Prayer  comes  from  a  word  in  the  Hebrew,  which 
signifies  appeal,  intcrpellatioij,  intercession: 
whereby  we  refer  our  own  cause,  and  that  of 
others,  unto  God  as  judge,  calling  upon  him, 
appealing  to  him  for  right, present  inrroursrlres 
and  our  cause  unto  him.  The  prnyrrs  that  we 
direct  to  God,  are  the  ordinary  cimreyance  of 
the  graces  that  we  receive  from  him:  Christ 
himself,  the  great  example  of  the  righlmns,  and 
of  the  elect,  taught  us  to  pray,  to  inform  us, 
that  it  is  by  that  we  honour  Gnd,  nnd  draw 
down  upon  ourselves  his  favours  nnd  graces. 

The  parts  of  Praver  are  said  to  be  innocation, 
adoration,  confession,  petition,  plra'ling,  dedi- 
cation, thanks rriving,  and  blessing. 

2  S'tm.T.'iT.  found  in  his  heart  to  pray  this  p.  to  f  hea 

1  Kings  8.  28.  have  respect  to  the  ;).  of  ihy  servant 

29.  mavest  hearken  lo  the  p.  2  Chron.  6.  19,  20. 
33.  p.  shall  be  made  by  any  man,  2  Chron.  6. 29. 


PRA 

1  Kings  S.  43.  Iiear  tlieirp.  49. 2  Ckron.  0. 35,39,40. 
54.  sulijiiioii  made  an  end  of  praying  liiis^. 

2  Kings  I'J.  4.  litt  up  lliy  p.  for  runinant,  ha.  37.  4. 
S  Ckron.  7.  15.  my  ears  slmll  be  attent  to  the  p. 

30.  ii7.  Ilieir/;.  caiue  to  his  holy  dwelling 
3;i.  16.  Alanusseh's;).  how  God  was  iiitreuled,  19. 
JVt/i.  1.  ti.  thou  inuyust  hear  the  p.  of  thy  servant 

4.  9.  nevertheless  we  made  our  p.  to  our  God 
Jufj  15.  4.  )ea  thou  restrainest  ;>.  before  God 
li-J.  '27.  tliou  Shalt  make  thy  ^.  to  huii,  shall  hear 
I'nal.  ti5.  '2.  O  thou  that  hcurest  p.  to  thee  shall  all 
7-J.  15.  p.  shall  be  made  for  him  continually 
to.  4.  how  long  be  angry  against;),  of  tliy  people, 
lU-2.  17.  shall  appear  in  Ins  glory,  he  will  regard 
the  p.  of  the  de^lilu'.e,  and  not  despise  their  p. 
lO'.l.  4.  my  adversaries,  but  1  give  niyuelf  unto  j». 
7.  let  hull  be  coiideinned,and  let  his/),  become  sin 
Proo.  J5.  e.  Ihep.  of  tiie  upright  is  his  delight 

ijy.  but  he  liearelh  the  p.  of  the  righteous 
2^.  9.  even  his  //.  shall  be  abominalion 
Jsa.  '2ii.  16.  poured  out  ixp.  when  thy  chastening 
5U.  7.  1  will  make  them  joyful  in  my  house  of/), 
for  my  house  *ball  be  called  a  house  of/). 
JIut.-il.  13.  Mark  n.  17.  I.u/ce  19.  40. 
Jer.  7. 10.  nor  lit't  up  my  cry  nor  /).  for  them,  11. 14. 
J.am.  3.  44.  (hat  our/),  should  not  pass  through 
Jjan.  9.  3. 1  set  my  face  to  tlie  Lord,  to  seek  by  p. 
I'.i.  yet  iiiaile  we  not  our/),  before  Lord  our  God 
17.  now,  O  our  God,  hear  the/),  of  thy  servant 
J/. it).  3.  1.  up.  ofHabakkuk  the  prophet 
Mat.  17.  '21.  nothing  impossible,  howbeil,  this  kind 
goelh  not  out  bui  by  p.  and  fasting,  Mark  9.  29. 
Ijuke  1.  13.  fear  not,  Zacharias,  thy/),  is  heard 
Jicls  3.  1.  went  into  the  temple  at  the  hour  of/). 
0.  4.  but  we  will  give  ourselves  continually  to  p. 
lU.  31.  Cornelius,  thy/),  is  heard,  and  thy  alms 
r2. 5./).  was  made  without  ceasing  to  God  for  him 
lo.  13.  we  went  out  where/),  was  woui  to  be  made 
16.  as  we  went  to/),  a  ceitain  damsel  met  us 

1  Cor.  7.  5.  ihat  ye  may  give  yourselves  to  p. 

2  Cor.  1.  11.  ye  also  helping  together  by  p.  for  ug 
9.  14.  by  their  p.  for  you,  which  long  after  you 

y.ph.&.\i'.  praying  always  with  all/)  and  siipplicat. 

run.  1.  4.  .ilways  in  every  p.  of  mine  for  you  all 

19.tliis  shall  turn  lo  my  salvation  through  your/). 

4.  6.  in  every  thing'by  /).  let  requ.  be  made  known 
]  Tim.  4.  5.  lor  it  is  sanctified  by  the  word  and  p. 
Jan.  5.  15.  the  p.  of  faith  shall  save  the  sick 

10.  the  ellectual  p.  of  a  righteous  man  availeth 
1 17.  he  prayed  in  his/),  that  it  might  not  rain 
1  Pel.  4.  7.  be  therefore  sober,  and  watch  unto/). 
See.  Ukard. 
In  PRAYER. 
.\"  A.n.)7.1Ialtaniah  began  the  thanksgiving  »n/). 
yy/in.9. 21.  yen,  whilel  was  speaking  in/). Gabriel 
Mat.  21.  22.  whatever  ye  ask  in  p.  believing 
J.ake  G.  12.  he  continued  all  night  in  p.  to  God 
.'lets  1.  14.  they  continued  with  one  accord  in  p. 
Horn.  12. 12.  patient  in  tribu.  continuing  instant  in  p. 
C'ul.  4.  2.  continue  )'»  /).  and  watch  in  the  same 

^Vy  PR.'W'ER. 
Jill)  16. 17.  not  for  any  injustice,  also  my  p.  is  pure 
/'».4.1.  have  mercy,  hear  my  p.  17. 1. 1.39.  12. 1  54.2. 

5.  3.  in  the  morning  will  I  dirnct  my  p.  to  thee 

0.  9.  the  Ijord  heard,  Ihe  Lord  will  receive  my  p. 
3.').  13.  and  my  p.  returned  to  mine  own  bosom 
42.  8.  his  song,  and  my  p.  to  the  God  of  my  life 
55.  1.  give  ear  unto  my  p.  O  God,  and  hide  not 
61.  1.  hear  my  cry,  O  (Jod,  attend  to  viy  p.  64.  1. 
184.  8.  I  86.0.  I  102.  1.  |  143.  1. 
60.  19.  he  hath  attended  to  the  voice  of  my  p. 
20.  God  which  hath  not  turned  away  viy  p. 
69.  13.  my  p.  is  to  thee  in  an  acceptable  time 
88.  2.  let  my  p.  come  before  thee,  incline  thine  ear 

13.  in  the  morning  shall  my  p.  prevent  thee 
141.2.  let  my  p.  be  set  forth  before  Uiee  as  incense 
5.  for  yet  my  p.  shall  he  in  their  calamities 
/,am.3.  H.  when  I  cry  and  shout,  heshutt.  oulmj/p. 
Jonah  2.7. my  /). came  in  lo  thee  into  thy  holy  temple 
Hum.  10.  I.  brethren,  my  p.  to  God  for  Israel  is 

PR.\YKRS. 
r$al.  72.  2l).  /(.  of  David,  son  of  Jesse,  are  ended 
Ua.  J.  15.  when  ye  iiiiikc  many  /).  I  will  not  hear 
^/at.23.14.fc.rp«'ienco  make  lonsp. therefore  have 
greiilrrdainniition,  Mark  12.40.  Luke  20.  47. 
l.uk'  2.  37.  .Anna  continued  in  /).  day  and  night 

5.  .33.  why  do  the  disciples  of  John  make  p.l 
.9fr«2. 42.  Cdnliimoilin  breaking  of  bread  and  in  p. 

10.  4.  thy  n.  and  ahns  arc  romo  up  before  God 
Hum.  1.9. 1  make  mention  of  vou  always  in  my  p. 
V.ph.  1. 10.  1  Thrgii.  1. 2.  2  Tim.  1.3.  I'hilem.  4. 
15.  30.  strive  with  me  in  your  p.  to  God  for  me 
Cf)/.4.l2.1';(iaj)lirBH  labouring  fervently  for  you  in  p. 
1  Tim.2.  I.  I  exhort  Ihal  p.  bo  made  for  nil  men 
5.  5.  widow  indeed  conliniieth  in  p.  night  and  day 
/V/(7e/H.22.  I  trust  thro'  your  p. I  shall  be  given  toy. 
J/rh.  5.  7.  when  he  had  ofTerid  up  p.  with  tears 
1  rft.3.7.  as  heirs  of  life,  lhatyoiirp.be  not  hinder. 
12.  hisenrs  are  open  lo  Ihiir  p.  hut  face  of  Lord 
ii:<B.5.S.fu!l  ofoduuri,  which  ar«  the/). of  the  saiiitB 
452 


PRE 

Rev. 8.3.  he  should  offer  it  with  the  p.  of  the  saints 

4.  the  smoke  which  came  with  thep.  of  the  saints 

PKAYEST. 
Mat.  6.  5.  when  thou  p.  be  not  as  the  hypocrites,  6. 

PllAYETH,  ING. 
1  Sam.  1. 12.  as  Hannah  continued  p.  before  Lord 

26.  my  lord,  I  am  woman  that  stood  p.  by  thee 
1  Kivgs8.'2S.  hearken  lo  (irayer  which  thy  servant 

p.  before  thee  this  day,  2  Chr.  6.  19,  20. 
54.  Solomon  had  made  an  end  ofp.  2  C/ir.  7. 1. 
Isa.  44.  17.  he  worshippelh  it  and  p.  to  it 
Dan.  6.  11.  these  assembled  and  found  Daniel  p. 

9.  20.  while  I  was  speaking  and  p.  and  contiissing 
Mark  11.25.  when  ye  stand  p.  forgive  ought  ag.  any 
J.uke  1.10.  multitude  of  the  people  were  p.  without 

3.  21.  and  Jesus  p.  the  heaven  was  opened 
9.18.as  he  was  alonep. his  disciples  were  with  him 

11.  1.  as  he  wasp,  in  certain  place  when  he  ceased 
Jlcts  9.  11.  behold  hep.  ||  11.  5.  I  was  at  Joppap. 

12.  12.  where  many  were  gathered  together  p. 

1  Cor.  11.  4.  every  man  p.  with  his  head  covered 

5.  but  every  woman  thatp.  with  head  uncovered 

14.14.  my  spiritp.  but  my  understand,  is  unfruitful 

2  Cvr.  8.  4.  p.  us  with  much  entreaty  to  receive  gift 
Kpk.  6.  18.  p.  always  with  all  prayer  in  the  Spirit 
C.'vl.  1.  3.  p.  always  for  you  |{  4.  3.  p.  also  for  us 

1  77«.«.v.  3.  10.  night  and  day  p.  exceed,  to  see  your 
Jude  20.  but  ye,  beloved,  p.  in  the  Holy  Ghost 

PREACH. 
JVrA  6.7.  thou  hast  appointed  jirophets  to  p.  of  thee 
Isa.  61. 1.  Lord  hath  anointed  me  top.  good  tidings 
Jonah  3.  2.  p.  to  it  the  preaching  that  I  bid  thee 
Mat.  4.  17.  from  that  time  Jesus  began  top. 

10.  7.  p.  saying,  the  kingdom  of  God  is  at  hand 

27.  what  ye  hear,  that  p.  ye  upon  the  house-tops 

11.  1.  he  departed  thence  top.  in  their  cities 
Mark  1.  4.  John  did  p.  the  baptism  of  repentance 

38.  that  I  may  p.  there  also,  J^uke  4.  43. 

3.14.  that  he  miglit  send  them  forth  top. /^kA.; 9. 2. 
I.ukc  4. 18.  to  p.  deliverance  to  the  captives,  19. 

9.  00.  but  go  thou  and  p.  the  kingdom  of  God 
Jlcts  5.  42.  they  ceased  not  top.  Jesus  Christ. 

10.  42.  he  commanded  us  to  p.  to  the  people 

14. 15.  and  p.  unto  you  that  ye  should  ri^lurn  toG. 
1.5.21.  Mos's  hath  in  every  city  them  thatp.  him 
10.  6.  forbiilden  by  Holy  Ghost  to  p.  word  in  Asia 
17.  3.  that  Ibis  Jesus  whom  I  p.  to  you  is  Christ 

Hum.  10.  8.  that  is  the  word  of  faith  which  we  p. 

15.  and  how  shall  they  p.  e.xcept  they  be  sent? 

1  0)T.  1.  23.  but  we  p.  Christ  crucified 

9. 10.  Iho'  I  p.  gospel,  I  have  nothing  to  glory,woe 
is  tome  if  I  p.  not  gospel,  necessity  is  laid  on  me 

15.  11.  I  or  they,  so  we  p.  and  so  ye  believed 

2  Cor.  4.  5.  we  p.  not  ourselves,  but  Christ  Jesus 
Gal.  1. 16.  that  I  might  p.  him  among  the  heathen 

2.  2.  the  gospel  which  I  p.  among  the  Gentiles 

5.  II.  and  I  brethren,  if  I  yet  p.  circumcision 
F.jih  3.  8.  that  I  should  p.  among  Gentiles 
Phil.  1. 15.  some  indeed  p.  Christ  ofenvy  and  strife 

16.  theonep.  Christ  of  contention,  not  sincerely 
Cul.  1. 125.  dispensation  given  me  fully  to  p.  word 

28.whom  wep. warning  every  man, in  all  wisdom 
2  Tim.  4.  2.  p.  the  word,  be  instant  in  season 

PREACHED. 
P.s«/.4l).9. 1  have  p.  i  ighieousn.  in  great  congregal. 
Mat.  11.5.  the  poor  have  the  gospel  p.  to  them 
Mark  1. 7. John  p. saying, ihere  Cometh  one  iifi«r  me 

39.  hep.  in  their  synagogues  througli  Galdee 
2.  2.  many  were  gathered,  he  p.  the  word  to  them 

6.  12.  they  went  and  p.  that  men  should  repent 
16   20.  they  went  forth  and  p.  every  where 

Luke  3.  18.  many  other  things  p.  he  to  the  people 

4.  4  4.  hr  p.  in  the  synagogues  of  Galileo 

16.  10.  since  that  lime  the  kingdom  of  God  is  p. 
24.  47.  that  remiss,  nfgins  siiould  hep.  in  his  name 

Jlct.i  3.  20.  Jesus  Christ,  who  before  was  p.  lo  you 
4.  2.  p.  through  Jesus  the  resurrection  from  dead 
8.  5.  p.  Christ  tf<  Samaria  ||  35.  p.  Jesus  to  eunuch 
25.  iheyp.  Ihe  word  of  the  Iionl,  p.  the  fospel 
.  40.  Pbifip  p.  in  all  cities  (ill  he  came  to  Cciaren 
9.20..'^aiil  p.  Christ  in  syniigog.  to  be  Son  of  God 
27.i<arnabas  told  how  Saul  had  p. boldly  at  Daru. 
10.  37.  that  word,afler  (he  hnpdsin  which  John  p. 

13.  5.  (Iieyp.  iho  word  of  God  in  their  synagogues 
24.  when  John  had  first/),  before  his  coming 
38.tliroiigh  this  man  is^).  to  you,  forgiven.  ofRins 
42.  that  these  words  might  lie  p.  tlic!  next  sabbath 

14.  25.  when  they  had  p.  the  word  in  I'crga 

15.  30.  let  US  go  and  visit  where  wn  have  p. 

17.  13.  the  word  of  God  was  p.  of  Paul  at  Berca 
Ifl.  hncnuBO  hep.  Jesus  and  the  resnrreclion 

20.  7.  Paul  p.  ready  to  depart  on  (he  morrow 

1  Cor.  9. 27.  lest  when  I  have  ;).  to  others,  I  myself 
15.  2.  ifyo  keep  in  memory  whiit  I  p.  to  you 

12.  if  Christ  bo  p.  (hat  he  rose  from  (he  dead 

2  Cnr.  1.  19.  JesiiB  who  was  ;>.  among  yon  by  us 
11.4. if  preach  iinolhi'r.TcsiiH  whnm  wehnvenotp. 

r.oi.  1.  P.  other  gos|M'l  (ban  I  hat  we  have  p.  lo  yon 
Fph.'i.  17.  canieandp.  prrnro  to  yon  who  were  afar 
Phil.  1.  18.  Christ  is  p.  nnd  I  tliercin  do  rejoice 


PRE 

CoM.23.  which  wasp,  to  every  creat.  under  hoivcD 
1  Ttin.  3. 16.  p.  to  Gentiles,  believed  on  in  tlie  world 
lUb.  4.  2.  but  the  w  old  p.  did  not  piolit  Ihcm 

0.  they  (o  whom  it  was  lust  p.  entered  not  in 

1  Pet.  3.  19.  he  went  and  p.  to  the  spirits  inprisoo 

iice  Gospel. 

PREACHER. 

Eccl.  1.  1.  (he  words  of  thep.  the  son  of  David 

2.  vanity  of  vanities,  saith  thep.  all  vanity,  12.81 

12.  I  the/),  was  king  over  Israel  in  Jerusalem 

7.  27.  behold,  this  have  I  found,  saith  thep. 
12.9. becausep. was  wise,  hestill  taught  the  people 

10.  thep.  sought  to  find  out  acceptable  woida 
Rum.  10.  14.  how  shall  (hey  hear  w  i(hout  a  p..' 

1  Tim.  2. 7.  w  hereto  1  am  ordained  ap.  2  '/Vin. 1.11. 

2  Pet.  2.  5.  but  saved  IS'oah,  a  p.  ol  rigbteousi.ess 

PREACHEST,  ETH,  ING. 
.lonah  3.  2.  preach  to  it  thep.  that  I  bid  tliee 
Mai.  3.  1.  in  those  days  came  John  p.  J.uke  3.  3. 
4.  23.  p.  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom,  9.  35. 
12.  41.  rise  in  judgment,  because  they  repented  at 
thep.of  Joiias,and  a  greater  is  here,  Luke  11.32. 
Mark  1. 14.  Jesus  came  into  Galilee  p.  the  gospel 
LukcB.  1.  p.  and  shewing  glad  tidings  of  the  kingd. 

9.  6.  they  went  through  the  (owns  p.  the  gospel 
.Hcts  8.  4.  they  went  every  w here  p.  the  word 

12.  p.  the  things  concerning  the  kingdom  ol  God 

10.  30.  p.  peace  by  Jesus  Christ,  he  is  Lord  of  all 

11.  19. p.  the  word  to  none  but  to  the  Jews  only 

20.  spake  to  the  Greeks,  p.  the  Lord  Jesus 
15.35.  Paul  and  Barnabas  continued  in  Aiitioch  p. 

19.  13.  we  adjure  you  by  Jesus,  whom  Paul  p. 
20.9.as  Paul  was  longp.Euiychus  sunk  with  sleep 

25.  ye  all,  among  whom  I  have  gone  p.  shall  see 

28.  31.  p.  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  teaching 
Horn.  2.  21.  thou  thatp.  a  man  should  not  steal 

10.  t  10.  Lord,  who  hath  believed  our  p.  ? 
16. 25.  to  establish  you  according  to  thep.  of  Jesus 
fial.  1.  23.  he  p.  the  faith  which  once  he  destroyed 

1  Cor.  1.  18.  for  thep.  of  the  cross  is  foohshness 

21.  by  the  foolishness  ofp.  to  save  them  (hat 

2.  4.  my  p,  was  not  with  enticing  words 

15.  14.  if  Christ  be  not  risen,  then  is  our  p.  vain 

2  Cor.  1.  t  18.  our  p.  t<iward  you  was  nut  yea 

10.  14.  come  as  far  as  to  you,  p.  gospel  of  Christ 
11.4.  if  he  that  comelh  p.  another  Jesus 
2  Tim.  4.  17.  that  by  me  p.  might  bo  fully  known 
TfM.S.huth  indue  limes  maniles.  his  word  ihro'p. 

PRECEPT,  S. 
.V(7i.  9.  14.  commandcst  them  p.  and  statutes 
/'««/.119.4.  thou  hast  commanded  us  to  keep  thyy, 
15.  I  will  meditate  in  thy  p.  78. 
27.  make  me  lo  understand  the  way  of  thy  p. 
40.behold,I  have  longed  after  thy  p.  quicken  me 
45.  for  I  seek  thy  p.  O  87.  I  forsook  no(  (hy  p. 
50.  this  I  had,  because  I  kept  thy  p.  100,  1C8. 
63.  keep  thy  p.  69, 134.  ||  93.  never  forget  thy  p. 
94. 1  am  (hine,  save  nic,for  I  have  sought  thy  p. 
104.  through  (hyp.  I  gel  understanding,  and  hate 
1 10.  wicked  laid  snare,  yet  I  erred  not  from  ihy^t 
12'^.  therefore  I  esteem  all  thy  p.  to  be  right 
141.  I  um  small,  yet  do  not  1  forget  thy  p. 
\Xt.  consider  how  I  love  thy  p.  quicken  me 
173.  help  me,  for  I  have  chosi-n  thy  p. 
Isa.  28.  10.  for  p.  mus(  be  upon  p.  p.  on  p.  13. 

29.  13.  their  fear  is  (aught  by  thep.  of  men 
./fr.  35.  18.  because  ye  have  kept  all  Jonadab'sp. 
/>a7i.9. 5.  we  have  rebelled  by  depart,  from  thy  p. 
Mark  10.5.  for  ha.iln.  of  heart  he  wrote  you  this  p. 
Heb.  9.  19.  for  when  Mosrs  had  spoken  every  p. 

PRECIOUS. 
Oni.^A.  53.  hngavetoRebekah'smothcrp.  things 
Dint.  33.  13.  blessed,  for  thep.  things  of  heaven 
M.  for  p.  fruits  brought  forth  by  sun  ami  moon 

15.  and  for  thep.  tli'.igs  of  the  lasting  hiils 

10.  for  p.  things  of  the  earth,  and  fiilnifs  thereof 

1  Sani.'^.  1.  the  word  of  (he  Ld.  wasp,  in  those  days 
18.  t30.  David  behaved  so  that  his  name  wasp. 

20.  21.  because  my  soul  wasp,  in  thine  eyes 

2  Kinirs  1.  13.  let  liiy  life  hep.  in  Ihv  sight,  14. 

20.  13.  Ilizekiah  shewed  them  p.  things,  /.«a.39.2. 
2  Chr.  20.  25.  and  p.  jewels  w  liich  they  stripped  off 

21.  3.  Jehoshaplial  gave  (hem  gifts  ofp.  (hingi 
32.  t23.  many  hrough(  p.  (Iiiiigs  (o  Hezikiah 

F.ira  1.0.  6(rengthened  their  hands  with  p.  things 

8.  27.  two  vessels  of  fine  copper,  p.  as  ^old 
Job  28.  10.  nnd  his  eye  seeth  every  p.  thing 

16.  cannot  be  valued  with  the;),  onyx  or  s.ippbiro 
Psnl.  .36.  t7.  how  p.  is  thy  loving  kindness! 

49.  8.  for  the  redemption  of  (heir  soul  is  ;<. 
72.  II.  and  p.  shall  their  blood  bo  in  his  sight 
1 10   15.  p.  in  sight  of  Ld.  is  the  death  of  his  saints 
120.  6.  he  Ihiit  gneth  forih  bearing  p.  seed 
133.  2.  it  is  like  the  p.  oinlment  on  the  head 
139.  17.  howp.  also  are  thy  thoiiglils  tome,  0  God 
141.  t5.  li't  not  Ihoirp.  oil  break  my  head 
Prov.  I.  13.  wo  shall  find  all  p.  substance 

3.  15.  wisdom  is  more  p.  than  rubies,  and  nil  things 
0.  20.  (he  adnliorcss  will  hunt  for  the  p.  life 

12.  27.  but  the  subst.incc  of  a  diliffnnl  mun  is  p 


PRE 

i'roB.20.  S.buttlie  lips  of  knowledge  are  ap.  Jewel 

24. 4.chaiiibers  tilled  withali^j.and  picus.ajit  riches 

£ccl.  7.  1.  a  good  name  is  belter  tbiin  p.  oinlmenl 

/sa.13.12.  I  will  make  a  man  niore/j.tlian  line  gold 

28.  16.  1  lay  in  Zion  a  p.  corner-stone,  1  Pel.  'J.  6. 
43. 4.  since  thou  wasi  p.  in  my  sight  been  honour. 

Jcr.  15.  IS),  if  thou  take  the/;,  from  the  vile 
'20.  5.  1  will  deliver  all  the/;,  things  thereof 
J.ain.  4.  '2.  the  p.  sons  uf  Zion, comparable  to  gold 
Kzek.Hi.  25.  have  taken  the  treasure  and  p.  things 
27. 20.  Dedau  wusuierch.  in /(.clothes  for  chariots 
lJait»ll.  8.  and  shall  carry  away  their  p.  vessels 

43.  he  shall  have  power  over  all  p.  things 
Zfch.  14.  t  6.  in  that  day  light  shall  not  be  p. 
Mat.  2(j.  7.  there  came  to  him  a  woman,  having  an 
ahibaster  bo.\  of  very  p.  ointment,  Mark  14.3. 
Jam.  5.  7.  the  husbandman  waiteth  for  the  p.  fruii 
lffM.7.trial  of  your  faith  much  more  p.  than  gold 
lit.  but  with  the  p.  blood  of  Christ,  as  of  a  lamb 
2.  4.  as  to  a  living  stone,  chosen  of  God,  and  y;. 
7.  to  you  therefore  which  believe  he  is  p. 
2  Pet.  1.  1.  that  have  obtained  likey.  faith  with  iis 
4.aro  given  to  us  exceeding  great  and  p.  promises 
/lev.  18.  12.  for  no  man  buyeth  their'/),  vessels 
21.  11.  her  light  was  like  to  a  stone  most/). 

I'KECIOUSNESS. 
P.*.  37.  t2l>.  enemies  of  the  Lord  as  the/),  oflambs 

PREUESTIJVATE. 
T'his  word  is  taken  for  tkc  design  that  God  has 
been plea.-icd  to  Aace  from  all  eternity.,  ofbring- 
ing  by  his  free  grace  to  faith  and  eternal 
salvation,  some  certain  persons,  whom  he  loved 
sn  Christ;  whilst  he  leaves  othert  to  continue 
in  their  infi.delity,  or  in   their  corruptions  : 
Those  that  are  so  lift  are  the  Reprobate,  and 
the  others  are  the  Elect,  or  Predestinated. 
Rom.  8.  2!).  for  whom  he  did  foreknow,  he  did  p. 
30.  and  whom  he  did  p.  them  he  also  called 
PHEDESTINATED. 
Eph.  1.  ."i.  having  p.  us  to  the  adoption  of  sons 

11.  being/),  arcordin*  (o  the  purpose  of  him 

PRE-EMINENCE. 
Eccl.  3.  10.  a  man  hath  no  p.  above  a  beast 
Col   1.  18.  that  in  all  things  he  might  have  the  p. 
3 .fohn  9.  DiolrephcK,  who  loveth  to  have  the/). 

PREFER. 
Ps.  137.6.  if  I/),  not  .Iirnsalcm  abnveiny  chief  joy 

PREFERRED,  ING. 
Esih.  2.  9.  and  he  p.  her  and  her  maidens 
IJan.  6.  3.  Daniel  was  p.  above  the  presidents 
John  1.15.  he  that  cornel h  after  me  isp.bef.  me,  27. 
30.  who  i.<  p.  before  me,  for  he  was  before  me 
Rotn.  13.  10.  in  honour/),  one  another 
1  Tim.5.  21.  observe,  without /I.  one  before  another 

PREJUDICE. 
ITim.  5.  t  21.  observe  these  things  without/). 

PRE-MEDITATE. 
Mark  13.  11.  neither  p.  but  whatsoever  is  given 

PREPAR.ATION. 
iCkron.  22.  5.  I  will  therefore  now  make/),  for  it 
JVah.  2.  3.  with  flaming  torches  in  the  day  ofp. 
jV<it.27.l)2  the  next  day  that  followed  the  day  of/). 
Mark  15.  42.  Lukeia.  54.  .John  19. 14,  31,42. 
Eph.  6.  15.  feet  shod  with  p.  of  the  gospel  of  peace 

PREPARATIONS. 
Prov.  10.  \.p.  of  the  heirt  in  man  from  the  Lord 

PREPARE 
Sijnifies,  [1]  To  get  or  make  ready.  Josh.  1.  11. 
[2]  To  ft  and  i/ualify,  Rom.  9.23.  [3]  To  ap- 
point. Mat.  20.  23.  [4]  To  be  fixed,  Psal. 
57.  f  7.  [.")]  To  direct,  guide,  and  establish, 
1  Chron.  2:1.  18. 
Eiod.lo.^.  my  (Jod,  and  I  will  p.  him  a  habitation 

10.  5.  on  sixth  day  they  shall  /).tliat  they  bring  in 
I,eB.\4.y.i>t  piiesl  shall  command  they  p.  Ilie  house 
JVum.  15.5.  for  adrink-ofr.>ring  p.  the  fourth  part 

6.  or  for  a  ram  p.  thou  fur  a  meat-offering 

12.  according  to  the  nunibi  r  that  ye  shall  p. 
2.'''.  1.  Balaam  said,  p.  me  seven  oxen,  five  rams 

29.  build  me  seven  altars,  and  p.  seven  bullocks 
Deut.  19.  3.  thou  shall  p.  Iliee  a  way,  divide  coasts 
Jn.th.  1.  11./).  you  victuals  to  pass  over  Jordan 

22.  26.  we  s  lid,  let  u-!  now  p.  to  build  us  an  altar 
l.SaTO.7.3.p.your  hearts  tothe  Lord,  and  serve  him 

1  Kings  18.4  l.say  to.\hab,p.cbariot,get  thee  down 
IChron.  9.  32.  to  p.  shew-brcad  every  sabbath 

29.  18.  O  Lord  God,  p.  their  heart  unto  thee 

2  Chron.  2.  9.  to  p.  me  timber  in  abundance 
31.  11.  p.  chambers  ||  35.  4.  and  p.  yonrsclves 
35.  6.  sanctify  yourselves,  and  p.  your  brethren 

Efth.  5. 8.  come  to  banriuet  that  I  shall ;).  for  them 
Joh  S.  8.  and  p.  thyself  to  the  search  of  their  fathers 

11.  13.  i''thnu  p.  thine  heart  toward  him 

27. 10.  tho'  he  p.  raiment  as  clay  II  I",  he  may  p.  it 
Psal.  10.  17.  Lord,  thou  wilt  p.  their  heart 
."i9.  4.  they  p.  ihemselves  without  my  fault 
01.  7.  O /*j^_ mercy  and  truth,  which  mav  pre9er\e 
107.  30.  that  thev  may  /).  a  city  for  habitation 
"ri)'.  24.  27.  p.  thy  work  without,  and  make  it  fit 

30.  25.  yet  they  ».  their  moat  in  the  summer 

453 


PRE 

fsa.  14. 21.  p.  slaughter  for  his  children  for  Iniquity 
2).  5.  p.  the  table,  watch  in  the  watch-lower 
40.  3.  of  him  that  crietli,  p.  ye  way  of  Lord,  Mai. 
3.  1.  Mat.  3.  3.  Mark  1.  2,  3.  Luke  1.  76. 
20.  ho  seeketh  a  workman'to  p.  a  graven  image 
57.  14.  and  shall  say,  cast  ye  up,  p.  the\vay 
62.  10.  p.  ye  the  way  of  the  people,  cast  up 
65.  11.  they  that  p.  a  table  for  tliat  troop 

./er.  0.  4.  p.  ye  war  agamst  her,  arise,  let  us  go  up 
12.  3.  and  p.  them  tor  the  day  of  slaughter 
22.  7.  1  will  p.  destroyers  against  thee 
46.  14.  say  ye,  stand  fast  and  p.  thee,  sword  shall 
51.  12.  set  up  watchmen,  p.  the  ambushes 
27.  blow  the  trumpet,  p.  nations  agamst  her,  28. 

Eiek.  4.  15.  and  thou  shaltp.  thy  bread  therewith 
12.  3.  p.  thee  stuff'  for  removing,  and  remove 

35.  0.  I  will  p.  thee  to  blood,  blood  shall  pursue 
38.  7.  p.  for  thyself,  thou  and  all  thy  company 
43.  25.  p.  every  day  a  goat,  they  shall  also  p. 

45.  17.  the  prince  shall  p.  the  sin- offering 

22.  on  that  day  prince  shall  p.  for  himself,  46.12. 
24.  he  shall  p.  a  meat-offering,  46.  7,  14. 

46.  2.  the  priest  shall  p.  his  burnt-offering,  13. 
15.  they  shall  p.  the  lamb  and  meat-otfering 

Joel  3.  9.  p.  war  ||  Jimos  4. 12.  p.  to  meet  thy  God 
Mic.  3.  5.  they  even  p.  war  against  liini 
.^/aM  1.10. messenger,  whoshallp.way  before  thee 
26.  17.  where  wilt  thou  that  we  p.  for  thee  to  eat 
the  passover^  Mark  14.  12.  J^uke  22.  8,  9. 
Luke  3.  4.  saying,  p.  ye  the  way  of  the  Lord,  7. 27. 
John  14.  2.  I  go  to  p.  a  place  for  you 
3.  if  I  go  and  p.  a  |dace  for  you,  I  will  come  ag. 

1  Git.  14.  8.  who  shall  p.  himself  to  the  battle? 
Philem.  22.  but  withal  p.  me  also  a  lodging 

PREPARED. 
Oen.  24.  31.  I  p.  the  house  and  room  for  camels 

41.  t  32.  dream  doubled,  for  the  thing  is  p.  of  God 
Eiod.  12.  39.  neither  had  they  p.  any  victual 

2;{.  20.  to  bring  thee  into  the  place  I  have  p. 
J\rum.  21.  27.  let  the  city  of  Silion  be  built  and  p. 

2.3.  4.  I  have  p.  seven  altars,  and  have  offered 

2  Sam.  15.  1.  Absalom  p.  chariots  and  horses 

1  Kings  1.  5.  Adonijah  p.  ||  5.  18.  they  p.  timber 
6.  19.  the  oracle  hep.  in  the  house  wilhin 

2  Kings  6.  23.  he  p.  provision  and  sent  them  away 

1  Chron.  12.  39.  for  their  brethren  had  p.  for  them 

15.  1.  David  p.  a  place  for  the  ark  of  God,  and 

piichcd  for  it  a  tent,  3,  12.  2  Clir.  1.  4.  |  3.  1. 
22.  3.  David  p.  iron  in  abundance  for  the  nails 
5.  David  p.  abund.  before  his  death,  14.  |  29.  2. 

2  Chron.  8.  16.  all  the  work  of  Solomon  wasp. 

12.  14.  Rehoboani  p.  not  his  heart  to  seek  the  L. 

19.  3.  Jehoshaphat  p.  his  heart  10  seek  God 

20.  33.  for  as  yet  the  people  had  not  p.  their  heart 

26.  14.  Uzziah  p.  shields  and  spears  for  them 

27.  6.  Jotliam  p.  his  ways  before  the  Lord 

29.  19.  the  vessels  Ahaz  cast  away  we  have  p. 

36.  he  rejoiced  that  God  had  p.  the  people 
31.11.  they  p.  chambers  in  the  houseof  the  Lord 
35.  10.  the  service  wasp,  the  priests  stood,  16. 

20.  after  this,  when  Josiali  had  p.  the  temple 
Ezra  7.  10.  Ezra  had  p.  his  heart  to  the  law 
JVV'A.  5.  13.  now  that  which  wasp,  for  me  daily 

8.  10.  and  send  to  them  for  whom  nothing  is  p. 

13.  5.  he  had  p.  for  him  a  great  chamber 
Esth.  5.  4.  to  the  banquet  that  I  have  p.  12.  |  6. 14. 

6.  4.  to  hang  Mordecai  on  gallows  Hamanp.  7.10. 
Job  28.  27.  hep.  it,  yea,  and  searched  it  out 

29.  7.  when  I  p.  my  seat  in  the  street 

Psal.  7.13.  he  p.  for  him  the  instruments  of  death 

9.  7.  he  hath  p.  his  throne  for  judgment 
57.  6.  they  have  p.  a  net  for  my  steps 

t  7.  my  heart  is  p.  I  will  sing  and  give  praise 
68.  10.  thou  hast  p.  of  thy  goodness  for  the  poor 
74.  16.  thou  hast  p.  the  light  and  the  sun 
78.  t  8.  a  generation  tliatp   not  their  hearts 
103.  10.  the  L   halli  p.  his  throne  in  the  heavens 
Prov.  3. 1 19.  by  understanding  he  p.  the  heavens 
8.  27.  when  he  p.  the  heavens,  I  was  there 
19.  29.  judgments  are  p.  for  scorners,  and  stripes 

21.  31.  the  horse  is  p.  against  the  day  of  battle 
ha. '2.  1 2.  mountain  of  the  Lord's  house  shall  be  p. 

16.  t  5.  in  mercy  shall  tho  throne  be  p. 

30.  33.  Tuphet  of  old,  for  the  king  it  is  p. 

64.  4.  neither  hath  the  eye  seen  what  he  hath  p. 
F.zek.  23.  41.  a  stately  bed,  and  atable  p.  before  it 

28.  13.  workmanship  of  the  pipes  wasp,  in  thee 
38.  7.  be  thou  p.  and  prepare  for  thyseLf 

Dan.  2.  9.  for  ye  have  p.  lying  words  to  speak 
H0S.2.S.  her  silver  and  gold  which  they />.  for  Baal 

6.  3.  his  going  forth  is  p.  as  the  morning 
.Tvnah  1.  17.  now  the  I,ord  had  p.  a  great  fish 

4. 6.  God  p.  a  gourd  ||  7.  a  worm  ||  8.  an  east  wind 
jVaA.  2.  5.  make  haste,  and  the  defence  shall  bw-p. 
Zrph.  1.  7.  for  I  he  Lord  hath  p.  a  sacrifice 
Mat.  20.  23.  it  is  not  mine  10  give,  but  it  shall  be 
given  to  them  for  whom  it  is  p.  Mark  10. 40. 

22.  4.  tell  them,  behold,  I  have  p.  my  dinner 
25.  34.  inherit  the  kingdom  p.  \\  41.  into  fire  p. 

Mark  14. 15.  will  shew  you  a  lar^e  upper  room  p. 


PRE 

Luke  1. 17.  to  make  ready  a  people  p.  for  the  Lord 

2.  31.  which  thou  hast  p.  before  face  of  all  people 

12.  47.  which  knew  his  Lord's  will,  but  p.  not 

23.  SO.they  p.  sjiices,  and  rested  the  sabbath,  24.1. 

Horn.  9.  23.  the  vessels  of  mercy  afore  p.  to  glory 

ICor.  2.  9.  things  G.  hath  p.  for  them  that  love  hiiii 

Eph.  2.  t  10.  good  works  God  hath  p.  to  walk  111 

2  7'im.  2.  21.  be  a  vessel  p.  to  every  good  work 

Ueb.  10.  5.  but  a  body  hast  thou  p.  me 

11.  7.  Noah  p.  an  ark  to  the  saving  of  his  house 
16.  their  God,  for  he  hath  p.  for  them  a  city 

Rev.  8.  6.  and  the  seven  angels  p.  to  sound 

9.  7.  the  locusts  were  like  to  horses  p.  for  battle 
15.  which  were  p.  for  an  hour,  a  day  and  a  month 

12.  6.  and  the  woman  hath  a  place  p.  of  God 
II).  12.  that  the  way  of  kings  of  east  may  hep. 
21.  2.  the  holy  cilvp.  asa  bride  for  her  husband 

PliEPAREDST. 
Ps.  80. 9.  thou  p.  room  before  it,  to  take  deep  root 

PREPAREST. 

M'um.  15.  8.  when  thou  p.  a  bullock  for  an  offering 

Psal.  23.  5.  thou  p.  a  table  before  me  in  presence 

65.  9.  thou  waterest  the  earth,  thou  p.  them  corn 

when  thou  hast  so  provided  for  it 

PREPARETH. 

2  Chron.  30.  19.  that  p.  his  heart  to  seek  God 

■Job  1.5.  35.  bring  forth  vanity,  their  belly  p.  deceit 

P«.147.8.who/).  rain  fur  earth,  maketh  grass  grow 

PREPARING. 
JVfA.I3.7.p.him  achamber  in  courts  of  house  of  G 
1  Pet.  3.  SW.  in  davsof  Noah,  while  the  ark  wasp 

PRESBYTERY. 
1  Tim.  4.  14.  with  laving  on  of  the  bands  of  the  p 

PRESCRIBED,  ING. 
Ezra  7.  22.  and  salt  without  p.  how  much 
Isa.W.  1.  that  write  grievousn.  which  they  have  p. 

PR  ESENCE. 
Gen.  3.  8.  hid  themselves  from  the  p.  of  the  Lord 
4^16.  Cain  went  out  from  the  p.  of  the  Lord 
27.  .30.  Jacob  was  scarce  gone  from  the  p.  of  Isaac 
45.  3.  for  Joseph's  brethren  were  troubled  at  his  p. 
47.15  for  why  should  we  die  in  thy  p.?  money  fails 
/'-rorf.lO.ll.they  were  driven  out  froniPharaoh'sp. 

33.  14.  he  said,  my  p.  shall  go  with  thee 

I5.if  thyp.go  not  with  me, carry  us  not  up  hence 
35.  .20.  all  Israel  departed  from  the  p.  of  Moses 
Lev.  22.  3.  that  soul  shall  be  cut  oft' from  my  p. 
JsPum.  20.  6.  Mrises  went  from  the  p.  of  assembly 
1  *a7)7. 18.  11.  David  avoided  out  of  his  p.  twice 
19. 10. but  he  sli|iped  away  out  of  Saul'sp.  and  fled 
21. 15.  this  fellow  to  play  the  madman  in  my  p. 
2ia/n.  16. 19. whom  should  I  serve"?  as  I  have  served 
in  thy  father's  p.  so  will  I  be  in  thy  p. 
17.  t  11.  I  counsel  that  thy  p.  go  to  battle 
IKmgs  I2.2.Jeroboani  fled  from  the  p.  of  Solomon 
2Kings  3.14. were  it  not  I  regard/),  of  Jehoshaphat 
5.  27.  and  he  went  out  from  his  p.  a  leper 

13.  23.  neither  cast  he  them  from  his  p.  as  yet 
2-4.  20,  till  he  had  cast  them  out  from  his  p. 
25.  19.  five  of  them  that  were  in  the  king's  p. 

1  Chron.  16.  27.  glory  and  honour  are  in  Ids  p. 
33.  then  shall  the  frees  sing  at  the  p.  of  God 

2  Chron.  9.  23.  the  king  sought  the  p.  of  Solomon 
20.  9.  when  we  stand  before  this  house  in  thy  p. 

34.  4.  they  brake  the  altars  of  Baiilim  in  his  p. 
AV/i.  2.  1.  I  had  not  been  before  sad  in  his  p. 
Esth.  7.  6.  Hainan  was  afraid  at  the  p.  of  the  king 

8.15.Mordocai  went  from  thep.  ofking  in  apparel 
.Job  1.  12.  Satan  went  from  the  p.  of  the  Lord, 2. 7. 
23.  15.  therefore  I  am  troubled  at  his  p. 
FxnZ.  9.  3.  they  shall  fall  and  perish  at  thy  p. 
16. 11. in  thy  p.  fulness  of  joy,  righthand  pleasures 
17.  2.  let  my  sentence  come  forih  from  thy  p. 
31.  20.  thou  shalt  hide  thcni  in  ihesecret  of  thyp. 
42.  t  5.  I  shall  praise  him,  his  p.  is  salvation 
51.  II.  cast  me  not  away  from  thyp.  lake  not  thy 
68.  2.  let  ihe  wicked  perish  at  thep.  of  God 

H.lieavensdropped,  Sinai  moveil  at  thep.ofGod 
95.  2.  come  before  his  p.  wiili  thanksgiving 
97.  5.  the  hills  melted  like  wax  at  thep.  of  God 
100.  2.  come  before  his  p.  with  singing 
114.  7.  tremble,  thou  earth,  at  thep.  of  the  Lord 

139.  7.  whither  shall  I  flee  from  thy  p.? 

140.  13.  the  upright  shall  dwell  in  thy  p. 
Pror.  14.  7.  go  from  thep.  of  a  foolish  man 
fsa.\.7.  strangers  shall  devour  your  land  inyourp. 

19.  1.  the  idols  of  Egypt  shall  be  moved  at  his  p. 

63.  9.  and  the  angel  of  his  p.  saved  them 

64.  1.  that  mountains  might  flow  down  at  thyp. 

2.  that  the  nations  may  tremble  at  thy  p. 

3.  the  mountains  flowed  down  at  thy  p. 

./rr.  4.  26.  all  the  cities  broken  down  at  p.  of  Lord 
5.  22.  will  ye  not  tremble  at  my  p.  which  have 
23.  39.  and  [  will  cast  you  out  of  my  p.  52.  3. 

F.zek.  38.  20.  all  the  men  shall  shake  at  my  p. 

Jonah  1.3.  Jonah  rose  to  flee  from  thep.  of  llie  Ld. 

10.  men  knew  he  fled  from  thep.  of  the  Lord 
M'ah.  1.  5.  and  the  earth  is  burnt  at  his  p. 
Zeph.  1.  7.  hold  thy  peace  at  the  p.  of  Ihe  Lord 
Lukt  13.  26.  wo  have  eaten  and  drunk  in  ihy  p- 


PRE 

Jlct3  3. 19.  the  times  of  refreshing  come  from  the  p. 

5.  41.  they  depiirted  from  tlie;;.  of  thu  cuuncil 

1  Cor.  1.  29.  that  no  flesh  should  glory  in  Ins  p. 

2  Cor.  10.  1.  who  in  p.  am  base  among  you 

10.  his  IcUera  weighty,  but  his  bodily  p.  is  weak 
Phil.  2.  12.  ye  have  obeyed,  nftt  as  in  iny  p.  only 

1  7'Ae*s.2.17. being  taken  from  you  inp.  not  in  heart 
iTIuss.l.  9.  with  destruction  from  limp,  of  the  Ld. 
Jude  24.  present  you  fuuitji-ss  before /(.  of  hisglory 

III  the  PKESKNCE. 
Ocn.  16. 12.  he  shall  dwell  in  lite  p.  of  his  brethren 
2.1.  11.  in  tlie  p.  of  my  people  1  give  it  thee 

18.  made  sure  in  the  p.  of  ihe  children  of  lleth 
25.  18.  Ishmael  di.d  m  the  p.  of  all  his  brethren 
JJeut.-25.  y.his  brother's  wife  come  in  t.p.  of  elders 

2  Sam.  10.  19.  should  I  not  serve  in  the  p.  of  his  son 
1  Kings  a.  22.  Solomon  stood  /«  t.  p.  of  congregat. 

21.  13.  against  JVaboth,  in  the  p.  of  the  people 
1  Chron.  24.  31.  these  cast  lots  in  the  p.  of  David 
Psal.  23.  5.  a  table  in  the  p.  of  mine  enemies 

116.  14.  now  in  Ihe  p.  of  all  ilia  people,  18. 
Pron.  17.  le.  become  surely  in  the  p.  of  his  friend 

25.  6.  put  not  forth  thyself  in  the  p.  of  the  king 

7.  than  he  put  lower  in  the  p.  of  the  prince 

Jer.  28.  1.  Hiinauiah  spake  in  tAc;>.of  the  princes 

11. /n  the  p.  of  people  ||  32.12. i'/t  «Ae;>. of  witnesses 

I.ukc  1.  19. 1  am  Gabriel,  that  stand  in  the  p.  of  G. 

14.  10.  thou  Shalt  have  worship  in  the  p.  of  them 

15.  10.  there  is  joy  in  the  p.  of  the  angels  of  God 
John  20.30.  signs  did  Jesus  in  the  p.  of  his  disciples 
jicln  3.  13.  and  denied  him  in  the  p.  of  Pilate 

16.  given  him  perfect  sonndn.  in  the  p.  of  ynu  all 
27.  3.).  he  gave  thanks  to  G.  in  the  p.  of  Ihem  all 

17'A'»».2. 19.  arenotevenye,  in<Ae;(.  of  our  L.J. 
Heb.  9.  24.  now  to  appear  m  the  p.  of  God  for  us 
Rev.  14. 10.  in  t.  p.  of  holy  angels,  in  (.  p.  of  Lamb 

PRESENT,  Subntantioe. 
Gen.  32.  13.  he  took  a  p.  for  Esau  his  brother,  18. 

20.  for  he  said,  I  will  appease  him  with  Ihep. 

21 .  so  went  the  p.  over  before  him,  himself  lodged 

33.  10.  if  found  grace,  then  rec.  my  ;>.  at  my  hand 
43.  11.  Israel  said,  carry  down  the  man  a  p. 

15.  men  took  the  p.  \\  25.  they  made  ready  the  p. 
26.  they  brought  him  the  p.  in  their  hand 
Judg.  3.  15.  by  Ehud  Israel  sent  a  p.  to  Eglon 

17.  he  brought  the  p.  ||  18.  an  end  to  ofttr  the  p. 

6.  18.  depart  not  till  1  come  and  bring  forth  my />. 
1  Sam.  9.  7.  there  is  not  a  p.  for  the  man  of  God 

2.5.  t  27.  let  this;?,  he  for  the  young  men 
30.  26.  behold  a  p.  of  the  spoil  of  the  enemies 

1  A'ln^'.*  9. 16.  had  given  it  for  a  p.  to  his  daughter 
JO.  25.  they  brought  every  man  his  p.  2CAr.  9.24. 

15.  19.  I  have  sent  thee  n  p.  of  silver  and  gold 

2  Kinirs  8.8.  the  king  said,  take  a;),  in  thine  hand 

9.  so  Hazael  went  to  meet  him  and  took  a;i. 

16.  8.  and  sent  it  for  a  p.  to  the  king  of  Assyria 

17.  4.  and  brought  no  p.  to  the  king  of  Assyria 

18.  31.  make  an  agreement  by  a  p.  Isa.  36.  16. 

20.  12.  sent  letters  and  a;),  to  Hey.ekiah, /sa.  39.1. 
y«a.  18.  7.  a  p.  brought  to  Lord  of  hosts  for  a  people 
F.iek.  27.  15.  they  brought  for  a  p.  horns  of  ivory 
Hvs.lO.  6.  be  carried  to  Assy,  for  a  ;;.  to  king  Jareb 

PRESENT,  Participle. 
1.9am.l.3.15.  Saul  numbered  the  people ;».  with  him 

21.  3.  give  me  five  loaves,  or  what  there  is  p. 

2  .Sam.  20.  4.  assemble  Judah,  and  be  thou  here  p. 
lA'ini>'.s-20.27.Israel  were  numbered, and  wereallp. 
lCArr29. 17.  have  seen  thy  people  p.  to  otfer  will. 
2Chrnn.  5.  11.  all  the  priests  p.  were  sanctified 

30.  21.  Israel  p.  at  Jerusalem,  kept  the  feast 

31.  1.  all  p.  went  out  and  brake  the  images 

34.  32.  he  caused  all  that  were  p.  to  stand  to  it 
f'.irar<.  2.5.  king,  lords,  and  all  Israel  p.  offered 
F..ith.  4.  10.  gather  all  the  Jews  p.  in  Shushan 
PsaHC).\.  God  is  a  very  p.  help  in  timeof  trouble 
/,«/.<•  5.  17.  power  of  the  Lord  was  p.  to  heal  them 

13. 1. there  were  p. at  1  lint  season  some  that  told  him 
18.  30.  shall  receive  manifold  more  in  this  p.  lime 
^(An  14.  2.5.  I  have  spoken,  being  yet  p.  with  you 

.Sets  10.  33.  now  are  we  all  p.  bofore  God,  to  hear 
21.18.1'aiil  went  with  iis.and  all  the  elders  were  p. 
2>>.  2.  kindled  a  fire,  received  us  because  of  p.  rain 

Hom.l.  18.  to  will  in  p.  with  me,  but  how  to  perform 
21.  when  I  wonlil  do  good,  evil  is  p.  with  me 
8.  18.  I  Kckon  that  the  sull'eriiigs  of  Ibis  p.  time 
38.  nor  things  p.  are  al>lelo8e|iarate  us  from  love 
II.  5.  even  nt  this  p.  time,  there  is  a  remnant 

XCor.^Stl.  thinifsp.or  things  to  come,  all  are  yours 
A.  1 1,  even  to  this  p. hour  we  both  hunger  and  thirst 
5.  3.  hill  p.  iftspiri',  have  judged  astho'  I  were  p. 
7.26.  that  this  is  irood  for  tlnr  p.  distiess 
15.  6.  of  whom  the  grcaler  part  remain  to  this  p. 

2  Cnr.  5.  8.  willing  rather  to  be  p.  with  the  Lord 
0.  we  labour,  that  whether  p.  or  absent 
10.2.1  beseech  you,  that  I  may  not  behold  whcnp. 
II.  9.  when  I  was  p.  with  you  and  wanted 
13.  2   I  foroleti,  as  if  I  were  p.  rhe  second  lime 

10.  I  write,  lest  being  p.  1  should  use  slmrpnes." 
Oal.X.  4.  that  he  might  deliver  us  from  Ihisp.  world 

4.  18.  and  not  only  when  I  am  p.  with  you 
4S4 


PRE 

Gal.  4.20. 1  desire  to  hep.  with  you,  and  to  change 
•i'fim.  4.  10.  forsaken  me,  having  lov.  this  p.  world 

Tit.  2.  12.  we  should  live  godly  in  this  p.  world 
Heb.  9.  9.  which  was  a  figure  lor  the  time  then  p. 

12.  11.  no  chastening  for  the  p.  seemelh  joyous 
iPet.  1.  12.  and  be  established  in  the/),  truth 

PRESENT,  ED. 
Gen.  46.  29.  Joaejih  p.  himself  to  bis  father 

47.  2.  he  p.  five  of  his  brethren  to  Pharaoh 
Etud.M.i.  andp.  thyself  there  to  me  in  the  mount 
/>eo.2.8.the  ineat-ort'ering,  when  it  is  p.  to  the  priest 

7.  35.  in  the  day  when  he  p.  them  to  minister 

9.  12.  Aaron's  sons  p.  to  him  the  blood,  18. 
13.  and  they  p.  the  burnl-odering  to  him 

14. 11.  the  priest  sliull  p.  the  man  to  be  made  clean 

10. 7.  the  two  gouts,  and  p.  them  before  the  Lord 

10.  the  scape-goat  shall  be  p.  before  the  Lord 
27.  8.  then  be  shall  p.  himself  l)efore  the  priest 

11.  then  he  sh.illp.  the  beast  before  the  priest 
JVuHi.  3.  6.  and  p.  the  tribe  of  Levi  before  Aaron 
Deiit.  31.  14.  p.  yourselves  before  the  tabernacle 
.Jush.  24.  1.  they  p.  Ihemselves  before  God 
■fudg.  6. 19.  Gideon  brought  it  under  oak,  and  p.  it 

20.  2.  the  tribes  of  Israel  p.  themselves 

1  Sam.  10. 19.  now  p.  yourselves  before  the  Lord 
17.  16.  Goliath  the  Philistine  p.  himself  forty  days 

2  Chrvn.  1 1. 1  13.  the  Levites  p.  themselves  to  him 
.Job  1.  (i.  the  sons  of  God  came  to  p.  themselves 

2.  1.  Satan  came  top.  himself  before  the  Lord 
Jer.  30.  7.  it  may  be  they  will  p.  their  supplication 

3d.  26.  I  p.  my  supplication  before  the  king 

42.  9.  ye  sent  to  p.  your  supplication  before  him 
F.zelt.  20  28.  they  p.  the  provocation  of  offering 
Dan.  9.  18.  for  we  do  not  p.  our  supplications 
Mat.  2.  11.  they  p.  to  him  gifis,  gold  and  myrrh 
Luke  2.  22.  they  brought  him  top.  to  the  Lord 
/lets  9.41. when  he  bad  called  the  saints,  p. her  alive 

23.  33.  they  p.  Paul  also  before  the  governor 
Rum.  12.  1.  that  ye  p.  your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice 
2  Cor.i.  14.  shall  raise  us  up  by  Jus.  and  p.  us  with 

11.2.  that  I  may  p.  you  as  a  chaste  virgin  to  Christ 
KpA.  5.27.  he  might  p.  it  to  hims.  a  glorious  church 
Cul.  1.  22.  to  p.  you  holy  and  unblaineable 

28.  that  we  may  p.  every  man  perfect  in  Christ 
Jade  24.  to  him  that  is  able  to  p.  you  faultless 

PRESENTING. 
Dan.  9.  20.  p.  my  Bupplicaiion  before  the  Lord 

PRESENTLY. 
1  Sam.  2   16.  let  them  not  fail  to  burn  the  fat  p. 
Proe.  12.  16.  a  fool's  wrath  is  p.  known 
Mat.  21.  19.  and  p.  the  fig-tree  withered  away 

26..53.lie  shall  p.  give  me  more  than  twelve  legions 
PAi7.  2.  23.  him  thrreforp  I  hope  to  send  p. 

PRESENTS. 
1  Sam.  10.  27.  and  tiny  brought  him  no  p. 

1  Kings  4.  21.  they  brought  p.  and  served  Solomon 

2  Kinirs  17.  3.  Hoshea  gave  Shalrinaneser  p. 

2  Chr.  17.  5.  p.  to  Jeliosh.  1 1 .  1|  32.  23.  to  Hezekiah 

P.-<nl.  68.  29.  kings  shall  bring  p.  unto  thee 
72. 10.  kingsof  Taisb.  and  the  isles  shall  bring  p. 
76. 1  Met  alibiing  p.  to  him  that  ought  to  be  feared 

JV/i'c.l.  14.  therefore  slinit  give  p.  to  Moresholh-gath 
PRESERVE 

Signifies,  [I]  To  keep  safe  or  defend,  Psal.  16.  1. 
[2]  To  suKtain  or  uphold,  Psal.  36.  6.__  [3]  To 
reserve,  save,  or  keep  alive,  Gen.  45.  7. 

O  thou  Preserver  of  nun,  lob  7.  20.  O  thou  irhn, 
as  thou  wast  the  Creator  of  man,deltirhlest  to 
be,  and  to  be  called,  the  Preserver  and  Saviour 
of  men:  and  that  wuitest  to  be  kind  and  gra- 
cious to  vien  from  day  to  day,  as  occasion  re- 
quires; do  not  deal  with  me  in  a  way  contrary 
to  thine  own  nature  and  name,  and  to  the  man- 
ner of  thy  dnalinir  with  all  the  rest  of  mankind. 
Or,  O  tliou  Observer  of  men,  thou  who  didst 
r/ar.tly  know  and  diligenlhj  observe  all  the  in- 
ward motions  nod  outward  actions  of  men  ;  I 
have  sinned  ;  and  Iherrfore  if  thou  shall  be  se- 
vere to  mark  mine  iniquities,  as  thou  seemest 
to  be,  I  know  not  wli.il  to  siiv  or  do  unto  then. 

Ocn.  19.32.  that  we  mav  p.  seed  of  our  father,  34. 
45.  5.  for  God  did  semi  me  before  you  to  p.  life 

7.  God  sent  me  to  p.  you  a  posterity  in  the  earth 
/?r>u«.6.24.  that  hi^  might  p.  us  alive,  as  at  thisday 
Psal.  12. 7.  thou  shaltp.  them  from  this  generation 

16.  I.  p.  me,  O  God,  for  in  thee  do  I  put  my  trust 

25.  21,  let  integrity  and  uprightness^,  me 

32.  7.  my  liidina  place,  shalt  p.  mo  from  troublu 

40.  11.  lc;l  thy  hiving  kindness  coiitinnally  p.  mo 

41.  2.  the  Lord  will  p.  him  and  keep  him  alive 
61.  7.  prepiire  mercy  and  truth  which  may  p.  him 
•'•4.  1.  hear  me,  p.  iny  life  from  fear  of  the  enemy  i 
79.  II.  p.  thou  those  that  are  apiiointed  to  die 
86.  2.  p.  my  soul,  for  I  am  holy,  <  •  thou  my  God 
121.  7.  L.  p.  thee  from  all  evih'hosbnll  p.  thy  soul 

8.  ih.>  Lord  shall  p.  thy  goinc  out  and  coming  in 
140.  1.  O  Lord,  p.  me  from  the  violent  man,  4. 

rrftii.2. 1 1. discretion  shiill  p. thei",iind'-J8t. keep  thee  I 
4.  0.  forsake  her  not,  and  she  shall  p.  thee 
14.  3.  but  the  lips  of  the  wise  shall  p.  ihntn 


PRE 

Prov.  20. 28.  mercy  and  truth  p.  king,  Ws  throne 
22.  12.  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  p.  knowledge 
Isa.  31.  5.  and  passing  over  he  will  p.  Jerusalem 
49. 8.  I  will  p.  thee,  and  give  thee  for  a  covenant 
Jer.  49.  11.  thy  children,  I  will  p.  them  alive 
Hab.  3.  t2.p.  alive  thy  work  in  midst  of  the  years 
I,uke  17.  33.  whoso  shall  lose  his  life  shall  p.  it 
2  Tim.  4. 18.  Ijord  will  p.  to  his  heavenly  kingdom 

PRESERVED,  ETIl. 
Gen.  32.  30.  I  have  seen  God,  and  my  life  is  p. 
■  /osh.  24.  17.  and  p.  us  in  all  the  way  we  went 

1  Sam.  30. 23.  Lord  hath  given  us,  w  ho  hath  f.  U9 

2  Sam.  8. 6.  Syrians  David's  servants,  Ld.  p.  David 

whithersoever  he  went,  1  Chron.  18.  6,  13. 
.Tob  10.  12.  thy  visitation  hath  p.  my  spirit 
29.  2.  that  I  were  as  in  the  days  when  God  p.  me 

36.  6.  he  p.  not  the  life  of  the  wicked,  gives  right 
Psal.  31.  23.  love  Lord,  for  the  Lord  p.  the  faithful 

37.  28.  forsakes  not  his  saints,  they  are  p.  for  ever 
97.  10.  hate  evil,  he  p.  the  snuls  of  his  saints 
116.6.  Ihe  Lord  p.  the  simple,!  was  brought  low 

145.  20.  the  Lord  p.  all  them  that  love  him 

146.  9.  the  Lord  p.  the  strangers,  he  relievelh 
Prov.  2.  8.  he  p.  the  way  of  his  saints 

16.  17.  he  that  keepcth  his  way  p.  his  soul 
ha.  49.  6.  and  to  restore  the  p.  of  Israel 
Hos.  12.  13.  and  by  a  prophet  was  he  p. 
Mat.  9. 17.  but  they  put  new  wine  into  new  bottles, 
and  both  are  p.  Duke  5.  38. 

1  7'A<'.«s.5.23.vour  spirit  soul- and  bodyp  hlanieless 
Jude  1.8anctified,and  p. in  Jesus  Christ,  and  called 

PRESERVER. 
Tub  7.  20.what  shall  1  ih.  ui  ihep,  O  thou  P.  of  men? 

PRESERVEST. 
JWA.  9.  6.  thou  Lord  hast  made  and  p.  them  all 
Psal.  36.  6.  O  Lord.  Ihon  p.  innn  and  beast 

PRESIDENTS. 
Dan.  a.  2.  and  over  these  three  p.  Daniel  was  first 

3.  this  Daniel  was  preferred  above  p.  and  princes 

4.  the  p.  sought  to  find  occasion  asainst  Daniel 
6.  thtsep.  and  princps  assembled  to  the  king,  7. 

PRESS 

Signifies,  [I]  To  squeeze  close  toselher.  Gen.  40. 
II.  [2]  Trt  Mron^  ur  cn»irrf,  Lnke  8.  45.  [3] 
To  urge,  or  he  instant,  Gen.  19.  3.  [4]  To 
pursue  and  seek  after  salvation  and  happi- 
ness with  a  holii  boldness,  resolution,  zeal,  and 
fervency,  lAikp.  16.  16.  Phil.  3. 14.  [5]  J3  crowd 
or  throhg,  Luke  19.  3. 

The  word  Press  is  likewise  used  not  only  for  the 
instrument  or  machine  by  which  gropes  are 
squeezed,  Isa.  10.  10.  I>vt  al-o  for  the  vessel  or 
Tat,  wherein  the  wine  runs  from  the  Press,  and 
in  which  it  is  received  and  preserved:  li'hence 
arc  these  expressions;  He  tVi'jS'  d  a  wine  press 
in  Ais  vineyard,  Mat.  21.  33.  Thy  presses  shall 
burst  out  \vith  new  wine,  Prov.  3. 10.  To  draw 
out  of  the  press.  Hog.  2.  16.  It  was  a  kind  of 
subterraneans  cistern  ;  in  which  the  wine  was 
received  and  kept,  till  it  was  put  into  jars  or 
vessels  of  earth  or  wood. 

Mark  2.4. could  not  dime  nigh  for  the  p.  Dvke  8.19. 
5.  27.  came  in  p.  behind  him,  touched  his  i-nrment 
30.  Jesos  tiirni'd  him  about  in  the  p.  and  said 

Duhe  19.  3.  Zaccheus  couhl  not  see  Jesus  for  tIie/>. 
PRESS. 

.Tnel  3.  13.  for  Ihe  p.  is  full,  the  fats  ovciflow 

Hag.  2.  16.  to  draw  out  fit>v  vessels  out  of  Ihe  p. 
See    Wink. 
PRESS  KAT. 

Hag.^.  16.wlw'n  on.ranielothe  p.  to  draw  vessels 
PRESS,  ED,  ETH. 

/7f  n.l9.3.Lot  p. on  :  he  I  wn  i\  nsels  ni  Sodom  greatly 
9.  they  p.  sore  on  TiOt,  and  cnnic  near  the  door 
40.  II.  and  I  took  the  grapes  .iiid  p.  them 

.Tudg.  16.  16.  D.lilah  p.  him  daily  with  her  words 

2  .Sflm.l3.  25.  Absalcim  p.  him.  hewoiild  not  go,  27. 
Esth.  8.  14.  pi>stsp  on  bv  the  kine's  command 
r.«.  .'^8.2.  arrows  slick  fast,  and  ihv  hand  p.  me  sore 
F:ri.23.3.  lliirc  were  tlie'r  breasts  p.  they  bruised 
.■?mos2.I3.  heboid,  lump  under  voii  ns  a  cartisp. 
Mark  3.  10.  they  p.  on  him  for  to  touch  him 
/.ukr  5.  1.  nslhc  penple  p.  tohi'nrlbe  wordofGod 

6. 38.  enod  measure,  p.  down  and  shaken  together 
R.  45.  the  multitude  thron?  thee  and  />.  thee 
16.  16.  kinedom  prcnrhed,  every  man  p.  into  it 
lets  18..5.Paiil  was  p.  in  spirit. and  testified  'o  Jews 
2  Ciir.  I.  8.  that  we  xvere  p.  above  mensiire 
Phil.  3.  14.  I  p.  toward  Ihe  mark  for  the  prize 

PRESSES. 
Prov.  3.  10.  thv  p.  simll  biir.'l  with  new  wine 
Aia.ie.  10.  tread.  shaM  'rend  .viil  no  wine  in  tlieirp 

PRESUME. 
Pievl.  18.  OO.  ihe  prophet  who  shall  i>.  to  sneak 
f;.irA.7.5.wherc  is  he  Ibii  dor..!  pin  his  heart  to  d« 

PRESr.MED. 
JViim.  14.  44.  ho'  'hev  p.  to  ■',<  "P'o  Ihe  hilltop 

PRESCMPTI  OKS. 
Dent.  1.  t  43.  ye  wre  p.  mid  went  up  the  hMI 
Psal.  19.  13.  keep  thyservaiil  also  from  p.  aim 


PRE 

,    S  Pet.  2.10. ;». arc  they,  self-will,  not  alraid  to  speak 
PRESUMPTUOUSLY. 
Exod.^l.  ^^.  if  u  man  come  p.  on  his  neighbour 
A'u/H.l 5.30.1.1)0  soul  that  doth  ought;;.  Dcut.i7A2. 
DeiU.  i.  43.  aiiil  went/),  up  into  the  iiill 
17. 13.  the  people  shall  hear,  and  do  no  more/». 
18.  22.  but  the  prophet  hath  spoken  it  «. 

PRETENCE. 
^/af.23.14.for  a /(.make  long  prayers,  JI/arA:  12.40 
Phil.  1. 18.»vv bother  in  p.  or  in  truth  (J.  is  preached 

PREVAIL 
Signifies,  [1]  To  have  the  advantage  over,  or  the 
better  oJ\   Jndg.  l(i.  5.     [2]    To  be  raised  or 
lifted  711),  Gen.  7.  20. 
The  blessings  of  thy  father  have  prevailed  above 
the  blessings  of  my  progenitors.  Gen.  49.  26. 
Theblcssinirs  uihich  I  thy  father  have  conferred 
^  upon  thee,  are  much  mure  considerable  than 
those  which  I  receiocd  either  from  my  father 
Isaac,  or  from  my  grandfather  Abraham  ;  and 
that,  (1)  In  the  extent  of  the  blessings:  Ish 
niaei  was  excluded  in  one,  and  Esau  in  the 
other's  blessings ;   but  I  have  included   both 
Ephraini  and  Manasseh  hi  my  blessing.     (2) 
In   the   distinctness   and  clearness  of  them: 
For  that  land  of  Canaan,  which  was  transmit- 
ted to  Isaac  and  .?acob  only  in  the  general, 
was  now  iit  some  sort  particnlarly  distributed 
to  Sosefh  and  to  the  rest  of  his  brethren;  and, 
(3)  In  the  nearness  of  the  accomplishment: 
J\''ow  there  was  a  more  likely  prospect  of  the 
multiplication  of  their  seed,  than  (o  Abraham 
or  Isaac ;  and  soon  after  they  m  ultiplied  to  as- 
tonishment, and  drew  near  to  the  possession 
of  the  promised  land. 
Oen.  7.  20.  fifteen  cubits  upward  did  the  waters  p. 
•\"«m.  22.  6.  peradvnnture  I  shall  p.  ^  II. 
Judg.  16.  5.  and  see  by  what  means  we  may;?. 
]  Sam.  2.  9.  for  by  strength  shall  no  man  ;;. 

17.  9.  if  I  p.  ag.  him,  then  ye  shall  be  our  servants 

26.  25.  thou  shalt  do  great  things  and  shalt  still  p. 
1  Kings  22.2-3.  he  said,  thou  shalt  persuade  him, 

and  p.  also,  go  forth  and  doso,2CAron.  18.21. 
i  CJtron.  14. 11.  O  Lord,  let  not  man  p.  against  thee 
Ksth.  6.  13.  thou  shalt  not  p.  against  him 
Job  1.5.  24.  ihey  shall  p.  against  him,  as  a  king 

18.  0.  and  the  robber  shall  p.  against  hinj 
Psal.  '■).  19.  arise,  O  Lord,  let  not  man  p. 

12.4.who  said,  with  our  tongue  will  we  p.  our  lips 
65.  3.  iniquities  p. ag.  me,  as  for  our  transgressions 
Prov.  6.  t  3.  so  shalt  thou  p.  with  thy  friend 
KccZ  4.12.ifonep.against  him, two  shall  withstand 
Isa.  7.  1.  to  war,  but  could  not;;,  against  it 

16.12.  Moab  shall  come  to  pray,  but  he  shall  notp. 

42. 13.  he  .shall  cry,  he  shall  p.  against  his  enemies 
47.  12.  stand  now,  if  so  be  thou  mayest  p. 

Jer.  1. 19.  they  shall  not  p.  against  thee,  for  I  am 
wiih  thee,  saith  L.  of  hosts,  15.  20.  |  20.  11. 

.">.  22.  though  the  waves  tos«,  yet  can  they  not  p. 

20. 10.  will  be  enticed,  and  we  slm lip.  against  him 
Dnn.  11.7.  who  shall  deal  iigain?!  him  and  shall  p. 
Mat.  16.  l^J.  the  gates  of  hell  >^hall  not  p.  against  it 

27.  21.  when  Pilate  saw  he  could  p    nothing 
Jukn  12  19.  perceive  ve  how  ve;;.  nothing 

PREVAILED. 
Oen.  7.  IS.  the  waters  p.  and  incr^nspd,  19. 

21.  the  waters  p.  on  the  earth  1.50  days 
30.  S.  I  have  wrestled  with  my  sister  and  have  p. 
32.  25.  when  he  saw  ho  p.  not  against  him 

28.  thou  hast  power  with  God  and  men,  hast  p. 
47.  20.  because  the  famine  p.  over  them 
Ad.  26.  the  blessings  of  thy  father  have  p. 
Ezod.  17.  11.  when  Moses  held  up  his  hand,  Israel 
p.  when  he  let  down  his  hand,  Amalek  p. 
Jiidg.  1.  35.  the  hand  of  the  house  of  .loseph  p. 

3.  10.  Othniel's  hand  p.  against  Chushan 

4.  24.  the  children  of  Israel  p.  asainst  J  thin 
6.  2.  the  hand  of  Midian  p.  against  Israel 

1  Sam.  17.  50.  so  David  p.  over  Goliath 

2  Sam.  11.  23.  snndy  the  men  p.  against  us 
24.  4.  the  kins's  word  p.  against  .loab 

1  h'in^s  16.  22.  the  people  that  tbilowed  Omri  p. 

2  Kings  25.  3.  the  famine  p.  in  the  city,  no  bread 
I  Chron.  5.  2.  for  Judah  p.  above  his  brethren 
2Chrnn.P.  3.  Solomon  p.  against  Hamath-zobah 

13.  18.  .Indah  p.  because  they  relied  on  the  Lord 

27.  5.  .Toiham  p.  against  the  Ammonites 
P.«.13.-t.lest  mine  enemy  say,I  have  p.  against  thee 

129.  2.  vet  they  have  notp.  against  me 
Jrr.  20.  7.  thnu  art  .itronjer  than  I,  and  hast  p. 

38.  22.  thv  friends  have  ;i.  azninst  thee 
/.am    I.  16.  I  weep  becuise  the  enemy  p. 
Van.  7.  21.  the  same  horn  p.  agiiinst  the  saints 
Hos.  12.  4.  he  had  power  over  the  aniel  and  p. 
0Aa'Z.7.t!ie  men  at  peace hnvedeceived  theeandp. 
f.nkr  23.  23.  the  voices  of  the  chief  priests  p.« 
jjcis  19. 16.  th(i  man  in  whom  the  evil  spirit  was  p. 

20.  sn  mightily  grew  the  word  of  God  and  p. 
Hrv.  5.5.  the  root  of  David  hath  p. to  open  the  book 

12.  8.  the  dragon  anil  >ii^  angels  p.  not 
435 


PRI 

PREVAILEST. 
Job  14.20.thoiigh  p. for  ever  against  him.he  pasBelh 

PREVAILETH. 
Lam.  1. 13.  he  sent  tire  into  my  bones,  and  it  p. 

PREVENT. 
.lob  3. 12.  why  did  the  knees  p.  ine7  or  the  breasts 
Psal.  17.  t  13.  arise,  O  Lord,  p.  bis  face 
59.  10.  the  God  of  my  mercy  shall  p.  me 
7i'.  8.  let  thy  tender  mercies  speedily  p.  us 
88.  13.  in  the  morning  shall  my  jirayerp.  thee 
95.  t  2.  let  us  p.  his  face  with  thanksgiving 
119.  148.  mine  eyes  p.  the  night-watches 
jlmos  9.10.  which  say,  the  evil  shall  notp.  us 
1  IViess.  4.15.  we  shall  notp.  thciii  who  are  asleep 

PREVENTED. 

2SaTO.  22.  6.  the  snares  of  death  p.  me,  Psal.\8.5 

19.  they;;,  me  in  the  day  of  iny  calamities,  but 

the  Lord  was  my  stay,  Psal.  IS.  18. 

Job  30.  27.  the  days  of  affliction  p.  me 

41.  11.  who  hath  p.  me  that  I  should  repay  him  ? 

Psal.  119.  147  Ip.  the  dawning  of  the  morning 

fsa.  2L  14.  they  p.  with  their  bread  him  that  Bed 

jl/a£.17.25.Jesusp. him, saying,  Simon,of  whom  do 

PREVENTEST. 
Ps.21.3.  forthoup.him  with  blessings  of  goodness 

PREY, 
./cr.  30.16.  and  all  thatp.  on  thee  will  I  give  forap 

PREY. 
Oen.  49.  9.  from  the  p.  my  son,  thou  art  gone  up 

27.  in  the  morning  he  shall  devour  the  p. 
JVu/rt.l4.3.why  hroughtto  this  land,  that  our  wives 
and  children  shall  be  a  p.?  31.  Deut.  1.  39. 

23.  24.  Israel  not  lie  down  till  he  eat  of  tliep. 
31. 12.  they  brought  the  captives  and  p.  to  \fose 

26.  take  the  sum  of  the  p.  that  was  taken 

27.  and  divide  thep.into  two  parts  between  them 
32.  and  the  booty  being  the  rest  of  the  p. 

Deut.  2.  35.  only  the  cattle  we  took  for  a  p.  to  our- 
selves and  the  spoil,  3.  7.  TbsA.  8. 2,  27.  I  11. 14. 
Judg.  5.  30.  divided  the  p.  a  p.  of  divers  colours 

8.24.  that  ye  wouldgive  me  the  ear-rings  of  hisp. 
25.  did  cast  every  man  the  ear-rings  of  hisp. 
2  Kings  21. 14.  Judah  shall  become  a;».and  a  spoil 
JVch.  4.  4.  give  them  for  a  p.  in  thelandofca|itivity 
Esth.  3.  13.  take  the  spoil  of  them  for  a  p.  8.  11. 

9.  15.  on  the  p.  they  laid  not  their  hand,  16. 
Job  4. 11.  the  old  lion  perisheth  f()r  lack  of  p. 

9.  26.  as  the  eagle  that  hasteth  to  the  p. 

24.  5.  behold,  as  wild  asses  rising  betimes  for  a  p. 
38.  39.  will  thou  hunt  the  p.  for  the  lion  ? 
39.29.  from  thence  she  seekelh  ihep.and  her  eyes 

Psal.  17.  12.  like  a  lion  that  is  greedy  of  hisp. 

76.  4.  more  excellent  than  the  mountains  of  p. 

104.  21.  the  young  lions  roar  after  their  p. 

111.  t  5.  he  hath  given  p.  to  them  that  fear  him 

124.6.  who  hath  not  given  us  for  a  p.  to  their  teeth 
Prov.  23.  28.  she  also  lielh  in  wait  as  for  a  p. 
As-«.  5. 29.  yea,  they  shall  roar  and  lay  hold  of  the  p. 

10.2. that  widows  may  betheirp.and  rob  fatherless 
6.  to  take  the  p.  ofan  hypocritical  nation 

31.4.  as  the  lion  and  young  lion  roaring  on  hisp 

33.  23.  then  is  the  p.  of  a  great  spoil  divided 
42.  22.  they  are  for  a  p.  and  none  delivereth 
49.  24.  shall  the  p.  be  taken  from  the  mighty? 

25.  the  p.  of  the  terrible  shall  be  delivered 
.59.15.thatdepaitetli  frouievil  maketh  himselfap 

./er.  21.9.  hesliall  live,  and  his  life  shall  be  to  bin 

forap.  3?.  2.  |  39.  18.  J  45.5. 

30. 16.  and  all  that  p.  on  thee  I  will  give  for  a  p. 

Ezek.l  .'il.  I  will  give  it  to  hands  of  strangers  forp. 
]!l.  3.  a  young  lion,  it  learned  to  catch  the  p. 
22.  27.  her  princes  are  like  wolves  ravening  the  p. 
26.  12. ihey  shall  makeap.ofthy  merchandise 
29.  19.  he  shall  take  her  spoil,  and  take  her  p. 

34.  8.  because  my  flock  became  a  p.  and  meat 
22.  and  my  flock  shall  no  more  be  a  p.  28. 

36.  4.  saith  the  Lord,  to  the  cities  that  became  a  p. 

5.  with  des|)iteful  minds  to  cast  it  out  for  a  p. 
38.  12.  I  will  go  np  to  take  a  sp'iil  and  a  p.  13. 

Dan.  11.  24.  he  shall  scatter  among  Iheni  the  p. 

Jlmos  3.  4.  will  a  lion  roar  when  he  hath  nop.? 

J\''(iA.2.  12.  the  lion  filled  his  holes  with  p. and  dens 

13.  I  will  cut  off  thy  p.  from  the  earth 
3.  1.  woe  to  the  bloody  city,  the  p.  ileparteth  not 

Zeph.  3.  8.  till  the  dav  ihat'l  rise  up  to  the  p. 
PRICE 

Signifies.  [1]  The  rate  of  any  thing  that  ishoiight 
or  sold,  2  Chron.  1.  16.  [2]  IVorth  or  valve, 
Prov.  31.  10.  [3]  Esteem,  1  Pft.  3.  4.  [4] 
Jin  opportunity  or  advantngr.  Prov.  17.  16. 

Ye  arc  b  night  with  a  price,  1  Cor.  6.  20.  Ye  are 
redermeti  out  nf  the  hands  of  divine  justice,  and 
rescued  nut  of  the  hondnrre  of  sin  and  Satav,liy 
the  blond  of  Christ,  paid  to  God,  the  Supreme 
.Judge  fnr  your  ransom,  whereby  Christ  Aas^of 
an  everlasting  dominion  nver  you. 

Lev.  25.  16.  accordini  to  years  thou  shalt  increase 
llie  p.  to  fewness  thou  shalt  diminish  the  p.  .50. 
■52.  shall  give  him  again  the  p.  of  his  redemption 

ZJewt.  23. 18.  not  bring  p.  of  a  dog  to  house  of  Lord 


PRI 

2  Sam.  24. 24. 1  will  buy  it  at  a  p.  1  Ckr.  21. 22, 24. 
1  Kings  10. 28.  king  Solomon's  merchants  received 
the  linen  yarn  at  a  p.  2  Chron.  1.  16. 
Job  28.  13.  man  knoweth  not  the  p.  thereof,  15. 

18.  for  the  p.  of  wisdom  is  above  rubies 
R'.  44.12.  thou  dost  not  increase  wealth  by  their  p. 
Prov.  17. 16.  why  is  there  a  p.  in  hand  ol  a  fool? 
2?.  26.  and  the  goats  are  the  p.  of  the  field 
31. 10.  virtuous  woman,  for  her  p. far  above  rubies 
/sa.45.13.shall  let  go  my  capt.  not  forp.nor  lewa-d 
55.  1.  yea,  come,  buy  wine  and  milk  without  p. 
.fer.  15.  13.  thy  substance  to  the  spoil  without  p. 
Lam.  5.  f  4.  our  wood  cometh  forp.  unto  us 
Zech.  11.  12.  give  me  my  p.  weighed  for  nie  my  p. 

13.  a  goodly  p.  that  I  was  prized  at  of  them 
w'l/ttM3.46.when  he  had  found  one  pearl  ofgreatp. 
27.6.  not  into  treasury,  because  it  is  thep.  of  blood 
9.  they  took  thep.  of  him  that  was  valued 
..^cts  5.  2.  and  kejjt  back  part  of  the  p.  3. 

19.  19.  they  counted  thep.  of  the  books  burnt 
1  Cor.  6.  20.  for  ye  are  bought  with  a  p.  7.  23. 
1  Pel.'S.i.  meekspirit  isin  sight  of  God  ofgreatp. 

PRICES. 
.^cts  4.  34.  brought  p.  of  the  things  that  were  sold 

PRICKED. 
Pa'oJ.  73.21.  thus  heartgrieved,  I  wasp,  in  my  reins 
Jlcts  2.  37.  they  wen^  p.  in  ihfir  heart,  and  said 

PRICKING. 
Eiek.  28.24.  shall  be  no  more  a  p.  briar  to  Israel 

PRICKS. 
JVum.  33.55.  those  that  remain  be  p.  in  your  eyes 
./lets  9.  5.  it  is  hard  to  kick  against  the  p.  26.  14. 

PRIDE. 
Lev.  26.  19.  I  will  break  thep.  of  your  power 
1  Sa7n.  17.  28.  I  know  thy  p.  and  naughtiness 
"Chron.  32.  26.  Hezekiah  humbled  himself  for  p. 
./ob  9.  t  13.  the  helpers  ofp.  do  stoop  under  him 

20.  t  12.  by  understanding  he  smiteth  through  p. 
33.  17.  and  that  he  may  hide  p.  from  man 

35.  12.  they  cry  because  of  the  p.  of  evil  men 
38.  t  11.  thep.  of  thy  waves  shall  be  stayed 
41.  15.  his  scales  are  hisp.  shut  up  together 

34.  he  is  a  king  over  all  the  children  ofp. 
Psal.  10.  2.  the  wicked  in  his  p.  doth  persecute 
4.througlip.of  his  countenance  will  not  seek  God 
31.20.  thou  shalt  hide  them  from  thep.  of  man 

36.  1 1,  let  not  the  foot  ofp.  come  against  me 
59.  12.  let  them  even  be  taken  in  their  p. 
73.6.thercforep.compa?seth  them  aboutas  a  chain 

Prov.  8.  13.  p.  do  I  hate  ||  11.  2.  when  p.  cometh 

13.  10.  only  by  p.  cometh  contention 

14.  3.  in  the  mouth  of  the  foolish  is  a  rod  ofp. 
16. 18.  p.  goeth  before  destruction,  before  a  fall 

21.  t  24.  who  dealeth  in  the  wrath  ofp. 

29.  23.  a  man's  p.  shall  bring  him  low 
Isa.  9.  9.  that  say  in  the  p.  of  their  hearts 

16.  0.  we  have  heard  of  thep.  of  Moab,  even  of 
his  haughtiness  and  hisp.  .fcr.  43.  29. 
23.9.  hath  purposed  to  stain  thep.  of  all  glory 
2.5.  11.  and  he  shall  bring  down  their  p. 
28. 1.  woe  to  the  crown  ofp.  to  the  drunkards,  3. 
Jer.  13.9. 1  will  mar  the  p.  of  Judah  and  Jeiusalem 
17.my  soul  shall  weep  in  secret  places  for  your  p 

49.  16.  the  p.  of  thy  heart  hath  deceiveil  ihee 

50.  t  31.  bchidd  I  am  against  thee,  O  thou  p. 
t  32.  p.  shall  stumble  and  fall,  none  shall  raise 

Fzek.7.\0.  the  rod  hath  blossomed,  p.  halh  budded 
16.49.  iniijuity  of  thy  sister  ?odom  p.  fuln. of  bread 
.56. Sodom  was  not  mentioned  in  theday  of  thy  p. 

30.  6.  and  thep.  of  her  power  shall  come  down 
Dan.  4.37.  those  that  walk  in  p  he  is  able  to  abase 

5.  20.  but  when  his  mind  was  hardeneil  in  p. 

Mns.  5.  5.  the  p.  of  Israel  doth  tcstif;v,  7.  10. 

Otnd.  3.  the  p.  of  thy  heart  hath  deceived  Ihee 

J^ah.  2.  t  2.  lor  the  Lord  hath  turned  away  the  p. 
of  Jacob  and  the  p.  of  Israel 

Zeph.  2.  10.  this  shall  Ihey  have  for  their  p. 
3.  II.'I  will  take  Ihein  away  that  rrjiiici' in  Ihv  p. 

Zeeh.  9.  6.  I  will  rut  ofTlhep.  of  the  Philistines 
10.  II.  thep.  of  Assyria  shall  he  brought  down 
113.  roarinsoflion-i.for  thep.of.Torrlan  is  spoiled 

.M'irk  7.  22.  for  out  of  the  heart  proceedeih  p. 

1  'r/m.3. 6.  lest  being  lifted  up  wi'h  p.  he  fall  into 

1  .John  2.  16.  the  p.  oflife,  is  not  of  the  Father 
PRIEST. 

Tlie  Priest  under  the  lair  tnas  a  person  cnnsecra- 
ted  and  ordained  of  God,  not  only  to  tench  the 
people  and  pray  for  them,  but  also  to  offer  up 
sacrifices  for  his  0JC7i  sins,  and  those  nf  the 
people,  I,ev.  4.  ,5,  6. 

The  Priesthood  »/•«.?  not  nnnered  to  a  rprtain 
family,  till  after  the  prnmulgatimi  ff  the  la7B 
of  Moses  Before  that  time  the  fir<f-forti  of- 
every  family,  the  fathers,  the  priiics,  the 
kings,  were  prie.its,  bnrn  in  their  eitu  nnd  in 
their  house.  Cain  and  Abel,  Noah,  Abraham. 
and  Job,  .Ahimclech  and  li.iban,  Isa-r  and 
Jacob,  offered  themselves  their  own  sncriftcfs. 
In  the  soleinnilyof  the  cn7iennnt  thni  the  J.ord 
made  withhis  people  at  the  foot  nf  mount  Sinai. 


PRI 

Motes  performed  the  ojjice  of  meatnlor,  and 
y.iuni;  men  were  chosen  from  among  the  chil- 
dren of  hrael,  to  perforin  the  office  of  I'riests, 
Exod.  2-1.  5,  6.     But  after  that  the  l,ord  had 
chosen  the  tribe  of  Levi  to  serve  him  in  hin 
lahcmacUf  and  that  the  priesthood  was    an- 
nexed to  the  family  uf  Aufon,  then  the  ri^hl  of 
offering  sacrifices  to  God  was  reserved  to  the 
priests  alone  of  his  family.  Num.  JO.  40. 
The  ordinary  priests  scrrat  immediately  at  the 
attar,  offered  the  sacrifices,  killed  and  Jlayed 
them,  and  poured  their  blood  at  the  foot  of  the 
altar,  iJ  C'liron.  'Zl.  M.  |  :!5.  11.      'J'hey  la/jt  up 
a  continual  fire  upon  the  altar  of  burnt  sacri- 
fices, and  in  the  lanip^  of  the  gulden  candle- 
stick that  was  in  the  holy  place ;  they  /mended 
the   loaves   of    the   shew-bread,   baked   them, 
offered  them  upon  the  golden  altar,  and  changed 
them  every  sabbath  day. 
Que  of  the  chi'f  employments  of  the  priests,  neit 
to  attending  npnn  the  sacrifices  and  the  service 
of  the  temple,  was  the  instruction  of  the  peo- 
ple ;  the  distinguishing  tlte  several  sorts  of 
leprosy,  the  causes  of  divorce,  the  waters  of 
jealousy,  vows,  the  uncleanncsses  that  were 
contracted    several    ways ;     all    these    were 
brought  before  the  priests,  Luv.  13.  13.  Num. 
5.  14,  15.  Flos.  4.  6.  Mai.  i.  7. 
The  high-priests  only  had  the  privilege  of  enter- 
ing into  the  sanctuary  once  a  year,  which  was 
the  day  of  solemn  erpiatiun,  to  make  atonement 
for  the  sins  of  the  whole  people,  Lev.  Ki.  2,  3, 
4,  1,-c.  (rod  had  also  appropriated  to  his  person 
the  oracle  of  his  truth  ;  so  that  when  he  was  ha- 
bited with  the  proper  ornaments  of  his  dignity, 
and  with  the  Uriiii   and  Tliuinmim,  he  gave 
answers  to  the  questions  made  to  him,  and  God 
discovered  to  him  secret  and  future  things, 
Kx<«l.  2c.  30. 
Thr  term  Priest  is  most  properly  given  to  Christ, 
of  whom  the  high-prieats  under  the  law  were 
types  and  figures,  he  being  the  Iliyli-iiriest,  e»- 
pecially  ordained  of  God,  uho,  by  the  sacrifice 
of  himself,  once  offered  by  himself,  and  also  by 
his  intercession,  might  reconcile  unto, and  fur 
ever  keep  in  fanour  with   God,  all  true  be- 
licners,  He!>.  7.  17.  |  9.  11,  12,  ^l,  25. 
''Ac  word  is  also  applied  to  every  true  believer, 
who  IS  enabled  to  offer  up  himsilf  spiritual 
sacrifices  of  prayer  andpraise  to  God,  through 
Jesus  Christ,  1  Pet.  2.  5.  llev.  1.  G. 
Gev.  14.  18.  the  p.  (>(  the,  most  high  God,  I/ib.  7. 1. 
F.xod.l.  10.  tlie;>.  of  Midiiui  liiid  eoven  dauglitiirs 
•K).  30.  thftt  9on  that  in  p.  in  \\\»  utoad,  Lev.  Hi.  32. 
/,cv.  I.  0.  tlic  p.  sliall  bum  it  fill  on  the  altar,  13, 
17.  I  2.  2,  9,  10.  I  3.  11,  10.  1  4.  10,  31,  35. 
I  7.  5,  31. 
12   the  ;;.  shall  lay  them  in  order  on  the  Wdod 
2.8.  when  it  iif  presented  lo  ihe;?.  he  shall  brinij  it 
•1.3.  if  the  p.  that  in  anointed  do  Bin  iis  the  jh'ojjIo 
0.  the  p.  shall  dip  his  finger  in  the  blood,  17. 
SO.  the  ». shall  make  an  lUonenient  (or  lheni,20. 
I  5. 6.  I  6.  7.  I  12.  8.  1  15.  15,  30.  |  10.  30.  | 
19.22. 
Vi.  and  the  p.  shall  take  of  the  blood,  30,  34. 
Tt.  H.  he  shall  hriug  them  to  the  p.  "ho  shall  ofl'er 
fi.  10.  lhe;>.  shall  put  on  liis  linen  garment 
7.8.the  p.  shall  have  to  himself  the  skin  of  o.Tering 
9.  ii  shall  be  the  p,  that  olFereth  it,  14.  |  14.  13. 

13.  3.  the  p.  shall  loi>U  on  the  plague  in  the  skin, 

5,  0,  17,  20,  21,  25.  2G,  27,  30,  31,  32.  the  p. 
shall  look  on   liim  and   pronounce  him  un- 
clean, 8,  11,  20,  22,  25,  .30,  44. 
4.  the  p.  shall  shut  him  up  seven  days,.').  31, 33.' 
e.ihep.  ihall  pronounce  him  clean,  17,23, 28,3». 

9.  brought  lo  th'»  p.  1|  16.  come  to  the  p.  14.  2. 

14.  11.  p.  that  miikcth  him  clean  shall  [ircsrnt 

10.  the  p.  ^hall  dip  his  righl-fingor  in  the  oil 
3.-1.  that  owneth  the  houite  shall  come  and  tell  p. 
48.  thi'  p.  nliall  pronounce  the  house  clean 

21.  9.  if  Ihe  dauRhicr  of  a  p.  profane  herself 
2i.  11.  ifihep.  buy  any  soul  with  his  money 
23.  10.  ycshallbriMguBheaforfirBt-fruitstolhep. 

11.  the  p.  shall  wave  it  before  the  LorrI 

27.  H.  the  p.  ihall  value  him,  according  lo  ability 
JViim.  5.  S.lcl  the  trespass  be  ri?compcn»edto  Ihep. 
)').  I  ben  the  man  shall  bring  bis  wife  to  the  p. 
.TO.  Ihe  p.  siian  execute  upon  hir  all  tlii*  law 
r..  20.  this  is  h(dy  for  llie  p.  wilh  the  wave-breast 
10.  7.  Ihe  p.  sliull  wash  and  be  unclean  until  even 
:Vt.  32.  shall  not  dwell  in  bind  till  ilealh  of  high-p. 
Driit.  17.  12.  the  nuin  that  will  not  hearken  lo  p. 
ia)2  arccoinenigh  lo  bailie,  Ih"  p.  thrill  approach 
20.  3   Ihoii  shall  go  !0  the  p.  in  those  days 
Jndir.  17.  5.  one  of  his  sons  who  bernme  his  p. 
'Ay  dwell  with  me,  nnd  li"  lo  inc  a  father  and  p. 
i:t.r,  ilo  mpsood,scein"l  have  a  Lovitetomy  p. 
IH.  1.  Micah  hath  hired  me,  and  I  am  his  p. 

ri.  be  lo  us  a  p.  and  a  father,  belter  b-  an. 
I  Sam.  2.  14.  all  that  the  p.  took  fur  lumself 
4U 


PRI 

1  S.im.  2.  15.  and  said,  give  flesli  to  roast  for  the  p. 

20.  did  I  choose  him  out  of  Idraei  to  be  my  p. 7 

J5.  and  I  will  raise  me  up  atiiithful  p. 
J  4    I'J.  while  Saul  talked  to  the  p.  the  noise 

30.  then  said  the  p.  let  us  draw  near  lo  God 
21.4.  the  p.  answered,  there  is  no  common  bread 

0.  so  the  p.  gave  them  hallowed  bread 

1  A7i(^'s  2.27.  Bolom.  thrust  Abiatbar  from  beingp. 

2  Kings  11.  15.  Ihep.  had  said,  let  her  nut  be  slain 
■iChrun.  13.  0.  Ihe  same  may  be  a  p.  of  them  that 

are  no  gods,  but  as  for  us  the  Lord  is  our  God 
1.3.  3.  Israel  hath  been  without  a  leaching  p. 
Kzra  2.  03.  till  there  stoud  up  a  p.  JiTeh.  7.  05. 
I'sal.  110.  4.  L.  hath  sworn,  thou  art  a  p.  for  ever 
after  the  order  of  Melchis.  Hcb.H.  0.  |  7.  17,21. 
Isa.  8.  2.  1  took  faithful  witnesses,  Uriah  Ihep. 

21.  2.  as  with  the  people,  so  wilh  the  p. 

28.7.  the  p.  and  the  inophet  have  erred  thro'  wino 
.Icr.  0.  n.  lo  the  p.  every  one  dealeth  falsely, 8.  10. 

14.  18.  prophet  and  p.  go  to  a  land  they  know  not 

18.  18.  the  law  shall  not  perish  from  the  p. 

2.'}.  11.  for  both  prophet  and  p.  arc  profane 
33.  when  a  prophet  and  p.  shall  ask  tlx.e,  34. 

29.  20.  the  Lord  made  thee  p.  instead  of  Johoiada 
Lam.  2.  0.  and  hath  despised  the  king  and  the  p. 

20.  sliall  the  p.  and  prophet  be  slain  in  sanctuary 
Kzek.  7.  2(5.  but  the  law  shall  perish  from  the  p. 

44.  13.  shall  not  coine  near  to  do  the  odice  of  a  p. 

21.  nor  shall  any  p.  drink  wine  when  they  enter 

22.  or  shall  take  a  widow  thai  had  a  p.  before 

30.  ye  give  lo  Ihep.  the  first  of  your  dough 

31.  the  p.  shall  not  eat  of  any  thing  that  is  torn 
Hus.i.4.  this  peojde,  as  they  that  strive  with  tiiep. 

0.  1  will  reJLCl  thee,  thou  shall  be  nop.  to  ine 

9.  and  there  shall  be  like  people  like  p. 
Jlmos  7.  10.  the  p.  of  Ilethel  sent  to  Jeroboam 
Zeeh.f).  13.  and  he  shall  be  a  p.  on  his  throne 
Alal.  2.  7.  the  p.  lips  should  keep  knowledge 
J\Ial.  8.  4.  see  thou  tell   no  man,  but  go  thy  way, 

shew  thyself  lo  the  p.  Mark  1.  44.  Luker>.  14. 

/^iikc  l.ij.a  cerlninp. named  Zatharias,and  liis  wife 

10.  31.  by  chance  there  came  down  a  certain  p. 

JJrts  14. 13  p.  of  Jupiter  brought  oxen  and  garhiirds 

Heb.  7.  3.  like  Son  uf  God,  nbideth  ap.  continually 

11.  what  need  another  p.  should  rise  after  order 

^^>.  after  similitude  Melchisedecariscth  aiioth.p. 

20.  as  not  without  an  oath  he  was  made  p. 

8.  4.  if  lie  were  on  earth,  he  should  not  be  a  p. 
10.  11.  every  p.  standeth  rlaily  ministering 

See  Chief. 

i/igh-?n\Ksr. 

Lev.  21.  10.  the  high-p.  shall  not  uncover  his  bead 

JVii/rt.  35.  25.  he  shall  abide  in  the  city  of  refuge 

till  the  death  of  the  highp.  .lush.  20.  6. 

2  Kings  12.   10.  when  much  money  in  chest,  the 

high-p.  came  and  iml  it  in  bags,  2  Chr.  24.  11. 

22.  4.  go  to  Hilkiah  the  high-p.  that  he  may  sum 
JV(A.3.1.Eliashib  iha  high-p.  rosy  up  with  brethren 
Zeeh.  3.  1.  Joshua  the  high-p.  standing,  8.  I  0.  11. 
Mat.  20. 3.  to  the  palace  of  ihe  high-p.  J. like  22.54. 

51.  one  of  thein  struck  a  servant  of  the  highp. 
(ind  smote  offhis  ear,  /,u,/te22.50../oA7>l8.10 
.37.  led  him  lo  Caiaphas  the  high-p.  .John  18.  24. 
20.  05.  the  high-p.  rent  bis  clothes,  jW/irA  14.  03. 
I^Jark  2.  20.  in  Ihe  days  of  Abiathar  the  high-p. 
.John  11.  49.  '.'o'tphas  being  high-p.  51.  \  18.  13. 
18.  15.  Uiaf  disciple  was  known  lo  ihe  high-p. 
22.  saying,  answercsl  thou  the  high-p.  so  1 
■'lets  40.  as  many  us  were  ofihe  kindred  nfhigb-p. 
7.  I.  then  said  the  high  p.  are  these  things  so  7 

9.  1.  Saul  v\ent  to  t'm-high-p.  nnd  desired  letters 
22.  5.  IIS  also  the  hinh-p.  doth  bear  me  witness 
H.  4.  they  said,  revilest  thou  God's  high-p.  ? 

Heb.  2.  17.  that  he  might  be  a  faithful  high-p. 

3.  1.  consider  Apostle  JJigh  P.  of  our  profession 

4.  14.  we  havegreat  A-p.  that  is  parsed  into  heav. 
15.  we  have  no'  a  A.-p.  which  cannot  he  touched 

5.  1.  for  every  high-p.  taken  from  among  men 
5.  Christ  glorified  not  himself  lo  be  a  high-p. 

10.  called  a  high-p.  after  order  of  Melch.  0.  20. 

7.  20.  such  a  A.-p.  bicame  \n,  who  is  holy,  hnrml. 

8.  1.  we  havesui;li  a  high-p.  who  is  set  on  throne 
3.everyA(>A-,"'.i»  ordained  to  olTer  gifts  and  sncr. 

9.  7.  but  into  the  second  went  the  high-p.  alone 

11.  Christ  beiirg  come  p  high-p.  of  good  things 
2.y  as  ihe  high-p.  enleroth  into  Ihe  holy  place 

10.  21.  hnring  a  high-p.  over  the  house  of  God 
13.  11  bloo<l  IS  bronghl  inlo  unnctuary  by  highp. 

See  Oryi(-r. 
PRIF.STfl. 
fJen.  47.  2S.  the  land  of  iIk-  p.  honght  be  not,  for 
the  p.  had  a  porlion  ancignid  them  of  Pharaoh 
20.  except  the  land  of  the  p.  only,  not  Pharaoh's 
Kind.  19.  0,  ye  shall  be  to  me  a  kinirdom  of  p. 
Ler.  1.11.  the  p.  shall  sprinkle  the  blood,  3.  2. 
."5  13.,tnd  Ih''  roninanl  shall  be  the  p.  ns  an  ofTering 
6. 20.  all  the  males  among  the  p.  shall  eat  thereof 
13.  2.  or  bro\i(»ht  to  one  of  his  sons  the  p. 
10.  33.  he  shall  nmke  an  atomm.nt  for  Ihep. 
22.  10.  a  lojournot  jf  lljup.  shall  not  oat 


PRI 

/.,<'W.22. 12.  ifp.daiigliterbe  married  {|  13.  ifwidov? 

23.  2U.  thuy  shall  be  holy  lo  the  Lord  for  the  p. 

27.  21.  lliu  pi>ssessioii  tlienof  shall  be  Ihep. 
IJcut.  18.3.  this  shall  be  Ihep,  due  from  the  peopio 

19. 17.shall  stand  before  p.  and  judges  ihat  sliall  be 
.Josh.  3.  17.  the  p.  that  bure  the  aik  stood  firm 

4.  3.  take  you  out  where  the  p.  feet  stoud,  9. 
0.4.  Ihep.  bare  .seven  truinpulsof  riym'sbornB,  13. 

12.  and  the  p.  took  up  the  ark  of  the  Ijord 
.ludg.  18.  iJO.  he  and  hissoiis  werep.  lolr^beufDaa 

1  Sam.  1. 3.  Hophni  and  Phinehas  I  he  p.  were  there 

5.  5.  nor  llie  p.  uf  Uagoii  treud  on  liie  threshoM 

0.  2.  the  Philistines  called  for  the  p.  and  diviners 

22.  17.  king  said,  turn  and  slay  the  p.  of  ihc  Lord 

18.  said  to  X)u<;g,  turn  thou  and  fall  on  Ihe  p. 
21.  shewed  David,  that  fratil  hud  slain  Lord'sp 

\ Kings  8.      the  elders  and  iho  p.  took  up  the  ark  ^ 
12.  31.    croboain  madep.  of  the  lowest  of  the  peo- 
ple who  were  not  of  Ihe  sons  of  Levi,  13.  33. 
13.2.0II  Ihee  shall  he  offer  the  p.  of  the  high  places 

2A7n^«10.11.JehU9lew  A  hub's  p.  he  left  him  none 

19.  call  me  all  Uaal'sp.  let  none  be  wanting 

12.  0.  p.  had  not  repaired  breaches  of  the  house 
17.  27.  carry  thiihcr  one  of  Ihep.  ye  brought 

23.  .5.  he  put  down  idolatrous  p.  of  king  of  Judah 

20.  and  he  slew  all  the  p.  of  llie  high  places 

2  Chron.  4.  0.  the  sea  was  for  Ihe  p.  to  wash  in 

5.  12.  n  hund.  tv%eiity  p.  sounding  with  truinpeta 
)4.t)iep.  could  iiotsland  lo  minister  fur  the  cloud 

0   41.  let  thy  p.  beTloihed  with  Kilvation 

8.  14.  he  aj)poinled  the  courses  of  the  p. 

11.  15.  he  ordained  him  p.  for  the  high  placca 

13.  9.  have  ye  not  cast  out  the  p.  of  the  Lord  ? 
12.  and  bis  p.  with  trumpcis  to  cry  alarm 

23.  0.  none  came  into  house  of  Lord  save  the  p, 
20.  17.  with  him  fourscore  p.  of  the  Lord 

19.  while  U/.ziali  was  wroth  with  the  p. 
29.34.  but  thep.  were  too  few,  they  could  nots'a^ 
30.3.  p.  had  not  sanctified  themselves  sulBc^cntJ/ 
34.  5.  Josiah  burnt  the  bones  of  the  p. 

X>.  2.  Josiah  set  the  p.  in  their  charges 

8.  gave  it  lo  the  p.  for  the  passover-offering* 
Kzra  0.  18.  they  set  the  p.  in  their  divisions 

20.  were  purified,  and  killid  the  passover  for  p. 

7.  10.  of  the  people  and  p.  offering  willingly 

9.  7.  and  our  p.  been  delivered  into  hand  of  kings 
Keh.  2.  16.  nor  had  I  as  yet  told  it  lo  the  p. 

3.  22.  after  him  repaired  the  p.  men  cf  the  plain 
9.  32.  the  iri.ublethat  bath  come  on  \i*  nnd  our  p. 

34.  neither  have  we  nor  our  p.  kept  thy  law 
13.  5.  where  they  laid  ihe  offerings  of  ilie  p. 
Psal.  78.64.  theirp.  fell  by  ihe  sword,  their  widow* 
99.  t).  Moses  and  .Aaron  among  bis  p.  and  f  .'imiiel 
132.  9.  let  thy  p.  be  clothed  with  riglitconsne,ss 

16.  I  will  clothe  her  p.  with  Bnlvalion 
/.«a.37.2.he  sent  elders  ofp.  covered  with  sackcloth 

01.  C.  but  ye  shall  be  named  Ihep.  of  the  Lord 
.Jir.  1.18.  igainst  the  p.  thereof  tnil  people  of  land 

2.  9.  thep.  snid  not,  where  la  Ihe  Lord  ? 

20.  their  p.  ashamed  |1  4.  9.  their  p.  astonished 
h.  31.  niid  the  p.  bare  rule  by  their  means 

6.  1.  Ihe  bones  of  thep.  Ihev  "ball  bring  out 
13.  13.  I  will  fill  the  p.  with  drunkenness 
3I.I4.I  will.saliaie  ihe  soulnof  thep.  with  fatne** 
32.  32.  to  provoke  me  lo  nng"r,  they  and  theirp. 
48.  7.  shall  go  inlo  captivity  with  his  p.  49.  3. 

J^am.  1.  4.  her  p.  sigh,  her  virgins  are  iifflieted 
19.  my  p.  and  mine  eldi'rs  gave  up  the  ghost 

4.  13.  for  ihe  iniquities  of  her  p.  that  shed  blood 
10.  Ihey  respected  itol  Ihe  persons  of  the  p. 

F.zrk.  22. 20.  her  p.  violated  my  biw,  nnd  profaned 

40.  45.  ho  said,  Ibi*  chaniber'is  for  Ihe  p. 

41.  30.  shall  be  for  thep.  4.5.  4.  |  48.  10,  11. 
Has.  5.  1.  hear  this,  Op.  and  hearken,  O  Israel 

6.9.  company  n\' p.  murder  in  the  way  bv  consent 
.loel  1.  9.  p.  Ihe  Lnrd's  ministers  mourn,  13.  |  2. 17. 
Mic.  3.  II.  the  p.  there.. flench  for  hite 
7.eph.  1.  4.  I  will  ml  ofTlhe  names  of  thep. 

3.  4.  her  p.  Iiiive  polluted  ihe  sanctuary 
Hag.  2.  II.  nsk  now  Ihe  p.  ccmcerning  the  law 
.Mrii!.  I.  0.  to  you,  Op.  that  despise  my  nnnio 

2.  1.  and  now.  Op.  Ibis  commandment  is  for  yon 
Mat.  12.  4.  not  lawful  but  only  for  the  n.  tor-at 
5.  ihep.  in  the  temple  prnlane  ihesahlmth,  nnrf 
are  blameless,  Mark  2.  20.  I.ulte  K  4. 
Mark'i.V^.  which  isnol  lawful  loentbul  for  the  p. 
J.uke  17.  14.  go  shew  ynursehes  to  rb>>  p. 
.'Iclii  4.  I.  the  p.  and  c'aplnin  rr.ini-  upon  them 
0.  7.  a  company  ofp.  were  obedient  lo  the  faith 

19.  14.  the  sons' of  HrcvR  ehii-f  of  Ihe  p.  did  so 
U'h.  7.  21.  those  p.  were  lunde  wilh"Ul  an  onih 

23.lIievtrulywercnmn;-p.notsitferi'd  locnntiniio 

8.  4.  si'eing  therm  nm  p.  tlint  offiT  ?ififl  hv  law 

9.  0.  the  p.  went  always  into  the  first  tnbernacin 
Rev.  1.  0.  hath  made  us  kin?"  nnd  p.  to  God,  5.10 

20.  of  .nhnll  be  p.  of  find  nnd  of  Christ,  and  reign 

See  Ciiiir,  Lkvitf.s,  OvrirE. 

//ixrA  PRIKSTS. 

J.uke  3.  2.  .\nnns  nnd  Cniaphnu  were  hich-p. 
i/c6.7.?7.i>codetb  not  daily  astboso  Ar^^A-p.tooflW 


PRl 

HebJMS.  for  the  law  maketh  men  h.-p.  which  have 

PRIESTHOOD. 
£zoii.40.15.for  their  anointing  shall  be  an  overlast- 
ingp.  throughout  their  generations,  JVuin. '25. 13. 
J^um.  16.  10.  and  seek  ye  the  p.  also '! 

18.  I.  thou  and  sons  shall  bear  iniquity  of  your;;. 
Josh.  18.  7.  for  p.  of  the  Lord  is  their  inheritance 
ISam.  2.  t36.  put  mo  into  somewhat  about  the  p. 
Ezra  2.  62.  as  polluted  from  the  p.  JVcA.  7.  64. 
A'>A.  13.  29.  they  deliled  the  p.  the  covenant  of  p. 
Heb.  7  5.  they  of  Levi,  who  receive  the  office  o( p. 

11.  if  perfuction  were  by  the  Levitical/). 

12.  for  the  p.  being  changed,  there  is  made 

14.  MoBos  spake  nothing  concerning  the  p. 
'iA.  but  tills  man  hath  an  unchangeable  p. 

\Pet.  2.  5.  a  holy  p.  ||9.  ye  are  a  loyalp. 
PRINCE. 

This  name  is  given,  [1]  To  God,  who  is  the 
supreme  Ruler  and  (rvvcrnor,  Dan.  8.  11.  [2J 
To  Christ,  who  is  called  the  Prince  of  Peace, 
Isa.  9.  G.  He  is  the  only  purchaser  and  pro- 
curer of  peace  between  God  and  men,  Isa.  53.  5. 
and  of  peace  between  men  and  men,  between 
Jews  and  Gentiles,  I'.ph.  2.  15.  and  he  left 
peace  as  his  legacy  to  his  disciples,  John  14.  27. 
Jie  is  culled  the  Prince  of  Life,  Mcts  3.  15. 
Jls  God,  he  is  the  author  of  our  temporal  life, 
in  whom  toe  live  and  move,  and  in  whose  hand 
is  our  breath;  and  as  Mediator, he  is  the  guide 
and  way  to  eternal  life,  John  14.  6.  He  is 
also  called,  the  Prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth. 
Rev.  1.  5.  He,  as  King,  rules  over  all,  even 
his  greatest  and  most  powerful  enemies.  [3] 
To  the  chief  of  the  priests,  called  the  princes 
of  the  sanctuary,  Isa.  43.  28.  [4]  To  the 
Roman  Emperor,  Dan.  9.  2fi.  [51  To  men  of 
princely  excellency  and  worth,  Eccl.  10.  7. 
[6]  To  the  nobles,  counsellors,  and  officers  in  a 
kingdom,  Isa.  10.  8.  [7]  To  the  chief,  or 
principal  men  of  families, or  tribes.  Num.  17.  2. 
[8]  To  the  devil,  called  the  prince  of  this 
world,  John  12.  31.  who  boasts  of  having 
all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  at  kis  disposal. 
Mat.  4.  9. 

Gen.  2.3.  6.  thou  art  a  mighty  p.  amongst  us 
32. 28.  as  a  p.  hast  thou  power  with  God  and  men 
34.2.  when  Shechem,p.of  the  country,  saw  her 
41.  t  45.he  gave  him  to  wife  A.senath  the  daughter 
of  Potipherah,  p.  of  On,  f  50.  |  46.  t20. 

Exod.  2.  l■^.  who  made  thee  a  man,  a  p.  over  us  ? 
tl6.  the  p.  of  Midian  had  seven  daughters 

J^um.  7.  II.  each  p.  shall  offfr  on  his  day' 

16. 13.  except  make  thyself  altogether  ap.  over  us 
17.  6.  for  each  p.  a  rod,  even  twelve  rods 

25.  18.  Cozbi  the  daughter  of  a  p.  of  Midian 
34. 18.  take  one  p.  of  every  tribe  to  divide  the  land 
Tosh.  5. 1 14.  as  a  p.  of  host  of  the  Lord  am  Iconie 

22. 14.  of  each  chief  house  ap.  through  all  Israel? 
2.'*am.3.XS.  know  ye  not  there  is  a  p.  fallen  in  Israel 

20. 1 26.  Ira  the  Jairite  was  a  p.  about  David 
\Kings  11.  34.  I  will  make  him  p.  all  his  days 

14.  7.  and  made  thee  a  p.  over  my  people,  16.  2. 
Ezra  1.8.  numberedtoSheshhazzar  thep.  of  Judah 

^oi21.28.  for  ye  say,  where  is  the  house  of  the  p.  ? 

31.  37.  as  a  p.  would  I  go  near  to  him 
Prov.  14.  2iS.  but  in  want  of  people  isdestruct.  ofp. 

17.  7.  much  less  do  lying  lips  become  a  p. 

25.  7.  shouldest  be  put  lower  in  presence  of  thep. 

15.  by  long  forbearing  is  a  p.  persuaded 

28. 16. p.  that  wanteth  understand,  is  an  oppressor 

Cant.7.1.how  beautiful  are  thy  feet.  Op.  daughter! 

Tsa.  9.  G.  the  P.  of  peace  ||  24.  +2.  so  with  the  p. 

Jcr.  51.  .59.  and  this  Seralah  was  a  quiet  p. 

JEzfAr.  7.27.  thep.  shall  be  clothed  with  desolation 
12. 10.  this  burden  conccrneth  the  p.  in  Jeriisilem 
12.  and  p.  shall  bear  on  his  .shoulder  in  twilight 
21.  25.  thou  profane  wicked  p.  of  Isr.  day  is  come 
28.  2.  son  of  man,  say  to  thep.  ofTyrus 
30.  13.  be  no  more  a  p.  of  the  land  of  Egypt 
34.  24.  and  my  servant  David  a  p.  among  them 

37.  25.  my  servant  David  shall  be  their  p.  for  ever 

38.  2.  son  of  man,  prophesy  against  Gog,  Magog, 
the  chief  p.  of  .Mcshoch  and  Tubal,  3.  |  39.  1. 

44.  3.  this  gate  is  for  the  p.  the  p.  shall  sit  in  it 

45.  7.  and  a  portion  sliall  be  for  the  p.  on  one  side 
17.  it  shall  be  thep.  part  to  give  burnt-offerings 
22.  on  that  day  shall  the  p.  prepare  a  bullock 

46.2.  thep.  shall  enter  by  the  way  of  the  porch 
4.  the  burnl-ofruring  thattl>ep.  shall  otfer 
8.  and  when  the  p.  shall  enter  he  shall  go  in 
10.  and  tfiop.  in  the  midst  of  them,  shall  go  in 
12.  when  p.  prepares  a  voluntary  burnt-offuring 

16.  if  the  p.  give  a  gift  to  any  of  his  sons 

17.  after,  it  shall  return  to  thep.  but  inheritance 

18.  p.  shall  not  take  of  the  people's  inheritance 
48.  21.  residue  shall  be  for  the  p.  on  the  one  side 

Dan.  1.  7.  to  whom  p.  of  the  eunuchs  gave  names 

8.  ho  requested  ofp.  of  the  eunuchs  not  to  defile 

9.  Banicl  into  favour  with  the  p.  of  the  eunuchs 
8>  IL  he  magnified  himself  even  to  p.  of  the  host 

457 


PRl 

D  (1)1.8.25.  lie  shall  also  stand  upog.thop.ofprinces 

9.  25.  to  build  Jurusuleni,  unto  the  Messiah  the  f . 
26.  people  of  thu  p.  that  shall  come  shall  destroy 

10.  13.  hut  thep.  uf  Persia  withstood  nie 

20.  to  fight  with  p.  ol  Persia,  p.  of  Grccia  come 

21.  none  holdeth  with  me,  but  Michael  your  p. 

11.  18.  but  a  p.  for  his  own  behalf  shall  cause 

22.  shall  be  broken,  also  the  p.  of  the  covenant 

12.  1.  then  shall  Michael  stand  up,  the  groat  p. 
Hos.  3.4.  Israel  shall  abide  many  days  without  np. 

12.  t  3.  Jacob  by  his  strength  was  a  p.  with  God 
JUic.  7.  3.  thep.  and  the  judge  ask  for  a  reward  • 
jyiat.  9.  34.  the  Pharisees  saiil,  he  casleth  out  devils 

by  thep.  of  devils,  12.  24.  Mark  3.  22. 
.fuhnl'i.31.  thep.  of  this  world  shall  he  cast  out 
14.  30.  for  thep.  of  this  world  cometh,  and  hath 

16.  11.  because  thep.  of  this  world  is  judged 
j]cts  3.  15.  and  killed  P.  of  life  whom  God  raised 

5.31. him  hath  God  exalted  to  be  a  P.  and  Saviour 
Kph.'i.'i.  according  tup.  of  the  power  of  the  air 
Rev.  1.  5.  Jesus  Christ  the  P.  of  kings  of  the  earth 

PRINCES. 
Gen.  12.  15.  thep.  also  of  Pharaoh  saw  Sarai 

17.20.  twelve  p.  shall  Ishmael  beget,  2.1.  10. 

47. 1 22.  the  land  of  the  p.  bought  he  not,  f  26. 
Exod.  12. 1 12.  and  against  all  thep.  of  Egypt  will  I 
execute  judgment,  I  am  the  Lord 
JSTum.  7.  3.  a  wagon  for  two  p.  ||  10.  thep.  offered 

16.2.  rose  up  250p.  ||  21.  18.  thep.  digged  a  well 

22.  8.  and  thep.  of  Moab  abode  with  Balaam 
15.Balak  sent  yet  agalnp.  more  honourable  than 

24.tl7.  sceptre  out  of  Israel  shall  smitep.  of  Moab 
./o.?A.9. 15.  p.  of  the  congregation  sware  to  them 

13.  21.  wh6m  Moses  smote  with  the  p.  of  Midian 

22.  14.  with  Phinehas  ten  p.  sent  to  Reuben 
.Judg.5.  3. hear,  O  ye  kings,  give  ear,  O  yep. 

15.  and  thep.  of  Issachar  were  with  Deborah 
7. 25.  they  took  the  two  p.  of  the  Midianites 

8.  14.  ho  described  to  him  thep.  of  Succoth 
lSam.2.8.  he  raiseth  the  poor,  to  set  them  among  p. 

29.  4.  the;;,  of  the  Philistines  were  wroth 
2.Saw.8.  t  18.  and  David's  sons  were  p. 

19.  t  6.  that  p.  or  servants  are  not  to  thee 
IKings'iQ.  14.  even  by  the  young  men  of  the  p. 
\Chron.  4.  38.  these  were  p.  in  their  families 

28.  21.  p.  and  jieople  will  be  at  thy  command 
'iChron.  28.  14.  armed  men  left  spoil  before  the  p. 

30.  12.  one  heart  to  do  the  commandment  ofp. 
24.  and  thep.  gave  a  thousand  bullocks 

35.  8.  hisp.  gave  willingly  to  the  people  to  priests 

36.  18.  treasures  of  hisp.  brought  to  Babylon 
Ezra  7.  28.  and  before  all  the  king's  rnighty  p. 

9.  2.  yea,  the  hand  of  thep.  hath  been  chief 

10.  8.  come  according  to  the  counsel  of  thep. 
JVeA.  9.  34.  neither  have  our  p.  kejit  thy  law 

.38.  ourp.  Levites,  and  priests  seal  to  it 
Esth.  1.  3.  he  made  a  feast  to  all  hisp.  2.  18. 

5.  11.  how  he  had  advanced  him  above  thep. 

6.  9.  to  the  hand  of  one  of  the  king's  noble  p. 
.fob  3.  15.  had  neen  at  rest  with  p.  that  had  gold 

12.19.  leadothp.  away  spoiled,  overthrows  mighty 
21.  he  poureth  contempt  on  p.  and  weakenelh 

29.  9.  thep.  refrained  talking,  and  laid  their  hands 
34.  18.  is  it  fit  to  say  to  p.  ye  are  ungodly  ? 

19.  to  him  that  accepteth  not  the  persons  ofp. 

Psal.  "15.  16.  thou  mayest  make  p.  in  all  the  eartl 
47.  9.  thep.  of  the  people  arc  gathered  together 
68.  27.  the  p.  of  Zebulun,  thep.  of  Naphtali 

31.  p.  shall  come  out  of  Egypt,  Ethiopia  stretch 
76.12.  he  shall  cut  off  the  spirit  ofp.  he  is  terrible 
82.7.  die  like  men,  and  fall  like  one  of  thep. 
105.  22.  to  bind  hisp.  at  his  pleasure,  and  tench 
107.40.  he  poureth  contempt  upon  p.  and  causeth 
1 13.  8.  he  may  set  him  with  p.  even  with  the  p. 
lIR.O.to  trust  in  Lord,  than  to  put  confidence  in  p. 
119.  23.  p.  also  did  sit  and  speak  against  me 
161. p.  have  persecuted  mo  without  a  cause 
146.  3.  put  not  your  trust  in  p.  nor  in  son  of  man 
143.  11.  p.  and  all  judges  of  the  earth,  praise 

Prov.  8.  15.  by  me  p.  decree  justice  ||  16.  p.  rule 

17.  26.  it  is  not  good  to  strike  p.  for  equity 
19.  10.  much  less  for  a  servant  to  rule  overp. 
28.  2.  for  transgression,  many  are  thep.  thereof 

31.  4.  it  is  not  for  p.  to  drink  strong  drink 
Eccl.  10.  7.  p.  walking  as  servants  on  the  earth 

16.  O  land,  when  thy  p.  eat  in  the  morning 
17.blessed  art  thou,  when  thyp.eat  in  due  season 

ha.  1.  23.  thy  p.  are  rebellious  and  thieves 
3.  4.  and  I  will  give  children  to  bo  their  p. 

14.  the  Lord  will  enter  into  judgment  with  the  p. 
10.  8.  are  not  my  p. altogether  kings? 
19.  11.  p.  of  Zoan  fools,  p.  of  Noph  deceived,  13. 
21.  5.  arise,  ye  p.  and  anoint  the  shield 

23.  a.  against  Tyre,  whose  merchants  are  p. 

30.  4.  his  p.  were  at  Zoan,  his  ambassadors  came 

31.  9.  his  p.  shall  be  afraid  of  the  ensign 

32.  1.  and  p.  shall  rule  in  judgment 
34.  12.  and  all  her  p.  shall  be  nothing 

40.  23.  that  bringeth  thep.  to  nothing 

41.  25.  and  he  ahall  come  upon  p.  u  on  mortar 

S  O 


PRl 

/in.  43. 28. 1  have  p'rofaned  thep.  of  the  sanctuarv 
49.  7.  p.  also  shall  worship  because  of  the  Lord 

Ji:r.  1. 18.  made  thee  as  brazen  walls  against  thep 
2.  26.  they,  their  kings  and  p.  are  aslmmed 

4.  9.  the  heart  of  the  p.  shall  be  aalonished 

8.  1.  they  shall  bring  out  the  bones  of  hisp.' 
17.25.  kings  and /Abitting  on  the  thioiie  o*' David 
24.  8.  so  will!  give  the  king  of  Judali  and  hisp. 

26.  10.  thep.  said,  this  man  is  not  worthy  lo  die 
32.  .32.  they  and  their  jtings  and  p.  provoke  nie 
34.  21.  hisp.  I  will  give  to  their  enemies 

37.  15.  the  p.  were  wroth  with  Jeremiah 

38.  17.  if  thou  go  forth  to  the  king  of  Babylon  sp 
25.  if  thep.  hear  that  I  have  talked  with  Uiee 

44.  21.  the  incense  that  ye  and  your  p.  burn 

48.  7.  Chemoshnnd  hisp.  go  into  captivity, 49. 3 

49.  38.  I  will  destroy  from  thence  thep. 

50.  35.  a  sword  is  on  her  p.  and  her  wise  men 
51.57.  I  will  make  drunk  her  p.  and  wise  men 

/,«m.  1.  6.  her  p.  are  become  like  harts  that  find 

2.  2.  be  hath  polluted  the  kingdom  and  p.  thereof 

9.  her  kings  and  p.  are  among  the  Gentiles 

5.  12.  p.  are  hanged  up  by  their  hand 
/'.'2CA.22.27.  her  p.  like  wolves  ravening  the  prey 

23. 15.  in  dyed  attire,  all  of  them  p.  to  kiok  to 
32.  29.  Edom  and  her;;,  with  their  might 

30.  there  thep.  of  the  north,  all  of  them 

39.  IH.  and  ye  shall  drink  the  blood  of  thep. 
45.8.  my  p.  shall  no  more  oppress  my  people 

JJati.'.i.  2.  the  king  sent  to  gather  together  thep. 

6.  1.  pleased  to  set  over  the  kingdom  120 p. 

3.  this  Daniel  was  preferred  above  thep. 

4.  thep.  sought  to  find  occasion  against  DaiV)l 
8.25.  he  shall  stand  up  against  the  jirince  ofp. 

9.  6.  the  prophets  who  spake  in  thy  name  to  our  p. 
8.  confusion  office  to  ourp.  and  fathers 

10.  13.  Michael  one  of  the  chief  p.  came  to  ma 

11.  5.  one  of  his  p.  shall  be  strong  above  hini 
Has.  7.  3.  they  make  p.  ^lad  with  their  lies 

5.  thep.  have  made  him  sick  with  wine 
16.  their  p.  shall  fall  by  the  sword  for  rage 

8.  4.  they  have  made  p.  and  I  knew  it  not 

10.  shall  sorrow  for  ttie  burthen  of  the  king  ofp. 
9.15. 1  love  them  no  more,  all  their  p.  arc  revoltcrs 
13. 10.  of  whom  thou  saidst,  give  nie  a  king  andp. 

Jlmos  1.15.  their  kinggo  into  captivity, he  and  hiip. 
Jific.  3.  1.  hear  ye  p.  of  the  house  ol  Israel,  9. 
5. 15.  shall  raise  against  him  eight  p.  of  men 
Hub.  1.  10.  the  p.  shall  be  a  scorn  unto  them 
Zeph.  1.  8. 1  will  punish  the  p.  and  king's  children 

3.  3.  herp.  within  her  are  roaring  lions 

Mat.  20.25.  thep.  of  Gentiles  exercise  dominion 

ICor.  2.  6.  nor  the  wisdom  of  thep.  of  this  world 

8.  which  none  of  thep.  of  this  world  knew 

Jill  the  PRINCES. 

2  A'in^-,?  24. 14. carried  nwiiy  all  t.p.and  mighty  men 

1  Chron.  29.  24.  and  alt  thep.  submitted  themselves 

2CV/J-0J1.  24.  23.  and  destroyed  all  the  p.  of  people 

Esth.l.lli.hMli  done  wrong  to  all  thep.  and  people 

3.1. set  his  seat  above  all  the  p.  that  were  with  him 

P.ial.  83.  11.  all  their  p.  as  Zeba  and  Zaimunna 

Jer.  26.  12.  Jeremiah  8i>ake  to  all  the  p.  and  people 

36.  21.  Jehudi  read  it  in  the  ears  of  all  thep. 

Ezek  26.  10.  then  all  the  p.  of  the  sea  came  down 

Jlmos  2.  3.  and  will  slay  all  thep.  thereof  with  him 

Sec  Israel. 

PRINCES  rt/./wrfnA. 

JWA.  12.  31.  then  I  brought  up  p.  o/ ./iirfaA  on  wall 

I'sal.  68. 27  there  is  p.  of  .!udiih,nTii\  their  council 

./er.  52.  10.  he  slew  all  the  p.  of  Judah  in  Riblah 

Hos.  5.  lO.p.  of  .Judah  arc  like  to  them  that  remove 

Mat. '2.  6.  thou  art  not  the  least  a.moi\s p.  of  Judah 

PRINCESS. 
T.am.  1.  1.  she  that  was  p.  among  the  provincei 

PRINCESSES. 
\Kings  11.  3.  Solomon  had  700  wives  p. 
ha.  49. 123.  p.  shall  be  thy  nursing  mothers 

PRINCIPAL. 
Kiod.  30.  23.  take  thou  also  unto  thee  p.  spices 
Lev.  6.  5.  ho  shall  even  restore  it  in  the  p. 
Jfnm.  5.  7.  recompense  his  trespass  with  thep. 
]/i'iH^»4.5.  Zabiid  son  of  Nathan  wasp,  officer 
2A'?77;t«25.19.  thep. scribe  ofthc  host,  ./cr.,52.  25. 
\Chron.  24.6.  one  p.  househrdd  taken  for  Elcazar 

31.  the  priests  even  p.  fathers  cast  lots 

27.  t  5.  Benniah  son  of  Jehoiada  was  n  p.  officer 
JWA.  11.  17.  Mattaniahp.  to  begin  thank.'giviii" 
Job  30. 1 15.  they  pursue  my  p.  one  as  the  wind 
Prov.  \.\1.  fear  of  the  Lord  is  thep.  part  of  wisdom 

4.  7. wisdom  is  the  p.  thing,  therefore  get  wisdom 
Isa.  Ifi.  8.  have  broken  down  thep.  plants  Ihef^cof 

28.  25.  and  cast  in  thep.  wheat  and  barley 
.Tier.  25.  34.  wallow  in  the  ashes,  yo  p.  of  the  flock 

3.5.  no  way  to  fly,  nor  thep.  of  the  flock  escape 
38.  1 14.  the  king  took  Jeremiah  into  thep.  entry 
Ezek.  47. 1 12.  itshall  bring  forth  p.  fruit 
Mic.  .5.  5.  there  we  shall  raise  ag.  him  eight  p.  men 
..fle«s25.23.  p.  men  of  the  city  entered  with  Agrippa 

PRINCIPALITY,  TIES. 
Jtr.  13. 18.  for  your  p.  shall  com»  do wn,  the  orown 


PRI 

KtviJiJSS.  angelf,  p.  nor  powers  be  able  to  separate 
Eph.  1.  21.  far  above  a\lp.  posver  and  might 
y.  10.  tliat  now  to  the  p.  might  be  known  wisdom 
6.  I'i-  we  wrestle  against  yj.  and  against  jiowers 
Col.  1.  It),  p.  were  created  by  him  and  for  him 
2.  ID.  which  is  the  liead  of  all  p.  and  power 

15.  having  spoiled  ;;.  he  made  a  shew  of  them 
Tit.  3.  1.  put  them  in  mind  to  be  subject  lo  p. 
Jude  t  6.  tlie  angels  which  kept  not  tlieir  p. 

PRINUIPLKS. 
fleb.  5. 12.  have  need  that  one  teach  yon  the  first ;;. 
6    1.  leaving  the  p.  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ 

PKINT. 
Lev.  19.  26.  ye  shall  not;>.  any  marks  upon  you 

I'KLNT. 

Job  13. 27.  thou  settest  a  p.  on  the  heels  of  my  feet 

John  20.  25.  except  1  see  in  his  hands  the  p.  of  the 

nails,  and  put  my  finger  into  p.  of  the  nails 

PRINTED. 

Job  19.  23.  O  that  my  words  were;),  in  a  book 

PRISON 
Signifies,  [1]  ..^  place  to  confine  debtors  and  male- 
factors, Mat.  18.  30.  Luke  23.  19.  [2]  Ji 
low,  obscure,  and  base  condition,  Eccl.  4.  14. 
[3]  The  cave  wherein,  as  in  a  prison,  l)ii\'id  hid 
himself.  Psalm  142.  7.  [4]  That  spiritual 
thraldom  and  bondage  in  which  sinners  are 
kept  by  Satan,  and  their  own  lusts,  Isa.  42.  7. 
[oj  y/ie  ^Taije,  Isa.  53.  8.  [6J  That  powerful 
restraint  by  which  God  keeps  in  and  bridles 
Satan,  Rev.  20.  7. 
He  preached  to  the  spirits  in  prison,  1  Pet.  .3. 
I'J.  Christ  preached  tu  the  sinners  of  the  old 
world  by  Noah,  whom  he  inspired  that  he  might 
be  a  preacher  of  righteousness,  to  warn  that 
wicked  generation  of  approaching  judgments, 
and  eihurt  them  tu  repentance;  whosesuuls,  be- 
cause of  their  disobeitii.ncc,  are  rrserved  in  the 
infernal  prison  of  hell,  and  were  su  at  the  time 
when  the  ..Apostle  Peter  wrote  his  epistle. 
Cien.  39.  20.  Potiphar  put  Josei)h  in  p. 

22.  the  keeper  of  the  p.  committed  to  Joseph 
40.  3.  put  butler  and  baker  in;/,  where  Joseph  was 
42.  19.  let  one  be  bound  in  the  house  of  your;). 
IKings  22. 27.  put  this  fellow  in;<.  2C7ir.  IS.  2ti. 
SKings  17.  4.  king  of  Assyria  bound  Hosliea  inp. 
25.  27.  he  brought  Jehoiachin  out  of;;. 

29.  and  changed  his;),  garments,  Jcr.  52.  31,33. 
JWA.  3.  25.  Palal  repaired  by  the  court  of  the;/. 
/'s.l42.7.bring  my  soul  out  of  p.  to  praise  thy  name 
Eccl.  4.  14.  for  out  of  p.  he  cometh  to  reign 
Isa.  24.  22.  and  they  shall  be  shut  up  in  the  p. 
42.  7.  to  bring  out  the  prisoners  from  the  p. 
22.  they  are  all  of  them  hid  in  ;;.  houses 
53.  8.  he  was  taken  from  ;).  and  from  judgment 
CI.  1.  to  proclaim  opening  of  the  p.  to  the  bound 
Jer.  29.  20.  that  thou  shouldest  put  him  in  p. 
32.  2.  Jeremiah  was  shut  np  in  the  court  ot  thep. 
12.  before  Jews  that  sat  in  the  court  of  the  p. 

33.1.  word  came  to  Jeremiah  while  he  was  shut  up 
in  court  of  the  p.  37.  21.  |  38.  6,  28.  |:i9.  15. 

37.  4.  for  they  had  not  put  him  into  p. 

15.  ihey  put  him  in  p.  in  Jniiatliaii's  house 
39.  14.  Ihey  took  Jeremiah  out  of  the  p. 
52.  11.  he  put  Zcdekiali  in  p.  till  his  di  alli 
Mat.  4.  12.  Jesus  heard  that  John  was  cast  into  p. 

5.  25.  and  thou  be  cast  into  p.  /.uke  12.  58. 

11.2.  when  John  heard  in  p.  the  works  of  Christ 
14.  3.  Herod  put  him  in  p.  for  Ilerodias'  sake 

10.  he  sent  and  beheaded  John  in  p.  Mark  6.  27. 
IP.  30.  he  cast  him  into  p.  till  he  should  pay  debt 
£5.  3fi.  1  was  in  p.  and  ye  came  unlo  me 

39.  when  saw  we  ihf  e  in  p.  and  came  to  Ihee  ?  44. 
Mark  1.  14.  now  after  that  John  was  put  in  p. 

6.  17.  Ill-rod  had  sent  and  bound  John  in  p. 
7.utr3.  20.  added  this,  that  he  shut  up  John  in  p. 

22.  33.  to  go  with  thee  both  to  p.  and  lo  death 
21.  in.  and  for  murder  was  cnst  into  p.  2.">. 
Jiihn  3.  24.  for  John  was  not  yet  cast  into  p. 
^ct.1  5. 18.  and  put  the  apostles  in  the  common  p. 
19.  the  angel  by  nljht  opened  thi;  p.  doors 
CI.  sent  lo  Ihc  p.  ||22.  found  them  jiot  in  the  p. 
8.3.  hailing  men  and  women,  commilted  them  top 
12.  4.  Peter  was  put  in  p.  ||  5.  ho  was  ki'pt  in  p. 
7.  lijht  shineil  ||  17.  Lord  brought  him  out  of  p. 
Jfi.  23.  Paul  and  Silas  were  cast  into  p. 
24.  the  inner  p.  ||27.  Bcolng  the  p.  doors  open 
26.  10  many  of  the  haiiits  did  1  siuil  up  in  p. 
I  Pet.  3. 19.  he  wi'ut  and  preach(^d  to  the  spirits  in  p. 
Ihiu  2.  10.  the  devil  shall  ca<l  some  of  you  intop. 
20.7.  Satun  shall  be  loosed  out  of  his  p. 
.VfC  r.ATK. 
PRISONIIOUSR. 
Judg.  10.  01.  and  Samson  did  grind  in  the  p. 

45.  and  they  called  for  Samson  out  oflhep. 
ZChron.  I'i.  10.  Ihon  Asa  put  II;in mi  in  a  p. 
]sa.  i-2.  7.  lo  bring  them  in  ilarkucss  out  of  the  p. 

PRI9ONI0R. 
P»a,'.  70.  11.  let  sighing  of  lli"  p.  come  before  thee 
102.  20.  to  bear  sroanins  of  tJiop.  tu  luusa  Uiusu 


PRO 

Jl/at.  27.  15.  was  wont  to  release  to  the  people  ap. 

lb.  they  had  then  a  notable  p.  Mark  15.  ti. 
Jlcts  23. 18. 1'aulp.  called  me  to  him  and  prayed 
25.  27.  it  aeemeth  unreasonable  to  send  a  p. 
28.  17.  yet  was  1  delivered  p.  to  the  Romans 
Eph.  3. 1. 1  Paul  thep.  of  Jesus,  4.  1.  Philem.  1.  9. 
'2Tim.  1.  8.  be  not  thou  ashamed  of  me  his  p. 
See  Fellow. 
PRISONERS. 
Oen.  39.  20.  a  place  where  king's  p.  were  bound 
22.  the  keeper  committed  to  Josejih  all  thep. 
JV«;n.  21.  1.  king  Arad  took  some  of  Israel  p. 
Job  3.  18.  there  thep.  rest  together,  they  hear  not 
Fsal.  09.  33.  the  Lord  desjiiseth  not  his  p. 
146. 7.  the  Lord  looseth  the  p.  opens  eyes  of  blind 
Isa.  10.  4.  they  shall  bow  down  under  thep. 
14.  17.  that  opened  not  the  house  of  his  p. 
2U.  4.  Assyria  shall  lead  the  Egyptians  p. 
24.  22.  they  shall  be  gathered  together  asp. 
42.  7.  lo  bring  out  the  p.  from  the  prison 
49.  y.  that  thou  maycst  say  to  the  p.  go  forth 
J.,am.'.i.  34.  to  crush  under  feet  thep.  of  the  earth 
Zcch.  9.  11.  I  liave  sent  forth  thy  p.  out  of  the  pit 

12.  turn  ye  to  the  strong  hold,  yep.  of  hope 
Jlcts  10.  25.  sang  praises,  and  the  p.  heard  ihera 
27.  supposing  that  the  p.  had  been  Hed 

27.  1.  they  delivered  Paul  and  certain  other  p. 
42.  the  soldiers'  counsel  was  to  kill  the  p. 

28.  10.  the  centurion  delivered  thep.  to  captain 

PRISONS. 
f^uhe  21.  12.  persecute  you,  delivering  you  into  p. 
Wtts22.  4.  bind,  and  deliver,  intop.  men  and  worn. 
2C(/r.  II.  23.  in  p.  more  frequent,  in  deaths  oft 

PRIVATE. 
2Pct.  1.  20.  no  prophecy  of  any  p.  interpretation 

PRIVATELY. 
Mat.'2i.3.  the  disciides  came  to  Christ,  p,  saying 
J\[urkC).  32.  Jesus  went  into  a  ship  p.  Luke  9.  10. 
9.28. discijiles  John  and  Andrew  ask  him  p.  13.  3. 
Luke  10.23.  he  turned  to  his  discijdea  and  said  p. 
.icts  23.  19.  went  aside  with  Paul's  kinsman  p. 
Gal.  2.  2.  but  p.  to  them  that  were  of  reputation 

PRIVILEGE. 
John  1. 1 12.  to  as  many  as  received  him  gave  hep. 

PRIVILY. 
fudg.  0.  31.  he  Bent  messengers  to  Abimelechp. 
l.Vu/rt.  24.  4.  David  cut  oil' Saul's  skirt  p. 
Psal.  10.  8.  his  eyes  are  p.  .set  against  the  poor 
11.  2.  that  they  may  ;).  shoot  at  the  upright 

31.  4.  pull  me  out  of  net  laid  p.  for  nie,  142.  3. 
04.  5.  they  commune  of  laying  snares  p. 

101. 5.  whosop.  slanders  his  neighbour  will  cut  ofl' 
Prov.  1.  11.  l^t  us  lurk  p.  for  the  innocent 

18.  they  liirk  p.  for  their  own  lives 
Mat.  1. 19.  Joseph  was  minded  to  put  her  awayp. 
2.  7.  Herod,  when  he  had  p.  called  the  wise  men 
.lets  10.  37.  and  now  do  they  thrust  us  out  p.  1 
(ial.  2.  4.  who  came  in  p.  to  spy  out  our  lilierty 
'2Pct.  2.  1.  who  shall  p.  bring  in  damnable  heresies 

PRIVY. 
Vent.  23.  1.  he  that  hath  his  p.  member  cut  off 
IKings  2.  44.  llie  wickedness  thy  heart  is  p.  to 
/','2cA-.21.14.the  sword  enters  into  tlieirp.  chambers 
Acts  5. 2.  part  of  price,  his  wife  also  being  p.  to  it 

PRIZE. 
ICor.  9.  24.  all  run,  but  one  receivelh  the  p. 
Phil.  3.  14.  I  press  toward  ihe  mark  for  thep. 

PRIZED. 
Zerh.  1 1. 13.  a  goodly  price  that  I  wasp,  at  of  them 

PROCEED. 
F.xod.  25. 35.  according  to  the  si.v  branches  that  p. 
.lush.  0.  10.  nor  any  word  p.  out  of  your  mouth 
■iSam.'.  12.  seed  which  aliall  p.  our  of  thy  bowels 
.)ub  40.  5.  twice  spoken,  b\it  I  will  p.  no  further 
Isa.  2'.1.  14.  I  will  p.  to  do  a  marvellous  work 
51.  4.  give  ear,  for  a  law  shall  p,  from  me 
Jer.  9.  :t.  for  they  p.  from  evil  lo  evil,  know  not  me 
30.  19.  and  out  of  them  shall  p.  thanksgiving 

21.  ihi'ir  governor  shall  p.  fiom  midst  of  them 
Jfab.\.7.  their juilgm.  and  dignity  shallp.  of  tlienis. 
Mot.  15.  \H.  p.  out  of  the  mouth  defile  the  man 

I'.t.  out  of  the  h.artp.  murders,  .Mark  7.  21. 
F.ph.  4.  2!l.  let  no  corrupt  communication  p. 
1  Pini.  3.  9.  ibey  shall  p.  no  further,  folly  manifest 

PROCEEDED. 
JV«m.  30. 12.  whatoierp.  out  of  her  lips,  not  stand 

32.  24.  do  that  which  haib  p.  out  of  your  month 
Judg.  1 1.  30.  do  that  which  p.  out  of  thy  mouth 
.lob  35.  1.  Elihu  also  p.  ami  saiil,  suff.r  me 
A«/i:c4.22. wondered  at  the  gracious  wordswhichp. 
John  8.  42.  for  Ip.  forth  and  came  from  God 
Arts  12.  3.  ho  p.  further  to  take  Peter  also 

liev.  19.  21.  which  sword  p.  out  of  his  mouth 

PnOCEEDETIl. 
Oen.  24.  .50.  the  thing  p.  from  the  Lord 
JVh m.30.2.according  lo  all  Ihnl  p.  out  of  his  mouth 
Deul.  8.  3.  hilt  by  every   word   ihal  p.  out  of  tin' 
moulh  of  God  doth  man  live,  Mot.  4.  4. 
l.'>(im.  24.  13.  wickedness  p.  from  Iho  wicki'd 
Eccl.  lu.  5.  as  au  error  which  p.  from  tb«  rulor 


PRO 

Jam.  3.  38.  outof  Most  High  p.  not  evil  and  good 
Hab.  1.  4.  therefore  wrong  judgment  p. 
Juhn  15.  20.  Spirit  of  trutli  which  p.  Irom  Father 
Jam.  3.  10.  out  of  the  same  mouth  p.  blessing 
Hev.  11.  5.  fire  p.  out  of  their  mouih  and  devouri 

PROCEEDING. 
Rev.  22.  1.  water  of  life  p.  out  of  throne  of  God 

PROCESS. 
Gen.  i.  3.  inp^of  time  Cain  brought  an  offering 
38.  12.  in  p.  of  time  Sliuah  Judali's  wife  died 
Kzod.  2.  23.  in  p.  of  time  the  king  of  Egypt  died 
Judg.  11.  4.  in  p.  children  of  Amnion  made  war 
iChrun.  21.  19.  in  p.  Jehoram's  bowels  fell  out 

PROCLAMATION. 
Ki.od.  32.  5.  Aaron  made  p.  and  said,  to-morrow 
\Kings  15.  22.  then  king  Asa  made  a  p.  through 
out  all  Judah 

22.  36.  and  there  went  a  p.  throughout  the  host 
2C7ir.  24. 9.  Joashmade  a  p.  thro'.ludah  and  Jerus. 

30.  5.  to  make  p.  throughout  all  Israel 

30.22.  Cyrus  made  p. through  kingdom,  F.:ra  1.  1 
A'iral0.7.Ezra  and  princes  madep.  through  Judah 
JJan.  5. 2y.  Belshazzar  made  p.  concerning  Danie) 

PROCLAIM. 
F.Tod.  33.  19.  and  I  will  p.  the  name  of  the  Lord 
Lev.  23.  2.  feast  of  the  Lord  ye  shall  p.  4,  21,  37 

25.  10.  p.  liberty  ||  De«t.20.  10.  p.  peace  unto  it 
.Judg.  7.  3.  go  top.  in  the  ears  of' the  people 

21.  t  13.  they  sent  top.  peace  to  Benjamin 
Hath  4.  t  11.  and  p.  thy  name  in  Beth-lehem 
Ih'ings  21.  9.  p.  a  fast,  and  set  Nahoth  on  high 
'iKings  10.  20.  Jehu  said,  p.  a  solemn  assembly 
JVeA.  8.  15.  p.  that  they  fetch  pine-branches 
Ksth.  G.  9.  p.  before  him,  thus  shall  it  bo  done 
Prov.  20.  0.  most  men  p.  their  own  goodness 
Isa.  12.  t  4.  praise  the  Lord,  p.  his  name 

01. 1.  he  hath  sent  me  to  p.  liberty  to  the  captivei 

2.  top.  the  acceptable  year  of  Ihe  Lord 
Jer.  3.  12.  go  and  p.  these  words,  11.  0.  j  19.  2. 

7.  2.  stand  in  gate  of  Lord,  and  p.  there  this  word 

34.8.  had  made  a  covenant  top.  liberty  to  theiE 
17.  I  p.  a  liberty  for  you  to  sword,  lo  pestilence 
./orl'.i.  9.  p.  ye  this  among  the  Gentiles,  prepare  wai 
Amos  4.  5.  and  p.  and  |mblish  the  free-olferings 

PROCLAIMED. 
Exod.  34.  5.  and  p.  the  name  of  Ihe  Lord,  B. 

30.  C.  they  caused  it  lo  be  p.  Ibrough  the  camp 
1  Kings  21. 12.  they  p.  a  fast,  set  Naholli  on  high 
IKings  10.  20.  a  solemn  assembly,  and  ihey  p.  it 

23.  10.  Ihe  man  of  God  p.  whop.lhese  words,  17 
2CArfl)!.  20.  3.  Jelio?haphat  fean  d  and  p.  a  fast 
Fira  8.  21.  I  p.  a  fast  there  at  the  river  Ahava 
Eslh.fi.ll.  Hamanp.  before  him,  I  bus  shall  be  done 
Isa.  02.  11.  Lord  hath  p.  thy  salvation  cometh 
.Ter.  30.  9.  tlicy  p.  a  fast  belbre  Lord  to  Jerusalem 
/.nm.  1. 1 21.  thou  wilt  bring 'he  day  thou  bast  p. 
Jonah  3.  5.  ihey  p.  a  fast,  and  put  on  sackcloth 

7.  caused  it  lo  be  p.  and  published  thro'  Nineveh 
Luke  12.  3.  shall  hep.  upon  the  hoiise-toj»8 

PROCLAIMETH,  ING. 
Prov.  12.  23.  the  heart  of  fools  p.  foolisIinesB 
.Icr.  .34. 15.  in  p.  liberty  every  man  to  neighbour,  17. 
Rev.5.i.  I  saw  a  strong  angel  p.  ;vitli  aloud  voice 

PRtK'URE. 
,/er.  26. 19.  thus  might  we  p.  great  evil  ag.  oursoull 
33.  9.  they  shall  fear  for  all  posieiitv  I  p.  to  it 

PROCURED. 
.rcr.  2. 17.  hast  thou  not  p.  this  to  tl  y^ilf? 
4.  18.  thy  doings  have  n.  these  things  to  thee 

PROCURETH. 
Prov.  11.27.lhat  diligently  seeketh  good_'».  favour 
17.  t  9.  he  that  covcreth  a  transgres-^ion  p.  love 

PRODUCE. 
Isa.  41.  21.  p.  your  cause,  saiih  Loid,  bring  forth 

PROFANE. 
This  is  said  of  the  contempt  and  oliuse  of  holy 
things:  .11  man  who  is  defiled,  an:i  touches  any 
sacred  thing  pollutes  or  profane.-  it.  .1  profane 
person  is  one  openly  wicked.  He  that  makes  a 
jest  of  sacred  things,  vho  defiles  himself  by  im- 
pure and  shameful  artiuns,  is  u  pi olano person, 
Lev.  21.  il,  12.  "  The  srriplnrr  calls  Esau,  pro- 
fane, because  he  sold  his birth-righl,  which  wat 
considered  us  a  holy  thing,  not  only  hrraus» 
the  priesthood  was  annexed  tn  it,  but  r.ls0 
because  it  was  a  privilege  leading  lo  ('hrist, 
and  a  tirpe  of  his  title  to  the  A.'«)' ■"/.,'  inherit- 
ance, Heb.  12.  10.  The  priests  of  the  race  of 
.Aiiron  were  enjoined  lodistinsruish  brtweenstf 
eredand  profane,  between  purr  nn<l  d: filed.  Lev. 
10.  10.  and  for  this  reason  lb-  use  of  wine 
icas  forbid  them  in  the  t-mple,  during  their 
time  of  waiting.  It  was  forbid  them  to  keep 
the  flesh  of  Ihc  pence-offerings  above  two  days  : 
if  they  eat  of  it  on  the  third  day,  they  wer* 
punished  as  profaners  of  hobi  things.  Leu 
19.  7,  8. 
To  profane  Ihe  temple,  to  profane  the  snbbatK, 
tn  profane  the  tilliir,  ore  expressifv:  In  denott 
the  violation  of  the  holy  rest  of  the  sabbath,  Uu 


PRO 

entering  of  foreigners  into  the  temple,  the  ir- 
reverences that  are  committed  there,  the  impious 
sacrifices  that  are  offered  on  the  altar  of  the 
JLord.  To  profane  a  vine,  or  a  tree,  is  to  make 
them  common,  and  proper  to  be  employed  in 
ordinary  uses,  Deut.  'UO.  6,  What  man  is  he 
that   halh   planted  a  vineyard,  and   hath  not 
eaten  of  it's     7'he  Hebrew  says,  who  hathnot 
yet  profaned  it.     In  Lev.  19.  'i'i,  24,  Src.  where 
Moses  passes  a  law  concerning  the  fruit  of 
trees  newly  planted,  he  expressed  the  impurity 
of  the  first-fruits,  by  calling  them  U7tcircumcis- 
ed.    For  the  three  first  years  these  fruits  were 
cut  off  as  impure  :    The  fourth  year  they  offered 
rch'U  was  produced  in  the  temple:   And  in  the 
fifth  year  the  owner  had  the  liberty  of  making 
V.SC  of  the  fruit  as  his  own,  which  then  became 
profane,  or  common.    Jeremiah  promises  the 
Israelites  that  they  should  return  again  into 
their  own  country,  that  they  sluuld  jdant  vine 
yards  on  the  mountains  of  Samaria,  and  should 
profane  them;  that  is,  should  eat  of  the  fruit 
thereof,  Jer.  31.  f  5. 
Lev.  21.7.  they  shall  not  take  a  wife  that  \sp.  14. 
Jer.  23.  11.  both  prophets  and  priests  are;). 
£zei.  21. 25.  and  thou  p.  wicked  prince  of  Israel 
22.  26.  and  put  no  difference  between  holy  and  p. 
28.16.  t  will  cast  thee  asp.  out  of  mountain  of  God 
42.  20.  between  the  sanctuary  and  the  p.  place 
44.  23.  shall  teach  difference  between  lioly  and  p. 
48.  15.  shall  be  a  p.  place  for  the  city,  for  suburbs 

1  Tim.  1.  9.  the  law  is  made  for  the  unholy  and  p. 
4.  7.  but  refuse  y.  old  wives'  fables,  exercise  thys. 
6.20.  avoid  p.  and  vain  babblings,  2  Tim.  2.  16. 

Jieb.  12.  16.  lest  there  be  an^v  p.  person,  as  Esau 

PROFANE. 
/jSV.  13.21.  neither  shaltlhou  p.  name  of  thy  God, 
I  am  Lord,  19. 12. 1  20.  3.  ]  21.  6.  |  22.  2,  32. 
19.  129.  do  not  thou  p.  thy  daiigliler  to  cause 
21.4.  being  cliief  among  his  people  lop.  himself 
9.  the  daughter  of  any  priest,  if  she  p.  herself 
12.  he  shall  not  p.  the  sanctuary  of  his  God,  23. 
15.  nor  siiall  he  p.  his  seed  among  his  people 
22.  9.  and  die  tiierclbre,  if  they  p.  my  ordinance 

15.  they  shall  not;?,  the  holy  things  of  Israel 
/^"uin.  30.  f  2.  if  a  man  vow  he  shall  not  p,  his  word 
Deut.  28.  t  30.  plant  a  vineyard,  and  not  ju.  it 
l\'eh.  13. 17.  evil  that  ye  do,  and  p.  the  siibb;ith-day 
Psal.  8'J.  1 31.  if  they  p.  my  statutes,  and  keep  not 
Jer.  31.  t  5.  the  planters  shall  plant  and  p.  them 
Ezek.  23.  39.  they  came  to  my  sanctuary  to;>.  it 

24.  21.  behold,  I  will;),  my  sanctuary 

.Amos  2.  7.  go  in  to  same  maid,  to  p.  my  holy  name 
Mat.  12. 5.  ihe  priests  in  the  temple  p.  iho  sabbath 
Acts  24.  d.  who  hath  gone  about  lo  p.  the  temple 

PROFANED. 
Lev.  19.  8.  he  hath  p.  the  hallowed  things 
Psal.  55.  t20.  he  hath;),  his  covenant 
89.  39.  thou  hast  p.  his  crown  to  the  grotind 
Jsa.  43. 28.  therefore  I  havep.  the  princes  of  sanct. 
Eiek.  22.  8.  lliou  hast  p.  my  sabbaths,  23.  38. 
t  16.  thou  slialt  hep.  in  sight  of  the  heathen 
26.  p.  my  holy  things,  I  amp.  among  them 

25.  3.  aha,  against  my  sanctuary,  when  it  was  p. 

36.  20.  they;),  my  holy  name,  when  they  said 
21.  pity  for  my  name  which  Israel  had  p.  22,  23. 

Mai.  1.  12.  but  ye  have  p.  it,  in  that  ye  say 

2.  11.  Judah  haih  ;).  the  holiness  of  ihe  Lord 

PROFANENESS. 
Jer.  23.  13.  from  the  prophets  of  Jerusalem  is  p. 

PROFANETH. 
Lev.  21.  9.  she  p.  her  father,  she  shall  be  burnt 

PROFANING. 
JWA.  13.  18.  bring  more  wrath  by  p.  the  sabbath 
Mai.  2.  10.  by;),  the  covenant  of  our  fathers 

PROFESS. 
Deut.  26.  3.  I  p.  this  day  to  the  Lord  thy  God 
Mat.  7.  23.  then  will  I  p.  I  never  knew  you 
7'(M.16.  they  p.  that  they  know  God,  but  deny  liim 

3.  t  I'l-  let  our.s  l»arn  to  p.  honest  trades 

PROFESSED,  ING. 
Rom.  1.22.  p.  theineelvcs  to  be  wise,  they  became 

2  Cor.  9.13.  glorify  God  foryourp.  subject,  togosp. 
1  Tim.2.  10.  which  becometh  women  p.  godliness 

6.  12.  hast  p.  a  good  profession  before  many 
21.  some  p.  have  eried  concerning  the  faith 
PROFESSION. 
1  Tim.  6. 12.  hast  professed  a  good  p.  before  many 
1 13.who  before  Pontius  Pilate  witnessed  good  p. 
fleb.  3.  I.  the  High-Priest  of  our  p.  Christ  Jesus 
4. 14.  a  high-priest,  let  us  hold  fast  our  p.  10.  23. 

PROFIT,  Substantive. 
Gen.  25.32.  what  p.  shall  this  birth-right  do  me? 

37.  26.  what  p.  is  it  if  we  slay  our  brother  I 
F.sth.  3.  8.  it  is  not  for  the  king's  p.  lo  suffer 
Job  21. 15.  what  p.  should  have  if  we  pray  to  him  1 

30.  2.  whereto  might  their  strength  p.  me  'i 

35.  3.  and  what  p.  if  1  be  cleansed  from  my  sin  1 

Pinl^  30.  9.  what  p.  is  there  in  my  blond  ? 

Prov.  14. 23.  in  all  labour  there  a  p.  but  talk  of  lips  | 
429 


PRO 

Eccl.  1.  3.  all  is  vanity,  what  p.  hath  a  man  of 
all  his  labour  under  the  sun  1  3.  9.  |  5.  16. 

2.  11.  and  there  was  nop.  under  the  sun 

5.  9.  moreover  the  p.  of  the  earth  is  for  all 

7.  11.  by  wisdom  there  is  p.  to  them  that  see  sun 
Isa.  30.  5.  nor  be  any  help  nor  p.  but  a  shame 
Jer.  16.  19.  have  inherited  things  wherein  is  nop. 
Mai.  3. 14.  what  p.  that  we  have  kept  ordinancel 
Rom.  3.  1.  what  p.  is  there  of  circumcision? 

1  Cor.  7.  35.  and  this  I  speak  for  your  own  p. 

10.  33.  not  seeking  mine  own  p.  but  the  p.  of  many 

2  Tim.  2.  14.  they  strive  not  about  words  to  nop. 
Heb.  12.  10.  but  he  chasteneth  us  for  our  p. 

PROFIT,  ?'erb. 
1  Sam.  12.  21.  after  vain  things  which  cannot  p. 
Job  35.  8.  thy  righteousness  may  p.  the  son  of  man 
Psal.  120.  13.  what  shall  it  p.  thee,  false  tongue? 
Proti.  10.  2.  treasures  of  wickedness  p.  nothing 

11.  4.  riches  p.  not  in  the  day  of  wrath 
/sa.30.5.were  ashamed  of  people  that  couldnotp.O. 

44.  9.  their  delectable  things  shall  not  p. 

47.  12.  if  so  be  thou  shall  be  able  to  p. 

48.  17.  I  am  the  Lord  which  teacheth  thee  lop. 
57.  12.  and  thy  works,  for  they  shall  not  p.  thee 

Jer.  2.  8.  and  walked  after  things  that  do  not  p. 
11.  people  changed,  for  that  which  doth  not  p. 
7.  8.  behold,  ye  trust  in  lying  words  Ihatcannotp. 

12.  13.  put  themselves  lo  pain,  but  shall  not  p. 
23. 32.  they  shall  not  p.  this  people,  saith  the  Lord 

Mark  8.  36.  what  p.  if  he  gain  the  whole  world 
1  Cor.  12.  7.  is  given  to  every  man  lo  p.  withal 

14.  6.  speaking  with  tongues,  whalshalllp.  you? 
Gal.  5.  2.  Christ  shall  p.  you  nothing 
Heb.  i.  2.  the  word  preached  did  not  p.  them 
Jam.  2.  14.  what  doth  it  p.  my  brethren,  though 

16.  ifve  give  not  things  needful,  what  doth  it  p.? 
PROFITABLE. 
J()i22.  2.  can  a  man  be  p.  to  God,  asp.  to  himself? 
F.ccl.  10.  10.  but  wisdom  is  p.  lo  direct 
Isa.  44.  10.  a  graven  image  that  is  p.  for  nothing 
Jer  13.  7.  the  girdle  wasp,  for  nothing 
Mat.  5.  29.  p.  that  one  of  thy  members  perish,  30. 
Acts  20.  20.  I  kept  back  nothing  p.  to  you 
1  Cor.  G.  t  12.  all  things  are  lawful,  but  not  p. 

1  Tim.  4.  8.  but  godliness  is  p.  lo  all  things 

2  Tito.  3.  16.  the  scripture  is  p.  for  doctrine 
4.  11.  Mark  is  p.  lo  me  for  the  ministry 

Tit.  3.  8.  lhe.se  things  are  good  and  p.  to  men 
Philem.  11.  but  now  p.  to  thee  and  to  me 

PROFITABLY. 
Eph.  4.  t  29.  but  that  which  is  good  to  edify  p. 

PROFITED,  ETH. 
./ob  33.  27.  if  any  say  I  have  sinned,  and  it  p.  not 
34.  9.  he  said,  it  p.  nothing  to  deKght  in  God 
Hab.  2.  18.  what  p.  the  graven  and  molten  image 
Mat.  15.  5.  whoso  shall  say  to  father  or  mother,  it  is 
a  gift  by  whatever  thou  mighteslbep.JI7ar/;7.11. 
16.  26.  what  is  a  man  p.  if  he  gain  whole  world 
.rohn  6.  63.  the  spirit  quickeneth,  flesh  p.  nothing 
Rom.  2.  25.  circumcision  p.  if  thou  keep  the  hiw 
1  Cor.  13.  3.  and  have  not  charity,  it  p.  nothing 
Oal.  1.  14.  I  p.  in  the  Jews'  religion  above  many 
1  7'!m.4.8.  for  bodily  exercisep.  little,  but  godliness 
Heb.  13.  9.  not  p.  them  tint  have  been  occupied 

PROFITING. 
1  Tim.  4.  15.  that  Ihv  j>.  mav  appear  to  all 

PROFOUND. 
Hos.  5.  2.  the  revolters  are  p.  to  make  slaughter 

PROGENITORS. 
Gen.  49. 2R.  prevailed  above  the  blessings  of  my  p. 

PROGNOSTICATORS. 
ha.  47. 13.  let  monthly  p.  stand  up  and  save  thee 

PROLONG,  ED. 
JVuTT).  9.  tI9.  when  cloud  p.  they  journeved  not 
Deut.  4.  26.  ye  shall  not  p.  your  days,  30.  18. 
40.  thoii  shall  keep  his  statutes,  that  Ihou  mayest 
p.  thy  davs  upon  the  earth,  5.  16,  33.  I  6.  2. 
I  11.9.  117.  20.  I  22.  7. 
32.  47.  through  this  thing  ye  shall  p.  your  davs 
Josh.  24.  t31.  Israel  served  all  the  days  of  the  elders 
that  p.  after  Joshua,  .Tudg.  2.  1  7. 
,Tob  6. 11.  what  is  my  end,  that  I  should  p.  my  life? 

15.  29.  the  wicked  shall  not  p.  the  perl'ection 
Psal.  61.  6.  thou  wilt  p.  the  king's  life  and  years 
Prov.  2-^.  2.  by  knowledge  the  state  shall  be  p. 

16.  he  that  hatethcovetousness  shall  p.  his  days 
Eccl.  8.  12.  though  a  sinner's  days  be  p.  yet  surely 

13.  neither  shall  the  wicked  p.  his  days 
^■a.  13.  22.  and  her  days  shall  not  be  p. 
53.  10.  he  shall  see  his  seed,  he  shall  p.  his  days 
KzfAr.  12.  22.  the  days  arc  p.  and  vision  faileth 
12.  25. 1  am  the  Lord,  I  will  speak,  and  the  word 
shall  come  to  pasg,  it  shall  be  no  mirep. 
28.  there  shall  none  of  my  words  be  p.  any  more 
J[3an.7.12.yet  their  lives  were  p. for  season  and  time 

PROLONGETH. 
Prov.  10.  27.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  p.  days 
F.ccl.  7.  15.  there  is  a  wirkpd  man  that  p.  his  life 

PROMISE. 
It  is  an  assurance  that  God  has  given  in  his  \   6.  3.  that  ye  may  increase  as  the  Lord  p.  thee 


PRO 

reord  of  hestoiring  blessings  upon  his  people,  2 
Pet.  1.  4.  The  word  in  the  jVew  Testament  it 
often  taken  for  thnse  promises  that  God  hereto- 
ft'-emadeto  Abraham  and  t/te  other  patriarchs, 
of  sending  the  IMessiab.  It  is  in  this  sense  that 
the  apostle  Paul  commonly  uses  the  word  pro- 
mise, Romans  4.  13,  14.  Galatians  3.  16.  The 
promises  of  the  new  covenant  are  colled  better 
than  those  of  the  old,  Heb.  8. 6.  because  they  are 
more  spiritual,  clear,  extensive,  and  universal, 
than  those  in  the  Mosaieal  covenant  icere.  The 
time  of  the  promise.  Acts  7.  17.  is  the  time  of 
the  fulfilling  of  the  proinise.  God  had  told 
Abram,  Genesis  15.  13,  14.  that  his  seed  should 
be  a  stranger  in  a  strange  land,  hut  that  after 
four  hundred  years  he  would  bring  thmi  out 
Ihcncr;  the  time  of  the  promise  came,  tchcn  these 
four  hundrcdyears  were  expired.  The  children 
of  the  promise  are  [1]  The  Israelites  descended 
from  Isaac,  in  opposition  to  the  Ishmaelites  de- 
scended from  Ishmael  and  Hagnr.  [2]  The 
Jews  converted  to  Christianity,  inopposition  to 
the  incredulous  Jews,  who  will  not  believe  in 
Christ:  and  [3J  All  true  believers  who  are  bom 
again  hyihe  .tvpervaturalpowcrofGod'sSpirit, 
and  by  foitli  lay  hold  on  the  promise  of  salva- 
tion made  in  Christ;  these  are  the  spiritual 
seed  of  Abriiham,  to  whom  the  spiritual  bless- 
ings conlaitied  in  Ihe  covenant  and  the  inheri- 
tance dn  belotin-,  Romans  9.  8.  Galatiims  4.  28. 
77tc  Huly  .'Spirit  of  promise,  Ephesians  1.  13. 
signifies,  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  God  has  pro- 
mised to  those  that  shall  believe  in  him,  which 
is  the  pledge  of  a  believer's  everlasting  happi- 
ness. The  first  commandment  to  which  God  has 
annexed  a  promise,  is  that,  Honour  thy  father 
and  mother,  Ephesians  6.  2.  To  lehich  God 
has  subjoined  this  promise,  that  their  daysshall 
be  multiplied  upon  the  earth,  Exod.  20.  12. 
Promises  also  denote  eternal  life,  or  the  bless- 
edness promised,  which  is  the  object  of  the 
Christian's  hupr,  Heb.  6.  12. 
JVMm.  14.  .34.  ami  ye  ."ihall  know  my  breach  of  p. 

1  Kings  8.  56.  hath  not  failed  one  word  of  good  p. 

2  Chron.  1.  9.  let  thy  p.  to  David  be  established 
JVeh.  5.  12.  they  should  do  according  lo  this  p. 

13.  that  performeth  not  this  p.  even  thus  be  he 
shaken  out,  and  emptied,  people  did  accord,  top. 

Psal.  77.  8.  doth  his  p.  fail  for  evermore? 
105.  42.  for  he  remembered  his  holy  p.  and  Abram 
A«/if  24.49.  behold,  I  send  p.  of  my  Father  on  you 
Acts  1.4.  but  wait  for  the  p.  of  the  Father 
2.  33.  received  of  Father  thep.  of  the  Holy  Ghost 

39.  for  Ihep.  is  to  you  and  to  your  childreri 
7.  17.  but  when  the  lime  of  ihep.  drew  nlgli 
13.  23.  God  accord,  to  his  p.  hath  raised  a  Saviour 
32.  the  p.  made  to  f  ithers  God  hath  fulfilled 
23.  21.  now  are  ready,  looking  for  a  p.  from  thee 
26.6.  for  hope  of  Iho  p.  made  of  God  to  fathers 

7.  lo  which  p.  our  tribe?  serving  d.  day  and  night 
Rom.  4.  13.  the  p.  that  he  shall  be  the  heir  of  world 

14.  and  thep.  is  made  of  none  effect 

16.  to  the  end  the  p.  might  be  sure  lo  the  seed 
20.  he  staggered  not  at  thep.  through  unbelief 

9.  8.  but  children  of  thep.  counted  for  the  seed 
9.  for  this  is  word  of  p.  at  this  time  I  will  come 
Gal.  3.  14.  that  we  might  receive  p.  of  the  Spirit 

17.  that  it  should  make  the  p.  of  none  effect 

18.  for  if  the  inheritance  be  of  the  law,  it  is  no 
more  of  p.  but  God  gave  it  to  Abraham  by  p. 

19.  seed  shall  come,  lo  whom  the  p.  was  made 
22.  that  thep.  by  faith  of  Jesus  Christ  might  be 

20.  then  are  ye  heirs  according  lo  Ihe  p. 
4.  23.  but  he  of  the  free-woman  was  by  p. 

28.  we,  as  Isaac  was,  arc  the  children  of  p. 
FpA.  1.13.  ye  were  sealed  with  that  Holy  Spirit  ofp. 

2.  12.  and  siranjors  from  the  covenanls  ofp. 

3.  6.  the  Gentiles  be  partakers  of  liis  p.  in  Christ 
6.  2.. which  is  Ihe  first  commandment  with  p. 

1  Tim.  4.  8.  having  the  p.  of  the  life  that  now  is 

2  Tim.l.  1.  according  to  the  p.  oflife  in  Christ  Je». 
//cA.4.1.rear,  lest  a  p.  left  us  of  entering  into  his  rest 

6.  13.  for  wlien  God  made  p.  to  .Abraham 

15.  after  he  had  patiently  endured,  he  obtained  p. 

17.  God  willing  lo  shew  unto  the  heirs  ofp. 
9.  15.  might  receive  the  p.  of  eternal  life,  10.  .36. 
11.9.  by  I'ailh  he  sojourned  in  the  land  ofp.  in  a 

strange  country,  heirs  with  him  of  the  same  p. 

39.  and  these  all  received  not  the  p. 
2  Pet.  3.  4.  saying,  where  is  ihep.  of  his  coming? 

9.  the  Lord  is  not  slack  concerning  his  p. 

13.  according  to  his  p.  we  look  for  new  lieavnn* 

1  .John  2. 25.  that  is  Ihe  p.  that  he  hath  promised  us 
PROMISE,  Verb. 

2  Pe^2. 19.  while  thev  p.  them  liberty,  they  are 
PROMISED. 

F.rod.  12.  25.  will  give  you  according  ns  he  halhp 
JVwm.  14.  40.  we  will  go  to  the  place  the  Lord  p. 
Deut.  1. 11.  Ihe  I<ord  ble.is  you  as  he  halh  p.  15.1 


PRO 

Dent.  9. 98.  not  able  to  briog  them  to  the  land  he;>. 
10.9.  the  Lord  is  his  inheritance,  as  hop. 

12.  20.  the  Lord  shall  enlarge  ihy  border,  ag  he  p. 

19.  8.  and  give  tliee  the  (and  he  p.  to  give,  27.  3. 
23.  23.  shall  keep  that  whieh  thou  hast;>.  to  God 

20.  18.  to  be  his  peculiar  people,  as  lie  p.  thee 
Josh.  9.  21.  let  them  live,  as  tiie  princes  had  p. 

2".'. 4. given  rest  to  your  brethren,  as  hep.  them 
23.  5.  ye  shall  possess  their  land,  as  the  L.  p.  you 
10.  God  figlUeth  for  you,  as  he  hath  p.  you 
15.  as  all  good  things  are  come  the  Lord  p.  you 

2  Sam.  7.  28.  hast  p.  this  goodness  to  thy  servant 
1  Kings  2.  24.  and  hath  made  me  a  house,  as  he  p. 

.5.  12.  Lord  gave  Solomon  wisdom,  us  he  p.  him 

8.  20.  1  sit  on  the  throne  of  Israel  as  the  Lord  p. 
50.  haili  given  rest  to  people,  as  hep.  by  Moses 

9,  5.  as  I  p.  to  llavid  thy  father,  saying 

3  Kings  8. 19.  as  liep.togive  a  light,  2  Chr.  21.  7. 

1  Chron.  17.  20.  and  ihou  hast  p.  this  goodness 

2  Chron.  0.  10.  I  am  set  on  the  throne  as  Lord  p. 
15.  hast  kept  that  which  thou  hast  p.  David,  10. 

JVcA.  9.  23.  concerning  which  thou  hadstp.  to  fath. 
Ksth.  4.  7.  of  the  sum  that  Haman  had  p.  to  pay 
Jer.  :i2.42.  will  bring  on  them  all  good  I  p.  33.  14. 
Mat.  14.7.  Herod  p.  with  oath  to  give  her  whatever 
Mark  14.  U.  they  were  glad,  p.  to  give  him  money 
J.uke  1.  72.  to  perform  the  mercy  p.  to  our  fathers 

22.6.  hep.  to  betray  him  unto  ihem  in  absence 
^cts  7. 5.  yet  he  p.  to  give  it  to  him  for  a  possession 
Rom.  I.  2.  gospel  of  God,  which  he  had  p.  afore 

4.  21.  that  what  he  p.  he  was  able  to  perform 
7>'f.I.2.in  hope  of  eternal  life,p.beforc  world  began 
//e4.10.23.hold  fast  prolicssion,  he  is  faithful  thalp. 

11. 11. because  they  judged  him  faithful  that  had  p. 

12.  26.  now  he  hath  p.  saying,  once  more  I  shake 
./am.l.l2.which  Lordp.to  tliemll)atlovehim,2.  5. 
1  John  2.25.  this  is  promise  ho  halb  p.  us  eternal  life 

PROMISEDST. 

1  A'in;?58.24.  keep  with  David  that  thoup.him,25. 
JVcA.  9. 15.  and  p.  that  they  should  go  into  the  land 

PRO.MISES. 
Rom.  9.  4.  are  Israelites,  to  whom  pertain  the  p. 

15.  8.  to  confirm  the  p.  made  to  the  fathers 

2  Cor.  1.  20.  all  p.  of  God  in  him  are  yea  and  amen 
7.  1.  having  therefore  these  p.  dearly  beloved 

Oal.  3.  16.  to  Abraham  and  his  seed  were  p.  made 

21.  is  the  law  then  against  the  p.  of  God? 
7/?i.6.l2.who  through  faith  and  patience  inheritp. 

7.  6.  Melchiaeilec  blessed  him  that  had  the  p. 
8.6.covenant  whichwasestablishcd  upon  bctlerp. 
11.13.  those  all  died  in  faith, not  having  received  p. 

17  he  that  had  received  tlie  p.  offered  up  hisson 

33.who  thro'faith  obtainedp.and  stoppedmouths 

2  Pct.\.  4.  given  us  exceed in;r  great  and  jireoious  p. 

PKO.MKSLNG. 
£i«i.l3.22.not  return  from  his  wicked  wnyby p.life 

PUO.MOTE. 
JVu>n.22. 17.  I  will  p.  thee  to  great  honour,  24. 11. 
37.  am  I  not  able  indeed  to  p.  thee  to  honour? 
Prov.  4.  8.  exalt  her,  and  she  shall  p.  thee 

PUO.MOTE  D. 
Jaiig.  9.  9.  and  go  to  be  p.  over  the  trees,  11,  13. 
F.sth.  5.  11.  told  wherein  the  king  had  p.  him 
Dan.  3.  30.  then  the  king  p.  Shadrach,  Meshach 

PRO.MOTION. 
Ptat.  7.).  fi.  p.  Cometh  not  from  the  east  nor  west 
Prov.  3.  35.  but  shame  shall  be  the  p.  of  fools 

PRONOUiNCE. 
J,tv.  5.  4.  that  a  man  shall  p.  with  an  oath 

13.  3.  Iho  priest  shall  look  on  him  and  p.  him 

nnclean,  0,  8,  11,  l."),  20,  22,  2.5,  2-7,  3l),  44. 

13.  shall  p.  him  clean,  17,  23,  28,  34,  37.  |  14.  7. 
59.  this  is  the  law,  to  p.  it  clean  or  unclean 

14.  48.  then  the  priest  shall  p.  the  house  clean 
Judg.  12.  6.  for  he  could  not  frame  to  p.  it  right 

PRO.\0(JNCED. 
AVt.  6.  12.  but  he  p.  this  prophecy  against  mo 
Jer.  11.  17.  the  Lonl  hath  p.  evil  against  thee 

16.  10.  ».  this  great  evil,  19.  15.  |  35.  17.  |  40.  2. 
18.  8.  if  that  nation  ngainst  whom  I  p.  turn 
S5.  13.  the  word  which  I  have  p.  against  it 
36.  13.  I>oril  will  ri'pent  of  the  evil  that  hop. 

19.  the  Lord  re|M,-iiled  of  the  evil  he  had  p. 

34.  5.  for  I  hav.'  p.  the  word,  sailh  the  Lord 

30.  7.  that  the  Lord  Imlh  p.  against  this  people 

18.  Jeremiah  //.  nil  ihe.ie  words  unto  me,  31. 

PRO.\Oi:.\(;|.\G. 

I.,n.  3.  4.  if  a  »oul  swonr,  p.  to  do  evil  or  good 

PROOF. 
2  Cor.  2.  9.  that  I  might  know  Iho  p.  of  you 

8.  24.  nhcw  ye  to  them  llii>  p.  of  your  lovo 
13.3.  linro  ye  s^ek  n  p.  of  Christ  -peaking  in  mo 

Phil.  2.  22.  but  yo  know  Iho  p.  of  him 
2  7^711.  4.  5.  make  full  p.  of  Ihy  ministry 

PROOF.si. 
j9ct<1.3. shewed  hiin»nlf  alive  Oy  many  infulliblcn. 

PROPER. 

1  Chr.  20.  3.  I  hnvp  of  mine  own  p.  good,  ofgold 

.4cMl. ni.fi. 'Irlisralltd  in  th.'ir  p. tongue, Ai'eldainn 

'  Cur.  7.  7.  but  every  man  hnth  his  p.  gift  of  God 

4G0 


PRO 

Heb.  11.  23.  becausfthey  saw  he  was  an.  child 

PROPH.ANE,  Sec  Profahk. 

PROPHECY. 

2  Chr.  9.  29.  Solomon's  acts  in  the  p.  of  Ahijah 

15.  8.  when  Asa  heard  p.'  of  Obed  he  took  courage 
JVfA.  6.  12.  he  pronounced  thisp.  against  me 
/'too.  30.  1.  the  p.  man  spake  to  Ithiel  and  Ucal 

31.  1.  the  p.  that  his  mother  taught  him 
Mat.  13. 14.  in  them  is  fulfilled  the  p.  of  Esaiaa 
1  Cor.  12.  10.  to  another  p.  hy  the  same  Spirit 

13.  2.  though  I  have  the  gift  of  p.  and  not  charity 

1  Tim.  4.  14.  neglect  not  the  gift  given  thee  by  p. 

2  Pit.  1.  19.  we  have  also  a  more  sure  word  ofp. 

20.  nop.  of  scripture  is  of  private  interpretation 

21.  p.  came  not  in  old  time  by  the  will  of  man 
Rev.  1.  3.  blessed  that  hear  the  words  of  thisp. 

11.  G.  that  it  rain  not  in  the  days  of  their  p. 
19. 10.  for  the  testimony  of  Jesus  is  spirit  ofp. 

22.  7.  ble-ssed  that  keepeth  the  sayinp  of  thisp. 
10.  seal  not  the  sayings  of  the  p.  of  this  book 

18.  that  heareth  words  of  the  p.  of  this  book 

19.  if  any  man  take  from  the  words  of  thisp. 
PROPHECIES. 

1  C«r.  1.3.  8.  but  whether  p.  they  shall  cease 

1  Tim.  1.  18.  according  to  the  p.  that  went  before 

PROPHESY,  Verb. 
JVum.  11.  27.  Eldud  and  Medad  do  p.  in  the  camp 
1  Sam.  10.  5.  they  shall  p.  ||  6.  thou  shultp. 
1  Kings^2.8.  he  doth  not  p.  good  of  me,  but  evil 
18.  that  he  would  not  p.  good,  2  Chron.  18.  17. 
1  CAr.  25.1.  who  shouldp.  w  ith  harps  and  cymbals 
Isa.  30.  10.  p.  not  to  us  right  things,  p.  deceits 
Jer.  5.  31.  the  projdiets  p.  falsely,  and  priests 
II.  21.  saying,  p.  not  in  the  name  of  tlie  Lord 

14.  14.  prophets  p.  lies,  they  p.  false  visions 

15.  concerning  the  prophets  thalp.  in  my  name 

16.  the  peo))le  to  whom  they  p.  shall  bo  cast  out 
19. 14.  Jeremiah  came  from  where  Lord  sent  lop. 

23.  16.  hearken  not  to  the  prophets  that  p. 

25.  what  the  prophets  said,  that  p.  lies  in  my 
name,  26,  32.  |  27.  10,  14,  15,  16.  |  29.  9,  21. 

25.  .30.  p.  against  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth 

26.  12.  Lord  sent  me  to  p.  against  this  house 
32.3.why  dost  thoup.  and  say,  I  will  give  thiscily? 

Ezck.  4.  7.  ihou  shall  p.  against  Jerusalem 

6.  2.  p.  against  the  mountains  of  Israel,  36.  1. 
1 1 .  4.  p.  against  Jaazaniah  and  Pelatiah,  p. 

13.  2.  p.  against  the  prophets  that  p.  17. 

20.  46.  p.  against  the  forest  of  the  soulh  field 

21.  2.  p.  against  land  of  Israel  {|  9.  Jerusalem 
14.  son  of  man,  p.  and  smite  thy  hands  together 
28.  p.  and  say  concerning  the  Ammonites,  2.5.2. 

28.21. p.  against  Zidon  ||  29.  2.p.  against  Pharaoh 
30.2.  p.  againstJJgypt  |{  35.2.  p. against  mount  Seir 
34. 2.  son  of  man  p.  against  the  shepherds  of  Israel 

36.  6.  p.  concerning  the  land  of  Israel,  and  say 

37.  4.  p.  on  these  bones  |{  9.  p.  to  the  wind 

38.  2.  son  of  man,  p.  against  Gog,  14.  |  39.  1. 
43. 1 3.  when  I  came  to  p.  city  should  be  destroyed 

.Tuel  2.  28.  your  sons  shall  p.  ^cts  2.  17,  13. 
JImos  2.  12.  ye  gave  the  Nnzarites  wine,  and  com- 
manded the  prophets,  sfiying,p.  not,  Mic.  2. 6. 
3.  8.  who  can  but  p.?  |{  7.  12.  eut  bread  and  p. 

7.  13.  but  p.  not  again  any  more  at  Beth-el 
1.5.  Lord  said  to  me,  go  p.  to  my  people  Israel 
16.  p.  not  against  Israel  and  the  house  of  Isaac 

Mic.  2. 11.  [  will  p.  to  thee  of  wine  and  strong  drink 
ZccA.]3.3.that  when  any  shall  yet  p. then  his  father 
Mat.  15.  7.  well  did  Esaiasp.  of  ?ou,  saying 
26.  08.  p.  thou  Christ,  Mark  14.65.  /.u/re  22. 64. 
.'?c^«2I.9.liad  four  daughters,  virgins,  which  did  p. 
Rom.  12.  6.  whether  p.  let  us  p.  to  the  proportion 
1  Cor.  13.  9.  wo  know  in  pari,  and  we  p.  in  part 

14.  1.  rather  that  yo  may  p.  ||  39.  covet  top. 
24.  if  all  p.  II  31.  we  may  all  p   one  by  one 

Wci'.lO.l  I.  thou  niustp.ag.lii'fore  iint ions  and  kings 
II.  3.  my  two  wilnesses  shall  p.  1200  days 
PROPHESIED. 
A^urn.  11.25.  they  p.  and  did  not  cease 

26.  Eldad  and  .Mudad  they  p.  in  the  camp 
1  Sam.  10.  10.  Spirit  of  God  eiuiie  upon  Saul,  and 

he  p.  among  thi-m,  II.  j  18.  10.  j  19.  23,  24. 
19  20.  the  missengirs  of  Saul  also  p.  21. 
I  Kings  18.  29.  they  p.  until  the  evening  sacrifice 

22.  10.  prnphols  p.  before  them,  12.  2  Chron.  18.  9. 

1  CAr»n.  25.  2.  sons  of  .\saph  p.  according  to  order 
3.  the  sons  of  Jcduthun  who  p.  with  a  harp 

2  Chron.  20.  37.  Eliezer  p.  against  Jehoshaphnt 
F.zra  5.  1.  Ilaggai  and  Zochariah  p.  to  the  Jews 
./it. 3. 8.  piLslors  transgressed,  prophets  p.  by  Hual 

20.  1.  Pashur  heard  that  Ji'remiiili  p.  these  things 
6.  Pashur  shall  die,  and  all  to  whom  thoup.  lies 

23.  13.  the  prophets  ofSamaria  p.  in  Baal 
21.  I  have  not  spoken  to  them,  yet  they  ». 

25. 13.  bring  on  Babylon  all  i  hat  Jeremiah  hath  p. 

26.  9.  why  hast  ihou  p.  in  the  name  of  the  Lord? 
II.  for  ho  hath  p.  against  this  city,  20. 
18.  Micnh  p.  in  days  of  Ilozekinh  king  of  Judali 
2f).  Urijah  p.  ||  28.  8.  p.  ag.iinsl  many  coiintrii'S 

'is.  6.  the  Lord  lierfurm  '.lio  words  thou  hast  p. 


PRO 

Jer.  29. 31.  because  Shemaiah  hath  p.  to  you  a  lie 

37. 19.  where  are  your  prophets  which  p.  to  you? 
I^:c4.  ll.13.when  Ip.  Pelatiah  son  of  Benaiah  died 

37. 7.  so  I  p.  as  I  was  commanded,  and  as  I  p.  10 
38.  17.  who  p.  I  would  bring  thee  against  them 
ZfcA.  ]3.4.prophels  shall  be  ashamed  when  they  p 
Mat.  7.22.  Lord,  have  we  not  p.  in  thy  name? 

11.  13.  the  prophets  and  the  law  p.  until  John 
Mark  7.  6.  he  said,  well  hath  Esaiasp.  of  you 
Luke  1.  67.  his  father  Zachariahp.  saying,  blessed 
■/ohn  11.  51.  Caiaphasp.  that  Jesus  should  die 
.4c(s  19.  6.  they  spake  with  tongues  and  p. 

1  Cor.  14.  5. 1  would  rather  that  ye  p.  greater  is  he 

1  Fet.  1. 1 10.  of  which  salvation,  Ihey  p.  who  p.  of 

the  grace  which  should  come  unto  yoo 
Jude  14.  Enoch  also  p.  of  these  things,  saying 
PROPHESIETH. 

2  CAr.  18.  7.  for  he  never  p.  good  to  me,  but  evil 
.fer.  28.  9.  the  prophet  which  p.  of  peace 
F.zck.  12.  27.  he  p.  of  the  times  that  are  far  off 
Zrch.  13.  3.  shall  thrust  him  through  wheri  hep. 
I  Cor.  11.  5.  that  p.  with  her  head  uncovered 

14.  3.  he  that  p.  speaketh  unto  men  to  edificalioD 

4.  but  he  that  p.  edifietli  the  church 

5.  greater  is  In-  that  p.  than  he  that  speaketh 

PROPHESYING,  S. 
I  Sam.  10.  13.  whi;n  he  had  made  an  end  ofp. 

19. 20.  they  saw  the  company  of  the  pro|ihels  p. 
Fzra  0.  14.  they  prospered  through  p.  of  Haggai 
I  Cor.  11.4.  every  man  p.  having  his  head  covered 

14.  6.  except  I  shall  speak  to  you  by  p.  or  by 

doctrine 

22.  but  p.  serveth  not  for  them  that  believe  not 

1  Thess.  5.  20.  despise  not  p.  prove  all  things 
PROPHET. 

This  word  comes  from  ?Ap  Greek, Prophetes,  vhich 
signi^fies  one  that  foretells  future  events.  Tha 
Hebrews  at  the  heginntng  called  them  Seers, 
videos.  .Iftrrwards  they  called  them  Nabi, 
which  comes  frovi  the  root  Nibba,  to  foretell, 
to  divine.  Jll.<o  the  scripture  often  gives  them 
the  name  of  Men  of  God,  and  of  Angr-Is,  or 
Me.espngers  of  the  Lord.  The  verb  >'ibba,  to 
prophesy,  is  of  great  extent.  Sometimes  it  sig- 
vifes  to  foretell  what  i.ttocome:  at  other  limes 
to  be  inspired,  to  speak  from  God.  It  is  said. 
Exodus  7.  1,  Jiaroii  thy  brother  shall  bo  thy 
prophet;  that  is,he  shall  c/plain  and  interpret 
thy  sentiments  and  commands  to  Pharaoh  -and 
the  people.  The  apostle  Paul,  in  his  epistle  to 
TiliLS,  1.  12.  tjuoliniT  a  profane  poet,  calls  him 
Prophet;  because  the  Pagans  thought  their  poets 
inspired  by  th"  gods.  The  scripture  often  gives 
the  name  o/ Prophet  to  impostors,  who  falsely 
boasted  of  inspiration,  1  Kings  18.  22. 

Jls  the  true  Pro|ili.ts,  at  the  time  that  they  were 
transported  by  the  motions  of  Cod's  SpiriCwere 
sometimes  agitated  in  a  violent  manner;  those 
mnlions  were  culled  prophesying,  which  persons 
exhibited,  who  were  filled  with  a  good  or  evil 
spirit.  For  example,  Saul,  being  moved  by  an 
cril  spirit,  prophesied  in  Us  house,  1  Sam.  18. 
10.  that  is,  he  was  agitated  with  violence,  and 
uscdstrange  and  unusual  gestures,  signs,  and 
speeches,  as  the  Prophets  did.  To  prophesy  i* 
also  put  for  to  make  or  sing  psalms,  or  songs 
of  praise  to  Ood,  1  Sam.  10.  5,  6.  1  Chron. 
25.  1.  This  t'rm  is  also  used  by  St.  Paul, /or 
explaining  scripture,  preachng,  or  speaking  to 
the  church  in  puhlic,  1  Cor.  14.  1,  3,  4. 

The  most  usual  ien)i  by  trhich  Ood  communicated 
himself  to  the  Prophets  ivas  by  inspiration, 
which  consisted  in  illuminating  the  mind  of  the 
prophrt,anderriting his  willtn  pmelaiw  lehat 
the  Lord  dlrtnted  to  him  from  within.  It  is  in 
this  sense  that  all  the  authors  of  the  canonical 
book;  of  scripture,  both  of  the  Old  and  \ew 
Trstameni,  arc  acknowledged  as  Prophets.  Ood 
also  communicated  himself  to  the  prophets  by 
dreams  and  nocturnal  visions.   In  Acts  JO.  11, 

12,  it  is  said,  that  Peter  fell  into  an  ecstasy 
at  Hoon-dav,  and  had  a  revelation  concerning 
the  call  of  the  Gentiles  to  the  faith.  The  Lord 
appeared  to  Joh  and  to  Moses  in  a  cloud,  and 
diseiirered  his  will  to  them,  Num.  II.  2.5. 
Job  38.  1.  /fe  has  often  made  his  voice  to  be 
heard  in  an  articulate  manner;  thus  he  spake 
tn  Mines  in  the  burning  bush,  and  upon  mount 
Sinai,  and  to  Samuel  in  the  night,  1  Sam. 
3.4. 

If'e  have  in  the  Old  Testament  the  writings  of 
the  siitren  Prophets;  tint  is,  ot"  four  greater, 
and  twelve  lesser  Prophets.  The  four  great 
Propht'iii  are  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  E/.ekiel,  and 
Diiiiel.  The  twelve lesserPrnphots  arc,  Ilosea, 
Joil,  .\mos,  Obndiali,  Jonah,  Micah,  Nahuin, 
nabakkiik,Zephaniali,  Haggai,  Zechatiah,a?i<i 
Miihi.hi. 

Thi.1  is  nearly  the  chronological  order  i»  icMcJk 
they  tnay  be  ranged.  ' 


PRO 

T  HoBHAprophesied  under  Vzz\a.h,Jotham,Ah!iZ, 
and  Hezekiah,  kings  of  JuJah,  and  under 
Jeroboam  11.  king  of  Israel,  and  his  succes- 
sors, to  the  destruction  of  Sainnria.  Home 
tltink,  that  the  title  of  lloseii'spropheci/,  where- 
in vienlion  is  made  of  his  having  prophesied 
under  so  many  kings,  is  not  his  oicn,  but  some 
ancient  transcriber's;  and  that  the  true  begin- 
ning of  ihi'i  Proiiliot's  work  is  at  V«rse  2,  The 
beginning  of  tlio  word  of  the  Lord:  For,  say 
they,  if  he  had  prophesied  under  the  reign  of 
all  these  princes,  he  mtist  have  lived  a  eery 
long  time;  by  a  moderate  calculation,  for  the 
space  of  one  hundred  and  twcloe  years. 

2.  Anio3  began  to  prophesy  tlic  second  year  be- 
fore the  earthquake,  which  was  in  the  reign  of 
king  Uzziah,  about  six  years  before  the  death 
o/ Jeroboam  II.  king  o/ Israel. 

3.  Uaiuh  began  to  prophesy  at  the  death  of  Uz- 
ziah,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  io- 
thaui  king  of  Judah.  He  continued  to  pro- 
phesy to  the  reign  of  Maiiasseh,  who  caused 
him  to  be  put  to  death. 

4.  ionah  lived  in  the  kingdom  o/ Israel  under  the 
kings  Joash  and  Jeroboam  II.  about  the  same 
time  as  Husea,  Isaiah,  and  Amos. 

5.  Micah  lived  under  Jotham,  Ahaz,  and  He- 
zekiah, kings  of  Judah;  he  was  contemporary 
with  Isaiali,  but  began  latei'  to  prophesy. 

6  Naliuni  appeared  in  Judah  under  the  reign  of 
Hezekiah,  and  after  the  expedition  of  Sen- 
nacherib. 

7  Jeremiah  began  in  the  thirteenth  year  of  the 
reign  of  Josiah  king  o/  Judah.  He  continued 
to  prophesy  under  the  reigns  of  Shallum,  Je- 
hoiakim,  Jcconiah,  and  Zedekiah,  to  the  taking 
o/ Jerusalem  Oy  the  Chaldeans;  aiid  it  is  thought 
he  died  tioo  years  after  in  Egypl;  Baruch  was 
his  disciple  and  amanuensis. 

8.  Zephaniah  appeared  at  the  beginning  of  the 
reign  of  Josiah,  and  before  the  twenty-eighth 
year  of  this  prince:  he  was  contemporary  with 
Jeremiah. 

9.  Joel  prophesied  under  Josiah  about  the  same 
time  as  Jeremiah  and  Ze|)haniah. 

10.  Daniel  teas  taken  into  Chaldea  in  the  fourth 
year  of  Jehoiakim  king  of  Judah,  and  pro- 
phesied at  Cabylon  to  the  cud  of  the  cap- 
tivity. 

11.  ^■iekl\e\  was  carried  captive  toXia.hy]on,  along 
with  Jeconiah  king  «/  Judah,  in  the  year  of  the 
icorld  340o.  7/e  began  to  prophesy  in  the  year 
3409.  He  continued  till  towards  the  end  of  the 
reign  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  who  died  in  the  year 
of  the  loorld  3442. 

12.  Habakkuk  lived  ut  Judea  at  the  beginning  of 
the  reign  of  Jehoiakim,  about  the  year  331)4, 
and  before  the  coming  of  Nebucliadnczzar  into 
the  country  in  33'J8.  He  dwelt  in  Judea  during 
the  captivity." 

13.  Obadiah  dwelt  in  Judea  after  the  taking  of 
Jerusalem,  and  before  the  desolation  of  Idumea. 

14.  Haggai  was  born  in  all  probability  at  Baby- 
Ion,  jFVum  whence  he  returned  with  Zurubbabel. 
In  the  second  year  of  Darius  son  of  Hystaspes, 
he  was  excited  by  God  to  exhort  Zerubba- 
bel,  the  prince  of  Judali,  and  the  high-priest 
Joshua,  to  resume  the  woric  of  the  temple, 
tchich  had  been  interrupted  for  so  long  time, 
by  the  envy  of  those  who  were  enemies  to  the 
Jews,  who  prevailed  with  Cyrus  to  revoke 
that  permission  whereby  he  had  empowered  the 
Jews  to  rebuild  their  temple.  Jind  Cambyses 
the  son  of  Cyrus  coming  to  the  crown,  renewed 
the  same  prohibition:  .So  that  the  temple  for 
fourteen  years  continued  in  the  same  state 
wherein  //;«  Jews  had  put  it  immediately  after 
their  return. 

15.  Zechariali  prophesied  in  Judea  at  the  same 
time  as  Haggui,  and  he  seems  to  have  continued 
to  prophesy  after  him. 

16.  Malachi,  the  last  prophet,  has  not  put  any 
date  to  his  prophecies.  If  he  was  the  same  as 
Ezra,  as  some  think,  he  may  have  prophesied 
under  Ntihi-mi-ih,  who  returned  into  iudf.a.'.i5M. 

Besides  these,  there  are  found  the  names  of  a 
great  many  more  prophets  in  scripture,  such 
as  Abraham,  Isaac,  Jacob,  Moses,  Joshua, 
Samuel,  Nathan,  David,  Solomon,  ice.  Christ 
Jesus  is  the  great  Priiphet  of  his  church; 
Jiloaes  prophesying  nf  him,  Deut.  18.  15.  says, 
God  will  raise  up  a  Prophet  like  unto  me;  thnt 
is,  such  a  prophet  as  f  am,  resembling  me  in 
nature  atid  ojjir.e,  being  a  man  and  mediator, 
as  I  am,  though  more  excellent,  and  in  a  more 
lingular  sort;  I  as  a  servant,  he  as  a  .Son  and 
Lord  of  his  church,  who  will  teach  them  the 
will  of  God,  not  only  in  his  own  person  on 
earth, but  by  his  word  and  Spirit  lohen  exalted 
io  the  right  hand  of  power  in  heaven. 
461 


PRO 

Exod.  7.  1.  and  Aaron  thy  brother  shall  be  thy  p. 
Deut.  IS.  20.  but  the^.  which  shall  presume,  22. 

1  Sam.  22. 5.  the  p.  Gad  said  to  David,  abide  not 

2  .Sam.  24. 11.  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  the^. 

1  Kings  i.  32.  David  said,  call  me  Nathan  ihu  p. 
44.  the  king  hath  sent  with  him  Nathan  ine  p. 

11.  2!J.  Ahijah  the  p.  found  Jeroboam  in  the  way 
13.  11.  there  dwell  an  old  p.  in  Beth-el,  25. 

23.  for  the  p.  whom  lie  had  brought  back 

29.  p.  took  up  the  carcase  of  the  man  of  God, 

and  the  old  p.  came  to  mourn  and  bury  liini 

16.  7.  by  hand  of  the  p.  Jehu  came  the  word,  12. 

18. 36.  Klijah^.  caine  near  and  said,  God  of  Abr. 

20.  22.7/.  came  to  king  of  Israel,  and  said  to  him 

2  Kings  5.  3.  would  God  my  lord  were  with  the  p. 

13.  if  the  p.  had  bid  thee  do  some  great  thing 
6.  12.  Elisha  the;;,  telleth  what  thou  speakest 
9.  4.  young  man  the^.  went  to  Ramotli-gilead 

20.  11.  Isaiah  the  p.  cried  to  Lord,  he  brought 
23.  18.  with  bones  of  p.  that  came  out  of  Samaria 

2  Chron.  12.5.  came  Shemaiah  tlie^.  to  Rehoboam 

13.  22.  are  written  in  the  story  of  the  p.  Iddo 
15. 8.  when  Asa  heard  the  prophecy  of  ihep.  Oded 

21.  12.  there  came  a  writing  from  Elijah  the;;. 
25.  16.  then  the;;,  forbare,  and  said,  1  know 

32.  20.  the  p.  Isaiah  prayed  and  cried  to  heaven 
35. 18.  none  like  it  from  the  days  of  Samuel  the  ;;. 
36.  12.  Iiumbled  not  himself  before  Jeremiah;;. 
Ezra  5.  1.  then  Haggai  they,  projihesied 

6.  14.  through  the  ptopliesying  of  Haggai  the  p. 
Psal.  74.  9.  there  is  no  more  any  p.  among  you 
Isa.  3.2.  Lord  doth  take  away  the;;,  and  prudent 

9.  15.  the  p.  that  teacheth  lies,  he  is  the  tail 
28.  7.  priest  and  ;;.  have  erred  thro'  strong  drink 
Jer.  6.  13.  from  p.  to  the  priests  deal  falsely,  8. 10. 
18.  18.  nor  shall  the  word  perish  from  the  p. 

23.  11.  for  both;;,  and  priests  are  profane 
28.  the;;,  tiiat  hath  a  dream  let  him  tell 

28.  6.  the;;.  Jeremiah  said,  amen,  the  Jjord  do  so 
9.;;.  which  propliesieth  of  peace,  when  the  word 
of  the  ;;.  shall  come  to  pass  then  p.  be  known 
17.  so  Hananiah  the  p.  died  the  same  year 
36.  26.  to  take  Baruch  and  Jeremiah  the  p. 
37.2.  nor  he  nor  his  servants  hearken  to  the  p. 
38.  10.  take  up  Jeremiah  the  p.  out  of  dungeon 
Lam.  2.20.  shall  the;;,  be  slain  in  the  sanciuaryl 
Ezck.  7.  20.  then  shall  they  seek  a  vision  of  p. 

14.  4.  and  coineth  to  the;;.  I  will  answer  him 

9.  if  the;;,  be  deceived,  I  have  deceived  that  p. 

10.  the  punishment  of  the  ;;.  shall  be  even  as 
Hos.  4. 5.  the  p.  also  shall  fall  with  thee  in  the  night 

9.  7.  tlie  ;;.  is  a  fool  |1  8.  ;;.  is  a  snare  of  a  fowler 
Amos  7.  14.  then  he  said,  I  was  nop.  nor  p.  son 
JIic.2.  II.  he  shall  even  be  the  p.  (Jf  this  people 
//a/;.3.1.aprayerof  Habakkuk  thep.onShigionoth 
Zefh.  13.  5.  he  shall  say,  I  am  nop.  a  husbandman 
jMal.  4.  5.  behold,  1  will  send  you  Elijah  the  p. 
jV/at.  1.22.  which  was  spoken  by  the  p.  Isaiah,  2. 15. 
I  3.  3.  I  4.  14.  I  8.  17.  I  21.  4.  J.uke  3.  4. 
.fuhn  1.  23.  I  12.  38.  Ads  28.  25. 
2.  5.  in  Bethlehem,  for  thus  it  is  written  by  the  p. 
17.  that  which  was  spoken  by  Jeremy  p.  27.  9. 

12.  39.  but  the  sign  of  the  p.  Jonas,  Luke  11.  29. 

13.  35.  which  was  spoken  by  p.  David,  27.  35. 
21.  11.  this  is  Jesus  the  p.  of  Nazareth  of  Galilee 

24.  15.  spoken  of  by  Daniel  the  p.  Mark  1,3.  14. 
/y«4e  1.76.  thou  child  be  called  p.  of  the  Highest 

4.  17.  delivered  to  him  the  book  of.  the  p.  Esaias 

24.  no  p.  is  accepted  in  his  own  country 

27.  many  lepers  in  the  lime  of  Eliseus  the  p. 

7.  28.  not  a  greater  p.  than  John  the  Baptist 
John  7.40.  the  people  said,  of  a  truth  this  is  the  p. 

52.  look,  for  out  of  Galilee  ariseth  nop. 
Acts  2. 16.  this  is  what  was  spoken  by  the  p.  Joel 

7.  48.  not  in  temples  made  with  hands,  as  saith  p. 

8.  28.  in  his  chariot  he  read  Esaias  the  p.  30. 
34.  I  pray  thee,  of  whom  speaketh  the  p.  this? 

13.  20.  he  gave  them  judges  until  Samuel  the  p. 
2  Pct.i.  16.  the  ass  forbade  the  madness  of  the  p. 
See  Priest. 
.^PROPHET. 
Gen.  20.  7.  now  restore  man  his  wife,  for  he  is  a  p. 
J^um.  12.  6.  if  there  be  a  p.  among  you,  I  the  Lord 
l)ent.  13.1.  if  there  arise  a  p.  or  dreamer  of  dreams 
18. 15. 1  will  raise  up  a  p.  from  among  brethren,  to 
him  ye  shall  hearken,  18.  .4c«s  3.  22.  |  7.37. 
22.  when  a  p.  s|)eaketh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
34.  10.  there  arose  not  a  p.  in  Israel  like  Moses 
.Jadg.  0.  8.  Lord  .sent  a  p.  to  the  cl^ildren  of  Israel 
1  .Sam.  3.  20.  Samuel  was  established  to  he  a  p. 

9.  9.  ho  that  ig  now  called  a  p.  was  called  a  seer 

1  Kings  13.  18.  he  said,  I  am  a  p.  also  as  thou  art 

18.  22.  I,  even  I  only  remain  a  p.  of  the  Lord 

19.  16.  shalt  anoint  Elisha  to  be  a  p.  in  thy  room 

20.  13.  there  came  a  p.  unto  Ahab  saying 

22. 7.  is  there  not  here  a  p.  of  the  Lord  besides,  to 
inquire  of  himl  2  Kings  3. 11.  2  Chron.  18.  6. 

2  A'i;i^s  5.  8.  he  shall  know  there  Is  a  p.  in  Israel 
2  Chron.  25.  15.  the  Lord  sent  a  p.  to  Amaziah 

23.  9.  but  a  p.  of  tha  Lord  was  thore,  Oded 


PRO 

Jer.  1.  5.  I  ordained  thee  a  p.  to  the  nations 

29.  'Ht.  that  is  mad  and  makelli  himself  a  p.  27. 
Ezek.  2.5.  there  hath  been  a  p.  among  them,  33. 33 

14.  7.  Cometh  to  a  p.  to  inquire  of  him  about  m% 

Hos.  12.  13.  by  a  p.  the  Lord  brought  Israel  out 

of  Egypt,  and  by  a  p.  was  he  preserved 

Mat.  10.  41.  he  that  receiveth  a  p.  in  the  name  of 

a  p.  shall  receive  a  p.- reward 

11.9.  but  what  went  ye  out  for  to  see?  a  p.? 

13. 57.  a  p.  is  not  without  honour  save  in  his  own 

Country,  and  house,  Mark  6.  4.  John 

4.  44. 

14.5.  he  feared  multitude,  because  thev  accounted 

him  as  a  p.  21.  26.  JUark  11.  'Si.'Luke'iO.  6, 

21.  46.  the  multitude,  they  look  him  for  a  p. 

Mark  6. 15.  that  it  is  a  p.  or  as  one  of  the  prophets 

Luke  7. 16.  saying,  a  great  p.  is  risen  up  among  us 

39.  this  man,  if  he  were  a  p.  would  have  known 
13.  33.  for  it  cannot  be  thai  a  p.  [lerish  out  of 

Jerusalem 
24.  19.  concerning  Jesus,  who  was  a  p.  mighty 

John  4.  19.  she  said,  I  perceive  that  thou  art  a  p. 
9.  17.  the  blind  man  said,  he  is  a  p. 

.dcts  2.  30.  David  being  ap.  and  knowing  that  God 

21.  10.  there  came  a  certain  p.  named  Agabus 

1  Cor.  14.  37.  if  any  man  think  himself  to  be  ap. 
Tit.  1.  12.  one,  even  a  p.  of  their  own  land 

Fa/5e  PROPHET. 
Acts  13.  6.  found  a  false  p.  a  Jew  named  Barjesug 
Hev.  16.  13.  like  frogs  out  of  mouth  of  false  p. 
19.  20.  the  beast  was  taken,  with  him  the  false  p. 

20. 10.  devil  was  cast  where  beast  and/aJsf  p.  are 

See  Lord. 
That  PROPHET. 
Deut.  13.3.  not  hearken  to  the  words  of  that  p. 
5.  and  that  p.  or  that  dreamer  shall  die,  18.  20. 
Ezek.  14.  9.  I  the  Lord  have  deceived  that  p. 
.John  1.  21.  they  a.sked  him,  art  thou  that  p.?  25. 
6.  14.  this  is  of  a  truth  that  p.  that  should  coma 
.Icts'i.  23.  every  soul  which  will  not  hear  that  p. 

PROPHETS. 
JVam.  11.  29.  that  all  the  Lord's  people  were  p. 
1  .Sam.  10.  5.  thou  shalt  meet  a  company  of  p. 

10.  p.  met  him  ||  11.  prophesied  anmng  the  p. 

12.  is  Saul  also  among  the  p.?  19.  24. 

28.  6.  the  Lord  answered  him  not  by  p.  15. 

1  Kings  18.  4.  Obadiah  hid  100  p.  bv  50  in  a  cave 

13.  Jezebel  slew  the  p.  ||  19.  p.  of  Baal  450.     22. 

40.  take  the  p.  of  Baal,  let  none  of  them  escape 
19.  10.  Israel  have  forsaken  thy  covenant,  have 

slain  thy  p.  with  the  sword,  14.  jVcA.  9.  26. 

22.  6.  the  king  of  Israel  gaihered  the  p.  together 
22.  I  will  be  a  lying  spirit  in  p.  2  Chron.  18.  21. 

2  Kings  3. 13.  to  p.  of  thy  father,  and  p.  of  mother 
23. 2.  Josiah  went  and  the  p.  tx>  the  house  of  Lord 

2  Chron.  20.  20.  believe  his  p.  so  shall  ye  prosper 
24.  19.  he  sent  p.  ||  36.  16.  they  misused  his  p. 

Ezra  5.  2.  with  them  were  the  p.  of  God  helping 

JVcA.  6.  7.  and  thou  hast  appointed  p.  to  preach 
9.  30.  thou  testifiedst  by  thy  Spirit  in  thy  p. 
,32.  the  trouble  that  hath  come  on  our  p. 

fsa.  29.  10.  the  p.  and  seers  hath  he  covered 

30.  10.  say  to  the  p.  prophesy  not,  .^mos  2.  12. 
Jer.  2.  8.  and  p.  prophesied  by  Baal,  and  walked 

26.  their  princes,  their  priests  and  p.  are  ashamed 
30.  your  own  sword  haih  devoured  your  p. 

4.  9.  the  p.  shall  wonder  ||  5.  13.  p.  become  wind 

5.  31.  the  p.  prophesy  falsely,  and  priests  bear  rule 
8.  1.  they  shall  bring  out  liie  bones  of  the  p. 

13.  13.  I  will  fill  the  p.  with  drunkenness 

14.  13.  the  p.  say,  ye  shall  not  see  the  sword 

14.  p.  prophesy  lies  in  my  name,  sent  them  not 

15.  by  swojd  and  famine  shall  those  p.  be  cons, 

23.  \X  I  have  seen  folly  in  the  p.  of  Samaria 

14.  I  have  seen  in  the  p.  a  horrible  thing 

1.5.  from  p.  is  profaneness  gone  forth  into  land 
21.  I  have  not  sent  these  p.  yet  they  ran 
25. 1  have  heard  what  the  p.  said,  that  prophesy 
26.  they  are  p.  of  the  deceit  of  their  own  heart 
30.  I  am  against  the  p.  that  steal  my  word,  31. 

26.  7.  so  priests  and  p.  heard  Jeremiah  speaking 
8.  the  p.  and  all  the  people  took  Jeremiah 

11.  then  spake  the  p.  this  man  is  worthy  to  die 

27.  9.  therefore  hearken  not  to  your  p.  16. 

15.  and  that  ye  and  the  p.  might  pi-rish 

18.  if  they  be  p.  and  word  of  Lord  be  with  them 

28.  8.  the  p.  thnt  have  been  before  me  and  thee 
2!t.  1.  words  of  the  letter  Jeremiah  sent  to  the  p. 

8.  saith  the  Lord,  let  not  your  p.  deceive  you 
15.  the  Lord  hath  raised  us  up  p.  in  Babylon 

32.  32.  they  and  their  p.  provoke  me  to  anger 
,37.  19.  where  are  now  your  p.  which  prophesied 

f,am.  2.  9.  her  p.  also  find  no  vision  from  the  Lord 

14.  thy  p.  have  seen  vain  things  for  thee 
4.  13.  for  the  sins  of  her  p.  that  hath  shed  blood 

Ezek.  13.  2.  prophesy  against  the  p.  of  Israel 

3.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  woe  unto  the  foolish  p. 

4.  O  Israel,  thy  p.  are  like  foxes  in  deserU 

9.  mv  hand  shall  be  upon  the  p.  that  see  vanity 
22.  35.  there  ia  a  conspiracy  of  herp,  in  midst 


PRO 

Eret.22. 29. p.  daubed  ihem  with  untemp.  mortar 
Has.  6.  5.  I  have  hewed  them  by  the  p.  have  slain 
r2. 10.  I  have  spoken  by  p.  and  multipli»d  vi:.iuii5 
j3mos  '2.  11.  I  have  raised  up  of  your  sons;;. 

12.  and  coininaiided  the  p.  saying,  prophesy  not 
Mic.  3.  (3.  the  sun  shall  go  down  over  the  p. 

11.  and  the  p.  ihereol' divine  for  money 
Zeph.'.i.  4.  her  p.  are  light  and  treacherous  persons 
Xech.  I.  4.  to  whom  tlie  former  p.  have  cried 

5.  and  the  p.  do  tliey  live  for  ever  7 
7. 7.  the  words  of  the  Lord  halli  cried  by  formerp. 

12.  words  Lord  sent  in  his  Spirit  by  former  p. 
13.  2.  I  will  cause  the  p.  to  pass  out  of  the  land 

4.  the  p.  shall  bo  ashamed,  each  of  his  vision 
Mat.  5.  12.  so  persecuted  they  the  p.  Lu/ii;  6.  23. 

17.  think  not  that  1  am  come  to  destroy  the  p. 
7. 12.  do  so  to  them,  for  this  is  the  law  and  the  p. 
13. 17.  many  p.  have  desired  to  see,  Luke  10.  24. 

22.  40.  on  these  two  hang  all  the  law  and  the  p. 

23.  31.  the  children  of  them  who  killed  the  p. 
34. 1  send  unto  you  p.  and  wise  men,  Luke  11.49. 

37.  O  .lerus;ilem,  lliou  that  killest  the  p. 
.Virk  1.  2.  as  it  is  written  in  the  p.  1  send  my  mes- 
senger, Luke  18.  31.  |  24.  2.i.  John  li.  4.5. 

Luke  1.  70.  as  he  S|)ako  by  his  holy  p.  2  Pet.  3.  2. 
1(5.  I'j.  the  law  and  the  p.  were  until  John 
2'.t.  .-Vbraham  said,  they  have  Mos.-s  and  ;).  31. 

24.  25.  slow  to  believe  what  the  p.  have  s|)okt;n 
JuAn  1.  4.1.  we  found  him  of  whom  thop.  did  write 

8.  52.  Abraham  and  the  p.  are  deail,  5!). 
^cts  3.  13.  God  shewed  by  the  mouth  of  his  p.  21. 
II.  27.  p.  came  from  Jerusalem  to  Antioch 
13. 1.  in  church  at  Aniiochcertainp.  and  teachers 

15.  al'ter  the  reading  of  the  law  and  thop. 

4U.  that  come  on  y<m  which  is  spoken  in  the  p. 
13.  32.  Judas  and  Silas  being  p.  also  themselves 
24.  14.  believing  all  things  written  in  the  p. 
26.  22.  s.iying  none  other  things  than  p.  did  say 

27.  king  Agrippn,  believest  thou  the  p.?  • 

Rom.  1.  2.  which  he  pro.iiiscd  afore  by  his  p. 

3.  21.  being  witnessed  by  the  law  and  the  p. 

II.  3.  Lord,  lliey  have  killed  p.  and  digged  down 

1  Cor.  12.  2tJ.  secondarily,  p.  thirdly,  teachers 

2'J.  are  all  p.?  ||  14.  2'.».'let  p.  sjieak  two  or  three 
Eph.  2.  20.  built  on  the  foundation  of  thop. 

3.  5.  as  it  is  now  revealed  to  his  p.  by  the  Spirit 

4.  11.  and  he  gave  srimo  p.  and  teachers 

I  TAess-i.  15.  who  killed  the  liord  and  ll\eir  ownp. 
y/pft.  1.  1.  who  spake  to  ihe  fathers  by  the  p. 
Jam.  5.  10.  lake,  my  brethren,  p.  who  have  spoken 
1  Pet.  I.  10.  of  which  salvation  the  p.  inquired 
Rfv.  11.  10.  because  these  two  p.  tormented  them 
18.  20.  rejoice  over  her,  ye  holy  apostles  and  p. 
24.  in  her  was  found  blood  of  p.  and  of  saints 

22.  9.  do  it  not,  ("ir  I  am  of  thy  brethren  the  p. 

Jill  the  PIU)PHKTS. 

1  A'ino'sl9.1.tolil  Jezidiel  how  he  had  slain  all  the  p. 
£2.  lU.  kind's  of  Judah  and  Israel  on  their  throne, 

and  all  the  p.  prophesied,  12.  2  Chr.  18.  i),  1 1. 

2  Kin^.^  10.  19.  now  call  to  me  all  the  p.  of  llaal 
17.  13.  Lonl  tfstified  against  Israel  by  all  the  p. 

Mat.  11.  13.  all  the  p.  prophesied  until  John 

Ijuke\\.5l).U\al  blood  ofallthep.  may  be  reciuired 

13.28.  when  ye  see  all  the  p.  in  kingdom  of(ioil 

24  27.  and  beginning  at  all  the  p.  he  expounded 

^c'.i  3.  24.  yea,  and  all  fhep.  from  Samuel  foretold 

10. 43.  to  himgive  «H(//cp.  witness  thro'hisnamc 

/••«;«•  I'KOPHETS. 

Mat.  7.  1.5.  beware  oi false  p.  in  sheep's  clothing 

24. 11.  m.\ny  false  p.  shall  rise,  24.  Mark  13.  22. 

Luke  6.  20.  for  so  did  their  fathers  to  the/a^«e  p. 

.  2  Pet.  2.  1.  there  vintu  false  p.  also  among  them 

1  John  4.  1.  because  manv  false  p,  are  gone  out 

My  PROl'lIliTS.v 

1  Chron.  IG.  22.  siiyiiig,  touch  not  mine  anointed, 

and  do  mif  p.  no  barm,  Psal.  105.  15. 

O/rA^  PROPIIKTS. 

I  .?07i.  10.  10.  behold,a  roMipany  n/fA«p.  metliim 

r.).  20.  whi-n  they  saw  the  company  of  the  p. 

1  A  ings  20.  3.5.  a  certain  man  of  llie  sons  of  the  p. 

41.  Ihe  kini;  discermrd  bim  that  he  was  of  the  p. 

22. 13.  words  aflhr  p.  d-clare  good,  2  Chr.  IH.  12. 

iKings  2.3.Honii  i)/M''/<.that  wore  at  Belh-el  came 

5.  the  sonji  uf  Ihe  p.  at  Jericho  came  lo  Klltlia 
7.  fifty  sons  of  thr  p.  went  to  view  afar  ntT 
15.  Ihn  sons  iif  Ihf  p.  said,  the  spirit  of  Elijah 

4.1.11  woman  of  the  wives  of  sons  «/ eAf  p.  cried 

38.  and  neellin  potias^  for  the  sons  of  the  p. 
J\,'eh.n.  14.  inyGoil.iliiok  Ihoiiof  the  rest  o/ (Ac  p. 
.fer.  23,  0.  beoaiiHe  nf  Ihe  p.  nil  mv  bones  shako 

16   hearken  not  to  the  words  nf  the  p.  27.  14. 

2rt.  how  h)ng  shall  this  be  in  the  Urutl  of  Ihr p.? 
Ho.t.  12.  10.  inral  similitiiilca  by  inini.<lry  o/ »A«  p. 
y.reh.  H.  0.  that  hear  Ihi'ne  hv  the  mouth  of  Ihr  p. 
Mat.in.\4.F.\m'*or  itni)  nf  Ihe  p.  Market.  15.  |  H,2rt. 

23.  29.  yo  build  the  lombs  of  the  p.  Luke  11.  47. 
30.  p:irtnkors  with  them  in  the  blood  of  the  p0 

20.  5(5.  that  scriplnreii  of  the  p.  might  bo  fulfilled 

/,uke  9.  H.  that  onfi  of  the  p.  was  risen  ngaiii,  1!». 

^et»  3.2.5.  yo  aro  children  of  the  p.  and  ofcuvc^gut 

403 


PRO 

..^cts  7.  42.  as  it  is  written  in  the  book  of  the  p. 
52.  which  of  p.  havenotyour  fathers  persecuted? 
13.  15.  after  the  reading  o/the  law  and  the  p. 
27.  because  they  knew  not  the  voice  of  the  p. 
15.  15.  and  to  this  agree  the  words  of  the  p. 
2ti.  23.  persuading  them  of  Jesus  out  of  the  p. 
Horn.  16.  26.  made  manifest  by  scrijilures  of  the  p. 

1  Cor.  14.  32.  spirits  of  the  p.  are  subject  to  the  p. 
Kpk.  2.  20.  built  on  the  foundation  of  the  p. 
Heb.  U.  32.  time  would  fail  me  lo  tell  of  the  p. 
Rev.  16.  6.  for  they  have  shed  the  blood  of  the  p. 

22.  6.  the  Lord  God  of  the  holy  p.  sent  bis  angel 
tiervaiits  the  PKOl'llKTS. 

2  Kings  9. 7. 1  may  avenge  blood  of  my  serv.  the  p. 
17. 13.  law  which  [  sent  lo  you  by  my  serv.  the  p. 

23  as  the  Lord  had  said  by  all  bis  servants  the  p. 
21.  10.  and  Lord  spake  by  his  servants  thep.H.'i. 

Ezra^J.  U.which  thou  hast  commanded  by  sere. p. 

Jer.  7. 25.  sent  you  my  s.  p.  25.  4.  |  29.  19.  |  35. 15. 
26.  5.  hearken  to  the  words  of  my  servants  the  p. 

Eiek.  38. 17. 1  have  spoken  in  old  time  by  my  ser- 
vants the  p. 

Dan.S).G.  neither  have  we  hearkened  to  servants  p. 
10.  laws  which  he  set  before  us  by  hisscrurnit^p. 

~1mos3.1.  herevealeth  his  secret  to  h\fi  servants  p. 

'Aeeh.  l.li.  words  wtiich  1  commanded  my  serv. p. 

Rev.  10. 7.  be  finished,  as  he  declared  to  his  serv. p. 
11.  IS.  that  thou  shouldest  give  reward  to  ser- 
vants the  p. 
PROPIIKTESS. 

Riod.  15. 20.  Miriam  p.  look  a  timbrel  in  her  hand 

.liidg.  4.  4.  and  Deborah  a  p.  judged  Israel 

2  Kinirs'ii.  14.  went  to  Huldah  p.  2  Chron.  34.22. 

•VeA.  6.  14.  my  God,  think  on  the  p.  Noadiah 

Isa.  8. 3. 1  went  lo  the  p.  and  she  conceived  a  son 

l^ukc  2.  36.  there  was  one  Anna  a  p.  of  great  age 

Rev.  2. 20.  woman  Jezebel,  who  railed  herself  a  p. 
PROPITIATION. 

Rom.  3.  25.  whom  God  hath  set  forth  to  he  a  p. 

1  John  2.  2.  and  he  is  the  p.  for  our  sins,  4.  10. 
PROPORTION. 

1  Kings  7.  36.  according  lo  Ihe  p.  of  every  one 

.lob  4J.  12.  I  will  not  conceal  his  comely  p. 

Rom.  12. 6.  let  us  prophe.sy  according  lo  p.  of  faith 
PROSELYTE. 

This  term  comes  from  iAe  Greek  word,  Proselytes, 
which  signifies  a  stranger,  otie  that  conies  from 
abroad,  or  from  another  place.  The  Hebrew 
wordiicr  or  iXecher, has  the  same  signification. 
in  the  language  of  the  Jews,  they  go  by  this 
name,  who  come  to  dwell  in  their  country,  or 
who  embrace  their  religion,  though  they  arc 
not  Jews  by  birth. 

The  Hebrews  distinguish  two  kinds  o/Pros'elytes. 
The  first  are  called  Proselytes  of  llie  Gate, 
and  the  others  Proselyies  of  juslice.  The/irst 
are  those  who  dwelt  in  the  land  of  Israel, 
or  even  out  of  that  country,  and  who,  without 
obliging  themselves  lo  circumcision,  or  to  any 
othi  r  ceremiiny  of  the  law,  feared  and  loorship- 
ped  Ihe  true  (lad,  observing  the  rules  that  were 
imposed  upon  the  children  of  Noah:  These 
precepts  are  seven  in  number,  [1]  De  Judiciis. 
Obedience  is  due  to  judges,  magistrates,  and 
princes.  [2]  Ue  cuitu  «.xtraneo.  The  worship 
of  false  gods,  .superstition,  and  sacrilege,  are 
absolutely  forbidden.  [3]  Do  malediclione  no- 
minis  san^issimi.  ./Is  also  cu7'sing  the  nunie  of 
God,  blasphemies,  and  false  oaths.  [4]  I)e 
revelalione  turpiludinum.  Likewise  all  inces- 
tuous and  unlawful  conjunction^  or  copula- 
tions, as  sodomy,  bestiality,  crimes  against  na- 
ture. [5]  l)e  sanguinis  etfusioni.  The  effusion 
of  the  blood  of  all  sorts  of  animals,  murder, 
wounds,  and  mutilations,  [li]  De  rupiiia. 
Thefts,  cheats,  lyins,  '^-c.  [7]  Do  meinhro 
aniinalis  vivenlis.  The  parts  of  an  aniiQ^ 
still  alive  arc  not  lo  he  eaten,  as  was  practised 
by  some  pagans.  Of  this  number  was  Naanian 
the  Syrian,  Cornelius  the  centurion,  the  eunuch 
of  Queen  Candace  and  others:  .Suck  as  would 
enter  themselves  as  Pru.'ielyles  of  habitation,  or 
of  the  gale,  promised  with  an  oath  in  the  pre 
sence  of  three  witnesses,  to  keep  those  seven 
precepts.  Their  privileges  were  said  to  be. 
First,  that  by  the  ohservnliim  of  the  rules  of 
natural  justice,  and  by  eiemption  from  idola- 
try, blasphemy,  incest,  adultiri/,  anil  murder, 
they  thought  they  were  in  Ihe  path  to  eleWial 
life.  Secondly,  they  might  dwell  in  thr  land  of 
Israel,  and  have  a  share  in  Ihe  outward  pros- 
perities of  the  people  of  (Jod. 

The  Proselytes  of  Jiisliro  are  those  that  were 
converted  to  Judaism,  who  had  engaged  them- 
selves toreceive  circumcision,  and  to  observe 
the  whole  law  of  Mosrs.  Thus  they  ivere  ad- 
mitted to  all  Ihe  preruiratives  of  the  people  nf 
(}od,  as  well  in  this  life  as  in  IJie  other.  Thr 
Rabbins  any,  that  before  eircumciiuon  wa.i  nd- 
mjiitteredU)  them,  and  before  they  were  admit  ■  I 


PRO 

ted  into  the  religion  of  the  Hebrews,  they  were 
examined  about  the  motives  of  their  conversion, 
to  know  whether  their  change  was  voluntary,  or 
whether  it  proceeded  from  anyreasons  of  inter 
est,  fear,  ambition,  or  such  like.  'I'hree  things 
were  required  in  a  complete  Proselyte,  which 
were,  washing  or  plunging  his  body  in  a  cis- 
tern of  water,  circumcision,  and  sacrifice;  but 
for  women,  only  washing  and  sacrifice. 
Mat.  23. 15.  com|>ass  sea  and  land  lo  make  one  p. 
.'lets  6.  5.  they  chose  Nicholas  a  p.  of  Anliocli 

PRt)SELYTES. 
yjfis  2.  10.  Jews  and  p.  we  hear  in  our  tongues 
13.  43.  many  Jews  and  reliirious  p.  followed  Paul 
PROSPECT. 
1  Kings  7.  t5.  doors  and  posts  were  square  in  p. 
Eiek.  40.  44.  chambers  whose  p.  was  to  the  south 
46.p.  to  the  north  ||  42.  15.  p.  lo  the  easl,  43.  4. 
PROSPER. 
Gen.  24.  40.  God  will  send  his  angel  and  p.  thee 
42.  if  now  thou  do  p.  m^  way  which  I  go 
39.  3.  Lord  made  all  that  Joseph  did  to  p.  23. 
JVuin.  14.  41.  you  transgress,  but  it  shall  not  p. 
Dcut.  28.  2'J.  thou  shall  not  p.  in  thv  ways 
29.  9.  that  ye  may  p.  .losh.  1.  7.  1  Kings  2.  3. 
1  Kings  22.  12.  ihe  i)rophels  prophesied,  saying,  go 
up  10  Ramoth-gileud  and  p.  15.  2  Chr.  18.  11, 14. 

1  Chron.  22.  11.  now  my  son,  the  Lord  p.  thee 
13.  then  shall  thou  p.  if  thou  lakcst  heed 

2  Chron.  13.  12.  tight  ye  not,  for  ye  shall  not  p. 
20.  20.  believe  his  prophets,  so  shall  yep. 

24.  20.  why  Iraii.sgress  ye,  that  ye  cannot  p.? 

26.  5.  as  he  sought  the  Lord,  God  made  him  to  p. 
JVih.  1.  11.  p.  I  pray  thee  ihy  servant  this  day 

2.  20.  I  said,  the  God  of  heaven,  be  will  p.  us 
./ob  12.  6.  the  tabeniacles  of  robbers  p. 
Psal.  1.  3.  and  whatsoever  he  doclh  shall  p. 

45.  t  4.  and  in  thy  majesty  p.  thou,  ride  thou 

73. 12.  these  are  the  ungodly  who  p.  in  the  worM 

122.  6.. they  thall  p.  that  love  thee 
Prov.  28.  13.  he  thai  coverelh  his  sins  shall  not  p. 
Feci.  11.  6.  Ihou  knowest  not  whether  shall  p. 
Isii.  52.  t  13.  behold  my  servant  shall  p. 

.53.  10.  (ileasure  of  the  Lord  shall  p.  in  his  hand 

54.  17.  no  weajion  formed  against  thee  shall  p. 

55.  II.  il  shall  p.  in  the  thing  whereunlo  I  sent  it 
Jer.  2.  37.  and  thou  shall  not  p.  in  them 

5.  28.  yet  ihey  p.  ||  10.  21. 1  hey  shall  not  p.  20. 1 1. 
12.  I.  wlierelbie  dolh  the  way  of  the  wicked  p.  ? 
22. 30. write  this  man  childless,  a  man  that  shall  nut 
p.  in  his  days,  for  no  man  of  his  seed  shall  p. 
23.  5.  a  king  shall  reign  and  p.  and  execute 

32.  5.  tho*  ye  lighi  with  Chaldeans  ye  shall  not  p 
Lam.  1.  5.  her  adversaries  are  chief,  her  enemies  p. 
Ezck.  15.  t  4.  the  vine  when  burnt,  will  it  p..' 

16.  1.3.  thou  didst  p.  II  17.  9.  shall  it  p.?  10. 

17.  15.  shall  hep.?  shall  he  escape? 

f>an.'3.  t30.  king  made  Shadrach  top.  inBabylwi 
8.  24.  he  shall  destroy  wonderfully  and  p. 
25.  through  his  policy  he  shall  cause  craft  top. 
11.  27.  Ihey  shall  speak  lies,  but  it  shall  not  p.  36. 

3  .John  2.  I  wish  above  all  that  thou  niayestp. 

PROSPERED. 
Gen.  24.  50.  seeing  the  Lord  halhp.  my  way 
Judg.  4.  24.  the  hand  of  Israel  p.  against  Jabin 

1  Sum.  18.  t  5.  and  David  went  out  and  p.  f  14. 

2  Sam.  11.  7.  David  demanded  how  the  warp. 

2  Kings  18. 7.  Hezekiahp.  2  Chron. 31.  21.  |  32. 30. 

1  Chron.  29.  23.  Solom.p.  ||  2  Chron.  14.  7.  Asa  p. 

Ezra  6. 14.  p.  through  the  prophesying  of  Ilaggai 

./oA  9.4. who  hardened  himself. ig.  him  and  halhp.? 

Dan.  6.  28.  so  this  Daniel  p.  in  tho  reign  of  Darius 
8.  12.  it  casi  down  Iriilli  lo  tho  ground  and  it  p. 

1  Cur.  16.  2.  everv  imn  lav  bv,  as  God  halli  p.  him 
PROSPERETII. 

Ezra  R.  8.  and  this  work  p.  in  their  hands 

Psal.yi.l.  fret  not  bee.  of  him  that  p.  in  his  way 

Prov.  17.  8.  a  gilt,  whithersoever  it  turneth  it  p. 

3./ohn  2.  nmyest  be  in  lii'allb,  even  as  thy  soul  p 
PROSPERITY. 

/)fi((.23.ri.  Ihou  shall  not  seek  llieir  p.  all  thy  days 

1  .'^iirn.25.  6.  thus  shall  say  to  him  that  livotli  in  p. 

1  Kings  10.7.  thy  wisdom  and  p.  rxcoedeih  faino 

Job  15.21.  in  p.  tho  destroyer  shall  come  on  him 
36.  11.  ifserve  hiin,  shaH  spend  llioir  days  in  p. 

Psal.  30. 6.  in  my  p.  I  said,  1  shall  never  bo  movoil 
35.  27.  Lord  hath  ploasuto  in  the  p.  of  his  servant 
7.1.  3.  when  I  saw  Iho  p.  of  the  wicked 
1 18.  25.  O  Lord,  I  beseech  llioe,  send  now  p. 
122.  7.  peace  bo  within  thy  walls,  p.  in  palaces 

Pror.  I.  32.  the  p.  of  fools  shall  destroy  them 

Errl.  7.  14.  in  the  day  ofp.  be  joyful 

A  r.  22.  21.  T  spake  lo  thee  in  Ihy  p. 

33.  9.  for  all  the  p.  that  I  procure  I/)  il  • 

f.iiin.  3.  17.  removed  far  from  peace,  F  forgatp. 
Dan.  8.  t  25.  by  p.  shall  he  deslmv  many 
y.reh.  I.  17.  my  cilies  Ihro'  p.  shall  y«t  bo  spread 
7.  7.  when  Jerusalem  was  inliahilul  and  in  p. 

PROSPEROrS. 
'Vtn.  2».21.  whelher  tho  Lord  made  his  journey^ 


tRO 

*en.  39. 2.  Ld.  was  with  J«cph,  he  was  &  p.  mar. 
Jvsli.  1.  8.  tlion  shall  thou  make  thy  way  p. 
Judg.  16.  5.  whether  the  way  we  go  siiall  hep. 
Jab  ti.  6.  maka  the  habitation  of  righteousness  p. 
Isa.  48.  15.  and  he  shall  make  his  way  p. 
Zech.  8.  Vi.  for  the  seed  shall  he  p.  vine  give  fruit 
Auni.  1. 10.  if  at  length  I  might  have  a /i.  journey 

PKOriFEKUUSLY. 
3  Chron.  7.  11.  Solomon  p.  ett'ecled  all  that  came 
tsal.  45.  4.  and  in  thy  majesty  nilop.  because 

I'KOriTlTUTE. 
Lev.  19.  29.  do  not  p.  thy  daughter  to  be  a  whore 

PKUTECTKtST. 
Psal.  5.  t  11.  shout  for  jiiy,  because  thou ^.  them 

I'ROTKCTION. 
Deut.  32.  38.  let  them  lise  up  and  be  your  p. 

PROTEST,  ED. 
Ocn.  43.  3.  the  man  did  solemnly  p.  to  us,  saying 
ISam.  8.  9.  hearken,  yet  p.  solemnly  unto  them 
iKiiijrs  2.  42.  and  Vp.  unto  thee,  saying,  know 
Jtr.  11.  7.  I  earnestly  p   to  your  fathers 
Zech.  3.  6.  the  angel  of  the  Eorfl  p.  to  Joshua 
1  Ckir.  15.  31.  I  p.  by  your  rejoicing  in  Christ 

PROTESTING. 
Oen.  43.  t  3.  the  man  p.  protested  to  us,  saying 
Jer.  11.  7.  and  p.  saying,  obey  my  voice 

PROTRACT. 
JVeA.  9.  t  30.  many  years  didst  thou  p.  over  them 

PROUD. 
Job  9.  13.  the  p.  heli)ers  do  stoop  under  him 
2().  12.  by  understanding  he  smiteth  through  the  p. 
38.  11.  and  here  shall  thy  p.  waves  be  stayed 
40.  11.  behold  every  one  that  is  p.  and  abase  him 

12.  look  on  every  one  that  is  p.  bring  him  low 
Psal.  12.  3.  the  tongue  that  speaketh  p.  things 
31.  23.  and  plentifully  rowardeth  the;;,  doer 
4U.  4.  blessed  is  the  man  who  respecteth  not  the  p. 
8tj.  14.  O  God,  the  p.  are  risen  against  me 
94.  2.  lift  up  tliysell',  render  a  reward  to  the  p. 
101.  5.  him  that  hath  a  p.  heart  will  I  not  suffer 
119.  21.  tliou  hast  rebuked  the  p.  that  are  cursed 
51.  the  p.  have  had  me  greatly  in  derision 
G9.  the  p.  have  forged  a  lie  against  me 
,    78.  let  p.  be  ashamed,  for  they  dealt  perversely 
85.  the  p.  <ligged  pits  for  me,  not  after  thy  law 
122.  be  surety  for  me,  let  not  the  p.  oppress  me 

123.  4.  our  soul  is  tilled  with  contempt  of  the  p. 

124.  5.  the/),  waters  had  gone  over  our  soul 
13S.  6.  but  the  p.  ho  knoweth  afar  off 

140.  5.  the  p.  have  hid  a  snare  for  me  and  cords 
Pruv.  6.  17.  Lord  hateth  a.  p.  look,  a  lying  tongue 

13.  25.  the  Lord  will  destroy  the  house  of  the  p. 

ltj.5.  every  one  p.  in  heart  is  abomination  to  Lord 
19.  than  to  divide  the  spoil  with  the  p. 

21.  4.  a  high  look  and  a  p.  heart  is  sin 
24.  p.  scorner  is  his  name,  who  deals  in  p.  wralh 

28. 25.  he  that  is  of  a  p.  heart  stirreth  up  strife 
Eccl.  7.  8.  the  patient  better  than  the  p.  in  spirit 
Jsn.  2.  12.  day  of  the  Lord  on  every  one  that  is  p. 

13.11.  I  will  cause  thearrogancy  ofthep.  to  cease 

16.  6.  we  have  heard  of  Moab,  he  is  very  p. 
Jer.  13.  15.  be  not  p.  for  the  Lord  hath  spoken 

43.  2.  all  the  p.  men  aLiswered  Jeremiah 

48.  29.  heard  pride  of  Moab,  he  is  exceeding  p. 

50.  29.  she  hath  been  p.  ||  31.  O  thou  most  p. 

32.  most  p.  shall  stumble  and  fall,  none  raise  him 
//a4.  2. 5.  lie  is  a  p.  man,  neiilur  kcepethathonie 
Jil'il.  3.  15.  we  call  the  p.  hap|)y  ||  4. 1.  p.  as  stubble 
JLuke  1.  51.  he  hath  scattered  the  p.  in  imagination 
Rinn.  1.  30.  filled  with  unrighteousness,  p.  boasters 

1  Tim.  *).  4.  he  is  p.  knowing  nolhing,  but  doling 

2  Tim.  3.  2.  men  shall  be  lovers  of  themselves,  p. 
Jam.  4.  G.  God  resistnth  the  p.  1  Pet.  5.  5. 

PROUDLY. 
F.xnd.  18. 11.  wliorein  dealt/),  he  was  above  Ihem 
15am.  2.  3.  talk  no  more  so  exceeding  p. 
J^ck.  9. 10.  ihou  kncwest  that  they  dealt  p.  IG,  29. 
.  Psal.  17.  10.  with  iheir  mouth  they  speak  p. 
31.18.whii-li  .;pe:ik  grievous  things  p.  against  right 
Isa.  3.  5.  child  shall  behave  himself  p.  ag.  ancient 
Dan.  5.  t  20.  and  his  mind  hardened  to  deal  p. 
Obad.  12.  neither  shonldest  thou  have  spoken  p. 

PROVE 
Signifies  [1]   To  try  and  examine,  2  Cor.  13.  5. 
[2]  To  make  innnifcst  by  argument,  Acts  9.  22. 
Rom.  3.  9.      [3]    To  make  good.  Acts  24.  13. 
[4]    To  try  bit  satnc  affliction,  that  men  may 
know  their  own  hearts,  Ileut.  8.  2.     [3]  To 
find  true,  Eecl.  7.  23.     [fi]  To  judse.  Job  9. 20. 
[7]    To  iliacern,  approve  of,  and  conform  to, 
Rom.  12.  2. 
F.zod.  16.  4.  that  I  may  p.  them,  Deut.  8.  16. 
20.  90.  /ear  not,  for  God  is  come  to  p.  you 
Dcv.t.8.2.  to  humble  thee,  and  to  p.  thee,  to  know 
33.  8.  holy  one,  whom  thou  didst  p.  at  Massah 
jKif.  2.22.  that  lhroii<;h  thoin  I  may  p.  Isr.  3. 1,4. 
6.  39.  let  ine  p.  thee  but  Ibis  once  with  fleece 
lA'iny.?  10.  I.  she  cane  to  p.  Solomon,  2  Chr.  9. 1. 
Job  9.  20.  if  (  fi'.y  perfect,  it  shall  p.  me  perverse 
13.  t  15-  1  will  p.  mine  own  w.'iys  before  him 
463 


PRO 

Psal.  20.  2.  examine  me,  O  Lord,  and  p.  me 
Keel.  2.  1.  go  to  now,  1  will  p.  thee  wiih  mirth 
iJaa.l.  12.p.  thyservants,  1  beseech  thee, ten  days 
Mai.  3.  10.  bring  the  tithes,  p.  me  now  herewith 
Luke  14.  19.  I  have  bought  oxen,  I  go  top.  them 
.lohn  6.  6.  this  he  said  lop.  him,  for  he  knew 
Jicts  24.  13.  neither  can  they  p.  the  things,  25.  7. 
Horn.  12.  2.  that  ye  may  p.  what  is  that  good  will 
2  Cur.  8.  8.  top.  the  sincerity  of  your  love 

13.  .5.  p.  your  own  selves,  know  ye  not  yourselves? 
Gal.  6.  4.  but  let  every  man  p.  his  own  work 

1  Tkess.  5.  21.  p.  all  things,  hold  fast  what  is  good 

PROVED. 
Gen.  42. 15.  hereby  ye  shall  hep.  by  lifeof  Pharaol 
16.  send  one  of  you,  that  your  words  may  bep 
Exod.  15.25.  made  a  statute,  and  there  hep.  then 
ISam.  17.  39.  he  had  not  p.  his  swotd,  David  said  to 
Saul,  I  cannot  go  with  these,  I  have  not  p.  llien 
Psal.  l7.  3.  thou  hast  p.  my  heart  and  visited  me 
66.  10.  thou,  O  God,  hast  p.  us,  thou  hast  tried  us 
81.  7.  I  p.  thee  at  the  waters  of  Meribah 
95.  9.  when  your  lathers  p.  me  and  saw  my  works 
Eccl.  7.  23.  all  this  have  Ip.  by  wisdom 
Dan.  1.  14.  he  consented,  and  p.  them  ten  days 
Hum.  3.  9.  we  before  p.  Jews  and  Gentiles  under  sin 

2  Cor.  8.  22.  whom  we  have  often  p.  diligent 
1  Tim.  3.  10.  anil  let  these  also  be  first  p. 
Hcb.  3.  9.  your  lathers  p.  me,  and  saw  my  works 

PROVETH. 
Deal.  13.  3.  for  Lord  your  God  p.  you,  to  know 

PROVING. 
.^cts  9.  22.  Saul  p.  that  this  is  very  Christ 
Eph.  3.  10.  p.  what  is  acceptable  to  the  Lord 

PROVENDER. 
Gen.2i.  25.  we  have  both  straw  and  p.  enough 
32.  the  man  gave  straw  and  p.  for  the  camels 
42. 27.  one  opened  sack  to  give  his  assp.  in  the  inn 
43.  24.  the  man  gave  their  asses  p. 
.fudg.  19.  19.  yet  there  is  both  straw  and  p. 

21.  he  brought  him  and  gave  p.  to  the  asses 
fsa.  30.  24.  the  oxen  and  asses  shall  eat  clean  ». 

PROVERB. 
The  Hebrews  give  the  name  of  Proverbs,  Para- 
bles, or  Similitudes,  to  moral  sentences,  max 
ims,  comparisons,  or  enigmas,  expressed  in  a 
style  that  is  poetical,  figurative,  close,  and 
sententious:  They  call  this  kind  of  Proverbs, 
Mishle.     Solomon  says,  that  in  his  time  max 
ims  of  this  sort  were  the  chief  study  of  the 
learned.     A  wise  man  will  endeavour,  says  he, 
to  understand  a  proverb,  and  the  interpretatio 
the  words  of  the  wise  and  their  dark  saying 
Prov.  1.  6.     In  the  Proverbs  of  Solomon  we 
find  rules  for  the  conduct  of  all  conditions  of 
life;  fur  kings,  courtiers,  men  engaged  in  the 
affairs  of  the  world ;  for  masters,  servants, 
fathers,  mothers,  and  children. 
Deut.  28.  37.  ye  shall  be  a  p.  and  a  by-word 
lSam.10.12.it  became  ap.  is  Saul  among  prophets? 
24. 13.  as  saitli  the  p.  of  the  ancients 

1  Kings  9.  7.  Israel  shall  be  a  p.  and  a  by-word 

2  Chron.  7.  20.  this  house  will  I  make  to  be  a  p. 
Psal.  69.  11.  and  I  became  a  p.  to  them 

Prov.  1.6.  to  understand  a  p.  and  words  of  the  wise 
Isa.  14.  4.  take  u?  this  p.  against  king  of  Babylon 
■Jer.  24.  9.  I  wis  deliver  them  to  be  a  p.  and  curse 
£2r4.12.22.what.s  thatp.ye  have  in  land  oflsrael! 
23.  I  will  make  this  p.  cease,  and  they  shall  no 
more  use  it  as  a  p.  in  Israel,  18.  2,  ;i. 

14.  8.  I  will  make  him  a  sign,  and  a  p.  and  cut  otf 
JIab.  2.  6.  all  Ihess  take  np  a  taunting  p.  ag.  him 
I,uke  4.  23.  will  surely  say  this  p.  phys.  heal  thyself 
Ji^hn  10.29.  now  speakest  Ihou  plainly,  and  nop. 
2  Pu.  2.  22.  it  is  happened  according  to  the  p. 

PliOVERBS. 
J^um.  21.27.  whertlore  they  that  speak  in  p.  say 
yh'ings  4.  32.  Solomon  spake  three  thousand  p. 
Prov.  1.  1.  the  p.  of  Solomon,  10.  1.  |  25.  1. 
Eccl.  12.  9.  the  pre:icher  set  in  order  many  p. 
Ezek.  16.  44.  behold,  every  one  tiiat  useth  p.  shall 


PRO 

Ps.  65.  9.  prepares!  corn,  when  thon  hastp  fo/  » 
/>«A(;12.v:0.  whose  shall  those  things  be  thou  liaslp.7 
JJeb.  11.  40.  God  having  p.  better  tilings  for  Ui 

PROVIDENCE. 
Mcts  24.  2.  are  done  to  this  nation  by  thy  p. 

PROVIDETH. 
Job  38.  41.  whop,  for  the  raven  his  food 
Prov.  6.  8.  and  p.  her  meat  in  the  summer 

PROVIDING. 

2  Cor.  8.  21.  p.  for  honest  things,  not  only  in  sight 

PROVINCE,  S. 

1  h'ings  20. 14.  by  the  princes  ol  the  p.  15,  17, 19. 
Ezra  4.  15.  this  city  is  hurtful  to  kings  and  p. 

6.  2.  there  was  found  in  the  p.  of  the  Medes 

7.  16.  carry  the  gold  thou  canst  find  in  the  p. 
JVf/i.  7.  6.  these  are  the  children  of  the  p.  went  up 

11.  3.  now  these  are  the  chief  of  the  p. 
Esth.  1.  1.  Ahasuerus  reigned  over  127  p. 
16.  hath  done  wrong  to  all  people  in  all  p.  22. 

2.  3.  let  the  king  appoint  officers  in  all.  the  p. 
18.  then  the  king  made  a  release  to  the  p. 

3.8.  is  a  people  scattered  in  allp.of  thy  kiiigdom 
13.  Hainan  sent  by  jiosts  to  all  the  king's  p. 

4.  11.  all  the  people  of  the  king's  p.  do  know 

8.  9.  127  p.  and  do  every  p.  according  to 

12.  upon  one  day  in  all  p.  of  king  Ahasuerus 

9.  4.  Mordecai's  tiime  went  through  all  the  p. 
12.  what  have  they  done  in  the  rest  ofthep. 
28.  these  days  should  be  kept  through  every  p. 

Eccl.  2.  8.  I  gathered  the  treasure  ofthep. 

5.  8.  if  thou  seest  oppression  in  a  p.  marvel  not 
Dam.  1.  1.  she  that  was  princess  among  the  p. 
Eiek.  19  8.  nations  set  against  him  from  the  p. 
2>on.2. 48.  the  king  made  Daniel  ruler  over  the  p. 

3.  1.  he  set  up  an  image  in  the  p.  of  Babylon 
30.  promoted  Shadraeh  in  the  p.  of  Babylon 

8.  2.  I  was  at  Shoshan  in  the  p.  of  Elam 
11.  24.  shall  enter  on  the  fattest  places  of  the  p. 
..^cts  23.  34.  he  asked  of  what  p.  he  was 
25.  1.  now  when  Kesius  was  come  into  the  p. 

PROVISION. 
Gen.  42.  25.  and  to  give  them  p.  for  the  way 
45.  21.  Joseph  gave  them  p.  for  the  way 
./usk.  9.  5.  all  the  bread  of  their  p.  was  dry 
12.  this  our  bread  we  took  liot  for  our  p. 
iKings  4. 7.  each  man  his  month  in  a  year  madep. 
22.  Solomon's  p.  for  one  day  was  30  measures 

2  Kings  6.  23.  he  prepared  great  p.  for  them 

1  Chron.  29.  19.  for  the  which  I  have  made  p 
Psal.  132.  15.  I  will  abundantly  bless  her  p. 
Dan.  ].  5.  the  king  appointed  ihem  a  daily  p. 
Pom.  13.  14.  and  make  not  p.  t'or  the  flesh 
PROVOCATION. 

1  Kings  15.  30.  Jeroboam  made  Israelsin  by  hisp. 
21.  22.  for  the  p.  wherewith  Ah.lb  provoked 

2  Kings  19.t  3.  it  is  a  day  of  trouble,  rebuke  and  p. 
2;).  26.  because  of  the  p.  Mauasseh  provoked 

JVVA.  9.  18.  and  had  wrought  great  p.  26. 
■Job  17.  2.  doth  not  mine  eye  continue  in  their  p.? 
Psal.  95.  8.  harden  not  your  hearts  as  in  p.  as  in 
day  of  temptation  in  the  wildern.  Mi. 3. 8, 15. 
.Jer.  32.  31.  this  city  hath  been  to  me  as  a  p. 
Eiek.  20.  28.  there  they  presented  p.  of  offering 

PROVOKE. 
F.xod.  23.  21.  obey  his  voice,  and  p.  him  not 
J^Tum.  14.  11.  how  long  will  this  people  p.  met 
Deut.  31.  20.  if  yep.  and  break  my  covenant 
.Job  12.  6.  and  they  that  p.  God  are  secure 
Psal.  78.  40.  hov.'  oft  did  theyp.  him  in  wilderness? 
Isa.  3.  8.  doings  against  Lord  top.  eyes  of  his  glory 
.Jer.  7.  19.  do  they  p.  me  to  linger  ?  snith  the  Lord 

44.  8.  in  that  ye  p.  me  to  wrath  wiih  works 
I.uke  11.  .53.  began  to  urge  and  p.  him  to  speak 
i^om. 10.19.  I  will  p.  to  jealousy  by  them  no  people 

11.  11.  for  lop.  them  to  jealousy,  14. 
1  Cor.  10.  22.  do  we  p.  the  Lord  to  jealousy? 
Eph.Ci.i.  ye  fathers,  p.  not  your  children  to  wrath 
f^cb.  3.  16.  some  when  they  liad  heard,  did  p. 

10.  24.  to  p.  to  love  and  to  ?ood  works 
PROVOKED. 


Tohn  16.23.  these  spiken  in  p.  no  more  speak  in  p.  LVum.  14.23.  nor  shall  any  of  them  tlialp.mcsee  it 


PROVIDE. 

Ocn.  22.  8.  God  will  p.  himself  a  lamb  forofferin; 

1 14.  Abraham  called  the  place,  the  Lord  willp 

30.  30.  now  when  shall  I  p.  for  mine  own  house? 

Exod.  18.  21.  shall  p.  out  of  the  people  able  men 

1  Sum.  16.  17.  p.  me  a  man  that  can  play  well 

2  Clir.  2.  7.  with  cunning  men  whom  David  did  p. 
PSal.  78.  20.  can  hep.  floah  for  his  people? 
jMat.  10.  9.  p.  ni^ithergold  nor  silver  in  your  purses 
iMke  12.  33.  p.  yourselves  bags  which  wax  not  old 
^cts  23.  24.  and  p.  Ihem  beasts  to  set  Paul  on 
Horn.  12.  17.  p.  tidngs  honest  in  sight  of  all  men 
1  Tim.  5.  8.  but  if  anv  p.  not  for  his  own  hou.=e 

PROVIDED. 
Deut.  33.  21.  hep.  the  first  part  for  himself 
J.Sam.  16.  1.  I  have  p.  me  a  king  anlong  his  sons 
iSam.  19.  32.  he  had  p.  the  kin?  of  sustenance 

1  Kinrrs  4.  7.  which  p.  victual.!  for  the  king,  27. 

2  C%r0n.32.29.  Hezekiah  p. possessions  of  llucks 


16.  30.  ye  shall  know  these  men  have  p.  the  Lord 
Deut.  9.  8.  in  Horeb  ye  p.  the  I^ord  to  wralh 

22.  at  Tabernh  and  Massah  ye  p.  liOid  to  wrath 
1  Sam.  1.  6.  and  her  adversary  also  p.  her  sore 

7.  soshe  n.  her,  Iheref.  she  wept  and  did  not  eat 
1  A77)irr.>f  I  l.22.Jud.p.himtojealousy  withtheirsiiis 
iJCings  23.  2(1.  Mana.isch  liad  p.  him  withal 
1  Chron.il.  1.  Satan  p.  David  to  number  Israel 
Ezra  5.  12.  after  that  our  fathers  had  p.  God 
Psal.  78.  .56.  tempted  and  p.  the  most  high  God 
106.  7.  but  p.  him  at  the  sea,  even  the  Red-sett 

29.  they  p.  him  with  their  own  inventions 

33.  because  they  p.  the  spirit  of  Moses,  43. 
Zech.  8.  14.  when  your  fathers  p.  me  to  wrath 

1  Cor.  13.  5.  charity  is  not  easily  p.  Ihinkolh  no  ev^ 

2  Cor.  9.  2.  and  your  zeal  hnlh  p.  very  many 

PROVOKEDST. 

Deut.  9.  7.  forget  not  how  thou  p.  Lord  thy  Go< 

See  Ang«r. 


PUB 


PROVOKETn. 
Prov.  00. 2.  whoso  ;>.  him  to  anger  linneth  ag.  sou 
/sa.  65.  3.  people  Ihat  p.  me  to  anger  to  my  luce 
Eiek.  8.3.  where  was  image  which  p.  tojealou.sy 

PROVOKING. 
Deut.  32.  19.  because  of  p.  his  sons  and  daughters 

1  Kings  14.  15.  they  made  groves,  p.  Lord  to  angi^r 
It).  7.  against  Bunsha  in  p.  the  Lord  to  anger,  13. 

Psal.  78. 17.  hy  p.  the  Most  High  in  the  wilderness 

Oai.5.26.no\.  desirous  ofvaingiory,;).  one  another 

PRUDENCE. 

2  Chr.  2. 12.  ion  endued  with  p.  and  understanding 
Prov.  8.  12. 1  wisdom  dwell  with;). find  knowledge 

11).  t  11.  the  p.  of  a  man  deferrcth  his  anger 
Eph.  1.  8.  he  hath  abounded  in  all  wisdom  and  p. 

PKUUENT. 
lS(iin.l6.18.Dav.;).in  matters,  and  a  comely  person 
Protj.  12.  It),  but  a  p.  man  covereth  shanio 
23.  a.  p.  man  coucealeth  knowledge 

13.  16.  every  p.  man  dealeth  with  knowledge 

14.  8.  wisdom  of  the  p.  is  to  understand  his  way 
15.  but  the  p.  man  lookolh  well  to  his  going 
18.  but  the;),  are  crowned  with  knowledge 

15.  5.  but  he  that  regardeth  reproof  is;). 

16.  CI.  the  wise  in  heart  shall  be  called  p. 

18.  15.  the  heart  of  the;),  getteth  knowledge 

19.  14.  and  a  ;).  wife  is  from  the  Lord 
22.  3.  a  p.  man  forcseeth  evil  and  hideth,  27. 12. 

Isa.  3.  2.  take  away  ihep.  and  the  ancient 
5.  21.  woe  to  lliem  that  are  p.  in  their  own  sight 
10.  13.  by  my  wisdom  I  have  done  it,  for  I  am  p. 
29. 14.  understanding  of  theirp.  men  should  be  hid 
Jer.  49.  7.  is  counsel  perished  from  the  p.? 
Hos.  14.  9.  who  Is  p.  and  he  shall  know  them"? 
^mos  5.  13.  the  p.  shall  keep  silence  in  that  time 
Mat.  11.  25.  hid  these  things  from  p.  JMke  10.  21. 
Jlcts  13.  7.  the  deputy  Sergius  Paulus,  a  p.  man 
1  Qw.  1.  19.  to  nothing  understanding  of  the  p. 

PRUDENTLY, 
/ra.  52.13.  my  serv.  shall  deal  p.  heshallbee.talted 

PRUNE. 

Lev.  25.  3.  six  years  siiall  thou  p.  thy  vineyard 

4.  seventh  vear  not  sow  thy  field  nor  p. 

PRUNED. 

Isa.  5.  6.  I  lay  it  wnstv,  itshallnot  bep.  nordiggcd 

PRUNIN(J. 

Ita.'i.  4.  they  shall  bcu  their  spears  into  p.  hooks 

18.  5.  ho  shall  cut  otf  the  sprigs  with  p.  hooka 

Joel  .3.  10.  beat  your  ji.  hooks  into  spears 

Mic.  4.  3.  lliey  shall  hint  their  spears  into  p.  hooks 

l'if.\LM. 
1  Chron.  16.  7.  then  David  delivered  first  this  p. 
Paul.  SI.  2.  lake  a  p.  II  98.5.  with  the  voice  of  a  p. 
Mai.  26.  t  .'JO.  when  they  had  sung  a  p.  they  went 
out  into  the  mount  of  Olives,  Mur/c  14.  f  26. 
^ct»  13.  33.  as  it  is  also  written  in  the  second  p. 

35.wherefore  he  sttith  also  in  aiiotherp. thou  shall 
lC»r.  14.26.  how  is  it  every  one  of  you  hath  a  p.? 

PS.\LMIST. 
S  Sam.  23. 1.  last  words  of  David,  swcetp.  of  Israel 

PSALMS. 
1  Chron.  16.  9.  sing  p.  to  him,  Psal.  105.  2. 
AcA.  12.  t8.  the  Levitesover  thcp.  of  thanksgiving 
Psal.  95.  2.  make  a  joyful  noise  to  him  with  p. 
iMke  20.  42.  David  himself  saith  in  the  book  ofp 
24.  44.  which  were  written  in  p.  concerning  mo 
JlcU  1.  20.  f.ir  it  is  written  in  the  book  ofp. 
F.pli.  5. 19.  spcakini;  to  yourselves  in  p.  and  hymns 
Co/  3.16.admoni8liiiig  one  another  in  p.  and  hymns 
Jam.  5.  13.  is  aiiv  nierrv'!  let  him  sing  p. 

PSALTERY. 
1  Sam.  10. 5.  meet  a  coin[  any  of  propiiets  will)  a  p. 
Psal.  33.  'i.  sing  to  him  with  the  p.  144.  9. 
57.  8.  awake,  my  glory,  awakep.  and  harp,  108.2. 
71.  22.  I  will  also  priiiso  thee  with  the  p.  92.  3. 
81.  2.  biing  hither  the  pleasant  harp  with  the  p. 
150.  3.  praise  him  w  ith  trumpet  the  p.  and  harp 
Don.  3.  .').  w  Inn  vc  lii:ir  sound  of  the  p.  7,  10,  15 
PSALTKRII'..-!,  .s<T  Uymdals. 
PUR  Lie  AN, 
In  Orcck,  Tclones,  was  a  farmer,  or  a  receiver 
of  public   mnnnj,  an  officer  of  the  revenue,  a 
man  emphitirdin  cnllrcting  such  impositions  as 
are  hatiful  In  the  people.    Jlmvng  the  Roman 
tAere  verr  two  sinis  of  Farmers:  Some  were 
(teneral  Farmers,  irhn  in  every  province  had 
their  drputim^aiid  undrr-farmcrs,whocothet.ed 
the  revenues  and  ullirr  profits  of  the  empire,  of 
vhich  thai  ir"rr  on  account  to  the  Kiiiprror 
These  prinripiil  Furiners  were  men  of  great 
consideration  in  tin-  government ;  and  Cicero 
tays,  that  among  thi.ie  were  to  be  found  the 
flower  of  the  Roman  knights,  the  ornament  of 
the  city,  and  the  strength  of  the  commonwealth. 
But  the dqiulies , the  under- far mrrs , the  commis- 
sioners, lAf  Publicans  of  the  lower  order,  were 
looked  upon  as somanythieve.n  andpitkpnrketn. 
Theocritus  being  once  asked,   HTlirh  wa^  the 
most  cruel  of  all  beasts,  made  answer,  That 
among  tht  beasts  of  the  wilderness,  Lhey  were 
464 


lUB 

the  bear  and  the  lion;  among  the  beasts  of  the 
city,  thttj  were  the  Publican  and  the  Parasite. 
Among  the  Jews,  the  name  and  profession  of  a 
Publican  teas  the  most  odious  thing  in  the 
world.  This  nation,  in  a  particular  manner, 
valued  themselves  upon  their  freedom:  We  be 
ylbraham's  sveii,  and  were  never  in  bondage  to 
any  man,  John  8.  33.  I'hey  could  not,  without 
the  utmost  reluctancy,  see  Publicans  in  their 
country,  rigorously  exacting  those  tributes 
and  impositions  that  were  laid  on  Ihem  by  the 
Romans  :  A'«pcciu//i/«Ae  Galileans  or  Herodians 
submitted  to  this  badge  of  servitude  not  with- 
out the  greatest  impatience,  and  thought  it  even 
unlawful  to  pay  tribute  to  a  foreign  power:  as 
they  shewed  by  that  question  they  put  to  our 
Saviour,  Luke  20.  22,  Is  it  lawful  lor  us  to  give 
tribute  to  Cesar,  or  no?  Those  of  their  own 
nation  that  undertook  this  employ,  they  looked 
upon  as  no  better  than  heathen,  Let  him  be 
unto  thee  as  a  heathen  man,  and  u  Publican, 
Mat.  18.  17.  It  is  said,  that  Ihoj  would  not 
allow  them  to  come  into  their  teoiplc,  or  their 
synagogues,  nor  admit  them  to  partake  of 
their  public  prayers,  or  of  their  offices  of  judi- 
cature, or  alloui  them  to  give  testimony  in  a 
court  of  justice ;  and  for  certain  they  would 
not  accept  of  their  presents  at  the  temple,  no 
more  than  they  would  of  the  price  of  pro.ititu- 
tion  or  of  blood,  or  of  any  thing  else  of  the 
like  nature. 
Inhere  were  many  Publicans  in  Judca,  in  the  time 
of  our  Saviour.  Zaccheus  probably  was  one 
of  the  principal  Farmers,  since  he  is  called  th 
chief  among  the  Publicans,  Luke  19.  2.  but 
Matthew  was  only  an  inferior  Publican.  The 
Jews  reproached  our  Saviour  with  bein^ 
friend  of  Publican.^  and  sinners,  and  of  eating 
with  them,  Luke  7.  34.  And  our  Saviour  told 
the  Jews,  That  harlots  and  Publicans  went  into 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  before  them.  Mat.  21. 

31.  In  the  parable  of  the  Publican  and  Phari 
see,  who  made  their  prayers  together  in  the 
temple,  we  see  with  what  .sentinents  of  humility 
the  view  of  his  condition  inspired  the  Pub- 
lican ;  he  keeps  afar  off,  and  probably  dare, 
not  so  much  as  enter  the  court  of  the  people , 
he  is  afraid  to  lift  up  his  eyes  to  heaven  ;  he 
smites  his  breast,  and  submissively  asks  par- 
don of  God,  Luke  18.  10,  li-c.  Zaccheus  says 
to  our  Saviour,  that  he  was  ready  to  givchalf 
of  his  goods  to  the  poor,  and  to  restore  four- 
fold of  whatever  he  had  unjustly  acquired, 
Luke  19.  8.  And  this,  because  at  that  time 
the  Roman  laws  required  that  whenever  any 
Publican  was  convicted  of  extortion,  he  should 
be  obliged  to  render  four  times  the.  value  of 
what  he  had  extorted. 

PUBLICAN,  S. 
Mat.  5.  46.  do  not  even  the  p.  the  same?  47. 
Q.lO.many  p.  sat  with  him,  Mark  2.15.  Luke 5. 29. 
11.  said  to  his  disciples,  why  eateth  your  master 
with  p.  and  sinners,  Mark  2. 16.  J.uke  5. 30. 

10.  3.  Philip,  Thomas,  and  Matthew  the  p. 

11.  19.  a  friend  ofp.  and  sinneri,  I.ukc  7.  34. 

18.  17.  let  him  be  to  thee  ns  a  lieathen  and  a  p. 
21.  31.  p.  go  intothe  kingdom  of  God  before  you 

32.  but  the  p.  and  the  harlots  believed  him 
I.uke  3.  12.  then  came  also  p.  to  be  baptized 

5.  27.  ho  saw  a  p.  named  Levi  sitting  at  receipt 
7.  29.  the  p.  justified  God,  being  baptized  with 
li).  1.  then  drew  near  to  him  the  p.  to  hear  him 
18   10.  the  one  a  Pharisee,  and  the  other  a  p. 

11.  God,  I  thank  thee,  I  am  not  as  this  p. 

]3.p.stnndiiig  afar  off,  said,  d.  be  merciful  to  me 

19.  2.  Zaccheus  was  chief  among  the  p.  and  rich 
PUBLIC. 

Mat.  1.  19.  not  willlne  to  make  her  a  p.  example 

PUBLICLY. 
Acts  18. 28.  for  he  p.  convinced  the  Jews,  showing 

20.  20.  but  have  shewed  voo,  have  taught  you  ». 
PUBLISH. 

Deut.  32.  3.  I  will  n.  the  name  of  the  Lord 
1  Sam.  31.  9.  to  p.  it  in  the  Imiise  of  their  idola 
2.S'rtm.  1.  20.  p.  It  not  in  the  streets  of  Askelon 
Jfeh.  8. 15.  should  p.  Ihat  ihcy  bring  pine-branches 
Psal.  26.  7.  may  p.  with  the  voice  of  thanksgiving 
Jer.  4. 5.  p.  in  Jerusalem  ||  16.  p.  against  Jerusalem 
5.  20.  declare  this,  p.  it  in  Judah,  saying 
31.  7.  p.  ye  an<1  say,  O  Lord,  save  thy  people 
46.  14.  declare  in  Egypt,  p.  in  Migdol,  p.  in  Noph 
."M).  2.  p.  and  conceal  not,  Babylon  is  taken 
Amos  3.  9.  p.  in  the  pnlacis  of  Ashdod  and  Egypt 
4.  5.  proclaim  and  p.  the  free  offerings 
Mark  1.  45.  but  he  began  to  p.  it  much,  5.  20. 

PUBLISHED. 
F.^th.  1.  2tl.  king's  decree  bep.  thro'  all  empire, 22. 
3.  14.  the  copy  of  Iloman's  decree  was  p.  8.  13. 
Psal.  68.  11.  groat  wai  the  company  that  p.  it 
Jonah  3.  7.  ho  caused  it  to  bo  p.  through  Nineveh 


PUN 

Mark  7.  38.  bo  much  more  a  great  deal  they  p.  H 
13.  10.  the  gospel  must  first  bep.  among  nationi 
Luke  8.  39.  be  went  and  p.  through  the  whole  city 
Acts  10.  37.  that  word  ye  know,  which  wasp. 
13.  49.  word  of  the  Lord  was  p.  through  all  regioo 

PURLISHKTH. 
Isa.  52.  7.  that  p.  peace,  that  p.  salvation 
.kr.  4. 15.  voice  p.  aflliction  from  mount  Ephraira 
JVa/i.  1.  15.  behold  the  feet  of  him  that  p.  peace 

PUFF. 
Job  11.  \  20.  their  hopes  shall  be  a  p.  of  breath 
PUFFED  up. 

1  Cor.  4. 6.  no  one  of  you  be  p.  up  against  another 

18.  some  are  p.  up,  as  though  I  would  not  come 

19.  will  know,  not  speechof  them  that  are  p.  up 
5.  2.  ye  are  p.  up,  and  have  not  rather  mourneu 

13.  4.  charity  vaunteth  not  itself,  is  not  p.  up 
Col.  2.  Id.  vainly  p.  up  by  his  Heshly  mind 

PUFFETH  at. 
Psal.  10. 5.  as  for  all  his  enemies,  he  p.  at  them 
12.  5.  set  him  in  safety  from  him  that  p.  at  him 
PUFFETH  up. 

2  Cor.  8.  1.  knowledge  p.  up,  charity  edifieth 
PULL,  ED. 

den.  8.  9.  Noah  p.  the  dove  to  him  into  the  ark 
19.  10.  but  the  men  p.  Lot  into  the  house 
■  losh.  8.  t  6.  till  we  have  p.  them  from  the  city 
1  Kings  13.  4.  Jeroboam  could  not  p.  it  in  again 
F.ira  6.  11.  let  timber  be  p.  down  from  his  house 
Psal.  31.  4.  p.  me  out  of  net  they  have  laid  for  m« 
Isa.  22.  19.  and  from  thy  state  shall  p.  thee  down 
Jer.  1.  10.  set  thee  to  p.  down  and  destroy,  18.  7. 

12.  3.  p.  them  out  like  sheep  for  the  slaughter 
24.  6.  I  will  build  them  and  not  p.  down,  42.  10. 

/-am.  3. 11.  p.  me  in  pieces,  hath  made  me  desolate 
F.zek.  17.  9.  shall  he  not  p.  up  the  roots  thereof? 
.flmos  9.  15.  and  they  shall  no  more  bep.  up 
Mic.  2.  8.  ye  p.  off  the  robe  with  the  garment 
Xech.  7. .11.  but  they  p.  away  the  shoulder 
Mat.  7.4.  p.  out  moteout  of  thine  eye,  Luke  6.42. 
I.uke  12.  18.  I  will  p.  down  my  barns  and  build 

14.  5.  and  will  not  p.  him  out  on  the  sabbath  ? 
Acts  23.  10.  lest  Paul  should  have  been  p.  in  pieces 

PULLING. 
1  Cor.  10.  4.  mighty  to  the  p.  down  of  strong  holds 

PULLING. 
,/ude  23.  others  save  with  fear,  p.  them  out  of  fire 

PULPIT. 
JWA.  8.  4.  Ezra  the  scribe  stood  upon  a  p.  of  wood 

PULSE. 
2Sani.l7.28.Barzillai  brought  beans  and  parched  p. 
Dan.  1.  12.  let  them  give  p.  to  eat,  and  water,  16. 

PUNISH. 
/,ct!.26.18.p.you  seven  times  more  for  your  8in8,24 
Prov.  17.  26.  also  top.  the  just  is  not  good 
Isa.  10. 12.  p.  the  stout  heart  of  the  kingof  Aasyiia 

13.  11.  I  will  p.  the  world  for  their  evil 
24.  21.  the  Lord  shall  p.  the  host  of  the  high  ones 

26.  21.  Lord  cometh  to  p.  inhabitants  of  the  earth 

27.  1.  Lord  with  strong  sword  shall  p.  Leviathan 
,/er.  9.  25.  I  will  p.  all  them  that  are  circumcised 

11.  22.  behold  I  will  p.  the  men  of  .Anathoth 
13.  21.  what  wilt  thou  say  when  he  .shall  p.  theo? 

21.  14.  but  I  will  p.  you  according  to  the  fruit  of 
vour  doings,  sailh  the  Lord 

2.3.  34.  p.  man  ||  25. 12.  p.  king  of  Babylon,  50.  la 
27.  8.  will  p.  that  nation  ||  29.  32.  p.  Shemaioh 
30.  20.  I  will  p.  nil  that  oppress  them 
36.  31.  I  will  p.  Jehoiakim  and  his  seed 
44.  13.  I  will  p.  them  in  Egypt,  as  I  p.  Jerusnlem 
29.  a  sign  that  I  will  p.  you  in  this  place 
46.  25.  I  will  p.  the  multitude  of  No  and  Pharaoh 
51.  44.  and  I  will  p.  Bel  in  Babylon 
Hos.  4.9  1  will  p.  them  for  their  ways  and  reward 
14.  I  will  not  p.  your  daughters  when  commit 

12.  2.  and  p.  Jacob  according  to  his  ways 
.^rnos  3.2.you  known,  I  will  p.  you  lor  your  iniquiU 

t  14.  in  the  day  that  I  will  p.  Israel 
Zeph.  1.  8.  in  the  day  that  1  will  p.  the  princes 

9.  I  will  p.  all  those  that  leap  on  the  threshold 

12.  I  will  p.  men  that  are  settled  on  their  lees 
Zeeh.  8.  14.  ns  I  thought  to  p.  when  your  fathers 
Acts  4.21.  finding  nothing  how  they  might  p.  them 

PUNISHED. 
F.jod.  21.  20.  if  smite,  he  shall  he  surely  p.  22. 

21.  he  shall  not  be  p.  for  he  is  his  money 
Firn'.1.\3.  Ihon  hnsi  p.less  than  iniquities  deserved 
.hb  31.  11.  it  is  an  iiiifiuily  to  hep.  bvjud»e«,  28* 
Prov.  21.  11.  when  scorner  is  p.  simple  made  wise 

22.  3.  but  the  simple  pass  on  and  are  p.  27.  12. 
.fer.  44.  13.  as  I  have  p.  Jerusalem  with  the  sword 

50. 18.  will  punish  as  I  have  p.  the  king  of  Assyria 
/.eph.  3.  7.  not  be  cut  off,  howsoevrr  I  p.  them 
Z.erh.  10.  3.  anger  ng.  the  shepherds,  J  p.  thegoats 
Acts  22.  5.  to  bring  them  bound  to  Jerus.  to  be^ 

26.  11.  I  p.  them  oft  in  every  synagogue 
2TAr.<.?.I.9. shallbep.  with  everlasting  destruction 
2  Pet.  2.  9.  unjust  to  the  dnv  of  judgment  to  bo  p. 

PUNISHMENT. 
Several  lortt  of  punishment  were  in  vse  awi«ng 


PUN 

the  Jews,  which  are  mentioned  in  the  scripture, 
as,  [1]  The  punishment  of  the  cross :  This  was 
a  servile  punishment,  which  was  injlictcd  on 
the  vilest  of  slaves :  To  be  cracijied  was  a 
great  mark  of  injamy  to  officers,  and  men  of 
qaality.  The  common  way  of  crucifying  was 
itj  fastening  the  criminal  with  nails,  one  at 
cac/i  hand,  and  one  at  both  his  feet,  or  one  at 
each  of  them.  They  were  likewise  bound  fre- 
qncntly  with  cords ;  and  this  penalty,  which 
seems  in  one  sense  gentler,  because  it  occasions 
less  pain,  in  another  was  more  cruel,  because 
the  condemned  person  Oy  this  means  was  made 
to  languish  for  a  longer  time.  Before  they 
nailed  the  person  to  the  cross,  they  generally 
scourged  him  with  whips,  or  leathern  lashes. 
Our  Haviaur  was  severely  scourged  during  his 
passion ;  Pilate  having  pronounced  sentence 
against  him,  ordered  him  to  be  scourged,  and 
delivered  him  up  to  be  crucified.  The  law  or- 
dained, that  the  person  executed  should  not  be 
left  upon  the  cross  after  sun-set,  because  he 
that  is  hanged  in  this  manner  is  cursed  by 
God,  Deut.  ill.  'J2,  2;i. 

[2]  Suspension,  hanging,  or  the  punishment  of  the 
rope.  The  Jews  maintain  that  none  but  ido- 
laters and  blasphemers  underwent  this  punish- 
inent.  Haman  and  his  sons  were  hung  upon  a 
high  gallows,  Kstli.7.10.  Pharaoh's  chief  baker 
was  first  beheaded,  and  afterwards  hung  upon 
a  gibbet,  Gen.  iO.  2±  IP'e  read  in  the  scrip- 
ture, that  sometimes  they  hung  up  men  alive, 
and  sometimes  hung  up  their  carcases  after 
they  were  dead.  Josh.  8.  29.  2  Sam.  21.  12. 

[3]  Stoning,  or  putting  to  death  by  casting  stones. 
This  punishment  was  very  much  in  use  among 
the  Hebrews  :  It  is  said,  that  this  penalty  teas 
inflicted  upon  all  those  criminals  that  the  law 
condemns  to  death,  without  expressing  the 
particular  kind  of  death:  For  example,  the 
incest  of  a  son  with  his  mother,  or  of  the  soti 
with  his  mother-in-lam,  or  of  a  father  with  his 
daughter,  or  with  his  daughter-in-law;  or  of 
a  man  that  debauches  a  woman  that  is  con- 
tracted; or  of  her  that  is  contracted,  and  con- 
sents to  another;  those  that  are  guilty  of  the 
crimes  of  sodomy  or  bestiality ;  idolaters, 
blasphemers,  magicians,  conjurers,  breakers 
of  the  sabbath  ;  those  that  offer  their  children 
to  Moloch  ;  those  that  entile  others  to  idolatry  ; 
a  son  rebellious  to  his  father,  and  condemned 
by  the  judges. 

|4]  Fire.  This  pimishment  was  very  common 
IVhen  Judah  was  informed  that  his  daughter- 
in-law  Tamar  was  with  child,  he  would  have 
had  her  burnt  as  an  adulteress,  Gen.  38.  24. 
The  law  of  Moses  inflicts  the  punishment  of 
the  fire  upon  the  daughters  of  the  priests,  who 
were  guilty  of  fornication.  Lev.  21.  9.  Nebu- 
chadnezzar caused  Daniel  aitd  his  companions 
to  be  thrown  into  a  burning  fiery  furnace,  be- 
cause they  would  not  worship  his  golden  image, 
Dan.  3.  21.  Jind  by  the  law  he  was  ordered  to 
be  burnt  alive,  who  should  marry  the  mother 
and  her  daughter.  Lev.  20.  14. 

|5]  The  punishment  of  the  rack,  or  tympanum. 
This  is  met  with  in  the  Greek  of  St.  Paul  to 
the  Hebrews,  11.  35.  Interpreters  are  divided 
about  the  sense  of  this  word,  Tympanizein. 
Some  have  explained  it  of  the  Tressel  or  Chi- 
valet,  a  punishment  very  frequent  in  antiquity, 
but  very  much  unknown  at  this  day:  Others 
think  that  the  .fipostle  alludes  to  the  death  of 
John  the  Baptist,  and  to  that  of  St.  James, 
who  were  both  beheaded.  Some  think  it  signi- 
fies to  flay  alive,  others  take  it  in  a  general 
sense,  fur  all  kinds  of  capital  punishments  and 
violent  deaths  :  But  interpreters  are  generally 
of  opinion,  that  the  Jlposlle  here  means  the 
Bastinado,  or  the  punishment  of  the  whip,  and 
lliat  there  is  an  allusion  to  the  cruelties  exer- 
cised upon  old  Eleazar,  and  the  seven  brethren 
the  Maccabees.  The  second  book  of  Mac. 6. 19, 
speaking  of  the  martyrdom  of  Eleazar,  says, 
that  he  came  lo  the  Tympanum. 
C]  Imprisonment.  This  ivas  not  always  consi- 
dered as  a  punishment,  but  was  to  keep  and 
secure  a  person  accused  or  suspected.  Joseph 
detained  his  brother  Simijon  in  prison,  till  he 
should  be  assured  of  the  truth  of  what  his  bre- 
thren had  told  him  concerning  his  father  and 
his  brother  Benjamin,  Gen.  42.  19.  The  blas- 
phemer that  was  brought  to  IMoses,  Lev.  24.12. 
and  the  man  that  was  found  gathering  sticks 
on  the  sabbath-day,  Num.  1.5.  34.  irere  put  in 
ward  till  the  Lord  declared  the  kind  of  pun- 
isliment  Ihnj  were  to  undergo. 

But  often  imprisonment  was  made  a  punishment 
when  it  iBoa  attended  with  shame  and  severi- 
ties. 

46S 


PUN 

When  Joseph  icas  unjustly  accused  by  Poliphar's 
wife,  he  was  put  in  priso7i,  and  loaded  with  fet- 
ters. Gen.  39.  20.  Samson  was  taken  by  the 
Philistines,  cast  into  a  dungeon,  had  his  eyes 
put  out,  and  forced  to  grind  at  the  mill,  Judg. 
16.  21.  Bonds,  fetters,  shackles,  manacles  and 
chains,  which  usually  attended  imprisonment, 
must  be  looked  upon  as  puiiishmenls. 

[7]  The  sword,  or  beheading.  In  scripture  there 
arc  several  instances  of  Decapitations.  Pha- 
raoh's chief  baker  had  his  head  cut  off;  after 
which  his  body  was  hung  upon  a  gibbet.  Gen. 
40.  19.  Abimelech,  son  of  Gideon,  cut  off  the 
heads  of  seventy  sons  of  Gideon,  his  brethren, 
upon  one  stone,  Judg.  9.  5.  The  people  ofti-a- 
niaria  cut  off  the  heads  of  seventy  of  the  sons 
o/Ahab,  and  sent  them  in  baskets  to  Jehu,  2 
Kings  10.  7.  John  the  Baptist  was  beheaded  in 
prison,  by  the  order  of  Herod,  Mat.  14.  10. 

[8]  The  precipice,  or  throwing  headlong  from  the 
top  of  a  rock  :  This  was  not  a  common  pun 
ishment :  If  it  has  been  sometimes  used  among 
the  Hebrews,  it  was  in  singular  cases.  Aina 
ziah  king  of  Judah  overcame  ten  thousand 
Iduiiieans,  and  made  them  prisoners  of  war, 
and  cast  them  doion  from  the  top  of  a  high 
rock,  2  Chron.  25.  12. 

[9]  To  be  torn  in  pieces  by  tliorns,  or  under  har- 
rows or  sledges  of  iron.  There  are  some  ex- 
amples of  these  punishments  in  scripture. 
ff'hen  Gideon  returned  from  pursuing  the  Mi- 
dianites,  he  tore  with  thorns  and  brambles  of 
the  desert  the  chief  men  of  the  city  of  Succotli, 
who  had  insulted  him,  Judg.  8.  10.  And  Da- 
vid made  the  Ammonites  undergo  a  punish 
ment  more  cruel  and  severe,  2  Sam.  12.  31, 
He  put  them  under  harrows  and  a.\es  of  iron, 
and  made  them  pass  through  the  brick-kiln. 
These  harrows  or  sledges  of  iron  were  ma- 
chines proper  for  threshing  of  corn,  in  order 
to  get  the  grain  out  of  the  straw,  which  were 
loaded  with  iron  or  stones,  for  bruising  the 
straio.  By  the  Brick-kiln,  is  either  meant  the 
furnace  in  which  the  bricks  were  burnt,  or  the 
place  where  the  earth  was  beat  and  macerated, 
in  which  these  miserable  wretches  were  exe- 
cuted. 

[10]  Tlie  saw,  to  be  cut  through  the  middle:  This 
punishment  was  not  known  among  the  He 
brews:  Some  are  of  opinion,  that  it  came  ori 
ginally  from  the  Persians  or  Chaldeans:  It  is 
certain  that  it  is  still  in  use  among  the  Swit- 
zers,  and  that  they  put  it  inpracticc  not  many 
years  ago,  vpon  one  of  their  countrymen  guilty 
of  a  great  crime:  they  put  him  in  a  kind  of 
coffn,  and  sawed  him  at  length,  beginning  at 
his  head,  as  a  piece  of  wood  is  sawn.  The 
apostle  Paul,  in  his  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews, 
11.  37.  speaking  of  the  calamities  suffered  by 
the  prophets  and  saints  of  the  Old  Testaynent 
says,  that  they  were  sawn  asunder :  Several 
of  the  ancients  have  explained  this  passage 
concerning  the  death  of  Isaiah,  who  is  said  to 
have  been  put  to  death  by  king  Manasseh, 
with  a  saw. 

[11]  Cutting  oft"  the  hair  of  the  guilty  person  : 
This  seems  to  be  a'fmnishment  rather  shame- 
ful than  painful  ;  and  yet  it  is  thought  that 
pain  likewise  was  added  to  the  disgrace;  and 
that  they  were  not  contented  to  shave  or  cut 
the  hair,  but  tore  it  off  with  violence,  as  if 
they  had  been  plucking  a  bird  alive.  This 
much  the  Hebrew  signifies  in  Neh.  13.  25,  I 
contended  with  them,  and  smote  certain  of 
Ihnm,  and  plucked  off  ihe  hair. 

[12]  To  pluck  out  the  eyes :  This  is  a  punish- 
ment not  common  ;  and  though  Moses  had  ap- 
pointed that  an  eye  should  be  given  for  an  eye, 
and  a  tooth  for  a  tooth,  F.xod.  21.  24.  yet  it  is 
the  opinion  of  Commentators  that  this  law 
leas  very  seldom  put  in  practice  according  to 
the  letter ;  and  that  the  offender  7Cas  gene- 
rally punished  by  a  pecuniary  penalty,  which 
was  converted  to  the  use  of  the  injured  party. 
When  the  Philistines  had  laid  hold  on  Samson, 
and  intended  to  prevent  his  doing  them  any 
more  harm,  they  put  him  in  prison,  and  bored 
out  his  eyes,  Judg.  IG.  21.  Nebuchadnezzar 
took  king  Zedekiah,  and  had  his  children  put 
to  dentil  in  his  presence,  then  caused  his  eyes 
to  be  put  out,  and  afterwards  had  him  carried 
to  Babylon  in  chains,  2  Kings  2.').  7. 

[13]  To  cut  off  the  extremities  of  the  feet  and 
liands  was  a  piece  of  cruelty  formerly  exer- 
cised by  Adoni-bezok  king  of  Bezek,  upon 
seventy  kings  who  had  been  conquered  by  him, 
and  who  eat  like  dogs  under  his  table.  But 
God  thought  fit  to  have  him  tortured  after  the 
same  manner  that  he  had  tortured  others.  The 
Israelites  conquered  him,  took  him,  and  cut 
3  P 


PU.R 

off  the  extremities  of  hishandt  and  feet,  Judj. 
1.  5,  6,  7.  David  treated  the  viurderers  of 
Ish-boshelh  in  the  same  manner,  and  had  their 
bodies  hung  up  over  the  pool  of  Hebron,  2  Sam» 
4.  12. 
Gen.  4.  13.  my  ;;.  is  greater  than  I  can  bear 

19.  tl5.  lest  thou  be  coiisumcU  in;;,  of  the  city 
/yC».  2t>.  41.  than  accejit  the /<.  of  their  iniquity,  43. 

1  iiani.28.10.  Sautswaie,  no^.  shall  happen  to  thee 
2yti?in's7.t9.they  said,  if  we  tarry,  we  shall  lind^. 
./ob  21. 1 19.  God  Vayelhp.  of  iniquity  for  children 

31.  3.  and  a  strange  p.  to  the  workers  of  iniquity 
Prov.  19.  19.  a  man  of  great  wrath  shall  sutler^. 
Lata.  3.  39.  a  man  for  the  p.  of  Ins  sins 
4.  U.  p.  of  my  people  is  greater  than  the  p.  of 
the  sin  of  Sodom 
22.  the  p.  of  thine  iniquity  is  accomjilished 
£zcA-.  14. JO.they  shall  bear  Xiiep.  of  their  iniquity, 
the  ;).of  prophets  u9;;.of  him  that  seeketh  to  him 
Hos.  12.  t  8.  he  shall  huve  p.  in  whom  is  sin 
Jlmos  1.  3.  and  for  four  I  will  not  turn  away  the 
p.  thereof,  (i,  9,  11,  13.  |  2.  1,  4,  6. 
Zeeh.  14.  19.  this  sliall  be  the/),  of  Egypt 
Mat.  25.  46.  these  shall  go  into  everlasting  p. 

2  Cor.  2.  6.  sutiicient  to  such  a  man  is  this  p. 
Heb.  10.  29.  of  how  much  sorer/;,  suppose  ye 
lPct.2.  14.  sent  bv  him  for  the/?,  of  evil  doeri 

PUNISHMENTS. 
Job  19.  29.  for  wrath  bringelh  thep.  of  the  sword 
Psal.  149.  7.  to  execute  ;*.  upon  tlie  people 
Jcr.  44.  t  9.  have  ye  forgot  the/),  of  your  fathers  1 

PUR. 
Esth.^. 1. ihey  cti%\. p.  that  is,  the  lot,  before  Haman 
9. 24.  for  Haman  had  cast  p.  for  lo  consume  them 
2(i.  called  these  days  Purim,  after  the  name  oip . 
See  PuRliM. 
PURCHASE,  Substantive. 
Gen.  49.  32.  p.  of  Held  and  cave  that  was  therein 
Jycv.  22.  t  11.  if  the  priest  buy  a  soul  with  p. 
Jer.  32.  11.  so  I  took  the  evidence  of  the  p. 
12. 1  gave  evidence  of  the  p.  to  Baruch,  14,  IC. 
PURCHASE,  ED. 
Gen.  25.  10.  field  Abraham  p.  of  the  sons  of  Heth 
-K3'orf.]5.16.1ill  people  pass  over  which  thou  haslp. 
Lev.  25.  33.  if  a  man  p.  of  the  Levites,  then  house 
Ruth  4.  10.  Ruth  have  I  p.  to  be  my  wife 
Psai.74.2.remembcr  thy  congregation  thou  hastp. 
78.  54.  mountain  which  his  right  hand  had  p. 
Jicts  1.  18.  this  man  p.  a  field  with  iniquity 
8.20.  thought  the  gilt  of  God  may  be  p.  by  montsy 

20.  28.  which  he  halh  p.  with  his  own  blood 
Eph.  1.  14.  until  the  redemption  oflhep.  possession 
1  'J'im.3. 13.  have  used  the  olfice  of  deacon  wellp. 

1  Pet.2. 19.  ye  are  ap.  people,  that  ye  should  shew 

PURE 

Signifies,  [1]  Simple,  unmixed,  uncom pounded, 
as  wine  without  water,  gold  or  silver  without 
dross,  Exod.  25.  17,  31.  Deut.  32.  14.  [2] 
Holy,  free  from  spot,  stain,  or  the  least  mix- 
ture of  sin,  Psal.  19.  8.  1  John  3.  3.  [3]  One 
who  is  single-hearted  and  sincere,  free  from 
any  reigning  sin.  Mat.  5.  8.  [4]  Devout  and 
religious,  Prov.  30.  12.  [5]  Ty-ied  or  refined, 
Psal.  119.  t  140.  Thy  word  is  pure;  that  it, 
it  is  perfectly  free  from  all  falsehood  and 
deceit,  and  contains  pure  precepts,  pure  ex- 
amples, great  helps,  and  strong  encourage- 
ments to  purity,  and  dissuasives  from  sin. 
[6]  Clear  and  free.  Acts  20.  26.  [7]  Lawful 
to  be  used,  Bom.  14.  20.  [8]  Believers,  whose 
hearts  are  purified  by  faith.  Tit.  1.  15.  [9] 
Free  from  error,  idolatry,  and  hypocrisy, 
James  1.  27. 

F.xod.  27.  20.  that  they  bring  the  p.  oil.  Lev.  24.2. 

30.  23.  take  p.  myrrh  ||  34.  with  p.  frankincense 

31.  8.  the  p.  candlestick,  39.  37.  Lev.  24.  4. 
Lev.2\.  G.  thou  shalt  set  cakes  on  thep.  table  be- 
fore the  Lord 

7.  thou  shalt  put  p.  frankincense  on  each  row 
Deut.  32.  ]4.  didst  drink  Ihe  p.  blood  of  thegrnpo 

2  Sam.  22. 27.  with  the  p.  thnu  wilt  shew  thyselfp 

with  froward,  thyself  froward,  Psal.  18.20. 

1  Kings  5.  11.  and  twenty  measures  of  p.  oil 

2  Chron.  13. 11.  Ihe  shew-brendseton  thep.  lablo 
Ezra  6.  20.  all  were  p.  and  killed  Ihe  passovcr 
.lob  4. 17.  shall  a  man  be  more  p.  than  his  Maker? 

8.  G.  if  thou  wert  p.  and  upright,  surely  now 
11.4.  for  ihou  hast  said,  my  doctrine  is  p. 
16.  17.  not  for  any  injustice,  also  my  prayer  isp. 
25.  5.  yea,  Ihe  stars  are  not  p.  in  his  sight 
Psal.  12.  6.  the  words  of  the  Lord  are  p.  wordf 

19.  8.  the  commandment  of  the  Lord  is  p. 
119.  140.  Ihy  word  is  very  p.  therefore  I  love  it 

Prov.  15.  26.  Ihe  words  of  thep.  are  pleasant  . 

20.  9.  who  can  say,  I  amp.  from  my  ein? 

11.  whether  his  work  be  p.  whether  it  be  fight 

21.  8.  but  as  for  thep.  bis  work  is  right 

30.  5.  every  word  of  God  is  p.  he  is  a  shield  to 
them  that  nut  trust  in  hiia 

12.  a  generation  that  are  p.  in  thoir  own  eyes 


PUR 

fir.  51.  t  II-  makop.  tho  arrows,  gather  shlelda 
Dan.  7.9.  (ho  hair  uf  his  lieatl  hku  Ijie;;.      wool 
JUic.O.  11.  shall  I  count  them  p.  with  wicked 
y.'-ph.  '3.  y.  I  will  turn  to  tho  people  a. p.  languago 
.Mdl.  1.  11.  ill  every  pluco  a;;.  oH'uring  bo  oHoroil 
Mark  14.  t3.au  alabaster  box  ot';<.  iiard,iiro(.ious 
.ids  "JO.  -0.  1  am;».  tVom  tho  blood  of  all  men 
Horn.  14. '20.  all  things  indued  arejj.  but  it  in  evil 
l^kil.  4.  d.  whutsoevor  things  are  p.  what  lovely 

1  Tim.  3.  y.  the  luyitery  ol'  faith  in  up.  conscience 
5.  -H.  neither  bo  jiartaker  of  niiiK,  keep  thyself  j7. 

2'J'im.  1.  3.  whom  1  ocrvo  with;*,  conscience 
Ttt.  1.  15.  to  the  p.  all  things  aro/i.  but  to  them 
that  are  delilod  and  uubulieviiig  notliing  is  p. 
Hcb.  iU.  'i'i.  and  our  bodies  washed  withy,  water 
Jam.  1.27.  p.  religion  and  undotilod  is  this,  to  visit 
3.  17.  but  the  wisdom  iVoni  above  is  first/). 

2  I'll.  3.  1.  in  both  which  I  slir  up  yuuc  p.  minds 

1  John  3.  3.  puriri(^th  himself  even  as  he  is;;. 
lico.  l.'i.  ti   tho  seven  angols  clothed  in  p.  linen 

!ii.  1.  he  shewed  mo  a  p.  river  of  water  of  lifo 
Hcc  IIkakt,  Gold. 
I'UllELY. 
Isa.  1.  25.  and  I  will  p.  purge  away  thy  dross 

PUllENKSS. 
Job  22. 3().  it  is  delivered  by  the  p.  of  tliine  hands 
Proo.  2J.  11.  he  thatlov.j;.  of  heart,  king  his  friend 

2  Car.  U.li.B.ai)proving  ourselves  hyp.  by  knowlod. 

puki:r. 

I.am.  4.  7.  her  Nazariles  were  p.  than  snow 
Uab.  1.  13.  thou  art  of  p.  eyes  than  to  behold  evil 

PURGE. 
2  OAr.  34.  3.  Josiah  began  lop.  Judah  and  Jerusa. 
Psal.5\.T.  p.  me  with  hyssop,  and  I  shall  bo  clean 
Go.  3.  our  transgressions  thou  shall/),  them 
79.  y.  and/),  away  our  sins  for  thy  name's  sake 
Isa.  1.  ii5.  and  purely  p.  away  thy  dross  and  tin 
£zek.'2i).'.iS.  1  will/),  from  among  you  the  rebels 
43.  iS).  thus  shalt  thou  cleanse  and  p.  it 
2G.soven  days  shall  they  p.  the  altar  and  purify  it 
Dan.  11.  3.1.  some  of  thein  shall  fall  to  /).  them 
Jlal.  3.  3.  and  p.  them  as  gold  and  silver,  to  olier 
JUal.  3.  12.  he  will  thoroughly  p.  bis  floor,  and 
gather  his  wheat  into  the  garner,  Luke  3. 17. 
1  Cor.  5.  7.  p.  out  therefore  the  old  leaven 
UTim.  2.21.  if  a  man  therefore/). himself  from  these 
JUeb.9.  14.  p.  your  conscience  from  dead  works 
PURGED. 

1  Sam.  3. 14.  iniquity  of  Eli's  hou.so  shall  not  bep. 

2  Chron.  IH.  H.  when  he  had  p.  the  land  and  house 
J'rov.  10.  6.  by  mercy  and  truth  iniquity  is  p. 
Isa.  4. 4.  and  shall  have  p.  the  blood  of  Jerusalem 

C.  7.  thy  iniquity  is  taken  away,  and  thy  sin  p. 

22.  14.  surely  this  iniquity  shall  not  be  p. 

27.  9.  by  this  shall  the  ini(iuity  of  Jacob  bep. 
£zck.'2-\.  13.  because  1  have  p.  thee,  and  thou  wast 
not  p.  thou  bhalt  not  be  p.  from  thy  filthiness 
ffcb.  1.  3.  when  he  had  by  himself  p.  our  sins 

9.  22.  almost  all  things  areby  thclawp.by  blood 

10.  2.  because  that  the  worshippers  once  p. 

2  Pct.1.9.  hath  forgotten  he  wasp,  from  his  old  sins 

PURGETH. 
John  15. 2.  every  bram-h  that  beareth,  ho  p.  it 

PURGING. 

Proi>.20.t30.bluene*s  of  a  wound  is  a  p.  medicine 
Mark.T.  19.gonth  out  into  the  draught,p.  meats 

PURinCVTlON,  S. 
JWm.  19.  9.  it  shall  he:  kept,  it  is  a  p.  for  sin 

17.  take  of  asliis  of  the  burnt  liiiiler  of  p.  for  sin 
Z  Chron.  30.  10.  according  top.  of  the  sanctuary 
JVrA.  12.  45.  porters  kept  the  ward  of  their  p. 
£i>th.  2. 3.  tho  things  of  their  ji.  be  given  them 

12.  so  were  the  days  (dllicMr  p.  accomplished 
I.Mkc%  2J.  when  days  of  herp.were  accoiLiilishcd 
^c{«21.2<).  tho  accomplishment  of  the  days  of  p. 

PURIFY. 
AVm.l0.12.i>hnllp.hlin9elfwiihitthotliirddaV;19. 

20.  «hall  ho  ninlean,  anil  shall  not  p.  himself 
Dl.Ilt.p.yonrselves  and  your  captives  on  third  day 

20.  p.  all  your  raiment,  nnd  all  mado  of  skins 
Jbft  41.2'>.hyreiiHiin  of  breakings  theyp.thcmsolvos 
/to.  00.  17.  they  p.  iJiiMnselvis  in  the  gardens 
F.ick.  43.  2<i.  seven  days  shall  they  p.  the  altar 
.Mai.  3.  3.  and  he  shall'  p.  the  sons  of  Levi 
John  II.  .'>■'».  went  to  JeriiKalem  lop.  themselves 
Jlrti  21.  24.  take  nnd  p.  thvself  with  them 
Tit.  2.  14.  and  p.  to  hiinself  a  peculiar  pfO(>lo 
Jam.  4.  8.  p.  your  luari-t,  vi-  double  minded 

PURIKIKI). 
I.rv.  8. 1.V  nnd  p.  the  allnr,  ami  poured  the  blood 
.Xum.  8.  21.  the  Lovites  were  p.  F.irn  fi.  20. 

31.  2;i.  »hnll  l)fl  p.  with  the  waier  of  separation 
2  Sam.  11.4.  Ilathsholia  wo«p.  from  uncloanncss 
I'sal.  12.0.  nropure  wordHjns^ilverp.  seven  times 
J'rov.  30.  t  5.  every  word  of  God  is  p. 
Dan.  12.  It),  many  shall  be  p.  nnd  made  whito 
.Ids  21. 18.  ciTliiin  Jews  from  Asia  found  me  p. 
}l(h.  9. 1 1  ■'.nor  first  tesininentp.  without  liUiod 

2'l.  tho  pntli'nn  of  thing.!  in  Hie  heaviin  hep. 
1  i'ct.  1.22.  seeing  y«  bavep.  your  souls  in  obvying 


PUR 

PUEIFIEH, 

MaL  3.  3.  ho  shall  sit  as  a  refiner  and  p.  of  silver 

PURIFIETII. 

jYam.  19.  13.  toucheth  a  dead  body  and  p.  not 
1  John  3.  3.  that  hath  this  hope  p.  iiinisclf 

PUIUFYIMG. 
Lev.  12.  4.  shall  continue  in  the  blood  of  her  p. 

0.  when  the  days  of  her  p.  arc  fullillcd 
J^utn.  tt.  7  sprinkle  water  of  p.  on  them 

1  Chron.  23.  2d.  olhco  was  in  p.  all  holy  things 
K.ilh.  2.  12.  with  other  things  for  p.  of  women 
John  2.  6.  after  the  manner  of  the  p.  of  tho  Jews 

3.  23.  then  there  arose  a  question  about  p. 

Jlcb.  9.  13.  sanctifieth  to  the  p.  of  tho  flesh 
PURIFYING. 

Jlds  15.  9.  p.  their  hearts  by  faith 
21.  20.  and  the  iie.xl  dav  p.  himself  with  them 
PUiUM, 

Or  Pur,  or  Phur;  thaL  is  to  say,  Lots.  T/iis  was 
a  very  solemn  feast  of  the  Jews,  instituted  in 
memory  of  the  Lots  that  were  cast  by  Ilaman 
the  enemy  of  the  Jews.  These  I^ols  mere  cast 
in  thejirst  month  of  the  year,  Esth.  3.  7 :  a7id 
marked  out  the  twelfth  month  of  the  same  year, 
for  the  execution  of  llaman's  desif^n,  which 
was  to  destroy  all  tlic  Jews  of  the  king-doni  of 
Persia.  Thus  the  superstition  of  llanian,  in 
casting  and  pursuing  the  event  of  t,'u'sc  Lots, 
was  the  cause  of  his  oan  ruin,  and  of  the  pre- 
servation of  the  Jews  ;  who  had  now  time  to 
avert  this  blow,  by  means  e/ Esther  the  spouse 
of  Ahasuerus,  and  to  remove  those  ill  impres- 
sions he  had  conccivca  of  the  Jews.  In  memory 
of  this  so  siffrial  and  miraculous  deliverance, 
the  Jews  instituted  a  feast,  to  which  they  gave 
the  name  of  Pur,  or  Puriin. 

Esth.  9. 20.  called  these  days  P.  after  name  of  Pur 

28.  and  that  these  days  of  /'.  should  not  fail 

29.  to  confirm  this  second  letter  of  i'.  31. 

32.  and  the  decree  of  Esther  confirmed  these  P. 
PURITY. 
ITim.  4.  12.  he  thou  an  example  in  faith,  in  p. 
5.  2.  rebuke  the  voung'.'r  as  sisters,  with  all  p. 

PURLOINING. 
7'tt.  2. 10.  not  p.  but  shewing  all  good  fidelity 

PURPLE. 
F.xod.  25.  4.  this  is  the  oli'eriiig,  blue,  p.  and  scarlet 
20. 1.  thou  shalt  make  curtains  uf  fine  linen  andp. 
39.  3.  tho  gold  cut  into  wires,  to  work  in  the  p. 
JVum.  4. 13.  take  away  ashes  and  spread  a  p.  cloth 
Jud^'.S.  2(5. p.  raiment  was  on  the  kings  of  iMidian 

2  Chron.  2.  7.  send  a  man  cunning  to  work  inp.  14. 

3. 14.  he  made  the  vail  of  blue,  andp.  and  crimson 
Esth.  1. 0.  fastened  with  cords  of  fine  linen  and  p. 

8. 15.  Mordcc.  went  out  with  garni,  of  linen  andp. 
Prov.  31.  22.  her  clothing  is  silk  and  p. 

Cant.  3.  10.  he  made  the  covering  of  it  of  p. 

7.  5.  and  the  hair  of  thine  head  like  p. 
Jcr.  10.  9.  blue  and  p.  is  their  clothing 
Ezek.  27.  7.  p.  was  that  which  covered  thee 

lO.Syria  occupied  in  thy  fairs  with  emeralds, p. 
Mark  15.  17.  and  they  clothed  him  with  p. 

20.  mocked  him,  they  took  ofl'tho  p.  from  him 
Luke  10.  19.  a  certain  rich  man  clothed  in  p. 
John  19.  2.  the  soldiers  put  on  him  a  p.  robe 

5.  then  came  .Jesus  forth  wearing  the  p.  roho 
.lets  1().  14.  a  woman  namffl  Lydia,  a  seller  of  p. 
Heb.9. 1 19.  Moses  took  p.  and  sprinkled  the  book 
/^fi).17.4.  the  woman  was  arrayed  inp.  and  scarlet 

18.12.  iioiu!  buyeth  the  merchandise  of  p. 
10.  that  great  citv,  that  was  clothed  in  p.  and 
PURPOSE.  [scarlet 

JVi/Tn.  14.  t34.  ve  shall  know  my  altering  of  mv  p. 
Ruth  2. 10.  anil'  let  fall  sumo  handfuls  of  p.  for  her 
F.zra  4.  5.  hired  counsellors  to  frustrate  their  p. 
JWA.  8. 4.  a  pulpit  of  wood  Ihey  inadi'  for  lliep. 
.fob  33.  17.  tlial  he  may  withdraw  man  from  his  p. 
Prov.  20.  18.  every  p.  is  established  by  counsel 
Eerl.  3.  I.  and  a  time  to  every  p.  17.  (  8.  0. 

5.  t8.  if  thou  seest  oppression,  marvel  not  ntthep. 
Isa.  1.  11.  to  what  p.  is  multitude  of  yoursiicrifici's 

14. 2<).  thisisthop.thatis  purposed  upon  the  earth 

.30.7.  the  Egyptians  shall  help  in  vain,  and  to  nop. 
.Jcr.  0.  20.  to  what  p.  coineth  to  me  iiicOOWT 

49.  30.  Nebuchadnez/.nr  conceived  a  p.  B^.IIazor 

.51.  29.  for  every  p.  of  the  liord  shall  stand 
y.irk.  38.t  10. thou  shalt  conceive  a  inischievousp. 
I)an.f>.  17.  that  p.  ho  not  changed  concerning  Dan. 
Mat.  20.  8.  saying,  to  what  p.  is  this  waste? 
Jteta  11.  23.  with  p.  of  heart,  they  would  cleave 

2().  10.  for  I  have  nppcnroii  to  thee  for  this  p. 

27.  V.\.  supposing  that  they  had  obtained  their  p. 
43.  the  centurion  kept  llieni  from  their  p. 
Horn.  8. 2^.  who  are  the  called  according  to  his  p. 

9.11.  that  the  p. of  (iod  according  to  election  stand 
17.  even  for  this  same  p.  have  I  raised  lhe(>  up 

F.ph.  1. 11.  according  to  Ihc  ;i.  of  him  who  workelli 

3.  1 1,  according  to  the  etornnl  j/.  in  fhrixt 

0. 22.  whom  I  sent  to  you  for  tlii'  saiiii?  p.  Col.  4. 8. 
27'im.l.O.  culled  us  accord,  to  hisownp.  and  grace 


PUR 

27Km.  3. 10.  but  thou  hast  fully  known  my  p.  faila 
1  John  3.  b.  for  tliisp.  Son  of  God  was  manifested 

PURPOSES. 
Gen.  0.  t  5.  tliep.  of  man's  heart  was  only  evil 
Job  17. 11.  my  days  are  past,  my  p.  are  broken  ofT 
Proo.  15. 22.  without  counsel  p.  are  disapponitcd 
Isa.  19. 10.  they  shall  be  broken  in  the  p.  then  of 
Jcr.  49.  20.  hear  counsel  of  tlie  Lord  and  p.  50.  4a 
PURPOSE,  El). 

1  Kings  5.  5. 1  p.  to  build  a  house  to  the  Lord 

2  Chr.  28.10.p.  to  keep  under  Judah  and  Jerusal. 
32.  2.  Sennacheribp.  to  fight  against  Jeru.saleni 

Psal.  17.  3. 1  am  p.  my  mouth  shall  not  transgress 
140.  4.  who  have  p.  to  overthrow  my  goings 
Isa.  14.  24.  and  as  I  have  p.  so  shall  it  stand 
20.  this  is  tho  purpose  p.  upon  the  whole  earth 
27.  the  Lord  hath  p.  who  shall  disannul  it  7 

19.  12.  what  the  Lord  hath  p.  ujion  Egypt 

23. 9.  Lord  hath  p.  to  stain  tho  pride  of  all  glory 
40.  11.  I  have  p.  it,  and  I  will  also  do  it 

Jcr.  4.  28.  I  have  p.  it,  and  will  not  repent 
2().  3.  repent  me  of  the  evil  which  1  p.  to  do  them 
30.  3.  will  hear  all  evil  which  I  p.  to  do  to  them 
49.  20.  his  purposes  that  he  hath  p.  50.  45. 
I^am.  2.  8.  the  Lord  hath  p.  to  destroy  the  wall 
l)an.\.  8.  Dan. p.  in  his  heart  not  to  defile  himself 
Jicls  19.  21.  Paul  p.  in  sjiirit  to  go  to  Jerusalem 

20.  3.  Paul  p.  to  return  through  Macedonia 
Rom.  1.  13.  that  oftentimes  I ;).  to  come  to  you 
2  Cor.  1. 17.  tliin"s  Ip.  do  I  p.  accord,  to  the  lleshi 
F.ph.  1.  9.  his  vra|  which  he  hath  p.  in  himself 

3. 11.  eternal  purpose  which  hop.  in  Christ  Je«UB 

purposl:tii. 

2  Cor.  9. 7.  every  man  as  hep.  in  his  heart,  eo  give 

PURPOSING. 
Gen.  37.42.  Esau  doth  comfort  liims.  p.  to  kill  thee 

PURSE. 
Prov.  1.  14.  cast  in  thy  lot,  let  us  have  one  p. 
Luke  10.  4.  carry  neitberp.  nor  scrip,  nor  shoe! 

22.  .3.5.  when  I  sent  you  without  p.  and  scrip 

30.  but  now  ho  that  hath  a  p.  let  him  take  it 

PURSES. 

Mat.  10.9.  provide  neither  silv.  nor  brass  in  yourp. 

Mark  0.8.  they  should  take  no  money  in  their  p. 

PURSUE. 

Gen.  35.  .5.  they  did  not  p.  after  the  .sons  of  Jacob 
A'lo/AlS.O.  the  enemy  said,  I  will  p.  I  will  overtake 
Dcut.  19.  0.  lest  the  avenger  of  blood  p.  Josh.  20. 5. 

28.22.tliey  shall  p.  thee  until  ihou  perish,  4.5. 
Josh.  2.  5. p.  after  them,  ye  shall  overtake  them 

8.  10.  the  men  of  Ai  wore  called  together  top. 

10.  19.  stay  not,  hut  p.  after  yonr  enemies 
1  Sam.  24.  14.  after  whom  dost  thou  p.? 

25. 29.  a  man  is  jisen  to  p.  thee  nnd  seek  thy  soul 

20.  13.  wherefore  doth  my  lord  thus  p.  me  ? 

30.  8.  shall  I  p.  after  this  troop  7  lie  answered,  p, 
2.'*rt?)i.  17.  1.  I  will  arise  andp.  nficr  David 

20.  0.  take  thy  lord's  .servants,  p.  after  Sheba,  7. 

24.  in.  wilt  thou  flee  while  enemies  p.  thee  7 
Job  13.  25.  and  will  thou  p.  the  dry  stubble  7 

30.  15.  terrors  p.  my  soul  as  the  wind 
Vsal.  34.  14.  do  good,  seek  |)cace  andp.  it 
Isa.  5.  t  11.  that  continue  till  wine  p.  them 

30. 10.  therefore  shall  they  that  p.  you  be  swift 
Jer.  48.  2.  O  mailmen,  tiie  sword  shall  p.  theo 
Ezek.  35.  6.  and  blood  shall  p.  thee 

Uos.  8.  3.  Israel,  the  enemy  shall  p.  him 

.'Imos  1. 11.  bee.  Edom  did  p.  his  brolh.with  sword 

JVa/j.  1.  8.  and  darkness  shall  p.  his  enemies 

PURSUED. 
Gm.  14. 14.  .\bram  p.  llicmio  DannndIIobnh,15L 

31.  23.  Laban  and  his  brethren  p.  Jacob,  30. 
F.xod.  14.  8.  Pharaoh  and  the  I'gvptians  p.  after 

Israel,  9,  23.  Drat.  11.'  4.  .lo.-'h.  24.  & 
.Tosk.i.  7.  p.  tho  spies  ||  8.  10.  they  of  Ai  p.  17. 
Judg.  1.  0.  p.  after  Adoni-bezek,  and  caught  him 
4.  10.  but  Barak  p.  after  the  ehariot.s,  22. 

7.  2:1.  Gideon  p.  after  the  Midinnites,  25.  |  8. 12. 
20.  45.  Israel  ;).  nenjamin  unto  Gidum 

1  .Sam.  7.  II.  Israel  p.  the  Philistines,  17.  52. 
2:i.2">.  Saul  p.  David  ||  30.10.  David  p.  Amalekitca 

2  .Sam.  2.  19.  and  .Xsiiliel  p.  afier  Abnor 

24.  Joal)  p.  Abner  ||  28.  Joabp.  Israel  no  more 
20.  10.  so  Jouh  and  Ahishai  ;/.  ofier  Sheba 
22.  .38.  I  have  p.  mine  enemies,  Psnl.  18.  37. 

1  A'l^ii'.*  20.20.Syriiins  fled,  and  Israel  p.  after  them 

2  A'i)i^'.<  25.  5.  nnd  Ihe  army  of  Chaldei's  p.  tho 

king  and  overtook  him,  .Irr.  39.  5.  |  52.  8 
^Chron.  13.  19.  Abi.jnh  p.  after  Jerntioam 
11. 13.  Asa  and  people  p.  the  Elliiopianslo  Gerar 
Isa.  41.  3.  he  p.  them,  and  passed  safely 
AaHi.4.19.  Iheyp.  iisnpoii  the  mountains,  laid  wai* 

rURSUEK,  S. 

.Tosh.  2.  10.  get  to  tho  monniain  lest  p.  meet  you 

22.  until  the  p.  returned,  the  p.  sought  Ihcm 

8.  20.  nnd  the  people  Inriiril  back  upon  ihep. 
Lam.  1.  0.  nie  srono  without  sirength  before  tilop 

PITUSUEI'II,  INt;. 
Lrn^a.  17.  nnd  ye  ^hn\\  flee  when  none  p.  you 
30.  and  they  shall  fall  when  none  71.  37. 


PUT 

Jwlg.  8. 4.  Gideon  with  300  men,  faint,  yet  j>.  tliora 
5. 1  ani/j.Zobali  and  Zalniunna,  kinijs  ot'Alldian 
1  Ham.  ii^.  -d.  riaul  ictunied  from  p.  alter  Uavid 
8  HiLiii.  3.  2.;.  beiiold,  Joab  camo  from  p.  a  troop 

IH.  It),  llio  jieople  ruturiicd  from  p.  alter  Israul 
I  Kings  18.  -7.  your  god  is  ^.  or  on  a  journey 

2:2.  33.  perceived  it  was  not  tlie  liing,  tliey  turned 

buck  I'rom^.  Jehosiiapliat,  2  L'kron.  18.  32. 

Prov.  11. 19.  lie  lliat/;.  avilp.  it  to  liis  own  death 

13.  21.  evily.  sinners,  to  tlie  rigliteous  good  rejiaid 

yj."!.  hep.  them  with  words,  yet  they  are  wanting 

23.  1.  the  wicked  flee  when  no  man  p. 

PUKSUIT. 
1  Kings  18. 127.  he  is  a  god,  talking,  or  hatli  a  p. 

PUKTKNANCK. 
Exod.  12. 9.  roast  with  lire,  his  head,  legs,  and  p. 

PUSH. 
Exod.  21.  29.  but  if  tlie  o.\  were  wont  to  p.  36. 

32.  if  the  ox  p.  a  man-servant  or  maid-servant 
Dcut.  33.  17.  with  them  he  shall  p.  the  people 
1  Kings  22.11.  with  tliose  thou  shalt;;.  the  Syrians, 
until  thou  have  consumed  them,  2  Chr.  18. 10. 
Job  30.  12.  tiiey  ^.  away  my  feet,  and  raise  up 
Psal.  44.  5.  thro'  thee  will  we^.  down  our  enemies 
Dau.li.AO.  at  the  end  shall  king  of  south  ^.  at  iiim 

PUS'liED. 
Ezck.  34.  21.  p.  all  the  diseased  with  your  horns 

PUSHlJVli. 
Dan.S.i.l  saw  the  ram;;,  westward  and  northward 

PUT. 
Gen.  2.8.  there  God  p.  the  man  he  had  formed,  15. 

3.  lo.  1  will/>.  enmity  between  thee  and  woman 

24.  2.  ;).  thy  hand  under  my  thigli,  9.  |  47.  29. 
47.  and  I  /;.  the  ear-ring  upon  her  face 

27.  15.  p.  them  upon  Jacob  her  younger  son 

16.  she  p.  the  skins  of  the  kids  upon  his  hands 

28.  11.  Jacob;;,  the  stones  for  his  pillows 
21).  3.  p.  the  stone  again  on  tlie  well's  mouth 

30.  40.  hey.  his  own  flocks  by  themselves 

42.  when  cattle  were  feeble,  he  p.  not  the  rods 

31.  34.  Rachel  y.  them  in  tlie  camels' furniture 

32.  10.  ;).  a  space  betwixt  drove  and  drove 

38.  14.  Tamaryj.  ott'her  w-idow's  garments 

39.  4.  all  he  had  he  p.  into  Joseph's  hand 

40.  15.  that  they  should  p.  me  into  the  dungeon 
42.  17.  ho  p.  them  altogether  in  ward 

46.  4.  Joseph  shall/),  his  hand  on  thine  eyes 
48.  Is.  p.  tliy  right  hand  upon  his  head 
Exod.  3.  3.  draw  not  nigh  hither,  p.  off  thy  shoes 
from  oft"  thy  feet,  /.9a.  20.  2.  Jlcts  7.  33. 
22.  ye  shall  ;;.  them  on  your  sons  and  daugliters 

4.  6.  Lord  said,  p.  now  thy  hand  in  thy  bosom 
15.  si)erik  to  him,  and  p.  words  in  his  mouth 

5.  21.  lop.  a  sword  in  their  hand  to  slay  us 
8.  23.  I  will;),  a  division  between  my  people 
11.  7.  may  know  the  Lord  doth  p.  a  difference 

15.  26.  1  willy,  none  of  these  diseases  on  thee 

16.  33.  p.  a  homer  full  of  manna  therein 

22.  5.  andy.  iiis  beast  in  another  man's  field 
8.  to  see  whether  he  havey.  his  hand 

11.  an  oath  that  he  hath  noty.  his  hand 
03.  1.  y.  not  thine  hand  with  the  wicked 

29.  24.  thou  slialty.  all  in  the  hands  of  Aaron 

30.  30.  y.  of  the  perfume  before  the  testimony 

32.  27.  y.  every  man  his  sword  by  his  side 

33.  5.  now  y.  off  thy  ornaments  from  thee 
22.  I  will  p.  thee  in  a  cleft  of  the  rock 

J,cv.8.27.  hep.  all  on  Aaron's  and  his  sons' hands 
19.  14.  nory.  a  stumbling-block  before  the  blind 

21.  12.  and  thcyy.  the  blasphemer  in  ward 
26.  8.y.  ten  thousand  to  flight,  JJcut.  32.  30. 

JV«)/i.0.27.  shall  y.  my  name  on  the  children  of  Isr. 
11.17.  of  spirit  which  is  on  thee,  and  y. upon  them 
2il.  the  Lord  would  y.  his  spirit  on  them 
21.9.M0SCS  made  a  serpent  of  brass,  andy.  it  on  a 

23.  5.  the  Lord  y.  a  word  in  Balaam's  mouth,  IG. 
Deut.  10.  2.  thou  shall  y.  them  in  the  ark 

5.  ly.  the  tables  in  the  ark  which  I  had  made 
11.29.  thou  slialt  y .  the  blessing  on  mount  Gcri/.im 
12. 5.  the  place  he  shall  choose  toy.  his  name,  21. 

7.  ye  shall  rejoice  in  all  ye  y.  your  liand  to 

18.  18.  and  will  p.  my  words  in  his  mouth 
23.24.bntlhou  shall  not  y. any  grapes  iu  thy  vcssol 

.70.9 A.  7.  ll.y.  it  even  among  their  own  stuff 
.Ixidg.  12.  3.  ly.  my  life  in  my  hands,  and  passed 
1  fiam.  2.  30.  y.  me  into  one  of  the  ])riest'8  otKces 

8.  16.  your  king,  he  will  y.  your  asses  to  work 
14.  26.  but  no  man  y.  his  hand  to  his  mouth 

17.  39.  and  David  y.  them  ofl'him 

54.  but  he  y.  Goli.ith's  armour  in  his  tent 

19.  5.  for  ho  did  y.  his  life  in  his  hand 
28.  21.  I  have  y.  my  life  in  my  liand 

lA'i»J-.«5.  3.  Ld.y.  them  under  the  soles  of  his  feet 

9.  3.  to  y.  my  name  there,  11.  30.  ]  14.  21. 

12.  29.  the  other  of  Ihc  calves y.  he  in  Dan 

18.  23.  lay  it  on  wood,  and  y_  no  lire  under 

22.  27.  saitli  the  king,  y.  this  fellow  in  prison 
Kinss  4.  34.  hoy.  his  mouth  upon  his  mouth 

11. 12.  the  king's  son,  theyy.  the  crown  on  him 

13.16. p.  tlilne  hand  upon  ^q  bow,  he  p.  his  hand 

407 


PUT 

2  Kmgs  19. 28.  will  p.  hook  in  thy  nose,  Tsa.  37.29. 

21.  7.  in  this  house  and  Jerusalem  will  ly.  my 

name  for  ever,  2  Vhr.  6.  20.  |  12. 13.  [33.7. 

1  Ckron.  11.19.  that  havey.  their  lives  in  jeopardy 
13.  10.  because  he  y.  his  hand  to  the  ark 

21.  27.  and  the  angel  p.  up  his  sword  again 

2  Chron.  6.  11.  and  in  the  house  have  1  y.  the  ark 
36. 3.  the  kingof  Egypty.  him  down  at  Jerusalem 

22.  Cyrus  y.  the  decree  in  writing,  Ezra  1.  1. 
Ezra  6. 12.  destroy  kings  thuty.  their  hand  to  alter 

7.  27.  hathyj.  such  a  thing  in  the  king's  heart 
JVcA.  2.  12.  what  God  had  y.  in  my  heart  to  do 

3.  5.  the  nobles  y.  not  their  necks  to  the  work 

4.  23.  that  every  oney.  them  off  for  washing 
6.  14.  Tobiah  would  have  y.  me  in  fear,  19. 

£s(yi.9.1.  his  decree  drew  near  to  bey. in  execution 
.Job  4.  18.  behold,  lie.y.  no  trust  in  his  servants 
13. 14.  wherefore  do  £y.  my  life  in  mine  handl 
17.  3.  lay  down,  y.  me  in  a  surety  with  thee 
19.  13.  he  hath  y.  my  brethren  far  from  me 
2.3.  6.  no,  but  he  would  /).  strength  in  me 
38.  36.  whoy.  wisdom  in  the  inward  jiarts 
41.  2.  canst  thou  p.  a  hook  into  his  nose  1 
Psal.  4.  7.  thou  hast  p.  gladness  in  my  heart 

8.  6.  thou  hasty,  all  things  under  his  feet,  1  Cor. 

15.  25,  27.  I  Kph.  1.  22.  |  IIeh.%  8. 

9.  20.  y.  in  fear,  O  Lord,  that  nations  may  know 
30.11. thou  hasty,  olf  my  sackcloth  and  girded  me 
31.  18.  let  the  lying  lijis  bey.  to  silence 

40.  3.  he  hath  p.  a  new  song  in  my  mouth 

14.  let  them   be  driven   backward,  and  p.  to 

shame  that  wish  me  evil,  44.  7.  |  53.  5. 
44.  9.  but  thou  hast  cast  off  and  y.  us  to  shame 
56.  8.  p.  thou  my  tears  into  thy  bottle 
78.  66.  he  y.  them  to  a  perpetual  reproach 
88. 18.  lover  and  IViend  hast  thou  p.  far  from  me 
118.8. better  to  trust  in  L.  than  toy.  conlid.in  man 
O.better  to  trust  inL.  tlum  to/j.conlid.  in  princes 
119.  31.  O  Lord,  y.  me  not  to  shame 
Prov.  23.  2.  and  y.  a  knife  to  thy  throat 

25.  8.  when  thy  neighbour  hath  y.  thee  to  shame 
10.  lest  he  that  hearelh  ity.  thee  to  shame 

Eccl.  10.  10.  then  must  hey.  to  more  strength 
C'n7)£.5.3. 1  havey.  ott'my  coat,  how  shall  Iy.it  on? 

4.  my  belovcdy.  in  his  hand  by  holeof  thedoor 
Is  a  5.  20.  woe  to  them  thaly.  darkness  for  hght 

10.  13.  I  havey.  down  the  inhabitants 

11.  8.  weaned  child  y.  his  hand  on  cockatrice' den 
37.  1 7. 1  will  y.a  spirit  into  him 

42. 1. 1  havey.  my  Spirit  upon  him,  Mat.  12. 18. 
43.  26.  y.  me  in  remembrance,  let  us  plead 
47.  11 .  thou  shall  not  be  able  to  y.  it  off 
51.  16.  I  havey.  words  in  thy  mouth,  .Jrr.  1.  9. 

23.  p.  it  into  the  hand  of  them  that  afflict  thee 
53.  10.  to  bruise  him,  he  hath  y.  him  to  grief 
59. 1 19.  Spirit  of  the  Lord  shall  y.  him  to  flight 

21.  the  words  I  p.  in  thy  mouth  shall  not  depart 
03.11. where  is  he  thaty. his  Holy  Spi.  within  him? 
Jcr.  3.  19.  how  shall  ly.  thee  among  the  children 

8.  14.  for  the  Lord  our  God  hath  p.  us  to  silence 

12.  13.  they  havey.  theuisel.  to  pain  but  not  profit 

31.  33.  I  willy,  my  law  in  their  inward  parts 

32.  40.  I  will  y.  my  fear  in  their  hearts 
47.  6.  O  sword  p.  up  thyself  into  thy  scabbard 

Ezek.  8.  17.  they  y.  the  branch  to  their  nose 
11. 19. 1  will  give  them  one  heart,  I  will.y.  a  new 
spirit  within  you,  36.  26,  27.  |  37. 14. 
IG.  14.  through  my  comclinessl  hady.  upon  thee 
22.  26.  her  priests  have  y.  no  diftercnce 
29.  4.  I  will  y.  hooks  in  (hy  jaws,  33.  4. 
.30.  13.  I  will  p.  a  fear  in  the  land  of  Egypt 
37.  6.  andy.  breath  in  you,  and  ye  shall  live 
Dan.  5.  19.  and  whom  he  would  hey.  down 
Joel  3.13.y.in  the  sickle,  for  the  harvest  is  ripe 
Jl/ic.2.12.I  willy. them  together  as  sheep  ofBozrah 
7.  5.  trust  not  a  friend, y.  yc  not  confid.  in  a  guide 
Zeph.  3.  19.  where  they  have  been  y.  to  shame 
Hair.  1.6.  earni'th  wages  toy.it  in  a  bag  with  holes 
Mat.  5. 15.  nor  light  candle  andy.  it  under  a  bushel 

9.  17.  nor  do  men  y.  new  wine  into  old  bottles 
19.  6.  let  no  man  y.  asunder,  Mark  10.  9. 

22.  34.  that  he  had  p.  the  Sadducees  to  silence 
2,5.  27.  oughtcst  toy.  my  money  to  exchangers 

26.  bi.p.  up  again  thy  sword,  .Tohn  18.  11. 

27.  6.  not  lawful  toy.  them  into  the  treasury 
Mark  10.16.  y.  his  hands  on  them  and  blessed  them 
/Mkc  1  ..52.hath  y.down  t  he  mighty  from  their  seats 

15.22.  bring  best  robe,y.  it  on  him,  and  y.  a  ring 
.Ukn  5.  7.  I  have  none  toy.  me  into  the  pool 
9.  1.").  he  y.  clay  upon  mine  eyes,  and  I  do  sec 
19.29. 7).  it  upon  hyssop,  and  y.  it  to  his  mouth 
20. 25.  uide.'is  I  p.  my  finger  into  the  print  of  nails 
..^cls  1.  7.  the  Father  hathy.  in  his  own  power 

4.  3.  they  y-  the  apostles  in  hold  unto  next  day 

5.  18.  and  p.  them  in  the  common  |)ri.ion 
2.'>.  behold,  the  men  whom  ye  y.  in  prison 

13.  46.  seeing  yey.  the  word  of  God  from  you 

15.  9.  andy.  no  ditrcrenco  between  us  and  them 
10.  to  y.  a  yoke  upon  the  neck  of  the  disciples 

Rom.  14.  13.  that  no  man  y.  a  stumbling  block 


PUT 

1  Cor.  15. 24.  he  shall  havey.  down  actliorily 
25.  till  hey.  all  his  enemies  under  his  feet 

2  Cor.  5.  t  VJ.p.  in  us  the  word  of  reconciliation 
8.10.  God,  which  y.  the  same  earnest  care  in  Titui 

Ep/i.  4.  22.  that  ye  y.  olf  the  old  man,  Cul.  3.  U. 
Col.  3.  8.  ye  also  y.  off  all  these,  anger,  wrath 
ITim.  4.0.  if  thou  y.  the  brethren  in  remembrance, 
shall  be  a  good  minister,  2  'J'ini.  2. 14. 
iTirn..  1  6.  wherefore  1  y.  thee  in  remembrance 

Tit.  3.  1.  y.  them  in  mind  to  be  subject  to  powers 
Pkilcm.  18.  if  he  oweth,  y.  that  on  my  account 
Hcb.  2.  5.  to  angels,  hath  he  noty.  in  subjection 

6.6.if  fall  away,  to  renew  them, seeing  they  crucify 
Son  of  God  afresh,  andy. him  to  an  open  shame 

8. 10. 1  will  y.  my  laws  into  their  mind,  and  write 

10.  1().  I  willy,  my  laws  into  their  hearts 
Jam.  3.  3.  wey.  bits  in  the  horses'  mouth 
1  Pet.  2.  15.  ye  may  y.  to  silence  the  ignorance 
'i  Pet.  1.  12.  toy.  you  always  in  remembrance 

14.  knowing  that  1  musty,  olf  this  tabernacle 
Jude  5.  I  will  y.  you  also  in  remembrance 
Kcv.  2.  24.  I  will  y.  on  you  none  other  burden 

17.  17.  God  hathy.  in  their  hearts  to  fulfil  his  will 

PUT  away. 
Clen.  35.  2.  p.  aieay  I  he  strange  gods  among  you 
Exod.  12.15.  p.awaij  the  leaven  out  of  your  houses 
/>ai.21.7.nortakea  woman  p.aicay  from  her  hush. 
Deut.  19. 13.  y.av/ju)/ guilt  ot  innocent  blood,  21. 9. 

22.  19.  he  may  noty.  away  all  his  days,  29. 
Josh.  24.14.  p.  away  the  strange  gods  your  fathers 

served,  23.  Judg.  10.  16.  1  Sam."!.  3. 

1  Sam.1. 14.  Eli  said,  y.  away  thy  wine  from  theo 
28.  3.  Saul  had  y.  away  wizards  out  of  the  land 

2  .Sn)H.  7.  1.5.  Saul  whom  ly.  atcay  before  Ihcc 
12. 13.  Nathan  said,  the  Ld.  hath  p.  away  thy  sin 

2  Kings  3.  2.  Jehoram;;.  atony  the  image  of  IJaal 

23.  24.  all  the  abominations  did  Josiahy.  away 

2  C/iron.  15.  8.  Asay.  away  the  abominable  idols 
Ezra  10.  3.  make  a  covenant  toy.  away  the  wives 
19.  they  gave  their  hands  toy.  axcay  their  wives 
Job  11.  14.  if  iniquity  be  in  thine  hand,  p.  it  away 
22.  23.  p.  C!0ff7/iiuquity  from  thy  tabernacle 
Psal.  18.22. 1  did  noty.  a^cay  his  statutes  from  me 
27.  9.y.  not  thy  servant  away  in  anger 
88.  8.  thou  hasty.  a2cay  mine  acquaintance 
Prov.  4.  24.  y.  away  from  thee  a  froward  mouth 
/sa.SO.l.whom  I  havey. ajcaj),your  motherp.aicoi/ 
,hr.  3. 1.  if  a  man  y.  away  his  wife,  will  he  return 
S.Ihady.her  njca^and  given  her  a  bill  of  divorce 

4.  1.  if  thou  willy,  aicay  thine  abominations 
Ezek.  43.  9.  let  them  y.  away  their  whoredom 

44.22.  nor  shall  i)riest  take  her  that  isy.  away 
Has.  2.  2.  let  hery.  aicay  her  whoredoms 
JImos  6.  3.  ye  that  y.  far  away  the  evil  day 
Mat.  2. 1 16.  if  he  hate  her,  7).  her  away 
.yj/ai.l.l9.Joscph  was  minded  toy.her  away  privily 

5.  31.  it  hath  been  said,  whnso  shall  y.  atcay  his 

wife,  32.  I  19. 9.    Mark  10.  11.  J.uke  10. 18. 
MarkVi.^.  is  it  lawful  for  man  I07).  a(rn;/ hi.«  wife? 

12.  if  a  woman  shall  y.  aioay  her  husband 
1  Cor.  5. 13.  7).  away  from  you  that  wicked  person 

7.  11.  let  not  the  husband  p.  awayhSs  wife,  12. 
13.  11.  when  a  man,  I  y.  axcay  childish  things 

Eph.  4.  31.  let  anger  and  evil  speaking  be  y.  away 
1  Tim.  1.  19.  which  some  having y.  away 
Heb.  9. 20.  to  y.  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  hims. 
Hec  Dkath,  Evil. 
VVT  forth. 
Gen. 3. 22.  lest  he  p.  forth  and  take  of  tree  of  life 

8.  9.  Noah  p.  forth  his  hand  and  look  the  dove 
19.  10.  the  men  y.  forth  their  hand  and  pulled 

Lot  into  the  house  to  them 
Exod.A.i.p.forth  thine  hand  and  take  it  by  the  tail 
Derit.  33.  14.  precious  things  y.  forth  by  the  moon 
.Tiidsr.  3.  21.  and  Ehud y./«r(A  his  left  hand 

6.  21.  the  angel  p.  forth  the  end  of  the  staff 
14. 12.  I  will  now  p.  forth  0.  riddle  to  you,  13. 

15.  15.  Samson  y./«rtA.  and  took  the  jaw-bone 

1  .f  (!))).  14. 27.  .Tonath.y./firtA  therod  and  dipped  it 
22.17.the  servants  not  y./orf  A  to  slay  the  priests 
24.10.  not  p.  forth  mine  hand  ag.  Lord's  anointed 

2  Sam.Cy.C.  Xl/.znhp.f.  his  hand  to  ark,  1  Chr.  13.9. 
15.5.  to  do  Absalom  obeisance, hey./urf yds  hand 
18. 12.  yot  nntp.forthmy  hand  against  king's  son 

1  Kings  13.4.  ieroh. p. forth  his  hand,  and  hep./. 
Job  1.  11.  p.  forth  thine  hand  and  touch  all,  2.  5. 

12.  only  upon  himselfy.  noX  forth  lliy  hand 
Ps.  55.  26.  hep.  forth  hands  against  him  at  peaco 

125.  3.  lest  the  righteous  p. /or^A  their  hand.s 
P)-oi'.8.1.doth  not  Understand.  y./orfA  her  voice? 

25.  0.  p.  not  forth  thyself  in  presence  of  the  king 
./rr.l.O.L  .p.  forth  his'hand  and  touched  my  mouth 
i^:cA-.8.3.  he  p.  forth  form  of  a  hand  and  took  mo 

17.  2.  son  of  man  y.  forth  a  riddle  and  speak 
Mat.  8.  .3.  .Tcsns  p.  forth  his  hand  and  touched 
him,  I  will,  be  thou  clean,  Mark  1.41.  7,M.5.13. 

9.  25.  l)ul  when  people  were  p.  forth,  ho  wentitj 
13.24.  another  parnblr  p. he/nr/A,  31.  ^w/.-cl4  7. 

Mctn  5.  34.  cemmandcd  to  p.  the  apostles /or/4 
9.  40.  but  Pctory.  thoin  all /»»•//(,  and  knceloi 


PUT 

PUT  on. 
Oe%.  S3.  20.  bread  to  eat,  and  raiment  to  p.  on 
3d.  I'J.  Tamar;).  on  garinenu  of  her  widowliood 
EzoU.'2\>.'M.  Ills  son  llial  id  priest,  shall  p.  tliciii  on 
33.  4.  iiu  man  did;>.  u»  iuiii  Ins  urnuiiiuiitd 
J^en.  ti.  11).  the  pritst  shall  p.  vn  his  luiuii  garment 
ll.hesliall^J.  un  othutgarineiits,  and  carry  Ibrili 
IG.  4.  he  shall;;,  on  llie  holy  linen  cuat 

24.  he  shall  p.  on  his  garments  and  come  forth 
21.  10.  high-priest  consecrated  to  p.on  the  guriii. 

JVuin.l6.4li.;».0rt  incense,  and  go  (juickly  to  congr. 
JJeut.  'i-i.  5.  nor  a  man  p.  on  a  woman's  garinenl 
Si  Sam.  1.  24.  weep  for  !?aul,  wlio;;.  oh  ornaments 

14.  2.  1  pray  p.  on  now  mourning  apparel 

20.  ti.  Joah's  garment  he  had  p.  on  was  girded 
lA'ini's22.30.butp.thou  on  thy  robes,  2  C/ir.lri.£). 
2  Kings  3.  21.  all  that  were  able  to  p.  on  armour 
iUthl'i.  1.  Mordecai  ;;.  on  sackcloth  with  ashes 

5.  1.  Esther  p.  on  her  royal  api)arel  and  stood 
'o6  27. 17. may  prepare  it,  but  the  just  shall/),  it  on 
29.  14.  I  p.  on  righteousness,  and  it  clothed  me 

Cant.  5.  3. 1  i)ut  olf  my  coat,  liow  shall  1  p.  it  07i? 

Ua.  51.  y.  awake,  awake,  p.  on  strength,  52.  1. 
52.  1.  p.  on  thy  beautiful  garments,  O  Jerusalem 
59. 17.  he  p.  on  righteousness  as  a  breast-plate,  lie 
p.  on  garments  of  vengeance  for  clothing 

JcT.  13.  1.  take  a  girdle  and  p.  it  on  thy  loins,  2. 
4G.4.  furbish  the  spears,  and/(.  on  the  brigandines 

Eitk.  24.  17.  and;),  on  thy  shoes  upon  thy  feet 
42.  14.  and  bliuil  p.  on  other  garments,  44.  19. 

Jonah  3.  5.  the  people  of  Nineveh /<.  on  sackcloth 

Mat.  U.  25.  nor  what  ye  shall  p.  on,  Luke  12.  22. 

21.  7.  they  p.  on  the  ass  and  colt  their  clothes 
27.26.they  stripped  him  and;),  on  him  scarlet  robe 

29.  when  they  had  platted  a  crown  of  thorns, 
they  p.  it  on  his  head,  John  19.  2. 

48.one  of  them  />.a  sponge  on  a  reed,«U(jrA  15.30. 
Mark  t).9.be  shod  with  sandals,  not  p.  on  two  coats 
I.uke  15.  22.  bring  and  p.  on  hiin  the  best  robe 
John  19.  19.  Pilate  wrote  a  title  and  p.  it  on  cross 
Horn.  13.  12.  and  let  us  p.  on  the  armour  of  light 

14.  but  p.  ye  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

1  Cor.  12.  t  iJ.  on  these  we  p.  on  more  honour 

15.  53.  this  corruptible  must  p.  on  incorruption 
54.  this  mortal  shall  have  p.  on  immortality 

Gal.  3.  27.  baptized  into  Christ,  have  p.  on  Christ 
tlplt.  4.  24.  that  ye  p.  on  the  new  man.  Col.  3.  10. 
O.ll.p.on  the  whole  armour  of  G.  ye  may  be  able 
Col.  3.  12.  p.  on  therefore,  as  the  elect  of  God, 
bowels  of  mercies,  kindness 
14.p.on  charity,  which  is  the  bond  of  perfectness 
PUT  out. 
Oen.38.28.  when  she  travailed  onep.ouf  his  hand 
F.zod.  17.  14.  p.  out  the  remembrance  of  Amaiek 
/-«r.  6.  12.  the  fire  on  the  altar  shall  not  be  p.out 
A''um.  5.  2.  p.  out  of  the  camp  every  leper,  4. 
3.  both  male  and  female  shall  ye  p.  out 

16.  14.  wilt  thou  p.  out  the  eyes  of  these  men'? 
Deut.  7.  22.  the  Lord  will  p.  out  tliose  natioiia 

25.  6.  that  his  name  be  not  p.  out  of  Israel 
Judg.  16.21.  the  Philistines  p.  out  Samson's  eyes 

2  .Sam.  13.  17.  p.  now  this  woman  out  from  me 
S  Kings  0.  7.  hep.  out  his  hand  and  took  the  axe 

25.  7.  and  they  p.  out  the  eyes  of  Zedekiah  and 

bound  him  with  fetters,  Jcr.  39.  7.  |  52.  11. 
2  Chron.  29.  7.  also  they  have  p.  out  the  lamps 
Job  1?.  5  the  light  of  the  wicked  shall  be  p.  out 
0.  the  light  shall  bo  dark,  and  his  candle  be  p. 
out,  21.  17.  Proo.  13.  9.  ]  20.  20.  |  24.  20. 
Paal.  9.  5.  thou  hast  p.  out  their  name  for  ever 
£zeA.32.7.  when  I  p.  thee  out  I  will  cover  heaven 
Mark  5.40.wlien  he  had  p.  them  all  out,  //U.8.54. 
J^uke  10.  4.  when  I  am  p.  out  of  the  stewardship 
John  9.  22.  he  should  be  p.  out  of  the  synagogue 
i2.42.le9t  Ihpy  should  be  p.  out  of  the  synagogue 
IG.  2.  Ihoy  shall  p.  you  out  of  the  synagogues 

PUT  trust. 
Judf.Q.\5.  come  ond  p.  your  ti^ist  in  mv  shadow 
Kings  18.  24.  p.  thy  trust  on  Egypt,  Jsa.  30.  9, 
Chron.  5.  20.  hi-canso  they  p.  their  trust  in  him 
fiat.  4.  5.  and  p.  your  trust  in  the  Lord 
5.  U.  let  all  that  p.  their  trust  in  thee  rejoice 
7.  1.  O  Lord  my  God,  in  thee  do  I  p.  my  trust, 
16.  1.  |2.>.  20.  |71.  1 
9.  10.  that  know  thy  name,  will  p.  trust  in  tlieo 
11.  1.  in  the  Lord  p.  I  my  trust,  31.  1.  |  71.  1. 
17.7.  thalsttvcst  them  which  p.  their  tru.it  in  thee 
36.7j>. their  trust  under  the  nhadow  of  lliy  wings 
56.  4.  in  God  I  hnvo  p.  my  trust,  I  will  not  fear 
73.  28.  I  have  p.  my  trust,  in  the  Lo'd  God 
146.  3.  p.  not  your  trust  in  princes,  nor  son  of  man 
J'ror.30.5.shicld  to  them  that  p.  their  trust  in  him 
.ter.  39.  18.  because  tlit>u  hn»l  p.  thy  trust  in  mo 
1  Tkrss.  2.  4.  to  be  p.  in  trust  with  the  (foxpi'l 
Hcb.  2.  13.  and  again,  I  will  p.  my  trust  in  him 

PUT,  Participle. 
Otn.  .'50.  26.  Joseph  was  p.  in  a  roOin  in  rj;vpt 
L,tv.  11.  .32.  the  vessel,  it  must  be  p    into  water 
38.  but  if  any  water  bo  p.  on  seed,  be  unclean 
U.  19.  ih«  ihiU  bs  p.  apart  teven  dayt 


auA 

Z,«c.l8.19.slialt  not  approach  as  long  as  sbep.apart 
2  !iam.  3. 34.  hands  not  bound,  nor  leet  p.  ill  letters 

1  A'in^4  22. 10.  the  kings  having  p.  on  llieir  robus 

2  Kings  14.12.  Judah  wasp. to  worse  beloie  Israel 

1  Ckrun.  19.  Itj.  the  Syrians  p.  to  the  woise,  19. 
27.  24.  neither  wus  the  iiumberp.  in  the  account 

2  Chron.  2.  14.  to  hnd  out  every  device  shall  bep. 
6.  24.  if  thy  people  Israel  bep.  to  the  worse 
25.  22.  Judah  wasp,  to  the  worse  belbre  Israel 

Ezra  2. 02.  were  not  found,  therefore  were  they  as 

polluted,  p.  from  the  priesthood,  JVVA.  7.  04. 

Psal.  35. 4.  let  them  be  p.  to  shame  that  seek  after 

my  soul,  let  them  be  turned  back,  83.  17. 

70.  2.  and  p.  to  confusion,  that  desire  my  hurt 

71. 1.  ill  thee  1  trust,  let  me  never  be  p.  to  confus. 
Prov.  'io.  7.  than  that  thou  shouldest  be  p.  lower 
Eccl.  3.14.  what  God  doeth,  nothing  can  bep.  to  it 
Isa.  54.  4.  for  thou  shult  not  bep.  to  shame 
Jcr.  50.  42.  they  shall  ride,  every  one  in  array 
Zrph.  3.  19.  where  they  have  been  p.  to  shamo 
JliU.  9.  10.  for  that  which  is  p.  in  to  till  it  up 
Mark  1.  14.  now  after  that  John  wasp,  in  prison 

2.  22.  new  wine  p.  into  new  bottles,  J.ukc  5.  38. 
/^uke  9.  02.  no  man  having  p.  his  hand  to  plough 
John  12.  0.  Judas  bare  what  was  p.  in  the  bag 

13.  2.  devil  having  now  p.  into  the  heart  of  Judas 

//ft.  2. 8.  he  left  nothing  that  is  not  p.  under  him, 

but  now  we  see  not  yet  all  things  p.  under  him 

Rev.  11.9.  not  suU'er  dead  bodies  to  bep.  in  graves 

PUTTEST. 
JVum.  24.  21.  and  thou  p.  thy  nest  in  a  rock 
Deut.  12.18.  bless  all  thou  p.  thine  hands  to,  15. 10. 
2  Kings  18.14.  that  which  ihoup.on  me  will  1  bear 
Jot)  i.i.  27.  thou  p.  my  feet  in  stocks  and  lookest 
Psal.  119.119.  thou  p.  away  the  wicked  like  dross 
i/oi.2.15.  that ;/. thy  bottle  to  him,  luakest  drunken 

PUTTETH. 
Ezod.  30.  33.  who  p.  any  on  a  stranger,  be  cut  oft' 
JVum.  22.  38.  the  word  that  God  p.  in  my  mouth 
Deut.  25.  11.  woman;),  forth  her  hand  and  takeih 

27.  15.  graven  image,  and  p.  it  in  a  secret  i)lace 
\Kings  20.11. boast  hiinselfashe  thatp.ott'harness 
Job  15.15.he  p.  no  trust  in  saints,  heavens  not  clean 

28.  9.  ho  p.  forth  his  hand  upon  the  rock 
33.11. hep. my  feet  in  the  stocks,  marketh  my  steps 

Psal.  15.  5.  ho  that  p.  not  out  his  money  to  usury 
06.  t  !)■  which  p.  our  soul  in  life,  and  suti'ereth  not 
75.  7.  God  p.  down  one  and  setteth  up  another 

f  row. 26.  fS.ihat p.  a  precious  stone  among  stones 

28.  25.  that  p.  his  trust  in  Lord  slial  1  be  made  fat 

29.  25.  who  p.  his  trust  in  the  Lord  shall  be  safe 
Cant.  2.  13.  tne  fig-tree  p.  forth  her  green  figs 
ha.  57.13.  p.  his  trust  in  me  shall  possess  the  land 
Jer.  43.  12.  as  a  shepherd  p.  on  garment,  go  forth 
/^am.3. 29.  hep.  his  mouth  in  the  dust,  if  he  hope 
Ezek.  14.4.  p.  the  stumbling  block  of  iniquity,  7. 
Mic.  3.  5.  and  he  that  p.  not  into  their  mouths 
Mat.  9.  16.  no  man  p.  new  cloth,  Luke  5.  30. 

24.  32.  when  branch  is  yet  lender  and  p.  forth 

leaves  ye  know  that  summer  is  nigh, 

Mark  13.  28. 

Jl/arJl2.22.no  man  p. new  wine  into  old  bottles,new 

wine  must  be  put  into  new  bottles,  Duke  5.  37. 

4.  29.  immediately  ho  p.  in  sickle,  harvest  come 
Luke  8. 10.  no  man  p.  a  lighted  candle  under  a  bed 

11.33.a  candle,  no  man  p. a  lighted  candle  in  secret 

16.18.whosop.away  his  wife  and  marries  another 
John  10.4.  when  he  p. forth  his  ownsheop,liegoeth 
Rom.  14.  t23.  that  p.  a  ditVerence  between  meats 

PUTTING. 
f?(;n.21 .14.  bottle  ofwaterp.it  on  Ilagar's  shoulder 
J^ev.  16.  21.  p.  them  upon  the  head  of  the  goat 
./udg.T.d.p.  their  hand  to  their  mouth  and  lajiped 
fsa.  5H.9.  p.  forth  of  the  finger  and  speaking  vanity 
Mai.  2.  16.  God  snith  that  he  hateth  p.  away 
.^cts  9.  12.  Ananias  p.  his  hand  on  him,  17. 

19.33.lhey  drew  Alexander,  Jews  p.  him  forward 
Rom.  15.  15.  in  some  sort,  as  p.  you  in  mind 
Kph.  4.  25.  wherefore  p.  away  lying,  speak  truth 
Col.  2. 11.  in  p.  offtlie  body  of  the  sins  of  the  flesh 
IThcss.  5.8.  p.  on  the  lirenst-plate  of  faith  and  love 
XTitn.  1.  12.  me  faithful,  p.  me  into  tlii^  ministry 
2  Tim.  1.  6.  the  gift  in  thee  by  p.  on  of  my  hands 

1  Pet.  3.  3.  whoso  odorniiig,  not  p.  on  of  apparel 
but  hidden  man  of  the  heart 

21.  not  the  p.  away  of  the  tilth  of  the  flesh 

2  Pet. 1.13.  to  stir  vou  u|)  by  p.  vou  in  remembrance 
PUTUlI'VLNt;. 

Isa.  1.  6.  but  wounds  and  bruises,  and  p.  sores 


Q. 


QUAILS, 

Birds  somexehat  less  than  pigeons:  God  gave 
(inails  to  the  Israelites  tipon  tu-o  oceasio 
I'lrsl,  in  the  wildrrnrss  of  Sin,  or  Zin,  a  far 
days  after  Ihey  had  piis.ird  ovrr  the  Ked-sea, 
Kiod.  10.  13.  The  second  time  teas  at  the  en- 
campm«nr,c(ii{«ii  in  Hebrew, Kibroth-hataavah 


QUE 

or  the  graves  of  lust,  JVum.  11. 32.  Tk»  number 
of  them  was  vifaculoas  ;  for  it  is  said,  that 
God  rained  flesh  upon  them  as  dust,  ond  fea- 
thered fowls  like  lis  the  sand  of  the  sea,  Psal. 
78.  27.  They  are  said  to  be  birds  larger  than 
sparrows,  and  tee  arc  luld  that  llirir  Jlish  is 
very  delicious  and  agreeable,  li'hen  Hod  fed 
the  Israelites  icith  these,  it  happened  to  be  in 
the  spring,  when  the  Humh  passed  from  Asia 
into  Europe.  Then  they  are  to  be  found  in 
great  numbers  vpon  the  coasts  of  the  Ked-sea 
U7i<i  the  Mediterranean.  God  caused  a  jcind  to 
arise,  that  drove  them  within  and  about  the 
camp  of  the  Israelites;  and  it  is  in  this  that  the 
miracle  consists,  that  they  were  brought  so 
seasonably  to  this  place,  and  in  so  great  num- 
bers, as  to  suffice  above  a  million  of  persons 
above  a  month.  Some  authors  ajfirtn,  that  in 
those  eastern  ana  southern  countries,  Quails 
are  innumerable,  so  that  in  one  part  of  Italy, 
within  the  eornpass  of  five  miles,  there  were 
taken  about  a  hundred  thousand  of  them 
every  day  for  a  month  together;  and  that  some- 
times they  fly  so  thick  over  the  sea,  that  being 
weary  they  fall  into  ships,  sometimes  in  such 
vumbers,  that  they  sink  them  with  their  weight. 
F.xod.  16. 13.  that  at  even  q.  came  up  and  covered 
JV"«7H.  11.  31.  a  wind  from  the  Lord  brought  q. 
32.  the  people  stood  and  they  gathered  the  y. 
Psal.  105.  40.  the  people  asked,  and  he  brought  q, 

UUAKE. 
./of ?2.10.Farth  shall  q.hct'me  them,heavens  tremble 
A''nh.  1.  5.  the  mountains  g.  at  him,  the  hills  melt 
Mat.  27.  51.  at  Christ's  death  the  earth  did  q. 
lleb.  12.21.  Moses  said,  1  exceedingly  fear  and  q. 

aUAKED. 
Exod.  19.  18.  and  the  whole  mount  g.  greatly 

1  Sam.  14.  15.  the  host  trembled,  and  tlie  earth  q. 

QUAKING. 
Ezek.  12.  18.  son  of  man,  eat  thy  bread  with  q. 
i5an. 10.7. but  a  great  g.  fell  on  them,  and  they  iled 

QUANTITY. 
Isa.  22.  24.  shall  hang  on  liim  vessels  of  small  g. 

QUARREL. 
ITim.  3. 13.  a  bishop  not  ready  to  q.  but  patient 

QUARREL. 
I^ev.  26.25.  asword  shall  avenge  q.  of  my  covenant 

2  Kings  5.  7.  see  how  he  seeketh  a  q.  against  me 
Mark  G.  19.  Hcrodias  had  a  q.  against  John 
Col.  3. 13.  forgiving,  if  anv  man  have  a  q.  ug.  any 

QUARRIES. 
Judg.  3.  19.  Ehud  turned  again  from  the  g. 
20.  Ehud  escaped  and  jiassed  beyond  the  q. 
QUARTER. 
Gen.  19. 4.  all  people  from  every  q.  to  Lot's  house 
Josh.  18.  14.  Kirjath-jearim,  Ibis  was  the  west  q. 
Is<i.  47.  15.  thy  merchants  shall  wander  to  his  q. 
56.  11.  every  one  for  his  gain  from  his  q. 
Mark  1.  45.  and  they  came  to  him  from  every  q. 
See  Soi'TH. 
QUARTERS. 
Erod.  13.  7.  no  leaven  shall  be  seen  in  thy  g. 
Deut.  22.12.  shalt  make  thee  fringes  on  llie  four  y. 
1  Chron.  0.  24.  in  four  q.  were  the  porters 
.ler.  49.  36.  four  winds  from  the  four  q.  of  heaven 
..^cts  9.  32.  as  Peter  pass.thro'  all  q.  came  to  Lydda 
16.  3.  because  of  the  Jews  which  were  in  those  q. 
28.7.  in  same  g.  were  possessions  of  Publius 
Rev.  20.  8.  shall  deceive  nations  in  four  q.  of  earth 

QUATERNIONS. 
.^cts  12.  4.  he  delivered  Peter  to  four  g.  of  soldiers 

QUEEN. 
This  name  is  given,  [1]  7'o  the  wife  or  consort 
of  a  king,  Neh.  2.  6.  [2]  To  a  soverrien  prin- 
cess, or  chief  ruler  of  a  kingdom,  1  Kings  10. 
1.  [3]  To  the  true  catholic  church,  e/^oused  to 
Christ  the  King  of  his  people,  as  to  a  hus- 
band, Psal.  45.  9.  [4]  To  the  false  antichris 
tian  church,  which  through  pride,  presnmp 
lion,  and  security,  boasts  that  she  is  the  only 
infolliblc  and  impregnable  church,  against 
which  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail,  Rev.. 
IH.  7.  [5]  7'o  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars,  which 
the  Hebrew  idolaters  colled  by  the  name  of  the 
(pieen  of  heaven,  .ler.  44.  17,  25.  Thrt/  set  vp 
altars  to  her  upon  the  plnt-fnrms  or  roofs  of 
their  houses,  or  the  corners  of  the  streets,  near 
thrir  doors,  and  in  grove.s.  They  offered 
rakrs  to  her  kneaded  up  jeilh  oil  and  honey, 
ond  made  libations  to  her  with  wine  and  other 
liquors,  these  were  offerings  which  the  Lord 
hiidrnmmnnded  to  be  made  to  himself ,  Lev.  23. 
13.  Num.  6.  17. 
1  Kings  10.  1.  the  q.  of  Sheba  heard  of  the  fame  of 
Sol.shccamptohim  with  questions,  2  rAr.9.1. 
4.  when  the  g.  had  seen  n.l  Solomon's  wifidom 
10. no  such  spices  as  the  i^.of  Sheba  giivp  Solom 
13.king  Solomon  gave  the  ^.of  Sheba  all  her  do- 
sire,  whatsoever  she  asked,  2  Chr.  9.  9, 12 
U.  19.  Pharaoh  gave  Hadad  the  liiter  of  the  g 


dUE 

}  Kings  15.13.Asa  removed  mothci  Maachah  from 
being  (/.  she  had  made  an  idol,  i  Clir.  15.  16. 
^IChiffs  10.  13.  wo  go  to  salute  ciiildreii  oftlie  y. 
A'e/i.  --l.  (J.  the  king  said,  the  (j.  silling  by  him 
£st/t.l.y.  Vashti  the  q.  made  a  least  lor  llio  women 
11.  to  bring  the  y.  ||  1-.  the  g.  rtd'used  to  come 
15.  what  shall  we  do  to  the  ij.  Vashti! 
It),  the  (j.  hath  not  done  wrong  to  the  king  only 
17. this  deed  ot'y.shall  come  abroad  to  all  women 
18.  which  have  heard  the  deed  of  the  q. 
S.  4.  let  the  maiden  that|>icaseth  the  king  be  ;. 

17.  he  made  Esther  ij.  instead  of  Vashti 
4.4  (/.grieved  ||  5.  3.  what  wilt  thou,  q.  Esther'? 
5.  12.  (/.  let  no  man  to  the  baiuiuet  but  myself 
7.2.  what  is  thy  petition,  q.  Esther?  siiall  be  grant. 

6.  then  Hainan  was  afraid  before  king  and  q. 

7.  Haman  make  request  to  the  q.  for  his  lite 

8.  will  he  force  q.  also  betbre  ino  in  the  liousel 
8.  1.  king  gave  house  of  Uaman  to  Esther  the  q. 
9.31.  as  Mordecai  and  Esther  the  5.  enjoined  ttiem 

Psal.  45.  U.  did  stand  the  q.  in  gold  ol  Ojiliir 
./er. 13. 18  say  to  the  king  and  q.  humble  yourselves 
44.  17.  to  burn  incense  to  the  q.  of  heaven 

25.  vowed  to  burn  incense  to  the  q.  of  iieaven 
Dan.  5.  10.  the  q.  came  into  the  bainiuet-house 
JUat.  i'2.42.  the  q.  of  the  south  shall  rise  up  in  the 
judgment  with  this  generation,  J^uke  11.  31. 
.^cts  8.  '27.  eunuch  under  Candace  q.  of  Ethiopians 
Hcv.  IH.  T.  she  saitli,  1  sit  a  g.  and  am  no  widow 

UUEENri. 
Cant.  6.  8.  there  are  threescore  g.  and  virgins,  9. 
Isa.  4'J.  '2'3.  and  their  q.  thy  nursing  mothers 

aUENCH 
Signifies,  [1]  To  hinder  or  extinguish.,  2  Sam.  14. 

7.  Cant.  8.  7.  [2]  To  let  or  hinder  the  consum- 
ing force  of,  Heb.  11.  34. 

Quench  not  the  Spirit,  1  Thess.  5.  19.     You  that 
have  received  the  Hpiril,  and  have  had  experi- 
ence of  the  workings  and  motions  tliereuf  in 
and  upon  your  hearts,  take  heed  of  doing,  or 
neglecting,  any  thing  that  may  render  them 
ineffectual  to  you,  cither  in  whole  or  in  part; 
but  cherish  them  by  a  ready  compliance  there- 
with.    JVot  that  the  habiis  of  grace  may  be 
totally  extinguished  in  such  as  are  truly  re- 
generated, yet  they  may  be  abated  as  to  degree 
and  licely  exercise:  But  those  common  illumi- 
nations and  convictions  of  the  Spirit,  which 
persons  unregeneratcd,  especially  such  as  liv 
under  the  gospel,  do  often  find,  may  be  totally 
lost,  Ileb.  ti.  4,  5,  6. 
2  Sam.  14. 7.  so  they  shall  q.  my  coal  which  is  left 
21.  17.  that  thou  q.  not  the  light  of  Israel 
Psal.  104.  11.  the  wild  asses  q.  their  tjliirst 
Cant.  8. 7.  waters  cannot  ^.  love,  nor  floods  drown 
Isa.  1.31.  both  shall  burn,  and  none  shall  g.  ihem 

42.  3.  smoking  tlax  shall  he  not  g.  Mat.  12.  20. 
Jer.  4. 4.  lest  fury  burn,  that  none  can  g.  it,  21. 12. 
Amos  5.  6.  and  there  be  none  to  g.  it  in  Beth-el 
Eph.  0.  16.  able  to  g.  the  tiery  darts  of  the  wicked 
1  Thess.5.1^.  o.not  Spirit,  despise  not  jirophesyings 

aUEx\CHED. 
Jfnm.  11.2.  Moses  prayed,  lire  was  q.  2  Chr.  34.  25. 
2A'J;(o-s22.17.  my  wrath  sliallnot  be  ^.ag.this  place 
Psal.  118.  12.  they  aie  q.  as  the  fire  of  thorns 
Isa.  34.  10.  it  shall  not  be  q.  night  nor  day 

43.  17.  they  are  extinct,  they  are  q.  as  tow 
66.24.  worm  shall  not  die,  nor  shall  their  tire  be  q. 

Jer.  7.  20.  my  fury  burn,  and  shall  not  be  q.  17. 27. 

Ezek.  20.  47.  the  flaming  flame  shall  not  be  q.  48. 

Mark  9.  43.  into  the  fire  that  never  shall  be  y.45. 
44.  and  where  the  lire  is  not  q.  46.  48. 

Heb.  11.34.  q.  the  violence  of  tire,  escaped  sword 
UUESTION 

Signifies,  [1]  .'?  demand  to  which  an  answer  is 
required,  Mat.  22.  3.5.  [2]  Contentions,  quar- 
rels, or  disputes,  1  Tim.  1.  4.  The  apostle  Paul 
would  have  his  disciples  Timothy  mid  Titus 
to  avoid  vain  questions,  or  vain  disputes, 
tchich  are  only  concerning  genealogies,  and 
the  sense  of  the  law,  because  this  kind  of  ques- 
tion 15  more  apt  to  give  offence  than  to  edify, 
2Tim.  2.  23.  Tit.  3.  9. 

Of  Ciuestions  there  arc  several  sorts,  [1]  Reli- 
gious, as  when  one  asks  the  import,  scnsf,  and 
meaning  of  the  statutes  and  commandments 
of  Ciod,  Deut.  6.  20.  [2]  Blasphemous,  such 
was  the  Jews'  question  to  our  Saviour,  John 

8.  48,  Say  we  not  well,  that  thou  art  a  Sama- 
ritan, and  haat  a  devil  1  [3]  Curious,  Au/re  13. 
23,  Lord,  are  there  few  that  be  saved  ?  [4] 
Foolish  and  unlearned,  such  as  questions  about 
genealogies,  that  recounting  of  ancestors, 
which  proceeds  from  a  vain  mind,  and  tends 
to  vain-glory;  and  questions  about  the  observ- 
ance of  the  ceremonial  lair,  or  the  sense  of 
some  little  things  therein,  2  Tim.  2.  23.  Tit. 3. 

9.  [5]  Hard,  1  Kings  10.  1,  The  queen  of 
Sheba  came  to  prove  Solomon  with  hard  ques- 
tions ;  that  is,  with  enigmatical,  parabolisal, 


QUI 

intricate,  and  perplexing  questions,  which  were 
much  used  among  the  eastern  sages,  Judg.  14. 
12.  [6J  Captious,  such  as  are  proposed  to  en- 
tangle and  perplex  a  person,  that,  from  his 
answers  an  occasion  and  opportunity  may  b 
had  for  accusing  and  punishing  him;  of  this 
sort  was  the  question  of  the  I'hurisees  and  He- 
rodians  to  our  Saviour,  Mark  12.  14,  Is  it  law- 
ful to  give  tribute  to  Ca;sar,  or  no!  [7J  Hypo- 
critical, such  was  Herod's  to  the  wise  men 
Mat.  2.  7,  He  asked  them  diligently,  what  timi 
the  star  ajipeaied;  but  concealed  his  bloody 
design  of  murdering  Christ ;  which  in  a  short 
time  after  he  in  vain  endeavoured  to  eff'ectuatc, 
by  murdering  all  the  children  that  were  in 
Bethlehem.  [8]  Accusatory,  JVeA.  2.  19,  Will 
ye  rebel  against  the  king'?  [9]  Reprehensive,  1 
Sam.  1.  14,  How  long  wilt  thou  be  drunken  1 
[lOJ  Allirmative,  jV«y«.  12.  2,  Hath  not  the 
Eord  also  spoken  by  us?  that  is-.  He  hath 
spoken  by  us.  [11]  Negative,  JV'uhi.  23.  8. 
How  shall  I  curse  whom  Gud  hath  not  cursed? 
t/iat  is,  I  cannot  curse  them,  [12J  Ji  question 
may  be  propounded  through  pride  and  ambi 
tion :  The  disciples  came  to  Christ,  and  asked 
him,  Who  is  the  greatest  in  the  kingdom 
heaven  "i  Mat.  18.  1.  The  kingdom  of  heaven 
of  which  our  Saviour  talked,  though  they  ex 
pected  it  should  be  perfected  in  heaven,  yet 
titty  made  account  that  it  should  be  begun  on 
earth,  and  administered  in  a  pompous  manner, 
as  other  earthly  kingdoms  are. 

To  put  one  to  the  question,  was  a  punishment 
among  the  Romans.  They  put  criminals  to 
the  question,  or  endeavoured  to  extort  confes- 
sions from  them,  by  whipping  them  with  whips 
or  scourges.  Some  think  that  the  off'cndcr  icas 
stripped  to  his  waist,  and  that  his  hands  were 
tied  to  a  pillar,  that  his  back  might  be  stretch- 
ed out  to  receive  the  blows.  Others  are  of 
opinion,  that  his  hands  were  fastened  to  a 
stake  drove  into  the  ground,  of  a  foot  and  a 
half  or  two  feet  high,  so  that  the  criminal 
stooping  with  his  face  towards  the  ground, 
might  present  his  naked  back  to  such  as  were 
appointed  to  scourge  him. 

There  is  an  example  of  this  in  Acts  22. 24.  IVlien 
the  apostle  Paul  made  an  oration  to  the  people 
at  Jerusalem,  and  related  to  them  the  manner 
of  his  conversion,  they  listened  to  him  very 
attentively  till  lie  came  to  that  part  of  his  dis- 
course, where  he  told  them  that  God  had  sent 
him  to  preach  to  the  Gcnitiles  ;  then  they  raised 
their  voices,  and  cried  out,  that  he  was  not  fit 
to  live,  and  were  going  to  put  him  to  death  ; 
Lysias  the  tribune  gave  command,  that  he 
should  be  examined  by  scourging,  or  be  put  to 
the  question,  as  the  French  expression  is, 
agreeable  to  the  Greek  word  here  used ;  btit 
when  they  were  binding  him,  Paul  asked  the 
centurion  there  present.  Is  it  lawful  for  you 
to  scourge  a  Roman  citizen,  and  uncondemn- 
ed  ?  upon  which  Lysias  caused  him  to  be  un- 
bound. 

QUESTION,  Substantive. 

Mat.  22.  35.  then  a  lawyer  asked  him  a  q. 

Mark  11.  29.  I  will  ask  you  one  q.  answer  me 
12.  34.  no  man  durst  ask  him  any  q.  hukeW.  40. 

John  3.  25.  there  arose  a  q.  between  the  disciples 

Acts  15.  2.  came  to  the  apostles  about  this  q. 

18.  15.  if  it  be  a  q.  of  words  and  names 

19.  40.  we  are  in  danger  to  be  called  in  g. 
23.  6.  of  resurrection  I  am  called  in  g.  24.  21. 

1  Cor.  10.  25.  asking  no  g.  for  conscience,  27. 

UUESTION,  yerb. 
Mark  8.  11.  the  Pharisees  began  to  g.  him 
9. 16.  he  asked  the  Scribes,  what  q.  ye  with  them 
QUESTIONED.  ING. 

2  Chron.  31.  9.  then  Hezekiah  g.  with  the  priests 
Mark  1.  27.  that  they  q.  among  themselves 

y.  10.  q.  what  rising  from  the  dead  should  mean 
14.  he  saw  a  multitude,  and  Scribes  q.  with  them 
Luke  23.  9.  Pilate  q.  with  him  in  many  words 

QUESTIONS. 
1  Kings  10. 1.  the  queen  came  to  prove  him  with  q. 

3.  Solomon  told  her  all  her  q.  2  Chron.  9. 1,  2. 
Mat.  22.  46.  neither  durst  any  ask  him  more  g. 
Luke  2.  46.  both  hearing  and  asking  them  g. 
Acts  23.  29.  to  be  accused  of  7.  of  their  law 

25.  19.  but  had  certain  q.  against  him 

20.  because  I  doubted  of  such  manner  of  9. 

26.  3.  because  I  know  thee  to  be  expert  in  g. 
ITim.  1.4.  which  minister  q.  rather  than  edifying 

6.  4.  but  doting  about  q.  imd  strifes  of  words 
2Tim.  2.  23.  but  unlearned  g.  avoid.  Tit.  3.  9. 

QUICK. 
Lev.  1'3.  10.  and  there  be  q.  raw  fle-sh  in  the  rising 
24.  the  g.  flesh  that  burnelh  have  a  white  spot 
J^um.  16.  30.  and  they  go  down  q.  into  the  pit 
Psal.  55.  15.  let  them  go  down  ;.  into  hell 


QUI 

Psal.  124.  3.  then  they  had  swallovfed  as  up  g. 

Isa.  11.  3.  and  shall  make  him  of  q.  understanding 

Acts  10.42.  ordained  to  be  judge  ol  the  j.  and  dead 

2  Tim.  4.  ].  who  shall  judge  the  q.  and  the  dead 

Heb.  4.  12.  the  word  of  Gud  is  q.  and  powerful 

1  Pet.  4.  5.  that  is  ready  to  judge  the  o.  and  dead 
QUICKEN 

Signifies,  [1]  To  give  life  to  the  dead,  Rom.  4. 17. 
[2]  'J'o  raise  and  cheer  up  such  as  languish, 
by  renewing  their  comforts,  and  exciting  their 
graces,  Psal.  119.  25.  [3]  'J'o  bring  such  as 
are  dead  in  sin  into  a  state  of  spiritual  life, 
by  enduing  them  with  a  principle  of  grace  and 
spiritual  life  in  sanctificalion,  and  delivering 
them  from  the  guilt  of  sin  by  justification^ 
Eph.  2.  1,  5.  The  last  Adam  was  made  a  quick- 
ening spirit,  1  Cor.  15.  45.  Christ,  the  second 
Adam,  or  public  person,  and  head  of  the  new 
covenant,  is  partaker  of  the  divine  nature, 
and  endued  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  whereby  he 
becomes  the  fountain  of  heavenly  life  to  all  his 
members,  Rom.  8.  10,  11.  And  as  the  soul 
dwelling  in  the  first  Adam's  body,  made  him  a 
living  soul,  so  Christ's  dwelling  in  true  be- 
lievers, quickens  and  enables  tkem  both  lure 
and  hereafter,  John  17.  23. 

Psal.  71.  20.  thou  shall  7.  me  again,  and  bring  mo 
SO.  18.  g.  us,  and  we  will  call  on  thy  name 
119.  25.  g.  me  according  to  thy  word,  107,  154 
37.  turn  me  from  vanity,  g.  me  in  thy  way 
40.  q.  me  in  thy  righteousness 
88.  q.  me  after  thy  loving-kindness,  159. 
149.  g.  me  according  to  thy  judgment,  156. 
143.  11.  g.  me,  O  Lord,  for  thy  name's  sake 

Rom.  8.  11.  shall  also  q.  your  mortal  bodies 
QUICKENED. 

Psal.  119.  50.  for  thy  word  hath  q.  me 
93.  for  with  thy  precejits  thou  hast  q.  me 

1  Cor.  15.  36.  that  which  thou  sowest  is  not  q. 

Eph.  2.  1.  you  hath  he  q.  who  were  dead  in  sins 
.5.  halh  g.  us  together  with  Christ,  Col.  2.  13. 

1  Pet.  3. 18.  put  to  death  in  flesh,  but  0.  by  Spirit 
QUICKENETH. 

.Tohn  n.  21.  Father  g.  them.  Son  q.  whom  he  will 
6.  63.  it  is  Spirit  that  q.  flesh  protitelh  nothing 

Rom.  4. 17.  believed,  even  God  who  q.  ihe  dead 

S  Cor.  3.  t  6.  the  letter  killeth,  but  the  Spirit  g. 

1  Tim.  6.  13.  in  the  sight  of  God,  who  q.  all  things 
QUICKENING. 

1  Cor.  15.45.  the  last  Adam  was  made  a  g.  spirit 
QUICKLY. 

f?ej!. 18.6. make  readyy.lhree  measures  of  fine  meal 

27.  20.  how  hast  thou  found  it  so  q.  my  son  ? 
Exod.  32.  8.  they  have  turned  aside  q.  out  of  the 

way,  Deut.  9.  12,  16.  Judg.  2.  17. 
Mian.  16.46.  put  on  incense  and  go  q.  to  congregat. 
Deut.Q.'.i.  so  shall  thou  destroy  them  q.  as  Ld.  said 

12.  get  thee  down  q.\\  11. 17.  lest  ye  perish  q. 
28.20.  till  thou  perish  g.  because  of  thy  doings 
Josh.  2.  5.  pursue  g.  for  he  shall  overtake  them 
8.  19.  the  ambush  arose  g.  out  of  their  place 

10. 6.  come  up  to  us  q.  and  save  us,  and  help  us 
23.  16.  ye  shall  perish  q.  from  ofl'the  land 

1  .Sam.  20. 19.  thou  shall  go  down  g.  and  como 

2  Sam.  17.  16.  therefore  send  g.  and  tell  David 
18.  but  they  went  both  of  them  away  g. 
21. said  to  David, arise  and  pass  q.  ov^jr  the  water 

2  A7»,f''«l.l  l.thus  hath  the  king  said,  come  down  j. 
2  Chron.  18.8.  fetch  g.  Micaiah  the  son  of  Imla 
Psal.  94.  1 11.  my  soul  had  q.  dwelt  in  silence 
Eccl.  4.  12.  a  threefold  cord  is  not  q.  broken 
Mat.  5.  25.  agree  with  thine  adversary  q. 

28.  7.  go  g.  and  tell  his  disciples  that  he  is  risen 
8.  they  departed  g.  with  fear,  Mark  16.  8. 

Luke  14.  21.  go  g.  into  the  streets  and  lanes 

16.  6.  take  thy  bill,  sit  down  g.  and  write  fifty 
John  11.  29.  Mary  arose  g.  and  came  to  Jesus 

13.  27.  then  said  Jesus,  that  thou  doest,  do  g. 
Acts  12.7.  the  angel,  saying,  arise  up  7.  Peter 

2-2.  IS.  Paul,  get  thee  q.  out  of  Jerusalem 
Rev.  2.  5.  repent,  else  I  will  come-to  thee  q.  16. 

3.  11.  behold,  I  come  q.  hold  fast,  22.  7,  12. 

11.  14.  behold  the  third  woe  coinelb  q. 

22.  20.  sureJy  I  come  q.  even  so,  come  Lord  Jesus 

QUICKSANDS. 
Acts  27,  17.  lest  they  should  fall  into  the  q. 

QUIET. 
Judg.  16.2.  Ihe  Philistines  laid  wait  and  were  q. 

18.7.  after  manner  of  the  Zidonians,  y.and  secure 
27.  came  to  Laish,  to  a  people  that  were  at  q. 

"Kings  11.20.  all  the  people  of  the  land  rejoiced, 
and  the  city  was  in  q.  and  they  slew  Atha- 
liah,  2  CAro7;.23.  21. 

1  Chron.  4.  40.  and  the  land  was  wide  and  q. 

2  Chr.  14. 1.  in  his  days  the  land  was  g.  ten  years 
5.  the  kingdom  was  q.  before  liim,  20.  30. 

Job  3. 13.  for  now  should  I  have  been  q.  and  slept 
26.  neither  was  I  q.  yet  trouble  camo 
21.  23.  one  dieth,  being  wholly  at  ease  and  a. 
Psal.  3^.  SO.  devise  against  tliem  that  are  q.  in  l&nd 


RAB 

Pt.  107. 30.  tlicn  arc  they  glad,  because  they  bo  q. 
Frov.  1.  'Si.  wliubo  hcarkuneth  tu  uic  xlmll  be  in  q. 
Eccl.  9. 17.  llic  words  of  wise  men  are  iicard  lu  q. 
Isa.  7.  4.  say  to  him,  take  heed  uud  be  q.  Icar  not 

14.  7.  the  whole  earth  ia  at  rest,  and  is  q. 

'Si.  Id.  my  people  shall  dwell  in  q.  resting-places 

33.  m.  ihy  eyes  shall  see  Jerusalem  a  q.  habitation 
Jer.  30. 10.  Jacob  shall  return  and  be  in  rest  and  q. 

47.  G.  O  sword,  how  long  wUI  it  be  ere  thou  be  q.? 
7.  how  be  q.  seeing  the  Lord  hath  given  charge 

49. 23.  there  is  sorrow  on  the  sea,  it  cannot  be  q. 

51.  59.  and  this  Seraiah  was  a  q.  prince 
Eiek.  16. 4-2. 1  will  bo  q.  and  will  be  no  more  angry 
Amos  l.tS.lor  (our  trausgrfssions  1  will  not  let  bey. 
JVuA.  1.  \-2.  iho'  thoy  bo  q.  they  shall  be  cut  down 
JicU  l'J.3a.  ye  ought  lo  be  '/•  and  do  nothing  rashly 
1  Tluss.i.Xl.  and  that  yu  study  to  be  q.  and  lo  work 
1  Tim.  •i.'J.  that  wo  may  lead  a  y.and  peaceable  life 

1  PU.  3.  4.  the  ornament  of  a  meek  and  q.  spirit 

UUIETED. 
Pa.  131. 2. 1  have  behaved  and  q.  myself  as  a  child 
iJecA.li.  8.  these  q.  mv  spirit  in  the  north  country 

aOlKTKTll. 

Job  37. 17.  when  lie  q.  the  earth  by  tlio  south  wind 

UUIKTLY. 

2  Sa;n.3.27.Joabtook  Abnertospeak  j.  and  smote 
L.am.  3.  "Jli.  and  q.  wail  for  the  salvation  of  Lord 

UUIETXIWS. 
Judg.B.  28.  the  country  was  in  q.  forty  years 

1  Chron.  ii-i.  9. 1  will  give  q.  to  Israel  in  his  days 
Jub  20.  20.  surely  he  shall  not  feel  q.  in  his  belly 

34.29.  when  lio  givelh  q.  who  can  make  trouble'? 
Psal.  23.  t  2.  leadoth  me  beside  the  waters  of  5. 
Prov.  17.  ].  belter  is  a  dry  morsel  and  q. 
F.ccl.  4. 6.  better  is  a  handful  with  q.  Ihan  a  bouse 
y^-ii.  30.  1j.  m  q.  and  contid.  shall  be  your  strength 

32.  17.  effect  of  righteousness,  q.  and  assurance 
F.zek.  19. 1 10.  thy  mother  like  a  vine  in  q. 
Jlcts  24.  2.  sosing  tliat  by  thee  we  enjoy  great  q. 

2  Tliess.  3.12.  wec.Nhort  that  witii  q.  they  work 

UUIT. 
£xorf.  21.19.  then  shall  he  that  smote  him  be  q. 

2■^.  but  Iho  owner  of  the  ox  sliall  be  q. 
Josh.  3.20.  then  we  will  be  q.  of  thine  oath 

aurr. 

1  Sum.  4. 9.  g.  yourselves  like  men,  1  Cor.  10.  13. 

aUITE. 
Otn.  31.  15.  and  q.  devoured  also  our  money 
y.zod.  23.24.  ihou  shall  q.  break  down  their  images 
Lev.  2o.  t  — i.  tlie  land  shall  not  be  q.  cut  olf 
Jfum.  17.  )0.  shall  y.  take  away  Iheir  murmurings 

33.  52.  and  q.  pluck  down  all  their  high  places 

2  -Ham.'A.  21.  sent  Abner  away,  and  he  is  q.  gone 
Job  0.  13.  and  is  wisdom  driven  q.  from  me? 
JIab.'S.  9.  thy  bow  was  ni;ide  q.  naked 

QUIVEU. 
Cfen.  27.  3.  therefore  take  thy  q.  and  thy  bow 
Job  39.  23.  the  7.  raltleth  against  him 
Psal.  127.5.  happy  the  man  that  hath  his  q.  full 
/ja.22.  G.  Elam  barelhe  n.  with  chariots  of  men 
49.  2.  polished  shaft  in  his  q.  hath  he  hid  mo 
Jer.  5.  Ifi.  their  q.  is  as  an  open  sepulchre 
/.am.  3. 13.  arrows  of  his  q.  to  enter  into  my  reins 

QLaVEIlED. 
Uab.  3.  IG.  when  1  heard,  my  lips  ;.  at  the  voice 

R. 

RARM. 

Rab,  Kabbin,  Rabbin,  Rabbam  ;  a  name  of  dig- 
nity among  the  Flobrews,  siirnifying  iJoctor, 
or  Master.  Tke  name  of  Rab  was  given  to 
their  masters  and  diictor.i.i  to  the  chief  of  a 
clots,  and  to  the  principal  officerg  of  the  court 
of  a  prinec :  For  ciample,  Nebiizar-adan, 
Oimeral  of  the  army  of  liintr  Xebuohadnezzar, 
it  always  called  Rab  Tabachim,  the  master  of 
the  butchers,  cooks,  or  ffuariU,  2  Kings  25.  8, 
SW.  Daniel  speaks  of  Aslipenaz  the  Rab  of  the 
tunuehs  of  the  iirnise  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  IJan. 
1.  3.  and  of  the  Rab  of  the  S.iganim,  or  chief 
of  the  governors,  or  peers,  Dan.  2.  48.  This 
yropKet  himself  was  preferred  to  he  the  chief 
of  the  intrrprcters  of  dreams,  or  the  Rub  of 
the  ('hnrtumim,  Dan.Tt.  11.  It  appears  that 
this  name  came  orifrinnlly  from  the  Chaldees  ; 
for  before  the  enplirity,  irhen  any  mention 
was  made  of  Judon,  it  is  not  found  that  it  was 
vsed,  but  onlii  trii'n  any  mention  was  to  be 
made  of  the  ojficrrs  of  the  king  of  Unbylon. 

Rab,  or  Rabban,  properly  signifies  Master,  or 
one  that  eieils  in  any  tliin'j.  Rabbi,  or  Itali- 
bnni,  is  my  Mnntcr;  Rabhm  is  the  plural. 
Thus  Rab  is  of  gren'tr  dignity  than  Kiibbi : 
and  Itahbin,  or  RiiblibiiitA  a  word  of  greater 
dignity  than  either  Uab,  or  Kiiblii. 

1'hrre  tcrre  several  gradations,  before  theyeovhl 

arrive  at  the  dignity  of  Kabbin.    Jle  that  was 

•tauter,  or  head  of  the  school,  maa  ealloJ  Ca 

470 


RAG 

cham,  or  Wise ;  and  he  had  the  name  of  Ba- 
char,  or  Elow,  who  aspired  to  the  docturship, 
and  for  this  purpose  frequented  Ike  school  of 
the  Cachaiu.  IVhen  he  was  further  advanced, 
he  had  the  title  of  Cabar  vf  the  Rab,  or  the 
master's  companion.  Jind  then,  when  he  teas 
further  skilled  in  the  knowledge  of  the  law 
and  the  traditions,  he  was  called  only  Rab,  or 
Rabbin,  and  Morena,  our  master. 

The  Cacham  Rab,  or  the  master  Rabbin,  decided 
all  sorts  of  differences,  determined  what  thing, 
were  allowed,  or  forbidden,  and  judged  in  all 
matters  uf  religion.  He  celebrated  marriages, 
and  declared  divorces  :  J-ic  preached,  if  he  had 
a  talent  fur  it,  and  was  head  of  the  academics. 
He  had  the  head  seat  of  the  assemblies,  and  in 
the  synagogues.  JJe  repriviandcd  the  disobe- 
dient, and  could  even  excommunicate  ihem, 
■which  procured  him  great  respect  and  authu- 
rity.  In  their  schools  they  sUt  upon  raised 
chairs,  and  their  scholars  were  at  their  feet : 
Hence  it  is  that  I'aul  is  said  to  have  studied 
at  the  feet  of  Rabbi  Gamaliel,  Jicts  22.  3. 

Our  Saviour  reprehends  the  Hcribes  and  Phari- 
sees for  affecting  to  have  honourable  titles 
given  them,  and  to  be  the  lords  and  guides  of 
the  people's  faith  ;  and  exhorts  his  diseipi 
not  ambitiously  lo  affect  such  titles,  or  uiiy  vain 
applause,  or  precedency  one  above  another; 
telling  them,  that  himself  was  the  only  Law- 
giver and  Teacher,  who  only  can  teach  poiccr- 
fully  and  inwardly,  and  in  matters  of  faith 
and  worship  is  only  to  be  followed,  Mai.23.7,8. 

jMat.  23.  7.  they  love  lo  bo  called  of  men  r.  r, 
a.  be  not  ye  called  r.  for  one  is  your  master 

John  1.  38.  they  said,  H.  where  dwellesl  thou  ? 
49.  Nathanael  sailh,  /i.thou  art  the  Son  of  (Jod 
3.2. /i.  we  know  thou  art  a  teacher  come  from  God 
20.  It.  he  that  was  with  thee,  the  same  baptizelh 
C.  25.  they  said,  H.  when  earnest  thou  hither  1 
RAB  BOM. 

John  20.  IG.  Mary  turned  herself  and  sailh,  R. 
RACA, 

Or  Racha,  is  a  Syriac  word,  which  properly  sig- 
nifies empty,  vain,  beggarly,  foolish,  and  which 
includes  in  it  a  strong  idea  of  contempt .  Light- 
foot  says,  that  in  the  books  of  the  Jews,  the 
word  Raca  is  a.  term  of  the  uAnost  coiitcnipl, 
and  is  used  to  be  pronounced  with  certain  ges- 
tures of  indignation,  as  spitting,  turning 
away  the  head,  <$-c.  The  Pharisees  in  their 
lectures  upon  this  law.  Thou  shall  not  kill,  ex- 
tend it  no  further,  than  that  a  man  should  not, 
without  a  warrant,  actually  take  away  the 
life  of  another.  Put  our  Saviour  gave  them 
another  sense  of  this  law,  namely,  that  if  a 
man  doth  but  in  his  heart  nourish  wrath  and 
anger  against  another  without  a  just  cause  ; 
and  lets  it  grow  up  into  malice,  and  thoughts, 
and  desires,  of  private  revenge,  though  he  he 
not  by  it  obnoxious  lo  courts  of  justice,  yet  he 
is  accountable  to  God,  and  liable  to  his  judg- 
ment: Put  if  men  suffer  their  passions  to 
break  out  into  reviling  and  opprohious  lan- 
guage, such  as  Raca,  or  Thou  fool,  they  are 
not  only  liable  to  the  eternal  vengeance  of  (tod, 
but  ought  to  be  subjected  lo  the  punishment  of 
the  civil  ningistrale ;  these  scornful,  disdain- 
ful, and  vilifying  speeches  being  the  begin- 
nings of  murder,  provocatives  to  it,  and  indi- 
CLlians  of  murderous  hearts.  Mat.  5. 22,  Who- 
soever shall  say  to  his  brother,  Kaca,  shall  bo 
in  danger  of  the  council. 
RACE. 

Psal.  19.  5.  rejoiccth  as  a  strong  man  to  run  a  r. 

F.ccl.  9.  11.  I  saw  that  tlio  r.  is  not  lo  the  swift 

1  Cor.  9.  24.  they  which  run  in  a  r.  run  all 
Heb.  12.  1.  run  with  palioiice  the  r.  sol  before  us 

RAFTEKS. 
Cant.  1.  17.  the  brains  of  cedar,  and  our  r.  of  fir 

RAGE,  Substantive. 
i  Kings  5.  12.  Naaman  turned  away  in  n  r. 
19.  27.  I  know  Ihy  r.  against  me,  Isa.  37.  28. 

2  Chron.  10.  10.  Asa  was  in  a  r.  with  the  seer 
2H.9.  and  ye  have  slain  them  in  a  r.  that  reached 

.Job  39. 24.  he  swallowefh  Iho  ground  witli  r. 
40.  11.  cast  abroad  the  r.  of  thy  wrath 
Psal.  7.  fi.  lift  up  thyself  horause  of  r.  of  enemies 
Prov.  fi.  34.  for  joalou»y  i»  the  r.  of  a  man 
/;an.3.13.NebuchHd.oo«inandc'd  in  his  r.  In  bring 
Hos.  7. 10.  they  shall  fall  for  the  r.  ofthoir  tonguo 

RAGE,  f^rrb. 
Psal.  2.  1.  why  do  the  lualhon  r.?  .lets  4.  25. 
Prov.  v.).  9.  wlielhor  he  r.  or  Inuah,  no  rest 
.fer.  4(>.  9.  come  up,  yo  horses,  r.  ye  cliarinU 
JVuA.  2.4.  chariots  shall  r.  in  the  streets  shall  jusllo 

RAGED. 
Psal.  4C.  G.  heathen  r.  Iho  kingdoms  wore  moved 

RAGRTII. 
Prov.  14.  IG.  but  Uio  foul  r.  and  is  confident         1 


RAl 

RAGGED. 
Isa.  2.  21.  to  go  into  the  inps  of  the  r.  rocks 

RAGLNG. 
Psal.  89.  9.  thou  rulest  the  r.  of  the  sea 
Prov.  20.  1.  wine  is  a  mocker,  strong  drink  ia  r. 
Jonah  1.  15.  and  the  sea  ceased  from  her  r. 
I^ukc  c'.24.  he  rebuked  the  wind  and  r.  of  the  water 
./ui/el3.r.  waves  of  the  sea  foaming  out  Iheii  shame 

RAGS. 
Prov.  23. 21.  drowsiness  shall  clothe  a  man  wilh  r. 
Isa.  04.  6.  all  our  liglileousnesses  are  as  filthy  r. 
Jer.  38.  11.  Ebedmelech  took  old  rotten  r. 
12.  put  r.  uuder  thine  arm  holes,  under  cords 
RAIL. 
2  Chron.  32. 17.  Sennacherib  wrote  letters  to  r. 

RAILED. 
1  Sam.  25.  14.  Nabal  r.  on  David's  messengers 
Mark  15.  29.  they  that  |)assed  by  r.  on  Jesus 
Luke  23.  39.  one  of  the  malefactors  r.  ou  him 

RAILER. 

1  Cor.  5. 11.  keep  not  company  with r. or  drucktu'd 

RAILING. 

2  Pet.  2. 11.  angels  bring  not  r.accusation  ag.  them 
Juc/eO.durst  not  bring  against  him  a r.  accusation 

RAILING. 
1  T'(m.5.tl4.  give  none  occasion  to  adversaTy  for  r. 
0.  4.  whereof  Cometh  envy,  strife,  r. 
1  Pet.  3. 9.  not  rendeiins  r.  for  r.  but  contrariwiso 

RAIMENT. 
Gen.  24.  53.  the  servant  gave  r.  to  Rebckah 
27.  15.  Kcbekah  took  goodly »".  of  her  son  Esaa 
27.  Isaac  smellcd  his  r.  and  blessed  him 
2-'.  20.  if  the  Lord  will  give  me  r.  lo  put  on 
41.  14.  Joseph  shaved,  and  chang'  d  his  r. 
45.  22.  gave  to  each  man  changes  of  r.  but  to 
Benjamin  300  pieces  of  silver  and  Cv9 
changes  of  r. 
Exod.  3.  22.  borrow  of  the  Egyptians  rf.  12.  35. 

21.  10.  her  food  and  r.  shall  he  not  diminish 

22.  9.  any  manner  of  trespass  for  sheep,  for  r. 
2G.  if  thou  lake  thy  neiglibour'sr.  to  pledge,  27. 

Lev.  11.  32.  when  unclean  beast  falls  on  r.  wash 
JV'u7H.  31.20.  purify  all  your  r.  all  made  of  skius 
Deut.  8.  4.  thy  r.  waxed  not  old  ujion  ihee 

10. 18.  the  Lord  loveth  the  stranger,  giving  him  r. 

21. 13.  she  shall  jiut  r.  of  her  captivity  from  her 

22.  3.  lost  r.  restore,  and  all  lost  ihiiigs  of  brother 
24. 13.  that  he  may  sleep  in  his  r.  and  bless  thee 

17.  thou  shah  not  lake  a  widow's  r.  to  pledgo 
.Tosh.  22.  8.  return  to  your  lonis  wilh  much  r 
Judg.  3.  10.  Ehud  girded  a  dagger  under  his  r. 

8.  2l5.  purple  r.  that  was  on  Iho  kings  of  Midian 
liulh  3.  3.  wash  thyself  and  put  thy  r.  upon  thee 

1  .S'«ni.28.  8.  Saul  disguised  himself  and  put  on  r. 
'iKings  5.5.Naaman  took  wilh  him  ten  chang.of  r. 

7.  8.  the  lepers  carried  thence  r.  and  hid  it 

2  CAroH.  9. 24.  presents  to  Solomon,  gold  and  r. 
F.sth.  4.  4.  the  queen  sent  r.  10  clothe  Mordecai 
Job  27. 10.  and  though  he  prepare  r.  as  the  clay 
Psal.  45. 14.  be  brought  to  king  in  r.  of  needle-work 
Isa.  14.  19.  ciist  out  as  the  r.  of  those  that  are  slain 

()3.  3.  and  I  will  slain  all  my  r. 
V.zek.  IG.  13.  thy  r.  was  of  hue  linen  and  silk 
'/.ech.  3.  4.  I  will  clothe  thee  with  change  of  r. 
Mat.  3.  4.  John  had  his  r.  of  camels'  hair 

C.  25.  and  the  body  more  than  r.  Luke  12.  23. 
2^. why  take  ye  thought  for  r.?  consider  the  lilic* 

11.  8.  a  man  clothed  in  soil  r.  Lukcl.  25. 

17.  2.  his  r.  white  as  light,  Mark  9.3.  l.ukc  9.29. 

27.  31.  put  his  own  r.  on  him,  and  led  him  away 

28.  3.  and  his  r.  was  white  as  snow 

Luke  10.3U.  among  thieves,  who  strip|)od  him  of  r 

23.  34.  thoy  parted  his  r.  and  cast  lots,  .John  19. 24. 
.Iris  Irt.  (i.  Paul  shook  his  r.  and  said  In  thoin 

22.  20. 1  kept  the  r.  of  Ihem  that  slew  Stephen 
1  Tim.  fi.  8.  having  food  and  r.  let  us  be  content 
.lam.  2.  2.  nnd  there  came  a  poor  man  in  vile  r. 
Riv.  3.  .5.  the  same  shall  be  clothed  in  while  r. 

18.  buy  whiter,  that  thou  niayost  be  clothed 
4. 4. 1  saw  twenty-four  eUlors  clothed  in  while  r. 

RAIN 
Is  the  rnpours  exhaled  by  the  sun,  which  fall 
from  the  clouds  to  the  earth  in  drojis,  Eccl.  11. 
3.  There  are  some  who  think,  by  some  expres- 
sions of  the  scripture,  that  the  aneieni  He- 
brews imagined  the  Rain  to  be  derived  from 
certain  great  rcservatories,  which  they  sup- 
posed to  be  above  the  heavens,  and  which  Mo- 
tes calls  the  waters  above  the  firmament,  ht) 
way  of  contradislinrlion  from  the  inferior 
ualrrs,  which  are  those  of  the  sen,  rivers,  &c. 
For  example,  Moses  says,  that  at  the  time  of 
the  Deluge,  the  Rain  did  not  fall  according  to 
the  ordinnrii  course  of  natuie,  but  that  the 
catnrae Is,  tiic  flood-gates  of  heaven  were  set 
open.  Gen.  7.  11,  All  the  fnunliiins  of  the  groat 
drop  were  broken  up,  and  Iho  windows  of  hoa- 
vou  were  opened.  .'Ind  Ilosea  sayf,  that  in 
times  of  great  drouglU  the  clouds  cry  to  the 
J,ord,  betceching  hint  to  permit  the  vattri 


RAI 

wkfck  lie  keeps  tn  his  treastiries  and  reposito- 
ries, to  fall  into  them  and  replenish  them,  Uos 
2.  'il,  1  will  liear  the  heavens. 

The  saercd  writers  often  speak  of  the  Kain  of 
the  former  season,  and  of  the  Ruin  of  the  lat- 
ter season.  Deut.  11.  14,  I  will  give  you  the 
rain  of  your  land  in  his  due  season,  the  first 
Jiain,  and  the  latter  Rain:  Jllso  in  Uoa.  G.  3. 
Twice  in  the  year  there  fell  plenty  of  rain  in 
Judea ;  in  the  beginning  of  the  civil  year,  about 
Soj)tember  or  October,  and  half  a  year  after 
in  the  month  Abib  or  JNlaich,  which  was  the 
first  month  in  the  ecclesiastical  or  holy  year, 
whence  it  is  called  the  latter  rain  in  the  tirst 
month,  Joel  2.  23; 

The  Hebrews  often  compare  speech  and  dis- 
course to  Uain.  Deut.  32.  2,  My  doctrine  shall 
drop  as  the  rain  ;  that  is,  Jis  rain  falling  upon 
herbs  and  grass  makes  them  fresh,  fragrant, 
and  flourishing,  the  same  effect  I  may  justly 
expect  and  hope  that  my  discourse  will  have 
upon  your  hearts,  namdy,  to  make  them  soft, 
pliable,  and  fruitful.  Job  says,  that  in  the 
time  of  his  prosperity  he  was  attended  to  with 

freat  respect  and  eagerness,  that  his  discourse 
istillcd  like  soft  rain :  That  they  expected  it 
like  rain,  and  opened  their  mouth  to  receive 
his  words,  and  therewith  to  satisfy  their  thirst, 
as  the  parched  earth  opens  its  mouth  to  re- 
ceive the  Uain  of  the  latter  season,  Job  21). 
22, 23. 

The  Psalmist  says,  that  God  maketh  lightnings 
for  the  rain,  Psal.  135.  7.  He  bringeth  water 
even  out  of  the  fire  ;  he  maketh  thick  clouds, 
which  bring  broken  produce  lightnings,  and 
so  are  dissolved  into  showers  of  rain  :  Or,  he 
maketh  lightnings  with  rain,  Jer.  10.  13.  He 
causeth  both  of  them  to  come  out  of  the  same 
cloud.  Or  thus  :  Lightning  goes  before  thun- 
der and  rain;  and  when  we  perceive  lightning, 
and  hear  a  fresh  clap  of  thunder  during  a 
storm,  wc  conclude  that  the  shower  will  soon 
come.  This  is  easily  applied.  Lightning  arid 
thunder  are  produced  only  by  the  shuck  of 
clouds  one  against  another;  and  the  same 
snock  is  the  cause  of  rain  also.  The  prophet 
therefore  may  observe  here,  that  lightning  is 
as  it  were  the  forerunner  and  the  natural 
token  of  rain. 

Oen.  7.  12.  the  r.  was  upon  the  earth  forty  days 
8.  2.  and  the  r.  from  heaven  was  restrained 

iCiof/.O.SS.  and  the  r.was  not  poured  on  the  earth 
34. Pharaoh  saw  tlie  ?•. ceased, he  sinned  yet  more 

/.ei).  215.4.  then  I  will  give  you?,  in  due  season,  and 
land  shall  yield  increase,  Vcut.  11. 14.  1 28. 12. 

Dent.  11.  11.  land  drinks  water  of  the  r.  of  heaven 

17.  he  shut  up  the  heaven  that  there  be  no  r.  1 

Kings  8.  35.  2  Chron.  G.  20.  |  7. 13. 

28.  24.  the  Ld.  shall  make  r.  of  thy  land  powder 
32.  2.  my  doctrine  shall  drop  as  the  r.  as  the  dew 

ISam.  12.  17.  I  will  call  on  the  Lord  to  send  r. 

12.  IS.  the  Lord  sent  thunder  and  r.  that  day 

2  -Sam.  1.21.  let  there  be  no  dew  nor  r.  upon  you 

23. 4.  as  crass  springing  by  clear  shining  after  r. 

1  Kings  8.  3t).  then  hear  thou  and  give  r.  \ipon  ihy 

land  thou  hast  given  thy  people,  2  Chr.  G.  27. 

17.  1.  there  shall  not  be  dew  nor  r.  these  years 
7.  brook  dried  up,  because  there  had  been  no  r. 
14.  till  that  day  the  Lord  send  r.  on  the  earth 

18. 1.  show  to  Ahab,  I  will  send  r.  upon  the  earth 
41.  for  there  is  a  so\md  of  abundance  of  r. 
44.  that  the  r.  stop  thee  not  ||  45.  was  a  great  r. 

2  Kings  3.  17.  ye  shall  not  see  wind,  nor  see  r. 
Ezra  10.  9.  peo[ile  sat  trembling  for  the  great  r. 

13.  people  aro  many,  and  it  is  a  time  of  much  r. 
Job  5.  10.  who  giveth  r.  upon  the  earth 
23.20.  and  when  he  made  a  decree  forr.  and  way 

29.  23.  Ihey  wsited  for  me  as  for  the  r. 

3(1 .27.  clouds  pour  down  r.  according  to  vapour 
37.  G.  to  small  r.  and  to  great  r.  of  his  strength 
38.28.hathr.  a  father?  or  who  hath  begotten  dew? 
Psal.  t')5. 1 10.  causcst  r.  descend  into  the  furrows 
f)8.  9.  thou,  O  God,  didst  send  a  plentiful  r. 
72.6.  ho  shall  come  down  like  r.  on  mown  grass 
84.  C.  the  r.  also  filleth  the  pools 
IQ.').  32.  he  gave  them  hail  for  r.  and  flaming  fire 

13.5.  7.  he  rnaketh  lightnings  for  the  r. 

147.  8.  sing  to  the  Ld.  who  prepareth  r.  for  earth 
Proo.  25.  14.  is  like  clouds  and  wind  without  r. 
23.  the  north  wind  driveth  away  r. 

2(5.  1.  as  snow  in  summer,  and  r.  in  liarvcst 

28.  3.  that  ojiprrsseth  poor  is  like  a  sweeping  r. 
Keel.  11.  3.  if  clouds  be  full  of  r.  they  empty 

12.  2.  nor  the  clouds  return  after  the  r. 
Cant.2. 11.  winter  is  past,  the  r.  is  over  and  gone 
fsa.  4.  fi.  tabernacle  for  a  covert  from  storm  and  r. 

5.  G.  I  will  command  clouds  they  r.  no  r.  on  it 

18.  t  i.  like  clo'.r  heat  after  r.  and  clouil  of  dew 

30.  2.1.  then  shall  he  give  the  r.  of  thy  seed 

44. 14.  he  niantcth  an  ash,  <ind  r.  doth  nourish  it 
471 


RAI 

Tsa.  55. 10.  as  the  r.  cometh  down  from  heaven 
Jer.  5.  24.  let  us  fear  the  Lord  that  givcth  r. 

10. 13.  ho.maketh  liglitnliigs  with  r.  51,  16. 

14.  4.  ground  is  chapt,  for  thero  was  no  r. 
22.are  there  any  vanities  of  Guntiles  can  cause  r. 
F.zck.  1.  28.  as  the  bow  in  the  cloud  in  day  of  r. 

38.  22. 1  will  r.  an  overflowing  r.  and  brimstone 
Hos.  G.  3.  and  ho  shall  make  us  as  the  r. 
Joel  2.  23.  ho  will  cause  to  come  down  for  you  r. 
Jlmos  4.  7.  I  have  withholden  thg  r.  from  you 
Z.cch.  14.  17.  even  upon  them  shall  bo  no  r. 

18.  if  family  of  Egypt  go  not  up,  that  have  no  r. 
Mat.  5.  45.  he  sendeth  r.  on  the  just  and  unjust 

7.  25.  and  the  r.  descended,  and  Hoods  came,  27. 
Jlcts  14. 17.  in  that  he  did  good,  and  gave  us-r. 

28.  2.  and  received  us,  because  of  the  present  r. 
Heb.  0.  7.  the  earth  which  drinketli  in  the  r. 
Jam.  5.  IB.  he  prayed,  and  the  heaven  gave  r. 

ice  Latter. 

RAIN,  Verb. 

fi'c7i.2.5.Lord  had  not  caused  it  to  r.  on  the  earth 

7.  4.  cause  it  to  r.  forty  days  and  forty  nights 
F.xod.  9.  18.  to-morrow  I  will  cause  it  to  r. 

IG.  4.  I  will  ?-.  bread  from  heaven  for  you 
Job  20.  23.  God  shall  r.  his  fury  on  hiiu 

38.  2G.  to  cause  it  to  r.  on  the  earth 
Psal.  11.  G.  on  the  wicked  he  shall?-,  snares 
Isa.  5.  G.  tjic  clouds,  that  they  r.  no  rain  on  it 
Kzek.  38.  22.  I  will?-,  an  overflowing  rain 
Hos.  10. 12.  till  he  coine  and  ?-.righteousness  on  you 
Jlmos  4.7.1  causedit  to  r.on  one  city,  not  on  anoth. 
.Jam.  5. 17.  Elias  prayed  earnestly  it  might  not  r. 
Rev.  11.  G.  that  it  r.  not  in  days  of  their  prophecy 

RAINBOW. 
Rev.  4.  3.  there  was  a  r.  round  about  the  throne 

10.  l.I  saw  an  ansel,  and  a  r.  was  upon  his  head 

"rained. 

Oen.  19.24.  Lord  r.  upon  Sodom  and  Gomorrah 
Kxod.9.  23.  the  Lord  r.  hail  on  the  land  of  Egypt 
Psal.  78.  24.  and  had  r.  down  manna,  flesh,  27. 
F.zek.  22.  24.  thou  art  the  land  not  r.  upon 
jimos  4.  7. 1  withheld  rain,  one  piece  was  ?■.  upon ; 
and  the  piece  whereupon  it  r.  not,  withered 
Luke  17.  29.  the  same  day  it  r.  fire  from  heaven 
Jam.  5. 17.  it  r.  not  for  three  years  and  si.\  months 

RAINY. 
Prov.  27.  15.  a  continual  dropping  in  a  r.  day 

RAISE 
Signifies,  [1]  To  lift  up,  1  Sam.  2.  8.  Psal.  113. 
7.     [2]  To  invent,  or  relate,  E.\od.  23.  1.  [3] 
To  ordain  and  appoint,  E.xod.  9.  IG.    [4]  To 
beget,  Gen.  38.  8.  [5]  To  keep  in  remembrance., 
Ruih  4.  5.     [G]  To  be  restored  to  life.  Mat.  11. 
5.  John  2.  19.     [7]  To  call  to,  and  fit  persons 
for  ami  ivork,   Judg.  2.  IG.     [8]  To  build,  Isa. 
23. 13. "[9]  To  make  to  stand,   Psal.  107.125. 
Gen.  38.8.  marry  her,  and  r.  up  seed  to  thy  brother 
Exod.  23. 1.  thou  shall  not  r.  a  false  report 
Deut.  18. 15.  Ld.  thy  God  will  r.  up  a  prophet  like 
to  me,  to  him  hearken,  18.  Jicts  3. 22.  |  7. 37. 
25. 7.  rofnseth  to  r.  up  to  brother  a  name  in  Israel 
.Tosh.  8.  29.  and  ?•.  thereon  a  great  heap  of  stones 
Ruth  4.  5.  to  r.  up  the  name  of  the  dead,  10. 

1  Sam.  2.  3.5.  I  will  r.  me  up  a  faithful  priest 

2  Sam.  12.  11.  behold,  I  will  r.  up  evil    against 

thco  out  of  thine  own  house 
17.  elders  went  to  him  to  r.  him  up  from  earth 
I  Kings  14. 14.  the  Lord  shall  r.  up  a  king  in  Israel 
1  Chron.  17.  11.  I  will  r.  up  thy  seed  after  thee 
Job  3.  8.  who  are  ready  to  r.  up  their  mourning 
19.  12.  his  troops  r.  up  their  way  against  me 
30. 12.  they  r.  up  against  me  ways  of  destruction 
PsaZ.41.10.  Lord  be  merciful  to  me,  and  r.  me  up 
48. 1 13.  mark  her  bulwarks,  r.  up  her  palaces 
/.9a.  15.  5.  they  shall  r.  up  a  cry  of  destruction 

29.  3.  and  I  will  r.  forts  against  thee 

44.  2G.  I  will  ?•.  up  the  decayed  places  thereof 

49.  )j.  my  servant  to  r.  up  the  tribes  of  Jacob 
fS.will  give  thee  for  a  covenant  to?-,  up  the  earth 

.58.12.  sha  It  ?-.up  foundations  of  many  generations 
61.  4.  they  shall  r.  up  the  former  desolations 
.Trr.  23.  5.  I  will  r.  to  David  a  righteous  branch 
.30.  9.  David  their  king,  whom  I  will  r.  up 

50.  9. 1  will  r.  against  Habylon  an  assembly 
32.none  shall  r.him  up||51.1.  ?-.a  destroying  wind 

F.zek.  23.  22.  I  will  r.  up  thy  lovers  against  thee 
.34.  2t).  I  will  r.  up  for  them  a  plant  of  renown 
Hos.  6.  2.  in  the  third  day  he  will  r.  us  up 
Joel  3.  7.  I  will  r.  theiti  whither  ye  have  sold 
j?mo.'5. 2.  virffin  of  Isr.  there  is  none  to  r.  her  up 
G.  14.  but,  behold,  I  will  r.  a  nation  against  you 

9.  11.  I  will  r.  up  the  tabernacle  of  David,  and  I 

will  r.  up  his  ruins,  and  I  will  build  it 
Min.  5. 5.  we  shall  r.  against  him  seven  shepherds 
Hob.  1.3.  there  are 'that  r.  up  strife  and  contention 
G.  1  willr.  up  the  Chaldeans,  that  hasty  nation 
Zcrh.  11.  IG.  I  will  r.  tip  a  shepherd  in  the  land 
./I/rt/,.3.  9.  to  r.  up  children  to  Abraham,  J.uke^.8. 

10.  8.  heal  the  eick,  clcan.se  the  lepers,  r.  the 

dead,  cast  out  devib 


RAM 

Mat.  22. 24.  his  brother  marry  lila  wift?,  and  r.  op 
seed  to  his  brother,  Markl^.ld.  LukeW.aa. 
John  2.  19.  and  in  three  days  I  will  r.  it  up 

G.  39.  I  will  ?-.  it  up  again  at  last  day,  40,  44,  54. 
Jlcts  2.30.  he  would  r.  uji  Christ  to  sit  on  his  throne 

2G.8.  why  incredible  that  God  should  r.  the  dcadi 

1  Cor.  G.  14.  and  will  also  r.  U|)  us  by  his  power 

2  Cor.  4.  14.  and  he  shall  r.  up  us  also  by  Jesus 
Heh.  11. 19.  accounting  God  was  able  to  r.  him  up 
Jam.  5.  15.  and  the  Lord  shall  r.  him  up 

RAISED. 
Ea:od.9.16.Ir.thee  up  to  shew  mypower,Ro?n.9.17. 
Josh.  5.  7.  children  whom  he  r.  up  in  their  stead 

7.  2G.  they  r.  over  him  a  great  heap  of  stones 
.Tudg.'i.  IG.  nevertheless  the  Lordr.  up  judges,  18. 

3.  9.  the  Lord  r.  up  a  deliverer  to  Israel,  15. 
2  Sam.  23. 1.  the  man  who  was  r.  up  on  high,  said 

1  A'i'rt^s  5. 13.  Solomon  r.  up  a  levy  of  Israel, 9.15. 

2  Chron.  32.  5.  and  r.  it  up  to  the  towers,  33.  14. 
Ezra  1.  5.  all  whose  spirit  God  r.  logo  up  to  build 
Job  14.  12.  not  awake,  nor  be  r.  out  of  their  sleep 
P»o?j.l5.t  19.the  way  of  righte.  is r.  up  as  a  causey 
Cant.  8.  5.  I  r.  tlieo  up  under  the  apjde-tree 
/sfj.l4.9.it?-.  up  from  their  thrones  kings  of  nations 

23. 13.  the  Assyrian  r.  up  the  palaces  of  Chaldoa 
41.  2.  who  r.  up  the  righteous  man  from  the  east 

25.  I  havo  r.  up  one  from  the  north 
45.  13.  I  have  r.  him  up  in  righteousness 
Jer.  G.  22.  a  great  nation  shall  be  r.  from  the  earth 
25.  32.  a  great  whirlwind  shall  be  r.  up  from  earth 

29.  15.  Lord  hath  r.  us  up  prophets  in  Babylon 
50.  41.  many  kings  shall  be  ?-.  from  the  earth 
51. 11.  Lord  r.  up  the  spirit  of  the  kings  of  Medes 

Dan.  7.  5.  a  bear  r.  up  itself  on  one  side 
Jlmos  2.  11.  I  r.  up  of  your  sons  for  prophets 
Zcch.  2.  13.  is  r.  up  out  of  his  holy  habitation 
9.  13.  when  I  have  r.  up  thy  sons,  O  Zion 
Mat.  1.  24.  then  Joseph  being  r.  from  sleep  did 
11.5.  the  deaf  hear,  the  dead  arer.  up,  Lukel.H. 
IG.  21.  he  must  go  and  sufier,  be  killed,  and  r.  up 
again  the  third  day,  17.  23.  Luke  9.  22. 
Luke  1.  69.  hath  r.  up  a  horn  of  salvation  for  us 
20.  37.  now  that  the  dead  are  r.  Moses  shewed 
.7ohn  12.  I.Lazarus  whom  he?-.from  the  dead,  9.17. 
.^cts  2.  24.  whom  God  hath  r.  up,  32.  ]  3.  15,  20. 
1  4. 10.  I  5. 30. 1  10. 40. 1 13.30,  33, 34. 
1 17.  31.  Rom.  10.  9.  1  Cor.  6.  14.2 
Cor.  4.  14.  Gal.  1.1.  Eph.  1.  20. 

12.  7.  angnl  r.  up  Peter  ||  13.22.  he  r.  up  David 

13.  23.  hath  God  ?-.  to  Israel  a  Saviour,  Jesus 
50.  the  Jews  ?-.  persecution  against  Paul 

Rom.  4.  24.  if  we  believe  on  him  that  ?-.  up  Jesus 
25.  who  was  r.  again  for  our  justification 

6.  4.  like  as  Christ  was  r.  from  the  dead  by  Father 
9.  Christ  being  r.from  the  dead,  he  dieth  no  more 

7.  4.  married,  even  to  him  who  is  r.  from  the  dead 
8. 11.  if  the  Spirit  of  him  that  r.  up  Jesus  dwell 

in  you,  he  that  r.  up  Christ  shall  quicken 
1  Cor.  15.  15.  ?■.  up  Christ ;  whom  he  r.  not  up 
IG.  if  the  dead  rise  not,  then  is  not  Christ  r. 
17.if  Christ  benot  r.your  faith  is  vain,  yet  in  sins 
35.  some  men  will  say,  how  are  the  dead  r.? 
42.it  is  sown  in  corruption,  r.  in  incorruption,  52. 

43.  it  is  r.  in  glory,  it  is  ?-.  in  power 

44.  it  is  sown  n  natural  body,  r.  a  spiritual  body 
Eph.  2.G.  and  hath  r.  us  up  together  in  Christ  Jesus 
Cp/.2.12. through  operation  ol'God  who  r.him  from 
1  TAf.s.'. 1.10. wait  for  hisSon,whom  her.from  dead 
27'm.2.8.  remember  Jesus  of  seed  of  David  was  r, 
Heb.  11.  35.  women  received  their  dead  r.  to  life 
1  Pet.X.  21.  believe  in  God  that  r.him  up  from  dead 

RAl.SER. 
Dan.  11.  20.  then  shall  stand  up  a  r.  of  ta.xe3 
Hos.  7. 1 4.  the  r.  will  cease  after  he  hath  kneaded 
RAISETH. 

1  Sam.  2.R.he  r.  poor  out  of  the  dust,  Psal.]13.7. 
.Job  41.  25.  when  he  r.  himself,  mighty  are  afraid 
Psal.  107. 25.  for  ho  commamls  and  r.  stormv  wind 

145.  14.  he  r.  those  that  be  bowed  down,  146.  8. 
.John  5.  21.  for  as  the  Father  r.  up  the  dead 

2  Cor.  1.  9.  but  trust  in  God  which  r.  the  dead 

RAISING. 
Hos.l.A.oven  heated  by  ba  ker  who  cea.scth  from  r 
Jlcts  24.  12.  nor  found  thev  ine  r.  up  the  people 

RAISINS. 

1  Sa?n.25.18.Abigail  look  a  hundred  clusters  of  r. 

30.  12.  theveave  the  Egyptian  two  rlustcrs  of  r. 

2  .Sffm.lG.l.Ziba  met  David  with  100  bunches  of  r. 
1  Chr.  12.  40.  they  brousbt  bunches  of  r.  and  wine 

RAM. 
Gen.  15.9.  take  a  r.  of  three  years  old,  and  she-goat 
22.13. behind  him  a  r.  caught  in  a  thicket  by  horns 
Kro'/.  29. 15.  take  oner.  ||  16.  thou  shalt  slay  then 
18.  thou  shalt  burn  the  whole  r.  Lev.  8.  21. 
2-2.  it  is  a  r.  of  consecration,  27, 31.  J,ev.  8.  22. 
32. Aaron  and  hlssonsshall  eat  the  flesh  of  the  r 
Lev.  9.  2.  take  a  r.  for  a  biirnt-oflerinj,  and  ofTet 
4.r.for  pnace-ofi'crings  ||  19.21.  for  trespass-offur. 
J^um.  5.  8.  besides  the  r.  of  the  atonement 
15. 11.  thus  shall  it  be  done  for  one  r.  or  a  lamb 


RAN 

JCir«10.19.bcingguilly,lhey  offered  or.fortrespain 
JCzck.  43.  'if-  sliiill  otter  a  r.  without  bluinitih,  i!j. 
45.  '24.  (irepire  an  eplinh  lor  a  r.  4(i.  5,  7,  11. 
4G.  4.  the  prince  aliull  olt'ur  lu  tlie  Lord  a  r. 

B.  in  the  iliiy  of  the  new  inuun  kix  Itimbs  and  a  r. 
JJan.  B.  .'1.  I  «aw  a  r.  which  liad  two  liurna 
4. 1  miw  the  r.  pushing  westward  and  northward 
ti.  the  goat  ran  to  Die  r.  that  had  two  liorns 
7.  come  close  to  the  r.  there  was  nn  power  in 
the  r.  none  to  deliver  fhe  r.  out  oT  Ins  handd 
20.  the  r.  having  two  horns  are  llio  kings 
U.\.MH. 
Om.31.  10.  r.  which  leaped  wore  ring-sfraked,  12. 
'JeS.  liie  r.  of  thy  dock  have  I  not  eaten 

32.  14.  Jacob  m-nt  Ksau  -JtKJ  ewes  and  20  r. 
Vcut.'Si.  14.  Willi  r.  ol  breed  of  Basban  and  goals 
1  Sam.  15.  -a.  and  to  hearken  than  (he  I'at  ol  r. 

t  Kin^r.i  3.  4   Moab  rendered  100,(100  r.  with  wool 
1  C7ir?21l.  '.'1.  they  sarriliced  to  the  Lord  1000  ;•. 
i  Ckron.  17.  II.  Hie  Arabians  brought  7700  r. 
£zra  0.  "J.  r.  lor  oflerings  of  the  liod  of  heaven 
17.  otlered  at  dcdicalion  of  the  house  200  r. 

7.  17.  thuu  mayest  buy  with  this  money  r.  lambs 
H.  35.  offered  ninety-six  r.  for  a  siii-otfering 

r»al.  till.  15.  with  the  fat  of  r.  f.ia.  34.  0. 
114.  4.  the  mountains  ski|iped  like  r.  li. 
Jua.  I.  11.  1  am  full  of  the  burnt  oflcrings  ofr. 
34.  t).  the  sword  is  filled  with  fat  of  kidneys  ofr. 
60. 7.  the  r.  of  Nebaioth  shall  minister  to  thee 
Jcr.  51.  40.  bring  tliem  to  the  slaughter  like  r. 
I'.zek.  27.  21.  Kedar  occujiied  with  tlice  in  r. 
34.  17. 1  judge  between  the  r.  and  the  he-goats 
y.t.  IH.  ye  shall  drink  ihc  b'..ood  ofr.  of  lambs 
Mic.  0.7.  will  Lord  be  pleased  with  thousands  ofr. 
Hce  Battkrino,  Seven. 
RAM.S'-llORNS. 
Josh.  C.  4.  seven  priests  shall  bear  before  tho  ark 
seven  truinpeU  of  r.-Aorn,?,  C,  H,  13. 
5.  when  they  make  a  long  blast  with  the  r.-lwrns 
RAMS'-SKINS. 
Hzod.Za.  5.  r.-j'Ain.s  dyed  red,  and  bndgers'-skiiis, 
and  shittim-woo.l,  2(i.  14. 1 35. 7. 1 30. 10. 1 30. 34. 
UA-MPAKT. 
/.am.  2.  8.  he  made  the  r.  and  tho  waH  to  lament 
JVuA.  3.  b.  then  populous  No,  wlioeo  r.  was  the  seu 

KAN. 
Of7i.l8.2..\braham  r.  to  meet  them  from  tent-door 
7.  r.  to  herd  ||  24.17.  servant  r.  to  meet  Keliekah 
24.  20.  Uebckah  r.  to  the  well  to  draw  water 
2H.  the  ilamsel  r.  and  lold  her  mother's  house 
2!l.  Lahan  r.  out  to  the  man  to  the  well 
29.  12.  and  Raehel  r.  and  told  her  father 

13.  Lnban  r.  to  meet  .Jacob  and  embraced  him 

33.  4.  Ksau  r.  to  meet  him,  and  embraced  hiiii 
F.ioil.  9.  23.  the  fire  r.  along  upon  the  ground 
J^iim.  1 1.27.  there  r.  a  young  man  and  told  Moses 

1«.  47.  Aaron  r.  into  niidst  of  ilic  congregation 
Jo.ih.  7.  22.  the  messenger  r.  to  Aaron's  lent 

8.  19.  Ihe  ambush  r.  into  Ai,  nnrl  set  it  on  fire 
.Tudrr.  7.  21.  all  Ihe  host  of  Midian  r.  and  fled 

9.  21.  .lo'ham  r.  away,  and  Med,  and  wentto  Deer 
13.  10.  Mannah's  wife  r.  and  shewed  her  husband 

1  .Vom.3.  5.  Samuel  r.to  Eli,  and  said,  here  am  1 
4.  12.  a  man  of  Benjamin  r.  out  of  the  army 

10.  23.  and  lliey  r.  and  fetched  Saul  thence 
]7.22.David  r.  into  the  army  and  sainted  brethren 

51.  David  r.  and  stood  upon  the  I'hilislino 
20.  30.  as  the  bid  r.  be  shot  an  arrow  beyond  him 

S  Sam.  IH.  21.  C'ushi  bowed  himself  to  Joab  and  r. 
23.  Ahimnaz  r.  by  the  plain  and  overran  Cuslii 

I  fCin;rn  2.  39.  two  servants  of  Sliimci  r.  away 
If.  35.  the  water  r.  round  about  the  altar 
46.  Kliph  r.  before  A  hah  to  Jezreel 
19.  20.  Klisha  left  the  oxen  and  r.  nfler  Elijah 
22.3.5.  Ihc  blood  r.  into  the  midst  of  the  chariot 

9Kinffii  23.t  12.  king  beat  down,  and  r.from  thoncc 

Pial.  <  (.2.  my  nore  r.  in  the  night  and  ceased  not 
105.  41.  the  waters  r.  in  the  dry  plares  like  a  river 
133.  2.  the  ointment  that  r.  down  upon  tho  beard 

Jrr.  ZJ.  21.  I  havi'  not  sent  them,  ycl  they  r. 

F.z'k.  1.  14.  the  living  creatures  r.  and  returned 
47.  2.  there  r.  out  waters  on  Iho  right  iiido 

/)an.8.0  the  goat  r.  to  Ihe  ram  in  fury  of  his  power 

Mai.  B.  32.  llie  herd  of  swine  r.  violently  down  a 

meep  place  into  the  s.mi,  Mark  5.  13.  Lukr  8.  33. 

27.  4".  one  r.  and  tilled  a  spuni;",  Mark  15.  WIS. 

Mark  0.  33.  niiinv  knew  bim,  and  r.  afoot  thither 
55.Hnd  r.  ihroiigli  that  whole  region  round  about 

J.ukr  15.  20.  his  fither  r.  and  fell  on  his  nock 
19.4.  Zacrlieus  r.  b"lbre  and  ellinbed  up  (.  CT» 
21.  12.  tiien  arose  Peli'r  and  r.  to  tho  i<e|iulcnrn 

.Inhn  20.  4.  so  they  r.  both  loRi'ther,  other  outrun 

Jlrln  3.  11.  the  people  r.  tojethi-r  unto  them 
7.  .57.  ih"V  r.  upon  Plepben  with  one  ncrord 
P.  ;!0.  Philip  r.  to  Ihe  rhnriot,  nmt  heard  him 
12.  14.  «  Inn  |.||''  knew  PcIit's  voire,  «he  r.  In 

14.  14.  Paul  and  Barnnbas  r.  in  niiionj;  the  people 
at.  30.  the  people  r.  logelhi'r  and  look  Paul 

:i2.  chief  raptain  look  soldiers  and  r.  down 

27.  41.  they  r.  the  ship  n;round  end  eluck  fast 

473 


RAT 

[  Jade  11.  they  r.  greedily  after  tho  error  of  Balaam 

RANG. 
1  Sam.  4.  5.  shouted,  so  that  the  earth  r.  again 
lA'i/i^>'jl.45.1sraeUliouted,8o  that  Ihucily  r.ugain 

RANlii;. 
Job  39.  8.  the  r.  of  the  inouniains  is  his  pasture 

rani;ki>. 

1  Sam.  17.  t  2.  Saul  and  Israel  r.  the  battle 
RANGERS. 

1  Chron.  12.  t  33.  of  Zebulun  r.  of  battle  50,000 

RANGES. 
//SB.  11.  35.  or  r.  for  jiots,  they  shall  be  broken 

2  Kingn  ll.H.  thatcoinelh  wilhiii  r.  let  him  be  slain 
15.  have  her  Ibrth  without  the  r.  2  Chron.  23.14. 

RANGING. 
Prot).28.15.as  a  roaring  lion,aud  a  r.bcar,go  a  ruler 

RANK. 
(7en.41.5.ears  came  up  ujioii  one  stalk,  r.and  good 

7.  seven  linn  ears  devoured  the  seven  r.  ears 
F.tod.  13.  t  If.  Israel  went  up  by  live  in  a  r. 
JSfum.  2.  Iti.  they  shall  set  forth  in  the  second  r. 

24.  they  shall  go  lorward  in  the  third  r. 
Jadg.  7.  t  11.  then  went  to  outside  ol  the  r.  by  five 
1  Vliron.  12.  33.  of  /.ebuluii  50,000  could  keep  r. 
t  30.  of  Asher  keeping  their  r.  40,000 
3<^.iiien  of  war  that  could  keep  r.canic  to  Hebron 
Psal.  55. 1 13.  thou  a  man  according  to  my  r. 
Oa^4.t25.  Agar  u  in  the  saniu  r.  with  Jerusalem 

RANKS. 
1  Kings  7.  4.  light  was  against  light  in  three  r.  5. 
Joel  2  7.  and  tliey  shall  iiol  break  tlieir  r. 
Mark  0.40.  they  sat  down  in  r.  by  huiid.  and  fifties 

RANSUM 
Is  a  signification  wade,  or  price  paid,  for  the  re 
deeming  of  a  captive,  or  for  procuring  a  par- 
don for  some  notorious  offender.  </od,  giving 
directions  to  his  ministers  how  to  behave  to 
wards  penitent  sinners,  says,  Ueliverhim  from 
going  down  to  the  pit,  1  have  found  a  ransom, 
Job  33.  24.  Drelare  to  him  that  I  have  pardon 
cd  and  will  hial  him  ;  for  J  have  found  out  an 
erpedientjund  a  way  of  ransoming  and  redeem 
ing  sinners  from  death,  both  spiritual  and 
eternal,  which  they  by  thtirsins  have  deserved; 
which  is  by  the  death  of  viy  Hon,  the  licdeem- 
er  and  Saviuur  :  Jlinec  Christ  is  called  a  Ran- 
som. 1  'I'lm.  2.  6,  Who  gave  himself  a  ransom 
for  all,  to  be  testified  in  due  time.  Man  bring 
in  a  lust  and  deplorable  condition,  and  liable 
to  eternal  death  on  account  of  his  sins ;  the 
eternal  Son  of  God,  moved  by  his  divine  love, 
undertook  to  restore  fallen  man  to  the  favour 
of  (rod,  and  voluntarily  endured  the  punish 
vie.nt  due  to  our  sins,  and  gave  his  most  pre- 
cious life  and  blood  as  the  price  of  our  re- 
demption :  Jlnd  therefore  such  as  Christ  re 
deems  from  the  spiritual  bondage  of  sin  »»/i 
Satan,  are  called  the  ransomed  of  the  i.ord, 
Jsa.  35.  10. 

RANSOM,  Substantive. 
Kxod.  21.  30.  he  shall  give  for  the  r.  of  his  life 
30.  12.  tliey  shall  give  every  man  a  r.  for  his  soul 
1  Sam.  12.  1  3.  of  whoso  hand  I  received  any  r.? 
.lob  33. 24.  ileliver  him  from  pit,  I  have  found  a  r. 
30.  It*,  then  a  great  r.  cannot  deliver  ihee 
P.ial.  49.  7.  nor  can  they  give  to  God  a  r.  for  him 
I'rov.  0.  35.  he  will  not  regard  any  r.  neither  rest 
13.  8.  Ihc  r.  of  a  man's  life  are  his  riches 
21.  18.  the  wicked  shall  be  a  r.  for  the  righteous 
Isa.  43.  3.  I  gave  Egypt  for  thy  r.  Seba  for  thee 
.1mo>  5.  t  12.  they  alHiet  the  just,  they  take  a  r. 
Mat.  20. 28.  oven  as  the  Son  of  man  came  to  give 
his  life  a  r.  for  many,  Mark  10.  45. 
1  Tim.  2.0.  who  gave  hinis.  r.  for  all,  to  be  testified 

RANSOM. 
Hot.  13. 14. 1  will  r.  them  fr.>ni  power  of  the  grave 

RANSOMED.    ■ 
A»/i.  35.  10.  the  r.  of  the  Ld.  sliiill  return  and  come 
51.  10.  made  the  sea  a  way  lor  llier.  lo  pass  over 
Jcr.'M.  11.  Lord  hath  redeemed  Jacob  and  r.  him 

RARE. 
Dan.  2. 11.  it  i«  a  r.  thing  that  tho  king  rcquiroth 

RASE. 
Psal.  137.  7.  r.  it,  r.  it,  even  to  the  foundation 

RASH. 
KeeJ.  5. 2.  bonotr.with  thy  mouth,  heart  not  hasty 
ha.  32.  t  4.  the  heart  of  Ihe  r.  shall  undiTsland 

1  Cor.  13.  t4.  cliaritv  is  not  r.  is  not  |)ulled  up 

RASHLY. 

fUk'\  X"  •••  ought  iwbo  <iuii'l,  and  do  nothing  r. 

RASHNESS. 

2  .Sam.CI^.Ooc  «mi-to  Uzznh  for  his  r.  and  he  died 

RA  PE. 
F.ind.  10.4.  people  shall  (>iilher  '  irlftin  r.  every  day 

1  h'ini's  10. 25.  brought  mules  alar.  2  Chr.  9.  24. 

2  Kings  25. 3(1.  a  daily  r.  for  eviry  day  all  his  days 
2  Chron.  8.  13.  even  afn'r  a  rerliiin  r.  every  day 

1  RATHER. 

■  fn.ih.  22.  24.  if  we  have  not  r.  done  it  for  fear 
1 3  hiugi  5.  13.  Iiuw  much  r.  w  hen  ho  aaitli  to  thcc 


RAW 

Jab  7.  15.  chooioth  death  r.  Ihan  life,  Jer.  8.  3. 
32. 2.  because  he  justified  himself  r.  than  God 
3li.  21.  this  bust  thou  chosen  r.  than  atilictiou 

Ps.  52.  3.  and  lying  r.  than  to  speak  righteousneit 
84.  10.  had  r.  be  a  door-keejier  in  house  ol'God 

Pruv.  8. 10.  receive  knowledge  r.  than  choice  gold 
Hi. lO.to  get  understand,  r.to  he  chosen  than  silver 
17.  J2.  meet  a  man,  r.  than  a  fool  in  bis  lolly 
22.  l.a  good  name  is  r.  to  he  cIiosimi  than  great 
riches,  loving  favour  r.  than  silver  and  gold 

Mat.  10. 1),  go  r.  to  the  lost  sheep  of  house  of  Israel 

28.  r.  fear  him  that  is  able  to  destroy  in  hell 

18. 8. r.  than  having  two  hands  to  be  cast  into  fire 

9.  r.  than  having  iwo  eyes  lo  be  cast  inio  hell 

25.  9.  but  go  ye  r.  lo  the  in  that  sell,  and  buy 

27.24.  but  I  hair,  luinull  was  made,  he  took  water 

Mark  5.  20.  nothing  bettered,  but  r.  grew  worse 
15.  II.  that  he  should  r.  release  Barabhas  lo  them 

J.ukc  10.20.r.rej.  your  names  are  written  in  heaven 

11.  28.  r.  blessed  arc  they  that  hear  and  keep 
41.  but  r.  give  alms  uf  such  things  as  ye  have 

12.  31.  but  r.  seek  ye  kingdom  of  (iod,  all  things 
51.  come  togive  peace,  I  tell  you  nay,  r.  division 

17.  8.  and  will  not  r.  say  unto  him  make  ready 

18.  14.  hi'  went  down  justified  r.  than  the  other 
John  3.  19.  anil  men  loved  darkness  r.  than  light 
Jlcts  5.  29.  we  ought  to  obey  God  r.  than  men 
Horn.  3.  8.  not  r.lel  us  do  evil,  that  good  may  cumo 

H.  34.  Christ  died,  yea,  r.  that  is  risen  again 

11.  11.  but  r.  through  their  lull  salvation  is  cume 

12.  19.  nveiigc  not,  but  r.  give  place  lo  wrath 
14.  13.  not  judge  one  another,  but  judge  this  r. 

1  Cor.  5.  2.  arc  pulled  up,  and  have  not  r.  mourned 

6.7.  why  do  ye  not  r.  take  w  roiigl  why  not  sufler? 
7. 21.  but  if  tliou  nviyest  be  made  free,  u.se  it  r. 
9. 12.if  others  be  partak.of  thiepower  are  not  we  r. 
14.  1.  desire  r.  that  ye  may  prophesy,  .5. 

19.hndr.speak  five  words  with  my  understanding 

2  Cor.  2.  7.  so  that  ye  ought  r.  to  forgive  him 

3.8.  how  ministration  of  the  Spirit  be  r.  glorious? 
5.  8.  w  illine  r.  to  be  absent  from  the  body 

12.  9.  therefore  I  will  r.  glory  in  my  infirmities 
(ial.  4.9.  ye  have  known  God,  or  r-  kiijiwn  of  God 
F.ph.  4.  28.  steal  no  more,  but  r    A  mm  labour 

5.  4.  let  it  not  be  named,  but  r  giving  of  thanks 
11.  with  works  of  darkness,  Vat  r.  reprove  them 
Phil.  1.  12.  r.  to  the  furllicraf.ee  of  the  gospel 

1  7'/m. 1.4. which  minister  questions  r. than  edifying 
4.  7.  and  exercise  thyself  r.  to  godliness 

0.2.  hut  r.  do  them  service,  because  faithful 
Vhilem.  9.  yet  for  love's  sake  I  r.  brseceh  Iheo 
//(/;.  11.  25.  choosing  r.  to  suffer  aOliction  with 

12.  9.  r.  be  in  subjection  to  Ihe  Father  of  spirits 

13.  let  lame  be  turned  out,  but  let  it  r.  be  healed 

13.  19.  but  I  beseech  you  the  r.  to  do  this 

2  F  tt.\.  10.  r.  give  dilimnco  to  make  calling  euro 

RATTLE'l'H. 
.7o4  39.23.the  quiver  r.against  liim,spcarand  shield 

RATTLING. 
JVaA.  3. 2.  noise  of  llio  r.  of  the'  wheels  and  horiet 

RAVEN,  S. 
Gen.  8.  7.  Noah  sent  foith  a  r.  which  went  forth 
Krv.  11.  15.  every  r.  is  unclean,  Drvt.  14.  14. 
1  h'ingsl'.A.  I  havecommaiiiled  the  r.lo  feed  the« 

fi.  and  the  r.  hroucht  Elijah  bread  and  flesh 
.Job  38.  41.  who  proviileth  the  r.  food,  Ps.  147. 9. 
Prov.  30.  17.  the  r.  of  the  valley  shall  pick  it  out 
Cant.  5. 11.  his  locks  bushv,  and  black  as  a  r. 
Jsa.  34.  II.  the  owl  and  the  r.  shall  ilwell  in  it 
I^ukc  12.  24.  consirler  the  r.  they  neither  bow 

RAVENING. 
Psal.  22. 13.  Ihey  gaped  upon  me  as  a  r.  lion 
F.zrk.  22.  25.  like  a  roaring  linn  r.  the  prey 
97.  her  princes  are  like  wolves  r.  the  prey 
Mat.  7.  15.  but  inwardiv  Ihev  are  r.  wolves 

RAVP.NI.NG. 
Luke  11.  39.  your  inward  part  is  full  ofr. 

RAVENOnS. 
Isa.  35.  9.  nor  any  r.  beast  shall  go  up  thereon 
40.  li.ealliiii;  a  r.  bird  fiom  tlieenst 
F.zck.  .39.  4.  I  will  give  thee  to  ihe  r.  birds 

Ravin,  rrrb. 

Gen.  49.  27.  Benjamin  shall  r.  as  a  wolf 
Psal.  17. 1 12.  as  a  lion  that  desirelh  lo  r. 

RAVIN. 
JVai.  2.  12.  the  lion  filled  his  dens  with  r. 

RAVISHED. 
Cnnt.  A.  0.  thou  hast  r.  iiiv  heart,  my  fislor 
Isa.  13.  10.  tho  wives  of  Babylon  shall  be  r. 
/.am.  5.  11.  they  r   the  women  in  Zion 
X'ch.  14.  2.  the  women  in  Jiriisalem  shall  be  r. 

RAVISHED. 

'rnr.  5. 19.  and  he  thoii  r.  iihvays  with  her  love 

20.  w  hv  wilt  tluni  be  r.  with  a  sirange  woman? 

RAW. 

Pjod.  12.9.  eat  not  of  it  r.  nor  sodden  with  water 

J.er.  i:i.  10.  if  there  he  <|iii<'k  r.  Ilcsh  in  Ihe  rising 

14.  but  when  the  r.  flesh  appearelh  in  him 

15.  till!  priest  seer,  flesh,  for  r.  flesh  is  unclean 
I  Sam.  2. 15.  he  will  not  have  sudden  flesli,  Init  r. 


REA 

Mat.O.\  ..G.  no  man  putteth  r.  cloth  to  an  old  gar- 

muiit,  lor  the  rent  is  made  worso,  Mtirk'i.^  i!l. 
KAZOll. 
Y'his  is  an  instrument.  iccU  Icnoicn.     It  isgaid, 
J'sal.  5'^.  2,  Tliy  tonguu  is  liko  a  shiirp  razor, 
working  doceillully.     II  /an in  the  J^nalinist, 
spcalcing  of  Uoeg  tUc   Edoiiiito,   insinuates, 
that  as  a  man  pretending  only  to  shave  ojf'  t/ic 
hair  with  a  sharp  razor,  dulh  suddenly  and 
unexpectedly  cut  the  throat ;  so  Uotg^/rtYcHi/- 
ed  only  to  vindicate  himself  from  the  imputa- 
tion Iff  disloyalty,  1  Sam.  'Zi.  U.  but  realty  in- 
tended to  expose  the  priests,  who  were  David's 
friends,  to  Saul's  fury  and  cruelty.    Jlnd  in 
Isa..  7.  'M,  (Jod  threatens  to  sliave  Judah  witli 
a  razor  tliat  is   liired,  Ulc.  that  is,  utterly  to 
spoil  and   destroy  Judah,   by  the  succtssive 
kings  of  the  Assyrian  empire,  as  Sonnacliuril), 
M  Kings  Id.  IX   Esarhaddon,  2  Kings  lU.  37. 
and  especially  by  Nubuehadnezzar,  who  hav- 
ing subdued  the   Assyrian    monarchy,  from 
thenceforth  was  king  of  Assyria  as  iotil  as  of 
Ciialdea,  and  who  completed  the  calamity  o/Ju- 
riuli,  which  was  begun  by  the  kings  of  Assyria. 
JW»i.  0. 5.  all  the  days  tliere  shall  no  r.  come  upon 
his  head,  Judg.  13.  5.  |  Hi.  17.  1  !Sam.  1.  11. 
8.t7.cause  a  r.tn  pass  over  the  ticsli  of  the  Levites 
Psal.  52.  2.  thy  tongue  like  a  sharp  ;•.  working 
Isa.  7.  20.  the  Lord  shall  sliave  with  a  r.  hired 
Kiek.  5.  1.  son  of  man,  take  thou  a  barber's  r. 

KEACII. 
Oen.  11. 4.  a  tower  whose  top  may  r.  to  heaven 
£xod.  28.42.  linen  breeches  shall  r.  to  the  thighs 
JLev.S.t".  ifhishand  cannot  r.  to  a  lamb,  14.  t  21. 
2G.  J.  your  threshing  shall  r.  to  the  vintage,  and 
your  vintage  shall  r.  to  the  sowing  time 
JViiwi.  34.  11.  the  border  shall  r.  to  the  sea 
Job  21).  t).  and  though  his  head  r.  unto  the  clouds 
Isa.  8. 8.  he  shall  r.  even  to  the  neck,  O  Inimanuol 
30.  28.  breath  shall  r.  to  the  midst  of  the  neck 
Jer.  48.  32.  thy  plants  r.  to  the  sea  of  Jazer 
Zcch.  14.5.  valley  of  the  mountains  shall  ?•.  to  Azal 
JohnW.  27.  r.  hither  thy  finger,  and  r.  thy  hand 
S  Cor.  10.  13.  a  mc-isure  to  r.  even  unto  you 

REACHED. 
Ocn.  28. 12.  the  ladder's  to|)  r.  to  heaven 
Iiuth'2.  14.  ho  r.  her  parched  corn,  she  did  eat 
J)an.  4.  11.  tree,  whoso  height  r.  to  heaven,  20. 
2  Cor.  10.  14.  as  though  we  r.  not  to  you 
Jicv.  18.  5.  Babylon's  sins  have  r.  to  heaven 

KEACHETH. 
S  Ckr.  28.  9.  slain  in  a  rage  that  r.  up  to  heaven 
PsaC.  30.  5.  thy  faithfulness  r.  to  the  clouds 

108.  4.  and  thy  truth  r.  to  the  clouds 
ProD.  31.  20.  yea,  she  r.  her  hands  to  the  needy 
Jcr.  4.  10.  whereas  the  sword  r.  to  the  soul 
IH.  it  is  bitter,  because  it  r.  to  thine  heart 
51.  9.  Babylon's  judgment  r.  to  heaven 
Dan.  4.  22.  for  thv  greatnrss  r.  to  heaven 

iiEACIIIi\G. 
Phil.  3. 13.  r.  forth  to  tiiose  things  which  are  before 

READ. 
Kind.  24.  7.  he  r.  in  the  audience  of  the  people 
Josh.  8.  34.  he  r.  all  the  words  of  the  law,  3.5. 
iKings  5.  7.  when  king  of  Israel  had  r.  the  letter 
19.  14.  Hezckiah  received  and  r.  the  letter 
22.  8.  Shaphan  r.  the  book  of  the  law,  10. 
23. 2.  kin^  Jijsiah  r.  in  their  ears  all  the  words  of 
the  nook  of  the  covenant,  2  Chron.  34.  30. 
2  Chron.  .34.  24. 1  will  bring  all  the  curses  r. 
F.ira  4.  18.  the  letter  hath  been  plainly  r. 

2.3.  the  king's  letter  was  r.  they  made  them  cease 
;W/t.  8.  3.  her.  before  all  book  of  the  law,  H. I  13.  1. 
18.  from  first  day  to  the  last  ho  r.  the  law 
9.3.  thoy  stood  \i\t  in  their  place  and  r.  in  the  law 
F.sth.  6.  1.  book  of  the  records  was  r.  before  king 
Isa.  37.  14.  he  received  the  letter,  and  r.  it 
Jer.  29.  29.  Zcphaniah  the  priest  r.  this  letter 
3C.  10.  then  r.  Baruch  the  words  of  Jeremiah 
21.  Jehudi  r.  in  the  ears  of  the  king  and  princes 
23.wlien  hor.  three  or  four  leaves,  the  kins  cut  it 
Mat.  12.  3.  have  ye  not  r.?  19.  4.  |  21. 10.  |  22.  31. 
Mark  2.  25.  \  12. 10.20.  Luke  6.  3. 
John  19.  20.  this  title^.  many  of  tlie  Jews 
^cts  8.  28.  the  eunuch  r.  Esaias  the  prophet 
32.  tho  place  of  scripture  which  he  r.  was  this 
13.  27.  prophets  are  r.  every  sahbalh-day,  I.').  21. 
T.5.  31.  which  when  they  had  r.  they  rejoiced 
23.34.  when  the  governor  had  r.  the  letter 
2  C'or.3.2.ye  are  our  epistle  known  and  r.of  all  men 
15.  when  Moses  is  r.  the  vnil  is  upon  their  heart 
Col.  4.  16.  when  this  epistle  is  r.  among  you 
1  Thess.  5. 27. 1  charge  von  that  this  epistle  be  r. 

READ. 

Dent.  17. 19.  the  king  shall  r.  therein  all  his  life 

31.  II.  thou  shiilt  r.  this  law  before  all  Israel 

Jsa.  29.  11.  saying,  r.  this,  I  pray  thee,  12. 

34.  10.  seek  out  of  the  book  of  the  Lord  and  r. 

Jer.  36,  6.  go  and  r.  in  the  roll  thou  hast  written 

15.  thay  said,  lit  down  now  and  r.  it  in  oureara 

473 


REA 

JiT.51.61.whcn  thou  conicst  t(J  Babylon  and  shaltr. 
Dan.S.I.  whosoever  shall  r.  this  w  riting  and  shew 
8.  king's  wise  muii,  they  could  not  r.  the  writing 
17.  let  thy  gifts  bo  to  thyself,  yet  I  will  r. 
Mat.  21.  42.  did  ye  never  r.  in  iho  scripturcsl 
Jyukc  4.  1(3.  Jesus  went  in  and  stood  up  for  to  r. 
.'Jets  8.  30.  I'hilip  ran  and  heard  him  r.  Esuias 
2C<;r.l.l3.we  write  none  oth.things  than  whatyor 
Kph.  3.  4.  whereby  when  ye  r.  ye  may  undersiand 
Col.  4.  10.  likewise  r.  the  epistle  from  Laudicca 
liev.  5.4.  wept,  because  none  worthy  to  r.  the  book 

READES5T. 
Luke  10.  2C.  what  is  written  in  law,  how  r.  thou"! 
.^cts  8.  30.  understandest  thou  what  thou  r.7 

READETII. 

Ilab.  2. 2.  make  it  jilain,  that  he  may  run  that  r.  il 

Mat.  24.  15.  when  ye  shall  see  the  abumination, 

whoso  r.  let  him  understand,  Mark  13.  11. 

liev.  1.  3.  blessed  is  he  that  r.  and  they  that  hear 

READING. 
JVeh.  8.  8.  they  caused  them  to  understand  the  r. 
F.ccl.  12.  t  12.  much  r.  is  a  weariness  of  the  llesli 
.'lets  13. 15.  after  the  r.  of  thc'law  and  the  prophett 
2C"ur.3.14.  vail  untaken  away  in  r.  the  Old  Testani, 

1  Tim.  4.  13.  till  1  come,  give  attendance  to  r. 

READING. 

Jer.  36.  8.  r.  in  the  book  of  the  words  of  the  Lord 

51. 03.  when  thou  hast  made  an  end  of  r.lhis  book 

READh\Es<S. 

JJcts  17. 11.  they  received  tho  word  with  r.  of  mind 

2  Cor.  8.  11.  that  as  there  was  a  r.  to  will 

10.  0.  having  a  r.  to  revenge  all  disobedience 

READY. 
Exod.  17.  4.  the  people  he  almost  r.  to  stone  me 

19.  11.  and  be  r.  against  tho  third  day,  15. 

34.  2.  he  r.  in  the  morning,  and  come  up  to  Sinai 
Mum.  32.  17.  we  will  go  r.  armed  before  Israel 
IJeut.  1.  41.  ye  were  r.  to  go  up  into  the  hill 

20.  5.  a  Syrian  r.  to  perish  was  my  father 
.Josh.  4. 1 13.  about  40,000  r.  armed  passed  over 

8.  4.  go  not  far  from  the  city,  but  be  ye  all  r. 

1  .'iam.  25.  18.  Abigail  took  five  sheep  r.  dressed 

2  .Sam.  15.1.'>.  thy  servants  arc  j-.to  do  whatsoever 
18.  22.  why  run,  seeing  thou  hast  no  tidings  r.? 

fhra  7.  0.  Ezra  was  a  r.  scribe  in  the  law  of  Aloses 
jVch.  9.  17.  but  thou  art  a  God  r.  to  pardon 
Ksth.'3.lA.  they  should  her.  against  that  day,  8. 13. 
./oh  3.  8.  who  are  r.  to  raise  up  their  mourning 
12.  5.  he  that  is  r.  to  slip  with  his  feet 
15.  23.  knoweth  the  day  of  darkness  is  r.  at  hand 
24.  anguish  shall  jirevail  as  a  king  r.  to  battle 
28.  ill  jiouscs  which  are  r.  to  become  heaps 
17. 1.  my  days  arc  extinct,  the  graves  aro  r.  for  me 
18.  12.  and  destruclion  shall  be  r.  at  his  sido 
29.13.  the  blessing  of  him  r.  to  perish  came  on  me 
32.  19.  my  belly  is  r.  to  hurst  like  new  bottles 
Psal.  .38.  17.  lor  I  am  r.  to  halt,  and  my  sorrow 
45.  1.  my  tongue  is  the  pen  of  a  r.  writer 
80.  5  thou.  Lord,  art  good,  and  r.  to  forgive  , 
88. 15. 1  am  alilicted,  and  r.  to  die  from  my  youth 
/'r«y.24. 11.  to  deliver  those  that  are  r.  to  be  slain 
31.  0.  give  strong  drink  to  him  that  is  r.  to  perish 
Ecel.  5.  1.  be  more  r.  to  hear  than  to  give  sacrifice 
Isa.~l.  13.  they  shall  coino  who  were  r.  to|)orish 
30. 13.  this  iniiiuity  shall  he  as  a  broach  r.  to  fall 
32.4.the  tongue  of  staniinerers  be  r.  to  speak  plain 
38.  20.  tho  Lord  was  r.  to  save  me,  we  will  sing 
41.7.  saying,  it  is  r.  for  the  soldering,  he  fastened 
51.  13.  the  oppressor,  as  if  he  were  r.  to  destroy 
/;a;i.3.15.  now  if  ye  be  r.  to  fall  down  and  worship 
Mat.  22.  4.  fallings  are  killed,  and  all  things  are  r. 
8.  then  saith  he,  the  wedding  is  r.  Luke  14. 17. 

24.  44.  therefore  be  ye  also  r.  l.uke  12.  40. 

25.  10.  they  that  were  r.  went  in  with  him 
Mark  14.  38.  tho  spirit  is  r.  but  the  flesh  is  weak 
l^uke  7. 2.  a  centurion's  servant  sick,  and  r.  to  die 

22.  33.  Lord,  I  am  r.  to  go  with  thoo  to  prison 
John  7.6.  my  lime  not  come,  your  time  is  always  r. 
Jicts  20.7.  Paul  preached  to  them,  r.  to  depart 

21.  13.  I  am  r.  not  to  be  bound  only,  but  to  die 
23. 15.  we,  or  ever  he  come  near,  are  r.  to  kill  him 

21.  now  arc  r.  looking  for  a  promise  from  thee 
Rom.  1.  15. 1  am  r.  to  preanh  the  gospel  at  Rome 
2  Cor.  8.  19.  and  tho  declaration  of  your  r.  mind 
9.2.  Achaia  was  r.  a  year  ago,  zeal  hath  provoked 

3. 1  sent  brethren,  that,  as  I  said,  ye  may  be  r. 

S.that  the  same  might  be  r.  as  n  matter  of  bounty 

12.  14.  tho  third  time  I  omr.  to  coino  to  you 

1  7'/m.3.t3.must  not  be  r.  to  qnarnd,  as  one  in  wine 
0.  18.  that  yo  be  rich  in  good  works  r.  to  distribute 

I'Vim.  4.  6.  for  I  am  now  r.  to  ho  ofTiTod 
Tit.  3.  1.  put  in  mind  to  be  r.  to  every  good  work 

Hrb.  H    13.  that  waxeth  old,  is  r.  to  vanish  away 

irf«.1.5.snlvation,  r.tobe  revealed  in  the  last  time 
3.15.  be  r.  always  to  give  an  answer  to  every  rnan 
4.5.  to  give  account  to  him  thai  is  r.to  judge  quick 
5.  2.  not  for  filthy  lucre,  but  of  a  r.  mind 

Rert.  3.  2.  strengthen  the  things  that  are  r.  to  die 

13.  4.  the  woman  which  was  r.  to  bo  delivered 

See  Made,  Maks. 
34 


RKA 

REALM. 
2  Chron.  20.  30.  the  r.  of  J.hoshaphat  wa«  quiot 
F.ira  7.  13.  they  of  luy  r.  w  ho  are  minded  to  go 
23.  why  should  ihere  bo  w  rath  aguinsl  tho  r.l 
Dan.  1.20.  he  found  ihem  better  than  all  in  his  r. 
0.  3.  the  king  thought  lo  set  liiin  over  the  r. 
9.  1.  Darius,  king  over  the  r.  of  the  ChaldcanB 
11.2.  lie  shall  Btir  up  all  against  the  r.  of  Grecia 
RlCAl' 
Signifies,  [1]  To  cut  down  corn.  Jam.  5.  4.     [2] 
To  receive  the  fruit  or  reward  of  our  works, 
whether  good  or  bad.  Gal.  0.  7,  8.     [3]  'Jo  ex- 
pect increase.    Mat.  25.   26.     [4]   'J'v  execute 
judgment   on    antichrist  and  his   adherents. 
Rev.  14.  15. 
Lev.  19. 9.  and  when  ye  r.  the  harvest,  23.  10,  22. 
shall  not  wholly  r.  tho  corners  of  thy  field 
25.  5.  what  growcth  of  itself  thou  shalt  not  r. 

11.  in  jubilee  ye  shall  neither  sow  nor  r. 
Ruth  2.9.  let  thiiio  eyes  ho  on  the  field  they  r. 

1  iiain.  8.  12.  set  your  servants  lo  r.  his  harvest 

2  Kings  19. 29.in  third  year  sow  and  r.  Jsa.  37. 30. 
Job  4.  8.  they  that  sow  wickedness  r.  Ihe  samo 

24.  0.  they  r.  every  one  his  corn  in  the  field 
Psal.  12().  5.  they  that  sow  in  tears  shiill  r.  in  joy 
Frvv.  22. 8.  he  that  soweth  iiiiijuity  shall  r.  vanity 
Feet.  11.4.  he  thatregardeth  the  clouds  shall  not  r. 
./cr.l2.13.tlK'y  have  sown  wheat,  but  shall  r.thorns 
//os  8.7.1iave  sown  wind, they  shallr.Ihe  whirlwind 

10. 12.  sow  in  righteousness,  r.  in  mercy 
Mic.  6.  15.  thou  shalt  bow,  but  shall  not  r. 
Mat.  6.  26.  the  low  Is  of  the  air  r.  not,  Luke  12. 24. 

25.  20.  thou  knewest  1  r.  where  I  sowed  not 
John  4.  38.  to  r.  whereon  ye  bestowed  no  labour 

1  Cor.  9.  11.  if  we  shall  r.  your  carnal  things 

2  Cor.  9.  6.  he  which  soweth  sparingly  shiill  r. 

sparingly,  ho  which  soweth  bountifillly  shall 
r.  bountifully 
Oal.  6.  7.  whatever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  hor. 

8.  soweth  to  fiesh,  shall  of  the  flesh  r.  corruption, 
to  Spirit,  shall  of  the  Si)irit  r.  Iif«  everlasting 

9.  in  due  season  we  shall  r.  if  wo  faint  not 
Rev.  14.  15.  thrust  in  thy  sickle  and  r.  for  the  time 

is  como  for  thee  to  r.  for  the  harvest  ia  ripe 

REAPED. 

//o.?.10.13.  ye  have  plowed  wickedn.  yo  r.  Iniquity 

Jam.5.4.  the  hire  of  labourers,  which  r.  down  your 

fields,  tho  cries  of  them  which  r.  are  entcrod 

Rev.  14.10.  thrust  in  his  sickle,  the  earth  was  r. 

REAPER. 
Jlmos  9.  13.  the  plowman  shall  ovcrtako  the  r. 

REAPERS. 
Ruth  2. 3.  Ruth  gleaned  in  the  field  after  the  r. 
4.  Boaz  said  to  the  r.  the  Lord  be  with  you 
7.  I  pray  you,  let  me  glean  ader  the  r. 
2  Kings  4. 18.  he  went  out  to  his  father  to  the  r. 
Mat.  13.30.1  will  say  to  the  r.  gather  the  tares 
39.  the  enemy  is  the  devil,  and  r.  are  the  angeli 
REA PEST. 
Lev.  23. 22.  not  make  clean  riddance  when  thou  r. 
Luke  19.  21.  and  thou  r.  ihat  thou  didst  not  sow 

REAPE'l'H. 
Tsa.  17.  5.  the  harvesl-mnn  r.Ihe  cars  with  his  arm 
.hhn  4.  30.  he  that  r.  receiveth  wages,  that  both  ho 
that  Bowolh  and  he  that  r.  may  rejoice  together 
37. that  saying  is  true,  one  soweth  and  another  r. 
REAPING. 
1  fiam.  6.  13.  and  they  of  Beth-shemesh  were  r. 
Mat.  25.  24.  Lord,  I  knew  that  thou  art  a  hard 
man,  r.  where  tiion  hastnotsown,  Z,uJtel9.22. 
REASON 
Signifies,  [1  ]  That  fneulty  of  the  soul  whereby  loa 
judge  of  things,  Dan.  4.  36.  \1\  Proof ,  ground, 
or  argument,  1  Pel.  3. 15.    [3J  To  confer,  dis- 
pute, or  argue.  Mat.  16.  8.  Mark  8.  10. 
Reasonable  service,  Rom.  12.  1.     The  spiritual 
sacrifice    of  a   Christian,    offering    not   Ihe 
bodies  of  unrensonahle   beasts,  as  Ihcy  were 
wont  to  do  under  the  law  ;  but  himself  wholly 
being  a  reasonable   creature,    as   a  sacrifice 
unto   flod  his  Creator  and  Redeemer,  which 
is  a  most  reasonable  thing,  to  do  him  service 
and  obedience  in  all  thing.i,  according  to  hit 
revealed  will,  whieJi  is  a  very  reasonable  rule. 
Reasonable  service,  in  Greek,  Xoyiith  hatTftiety 
may  be  such  as  will  he  agreeable  to  the  notion 
of  0  Aoyoc,  the  Word,  as  it  signifies  Christ, 
and  then  it  is  the  Christian  service.    It  may  be 
as  Aoj-Of  signifies  the  word,  or  scripture,  and 
then  it   will  be   that   worship  which  is  pre- 
scribed us  in  the  scripture.     It   may  bi  a» 
\oy»(i  word,  is  opposed  to  li/jLOt,  law,  and 
then  it  will  be  the  evan<;elical  worship.     Or  it 
may  be  such  a  worship  of  flod  as  is   molt 
agreeable  to  reason,  as  is  before  observed. 
1  Kings  9. 15.  and  this  is  the  r.  of  the  levy,  whirn 
king  Solomon  raised 
Prov.  26. 16.  than  seven  men  that  can  render  a  r, 
EccL  7.  25. 1  applied  to  waicb  the  r.  of  thinga 


REB 

of  the  Hebrew  vord  Marah,  which  signifies 
bitterneiia,  because  ichoWion  in  a  t/Unjr  distaste- 
ful  unto  (iud,  and  provokes   him  to   anther. 
Men  are  said  to  rebel,  [l^Jlgaiiist  the  J^ord, 
Num.  14.  y.    [-i]  .Igainst  his  words,  P»al.  107. 
11.  [i]  .Igainst   his    Spirit,   Isu.  1)3.  10.     1.4] 
Against  an  earthly  king,  1  Kings  Vi.  i"J. 
JVum.  14.  9.  uiily  r.  not  aguinst  tliu  Lurd,  nur  fear 
Josh.  1.  18.  wlio3ocv«r  dolli  r.  he  sliull  ilio 
i-2. 16. }'c  haie  builtlcd an  altar  thut  je  might  r. 
18.  seeing  that  >'e  r.  tu-<luy  against  the  Lord 

19.  r.  not  against  the  Lord,  nor  r.  against  uh 
2y.  God  forbid  tliat  wu  should  r.  against  the  Lord 

1  Ham.  1-2.  14.  il'ye  will  obey  and  not  r.  ag.  Lord 

15.  and  ifyu  will  not  obey  the  Lord,  but  r. 
^eh.i.  19.  what  do  ye  7  will  yc  r.  against  the  king? 
6.  6.  sailh  it,  that  thou  and  the  Jews  think  to  r. 
Job  24.13.  they  are  of  those  that  r.  against  the  light 
Psal.  78.  t40.  how  oft  did  they  r.  against  him  7 
Isa.  1.  20.  if  ye  refuse  and  r.  ye  shall  be  devoured 
JIos.  7.  14.  they  assemble  for  corn,  and  r.  against 
KEBKLLED.  [me 

Gen.  14.  4.  and  in  the  thirteenth  year  they  r. 
JVum.  20.  24.  because  ye  r.  ag.  my  words  at  waters 
of  Meiibah,  27.  14.  J)cut.  1.20,43.  |  9.  23. 

1  Kings  12.  19.  Kehoboani  Hed,  so  Israel  r.  ag.  the 
house  of  Uavid  unto  this  day,  2  Chron.  10.  19. 

2  Kings  1.  1.  Moab  r.  against  Israel,  3,  5,  T. 
18.  7.  Hczekiah  r.  against  the  king  of  Assyria 
24.  1.  Jehoiakim  r.  against  Nebuchadnezzar 

20.  Zedekiah  r.  2  Ckron.  30.  13.  Jer.  52.  3. 
2  Chron.  13.  6.  Jeroboam  halli  r.  against  his  lord 
JS'eh.  9.  20.  they  were  disobedient,  and  r.  ag.  tliee 
I'sal.  5.  10.  for  they  have  r.  against  thee 

105.  28  and  they  r.  not  against  his  word 

107.  U.  because  they  r.  against  the  words  of  God 
/5a. 1.2.1  have  nourished  children,  and  they  haver. 

63.  10.  but  they  r.  and  vc.\ed  his  Holy  Spirit 
Lam.  1.  18.  I  have  r.  {|  20.  I  have  grievously  r. 

'\.  42.  we  have  r.  thou  hast  not  pardoned 
F.zek.  2.  3.  I  send  thee  to  u  nation  that  hath  r. 

17.15.  her.  in  sending  his  ambassadors  to  Egypt 

20.  8.  but  they  r.  against  me,  13.  21. 
iJan.  9.  5.  we  have  r.  by  departing  from  thee 

9.  to  our  God  mercy,  though  we  have  r.  ag.  him 
Hos.  13.  10.  Samaria  hath  r.  against  her  God 

REBELLEST. 
^  Kings  "iS.  20.  Rab-shakeh  siid  to  Hezekiah,  on 
whom  dost  tlidii  triist,  tliattliou  r.?  Isa.  3(3.  5. 
REBELLION. 
J^am.  ]7.t  10.  as  a  token  against  the  children  of  r. 
yjeut.  31.27.  for  I  know  thy  r.  and  thy  stiff  neck 
Josh.  1^2.  22.  Israel  he  shall  know  if  it  be  in  r. 
I  Sam.  15.  23.  r.  is  as  the  sin  of  witchcraft 
20. 130.  thou  son  of  perverse  r.  do  not  I  know 
Kzra  4.  19.  and  that  r.  hath  been  made  therein 
JWA.  9.  17.  and  in  their  r.  appointed  a  captain 
Job  34.  37.  for  he  addelh  r.  unto  his  sin 
PruB.  17. 11.  an  evil  man  seeketh  only  r. 
Jer.  "US.  16.  because  thou  hast  taught  r.  29.  32. 
Ezek.'i.  f  7.  whether  hear  or  forbear,  they  are  r. 

REBELLIOUS. 
Deut.  9.7.  ye  have  been  r.  ng.  the  Lord,  24.  |  31. 27. 

21.  18.  if  n  man  have  a  stubborn  and  r.  son 
20.  they  shall  say,  this  our  son  is  stubborn  and  r. 

1  Aom.  20.  .'JO.  thou  son  of  the  perverse  r.  woman 
F.irai.  12.  building  the  r.  and  the  bad  city,  15. 
P.oal.  66.  7.  let  not  the  r.  exalt  themselves 

68.  6.  but  the  r.  dwell  in  a  dry  land 

18.  yea,  for  the  r.also  ||  78.  8.  and  a  r.  generation 
Isa.  1.  23.  thy  princes  arer.  companions  of  thieves 
30.  1.  woe  to  the  r.  children,  saith  the  Jjord 
9.  this  is  a  r.  people  ||  50.  5.  1  was  not  r. 
fw).  2. 1  have  spread  out  my  hands  to  a  r.  people 
Jer.  4.  17.  she  hath  been  r.  against  me,  saith  Loril 
5.  23.  but  this  people  hath  a  revolting  and  r.  heart 
Eiek.  2.  3.  son  of  man,  I  send  thee  to  a  r.  nation 
S.lhey  are  a  r.  hnuse,  6.7.  |  3.  9, 26, 27.  ]  12. 2,  3. 
8.be  not  thou  r.like  that  r.houee,  open  tiiy  mouth 
12.  2.  thou  dwellest  in  the  midst  of  a  r.  house 
17.  12.  say  now  to  the  r.  house,  know  ye,  44.  6. 
24.  3.  and  utter  a  parable  to  the  r.  house 

REBELS. 
.^fum.  17.10.  Anron'«  rod  kept  for  a  token  ag.  the  r. 
20.  10.  Moses  and  Aaron  said,  hoar  now,  ye  r. 
Jer.  .50.  t  '-^l-  "o  "P  again"'  'he  land  of  r. 
F.zek.  2.  t  6.  though  r.  and  thorns  bo  with  thee 
20.  38.  I  will  pur^'e  out  from  among  you  the  A 

REBUKE,  Sub.'!t„ntivf. 
Drut.  29.20.  Iho  Lord  shall  send  on  thee  r. 

2  Kings  19.  3.  this  is  a  day  of  r.  ha.  37.  3. 
Ptal.  18.  1.5.  at  thy  r.  at  Iho  blast  of  thy  nostril* 

70.  8.  at  thy  r.  the  horse  cast  into  n  dead  sleep 
PO.  10.  they  perish  at  the  r.  of  thy  rniinlcnance 
104.  7.  at  thy  r.  they  fled,  they  busted  away 
Pror.  13.  1.  but  a  srorner  hearelh  not  r. 

8.  but  the  poor  heareth  not  r. 
27.  .'5.  open  r.  is  belter  than  siTret  Invn 
F.ccl.  7.  5.  it  is  better  to  hear  the  r.  of  the  wise 
Abirtm,  A*um.  IS.  1,  2,  ^e,    Kobellion  e«m«<A  /fa.  25.  8.  the  r>  of  bis  pcoyle  (hall  ho  take  awsT 
474 


REB 

Eeel  7.127.  weighing  one  by  one  to  find  out  the  r. 
JJan.  4. 36.  at  the  same  time  my  r.  returned  to  me 
Jets  6.  2.  it  is  not  r.  we  should  leave  tlie  word 

18. 14.  O  ye  Jews  r.  would  that  I  should  bear 
1  Pet.  3.  13.  that  asketli  you  a  r.  of  the  hope  in  yuu 

liy  REASON. 
Cen.  41.  31.  plenty  not  known  by  r.  of  that  famine 
47. 13.  land  of  Canaan  fainted  byr.  of  the  famine 
F.zod.  2.  2;{.  Israel  sighed  iyr.  of  the  bondage 
3. 7. 1  heard  their  cry  by  r.  of  their  ta.-.k-ma5ler3 
8.  24.  the  land  was  corrupted  by  r.  of  the  tlies 
J^Tum.  y.  10.  if  any  be  unclean  by  r.  of  a  dead  body 
IS.  8.  the  hallow  ed  things  given  by  r.  of  anointing 
32.  shall  bear  no  sin  by  r.  of  it,  wUen  ye  heaved 
Veut.  5.  5.  for  ye  were  afraid  by  r.  of  the  fire 
Jo5A.9.13.our  shoes  are  become  old  Ay  r.of  journey 
/    tl'*-  they  received  the  men  by  r.  of  their  victuals 
Judg.'i.M.fot  it  rejiented  the  L.  for  their  gtoaiiings 
by  r.  of  them  that  oppressed  and  ve.ved  them 

1  Kings  14.  4.  Aliij.ih's  eyes  were  set  by  r.  of  age 

2  C'Ar°5. 14.  not  able  to  liiinister  by  r.  of  the  cloud 

20. 15.  be  not  afraid  by  r.  of  this  great  multitude 
21.15.thy  bowels  fall  out,  Ayr.  of  the  sickness,  19. 

Job  6.  16.  brooks  are  blackish,  by  r.  of  the  ice 

17.  7.  mine  eye  also  is  dim  by  r.  of  sorrow 
31.  23.  Ay  r.  of  his  highness  I  could  nottndure 

35.9.  by  r.  of  oppressions  they  make  the  oppressed 
cry,  they  cry  out  Ay  r.  of  the  arm  of  the  mighty 

37. 19.  we  cannot  order  speech  Ay  r.  of  darkness 
41.25.  Ay  r.  of  breakings  they  purify  themselves 
Tsal.'^.i.  roared  Ay  r.  of  disquietness  of  my  heart 
44.  16.  that  blasphemeth  Ay  r.  of  the  enemy 
78.  65.  a  mighty  man  that  shouteth  Ay  r.  of  wine 
88.  9.  mine  eye  mourneili  Ay  r.  of  affliction 

90. 10.  if  Ay  r.  of  slri-ngib  they  be  fourscore  years 
102. 5.  Ay  r.  of  my  groan,  my  bones  cleave  to  skin 

frov.  20.4.  the  sluggard  will  not  plow  Ay  r.  of  cold 
Isa.  49.  19.  loo  narrow.  Ay  r.  of  the  inhabitants 
Kzek.  19.10.  full  of  branches  Ay  r.  of  many  waters 
21.12.  terrors  Ayr.  of  sword  shall  be  on  my  people 
26.  10.  Ay  r.  ol  the  abundance  of  his  horses 
28.  17.  Tyrus  corrupted  Ay  r.  of  thy  brightness 
Han.  8.  12.  a  host  given  him  Ay  r.  of  transgression 
Jonah  2. 2. 1  cried  Ay  r.  of  my  affliction  to  the  Ld. 
^ic.2.12.  shall  make  great  noise  Ay  r.  of  multitude 
John  6.  18.  the  sea  arose  Ay  r.  of  a  great  wind 

12.  11.  Ayr.  of  him  many  believed  on  Jesus 
JJom.8.20.Ay  r.of  him  who  subjected  same  in  hope 
2  Cor.  3.  10.  Ay  r.  of  the  glory  that  excelleth 
Ueb.  5. 3.  Ay  r.  hereof  he  ought,  as  for  the  people, 
BO  also  for  himself,  to  offer  fur  sins 
14.  who  Jy  r.  of  use  have  their  senses  exercised 
7.23.priests  not  sulfercd  to  contimie  Ay  r.  of  death 
2  Pet.2.2.  Ay  r.of  whom  way  of  truth  evil  spoken  of 
Hev.  8.13.  Ay  r.  of  the  other  voices  of  the  trum|)et 
9.2.  sun  and  air  were  darkened  by  r.  of  the  smok 

18.  19.  were  made  rich  Ay  r.  of  her  costliness 

REASON,  Verb. 
.  Sam.  12. 7.  that  I  nniy  r.  with  you  before  the  Ld. 
Job  9. 14.  and  choose  out  my  words  to  r.  with  you 
13.3.  surely  I  would  speak  and  desire  to  r.  with  G. 
15.  3.  should  he  r.  with  un|irolitable  talk? 
Isa.  1.  18.  come  now  and  let  us  r.  together 
Jer.  12.  t  1.  let  me  r.  the  case  with  thee 
Mat  16.8.  Jesus  said,  why  r.  ye  among  yourselves, 
because  ye  have  no  bread?  Mark  2. 8.  \  8.  17. 
JLukt  5.  21.  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  be 
22.  Jesus  said  to  them,  what  r.  ye  in  your  hearts? 
REASONABLE. 
J2om.  12. 1.  living  sacrifice,  which  is  your  r.  service 

REASONABLY. 
Jleb.  5.  t  2.  who  can  r.  bear  with  the  ignorant 

REASONED. 
Mat.  16.  7.  and  they  r.  among  themselves,  21.  2.5. 
Mark  8. 16;  I  1 1.  31.  Lvke  20.  5 
Murk  2.  R.  when  Jesus  perceived  that  they  so  r. 
J.ukeVt.  14.  the  husbandmen  r.  among  themselves 
24.  15.  while  ihcy  r.  Jesus  himself  drew  near 
^ct$  17.  2.  three  sabbaths  Panl  r.  with  them 
18.  4.  he  r.  in  the  •vnagoguc  every  sabbath 

19.  Paul  r.  with  the  Jews  at  Ephcsiis 
34.25.  and  as  her.  of  riehieousness  and  judgment 

REASONING. 
Job  13.  fi.  hoar  now  my  r.  and  hearken  to  pleadings 
J.uke  9.  4(5.  then  there  arose  a  r.  atnong  them 
jJ(;U28. 29.  the  Jews  departed,  and  had  great  r. 

REASO.M.NG. 

^arW.fi.lhere  were  ci-rtain  scribesr.in  their  hearts 

12.  28.  and  hnvins  heard  Ihnm  r.  together 

REASONINGS. 

C  Cor.  10. 1 5.  casting  dt)wn  r.  and  every  high  thing 

REASONS. 
ro6  32.11ibehold  I  waited,  and  gave  oar  to  your  r. 
'»a.  41. 21.  brine  forth  voiir  r.  saith  king  of  Jacob 

REBEL. 
To  rebel  j»  l^  fight  or  make  war  against  a  Ina 
ful  sovereign,  as  Absalom    did   against   his 
father  Dnvid,  2  Sam.  15.  10,  (J  c.    Or  to  east  nff 
the  yoke  of  a  lawful  governor,  as  Koroh  ami 


REC 

Isa.  30. 17.  thousand  shall  fine  •  the  r.of  one,  at 

the  r.  of  five  shall  ye  flee   till  left  as  a  beaco* 
50.  2.  behold,  at  my  r.  I  dry  up  the  sea 
31.  20.  thy  sons  lie  lull  of  the.  r.  of  thy  God 
66.  15.  to  render  his  r.  with  flames  ol  tire 
.Icr.  15.  15.  know  that  for  thy  sake  I  sulfered  r. 
Hos.  5.9.  Ephraim  shall  be  desolate  in  the  day  ofr 
Phil.  2.15.  without  r.  in  miilst  of  a  (lerverse  nation 

REBUKE 
Signifies,   [1]  To  reprove  or  check,  Lev.  19M7. 
[2J  To  restrain,  Zech.  3.  2.  Jude  9.     [3J  To 
silejice,  or  command   persons   to   hold    their 
peace,  Luke  19.  39.     [4J  7'u   convince  of  sin, 
and  bring   to   repentance,    lea.   2.  4.     [5]    'J'o 
cure,  Luke  4.  39.     [6J  To  chasten,  affiict,  or 
correct,  Psal.  6.  1. 
Lev.  19. 17.  thou  shall  in  any  wise  r.  thy  neighbour 
Kiith  2.  16.  that  she  may  glean  them,  and  r.  her  not 
1  Chron.  12.  17.  God  look  thereon,  and  r.  it 
Psal.  6. 1.  O  Lord,  r.  me  not  in  thine  anger,  38. 1. 
as.  30.  r.  the  company  of  spear-men,  the  bulls 
Prov.  9.  8.  r.  a  wise  man,  and  he  will  love  thee 
24.  25.  to  them  that  r.  him  shall  be  delight 
Isa.  2.  4.  he  shall  r.  many  nations,  Mic.  4.  3. 
17.  13.  the  nations  rush,  but  God  shall  r.  them 
54.  9.  I  would  not  be  wroth  with,  nor  r.  then 
Zech.  3.  2.  Lord  said  to  Satan,  the  Ld.  r.thee,  even 
the  Lord  that  hath  chosen  Jerusalem,  r.  thee 
Mnl.  3.  11. 1  will  r.  the  devourer  for  your  eakes 
Mat.  16.22.  Peter  began  to  r.  him,  Mark  8.  32. 
Luke  17.  3.  if  thy  brother  trespass,  r.  him 
19.  39.  some  said,  Master,  r.  thy  discijiles 

1  Tim.  5.  1.  r.  not  an  elder,  but  entreat  him 

20.  them  that  sin,  r.  bef.  all,  that  others  may  feai 

2  Tim.  4.  2.  r.  exhort,  with  all  long-sutlering 
Tit.  1.  13.  wherefore  r.  tliem  sharply,  2.  15. 
.hide  9.  Michael  said,  the  Lord  r.  thee 

Heo.  3. 19.  as  many  ns  I  love,  I  r.  and  chasten 
REBUKED. 

Gen.  31. 42.  God  hath  seen  and  r.  thee  yesternight 
37.  10.  his  father  r.  him,  and  said  to  iiiin 

A>A.  5.  7.  and  I  r.  the  nobles  and  the  rulers 

Psal.  9. 5.  hast  r.  the  heathen,  thou  hast  destroyed 
1U6. 9.  he  r.  the  Red  sea  also,  and  it  was  dried  up 
1 19.  21.  thou  hast  r.  the  proud  that  are  cursed 

Mat.  8. 20.  he  r.  the  wind,  Mark  4. 39.  Luke  8.  24. 

17.  18.  Jesus  r.  devil,  and  he  departed  out  of  him 

19.  13.  disciples  r.  them,  Mark  10. 13.  Lu.  18. 15i. 

20.  31.  the  multitude  r.  the  blind  men 

Mark  1 .2.5.  he  r.  the  devil,  9. 2.5.  Luke  4. 35.  1 9.  4a 
8. 33.  Jesus  r.  Peter,  saying,  get  thee  behind  me 

Luke  4.  39.  he  stood  over  her  and  r.  the  fever 
y.  55.  hut  Jesus  turned,  and  r.  James  and  John 

18.  .39.  ihey  that  went  before  r.  the  blind  man 
23.  40.  but  the  other  thief  answering  r.  him 

Heb.  12.  5.  nor  faint  when  thou  art  r.  of  hi(n 
2  Pet.  2. 16.  but  Balaam  was  r.  for  his  iniquity 

REBUKER. 
Hos.  5.  2.  though  I  have  been  a  r.  of  them  all 

REBUKETH. 
Pro»i.9.7.  he  that  r.  a  wicked  man  gelteth  a  blot 
28.23.  he  that  r.a  man,  after  shall  find  more  favoui 
^Imos  5.  10.  they  hate  him  that  r.  in  the  gate 
JVaA.  1.  4.  he  r.  the  sea,  and  maketh  it  dry 

REBUKES. 
P.9a/.39.11.  when  thou  with  r.  dost  correct  man 
Ezek.5. 15.  execute  juilgmonls  in  furious  r.  25.17. 

RKIUKING. 
2  Sam.  22. 16.  fouiKiations  discovered  at r.  ofLord 

REBI'KI.NG,  Participle. 
Luke  4.  41.  he  r.  them,  suffered  them  not  to  speak 

RECALL. 
Lam.  3.  21.  this  I  r.  to  mind,  therefore  I  hope 

RECEIPT. 
Mat.  9.  9.  as  Jesus  passed,  he  saw  Matthew  sitting 
at  the  r.  of  custom,  Mark  2.  14.  Luke  5.  27. 
RECEIVE 
Signifies,  [1]  To  take  vhat  is  given,  paid,  or  put 
into  one's  hands,  2  Sam.  18.  12.  2  Kings  5.  26. 
[2]  Ta  contain,    1  Kings  8.  64.     [3]  To  enter- 
tain, lodire,  or  harbour.  Acts  2.".  2,  7.     [41  To 
bear    leith,   or  suffer,    2  Cor.  11.  T6.     [5]  To 
hearken   to,  Prov."  2.   1.     [6]  To  believe.  Mat. 
1 1.  14.  John  1.  12.     [7]  To  give.  Rev.  13.  f  10. 
[8]  To  attend  and  assent  to,  Mai.  13.  20.    [9] 
To  admit  one  to  he  a  member  of  the  chujrh, 
Rom.  14.  1.  [10]  To  be  endued  u-ilh,   \cl8  1.  h. 
[11]  To  enjoy  and  possess,  Heb.  10.  .16.     [l.oj 
To  bear  palirntly  and  thankfully,  J(d)  2.  10. 
[13]  To   be   rewarded,    Mat.   10.  41.     [I4J  To 
hare,  Hos.  10.  6. 
F.zod.  29.  2.5.  thou  shall  r.  the  wave-offering 
A'um.  18.  28.  ye  shall  offer  all  your  tithes  which 
ye  r.  of  the  children  of  Israe. 
Drut.  ,33.  3.  every  one  shall  r.  of  thy  words 
1  Snm.  10.  4.  which  thou  shall  r.  of  their  handi 
2.Snni.  18.12.  though  I  should  r.a  thousand  shekels 
1  Kings  5.9.  and  thou  slinit  r.  the  cedar  and  fir 
Job  2.  10.  shall  we  r.  good  at  the  hnnd  of  God 
37. 13>  which  they  ihall  r.  of  ibe  Almifihtj 


REC 

Psat.  6.  9.  the  Lord  will  r.  my  prayer 
24.  5.  he  shall  r.  the  blessing  from  the  Lord 
49.  15.  God  will  redeem  my  soul,  for  he  shall  r.  me 
7,3.  24.  guide  me,  niid  afterward  r.  me  to  glory 
75.2.  when  I  shall  r.  the  congregation  I  will  judge 

ProB.  2.  1.  my  son,  if  thou  will  r.  my  words 

10.  8.  the  wise  in  heart  will  r.  commandments 
Isa.  57.  (i.  offering,  should  I  r.  comfort  in  these? 
£jc/c.  Ifi.ei.  be  ashamed,  when  thou  shall  r.  sisters 
Dan.  2  li.  ye  shall  r.  of  me  gifts  and  rewards 
/■/os.  10  6.  Ephraim  shall  r.  shame,  and  Israel 
JWic.  1.  11.  he  shall  r.  of  you  his  standing 

V  Zcjili-  3.  7.  I  said,  thou  wilt  r.  instruction 

Jllal.lO.il.a.  propl)el,he  shall r.a  prophet's  reward 
a  righteous  man  shall  r.  a  righle.  man's  reward 

11.  5.  llie  blind  r.  their  sight,  the  lame  walk 
14.  if  ye  will  r.  it,  this  is  Klias  which  was  to  come 

18.  5.  whoso  shall  r.  one  such  little  child  in  my 
name,  rcceiveth  me,  Mark  9.  37.  J^tike  9.  48 

19.  11.  he  said,  all  men  cannot  r.  this  saying 
29.  he  shall  r.  a  hundred  fold,  Marie  10.  30. 

20.  7.  and  whatsoever  is  right,  that  shall  ye  r. 

21.  22.  whatsoever  ye  ask,  believing,  ye  shall  r. 
34.  that  they  might  r.  the  fruits  of  it 

23.14. long  prayers,thorefore  ye  shall  r.  the  greater 
damnation,  Mark  12.  40.  L^ke  20.  47. 
Mark  4.16.  r.  the  word  with  gladness,  Luke  8. 13. 
20.  these  are  such  as  hear  the  word  and  r.  it 

10.  51.  Ld.  that  I  might  r.  my  sight,  Luke  18.  41. 

11.  24.  when  ye  pray,  believe  that  ye  r.  them 

12.  2.  that  he  might  r.  from  the  husbandmen 
Z-iike  10.  8.  whatsoever  city  ye  enter,  and  they  r. 

16.  4.  that  they  may  r.  me  into  their  houses 
9.  they  may  r.  you  into  everlasting  habitations 

23.  41.  for  we  r.  the  due  reward  of  our  deeds 
John  5.  43.  if  in  his  own  name,  him  ye  will  r. 
44.  how  can  believe,  which  r.  honour  one  of  ano. 

7.  23.  it  a  man  on  the  sabbath  r.  circumcision 
SO.lhis  spake  he  of  the  Spirit,which  they  that  be- 
lieve on  him  should  r.  Holy  Ghost  not  given 

14.  3.  I  will  come  again,  and  r.  you  to  myself 
16.  14.  for  he  shall  r.  of  mine,  and  shew  it  to  you 

24.  ask,  ye  shall  r.  that  your  joy  may  be  full 
^cfs  1.8.  but  ve  shall  r.  power  after  that  Holy  Gh. 

2.  38.  and  ye"  shall  r.  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
3.21.  Jesus,  whom  heavens  must  r.  till  restitution 

8.  15.  prayed,  that  they  misht  r.  the  Holy  Ghoet 
19. on  whomso.  I  lay  hands,  may  r.  the  Holy  Gh. 

9. 12.  hands  on  him,  that  he  might  r.  his  sight 

17.  Jesus  sent  me,  that  thou  mightest  r.  thy  sight 
10.43.  whoso,  believelh,  shall  r.  remission  of  sins 
26.  18.  that  they  may  r.  forgiveness  of  sins 
Jiom.  5.17.  more  they  which  r.abundance  of  grace 

13.  2.  that  resist  shall  r.  to  themselves  damn-ation 
l(i.  2.  that  ye  c.  her  in  Eord,  as  becometh  saints 

1  Cor.  3.  8.  every  man  shall  r.  his  own  reward 

14.  if  his  work  abide,  he  shall  r.  a  reward 
4.  7.  if  thou  didst  r.  it,  why  dost  thou  glory? 

14.  5.  that  the  church  may  r.  edifying 
S  Cor.  5. 10.  that  every  one  may  r.  the  things  done 

6.  17.  touch  not  unclean  thing,  and  I  will  r.  you 

7.  9.  that  ye  might  r.  damage  by  us  in  nothing 

8.  4.  praying  us,  that  we  would  r.  the  gift 
11.  4.  or  if  yer.anotherspirit  ye  have  not  received 

Oal.  3.  14.  that  we  might  r.  promise  of  the  Spirit 

4.  5.  that  we  might  r.  the  adoption  of  sons 
F.pk.  6.  8.  the  same  shall  he  r.  of  the  Lord 
Col.  3. 24.  ye  shall  r.  the  reward  of  the  inheritance 

25.  he  shall  r.  for  the  wrong  he  hath  done 
Philem.  15.  that  thou  shouldest  r.  him  for  ever 
Ileh.  7.  5.  sons  of  Levi,  who  r.  office  of  priesthood 

8.  and  here  men  that  die  r.  tithes 

9.  15.  which  are  called  might  r.  promise,  10.  36. 
11.  8.  he  should  after  r.  for  an  iidieritance 

Jam.  1.  7.  that  man  think  he  shall  r.  any  thing 
12.  when  tried,  he  shall  r.  the  crown  of  life 

3.  1.  knowing,  ye  shall  r.  greater  condemnation 

5.  7.  until  he  r.  the  early  and  latter  rain 

1  Pet.  5.  4.  ye  shall  r.  a  crown  of  glory,  fadeth  not 

2  Pr.t.  2.  13.  shall  r.  the  reward  of  unrighteousness 
1  .fokn  3.  22.  whaLsnever  we  ask,  we  r.  of  him 

5.9   if  we  r.  the  witness  of  men,  God  is  greater 
S  John  8.  but  that  we  r.  a  full  reward 
Jirv.  14. 9.  if  any  tnan  r.  his  mark  in  his  forehead 

17. 12.  but  r.  power  as  kinjs  one  hour  with  beast 
RRCF.IVR,  Imperalirdy. 
Oev..  33.  10.  then  r.  my  present  at  my  hand 
Job  22.  22.  r.  I  pray  thee,  the  law  from  his  mouth 
Pron.  4.  10.  hear,  O  my  son,  and  r.  my  sayings 

8.  10.  r.  mv  instruction,  and  not  silver,  19.  20. 
Jer.  0.  20.  let  your  ear  r.  the  word  of  his  mouth 
F.zrk.  3.  10.  r.  all  my  words  in  thine  heart 
f{os.  14.  2.  say  to  him,  r.  us  graciously 
Mat.  19.  12.  he  that  is  able,  let  him  r.  it 
J.ukr  18.  42.  .lesus  saith,  r.  thy  siglit,  .^cts  22.  13. 
John  20.  22.  he  saith,  r.  ye  the  Holy  Ghost 
j?f,f.?  7.  .59.  Bavins,  Lord  Je?us,  r.  my  spirit 
Jiom.  14.  1.  him  that  is  weak  in  the  faith,  r.  ye 

15.,7.  r.  ye  one  another,  as  Christ  also  received  ui 
S  Cor.  7.  2.  r.  us,  wo  have  wronged  no  man 
475 


REC 

2  Car.  11.  M.  yet  as  a  fool  r.  me,  that  I  may  boait 
Phil.2.  29. r.  him  in  the  Lord  with  gladnesi 
Cui.  4.10.  and  Marcus,  if  become  unto  you,  r.  him 
Philem.  12.  r.  him  that  is  mine  own  bowels 

17.  if  thou  count  me  a  partner,  r.  him  as  myself 
Jam.  1.  21.  r.  with  meekness  the  ingrafted  word 

KECEIVE,  jYtgatively. 
2  Kinffs  5.  IG.  but  Elishasaid,  1  will  r.  none 

12.7.  r.  no  moro  money  of  your  acquaintance 
Job  2.10.shall  we  r.  good,  and  shall  we  not  r.  eviH 
Jcr.  17.  23.  that  thty  might  not  r.  instruction 

35. 13.  will  ye  not  r.  inslruc.  to  hearken  to  words? 
Eiek.  36.30.  ye  shall  r.no  more  reproach  of  famine 
Mat.  10.  14.  whosoever  shall  not  r.  you  nor  hear 
your  words,  shakeoff  dust,  Mark  6. 11.  J^u.  9.5 
Mark  10.15.  whosoever  shall  notr.  the  kingdom  of 

G.as  a  little  child,  not  enter  therein,  J^uke  18. 1 
Xuie  9.53. they  did  notr.him,  because  his  face  was 

10.  10.  and  they  r.  you  not,  go  into  the  streets 

18.  30.  who  shall  not  r.  manifold  more  in  this  time 
John  3.  11.  we  testify,  and  ye  r.  not  our  witness 

27.  a  man  can  r.  nothing,  except  it  be  given  him 
5.  34.  but  I  r.  not  testimony  from  man 

4i.  I  r.  not  honour  from  men 

43. 1  am  come  in  Father's  name,and  ye  r.  me  not 
14.  17.  Spirit  of  truth,  whom  the  world  cannot  r 
Jicts  22.  18.  for  they  will  not  r.  thy  testimony 

1  Cor.  4.  7.  what  hast  thou  that  thou  didst  not  r.? 

2  Cor.  6. 1.  that  ye  r.  not  the  grace  of  God  in  vain 

1  Tim.  5. 19.  against  an  elder  r.  not  an  accusation 
Jam.  4.  3.  ye  ask  and  r.  not,  because  ye  ask  amiss 

2  .lohn  10.  r.  him  not  into  your  house 

2  John  10.  neither  doth  he  himself  r.  the  brethren 
Rev.  18.  4.  and  that  ye  r.  not  of  her  plagues 

RECEIVE,  Infinitivdy. 
Gen.i.ll.  earth  opened  mouth  to  r.  brother's  blood 
38.  20.  to  r.  his  pledge  from  woman's  hand 
Exod.27.3.  thou  shall  make  his  pans  tor.  his  ashes 
Deut.  9.  9.  when  I  was  gone  up  to  r.  the  tables 
lA7n^.98.64. because  brazen  altar  before  L. was  too 
little  to  r.  the  burnt-offerings,  2  Chron.  7.  7. 
^2Kings  5.26.is  it  a  time  to  r.  money,to  r.garments? 

12.  8.  the  priest  consented  to  r.  no  more  money 
Prov.  1.  3.  to  r.  the  instruction  of  wisdom 
.fer.  5.  3.  but  they  have  refused  to  r.  correction 

32.  33.  they  have  nut  hearkened  to  r.  instruction 
Mat.  3.  10.  there  shall  not  be  room  enough  to  r.  it 
Mat.  19. 12.  he  that  is  able  to  r.  it,  let  him  r.  it 
Mark  2.  2.  that  there  was  no  rooin  to  r.  them 
Luke  6.  34.  of  whom  ye  hope  to  r.  as  much  again 

19.  12.nobleiTian  went  to  r.  for  himself  kingdom 
.lets  16.21.  teach  customs  not  lawful  for  us  to  r. 

18.  27.  brethren  e.xhorting  the  disciples  to  r.  him 

20.  35.  it  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  r. 

3  Johyi  8.  we  therefore  ought  to  r.  such 
Rev.  4.  11.  thou  art  worthy,  O  Lord,  to  r.  glory 

5.  12.  worthy  is  the  Lamb  to  r.  power  and  riches 

13.  16.  causeth  to  r.  a  mark  in  their  right  hand 
RECEIVED. 

<?e7i.  26. 12.  Isaac  r.  the  same  year  a  hundred-fold 
Kxod.  32.  4.  and  Aaron  r.  them  at  their  hand 
36.  3.  and  they  r.  of  Moses  all  the  offering 
JVum.  12.  14.  after  that  let  Miriam  be  r.  in  again 
23.  20.  behold,  I  have  r.  commandment  to  bless 
.34.  14.  two  tribes  and  half  r.  inheritance,  15. 
36.3.their  inheritance  shall  be  put  to  the  inherit- 
ance of  the  tribe  whereunto  they  are  r.  4. 
Jo.'^h.  9.  1 14.  r.  the  men  by  reason  of  victuals 
13.  8.  the  Gadites  have  r.  their  inheritance 
18.  2.  which  had  not  r.  their  inheritance 
.Tudg.  13.  23.  he  would  not  have  r.  burnt-offering 
1  .Sam.  12  3.  of  whose  hand  have  I  r.  any  bribe? 
25.  35.  David  r.  of  Abigail  that  she  brought 
1  Kings  10.  28.  had  linen  yarn  from  Egypt,  king's 
merchants  r.  linen  yarn  at  a  price,  2  C/jr.  1. 16. 
^King.':  19.  14.  Hezekiah  r.  the  letter,  rsa.37. 14. 
1  Chr.  12.  IS.  thine  are  we;  then  David  r.  them 
Est/i.  4.  4.  Esther  sent  raiment,  Mordccai  r.  it  not 
.Tob  4.  12.  and  mine  ear  r.  a  little  thereof 
Psal.  68.  18.  thou  hast  r.  gifts  for  men 
Pron.  24.  32. 1  looked  upon  it,  and  r.  instruction 
Tsa.  40.  2.  she  hath  r.  of  the  Lord's  hand  double 
Jcr.  2.  30.  your  children,  they  r.  no  correction 
F.iek.  18.  17.  hath  not  r.  usury  nor  increase 
Zeph.  3.  2.  she  obeyed  not,  she  r.  not  correction 
Mat.  10.8.  cast  out  <lHvils,  freely  ye  r.  freely  give 
13.  19.  this  is  he  which  r.  seed  by  the  way-side 
20.  r.  into  stony  ||  22.  thorns  ||  23.  good  ground 
17. 24.  they  that  r.  tribute  money  came  to  Peter 
20.  9.  when  came,  they  r.  every  man  a  penny,  10. 

11.  and  when  they  had  r.  it  thpy  murmured 
34.  immediately  their  eves  r.  sight,  followed  him 

25.  16.  r.  five  talents  ||  17.  r.  two  ||  18.  had  r.  one 
27.  I  should  have  r.  mine  own  with  usury 
Mark  7.  4.  many  things  which  they  r.  to  hold 

10.  .52.  he  r.  his  siglit,  Jvke  18.  43".  .lets  9.  18. 

15.23.  gave  him  wine  with  myrrh,  but  r.  it  not 

16.  19.  he  was  r.  iiji  into  heaven,  Jlcts  1.  9. 
/yW<<»6. 24.  woo  to  rich,  for  ye  haver,  your  consol. 

8.  40.  was  returned  the  people  gladly  r.  him 


REC 

Luke  9. 11.  r.  them  and  spake  to  them  of  kingdom 
51.  when  time  was  come,  that  he  should  be  r.  u]> 
10.  38.  and  Martha  r.  him  into  her  house 
15.  27.  because  he  hath  r.  him  sale  and  sound 

19.6.  Zaccheus  came  down  and  r.  him  joyfully 

15.  when  he  was  returned,  having  r.  kingdom 
John  1. 11.  he  came  to  his  own,  his  own  r.  him  not 

12.  to  as  many  as  r.  him,  to  them  gave  he  power 

16.  out  of  fulness  have  all  wo  r.  grace  for  grace 

3.  33.  he  that  hath  r.  testimony,  hath  set  his  seal 

4.  45.  when  he  was  come  Galileans  r.  him 

6.  21.  then  they  willingly  r.  him  into  the  ship 
9. 11.  I  went  and  washed,  and  \r.  sight 

15.  Pharisees  asked  him  how  he  had  r.  his  sight 
18.  Jews  did  not  believe  that  he  had  r.  his  sight, 
called  parents  of  him  that  had  r.  his  sight 
10.  18.  this  commandment  I  r.  of  my  Father 

13.  30.  he  then,  having  r.  the  sop,  went  out 
17.8.  have  given  them  thy  words,  and  they  r.  them 

18.  3.  Judas  then  having  r.  a  band  of  men 

19.  30.  when  Jesus  had  r.  the  vinegar,  he  said 
Jicts  1.  9.  and  a  cloud  r.  him  out  of  their  sight 

2.  33.  and  having  r.  of  the  Father  the  promise 
41.  they  that  gladly  r.  his  word  were  baptized 

3.  7.  immediately  feet  and  ancle-bones  r.  strength 

7.  38.  who  r.  the  lively  oracles  to  give  unto  us 
53.  who  have  r.  law  by  angela,  and  have  not  kept 

8. 14.  heard  that  Samaria  had  r.  the  word  of  God 

17.  laid  hands  on  them,  they  r.  the  Holy  Ghost 

9.  19.  when  he  had  r.  meat  he  was  strengthened 

10.  16.  the  vessel  was  r.  again  up  into  heaven 
47.  which  have  r.  the  Holy  Ghost  as  well  as  we 

11. 1.  heard  that  Gentiles  had  r.  the  word  of  God 
15.  4.  when  come,  they  were  r.  of  the  church 
16.24. who  having  r.  such  charge,  thrust  them  into 
17.  7.  whom  Jason  hath  r.  these  all  do  contrary 

11.  the  Bereans  r.  the  word  with  all  readiness 

19.2.  haveyer.  the  Holy  Ghost  since  ye  believedt 

20.  24.  the  ministry  which  I  have  r.  of  the  Lord 
21. 17.  when  we  were  come,  brethren  r.  us  gladly 
22.  5.  from  whom  I  r.  letters  to  the  brethren 
26. 10.  having  r.  authority  from  the  chief  priest* 
28.  2.  barbarians  kindled  a  fire  and  r.  us  every  ona 

7.  Publius  r.  us  ||  30.  Paul  r.  all  that  came 
21.  we  neither  r.letters  out  of  Judea,nor  brethren 
i?«m.l.5.by  whom  we  haver,  grace,  for  obedience 
4.11.  and  he  r.  the  sign  of  circumcision,  a  seal 

5.  II.  by  whom  we  have  now  r.  the  atonement 

8. 15.  ye  have  not  r.  the  Spirit  of  bondage  again 
to  fear,  but  ye  have  r.  the  Spirit  of  adoption 

14.  3.  judge  him  that  eateth,  for  God  hath  r.  him 

15. 7.  reri'ivc  ye  one  another,  as  Christ  also  r.  us 

1  Cor.  2. 12.  we  have  r.  not  the  spirit  of  the  world 

4.  7.  why  dost  glory,  as  if  thou  hndst  not  r.  it? 
11. 23. 1  r.  of  the  Lord,  that  which  I  delivered 

15.  1.  which  also  ye  have  r.  ||  3.  which  I  r. 

2  Cor.  4.  1.  as  we  have  r.  mercy,  we  faint  not 
7.  15.  how  with  fear  and  trembling  ye  r.  him 

11.  4.  if  receive  anoth.  spirit,  which  ye  have  notr. 
24.  of  the  Jews  five  times  r.  I  forty  stripes 

Go/.1.9.preach  another  gospel  than  that  ye  have  r. 

12.  I  r.  it  not  of  man,  neither  was  I  taujht  it 

3.  2.  r.  ye  the  Spirit  by  the  works  of  the  law? 
4.14. but  r.  me  as  an  angel  of  God,  even  as  Christ 

Phil.  4.  9.  the  things  ye  have  r.  and  seen  in  me,  do 

1 18. 1  have  r.  all,  having  r.  of  Epaphroditus 
Col.  2. 6.  as  ye  have  r.  Christ,  so  walk  ye  in  him  ■ 

4.  10.  louchiflg  whom  ye  r.  commandments 
17.  take  heed  to  the  ministry  thou  hast  r.  in  Lord 

1  Thess.  1.  6.  having  r.  the  word  in  much  affliction 
2.13.  when  ye  r.  word,  r.  it  not  as  the  word  of  man 
4. 1.  as  ye  have  r.  of  us  how  ye  ought  to  walk 

iThess.  2.10.  because  they  r.  not  the  love  of  truth 

3.  6.  not  after  the  tradition  which  he  r.  of  us 
ITim.  3. 16.  believed  on  in  world,  r.  up  into  glory 

4.  3.  meats  which  God  hath  created  to  be  r. 
4.  creature  is  good,  if  it  be  r.  with  thanksgiving 

ffeb.  2.  2.  transgression  r.  just  recompence  of  rew, 
7.  6.  r.  tithes  of  Ahrah.  and  blessed  him  that  had 

11.  for  under  it  the  people  r.  the  law 
]0.26.if  we  sin  wilftilly  after  we  have  r.knowledge 
11. 11.  through  faith  Sarai  r.  strength  to  conceive 
13.  these  all  died,  not  having  r.  thfl  promises 
17.  he  that  r.  promises  offered  up  his  only  son 
19.  from  whence  also  he  r.  him  in  n  figure 
31.  when  Rahab  had  r.  the  spies,  .Tarn.  2.  2.1. 
3-5.  women  r.  their  dead  raised  to  life  again 
39.  these  all  having  obtained  n  eood  report  fiiro 
faith,  r.  not  the  promise,  God  having  provided 

1  Pet.  1. 18.  from  your  vain  conversation  r.  by  tra- 
dition from  your  fatheri 

4.  10.  as  every  one  hath  r.  the  eift,  so  minister 

2  Pet.  1. 17.  for  he  r.  from  God  the  Father  honour 

1  .Tohn  2.  27.  anointing  ye  have  r.  ahidelh  in  you 

2  .fohn  4. as  we  have  r.  a  command  from  the  Father 
Rev.  2.  27.  sive  power,  even  as  I  r.  of  my  Father 

3.  3.  remember  how  thou  hast  r.  and  heard 

17.  12.  ten  kings  who  have  r.  nn  kinffdom  nf  yrt 

19.  20.  them  that  had  r.  the  mark  of  the  beast 

20.  4.  had  not  r.  the  mark,  reigned  with  Chrijt 


REC 

RECEIVEDST. 
LMielS.  25.  thou  in  ihv  liic  timo  r.  tliy  good  things 

reOeiveu. 

Isa.  33.  13.  where  is  tlie  scribel  where  ia  the  r.? 

IIECEIVETU. 
Judg-  19.  18.  there  i«  no  man  timt  r.  me  to  house 
JoO  .to.  7.  or  wliai  r.  he  ot'Uiiiiu  huiid? 
Psal.  15. 1 3.  nor  r.  reproach  against  iiis  neighbour 
Prov.  21. 1 1.  %vlien  wise  a  instructed,  he  r.  knowl. 
21).  4.  but  lie  that  r,gifi8,  overlliroweth  it 
.ler.  7.  28.  this  is  a  nation  that  r.  not  correction 
.Val.-i.y.i.ot  r.oftl-ring  witli  good- will  at  your  hand 
.Mat.  '.  8.  every  one  that  asketli,  r.  Luke  11.  10. 
10. 40.  be  that  r.  you  r.  me,  and  lie  that  r.  me  r. 
Iiiin  that  siait  me,  John  13.  20. 
41.  he  that  r.  a  prophet,  that  r.  a  rigt)teous  man 

13.  20.  heareth  the  word,  and  anon  r.  it  with  joy 
18.  5.  one  such  liiile  child  in  my  name,  r.  mo 
Mark  9.  37.  whosoever  shall  receive  me,  r.  not 

me,  but  him  tliat  sent  mc,  Luke  9.  48. 
J.uke  15.  2.  this  man  r.  sinners,  caleih  with  them 
John  3.  32.  and  no  man  r.  his  testimony 
4.  36.  he  that  reapeth  r.  wages,  and  gathcreth 
12.48.  he  that  rejocteth  me,  and  r.  not  my  words 
1  Cor.  9.  24.  they  run  all,  but  one  r.  the  prize 
Jleb.  6.  7.  for  the  earth  r.  bie.ssing  from  God 

7.  8.  men  that  die  receive  tithes,  but  there  he  r. 

tliem,  ofw.'ioni  it  is  witnessed  that  he  liveth 
9.  Levi  who  r.  tithes,  paid  tithes  in  .\braham 
12.  t).  and  scourgeth  every  son  whom  he  r. 
Jirv.~.  17.  no  man  knoweth,  saving  he  that  r.  it 

14.  11.  whosoever  r.  the  mark  of  his  name 

RECEtVETH  not. 

1  Cor.  2.  14.  natural  man  r.  not  the  things  of  God 
3  John  9. 1  wrote,  but  Uiotrcphes  r.  us  not 

KEUEIVI.XG. 
S/Tin^s 5.20.8pared  piiaainan,  in  notr.athis  hands 
.Acta  17.  15.  and  r.  a  commandment  to  Silas 
Rom.  1.  27.  r.  in  themselves  that  recompence 

11.  1.5.  what  shall  r.ofthem  be  but  life  from  dead? 
Phil.  4. 15.  as  concerning  giving  and  r.  but  ye  only 
//ci.  12. 28.  wherel'.wcr.  a  kingdom  which  cannot 
li'eM.9.r.  the  end  of  your  faith,  the  salvation 

RECKON 
Signifies,  [1]  To  cast  up  or  count.  Mat.  18.  24. 
[2]  To  esteem,  rrpute,  and  number,    Luke  22. 
37.     [3]  To  propound  to  one's  self,  or  think 
with  one's  self,  Isa.  38.  13.     [4]  To  conclude, 
collect,  and  /gather,  as  by  reason  and  argu- 
ment, Rom.  <).  1  J. 
ficn.  40. 1 13.  within  3day3  Pharaoh  shall  r.  1 19. 
/>f  r.  25. 50.  he  shall  r.  with  him  that  bought  him 
27.  18.  the  priest  shall  r.  to  him  the  money,  2.3. 
J^Tum.  4.  32.  by  name  ye  shall  r.  the  instruments 
F.iek.  44.  20.  they  shall  r.  to  him  seven  days 
Mat.  18.  24.  when  h«!  began  to  r.  one  was  brought 
Jiom.Q.  11.  r.  yourselves  to  be  dead  indeed  to  sin 

8.  16.  I  r.  the  sufferings  of  this  present  time 

3  Cor.  10. 1 2.  which  r.  of  us  as  though  we  walked 

RECKONED. 
Gen.  40.  t  20.  he  r.  with  the  butler  and  baker 
JVmn.l8.27.yourheave-oirering  r.  as  corn  of  flour 
23. 9.  the  people  shall  not  be  r.  among  the  nations 

2  Sam.  4.  2.  for  Boeroth  was  also  r.  to  Benjamin 
2  Kinifs  12. 15.  moreover,  they  r.  not  with  the  men 

1  Chr.5.  1.  genealogy  is  not  to  be  r.  by  birth-right 
7.  when  the  genealogy  of  generations  was  r. 
IT.  all  these  were  r.  by  genealogies,  7.  5,  7.  |  9. 

1,  22.  2  Chron.  31.  19.  Ezra  2.  62.  I 
8.  3.  JVtA.  7.  5,  64. 
Psal.  40.  5.  thy  thoughts  to  us  cannot  be  r.  up 
J.ra.  38.  l.").  I  r.  till  morning,  that  as  a  lion  so  will 
J.uke  •.'2. 37.  he  was  r.  amongst  the  transgressors 
y^om.  4. 4.  the  reward  is  not  r.  of  grace,  but  of  delit 
U.  faith  was  r.  to  Ahra.  ||  10.  how  was  it  then  r.? 
RECKO.\ET(I. 
Mai.  25.  19.  lord  of  those  servants  r.  with  them 
RECKONLNG. 

2  Kings  22.  7.  there  was  no  r.  made  with  thera 
1  Chron.  23.  11.  ilii.ri>fi,re  ihev  were  in  one  r. 

Ri:C(l.MME.\i>ED. 

Jlets  14.  26.  from  wli.iir.-  they  had  been  r. 
15.40.  Paul  depnrii.|,l..in2  r.tothe  grace  of  God 
Rrco.MPE.NCE, 

Jl  requital,  retaliation,  or  amrnils,  Luke  14. 12. 
/n  Rom.  1.  27,  we  rend,  ihitt  the  Grnlilns  rc- 
rnived  that  recompence  f,l"  ihcir  error  which 
wB»meet;  and  in  r/inp.  11.  9.  it  i>  raid.  Eel 
their  laldo  bo  made  a  snare  anil  a  recompence 
unto  them.  In  both  which  places  the  Jlposllc 
speaks  of  that  judgment  of  C/ml  bi/  which  nin 
1.1  punished  icith  .sin;  [I]  /n  the  Gentiles,  who 
abused  their  natiiriil  kiwirled)(r;  how  meet 
was  it  that  they  who  had  forsaken  the  Author 
vl'  nature,  should  be  ginen  up,  not  to  kerp  the 
iitiin  of  nii'un!  That  thrii  who  had  rhnnsed 
the  rinrynf  God  into  the  «i,nil,ludf  ofbriisis, 
s'lould  he  left  to  do  those  things  which  beasts 
themselves  abhorred!  [2]  IntheJnw*,  abusing 
their  revealed  knowUdirr,for  which  their  un- 
470 


REC 

derstandinga  were    darkened.,  and   spiritual 
blindness  increased,  so  that  they  could  discern 
nothing  of  heavenly  things;  and  what  things 
were  delectable  to  them,  were  turned  into  their 
ruin  and  destruction.      Recompence   is    also 
taken  for  that  free  and  gracious  reward  which 
the  saints  shall  have  in  heaven.     Luke  14.  14, 
For  thou  slialt  be  recompensed  at  the  resurrec- 
tion of  the  just. 
IJeut.  32.  35.  to  me  belongeth  vengeance  and  r. 
.Job  15.  31.  nut  trust  in  vanity,  vanity  shall  lie  his  r. 
/'rfl».12.14.lher.  of  aman'sliand  shall  be  rendered 
Isa.  35.  4.  even  God  will  come  with  a  r. 
40.  t  10.  reward  and  r.  for  his  works,  02.  t  11. 
59. 18.  repay  r.  to  his  enemies,  to  the  islands,  r. 
6G.C.  voice  of  Ld.  that  renderelh  r.  to  his  enemies 
■fer.  51.  C.  time  of  veng.  he  will  render  to  her  a  r. 
Lam.  3.  Ii4.  render  to  them  a  r.  O  Lord 
//o«.  9.7.  days  of  r.  are  come,  Israel  shall  know 
Joel  3.  4.  will  ye  render  iiie  a  r.l  speedily  will  I 

7.  I  will  return  your  r.  on  your  own  head 
Luke  14.  12.  they  bid  tliee,  and  a  r.  be  made  thee 
Horn.  1.  27.  receiving  that  r.  of  their  error 

11.  9.  let  their  table  be  made  a  r.  to  them 
2  Cor.  6. 13.  now  for  a  r.  in  the  saine,be  ye  enlarged 
Heb.2.2.  transgression  received  a  just  r.  of  reward 
10. 3.5.  your  conlid.  which  hath  gn.-at  r.  of  reward 
11.  26.  for  he  liad  respect  to  the  r.  of  reward 

RECOMPENCKS. 
fsa.  34.  8.  it  is  year  of  r.  for  controversy  of  Zion 
59.  t  18.  according  to  their  r.  he  will  repay 
Jer.  51.56.  the  Lord  God  of  r.  shall  surely  requite 

RECO.MPE.\.SE,  ferb. 
JVum.  5. 7.  he  shall  r.  his  trespass,  and  add  the  6 Ah 

8.  if  he  have  no  kinsman  to  r.  the  trespass  unto 
Ruth  2.  12.  the  Lord  r.  thy  work  and  reward  thee 
2  Ham.  19.  .36.  why  should  the  king  r.  me? 
./ob  34.  33.  he  will  r.  it,  whether  thou  refuse 
I'rov.  20.  22.  say  not  thou,  1  will  r.  evil 
Isa.  65.  6.  JL  will  r.  I  will  r.  into  tlicir  bo.som 
.fer.Ui.  18.  and  first  I  will  r.  their  iniquity  and  sin 

25. 14.  will  r.  according  to  their  deeds,  Hos.  12.2. 
."iO.  29.  r.  w'ork  |{  Ezek.  7.  3.  r.  abominations,  8 
F.zek-  7.  4.r.  thy  ways,9.  \  9. 10.  |  11.  21.  1 16.  43. 
17.  19.  mine  oath  and  my  covenant  I  will  r. 
23.  49.  they  shall  r.  your  lewdness  upon  you 
.Joel  3.  4.  if  ye  r.  me,  speedily  will  I  return  it 
/.u/.e  14. 14.slialt  be  blessed,  forthey  cannot  r.  thee 
Unm.  12.  17.  r.  to  no  man  evil  for  evil 
iThess.  1.6.  to  r.  tribulat.to  them  that  trouble  you 
Jlcb.  10.  30.  we  know  him  that  hath  said,  I  will  r. 

RECO.MPENSED. 
JVam.5.  8.  let  the  trespass  be  r.  to  the  Lord 
2  Sam.  22.  21.  according  to  the  cleanness  of  my 
hands  hath  he  r.  me,  25.  I'sal.  18.  20,  24. 
Prov.  11.  31.  behold,  the  righteous  shall  be  r. 
Jer.  18.  20.  shall  evil  be  r.  lor  good  ? 
K2fA.22.3I.  their  own  way  have  I  r.  on  their  heads 
Luke  14.  14.  thou  shall  be  r.  at  the  resurrection 
Rom.  11.  35.  and  it  shall  be  r.  to  him  again 

RECOMPEN.srST. 
Jer.  32.  18.  thou  r.  iniquity  of  fathers  to  children 

RECO.MPENSETIl. 
Psal.  137.  t  8.  happv  shall  he  lie  that  r.  thee 

RECOMPENSING. 
2  Chron.  6.  23.  by  r.  his  wav  upon  his  own  head 

RECONCILE. 
Reconciliation,  7s  a  restoring  to  favour,  or  mak- 
ing those  friends  7cho  before  were  at  variance, 
as  God  and  the  elect  were,  t/irough  sin,  till  of 
enemies    they    became   friends,   through    the 
atonement  made  in  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  re- 
ceived by  faith,  Eph.  2.  16,  That  he  might  re- 
concile both  to  God  by  the  cross.  Col.  1.  21,  Yt 
were  enemies,  yet  now  hath  ho  reconciled  you. 
The  ininistry  of  the  gospel  is  called,  the  minis- 
try of  reconciliation,  2  Cor.  5.  IH.  because  re- 
conciliation is  thircby  published  and  declared 
to  such  as  arc  yet  enemies  to  God. 
To  the  making  of  reconciliation  three  things  are 
required  in  him  who  is  Meiliator  of  it.     fl] 
That  he  make  intercession  for  llie  offtndi-r.  [2J 
That  he  satisfy   the  offended  party  fur  the 
wrong  done.     [3]  To  provide  that  the  offender 
shall  ojind  no  more.  .'Ill  which  our  Lord  .Jesus 
Christ  doth.  La.  53. 12.  John  17. 22.  Eph.  2. 16. 
/.rt>.  6.  30.  the  blood  is  brought  tor.  withal 
1  .Sa/n.  29.  4.  for  whrrowilli  should  ho  r.  himself 
Ezek.  45.  20.  so  shall  yo  r.  tfie  house 
Eph.  2.  16.  that  he  might  r.  both  to  God  by  crow 
Col.  I.  20.  by  him  lo  r.  nil  thing's  to  himself 

RECONCILED. 
Mat.  5. 24.  go  thy  way,  first  be  r.  to  thy  brothor 
Jtom.  5.  10.  if  when  eneimes  we  were  r.  to  God 

1  for.  7.  II.  or  let  her  bo  r.  lo  her  husband 

2  Cir.  5.  IH.  w  ho  liatli  r.  us  to  himsi'lf  hy  .lusus  Clir. 

20.  wi.  pray  you  in  Christ's  sir.id,  he  ye  r.  to  God 
CuM.21.you  that  were  enemies, Vft  now  hath  he  r. 

RECONCILIATION. 
Ltv.  8. 15.  sanctified  it,  to  make  a  r.  upon  it        | 


RED 

2  Chron.  29. 24  they  made  r.  with  their  blood 
Ezek.  45.  15.  one  lamb  to  make  r.  for  iliem,  17 
Jjan.  9.24.  to  make  r.  for  iniquity,  and  bring  in 
2  Cor.  5. 18.  who  haili  given  to  us  the  ministry  of. 
19.  and  hath  comnmted  unto  us  the  word  of* 
Heb.  2.  17.  to  make  r.  for  the  sins  of  the  jieople 

RECONCILING. 
/.,et).16.20.  when  he  made  an  end  of  r.  holy  placv 
Horn.  11.15.  if  the  casting  away  be  the  r.  of  world 
2  Cor.  5. 19.  God  was  in  Christ,  r.  the  world      ' 

RECORD. 
Exod.  20.  24.  in  all  places  where  I  r.  my  name 
Lent.  30. 19. 1  call  heaven  and  earth  to  r.  31.  28L 

1  Chron.  16.4.  he  appointed  Levites  to  r.andprais* 
Isa.  8.  2.  I  took  unto  me  faithful  witnesses  lo  r. 
.■?c^5  20.26. 1  take  you  to  r.thisday,  that  lam  puM 

RECORD,  Substantive. 
Ezra  6.  2.  and  therein  was  a  r.  thus  written 
Job  16.  19.  also  now,  behold,  my  r.  is  on  high 
John  1.  19.  and  this  is  the  r.  of  John,  when 

32.  John  bare  r.  saying,  I  saw  the  Spirit,  34. 
8,  13.  thou  bearest  r.  of  thyself,  thy  r.  is  not  tru« 
14.  though  1  bear  r.  of  myself,  yet  my  r.  is  true 
12.  17.  the  people  that  was  with  him,  bare  r. 

19.  35.  he  that  saw  bare  r.  and  his  r.  is  true 
Rom.  10.2.  I  bare  them  r.  that  they  have  a  zeal 

2  Cor.  1.  23.  I  call  God  for  a  r.  upon  my  soul 

8.  3.  to  their  power  I  bear  r.  yea,  and  beyond 
Gal.  4.  15.  I  hear  you  r.  if  it  had  been  possible 
Phil.  1.8,  God  is  my  r.  how  greatly  1  long  after  you 
Col.  4. 13. 1  bear  him  r.  that  he  hath  a  zeal  for  you 
X.John  5.7.  there  are  three  that  bear  r.  in  heaven 
lO.because  he  bclieveth  not  r.God  gave  of  his  SoQ 
11.  this  is  the  r.  that  God  hath  given  us 

3  .John  12.  we  bear  r.  and  ye  know  our  r.  is  true 
Rev.  1.  2.  who  hare  r.  of  the  Word  of  God 

RECORDED. 
JVcA.  12.  S^2.  Levites  were  r.  chief  of  the  fathers 

RECORDER. 

2  Sam.  8.  16.  Jehoshaphat  the  son  of  Ahilud  wai 

r.  20.  24.  1  Kings  4.  3.  1  Chron.  18.  15. 

2  Kings  18.  18.  and  Joah  the  sou  of  Asaph  the  r. 

Jsa.  36.  3,  22. 

2  Chron.  34.  8.  Joah  son  of  Joahaz  r.  to  repair 

RECORDS. 
Ezra  4. 15.  that  search  be  made  in  the  book  of  r. 
Esth.  G.  1.  he  commanded  to  bring  the  book  of  r. 

RECOVER. 
Judg.  11.  26.  why  did  ye  not  r.  them  in  that  time 

1  .Sam.  30.  8.  for  thou  shall  without  fail  r.  all 

2  Sam.  8.3.  as  he  went  to  r.  his  border  at  Euphrates 
2A'!nn'«1.2.inquireof  Baal-zebub  whether  Ishallr. 

5.  3.  the  prophet  would  r.  him  of  his  leprosy 

6.  I  have  sent  Naanian,that  thou  mayest  r.  him 

7.  that  this  man  doth  send  lo  me  to  r.  a  rnan 
11. and  strike  his  hand  over  place,and  r.  the  Icpef 

8. 8.  inquire  by  him,  shall  I  r.  of  this  disease  ?  9. 

10.  thou  mayest  r.  ||  14.  that  shouldest  surely  r. 
2  Chr.  13.  20.  nor  did  Jeroboam  r.  strenglli  again 

14.  13.  that  they  could  not  r.  theiiiseUes 
Psal.  .39.  13.  spare  me,  that  I  may  r.  strength 
Isa.  11.  11.  to  r.  the  remnant  of  his  people 

38.  16.  so  wilt  thou  r.  me  and  make  me  to  live 

21.  and  lay  it  for  a  plaisler,  and  he  shall  r. 

Hos.  2.  9.  and  I  will  r.  my  wool  and  my  flax  • 

Mark  16.18.1ay  handsonthoslck,  and  they  shall  r.    • 
'iTiin.  2.  26.  that  they  mav  r.  themselves  out  of 

RECOVERED. 
1 .9ani.30. 18.  David  r.  all  the  Amalekitestook,  19. 

22.  not  give  them  aught  of  spoil  we  have  r. 

2  Kings  13.  25.  Joash  beat  him,  and  r.  cities  of  Itr. 
14.  28.  how  he  warred,  and  r.  Damasi-us 
16.  6.  Rezin  king  of  Syria  r.  Elalh  to  Syria 

20.  7.  and  they  laid  it  on  the  boil,  and  he  r. 
/s(i.38.9.wlien  Ilezekiah  was  sick,  and  was  r.  39.1. 
.Jer.  8.  22.  why  is  not  the  health  of  my  people  r.1 

41.  16.  Johanan  tcMik  the  people  he  had  r.     / 

RECOVERING. 
Luke  4.  18.  to  preach  r.  of  sight  to  the  blind 

RICCOCNT. 
A'aA.2.5.he  shall  r.his  worlhies,  tliey  shall  gtumble 

RECTI  EY. 
Prov.  11. 1 5.  righteousness  of  perfect  shall  r.  way 

RED. 
Gen.  25.  2.3.  first  came  out  r.  all  over  like  a  hairy 
30.  Esniisaid,  feed  me  with  ihatsamo  r.  pottage 
49.  12.  Judah,  his  eyes  shall  be  r.  with  wine 
Cjod.2.">.5.ranis'  skins  dyed  r.  and  hndi;.  hkins.  and 
shiilim  wood,  26. 14. 1  3.5.  7.  |  .30. 19.  1 39. 34. 
35.  23.  with  whom  was  fouml  r.  skins  of  rami 
JsTum.  19.  2.  bring  Iheo  a  r.  heifer  without  spot 
2  Kings  3.22.  Moabitos  saw  the  water  r.  as  blood 
Esth.  I.  6.  on  a  pavement  of  r.  bine,  and  white 
Ps.  68. 1 23. foot  may  be  r.  in  blood  of  iliy  enemies 
75.  H.  the  wine  is  r.  it  is  full  of  iiii.xlure 
Prnr.  H.  31.  look  not  on  ihc  wine  when  it  is  r. 
Isa.  1. 18.  Ilioiigh  your  sins  he  r.  like  crimson         ^ 
27.  2.  sing  ye  to  her,  a  viiii'vard  of  r.  w  ine 
63.  2.  wherefore  art  thou  r.  in  thine  apparol? 
JVaA.  2.  3.  the  shield  uf  bis  mighty  men  is  niadex 


RED 

Zech- 1.8. 1  saw  b/  niglit  a  man  riding  on  a  r.  horse 
and  beliind  him  wore  there  r.  horses  and  white 
G.  2.  ill  lirsl  cliariot  were  r.  horses,  in  second  hiack 
Mat.  Iti.  2.  it  will  bo  I'uir  weather,  lor  sky  is  r.  3. 
Hcu.  (3. 4.  then  went  out  another  liorse  tliat  was  r. 
1'2.  'J.  a.  great  r.  dragon,  seven  lieada  and  ten  horns 

KKU-sea. 

Exod.  10. 19.  and  cast  tlie  locusts  into  the  r.-sea 

IS.  IS.  Uod  led"  them  hy  llie  way  of  the  r.-sea 

15.  4.  cliosen  caj^tains  are  drowned  in  tlie  r.-sea 

2-i.  Moses  brouglit  Israel  Irom  the  r.-sea 

23.  31.  1  will  set  thy  bounds  from  the  r.-sea 
JVuiit.  14.  25.  get  into  the  wilderness  by  the  r.-sea 

21.  14  it  iisaid,  what  he  did  in  the  r.-sea 
iJeu'.  1.  4U.  take  your  journey  by  the  r.-sca 

11.  4.  how  he  made  the  r.-sca  to  overflow  them 
JosA.  2. 10.  heard  Iw w  the  Lord  d'ied  uji  the  r.-sea 

4.  a.  as  the  Lord  your  God  did  to  the  r.-sea 

24.  tj.  the  Egyptians  pursued  after  to  the  r.-sea 
JVek.  y.  9.  thou  heardest  iheir  cry  by  the  r.-sea 
I'sal.  lOli.  7.  but  provoked  him  at  the  r.-sea 

9.  lie  rebuked  tJie  r.-sea,  and  it  was  dried  up 
22.  he  had  done  terrible  things  by  the  r.-sea 

131. 13.  to  him  who  divided  the  r.-sea  in  parts 

10.  overtlirew  Pharaoh  and  his  host  in  the  r.-sea 
Jcr.4M.  21.  noise  thereof  was  heard  in  the  r.-sea 
Acts  7.  3t).  he  shewed  wonders  in  the  r.-sea 
Heb.lX.  29.  by  faith  they  passed  through  the  r.-sca 

KEUDISH. 

Let.  13.  19.  a  bright  spot  somewhat  r.  24.  43. 
4i.  a  white  r.  sore,  it  is  a  leprosy  sprung  up 
4ii.  if  the  plague  be  r.  in  the  garment  or  skm 
14.37.  if  tl» plague  be  with  hollow  strakes,  r. 
REDEEM 

Signifies,  [1]  To  buy  again  something  that  had 
bieii  sold,  liy  paying-  back  the  price  unto  him 
that  bought  it,  Lev.  25.  25.  1  27.  20.  [2]  To 
diliocr  and  bring  out  of  bondage  with  a 
strong  hand,  and  without  any  ransom,  such 
as  were  kept  prisoners  by  their  enemies ,  Dent. 
"i.  5.  I  32.  (5.  [3]  To  deliver  sinners  from  the 
tyranny  of  Satan,  from  sin,  death,  and  hell, 
ly  the  purchase  of  Christ's  blood,  and  the 
jMwer  of  his  grace.  Thus  is  Christ  both  the 
Jiansomcr,  aiid  ransom,  Luke  1.  C8.  1  Tim.  2. 
e.   Tit.  2.  14. 

Fedemption  sometimes  signifies  deliverance  both 
from  the  guilt  and  power  of  sin,  by  forgive- 
ness and  sanctification,  Eph.  1.  7.  Sometimes 
it  is  taken  fur  the  whole  work  of  a  sinnc7-'s 
salvation,  comprehending  all  things  that  be- 
long to  it.  Heb.  9.  12,  Having  obtained  eter- 
nal redemption  for  us.  Our  whole  redemption, 
from  the  first  act  to  the  last,  both  for  merit 
and  efficacy,  is  wholly  from  Christ,  and  not  at 
all  from  ourselves.  Lastly,  the  last  act  of  our 
salvation  is  the  resurrection  of  our  bodies  and 
the  sentence  of  the  last  judgment,  after  which 
the  saints  shall  be  glorified  as  the  sons  of  God 
by  adoption,  their  souls  and  bodies  being  re- 
united; in  this  sense  redemption  is  taken, 
Luke  21.  28.  Jlom.  8.  23. 

To  redeem  time,  Eph.  5.  16.  To  embrace  and 
improve  every  ouportunity  of  doing  good.  It 
is  a  metaphor  taken,  from  merchants  that  dili- 
gently observe  the  time  of  buying  and  selling, 
and  eflsily  part  with  their  pleasures  for  gain; 
that  is,  deny  yourselves  in  your  ease,  pleasure, 
^c.  to  gain  an  opportunity  of  doing  good. 

Eiod.  6.  ().  I  will  r.  you  with  a  stretciied-out  arm 
13. 13.  firsiling  of  ass  shall  r.  with  a  lamb,  34.  20. 
15.  the  first-born  of  my  children  1  r.  34.  20. 

Lei\  2.1.  25.  and  if  any  of  his  kin  come  to  r.  it 
2().  if  he  have  none  to  r.  it  ||  29.  he  may  r.  it 
32.  the  cities  may  the  Levites  r.  at  any  time 

48.  when  sold,  one  of  his  brethren  may  r.  him 

49.  his  uncle's  son,  or  any  of  kin  may  r.  him 
27. 13.  but  if  he  will  at  all  r.  it,  then  he  shall  add 

15.  that  sanctified  his  house  will  r.  it,  19,  20,  31, 
^nm.  18.  15.  the  first-born  pf  man  shall  thou  r. 

16.  from  a  month  old  slialtthou  r. 

17.  the  firstling  of  a  goat  thou  shall  not  r. 
R««A2.  t20.  man  is  one  that  hath  right  to  r.  3.  t9. 

4.  4.  if  thou  wilt  r.  it,  r.  it,  if  not  I  will  r.  it 
6.  1  cannot  r.  it  for  inysclf,  r.  thou  it 
2  Sam.  7.23.  what  nation  in  earth  is  like  Isr.  whom 
God  went  lo  r.  to  himself'?  1  Chron.  17.  21. 
AVA.  5.  5.  nor  is  it  in  our  power  to  r.  tliem 
Job  5.  20.  in  famine  he  shall  r.  thee  from  death 
6.  23.  tor.  me  from  the  hand  of  the  mighty 
Psal.  25.  22.  r.  Isr.  O  God,  out  of  all  his  Uoublcs 
26.  11.  r.  me  and  be  merciful  unto  me 
44.  26.  arise,  and  r.  us  for  thy  mercies'  sake   . 
49.  7.  none  of  them  can  r.  his  brother,  nor  give 

15.  but  God  will  r.  my  soul  from  tlio  grave 
f)9. 18.  ilraw  nigh  to  my  soul,  and  r.  it,  deliver  me 
72.  14.  he  shall  r.  their  soul  from  deceit 
130.  8.  he  shall  r.  Israel  from  all  his  iniquities 
Tsa. 50.2.  is  my  band  shortened  thai  it  cannot  r.? 
Jer.  15.  21. 1  will  r.  thee  out  of  hand  of  terrible 
477 


RED 

Hot.  13. 14. 1  will  r.  them  from  death 
J\lic.  4.  10.  the  Lord  shall  r.  thee  from  Babylon 
Gal.  4.  5.  to  r.  them  that  were  under  tlje  law 
I'it.".  14.  that  he  might  r.  us  from  all  iniquity 

KEUEBWED. 
Gen.  48.  16.  the  angel  which  r.  me  from  all  evil 
Kxud.  15.  13.  led  forth  people  whom  thou  hast  r. 
21.  8.  if  jilease  not,  then  shall  be  let  her  be  r. 
IjCV.  19.  20.  who  lieth  with  a  bond-maid  not  J-. 
25.  30.  if  a  house  in  a  walled  city  be  not  r. 
31.  but  the  houses  of  the  villages  may  be  r. 
48.  brother  sold  to  a  stranger  may  be  r.  again 
54.  if  be  be  not  r.  then  go  out  in  year  of  jubilee 
27.  20.  if  he  hath  sold  the  field,  it  shall  not  be  r. 

27.  an  unclean  beast  not  r.  then  it  shall  be  sold 

28.  no  devoted  thing  to  the  Lord  shall  be  r.29. 
33.  the  tithe  and  the  change  shall  not  be  r. 

J\ram.  3.4().  those  be  r.  that  are  more  than  Levites 
18.  16.  those  that  are  to  be  r.  from  a  month  old 

Deut.  7.8.  the  Ld.  halh  r.  you  out  of  the  bouse  of 

bond-men,  from  king  of  Egypt,  15. 15.  ]  24. 18. 

9.26. thy  people  thou  hast  r.  through  thy  greatness 

13.  5.  Lord  which  r.  you  out  of  house  of  bondage 
21.  8.  be  merciful  to  Israel,  whom  thou  haslr. 

2  Sam.  4.  9.  Lord  hath  r.  my  soul,  1  Kings  1.  29. 
1  Chr.  17.  21.  whom  thou  hast  r.  out  of  Egypt  by 
thy  great  power,  JVeh.  1.  10.  Psal.  77.  15. 
JVe/i.  5. 8.  we  after  our  ability  have  r.  the  Jews 
Psal.  31.  5.  thou  hast  r.  me,  O  Lord  God  of  truth 

71.  23.  ray  soul  shall  rejoice  which  thou  hast  r. 

74.  2.  remember  thine  inheritance  thou  hast  r. 

106.  10.  he  r.  them  from  the  hand  of  the  enemy 

107. 2.  let  the  r.  of  liOrd  say  so,  whom  he  halh  r. 

136.  24.  and  hath  r.  us  from  our  enemies 
Isa.  1.  27.  Zion  shall  be  r.  with  judgment 

29.  22.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  who  r.  Abraham 

35.  9.  no  lion  tlicre,  but  the  r.  shall  walk  there 

43.  1.  fear  not,  I  have  r.  thee,  thou  art  mine 

44.  22.  return  unto  me,  for  1  have  r.  thee 

23.  the  Lord  bath  r.  Jacob,  43. 20.  Jer.  31.  11. 
51. 11.  therefore  the  r.  of  the  Lord  shall  return 
52.  3.  and  ye  shall  be  r.  without  money 

9.  r.  Jerusalem  ||  62. 12.  holy  people  r.  of  Lord 
63.  4.  year  of  my  r.  is  come  |i9.  in  pity  he  r.  them 
Lam.  3.  .58.  O  Lord,  thou  hast  r.  my  life 
Hos.  7. 13.  tho'  I  r.  them,  yet  they  have  spoken  lies 
jyiic.6.4.  I  r.  thee  out  of  the  house  of  servants 
Zech.  10.  8.  I  will  hiss  for  them,  I  have  r.  them 
Luke  1.  G8.  he  hath  visited  and  r.  his  people 
24.  21.  it  had  been  he  who  should  have  r.  Israel 
Gal-  3. 13.  Christ  r.  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law 

1  Pet.  1. 18.  ye  were  not  r.  with  corruptible  things 
Rev.  5.  9.  thou  hast  r.  us  to  God  by  thy  blood 

14.  3.  none  learn,  but  the  144,000  which  were  r 
4. these  werer.lVom  among  men,  being  first-fruits 

REDEEMEDST. 

2  Sam. 7. 23.  which  thou  r.  to  thee  from  Egypt 

REDEEMER. 
Ruth  4.  tl4.  who  hath  not  left  thee  without  a  r. 
Job  19.  2.5.  for  I  know  that  my  R.  liveth 
Psal.  19.  14.  O  Lord,  my  strength  and  my  R. 
78.35.tbey  remembered  the  high  God  was  their  R. 
Prov.i'i. 11.  their  R.  is  mighty,  he  shall  plead  cause 
Isa.  41. 14.  andthy  ie.the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  54. 5. 
43.  14.  thus  saith  the  Lord  your  R.  the  Holy  One 
44.6.  thussaith  the  Lord,  his  iJ.  the  Lord  of  hosts 

24.  saith  the  Lord  thy /i. 43. 17. 1 49.  7. !  54.  8. 
47.  4.  as  for  our  R.  the  Lord  of  hosts  is  ids  name 
49.26.shall  know  that  I  the  Lord  am  thy  ft.  60. 16. 
59.20.  ft.  shall  come  lo  Zion,  to  thein  that  turn 
63.  16.  thou,  O  Lord,  art  our  Father,  our  li. 

Jer.  50.  34.  their  ft.  is  stron?,  the  Lord  of  hosts 

REDEEMETH. 
Psal.  34.  22.  the  Lord  r.  the  souls  of  his  servants 
103.  4.  whor.  life  from  distruction,  who  crowns 

REDEEMING. 
ftu«A4.7.this  was  the  manner  in  Israel  concerning  r. 
£nA.5.16.r.time, because  the  davs  areevil,  Col.i.5. 

REDEMPTION. 
Exod.  8.  t  23. 1  will  put  a  r.  between  my  people 
Let).  25.  24.  ye  shall  grant  a  r.  for  the  land 
t31.  houses  of  the  villages,  r.  belongeth  to  it 
fil.  he  shall  give  again  the  price  of  his  r.  52. 
JiTum.  3.49.  Moses  look  tlic  r.  money  of  them 
Psal.  49.8.  r.  of  their  soul  is  precious,  and  ceaseth 
11 1.  9.  he  sent  r.  to  his  people,  holy  is  his  name 
130.  7.  with  the  Lord  there  is  plenteous  r. 
Jer.  32.  7.  the  right  of  r.  is  thine  to  buy  it,  8. 
Luke  2.  38.  to  them  that  looked  for  r.  in  Jerusal. 
21.  28.  then  look  up,  for  your  r.  draweih  nigh 
Rom.  3.24.  justified  through  the  r.  thai  is  in  Christ 
8.  23.  for  adoption,  to  wit,  the  r.  of  our  body 
lCoc.l.30.Christismadelo  us  sanctification  and  r. 
Eph.\.".\n  whom  have  r.  through  blood.  Col.  1.14. 

14.  until  the  r.  of  the  purchased  possession 

4.  30.  when: by  ye  are  sealed  unto  the  day  of  r. 
Hcb.S).  12.  having  obtained  eternal  r.  for  us 

15.  for  r.  of  the  transgressions  that  were  under 

REDNESS. 
Fruv .  23. 29.  who  hath  woe  1  who  halh  r.  of  eyes  7 


REP 

REDOUND. 

2  Cor.  4. 15.  that  grace  might  r.  to  the  glory  of  God 
REED 

Signifies,  [1]  A  plant  growing  in  fenny  and  wa- 
tery  places,  Jcib  40.  21.  [2]  A  staff  or  rod  of  a 
reed,  which  was  put  in  oar  Saviour's  hand  at 
his  passion,  by  jcay  of  derision,  histead  of 
a  sceptre,  Mat.  27.  29.  [3]  A  Jewish  measure 
of  six  cubits  three  inches,  or  three  yards  three 
inches,  Ezek.  40.  3. 

Egypt  is  called  a  reed,  2  Kings  18. 21.  in  allusion 
to  the  reeds  t/iai  were  numerous  uponthe  banks 
of  the  Nile;  and  a  broken  reed,  to  denote  the 
inability  and  weakness  of  the  Egyptians  to 
support  and  aid  Hezekiah  against  the  Assy- 
rians. A  bruised  reed,  fsa.  42.  3.  A  believer 
weak  ill  grace,  who  is  of  a  broken  and  a  con- 
trite heart  for  sin.  Our  Saviour  speaking  of 
John  the  Baptist,  says,  that  he  was  not  a  reed 
shaken  with  the  wind.  Mat.  11.  7.  He  was 
not  one  of  an  unsettled  mind;  but  constajit 
and  fixed  in  the  truth ;  his  testimony  of  me  was 
always  the  same. 

1  Kings  14.  15.  the  Lord  shall  smite  Israel  as  a  r. 

2  Kings  18.21.  thou  trustesl  upon  the  staff  of  this 

bruised  r.  Isa.  36.  6. 
Isa.  42.  3.  a  bruised  r.  shall  he  not  break,  and  the 
smoking  flax  shall  he  not  quench,  JUat.  12.  20. 
EzcA.  29. 6.  they  have  been  a  staff  of  r.  lo  Israel 
40.  3.  a  man  with  a  measuring  r.  in  his  hand 
42. 16.  the  east  side  with  measuring  r.  17, 18, 19. 
JUat.ll.l.  what  went  ye  out  into  the  wilderness  lo 
see?  ar.?  Luke  7.  24. 
27.  29.  they  put  a  r.  in  his  right  hand  and  bowed 
.30.  they  smote  him  with  a  r.  Mark  15.  19. 
48.  one  of  them  ran  and  put  the  sponge  on  a  r. 
and  gave  him  to  drink,  Mark  15.36. 
Rev.  11.  1.  there  was  given  me  a  r.  like  a  rod 
21.  15.  had  a  golden  r.  to  measure  the  city 
16.  he  measured  with  the  r.  12,000  furlonga 
REEDS. 
.lob  40.  21.  he  lieth  in  the  covert  of  the  r. 
Isa.  19.  6.  the  r.  and  flags  shall  wither,  7. 
35.  7.  in  the  habitation  of  dragons  shall' be  r. 
Jer.  51.  32.  the  r.  they  have  burnt  with  fire 
Ezek.  42.  16.  he  measured  the  east  side  with  the 
measuring  reed  five  hundred  r.  17,  18,  19. 
45. 1.  the  length  shall  be  the  length  of  25,000  r. 

REEL. 
Psal.  107.  27.  they  r.  to  and  fro,  and  stagger 
Isa.  24.20.  earth  shall  r.  to  and  fro  like  a  drunkard 

REFINE. 
ZecA.13.9.  andlwill  r.  them  as  silver  is  refined 

REFINED. 
2  Sam.  22. 1 31 .  his  way  is  perfect,  the  word  of  the 
Lord  is  r.  Psal.  18.  t  30.  |  119.  f  140. 
1  Chron.  28.  18.  for  the  altar  r.  gold  by  w  eight 
29. 4.  seven  thousand  talents  of  r.  silver  to  overlay 
Isa.  2.5.  6.  a  feast  of  wines  on  the  lees  well  r. 
48.  10.  behold,  I  have  r.  thee,  but  not  with  silver 
Zech.  13.  9.  I  will  refine  them,  as  silver  ij  r. 

REFINER. 
Mai.  3.  2.  he  is  like  a  r.  fire,  anil  like  fuller's  soap 
3.  he  shall  sit  as  a  r.  and  purifier  of  silver 
REFORMATION. 
Heb.  9. 10.  imposed  on  ihein  until  the  time  of  r. 

REFORMED. 
Z,eo.  26. 23.  and  if  ye  will  not  be  r.  by  these  things 

REFRAIN. 
Gen.  45.  1.  then  Joseph  could  not  r.  himself 
Job  4.  t  2.  but  who  can  r.  from  woids? 
7.  11.  therefore  I  will  not  r.  my  mouth 
Prov.  1.  15.  my  son,  r.  thy  foot  from  their  path 
Eccl.  3.  5.  there  is  a  time  to  r.  from  embracing 
Isa.  48.  9.  and  for  my  praise  I  will  r.  for  thee 
64. 12.  wilt  thou  r.  thyself  for  these  things,  O  L.? 
Jer.  31. 16.  r.  voice  from  weeping,  eyes  from  tears 
Acts  5.  38.  I  say  to  you,  r.  from  these  men 
1  Pet.  3.  10.  let  him  r.  his  tonjue  from  evil 

REFRAINED. 
^f7!.43.31..Toseph  r.  himself  and  said,  set  on  bread 
Eslh.  5.  10.  nevertheless,  Ilaman  r.  himself 
./ob  29.  9.  princes  r.  talking,  and  laid  their  hand 
Psal.  to.  9.  I  have  not  r.  my  lips,  thou  knowest 
119. 101. 1  have  r.  my  feet  from  every  evil  w  ay 
Isa.  42.  14.  I  have  been  still,  and  r.  myself 
Jer.  14.  10.  they  have  not  r.  their  feet 

REFRAINETH. 
Prov.  10.  19.  but  he  I  hat  r.  his  lips  is  wise 

REFRESH 
Signifies,  [1]  To  rrrire,  1  Cor.  16.  18.  [2]  Ts 
take,  rest,  Exod.  23.  12.  [3]  To  strengthen 
one's  self  by  food,  1  Kings  13.  7.  [4]  3'» 
breathe.  Job  32.  f  20. 
Times  of  refreshing.  Acts  3. 19.  or  limes  of  cool- 
ing, as  afflictions  are  called  a  fiery  trial,  deli- 
Viravee  from  them  is  a  seaso7t  of  refreshing 
or  cooling:  Such  a  time  of  refreshing  after 
troubles  frequently  comes  in  this  life;  but 
tchcn  this  life  ends  a  ddivcrance  comes  frmn 


REP 


all  affiietionf  to  them  that  truly  fear  and  trrve 

Ciod.     It  is  a  ff^urativf  vianntr  of  tpeakin/^, 

taken  from  the  eu.itom  of  labuurcrs,  who  in  the 

hi'at  of  the  dayrrpose  themselves  in  eool  shades. 

1  Kings  13.7.  ronie  home  wiih  me  ond  r.  tliyecif 

jlets  ii7.  M.  Julius  suffered  Paul  to  r.  Iiimself 

fhilem.  20.  brollicr.  r.  mv  howeU  in  llie  Lord 

HEFRKSIIKD. 
P.iod.  23.  12.  and  Itiiil  ilic  sirungcr  niny  l)c  r. 
31.  17.  on  the  scvcnlti  diiy  lie  nstcd  and  was  r. 

1  Sam.  Ifi.'i:!.  David  played, so  Saul  wasr.  and  well 

2  .Sim.  10.  n.  David  and  |ii'o|iIe  with  him  r.theius. 
Job  3-.;.  20.  I  will  speak  thai  I  may  be  r. 
Uom.  l.">.  'Si.  and  lli:il  I  may  with  you  be  r. 

1  Cur.  Iti.  IH.  for  Ihev  r.  my  spirit  and  yours 

2  Cor.  7.  n.  Tiius,  his  spirit,  was  r.  by  you  all 
2  'Am.  1.  Ifi.  OnesipliorUH,  for  he  often  r.  me 
Philem.  7.  llie  bowels  of  the  saints  are  r.  by  thee 

KKFIU'.SIIKTII. 
Prov.  25.  13.  for  lie  r.  the  soul  of  his  masters 

KKFRKt^HlNG. 
Jsa.  2K.  12.  this  is  r.  yel  they  would  not  hear 
Jicts  3.  I'J.  when  times  of  r.  shall  come  from  Ld. 

RKFUGi: 
7s  a  strong  hold,  or  place  of  safety,  to  fly  to  in 
danger,' itherc  men  may  be  protected  and  es- 
cape the  enemy.    Num.  35.  13.     God  is  called 
the  refuse  of  his  people,  Dcut.  StJ.  27.     He  de- 
fends them  against  the  assaults  of  all  their 
enemies.     Christ  is  a  refuge  in,  his  righteous- 
ness and  blood,  I.sa.  25.  4. 
Cities  of  refuge.     In  order  to  provide  for  the  se- 
curity of  those,  who  unawares   and  without 
any  design  should  kill  a  man,  the  Lord  com- 
manded ilosKH  to  appoint  sii  cities  o/ refuge, 
that  tchoevrr  suddenly  and  against  his  will 
should  spill  the  blood  of  a  man,  might  retire 
thither,  and  have  time  to  prepare  for  his  de- 
fence and  justification  before  the  judges,  so 
that  the  kinsman  of  the  deceased  might  not 
pursue  him  thither  and  kill  him.     Of  these  ci- 
ties there  were  three  on  each  side  Jordan,  tho.<!e 
on  this  side  Jordan  irtrc  Kidesh  of  Naphtali, 
Hebron,  and  Sliecliein.      Those  beyond  Jordan 
Kere  llezer,  (Jolan,  and  Rarnotli-gilead,  ./osh. 
20.  7,  R.      These  cities  were  to  be  easy  of  ac- 
cess, and  to  have  smooth  and  good  roads  to 
them,  and  bridges  where  there  should  be  occa- 
sion :   IVhrn  there  were  any  cross-roads,  they 
took  care  to  set  up  posts  with  an  inscription, 
directing  the  way  to  the  city  of  refuge.    This 
city  was  to  be  well  supplied  -.cith  water  and 
all  kinds  of  provisions.     It  was  not  allowed 
there  to  make  any  weapons,  that  the  relations 
of  the  deceased  might  not  be  furnished  there 
with  arms  to  gratify  their  revenge.      'J'hougk 
the  manslaycr  had  fled  to  the  city  of  refuge, 
yet  he  was  not  thereupon  exempt  from  the  pur- 
suits of  justice :  An  information  was  pr<fer- 
red  against  him,  he  was  summoned  before  the 
judges,  and  before  the  people,  to  clear  himself, 
and  to  prove  Ike  murder  was  merely  casual 
and  involuntary.     If  he  was  found  innocent, 
he  dwelt  safely  in  the  city  to  which  he  had  re- 
tired; if  otherwise,  he  was  put  to  death,  ac- 
cording tn  the  sevrrity  of  the  law.      Though 
he  was  found  innocent,  he  was  not  thrrcfore 
immediately  set  at  liberty  ;  but  to  inspire  the 
greater  horror,  even  of  involuntary  murder, 
it  xeems  as  if  the  law  would  punish  it  with  a 
kind  of  banishment  ;  for  he  was  obliged  to 
dwell  in  this  city,  without  going  out  of  it,  till 
the  death  of  the   high-priest :  .Ind  if  before 
this  time  he  should  anywhere  go  out  of  the 
rity,  the  reren-r'T  of  blood   might  safely  kill 
him.  Num.  35.  2.'),  2(5,  27,  .Vc. 
Jfum.  3.V  13.  nix  citiei  shall  ye  have  for  r.  13. 
J)eut.  33.  27.  the  eternal  Cod  is  thy  r. 
Josh.  20.  3.  »hall  be  your  r.  from  avenger  of  blood 
9  Sam.  2-2.  3.  he  is  my  high  lower  and  my  r. 
Pjoi.O.O.I.d.  aUo  will  he  a  r.  for  the  oppresseil,  a  r. 
in  limi'«  of  Ironliln,  they  that  know  thy  nami 
J4.  fl.  roiin.vl  of  poor,  because  the  Lord  is  his  »■ 
-in.  1.  fiod  i«  our  r.  7.  1 1 .  II  -IH.  3.  C.  is  known  for  r. 
57.  1.  in  shallow  of  thy  wirn«  I  will  make  my  r 
until  ihi'se  ralaniilies  be  overpast,  01.  f  4. 
S*).  in.  llioii  hant  been  my  r.  In  the  day  of  trouble 
fi2.  7.  my  r.  is  in  fJod  ||  H.  Coil  in  a  r.  for  iis 
7l.7.wonder  tomnnv.lhoii  art  mv  strong  r.  112.  .V 
til.  2.  he  is  mv  r.  0.  C  01.  2'2.  r.od  is  roek  of  my  r. 
](I4.  IP.  lb"  high  hills  a  r.  (or  the  wild  goals 
1 12.  4.  r.  failed  me  ||  ."J.  llioii  art  iiiy  r.  and  portion 
Trov.  14.2(1.  hii  rhildren  shall  have  a  pla.e  of  r. 
hn.  4.  0.  n  plaeo  ol'r.  ||  2.'>  4.  to  the  needy  a  r. 
2^.  l.j.  for  wp  have  made  he*  our  r.  and  under 

17  the  hail  sliall  sweep  awny  tho  r.  nflie* 
Jrr.  10.  I'.».  ()  Lord,  my  r.  in  lh<'  day  ofafflietinn 
Jlrb. «.  18.  who  have  fl.-d  for  r.  to  lay  li<dil  on  hope 

RF.FI'SR. 
1  Sam.  13.  0.  ovcry  Ihiiie  (hal  woi  vilo  and  r. 
478 


REG 

Jfr.6.t30.r.8ilver  shall  men  call  thorn,  because  Ld. 
Ijum.  3.  45.  thou  liaiit  made  as  r.  midst  of  peoplu 
Autos  a.  U.  that  wu  may  sell  the  r.  of  wheat 

REFUSE,  yerb. 
F.xod.i.^.\C  thou  r.to  let  tftem  go,  8.2.  |  9.2.  1 10.4. 

JO.  3.  bow  long  wilt  thou  r.  to  humble  ihyselfl 

10.  28.  r.  ye  to  keep  my  commandments  and  laws? 

2J.  17.  if  her  father  utterly  r.  to  give  her  to  him 
.tob  34.  33.  whether  tiiou  r.  or  chouse,  and  not  I 
I'roD,  8. 33.  hear  instruction,  be  wise,  and  r.  it  not 

21.  7.  jjccause  they  r.  to  do  judgment 

25.  the  desire  of  slothful,  his  hands  7-.  to  labour 
Isa.  1. 20.  but  if  ye  r.  shall  be  devoured  with  sword 

7.  15.  that  he  may  know  to  r.  the  evil.  It). 
Jer.  8.5.  they  r.  to  return  ||  D.  G.  they  r.  to  know  me 

13. 10.  this  evil  people  wliich  r.  to  hear  my  words 

25.  '2S.  if  they  r.  to  take  the  cup  at  thine  hand 

38.  21.  if  thou  r.  to  go  forth,  this  is  the  word 
Acts  25.  11.  if  I  be  an  olfeiiiler,  1  r.  not  to  die 
17'im.4.  7.  hut  r.  jirofune  and  old  wives'  fables 

5.  11.  but  the  younger  widows  r. 
IJeb.  12.  25.  see  that  ye  r.  not  him  that  spcaketh 

KEFUSED. 
Gen.  37.  35.  but  Jacob  r.  to  he  comforted,  and  said 

3U.  8.  Joseph  r.  to  lie  with  his  master's  wife 

48.  11).  Jacob  r.  to  remove  his  hand 
A"um.  20.  21.  Edoni  r.  to  give  Israel  passage 

1  .Sam.  8. 1'.).  people  r.to  obey  the  voice  of  tSamucl 

10.  7.  look  not  on  him  for  I  have  r.  him 
28.  23.  but  Saul  r.  and  said,  I  will  not  cat 

2  Sam.  2. 23.  howheil  Asahel  r.  to  turn  aside 
13.  9.  she  poured  out,  but  Amnon  r.  to  eat 

1  Kings  20.  35.  and  the  man  r.  to  smile  lilin 
21. 15.  the  vineyard  he  r.  to  give  thee  for  money 

2  Kings  5. 10.  iNaaman  urged  him  to  take,  but  he  r. 
A'lA.  9. 17.  our  fathers  hardened,  and  r.  to  obey 
Esth.  1.  12.  but  the  queen  Vasliti  r.  to  come 
./ob  (>.  7.  the  things  tliat  my  soul  r.  to  touch  are  as 
Psal.  77.  2.  my  soul  r.  to  be  comforted 

78.  10.  and  they  r.  to  walk  in  his  law  ■ 
07. he  r.tabernacle  of  Joseph,  and  chose  Ephraim 

118.22.  the  stone  which  the  builders  r.  is  become 
Prov.  1.  24.  because  I  have  called  and  ye  r. 
fsa.  54.  0.  when  thou  wast  r.  sailh  thy  God 
./(T.5.3.tliey  r.to  receive  correction,  they  J'.to  return 

11.  10.  their  fathers  who  r.  to  hear  my  words 
31. 15.  Rachel  r.  to  bo  comforted  for  her  children 
50.  33.  all  that  took  them  r.  to  let  them  go 

F.zck.  5.  ().  for  they  have  r.  my  judgments 
//o.?.11.5.  Assyrian  his  king,  beca.  they  r.  to  return 
Zcc/(.7.11.  but  they  r.to  hearken,  and  pulled  away 
.lets  7.  3.5.  this  Moses  whom  they  r.  saying 
1  Tim.  4. 4.  and  nothing  to  be  r.  if  it  be  received 
WW). 11.24.  by  faith  Moses  r.  to  be  called  the  son  of 

12.  25.  who  r.  him  ihiit  spake  on  earth 
KEFUSEDST. 

Jcr.  3.3.  a  whore's  forehead,  thou  r.  to  be  ashamed 

REFUSETH. 
F.zod.  7.  14.  Pharaoh  r.  to  let  the  people  go 
jVum.22. 13.  the  Lord  r.  to  give  nie  leave  to  go 

14.  the  princes  said,  Unlaam  r.  to  come  with  us 
Deut.2!i.~.my  husband's  brother  r.to  raise  up  name 
I'ron.  10.  17.  but  he  that  r.  reproof,  erretli 

13.  IW.  shame  shall  be  to  him  that  r.  instruction 
15.32.  he  that  r.  instruction  despiseth  his  own  sou 

fsa.  H.  0.  this  people  r.  the  waters  of  Shiloah 
Jcr.  15. 18.  my  wound  which  r.  to  be  healed 

REGARD. 
F.eel.  8.  2.  and  that  in  r.  of  the  oath  of  God 
Dan.  3.  t  13.  these  men  have  set  no  r.  on  iheo 
Acts  8.  11.  to  him  they  had  r.  because  he  had  bo 
REGARD  (witched 

Signifies,  [1]  To  look  upon  with  concern  or  com- 
passion, Dent.  28.  .50.  [2]  To  think  of,  consider, 
or  Iny  to  heart,   Isa.  5.  12.  [3]Tn  have  respect 
/»r,2  Kin2s3.  14.  [i]Tohear  and  answer,  Psnl. 
102.17.  [5]7'ooAj»rriT,  Rom.  14.0.  [0]  To  look 
to  with  an  approving  covetous  rye.  Job  3fi.  21. 
Psal.  00.  IH.    [71  To  set  the  heart  unto,  Exod. 
9.  t2l.     [8]  To  lay  lo  heart,  I  Sam.  25.  25. 
REGARD,  Ferb. 
Gen.  4.').  20.  r.  not  your  stiilf,  for  Egypt  Is  yours 
F.iod.  .V  9.  and  let  them  not  r.  vain  words 
/,«n.  19.  3l.r.  not  them  that  have  familiar  spirits 
Dent.  28.  .50.  which  shall  not  r.  person  of  the  nged 

1  .S,im.  4.20.  she  answered  not,  nor  diil  she  r.  it  • 
5.  let  not  mv  lord  r.  this  man  of  Relial 

2  .S<im.  13.  20.  r.  not  this,  he  is  thy  brother 
2  Kings's.  14.  were  it  not  that  I  r.  Jehoshaplmt 
.Inh  3.4.  that  day,  let  not  Gorl  r.  it  from  above 

35.  13.  nor  will  the  Almlithiy  r.  it 
30.  21.  take  heed,  r.  not  iimpiitv 

Psal.  2**.  5.  they  r.  not  the  works  of  tho  TiOrd 
31.0.  I  have  hated  lliein  that  r.  King  vanities 
00.  18.  if  I  r.  iniipiilv  in  mv  heart,  Lord  not  hear 
91.  7.  neither  shall  the  God  of  Jaroh  r.  it 
102.  17.  he  will  r.  the  prayr  of  the  deslitulo 

Pror.  5.  2.  that  thnii  mayesi  r.  disrrelion 
0.35. he  will  not  r.anv  ransom, nor  will  rest  eontoni 

Isa.  S.  12.  they  r.  not  tlio  work  of  the  Lord 


REG 

Isa.  13.  17.  the  Modes  who  will  not  r.  silrer 
18.t  4. 1  will  r.  my  set  dwelling  like  tt  clear  heat 
Lam.  4.  16.  the  Lord,  he  will  no  more  r.  them 
y.>un.  11.  37.  r.  God  of  his  fathers,  nor  r.  any  god 
Amos  5.  22.  nor  will  I  r.  the  peace-olleriiig 
J/ab.  1.  5.  behold,  r.  and  wonder  marvellously 
Mai.  1.  9.  will  he  r.  your  persons  I  saith  the  Loid 
J^uke  18.  4.  though  1  fear  not  God,  nor  r.  man 
Rom.  14.  6.  to  the  Lord  he  doth  not  r.  it 

REGARDED. 
Fzod.  9.  21.  he  that  r.  not  the  word  of  the  Lord 
1  Kings  18. 29.  there  was  no  voice,  nor  any  that  r. 

1  Chron.  17. 17.  thou  hasm  me  as  of  high  degre* 
Psal.  100.  44.  nevertheless,  he  r.  their  alHictiun 
Prov.  1.24.  I  stretched  out  my  hand,  and  no  manr. 
Dan.  3. 12.  these  men,  O  king,  have  not  r.  thee 
Luke  1.  48.  he  r.  the  low  estate  of  his  handmaid 

18.  2.  the  judge  feared  not  God,  neither  r.  man 
IJeb.  8.9.  and  I  r.  them  not,  saith  the  Lord 
REGARDEST. 

2  Sam.  19.  6.  thou  r.  not  princes  nor  servant* 
Job  30.  20.  I  stand  up  and  thou  r.  me  not 
«Vat.  22.10.  r.  not  the  persons  of  men,  Jl/ar/c  12. 14. 

REGARDETH. 
/JniMO.n.  mighty  and  terrible,  that  r.  not  person 
.fob  34.  19.  nor  r.  the  rich  more  than  the  poor 
39.  7.  neither  r.  the  crying  of  the  driver 
Prov.  12. 10.  a  righteous  man  r.  the  life  ofhis  heart 
13.  18.  he  that  r.  reproof  shall  be  honoured 
15.  5.  hut  be  that  r.  reproof  is  prudent 
29.  7.  wicked  r.  not  lo  know  the  cause  of  the  pool 
Feel.  5.  (■.  he  that  is  higher  than  the  highest  r. 
11.  4.  ho  that  r.  the  clouds  shall  not  runp 
/j(fl.33. 8.  he  hath  despised  cities,  be  r.  no  man 
IJnn.a.y.i.  they  said,  Daniel  r.  not  thee,  O  king 
.Mill.  2.  13.  he  r.  not  the  offering  any  more 
Horn.  14.  G.  he  that  r.  a  day,  r.  it  to  the  Lord 

REGARDERS. 
./^ni/w.  9.137.  come  along  by  plain  of  the  r.  of  timci 

REGARDING. 
.Job  4. 20.  Ihey  perish  for  ever  without  any  r.  it 
Phil.  2.  30.  nor  r.  his  life  to  supply  your  lack 

KEtJENERATlON 
Is  the  change  and  renovation  of  the  soul  by  thi 
Spirit  and  grace  of  God,  John  3.  5,  0.  Jt  ii 
called  the  new-birth,  and  consi:ils  in  the  infu- 
sion of  spiritual  life  into  the  soul,  John  .5.  2.'x 
whereby  it  is  enabled  to  perform  spiritual  ac- 
tions, and  live  to  God,  Rom.  14.  8.  Tit.  3.  5. 
Not  by  works  of  rishteousnoss  which  wo  have 
done,  but  according  lo  his  mercy  he  saved  ui 
bv  Ihe  washing  of  regeneration,  and  renewing 
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Jam.  1.  18,  Ofhis  own  wil. 
begat  he  us  by  Ihe  word  of  truth.  And  our  Sa- 
viour speaking  to  Nicodenms,  snys.  Verily  I 
say  unto  thee.  Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he 
cannot  see  Ihe  ki.ngdom  of  God,  John  3.3,4,  6. 
And  the  apostle  Peter  says  in  like  manner. 
That  (Jod  hath  begotten  us  njain  unto  a  lively 
hope,l>y  the  resurrection  of  Christ  from  Ihe  dead, 
1  Pet.  1.3.  that  is,Ae  haih  given  us  a  new-birth, 
he  hath  regenerated  and  renewed  us,  and  there- 
by wrought  in  vs  such  a  hope  or  assurance  of 
salvation,  as  puts  life  into  our  souls  ;  lehiek 
hope  is  built  upon  the  resurrection  of  Christ, 
and  the  doctrines  depending  on  it,  as  the  foun- 
dation nf  our  resurreelion  and  future  glorp, 
since  the  members  must  partake  of  the  same 
condition  with  the  head,  John  14.  19.  /(  15 
said,  Mai.  19.  2.-',  Ye  which  have  followed  mo 
in  the  regenrrotion,  when  the  Son  of  man  shall 
sit  in  Ihe  tliroi.e  of  his  glory,  ye  shall  also  sit 
upon  thrones.  Ye  which  have  followed  me  in 
tho  regeneration,  that  is,  ye  my  oposllrs,  who 
have  been  viy  attejidants  and  assistants, 
while  I  have  been  Ity  my  doctrine  reforming 
the  world ;  while  I  have  been  regencrnling  my 
church,  and  putting  it  into  a  new  state;  Or, 
70iniri/r  regeneration  with  the  following  words, 
in  ibe  regeiieintion  when  the  Son  of  man  shnli 
sit,  tec.  that  is,  at  the  day  of  judgment,  when 
there  shall  he  new  heavens  anil  earth,  and  your 
bodies  shall  be  raised  up  again  in  a  slorious 
vianner,  and  vour  souls  mode  perfectly  happy; 
then  you  shall  not  only  partake  of  the  hravenltf 
treasure,  but  shall  be  in  the  highest  degree  of 
dignity  there. 
Mat.  19.  28.  that  yc  which  followed  mc  In  tho  r. 
Tit.  3.  .5.  ho  saveii  iis  by  the  washing  of  r. 

REGION. 
/)/-w/.3.4.  nil  the  r.of  Arjoh  Ihe  kincdnm  of  Of,  13. 
1  Kings-\.  ll.lhoBon  of  Abinndab  in  all  r.  ofDor 

21.  Solomon  had  ilominion  uvor  all  the  r. 
Miil.'.\.  5.  then  went  lo  him  all  the  r.  round  Jordan 
4.10.  peo.  saw  creni  light,  and  lothim  whirh  snl 
ill  Ihe  r.nnd  shadow  of  death  lislil  is  sprung  up 
Mark  l.i-".  his  fame  sprend  nboiH  tliroii^honl  nil 
Ihe  r. round  about  (Jnlilen.  l.ukeX.  M.  |  7.  17 
0.  .55.  and  ran  through  that  uhide  r.  rniiiid  about 
Luke  3.1.  Philip  tctrarch  of  the  r.  uf  Trachonili* 


REI 

JitU  13. 49.  word  of  the  Lord  published  thro'  the  r. 

14.  G.  lliey  tloU  to  the  r.  that  licth  round  about 

lU.  li.  whuii  ihcy  hud  gone  thro'  tlior.  ol'Galulia 

KEGIONS. 

ActsB.  1.  they  were  scattered  thro'  the  r.  of  Judea 

SOir.  10.  IG.  to|)roach  tliogosjiel  in  r.  beyond  you 

11. 10.  no  mail  shall  sto|i  iiie  in  the  r.  of  Acliaia 

Oal.  1.  ^1.  atlurwurds  I  came  into  tlie  r.  of  Syria 

KEGISTEK. 
Ezra  2.  62.  those  sought  tlieir  r.  JVcA.  7.  64. 
JVVA.  7.  5.  I  found  a  r.  of  the  genealogy  of  them 

REHEARSE. 
Etod.  17.  14.  and  r.  it  in  the  cars  of  Joshua 
ladg.  5.  11.  r.  the  righteous  acts  of  tlie  Lord 

REHEARSED. 
{  Sam.  8.  21.  he  /-.  them  in  the  cars  of  the  Lord 
17.  31.  they  r.  David's  words  before  Saul 
Acts  11.  4.  I'etor  r.  the  matter  from  the  beginninj 

14.  27.  tliey  r.  all  that  (iod  had  dono  with  them 

REJECT 
fignifies,  [1]  To  sliglit  ordcspisc,  Mos.  i.  G.    [2] 
To  cast  off  or  forsake,  Jer.  7  2U.  |  14.  19.   [3J 
To  refuse,  or  deny  t/te  granting  of  one's  suit 
MarkG.  2G.  [4]  To  frustrate,  Mark7.  fi). 
Tliat  which  heareth  thorns  and  briars  is  rejected, 
Heb.  G.  8.     .>is  the  eartli,  when  it  is  painfully 
tilled,  and  plentifully  watered  with  ram  from 
hcaoen,  is  good  for  nothing  but  to  be  burnt, 
if  instead  of  good  fruit,  it    bringcth  forth 
thorns   and  thistles ;  so  they   that  enjoy  the 
means  of  grace,  and  yet  bring  forth  nothing 
but  cursed  fruit,  displeasing  to  (Jod,  deserve 
no  further  care  nor  culture,  but  must  expect  to 
be  deprived  of  t/ic  means  of  grace,  and  exposed 
to  utter  ruin. 
Jjum.  5. 1 22.  wilt  thou  utterly  r.  us,  thou  art  wroth 
Has.  4.  G.  1  will  r.  tliue,  that  thou  ^e  no  priest 
Mark  G.  2B.  for  his  oath's  sake  he  would  not  r.  her 
7.  9.  full  well  ye  r.  the  commandment  of  God 
Tit.  3. 10.  after  the  first  and  second  admonition,  r. 

REJECTED. 
1  Sam.  8.  7.  they  have  not  r.  thee,  but  they  r.  me 
10. 1'J.ye  have  this  day  r.  your  God  who  saved  you 

15.  23.  because  thou  hast  r.  the  word  of  the  Ld. 

he  hath  also  r.  thee  from  being  king,  2G. 
16. 1.  seeing  (  have  r.  him  from  being  king 
iKings  17.  15.  they  r.his  statutes  and  his  covenant 
20.  Lord  r.  all  the  se.'d  of  Isr.  and  alHicted  them 
Isa.  SA.'i.  he  is  despised  and  r.  of  men,  man  of  sorr. 
Jer.  2.  37.  for  the  Lord  hath  r.  thy  confidence 
6. 19.  r.  my  law  ||  30.  becau.se  the  Ld.  Iiathr.  them 

7.  29.  Lord  hath  r.  the  generation  of  his  wrath 

8.  9.  lo,  they  have  r.  the  word  of  the  Lord 
14.  19.  hast  thou  utterly  r.  Judali  1 

/,am.5.22.but  thou  hast  utterly  r.us,  thou  art  wroth 
Has.  4.  6.  because  thou  hast  r.  knowledge 
Jfat.  21.42.  stone  which  the  builders  r.  is  become 
head  of  the  corner,  Mark  12.  10.  Luke'20.  17. 
JIfartS.  31.heshall  be  r.  of  the  elders,  Lukei).  22. 
Luke  7.  30.  the  lawyers  r.  the  counsel  of  God 
17. 25.  but  he  must  first  be  r.  of  this  generation 
Oal.  4.  14.  my  temptation  in  my  Hesh  ye  r.  not 
Heb.  6.  8.  that  which  heareth  thorns  and  briars  is  r. 
12.17.  when  would  have  inherited  blessing,  was  r. 
REJECTETH. 
John  12. 48.  he  that  r.  me,  receiveth  not  my  words 
\Thess.  4. 18.  he  that  r.  r.  not  man  bu.t  God 

REIGN. 
To  reign,  is  to  rule  or  command  as  a  sovereign 
prince,  2  Sam.  5.  4,  5.  God  is  the  absolute 
Monarch  of  the  world,  he  governs  anddisposcs 
of  all  things  in  heaven  and  in  eartk.  Psal.  93. 
1,  The  Lord  reigneth.  Sin  is  said  to  reign, 
Rom  6.  12.  when  the  lasts  and  motions  of  sin 
are  readily  obeyed,  as  one  would  obey  the  law 
and  command  of  a  king  :  when  it  exercises  an 
uncontrolled  absolute  power  in  the  soul.  Grace 
is  said  to  reign,  Uom.  5.  21.  when  the  right- 
eousness of  Christ  being  freely  imputed,  his 
Spirit  reigns  in  our  hearts,  and  we  are  govern- 
ed by  the  motions  and  impulses  thereof ;  so 
that  sin  cannot  condemn  u.»  to  death,  nor  rule 
over  us,  as  it  did  before  grace  was  planted  in 
the  soul.  .Ind  such  as  receive  abundance  of 
grace,  are  said  to  reign  in  life  by  Jcsns  Christ, 
Rom.  5.  17.  that  is.  They  partake  of  spiritual 
life  here,  whereby  they  conquer  sin,  and  obtain 
eternal  life  hereafter,  when  they  reign  inglory. 
1  Kings  Ci.l.  in  fourthycar  of  Solomon's  r.  over  Isr. 
ZKingsH.  12.  took  Jelioiachinin8th  year  of  his  r. 

1  Chron.  4.  31.  their  cities  to  the  r.  of  David 
29.  30.  king  David's  acts  with  all  his  r.  written 

2  Chr.  3fi.20.till  the  r.  of  the  kingdom  of  Persia 
Jfeh.  12. 22.  the  priests  recorded  to  the  r.  of  Darius 
Esth.i.  IG.  was  taken  to  king  in  7th  year  of  his  r. 
Z.uAe  3.1.  in  the  filleenlh  year  of  the  r.  of  Tiberius 

REIG.V,  Verb. 

Oe)».37.8.breth.  said,  shalt  thou  indeed  r.  over  US'? 

Exod.  15.  18.  Lord  shall  r.  for  ever,  Psal.  146. 10. 

Lety.  26. 17.  Uiey  that  hate  you  shall  r.  over  you 

47» 


REI 

Deut.  13.6.  the  Ld.  blesseth  thee,  fhoo  shah  r.  over 

many  nations,  but  they  shall  not  r.  over  thee 
.7u(/i'-.9.2.that70r.  over  you.orihat  oner.overyou 

8.  the  trees  said,  r.  thou  over  us,  10.  12, 14. 

1  Sam.  8.  7.  that  1  should  not  r.  over  them 

9.  shew  the  manner  of  the  king  that  shall  r.  11 
9.  17.  Lord  said,  this  sujue  shall  r.  over  my  people 
11. 12.  who  is  he  that  said,  shall  Saul  r.  over  us  ? 
12. 12.  nay,  but  a  king  shall  r.  over  us 

2  Sam.  3.  21.  thou  mayest  r.  over  all  that  thy  heart 

1  Kings  1.  15.  then  Adonijah  said,  1  will  r. 

11.  hast  thou  not  heard  tliat  Adonijah  doth  r.? 

13.  assuredly  Solomon  shall  r.  after  me,  17,  30. 

24.  hast  thou  said,  Adonijah  shall  r.  after  me  1 
2. 15.  Israel  set  their  luces  on  me,  that  1  should  r. 
11.37.  and  1  will  take  thee,  and  thou  shalt  r. 
IG.  15.  Zimri  did  r.  seven  days  in  Tirzah 

2  Chron.  1.  8.  and  hast  made  ine  to  r.  in  his  stead 

23.  3.  he  said,  behold,  the  king's  son  shall  r. 
Job  34.  30.  that  the  hypocrite  r.  not,  lest  people 
Prov.S.l5.hy  me  kings  r.  and  princes  decree  justice 
Eccl.  4.  14.  for  out  of  prison  he  cometh  to  r. 
Isa.  24. 23.  when  the  Ld.  of  hosts  shall  r.  in  Zion 

32.  1.  behold,  a  king  shall  r.  in  righteousness 
J('r.22.15.shalt  thou  »-.becauso  thou  closest  thyself 

23.5.  a  king  shall  )•.  jirosper  and  execute  judgment 

33.  21.  that  David  sliuuld  nut  have  a  son  to  r. 
J\Iic.  4.  7.  the  Lord  sliall  r.  over  them  in  Zion 
Mat.  2.22.  when  he  heard  that  Archelaiis  did  r. 
Luke  I.  33.  he  ^hall  r.  over  the  house  of  Jacob 

i'.).  14.  we  will  not  have  this  man  to  r.  over  us 

27.  enemies  that  would  not  that  1  should  r.  over 
Rovi.  5.  17.  shall  r.  in  life  by  one,  Jesus  Christ 

21.  even  so  might  grace  r.  lo  life  by  Jesus  Christ 
6.  12.  let  not  sin  r.  in  your  mortal  bodies 
15.  12.  he  that  shaJI  rise  to  r.  over  the  Gentiles 

1  Cor.  4.  8.  would  to  God  ye  did  r.  that  we  might  r. 
15.  25.  for  he  must  r.  till  he  put  all  enemies  under 

2  Tim.  2.  12.  if  we  suH'er,  we  shall  r  with  him 
Rev.  5.  10.  and  we  also  shall  r.  on  the  earth 

11.  15.  and  he  shall  r.  for  ever  and  ever 
20.  6.  they  shall  r.  with  him  a  thousand  years 
22.  5.  they  shall  r.  for  ever  and  ever 
See  Beoan. 
REIGNED. 
Gen.  35.  31.  the  kings  that  r.  in  the  land  of  Edom 
before  any  king  ?•.  over  Israel,  1  Chron.  1.  43. 
■Judg.'i.  22.  when  Abimelech  had  r.  three  years 

1  Sam.  13.1.  Saul  r.  one  year,  and  when  he  r.  two 

2  Sam.  2.  10.  Ish-boslieth  Saul's  son  r.  two  years 
5.4.  David  r.  forty  years  over  Judah  and  Israel 

5.  David  r.seven  years  in  Hebron,  thirty-three  in 

Jerusalem,  1  Kingsi.  11.  1  Chr.  3.  4.  I  29.  27 

8.  1.5.  David  r.  over  Isr.^el,  1  Chr.  18.  14.  |  29.  2G 

10. 1.  Hanun  his  son  r.  in  liis  sti'ud,  1  Chr.  19.  1 

IG.  8.  house  of  Saul,  in  whose  stead  thou  hast  r. 

1  Kings  4. 21.  and  Solomon  r.  over  all  kingdoms 

11.  42.  1  Chron.  29.  28.  2  Chron.  9.  2G,  30 

11.  24.  Rezon  r.  in  Damascus  ||  25.  r.  over  Syria 
43.  Rehoboam  r.  12.  17.  SiChron.  9.  31.  |  10.  17. 

14.  31.  Abijam  his  son  r.  2  Chron.  12.  IG.  |  13.  2. 

15.  8.  and  Asa  r.in  his  stead,  9.  10.  i  Chron.  14.1. 

24.  Jehoshaphat  his  son  r.  2  Chr.  17.  1.  |20.31. 

25.  Nadab  r.  ||  28.  Baasha  r.  29.  ||  If..  6.  Elali  r. 

16.  10.  Zimri  r.  in  his  stead  ||  22.  Omri  r.  23. 

28.  Omri  died,  and  Ahab  his  son  r.  in  his  stead 

22.  40.  Ahaziah,  Ahab's  son  r.  in  his  stead,  51. 

2  Kings  8.  24,  26.  2  Chron.  22.  1,  2. 
42.  Jehoshaphat  r.  25  years,  2  Chron.  20.  31. 
50.  Jehoram  r.  2  Kings  3.1.||8.17.  2  C/ir.21.5,20. 

2  Kings  3.  27.  his  eldest  son  that  should  have  r. 
8. 15.  Hazael  r.\\  10.  35.  Jehoahaz  r.  ||  30.  Jehu  r. 

12.  1.  Jehoash  r.  forty  years  in  Jerusalem 

21.  Amaziah  r.  14^  1.  2  Chron.  24.  27.  |  25.  1. 

13.  24.  Benhadadr.  ||  14.  16.  Jeroboam  r.  23. 
14.29.Zuchariah  r.  |1 15.  2.  Azariah  r.  2  CA?-.2G.3. 

15.  7.  and  Jotham  r.  33.  2  Chr.  2l>.  23.  |  27.  1,  8. 
lO.Shallum  r.l3.||  14.  MenalMm  son  of  Gadi  r.  17. 

22.  Pekahiah  his  son  r.  23.  ||  25.  Pekah  r.  27. 
30.  Hoshea  r.  \\  33.  Ahaz  r.  16.  2.  2  Chr.  28.  1. 

16.  20.  Hezekiah  r.  13.  2.  2  Chr.  28.  27.  I  29.  1. 

19.  37.  Esarhaddon  r.  in  his  stead,  Isa.  37.  38. 

20.  21.  Manasseh  r.  21. 1.  2  Chr.  .32.  33.  |  3.^  1. 
21.18.  Anion  r.in  his  stead,  19.  2  CAr.  33.20,21. 

26.  Josiah  r.  in  his  stead,  22.  1.  2  Chron.  34.  1. 

23.  31.  Jehoahaz  r.  three  months,  2  Chron.  30.  2. 
36.  J(dioiakim  r.  eleven  years,  2  Chron.  36.  5. 

24.  6.  Jehoiachin  his  son  r.  8.  2  CAron.  36.  8,  9. 
18.  Zedekiah  r.  2  Chr.  .36.  1 1.     .Ter.  37. 1. 1 .52.1. 

2  Chron.  22.  12.  and  Alhaliah  r.  over  the  land 
F.sth.  1. 1.  Ahasuerus  r.  from  India  to  Ethio])in 
./er.22.11. touch. Shallum  which  r.instead  of  Josiah 
Rom.  5.  14.  death  r.  from  ,\dam  to  iMoscs 
17.  for  if  by  one  man's  offence  death   r.  by  one 
21. that  as  sin  hath  r.unto  death  so  might  grace  r. 
1  Cor.  4.  8.  ye  have  r.  as  kings  without  us 
Rev.  11. 17.  hast  taken  thv  great  power,  and  hnst  r. 
20.  4.  lived  and  r.  with  Christ  a  thousand  years 

REIGN  EST. 
ICAr .29.12  thour.  orer  all,  and  in  thjhaad  power 


REJ 

REIGNETH. 

1  Sam.  12.  14.  ye  and  the  king  that  r.  over  yon 

2  Sam.  15.  10.  shall  say,  Absu'iom  r.  in  Hebron 

1  Kings  1. 18.  Adonijah  r.  \\  2  Kings  9.t  13.  Jehu  r 
1  CAr.  16.  31.  the  Lord  r.  /'j,u/.9ti'.10.  |  97. 1.  |'J9.1, 
Psal.  47.  8.  God  r.  over  the  heathen,  God  sitteth  on 
93.1.Ld.r.  he  is  clothed  wuii  majesty  and  strength 
Prov.  30.  22.  for  a  servant  when  he  r.  and  a  fool 
Isa.  52.  7.  that  ealth  unto  Zion,  thy  God  r. 
Rev.  17. 18.  which  r.  over  the  kings  of  the  earth 
19.  6.  for  the  Lord  God  omnipotent  r. 

REIGNING. 
1  Sam.  16.1.1  have  rejected  him  from  r.  over  Israel 

REINS, 
Or  Kidneys.  The  Hebrews  ascribe  to  the  Reina 
or  Kidneys,  knowledge,  joy,  pain,  pleasure  : 
Hence  it  is  that  in  scripture  it  is  so  often  said, 
that  God  searcheth  the  hearts  and  the  reins, 
Psal.  7.  9.  ./tr.  17.  10.  |  20.  12.  God  upbraids 
tlie  Jews  with  having  him  in  their  mouths,  but 
not  in  their  reins.  Jer.  12.  2,  Thou  art  near  in 
their  mouth,  and  far  from  their  reins:  Thoii 
art  far  fromtheir  hearts  and  affections:  They 
have  neither  fear  of  thee,  nor  love  for  thee, 
nor  desire  after  thee,  nor  delight  in  thee:  nor 
are  they  obedient  to  thee.  The  prophet  bcinir 
under  temptation,  by  reason  of  the  jirosperity 
of  wicked  men,  complains  that  his  distemper 
had  set  fire  to  his  heart,  and  caused  a  great  in- 
flammation in  his  reins.  Psal.  73.  21,  1  was 
])ricked  in  my  reins:  I  was  iieartily  and  deeply 
wounded  with  disquieting  thoughts  and  tor- 
menting passions,  envy,  sorrow,  and  anger. 
The  Psalmist  says,  that  his  reins  instructed 
liim,  Psal.  IG.  7.  that  is,  his  inward  thoughts 
and  affections,  being  moved  by  the  secret  influ- 
ence of  God's  Spirit,  directed  him  how  to  serve 
and  please  God,  and  put  his  whole  trust  and 
confidence  in  him.  .find  Jeremiah  says,  that 
the  Lord  had  sent  the  daughters  of  his  quiver 
into  his  reins.  Lam.  3.  13.  that  is,  he  has  pier- 
ced me  with  his  arrows,  heliath  exhausted  his 
whole  quiver  upon  me  ;  for  the  daughters  of  the 
quiver  is  a  poetical  expression  for  arrows, 
/-cu.  15.  t2.  when  any  man  hath  a  running  of  the 
r.  because  of  his  issue  he  is  unclean,  22. 14. 
■Tob  16.  ]:(.  ho  clcaveth  my  r.  asunder,  he  poureth 
19.  27.  though  my  r.  be  consumed  within  ma 
Psal.  7. 9.  for  righteous  God  trieth  the  heart  and  r. 

16.  7.  my  r.  also  instruct  me  in  the  night-seasons 
26. 2.  examine  mc,  O  Ld.  try  my  r.  and  my  heart 
73.  21.  and  thus  I  was  pricked  in  my  r. 

139.  13.  for  thou  hast  possessed  my  r. 
Prov. '23. 16.  yea,  my  r.shall  rejoice  when  thy  lipj 
Isa.  11.  5.  and  faithfulness  the  girdle  of  his  r. 
./er.  11.  20.  O  Lord  of  hosts,  that  triest  the  r. 

12.  2.  thou  art  in  their  mouth,  and  far  from  their  r. 

17.  10.  I  try  the  r.  \\  20.  12.  that  seest  the  r. 
Lam.  3.13.  he  caused  his  arrows  toenter  into  nryr. 
Rev.  2. 23.  know  I  am  he  who  searcheth  the  r. 

REJOICE. 
Deut.  12.  7.  ye  shall  r.  in  all  that  ye  put  your  hand 
unto,  ye  and  your  households,  14.  26. 
16.  14.  thou  shalt  r.  in  thy  feast,  thou  and  thy  son 
15.  God  shall  bless  thee,  therefore  thou  shalt  r. 
26.  11.  and  thou  shalt  r.  in  every  good  thing 
28.  63.  so  the  Lord  will  r.  over  you,  30.  9. 

32.  43.  r.  O  ye  nations,  with  his  people 

33.  18.  he  said,  r.  Zebulun,  in  thy  going  out 
Judg.  9.  19.  r.  ye  in  Abimelech,  and  he  in  you 

IG.  23.  the  lords  of  the  Philistines  gathered  to  r, 
1  Sam.  2.  1.  because  I  r.  in  thy  salvation 

19.  5.  thou  sawest  it,  and  didst  r.  why  wilt  thou 

1  CAr.  16.  10.  glory  in  his  holy  name,  let  the  heart 

ofthem  r.  that  .seek  the  Lord,  Psal.  105.  3. 
32.  lot  the  fields  r.  and  all  that  is  therein 

2  Chron.  6.  41.  and  let  thy  saints  r.  in  goodness 

20.  27.  Lord  hath  made  them  to-r.  .TVeh.  12.  43. 
.Job  3.  t6.  let  it  not  r.  among  the  days  of  the  year 

20.  18.  and  ho  shall  not  r.  therein 
21. 12.  they  r.  at  the  sound  of  the  organ 
Psal.  2.  11.  serve  the  Lord  with  fear,  and  r.  with 
trembling 
5.  11.  let  all  th.it  put  their  trust  in  thee  r. 
9.  14.  I  will  r.  in  thy  salvation 

13.  4.  those  that  trouble  me  r.  when  I  am  moved 
.5.  my  heart  shall  r.  in  ihy  salvation 

14.  7.  Jacob  shall  r.  and  Israel  shall  be  glad 
20.  5.  we  will  r.  in  thy  salvation,  and  in  the  name 
21.1.  and  in  thy  salvation  how  greatly  shall  he  r. 
30. 1.  and  hast  not  made  my  foes  tn  r.  over  me 
33.21. for  our  heart  shall  r.  in  liim,  because  trusted 
35.  9.  my  soul  shall  r.  in  his  salvniinn 

19.  let  not  mine  enemies  wrongfully  r.  over  me 
24.  judge  me,  O  Ld.  and  let  them  not  r.  over  me 
26.  lot  them  he  ashamed  that  r.  at  mine  hurt 
38. 16.  hear  me,  lert  they  should  r.  over  me 
48.  11.  let  mount  Zion  r.  let  Judah  be  glad 
51.8.  that  the  bones  thou  hast  broken  may  r. 
5d»  IQi  the  righteous  ehall  r.  when  he  sceth 


REJ 

P«.GO.  6.  G.  Iiath  spoken  in  lioliness,  I  will  r.  108. 7. 
63.  7.  in  lliu  sliudow  ot'tiiy  wings  will  i  r. 

11.  but  tl>u  king  shall  r.  ni  Gud 

C5.  C.  tlin  uutguuigH  uf  niurnirig  und  evening  to  r. 

12.  the  hull!  hills  r.  ||  GC.  tj.  lliore  diii  we  r. 
6b.  3.  let  the  righteous  r.  yeu,  e.xceeiluigly  r. 

4.  r.  before  hiiii  ||  71.  23.  my  lips  shall  greatly  r. 
85.  (5.  revive  us,  that  lliy  people  may  r.  in  thee 
&).  4.  r.  tJie  soul  ol'  thy  servant,  uiiio  thee  do  1  lilt 
89.  12.  Tubor  and  llerinon  shall  r.  in  thy  nunie 
H3.  Ill  thy  name  shall  they  r.  all  the  day 
42.  thou  hast  made  all  his  enemies  to  r. 

96.  11.  let  the  heavens  r.  1|  12.  trees  olthe  wood  r. 

97.  l.Lurd  reigiiuth,  let  the  earth  r.  isles  be  glad 
9S.  4.  make  a  loud  noise,  r.  and  sing  praise 
104.  31.  the  Lord  shall  r.  in  his  works 

lUtj.  J.  that  1  may  r.  in  the  gladness  of  thy  nation 
107.  42.  the  righteous  shall  see  it  and  r. 
WJ.  26.  let  them  be  ashamed,  let  thy  servant  r. 
liy.  lt)2.  1  r.  at  thy  word,  as  one  that  lindeth 
149.  2.  let  Israel  r.  in  him  thiit  made  him 
Proo.2.14.  who  r.  to  do  evil,  and  delight  in  froward. 

5.  Id.  and  r.  with  the  wile  of  thy  youth 

23.  Ij.  if  thine  heart  be  wise,  mine  heart  shall  r. 
It),  yea,  my  reins  shall  r.  when  thy  lips  speak 
24.  the  father  of  the  righteous  shall  greatly  r. 
2d.  shall  be  glad,  and  she  that  bare  thee  shall  r. 

24.  17.  r.  not  when  thine  enemy  falleth 
27,  9.  ointment  and  perfume  r.  the  heart 

2d.  12.  when  right,  men  do  r.  tliere  is  great  glory 
29.  2.  when  righteous  are  in  authority,  people  r. 
6.  but  the  righteous  doth  sing  and  r.     , 

31.  25.  and  she  shall  r.  in  time  to  come 

Eccl.  3. 12.  for  a  man  to  r.  and  do  good  in  his  life 
22.  than  that  a  man  should  r.  in  his  works,  5.  19. 
4. 16.  they  also  that  come  after  shall  not  r.  in  him 
11.8.  but  if  a  man  live  many  years,  and  r.  in  them 
9.  r.  O  young  man,  in  thy  youth,  let  thy  heart 
Isa.  8.  6.  and  r.  in  llcziii  and  Ueinaliah's  son 
9.  3.  and  as  men  r.  when  they  divide  the  spoil 
13.  3.  even  them  that  r.  in  my  highness 
14. 8.  yea,  the  fir-trees  r.  at  thee,  and  the  cedars 
29.  r.  not  thou,  whole  Palestina,  because  the  rod 
2;'.  12.  he  said,  thou  shalt  no  more  r.  O  virgin 
24. 8.  the  noise  of  them  that  r.  endetli,  joy  ceaseth 
29. 19.  poor  among  men  shall  r.  in  the  Holy  One 
.35. 1.  the  desert  shall  r.  \\  2.  shall  bh)ssom  and  r. 

61.  7.  for  confusion  they  shall  r.  in  tlir:ir  portion 

62.  5.  as  a  bridegroom,  so  shall  (lod  r.  over  thee 
65.13.  my  servants  shall  7-.bul  ye  shall  be  ashamed 

19.  I  will  r.  ill  .lerusalem,  and  joy  in  my  people 
61).  10.  r.ye  with  Jerusalem,  and  beglad  with  her 

14.  and  when  ye  see  this,  your  heart  shall  r. 
Jer.  31.  13.  then  shall  the  virgin  r.  in  the  dance, 
and  I  will  make  them  r.  from  their  sorrow 

32.  41.  I  will  r.  over  them  to  do  them  good 
51.39.  that  they  may  r.  and  sleep,  and  not  awake 

J,ain.  2. 17.  he  hath  caused  thine  enemy  to  r.  over 
£26*.  7.  12.  let  not  (he  buyer  r.  nor  seller  mourn 

35. 15.  as  thou  didst  r.  at  the  inheritance  of  Israel 
J/bs.  9.  1.  r.  iiot,U  Israel,  for  joy,  as  other  people 
Jinws  ti.  13.  ye  which  r.  in  a  thing  of  nought 
J\lic.  7.  8.  r.  not  against  me,  O  mine  enemy 
Zcpk.3.ll.  will  take  awuy  them  that  r.  in  thy  pride 

17.  the  Lord  will  r.  over  thee  with  joy 
ZecA.2.10.  sing  and  r.O  daught.  of  Zioii,  lo,  I  come 

4.  1 10.  sith  the  seven  eyes  of  the  Lord  shall  r. 

9.  9.  r.  greatly,  O  dauifliler  of  Zion,  shout 

10.  7.  and  their  heart  siiall  r.  as  through  wino 
/Mke  1.  14.  and  many  shall  r.  at  his  birth 

6.  23.  r.  ye  in  that  day,  and  leap  for  joy 

10.  20.  in  this  r.  not,  rather  r.  because  your  names 

15.  6.  r.  with  me,  for  I  have  found  my  sheep 

9.  r.  with  me,  for  I  have  found  the  piece  [  lost 
19.37. whole  muUitmle  of  the  disciples  began  lo  r. 
Jo>in  t.3«i.|i(-  that  sowetli  and  he  that  reapetli  may  r. 
a.  35.  ye  were  willing  fur  a  season  to  r.  in  his  light 
14.  2-.  if  ye  loved  me,  yo  would  r.  because  I  said 

16.  20.  ye  shall  weep,  but  the  world  shall  r. 
22.  but  I  will  see  you,  and  your  heart  shall  r. 

^ct3  2.26.therefore  did  my  heart  r.  my  tongue  glad 

Horn.  5.  2.  and  r.  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  Uod 
12. 1.5.  r.  wilh  them  that  do  r.  and  weep  with  them 
15. 10.  ho  aaith,  r.  ye  (ienliles,  with  his  people 

1  Ctor.T.  30.  Ihi'ythatr.  as  though  they  rejoiced  not 
12.20.  is  one  hiiniiured,iill  the  members  r.  with  it 

2C«r.2.3.  Ii'it  I  have  sorrow  of  whom  I  ought  to  r. 

7.  9.  now  I  r.  not  llint  yn  were  made  sorry 

l(i.  I  r.  that  I  havoconfidence  in  you  in  all  things 
rr'o/.4.27.r.tliou  barren  that  hearcst  not, break  forth 
Pliil.  1.  IH.  Hiiil  I  therein  do  r.  yea,  and  will  r. 

2.  10.  that  I  may  r.  in  the  day  of  Christ 

17.  yen,  if  I  be  olTereil,  I  joy  ami  r.  with  you  all 
IH.  for  the  samccauiie  dn  ye  joy  and  r.  wilh  me 
28.  that  when  yc  see  him  again,  ye  may  r. 

3.  3.  we  worship  God,  and  r.  in  Christ  Jesua 
Oil.  1.  24.  who  now  r.  in  my  fufleringi  for  you 

1  TUrnR.  5. 11).  r.  evermore,  pray  without  ccaxing 
Jain.  1.  9.  let  the  brother  of  low  degree  r, 
4. 10  but  now  ye  r.  in  yout  boanlingt 
480 


REJ 

1  Ptt.  1. 6.  wherein  ye  greatly  r.  though  now  ye  are 

8.  r.  with  joy  unspeakable  and  lull  of  glory 

4.  13.  but  r.  ill  as  much  as  ye  are  jiartnkers 

yif  u.lI.lO.lhey  that  dwell  on  earth  .sli.r.  over  them 

12. 12.  therefore  r.  ye  heavens,  and  ye  that  dwell 

18. 20.  r.  over  her,  thou  heaven,  and,  ye  apostles 

Hee  GLA.D. 

REJOICE  before  the  Lord. 

Lev.  23.40.  ye  shall  r.  before  the  Lord  seven  days 

Deal.  12.  12.  ye  shall  r.  before  the  Jjord  your  God 
18.  shall  r.  before  the  Ld.  thy  God, It).  11.  1 27.  7. 
IIEJOICE  in  the  Lord. 

Psal.  33. 1.  r.  in  the  Lord,  O  ye  righteous,  97.  12. 

Isa.  41. 10.  r.  in  the  Lord,  glory  in  the  Holy  One 
61. 10. 1  will  greatly  r.  in  the  Lord,  and  be  joyful 

Joel'2.  23.  yo  children  of  Zion,  r.  in  the  Lord 

Hab.  3.  18.  yet  I  will  r.  in  the  Lord,  1  will  joy 

Zeeh.  10.  7.  their  heart  shall  r.  in  the  Lord 

Phil.  3.  1.  finally,  my  brethren,  r.  in  the  Lord 
4.4.  r.  in  the  Lord  alwav,and  again,!  say,  rejoice 
KEJOiCED. 

Kzod.  18. 9.  Jetliro  r.  for  all  goodness  done  to  Isr. 

Dcut.  28.  63.  as  the  L.  r.  over  you  lo  do  you  good 
30.  9.  rejoice  for  good,  as  he  r.  over  thy  fathers 

Judg.  19. 3.  the  father  of  the  damsel  saw  hiiii,  her. 

1  ft'tt/M.  0.  13.  the  men  of  Belh-shemesh  r.  to  see  it 
11.  15.  Saul  and  all  the  men  of  Israel  r.  greatly 

1  Kings  1. 40.  the  jieople  r.  so  that  the  earth  rent "" 

5.  7.  Uiram  r.  greatly  at  Solomon's  words 
2Kings  11. 14. the  people  r.aiid  blew  with  trumpets 

when  Joash  was  made  king, 20.  2  CV(r.23.13,21. 

1  Chrun.  29.  9.  the  people  r.  and  David  also  r. 

2  Chron.  15.  15.  and  all  Judah  r.  at  the  oath 
24.  JO.  all  the  princes  and  all  the  people  r. 

29.  30.  and  Uezekiah  r.  and  all  the  jiuople 

30.  25.  the  strangers  out  of  Jsi  aj;l  and  Judah  r. 
JWA.  12.  43.  all  that  day  they  olfeied  great  sacri- 
fices and  r.  the  wives  also,  and  the  children  r. 

44.  for  Judah  r.  for  the  priests  and  Leviles 
Ksth.8. 15.  the  city  of  Shushan  r.  and  was  glad 
Job  31.  25.  if  I  r.  because  my  wealth  was  great 

29.if  1  r.  at  the  destruction  of  him  that  hated  me 
Psal.  35.  15.  but  in  mine  adversity  they  r, 
97.8.Sion  was  glad,  and  the  daughters  of  Judah  r. 
119. 14.  I  have  )•.  in  the  way  of  thy  teslimonies 
Eccl.  2.  10.  for  my  heart  r.  in  all  my  labour 
Jer.  15.  17.  1  r.  not  in  the  assembly  of  the  mockers 

50.  11.  yo  r.  O  destroyers  of  mine  heritage 
F,zek.2'>.  6.  the  Ammonites  r.  against  Israel 
Hos.  10.  5.  the  priests  that  r.  on  it  shall  mourn 
Obad.  12.  nor  shouldest  thou  have  r.  over  Judah 
Jonah  4.  f  0.  Jonah  r.  with  great  joy  for  the  gourd 
Mat.  2.10.  when  they  saw  the  star,  they  r.  with  joy 
Lvke  1.  47.  my  spirit  hath  r.  in  God  my  Saviour 
■58.  Elisabeth's  friends  and  cousins  r.  with  her 
10.  21.  in  that  hour  Jesus  r.  in  spirit,  and  said 
13.  17.  the  people  r.  for  the  things  that  were  done 
John  8. 50.  your  father  Abraham  r.  to  see  my  day 
Acts  7.  41.  V.  in  the  works  of  their  own  hands 
15. 31.  when  had  read,  they  r.  for  the  consolation 
10.34.  the  jailer  r.  believing  in  God  wilh  his  house 

1  Cur.  7.  30.  they  that  rejoice,  as  though  they  r.  not 

2  Cor.  7.  7.  when  he  told  us,  so  that  I  r.  the  more 
Phil.  4.  10.  hut  I  r.  in  the  Lord  greatly 

2  John  4.  I  r.  greatly  that  I  found,  3  John  3. 

KEJOICETH. 
1  Sam.  2. 1.  Hannah  said,  my  heart  r.  in  the  Lord 
Job  39   21.  the  horse  r.  in  his  strength 
41.  t  22.  and  sorrow  r.  before  leviathan 
Psal.  10.  9.  ray  heart  is  glad,  and  my  glory  r. 
19.  5.  which  r.  as  a  strong  man  to  run  a  race 
2d.  7.  therefore  my  heart  greatly  r.  I  will  praise 
ProD.lI.lO.  whengoeth  well  with  righteous,  city  r. 
13.  9.  the  light  of  the  righteous  r.  but  the  lamp 
15.  30.  the  light  of  the  eyes  r.  the  heart 
29.  3.  whoso  loveth  wisdom  r.  his  fallier 
Isa.  5.  14.  and  he  that  r.  shall  descend  into  it 
02.  5.  as  the  bridegroom  r.  over  the  bride 
64.5.  thou  meetest  liiiu  thai  r.  and  worketh  right 
Kiek.  3.).  14.  when  the  whole  earth  r.  I  will  make 
Mat.  18. 13. 1  say  to  you,  he  r.  more  of  that  sheep 
John  3.  2".l.  the  friend  of  the  liiidegroom  r.  greatly 
1  Cor.  13.  0.  r.  not  in  ini(Juiiy,  but  r.  in  truth 
Jam.  2.  13.  and  mercy  r.  against  judgment 

REJOIGEST. 
Jer,  11.  15.  when  thou  ilorsi  evil,  then  thou  r. 
REJOI('I.\G. 

1  Kings  1.  45.  nnd  thev  are  coiiin  up  from  thence  r. 

2  Chron.  2.'!.  IH.  lo  olliir  burnt-olVerings  with  r. 
.rob  8.  21.  till  he  fill  lUy  lips  with  r. 

Psal.  19.  8.  his  slBliiles  are  right,  r.  the  heart 
45.15.  wilh  r.shnll  they  be  brouslit  lo  king's  palace 
107.  22.  let  them  declare  Ins  works  with  r. 
lIH.l.TTlhe  voice  of  r.  is  intalHTnaclo  of  righteous 
119.  111.  for  they  are  the  r.  of  my  heart 
12li.  0.  ho  shall  doubtless  rome  again  with  r. 

/'roD.  8.:«).  I  was  his  delight,  r.  always  before  him 
31.  r.  in  the  habitable  i-art  of  his  earth 

Isa.  G.I.  IH.  for,  behold,  I  create  Jerusalem  a  r. 

Jer.  15. 10.  thy  word  wos  to  mo  llio  r.  of  my  heart 


REM 

77a  J.  3. 14.  their  r.  was  to  devour  the  poor  gceretlf 
Zcph.  2.  15.  this  is  the  r.  city  that  said,  I  am 
Luke  15.  5.  he  Inyeth  it  on  his  shouldiis  r. 
J3cl.f0.il.r.l\ial  they  were  counted  worthy  to  sufTei 

8.  39.  and  the  eunuch  went  on  his  way  r. 
Rom.  12^.  12.  r.  in  hope,  patient  in  tribulation 
1  Cor.  Id.  31. 1  protest  by  your  r.  which  I  have 
2Cor.l.l2.  for  our  r.  is  this,  testimony  of  conscienca 
14.  that  we  are  your  r.  even  as  ye  also  are  ours 

6. 10.  as  sorrow,  yet  always r.asjioor,  yet  making 
(fal.  6.  4.  then  shall  he  have  r.  in  himself 
Phil.  1.  26.  that  your  r.  may  be  more  abundant 

1  Thcss.2. 19.  for  what  is  our  crown  of  r.  are  not  y« 
Ilcb.  3.  6.  the  r.  of  the  hope  firm  unto  the  end 
Jam.  4. 16.  in  your  boastings,  all  such  r.  is  evil 

RELEASE 
Signifies,  a  remission,  or  discharge:  It  is  called 
in  Hebrew,  Shemiilah,  in  Greek,  Aphesis; 
that  is,  forgiveness,  or  remission;  being  the 
same  word  which  in  the  M'cw  Testament  i» 
used  for  the  pardon  of  sins.  Mat.  26. 28.  Mark 

1.  4.  of  which  this  release  of  debts  was  a  sha- 
dow. Deut.  15.  2,  This  is  the  manner  of  the  re- 
lease: Every  creditor  that  leiideth  ought  shall 
release  it;  That  is,  not  absulutebi  and  finally 
forgive  it,  but  forbear  it  for  that  year. 

Dcut.  15.  1.  at  the  end  of  seven  years  make  a  r. 

2.  this  is  the  manner  of  the  r.  it  is  Ihe  Lord's  r. 
9.  the  seventh  year,  the  year  of  r.  is  at  hand 

31.10.  in  the  solemnity  of  the  year  of  r.  in  feast 
Esth.2.l8.  he  made  ar.  to  provinces  and  gave  gifts 

RELEASE,  Verb. 
Deut.  15.  2.  every  creditor  that  lendelh  shall  r.  it 

3.  what  is  thine  with  thy  brother,  hand  sHall  r 
Mat.  27.15.  at  that  feast  governor  was  wont  to  r.  a 

prisoner  whom  th.  would,  />«. 23.17.  .John  18.39. 
17.  Pilate  said  unto  them,  whom  will  ye  thai  I 
r.  unio  you  1  21.  .War*  15.  9.  John  18.  39 
Jtfari-15.11.the  chief  priests  moved  the  people,thal 
he  should  rather  r.  Barabbas,  J^ukt  23. 18 
Z,«/ic23.10.1  will  therefore  chastise  him,  andr.him 
20  Pilafe  therefore, willing  tor.  Jes.  spake  again 
John  19.  10.  and  that  I  have  power  to  r.  thee? 
12.  from  thenceforth  Pilate  sought  to  r.  him 
RELEA.SED. 
Mat.  27.  20.  then  r.  he  Barabbas  to  them,  and 
scourged  Jesus,  Mark  15.  15.  J^uke  23.  29 
Mark  15.  6.  now  at  the  feast  he  r.  one  prisoner 
RELY. 

2  Chron.  IG.  8.  becau.se  thou  didst  r.  on  the  Lord 

RELIED. 

2  Chron.  13.  18.  because  they  r.  on  the  Lord  God 

16.7.  thou  hast  r.  on  i^vria,  nnd  hast  not  r.  on  Ld 

RELIEF. 

Acts  ]  1.29.  disciples  determined  to  send  r.  to  breth. 

RELIEVE. 

Lev.  25.  3.5.  if  brother  poor,  then  thou  shalt  r.  him 

Isa.  1. 17.  r.  the  oppressed,  f  rigliten  the  oppressed 

Lam.  1.11.  given  pleasant  things  for  meat  to  r.  soul 

16.  the  comforter  that  should  r.  is  far  from  me 

19.  while  they  sought  meat  to  r.  their  souls 

lTiOT.5.  It),  if  any  have  widows  let  them  r.  them, 

that  it  may  r.  tlwm  that  are  widows  indeed 

RELIEVED. 

lTi)n.5.  10.  if  she  have  r.  the  nftlictcd,  if  followed 

RELIEVEl'll. 
Psal.  146.  9.  he  r.  the  faiherless  and  the  widow 

REMGIO.V 
Is  taken,  [1]  For  a  profe.ision,  or  the  citemal  and 
ceremonial  worship  of  the  Jews,  as  it  was  cor- 
rupted b\i  the  traditions  of  the  Pharisees,  Acts 

26.  5.  [2]  For  true  godliness  or  real  religion^ 
errn  that  inward  pirtij  of  the  heart,  whereby 
God  is  truly  acknowledged,  feared,  and  lovtdf 
and  which  inclines  persons  to  perforin  all  dw 
ties  of  lope  or  charity  toward  tJiose  that  are 
in  distress,  especially  for  religion.  Jam.  1.  27. 
[3]  Fur  superstition.  Col.  2.  18,  Let  no  man 
beguile  you  of  your  reward,  in  worshipping  of 
angels;  in  the  Greek  it  is,  ir  B-fXfutict  tZv 
i5j^«Xa)V,  in  the  religion  of  angels.  Do  not 
imitate  those  who  affect  to  humble  themsrlvea 
before  the  angels,  and  to  pay  them  a  supersti- 
tious worship. 

.9els2i>.  5.  after  the  siraitest  sect  of  our  r.I  lived 

Gal.  1.13.  ye  heard  mv  conversation  in  the  Jews'  r. 

M.  profiled  in  llie  Jews'r.abovemniiy  my  e()ual§ 

.Tarn.  1.26.  deccivelh  his  henrt,  this  man's  r.  is  vain 

27.  pure  r.  and  iiiidefileil  lieforo  God,  is  thii 

RELiGini;s. 

Acts  13.  43.  and  r.  prosilyios  rollowed  Paul 
Jam.  1.  26.  if  ony  among "vmi  seem  to  bo  r. 

REM. UN. 
r/rn.  38.  11.  r.  n  widow  at  thy  father's  house  till 
F.rod.  8.  9.  that  the  frogs  r.  in  the  river  only,  11. 
12.  10.  let  nothing  of  it  r.  until  the  morning 
23.  18.  nor  fal  of  my  sacrifice  r.  till  morning 
29.  34.  if  the  flesh  of  consecralioii  r.  burn  it 
Lev.  19.  6.  if  ought  r.  till  lliird  day,  BhuU  bo  burnt 


REM 

//eo.'25.v!3.  then  tliatwhich  is  sold  sliall  r.  in  Iiand 
27.  Is.  reckon  according  to  tlie  years  tliat  r. 

.A'um.  ;il!.  03.  lliose  wliicli  ye  let  r.  sliall  be  Jiricks 

iJcut.  vJ.  31.  we  destroyed  sll,  we  left  none  to  r. 
It).  4.  nor  shall  any  of  the  fiisli  r.  till  morning 
ID.  iiU.  those  wliicli  j-.  shall  hear  and  fear 
21.  13.  slio  shall  r.  in  thine  house,  ami  bewail 
23.  his  body  shall  not  >•.  all  nighl.  on  the  tree 

Josh.  1.  II.  your  little  ones  and  cattle  shall »•. 
^.  J  i.  iieitlier  did  there  i-.  any  more  courage 
8.  2-2.  so  that  they  let  none  of  them  r.  10.  28,  30. 

23.  4.  1  divid  ;d  to  you  by  lot  these  nations  that  r. 
7.  that  ye  come  not  among  these  nations  that  r. 
12.  else  if  ye  cleave  to  these  nations  that  r. 

Jadg.  3.  17.  and  why  did  Dan  r.  in  sliiiisl 
21.  7.  how  shall  do  for  wives  for  lliem  that  r.  Ifi. 
1  Sam.  20.  11).  and  thou  shall  r.  by  the  alone  Ezel 

1  Kinirs  11.  10.  six  months  did  .loab  r.  in  Edom 

13.  22.  I,  even  1,  only  r.  a  projihet  of  the  Lord 

2  Kinirs  7. 13.  let  some  take  live  of  the  horses  that  r. 
F.zralK  ).■).  for  we  r.  yet  escaped,  as  it  is  this  day 
Job  21.  32.  yet  shall  he  r.  in  the  tomb 

27.lj.tliose  that  r.  ofhiiii  shall  be  buried  in  death 

37.  S.  the  beasts  go  to  dons  and  r.  in  their  places 
PsaC.  .55.  7.  then  would  I  r.  in  the  wilderness 
Pruv.  2.21.  and  the  perfect  shall  r.  in  the  land 

%   21.  l(i.  shall  r.  in  the  congregation  of  the  dead 
•Isa.  10.  32.  as  yet  shall  he  r.  at  Nob  that  day 
32.  It),  righteousness  shall  r.  in  the  fruitful  field 
C5.  4.  which  r.  among  the  graves,  and  lodge  in 
00.22.  as  the  new  heavens  and  new  earth  shall  r. 
bel'oro  me,  so  shall  your  seed  and  your  name  r. 
Jer.  8. 3.  residue  of  them  that  r.  of  this  evil  family 
17.  25.  and  this  city  shall  r.  forever 

24.  S.  I  will  give  the  residue  of  Jerusalem  that  r. 
27.  11.  those  will  I  let  r.  still  in  their  own  land 

111.  saith  Lord,  concerning  the  vessels  that  r.  2t. 
30.18.  the  palace  shall  r.  after  the  manner  thereof 

38.  4.  he  weakcneth  the  hands  of  the  men  tliatr. 
42.  17.  none  of  them  shall  r.  44. 14.  |  51.  02. 

44.  7.  why  commit  ye  evil,  toleaveyou  none  to  r. 
£:('A-.7.ll. violence  is  risen  up,noiie  ofthem  shall  r. 

17.  21.  and  they  that  r.  shall  be  scattered 

31.  13.  on  his  ruin  shall  the  fowls  of  heaven  r. 

32.  4.  I  will  cause  the  fowls  to  r.  upon  I'haraoh 
3\t.  14.  shall  sever  out  men  to  bury  those  that  r.  of 

Jtnios  0.  9.  if  there  r.  ten  men  in  one  house 
Obad.  14.  nor  delivered  those  that  r.  in  distress 
Z''ch.5.  4.  Hying  roll  shall  ?•.  in  midst  of  his  house 

12.  14.  all  the  families  Ihatr.  shall  mourn  apart 
I^ulic  10. 7.  in  the  same  house  r.  eating  such  things 
John  6. 12.  he  said  gatherup  the  fragments  thatr. 

1.5. 11  I  have  spoken,  that  my  joy  might  r.  in  you 
10.  I  havij  chosen  you,  that  your  fruit  should  r. 
1'.).  31.  that  the  bodies  should  not  r.  on  the  cross 
1  Cor.  7.  II.  if  she  depart,  let  her  r.  unmarried 

15.  0.  of  whom  the  greater  part  r.  to  this  present 

1  Thcss.  4.  15.  we  alive  r.  till  coming  of  the  Lord 

17.  we  which  are  alive  and  r.  shall  be  caught  up 

J7e6.12.27.those  things  that  cannot  beshaken  may?". 

1  John  2.  24.  if  that  which  ye  have  heard  r.  in  you 
/i«».3.2.strengthen  the  things  which  r.  ready  to  die 

REMAI.NDER. 
Erod.  2().  1 13.  a  cubit  on  the  other  side  in  the  r. 

29.  34.  then  thou  shall  burn  the  r.  with  fire 
Jjcv.  6.  16.  the  r.  shall  Aaron  and  his  sons  eat 

7.  16.  on  the  morrow  also  the  r.  shall  be  eaten 
17.  hut  the  r.  on  the  third  day  sliall  be  burnt 

18,  f  0.  none  approach  to  any  that  is  r.  of  his  Hesh 

2  .Saw.  14.  7.  shall  not  leave  neither  name  nor  r. 
2  Ckrnn.  30. 1 20.  r.  from  sword  carried  to  Babylon 
Psal.  70.  10.  the  r.  of  wrath  shall  thou  restrain 
Jer.  51.  t  35.  the  violence  done  to  me  and  my  r 

REAIAL-VED. 
Oen.T.  23.  Noah  only  r.  alive,  and  they  in  the  ark 

14.  10.  and  they  that  r.  fled  to  the  mountain 
F.xod.  8.  31.  ho  removed  the  flies,  there  r.  not  one 

10.  15.  there  r.  not  any  green  thing  in  the  trees 

19.  there  r.  not  one  locust  in  all  coasts  of  Egypt 
14.  2-<.  there  r.  not  so  much  as  one  chariot 
JVitm.  11.  26.  hut  there  r.  two  of  the  men  in  camp 
3.5.  28.  because  he  should  have  r.  in  city  of  refuge 

30.  12.  their  inhf-rilance  r.  in  house  of  theirfather 
Jievt.  3.  11.  Og,  king  of  Bashan,  r.  of  the  giants 

4.  25.  when  thou  shall  have  r.  long  in  the  land 
TflsA..!  0.20.thp  rest  who  r.  entered  into  fenced  cities 
11.22.  in  Galh  and  .^shdod  there  r.  Anakims 

13.  12.  who  r.  of  the  remnant  of  the  giants 

18.  2.  and  there  r.  of  Israel  seven  tribes  . 

21.20.  the  T,evite3  which  r.  of  the  Kohathite8,26. 
Jv'lir.  7.  3.  there  r. With  Gideon  but  10,000  men 
I  Slim.  11.  11.  they  whiclkr.  were  sciittcrcd  80  that 

23.  14.  David  r.  in  a  mountain  in  the  wilderness 

21.3.  Davit!  nnd  his  men  r.  in  the-sides  of  the  cave 
2-'>'7m.l3.20.Tamnrr.  desolate  in  Absalom's  bouse 
1  /TiTiT.?  22.40.  the  Sodomites  which  r.he  took  out  of 
B  KiviTs  10.  11.  Jehu  slew  all  thai  r.  of  Ahab's,  17. 

13.  0.  and  there  r.  the  grove  also  in  Samaria 

25.  22.  people  that  r.  he  set  Gedaliah  nvertbnm 
C'ilr0x.i3.14.the  ark  r.in  the  family  ofObcd-edom 

481 


REM 

£ccZ.  2. 9.  also  my  wisdom  r.  «ith  mo 
.Icr.  34.7.  for  these  delem--ed  ciliet,  /•.  of  Judah 
37.  10.  there  r.  but  wounded  iii<;ii  among  them 
16.  Jcieniiiih  hadr.  many  days  in  the  Uungeoii 
21.  her.  in  the  courlof  the  pri«ou,  38.  13. 
31).'J.i\ebuiar-adaii  carried  auay  captive  the  rem- 
nant of  the  peojilo  that  ;;.  in  the  city,  52.  15. 
41. 10.  ishmael  carried  auay  caiilivu  them  that*' 
48.  11.  thurefoieliio  taste  r.  ill  liim,  his  scent 
51.  30.  the  mighty  men  have  r.  in  their  holds 
Lam.  2.  22.  in  ihe  day  of  the  Lord's  anger  none r. 
Kick.  3. 15.  I  r.  there  astonished  seven  days 
Dan.  10.  8.  there  r.  no  slrengtli  in  ine,  17. 

13.  and  I  r.  tliere  with  the  kings  of  Persia 
Mat.  11.23.  had  been  done  in  Sod.  it  would  have  r. 

14.  20.  they  took  uji  the  fragments  thai  r.  twelve 

baskets  full,  J^uUe  i).  17.  John  6.  13. 

I^ukc  1.22.  he  beckoned  to  them,  and  r.  speechless 

Jicls  5.  4.  while  it  r.  was  it  not  thine  owii'J 

27.  41.  the  forejiart  stuck  fast,  and  ;•.  immoveable 

KEMALNEST. 
Lam.  5. 19.  thou,  O  Lord,  r.  for  ever,  Hcb.  1.  II. 

llExMAUNETH. 
Ocn.8.  22.while  earth  r.  seed-time  shall  not  cease 
Exod.  10.  5.  thai  which  r.  to  you  from  the  hail 

12.  10.  that  which  r.  until  morning  ye  shall  burn 
10.  23.  that  which  r.  over  lay  it  up  for  you 

Lev.  8.  32.  ihat  r.  of  the  llesh  and  bread  shuJl  burn 
10.  12.  take  the  ineat-olVering  that  r.  and  eat  it 
10.  10.  so  shall  he  do  for  the  labernacle  that  r. 

JVjim.  24.  19.  and  he  shall  destroy  him  that  r. 

Josh.H.  29.  a  great  heap  of  stones  lliat  r.  to  this  day 

13.  1.  there  r.  yet  much  land  to  be  possessed 
2.  this  is  the  land  that  yetr.  all  Geshuri 

Judg.  5. 13.  he  made  him  that  r.  liave  dominion 
I  .Sa/ft.  6.  IS.  Abel,  which  stone  r.  unto  this  day 

10.  11.  Jesse  said,  there  r.  yet  the  youngest 
'iKiiiffsl'J.  130.  the  escaping  of  Judah  thatr.  shall 
again  take  root  downward,  Isa.'il.  t  31. 
1  Chi-on.n.  I.  the  ark  of  the  Lord  r.  under  curtains 
./u4  19.  4.  and  be  it,  my  error  r.  with  myself 

21.  34.  in  your  answers  there  r.  falsehood 

41.22.  in  his  neck  r.  strength, sorrow  turned  to  joy 
Isa.  4  3.  he  that  ?'.in  Jerusalem  shall  be  called  holy 
./cr.  38.  2.  he  thai  r.in  this  city  shall  die  by  sword 

47.  4.  to  cut olF from  Tyrus  every  helper  thatr 
Kzck.  0.  12.  he  that  r.  and  is  besiegid  shall  die 
Hair.  2.  5.  so  my  S|)irit  r.  among  you,  fear  ye  not, 
Zcch.  9.  7.  he  thatr.  even  he  shall  be  for  our  God 
■hku  9.  41.  ye  say,  we  see;  theretbre  your  sin  r. 

1  Cor.  7.  29.  it  r.  that  they  that  have  wives  be  as 

2  Car.  3.  11.  much  more  that  which  r.  is  glorious 

14.  to  this  day  r.  the  same  veil  untaken  away 
9. '.).  it  is  written,  his  righteousness  r.  for  ever 

Hcb.  4.  6.  seeing  it  r.  that  some  must  enter  therein 
9.  there  r.  therefore  a  rest  to  the  people  of  God 
10.  20.  there  r.  no  more  sacrifice  for  sins 

1  John  3.  9.  doth  not  sin,  for  his  seed  r.  in  him 

KEMAIMNG. 
JVam.  9.  22.  the  cloud  tarried,  r.  on  the  tabernacle 
Dcut.  3.  3.  smote  him,  till  none  was  left  r.  to  Og 
.Jvsh.  10.  33.  he  left  none  r.  37,  39,  40.  |  11.  8. 
21. 40.  which  were  r.  of  the  families  of  the  Levites 

2  .S(iJ)i.21.5.we  should  be  destroyed  from  r.in  coasts 
2  Kings  10.  11.  Jehu  slew  all,  he  left  Aliab  noner 

1  Chron.  9.  33.  who  r.  in  the  chambers  were  free 
.Tob  18.  19.  nor  shall  have  any  r.  in  his  dwelling 
Jer.  30. 1 23.  a  r.  whirlwind  shall  fall  on  the  wicked 
Ohad.  18.  shall  not  be  any  r.  of  the  house  of  Esau 
John  1.  33.  on  whom  thou  shall  see  the  Spirit  r. 

REMEDY. 

2  Chron.  30. 16.  till  wrath  arose,  there  was  no  r. 
Prov.  0. 15.  suddenly  shall  he  be  broken  withoutr. 

29. 1,  shall  suddenly  be  destroyed,  and  without  r. 
REMEMBER. 

When  referred  to  God,  signifies.  To  care  for  one, 
to  pity,  succour,  and  save  him;  or,  when,  after 
some  delays  and  suspensions  of  his  favour,  he 
return.'!  and  shcics  kindness  to  him:  God  re- 
membered Noah ;  He  shewed  himself  careful 
o/Noall,a;^rf  the  creatures  that  icerc  with  him 
in  the  ark,  by  providing  for  their  deliverance 
from  the  deluge,  according  to  his  promise.  Jfc 
remembered  Abraham,  Gen.  19.  29.  God  re- 
membered and  heard  Abraham's  prayer  in  be- 
half o/Lot,  and  sent  him  out  of  the  overthrow. 
God  says,  I  will  remember  their  sins  no  more, 
Jer.  31.  34.  that  is,  I  will  pardon  them  ;  I  joill 
blot  them  nut  of  the  l>"ok  of  mn  remembrance. 
IV hen  applied  to  men  it  signilies,  [1]  F.ither  to 
call  to  mind  something  past,  or  In  keep  in  mind 
something  for  the  time  tn  come,  E.xod.  20.  8. 
Luke  17.  32.  [2]  To  muse,  or  meditate  upon, 
Psal.  63. 0.  [3]  To  put  truft  and  cunfidencein, 
Psal.  20.  7.  [4]  To  considn;  Mat.  16.  9.  [5] 
To  celebrate  and  extol,  1  Chi  on.  Hi.  12.  W  To 
viakr  a  collection,  or  contribution  for,G,i\^.\0. 
[7]  To  coll  one  to  an  oeeount,  to  cen.^ure,  or 
punish,  3  John  10.     [8]  To  esteem,  Eccl.  9.  15. 

Gen.  40.  23.  yd  did  not  the  buller  r.  Joseph 
3  R 


REM 

Exod.  13.  3.  Moses  said  to  the  people,  r.  this  day 
20.  8.  r.  the  sabballi  -ij;iv  to  keep  It  holy 
32. 13.  r.Abi  aluim,  Is.iue,  and  Urael,  Ovut.  P.  27. 

jVu//i.ll.3.wu  r.  ll.u  lish  wliiuli  u  e  did  cat  in  iigj  pt 

15.  39.  r.  all  the  coniniaiKhiiciitsol  the  Loid 
40.  that  }e  may  r.  and  do  iny  coimuaiidnients 

Ijtul.  5.  15.  and  r.  thai  iliou  \i  asl  a  scrvani  in  tiie 

land  of  Lgyiit,  15.  15.  |  10.  12.  |  24.  18,22 

7.  18.  thou  shall  r.  «lial  the  Lorudid  lo  I'liaiaoh 

8.2.  thou  shall  r.  all  the  way  the  Lord  led  iheo 

18.  r.  the  Lord  givetli  thee  power  lo  get  v,ealtli 

9.  7.  r.  how  thou  provokedsl  the  Loid  thy  God 
15.15.  r.  that  thou  wast  a  bond-man  in  Egypt, uml 

the  Lord  redeemed  thee,  16.  12.  |  24.  18,  22 

10.  3.  r.  tiie  day  when  thou  earnest  out  of  Egypt 

24.  9.  r.  what  the  Lord  thy  God  did  to  Jlniiim 

25.  17.  r.  what  Alnalek  did  lo  thee  by  the  wuy 
32.7.  J",  the  days  of  old,  consid.  the  years  of  many 

Josh.  1.  13.  r.  word  which  Moses  Commanded  you 
Judg.  9.  2.  r.  also  that  I  am  your  bone  and  fhsh 

1  *um.25.31.  Abigail  said,  tlu.n  r.  thine  handinaid 

2  .Sa/rt.  14.  11.  lei  the  king  r.  the  Lord  thy  God 
19.  19.  neillier  do  thou  r.  what  tiiy  servant  did 

2AiH^<a-9.25.  r.  when  land  thou  rode,  alter  Ahab 
2U.3.  r.  how  1  have  walked  before  thee,  Jsa.  38. 3. 

1  Chr.  10.  r2.  r.  his  marvollous  works,  I'sal.  105.  5. 

2  Chron.  6.  42.  r.  ihemercies  of  David  ihy  servant 
J^'eh.  1.8.  r.  the  word  thou  comniandedst  Moses 

4.  14.  r.  the  Lord,  which  is  great  and  terrihlu 

13.  29.  r.  them  that  have  delilcd  the  priesthood 
Job  4.  7.  r.  who  ever  i)eri.>iied,  being  innocent? 

7.7.0r.my  life  is  wind,  eye  shall  noinoreseegood 

10.  9.  r.  that  thou  bast  made  me  as  the  clay 

11.  10.  and  r.  it  as  waters  that  pass  away 

30.  24.  r.  that  thou  magnify  his  work 

41.  8.  lay  thine  hand  upon  liiiii,  r.  the  battle 
Psal.  20.  3.  r.  all  thy  olferings  and  accept  sacriOco 

7.  but  we  will  r.  the  name  of  the  Lord  our  (Jod 
22.  27.  all  ends  of  world  shall  r.  and  turn  to  Lord 
25.  0.  r.  thy  mercies,  they  have  been  ever  of  old 

7.  r.  not  the  sins  of  my  youth,  r.  thou  me 
74. 2.  r.  thy  congrcgat. which  lliou  hast  purchased 

18.  r.  this,  that  the  enemy  halh  rejaoached 

22.r.how  tlie  foolish  man  rcproacdielh  thee  daily 
79.  8.  O  r.  not  against  us  former  iniquities 
89.47.r.haw  shorlmy  time  is,  why  bast  Ihoii  niado 

50.  r.  Lord  the  reproach  of  ihy  servants 
103.  18.  and  to  those  that  r.  his  cominandments 
119.49.  r.  the  word  unto  thy  servant,  upon  which 
132.  1.  Lord,  r.  David,  and  all  his  afflictions 
137.  7.  r.  O  Lord,  the  children  of  Edom,  who  said 
/Vot).31.7.1et  him  drink,  and  r.  his  misery  no  more 
Eccl.  5.  20.  he  shall  not  much  r.  the  daysofliislifo 

11.  8.  yet  let  him  r.  the  days  of  darkness 

12.  1.  r.  now  thy  Creator  in  the  days  of  thy  youth 
Cant.  I.  4.  we  will  r.  thy  love  more  than  wino 
Isa.  43.  18.  r.  ye  not  the  former  things  ?  46.  9. 

25.  for  mine  own  sake  1  will  not  r.  ihy  sins 
44.  21.  r.  these,  O  Jacob  and  Israel,  thou  my  serv 
40.  8.  r.  this,  and  shew  yourselves  men 
47.  7.  neither  didst  ?■.  the  latter  end  of  it 
54. 4.  shall  not  r.  the  reproach  of  thy  widowiiood 
64.  5.  thou  meetest  those  that  r.  thee  in  thy  wayi 

9.  he  not  wroth,  neither  r.  iniquity  for  ever 
Jer.  3.  16.  neither  shall  they  r.  it,  neither  visit  it 

14.  10.  he  will  now  r.  their  iniquity,  and  visit 
21.  r.  break  not  thy  covenant  with  us 

17.2.whilst  their  children  r.their  altars  and  groves 
18.  20.  r.  that  I  stood  before  tliso  to  speak  good 

31.  20.  since  I  spake  I  do  earnestly  r.  him  still 
44.  21.  and  the  peojile,  did  not  the  Lord  r.  them  ? 
51.  ."JO.  ye  that  have  escaped,  j-.  the  Lord  afar  olT 

Lam.  3.  f  19.  r.  mine  affliction  and  my  misery 

5.  1.  r.  O  Lord,  what  is  come  n|)on  us,  consider 
Ezek.  10. 61 .  then  shall  r.  thy  ways,  20.  43.  |  30.  31. 

03.  that  thou  niaycst  r.  and  be  confounded 
23. 27.  so  that  thou  shall  not  r.  Egypt  any  more 
Hos.8.  13.  now  will  he  r.  their  iniquity,  and  visit 
9.9.  therefore  he  wilir.  ini(|uity  and  visit  their  sins 
./lfi(-.6.5.0  my  people,  r.  now  what  Balak  consulted 
//«/*.  3. 2.  OL.  revive  thy  work,  in  wrath  r.  mercy 
.l\lnl.  4.  4.  r.  the  law  of  Mo.ses  my  servant 
Mat.  10. 9.  neither  r.  the  five  loaves,  Mark  8.  18. 
27. 63.  sir,  we  r.that  deceiver  said,  I  will  rise  again 
/,h/ic1.72.  the  mercy,  and  to  r.  his  holy  covenant 

16.  25.  r.  that  thou  in  thy  lifetime  receivedst 

17.  32.  r.  Lot's  wife  II  24.0.  r.  howhespwke  to  you 
hint  15.  20.  r.  Ihe  word  that  I  said  unto  you 

16.  4.  that  when  the  time  shall  come  ye  may  r. 
Mets  20.  31.  r.  that  by  the  space  of  three  years 

35.  r.  the  words  of  the  Lord  .fesus,  how  he  said 
Gal.2.  10.  they  would  that  we  should  r.  the  poor 
Kph.  2.  11.  r.  that  ye  being  in  time  past  Gentiles 
Col.  4.  18.  r.  my  bonds,  ^raco  he  with  you,  amon 

1  7V(«s.2. 9.  foryer.  brelh.  our  labour  and  travail 

2  Thess.  2.  5.  r.  ye  not  that  I  told  you  these  things 
2T(w.2.8.r.that  Jesus  Christ  was  raised  from  dead 
Heb.  13.  3.  r.  them  that  are  in  bonds,  as  bound 

7.  r.  them  which  have  the  rule  over  you 
Jude  17.  r.  the  words  spok.  of  iho  apostles  of  Jmim 


REM 

Hers  0.3.  r.  from  wlipnce  tiioii  art  ftillpn,  btwI  repent 
3.  ;i.  r.  how  tliou  litisl,  rtcuived,  uiid  LolJ  fast 

1  UL.Mi.MliKl!. 
(icn.  41.  'J.  saying,  /  do  r.  my  laiilts  this  ihiy 
J  iia.111.  lo.  "2.  y  r.  lliat  wliich  Aiualok  did  lo  Israel 
Joi^l.li.  even  wlien  Ir.  1  am  arraid,aud  Irenibluig 
t'sal.  4i.  4.  when  /  r.  ihese,  1  pour  out  my  soul 
(i:j.  0.  when  Ir.  Ihue  U|)i)n  my  bed,  and  mudiiate 
Y.Q.  G.  if  /  do  not  r.  llieo,  let  my  tongue  cleave 
\\i.  5.  /  r.  the  days  ot'old,  1  muse  on  the  work 
Jcr.  a.  ii.  /  r.  tliee,  the  kindness  ollhy  youth 
ilos.l.i.  consider  not  that  Ir.  all  their  wickedness 

IwiU  UICJIKMUBU. 
Ocn.  0.  15.  /  iciU  r.  my  covenant  between  me,  lU. 
l^cv.  'M.  4-J.  /  wtil  r.  my  covenant  with  Abraham 

4j.  /  tcili  lor  their  sakcs  r.  llie  covenant 

Psal.  4i.  t).  Ihcrelore  wtll  I  r.  thee  Iroin  Jordan 

77.  10.  but  I  will  r.  the  years  of  the  right  hand 

11.  /  wUlr.Uiu  works,  /  (o.  r.tliy  wonders  of  old 

Jer.  31.  34.  and  I  will  r.  their  sin  no  more,  I  will 

I'or^'ive  their  iniquity,  Heb.  6.  12.  |  10.  17. 

F.zck.  ]().  bO.  /  will  r.  my  covenant  with  thet 

3  John  JO.  J  will  r.  Ins  deeds  which  he  doelh 

KEMt;.\llU:il  me. 
Gc/t.  40. 1 14.  r.  me  w  ith  thee,  and  shew  kindness 
JuU^r.  10.  -Jd.  r.  mc,  that  1  may  be  ai  once  avenged 
1  Sum.  I.  11.  look  on  thine  handmaid,  and  r.  me 
j\\/i.  13.  14.  r.me,  O  (joil,  concerning  tliis,  22,  31 
Jol/  14.  13.  apiioint  me  a  set  time,  and  r.  mc 
fsal.  'Jo.  7.  r.  mc  lor  thy  goodness'  sake,  O  Lord 
lOG.  4.  r.  mc  with  the  favour  thai  thou  bearest 
Jer.  1.1.  15.  O  Lord,  thou  kiiowest,  r.  me,  and  visit 
Kiek.  6.  y.  and  they  that  escape  of  you  shall  r.  vti 
Zcck.  10.  9.  and  they  shall  r.  me  in  tar  countries 
y^uAe23.4'2.  L.r.mu  when  thouccmest  tothy  kingd. 
1  Cor.  11.  ti.  that  vc  r.  me  in  all  things,  and  keep 

REMEMBKllED. 
Oen.  8.  1.  God  r.  Noah  ||  11).  -29.  (Jod  r.'Abraliam 
30.  22.  tiod  r.  Rachel  ||  4-2.  9.  Joseph  r.  dreams 
j!;iorf.2.24.God  r.his  covenant  with  Abraham,ii..'5. 
JVum. 10.  !l.  ye  shall  be  r.  before  tha  Lord  your  God 
Judg.  a.  34.  children  of  Israel  r.  not  the  Lord 
1  Ham.  1.  19.  and  the  Lord  r.  Hannah 
S  t'Ar.  24.  22.  thus  Joasli  r.  not  the  kindness 
Eslh.'i.  1.  Aha.tueru^  r.  Vashti,  what  she  had  done 

9.  -iS.  that  these  days  of  Puriin  should  be  r. 
Job  24.  20.  the  sinner  shall  be  no  more  r. 
/'«.4o.  17.  I  will  make  Ihy  name  to  be  r.  in  all  gen. 

77.  3.  I  r.  Gild  and  was  troubled,  I  complained 
7H.  35.  they  r.  thai  God  was  their  Saviour 
39.  for  he  r.  that  they  were  hut  llesh,  a  wind 
42.they  r.not  his  hand,  when  he  delivered  tliem 
98.  3.  he  r.  his  mercy  toward  the  house  of  Israel 
105.  fi.  he  hath  r.  hi.s  covenant  forever 
42.  for  he  r.  his  holy  promise,  and  Abraham 
ion.  7.  they  r.  not  Ihe  mullitude  of  thy  mercies 
45.  he  r.  for  ihem  his  covenant,  and  repented 
109.  U.  let  the  iniquity  of  his  fathers  be  r. 
10.  because  that  he  r.  not  to  shew  mercy 
111.  4.  hath  made  his  wonderful  works  to  bo  r. 
119.  52.  I  r.  thy  judgments  of  old,  O  Lord 
55.  I  have  r.  thy  name,  ()  Lord,  in  the  night 
l.'ili.  23.  who  r.  us  in  our  low  estate,  bis  mercy 
l.')7.1.we  sat  down,  yea, we  wept,  when  wer.Zion 
Eccl.  9.  15.  yet  no  man  r.  that  same  poor  man 
/xa.23. 16.  sing  many  songs,  that  thou  mayest  bcr. 
57.  II.  thou  hast  not  r.  me,  nor  laid  to  thy  heart 
U3.  II.  then  her.  the  days  of  old.  Muses,  and  pco. 
C5.  17.  and  the  former  heavens  shall  not  be  r. 
Jer.  II.  19.  that  his  name  may  be  no  more)-, 
y-ui/i. 1.7.  Jerusalem  r.  in  the  days  of  her  afflictions 
2.  1.  r.  not  his  footstool  in  the  day  of  his  anger 
Kzek.  3.  20.  his  righteousness  shall  nut  be  r.  33.  13. 

10.  22.  thou  hast  not  r.  the  days  of  thy  youth,  43. 
21.  24.  because  ye  niiide  your  iniquity  to  be  r. 

32.tlion  shall  be  for  fuel,  thou  shall  be  no  more  r. 
S!5.  10.  that  the  Ammonites  may  not  be  r. 
Jlos.  2.  17.  they  shall  no  more  be  r.  Zech.  13.  2. 
.imm  I.  9.  and  r.  not  ihc  brotherly  covenant 
Jonali  2.  7.  wlien  my  soul  fainted,  I  r.  the  Lord 
J//Jf .  2(i.  75.  Peter  r.  llio  words  of  Jes.  f.ukc'i-i.  Gl. 
J.uke'i\.ii.  Ihey  r. Iiis  word-;,  and  told  these  things 
John  2.  17.  his  disciples  r.  that  it  was  written 
22.  when  he  was  risen,  they  r.  that  he  had  said 
12.  K).  when  Jesus  was  glorified  then  they  r. 
Jtcts  11.  16.  then  r.  I  the  word  of  the  Lord 
Heb.  II.  t  22.  by  I'ailh  Joseph  r.  the  departing 
Hcv.  18.  5.  and  (iod  haih  r.  her  iniquities 

RE.MK.MIiF.Ur.ST. 
r.inl.  88.  5.  like  Ihe  slain  whom  ihou  r.  no  more 
Mill.  5.  23.  theie  r.  thai  tliv  hmibt^r  hath  ou"lit 

REMr.MIiliUKTn. 
Psnl.  9.  12.  when  he  makclli  inqiiisilion,  he  r. 

1 03. 14. ho  knoweth  our  frainc,her.weiirc  but  dust 
F.ccl.  5.  t  20.  yet  he  r.  the  days  of  his  lifi. 
J,am.  1.  9.  she  r.  not  lior  last  end,  she  camodown 
John  16.  21.  she  r.  no  more  thu  nngnish,  for  joy 
3  Cor.  7.  15.  whiUf  ho  r.  the  obrdieiioo  of  you  all 

nKMF.MllF.RINr.. 
Z/am.  3.  19.  r.  miuo  afflinion  and  my  miiory 
463 


REM 

1  Thess.  1. 3,  r.without  ceasing  your  work  of  faith 

REMK.MBKA.NUE. 
Eiod.  17.  14.  1  «illiHit  outlher.  ofAmalek 
.Viiiii.  5.  15.  an  olieiing,  bringing  iniijuity  to  r. 
1)1  ul.  25. 19.  thou  shall  blot  out  the  r.  ul'  Aniuiek 
32.j(j.  1  said,  1  would  make  the  r.  of  Ihein  to  cease 

2  .Sam.  18.  Id.  1  have  no  son  to  keep  my  miine  in  r. 
1  Kings  17.  IS.  art  thou  come  to  call  my  sin  to  j-.? 
Job  Iri.  17.  his  r.  shall  perish  from  the.eartli 
Psal.  6.  5.  lor  in  dualh  there  is  no  r.  of  thee 

30.  4.  give  thanks  at  r.  of  his  holiness,  97.  12. 
34.  10.  to  cut  otf  the  r.  of  them  fioin  the  earth 
3d.  I.  a  psalm  of  Uavid,  to  bring  to  r.  70.  1. 
77.  6. 1  call  to  r.  my  song  in  the  night 
83.  4.  that  Ihe  name  of  Israel  be  no  more  in  r. 
102.  12.  and  iby  r.  unto  all  generalions 
112.  0.  the  righteous  shall  be  in  everlasting  r. 

F.tcl.  1.  11.  there  is  no  r.  of  former  things 
2.  10.  there  is  nor.  ol'tbe  wise  more  than  the  fool. 

Isa.  20.  8.  the  desire  of  our  soul  is  to  the  r.  of  thee 
43.  20.  put  me  in  r.  let  us  plead  togolher 
57.  8.  behind  the  doors  hast  thou  set  up  thy  r. 

/,am.  3.  20.  my  soul  halhthem  siill  inr.  is  humbled 

h,zek.  21.  23.  but  he  will  call  lo  r.  the  iniquity 
24.  because,  1  say,  that  ye  are  come  to  7-. 

23.  19.  calling  to  r.  the  days  of  her  youlh,  21. 
29.  Hi.  which  bringeth  their  iniquily  to  r. 

Mai.  3.  10.  a  book  of  r.  was  written  before  him 
Mark  II.  21.  I'elur  calling  to  r.  saitli  to  him 
]^uke  I.  54.  he  hath  holpen  Isr.  in  r.  of  his  mercy 

22.  19.  this  do  in  r.  of  me,  1  Cor.  11.  24. 
John  14.  20.  he  shall  bring  all  things  to  your  r. 
.'•lct.i  10.  31.  thine  alms  are  had  in  r.  before  (Jod 
1  Cor.  4.  17.  Timothy,  who  shall  bring  you  intor. 

11.2.).  this  do  ye,  as  oft  as  ye  drink  it,  in  r.  of  me 
Phil.  1.3.  I  thank  my  God  upon  every  r.  of  you 
1  'I'hcss.  3.  0.  thai  ye  have  good  r.  of  us  alvi-ays 

1  I'im.  4.  6.  if  thou  put  the  brethren  in  r. 

2  Tim.  1.  3.  that  1  have  r.  of  thee  in  my  prayers 

5.  when  I  cull  to  r.  the  unfeigned  faith  in  tliee 

6.  wherefore  1  put  thee  in  r.  that  thou  stir  up 

2.  14.  ofthe^ic  things  put  them  in  r.  charging 
Ileb.  10.  3.  in  those  sacrifices  there  is  a  r.  of  sins 

32.  but  call  to  r.  the  former  days  in  which 
2  Pel.  1.  12.  to  put  you  always  in  r.  .tude  5. 
I3.I  think  it  ineello  stir  you  up  by  putt,  you  inr. 

15.  be  able  to  have  lliese  ihings  always  in  r. 

3.  1.  I  stir  up  your  pure  minds  by  way  "of  r. 
Rev.  16.  19.  great  liabvlon  came  in  r.  before  God 

REME.M'liRANCER. 
25am.  8.  tin.  Johushaphatlheson  of  Ahilud  was 
r.20.  t  24.  1  A7«ir.s.  4.  t  3.  1  Ckron.  18.  f  15. 
REME.MBRANCES. 
Job  13.12.  your  r.  are  like  to  ashes,bodies  to  bodies 

REMISSION. 
Mat.  26.  28.  blood  shed  for  many,  for  the  r.of  sins 
Mark  1.  4.  baptism  of  re)Hmtance  for  r.  fyuke'.i.  3 
Luke  1.  77.  liiiowleilge  of  salvation  by  r.  of  sins 

24.  47.  that  r.  should  bo  preached  in"  his  name 
Jlcls  2.  38.  repent,  and  be  baptized  for  r.  of  sins 

10.43.  whosoever  believeth  shall  receive  r.  of  sins 
Horn.  3.  2,5.  for  the  r.  of  sins  that  are  past 
Heb.  9.  22.  without  shedding  of  blood  is  no  r. 

10. 18.  where  r.  is,  then!  is  lei  more  ofFeringfor  sin 

REMIT,  TED. 
■John  20.  23.  whosc^soever  sin.i  ye  r.  thoy  are  r. 

RE.MNANT. 
Ocn. 45.^7.  God  sent  me  before,  to  put  for  you  a  r. 
/,co.  2.  3.  the  r.  of  meal-oirering  shall  bo  .Aaron's 

5.  13.  r.  shall  be  the  priest's  as  a  nicat-ofVering 

14.  18.  the  )•.  of  the  oil  that  is  in  the  priest's  hand 

IJeut.'i.  11.  for  only  Og  king  of  Rashan  remained 

of  the  r.  "of  giants,  ./ash.  12.  4.  |I  13.  12. 

23.  54.  his  eye  evil  toward  Ihe  r.  of  his  children 
/osA.23.  12.  if  ye  cleave  to  the  r.of  these  nations 
i  -Sam.  21.  2.  the  Giboonitcs  were  ofr.  of  Amorites 

1  Kiiigx  12.  23.  speak  to  the  r.  ofthe  people,  saying 
14. 10.  I  will  Kike  away  the  r.  of  Jeroboam 
22.4().r.  of  the  Sodomites  Jehoshaphat  took  away 

2  h'iiin-.i  19.  4.  lift  lip  Ihy  prayer  for  the  r.[sa.3~.  4. 
3(1.  Ihe  r.  escaped  shall  take  root,  Ina.  37.  31. 

31.  (Mil  ofjorusnlem  shall  go  forth  ar.  Asa.37.  32. 
21.  14.  I  will  for.^aku  the  r.  of  mine  inheritance 

25.  II.  the  r.  did  Neburar-aduii  carry  away 
2  Chron.  30.  6.  ho  will  return  lo  the  r.  of  vou 
Kira  3.  8.  the  r.  of  their  brethren  the  priests 

9. 8. grace  shewed  from  L. to  leave  us  a  r. to  escape 

14.  80  that  there  should  be  no  r.  nor  escaping 
A"*!-*.  1.  3.  Ihc  r.  linil  are  left  ofthe  captivity 
./,-*  22.  00.  bill  the  r.  of  Ihem  the  fire  consumed 
/.v(i.  1.  9.  unless  the  I^d.  hiid  left  us  a  very  small  r. 

7.  t  ;)•  tlie  r.  sliiill  return,  even  the  r.  1().  21. 

II.  II.  set  his  hand,  to  rci  liver  the  r  of  his  people 

16.  there  shall  be  a  high- way  for  the  r.  of  his 
14.22.  I  will  cut  oflTroin  Bnhvlon  iher. 

30.  [  will  kill  ihy  root,  and  hi'  shall  siny  tliy  r. 
15   9.  I  will  bring  lions  riii  the  r.  of  Iholiind 
10.  14.  the  r.  «hall  bo  very  Rninll  and  feeble 
17.  3.  the  liinjdom  slinll  ccntu;  from  r.  ofSyria 
37.  4.  lifl  uj)  Uiy  prayer  Ibr  Iho  r.  loA 


REM 

Tsa.  46. .?.  hcnrkon  all  the  r.  of  Ihe  hontfl  of  Uraa^ 
./«•.  6.9.  ihoysiiull  glean  tlie  r.  ofLrftel  as  a  viiio 

1 1.  2.!.  and  ihere  snail  be  no  r.  ollhein 
15.  11.  verily  it  shiill  be  weil  wirli  thy  r. 
2:t.  .3.  and  1  will  gather  the  r.  of  my  dock 
25.  20.  Ihe  r.  ofAshdod  did  drink  of  ihe  cup 
31.  7.  O  Lord,  save  thy  peiqii,',  the  r.  of  Israel 
39.  9.  Nebu/.ar-adan  carried  away  ther.  oficojile 
40.1 1,  the  king  of  Kabylon  bad  left  a  r.  of  Judah 

15.  Jews  be  scattered,  and  r.  of  Judaii  perish 

41.  16.  Johanan  look  the  r.  ofthe  jieople,  43.  5. 

42.  2.  pray  for  us  lo  the  Lord,  even  for  all  this  r. 
15.  hear  the  word  ofthe  Lord,  ye  r.  of  Judali 
19.  O  ye  r.  of  Judah,  go  ye  not  into  Egypt 

44.  12.  1  will  take  the  r.  of  Judah,  thalYiavo  set 

14.  so  thai  iimie  of  the  r.  of  Judah  thall  escape 

2d.  the  '•.  shall  know  whose  words  shall  stand 

47. 4.  Lord  will  spoil  r.  of  the  country  of  Caphtor 

5.  Ashkeloii  is  cut  olf,  with  the  r.  of  their  valley 

Kick.  5.  10.  Ihe  whole  r.  of  thee  will  I  scatter 
(i.  d.  yet  will  1  leave  n  t.  that  ye  may  have  some 
II.  13.  Lord,  will  thou  m:ike  an  end  ofthe  r.  7 
14.  22.  yet  behold,  therein  shall  be  lel\  a  r. 
2.3.  25.  and  thy  r.  shall  fall  by  the  sword 
25.  10.  1  will  destroy  tiie  r.  of  ihe  sea-coast 

./uel  2.  32.  in  ihe  r.  whom  the  Lord  shall  call 

Jlinus  1.  8.  the  r.  ofthe  I'liilistines  shall  perish        j 
5.  15.  God  will  be  gracious  to  the  r.  of  Joseph 
9.  12.  ihat  they  may  possess  the  r.  of  Edoni 

Mic.  2.  12.  I  will  surely  gather  ihe  r.  of  Israel 

4.  7.  and  I  will  make  her  that  hailed,  a  r- 

5.  3.  the  r.  of  his  brethren  shall  return  lo  Israel 

7.  the  r.  of  Jacob,  in  the  midst  of  many  people 

8.  the  r.  of  Jacob  shall  be  among  the  Gentiles 

7.  18.  the  transgression  ofthe  r.  of  his  heritage 
Ilab.  2.  8.  all  the  r.  of  the  people  shall  sjioil  tiiee 
'/.epk.  1.  4.  and  1  will  cut  off  the  r.  of  Daal 

2.  7.  the  coast  shall  bo  for  ther.  of  house  of  Judah 

9.  the  r.  of  my  people  shall  possess  them 
3. 13.  the  r.  of  Israel  shall  not  do  iniquity 

Hag.  1. 12.  all  the  r.  of  the  jieople  obeyed  the  Lord 

14.  the  Lord  stirred  up  the  spirit  oi' the  r. 
7,ech.  8.  6.  if  it  be  marvellous  in  the  eyes  of  ther* 

12.  I  will  cause  the  r.  of  this  people  to  possess 
Mat.  22.  6.  the  r.  took  his  servants,  and  slew  Ihem 
Rom.  9.  27.  Esaias  also  crielli,  a  r.  shall  be  saved 

11.  ,5.  at  this  present  time  also  there  is  a  r. 
len.  II.  13.  the  r.  were  affrighled,  and  gave  glory 

12.  17.  the  dragon  went  to  make  war  with  the  r. 
19.21.  the  r.  were  slain  with  the  sword  of  him  Uiat 

RE.MORSE. 
Rom.  11.  tS.  God  hath  given  them  tlie  spirit  ofr. 

REMOVE. 
Oen.  48.  17.  he  held  up  his  father's  hand  to  r.  it 
JVum.  36.  7.  so  shall  not  the  inberilance  of  Israel  r. 
from  tribe  to  tribe,  but  keep  to  bis  tribe,  D. 
Deut.Vi.W.  shall  notr.  thy  neighbour's  land-mark 
.losh.  3.  3.  Ilien  ye  shall  r.  from  your  place  and  go 
Judg.  9.  29.  then  would  I  r.  Abimelech 
2  -Sum.  6.  10.  so  David  would  not  r.  the  ark 
■i,  Kings  23.  27.  the  Lord  said,  I  will  r.  Judah  also 
24.  3.  came  on  Judah,  to  r.  them  out  of  his  siglA 
2  C'hron.  33.  8.  neilhcr  will  1  any  more  r.  Israel 
Job  24.  2.  some  r.the  landmarks,  they  take  away 
27.  5.  1  will  not  r.  mine  inti-grity  from  me 
P.^al.  36.  11.  let  not  the  hand  ofthe  wicked  r.me 
3y.l0.r.  thy  stroke  away  from  me,  I  am  consumed 
119.  22.  r.  from  me  reproach  and  contempt 
29.  r.  from  me  the  way  of  lying,  and  grant  mo 
Pron.  4.  27.  turn  not,  r.  thy  fool  from  evil 
5.  8.  r.  thy  way  far  from  "her,  and  come  not  nigh 
22.  28.  r.  not  the  ancient  land-mark,  23.  10. 

30.  8.  r.  far  from  me  vanity  and  lies 
F.ccl.  II.  10.  therefore  r.  sorrow  from  thy  heart 
Isa.  10.  f  27.  his  burden  shall  r.  from  thy  shoulder 

13.  13.  tin;  earth  shall  r.  out  of  her  place 

31.  t  2.  yet  he  is  wise,  and  will  not  r.  his  words 
46.  7.  he  slnndetb,  from  his  place  shall  he  not  r. 

Jer.  4.  1.  relinn  uiilo  me,  then  shall  thou  not  r. 
27.  10.  prophesy  a  lie,  to  r.  you  far  from  your  land 

32.  31.  Ihat  I  slionid  r.  it  from  before  liiy  face 
50.3.  they  shall  r.  lliey  shall  depart  man  and  beast 

8.  r.  out  ofthe  midst  of  Babylon,  and  eo  forth 
F.zck.  12.  3.  r.  by  day,  ihou  shall  r.  from  thy  placo 

21.  26.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  r.  tlio  diadem 

45.  9.  O  princes,  r.  violence  and  spoil 
//«.<.  5.  10.  they  were  like  them  that  r.  the  bound 
.fvrl  2.  20.  bill  I  will  r.  the  northern  annv 

3.  6.  that  ve  might  r.  Ihem  from  their  border 
Mic.  2.  ;i.  from  which  ye  shall  not  r.  your  necks 
'/.rrli.  3.  9.  I  will  r.  iho'ininniiy  of  lliiil  lanil 

11.  !.  half  Iho  niounlniii  siiall  r.  toward  north 
Mat.  17.  90.  ye  shall  say,  r.  Iienee,  and  it  shall  r. 
/,«/.r22.42.  if  tlion  bo  willing,  r.  iliisciip  from  mo 
1  Cor.  13.2.  allfailh.so  Hint  I  could  r.  mountains 
/;cu.2.5.orelso  I  will  r.  thy  candlestick  out  of  place 

REMOVED. 
Oen.  8.  13.  Noah  r.  the  covering  of  the  nrk 

12.  d.Abram  r.13.18.  ||  26.22.  Isaacr.  from  Ihenc* 
UO,  35.  Jacob  r.  the  Lc-;{uati  that  w«ro  spott«d 


REN 

Oen.  <7.  21.  and  Joseph  r.  tho  pooplo  to  cttica 
Exotl.  H.  31.  tliu  Lord  r.  tlie  swarms  of  Ilius 
l\.  19   the  aiigL'l  of  (Jod  r.  :iiiil  wuiit  bcluiul  tlinm 
S'U.  18.  the  pcuplu  saw  it  uiiii  c.  uinUlutiilaliir  olt' 
JVK^^.  1-.;.  10.  tlie  pooi)li!  r.  liom  llui;erolli  to  Piiraii 
i!l.  1'2.  tlioy  r.  anil  pilclicd  in  llio  valley  ol'Zured 

13.  r.  and  jiitclied  on  the  other  side  ol' Ariiou 
3iJ.  5.  tlie  cliddreu  ori.srael  r.  from  Kamc-^es 

7.  lliey  r.  Irotn  Kliiarn  ||  'J.  illarali  ||  lU.  Kljin 
11.  tliey  T.  from  the  Ueu-sea  ||  H.  r.  from  Alush 
It),  r.  from  ihedeeerl  of  .Sinai  {|  '.il.  Iroin  Lihiiuh 
534.  T.  from  inoiinl.  Shapher  ||  -'5.  from  iiaruiluh 
iiii.  r.  froiiiMaklioloili  ||  -28.  from  Turah 
cti,.  r   from  Kene-jaakaii  ||  3-1.  Irom  .)otbatIiah 
'M.  llu'y  r.  from  JOzion-gaher  ||  37.  from  Kadeth 
40.»".froiiiJ)ihori-gad||  ■17.froinAlmoii-diblalliaim 
Dcut.  ^8.  So.  and  shall  be  r.  into  all  kingdoms 
Jiisk.'.i.i.  Ihey  r.  from  Shittim,  and  came  to  Jordan 

14.  when  the  people  ;■.  to  pass  over  Jordan 

11.  t  J.").  Joshua  iMiolhing  ol  all  Lord  eonimanded 

1  iSatii.  0.  !i.  known  \:  hy  Ins  hand  is  not  r.  fioin  you 
18.  13.  therefore  Saul  r.  David  from  him 

2  Sam.  td.  I'i.  he  r.  Amasa  ont  of  tho  liigli-way 
1  Kiiiirs  1.5.  12.  Asa  r.  the  idols  his  father  made 

13.  alsol'aacliali  liisniother,even  her  he  r.  from 
being  (jueen  for  making  an  idol,  'J  Chr.  15.  Ifi. 

14.  the  high  places  were  not  r.  i!  Kings  1.5.  4,  35. 
S  Kjngs  l(i.  17.  Aliaz  r.  ihe  laver  from  otf  the  bases 

17.  18.  Lord  r.  Israel  out  of  bis  sight,  23.  |  ';;3.  27. 
2li.  the  nations  which  thou  hast  r.  know  not 

18.  4.  Ilczek.  r.  the  high  jilaces,  and  brake  images 
1  C/iron.  13.  t  13.  so  l>avid  r.  nut  the  ark  home 

£  Chran.  35.  1-2.  and  they  r.  the  buriit-oiierings 
36. t3.  the  king  of  Lgypi  r.Jchouhaz  at  Jerusalem 

Jab  14.  18.  and  the  rock  is  r.  out  of  his  |)lace 
18.  4.  shall  the  rock  be  r.  out  of  his  place? 
l!t.  10.  and  mine  hope  hatli  her.  like  a  tree 

32.  t  15.  they  r.  spi'oches  from  themselves 

36.  16.  so  would  he  have  r.  thee  out  of  the  strait 
Psal.  4fi.  2.  we  will  not  fear,  1  hough  the  earth  be  r. 
81.  G.  I  r.  his  shoulder  fiocn  the  burden 

103.  12.  so  I'ar  hath  he  r.  our  transgressions 

104.  ,5;  the  earth,  that  it  should  noi  be  ?-.forever 
12.5. 1.  shall  he  as  mount  Zi(jn,  which  cannot  be;-. 

I'ruv.  10.  30.  the  righteous  shall  never  be  r. 
Isn.  6.  12.  till  the  Lord  have  r.  men  far  away 
10.  13.  I  have  r.  the  bounds  of  I  he  people 

3L  Madmenah  is  r.  the  inhabitants  gather 
17.  f  II.  harvest  shall  be  r.  in  day  of  inheritance 
22.25.  the  nail  fastened  in  the  sure  place  shall  ber. 
.  24.  20.  the  earth  shall  he  ;•.  like  a  cottage 
Sf).  15.  thou  hast  r.  it  far  to  all  ends  of  the  earth 

29.  13.  but  have  r.  their  heart  far  from  me 

30.  20.  yet  shall  not  thy  teacher?  ber.  to  a  corner 

33.  20.  not  line  of  the  slakes  shall  be  r.  any  more 
38.  12.  mine  age  is  r.  from  me  as  a  shepherd's  tent 
51.  JO.  the  hills  shall  be  r.  my  kindness  and  the 

covenant  of  my  jieace  shall  not  be  r.saith  Lord 
Jrr.  15.  4. 1  will  cause  ihem  to  be  r.  into  kingdoms 
24.  9.  I  will  deliver  them  to  be  r.  20.  18.  1  34.  17. 
l^am.  1.  8.  Jerusalem  sinned,  therefore  she  ia  r. 
3.  17.  and  thou  hast  r.  my  soul  far  from  peace 
Ezch.  7.  10.  their  gold  shall  be  r.  g<dd,  not  able 
23.  46.  I  will  give  them  to  lie  r.  atid  spoiled 
36.  17.  tlieir  way  as  the  unckanncss  ofar.  woman 
Jlmos  6.  7.  and  the  banquet  of  them  shall  be  r. 
Mid.  4.  how  hath  he  r.  it  from  me,  turning  away 
7.  11.  in  that  day  shall  the  decree  be  far  r. 
.V(zi!.21.21.if5'e  Jhall.say,bethou  r.  Mark  U.  23. 
Jlcts  7.  4.  he  r.  Abraham  int,o  this  land,  wherein 
13.  22.  when  he  had  r.  Saul,  ho  raised  up  David 
Oal.  1.  C.  I  marvel  that  ve  are  so  soon  r.  from  him 

llEMOVETH. 
/)f  7//,.27.17.curscd  that  r.his  neighhour'sland-mark 
Jol)  0.5.  which  r.thc  mountains, and  they  know  not 

32  20.  he  r.  av.ay  the  speech  of  the  trusty 
F.ccl.  10.0.  whoso  J-.  stones  shall  be  hurt  therewith 
f.ta.~~.  18.  when  he  ;•.  his  rough  wind  in  day  ofeast 
Dan.  2.  21.  he  chanjeth  the  seasons,  he  r.  kin, 

RE.\IOVIi\G. 
Ocn.  30.  32.  r.  from  thy  flock  all  tho  speckled 
Isa.  14.  t  0.  who  smote  people  in  wrath  wilhoutr. 
40.  21.  .seeing  I  am  a  captive  r.  to  and  fro 
Jcr.  15.  t  4.  I  will  give  them  for  a  r.  24.  f  9.  i 

34.  t  17. 
/.am.  1.  t  S.  therefore  Jerusalem  is  become  a  r. 
F.zrk.  12.  3.  therefore  prepare  the  stuff  for  r.  4. 
23.  t  46.  and  I  will  give  them  for  a  r.  and  spoil 
Hcb.  12.  27.  signifieth  the  r.of  those  things  shaken 

REND. 
ioiO(i.39.23.aban(l  round,  thatephod  should  notr. 
/.rv.  10.  6.  neither  r.  your  clothes,  lost  ye  die 

]3..'i6.priest  shall  r.  the  plague  out  of  the  garment 
1  /w;iir.<r  11.11.  Twill  surely  r.  the  kingdom,  12,31. 
13.  howbeit,  I  will  not  r.  away  all  the  kingdom 
31.  hf-hold,  T  will  r.  the  kingdom,  14.  8. 
2CArnn.34. 27.  did.^tr.  thy  clothes  and  weep  before 
r.ccl.  3.  7.  a  time  to  r.  and  a  time  to  sew 
Tsn.  64.  1.  oh  that  thou  wouldrst  r.  the  heavens 
Ezek.  13.  11.  and  a  stormy  wind  Ehall  r.  it,  13. 
4c3 


REN 

Elf /t.SO.T.thou  didst  break  andr.all  thctr  shoulder 
Hos.  13.  S.  and  I  will  r.  the  caul  of  their  lieart 
.Jucli.  13.  r.  your  heart,  and  not  your  garments 
U,(£.  7.  0.  lust  they  turn  again  and  r.  you 
Juliii,  ly.  24.  let  us  not  r.  it,  but  cast  lots  for  it 

iij;kdi;k. 

JVt(7;i.l8.9.every  oilering  they  r.loniebe  most  holy 
JJciit.  32.  41.  I  will  r.  vengeance  to  mine  enemies 

43.  he  will  r.  vengeance  to  his  adversaries 
Judir.'H.bl.  evil  of  tlie  men  of  Shecheni  did  tiodr. 

1  Sam.  26.  23.  Lord  r.  to  every  man  his  faithfulness 

2  Chr.  6.  30.  r.  to  every  man  according  to  his  way.s 
./«//  33.  26.  \'oT  he  will  r.  unto  man  his  iighteousiiess 

34.  11.  for  the  work  of  a  man  shall  he  r.  to  lijin 
Psal.  28.  4.  r.  to  them  their  desert,  they  regard  not 
3.?.  20.  llicy  that  r.  evil  for  good,  are  adversaries 
5i).  12  U  (jod,  I  will  ?•.  praises  unto  thee 
7'J.  12.  and  r.  to  our  neighhour  seven-fold 
94.  2.  lift  up  thyself,  r.  a  reward  to  the  proud 
116. 12.  wliat  shall  1  r.  to  tlie  L.  for  all  benelits  '< 
f?-u«.24.12.  doth  not  he  know  it,  and  shall  not  her. 
to  every  man  according  to  his  works?  /tom.S.ii. 
20.  say  not,  1  will  j-.  to  man  accord,  to  his  work 
26.  16.  than  seven  men  that  can  r.  a  reason 
/sa. 66.15. Lord  will  come,  to  r.  his  anger  with  fury 
.Jcr.  51.  6.  he  will  r.  to  Babylon  areconipence,  2-1. 
y>(i7ft.  3.  64.  r.  to  them  a  recoin|)eiice,  O  Lord 
Hos.  14.  2.  so  will  we  r.  the  calves  of  our  lips 
.Tocl'A.'\.  will  ye  r.  nie  a  rcconi pence?  ifrccompence 
Zcch.9.  12.  i  declaie,  that  1  will  r.  double  to  thee 
JIiLt.  21.  41.  which  shall  r.  him  the  fruits  in  season 
22.  21.  r.  unto  Ca3sar,  Mark  12. 17.  Jyuke  20.  25. 
Hem.  13.  7.  r.  therefore  to  all  their  dues,  tribute 
1  Cor.  7.  3.  lethusband  r.  to  wile  due  benevolence 

1  TAesi.3.0.  what  thanks  can  we  r.  to  God  for  you? 
5.  15.  see  tliat  none  r.  evil  for  evil  to  any  man 

RENDERED. 
fudff.  9.  56.  thus  God  r.  wickedness  of  Abimelcch 

2  Kinrrs  3.  4.  the  king  of  Moab  r.  to  (he  king  of  Isr. 
17.  t  3.  Hoshea  r.  Shalmaneser  tribute 

2  Chr.  32.  25.  Hezekiah  r.  not  according  to  benefit 

/'7ou.J2.]4.reConipence  of  man's  bands  be  7'.to  him 
RENDEREST. 

Psal.  62. 12.  r.  to  every  mnn  according  to  his  work 
RENDERETH. 

/6a.  CG.6.  a  voice  of  the  Lord  that  r.  recompence 
RENDERING. 

1  Pet. 2.  9.  notr.  evil  forevil,  orrailing  for  railing 
RENDEST. 

.kr.  4.  30.  though  thou  r.  thy  face  with  painting 
RENDING. 

Psal.  7.  2.  lest  he  tear  mv  soul,  r.  it  in  pieces 
RENEW. 

To  renew  sometimes  sijrnifics  to  establish,  or  con- 
firm. 1  Sam.  11.  14,  Let  us  go  to  Gilgal,  and 
renew  the  kingdom  there:  foetus  ratify  the  co- 
venant between  Saul  and  thepeoplc  concerning 
the  kingdom,  and  install  him  publicly  and  so- 
lemnly into  it.  .^sa  renewed  the  altar  of  the 
Lord,  2  Ckron.  15.  8.  J{e  repaired,  or  rebuilt 
it,  after  it  had  been  decayed  through  long  use, 
or  broken  doicn  by  idolaters:  Or,  he  consecrated 
and  dedicated  the  altar,  which  had  been  polluted 
by  ididaters,  and  needed  purification.  Job 
says,  that  God  renewed  his  witnesses  against 
him,  .lob  10.  17.  that  is,  He  brought  fresh 
plagues  and  judgments  upon  him,  which  were 
the  witnesses  and  evidences  bnlhof  his  sin,  and 
CJoeVs  displeasure  against  him.  In  another 
place  he  says,  that  his  how  was  renewed  in  his 
hand,  .lob  29.  20.  Or,  as  it  is  in  the  Hebrew 
it  changed  itself,  grew  as  it  were  a  new  bow, 
when  other  bows  by  much  use  grow  weak  and 
useless  :  Or,  it  changed  its  strength,  and  got 
new  force,  as  the  word  is  used  in  Isa.  40.  31 
They  that  wait  upon  the  Lord  shall  renew  their 
strengi  h;  they  shall grorc  stronger  and  stronger 
in,  faith  and  patience.  God  renews  the  face 
of  the  earth,  Psal.  104.  30.  By  his  providence 
he  preserves  the  succession  of  living  creatures 
upon  the  earth,  which  othericise  would  be 
desolate,  and  without  inhabitants.  Renew  our 
days  as  of  old,  S6'7/.«  Jeremiah, /vrtr/;,.  5.21.  that 
is.  Bring  vs  out  of  our  captivity,  and  restore 
us  to  our  former  fioorishing  condition. 

Renewing  is  taken  either,  [1]  For  that  work  nf 
the  .'Spirit,  whereby  the  elect,  of  enemies  to  God, 
and  children  of  wroth,  become  tlie  children  of 
Giid,ciUzens  with  the  saints,  heirs  and  co-heirs 
with  Christ,  being  by  fnilh  made  partakers  of 
his  righteousness  and  sufferings,  and  having 
the  image  of  God,  which  consists  in  righteous 
ness  and  holiness,  restored  in  their  souls  ;  and 
this  is  the  same  with  regeneration, or  being  born 
an-(7)n,  Tit.3. 5.  Or  [2]  For  revivimr,  strength- 
enlnsT,  and  repairing  of  that  irhiekis  decayed 
anl  blemished  by  sin,  Psal.  51 .  10. 

1  Ham.  11.  14.  lot  us  go  to  Gilgal  and  r.  tho  kin 
dom  thorp 

2CAron.21.  t  4.Joa3h  minded  to  r.  housoof  Lord 


REP 

Psai.  51.  10.  and  r.  a  right  sjilrlt  within  mo 
Isa.  40.  31.  they  that  wait  on  L.  shall  r.  strcngll 
41.  1.  let  the  people  r.  their  strength,  come  near 
I.am.  5.  21.  turn  us,  O  Lord,  r.  our  days  as  of  old 
Hcb.6. 6.  if  they  fall  away,  to  r.  them  ag.  to  reponU 

ULNLVVED. 
2  Chron.  15.  8.  Asa  r.  the  ahar  of  the  Lord 
.Job  2y.  20.  and  my  bow  was  7-.  in  my  baud 
I'sul.  Jt)3.  5.  so  liiattliy  youth  is  r.  like  llie  eagle'g 
2  Cor.  4.  lU.  yet  the  inward  man  is  7-.  day  by  day 
I'.ph.  4.  23.  and  he  r.  in  the  spirit  of  ymir  iiiiiid 
Col.  3.  10.  the  new  man  wiiieli  is  r.  in  knovvledgo 

RENE  WEST. 
.Job  10.  17.  thou  r.  thy  witne^Ses  against  mo 
Psal.  104.  30.  and  thou  7-.  the  face  of  the  earlh 

RENEWING. 

Jiom.  12.  2.  be  transformed  hy  the?-,  of  your  mind 

'1  it.  3.  5.  he  saved  us  by  the  r.  of  the  Holy  Ghost 

RENOUNCED. 
2  Cor.  4.  2.  buthaver.  the  hidden  things  of  dishon. 

RENOWN. 
Gen.  6.  4.  the  giants,  which  were  of  old,  men  of  r. 
J\i'u7n.  16.  2.  famous  m  the  congregaticni,  men  of  r. 
lizck.  J6.  14.  thy  r.  went  forth  among  the  heathen 

15.  and  playedsl  the  harlot  becau^e  oftliy  r. 
34.  29.  1  will  raise  up  for  them  a  plant  of  r. 
30.  13.  it  shall  be  to  them  a  r.  saith  ilie  Lord 
Han.  9.  15.  and  hast  gotten  thee  7-.  as  at  this  day 

RENOWNED. 
JV«777,.  1.  16.  these  were  the  r.of  the  congregation 
Isa.  14.  20.  the  seed  of  evil-doers  shall  never  bur. 
Kick.  23.  23.  captains,  and  great  lords,  and  r. 
26.  17.  the  r.  city  which  was  strong  in  the  sea 

RENT,  Substantive. 
Jsa.  3.  24.  and  instead  ofa  giidle  there  shall  ho  a  r. 
Mat.  9.  16.  and  the  r.  is  made  worse,  Mark  2.21. 
Lukcb.  36.  then  both  the  new  makeih  a  r. 

RENT,   Participle. 
Gen.  37.  33.  Joseph  is  without  doubt  r.  in  pieces 
Kxod.  28.  32.  a  hole  in  the  ephod,that  it  he  notr. 
.Josh.^i.  4.  they  took  wine  bottles,  old  and  r.  13. 
2  Ham.  15.  32.  Husliai  came  with  his  coat  r. 
1  Kings  13.  3.  the  altar  shall  be  r.  |{  5.  altar  was  r. 
Ezra  9.  5.  having  r.  my  garment  and  my  mantle 
jVai.  27.  51.  behold,  the  vail  of  the  temple  wag 
r.  in  twain,  Mark  15.  38.  ].ukc  23.  45. 
Mark  1.  t  10.  John  saw  the  heavens  r.  and  Spirit 
See  Clothes. 
RENT,   Verb. 
.Judg.  14.  G.  Samson  r.  the  lion  as  ho  would  havo 
r.  a  kid,  and  he  had  nothing  in  his  hand 
I  Sam.  15.  27.Siiulr.  theskirtof  Saniuersniantlo 
28.  Lord  hath  r.  the  kingdom  from  ihee,  28.  17. 
2Su7«.  13. 19.  Tamar  r.  her  garment  that  was  on  licr 

1  Kings  1.  40.  the  earth  r.  with  the  sound  of  them 
11.  30.  Ahijah  r.  .leroboara's  new  garment 

19.  11.  and"  a  strong  wind  r.  the  mountains 

2  Kings  17.  21.  he  7-.  Isr.  from  the  house  of  David 
F.ira  9.  3.  when  I  heard  this,  I  r.  my  garment 
Job  1.  20.  then  Job  arose,  and  r.  his  mantle 

2.  12.  Job's  friends  r.  every  one  his  mantle 
26.  8.  and  the  cloud  is  not  r.  under  them 
,Jer.  36.  24.  they  were  not  afraid,  nor  r.  their  garm. 
F.zek.?.Q.  16.  Sin  shall  have  pain,  and  No  shiifl  bo  r. 
Mat.  27.  51.  vail  of  the  temple  was  r.  and  rocks  r. 
Mark  9.  26.  tho  siiirit  cried,  and  7'.  him  soro 

REPAID. 
Prov.  13.  21.  but  to  the  righteous  good  shallbe  r. 

REPAIR. 
'2  Kings  12.  5.  let  the  priests  »•.  thebrcnchesof  tho 
hou.^e  (dGod,  22.5, 6.2  Chr.  24.  4.  | 
34.  8,  10. 

7.  why  r.  ye  not  the  breaches  of  tho  house? 

8.  neither  to  r  the  breaches  of  the  house 

12.  and  hewed  stone  to  r.  the  breaclics,  22.  5,  6 
2  Chron.  24.5.  go  and  gather  money  tor.  the  house 

12.  and  hired  carpenters  to  r.  the  house  of  Lord 
Ezra  9.  9.  to  give  us  a  reviving  to  r.  the  house 
fsa.  01.  4.  and  they  shall  r.  the  waste  cities 

REPAIRED, 
./i/rf^.  21.23.  Benjamin  r.  cities,  and  dwelt  in  Ihem 

1  Kings  11.27.  Solomon  r.  the  breaches  of  the  citjr 
IS.  .30.  Elijah  r.  the  altar  of  the  Lord  broken  down 

2  Kings  12.  6.  the  priests  had  not  r.  the  breachea 
14.  and  r.  therewith  the  house  of  the  Lord 

1  Chron.  11.  8.  ami  Joab  r.  the  rest  of  the  city 

2  Chron.  26. 1 0.  Uzziah  r.  the  towers  in  Jerusalem 

20.  3.  Hezekiah  r.  Ihe  doors  of  the  house 

32.  .■).  Hezekiah  r.  Millo  in  the  city  of  David 

33.  16.  Mnnasseh  r.  the  altar  of  the  Lord 
JVf/t.  3.  4.  next  lo  them  r.  .5,  7,  8,  10,  12,  19. 

«j.  after  him  r.  17,  18,  20,  22,  2.3,  24. 
REPAIRER. 
Tsa.5S.  12.  thoushnlt  he  called  the  r.of  tho  breach 

REPAIRING. 
2  Chron.  24.  27.  concenfng  tho  r.  of  the  house 

REPAY. 
Dent.  7. 10.  not  be  slack,  he  v.-ill  r.  him  lo  his  fare 
.lob.  21.  31.  who  shall  r.  him  what  he  hnth  donet 
41.ll.whohc.th  ptcventod  mo,that  I  should  r.himt 


REP 

ba.  50. 18.  accoriVing  to  their  docfts  ho  will  r.  ftiry, 
and  to  the  islands  he  will  r.  reeoiii|ioiioe 

I.ulic  10.  3j.  when  1  come  again,  1  will  r.  thee 

]lum.  \~.  10.  vengeance  is  mine,  I  will  r.saiih  Ld. 

I'lUleiii.  I'.).  I  I'uul  liave  written  it,  I  will  r.  it 
KEPAYETH. 

JDcat.  7. 10.  and  r.  them  that  hate  him  to  their  face 
KEPKATETU. 

rror.lT.D.hc  that  r.  matter, s(t|)aratcth  very  friends 
KEl'ENT. 

Re|)';ntanco  is  taken  [I]  t'jr  that  regret  and  re- 
luctance that  arise  in  a  penun,  after  having 
done  sumetluvg  tlial  hi-  ought  nut  to  have  dune  : 
tVhcn  Judm  saa  that  Clirisl  was  condemned, 
it  is  said  of  him,  that  he  repented  of  what  he 
had  done,  Mat.  '27.  .i.  He  was  mightily  a^Uctcd 
in  his  nintd  about  it,  and  icishcd  it  had  not  been 
done.  Hut  this  repentance  arises  from  a  fear 
iifthc punishmentdcnounc'jdagainst  sin,andis 
■not  accompanied  icith  hatred  of  sin ;  as  when  a 
malefactor  suffers  for  his  crimes,  he  rejlects 
vponhis  actions  withsorruw;butthisnotbeinga 
sacruL  act,but  proceeding  from  a  violent  princi- 
ple, is  consistent  with  as  great  a  locc  to  sin  as  he 
had  before,  and  maij  be  entirely  terminated  on 
himself;  he  may  be  sorry  for  his  crimes,  as 
they  have  exposed  him  to  punishment,  and  yet 
not  he  grieved  that  thereby  he  has  offended  God. 
This  IS  legal  repenlance.  \i]  For  that  saving 
grace  wrought  in  the  soul  by  the  Spirit  of  God, 
whereby  a  sinner  is  made  toseeand  be  sensible 
of  his  sin,  is  grieved  and  humbled  before  Ood 
on  account  of  it,  not  so  much  for  the  punish- 
ment to  which  si~  .tu.?  maii":  him  liable,  as  that 
thereby  God  is  di.ihonoured  and  offended,  his 
lair.i  violated,  and  his  own  soul  polluted  and 
defiled  ;  and  this  grief  arises  from  love  to  God, 
and  is  accompanied  with  a  hatred  of  sin,  a 
love  to  holiniss,  and  a  fixed  resolution  to  for- 
tiakc  sin,  and  an  expectation  of  favour  and  for- 
giveness, through  the  merits  of  Christ.  This  is 
evan^u'lictil  or  !»osiiel  repentance,  .Mat.  3.  2,  8. 
.'2cts:i.  10.    aCflj-.  7.  10. 

The  sacred  writers  often  represent  God  as  moved 
with  rcgret,or  tv\Knlnncc,orrdenting,  for  hav- 
ing suffered  or  resolved  upon  certain  things. 
Jt'is  said,  that  Ood  repented  that  he  had  made 
man,  seeing  that  his  wicludncss  had  proceeded 
to  such  an  extremity,  Oen.  0.  (i.  Jt  is  else- 
where said,  that  he  repented  of  having  made 
Haul  king  over  his  people,  1  Sam.  15.  11.  'fhis 
is  not  to  be  understood,  as  if  God  had  conceived 
anyrcgret  at  any  thing  that  he  had  done  wrong, 
or  that  he  repents  of  a  false  step  that  he  had 
made,  as  n  man  does  when  he  perceives  he  has 
committed  an  error.  God  is  not  capable  o/ re- 
pentance in  this  sense.  But  sometimes  he 
changes  his  conduct  towardsthoseihat  are  -un- 
faithf'Ul  to  him,  and  after  having-  treated  them 
Willi  mercy,  he  corrects  thrm  with  severity,  as 
if  he  had  repented  of  what  he  had  before  done 
in  their  favour.  Jllso  God  is  said  to  repent  of 
the  evil'  he  was  about  to  inflict ;  when  moved 
with  compassion  towards  the  miserable,  or  en 
treated  by  their  prayers,  he  remits  the  punish- 
ment of  their  sins,  or  does  not  execute  the 
threaten  ings  he  had  made  against  them  :  Thus 
it  is  said  in  the  Psalm.H,  thai  he  repented  ac- 
ordiiig  to  the  miillitudo  of  hii  mercies,  Psal. 
100.  V,.  .See  .ler.  18.  8. 

F.ind.  IX  17.  Ic3t  peradventure  the  people  r. 
3-2. 1-2.  turn  from  thy  fiircc  wralh,  and  r.  of  this 

A'u;n.23. 10.  neither  son  of  man,thathe  shouldr, 

Juul.  3i2.  30.  iho  Lord  shall  r.  for  his  gervants 

1  Sam.  1.5.  211.  and  also  the  Strength  of  Israel  will 
not  r.  for  he  is  not  a  man  that  he  should  r. 

1  A7n/,'»>'.17.ifthey  r.  in  the  land  of  their  captivity 

JoUi-i.fi.  I  uliht)r  myself,  and  r.  in  dust  and  ashes 

Psnl.  00. 13.  let  it  r.  thee  concerning  thy  servants 
1111.4. Lord  hath  sworn,  and  will  not  r.  //c6.7.21 
IS."}.  14.  lie  will  r.  himself  foncerning  his  servants 

Jer.  4.  2"*.  I  have  piirposi'd  it,  and  will  not  r. 
JP.H.  if  nation  turn,  I  will  r.  of  the  evil,  20.  13. 

10.  if  it  do  evil,  ih<^n  I  willr.  of  the  good 
00.  3.  Ihnt  I  mnv  r.  ||42. 10.  for  I  r.  of  the  evil 
Kirk.  14.0.r.  ami  turn  yourselves  from  idol9,18.30 
21.  14.  neither  will  I  spare,  neither  will  I  r. 
loeli.  14.  who  knowclh  if  he  will  return  andr.  and 
leave  n  hh'S^ing  beliiml  him  1  .lonah  3.  9. 

^fnt.3.  2.  .John  the  IlapiiHl  prearhed,  saying,  r.  for 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand,  4.  17. 
Mark  l.l.'i.Jesns  preached, r.ye, and  believe  gospel 
G.  \i.  they  went  and  preached  that  men  shonid  r. 
1,-iihe  13.3.except'ver.ye  shallall  likewise  perish,.'). 
1*1  30   if  one  went  from  the  dead,  they  will  r. 
17.  3.  ond  if  thy  hrothor  r.  forgive  him,  4. 
Of(.<2. 3S.  r.  ami  he  hapti/.i'd  every  one  of  yon 
3  Pl.r.ye  iheref  and  he  ronvi'rtod,  that  your  •'in.* 
h.  2-2.  r.  of  this  thy  wickedness,  and  pray  (Jod 
17.  30.  but  eommandcth  nil  meuovery  whtsretor. 
i6\ 


REP 

Acts  20. 20.  that  they  sliould  r.  and  turn  to  Gfod 
•Z  Cor.  7.  8.  made  you  sorry,  1  do  notr.  tho'  I  didr. 
yifu.2. 5.  remember  therefore  and  r.  e.vcejit  thou  r. 
]0.  r.  or  else  1  will  come  unto  thee  quickly 

21.  1  gave  her  space  to  r.  of  her  fornication 

22.  except  they  r.  of  their  deeds 

3.  3.  remember  how  Ihou  hast  received, and  r. 

10.  I  chasten,  be  zealous  therefore  and  r. 

KEl'ENTANCE. 
f/os.  13.  14.  r.  shall  be  hid  from  mine  eyes 
Jitat.  3. 8.  bring  forth  fruits  meet  forr.  J^uke  3.  8. 

11.  I  indited  baptize  you  with  water  untor. 

0.  13.  to  call  sinners  to  r.  Mark'i.  17.  y.ijAe5.32. 

i\lark  1. 4.John  did  preach  the  baptism  of  r.  for  re- 
mission of  sill;',  J.uke'i.  3.  Jlets  13.24.  |  10.  4. 
TMke  15.7.  than  over  ninety-nine  which  need  no  r. 

24.47.  that  r.  and  remission  of  sins  be  preached 
Jlets  5.31.  him  hath  God  exalted  for  to  give  r.  to  Isr. 

11.  18.  God  also  to  the  Gentiles  granted  r.  to  life 

20.  21.  testifying  to  the  Greeks  r.  toward  God 
20.20.should  turn  to  God,  and  do  works  meet  forr. 

Horn.  2.  4.  the  goodness  of  God  leadeth  thee  to  r. 

11.  20.  the  gifts  and  calling  of  God  are  without  r. 
2  Cor.  7.  9.  but  I  rejoice  that  ye  sorrowed  to  r. 

10.  godly  sorrow  worketh  r.  to  salvation 
2  Tim.  2. 2.3. if  Godperadventure  will  givethemr. 
Heb.  6.  1.  not  laying  again  the  foundation  of  »■. 

G.  if  they  fall  away,  to  renew  them  again  to  r. 

12.  17.  he  found  no  place  of  r.  thoufjli  hesoughtit 
2  i'c£.3.0.uny  perish,  hut  that  all  should  come  tor. 

KEl'i:.\TEl). 

Gen.  6.  0.  it  r.  the  Lord,  that  he  had  made  man 

Exod.'^i.M.  the  Lord  r.  of  the  evil  be  thought  to  do 

2  Sam.  24.  16.  1  Cliron.  21.  15.  .ler.  26.  10. 

j!(rfn'.2.18.itr.  the  Lord  because  of  their  groanings 

21.  6.  the  children  of  Israel  r.  for  Benjamin,  15. 

1  Sam.  15.  35.  the  Lord  r.  that  he  made  Saul  king 
Psal.  106.  45.  the  Lord  r.  according  to  his  mercies 
Jer.  8.  6.  no  man  r.  him  of  his  wickedness,  saying 

20.  16.  as  cities  the  Lord  overthrew,  and  r.  not 
31.  lU.  surely  after  that  I  was  turned,  I  r. 

JImos  7.  3.  the  Lord  r.  for  this,  it  shall  not  be,  6. 
.Jonah'A.  10.  God  r.  of  the  evil  that  he  had  said 
Zeeh.  8.  14.  as  1  thought  to  punish  you,  and  I  r.  not 
Mat.  11.  20.  to  upbraid  cities,  because  they  r.  not 
2L  they  would  have  r.  long  ago,  Luke  10.  13. 
12.  41.  the  men  of  Kineveh  shall  rise,  because 
they  r.  at  the  preaching  of.Ionas,  Auie  11.  32. 

21.  20.  I  will  not,  but  afterward  he  r.  and  went 
32.  and  ye,  when  yohad  seen  it,r.  not  afterward 

27.  3.  Judas  r.  himself,  and  brought  the  silver 

2  Cur.  7.  10.  worketh  repentance  not  to  be  r.  of 
12.  21.  many  that  have  not  r.  of  the  uncleanness 

Rev.  2.  21.  I  gave  space  to  repent,  and  she  r.  not 
0.20.who  were  not  killed  hytlirse  plagues, yet»-.not 
21.  neither  r.  of  their  murders  nor  their  thefts 
16.  0.  blasphemed  name  of  God,  and  r.  not,  11. 

UEPENTEST. 
./onaA4.2.art  a  gracious  (5o<l,  and  r.theeof  theevil 

REPE.NTETH. 
Gen.  6.  7.  for  it  r.  me  that  I  have  made  them 
1  Sam.  15. 11.  it  r.  me  that  I  have  set  up  Saul  king 
.foel'2. 13.  he  is  slow  to  anger,  and  r.  him  of  the  evil 
Lukel5.  7.  joy  shall  he  over  one  sinner  that  r.  10. 

REPENTING. 
Jer.  15.6. 1  will  destroy  thee,  I  am  weary  with  r. 

REPEiN'TlNGS. 
WtfS.ll.S.my  heart  is  turned, r.are  kindled  together 

REPETITIONS. 
Mat.  6.  7.  use  not  vain  r.  as  the  heathen  do 

REPLENISH. 
fJen.l.SS.be fruitful, miiltipiv, and  r.thc  earth,  9.  1. 

REPLENISHED. 
If  a.  2.  6.  because  they  he  r.  from  the  east 
23.  2.  the  merchants  of  Zidon  have  r.  'I'yro 
.ler.  3).  25.  and  I  have  r.  every  sorrowful  soul 
F.zrk.  26.  2.  I  shall  bo  r.  now  she  is  laid  waste 

27.  25.  thou  wast  r.  and  maile  very  glorious 

REPLIESI'. 
Rom.  9.  20. 0  man,  who  art  thou  that  r.  ag.  God  7 

REPORT. 
f?fn.  37. 2.JoBepli  brought  to  his  father  their  evil  r. 
F.Tod.  23.  1.  thou  shult  not  raise  a  false  r. 
JVuTn.  13.  32.  they  brought  up  an  evil  r.  of  Ihc  land 
14.  37.  men  thai  dul  bring  up  theevil  r.  died 
Hrut.  2.  25.  the  nations  who  shall  hear  r.  of  theo 
1  Sam.  2.  2-1.  nay,  my  sons,  it  is  no  good  r.  I  hear 
1  Kings  10. 6.  it  was  a  true  r.  I  heard,  2  Chron.9. 5. 
JVr/i.  i).  13.  they  might  have  matter  for  an  evil  r. 
I'rov.  15.  30.  and  a  good  r.  maketh  the  bones  fat 
Isa.  23.  5.  as  at  tho  r.  concerning  Egypt,  so  shall 
(hey  be  sorely  pained  at  the  r.  of  Tyre 

28.  10.  it  phall  be  a  vexation  only  to  understand  r. 
53.1. who  hath  believed  our  r.?lo  whom  isthe  arm 

of  tho  Lord  revealed  ?  John  12.  38.  Rom. 

10.  10. 
.A  r.  50.  43.  the  king  of  IVihylon  hath  heard  the  r. 
f/ah.  3.  t  2.  I  have  lirnrrl  thy  r.  and  was  afraid 
.IclaO.  3.  look  out  seven  men  of  hone-t  r.  full  of 
llolyObubt 


REP 

./3ct«10.22.CorncIlQ9wa'!  ofgoodr.amonglhf.Jcflri 
22.  12.  let  Ananias  having  a  good  r.  of  the  Jewa 

2  Cor.  6. 8.  by  evil  r.  and  good  r.  as  deceiv.  yet  true 
/'A(Y.4.8.whatsoever  tilings  ate  of  good  r.  and  jiuio 
1  'J'im.  3.  7.  a  bishop  must  have  a  goodr.  of  them 
Heb.  11.  2.  by  faith  llie  elder.*  obtained  a  good  r. 

39.these  nil  having  obtained  a  goodr.  Ihro'  failh 

3  John  12.  Demetrius  hath  a  good  r.  of  all  men 
REPORT,   yerb. 

Jer.  20.  10.  r.  say  they,  and  we  will  r.  it 

ICor.  14.25.  he  will  r.  that  God  is  in  you  of  a  trulh 
REPORTED. 

JVcA.  6. 6.  it  is  r.  among  heathen,  Gashmu  sailh  it 
7.  shall  it  be  r.  to  king  according  to  these  words 
10.  also  they  r.  his  good  deeds  before  me 

/C»-(A.1.17.des|>ise  their  husbands,when  it  shall  bcr. 

Kzek.  0.  11.  the  man  which  had  the  iukburn  r. 

jl/«£. 28.15. this  saying  is  commonly  r.  among  Jews 

Acts  4. 23.  they  r.  all  that  the  chief  priests  bad  said 
16.  2.  Timothcus  was  well  r.  of  by  the  brethren 

Rom.  3.  8.  and  not  rather  as  we  beslunderously  r. 

1  Cof.5.1. it  is  r.that  there  is  fornication  among  you 

1  'lim.  5.  10.  a  widow,  well  r.  of  for  good  wuiks 

1  I'et.  1.  12.  minister  tliinss  that  are  now  r.  loyoj 
REPOSSESS. 

£io£/.15.t0.will  draw  sword,  my  band  shall  r.  them 
REPROACH 

Signifies,  [1]  Scorn,  or  derision,  Neh.  2.  17. 
I  5.  0.  [2J  .^.Aninf,  infamy,  or  disgrace,  Prov. 
6.  33.  [3j  Censures  and  reflections,  lai.  51.  7. 
[4]  Injury  or  contumely  either  in  word,  urdecdj 
2L'or.  12.  10.  [5]  'J'he  silts  of  men,  which  casi 
dishonour,  or  reproach  upon  God,  Rum.  15.  3. 
[0]  Sterility,  or  barrenness  in  women,  Gen.  30. 
23.  This  among  the  Hi  brcvjs  was  reckoned  a 
reproach,  because  such  did  seem  to  be  excluded 
from  the  promise  made  to  Abraham  concerning 
the  multiplication  of  his  seed  ;  and  bcciiiisi  they 
were  not  in  the  capacity  of  having  the  proniiseii 
Seed  to  become  of  their  posterity.  [7]  Uncir- 
cumcision,  which  the  Jews  counted  a  leptoach. 
Josh.  5.  9,  This  ilay  have  I  rolled  away  Iho 
reproach  of  F-gypl  from  off  you.  J  hare  freed 
you  from  that  shame  and  dishonour  which  did 
lie  upon  you  lehil.^l  you  were  bondslaves  in  the 
land  of  Egypt,  by  receiving  you  into  covenant 
with  me,  acknowledging  you  for  viy  peculiar 
people,  and  admittivgyou  to  have  this  privilege 
sealed  unto  you  by  circumcision.  H  is  called 
the  reproach  of  Egy|it,  either,  [1]  Hecause  the 
Egyptians  were  nut  in  covenant  with  God,nei- 
ther  did  they  partake  of  the  seals  of  it,  as  may 
be  gathered  from  Exod.  2.  6.  where  the  child 
Moses  teas  known  to  be  a  Hebrew  by  his  murk  ; 
and  therefore  the  Tl^y[)t'iarif,  as  other  nations, 
were  aliens  aud  strangers  from  God,  and  had 
in  abomination  by  the  church  and  people  of 
God,  Ejih.  2.12.  Or,  [2]  Because  (At-  Israeliles 
came  out  of  Egypt,  and  were  esteemed  to  be  a 
sort  of  Egyptians,  A'um.  22.  5.  which  they 
justly  thought  a  great  rejiroach  ;  but  by  their 
circumcisionlhcy  weredislinguishi  dfromthem, 
and  manifested  to  be  another  kind  of  people. 
Or,  [3]  IJeeause  many  of  tin  in  lay  undirthis 
reproach  in  Egypt,  having  wickedly  neglected 
this  duty  therefor  worldly  reasons ;  and  others 
of  thrm  continued  in  the  same  shameful  condi- 
tion for  many  ijears  in  the  teitdcmrss. 

.fosh.  5.  0.  I  have  rolled  away  the  r.  of  Egypl 

Judg.b.  \  18.  Zebulun  and  Naphtali  expo.-ed  to  r. 

1  Sam.  17.  20.  and  taketh  away  the  r.  from  Israel 

JV(A.  1.3.  the  remnant  are  in  great  alfliclion  and  r. 
4.  4.  and  turn  ihcir  r.  upon  their  own  head 
5. 9.  because  of  the  r.  of  the  heathen  our  enemies 

Psnl.  ,57.  3.  he  shall  save  me  from  the  r.  of  him 
60.  7.  because  for  thy  sake  I  have  borne  r. 

20.  r.  bathbrok.  my  heart,  lam  full  of  heaviness 
71.  13.  let  them  be  covered  with  i .  that  seek 
78.  60.  he  put  them  to  a  perpetual  r. 
70.  12.  iheir  r.  wherewith  they  reproached  Iheo 
80.50.  remember  the  r.  of  thy  servants  how  I  bear 
in  my  bosom  tho  r.  of  the  mighty  peoplo 
110.  22.  remove  from  me  r.  and  contempt 

Prov.  6.  33.  and  his  r.  shall  not  be  wiped  away 

18.  3.  and  with  ignominy  cometh  r. 

19.  2t).  is  a  son  that  causelh  shame  and  r. 
22.10.  cast  out  the  scorner,  strife  anil  r.  shall  cease 

Isa.  4.  I.  called  by  thy  name  to  take  nwny  our  r. 
51.  7.  fear  ye  not  the  r.  of  men,  nor  be  afraid 
51.  4.  not  remember  the  r.  of  thy  widowhood 

.Irr.  23.  40.  I  will  bring  an  overln-sliiig  r.  on  you 
31.  19.  becBUso  1  did  bear  the  r.  of  my  youth 
51.  51.  wo  are  confounded,  bee.  we  have  heard  r. 

I.am.  3.  30.  he  is  filled  full  with  r. 
01.  Ihou  hast  heard  their  r.  O  Lord,  against  me 
5. 1 .  remember,0  Lord,  consi.lcr  and  beholil  our  r. 

I'.-.ik.  16.  .57.  discovered,  as  at  the  lime  of  thy  r. 
21.  2.'*.  concrrnin:.'  the  r.  of  .Aininooitrs,  sny  thou 
36. 15.  noilbor  shall  thou  bear  the  r.  of  the  peo- 
plo any  more 


REP 

Ese74  80.30.  that  yo  receive  no  more  r.  of  ftimtno 
Dan.  11. 18.  a  jirince  lor  his  own  bfliuirslinll  cause 

the  r.  oli'urud  by  him  to  cease,  williout  iiis  o\mi 
Hos.  Vi.  14.  ami  i'lis  r.  shall  hisLiorit  return  to  him 
Joel  2.  17.  and  give  not  thnie  lieritagc  to  r. 
Mic.  ti.  IB.  theretbro  ye  shall  bear  r.  of  my  people 
Ze]>h.  2.8.  I  have  heard  Iher.  ol'JMoab  and  Amnion 

3.  Id.  to  whom  the  r.  of  it  was  a  burden 
2Cor.ll.21.I  s))cak  as  concerning  r.as  though  weak 
1  Tim.  3.  7.  must  have  a  good  report  lest  fall  intor. 

4.  10.  therefore  we  both  labour  and  sutler  r. 
Hcb.  11.  2C.  esteeming  r.  of  Christ  greater  riches 

I'S.  13.  let  us  go  without  the  camp,  bearing  his  r. 
.4  HEl'ROACII. 

Ocn.  34.  14.  we  cannot  do  this,  that,  were  ar.  to  us 

1  Sam.  11.2.  and  lay  it  for  a  r.  upon  all  Israel 

J^rh.'i.  17.  let  u.s  build,  that  we  be  no  more  a  r. 

Psal.  15. 3.  he  that  taki'th  not  up  a  r.  ag.  neighbour 
22.  6.  a  r.  of  men,  and  despised  of  the  peo[)lo 
'31.  11.  I  was  a  r.  among  all  mine  enemies 
31).  8.  make  mo  not  the  r.  of  ihe  foolish 
44.  13.  thou  niakest  ns  a  r.  to  our  neighbours 
7!t.  4.  we  arc  become  a  r.  to  our  neighbours 
80.  41.  all  spoil  him  ;  ho  is  a  r.  to  his  neighbours 
109.  25.  I  became  also  a  r.  to  them,  they  shaked 

Prov.  14.  34.  but  sin  is  a  r.  to  any  people 

Isa.  30.  5.  all  ashamed  of  a  people  that  were  a  r. 

Jer.  0.  10.  the  word  of  the  Lord  is  to  tliera  a  r. 
20.  8.  the  word  of  the  Lord  was  made  a  r. 
24.  9.  I  will  deliver  them  for  their  hurt  to  be  a 
r.  and  a  proverb,  29.  18.  1  42.  18.  |  44.  8,  12. 
49.  13.  ISozraii  shall  become  ar.  and  a  curse 

Eirk.  5. 14. 1  will  make  thee  ar.  among  the  nations 

15.  Jerusalem  shall  be  a  r.  and  a  taunt 
22.  4.  I  have  made  thee  a  r.  unto  the  heathen 

Dan.  9.  IG.  because  Ihy  people  are  become  o  r. 

Joel  2.  19.  and  I  will  no  more  make  you  a  r. 
My  REl'ROACH. 

<7cn.  30. 23.  she  said,  God  hath  taken  away  myr. 

1  .S(i7n.25.39.  that  hath  pleaded  the  cause  of  my  r. 
Jnb  19.  5.  if  indeed  ye  plead  against  mo  my  r. 

20.  3.  I  have  heard  the  check  o(  my  r. 
Psal.  69. 10.  when  I  wept,  that  was  myr. 
19.  thou  hast  known  myr.  and  my  shame 
119.  39.  turn  away  my  r.  which  I  fear 
J^ulccl.  25.  to  take  away  mt/r,  among  men 

UEPRO.VOfl. 
/?i((A2.  15.  saying,  let  her  glean,  and  r.  her  not 

2  Kings  19.4.whom  king  of  Assy  ria  his  master  hath 

sent  to  r.  the  living  Go<l,  16.  Isa.  37.  4,  17. 
.Vi"A.  6.  13.  have  matter  that  they  might  r.  me 
Jobil.  f).  my  heart  shall  not  r.  me  so  long  as  I  live 
Psal.  42.  10.  as  with  a  sword,  mine  enemies  r.  me 
74.  10.  how  long  shall  the  adversary  r.  me  1 
102.  8.  mine  enemies  r.  me  all  the  day 
Luke  6.  22.  when  men  shall  r.  you  for  my  sake 

REPROACHED. 
/..ci-.lO.  1 20. who.  lieth  with  a  bond-maid  r.  by  man 
2  Sam.  21.  t21. when  he  r.  Israel,  Jonathan  slew 
2  Kings  19.  22.  whom  hast  thou  r.  ?  Isa.  37.  23. 
23.  by  thy  messengers  thou  liastr.  the  Lord,  and 
said,  I  am  come  to  Lebanon,  Isa.  37.  24. 
Jnh  19.  3.  these  ten  times  have  ye  r.  me 
Psrt/.  55.  12.  it  was  not  an  enemy  that  r.  me 
(lO.  9.  that  r.  thee,  are  fallen  upon  me,  Rom.  15.  3. 
74.  18.  remember  this,  that  the  enemy  hath  r. 
79. 12.  wherewith  they  have  r.  thee,  O  Lord 
89.  51.  wierewith  thine  enemies  have  r.  O  Lord, 
they  have  r.  the  footsteps  of  thine  anointed 
Zqyh.  2.  8.  whereby  they  have  r.  my  people 
lO.because  they  have  r.and  magnified  themgelves 

1  PU.  4.  14.  if  ye  he  r.  for  t.hrist,  happy  are  ye 

REPROACHES. 
Psal.  69.  9.  and  the  r.  of  them  that  reproached 
thee  are  fallen  upon  mo,  Rom.  15.  3. 
Isa.  43  28.  therefore  I  have  gjven  Israel  to  r. 

2  Cor.  12.  10. 1  take  pleasure  in  r.  for  Christ's  sake 
Heb.  10.  33.  whilst  ve  are  made  agazingstock  by  r. 

REPROACHEST. 
/.uie  11. 45.  Master,  thus  savins,  thou  r.  us  also 

REPROACHETH. 
JVum.  15.30.  doth  ought  presumptuously,  r.  Lord 
P.t«Z.  44. 16.  voice  of  him  that?-,  and  blaspherueth 
57.  t  3.  he  r.  him  that  would  swallow  me  up 
74.  22.  remember  how  the  foolish  man  r.  thee 
119.  42.  to  answer  him  that  r.  me,  Prov.  27. 11. 
Prov.  14.  31.  oppresseth  poor  r.  his  Maker,  17.  5. 

REPROACHFITLLY. 
Job  IG.  10.  they  have  smitten  me  on  the  cheek  r. 
1  Tim.  5.  14.  give  none  ocasinn  to  speak  r. 

E  EPROBATE 
/h  Greek,  aJsxi.Moc.  This  icoril  aJwonn- Mctal- 
iets  is  vsed  to  signify  any  metal  that  will  not 
endure,  the  trial,  or  7chcn  tried,  that  betrays  it 
self  to  be  adulterate,  or  reprobate,  and  of  a 
coarse  alloy:  Thus  Jeremiah  says  o/.Tudah,  .Ter. 
(i.  30,  Reprobate  silver  shall  men  call  them,  be- 
cause Ihe  T,ord  hath  rejected  them.  They  are 
not  purged,  nor  refined,  neither  will  they  pass 
for currentbeforeGod,orgaodtiien.  TA«Agoncs 
433 


REP 

take  tfU  morda  hi  another  eense,  /Is  fie  that 
strives  as  he  ought,  and  coiiijucrs,  is  ^oxi/co>, 
approved,  2  Tim.  2.  15.  so  he  that  loses  the 
game  and  prize,  that  doth  not  run  or  strive 
according  to  the  laws  of  the  game,  and  so  over 
come,  is  said  to  »iioxi/40{,  to  miscarry  in  the 
race,  and  so  to  lose  the  reward:  Thus,  at  the 
close  of  an  agonistical  discourse  of  running  and 
striving,  the  jiposlle  Paul  says,  1  bring  under 
my  body,  /  subdue  my  sensitive  powers,  and 
mortify  my  carnal  u_ff'ectiuns,  lest  when  1  have 
preached  to  others,  1  myself  should  be  a  cast- 
way,  or  reprobate,  1  Cur.  9.  27.  Lest  I  should 
be  a  counterfeit,  a  mere  pretender,  being  void  of 
trucgracc;anU  consequently  such  as  (iod  would 
reject  as  unfit,  and  unworthy  to  be  rewarded  by 
him.  A  reprobate  mind,  that  is,  a  mind  har- 
dened in  wickedness,and  so  stupidas  not  to  dis- 
cern between  good  and  evil,  Rom.  1.  28. 
Reprobation  is  generally  nndcrstood of  the  decree 
and  purpose  of(jod,lo  abandon  the  wicked  to  the 
greatest  of  ei>ils,  by  not  delivering  them  out  of 
that  mass  of  corruption,  in  which  all  mankind 
are  involved  by  nature;  and  in  nut  affording 
them  the  graces  necissary  to  their  arriving  at 
eternal  happiness  ;  God  does  not  reprobate  men 
by  making  them  wicked,  bat  by  not  granting 
them  the  benefits  of  his  gratuitous  mercy. 
.Ter.  0.  30.  r.  silver  shall  men  call  them,  because 
Rom.  1.  28.  God  gave  them  over  to  a  r.  mind 
2  Tim.  3.  8.  men  r.  concerning  the  faith 
Tit.  1.  16.  and  being  to  every  good  work  r. 

REPROHATES. 
2  Cor.  13. 5.  that  Christ  is  in  you,  e.xcept  ye  be  r. 
6.  I  trust  ye  shall  know  that  we  are  not  r. 
7.shoulddo  that  which  is  honest,  Iho'  we  be  as  r. 
REPROOF. 
,Tob  26.  11.  and  they  are  astonished  at  his  r. 
froH. 1.23.  turn  you  at  myr.  I  will  pour  out  my  Spi. 

25.  ye  would  none  of  my  r.  ||  30.  despised  my  r. 
5. 12.  have  haled  instruction,  my  heart  despised  r. 
10.  17.  but  he  that  refuselh  r.  erreth 

12.  1.  but  he  that  haleth  r.  is  brutish 

13.  18.  he  that  regardeth  ?•.  shall  be  honoured 
15.  5.  but  he  that  regardeth  r.  is  jirudont 

10.  and  he  that  haleth  r.  shall  die 

31.  heareth  the  r.  of  life,  abideth  among  the  wise 

32.  he  that  heareth  r.  getteth  understanding 
17.  10.  a  r.  entereth  more  into  a  wise  man  than 

29. 15.  the  rod  and  r.  give  wisdom,  but  a  child 
2  Tim.  3.  16.  all  scripture  is  profitable  for  r. 

REPROOFS. 
Psal.  33. 14.  as  a  man  in  whose  mouth  are  no  r. 
Proy.6.23.  r.  of  instruclion  are  the  way  of  life 
29. 1 1.  a  man  of  r.  that  hardeneth  his  neck 
REPROVE. 
2/u'7?^.sl9.4.r.  the  words  of  Rab-shakeh,  Isa.  37. 4. 
Job  6.  25.  but  what  doth  your  arguing  r.  ? 
26.do  ye  imagine  to  r.  words  and  speeches  of  one 
that  is  desperate 
13. 10.  he  will  surely  r.  you  if  ye  accept  persons 
22.  4.  will  he  r.  thee  for  fear  of  thee  1 
Psal.  50.  8.  I  will  not  r.  thee  for  burnt-ofFerings 
21.  but  I  will  r.  thee,  and  .set  them  in  order 
141. 5.  let  him  r.  me,  it  shall  be  an  excellent  oil 
Prov.  9.  8.  r.  not  a  seorner  lest  he  hate  thee 
19.  25.  and  r.  one  that  hath  understanding 
30.  6.  lest  he  r.  thee,  and  thou  be  timnd  a  liar 
Isa.  11.  3.  neither  r.  after  the  hearing  of  his  ears 
4.  and  r.  with  equity  for  the  meek  of  the  earth 
Jer.  2.  19.  and  thy  backslidings  shall  r.  thee 
Hos.  4.  4.  let  no  man  strive  nor  r.  another       ' 
Mai.  2.  t  3.  behold  I  will  r.  your  seed,  and  spread 
John  16.  8.  when  come,  he  will  r.  the  world  of  sin 
Eph.!t.  11.  have  no  fellowship,  but  rather  r.  them 
2  7'im.4. 2.  r.  rebuke,  exhort  Willi  all  long-suffering 

REPROVED. 
<7rn.20.10.she  wasr.  {|  21.  25.  Abraham  r.  Abimel. 
lCAron.lG.21. he  suffered  no  man  to  do  them  harm, 
yea  he  r.  kings  for  their  sakes,  Psal.  105.  14. 
Prov.  29.  1.  he  that  being  often  r.  hardeneth  neck 
.Ter.  29.  27.  why  hast  Ihon  not  r.  Jeremiah  ? 
Hah.  2. 1.  and  what  I  shall  answer  when  I  am  r. 
I.uke  3.  19.  Herod  Ihe  lelrarch  being  r.  by  John 
J«An3.20.nor  Cometh  to  light  lest  deeds  should  her. 
Eph.  5.  13.  all  things  that  are  r.  are  made  manifest 

REPROVETH. 
.Tab  40.  2.  he  thatr.  God,  let  him  answer  it 
Psal.  119. 1 42.  so  shall  I  answer  him  that  r.  me 
Prov.  9.  7.  he  that  r.  a  seorner  getteth  shame 
15.  12.  a  seorner  loveth  not  one  that  r.  him 
/jta.  29. 21. and  lav  asnare  for  him  thatr.  in  gate 

REPROVER. 
Prov.  25. 12  so  is  a  wise  r.  upon  an  obedient  ear 
Ezek.  3.  20.  thcu  shall  not  be  lo  them  a  r. 

RKPUTATIOIV. 
Eccl.  10. 1.  so  a  lillle  fcdly  him  that  is  in  r.  for  wisd. 
.'?(;;.•.•  5. 34.  Gamaliel  had"  in  r.  among  Ihe  people 
Gal.  2.2.  privately  to  them  which  were  ofr. 
PAt^2.7.butmadohimself  of  DO  r.  and  took  on  him 


RER 

PMl.  9.  29.  toccivo  him  therefore,  hold  such  hi  n. 

REPUTED. 
Job  18. 3.  wherefore  are  we  r.  vde  in  your  sight  1 
Dan.  4.  35.  all  the  inhabitants  are  r.  us  nothing 

REUUEST,  S. 
./ud^.  8.24.  Gideon  eai<l,  I  would  desire  a  r.  of  yo* 
2  .'iam.  14.  15.  that  the  king  shall  perform  the  r. 
22.  Ihe  king  hath  fuililled  the  r.  of  his  servant 
.Ezra  7  6.  the  king  granted  him  all  his  r. 
AVA.2. 4.  king  said,  for  what  dost  thou  make  r.  ? 
Esth.  4.  S.  go  to  the  king,  to  make  r.  before  him 
5.3.whatis  Ihy  r.  queen  Esther  7  6.  j  7.  2.  |  9.  12. 

7.  3.   my  life  be  given  me,  my  people  at  my  r. 
7.  and  Hanian  stood  up  to  make  r.  for  his  life 

,7ob  6.  8.  O  that  1  might  have  my  r.  .' 

Psal.  21.  2.  and  hast  not  withhoiden  r.  of  his  lips 

lOo.  15.  he  gave  them  Iheir  r.  but  sent  leanness 
Runt.  1.  10.  making  r.  for  a  prosperous  journey 
Phil.  1.  4.  in  every  prayer  making  r.  with  joy 

4.  G.  let  your  r.  be  made  known  to  God 
1  Thcss.  4. 1 1.  we  r.  you,  thai  as  ye  have  received 

REUUESTED. 
Judg.  8.  26.  weight  of  the  ear-iings  that  he  r. 
1  Kings  19.  4.  and  Elijah  r.  that  he  might  dio 
1  Chr.  4. 10.  and  God  granted  Jabez  what  he  r. 
j\rch.  13.  t  6.  Kehemiah  earneslly  r.  of  ihe  king 
Han.  1.  8.  he  r.  of  the  prince  of  ihe  eunuchs 

2.  49.  Daniel  r.  of  the  king,  and  he  set  Shadrach 

REQUIRE. 
Gen.  9.  5.  your  blood  will  I  r.  of  every  beast,  and 
at  the  band  of  man  will  1  r.  the  life  of 
man 

31.  39.1  bare  the  loss,  of  my  hand  didst  Ihou  r.  it 

43.9.1  will  be  surety,  of  my  hand  shall  thou  r.  him 
Deut.  10.  12.  what  doth  the  Lord  r.  ?  Mic.  6.  8. 

18. 19.  whoso,  will  not  hearken,  I  will  r.  it  of  him 

23.  21.  for  the  Lord  will  surely  r.  it  of  thee 
./osh.  22.  2.1.  kt  Lord  himself r.  it,  1  Sam.  20.  16. 
2.S"am.  3. 13.  but  one  thing  I  r.  of  thee,  that  is 

4.  11.  shall  I  not  r.  his  blood  at  your  hand? 

19.  38.  whatsoever  tho.u  shall  r.  that  will  I  do 

1  Kings  8.  t  31.  if  trespass,  and  he  r.  an  oath  ofhini 
59.  maintain  the  cause  as  the  matter  shall  r. 

1  Chr.  21.  3.  w  by  doth  my  loid  r.  this  thing  ? 

2  Chr.  24.  22.  he  said,  Lord,  look  on  it,  and  r.  it 
Ezra!.  21.  whatsoever  Ezra  shall  r.  of  you 

8.  22.  I  was  ashamed  to  r.  of  the  king  a  band 
JVeh.  5. 12.  we  will  restore,  and  r.  nothing  of  them 
Psal.  10.  13.  he  hath  said,  Ihou  wilt  not  r.  it 
Ezek.3. 18.  wicked  man  shall  die  in  his  ininuily,but 

his  blood  will  I  r.  at  thine  hand,  20.  (33;6,8. 

20.  40.  and  there  will  I  r.  your  offerings 
34.  10.  and  I  will  r.  my  flock  at  their  hand 

Luke  12.  t  20.  this  night  do  they  r.  thy  soul 
1  Cor.  1.  22.  for  the  Jews  r.  a  sign,  and  Ihe  Greeks 
7.  36.  and  need  so  r.  let  him  do  what  he  will 

REQUIRED. 
Gen.  42.  22.  therefore  behold,  his  blood  is  r. 
Exod.l^.  36.  they  lent  lot  hem  such  things  as  they  r. 

1  Sam.~\.S.  because  the  king's  business  r.  haste 

2  Sam.  12.  20.  when  he  r.  they  set  bread  before  hira 

1  CAr.  16.37.  to  minister,  as  every  day's  work  r. 

2  Chr.  8.  14.  as  duty  of  every  day  r.  Ezra  3.  4. 

24.  6.  why  hast  Ihou  not  r.  of  the  Levites  to  bring 
JVeh.  5. 18.  yet  r.  not  I  the  bread  of  ihe  governor 
iCs/A.2.15.she  r.  nothing  but  what  Hegai  appointed 
Psal.  40.  6.  and  sin-offering  hast  thou  not  r. 

137.  3.  and  they  that  wasted  us,  r.  of  us  mirth 
Prov.  30.  7.  two  things  I  have  r.  of  Ihee,  deny  not 
Isa.  1. 12.  who  hnth  r.  this  at  your  hand,  to  tread 
J.uke  11.  50.  may  be  r.  of  this  generation,  51. 

12.  20.  this  night  Ihy  soul  shall  be  r.  of  thee 
48.  much  is  given,  of  him  shall  he  much  r. 

19.  23.  I  might  have  r.  mine  own  with  usury 

23.  24.  gave  senlcncc  that  it  should  be  as  llicy  r 

1  Cor.  4.  2.  it  is  r.  of  stewanU  lo  be  faithful 

REQUIREST. 
Ruth  3. 11.  fear  not,  I  will  do  to  Ihee  all  that  thou  r. 

REQUIRETH. 
Eccl.  3.  15.  and  God  r.  that  which  is  past 
Dan.  2.  11.  it  is  a  rare  thing  that  the  king  r. 

REQUIRING. 
Eukc'23.  23.  were  instant,  r.  he  might  be  crucified 

REQUITE. 
Gen.^0.  15.  Joseph  will  certainly  r.  us  Ihe  evil 
/>e«t.32.6.  do  ye  thusr.  Lord,  O  foolish  people? 
2.Sa;n.2.  6.  and  I  also  will  r.  you  this  kindne.as 
](>.  12.  it  mnv  be  Ihe  Lord  will  r.  megood  for  thit 

2  Kings  9.  26!  I  will  r.  thee  in  this  plaF,  saith  Lord 
Psal.W.  14.  beholdest  to  r.  it  with  !!;>'  hand 

41.  10.  O  Lord,  raise  me  up,  that  I  may  r.  them 
./er.  51.  .56.  the  God  of  recompenccs  shall  snrelyr 
1  Tim.  5.  4.  let  them  learn  lo  r.  Iheir  parents 

REQUITED. 
ludff.  1.  7.  as  T  have  done,  so  God  hath  r.  me 
1  6atra.  25. 21.  and  he  hiih  r.  me  evil  for  good 

REQUlTIXt;. 
2'CSr.  6.  23.  judge ihvsfrv nets  hvr.  the  wicked 

REREWARD.' 
JVum.  10.25.  the  standard  of  Dan  wae  hii  r. 


RES 

Josh.  0.  0.  ant  llio  r.  camo  after  tho  ar6 

in.  but  the  7   came  after  the  ark  of  tlio  Lord 
1  Sum.  2i).  2.  David  and  hU  men  passed  on  in  the  r. 
Jsii.  5i.  1-.  tlic  God  of  Israel  will  be  your  r. 
5d.  8.  the  glory  of  the  Ijord  shall  bu  lliy  r. 
KESUUE. 
X)c«J.  28.  31.  and  thou  shall  have  none  to  r.  them 
J'sal.  ilo.  17.  r.  my  soul  from  their  destructions 
Hus.  5. 14. 1  will  take  awav,  and  none  shall  r.  him 

1  Sam.  It.  4j.  the  (leojile  r.  Jonathan,  he  died  not 
;iO.  18.  and  David  r.  his  two  wives 
yicts 2X27.  then  came  I  with  an  army,  and  r.  him 

KKSt.'lETH. 
Z^an.  C.  27.  he  delivenili  a;icl  r.  and  he  workcth 

UliSKMULAA'CE. 
ZccA.  5.6.  this  is  their  r.  through  all  the  earth 

Kt;SKMBLE. 
JmIu  13. 18.  wlvereunto  shall  I  r.  kingdom  of  God 

UKSE.MBLKl). 
y«(/".  8. 13.  cacli  one  r.  tlio  children  of  a  king 

llESERVE. 
Psal.'^.  t  11- f.  tlie  children  of  death 
Jcr.  3.  J.  will  her.  his  anger  forever?  will  he  keep  it 
50.  iJO.  for  I  will  pardon  Ibeni  whom  I  r. 
S  I'et.  2.  y.  tor.  the  unjust  to  the  day  of  judgment 

RKrfERVKD. 
Orn.  27.  30.  hast  thou  not  r.  a  blessing  for  me? 
J\ru.m.  18.  "J.  shall  be  thine  of  the  most  holy  things  r. 
Judir.  21.  22.  because  we  r.  not  to' each  his  wife 
Jiutk'i.  IS. she  gave  her  mother  that  she  had  r. 
a  iiam.S.  i.  but  r.  for  100  chariots,  1  C/ir.  Id.  4. 
^1/4  21.  31).  wicked  is  r.  to  the  day  of  destruction 
3.-'.  23.  which  I  haver,  against  time  of  trouble 
.icln  25.  21.  but  when  Paul  had  appealed  to  be  r. 
lii>m.  11.  4.  1  have  r.  to  myself  7000  mrn 

1  fil.  1.  4.  an  inheritance  r.  in  heaven  for  you 

2  I'd.  2.  4.  delivered  them  to  be  r.  to  judgment 

17.  to  whom  the  mist  of  darkness  is  r.  tor  ever 
'.i.  7.  the  heavens  and  earth  are  r.  unto  fire 
Judc  (i.  angels  he  hath  r.  in  everlasting  chains 

13.  to  whom  is  r.  the  blackness  of  darkness 

UE.SERVETH. 
Jcr.  5.  24.  her.  to  us  the  weeks  of  the  harvest 
J^'aJi.  1.  2.  the  Lord  r.  wrath  fur  his  enemies 

RKSIDb'E. 
Kxod.  10.  5.  and  the  locusts  phal!  oat  the  r. 

1  C'hrun.  li.  GG.  r.  of  the  sons  of  Koliath  had  cities 
VVcA.  1 1.  20.  the  r.  of  Israel  were  in  all  the  cities 
/■la.  21.  17.  the  r.  of  archers  shall  be  diminished 

2r<.  .5.  Lord  shall  be  a  diadem  to  r.  of  his  jieople 

38.  10.  I  am  deprived  of  the  r.  of  my  years 
44.  17.  and  the  >:  then:of  he  niakcth  a  god 

19.  shall  I  make  the  r.  thereof  an  abomination 
Jcr.  S.  3.  chosen,  by  all  the  r.  of  them  that  remain 
15.  9.  the  r.  of  them  will  I  deliver  to  the  sword 
24.  8.  and  the  r.  of  Jerusalem  that  remain 
27.  I'J.  salth,  concerning  the  r.  of  the  vessels 
2!l.  1.  that  Jeremiah  sent  to  the  r.  of  the  elders 

39.  3.  with  all  tho  r.  of  the  princes  of  Babylon 
41.  lO.Ishmael  carried  captive  the  j-.  of  the  people 
52.  15.  and  the  r.  of  the  people  that  remained 

>;:«/«■.  9.  8.  wilt  thou  destroy  all  the  r.  of  Israel? 
2.3.  25.  and  thy  r.  shall  be  devoured  by  the  fire 
31.  18.  but  ye  must  tread  the  r.  of  your  pastures 
30.  3.  might  be  a  possession  of  the  )•.  to  lieallijn 
4.  became  a  derision  to  the  r.  of  the  heathen 
ri.  in  jealousy  liavcl  spoken  against  r.of  heathen 
48.  Irf.  the  r.  in  length  over-against  the  oblation 

21.  the  r.  shall  be  for  the  prince  cni  one  side 
/)(!«.  7. 7.  mill  stamped  titer,  with  the  feel,  19. 
./«('/  1.  t  4.  r.  of  palmer- worm  locusts  halli  oaten 
'/.rph.  2.  9.  the  r.  of  my  people  shall  spoil  them 
Jliii;.  2.  2.  speak  to  Joshua  aiirl  the  r.  of  the  peojile 
y.crh.  I*.  11. 1  will  not  be  to  the  r.  as  in  former  days 

14.  2.  the  r.  of  the  pei)|)le  shall  not  be  cut  olT 
M'll.  2.  1.5.  yet  had  he  the  r.  of  the  Spirit 
Mark  Hi.  13.  they  went  and  told  it  to  tho  r. 
JicU  1.5.  17.  that 'the  r.  might  seek  the  Lord 

RI::rilST. 
y«A.3  l.Satnn  standing  at  his  right  hand  lo  r. 
Mat.  .5.  39.  hut  1  say  unto  yon,  that  ye  r.  not  evil 
I.uke  21.  IS.all  your  ndversar.  shall  not  be  able  to  r. 
.'Ids  r>.  10.  they  wore  not  able  to  r.  the  spirit 
7.  51.  ye  do  always  r.  the  Holy  (Jliost  as  fathers 
]lnm..  13.  2.  they  that  r.  shall  rerieive  damnation 

2  Tim.  3.  H.  HO  do  these  also  r.  the  truth 
Jinn.  4.  T.  r.  tho  devil  and  he  will  floe  from  you 

5.  li.  ye  killed  tho  just,  ami  he  dolh  not  r.  you 
1  ret.ii.'J.  whom  r.  stedfioit  in  tlm  faith,  knowing 

RESIflTKn. 
Rom.  9.  in.  thou  will  say,  who  hath  r.  his  will  ? 
/fell.  12.  4.  ye  havn  not  vet  r.  niUo  blood,  slriviii" 

nESI.STF.TH. 
Itfiiii.  13.  2.  whoso,  r.  th""  power,  r.  ordinance  ofG. 
Jam.  4.  G.  God  r.  the  proiil,  1  I'et.  5.  5. 

RKSdLVKD. 
/,«^(>lfi.  4. 1  am  r.  ulnil  to  do,  when  I  am  put  out 

KK.SdRT. 

AVA.!.  20.  r.  yo  Ihilhor  to  \ij,  God  will  fisht  for  ub 

4dti 


KES 

Peal.  71.0.  whorcunto  I  may  continually  r. 
Murk  10. 1.  and  the  people  r.  to  him  again 
Ju/in  Id.  20.  in  the  it  loplu,  whiihcr  Jews  always  r. 

KE:3(JKTED. 
2  Chron.  11.  13.  tho  priests  and  Levites  r.  to  hirft 
JIark  2.  13.  multituilo  r.  to  liim,  be  taught  them 
Ju/tn  10.  41.  and  many  r.  to  liiui,  and  said 
18. 2.  Jesusofttimoar.  Ihither  with  his  disciplfs 
.rids  10.  13.  we  spake  to  the  women  whor.  thither 

RESPECT. 
God  had  respect  to  jJicl,  and  to  his  oflering, 
ft'cn.  4.  4.  /Jc  looked  to  him  with  a  fuKouralite 
a7id  gracioiia  eye,  he  kindly  accepted  and  owned 
him  and  his  sacrifice.,  and  testified  this  to  Cain 
and  all  there  present,  either  by  an  audible  voice, 
or  by  some  visible  sign,  by  consumin<r  his  sacri- 
fice by  fire  from  heaven,  as  is  generally  con 
jectarcd ;  by  which  token  (rod  did  afterwards 
frequently  signify  his  acceptance  of  sacrifices, 
Lev.  9.  24.  Judg.  0.  21.  1  Kings  18.  38, 
Respect  of  persons.  (Jod  appointed,  that  the 
Judges  should  pronounce  their  setttences  with- 
out any  respect  of  jiersons,  J,ev.  19. 15.  JJeut.l. 
17.  'J'hat  they  should  consider  neither  thejioor, 
■nor  therich,  nor  the  weak,  nor  the  powerful,  but 
only  attend  to  truth  and  justice,  and  give  sen- 
tence according  to  the  merits  of  the  cause.  God 
hiith  no  respect  of  persons,  Deul.  10.  17. 
2 Chron.  19.  7.  He  deals  justly  and  equally 
with  all  sorts  of  men,  and  as  every  one  that 
truly  fears  and  obeys  him  shall  be  accepted,  so 
all  incorrigible  transgressors  shall  beseverely 
punished,  whether  Jews  or  Gentiles,  of  whatso- 
ever nation,  family,  name,  or  quality,  thry  be. 
Ofu.4.4.  the  Lord  hath  r.  to  Al/ol  and  Ins  olfering 

5.  to  Cain,  and  lo  his  olfering,  he  had  not  r. 
F.xod.  2.  25.  God  looked,  and  had  r.  unto  them 
Ijcv.  2().  9.  for  I  will  have  r.  unto  you 

1  JCingsti.'-^.  yet  have  thou  r.  unto  the  prayer  of 
thy  servant  and  his  snpiilieation,  2  Chr.  (i.  19. 

2  Kings  13.  23.  and  the  Lmd  had  r.  unto  them 
2  Chr.  19.  7.  there  is  no  iniquity  nor  r.  of  persons 

with  God,  Rom.  2.  11.  Kph.  G.  9.  Col.3.  25. 
Ps/tl.  74.  20.  have  r.  unto  covenant,  for  dark  jilaees 
119.  G.  when  1  have  r.  to  all  thy  commandments 
15.  and  I  will  have  r.  unto  thy  ways 
117. 1  will  have  r.  unto  thy  statutes  continually 
138.  0.  yet  hath  he  ?•.  unto  the  lowly 
Pj-ov.  24.  23.  it  is  not  good  to  have  r.  of  persons 
in  judgment,  nations  shall  abhor  him,  28.  21. 
Isa.M.  7.  his  eyes  shall  have  r.  to  the  Holy  One 
22. 11.  nor  hadr.  to  him  that  fashioned  it  long  ago 
2  Cor.  3. 10.  for  even  that  had  no  glory  in  this  r. 
Phil.  4.  U.  not  that  I  speak  in  r.  of  want 
Col.  2.  IG.  let  none  judge  you  in  r.  of  aholy  day 
Heb.  11. 20.  Moses  had  r.  to  recompence  of  reward 
Jam.  2. 1.  have  not  the  faith  with  r.  of  persons 
3.  ye  have  r.  to  him  that  weareth  gay  clothing 
9.  if  ye  have  r.  to  persons,  ye  commit  sin 

1  Pet.  1.  17.  who  wiliiont  r.  of  persons,  judgcth 
RESPECT,   yerb. 

Lev.  19.  15.  thou  shalt  not  r.  the  person  of  poor 
J^um.  10. 15.  Jfoscssai<l,r.  not  thou  their  oflering 
Drut.  1.  17.  ye  shall  notr.  persons  in  judgm.  10. 19. 

2  ."*«)».  14.  14.  neither  doth  God  ;•.  any  person 
Isa.  17.8.  nor  shall  r.  that  which  hia  lingers  made 

RESPECTED. 

/,«;».  4.  10.  they  r.  not  the  persons  of  tho  priesta 
ilESPECTEDST. 

/.«rt.  57. 1 9.  thou  r.  the  kin",  ami  didst  increase 
RE-SPECTKR. 

Jlcts  10.  34.  I  perceive  (Icid  is  no  r.  of  persons 
RESPECTETII. 

.Toh  37.  24.  he  r.  not  any  that  are  wise  of  heart 

Psal.Vi.A.  blessed  is  tho  man  thatr.  not  the  proud 
RESPITi;. 

F.iod.S.  15.  when  Pharaoh  snw  that  there  was  r. 

1  Sam.  11.  3.  tho  ciders  said,  give  us  seven  days'  r. 
RES'P 

Signifies,  [1]  .i1  ceasing  from  labour  or  jcorks, 
Exod.  5.  .5.  I  35.  2.  [2]  .n  respite,  or  brenlh- 
ing-timc,  from  open  wars  and  hostilities,  Josh. 
14.  15.  [31  .'7  calmness,  composure,  and  tran- 
quillity of  spirit,  and  n  ehenful  confidrnee  in 
the  promises  and  proridencr  of  f/od,  I'snl.  IIG. 
7.  [4]  .4  quirt,  fired,  and  secure  habitation, 
such  was  Ciuiaan  to  the  Israelites,  Deut.  3.  20. 
and  the  temple  on  Moriah  lo  the  ark,  ir/iieh 
before  had  ro  fired  place  or  setllrmcnl,  Psal. 
132.  8.  .^nd  Namni  says  to  Ruth,  the  Lord 
grant  you  may  find  rest,  that  i»,  a  comfortable 
settlement,  Ruth  1.  9.  f51  '/'he  church  and 
house  of  (lod,  wherein  Christ  rested  hy  his  love 
nnd  grace,  Un.  11.  10.  [li]  .'1  erasing  from 
tillage,  and  husbandry.  Lev.  25.  5.  [7]  That 
peace  with  (Ind  and  their  own  rnnscienees,whieh 
l.ellrrers  ciijnuin  this  world,  hnring  thelorr of 
find  she  I  abroad  in  th'ir  hrarls  by  the  llniij 
Ghosl,wilnessingthrirreeonriliutinn,  justifica- 
tion, renovation,  and  adojition,  so  that  they  re- 


RES 

Jotco  ftj  hope  of  tho  glory  of  God,  Mot.  11.  S9 
lleb.  4.  3,  Tor  we  wbich  have  believed  do 
enter  into  rest.  [8j  Gud's  sacred  rest  f run  tha 
works  of  creation,  lleb.  4.  4,  And  Gud  did  rest 
the  seventh  day  from  all  his  works;  thai  is, 
after  God  had  perftded  the  invisible  and  visi- 
ble world,  on  Ihcrevicw  oj'allhis  works  finding 
them  very  good, licwas  sati.ified  in  uUlhosedis- 
covcries  of  his  own  ptrjtdious  in  the  works  of 
his  hands.  God  always  tiijoyed  his  own  glory 
and  blessedness  even  from  eternity:  llul  this 
rest  hath  rc.-^pict  to  theprccedcnl  work  of  crea- 
tion, and  that  joyful  refitetion  that  God  made 
upon  his  own  works ;  because  they  were  accord- 
ing to  the  model  of  his  infinite  wisdom,  he  was 
infinitely  pleased  in  them.  'J'hii  sae.red  rest, 
and  that  which  was  promised  to  the  Israclilea 
in  the.  land  of  Canaan,  are  meiitioned  by  Lite 
apostles  as  illustrations  of  that  rest  which  the 
saints  shall  enjoy  in  heaven  after  all  their 
works  done  for  the  glory  of  God  on  earth,  lleb. 
4.  9,  There  remaiiiuth  therefore  a  rest  to  the 
peo[do  of  God.  'J'hc  Israelites  were  at  first 
harassed  in  Egypt  with  cruel  oppression,  and 
they  were  to  pass  through  a  waste  and  wild 
wilderness,  wherein  they  were  to  have  many 
hard  and  dijjicult  journeys  :  To  those  that  did 
believe  and  obey,  Canaan  was  promised  as  a 
land  of  rest;  but  this  temporal  Canaan  was  only 
a  type  of  the  hcuvi  uly  Canaan,  the  land  above, 
thutfiows  icith  milk  and  honey ;  that  is,  where 
holiness,  and  joy,  and  pleasure  arc  for  ever  in 
pcrj'cclion. 

REST,  Substantive. 
Gen.  8.  t2].  the  Lord  smelled  a  savour  of  r. 
49.  15.  Issi'.char  saw  that  r.  was  good 
Ejcod.  10.  23>lo-murrow  the  r.  of  the  holy  sabbath 
31.  15.  but  in  the  seventh  is  the  sabbath  of  r. 
35.  2.  Lev.  10.  31.  I  23.  3,  32.  |  25.  4. 
33.  14.  my  presence  shall  go,and  1  will  give  thee  r. 
Lev.  2.5.  5.  for  it  is  a  year  of  r.  to  tho  hind 
jVh;h.28.  t2. olfering  for  a  savour  of  r.  shall  observe 
IJcut.  3.  20.  until  the  Lord  have  given  r.  unto 
your  brethren.  Josh.  1.  13. 
12.  9.  for  ye  are  not  as  yet  come  to  the  r. 

10.  when  he  giveth  you  r.  from  your  enemies 
25.  19.  when  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  given  thee  r. 
28.  G5.  neither  shall  the  sole  of  thy  foot  have  r. 
Josh.  1. 15.  the  Lord  have  given  your  hielliren  r. 
14. 15.  Hebron  the  inlieritance  of  Caleb,  and  tho 
land  had  r.  fioin  war,  Judg.  3.  11.  I 
.5.31. 

21.  44.  the  Lord  gave  them  r.  round  about 

22.  4.  God  hath  given  r.  \\  23. 1.  Lord  had  given  r. 
Judg.  3.  30.  and  the  laiui  had  r.  eighty  years 
Ruth  1. 9.  the  Lord  grant  you  may  find  r.  each 

3.  1.  daughter,  shall  I  not  sei;k  r.  for  thee 
18.  for  the  man  will  not  be  in  r.  till  l-.avc  finished 
2  .SaHi.7.  l.ihe  Loid  had  given  him  r.  from  his  ene- 
mies, 1  kings  5. 4.  [8.50.2  Chrun, 
14.  0,  7. 
14. 1 17.  word  of  my  lord  king  shall  now  be  for  r. 

1  Chron.  0.  31.  after  that  the  ark  had  r. 
22.9.  who  shall  be  anianof  r.and  I  will  give  him  r. 

18.  hath  he  not  given  you  »•.  on  every  side? 

23.  2.5.  God  of  Israel  hath  given  r.  lo  his  people 
2.'^.  2.  I  had  in  mine  heart  lo  build  a  house  of  r. 

2  Chi-nn.  15. 1.5.  the  Lord  gave  them  r.  round  about 
20.  30.  for  his  God  gave  hini  r.  round  about 

F.-.ra 0.  t  10.  they  iniiy  oflir  sacrifices  of  ;•.  to  God 
.\V7/.9. 28.  but  after  ibey  had  r.lliey  did  evil  again 
Kslh.  2.  t  18.  he  imidc  a  r.  to  the  iirovinces 
9.  10.  Ihe  Jews  had  r.  from  their  enemies 

.Mill.  13.  I  should  have  slept,  then  had  I  been  at  r. 
17.  and  there  Ihe  weary  he  at  r. 
20.  I  was  not  in  safety,  neither  hod  I  r. 
11.  18.  thou  shalt  take  ihy  r.  in  snli-ly 
li.  10.  when  our  r.  logetlier  is  in  the  dust 
30.  t  10.  r.  of  Ihy  table  should  be  full  of  fatness 

I'snl.  38.  3.  iieiiher  is  there  any  r.  in  my  bones 
55.  0.  then  would  1  fly  away  and  he  at  r. 
94.13.  that  thou  mayestgive  him  r.  from  adversity 
95.  11.  that  they  should  not  enter  into  my  r. 
110.7.  return  lo  Ihy  r.  O  my  soul,  tiirllie  Lord 
132.  8.  arise,  ()  Lord,  into  thy  r.  thou  and  ark 
14.  this  is  my  r.  for  ever,  here  will  I  dwell 

Pror.  29. 17.rorrect  thy  son,  ho  shnll  give  thco  r. 

Feel.  2.  2.3.  his  heart  tiiketh  not  r.  in  Ihe  night 
0.  5.  this  hntli  more  r.  than  the  other 

/.v«.ll.  10.  (ientilesseek,nnil  hisr.  shall  begloiiou« 
14.  3.  the  Lord  shnll  give  then  r.  from  thy  soriow 
7.  whole  onrlh  is  at  r.  iind  ipiiol,  y.rch.  1.  11. 
18.4.  Lord  saiil,  I  will  lake  my  r.  nnd  consider 
28. 12.  this  is  r.  wherewith  ye  cause  weary  to  rest 
30.  15.  in  reluming  and  r.  shall  ye  be  saved 
34.  14.  nnd  find  for  herself  a  place  of  r. 
GO.  1.  nnd  where  is  Ihe  pini-e  of  my  r.  ? 

.fer.  G.  10.  and  ye  shall  fiiiil  r.  fiir  your  Bonis 
30.  10.  Jacob  shall  return  and  he  in  r.  40.  !17. 
DO.  3i.  tliat  ho  may  give  r.  to  tho  land 


RES 

£:i(fll:.ir).T19.hflst80t  It  before  tIlom^^T  envoxn  o9r, 
W.  t41.  1  will  accupt  willi  your  savour  of  r. 
'36.  1 1,  i  will  go  10  tliL-iii  thai  uru  lit  r. 
lJanAAANvbarA)a.diit;Z7.ut  w:isat?-.iii  mine  house 
Jiic.i.  JO.  arise  ye  ami  liepartjlor  lliis  jij  not  your  r. 
Z.cck.  1).  1.  and  Damascus  shall  be  the  r.  thereof 
Mat.  11.  -is.  como  uuio  luo  an<l  1  will  give  you  r. 
iii).  and  ye  shall  lind  r.  to  your  souls 
1'2. 4;).  seekiiigr.  and  tindeth  none,  J^uke  11.  34. 
ii().4.5.  sleep  on  now,  and  take  your  r.  Mark  14.  41. 
John  U.  13.  that  he  had  spoken  of  taking  r.  in  sleep 
Jlcls  7.  49.  or  what  is  the  place  of  my  r.  ? 

9.111.  then  had  the  churclicsr.  through  all  Judea 
U  Tliess.  1.7.  to  you  who  are  troubled  r.  with  ua 
Htli.  i.  11.  they  shall  not  enter  into  my  r.  18. 
4. 1.  lest  a  promise  being  lell  us  of  entering  into  r. 
3.  for  we  which  have  believed  do  enter  into  r. 
5.  and  again,  if  they  shall  enter  into  my  r. 
8.  forif  Jesus  liad  given  Ihem  r.  then  not  spoken 
y.  there  reinaineih  a  r.  to  the  people  of  God 
lU.  he  that  is  entered  into  his  r.  hath  Ceased 

11.  let  us  labour  therefore  to  enter  into  that  r. 

See  No. 
REST,  Jldjective. 
Gen. 30.  36.  Jacob  fed  the  r.  of  Laban's  flock 
Kiud.i!':.  10.  the  names  of  the  r.  on  the  other  stone 
JLev.  5. 9.  the  r.  of  the  blood  shall  be  wrung  out 

14.  17.  the  r.  of  the  oil  that  is  in  his  hand,  ^9. 
J\''um.  31.8.  besides  the  r.  of  them  that  were  slain 

3-J.  and  the  booty,  being  the  r.  of  the  prey 
Dcut.  3. 13.  the  r.  of  Gilead  gave  I  to  the  half  tribe 
Josh.  10. 'JO.  the  r.  entered  into  fenced  cities 
JtiUg:  7.  I),  but  the  r.  bowed  down  to  drink  water 
1  .sVim.  15. 15.  and  the  r.  have  we  utterly  destroyed 
iitiim.  10.  10.  the  r.  of  the  people  he  delivered  to 
Abishai  his  brotlier,  1  Chron.  19.  11. 

1  Kings  20.  30.  tliq  r.  tied  to  Apliek  to  the  city 

2  Kings  4.  7.  live  thou  and  thy  children  of  the  r. 

1  CliTun.  II.  8.  Joab  repaired  the  r.  of  the  city 
It).  41.  Jeduthun  and  the  r.  cbo.>en  to  give  thanks 

2  CVif.  24.  14.  they  brought  the  r.  of  the  money 
JV"t.7i.  2.  IC).  nor  told  it  to  the  r.  that  did  the  work 

0.  l.r.  of  our  enemies  heard  1  had  built  the  wall 
11.  1.  the  r.  of  the  people  also  cast  lots 
EsZA.9. 12.  what  have  done  in  the  r.  of  provinces  7 
Psal.  17. 14.  and  leave  the  r.  to  their  babes 
Isa.  10.  19.  the  r.  of  the  trees  of  his  forest  be  few 
t'2cA'.45.8.  the  r.  of  the  land  shall  give  to  Israel 
y>'a;i.2.18.  that  Daniel  should  not  perish  with  ther. 
Zeck.  11.  9.  let  the  r.  eat  the  tlesii  of  another 
Mat.  27.  49.  r.  said,  let  us  see  if  Ellas  will  come, 
Luke  12.  26.  why  take  ye  thought  for  the  r.  ? 
24.  9.  and  told  to  the  eleven  and  to  all  the  r. 
Jicts  2.  37.  they  said  to  Peter  and  the  r.  of  apostles 
5.  13.  ofr.  durst  no  man  join  himself  to  them 
27.  44.  and  the  r.  they  escaped  all  safe  to  land 
llom.W.  7.  election  obtained,  and  r.  were  blinded 
1  Cor.  7.  12.  to  the  r.  speak  I,  not  the  Lord 
11.  34.  the  r.  will  I  set  in  order  when  I  come 

1  Pet.  4. 2.  not  live  r.  of  his  time  to  lusts  of  men 
RcB.  2.  24.  to  you  I  say,  and  to  the  r.  in  Thyatira 

9.  20.  the  r.  that  were  not  killed  repented  not 
20. 5.  r.  of  the  dead  lived  not  again  till  1000  years 
.See  Acts. 
REST,  Verb. 
(7cn.  18. 4.  wash  your  feet,  and  r.  under  the  tree 
Exod.5.  5.  ye  make  them  r.  from  their  burdens 
23.  11.  in  the  seventh  year  thou  shall  let  it  r. 

12.  oil  the  seventh  day  thou  shalt  r.  34.  21. 
34.21.  in  earing  time  and  in  harvest  thou  shall  r. 

Lib.  23.  f  32.  from  even  to  even  shall  ye  r. 

23.  12.  then  shall  the  land  r.  to  the  Lord,  20.  34. 

2t;.  35.  because  it  did  not  r.  in  your  snhbaths 
/>e«J.5.14.thy  maid-servant  may  r.  as  well  as  thou 
Josh.  3. 13.  as  soon  as  the  feet  of  the  priests  shall  r. 

2  San.  3.  29.  let  it  r.  on  the  head  of  Joab 

7.  11.  have  caused  thee  to  r.  from  thine  enemies 
21.  10.  neither  the  birds  to  r.  on  them  by  day 
2  Kings'i.  15.  the  spirit  of  Elijah  doth  r.  on  Elisha 
2  Chruii.  14. 11.  we  r.  on  thee,  in  thy  name  we  go 
J«4  3.  18.  there  the  prisoners  r.  together,  hear  uot 

14.  0.  that  he  may  r.  tdl  he  shall  accomplish 
Psal.  16.  9.  my  flesh  shall  r.  in  hope,  Ads  2.  26. 
37.  l.r.  in  the  Lord,  and  wait  patiently  for  him 
125.  3.  rorl  of  wicked  shall  not  r.  on  the  righteous 
ProB.6. 35.  nor  will  her.  cont('nt,tho' thou  g.  gilts 
Cant.  1.7.  where  thou  makc^^t  thy  flock  to  r.  at  noon 
Isa.l.  19.  all  of  them  shall  r.  in  the  desolate  valleys 
11.2.  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  shall  r.  upon  him 
25.  10.  in  this  mountain  shii^l  the  hand  of  Lord  r. 
28. 12.  wherewith  ye  may  cause  the  weary  to  r. 
30.t32.  the  grounded  statt'sball  r. upon  him 
34.  14.  the  ecrcech-owl  also  shall  r.  there 
51.4.  I  will  make  my  judgniiMit  to  r.  for  a  light 
57.2.  enter  into  peace,  they  shall  r.  in  their  beds 
20.  are  like  the  troubled  sea,  when  it  cannot  r. 
C2.  1.  for  Jerusalem's  sake  I  will  not  r. 
03. 14.  the  Spirit  of  the  Ijord  caused  him  to  r. 
fer.  31.  2.  when  I  went  to  cause  him  to  r. 
47.  0.  put  up  into  thy  Rcabbard,  r.  and  bo  Mill 
487 


RES 

tho1t.^.\%  I  wTIl  cause  my  fury  to  r.npon  tfiom,(tnd 

will  be  conilbrled,  10.  4','.  |  21.  17.  |  24.  13- 
44.  30.  that  he  may  cause  the  blessing  to  r. 
Dan.  12.  13.  for  thou  shall  r.  and  staml  in  thy  lot 
tlah.  3.  16.  that  1  might  r.  in  tlie  day  of  trouble 
Zcjih.  3. 17.  he  will  r.jn  love,  he  will  joy  over  thee 
Markti.  31.  come  into  a  desert  place,  and  r.  awhile 
LiUke  10.  6.  if  son  of  peace  lhere,your  peace  shall  r. 
2  Cur.  12.  9.  that  the  power  of  Christ  may  r.on  me 
i/c4.4.  4.  Uud  did  r.  Beveiith  day  from  his  works 
iieo.  4. 8.  they  r.  not  day  and  night  saying.  Holy 
6. 11.  that  they  should  r.  yet  for  a  little  season 
14.  13.  that  they  may  r.  from  their  labours 

RESTED. 
Gcn.2.2.  he  r.on  seventh  day, 3.  Ex.  20.  II.  |  31. 17. 
8.  4.  the  ark  r.  Exud.  10.  14.  locusts  r.  in  Egypt 
Exod.ia.  30.  the  people  r.  on  the  seventh  day 
JVum.  9. 18.  as  long  as  the  cloud  abode  they  r.  23. 

10.  12.  the  cloud  r.  in  the  wilderness  of  Paran 
36.  when  it  r.  he  said,  return,  O  Lord,  to  thous. 

11.  25.  when  the  Spirit  r.  ui)on  them,  26. 
Josh.  11.  23.  and  the  land  r.  from  war 

1  Sam.  25. 1 9.  they  sjiake  in  David's  name,  and  r. 

1  Kings  (i.  10.  the  chambers  r.  on  the  house 

2  Chron.  32.  8.  people  r.  on  the  words  of  Hezckiah 
Esth.9. 17.  on  the  14lh  dayof  the  same  r.  they,  13. 

22.  wherein  the  Jews  r.  from  their  enemies 
.7ob  30.  27.  my  bowels  boiled  and  r.  not 
Z.iiAe  23.56.  they  r.  sabbath-day,  according  to  com. 

RESTEST. 
Rom.  2.  17.  thou  art  a  M-w,  and  r.  in  the  lav? 

RESTETIL 
JbA24.23.it  be  given  him  in  safety,  whereon  her. 
Prov.  14.  33.  wisdom  r.  in  heart  of  him  that  hath 
Eccl.  7.  9.  for  anger  r.  in  the  bosorn  of  fools 
ha.  7.  t  2.  saying,  Syria  r.  on  Ephraim 
\Pct.  4.  14.  fur  the  Spirit  of  God  r.  upon  you 

RESTING. 
JVum.  10.  .33.  to  search  out  a  r.  place  for  them 
2  Chron.Ct.  41.  arise,  O  Lord,  into  thy  r.  place 
Prov.  24.  15.  spoil  not  his  r.  place 
Isa.  32.  18.  my  people  shall  dwell  in  r.  places 
Jor.  50.  6.  they  have  forgotten  their  r.  place 

RESTITUTION. 
Exod.  22.  3.  he  should  make  full  r.  5,  G,  12. 
Job  20.  18.  according  to  his  substance  shall  r.  be 
Jicts 'S.  21.  until  the  times  of  the  r.  of  all  things 

RESTORE 
Signifies,  [1]   To  give  back  again,  Gen.  20.  14. 
Judg.  11.  13.     [2]    To  set  again   in  the  first 
state   or   condition,   Gen.   40.    13.  Isa.  1.  26. 
Acts    1.   6.       [3]   To  recover,  or    get   again, 
2  Kings  14.  25.     [4]   To  make  restitution  or 
satisfaction  for  pretinded  wrongs  out  of  one's 
proper  right  or  substance,  Psal.  69.  4.     [5]  To 
heal  or  cure.  Mat.  12.  13.     [6]  To  reform  the 
corrupt  state  of  the  church,  both  in  doctrine, 
worship,  and  life.  Mat.  17.  11.     [7]  To  endea- 
vour to  bring  a  person,  that  has  fallen  into  sin, 
to  a  sight  of  his  sin,  to  a  sense  of  Gail's  par- 
doning mercy,  and  to  amendment  of  life.  Gal. 
6.  1. 
Gen.2.0.  7.  now  therefore  r.  the  man  his  wife,  and 
if  thou  r.  her  not,  thou  shall  surely  die 
40.  13.  Pharaoh  will  r.  thee  to  thy  place 
42.  25.  to  r.  every  man's  money  into  his  sack 
Exod.  22.1.  he  shall  r.  live  oxen  for  an  ox 

4.  if  theft  be  certainly  found,  he  shall  r.  double 
Lev.  6.  4.  he  shall  r.  that  which  he  took  away 

5.  he  shall  even  r.  it  in  the  principal 

24.  21.  he  that  killeth  a  beast,  he  shall  r.  it 

25.  27.  and  r.  the  overplus  to  whom  he  sold  it 
28.  but  if  he  be  not  able  to  r.  it  to  him 

JVum.  35.  25.  congregation  shall  r.  him  to  the  city 
Dcut.  22.  2.  thinfs  strayed  thou  shalt  r.  again 
yMd^.ll.Kl.thercfore  r.thosc  lands  again  peaceably 
17.  3.  I  will  r.  it,  1  Sam.  12.  3.  1  Kings  20.  34.  .' 
2  .Sam.  9.  7.  I  will  r.  thee  all  the  land  of  Saul 

12.  6.  he  shall  r.  the  Iamb  fourfold 

16.  3.  to-day  shall  the  house  of  Israel  r.me 
2  A7nn-s8.  6.  r.  all  that  was  hers,  and  fruits  of  field 
JVeA.  .5. 1 1.  r.  I  pray  you,  to  them  ||  12.  we  will  r. 
Job  20.  10.  and  his  hands  shall  r.  their  goods 
18.  that  which  he  laboured  for,  shall  he  r. 
Psal.  51.  12.  r.  to  me  the  joy  of  thy  salvation 
/Vow.  6. 31.  if  he  be  found,  he  shall  r.  sevenfold 
Isa.  1.  26.  I  will  r.  thy  judges  as  at  the  first 

42.  22.  they  are  for  si)oil,  and  none  saith  r. 

49.  6.  and  to  r.  the  preserved  of  Israel 

57.  18.  I  will  lead  and  r.  comforts  unto  him 
Jer.  27.  22.  I  will  r.  them  to  this  place 

30.  17.  I  willr.  health  to  thee,  and  heal  tlico 
Kick.  33.  15.  if  the  wicked  r.  pledjo,  shall  live 
Dan.  9. 2.5.  command  to  r.  and  to  build  Jerusalem 
.Toell.  25. 1  will  r.  you  the  years  locust  hath  eaten 
Mat.  17.  11.  Elias  shall  come  and  r.  all  things 
I.vke  19.  8.  have  taken  any  thing,  I  r.  him  fourfold 
.'lets  1.  0.  Lord,  wilt  thou")-,  kingdom  to  Israel  ? 
OaU    G>  1.  ye  whicli  ure  spiritual  r.  such  a  one 
in  tho  spirit  of  moeknosB 


RES 

HESTOUEn. 

Oen.  20.  14.  Abimelech  r.  lum  'o'arah  hia  wift 
40.21.  he  r.thc  tliief  bmler  to  his  butlership 
41. 13.  me  he  r.  to  mine  oliice,  him  ho  hanged 
42.  28.  my  money  is  r.  and  it  is  in  my  sack 

iJeut.  28.  31.  thine  ass  shall  not  he  r.  to  thee 

Judg.  17.  3.  when  he  had  r.  the  1100  shekels,  4. 

1  Sam.  7. 14.  the  cities  taken  from  Israel  were  r. 

1  Kings  13.  6.  pray  for  me,  that  my  hand  may  ba 
r.  to  me:  the  king's  hand  was  r.  him  agaiD 

2  Kings  8. 1.  woman,  whose  son  he  li.id  r.  to  lile,5. 
14.22.iie  built  and  r.  Elath  to  Judah,2  Chr.  20. 2. 

25.  he  r.  coast  of  Israel  from  Hamaib  to  tho  sea 
2  Chron.  8.2.  tho  cities  IJuram  had  r.  to  Solomon 
Ezra  6. 5.  the  vessels  brought  to  Babylon  be  r. 
Psal.  69.  4.  I  r.  that  which  I  took  not  away 
Eiek.  18.  7.  hilt  hath  r.  to  the  debtor  his  jiledge 

12.  hath  spoiled  by  violence,  hath  not  r.  pledge 
Mat.  12. 13.  he  stretched  his  hand  forth  and  it  waa 
r.  whole  like  as  the  other,  Mark  3.  5.  Luko 
6.  10. 
Marks.  25.  bis  sight  was  r.  and  ho  saw  clearly 
Ilcb.  13.19.  that  I  may  be  r.  to  you  the  sooner 

RESTORICR. 
Ruth  4.  15.  he  shall  be  to  thee  a  r.  of  thy  lifo 
/sa.  38. 12.  shall  be  called  r.  of  paths  to  dwell  in 

RESTORETH. 
Psal.  23.  3.  he  r.  my  soul,  he  leadelh  me  in  ptths 
Mark  9.12.  Elias  cometh  first  and  r.  all  things 

RESTORING. 

P«(tM9.  t7.  law  of  the  Lord  is  perfect,  r.  the  soul 

Mic.  2.  t4.  instead  ofr.  be  hath  divided  our  fields 

RESTRAIN. 

1  Sam.  9.  1 17.  this  same  shall  r.  my  people 

2  Kings  4.t  24.  r.  not  for  me  to  ride  e.xcept  I  bid  theo 
Job  15.8.  and  dost  thou  r.  wisdom  to  tliyself? 
Psal.lC).  10.  the  remainder  of  wrath  shalt  thou  r. 
Dau.9.\Sti.  seventy  weeks  ditermiiied  tor.  transg. 

RESTRAINED. 
Gen.  8.  2.  and  the  rain  from  heaven  was  r. 
11.  6.  and  now  nothing  will  bo  r.  from  thom 
16.  2.  Sarai  said,  Lord  halb  r.  nie  from  bearing 
Exod.  36.  6.  the  people  were  r.  from  bringing 
1  Sam.  3. 13.  Eli's  sons  vile,  and  he  r.  them  not 
fsa.  63.  15.  thy  mercies  toward  me,  are  they  r.  7 
Ezek.  30. 1 18.  at  Tehaphnehcs  the  day  shall  ber 
31. 15. 1  r.  the  floods  thereof,  and  great  waters 
JJcts  14. 18.  with  these  savings  scarce  r.  they  peo. 

RESTRA'INEST. 
Job  15.  4.  yea,  thou  r.  prayer  before  God 

RESTRAINT. 
/,ey.  23. 1 30.  itis  a  day  ofr.  Dent.  16.  f  8.2  Cin 
7.  t  9.  JVeh.  a.  t  18.  .Toel  1.  f  14. 
.Tudg.  18.t7.  there  was  no  heir  ofr.lo  put  to  shame 
I  Sam.  14.6.  for  there  is  no  r.  to  the  Lord  to  sav» 
Jer.  17.  t8.  shall  not  be  careful  in  the  year  ofr 

RESTRAINTS. 
Jer.  14.  t  1.  the  word  of  the  Lord  concerning  r. 

RESTS. 
1  Kings  6.  6.  he  made  narrowed  r.  round  about 

RESURRECTION. 
The  belief  of  a  general  resurrection  of  the  dead, 
which  will  come  to  pass  at  the  end  of  the  world, 
and  which  will  be  followed  with  an  immortality 
either  of  happiness,  or  misery,  is  a  principal 
article  of  religion  in  common  to  the  Jew  and 
the  Christian  :  It  is  very  expressly  taught  both 
in  the  Old  and  New  Testament,     .lob  19.  25, 
26,    27,     And   though    after   my  skin    worms 
destroy  this  body,  vet  in  my  flesh  shall  I  seo 
God,  S,-c.     John  5.  28,  2S),   Marvel  not  at  this, 
for  the  hour  is  coming,  in  which  all  that  are  ic 
the  graves  shall  hear  his  voice,  and  shall  come 
forth,  they  tlnit  have  done  good,  unto  the  ra 
surreclion    of  life;    and  they   that  have  don 
evil,  unto  the  resurrection  of  damnation. 
The  resurrection  is  ii  doctrine  unknown  to  th 
wisest  heathens,  and  peculiar  to  the  gospel 
Sowe glimmerings  thnj  had  of  the  soul's  immor' 
tality,  but  no  knowledge  of  the  reviving  of  the 
body.     But  reason  assists  faith  in  this  point, 
both  as  to  the  will   of    God,  and  his  power 
for  the  performing  it.     The  divine  laws  are 
the  rule  of  duty  to  the  entire  man,  and  not  to 
the  soul  only ;  and  they  are  obeyed,  or  violated 
by  the  soul  and  body  incmtjunetion.    The  soul 
designs,  the  body  executes.   The  senses  are  the 
open  ports  to  admit  temptations.     Carnal  af- 
feclions  deprave  the  soul,  C'irrupt   the  mind, 
and  mislead  it.     The  heart  is  the  fountain  of 
profaneness,and  the  tonirue  expresses  it :  Thug 
the  members  are  instrumonis  of  iniciuiiy.     .^nd 
the  body  is  obedient  to  the  holy  soul  in  doing, 
or  suffering  for  God;  and  denies  its  sensual 
appetites  and  satisfactions  in  compliance  with 
reason  and  grace  ;  the  members  are  instruments 
of  righteousness,     /fence  itfolloirs,  that  there 
will  he  an  universal  resurrection,  thai  there- 
warding  goodness  of  God  may  appear  in  ma- 
lung  the  ImkUch  of  his  servants  gloriously  hafp 


RES 

P9  with  thctr  eouls,  and  their  eouts  comphtelj/ 
happy  III  union  icitli  Utcir  bodies,  to  which  t/ici/ 
have  a  tiiitural  incliitatwii ,'  and  ins  rtctitgtng 
Justice  may  Oc  manifest,  inpanisliingtlie  Oudtcs 
oj'tlie  wicked  Willi  eternal  torments  answerable 
to  tlicir  guilt.  ./Ind  as  to  tlie  possibiUlij  of  Ike 
resurreetwii,t!iecoiitiiiaal  production  of  things 
in  tlie  world,  is  a  clear  demonstration  of  tlie 
ptwer  of  God  for  that  effect.  There  is  an 
instance  that  our  iiaoiuur  and  the  apostle  I'aul 
made  use  of,  as  an  image  of  the  resurrection  ; 
A  grain  ol  com  sowed  in  the  earlli,  corrupts 
and  dies,  and  after  si)rings  up  entire ;  its 
death  is  a  disposition  to  life,  John  12.  24. 
1  Cor.  15.  3ij.  The  essays  of  trod's  power  in 
the  works  of  returning  nature,  Jlowers  and 
fruits  in  their  season,  instruct  us  hoio  easily 
he  can  make  those  that  are  in  the  dust  to  awake 
to  life. 

But  more  especially  the  resurrection  of  Christ  is 
Ihe  argument,  the  claim,  and  assurance  of  the 
resurrection  of  believers  to  glory.  For  God 
chose  and  appointed  him  to  be  the  example  and 
principle, from  whom  all  diBineblessings  should 
be  derioed  to  them ;  accordingly  he  tells  his 
disciples.  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also, 
John  14.  lU.  He  is  called  the  lirst- fruits  of 
them  that  slept,  I  Cor.  15.  20.  because  as  the 
Jirst-frutts  were  a  pledge  and  assurance  of  the 
following  harvest;  and  as  from  the  condition  of 
the  Jirst-f raits  being  offered  to  God,  the  whole 
haroest  was  entitled  to  a  consecration,  so  our 
Saoiour's  resurrection  to  the  life  of  glory  is  the 
earnest  and  assurance  of  ours.  Jie  is  the 
Ueud,  believers  are  Ais  members ;  and  therefore 
shall  have  communion  with  him  in  his  life.  It 
13  recorded,  to  confirm  the  hope  of  believers,  how 
early  his  power  was  displayed  in  forcing  the 
grace  to  ri.Uasc  its  captives.  Mat.  27.  5J,  a.'i, 
And  many  bodies  of  saints  which  slept,  arose, 
and  came  out  of  the  graves  after  his  resurr^'C- 
tion,  and  went  into  the  holy  city,  and  appeared 
unto  many.  From  what  he  has  done,  to  what  he 
can  do,  the  consequence  is  clear. 
TuK  Kesi'rrectios  of  Christ  is  the  most 
important  article  of  the  gospel,  and  the  de- 
monstration of  all  the  rest ;  hence  St.  Paul 
says,  1  Cor.  15.  14,  If  Christ  bo  not  risen,  then 
is  our  preachin;  vain,  and  your  faith  is  also 
vain :  And  verse  17,  If  Christ  be  not  raised, 
your  faith  is  vain,  ye  are  yet  in  your  sins. 
The  apostles  being  sent  to  convert  the  world, 
were  to  Cay  this  down  as  the  foundation  of  their 
jircacA/nn-,  That  Jesus  Christ  was  raised  from 
the  dead,  that  all  might  yield  faith  and  obe- 
dience to  him.  Acts  1.  21,  22,  Wherefore  of 
these  men  which  have  companied  with  us, 
a\\  Ihe  time  that  the  Lord  Jesus  went  in  ami 
out  among  us,  beginning  from  the  baptism  of 
John,  uiiio  the  same  day  that  he  was  taken 
up  from  us,  mu<t  one  be  ordained  to  be  a 
witness  with  ue  of  liis  resurrection.  The 
resurrection  of  Christ  confirms  the  faith  of 
Christians  in  his  person,  as  he  is  thereby  de- 
clared to  be  the  Son  of  Gnd  with  power,  Rom. 
1.  4.  He  was  the  .Son  ofOodfroin  eternity,  as 
tAc  Word;  and  from  the  first  moment  of  his 
incarnation  as  Cod-M\n;  yet  the  honour  of 
thi.^  riliition  was  much  eclipsed  in  his  poor  life 
and  ignominious  death ;  batin  his  resurrection 
God  did  publicly  own  him  in  the  face  of  the 
uorlil :  therefore  Ac  is  represented  testifying 
from  heaven.  Thou  art  my  Son,  this  day  have 
I  begollcn  thee,  Jlcts  13.  33.  Jlis  resurrec- 
tion was  likewise  a  most  pregnant  proof  of  the 
allsiiffiiienry  of  his  satisfaction.  The  curse 
of  Ihr  line  iireiimpanied  his  death,  and  seemed 
like  an  itifinile  weight  to  lie  on  his  grave;  but 
in  rising  again,  the  value  and  virtue  of  his 
sufferings  icii.i  fully  declared.  Rom.  4.  25,  He 
yvtiH  delivered  for  our  olTences,  and  was  raised 
again  for  our  jiislifieation :  Having  as  oar 
Surety  paid  our  il'bt,and  given  fulLiatisf  action 
to  divine  justice,  he  was  released  from  t/ir 
grave,  and  the  disrhargn  was  most  solrmnly 
published  to  the  world.  On  this  doctrine  of  his 
resurrection,  as  was  said,is  also  builtour  foith 
in  his  promises,  to  gire  life  and  glory  to  his 
srrvail.i.  For  how  could  we  believe  him  to  be 
the  .'lulhor  of  life,  who  remained  under  Ihe 
power  of  death  ?  If  he  had  hern  confined  to  the 
grave,  all  our  hopes  had  been  buried  with  him. 
But  his  resurrection  is  the  cause,  pnllern,  and 
argument  of  ours  ;  and  Christ  mat/  be  sai'l,  vol 
only  to  have  raised  his  body  from  the  grave,  but 
also  his  church  with  him. 

JWat.  22.  23.  came  to  him  the  3aiMurops,  who  nav 

tlioroisnor.^Vnr/.-  12.  li^..'Jc(.»23.  rt.  Rv.r.l.VlJ. 

28.  therefore  in  the  r.  whose  wifo  shall  she  be 

of  the  Bevon  t  ^fark.  12.  23.     Luke  20.  33. 

iiS 


RET 

JI/aJ.23.  30.  in  tho  r.  they  neither  marry,  nor  given 

31.  but  as  touching  the  r.  have  ye  not  read  that 
27.  53.  and  came  out  ol  the  graves  alter  iiis  r. 

J.uke  14.  14.  thou  shall  he  recompensed  at  the  r. 
20.  27.  deny  any  r.  ||  3t).  the  children  of  the  r. 
John  5.  2y.  they  that  have  done  good  to  the  r.  of 
life,  that  have  done  evil,  to  the  r.  of 
damnation 
11.  24.  I  know  that  my  brother  shall  rise  in  ther. 
25.  Jesus  said  to  her,  1  am  the  r.  and  the  life 
Acts  1.  22.  to  be  a  witness  with  us  of  his  r. 
2.  31.  David  spake  of  the  r.  of  Christ 
4.2. they  preaciied  through  Jesus  r.  from  tlio  dead 
33.  gave  witness  of  the  r.  of  the  Lord  Jesus 

17.  la.  because  he  preached  Jesus  and  the  r. 

32.  whi;n  they  heard  of  the  r.  some  mocked 

23.  6.  of  the  hope  and  r.  1  am  called  in  question 

24.  15.  that  there  shall  be  a  r.  of  tho  dead 

21.  1  cried  among  them,  touching  r.  of  the  dead 
Rom.  1.  4.  declared  by  the  r.  from  the  dead 
tj  5.  we  shall  be  also  in  the  likeness  of  liis  r. 

1  Cor.  15.  13.  but  if  tlrere  be  no  r.  of  the  dead 

21.  by  man  came  the  r.  ||  42.  so  is  r.  of  the  dead 
Phil.  3.  10.  that  I  may  know  the  power  of  his  r. 
11.  if  I  might  attain  to  the  r.  of  the  dead 

2  Tim.  2.  16.  saying,  that  tho  r.  is  past  already 
Heb.d.  2.  of  r.  from  the  dead,  and  eternal  judgment 

11.  35.  that  they  might  obtain  a  better  r. 
I  Pet.  1.  3.  a  lively  hope,  by  r.  of  Jesus  from  dead 
3.21.  baptism  doth  save  us,  by  r.  of  Jesus  Christ 
Rev.  20.  5.  this  is  the  lirst  r. 
6.  blessed  and  holy  is  he  that  hath  part  in  firstr. 
UETAIN. 

1  Chr.  29.  tI4.  my  people  that  we  should  r   strength 
■/ob  2.  9.  dost  thou  still  r.  thine  integrity  1 

Prov.  4.  4.  he  said,  let  thine  heart  r.  my  words 
ll.lG.gracious  woman  honour,strongmenr.richca 

Eccl.  S.  8.  no  man  hath  power  to  r.  the  spirit 

J)an.  11.  G.  she  shall  not  r.  the  power  of  the  arm 

JuAh20.2:).  whose  soever  sins  ye  r.lhcy  are  retained 

liom.l.a.  did  not  like  lo  r.  God  in  their  knowledge 
RETALVED. 

Jiidg.  7.  8.  Gideon  r.  those  three  hundred  men 
19.°4.  the  damsel's  father  r.  him,  and  he  abode 

Dan.  10.  8.  left  alone,  and  1  r.  no  strength,  10. 

.fohn  20.  2;).  whose  sins  ye  retain,  they  arc  r. 

P/iilem.  13.  whom  I  would  have  r.  with  ma 
RETAINETH. 

Prov.  3.  18.  and  happy  is  every  one  that  r.  her 
ll.lG.gracious  woman  r.honour,stroiigmenriches 

Mic.  7.  18.  he  r.  not  his  anger  for  ever 
RETIRE. 

2  Sam.  11. 15.  set  him  in  the  hottest  battle,  and  r. 
/er.  4.  6.  set  up  standard  toward  Zioii,  r.  stay  not 

RETIRED. 
Tudg.  20.  39.  when  the  men  of  Israel  r.  in  battle 
2  Sam.  20.  22.  they  r.  from  the  city  every  man 

RETijRN,  Substantive. 
Gen.  14.  17.  went  out  to  meet  Abram  after  his  r. 

1  Sam.  7.  17.  Samuel's  r.  was  to  Ramah,  his  house 

2  Sam.  11  .t  1.  at  r.  of  year  Dav.  sent,  1  CAr.  20. 1 1- 
1  Kings  20.  22.  for  at  the  r.  of  the  year  the  kings 

of  Syria  will  come  up  against  thee,  21). 

RETIJRN 

Signifies  [1]   To  go  back   again,  E.xod.   13.  17. 

[2]     To    come    again,    2  Chron.   18.  20.     [3] 

To  requite  or  recompense,  1  Kings  2.  44.     [4J 

To  repent,  as  when  a  sinner,  who  has  erred 

from  the  ways  of  God's  commandments,  doth 

return,  to  God  by  unfeigned  repentance,    Isa. 

10.   21.     Ezek.   18.   32.     ['>]   To  comply  with 

sinners  in  their  sinful  courses,  or  to  soothe 

them  up  therein,  Jer.   15.  19.     [G]    To   shew 

fresh  signs  of  favour  and  mercy,  after  some 

afflictions    for   sins,   I'sal.  G.  4.      Joel  2.  14. 

[7]   To  relate,  E.\od.  4.    18.     [8]    To    depart 

or  get  away,  1  Sam.  20.  4.     ['.)J    To  iterate, 

Prov.  2G.  t  II. 

Gen.  3.  19.  in  sweat  eat  bread,  till  thou  r.  to  the 

ground,  for  dust  thou  art,  to  dust  shalt  thou  r. 

JG.  9.  r.  to  tJiy  mistress  and  submit  thyself 

18.  10.  he  said,  I  will  certainly  r.  to  thee,  14. 

31.  3.  nnd  r.  to  the  land  of  lliy  kindred,  13. 

32.  9.  O  God,  the  Lord,  which  saidst  to  me,  r. 
F.iod.  4.  IH.  let  me  r.  lo  mv  brethren  in  Egypt 

19.  the  Ijord  said  unto  Moses,  go  r.  into  Egypt 

13.  17.  l(!8t  the  people  repent,  and  r.  lo  Egypt 
^r7).25. 10.  shall  r.  lo  his  possession,  13,  27,  28. 

41.  and  he  shall  r.  unto  his  own  family 
27.  2<.  in  year  of  jubilee,  tlif  field  shall  r.  to  him 
Xum.f^.  ti'>.  from  the  ago  of  filly  r.  from  warfare 
II).  36.  r.  Lord,  to  iho  many  thousands  of  Israel 

14.  4.  let  us  make  a  captain,  nnd  r.  into  Egypt 
23.  5.  the  Lord  saiil,r.  iiiilo  Ralak,  nnd  upeiik 
:{2.22.  then  afterward  yi-  sinll  7.  and  he  guiltless 
35.  28.  af>or  tho  dealh'of  high-priest,  tho  slayer 

shall  r.  to  the  land  of  his  possession,  ./bsA.  20.  6. 
Dcut.  3.  20.  Ihcn  shall  ye  r.  i^veiy  man  to  his  pos- 
session which  I  have  given  lo  you,  Josh. 
1.  13l 


RET 

Deut.  17. 16.  nor  shall  he  cause  people  r.  to  Egjpl 
20.  5.  let  him  go  and  r.  to  his  house,  G,  7,  8. 
3U.  3.  the  Lord  thy  God  will  r.  and  gatlier  thee 
6.  tliou  shalt  r.  and  obey  llie  voice  of  the  Lord 
Josh.~2.i.  now  r.  ye,  and  get  you  unto  your  tenU 

8.  saying,  r.  with  much  riches  to  your  tents 
J«(/n'.7.3.wliosoever  is  fearful  and  afraid,  let  him  r. 

11.  31.  when  1  r.  from  the  children  of  Aiiimon 
liuth  1.  G.  arose,  that  she  might  r.  from  Moab 

8.  Naomi  said,  go  r.  to  her  mother's  house 
10.  surely  we  will  r.  wilh  thee  to  thy  people 
15.  r.  thou  after  thy  sister-in-law 

1  Sam.  0. 3.  but  in  any  wise  r.  him  trespass-offering 
b.  and  put  the  jewels  of  gold  which  ye  r.  him 

9.  5.  Saul  sai(^  to  his  servant,  come,  let  us  r. 
2G.21.  then  said  Saul,l  havesinnedr.  my  son  DaT 

29.  4.  the  princes  said,  make  this  fellow  r.  7. 

2  .Sam.  2. 20.  how  long  ere  thou  bid  the  people  r.7 

3.  IG.  then  said  Abner  to  him,  go,  r.  he  reiurni.d 

10.  5.  till  beards  be  grown,  then  r.  1  Chron.  19.5. 
15   19.  wherefore  goest  thou  also  with  us  1  r. 

20.  seeing  1  go  wliither  I  may,  r.  thou,  aodtako 
34.  if  thou  r.  to  the  city  and  say  unto  Absalom 
19.  14.  they  said,  r.  thou  and  all  thy  servants 
24.  13.  advise  and  see  what  answer  I  shall  r. 

1  Kings  2.  32.  the  Lord  shall  r.  his  blood,  33. 

44.  Lord  shall  r.  thy  wickedness  ujion  ihiiio  head' 
8.48.  so  r.  to  thee  with  all  their  heart  and  soul 

12.  24.  ye  shall  not  go,  r.  every  man  to  his  house 
2G.  now  shall  the  kingdom  r.  to  house  of  David 

]9.  15.  go,  r.  on  thy  way  to  the  wilderness 
22.  17.  these  have  no  master  letlhem  r.  every  man 
to  his  house  in  peace,  2  Chr.  11.  4.  |  18.  16. 
28.  if  thou  r.  at  all  in  peace,  2  Chron.  18.  27. 

2  Kings  18. 14.  saying,  I  have  offended,  r.  from  me 

19.  7.  the  king  of  Assyria  shall  hear  a  rumour 
and  shall  r.  to  his  own  land,  33.  Isa.  'Si.  7,  34. 

20.  10.  nay,  but  lei  the  shadow  r.  backward 

2  Chron.  G.  24.  and  shall  r.  and  confess  thy  name 
38.  if  they  r.  lo  thee  willi  all  Iheir  heart 
10.  9.  that  we  may  r.  answer  lo  this  people 
18.  2G.  put  this  fellow  in  the  prison  until  I  r. 

30.  G.  he  will  r.  lo  you  ||  9.  if  ye  r.  unto  him 
J\rch.2.  G.  the  king  said  to  me,  \vhen  wilt  thou  r.  ? 

4.  12.  from  ail  places,  whence  ye  shall  r.  to  us 
£.5<A.4.15.Esther  bade  them  r.Mordecailhis  aiisw. 

9.25.devise  of  Ilaman should  r.  upon  his  own  head 
Job  1.  21.  and  naked  shall  I  r.  thither 

6.  29.  r.  yea,  r.  again,  my  righteousness  is  in  it 
7. 10.  he  shall  r.  no  more  to  his  house,  nor  place 
15.22.he  helieveth  not  that  he  shall  r.out  of  darkn. 
17.  10.  but  as  for  you  all,  do  ye  r.  and  come  now 
22.  23.  if  thou  r.  to  the  Almighty,  be  built  up 
33.  25.  he  shall  r.  to  the  days  of  his  youth 

35.  t4.  I  will  r.  words  to  thee,  and  companions 
3G.  10.  commandeth  that  they  r.  from  iniquity 
Psal.  G.  4.  r.  O  Lord,  deliver  my  soul,  O  save  mo 
10.  let  mine  enemies  r.  and  be  ashamed 

7.  7.  for  their  sakcs  therefore  r.  thou  on  high 
IG.  his  mischief  shall  r.  upon  his  own  head 

.59.  6.  they  r.  al  evening  ||  14.  and  let  them  r. 

73.  10.  therefore  his  people  r.  hither,  and  waters 

74.  21.  let  not  the  ojipressed  r.  ashamed,  let  poor 
80.  14.  r.  we  beseech  thee,  ()  God  of  hosis 

90.  3.  thou  sayest,  r.  ye  children  of  men 
13.  r.  O  Lord,  how  long  ?  nnd  let  it  repent  theo 

94.  15.  judgment  shall  r.  unto  righleousncss 

104.  29!  Ihey  die,  and  r.  lo  their  dust 

IIG.  7.  r  to  ihy  rest,  O  my  soul.  Lord  hath  dealt 
Prov.  2. 19.  none  that  go  unto  lier,  r.  again,  neillier 

2G.  27.  he  Ihal  rollelh  a  stone,  it  will  r.  on  him 
F.ecl.  1. 7.  from  wbimce  rivers  come,  thither  they  r. 

5.  15.  naked  shall  he  r.  to  go  as  he  came 

12.  2.  nor  the  clouds  r.  after  tho  rain 

7.  dust  shall  r.  to  the  earth,  and  spirit  r.  to  God 
Cant.  6.  13.  r.  r.  O  Shunamite,  r.  r.  that  we  may 
fsa.  I.  t  27.  they  that  r.  of  her  shall  be  redeemed 

G.  13.  yet  in  it  a  tonlli  shall  r.  and  shall  beeaten 

10.  21.'  the  remnant  of  Jacob  shall  r.  to  God,  22 

21.  12.  if  ye  will  inquire,  iiM|uiro  ye,  r.  como 
.35.  10.  the  ransomed  of  the  Lord  shall  r.  51.  11. 
41.  t28.  that  when  I  asked  them  could  r.  a  word 
44.  22.  r.  unto  me,  for  I  have  redeemed  theo 

63.  17.  r.  for  thy  servant's  sake,  the  tribes 
./(T.3.  I.  shall  he  r.  to  her  again  ?  yet  r.  iigain  to  ma 
12.  proclaim  these  words,  r.  buckslidine  Israel 
22.  r.  ye  backsliding  children,  and  I  will  heal 
4.  1.  if  thou  wilt  r.  saith  the  Lord,  r.  unio  mo 
12.  15.  I  will  r.  and  have  compassion  on  them 
15.  19.  thus  saith  Iho  Lord,  if  thou  r.  lei  ihcm  r. 
nnio  thee,  but  r.  not  Ihou  unto  Ihenj 
I!'.  U.  r.  ye  every  one  from  his  evil  way,  35.  15. 

22.  10.  for  ho  shal   r.  no  nior<!  lo  his  country 

23.  14.  that  none  (lolh  r.  from  his  wickedness 

24.  7.  for  thov  shall  r.  with  Iheir  whole  heart 

30.  10.  and  Jacob  shall  r.  iind  h>'  in  rest,  46.  27. 

31.  8.  a  grcot  company  shall  r.  Ihilher 
3l'i.3.lhat  VP  may  r.  every  man  from  his  evil  way 

7. it  may  bo  thevwillr.every  one  from  his  evil  wny 
37.  T.  bebuld,  Pharaoh's  army  shall  r.  to  Egypt 


RET 

#'«r.44.14.that  theyshould  r.into  the  land  of  Judah, 
for  none  shall  r.  but  such  as  escape,  28. 
50.  9.  their  arrows  none  shall  r.  in  vuin 
E:eft.l6.55.when  Sodotn  and  Sainaiia shall  r.  they 
desire  to  r.  then  thou  and  thy  daughters  shallr. 
18.  23.  that  wicked  should  r.  from  waysaud  live 

46.  17.  after  it  shall  r.  to  the  prince 

Dan.  9.  t25.  after  sixty-two  weeks  shall  streetr. 

10.  20.  and  now  will  1  r.  to  fight  with  Persia 

11.  9.  and  shall  r.  into  his  own  land,  10.  28. 
13.  the  king  of  the  north  shall  r.  and  set  forth 

29.  and  the  time  appointed  he  shall  r.  and  come 

30.  therefore  he  shall  be  grieved  and  r. 
Hos-  2.  7.  I  will  go  and  r.  to  my  first  husband 

9. 1  will  r.  and  take  away  my  corn  and  my  wine 
3.  5.  afterward  shall  the  cliildren  of  Israel  r. 
5.  15.  I  will  go  and  r.  lo  my  place,  till  they 
7. 16.  they  r.  but  not  to  the  Most  High 
8.  13.  visit  their  sins  they  shall  r.  to  Egypt,  9.  3. 

12.  14.  his  reproach  shall  his  Lord  r.  unto  iiim 

14.  7.  they  that  dwell  under  his  shadow  shall  r. 
Joel  2.  14.  who  knoweth  if  he  will  r.  and  repent 

•     3.4.  speeddy  will  I  r.  recompence  on  your  head,". 
Obad.  15.  thy  reward  shall  r.  upon  thine  own  head 
Mic.  1.  7.  they  shall  r.  to  the  hire  of  a  harlot 
5.  3.  then  the  remnant  olhis  brethren  shall  r. 
Jital-\A.  whereas  Edom  saith,  we  will  r.  and  build 
3.  7.  r.  to  ine,  and  I  will  r.  to  you,  saith  the  Lord 
of  hosts,  but  ye  said,  wherein  shall  wer.? 
18.  then  shall  ye  r.  and  discern  between  righteous 
Mat.  10.  13.  if  it  be  not  worthy,  let  your  peace  r. 
12.44. he  saith,  I  willr.into  my  house, /^uie  11.24. 
24.  18.  nor  let  hira  which  is  in  the  field,  r.  back 
LukeS.  39.  r.  to  thine  own  house,  shew  how  great 
12.  3S.  when  he  will  r.  from  the  wedding 
Acts  15.  1(5.  after  this  I  will  r.  and  build  again 
18.  21.  but  I  will  again  r.  to  you,  if  God  will 

To  RETURN. 
Exod.  4.  21.  when  thou  goest  to  r.  into  Egypt 
JV'um.  14.  3.  were  it  not  bettor  for  us  to  r.  to  Egypt 
Dcut.  17. 16.  nor  cause  the  people  to  r.  into  Egypt 
Ruth  1.7.  they  went  lo  r.  unto  the  land  of  Judah 

16.  entreat  me  not  to  leave  thee,  or  to  r. 
1  Sam.  29.  11.  so  David  and  his  men  rose  early  tor. 
3  Ckr.  10.  6.  what  counsel  give  ye  to  r.  answer,  9. 
J^th.  9.  17.  appointed  a  captain  to  r.  to  bondage 
Jer.  5.  3.  they  have  refused  to  r.  8.  5.  Hos.  1 1.  5. 
22.  27.  to  the  land  where  they  desire  tor.  44.  14. 
29.  10.  in  causing  you  to  r.  lo  this  place,  30.  3.  | 
32.  44.  I  33.  7,  11,  26.  [  34.  22.  \  42.  12. 

34.  11.  but  they  caused  the  servants  to  r.  18. 
37.  20.  cause  me  not  to  r.  to  the  house,  38.  26. 

l.am.  3.  t  21.  this  I  make  to  r.  to  my  heart 
E:e/>.  21.  30.  shall  I  cause  it  t«r.  into  his  sheath? 
20.  14.  cause  them  to  r.  to  the  land  ofPathros 

47.  6.  caused  me  to  r.  to  the  brink  of  the  river 
Hos.  4.  t  9.  I  will  cause  to  r.  their  doings 

11.5.  .As.'iyrian  be  his  king,  bee.  they  refused  to  r. 
Luke  19.  12.  went  to  receive  a  kingdom  and  to  r. 
Mcts  13.  34.  now  no  more  to  r.  to  corruption 

20.  3.  he  purposed  tn  r.  through  Macedonia 

RETURN  to  or  unto  the  Lord. 

Dcut.  30.  2.  and  shak  r.  unto  the  /^ord,  and  obey 

l.Sam.7.  3.  ifyer.unto  the  Ld.  with  all  your  hearts 

Isa.  19. 22.  they  shall  r.unto  /^(/.he  shall  heal  them 

55.  7.  let  himr.unlo  h.  he  will  have  mercy  on  him 

Hon.  6.  1.  let  us  r.  unto  the  Lord,  for  he  hath  torn 

7.  10.  they  do  not  r.  to  Lord  nor  seek  him  for  this 

14. 1.  O  Israel,r.Mn(o  ^.thyG. for  thou  hast  fallen 

JVo£  RETURN. 

^«?n. 32. 18.  we  will  notr.  to  our  houses  till  Israel 

Deut.W.  t  31. thy  ass  taken,  and  shall  not  r.to  thee 

1  Sam.  15.  20.  Samuel  said,  I  will  not  r.  with  thee 

2  Sam.  12.  23.  go  to  him,  but  he  shall  notr.  to  me 
1  Kings  13.  16.  he  said,  I  may  not  r.  with  thee 
Job  7.  t  1.  mine  eves  shall  not  r.  to  see  good 

10.  21.  before  I  go  whence  I  shall  not  r.  10.  22. 
39.  4.  they  go  forth,  and  r.  not  unto  them 

Isa.  4.5.  23.  the  word  is  gone  out,  and  shall  not  r. 
55.  11.  it  shall  not  r.  to  me  void,  but  accomplish 
J«r.  8.  4.  shall  he  turn  away,  and  not  r.  1 

15.  7.  destroy,  since  they  r.  not  from  their  ways 

22.  11.  he  shall  not  r.  thither  any  more,  27. 

23.  20.  the  ang'T  of  the  Lord  shall  not  r.  30.  24. 
Etek.  7. 13.  for  seller  shall  not  r.to  what  is  sold, the 

whole  multitude  thereof  which  shall  not  r. 
13. 22.  that  he  should  not  r.  from  his  wicked  way 

21.  .5.  rny  sword  not  r.  any  more  into  his  sheath 

35.  9.  thy  cities  shall  not  r.  and  ye  shall  know 
46.  9.  he  shall  not  r.  by  the  way  he  came  in 

Ho».  7.  10.  they  do  not  r.to  the  Lord,  norseek  him 

11.  5.  he  shall  not  r.  into  the  land  of  Egypt 

9.  1  will  not  r.  to  destroy  Ephraim,  I  am  God 
^at.2.I2.heing  warned  theyshould  notr.  to  Herod 
I.,iike\l.Z\.  he  in  field,  let  him  likewise  notr.  back 

RETURNED. 
Gen.  8.  3.  waters  r.  from  off  the  earth  continually 
9.  the  dove  r.  to  him  ||  12.  the  dove  r.  not  again 
18.  33   and  Abraham  r.  unto  his  pHce 
^  S3.  19.  »a  Abraham  r.  lo  his  young  moa 
*  490 


RET 

(?en.43. 24.  Josep^l  r.  again,  communed  with  them 
43.  10.  surely  now  we  had  r.  this  second  time 

18. because  of  the  money  that  was  r.  in  our  sacks 
Exod.5.  22.  Moses  r.to  the  Lord  and  said,  32.  31. 
14.  27.  and  the  sea  r.  to  his  strength,  28. 
19.  8.  Moses  r.  the  words  of  the  i)eople  to  Lord 
Lev.  22.  13.  if  she  is  r.  to  her  father's  house 
JVuffj.  11.14.  the  children  of  Israel  r.  and  wept,  and 
said,  who  shall  give  us  flesh  to  eatl  fJeut.l.ii. 

24.  25.  Balaam  rose  up,  and  r.  to  his  place 
.fosh.  2.  16.  hide  yourselves  till  pursuers  be  r.  22. 

4.  18.  that  the  waters  of  Jordan  r.to  their  place 
22.9.  the  children  of  Reuben  and  of  Gad  r. 

32.  Phiiiehas  and  the  princes  r.  from  Reuben 
Judg.  2.  19.  when  the  judge  was  dead  they  r. 

5.  29.  yea,  she  r.  answer  lo  herself 

7.  3.  there  r.  of  the  people  22,000  from  Gideon 

8.  13.  Gideon  r.  from  battle  before  sun  was  up 

11.  39.  Gideon's  daughter  r.  to  her  father 
21.  23.  the  Benjamites  r.  lo  their  inheritance 

Ruth  1.  22.  so  Naomi  and  Ruth  her  daughter  r. 
l.Sa7n. 1.127. whom  I  obtained  by  petition  shall  her. 

6.  16.  they  r.  to  Ekron  the  same  day 

17.  57.  David  r.  from  the  slaughter  of  Goliath 

25.  33.  the  Lord  hath  r.  the  wickedness  of  Nabal 
2  Sam.  1.  22.  the  sword  of  Saul  r.  not  empty 

3.  16.  then  said  Abner,  go,  return,  and  he  r. 
6.  2U.  then  David  r.  to  bless  his  household 

16.  8.  Lord  r.  on  thee  all  blood  of  house  of  Saul 

17.  3.  the  man  whom  thou  seekest,  is  as  if  all  r. 
19.  15.  so  the  king  r.  and  came  to  Jordan 

23.  10.  and  the  people  r.  alter  him  only  to  spoil 

1  Kings  13. 10.  and  r.  not  by  the  way  that  he  came 

33.  after  this  thing  Jeroboam  r.  not  from  evil 

2  Kings  4.  35.  Elisha  r.  and  walked  to  and  fro 
5.  15.  he  r.  to  man  of  God,  he  and  his  company 

2  CUron.  25. 10.  and  they  r.  home  in  great  anger 
32.  21.  Sennacherib  r.  with  shame  of  face  to  land 
Ezra  5.  11.  thus  they  r.  us  answer,  saying 
JVcA.  4.  15.  we  r.  all  of  us  to  the  wall  to  work 

9.  28.  yet  when  they  r.  and  cried  unto  thee 
Psal.  35.  13.  my  prayer  r.  into  mine  own  bosom 

78.  34.  they  r.  and  inquired  early  after  God 
126.  t  1.  when  the  Lord  r.  the  returning  of  Zion 
Isa.  38.  8.  so  sun  r.  ten  degrees,  by  which  degrees 
./er.  3.  7.  I  said,  turn  thou  unto  me,  but  she  r.  not 
14.3.theyr.with  theirvessels  empty, were  ashamed 

18.  t  4.  so  he  r.  and  made  it  ano'hcr  vessel 
40.  12.  even  all  the  Jews  r.  out  of  all  places 

Ezek.  1.  14.  and  the  living  creatures  ran,  and  r. 
17.  and  they  r.  not  when  they  went 

8.  17.  and  h.ive  r.  to  provoke  me  to  anger 

9.  t  11.  the  man  with  the  iiikhoin  r.  the  word 
47.  7.  when  I  had  r.  lo,  at  the  bank  of  the  river 

Dan.  4.  3-5.  mine  understiinding  r.  unto  me 

36.  at  thf;  same  time  my  reason  r.  unto  me 

Hos.  6.  11.  when  I  r.  the  captivity  of  my  people 

.'Jmos  4.  6.  yet  have  j-e  not  r.  to  me,  8,  9,  10,  11. 

Zeck.  1.  G.  ihi;y  r.  and  said,  as  the  Lord  thought 

16.  thus  saith  L.  I  am  r.  to  Jerusal.  with  mercies 

7. 14. land  desolate,that  no  man  passed  thro' nor  r. 

8.  3.  I  am  r.  to  Zion,  and  will  dwell  in  midst 
j\]at.  21.  18.  in  the  morning  as  he  r.  into  the  city 
Mark  14.  40.  when  he  r.  he  found  them  asleep 
J^uke  1.  56.  and  Mary  r.  to  her  own  house 

2.  20.  shepherds  r.  glorifying  God  for  all  things 

4.  1.  Jesus  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost  r.  from  Jordan 
14.  Jesus  r.  in  power  of  the  Siiirit  into  Galrlee 

8.  37.  he  went  up  into  the  ship  and  r.  back  again 
40.  when  Jesus  r.  the  people  gladly  received  him 

9.  10.  the  apostles  when  r.  again  told  him  all 

10.  17.  the  seventy  r.  ag.-.in  with  joy,  saying 
17.  18.  arc  net  found  that  r.  to  give  glory  to  God 

19.  15.  when  he  was  r.  having  received  kingdom 

23.  48.  all  the  people  smote  their  breasts  and  r. 
56. they  r.and  prepared  spices  and  rested  sabbath 

24.  9.  r.  from  sepulchre  and  told  all  these  things 
33.  they  rose  same  hour,  and  r.  to  Jerusalem 
52.  they  worshipped  him,  and  r.  to  Jerusalem 

Jlcts  1.  12.  then  r.  they  to  Jerusalem  from  Olivet 

5.  22.  when  the  officers  found  them  not,  they  r. 
8.  25.  the  apostles  r.  to  Jtrusalem,  and  preached 

12.  25.  Barnabas  and  Saul  r.  from  Jerusalem 
13. 13.  and  John  departing  from  them,  r.to  Jerus. 
14.  21.  they  r.  again  to  Lysfr.i  ar.d  Iconium 

21.  6.  we  took  ship,  and  they  r.  home  again 
23.  32.  they  left  the  horsemen,  and  r.  to  the  castle 
Gal.  1.  17.  and  I  r.  again  unto  Damascus 
Hch.W.  15.  might  have  hail  opportunity  to  hive  r. 
1  Pet.  2.  25.  now  r.  to  thn  Slippherd  of  your  souls 

RETURNETH. 
Psal.  146.  4.  his  breath  goeth,  he  r.  to  his  earth 
Pror.  26.  11.  as  a  dog  r.  to  his  vomit,  so  a  fool  r. 
F.ccl.  1.  6.  the  wind  r.  according  to  his  circuits 
fsa.  55.  10.  rain  r.  not  thither,  hut  watercth  earth 
Ktck.  35.  7.  him  that  r.  I  will  cut  off  from  Seir 
Zech.  9.  8.  I  will  encamp  because  of  hira  that  r. 

RETURNING. 
Oen.  8.  t  3.  the  waters  returned  in  going  and  r. 
t  7.  the  ravea  went  forth  in  going  and  r. 
3S 


REV 

Psal.  128.  1.  when  the  Lord  returned  r.  of  Z:oa 
Isa.  30.  15.  in  r.  and  rest  shall  ye  be  saved 
Luke  7.  10.  and  they  r.  found  the  servant  whole 
Jlcts  8.  28.  was  r.  and  sitting  in  his  chariot,  read 
Ksaiaa  the  prophet 
Heb.  7. 1.  met  Abraham  r.  from  slaughter  of  kingj 

REVEAL. 
To  reveal  signifies,  To  discover  that  which  was 
before  concealed,  as  to  reveal  a  secret,  Prov.  1 1. 
13.  Jllso  to  make  apersonundcrstand  any  part 
of  divine  truth  which  he  knew  not,  or  was  in  a 
viistake  about  before.  If  in  any  thing  ye  be 
otherwise  minded,  God  shall  reveal  even  this 
unto  you,  Phil.  3.  15.  The  apostleVuwX  speak- 
ing uf  the  gospel,  says.  That  therein  is  the 
righteousness  of  God  revealed,  Rom.  1.  17.  that 
is,  That  way,  or  tnethod  of  becoming  righteous, 
which  is  of  God's  institution,  ordination,  ap- 
pointment, and  establishment,  and  which  alone 
he  will  accept  of  to  life,  namily  by  faith  in 
Christ,  is  fully  and  ylaivly  discovered  in  the 
gospel;  which  was  whuHy  unknown  to  the 
Gentiles,  and  but  obscurely  made  known  to  Uie 
Jews.  Jlnd  in  verse  18.  he  says,  That  the 
wrath  of  God  is  revealed  from  heaven  against 
all  ungudliness  of  men:  His  displeasure  was 
made  known  by  those  judgments  which  he  in- 
flicts upon  sinwrs,  and  by  their  remorse  and  the 
chnllengcs  of  their  consciences. 
Revelation,  in  Greek  Apocalypsis,  is  the  namt 
given  in  particular  to  that  part  of  the  holy 
scriptures  which  was  revealed  to  John  the  Di- 
vine, in  the  Isle  of  Pii.imuii,whither  he  had  been 
banished  byT)i>in'a'ian,iind  which  chii^fly  contains 
prophecies,  or  predictions  concerning  the  state 
of  the  church  in  future  ages.  It  is  also  called 
Revelation,  when  God  makes  manifest  any 
thing  to  man  in  an  extraordinary  and  super- 
natural manner,  whether  by  dream,  vision, 
ecstasy,  or  otherwise.  St.  Paul  says.  That  he 
had  not  received  the  gospel  by  the  ministry  of 
men,  but  by  aparlicular  Revelation  from  God, 
who  had  immediately  convey  edlhe  knowledge  of 
divine  things  unto  him.  Gal.  1.  12.  Jlnd  else- 
where, That  he  did  not  go  up  to  Jerusalem 
after  his  conversion  by  the  mere  motion  of  his 
ouin  mind,  but  in  consequence  of  a  revelation 
that  he  had  for  that  purpose.  Gal.  2.  2.  The 
word  A|)ocalypsis  is  used  likewise  to  express 
the  manifestation  of  Christ  to  the  Jews  and 
Gentiles,  J^uke  2.  32.  The  manifestation  of 
the  glory  with  which  God  iciU glorify  his  elect 
and  his  faithful  scrva7its  at  the  last  judgment, 
Rom.  8.  13.  Jlnd  the  declaration  of  his  judg- 
ments, in  his  conduct  both  towards  the  godly 
and  towards  the  wicked,  Rom.  2.  5. 
Ruth  4.  t  4.  and  I  said,  I  will  r.  in  thine  ear 
,Iob  20.  27.  thi'  heaven  shall  r.  his  iniquity 
Psal.  1  !9.  t  18.  r.  mine  eyes  that  I  nray  behold 
.ler.  .33.  6.  I  will  r.  them  abuirdance  of  peace 
Dan.  2.  47.  seeing  thou  couldest  r.  this  secret 
Jilat.  11.  27.  the  Father,  but  the  Son,  and  he  to 
whomsoever  the  iron  will  r.  him,  Luke  10.22. 
Gal.i.  16.  called  me  by  Iiisgrace,tor.  his  Son  in  me 
Phil.  3.  15.  God  shall  r.  even  this  unto  you 

REVEALED. 
Deut.  29.  29.  but  things  r.  to  us  and  our  children 

1  Sam. 3.7.  nor  wasthi-  word  of  theLo:d  r.  to  him 
21.  the  Lord  r.  himself  to  Samuel  in  Shiloh' 

9.  t  15.  01W  the  Lord  had  r.  the  ear  of  Samuel 

2  Sam.  7.  27.  thou  hastr.  to  thy  servant,  saying 
1  Ckron.  17.  f  25.  hast  r.  the  ear  of  thy  servant 
Esth.  8.  t  13.  the  copy  of  the  writing  r.  to  people 
Psal.  98.  t  2.  his  righteousness  hath  he  r. 

Isa.  22.  14.  it  was  r.  in  mine  ears  by  the  Lord 
2^.  1.  from  the  lanri  of  Chittim  it  is  r.  to  Ihera 
40.  5.  and  the  glorv  of  the  Lord  shall  he  r. 
53.  1.  to  whom  is  arm  of  Lord  r.?  John  12.  38. 
56.  1.  and  my  righteou.-iness  is  near  to  be  r. 
Jer.  II.  20.  for  unto  thee  have  I  r.  my  cause 
Dan.  2.  19.  then  was  the  secret  r.  to  Daniel 
SO.  this  secret  is  not  r.  to  me  for  any  wi.^dom 

10.  1.  a  thing  was  r.  to  Daniel,  ami  wa?  true 
Mat.  10.26.  for  there  is  nothing  covered,  that  shaU 

not  ber.nor  hid  llrat  sh.nol  be  known,  Lvkei2.Z. 

11.  25.  and  hast  r.  Ihem  to  babes,  Luke  10.  21. 

16.  17.  flesh  and  blood  hath  not  r.  it  onto  thee 
/>Kic2.  26.  it  wasr.  to  Simeon  by  the  Holy  Ghost 

.35.  that  the  thoughts  of  many  hearts  may  be  r. 

17.  30.  shnll  be  in  day  when  the  Son  of  man  r. 
Rom.  1.  17.  therein  is  the  righteousness  of  God  r. 

18.  for  the  wrath  of  God  is  r.  from  heaven 
8.  18.  with  the  glory  which  shall  be  r.  in  us 

1  Cor.  2.  10.  God  hath  r.  them  to  us  by  his  Spirit 
3.13.  day  declare  it,  because  it  shall  be  r.  by  fire 
14.  30.  if  anv  thing  be  r.  to  another  that  sitteth 

Gal.  3  23.  the  laith  which  shou'd  afterwards  bo  r 
Eph.  3.  5.  as  it  is  now  r.  to  his  holy  apostlei 

2  Thess.  1.  7.  when  the  Lord  .Jesus  shall  be  r. 

2.  3.  a  falling  away  first,  and  that  maouf  tin  bor. 


REV 

S  nu$s.  2. 6.  now  ye  know  what  withholdcth,  Ihat 

he  might  be  r.  In  his  time 

8.  that  wicked  one  be  r.  whom  L.  shall  consume 

I  Pet.  1.  5.  to  salvation,  ready  to  be  r.  in  last  time 

12.  unto  whom  it  was  r.  that  not  to  themselves 

4.  13.  that  when  hie  glory  shall  be  r.  ye  may  be 

5. 1.  and  aUo  a  partaker  of  glory  that  shall  be  r. 

REVEALER. 
Dan.i.  47.  your  God  a  God  of  gods,  a  r.  of  secrets 

REVEALETH. 
.Job  33. 1 16-  then  he  r.  the  ears  of  men,  and  sealeth 
Ptov.  11.  13.  a  tale-bearer,  r.  secrets,  20.  19. 
Dan.  2.  22.  he  r.  the  deep  and  secret  things 

28.  but  there  is  a  God  in  heaven  that  r.  secrets 

29.  he  that  r.  secrets  maketh  known  to  thee 
Jlmos  3.  7.  he  r.  his  secrets  to  his  servants  prophets 

REVELATION. 
Rom.  2. 5.  and  r.  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God 
16.  25.  according  to  r.  of  the  mystery  kept  secret 
1  Cor.  1. 17.  waiting  for  the  r.  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
14.  6.  except  1  shall  speak  to  you  either  by  r. 

26.  every  one  hath  a  r.  halh  an  interpretation 
Oal.  1.  12.  but  by  the  r.  of  Jesus  Christ 

3.  2.  and  I  went  up  by  r.  and  communicated 
Kph.  1. 17.  may  give  you  the  Spirit  of  wisdom  and  r. 
3.  3.  how  that  by  r.  he  made  known  to  me 
1  Pet.  1. 13.  grace  brought  at  the  r.  of  Jesus  Christ 
Rev.  1.  1.  the  r.  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  God  gave 

REVEL.VnONS. 

S  Cor.  12. 1. 1  will  come  to  visions  and  r.  of  the  L. 

7.  lest  I  should  be  exalted  thro'  abundance  of  r, 

REVELLINGS. 

Oal.  5.21.  works  of  the  flesh  are  r.  and  such  like 

1  Pet.i.  3.  when  ye  walked  in  lusts,  r.  banquetings 

REVENGE. 

Bevengc,  as  it  includes  a  sense  of  sorrow  and 
trouble  for  the  injuries  that  are  dune  to  us,  can- 
not by  any  mean.'!  belong  to  God.  J^one  of  his 
creatures  can  disturb  his  peace,  or  cause  to  him 
any  trouble  or  resentment.  Man  has  recourse 
to  revenge,  only  because  he  i.f  galled  and  sen- 
sible of  injuries.  fVhen  therefore  it  is  said  in 
scripture,  that  God  revenges  himself,  it  speaks 
after  a  papular  and  improper  manner.  He  nin- 
dicates  the  injuries  done  to  his  justice  and  his 
majesty,  and  to  the  order  he  has  established  in 
the  world,  yet  without  any  emotion  of  pleasure 
or  di.fpleasure.  He  revenges  the  injuries  done 
to  his  .servants  because  he  is  just,  and  because 
order  and  justice  must  be  preserved.  Men  re- 
venge I  heviselves  outof  weakness,  because  they 
are  offended,  because  they  are  too  much  in- 
fluenced by  self-love,  .t  great  soul  onrrliioks 
and  despises  injuries;  a  soul  enlightened  by 
grace  and  faith,  leaves  the  judgment  and  re- 
venge (if  them  to  God,  who  has  suficiently  de- 
clared himself,  to  make  it  understood  by  good 
men,  that  vrn^eance  belnngr.th  only  to  him  ;  To 
me  belongeth  vengeance  and  recompence,  Deut. 
32.  35.  He  forbids  malice  and  revenge,  in  ex- 
press terms ;  he  will  not  allow  us  to  keep  any 
resentment  in  our  hearts  against  nur  brethren  : 
Thou  ehalt  not  hate  thy  brother  in  thine  heart; 
Ihou  shalt  in  any  wise  rebuke  thy  neighbour, 
and  not  suffer  sin  upon  him.  Thou  shalt  not 
avenge,  nor  boar  any  grudge  against  the  chil- 
dren of  thy  people,  /^er.  19.  17, 18.  .^nd  when 
God  established  the  Li.-x  Talionis,  he  dues  ni>t 
thereby  allow  of  revenue,  but  sets  limits  to  it. 
Non  fomes,  sed  limes  luroris  est,  says  Austin. 
He  does  not  intend  to  provoke  to  anger,  but  to 
stop  the  progress  and  consequences  of  it.  Non 
ut  idquod  scipitum  erat,  hinc  accenderetur :  sed 
ne  id  quoil  ardebat,  ultra  exlenderetur. 

Jer.  15.  LI.  O  Lord,  r.  me  of  my  persecutors 

2Cor.  10.  fi.  in  a  re.idiness  to  r.  all  disobedience 
RKVRNOE,  .Substantive. 

Jer.  20.  10.  and  we  shall  take  our  r.  on  him 

f;i<;t.25. 15. because  (lie  Philistines  have  dealt  by  r. 

8  Cor.  7.  1 1,  yea,  what  r.  it  wrought  in  you 
REVENGED. 

F.iek.  2.'i.l2.  bi^Cause  Edom  r.  himself  upon  them 
REVE.NGER. 

Jfum.  35.  19.  iho  r.  shall  slay  the  murderer,  21. 
44.  congrcgati<m  shall  judge  between  the  slayer 
and  the  r.  of  blood 
2S  deliver  the  slayer  out  of  the  hand  of  the  r. 

27.  if  r.  find  him  without,  and  r.  kill  the  slayer 
yah.  1.  t  'J-  the  Lord  is  a  j.-alous  God,  and  a  r. 
Rom.U.i.  for  h"  is  mminierof  G.  ar.  toexecutc 

REVENGERS. 

2  Sam.  H.  11.  that  thou  -.voMldcst  not  sufTcr  ther. 

REVENGES. 
Ctut.  32.  42.  from  the  beginning  ofr.  on  enemy 
P#a/.94.tl.  O  God  of  r.shew  ihvself,  lift  up  thyself 

REVENGETH. 
Jfah.  1.3.  the  Lord  r.  the  Lord  r.  and  i^  furious 

REVENGING. 

P»a?.79. 10  by  the  r.  of  the  binod  of  Ihv  «er\-nni« 

Eztk-  25.  t  13.  Edom  dealt  by  r.  i^rcngenvwit      | 

4M 


REV 

REVENUE. 
Ezra  4. 13.  so  thou  shalt  endamage  the  r.  of  kin, 
Proc.  8.  19.  my  r.  is  bettor  than  chnice  silver 
Isa.  23.  3.  the  harvest  of  the  river  is  her  r. 

REVENUES. 
Prop.  15.  fi.  but  in  the  r.  of  the  wicked  is  trouble 
16.  8.  a  little  is  better  than  great  r.  without  right 
,fer.  12.  13.  they  shall  be  ashamed  of  your  r. 

REVERENCE 
Reverence,  when  it  is  said  to  be  given  to  man, 
is  a  submissive  humble  carriage  and  respect, 
which  inferiors  owe  to  their  superiors  ;  thus, 
Mephibosheth  did  reverence  to  David,  and  ac 
knowledged  him  for  his  sovereign,"  Sam.  9.6. 
Mnd  wives  are  commanded  to  reverence  their 
husbands,  Eph.  5.  33.  that  is,  to  e.'teem  them, 
to  fear  them,  not  with  a  servile,  but  ingenuous 
fear,  and  such  as  proceeds  from  love,  and  to 
manifest  their  esteem  by  the  whole  of  their  car- 
riage towards  them.  But  when  God  is  the 
object  of  our  reverence,  it  signifies,  That  holy, 
humble  and  filial  fear  of  his  displeasure,  and 
that  submissive,  lowly,  and  self-abasing  tem- 
per of  spirit,  with  which  we  should  approach  to 
him  in  the  duties  of  his  jsorship,  and  with  which 
we  should  demean  ourselves  under  his  chasten- 
ings:  this  temper  being  absolutely  necessary 
and  most  congruous  with  respect  to  God,  upon 
the  account  of  his  sovereignty,  justice,  and 
goodness , declared  in  his  chastenings;  and  with 
respect  to  our  frailty,  our  dependence  upon  him, 
our  obnoziousness  to  his  law,  and  our  obliga- 
tions to  him,  that  he  will  please  to  afflict  us  for 
our  good.  To  this  purpose  the  apostle  speaks  ; 
Heb.  12.9,  We  have  had  fathers  of  our  flesh  who 
corrected  us,  and  we  gave  them  reverence  ;  shall 
we  not  much  rather  be  in  subi|«lion  unto  the 
Father  of  spirits,  and  live  "?  We  have  had  our 
natural  parents,  who  were  our  instructors  and 
correctors,  who  made  use  of  the  rod,  as  well  as 
the  word,  for  our  nurture, yet  our  bowels  turned 
towards  them  ;  we  have  been  cover ed  with  shame 
and  blushing  for  our  faults,  and  have  submit- 
ted to  their  correction,  so  as  to  reform  and  turn 
from  the  faults  for  which  they  chastised  us  : 
and  shall  ice  not  much  rather  submissively 
receive  correction  from  God,  reform  under  it, 
and  resign  ntir  souls  to  him  who  is  the  Creator 
of  them , and  the  sovereign, guardian, protector, 
and  disposer  of  them  ?  Likewise  in  the  duties 
of  prayer,  hearing  the  word,  and  the  like,  an 
humble  conrrjdinn  of  God,  as  the  supreme,  eter- 
nal, and  infinitely  perfect  Heing ;  as  the  omni- 
present, omniscient,  and  an  incomprehensibly 
glorious  Majesty,  whose  throne  is  in  heaven; 
whose  J^ame  alone  is  excellent,  whose  glory  is 
above  the  earth  and  heaven,  would  engage  us 
to  approach  him  with  deep  rrverevce  and  holy 
fear.  Heb.  12.  23,  20,  L^t  us  have  grace, 
whereby  we  may  serve  God  acceptably,  with 
reverence  and  godly  fear ;  for  our  God  is  a  con- 
suming fire. 
Lev.  19.30.  shall  r.  my  sanctuary,  I  am  Lord,  2R.2. 
Esth.  3.2.  all  the  king's  servants  in  gate  r.  Itnman 
Mat.  21.37.  but  last  of  all  he  sent  to  them  his  son, 
saving,  thev  will  r.  my  son,  Mark  12. 0. 
Luke  20. 13. 
Eph.  5.  33.  the  wiTe  soe  that  ahe  r.  her  husband 

REVERE>fCE. 
2  fsam.  9.  fi.  Mephibosheth  did  r.  to  T>avid 
1  Kings  1.31.  Hath-sheba  bowed, and  did  r.toking 
Esth.  3.  2.  Mordecai  bowed  not,  nor  did  him  r.  5. 
Psal.  fO.  7.  to  he  had  in  r.  of  all  that  are  nliniit  him 
Heb.  12.9.  wegavethemr.il  28.  serve  Gnd  withr. 
1  Pet.  3.  t  15.  to  give  an  answer  of  your  hope  with  r. 

REVEREND. 
Psal.  in.9.liC8ent  redemp.  holy  and  r.  is  his  name 

REVERSE. 

JVwm.  23.  20.  and  he  hath  blessed,  and  I  cannot  r.  it 

Esth.  8.  5.  let  it  he  written,  tor.  the  letters  devised 

8.  and  sealed  with  king's  ring,  may  no  man  r. 

Jer.  2.  t  24.  in  her  occnnion  who  can  r.  it? 

REVILE. 
Exnd.  22.28.  thou  shalt  not  r.  the  gods,  nor  curse 
Mat.  5. 11.  blessed  are  ye  when  men  shall  r.  you 

REVILED. 
.V'A.  13.  t25.  I  contended  with  them,  nndr.  them 
.V(i<.27. 39.  that  passed  by  r.  him,  wac.  their  heads 
Mark  15.  32.  they  that  were  crucified  r.  him 
John  9.  28.  they  r.  him,  and  snid,  thou  art  disciple 
1  Cor.  4.  12.  being  r.  we  bless,  being  persecuted 
I  Pet.  2. 23.  who  when  he  wns  r.  r.  not  again 

REVILERS. 
1  Cor.  6. 10.  nor  r.  shall  inherit  kingdom  of  God 

REVILEST. 
Jlcts  23.4.  they  Raid,  r.  thon  God's  high  priest  f 

REVILF.TII. 
Ezod.  21.tn.thatr.hi«  father  shnll  bo  put  to  death 

REVILI.VtiS. 
Ua.  51.  7.  feai  oot,  oeilliof  be  ye  afinid  of  tlwir  r. 


REW 

Zeph.  2.  8.  and  the  r.  of  the  children  of  Ammon 

REVIVE. 
JVcA.  4. 2.  will  they  r.  the  stones  out  of  the  heaps  1 
Psa/.85.6.  wilt  thou  not  r.us  again,  that  thy  people 
138.  7.  thou  wilt  r.  me,  Ihou  shalt  stretch  forth 
Isa.  57. 15.  with  a  contrite  spirit,  to  r.  spirit  of  the 
humble,  and  tor.  the  heart  of  the  contrite  one* 
Hos.  6.  2.  alier  two  days  will  he  r.  us,  we  shall  live 
14.  7.  they  shall  r.  as  com,  and  grow  as  the  vin« 
Hab.3.".  O  Lord,r.  thy  work  inmidstof  theyeari 

REVIVED. 
Oen.  45.  27.  the  spirit  of  Jacob  their  father  r. 
.Tudg.  15.  19.  his  spirit  came  again,  and  he  Y. 

1  Kings  17.  22.  soul  of  the  child  came,  and  he  r. 
'i  KingsVi.^l.  and  touclied  hones  of  Elisha,  her 
rtofH.Y.  9.  when  the  commandment  came,  sin  r. 

14.  9.  to  this  end  Christ  both  died,  rose,  and  r. 
Phil.  4.  t  10-  that  now  vour  care  of  me  hath  r. 

REVIVING. 
F.:.ra  9.  8.  to  give  us  a  little  r.  in  our  bondage,  9. 

REVOLT. 

Deut.  13.  t  5.  prophet  spoken  r.  against  the  Lord 

/sa.  59.13. speaking  oppress,  andr.  uttering  falseh 

Jer.  28. 1 16.  because  thou  hast  taught  r.  29.  t  32 

RE*-OLT. 

2  Chron.  21.10.  the  same  time  also  did  Libnah  r 
Isa.  1.  5.  be  stricken,  ye  will  r.  more  and  more 

REVOLTED. 
2  Kings  8. 20.  in  his  days  Edom  r.^2. 2CAr.21.8,10 

22.  then  Libnah  r.  at  the  same  time 
Isa.  31.  6.  to  him  from  whom  Israel  have  deeply  r 
Jer.  5.  23.  but  this  people,  they  are  r.  and  gone 

REVOLTERS. 
Tcr.  6.  28.  are  all  grievousr.  walking  withslanderi 
Hos.  5.  2.  the  r.  are  profound  to  make  slaughter 

9.  15.  I  will  love  them  no  more,  princas  are  r. 
REVOLTING. 

Jer.  5. 23.  this  people  hath  a  r.  and  rebellious  heart 

REVOLUTION. 
Exod.'M.  t22.  observe  feast  at  the  r.  of  the  year 

1  i'n;it.  1.120.  when  ther.  of  days  was  come  about 

2  Chron.  24. 1 23.  in  the  r.  of  the  year  Syria  came 
REWARD 

Signifies,  [I],j9  recompence,  requital,  or  amends, 
upon  account  of  some  service  done,  or  good 
action  performed,  such  as  is  due  to  labourers 
far  their  work,  1  Tim.  5.  13.  [2]  That 
free  and  unmerited  recompence  which  shall  be 
given  to  the  godly  by  the  goodness, bounty, and 
mercy  of  God,  after  all  their  labours  in  hia 
service.  This  is  a  reward  wholly  of  grace, 
in  respect  of  us,  or  our  deserving,  but  of  jus- 
tice on  account  of  the  purchase  of  it  by  the 
sacred  treasure  of  Christ's  blood,  and  the 
unchangeable  tenor  of  the  go.ipel,  wherein  God 
promises  heaven  to  all  obedient  and  true  be- 
lievers, Mat.  5.  12.  I  6.6.  [3]  That  extreme  and 
fearful  punishment  and  recompence  from  the 
terrible  majesty  and  revenging  justice  of  God, 
which  will  be  inflicted  upon  impenitent  sinners, 
Psal.  91.  8.  [4]  .-?  gift  or  bribe,  Deut.  27. 
2.^.  [5]  The  fruit  or  benefit  of  lab.nir  in 
this  World,  Eccl.  9.  5.  [6]  Human  applause. 
Mat.  6.  2,  5.  [7]  Comfort  and  joy,  Psal. 
19.  11. 
Gen.  15.  1.  Abram,  I  am  thy  exceeding  great  r. 
.N'um.  18.  31.  for  it  is  your  r.  for  your  service 
Deut.  10.  17.  a  lerritdo  God,  who  laketh  not  r. 

27.  25.  cursed  lhat  laketh  r.  to  slay  the  innocent 
Ruth  2.  12.  a  full  r.  be  given  thee  of  the  Lord 
2  Sam.  4.10.  who  tho't  I  would  have  given  him  a  r 

19.  36.  the  king  recompense  it  me  with  such  a  r 
1  Km^s  13.  7.  go  home,  and  I  will  give  thee  a  r. 
.fob  6.  22.  did  I  say,  bring  to  me,  or  give  a  r. 

7.  2.  as  a  hireling  looketh  for  the  r.  of  his  work 
Psal.  15.5.  nor  laketh  r.  against  the  innocent 

10.  11.  and  m  keeping  of  them  there  is  great  r. 
40. 15.  let  them  be  desolate  for  a  r.  of  their  shame 
.58.  11.  verily,  there  is  a  r.  for  the  righteous 
70.  3.  let  them  be  turned  hack  forr.  of  their  shame 
91.  8.  only  thou  shalt  see  the  r.  of  Iho  wicked 
94.  2.  lift  up  thyself,  render  a  r.  to  the  proud 
100.  20.  let  this  be  the  r.  of  mine  adversaries 
127.  3.  and  the  fruit  of  the.  womb  is  his  r. 

Prnr.  11.  18.  that  soweth  righteousness,  a  sure  r. 
21.  14.  a  r.  in  the  bosom  pacifieth  strong  wrath 
22. 1  4.  the  r.  of  humility  is  riches  and  honour 
23.  1 18.  Burciv  Ihere  is  a  r.  and  thine  expectation 
21.  14.  hast  fo'unil  u  isdom.thcn  there  nhall  be  a  r 

20.  for  there  shall  bo  no  r.  to  the  evil  man 
Feci.  4. 9.  bee.  they  have  a  good  r.  for  their  laboB 

0.  7..  neither  have  they  any  more  a  r. 
fsa.  3   II.  the  r.  of  his'hands  shnll  be  given  him 

5.  23.  which  justify  the  wicked  for  r. 

40.  10.  his  r.  is  with  him,  and  hia  work,  62.  11. 

45    13   he  shall  let  go  my  captives,  not  for  r. 

49.  t  4.  and  my  r.  is  with  my  God 
Jrr.  40.  5.  the  captain  gave  Jeremiah  a  r. 
Eiek.  16.34.  thoiigiveot  r.  and  no  r.  is  given  th«« 
Hos.%\.  thou  hast  loved  ar.  ujon  every  corn-floo* 


RIC 

Obad.  15.  thy  r.  shall  return  upon  thine  own  head 

Mtc.3.  11.  lieads  thereof  judge  forr.  prieats  teach 

7.  3.  the  prince  asketh,  and  judge  asketh  Ibrar. 

JUat.  5.  12.  great  is  your  r.  in  heaven,  Luke  6. 21). 

46.  if  love  ihern  which  love  you,  what  r.haveye? 

6.1.otheiwise  ye  have  no  r.ol  your  Father  in  heav. 

2.  verily,  I  say  to  you,  they  have  their  r.  5,  16. 

10  41.hethi.t  receiveth  a  prophet  shall  receive  a 

prophet's r.  shall  receive  a  righteous  man's  r. 

42.  he  shall  in  no  wise  lose  hie  r.  Mark  9.  41. 

Luke  6.  35  but  do  good,  and  your  r.  shall  be  great 

Hi.  41.  for  we  receive  the  due  r.  of  our  deedi 

4ctsl.  Id.  man  purchased  a  lield  with  r.  of  iniquity 

Rom.  4.  4.  Iiiin  ihatworketh  is  the  r.  not  reckoned 

1  Citr.  3.  8.  every  man  shall  receive  his  own  r. 

14.  if  any  man's  work  abide  he  shall  receive  a  r. 

9.  17.  if  1  do  this  thing  willingly  I  have  a  r. 
18.  whatismy  r.then!  verily,  that  when  I  preach 

Col.  2.  18.  let  no  man  beguile  you  of  your  r. 
3.  24.  ye  shall  receive  the  r.  of  the  inheritance 

1  Tim.  5.  18.  the  labourer  is  worthy  of  his  r. 
/£eb.-i.'2.evety  transg.  received  ajust  recomp.  of  r. 

10.  35.  confidence,  which  hath  great  recomp.  of  r. 
11.215.  he  had  respect  to  the  recompenceof  ther. 

2  Pet.  2. 13.  shall  recHive  the  r.  of  unrighteousness 
2  .To/in  S.  but  that  we  receive  a  full  r. 
Ju.de  11.  ran  greedily  after  error  of  Balaam  for  r. 
Hev.  U.  18.  the  lime  is  come  thou  shouldest  giver. 

22.  12.  I  come  quickly,  and  my  r.  is  with  me 

REWARD,   Verb. 
Deul.  32.  41.  and  1  will  r.  them  that  hate  me 

1  Sam.  24.  19.  wherefore  the  Lord  r.  thee  good 
S  Sam.  3.  39.  the  Lord  shall  r.  the  doer  of  evil 

2  Cliron.  20.  11.  behold,  I  say,  how  they  r.  us 
Psal.  54.  5.  he  shall  r.  evil  to  mine  enemies 
Prov.  25.  22.  heap  coals,  and  the  Lord  shall  r.  thee 
H'os.  4.  9.  and  I  will  r.  them  their  doings 
JUat.  6.  4.  Father  himselfshall  r.  thee  openly,  6,18. 

16.27.  he  shallr. every  man  according  to  his  works 
2  Tim.  4.  14.  Lord  r.  him  according  to  his  works 
Rev.  18.  6.  r.  her,  even  as  she  rewarded  you 

REWARDED. 
Oen.  44.  4.  wherefore  have  ye  r.  evil  for  good  ? 
lSani.24.17.for  thou  hast  r.megood,  whereas  thou 
art  more  righteous  than  I,  I  have  r.  thee  evil 
2Sam.22.  21.  the  Lord  r.  me  according  to  my  righ- 
teousness and  cleanness  of  my  hands,  P.<tuM8.20. 
2  Chron.  15.  7.  be  strong,  your  work  shall  be  r. 
Psal.  7.  4.  if  I  haver,  evil  to  him  that  was  at  peace 
35.  12.  they  r.  me  evil  for  good,  109.  5. 
103.  10.  nor  r.  us  according  to  our  iniiiuiiiea 
Prov.  13.  13.  that  feareththe  commandment  be  r. 
Isa.  3.  9.  for  they  have  r.  evil  to  themselves 
Jer.  31.  16.  thy  work  shall  be  r.  saith  the  Lord 
Rev.  18.  6.  reward  her  even  as  she  r.  you,  double 

REWARDER. 
Heb.  11.  6.  a  r.  of  them  that  diligently  seek  him 

REWARDETH. 
Job  21.  19.  he  r.  him  and  he  shall  know  it 
Psal.  31.  23.  and  plentifully  r.  the  proud  doer 

137.  8.  happy  he  that  r.  thee,  as  thou  hast  served 
Prov.  17. 13.  whoso  r.evil  for  good,  evil  not  depart 
26.  10.  both  r.  the  fool,  and  r.  transgressors 

REWARDS. 
^um.  22.  7.  with  the  r.  of  divination  in  their  hand 
I.ia.l.  2:t.  every  onelovelh  gifts,  followeth  after  r. 
7.>a7!.2. 6.  ye  shall  receive  of  me  gifts  and  r.  honour 
5.  17.  Daniel  said,  give  thy  r.  to  another 
Hos.l.  12.  these  are  myr.  my  lovers  have  given  me 

RIB,  S. 
Qrm.1.  21.  Adam  slept,  and  God  took  one  of  his  r. 

St2.  the  r.  which  God  had  taken  from  man 
F.Tod.  30.  t  "l.  make  two  rings  by  two  r.  of  altar 
2  Sam.  2.  2.3.  Abner  smote  Asahel  under  the  fifth  r. 
3.27..IoabsmoteAbner  ||  20. 10..Ioab smote  Amasa 
4.6.Rechab  and  Baanah  smote  Ish-bosheth  under 
the  fifth  r. 
1  Kirtjrs  6.  t  5-  and  he  made  r.  round  about 
7.  t  3.  it  was  covered  with  cedar  upon  the  r. 
Dan.  7.  5.  beast  had  three  r.  in  the  mouth  of  it 

RIBA.VD. 
Jfam.  15.  38.  on  fringe  of  the  borders  a  r.  of  blue 

Signifies,  f  I]  One  that  has  rrreal  mcnme.i,orplen- 

tyof  iBorUltj irood  things,  1  Tim.  6. 17.  [2]  One 

that  ahoundrlh  in  spiritual  irond  Ihinirs,  being 

furnished  with  Ihrirrar.es  of  God's  Spirit,  Jam. 

2.    5.    Rev.  2.  9.     [3]    Such  as  in  their  own 

opinion  are  spiritually  rich,  when  in  reality 

they  are  not,  Rev.  3.  17.     [4]  Such  as  place  all 

their  happiness  and  confidencein  their  outtcard 

prosperity.  Mat.  l^.H.  Jinke.fi.  a.     [5]  IVise 

and    worthy  men,  who    are  richly  famished 

vith  ezccUent  endowments  of  the  mind,  Eccl. 

10.  6. 

Oen.  13.  2.  Abram  was  very  r.  in  cattle,  in  silver 

14.23. lest  thou  shouldst  say.f  h.nve  marle.\bram  r. 

F.zod.  30.  15.  r.  shall  not  give  more,  nor  poor  less 

I,ev.  25.  47.  and  if  a  stranger  wax  r.  by  thee 

Ruth  3. 10.  followedst  not  young  men  poor  or  r.  | 

491 


RIC 

1  5am43.  7.  the  Lord  maketh  poor  and  makoth  r. 

2  Som.  12. 1.  there  were  two  men  in  one  city,  one  r. 
Job  15.  29.  he  shall  not  be  r.  neither  shall  his  subst. 

34.  19.  nor  regardeth  the  r.  more  than  the  poor 
Psal.  45.  12.  the  r.  shall  entreat  thy  favour 
49.  2.  hear  this,  both  r.  and  poortogether 
16.  be  not  thou  afraid  when  one  is  made  r. 
Prov.  10.  4.  the  hand  of  the  diligent  maketh  r. 
22.  the  blessing  of  the  Lord,  it  maketh  r. 

13.  7.  there  is  that  maketh  himself  r.  yet  hath 

14.  20.  poor  is  hated,  but  the  r.  hath  many  friends 
18.  23.  but  the  r.  answereth  roughly 

21.  17.  he  that  loveth  wine  and  oil  shall  not  her 

22.  2.  r.  and  poor  meet  together.  Lord  is  maker 
7.  the  r.  ruleth  over  the  poor,  and  the  borrower 

16.  he  that  givelh  to  the  r.  shall  come  to  want 

23.  4.  labour  not  to  her.  cease  from  thy  wisdom 
28.  6.  than  ho  that  is  perverse,  though  he  be  r. 

20.  but  he  that  maketh  haste  to  be  r.  22. 
Eccl.  5. 12.  abund.of  r.  will  not  suffer  him  to  sleep 

10.  6.  folly  is  set,  and  the  r.  sit  in  low  place 
20.  and  curse  not  the  r.  in  thy  bed-chamber 
Tsa.  53.  9.  and  with  the  r.  in  his  death,  because 
.Ter.  5.  27.  therefore  they  are  great,  and  wa.xen  r. 
Ezek.  27.  24.  in  chests  of  r.  apparel,  bound  with 
I/os.  12.  8.  Ephraim  said,  yet  I  am  become  r. 
Zech.  11.  5.  say,  blessed  be  the  Lord,  for  I  am  r. 
Mark  12.  41.  many  that  were  r.  cast  in  much 
J.uke  1.  53.  and  the  r.  he  hath  sent  empty  away 

6.  24.  but  woe  unto  you  that  are  r.  for  ye  received 

12.  21.  so  is  he  that  is  not  r.  toward  God 
14.12.  call  not  thy  r.  neighbours,  lest  they  bid  thee 

18.  23.  he  was  veiy  sorrowful,  for  he  was  very  r. 

19.  2.  Zaccheus  chief  among  publicans,  was  r. 
Rom.  10.  12.  same  Lord  is  r.  to  all  that  call  on  him 

1  Cor.  4.  8.  now  ye  are  full,  now  ye  are  r. 

2  Cor.  6.  10.  as  poor,  yet  making  many  r. 
8.  9.  tliough  he  was  r.  yet  for  your  sakes  he 

became  poor,  that  ye  through  his  poverty 

might  be  r. 
Eph.  2.  4.  but  God  who  is  r.  in  mercy 
1  Tim.  6.  9.  they  that  will  be  r.  fall  into  temptation 

17.  charge  them  that  are  r.  in  this  world 

18.  that  they  do  good,  and  be  r.  in  good  works 
.Tarn.  1.  10.  let  the  r.  rejoice  in  that  he  is  made  low 

2.  5.  hath  not  God  chosen  the  poor,  r.  in  faith? 
Rev.  2.  9.  I  know  thy  poverty,  but  thou  artr. 

3.  17.  because  thou  sayest,  I  am  r.  and  increased 
18. 1  counsel  to  buy  of  me  gold,  thou  mayest  be  r. 

13.16.  he  causeth  the  poor  and  r.to  receive  a  mark 

18.  3.  the  merchants  of  earth  are  waxed  r.  15, 19. 

RICH  man  or  7ncn. 

'iSam.  12.  2.  the  r.  man  had  e.xceeding  many  flocks 

4.  there  came  a  traveller  to  the  r.  man 
Tob  'in.  19.  r.  man  shall  lie  down  but  shall  not  be 
Prov.  10.  15.  ther.  man's  wealth  is  hisstrong  city, 
the  destruction  of  the  poor  is  poverty,  18. 11. 
28.  11.  the  r.  vian  is  wise  in  his  own  conceit 
Jer.  9.  23.  let  not  the  r.  man  glory  in  his  riches 
Mic.  6.  12.  the  r.  men  thereof  are  full  of  violence 
Jtf'aM9.23.  a  r.man  shall  hardly  enter  the  kingdom 

24.  it  is  easier  for  a  r.  man  to  enter  into  the 
kingdom  of  God,  Mark  10.  25.  Luke  18.  25. 

27.57.  there  came  a  r.  man  of  Arimathea,  Joseph 
iMke  12.  16.  the  ground  of  a  r.man  brought  forth 
16.  1.  there  was  a  certain  r.  man  had  a  steward 

19.  a  r.  man  was  clothed  in  purple  and  fine  linen 

21.  the  crumbs  which  fell  from  ther.  7na«'s  table 

22.  the  r.  man  also  die.d  and  was  buried 
21.1.  and  saw  the  r.  jnen  casting  into  the  treasury 

,fam,.  1.  11.  so  also  shall  the  r.  man  fade  away 
2.  6.  do  not  r.  men  oppress  you  and  draw  you 
5.  1.  go  to  now,  ye  r.  men,  weep  and  howl 

Rev.  6.  15.  great  men,  and  r.  men  hid  themselves 
RICHER. 

Dan.  11.  2.  the  fourth  shall  be  far  r.  than  Ihey  all 
RICHES. 

Gen.  31.  16.  the  r.  God  hath  taken  that  is  our3 
.36.  7.  r.  were  more  than  they  might  dwell  together 

.fosh.  22.  8.  return  with  much  r.  to  your  tents 

Ruth  4.tl  1.  get  thee  r.  in  Ephratah,  and  be  famous 

1  Sam.  17.  25.  the  king  will  enrich  with  great  r. 

1  Kings  3. 1 1,  neither  hast  asked  r.  2  Chron.  1.11. 

13.  I  have  given  thee  both  r.  and  honour 
10. 23.  king  Solomon  exceeded  all  the  kings  of  the 

earth  for r.  and  for  wisdom, 2  CAr.  9.  22. 

1  Chron.  29.  12.  both  r.  and  honour  come  of  thee 
28.  David  died  full  of  days,  r.  and  honour 

2  Chr.  17.  5.  brought  presents  to  Jeho.shaphat,  he 
had  r.  and  honour  in  abundance,  18.  1. 

20.  25.  Ihey  found  r.  with  dead  bodies  and  jewels 

32.27.  Ilexek.had  exceeding  much  r.  and  honour 
Esth.  1.4.  he  shewed  the  r.  ofhis  glorious  kingdom 

5.  11.  Haman  told  them  of  the  glory  ofhis  r. 
.fob  20.  15.  he  swallowed  down  r.  vomit  them  up 

38.  19.  will  he  esteem  thy  r.?  no,  not  gold 
Psal.  37.  16.  is  better  than  the  r.  of  many  wicked 

,39.6.  heheapelh  upr.  and  knoweth  not  who  shall 

44,  t  12.  thou  aellest  thy  people  without  r. 

49.  6.  thoy  that  boast  themselves  in  their  r. 


RID 

Ps.  53.  7.  but  trusted  in  the  abundance  ofhis  r. 
62.  10.  if  r.  increase,  set  not  your  heart  on  thaK 
73.  12.  the  ungodly  prosper,  they  increase  io  r 
104.  24.  O  Lord,  the  earth  is  full  of  thy  r. 
112.  3.  wealth  and  r.  shall  be  in  his  house 
119.  14. 1  have  rejoiced  as  much  as  in  all  r. 
Prov.  3.  16.  and  m  her  left  hand  r.  and  honour 
8.  18.  r.  and  honour  are  with  me,  yea  durable 
11.  4.  r,  profit  not  in  the  day  of  wrath 
16.  a  woman  retains  honour,  and  strong  men  r 
28.  he  that  trusteth  in  his  r.  shall  fall 

13.  7.  that  maketh  himself  poor,  yet  hath  great  r 
8.  the  ransom  of  a  man's  life  are  his  r. 

14.  24.  the  crown  of  the  wise  is  their  r. 
19.  14.  and  r.  are  the  inheritance  of  fathers 

22.  1.  a  good  name  is  rather  to  be  chosen  than  r 

4.  by  the  fear  of  the  Lord  are  r.  and  honour 
16.  he  that  oppresseth  the  poor  to  increase  his  r 

23.  5.  for  r.  ceitainly  make  themselves  wings 

24.  4.  chambers  shall  be  filled  with  all  pleasant  r 
27.  24.  for  r.  are  not  for  ever,  and  doth  crown 

30.  8.  give  me  neither  poverty  nor  r.  feed  me 

31.  t  29.  many  daughters  have  gotten  r. 
Eccl.  4.  8.  nor  is  his  eye  satisfied  with  r. 

5.  13.  even  r.  kept  for  the  owners  to  their  hurt 
14.  but  those  r.  perish  by  evil  travail 
19.  every  man  to  whom  God  hath  given  r.  6.  2. 
9. 11.  nor  yet  r.  to  men  of  understandmg 
Isa.  8.  4.  the  r.  of  Damascus  shall  be  taken  away 

10.  14.  my  hand  found  as  a  nest  the  r.  of  people 
30.6.  they  will  carry  their  r.  on  young  asses 
45.  3.  I  will  give  thee  hidden  r.  of  secret  places 
61.  6,  ye  shall  eat  the  r.  of  the  Gentiles 

./er.  9.  23.  let  not  the  rich  man  glory  in  his  r. 

17.  11.  so  he  that  getleth  r.  and  not  by  right 
48.  30.  because  r.  that  he  hath  golten  is  perished 

Ezek.  26.  12.  they  shall  make  a  spoil  of  thy  r. 

27.  12.  Tarshish   was  thy  merchant  by  reason 
of  the  multitude  of  all  kind  of  r.  18.27,33. 

28.  4.  with  thy  understanding  thou  hast  gotten  r. 

5.  by  thy  traffic  hast  thou  increased  thy  r.  and 
thine  heart  is  lifted  up  because  of  thy  r. 

DrtTO.11.2.thro'  his  r.shall  stir  up  all  against  Grecia 

13.  the  king  of  the  north  shall  come  with  much  r. 

24.  shall  scatter  among  them  the  prey,spoil  andr. 

28.  then  shall  lie  return  into  his  land  with  great  r. 
Jl/ai.l3. 22.  careoflhis  world  and  the  deceitfulnesi 
ofr.  choke  the  word, Mark  4. 19.  LukeS.  14 
Mark  10.  23.  how  hardly  they  that  have  r.  enter 

24.  them  that  trust  in  r.  to  enter,  Lvke  18.  24. 
Lnke  16.  f  9.  make  friendsofr.  of  unrighteousness 

11.  who  will  commit  to  your  tru.^t  the  true  r.  7 
Rom.  2.  4.  or  despisest  thou  ther.  ofhis  goodness? 
9.  23.  he  might  make  known  the  r.  ofhis  glory 

11.  12.  if  the  fall  of  them  be  the  r.  of  the  world, 
and  the  diminishing  of  Ihem  r.  ofthe  Gentiles 

33.  O  the  depth  ofthe  r.  ofthe  wisdom  of  God 
2  Cor.  8.  2.  abounded  to  the  r.  of  their  liberality 
Eph.  1.  7.  redemption  according  to  r.  of  his  grace 

18.  what  the  r.  ofthe  glory  ofhis  inheritance 
2.  7.  that  he  might  shew  exceeding  r.  ofhis  grace 
3.8.that  I  should  preach  unsearchable  r.  of  Christ 

16.  grant  you  according  to  the  r.  ofhis  glory 
Phil.  4. 19.  according  to  his  r.in  glory  by  Christies. 
Col.  1.  27.  what  the  r.  of  the  glory  of  the  mystery 
2.  2.  knit  in  love,  to  all  the  r.  ofthe  full  assurance 
1  Tiin.G.  17.  nor  trust  in  uncertain  r.but  in  fiving  G. 
T-fch.  11.  20.  the  reproach  of  Christ  greater  r.  than 
.fam.  5.  2.  your  r.  are  corrupted,  your  garments 
Rev.  5. 12.  worthy  is  Lamb  to  receive  power  and  r. 
18.  17.  in  one  hour  so  great  r.  are  come  to  nought 

RICHLY. 
Col.  3.  16.  let  llie  word  of  Christ  dwell  in  you  r. 
1  Ti'm.  6. 17.  but  trust  in  living  God,  who  giveth  r. 
Tit.^.  t  6.  which  he  shed  on  us  r.  thro'  Jesus  Christ 

RID. 
f?pn.37. 22;  that  he  might  r.  him  outoftheir  hands 
Exod.  6.  6.  I  will  r.  ynu  out  of  their  bondage 
Lev.  26.  6.  I  will  r.  evil  beasts  out  ofthe  land 
Psal.  82.  4.  r.  them  out  ofthe  hand  ofthe  wicked 
144. 7.  send  thine  hand,  r.  me,  and  deliver  me,  11. 

RIDDANCE. 
/,c?).2.3.22.  thou  sliatt  not  make  clean  r.oflhy  field 
Zq»A.1.18.ho shall  make  even  speedy  r.of  all  them 

RIDDEN. 
JVttm.22.30.am  not  I  thine  ass,  which  thou  hast  r.  7 

RIDDETH. 
2Soin.  22.  t33.  God  is  my  strength,  he  r.  my  way 

RIDDLE. 

.Tudg.  14. 12.  Samson  said  to  them,  I  will  now  put 

forth  a  r.  to  you,  13, 14,  15, 16, 17, 18,  19. 

Ezek.  17.  2.  son  of  man,  put  forth  a  r.  and  speak 

1  Cor.  13. 1 12.  now  we  sec  in  a  r.  then  face  to  face 

RIDE. 
<?en.  41.43.hemado  hifii  to  r.in  the  second  chariot 
Deut.'Xi.  13.  he  made  him  r.onhigh  places  ofearth 
.ludg.  5.  10.  speak,  ye  that  r.  on  white  asses 
2.Sam.  6. 1 3.  they  made  to  r.the  ark,  1  CAr«n.I3.t7. 
16.2.  the  asses  are  for  the  king's  household  to  r.on 
19.  88. 1  said  I  will  saddle  an  ass  that  I  may  r 


RIG 

\  Kingsl.  W-  cause  Sol.  r.  upon  my  mule, 38,  44. 
iKtttgsi.  ! -24. restrain  not  for  me  to  r.  except  I  bid 
10.  16.  so  they  made  him  to  r.  in  his  chariot 

13.  1 16.  make  thine  hand  to  r.  upon  the  bow 
F.sl/i.  6.  \  9.  and  cause  him  to  r.  through  the  city 
Job  30.  22.  thou  causest  me  to  r.  upon  the  wind 
P.ial.  45.  4.  and  in  thy  majesty  r.  prosperously 

66.  12.  thou  hast  caused  men  to  r.  over  our  heads 
Isa.  30.  16.  but  ye  said,  we  will  r.  upon  the  swil't 

5e.  14.  1  will  cause  thee  to  r.  on  tlie  high  places 
Jer.  6.  23,  they  r.  on  horses  set  in  array,  5U.  42. 
//bs.lO.  n.I  will  make  Ephraira  to  r.Judah  plow 

14.  3.  we  will  not  r.  upon  horses,  nor  will  we  say 
J{ab.  3.  8.  that  thou  didst  r.  upon  thine  horses 
J/a<'.  2.  22.  overthrow  chariots,  and  those  that  r. 

KIDKR. 
Gen.  49.  17.  so  that  his  r.  shall  fall  backward 
Kzod.  15.  1.  horse  and  r.  thrown  into  the  sea,  21. 
Job  39.  18.  she  ecorneth  the  horse  and  his  r. 
Jcr .51.21.  with  thee  will  I  break  in  pieces  the  horse 
and  his  r.  break  in  pieces  the  chariot  and  his  r. 
ZccJi   12.  4.  I  will  smite  his  r.  with  madness 

RIDERS. 
2A.'in''s  lB.23.if  thou  be  able  to  setr.  on,  Jsa.2Q.  8. 
F.-ith^a.  10.  and  he  sent  letters  by  r.  on  mules 
Mair.  2.22.  the  horses  and  their  r.  shall  come  down 
yeck   10.  5.  the  r.  on  horses  shall  be  confounded 

RIDETH. 
Lev.  15.  9.  what  saddle  he  r.  on  shall  be  unclean 
Deut.  :W.  2f>.  who  r.  upon  the  heaven  in  thy  help 
Est/i.6.  8.  and  the  horse  that  the  king  r.  upon 
Pial.  (i8.  4.  eitol  him  that  r.  on  the  heavens,  33. 
Isa.  lit.  1.  behold,  the  Lord  r.  on  a  swift  cloud 
.imoo- 2.1  j.neilhtr  shall  he  that  r.  the  horse  deliver 

RIDING. 
^'um.  22.  22.  now  Balaam  was  r.  on  his  ass 
2  Kings  4. 24.  slack  not  thy  r.  for  me,  except  I  bid 
Jer.  Iv.  25.  kin;;s  shall  enter  r.  in  chariots,  22.  4. 
Ezek.  23.  6.  young  men,  hor.semen  r.  on  horses,  12. 
23.  great  lords,  all  of  them  r.  upon  horses 
33.13.thou  and  many  people  with  tlieer.on  horses 
Zcch.  1.  8.  and  behold,  a  man  r.  on  a  red  horse 
9.  9.  thy  king  cometli  unto  thee  r.  upon  an  ass 

RIDICULOUS. 
/ja.33.  t  lO.lhou  shalt  not  sec  a  people  of  a  r.tongue 

RIDGES. 
/'.sa.65.10.  thou  waterestlher.  thereof  abumlantly 

Kin,  or  RYE. 
F.zod.  0.  32.  the  wheat  and  r.  were  nol  smitten 
/ia.2tJ.25.castin  \\'hoat,  barley  and  r.in  their  place 

lUFLED. 
Zcch.  14.  2.  the  houses  r.  and  the  women  ravished 

RIGHT,  Substantive. 
G"(m.l^.25.sliall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  dor.? 
JVam.  27.  7.  the  daughters  of  Zelophehad  speak  r. 
ncut.  21.  17.  the  r.  of  the  first-born  is  his 
Jiuth  2.  t  20.  is  one  that  hath  r.  to  redeem,  3.  t  9. 
4.  0.  redeem  thou  my  r.  to  thyself,  for  I  cannot 
2  Sam.  19.  23.  \^■hat  r.  have  Ito  cry  to  the  king  ? 

43.  we  have  also  more  r.  in  David  than  yo 
I  ICinirs  8.t45.1ie.ir  thou  in  heaven  their  prayer,  and 
"  maintain  their  r.  t  49. 2  Ckr.  6.  f  35.  t  39. 
.\'eh.  2. 20.  but  ye  have  no  portion  nor  r.  in  Jerus. 
9.33.  for.thou  hast  done  r.  we  havedone  wickedly 
Job  31.  6.  should  I  lie  against  my  r.  ?  my  wound 

17.  shall  even  he  that  hateth  r.  govern  1 
36.  6.  but  he  giveth  r.  to  the  poor 
P»a/.  9. 4.thou  hast  maintained  my  r.  judging  r. 
17.  1.  hear  the  r.O  L.  attend  to  my  cry,  give  ear 
140. 12.  the  Lord  will  maintain  the  r.  of  the  poor 
Prov.  16.  a.  than  great  revenues  without  r. 

13.  and  they  love  him  that  speaketh  r. 
ha.  10. 2.  to  take  away  the  r.  from  poor  of  my  peo. 
32.  7.  to  destroy  when  the  needy  speaketh  r. 
5J.  t  8.  ilivre  is  no  r.  in  their  goingi 
Jer.  5.  2.i  the  r.  of  the  needy  do  ihey  not  judge 
17.  II.  ho  that  geltclli  riches,  anrl  not  by  r. 
32.  7.  the  r.  of  redemption  is  thine  to  buy  it,  8. 

4a 


Ria 

Juh  34.  23.  he  will  not  lay  on  man  more  than  r. 
35.  2.  thinkest  thou  this  i«  ber.  that  thou  saidstl 

Psal.  19.  8.  the  statutes  of  the  Lord  are  r. 
45.  6.  the  sceptro  of  thy  kingdom  is  a  r.  sceptre 
51.  10.  O  God,  renew  a  r.  spirit  within  me 
107.  7.  he  led  tUfem  forth  by  the  r.  way 
1 19. 75.  thy  judgments  are  r.  ||  128.  thy  precepts  r. 

Prov.  4.  11.  1  have  led  thee  in  r.  paths 
8.  6.  and  the  opening  of  my  lips  shall  be  r.  things 
9.  they  are  all  r.  to  them  that  find  knowledge 

12.  5.  the  thoughts  of  the  righteous  are  r. 

14.  12.  there  is  a  way  which  seemeth  r.  16.  25. 

20.  11.  whether  his  work  be  pure,  and  whether  r. 
2:1.  16.  when  thy  lips  shall  speak  r.  things 

24.  26.  shall  kiss  his  lips  that  giveth  a  r.  answer 
Eccl.  4.  4.  again  i  considered  every  r.  work 

11.  t  6.  thou  knowest  nol  whether  shall  be  r. 
Isa.  30. 10.  which  say,  prophesy  not  to  us  r.  things 

45.  19.  I  the  Lord  declare  things  that  are/-. 
Jer.  2.21.  I  had  planted  thee  wholly  a  r.  seed 

23. 10.  their  course  is  evil,  and  their  force  is  not  r. 

34.  15.  yc  turned,  and  had  done  r.  in  my  sight 
Hos.  14.  9.  for  the  ways  of  the  Lord  are  r. 
Jimos  3.  10.  for  they  know  nol  to  do  r.  saith  Lord 
J\Iark  5.15.  clothed,  and  in  his  r.  mind,  Luke  8.  35. 
Luke  10.  23.  thou  hast  answered  r.  this  do  and  live 
Jicls  4.  19.  whether  it  be  r.  in  the  sight  of  God 

8.  21.  thy  heart  is  not  r.  in  the  sight  of  God 

13.  10.  not  cease  to  pervert  the  r.  ways  of  the  L. 
iPct.  2. 1.5.  which  have  forsak.r.  way,  gone  astray 
Hcv.  22. 14.  that  they  may  have  r.  to  the  tree  of  life 

/*  RIGHT. 
Exod.  15. 26.  if  thou  will  ddigently  hearken  and  do 
that  which  is  r.  in  his  sight,  1  Kings  11.  33, 
Deut.  6.  13.  thou  shalt  do  that  is  r.  12.25.  |  21.9. 
12.H.every  man  doeth  whatsoever  is  r.in  own  eyes 
28.  when  thou  doest  that  which  is  r.  13.  18. 
Judg.  14  .t  3.  get  her  for  me,  she  is  r.  in  mine  eyes 
1  Kings  11.  33.  hast  iiol  walked  to  do  that  is  r. 
■IKingsW-  30.  ine.xccut.  that  which  is  r.in  my  eyes 
.Job  42.  7.  have  not  spoken  of  me  thing  that  «'»■  r.  8. 
Psal.  33.  4.  for  the  word  of  the  Lord  is  r. 
Pron.  12. 15.  the  way  of  a  fool  is  r.  in  hisowneycs 

21.  2.  every  way  of  man  is  r.  in  his  own  eyes 
8.  but  as  for  the  pure,  his  work  is  r. 

Jrr.  26.  t  14.  do  with  me  as  is  r.  in  your  eyes 
F.zek.  13.  .5.  but  if  a  man  do  that  which  is  r. 

19.  he  hath  done  that  which  is  lawful  and  r.  and 
kept  my  statutes,  21.  27.  |  33.  14,  16,  19. 
j\fat.  20.  4.  whatsoever  is  r.  I  will  give  you 

7.  whatsoever  i*  r.  that  shall  ye  receive 
Luke  12.  57.  and  why  judge  ye  not  what  is  r.  7 
Eph.Q.  1.  obey  your  parents  in  the  Lord,  this  is  r. 

IVas  RIGHT. 
.Tudg.  17.  6.  there  was  no  king  in  Israel,  hut  every 

man  did  that  which  was  r.  in  his  own  eyes,21.25. 

1  Sam.  18.  t  20.  the  thing  was  r.  in  Saul's  eyes 

2  .Sam.  17. 1 4.  the  saying  was  r.  in  eyes  of  Absalom 

1  Kings  14.  8.  David  do  that  which  was  r.  15.  5. 
15.  11.  Asa  did  that  which  was  r.  2  Chron.  14.2. 
22.43.Jelioshapliat  did  thai K>as  r.  2  Chron.  20.32. 

2  Kings  12.  2..leboasli  did  that  was  r.2  CArojj.24.2. 

14.  3.  Amaziah  did  thai  which  mo.?  r.  2  CAr.  25.2. 
15.3.  Azariah  diil  that  which  was  r.  2  C/ir(/7i.26.4. 

34.Jothani  did  that  which  wasr.'i  Chron.^l.'i. 
16.2.  .^hazdid  not  that  which  wasr.  in  sight  ol'L. 
18.  3.  Hezekiah  did  that  was  r.  2  Chron.  29.  2. 
22. 2.  Josiah  did  that  wliich  wasr.  2  Chron.  34.  2. 

1  Chron.  13. 4.  the  thing  was  r.  in  eyesof  the  people 

2  Chrnn.  30.  f  4.  thing  was  r.  in  eyes  of  Hezekiah 
.liib  3.3.  27.  I  have  [lerverted  that  which  was  r. 
Psal.  73.  .37.  their  heart  icas  not  r.  with  him 
Jer.  n.  16.  that  which  came  out  of  my  lips  was  r. 

RIGHT. 
.7osA.3.1C.  the  people  passed  over  r.  against  Jericho 

RIGHT-CHEEK. 

Mat.  5.  39.  whoso  shall  smile  Ihee  on  the  r.  check 

RI(;ilT  CORNER. 


4«.t  30.  lho,seon  whom  he  stayeth  do  not  r.         ,2AVn^«ll. 11. guard  stood  round  Irom  the  r.corncr 
■.om.3.35.lo  lur;i  aside  r.of  a  man  bef.  Most  High  •'>''•'•  ^"'^'^^  .,*'*"; 

J<:ie*.2l.27.benomore,  till  he  come  whoser.il  is'  RI(;HT-E.\RL\  . 

22.t29.llieyhuve  oppressed  the  stranger  withoutr. ' /'«'ii.  40.  5.  Goil  shall  help  '{•■;'»""  '"»'  r.carly 
jJmo»  5.  12.  they  turn  aside  tho  poor  from  their  r.  I  RIGHT-EORrH. 

Jira/.3.  5.  that  turn  nsido  the  stranger  from  his  r.   ;  Jer.  49.  5.  yc  shall  be  driven  every  man  r.-fortA 
/oAd  1.  t  12.  to  them  gave  he  r.  to  be  sons  of  God'  UIGIlT-O.V 

//£4.13.10.an  altar,  whereof  they  have  no  r.  to  eat  i  Trou.  4.  25.  let  thine  eyes  look  r.  on,  and  eye  lids 
RI(;iIT,  Jldjcctivc.  I   9.  15.  to  call  p^HSengers  who  go  r.  on  their  ways 

r7fn.24.4P.tho  Lord  whohiidledmeinther.  way'  RIGHT-PILLAR. 

Drul.  32.  4.  a  God  of  truth,  jo»t  and  r.  is  he  il  Kings  ~.'i\.  be  set  up  lh.-r./)i//ar  called  Jachin 

»AojA.  9.  25.  do  as  Jeeineth  good  and  r.  unlo  thee'  KKJHT-VVELL. 

.Judg.  12.  6.  he  c»uld  not  frame  to  pronounce  it  r. ,  Psal.  139.  14.  and  that  my  s.iul  knowelh  r.  teell 

1  .Sam.  12.  23. 1  will  teach  you  the  good  undr.  way!  RIGHTEOUS. 

2  Sam.  15.  3.  sec,  thy  maltirs  aro  good  and  r.       I  Son  the  Signification  of  JrBT. 

1  Kins'  9-  t  12.  the  cities  were  nol  r.  in  his  eves  VJen.  7.  1.  for  thee  have  I  seen  r.  beloro  me 

2A-in/»10.1.'..i9thyhfartr.ftsmyhfartwiththine     '"  ""       '•  ■' -•■--—"•'•'•  —1.  .i- -.<• 

17.  9.  Israel  did  sccroily  things  that  were  not  r. 
Ezra  8.  21.  to  seek  of  him  a  r.  way  for  us 
AVA.  9.  13.  thou  gavcn  them  r.  judgments 
F.tth.  8.  5.  and  the  thing>i  seem  r.  before  the  kinif 
Jvb  f.  8-J.  how  forciblo  are  r.  words '.  but  what  doth 


4oa 


1H.23.  will  thou  destroy  iho  r.  with  the  wicked  1 
21.  if  there  be  fiflv  r.  wilt  thou  ilestroy,  and  nol 
spare  the  place  for  the  fifty  r.  that  iiro  iherrin? 
2.).  that  be  far  from  iheo  to  siny  r.  with  wicked 
26.  if  I  find  fiflv  r.  in  the  city,  1  will  spare 
28.  ptradvoiiuire  Iheio  sliull  lack  five  of  fifty  r. 


RIG 

Gen.  20.  4.  Lord,  will  thou  slAy  also  a  r.  na.ion 
33.  26.  Judah  said,  she  haih  been  more  r.  than  I 

Eiod.  23.  7.  the  innocent  and  r.  slay  thou  nol 
8.  gift  pervertelh  the  words  of  the  r.  Deut.  I6.1St 

M'um.  23.  10.  let  me  die  the  death  of  the  r. 

Deut.  4.  8.  what  nation  that  halh  judgments  so  r 
2.5.  1.  they  shall  justify  the  r.  2  CAron.  6.  23. 

Judg.  5.  11.  the  r.  acu  of  the  Lord,  1  Sam.  12.  7 

1  Sam.  24.  17.  he  said,  thou  art  more  r.  than  I 

2  Sam.  4.  11.  wicked  men  have  slain  a  r.  persoo 

1  Kings  2.  .32.  who  fell  on  two  men  more  r.  than  he 
8.  .32.ju8lifying  the  r.  to  give  him  according  to  hit 

2  Kings  10.  9.  Jehu  said  to  all  the  people,  ye  ber. 
Ezra  9.  15.  Lord  God  of  Isr.  thou  art  r.  ,VcA.  9.S. 
.lob  4.  7.  or  where  were  the  r.  cut  off? 

9.15.  whom,  Iho'  I  were  r.  yet  would  1  not  answtf 

10.  15.  if  1  be  r.  yet  will  I  not  lift  up  my  nead 
15.  14.  what  is  man,  that  he  should  be  r. .' 

17.  9.  r.  also  shall  hold  on  his  way, grow  stronger 
22.  3.  is  itany  pleas,  to  Almighty  that  thou  art  r.? 

19.  the  r.  see  it,  and  are  glad,  Psal.  107.  42. 
2:).  7.  there  the  r.  might  dispute  with  him 

32.  1.  because  he  was  r.  in  his  own  eyes 

'.a.  5.  Job  halh  said,  I  am  r.  {|  35.  7.  if  thou  be  r 

36. 7.  he  vvilhdraweth  not  his  eyes  from  the  r.  but 

with  kings  are  they  on  the  throne,  Psal.  34.  15. 

40.8. will  thou  condemn  nic  that  thou  inayest  ber 

Psal.  1. 5.  nor  sinners  in  the  congregation  of  the  r. 

(').  f.jr  the  Lord  knowelh  the  way  of  the  r. 

5.12.f.ir  thou  wilt  bless  the  r.with  favoui,compa98 

7.  9.  for  the  r.  God  trieth  the  hearts  and  reins 

11.  God  judgeth  the  r.  God  is  angry  with  wicked 

11.  3.  what  can  the  r.  do  ?  ||  5.  Lord  trieth  the  r. 
14.  5.  for  God  is  in  the  generation  of  the  r. 

19.  9.  the  judgments  of  the  Lord  are  true  and  r. 
altogether,  119.  7,62,  106,  KiO,  164. 
31.  18.  lips  speak  contemptuously  agaiiisl  the  r. 
32. 11.  be  glad  in  the  Lord,  and  rejoice,  ye  r. 

33.  1.  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  O  ye  r.  97.  12. 

.34.  17.  the  r.  cry,  and  the  Lord  hearetli  them 
19.many  are  the  afflictions  of  the  r.Lord  deliver! 
21.  they  that  hate  the  r.  shall  be  desolate 
35.  27.  let  them  he  glad  that  favour  my  r.  cause 
37.  17.  but  the  Lord  upholdelli  the  r. 
21.  hut  the  r.  shewetli  mercy,  and  giveth 

25.  yel  have  I  nol  seen  r.  forsaken,  nor  his  seed 

29.  the  r.  shall  inherit  the  land,  and  dwell  therein 

30.  the  mouth  of  the  r.  speaketh  wisdom 
32.  the  wicked  watcheth  the  r.  to  slay  him 
39.  but  the  salvation  of  the  r.  is  of  the  Lord 

52.0.  the  r.  also  shall  see,  and  fear,  and  laugh 
55.  22.  he  shall  never  sulfer  the  r.  to  be  moved 
53.10.  the  r.sliall  rejoice  when  he  seeth  vengeance 

11.  verily  there  is  a  reward  for  the  r. 

(i4.  10.  the  r.  shall  be  glad  in  the  Lord,  and  trust 
63.  3.  but  let  the  r.  be  glad,  let  them  rejoice 
69.  23.  let  lh(im  not  be  written  with  the  r. 
72.  7.  in  his  ilays  shall  the  r.  flourish,  and  [x'nce 
7.5.  10.  but  the  horns  of  the  r.  shall  be  exulted 
92.  12.  the  r.  shall  flourish  like  the  palm-tree 
94.  2!.  they  gather  against  the  soul  of  the  r. 
97.  I  J.  light  is  sown  for  r.  nod  gladness  for  upright 
112.  4.  the  Ld.  Is  full  of  compassion  and  r.  116.  5 

6.  the  r.'shall  be  in  everlasting  rcnu-mbranco 
118  1.5.  rejoicing  is  in  ihe  tabernacles  of  the  r. 

20.  this  gale,  into  which  the  r.  shall  enter 
119.  106.  sworn  that  I  will  Keep  thv  r.  judgment! 

137.  r.  art  lliou,  O  Lord,  Jer.  12.'). 

133.  thy  testimonies  are  r.  and  very  faithful 
125.3.tho  rod  of  the  wicked  shall  not  rest  upon  the 
lot  of  the  r.  lesi  the  r.  put  forth  their  hands 

140.  13.  t\ti:  r.  shall  give  thanks  to  tby  name 

141.  5.  let  the  r.  smite  me,  it  shall  he  a  kindness 
142.7.  Ihe  r.  shall  compass  me  about,  thou  shalt 

145.  17.  the  Lord  is  r.  in  nil  his  ways,  and  holy 

146.  3.  Lord  lovelhlher.  he  preaerveth  strangers 
Prov.  2.  7.  he  hiyelh  up  sound  wisdum  for  the  r. 

20.  that  thou  mayest  keep  the  paths  of  the  r. 
3.32.  frow.ird  is  abominat.  lint  his  secret  in  with  r. 

10.  3.  the  Lord  will  not  siitfer  (ho  r.  to  famish 
16.  labour  of  the  r.  tendeih  to  life,  wicked  to  sin 

21.  the  lips  of  Ihe  r.  feed  many,  but  fools  die 
24.  hut  the  desire  of  Ihe  r.  shall  be  prnnlpd 
2.5.  but  Ihe  r.  is  an  everlasting  foundalion 
23.  Ihe  hope  of  the  r.  shall  he  elarlness 

30.  the  r.  shall  never  he  removed,  hut  Iho  wicked 
32.  the  lips  of  the  r.  know  what  is  acceptable 

11.  8.  Ihe  r.  is  delivered  out  of  trouble 

10.  when  it  goeth  well  with  the  r.  rily  rpjoiccth 
21.  hut  the  seed  of  the  r.  shall  he  dolivorod 
2;i   Ihe  desire  of  ihe  r  is  only  eood 
2H.  but  the  r.  shall  flourish  as  a  branch 

30.  the  fruit  of  iho  r.  is  a  Iroe  of  lif.> 

31.  bi'bold,  r.  shall  he  recompensed  in  Ihe  enrlh 

12.  3.  hut  the  root  of  the  r.  shall  nut  be  moved 
5.  lliougbiB  of  Ihe  r.  arc  right,  but  Ihe  counsel* 

7.  but  the  house  of  llio  r.  shall  stand 

12.  but  the  root  of  the  r.  yieldelh  fruit 

26.  the  r.  is  more  excellent  than  his  ncighlmur 

13.  9.  the  li^ht  of  the  r.  rejuiccth,  but  the  lamp 


RIG 

-or.  13.  21.  but  to  the  r.  good  shall  he  repaid 

25.  the  r.  eatelli  to  the  satisfying  of  his  soul 
14  i>.  but  among  the  r.  there  is  favour 

19.  and  the  wicked  how  at  the  gates  of  tlio  r. 
3-2.  but  the  r.  hath  hope  in  his  death 

15.  6.  ill  the  huu^e  of  tlie  r.  is  niucli  lieasure 
1^.  but  the  way  of  the  r.  is  made  plain 

28.  the  heart  of  the  r.  studietli  to  answer 

29.  but  he  heareili  the  prayer  of  the  r. 
l().  13.  )-.  lips  are  the  deUght  of  kings 

18.  5.  it  i»  not  good  to  overthrow  the  r.  in  judgm. 

lU.  tile  r.  runneth  into  it,  and  is  safe 
SI.  IS.  tlie  wicked  shall  be  a  ransom  for  the  r. 

26.  but  the  r.  giveth,  and  spareth  not 

2^}.  2'!.  the  father  of  tlie  r.  shall  greatly  rejoice 
24.  15.  lay  not  wait  against  I  he  dwelling  of  the  r. 

24.  he  that  saitli  to  the  wicked,  thou  art  r. 
28.  1.  the  wicked  flee,  but  the  r.  are  bold  as  a  lion 

lU.  whoso  causeth  the  r.  to  go  astray,  shall  I'all 

28.  hut  when  the  wicked  perish,  the  r.  increase 
2U.  2.  when  the  r.  are  in  authority,  people  rejoice 

6.  but  the  r.  doth  Sng  and  rejoice 

7.  the  r.  coiisiderelh  the  cause  of  the  poor 
16.  but  the  r.  shall  see  their  fall 

Eccl.  '3.  17.  God  shall  judge  ther.  and  the  wicked 

7.  IG.  be  not  r.  overmuch,  neither  over-wise 

8.  14.  happeneth  according  to  the  work  of  the  r. 

9.  1.  the  r.  and  the  wise  are  in  the  hand  of  God 
■2.  there  is  one  event  to  the  r.  and  to  the  wicked 

fsa.  3.  10.  say  ye  to  the  r.  it  shall  be  well  with  him 
5.  23.  and  take  away  the  righteousness  of  the  r. 

24.  16.  we  have  heard  songs,  even  glory  lo  the  r. 
26.  2.  open  ye,  that  the  r.  nation  may  enter  in 
41.26.wlio  hath  declared,  that  we  may  8ay,he  is  r. 
53.  11.  my  r.  servant  shall  justify  many 

57.  1.  r.  perisheth,  and  no  man  layeth  it  to  heart, 

none  considering  that  the  r. is  taken  from  the  evil 

60.  21.  thy  people  also  shall  he  all  r.  shall  inherit 

.^fr.I2.1.  r.  ait  thou,  O  Ld.  when  I  plead  with  thee 

20.  12.  O  Lord  of  hosts,  that  triest  the  j-. 
23.  5.  that  I  will  raise  to  David  a  r.  branch 

Ezek.  13.  22.  with  lies  ye  have  made  the  r.  sad 

16.  .52.  thy  sisters,  they  are  more  r.  ihiin  tliiui 
18.  20.  the  righteousness  of  the  r.  shall  be  on  him 

24.  but  when  the  r.  turnelh  away  from,  33.  IS. 

21.  3.  1  will  cut  otffroni  thee  ther.  and  wicked,  4. 
33.  12.  the  righteousness  of  the  r.  shall  not  deliver 

him  in  the  day,  nor  shall  the  r.  be  able  to  live 
13.  when  I  shall  say  to  the  r.  he  shall  live 
.imos  2.6.  because  they  sold  r.  for  silver,  and  poor 
Hub.  1.  4.  the  wicked  doth  compass  about  the  r. 
13.  wicked ilevoureth  him  that  is  more ;-.llKin  he 
J\Ial.  3.  18.  discern  between  the  r.  and  the  wickid 
Mat.  9.  13.  I  am  not  come  to  call  the  r.  hut  sin- 
ners to  repentance,  Mark  2.  17.  I.uke  5.  32. 
13.  43.  then  shall  ther.  shine  furih  as  tlie  sun 
23.28.  ye  outwardly  appear  r.  to  men,  but  within 
2!).  because  ye  garnish  the  sejiulchros  of  the  r. 
35. that  on  you  may  come  all  r.hloi/d  shed  on  the 
earth,  from  hlood  of  r.  Abel  to  Zacliaiias 

25.  27.  then  shall  the  r   answer,  saying,  liOid 
46.  but  the  r.  shall  go  into  life  eternal 

I,uke  1.  6.  and  they  were  both  r.  before  God 
18.  y.who  trusted  they  were  r.  and  despised  others 

John  7.  24.  judge  not  by  appearance,  but  judge  r. 
17.25.  O  r.Fatlier,  the  world  hath  not  known  thee 

liniii.i.  5.  and  revelation  of  the  r.  judgment  of  God 

3.  10.  it  is  written,  there  is  none  r.  no  not  one 
5.  lit.  so  by  obedience  of  one,  many  he  made  r. 

2  T/<M.s.l.  5.  a  manifest  token  of  r.  judgment  ofG. 
fi.  it  is  a  r.  thin"  with  God  to  recom|)ense  Iribiil. 
2  Tim.  4.8.  the  Lord,  the  r.  Judge,  shall  give  me 
//t;A.  11.4.  he  obtained  witness  that  h#»as  r. 

1  I'f.t.  3.  12.  the  eyes  of  the  Lor.l  are  over  the  r. 

4.  18.  ifr.  scarcely  be  saved,  where  sliall  sinner 

2  I'rt.  2.  8.  Lot  ve.xed  his  r.  soul  from  day  today 
l./o/ij;  2.1.  we  have  an  advocaie,Je5US  Christ  the  r. 

29.  if  y<!  know  that  he  is  r.  ye  know  every  one 
3.  7.  hi-  t|iat  doctli  righteousness  is  r.  as  he  is  r. 

12.  his  own  works  were  evil,  and  his  brother's  r. 
Rrv.  16.5. 1  heard  the  angel  say,  thou  aitr.  OLd. 
7.  O  Lord,  true  and  r.  are  thy  judgments,  10.  2. 
2-2.  11.  and  he  that  is  r.  let  him  be  r.  still 
■Src  Lord  is. 
RIGHTEOUS  man,  or  mm. 
P.^-nl.  37.  16.  a  little  that  a  r.  man  hath  is  belter 
Pror.  10.  II.  the  mou'h  of  a  r.jnan  isa  well  of  life 

12.  10.  a  r.  man  regardeth  the  life  of  his  beast 

13.  5.  a  r.ni.  hatelh  lying,  but  wicked  is  lo.ith..!oine 
21.  12.  a  r.  man  wisely  considereth  the  house 
2.5.  26.  a  r.  man  falling  down  before  the  wicked 
28.  12.  when  r.  men  do  rejoice,  there  is  glory 

/-■(I.  41.2.  who  raised  up  the  r.  mnn  from  the  enst 
f?rrA-.  3. 20.  again,  when  ar.  man  doth  turn,  18.26. 
21.  nevertheless,  if  thou  warn  the  r.  vian 
23.  4.5.  and  the  r.  mm,  they  shall  jud|je  them 
Mat.  10.  41.  he  thai  receii'elh  a  r.  man  in  the  name 
of  a  r.  man,  shall  rec-ive  a  r.  man's  reward 
13.17. manvr.mcn  have  desired  to  see  those  things 
Luke  23.  47  saying,  certainly  this  was  a  r.  man 
493 


RIG 

Rom.  5.  7.  icarcely  for  a  r.  man  will  one  die 

1  I'tm.  1.  9.  that  Ihe  law  is  not  made  liira  ;-.  man 
./am.  5. 16.  the  fervent  prayer  of  a  r.  »/ia/i  availeth 

2  Ftt.  2.  8.  tor  that  r.  man  dwelling  among  them 

K1GHTEOU.SLY. 

/)eut.  1.  16.  hear  causes,  and  judger.  TroK.Sl.  9. 

Psal.  67.  4.  thou  shall  judge  llie  people  r.  1)6.  10. 

Isa.  33.  15.  he  that  wulketli  r.  shall  uwell  on  high 

./e,r.  11.  20.  O  Lord  of  hosts,  that  judgest  r. 

Tit.  2.  12.  that  we  should  live  soberly,  r.  and  godly 

1  I'et.  2.  23.  cimiinitted  to  him  that  judgelh  r. 
KlGHTEUUSiNESrf 

Signifies,  [1]  That  pirfcction  of  the  dicine 
nature,  whereby  God  is  must  just,  and  7nost 
hull/  in  hiiUSilf,  and  in  all  his  dtaiings  with  hit 
creatures,  and  uliscrccs  the  slricte.it  rules  of 
rectitude  and  equity,  Job  36.  3.  John  17.  io 
[2]  The  clemency,  mercy,  and  guudncss  of  (rod 
Deut.  6.  25.  Psal.  51.  14.  [3j  His  truth  and 
faithfulness  in  fulfilling  and  making  good  his 
j/rumises,  Psal.  31.  1.  Isa.  42.  6.  |  45.  19.  [4] 
'J'he  blessed  and  gracious  fruit  and  reward  of 
riffhteousness,Psiil.2i.5.  Jsa.  58.  8.  [5]  The 
active  andpassivc  obedience  of  Christ,  whereby 
he  perfectly  fulfilled  the  law,  and  propitiated 
the  justice  of  (rod  :  which  obedience  being  im- 
puted lo  the  elect,  and  received  by  faith,  their 
sins  are  pardoned,  their  persons  accepted,  and 
they  are  brought  to  eternal  glory,  Lan.  9.  24. 
This  righteousness,  whereby  a  sinner  is  justi- 
fied, is  called  Ihe  righteousness  of  God,  Hoin. 

I.  ll.^ecauseit  isof  (iod's  institution,  ordina- 
tion, and  appointment,  and  which  alone  he  will 
accept  of  to  life :  Or,  because  it  was  performed 
by  him  who  is  God  as  well  as  man,  and  is 
therefore  of  infinite  value  and  merit:  Or,  be- 
cause it  is  opposed  to  the  righteousness  of 
works,  Rom.  10.3.  Jl  ii-ca/Zerf tlie  righteousness 
of  faitii,  Horn.  4.  13.  because  it  is  upprehendnl 
and  applied  by  faith.  Jind  it  is  called  the  law 
of  rigliteousiiess,  Horn.  9.  31.  in  opposition  to 
that  law  of  righteousness,  by  which  the  unbe- 
lieving Sews  sought  lo  be  justijled.  .(indChr'nt 
is  cnlird,  Tlie  Lord  our  Righteousness,  Jer. 
23.  6  that  is,  The  procurer  and  besloiocr  of  all 
that  righteousness  and  holiness  that  are  in  be- 
lievers. [G]  That  vprighl7tess,  er/uity,  and 
justice  in  elealing,  which  ought  to  be  between 
mnn  and  man,  Luke  1.  75.  Eph.  4.  24. 
[7]  ./3m  eminent  act  of  justice  and  piety, 
proceeding  from  a  sincere  leal  for  God\< 
honour,  and  the  good  of  his  people,' Ps:i\.  IOC. 
31.  [8J  Holiness  of  life  and  conversation, 
1  Cor.  15.  34. 

The  doctrine  of  the  gospel  is  called  the  word  of 
righteousness,  Heb.  5.  13.  because  therein  the 
righteousness  of  God  is  revealed  to  us,  and  it 
alone  declares  the  way  of  becoming  righteous. 
})eut.l\-25.  and  it  shall  hi;  ourr.  if  we  observe  to  dn 
24.  13.  it  shall  be  r.  to  thee  before  Lord  thy  God 
33.  19.  there  they  shall  oft'er  sacrifices  of  r. 
Job  29.  14.  1  put  on  r.  and  it  clothed  me 
36.  3.  and  [  will  ascribe  r.  to  my  Maker 
F^rt/.4.5.otf'erlhe  sacrifices  of  r.  and  I  rust  in  the  L. 

1 1.  7.  for  the  righteous  Lurd  lovetli  r.  33.  5. 
15.  2.  he  that  workeili  r.  shall  never  bo  moved 

23.  3.  he  leadeth  nie  in  paths  of  r.  for  name's  sake 

24.  5.  and  r.  from  the  God  of  his  salvation 

40. 9. 1  have  preached  r.  in  Ihegreat  congregation 
45.  4.  bircause  of  truth,  and  mei.'kiicss,  and  r. 
7. thou  Invest  r.and  liatest  wrckcdness,  Heb.  1.9. 
48.  lO.lhy  right  hand,  O  God,  is  full  of r. 

51.  19.  then  slialt  be  pleiisoil  with  sacrifices  of  r. 

52.  3.  ihou  lovest  lying,  rather  than  to  speak  r. 
.58.  1.  do  ye  indeed  speak  r.  O  congregation  ? 
72.  2.  he  shall  judge  thy  people  with  r.  and  poor 

3. mountains  shall  bring  ])eace,and  little  hills  byr. 
85.  10.  r.  and  peace  have  kissed  each  other 

II.  and  r.  shall  look  <lown  from  heaven 

13.  r.  shall  go  before  him,  and  set  us  in  the  way 
94.  15.  hut  judgment  shall  return  unto  r. 

96.  13.  he  shall  judge  the  world  with  r.  98.  0. 

97.  2.  r.  is  the  habitation  of  his  thmne 
99.  4.  thnu  executest  r.  in  Jacob,  103.  6. 
101).  n.  blessed  is  he  that  doi-lh  r.  at  all  times 

118.  19.  open  to  ino  the  gales  of  r.  I  will  go  into 

119.  1 14.  the  r.  of  thy  testimonii'S  is  everlasting 
172.  for  all  thy  eommandmenls  are  r. 

132.  9.  let  thy  priests  be  clothed  with  r.thy  saints 
Pro)i.2.9.  then  shaltthou  underst.r.  and  judgment 
8.  13.  yen,  durable  riches  and  r.  are  with  me 

20.  I  lead  in  the  way  of  r.  in  midst  of  the  jiaths 
10.  2.  hut  r.  delivereth  from  death,  11.  4. 
11.5.  the  r.  of  the  perfect  shall  direct  his  way 

6.  the  r.  of  the  upright  sh;ill  deliver  them 

18.  to  him  that  soweth  r.  shall  he  a  sure  rewanl 

19.  as  r.  tendcth  to  life  so  he  thai  pnrsuclh  evil 

12.  17.  he  that  speakellj  truth,  sheweth  forth  r. 
2b   in  the  way  of  r.  is  life,  and  in  ihe  pathway 

13.  6.  r.  koepelh  him  that  is  upright  in  the  way   I 


RIG 

Prov.  14.  34.  r.  exalteth  a  nation,  sin  reproach  ta 

15.  9.  he  loveth  him  that  followelh  after  r. 

16.  8.  better  is  a  little  with  r.  than  great  revenue! 
12.  for  the  throne  is  establi,.<lied  by  r. 

31.  IS  a  crown  of  glory,  if  found  in  tiiewayofr. 

21.  21.  he  that  followelh  afu'r  r.  and  mercy  find- 

elh  life,  r.  and  honour 
Ecc/.3.I6.and  the  place  of  r.ihat  inii|uily  was  there 
Jsa.  1.  21.  r.  lodged  in  it,  but  now  niuidcrers 
26.  Ihe  city  of  r.  ||  27.  and  her  converts  with  r. 

5.  23.  wliicii  take  away  the  r.  of  the  righteous 
10.22.  consumption  decreed  shall  overUow  with  r. 

11.  4.  but  with  r.  shall  he  judge  ilie  poor 
5.  and  r.  shall  be  the  girdle  ol'hig  luiiis 

16.5.judging  and  seeking  judgment, and  hasting  r 
26.  9.  the  inhabitants  of  the  world  will  learn  r. 

10.  let  favour  he  hewed  yet  will  he  not  learn  r. 
28.  17.  and  r.  will  I  lay  to  the  plummet 
32.  16.  and  r.  shall  remain  in  the  fruitful  field 

17.aiiii  the  work  ofr.shall  be  peace,aiKl  the  eftect 

of  r.  quietness  and  a>surance  for  ever 

33'.  5.  Loid  hath  filled  Zion  with  judgment  and  r. 

41.  t  2.1  who  raised  up  r.  from  ihe  east 

45.  8.  drop  down,  ye  heavens,  from  above,  and  let 

skies  pour  down  r.  and  letr.springup  together 

19.  I  the  Lord  speak  r.  I  declare  right  things 
24.  in  the  Lord  have  I  r.  t  in  the  Lord  is  all  r. 

4li.  12.  hearken  unto  me,  ye  that  are  far  from  r. 
51.  1.  ye  that  follow  after  r.  \\  7.  ye  that  know  r. 
54.  17.  their  r.  is  of  me,  saith  the  Lord 
58.  2.  yet  they  seek  me  as  a  nation  that  did  r. 
oil.  17.  for  he  put  on  r.  as  a  breastplate 

60.  17.  will  make  thy  ollicers  peace,  thine  exact,  r 

61.  3.  ihat  l^iey  might  be  called  trees  of  r. 
10.  he  hath  covered  me  wiih  the  robe  of  r. 

11. so  Lord  will  cause  r.and  praise  to  spring  forth 

62.  1.  until  the  r.  thereof  go  forth  as  brightpess 
64.  5.1I10U  meotest  him  that  rejoice! h  and  work.  r. 

./()•.  9.  24.  that  I  am  the  Lord  which  exerciee  r. 

22.  3.  execute  ye  judgment  and  r.  and  deliver 

23.  6.  this  IS  his  name,  the  Loid  olt  r.  33.  16. 
33. 15.  at  that  time  will  I  cause  the  branch  of  r.  to 

grow  up  to  David,  and  he  shall  execute  r. 
51.  10.  the  Lord  hath  brought  forth  ourr. 
F:ek.  14. 14.  duliver  their  own  souls  by  their  r.  20. 
18.  20.  the  r.  of  the  righteous  shall  he  upon  him 
3.').  12.  iher.  of  the  righte.ius  shall  not  deliver  hirn 
Dan.  4.  27.  and  break  ofi'thy  sins  by  r. 
9.  7.  O  Lord,  r.  helongeth  unto  the«,  hut  to  us 
24.  to  bring  in  everlasting  r.  and  10  seal  up  vision 

12.  3.  they  that  turnmany  to  r.  shall  sliine  as  stars 
f/os.  10.  12.  till  he  come  and  rain  r.  upon  you 
.fimns  5.  7.  and  who  leave  off  r.  in  the  earth 

24.  and  let  r.  run  down  as  a  mighty  stream 

6.  12.  ye  have  turned  the  fruit  of  r.  into  hemlock 
Mic.  6.  5.  that  ye  may  know  the  t.  of  the  Lord 
Zr;)A.2.3.allye  meek  of  earth, seekr.seek  meekness 
.Mai.  4.  2.  to  you  that  fearshall  the  Sun  of  r.  arise 
Mat.  S.  15.  thus  it  becom.nh  us  to  fulfil  all  r. 

5.6.  blessed  are  they  that  hunger  and  thirst  after  r. 

20.  except  your  r.  exceed  the  r.  of  the  Scribes 
21.  32.  for  John  came  to  you  in  the  way  of  r. 

J. like  1.75.  in  r.  before  him  all  thp  days  of  our  life 

John  16. 8. he  will  reprove  the  «orld  otsin  and  of  r. 

10.  of  r.  heel  go  to  my  Fat  her, ye  see  me  ho  mora 

.lets  10.35.  he  that  worketh  r.is  accepted  wiih  him 

13.  10.  Ihou  enemy  of  all  r.  wilt  thou  not  cease 
21.25.  as  he  reasoned  of  r.and  judgm.  Felix  tremb 

Rum.  1.  17.  for  tlicrein  is  Ihe  r.  ol  God  revealed 
2.  26.  if  uncircumcision  keep  the  r.  of  the  law 
3.5.  if  our  unri"htoousne..:s  commend  ther.ofOod 

21.  the  r.  of  God  without  the  law  is  manifested 

22.  even  ther.  of  God  which  isby  fiith  of  Christ 
4.  6.  to  whom  God  imputeth  r.  without  works 

ll.receiveil  si^'u  ofcircuiiicisi(in,aseal  ofther.of 
the  faith,  Ihatr.mighl  heimputed  to  them  also 

13.  for  the  promise  was  through  the  r.  of  faith 
5.17.lheyw-liich  receiv*  gift  ofr.shall  reign  by  Jfs. 

18.  so  by  the  r.  of  one  the  free  gift  came  on  all 

21.  so  niightyrace  reign  through  r.  to  eternal  life 
6.13.  yield  your  members  inslrumenisofr.  lo  God 

16.  whether  of  sin  to  death, or  of  obedience  untor 

18.  free  from  sin,  ye  became  the  servants  of  r 

19.  so  now  yield  your  members  servants  to  r. 
20.wlunye  wereserv.of  3in,ye  were  fme  from  r. 

8.  4.  that  ther.  of  the  law  might  be  fulfilled  in  us 
10.  but  tlio  spirit  is  life  because  of  r. 

9.  30.  that  the  Gentiles  who  followed  not  after  r. 

have  attained  tor.  even  ther.  whii-h  is  of  faith 

31.  but  Israel  which  followed  after  the  law  of  r. 

lialh  not  attained  to  the  law  ofr. 

10.3.  they  being  ignorant,  eoing  about  to  establish 

thi'irhwn  r.  have  not  submitted  to  ther.  of  God 

5.  Moses  describeth  the  r.  which  is  of  the  law 

6.  the  r.  which  is  of  faith  speaketh  on  this  wise 
10.  for  with  the  heart  man  believeth  unto  r. 

14. 17.  kingdom  of  God  not  meatann  drink, butr. 

1  Cor. 1.30.in  Christ,  who  of  God  is  made  unto  us  r. 
15.  34.  awake  to  r.  and  sin  not,  for  smiehave  rot 

2  Cor.  3.  9.  much  more  doth  the  ministration  of  r. 


RIG  , 

t  Car.  5.21.  (list  we  might  be  made  r.  of  God  in  him 

G.  7.  hy  the  armour  of  r.  on  the  rijjlit  liiinil  uiid  left 

14.w'lml  llilowship  hath  r.  willi  uririi'liteousiieos' 

0.10. your  set-il,  a«id  increaao  the  fruiia  ol'yuur  r 

11.  15.  be  transformed  as  the  minisleis  ofr. 
Oaia.iX.  if  r.  come  by  law, Christ  is  ileaJ  in  vuiii 

3.  21.  verily,  r.  should  have  been  by  the  law 

5.  5.  we  throu^'h  the  Spirit  wail  for  the  hoi)t;  of  r. 
Eph.  5.  9.  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  in  all  r.  and  truili 

6.  14.  and  haviii!;  on  the  breastplate  of  r. 

P/ii'.  1. 1 1,  bein;;  filled  with  the  fruits  ofr.  by  Jesus 
3.  li.  touching  r.  which  is  in  the  law,  blainele.ss 

9.  but  the  r.  which  is  of  God  by  faith 

1  Tim.  G.  II.  luid  follow  after  r.  -2  Tim.  2.  22. 

2  TYwi.  4.  8.  there  is  laid  up  for  me  a  crown  ofr. 
Tit.  3.  5.  not  by  works  ofr.  which  we  have  done 
Heb.  1.  8.  a  sceptre  of  r.  is  sceptre  of  thy  kingdom 

5.  13.  is  unskdful  in  (he  word  ofr.  he  is  a  babe 

7.  2.  first  being  bv  interpretation  king  ofr. 
11.7.  and  became  heir  of  the  r.  which  is  by  faith 

33.  through  faith  subdued  kingdoms,  wrouglitr. 

12.  11.  nflerward  it  yieldeth  peaceable  fruit  ofr. 
Jam.  1.  2(1.  wrath  of  man  worketh  not  r.  of  (Jod 

3.  18.  the  fruit  of  r.  is  sown  in  peace  of  them 

1  Pft.2.24.  webeingdead  to  siu should  live  unt<ir. 

2  Pet.  1.1.  obtained  likefaith  through  the  r.  of  (Jod 

2.  5.  spared  not,  but  saved  Noc  a  preacher  of  r. 
21.  been  better  not  to  have  known  the  way  of  r. 

3.13. we  look  for  a  new  earih,  wherein  dwelleth  r. 
1  fokn  2. 29.  every  oi>e  that  doeth  r.  is  born  of  God 
3.7.  he  that  doelii  r.  is  rigliteods,  as  he  is  righteous 

10.  whosoever  doth  not  r.  is  not  of  God 

Kev.  19.  8.  fi)r  the  line  linen  is  the  r.  of  the  sainis 

Fvr  RIGHTEOUSNESS. 
Gen.  15.  Cy  .Abnim  iK'lieved  in  the  Lord,  and  he 
counted  it  to  bin. /or  r.  Ps.  106.31.  ««/h.4.3. 
Psal.  143.  11.  /or  thy  r.  sake  bring  my  soul  out  of 
J.ia.  5.  7.  he  looki'd  fvr  r.  but  behold  a  cry 
Mtit.  .'J.IO.  blessed  are  they  which  are  persec.  forr. 
Ham.  4.  5.  his  faith  is  counted /or  r.  Oal.  3.  fi. 
O.reckoned  ||  22  imputed  to  him  fur  r.  ./(im.2.23. 
10.  4.  for  riirist  is  the  end  of  the  law  fur  r. 
1  Pet.  3.  14.  if  yp  suifer/or  r.  sake,  liappy  are  ye 

His  UIGHTEOUSNESS. 
1  Sam  20. 2.'}.  the  Kord  render  to  every  man  hia  r. 

1  Kingj  8.  32.  give  according  to  ki.i  r.  2  C/tr.  6.23. 
Lib  33.  21).  fur  he  will  render  unto  man  hi.i  r. 
P.<«/.  7.  17.  I  will  praise  the  Ld.  according  to  lii.^  r. 

22. 31.  they  shall  declare  A/*  r.  to  a  i)eople  be  born 
5H.  6.  the  heavens  shall  ileclare  his  r.  97.  ti. 
98.  2.  ?tis  r.  bath  he  openly  shewed  in  the  sight 
103.  17.  and  kis  r.  unto  children's  children 
III.  3.  and  his  r.  endurelh  for  ever,  112.  3,  9. 

/;cc/.7.1.i. there  is  a  just  man  that  pi-risheth  in  his  r. 

/.va.  42. 2l.tb<'  Lord  is  well  pleased  (or  his  r.sake 
."j!!.  I(i.  broiighl  stilvatiou,  and  Ai.*r.  sustained  him 

i','ze/c.3.20.  again,  when  a  righteous  man  doth  turn 

from  his  r.  and  commit  inii)uity,  18.  21,  20. 

18.  22.  in  his  r.  that  he  hath  done,  he  shall  live 

33   12.  not  he  able  to  live  for  his  r.  in  the  ilay 

13.  if  he  trust  to  his  own  r.  and  commit  iniiinity, 

his  r.  he  halh  done  shall  not  be  rcmembcrcjd 

Hfic.1.0.  will  bring  to  light,  and  I  shall  behold  his  r. 
Wat.li.'.iX  but  seek  the  kingdom  of  God  and  *('.•»  r. 

/<(;rn.  3.23. to  declare /((■«  r.  lor  remission  olsins,26. 

2  Cor.  9. 9.  given  to  the  poor  his  r.  ri-main.  for  ever 

In  RIGIITEOUS.VESS. 
f.cv.  19.  15.  in  r.  shalt  tlioti  judge  thy  neighbour 

1  h'nirr.t  3.fi.aslie  walked  bef  thee  in  truth  and  in  r. 
Psal.^.  t  4.  Ihousattflst  in  the  throne,  judging  m  r. 

8.  and  he  shall  judge  the  world  in  r. 

17.  15.  as  for  me,  I  will  behold  thy  face  in  r. 

65.  5.  by  terrible  things  in  r.  wilt  thou  answer  us 
Pron.  8.  8.  all  the  words  of  my  mouth  are  in  r. 

25.  5.  his  throne  shall  be  established  in  r. 
Isi.  5.  16.  God  that  is  holy  shall  be  sanctified  in  r. 

32.  1.  behold,  a  king  shall  rygn  in  r.  and  princes 

42.  6.  I  the  Lord  hive  callen  thee  in  r. 

45.  13. 1  have  raised  him  in  r.  and  will  direct 
23.  the  word  is  grine  out  of  my  mouth  in  r. 

48. 1.  moniion  the  God  of  Israel,  but  not  in  r. 

54.  14.  in  r.  shalt  ihou  be  established 

03.  1.  I  thai  »po  ik  in  r.  mighty  to  save 

Jer.  4.2.  thou  shrdt  swear,  the  Lord  livelh,  in  r. 
Hos.  2.  19.  I  will  betroth  theo  unto  me  in  r. 

H).  J2.  sow  to  yourselves  in  r.  reap  in  mercy 
y.i-f.h.  8.  8.  I  will  be  their  Gml  in  truth  and  in  r. 
M'tl.  3.  3.  that  thi-v  may  nlfer  an  ofll-ring  in  r. 
Jlr.ls  17.  31.  he  will  jmlgo  llin  woilil  in  r. 
Horn.  9.  28.  he  will  finish  and  cut  it  short  in  r. 
F.ph.  4.  24.  which  aller  God  is  creatcil  in  r. 

2  Tim..  3.  16.  scripture  U  for  in><lructii>n  in  r. 
/ico.  19.  II.  and  in  r.  hr  di)lh  jiidu'.'  and  make  war 

My  RIGin'E()l'.'^.\l'..-*.S. 
Gfn.  30. 33.  so  mij  r.  answiir  firmi'in  time  to  come 
lif■ut.9.^■  saving,  for  my  r.  J..ord  halh  broujht  mo 
2  .Sam.  22.  21.  ihc  Lord  rewarded  me  according  In 
niF/ r.  an  I  clennneB<of  hands,25.  Ps.  18.20,21. 
Job  6.  29.  yea,  return  again,  mij  r.  is  in  it 
27.  0.  >n»  r.  I  hold  fast,  and  will  not  let  it  go 
494 


RIN 

\Jub  33.  9.  thou  saidst,  my  r.  Is  more  than  God's 
Psal.  4.  1.  hear  me  when  I  call,  O  God  of  my  t. 
7.  8.  judge  ine,  O  Lord,  according  to  my  r.  » 
35.  t  27.  let  them  be  glad  that  favour  my  r. 

/.stt.  41.10.  uphold  thee  with  the  right  hand  of  my  r. 
46.  13.  I  bring  near  my  r.  ||  51.  5.  my  r.  is  near 
51.  6.  and  ;ni/  r.  shall  not  be  abolished 
8.  but  J«y  r.  shall  be  lor  ever,  and  my  salvation 
.56.1  .salvation  is  near  to  come,  my  r.to  be  revealed 

Phil.  3.  9.  may  be  found,  not  liaving  mine  own  r 
Thy  RIGHTEOUSNESS. 

Deut.  9.  5.  nor  for  thy  r.  or  uprightness,  6. 

Jub  8.  6.  make  the  habitation  o(  Ihy  r.  prosperous 
35.  8.  and  thy  r.  may  profit  the  son  of  man 

Psal.  5.  8.  lead  me,  O  Lord,  in  thy  r.  because 

/  31.  1.  in  thee  I  trust,  deliver  me  in  thij  r.  71.  2. 

35.  21.  judge  me,  O  Lord,  according  to  Ihy  r. 
28.  and  my  tongue  shall  speak  o( thy  r.71.24. 

36.  6.  Ihy  r.  is  like  the  great  mountains 

10.  O  contiiiu'!  thyr.  to  the  upright  in  heart 

37.  (i.  he  shall  bring  forth  ihy  r.  as  the  light 
40.  ID.  I  have  not  hid  thy  r.  within  my  heart 
51.  14.  and  my  tongue  sliall  sing  aloud  of  thy  r. 
6!l.  27.  and  let  them  not  come  into  thy  r. 

71. 15.  my  mouth  shall  shew  forth  thy  r.  all  day 
16.  1  will  make  mention  oCthy  r.  of  thine  only 
19.  thy  r.O  God,  is  very  high,  who  is  like  to  thee  ? 
72.  1.  and  give  thy  r.  unto  the  king's  son 
88.  12.  thy  r.  be  known  in  land  of  forgetfulne.ss 
81).  Ki.  and  in  thy  r.  shall  they  be  e.xalted 
119.t7.  when  I  have  learned  judgments  of  thy  r. 
40.  (piicken  me  in  thy  r.  ||  123.  for  Word  of  thy  r. 
142.  thy  r.  is  an  everl.  light,  thy  law  is  the  truth 
143.  1.  in  faithfulness  answer  me,  and  in  thy  r. 

11.  for  thy  r.  sake  bring  my  soul  out  of  trouble 
145.  7.  and  they  shall  sing  o(  thy  r. 

/sa.48.18.lhen  had  Uty  r.  been  as  waves  of  the  sea 
.57.  12.  I  will  declare  thy  r.  and  thy  works 
58.  8.  thy  r.  shall  go  before  thee,  glory  of  Lord 
62. 2.  anil  the  Gentiles  shall  see  Ihy  r.  and  kings 

Dan.  9.  16.  O  I.iord,  according  to  all  thy  r. 
RIGHTEOUSNESS. 

■Tudg.  5.  t  IL  they  shall  rehearse  r.  of  the  Lord 

1  .S'a/«.  12.  t7.  that  I  may  reason  of  the  r.  of  Lord 
tsa.  33.  t  15.  he  that  walketh  in  r.  and  speaketh 

45.  t24.  in  the  Lord  is  all  r.  and  strength 

64.  0.  and  all  our  r.  are  as  filthy  rags 
Ki^/r.  3. 20.  when  righieoiis  turm-th  from  his  r. 

33.  13.  all  his  r.  shall  not  be  remembered 
Dan.  9.  18.  not  for  mir  r.  but  for  thy  great  mercies 

RIGHTLY. 

Gen.  27.  36.  Esau  said,  is  not  he  r.  named  Jacob  ? 
lAike  7.  43.  he  said  to  him,  thou  hast  r.  judged 

20.  21.  master,  we  know  that  thou  teachest  t. 

2  7'im.  2.  15.  r.  dividing  tlic  word  of  truth 

RU;OUR. 

KxorZ.  1.  13.  maile  Israel  to  serve  with  r.  14. 

Lev.  25.  43.  thou  shalt  not  rule  with  r.  46,  53. 
RING. 

The  antiquity  of  rings  is  known  from  scripture  : 
.Vbrahaiii's  srrennt  ^nve  an  ear- ring  t.u  Re- 
bckah.  Gen.  24.  22.  ./ifler  the  victory  that  the 
Israelites  obtained  over  the  Midianites,  they 
offered  to  the  Lord  the  rings  and  bracelets  that 
they  had  taken  from  the  enemy,  Num.  31.  .50. 
It  was  a  mark  of  /soiiernmcnt  and  anthurity, 
and  was  used  chirjty  l.o  seal  patents  or  public 
orders  ;  thus  when  Pliaraoh  committed  the  /ro- 
vrrnment  of  all  Egypt  to  Joseph,  he  took  his 
ting  froiil  his  fin/rcr,  and  gave  it  to  Joseph,  as 
a  token  of  that  authority  with  which  he  invest- 
ed him,  and  which  he  intended  he  should  exer- 
cise over  all  kis  people.  In  like  manner  did 
Ahasuerus  to  his  favourite  Haman,  and  to 
Morilecai,  who  succeeded  Uaman  in  his  dig- 
nity, Esth.  3.  10.  I  a.  2. 

fVheii  Jaci)(/  arrired  at  the  land  of  Canaan,  at 
his  return  from  Mesopotamia,  he  gave  orders 
to  his  people  to  put  into  his  custody  all  the 
strange  jjods  which  were  in  their  hand,  and  all 
tlirir  ear  rings  which  were  in  their  ears.  Gen. 
35.  4.  This  seenn  to  insinuate,  and  uthrr 
writers  erpressly  affirm,  that  £Ao«cstraiige  gods 
were  superstitious  or  magical  figures,  en- 
graven upon  their  rings,  their  bracelets,  and 
Ike  pendants  in  th'ir  ears.  Or  else  accord- 
ing to  others,  that  these  rings  and  pendants 
were  upon  the  hands,  and  in  the  ears  of  those 
false  gods.  ' 

f;cn.41.42.  Pharaoh  took  olT  his  r.  from  his  hand 

F.ind.  26.24.  boards  be  coupled  unto  one  r.  30.  29. 

K.««A.3.10.king  .Ahasuerus  look  his  r.from  his  hand 

12.  and  sealed  wilh  the  king's  r.  8.  8,  10. 

8. 2.  the  king  took  olT  his  r.  gave  it  to  Mordecai 
I.uke  15.  22.  the  father  said,  put  a  r.  on  his  hand 
.Jam.  2.  2.  if  there  comn  in  a  man  wilh  a  gold  r. 

RINOI.R.MtER. 
.lets  21.  5.  and  a  r.  of  the  sect  of  the  Nazarencs 

RIN(;3. 
Ezod.  25.  12.  Ihou  ilialt  cast  four  r.  of  gold  for  it 


RIS 

Ezod.  25.  14.  thou  shalt  put  the  staves  into  the  r. 
15. 1 27.  7. 1  .-n.  5.  1  :«.  7. 

26.  29.  and  make  their  r.  of  gold,  28.  23,  26.  27. 

1 .10.  4.  I  36. 34.  I  37.  3,  13.  |  39. 16,  19,  20 

27.  4.  thou  shalt  make  ujjon  net  four  brazen  r. 

28.  28.  they  shall  bind  the  breast|dute  by  the  r. 
JVum.  31.50.  prey  gotten  of  jewels,  bracelets,  and  r. 
K.s-tA.1.6.  were  hangings  fastened  tosilverr. pillars 
Cant.  5.  14.  his  hands  are  as  gold  r.  set  with  beryl 
Isa.  3.  21.  will  lake  away  the  r.  anil  nose  jewels 
y.ick.  1.  18.  their  r.  so  high  that  they  were  dread- 
ful, their  r.  were  full  of  eyes  round  about 

RING-STRAKED. 
f?f  n.30  35.  removed  he-goats  that  were  r.-straked 
31.  8.  if  he  said,  the  r.-straked  shall  he  thy  hire 
lO.rams  wcrer.-A-<r«Af(i,speckled,andgrisled,I2. 
RINSED. 
f.cv.  6.  28.  the  brazen  pot  he  both  scoured  and  r 
15.  11.  and  hath  not  r.  his  hands  in  water 
12.  every  vessel  of  wood  shall  be  r.  in  water 
RIOT,  Substantive. 
Isa.  29.  t  9.  stay  yourselves,  wonder,  take  your  r. 
'J'it.  1.  6.  children  not  accused  ofr.  or  unruly 
lPet.4.  4.  that  you  run  not  to  th&«ame  excess  ofr. 

RIOT. 
2  Pet.  2.  13.  as  they  that  count  it  pleasure  to  r. 

RIO'CING. 
liom.  13.  13.  walk  not  in  r.  and  drunkenness 

RIOTOUS. 
Prov.  23.  20.  be  not  amongst  r.  eaters  of  flesh 
28.  7.  he  I  hat  is  a  companion  ofr.  men  shamcth 
jMke  15.  13.  there  wa-ted  his  substance  with  r. 
RIP.  [living 

^Kings  8.12.thou  wilt  r.  up  their  women  with  child 

RII'E. 
Gen.  40.  10.  the  clusters  brought  forth  r.  grapes 
F.xod.  22.  29.  to  offer  the  first  of  thy  r.  fruits 
J\rum.  1.1.  20.  was  the  time  of  the  first  r.  grapes  f 

18.  13.  whatsoever  is  first  r.  in  the  land  be  thine 
./tr.  24.  2.  one  basket  had  good  figs,  even  like  the 
figs  that  are  firgt  r.  T/os.  9.  10.  JVnA.  3.  12 
.fnel  3.  13.  put  in  the  sickle,  for  the  harvest  is  r. 
Jlic.  7.  1.  my  soul  desired  the  first  r.  fruit 
Murk  4.  t  29.  when  the  fruit  is  r.  he  puts  in  sickle 

1  0>r,  14.  t  20.  but  in  understanding  be  ofr.  ago 
Jiev.  14.  15.  lime  to  reap,  for  harvest  of  earth  is  r 

18.  gather  the  clusters,  fur  her  grapes  are  fully  r 
RIPENING. 
Isa.  18.  5.  and  the  sour  era|)e  is  r.  in  the  flower 
RIPPED. 

2  Kings  1.5.  16.  all  the  women  wilh  child  he  r.  up 
Hos.  1,3. 16.  their  women  with  child  shall  be  r.  up 
Amoa  1.  13.  because  they  have  r.  up  tlie  women 

RISE 
Signifies,  [1]  To  get  up  from  one's  sent,  or  from 
bed.  Gen.  19.  2.   Mark   10.  49.     [2]  To  pr'oceea 
or  come   from,  Num.  24.  17.     [31    To   be  ad- 
vanced to  honour  or  authority,  Prov.  28.  12. 
[4]   To  be  mooed  or  kindled,  Eocl.  10.4.     [51 
7'o  shine,  Mat.  .5.  45.     [6]   To  reb,l,  2  Sam. 
18.  32.     [7]    7'o  stir  or  awake  out  of  spiritual 
sloth  and  securiti/  to    a  inore  lively   frame, 
Cant.  3.  2.     [8]   To  go  forth.  Gen.  19.  t'23. 
Exod.'il.ld.  if  he  r.  again,  and  walk  abroad  upon 
his  staff,  then  shall  he  that  smote 
J\''ttm.  24.  17.  and  a  sceptre  shall  r.  out  of  Israel 
7Vc«^33.11.  smite  them  that  r.  that  they  r.  not  Hg. 
./o.<A.  18.  4.  they  shall  r.  and  go  ihroosh  the  land 
.hidg.  8. 21.  then  they  said,  r.  thou,  and  fall  on  ug 
9.  33.  thou  shalt  r.  early,  and  set  upon  the  city 

1  .Sam.  22.  13.  that  he  should  r.  to  lie  in  wait 
24.  7.  and  suffered  them  not  to  r.  against  Saul 

2  Sam.  12.^1.  when  child  was  dead,  thou  didst  r. 
18.  32.  all  that  r.  against  thee  be  as  Absalom  is 

Ml  30.  12.  upon  my  right  hand  r.  the  youth 
P«aM8.:)8. wounded  them,  lliey  were  not  able  to  r. 

27.  3.  though  war  should  r.  against  me,  in  this 

will  I  be  confident 
36.  12.  they  are  cast  down,  Blinll  not  be  able  to  r. 
1 19. 62.  at  inidnight  I  will  r.  to  give  thanks  to  thea 
1 10.  10.  into  deep  pits,  that  they  r.  not  up  again 
'*r»c.  24.  22.  for  their  calamity  shall  r.  suddenly 

28.  12.  when  the  wicked  r.  a  ninn  is  bidden,  28. 
Cant.  3.  2.  I  will  r.  now  and  go  about  the  city 
tsa.  14.21.  prepare  slaughter,  that  ihey  do  not  r. 

24.  20.  the  earth  shall  fall  and  not  r.  njain 
26.  11.  they  are  deceased,  they  shall  not  r. 
33   10.  now  will  t  r.  saith  the  Lord 
43.  17.  they  shall  lie  down  togoth.  they  shall  not  r. 
51.  17.  every  tonino  that  shall  r.  thoii  shall  cond 
.58.  10.  thenshall  Ihy  light  r.  in  ob.^eurily 
Jer.  25.27.  drink  ve,  spue,  fall  and  r.  no  more 
51.64.  Habyinn  shall  not  r.  froiu  I'vil,  1  will  bring 
linos  5.  2.  the  virgin  of  Israel  shall  no  more  r. 
7.  9.  I  will  r.  against  the  house  of  Jeroboam 
.V(i/.  5.  45.  he  maketh  sun  to  r.  on  evil  and  good 

20.  19.  crucify  him,  and  the  third  ilay  he  shall  r. 
a-aip,  .V.irA  9.  31.  |  10.  34.   /,».  18.33.  |  24.7 

21.  7.  b>r  nation  shall  r.  againit  nation,  and  kin:; 
doin  against  kingd.  Mark  13.  8.  I.ukc  21.  10 


RIS 

.lfat.24.11.manyra;se  prophet!  shall  r.^orJH3.22. 
26.  40.  r.  let  us  be  going,  behold,  lie  id  uHiand 
87.  (5.1.  ul'tur  tlirtje  duys  I  will  r.  ug:iiii,  Mark  8.  'il. 

tiark  4.  "il.  and  should  sleep,  and  r.  night  und  day 

10.  49.  bo  of  good  comfort,  r.  he  callcth  thee 
12.23.  in  the  resurrection,  when  they  eliull  r.  25. 

26.  and  as  touching  the  dead,  that  tJiey  r. 
Luke  11. 7. trouble  me  not,  I  cannot  r.  and  give  thee 
8.  though  he  will  not  r.  because  ho  is  his  friend 
12.  54.  when  ye  see  a  cloud  r.  out  of  the  west 
22.  46  he  said  to  them,  why  sleep  yel  r.  and  pray 
24.  46.  it  behoved  Christ  to  sutter  and  to  r.  from 
John  5.  8.  Jesus  saith,  r  take  up  thy  bed  and  walk 

11.  23.  Jesus  saitli,  thy  brother  shall  r.  again 
24.  I  know  ho  sliall  r.  {|20.9.that  he  must  r.  again 

Acts  10.  13.  came  a  voice,  r.  Peter,  kill  and  eat 
26.  16.  but  r.  and  stand  upon  thy  feet 
23.sliould  be  the  first  that  should  r.t'rom  the  dead 

Rom.  15.  12.  he  that  shall  r.  to  reign  over  Gentiles 

I  Cor.  15.  15.  if  so  be  the  dead  r.  not,  IG,  29,  32. 

1  Thess.  4.  16.  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  r.  first 

Heb.  7.  11.  what  need  that  another  priest  should  r. 

Rev.  11.  1.  r.  and  measure  the  temple  of  God 
1H3E  up. 

Oen.  19. 2.  yo  shall  r.  up  early  and  go  on  yonr  ways 
31.  35.  let  it  not  displease,  that  I  cannot  r.  up 

Ezod.  8.20.  r.  up  and  stand  before  Pharaoh,  9. 13. 

12.  31.  r.  up  and  get  you  forth  from  my  jiuople 
Lev.  19.32.  thou  slialt  r.  up  before  the  hoary  head 
JW/rt.  10.  3.).  r.  up.  Lord,  let  enemies  be  scattered 

22.  20.  if  men  come  to  call  theo  up,  r.  up  and  go 
23  18.  r.  up,  Balak,  and  hear,  thou  son  of  Zippor 

24.  behold,  the  people  shall  r.  up  as  a  lion 
Deut.  2.  13.  now,  r.  up,  said  I,  and  get  over  brook 
24.  r.  ye  up,  und  pass  over  the  river  Arnon 
19.  11.  if  a  man  r.  up  against  his  neighbour 

15.  one  witness  shall  not  r.  up  against  a  man 

16.  if  a  false  witness  r.  up  against  any  man 
28.7.the  Lord  shall  cause  thine  enemies  thatr.wp. 
29.  22.  the  generation  that  shall  r.  up  after  you 

31.  18.  this  people  will  r.  up,  and  go  a  whoring 

32.  38.  their  gods,  let  them  r.  up  and  help  you 
Josh.  S.  7.  then  yo  shall  r.  up  from  the  ambush 
Judg.  20. 38.  should  make  a  great  flame  r.  up,  40. 
1  Sam.  29.  10.  wherefore  r.  up  early  in  morning 
JVeA.  2.  18.  and  they  said,  let  us  r.  up  and  build 
Job  20.  27.  and  the  earth  shall  r.  up  against  him 
Psiil.  3.  1.  many  are  they  that  r.  up  against  me 

17.7.  save  them  from  those  that  r.  u/>  against  them 
\  le.  48.  liftest  me  above  those  that  r.  up  against  me 
35.  II.  false  witn.  did  r.  up,  they  laid  to  my  charge 
41.  8.  now  that  he  lieth,  he  shall  j-.  up  no  more 
44.  5.  we  will  tread  them  under  that  r.  up  ag.  us 
59. 1.  defend  me  from  them  that  r.  up  against  me 
74.23.  the  tumult  of  those  that  r.  up  against  thee 
92. 11.  desire  of  the  wicked  that  r.  up  against  me 
94.  16.  who  will  r.  up  for  m»  ag.  the  evil-doers? 
127.  2.  it  is  vain  for  you  to  r.  up  early,to  sit  up  late 
139.21.  grieved  with  those  that  r.  up  against  theel 
Prou.3I.28.  her  children  r.  up,  and  call  her  blessed 
Eccl.  10.4.  if  the  spirit  of  the  ruler  r.  up  ag.  thee 
12.  4.  he  shall  r.  up  at  the  voice  of  the  bird 
CanLi.  10.  my  beloved  said  to  me,  r.  up,  my  love 
Isa.5.  11.  woe  unto  them  that  r.  u/)  in  the  morning 
14.  22.  I  will  r.  up  against  them,  saith  the  Lord 
28.21.  the  Lord  shall  r.  up  as  in  mount  Porazim 
32.  9.  r.  up,  ye  women  at  ease,  hear  my  voice 
Ji-r.  37.  10.  should  r.  up  every  man  in  his  tent 
47.  2.  behold,  waters  r.  up  out  of  the  north 
49.  14.  gather  against  her,  and  r.  up  to  battle 
51. 1.  against  them  that  r.  up  against  me,  a  wind 
Lam.  1.  14.  from  whom  I  am  not  able  to  r.  up 
Jintos  8.  8.  it  shall  r.  up  wholly  as  a  flood,  9.  5. 

14.  even  they  shall  fall,  and  never  r.  up  again 
Obad.  1.  let  us  r.  up  against  Edom  in  battle 
JVaA.  1.  9.  alfliction  shall  not  r.  up  the  second  time 
Hah.  2.  7.  shall  they  not  r.  up  suddenly  that  bile 
Zcph.  3.  8.  until  the  day  that  \r.  up  \a  the  prey 
Zech.  14.  13.  his  hand  r.  up  against  his  neighbour 
Jlfat.10.2 1. children  shall  r. tip  against  their  parents, 
and  cause  them  to  bo  put  to  death,  Mark 
13.  12. 
12.41.  the  men  of  Nineveh  shall  r.  up,  Luke  11.32. 

42.  queen  of  the  south  shall  r.  up,  Luke  11.  31. 
Mark  X  26.  and  if  Satan  r.  up  against  himself 

14.  42.  r.  up,  lo,  he  that  betrayeth  rac  is  at  hand 
Luke  5.23.  whellior  is  easier  to  say,  r.  up  and  walk 
6.  8.  he  said,  r.  vp  and  stand  forth  in  the  midst 
Acts  3.  6.  ill  the  name  of  Jesus  r.  up  and  walk 
Rev.  13.  1.  I  saw  a  beast  r.  up  out  of  the  sea 

RISEN. 
Gen.  10. 23.  tb««iin  was  r.  when  I,ot  entered  Zoar 
Ezod.lrl.  3.  ifsun  be  r.  on  him,  blood  shall  be  shed 
ifum.  32.  14  ye  are  r.  up  in  your  fathers"  stead 
Judff.  9.  18.  ye  arc  r.  up  against  my  father's  house 
Ruth  2.  15.  and  when  she  was  r.  u[)4o  glean 

1  Sam.  25.  29.  yot  a  man  is  r.  lo  pursue  thee 

2  Sam.  14.  7.  behold,  the  whole  family  is  r.  uji 
ih'inesi'.'H).  I  am  r.up  in  room  ot  D;iv.'2  CAr.6.10. 

Kings  &.15.  llie  servant  of  the  man  of  God  wasr. 
495 


RIV 

2  Chron.  13.  fl.  the  servant  of  Solomon  Is  r.  up 
21.  4.  when  Jehoram  was  r.  up  to  the  kingdo(n 
I'.ial.  20.  8.  but  we  are  r.  and  slaiid  upiiglil 
27.  12.  for  false  witnesses  are  r.  up  against  me 
54.  3.  for  strangers  arc  r.  up  against  ine 
86.  14.  O  God,  the  proud  are  r.  against  me 
[sa.  60.  I.  the  glory  of  the  Lord  is  r.  upon  thee 
Eiek.  7. 11.  violence  is  r.  into  a  rod  of  wickedness 
47.  5.  for  the  waters  were  r.  waters  to  swim  in 
Mic.  2.  8.  even  of  late  my  people  is  r.  up  as  enemy 
Mat.  11.  11.  there  hath  not  r.  a  greater  than  John 
14.  2.  Herod  said,  this  is  John  the  liuptist,  he  is  r. 
from  the  dead,  Mark  6.  14,  16.  Luke  9.  7. 
17.9.  until  the  Son  of  man  her.  again,  JI/arA9. 9. 

26.  32.  after  I  am  r.  I  will  go  before,  Mark  14.  28. 
27.64.his  disciples  steal  him  away  and  say  he  is  r. 
28.6.  he  is  not  here,  he  is  r.  as  he  said,  Mark  16.6. 

Jl/arA16.9.now  when  Jesus  wasr.carlythe  first  day 
14. which  had  seen  him  aflerhewas  r../o/tn21.l4. 
Luke  7.  16.  that  a  great  jirophet  is  r.  among  us 
9.  8.  that  one  of  the  old  prophets  was  r.  19. 

13.  25.  when  once  the  master  of  the  house  is  r.  up 
24.  34.  the  Lord  is  r.  iiidei'd,  and  hatli  appeared 

John  2. 22.when  therefore  he  was  r.  from  the  dead 
..lets  17.  3.  that  Christ  must  nei.dn  have  r.  again 
/i«;n.8.34.Christthaldied,yea  rather  that  isr.agnin 

1  C«r.l5. 13.  if  no  resurrection,  then  is  Christ  not  r. 

14.  if  Christ  be  not  r.  ||  20.  but  now  is  Christ  r. 
Cnl.  2.  12.  in  baptism  ye  are  also  r.  with  him 
3.1. if  ye  'ae  r.  with  Christ, seek  those  things  above 
Jam.  1.  11.  for  the  sun  is  no  sooner  r.  with  heal 

RIS  EST. 
/)ea«.6.7.thou  shalttalknttliomwhenthour.il. 19. 

RISETH. 
Deitt.22.26.  as  when  a  man  r.against  his  neighbour 
Josh.  6.  26.  cursed  that  r.  up  and  buildeth  Joriclio 

2  Sam.  23.  4.  shall  be  as  the  light  when  the  sun  r. 
Job  9.  7.  which  coinmandetli  the  sun  and  itr.  not 

14.  12.  so  man  lieth  down,  and  r.  not 

24.  22.  he  r.  up,  and  no  man  is  sure  of  life 

27.  7.  he  that  r.  up  against  me,  as  the  unrighteous 

31.  14.  what  then  shall  I  do  when  God  r.  un? 
Prov.~i.  16.  a  just  man  falloth,  and  r,  up  again 

31.15.  she  r.  also  while  it  is  yet  night,  giveth  meat 
fsa.  47.  11.  thou  shall  not  know  from  whence  itr. 
Jer.  46.  8.  Egypt  r.  up  like  a  flood,  and  his  waters 
Mic.  7.  6.  tlio  daughter  r.  up  against  her  mother 
John  13.4.  Jesus  r.from  supper,  and  girded  himself 

RISING,  Suhstantioe. 
Lev.  13.  2.  if  in  skin  of  his  f1c:sh  a  r.  or  bright  spot 
10.  the  priest  shall  see  if  the  r.  be  white,  19.  43. 
28.  if  the  spot  stay,  it  is  a  r.  of  the  burning 
14.  56.  this  is  the  law  for  a  r.  and  for  a  scab 
JVi-A.  4.  21.  held  spears  from  the  r.  of  the  morning 
Prow.  30.  31.  a  king,  against  whom  there  is  no  r. 
fsa.  60.  3.  and  kings  to  the  brightness  of  thy  r. 
Mark  9.10.  what  the  r.  from  the  dead  should  mean 
//«/ce  2.34.  this  child  is  set  for  the  fall  and  r.  of  many 

SUN-RISING. 

JVum.  2.3.  on  the  east-side  toward  the  r.  of  the  sun 

21.11.  before  Moab,  toward  sitn-r.  34. 15.  Deut.i. 

41,  47../«sA.  12. 1.  1  13.  5.  |  19.  12,  27,  34. 

Psal.  50.  1.  culled  the  earth  from  the  r.  of  the  sun 

113.3.  from  r.  of. •fuTi,  Lord's  name  is  to  be  praised 

l.fn.  41.25.  from  r.  of  sun  shall  he  call  on  my  name 

45.  6.  that  they  may  know  from  the  r.  of  the  sun 

59.  19.  and  fear  his  glory  from  the  r.  of  the  sun 

Mai.  1.11.  from  r.  of  sun  my  name  shall  be  great 

Mark  16.  2.  came  to  the  sepulchre  at  r.  of  the  sun 

Luke  1.  178.  the  sunr.  from  on  high  visited  us 

RISING. 
2  Chron.  36. 15.  sent  by  his  messengers,  r.  betimes 
.fob  16.  8.  my  leanness  r.  in  mo  bearetii  witniss 
24.  5-  as  wild  asses  go  forth,  r.  betimes  for  a  prey 

14.  miiidercr  r.  with  the  light  killoth  the  poor 

Prod.  27.  14.  he  that  blesselli  his  frii-nd,  r.  early 

Jer.l.  13. 1  spake  unto  you,  r.up  early,  and  spcak- 

,  ing,  but  ye  heard  not,  25.  3.  |  35.  14. 

2.5.  I  sent  my  servants  the  prophets  to  you  r.  up 

early,  2.5.  4.  1  26.  5.  1  29.  19.  |  3.5.  15.  |  44.  4. 

11.  7.  r.  earlv,  and  protesting,  say.  obey  my  voice 

32.  33.  though  I  taught  them',  r.  up  o.irly,  te'arlim,' 
/,am.3.63.  sittingdown  and  r.  up,  I  am  their  music 
Mark  1. 3,5.  in  the  mornln?,  r.hifbrc  day,  ho  prayed 

RITES. 

.Yum.  9.  3.  keep  it  according  to  all  the  r.  of  it 

.lets  6,  t  14.  this  Jesus  shall  cliangn  the  r. 

Heb.  9.  t  10.  which  stood  in  washings  and  carnal  r. 
-■  RIVER 

\s  a  great  stream  of f re. <h  mntrrjtniring  in  achan- 
vl  from  a  source  nr  spring  into  the  sea,  Evoil. 
2.  5.  ft  is  used  to  dnuitr  grriit  plnifij  of  an;/ 
thing.  Job  29.  6,  The  rock  poured"  me  i.iit 
rivers  of  oil,  that  is,  greatplcnti/ and  abundance 
of  oil  Psal.  36.  8,  Thou  shall  make  them  drink 
of  the  river  of  thy  pleasures.  7'A«u  shalt  make 
them  partake  of  Ihatnbundant  pUasnrp,dr  Hit  ht, 
and  satisfaction,  ichirh  tlinu  not  only  nijoyist 
thyrlf,  hut  hestowest  on  thy  people:  tnd  river 
may  note  the  constancy  and  perpetuity  of  these 


RIV 

J  \MSures,  at  irrll  as  their  plenty.  Ind  in  John 
7.  38,  He  that  helieveih  on  me,  out  of  Ins  heliy 
shullflowriversof  living  waier;  that  is,  Hcshail 
be  endued  uilh  the  gifts  and  graces  of  tlie 
Spirit  in  a  plentiful  mra.iure,  which  shall  not 
only  refresh  himsi  If,  hut  shall  break  forth,  and 
be  com  in  uniculid  to  others  also  for  theirrifresh- 
ing.  Jindof  Behemoth  it  is  j*ui(/,  Job4ll.23,»AnJ 
lie  diinketh  up  a  river,  that  is,  a  great  quan- 
tity of  water,  by  a  hyperbole.  Thou  watcre st  the 
earth  with  the  river  of  God,  says  the  Psalnimt, 
that  is,  withplentiful  showers  of  rain  from  the 
clouds,  Psal.  65.  9.  JInd  in  Psal'.  46.  4,  There  is 

.  a  river,  the  streams  whereof  shall  make  glad  the 

city  of  God ;  that  is,  The  gracious  presence 

of  God, and  thcblessings  flowing  from  thence, 

shall  make  Zion,  or  the  church  of  (iod,  glad. 

Oen.  31.21.  Jacob  rose  up,  and  piesod  over  the  r. 

36.  37.  Saul  of  Rehobolh  by  ther.  1  CAnm.  1.  48. 

41.1.  Pharaoh  dreamed,  bidiold,  lie  stood  by  tht:  r. 
F.xod.  1.  22.  every  son  ye  shall  cast  into  the  r. 

2.  5.  daughter  of  Pharaoh  came  to  wash  at  the  r. 

4.  9.  the  Wiiler  of  the  r.  shall  become  blood 

7.  18.  the  fish  in  the  r.  shall  die,  and  r.  stink 

8.  3.  the  r.  shall  bring  forth  frogs  ahiindanily 

9.  that  they  may  remain  in  the  r.  only,  11. 
Deut.  2.  24.  lake  your  journey,  pass  over  ihe  r. 

3.  16.  1  gave  from  Gileud  even  to  the  r.  Arnon 
.losk.  13.  9.  the  city  in  the  midst  of  r.  2  Sam.  24. 5. 
Judg.  4.  7.  I  will  draw  to  the  r.  Kislion,  Siscra 

5.  21.  r.  Kishon  that  ancient  r.  8we|)t  them  away 
2  .S:am.  17.  13.  we  will  draw  that  city  into  the  r. 

1  Kings  4.  21.  ^oloinon  rcignoil  over  from  the  r. 
Ezra  4.  10.  ihe  rest  that  are  on  this  side  the  r. 

16.  thou  shalt  have  no  portion  on  this  side  the  r. 

5.  3.  came  Tatnai,  governor  on  this  side  the  r. 

8. 15. 1  gathered  tliem  to  r.  that  niniintli  to  Aliava 
Job  40.23.  behold  hedrinkelhu|)r.  and  hasteth  not 
I'sal.  36.  8.  make  them  drink  ol  ;■.  of  thy  pleasures 

46.  -l.a  r.  the  streams  shall  iiiakeg!a'l  city  of  God 

65.  9.  thou  enrlchest  it  with  the  r.  of  God 

72  8.  have  dominion  from  the  r.  to  ends  of  earth 
80.  11.  she  sent  out  her  branches  unto  the  r. 
105.  41.  Ihe  waters  ran  in  the  dry  places  like  a  r. 
fsa.  8.  7.  hringoth  upon  them  the  waters  of  the  r. 
11.  15.  he  shall  shake  his  hand  over  the  r. 
19.  .5.  and  the  r.  shall  be  wasted  and  dried  up 
23.  3.  the  harvest  of  the  r.  is  her  revenue 

10.  pass  through  thy  land  as  a  r.  O  daughter 
27. 12.  Lord  shall  boat  ofl'fioin  channel  of  the  r. 
48.  18.  then  had  thy  peace  been  as  a  r.  O  daughter 

66.  12.  I  will  extend  peace  to  her  like  a  r. 
./er.  2.  18.  to  drink  the  waters  of  the  r. 

17.8.  and  that  spreadeth  out  her  roots  by  the  r. 
t.am.'i.  18.  let  tears  run  down  like  r.  day  and  night 
/CicA.29.  3.  which  hath  saiil,  my  r.  is  my  own,U 

47.  5.  it  was  a  r.  that  I  could  not  pass  over 

9.  every  thing  shall  live  whither  the  r.  cometh 
.linos  6.  14.  afflict  you  to  the  r.  of  the  wilderness 
Mic.  7.  12.  he  shall  come  from  the  fortress  to  iher. 
Zech.O.  10.  his  dominion  from  r.  to  ends  of  earth 

10.  11.  all  the  deeps  of  the  r.  shall  dry  U|) 
Mark  1.  5.  and  were  hapti/.ed  in  the  f.  of  Jordan 
ylcts  16.  13.  on  the  sabbath  we  went  by  a  r.  side 
Ren.  22. 1.  he  shewed  me  a  pure  r.  of  water  of  life 

2.  on  either  side  of  ther.  was  Ihe  tree  of  life 
See    Rank,    Brink,     Bkvond,    Ched.\r,    Eu- 

PHRATliS. 

RIVERS. 

F.xod.  7.  19.  stretch  out  thine  hand  on  the  r.  8.  !i. 
Lev.  11.9.  whatsoever  haih  fins  in  ther.  ye  may  ent 

10.  all  thai  have  not  fins  in  the  r.  ye  may  not  eat 
Deut.  10.  7.  to  Jothath,  a  land  ofr.  of  waters 

2  fiings  5.  12.  are  not  the  r.  of  Damascus  liettei 
19.  2-1.  I  have  dried  up  all  the  r.  fsa.  37.  25. 

./oh  20.  17.  yo  shall  not  see  the  r.  of  honey 
23.  10.  he  cutteth  out  the  r.  among  the  rocks 
29.  6.  when  the  rock  poured  me  out  r.  of  oil 
Psnl.  1.  3.  like  a  tree  planted  by  Ihe  r.  of  water 
74.  15.  thou  driedst  up  mighty  r. 
7P.  16.  he  caused  waters  to  run  down  like  r 

44.  had  turned  their  r  into  blool,  and  their  floods 
89.  25.  I  will  set  his  right  hand  in  Ihe  r. 
107.  33.  he  turnetb  r.  into  a  wilderness 
119.  136.  r.  of  waters  run  down  mine  eyes 
137.  1.  l)v  the  r.  of  Babylon  there  we  sat  and  wept 
I'roi;.  5.  16.  and  r.  of  waters  in  the  streets 
21.  1.  in  tlie  hand  of  the  Lord,  as  r.  of  water 
Feel.  I.  7.  all  r.  run  into  Ihe  sea,  yet  it  is  not  full 
Caul.  a.  12.  astheeyesof  doves  by  ther.  of  waters 
fsa.  7.  18.  the  Lord  shall  hiss  for  the  fly  in  the  r. 

18.  2.  a  mtion,  whose  land  r.  have  spoiled,  7- 

19.  6.  and  they  shall  turn  the  r.  far  away 
.30.  25.  and  on  every  high  liill  r.  and  streams 

32.2.  a  man  shall  be  asr.  of  water  in  a  dry  place 
33.  21.  Ihe  Lord  will  be  to  us  n  place  of  hroad  r. 

41.  IS.  I  will  open  r.  in  high  jihices  and  fountains 

42.  15.  I  will  make  the  r.  islimds  nnd  dry  up 
43.2.  when  thou  passest  through  ther.  they  shall 

not  overflow  thee 


ROB 

l$a.  43. 19.  anil  I  will  make  r.  in  the  desert,  30. 

4-t.  27.  to  tlif  deep,  be  dry,  and  will  dry  up  thy  r. 

47.  2.  uncover  tlie  tliigh,  puss  over  the  r. 

S0.2. 1  make  iher.  a  wilderness,  their  ti:ih  stinkcth 
Jer.  31.  9.  I  will  cause  them  to  walk  by  the  r. 

46.  7.  whose  waters  are  moved  as  the  r.  8. 
Z-am.3.48.minB  eye  runneth  down  withr.  of  waters 
Ezek.  6.  3.  thii.s  saith  the  Lord  to  the  hills  and  r. 

2y.  3.  the  great  dragon  that  lieth  in  midst  of  his  r. 

4. 1  will  cause  fish  of  thy  r.  to  slick  to  thy  scales, 

I  will  bring  thee  up  out  of  midst  oftliy  r. 

5.  I  will  leave  thee,  and  all  the  fish  oftliy  r. 
10.  behold,  I  am  against  thee,  and  against  thy  r. 

30.  12.  I  will  make  the  r.  dry,  and  sell  the  land 

31.  4.  the  deep  set  him  up  on  high  with  her  r. 
12.  his  bouglis  are  broken  by  the  r.  of  the  land 

32. 2.  thou  earnest  forth  with  thy  r.  and  troubledst 

6.  and  the  r.  shall  be  full  of  thee 

14.  then  will  I  cause  their  r.  to  run  like  oil 

34.  13.  [  will  feed  them  on  mountains  by  the  r. 

35.  8.  in  all  thy  r.  shall  they  fall  that  are  slain 

36.  6.  say  to  the  hills,  to  the  r.  and  the  valleys 

47.  9.  whithersoever  the  r.  shall  come,  shall  live 
Joel  1 .  20.  for  the  r.  of  waters  are  dried  up 

3.  18.  all  the  r.  of  Judah  shall  flow  with  waters 
Mic.6.  7.  be  pleased  with  ten  thousands  of  r.  of  oil 
JV'aA.  1.  4.  rebuketh  the  sea,  and  drieth  up  the  r. 

2.  6.  the  gates  of  the  r.  shall  be  opened 

3.  8.  populous  No,  that  was  situate  among  Iher. 
ffab.  3. 8.  was  the  Lord  displeased  against  the  r.? 

9.  thou  didst  cleave  the  earth  with  r. 

./bAn7.38.out  of  his  belly  shall  flow  r.of  livin|  water 

Rev.  &■  10.  the  star  fell  on  the  third  part  of  the  r. 

16.  4.  the  third  angel  poured  out  his  vial  on  tlier. 

RO.AD. 

I  Sam.  27.  10.  whither  have  ye  made  a  r.  to-day 

ROAR. 
1  Chron.  16.  32.  let  the  sea  r.  Psal.  96.  11.  |  98.  7. 
Pial.  46.  3.  wc  will  not  fear,  tho'  waters  thereof  r. 
74.  4.  thine  enemies  r.  in  thy  congregations 
104.  21.  the  young  lions  r.  after  tlieir  prey 
ha.  5.  29.  they  shall  r.  like  young  lion^ 

30.  in  that  day  they  shall  r.  against  them 
42. 13.  L.  shall  r.  he  shall  prevail  against  enemies 
59.  11.  we  r.  all  like  bears,  and  mourn  sore 
Jer.  5.  22.  tho'  they  r.  yet  can  they  not  pass  over 
25.  30.  the  Lord  shall  r.  from  on  high,  and  utter 
31.35.  divided  the  sea,  when  the  waves  thereof  r. 

50.  42.  their  voice  shall  r.  like  the  sea,  shall  ride 

51.  38.  they  shall  r.  together  like  lions,  shall  yell 
.55.  when  her  waves  do  r.  like  great  waters 

ffo.<i.  11. 10.  he  shall  r.  like  a  lion,  when  he  shall  r. 
Joet  3.  16.  the  Lord  shall  r.  out  of  Ziun,  J}mus  1.2. 
JimosZ.  4.  will  a  lion  r.  if  he  hath  taken  no  prey? 

RO.VRED. 
Jadg.  14.  5.  a  young  lion  t.  against  Samson 
PioT.  38. 8.  1  have  r.  by  reason  of  the  disquietness 
/sa.  51.  15.  that  divided  the  sea,  whose  waves  r. 
Jer.%.  15.  the  young  lionj  r.  upon  him,  and  yelled 
Amos  3.  8.  the  lion  haih  r.  who  will  not  fear 

ROARETH. 
./»A37.4  after  it  avoicer.  hethunderoth  with  voice 
Jer.  6.  23.^tlieir  voice  r.  like  the  sea,  they  ride 
Ren.  10.  3.  ihe  iinsel  cried,  as  when  a  lion  r. 

ROARliNG,  Substanlive. 
Jnb  4. 10.  the  r.  Ihe  teeih  of  the  lions  are  broken 
I'sal.a.  1.  why  go  far  from  the  words  of  my  r.? 

32.  3.  my  bones  wa.xed  old  thro'  my  r  nil  the  day 
I'ron.  19. 12.  the  king's  wrath  is  us  the  r.  of  a  lion 

20.  2.  tiie  fear  of  a  king  is  as  the  r.  of  a  lion 
lia.5. 2:).  their  r.  shall  be  like  a  lion,  they  shall  roar 

30.  they  *hji\\  roar  like  the  r.  of  the  sea 
F.iek.  19.  7.  land  was  desolate  by  the  noise  of  his  r 
Zech.  11.  3.  a  voice  of  the  r.  of  young  lions 

ROARI.VO,  JIdjcclive. 
PmhI.  22.  13.  they  gaped  upon  me  as  a  r.  lion 
Prnv.  2^.  1.5.  as  a  r.  hon,  so  is  a  wicked  ruler 
ina.  31.  4.  as  llie  young  lion  r.  on  his  prey 
F.iek.  22.  2.5.  there  is  a  conspiracy,  like  a  r.  lion 
/.Kjth.  3.  3.  her  princes  wilhin  her  are  r.  lions 
/,ii*r  21.  25.  ili«iri.ss,  the  sea  and  the  waves  r. 
1  Pet.  ft.  8.  llie  devil,  as  a  r.  lion,  walketh  about 

R(),\  RINGS. 
Job  3.  24.  my  r.  are  iioiinil  out  like  the  waters 

RO.VST,  KI). 
F.tnd.  12.  H.  «hnlle.'ii  in  tbat  nii;ht  flesh  r.  with  fire 
•>.  cat  not  cif  il  raw,  Inii  r.  willi  fire,  /)/!«£.  16.  7. 
1  .Sim.  2.  15.  eivr  lli.^li  to  r.  for  the  priest 
£  Chrow.  35.  13.  llu  y  r.  the  pnssovcr  with  fire 
ha.  44.  Hi.  he  ronntcih  r.  is  nalisfied,  he  warmeth 

19.  yen,  also  I  bavn  r.  flesh,  and  eaten  it 
Jar.  29.  22.  whom  the  kinc  of  Uabylon  r.  in  fire 

ROASTlvni. 
Vrov.  J2.  27.  the  slollifiil  man  r.  not  that  ho  took 

Ron. 

T.m.  19.  1.3.  ihoti  shall  not  r.  thy  neizhbmir 
26.22.  lieasts,  wliirh  shall  r.  you  of  your  cliildren 
I  Sam.  23.  1.  and  llicy  r.  Ihe  threshing  floors 
Prov.  22.  22.  r.  not  the  poor,  because  he  is  poor 
ha.  10.  2.  and  that  they  may  r.  the  futhorleas 


Wf 


490 


ROC 

Tsa.  17.  14.  and  this  is  the  lot  of  them  that  r.  us 

F.zek.  39. 10.  spoil,  and  r.  those  that  robbed  them 

MiiX.  3. 8.  will  a  man  r.God?  yet  ye  have  robbed  me 
ROBBED.  • 

Judg.  9.  25.  and  they  r.  all  that  came  by  them 

2  .Sum.  17.  8.  they  be  chafed  in  minds,  as  a  beurr. 

Psal.  119.  61.  the  banns  of  the  wicked  have  r.  me 

Pruv.  17. 12.  let  a  bear  r.  of  her  whelps  meet  a  man 

I^a.  10.  13.  and  I  have  r.  their  treasures 
42.22.  but  this  is  a  people  r.  and  spoiled 

,/cr.  50. 37.  a  sword  on  her  treasures,  they  shall  be  r. 

Ezek.3^.  15.  if  the  wicked  give  again  that  he  had  r. 
39.  10.  and  they  shall  rob  those  that  r.  them 

Mai.  3.  8.  ye  haver,  me,  wherein  have  we  r.  thee'? 
9.  ye  have  cursed  with  a  curse,  for  ye  have  r.  me 

2  Cur.  11.  8.  1  r.  other  churches,  taking  wages 
ROBBER. 

Job  5. 5.  and  the  r.  swalloweth  up  their  substance 
18.  9.  and  the  r.  shall  prevail  against  him 

Pruv.  23.  t  28.  she  also  lieth  in  wait  as  a  r. 

Kick.  18.  10.  if  he  beget  a  son  that  is  a  r. 

Juhn  10.  li  the  same  is  a  thief  and  a  r. 
18.40.theycried, not  this  inan,nowBarabbaswa8r. 
ROBBERS. 

./o4  12.  6.  the  tabernacles  of  r.  prosper 

fsa.  42.  21.  and  who  gave  Israel  to  the  r. 

.Jer.  7.  11.  is  this  house  become  a  den  of  r.? 

Kzek.  7. 22.  for  the  r.  shall  enter  into  it  and  defile  it 

Dan.  11.  14.  the  r.  of  thy  people  shall  e.xalt  thenis. 

Hos.  0. 9.  as  troops  of  r.  wait  for  a  man,  so  priests 
~.  1.  and  the  troop,  of  r.  spoilelh  without 

Obad.  5.  if  r.  by  night,  would  they  not  have  stolen 

John  10.  8.  all  that  came  befoie  me  are  r. 

.-Jcis  19.  37.  these  men  are  not  r.  of  churches 

2  Cor.  11.  26.  in  perils  of  waters,  in  perils  of  r. 
ROBBERY. 

Psal.  62.  10.  and  become  not  vain  in  r. 

Prou.  21.  7.  the  r.  of  the  wicked  shall  destroy  them 

/.«a.  61.  8.  I  hate  r.  for  burnt-oflering 

Ezek.  22. 29.  have  exercised  r.  and  vexed  the  poor 

./imos  3.  10.  who  store  up  r.  in  their  palaces 

JV/jA.  3.  1.  the  bloody  city  is  full  of  lies  and  r. 

Phil.  2.  6.  who  thought  it  no  r.  to  bo  equal  with  G. 
ROBBETH. 

Prov.  28.  24.  whoso  r.  his  father  or  his  mother 
ROBE. 

God  gives  orders  to  Moses /.ffjnafte  the  robe  of  the 
ephod,  F.zod.W.'ii.  In  Hebrew  H  is  called 
Megnil:  Il  was  along  garmentwomnextunder 
the  ephod,  which  was  girded  about  the  high- 
priest' sbudywiththi;  curiuas  girdlnofthe  ephod. 
Our  Saoiuur  says,  Beware  of  the  Scribes,  who 
desire  to  walk  in  long  robes,  /..uke  20.  46. 
The  .'Scribes  icore  thuse  garments  in  token  of 
greater  gravity  than  others:  Christ  condemns 
not  the  garb,  but  their  affrctation,  ambition, 
vain-glory,  and  seeming  holiness ,  whereby  thty 
deceived  the  people.  The  best  robe  is  the 
righteousness  of  Chustimputed  to  believers  for 
their  justification,  Luke  15.  22.  Heavenly 
glory  is  likewise  set  forth  /ly  white  robes,  liev. 
6.  II.  White  robes  were  given  them,  speaking 
of  the  martyrs:  their  innocency  was  cleared, 
and  tjicy  made  perfectly  happy. 

Ezod.  28.  4.  they  shall  make  an  ephod,  and  a  r. 
31.  thon  shall  make  the  r.  of  the  ephod  of  blue 
34.  a  golden  bell  on  the  hem  of  the  r.  39.  2.5,  26. 
29.  5.  put  upon  .Aaron  the  coal  and  r.  J^ev.  8.  7. 

1  Sam.  IH.  4.  Jonathan  stripped  himself  of  his  r. 
24.  4.  David  cut  off  the  skirt  of  Saul's  r. 
ll.si'e  tho  skirt  of  thy  r.  in  my  band,  for  in  that  I 
cut  off  the  skirt  of  thy  r.  and  killed  thee  not 

1  Chron.  15.  27.  David  was  clothed  with  a  r. 
.fob  1.  t  20.  then  Job  arose,_and  rent  his  r. 

2p.  14.  my  judgment  was  as  a  r.  and  a  diadem 
I.Ki.  22.  21.  I  will  clolhe  him  with  thy  r. 
01.  10.  hath  covered  me  with  r.  of  righteousness 
./imaA3. 0.  tho  king  arose  and  laid  his  r.  from  him 
jMic.  2.  8.  yo  pull  ofl"thc  r.  with  the  garment 
jMal.  27.  ^.  they  put  on  Jesus  a  scarlet  r. 

31.  afli.-r  that,  they  took  Ihe  r.  ofl"from  him 
I.uke  15.  22.  bring  forlh  the  best  r.  and  put  it  on 
23.11. his  men  of  war  arrayed  him  in  a  gorgeous  r. 
John  19.  2.  they  put  on  Jisus  a  purple  r. 
5.  Jesus  came  forth,  wiaring  the  purple  r. 
ROBES. 

2  .Sum.  13. 18.  with  surli  r.  were  virgins  apparelled 
I  A'lit"*  22.  10.  the  kings  having  put  on  their  r. 

.10.  but  put  thou  on  thy  r.  2  CAr.  18.  9,  29. 
Kick.  26.  16.  the  princes  shall  lay  away  their  r. 
I.uke  20.  46.  the  Scribes  desire  to  walk  in  long  r. 
Iter.  6.  II.  and  while  r.  wore  given  unio  them 
7. 9.  siood  before  the  Lamb,  clothed  with  white  r. 

13.  what  arc  these  which  are  arrayed  in  whiter.? 

14  these  are  they  which  have  washed  their  r. 

ROCK. 

Palestine  icin<f  a  mounlninnus  country,  had  also 

mrini/  rocks,  which  made  port  of  the  strength  of 

the  country;  for  in  times  of  danger  they  retire:! 

totktm,  where  they  found  a  refugt  against  OBy 


ROC 

sudden  Irruptions  of  the  enemy.  When  the  Ben 
Janiiles  totTe  ovircoine,and  almost  ezterminated 
by  <Ae Israelites  of  the  other  tribes,  they  securtd 
themselves  in  the  rock  Rimmon,  .ludg.  20.  47 
Samson  kept  garrison  in  the  rock  Etuin,  Judg. 
15.  8.  H'hen  David  was  persecuted  by  Saul, 
he  often  hid  himself  in  caverns  made  in  a  rock: 
as  at  Maon,  at  Adnllam,  at  E-i  gedi,  where 
there  was  a  cave  of  a  vast  extent,  in  which 
David  andhis  people  concealed  themselves,  and 
Saul  entered  into  it,  and  continued  for  some 
lime  without  discovering  them,  1  Sam.  22.  1.  | 

23.  25.  I  24.  2,  4,  5. 

Mention  is  made  in  scripture  of  several, rncke, 
as,  the  rocks  Bozez  and  Seneh,  which  were  be- 
tween Michmash  and  (!ibeah,  and  urAirA  Jona 
than  the  son  of  Saul  climbed  up,  when  he  went 
to  attack  the  Philistines,  1  .Sam.  14.  4. 

Selahamma  lekotli,or  the  rock  of  divisions:  Thia 
was  in  the  deserts  of  Maon,  andhad  this  name 
given  it,  because  Saul  was  here  obliged  to  quit 
his  pursuit  after  David,  and  to  return  to  the 
assistance  of  his  country,  which  was  then  in 
vadcd  by  the  Philistines,  1  Sam.  23.  28.  ' 

The  rock  of  Iloreb.  From  this  rock  ^h^scs caused 
the  waters  to  gush  out,  to  supply  the  necessi- 
ties of  the  people,  when  they  were  encamped  at 
Rephidim,  Exud.  17.  6. 

The  rock  Adullam  was  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
the  city  of  the  same  name,  in  the  tribe  of  Ji»- 
dah,  1  Sam.  22.  1. 

The  rock  of  the  waters  of  Mcribah,  or  Strife. 
This  is  the  rock  where  the  faith  of  Moses 
failed,  and  where  the  scripture  makes  mention 
of  his  having  hesitated  in  mind,  and  that  he 
did  not  honour  God  as  he  ought  before  tht 
children  o/ Israel,  JV'um.  20.  10,  11. 

Tlie  name  of  rock  is  also  given  to  God,  by  way 
of  metaphor,  because  God  is  the  strength,  the 
rifuge,  and  the  asylum  of  his  people,  as  the 
rocks  were  in  those  places,  whither  the  people 
retired  in  case  of  an  unforeseen  attack,  or  ir- 
ruption of  the  enemy.  The  Lord  is  my  rock  and 
my  fortress ;  who  is  a  rock,  save  our  God?  Psal. 
18.  2,  31.  Then  he  forsook  God  which  made 
him,  and  lightly  esteemed  the-rock  of  his  salva- 
tion, Deut'.'.n.  15. 

It  is  said  in  Deut.  32.  13.  That  the  Lord  had 
settled  his  people  in  a  high  country,  and  made 
them  to  suck  l^oney  out  of  the  rock,  and  oil  out 
of  the  tllnty  rotk.  That  is,  he  brought  them  oui 
of  Egypt,  which  was  a  Jiat  country,  and  sub- 
ject to  inundations,  and  placed  them  in  the 
land  of  Canaan,  which  was  a  mountiinous 
country  of  great  fertility;  the  hills  of  which 
were  loaded  with  vines  and  olive  trees,  and  of 
which  the  very  tjocks  were  filled  with  swarms 
of  bees,  by  which  means  the  inhabitants  had 
abundance  of  honey. 

Rook  ii-  also  used  for  a  quarry,  and  in  a  figura 
tire  sense,  for  the  patriarch  of  a  nation,  or  Ihe 
first  father,  who  is,  as  it  were,  the  quarry  from 
whom  Ihe  men  of  that  nation  have  proceeded 
Isa.  51.  1,  Look  unto  the  rock  whence  ye  are 
hewn ;  look  unto  Abraham  and  Sarah,  whose 
descendants  you  arc. 

The  rock /rom  which  (Ac  Israelites  ircrp  supplied 
with  water,  was  a  figure  and  type  of  Chr'iai,  as 
the  apostle  observes,  1  Cor.  10.  4,  They  drank 
of  that  spiritual  rock  that  followed  them,  and 
that  rock  was  Christ.  liclicvers  have  their 
spiritual  refreshing  from  Christ,  as  the  thirsty 
I.sraelilcH  were  refreshed  with  l.hf  waters  that 
gushed  out  of  the  rock  in  the  wilderness.  Christ 
likewise  sustains  and  bears  up  his  church, 
built  upon  him  by  faith,  as  a  house  upon  a 
rock.  Mat.  16.  18,  -And  upon  this  rock  will  I 
builil  my  church. 

Rock  also  signifies  unfruitful  andstony-heaitcd 
hearers  of  the  word,  Luke  8.  fi.  .^1  firm,  solid, 
and  immovable  foundation.  Mat.  7.  25.  .fl  soft 
or  secure  place  of  retreat.  Num.  24.  21.   Job 

24.  8.     JIarrrn  and  rocky  places.  Job  29.  6. 
F.Tod.  17.  6.  I  will  Bland  be"fore  thee  upon  Ihe  r. 

33.  21.  the  Lord  said,  thou  shall  stand  upon  a  r. 
22.  that  I  will  put  thee  in  a  ch^ft  of  the  r. 
A'l/m.  20.  8.  speak  to  the  r.  before  iheir  eyes 

10.  must  wc  fetch  you  water  out  of  this  r.7 

11.  Moses  with  his  rod  smote  the  r.  twice 
24.  21.  and  thou  pultest  thy  nesi  in  a  r. 

I>rul.  8.  15.  who  brought  thee  water  out  of  the  r. 
32.  4.  he  is  tho  r.  his  work  is  perfect,  a  God  of 
truth,  and  without  ininuity 
13.  he  made  them  suck  honey  ami  oiloutoftner.i 
15.  hii  lightly  esteemed  the  r.  of  his  salvation 
18.  of  th%r.  thai  begat  thee  thou  art  unmindful 
30.  except  their  r.  had  sold  them,  and  L.  had  »hu». 
ni.'thoir  r.  is  not  as  our  r.  our  enem.  being  judges 
37.  where  is  iheir  r.  in  whom  they  Irusied? 

Judg.  C.  30.  take  and  lay  them  on  tlii*  r.  he  did  m 


ROC 

/Urfg'.  (5. 21.  rose  fire  out  of  r.  and  consumed  flesl 

26.  and  bviild  an  altiir  to  the  Lord  on  this  r. 
7.25.slew  Oreb  on  the  r.  Oreb  and  Zceb  ihey  slew 
13.  19.  Manoah  otTered  it  on  a  r.  to  the  Lord 
15.  8.  Samson  dwelt  In  tlie  top  of  the  r.  Etam 
20.45.  the  Benjamites  turned  to  the  r.  ofRiinirion 

1  .Sim.  2.  2.  neither  is  there  any  r.  like  our  God 
H.4.  a  sharp  r.  on  one  side,  sharp  r.on  other  side 

23.  25.  David  came  down  into  a  r.  and  abode 
t  28.  they  culled  it  the  r.  of  divisions 

2  Sam.  21.  10.  Kizpah  spread  sackcloth  on  tlier. 
22.  2.  he  said,  Lord  is  my  r.  Psid.  18.  2.  |  92. 15. 

3.  the  God  of  my  r.  in  him  will  I  trust,  mysliield 
32.  aud  who  is  a  r.  save  our  God  ■?  Psal.  18.  31. 
47.the  Lord  iivetli,  blessed  be  my  r.  Psal.  18.  4(5. 
and  exalted  bo  the  God  of  the  r.  of  my  salvation 

23. 3.  the  God  of  Israel  said,  the  r.  of  Israel  spake 

2  Kings  14.  j  "•  Amaziah  took  the  r.  by  war 

3  Chroii.  11.  1.5.  captains  went  to  the  r.  to  David 
2CAr(;?t.25.12.cast  them  down  from  the  top  of  the  r. 
JVeA.  9.  15.  thou  broughtcst  water  for  them  out  of 

iher.  fortheirthirst,  Psai.  78. 16.  [  105.41. 
Job  14.  18.  the  r.  is  removed  out  of  his  place 

13. 4.  and  shall  the  r.  he  removed  out  of  his  place? 
19.  24.  that  they  were  graven  in  the  r.  for  ever 

24.  8.  they  embrace  the  r.  for  want  of  a  shelter 

28.  9.  he  putteth  forth  his  hand  upon  the  r. 

29.  B.  and  ihe  r.  poured  out  rivers  of  oil 

39.  1.  time  when  wild  goats  of  the  r.  bring  forth  ■? 

28.  she  dwelleth  on  the  r.  on  the  crag  of  the  r. 
Psal.  19.  1 14-  O  Lord,  my  ?■.  and  uiy  Redeemer 
27.  5.  he  shall  .set  me  U|)  upon  a  r.  40.  2. 
26.  1.  unto  thee  will  I  cry,  O  Lord,  my  r. 
31. 2.  be  thou  my  strong  r.  for  a  house  of  defence 

3.  for  thou  art  my  r.  and  my  fortress,  71.  3. 
42.9.  I  will  say  to  G.  my  r.  why  hast  forgotten  me 

61.  2.  lead  me  to  the  r.  that  is  higher  than  I 

62.  2.  God  only  is  my  r.  6.  |{  7.  r.  of  my  strength 
71.  t3.  be  thou  to  me  for  a  r.  of  habitation 
73. 1 211  God  is  the?-,  of  my  heart,  and  my  portion 
lb.  20.  behold,  he  smote  the?-,  the  waters  gushed 

35.  they  remembered  that  God  was  their  r. 
81. 16.  with  honey  out  of  the  r.  have  I  satisfied  thee 
89. 26.  r.  of  my  salvation  ||  94. 22.  r.  of  my  refuge 
95.1.  make  a  joyful  noise  to  ther.  of  our  salvation 
114.  8.  which  lurned  the  r.  into  a  standing  water 

Proo.  30.  19.  the  way  of  a  serpent  upon  a  r. 

Cant.  2.  14.  my  dove,  that  art  in  the  clefts  of  the  r. 

isa.  2. 10.  enter  into  the  r.  and  hide  thee  in  the  dual 
8.  14.  for  a  r.  of  offence  to  both  houses  of  Israel 
10. 26.  according  to  the  slaughter  of  the  r.  of  Oreb 

17.  10.  not  mindful  of  the  r.  of  thy  strength 

22. 16._that  graveth  a  habitation  for  himself  in  a  r. 
26.  t4'  in  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  the  r.  of  ages 
30.T29.  when  one  goeth  to  come  to  the  r.of  Israel 

31.  t  9-  and  his  r.  shall  pass  away  for  fear 

32.  2.  a  man  shall  be  as  the  shadow  of  a  great  r. 
42.  11.  let  the  inhabitants  of  the  r.  sing 
44.  t8.  yea,  there  is  no  r.  I  know  not  any 

48.  21.  he  caused  waters  to  flow  out  of  r.  for  them 
51   1.  look  unto  the  r.  whence  ye  are  hewn 

•Jer.  5.  3.  they  made  their  faces  harder  than  a  r. 
13.  4.  go,  hide  the  girdle  in  a  hole  of  the  r. 

18.  14.  leave  the  snow  which  cometh  from  the  r. 
21.  13.  I  am  against  thee,  O  inhabitant  of  the  r. 

23.  29.  a  hammer  that  breaketh  the  r.  in  pieces 
48.28.  leave  cities,  and  dwell  in  ther.like  the  dove 

49.  16.  thou  that  dwellest  in  the  clefts  of  the  r. 
Ezek.  24.  7.  she  set  it  upon  the  top  of  a  r. 

8.  I  have  set  her  blood  upon  the  top  of  a  r. 

26.  4.  I  will  make  her  like  the  top  of  a  r.  14. 
Jimos  6.  12.  shall  horses  run  upon  the  r.  ? 
Ohad.  3.  ihou  that  dwellest  in  the  clefts  of  the  r. 
Hab.  1.  t  12.  O  r.  thou  hast  established  them 
Mat.  7.  24.  a  man  which  built  his  house  upon  a  r. 

25.  for  it  was  founded  upon  a  r.  Luke  6.  48. 
Ifi.  18.  and  upon  this  r.  I  will  build  my  church 

27.  60.  and  Joseph  laid  it  in  his  own  new  tomb, 
wliicli  he  had  hewn  out  in  the  r.  Mark  15. 46. 

Luke  8.  6.  some  fell  upon  a  r.  ||  13.  they  on  the  r. 

Rom.  0.  33.  as  it  is  written,  behold,  I  lay  in  Sion  a 

Btuinbling  stone,  and  r.  of  offence,  1  Pet.  2. 8. 

1  Cor.  10.  4.  for  they  drank  of  that  spiritual  r.  that 

followed  them,  and  that  r.  was  Christ 

ROCKS. 

J^'tim.  2,3.  9.  for  from  the  top  of  the  r.  I  see  him 

1  Sam.  13.  0.  then  the  pnople  hid  themselvesin  r. 

24.  2.  Saul  went  to  seek  David  upon  the  r. 

1  Kinrrs  19. 11.  a  strong  wind  brake  in  pieces  the  r. 
Job  28.  10.  he  cnlteth  out  rivers  among  the  r. 

30.  6.  to  dwell  in  the  caves  of  the  earth,  and  in  r. 
P.ial.  78.  1.5.  he  clave  Ihe  r.  in  the  wilderness 

104.  13.  and  the  r.  are  a  refuge  for  the  conies 
Prov.  30.  2i).  vet  make  they  their  houses  in  the  r. 
Isa.  2.  19-  thpy  shall  go  into  the  holes  of  the  r. 
21.  into  clefts  of  the  r.  and  tops  of  the  ragged  r. 

7.  19.  thny  shall  rest  in  the  holes  of  the  r. 

33.  16.  his  dcfenre  shall  be  the  munitions  of  r. 
57.5.  flaying  the  children  under  the  clefts  of  the  r. 
Ter.  4  29.  the  whole  citv  shall  climb  on  the  r. 

497 


ROD 

./er.16. 16.  shall  hunt  them  out  of  the  holes  of  the  r. 
51.  25. 1  will  roll  thee  down  from  the  r. 
JVuA.  1.  6.  the  r.  are  thrown  down  by  him 
Mat.  27.  51.  the  earth  did  <iuake,  and  the  r.  rent 
^c««27.  29. lest  they  should  liave  fallen  upon  ther. 
Rev.  6.  15.  hid  themselves  in  the  dens  and  in  the  r. 

16.  and  said  to  the  r.  fall  on  us,  and  iiide  us  from 

ROD 

Is  used  sometimes  for  the  branche.i  of  a  tree,  Gen. 
30.  37.  Jacob  took  him  rods  of  green  poplar, 
and  of  the  hazel  and  chesnul-tree.  Hometimes 
for  a  staff  or  wand,  1  Sam.  14.27.  Jonathan 
put  forth  the  end  of  the  rod  that  was  in  his 
hand,  and  dijjped  it  in  a  honey-comb.  Or  for 
a  shepherd's  crook.  I,ev.  27.  32,  .And  con- 
cerning the  tithe  of  the  herd,  or  of  the  flock, 
even  of  whatsoever  |)asseth  under  the  rod.  'Or 
for  those  rods  and  chastisements  which  God 
makes  use  of  to  correct  men.  2  Sam.  7.  14,  If 
he  commit  iniquity,  I  will  chasten  him  with 
the  rod  of  men.  Job  9.  34,  Let  him  take  his 
rod  away  from  me.  The  mighty  poxoer  of  the 
Messiah  is  sometimes  represented  by  a  rod  of 
iron.  Psal.  2.  9,  Thou  shalt  break  them  with 
a  rod  of  iron.  Rev.  2.  27,  He  shall  rule  them 
with  a  rod  of  iron.  Rod  is  put  for  a  young 
sproiit  or  branch,  and  to  point  out  the  miracu- 
lous birth  of  the  Messiah,  who  was  to  proceed 
from  a  virgin  mother.  Isa.  11.  1,  There  shall 
come  forth  a  rod  out  of  the  stem  of  Jesse,  and 
a  branch  shall  grow  out  of  his  roots.  It  sig- 
nifies sometimes  a  tribe,  or  people.  Psal.  74. 
2,  Remember  the  rod  of  thine  inheritance 
which  thou  hast  redeemed. 

The  gospel  publishedby  ChrUthimsclf,  or  by  his 
apostles  aud  mittisters,  being  accompanitd  by 
his  Spirit,  is  called  the  rod  of  his  strength,  or 
his  strong  and  powerful  rod,  whereby  he  did 
his  great  exploits,  and  established  kts  church 
in  the  world,  Psal.  110.  2.  It  is  also  taken 
for  the  rod  of  discipline,  or  ecclesiastical  cen- 
sures, 1  Cor.  4.  21,  Shall  I  come  unto  you 
with  a  rod  7  ^nd  for  those  means  and  instru- 
ments which  God  makes  use  of  in  his  pastoral 
care  over  his  people,  Psal.  23.  4,  Thy  rod  and 
thy  staff,  they  comfort  me.  The  rod  of  the 
wicked  is  their  power  and  authority,  Psal 
125.  3.  Moab  is  called  a  strong  staff,  and  a 
beautiful  rod,  ^er.  48.  17.  They  were  a  people 
that  had  been  a  rod  against  others,  or  had 
ruled  over  so  many  others ;  the  rod  a7id  staff 
being  the  ensigns  of  power  and  government, 
as  well  as  instrumeyils  for  punishing  offenders 

Exod.  4. 4.  he  caught  it,  and  it  bee.  a  r.  in  his  hand 

17.  thou  ^halt  take  this  r.  in  thine  hand 

20.  Moses  took  the  r.  of  God  in  his  hand,  17.9 
7.  9.  thou  shalt  say  to  Aaron,  take  thy  r.  19. 

12.  for  they  cast  down  every  man  his  r. 

20.he  lifted  up  ther.  and  smote  the  waters,  14.  6. 

21.  20.  if  a  man  smite  his  servant  with  a  r. 
I^ev.  27.  32.  whatsoever  passeth  under  ther. 
A^um.  17. 2.  write  thou  every  man's  name  on  his  r. 

8.  the  r.  of  Aaron  for  the  house  of  Levi  budded 
20.  11.  with  his  r.  he  smote  the  rock  twice 

1  Sam.  14. 27.  Jonathan  put  forth  the  end  of  the  r. 

2  Sam. 7. 14.  Iwillchasten  him  with  ther.of  men 
Job  9.  34.  let  him  take  his  r.  away  from  me 

21.  9.  neither  is  the  r.  of  God  upon  them 
Psal.  2.  9.  thou  shalt  break  them  with  a  r.  of  iron 

23.  4.  thy  r.  and  thy  staff  they  comfort  nie 
74.  2.  remember  the  r.  of  thine  inheritance 
89.  32.  I  will  visit  their  transgression  with  a  r. 
110.  2.  the  Lord  shall  send  the  r.  of  thy  strength 
125.3.  r.  of  wicked  shall  not  rest  on  the  righteous 
Prov.  10.  13.  a  r.  is  for  the  back  of  fools,  26.  3. 

13.  24.  he  that  spareth  his  r.  Iialeth  his  son 

14.  3.  in  the  moulh  of  the  foolish  is  a  r.  of  pride 

22.  8.  and  the  r.  of  his  anger  shall  fail 

15.  the  r.  of  correction  shall  drive  it  away 

23.  13.  thou  shalt  beat  him  with  the  r.  14. 
29.  15.  the  r.  and  reproof  give  wisdom 

Isa.  9.  4.  thou  hast  broken  the  r.  of  his  oppressor 
10.  5.  O  Assyrian,  the  r.  of  mine  anger 
15.  as  if  the  r.  should  shake  itself  against  them 
24.  he  shall  smite  with  a  r.  and  lift  his  staff 
26.  as  his  r.  was  on  the  sea,  so  shall  he  lift  it  up 
11. 1.  shall  come  forth  ar.  out  ofthe  stem  of  Jesse 
4.  shall  smite  the  earth  with  the  r.  of  his  mouth 
14.  29.  the  r.  of  him  that  smote  thee  is  broken 
28.  27.  and  the  cummin  is  beaten  out  with  a  r. 
30.31.  the  Assyrian  be  beat. which  smote  with  a  r. 
.ler.  1.  11.  and  said,  I  see  a  r.  of  an  almond-tree 
10.  16.  Israel  the  r.  of  his  inheritance,  51.  19. 
48.  17.  how  is  the  beautiful  r.  broken  ! 
/,am.3.  l.haveseen  affliction  by  the  r.  of  his  wrath 
i?rf  7;.7.10.ther.hath  blossomed,  pride  hath  budded 
11.  violence  is  risen  up  into  a  r.  of  wickedness 
19.  14.  fire  is  gone  out  of  a  r.  of  her  branches,  so 
.  thatshe  hath  no  strong  r.  to  be  a  sceptre  to  rule 
2O.37.will  cause  you  tn  pass  under  the  r.&nd  bring 
3T 


ROO 

Eiek.Jll.  10.  it  contemneth  the  r.  of  my  son,  1,1 
Mie.o.  1.  they  shall  smite  Judge  of  Israel  with  a  r 

6.  9.  hear  ye  the  r.  and  who  hath  apijointed  it 

7.  14.  feed  thy  peojile  with  thy  r.  the  flock 
.fohn  18.  t22.  an  otficer  struck  Jesus  with  a  r 
lCor.4.  21.  shall  I  come  to  you  with  ar.  or  in  love? 
Heb.  9.  4.  wherein  was  Aaron's  r.  that  budded 
Rev.  2. 27.  shall  rule  them  with  a  r.  of  iron,  19.  15 

11.  1.  there  was  given  me  a  reed  like  to  a  r. 

12.  5.  who  was  to  rule  all  nations  with  a  r.  of  iron     ' 

RODE. 

Gtn.24.  61.Rebekah  and  her  damsels  r.  on  cume!^ 

./Krf^.10.4.  hehad  thirty  sons  thatr.on  thirty  colta 

12.  14.  he  had  thirty  nephews  that  r.  on  ass-colts 

1  Sam.  25.  20.  it  was  so  Abigail  r.  on  the  ass,  42 
30. 17.  none  escaped,  save  4U0  whicii  r.  on  cameli 

2  Sam.  13.  1 29.  every  man  r.  on  his  mule  and  fled 
18.9. Absalom  r.  upon  a  mule,  went  under  the  oak 
22. 11.  he  r.  on  a  cherub,  and  did  fly,  Psal.  18. 10. 

1  Kings  13.  i3.  the  old  jirophet  r.  on  the  ass 
18.  45.  and  Aliab  r.  and  went  to  Jezreel 

~KingsO.iG.JeUu  r.iii  a  chariot  andwent  to  Jezreel 

25.  remember  when  I  and  thou  r.  together 
jVeh.  2. 12.  nor  any  beast,  save  beast  that  I  r.  upon 
Esth.  8. 14.  the  posts  that  r.  on  the  mules  went  out 

RODS. 
Of  71.  30.  37.  Jacob  took  r.  of  green  poplar 

41.  that  they  might  conceive  among  the  r. 
Exod.  7.  12.  Aaron's  rod  swallowed  up  their  r. 
JVur/i.  17.  C.  the  princes  gave  him  twelve  r. 

7.  and  Moses  laid  up  the  r.  before  the  Lord 
Ezck.  19.  11.  she  had  strong  r.  for  the  scejitroi 

12.  her  strong  r.  were  broken  and  withered 
Mat.  26.  t07.  and  others  smote  him  with  r. 

2  Cor.  11.  25.  thrice  was  I  beaten  with  r. 

ROE,  S. 
1  Chron.  12.  8.  as  swift  as  the  r.  on  the  muuntaini 
Prov.  5.  19.  lei  her  be  as  the  hind  and  pleasant  r. 
6.  5.  deliver  thyself  as  a  r.  from  the  himter 
Caiif.  2.  7.  I  charge  you  by  the  r.  and  hinds,  3.5. 

9.  my  beloved  is  like  a  r.  or  a  young  hart 
17.turn,my  beloved,be  thou  like  a  r.or  hart,8. 14. 

Isa.  13.  14.  it  shall  be  as  the  cliased  r.  as  a  sheep 

See  Young. 

mid  ROE. 

2Sam.  2. 18.  Asahel  was  as  lightof  foot  as  a  wUdr. 

ROE-BUCK,  S. 
/JcM<.12.15.ye  may  eat  ofthe  r.22.  ]  14.5.  ]  15.22. 
iKings  4.  23.a  hundred  sheep,  besides  harts  and  r. 

ROLL,   Verb. 
Gen.  29.  8.  we  cannot,  till  they  r.  away  thestoc* 
43.  f  18.  brought,  that  he  may  r.  himself  on  us 
Josh.  10.  18.  and  Joshua  said,  r.  great  stones 
1  S  im.  14.  33.  r.  a  great  stone  unto  me  this  day 
Psal.yi.  t5.  r.  thy  way  upon  the  Lord,  trust  io 
him,  and  he  shall  bring  to  pass,  Prov.  10.  t3. 
.Ter.  51. 25.  and  I  will  r.  thee  down  from  the  rocks 
Jlmos  5.  t24.  let  judgment  r.  down  as  waters 
Mic.  1.  10.  in  Aphrah,  r.  thyself  in  the  dust 
J)farA-16.  3.  who  shall  r.us  away  stone  f|um  sepulc. 

ROLL,  Substantive. 

Ezra  6.  2.  and  there  was"R)und  at  Achmethaar. 

Isa.  8.  1.  take  thee  a  great  r.  and  write  in  it 

Jer.  36.  2.  take  thee  a  r.  of  a  book,  write  thercia 

6.  go  and  read  in  the  r.  ||  28.  take  another  r. 

23.  till  all  the  r.  was  consumed  in  the  fire 

2!).  thus  saith  the  Lord,  thou  hast  burnt  this  r. 

Eick.  2.  9.  a  hand  was  sent  unto  me,  and  lo,  a  r, 

3.  1.  eat  this  r.  |{  2.  he  caused  me  to  eat  that  r. 

3.  fill  thy  bowels  with  this  r.  that  I  give  thee 

Zech.  5.  1.  then  I  looked,  and  behold,  a  flying  r.  2. 

ROLLS. 
Ezra  6.  1.  search  was  made  in  the  house  ofthe  r, 

ROLLED. 
Gen.  29.  3.  they  r.  the  stone  from  the  well's  mouth 

10.  that  Jacob  went  near,  and  r.  the  stone 
.Tosh.  5.  9.  I  have  r.  away  the  reproach  of  Egypt   r 
Job  30.  14.  in  desolation  they  r.  themselves  on  me 
P.s«Z.22.t8.  he  r.himself  on  the  Lord  to  deliver  hiiu 
tsa.  9.  5.  with  noise,  and  garments  r.  in  blood 

34.  4.  the  heavens  shall  be  r.  together.  Rev.  6.  14. 
Lam.  3.  1 16.  he  hath  r.  me  in  ashes 
Mat.  27.  60.  he  laid  it  in  his  own  new  lomb,  her.  a 
great  stone  to  door  ofthe  sepulchre,  Mark 
15.  46. 
28.  2.  the  angel  came  and  r.  back  the  stone 
Mark  16.  4.  they  saw  that  the  stone  wasr.  away 
Luke  24.  2.  and  thev  found  Ihe  stone  r.  away 

ROLLER. 
Ezck.  30. 21.  not  be  bound  up,  to  put  a  r.  to  bind  it 

ROLLETH. 
Pror.26. 27.  he  that  r.  a  stone  it  will  return  on  him 

ROLLING. 
Ezra  5.  f  8.  the  house  of  God  built  with  stones  of  r. 

ROLLING. 
Isa.  17.  13.  the  nations  shall  flee  like  a  r.  thing 

ROOF. 
Gen.  19.  8.  they  came  under  the  shadowof  my  r. 
Exod.  30.  t3.  thou  shalt  overlay  the  r.  with  gold 
Dent.  22. 8.  thou  shalt  make  a  battlement  for  th»  r. 


ROO 

Joth  ■  2.6.but  (he  brought  them  up  to  the  r.  and  hid 

with  flax  which  she  had  laid  in  order  on  the  r. 

Jtfdg.  Iti.  il.  on  the  r.  were  3000  men  and  women 

S  Sam.  11.  '2.  David  walked  on  the  r.  of  the  house, 

and  from  the  r.  he  saw  a  woman  washing  herself 

i8.  y4.  watchman  went  up  to  the  r.  over  the  gate 

JV'f/f.tf.lG.people  made  booths  on  the  r.of  liis  house 

/J2ct.40.13.he  measured  the  gatefrom  the  r.ofone 

A/at.8.8.I  am  not  worthy  thatihou  shouldestconie 

ft  under  my  r.  but  speak  llie  word  only,  Luke  7.  G. 

Mark  '2.  4.  they  uncovered  the  r.  where  he  was 

ROOF  with  mouth. 
Job  29.  10.  their  tongue  cleaved  to  r.of  their  mouth 
Psal-VyiA.  let  my  tongue  cleave  to  r.  of  my  moutA 
Cant.  7.  9.  the  r.  of  thy  mouth  like  the  best  wine 
/.,<im.4. 4. tongue  ofchild  cleaveth  to  r.  of  his  mouth 
Kiek.X'iG.l  will  make  thy  tongue  cleave  to  r.of  771. 
Jios.  8.  t  1-  set  'be  trumpet  to  the  r.  of  thy  mouth 

ROOFS. 
Jcr.  19. 13.  on  whose  r.  they  burnt  incense, 32.  29. 

ROOM. 
Gen.  24. 23.  is  there  r.  in  thy  father's  house  for  us  ? 
25.  we  have  r.  to  lodge  in  |{  31.  r.  for  tlie  camels 
26.  22.  for  now  the  Lord  hath  made  r.  for  us 
Deut.  2.  t  12.  the  children  of  Esau  dwelt  in  their  r. 
2.9uin.l9.I3.if  thou  be  not  captain  in  the  r.  of  Joab 
1  Kings  C.  3.5.  the  king  put  Benaiah  in  Joab's  r.  and 
ho  put  Zadok  the  priest  in  the  r.  of  Abiathar 
5.  1.  had  anointed  him  king  in  the  r.  of  his  father 

5.  thy  son  whom  I  will  set  in  thy  r.  shall  build 
fi.  20.  lam  risen  in  the  r.of  David,  2  C'Ar.  6.  10. 
19.  16.  and  Elisha  shall  thou  anoint  in  thy  r. 
Pfal.  31.  8.  thou  hast  set  my  feet  in  a  large  r. 
80.  9.  thou  preparcdsi  r.  before  it,  it  filled  the  land 
J'rov.  18.  10.  a  man's  gift  maketli  r.  for  him 
/s-a.  57.  t  8.  thou  lovedst  their  bcd,thou  providestr. 
JUal.  3.  10.  there  shall  not  be  r.  enough  to  receive 
,Vat.  2.22.  Archelaus  reigned  in  the  r.  of  Herod 
Mark'i.  2.  that  there  was  no  r.  to  receive  them 
14.  15.  will  shew  you  a  large  upper  r.  /,uAc22. 12. 
7-uAr2.7.because  there  was  no  r.for  them  in  the  inn 
12.  17.  I  have  no  r.  where  to  bestow  my  goods 
14.8.bidden  toa  wedding,sitnotdownin  highest  r. 

9.  thou  begin  with  shame  to  take  the  lowest  r. 

10.  when  bidden,  go  and  sit  down  in  the  lowest  r. 
22.  Lord,  it  is  done,  and  yet  there  is  r. 

Jlcls\.  13.  went  up  to  an  upper  r.  where  was  Peter 
24.  27.  Porcius  Festus  came  in  Felix'  r. 

1  Cor.  14. 16.  how  shall  he  that  occupieth  ther. 
ROOMS. 

Gen.  6. 14.  r.  shalt  thou  make  in  the  ark,  and  pitch 

1  Kings  20.  24.  and  put  captains  in  their  r. 

1  Chron.i.  41.  destroyed  them,  and  dwelt  in  their  r. 

Mat.'H.G.  they  love  the  uppermost  r.  at  feasts  and 
chief  scats  in  synagog.jT/urA  12.39.  /,«/.;«  20.46. 

Luke  14.  7.  how  they  chose  out  the  chief  r. 
ROOT 

Is  that  part  of  a  plant  which  extends  itself  down- 
ward, and  which  fastens  the  plant  to  the  earth, 
Job  14.  8.  It  is  said  of  such  as  received  the 
seed,  into  stontj  places,  that  they  had  no  root 
in  themselves,  Mat.  13.  21.  They  had  not  the 
toil  of  a  sincere  heart,  solid  affections,  firm 
and  fixed  resolutions,  and  habitual  dispositions 
of  grace.  It  is  taken  for  the  fountain,  the 
cause,  or  occasion  of  any  thing.  I  Tim.  6.  10, 
The  love  of  money  is  the  root  of  all  evil.  Lest 
there  be  among  you  a  root  that  bcarolhgall  and 
wormwood,  /.»««£.  29. 18.  Lest  there  should  be 
among  yuu  some  close  idolaters,  who  conceal- 
ing tkemseloes  from  the  public  view,  might  se- 
cretly infect  and  poison  others,  and  so  draw 
down  upon  you  the  effects  of  Ood's  anger.  It  is 
also  taken  for  parents  or  progenitors,  Isa.  14. 
29,  Out  of  the  B(^r[)enl's  root  shall  come  forth  a 
cockatrice;  meaning  Hczekiah,  who  should  be 
bom  of  the  royal  family  of  David.  jJnJ  the 
apostle  Va\i\,  speaking  of  the  conversion  of  the 
Jewi,»fiy.?,  Rom.  11.  10,  If  the  root  be  holy,  so 
aro  the  branches;  that  is,  //"Abraham  and  the 
patriarchs,  from  whom  the  Jews  descended, 
vere  in  covenant  with  Cod,  the  body  of  the  na 
lion  is  also  in  covenant  with  him,  and  conse- 
crated to  him,  and  therefore  God  will  not  cast 
them  off  for  ever.  Christ  Joausi.s  Ay  amctonymy 
called  the  tnol  of  Jeinfc,  Isa.  11.10.  jind  thcroot 
of  David,  Itrv.  5.  5.  instead  of  a  Branch  grow- 
ing out  (>/  the  root :  lie  is  David's  son,  as  he  is 
man,yel  David's  Root,  and  Lord,  asheis  God, 
and  gnrr  a  being  to  him  and  his  family,  Psal. 
1 10. 1.  Thrir  root  shall  be  as  roltennoBs,  and  their 
bingsom  Rhall  go  up  n«  dust,  Isa.  5.  24.  that  is. 
They  shall  be  utterly  destroyed,  both  root  and 
branch,  parent.t  and  children,  old  and  young, 
as  a  tree  that  is  rotten  at  the  root  cannot  grow 
any  more. 

ROOT,  Substantive. 

Deut.  29.  If.  nmonj  you  a.  r.  that  bcnrcth  gall 

J«dn'..').l  <  "UlorR[ihraim  was  ar.ng-iin..t  Ainiilek 

iKings  19.30.  Judali  (hall  airaiD  lake  r.  dowowaid 
4M 


ROS 

Job  5.  3. 1  have  seen  the  foolish  taking  r. 
14.  8.  though  the  r.  thereof  wa.<[  old  in  the  earth 

19.  28.  seeing  the  r.  of  the  matter  is  found  in  me 

29.  19.  my  r.  was  spread  out  by  the  waters 
I'tal.  80.9.  thou  didst  cause  the  vine  to  take  deep  r. 
Prov.  12.  3.  r.  of  the  righteous  shall  not  be  moved 

12.  tlie  r.  of  the  righteous  yIelJeih  fruit 
/.;a.5.24.  so  their  r.shall  be  rottenness, and  blossom 

11.  10.  there  shall  be  a  r.  of  Jesse,  Horn.  15. 12. 

14.  29.  for  out  of  the  serpent's  r.  a  cockatrice 
30.  and  I  will  kill  thy  r.  with  famine 

27.  6.  them  that  come  of  Jacob  to  take  r.  37.  31. 
40.  24.  yea,  their  stock  shall  not  take  r. 

53.2.  he  shall  grow  upas  a  r.  out  of  a  dry  ground 
.ler.  12.  2.  yea,  they  have  taken  r.  they  grow 
Ezek.  31.  7.  for  his  r.  was  by  great  waters 
Dan.  11.7.  out  of  a  branch  of  her  r.  shall  one  stand 
Nos.  9. 16.  Fphraim  is  smitten,  their  r.  is  dried 
Mai.  4.  1.  it  shall  leave  neither  r.  nor  branch 
Mat.  3. 10.  and  now  also  the  axe  is  laid  unto  ther. 

of  the  trees,  Luke  3.  9. 

13.  G.  because  they  had  notr.  they  withered  away, 

21.Ji;arA-4.6, 17.  Luke  8.  IS. 

Luke  17. 6.  might  say,  be  thou  plucked  up  by  the  r. 

Rom.  11.  16.  if  the  r.  be  holy  so  are  the  branches 

17.  with  them  partakcst  of  the  r.  and  fatness 

18.  thou  bearest  not  the  r.  but  the  r.  thee 

1  'Pim.  6. 10.  the  love  of  money  is  the  r.  of  all  evil 
fleb.  12.  15.  lest  any  r.of  bitterness  trouble  you 
Hev.3.5.r.  of  Dav.hath  prevailed  to  open  the  book 
22.  16.  I  am  the  r.  and  offspring  of  David 
ROOT. 

1  Kings  14. 15.  he  shall  r.  up  Israel  out  of  his  land 
.fob  31.  12.  and  would  r.  out  all  mine  increase 
Psal.  52.  5.  and  r.  thee  out  of  the  land  of  tlie  living 
Jer.  1.  10.  this  day  I  have  set  thee  to  r.  out 
Mat.  13.  29.  lest  ye  r.  up  the  wheat  with  them 

ROOTED. 
Deut.  20.  W.  the  Lord  r.  them  out  of  their  land 
.lob  18. 14.  confidence  shall  be  r.  out  of  tabernacle 
31.  8.  yea,  let  my  offspring  be  r.  out 
Prou.  2. 22.  the  transgressors  shall  be  r.  out  of  it 
Zcph.  2.  4.  and  Ekron  shall  be  r.  up 
Mat.  15.13.  ray  Father  hath  not  planted,  shall  ber. 
F.ph.  3.  17.  that  ye  being  r.  and  grounded  in  lovo 
Col.  2. 7.  r.  and  built  up  in  him,  and  stablished 

ROOTING. 

Ezra  7.  f  26.  whether  it  be  to  death,  or  to  r.  out 

ROOTS. 

2  Chron.l.  20.  I  will  pluck  them  up  by  the  r. 
,Iob  8.  17.  his  r.  are  wrapped  about  ttie  heap 

13. 1 27.  thou  setlest  a  print  on  the  r.  of  my  feet 
18.  16.  his  r.  shall  be  dried  up  beneath 
2H.9.  he  overturneth  the  mountains  by  the  r. 

30.  4.  who  cut  up  juniper  r.  for  their  meat 
36. 130.  behold,  God  covereth  the  r.  of  the  sea 

Isa.  11. 1.  and  a  branch  shall  grow  out  of  his  r. 

Jcr.  17.  8.  that  spreadeth  out  her  r.  by  the  river 

Ezek.  17.6.  and  the  r.  thereof  were  under  him 
7.  this  vine  did  bend  her  r.  toward  him 
9.  shall  he  not  pull  up  the  r.  thereof? 

Dan.  4.  15.  leave  the  stump  of  his  r.  23.  26. 
7.  8.  three  of  the  first  horns  plucked  up  by  the  r. 

Hos.  14.  5.  he  shall  cast  forth  his  r.  as  Lebanon 

.Imos  2.9.  I  destroyed  his  r.  from  beneath 

Mark  11.  20.  they  saw  fig-treedried  up  from  the  r. 

.fude  12.  trees  twice  dead,  plucked  up  by  the  r. 
ROPES. 

.Tudg.  16.  11.  if  they  bind  me  with  new  r.  12. 

2  .Slim.  17. 13.  then  shall  all  Isr.  bring  r.  to  that  city 

1  Kings  20.  31.  let  us  put  r.  on  our  heads,  32. 
.Ids  11.  32.  the  soldiers  cut  off  the  r.  of  the  boat 

RoRK,  see  Roar. 
ROSE,  Substantive. 
rant.2.  LI  am  r.of  Sharon,  and  the  lily  of  valleys 
Isa.  35.  1.  the  desert  shall  blossom  as  the  r. 

ROSE,  rerb. 
Gen.  4.  8.  Cain  r.  up  against  Abel,  and  slew  him 
19. 1.  Lot  r.  up  to  meet  them,  and  bowed  himself 

22.3.  Abraham  r.  early,  and  went  to  the  place 

25. 34.  Ksau  did  cat,  and  r.  up,  and  went  his  way 
32.31.  the  sun  r.  upon  him  as  he  passed  Penuel 

37.35.  his  sons  and  daughters  r.  to  comfort  him 
Kiorf.  10.2.3.  nor  r. any  from  his  place  for  three  days 

12.  .30.  Pharaoh  r.  up  in  the  night,  and  servants 

15.  7.  overthrown  them  that  r.  up  ngpinst  thee 
33.  10.  and  all  the  |>C()plo  r.  vn  and  worshipped 

.Vui7i.2.'>.  7.  Phinchos  r.  up  from  the  congregation 
Deut.  33.  2.  Iho  Lord  r.  up  from  Seir  unto  Ihem 
/w.«/i.  3.  10.  the  waters  atnod  ami  r.  upon  a  heap 

.fudg.  6.21.  there  r.  up  fire  out  of  the  rock 

20.  5.  the  men  of  Giheali  r.  up  against  me 
Huth  3.14.  slier,  up  before  one  could  know  nnotlior 

2  .Vam.  22.  40.  them  that  r.  iipajainstme,  hast  thou 

subdued  under  me,  I'sal.  18.39. 

1  Kings  2.  19.  and  Iho  king  r.  up  to  meet  her 

2  Kings  7.  5.  the  lepers  r.  in  the  twilight  to  go 
2  rAron.20. 19.  the  Inprosy  r.  up  in  his  forehead 

28.15. ilio  men  which  wer<"  ciprcssod  by  name  r.up 
/'«ai.  124.2.  L.  who  waaoQouisid*  wbenmeu  r.  up 


ROU 

Cant.  5.  5.  I  r.  up  to  open  to  my  beloved 
./er.  26.  17.  then  r.  up  certain  of  the  elders 
Lam.  3. 62.  the  lips  of  those  that  r.  up  against  mt 
i^on.  3. 24.  then  Nebuchadnezzar  r.  up  in  haste 
8.  27.  1  r.  up  and  did  the  king's  business 
Jonah  1.  3.  but  Jonah  r.  up  to  flee  to  Tarshish 
Zeph.  3.7.  they  r.  early  and  corrupted  their  doing* 
Luke  4.  29.  r.  up  and  thrust  him  out  of  the  city 
5.  2i?.  and  he  left  all,  r.  up,  and  followed  him 
16.31.  nor  be  persuaded  tho'onc  r.  from  the  dead 
22.  45.  when  he  r.  from  prayer  and  was  come 
24.  33.  they  r.  up  the  same  hour,  and  returned 
John  11.  31.  when  they  saw  Mary  that  she  r.  u]! 
Acts  5. 17.  then  high-priest  r.  up,  and  all  with  him 
36.  for  before  these  days  r.up  Theudas 
10.  41.  who  did  eat  and  drink  with  him  after  her. 
26.30.  king  r.  up,  and  the  governor,  and  Bernice 
Rom.  14.  9.  to  this  end  Christ  both  died  and  r. 

1  Cor.  10.  7.  the  people  did  eat,  and  r.  up  to  play 

15.  4.  he  was  buried  and  r.  again  the  third  day 
12.  now  if  Chr.  be  preached  that  he  r.  from  dead 

2  Cor.  5. 15.  but  live  to  him  who  died  and  r.  again 

I  7'Aess.4.14.  if  we  believe  that  Jes.  died  andr.aga. 

Rev.  19. 3.  her  smoke  r.  up  for  ever  and  ever 

See  MoRNi.so. 

ROSIN. 

£zcA.27.  t  n.Judali  traded  in  thy  market  oil  and  r. 

ROT. 
J^um.  5.  21.  when  L.  make  thy  thigh  to  r.  22, 27. 
Prov.  10.  7.  but  the  name  of  the  wicked  shall  r 
Ita.  40.20.  he  chooseth  a  tree  that  will  not  r 

ROTTEN. 
Job  13.  28.  and  he,  as  a  r.  thing,  consumeth 
41.  27.  he  esteemeth  brass  as  r.  wood 
Jer.  38.  11.  so  Ebed-melech  took  old  r.  rags 

12.  put  now  these  r.  rags  under  thine  arm-holes 
Joeli.  17.  the  seed  is  r.  under  their  clods 

ROTTENNESS. 
Prov.  12. 4.  but  she  that  maketh  ashamed,  is  ai  r. 
14.  30.  but  envy  is  the  r.  of  the  bones 
/sa.  5. 24.  so  their  root  shall  be  as  r.  blossom  asdutt 
Hos.  5. 12.  I  will  be  to  the  house  of  Judah  as  r. 
Hob.  3. 16.  when  I  heard  r.  entered  into  my  bonet 

ROVERS. 
1  Chron.  12.21.  they  helped  David  against  the  r. 

ROUGH. 
Deut.  21.  4.  bring  the  heifer  to  a  r.  valley 
/«a.  27.  8.  he  slayeth  his  r.  wind  in  the  day  of  east 
40.  4.  and  the  r.  places  shall  be  made  plain 
Jer.  51. 27.  cause  horses  to  come  as  r.  caterpillaff 
Dan.  8.  21.  the  r.  goat  is  the  king  of  Grecia 
Zeeh.  13.  4.  neither  shall  they  wear  a  r.  garment 
Luke2.5.  and  the  r.  ways  shall  be  made  smooth 

ROUGHLY. 
Gen.  42.  7.  Joseph  spake  r.  unto  them,  30. 
1  Sam.'Ud.  10.  what  if  thy  father  answer  thee  r.  7 
IKings  12. 13.  and  the  king  answered  the  people  r 
and  forsook  old  men's  counsel,  2  CAr.  10  13 
Prou.  18.  23.  but  the  rich  answereth  r. 

ROUND. 
Lev.  19.27.  ye  shall  not  r.  corners  of  your  headi 

ROUND. 
Gen.  19.  4.  compassed  the  house  r.  old  and  young 
Ezod.  16. 14.  there  lay  a  small  r.  thing  on  ground 
.^.vA.  7.  9.  the  inhabitants  shall  environ  us  r 
1  Kings  7.  23.  the  mollrn  sea  was  r.  all  about 

35.  a  r.  compass  II  10.  19.  top  of  the  throne  was  r 
P5nZ.22.i2.  strong  bulls  of  Bashan  have  beset  rae  r. 
Cant.  7.  2.  thy  navel  is  like  a  r.  goblet 
/id. 3.  18.  the  Lord  will  take  away  their  r.  tires 
Eiek.  41.  t7.  it  was  made  broader  and  went  r. 
Luke  19.  43.  thine  enemies  shall  compass  'hee  r. 

ROUND  about. 
Gen.  35.  5.  the  terror  of  God  was  on  cities  r.  about 
Fzod.  7.  24.  d'^rgcd  r.  about  the  river  for  water 

16.  13.  in  the  morning  dew  lay  r.  about  the  host 
19.  12.  thou  shalt  set  bounds  to  the  people  r.  ab. 

Lev.  14.41  cause  the  house  to  be  scraped  r.  about 

J^um.  1.  50.  the  Levites  encamp  r.  ab.  tabernacle 

11.24.  Moses  set  the  elders  r.abo.  the  tabernacis 

16.34.  ad  Israel,  that  were  r.  about  them  fled 

22.  4.  Company  shall  lick  up  all  that  are  r.  ab.  u» 

Drut.  6.  14.  gods  of  the  people  r.  abo.  you,  13.  7. 

12.  10.  when  he  piveth  rest  from  all  your  enemies 

r.  aiout,  25. 19.  Jo*A.21.44.  2  CAr.  15.15. 

21.  2.  measure  the  cities  r.  about  him  that  is  sisio 

.Tosh.  6.  3.  and  ye  shall  go  r.  about  the  city  once 

.fudg.  19.  22.  men  besot  the  house  r.  about,  20. 5. 

1  Sam.  23.  26.  for  Paul  compassed  David  r.  about 

31.  9.  they  cut  off  Saul's  head,  and  sent  into  the 

land  of  the  Philistines  r.  about,  1  Chr.  10.  9. 

2.Sam.  22.12.  and  he  made  darkness  paviliimsr.  ab 

him,  and  tliick  clouds  oflhe  skies,  Psal. 

18.  11. 

1  Kings  4.  24.  Solomon  had  peace  on  all  sides  r.ab. 

31.  and  his  fame  was  in  all  nations  r.  about 
18,  35.  and  the  water  ran  r.  about  the  altar 

2  Kings  6.  17.  and  rlmriota  of  fire  r.  about  riisha 
1  rAr.9.  27.  ihcy  lodged  r.  about  the  house  of  God 
Job  10. 8.  tliine  hands  bare  faibioncd  me  r.  «/i«iii 


RUB 

Job  16.  13.  his  archers  compass  me  r.  about 
19.  1'2.  Iiij  troops  encamp  r.  about  my  tabernacle 
22.  10.  therefore  snares  are  r.  about  thee 
37.  I'2.  it  is  turned  r.  about  by  his  counsels 

41.  14.  his  teeth  are  terrible  r.  about 
faal.  3. 6.  that  set  themselves  against  me  r.  about 

27.6.  Iiead  be  lifted  above  mine  enemies  r.  aftou( 

34. 7.  angel  encampethr.  about  them  that  fear  him 
44. 13.  a  derision  to  them  that  are  r. about,79. i. 
48.  12.  walk  about  Zion,  and  go  r.  about  her 
59.  6.  make  a  noise,  and  go  r.  about  the  city,  14. 
76. 11.  let  all  r.  about  him  bring  presents  to  hi  m 

88. 17.  they  came  r.  about  me  daily  like  water 
89.  8.  or  like  to  thy  faithfulness  r.  about  thee 
97.  3.  he  burneth  up  his  enemies  r.  about  him 
12.1.2.  as  the  mountains  are  r.  about  Jerusalem 
128. 3.  children  like  olive  plants  r.  about  ihy  table 

fsa.  29.  3.  1  will  camp  against  thee  r.  about 

42.  2.5.  and  it  hath  set  liira  on  fire  r.  about 

49. 18.  lift  up  thine  eyes  r.  about  and  behold,  60. 4. 
Jer.  20.t  3.  Lord  hath  called  ihy  name,  fear  r.about 

21.  14.  a  fire,  it  shall  devour  all  things  r.  about  it 
46.  5.  for  fear  was  r.  about,  saith  the  Lord 

50.  29.  camp  against  Babylon  r.  about 

51.  2.  in  trouble  they  shall  be  against  her  r.  about 
Eiek.  10. 12.  the  wheels  were  full  of  eyes  r.  about 

34. 26.  will  make  places  r.  about  my  hill  a  blessing 
Joel  3.  11.  gather  yourselves  together  r.  about 

12.  there  will  sit  to  judge  all  the  heathen  r.  about 
Jlmos  3. 11.  an  adversary  even  r.  about  the  land 
Jonah  2.  5.  the  depth  closed  me  r.  about,  the  weeds 
Zech.  2.  5.  I  will  be  to  her  a  wall  of  fire  r.  about 
Mat.  21.  33.  he  hedged  the  vineyard  r.  about 
Luke  1.  65.  fear  came  on  all  that  dwelt  r.  about 

2.  9.  the  glory  of  the  Lord  shone  r.  about  them 
.Bets  9.3.  shined  r.  about  him  a  light  from  heaven 
Horn.  15. 19.  r.  about  to  Illyricum,  I  have  preached 
Rev.  4.3.  there  was  a  rainbow  r.  about  the  throne 
4.  r.  about  the  throne  were  four  and  twenty  seals 

6.  four  beasts  ||  5. 11.  angels  r.about  the  throne 

See  Camp. 

ROUSE. 

Oen.49. 9.  and  as  an  old  lion  who  shall  r.  him  up 

ROW,  S. 
Ezod.  28.  17.  set  it  irtfour  r.of  stones,  39.  10. 
17.  the  first  r.  39. 10.  ||  18.  the  second  r.  39. 11. 
19.  the  third  r.  39. 12.  ||  20.  the  fourth  r.  39.  13. 
Leo.  24.6.  cakes,  six  on  a  r.  on  the  pure  table 

7.  thoushalt  put  pure  frankinsense  on  each  r. 

1  Kings  6.  36.  he  built  the  inner  court  with  three  r. 
7.  2.  four  r.  of  cedar  pillars  ||  3.  fifteen  in  a  r. 
4.  there  were  windows  in  three  r.  and  light 


RUL 

L,am.  A.  7.  Nazarites  were  more  ruddy  than  r. 
Ezek.  28.  t  13-  'he  r.  was  thy  covering 

RUDDER-BANDS. 

Acts  27. 40.  and  loosed  the  r. -bands,  and  hoised  up 

RUDDY. 

1  Sam.  16. 12.  David  was  r.  and  beautiful,  17. 42, 
Cant.  5.  10.  ray  beloved  is  white  and  r.  chiefest 
Lam.4L.7.  her  Nazarites  were  more  r.  than  rubies 

RUDE. 

2  Cor.  11. 6.  but  though  1  be  r.  in  speech 

RUDIMENTS. 
Oal.  4.  t3.  in  bondage  under  the  r.  of  the  world 

t  9.  how  turn  ye  again  to  the  beggarly  r. 
Col.  2. 8.  lest  any  spoil  you  after  the  r.  of  the  world 
20.  if  dead  with  Christ  from  thor.of  the  world 
RUE. 
Luke  11.  42.  for  ye  tithe  mint,  and  r.  and  herbs 

RUG. 
.Tudg.  4. 1 18.  turned  in,  Jael  covered  him  with  a  r. 

RUIN. 
2  CAron.  28. 23.  but  they  were  thar.  of  him 
Psai.  89.  40.  thou  hast  brought  his  holes  to  r. 
Prov.  24.  22.  who  knoweth  the  r.  of  them  both'? 

26.  28.  and  a  flattering  mouth  worketh  r. 
laa.  3.  6.  and  let  this  r.  he  under  thy  hand 

23.  13.  he  broiught  the  land  of  the  Ciialdeans  tor. 
25.  2.  thou  hast  made  of  a  defenced  city  ar. 
F.iek.  18.  30.  so  iniquity  shall  not  be  your  r. 

27.  27.  thy  company  shall  fall  in  the  day  of  thy  r. 
31.  13.  on  his  r.  shall  all  the  fowls  remain 

Luke  6. 49.  it  fell,  the  r.  of  that  house  was  great 

RUINS. 
Ezek.  21.  15.  that  their  r.  may  be  multiplied 
Jlmos  9.  11.  in  that  day  will  I  raise  up  his  r. 
Acts  15.  16.  I  will  build  again  the  r.  thereof 

RUINED. 
Tsa.3.  8.  for  Jerusalem  is  r.  and  Judah  is  fallen 
Ezek.  36.  35.  and  the  r.  cities  are  become  fenced 
36.  shall  know  that  Ithe  Lord  build  the  r.  places 
RUINOUS. 
2  Kings  19.25.  that  thou  shouldest  be  to  lay  waste 
fenced  cities  into  r.  heaps,  Tsa.  37. 26. 
Isa.  17. 1.  Damascus  not  a  city,  it  shall  bear,  heap 

RULE. 
Oen.  1. 1 16.  the  greater  light  for  the  r.  of  the  day 
1  Kings  22.  31.  that  had  r.  over  Ahab's  chariots 
Kstk.^.  1.  Jews  had  r.  over  them  that  hated  them 
Psal.  19.  t4.  their  r.  is  gone  through  all  the  earth 
Prnv.  17.  2.  a  wise  servant  shall  have  r.  over  a  son 
19.  10.  for  a  servant  to  have  r.  over  princes 
25.28.  he  that  hath  no  r.  over  his  own  spirit 
Reel.  2. 19.  yet  shall  he  have  r.  over  all  my  labour 


12.  thegreat  court  round  about  was  with  three  r.\  Jsa.  44.  13.  the  carpenter  stretcheth  out  his  r 
18.  two  r.  pomegranates,  42.  'iChron.i.  13,  63.19.  we  are  thine,  thou  never  barest  r.  over  them 


2  Ckron.  4.  3.  two  r.  of  o.ien  cast  when  it  was  cast 
Ezra  6.  4.  a  r.  of  new  timber,  three  r.  of  stones 
Cant.  1.  10.  thy  cheeks  comely  with  r.  of  jewels 
Ezek.  46.  23.  with  boiling  places  under  the  r. 

ROWED. 
Jonah  1. 13.  the  men  r.  hard  to  bring  it  to  land 
John  6. 19.  when  they  had  r.  25  or  30  furlongs 

ROWERS. 
£iei.  27. 26.  thyr.  brought  thee  into  great  waters 

ROWING. 
^arA:  6.  48.  he  saw  them  toiling  in  r.  wind  contrary 

ROYAL. 
Gen.  49.  20.  Ashcr  shall  yield  r.  dainties 
Josh.  10.  2.  Gibeon  was  as  one  of  the  r.  cities 

1  Sam. 27.  5.  for  why  should  I  dwell  in  ther.  cily  ? 

2  Sum.  12.  26.  Joab  fought,  and  took  the  r.  city 

1  Kings  10. 13.  Solomon  gave  her  of  his  r.  bounty 

2  Kings  11.  1.  Athaliah  the  mother  of  Ahaziah 

destroyed  all  the  seed  r.  2  Chron.  22. 10. 
1  CAr.  29. 25.  Ld.  bestowed  on  Solomon  r.  majesty 
Esth.  1.  7.  they  gave  them  r.  wine  in  abundance 
11.  to  bring  Vashti  the  queen  with  the  crown  r. 
19.  give  her  r.  estate  to  another  that  is  better 
2.  16.  so  Esther  was  taken  into  his  house  r. 
17.  so  that  he  set  the  crown  r.  on  her  head 
5. 1.  Esther  put  on  her  r.  apparel,  and  the  king  sat 
on  his  r.  throne  in  his  r.  hou^e  near  the  gate 
6.  8.  let  r.  apparel  be  brought,  and  the  crown  r. 
8. 15.Mordocai  went  in  r.apparel  of  blue  and  white 
Isa.  62.  3.  a  r.  diadam  in  the  hand  of  thy  God 
c/pr.  43.10.  he  shall  spread  his  r.  pavilion  over  them 
Pan. 6.7.to  establish  a  r.  statute  and  make  a  decree 
flcLi  12.  21.  Herod  arrayed  in  r.  apparel,  sat  on 
Jam.  2.  8.  if  ye  fulfil  the  r.  law,  ye  do  well 
1  Pet.  2.  9.  ye  are  a  r.  priesthood,  a  holy  nation 

RUBUI.NG. 
Luke  6.  1.  and  did  eut,  r.  them  in  their  hands 

RUBBISH. 
VicA.  4.  2.  will  they  revive  the  stones  out  of  the  r. 
10.  strength  is  decayed,  and  there  is  much  r. 
RUBY,  RUBIES. 
F.zod.  2S.  t  17.  the  first  row  a  r.  39.  t  10. 
./ij6  2S.J8.  price  of  wisdom  is  above  r.  Prov.  8. 11. 
Prov.  3.  15.  wisdom  is  more  prf-ious  than  r. 
20.  15.  there  is  gold,  and  a  multitude  of  r. 
31.  10.  for  her  price  is  far  above  r. 
499 


1  Cor.  15.24.  when  he  shall  have  put  down  all  r. 

2  Cor.  10. 13.  according  to  the  measure  of  the  r. 
15.  be  enlarged  according  to  ourr.  abundantly 
t  16.  and  not  to  boast  in  another  man's  r. 

Gal.  6.  16.  as  many  as  walk  according  to  this  r. 
PA(7. 3. 16.  let  us  walk  by  the  same  r.  let  us  mind 
ffeb.  13.7.  remember  them  that  have  r.over  you 

17.  obey  them  that  have  the  r.  over  you 
24.  salute  all  them  that  have  the  r.  over  you 

See  Bare,  Bear. 
RULE. 
Gen.  1. 16.  God  made  two  great  lights,  the  greater 
light  to  r.  the  day,  and  lesser  light  to  r.night 

18.  to  r.  over  the  day,  and  over  the  night 
3. 16.  and  thy  husband  shall  r.  over  thee 
4.  7.  to  thee  be  his  desire,  thou  shalt  r.  over  him 

I^ev.  25.  43.  not  r.  over  him  with  rigour,  46,  53. 
Judg.S.  22.  r.  thou  over  us,  thou  and  thy  son 

23.  I  will  not  r.  over  you,  nor  shall  my  son  r. 
Ps/iJ.  28.  to.  r.  them,  ami  lift  them  up  forever 
110.  2.  r.  thou  in  the  midst  of  thine  enemies 
136.8.  sun  to  r.  by  day, for  his  mercy  endureth  ever 
9.  moon  and  stars  to  r.  by  night,  for  his  mercy 
Prov.  8.  16.  by  me  princes  r.  and  nobles,  all  judges 
Isa.  3.  4.  and  babes  shall  r.  over  them 

12.  as  for  my  people,  women  r.  over  them 
14.  2.  they  shall  r.  over  their  oppressors 

19.  4.  a  fierce  king  shall  r.  over  them 

28.  14.  that  r.  this  people  that  is  in  Jerusalem 
32.  1.  and  princes  shall  r.  in  judgment 

40.  10.  and  his  arm  shall  r.  for  him 

41.  2.  who  made  the  righteous  man  r.  over  kings 
.52.5.  they  that  r.over  them  make  them  to  howl 

KjeA:.10.14.she  hath  no  strorffe  rod  to  be  a  scep.to  r. 

20.  33.  with  furv  pouredout  will  I  r.  over  you 

29.  15.  they  shall  no  more  r.  over  the  nations 
Dan.  4.  26.  shalt  have  known  that  the  heavens  r. 

11.  3.  michty  kings  shall  stand  up,  that  shall  r. 

39.  and  he  shall  cause  them  to  r.  over  many 

./oe/2. 17.  that  the  heathen  should  r.  over  them 

Mic.5.  t*.  he  shall  r.  in  the  strength  of  the  Lord 

7. 1 14.  r.  thy  people  with  thy  rod,  the  flock 
ZecA.  6   13.  ho  shall  sit  and  r.  on  his  throne 
Mat.  2. 6.  a  governor  that  shall  r.  my  people  Israel 
Mark  10.42.  who  are  accounted  to  r.  over  Gentiles 
Col.  3.  15.  let  the  peace  of  God  r.  in  your  hearu 


RUL 

I  TtOT.3. 5.  if  a  man  know  not  how  to  r.  his  house 
5.  17.  elders  that  r.  well  worthy  of  double  honour 
Bev.  2.  27.  r.  with  a  rod  of  iron,  12.  5.  I  19. 15; 

RULED. 
Gen.  24. 2.  his  eldest  servant  that  r.  over  all  he  had 
41.  40.  at  thy  word  shall  all  my  people  be  r. 
1  Kings 5. 16.  three  thousand  r.over  the  people 
Ezra  4.  20.  which  have  r.  over  all  countries 
Psal.  106.41.  they  that  hated  them  r.over  them 
Isa. 14. 6.  he  that  r.  nations  in  anger  is  persecuted 
fjam.  5. 8.  servants  have  r.  over  us,  none  delivereth 
Ezek.  34. 4.  with  cruelty  have  ye  r.  over  them 
Dan.  5. 21.  till  he  knew  that  God  r.  in  kingdom 

RULER. 
Gen.  41.  43.  Pharaoh  made  Joseph  r.  over  all  the 
land  of  Egypt,  45.  8.  Psal.  105.21. 
43.16.  Joseph  said  to  the  r.  of  his  house,  bring 
F.zod.  22.  23.  thou  shalt  not  curse  r.  of  thy  people 
LeiK  4.22.  when  a  r.  hath  sinned  through  ignorance 
JVuin.  13.  2.  every  one  a  r.  among  them 

1  Saw.  25. 30.  appointed  thee  r.  over  my  people  Isr. 
2  .Sam.  6.  21.  |  7,  8.  1  Chron.  11.  2.  |  17. 7. 

2  Sam.  7.  8.  I  took  thee  from  following  sheep  to  be 
r.  over  my  people,  over  Israel,  IChron.  17.7. 

23. 1 3.  thou  r.  over  men,  ruling  in  fear  of  God 
1  Kings  1.  35.  1  have  appointed  Solomon  to  be  r. 

1  Chron.  5.  2.  for  of  Judah  came  the  chief  r. 
9. 11.  Azariah  r.  of  house  of  God,  2  CArun.  31. 13w 

2  CAr.  7.  18.  there  shall  not  fail  thee  a  man  to  be  r. 
11.  22.  he  made  Abljah  r.  among  his  brethren 

JiTeh.  7.  2.  and  Hanamah  the  )•.  of  the  palace 
11.  11.  Seraiah  was  r.  of  the  house  of  God 
P«oA  68. 27.  there  is  little  Benjamin  with  their  r. 
105.  20.  even  the  r.  of  the  people,  let  hiin  go  free 

Prov.  6. 7.  the  ant  having  noguide,  overseer,  or  r. 
23.  1.  when  thou  sittest  to  eat  with  a  r.  consider 
28. 15.  so  is  a  wicked  r.  over  the  poor  people 
29.  12.  if  k  r.  hearken  to  lies,  his  servants  wicked 
26.  many  seek  r.  favour,  but  judgment  cometh 

Eccl.  10.  4.  if  the  spirit  of  the  r.  rise  against  thee 
5.  as  an  error  which  proceedeth  from  the  r. 

Isa.  3. 6.  be  thou  our  r.  {|  7.  make  me  not  a  r. 
16.  1.  send  ye  the  lamb  to  the  r.  of  the  land 

.Ter.  51.  46.  and  violence  in  the  land,  r.  against  r.    ^ 

Dan.  2.  10.  no  king  nor  r.  asked  such  things 
38.  and  hath  made  thee  r.  over  them  all,  48. 
5.  7.  shall  be  third  r.  in  the  kingdom,  16.  29. 

Jl/ic.5. 2.  out  of  thee  shall  he  come  that  is  to  be  r. 

Hab.  1.  14.  as  creeping  things  that  have  no  r. 

Mat.  9.  18.  behold,  there  came  a  certain  r. 
24.45.  whom  his  Lord  hath  made  r.  Lukel2.4Si. 
47.  he  shall  make  him  r.  over  all  his  goods 
25.  21.  I  will  make  thee  r.  over  many  things,  23. 

Mark  5.35.  while  he  yet  spake,l  here  came  from  the 
r.  of  thesynagogue's  house,  LukeS.id. 

Luke  13. 14.  the  r.  of  the  synagogue  answered 

.John  2. 9.  when  the  r.  of  the  feast  had  tasted  water 
3.  1.  a  man  named  Nicodemus,  a  r.  of  the  Jews 

Acts  i.  1 1.  the  r.  of  the  temple  came  upon  them 

7.27.  who  made  thee  ar.  and  a  judge  over  us  7  35. 

35.  the  same  did  God  send  to  boa  r.and  deliverer 

18.  17.  the  Greeks  beat  Sosthenes  the  chief  r. 

23.  5.  shalt  not  speak  evil  of  the  r.  of  thy  people 

RULERS. 

Gen.AI.S.  then  make  them  r.  over  my  cattle 

F.zod.  18.  21.  r.  of  thousands,  r.  of  hundreds,  2.5. 
34.31.  Moses  called  the  r.  of  the  congregation 
35.  27.  the  r.  brought  ony.v-slones  to  be  set 

Deut. }.  13.  and  I  will  make  them  r.  over  you 

.Tudg.  15.11.  kno west  thou  not  the  Philistines  arer. 

2  Sam.  8. 18.  and  David's  sonswere  chief  r. 

1  Kings  9.22.  were  r.  of  his  chariots  and  horsemen 

2  Kings  10.  1.  Jehu  wrote  to  the  r.  of  Jezreel 
11.  4.  Jehoiada  set  r.  over  hundreds,  19. 

1  Chron.  27.  31.  all  these  were  r.  of  the  substance 

2  Chrnn.  35.  8.  r.  of  the  house  of  God  gave  to  priest 
Ezra  9. 2.  the  hand  of  the  r.  chief  in  this  trespass 
JV>A.4.16.  the  r.  were  behind  the  house  of  Judah 

5.7.  I  rebuked  the  r.  and  said,  ye  exact  usury 
II.  I.  the  r.  of  the  people  dwelt  at  Jerusalem 
12.40.  so  stood  I,  and  the  half  of  the  r.  with  me 

13.  II.  then  contended  I  with  the  r.  and  said 
F.sth.  9.  3.  the  r.  of  the  provinces  helped  the  Jewi 
Psal.  2.  2.  the  r.  take  counsel  against  the  Lord 
Isa.  1.  10.  hear  word  of  the  Lord,  ye  r.  of  Sodom 

14.  5.  the  Lord  hath  broken  the  sceptre  of  the  r. 

22.  3.  all  thy  r.  are  flod  together,  they  are  bound 
29. 10.  and  your  r.  the  seers  hath  he  covered 
49.7.  to  a  servant  of  r.  kings  shall  see  and  arise 

yer.33.26.  I  will  not  take  any  of  his  seed  to  be  r. 

51.23.  thee  will  I  break  in  pieces  captains  and  r. 

28.  prepare  against  her  r.  |1 .57.  make  drunk  her  r. 

Ezc*.23.  6.  her  lovers,  which  were  captains  and  r. 

23.  I  will  raise  up  those  r.  against  thee 
Dan.  3. 3.  all  the  r.  were  gathered  toffnther 

7.  t27.  and  all  r.  shall  serve  and  obey  him 
ffos.4.18.  her  r.  with  shame  do  love,  givo  ye 
Mark  5. 22.  cometh  one  of  the  r.  of  the  synngngue 

13.9.  ve  shall  be  brought  before  r.  Luke  21. 12. 
Luke  23. 13.  when  ho  had  called  together  the  r. 


RUN 

Z.uA-e33.35.  and  r.also  with  the  people  iJprided  him 
2-1.  20.  how  our  priests  and  r.  delivered  him 
John  7.  26.  do  the  r.  know  tliat  this  is  the  Christ? 
48.  have  any  of  the  r.  believed  on  him? 

12.  42.  many  among  the  chief  r.  believed  on  him 
Wc(.*3.17.through  ignorance  ycdid  it,ns  also  did  r. 

4.  2G.  the  r.  were  gathered  against  the  Lord 

13.  15.  the  r.  of  the  synagogue  sent  to  Paul 
27.  and  their  r.  becj'use  they  knew  hini  not 

14.  5.  an  assault  made  of  the  Jews,  with  their  r. 
Ifi.  19.  the  damsel's  masters  drew  ihem  to  the  r. 
17.  8.  they  troubled  the  people  iind  r.  of  the  city 

Horn.  13.  3.  r.  not  a  terror  to  good  works,  hut  evil 
£ph.6. 12.  we  wrestle  against  iher.  ofihe  darkness 

RULEST. 
2  Chron.  20.  6.  and  r.  not  thou  over  all  kingdoms 
Psal.  89.  9.  thou  r.  the  raging  of  the  sea 

RULETH. 
S  Sam.  23.  3.  he  that  r.  over  men  must  be  just 
Psal.  59.  13.  let  ihem  know  that  God  r.  in  Jacob 

66.  7.  he  r.  by  his  power  for  ever,  his  eyes  behold 

103.  19.  and  his  kingdom  r.  over  all 
Prov.  Ifi.  32.  that  r.  his  spirit  is  better  than  he  thai 

22.  7.  rich  r.  over  the  poor,  and  the  borrower 
J?cf/.  8.9.  wherein  one  man  r.  over  another  to  hurt 

9.  17.  more  than  cry  of  him  that  r.  among  fools 
Dan.  4.  17.  the  Most  High  r.  among  men,  25,  32. 
Jffos.  11.  12.  but  Judah  yet  r.  with  God,  is  faithful 
Rom.  12.  8.  he  that  r.  with  diligence 

1  TYm.  3.  4.  one  that  r.  well  his  own  house 

RU1,ING. 

2  Sam.  23.  3.  must  be  just,  r.  in  the  fear  of  God 
Jer.  22.30.  sit.  on  throne,  and  r.  any  more  in  Judah 

1  Tim.  3.  12.  r.  their  children  and  houses  well 

RUMBLING. 

Jitr.  47.3.  atr.  of  his  «  hcils,  fathers  not  lookback 

RUMOT'R,  S. 

2  Kinss  10.  7.  ami  he  shall  hear  a  r.  ha.  37.  7. 
Jcr.  49.  14.  I  have  heard  a  r.  from  the  Lord 

51.  46.  lest  ye  fear  for  the  r.  in  the  land,  a  r.  shall 
come  one  year,  in  another  year  shall  come  a  r. 
F.ztk.l.'Xi.  mischief  on  mischief,  r.  shall  he  upon  r. 
Obad.  1.  we  have  heard  a  r.  from  the  I.iord 
Mat.  24.  6.  ye  shall  hear  of  wars  and  r.  of  wars 
Mark  13.7.when  ye  shall  hear  ofwars  and  r.nf  wars 
JLukel.YI.  this  r.  of  him  went  forth  thro'  all  Judeu 

RUMP. 
Exod.  29.  2?.  thou  shalt  take  of  the  ram  and  the 
fat  and  the  r.  Lcr.  3.9.  I  7.  3.  I  8.25.  I  9.  19. 
RUN. 
To  runts  to  move  with  a  .iwift  paee,'i^am.\9. 19. 
'      Tlie  Christian  conversation  is  called  a  race  or 
running.     1   Cor.  9.  24,  So  run  that  you  may 
obtain:  that  is,  U.ie  S7ich  diligence,  care,  and 
covstanry  inyour  Christian  course,  thatyemay 
obtain  thf  prize  of  eternal  glory  set  before  you: 
It  is  spiiUen  in  allusion  to  the  custom  in  their 
races,  of  hanging  vp  a  crown  or  garland  at  the 
goal,  and  such  as  first  laid  hold  on  it  and  took 
it  down,  hod  it  as  a  reward.     St.  Paul  says  to 
the  Galalians,  Ye  did  run  well,  who  did  hinder 
you?  Oal.  5.  7.  that  is.  Ye  were  forward  for- 
merly in  adhering  to  the  true  doctrine  of  jus- 
tification by  faith  in  Christ,  and  to  Christian 
liberty,  andyou  practised  accordingly;  whohat 
turnedynu  out  of  your  icay,  or  hindered  you  in 
your  race,  that  ynu  now  eipcct  to  he  justified 
by  the  works  of  the  law,  and  siihmit  yi'nrsolocs 
to  the  yoke  of  ceremonies?      The  same  Jfpos 
tie  compares  h:s  labour  and  diligence  in  th' 
■work  of  his  ministry  to  a  race.     Phil.  2.  16, 
Holding  forth  the  word  of  life,  that  I  may  re 
joico  in  the  day  of  Christ,  that  I  have  not  run 
in   vain.      JInd   an   eager  pursuit   of  sinful 
courses  is  also  by  the  apostle  Peter  compared 
to  a  race.     1  Pet.  4.  4,  That  ye  run  not  will 
them  to  the  same  exeesH  of  riot. 
Gen.  41. 1 14.  Ihey  maile  Joseph  r.  out  of  dungeon 
49.  22.  whiise  branches  r.  over  the  wall 
Lev.  l.S.  3.  whether  his  flesh  r.  with  his  issue 

25   if  a  woman's  issue  r.  beyond  the  time 
Judg.  IS.  25.  lest  angry  fellows  r.  upon  thee 

1  Sam.  8.  11.  some  shall  r.  before  his  chariots 

17.  17.  and  r.  In  the  camp  In  Ihy  brethren 
20.6.  n«ked  me,  that  he  might  r.  In  Bethlehem 

36.  r.  find  out  now  the  arrows  which  I  shi'ot 

2  Sam.  15.  1.  Absalom  prepared  chariots,  horses, 

and  fifty  men  to  r.  before  him,  1  Kings  1.  5. 

18.  19.  let  me  now  r.  and  hear  lidiiig<,22,  23. 
22.  .10.  by  I  heel  haver,  thro' a  troop,  Psni.  18.29. 

2  h'im'S  4.  22     that  I  may  r.  lo  the  man  of  God 

26.  r.  now,  I  pray  thee,  to  meet  her,  an<l  say 

5. 20.  as  Ihe  Lord  liveth,  1  will  r.  after  Naatnan 

2  Chron.  16.  0.  evesof  I,(>rd  r.  to  and  fro  Ihro' earth 

Job  a.  t  14.  Ihey  r.  into  darkn<«s  in  Ihe  ilny-lime 

Psal.  19.  .5.  and  rejoicelb  ns  slmngmnn  lo  r.  a  race 

58,  7.  lei  Ihem  melt  as  wnterH,whieh  r.  continuallT 

.W.  4.  Ihey  r.  ami  prepare  Ibems.  without  my  fauh 

78.  16,  he  caiiseil  waters  lo  r.  down  like  riven 

104.  10.  the  springs,  which  r.  among  the  hilla 

SOO 


RUS 

Psal.  119.  32. 1  will  r.  the  way  of  thy  command. 
136.  rivers  of  waters  r.  down  mine  eyes,  because 
Prov.  1.  16.  for  their  feet  r.  to  evil,  Isa.  59.  7. 
Keel.  1. 7.  all  the  rivers  r.  into  Ihe  sea,  sea  not  full 
Cant.  1.  4.  draw  me,  we  will  r.  after  thee 
/sa.  3.3.  4.  as  running  of  locusts  shall  he  r.  on  them 
40.  31.  they  shall  r.  and  not  be  weary,  shall  walk 
55.  5.  nations  that  knew  not  thee  shall  r.  to  thee 
Jcr.  5.  l.r.  yeto  and  fro  thro' streets  of  Jerusalem 
9.  18.  that  your  eyes  may  r.  down  with  tears 

12.  5.  if  thou  hastr.  with  the  footmen 
13.17.  mine  eyes  shall  r.  down  with  tears,  because 

the  Lord's  flock  is  carried  away  captive,  14. 17. 
49.  3.  lament,  and  r.  to  and  fro  by  the  hedges 
19.  I  will  make  him  r.  away  from  her,  50.  44 
51.  31.  one  post  shall  r.  to  meet  another 
Aam.2.18.1et  tears  r*. down  like  a  riv.day  and  night 
Fzek.  24.  16.  neither  shall  thy  tears  r.  down 
32.  14.  cause  their  rivers  to  r.  like  oil,saith  Lord 
Dan.  12.4.  many  shall  r.  to  and  fro,  and  knowledge 
Joel  2.  4.  and  as  horsemen,  so  shall  ihcy  r. 
7.  Ihey  shall  r.  like  mighty  men,  they  shall  climb 
9.  they  shall  r.  in  the  city,  shall  r.  on  the  wall 
,1mns  3.t6.shall  a  trumpet  be  blown,  people  not  r.? 

5.  24.  but  let  judgment  r.  down  as  waters 

6.  12.  shall  horses  r.  upon  the  rock?  will  one  plow 
H.  12.  shall  r.  to  and  fro  to  seek  word  of  the  Lord 

JVah.  2.  4.  they  shall  r.  like  the  lightnings 
/^a6.2.2.write  vision,  that  he  may  r.  that  readeth  it 
Hag.  1.  9.  and  ye  r.  every  man  to  his  own  hou^e 
Zech.  2.  4.  r.  speak  to  this  young  man,  saying 

4.  10.  eyes  of  Ihe  T/ord  r.to  and  fro  thro'  the  earth 
Mat.  28.  8.  Ihey  did  r.  to  bring  his  disciples  word 

1  Cor.  9.  24.  that  they  which  r.  in  a  race  r.  all,  but 
onereceiveth  Ihe  prize,  sor.  that  ye  may  obtain 

26. 1  therefore  so  r.  not  as  uncertainly,  so  fight  I 
Gal.  2. 2.  lest  by  any  means  I  should  r.  or  had  r.  in 

5.  7.  ye  did  r.  well,  who  did  hinder  you? 
Phil.^.  16.  that  I  may  rejoice,  I  have  notr.  invain 

2  Thess.  3.  f  1.  that  the  word  of  Ihe  Lord  may  r. 
Heb.  2. 1 1.  lest  at  any  time  we  should  r.  out 

12.  1.  let  usr.  with  patience  the  race  before  us 
1  Pet.  4.  4.  that  ye  r.  not  to  Ihe  same  excess  of  riot 

RUNNEST. 
Prov.  4.  12.  when  thon  r.  thou  shalt  not  sturri'jle 

RUNNETH. 
Job  15.  26.  he  r.  upon  him,  even  on  his  neck 
16. 14.  he  breaketh  me,  he  r.  upon  me  like  a  giant 
Psal.  23.  5.  Ihou  anoinlest  my  head,  my  cupr.over 
147.  15.  his  word  r.  very  swiftly 
Prov.  18.  10.  the  righteous  r.  into  it,  and  is  safe 
/.am.  1.  16.  mine  eye  r.  down  with  water,  3.  48. 
Mat.  9.  17.  the  bottles  break,  and  Ihe  wine  r.  out 
./(/An  20.  2.  then  she  r.  and  cometh  to  Simon  Peter 
/iloni.9.1G.notofhin)  thai  willelh,  nor  of  him  that  r. 

RUNNERS. 
1  •Vnm.22. 1 17.  the  king  said  lo  the  r.  turn  and  slay 

1  Kings  14.  t27.comTnilted  shields  to  the  chief  of  r. 
RUNNING. 

f^ev.  ]4..'>.  one  bird  be  killed  over  r.  water,  6,  50, 
51.  dip  tliem  in  r.  water,  and  sprinkle  the  house 
.52.  he  shall  cleanse  iho  house  with  ther.  water 

15.  2.  whi'n  any  man  hath  a  r.  issue,  22.  4. 

13.  shall  bathe  his  flesh  in  r.  water,  and  be  clean 
J^um.  19.  17.  for  an  unclean  person  take  r.  water 

2  .'iam.  18.  24.  and  behold,  a  man  r.  alone,  26. 
~.  (he  r.  of  the  foremost  is  like  r.  of  Ahiniaaz 

2  Kings  5.21.  when  Naamnnsaw  him  r.  after  him 
2  Chron.  23.  12.  Alhnliah  heard  Iho  people  r. 
Prov.  5.  15.  and  r.  waters  out  of  thine  own  well 

6.  18.  feet  that  be  swift  in  r.  to  mischief 
Asrt.  33. 4.  as  ther.  to  and  fro  of  locusts  shall  he  run 
.ler.  18.  t  14.  shall  the  r.  waters  be  forsaken? 
F.zek.  31.  4.  with  her  rivers  r.  about  his  plants 
Mark  9.  15.  the  people  r.  to  him  and  saluted  him 

25.  when  Jesne  saw  the  people  r.  logcthor 
10.  17.  there  came  one  r.  and  kneeled  to  him 
l.uke  6.n8.good  measure  and  r.  over  shall  men  give 
.lets  27.  16.  and  r.  under  a  certain  island,  Clauda 
Rev.  9.  9.  as  the  sound  of  chariots  r.  lo  batllo 

RUSH. 

.Tab  8.  11.  can  Ihe  r.  grow  without  mire? 

Isa.  9. 14.  T<ord  will  cut  otTlirnnch  and  r.  in  one  day 

19.  15.  nor  any  work  which  branch  or  r.  may  do 

RITSH. 

/<a.l7.13.nationsihnll  r.  like  rushing  many  waters 

Rir.<5HEl). 
Judg.  9.  41.  Ahinielee^  and  company  r.  forward 
20. 37.  the  Hers  in  wail  haiited  and  r.  upon  Gibcah 
.Job  1.  t  17.  the  Chaldeans  r.  upon  Ihe  camels 
Mark  3.  f  10.  tliey  r.  upon  Jeius  lo  liiuch  him 
Acts  19.  29.  they  r.  with  one  accord  inio  theatre 

RITPMES. 
Isa.  35.7.  where  draeons  lav  xhall  be  reeds  and  r. 

RUSHETH. 
.Ter.  8.  fi.  every  one  tnrneil,  n«  horse  r.  ioto  battle 

RTTPHlNi;. 
f-in. 17.12. woe  to  multitudi^  and  lo  the  r.  of  natioiif, 
that  make  a  r.  like  Ihe  r.  of  many  waters 

13.  nations  shall  rush  like  the  r.  of  many  waters 


SAB 

Jer.  47.  3.  at  r.  of  chariots  fathers  shall  not  ook 
Eiek.  3.  12.  I  heard  a  voice  of  a  great  r.  13. 
Jlcts  2.2.  there  came  d  sound  i^  ofar.  mighty  wind 

RUST. 
Mat.  6. 19.  where  moth  and  r.  dolh  corrupt,  20. 
Jam.  5.3.  r.  of  them  shall  be  a  witness  against  you 

s. 

SABAOTIl, 
Or  rather  Zabaoth,  a  Hebrew  word,  that  sig- 
nifies Hosts  cr  Armies.  Jehovah  Sabaoth,  The 
Lord  of  hosts,  Horn.  9.  29.  Whose  host  all 
creatures  are,  whether  the  host  of  heaven,  or  th« 
angels  and  ministers  of  the  Lord;  or  the  stars 
and  planets  which  are  as  an  army  ranged  in 
battle-array,  and  performing  the  will  of  God: 
Or  the  people  of  the  Lord,  both  of  the  Old  and 
M'cw  Testament,  which  is  truly  the  army  of 
the  Lord,  of  which  (rod  is  Ihe  General  and 
Commander.  The  Hebrew  word  Zaba  is  also 
used  to  signify  the  service  that  his  mitiisters 
perform  for  him  in  the  tabernacle;  because 
thiy  are  there,  as  it  were,  soldiers  or  guards 
attending  at  the  court  of  their  Prince,  Num. 
4.  3,  23,  30. 
Rom.  9.29.  except  the  Lord  of  s.  had  left  us  a  seed 
Jam.  5.  i.  are  entered  into  theears  of  the  Lord  of «. 

SABBATH. 
This  word  in  Hebrew  signifies  Rest,  God  having 
created  the  world  in  six  days,  rested  on  the  se- 
venth. Gen.  2.  2.  that  is,  after  God  had  per- 
fected the  invisible  and  visible  worlds,  on  the 
review  of  all  his  works, finding  ihcni  very  good, 
he  took  pleasure,  he  was  sati.-fied  in  all  thast 
discoveries  of  his  own  perfections  in  the  works 
of  hii!  hands.  He  blessed  this  day,  anA  sancti- 
fied it,  because  he  had  rested  upon  it.  From 
that  time  he  set  it  apart,  and  appointed  it  in 
a  peculiar  manner  for  his  worship.  .Ind  the 
Hebrews  afterwards,  in  consequence  of  this  de- 
signation, and  to  preserve  the  memory  of  the 
creation,  sanctified,  by  his  order,  tlie  Sabbath- 
day,  or  the  seventh  day,  by  abstaining  from  all 
work,  labour,  and  servile  employments,  and  by 
applying  themselves  to  the  service  of  the  Lord,9 
to  the  study  of  his  law,  and  to  prayer.  JInd 
at  mount  Sinai  ly  a  positive,  moral,  and  per- 
petual commandment  God  hath  appointed  on« 
day  in  the  seven  to  be  kept  holy  to  himself; 
which  in  the  New  Testament  is  called  the 
Lord's  day,  and  is  to  be  continued  to  the  end 
of  the  world  as  the  Christian  Sabbath. 

Sabbath  is  also  taken  for  the  whole  week.  Luke 
18.  12,  I  fast  twice  in  the  week  ;  in  the  Greek 
it  is,  I  fast  twice  in  Ihe  Sabbath:  Sometimes 
for  the  sabbatical  year,  which  was  celebrated 
among  the  Jews  every  seventh  year,  when  the 
land  was  to  rest,  and  to  be  left  without  cut 
tare.  Lev.  25. 2,  4  God  appointed  the  obscrvd 
tion  of  the  sabbatical  year  to  enforce  the  ae- 
knoirledgment  of  his  sovereign  authority  over 
all  things,  and  particularly  ovir  the  land  of 
Canaan,  irhich  he  had  given  to  the  HebrewF, 
and  in  whi'h  they  wire  hut  tenants  at  his  will. 
Likewise  for  the  trial  and  exercise  of  their 
ohedirnce,  and  the  demonstration  of  his  provi- 
dence, as  well  in  the  general  towards  men,  as 
more  especially  towards  his  own  people ;  and 
to  wean  them  from  inordinate  love,  and  pursuit 
of,or  trust  to,  worldly  advantages  ;  and  t« 
inure  them  to  depend  upon  God  alone,  and 
upon  God's  blessing  for  their  subsistence ; 
and  to  put  them  in  mind  of  that  blessed  and 
eternal  rest  provided  for  all  the  godly,  whe^in 
they  shall  be  perfectly  freed  from  all  worldly 
labours  and  troubles. 

Sabbath  is  likewise  taken  for  all  Ihe  Jewhh  festi- 
vals, indifferently.  Lev.  19.  3,  30,  Keep  my 
sabbaths;  that  is,  my  feasts,  ns  the  Pnssovor, 
ihe  feast  of  Tabernacles,  &c.  F.v.ckie]  says,  that 
the  Sabbaths  are  signs  that  God  has  given  to 
his  penide  to  distinguish  Ihem  fmm  other  na- 
tions, F.zek.  20.  12,  20.  .Ind  Moses,  in  DeuL 
5.  15,  The  Lord  hath  brought  thee  out  of 
Egypt,  therefore  the  l>nid  Ihy  God  hath  com 
niandcd  thee  lo  keep  the  Sabbalh-day. 

Sabbath  is  also  taken  for  the  eternal  rest  and  fe- 
licity in  heaven,  where  Ihe  spirits  of  just  men 
are  maile  perfect ;  anil  the  saints  are  delivered 
from  sin  and  sorrow,  from  Ihe  guilt  and  power 
of  sin,  and  even  from  the  very  bring  of  sin, 
for  Jesus  saves  his  people  from  their  sins. 
Thri)  irill  be  blessed  in  heaven  with  complete 
conformity  lo  God,  nnd  iininteirupted  rom- 
iTiunion  with  him;  and  their  happiness  will  bl 
eternal,  for  Ihey  will  ever  be  with  the  Lord,  and 
will  enjoy  an  eternal  Sabbath.  Heb.  4.  9 
"riiere  ronisineth  thcroforo  a  rest  to  the  peo 


SAB 

pie  ol  God  ;  In  the  Greek  it  is  o»E;»Tio-/»of, 
a  keeping  of  ttio  Subbath. 

A  Sabbatli-day's  journey.  Lang  journies  were 
forbidden  the  iewson  Sabbulliilays.  fray  ihal 
your  tlighl  be  not  in  tbe  winter,  neiliier  un  the 
babbuih-day,  says  our  Haeiour,  Alat^  '2i.  iiO. 
However,  it  is  evident  l/tey  were  allowed  to  go 
a  certain  space  on  t/iat  day,  at  least  to  the 
,  temple  or  tabernacle  from  the  remote  parts  of 
the  city  or  camp.  And  St.  Luke  says,  that  the 
mount  of  Olives  was  distant  /rum  Jerusalem 
the  space  of  a  sabballi-day's  joarncy,  Acts  1 
m.  The  Rabbins  generally  Jix.  this  space  at 
two  thousand  cubits  ;  that  is,  about  a  mile. 

The  second  subbaih  at'ler  the  first,  JLuke  0.  1. 
Some  have  taken  it  for  the  second,  others  for 
the  last  day  of  unicaoened  bread  ;  and  some 
for  the  day  of  Pentecost :  The  Passover  was 
the  first  sa.l)b^lh,  according  to  them,  and  Pente- 
cost the  second.  Ot/iers  have  thought,  that  the 
first  grand  sabbath  was  the  first  sabbath  of  the 
civil  year,  in  the  inontk  Tizri ;  and  that  the 
second  was  the  first  of  the  holy  year,  or  of  the 
month  Nisan.  The  opinion  most  generally 
followed,  IS  of  thuse  who  think  that  to  have  been 
the  first  sabbath,  which  followed  thesecond  day 
of  unleavened  bread.  The  Jews  thus  reckoned 
their  sabbaths  fromthe  Passover  to  Pentecost; 
the  first  wax  called  secuiido-primum,  or  sccojid 
after  the  first ;  that  is,  the  first  after  the  se- 
cond day  of  unleavened  bread :  The  second  was 
called  secundo-secundum,  ortlie  second  day  of 
the  sabbath  after  the  second  day  of  unleavened 
bread  :  The  third  was  called  secuiido-tertium, 
or  the  third  day  of  the  sabbath  after  the  second 
day  of  unleavened  bread :  And  so  of  all  the 
rest,  as  far  as  secundo-septimum  ;  that  is,  the 
seventh  day  of  the  sabbath  after  the  second  day 
of  unleavened  bread.  The  seventh  sabbath 
immediately  preceded  Pentecost,  which  was  ce- 
lebrated the  fiftieth  day  after  the  second  day 
of  unleavened  bread. 

The  preparation  of  the  sabbath ;  in  Greek,  Para- 
sceue.  The  Jews  gave  the  name  of  Parasceue 
to  the  sixth  day  of  the  week,  because  being  not 
allowed  on  the  sabbath  to  prepare  their  food, 
they  provided  the  day  before  what  was  neces- 
sary fnr  their  subsistence  on  the  sabbath.  The 
Evangelist  iohn  says,  that  Friday,  on  which 
our  Hdvioar  suffered,  was  the  preparation  of 
the  passover,  John  19.  14.  because  the  passover 
was  to  be  celebrated  the  day  following.  St. 
Matthew  mar/csout  theday  by  these  words,  Tbe 
day  that  followed  the  Parasceue,  Mat.  27.  62. 
All  the  Evangelists  observe,  that  they  delayed 
nut  to  take  dawn  Ghrtsl  from  the  cross,  and  to 
puthim  in  the  nearest  tomb,  because  it  was  the 
evening  of  the  Parasceue,  and  that  the  sabbath 
was  to  begin  immediately  after  the  setting  of 
the  sun,  or  the  rising  of  the  stars. 

Ezod.  16.  23.  to-morrosv  is  the  rest  of  the  holy  s. 
25.  eat  that  to-day,  for  to-day  is  a  s.  to  the  Lord 
29.  see,  for  that  the  Lord  hath  given  you  the  s. 
20.  10.  the  seventh  day  is  the  s.  of  the  Lord  thy 
God,  31.  15.  1  35.  2.  Lev.  23.  3.  Deut.  5.  14. 
31.  14.  ye  shall  keep  the  s.  therefore,  16. 

/,et».  16.  31.  on  that  day  the  priest  shall  make  an 
atonement,  it  shall  be  as.  of  rest  to  you,  23.3, 32. 

23.  11.  morrow  after  the  s.  priest  shall  wave  it 

15.  count  to  you  from  the  morrow  after  the  s. 

16.  after  seventh  s.  shall  ye  number  fifty  days 
24.  in  first  day  of  the  month  shall  ye  have  a  s. 
32.  from  even  to  even  shall  ye  celebrate  your  s. 
39.  on  the  first  day  shall  be  a  s.  on  the  eighth  a  s. 

24.  8.  every  s.  he  shall  set  in  order  before  Lord 

25.  2.  then  shall  the  land  keep  a  s.  4,  6.  ^ 
Jfum.  28.  10.  this  is  the  burntotfering  of  every  s. 
2  Kings  i.  23.  he  said,  it  is  neither  new  moon  nor  s. 

11.  5.  a  third  part  of  you  that  enter  in  on  the  s. 
7.  two  parts  of  all  you  that  go  forth  on  Ihe  s. 
even  they  shall  keep  the  watch,  9. 2  CAr.  23.  8. 
16.  18.  the  covert  for  the  s.  turned  Ahaz 

1  Chron.  9.  32.  to  prepare  the  ehew-bread  every.?. 

2  Chr.  36.  21.  as  long  as  desolate,  she  kept  the  s. 
JVeA.  9.  14.  and  madest  known  to  them  thy  holy  s. 

10.  31.  we  would  not  buy  it  of  them  on  the  s. 
13. 15. 1  saw  some  treading  wine-presses  on  thes. 
16.  men  of  Tyre  brought  ware,  and  sold  on  the  s. 

18.  ye  bring  wrath  on  Israel,  by  profaning  the  «. 

19.  the  gates  began  to  be  dark  before  the  s. 
21.  from  that  time  came  Ihey  no  more  on  the  s. 

jsa.  56.  2.  blessed  is  the  man  that  kcepeth  the  *.  fi. 
58.  13.  turn  thy  foot  from  the  s.  call  s.  a  delight 
66.  23.  from  one  s.  to  another  ehall  all  wo'ship 
r-zok.  46.  1.  but  on  the  s.  it  shall  be  openeil 
Amo.<<  8.  5.  saying,  when  will  the  s-  W  gonel 
Mat.  28.  1.  in  the  end  of  the  s.  came  Mary 
Miria.  27.  the  s.  was  made  form  an,  not  man  for  s. 
28.  the  Son  of  man  is  Lord  of  the  s.  Luke  6.  5. 
16.  1.  when  tbe  s.  was  past,  Mary  Magdalene 

sax 


BAt; 

Luke  6. 1.  on  the  second  s.  after  the  first,  he  went 
13.  10.  teaching  in  the  synagogue  on  the  a. 

15.  doth  not  each  on  the  6. loose  his  ox  or  his  ass? 

23.  54.  it  was  the  preparation,  and  the  s.  drew  on 

John  5.  18.  because  he  not  only  had  broken  the  s. 

Actsl'i.i'i.  these  words  be  preached  to  ihcm  nexts 

10.  13.  on  the  s.  we  went  out  of  city  by  river-side 

18.  4.  he  reasoned  in  the  synagogue  every  s. 

Heb.  4.  t  9.  there  remaiiieth  a  keeping  of  a  a. 

See  Day,  Days. 

SABBATHS. 

£iO(i.31. 13.  speak  to  the  children  oflsrael,  saying, 

my  s.  ye  shall  kee|i,  Lev.  19.  3,  30.  |  20.  2. 

Lev.  23.  15.  seven  s.  shall  be  complete 

38.beside  the  s.  of  the  Lord,and  beside  your  gifts 

25.  8.  and  thou  shalt  number  seven  s.  of  years 

26.  34.  land  enjoy  her  s.  even  (hen  shall  the  land 

rest  and  enjoy  her  .*.  43.  2  Chron.  36.  21. 
35.  it  shall  rest,  because  it  did  not  rest  in  your  £. 
lCViron.23.  31.  to  ofler  the  burnt-sacrifices  in  the  *. 
2  Chron.  2.  4.  [  8. 13.  |  31.  3.  JVeA.  10.  33. 
Isa.  1.  13.  new-moons  and  s.  I  cannot  away  with 
56.  4.  saith  Lord  to  the  eunuchs  that  keep  my  s. 
Lam.  1.  7.  the  adversaries  did  mock  at  her  s. 
2.  6.  Lord  caused  the  s.  to  be  forgotten  in  Zion 
Ezek.  20. 12.  also  I  gave  them  my  s.  to  be  a  sign 

13.  and  my  s.  they  greatly  polluted,  16,  24. 
22.  8.  and  thou  hast  profaned  my  s.  23.  38. 
26.  the  priests  have  hid  their  eyes  from  my  s. 
44.  24.  they  shall  keep  my  laws  and  hallow  my  5. 
45  n.itshall  be  prince's  part  to  give  offerings  (ots 
46. 3.  the  people  shall  worship  at  this  gate  in  the  s. 
Hos.  2.  11.  I  will  also  make  to  cease  her  s. 

SACK. 
C?e7i.42.25.then  Josephcommanded  to  restore  every 
man's  money  into  his  s.  35.  \  43.  21.  j  44.  1. 
44.  2.  put  my  silver  cup  in  s.  mouth  of  youngest 

11.  they  took  down  every  man  his  s.  to  ground 

12.  and  the  cup  was  found  in  Benjamin's  s. 
Lev.  11.  32.  or  s.  of  unclean  must  be  put  in  water 

SACKBUT. 
Dan.  3.  5.  ye  hear  the  sound  of  the  s.  7,  10,  15. 

SACKCLOTH. 
This  is  a  pure  Hebrew  word,  and  has  spread  into 
many  languages.  Besides  the  common  signifi- 
cation, which  is  very  well  known,  it  stands  also 
for  a  suit  of  mourning,  which  was  worn  at  the 
death  of  a  friend,  or  relation.     In  great  cala- 
mities and  troubles,  they  wore  sackcloth  about 
their   bodies ;    Gird   you  with  sackcloth,  and 
mourn  before  Abner,  2  Sam.  3.  31.    Let  us  put 
sackcloth  on  our  loins,  and  go  Out  and  implore 
the  clemency  of  the  king  of  Israel,  1  Kings 
20.  31.     Ahab  tore  his  clothes,  put  on  a  shirt 
of  hair-cloth  next  to  his  skin,  fasted,  and  lay 
upon  sackcloth,   1  Kings  21.    27.     And  when 
Mordecai  was  informed  of  the  ruin  that  threat- 
ened his  nation,  he  put  on  sackcloth,  and  co- 
vered his  head  with  ashes,  Esth.  4.  1.  And  Job 
says,  I  have  sewed    sackcloth  upon  my  skin 
Job  16.  15. 
On  the  contrary,  in  the  time  of  joy,  and  upon  the 
hearing  of  any  good  news,  thuse  that  were  clad 
in  sackcloth,  lure  it  fromlheir  bodiea,and  cast 
it  from  them.  Psal.  30. 11,  Thou  hast  put  olfmy 
sackcloth  and  girded  me  with  gladness.  Thepro- 
phets  were  commonly  clothed  in  sackcloth.  The 
Lord  bids  Isaiah  to  put  off  the  sackcloth  that 
was  about  his  body,  and  to  go  naked,  Isa.  20.  2. 
Zechariah  says,  that  the  false  prophets  should 
no  longer  prophesy  in  sackcloth,  to  deceive  the 
simple'Zpj-U.  13.  4.     They  shall  prophesy  1260 
days,  clothed  in  sackcloth,  Rev.  11.  3. 
Gen.  37.  34.  and  Jacob  put  «.  upon  his  loins 
2  .Sam.  3.  31.  he  said,  gird  you  with  s.  and  mourn 
21.  10.  Rizpah  took  s.  and  spread  it  on  the  ruck 
lA'i«o-s20.31.  the  kings  oflsrael  are  merciful  kings 
let  us  puts,  on  our  loins,  and  ropes,  32. 
21.  27.  Ahab  put  s.  on  his  flesh,  and  lay  in  s. 
2  Kings  6.  30.  people  looked,  and  he  had  s.  wiUiin 
19. 1.  Hezekiah  covered  himself  withs.  Isa.  37.  I. 
2.  elders  of  the  priests  covered  with  s. /sa.  37. 2. 
ICAr.  21. 16.  David  and  elders  were  clothed  with  s. 
E.ith.  4. 1.  Mordecai  rent  his  clothes,  and  put  on  s. 
2.  for  none  might  enter  the  gate  clothed  with  *-. 
.fob  16. 15.  I  have  sewed  s.  upon  my  skin 
PsaZ.30.1  l.hast  put  off  my  s.  and  girded  with  glad. 
S.').  13.  when  they  were  sick,  my  clothing  was  s. 
69.  11.  I  made  s.  also  my  garment,  and  a  proverb 
Isa.  3.  24.  instead  of  a  stomacher,  a  girding  of  s. 
J.l  3.  in  streets  they  shall  gird  themselves  with  s. 
20.  2.  go,  and  loose  the  s.  from  otfthy  loins 
22. 12.'  in  thatday  did  Lord  call  to  girding  with  s. 
32.1 1  .strip  von,  and  make  you  bare,  and  gird  s.  on 
your  loins,  .Jar.  4.  P.  |  6.  26.  j  48.  37.  1  49.  3. 
50.  3.  I  make  s.  the  covering  of  the  heavens 
Z.rt7n.2.10.  they  have  girded  themselves  with  ».vir 
gins  hang  down  their  heads,  F.zek.  7. 18.  1  27. 31 . 
n'an.  9.  3.  to  seek  the  Lord  w'th  fasting  and  s. 
Joel  1   8.  lament  like  a  virgin  girded  with  ».  for 


SAC 

Joeli.  13.  come,  lie  all  night  in*,  ye  minister!  ofG 
Amos  8.  10.  and  1  will  bring  up  *.  u|)on  all  loini 
Jonah  3.  5.  the  people  of  Nineveh  put  on  s. 
6.  the  king  covereil  him  with  s.  and  sat  io  asbet 
8.  but  let  man  and  beast  be  covered  with  s. 
Rev.  6.  12.  the  sun  became  black  as  s.  of  hair 
11.  3.  they  sliall  propliesv  1260  days,  clothed  in  s 
SACKCLOTHES. 
JVeA.  9.  1.  Israel  were  assembled  with  s.  on  them 

SACKS. 
Gen.  42.  2.5.  to  fill  their  «.  with  corn, 44.  1. 
43.  12.  the  money  was  brought  again  in  your  s. 

22.  we  cannot  tell  who  put  our  money  in  our  s. 

23.  your  God  hath  given  you  treasure  in  yours. 
■fosh.'i.  4.  the  Gibeonilestuok  old  *.  on  their  asses 

SACRIFICE 
Is  an  offering  made  to  God  upon  his  altars  by  the 
hand  of  a  lawful  minister,  to  acknowledge  hi-f 
power,  to  own  entire  dependence  on  lain,  or  to 
conciliate  his  favour.    A  sacrifice  differs  from 
a  mere  oblation  in  this,  that  in  a  sacrifice  there 
must  be  a  real  change  of  destruction  of  the  thing 
offered :  whereas  an  oblation  is  but  a  simple 
offering  of  a  gift.     As  men  have  always  been 
under  an  obligation  of  acknowledging  thesa 
premc  dominion  of  God  over  them,  and  what 
ever  belongs  to  them;  and  as  therehave  always 
been  found  persons  that  have  conscientiously 
acijidlledthcmselces  of  this  duty ,iii s probable , 
that  therehave  been  always  sacrifices   in  the 
world. 
Adam  and  his  sons,  Noah  and  his  descendants, 
Abraham  and  his  posterity.  Job  and  Melchi 
zedek,  before  the  law,  have  offered  to  God  real 
sacrifices.     The   law  did    only  ascertain  the 
quality,  the  number,  and  other  circumstances  of 
sacrifices:   before  that,  all  was  arbitrary.  Thctj 
offered  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  the  fat  ofthe  milk 
of  animals,  the  fleeces  of  sherp,  or  the  blood  and 
the  flesh  of  the  victims :  Every  one  pursued 
his  own  humour,  his  acknowledgment,  his  zeal, 
or  his  devotion  :  But  among  the  Jews,  the  laic 
appointed  what  they  were  to  offer,  andinickot 
guanlitics.     Before  the  law  icas  given,  every 
one  was  the  priest  and  minister  of  his  own 
sacrifices ;  at  least  he  was  at  liberty  to  choose 
what  priest  he  pleased  to  offer  his  victims. 
This  honour  was  generally  conferredvpon  the 
most  ancient,  or  head  of  a  family,  on  princes, 
or  men  of  the  greatest  virtue  and  integrity 
But  after  Moses  this  was  wholly  confined  to  the 
family  of  Aaron. 
Of  these  sacrifices  some  were  eucharistical,  and 
ore  called  poace-oflerings,  by  which  the  sacri 
fleer  acknowledged  the  bounty  of  God,  and  his 
own  unworthiness,  and  rendered  praise  for  a 
favour  received, and  desired  the  divine  blessing 
Others  were  expiatory,  the  sin-oflerings,  for 
averting  of  God's  wrath.  These  offerin  ga  signi 
fled.  That  man  is  a  sinner,  and  therefore  obnox 
inus  to  the  just  indignation  and  cilrcme  dis 
pleasure  of  the  holy  and  righteous  God;  and 
that   God  was  to  be  propitiated,  and  that  he 
might  pardon  him:  That  God  would  not  forgive 
sin  without  Ihe  atonement  of  justice,  whicltre 
quired  the  death  of  the  offender ;  but  it  being 
tempered  with  mercy,  accepted  a  sacrifice  in  his 
stead.     There  was  a  double  guilt  contracted  by 
those  that  were  under  thcMo^n\ca]  dispensation,   , 
[1]  Typical,  from  the  breach  of  a  ceremonial 
constitution  which  hadnorclalion  to  morality, 
such  were  accidental  diseases, the  touching  of  a 
dead  body,  ire.  which  were  estenmrd  vicious  ac- 
cording to  the  law,  and  the  defiled  icereejchided 
from  sacred  and  civil  society:  but  as  thnsepol 
lutions  were  penal,  merely  by  the  positive  will 
of  God,  so   the  crei-cise  of  his  supreme  right 
being  tempered  with  wisdom  and  equity,  he  or- 
dained that  the  guilt  should  be  abolished  by  a 
sacrifice,  and  that  they  should  be  fully  restored 
to  their  former  privileges  :   Thus  Ihe  apostle 
says,  Heb. 9.  13,  That  the  blood  of  those  sacri 
flees  sanctifieth  to  the  purifying  ofthe  flesh:  that 
is,  communicated  a  legal  purity  to  the  offerers, 
and  consequently  aright  to  approach  theholy 
place.     The  reason  of  these  institutions  was, 
that  the  legal  impurity  miaht  represent  Ihe  true 
defilements  of  sin,  and  the  expiatory  sncriflces 
prrflariire  that  great  and  admirnhle  Oblation 
which  should  purge  away  all  sin.  [2]  They  had 
contracted  a  real  guilt  which  respects  the  con- 
science, from  the  breach  of  the  moral  law,  and 
which  suhjectrd  the  nffnider  to  death  temporal 
and  eternal.   This  could  not  bepiirged  away  by 
those sarriflcra:  Forhoir  is  it  possible,  thatthe 
bloodof  a  beast  shoiddcleanst  the  sokI  of  man, 
or  satisfy  the  justice  of  an  offended  God?  On 
the  contrary,  they  revived  Ihe  guilt  of  sin,  and 
reinforced  the   rigour  of  the   lair,    anil   were 
a  public  profession  of  the  misery  of.  men,  A§ 


SAC 

lite  moral  law  contained  a  declaration  of  our 
i;iiilt,  and  fJod'i  ri^lu  to puniah,  so  all  thcparts 
uf  the  ceremonial  iccre  cither  arguments  and 
con  cictiona  of  sin,  or  images  of  the  punishment 
due  for  them.  Bat  as  they  had  a  relation  to 
C'hri>t,  the  great  gospil  sacrifice,  who  was  their 
comiitement,  so  they,  signified  the  eipiation  of 
moral  guilt  by  his  sacrifice,  and  freed  the  sinner 
from  that  temporaldeath  to  which  he  was  liable 
as  a  representative  of  our  freedom  from  eternal 
death  by  the  blood  of  the  cross.  Hence  in  the 
JVew  Testament  Christ  is  called  a  Lumb,  in 
the  notion  of  a  Bacrilice,  The  Lamb  of  God 
wliicli  lakelli  away  the  sin  of  the  world,  John  1. 
29.  The  Lamb  .-(lum  from'thefoundalioii  of  the 
world,  Jteo.  13.  8.  He  was  represented  by  the 
redhcifer,  whose  a.ihcs  were  the  chief  ingredient 
tn  the  waters  of  purification,  llcb.  'J.  13,  14. 
For  if  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goals,  and  the 
ashes  of  a  heifer  sprinkling  the  unclean,  sane 
tirieth  to  die  purifying  of  the  tl';3h,  how  much 
more  shall  the  blood  of  C/irist  purge  the  con 
science  ?  Kspccialhj  the  aniiicersary  sacrifice, 
which  was  the  abridgement  and  recapitulation 
of  the  rest,  hath  an  eminent  respect  to  Christ, 
kch.'.*.  7,8. 

^s  to  the  beasts  sacrificed  by  the  lev/a,  and  their 
manner  of  sacrificing  them,  .See  the  dignifica- 
tioiiu/ OFFERING. 

Oen.  31.  54.  ihen  JacobofTcred  s.upon  tlie  mount 

Kxod.  5.  17.  let  ua  go  and  do  .s.  to  the  Lord,  8.  8. 
1-2.  '27.  say,  it  is  the  s.  of  the  Lord's  passover 
23.  IB.  not  offer  blood  ofi.  with  leavened,  34.  25 
34.  13.  and  one  call  llice,  and  thou  oat  of  hiss. 
25.  nor  shall  a.  of  passovcr  be  left  lo  morning 

icB.T.lS.then  he  shall  otrecwilhs.  of  thanksgiving 

13.  leavened  bread  with  s.of  thanksgiving,22.29 

ll>.  if  $.  be  a  vow,  it  shall  beeutenthesaineday 

17.8.  whoso  offereth  a  £.  and  bringeth  not  to  door 

27.  11.  any  beast  of  which  they  do  not  offer  a 

JVum.  15.  3.  or  make  a  s.  in  performing  a  vow,  8. 

28.6.il  is  for  a  sweet  savour,  a  s.  made  by  fire  unto 

the  Lord,  8,  13,  19,  24.  |  29.  0,  13,  36. 

Dtut.  18.  3.  the  priests'  due  from  Ihem  that  offer  s. 

Josh.  22.  2C.  let  us  now  build  an  altar,  not  for  s. 

Ju'ig.  11).  2.3.  for  to  offer  a  great  s.  to  Dagon 

1  .Sam.  1.  21.  went  up  to  oHer  the  yearly  *.  2.  19. 

2.  29.  wherefore  kick  ye  at  my  s.  and  offering? 

3.  14.  iniquity  of  Eli's  house  not  purged  with  s. 
9.12.for  there  is  as.  of  people  to-day  in  high  jiliice 

13.  because  he  doih  bless  the  s.  then  they  eat 
15.  22.  bfhold,  to  obey  is  better  than  s. 
IG.  3.  call  Jesse  to  the  s.-dod  I  will  shew  thee,  5. 

20.  t).  there  is  a  yearly  «.  for  all  the  family,  29. 

1  Kinas  12.  27.  if  this  people  do  «.  at  Jerusalem 
18.  29.  they  prophesied  till  time  of  the  evening  «. 

35.  at  the  time  of  evening  s.  Elijah  drew  near 
-K'(n^j5.17.nor  offer «.  to  oiher  gods,  but  the  Lord 
10.  19.  for  I  have  a  great .?.  to  do  to  Baal 
17.  3(5.  him  shall  ye  fear,  and  lo  him  shall  yedos. 

2  Chron.  2.  H.  save  only  to  burn  s.  before  him 
7.  5.  king  Solomon  offered  a  s.  of  22,000  oxen 

12.  chosen  this  place  to  myself  for  a  housse  of*. 
29.  t  IL  the  Lord  hath  ciMsen  you  to  offer  s. 

£zra9.  4.  I  sat  astonied  until  the  evening  s. 
5.  at  the  evening  s.  I  arose  up  from  iny  heaviness 

Psal.  40.  n.  s.  thou  didst  not  desire,  51.  l(i. 
."iO.  5.  that  have  made  a  covenant  with  mc  by  s. 
111!.  17.  I  will  offer  to  thee  the  ^.  of  thanksgiving 
118.  27.  bind  the  s.  with  cords  to  horns  of  altar 
111.2.  and  lifting  up  of  my  hands  as  evening  *. 

PruK.  15.  8.  s.  of  the  wicked  is  abomination 

21.  3.  to  do  justice  is  more  acceptable  than  s. 
F.ccl.  5.  1.  to  hear  than  lo  give  the  s.  of  fools 
ha.  19.  21.  the  Egy|itians  shall  do  s.  and  oblation 

34.t).  for  the  Lord  haili  a.s.  in  Bozrah  and  Iduniea 
.'57.  7.  oven  thither  wentest  thou  lo  offer  s. 
Jrr.  33.  II.  the  voice  of  Ihem  that  bring  s.  of  praise 

18.  nor  want  a  man  to  do*,  continually 

40.  10.  for  God  hiith  a  ».  in  the  north  country 
K:'A.".39. 17. gather  together  lo  my  ».even  a  great  s. 

19.  and  drink  blond  till  ye  he  drunken  of  my  s. 
44.  IL  they  shall  slay  the  s.  for  llio  pi^oplo 

4fi.  24.  where  ministers  boil  the  ».  of  the  people 
Dan.'H.  ll.daily».waBlakenaway,9.27.  |  II.  31. 

12.  a  host  wai  given  him  against  the  daily  s. 

13.  how  longsh:ill  b«  the  virion  ofllie  daily  s.t 
12.  II.  from  the  lime  dnily  ».  shall  bo  taken  away 

Unit^.  4.  Israel  shall  abide  many  dayi  wilhoul  a .«. 

fl.  f>.  I  deVireil  mercy,  and  not ».  jlfuf.  9. 13.  |  12.  7. 
Jimnii  4.  5.  offer  a  a.  of  Ihankxgiving  with  leaven 
Jonah  1.  It),  then  Ihn  m'ln  olFi'red  u .».  lo  the  Lord 
7.yh.  I.  7.  for  thi>  Lord  hath  propnroil  a  ».  8. 
Mnl.  1.  8.  if  ye  offer  the  blind  for  n.i*  it  not  evil? 
Mark  9.  49.  every  a.  shall  b«  suited  with  salt 
J.uke  2.  24.  and  to  offer  a  *.  aceordinglo  the  law 
Jlets  7.41.  in  those  days  Ibev  offered  ».  to  the  iilol 

14.  13.  and  would  have  done  *.  with  the  people 
18.  that  they  had  not  done  ir.  unto  them 
y<om.8.  t3.  by  a  *.fur»in<-'indemned  sin  in  the  flesh 
M»  I 


SAC 

Rom.  12.  1.  that  ye  present  your  bodies  a  Hvhig* 
1  Cor.  8.  4.  are  otlered  in  s.  to  idols,  10.  19,  28. 
Kph.  5.  2.  a  ».  to  God  for  a  sweet  smelling  savour 
I'hil.  2.  17.  if  I  be  offered  on  the  s.  of  your  faith 
4.  18.  a  s.  acceptable,  well-pleasing  lo  God 
Heb.  7.  27.  needeih  nut  daily  as  those  lo  offer  up  s. 
0.  2S.  to  jiul  away  sin  by  the  $.  of  himself 
lO.a.he  sailh,  a.  and  offering  thou  wouldest  not,  8 
12.  atler  he  had  offered  one  *.  ior  sins,  for  ever 
26.  there  remalneth  no  more  a.  for  sins 

11.  4.  Abel  offered  to  God  a  more  excellent  s. 
13.  15.  by  liiin  let  us  offer  the  a.  of  piaise 

Hee  Burnt,  Peack-Ofperino. 

S.\CKIF1CE,  yerb. 

Ezod.  3. 18.  let  us  go  and  a.  to  the  Lord  our  God 

5.  3,  8.  I  H.  27. )  10.  25.  ||  8.  25.  go  ye,  *! 

8.  26.  shall  we  s.  abomination  of  the  Egyptians? 

29.  in  not  letting  the  people  go  to*,  to  the  Lord 

13.  15. 1  *.  to  Lord  all  that  openeth  the  matrix 

20.  24.  thou  shall  s.  thereon  thy  burnt-offerings 

Z)e«t.l5. 21.  any  blemish,  thou  shall  nots.  it,  17.  1. 

16.  2.  thou  shall  therefore  a.  the  passover,  6. 
5.  not  .9.  the  passover  within  any  of  thy  gates 

ISam.  1.  3.  Elkanah  went  up  yearly  to  a.  to  Lord 
15.  15.  the  people  spared  the  best  to  s.  lo  the  Lord 

21.  should  have  been  destroyed  lo  a.  lo  the  Lord 

10.  2.  and  say,  I  am  come  to  s.  lo  the  Lord,  5. 

1  Kings 'i.  4.  Solomon  went  to  Gibeon  lo  s.  there 

12.  t  32.  Jeroboam  offured  to  s.  to  calves  he  made 

2  Kings  14.  4.  as  yol  the  people  did  «.  and  burnt  in- 

cense on  the  high  places,  2  Chron.  33.  17. 

17.  35.  nor  shall  a.  to  other  gods,  nor  serve  them 
2  Chron.  11. 10.  came  lo  Jerusalem  to  a.  to  the  Ld 
F.ira  4.  2.  we  seek  your  God,  and  do  j).  lo  him 
jWA.4.2.  will  they  a.?  will  they  make  end  in  a  day? 
Paal.  54.  6.  I  will  freely  *.  lo  thee,  I  will  praise 

107.  22.  let  them  *.  sacrifices  of  thanksgiving 
Kzek.  39.  17.  gather  to  my  a.  thai  I  do  a.  for  you 
Hos.  4.  13.  ihey  s.  on  the  tops  of  the  mountains 
14.  and  they  s.  with  harlots,  therefore  the  people 

8.  13.  they  a.  but  the  Lord  accepteth  them  not 

12.  11.  they  are  vanity,  they  a.  bullocks  in  Gilgal 

13.  2.  they  say,  let  the  men  that  *.  kiss  the  calves 
.Tonah  2.  9.  I  will  s.  to  thee  with  thanksgiving 
Hab.  1.  10.  therefore  they  a.  unto  their  net 
Zcch.  14.21.  Ihoy  that  s.  shall  seethe  therein 
Mnl.  I.t8.  if  yeofl'er  the  blind  to  5.  is  it  not  evil  ? 
1  Cor.  10.  20.  things  Gentiles  .?.  they  s.  to  devils 

SACRIFICED. 
Ezod.  32.8.  llrey  made  them  a  calfand  s.  thereunto 
Deut.Zi.  17.  they  s.  unto  devils,  not  lo  God 
Josh.  8.  31.  they  .^.^hereon  peace-offerings 
.Judg.  2.  5.  and  they  «.  there  unto  the  Lord 

1  Sam.  2.  15.  the  servant  said  lo  the  man  that  a 
0.  15.  and  a.  sacrifices  the  same  day  lo  the  Lord 

11.  15.  all  the  people  went  to  Gilgal  and  a. 

2  .Sam.  6.  13.  David  s.  oxen  and  fallings 
IKin/rs  3. 2. onFy  the  people.',  in  the  high  places, 3. 

2  Kings  12.  3.  [  15.4,35.  |  16.4.  2  C/(r.28.4 
11.  8.  for  his  strange  wive.^,  and  s.  lo  their  gods 
2  Kinga  17.  32.  madeof  the  lowest  priests  which*. 
23.  120.  he  s.  all  the  priests  of  the  high  places 

1  CAr(;n.21.28.  Lord  answered  him,  then  he  s.  there 

2  Chron.  5.  C.  all  that  assembled  before  ark  s.  sliee|) 
28.23.  Ahazs.lo  the  godsofDamasc.  which  smote 
33.  10.  Manasseh  .s.  on  the  altar  of  iheLord 

22.  for  Anion  *.  to  all  the  carved  images 
34.4.  and  strewed  it  on  graves  of  them  that  had  s. 

Psal.  1015.  37.  yea,  they  s.  their  sons  unto  devils 

38.  daughters,  they  a.  lo  the  idols  of  Canaan 
Eiek.  16.  20.  these  thou  a.  to  them  to  be  devoured 

39.  19.  of  my  sacrifice  which  I  have  .«.  for  you 
Hoa.  11.2.  they  *.  lo  Baalim,  and  burnt  incense 
.Jonah  1.  1 16.  then  the  men  *.  a  sacrifice  to  Lord 
Mark  14.  t  12.  when  they  a.  the  passover 
1  Cor.  5.  7.  for  even  Christ  our  Passover  is  *.  for  us 
Rev.  2.  14.  to  eat  thiiics  *.  to  idols,  20. 

SACRIFICEDST. 
Deut.  10.  4.  nor  shall  flesh  Ihoii .«.  remain  all  night 

SACRIFICES. 
nen.  40.  1.  Israel  at  Beer-slieba  offered  s.toGod 
Kind.  10. 25.  Moses  said,  thou  must  give  us  also  a. 

18.12.Jelhro,Moses"  father-in-law,look.».  for  God 
/,«»».  10.  13.  of  the  t.  of  the  Lord  made  by  fire 

17.  5.  the  s.  which  Ihoy  offer  in  the  open  field 

7.  ihev  shall  no  moro  offer  their  a.  lo  devils 

jV«)n.25.2.they  called  people  to  the*,  of  their  gods 

2'<.  2.  my  *.  shall  ye  observe  to  offer  in  season 
D'ut.  12.  6.  ihitlirr  ye  shall  bring  voiir  *.  and  tithes 

32.  38.  which  did  eat  the  fnt  of  their  a. 

33.19.  there  llipy  thall  offer  the  .«.  ofrighteonsness 
./«»/».  13.  14.  *.  of  the  I^ord  are  their  inherilanco 

22.  28.  the  altar  not  for  a.  but  it  is  a  witness,  29. 
1  .Sam.O.  1,5.  nnd  sacrlfii-ed  .«. same  day  lo  the  Lord 

1.5.  22.  hath  Lord  as  great  delight  in  .».  nsobcying 

1  Citron.  29.  21.  they  sacrificed  a.  in  abundance 

2  Chron.T.  1.  fire  came  down  and  consumed  tho  *. 
20.  31.  come  near  and  bring  a.  thev  brought  in  «. 

Ezra  6.  3.  lot  the  place  where  he  off -red  a.  be  laid 
10.  thai  thuy  may  offer  a  to  God  ofboavon 


SAD 

JVek.  13.  43.  also  that  day  they  offered  great  *. 

Psal.  4.  5.  offer  s.  of  righteousness,  put  your  truft 
27.  0.  therefore  will  1  offer  s.  of  joy,  I  will  sing 
50  8.  1  will  not  reprove  thee  for  iJiy  a.  offering! 
51. 17.  the*,  of  God  are  a  broken  spirit,  a  broken 
19.  then  shall  be  pleased  with  *.  of  righteousaess 

106.  28.  joined  toBaal-peor,  and  eat  *.  of  dead 

107.  22.  lei  them  sacrifice  the  *.  of  thanksgiving 
Prov.  17.  1.  than  a  house  full  of*,  with  strife 
Isa.  1.  11.  lo  what  purpose  is  the  multitude  of*.? 

29.  1.  add  ye  year  to  year,  let  them  kill  *. 
43.  23.  nor  hast  thou  honoured  me  with  thy  *. 
24.  nor  hast  thou  filled  me  with  the  fat  of  ihy  a 
50.  7.  their  *.  shall  be  accepted  on  mine  altar 
.Jer.  6.  20.  nor  are  your  *.  sweet  unto  me 

7.  21.  put  your  burnt-offerings  lo  your  *.  and  eat 

22.  nor  commanded  them  concerning  «. 

17.  26.  bringing  a.  of  praise  to  house  of  the  Lord 
Ezek.''20.  28.  they  saw  every  high  hill  and  offered  *. 
//H*.4.19.they  shall  he  ashamed, because  of  their ». 

9.  4.  their  *.  shall  be  as  the  bread  of  mourners 

13.  t  2.  Ihey  say,  let  *.  of  men  kiss  the  calves 
JJnios  4.  4.  and  bring  your  *.  every  morning 

5.  25.  have  ye  offered  unto  me  ».  and  offerings 
.Mark  12.  33.  lo  love  the  Lord  is  more  than  all  s 
/yu/iel3.1. whose  blood  Pilate  mingled  with  their  s, 
.Ida  7.  42.  have  ye  offered  *.  for  forty  years  ? 
I  Cor.  10.  18.  that  eat  the*,  partakers  of  the  altar 
Heb.  5.  I.  that  he  may  offer  gifts  and  s.  for  sins 

8.  3.  every  high-priest  is  ordained  to  offer  *. 

9.  9.  in  which  were  offered  both  gifts  and  .*. 

23.  but  the  heavenly  things  with  belter  *. 
10.1.  can  never  with  those*,  make  coiners  perfect 

3.  but  in  those  *.  there  is  a  remembrance  mado 
6.  in  *.  for  em  thou  hast  had  no  pleasure 
11. offering  oftentimes  the  same*,  thai  never  can 
13.  10.  for  with  such  *.  God  is  well  pleased 
1  Pet.  2.  5.  a  holy  priesthood,  lo  offer  up  spiritual*. 
Sec  BiR.sT. 
SACRIFICETH. 
Exod.^.'Un.hc  that  *.to  any  god,  save  to  Lord  only 
Eccl.  9.  2.  lo  him  that  *.  and  to  him  thai  a.  not 
/*«.65.3.people  that  *.in  gardens, and  hum  incense 
60.  3.  he  that*,  a  lamb  as  if  he  culoffa  dog's  neck 
JI/flM.14.which  hath  a  male,  and  *.  a  corrupt  thing 

SACRIFICING. 
lA'i'nn'*  8.5. Israel  were  with  him  s. sheep  and  o.vcn 

12.  32.  *.  to  the  calves  that  he  had  made 

Rom.  15.  t  16.  that  the  *.  up  of  Gentiles  might  be 

SACRILEGE. 
ftom.2.22.that  ablwrrcet  idols,dost  thou  commit ».? 

SAD. 
^f  n.40.6.Joseph  looked  <m  them,  bch.they  were *. 
1  Sam.  1.  18.  her  countenance  was  no  more  *. 

1  Kings  21.  5.  Jezebel  said,  why  is  thy  spirit  so  g.  ? 
JVrh.  2.1.  I  had  not  been  before  *.  in  his  presence 

2.  the  king  said,  why  is  thy  countenance  *.  ? 

3.  I  said,  why  should  not  my  countenance  be*.? 
Ezrk.  13.  22.  because  with  lies  ye  have  made  the 

heart  of  righteous  *.  whom  I  have  not  made  * 
./^/a^6.10.  be  not  as  hypocrites,  of  a  .«.  countenance 
J/art  I0.22.he  was*. at  that  s;iying,and  went  away 
/^u/i.c24.17.communications  as  ye  walk,  and  are*. 

SADDER. 
Dan.  1. 1  10.  why  shoiiM  he  see  your  faces  *.  ? 

SADDLE. 
I^ev.  15. 9.  what  *.  he  rideth  upon  shall  be  unclean 

SADDLE. 

2  .Sam.  10.  26.  thy  servant  said,  I  will  s.  me  an  ass 

1  Kings  13.  13.  old  prophet  said,  *.  ine  the  ass,  27. 

SADDLED. 
Gen.  22.  3.  Abraham  rosi;  up  early  and  *.  his  asa 
jVum.  22.21.  Balaam  *.  his  ass,  went  with  princes 
Jndg.  19.  10.  were  with  the  L^vite  two  nssea  *. 
2.sVim.l0.1  .Zilia  met  David  with  couple  of  asses  s. 
17.  23.  Aliithopliel  *.  his  ass,  and  gal  him  home 
XKinga'i.  40.  Shimei*;and  went  aflerhis  servants 

13.  13.  so  they  *.  him  the  ass,  and  he  rode,  23,27. 

2  Kings  4.  24.  the  woman  of  Shunam  *.  an  ass 

SADDUCEES. 

The  disciplca  of  Sadoc.  They  cnnstitutcdone  of 
the  four  principal  .S«i*  of  the  .lews.  Wknt 
chirfty  distiniruishrd  them  from  the  other  Jews 
ira.<,  the  opinion  they  maintained concrrningtht 
rxistrnre  of  angels,  and  the  immortality  of  Uie 
soul.  They  did  not  deny  but  that  we  had  rea- 
sonable aouls ;  but  they  maintained  ftis  soul 
i/'n.t  mfirlal ;  and  by  a  nrre.^sary  cnn.^equrnci'- 
th'ti  denied  the  rewards  and  punishment  a  of 
another  life.  They  prrtendid  also,  that  whntis 
anidof  the  exiatenreof  angels,  aiid of  a  future 
rr.iiirrrrtion,  are  nothing  hut  i7/u,«iV>n*.  Epi- 
phaiiiiis,  and  after  him  .\us'in,  hare  advanced 
that  the  SadduceM  denied  the  Holy  O host, 
/tut  neither  the  Ernngrlists  nnr  Josepnus  ac- 
cuse them  of  any  er,ror  like  thia. 

Theyarelikrwiae  aeeu.<!rdofrejeetingaV  rtirbooks 
of  scripture,  except  those  of  Moses  ;  and  to  sup- 
port this  opinion  it  i*  ohaereed,  that  our  Sariour 
makesllae  of  no  scripture   against  them,  but 


SAI 

passages  taken  out  of  the  Pentateuch.    But  it 
is  said,  to  vindicate  them  from  this  reproach, 
that  they  did  not  appear  in  Israel  till  after  the 
number  of  the  holy  books  were  fixed,  and  tliat 
if  they  had  been  to  choose  out  of  the  canonical 
Scriptnrc.i,  the  Pentateuch  was  less  favourable 
to  them  than  any  other  book,  since  it  so  often 
makes  mention  of  angels.     Besides,  the  Sad 
tlucees  were  present  in  the  temple,  and  at  other 
religious  assemblies,  where  the  books  of  the 
prophets   were  read  indifferently  as  well  as 
thoseof  Moses.   They  were  in  the  chiif  employs 
of  the  nation,  many  of  them  were  even  priests. 
IVould  the  Jews  have  suffircd  in  these  employ- 
ments persons  that  rejected  the  greatest  part 
of  their  Scriptures  ? 
Hs  the  Saddi\cees  ackjiowledged  neither  punish- 
ments nor  recumpences  !?i  another  life,  so  they 
were  inexorable  in  their  chastening  transgres- 
sors.  They  observed  the  law  themselves,  and 
caused  it  to  be  obscrnedbyothcrs  with  the  utmost 
rigour.  They  admitted  of  none  of  the  traditions, 
explications,  or  mortifications  of  the  Pliarisces; 
they  kept  only  to  thetexX  of  the  law;  and  main 
tained,  that  only  what  was  written  was  to  be 
observed. 
As  to  Sadoc  the  founder  of  their  Sect,  it  is  sgid, 
that  he  succeeded  one  Antigoiius  Soccliceiis,  as 
a  disciple  succeeds  his  master, in  the  tradition 
of  his  doctrine ;  which  Aiitigunus  had  in  the 
same  manner  succeeded  Simon    the  Just,  the 
high  priest  of  the  Jews.   This  Simon  the  Just 
died  in  the  year  of  the  world  3711,  before  the 
vulgar  ^ra  293.  So  that  Sadoc  7nay  have  lived 
about  the  year  of  the  world  3740. 
Mat.  3.  7.  when  he  saw  the  s.  come  lo  his  baptism 
16. 1.  the  s.  came  lecnptiDg  Jesus,  and  desired  him 
6.  Jesus  said,  beware  of  the  leaven  of  the  s.  11. 
12.  but  beware  of  tlie  doctrine  of  the  s. 
22.23.  the  same  day  came  to  him  the  s.  which  say 
34.  had  heard  thut  he  iiad  put  the  s.  to  silence 
w9cts  4.  1.  the  priests  and  the  s.  came  upon  them 
5.  17.  the  .9.  laid  their  hands  on  the  apostles 

23.  6.  Paul  porcciveil  that  the  one  part  were  s. 
T.arose  a  dissension  between  the  Pharisees  and.;. 
8.  for  the  s.  say,  that  there  is  no  resurrection 

SADLY. 
Gen.  40. 7.  he  asked,  sav.whv  look  ye  so  s.  to-day? 

SADNESS. 

Eccl.7.3.hy  s.  ofcounien:ince  heart  is  made  better 

SAFE. 

1  Sam. 12. 11.  Lord  delivered  you, and  ye  dwelled  s. 

2  Sam.  18.  29.  is  the  young  man  Absalom  s.  ?  32. 
'oft  2).  0.  their  houses  are  .«.  from  fear,  nor  is  rod 

Psal.  119.  117.  hold  thou  me  up,  and  I  shall  bes. 
Prov.  18.  10.  the  righteous  run  into  it,  and  are  s. 

29.  25.  whoso  trusteth  in  the  Lord  shall  be  s.     ^ 
Jsa.  5.  29.  they  shall  carry  the  prey  away  s. 
p.zek.  34.  27.  and  tliey  shall  be  s.  in  tlieir  land 
JLuke  15.  27.  because  he  had  received  him.?. 
jicts  23.  24.  that  they  may  bring  him  s.  to  Felix 

27.  44.  and  so  they  escaped  all  s.  to  land 
Phil.  3.  1.  to  write  the  same  things,  for  you  it  is  s. 

SAFEGUARD. 
1  Sam.  22.  23.  but  with  me  Ihou  shall  be  in  s. 

SAFELY. 
Psnl.  78.  53.  he  led  the:n  on  s.  they  feared  not 
Prop.  1.  33.  whoso  liearkenetli  to  me  shall  dwell  s 

3.  23.  then  shall  thou  walk  in  thy  way  s. 

31.  11.  heait  of  her  husband  doth  s.  trust  in  her 
Jsa.  41.3.  he  pursued  them,  and  passed  s. 
Jfos.  2.  13.  I  will  make  thorn  to  lie  down  5. 
ZccA.  14.  11.  Jerusalem  shlll  be  s.  inhribited 
Mark  14.  44.  that  is  he,  take  and  lead  him  away  « 
Jlcts  16.  23.  charging  the  jailer  to  keep  thorn  s. 
See  DwEt.L. 
SAFETY. 
.7o43.26. 1  was  not  iu  s.nor  hail  I  rest,  trouble  came 

5.4.  his  children  are  far  from  s.  nnd  arc  crushed 
11.  that  those  which  mourn  may  be  e.xalted  to  s. 

11.  18.  and  thou  shall  take  thy  rest  In  s. 

24.  23.  thdush  it  be  given  him  to  be  in  s. 
PsaM2. 5. 1  willsel  him  ins.  from  him  that  pufFeth 

22.t9.kcepestmeins.wlien  on  my  mother's  breasts 
33.  17.  a  horse  is  a  Vi-iin  thing  for  s. 
Prov.  II.  14.  in  midtitudo  of  counsellors  is  s.24.6. 
21.  31.  horse  is  for  battle,  but  s.  is  of  the  Lord 
Isa.  14.  30.  ihe  noedy  shall  lie  down  in  s. 
6cts  5.  23.  the  prison  found  we  shut  with  all  s. 
Thest.  5.3.  lior  when  they  ?hall  say,  peace  and  a. 
See  OwEi.L. 
SAFFRO.V. 
Ca)it.4.I4.  spikenard  and  .f.calamusand  cinnamon 

SAID. 
Oen.  2.  2.3.  Adam  s.  this  is  hone  of  my  bone 
3.  1.  the  serpent  s.  hath  Rod  s.  ye  shall  not  eati 
9.  28.  Noah  s.  blessed  be  the  Lord  Godof  Shem 
21.  12.  in  all  that  Sarah  hath  s.  hearken  to  her 
24.  65.  Ihe  servant  had  s.  ii  is  my  master 
41.  54.  Uie  dearth  began  to  come,  as  Joseph  ». 
503 


SAI 

Exod.  5.  22.  Moses  returned  to  the  Lord  nnd  *. 

12.  31.  rise  up,  go,  serve  the  Lord  as  ye  have  s. 
32.  also  take  your  Hocks  and  herds,  as  ye  have  s. 

17.  10.  so  Joshua  did  as  Moses  had  s.  to  him 
Lev.  10.  5.  they  carried  them  out,  as  Moses  bads. 
.A/"M;n.ll.21.thouhast5. 1  will  give  them  llesli  toeat 

14.31.  Utile  one6,ye  ^.should  be  a  prey,  y;f«M.39. 

23.  30.  Ualak  did  as  Balaam  had  s.  and  offered 

36.  5.  the  tribe  of  the  sons  of  Joseph  hath  5.  well 
Deut.  1.  21.  as  the  God  of  thy  fathers  hath  s. 
.fudg.l.  20.  they  gave  Hebron  lo  Caleb  as  Moses  *. 

6.  36.  if  thou  wilt  save  Israel,  as  thou  hast  *.  37 

1  Sa7a.  10.15.  tell  me,  I  pray  thco,  what  Samuel  .s- 

11.  12.  who  is  he  that  s.  shall  S;iul  reignover  us! 

12.  I.  I  have  hearkened  lo  you  in  all  ye  s.  to  me 
27.  1.  David  s.  1  shall  now  perish  by  hand  of  Saul 

2  Sam.  7.  25.  and  now,  O  Lord,  do  as  thou  hasl«. 

13.  35.  behold,  as  thy  servant  «.  so  it  is 

23.  1.  David,  son  of  Jesse,  «.  the  anointed  of  God 
of  Jacob,  and  the  sweet  psalmist  of  Israel  s. 

1  Kings  2.  3S.  as  my  lord  king  hath  s.  so  will  I  do 
8.  29.  thy  eyes  open  toward  place  of  which  thou 
hasts.  my  name  shall  be  there,  2  Chron.  6.20. 
12.26.  Jeroboam  s.  now  shall  the  kingdom  return 
17.  13.  Elijah  5.  to  her,  go,  do  as  thou  liast  s. 

22.  20.  one  s.  on  this  manner,  another  s.  on  that 
2h'ings7. 17.  and  he  died,  as  the  man  of  God  liads. 
1  Chron.  17.  23.  therefore.  Lord,  do  as  thou  basts. 
Ezra  10.  12.  as  thou  hast  s.  so  must  wc  do 
JVeh.  5.  2.  there  were  that  s.  we  are  many, -3. 
Esth.  5.  5.  that  he  may  du  as  Esther  hath  s. 

8.  I  will  do  to-morrow  as  the  king  hath  s. 

.fob  11.  4.  for  thou  hast  s.  my  doctrine  is  pure 
31.  31.  if  the  men  of  my  tabernacle  «.  not 
3d.  11.  when  I  s.  hitherto  shall  thou  come 

Psal.  12.4.  who  s.  with  our  tongue  will  we  prevail 

14.  1.  fool  s.  in  his  heart,  there  is  no  God,  53.  1. 

27.  8.  my  heart  s.  to  thee,  thy  face  will  I  seek 
Prov.  7.  13.  and  with  an  impudent  face,  5.  to  him 
Isa.  14. 13.  thou  hast  s.  I  will  ascend  into  heaven 

28. 15.  yes.  we  have  made  a  covenant  with  death 
30.  16.  ye  s.  no,  for  we  will  flee  upon  horses 
47.  10.  lor  thou  hast  s.  none  seeth  mo 
■Icr.  2.  8.  the  priests  s.  not,  where  is  the  Lord  ■? 

23.  25.  I  have  heard  what  the  prophets  s. 

28.  6.  even  the  prophet  Jeremiah  s.  amen 
29. 15.  because  ye  s.  Lord  hath  raised  up  prophets 
38.  25.  declare  unto  us  what  thou  hast  s.  lo  the 

kinij,  also  what  the  king  s.  unto  thee 
/!,a7n.4.20.  ofwhom  we  s.und.  his  shadow  shall  live 
£;rci-.9. 8.  andl  s.  ah,  LoidGod,  wilt  thou  destroy 
12.  9.  hath  not  the  rebellious  house  s.  lo  thee 
26.  2.  Tyrus  hath  s.  against  Jerusalem,  36.  2. 
27. 3.  O  Tyrus,  thou  hast  s.  I  am  of  perfect  beauty 

28.  2.  because  thou  hast  s.  I  am  a  god,  I  sit 

29.  3.  the  great  dragon  who  hath  s.  my  river  is 
mine  own,  and  I  have  made  it  for  myself 

Dan.  3. 28.  Nebuch.s.  blessed  be  God  ofShadrach 
8.  13.  and  another  saints,  to  that  saint  who  spake 
■  hnah  4.  8.  Jonah  s.  it  is  better  for  me  lo  die 
.Mic.  7.  10.  her  who  s.  to  me,  where  is  the  Lord  7 
Zrph.  2.  15.  the  ciiy  that  s.  in  her  heart,  I  am 
J\lal.  3.  14.  ye  have  s.  it  is  vain  to  serve  God 
.l/uM7.5.beliold,a  voice  which  s.ihis  is  my  beloved 
Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased,  J^uke  3.  22. 

26.  35.  likewise  aI.>os.  all  the  disciples 
64.  Jesus  saith  unto  him,  thou  basts. 

27.  03.  sir,  we  remember  that  th.it  deceiver  s. 
Mark'i.M.  as  he  passed  by, he  s.  to  Levi,  follow  me 
Luke  1.  1.3.  the  angel  s.  to  him,  fear  not,  30. 

20.  39.  the  scribes  s.  Master,  thou  hast  well  s. 

24.  23.  had  seen  angels,  who  s.  that  he  was  alive 

24.  and  found  it  even  so  as  the  women  had  s. 
.John  1.  23.  make  straight  the  way,  as  s.  Esaios 

5.  18.  but  s.  also,  that  God  was  his  Father 
7.  38.  as  the  scripture  hath  s.  out  of  his  belly  flo 
12.41. these  things  s.Esaias,whcn  he  saw  his  glory 
.50.  even  as  the  Father  s.  unto  me,  so  I  speak 

Jicls  2.  38.  then  Peter  s.  repent,  acid  be  baptized 
4.23.  reported  all  the  chief  priests  had  s.  lothem 
7.  37.  this  is  that  Moses  who  s.  unto  Israel 
17.  28.  as  certain  of  your  own  poets  have  s. 

Rom.  7.  7.  except  law  had  s.  thou  shall  not  covet 

G(\l.  1.  9.  as  Wc;  s.  before,  so  say  I  now  again 

Heb.  7.  21.  by  him  that  .<r.  to  him,  the  Lord  sware 
10.  30.  we  know  him  that  halh  s.  vengeance 

Rev.  5.  14.  and  the  four  beasts  s.  amen 
-inswered  and  S.\ID. 

F.zod.  24.  3.  and  all  the  people  answered  and  s. 

l.S'am.10.12  one oflhe same  pl.ice  avsweredands. 

Job  2.  4.  Satan  answered  and  s.  skin  for  skin 
40.  I.  moreover,  the  Lord  answered  3ob  and  s. 

Mat. '20.  l^.hoanswered  onqofthem  ands.  friend 

/,u4t9.49.JohnansK3crcrfaHi/s. Master,  we  saw  one 

See  Answered. 

Ood  SAID. 

Gen.  3.  1.  yen,  hath  God  s.  ye  shall  not  eat  1  3. 
17.  23.  circumcised  the  sfime  day,  as  Ood  had  s. 

31.  16.  whatsoever  God  hath  3.  unto  thee,  do 
2  Chr.  33. 7.  cet  an  idol  io  the  house  of  which  G.  *. 


SAI 

Acts  7.  7.  and  the  nation  will  1  judge,  j.  Oed 
'ZCor.  6. 10.  temple  of  the  living  God,  as  O.  hath  s. 

He  SAID. 
Gen.  19.  17.  he  s.  escape  for  thy  life,  look  not 
20.  5.  s.  he  not  unto  me,  she  is  my  sister  ? 

31.  8.  if  Ac  s.  thus,  speckled  shall  be  thy  wages 
12.  he  s.  lift  up  thine  eyes  and  see  tlic  rams 

32.  26.  Ac  s.  let  me  go,  for  the  day  breaketh 
27.  Ac  s.  what  is  thy  name  'i  and  Ae  s.  Jacob 

41.  51.  God,  s.  Ac,  hath  made  me  forget  my  toil 
Exod.  18.  24.  so  Moses  did  all  that  Jetliro  had  s. 
J)eut.  II.  2.5.  no  man  shall  he  able  to  stand  hefor* 
you,a8Aehaths.  18.2.  (29.  l.i.  Josh.  13.  14,33 
.To.%h.  14  10.  the  Lord  hath  keptme  alive,  as  Ae«. 
./Mrf»-.H,3.their  ang.  was  abated,  when  Ae  had  j,-.  that 
1  Sam.  3.  17.  if  thou  hide  any  thing  Ae  s.  to  thee 

1  Kings  2.  4.  not  fail  thee,  s.  Ac,  a  man  on  throne 
31.  do  as  Ac  hath  s.  fall  upon  him,  and  bury  him 

2  Kings  17.23.  as  Ae  s.  by  all  his  servants,  prophets 

1  Chron.  22.  II.  build  the  house,  as  Ac  s.  of  thee 

2  Chr.  24.  22.  Ae  s.  Lord,  look  oil  it,  and  recpiire  it 
Job  23.  28.  to  man  he  s.  behold,  tear  oflhe  Lord 
Psal.  10.  6.  Ac  hath  s.  in  his  heart,  11.  13. 

106.  23.  Ac  s.  that  he  would  destroy  them 
[sa.  28.  12.  to  whomAe  s.  this  is  rest  wherewith 

40.  6.  the  voice  said,  cry,  Ae  s.  what  shall  I  cry? 

63.  8.  for  Ac  s.  surely  they  are  my  people 
./er.  40.  3.  now  the  Lord  hath  done  as  Ac  hath  s. 
Ezek.  9.  5.  to  the  others  Ae  s.  in  mine  hearing 

20.  9.  because  Ac  hath  s.  the  river  is  mine 
■Jonah  3.  10.  God  repented  oflhe  evil  Ae  had  s. 
Mat.  27.  43.  for  Ac  s.  I  am  the  Son  of  God 

28.  6.  he  is  not  here,  for  he  is  risen,  as  Ae  s. 
Mark\4.  16.  came  and  found  as  Ae  s. /,«Ae  22.13. 

16.  7.  there  shall  ye  see  him,  as  Ae  s.  unto  you 
Luke  9.  33.  Peter  said,  not  knowing  what  Ae  s. 

13.17.  when  Ac  s. these,  his  advers.  were  ashamed 
.Tohn  2. 22.  the  disciples  remembered  that  Acs.  this 

6.  6.  this  Ac  s.  to  prove  him,  for  he  knew 

9.  17.  what  sayest  thou  ?  Ae  s.  he  is  a  projjhet 

12.  6.  this  Ae  s.  not  that  he  cared  for  the  poor 

33.  this  Acs.  signifying  what  death  he  should  die 

18.  6.  as  soon  asAe.  s.  lo  them,  I  am  he,  they  fell 

19.  .SO.  Ae  s.  it  is  finished,  and  bowed  his  head 

20.  20.  when  Ae  had  so  s.  he  shewed  his  hands 
22.  when  Ac  had  s.  this,  he  breathed  on  them 

Acts  7.  60.  when  Ae  had  ,?.  this,  he  fell  asleep 

9.  5.  Ae  s.  who  art  thou.  Lord  7  I  am  Jesus 

20.  35.  how  hes.  it  is  more  blessed  logive  than  lo 
23.  7.  when  Ac  had  so  s.  there  arose  a  dissension 

2  Cor.  12.  9.  Ac  s.  my  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee 
f/rb.  1.  5.  to  which  oflhe  angels  s.  Ac,  13. 

10.  9.  then  s.  he,  lo,  I  come  to  do  thy  will,  O  God 

13.  5.  for  Ac  hath  s.  I  will  never  leave  thee 
■  lam.  2.  11.  Ae  that  s.  do  not  commit  adultery 
Rev.  22.  6.  Ae  s.  these  thinira  are  faithful  and  true 

/  SAID. 
Gen.  26.  9.  because  Is.  lest  Idle  for  her 
Exod.3.l7.  /have  s.I  will  bring  you  up  out  of  Egypt 

23.  13.  in  all  things  thnl  /  have  s.  be  circumspect 
Deut.  32. 26.  /s.  I  would  scatter  them  into  corners 
Josh.  1.  3.  that  have  I  given,  as  Is.  to  Moses 
.Judg.  6.  10.  /  s.  unto  you,  I  am  the  Lord  your  God 
IS(zm.2.30.  Is.  indeed,  that  thy  house  should  walk 

9.  23.  bring  the  portion,  of  which  Is.  set  it  by 
2  Sam.  19.  29.  Is.  thou  and  Zllia  divide  the  land 
2  A'l «^rs 23. 27.  house  of  which  Is.  my  name  shal 
./oh  9.  22.  this  is  one  thing,  therefore  Is.  it 

29.  18.  then  Is.  I  shall  die  in  my  nest,  multiply 

32.  7.  Is.  days  should  speak,  and  years  teach 
Ps.  30.  6.  in  prosperity  Is.  I  shall  never  be  moved 

39.  1.  Is.  I  will  lake  heed  to  my  wavs,  not  to  sin 

40.  7.  then  s.  /,  lo,  I  come,  Ilr'b.  10'7. 

41.  4.  Is.  Lord,  be  merciful  to  me,  heal  my  soi4 
82.  6.  A  have  s.  ye  are  gods,  and  are  children 
94.  IS.  when  /  s.  foot  slippeth,  mercy  held  me  up 
102.  24.  Is.  O  my  God,  take  me  not  away 
H2.  5.  /  s.  thou  art  my  refuge  and  portion 

Kfc/.  2. 1.  /s.inmy  heart,  so  to  now,  15.  ||  3. 17,18. 

Isa.th  II.  then  s.  /,  Lord,  how  long?  he  answered 
45.19.  /s. not  to  seed  of  Jacob,  seek  ye  me  in  vain 
65.  1.  Is.  behold  mo,  behold  me,  to  a  nation 

Ezek.  1().  6.  Is.  when  tlmu  wast  in  thy  blood, live 

John  1.  30.  this  ishe  of  whom /.».  afler  mocometh 
3.  7.  marvel  not  that  Is.  ye  must  b"  born  again 

8.  25.  the  same  that  Is.  from  the  beginning 

10.  36.  because  Is.  I  am  the  Son  of  God 

11.  40.  s.  /not  to  thee,  if  thou  wnuldest  believe 
42.  Is.  il,tlial  they  may  believe  thou  hast  gent  me 

14.  28.  ye  have  heard  how  Is.  lo  you,  I  go  away 
16.  4.  those  things  Is.  not  .it  the  beginning 
18.  20.  and  in  secret  have  Is.  nothing 

21.  ask  them  which  heard  mo,  what  /have  t. 
lets  11.  8.  Is.  not  so.  Lord,  for  iiolhlng  common 

2  Cor. 7.  3.  /have  s.  that  ye  are  in  onr  hearts 

9.  3.  yet  have  I  sent,  that  ns  Is.  ye  may  be  ready 
See  Jesus. 
She  SAID 

Gen.  4.  25.  God,  s.  sA*-,  hath  appomtcd  me  nnothet 
20.  5.  even  jA«  herself  s.  he  is  my  brolhef 


SAI 

Gen.1i.58.  wilt  thou  go  with  this  mant  she  s.lw'iW 
t'.iod.  4.  '."fi.  tiieii  she 3.  a  bloody  liuabaiitl  thou  art 
1  Kings  ii. J4. 1  lm\  e  somewhat  to  say,  slie  s.say  on 
,Ua£.  lo.'27.  sAea.  truth,  Lord,  yetdofis  eat  cruinbd 
Jolm  H.  11.  she  s.  no  man,  Lord;  Jtsusuaid  to  her 
11.  '23.  wlicn  she  had  so  i.  she  went  hor  way 
•20.  14.  when  she  had  thus  j(.  she  turned  herself 
Acts  5.  6.  and  she  s.  ve»,  I'or  bo  much 

T/ii-i/  SAID. 
Exod.  24.  7.  and  Ihey  s.  all  that  the  Lord  hath 
said  will  wo  do,  and  be  ubcdiruit 
J}eut.  5. 28.  they  have  well  s.  all  they  have  spoken 
^iChron.a.'.l.s.  they,  he  is  the  s-onorjolioshaplial 
•J().  -iJ.  ihey  buried  in  lield,  tor  they  s.  he  is  a  leper 
P.ial.  &i.  i.  they  have  s.  come,  let  us  cut  them  otV 
./cr.  2.  6.  neither  a.  they,  where  is  the  Lord  ? 
Jfa£.  9.28.  believe  ye  ?  they  s.  unto  him,  yea,  Lord 
■27.  22.  th;y  all  *.  let  him  be  crucilied 
JUnrk  3.  21.  for  they  s.  he  is  hosido  himself 
;tO.  because  thnj  s.  he  hath  aii  unclean  spirit 
It).  8.  amazed,  nor  s.  they  any  thing  to  any  man 
l.uke  111.  :i4.  thiy  s.  the  Lord  hath  need  of  him 
u9cts  12.  15.  then  .».  they,  it  is  his  angel 

SAID,  Passively, 
ficn.  10.  9.  wherefore  it  is  s.  even  as  Nimrod 
22. 14.  as  it  is  .•».  to  this  day,  in  mount  of  the  Lord 
Kiod.  5.  19.  after  it  was  .f.  ye  shall  not  minish 
1  Kings  13.  17.  it  was  s.  by' the  word  of  the  Lord 
Job  3.  3.  let  the  night  perish,  in  which  it  was  s. 
34.  31.  surely  it  is  meet  to  be  s.  to  God 
Vsal.  87.  5.  of  Zion  it  shall  be  s.  this  and  that  man 
I'roB.  25.  7.  better  it  be  s.  to  thee,  come  up  hither 
F.ccl.  1. 10.  is  there  any  thing  whereof  it  may  be«.? 
Isn.  25.  9.  it  shall  be  s.  in  that  day,  this  is  our  God 
.ler.  16.  14.  it  shall  no  more  be.«.  the  Lord  livetli 
Kick.  13.  12.  slinll  itnotbea.  where  ia  tho(laul)ing 
Hos.  1.  in.  where  it  was  s.  to  them,  ye  are  not 
.Mat.  5.  21.  it  was  s.  by  them  of  old  time,  27,  3.3. 

31.  ye  have  heard  it  hath  been  s.  38,  43. 
y,uie2.24.according  to  that  which  is*,  in  law  of  L. 
23.  4().  having  s.  ihn.^,  he  gave  up  the  ghost 
Horn.  9.  12.  it  was  s.  ilie  elder  shall  serve  younger 

2r).  tlint  where  it  was  s.  ye  are  not  my  people 

Heb.  3.  15.  whilst  it  is  s.  to-day,  if  ye  will  hear,  4.  7. 

11.  18.  of  whom  it  was  s.  in  Isaac  shall  thy  seed 

7i'  c.  6.  11.  and  it  was.?,  to  them,  they  should  rest 

SAIDST. 
Oen.  12.  10.  why  s.  Ihon,  she  is  my  .sister? 
20.  9.  and  how  «.  thou,  sh.-  is  my  sister? 
32.  9.  OGod  the  Lard,  which  .-.-.  to  me,  return 

12.  thou  s.  I  will  surely  do  thee  good,  make  seed 
Kind.  32.  13.  s.  to  Ihem,  I  will  multiply  yourseed 
.hidi^.'J.  38.  where  is  thy  month  wherewilh  thou.?. 
I  h'iiirrs  2.  42.  thou  s.  word  F  have  heard  is  good 
.!nb  3.5. 2.  thou .«.  my  r'gliteous.  is  more  than  God's 
I'.ial.  27.  8.  when  thou  s.  seek  ye  my  face 
/vii.  47.  7.  and  thou  ■;.  I  shall  be  a  laily  for  ever 
./rr.  2.  20.  and  thou  s.  I  will  not  transgress 
25.  but  Ihon  .?.  there  is  no  hope,  I  loved  strangers 
22.  21.  I  spake,  but  thou  s.  I  will  not  hear 
J.am.  3.  57.  thou  drewest  near,  thou  .?.  for  mo 
Fzek.^2^.  3.  b"C'i  use  thou.?,  aha,  a?,  mv  sanctuary 
//o».13. 10.  of  whomlhou.T.  givi- me  a  king  and  pr. 
Ji)hn  4.  18.  he  is  not  thy  hush,  in  tliats.  thou  truly 

SAIL,  Svhstiintive. 
ffn..  33.  23.  they  could  not  spread  the  .?. 
I  irk.  27.  7.  which  thou  spreadest  forth  to  be  thy  s. 
.Ul.t  27.  17.  thev  strake  s.  and  so  were  driven 
41).  and  hoised  up  the  main  s.  to  the  wind 
SAIL. 
Jietn  20.  3.  as  he  was  about  to  s.  into  Syria 
Ifi.  Paul  had  determined  to  s.^lly  Ephesiis 
27.  I.  when  it  wnsdi'terni.  we  should  s.  into  Italy 
21.  God  hath  given  thee  all  them  that ». with  thee 
SAILKO. 
J.uke  8.  23.  as  they  s.  he  fell  n-^leep,  came  a  storm 
Sr.lt  27.4.  when  we  launched,  vvc  .t.  under  Cyprus 
7.  and  when  we  had  .».  slowly  many  days 
SAILING. 
Jlrti  27.  9.  and  when  s.  was  now  dangerous 

SAILING. 
.•Iff.i  21.  2.  and  findin?  a  ship  s.  over  to  Phonieia 
27.  0.  the  centurion  found  a  ship  s.  into  lialy 

SAILORS. 
/?cB.18.17.all  companvin  i'hi|)s,nnd  .i.stnod  afar  off 

SAINT 

Sijrnififi',  [1]   .1  holy  t:r  ^odly  prr.tnn,  one  that 

M  snby  pTofrssinii,rnvriin7il,  and rnnversatlon , 

PsbI.    in.   3.   H-h.    fi.   10.     (21   Those  hlessrd 

spirits  irhn  ar'  trrnrionftii  ndwilt'-d  hy  (ind  to 

pnrtnke  oferrrlfftinir  clnry  iind  hl'ssedn^sf, 

Rev.  18. 24.     [3]  The  holy  an/rrls,  Dent.  33.  2. 

.Indo  14. 

Fur  the  perfoctine  of  the  Saints,   Fph.  4.  12.    To 

strengthen  nndeonfirm  them  more  nnd  more  in 

their  vnion  to  Christ  their  Ilrnd,  nnd  in  their 

love   to  nni"  another,  and   in  faith  and  every 

frae.ei,  till  thry  eome  In  a  per  feel   man  in  hea 

Ti'n,  when  erace  shall  he  lurni-d  into  elory. 

r.sviMOC.  If),  they  envied  Aaron,  the  *.  of  tha  Lord 

SU4 


SAI 

7)071.8.13.  then  Ihearil  one  s.spenk.  another  s.said 
to  thatjt. which  spake  howlong  sliall  vis.be  trod.l 
Phil.  4.  21.  salute  every  ».  in  Christ  JesuB 

SAINTS. 
Dent.  33.  2.  he  came  with  ten  thousands  of  s. 

3.  he  loved  the  people  ;  all  his  i.  arj;  in  thy  hand 

1  Sam,  2.  9.  lie  will  keep  the  feet  of  his  s. 

2  Chron.  6.  41.  let  thy  s.  rejoice  in  goodness 
Job  5.  1.  and  to  which  of  thti  «.  will  thou  turn  ? 

15.  15.  behold,  he  putteth  no  trust  in  liis  s. 
Psal.  IB.  3.  but  to  the  s.  that  are  in  the  earth 
.30. 4.  sing  to  the  Lord,  O  ye  s.  of  his,  give  thanks 
31.  23.  O  love  Lord,  all  ye  his  .■?.  Lord  |)re3ervetli 
:54.  9.  fear  the  Lord,  ye  his  s.  there  is  no  want 
37.  28.  for  the  Lord  lorsaketh  not  his  s. 
50.  5.  gather  my  s.  together  to  me,  those  made 
52.  9.  wait  on  thy  name  for  it  is  good  before  thy  «. 
79.  2.  the  flesh  of  thy  u.  to  the  beasts  of  the  earth 
89.  5.  thy  faithfulness  in  the  congri^gatioo  of  the  4-. 

7.  God  is  to  he  feared  in  the  assembly  of  the  «. 
97.  10.  he  preserveth  the  souls  of  liis  s. 
111).  15.  precious  to  the  Lord  is  death  of  his  s. 
132.  H.  and  let  thy  s.  shout  for  joy 

Hi.  and  her  s.  shall  shout  nloud  for  joy 
I45.10.all  thy  works  praise,  and  s.  shall  bless  thee 

148.  14.  he  exaltelh  the  praise  of  all  his.?. 

149.  1.  and  his  praise  in  the  congregation  of  ». 
5.  let  s.  be  joyful  in  glory,  let  thtni  sing  aloud 

9.  this  honour  have  all  his  s.  praise  ye  the  Lord 
ProB.  2.  8.  he  jireserveth  the  way  of  his  s. 
Dan.  7.  18.  but  s.  shall  take  the  kingdom,  22,  27. 

21.  the  same  horn  made  war  with  the  s. 

25.  and  shall  wear  out  the  s.  of  the  Most  High 
Hos.  11.  12.  but  Judah  is  faithful  with  the  s. 
Zech.  14.  5.  God  shall  come  and  all  s.  with  thee 
Mat.Sil.  .52.  many  bodies  of.?,  that  slept  arose 
Jlcis  9.  13.  how  much  evil  he  halli  done  to  thy  s. 

32.  Peter  came  down  also  to  the  s-  at  LyUda 

41.  when  he  had  called  the  s.  and  widows 
26.  10.  many  of  the  s.  did  I  shut  up  in  prison 
ftom.  1.  7.  beloved  of  God,  called  to  bo  s. 
8.  27.  because  he  maketh  intercession  for  the  s. 

12.  13.  distributing  to  the  necessity  olthc  s. 

15.  25.  but  now  I  go  to  Jerusalem  to  minister  to  s. 
2(i.  to  make  a  certain  contribution  for  the  poor  s. 
31.  that  my  service  may  be  accepted  of  the  s. 

16.  2.  that  ye  receive  her  in  Lord  as  becomolh  s. 
1.5.  salute  all  the  s.  with  them,  fjeh.  13.  24. 

lCor.1.2.  to  them  that  ate  sanctified,  called  to  be  s. 
fi   1.  dare  any  go  to  law,  and  not  before  the  s.  ? 
2.  do  ye  not  know  that  Ihcs.  shall  judge  world  ? 
14.33.  of  peace,  as  in  all  the  churches  of  the  s. 
16.  1.  now  concerning  the  collection  for  the  s. 
IS.bave  addicted  themselves  to  the  ministry  of ». 
2  Car.  1.  1.  with  all  the  s.  which  are  in  Achaiij 

8.  4.  nnd  take  opon  us  tho  ministering  to  the  s. 

9.  1.  for  as  touching  the  ministering  to  the  5. 

12.  not  only  supplieth  the  want  of  the  s. 

13.  13.  all  the  s.  salute  you,  Phil.  4.  22. 
Kph.^.^.  to  the.9.atEphesus,and  faithful  in  Christ 

15.  after  I  heard  of  your  love  to  all  the  s. 

13.  riches  of  the  glory  of  his  inheritance  in  9. 
2.  19.  ye  are  fellow  citizens  with  the  s. 

3  8.  to  me  who  am  less  than  the  least  of  all  s. 
IS. that  yo  may  be  able  to  comprehenr'  with  all  s. 

4.  12.  for  the  perfecting  of  tho  s.  for  the  ministry 

5.  3.  let  it  not  be  once  named,  as  beeometh  s. 

6. 18.  praying  with  prayer  andsupplicat.  for  all  s. 
Phil.  1.  I.  to  all  the  .?.  in  Christ  Jesus  at  Philippi 
Col.  1.  2.  to  all  the  s.  and  faithful  at  Colossc 

4.  since  we  heard  of  tho  love  ye  have  tonll  the  s. 
12.  partakers  of  the  inheritance  of  the,*,  in  light 
20.  the  mvstery  now  made  manifest  to  his  .«. 

1  7'Afl.?,?.  3. 13. at  coaling  of  our  Lord  with  all  hiss. 
'iThess.  1.  10.  ho  shall  come  lo  tie  glorified  in  his  s. 
1  Tim.  5.  10.  if  she  have  washed  the  s.  feet 
Philrm.  5.  love  and  faith,  wliicli  thou  hast  to  all.?. 

7.  the  bowels  of  the  s.  are  refreshed  by  llieo 
Hell.  C.  in.  in  that  yn  have  ministered  lo  the  a. 
Judp  3.  for  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  .?. 

14.  the  Lord  comelh  with  10,000  of  his  .?. 
Uev.  5.8.  which  are  the  prayers  of  the  .?.  8.  3,  4. 

II.  18.  ihnt  thi'U  shonMesl  give  reward  to  thy  s. 

13.  7.  it  was  given  him,  to  mnke  war  with  the  s. 

10.  hero  is  t'le  patience  and  faith  of  the  3. 

14.  12.  hero  is  the  patience  of  the  s. 

15.  3.  just  nnd  true  am  thy  ways,  thou  Kin,^  ofs. 

16.  6.  for  Ihey  linv  shed  the  blood  of  the  s. 

17.  6.  the  woman  drunk'  n  with  the  blood  of*. 

18.  24.  in  her  was  f.mnd  ihe  b'ood  of  the  s. 

19.  8.  th^  fine  linen  is  Ihe  righleousness  of  the  s. 

20.  9.  and  conipiisfed  ilw  camp  of  the  ».  about 

BAITII. 

1  Kings  3.  23.  Ihe  one  ».  this  is  my  son  that  livcth, 

and  Iho  other  .?.  nay,  but  thy  son  is  dead 

20.2.  thuH  .?.Renliadad,lhy  silver  and  gnldig  mini' 

.32.  servnni  Henhndad  .?.  I  prav  thee  let  me  live 

22.27  ».  kin;:,  put  this  fellow  in  p'ris.  2  Chr.  18.  26. 

2  Kings  9.  18.  thus  *.  Ihe  king,  is  if  peace?  19. 
Id.  19.  thuj  >'.  the  great  king,  tlio  king  of  AsHyria 


SAK 

2  Kings  18.  29.  thus  s.  the  king,  let  not  HczeMaH 

deceive  you,  31.  2  Chr.  32.  10.  Isa.  3fi.  J4. 

19.3.thus  s.Hezek.  this  a  day  of  trouble,  Isa.  37.  3 

2  dAr.36.23.  thus  3.  Cyrus,  kingof  Pers.  Ezra  1.2. 

Job  28.  14.  the  depth  s.  the  sea  s.  it  is  not  in  me 
33.  24.  he  is  gracious  lo  him,  and  s.  deliver  him 
35.  10.  but  none  s.  where  is  God  my  maker? 

Psal.  36.  J.  the  transgression  of  the  wicked  s. 

/V()«.9.4.that  want  understand ing,she,?.  to  him, 15- 

20.  14.  it  is  nought,  it  is  nought,  s.  the  buyer 
22.  13.  the  shithful  man  s.  there  is  a  lion,  26   13. 
26.  19.  that  deceiveth,  and  a.  am  not  I  in  sport? 

ham.  3. 37.  who  is  he  that .?.  and  it  comelh  to  pass? 
Mat.  7.  21.  not  every  one  that  s.  to  me,  Lord,  Lord 

26.  18.  say  to  him.  Master  9.  my  lime  is  at  hand 
Mark  8.  29.  Peter  s.  to  him,  thou  art  the  Christ 

15.  28.  scripture  was  fulfilled  which' s.  ./am.2.  23. 
J.uke  18.  6.  L.  said,  hear  what  the  unjust  judge*. 
./(/An  4.  10.  if  thou  knewest  who  it  is  that .?.  give 

19.  28.  the  seripture  might  be  fulfilled,  3.  I  tliirs. 
Jlctsl.  48.  in  temples  iniide  w  ith  hands,  as  s.  proph. 

21.  11.  tluiss.  the  Holy  Ghost,  so  the  Jews  do 
Horn.  3. 19.  the  law  s.  it  a.  to  Ihem  that  are  under 

4.  3.  for  what  3.  the  scripture,  10.  8. 

9.  17.  for  scripture  s.  to  Pharaoh,  for  this  purpcso 

10.  II.  for  scriptures,  whoso,  helievelh  on  him 
Ifi.  for  Esaias  s.  20.  1|  19.  first  Moses  s. 

11.2.  wot  ye  not  what  the  scripture  s.  of  Elias  ? 
■  4.  but  what  s.  the  answer  of  God  to  him  ? 

1  Cor.  3.  4.  for  while  one  s.  I  am  of  Paul,  another 

9.  8.  or  s.  not  Ihe  law  the  same  also  ? 

14.34.  women  to  be  under  obedience,  as  also ,?.  law 
Gal.  4.  30.  what .?.  the  sciiptiire  ?  1  Tim.  5.  18. 
Hch.  3.  7.  as  tlie  Holy  Ghost  s  if  ye  will  hear 
.lam.  4.  5.  do  ye  think  the  scripture  s.  in  vain 
Rev.  2.  7.  let  him  hear  w  hat  the  Spirit  s.  lo  th«i 
churches,  II,  17,  29.  |  3.  6,  13,  22. 
8.  a.  the  First  and  the  Lust  ||  18.  a.  Son  of  God 
3.  14.  s.  the  Amen  ||  14.  13.  yea,  s.  the  Spirit 

18.  7.  she  s.  I  sit  a  queen,  and  am  no  widow 

22.  20.  he  s.  surely  I  come  quickly,  amen 

God  SAITH. 

2  Chron.  18.  13.  what  my  God  s.  that  I  will  speak 
24.  20.  thus.?.  God,  why  transgress  ye  commands 

Psn/.  .50. 16.  to  wiclied  God  s.  what  hast  thou  todo 

/.?n.42.5.thiis  s.God  Ihe  Lord,thal  created  heavens 
54.  6.  when  thou  wast  refused,  s.  thy  God 
57.  21.  thi-re  is  no  peace,  s.  my  God,  lo  wicked 
66.  9.  liring  forlli  and  shut  the  woinb,.«.  thy  Goa 

.^cts  2. 17.  shall  come  to  pass  in  the  last  davs,  s.  G. 
He  SAITH. 

Gen.  41.  55.  go  to  Joseph,  whit  he  ».  to  you,  do 

1  Ham.  9.  6.  all  that  he  3.  comelh  surely  to  pass 

2  .Sam.  17.  5.  let  us  hear  likewise  what  Ar  .?. 
iKjngs5.  13.when  he  a.  to  thcc,  wash  and  bo  clean  | 
.Toh  37.  6.  for  lie  s.  lo  Ihe  snow,  be  thou  on  earth 

Prop. '23.  7.  eat  and  drink,  s.  he  to  thee,  his  heart 

24.  24.  Ac  that  s.  to  wicked,  thou  art  righteous 
Eecl.  4.  8.  nor  s.  Ac,  for  whom  do  I  labour  ? 

10.  3.  and  he  s.  to  every  one  that  ho  is  a  fool 
Mark  11.  23.  shall  believe  those  thinjs  Acs.  shall 

come  to  pass,  he  shall  have  whaisoever  ht  s. 
.John  2.  5.  whatsoever  he  s.  to  you,  do  it 
16.18. what  is  this  Ac .?.?  we  caimnt  tell  what  he  s. 

19.  35.  and  he  knnweth  that  he  ,?.  true 

21.  15.  Ac  s.  to  Peter,  feed  my  lambs,  16. 
Jlrts  1.  4.  which,  ,?.  A'^,  yc  have  heard  of  ine 

22.  2.  Ihev  kept  Ihe  more  silence,  and  he  3. 
Rom.  10.  21.  lo  Israel  Ac  s.  |1  15.  10.  ajain  Acs. 

1  C)r.  6. 16.  fiir  two,  s.  Ac,  shall  he  one  flesh 
9.  10.  or,  ,?.  Ac  it  altogether  fur  our  sakcs? 

2  Cor.  6.  2.  he  s.  1  have  heard  thee  in  a  time 
Gnl.  3.  16.  Ac  s.  not,  and  to  seed.s,  as  of  many 
Hell.  8.  5.  see.  .?.  Ac,  that  thou  make  all  things 

I3.in  thai  Acs.  a  new  covenant,  he  made  first  old 
See  Jksi's,  IjORd. 
SAKE. 
(7i*»i.8.  21. 1  wiil  not  curse  the  ground  for  man's  s. 
12. 16.  he  entreated  Abrnm  well  for  her  a. 
18.  29.  he  said,  I  will  not  do  it  for  forty's  >. 
31.  not  for  twenty's  .?.  |t  32.  not  for  ten's  ». 

20.  II.  they  will  slav  me  for  mv  wife's  a. 

26.  24.  I  will  inulti|>ly  thy  seed' for  Abraham's  ? 
39.  5.  bhssi'd  the  Fgyplinn's  honse  for  Jo«ep!i'B.t. 
F.iod.  18.8.  Lord  hath  done  to  Egypt  for  IsrMel's  s. 
21.2ll.lel  him  20  free  for  eye's  ».  ||27.  for  tooth's .?. 
.\Sim.  II.  29.  Moses  said,  enviest  Ihon  for  my  s.  7 

25.  11.  whileho  was  z<-alonsformv  s  nmon-jlhem 
|3.  was  slain  in  day  of  the  phivnc  for  Pcor's  t. 

I  Sam.  12.  22.  not  forsake  his  people  flSr  name's  s. 

23.  10.  Siiul  seeketh  lo  destrnv  Ihn  city  for  my  a. 
2."<'njji.. 5.12. Lord  evnllclh  hin'kinsdimi  fiir  Ismel'ss. 

7.21  for  thy  word's  .?.  ha«l  d..ii.' all,  1  CAr.  17.  19 
9  1.  I  miy  shew  him  kindn'SR  for  Jonathan's  s.  7 
18  5.  deal  Kontly  for  my  s.  wiili  yoiinj  mnn  Absal. 
I  Kings  8.  41.  a  stranger  that  cometh  out  of  n  fn 
country  for  thv  name's  .«.  2  CArnn.  fi.  32 

11.  12.  for  Dav.  thy  father's  .?.  13.  32,  34.  |  1.5.  4. 

2  Kings  8. 19. 1  19. 3 1   |  20.  6.  JN/i/.  1.32.  Itt 
13.  for  Jorusalcm's  ».  which  I  have  chosen 


SAK 

Keh.  9  31.  not  consume  them  for  great  mercies'  5. 
Job  13.  17.  entreated  for  children's  s  of  my  body 
f«oi  ti.  4.  save  me  for  thy  mercies'  s.  31.  16. 

:13.  3.  he  leadeth  me  for  his  name's  s.  31.  3. 

io.  7.  remember  thou  me  for  thy  goodness'  s. 
11.  for  thy  name's  s.  pardon  mine  iniquity 

44.  26.  arise,  redeem  us  for  thy  mercies'  s. 
69.  6.  not  be  confounded  for  my  «.  O  God 
79.  9.  purge  away  ♦ur  sins  for  thy  name's  s. 
106.  8.  he  saved  them  for  his  name's  s. 

109.  21.  but  do  thou  for  me,  for  thy  name'i  s. 
115.  1.  give  glory,  for  thy  mercy  and  truth's  s. 
143.  11.  quicken  me,  for  thy  name's  s.  for  thy 
righteousness  s.  bring  my  soul  out  of  trouble 
Isa.  37.  35.  for  mine  own  i.  and  David's  s. 

42. 21.  Ld.  is  well  pleased  for  his  righteousness'  j. 
43.  14.  for  your  s.  I  have  sent  to  Babylon 

25.  blottethout  thy  transgressions  for  my  own  s. 

45.  4.  for  Jacob's  5.  I  have  even  called  thee 
48.  9.  for  my  name's  s.  will  1  defer  mine  anger 

11.  even  for  mine  own  s.  will  I  do  it 
62. 1.  for  Zion's  s.  for  Jerusalem's  s.  I  will  not  rest 
(53.  17.  return  for  thy  servant's  s.  the  tribes 
its  5.  that  cast  you  out  for  my  name's  s.  said 
Jf  14.  7.  O  Lord,  do  thou  it  for  thy  name's  s. 

21.  do  not  abhor  us  for  thy  name's  s. 
Eiek.  20.  9.  but  I  wrought  for  my  name's  s.  that  it 
should  not  be  polluted,  14,22,  44.  |  36.  22. 
Dan.9. 17.  shine  on  thy  sanctuary,  for  the  Lord's  s. 

19.  defer  not  for  thine  own  s.  O  my  God 

Jonah  1. 12.  for  my  s.  this  great  tempest  is  on  you 

Jfic.3.12.  shall  Zion  for  your  5.  be  plowed  as  a  field 

JUat.5. 10.  who  are  persecuted  for  righteousness' s. 

11.  shall  say  evil  against  you  falsely  for  my  s. 

10.  18.  ye  shall  be  brought  before  governors  and 

kings,  for  my  s.  Mark  13.  9.  Luke  21.  12. 
82.  and  ye  shall  be  hated  of  all  men,  for  mv 
name's  s.  24.  9.  Mark  13.  13.  Luke  21.  17. 
39.  he  that  loseth  his  life  for  my  s.  shall  find  it, 
16.  2.=   Mark  8.  3'-   Luke  9.  24. 
14. 3.  Herod  bound  John  for  Herod,  s.  Mark  6. 17. 
0.  nevertheless,  for  the  oath's  s.  Mark  fi.  26. 
19.  12.  eunuchs  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven's  s. 
29.  th.1t  hath  left  lands  for  mv  name's  s.  shall  re- 
ceive hundred  fold,  Mark'lO.  29.  J,ukc  18.29. 

24. 22.  there  shall  no  flesh  be  saved,  but  for  elect's 
s.  those  days  shall  be  shortened,  Mark  13.20. 

Mark  4.  17.  persecution  ariseth  for  the  word's  s. 
Luke  6.  22.  cast  out  your  name  for  Son  of  man's  s. 
John  12.  9.  the  people  came  not  for  Jesus'  s.  only 

13.  38.  will  thou  lay  down  thy  life  for  my  5.? 

14. 11.  else  believe  me  for  the  very  works'  .s. 

15.21.  these  things  shall  do  to  you  for  ray  name's  s. 
Jets  9.  16.  things  he  must  suffer  for  my  name's  «. 

26.  7.  for  which  hope's  s.  I  am  accused  of  Jews 
Rom.  4.  23.  it  was  not  written  for  his  s.  alone 

11.  28.  for  gospel,  they  are  enemies  for  your  .<i. 
13.  5.  ye  must  needs  be  subject  for  conscience'  s. 
15.  30.  for  Lord's .«.  strive  with  me  in  your  prayers 

I  Cor.  4. 10.  we  are  fools  for  Christ's  s.  ye  are  wise 

9.  23.  and  this  I  do  for  the  gospel's  s. 

10.  25.  asking  no  question  for  conscience'  j.  27. 
28.  this  is  offered  in  sacrifice  to  idols,  eat  not,  for 

his  s.  that  shewed  it,  and  for  conscience'  s. 
S  Cor.  4.  5.  outselves  vour  servants  for  Jesus'  «. 
11.  we  are  alway  delivered  to  death  for  Jesus'  s. 

12. 10. 1  take  pleasure  in  distresses  for  Christ's  i. 
F.pk.  4.  32.  as  God  for  Christ's  s.  forgave  you 
Phil.  1.  29.  but  it  is  given  also  to  suffer  for  his  s. 
Col.  1.  24.  for  his  body's  s.  which  is  the  church 

3.  6.  for  which  things'  «.  wrath  of  God  cometh 
1  TOcw. 1.5. what  manner  of  menwewere  fi  ir  yours. 

5.  13.  to  esteem  them  highly  for  their  work's  .?. 
1  Tim.  5.  23.  use  a  little  wine,  for  thy  stomach's  s. 
7Vt.  1.  11.  teaching  things  for  filthy  lucre's  s. 
Philem.9.  yet  for  love's  s.  I  rather  beseech  thee 
1  Pet.'i.  13.  submit  to  every  ordinance  for  Lord's  s. 

3.  14.  but  and  if  ye  suffer  for  righteousness'  s. 

1  .John  2.  12.  your  sins  are  forgiven  for  name's  s. 

2  John  2.  for  the  truth's  s.  that  dwelleth  in  us 

3  .Johnl.  because  fur  his  name's  .?.  they  went  forth 
Rev.  2.  3.  and  for  my  name's  s.  hast  laboured 

Thi  S.AKE. 
Om.  3.  17.  cursed  is  the  ground  for  thy  .<<. 

12.  13.  that  it  may  be  well  with  me  for  thy  s. 
30.  27.  that  the  Lord  hath  blessed  me  for  thy  s. 

Psal.Ai.  22.  for  thy  s.  are  we  killed  all  day  long,  we 
are  as  sheep  for  the  slaughter,  Rom.  8.  36. 
69.  7.  because  for  thy  s.  1  have  borne  reproach 
l«a.  54. 1.5.  who.  gather  ag.  thee,  sh.nll  fall  for  thy  s. 
Jer.  2.  t  2.  I  remember  for  thy  s.  the  kindness 
15. 15.  know  that  for  thy  .f.  I  have  suffered  rebuke 
John  13,  37.  I  will  lav  down  my  life  for  thy  s. 

SAKES. 
Oen.  18.  26.  T  will  spare  the  place  for  their  t. 
T-ev.  26. 45. 1  will  for  their  .s.  rcmemb.  the  covenant 
Deut.  1.  37.  also  the  Lord  was  angry  with  me  for 
your .«.  saying,  thou  shalt  not  go,  3.  2fi.  |  4. 21. 
Judg.  21.  22.  be  favourable  to  them  for  our  s. 
RuSl  1  13  it  srieveth  me  trucb  for  your  s. 
503 


SAL 

1  Chr.  16.  21.  yea,  he  reproved  kings  for  their  s.  he 

suffered  no  man  to  do  them  wrong,  Ps.  105. 14. 

Psal.  7. 7.  for  their  s.  therefore  return  ihou  on  high 

106.  32.  it  went  ill  with  Moses  for  their  s. 

122.  8.  for  my  brethren  and  companions'  s. 
Isa.  65.  8.  so  will  I  do  for  my  servants'  j. 
Ezek.  36. 22.  I  do  not  this  for  your  s.  O  Israel,  32. 
Dan.  2.  30.  but  for  their .?.  thai  shall  make  known 
Mai.  3.  II.  and  I  will  rebuke  the  devourer  for  your 
*.  he  shall  not  destroy  the  fruits  of  your  ground 
Mark  6.  26.  and  for  their  s.  which  sat  witli  him 
Johi  11.  ]5. 1  am  glad  for  your  s.  I  was  not  there 

12.  30.  this  voice  came  not  for  me,  but  for  your  s 

17.  19.  and  for  their  5.  I  sanctify  myself 
Rom.  11.  28.  they  are  beloved  for  the  fathers'  i. 

1  Cur.  4.  (i.  I  have  transferred  for  your  s. 

9.  10.  or  saith  he  it  for  our  s.7  fur  our  s.  no  doubt 

2  Cor.  4.  15.  for  all  things  are  for  your  s. 

8.  9.  thougji  rich,  yet  for  your  s.  became  poor 

1  Thess.  3.  9.  we  joy  for  your  «.  before  God 

2  Tim.  2.  10.  I  endure  all  things  for  the  elect's  5. 
SALE. 

Z.e«. 25.27.  let  him  count  the  years  of  the .«.  thereof 
50.  price  of  hiss,  shall  be  according  to  the  years 

Deut.  18.  8.  besides  that  which  cometh  of  the  s. 
SALT, 

In  Greek,  Hals;  in  Hebrew,  Melach.  God  ap- 
pointed that  Salt  should  be  used  in  all  the  sacri- 
fices that  were  offered  to  him :  Every  oblation 
of  thy  meat-offcrmg  shalt  thou  season  with  salt; 
neither  shalt  thou  suffer  the  salt  of  the  covenant 
of  thy  God  to  be  lacking  from  thy  meat-offer- 
ing :  With  all  thine  offerings  thou  shalt  offer 
salt.,  Lev.  2.  13.  This  sii^nificd  that  incorrup- 
tion  of  mind,  aitd  sincerity  of  grace,  which  are 
necessary  in  alt  them  that  would  offer  an  ac- 
ceptable offerin/r  unto  God;  or  it  denoted  that 
communion  which  they  had  with  God  in  these 
exercises  of  his  worship,  salt  being  a  symbol 
both  of  friendship  and  ineor ruption.  It  ap- 
pears from  Ezek.  )6.  4.  that  heretofore  they 
rubbed  new-born  children  with  salt;  in  the  day 
thou  wast  born,  thou  wast  not  salted  at  all, 
nor  swaddled  at  all.  Some  think  they  did 
this,  to  dry  up  the  humiditij  that  abounds  in 
children  ;  and  to  close  up  the  pores,  which  are 
then  too  open.  Others  saij,  that  salt  hardens 
the  skins  of  children,  and  makes  them  more 
firm.  Others  think,  it  was  to  hinder  any  cor- 
ruptions that  might  proceed  from  cutting  off 
the,  navel-string.  Whatever  leas  their  end  in 
it,  the  prophet  here,  in  a  continued  allegory,,, 
describes  the  loorthless,  helpless,  and  despica- 
ble condition  of  the  Jews  nt  first,  till  God 
pitied  and  helped  them,  and  bestowed  alt  man- 
ner of  precious  blessings  upon  them. 

In  2  Kings  2.21.  the  prophet  Elisha  being  de- 
sired to  sweeten,  the  waters  of  the  fountain  of 
Jericho,  and  make  them  fit  to  drink,  required 
a  new  vessel  to  be  brought  to  him,  and  some 
salt  to  beput  therein.  They  followed  his  orders: 
ffc  threw  this  salt  into  the  spring,  and  said ; 
Thus  saith  the  Lord,  I  have  healed  these 
waters;  and  for  the  future  they  shall  not  be 
the  occasion  either  of  death  or  barrenness  :  .^o 
the  waters  became  good  fur  drinking,  and  lost 
all  their  former  bad  qualities.  JVaturally  the 
salt  must  only  have  served  to  increase  the 
brackishness  or  bittm}ess  of  this  fountain; 
but  the  prophet  is  directed  to  make  use  of  a 
remedy  that  seemed  contrary  to  the  effect  which 
7pas  produced,  that  the  miracle  might  become 
the  more  evident. 

Our  Saviour,  in  his  sermon  on  the  mount,  tells 
his  disciples.  Ye  are  the  salt  of  the  enrth,  Mat. 
5.  13.  Ye  are  persons,  who  being'  endued  with 
grace  yourselves,  ought  to  season  others,  and 
preserve  them  from  corruption  ;  and  the  doc- 
trine which  ye  profess  is  as  opposite  as  can  be 
to  the  pntrefactinn  of  the  vorld,  both  in  respret 
to  corrupt  doctrine  and  corrupt  manners.  Salt 
has  an  acrimony  by  which  it  pierc-th  the  lump; 
S')  the  word  is  piercintr,  Hch.  4.  12.  Ry  the 
salt  of  the  earth,  some  understand  mart,  with 
which  they  manure  their  land  in  some  couritries, 
instrad  of  dung. 

Salt  is  the  symbol  of  wisdom.  Col.  4.  6,  Let 
your  speech  be  always  with  grace,  seasoned 
with  salt.  It  is  the  symbol  of  perpetuity  and 
incorruption  :  Thus  they  said  of  a  covenant. 
It  is  a  covenant  of  salt  for  ever,  before  the 
Lord,  JVi/m.  IS.  19.  ./Jnd  in  2  Chron.  13.  5, 
The  Lord  God  of  Israel  gave  the  kingdom 
over  Israel  to  David  for  ever,  even  to  him, 
and  to  his  sons,  by  a  covenant  of  salt.  Salt 
is  the  symbol  also  of  barrenvss  and  sterility. 
tVhen  Abimelech  took  the  city  o/Sheohem,  A*- 
destroyed  it,  and  sowed  the  place  with  flr.If, 
that  it  might  always  remain  desert  and  un- 
fruitful, Judg.  9. 45.'  Zephaaiali  threatens  the 
3U 


SAL 

Amt'>nites  and  Moabitea,  from  the  Lyrd; 
Moab  shall  be  as  Sodom,  and  the  children  of 
Jimmon  as  Gomorrah,  even  the  breeding  of 
nettles,  and  salt-pits,  and  a  perpetual  desola- 
tion, Zeph.  2.  9.  Salt  is  likewise  the  symbol  of 
hospitality,  and  of  that  fidelity  that  is  due 
from  Servants,  friends,  guests,  and  domestics, 
to  those  that  entertain  them,  and  receive  them 
at  their  tables.  The  Governors  of  the  pro- 
vinces beyond  the  Euphrates,  icriling  to  king 
Artaxerxes,  tell  him,  Because  we  have  main- 
tenance from  the  king's  palace,  &.C.  F.zraA.  14. 
which  in  the  Chaldee  is.  Because  we  are  salted 
with  the  salt  of  the  palace. 

Mineral  salt ;  or  salt  that  is  dug  out  of  mines,  »'» 
form  of  a  hard  stone.  It  is  thought  that  Lot's 
wife  was  changed  into  a  statue  of  such  mineral 
salt,  that  she  became  as  a  rock  or  stone  of  aah, 
Gen.  19.  26. 

The  Salt-sea,  Gen.  14.  3.  is  the  Dead-sea,  or  the 
lake  of  Sodom,  called  likewise  the  lake  A.sphal- 
tites,  because  of  the  great  quantity  of  bitumen 
in  it,  so  that  no  fish  can  live  in  its  waters, 
and  a  man  cannot  without  difficulty  sink  in 
them,  by  reason  of  the  weight  and  density  of 
them,  i'he  crimes  of  the  inhabitants  0/ Sodom, 
Gomorrah,  Zeboim,  and  Admah,  were  come  to 
such  a  height,  that  (lod  destroyed  titfse  cities, 
together  with  their  inhaliitants,  by  fire  from 
heaven.  Theplain  wherein  they  stood,  whichbe-  ' 
fore  was  pleasant  and  fruitful,  like  an  earthly 
Paradise,  icas  first  ivfiamed  by  lightning, 
which  put  fi.re  to  the  bitumen,  with  which  it 
was  replete,  and  was  afterwards  overflowed 
by  the  tcaters  of  the  Jordan,  which  diffused 
themselves  there,  and  formed  the  Dead-sea,  or 
Salt-sea.  This  lake  receives  all  the  water  of 
Jordan,  of  the  brooks  Arnon  and  Jabbok,  and 
other  waters  lohich  descend  from  all  the  neigh- 
bouring mountains  ;  and  notioilhstanding  it 
has  no  visible  issue,  it  does  not  overflow.  It  is 
believed  that  it  discharges  itself  by  some  sub- 
terran.ous  channels  into  tAe  Red-sea,  or  jnto 
the  Mediterranean.  .According  to  Josephus' 
account,  the  lake  ((/Sodom  is  580  fxirlovgs  in 
length,  from  the  mouth  of  the  river  Jordan  to 
Zoar,  that  is,  about  two  and  twenty  leagues, 
at  three  unites  to  a  league;  and  150  furlongs 
wide;  that  ts  to  say,  about  five  leagues  of  the 
same  measure. 

Gen.  19.  26.  Lot's  wife  became  a  pillar  of  *.• 

/.ev.  2. 13.  with  all  thy  offer. ngs  thou  shalt  offer  s. 

Deut.  29.  23.  and  that  the  whole  land  thereof  is  i, 

.Josh.  11.  t  8.  Israel  chased  them  to  s.  [)its 
15.  62.  the  rhildren  of  Judah  had  the  city  of  s. 

.Iudg.{).45.  beat  down  the  city,  and  sowed  ii  with  3. 

2  Sam.  8.  13.  smiting  the  Syrians  in  the  valley  of  «. 

2  Kings  2.  20.  bring  me  a  new  cruse,  put  s.  therein 

21.  he  went  to  the  spring,  and  cast  the  .<(.  in  there 

14.  7.  Amaziah  slew  of  Eilom  in  the  valley  of  s. 

10,01)0,  1  Chron.  18.  12.  2  Chron.  25.  11. 

F.irai.  1 14.  we  are  salted  with  thes.  of  thepalaco 

6.  9.  that  which  they  have  need  of,  wheat,  s.  wine 

7.  22.  and  s.  without  prescribing  how  much 
.Job  6.6.  can  what  is  unsavourybe  eaten  without  s.? 
Jer.  17.  6.  hut  he  shall  inhabit  places  in  a  s.  land 
F.iek.  43.  21.  the  piiest  shall  ra-sl  s.  upon  thera 

47.  11.  the  marislies  thereof  shall  be  given  to  s. 
7eph.  2.  9.  surely  Moab  shall  be  as  s.  pits 
Mot.  5. 13.  ye  are  the  s.  of  the  earth,  but  if  the  ». 
Mark^.  49.  every  sacrifice  shall  be  salted  with  s. 
50.s.isgood  but  if  s.have  lost  his  saltness, where- 
with will  ye  season  it?  have  s.  in  yourselves 
I.uke  14.  34.  s.  is  good,  hut  if  s.  have  lostisayoar 
C^l.  4.  6.  let  your  speech  be  seasoned  with  s. 
.Jam.  3. 12.  no  fountain  can  yield  s.  water  and  fresh 
See  Covenant. 
SALT-SEA. 
Gen.^•^.'^■  in  the  vale  of  Siddim, which  is  Xhes.-sea 
J\''um.  M.  12.  goings  out  of  it  shall  be  at  the  s.-sea 
J^eut.  3. 17.  coast  ev»>n  to  the  s.-sea  under  Ashdoth 
.Josh.  3.  16.  the  waters  that  came  towartl  the  s.-sea 
12. 3.  sea  cf  plain,  even  to  s.-sea,  15.  2,  5.  118.  19. 

SALTED. 
Frod.  30.  +  35.  make  it  a  perfume  ».  torether 
F'zra  4.  t  14.  we  are  s.  with  the  salt  of  the  palace 
Fzek.  16.  4.  thou  wast  not  s.  at  all,  nor  swaddled 
Mat.!i.^^.  ifsall  lost  savoi]r,wherewith shall  it  be*. 
Mark  9. 49.  for  every  one  shall  be  s.  with  fire,  and 
every  sacrifice  shall  be  s.  with  salt ;  salt  is  goo4 
SALTNESS. 
Psal.  107.  t  34.  he  turneth  a  frditfiil  land  into  «. 
Mark  9.  50.  but  if  the  salt  have  lost  his  s. 

SALVATION 
1.  Is  taken  for  drliverance  from,  or  victory  over, 
outward  dangers  and  enemies.  Exod.  14.  13, 
Stand  still,  and  see  the  salvation  of  the  Lord: 
See  how  he  will  deliver  you  from  the  Fgvptianj 
your  enemies;  JInd  in  \  Sam.  14.  45,  Shall 
Jonathan  die,  who  bath  wrought  this  pent 


SAL 

■alvatjoo  \r  Tirael  7  who  by  Ood^s  assistance 
kath  obtained  thio  signal  victory  over  the  Phi- 


SAL 


8-  /kr  remission  of  sins,  true  faith,  repentance, 
ebedicnce,and  other  saving  graces  ofUie  Hpirit, 
tchich  are  the  way  to  salvation,  i.uke  JU.  f, 
This  day  is  salvation  cuinu  tu  this  liouse. 

3.  Fur  eternal  happiness  hereafter,  which  is  the 
object  uf  oar hopca  and  desires:  'J'hus  itissaid. 
To  give  knowledge  of  salvation  to  his  people, 
Luke  1.  77.  Godly  sorrov^'  worketh  repeiitunce 
unto  salvation,  :i  Cor.  7.  10.  .fJnd  the  gospel 
t*  called,  Tlio  gosiiul  of  salvation,  Eph.  1.  13. 
because  it  brings  the  good  news  that  salvatiim 
is  to  be  had;  it  o£crs  salvation  to  lost  sinners: 
it  shews  the  way  to  attain  it :  it  also  Jits  for 
salvation,  and  at  last  brings  to  iU 

4.  For  the  Author  of  siilcalion.  Psal.  27.  1,  TJie 
Lord  is  my  liglit  and  my  salvation:  He  is  my 
counsellor  in  all  my  dtj/icultics,  and  viy  Com- 
forter and  Deliverer  in  all  tny  distresses. 

5.  For  the  blessed  Jesus,  who  is  the  Saviour  of 
sinners.  J^uke  ii.  30,  Mine  eyes  have  seen  thy 
salvation,  says  Simeon  ;  /  have  seen  him  whom 
thou  hast  sent  into  the  world  to  be  the  Author 
and  procurer  of  salvation  to  lost  sinners 

6.  For  the  praise  and  benediction  that  is  given 
to  (rod.  Hev.  19.  1,  Alleluia,  salvation,  and 
glory,  and  honour,  and  power,  unto  the  Liord 
our  Uod. 

The  Hebrews  but  rarely  make  use  of  concrete 
terms,  as  they  are  called,  but  often  of  ab- 
stracted. Thus,  instead  of  saying  that  God 
saves  them,  and  protects  thnn  ;  they  say,  that 
Ciod  is  their  salvation.  Thus,  the  word  of 
galvalion,  the  joy  of  salvation,  the  rock  of 
salvation,  the  shield  of  salvation,  the  horn  of 
salvation,  the  tower  of  salvation,  &c.  is  as 
much  u.s  to  say,  The  word  that  declares  deliver- 
ance; the  joy  that  attends  the  escaping  a  great 
danger;  a  rock  where  any  one  takes  refuge,  and 
where  he  may  be  in  safety  from  his  enemy ;  a 
buckler  that  secures  from  the  arm  uf  the  enemy; 
a  horn  or  ray  of  glory,  of  happiness,  and  sal- 
nation,  A-e. 

Exod.  14.  13.  see  the  s.  of  the  Lord,  2  Chr.  20. 17. 

Deut.  32.  15.  lightly  esteemed  the  rock  of  his  s. 

1  .Sam.  11.  13.  the  Lord  wrought  s.  in  Israel  to-day 
14. 45.  Jonathan,  who  hath  wrought  this  great  s. 

19.  5.  the  l^ord  wrought  a  great  *.  for  all   [sruel 
S  .Sam.  19.  t  2.  tlie  s.  was  turned  into  mourning 

•22.  51.  he  is  the  tower  of  s.  for  his  king 
1  Chron.  11.  t  H.  tne  Lord  saved  them  by  a  greats. 

16.  23.  show  forth  from  day  to  day  his  s. 
35.  save  us,  O  God  of  our  s.  and  gather  us 
S  Chron.  6.  41.  let  thy  priests  be  clothed  with  s. 
Psal.  3. 8.  8.  belongeth  to  the  Lord,  thy  blessing  is 

14.  7.  O  that  the  s.  of  Israel  were  come,  53.  (i. 

20.  1 1>.  by  the  strength  of  the  ».  of  his  righi-hand 
24.  5.  and  righteousness  from  the  God  of  his  j. 
35.  9.  my  soul  shall  rejoice  in  his  s. 
'SI.  39.  the  s.  of  the  righteous  is  of  the  Lord 
42.  t  5.  I  shall  praise  him,  his  presence  is  s. 
50.  23.  to  him  will  I  shew  the  s.  of  God 
60.  t  U.  for  vain  is  the  s.  of  man,  140.  t  3. 
65.  5.  wilt  thou  answer  us,  O  God  of  our  *.  ? 
68.  19.  blessed  be  the  Lord,  even  the  God  of  our  s. 

20.  he  that  is  our  God,  is  the  God  of  s. 
74.  12.  working  c.  in  the  midst  of  the  earth 
73.  22.  because  they  trusted  not  in  his  5. 
79.  9.  help  us,  O  God  of  our  «.  for  the  glory 
85. 4.  turn  us,  O  God  ofour.5.  cause  anger  to  cease 

9.  surely  his  s.  is  nigh  them  that  fear  him 

95.  1.  miike  a  joyful  noise  to  the  rock  of  our  *. 

96.  2.  shew  forth  his  s.  from  day  to  day 
98.  2.  the  Lord  hath  made  known  his  s. 

3.  ends  of  ilu;  earth  have  seen  the  s.  of  our  God 
116.  13. 1  win  take  the  cup  of  s.  and  cull  on  name 
118.15.  the  voicfl  of*,  is  in  tabernacles  of  righteous 
119.  I.VI.  r.  is  far  from  wicked,  they  seek  not  thy 
132.  Ifi.  1  will  clollio  her  priests  with  «. 
144.  10.  it  11  hr-  that  givcth  n.  unti  kings 
149.  4.  he  will  beautify  the  meek  with  s. 
Inn.  12.  3.  sliall  ye  draw  water  out  of  the  wells  of  J. 
2.5.  9.  we  will  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  his  ». 
fit).  1.  ».  will  God  appoint  for  walls  and  bulwarks 
33.  2.  be  thou  our  n.  in  the  time  of  trouble 

6.  wisdom  and  knowledge,  and  strength  of  ». 
45. 8.  lot  the  earth  open,  and  let  Ihcm  bring  forth  s. 

17.  Israel  shall  bo  savid  with  an  everlastin;  s. 
46.  13.  I  will  place  >.  in  '/.ion  for  Israel  my  glory 
49.  R.  in  a  ilay  of.*,  have  I  h"lpcd  thee 
52.  7.  the  feet  of  him  that  puhlisheth  ». 

10.  ends  of  the  earth  shall  see  the  .<i.  of  our  God 
59.  II.  we  look  for  s.  but  it  is  far  from  us 

16.  thorpfore  his  arm  brought  ».  unto  him 

17.  he  put  on  a  helmet  of  .<:.  iijion  bs  head 
m.  IH.  but  shall  call  thy  walls  .».  iliy  gates  praisf 
61.  10.  he  hath  clothed  inc  with  the  garnienlsof* 
93  1.  and  the  $.  thereof  as  a  lamp,  bat  buriiclh 

SCO 


Isa.  63.5.  therefore  mine  own  arm  brought  *.  to  me 
Jer.  3. 23.  truly  in  vain  is  «.  hoped  for  fioiii  the  hills 
and  iiiuuntains,truly  in  the  Lord  is  the  s.  of  Israel 
l.am.  3.  2ti.  quietly  wait  for  the  s.  of  the  Lord 
Jonah  2.9. 1  will  pay  that!  vowed,*,  is  of  the  Lord 
Hab.  3.  8.  thou  diust  ride  on  thy  chariots  of  «. 
13.  thou  wentest  forth  for  s.  of  thy  pcojilc,  even 
tbr^.with  thine  anointed, wouiidest  the  wicked 
ZecA.  9.9.  behold,  thy  Kiu;;,  he  is  just  and  having  s. 
Luke  l.'(i9.  who  hath  raised  up  a  horn  of  s.  for  us 
77.  to  give  knowledge  of  s.  to  his  people 
3.  t>.  all  llesh  shall  see  the  s.  of  God 
19.  9.  Jesus  said,  this  day  is  s.  come  to  this  house 
./oAn4.22.  we  know  whatweworshijijfor  s.w  of  Jews 
Acts  4.  12.  neither  is  there  s.  in  any  other 
13.  2U.  to  you  is  the  word  of  this  «.  gent 
47.lhou  shouldest  be  for  s.to  the  ends  of  the  earth 
16.  17.  these  men  shew  to  us  ibo  way  of*. 
2d.  2d.  the  «.  of  God  is  sent  to  Ihg  Gentiles 
Horn.  1.  It),  the  gospel  is  the  power  of  God  to  s. 

10.  10.  with  the  mouth  cor:fessi(m  is  made  to  s. 

11.  II.  through  thoir  fall  s.  is  come  to  the  Gentiles 
13. 11.  now  is  our*,  nearer  than  when  we  believed 

2  Cor.  1.6.  whether  we  be  comforted,  it  is  for  your  *. 

6.2.  in  the  day  of  s.  have  I  JUCcoured#thee ;  now 
IS  the  accejited  time,  behold  now  is  the  dayof  s. 

7.  10.  godly  sorrow  wotkeih  repentance  to  s. 
Kph.  1. 13.  aiter  ye  heard  the  go.-.pel  of  your  s. 

6.  17.  take  the  helmet  of  s.  and  the  sword  of  Spirit 
Phil.  1.  28.  which  is  to  you  an  evident  token  of* 

2.12.work  out  your  own  s.  with  fear  and  trembling 

1  Thess.  5.  8.  and  for  a  helmet  the  hope  of  s. 
9.  hath  appointed  us  to  obtain  s.  by  our  Lord  Jes. 

2  Thess.  2.  13.  for  God  hath  chosen  you  to  » 
2  Tim.  2.  10.  that  they  may  obtain  the  s.  in  Christ 

3.  15.  scriptures  are  able  to  make  thee  wise  to  * 
Tit.  2.  II.  the  grace  of  God  that  bringeth  *. 
Heb.  1.  14.  for  them  who  shall  be  heirs  of*. 

2  3.  how  shall  we  escape,  if  we  neglect  so  great  s.? 
JO.lo  make  theCaptain  of  their  *.  perfect  through 

5.  9.  he  became  the  Author  of  eternal  s.  to  all  that 

t).  9.  better  things,  and  things  that  accompany  s. 

9.28.  shall  appear  ihe  second  time  without  sin  to  *. 

1  Pet.  1.  5.  who  are  kept  iliiough  faith  unto  s. 

9.  receiving  the  end  of  your  faith,  s.  of  your  souls 

10.  of  which  *.  the  prophets  have  inquired 

2  Pet.  3.  15.  the  long-suffering  of  the  Lord  is  s. 
.Jude  3.  to  write  to  you  of  the  common  s. 
Wet;.  7. 10.  saying,  s.  to  our  God  ||  19.  1-  *.  to  Lord 

12. 10.  now  is  come  .«.  and  strength,  and  kingdom 

My  SALVATION. 
F.xod.  15. 2.  the  Ld.  is  my  song,  he  is  become  my  s. 
2  .Sam.  22.  3.  ho  is  my  shield,  the  horn  of  »ny  s. 
47.  e.xalted  be  the  rock  ot  7ny  s.  Psal.  16.  46. 
23.  ').  for  this  is  all  my  s.  and  all  my  desire 
./ob  13.  16.  he  also  shall  be  my  s.  for  a  hypocrite 
I'.fal.  25.  5.  for  thou  art  the  God  of  rny  s. 
27.  1.  Lord  Is  my  lighj  and  my  s.  (>2.  6.  Isa.  12. 2. 
9.  leave  me  not,  6  God  ofiny  s.  51.  14.  |  88.  1. 
38.  22.  O  Lord  lyy  s.  II  62.  2.  he  only  is  my  s.  6. 
62.1. my  soul  wails  onGnd,froin  him  cometh  tny .«. 

7.  in  God  is  my  s.  \\  89.26.  my  God,  rock  of  my  s 
91.  16.  I  will  satisfy  him,  and  shew  him  mij  s. 
118.  14.  Of-  Lord  is  become  my  s.  21.   fsa.  12.2. 
140.  7.  ()  (Jod  the  Lord,  the  strength  of  ray  .«. 

ha.  12. 2.  behold,  God  is  my  s.  he  is  become  my  s. 
46. 13.  my  righteousn.  not  far,  my  s.  shall  not  tarry 
49. 6.  thou  mayest  be  my  s.  to  the  end  of  the  earth 
51.  5.  iiiys.  is  gone  forth  ||  6.  my  s. shall  be  forever 

8.  and  my  s.  from  generation  to  generation 
.56.  I.  ?ay  s.  is  near  to  come,  and  my  righteousness 

J\fic.  7.  7.  I  will  wait  for  the  God  of  my  s.  my  God 

/lab.  3.  18.  1  will  joy  in  the  God  of  my  s. 

Phil.  I.  19.  for  I  know  that  this  shall  turn  to  my  s. 

Thy  S.^LVATION. 
Orn.  49.  18.  I  have  waited  for  thy  .1.  O  Lord 
I.S.:»i.2.I.  mouth  enlarged,  bccausaljejoicein  t.  g. 
2  Sam.  22.  36.  thou  liast  also  given  me  the  shield  of 
My  Jt.  thy  gcnl  IcnCKS  made  me  great,  Psal.  18. 35. 
Psiil.  9.  14.  I  will  rejoice  in  Ihy  s. 
13.  5.  my  heart  shall  rejoice  in  thy  s. 

20.  5.  we  will  rejoice  in  thy  s.  and  set  up  banners 

21.  1.  and  in  thy  s.  how  greatly  shall  he  rejoice  ! 
5.  his  glory  is  great  in  thy  s.  honour  and  inajesly 

35.  3.  say  unto  my  soul,  1  am  Ihy  s. 

40. 10. 1  have  declared  thy  faithfulness  and  thy  s. 
Ifi.  let  such  as  love  thy  s.  say,  Lord  he  magnitied 

51.  12.  restore  unto  me  the  joy  of  (Ay  s.  70.  4. 

69.  13.  <)  God,  hear  mo  in  the  truth  of  «Ay  a. 
29.  I  am  poor,  let  lliy  s.  set  me  upon  high 

71.  15.  my  moulh  ^hall  shew  forth  (Ay  s. 

85.  7.  shew  us  Ihy  mercy,  O  Loiil,  grant  us  My  s. 

106.  4.  remember  me,  O  visit  me  with  thy  ». 

119.  41.  let  My  k.  come  according  to  thy  word 
81.  my  soul  faintelh  for  thy  n.  but  I  hope  in  woid 
123.  mine  eyes  fail  for  My  a.  and  for  the  word 
W\.  Lord,  (  have  bopeil  for  ihy  s.  and  done 
174.  I  have  longeil  for  My  .v.  (t  Lord 

ha.  17.  10.  thou  hasi  fnrgotlrn  the  God  of  (Ay  *. 

62.  11.  say  to  Zion,  behold,  My  a.  comelli 


SAM 

I^uke  3.  30l  fo:  mine  eyes  have  seen  My  i. 

SALUTATION. 
Luke  1.  29.  what  manner  of*,  this  should  be 
41.  at  8.  of  Mary,  babe  leaped  in  lier  womb,  44. 

1  Cor.  16. 21.  brethren  greet  you,  the  «.  of  me,  Paul, 
with  mine  own  hand,Cu^  4. 18.  2  Thess.  3. 17. 

SALUTATIONS. 
Mark  12.38.sciibeswho  love  *.in  the  market-placet 

SALUTE. 
Ii^am.l0.4.theywill*.lheeand  give  thee  two  loaves 
13.10.  Saul  went  to  meet  Samuel, thaf  might  *.hiia 
25.  14.  behold,  David  sent  to  *.  our  master 

2  .'<am.  8.  10.  Toi  sent  Joram  his  son  to  *.  David 
2  Kings  4.  29.  *.  him  not,  if  any  «.  thee,  answer  not 

10.  13.  we  go  to  s.  the  children  of  the  king 
Mat.  5.  47.  and  if  ye  *.  your  brethren  only 

10.  12.  when  ye  come  into  a  house,  s.  it 
jrarA15.18.and  began  to*.him,hail  king  of  theJews 
Luke  10.  4.  nor  shoes,  and  *.  no  man  by  the  way 
Acts  25. 13.  Agrippa  and  Bernice  came  to*.  Festuf 
Horn.  16.  5.  *.  my  well-beloved  Epenetus 
7.  *.  AndronicuB  ||  9.  *.  Urbane  our  helper 

10.  *.  Apelles,  *.  Aristobulus'  household 

11.  *.  Hercdian  |1  12.  *.  the  beloved  Persis 

13.  *.  Riifus  chosen  of  the  Lord,  and  his  mother 
16.  *.  with  a  holy  kiss,  the  churches  *.  you 
22. 1  Tcrtius,  who  wrote  this,  *.  you  in  iJie  Lord 

1  Cor.16.19.  the  churches  of  Asia  *.you,Aquila  and 
Priscilla  *.  you  much,  with  church  in  their  house 

2  Cor.  13.  13.  all  the  saints  s.  you,  Phil.  4.  22. 
Phil.  4.  21.  *.  every  saint  in  Christ  Jesus 
C0/.4.15.  *.  the  brethren  in  Laodicea  and  Nymphaa 

2  Tim.  4.  19.  *.  the  household  of  Onesiphorus 
Tit.  3. 15.  all  that  are  with  me,  *.  thee,  greet  them 
I'hilem.  23  there  *.  thee  Epaphras  and  Marcus 
Jlcb.  13.  24.  *  them  that  have  the  rule  over  you  ; 

they  of  Italy  «.  you,  grace  be  with  you  all 

3  John  14.  our  friends  *.  thee,  greet  the  friends 
SALUTED. 

.Tudg.  18.  15.  the  Daniles  came  and  s.  Micah 

1  Sam.  17.  22.  David  came  and  *.  his  brethren 
30.  21.  David  came  near  to  the  people  and  *.  them 

2  Kings  10. 15.  Jehu  *.  Jehonadab,  and  said  to  him 
Mark  9.  15.  the  people  running  to  Jesus,  *.  him 
Luke  1.  40.  Mary  entered,  and  *.  Elisabeth 
Acts  18. 22.  Paul,  when  he  had  s.  the  church,  went 

21.  7.  we  came  to  Ptolemais,  and  s.  the  brethren 

19.  when  Paul  had  s.  James  and  the  elders 

SALUTETH. 

Rom.  10.  23.  Gains  mine  host,  and  Erastus  *.  you 

Col.  4.  10.  Aristarchus  my  fellow-prisoner  *.  you 

12.  Epaphras,  a  servant  of  Christ,  *.  you 

1  Pet.  5.  13.  the  church  that  is  at  Babylon  t.  you 
SAMARITAN. 

Luke  10.  33.  but  a  certain  S.  came  where  he  was 
17.16.fell  down  giving  him  thanks,  and  he  was  a  S. 
John  8.  48.  that  thou  art  a  S.  and  hast  a  devil 
SA.MARITANS. 

2  A'l'n  n-*17.29.houses  of  high  places  the  S.had  mad« 
Mat.  10.  5.  into  any  city  of  the  .S.  enter  yc  not 
/.ukc  9.  52.  they  entered  into  a  village  of  the  5. 
John  4.  9.  the  Jews  have  no  dealings  with  the  S. 

39.  many  of  the  S.  of  that  city  believed  on  liira 

40.  the  S.  he-soiiglit  him  to  tarry  with  them 
Acts  8.  25.  preached  in  many  villages  of  the  S. 

SAME. 
(7 en. 5.29.8aying,this  *.shall  comfort  us  in  our  work 
6.  4.  the  *.  became  mighty  men,  men  of  renown 
10.  12.  and  Resen,  the  *.  is  a  great  city 

14.  8.  the  *.  is  Zoar  ||  23.  2.  the  *.  is  Hebron,  la 
24.  14.  let  the  *.  be  siie  thou  bast  appointed,  44. 
26.  24.  (lie  Loid  appeared  to  Isaac  the  *.  night 
44.  6.  he  overtook  and  spake  them  these  s.  words 
48.  7.  in  the  way  of  Ephrath,  the  ».  is  Beth-Iebem 

F.xod.  25.  31.  his  flowers  shall  be  of  Ihe  ».  37.  17. 


36.  knops  and  branches  shall  be  of  the  5.  37.  22 
27.  2.  his  horns  shall  be  of  the  s.  37.  25.  |  38.  2. 
28.8.  curious  girdle  of  ephod  shall  be  of  the  i.X).5 
A*um.  10.  32.  Ihe  s.  goodness  will  we  do  untolhco 

15.  30.  presumptuously,  the  *.  reproachcth  Ihe  L 
.Josh.  15.  8.  the  Jebusile,  Ihe  s.  is  Jerusalem 
.furig.  7.  4.  the  s.  shall  go,  the  *.  shall  not  go 

1  Sam.  9.  17.  the  *.  shall  reign  over  my  people 

2  Sam.  5.  7.  Zion,  the  *.  is  the  city  of  David 

1  Kings  13. 9.  nor  turn  by  the  *.  way  thou  earnest 

2  King.<i  19.  29.  and  in  the  second  year  ye  slKtll  cat 

that  which  springelh  of  the  *.   /.v<i.  37.  30 

1  Chron.  1.  27.  Abram,  the  .1.  is  Abraham 

16.  17.  bath  confirmed  the  *.  to  Jacob,  Ps.  10.5. 10 

2  Chr.  13.  9.  the  .«.  may  be  a  priest  of  Ihem,  no  gods 
18.  7.  the  a.  is  Miciiiab  the  «on  o(  Imla 

;12.  12.  hath  not  the.?.  Hezekiah  laken  awav 
F.zrn  10.  23.  Shimei,  and  Kelai:ih,  the  s.  is  Kelita 
F.slh.  9. 1.  month  .Adar,  on  thiilpc>nlh  day  of  ihe  t 
17.  on  the  fourteenth  ||  IP.  on  the  fifteenth,  21- 
.hb  4.  8.  Ihey  that  sow  wickedness  reap  the  t 

13.  2.  what  yc  know,  the  a.  do  I  know  also 
Psal.  68.  23.  and  the  toniue  of  ihy  dogs  in  the  t 

75.  8.  full  of  mixture,  he  |  oiireih  out  of  the  ». 

102. 27.  but  lliou  art  Uie  i.  thy  years  have  no  vtd 


SAN 

Ps  113. 3.  to  the  going  down  of  the  *.  Mai  1. 11. 

Prov.  28.  24.  the  «.  is  the  companion  ol'a  destroyer 
Eccl.  9.  15.  no  man  remembered  that  «.  poor  man 
yer.28.J7.so  Hananiah  the  prophet  died  the  «.  year 
£zek.  3.  18.  *.  wiclied  man  shall  die  in  his  iniquity 

21.26.  this  shall  not  be  the  s.  exalt  him  that  is  low 

44.  3.  the  prince  shall  go  out  by  the  way  of  the  s. 
Dan.  7. 21.  the  s.  horn  made  war  with  the  saints 
Amos  2.  7.  a  man  and  his  father  go  in  tp  the  s.  maid 
Mat.  5. 19.  the  s.  shall  be  called  great  in  the  kingd. 
46.  if  love  them,donoteven  the  publicans  the*.? 

12. 5(1  the  5.  is  my  brother  and  sister,  Mark  3.  35. 

21.42.  the  stone  builders  rejected,  the^.is  become 
tho  head  of  the  corner,  J^uke  20. 17. 1  Ptt.  2. 7. 

24.13.  shall  endure,  s.  shall  be  saved,  Mark  13.13. 

26.23.  that  dippeth  his  hand  the  s.  shall  betray  me 

48.  that  s.  is  he,  hold  him  fast,  Mark  14.  44. 
27.  44.  the  thieves  also  cast  the  s.  in  his  teeth 

JtfariS.SS.  lose  life,  the  s.  shall  save  it,  Au/te  9.24. 
9. 3/j.  desire  to  be  tirst,  the  a.  shall  be  last  of  all 

Luke  6.  33.  for  sinners  also  do  even  the  «. 

38.  for  with  the  *.  measure  that  ye  mete  withal 
7.  47.  to  whein  little  is  forgiven  the  s.  loveth  litlle 
9. 43.  that  is  least  among  you,  the  «.  shall  be  great 
16. 1.  the  «.  was  accused  that  he  wasted  his  goods 
20.  47.  the  s.  shall  receive  greater  damnation 

23.  51.  the  s.  had  not  consented  to  the  counsel 
John  1.  2.  the  s.  was  in  the  beginning  with  God 

7.  the  s.  came  for  a  witness  of  the  light 

33.  the  s.  is  he  which  haptizeth  with  the  HolyGh. 

7.  18.  the  J!,  is  true  ||  10.  1.  the  s.  is  a  thief 

8.  25.  the  s.  I  said  to  you  from  the  beginning 

11.  6.  he  abode  two  days  still  in  the  «.  place 

49.  befng  high-priest  that  s.  year,  18.  13. 

12.  48.  the  s.  shall  judge  him  in  the  last  day 
15.5.abidetb  in  me, the  s.bringeth  forth  much  fruit 

Acts  1.11. this  s.  Jesus  shall  so  come  in  like  manner 
2.36.God  made  that  .<;.  Jesus  both  Lord  and  Christ 

7.  19.  the  .<!.  dealt  subtilly  with  our  kindred 

35.  the  4'.  did  God  send  to  be  a  ruler  and  deliverer 
8.35  began  at  the  «.  scripture  and  preached  Jesus 
13. 33.  God  hath  fulfilled  the  .».  to  us  their  children 
14. 9.  the  s.  heard  Paul  SpeaU,  who  beholding  him 
16. 17.  the  s.  followed  Paul  and  us  and  cried 

24.  20.  or  else  let  these  s.  here  say,  if  they  found 
Rom.  1.  32.  who  knowing  not  only  do  the  s. 

2.  3.  that  judgest  them  which  do,  and  doest  the  s. 

8.  20.  who  hath  subjected  the  5.  in  hope 

10. 12.  the  s.  Lord  over  all  is  rich  to  all  that  call 

12.  4.  all  the  members  have  not  the  s.  office 

16.  be  of  the  x.  mind  one  toward  another,  mind 

not  high  things,  lC»r.  1. 10.  Phil.i.'i.lPet.i.l. 

13.3.  do  good,  and  thou  shall  have  praise  of  the  s. 

1  Cor.  1. 10. 1  beseech  that  ye  all  speak  the  s.  thing 

9.  8.  or  saith  not  the  law  the  s.  also  1 

10. 3.  did  all  eat  the  «.  spirit,  meat  ||  4.  the  s.  drink 
12.  4.  but  the  s.  Spirit,  2  Cur.  4.  13.  |  12.  18. 
5.  but  the  s.  Lord  {{  C.  but  it  is  the  .«.  God 
15.  39.  all  flesh  is  not  the  s.  fleVh,  one  kind  of  men 

2  Cor.  2.  2.  but  the  s.  which  is  made  sorry  by  me 

3.  I  wrote  this  s.  unto  you,  lest,  when  I  came 
8.19.admiiiistered  by  us  to  the  glory  of  the  s.  Lord 
9.5.  thats.  might  be  ready  as  a  matter  of  bounty 

Oal.  2.  8.  the  s.  was  mighty  in  me  to  the  Gentiles 

3.  7.  the  s.  are  the  children  of  Abraham 
Eph.i.W.  he  thatdescended  is  the  s.  that  ascended 

6.8.  the  s. shall  he  receive  of  the  Lord,  bond  or  free 
PAi7.1.30.having  tho  s. conflict  which  ye  saw  in  me 

2.  2.  having  s.  love,  being  of  one  accord  and  mind 
3. 16.  let  us  walk  by  the  s.  rule,  mind  the  s.  things 

Col.  4.  2.  and  watch  in  the  s.  with  thanksgiving 
2  Tim.  2.  2.  the  ^.  commit  thou  to  faithful  men 
Htib.  1. 12.  thou  art  the  s.  thy  years  shall  not  fail 
2. 14.  he  also  himself  likewise  took  part  of  the  *. 
11.  9.  the  heirs  with  him  of  the  s.  promise 
13.8.Jesus  Christ,  s.yesterday,to-day,and  for  over 
Jam.  3.  2.  if  any  offend  not,  the  s.  is  a  perfect  man 
)  Pet.  4.  10.  even  so  miriister  the  s.  one  to  another 
2  Pet.  2.  19.  of  the  s.  is  he  brought  in  bondage 

3.  7.  by  the  s.  word  are  kept  in  store,  reserved 

1  JbAn.2.23.  denies  the  Son,  s.  hath  not  the  Father 

27.  as  the  s.  anointing  teacheth  you  all  things 

7?eii.3.5.ovorcoinefh  the  ». shall  be  clothed  in  white 

Sff  Oav,  Hour. 

SANCTIFIC.^TION. 

1  Cor.  1.  30.  in  Christ,  who  of  God  is  made  to  us  « 

1  Thens.i.'i.  this  is  the  will  of  God,  even  your  s. 

4.  should  know  how  to  possess  his  vessel  in  s 

2  Thess.  2. 13.  through  «.  of  the  Spirit,  1  Pet.  1.  2. 

SANCTIFY, 

n'hr.n  referred  to  Ood,  signifies, 

I.  To  !>ej)nrate  and  appoint  any  thinir  to  a  kohj 

and  re.lisrious  use.     God  sanctified  the  seventh 

day,  (ten.  2  3     The  first  born  wore  sanctified, 

Exod.  13.2.    And  thus  the  tabernacle,  the  tem- 

fle,  the  priests,  the  altars,  the  sacrifices,  <S-c. 

were  sanctified  under  the  law. 

C     To  cleanse  a  sinner  from  the  foliation  and 

filth  of  sin,  to  free  him  from  the  power  and 

dtminion  of  sin,  and  endue  him  with  a  prin- 

507 


SAN 

tiple  of  holiness;  thus  God  by  his  Spirit  sanc- 
tifies the  elect,  or  true  believers.  1  Cor.  6.  11, 
And  such  were  some  of  you,  but  ye  are  washed, 
but  ye  are  sanctified. 

3.  To  manifest  his  glory  and  vindicate  his  ho- 
nour from  the  blasphemies  of  the  wicked,  Ezek. 
36.  23,  I  will  sanctify  my  great  name.  /  will 
clear  up,  and  remove  the  objections,  that  the 
sufferinffs  and  sijis  of  the  Jews  have  raised 
amon^  £Ac  Babylonians;  they  gave  the  Heathen 
occasion  to  thinJc  meanly  and  contemptibly  of 
me,  bill  I  will  shew  that  J  am  infinite  in  great- 
ness and  goodness.  Jind  in  Num.  20.  13,  This 
is  the  water  of  Meribah,  because  the  children 
of  Israel  strove  with  the  Lord,  and  he  was 
sanctified  in  them.  He  was  sanctified  among 
them  by  the  demonstration  of  his  omnipotence, 
veracity,  and  clemency  towards  the  Israelites, 
and  of  his  impartial  holiness  and  severity 
against  sin,  even  in  his  greatest  friends  and 
favourites,  as  Moses  was.  Thus  God  is  said 
to  sanctify  himsilf. 

4.  To  free  the  creature  from  the  curse  that  sin 
has  brought  upon  it,  and  make  it  fit  for  a 
free  and  holy  use.  1  Tim.  4.  5,  The  crea- 
ture is  sanctified  by  the  word  of  God,  and 
prayer. 

5.  T»  separate,  ordain,  and  appoint  the  Messiah 
to  be  the  King  and  Head  of  his  church.  John 
10.  36,  Say  ye  of  him  whom  the  Father  hath 
sanctified,  thou  blasphemest,  because  I  said,  I 
am  the  son  of  God  7  that  is,  If  the  title  of 
Gods  be  given  to  those  to  whom  Ood  has  given 
some  part  of  his  dominion,  then  surely  it  does 
much  more  properly  and  truly  belong  to  me, 
whom  viy  Father  has  appointed  to  rule  over 
all  with  himself,  and  whom,  he  has  separated 
and  ordained  for  Mediator  aiid  King  of  his 
church;  which  office  cannot  be  assumed  or  exe- 
cuted by  any  mere  creature,  but  only  by  the 
eternal  Son  of  God.  ■• 

To  sanctify  is  also  spoken  of  man,  and  signifies, 

1.  To  purify,  and  to  be  in  a  proper  condition  to 
appear  before  the  Lord,  and  to  partake  of  holy 
things.  Exod.  !9.  10,  11,  22.  And  the  Lord 
said  unto  Moses,  Go  unto  the  people,  and  sanc- 
tify them  to-day  and  to-morrow  and  let  them 
wash  their  clothes ;  and  be  ready  against  the 
third  day  to  receive  the  law.  And  let  the 
priests  also  which  come  near  to  the  Lord, 
sanctify  themselves,  lest  the  Lord  break  forth 
upon  them. 

2.  To  prepare.  Num.  11.  18,  Sanctify  yourselves 
against  to-morrow,  and  ye  shall  eat  flesh.  Josh. 
3,  5.  Sanctify  yourselves,  for  to-morrow  the 
Lord  will  do  wonders  among  you.  That  is. 
Prepare  yourselves,  em/eavour  to  bring  your 
hearts  to  a  holy  frame,  that  with  faith,  reve- 
'rence,  and  admiration,  you  may  behold  the 
great  work  that  God  will  do  for  you. 

3.  To  praise  God,  to  acknowledge  his  majesty,  to 
worship  him,  to  endeavour  to  make  hint  known, 
adored,  praised,  and  beloved  by  all  those  that 
are  capable  of  it :  thus  men  hallow  or  sanc- 
tify the  name  of  God.  Isa.  8.  13,  Sanctify  the 
Lord  of  hosts  himself,  and  let  him  be  your 
fear.  And  Mat.  6.  9,  Hallowed  be  thy  name. 
IVhen  we  desire  of  God,  that  his  name  may 
be  sanctified  or  hallowed,  it  is,  that  he  may  be 
honoiind,  praised,  and  glorified  through  the 
whole  tcorld,  and  especially  by  those  who  have 
the  happiness  of  knowing  him.  l.ct  them 
sanctify  it  by  their  holy  lives,  their  fidelity, 
their  submission  to  his  orders  :  And  they  that 
know  him  not,  that  they  may  come  to  the 
knowledge  of  him,  may  hear  his  word,  may  be- 
come tractable  to  the  instructions  of  his  minis- 
ters. What  is  meant  by  sanctifying  the  name 
of  God,  may  be  yet  better  apprfhendcd,  by 
what  is  opposite  to  it;  that  is  profaning  Ihr 
name  of  God  by  vain  swearing,  blasphemy, 
and  ascribing  his  name  to  idols;  by  furnishing 
wicked  men  and  infidels  with  an  occasion  of 
blaspheming  it  by  a  bad  life  and  scandalous 
conversation.  It  is  said.  Lev.  10.  3,  I  will 
be  sanctified  in  them  that  come  nigh  me ;  in 
his  priests,  when  by  the  terrible  and  exemplary 
punishment  of  Nadab  and  Ahihn,  tlic  Lord 
shewed  what  purity  he  required  in  his  servants, 
what  punctual  exactness  he  exper.ted  in  his 
service.  In  Num.  20.  12.  the  Lord  complains, 
that  Moses  and  Aaron  did  not  sanctify  him 
before  the  people  of  Israel:  And  how  did  thn/ 
not  sanctify  him  1  By  shoeing  some  distrust 
to  his  words.     Because  ye  believed  me  not. 

Saint,  holy,  holiness,  are  epithets,  which  in  a 
sovereign  manner  are  ascribed  to  God,  th" 
author  of  all  sanctity  and  holiness.  So  the 
Cherubims  and  Seraphims  cry  to  him  without 

'  ceasing,  Holy,  Holy,  Holy,  Isa.  6.  3.     He  is 


SAN 

named  by  way  of  excelle;ice,  the  SairK,  tl!« 
Holy  One  of  Israel,  Isa.  lU.  20.  All  our  hAi 
?ia,s  before  him  is  nothing  but  pollution;  Alf 
name  is  Holy,  or  rather  Holiness  itself. 
To  sanctify  may  be  reduced  to  the  four  following 
significations. 

1.  It  signifies,  To  confess  and  celebrate  that  to  be 
holy,  which  in  itself  was  so  before.  Mat.  6.  9. 
And  thus  it  is  to  be  understood  wheresoever 
God  is  said  to  be  sanctified. 

2.  'To  make  persons  holy,  who  were  impure  and 
defiled  before,  1  Cor.  6.  11.  And  this  is  tht 
sense  of  the  word  in  those  passages  of  scrip- 
ture where  the  elect  are  said  to  be  sanctified. 

3.  To  separate  and  set  apart  some  things,  or 
persons,  from  a  common  unto  a  holy  use,  as 
the  tabernacle,  temple,  priests,  cJi-c. 

4.  To  employ  a  thing  in  holy  and  religious  eier- 
cises,  in  the  worship  of  God  in  public  andpri- 
vale,  and  the  celebration  of  his  works ;  in  this 
and  the  former  sense  the  seventh  day  is  sancti- 
fied, E.\od.  20.  8.- 

Sanctification  differs  from  Justification,  thus: 

1.  Justification,  is  the  absolution  of  a  sinner 
from  the  guilt  of  sin  and  death;  whereas  sanc- 
tification IS  an  alteration  of  qualities  from 
evil  to  good. 

2.  Justification  consists  in  remission  of  sins 
through  the  imputation  of  Christ's  righteous- 
ness ;  sanctification  is  the  renovation  of  nature 
by  the  Holy  Spirit. 

3.  Justification  is  perfect  in  this  life;  so  is  not 
sanctification. 

4.  Justification  is  in  nature  before  sanctification, 
but  not  in  order  of  time ;  for  God  only  sancti- 
fies those  that  are  justified. 

Exod.  13.2.  s.  unto  me  all  the  first-born,  it  is  mine 
19.  10.  go  and  s.  them  today  and  to-morrow 

22.  and  let  the  piiests  also  5.  themselves 

23.  set  bounds  about  the  mount,  and  5.  It 

28.  41.  thou  shall  anoint  and  s.  Aaron  and  hit 

sons,  29.  33,  -14.  |  40.  13.  Lev.  8.  12.  |  21.  8 
29.27.  thou  shall  s.  the  breast  of  the  wave-offering 
36.  and  thou  shall  s.  the  altar,  37.  |  40.  10. 
44.  I  will  s.  the  tabernacle  and  the  allar 

30.  29.  and  thou  shalt  .?.  the  tabernacle  and  all 

his  vessels,  40.  10,  11.  Lev.  8.  11. 

31.  13.  ye  may  know  thai  I  am  the  Lord  that 
doth  s.  you.  Lev.  20.  8.  ]  21.  8.  Eiek.  20.  12. 

Lev.  11.  44.  ye  shall  s.  Yourselves,  20.  7.  Jfum. 

11.  18.  .Josh.  3.  5.  I  7. 13.  1  Sam.  16.  5. 

21. 15.  nor  profane  his  seed,  I  the  Lord  do  «.  him 

23.  for  I  the  Lord  do  s.  them,  22.  9,  16. 

27.  14.  when  a  man  shall  s.  his  house  to  be  holy 

16.  if  a  man  shall  «.  his  field,  17,  18,  22. 

26.  only  the  Lord's  firstling,  no  man  shall  s.  it 

J\rum.  20. 12.  ye  believed  me  not,  to  s.  nie,  27.  14. 

Deut.  5. 12.  keep  ihe  sab.-day,  to  s.  it,  JVch.  13. 22. 

15.  19.  all  the  firstling  males  thou  shalt  s. 
.Tosh.  7.  13.  up,  i'.  the  people,  i.  yourselves 

2  Kinrrs  10. 1 20.  Jehu  said,  s.  an  assembly  for  Baal 

1  Chrln.  15.  12.  *.  yourselves,  2CAr.  20.  5.  |  35.6. 
23.  13.  that  he  should  s.  the  most  holy  things 

2  Chron.  29.34.  Levitcs  move  upright  in  heart,  to  s. 
30.  17.  for  every  one  that  was  not  glean  to  j. 

/.^a.  8.  13.  s.  the'L.  of  hosts  himself,  him  your  fear 

29.  23.  they  shall  s.  the  Holy  One  of  Jacob 
66.  17.  they  that  s.  themselves  in  gardens 

K2e/i.36.23. 1  will  s.mygr.  name  whii  h  was  profan. 
37.  28.  healh(-n  know,  that  I  the  Lord  do  ».  Israel 
38.23.  thus  will  I  magnify  myself,  and  s.  myself 
44.  19.  shall  not  s.  people  wi:h  gnrmenls,  46.  20 
./ocl  I.  14.  «.  ye  a  fast,  2.  15.  ||  3.  t  9.  s.  war 
2.  16.  s.  the  congregation,  assemble  the  elderg 
./ohn  17.17.  s.  them  through  tljy  truth,word  is  tru:li 
19.  and  for  their  sakes  I  «.  myself,  iha»  ihey  may 
F.ph.  5.  2fi.  that  he  might  s.  and  cleanse  the  church 
1  TAc".?.  .">.  23.  the  very  God  of  peaces,  you  wholly 
ffeb.  13.  12.  that  he  might  s.  people  with  his  blood 
1  Pet.  3. 15.  but  s.  the  Lonl.God  in  your  hearts 

SANCTIFIED. 
<?('n.  2. 3.  God  blessed  the  severuh  day  and  s.  it 
Erod.  19. 14.  Moses  s.  ihe  people,  and  they  washed 
29.  43.  the  tabernacle  shall  be  s,  for  my  glory 
Len.  S.lO.s.the  tabernacle,  and  all  that  was  therein 
15.  s.  the  altar  ||  ;{0.  s.  Aaron  and  his  garment* 
10.  3.  I  will  be  s.  in  them  that  come  nigh  me 
27.  1.5.  if  he  that  s.  it  will  redeem  his  house 
19.  and  if  he  that  s.  the  field  will  redeem  it 
JVu7n.7.1.  s.  the'tabcrnac.  instrumenis,  and  vcsseU 
8.  17.  I  s.  the  first-born  of  Israel  for  myself 
Dfu(.32.51. because  ye  s.  me  not  in  Ihe  midst  oflsr. 
.Tosh.  20.  t  7.  and  they  s.  the  cities  of  refuge 
1  .Sam.  7.1.*.  Eleazarh'ssonfokeepthe  ark  of  L. 

16.  5.  he  s.  Jesse  ami  his  sons  to  the  sacrifice 
21.  5.  though  it  were  s.  this  day  in  the  vessol 

1  C/ir.  15. 14.  the  priesU  and  Levites  s.  themselvei 

2  CAron.  5.  11.  all  the  priests  present  were  #. 
7.  If).  I  have  chosen  and  s.  this  house,  20. 

29. 15.  gathered  their  brctliren,  and  *.  thenuflre* 


SAN 

4C!l».29. 17.  they  *.  the  house  oTthc  L.iti  8  days 
19.  all  llie  vcsBols  have  wu  prcjiarcil  and  s. 
'M.  till  the  other  priests  had  £.  tliemsolvca 
30. 3.  the  priests  had  not  s.  iheniBelves  sulhcicntly 
8.  enter  into  hiesanctu.  which  he  hath  s.  foi  ever 
13.  the  Levites  were  ashamed,  and  s.  themselves 
17.  many  in  the  congregation  were  not  «. 

24.  a  great  number  of  the  priests  s.  themselves 
31.  18.  in  their  set  otlice  they  s.  themselves 

JVe/i.  3.  1.  they  built  and  s.  the  slieep  gate 

12.  47.  they  s.  holy  things  to  the  Levites,  and 
the  Levites  «.  them  to  the  children  of  Aaron 

Job  1.  5.  Job  sent  and  j.  his  sons  and  his  daughters 
Jsa.  5.  Hi.  holy  God  shall  be  s.  in  righteousness 

13.  3.  I  have  commanded  my  s.  ones 

Jer.  1.  5.  I  ».  thee,  and  ordained  thee  a  prophet 
r.zek.  -20.  41.  I  will  be  *.  in  you,  3tj.  23. 
28. 22.  when  I  shall  be  «.  in  her||38.  16.  shall  s.  thee 

25.  be  5.  in  them  in  sight  of  the  heathen,  39.  27. 
48.  11.  It  shall  be  for  the  priests  that  are  s. 

Zrph.  1.  t  7.  for  the  Lord  hath  s.  his  guests 
John  10.  36.  say  ye  of  him,  whom  the  Father  s. 

17.  19.  that  they  also  might  be  s.  thro'  thy  truth 
.•icts  20. 32.  an  inheritance  among  them  s.  26.  18. 
Rom.  15.  16.  being  s.  by  the  Holy  Ghost 
1  Cor.  1.  2.  to  them  that  are  5.  in  Christ  Jesus 

6.  11.  but  now  ye  are  s.  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 

7.  14.  the  unbelieving  husband  is  «.  wife  is  s. 

1  7\m.4.5.  it  is  «.  by  the  word  of  God  and  prayer 

2  Tim.  2. 21.  shall  be  a  vessel  ».  for  the  Master's  use 
}Ub.  2.  11.  and  they  »vho  are  s.  are  all  of  one 

10. 10.  by  the  which  will  we  are  .«.  through  Jesus 

14.  he  hath  perfected  for  ever  them  that  are  s. 
29.  blood  of  the  covenant  wherewith  he  was  s. 

Jude  1.  to  them  that  are  .«.  by  God  the  Father 

S.\NC"nKIETH. 
Mat.  23.  17.  or  the  temple  that  s.  the  gold? 

19.  greater  the  gift,  or  the  altar  that  *.  the  gift? 
J/«i.2.1  l.both  he  that  s.and  they  that  are  sanctified 

9.13.  if  blood  of  bulls  .t.to  the  purifying  of  the  flesh 

S.VNCTUARY 
Signifies  A  holy  or  sanctified  place,  a  dwelling, 
place  iif  the  Most  High.  They  called  by  this 
■name  that  part  of  the  temple  of  Jerusalem, 
which  jcas  the  most  .lecrct,  and  most  retired  of 
all  the  rest,  in  which  was  the  ark  of  the  cove- 
nant, and  wherein  none  but  the  high-priest 
might  inter,  and  he  but  once  ill  a  year,  which 
teas  upon  the  day  of  solemn  cipiation.  The 
tame  name  was  also  given  to  the  most  sacred 
part  nf  the  tabernacle,  which  was  set  up  ill  the 
loilderness,  and  which  remained  still  some  time 
after  the  building  of  the  temple:  Each  of  these 
toere  called  Sanctuary,  or  the  Holy  of  Holies,  or 
Die  Most  Holy  Place,'  Lcn.  4.  6.  1  Kings  6.  16. 
It  was  a  square  of  twenty  cubits,  and  divided 
from  the  holy  place  by  a  curtain  or  veil  of  rich 
cloth.  Solomon  had  embellished  the  inside  of 
it  with  palm-trees  in  ie\'ie\o,  and  cherubims  of 
wood  covered  with  plates  of  gold;  and  in  gene- 
ral, the  whole  Sanctuary  jcas  adorned,  and,  as 
it  were,  overlaid  with  plates  of  gold.  From 
between  the  cherubims  which  covered  the  mercy- 
seat,  God  gave  answers  to  his  people,  when 
they  consulted  him  about  momentous  and  im- 
portant matters;  hence,  says  the  Psalmist,  The 
liOrd  send  thee  help  from  the  sanctuary,  Psal. 

20.  2.  It  was  a  type  of  Heaven,  which  is  also 
called  by  the  name  o/ Sanctuary,  Psal.  1U2.  19, 
For  he  hath  looked  down  from  the  height  of  his 
Sanctuary ;  from  heaven  did  the  Lord  behold 
the  earth. 

Bometimi'S  the  word  Sanctuary  is  used  in  gene- 
ral for  the  temple,  taking  its  denomination 
from  its  principal  oart.  2  Chron.  20.  8,  They 
have  built  thee  a  Sanctuary  therein,  for  thy 
name.  .Sometimes  for  the  holy  place,  fur  the 
place  nppninle.d  for  the  public  worship  of  the 
Jyord.  Psal.  73.  17,  Until  I  went  into  the 
Sanctuary  of  God.  It  is  taken  likewise  for 
the  holy  land,  the  land  of  Canaan.  Kiod.  1.5. 
17,  Thou  shall  bring  thorn  in,  and  plant  ihem 
in  the  Sanclunry  which  thy  hands  have  esla- 
l^liahed.  Or,  by  Sanctuary  here  may  be  under- 
Itood  the  temple  on  mount  Moriali,  which 
God  would  certainly  cause  In  be  built  and 
established :  The  past  tense  being  put  fur 
the  future,  to  note  the  r.ertainin  of  it.,  accord- 
ing to  the  style  of  the  prnphr'is.  It  is  said, 
Psal.  114.  2,  Judah  \a  God's  Sanctuary:  tliat 
is,  The  children  of  Isra(!|  (ire  Ihc  people  of 
God's  holiness,  as  they  are  called.  Isa.  63. 
Ifl.  or  Am  holy  people,  sanctified  nnd  set  apart 
from  all  the  nations  of  the  world,  tn  he  hi 
peculiar  people  and  possession,  /.astly,  S:\i\e- 
tuary  is  taken  for  a  refuge,  defence,  ur  prot'c- 
tiov,  Isa.  R.  14,  Ho  nhnll  be  your  siinctuiiry. 
F.irk.  II.  16,  I  will  be  to  thorn  as  a  little 
Sanctuary. 
Ejgd.  15.  17.  thou  ihalt  plant  thoin  in  the  >. 

Ma 


SAN 

F.iod.  25. 8.  let  them  make  me  a  s.  that  I  may  dwell 
30.  J3.  give  every  one  after  the  shekel  of  the  s. 
24.  of  cassia  500  shekels  after  the  shekel  of  the  s. 
36.  1.  to  work  all  manner  of  work  for  the  s.  3,4. 

6.  not  make  any  more  work  for  ottering  of  the  s. 
38.  24.  shekels,  after  the  shekel  of  the  s.  25,  26. 

Lev.  5.  15.  I  27.  3,  25.  JVuni.  3.  47,  50. 
I  7.  13,  19,  25,  31,  37.  |  18.  16. 
27.  of  100  talents  were  cast  the  sockets  of  the  s. 
Lev.  4. 6.  sprinkle  the  blood  before  the  vail  of  the  s. 
10.  4.  cany  your  brethren  from  before  the  s. 
12.4.  nor  come  into  the  s.  till  her  purifying  fulfilled 
16.  33.  he  shall  make  an  atonement  for  the  holy  s. 
19.30.ye  shall  reverence  my  s.\  am  the  Lord,  26. 2. 

21.  12.  neither  shall  he  go  out  of  the  £.  nor  pro- 

fane the  *-.  of  his  God  ;  I  am  the  Loijl 
JVum.  3.  28.  males  8600,  keeping  charge  of  the  «. 
38.  Aaron  and  his  sons  keeping  charge  of  the  £. 
4.  12.  wherewith  they  minister  in  the  s. 

15. when  theyhave  made  an  end  of  covering  the*. 
7.  9.  the  service  of  s.  belonging  unto  them 
8. 19.  when  children  of  Israel  come  nigh  to  \\\es. 

10.  21.  Kohathites  set  forward,  bearing  the  s. 
18.  1.  with  thee  shall  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  s. 

3.  they  shall  not  come  nigh  the  vessels  of  the  s. 
5.  and  ye  shall  keep  the  charge  of  the  s. 
19.20.  because  he  hath  defiled  the  s.  of  the  Lord 
Josh.  24.  26.  he  set  u|)  a  great  stone  by  the  St 

1  Chron.  9.  29.  to  oveiseo  the  instruments  of  the  s. 

22.  19.  arise,  and  build  ye  the  «.  of  the  liOrd 
24.  5.  divided  by  lot,  for  the  governors  of  the  s. 

28.  10.  hath  chosen  to  build  a  house  for  the  s. 

2  Chron.  20.  8.  they  have  built  thee  a  s.  therein 
21).  18.  go  out  of  the  s.  for  thou  hast  trespassed 

29.  21.  for  a  sin  offering  for  the  s.  and  Judah 
30.8.but  yield  yourselves  to  Lord,  enter  into  his  «. 

19.  according  to  the  purification  of  the  s. 

36.  17.  the  king  of  Babylon  slew  men  in  the  s. 
JVfA.  10.  .'59.  where  are  the  vessels  of  the  s. 
Psal:  20.  2.  the  Lord  send  thee  help  from  the  s. 

28.  t  2.  toward  the  oracle  of  thy  holy  s. 

29.  t  2.  worship  the  Lord  in  his  glorious  s. 
63.  2.  to  see  thee,  as  I  have  seen  thee  in  the  s. 
68.  24.  they  have  seen  thy  goings  in  the  .«. 

73. 17.  till  i  went  into  the  s.  of  God,  I  understood 
74.  3.  all  that  the  enemy  hath  done  wickedly  ins. 

7.  they  have  cast  fire  into  thy  s.  they  have  defiled 
77. 13.  thy  way,  O  God,  is  in  the  s.  who  so  great 
78.  54.  he  brought  them  to  the  border  of  his  s. 

69.  and  he  built  his  s.  like  high  palaces 
96.  6.  strength  and  beauty  are  in  his  s. 
102.  19.  he  hath  looked  from  the  height  of  his  s. 
114.  2.  Judah  was  his  s.  Israel  his  dominion 
134.  2.  lift  up  your  hands  in  the  s.  bless  the  Lord 
150.  1.  praise  the  Lord,  praise  God  in  his  s. 
Isa.  8.  14.  the  Lord  of  hosts,  he  shall  be  for  a  s. 
16.  12.  that  he  shall  come  to  his  s.  to  pray 

43.  28.  I  have  profaned  the  princes  of  the  s. 
60.  13.  to  beautify  the  place  of  my  s. 

63. 18.  our  adversaries  liave  trodden  down  thy  s. 
.Ter.  17.  12.  from  the  beginning  is  the  place  of  our  s. 
Aam.l.lO.hath  seen  the  heathen  entered  into  hers. 

2.  7.  the  Lord  hath  abhorred  his  s. 

20.  shall  the  priest  and  prophet  be  slain  in  the  s.? 
4.  1.  stones  of  the  s.  are  poured  out  in  the  street 

F.zck.  5.  11.  because  thou  hast  detiled  my  s. 

11.  16.  yet  will  I  be  to  them  as  a  little  s. 

23.  38.  they  defiled  my  s.  in  the  same  day 
39.lheyeame  the  same  dayinto  my  ,v.lo  profane  it 

42.  20.  between  the  .e.  and  the  profane  [>WKe 

44.  5.  with  every  going  forth  of  the  s. 

27.  and  in  the  day  that  he  goeth  into  the  s. 
4.5.  3.  in  it  shall  be  the  s.  and  most  holy  i>laco 
47. 12. because  theirwaters  theyissued  out  of  the  s. 
48.  8.  the  s.  shall  bo  in  the  midst  of  it,  10,  21. 
Dan.f:.  11.  and  the  place  of  his  s.  was  cast  dowji 

13.  to  give  the  s.  to  be  trodden  under  foot 

14.  he  said  to  nir,  then  shall  the  s.  be  cleansed 
9.  17.  and  cause  thy  face  to  shine  upon  thy  s. 

26.  the  people  shall  destroy  the  city  and  the  ». 
II.  31.  they  shall  pcdiute  the  s.  of  strength 
JImos  7.  t  13.  Heth-el  is  the  king's  .i.  and  court 
Zeph.  3.  4.  her  priests  have  polluted  the  >. 
Heb.H.2.  n  minifllor  of  the  s.and  the  true  tabernacle 
9.  I.  verily  the  first  covenant  had  a  worldly  s. 
2.  there  was  a  tabernaehi,  which  is  called  Ihcs. 
13.  11.  whose  blood  is  hroiighl  into  the  s. 

SANCTUARIES. 
/■./'i'.2l.23.shalt  iioljfom,  that  he  profane  not  my  ». 
26.  31.  and  I  will  bring  your  s.  to  desolation 
./(•r.51. 51. St  rangers  are  come  into.«.of  Lord's  house 
F.zek.^i*.  18.  hast  defiled  thy  .«.  by  thine  iniipiities 
.Imns  7.  9.  the  s.  of  Israel  shall  bo  laid  waste 

SA.'Vn. 
.1  similitude  taken  from  the  sand  of  the  sea,  is 
often  made  use  of,  to  express  a  nrry  great  mul- 
titude, or  a  very  great  weight,  or  something 
vrrif  grievous  and  intolerable.  God  promises 
Abraham  and  Jacob  to  multiply  their  posterity 
as  the  stars  of  heaven,  and  as  the  nand  of  the 


SAR 

$ea.  Gen.  23.  17.  |  "Xi.  12.    Job  compares  thi 
weight  of  his  ajjliclions  and  troubles  to  that  of 
the  sand  of  the  sea.  Job  6.  3,  Oh  that  my  grief 
were  weighed,  for  now  it  would  be  heavier  ihaa 
the  sand  of  the  sea.     JInd  Solomon  says,  that 
the  sand  and  gravel  are  very  heavy  things,  yet 
the  anger  of  a  fool  is  much  heavier,  Prov.  27.  3L 
JJ  fool's  anger  is  more  insupportable,  more  lit- 
tolerable, ^s  being  without  cause,  without  mea- 
sure, without  end.     Sand  is  likewise  of  a  slip- 
pery nature;  hence  it  is  said,  that  a  house  butU 
upon  it  cannot  stand,  Mat.  7.  26. 
The  prophet  iciemia.\i  magnifies  the  omnipotence 
of  God,  who  has  fixed  the  sand  of  the  shore  for 
the  boundaries  of  the  sea,  and  has  said  to  it, 
Hitherto  thou  shalt  come,  and  here  thou  shall 
break  thy  foaming  waves,  and  shalt  pass  no 
further,  ./er.  5.  22. 
Gen.  22.  17.  multiply  thy  seed  as  the  s.  32.  12. 
41.  49.  Joseph  gathered  com  as  the  s.  of  the  sea 
Kxod.  2. 12.  he  slew  and  hid  the  Egyptian  in  the  a 
IJeut.  33. 19.  tlicy  shall  suck  of  treasures  hid  in  s 
Josh.  11.  4.  there  went  out  much  people  as  the  ». 
Judg.  7. 12.  their  camels  were  as  the  s.  by  the  sea 

1  6<(7/i.  13.  5.  the  Pliilist.  gathered  to  fight  as  the  s 

2  Sam.  17.  11.  that  all  Israel  be  gathered  as  the  a 
1  Kings  4. 20.  Judah  and  Israel  are  many,  as  the  « 

29. God  gave  Solomon  largeness  of  heart  as  the* 
Job  6.  3.  for  now  it  would  be  heavier  than  tlie  s. 

29.  18.  and  I  shall  multiply  my  days  as  the  *. 
Psal.  78.  27.  and  feathered  fowls  like  as  tiie  9. 

139.  18.  they  arc  more  in  number  than  the  ». 
Prov.  27.  3.  a  stone  is  heavy,  and  the  s.  weighty 
Isa.  10.22.  though  thy  people  Isr.  be  as  the  s.  of  sea 

48.  19.  thy  seed  also  had  been  as  s.  and  offspring 
.7fr. 5.22.  which  placed  the  s.  for  a  bound  of  the  sea 

15.8.that  widows  are  increased  to  me  above  the  s. 

33.  22.  as  the  s.  of  the  sea,  cannot  be  measured 
//os. 1.10.  Israel  shall  be  as  s.  of  the  sea,  Iiom.9.^7. 
Hub.  1.  9.  they  shall  gather  the  captivity  as  the  s. 
Mat.  7.  26.  a  foolish  man  who  built  his  house  on  s. 
Heb.  11.  12.  there  sprang  of  one  so  many  as  thes. 
liev.  13. 1.  I  stood  upon  the  s.  of  the  sea  and  saw 

20.  8.  the  number  of  whom  is  as  the  4.  of  the  sea 

SANDALS, 

Jit  first  were  only  soles  tied  to  the  feet  with  strings 

or  thongs;  afterwards  they  were  covered;  and 

at  last  they  called  even  shoes.  Sandals. 

Mark  6.9.  but  be  shod  with  s.  put  not  on  two  coats 

Jlcts  12.  8.  angel  said,  gird  thyself,  and  bind  thy  s 

SANG. 
F.xod.  15.  1.  then  s.  Moses  and  Israel  this  song 
JVum.  21.  17.  Israel  s.  this  song,  spring,  O  well 
Judg.  5.  I.  then  s.  Deborah  and  Barak,  saying 

1  Sam.  29.  5.  is  not  this  David  of  whom  they  s.? 

2  CAr.  29.  28.  the  singers  s.  the  trumpeters  sounded 
30.s.praiseswitli  gladness,aiid  bowed  their  heads 

J^eh.  12.  42.  the  singers  s.  aloud,  with  Jezraliiah 
.Job  38.  7.  when  the  fhorning  stars  .•!.  together 
Psal.  106.  12.  they  believed  his  words,  s.  his  praise 
Mcts  16.  25.  Paul  and  Silas  s.  praises  to  God 

SANK. 

Ezod.  15.  5.  they  s.  into  the  bottom  as  a  stone 

10.  they  s.  as  lead  in  the  mighty  waters 

SAP. 

Psal.  104.  16.  the  trees  of  the  I,ord  are  full  of*. 

SAPPHIRE 
.Is  a  precious  stone,  second  only  tn  the  diamond 
in  lustre,  hardness,  and  price;  there  is  frequent 
mention  made  of  it  in  scripture :  Job  says, 
there  are  places  whose  stones  are  sapphires, 
.hb  28.  6.  that  is,  that  saiiiihire.'s,  and  other 
precious  stones,  are  very  common  in  some  coun- 
tries ;  they  are  mixed  with  the  stones,  and  cut 
out  of  them  and  polished.    Pliny  says,  that  the 
best  came  out  of  Media;  perhaps,  out  of  the 
country  of  the  Sapires,  or /rom  mount  Sophar, 
mentioned  by  Moses,  Gen.  10.  30.    The  oriental 
sapphire  is  of  a  blue  sky-colour,  or  a  fine  azure: 
whence    it  is,  that   the  prophets  describe  the 
throne  of  God,  as  it  were  of  the  colour  of  a 
sapphire  ;  that  is,  of  a  celestial  blue,  or  aiure, 
E.xod.  24.  10. 
Friid.  24.  10.  as  it  were  a  paved  work  of.*,  stone 
28.  18.  ilie  second  row  a  ff.  a  diamond,  39.  11. 
./(»4 28. 16. wisdom  cannot  be  valueil  withonyx  or.». 
/.am.  4.  7.  her  Nnzarilos,  their  polishing  was  o( s. 
/;:rA-.1.26.likeno68ofa  throne,  as  appearance  of*. 
10.  1.  there  appeared  over  them  as  it  were  a  s. 
28.  13.  the  .».  and  the  emerald  were  thy  covering 
ftcii.2l.l9.the  second  foundation  of  the  wall  was*. 

SAPPHIRES. 
.fob  28.  6.  the  stones  of  it  are  the  place  of  «. 
rV(»r. 5.14. his  bellv  as  bright  ivory.ovcrlnid  with*. 
Isa.  54.  11.  I  will  lav  Ihv  foundations  with  s. 

SARDINE. 
Ref.  4.  3.  he  was  tn  look  upon  like  a  s.  stone 

SARDIUS, 
Or  Ruby,  in  Hebrew,  Odem  :  .'7  gem  found  about 
I    Sardii  of  a  bloody  colour;  some  translate  i(  b$ 


SAT 


It    KOS    the  first    in 


ruby,   or  by   pyropus 
Aaron's  breast-plate. 
Ezod.  'is.  17.  tlie  lirst  row  shall  be  a  j.  39.  10, 
Eiek.  2d.  13.  tlie  «.  and  diamond  were  lliy  covering 
Hev.H.'.iO.  llie  aixtli  loundution  of  llio  wall  was  a  s. 

SARDONYX, 
Jls  if  it  were  a  Sardius  united  to  an  Onyx,  as  par- 
takingoj  both  tkeir  colours.  The  Onyx  ts  apre- 
cious  slonc,  commonly  called  Cornelian.  Tlie 
6asis<;/tAe  Cornelian  is  white,  us  the  nail  grow- 
ing under  thefies/i.  The  Hebrew  uiurtZ  Slioliein 
ha$  been  translated  by  Sardonycbus  Lapis, 
which  rather  signifies  an  Emerald. 
Rev.  21.  '2,0.  tlt'lh  louMdalion  of  wall  ot'city  was  a.s. 

SAT. 
Oen.31.34.Rach.  had  taken  and  s.  upon  the  images 
3S.  14.  Tamar  covered  with  a  vail,  6. in  open  j)luce 
Exod.  12.29.  lirst-born  of  Pharaoh  that  £.  on  throne 
IG.  3.  when  we  sat  by  the  Hesh-pots,  and  did  eat 
I8.13.on  the  morrow  Moses  s.  to  judge  the  peopli 
Judg.  20.  26.  they  wept  and  s.  belbre  the  Lord 
1  Sam.i.  9.how  Eli  s.  on  a  seat  by  a  post  of  temple 
4.  13.  Eli  s.  on  a  seat  by  the  way-side,  watching 

1  Kings  16.11.  as  soon  ashcs.on  his  throne,he  slew 

21.  13.  the  children  of  Belial  i.  before  Nabuth 

22.  10.  the  two  kings  s.  each  on  his  throne 

2  Kings  (j.  32.  but  Elisha  s.  in  his  house,and  elders 

s.  with  him,  and  the  king  sent  a  messenger 
1  Chron.  17. 1.  as  David  «.  in  his  house,  he  said 

16.  David  s.  before  the  Lord  and  said, who  am  1 1 
Jfeh.  8.  17.  they  made  booths,  «id  s.  under  them 
Job  29.  25.  I  chose  out  their  way,  and  s.  chief 
Psal.  26.  4.  I  have  not  a",  with  vain  persons 
Jer.  3.  2.  in  the  ways  hast  thou  s.  for  them 
15.17.1 «.  not  in  the  assembly  of  the  mockers,  nor 
rejoiced,  I  s.  alone  because  of  thy  hand 
36.  22.  now  the  king  s.  in  the  winter-house 
Eiek.  3. 15.  I  «.  where  they  5.  an#  remained  there 
8.  I.  as  I  s.  m  my  house,  the  elders  s.  before  me 
14.  behold,  there  s.  women  weeping  forTammuz 
20.  1.  the  elders  came  to  inquire  of  the  Ld.  and  s, 
Dan.  2.  40.  but  Daniel  s.  in  the  gale  of  the  king 
i^at.4.16.peoplc,  who  «.  indarkn.  saw  greatlight; 
to  them  that  s.  in  shadow  of  deatli  light  is 
sprung  up 
14.  9.  for  them  which  s.  with  him,  Mark  6.  26. 
26.55.  I  s.  daily  with  you  teaching  in  the  temple 
58.  Peter  s.  with  the  servant:*  to  see  the  end 
Mark  10.  46.  blind  Bartinieus  .?.  by  the  way-side 
begging,  I.ukc  \8.  35.  John  9.  8, 
16.  19.  and  he  «.  on  the  right  hand  of  God 
Z,uAe7.15.he  that  was  dead  s.  up,  and  beg.  to  speak 
10.39.  Mary  s.  at  Jesus'  feet,  and  heard  his  words 
19.  30.  a  coll  whereon  never  man  s.  Mark  11.  2. 
John  4.  6.  Jesns  wearied,  s.  thus  on  the  well 
^cts  2.  3.  cloven  tongues  s.  upon  each  of  them 
3.  10.  he  who  s.  for  alms  at  the  beautiful  gate 
Reo.  4.3.  he  that  s.  on  the  throne  was  like  a  jasper 
14.  14.  on  the  cloud  one  s.  like  the  Son  of  man 
19.  11.  he  that  s.  upon  him  was  called  Faithful 
19.  to  make  war  Jigaiiist  him  thats.  on  the  horse 
SAT  down. 
Exod.  32.  6.  the  people  6-.  down  to  eat  and  to  drink 
Deut.  33.  3.  and  they  s.  down  at  thy  feet 
Ezra  9.  3.  plucked  otf  hair,  and  s.  down  astonied 
10.  16.  they  s.  down  to  examine  the  matter 
J^eh.  1.  4.  1  s.  down  and  mourned  certain  days 
Esth.  3.  15.  the  king  and  Haman  s.  down  to  drink 
Job  2.  8.  Job  s.  down  among  the  ashes 
Psal.  137.  1.  there  we  s  down,  yea,  we  wept 
Can£.2.3.T  s.  down  under  his  shadow  with  delight 
JJ/a<.9.10.many  sinners  came  and  s.  down  with  him 
26.  20.  he  s   down  with  the  twelve,  Luke  22.  14 
Luke  4.  20.  gave  book  to  the  minister,  and  .9.  down 
5.3.  .1.  down  and  taught  the  people  out  of  the  ship 
■/oAnS.  2.  people  came,  has. down  and  taught  them 
Sets  13.  14.  they  went  into  the  synag.  and  s.down 
16.  13.  we  .«.  dawn  and  spake  to  the  women 
Heb.X.'i.s.  down  on  the  right  hand  of  God,  10.  12. 

SATAN, 
Or  Sathan,  or  Salhanas:  This  is  a  mere  Hebrew 
word,  and  signifies  an  adversary,  an  enemy, 
an  accuser.  Satan,  m  scripture,  is  sometimes 
taken  in  the  sense  of  an  adversary;  for  exam- 
ple, Christ  satjs  to  Peter,  Get  thee  behind  me, 
Satan,  thou  art  an  offence  unto  me,  Mat.  16. 
23.  That  is.  Begone,  O  mine  adoersa^)/, 
thou  that  with.itandest  what  I  most  desire,  and 
tchat  I  came  into  the  world  about,  namely,  to 
lay  down  my  life  for  the  elect ;  in  that  thou 
dissuadest  me  from  this,  thou  art  an  enemy  to 
the  redemption  andsalvation  of  mankind,which 
is  a  work  fit  for  none  but  a  devil.  But  most 
commonly  Saian  is  taken  for  the  Devil.  Mat. 
12.  26,  if  Satan  cast  out  Satan,  he  is  divided 
against  himself.  Rev.  20.  2,  He  laid  hold  on 
(he  dragon,  that  old  serpent,  which  is  the 
Uevil  and  Satan,  and  bound  him  .%  thousand 
years.  He  is  said  to  stand  at  Joshua's  right 
hand  and  to  accuse  him  and  the  Jetct  before 
509 


SAT 

Ood,  and  to  oppose  them  in  building  tb.«  temple, 
Zech.  3.  1. 


The  kingdom  of  Satan,  Mat.  12.  26.     Our  Sa- 
viour represents    Satan    as  a   monarch,  who 
has  other  subordinate  devils  obedient  to  hint. 
Beelzebub  is,  as  it  were,  their  king.     If  Beel- 
zebub, says  he,  cast  out  devils,  his  kingdom 
is  divided  against  itself,  he  labours  for  his  own 
ruin,  which   is   by   no   means   credible;   it  is 
therefore  false,  that  I  drive  out  devils  in  the 
name  o/Beelzebub.  The  apostle  Paul  declares  in 
Acts  2(5.  18.  that  all  those  who  believe  not  in 
Christ  are  undtr  the  empire  and  power  of  Satan. 
The  synagogue  of  Satan,  of  which  the  evange- 
list John  makes  mention,  Uev.  2.  9.  are  pro- 
bably the  unbelieving  Jews,  the  false  zealots 
for  the  law  of  Moses,  who  at  the  beginning 
were  the  most  eager  persecutors  of  the  Chris- 
tians.  They  were  very  numerous  at  Smyrna,  to 
the  angel  of  which  church  St.  John  speaks  in 
this  passage. 
The  depths  of  Satan.     Sf.  John,  writing  to  the 
Christians,  of  the  church  of  Thyatira,  says  to 
them,     You   know  not  the  depths   of  Satan ; 
which  have  not  known   the  depths  of  Satan, 
Tx  Hx^ix  Tu    o-»T»v8,   Rev.   2.   24.     That  is 
the  mysteries  of  the    Nicolaitans,    and  of  the 
Simoniaus,  who  concealed  their  errors  under  a 
mysterious  abstruseness  ■  they  spoke  of  certain 
intelligences  that  had  created  the  world,  and 
that  were  in  opposition  to  the  Creator.     They 
taught  aprofoundknowledge  cuncerningthe  na- 
ture of  the  angels,  and  their  different  degrees. 
'They  had  secret  books  written  in  an  abstruse 
and  mysterious  manner ;  and  these  arc  called 
the  depths  of  Satan. 
When  Christ  sent  forth  his  disciples  to  preach 
in  the  cities  and  villages  of  Judea,  they  re- 
turned back  with  great  joy,  and  told  him,  say- 
ing.   Lord,  even  the  devils  are  subject  to  us 
through  thy  name.    Jesus  tells  them,  1  beheld 
Satan    as   lightning   fall    from   heaven,   Luke 
10.  17,   18.     Ne  seems  to  allude  to  that  pas- 
sage  of  Isaiah ;   How    art   thou   fallen  Iroin 
heaven,  O  Lucifer,  son  of  the  morning  !     Isa. 
14.   12.      By   which  lie  insinuated,    that   the 
kingdom  of  the  devil  was  coming  to  a  period  ; 
that  Satan  should  soon   lose  his   poujer   and 
dominion  in  the  world,  by  the  preaching  and 
miracles  of  the  apostles.     Jind  in  Luke  22.31. 
he  says,  Simon,    Simon,   behold   Satan   hath 
desired  to  have  thee,  that  he  may  sift  you  as 
wheat;  but  I  have  prayed   for  thee   that  thy 
faith  fail  not ;  shewing  thereby  what  vain  ef- 
forts the  devil  would  make  to  destroy  the  infant 
church. 
By  collecting  the  passages  where  Satan  or  the 
Devil  is  mentioned,  it  may  be  observed:  that 
he  fell  from  heaven,  with   all  his  company  ; 
that  God  cast  him  down  from  thence  for  the 
punishment  of  his  pride;  that  by  his  envy  and 
malice,  si7i,  death,  and  all  other  evils,  came  into 
the  world ;  that  by  the  permission  of  God  lie 
exercises  a  sort  of  government  in  the  world 
over  his  subordinates,  over  apostate  angels  like 
himself;  thai  God  makes  use  of  him  to  prove 
good  men,  and  chastise  bad  ones ;  that  he  is 
a  lying  spirit  in  the  mouth  of  false  prophets, 
seducers,  and  heretics ;  that  it  is  he,  or  some 
of  his, that  torment  or  possess  men,  that  inspire 
them  with  evil  designs,  as  he  did  David  when  he 
suggested  to  him  to  number  his  people,  and  to 
Judas  to  betray  his  Lord  and  Master,  and  to 
Ananias,  and  Sapphira,  to  conceal  the  price  of 
their  field.     That  he  roves  full  of  rage,  like 
a  roaring  lion,  to  tempt,  to  betray,  to  destroy 
us,  and  to  involve  us   in  guilt   and  wicked- 
ness.  That  hispowerand  maliceare  restrained 
within  certain  limits,  and  controlled  bythewill 
of  God.     In  a  word,  that  he  is  an  enemy  to 
God  and  man,  aiui  uses  his  utmost  endeavours 
to  rob  God  of  his  glory,  and  men  of  their  souls. 
.See  Devil. 
1  Chron.il.  1. 5.  provoked  David  to  number  Israel 
Job  1.  ().  and  s.  came  also  among  them,  2.  1. 

12.  s.  went  out  from  the  jjresence  of  the  Lord 
Psal.  109.  6.  and  let  s.  stand  at  his  right  hand 
Zech.3.  l.s.  standing  at  his  right  hand  to  resist  him 
2.  the  I,ord  said  to  s.  the  Lord  rebuke  thee,  O  s. 
Mat.  4.  10.  Jesus  saith  to  him,  gel  thee  hence  s. 
12.26.  its.  cast  out  .9.  Mark  3.23,26.  LukeW.  18. 
16.23.getiheebehindmes.  J(/ftrt8.33.  Luke 4.8. 
Mark  4.  15.  s.  Cometh  and  taketh  away  the  word 
LukeW.  18.  (  beheld  s.as  lightning  fall  from  heaven 
13.  16.  whom  s.  hath  bound  these  eighteen  years 
22.3.  then  enteieds.  into  Judas  Israriot,  of  twelve 
31.  Simon,  Simon,  s.  hath  desired  to  have  you 
■fohn  13.  27.  and  after  the  sop,  s.  entered  into  him 
j?c««  5.  3.  why  hath  s.  filled  thine  heart  to  lie  ? 
26.  18.  to  turn  them  from  the  power  of  s.  to  God  1 


SAV 

Rom.  16.  20.  God  shall  bruise  ».  under  your  ftet 

I  Cor.  5.  5.  to  deliver  such  a  one  to  s.  that  ipirit 

7.  5.  that  s.  tempt  you  not  for  your  incontinency 

iCor.  2.  11.  lest  *-.  should  get  an  advantage  of  us 

11.  14. s.  himself  is  transformed  into  angel  of  light 
12. 7.was  given  me  tiie  messenger  of  s.  to  bufTetme 

1  7'A£ss.2.18.we  would  have  coine,buts. hindered u» 

2  7'^»«.2.9.whose  coming  is  after  the  working  of*. 
1  Tim.  1.  20.  whom  1  have  delivered  unto  s. 

5.15.  for  some  are  already  turned  aside  after*. 

Rev.  2.  9.  are  not  Jews,  but  the  synagogue  of  s. 

13.  where  Satan's  seat  is,  where  s.  dwelleth 

24.  and  who  have  not  known  the  depths  of*. 

3.  9.  I  will  make  them  of  the  synagogue  of*. 

12.  9.  the  great  dragon  was  cast  out,  called  *. 
20.  2.  he  laid  hold  on  the  dragon,  which  is  *. 

7.  s.  shall  be  loosed  out  of  his  prison 
SATIATE. 
.Ter.  31. 14. 1  will  5.  soul  of  the  priests  with  fatjiCBi 
46.  10.  the  sword  shall  be  s.  with  their  blood 

SATIATED. 
./er.31.25. 1  have  s.the  weary  soul,  and  replenished 

SATISFACTION. 
JV«ni.35.  31.  shall  take  no  s.  for  life  of  a  murderer 
32.  shall  take  no  .9.  for  him  that  is  fled  for  refuge 
SATISFY. 
Job  38.  27.  to  s.  the  desolate  and  waste  ground 
Psal.  90.  14.  O  s.  us  early  with  thy  mercy 
91. 16.  with  long  life  will  I «. him, and  shew  salvaU 
132. 15.  I  will  i-.  her  poor  with  bread 
Prov.  5.  19.  let  her  breasts  s.  thee  at  all  tinjes 
6.  30.  if  he  steal  to  s.  his  soul  when  he  is  hungry 
/*a.58.10.if  thou  s.  the  afflicted  soul,  then  thy  light 
11.  Lord  shall  guide  and  «.  thy  soul  in  drought 
Ezek.  7.  19.  they  shall  nut  s.  their  souls,  nor  fill 
Mark  8.  4.  whence  can  a  man  s.  these  with  bread 

SATiSFIED. 
Exod.  15.  9.  my  lust  shall  be  s.  upon  them 
I^ev.  26.  26.  and  ye  shall  eat  and  not  be  s. 
Deut.  14.  29.  the  fatherless  shall  eat  and  be  s. 
33.  23.  O  Naphtali,  s.  with  favour,  and  full 
Job  19.  22.  and  why  are  ye  nets,  with  my  flesh  ? 
27.  14.  his  offspring  shall  not  be  s.  with  bread 
31.31.  oh  that  we  had  of  hisHesh  !  we  cannot  be  *. 
Psal.n.15.  Ishallbes.  when  awake  with  thy  liken. 
22.  26.the  meek  shall  eat  and  be  s.they  shall  praise 

36.  8.  they  shall  be  «.  with  the  fatness  of  thy  housa 

37.  19.  in  the  days  of  famine  they  shall  be  s, 
59.  15.  and  let  them  grudge  if  they  be  not  s. 
63.  5.  my  soul  shall  be  s.  us  with  mar.  and  fatness 
63.4.we  shall  be  s.  with  the  goodno.ss  of  thy  house 
81.16.with  honey  out  of  rock  should  I  haves,  thee 
104.13.  the  earth  is  s.  with  the  fruit  of  thy  works 
105.  40.  he  4'.  them  with  the  bread  of  heaven 

Prov.  12.  11.  he  that  tillelh  his  land  shall  be  s. 
14.amanbes.with  good  by  the  fruitof  his  mouth 
14.  14.  and  a  good  man  shall  be  s.  from  himself 
18. 20.  a  man's  belly  be  s.  with  fruit  of  his  mouth 

19.  23.  and  he  that  hath  it  shall  abide  *. 

20.  13.  open  thine  eyes,  and  thou  shall  be  * 
30.  15.  there  are  three  things  that  are  never  *. 

Eccl.  1.  8.  the  eye  is  not  s.  with  seeing,  nor  the  ear 

4.  8.  neither  is  his  eye  s.  with  riches 

5.  10.  that  loveth  silver,  shall  notbe  s.  with  silver 
Isa.  9.  20.  shall  eat  and  not  be  s.  Mic.  6.  14. 

44.16.heroasteth  roast  and  is  s.  he  warms  himself 

53.  11 .  he  shall  see  of  travail  of  his  soul,  and  be  *. 

66.  11.  be  s.  with  the  breasts  of  her  consolations 
Jer.  31.  14.  my  people  shall  be  s.  with  goodness 

50. 10.  all  that  spoil  Chnldea shall  bes.  saith  Lord 

19.  and  his  soul  shall  be  .9.  on  mount  Ephraim 
/,(i7n.5.6.have  given  the  hand  to  Egyptians  lobe  *. 
F.zek.  16.  as.  and  yet  thou  couldest'not  be  «.  29. 
.^mos  4. 8.  wandered  to  drink  water,but  were  not*. 
Hab.  2.  5.  he  is  as  death,  and  cannot  be  *. 
SATISFIEST. 


Psal.li5.16.  and  thou  .9.  the  desiieof  every  thing 
SATISFIETH. 


Psal.  103.  5.  who  s.  (hy  mouth  with  good  things 

107.9.for  he  s.the  longing  soul,  and  filleth  hungry 
Isa.  55.2.  and  your  labour  for  that  which  s.  not 

SATISFYING. 
Prov.  ^3.  25.  the  righteous  catelh  to  s.  of  his  soul 
Col.  2.  23.  not  in  any  honour  to  the  s.  of  the  flesh 

SATTEST. 
Psal.  9.  4.  thou  s.  in  the  throne  judging  right 
Eiek.  23. 41.  thou  s.  upon  a  stalely  bed  and  a  table 

SATYR. 
Isa.  34. 14.  and  the  s.  shall  cry  to  his  fellow 

SATYRS. 
/*a.l3.21.owl8  shall  dwell  there,  and  s.  dance  there 

SAVE 
Signifies,  1.  To  deliver  from  temporal  dangers, 
and  protect  and  defend  any  one  in  them.  Mat. 
14.  30,  Peter  cried,  saying,  Lord,  save  me. 
2.  To  deliver  from  the  guilt,  to  free  from  tht 
power  and  pollution  of  sin.  Mat.  1.  21,  For  he 
shall  save  his  people  from  their  sins.  Thna 
only  Christ  saves  his  peo]tle :  they  arc  justified 
by  the  imputation  of  his  righteousness .  and  by 


SAV 


the  operation  of  his  Spirit  they  art  sanctified, 
the  potter  and  dominion  of  sin  are  subdued 
and  weakened,  and  at  last  sin  is  utterly  de- 
stroyed. 
3.   'Jo  obtain  eternal  life,  Mat.  10.22,  But  he  that 

enduretJi  to  tiie  end  uball  be  saved. 
Salvation  is  attributed, 

I    To  God.  Jer.  17.  14,  Save  me,  O  Lord,iond 
I  ihall  be  saved.     Ood  is  often  called  by  the 
name  of  Saviour.     2  Samuel  22.  3,  The  Lord 
it  my  refuge  and  my  Suviuur.     Hosea  13.  4, 
There  is  no  riaviour  bisidcs  me.  Isaiah  45.  15, 
Verily  thou  art  a  God  that  hidcat  thyself,  U 
God  of  Israt-I,  the  Saviour.     God  is  the   Sa- 
viour of  saviours,  and  the  God  of  gods  :  with- 
out him  there  is  neither  salvadun,  nor  deliver- 
ance, nor  succour  to  be  hoped  fur.    It  is  he  that 
raises  up  isaviours  to  his  people:  He  raised 
them  up  a  Savrour  in  the  person  of  Othniel,  the 
ton  ofKL'nez,aifatnst  the  king  o/Mesopotumia, 
who  opprcssid  them,  Judg.   3.  9.     He  raised 
them    up    another    in    Ehud   son  of   Gerah, 
against  Eglon,  king  of  the  Moabiles,  Judg. 
3.  1.5.     .find  Ubadiah  promises,  that  the  Lord 
will  send  Saviours  upon  the  mountain  of  Zion, 
to  judge  the  inounlain  of  Esau,  Obad.  21. 
2.  To  Christ.   The  name  Saviour  is  appropriated 
to  khe  Messiah,   who   icas  prefigured  by   all 
those  to  ichum  the  scriptures  of  t/ie  Old  Testa- 
ment give  the  name  of  Saviour,  as  Joshua, 
the  judge  of  Israel,  the  kings,  David,  Solomon, 
Josiah,  and  the  great  men  raised  up  in  an  ex- 
traordinary manner  to  deliver  the  people  of 
Ood.     The  prophets  had  marked  out  Chri.it 
under  the  name  of  Saviour.  Isaiah  VJ. '20,  The 
Lord  shall  send  them  a  Saviour,  and  a  great 
One,   and    he   shall    deliver    them.     .4nd    the 
apostles  and  sacred  writers  of  the  Jfew  Testa- 
ment generally  give   to   Christ   the  name  of 
Saviour  6i/  way  of  eminence.     fVhen  the  angel 
proclaimed  his  birth,  he  said  that  he  should  be 
called  Jvms,  that  is,  a  Saviour,  for  he  nhall 
•ave  his  people  from  their  sins,  Matthew  1.  21. 
W«<i  in  John  4.  42.  he  is   called  the  Saviour 
of  the  worhl.     .See  Acts    13.   23.   Phil.  3.  20. 
Thisname  isproperbjgicen  MChriat.  He  saves  his 
people  from  sin, from  hell,  and  destruction  :  he 
hath  not  only  merited salpalion  for  them  by  his 
death ;  but  he  applies  the  purchased  redempliun 
by  shedding  abroad  the  IIulij  Ghost  into  Ihcir 
hearts,  and  by  maintaining  and  constantly  pre- 
aerving  the  graces  that  are  implanted  in  them, 
as  the  natural  head  dolhdislil  and  derive  sense, 
motion,  and  life,  into  the  vnlural  body.    He  is 
a  Saviour  by  merit,  and  a  Saviour  by  efficacy  : 
Hence  he  is  said  to  be  tho  Author  of  eternal 
■alvation  to  nil  them  that  obey  him,  Heb.  5.  9. 
..^nd  to  have  obtained  eternal  redemption  for  us, 
Heb.  9.  12. 
3  Salvation  is  attributed  to  faith,  to  the  word  of 
God,  to  hiiplism,  and  to  vun  :     These  are  only 
instruments  and  means  whichGodmaktsuse  of 
either  for  beginning  or  furthii-ing  this  work. 
I.uke  7.  .50,     Jesus   said    to  the   woman,   thy 
faith  hath  saved  thee,  go  in  peace,   .lam.  1.  21, 
Receive    with    meekness    the    ingrafted    word, 
which  is  able  to  save  your  souls.  1  Vet.  3.  21, 
The  like  figure  whcreunto,  even  baptism,  doth 
a1(0  now  save   us.     Rom.  11.  14,     If  by  any 
nie&na  I  may  provoke  to  emulation  them  whicli 
are   my  flesh,  ami  might  save,  that  is,  be  an 
instrument  of  saving,  some  of  them.     J}nd  in 
1  Cor.  7.  Ifi,     For  what  knowest  thou,  O  wifi', 
whether  thou  shall  save  thy  husband  1  or  how 
knowcil  thou,  O  miin,  whether  thou  shall  s  ive 
thy  wifel     The  word   directs  and  points  out 
rehere  salvation  may  be  had  ;  faith  is  the  hand 
orinslrumeni  that  recrires  CliriHl  the  author  of 
lalvalinn  ;  baptism  becomes  an  effectual  means 
of  Saivalion,  not  from  any  virtue  that  is  in  the 
.     outward  ad taini.il ration  of  it,  but  only  by  the 
blessing  of  C\\t,!il,and  the  working  of  his  Spirit 
IK  them  that  receive  it,inelining  and  enabling 
them  to  bilieve  andheartily  to  acquiesce  in  the 
covenant,  which  they  make  with  God  at  bap- 
tism.whereof  it  is  the  teal.   Good  men  likewise, 
by  their  admoniliont  ami  good  example,   are 
made  instrumenlal  in  concerting  others  to  the 
faith.  Jam.  .I.  20. 
r*  Eph.  2.  .■),  8,  it  is  said.  By  grace  ye  nrusnvod. 
[1]  /n  rrrprel  nf  God's  elernul purpose,  looking 
to  nothing  in  the  errature,  Imt  deerenng  and 
purposini/  all  benefits  to  them  out  of  his  free 
love  and  favour.     (2)   fteeause  all    the  ports 
of  this  salvation  are  from  this  gr  are  :  as,  Con- 
vertion.      Gal.   I.   l.S.   When  it    pleased    Go.l, 
who  sppnrnli'd    me   from  my  motlnr'n  womb 
and  called   ine  by    his   crnrp.      .lustifieatiun 
Tit.  3.  7,  Thai  being  justified  by  his  grac",  Wt 
•hould  be  made  heiri,  nccurdiog  to  the  hope  of 
SIO 


SAV 

eternal  life.  ^11  our  qualifications  and  endow- 
ments, yea,  and  all  the  good  we  do,  are  vf  grace. 
1  Cor.  15.  10,  By  the  grace  of  Gud  1  urn  what 
1  am.    The  outward  means  of  salvation  are  of 
grace.     Horn.  10.   15,  How  shall  they  preach, 
except  they  be  sent?  Eph.  4.  d,  He  gave  gilUi 
unto  men.      The  price  of  our  redemption  was 
freely  paid.     John  10.  17,  IH,  Thtrelbre  doth 
my  Father  love   rae,  because  I  lay  down  my 
lile,   that   I   might   take  it  again.       No   man 
taketh   it  from  me,  but  I  lay  it  dosvn  of  my- 
self   The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  freely  prepared 
for  us.     John  14.  2,  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for 
you.       Jind  eternal   life  is  freely  bestowed. 
Horn.  6.  23,  But  the  gift  of  God  is  eternal  life, 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 
Gen.  45.  7.  God  seul  me  before  you  to  s.  your  lives 
IJeut.  20.  4.  the  Lord  goelh  with  you  to  s.  you 
22.27.  she  cried,  and  there  was  none  to  i.  her 
'iS.  29.  shall  be  spoiled,  and  no  man  shall  «.  thee 
Judg.  6.14.  go  in  this  thy  might,  thou  shalt  j.  Israel 
15.  O  my  Lord,  wherewith  sliall  I  s.  Israeli 
31.  will  ye  plead  for  Baal  1  will  ye  s.  him  7 
3(j.  if  thuu  wilt «. Israel  by  mine  hand,  as  hast  said 
37.  then  shall  1  know  that  thou  will  s.  Israel 
7.  7.  by  the  300  men  that  lapped  will  I  s.  you 

1  .Sam.  9.  Iti.  anoinlhiin,  that  ho  may  s.  my  peo.le 
10.24.  the  people  shouted  and  said,  God  »  the  king, 

2  Sam.  IG.  16.  2  Kings  11.  12.  2  Chr.  23.  11. 
14.  6.  there  is  no  restraint,  to  «.  by  many,  or  by  few 
19.11.  if  thou  «.  not  Ihyselfthisnighl,  shall  be  slain 
23.  2.  the  Lord  said  lo  David,  go  and  s.  Keilah 

2  .Sam.  3. 18.  by  the  hand  of  David  I  will  s.  Israel 
22.  28. the  afllicted  peojile  thou  wilts.  Psal.Xfi.  27. 

42.  but  there  was  none  to  i.  Ihein,  Fsal.  18.  41. 

1  Kings  1.  12.  that  thou  mayests.  tiiine  own  life 
23.  behold,  they  s»y,  God  s.  king  Adonijah 
34.  blow  trumpet,  say,  God  5.  king  Solomon,  39. 

20.  31.  go  to  king,  peradventure  he  will  a-,  thy  life 

2  Kings  19.  34.  for  1  will  defend  this  cily  lo  *.  it,  for 
my  own  sake  and  servant  David's  sake,/sa.37.35. 

JVfA.  6.  11.  would  go  into  the  temple  to  s.  his  life 
.lob  2.6.  behold,  he  is  in  thine  hand,  but  5.  his  life 
20.  20.  he  shall  not  s.  of  that  which  he  desired 
22.  29.  and  he  shall  *.  the  humble  person 
40.  14.  that  thine  own  right  hand  can  «.  thee 
P.<al.  12.  t  I.  «•  Lord,  for  the  godly  man  ceaseth 
20.  9.  s.  Lord,  let  the  king  hear  us  when  we  call 
2B.  9.  s.  thy  peojile,  feed  them  also,  .ler.  31.  7. 
37.  40.  he  shall  s.  them,  because  they  trust  in  him 

44.  3.  neither  did  their  own  arm  s.  them 
60.  5.  s.  with  thy  right  hand,  and  hear  me,  103.  6. 
69. 35.  for  God  will  s.  Zion,  and  will  build  Judah 
72.  4.  he  shall  s.  Ihe  childrtn  of  the  nivdy 

13.  and  he  sliall  s.  the  souls  of  the  needy 
76.9.  when  God  arose  to  s.  the  meek  of  the  earth 
8f>.  2.  O  my  God,  s.xhy  servant  thai  trusteth  in  thee 
16.  and  s.  the  son  of  thine  handmaid 
109.  31.  s.  him  from  thoic  that  condemn  his  soul 
118.  25.  s.  I  beseech  thee,  O  Lord,  send  prosperity 
145. 19.  he  also  will  hear  their  cry,  and  s.  tli 
froB. 20.22.  wait  on  the  Lord,  and  he  shall  s.  thee 
Isa.  35.  4.  behold,  your  God  will  come  and  s.  you 

45.  20.  and  pray  unto  a  god  that  cannot  s. 
41).  7.  he  cannot  answer,  nor  4.  him  out  of  trouble 
47.  13.  Ill  now  the  astrologers  stand  up  and  «.  thee 

15.  they  shall  wander,  none  shall  s.  th 
4ii.  25.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  I  will  s.  Ihy  children 
.59.1. Lord's  hand  is  notshortened,  tliutil  cannot  s. 
63.  1.  I  that  spiuk  in  righteousness,  mighty  to  *. 
ler.  2.  28.  let  tht^m  arise,  if  they  can  *.  llicu 

11.  12.  but  they  shall  not  s.  them  at  all  in  trouble 
14.9.  shoiildcstbe  as  a  mighty  man  thatcannot  «, 
15.20.  for  I  am  with  thee  loj».  thre,  ami  lo  delivfi 

thee,  saith  the  Lord,  30.  11.  I  42.  11.  |  46.  27, 
30.  10.  O  Isr.  I  wilU.the.'frnm  afar.'nnil  thy  seed 
4''.6.flii-,.<i.  your  lives,  be  like  the  heath  in  wilder 
F.iek.  3.  18.  to  warn  the  wicktrl,  lo  .«.  his  life 
13.  t  22.  should  not  return,  thai  I  should  s.  his  life 
34.22.  therefore  will  I  s.  my  Hock,  and  will  judg 
36.  29.  I  will  s.  you  ||  37.  23.  I  will  s.  them 
Hos.  1.7.  but  I  will  s.  thorn  by  the  Lord  their  God, 
and  will  not*,  them  by  bow  nor  by  sword 
13.  10.  where  is  there  any  other  that  may  s.  then  7 
//«ft.l.2.cry  til  thic  ofvioleiici',and  ihou  wilt  not*. 
Zeph.  3.  17.  he  will  s.  he  will  rijoice  over  Iheo 
19.  I  will  s.  her  that  hiilt<^lh,  and  gather  her 
y.eeh.  8. 7. 1  will  s.  my  people  from  the  east  country 

9.  10.  the  Lord  their  G<«1  i.hall  .«.  them  in  tho  day 

10.  0.  and  I  will  s.  the  liouiio  of  Jo.^ieph 

12.  7.  thel.ord  also  shall .«.  Ihe  tints  nfjudnh  first 
Jilfit.  1.  21.  Jesus  shall  *.  bis  people  from  their  sins 

10.  25.  for  whosoever  will  .«.  his  life  shall  lose  it 
Mark  H.  35.  /.nhr  9.  24.  |  17.  33 

13.  11.  for  the  Son  of  man  Is  come  to  s.   thai 
which  wai  lost,  f.uke  19.  10 

27.40.SByinj,  thou  that  destroyesi  the  temple,  nn<l 
hiiilde«t  it  in  throe  days,  ».  thyself,  Mark  1.5.  30 


SAV 

Mark2.4.it  it  lawful  to  s.  life,  or  to  kill  7  /.uite6.9 
J.uke  9.56.  is  not  come  to  dest.  men's  lives,butto 

23.  35.  let  him  s.  himself,  if  he  be  Christ 
37.  s.  thyself  II  39.  if  Christ,  ^.  thyself  and  ua 
.fohn  12.4'i.  1  came  not  to  judge,  but  lus.  ihe  world 
j^cts  2.  40.  s.  yourselves  from  this  generation 

27.  43.  but  the  centurion,  willing  lo  «.  Paul 
Horn.  11. 14.  if  I  inighl  s.some  of  them,  lCvr.9  22. 
1  Cor.  1.  21.  by  the  IbolishnesS  of  preach. to  s.  them 

7.  16.  shall  s.  thy  husband,  shall  s.  thy  wife 

1  lHm.\.  15.  Christcame  into  the  world  to  s.sinnen 
4.  16.  in  doing  this  thou  shalt*.  thyself  and  them 

Heb.5.  7.  tohim  that  was  able  to  s.  Iiini  from  death 
7.  25.  he  is  able  also  lo  s.  them  lo  the  uttermost 

.lam.  1.  21.  tho  woid,  which  is  able  to  3.  your  souli 
2.  14.  and  have  not  works,  can  laitli  s.  liira  7 

4.  12.  one  lawgiver,  who  is  able  to  s.  and  to  destroy 

5.  15.  the  prayer  of  faiih  shall  s.  the  sick 
20.  shall  s.  a  soul  from  death,  and  hide  sins 

Jude^S.utliciiS.  with  fear,  pulling  them  out  of  fire 
See  Alivk. 
SAVE  mc. 

2  Kings  16.7.  s.TOc  out  of  hand  of  the  king  of  Syria 
Psal.  3.  7.  arise,  O  Lord,  i.  nie,  O  my  God 

li.4.  s.  me  for  thy  mercies'  sake,  31.  16.  |  109.26. 
7.  1.  s.  mc  from  all  them  that  persecute  me 
22.21.S.  me  from  the  lion's  mouth,  Ihou  hast  heard 
31.  2.  be  thou  for  a  house  of  defence  to  s.  me 
44.6.  not  trust  in  bow,  nor  shall  my  sword  s.  me 

54.  I.  s.  me,  O  God,  by  thy  name,  and  judge  me 

55.  16.  I  will  call  on  God,  and  the  Lord  shall  s.  me 
57   3.  he  shall  send  from  heaven  and  s.  me 
59.  2.  deliver  me,  and  *.  me  from  bloody  men 
69.  1.  s.  me,  for  waters  are  come  in  unto  my  soul 
71.  2.  incline  thine  car  unto  mc,  and  s.  me 

3.  thou  hast  given  commandment  to  s.  me 
119.  94.  s.  me,  for  I  have  sought  thy  precepts 

146.  I  cried  unto  thee,  s.  nic,  and  I  shall  keep 
138.  7.  and  Ihy  right  hand  shall  *.  me 
Isa.'.iS.'iO.  the  Lord  was  ready  los.  me,  we  will  sing 
./er.  17;  14.  O  Lord,  s.  me,  and  I  shall  be  saved 
Mat.  14.  30.  Peter  cried,  saying.  Lord  s.  me 
.John  12.  27.  Father,  s.  me  from  this  hour 

SAVE  vs. 
.Tosh.  10.  6.  come  up  to  us  quickly,  and  s.  us 
22.  22.  if  it  be  in  rebellion,  s.vs  not  this  day 

1  Sam.  4.  3.  the  ark  may  s.  us  from  our  enemies 

7.8.  cease  not  to  cry  to  the  Lord,  that  he  wills,  us 
10.27. men  of  Belial  said,  how  shall  Ibis  man  s.  us? 
11.  3.  if  there  be  no  man  to  s.  us,  we  will  come 

2  Kings  19.  19.s.thou  us  out  of  his  hand,  /sa.37.30 
1  Chron.  16.  3.5.  s.  us,  O  God  of  our  salvation 
P.9.  80. 2.  stir  up  Ihy  strength,  and  come  and  s.us 

106.  47.  s.  us,  O  Lord  our  God,  and  gather  us 
/.la.SS.O.  we  have  waited  for  him,  he  will  s.  us 

33.  22.  Ihe  Lord  is  our  king,  he  will  s.  us 
Jer.  2.  27.  in  iheir  trouble  they  will  say,  s.  us 
Aiim. 4. 17. watched  for  a  nation  that  could  not  s.  us 
Hos.  14.  3.  Ashur  shall  not  s.  us,  we  will  not  ride 
Mat.  8.  2.5.  they  awoke  him,  saying,  Lord,  s.  us 
1  Pet.'.i.  21.  even  baptism,  doth  also  now  s.  us 

SAVE,  for  Besides. 
Gen.  14.  24.  s.  what  the  young  men  have  eaten 

39.  6.  he  knew  not  ought,  s.  ihc  bread  he  did  eat 
F.rod.  12.  16.  s.  that  which  every  mini  must  eat 

22.20.  he  thatsacrificethto  anv  god,s.  tolhe  Lord 
JVu«i.  14. 30.  5.  Caleb,  26.  65.  |  32.  12.  J)eut.  1.  36. 
/)f«M5.4.».when  there  shall  be  no  pooramongyou 
Jofh.  11.  13.  Israel  burned  none,  s.  Ilazor  only 
19.  that  made  peace  with  Israel,  s.  the  Ilivitcs 

14.  4.  they  gave  no  part  to  the  Levite.s,  .«.  cities 
.Jvdg.  7.  14.  is  nothing  else,  s.  Iho  sword  of  Gideuo 

1  Sam.  21.  9.  there  is  none  other,  s.  that  here 
30.  17.  there  escaped  none,  s.  400  young  men 

22.  s.  to  every  man  his  wife  and  his  cliitdrcn 

2  .S'am. 12.3.ponr  man  had  noihiiig,  s.  oneewo  lamb 
22^  32.  who  is  God,  s.  the  Lord  7  Psal.  18.  31. 

1  A'inn'.»3.18.wa3  no  stranger  in  the  house, .«. we  two 

8.9.  there  was  nothing  in  the  ark  s.  the  two  tables 

15.  5.  .f.  in  the  matter  ofUrinh  the  Ilillilo 
22.  31.  fiiihl  not,  s.  with  the  king  of  Israel 

2  Kings  4.  2.  hath  not  any  thing,  s.  a  pot  of  oil 
15.  4.  s.  that  the  high  places  were  not  removed 

2  Ckriin.Si.  6.  s.  only  lo  burn  saerifirc  before  him 
21    17.  no  son  left,  ,v.  Jehonhaz  the  youneest 

JV>*.  2.  12.  nor  any  with  me,  s.  the  beast  I  rode  on 

/>fl7i.  6.  7.  ask  a  petition,  ».  of  thee,  O  king,  12. 

Mat.  1 1.  27.  nnr  knoweth  any  the  Father,  s.  Son 
13.  .57.  not  without  honour,  s.  m  his  owncounlrr 
17.  8.  they  saw  no  man,  s.  Jesus  only,  Mark  9.8 
19.  11.  cannot  receive,  s.  they  to  whom  it  is^iven 

Murk  5.37.and  hesutfered  no  man  In  follow  him, ». 

Peter,  James,  and  John,  l.uke  8.  51. 

6.5.  s.  that  he  laid  his  hands  upon  a  few  sick  folk 

8.  that  Ihey  should  lake  nothing,  s.  n  staff  only 

f.uke  i.  20.  sent,  ».  unto  Sarepla,  a  citv  ofSidon 

17.  18.  none  found  ihiil  returned,  .».  this  stranget 

18.  19.  nont)  is  good,  t.  one,  that  is  Cod 


42.»nved  oihers,him»effhe  cannot  s.  Mirk  15  31.   John  0.  22.  there  was  no  other  boat,  s.  that  one 
40.  lot  uasco  whether  Elios  will  com«  to  s.  hiinl     46.  hath  teen  tho  Father,  s.  lie  which  is  of  God 


SAV 

fokfi  in.  10.  he  oeedeth  not,  s.  to  wash  his  (bet 
«ct<  20.  23.  s  that  the  Holy  Ghost  wilntsseth 
21.  25.  s.  to  keep  themselves  from  fornication 
1  Cor.  2.  2.  not  to  know  any  thing,  s.  Jesus  Christ 

11.  $.  the  spirit  of  man  which  is  in  him 
iZCor.  11.  24.  tive  times  receiv.  I  forty  stripes,  *.  one 
Oal.  1 .  lU.  I  saw  none,  s.  James,  the  Lord's  brother 
(i.l4.  God  forbid  that  1  should  glory,  s.in  the  cross 
liev.  13.  IT.  buy  or  sell,  s.  he  that  had  the  mark 

SAVED. 
Gen.  47.  25.  they  said,  thou  hast  s.  our  lives 
f.xod.  1. 17.  midwives  «.  the  men  children  alive,  18. 
JVam.  22.  33.  1  had  slain  thee,  and  s.  her  alive 
31. 15.  Moses  said,  have  ye  s.all  the  women  alivel 
Josli.  6.  25.  Joshua  s.  Rahab  tlie  harlot  alive 
Jadff.T .^.\tist  Israel  say,  mine  own  hand  hath  «.me 
8.  19.  if  he  had  «.  them  alive,  I  would  not  slay  you 
21.  14.  they  gave  them  wives  which  they  had  s. 

1  Sam.  23.  5.  David  s.  the  inhabitants  of  Keilah 
27.  11.  David  s.  neither  man  nor  woman  alive 

2Sam.  19.  5.  servants  who  this  day  hare  s.  thy  life 

9.  the  king  5.  us,  and  now  he  isHed  for  Absalom 

2  Kings  6.  10.  5.  himself  there,  not  once  nor  twice 
JVeA.  9.27.  thou  gavest  them  saviours,  who  s.  them 
Psal.  33. 16.  no  king  iss.  by  multitude  of  a  host 

44.  7.  but  thou  hast  «.  us  from  our  enemies 
106.8.neverthele.«s,  hes.  them  for  his  name's  sake 

10.  he  s.  them  from  him  that  hated  them 

/fa. 4^. 12. 1  have  declared,  and  have  s.  and  shewed 

45.22.  look  to  me,  and  be  ye  s.  all  the  ends  of  earth 
Jer.  4.  14.  wash  thy  heart,  that  thou  mayest  hes. 

8.  20.  the  summer  is  ended,  and  we  are  not  s. 
Mai.  19.  25.  when  his  disciples  heard  it,  saying, 
who  then  can  be  s.f  Mark  10. 2ti.  Luke  16. 2(j. 

24.  22.  no  Hesli  should  be  s.  Mark  13.  20. 

S7.  42.  he  s.  others,  Mark'l5.  31.  Luke  23.  35. 
Luke  1.  71.  that  we  should  hes.  from  our  enemies 

7.  50.  he  said,  thy  faiih  hath  5.  thee,  18.  42. 

8.12.takesaway,  lost  they  should  believe  and  be  5. 

13.  23.  Lord,  are  tliere  few  that  be  s.  ? 
John  3.17.  that  the  world,  through  him,  might  be  s. 

5.  34.  these  things  I  say,  that  ye  might  be  s. 
jlcts  2.  47.  the  Lord  added  such  as  should  be  s. 

4.12.thereis  no  other  name  whereby  we  must  bes. 

15.  I.  except  ye  be  circumcised,  ye  cannot  be  s. 
It).  30.  he  said,  sirs,  what  must  I  do  to  be  «.? 
27.  20.  all  hope  we  should  be  i.  was  taken  away 

Sl.excepl  these  abide  in  the  ship,  ye  cannot  be  s. 
/lo7n.8,24.  we  are  s.  by  hope,  hope  seen  is  not  hope 

10.  1.  my  prayer  for  Israel  is,  that  they  may  be  s. 
I  Cor.  1. 18.  to  us  who  are  s.  it  is  the  power  of  God 

5.  5.  that  the  spirit  may  be  s,  in  day  of  the  Lord 

10.  33.  but  the  profit  of  many,  that  they  may  be  «. 
15. 2.  by  which  also  ye  are  5.  if  ye  keep  in  memory 

2Cor.2.  15.  we  are  sweet  savour  in  them  that  are  «. 
jE^A.2.5.  hath  quickened  us  with  Chr.  by  gr.  are  s. 
8.  for  by  grace  are  ye  s.  through  faith 

1  Tkess.  2.  16.  to  the  Gentiles  that  they  might  be  s. 

2  Thess.  2.  10.  because  they  received  not  the  love 

of  the  truth,  that  they  might  be  saved 
1  Ttm.2.4.whowill  have  all  men  to  bes.and  to  come 
Tit.  3.  5.  but  according  to  his  mercy  he  s.  ua 
1  Pet.  3.  20.  wherein  eight  souls  were  s.  by  water 
4.  18.  if  the  righteous  scarcely  be  s.  where  shall 
2Pe£.2.5.but  s.Noah,  the  eighth  person,  a  preacher 
Rev.  21.  24.  nations  «.  shall  walk  in  the  light  of  it 

Ood  or  Lord  SAVED. 
F.rnd.H  30.  Lord.^.  Israel  that  day,  1  Sam.  14.  23. 
/)cMt.33.29.  who  is  like  thee,  O  people,  s.  by  Lord? 

1  .Sam.l0.19.ye  have  rejectedyour  God,'ivbos.  you 

2  Kings  14.27.  Lords,  them  by  hand  of  Jeroboam 

1  Chr.  11. 14.  fyord  s.  them  by  a  great  deliver.nnce 

2  Chron.  32.  22.  thus  Lord  s.  Hezekiah  from  Senn. 
Psal.  34;  6.  Lord  s.  him  out  of  all  his  troubles 

107.  13.  the  Lord  s.  them  out  of  their  distresses 
Isa.  63.  9.  angfl  of  his  presence,  s.  Iheni  in  his  love 
2  Tim.  1.  9.  God  who  hath  s.  us  and  called  us 
Jude  5.  how  that  the  Lord,  having  s.  the  people 

Shall  or  shall  fcg|AVED. 
J^um.  10.  9.  ye  shall  hr.  s.  f9n  your  enemies 
2.9am.22.4.I  shall  lies.frnm  mme  enemies,  P.'j.lS.S. 
Psal.fO.  3.  c.ius'<  thy  face  to  shine,w  c  .<ih.  hr  .t.7.19. 
Prov.  28.  18.  whoso  walkcth  ui<T'igh{\y  shall  be  s. 
fsa.  30.  15.  in  returning  and  rest  shall  ye  be  s. 

45.17.but  Israel  shall  lie  s.  in  Lord  wiih  salvation 

64.  5.  in  those  is  continuance,  and  we  shall  be  s. 
Jer.  17.  14.  O  Lord,  save  me,  and  I  shall  be  s. 

23.  6.  in  his  days  Jndah  shall  be  s.  33.  16. 

30. 7.  .Tacob's  trnnljle,  but  he  shall  be  s.  out  of  it 
^aM 0.22. he  hated  for  my  nime'ssakc,huthetliat 
endurcth  tothc-  end  sh'allbe  .f.24.13..;ifarA13.13. 
Mark  16.  16.  he  that  believcth  shall  be  s. 
.John  10.  9.  by  mc,  if  any  man  enter,  he  shallbes. 
^cts2.21.come  lo  pass,that  whosoevershall  call  on 
the  name  of  the  Lord,  shall  be  s.  Rom.  10.13. 

11.  14.  whereby  thou  and  thy  house  shall  be  s. 
15. 1  l.we  believe  that  through  gr.ace  wo  shall  be  s. 

16.  31.  believe  on  Lord  Jesus,  and  thou  shall  be  a. 
Rom.  5.  9.  we  shall  bes.  from  wrath  through  him 

10.  being  reconciled,  we  shall  be  s.  by  his  life 
511 


SAV 

Aom.9.27.tho' Israel  be  as  sanii,t€mMntskallbe». 

10.9.6halt  believe  God  raised  him,  thou  shaltbes. 

11.  26.  60  all  Israel  shall  be  s.  as  it  is  written 
ICor.  3.  15.  but  he  him».  shall  bes.  yet  so  as  by  fire 

1  Tim.  2. 15.  shall  be  s.iii  child-bearing,  if  coulmue 

S  A  VEST. 

2  Sam.  22.  3.  my  Saviour,  thou  s.  me  from  violence 
Job  26.  2.  how  5.  thou  arm  that  hath  no  strengibl 
Psal.  17.  7.  O  thou  that  s.  by  thy  right  hand 

SAVETH. 

1  Sam.  14.  39.  as  the  Lord  liveth,  who  s.  Israel 
17.  47.  the  Lord  «.  not  with  sword  and  spear 

.Job  5.  15.  but  he  g.  the  poor  from  the  sword 

i"so/.7.10.  my  defence  is  of  God,  who  ».  the  upright 
20.  6.  now  know  I  that  the  Lord  s.  his  anointed 
34.  18.  he  s.  such  as  be  of  a  contrite  spiiit 
107. 19.  they  cry,  he  s.  them  outof  their  distresses 
SAVING. 

Oen.l9.19.mercy  thou  hast  shewed  me  in  s.  my  life 

1  Sam.  25.  t  26.  withholden  thee  from  5.  thyself 
JVeA.4.  23.  s.  that  every  one  put  them  off  for  wash. 
Psal.  20.  6.  with  the  s.  strength  of  his  right  hand 

28.  8.  he  is  the  s.  strength  of  his  anointed 
67.  2.  thy  s.  health  among  all  nations 
Ecci.  5.  U.S.  the  beholding  of  them  with  their  eyes 
Amos  9.  8.  s.  that  I  will  not  utterly  destroy  Jacob 
Jlfa«.5.32.s.for  the  cause  of  fornication, causeth  her 
/.uke  4.  27.  and  none  was  cleansed,  s.  Naaman 
Heb.lO.  39.  but  ofthem  that  believe  to  a.  of  the  soul 
11.  7.  Noah  prepared  an  ark  to  the  s.  of  his  house 
Rev.  2.  17.  no  man  knoweth,  s.  he  that  receiveth  it 
SAVIOUR. 
See  Signihcation  of  S.^vk. 
■Tudg.  3.  t  9.  the  Lord  raised  up  a  s.  to  Israel 
2Sara.  22.  3.  my  high  tower,  my  refuge,  my  ». 

2  Kings  13.  5.  and  the  Lord  gave  Israel  a  3. 
Psal.lOa.  21.  they  forgat  God  their  s.wbo had  done 
Isa.  19.  20.  he  shall  send  them  a  s.  a  great  one 

43.  3.  for  I  am  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  thy  s. 
Isa.  43. 11.  I  am  the  Lord,  besides  me  there  is  no  s. 

45.  15.  that  hidest  thyself,  O  God  of  Israel,  the  s. 
21.  a  just  God  and  a  s.  there  is  none  beside  me 

49.  26.  all  flesh  shall  know  that  I  am  thy  s. 

60. 16.  thou  shalt  know  that  I  the  Lord  am  thy  i. 

63.  8.  they  are  my  people,  so  he  was  their  s. 
.Tcr.  14.  8.  the  s.  of  Israel  in  time  of  trouble 
Hos.  13.  4.  for  there  is  no  s.  beside  me 
Luke  1.  47.  my  spirit  hath  rejoiced  in  God  my  s. 

2.  11.  is  born  this  day  in  the  city  of  David  a  s. 
John  4.  43.  this  is  Christ  the  s.  of  the  world 
-"Jets  5. 31. him  hath  G.  exalted  to  be  a  prince  and;. 

13.  23.  hath  God  raised  to  Israel  a  s.  Jesus 
F.ph.  5.  23.  and  Christ  is  the  s.  of  the  body 
Phil.  3.  20.  from  whence  we  look  for  the  s. 

1  Tim.  1.  1.  by  the  commandment  of  God  our  s. 
2.  3.  is  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  God  our  s. 

4. 10.  we  trust  in  living  God,  who  is  5.  of  all  men 

2  Tim.  1.  10.  manifest  by  the  appearing  of  our  s. 
Tit  1.2.  according  tothe  commandm.ofGod  ours. 

4.  peace  from  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  our  s. 

2.  10.  they  may  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  ours. 
13.  looking  for  the  glorious  appearing  of  our  s. 

3.  4.  after  the  kindness  of  God  our  s.  appeared 
6.he  shed  on  us  abundantly  through  Christ  our  s. 

2  Pet.  1.  1.  through  righteousness  of  God  and  our  s. 
11.  into  everlasting  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  s. 

2.  20.  through  knowl  ?dge  ofthe  Lord  and  s.  Jesus 

3.  2.  of  us  the  apostles  ofthe  Lord  and  s. 

18.  but  grow  in  the  knowledge  of  our  s.  Christ 
1  .John  4.  14.  the  Father  sent  the  Son  to  be  the  s. 
Jude  25.  to  the  only  wise  God  our  s.  be  glory 

SAVIOURS. 
JVcA.  9.  27.  thou  gavest  them  s.  who  saved  them 
Obad.  21.  and  s.  shall  come  up  on  mount  Zion 

SAVOUR. 
Savour  proper/?/  signifies  a  scent  or  smell.  Eccl. 
10.  I,  Uiad  flies  cause  the  ointment  of  the 
apothecary  to  send  forth  a  stinking  savour,  or 
smell.  It  also  signifies  acidity.,  sharpness 
tartness,  or  that  quality  in  bodies  by  which  they 
give  a  relish  to  other  bodies,  and  make  them 
palatablc,or  by  which  they  corrode  other  bodies. 
Mat.  5.  13,  But  if  the  salt  have  lost  its  sa- 
vour; that  is,  its  acrimony  or  acidity.  It  is 
likewise  put  for  name,reputation,  or  character. 
Exod.  5.  21,  You  have  made  our  savour  to 
be  abhorred  in  the  eyes  of  Pharaoh. 
It  is  often  said  of  sacrifices  or  offerings,  that 
they  were  of  a  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord 
When  Noah  had  built  an  altar,  and  offered 
burnt-offerings  upon  it,  the  Lord  is  said  to 
have  smelled  a  sweet  savour,  or  a  savour  of 
rest.  Gen.  8.  21.  that  is,  God  graciously  ac- 
cepted of  his  sacrifice,  it  was  pleasing  and  de- 
lightful to  him,  being  a  fruit  of  T^onh's  faith 
and  thankfulness  :  These  sacrifices  God  was 
graeiovsly  pleased  to  accept  of,  as  thry  repre- 
sented Christ  the  great  gospel  sacrifice,  and 
as  they  were  offered  up  by  faith  in  liim.  The 
sacrifice  of  himself    which  Christ  offered  to 


SAW 

God  for  man  is  by  the  apostle  Paul  called  a 
sacrifice  of  a  sweel-siuellmg  savour,  Ejih.  5. 
2.     Ood  is   satisfied   and   appeased  thereby 
The   same  apostle  says,  2  Cor.  2.  15,     We 
are    unto  God   a  sweet   savour  of  Clirist   in 
them  that  are  saved,  and  in  them  that  perish; 
that  is,    IVe  are  careful  to  discharge  our  duty 
to  all  men  by  preaching  the  way  of  duloalion  to 
them,  and  by  learning  them  of  the  danger  of  a 
sinfulcourse;  and  our  labours  are  acceptable  t» 
God,  whatever  effects    they  hane  upon  souls. 
For  Ood,  whom  we  serve,  will  not  judge  of 
us,  nor  reward  us,  according  to  our  success, 
but  according  to  our  faithfulness  and  diligence 
in  his  work.     God  acctplelh  of  our  labours  as 
to  good  men,  to  whom  we  are  instruments  of 
eternal  life  and  salvation :  and  though  others 
despise  the  gospel,  and  refuse  lo  hear  the  sweet 
and  joyful  sound  of  it,  yet  as  to  them  also  we 
are  a   sweet    savour  to  Ood :    For  it  is  not 
for  any  neglect  in  us,  as  to  our  duty,  if  any 
perish,  but  from  their  own  wilfulness  arid  per- 
verseiiessf 
Ktod.  5  21.  ye  have  made  our  s.  to  be  abhorred 
Lev.  26.  31.  will  not  smell  s.  of  your  sweet  odourn 
Eccl.  10.  1.  the  ointment  to  send  forth  a  stinking  s. 
Cant.  1.  3.  because  of  the  s-  of  thy  good  ointment 
Joel  2.  20.  his  stink  and  his  ill  .1.  shall  come  up 
Mat.  5.  13.  if  the  salt  has  lost  his  s.  Luke  14.  .34. 
2Cor.2.I4.makcth  manilesi  the  s.  of  his  knowledge 
16.  the  s.  of  death  unto  death,  s.  of  lifeun'o  hie 
Sweet  SAVOUR. 
Gen.  8.  21.  and  the  Lord  smelled  a  sweet  B 
Exod.  29. 18.  it  is  a  sweet  s.  an  offering  to  the  Lord, 
Lev.  1. 9,  13,  17.  |  2.  9.  I  3.  5.  1  8.  21. 
JVum.  15.  14.  I  18.  17.  |  28.  8. 
25.  for  &  sweet  s.  an  offering  to  the  hori\,Al.Lev. 
2.  12.  I  3.  16.  I  4.  31.  I  6.  1,5,  21.  |  8.  28. 
I  17.6.  I  2.3.13.  jVk)«.  15.7,24.  |  28.2,6, 
13,  27.  I  23.  2,  6,  8.  Kzck.  16.  19. 
Lev.  23._18.  of  a  si^cet  s.  JVum.  28. 24.  |  29. 13, 36. 
JVitm.  15.  3.  to  make  a  sweet  s.  unto  the  Lord 
28.  13.  for  a  burnt-offering  of  a  sweet  3.  to  Lord 
K2CA-.6. 13. where  theydid  offer  sweet  s.to  their  idol* 
20.  28.  there  also  they  made  their  sweets. 
41.  I  will  accept  you  with  your  sweet  s. 
2  Cor.  2.  15.  for  we  are  to  God  a.sweets.  of  Christ 
£pA.  5. 2.  a  sacrifice  to  God  for  asiCcct-ameWing  3, 

Sweet  SAVOURS. 
■Ezra  6.  10.  may  offer  sacrificfs  oi'  sweets,  to  God 

SAVOUREST. 
Mat.  16.  23.  thou  s.  not  things  of  God,  Mark  8.  33. 

SAVOURY. 

Gen.  27.  4.  make  me  s.  meal,  such  as  I  love,  7, 14. 

31.  Esau  had  made  s.  meat,  and  brought  it 

SAW. 

Gen.  3.  6.  the  woman  s.  the  tree  was  good  for  food 

6.  2.  the  sons  of  God  s.  the  daughters  of  men 

9.  22.  Ham  s.  the  nakedness  of  his  father 

23.  they  s.  not  ||  22. 4.  Abraham  s.  the  place  afar 
26.  28.  they  said,  we  s.  the  Lord  was  with  thee 
32.2.^. when  he  s.  that  he  prevailed  not  against  hiiD 
.38.14.  for  she  s.  that  .Shelah  wasgrown,  not  given 
.39.  3.  his  master  s.  that  the  Lord  was  with  him 
42.  21.  in  that  we  s.  the  anguish  of  his  soul 
43   16.  when  Joseph  s.  Benjamin  with  them 
45.  27.  when  he  s.  the  wagons  which  Joseph  sent 

49.  15.  Issachar  s.  that  rest  was  good,  and  land 

50.  15.  his  brethren  s.  that  their  father  was  dead 
23.  Joseph  s.  Ephraini's  children  of  third  gener. 

Exod.  2.  2.  when  she  s.  that  he  was  a  goodly  child 
12.  when  he  s.  that  there  was  no  man,  he  slew 

10.  23.  they  s.  not  one  another  for  three  days 
14.  31.  Israel  s.  that  great  work  the  Lord  did 

24.  10.  and  they  s.  the  God  of  Israel,  11. 

33.  10.  all  the  people  s.  the  cloudy  pillar  stand 
J^Tum.  13.  28.  we  s.  the  children  of  .\nak  there 
22. 23.  ass  s.  the  angel  of  the  Lord  in  the  way,  27 

25.  7.  and  when  Phinehas  s.  it  he  rose  up 

.32.  9.  when  they  s.  the  land,  they  discouraged  Isr. 
Dcut.4.  12.  ye  heard  a  voice,but  .t.no  similitude,15. 

7.  19.  the  great  temptations  which  thinu  eyes  s. 
./«(/if.l9..30.all  that  s.it  said,  nosurh  deed  wasdone 
Ruth  1. 18.  when  she  s.  she  was  stedfastly  minded 

1  Sa7n.  6.  13.  they  s.  the  ark,  and  rejoiced  to  see  it 
10.  14.  when  he  s.  that  they  were  no  where 

17.  24.  Israel,  when  thev  s.  the  man  fled  from  him 

18.  28.  Saul  s.  that  the' Lord  was  with  David 

2  Sam.  11.  2.  David  s.  a  woman  wnshing  herself 

1  Kinrrs  3.28.  .9. that  the  wisdom  of  Goil  was  in  him 
16.  18.  when  Zimri  s.  thut  the  city  was  taken 
If.  17.  when  Ahab  s.  Elijah,  he  said  to  him 
19.3.when  hes.  that,  he  arose  and  went  for  his  life 

2  Kings  2.  12.  Elisha  s.  it,  and  he  ».  him  no  mora 
3.22.  s.  the  water  on  the  other  side  as  red  as  blood 
4.  2.5.  when  the  man  of  God  ».  her  afar  off 

6. 17.  L.  opened  eyes  of  the  younj  man  and  he* 
13.  4.  for  he  s.  the  oppression  of  Israel 
16. 10.  Ahazs.  an  altar  that  was  at  Dnmascun,  IS 
2  Chron.  15.  9.  they  s.  that  the  Lord  was  with  him 


SAW 

I  Ckr.  85.  21.  and  they  a.  one  another  in  the  face 
31.  8.  when  princes  a.  heaps,  they  blessed  the  Ld. 
AVA.S.ie.when  j.these  things  they  were  cast  down 
£sth.  1.  14-  the  princes  which  a.  the  king's  face 

7.  7.  he  a.  that  there  was  evil  determined  ag.  him 
Job  2.  13.  they  a.  that  his  grief  was  very  great 

3.  16.  had  not  been,  as  infants  which  never  a.  light 
80.  9.  eye  which  a.  him,  shall  see  him  no  more 
89.  8.  the  young  men  a.  me,  and  hid  themselves 
11.  when  the  eye  a.  me,  it  gave  witness  to  me 
Psal.  48.  5.  they  a.  it,  and  so  they  marvelled 
77.  16.  waters  a.  thee,  O  God,  the  waters  a.  thee 
95.  9.  your  fathers  proved  me,  and  «.  my  work 
97.  4..  the  earth  a.  his  liijlunings  and  trembled 
114.  3. sea  a.  it  and  Hed,  Jordan  was  driven  back 
Cant.  3.  3.  a.  ye  him  whom  my  soul  lovelh  f 
fsa.  41.  5.  isles  a.  it,  and  feared,  ends  of  the  earth 
Jer.  3.  7.  and  her  treacherous  sister  Judah  a.  it 
39.  4.  when  Zedekiah  «.  them,  and  men  of  war 
44.  17.  for  then  we  were  well,  and  a.  no  evil 
/Aim.  1.  7.  adversaries  a.  her  and  did  mock  at  her 
£iek.  8. 10.  so  I  went  in,  and  s.  behold,  every  form 
80.  2ii.  then  they  j.  every  high  hill?  offered  there 
S3. 16.  as  soon  as  she  a.  them,  she  doted  on  them 
Dan.  3.27.  «. these  men  on  whom  tire  had  no  power 
4. 23.  whereas  the  king  a.  a  watcher  coming  down 

5.  5.  the  king  a.  part  of  the  hand  that  wrote 
^o*.5.13.when  Ephraim  a.  bis  sickness  and  Judah 

«Jiis  wound,  then  went  Ephraim  to  the  Asr-yrian 

^a^.2.3.who  among  you  i.this  house  in  first  glory? 

Mat.  2.  9.  the  star  which  they  a.  went  before  them 
3.16.  a.  theSpirilof  God  descending,  JJ/arA  1. 10. 
12.  22.  the  blind  and  dumb  both  spake  and  a. 
17.  8.  they  s.  no  man,  save  Jeeus  only 
21.  38.  but  when  the  husbandmen  «.  the  son 
82.  U.S.  a  man  who  had  not  on  wedding-garment 
85.  37.  Lord,  when  a.  we  thee  a  hungered,  44. 
38.when .?.  we  thee  stranger||39.wlicn  s.  thee  sick 
86.71. another  maid  s.hiip,  and  said,  this  was  with 
Jesus  of  Mazarcth,  MarkH.  69.  Luke 'H.  56. 
87.3.  Judas,  when*,  he  was  condemned,  repented 
88.  17.  when  they  a.  him  they  worshipped  him 

Mark2.5.  when  Jesus  s.  their  faith  he  said  to  sick 

8. 23.  spit  on  his  eyes,  he  asked  him,  if  he  a.  aught 

9.  38.  saying,  Master,  we  s.  one  casting  out  devils 

in  thy  name,  and  he  follows  not  us,  AuieD.  49. 

LukeS.  34.  when  thcys.  what  was  done,  they  fled 

47.  when  the  woman  a.  that  she  was  not  hid 
9.  32.  when  they  were  awake,  they  a.  his  glory 
15.  20.  his  father  a.  him,  had  compassion  on  him 
17.  I.'j.  one  of  them,  when  he  «.  he  was  healed 
84.  24.  they  found  it  even  so,  but  him  they  s.  not 

./oAnd.  20.  ye  seek  me,  not  because  yes.  miracles 

8.  56.  Abraham  s.  my  day,  and  was  glad 
12.4l.thcse  things  said  Esuiae,when  he  s.his  glory 
19.  35.  he  that  a.  it,  bare  record,  his  record  is  true 
80.  20.  disciples  were  glad  when  theys.  the  Lord 

^cta  4.  13.  when  they  s.  the  boldness  of  Poter 

6.  15.  a.  hill  face  as  it  had  been  face  of  an  angel 

7.  55.  Stephen  s.  glory  of  God  and  Jesusstanding 

8.  18.  when  Simons,  that  Holy  Ghost  was  given 

39.  caught  Philip,  that  eunuch  a.  him  no  more 

9.  8.  when  his  eyes  were  opened,  he  a.  no  man 
35.  all  at  Lydda  a.  him,  and  turned  to  the  L. 

40.  and  when  Tabitha  a.  Peter,  she  sat  up 

10.  3.  Cornelius  a.  a  vision  ||  11.  a,  heaven  opened 

12.  3.  and  because  he  *.  it  pleased  the  Jews 

13.  36.  David  a.  corruption  ||  37.  a.  no  corruption 
16.19.  masters  s.  the  hope  of  their  gain  w.isgono 
17.  16.  he  a.  the  city  wholly  given  to  idolatry 
•2.9.  they  a.  indeed  the  light  and  were  afraid 

88.  fi.  hid  looked,  and  s.  no  harm  come  to  him 
Qal.  2.  7.  but  when  they  a.  that  the  gospel  of  the 

nncircumcision  was  committed  to  me 
Phil.  1.  30.  hav  r.g  the  same  conflict  which  ye  s. 
Heh.  3.  9.  your  failicrs  a.  my  works  forty  years 

11.  23.  because  they  a.  he  was  a  proper  child 
ii!«i.  1.  2.  who  bare  record  of  all  things  he  s. 

11.  11.  groat  fear  fell  on  them  who  j.  them 

12.  13.  wh>-n  the  dra;on  a.  that  he  was  cast  out 
19.  18.  crioil,  when  llii^ys.  smoke  of  her  burning 

SAW  joined  wilh   /.ord  or  (lod. 
Oen.  1.  4.  and  Ooil  a.  the  light  that  it  was  good 
10.  God  called   the  drv  land  earth,  and  fJod  a. 
thai  it  wa«gond,  12,  18,  21,  S.'i,  31. 
6.  5.  Ood  a.  that  ihe  wickedness  of  rnan  was  great 

89.  31.  when  the  l.anl  a.  that  Leah  was  hated 
F.Tod.  3   4. -when  the  Lord  a.  that  he  turned  aside 
Om.  32.  10.  when  Ihi;  Lord  a.  it,  he  abhorred 

8  Kinga  14.  2'i.  the  l.nrd  a.  the  affliction  of  Israel 
S  Chr.  12.  7.  when  /,.  a.  they  hunihted  themselves 
faa.  .v.).  I.*!,  the  l.nrd  «.  ii,  and  it  ilispleascd  h'rm 

K./.ord  a.rhnl  there  wnsnoman.and  wondoriiil 
.fonah  3.  10.  God  a.  their  worka,  that  they  turned 
f^tikel.  13.  /yori/s. her,  he  had  compassion  on  her 

/SAW. 

Oen.  41.19.  surh  as  /  never. ».  in  Egypt  for  badness 
44.  28.  one  went  oiil,  and  /  a.  him  not  sinco 
Joak.  7.  21.  when  la.  ainon;;  thespoils  a  garment 
Juilxr.  12.  3.  when  /  «.  that  ha  dchvorcd  mo  not 
*  518 


SAY 

1  Sam.  22.  9.  Is.  the  son  of  Jesie  coming  to  Nob 
28.  13.  la.  gods  ascending  out  of  the  earth 

2  Sam.  IS.  10.  /  a.  Absalom  hatiged  in  an  oak 
29.  /  s.  great  tumult,  but  knew  not  what  it  was 

1  Kinga  22.  17.  la.  all  Israel  scattered  on  the  hills 

19.  fa.  the  Lord  on  his  throne,  2  Chrcm.  18.18. 
JWA.I3.15.in  those  days  s. /in  Judah  some  trading 
Job  31.21.  when  la.  my  help  in  the  gale 

Fsal.  73.  3.  when  /  a.  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked 
Prov.  24.  32.  then  /*.  and  considered  it  well 
Eccl.  2.  24.  this  also  la.  from  the  hand  of  God 
8.  10.  so  la.  the  wicked  buried,  who  had  gone 
£zeA.l  1.1. among  whom  /s.Jaazanialison  ol  Azur 

16.  .50.  therefore  I  took  them  away  as  la.  good 
23.13.  then  la.  that  she  was  defiled,  took  one  way 

Hos.  9.  10.  la.  your  fathers  as  first-ripe  in  fig-tree 

13.  Ephraim,  as  la.  Tyrus,  is  planted  in  pleasant 
John  1.  32.  Is.  the  Spirit  descending  upon  him 

48.  when  thou  wast  under  the  fig-tree,  la.  thee 
Jicts  26.  13.  Is.  in  the  way  a  light  from  heaven 
Gal.  1.  19.  but  other  of  the  apostles  a.  I  none 
2.  14.  when  Is.  that  they  walked  not  uprightly 
Rov.  1.  17.  when  la.  him,  I  fell  at  his  feet  as  dead 

SAW. 
The  punishment  of  the  Saw.     See  Pcnishmknt. 
/sa.lO.  15.  shall  s.  magnify  ag.  him  thatsbuketh  it? 

SAWS. 
2Sam.l2. 31.he  put  Ammonites  under  s.l  CAr.20.3. 

SAWED. 
lA'jnfi's7.9.these  were  of  costly  stones  a.  with  saws 

SAWEST. 
Gen.  20. 10.  what  a.  thou  that  hast  done  this  thing? 

1  .Sam.  19.  5.  thou  s.  it  and  didst  rejoice 

28.  13.  king  said,  be  not  afraid,  for  what  a.  thou 

2  Sam.  18.  11.  Joab  said,  and  behold,  thou  s.  him 
Psal.  50. 18.  when  thou  s.  a  thief,  thou  consenledst 
Dan.  2.  31.  thou,  O  king,  a.  a  great  image 

34.  thou  a.  till  that  a  stone  was  cut  out,  45. 
4. 20.  the  tree  thou  a.  which  grew  and  was  strong 

8.  20.  the  ram  which  thou  a.  having  two  horns 
Rev.  1.  20.  seven  stars  thou  s.  seven  candlesticks  s. 

17.  8.  the  beast  that  thou  a.  was,  and  is  not 

12.  the  ten  horns  which  thou  s.  are  ten  kings,  16. 

IS.waters  thou  s.where  whore sitteth  are  peoples 

18.  the  woman  which  thou  a.  is  that  great  city 

SAWN. 

Hcb.  11.37.  they  were  stoned,  they  were  s.  asunder 

SAY 
Signifies,  [1]  To  apeak,  to  tell,  or  relate,  Gen.  37. 

20.  I  44.  16.  12]  To  utter,  or  pronounce,  Judg. 
12.  6.  [3]  To  will  and  command  with  efficacy, 
Gen.  1.3,  6,  9.  Luke  7.  7.  [4]  To  promise, 
Luke  2.'!.  43.  ['t]  To  think,  muse,  or  meditate, 
Deut.  7.  17.  Isa  49.  21.  Mat.  3.  9.  [61  To 
ask,  Mark  11.  31.     [7]  To  answer,  Exod.  3.  13, 

14.  [8]  To  affirm  and  teach.  Mat.  17.  10.  [9J 
To  expound,  Ileb.  5.  11.  [10]  To  admonish, 
Col.  4.  17.  [Ill  To  confess,  or  acknowledge, 
Luke  17.  10.  [12]  To  bear  witness.  Acta '24. 
2(1.     [13]   To  reason,  or  argue,  Jam.  2.  18. 

Gen.  14.  23.  lest  thou  shouldest  s.  I  have  made 

Abram 
34.  11.  what  ye  shall  a.  to  me  I  will  give,  12. 
37.  17.  for  I  heard  them  a.  let  us  go  to  Dotlian 
20.  we  wills,  some  evil  beast  hath  devoured  him 
41.  15.  I  have  heard  s.  that  ihou  canst  interpret  it 
44.  16.  Judah  said,  what  shall  we  s.  to  my  Lord 
50.  17.  BO  shall  ye  a.  to  Joseph,  forgive,  I  pray 
Ezod.3.  14.  thus  shall  ye  s.  to  the  children  of  Isr. 
I  AMhnth8entmetoyou,15.  |  19.3.  120.22. 
4.  12.  I  will  teach  you  what  thou  slialt  a. 
12.  2(!.  when  your  children  shall  s.  unto  you 
14.  3.  Pharaoh  will  a.  of  the  chililren  of  Israel 

21.  5.  if  the  servant  shall  a.  I  love  my  master 
Jfum.  a.  22.  and  the  woman  shall  a.  amin,  amen 

II.  12.  that  thou  shouldest  a.  to  me,  carry  them 

22.  19.  that  I  may  know  what  the  Lord  will  s. 
38.  have  1  now  any  power  at  all  to  s.  any  thing? 

Deut.  i.  7!.  hear  all  that  the  l-ord  our  God  shall ». 
6.  21.  then  Ihou  shait  a.  to  thy  son,  we  were 

9.  2.  a  people  great,  of  whom  thou  hast  heard  a. 
28. 67.  in  the  morning  thou  shall  a.  and  at  even  a. 

31.  17.  so  that  they  will  a.  in  that  day,  are  not 

32.  27.  lest  they  shovild  a.  our  hand  is  high 
./n»A.  22.  27.  your  children  may  not  a.  our  children 

28  when  they  should  a.  to  us  in  time  to  come 
.Tudg.  7.  II.  and  thou  shall  hear  what  they  a. 
])).  15.  she  said,  how  canst  thou  a.  I  love  thee  ? 

18.  24.  what  is  this  ye  a.  to  me,  what  ailoth  thee? 
l.«am.8.7.  in  all  they  a.  unto  thoi',  hearken  to  voire 

14.  10.  if  they  a.  thus,  come  up  to  us,  we  will  go 
00.  7.  if  he  a.  thus,  thy  serviinl  shall  have  peace 

2  .Snm.  7.  8.  therefore  thou  shalt  a.  to  mv  servant 
Dnvid,  I  look  thee  from  sheep  cote,  1  CAr.  17.  7. 

15.  26.  if  he  a.  I  have  no  delight  in  thee 

21.  4.  whnt  you  shall  a.  that  will  I  do  for  you 
1  Kinga  I.  3fi.  the  Lord  God  of  niy  lord  a.  so  too 
2.  I7.""Bpeak  I  pray  thee,  fi.r  hi^  will  not  s.  thee  nay 
9.8.  thevshall  s.  why  halh  the  Lord  Hone  thin  to 
tliis  land  and  to  tliis  houi^''  2  C,hro%.  7.21 


SAY 

1  Kinga  13. 32.  of  which  the  L.  did  a.  eat  do  braai 

22.  8.  let  not  the  king  s.  so,  2  Chron.  18.  7. 

2  Kinga  7.  4.  if  we  s.  we  will  enter  into  the  city 

9.  37.  BO  that  they  shall  not  a.  this  is  Jezebel 

2  Chron.  18.15.  that  thou  a.  nothing  but  truth  to  me 
Ezra  8.  17. 1  told  them  what  they  should  s.to  Iddo 

9.  10.  O  our  God,  what  shall  we  a.  after  this? 
JoiU.12.  he  takes  away,  whocan  hinder  him  ?  who 

will  a.  to  him,  what  doest  thou  ?  Eccl.  8.  4. 

21.  14.  they  s.  unto  God,  depart  from  us 

22.  29.  then  shall  thou  a.  there  is  lifting  up 

23.  5.  I  would  understand  what  he  would  a,  to  rM 

28.  22.  destruction  and  death  s.  we  have  heard 

32.  11.  whilst  you  searched  out  what  to  s. 

33.  27.  if  any  s.  1  have  sinned,  and  perverted  right 
37.  19.  teach  us  what  we  shall  a.  unto  him 

Psal.  3. 2.  many  s.of  my  soul,  there  is  no  help  in  G. 

4.  6.  there  be  that  a.  who  will  shew  us  any  good? 
35.  25.  let  them  not  s.  we  have  swallowed  him  up 

58.  11.  so  that  a  mah  shall  a.  there  is  a  reward 

59.  7.  they  belch  out,  for  who,  s.  they,  doth  hear  7 
94. 7.  yet  they  s.  L.  shall  not  see,  nor  G.  of  Jacob 
129.  8.  nor  do  they  who  go  by  s.  blessing  of  the  L 

Prov.l.  II.  if  they  s.  come,  let  us  lay  wait  for  blood 
20.  9.  who  can  s.  I  have  made  my  heart  clean  1 
Eccl.  12.  1.  when  thou  shall  s.  I  have  n6  pleasure 
laa.  2.  3.  many  people  shall  go  and  a.  come  ye 

29.  15.  the  a.  who  seeth  us?  and  who  knoweth  us? 
16.  shall  the  work  s.  of  him  that  made  il  ?  or  the 

thing  framed  s.  of  him  that  framed  it  1 
30. 10.  who  a.  to  the  seers,  see  not,  and  to  prophets 
33.  24.  and  the  inhabitants  shall  not  s.  I  am  sick 
44.  5.  one  shall  s.  I  am  the  Lord's,  and  another 
45.24.  surely  shallones.in  L.have  I  righteousnen 
48.5.  lest  thou  shouldest  s.niy  idol  halh  done  them 

7.  lest  thou  shouldest  s.  behold  I  knew  them 
58.3.  why  have  wefast.  s.they,and  thou  seest  not? 

9.  thou  shall  cry,  and  he  shall  a.  here  I  am 
./er.  2. 27.  in  trouble  they  will  s.  arise,  and  save  M 

5.  15.  neither  understandest  what  they  a. 

10.  11.  thus  shall  yes.  them,  the  gods  shall  perish 
14.  17.  therefore  thou  shall  s.  this  word  to  them 

20.  10.  report,  a.  they,  and  we  will  report  it 
2.3.  7.  they  shall  no  more  s.  the  Lord  livelh 

31.  29.  they  shall  s.  no  more,  fathers  have  eaten 
39.  12.  do  to  him  even  as  he  shall  s.  unto  thee 
42.  20.  according  to  all  that  the  Lord  shall  a. 

Eiek.  13.  7.  whereas  ye  a.  the  Lord  saiih  it 
28.9.  will  thou  yet  s.  before  him  that  slayeth  iatel 

Hos.  14.  3.  nor  will  we  s.  to  the  work  ofour  hands 

8.  Ephraim  shall  s.  what  have  I  to  do  wilh  idols? 
Mie.  2. 6.  prophesy  ye  not,  s.  they  to  I  hem  that  pro 

3.  11.  they  will  a.  is  not  the  Lord  among  us? 
Hab.%  1.  I  will  watch  to  see  what  he  will  s.  tome 
Zech.  11.  5.  they  that  sell  them,  s.  I  am  rich 
Jlfa/.1.2.yet  ye  s.wherein  loved  us?  2.14,17.  |  3.13. 
Mat.  3.  9.  think  not  to  s.  in  yourselves,  /,u*e3.8, 

5. 11.  shall  s.al'  manner  ofevil  against  you  falsely 
7.  22.  many  will  s.  to  me  in  that  day.  Lord,  Lord 
13.  51.  have  ye  understood  ?  they  a.  yea,  Lord 
16. 13.  Jesus  said,  whom  do  men  a.  that  1  the  Son 
of  man  am  ?  Mark  8.  27.  f.uhe  9.  la 
IS.whoms.yethatlam?  jVarA  8.29.  /,uAe9.90. 

21.  3.  if  any  man  a.  ought  to  you,  ye  shall  a. 
16.  and  s.  to  him,  hearest  thou  what  these  a.  7 

25.  if  we  should  s.  from  heaven,  he  will  a.  to  us, 
why  noi  believe  him?  Mark  11.31.  /,hA-c20.  3. 

26.  if  we  shall  s.  of  men,  Mark  1 1 .  32.  /,u*e20. 6. 
23.  3.  do  not  their  works,  for  they  a.  and  do  not 

3fnrA1.44.and  saith,  sec  thou  s.nothingtoany  man 
9.  6.  he  wist  not  what  to  s.  for  they  were  afraid 

/,«Ar4.03.ye  will  surely  s.l  his  proverb,heal  thyself 
7.  40.  Simon,  I  have  somewhat  to  s..  to  thee 

12.  II.  take  ye  no  thought  what  ye  shall  a. 

12.  the  Holy  G.  shall  teach  what  ye  ought  to  a. 
.John  4.  20.  ye  a.  that  Jerusalem  is  the  place  where 

7.  26.  he  speakelh,  and  they  s.  nothing  to  him 

8.  26.  I  have  many  things  to  s.  of  you,  16.  12. 
48.  s.  we  not  w^,  that  thou  hast  a  devil  ? 
54.  of  whom  y^B  Ihal  he  is  your  God 

13.  13.  ve  rail  niWnasier,  ye  a.  well,  for  so  I  am 
Jlcis  3.  22.  him  shall  ye  hear  in  all  things  he  shall  a. 

4.  14.  they  could  a.  nothing  ngein«t  it 

6.  14   we'hrard  him  s.  that  Jesus  shall  d'itroy 
21.  23.  do  therefore  this  that  we  s.  to  thee 

21.  IM.  who  hnth  something  to  a.  unto  then 
2<.  21).  or  else  let  these  same  here  a.  if  foundevil 
2fi.  22.  none  other  things  but  what  Mo.srs  did  a. 
Rom.  3.  5.  what  shall  we  s.  h  God  unrighteous  ? 
P.  ns  some  affirm  that  wp  a.  let  ui  do  evil 
4.1. what  shall  we  s.  then, shall  wo  continue  in  sin? 
6.  I.  I  7.7.  I  8.  31.  I  9.14,30. 

9.  20.  shall  thing  formed  s.to  him  that  formed  it? 
I  Cor.  12.  3.  no  man  can  a.  that  Jesus  is  the  I,ord 

14.  Ifi.  how!!hall  he  s.amen  at  thy  giving  thankif 
23.  will  they  not  a.  that  ve  are  mnd  ? 

15.  12.  how  a.  some  that  thcr^'  is  no  re«urreetlon? 
2r'nr.0.4.we,lhat  we  s.not  von,  should  he  ashamed 

10.  in.  for  his  letters,  a.  they,  are  weig'ity 
IThcaa.^.  15.  tliis  wo  s.  to  you  by  word  of  the  Losl 


SAY 

I  Ti'Ji  i.  7.  understanding  neither  what  they  *. 
TU.  2.  8.  having  no  evil  tiling  to  s.  of  jou 
P/itlem.  19.  albeit  I  do  not  s.  how  thou  owest  me 
Heb.  5.  11.  of  whom  we  iiave  many  things  to  a. 
7.  9.  as  I  may  so  «.  Levi  paid  tithes  in  Abraham 

9.  11.  that  is  to  £.  nut  of  this  building 

10.  '20.  for  us,  through  the  vail,  tluit  is  to  s.  his  flesh 

11.  14.  they  that  £.  such  things  declare  jilainly 
13.  6.  80  thit  we  may  boldly  »-.  Lord  is  my  helper 

Jam.  1.  13.  let  no  man  s.  when  he  is  templed 
4.  13.  go  to  now  ye  that  s.  lu-day  or  to-morrow 
15.  for  that  ye  ought  to  s.  if  the  Lord  will 

I  John  1.  6.  if  we  s.  we  have  followahlp  with  him 
j3.  if  we  s.Vfii  have  no  sin,  we  deceivoourselv.  lU. 

4.  '20.  if  a  man  a'.  I  love  Uod,  and  hateth  his  brother 

5.  1().  1  do  not  s.  that  he  shall  pray  for  it 
Hco.  '2.  'J.  which  £.  they  are  apostles,  and  are  not 

!1.  which  s.  ihey  are  Jews,  and  are  not,  3.  9. 
2'2. 17.  and  the  Spirit  and  the  bride  .$.  come 
Sec  Bkgan. 
SAY,  Impcratiody. 
Gen.  12.  13.  s.  I  pray  thee,  thou  art  my  sister 

20.  13.  at  every  place,  s.  of  me,  he  is  ray  brother 
Diul.  I.  42.  s.  unto  them,  go  not  up,  neither  light 
Judg.1.16.  s.  the  sword  of  the  Lord,  and  of  Gideon 

12.  6.  they  said  to  him,  «.  now,  Shibboleth 
1  .b'a/n.lo.lti.  and  he  said  to  him,  5.  on,  2  Sam. 14.12. 

1  Kings  2.  14,  16.  Luke  7.  40.  .lets  13.  15. 
Proo.  3.  26.  s.  not  to  thy  neigh,  go  and  come  again 
24.  29.  s.  not,  I  will  do  so  to  him  as  he  hath  done 
30.  9.  lest  I  deny  thee,  and  4-.  who  is  the  Lord  1 
Keel.  7.  10.  s.  not  thou,  what  is  cause  former  days 
Isa.  3. 10.  s.  ye  to  righteous,  shall  be  well  with  him 
35.  4.  s.  to  them  that  are  of  fearful  heart,  fear  not 
40.  9.  s.  to  the  cities  of  Judah,  behold  your  God 
43.  9.  or  let  them  hear,  and  s.  it  is  truth 

06.  3.  neither  let  the  eunuch  5.  I  am  a  dry  tree 
62.  11.  s.  ye  to  the  daughter  of  Zion,  behold  thy 

Jer.  1.  7.  jj.  not,  I  am  a  child,  for  tluiu  shalt  go 
46.  14.  s.  ye,  stand  fast,  and  prepare  thee 
4S.  19.  ask  her  that  escapeth,  and  s.  what  is  done 

50.  2.  s.  Babylon  is  taken,  Bel  is  confounded 
Ezek.  6.  11.  and  stamp  with  thy  foot,  and  5.  alas 

12.  11.  s.  1  am  your  sign,  like  as  I  have  done 
19.  2.  and  s.  what  is  thy  mother  ?  a  lioness 

21.  9.  s.  a  sword,  a  sword  is  sharpened 
28.  s.  the  sword  is  drawn  for  the  slaughter 

Hos.  14.  2.  s.  unto  him,  take  away  all  iniquity 
Jixi  2.  17.  let  them  s.  spare  thy  people,  O  Lord 

3.  JO.  let  the  weak  «.  I  am  strong 
Zeek.  ].  3.  s.  unto  them,  turn  ye  unto  me 
Mat.  21.  3.  s.  Lord  hath  need  of  them,  Mark  11.  3. 
huke  7.7.  s.  in  a  word, and  my  serv.  shall  be  healed 

10.  10.  go  out  into  the  streets  of  the  same,  and  s. 
John  4.  35.  s.  not  ye,  there  are  yet  four  months 

It).  36.  s.  ye  of  him  the  Father  hath  sanctified 
Col.^.Vl.  s.  to  .'Vrchippus,  take  heed  to  the  ministry 

/  SAY. 
Kzod.  3.  13.  his  name,  what  sliall  Is.  to  them  ? 

4.  23.  /  s.  unto  thee,  let  my  son  go  to  serve  me 
0.  2S).  speak  all  that  Is.  unto  thee,  Ezek.  44.  5 

Josh.  7.8.  what  shall  Is.  when  Israel  turneth  backs 
Jadg.  7.  4.  of  whom  Is.  this  shall  go  with  thee 

1  Sam.  20.  21.  Mis.  expressly  to  the  lad,  behold 
3  Kings  4.  28.  did  not  /  s.  do  not  deceive  ine  ? 

7.  13.  behold,  /  s.  they  are  as  all  the  multitude 

2  Chron.  20.  11.  behold,  /  j".  how  they  reward  us 
Job  6. 22.  did  /  «.  bring  unto  me,  or  give  a  reward  ? 

7.  13.  when  Is.  my  bed  shall  comfort  me 
9.20.if /s.I  am  perfect,  it  shall  prove  me  perverse 
27.  if  /  s.  I  will  forget  my  complaint,  leave  off 
10.  2.  /  will  s.  to  God,  do  not  condemn  me 
Psal.  27.  14.  be  of  courage,  wait.  Is.  on  the  Lord 
73.  15.  if  fs.  I  will  speak  thus,  I  should  offend 

51.  2.  /will  s.  of  the  Lord,  he  is  my  refuge 
1.10.  6.  Is.  more  than  they  that  watch  for  morning 
139.  11.  if  Is.  the  darkness  shall  cover  me 

F.eel.  n.  3.  Is.  an  untimely  birth  is  better  than  he 

Isa.  36. 5.  /  s.  sayest  thou,  but  they  are  vain  words 
3.?.  15.  what  shall  /«.  ?  he  Mth  both  spoken  to  me 
43.6.  /will  s.  to  the  north, five  up,  and  the  south 

Ezek.  2.  8.  son  of  man,  hear  what  Is.  unto  thee 
3.  18.  when  Is.  to  the  wicked,  33.  8,  14. 
12.  2.J.  /  will  s.  the  word,  and  will  perform  it 
21.  24.  because  Is.  ye  are  come  to  remembrance 
33.  13.  when  Is.  to  the  righteous,  he  shall  live 

Mat.  8.  9.  Is.  unto  this  man  go,  Luke  7.  8. 
IH.  22.  Is.  not  unto  thee,  until  seven  times,  but 

J/ar4  2.11. /s. to  thee, arise,5.  41.AuA:f  5.24.  |  7.14. 

Luke  f).  46.  and  do  not  the  things  which  Is. 

John  5.  34.  these  things /s.  that  ye  might  be  saved 

8-  46.  /  s.  the  truth,  why  do  ye  not  believe  me  ? 

.15.  if  /  should  s.  I  know  him  not,  shall  be  a  liar 

12.27.  what  shall  Is.  Fath.  save  me  from  this  hour 

49.  he  gave  me  commandment,  what  /should  s. 

Rom.  3.  26.  to  declare,  Is.  his  righteousness 
9.  1.  Is.  the  truth  in  Christ,  I  lie  not 

1  Cor   1.  12.  this  Is.  that  every  one  of  you  saith 
7.  29.  but  this  /  s.  brethren,  the  time  is  sliort 
9.8.<.  /  Ihess  things  as  a  mani  or  saith  nol  the  law 
»13 


SAY 

1  Cor.lO.15.1  speak  as  to  wise  men,  judge  what  Is 
19.  what  s.  1  then  7  that  the  idol  is  any  thing 
29.  conscience,  Is.  not  tliy  own,  but  of  others 

11.22.  what  shall  Is.  to  you  7  shall  1  praise  you  7 
15. 50.  now  this  /  s.  brethren,  2  Cur.  9.  6.  Gal.'.i. 
17.  1  5.  16.  Lph.  4.  17.  Col.  2.  4. 
Gal.  1.  9.  as  we  said  before,  so  s.  I  now  again 

2  Tint.  2.7.  consider  what  Is.hi.  give  thee  unders. 
Philem.  21.  knowing  thou  w  ilt  do  more  than  /  s. 
/^ei. 11.32.  what  shall  /  more  s.7  time  would  fail  me 

/  SAY  unto  you. 
2  Sam.  13.  28.  when  Is.  unto  you,  smite  Amnon 
2  Kings  2. 18  he  said,  did  /not  s.  unto  you,  go  not? 
Mat.{i.'2\).I s.unto  you.,tha.l  Solomon  in  all  his  glory 

21.  31.  /  s.  unto  you,  that  Publicans  go  belbre  you 
j)/ar/;13.37.what  Is.  unto  you,ls3Ly  unto  all,watcl; 
John  16.26.  Is.  notuntoyou,  I  will  pray  the  Fath 
Gal.  5.  2.  /  Paul  s.  unto  you,  if  ye  be  circumcised 
ICev.  2. 24.  unto  you  Is.  and  to  the  rest  in  Thyatira 

SAYEST. 
Ei^od.33.l2.  see,  thou  i\  to  me,  bring  up  this  people 
JVu7«.  22. 17. 1  will  do  whatsoever  thou  s.  unto  me 
Ruth  3.  5.  all  that  thou  s.  unto  me,  I  will  do 

1  Kings  18.  11.  and  now  thou  s.  go  tell  thy  lord,  14 

2  Kings  18.20.  thous.  but  they  are  but  vain  words, 
I  have  counsel  and  strength  for  war,  Isa.  36.  5. 

2  Chron.  25. 19.  thou  s.  lo,  thou  hast  smitten  Edom 
JVeh.  5.  12.  we  will  restore,  so  will  we  do  as  thou  s. 

6.  8.  there  are  no  such  things  dune  as  thou  5. 
■Job  22.  13.  and  thou  s.  how  doth  God  know  7 
Psal.  90.  3.  and  s.  return,  ye  children  of  men 
Proo.  24.  12.  if  thou  s.  behold,  we  knew  it  not 
Isa.  40.27.  why  s.  thou,  O  Jacob,  and  speak.  O  Isr. 

47.  8.  that  «.  in  thine  heart,  I  am,  and  none  else 
Jer.  2.  35.  yet  thou  s.  because  I  am  innocent,  1  will 
plead  with  thee,because  thou  s. I  have  not  sinned 
^inos  7. 16.  thou  s.  prophesy  not  against  Israel 
Mat.  26.  70.  saying,  I  know  not  what  thou  s. 

27.  11.  art  thou  king  of  the  Jews7  Jesus  said  unto 
him,  thou  s.  Mark^5. 2.  Luke  23.3.  John  18.37. 
Mark  14.  68.  Peter  denied,  saying,  I  know  not, 
neither  understand  I  what  thou  4.  Lukc2i.  60. 
Luke  20. 21.  Master,  we  know  that  thou  s.  rightly 
John  1. 22.  who  art  thou  7  what  s.  thou  of  thyself  7 

8.  S.that  such  should  be  stoned,  but  what  s.  thou7 
33.  s.  thou,  ye  shall  be  made  free  7  12.  34.  ]  14.  9. 

9.17.  they  say  to  blind  man,  whats.  thou  of  him7 

18.  34.  «.  thou  this  of  thyself  or  did  others  tell  7 
Rom.  2.  22.  thou  that  s.,a.  man  should  not  steal 
1  Cor.  14. 16.  he  understandeth  not  wliat  thou  s. 
Rev.  3.17.  because  thou  5. 1  am  rich,  and  increased 

SAYING. 
Gen.  37. 11.  brelh.envied,but  his  father  observed  s. 
Deut.  1.  23.  and  the  «.  pleased  me  well 

1  Sam.  18.  8.  the  s.  disjileased  Saul,  and  he  said 

2  Sam.  17.  4.  and  the  «.  pleased  Absalom  well 
6.  shall  we  do  after  his  s.  7  if  not,  speak  thou 

24.19.  David,  according  to  the  s.  of  God,  went  up 

1  Kings  2.  38.  and  Shimei  said,  the  s.  is  good 

12.  15.  that  he  might  perform  his  s.  by  Ahijah 

13.  4.  when  Jeroboam  heard  s.  of  the  man  of  God 
32.  the  «.  w  hich  he  cried  by  the  Lord  shall  come 

15.29.according  to  the  s.  of  the  L.  2  Kings  10.17. 

17.  15.  accord,  to  the  s.  of  Elijah,  2  Kings  2.  22. 

2  Kings  5.  14.  according  to  the  s.  of  the  man  of 
God,  8.  2. 

Esth.  1.21.  the  s.  pleased  the  king  and  the  princes 
Psal.  49.  4.  I  will  open  my  dark  s.  on  the  harp 
Jonah  4.2.  was  not  this  my  s.  when  in  my  country 
Mat.  15. 12.  were  offended  after  they  heard  this  s. 

19.  11.  all  men  cannot  receive  this  «.  save  they 

22.  but  when  the  young  man  heard  this  «. 
28.  15.  this  s.  is  commonly  reported  among  Jews 

Mark  7.  29.  for  this  s.  go  thy  way,  the  devil  is  gone 
8.  32.  and  he  s|)ake  that  s.  openly 

9.  10.  and  they  kept  that  s.  with  themselves 
32.  Ihey  understood  not  that  5.  Luke  2.50.  |  9.45. 

10.  22.  he  was  sad  at  that  s.  and  went  away 
lyuke  1.29.  she  was  troub.at  his  5.  and  cast  in  mind 

2.  17.  they  made  known  abroad  s.  that  was  told 
9.  45.  and  thoy  feared  to  ask  him  of  that*. 

18.  34.  this  5.  was  hid  from  them,  nor  knew  they 
John  4.  37.  herein  is  that  s.  true,  one  soweth 

39.  many  believed,  for  the  s.  of  the  woman 
42.  now  we  believe,  not  because  of  thy  s. 

6.  60.  this  a  hard  s.  who  can  hear  it 

7.  36.  what  manner  of  s.  is  this  that  he  said  7 

40.  many,  when  they  heard  this  s.  said 

8.  51.  I  say  to  you,  if  a  man  keep  my  s.  52. 
55.  but  I  know  him  and  keep  his  s. 

12.  38.  that  the  s.  of  Esaias  might  be  fulfilled 
]5.20.ifthcy  have  kept  my  s.  they  will  keep  yours 

18.  9.  that  the  s.  of  Jesus  might  be  fulfilleil,  32. 

19.  8.  when  Pilate  heard  that  5.  he  was  afraid 
21.  23.  then  went  this  5.  abroad  among  brethren 

Jicts  6.  5.  the  s.  pleased  the  whole  mulliludo 
7.  29.  then  fled  Moses  at  this  s.  into  Midian 
16. 36.  the  keeper  of  the  prison  told  this  s.  to  Paul 

Rom.  13.  9.  it  is  briefly  comprehcmled  in  this  a. 

1  Cor.  15.  54.  tlicD  shall  be  brought  to  pass  the  1. 
3X 


SCA 

1  Tini.l.  15.  this  is  a  faithful  s.  that  Ch.Jesus  came 
tosave  tmncLs,  4.  9.  2  Tim.%11.  'lit.Z.H. 

3.  1.  this  is  a  true  s.  if  a  man  desire  the  office 
SAYING,   Participle. 

1  Kings  1.6.displeasi(l  111  ^-.why  hast  thou  doneso7 
Jl/at.26.44.  he  prayed  third  time,  s.  the  same  words 
Mark  13. 6.  s.  1  am  Christ,  and  shall  deceive  many 
Luke  J1.45.Master,  thus  »'.ihoureproachcst  us  also 
Jicts  11.  7.  a  voice,  «.  arise,  Peter,  slay  and  eat 
26.22.  ».  noneolher  things  Ihan  those  which 

SAYINGS. 
J\rum.  14.  39.  Moses  told  these  s.  to  the  people 
.ludg.  13. 17.  that  when  thy  s.comc  to  pass,  may  do 

1  .SaHi.25.12.  so  David's  young  men  told  all  those  s. 

2  Chron.  13. 22.Abijah's5.  aie  written  in  the  story 
33.  19.  that  are  written  among  the  s.  of  the  seen 

Psal.i^.  13.  yet  their  posterity  approve  their  *. 
78.  2.  open  in  parables,  I  will  utter  dark  s.  of  old 
Prov.  1.  6.  to  undersiand  the  daik  s.  of  the  wise 

4.  10.  hear,  O  my  sou,  and  receive  my  s. 
20.  my  son  attend,  incline  thine  ear  to  my  s. 

Mat.  7.  24.  whoso  hearelh  these*. 26.  Luke6.il 
28.  when  Jesus  had  ended  these  s.the  people  were 
astonished  at  his  doctrine, 19. 1. 1  26. 1.  Luke  7. 1 
AuAe  1.65. all  these  s.were  noised  abroad  in  Judea 
2.  51.  his  mother  kept  all  these.?,  in  her  heart 
9.  44.  let  these  s.  sink  down  into  your  cars 
./oA?i  10. 19.  there  was  a  division  again  for  these  s 
14.  24.  he  that  loveth  me  not,  keejieth  not  my  t 
.lets  14.18.with  these  ^.scarce  restrained  they  peo 
19.28.  when  heard  these  s.  they  were  full  of  wratli 
Rom.  3.  4.  that  thou  mightest  be  justified  in  thy  i. 
Rev.  19. 9.  he  saith  lo  me  these  are  true  *.  of  Gcxi 
22.  6.  he  said  to  me,  these  s.  are  faithful  and  true 
7.  blessed  is  he  that  keepeth  the  5.  of  this  book 

9.  and  of  them  who  keep  the  5.  of  this  book 

10.  seal  not  the  s.  of  the  prophesy  of  this  book 
SCAB. 

Lev.  13.  2.  when  shall  have  in  skin  of  his  flesh  a  a 
6.  it  is  but  a  «.  ||  7.  if  s.  spread  much  in  skin,  fc 
14.  56.  this  is  the  law  for  a  s.  and  for  a  bright  spo' 
iJcut.  28.  27.  the  Lord  will  Emi.ie  thee  with  a  «. 
Isa.  3.  17.  therefore  the  Lord  will  smite  with  a  * 

SCABBARD. 
Jer.  47.  6.  O  sword,  put  up  thyself  into  thy  s. 

SCABBED. 
IjCV.  21.20.  he  that  is  scurvy  or  «. shall  not  approacii 
22. 22.  or  scurvy,  or  s.  ye  shall  not  offer  lo  the  L- 

SCAFFOLD. 
2  Chron.  6. 13.  Solomon  had  made  a  brasen  s. 

SCALES. 
Lev.  11.  9.  these  that  have  s.  eat  ye,  Deut.  14.  3 
lO.that  have  no  .'.ye  shall  not  eat,12.i?<;uM4.10 
JobA\.  15.  his  s.  are  his  pride,  shut  up  together 
/«a.40.12.who  weighed  the  mountains  ins. and  hill. 
£zfA.  29.  4.  I  will  cause  the  fish  to  slick  to  thy  s 
Acts  9. 18.  tliere  fell  from  his  eyes  as  it  had  been  t 

SCALETH. 
Prov.  21.  22.  a  wise  man  s.  the  city  of  the  mightj 

SCALL. 
I^ev.  13.  30.  it  is  a  dry  s.  even  a  leprosy  on  the  head 

31.  plague  of  the  s.  be  not  deeper  than  the  skin, 
shall  shut  up  him  that  hath  the  s.  7  days,  33. 

32.  and  behold,  if  the  s.  spread  not,  34. 
33.hcshall  be  shaven, hut  the  i.shall  henotshave 
35.  but  if  the  s.  spread  much,  he  is  unclean,  36. 
37.  if  the  s.  be  at  a  stay,  the  s.  is  healed 

14.  54.  this  is  law  of  all  manner  of  leprosy  and  *. 

SCALP. 

Psal.  63.  21.  God  shall  wound  the  hairy  s.  of  such 

SCANDAL. 

1  John  2.  t  10.  there  is  none  occasion  of  j.  in  him 
SCANDALS. 

Mat.  13.  t  41.  gather  out  of  his  kingdom  all  3. 
SCANT. 

2  Kings  4.  t  3.  borrow  the  vessels  abroad,  s.  not 
SCANT. 

Mic.  6. 10.  and  the  .«.  measure  that  is  abominable 

SCAPE-GOAT.    See  Goat. 

SCARCE. 

Gen.  27.  30.  Jacob  w  as  s.  gone  out  from  his  father 

Acts  14. 18.  with  these  savn^s  s.  restrained  people 

SCARCELY. 
Rom.  5.  7.  for  s.  for  a  righteous  man  will  one  die 
1  Pet.i.l8.  if  the  risliteons  .'.be  saved,  where  sinner 

SCARCENESS. 
Deut.  8.  9.  where  thou  shalt  eat  bread  without  *. 

SCAREST. 
Ji9j7.i4.then  thou.?,  me  with  dreams.and  terrifiest 

SCARLET. 
Gen.  38.  28.  the  midwife  bound  a  s.  thread,  30, 
Exod.  25.  4.  blue,  and  purjde,  and  s.  26.  1,  31,  3<5. 
I  27. 16. 1  28. 5, 6, 8, 15. 1 35. 6, 23, 25. 1 38. 18, 23. 
39.  3.  they  did  cut  gold  into  wires,  lo  work  it  in  «. 
Lev.i4.4.  to  lake  two  birds  alive,  and  clean,  cedar- 
wood,  s.  and  hyssop,  6,  49,  51,  52.  JVutti.  19.6. 
J^um.  4.  8.  they  shall  spread  on  them  a  cloth  of ». 
./osA.2.18.shalt  bind  this  line  of  ^.thread  in  window 
21.  and  she  bound  the  s.  line  in  the  window 

3  Sam.  1. 24.  weep  overSaul,  who  clothed  you  io  1. 


SCA 

Prcv.  31.  21.  her  houieliold  are  clothed  wiili  s. 
Cant.  4. 3.  lliy  lips  are  like  u  llircad  ofa.  lliy  Kpeech 
/sa.  1.  IP.  co^iie  now,  lliougli  your  mnt  bo  as  a. 
J^am.i.ilinU  were  liruuglil  up  ins'. embrace  duiigh. 
J)an.  5.  7.  eliail  be  dollied  wilh  «.  10  iD. 
•V'aA.'i.  3.  the  valiant  men  are  in  s.  lir  trees  shaken 
Mat.  'il.  'id.  tliey  put  on  Jbhuh  a  «.  robe 
Jlcb.  9.  19.  he  took  w  ater,  and  s.  wool,  and  hyssop 
lice.  17.  3.  a  woman  sit  on  a  s.  coloured  beast 
4.tlie  wornun  was  arrayed  in  purple  and  s.  colour 
IS.  12.  no  man  buyeth  the  merchandise  of  s. 
JG  that  great  cily  that  was  clothed  with  a. 
aC.ATTKK. 
r»«n.  11.  9.  from  thence  did  Lord  s.  thom  on  earth 
4'J.  7.  I  will  divide  them  in  Jacob,  «.  them  in  lar. 
/,ri,-. 'JTi.  33.  an.l  I  will  .i.  yuu  among  the  heathen 
.Vu.ni.  IG.  37.  lake  up  the  censers,  and  s.  the  lire 
Deal.  4.  il".  and  the  LyrJ  shall  s.  you  among  the 
heathen,  iH.  (>4.  .ler.  9.  Iti.  F.iek.  ti.  15. 

32.  20.  1  said,  I  would  s.  them  into  corners 

J  Kingi  14.  l.V  he  shall  s.  them  beyond  the  river 
-VVA.'i.S.  ifye  transgress,  I  will  s.  you  abroad 
.lob  18. 1 11.  terrors  make  afraid,  and  shall  i.  him 
f'»-oZ  .5.1.1 1. ».  them  by  thy  power,  O  Ld.  our  shield 
r>t<.  3J.  t.  thou  the  people  that  delight  in  war 
10().  27.  he  lifteJ  up  his  hand  to  s.  them  in  lands 
144.  fi.  cast  forth  lightning,  and.«.  them,  shootout 
/.<a.  13. 25.  cast  abroad  titch';s,  and  4-.  the  cummin 
."'•'J.  f  22.  thou  ihalt  s.theni  r.8  a  mensiruous  cloth 
41.  Iti.  whirlwind  shall  s-  Jiem,  and  shall  rejoice 
Jrr.  13.  21.  therefore  I  will  s.  Ihein  as  stubble 
H.  17. 1  will  i.  them  as  with  an  east-wind 
t'X.  1.  woe  to  the  paslo'?  that  s.  the  sheep 
4  J.  32.  I  will  *.  into  all  winds  them  that  are  in  the 
utmost  corners,  3t).  F.zck.  5.  10.  12. 
F.iek.  5.2.  a  third  part  thou  shalt  s.  in  the  wind 
6.  .5. 1  will  .V.  your  bones  round  about  your  altars 
10.2.fill  thine  hand,  and  s.  the  coals  ovcx  the  city 
12.14.1  will  «.  toward  every  wind  all  thathelp  hira 

IS.  when  I  shall  s.  them  among  the  nations 
20.  23.  that  I  would  s.  them  among  the  heatlien 
'*>.  12.  I  will  «.  the  Egyptians,  30.  23,  26. 
I>an.  4.  14.  hew  down  the  tree,  and  .i.  his  fruit 
1 1.24.  he  shall  «.  among  tlieni  the  prey  and  spoil 

12.  7.  to  a.  the  puwer  of  the  holy  people 

Hib.  3.  14.  they  came  out  as  a  whirlwind  to  s.  me 
7.rch.  1.21.  lift  up  their  horn  over  Judah  to  s.  it 
^a/.2.t3.I  will «. dung  on  yuiir  faces,duiig  of  li^asls 

SC.\TTr-RED. 
G'n.  1 1.  4.  lest  we  he  a.  abroad  upon  the  earth 

rt.  so  thi'  Lord  a.  them  abroad  from  thence 
F.iud.  5.  12.  the  peo|(le  were  «.  to  gather  stubble 
.^■•'uin.  10.  35.  1:1  ihinf  enemies  he  .<.  Psal.  68.  1. 
Di^ut.  30.  3.  whiiher  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  «.  thee 

1  .Sam.  11.1 1,  the  .\miiioni!es  that  remained  were  a. 

13.  8.  and  the  people  were  a.  from  Saul 

11.  because  I  saw  the  [leoplc  were  *.  from  me 

2  Sam.  18.  i.  the  battle  was  a.  over  the  country 
23.  1 22.  and  they  were  .«.  from  the  city 
ii.l.'j.hesenf  out  arrows  and  .«.  them,  Paal.  I*?.  14. 

1  Kinga^l.  17. 1  saw  all  Israel  a.  2  Ckron.  18.  16. 

2  Kinga  25.5.  his  army  were  a.  from  him,  .hr.  52. 8. 
/'.V(A.  3.  8.  there  is  a  certain  people  a.  abroad 
.M  4.  11.  the  stout  lions'  whelps  are  a.  abroad 

13.  15.  brimstone  shall  be  a.  on  his  habitation 
Ptal.  44.  1 1,  tliou  hast  a.  us  among  heathen,  GO.  1. 
53.5  fJod  hath  a.  the  bones  of  him  that  encampeth 
Ge^.  14.  when  the  Almighty  a.  kings  in  it 
K5.  10.  th'iu  hnst  a.  thine  enemies  wilh  thy  arm 
92.9.  all  tho  workers  of  ini(iuity  shall  be  a. 
141.7.  our  bones  ave  s.  at  the  grave's  rnouth 
//a.18.2.  go  ye  messengers  to  a  nations,  and  peeled 
7.  the  present  shall  be  brought  of  a  people  a. 

33.  3.  at  lifting  up  of  thyself  the  nations  were  a. 
.IfT.  3.  13.  and  hast  a.  thy  ways  to  the  strangers 

10.  21.  and  all  their  flocks  shall  be  a. 

ST  2.  ye  have  .».  niv  flock,  and  driven  them  away 

30.  1 1 .  an  enl  of  all  nations  whither  1  have  a.  thee 

31.  III.  Ill-  tha'  a.  Isr.  will  (gather  him  and  keep  him 
4n.I.'.iliat  all . Icwsfchould  be  .1. and  .ludah  perish? 
.V).  17.  Israel  Is  a  *.  sheep,  lions  have  driven 

Fitk.f'.?).  when  ye  shall  be;  .*.  through  the  countries 

1 1.  IB.  Ihough  f  .i.lhein,  1  will  be  a  little  sanctuary 
17.  I  will  gather  ani  a««emhle  you  out  of  coun- 
tries where  ye  have  betn  a.  20.  34,  41. 
1  28.  2.5. 

17.  21.  they  that  rcnain  shnll  lie  a.  to  all  winds 
20    n.  Kgvpiianp  gathered  whithvr  they  were  a. 

34.  5.  flock  a.  bccnnse  llii-ri'  is  no  shepherd,  they 
bnf'aine  meat  to  beaslsof  field  whenthey  were  *. 
fi.  my  flock  was  a.  on  tho  fare  of  the  earth 

12.  in  the  day  thai  hei«nmo;>g  his  she<  p  that  are 
n.  wherr  they  havo  been  a.  in  the  clouily  day 

21.  pushed  the  diseased  till  ye  have  a.  them 
3fi.  19.  and  I  a.  them  among  the  heathen 
4G.  IH.  that  my  people  be  not  a.  ov<rv  man 
Joul  3.  2.  plead  for  my  people  whom  thry  have  a. 
.Vak.  3. 13.  thy  people  is  a.  on  the  monntaini 
Hub.  3.  ft.  the  everlasting  mountains  were  t. 
Z*<k.  1.  19.  these  arc  the  horni  which  ha^c  «  21. 
SH 


SCE 

Zech.l.M.^a.  Ihcm  with  whirl  wind  among  nations 

I'i    7.  awake,  O  sword,  smite  the  8hc|)lierd,  and 

the  sheep  shall  he  a.  Mat.  26.  31.   Mark  14.  27. 

Mat.  y.  36.  they  were  a.  as  sheep  having  no  sheji. 

Lake  I.  51.  he  hath  a.  the  proud  in  the  imagination 

John  11.52.  gather  in  one  thechihiren  that  were  «. 

IG.  32.  hour  cumeth,  is  now,  that  ye  shall  be  a. 

JHla  5.  3t5.  as  many  us  obeyed  Theudas  were  a. 

8.  1.  were  5.  abroad  through  the  regions  of  Judea 

4.  were  a.  went  every  where  preaching,  11.  19. 

Jam.  1. 1.  to  the  twelve  tribes  that  are  «.  abroad 

1  Pet.  1. 1.  Peter  to  the  strangers  4-.  through  I'ontus 

SC.^TTKKETH. 
Job  37.11.  the  thick  cloud  he  a.  nia  bright  cloud 
38.  24.  which  a.  the  east-wind  upon  the  earth 
Psal.  147.  Ifi.  he  a.  the  hoar-frost  like  ashes 
Piov.  11.  24.  there  is  that  «  and  yet  increaeeth 
20.  8.  a  king  s.  away  all  evil  with  his  eyes 

26.  a  wise  kings,  the  wicked,  and  bringeth  wheel 

laa.'ii.  1.  the  Lord  a.  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth 

Mat.  12.30.  heuot  with  me  is  ag.  nie,  and  he  that 

gathereth  not  wilh  mo  ^.  abroad,  J.uke  11.23. 

John  10.  12.  the  woll'catcheth  and  ».  the  sheep 

SC.XTTElilNG. 
.Tob  37.  t  9.  and  cold  cometh  out  of  ihe  s.  winds 
Isa.  30.  30.  the  Lord  shall  shew  his  anger  wilh  a. 

SCENT. 
.Tnb  14.9.  yet  through  the  s.  of  water  it  will  bud 
Jp.r.  48.  II.  therefore  his  s.  is  not  changed 
Hoa.  14.  7.  the  *.  thereof  be  the  wine  of  Lebanon 

SCEPTRE. 
In  Greek,  Skeptron;  in  Hebrew,  Shebet.  This 
■word  aignifiea,  I.  ^  rod  of  command,  a  alajf  of 
aulhurily,  which  ia  supposed  to  be  in  the  hand 
of  kings^uf  sovereigns  of  aprovince,of  the  chief 
of  the  people.  Ahasuerus  carried  in  his  hand 
a  golden  Sceptre,  F.sth.  8.  4.  The  Sceptre  is 
a  sign  of  poiccr  and  authority ;  hence,  says  Isai- 
ah, The  Lord  hath  broken  the  Sceptre,  or  the 
power  of  the  rulers,  Isa.  14.  5.  Jlnd  Amos  re- 
presents the  sovereign  power  by  hiiu  that  holds 
the  Sceptre,  .^mos  1.  5,  8. 

II.  The  ScepUe,  or  the  word  Shebe\,is  put  for  the 
rod  of  correction,  for  the  aovereign  authority 
that  pun ishca  and  humbles.  Thou  shalt  break 
them  wilh  a  rod  of  iron  or  with  an  iron  Scep- 
tre, /'4a/.  2.  9.  Solomon  use*  tAe /cord  Shebet, 
to  express  the  rod  with  which  the  disobedient 
son  is  disciplined,  Prov.  22.  15. 

III.  The  Sceptre  is  of  ten  taken  for  a  tribe,  proba- 
bly, because  the  princes  of  each  tribe  carried  a 
Sceptre,  as  a  wand  of  command,  to  shew  their 
disnity ;  thus  the  word  Shebet  is  rendered  in 
1  Sam.  9.  21.  |  10.  19,  20,  21.  |  15.  17.  1  Kings 
11.32. 

IV.  The  Sceptre,  or  the  Hebrew  word  Shebet, 
signifies  a  shepherd's  wand.  Lev.  ?T.32.  The 
truncheon  of  a  warrior,  or  any  common  staff, 
2S.im.  23.  21.  Jlnd  the  rod  or  flail  with 
which  they  thresh  the  smaller  grains,  Isa.  28. 
27. 

Jacob  foretold  to  Judah,  that  the  Sceptre  should 
not  depart  from  Judah,  nor  a  Lawgiver  from 
between  his  feet,  till  Shiluh  come,  Gen.  49. 
10.  /?!/ t/ie  Sceptre  and  Lawgiver,  are  meant 
divers  forms  of  government :  the  first  being 
the  mark  of  regal  power  or  aovercignty ;  the 
other  title  respects  those,  whoae  power  suc- 
ceeded that  of  their  kinga,  in  the  peraon  of 
Zerulibahcl  and  hia  successors:  Jind  this  is 
that  which  should  not  depart  from  Judah  till 
Shiloli,  or  the  Messiah,. «A«u/(/ come.  Thiapro- 
phccy  doth  not  precisely  respect  the  person  of 
Judah,  fur  he  never  ascended  the  throne,  nor 
possessed  the  empire  over  hia  brethren  ;  nei- 
ther doth  it  respect  his  poaterity  aa  a  tribe 
distinguished  from  the  rcat, although  it  had  spe- 
cial advantageafrom  that  time:  For  Ihe  banner 
0/ Judah  led  the  camp  in  their  march  through 
the  wilderness.  Num.  2.  3.  'J'hal  tribe  had  the 
first  possesaion  of  the  land  of  Canaan,  Josh. 
15.  I.  JInd  these  were  the  beginnings  of  its 
future  glJiry.  .Ind  from  David  to  the  capti- 
vity, that  tribe  poaaesacd  the  kingdom,  but  the 
glory  of  hia  Serjitre  was  lost  in  the  peraon  of 
Zedekiah.  Therefore  the  full  meaning  uf  the 
prophecy  regards  the  people  of  Israel,  in  the 
relation  they  had  to  the  tribe  0/  Judah  :  For 
that  tribe  nlone  returned  entire  from  the  cap- 
tivity, with  anme  reliea  of  Levi  and  Benja- 
min ;  ao  that  the  nation  from  that  time  was 
distinguished  by  the  title  of  the  Jews,  in  re- 
lation to  !>.•  and  the  right  tn  dispo.ie  of  the 
Sceptre  was  always  in  the  tribe  of  Judnli: 
For  the  Levites  that  ruled  after  that  time 
received  their  power  from  them:  •'^o  that  the 
intent  of  the  prophecy  is,  that  after  Ihe  esta- 
blishment of  the  aupreme  power  in  the  family 
0/ Judah,  it  should  not  pass  into  the  hand.^  of 

I     itrangerf,but  aa  accrtiin  preaage,  andimme 


SCH 

diatc  forerunner  of  the  coming  of  Shiloh.  .^nd 
this  waa  fully  accomplished:  For  in  the  cap 
ticity  there  was  an  interruption,  rather  than 
an  extinction  of  their  government ;  their  return 
was  promiaed  at  the  time  they  were  carried 
captives  to  Babylon :  Hut  at  the  coming  of 
Christ,  Judea  was  a  province  of  the  Koinap 
empire  :  Herod,  an  Edornite,  aat  on  the  throne  ; 
and  as  the  tribe  of  Judah  in  general,  ao  the 
family  of  David  in  particular,  was  in  auch  a 
low  alatr,  that  Joseph  and  Mary,  loAo  tcer« 
descended  from  him,  were  constrained  to  lodgt 
in  a  stable  at  llelhlehem.  .Ind  since  our 
blessed  Haviour  hath  appeared  on  the  earth 
the  Jews  Aa«e  lost  all  authority,  their  civil  and 
ecclesiastical  state  is  utterly  ruined,  and  they 
bear  the  visible  signs  and  marks  of  infamous 
servitude.  For  though  great  numbers  of  this 
people  swarm  all  over  the  world,  since  the  de- 
struction of  their  city  and  temple  by  Titus, 
yet  they  have  never  been  able  to  cinbudy  again 
into  a  nation,  either  in  their  own,  or  any  other 
land ;  nor  have  they  to  this  day  ever  found  a 
place  where  they  cuuldre-establish  their  old  con- 
stitution of  law,  or  have  a  prince  of  their  own 
to  govern  them  by  it. 

'The  Jews  acck  in  vain  to  put  forced  meanings 
upon  this  prophecy  »/ Jacub,  saying,  that  the 
Sceptre  intimates  the  dominion  of  strangers,  to 
which  they  have  been  in  aubjection,  or  the  hopt 
of  seeing,  one  day,  the  sceptre,  or  supreme 
power,sittled  again  among  themselves.  In  vain 
likewise  they  take  refuge  in  tAcic^chmalotar- 
cha ;  that  is.  The  Head  of  the  captivity:  Such 
an  officer  the  Babylonish  Jews  had,  to  whom 
they  paid  a  voluntary  submission,  and  who  wot 
always  chosen  by  them  out  of  the  house  0/ 
David.  If  such  an  officer  be  still  there  in  being, 
he  is  no  more  than  what  their  Alabarcha  was 
at  Alexandria,  their  Ethnarcha,  at  Antioch, 
or  their  Episcopus  Judajorum,  in  England  , 
that  ia,  the  head  of  that  sect  in  that  place, 
without  sword  or  .■.ceptrc,  or  any  power  of 
coircion,  or  authority  of  jurisdiction,  butwhat 
he  hath  by  the  voluntary  submission  of  tht 
Jews  of  that  country,  which  was  the  case  loitk 
their  Babylonian  .(Echmalutaicha.  J^Tolhing 
therefore  can  be  more  vain  than  what  the 
Jews  urge  a.9  to  this  matter :  thai  is,  that  in 
this  jEchmaloiarcha  is  still  preserved  botit 
the  Sceptre  and  the  Law-giver  in  the  tribe  of 
Judah,  add  thct  therefore  the  prophecy  of  Ja- 
cob is  not  yet  fulfilled,  nor  the  Messiah  as  yet 
come. 

Gen.  49.  10.  the  s.  shall  not  depart  from  Judah 

.Yum.  24.  17.  and  a  s.  shall  arise  out  of  Israel 

Fsth.  4.  1 1.  the  king  shall  hold  out  the  gulden  s, 
5.  2.  king  held  out  to  P^slher  the  gulden  5.  8.  4. 

Psal.  45.  (i.  the  .?.  of  thy  kingdom  is  a  right  s. 

Isa.  14.  5.  Lord  hath  broken  the  5.  of  the  rulers 

Ezek.  19.  II.  she  had  strong  rods  for  the  s.  of  th«>ni 
14.  so  th'it  she  hath  no  strong  rod  to  he  a  s.to  rule 

.^mos  1.  5.   I  will  cut  off  him  that  holdeth  the  ». 
8.  will  cut  of!"  him  that  holdeth  s.  from  Ashkeloo 

Zech.  10.  11.  and  the  s.of  Egypt  shall  depart  away 

Ileb.  1.8.  s.of  righteonsncFS  is  thes.  of  thy  kingdota 
SCHISM 

Is  a  word  formed  from  the  Greek  word  Schismn, 
which  aignifica rupture,or division .  T/.r  apostle 
Paul  ezhorta  the  Corinthians  to  live  tn  union 
together,  that  there  be  no  divisions,  or. srAisms, 
.  among  them,  1  Cor.  1.  10,  11,  12.  ./?*  hcreay 
ia  a  departing  from  the  communion  of  tht 
church,  in  respect  of  doctrine,  or  some  funda- 
mental article  of  religion,  so  schism  is  taken 
for  a  separation  from  the  society  of  the  church 
for  external  things.  Thus  the  divisions  among 
the  Corinthians  were  not  about  matters  cf faith, 
but  ocensiimed  from  their  having  men's  persons 
in  admiration  ;  every  one  of  you  saith,  I  am 
of  Paul,  and  I  of  Jlpollos,  and  1  of  Cephas, 
and  I  of  Christ. 

1  Cor.  12.  25.  that  there  should  be  no  a.  in  the  bodj 
SCHOLAR. 

1  Chron.  25.  8.  they  cast  lots,  tho  teacher  ns  Ihe  s. 

Mai.  2.  12.  Lord  will  cut  ofl"the  master  and  the  «. 
SCHOOL. 

Tho'  it  cannot  be  doubted,  but  that  rcligioua  and 
devout  men,  from  the  first  beginning  of  man- 
kind, did  take  care  to  instruct  their  children 
and  families  in  the  fear  of  God,  yet, for  many 
aires,  there  is  no  mention  made  nfai-M],'m\pt,  nr 
fiehw)\^  erected  for  this  purjiose.  The  schoolt 
or  colleges  of  the  prophets  are  the  first  of 
which  we  have  any  lucnunts  in  scripture;  where 
the  children  of  the  prophets,  that  is.  their  dis- 
ciples, lived  in  the  exercise  of  a  retired  and 
austere  life,  in  study,  and  meditation,  and  read- 
ing of  Ihe  law  of  God.  It  is  aaid,  I  Sam. 
19.  18,  David  fled,  and  escaped,  and  came  U> 


SCO 

Samutt  1o  Ramah;  and  told  him  all  that  Saul 
had  done  to  him:  And  he  and  Samuel  went 
and  dwelt  at  M'aiotk.  This  Naiolh,  which  was 
in  the  suburbs  of  Ramah,  was  the  academy  of 
the  prophets.  .Bnd  it  is  probable^  that  among 
them  Samuel  chose  to  spend  all  the  leisure  time 
he  could  get,  from  the  necessary  avocations  of 
his  ptiblic  duty.  }Vefi.nd  more  also  under  the 
prophets  Elijah  and  Elisha,  at  Beth-el,  and  in 
the  plain  of  Jericho,  2  Kings  2.  :),  5.  These 
prophets  were  consulted  upon,  affairs  of  im 
portance ;  People  went  to  hear  their  lessons,  as 
appears  from  the  wunianofShiiuein,withwho>n 
Elisha  had  lodged.  Hi.r  husband  asked  her, 
Why  she  went  to  see  the  pro|)het,  seeing  that 
(lay  was  neither  the  sabbath,  nor  the  new 
moon,  2  Kings  4.  23.  which  insinuates  that 
these  were  the  chief  and  usual  times  in  which 
they  resorted  to  the  prophets  for  instruction 
These  Schools  continued  down  to  the  captivity 
of  Babylon,  and  it  should  seem,  that  even  the 
captives  went  still  to  hear  the  prophets,  when 
there  were  any  in  the  places  where  they  resided. 
Ezekiel  relates  several  conversations  that  he 
had  with  the  elders  of  Israel,  who  came  to  see 
him,  and  to  consult  him  several  times,  Ezek. 
14. 1, 2. 1  20. 1, 2, 3.  These  Scliools,  or  Societies, 
of  the  prophets,  were  succeeded  by  the  Syna- 
gogues.   See  Synagogue. 

Some  make  it  a  doubt  whether  there  were  any 
synagogues  before  the  captivity  of  Babylon. 
Yet  we  read  in  Psal.  74.  8,  They  have  burnt 
up  all  the  synagogues  ot'  God  in  the  land.  It 
is  affirmed,  however,  that  they  were  become  so 
7iunterous  in  Judea,  after  the  return  from  the 
captivity,  that  in  the  city  of  Jerusalem  only, 
there  were  upwards  of  four  hundred,  according 
to  some;  or  three  hundred  and  ninety-four  ac- 
cording to  others. 

tfVie  method  of  teaching  in  the  Synagogues  and  in 
the  Schools,  k?  observable  in  the  Gospels  and  in 
the  Acts.  When  Jesus  was  of  the  age  of 
twelve  years,  he  was  found  in  the  temple  in  the 
midst  of  the  doctors,  hearing  theni,  and  asking 
them  questions,  Luke  2.  46.  By  which  it 
should  seem,  that  the  doctors  of  thelaw  gave  a 
general  liberty  to  any  person  to  propound  ques- 
tions tn  them  about  the  law  of  God,  to  which 
they  gave  answers.  Our  Saviour  entering  ano- 
ther day  into  the  synagogue  of  Nazareth,  his 
own  country,  they  presented  to  him  the  volume 
of  the  prophet  Isaiah:  He  unfolded  and  opened 
it,and  havin  g  read  apassage  out  nf  the  prophet, 
he  rolled  it  up  again,  and  sat  down  to  speak, 
Ijuke  4.  16,  17,  <S'C.  ./Is  to  the  posture  of  the 
disciples  in  the  schools,  the  Jlpnstle  Paul  speaks 
of  it  in  Acts  22.  3,  I  was  brought  up  in  this 
city,  at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel.  The  Rabbin 
snt  upon  a  chair  that  was  raised  aloft ;  the 
scholars  that  were  the  greatest  proficients,were 
upon  benches  just  beloio  tKeir  master ;  and  the 
younger  sort  sat  upon  the  ground  on  hassocks. 

Acts  ly.  9.  disputing  in  the  s.  of  one  Tyrannus 
SCHOOL-MASTER. 

Gal. 3.24.  thelaw  was  our  s.  to  bring  us  to  Christ 
25.  after  faith,  we  are  no  longer  under  a  s. 
SCIENCE. 

/)<in.l.4.children  skilful  in  wisdom,  understand,  s. 

1  Tirn.  6.  20.  avoiding  babblings  and  oppos.  of  «. 

SCOFF. 

Ilab.  1.  10.  they  .shall  s.  at  the  kings  and  princes 

SCOFFERS. 

2  Pet.  3. 3.  there  shall  come  in  lastdays  s.  walking 

SCORCH. 
Rev.  16.  8.  power  wai  given  him  to  s.nJen  with  fire 

SCORCHED. 
J>fat.l3.6.when  sun  was  up  they  were  s.  Mark  4.6. 
Rev.  16.9.  ar.d  men  were  s.  with  great  heat 

SCORN,  Verb. 
Jbi  15.20.  my  friends  .5.  me,  mine  eye  poureth  tears 

SCORN. 
Ksth.  3.  6.  he  thought  s.  to  lay  hands  on  Mordecai 
Ps.  44. 13.  thou  makestus  a  reproach  and  ».  79.  4. 
ffab.  1.  10.  and  the  princes  shall  be  a  *.  to  them 
Sof  Eaitoiied. 
SCORNER. 
A  Scorner  i.i  one  who  makes  a  mock  of  sin,  and 
of  God's  threatenings  and  judgments  against 
tinners;  one  whoderides  all  wholesome  reproofs 
and  counsels,  scoffs  at  religion,  and  contemns 
the  word  and  faith  ful  ministers  of  God;  he  is  a 
man stcrof  iniquity, harin  IT  obtained  the  highest 
degree  of  sinning.     Psal.  1.  1,  Blessed  is  the 
man  that  sitteth  not  in  the  seat  of  the  scorn- 
ful.    Prov.  1.  22,  How  long  will  the  scornprs 
delisht  in  their  scorning  1     So\omon  describes 
the  Scorner  in  a  variety  of  eipresfions ;  he  is 
one  that  takes  phasure  in  scorninL',  Prov.  1.22. 
W>  is  ready  to  hate  such  as  rrhuke  him,  and  to 
tnlertain  malicious  and  rivcngeful  thoughts 
SIS 


SCO 

against  them.  Prov.  9.  3,  Reprove  not  a  scor- 
ner, lest  he  hate  thee.  He  stoppcth  his  ears 
against  reproofs.  Prov.  13. 1,  A  scorner  hear- 
elh  not  rebuke.  lie  is  proud,  arrogant,  and 
haughty,  Prov.  21. 24.  He  causes  strifes,  con- 
tentions,and  divisions  in  asociety.  Pruv.  22.10, 
Cast  out  the  scorner, and  contention  shall  go  out. 
He  brings  others  likewise  into  a  snare,and  that 
by  his'  wicked  coxtnsels  and  courses,  whereby  he 
seduces  and  infects  them,  so  that  they  are  expo- 
sed to  God's  wrath.  Prov.  2!).  8,  Scornful  men 
bring  a  city  into  a  snare.  God's  dreadful  judg- 
ments arc  threatened  again.<-t  them  in  a  re- 
markable manner.  Prov.  3.  34.  |  !l.  12.  |  I'J. 
29,  Surely  he  scornelh  the  scorners.  Jf  thou 
scornest,  thou  alone  shalt  bear  it.  Juilgnienl.s 
are  prepared  for  scorners.  ./hid  it  is  said,  that 
he  seeketh  wisdom,  and  findeth  it  not,  Prov. 
14.  6.  He  finds  it  not,  because  he  doth  nut 
seek  it  aright,  to  wit,  sincerely,  earnestly, 
and  seasonably,  and  in  a  constant  and  diligent 
use  of  all  the  means  which  God  hath  appointed 
to  that  end,  and  with  an  honest  intention  of 
employing  his  knowledge  to  the  service  of  God, 
and  the  furtherance  of  his  practice  nf  religion . 
Prov.  9.  7.  he  that  reproveth  a  s.  getteth  shame 
S.reprove  not  a  s.lest  he  hate  thee,  rebuke  a  wise 
13. 1.  but  a  s.  heareth  not  rebuke 

14.  6.  a  s.  seekelh  wisdom,  and  iindeth  it  not 

15.  12.  a  s.  loveth  not  one  that  reproveth  him 
19.  25.  smite  a  s.  ||  22.  10.  cast  out  the  s. 

21.  11.  when  s.  is  punished,  simple  is  made  wise 
24.«.  is  his  name,  who  dealeth  in  proud  wrath 
24.  9.  and  the  s.  is  an  abomination  to  men 

/sa.  29. 20.  the  s.  is  consumed  and  all  that  watch 
SCORNERS. 

Proti.l.22.how  long  will  s.  delight  in  theirscorning 
3.34.  surely  he  scorneth  the  5.  hut  he  giveth  grace 
19.29.  judgments  are  prepared  for  s.  and  stripes 

Hos.  7.  5.  he  stretched  out  his  hand  with  s. 
SCORNEST. 

Prov.  9.  12.  if  thou  s.  thou  alone  shalt  bear  it 

£zcA. 16.31.  not  been  as  a  harlot,  in  that  thou*,  hire 
SCORNETH. 

.Tob  39.  7.  he  s.  the  multitude  of  the  city 
18.  the  ostrich,  she  s.  the  horse  and  his  rider 

Pro-B.3.34.surely  hes.the  scorners, but  givetli  grace 

19.28.  an  ungodly  witness  s.  judgment,  and  mouth 

SCORNFUL. 

Psal.  1.  1.  nor  sitteth  in  the  seat  of  the  s. 

Prov.  29.  8.  s.  men  bring  a  city  into  a  snare 

Isa.  28.  14.  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  ye  .9.  men 
SCORNING. 

.7oft34.7.who  islikeJob.who  drinks  ups. like  water? 

Psal.  123.  4.  infilled  with  «.  of  those  that  are  at  ease 

Pro  y. 1.22.  how  long  will  scorners  delight  in  theirs. 
SCORPION, 

.Ivenom ous reptile,soniewhat  like  asmalllohster, 
that  has  a  bladder  full  of  dangerous  potion:  Its 
head  appears  to  be  jointed  and  continued  to  the 
breast :  It  has  two  eyes  in  the  middle  of  its 
head,  and  two  towards  its  extremity,  between 
which  come  out,  as  it  were,  two  arms,  which  are 
divided  into  two  like  the  claws  of  a  lobster.  It 
has  eight  legs,  proceeding  from  its  breast, e^^ery 
one  of  which  is  divided  into  siz  parts,  covered 
with  hair,  at  the  end  of  which  are  six  talons  or 
claws.  The  belly  is  divided  into  seven  rings, 
from  the  last  of  which  the  tail  proceeds,  which 
is  dividrd  into  seven  little  heads,  of  which  the 
last  IS  orjtied  with  a  sting.  In  some  are  ob- 
served sir  eyes,  and  in  others  eight  may  he 
visibly  perceived.  The  tail  is  long,  and  made 
after  t/ie  manner  of  a  string  of  beads  tied  end 
to  end,  one  to  another:  the  last  bigger  than  the 
others,  and  something  longer;  at  the  end  of 
which  are  sometimes  tjeo  stings,  which  arehol- 
low,  and  filled  with  a  cold  poison,  which  it 
squirts  into  the  part  which  it  stings. 

The  Scorpion  is  of  a  blackish  colour  like  soot ;  it 
waddles  as  it  goes,  and  fixes  violently  with  its 
snout,  and  by  its  feet,  on  such  persons  as  it 
seizes  upon,  so  that  it  cannot  be  phicked  off 
but  with  difficulty.  They  sny,  that  the  dam 
brings  forth  eleven  young  ones,which  are  small 
round  worms;  that  after  she  has  sat  upon 
them  and  hatched  them,  then  they  kill  the 
mother.  They  are  more  mischievous  to  women 
than  men,  and  more  to  girls  than  women.  It 
is  said,  that  the  best  and  surest  remedy  against 
the  bite  of  a  Scorpion  is,  to  squeeze  it  to  pieces 
upoitlhe  wound.  Moses  says,  that  the  Israel- 
ites passed  through  a  great  and  terrible  wil- 
derness, wherein  were  fiery  serpents,  and  Scor- 
pions, Deut.  8.  1.5.  The  Hebrew  reads  Ilaka- 
rab,  or  Akrab;/rrtm  whence  is  Akrabbim;  the 
ascent  of  Akrabbim,  or  Scorpions,  Num. 
34.  4. 

In  scripture,  Scorpions  are  used  in  a  ficrnrative 
sense,  for  isicked,  malicious,  and  crafty  men, 


SCO 

who,  scorpion-like,  wound,  torment,  and  kill 
good  men.  Ezek.  2.  6,  Thou  dwellest  among 
Scorpions.  Our  Saviour  says  to  his  disciples, 
Luke  10.  19,  Behold  1  give  unto  you  power 
to  tread  on  serpents  and  scorpions;  by  which 
may  be  signified  whatsoever  thcdcvil  may  make 
use  of  to  hurt  them.  The  disciples  of  .Anti- 
christ, who  by  their  poisonous  doctrines  wound 
the  souls  of  men,  are  likewise  compared  to 
Scorpions,  Jlcv.  9.  3. 

Scorpions  we7'e  also  a  kind  of  whip  armed  with 
points,  or  pointed  Ihurns,  like  the  tail  of  <i 
Scorpiim.  I-Vhen  the  Israelites  cu-inplained  to 
Rihoboam  of  the  weight  of  the  yoke  wherewith 
Solomon  had  loaded  them.  Thy  lather  made  our 
yoke  grievous,  make  it  lighter,  he  returned 
them  this  answer;  Whereas  my  father  did  lade 
with  a  heavy  yoke,  I  will  add  to  your  yoke: 
my  father  hath  chastised  you  with  whips,  but 
I  will  chastise  you  with  scorpions,  1  Kings  12. 
4,  II,  14. 

L)ike  11.  1 2.  if  he  ask  an  egg,  will  he  offer  him  as. 

Rev.  ^.5.  their  torment  was  as  the  torment  of  u  a. 
SCORPIONS. 

De«t.8.]5. through  that  wilderness  wherein'were."!. 

IKings  12.11.  my  father  chastised  you  with  whips, 
buti  will  chastise  you  with  s.  14.  2  Chr.  10  .11,14. 

£zc4.2.6.tho'thou  dost  dwell  amongs.be  not  afraid 

//U/re  10.19.1  giveyou  power  to  tread  onserp.ands. 

^cw.9.3.to  them  was  given  power,39S.  haTe  power 

10.  they  had  tails  like  to  s.  and  slings  in  thetn 

SCOURED. 

Lev.a.W.  if  it  be  sodden  in  a  braz.  pot,  it  shall  h«)  s. 
SCOURGE, 

The  punishment  of  the  scourge,  or  whip,  was  very 
common  among  (Ae  Jews.  The  law  ordains  that 
if  the  wicked  man  be  worthy  to  be  beaten,  the 
judge  shall  cause  him  to  lie  down,  and  to  bn 
beaten  before  his  face,  according  to  his  fault,  by 
a  certain  number:  Forty  strii)e3  he  may  give 
him,  and  not  e.vceed:  lest,  if  he  should  e.xceed, 
and  beat  him  above  these  with  many  stripes, 
then  thy  brother  should  seem  vile  unto  thee, 
Deut.  25.  1,  2,  3.  Thire  were  two  ways  of 
giving  the  las-h;  one  with  thongs  or  whips,made 
of  ropes'  ends,  or  straps  of  leather;  the  other, 
with  rods,  twigs,  or  branches  of  some  tree. 

The  Rabbins  think,  that  ordinary  faults  com- 
mitted against  the  law,  and  submitted  to  the 
prnalty  of  the  scourge,  were  punished,  not  with 
bloics  with  a  rod,  but  with  a  whip.  They  hold, 
that  all  punishable  faults,  tn  which  the  law 
has  not  annexed  the  kind  or  drgne  of  punish- 
ment, are  to  be  published  by  the  scourge. 
The  offender  teas  stript  from  his  shoulders  to 
his  middle,  and  was  tied  by  his  arms  to  a 
pretty  low  pillar,  that  he  might  lean  forward, 
and  the  executinner  might  the  more  easily 
come  at  his  back.  The  law  directed  that 
they  should  not  exceed  the  number  of  forty 
stripes:  and  the  Jews  that  thnj  might  not 
transgress  this  law,  seem  to  hove  made  thirty- 
nine  bloiDS  a  fixed  number,  which  they  never 
went  beyond,  as  may  be  gathered  from  2  Cor. 

11.  24,  where  the  apostle  says.  Of  the  Jews 
five  times  received  I  forty  stripes  save  one. 
But  it  is  said,  that  in  greater  faults  they 
struck  with  greater  violence. 

The  'Rahhms  further  say,  that  the  penalty  of  the 
scourge  irns  not  at  all  ignominiousamongthem, 
and  that  it  could  not  be  objected  as  a  disgrace 
to  those  that  had  suffered  it.  They  pretend, 
that  no  Israelite,  not  so  much  as  the  king,  or 
high-priest,  was  exempted  from  this  law,  when 
he  had  committed  any  fault  that  deserved  this 
punishment.  But  this  must  be  understood  of  th  e 
punishment  of  whipping  that  was  infiicled  in 
their  synanrogues,and  which  teas  rather  a  legal 
and  particular  penalty,  than  a  public  and 
shameful  correction.  Philo,  speaking  of  the 
manner  in  which  Flaccus  treated  the  Jews  of 
Alexandria,  says,  he  mad  e  them  under  !:o  the  pu- 
nishment of  the  whip,  which,  says  be,  is  not 
less  insupportable  to  a  free  man,  than  death 
itself.  Our  Saviour  speaking  nf  thepnins  unit 
ignominy  of  his  passion,  commonly  puts  his  _ 
scourging  in  the  first  place.  Mat.  20.  19.  Mark 
10.34.  Luke  18.  33. 

The  punishment  of  scourging  inflicted  on  our 
Saviour,  which  is  mentioned  in  Mat.  27.  26. 
has  given  occasion  for  several  conjectures : 
Some  say,  that  this  punishment  among  the  Ro. 
mans  was  a  solemn  preparative  to  crucifixion, 
but  this  would  make  scourging  a  part  of  the 
sentence  of  death  pronnuncedupon  onrSavlour, 
which  it  was  not,  as  appenrs  from  John  19.  1, 
4,  6,  &-e.  where  it  is  said,  that  Pilate  again  and 
again  smight  to  release  him,  even  after  he  wiis 
scourged,  and  that  he  told  the  Jews  that  he 
found  no  fault  in  him;  but  being  p>  tssed  upon 


SCR 

hy  the  Jews,  he  at  last  gave  sentence  against 
Aim,  that  he  should  lie  crucified,  which  was 
not  till  some  time  after  he  had  been  scourged. 
Grotiua  explains  this  of  the  punishment  of 
pulling  one  to  the  question,  which  was  common 
among  the  Romans,  an  eiampte  of  which  we 
have  in  Acta  '22.  ii.  Concerning  which,  see 
Question.  Hut  the  gospels  gioe  no  ground 
far  this  conjecture.  The  reason  generally  as- 
signed for  our  Saviour's  being  scourged, is  that 
Pilati',  willing  to  deliver  him  from  a  capital 
sentence,  appointed  this  0/ scourging  to  be  in- 
fiicled  on  him :  He  proposed  to  the  Jews  the 
scourging  of  him,  as  a  lighter  punishment, 
proportionable  to  the  crimes  they  laid  against 
him,  intending  afterwards  to  release  him.  So 
that  the  notion  of  his  scourging  was  that  of  a 
ligli'cr  punisliinenl,  to  release  him  from  a 
greater ;  though  when  that  was  infiicled,he  was 
prerailed  upon  to  gratify  the  Jews,  by  deliver- 
ing Jesus  up  to  be  crucified. 
The  scourge  of  the  tongue.  .Job  5.  21,  Thou 
(halt  be  hid  t'roni  the  scourge  of  the  tongue, 
or,  when  the  tongue  scourgeth;  that  is,  from 
false  accusations,  and  virulent  slayiders  and 
reproaches.  Scourge,  figuratively,  is  taken 
for  any  instrument  which  God  makes  use  of 
for  erecuting  his  judgments :  thus  he  used  a 
destroying  angel  to  scourge  the  Assyrians, 
Isa.  10.  20.  1  37.  3G. 
Job  a.  21.  thou  shall  be  hid  from  s.  of  the  tongue 
9.23.  if  the*,  sidy  suddenly,  he  will  laugh  at  trial 
If  a.  10.2(5.  Lord  of  hosis  shall  stir  up  a  s.  for  him 
28.  15.  when  the  overflowing  s.  shall  pass,  18. 
John  2.  15.  when  he  had  made  a  s.  of  small  cords 

SCOURGK. 

Mat.  10. 17.  they  will  s.  you  in  ihelr  synagogues 

20.19.  they  shall.?,  him,  Mark  10.34.  Luke  18.33. 

23.  34.  some  of  them  ye  shall  s.  and  persecute 

Jicti  22  25.  is  it  lawful  for  you  to  s.  a  Roman  ? 

SCOUROEU. 

J^en.  10.  20.  lie  with  a  bond  maid,  she  shall  be  «. 

^a/.27. 2C.  and  when  he  had  5.  Jes.  he  delivered 

him  to  be  crucitled,  Mark  15.  15.  .fohn  It).  1. 

SCOURGES.    . 

Josh.  23.13.  J.  in  your  sides, and  thorns  in  your  eyes 

SCOURGETH. 
Heb.  12. 6.  the  Ld. .«.  rverv  son  whom  he  roceivctli 

SCCjURGLNG. 
^cts  22.  24.  that  he  ..-hould  be  evamined  by  s. 

SCOUUGINGS. 
Heb.  11.  3C.  others  had  trial  ofs.  yea  of  bonds 

SCRABBLED. 
1  Sam.  21.  13.  David  feigned  himself  mad,  and  s. 

SCRAPE. 
i«Ti.  14.41.  shall  pour  out  the  dust  that  they  s.  off 
Job  2.  H.  Job  took  a  potsherd  to  s.  himself  withal 
Ezek.  26.  4.  I  will  also  s.  her  dust  from  her 

SCRAPED. 
/.(•I).  14.41.  he  shall  cause  the  house  to  bes.  within 
43.  if  plague  come  again,  after  he  hath  s.  house 
SCRIBE, 
In  Hebrew,  Sopher;  in  (ireek,  Grammateus. 
This  word  is  taken,  I.  For  a  clerk,  writer,  or 
secretary.  This  was  a  very  considerable  cm 
pluyment  in  the  court  of  the  kings  of  Judah,  in 
which  the  scripture  often  mentions  the  secre- 
taries, as  the  first  officers  of  the  crown.  Seraiah 
teas  scribe,  or  secretary,  to  king  David,  2  Sam. 
8.  17.  Sheva  is  said  to  hane  filled  that  post, 
2  Sam.  20.  2.'>.  Fdihoreph  and  Ahiah,  were 
secretaries  to  king  Solomon,  1  Kings  4.  3. 
Shelma  under  Hezekiah,  2  Kings  111.  2.  and 
Shaphan  under  Josiah,  2  Kings  22.  8.  .4s 
there  were  hut  few  in  those  times  that  could 
write  wrll  the  employment  of  a  Scribe  or  writer 
was  very  considerable. 
II.  A  S'-ribe  is  put  for  a  Commissary  or  Muster- 
master  of  an  army,  irho  makes  the  review  of 
the  troops,  keeps  the  list  or  roll,  and  calls  them 
oner:  Under thereignof  Uz/.iah king 07' Judah, 
there  is  found  Jeil  the  Scribe,  vho  had  under 
his  hand  the  king's  armies,  2  (Jhrnn.  2<i.  11. 
.And  at  the  time  of  the  captivity,  it  is  said. 
The  captain  of  Ihe  guard,  among  other  cun.H- 
derable  persons,  took  the  principal  Scribe  of  the 
host,  or  Secretary  of  mar,  who  mustered  the 
people  of  the  land,  2  Kings  25.  19. 
HI.  flcrilic  is  put  for  an  able  and  skilful  man,  a 
doctor  of  the  law,  a  man  of  learning',  that  un- 
derstands affairs.  Jonnthnn,  David's  uncle  hi/ 
the  father' s  side,  was  a  couns<dlor,  a  wise  man, 
nnil  a  Hcrihe,  1  Chron.  27.  3-2.  Baruch,  Mr 
disciple  and  .secretary  0/ J'Tomiah,  is  called  a 
Scribe;  .frr.  30.  26.  Jlnd  Ezra  1*  celebrated 
OS  a  skilful  Scribe  in  the  law  of  his  God, 
K/.ra  7.  6.  The  Scribes  of  the  people,  who  are 
frequently  mentioTud  in  the  gospel,  werepuhlir 
writers,  an'l  prof  essed  doctors  of  Ihe  laa,which 
tAty  rtad  and  izplainrd  to  the  peoplt. 


SCPw 


SCR 


Someplace  the  original  0/ Scribes  under  Muuea;} Mat.  8.  19.  a  s.  said.  Master,  I  will  follow  Ibee 
but  their  name  does  not  appear  till  under  the]  13.  52.  s.  instructed  uiilo  the  kingdom  of  heave 
Judges.     It  is  said,  that  in  the  war  of  Barak  Jl/urA  12.  32.  the  s.  said  unto  him,  well  Master 


against  Sisera,  Out  of  Machir  came  do 
governors,  and  out  of  Zcbulun  they  that  liiin- 
dle  the  pen  of  the  writer,  Judg.  5.  14.  Others 
think  that  David  first  instituted  them,  when 
he  established  the  several  classes  of  the  priests 
and  Levites.  The  Scribes  were  of  the  tribe 
of  Levi ;  and  at  the  time  that  David  />  said 
to  have  made  the  regulation  of  that  tribe,  we 
read  that  siz  thousand  of  them  were  constituted 
Otficers  and  Judges,  1  Chron.  23.  4.  among 
whom  it  is  reasonable  to  believe,  the  Scribes. 
were  included:  For  in  1  Chron.  24.  6.  we  read 
of  Shemaiah,  the  Scribe,  one  of  the  Leviies ; 
and  in  2  Chron.  34.  13.  we  find  it  written. 
Of  the  Levites,  there  were  Scribes  and  Otfi- 
cers. 

It  is  not  unlikely  that  they  might  have  had  their 
education  among  Ihe  colleges  of  the  prophets; 
since  we  do  nut  read  of  any  other  schools  of 
learning  than  among  them.  Their  very  name 
implies  some  degree  of  scholarship,  and  that  no 
inconsiderable  one;  since  we  find  our  Lord 
joining  prophets  and  wise  men,  and  Scribes 
together.  Mat.  23.  34.  And  the  prophet  Isaiah, 
and  after  him  the  apo:,tle  Paul,  instancing 
them  as  such  •  IVhere  is  the  wise  ?  where  is 
the  Scribe?  where  is  the  disputer  of  this  world? 
Isa.  33.  18.  1  Cor.  1.20. 
The  Scribes,  and  doctors  of  the  law,  in  scripture- 
phrase,  mean  the  same  thing:  And  he  that  in 
Mat.  22.  35.  is  called  a  doctor  of  the  law,  or 
a  lawyer,  in  Mark  12.  28.  is  named  a  Scribe,  or 
one  of  the  Scribes.  They  seem  to  have  had  the 
sole  expounding  of  the  Scriptures ;  and  there- 
fore the  disciples  ask  our  Saviour,  Mat.  17.  10, 
Why  then  say  ihe  Scribes  that  F.lias  must  first 
come.'  And  in  Mark  12.  3.5,  How  say  the 
Scribes  that  Christ  is  the  Son  of  David?  And 
in  Luke  20.  1,  2.  while  Christ  was  preaching 
the  gospel,  the  chief  priest  and  Scribes  came 
upon  him,  wtih  the  elders,  sayin;.',  Tell  us  by 
what  authority  doest  thou  these  things?  or 
who  is  he  that  gave  thee  this  authority  1  which 
they  thought  no  one  had  a  right  to  but  them- 
selves. 
Though  they  wereemploycd  to  be  thejudgcs,inter 
preters,  and  preachers  of  Ihe  law  to  the  people, 
we  find  that  they  canie,in  length  of  time, greatly 
to  abuse  their  trust;  by  delivering  traditiciiis, 
instead  of  Scripture,  and  thereby  setting  asidi 
even  the  law  itself.  Thus  they  very  pertly  de- 
manded of  Christ,  Matthew  15.  2,  3,  Ac.  VVhy 
do  thy  disciples  transgress  the  tradition  of  the 
elders?  which  our  Lord  fully  answers  Inj  an- 
other question;  Why  do  you  transgress  the 
commandment  of  God  hy  your  tradilinii  ?  For 
God  coramandeJ,  saying,  honour  thy  lather, 
S,-c. 

Their  departure  from  the  true  faith  in  doctrine, 
was  aceoinpnnied,  us  is  gcnerully  the  cose,  with 
adepravilyof  moralsin  their livis; j'or  notwith 
stanilinglheiroulward  Zealand  profession, I  hty 
had  Utile  or  no  true  religion  at  bottom.  There- 
fore our  Saviour  says  to  his  audience  upon  the 
mount,  Except  your  righteousness  shall  exceed 
the  righteousness  of  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees, 
y^  shall  in  no  crise  enter  into  the  kingdom  of 
heaven.  Mat.  5.  20.  .find  he  gives  various  in- 
stances of  their  irregular  and  unjust  doings.in 
Mat.  23.  2,  3,  4,  (J-c.  And  because  they,  the 
least  of  all  men,  could  bear  a  reformation,  we 
find  them  taking  all  occasions  to  oppose  the 
preaching  and  spreading  of  the  gospel :  They 
murmur  at  our  Lord,  whenever  they  see  him  do 
an  act  of  charity  or  public  good.  7'Ary  upbraid 
him  for  eating  with  pahlieans  and  sinners. 
ThnjcMa.xs,e hi mwilh holding  a  eorrcs/ondence 
with  Beelzebub.  They  waub  Aim  ;  seek  to  lay 
hands  on  him  ;  vehemently  accuse  him  before 
the  Roman  governor  ;  and  at  last  suborn /a/«c 
witnesses  to  procure  him  to  be  erurified. 

2  Sam.H.  17.  Seraiah  was  s.  \\  20 .25.  Shcvu  was  s. 

2  Kintrs  18. 18.  there  came  out  Eli.ikim,and  Sheh- 

na  the  1.  37.  |  19.  2.  Isa.  36.  3,  2-2.  |  37.  2. 

22.  3.  the  king  sent  Slmplmn,  Ihe  s.  8,  9,  10,  12. 

2  Chron.  34.  15,  18,  20.  .fer.  36.  10. 

25.  19.  he  look  principal .«.  of  the  l»ost,  .Arr.. 52.  25. 

1  rAroH.21.1).  and  Shemaiah  the  ,*.  wrote  them 
27.  32.  also  Jonathan  was  a  wise  man  and  a  .1. 

KiraA.  8.  Shimshai  Ihe  s.  wrote  a  letter,  9,  17, 23. 

7.  6.  Ezra  went  from  nahvhin,  wni  a  readv  s.  in 

Ihe  law,  11,  12.  yeh.  8.  4,  9,  13.  |  12.  26,  36. 

J^rh.fi.i.  F.zra  llui  s.  stood  upon  a  pulpit  of  wood 
13.  13.  Slielemiah  the  priest,  7,adok  tjie  s. 

Isa.  33.  IH.  whero  is  the  s.l  where  is  ilin  receiver? 

./er. 36,  12.  princes «nt, even Elishnma  the*. 20,  21. 
26.  Btruch  the  s.  3C.  I  37. 15.  Jonathan  Uic  s.  20. 


1  Cor.  1.  20.  where  is  the  *-..'  where  is  the  disputer? 

SCRIBES. 
l/i'(7!^s4.3.Elihoreph  and  Aliiah,son6ofShisha,s 

1  Chron.  2.  55.  the  families  of  the  s.  at  Jabez 

2  CAron.34. 13.  of  Leviies  there  wercs.  and  officers 
Kstk.  3.  12.  then  were  the  king's  «.  called,  8.  9. 
.Icr.  8.  8.  the  pen  of  tlie  s.  is  in  vain 
Jl/a^5.20.  except  exceed  the  righteou.'.ness  of  the  s. 

7.  29.  for  he  taught  ibem  as  one  having  autho- 
rity, and  not  as  the  s.  Mark  1.  22 

16.  21.  he  must  suffer  many  things  of  the  *. 

17.  10.  vvhy  Say  s.  Elias  must  come,  Mark  9.  11. 
20. 18.  Son  of  man  be  betrayed  to  s.  Mark  10. 33. 
21. 15.  when  the  s.  saw,  they  were  sore  displeased 
23.  2.  the  s.  and  Pharisees  sit  in  Moses'  seat 

13.woe  to  you  «-.14, 15,23,25,27,29.  Luke  1L44. 
26.  3.  then  assembled  the  chief  priests  and  s.  and 

elders  of  ihe  people,  Mark  14.  53.  Luke  22.66. 
Mark  2.  6.  went  certain  s.  reasoning  in  tlieir  hearts 

16.  when  the  s.  saw  him  cat  with  publicans 
3.  22.  the  s.  said,  he  hath  Beelzebub,  by  prince 
8.31.Son  ofman  must  be  rejected  of*.  Luke  9.22. 
9.  14.  the  s.  questioning  with  the  disciples 

11. 18.  the  s.  and  chief  priests  heard  it  and  sought 
how  they  might  destroy  him,  Luke  19.  47. 

27.s.say,by  what  aulhoriiy  doesl  thouthesethings? 
12.  28.  one  of  s.  asked  which  is  first  command.? 

35.  how  say  s.  that  Christ  is  the  Son  of  David? 
38.  he  said  to  them,  beware  of  s.  Luke  20.  46. 

14.  1.  the  s.  sought  how  to  take  him  by  craft 
Luke  5.  30.  the  s.  and  Pharisees  murmured,  15. 2 
6.7.  s.  watched  him  ||  20.  l.the  «.  came  upon  mm 
11.  .53.  the  s.  began  to  urge  him  vehemently 

20. 19.  prie.sits  and  s.  sought  to  lay  hands  on  him 

22.  2.  the  chief  priests  and  .f.  sought  to  kill  him 

23.  10.  the  .?.  stoiid  and  vehemently  accused  him 
.lohn  8.3.lhe  5.  brought  a  woman  taken  in  adultery 
Acts  4.  5.  the  s.  gathered  against  the  apostles 

6.  12.  the  s.  brouglil  Siephen  to  the  council 
23.9.  Ihe  s.  of  the  Pharisees  part  arose  and  strove 

SCRIP. 
1  Sam.  17.  40.  David  put  smooth  stones  in  as. 
Mat.lO.  10.  provide  nosilv.nor  s. for  your  journey, 
nor  two  coats,  Mark  6.  8.  Luke  9.  3.  |  10.  4. 
Luke  22. 35.  when  I  sonl  you  without  .5.  lacked  ye 

36.  but  now  let  him  take  bis  purse  and  his  s. 

SCRIPTURE, 

Or  Writing.  There  is  great  dispute  concerning 
the  first  invintor  of  letters  and  writing.  Some 
maintain  that  there  was  writing  before  the 
diluge,  and  that  .Ad.im  was  Ihe  inventor  of 
letters.  Othirs  think,  that  Moses  is  the  first 
author  of  whom  we  have  any  writings,  and 
that  before  him  there  were  no  wrilten  monu- 
ments. Through  Ihe  whole  lives  of  the  patri- 
archs, there  are  found  no  foolstejis  of  any 
writing;  neither  does  Vosis  quote  any  writing, 
that  WHS  extant  before  his  own  ;  for  the  book 
nf  the  wars  of  ihc  Lord,  mentioned  Num.  21. 
14.  some  think  that  it  is  a  passage  added 
to  Ihe  text  of  Mo.=es,  or  thai  it  was  a  writing 
composed  in  his  time.  Others  take  it  as  a 
prophecy  of  what  should  aftcrwardsbc  recorded 
in  the  books  n/ Josliua  nnrf  Judges;  and  instead 
of  reading  Ihe  text,  it  is  said  in  Ihc  book  of 
Ihe  wars  of  the  Loid,  they  say  Ike  Hebrew 
■will  hear  to  be  read  in  Ike  future  tense,  It  shall 
be  said  in  Ihe  book  of  the  wars.- 

AH  agree  that  it  is  an  admirable  invention  :  To 
paint  speech,  and  speak  to  the  eyes,  and  by 
tracing  out  cha'acters  in  diffident  forms  to 
give  coloitr  ami  body  to  thoughts.  It  is  also 
agreed  by  all,  that  there  is  nothing  extant  this 
day  in  the  world,  ritkrr  more  ancient,  or  more 
authentic,  than  the  books  of  Moses,  hut  it  does 
not  follow  from  thcnee,  that  there  was  no  writ- 
ing before  him.  It  appears,  on  the  contrary, 
that  wriling  was  known  and  common  rnouuh  at 
that  time  both  among  the  Egyptians  oiirf  He- 
brews. This  people  seemed  already  prepared 
and  accustomed  to  express  their  thoughts  and 
sentiments  after  this  manner.  .Ind  it  is  to 
be  supposed,  that  Ihe  chief  of  the  nation  read 
the  tables  of  Ihe  law.  Moses  had  been  »n- 
struc.lid  in  all  the  knowledge  of  the  KL'yplions, 
and,  donhtless,  hud  learned  their  manner  of 
writing. 

Thewordi>er\\i\mo  generiilly  stands  forlhesarred 
books  of  the  Old  and  .VeiB  Testament,  written 
by  hull/  men,  as  Iheii  if  ere  inspired,  instructed 
and  eiinhlid  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  2  Tim.  3.  10, 
All  Scripture  is  given  by  inspiration  of  God 
and  is  profitable  for  doctrine,  to  declare  and 
confirm  Ihe  truth  :  for  reproof,  to  convince  of 
sin,  and  confute  errors ;  for  correction,  to  re- 
form th'  life;  and  for  instruction  in  righieoui- 
DcsB,  that  IS,  to  teack  us  to  make  a  furtkci 


SEA 

progress  in  the  toatj  to  heaven;  or  to  instruct 
us  in  Ike  true  righteousness  renealed  by  the 
gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  in  which  we  may  appear 
with  comfort  before  God.  Scripture  ii  some 
timestakc7ifor  some  one  sentence  or  passage  of 
the  sacred  writings.  Mark  15.  28,  The  scrip- 
ture was  fulfilled,  which  saith,  Aiid  he  was 
numbered  with  the  transgressors.  The  passage 
referred  to  is  recorded  in  Isa.  53.  12.  Scrip- 
ture is  also  taken  for  the  Holy  Ghost  speaking 
in  the  scripture,  by  whose  inspiration  the  scrip- 
ture was  written.  Gal.  3.  8,  The  scripture, 
foreseeing  that  God  would  justify  the  heathen 
through  faitli,  preached  before  the  gospel  unto 
Jibraham,  saying,  In  tliee  shall  all  nations  be 
blessed.  And  in  John  5.  39,  our  Saviour  says, 
Search  the  scriptures,  for  in  them  ye  think  ye 
have  eternal  life,  and  they  are  they  which 
testify  of  me:  thai  is,  Diligently  examine  the 
books  of  the  Old  Testament,  which  yourselves 
acknowledge  do  set  forth  the  true  way  toeternal 
life :  and  upon  due  trial  you  will  find,  that 
all  those  prophecies  und  types  are  fulfilled  in 
vie;  and  that  all  the  promises  of  life  there 
made,  hane  respect  to  me,  and  point  me  out  as 
the  true  Messiah. 
Fhe  inspired  writings  of  the  Old  and  J^ew  Testa 
ments  are  called,  the  Scriptures,  the  Bible,  or 
the  Book,  by  way  of  eminence  and  distinction ; 
because  they  far  excel  all  other  books  :  For  (1) 
Tliey  contain  the  whole  will  of  God  necessary  to 
be  known  for  our  salvation.  (2)  They  contain 
that  wisdom  which  is  far  above  all  the  wisdom 
of  the  ivorld,  1  Cor.  2.  7.  (3)  They  were  in- 
spired by  the  Holy  Ghost,  2  Tim.  3.  16.  2  Pet. 

I.  21.  (4)  They  were  penned  by  the  most  excel 
lent  of  men,  for  wisdom  and  holiness,as^loses, 
David,  Solomon,  the  prophets,  apostles,  and 
evangelists.  (5)  They  are  most  perfect,  pure 
deep,  undsimmutable,  and  cnntain  all  things 
necessary  for  faith  and  practice,  Psal.  19.  7. 
2  Tun.  3.  IG,  17.  1  Pet.  I.  23.  (6)  J^o  writings 
or  scriptures  but  thesebring  such  glory  to  God 
or  have  such  an  efficacy  in  converting  a  soul, 
Psal.  19.  7,  8.  Heb.  4.  12.  (7)  Though  these 
books  were  written  by  divers  men  in  divers 
ages,  yet  there  is  as  great  harmony  in  them 
as  if  they  had  been  written  by  one  man. 

Dan.  10.  21.  shew  what  is  noted  in  the  s.  of  truth 
Mark  12.  10.  have  ye  not  read  this  s.  stone  which 

15.  28.  the  s.  was  fulfillpd  which  saith,  he  was 
Luke  i.  21.  he  said,  this  day  is  this  s.  fulfilled 
John  2.  22.  they  believed  the  «.  and  ihe  word  Jesus 

7.  38.  he  that  believeth  on  me,  as  the  s.  saith 
42.  hath  not  the  s.said,  Christ  cometh  of  David? 

10.  35.  word  came,  and  the  5.  cannot  be  broken 
19.37.  ag.  another  s.  saith,  they  shall  look  on  him 
^cts  1.  10.  this  s.  must  needs  have  been  fulfilled 

8.  32.  Ihe  place  of  the  s.  which  he  read  was  this 
35.  Philip  began  at  the  same  s.  and  preached  Jes. 

Rom.  4.  3.  what  saith  the  .s.?  11.  2.   Gal.  4.  30. 

9.  17.  for  the  s.  saith,  10.  11.  1  Tim.  5.  18. 
Gal.  3.8.  the  s.  foreseeing  that  God  would  justify 

22.  hut  the  s.  hath  concluded  all  under  sin 
2  Tim.  3.  16.  all  s.  is  given  by  inspiration  of  God 
Jam.  4.  .5.  do  you  think  the  s.  saith  in  vain 

1  Pet.  2.  6.  also  it  is  contained  in  the.?.  Hay  in  Sion 

2  Pet.  1.  20.  no  propheevof.?.is  of  private  interpr. 

SCRIPTURES. 
Mat.  21.  42.  have  ye  never  read  in  the  s.  the  stone 
22.  29.  ye  do  err,  not  knowing  the  s.  Mark  12.  24. 
26.  .54.  hilt  how  then  shall  the  s.  be  fulfilled  ? 
Mark  14.  49.  l)ut  the  .t.  must  be  fulfilled 
Luke'H.  27.  he  expounded  to  them  in  all  the  s. 
32.didiioiour  heart  burn,  while  he  opened  to  us  s. 
4j.oppned  underst.ihatthey  might  understand  s. 
John  5.  39.  search  s.  for  in  them  ye  think  ye  have 
Jicts  17.  2.  he  reasoned  with  them  out  of  the  s. 

II.  were  more  noble,  auil  searcheil  the  a.  daily 
18.  24.  a  .Tew  named  Apollos,  mighty  in  the  s. 

28.  shewing  by  the  s.  that  .lesus  was  Christ 
/?o»i.l.2.  promised  afore  by  prophets  in  Ihe  holy  s. 
15.4.  that  we  thro'  comfort  of  s.  might  have  hope 

16.  26.  and  by  the  s.  made  known  to  all  nations 

1  Cor.15.3.  Christ  died  ||  4.  rose  according  to  Ihe  s. 

2  Tim.'X.  15.  from  a  child  thou  hast  known  holy  *•. 
2  Pet.  3. 16.  unstable  wrest,  as  they  do  also  other  s. 

SCROLL. 
Isa.  34.  4.  henvens  shall  be  rolled  together  as  a  *. 
Ren.  6. 14.  and  thu  heaven  departed  as  a  A.  rolled 

SCUM. 
Eiek.  24.  6.  woe  to  the  pot  whose  s.  is  therein 
11.  that  the  8.  of  it  mny  be  consumed 
12.she\»earied  herselfwilh  lies,  her  great*. went 
not  forth  out  of  her,  her  s.  shall  be  in  the  fire 
SCURVY. 
T.er.  21.  20.  none  shall  appr.  that  is  s.  or  scabbed 
22.  22.  \\\cs.  or  scabbed  ve  shall  not  olTer  to  Lord 

SE.\. 

1  Kings  7  2S  he  made  a  molten  a.  2  Chron.  4.  2. 

517 


SEA 

l/r(n5's7.24.wereknops  compassing  i.round  about 
25.  the^.  was  set  above  upon  oxen,  2  Chron.  4.  4. 
39.  set  the*,  on  right  side  of  Ihe  house  eastward 

2  h'ings  16.  17.  Ahaz  took  down  the  s.  from  oxen 
25.  13.  the  s.  did  Chaldeans  break  in  pieces,  16. 

2  Chron.  4.  6.  the  5.  was  for  the  priests  to  wash  ii 
15.  one  s.  and  twelve  oxen  under  it 

JC/-.27.19.  saith  Lord,  concerning  the  pillars  and  s 
SEA, 

fn  Hebrew,  Jum  ;  in  Greek,  Thalasse.  It  is  tak- 
en for  that  general  collection  of  waters,  which 
encompasses  the  earth,  and  has  several  names 
given  it,  according  to  the  countries  it  washes, 
Gen.  1.  10.  Exod.  20.  11.  Psal.  95.  5.  The 
Uubrews  gave  the  name  of  Sea.  to  all  great  col- 
lections of  water,  to  great  lakes  or  pools.  7'Ait* 
the  Sea  of  Galilee,  or  of  Tiberias,  or  of  Cin- 
nereth,  w  710  other  than  the  lake  0/ Tiberias  or 
Gennesareth  in  Galilee,  Mat.  4.  18.  |  8.  32 
John  6.  1,  18.  The  Dead  Sea  or  Salt  Sea, 
See  Salt.  The  Sea  of  Jazer  is  the  lake  that 
was  near  the  city  of  Jazer,  beyond  Jordan,  ./er. 
48.  32.  The  Great  Sea  is  the  Mediterranean 
They  also  gave  the  name  of  Sea  to  a  very  great 
brazen  basin,  that  Solomon  caused  to  be  made 
for  the  temple,  forthe  convenience  of  the  priests, 
out  of  which  they  drew  water  for  washing  their 
hands  or  feet,  or  other  things  as  occasion  re- 
quired, 1  Kings  7.  23. 

The  Arabians,  and  Orientals  in  general,  some- 
times give  the  name  of  Sea  to  great  rivers, 
as  the  Nile,  the  Eupliraies,  the  Tigris,  and 
others,  which  by  their  magnitude,  and  by  the 
extent  of  their  overflowing,  seem  as  little  Seas 
or  great  lakes.  Hence  the  country  of  Babylon 
which  was  watered  by  the  Euphrates  is 
called  the  Desert  of  the  Sea,  Isa.  21.1.  Jere- 
miah speaks  of  it  in  the  same  manner.  Jer. 
51.  36,  I  will  dry  up  her  sea,  and  make  her 
springs  dry.  By  which  some  understand,  that 
God  woulddeprive  her  of  all  necessaries  for  her 
succour;  though  others  refer  it  to  the  particu- 
lar stratagem  by  which  Cyrus  took  Babylon, 
namely,by  drying  up  in  some  measure  the  river 
Euphrates,  that  is,  turning  it  into  other  chan- 
nels. Mnd  Ezekiel  describing  the  king  of 
Egypt  says,  Ezek.  32.  2,  Thou  art  as  a  whale 
in  the  seas;  because  his  habitation  was  upon 
the  banks  uf  the  Nile. 

Sea  2s  taken  for  a  multitude,  a  deluge  of  enemies. 
Jer.  51.  42,  The  sea  is  come  up  upon  Babylon. 
Jilso  for  the  inhabitants  of  the  islands  of  the 
sea.  Isa.  60.  5,  The  abundance  of  the  sea 
shall  be  converted  unto  thee.  The  islands  or 
nations  that  formerly  hated  thee,  shall  lone 
thee,  and  join  with  thee  in  religious  worship ; 
and  shall  bring  their  wealth,  which  they  get 
by  their  merchandise,  unto  thee.  Job  says. 
Am  I  a  sea  or  a  whale,  that  thou  setlest  a 
watch  over  me?  .Job  7.  12.  ./lin  I  so  unruly, 
and  so  ungovernable  a  creature,  that  thou 
needest  to  use  extraordinary  power  to  rule  and 
subdue  mcl  Jim  I  as  fierce  and  unruly  as  the 
sea,  which  would  overwhelm  the  earth,  and 
destroy  its  inhabitants, if  thou  didst  notappuint 
boundaries  to  itl  Or  is  my  strength  so  great 
as  that  of  the  sea,  which  can  endure  so  many 
violent  storms  one  after  another,  and  yet  can 
subsist  under  them, and  after  them?  JsTo,  I^ord; 
thou  knowesl  that  lam  but  a  weak,  feeble  crea- 
ture, whom  thou  canst  crush  in  a  moment, 
without  putting  these  chai7is  upon  me ;  without 
these  insupportable  pains  and  miseries.  The 
prophet  Micah  says.  Thou  wilt  cast  all  their 
sins  into  the  depth  of  the  sea,  Mic.  7.  19, 
What  is  cast  into  the  depth,  of  the  sea,  is  ordi- 
narily accounted  as  lost, we  have  no  expectation 
of  finding  it  any  more ;  so  to  cast  sins  into  ihe 
depth  of  the  sea,  imports  the  full  and  free  par- 
don of  them. 
By  the  sea  of  glass,  mentioned  Rev.  4.  6.  most 
probably  is  signified  the  blood  of  Christ, 
whereby  our  persons  and  services  are  mad.r 
aeerplable  to  God.  It  is  called  a  sea  in  allu- 
sion to  that  large  vessel  in  the  temple,  out  of 
ichich  theprie.'itsdrew  wat.r.rtomash  themselve.':, 
and  the  sacrifices,  and  the  instruments  which 
they  made  use  of  for  sacrificing,  1  Kings  7. '23. 
Its  being  represented  as  a  sea  of  glass  like 
unto  crystal,  may  denote  the  ."pntless  innocence 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  his  sufferings ; 
that  it  was  not  the  blood  of  a  malefactor,  but 
of  an  innocent  person. 
Exod.  14. 16.  stretch  thine  hand  over  the  .?.  27. 
2I.I,oid  caused  thes.togo  back,  made  the  a.  dry 

15.  10.  thou  didst  blow,  the  .«.  covered  them 

20.  11.  Lord  made  the  .9.  and  all  Ihat  is  therein, 
Psal.  95.  5.  Jonah  1.  9.  .^cts  4.  24. 
I  14.  1.5. 
JVum.  11.  31.  a  wind  brought  quails  from  the  >. 


SEA 

Deut.  30.13.  nor  is  it  beyond  s.  that  thou  shouldest 
say,  who  shall  go  over  the  s.  for  us  and  bring  it 

./osA.24.6.  you  came  unto  the  s.  Egyptians  pursued 
7. he  brought  the  s.  upon  them  and  covered  them 

I  Kings  10.22.lhe  king  had  at  s. a  navy  ofTarshish 

18.  43.  he  said,  go  up  now,  look  toward  the  s. 
2A')n^6l4.25.lie  restored  the  coast  to  the  s.  of  plain 

1  Chr.  16.  32.  let  the  s.  roar,  Psal.  96.  11.  |  98.  7. 

2  Chr.  20. 2.  cometh  a  multitude  ag.  thee  beyond  s. 
JVd/i.  9. 11.  thou  didst  divide  the  s.  went  thro'  the*. 

Job  26.  12.  Psal.  74.  13.  |  78.  13.  Jer.  31.  35. 
.hb  7.  12.  am  la  s.?  ||  38.  8.  or  who  shut  up  the  s. 7 

11.  9.  the  measure  thereof  is  broader  than  the  * 
14. 11.  as  the  waters  fail  from  s.  and  flood  decayi 
28.  14.  and  the  s.  saith,  it  is  not  with  me 

41.  31.  he  maketh  the  s.  like  a  jiot  of  ointment 
Psal.  66.  6.  he  turned  the  s.  into  dry  land 

72.  8.  he  shall  have  dominion  from  s.  to  s. 
78.  53.  but  the  s.  overwhelmed  their  enemies 
80. 11.  she  sent  out  her  boughs  to  s.  and  branches 
104.  25.SO  islhisgieat  wide  s.  wherein  are  things 
107.  23.  they  that  go  down  to  the  s.  in  ships 
114.  3.  the  s.  saw  it  and  fled  ||  5.  O  thou  s. 
Prov.  8.  29.  when  he  gave  to  the  s.  his  decree 
Isa.  11.  9.  as  the  wateis  cover  the  s.  Hub.  2.  14. 
16. 8.  her  branches  are  stretched  and  gone  oxer  a. 

19.  5.  the  waters  shall  fail  from  the  «.  and  riveru 

23.  2.  the  merchants  of  Zidon  that  pass  over  «.. 
4.  be  ashamed,  O  Zion,  for  the  s.  hath  spoken 
11. he  stretched  out  his  hand  over  Ihes.  he  shook 

24.  14.  they  shall  cry  aloud  from  the  s. 

42.  10.  sing  to  the  Lord,  ye  that  go  down  to  the  S. 

50.  2.  behold,  at  my  rebuke  1  dry  up  llie  5. 

51.  10.  art  thou  not  it  which  hath  dried  Ihe  s.? 
57.  20.  but  the  wicked  are  like  the  troubled  *. 

./er.  6.23.  their  voice  roarelh  like  s.  and  they  ride 

48.32. 0  vine  of  Sibm4li,tliy  pliinis  are  gone  over  s 
50.  42.  their  voice  shall  roar  like  the  s.  shall  ride 

51.36.1  will  dry  up  her «. and  make  her  springs  dry 
42.thes.is  come  up  upon  Babylon,  she  is  covered 

I. am.  2.  13.  for  thy  breach  is  great  like  the  s. 
Ezek.  26.  3.  as  the  s.  causeth  his  waves  to  come 
Van.  7.  3.  four  great  beasts  came  up  from  the  s. 
Jimos  8.  12.  they  shall  wander  from  s.  to  s. 
.lonah  1. 11.  what  shall  we  do  that  s.  may  be  calm? 
Mic.  7.  12.  in  that  day  he  shall  come  from  s.to  s. 
JVoA.  1.  4.  he  rebuketh  the  s.  and  maketh  it  dry 

3.  8.  populous  No,  whose  rampart  was  Ihes. 
//ai. 3.8.  was  thy  wrath  against  s.  that  didst  ride 
IS.thou  didst  walk  through  the*. with  thy  horse* 
Hag.  2.  6.  I  will  shake  Ihe  heavens,  earth,  and  s. 
Zech.  9.  10.  his  dominion  shall  be  from  s.  to  s. 

10. 11.  he  shall  pass  through  the  s.  wiili  atfliciion 
Mat.  8.  26.  then  he  arose  and  rebuked  the  .«. 
27.  even  winds  and  s.  obey  him,  Mark  4.  39,  41. 

17.  27.  go  thou  to  the  s.  and  cast  a  hook 
23. 15. woe  to  hypocrites, for  yecompasss.and  land 

/>«A;c21. 25.  distress,  the  ,•;.  and  the  waves  roaring 
Jlcts  27.  40.  they  committed  themselves  to  the  s. 

28.4.  this  man,  though  he  hath  escaped  the  s. 
1  Cor.  10.  1.  all  our  fathers  passed  through  the* 
Rev.  4.  6.  and  before  the  throne  was  a  s.  of  glasa 

7.  2.  to  whom  it  wnsgiven  to  hurl  Ihe  earth  anda. 

3.  saying,  hurt  not  the  earth  nor  the  s. 
10.  6.  who  created  the  s.  and  the  things  therein 
14.7.  fear  God,  and  worshi|)  him  that  made  the* 
15.  2.  I  saw  a  s.  of  glass,  minjlerl  with  fire 

20.  13.  and  the  s.  gave  up  Ihe  dead  that  were  in  it 
21.1.  first  earth  passed,  and  ihere  was  no  more  s. 

By  the  SEA. 
Exod.  14.  2.  before  it  shall  ye  encamp  by  the  a. 

9.  Egypiiansovertook  them  encamping 4?/ ZAe  *. 

'iSam.  17.11.  all  Israel  be  gathered  as  sand  by  thcs. 

1  Kings  4.  20.  Judali  and  Israel  as  sand  hy  the  a. 

5.  9. 1  will  convey  them  by  the  s.  2  Chron.  2. 16. 

A';a.l8.2.woe  lo  the  land  sendethamba.ssadorsiy*. 

Jer.  46.  18.  as  Carmel  by  the  s.  so  shall  he  come 

MarkA.  1.  the  mullilude  was  hy  thes.  on  the  land 

flew. 18.17.  as  many  as  Uai\e  liy  t he  s .  stood  afar  off 

.Sfit.  Coast,  Grkat. 

In  and  into  the  SEA. 

Ernd.  14. 28.  host  of  Pharaoh  that  came  into  the  s. 

15.1. horse  and  rider  hath  he  thrown  ?n^fl(/jcs.  21, 

4.  Pharaoh's  host  hath  he  cast  into  the  .v. 
19.  his  horse  with  horsemen  went  into  the  s. 

P.'nl.  77. 19.  thy  way  is  in  the  s.  thy  palli  in  great 
89.  2.).  I  will  .set  his  hand  also  in  Ihf  s. 

Eccl.  1.  7.  all  rivers  run  into  the  s.  yet  sea  not  full 

Isn.  27.  l.he  shall  slay  the  dragon  that  is  iv  thes. 
43.  16.  saith  Lord,  which  maketh  a  way  in  the  s. 

Ezek.^d.M.  renowned  city  that  was  strong  in  the  a. 

18.  the  isles  that  are  in  the  a.  shall  be  troubled 
47.  8.  these  waters  go  into  the  a  which  be-ng 

brought  forth  into  thrs.lhe  waters  shall  hohenlerj 
Jonah  1.  4.  there  was  a  miehty  tempest  in  the  a. 

5.  Ihe  mariners  cast  forth  the  wares  ixto  the  a. 

12.  fake  me  up,  and  cast  me  into  the  s.  15. 
Zech.  9.  4.  he  will  smite  her  power  in  the  s. 

10.  11.  he  shall  smile  the  waves  in  th^  a. 
Mat.  4.  18.  casting  a  net  into  the  s.  Mark  1.  16 


SEA 

Mat.  8.  24.  there  arose  a  great  tempest  in  the  s. 

3i.  whole  herd  of  swine  ran  in.  the  s.JUark  3.13. 

13.47. kiiigdoinoriieaven  like  a  iiel  cast  in<o  We  s. 
•21.  21.  be  thou  cast  into  the  s.  .Mark  11.  'Zi. 
Mark  9.4J.  and  ho  were  cast  («tu  t/tes.  Luke  17.2. 
y>uie  17.  U.  ye  might  say,  be  thou  phinted  in  Ike  s. 
John  'Jl.  7.  Peter  did  cast  iiimsell'  into  the  s. 
Acts  ■27.  38.  and  cast  out  the  wheat  into  the  s. 

43.  tliey  should  cjsl  themselves  tirst  into  the  .s. 

1  Cor.  10.  2.  all  baptized  in  the  cloud,  and  in  thcs. 
"i  Cor.M.'HJ.\n\>et\U  intlte  s.  among  false  bretliren 
Jam.  3.  7.  beast  and  things  in  the  s.  is  tamed 
Rev.  5. 13.  every  creature  ik  the  s.  saying,  bifssin" 

a.  ij.  great  mountain  burning  was  oust  into  thes 
It).  3.  and  every  living  soul  died  ;;i  the  s. 
Id.  I'J.  were  m^ide  ricii  all  that  had  ships  in  the  s 
21.  a  mighty  angel  casta  millstone  into  the  s. 
0/ the  SEA. 
Ocn.  1.  26.  let  us  make  man  in  our  imag:;,  let  them 
have  dommion  over  fish  of  the  s.  28.  Fn.  6.  8. 
9.  2.  the  I'car  of  you  upon  all  fishes  of  the  s. 

32.  12.  and  make  thy  seed  as  the  sand  of  the  s. 
41.  4!).  .loseph  gathered  corn  as  the  sand  «/ //iff  s 
41).  13  Zfbnlun  shall  dwell  at  the  haven  of  thes. 

Ejcod.  15.  S.  depths  congealed  in  the  heart  of  thcs 

11).  brought  again  the  waters  of  the  s.  upon  thorn 

JVunt.  11.22.  shall  all  thetish  o/ tA««.  be  gathered 

2  A''i//i.22.  It),  and  the  channels  o/«Ac  «.ap|)eared 
1  KiufTd  18.  44.  there  arisoth  a  cloud  out  of  thes. 
Joh  0.  3.  it  woula  be  heavier  than  the  sand  of  thes. 

9.8.  which  Ireadetb  upon  the  waves  of  the  s. 

12.  8.  the  fishes  of  the  s.  shall  declare  to  thee 

3G.  30.  heboid  he  covereth  the  bottom  of  the  s. 

2S.  l(i.  hast  thou  entered  into  the  springs  of  the  s. 
Ps.  33. 7.  he  galhereth  the  waters  of  the  s.  tOfjether 

68. 22.  I  will  bring  my  people  from  ilepths  of  the  s. 

78.  27.  feathered  fowls  liki)4as  the  sand  of  the  s. 

89.  9.  thou  rulest  the  raging  of  the  s.when  waves 

93.4.  theiiord  is  mightier  than  the  waves  of  the  s. 

131). !).  and  dwell  in  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  s. 
Isa.  5.  30.  against  them  like  the  roaring  of  the  s. 

9.  Land  afterwards  afllicther  by  the  way  of  thes. 

10.22.  fortho'  Israel  be  as  the  sand  of  the  s.  yet  a 
remnant  sh  ill  return,  ffos.  1.  10.  Rom.  9.27. 

23.4.  even  the  strength  o/ 4A«  «  bath  spoken 

48.  18.  thy  righteousness  as  the  waves  of  the  s. 

51.  10.  that  hath  maile  the  depths  of  the  s. 

fiO.  r).  itbixnii. of  the  s.  shall  be  converted  unto  thee 

63.  II.  he  that  brought  them  up  ou\  of  the  s. 
Jr.r.  5.  22.  pl;icfd  the  sand  for  the  bound  of  the  s. 

33.  22.  neither  the  sand  of  the  s.  be  measured 
f'.^nk.•2'^.  10.  the  princes  of  the  s.  shall  comedown 

27.  3.  Tyru'!,  O  thou, situate  at  the  entry  of  the  s. 
9.  ihn  ships  nf  the  s.  were  in  thee  to  occupy 
29.  all  the  pilofs  of  the  s.  shall  come  down 
38.20.  ih'!  fisli'W  of  the  s.  shall  shake  at  my  presen. 
ffos.  4.  3.  the  fi-ih''3  of  the  s.  shall  be  tikcn  away 
Amos  .5.  8.  that  calleth  for  the  witers  of  the  s.n.fj. 

9.  3.  hid  from  mv  sight  in  the  botiom  of  the  s. 
Mic.  7. 19.  thou  wilt  cast  their  sins  into  depths  ofs. 
Hab.  1.  14.  and  makest  men  as  the  fishes  nf  thes. 
Xrph.  1.  3.  I  will  consume  the  fish"S  of  the  s. 
Vat.  4.  1.').  by  the  way  of  the  s.  bi'yond  Jordan 

18.0.  better  he  were  drowned  inthedeplh  of  thes. 
tarn.  l.t).  he  that  wavereth,  is  like  a  wave  of  thes. 
Tudel^.  raging  wnvsof  thes.  foaming  out  their 
Her.  8.  8.  the  third  part  of  the  s.  became  blood 

12.12.  woe  to  theinhabiters  of  earthand  of  the  s. 

13. 1. 1  stood  and  saw  a  beast  rise  up  nut  of  thes. 

20.8.  the  number  of  whom  is  as  the  sand  of  the  s. 
.See  Midst. 
On  or  upon  the  SEA. 
Ptal.  0.').  .5.  of  them  that  are  afar  ofTupon  the  s. 
J-r.  40.  23.  faint-hearted,  there  is  sorrow  on  the  s. 
j>faM4.2.).  walking  on  tAes.Jt^arA 0.48.  ./o/iii  0.19. 

26.dnii^irlps«aw  liim  walking  on /A«!».Jl/ar/r  0.49. 
fl-n.  7.  I.  lint  the  wind  should  not  blow  on  the  s. 

10.  2.  and  h<'  set  his  right  foot  upon  the  .*. 

5.  the  an?el  which  I  saw  stand  upon  the  s.  8. 

l.'i.  2.  and  I  s  iw  them  stand  on  the  s.  of  glass 

16.3.thcsoco;i'1  angel  poured  outhis  vial  upon  T.  s. 

M:\-F AmSC.  men. 

F.iek.^a.  17.  that  was  iidinhilcd  nt s.-farin^men 

SR.V-MONSTKRS. 
Aam.  4.3.  even  th'-.«.-mffn,»«cr^ilraw  out  the  breast 
See  Ukd,  Svi.t,  S\nd. 
SR.A-SIIORR. 
Oen.  22. 17.  thy  seed  ns  nand  which  is  upon  the  s.s. 
F.i.o'l.  11.  30.  (.aw  thn  F.gypliiins  diTid  upon  s.s. 
fosh  11.4.  came  lognthera.'  ihesnndnpon  .«.  sAore 
Judj^.a.  17.  Anhor  rontinnod  on  Ihn  s.  shore 
1  fi'im.  13.  .5.  the  Philistini «  as  Hand  on  the  s.  a. 

1  Kinira  4.  29.  largeness  of  heart  ns  saml  on  ».  ». 
/t.  47.  7.  given  it  a  rhnrgo  against  Ihn  s.  shore 
ffeb.  II.  12.  of  one  sprang  many,  as  sand  by  s.  a. 

SKA-SIDR. 
r)eut.  1.7.  turn  vnii.nnd  go  bv  the  wav  of  Ibo'.t.  ». 
.Twisr.  7. 12.  the  Midinniteg  lav  ni  ^nn'l  bv  the  s.  s. 

2  Chrnn.  8.  17.  Solomon  went  to  F.lnth  at  the  s.  ». 
Mat,  13.  1.  the  same  d;)v  Jesus  sat  by  the  s.  tide 


SEA 

Mark  2. 13.  and  he  w  ent  forth  again  by  the  ».  side 
4.  1.  and  he  began  again  to  teaeli   by  the  s.  side 

Mcts  10.  t).  Simon  whose  house  is  by  the  s.  s.  32. 
SEAS. 

Oen.  1. 10.  the  gathering  of  the  waters  called  lie  s. 
22.  multiply  and  fill  the  waters  in  the  5. 

Lev.  11.  9.  what  hath  fins  and  scales  in  the  s.  eat 
lO.that  have  not  fins  in  the  i-.  be  an  abomination 

Deut.'Si.  19.  they  shall  suck  of  abundance  of  thcs. 

JVeh.  9.  6.  thou  ha^jt  made  the  s.  and  all  therein 

Ps.  8.8.  whatsoever  passeth  through  paths  of  the  j. 
24.  2.  for  he  hath  founded  it  upon  the  «. 
65.  7.  which  stilleth  the  noise  of  the  s.  their  waves 
69.  34.  let  the  s.  praise  him,  and  every  thing 
135.  6.  what  the  L.  pleased  that  did  he  in  the  s. 

Isa.  17.  12.  which  make  a  noise  like  noise  of  the  s. 

.ler.  15.  8.  widows  are  increased  above  sand  iti's. 

Ezek.  20.  t  1".  lliou  that  wast  inhabited  of  the  «. 

27.  4.  thy  borders  are  in  the  miilst  of  the  j;. 
25.  thou  wast  made  glorious  in  midst  of  the  s 
2ti.  hath  broken  thee  in  the  midst  of  the  s.  27. 34. 
33.  when  thy  wares  went  forth  out  of  the  s. 

28.  2.  I  sit  in  seat  of  God,  in  midst  of  the  s. 

8.  of  them  that  are  slain  in  the  midst  of  the  s 
32.  2.  Pliaraoh,  thou  art  as  a  whale  in  the  s. 

Dan. II. -ib.  tabernacle  of  his  palace  between  the  s. 

.Jonah  2. 3.  thou  hadst  cast  me  into  midst  of  the  s 

Acts  27.41.and  falling  into  a  place  where  two*. met 
SEAL, 

Is  an  imtrument  well  known,  wherewith  letters 
andolher  writings  are  sealed  and  ratified.  The 
ancient  Hebrews  wore  thr.ir  seals  or  signets  ('/( 
rings  on  their  fingers,  or  in  bracelets  on  their 
arms.  Jezebel  wrote  letters  to  the  elders  of  Is- 
rael to  condemn  Nabolh,  and  sealed  them  with 
hirig  Allah's  seal,  1  Kings  21.  8.  Haman  the 
Agagite  scaled  the  decree  of  king  Ahasuerus 
against  the  .Jews  with  the  king's  j5fa/|Kslh.3.12. 

Pliny  observes,  lib.  33.  cap.  1.  that  the  use  of 
seals  or  signets  was  yit  rare  at  the  time  of  the 
Trojan  war,  and  thattheywere  obliged  to  shiit 
up  their  letters  with  several  knots :  Hat 
among  t  Ac  Hebrews  they  are  much  inere  ancient. 
Judah  the  son  of  Jacob  left  his  seal,  his  brace 
let,  and  his  staff,  as  a  pledge  with  Tamar, 
whom  he  did  not  know,  Gen.  38.  18,  2.5.  And 
it  is  said  in  Deut.  .32.  .34,  Is  not  this  laid  up 
in  store  with  me,  and  sealed  up  among  my 
treasures'!  Job  says,  that  God  keeps  the  stars 
as  under  his  senl,  thathe  is  governor  and  mas- 
ter of  them,  and  allows  them  to  appear  when  he 
thinks  proper.  Job  9.  7.  He  sealeth  up  the  stars; 
And  in  chap.  14. "n,  My  transgression  is  sealed 
up  in  a  bag. 

In  civil  contracts  they  gcnerallymadr  two  origi- 
nals: one  continued  open,  and  was  kept  by  him 
for  whose  interest  the  contract  tens  made:  the 
other  was  sealed  up  and  depositedin  some  pub- 
lic office.  It  was  sealedup  to  prevent  any  fraud 
or  falsification.  Jeremiah  bought  afield  in  his 
country  of  Anathoth,  of  one  named  Hanancel ; 
he  wrote  the  contract,  called  loitnesses,  and 
sealed  it  up;  and  then  put  it  into  the  hands  of 
his  disciple  Baruch,  and  said  to  him;  Take 
these  evidences,  this  evidence  of  the  purchase, 
both  which  is  sealed,  and  this  evidence  which 
is  open,  and  put  them  in  an  earthen  vessel, 
that  thev  may  continue  many  days,  ,lcr.  32.  10, 
11,  12,  14. 

The  apostle  Paul  calls  circumcision  a  seal  of  the 
righteousness  of  faith.  Rom.  4.  11,  Abraham 
received  the  sign  of  circumcision,  a  seal  of  the 
righteousness  of  the  faith  wbicli  he  had  yet 
being  uncircumcised.  Circumcision  was  a  seal 
and  an  assurance,  on  God's  part,  both  to  .Abra- 
ham and  his  spiritual  seed,  that  he  would  give 
them  Christ  the  promised  seed  out  of  the  loi?is 
of  Abraham,  and  in  him  accept  of  them  as  his 
peculiar  people,  pardon  their  sins,  and  cleanse 
them  from  their  natural  corrupt  ion,signified  by 
their  evttingojf  their  foreskins.  It  was  a  con- 
firmation of  the  covenant  of  grace,  and  of  the 
righteousness  therein  promisedupon  believing 
in  <  'lirist.  Atd  the  same  apostle,  writing  to  the 
believing  EphesianSj.^ay.t,  In  whom  also,  after 
that  ye  believed,  ye  were  sealed  with  that  Ho- 
ly Spirit  of  promise,  Epb.  1.  13.  In  Christ  as 
your  head  and  representative  ye  were  scaled, 
that  is,  assured  and  ascertained  nf  your4nler- 
est  in  the  heavenly  inheritance,  which  assur- 
ance was  wrought  in  your  souls  by  the  imme- 
diate testimony  of  the  Hidy  Spirit. 

It  is  said  in  2  Tim.  2.  19,  The  foundation  nf 
God  slnndeth  sum,  having  this  seal,  the  Lord 
knowoth  them  that  are  his ;  that  is,  God's 
decree  of  election  is  unchangeable,  upon  which, 
as  a  firm  foundation,  the  salvation  of  the 
elect  depends;,  and  also  the  work  of  grace,  or 
principle  of  holiness,  which  God  bar  laid  in 
the  hearts  of  the  elect,  tj  be  as  a  foundation, 


SEA 

root,  or  seed,  for  eternal  life,  remains  immove- 
able,having  this  sv:i\,confir m alwn ,  or  securitr. 
that  God  discerns  his  people  from  others,  and 
will  take  care  of  them,  and  prisirve  them  to 
eternal  life.  The  apostle  in  1  Cor.  9.  2.  calls 
the  Corinthians  tAe  seal  of  his  apostleship; 
The  seal  of  mine  aposilesliip  are  ye  in  the 
Lord.  Ye  are  the  certain  evidence  of  my  di- 
vine call;  viy  apostolical  ojjice  hath  a  confir- 
mation in  you  by  the  effect,  as  the  writing  is 
confirmed  by  the  seal.  For  how  can  you  think 
that  the  blessing  of  God  should  so  fur  accom- 
pany the  gospel  which  I  preach,  as  to  turn  you 
from  Hagan  idolatry,  and  your  lewd  courses  of 
life,  to  the  true  Christian  religion,  and  to  a 
hulylife  and convirsation,  if  Godhad  not  beer. 
with  me  and  sent  me? 
In  llev.  5.  1.  ,Iohn  saw  a  book  sealifd  with  sev.in 
seals.  This  was  the  book  of  God's  decrees  and 
purposes  relating  to  his  church,  as  to  what 
remarkable  things  should  happen  to  it  to  the 
end  of  the  world;  its  being  sealed  denotes  that 
the  matter  contained  in  it  was  locked  up  from 
arid  unknown  to  the  creatures.  FJsewhere 
Sealing  denotes  secrecy,  as  in  Isa.  8.  16.  Dan. 
12.4.  It  also  denotes  security,  as  in  Kev.20.  3, 
He  cast  him  into  the  bottomless  pit,  and  shut 
him  up,  and  set  a  seal  upon  him.  Ne  put  a 
restraint  upon  him,  and  made  him  ahsolutcly 
incapable  of  doing  any  considerable  mischief 
to  the  church.  And  in  Mat.  27.  60,  They  went 
and  uHule  the  sejiulchre  sure,  sealing  the  stone, 
and  setting  a  watch. 
The  grace  of  snnctification  wrought  in  the  soul 
by  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  the  seal  of  assurance  of 
our  redemption  tocume,of  a  joyful  resurrection. 
Eph.  4.  3l),  And  grieve  not  the  Holy  Spirit  of 
God,  whereby  ye  are  sealed  unto  the  day  of 
redemption.  Ojie  observes,  that  in  the  com- 
parison o/oursanctificalion  with  sealing,  <Aerc 
are  the  following  circumstances  of  likeness  ; 
[1]  The  letter  written,  or  cabinet  filled  with 
treasurr,  is  eveni  good  Christian,  2  Cor.  4.  7. 
Heb.  10.  16.  [2]  The  wax  appointed  to  be 
sealed,  is  the  reUnting  heart  of  man,  apt  to 
taJce  any  impression,  Psal.  22.  14.  [3]  The 
sealer  is  the  Holy  Ghost,  Eph  1.  13.  |  4.  liO. 
[4]  The  seal  itself  is  the  word  of  God,  which 
being  applied  to  the  heart,  makes  an  impression 
upon  it.  [5]  T7ie  sealing,  or  impression  ac- 
tive, is  the  act  of  applying  the  word  of  God, 
whether  precept,  or  promise,  by  the  HolyGhost 
within,  and  the  minister  without,  to  the  hearer. 
[6]  The  print,  or  impression  passive,  or  the 
image  of  the  seal  hft  in  the  wax,  is  the  know- 
ledge,faith,  and  love  nf  that  triitli,holiness,and 
happiness  whichGodoriginally  hathinhimsclf, 
and  his  word  from  him,  and  the  new  ninn  hath 
the  true  image  thereof  in  iiniself,  Ep!i.  4.  2t. 
Col- 3.  10.  [7]  The  use  and  end  of  this  scaling, 
is  the  secrecy  and  safety  of  the  things  scaled 
fromtheeyesof  curiosity, and  hands  of  violence, 
wherewithstrangers  or  enemies  would  abuse  it. 
So  the  rhildrenof  God  are  past  the  censure  of 
the  wicked  world,  1  Cor.  2.  15.  |  4.  3.  They 
are  preserved  asprecious  things,  forGod'sown 
use,  to  be  with  him  iti  heaven,  2  Tim.  2.  20,  21. 
They  are  freed  from  the  malice  and  violence  of 
men  and  devils,  and  from  the  stroke  of  God's 
justice,  Ezek.  9.  4.  Mat.  16.  18.  The  spouse 
in  the  Canticles  wishes  to  be  set  as  a  seal 
upon  her  beloved's  heart,  as  a  seal  upon  bin 
arm.  Cant.  S.  0.  that  is,  that  she  might  be  en- 
graven upon  the  tables  of  his  heart,  that  his 
mind  and  heart  may  be  constantly  set  iiponher. 
There  seems  to  be  an  allusion  to  the  graven 
tablets  which  were  frei/uently  worn  upon  the 
breast ;  and  to  the  signet  on  a  man's  arm  or 
hand,  which  men  prized  at  a  more  than  ordinary 
rate ;  as  appears  from  Jer.  22.  24.  Hag.  2.  23. 
and  which  are  continually  in  their  sight. 
1  h'ini's  21. 8.  Jezebel  sealed  letters  with  Ahnb's  y. 
hb  38. 14.  it  is  turned  as  clay  to  the  .*.  they  stand 
41. 15.  his  scales  aro  shut  up  as  with  a  clo.so  s. 
Con/. 8. 6. set  mo  as  a.«.on  thylieart,  as  a.?. on  Ihyarm 
fohn  3.  33.  hath  set  to  his  s.  that  God  is  true 
Horn.  4. 11.  circumcis.a  .«.  of  righteousness  of  faitu 

1  ror.9  2.  tbe.«.  of  mine  apostleship  are  ye  in  the  L. 

2  Tim.^.  19.  having  this  s.  the  Lord  knoweth  his 
Rev.  6. 3.  the  sec.  .<.  ||  .5.  the  third*.  ||  7.lho  fourthjr. 

O.ihe  filth  s.\\  12.when  ho  had  opened  the  sixth .» 
7.  2.  another  angel,  havin,'  the  s  of  the  living  G 
H.  1.  and  when  he  had  opened  thesi'venth  s. 
9.  4.  hurt  only  those  that  have  not  the  .?.  of  God 
20.  3.  and  shut  him  up,  and  set  a  s.  upon  him 

SEALS. 
Krv.  5.  1.  anil  I  saw  a  book  sealed  v\'ilh  Roven  s 

2.  who  is  worthy  to  loose  the  ;?.  thereof? 

5.  Tiion  of  tribe  of  Jnda  prevailed  lo  loose  the 

9.  tliou  art  worthy  to  lake  and  opon  tlio  s. 


SEA 

Rtv  6. 1.  saw  when  the  Lamb  opened  one  of  tho  s. 

SEAL. 
A*eA.  9.  38.  our  princes  and  priests  s.  unto  it,  10. 1. 
J$a.  b.  16.  s.  the  law  among  my  disciples 
Jer.'MAi.men  shailsubscribe  evidences, ands. them 
Dan.  0.  24.  seventy  weeks  to  s.  up  the  vision 

12.  4.  O  Daniel,  shut  up  the  words,  s.  the  book 
Kev.WA.s.  tliose  things  the  seven  thunders  uttered 

S'i.lO.s.not  the  savings  of  the  prophecyot'thisbook 

■  SEALED. 
JOeut.  32.  34.  is  not  this  s.  up  among  my  treasures? 

1  Kings  21.  8.  the  letters  were  s.  with  Ahab's  seal 
Ksth.  3. 12.  written  and  s.  with  the  king's  ring,8. 8. 
Job  14.  17.  my  transgression  is  s.  up  in  a  bag 
Cant.  4.  12.  ray  spouse  is  a  fountain  s. 

Isa.  29. 11.  the  vision  is  as  the  words  of  a  book  s. 
Jer.  32.  10.  I  subscribed  and  s.  the  evidence 

11.  so  I  took  both  that  which  was  s.  and  open,  14. 
Dan.  6.  17.  the  king  s.  it  with  his  own  signet 

12.9.for  the  words  are  closed  up,  and  «.till  tho  time 
John  6.  27.  for  him  hath  God  the  Father  s. 
Rom.  15.  23.  when  I  have  s.  to  them  this  fruit 

2  Cor.  1.  22.  who  hath  s.  us  and  given  the  earnest 
E,ph.  1. 13.  ye  were  s.  with  that  Holy  Spirit  of  prum. 

4.30  grieve  not  the  Spirit, whereby  ye  are  A-.to  day 
Reti.  5.  1.  I  saw  a  book  5.  with  seven  seals 
7.3.  hurt  not  earth  norsea,  till  we  haves,  servants 

4.  I  heard  the  number  of  them  which  were  s. 
there  were  s.  144,000  of  all  the  tribes  of  Israel 

5.  of  Juda  were  .«.  12,000;  of  Reuben  ;  of  Gad  s. 

6.  of  Aser  ;  of  Nephthalim  ;  of  Manasses  s. 

7.  of  Simeon;  of  Levi;  of  Issachar  were  s.  12,000 

8.  ofZabulon;  of  Joseph;  of  Benjamin  were  s. 

SEALEST. 
Ezek.  25.  12.  thou  s.  up  the  sum  full  of  wisdom 

SEALETH. 
Job  9.  7.  coramandeth  the  sun,  and  s.  up  the  stars 
33.I6.he  openeth  their  ears, and  «. their  instruction 
37.7.  he  s.  up  hand  of  every  man,  all  may  know 
SEALING. 
JVeA.9. 1 38.  princes  and  priests  are  at  the  s.  10.  f  1. 
Max.  27.  66.  s.  the  stone  and  setting  a  watch 

SEAM. 
John  19.  23.  now  the  coat  was  without  s.  woven 

SEARCH. 
Deut.  13. 14.  then  slialt  thou  inquire  and  make  x. 
£ira4.15.  that  s. may  be  made  in  the  records,  5. 17. 

19.  s.  hath  been  made,  and  it  is  (bund,  6.  1. 
Job  8.  8.  prepare  thyself  to  the  s.  of  their  fathers 
38.  16.  hasi  thou  walked  in  the  s.  of  the  depth? 
P«ai.  64. 6.  theysearch  and  accomplish  adili^^ent,?. 
77.  8. 1  commune,  and  my  spirit  made  diligent  s. 
Jer.  2.  34.  I  have  not  found  it  by  secret  s. 

SEARCH,  Verb. 
TjCv.  27.  33.  he  shall  not  s.  whether  it  be  good 
J^'u.m.  10.  33.  to  s.  out  a  resting-place  for  them 

13.  2.  send  thou  men,  that  they  may  s.  the  land 

32.  the  land  through  which  wo  have  gone  to  s.  it 

14.  7.  the  land  we  passed  through  to  s.  it,  is  good 
38.  Joshua  and  Caleb  of  the  men  that  went  to  s. 

Deut.  1.  22.  we  will  send  men,  and  they  shall  s. 

33.  who  went  before  to  s.  you  out  a  place 
Josh-  2.  2.  there  came  men  to  s.  the  country,  3. 
.Judg.  18.  2.  the  Danites  sent  men  to  s.  the  land 

1  Sam.  23. 23.  if  he  be  in  the  land,  I  will  s.  him  out 
S  Sam.  10..3.  hath  not  David  rather  sent  his  servants 
unto  thee  to  .5.  the  city,  to  spy  it  out?  1  Chr.  19.  3. 
Ift'i'nn's  20.6 -will  send  my  servants,and  they  shall  s. 
9.Kinss  10.23.  s.  that  none  of  tho  servants  idlhe  L. 
Job  13.  9.  is  it  good  that  he  should  s.  you  out? 
Fsnl.  44.  21.  shall  not  God  s.  this  out,  he  know<jth 
139.  23.  s.  me,  O  God,  and  know  my  heart 
Fro «. 25. 2.bul the  honourof  kings  to  s.out  a  matter 

27.  for  men  to  s.  their  own  glory,  is  not  glory 
F.ccl.  1. 13. 1  gave  my  heart  to  s.  by  wisdom,  7.  25. 
Jer.  17.  10.  Ithe  Lord  .«.  the  heart,  I  try  the  reins 
29.  13.  wlien  ye  shall  s.  for  mo  with  all  your  heart 
Lam.'i.  40.  let  us  s.  our  ways,  and  turn  to  the  Lord 
Etek.  34.  6.  and  none  did  s.  or  seek  aftir  (hem 
8.  neither  did  my  shepherds  s.  (or  my  nock 
11.  I  will  both  s.  my  sheep,  and  seek  them  out 
39. 14.  after  Ihe  end  of  seven  monlhs  shall  they  s. 
■/imos  9.  3.  I  will  s.  and  take  them  out  thence 
Z-nph.  1.  12.  I  will  .f.  Jerusalem  with  candles 
Mat.  2.  8.  and  s.  diligently  for  the  young  child 
John  5.  39.  s.  ihe  scriptures,  they  testily  of  me 
7.  52.  s.  for  out  of  Galilee  ari'^eth  no  prophet 

SEARCHED. 

G'en.31.34.Laban  s.the  tent, but  found  themnot,35. 

37.  whereas  thou  hast  s.  all  my  slulT,  thou  found 

44.12.thp  stewards. for  the  cup,and  begnn  at  eldest 

A"Km.  13.  21.  .10  they  went  up,  and  s.  the  land 

32.  brought  up  an  evil  report  of  the  land,  nnd  s. 
A"«7n.  14.  (i.  Joshua  and  Caleb  .1.  the  land,  38, 

34  after  the  number  of  days  ye  .?.  the  land 
/)e«t.  1.24. came  unto  the  valley  of  K^hcol,  and  s.  it 
Job  .5.  27.  we  have  s.  it,  know  it  for  thy  good 

28.  27.  he  prepared  it,  vea,  and  .t.  it  out 

29.  )6.  the  cause  which  I  Knew  not,  I  s.  out 
^i.  11.  I  waited,  whilst  ye  s.  out  what  to  say 

519 


SEA 

Job  36.  26.  can  the  number  of  his  years  bo  s.  out 
P,saZ. 139.1.0  Lord,  thou  hast  s.  me,  and  known  me 
./cr.  31.  37.  and  the  foundations  of  the  earths,  out 

46.  23.  cut  down  her  forest,  tho'  it  cannot  be  s. 
Obad.  G.  how  are  the  things  of  Esau  s.  out. 
Acts  17.  11.  Ihe  Bereans  s.  the  scriptures  daily 
1  Pet.  1.  10.  which  salvation  the  i)rophets  s.  dilig. 

SEARCHES'!'. 
.Tob  10.  6.  that  thou  s.  after  my  sin  and  inquirest 
Prov.  2.  4.  if  thou  s.  for  her  as  for  hid  treasures 

SEARCHETH. 
1  Chr.  28.  9.  for  the  Lord  s.  all  hearts  and  underst. 
.fob  28.  3.  and  he  .«.  out  all  perfection,  tho  stones 

39.  8.  and  he  s.  after  every  green  thing 

"/•o!!.  18.17.  but  his  neighbour  comelh,  and  s.  him 

28.ll.tlie  poor  that  hath  understanding  s.  him  out 
Rom.  8.27.  that  s.  hearts,  knows  the  mind  of  Spirit 
1  &)•.  2. 10.  for  the  Spirits,  all  things,  things  of  G. 
Rev.  2.  23.  know  that  I  am  he  which  s.  the  reins 

SEARCHING. 
JVum.  13.  25.  they  returned  from  s.  of  Ihe  land 

Tob  11.  7.  canst  thou  by  s.  (ind  out  God  ? 
Prov.  20.  27.  s.  all  the  inward  parts  of  the  belly 
fsa.  40.  28.  there  is  no  s.  of  his  umlerstanding 
1  Pet.l.  11.  s.  what  time  Ihe  Spirit  of  Christ  Uit^  sig. 

SEARCHINGS. 
Judg.5.16.for  the  divisions  of  Reuben  were  great  s. 

SEARED. 
1  T'2m.4.2.  having  their  conscience  s.with  a  hot  iron 

SEASON. 

Ge7i.  40.  4.  and  they  continued  a  s.  in  ward 
Ezod.V3. 10.  thou  shalt  keep  this  ordinance  in  hiss. 
Deut .10.6.  at  the  s.  thou  earnest  forth  out  of  Egypt 

28.  12.  to  give  the  rain  unto  thy  land  m  his  s. 

Tosh.  24.  7.  ye  dwelt  in  the  wilderness  a  long  s. 
2A'i>:^s4.ir).  about  this  ,9.  thou  shalt  embrace  a  son 
17.  and  the  woman  bare  a  son  at  that  s. 

1  CAron.  21.  29.  the  altar  was  at  that  s.  at  Gibeon 

2  Chr.  15.3.  for  long  s.  been  without  the  true  God 
tAj45.2fi.tograve,as  a  shock  of  corn  cometh  in  hiss. 

30.  17.  my  bones  are  jiierced  in  the  night  s. 
.38. 32.  canst  thou  bring  forth  Mazzarolh  in  his  s. 
Psal.  1.  3.  a  tree,  that  bringeth  forth  fruit  in  his  s. 

22.  2.  I  cry  in  the  night  s.  and  am  not  silent 
ProB. 15.23.  a  word  spoken  in  due  s.  how  good  is  it? 
F.ccl.  3.  1.  to  every  thing  there  is  a  s.  and  a  time 
fsa.  .50. 4. 1  should  know  how  to  speak  a  word  in  .<(. 
./er.5.  24.  God  giveth  former  and  latter  rain  in  hiss. 

33. 20.  there  should  not  be  day  and  night  in  their  s. 
F.ieli.  34.  2G.  cause  the  shower  come  down  in  s. 
Dan.  7.  12.  their  lives  were  prolonged  fur  a  .1. 
Hos.  2.  9.  lake  away  my  wine  in  the  s.  thereof 
Mark  12.  2.  at  the  s.  he  sent  to  the  husbandmen 
lAike  1.20.  my  words  shall  be  fuKilled  in  their  s. 

4.  13.  the  devil  departed  from  him  for  a  s. 

13.  1.  were  present  at  that  s.  some  that  told  him 
20. 10.  at  the  s.  he  sent  a  servant  to  husbandmen 

23.  8.  he  was  desirous  to  see  him  of  a  long  s. 
,Tohn5.  4.  for  an  angel  went  down  at  a  certain  s. 

.35.  ye  were  willing  for  a  s.  to  rejoice  in  his  light 
.^rts  13.  n.  be  blind,  not  seeing  tlie  sun  for  a  s. 

19.  22.  but  he  himself  stayed  in  Asia  for  a  s. 

24.  25.  when  I  have  a  convenient  s.  I  will  call 
2  Cor.  7. 8.  made  you  sorry,  tho'  it  were  but  for  a  s. 
2T!m.  4.2. be  instant  in  s.out  of  s. rebuke,  exhort 
Philem.  15.  perhaps  he  therefore  departed  for  a  s. 
//f  A.  11. 25.  than  enjoy  the  pleasures  of  sin  for  a  s. 
1  Pet.  1.6.  tho'  for  a  s.  ifneed  be,  ye  are  in  heaviness 
RrA>.  6.  11.  that  they  should  rest  yet  for  a  little  s. 

20.  3.  and  after  that  he  must  be  loosed  a  little  s. 

See  Appointed,  Due. 
SEASONS, 
(rcn.l.  14.  lights  shall  be  forsigns,  and  .^.  and  days 
F.xod.  18.  22.  let  Ihem  judge  tlie  people  at  all  s.  2(i. 
T.ev.  23.  4.  the  feasts  ye  shall  proclaim  in  their  s. 
Psal.  16. 7.  my  reins  also  instruct  me  in  the  night  s. 
104.  Ifl.  he  appoinleth  the  moon  for  .<t.  tho  son 
Dan.  2.  21.  he  changeth  the  times  and  Ihe  s. 
Mat.  21.41.  who  shall  render  the  fruits  in  their  .f. 
.'ids  1.7.  it  is  not  for  you  to  know  the  times  and  s. 

14.  17.  in  that  he  gave  us  rain  and  fruitful  s. 
20.  18.  how  I  have  been  with  you  at  all  s. 

1  Thess.  5. 1.  of  the  s.  ye  have  no  need  that  I  write 
SEASON. 

T.ev.  2. 13.  every  meat-offer,  shalt  then  .«.  with  salt 

Mark  9.  50.  wherewith  will  ye  s.  it?  have  salt 
SEASONED. 

T.vke  14. 34.  if  lost  savour,  wherewith  shall  it  he  s.7 

Col.  4.  6.  let  your  speech  be  always  with  grace,  s. 
SEAT. 

The  seat  of  MoseB,  7ipon  which  the  Scribes  and 
Pharisees  sat,  is  to  erpress  the  nnthnrili/  nf  the 
doctors  nf  Ike  law,  and  the  o'Jtce  of  Irachinrr 
■which  was  granted  to  them,or  which  thnj  tank 
vpnn  themselves.  Our  T.ord  eommavdrd  that 
tkry  should  he  heard  avd  re.<!pected;  hut  he  for- 
bad that  their  actions  sh  mild  be  made  precedents 
and  examples,  Mai.  23.  2,  3. 

The  seat  of  the  Scorners,  of  which  there  is  men- 
tioK  in  Psal.  1.  J.  denotes  an  association  or  in- 


SEC 

corporation  with  libertines,  and  such  at  make 
a  mock  of  reUgion,  who  corrupx  as  tnucU  by 
their  scandalous  example  and  ccndiLCt,  as  by 
their  loose  principles,  all  those  that  hear  them 
and  keep  them  company.  The  seat  of  God  is 
his  throne  or  judgment-seat.  Job  23.  3,  O  that 
I  knew  where  I  might  find  him  I  that  I  might 
come  even  to  his  seat!  To  his  judgment-seat 
to  plead  my  cause  before  him  ;  not  upon  terms 
of  strict  justice,  but  of  grace  and  mercy.  There 
is  also  the  seat  of  justice,  a  bench  or  chair 
whereon  magistrates  sat  when  they  adminis-  , 
tered  justice,  Job  29.  7,  When  I  prepared  my 
seat  in  the  street. 
Judg.  3.  20.  E»lon  rose  out  of  his  s. 

1  Sam.  1.  9.  Eli  sat  upon  a  s.  by  a  post,  4.  13. 

4. 18.  he  fell  from  oft" the  s.  backward  near  the  gat« 
20.  18.  be  missed,  because  thy  s.  will  be  empty 
25.  the  king  sat  on  his  s.  on  a  s.  by  the  wall 

2  Sam.  23.  8.  the  Tachmonite  that  sat  in  the  s. 

1  Kings 2. 19.  caused  as.  to  be  set  for  king's  mother 
Esth.  3.  1.  set  Haman's  s.  above  all  the  princes 
./o4  23.  3.  O  that  I  might  come  even  to  hiss..' 

29.  7.  when  I  jirepared  my  s.  in  the  street  • 
I'sal.  1.  1.  nor  sitteth  in  the  s.  of  the  scornful 
Prov.  9. 14.  a  fooli.'h  woman  sitteth  on  a  s.  in  city 
Kick. S.'.^.where  was  the  s.  of  the  image  of  jealousy 

28.  2.  I  sit  in  the  s.  of  God,  in  midst  ol'the  seas 
/)a;i. 11.  t  3S.the  Almighty  in  hiss,  he  shall  honour 
Jimos  6.3.  and  cause  the  s.  of  violmce  lo  come  near 
Mat.  23.  2.  the  scribes  and  pharisecs  sit  in  Moses'  s. 
Ren.  2.  13.  thou  d^vellest  where  Satan's  s.  is 
See  JpDGMKNT,  Mercy. 
SEATED. 
Deut.  33. 21.  in  a  portion  of  the  lawgiver  was  he  a. 

SEATS. 
.Ter.  18. 1 3.  behold,  he  wrought  a  work  on  the  *. 
Jl/ai.2I.i2.  he  overthrew  tables  of  money-changers 
and  the  s.  of  them  that  sold  doves,  Mark  11.15. 

23.  6.  love  chiefs,  in  the  synagogues,  Mark  12.3a 
I.uke  1. 52.  hath  put  down  the  mighty  from  their*. 

11.  43.  for  ye  love  the  uppermost  s.  20.  46. 
Ueo.  4.  4.  four-and-lwenty  s.  upon  the  s.  24  elders 

11. 16.  the  elders  which  sat  before  God  on  their  a, 

SECOND. 
Gen.  6.  16.  with  s.  and  ihird  stories  make  the  ark 

32.  10.  and  so  commanded  he  ihe  s.  and  third 

41.  43.  he  made  him  to  ride  in  the  s.  chariot 
FTO(f.26.4.the  coupling  of  the  s.  5. 10.  |  36.1 1,12,12 

28.  18.  the  s.  row  shall  he  an  emerald,  39.  11. 
Leo.  5. 10.  he  shall  otT-^r  the  s.  for  a  hurnt-olTering 
J\lum.  2.  16.  they  shall  .set  Ibrth  in  the  s.  rank 
■Josh.  19.  1.  the  s.  lot  came  forth  to  Simeon 
Judg.  6.  25.  the  s.  bullock  of  seven  years  old 
26.takes.  bullock, and  o(rer||28.i  he  s. was  offered 

1  Sam.  15.  t  9.  Saul  spared  of  Ihe  l.est  and  3.  sort 

2  Kings  9.  19.  then  he  sent  out  a  s.  on  horseback 
22. 1 14.  Huldah  dwelt  in  Jerusalem  in  the  s.  part 

1  Chrnn.  15. 18.  with  them  brethren  of  the  s.  degree 

2  CAro?i.  35.24.  his  servants  put  him  in  iho  s.chariot 
Fira  1. 10.  silver  basins  of  a  s.  sort  410,  vessels 
Esth.O.  29.  to  confirm  this  s.  letier  ol  Purim 
Ecel.  4.  8.  there  is  one  alone,  llicre  is  not  a  s. 

15. with  the  s.child  that  shall  stand  up  in  his  stead 
Ezek.  10.  14.  the  s.  face  was  the  face  of  a  man 
Don.  7.  5.  behold,  another  beast,  a  s.  like  to  a  bear 

8.  t  3.  hut  one  horn  was  higher  than  the  s. 
Zepk.  1.10.  noise  of  a  cry,  a  howling  from  the  s. 
y.ech.  6.  2.  in  the  s.  chariot  were  black  horses 
Mat.  21.  30.  he  came  to  the  s.  nnd  said  likewise 

22.  26.  likewise  the  s.  hnd   her,  and  the  third, 
unto  the  seventh,  Jlfnrt  12.21.  /.wAe 20.30. 
39.  s.  commnndmcnt  is  like  unto  it,  Mark  12. 31 
Jyuke  6.  1.  and  it  came  to  pass  (in  the  s.  sabbath 
12. 38.  if  he  shall  come  in  s.  wnt'-h  or  the  third 

19.  18.  the  s.  came  saying,  L.  thy  pourd  gained 
.Tohn  4.  54.  this  is  the  s.  miracle  that  Jes'.is  did 
.firts  12.  10.  when  they  were  past  the  s.  ward 

13.  33.  as  it  is  written  in  s.  psalm,  thou  art  my  son 

1  Cor.  1.5.  47.  the  s.  man  is  the  Lord  from  heaven 

2  Cor.  1.  15.  that  ye  might  have  a  s.  b:'nefit 

Tit.  3.  10.  after  the  fir.'^t  nnd  s.  adnii  nition,  reject 
Heb.  8.  7.  no  place  should  have  been  sought  for  s. 

9.  3.  nnd  after  the  .1.  vail,  the  tabernacle 

7.  into  the  s.  went  the  high-pripst  once  a  year 

10.  9.  taketh  away  first,  that  he  may  e?t:il)iisli  s. 
2  Pet.  3.  1.  this  s.  epistle  I  now  write  niito  you 
Rev.  2.  11.  shall  not  be  hurt  of  the  .s.d.-:ith,  20.  fi. 

4.  7.  the  s.  beast  like  a  calf,  the  thiid  hal  a  face 

6.  3.  I  heard  the  s.  beast  say,  come  am!  see 

8. 8.  s.  angel  sounde-1,  and  as  it  were  a  mountain 

11.  14.  the  s.  woe  is  past,  the  third  woe  cometh 
16.  3.  the  s.  angal  poured  out  his  viiil  on  the  sea 

20.  14.  death  arifi  hell,  this  is  the  .■-■.  death,  21.  8. 
21. 19.  the  s.  foundation  of  the  wall  was  sapphira 

See  DvY,  Month. 

SECOND  time. 

Gen.  22. 15.  the  an^el  called  lo  Abraham  the  *  ( 

41.  5.  Pharaoh  slept,  and  dreamed  the  s.  time 

43.  10.  surely  now  we  had  returned  this  s.  time 


SEC 

/.eo.  13.  58.  llien  it  shall  be  washed  the  s.  time 
JVitw.  10.  <i.  when  jou  hlow  an  alarm  the  s.  time 
Josh.  5.  iJ.  and  circumciae  laraci  ihu  «.  time 

1  Sam.  •().  el.  I  will  not  aiiiite  liirn  the  s.  time 

2  Sam.  H.  2'J.  Absalom  sent  to  Joab  the  *.  time 

1  Kiii^'s'.l.-i.  the  L.  appeared  to  Solomon  tUes.time 
18.  34.  do  it  the  s.  time,  they  did  it  the  s.  time 
lU.  7.  the  angel  came  again  to  Elijah  the  s.  time 

2  h'in^s  10.  G.  Jehu  wrote  a  letter  the  i.  time 

1  CAr.''-."J.2J.  they  maile  Soloinoii  king  the  *.  time 
£sth.  •■2. 19.  when  virgina  were  gathered  the  s.  time 
Isa.  11.  11.  Lord  set  his  hand  the*,  ti/nc  lo  recover 
Jer.  1.  i:i.  the  word  of  Lord  came  to  me  the  s.  time 

saying,  what  scesl  thou  ?  13.  3.  |  33.  1. 
Jonah  3.  1.  the  word  came  to  Jonah  the  s.  time 
JVah.  1.  y.  affliction  shall  not  rise  up  the  *.  time 
Mat.  iiti.  42.  he  went  again  the  i.  time  and  prayed 
Mark  14.  72.  ami  the  a.  time  the  cock  crew 
John  3.  4.  can  he  enter  the  «.  lime  into  the  womb  7 

21.  lli.  Jesus  saith  to  Peter  the  s.  time,  Simon 
^JclD  7.  13.  at  the  «.  time  Joseph  was  made  known 

10.  15.  the  voice  spake  to  Peter  again  the  s.  lime 

2  Cor.  13.  2.  as  if  I  were  present  the  s.  time 
Heb.  'J.  2?.  he  shall  appear  the  s.  time  witliout  sin 

'      SECOND  Year. 

<7en.47.19.they  came  the  s.year  to  Joseph,and  said 

£x«'i'.40.17.  in  the  s«year,the  firstday  of  the  month 

J^'uni.  1.  1.  in  the  s.  year  after  they  were  come 
9. 1.  in  first  month  of  a.  yeor,the  L.  spake  to  Moses 
10.  11.  in  the  J^ear  the  cloud  was  taken  up 

2  Kings  lit.  20.  Ibis  a  sign,  ye  shall  eat  in  the  s.year 
that  which  springeth  of  the  same,  ha.  37.  30 

2  Chriin.  27.  5.  Ammon  paid  Jotliam  the  a.  year 

Ezra  3.8. in  the  s.year  of  their  coming  to  .Jerusalem 
4.24. it  ceased  to  the  s.  year  of  Darius  king  of  I'vrs 

Dan.'i.X.  in  the  s.year  of  reign  of  .N'ebiichadnezzar 
Nebuchadnezzar  dreamed  dreams 

Hag.  1.1.  in  s.  year  of  Darius,  15.  \  2.  10.  Zecli.  1. 7. 
SECONDAKILV. 

1  Cor.  12.  23.  God  set  s.  prophets,  thirdly  teachers 
SECRET. 

Is  taken,  [1]  For  an  affair  which  few  people 
knoui,  and  that  ought  to  be  kept  privati',  Prov. 
20.  19,  He  that  goeth  about  as  a  tale-bearer, 
reveal'.-th  secrets.  [2]  For  that  which  is  hid 
from  Ike  understamlins,'  of  all  men,  and  known 
only  to  God.  Deut.  29.  29,  The  secret  things 
belong  unto  the  Lord  our  God.  The  counsels 
and  purptisea  of  God  concerning  persons  or 
nations,  and  the  reasons  of  his  dispensations 
towards  them,  together  with  the  time  and  man- 
ner of  inflicting  J  adg  ments ,  or  shewing  mercy, 
arc  hidden  inhis  own  bosom,  and  nut  to  be  pried 
into  by  MS.  .And  in  Amos  3.  7,  The  Lord  will 
do  nothing,  but  he  revealelh  his  secret  unio  his 
gcrvants  the  prophets.  [3]  For  the  secret  fa- 
vour and  bhssing  of  God,  protecting,  direct- 
ing, and  succeeding  persons  in  all  their  affairs. 
Job  29.  4,  When  the  secret  of  God  was'  upon  my 
tabernacle.  ./Ind  in  Psal.  25.  14,  The  secret 
of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  him ;  and 
he  will  shew  thonj  his  covenant.  His  gracious 
and  falhcrty  providence  is  towards  them,  la- 
king  care  of  them,  and  working  for  them,  even 
then  when  God  seems  to  frown  upon  them  :  His 
word  is  with  them,  to  direct  and  guide  them  in 
the  right  way,  to  shew  them  their  duty  in  all 
conditions,  and  the  way  to  their  eternal  salva- 
tion :  Jind  this,  though  revealed,  yet  may  be 
called  a  secret,  because  of  the  many  and  deep 
rnystcrifs  in  it ;  because  it  is  said  to  be  hid 
from  many  of  those,  to  whom  it  was  revealed, 
Mat.  11.  2.5.  2  Cor.  3.  13,  14,  15.  Mnd  be- 
cause it  is  not  to  be  understiwd  to  any  purpose, 
unlrss  the  mind  be  illuminated  by  the  Spirit  of 
God,  Vta.\.  119.  18,  19.  [4]  For  the  hidden 
m'aning  and  import  of  a  dream  or  vision, 
Dan.  4.  9.  (.51  For  that  which  is  kept  close 
from  the  knowledge  of  all  other  men,nnd  where- 
of ourselves  only  are  conscious.  Psal.  90.  8, 
Thou  hast  si-t  our  secret  sins  in  the  light  of 
thy  roimtenan'-e.  F.ccl.  12.  14,  For  God  shall 
bring  every  work  into  judgment,  with  every 
secret  thing,  whether  it  be  good,  or  whether  it 
be  evil.  Hum.  2.  Ki,  In  t|,e  day  when  God 
ihnll  jiidire  the  secrets  of  inc'n  by  Jesus  Christ. 
IVhen  God  shall  judge  nol  only  the  outward  ac- 
tions of  men,  which  are  manifest  to  all  but 
their  most  hidden  sins,  and  secret  duties,  their 
inward  purposes,  designs,  and  aims.  The 
numberrr  of  secrets,  or  the  wonderful  num- 
bf-rer,  f)an.  H.  t  1^.  />!/  this  is  meant, 
Christ  Ji'sns,  irAo  is  wonderjjil,  Isa.  9.  (>.  and 
vho  hath  all  the  hidden  things  of  God  num- 
bered before  him,  and  knows  Ihrm  perfectly, 
and  revealelh  to  angels  and  men  those  secrets 
of  the  Father. 

Oen  40.  6.  O  my  soul,  com'>  not  tlioii  Inio  their  s. 

Jnh  1.5.  H   hasi  thou  heard  the  s.  of  (;..d  7 
10.  t  19.  all  the  men  of  nur  a.  abhorred  lue 

no 


SEC 

Job  24.  t  15.  the  adulter.er  sclteth  his  face  in  s. 
29.  4.  when  thes.  of  God  was  upon  my  tabernacle 
40.  13.  hide  them,  and  bind  their  faces  in  s. 
Psal.  25. 14.  the  s.  of  Ld.  is  with  them  that  fear  him 
27.  5.  in  s.  of  his  labern.  he  shall  hide  me,  31. 20. 
0-1.  4.  that  they  may  shoot  in  s.  at  the  perfect 
139. 15.  not  hid  from  thee  when  I  was  made  in  s. 
Prov.  3.  32.  but  his  s.  is  with  the  righteous 
9.  17.  stolen  waters,  bread  eaten  in  s.  is  pleasant 
21. 14.  a  gift  in  s.  pacifieth  anger,  a  reward  wrath 
25.  9.  and  discover  not  a  a.  to  another 
2(J.  t  20.  whose  hatred  is  covered  in  a. 
Isa.  24.  t  Ifi.  but  I  said  my  a.  to  me,  woe  unto  me 
45.  19.  t  have  not  spoken  in  «.  48.  16. 
.'er.  23.  f  18.  who'hath  stood  in  the  s.  of  the  Lord 
Ezek.  28.  3.  no  s.  that  they  can  hide  from  thee 
I  Jan.  2. 18.  desire  mercies  of  God  concerning  this  s. 
19.  then  was  the  s.  revealed  to  Daniel  in  vision 
27.  the  s.  which  the  king  hath  demandc;d 
30.  this  s.  hot  revealed  ine  for  any  wisdom  I  have 
47.  seeing  thou  couldcst  reveal  this  s. 
4.  9.  because  I  know  that  no  s.  troubleth  thee 
Imoa  3.7.  he  revealelh  his  a.  to  his  servants 
J/ut.6.4.that  thine  alms  may  be  in  s.and  thy  Father 
who  seeth  in  a.  shall  reward  thee  openly,  6,  18. 
C.  pray  to  thy  Father  who  is  in  s.  and  thy  Father 
18.  thou  appear  to  fast  to  thy  Father  who  is  in  s. 
John  7.  4.  there  is  no  man  doelh  any  thing  in  a. 
10.  he  went  up  to  the  feast  as  it  were  in  s. 

18.  20.  I  spake  openly,  in  s.  have  I  said  nothing 
Eph.  5.  12.  things  which  are  done  of  them  in  a. 

SECRET,  .Idjcclive. 
Deut.^l.lH.  cursed  that  pulteth  an  idol  in  a  a.  place 

29.  29.  s.  things  belong  unto  the  Lord  our  God 
,/udg.  3.  19.  I  have  a  s.  errand  unto  thee,  O  king 

i:i.  18.  why  askest  thou  my  name,  seeing  it  is  a.7 

1  Sam.  5.  9.  they  had  emerods  in  their  a.  parts 

19.  2.  take  heed,  abide  in  a  a.  place,  hide  thyself 

2  Kings Ti.  t  24.  when  GchazI  came  to  thes.  place 
Job  14.  13.  O  that  thou  wonldest  keep  me  s. 

15.  11.  is  there  any  s.  thing  with  thee  7 

20.  2G.  all  darkness  shall  be  hid  in  his  a.  places 
Psal.  10.8.  ins.  places  doth  he  murder  the  innocent 

17.  12.  as  a  young  lion  lurking  in  a.  jilaces 

18.  11.  he  made  darkness  his  s.  place 

19.  12.  cleanse  thou  me  from  s.  faults 
04.  2.  hide  me  from  the  s.  counsel  of  the  wicked 
81.  7.  I  answered  thee  in  the  s.  place  of  thunder 
90.  8.  our  s.  sins  in  the  light  of  thy  countenance 
91. 1.  that  d  welleth  in  the  s.place  of  the  Most  High 

Prov.  27.  5.  open  rebuke  is  better  than  s.  love 
EccM2. 14.  shall  bring  into  judgment  every  s.  thing 
(ant.  2.  14.  O  my  dove,  that  art  in  the  a.  places 
ha.  3.  17.  the  Lord  will  discover  their  s.  parts 
2().  I  1(5.  they  have  poured  out  a  s.  speech 
45.  3.  I  will  give  thee  hidden  riches  of  s.  places 
■Jer.  2.  34.  I  have  not  found  it  by  a.  search 
13. 17. my  soul  shall  weep  ins.placesforyour  pride 
23.24.  can  any  hide  himself  in  s. places,  saith  Lord 
49. 10.  Esau  bare,  T  have  uncovered  his  s.  places 
Kam.  3.  10.  he  was  to  me  as  a  lion  in  s.  places 
F.iek.  7.  22.  and  they  shall  pcdlule  my  s.  place 
Dan.  2.  22.  he  revealelh  the  deep  and  s.  things 
jl/a«.13.35.I  will  utter  things  which  have  been  kept 
a.  from  the  foundation  of  the  world,  fiom.lG.'25. 
24. 2().  behold,  he  is  in  s.  chambers,  believe  it  not 
Mark  4. 22.  nothing  hid,  nor  was  any  thing  kept  s. 
but  that  it  should  come  abroad,  /juke  8. 17. 
T.uke  11.  33.  no  man  pulteth  a  candle  in  a  a.  place 

SECRET."?. 
.lob  11.  G.  that  ho  would  shew  thee  thes.  of  wisdom 
Psal.  44.  21.  for  he  knowelh  the  s.  of  the  heart 
Prov.  11.  13.  a  tale-bearer  revealelh  a.  but  he  that 

20.  19.  that  goeth  as  a  tale-bearer,  revealcth  a. 
Dan.  2.  28.  but  there  is  a  God  that  revealeth  s. 

29.  he  that  revealeth  a.  maketh  known  to  theo 
47.  of  a  truth  it  is,  your  God  is  a  reveah-r  of  s. 
Rom,  2.  10.  when  God  shall  ju<lge  thes.  of  men 
1  Cor.  14.25.  thus  are  the  s.  of  his  heart  manifest 

SECRETS. 
Deut.  25.  11.  and  the  wife  taketh  him  by  the  s. 

SECRETLY. 
Gen.  31.  27.  wherefore  didst  thou  flee  away  a.  ? 
Deut.  13.0.  if  thy  brother  entice  theo  s.  saying 
27.24.  cursed  be  he  that  smitelh  his  neighbours. 
28.  .57.  she  shall  eat  them  for  want  of  all  things  a. 
./«s/i. 2.1. Joshua  son  of  Nun,  sent  two  men  to  .spy  s. 

1  .Sum.  18.  22.  commune  with  David  s.  and  say 
23.9.  David  knew  that  Sauls,  practised  mischief 

2  .Sam.  12. 12.  for  thou  didst  it  s.  but  I  will  do  this 
iKinga  17. 9.  did  s.  those  things  that  were  not  right 
Job  4.  12.  now  a  thing  was  s.  brought  to  mo 

13.  10.  will  reprove  you,  if  you  s.  accept  persons 
31.  27.  and  my  heart  hath  been  s.  enticed 

Psal.  10.  9.  he  lielh  in  wait  s.  as  a  lion  in  his  den 
31.20.  keep  thom  a.  in  a  pavilion  from  strife  of  ton. 

./er.  37. 17.  Zedckiah  asked  s.  is  there  any  word  7 
3K.  10.  Zi'dckiah  the  king  swares.  unto  Jeremiah 
40.  15.  Johanan  spake  to  Gedaliah  in  Mizpah  a. 

Hub.  3. 14.  their  rejoicing  wai  to  devour  the  po«r  t. 


SEC 

John  11. 28.  she  went  and  called  Mary  her  sifter# 

19.38.  Joseph  was  a  disciple,  huts,  for  fear  of  Jew* 

JiECT. 

This  ward  is  the  aame  in  the  Greek  with  th« 
word  heresy,  though  the  aound  be  not  at 
odious.  Jimong  the  Jews  were  known  fow 
several  Sects,  which  were  distinguished  bf 
the  singularity  of  their  practices  and  opi- 
niona,  and  yet  continuing  united  in  commu- 
nion with  each  other,  and  with  the  body  of 
their  nation.  These  Sects  are  those  of  the 
Pharisees,  the  Sadducees,  the  Essenians,  and 
the  lierodiaiis.  Jis  to  the  first  two  Sects 
aee  the  Significations  on  PiiARismus,  and  Sad- 

DUCKES. 

The  EssL-nians,  or  Essencs,  are  not  mentioned  in 
Scripture,  but  they  arc  deacribed  by  Jo.se|>hus 
and  other  historiana  :  Joseph,  de  liello,  lib.  2. 
cap.  12.  He  aays  that  they  live  in  perfect 
union  among  themaelvva,  and  abhor  roluptu- 
ousnesa,  aa  poiaun  of  the  most  dangerous  con- 
aequence.  They  do  not  marry,  but  they  bring 
vp  other  men's  children  with  aa  much  care  as 
if  they  were  their  own,  and  infuse  into  them 
very  early  their  own  spirit  and  maxims.  These 
children  are  all  treated  and  clothed  in  the  same 
manner,  and  do  not  change  their  dress  till  the 
clothes  they  have  are  entirely  worn  out. 
Some  employ  themselves  in  husbandry,  others  in 
trades,  and  manufactures  of  such  things  only 
as  are  of  use  in  time  of  peace,  their  designs  be- 
ing to  do  good  only,  to  themselves  and  other  men. 
Before  they  admit  any  who  desire  it,  to  be  of 
their  Sect,  they  put  them  to  a  year's  probation, 
and  during  this  time  inure  them  to  the  practice 
of  their  most  uneasy  exercises,  ."iftcr  this 
term,  they  per  mil  them  to  comeinto  the  common 
refectory,  which  is  as  it  were  a  sacred  temple, 
where  they  all  continue  in  profound  silence. 
There  they  are  served  with  bread,  and  every 
one  has  his  particular  mesa.  The  priest  says 
grace,  after  which  they  may  eat ;  they  finish 
their  meal  also  with  a  prayer.  Jifter  having 
proved  such  a  desire  to  be  of  their  Sect  for  a 
ijear,  they  permit  them  then  to  come  into  the 
place  where  they  bathe  when  they  come  from 
their  work;  but  they  do  not  admit  them  into 
the  inner  part  of  the  house,  till  they  have  gone 
through  another  trial  of  two  years.  fVhen 
these  two  years  are  expired,  they  are  allowed  to 
make  a  kind  of  profession,  whereby  they  engage 
themselves  by  the  most  awful  oaths  to  observe 
the  laws  of  piety,  justice,  and  modesty ;  fidelity 
to  God  and  their  prince ;  never  to  discnver  the 
secrets  of  the  Sect  to  strangers,  and  to  preserve 
thebooks  of  their  masters  and  the  names  of  an- 
gels with  great  care.  If  any  one  violates  these 
promises,  and  incurs  the  guilt  of  any  notorious 
fault,  he  is  expelled  the  society,  and  generally 
dies  of  want,  because  he  can  receive  no  food 
from  any  stranger,  being  tied  to  the  conlrarjf 
by  these  oaths. 
The  Esaenes  geyierally  live  long,  and  many  reach 
the  age  of  a  hundred  years  ;  which  is  said  to 
be  owing  to  the  simjilieily  of  their  diet,  ami  the 
great  regularity  of  their  lives.  They  sheta  an 
incredible  firmoiss  under  torment.%  whereof 
there  were  some  eminent  examples  during  the 
war  between  the  Romans  and  the  Jews.  They 
hold  the  souls  of  men  to  be  immortal,  and  be- 
lieve that  they  descend  from  the  most  elevated 
part  of  the  air  into  the  bodies,  which  are  ani- 
mated by  them,  whither  they  arcdrawn  by  aome 
natural  attraction,  which  they  are  not  able  to 
reaiat.  Jifter  death,  they  return  with  rapidity 
to  the  place  from  whence  they  came,  being  as  it 
were  freed  from  a  long  and  melancholy  capti- 
vity. JIs  to  the  stale  of  men's  souls  after 
death,  they  hare  the  same  scnJimrnls  iiLnoat  aa 
the  heathens,  who  place  the  souls  of  good  mm 
in  the  Elysian  fields,  and  those  of  wicked  men 
in  the  kingdom  of  Pinto,  where  they  are  tor- 
mented according  to  the  quality  of  their  faults 
.lllhough  the  Esscnes  were  the  most  religious  of 
their  nation,  they  nevertheless  did  not  go  to  the 
temple  of  Jernsalom,  nor  offered  any  bloody 
sacrificea.  They  were  afraid  of  being  polluted 
by  the  conversation  of  other  men,  whose  lives 
were  not  so  pure  as  theirs.  They  sent  their 
offeringa  thither,  and  themselves  offered  up  to 
God  the  sacrifice  of  a  clean  heart,  free  from 
the  guilt  of  any  great  offences.  They  tired  at 
a  distance  from  the  sea  shore,  for  fear  of  being 
corrupted  by  the  conversation  of  strangers. 
They  chose  rather  to  dwell  in  the  fields,  than 
in  cities  ;  and  applied  themselves  to  ngrieullure 
and  other  laborious  exercises,  which  did  not 
take  them  out  of  that  solitude  wheraf  they 
made  profession. 
Their  ttM<iie$  were  neilhtr  logic,  nor  natural 


SEC 

pkiiosophy.,  but  morality  and  Ihe  laics  of 
Moses.  To  these  t/icy  applied  themselves prin- 
cipally  upon  sabbat/irdays,  ichtn  they  assem- 
bled m  their  synagogues,  where  everyone  was 
seated  according  to  his  rank  ;  the  elder  above, 
the  younger  part  of  them  below.  One  of  the 
company  read,  and  another  of  the  ?nost  learned 
of  them  expounded.  They  made  use  of  symbols 
very  much,  of  allegories  and  parables,  after 
the  manner  of  the  ancients.  This  is  asummary 
of  the  description  which  Josephus  gives  of 
the  Essenes.  Some  are  of  opinion  that  John 
the  Baptist  lived  among  them,  till  the  time 
tchen  he  began  to  baptize  and  preac/i  re- 
pentance. 

7'he  Heroiiians,  so  named  from  Herod,  were 
another  Sect,  which  was  among  the  Jews  in 
our  Saviour's  time,  who  had  a  leaven,  or  par- 
ticular doctrinrs,  distinct  from  those  of  the 
Pharisees  and  Sadducees,  against  whom  our 
Saviour  requires  his  followers  to  guard  them 
selves,  Marlv  8.  15.  People  are  much  divided 
about  this  Sect.  Some  believe  that  the  Herod 
ians  took  Herod  for  the  Messiah ;  but  as  there 
were  seceral  Herods,  who  were  known  to  have 
reigned  over  the  Jews,  they  are  still  divided  to 
know  which  of  them  was  acknowledged  for  the 
Messiah.  The  generality  are  for  Herod  the 
Great,  the  son  of  Antipater,  who  died  in  a 
short  time  after  the  birth  of  Christ.  They 
say,  that  the  Herodians ^rounierf  their  opinion 
of  Herod's  being  the  Messiah  upon  the  cele- 
brated prophecy  of  Jacob,  Oen.  49.  10,  The 
sceptre  shall  not  depart  from  Jtidah,  nor  a 
lawgiver  from  between  his  feet,  until  Shiloh 
come;  and  unto  him  shall  the  gathering  of 
the  people  be.  These  marks  they,  mistaliing 
the  nature  ef  Chrisl's ki7igdom,  thought  suited 
exactly  with  Herod  ;  because  he  was  a  stranger, 
and  withal  a  powerful,  brave,  and  warlike 
prince,  and  appeared  at  a  time,  when  all  the 
world  were  in  expectation  of  the  Messiah. 
.Snd  Herod  is  said  to  have  procured  the 
genealogical  memoirs  of  the  house  of  David 
to  he  burnt,  that  so  no  one  might  be  able  to 
prove  that  he  was  not  of  a  family,  from 
uhich  it  was  well  known  that  t/je  Messiah  teas 
to  spring. 

Others  are  of  opinion,  that  Herod  H.  surnamed 
Antipas,  ajtd  Tetrarch  of  Galilee,  was  the 
head  of  the  Uerodians.  He  was  a  very 
ambitious  and  very  politic  prince,  for  our 
Saviour  calls  him  Fox,  Luke  I'.i.  32.  He 
might  be  very  tcell  thought  to  be  ambitious  of 
passinir  for  the  Messiah. 

Some  others  believed  Herod  Agrippa,  who  was 
appointed  king  of  Judea  by  Caligula,  to 
have  giiien  name  to  the  Herodians.  But  ,how 
is  this  opinion  maintainable,  since  the  Herod- 
ians tcere  already  knoion  some  years  before 
this  prince  ascended  the  throne  7 

Many  of  the  Fathers,  andseveral  Commentators, 
have  asserted,  that  the  Herodians  were  people 
of  Herod's  retinue,  who,  to  satisfy  their  curio- 
sity, or  make  their  court  to  their  master,  came 
uith  <Ae  Pharisees  to  tempt  Cbnslu/wn  paying 
tribute:  But  by  the  recital  of  Vie  Evangelists 
it  appears,  that  the  Herodians  were  a  Sect 
sU'jsisting  in  Judea  without  any  dependence 
on  king  Herod,  and  his  power  at  Jerusalem. 

Some  will  have  it,  that  the  Herodians  ware  poli- 
ticians who  favoured  the  dominion  of  Herod 
and  the  Romans  against  the  Jews,  who  were 
zealous  for  the  liberty  of  their  nation.  The  for- 
mer maintained,  that  it  was  their  duty  to  pay 
tribute  to  the  kings  established  by  the  Ro- 
mans :  but  the  other  Jews  were  of  the  con- 
trary opinion. 

D'.  Prideaux  says,  that  the  Herodians  were  a 
St^ct  formed  amongst  the  Jews,  and  had parti- 
culur  doctrines  distinct  from  those  of  the  Pha- 
risees and  Sadducees,  and  that  these  doctrines 
were  reducible  to  two  heads:  [1]  In  their 
belief  that  the  dominion  of  the  Romans  over 
the  Jews  was  just  and  lawful,  and  that  it 
was  their  duty  to  sjibmit  to  it.  [2]  That  in 
the  present  circumstances  they  might  with  a 
good  conscience  follow  many  of  the  heathen 
modes  and  usages.  It  is  certain,  says  he,  that 
thesewere  Herod's  principles  ;  since  he  excuses 
himself  on  the  score  of  the  necessity  of  the 
times,  for  acting  in  many  things  against  the 
maxims  of  the  Jewish  religion. 

Tlieir  hypocritical  loose  way  of  professing  and 
practising  the  law,  or  true  religion,  among 
other  bad  effects  which  it  produced,  made  these 
strange  factions  and  divisions,  even  among  the 
vain  professors  themselves.  Others  think,  that 
the  Jews  divided  themselves  into  several  sects, 
in  imitation  of  the  Greeks,  whose  philosophers  i 
521 


SEE 

teere  divided  into  different  factions  ;  such  as, 
the  Academics,  the  Stoics,  the   Peripatetics 
the  Epicureans,  i-c.     It  seems  as  if  the  Co- 
rinthians had  a  mind  to  introduce  something 
like  this  into  Christianity,  ichen  they  boasted^ 
I  am  a  disciple  of  Paul,  I  of  ApoUos,  1  of 
Peter;  wliich  abuse  the  apostle  Paul,  with  great 
vehemence,  corrects,  1  Cor.  1.  12,  13.  |  3.  iiC, 
Jlcts  5.  17.  which  is  the  s.  of  the  Sadducees 
15.  5.  the  s.  of  the  Pharisees  which  believed 
24.  5.  a  ringleader  of  the  s.  of  the  Nazarencs 
2(i.  5.  after  the  straitest  s.  of  our  religion  1  lived 
28.  22.  this  s.  is  every  where  spoken  against 

SECTS. 
1  Cer.  11.  t  19.  there  must  be  also  s.  amoncst  you 

SECURE. 
Judg.  8.  11.  Gideon  smote  the  host,  for  it  was  s. 
18.  7.  after  the  manner  of  the  Zidonians,  s. 
10.  when  ye  go,  ye  shall  come  to  a  people  s.  27. 
Job  11.  18.  thou  shall  be  s.  because  there  is  hope 
12.  6.  and  they  that  provoke  God  are  s. 
Mat.  28.  14.  we  will  persuade  him,  and  s.  you 

SECURELY. 
Proij.3.29.  devise  not  evil,seeing  d  welleth  s.by  thee 
Mic.  2.  8.  pull  garment  from  them  tliat  pass  by  s. 

SECURITY. 
Jicts  17.  9.  and  when  they  hail  taken  s.  of  Jason 

SEDITION. 
Ezra  4.  15.  that  they  moved  s.  in  the  city,  19. 
Luke  23.  19.  for  a  certain  s.  cast  into  prison,  25. 
Acts  24.  5.  we  have  found  this  man  a  mover  of  s. 

SEDITIONS. 
Gal.  5.  20.  the  works  of  the  flesh  are  s.  heresies 

SEDUCE. 
Mark  13.  2i  shall  shew  signs  and  wonders  to  s. 

1  .)ohn  2.  26.  written  concerning  them  that  s.  you 
flew.  2. 20.  thou  sutfercst  Jezebel  ios.  uiy  servants 

SEDUCED. 

2  Kings  21.  9.  Manasseh  ,t.  them  to  do  more  evil 
Isa.  19.  13.  they  have  also  s.  Egypt,  even  they 
Ezek.  13.  10.  they  have  also  s.  my  people,  sayin: 

SEDUCERS.  ■ 

2  Tim.  3.  13.  but  s.  shall  wax  worse  and  worse 
SEDUCETH. 

Prov.  12.  20.  but  the  way  of  the  wicked  s.  them 
SEDUCING. 

I  T!m.4.1.departfroni  faith,givingheed  to  s.  spirits 
SEE 

Signifies,  [1]  To  heboid,  or  perceivewith  the  eyes, 
Exod.  23.  5.  [2]  To  observe  with  approba- 
tion. Gen.  1.  4.  [3]  To  look  upon  with  con- 
sideration and  observation.  Mat.  22.  11.  [4] 
To  visit,  1  Sam.  15.  35.  1  Cor.  16.  7.  [5J 
To  suffer,  or  bear  icith,  Ezra  4.  14.  [6]  To 
hear,  Exod.  20.  18,  All  the  people  saw  the 
Ihunderings  and  the  noise  of  the  trumi)el 
jJnd  in  Rev.  1.  12,  I  turned  to  see  the 
voice  that  spake  with  me.  [7]  To  feel,  Psal, 
90.  15.  [8]  To  taste  of,  Luke  2.  26.  John  8 
51.  [9]  To  know  or  learn,  Gen.  37.  14.  [10] 
To  have  abundance  of  knowledge,  so  as  not  tv 
stand  in  need  of  instruction  from  others,  John 
9.  41.  [11]  To  perceive  and  understand  expe- 
rimentally, Exod.  5.  19.  Rom.  7.  23.  [J2] 
To  beware,  or  take  care,  Rev.  19.  10.  |  22. 
9.  [13]  To  knoic  by  divine  revelation,  Isa.  2. 
1.  I  13.  1.  [141  To  believe  iyi,  and  rely  upon 
Heb.  U.  27.  [15]  To  have  the  perfect  and  im- 
mediate  fruition  of  the  glorious  presence  of 
God  in  heaven.  Job  19.  26.  Mat.  5.  8,  Blessed 
are  the  pure  in  heart;  for  they  shall  see  God. 

TA!(«  seeing,  or  lo  see,  is  not  only  said  of  the  sense 
of  vision,  by  ichich  we  perceive  external  objects, 
but  also  of  inward  perception,  of  the  knowledge 
of  spiritual  things,  and  even  of  that  super- 
natural sight  of  hidden  things,  of  prophecy,  of 
visions,  of  ecstasies.  Whence  it  is,  that  for- 
merly they  were  called  Seers,  who  afterwards 
were  called  Nabi,  or  prophets,  1  Sam.  9.  'J.  and 
that  prophecies  were  called  visions,  Obad.  1. 

To  see  the  goodness  of  the  Lord,  Psal.  27.  13.  is 
to  enjoy  the  mercy  or  blessing  which  God  hath 
promised.  Job  says,  O  remember  that  my  life 
is  wind,  mine  eyes  shall  no  more  see  good,  .Job 
7.  7.  /  shall  die,  and  see  no  more ;  I  shall  no 
longer  enjoy  the  good  things  of  this  world.  .Snd 
in  Mat.  5.  8,  The  pure  in  heart  shall  see  God. 
They  shall  understand  the  mysteries  of  salva- 
tion, they  shall  perceive  the  loving  kindness  of 
God  towards  them  in  this  life,  and  shall  at 
length  perfectly  enjoy  him  in  heaven. 

It  is  said,  Exod.  24.  10,  That  the  elders  saw 
the  God  of  Israel :  They  did  not  see  any  re- 
semblance of  the  divine  nature,  which  is  ex- 
pressly denied,  Deut.  4.  15.  but  some  glorious 
appearance  or  token  of  God's  special  presence; 
or  rather  the  Second  Person  of  the  Trinity,  who 
then  shewed  himself  to  them  in  a  human  shape, 
as  a  testimony  of  his  future  incarnation. 
To  see  the  face  of  the  king,  F.sth.  1.  14.  is  to  be 
3Y 


SEE 

of  his  household,  to  apprcacK  near  him,  or  to 
have  familiar  converse  with  him.  The  kings 
of  Persia,  nnder  the  pretence  of  maintaining 
that  respect  and  majesty  that  wereduetotheia, 
seldom  permitted  their  subjects  to  see  them, 
and  hardly  ever  shewed  themselves  in  public  : 
J\ronc  but  their  most  intimate  friends,  or  their 
familiar  domestics,  had  the  advantage  ef  be- 
holding their  faces. 
(Ve«.2.19.brought  to  Adam, fos. what  he  would  call 
8.8.  he  sent  a  dove  to  s.  if  the  waters  were  abated 

11.  5.  and  the  Lord  came  down  to  s.  the  city 
19.  21.  he  said  unto  him,  s.  I  have  accepied  thee 
22.  T  14.  the  name  of  that  place,  the  Ld.  will  a. 
27.27.4-. the  smell  of  my  son  is  as  the  smell  of  afield 
29.  t  32.  and  Leah  called  his  name,  s.  a  son 

31.  5.  lie  said,  1  s.  your  father's  countenance 
34. 1.  Dinah  went  out  to  s.  the  daughters  of  land 
42.  9.  but  to  s.  the  nakedness  of  the  land,  12. 

44.  23.  tho-u  saidst,  you  shall  s.  my  face  no  more 

45.  12.  your  eyes  «.  and  the  eyes  of  my  brother 
24.  he  said,  s.  that  ye  fall  not  out  by  the  way 
28.  I  will  go  and  s.  Joseph  before  I  die 

48.  11.  I  had  not  tlniught  to  «.  thy  face,  and  to 
Exod.  1.  16.  and  when  ye  «.  them  upon  the  stools 

3.  3.  I  will  turn  aside,  and*,  this  great  sight,  4. 

4.  13.  s.  whether  my  brethren  be  yet  alive 

21.  .s.  that  thou  do  those  wonders  before  Pharaoh 

5.  19.  the  officers  did  s.  they  were  in  evil  case 
6.1.  now  Shalt  thou  s.  whatlviU  do  to  Pharaoh 

10.  5.  that  one  cannot  be  able  to  s.  tlie  earth 

28.  take  heed  to  thyself,  s.  my  face  no  more 

29.  hast  spoken  well,  I  will  s.  thy  face  no  more 

12.  13.  when  I  s.  the  blood,  I  will  pass  over  you 

13.  17.  lest  the  people  repent  when  they  s.  war 

14.  13.  stand  still  and  s.  the  salvation  of  the  Lord 
16.  29.  s.  for  the  Lord  hath  given  you  the  sabbath 

32.  they  may  s.  the  bread  wherewith  I  fed  you 

33.  20.  fur  there  shall  no  man  s.  me  and  live 
23.  and  thou  shalt  s.  my  back  parts 

34.  10.  the  people  shall  s.  the  work  of  the  Lord 
Lev.  13.  10.  and  the  priest  shall  s.  him,  17. 

20.17.  if  a  man  shall  s.hex  nakedness, and  she  s.  his 
Kum-A.  20.  shall  not  go  in  to  «.  holy  things  covered 

11.  23.  shalt  .J.  whether  my  word  come  to  pass 

13. 18.  5.  the  land  what  it  is,  and  people  that  dwell 

14.  23.  nor  shall  any  that  provoked  me  s.  it 

22.  41.  that  thence  he  might  «.  the  utmost  part 

23.  9.  for  from  the  top  of  I  he  rocks  I  s.  him 

13.  come  to  another  place, whence  thou  mayesl*. 
them,  thou  shalts.  but  the  utmost  part  of  them 

24.  17.  1  shall  s.  him,  but  not  now,  I  shall  behold 
27. 12.  and  s.  the  land,  which  I  have  given  to  Isr. 

32.  8.  I  sent  your  fathers  from  Kadesh  lo  5.  land 
32.  11.  surely  none  of  the  men  that  came  up  out 

of  Egypt  shall  s.  the  land,  Deut.  1.35. 
Deut.  1.  36.  save  Caleb,  he  shall  s.  hind,  will  give 
3.  25.  I  pray  thee,  let  me  s.  the  good  land 
28.  cause  to  inherit  the  land  which  thou  shall  i. 
23. 14.  that  he  .5.  no  unclean  thing  in  thee 

28.  10.  all  people  shall  s.  that  thou  art  called  by 
34.  sight  of  Ihine  eyes  which  thou  .«halt  s.  67. 
68.  thou  shalt  s.  it  no  more  again,  and  be  sold 

29.  4.  the  Lord  hath  not  given  you  eyes  to  a. 

22.  when  they  s.  the  plagues  of  that  land 

30.  15.  s.  I  have  set  before  thee  life  and  good 
32.  20.  he  said,  I  will  s.  what  their  end  shall  be 

39.S.  now  I,  even  I,  am  he,  there  is  no  G.  with  mo 

52.  yet  thou  shalt  «.  land  before  thee,  but  not  go 

34.  4.  I  have  caused  thee  to  s.  it  with  thine  eyes 

Josh.  22.  10.  they  built  there  a  great  altar  lo  s.  to 

Judg.  14.  8.  Samson  turned  aside  to  s.  the  carcaeo 

16.  5.  and  s.  wherein  his  great  strength  lieth 

1  Sam.  2.  32.  shall  s.  an  enemy  in  my  habitation 

6.  1.3.  they  saw  the  ark,  and  rejoiced  to  *.  it 
12.  16.  now  s.  this  great  thing  the  Lord  will  do 

17.  ye  may  s.  that  your  wickedness  is  great 

14.  17.  number  now,  and  s.  who  is  gone  from  us 
38.  and  s  wherein  this  sin  hath  been  this  day 

15.  35.  Samuel  came  no  more  to  s.  Saul,  mourned 
17.  28.  art  come,  that  thou  mightest  .i.  the  battle 

19.  3.  and  what  I  s.  that  I  will  tell  thee 

15.  Saul  sent  messengers  again  to  s.  David 
20.29.  let  me  get  away,  I  pray,and  s.  my  brethren 

21.  14.  then  said  Achish,  you  s.  the  man  is  mad 

23.  22.  know  and  s.  his  place,  where  his  haunt  is 

24.  11.  my  father  s.  yea,  s.  the  skirt  of  thy  robe 
2G..1G.  5.  where  king's  spear  is,  and  cruse  ofwater 

2  Sam.  13.  5.  when  thy  father  cometh  to  5.  thee,  let 

Taniar  come,  that  I  may  s.  it,  and  eat  it  at  her 

14.  32.  now  therefore,  let  me  i.  the  king's  face 

15.3.  s.  ihy  matters  are  good  and  right,  A  bsal.  said 

24.  3.  ihat  the  eyes  of  my  Lord  the  king  mays,  it 

13.  J.  what  ans.  I  shall  return  him  that  sent  noo 

1  Kings^^.  16.  .1.  to  thy  house,  David,  2  Chr.  10.11 
17.  23.  and  Elijah  said,  s.  thy  son  livelh 

20.  7.  and  «.  how  this  man  seekelh  mi.schief 

22.  Ihe  projihetsaid,  mark  and  s.  what  thou  dod 

22.  25.  thou  shalt  s.  in  that  day,  2  Chr.  18.  24. 

2  Kings  2. 10.  if  thou  s.  when  I  amtakcD  from  thee 


SEE 

2  Kings  5.  7.  s.  how  he  aceketh  a  quarrel  ag.  me 

6.  17.  Lord,  I  pray,  open  his  eyea  iliat  he  may  s. 
20.  open  the  eyes  of  these  men  thai  they  may  s. 
3-2.  s.  how  this  son  of  a  murderer  huth  sent  to 

T.iJ.lhou  shall  »■.  it  with  thine  eyec,  but  not  eat,  19. 

13.  let  us  Bend  and  s.  ||  14.  saying,  go  and  s. 
6.  iO.  went  down  to  s.  Joram,  'J.  Iti.  \i  C/ir.  ii-i.  0. 

9.  17.  the  watchman  said, Is.  a  company 

34.  gc  *.  now  this  cursed  woman,  and  bury  her 

10.  16.  come  with  me,  and  s.niy  zeal  for  the  Ld. 

19.  16.  open,  Lord,  thine  eyes,  and  s.  Isa.  37. 17. 
2;i.  17.  tlien  he  said,  what  title  is  that  that  I  s. 

2  C/ir.  18.  16.  he  said,  I  did  .■,•.  all  Israel  scattered 
•20.  17.  s.  the  salvation  of  the  Lord  with  you 

24.  5.  go,  and  *.  that  ye  hasten  the  matter 

25.  17.  come,  let  us  s.  one  another  in  the  face 
i-;zra4. 14.  was  not  meet  to  s.  the  king's  dishonour 
^/^eh■  9. 9.  didst  s.  nQiclion  of  our  fathers  in  Egypt 
Ksth.  3.  4.  to  5.  if  Mordecai's  matters  would  stand 

5.  13.  so  long  as  I  s.  Mordecai  the  Jew  sitting 
«.  6.  Esther  said,  how  can  I  endure  to  s.  the  evil 

that  shall  come  on  my  people  7  los.  the  destrucl. 
Job  3.  9.  neither  let  it  s.  the  dawning  of  the  day 
7.7.  mine  eye  shall  no  more  s.  good  ;  my  life  wmd 

8.  the  eye  that  hath  seen  me  shall  «.  me  no  more 
9.2j.  now  my  days  flee  away,  Ihey  s.  no  good 
10.  IS.  therefore  s.  thou  mine  affliction 
17.  15.  as  for  my  hope,  who  shall  s.  it  ? 
19. 26.  worms  destroy,  yet  in  my  flesh  shall  I  s.  G. 

27.  whom  [  shall  s.  for  myself,  and  nut  another 

20.  9.  the  eye  which  saw  him  shall  s.  him  no  more 
21.20.  his  eyea  shall  .5.  his  destruction,  shall  drink 
22.  19.  the  righteous  s.  it,  and  are  glad 

24.  1.  why  do  they  that  know  him  not  s.  his  days  7 
15.  the  adulterer  saith,  no  eye  shall  s.  me 

28.27.lhen  did  lies.it,  and  declare  it, he  prepared  it 

3l.4-doth  nolhes.  my  ways,  and  count  my  steps'! 

33. 26.  shall  pray,  and  he  will  s.  his  face  with  joy 
23.  his  soul,  and  his  life  shall  «.  the  light 

35.  5.  look  unto  the  heavens,  and  s.  the  clouds 

36.  25.  every  man  may  s.  it,  man  may  behold  d 
FaaL  10.  11.  he  hath  said,  God  will  never  s.  it 

14. 2.  God  looked  to  .s.  if  any  did  under3tand,o3.  2. 
IS.lO.neithcr  wilt  thou  siilfer  thine  Holy  One  to  s. 
corruption.  Acts  2.  27,  31.  |  13.  35. 
22.  7.  all  they  that  s.  me  laughed  me  to  scorn 
27. 13.  had  believed  to  s.  the  goodness  of  the  Lord 
31.  11.  they  that  did  s.  me  without,  fled  from  me 
34.  8.  O  taste  and  see  that  the  Lord  is  good 

12.  that  lovcth  many  days,  that  he  may  s.  good 
37.34.  when  the  wicked  an;  cut  olF,  thou  shall  s.  it 

40.  3.  many  shall  «.  it  and  trust  in  the  Lord 

41.  6.  if  he  come  to  s.  me,  he  spcaketh  vanity 
49.  19.  he  shall  go,  they  shall  never  s.  light 

52.  e.the  righteous  also  shall .?.  and  fear  and  laugh 
59.10.God  shall  let  me  s.my  desire  on  my  enemies, 

God  of  mercy  shall  prevent  nv',y2.  11.  |  118.  7. 
63  2.  to  s.  thy  power  and  glory,  as  I  have  seen 
61.  5.  they  commune,  th(,'y  say,  who  shall  s.  tliein? 

8.  all  that  s.  them  shall  llee  away 
66. 5.  come  and  a.  the  works  of  God,  he  is  terrible 
69.  32.  the  humble  shall  s.  thi.H,  and  ho  glad 
8<'i.  17.  that  they  which  ha'.e  me  may  «.  it 
91.8.  thou  shall  s.  the  reward  of  the  wicked 
97.  6.  aftd  all  the  people  s.  his  glory 

106.  ."i.  that  1  may  s.  the  good  of  ihy  chosen 

107.  24.  these  s.  the  works  of  the  Lord  in  the  deep 
42.  righteous  shall  s.  it  and  rejoice,  all  iniquity 

112.  8.  till  he  s.  his  desire  U[ion  his  enemies 
10.  the  wicked  shall  s.  it  and  be  grieved 
119.  74.  they  will  be  glad  when  ihey  s.  me 
128.  5.  ihou  shall  s.  the  good  of  Jerusalem  all  days 
6.  thoushalts.  thy  children's  children,  and  peace 
139.  16.  thy  eyes  did  s.my  substance  yet  imperfect 
24.  search,  J.  if  there  be  any  wicked  way  in  me 
TroB.  24.  18.  lest  the  Lord  s.  and  displease  him 
29.  16.  but  the  righteous  shall  s.  their  fall 
F.rcl.  1.  10.  whereof  it  may  be  said  s.  this  is  new 
2.  3.  till  I  might  *.  what  was  good  forsons  of  men 
3. 18.  that  men  mights,  that  tliemaelves  are  beast* 
2'.  bring  him  to  «.  what  shall  be;  after  him 

7.  11.  by  it  thi:re  is  profit  to  them  thit  s.  the  sun 

8.  16.  to  ».  the  busincis  thrit  is  done  upon  earth 
Cant-  2.  14.  f)  my  dove,  lot  me  s.  lliy  countenance 

G.ll.  I  went  into  iIk;  girdnn  of  nuts  to  s.  the  fruits, 
and  to  s.  whether  the  vine  flourished,  7.  12. 
ha.  5.  19.  let  him  hiistr>n  his  work,  that  we  may  s. 
6.  10.  rr»l  they  s.  with  their  ey<s,  hear  with  ears 
14.1R.thoy  that ». thee  shall  mrrowly  look  on  thee 
2-).  1 1.  Ihoy  shall  »•  and  bn  ashamod  for  their  envy 
29.  H.  eyes  of  the  blind  sliall  s.  out  of  obscurity 
30.20.  b'.l  thino  eyes  *hnll  s.  thy  t.'achers 

32.  3.  the  eyes  of  them  that  s.  ■hall  not  be  dim 

33.  17.  thino  eyes  shall  s.  the  king  in  his  beauty 
20.  thine  nyos  shall  s.Jnru«al.  a  ((uii''  habitation 

35.2.  ihcy  shall  ».the  glory oftho  L.and  cxcollency 
40..S.slory  t?v8alcd,and  nil  fle«li  shall  s.it  logcihor 
41.  20.  that  they  may  ».  ami  know,  and  consider 
48.  fi.  s.  all  this  1|  49.  7.  kin?*  shall  s.  and  arise 
52.  8.  for  tliey  shall  s.  eve  to  eye,  when  the  Lord 
528 


SEE 

Isa.  52.  10.  the  earth  shall  s.  solvation  of  out  God 

15.  what  had  not  been  told  :liem  shall  they  s. 
53.  2.  when  we  shall  s.  him,  there  is  no  beauty 

10.  he  shall  s.  his  seed,  he  shall  prolong  his  days 
11. he  shall  s.of  travail  of  his  soul, and  be  satisfied 

60.  5.  then  thou  shall  s.  and  flow  together 

61.  9.  all  that  s.  thein  shall  acknowledge  them 
02.  2.  the  Gentiles  shall  s.  thy  righteousness 

64.  9.  behold,  s.  we  beseech,  we  are  all  thy  people 
66.  18.  and  they  shall  come  and  s.  my  glory 
Jer.  1.  11.  I  s.  a  rod  ||  13.  I  s.  a  seething  pot 

2.  10.  send  to  Kedar,  s.  if  there  be  such  a  thing 

19.  know  and  s.  that  it  is  an  evil  thing  and  bitter 

23.  s.  thy  way  in  the  valley  what  thou  hast  done 

3.  2.  and  s.  where  thou  hast  not  been  lien  with 

4.  21.  how  long  shall  I  s.  the  standard,  and  hear 
5.I.S.  now  and  know,  and  seek  inllie  broad  places 
0.16.  stand  ye  in  the  ways  and  s.  and  ask  for  paths 
7.  12.  go  to  my  place,  and  s.  what  1  did  to  it 

11.  20.  let  me  s.  thy  vengeance  on  them,  20.  12. 
20.  18.  out  of  the  womb  to  s.  labour  and  sorrow 
22.  12.  ho  shall  die  and  s.  this  land  no  more 
30.6.S. whether  man  doth  travail  with  child  ?  why 

do  I  s.  every  man  with  his  hands  on  his  loins  ! 
51.  61.  and  shall  s.  and  shall  read  all  these  words 
Lam.  1.  11.  s.  O  Lord,  consider,  fori  become  vile 

12.  s.  if  there  be  any  sorrow  like  my  sorrow 
£ze/u.8.t).tliou  shall  s.greater  abominations,  13, 15. 
13.9.  Ihats.  vanity  ||  16.  s.  visionsofpeacefor  her 
16.  37.  they  may  s.  all  thy  nakedness 

20.  48.  all  tlesh  shall  s.  that  I  the  L.have  kindled  it 

21.  29.  whiles  they  s.  vanity  unto  thee,  and  divine 
32.31. Pharaoh  shall  s.  lhein,and  shall  be  comfort. 
33.  6.  but  if  the  watchman  s.  the  sword  come 
39.  21.  all  the  heathen  shall  s.  niyjudginent 

7)un. 1.10.  why  should  hes.  your  faces  worsi;  liking 
3.  25.  lo,  I  s.  four  men  loose,  walking  in  the  fire 
Totl  2.  i6.  your  old  men  shall  dream  dreams, 
your  young  men  shall  s.  visions,  Acts  2.  17. 
.^inosi].-i.  pass  ye  to  Calneh  and  .s.  go  ye  to  llainath 
fiiniik  4.  5.  miglit  s.  what  would  become  of  the  cuy 
JIic.  6.  9.  the  man  of  wisdom  shall  s.  thy  name 
.  10.  then  she  that  is  mine  enemy  shall  s.  it 

16.  the  nations  shall  s.  and  he  confounded 
Hub.  2. 1. 1  will  watch  to  s.  what  he  will  say  to  me 
Zech.  2.  2.  lo  s.  what  is  the  breadth  thereof 

4. 10.  shall  s.  the  plummet  in  hand  of  Zerubbabel 
5.2.  whalseestthou'?  I  answered,  I  s.  a  flyingroll 
5.  lift  your  eyes  s.  what  is  this  thai  goeih  forth 
9.5.  Ashkelon  shall  s.  it  and  fear,  G  aza  shall  s.  it 
10.  7.  yea,  their  children  shall  s.  it,  and  be  glad 
J\Ial.  1.  5.  and  your  eyes  shall  s.  and  ye  shall  say 
Mat.  5.  8.  blessed  pure  in  heart,  for  they  sliail  s^  G. 
16.  they  may  s.  your  good  works,  and  glorify 

7.  5.  and  then  shall  thou  s.  clearly  to  cast  out  the 

mote  out  of  thy  brother's  eye,  I.,uke  6.  42 

8.  4.  s.  thou  tell  no  man,  shew  thyself  to  the 

priest,  9.  30.  Mark  1.  44.  Acts  23.  22 
U.  4.  tell  John  those  things  you  hear  and  s. 
7. what  wentyou  out  into  wilderness  to  s.?a  reed 
shaken  with  the  wind,  B,y.Luke  7.  24,  2.5,  26 

12.  38.  iSIasler,  wo  would  .«.  a  sign  from  thee 

13.  14.  seeing,  ye  shall  s.Mark  4.  12.  .'?c(s28.26 

15.  heart  gross,  lesl  at  any  time  they  should  s 
with  their  eyes, hear  with  their  ear8,.4c(s  28.27. 

16.  but  blessed  are  your  eyes,  for  they  s. 

17.  many  desired  lo  s.  those  things  which  ye  s 
15.  31.  when  they  saw  the  blind  to  s.  I.ukel.  22. 
K).  28.  till  they  s.  the  Son  of  man  coming 

22.  11.  when  the  king  came  in  lo  s.  the  guests 
24.  6.  shall  hear  of  wars,  s.  that  ye  be  not  troubled 

30.  they  shall   s.  the  Son  of  man  coming  in  the 
clouds  of  heaven,  Mark  13.  26.  Luke  21.  27. 

26.  58.  Peter  sat  with  servants  to  .<;.  the  end 

27.  4.  they  said,  s.  thou  to  that  ||  24.  s.  ye  to  it 
49.  let  us  s.  whether  Elias  will  come  to  save  him 

28.  6.  come  s.  the  place  where  the  Lord  lay 
lO.iliat  they  go  into  Galilee,there  shall  they.?. me 

Mark  5.  14.  they  went  out  to  s.  what  was  done 
32.  ho  looked  to  s.  her  that  had  done  this  thing 
6.;t3.  go  anil  s.  II  8.  24.  I  s.  men  as  trees  walking 
15.32.lelOhris;  descend  that  wo  mays.and  b(diovc 

Luke  2.  15.  let  ua  go  to  Bethlehem  and  s.  this 

3.  6.  and  all  flesh  shall  s.  the  salvation  of  God 

8.  16.  Ihey  who  enter  in  may.t.  lighl,  11.  33. 

20.  thy  brethren  stand  without,  desiring  to  s.  thee 

9.  9.  who  is  this  1  and  ho  desired  to  s.  him,  23.  8. 
27.  not  taste  of  death  till  they  s.  kingdom  of  God 

14.  18.  I  have  bought  ground,  I  must  gn  and  ».  it 
17.  22.  when  ye  shall  desire  to  ."J.one  of  the  days 

23.  s.  here,  or  s.  there,  go  not  after  them 

19.  3.  Zacchoui  sought  to  s.  Jesus,  who  he  was 
4.  ho  climbed  into  a  aycamore-lri'e  lo  s.  him 

20.  13.  they  will  reverence  him  when  they  s.  him 

24.  39.  behold,  it  is  I  myself,  handle  me  and  s. 
Iahn\.  33.  on  whom  thou  shall  s.  Spirit  dcsccndin; 

39.  como  and  .<,.  40.  |  11.  34.  Rrv.  6.  1,  3,  .■>,  7. 
.50.  thou  shall  s.  greater  things  than  these 

4.  29.  ».  a  man  who  told  me  nil  tliingi  ever  t  did 
8. 51 .  if  man  keep  my  sayings,  shall  never ».  death 


SEE 

John  8.  5B.  your  father  Abr.  rejt  iced  to  s.  my  day 
9.15.1  washed,and  do ».  II  25.  1  Hasblinil,now  I  $ 
19.  they  asked  them-,  how  then  doth  he  now  g.f 
39.  I  came  into  this  world, that  Ihey  who  s.  not 
mights. and  that  they  whos. might  be  madeblini 
11.40.  if  believe,  thou  sliouldest  s.theglory  of  God 
12.  9.  but  that  they  might  «.  Lazarus  also 
21.  the  Greeks,  saying.  Sir,  we  would  s.  J^sus 
16.  22.  ye  have  sorrow,  but  I  w  ill  s.  you  again 
20.  25.  except  I  s.  in  his  hands  the  print  ot  naiii 
Acts  15.  36.  and  visitour  brelh.  and  s.  how  they  do 
19.21.  after  I  have  been  there,  I  must  also  s.  Home 
20.  25.  ye  all  shall  s.  my  face  no  more,  33. 
22. 14.  shouldst  know  his  will,  and  s.  that  just  One 
28.  20.  for  this  cause  I  called  you,  to  s.  you 
Rom.  1. 11.  for  1  long  to  s.  you,  that  I  may  impart 
7.  23.  I  s.  another  law  in  my  members,  warring 

15.  21.  w  honi  he  was  not  spoken  of,  they  shall  a 

24.  for  I  trust  lo  s.  you  in  my  journey 

1  Cor.  8. 10.  if  any  man  s.  thee  that  bast  knowledge 

16.  10.  s.  that  he  may  be  with  you  without  fear 

2  Cor.  8.  7.  s.  that  ye  abound  in  this  grace  also 
Gal.  1.  18.  I  went  up  to  Jerusalem  to  s.  Peter 
Eph.  3.  9.  to  make  all  men  s.  what  is  fellowship 

5.  15.  s.  that  ye  walk  circumspectly,  not  as  fooli 

33.  the  wife  s.  that  she  reverence  her  husband 

Phil.  1.27.  whelherlcome  and  s.  you  orbeabsent 

2.  23.80  soon  as  1  s.  how  it  will  go  with  mo 

1  Thcss.  2.  17.  to  s.  yuur  face  with  great  desire 
3.6.  desiring  greatly  to  s.  us,  as  we  also  to  s.  you        ♦• 

5.  15.  s.  thai  none  render  evil  for  evil  lo  any  man 

1  Tim.  6.  16.  whom  no  man  hath  seen,  nor  can  t. 

2  Tim.  1.4.  greatly  desiring  to  s.  thee,  being  mindf 
Hi^h. H.5.  s.  thou  make  all  according  to  the  pattern 

12.  14.  holiness,  without  which  no  man  .?.  the  Lord 

25.  s.  that  you  refuse  not  him  that  speaketh 
13.23. wiih  whom,  if  he  come  shortly,  I  will  s.  you 

1  Pet.  1.  22.  s.  that  ye  love  one  another  fervently 

3.  10.  he  that  will  s.  good  days,  let  him  refrain 

1  .fokn  5. 16.  if  any  man  s.  his  brother  sin  a  sin 

3  ./u/m  M.  but  I  trust  I  shall  shortly  s.  thee 
Rer.  1.  7.  he  Cometh,  and  every  eye  shall  s.  him 

12.  I  turned  t<i  s.  ihe  voice  that  spake  with  me 
3.  18.  anoint  with  eye-salve,  that  thou  maycst  s. 

6.  6.  and  s.  thou  hurt  not  the  oil  and  the  wine 

11.  9.  shall  s.  their  dead  bodies  three  days  and  half 
16.  15.  lest  he  walk  naked,  and  they  .s.  his  shame 
18.7.  for  she  sail h,  Isit  a  queen, shall s.  no  sorrow 

9.  when  they  shall  s.  the  smoke  of  her  burning 
19.  10.  he  said  to  me,  s.  thou  do  it  not,  22.  9. 
22.4.  and  they  shall  s.  hisface,  name  in  foteheadi 
"SEE  not,  or  not  SEE. 

Gen.  21.  16.  let  me  not  s.  the  deaih  of  the  child 
27.  1.  when  Isaac  was  old,  that  he  ccuir;  not  g. 
43.3.the  man  did  protest, ye  shall  not  s.  my  face,  5. 
44.  26.  for  we  may  not  s.  the  man's  face  e.xcept 
48.  10.  eyes  of  Israel  were  dim,  he  could  not  s. 

F.xod.  33.  20.  thou  canst  not  s.  my  face  and  live 

.Vum.  11.  15.  let  me  not .«.  my  wret<-hedness 
14.  23.  surely  they  shall  not  s.  the  land  I  sware 
23.  13.  utmost  part,  and  shall  not  s.  them  all 

/>e««.22.1.  thou  shall  no«s. thy  brother's  oxgoastr. 
4.  thou  shall  not  s.  thy  brother's  ass  fall  down 

^Sam.  3.  2.  Eli,  his  eyea  dim  he  could  not  s.4.  15. 

2  Sam.  3.  13.  not  s.  my  face,  except  thou  first  bring 
14.  24.  the  king  said,  let  not  Absalom  s.  my  face 

1  Kings  14.  4.  Ahijali  could  not  s.  his  eyes  set 
2A'in"'s3. 17.ye  shall  not  s.wind,norshall  ye  s.  rain 

22.  20.  thino  eyes  shall  not  s.  all  evil  1  will  bring 
.fob  9.  II.  lo,  he  goeth  by  me,  and  I  s.  him  not 

20.17.he  shall  nots.  the  rivers  of  honey  and  butter 

22.  II.  or  darkness  that  thou  canst  not  s. 

23.  9.  ho  hid 'th  himself  that  I  cannot  s.  him 

34.  "12.  that  which  I  s.  not  tench  thou  me 

35.  14.  though  thou  sayest,  thou  shall  not  s.  him 

37.  21 .  men  s.  not  the  bright  light  in  the  clouds 
Psnl.  49.  9.  should  still  live,  and  not  s.  corruption 

58.  8.  pass  away,  that  Ihcy  may  not  s.  the  sun 
69.  23.  let  their  eyes  be  darkened,  that  they  s.  not 
74.  9.  we  s.  not  our  signs,  there  is  no  more  prophet 
89.  48.  what  man  liveth,  and  shall  not  s.  death 
94.  7.  yet  they  say,  the  Lord  shall  net  s. 
9.  he  that  formed  Ihe  eye,  shall  he  not .».  ? 
115.  .■>.  eves  have  they,  bill  thevs.  not,  ]:)5.  ]fl. 
At  <»  .26.11. when  Ihy  hand  is  lifted  up,lhey  will  Tints. 
30.  10.  children,  which  say  to  the  seers,  s.  not 
33.  19.  thou  shall  not  s.  a  fierro  pcoi>lo,  a  people 

38.  11.  I  ehall  not.",  the  Lord,  oven  the  L.ird 
44.  9.  they  s.  not,  that  they  inny  be  nsbamed 

18.  he  hath  shut  their  eyes,  that  tliev  cannot  s. 
.7'.r.5.2l.  which  have  eyes,  ands.  not,  F.zek.M.  12. 

12.  4.  Ihey  said,  he  shall  not.i.  our  last  end 

14.  13.  Ihe  prophets  say,  ye  shall  not  s.  the  sword 
17. 6.  like  heath,  he  shall  not  s.  when  good  comclh 
8.  he  shall  not  .'■  when  hi'al  cornel h 
23.24.  can  any  hide,  that  I  shall  not  s.  him  ? 
Ezrk.  12.  fi.  that  Ihou  s.  not  the  ground,  12. 

13.  yet  ahnll  he  not  .•:.  it,  though  he  shall  die  there 
Dan.  a.  23.  hnst  prais'^d  goda  of  "old,  which  j.  not 
Zepk.  3. 15.  thou  shall  not  s.  evil  any  more 


SEE 

JUat.l2. 13.  because  they  seeing  s.  not,  and  hear  not 
23. 39.  ye  shall  not  s.  me  henceforth,  Luke  13. 35 
24.  2.  Jesus  said,  s.  ye  not  all  these  things  1 
Jtfar/i8.13.having  eyes  s.ye  not?  and  ears,  hear  not 
LiXike  2  26.  not  s.  death,  before  he  liad  seen  Christ 

8.  lU.  that  seeing,  they  might  not  s.  and  hearing 

17.  22.  shall  desire  to  s.  and  ye  shall  not  s.  it 
John  3.  3.  he  cannot  s.  the  kingdom  of  God 

36.  shall  not  s.  life,  but  wrath  abideth  on  him 

9.  39.  I  am  come,  that  they  who  s.  not  might  s. 
12.  40.  that  they  should  not  s.  with  their  eyes 
16. 16.  a  little  while,  and  ye  shall  not  s.  me,  17, 19. 

18.  26.  did  I  not  s.  thee  in  the  garden  with  him  ? 
Acts  22.  11.  when  I  could  not  s.  for  the  glory 
Rom.  11. 8.  hath  given  eyes,  that  they  should  not  s. 

10.  let  their  eyes  be  darkened  that  they  may  71.  s. 

1  Cor.  16.  7.  for  I  will  not  s.  you  now  by  the  way 

^eA.2. 8.  butwes.  not  yetall  things  put  under  him 

11. 5.  was  translated,  that  he  should  not  s.  death 

1  Pet.  1. 8.  though  now  ye  s.  him  not,  yet  believing 

2  Pet.  1.  9.  he  is  blind,  and  cannot  s.  afar  off 

fVe  SEE. 
Gen.37. 20.  toe  shall  s.  what  will  become  of  dreams 
Psal.  36.  9.  in  thy  light  shall  we  s.  light 
Jer.  5.  12.  neither  shall  ices,  sword  or  famine 

42. 14.  go  into  Egypt,  where  we  shall  s.  no  war 
Mark  15.32.  that  we  may  s.  and  believe,  JoknQ.'iO. 
John  9.  41.  now  ye  say,  we  s.  yoUr  sin  remaineth 
Rom.  8.  25.  but  if  we  hope  for  that  we  s.  not 
1  Cor.  13.  12.  now  we  s.  through  a  glass  darkly 
I  Tkess.  3.  10.  praying  that  we  mights,  your  face 
//e4.2.9.but  we  s.Jesus,whowas  niai'.e  alittle  lower 

3. 19.  so  !ce  s.  that  they  could  not  enter  in  because 
1  John  3. 2.  be  like  him,  for  we  shall  s.  him  as  he  is 

Ye  SEE,  or  SEE  ye. 
Exod.  14.  13.  ye  shall  s.  them  again  no  more 

16.  7.  then  ye  shall  s.  the  glory  of  the  Lord 
Josh.  3.  3.  when  ye  s.  the  ark  of  the  covenant 
1  Sam.  10.  24.  s.  ye  him  whom  Lord  hath  chosen? 
t  Chron.  29.  8.  to  hissing,  as  ye  s.  with  your  eyes 

30.  7.  who  gave  them  up  to  desolation,  as  ye  s. 
^ch.  2. 17.  I  said,  ye  s.  the  distress  that  we  are  in 
Job  6.  21.  ye  s.  my  casting  down,  and  a^e  afraid 
Cant.  6.  13.  what  will  ye  s.  in  the  Shulamite 
Isa.  C.  9.  and  s.  ye  indeed,  but  perceive  not 

18.  3.  s.  ye,  when  he  lifteth  up  an  ensign 

42.  IS.  hear,  ye  deaf,  look,  ye  blind,  that  ye  mays. 
66.  14,  when  ye  s.  your  hearts  shall  rejoice 
Jer.Z.  31.  O  generation,  s.  j/e  the  word  of  the  Lord 
42.  18.  and  ye  shall  s.  this  place  no  more 
Ezek.  13.  23.  therefore  ye  shall  s.  no  more  vanity 
14.  22.  ye  shall  s.  their  way  and  their  doings 
23.  they  shall  comfort  you  when  ye  s.  their  ways 
Dan.  2. 8.  because  ye  s.  the  thing  Is  gone  from  me 
J\fat.  13.  17.  many  have  desired  to  s.  those  things 
which  ye  s.  and  have  not,  Luke  10.  23. 
24.  2.  Jesus  said,  s.  ye  not  all  these  things'? 
33.  when  ye  shall  s.  all  these  things,  know  that  it 
is  near,  Mark  13.  29.  Luke  21.  31. 
20. 64.  hereafter  shall  ?/'' s.  the  Son  of  man  sitting 
on  the  right  hand  of  power,  Mark  14.  02. 

27.  24. 1  am  innocent,  s.  ye  to  it,  Mark  15.  36. 

28.  7.  in  Galilee  there  shall  ye  s.  him,  Mark  10.  7. 
Z,uke  12.  54.  when  >/e  s.  a  cloud  rise  out  of  the  west 

55.  and  when  ye  s.  the  south  wind  blow,  ye  say 
13.28.  when  t/e  shall  s.  Abraham  and  the  prophets 
21.  20.  when  ye  shall  s.  Jerusalem  compassed 

30.  yes.  and  knowof  yourselves,  summer  is  nigh 

24.  39.  hath  not  flesh  an4.  bones,  as  yc  s.  me  have 
John  1.  51.  hereafter  ye  shall  s.  heaven  open 

4.  48.  except  ye  s.  signs  ye  will  not  believe 
6.62.  what  if  j/e  shall  s.  the  Son  of  man  ascend 
14. 19.  but  ye  s.  me  ||  16. 10.  and  ye  s.  me  no  more 
16. 16.  a  little  while  ye  shall  s.  me,  17,  19. 
Acts  2.  33.  shed  this  which  ye  now  s.  and  hear 
3.16.  made  this  man  strong,  whom  ye  s.  and  know 

19.  26.  yc  s.  and  hear,  that  not  alone  at  Ephesus 

25.  24.  ye  s.  this  man,  about  whom  Jews  dealt 
1  Cor.  1.  26.  for  yr  s.  your  calling,  brethren 
Gal.  6.  11.  ye  s.  how  large  a  letter  I  have  written 
Phil.  2.  28.  when  ye  s.  him  again,  ye  may  rejoice 
ffeb.  10.  25.  much  more,  as  7/c  s.  day  approachin? 
Jam.  2.  24.  yc  s.  how  that  by  works  man  is  justified 
1  Pet.  1.  8.  though  now  v.'.  him  not,  yet  ye  rejoice 

SEED. 
Seed  in  scripture  is  taken  [1]  Properly,  for  that 
thin,  hot,  and  spirituous  humour  in  man's  body, 
which  is  fitted  by  nature  for  the  generation  of 
mankind.  Gen.  33.  9.  Likrtcise  for  that  matter 
■which  in  all  plants  and  fruits  is  disposed  for 
the  propagation  of  the  kind.  Gen.  1  11.  |  47. 19. 
[2]  Figuratively,  for  that  which  is  befrntten  ; 
and  this  is  spoken  cither,  (I)  Collectively,  of 
many,  of  children,  or  posterity  in  i^eneral,  as 
in  Gen.  17.  7,  8,  Clod  says  to  Abraham,  I 
will  establish  my  covenant  hetwecn  me  and 
thee,  and  thy  seed  after  thee  in  thnir  genera- 
tions. I  will  give  unto  thr-p,  and  to  thy  seed 
nfter  thee,  the  land  wherein  thou  art  a  stranger. 
Or,  ',2)  Individually,  of  one  alone,  as  of  Seth 
523 


SEE 

;  Gen.  4.  25,  God  hath  appointed  me  another 
seed  :  He  hath  given  me  another  son.  .ilso  of 
Jesus  Christ,  Gen.  3.  15,  I  will  put  enmity 
between  thy  seed  and  the  woman's  seed.  Gal. 
3.  16,  He  sailh  not.  And  to  seeds,  as  of 
many;  but  as  of  one ;  and  to  thy  Seed  which 
is  Christ.  (3)  For  works  of  mercy,  Eccl. 
11.6. 

The  seed  of  Abraham,  signifies,  [1]  The  whole 
posterity  of  Abraham,  according  to  the  jlrsh, 
including  both  the  bad  and  good.  Rom.  9.  7, 
Neither  because  they  are  the  seed  oi  Abraliam, 
are  they  all  children.  [2]  The  faithful  only, 
whether  Jews  or  Gentiles,  who  are  endued  with 
such  a  faith  as  Abraham  had.  Rom.  4.  16, 
To  the  ciid  the  promise  might  be  sure  to  all 
the  seed,  not  to  that  only  which  is  of  the  law, 
but  to  that  also  which  is  of  the  faith  of  Abra- 
ham. [3]  Christ  who  came  of  Abraham  accord- 
ing to  thejlcsh.  Gal.  3. 16,  To  thy  seed,  which 
is  Christ.  Or  thus.  Persons,  are  called  Abra- 
ham's seed,  either  carnally  only,  as  they  who 
valued  themseloes  on  account  of  their  descent 
from  Abraham  after  the  Jlcsh,  John  8.  33,  37. 
Or  carnally  and  spiritually  too,  as  the  believ- 
ing Jews  :  Or  spiritually  only,  as  the  Gentiles, 
who  had  the  same  faith  ?i:(7/i  Abraham,  though 
they  did  not  come  out  of  his  loins. 

The  word  of  God  is  compared  to  seed,  Luke  8.  5, 
11.  which  is  sown  in  the  heart,  as  the  hus- 
bandman casts  his  seed  into  the  ground.  The 
word  is  called  an  incorruptible  seed,  1  Pet.  1. 

23.  because  continuing  still  the  same,  and  being 
immutable  in  itself,  it  changes  and  renews  the 
hearts  of  those  that  by  faith  receive  it.  Or,  it 
may  be  understood  of  its  being  incorruptible 
effectioely,  because  it  leads  and  tends  to  immor- 
tal life ;  it  begets  in  the  soul  an  abiding  life, 
which  shall  continue  for  ever.  Hence  it  is 
said,^  John  3.  9,  Whosoever  is  born  of  God, 
doth  not  commit  sin  ;  for  his  seed  reinaineth  in 
him  :  The  new  or  divine  nature,  the  principle 
or  habit  of  grace  or  holiness  in  the  heart,  re- 
maineth or  abideth  in  him. 

The  apostle  Paul,  writing  to  the  Romans,  quotes 
a  passage  out  of  Isaiah,  Except  the  Lord  of 
sabaoth  had  left  us  a  seed,  we  had  been  as 
Sodom,  and  been  made  like  unto  Gomorrah, 
Rom.  9.  29.  JVhat  the  apostle  calls  seed,  is 
by  the  prophet  called  a  remnant,  Isa.  1.  9.  It 
is  an  allusion  to  the  custom  among  husband- 
men, who  spend  the  greatest  part  of  their  corn 
in  bread  and  other  food,  reserving  a  small 
quantity  of  the  choicest  and  best  for  seed ;  So 
would  God  deal  with  the  Israelites;  though 
they  were  innumerable  as  the  sand,  or  as  the 
stars,  yet  a  few  of  them  only  should  be  de- 
livered out  of  Babylon,  and  he  would  after- 
wards bring  but  a  few  of  them,  comparatively, 
to  believe  in  Christ. 

Gen.  1.  11.  bring  forth  herbs  yielding  s.  12,  29. 
47.  19.  give  us  s.  ||  23.  lo,  here  is  s.  for  you 

24.  and  four  parts  shall  be  your  own  for  s. 
F.zod.  16.  31.  the  manna  was  like  coriander  s. 
Lev.  11.  37.  their  carcase  fall  on  any  sowing  s. 

38.  but  if  any  water  be  put  upon  the  s. 
19. 19.  thou  shalt  not  sow  thy  field  with  mingled  s. 

26.  16.  and  ye  shall  sow  your  s.  in  vain 

27.  16.  thy  estimation  shall  be  according  to  the  s. 

a  homer  of  barley  s.  valued  .at  50  shekels 

.30.  all  the  tithe  of  the  s.  of  the  land  is  the  Lord's 

A^uvt.  20.  5.  it  is  no  place  of?,  oroffiss  or  vines 

Deut.  11. 10.  not  as  Egypt,  where  thou  sowedst  s. 

14.  22.  shalt  surely  tithe  all  the  increase  of  thy  s. 

22.  9.  lest  the  fruit  of  thy  s.  sown  be  defiled 

28.  38.  thou  shalt  carry  much  s.  into  the  field 
1  Sam.  8.  15.  the  king  will  take  the  tenth  of  s. 

1  Kings  18.32.  a  trench  contain  two  measures  of  s. 
.Tob  39..42.  will  the  unicorn  bring  home  thy  s. 
Psal.  126. 6.  hethatgoeth  forth  bearing  precious  » 
F.ccl.  11.  6.  in  the  morning  sow  thy  s.  and  evening 
Isa.  5. 10.  Ihes.  of  a  homer  shall  yield  an  ephah 
17.  11.  in  the  morning  make  thy  s.  to  flourish 

23.  3.  and  by  great  waters  the  s.  of  Sihor 

55. 10.  that  it  may  give  s.  to  the  sower  and  bread 
.Ter.  35.  7.  nor  shall  sow  s.  nor  plant  vineyard 

9.  neither  have  we  vineyard,  field,  nnr  s. 
F.zek.  17.  5.  he  took  also  of  the  s.  of  the  land 
.Toel  1.  17.  the  s.  is  rotten  under  their  clods 
.fimos  9.13.  the  treader  overtake  him  that  soweth  s. 
Hag.  2.  19.  is  the  s.  yet  in  the  barn  7  yea,  as  yv\ 
Zerh.S.  12.  for  the  s.  shall  be  prosperous,  the  vine 
Mai.  2.  3.  behold,  1  will  corrupt  your  s.  and  spread 
Mot.  13.  19.  which  receive  .<<   by  the  wav-side 

20.  s.  into  stony  places  ||  22.  s.  among  the  (horns 

23.  but  he  that  received  s.  into  good  ground 

24.  a  man  which  sowed  good  s.  in  his  field 

27.  sir,  didst  not  thou  sow  good  s.  in  thy  field  ? 

37.  he  that  soweth  the  good  .<:  is  the  Son  of  man 

38.  the  good  *.  are  the  children  of  the  kingdom 


SEE 

Mark  4. 26.  if  a  man  should  cast  s.  into  the  ground 

27.  and  the  s.  should  spring  and  grow  up 
Luke  8.  5.  a  sower  went  out  to  sow  iiis  s.  some  fo' 

11.  the  parable  is  this  ;  the  s.  is  word  of  God 

1  Cor.  15.  38.  and  to  every  s.  his  own  body 

2  Cor.  9.  10.  he  that  ministcreth  s.  to  the  sower 

1  Pet.  1. 23.  being  born  again,  not  of  corruptible  s 
1  John  3. 9.  for  his  *.  remaineth  in  him,  cannot  sia 
See  Copulation. 
SEED  for  Posterity. 
Gen.  4.  2.5.  God  hath  appointed  me  another  s. 
7.  3.  to  keep  s.  alive  upon  the  face  of  the  earth 

15.  3.  Abram  said,  to  mo  thou  hast  given  no  s 
19.32.  that  we  may  preserve  s.  of  our  father,  34. 
38.  8.  marry  her,  and  raise  up  s.  to  thy  biother, 

Mat.  22.  24.  Mark  12.  19.  Luke  20.  28. 
9.  Onan  knew  that  the  s.  should  not  be  his 
Lev.  12.  2.  if  a  woman  hath  conceived  s.  and  born 

21.  21.  that  hath  a  blemish  of  the  s.  of  Aaron 

22.  4.  what  man  of  the  s.  of  Aaron  is  a  leper 
JVum.  5.  28.  then  the  woman  shall  conceive  s. 

16.  40.  which  is  not  of  s.  of  Aaron  como^ear 
Deut.  1.  8.  to  give  it  to  their  s.  after  theil^ll.  9. 

4.  37.  he  chose  their  s.  after  them,  10.  15. 

31.  21.  forgotten  out  of  the  mouths  of  their  s. 
Ruth  4.  12.  s.  the  Lord  shall  give  of  tliis  woman 
1  .Sam.  2.  20.  the  Lord  give  thee  s.  of  this  woinan 

24.  21.  that  thou  wilt  not  cut  off  my  s.  after  me 

1  Kings  11. 14.  he  was  of  the  king's  s.  in  Edora 
39.  I  will  for  this  afflict  the  s.  of  David 

2  Kings  11. 1.  Athaliah,  mother  of  Ahaziah,  arose 

and  destroyed  all  the  s.  royal,  2  Chr.  22. 10. 

17.  20.  the  Lord  rejected  all  the  s.  of  Israel 

2.5.  25.  Ishmael  of  the  s.  royal  came,  Jer.  41.  1. 

1  Chron.  16.  13.  O  ye  s.  of  Israel  his  servant 
Eira  2.  59.  they  could  not  shew  their  s.  JVcA.  7.  CI. 

9.  2.  the  holy  s.  have  mingled  themselves 
•VfA.  9.  2.  the  s.  of  Israel  separated  them.selvea 
F.sth.  6.  13.  if  Mordecai  be  of  the  s.  of  the  Jews 

9.  27.  the  Jews  look  upon  them  and  their  s.  31. 

28.  nor  memorial  of  them  perish  from  llieir  *. 
.Tob  21.  8.  their  s.  is  estabiislied  in  their  sight 
Psal.  21. 10.  their  s.  shalt  thou  destroy  from  earth 

22.  23.  praise  him,  all  ye  the  s.  of  Jacob,  glorify 

him  ;  and  fear  hiin,  all  ye  the  s.  of  Israel 
30.  a  s.  shall  serve  him,  it  shall  be  counted  to  L. 
37.  28.  but  the  s.  of  the  wicked  shall  be  cut  off 
69.  36.  the  s.  also  of  his  servants  shall  inherit  it 
102.  28.  their  s.  shall  be  established  before  thee 
106.  27.  to  overthrow  their  s.  among  the  nations 
Prov.  11.  21.  the  .«.  of  righteous  shall  he  delivered 
Isa.  1.  4.  ah,  sinful  nation,  a  s.  of  evil  doers 

6.  13.  the  holy  s.  shall  be  the  substance  thereof 
14.  20.  the  it.  of  evil-doers  shall  never  be  renowned 
45.19.1  said  not  unto. <t.ofJacob,seek  yemeinvain 

25.  in  the  Lord  shall  all  s.  of  Israel  be  justified 
57.  3.  the  s.  of  the  adulterer  and  the  whore 

4.  ye  not  children  of  transgression,  a. 5.  of  falseh. 
61.  9.  their  s.  shiiU  be  known  among  the  Gentiles  ; 
that  they  are  the  s.  which  the  Lord  halhbk-ssed 
65.  9.  I  will  bring  forth  a  s.  out  of  Jacob 
23.  they  are  the  s.  of  the  blessed  of  the  Lord 
.Ter.  2.  21.  I  had  planted  thee  wholly  a  ngnt .«. 

7.  15.  I  will  cast  out  the  whole  s.  of  Ephraim 

23.  P.  which  led  the  s.  of  the  house  cf  Israel 

31.  27.  I  will  sow  with  s.  of  man  and  s.  of  beast 

36.  then  s.  of  Israel  also  shall  cease  as  a  nation 

37.  I  will  cast  off  all  the  s.  of  Israel,  33.  26. 
33.22.so  will  I  multiply  the  s.  of  David  my  servant 

Kick.  17.  13.  and  hath  taken  of  the  king's  s. 

20.  5.  I  lifted  up  my  hand  to  the  s.  of  Jacob 

43.  19.  give  to  priests  that  be  of  the  s.  of  Zadok 

44.  22.  they  shall  take  maidens  of  the  s.  of  Israe 
Dan.  1.  3.  bring  of  the  children  of  the  king's  s. 

2.  43.  shall  mingle  themselves  with  the  s.  of  men 
9. 1.  Darius  of  the  s.  of  the  Medes  was  made  kinj 
J\Ial.  2.  15.  that  he  might  seek  a  godly  s. 
Mark  12.  20.  the  first  dying  left  no  .?.  21,  22. 
.Tqhn  7.42.  that  Christ  cometh  of  the  s.  of  David 
.lets  13. 23.  of  this  man's  s.  hath  God  raised  Je.-us 
Rom.  1.3.  was  made  of  the  s.  of  David,  2  Tim.  2. 8. 
4  16.  that  the  promise  might  be  sure  to  all  his  » 
9.  8.  the  children  of  the  promise  counted  for  s. 

29.  except  the  Lord  of  sabaoth  had  left  us  a  s. 
Gal. 3. 19.  it  was  addid,  till  the  s.  should  come 
Heb.  11. 11.  Sarah  received  strength  to  conceive  s 
Rev.  12. 17.  to  make  war  with  the  remnant  of  her  * 

See  Abraham. 
His  SEED. 
Gen.  17. 19.  my  covenant  with  Isaac  and  his  s. 
46.  6.  Jacob  came,  and  all  his  s.  with  him,  7. 
4S.19.andAis  s.shall  become  a  multitudeof  nations 
F.xod.  28.  43.  a  statute  of  his  s.  after  him,  30.  21. 
Lev.  20. 2.  that  civelh  any  of  liis  s.  to  RIolech,  3, 4. 

21.  1.5.  nor  shall  ye  protline  his  s.  among  people 
A''«m.l4.24.  servant  Caleb  and  his  s.shall  possess  it 

24.  7.  and  his  s.  shall  be  in  many  wi\ter.» 

25.  13.  he  shall  have  it,  and  his  s.  after  h!ni 
Josh.  24.  3.  I  multiplied  his  s.  and  gave  Isaac 

2  Sam.  4.  8.  hath  avenged  thee  of  Saul  and  his  t 


SEE 

2  5am.  22. 51.  he  sliewed  mercy  to  his  anointed,  to 
David  and  his  s.  for  evermore,  fsiil.  18.  50. 
IKings  -J.yS.un  head  of  Joab  and  his  s.Wii  ever,  but 
upon  Uavid  and  his  s.  shall  be  peace  for  ever 
yeh.  y .  8.  thou  madest  a  covenant  to  give  it  to  his  s- 
Kith.  10.  3.  and  speaking  peace  to  all  his  s. 
Fsal.  25.  13.  his  s-  shall  inherit  the  earth 
37.  2.5.  nor  have  I  seen  Ai>  s.  begging  bread 
26.  lie  is  merciful,  and  his  s.  is  blessed 
89.  29.  his  s.  also  will  1  make  to  endure,  36. 
112.  2.  his  s.  shall  be  mighty  upon  earih 
Isa.  53, 10.  he  shall  see  his  s.  shall  prolong  his  days 
Jer.  22.  28.  why  are  they  cast  out,  he  and  his  s.? 
30.  for  no  man  of  his  s.  shall  prosper 

29.  32.  and  I  will  punish  Shemaiah  and  his  s. 
33.  21).  I  wdl  not  take  any  of  Ai>  *-.  to  be  rulers 
3i).  31.  I  will  punish  Jelioiakim  and  his  s. 
49.  10.  Esau,  his  s.  is  s|)oiled,  and  he  i,«  not 

yjctsl.  5.  would  give  it  to  him  and  his  s.  after  him 

6.  that  his  s.  should  sojourn  in  a  strange  land 

Thy  SKKD. 
Oen.2.  ■.  will  put  enmity  between  thy  s.  and  her  s. 

12.  7.  rS  thy  s.  will  I  give  this  land,  13.  15.  I  15. 

18.  I  17.  8.  I  21.  7.  I  26.  3.  |  28.  4,  13.  |  35. 
12.  I  48.  4.  JCjod.  33.  1.  Deut.  34.  4. 

13.  16.  1  will  make  thy  s.  as  dust,  16. 10.  |  28.  14. 
15.  5.  he  said  to  hiin,  so  shall  (Ay  .••■.be,  Rom.  4. 18. 

13.  that  thy  s.  shall  be  a  stranger  in  a  land 
17.  7.  my  covenant  between  me  and  thy  s.  after 
thee ;  to  bo  a  God  to  thee  and  thy  s.  10. 
9.  thou  and  thy  s.  aftnr  thee  in  their  generations 

12.  a  stranger  not  of  thy  s.  shall  bo  circumcised 

21.  12.  in  Isaac  shall  thy  s.  be  called,  Heb.Xl.  18. 

13.  make  Ishmael  a  nation,  because  he  is  thy  s. 

22.  17.  thy  s.  possess  the  gate  of  enemies,  24.  60. 

18.  in  thy  s.  shall  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  be 

blessed,  26.  4.  |  23.  14.  .^cts  3.  25. 
•'26.  24.  and  multiply  thy  s.  for  Abraham's  sake 
32. 12.  thou  saidst,  I  will  make  thy  s.  as  the  sand 
48.  11.  and  lo,  God  hath  shewed  me  also  thy  s. 
J^v.  18. 21.  not  any  of  thy  s.  pass  through  the  fire 
21.  17.  whosoever  of  thy  s.  Iiath  any  blemish 
.Vnm.lH.lD.iheheave-oftBringsIgivetheeand^Aj/s. 
De.tit.  28.  46.  curses  for  a  sign  on  thy  s.  for  ever 
.59.  Lord  will  make  plagues  of  thy  .?.  wonderful 

30.  6.  the  Lord  will  circumcise  the  heart  of  thy  s. 

19.  choose  life,  that  thou  and  thy  s.  may  live 

1  Sam. 20.  42.  the  Lord  be  between  mv.«.  and  f/n/s. 

2  Sam.  7.  12.  I  will  set  up  thy  s.  1  C'hron.  17.  11. 
ih'in^s  5.  27.  lepro^iy  shall  cleave  to  thee  .'uid  thy  s. 
.fob  5.  i).  thou  shall  know  that  thy  s.  shall  be  great 
I'sat.  '<9. 4.  thys.  will  I  establish  for  ever,  and  build 
/.Id.  43. 5.1  will  bring  thy  s.  from  the  cast  and  gather 

44.3. 1  will  pour  my  Spirit  upon  thys.  and  blessing 
4S.19.<Ai/.«. also  had  been  a.«  the  sand  andoftspring 
54.  3.  aiid  thy  s.  shall  inherit  the  Gentiles 
59.  21.  niy  Spirit  that  is  upon  thee,  shall  not  de- 
part out  of  the  mouth  of  «Ay.«.  not  thy  seed's  5. 
.Trr.  30.  10.  thys.  from  the  land  of  captivity,  46. 27. 
(ial.  3.  16.  and  to  thy  s.  which  is  Christ 

Your  SEED. 
F.xod.  32.  13.  all  this  land  will  I  give  to  your  s. 
/,fD.22.3.  whosoever  of  your.'.",  goeth  to  holy  things 
/«a.  66. 2'2.  so  shall  your  s.nn<\  your  name  remain 

SRED-TIMR. 
Oen.  8.  22.  s.-time  and  harvest  shall  not  cease 

SEEDS. 
Gal.  3.  16.  ho  eaith  not,  and  to  *.  as  of  many 

SEEDS. 

/)euf.22. 9.  not  sow  thy  vineyard  with  divers  s. 

.Vie. 13.4. whenhesowedscimo.f. fell  bylheway-side 

32.  which  is  the  least  of  nil  s.  Mark  4.  31. 

SEEING. 

Ezod.  4.  11.  or  who  maketh  the  s.  or  the  blind? 

SEEING,  rrrb. 
F.xod. 1^.  10.  any  benst  be  driven  uwny,  no  man  s. 
^um.  3.5.  2:1.  s.  him  not,  cast  it  on  him  that  ho  dio 
1  Kings  1. 48.  given  one  to  sit,  mine  eyes  even  s.  it 
Pron.  20.  12.  the  Lord  maketh  the  s.  eye 
/Cee/.  I.  8.  tho  eye  is  not  salisfiod  with  ».  nor  ear 
Istt.  21.  3.  I  was  dismayed  at  tho  s.  of  it 
33.  15.  IhnI  shntleth  his  eyes  from  s.  evil 
42.  20.  s.  many  things,  but  thou  observest  not 
EieAr.  22.  2>'.  s.  vanity,  and 'divining  lies  to  thorn 
Mat.  13.  13.  in  parables,  hecHUSO  they  s.  see  not 
H.ihall  not  iinder^<land,/>.  ye  shall  see  and  shall 
not  perceive,  Mark  4.  12.  .Irts  28.  2li. 
John  0.  7.  he  went  and  washed  and  came  s. 
Jlrts  2.  31.  he  s.  this,  spake  of  llie  resurrcflion 
1.  3.  s.  Poirr  and  .lohn  abfiut  to  go  to  the  lemple 

7.  24.  ».  one  of  them  sufTer  wrong,  defended  hiiii 
fl,  6.  the  pnopio  .».  the  miracles  that  ho  did 
9.  7.  spperhless,  hearini;  a  voice,  but  5.  no  man 
13.  11.  he  blind,  not  .».  the  sun  for  a  season 

Nfh.  11.97.  he  endured  as  «.  him  who  \*  inviKiblr' 
8  Pe!.2.  8.  in  ».  and  hearing,  vexed  his  right,  soul 

SEEING,  Jidvrrh. 

Orn.  15. 2.  what  wilt  thou  give  me, .«.  I  go  rhildles 

22.  1-2.  K.  iIhiu  hast  not  withheld  thiiw  oidy  sou 

24.  56.  s.  tho  Lord  lialh  proaporod  my  way 

524 


SES 

fi'fn.20.27. wherefore  come  yo  to  me,  s. ye  hate  me? 

44.  30.  s.  his  life  is  bound  up  in  the  lad's  life 
jVum.  16.  3.  s.  all  tho  congregation  are  holy 
.hidff .\'^.\S.v^\^y  askost  thoumy  name,s.  it  is  secret 

17. 13.  do  me  good,  s.  I  have  a  Levite  to  my  priest 
21.  16.  s.  women  are  destroyed  out  of  Benjamin 

Ruth  1.  21.  s.  the  Lord  hath  testified  against  me 
1  Sam.  16.  1.  s.  I  have  rejected  him  from  reigning 
28. 16.  s.  the  L.  is  departed  from  thee  and  become 

1  Chron.  12. 17.  s.  there  is  no  wrong  in  mine  hands 
.Job  19.  28.  s.  the  root  of  tho  matter  is  found  in  me 

21.  22.  8.  he  judgeth  those  that  are  high 

24. 1.  s.  times  are  not  hidden  from  the  .•Mmighty 
Psal.  50. 17.  5.  thou  hatest  instruction,  and  easiest 
Prov.  3.  29.  s.  he  dwellcth  securely  by  thee 
Isa.  49.21.  .9. 1  have  lost  my  children  and  amdcsol. 
.Jer.  47.  7.  s.  the  Lord  halli  given  it  a  charge 
Dan.  2.  47.  .?.  thou  couldest  reveal  this  secret 
Luke  1.  3-1.  how  shall  this  be,  «.  I  know  not  a  man 

23.  40.  s.  thou  art  in  the  same  condemnation 
Jlcts  17.  24.  s.  ho  is  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth 

2.5. s.  he  givelh  to  all  life  and  breath  and  all  things 
Rom.  3.  30.  5.  it  is  one  God  who  shall  justify 

2  Cor.  3.  12.  s.  then  that  we  have  such  hope 
Col.  3.  9.S.  that  ye  have  put  off  the  old  man 
Heb.  4.  6.  s.  it  remaineth  some  must  enter  therein 

14.  .s.  then  that  we  have  a  great  hish  priest 
5. 11.  hard  to  be  uttered,  s.  ye  are  dull  of  hearing 
6.  6.  .<!.  they  crucify  the  Son  of  God  afresh 
7.25.«.he  ever  livetli  to  make  intercessionfor  them 
12.  1.  s.  we  arc  compassed  about  with  witnesses 
\Prt.\.^Zi.  s.yii  have  purified  your  souls  in  obeying 
2  Pet.  3.14.  .•!.  ye  look  for  such  things,  be  diligi^nt 
17.  »'.  ye  know  thest^  things  before,  beware  lest 
SEEK. 
Orn.  37. 10.  Joseph  said,  I  s.  my  brethren,  tell  me 

43. 18.  that  he  may  .•?.  occasion  against  us  and  fall 
jV«m.  16.  10.  and  «.  ye  the  priesthood  also  ? 

24.  1.  Balaam  went  not  to  .t.  for  enchantments 
IJeut.  4.  29.  if  thou  s.  him  with  all  thy  heart 

12.  5.  even  to  his  habitation  shall  ye  «.  and  come 

22. 2.  sheep  be  with  thee  till  thy  brother .«.  after  it 
l.faw.9.3.  Kishsaid  to  Saul  his  son,  go  5.  the  asses 

10. 14.  whither  went  ye?  he  said,  to  s.  the  asses 
16.  16.  to  .?.  out  a  cunning  player  on  a  harp 
23.  15.  Saul  come  to  s.  his  life,  25.  ]  24.2.  |  26.'2 
2.5. 26.  they  that  s.  evil  to  my  Lord,  bo  as  Naba! 
29.  yet  a  man  is  risen  lo  pursue  and  s.  thy  soul 

26.  20.  for  king  of  Israel  is  come  out  to  ,5.  a  flea 

27.  1.  Saul  shall  despair  to  s.  me  any  more 

28.  7.  s.  me  a  woman  that  hath  a  familiar  spirit 
2  Sam.  5.  17.  the  Philistines  came  up  to  s.  David 

1  Iiimrs  2.  40.  Shimei  went  to  s.  his  servants 

18.  10.  whither  my  lord  hath  not  sent  to  s.  theo 

19.  10.  they  .•<.  my  life  to  take  it  away,  14. 

2  Kivgs  2.  16.  let  them  go,  and  s.  thy  master 

6.  19.  and  I  will  bring  you  to  the  man  whom  ye.«. 

1  Chron.  28.  8.  s.  the  commandments  of  the  Lord 
9.  if  thou  ,9.  him,  he  will  lie  found,  2  Chron.  15.2. 

2  Chron.  19. 3.  hast  prepared  thine  heart  to  s.  God 

30. 19.  that  prepnreth  his  heart  to  s.  God,  Ld.  God 
31.  21.  to  s.  his  God,  ho  did  it  with  all  his  heart 
34.  3.  Josiah  hecan  to  s.  after  the  God  of  David 

Ezra  4.  2.  build,  for  we  .«.  your  God  as  yn  do 

7.  10.  Ezra  had  pr'pared  his  heart  to  «.  the  law 
8.21.  lo  .9. him  a  right  way  for  us, and  our  little  ones 

22.  name  of  God  is  on  them  for  good  that  ,9.  him 
jVcA.  2.  10.  come  a  man  lo  .9.  the  welfare  of  Israel 
,Tob  5.8. 1  would  .9.  unto  God,  and  unto  God  commit 

7.  21.  shalt  .9.  me  in  morning,  but  I  shall  not  be 

8.  5.  if  thou  woiddest  .9.  unto  God  betimes 

20.  10.  his  children  shall  .9.  to  please  the  poor 
P.tn/.  4.2.  will  ye  love  vanity,  and  .9.  after  leasing 

9.  10.  thou  hast  not  forsaken  them  that  .«.  thee 

10.  15.  .9.  out  his  wickedneS'i  till  thou  find  none 
14.  9.  toseeif  there  were  any  tliat  did  s.  God,  53.2. 
24.  6.  this  is  tlie  generation  of  them  that  .9.  him 
27.  4.  one  thing  have  I  desired,  that  will  1 .9.  after 

8.  .9.  ye  my  face,  Ihy  face,  Lord,  will  I  .9. 

34.  14.  .9.  peace,  nndiiursue  it,  1  Pet.  3.  11. 

35.  4.  lit  them  be  put  to  shame  that  .9.  my  soul 
38.  12.  they  that  .9.  mv  lit",  Ihev  that  s.  mv  hurt 
40. 14.  be  confounded  that  .9.  after  my  soul,  70.  2. 
.54.  3.  and  oppressors  .9.  after  mv  soul 
63.  1.  thou  art  mv  God,  early  will  I  .9.  thro 

9.  those  that  .9.  my  "oul  go  into  the  lower  parts 
60.  6.  let  not  those  that  s.  thee  be  confounded 

32.  and  vour  heart  shall  live  thai  .9.  God 
70.4.  lei  all  lho«e  that  .9.  ihee  rejoice  and  be  clad 
71. 13.  be  covered  with  dishonour  thiit  .9.  my  hurt 

24.  Ihev  are  brought  unto  shame  thai  s.  mv  hurl 
S3.  16.  that  they  may  .9.  Ihy  mime,  O  Lord 
10).  o).  the  vounff  lions  .».  thiir  m>>at  from  God 
109.  10.  let  his  rhililren  s.  their  bread 
I  in.  2  blessed,  that  s.  him  with  iheir  whole  heart 

45. 1  will  walk  at  liberty,  for  I  .9.  Ihy  precepts 

176. 1  have  gone  astray  as  a  sheen,  .9.  ihvsi'rvant 
122.  9.  fi.r  the  hou«e  of  God.  I  will  9.  ihv  good 
Pror.  I.oi.  they  shall  s.  me,  but  shall  not  find  me 
8.  17.  and  tlioso  that  s.  nio  oarly  ahull  find  mo 


SEE 

pTOU.21.6.vanitytoss.toandfroof(hemtliat*.deatl» 
23.30.  who  hath  woe?  who  hath  sorrow?  they  that 
tarry  long  at  wine,  they  that  go  to  s.  mixt  wine 
35.  when  I  shall  awake,  I  will  s.  it  yet  again 
29.  10.  blood-thirsty  hate  upright,  just  s.  his  sou, 
2G.many  s.  the  ruler's  favour,  judgment  from  Ld. 
F.ccl.  1.  13.  I  gave  my  heart  to  s.  out  by  wisdom 
7.  25.  I  applied  mine  heart  to  s.  out  wisdom 
8. 17.  Iho'  a  man  labour  lo  .9.  it,  not  able  to  find  it 
Cant.  3.  2.  I  will  s.  him  whom  my  soul  loveth 
6.  1.  Ihy  beloved,  that  we  may  s.  him  with  thee 
fsa.  1.  17.  learn  to  do  well,  s.  judgment,  relieve 
8.19. when  shall  say,.?. untothcm  that  havefamiliaf 
spirits;  should  not  a  people  s.  unto  their  Godl 
11.  10.  bo  root  of  Jesse,  to  it  shall  the  Gcntiless. 

19.  3.  they  shall  s.  to  the  charmers  and  wizards 

20.  9.  with  my  spirit  within  me  will  I «.  thee  early 
34. 16.  .9.  ye  out  of  the  book  of  the  Lord,  and  read 
41.  12.  thou  shalt  s.  them,  and  not  find  them 

17.  when  the  needy  s.  water,  and  there  is  none 
45.  19.  I  said  not  to  Jacob,  s.  ye  me  in  vain 
.58.2.  yet  they  s.  me  daily,  and  delight  to  know 

./cr.  2.  24.  that  s.  her,  in  her  month  shall  find  her 
33.  why  trimmest  thou  thy  way  to  s.  lovel 
4.  30.  thy  lovers  despise  thee,  tliey  will  s.  thy  life 
II.  21.  the  men  of  Anathoth,  that  s.  thy  life 
19.  7.  to  fall  by  them  that  ,9.  their  lives,  21.  7. 

9.  they  that  s.  their  lives  shall  straiten  them 
22.  25.  into  hand  of  them  that  .9.  thy  life,  38.  16. 
29.  7.  s.  the  peace  of  the  city,  whillier  carried 

13.yc  shall  s.  me,  and  find  me,  when  ye  search  me 
34.  20.  into  hand  of  them  that  .9.  the'ir  life,  21. 
44.  30. 1  will  give  Pharaoh  to  them  that  .9.  his  life 
40.  26.  Egyptians  to  tho.-ic  that  s.  their  lives 
49.37.  Elam  dismayed  before  them  that  s. their  life 
Aam.  1.  11.  all  her  "people  sigh,  they  s.  bread 
Kzek.  7. 25.  they  shall  s.  peace,  there  shall  be  none 
26.  then  shall  they  s.  a  vision  of  the  prophet 
34.  6.  flock  was  scattered,  none  did  .9.  after  them 

11.  I  will  search  my  sheep,  and  s.  Ihem  out 

12.  as  a  shepherd  so  will  I  s.  out  my  sheep 

16.  I  will  .9.  that  which  was  lost  and  bring  again 
Dan.  9.  3. 1  set  my  face  unto  God,  lo  .9.  by  prayer 
Hos.  2.  7.  he  shall  .5.  them,  but  not  find  them 
Jjrnos  a.  4.  sailh  the  Lord,  s.  me,  and  ye  shull  live 

8.  .9.  him  that  maketh  the  seven  stars  and  Oiion 

14.  s.  good  and  not  evil,  that  ye  may  live 
B.  12.  to  .9.  the  word  of  tho  Lord,  ami  not  find  it 
JVoh.  3.  7.  whence  shall  1  .9.  comforters  (or  thee? 

11.  thou  shalt  bo  hid,  tliou  shall  .9.  strength 
y.rph.  2.  3.  s.  ye  the  Lord,  ye  meek  of  the  earih 
ZcfA.ll.  16.  a  sheiiherd  shall  not  .9.  the  young  ono 
12. 9.  in  that  day  I  will  .9.  lo  destroy  all  the  nations 
Mai.  2.  7.  they  should  .s.  the  law.at  his  moulh 

1.5.  that  he  might  .9.  a  gorily  seed,  take  heed 
Mat.'i.  13.  Herod  will  .9.  voun?  child  to  destroy  him 

6.  32.  after  all  these  things  do  the  Gentiles  s. 
.33.  ,9.  ye  first  the  kincdom  of  God,  J.tikr  12.  31, 

7.  7.  .9.  and  ve  shall  find,  knock,  /.«/.<■  II.  9. 
28.  5.  for  I  know  that  ye  .9.  Jesus,  .Mark  16.  6. 

JTark  1.  37.  they  said  to  him,  all  men  .9.  for  ihea 
3.  32.  Ihy  mother  and  thy  brethren  .t.  for  thee 

8.  12.  this  generation  .9.  afler  a  sign,  /.nke.  11.  29 
f.uke  12.  30.  these  tliinss  do  the  nations  ,9.  after 

13.  24.  many,  I  siiy  unto  yon,  will  .9.  to  enter  in 
15.  8.  doth  she  not  .9.  diligently  till  she  find  it? 
17.33.whosoeversliall.9.tosave  his  life,shBll  lose  it 
19.  10.  the  Son  of  man  is  come  to  ,9.  and  to  save 
24.  5.  whv  .9.  ye  the  livine  anumg  the  d.  ad  ? 

.John  1.  38.  Jesus  saith  unto  them,  what  .9.  ye? 

6.  2li.  ye  .9.  me,  not  because  ye  saw  the  miracles 

7.  25.  is  nnt  this  he  whom  they  .9.  lo  kill? 
34.  ye  Fhull  .9.  me,  and  shall  not  find  me,  36. 

8.  21!  ye  shall  .9.  me,  and  shall  die  in  your  sins 
37.  are  .Abraham's  seed,  but  ye  .9.  to  kill  me,  40. 

13.33.yo  shall.?,  me,  and  whither  I  go  cannot  coma 

18.  4.  Jesus  said  unto  Ihem,  whom  «.  ye  ?  7. 
8.  if  ve  s.  me,  let  these  so  their  way 

./lets  10.  19.  Spirit  said,  Ivhold,  throe  men  .9.  thee 
21.  Peter  said,  behold,  I  nm  he  whom  ye  .9. 
11.  25.  Ilnrnnhns  departed  to  Tarsus,  10,9.  Saul 
Rnvi.  2.  7.  to  Ihem  who  .9.  for  elory  and  honour 
11.  3.  I  nm  left  alone,  and  they  .«.  my  life 

1  Cor.  1.  22.  and  the  Greeks  .9.  after  wisdom 

10.  21.  let  no  man  .9.  his  own,  but  another's  wealth 

14.  12.  .9.  that  ve  may  excel  to  edifying  of  church 

2  Cor.  13.  3.  sinne  ye  s.  n  proof  of  Christ  spcnkin; 
Hal.  1.  10.  Ho  T  persuade,  or  s.  lo  ptease  men  ? 

2.  17.  if  while  we  ,«.  to  be  justified  by  Plirist 
Phil.  2.21.  for  nil  .9.  Iheir  own  Ihinss.  not  riirist's 
Col.  3.  1.  if  risen,  s.  those  thinss  which  aro  nlinva 
Ifrh.  ll.fi.  he  is  a  rewnrder  of  Ihem  that  s.  him 
It.  they  ihchire  plainly  that  they  .9.  n  country 
13.1  ).  here  we  have  no  ci'y,  but  we  .9.  one  lo  cnmfl 
III  r.W.li.  in  those  davssbnll  men  .9.  death,  not  findil 
Srr  Facp,  T,oRr>. 
.■Yol  SEEK,  or  PEEK  not, 
Jer.  13.  36.  the  priest  shall  imt  s.  fiir  yellow  hn!? 
I9.3l.>;<-/7*/'r.«.iifterwi7ards  lobe  ric^filed bythein 
Xum.  15.  39.  tJiat  ya  ».  net  after  your  own  heart 


SEE 

Dc«<.23. 6.  thou  shall Tiot  s.  their  peace  KzraO.  12. 
Hut/i  3.  1.  daughter,  shall  I  not  s.  rest  lor  thee  1 
Psdl.  10.  4.  the  uicked  will  not.  s.  alter  God 

119.  155.  the  wicked,  they  s.  not  thy  statutes 
Jer.  'M.  14.  all  thy  lovers,  they  s.  tliee  not 

45.  5.  seekest  thou  (^reat  things  1  «.  them  not 
Jimos  5.  5.  buts.  not  Belh-el,  nor  enter  into  Gilga 
Zec/t.  11. 10.  a  shepherd  shall  not  s.  the  young  one 
J^uke  \'2.  29.  s.  not  what  ye  shall  eat  or  drink 
Jo/m  5. 30.  because  I  s.  7iot  mine  own  will,  but  will 
44.  «.  not  the  honour  that  Cometh  from  God 

8.  50.  r .?.  not  mine  own  glory,  there  is  one  sceketh 

1  Or.  7.  27.  «.  not  to  be  loosed,  s.  not  a  wife 

2  Cor.  12.  14.  for  I  s.  ?iot  yours,  but  you 

SEEKEST. 
Gen.  37.  15.  the  man  asked  him,  what  s.  thou  ? 
Judu-.  4.  22.  I  will  shew  thee  the  man  whom  «. 
2  Sam.  17.  3.  the  man  thou  s.  is  as  if  all  returned 

20.  19.  thou  s.  to  destroy  a  mother  in  Israel 
1  Kings  1).  22.  that  thou  s.  to  go  to  thy  country 
Prov.  2.  4.  if  thou  s.  her  as  silver,  and  searchest  her 
Jer.  45.  5.  «.  thou  great  things'?  seek  them  not 
John  4.  27.  yet  no  man  said,  what  s.  thou  t 

JjO.lS.Jcsussailh  unto  her,  womaYi, whom  s.  thou7 

SEEIvETH. 
1  Sam.  19.  2.  Saul  my  father  s.  to  kill  thee 

20.  1.  what  is  my  sin,  that  he  s.  my  life  1 

22.  23.  fear  not,  he  that  s.  my  life,  s.  thy  life 

23.  10.  Saul  s.  to  destroy  the  city  for  my  sake 
24.9.  why  hearest  thou,  saying,  David  s.  thy  hurt? 

2.S(!CT. 16.il. who  came  forth  ofmy  bowels  s.  my  life 
1  Kings  20.  7.  and  see  how  this  man  s.  mischief 
S  Kings  5.  7.  see  how  he  5.  a  quarrel  against  me 
Job  3'J.  29.  from  thence  she  s.  the  prey,  her  eyes 
Psal.  37. 32.  watcheth  righteous,  and  .?.  to  slay  him 
Prar.ll.  27.  he  that  diligently  s.  good  procureth  fa- 
vour, but  he  that  s.  mischief,  it  shall  come  unto 

14.  6.  a  scorner  s.  wisdom  and  findeth  it  not 

15.  14.  he  that  hath  understanding  s.  knowledge 

17.  9.  he  that  covereth  a  transgression,  s.  love 
11.  an  evil  man  s.  only  rebellion,  a  messenger 
19.  he  that  exalteth  his  gate,  s.  destruction 

18.  1.  having  separated  himself,  s.  all  wisdom 
15.  and  the  car  of  the  wise  s.  knowledge 

31.  13.  till?  virtuous  woman  s.  wool  and  fla.T 
F.ccl.  7.  2-*.  which  yet  my  soul  s.  but  I  find  not 
Isa.  40.  20.  he  s.  unto  him  a  cunning  workman 
Jer.  5.  1.  any  that  s.  the  truth,  I  will  pardon  it 

30.  17.  this  is  Zion,  whom  no  man  s.  after 

38.  4.  this  man  .'.  not  the  welfare  of  this  people 
iLam.  3.  25.  the  Lord  is  good  unto  them  that  wait 
for  him,  to  the  soul  that  s.  him 
Ezck.  14. 10.  as  punishment  of  him  thats.  unto  him 

34.  12.  as  a  shepherd  s.  out  his  flock  in  the  day 
Mm.  7.  8.  and  he  that  s.  findeth,  Ln/ce  11.  10. 

12.39.  an  adulterous  generation  .?.  a  sign,  16.  4. 

18.  12.  leaveth  the  99,  and  s.  that  gone  astray 
John  4.  23.  the  Father  s.  such  to  worship  him 

7.  4.  doelh  in  secret,  and  s.  to  be  known  openly 
13.  s.  his  own  glory ;  .5.  his  glory  that  sent  him 

8.  50.  there  is  one  that  s.  and  jndgeth 
Rom.  3.  n.  there  is  none  that  .s.  after  God 

11.  7.  Israel  hath  not  obtained  that  which  he  .9. 
ICor.  13. 5.  charity  s.  not  her  own,  thinketh  no  evil 

SEEKING. 
Ksth.  10.  3.  Mordecai  s.  the  wealth  of  his  people 
ha.  16.5.  .'.judgment,  and  hasting  righteousness 
Mat.  12.  43.5.  rest,  and  findeth  none,  t.iikr.  11.  24. 

13.  45.  like  to  a  merchantman  s.  goodly  pearls 
Mark  8.  11.  .5.  of  him  a  sign  from  heaven 
Jjuke.^.  45.  they  turned  back  to  Jerusalem,  s.  him 

11.  54.  s.  to  catch  something  out  of  hi.",  mouth 

13.  7.  behold,  I  come  .t.  fruit,  and  find  none 
John  6.  24.  and  came  to  Capernaum,  .s.  for  .lesus 
Jicts  13.  8.  s.  to  turn  away  the  deputy  from  faith 

11.  went  aboiit  s.  some  to  lead  him  by  the  hand 
1  Cor.  10.  33.  not  .?.  mine  own  profit,  but  of  many 
1  Pet.  5.  8.  walkcth  about,  s.  whom  he  may  devour 

SEEM. 
Oen.  27.  12.  I  shall  .«.  to  him  a.s  a  deceiver 
Ilrut.  15.  18.  not. s  hard,  when  thou  sendest  away 

25.  3.  tlien  thy  brother  should  s.  vile  unto  thee 
Josh.  24.  15.  if  it  s.  evil  unto  vou  to  serve  the  Lord 
J^fh.  9.32.  let  not  all  the  trouble  s.  little  before  thee 
f.sth.  8.  5.  if  the  thing  .5.  right  before  the  king 
JVa/i.  2.  4.  the  chariot  shall  «.  like  torches 

1  Cor.  11.  Ifi.  but  if  any  mnn  .?.  to  be  contentious 
12. 22.  those  members  which  s.  to  be  more  feeble 

2  Cor.  10. 9.  I  may  not .«.  as  if  I  would  terrify  you 
jrrh.4.1.  lest  any  of  you  should  s.to  come  short  of  it 
Jam.  1.  26.  if  any  among  von  s.  to  be  religious 

Srr  Goon. 
SEEMED. 
Oi'n.  19. 14.  but  he  s.  as  one  that  mocked  to  his  sons 
29.  20.  and  they  •«.  unto  him  but  a  few  days 
Ecrl.  9.  13.  this  wisdom  s.  great  unto  me 
Jer. 27. 5.  ?iven  earth  unto  whom  it .?.  meet  unto  me 
/^ukp  2-?.  II.  their  words  .«.  to  them  as  idle  tales 
Onl.  2.  6.  but  these  who  s.  to  be  somewhat 
d.  James,  Cephas,  and  .Tohn,  who  s.  to  bo  pillars 


SEE 

SEEJIETII. 
Lev.  14.  35.  it  s.  there  is  a  plague  in  the  house 
jVum.  10.  9.  s.  it  but  a  small  thing  unto  you? 
1  Sam.  18.  2.3.  s.  it  light  to  be  a  king's  son-in-law? 
Prov.  14. 12.  there  is  a  way  which  s.  right,  10.  25. 

18.  17.  he  that  is  first  in  his  own  cause  .f.  just 
K2ck.  34.  18.  s.  it  a  small  thing  to  have  eaten  up 
J^vJcc  8. 18.  from  him  be  taken  what  he  s.  to  have 
Jicls  17.  18.  he  s.  a  setter  forth  of  strange  gods 

25.  27.  it  s.  unreasonable  to  send  a  prisoner 
1  Cor.  3. 18.  if  s.  to  be  wise,  let  him  become  a  fool 
Heb.  12.  11.  now  no  chastening  s.  to  be  joyous 
See  Good. 
SEEMLY. 
Prov.  19. 10.  delight  is  not  s.  f<ir  a  fool,  much  less 

26. 1.  rain  in  harvest,  so  honour  is  not «.  for  a  fool 

SEEN. 
Gen.  31.  42.  God  hath  s.  mine  aflliction  and  labour 
Exod.  10.  6.  such  locusts  as  fathers  have  not  s. 
Lev.  5. 1.  whether  he  baths,  or  known  of  swearing 
TVwJrt.  14.  22.  those  men  which  have  s.  my  glory 

93.  21.  nor  hath  he  s.  pervevseness  in  Israel 

27. 13.  when  thou  hast  s.  it,  thou  shalt  be  gathered 
Deut.  1.28.  we  have  s.  the  sons  of  the  Anakims 
31.  thou  hast  s.  how  the  Lord  bare  thee  as  a  man 

3.  21.  thine  eyes  have  s.  all  the  Lord  hath  done 

4.  3.  s.  what  the  Lord  did  because  of  Baal-peor 

9.  lest  thou  forget  the  things  thine  eyes  have  s. 

5.  24.  we  have  s.  that  God  doth  talk  with  man 
10. 21.  great  and  terrible  things  thine  eyes  have  s. 

11.  2.  have  not  s.  the  chastisement  of  the  Lord 
7.  but  your  eyes  have  ,«.  all  the  great  acts  of  Lord 

21.7.  hands  have  not  shed,  nor  have  our  eyes  s.  it 
29.  3.  the  great  temptations  thine  eyes  have  s. 
33.  9.  who  said  to  his  mother,  I  have  not  s.  him 
•/()5A.24.  7.  eyes  haves,  what  I  have  done  in  Egypt 
Jtidg.  2.  7.  the  elders  who  had  s.  the  great  works 
13.  22.  we  shall  die,  because  we  have  s.  God 
18.  9.  we  have  s.  land,  behold,  it  is  very  good 

1  Sam.  6.  16.  five  lords  had  s.  it,  they  returned 

23.  22.  see  his  place,  and  who  hath  s.  him  there 

24.  10.  behold,  this  day  thine  eyes  have  s.  how 

2  Sam.  18.  21.  go  tell  tlie  king  vvhat  thou  hast .?. 
l/rY(i^.?10.4. queen  of  Shebahad  ^.Sohmion's  wisd. 

7.  till  I  came  and  mine  eyes  had  s.  2  Chr.  9.  3,  6. 
13.  12.  sons  had  s.  what  way  man  of  God  went 
20.  13.  hast  thou  s.  all  this  great  multitude  ? 
2  Kings  20. 15.  what  have  they  s.?  Hezekiah  said, 
all  things  in  mine  house  have  they  s.  Isa.  39.4. 
23.  29.  he  slew  Josiah,  when  he  had  s.  him 
Ezra  3. 12.  many  that  had  s.  the  first  house,  wept 
Esth.  9. 26.  of  that  which  they  had  .s.  concerning 
.Toh  7.  8.  eye  that  hath  s.  me  shall  see  me  no  more 

8.  18.  his  place  shall  say,  I  have  not  s.  thee 

10.  18.  oh  that  I  had  died,  and  no  eye  had  s.  me 
13.  1.  mine  eye  hath  s.  all  this,  mine  ear  heard 

20.  7.  they  that  have  .9.  him  shall  say,  where  is  he? 
28.  7.  a  path  which  the  vulture's  eye  hath  not  .9. 
38. 17.  hast  thou  .9.  doors  of  the  shadow  of  death? 

22.  or  hast  thou  s.  the  treastu'es  of  hail  ? 

PsnI.W.  14.  thou  hast  .9.  it,  for  thou  behold,  mischf. 
35.  21.  our  eye  hath  s.  ||  22.  this  thou  hast  .s. 
48.  8.  so  have  we  .9.  in  city  of  the  Lord  of  hosts 
.54. 7.  mine  eye  hath  .9.  his  desire  on  mine  enenres 
68.  24.  they  have  s.  thy  goings,  O  God,  of  inv  G. 
90.  15.  and  the  years  wherein  we  have  s.  evil 
98.  3.  the  ends  of  earth  have  s.  salvation  of  God 

Prow. 2.5.  7.  the  prince  whom  thine  eyes  have  .9. 

Eccl.  4.  3.  who  hath  not  .9.  the  evil  work  that  is 

6.  5.  he  hath  not  .9.  the  sun,  nor  known  any  thing 

6.  yea,  though  I  live,  yet  hath  he  s.  no  good 
Tsa.  6.  5.  for  mine  eyes  have  .9.  the  Lord  of  hosts 

9.  2.  that  walked  in  darkness  hive  .9.  a  great  light 
fi4.4.nor  hath  eye  .9. what  he  hath  prepared  for  him 
66.  8.  who  hath  heard,  who  hath  .9.  such  things? 

19.  to  the  isles  afar  off  that  have  not  s.  my  glory 
.Ter.  1.  12.  then  said  the  Lord,  thou  bast  well.  .9. 
3.  6.  hast  thou  s.  what  backsliding  Isr.  hath  done? 

12.  3.  thou  hast  s.  me,  and  tried  my  heart 
Lam.  1.  8.  because  they  hnve  s.  her  nakedness 

10.  she  hath  .9.he:itben  entered  into  her  sanclunry 
2. 14.  thv  proiihets  have  .9.  vain  and  foolish  thin::s 

for  thee,  they  have  .9.  false  burdens  and  cau-es 
16.  thv  enemies  say,  we  have  found,  we  have  .«.  ii 

3.  .59.  O  L.  thou  hast  .9.  rnv  wrong,  judge  mv  cause 
60.  thou  hast  s.  all  their  vengeance  .igainst  me 

Ezrk.  8.  12.  thou  hast  .9.  whnt  the  ancients  do 
15.  then  said  he,  htist  thou  .9.  this?  17.  |  47.  6. 

13.  3.  and  have  .9.  nothing  H  6.  they  have  .9.  vanity 

7.  hnve  ye  not  .9   a  vain  vision,  whereas  ye  say 
Dav.  9.  21.  Gabriel  whom  T  had  .9.  in  the  vision 
7.e</i.  10.  2.  and  the  diviners  have  s.  a  lie,  and  told 
.Jtfril.  2.  2.  for  we  li.ave  .9.  his  star  in  ihe  east 

13. 17.  mnny  prophets  desired  to  see  those  things 
which  ve  see,  and  have  not  .9.  them,  r.nkr  10.24. 

21.  32.  and  ve,  when  ve  had  .9.  it,  repented  not 
Mark  9.  ).  till  Ihey  have  .9.  the  kingdom  ofGod 

9  they  should  tell  no  man  what  thlnis  they  had  .9. 
16.  14.'thev  bnlieved  not  them  which  had  .9.  him 
Luke  1.22.  they  perceived  that  he  had  s.  a  vision 


SEE 

Luke2.  20.  praising  God  for  all  things  they  had  * 

26.  not  see  death  before  he  had  *■.  Lord's  Christ 
30.  for  mine  eyes  have  s.  thy  salvation 

5.  26.  saying,  we  have  s.  strange  things  to-day 
9.  36.  told  no  man  the  things  which  they  had  s, 

19.  37.  for  all  the  mighty  works  that  they  had  a. 

23.  8.  he  hoped  to  have  s.  some  miracle  done 

24.  23.  saying,  that  they  had  s.  a  vision  of  angels 
37.  and  supposed  that  they  had  6\  a  spirit 

John  1.18.  no  man  hath  s.  God  at  any  time,  the  Son 

in  bosom  of  Father  declared  liim,  1  Johni.Vi. 

3.  11.  verily  we  testify  that  we  have  s. 

32.  what  he  hath  s.  and  hoard  that  he  tcstifieth 

4.45.  the  Galileans  had  s.  all  he  did  at.Ierusalem 

5.  37.  ye  have  not  at  any  time  s.  his  shape 

6.  14.  those  men,  when  they  had  s.  the  miracle 
46.  not  that  any  man  hath  s.  the  Father 

8.57.not  fifty  years  old,and  hast  thou  .9.  .Abraham? 
9.  8.  the  neighbours  which  before  had  t«.  him 
.37.  thou  hast  both  «.  and  it  is  he  that  lalketh 
11.  45.  had  s.  vvhat  Jesius  did,  believed  on  him 

14.  9.  he  that  hath  s.  me,  hath  s.  the  Father 

15.  24.  have  s.  and  hated  both  me  and  my  Father 

20.  IS.  she  had  s.  the  Lord  ||  25.  have  s.  the  Lord 
29.  Thomas,  because  thou  ha.st  s.  hast  believed 

Jlcts  4. 20.  we  cannot  but  speak  things  we  have  s. 

7.  44.  according  to  the  fashion  that  he  had  s. 

9.  12.  he  haih  *.  in  a  vision  a  man  named  Ananias 

27.  declared  to  them  how  he  had  s.  the  Lord 

10.  17.  what  this  vision  he  had  s.  should  mean 
yicts  11. 13.  be  shewed  us  how  he  had  s.  an  angel 

23.  when  he  had  «.  the  grace  of  God  was  glad 

16.  10.  after  he  had  s.  vision  we  went  to  Maced. 
40.  they  had  s.  the  brethren,  they  comforled  them 

21.  29.  ihey  had  5.  before  with  him  Trophimus 

22.  15.  be  witness  of  what  ttou  hast  .9.  26.  16. 

1  Cor.  2.9.eye  hath  not  s.  nor  ear  heard,  nor  entered 
9.  1.  have  I  not  s.  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  ? 
Phil.  4.  9.  things  j'e  have  heard  and  s.  in  me,  do 
Col.  2.  1.  and  for  as  majiy  as  have  not  «.  my  face 

13.  intruding  into  those  things  he  halh  not  *. 
1  Tim.  6.  16.  whom  no  man  hath  «.  or  can  see 
I  .Tohn  1.  1.  that  which  we  have  ,9.  wilh  our  eyes 

2.  the  life  was  manifested,  and  we  have  s.  it 

3.  that  which  we  have  .9.  declare  wij  unto  yoa 

3.  6.  whosoever  sinn.  hath  not  5.  him  nor  known 
4.14. we  have  s.  and  do  testify, Father  sent  the  Son 

20.1iothatloveth  not  his  brotherwhom  he  hath*, 
how  can  he  love  God  whom  he  hath  not«.? 
3  .Tohn  11.  he  that  doeth  evil,  halh  not  s.  God 
Rev.  1.  19.  write  the  things  which  Ihou  hast  5. 
22.8.  when  I  had  heard  and  .9. 1  fell  down  to  worsh. 

//aue/SEEN. 
Grn.  1.  1.  thee  have  f  s.  righteous  before  me 
1  Chrov.  29.  17.  now  have  Is.  thy  people  to  offer 
r.9oZ.  37.25.  yet  Acyfi  /not  s.  tberighleous  forsaken 
F.ccl.  7.  15.  all  things  Aa7)c  7.9.  in  days  of  my  vanity 

8.  9.  all  this  have  Is.  and  applied  my  heart 

9.  13.  this  wisilom  have  Is.  under  the  sun 
.Trr.  46.  5.  wherefore  have  Is.  them  dismayed 
Zech.  9.  8.  for  now  haiie  Is.  with  mine  eyes 

IhaveSZEN. 
Gen.  31.  12.  Ihnve  s.  all  that  Laban  doth  to  tliee 
32.30. //muc  .9.  God  face  to  face,  and  am  preserved 
33.  10.  for  therefore  I  hnrr  s.  thy  face,  40.  30. 
Exod.  3.  7.  I  have  s.  the  afHictiou  of  my  people 

9.  I  have  al.so  s.  the  oppression,  16. 
.32.9.  Lord  said,  /Ani-e. 9.  this  people,  75fu?.  9. 13. 
.hiilg.  6.  22.  alas,  for  because  I  have  s.  an  angel 
14.  2.  I  have  s.  a  woman  in  Timnath,  get  her 

1  Sam.  16.  IS.  I  have  s.  a  son  of  Jrsse,  ciinnin» 

2  Kings  9. 26.  fkave  .9.  yesterday  blood  of  Nnboth 
20.  5.  saith  Lord,  I  have  s.  thy  'ears,  Isa.  38.  5. 

./■0A4.8.  even  as  I  have  s.  \\wy  that  plow  iniquity 
5.  3.  Ihnve  s.  the  foolish  takine  root,  but  I  cursed 
1||fl7.  hear  me,  that  which  I  have  s.  I  declare 
31.  19.  if  [have  s.  any  jierish  for  want  of  clothing 

Psnl.  37.  35.  I  have  s.  Ihe  W'cked  in  great  (lower 
.55.  9.  I  have  s.  violence  and  strife  in  the  city 
63.  2.  iriory,  so  as  /  have  s.  thee  in  the  sanctuary 
110.  96.  Thare  s.  an  end  of  all  perfection 

Feci.  1. 14.  I  hnve  s.  all  the  wrrks  under  the  sun 
3.10.  r  have  .9.  (be  travail  which  Godlialh  given 
5.  13.  there  is  a  sore  evil  which  I  hare  s.\mi\<ir  sun 
18.  behold  that  which  I  have  s.  it  is  ffnod  to  tat 
fi.  1.  there  is  nn  evil  which  I  have  s.  10.  5. 
10.7.  Ih.  s.  servnnts  upon  horses,  and  princes  walk 

f9rt.44.16.  he  saith,  I  nm  warm,  Ihnve  s.  the  fira 
57.  W.  I  hare  s.  his  ways,  and  will  heal  him 

.Icr.  7.  11.  behold,  I  have  s.  it,  saith  the  Lord 
13.  27.  I  have  s.  thine  adulteries  nnd  ncishinjrR 
23.13.  rhave  s.M'iv  in  prophets  of  Samaria,  14. 

Lnm.'^.  1.  Ihnve  .9. "aflliction  by  rod  of  his  wrath 

rian.2.26.make known  unto  me\hc  Arenm  fhnve .1 

4.  9.  the  visions  ofmy  dream  that  f  hnrr  s.  18, 
Iln.t.  6.  10.  Ihave  s.  a  horrible  thing  in  Israel 
.Tnhn  8.  38.  I  speak  that  Ihave  s.  with  my  F.-'ther 
.lets  7.  34.  Ihave  .t  the  nfflinion  ofmy  people 

YeharnfiEF.T^. 
Gen.  45.  13.  tell  my  father  of  all  that?/c  have  s. 


SEE 

Eiod.  11.13.  the  Egyptians  whom  ye  have  s.  to-day 
ly.  4.  ije  have  s.  wlia'.  I  did  unto  the  Egyptians 
20.  '2i.  ye  kacc  s.  tiiat  I  liave  tallied  wjlh  you 
£>cut.'M.  •-i-i/e/iaves.  all  that  the  Lord  did  in  Kgypt 
uiilo  i'huraoh,  his  servants,  and  land,  Jusli.  "iJ.  3. 
IT.  yc  have  s.  their  abominations  and  idols 
Judg.'JA8.\\hal  yc have s.  me  do,  do  aslliavedone 

1  Sam.  17. 25.  have  ye  s.  this  man  that  is  come  up? 
Job  ii~.  V2.  behold,  all  ye  yourselves  have  s.  it 
Jsa.  ~-2.  SI.  ye  have  s.  the  breaches  of  the  city 
Jer.-U.  2.  ye  have  s.  all  the  evil  I  have  brought 
/>zfA-.i:i.f<.yeAa(jcs.lies,llierel'orelamagai.nstyou 
/juke  7.  22.  tell  John  what  things  ye  huve  s. 
John  a  36.  ye  also  have  s.  me,  and  believe  not 

8.  38.  ye  do  that  ye  have  s.  with  your  Father 
14.  7.  Iienceforth  ye  know  him,  and  have  s.  Iiim 

Mcts  1.11.  Jesus  shall  eo  come,  as  ye  have  s.  him  go 
Jam.  5.  11.  and  ye  have  s.  the  end  ot  the  Lord 

SKKiV,  Fu.isivfly. 
Gen.  8.  5.  were  the  tops  of  the  mountains  s. 

9.  H.  that  the  bow  shall  be  ».  in  the  cloud 
22.  14.  in  the  mount  of  the  Lord  it  shall  be  s. 

Exod.  13.  7.  no  leavened  bread  be  s.  Deut.  IC.  4. 

33.  23.  back  parts,  but  my  face  shall  not  be  s. 

34. 3.  neither  let  any  man  be  s.  through  the  mount 
JiTum.  14.  14.  tliat  thou.  Lord,  art  s.  face  to  face 
Jadrr.a.ti.wds  tliere  a  shield  or  spear  s.anig.  40,000? 

19.  30.  there  was  no  such  deed  done  nor  s. 

2  Sam.  17.  17.  for  they  might  not  be  s.  to  come 

22.  11.  ho  was  s.  upon  the  wings  of  the  wind 
1  Kin^s  C.  18.  all  was  cedar,  there  was  no  stone  s. 

8.  8.  ends  of  the  staves  were  not  s.  in  holy  place 
10. 12.  no  such  alniug-trees  were  s.  unto  this  day 

Job  3.'J.  21.  his  tlesh  is  consumed,  it  cannot  be  s. 

Psal.  IS.  15.  then  the  channels  of  water  were  s. 

I.ia.  1.  t  12.  wiien  ye  come  to  be  s.  before  me 
10. 12.  when  it  is  s.  that  Moab  is  weary 
47. 3.  thy  nakedness  covered ,  thy  shame  shall  be  «. 
60.  2.  and  his  glory  shall  be  s.  upon  tliee 

Z.ech.  9.  14.  and  the  Lord  shall  be  s.  over  them 

Jilat.  <).  1.  do  not  your  alms  to  be  s.  of  men,  5. 
y.  33.  saying,  it  was  never  so  s.  in  Israel 

23.  5.  all  their  works  they  do  to  be  s.  of  men 
Mark  16. 11.  they  heard  that  he  had  been  s.  of  her 
l^uke  24.  t  31.  and  he  ceased  to  be  s.  of  them 
Jicts  1.  3.  being  s.  of  them  forty  days,  13.  31. 
Horn.  1.  20.  the  invisible  thmgs  of  him  are  clearly,?. 

8.24.  but  hope  that  is  s.  is  not  hope, for  what  a  man 

1  Cor.  15. 5.  he  was  s.  of  Cephas,  then  of  the  twelve 

6.  afier  that  he  was  s.  of  above  500  brethren 

7.  s.  of  James  II  8.  last  of  all  he  was  .5.  of  nie  also 

2  Cor.  4. 18.  while  wc  look  not  at  things  that  are  .■». 
but  at  things  which  arcnots.thgs..?.are  temporal 

1  Tim.  3. 16.  (Jod  was  manifest  in  flesh,  .s.  of  angels 
H'-.b.  11.  1.  faith  is  the  evidence  of  things  not  s. 
3.  so  that  things  which  are  .?.  were  not  made 
7.  Noah  being  warned  of  God  of  things  not  s. 
13.  having  s.  them  afar  off  were  persuaded 
I  Pet.  1.  8.  whom  having  not  s.  ye  love,  in  whom 
lieo.  11.  19.  there  was  s.  in  his  temple  the  ark 
SEER. 
See  the  Signification  n/  Prophet. 
1  Sam.  9.  9.  come,  and  let  us  go  to  the  s.  he  that  is 
now  called  a  prophet  was  before-time  called  a  .s. 
11.  is  the  s.  here?  {{  13.  where  the  s.  house  is 
19.  Samnel  answered  Saul,  and  said,  I  am  the  s. 
1  Sam.  15.  27.  the  king  said,  art  not  thou  a  .?.  ? 
24. 11.  word  came  to  Gad,  David'ss.  1  CAr.21.9 

1  Chr.  9.22.  Samuel  the  s.  did  ordain  in  set  oflice 

25.  5.  Heman  the  king's  ,?.  in  the  words  of  God 

26.  28.  all  that  Samuel  the  s.  had  dedicated 
29.29.  the  acts  of  David  are  written  in  the  book  of 

Samnel  the  .«.  and  in  the  hook  of  Gad  the*. 

2  C/iron. 9. 29.  written  in  the  visions  of  Idilo  the.?. 
12.1.5.  artsof  Rehoboam  in  the  book  of  Mdo  tl^. 
16.  7.  Ilanani  the  s.  came  to  Asa  king  of  JuIWi 

10.  then  Asa  was  wroth  with  the  s.  for  this  thing 

19.  2.  Jehu  son  of  Hanani  the  s.  went  to  meet 
29.  25.  th.;  commandfm>nt  of  Gad  the  king's  n. 

30.  with  the  words  of  David  and  .Asapli  the  s. 
35.  15.  commandment  of  Jednlhun  the  king's  s. 
./imoa  7.  12.  said  unto  Amos,  O  Ihou  s.  flee  away 

SEERS. 
2/r!n^-.?17. 13.  testified  , n gainst  Isr.  and  Judahbys. 
2  Chron.  33. 18.  wonls  of  the  .«.  that  spake  to  him 
19.  they  are  written  among  the  sayings  of  the  s. 
I.^fi.  29.  iO.  your  rulers,  the  s.  hath  he  covered 
30. 10.  who  say  to  the  .t.  see  not,  and  to  prophets 
JlTie.  3. 7.  thenshalllhe.?.  be  ashamed  and  diviners 

8EEST. 
den.  13.  Mi.  the  land  lh(m  n.  to  thee  will  T  give  it 
16.  13.  called  the  Lord  that  <pake,  lliou  God  s.  me 
31.  43.  Laban  said,  all  that  thou  s.  is  mine 
i^rorf.  10. 28.  that  day  Ihou  «.  my  face  thou  shall  die 
Dfvt.  4. 19.  lest  when  thou  g.  the  son  Ihou  worship 
12.  13.  olTijr  not  in  every  place  that  Ihou  s. 

20.  I.  whim  thou  poest  to  battle  and  n.  horses 

21   11.  and  s.  among  captivs  a  beautiful  woman 

fii'/rr.  9.  3fi.  ihou  ».  the  shadow  of  the  niountains 

lirini'-«21.29.a.  thouhow  Ahabhumbloth  himself 

526 


SEL 


SEL 


Job  10.  4.  hast  thou  eyes,  or  s.  thou  as  man  seeth?  I  Some  ancunts  have  thought,that  Selali  shewed  tha 


f'rov.  22. 29.  s.  thou  a  man  diligent  in  his  business  ? 

26.  12.  s.  thou  a  man  wise  in  his  own  conceit  1 

2'J.  20.  s.  thou  a  man  that  is  hasty  in  his  words? 

Eccl.  5.  8.  il  thou  6-.  the  oppression  of  the  poor 

/su.58.3.  wherefore  have  we  lasted,  and  ihou  s.not? 

7.  when  thou  «.  the  naked,  that  lliou  cover  him 

Jer.l.  11.  the  word  came  to  Jeremiah  what  s.  thou? 

13.  I  24.  3.  .^mos  7.  8.  |  8. 2.  Zech.  4. 2.  |  5.  2. 

7. 17.  «.  thou  not  what  they  do  in  cities  of  Judah? 

20.  12.  U  Lord,  that  s.  the  reins  and  the  heart 

32.  24.  is  come  to  pass,  and  behold,  thou  s.  it 
Ezek.  8.  6.  son  of  man,  s.  thou  what  they  do  ? 

40.  4.  declare  all  thou  s.  to  the  house  of  Israel 
Dan.  1.  13.  and  as  thou  6-.  deal  with  thy  servants 
Mark  5.  31.  thou  s.  the  multitude  thronging  Ihue 

13.  2.  Jesus  said,  .s.  thou  these  great  buildnigs? 
Au/.e  7.  44.  he  said  to  Simon,  s.  tliou  this  woman? 
.'icls  21.  20.  thou  »'.  how  many  thousands  believe 
Jam.  2.  22.  s,  thou  how  faith  wrought  with  works? 
Rev.  1. 11.  what  thou  .«.  write  in  a  book  and  send  it 

SEETH. 
Gen.\5. 13.  have  I  also  looked  after  him  thats.  me? 

44.  31.  when  he  s.  lad  is  not  with  us,  he  will  die 
Exod.  4.  14.  and  when  he  s.  thee  iie  will  be  glad 

12.  23.  and  when  he  s.  the  blood  upon  the  lintel 
7^ev.  13.  20.  when  the  priest  s.  the  plague  in  sight 
Deal.  32.  36.  when  he  .5.  that  their  power  is  gone 

1  Sam.  16.  7.  Lord  i.  not  man  js.  looks  on  the  heart 

2  Kings  2.  19.  this  city  is  p'easant,  as  my  lord  s. 
Job  8.  17.  and  s.  the  place  of  stones 

11.  U.S.  wickedness,  will  he  not  then  consider  it? 
22. 11.  clouds  are  a  covering  to  him  that  he  s.  not 
28.  10.  and  his  eye  s.  every  precious  thing 

24.  and  he  s.  under  the  whole  heaven 
34.  21.  his  eyes  are  on  man,  he  s.  all  his  goings 
42.  5.  I  have  heard,  but  now  mine  eye  s.  thee 
Psal.  37.  13.  for  he  s.  that  his  day  is  conjing 
49. 10.  he  s.  that  wise  men  die,  likewise  the  fool 
58.10.  righteous  shall  rejoice,  when  he  s.  vengean. 
Eccl.  8. 16.  nor  day  nor  night,  s.  sleep  with  his  eyes 
Isa.  21.  6.  let  the  watchmen  declare  what  he  s. 

28.  4.  when  he  that  looketh  upon  it,  s.  it 
29. 15.  and  they  say  who  s.  us?  ||  47. 10.  none  s.  me 

Ezek.  8.  12.  they  say,  the  Lord  s.  us  not,  9.  9. 

12.  27.  the  vision  that  he  s.  is  for  many  days 
18.  14.  if  he  beget  a  son  that  s.  his  father's  sins 
33.  3.  if  when  he  a.  the  sword  come,  he  blow 
39. 15. when  any  s.  a  man's  bone,  then  set  up  a  sign 

Mat.  6.  4.  thy  Father  wlio  s.  in  secret,  6.  18. 
Mark  5. 38.  he  s.  the  tumult,  and  them  that  wept 
Luke  16.  23.  he  a.  Abraham  afar  off,  and  Lazarus 
John  1.  29.  the  next  day  John  a.  Jesus  coming 

5.  19.  do  nothing  but  wliat  he  s.  the  Father  do 

6.  40.  who  .S-.  the  Son,  and  believeth  on  him 

9.  21.  by  what  means  he  now  jj.  we  know  not 

10.  12.  but  a  hireling  a.  Ilie  wolf  co.niiiig 

11.  9.  he  stumbleth  not,  because  he  s.  the  light 

12.  45.  he  that  s.  me,  s.  him  that  sent  me 
14.  17.  because  it  s.  him  not,  nor  knowuth  him 

19.  a  little  while,  and  the  world  a.  ine  no  more 
20. 1.  s.  the  sfone  taken  away  from  the  sejiule^ire 
6.  Peter  went  in  and  ,s.  the  linen  clothes  lie 
12.and  a.  two  angels  in  white,  sitting,  one  at  head 
21. 20.  a.  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved,  following 
Itom.  8.  24.  what  a  man  a.  why  doth  he  yet  hojie  for 
2  Cor.  12.6.  think  of  me  above  what  hes.  me  to  be 
l./uAn3.17.  hath  this  world, and  s.brother  have  need 

SEETHE. 
Kiorf.  10.23.  morrow  issahb.  to-day  s. that  ye  will  a. 
23. 19.  the  first-fruits  bring,  thou  shall  not «.  a  kid 
in  his  mother's  milk,  34.  20.  Deiit.  14. 21. 

29.  31.  thou  shall  a.  his  flesh  in  the  holy  place 
2A'inn-,<t4.38..?.  pottage  for  the  sons  of  the  prophets 
/C:f/i-.  24.  5.  lot  them  .«.  the  bones  therein 
Zech.  14.21.  that  sacrifice  shall  come  and  .9.  therein 

SEETHING. 
I.?fl7n.2.13.priest'sservantscame, while  fleshwasi. 
./ofr4l.20.  goetli  smoke  as  out  of  a  .«.  pot  or  caldron 
Jer.  1.  13.  what  seest  thou  ?  I  said,  I  see  a  s.  pot 

SEIZE. 
.Toah.  8. 7.  then  ye  shall  rise  up  and  s.  upon  the  city 
Job  3.  6.  as  for  that  night,  let  darkness  a.  upon  it 
f«.55.15.  let  death.?,  upon  them,  let  them  go  down 
JVI'nt.21. 38.  let  ns  kill  him,  and  a.  on  his  inheritance 

SEIZED. 
.Ter.  49.24.  Damascus  is  feeble,  fear  hath  s.  on  her 

SELAH. 
Thia  Hebrew  imrd  is  fnuvd  srrrnty-forir  ti 


intermissioji  or  ccs^sation  of  the  actual  inspira 
tion  of  the  Psalmist,  or  of  the  internal  muliunt 
of  his  devotions.  There  are  who  say  that  Selah 
has  no  signification,  and  that  it  is  only  a  note 
of  the  ancient  music,  whose  use  is  no  longer 
known  :  for  Selah  may  be  taken  away  from  all 
the  places  where  it  is  found,  withiiut  interrupt- 
ing the  sense  of  the  Psalm.  Others  say,  it  i^itt 
a  note  which  shewed  the  elevation  vf  the  voice, 
and  that  in  those  places  the  reader  should  cry 
out,  and  make  an  exxln motion. 

But  it  is  generally  agreed  and  concluded,  that  the 
proper  signification  of  Selah  is,  the  end,  or  a 
pau.sc:  .ind  though  it  be  not  always  found  at 
the  end  of  the  sense,  nor  at  the  end  of  a  Psalm, 
yet  the  ancient  musicians  might  sometimes  put 
Selah  in  the  margin  of  their  Psalters,  to  shew 
where  the  pause  was  to  be  made,  and  where  the 
tune  ended  :  Eur  if  fie  ancient  Hebrews  sung 
with  great  pauses,  ending  all  at  once,  and  also 
beginning  again  all  at  once,  which  some  think 
they  did ;  then  it  was  necessary  to  mark  in  the 
margin  of  the  Psalm  the  place  of  the  pause,  and 
of  the  end,  that  the  whole  choir  might  rest  at 
once,  and  begin  again  ot  the  same  time.  Hut 
withal  it  is  generally  placed  at  some  remarka- 
ble passage;  which  gives  occasion  to  think 
that  it  served  also  to  quicken  the  attention  or 
observation  of  the  singer  and  hearer. 

Paal.3. 2.  many  say,  there  is  no  help  for  him  in  G.  s. 

4.  the  Lord  heard  me  out  of  his  holy  hill,  s. 

5.  salvation,  thy  blessing  is  upon  thy  people,  *. 
32.5. 1  will  confess,  forgavest  iniquity  of  my  sin,  s. 

See  Psal.  4.  2,  4.  1  7.  5.  I  9.  16,  20.  |  20.  3 
I  21.  2.  I  24.  6,  10.  I  32.  4,  7.  |  39. 
5,    11.    I 


4.   I   ' 
3,   5. 
I   59. 
I    66. 
32.    I 


I    44.   8.    I    46.   3,   7,   11. 


47. 


in  the  book  of  Psalms,  and  thrice  in  Hiibakkuk. 
The  ScptuaginI,  and  other  interpreters,  trans- 
late Selah  by  Ald^<t\/u^,  Diapsalmn,  which 
signifies  a  rest  or  pause  in  singing;  nr  n  rhnvge 
of  tone,  areordingto  others.  Some  will  have  it, 
that  Selah  marks  the  beginning  of  a  new  arnse, 
nr  a  new  measure  of  verses.  Others  translate 
Sclnli  by  forever,  and  say,  that  it  joins  what 
follows  to  that  which  goes  before,  and  shews 
that  what  has  been  said  deserves  to  be  always 
remembered 


49.  13,  15.  I  50.  6.  I  52. 
I  54.  3.  I  .55.  7,  19.  I  57.  3,  0 
5,  13.  I  CO.  4.  I  61.  4.  1  62.  4,  8 
4,  7,  15.  I  67.  1,  4.  I  6S.  7  19, 
75.  3.  I  76.  3,  9.  |  77.  3,  9,  15. 
I  81.'  7.  I  82.  2.  I  83.  8.  1  84.  4,  8.  |  85. 

2.  I   87.  3,   6.   I   88.  7,    10.  ]  89.  4,  37, 
45,  48.  I  140.  3,  5,  8.     143.  6.  Uab.  3. 

3,  9, 13. 
SELDOM. 

Prov.  25.tl7.  letthy  foot  be  s.  in  neighbour's  house 

Jfer  SELF. 
/,<■». 15  28.then  shall  she  numb,  to  her  s.  seven  dayt 
21.  9.  if  she  profane  her  s.  by  playing  the  whoru 
JVum.  30.  3.  if  a  woman  bind  her  s.  by  a  bond 
Judg.  5.  29.  yea,  she  returned  answer  to  her  a. 
livth  1.  t  18.  thai  she  strengthened  her  s.  to  go 

1  .Sam.  4.  19.  she  bowed  her  s.  and  travailed 
25.  41.  Abigail  bowed  her  a.  to  the  earth  and  said 

2  .Sam.  11.  2.  he  saw  a  woman  washing  her  s. 
t4.  she  had  )iuritied  her  a.  from  uncleanness 

1  Kings  14. 5.  she  shall  feign  her  s.  another  woman 
.Tob  39.  18.  what  time  she  liftelh  up  her  a.  on  high 
Psal.  84.  3.  the  swallow  found  a  nest  for  her  a. 
Prov. 31. 22.  maketh  her  s.  coverings  of  tapestrjr 
fsa.  5.  14.  therefore  hell  hath  enlarged  her  a. 

34.  14.  screech-owl  find  for  her  a.  a  place  of  rest 

61.  10.  as  a  bride  adorneth  her  s.  with  jewels 
Jer.  3.  11.  backsliding  Israel  hath  justified  her  a. 

4.  31.  daughter  of  Zion  that  bewaileth  her  a. 

49.24.  Damascus  is  feeble  ami  turn.Afrs.  to  flee 
Ezek.  22.  3.  the  city  maketh  idols  against  her  a. 

23.  7.  with  all  Iheir  idols  she  defiled  her  s. 

24.  12.  she  hath  wearied  her  s.  with  lies 
Hos.  2.  i;.'.  she  decked  her  a.  with  her  car-rings 
Zech.  9.  3.  Tyrus  did  build  her  a.  a  strong  hold 
Mat.  9.  21.  for  she  said  within  her  s.  if  I  touch 
JVnr/t  4.  28.  the  earth  bringcth  forth  fruit  of  Aer*. 
Luke  1.  24.  Elisabeth  hid  her  a.  five  mimlhs 

13.  11.  the  woman  could  in  no  wise  lift  upA«r  *. 
//(•ft.  11. 11. thro' faith  Sarah  Acrs.  received  strength 
Kev.  2.  20.  Jezebel,  who  callelh  her  a.  a  prophetess 

18.  7.  how  much  she  hath  glorified  her  a.  and  hvcd 

19.  7.  and  his  wife  hath  made  her  a.  ready 
See  Himself. 

It  SELF. 
Oev.  1.  n.  the  fruit-tree,  whoso  seed  is  in  it  s.  12. 
/,f  «.7.24.  and  the  fat  of  the  beast  that  dielh  otita. 
not  oat,  17.  1.5.  I  22.  8.  I^eut.  14.  21. 
18.  25.  the  land  it  a.  vomilelh  out  inhabitants 

25.  II.  nor  reap  what  growclh  of  i«  s.  ha.  .17.  30. 
C*  1 1  h'innrx  7. 34.  the  undersetters  were  of  the  hasc  it  9- 


.fob  10.  22.  a  land  of  darkness,  as  darkness  it  $.    * 

Psal.  41.  6.  his  heart  gathereth  iniipiily  to  it  a. 
68.  8.  even  Sinai  its.  was  moved  nl  the  presence 

Prov.  18.  2.  that  his  heart  may  discover  it  a. 
23.  31.  the  wine,  when  il  movelh  it  a.  aright 
27.  16.  the  ointment  which  bewrayelh  it  a. 
25.  the  lender  grass  shpwclh  it  a.  and  herbfl 

/v«.10.15.  shall  axoboast  its.  ag.  him  thnlhewethl 
saw  majnify  it».  rod  shake  iV.t.BtafTlifluptt* 
55.  2.  let  vnur  soul  deli"hti/  .'.  in  fatness 
GO.  20.  neither  shall  Ihy  moon  withdraw  it  s 


SEL 

/fr.31.21.(Iierc  shall  dA-ell  in  Judah  il  i.husbandin 
Ezek.lA.  afire  unfolding  it  s.  and  brightii.  about  it 
4.  14.  I  have  not  eaten  what  dieth  of  if  s.  44.31. 
17.  14.  be  base,  that  it  might  not  lift  it  s.  up 
29. 15.  nor  exalt  it  s.  any  more  above  the  nations 
Dan.  7.  5.  it  raised  up  it  s.  on  the  one  side 
Mat.  6.  34.  take  thought,  for  the  things  of  it .?. 

12.  25.  every  kingdom  divided  agst.  it  s.  is  brought 

to  desolation,  Mark  3.  24, 25.  Lulce  11. 17. 
John  15.4.  as  the  branch  cannot  bear  fruit  odts. 
20.  7.  but  wrapped  together  in  a  place  by  it  s. 
21. 25.  the  world  it  s.  could  not  contain  the  books 
Jiom.S.  16.  Spiritits.  bears  witness  with  ourljKrit 
21.  the  creature  it  s.  also  shall  be  delivered 

26.  the  Spirit  it  s.  maketh  intercession  for  us 
14.  14.  that  there  is  nothing  unclean  of  i£  s. 

1  O/r.  11. 14.  doth  not  even  nature  it  s.  teach  you? 

13.  4.  charity  vauntelh  not  it  s.  not  puffed  up 
5.  charity  doth  not  behave  it  s.  unseemly 

2C<)r.l0.5.casting  down  every  thing  that  exalts  it  s. 
JEp/i.  4.  16.  unto  the  edifying  of  j£  s.  in  love 
f{eb.9.2i.  Chr.  is  entered  into  heaven  it  s.  to  appear 
3  .fo/ui  12.  Demetrius  hath  good  report  of  truth  it  s. 

My  SELF. 
Gf7i.3.10.Iwas  afraid, because  naked  and  hid  mij  s. 

22.  16.  by  my  s.  have  I  sworn,  in  blfssing  I  will 
bless  thee,  Isa.  45.  23.  Jcr.2'Z.  5.  |  49. 13. 
Ezod.W.  4. 1  bare  you,  and  brought  you  unto  my  s. 
J^'um.  8.  17.  I  sanctified  them  for  my  s. 

12. 6. 1  the  Lord  will  make  my  s.  known  unto  him 
Deut.1.9. 1  am  not  able  to  bear  you  viy  s.  alone,  12. 
Judg-.  16.  20.  I  will  go  out  and  shake  iny  s. 
Hut/i  4.  6.  he  said,  I  cannot  redeem  it  for  my  s. 

1  .Sam.  13.12.  I  forced  my  s.  therefore  and  offered 

20.  5.  let  mo  go,  that  I  may  hide  vtys.  in  the  field 
25.  33.  which  hast  kept  me  from  avenging  my  s. 

2  .Sam.  18.  2.  I  will  surely  go  forth  with  you  my  s. 
22.  24.  I  have  kept  my  s.  from  mine  iniquity 

I  Kinirct  18.  15.  I  will  surely  shew  my  s.  unto  him 
22.  30.  I  will  disguise  my  s.  2  Chron.  18.  29. 
S  Kings  .5. 18. 1  bow  my  s.  in  the  house  of  Rimmon 
i  C/irov.  7. 12. 1  have  chosen  this  place  to  my  s. 
JVoA.  5.7.1  consulted  with  7ny  s.  and  rebuked  nobles 
E.«t/t.5.12.  let  no  man  come  with  the  king  but  my  s. 
C.  6.  delight  to  do  honour  more  than  to  my  s. 
Job  6.  10.  yea,  I  would  harden  my  s.  in  sorrow 
7. 20.  why  a  mark,  so  that  I  am  a  burden  to  my  s. 

9.  20.  if  I  justify  my  s.  ||  27.  'I  will  comfort  my  s. 
3u.  if  I  wash  my  s.  with  snow-water,  and  make 

13.  20.  then  will  I  not  hide  my  s.  from  thee 

10.  1.  I  will  leave  my  complaint  upon  my  .?. 
19.4. if  I  have  erred,  mine  error  remain,  with  my  s. 

27.  whom  I  shall  see  for  my  s.  and  eyes  behold 
31.  17.  or  have  eaten  my  morsel  my  s,  alone 

29.  or  if  I  lift  up  7n.y  s.  when  evil  found  him 
42. 6.  wherefore  I  abhor  mys.  and  repent  in  dust 
Psal.35. 14. 1  behaved  my  s.  as  though  he  had  been 
my  friend  or  brother,  I  bowed  down  heavily 
57. 8.  awake  my  glory,  I  my  s.  awake  early,  108. 2. 
101.  2. 1  will  behave  my  s.  wisely  in  a  perfect  way 
109. 4.  are  my  adversar.  but  I  give  my  .s.  to  prayer 
119.  16.  I  will  delight  my  s.  in  thy  statutes 

47.  I  will  delight  my  s.  in  thy  commandmsnts 

52.1  renembered  thy  judgm.  and  comforted  my  s. 
131.  1.  nor  do  I  exercise  my  s.  in  great  matters 

2.3urelyl  have  behaved  and  quieted  my  s.as  child 
Kccl.'i.  3. 1  sought  in  my  heart  to  give  my  s.  to  wine 

19.  my  labour  wherein  I  have  phflwed  my  s.  wise 
ha.  .33. 10.  saith  the  Lord,  now  will  I  lift  up  vty  s. 

43.  21.  this  people  have  t  formed  for  my  .t. 

44.  24.  that  spreadeth  abroad  the  earlh  by  my  s. 
Jrr.  8.  18.  I  would  comfort  my  s.  against  sorrow 

21.  5.  and  f  my  s.  will  fight  against  you 

F.ie.k.  14.  7.  I  tfce  Lord  will  answer  him  bv  my  s. 

20.5.  in  the  day  I  made  mi/ .9.  known  unto  them,  9. 

29.  3.  my  river  is  mine,  [  h;ive  made  it  for  my  s. 

35.  11.  I  will  make  my  s.  known  amonirst  them 

38.23.  thus  will  I  macnify  my  s.  and  sanctify  mys. 
Dan.  10.  3.  neither  did  1  anoint  my  s.  at  all 
Mit.  fi.  6  and  bow  my  s.  before  the  high  God 
Hah.  3.  16.  when  I  heard,  I  trembled  in  my  s. 
Zrch.7. 3.  scparat.  my  s.  as  T  have  done  many  years 
J>uke  7.  7.  neither  thought  I  ot?/  .?.  worthy  to  come 

24.  39.  that  it  is  I  my  s.  handle  me  and  see 
.Tohn  5.  31.  if  T  bear  witness  of  rr:y  s.  it  is  not  true 

7.  17.  ho  shall  know  whether  I  speak  of  my  s. 

28.  I  am  not  come  of  my  s.  but  he  that  sent  me 
8. 14.tho'  I  bear  record  of  my  s.  my  record  is  true 

18.  I  am  one  that  bear  witness  of  my  s. 

28.  when  ye  shall  know  that  t  do  nothing  of  mjis. 

42.  neither  came  I  of  my  .i.  but  he  sent  me 

54.  if  I  honour  my  s.  my  honour  is  nothing 
10. 18.  no  man  taketh,  but  I  lay  it  down  of  my  s. 
12. 49. 1  have  not  spoken  of  my  s.  Father  sent  me 
14.3. 1  will  come  again,  and  receive  you  nr\\nmys. 

10.  the  words  that  I  speak,  I  sp^ak  not  of  my  s. 

21. 1  will  love  him,  and  manifest  my  .«.  to  him 

17.  19.  and  for  their  sakes  I  sanctify  my  s. 

jSf<.5  7.  t  37.  a  prophet  olyonr  brethren  as  I  mys. 

10.  26.  saying,  .stand  up,  I  my  s.  also  am  a  man 

527 


SEL 

\/9cfs 20. 24. neither  count  I  my  life  dear  untomys. 

24.  10.  I  do  more  cheerfully  answer  for  my  s. 
16.  herein  do  [  e.\ercise  7ny  s.  to  have  always 

25.  22.  Agrippa  said,  I  would  hear  the  man  my  s. 

26.  9.  I  verily  thought  with  my  s.  I  ought  to  do 
Ko7n.  9.  3.  I  could  wish  that  my  s.  were  acciysed 

11.  4.  I  have  reserved  to  7iiy  s.  7000  men 

15.  14.  and  I  vty  s.  also  am  persuaded  of  you 

16.  2.  a  succourer  of  many,  and  of7iiy  s.  also 

1  Cor.  4.  4.  for  I  know  nothing  by  m7j  s.  yet  am  I 
6.1  have  in  afiguretran.sferr.  to  ?»?/«.  andApollos 

7.  7.  I  would  that  all  men  were  even  as  I  my  s. 
9.  19.  yet  have  I  made  7iiy  s.  servant  unto  all 

27.  lest  that  I  my  s.  should  be  a  cast-away 

2  Cor.  10.  1.  now  I  Paul  vty  s.  beseech  you 
11.7.  have  I  committ.  an  offence  in  abasing  my  s.7 

9.1  have  keptm?/  s.from  being  burdensome  to  you 
16.  receive  me,  that  I  may  boast  77iy  s.  a  little 

12.  5.  of  7iiy  s.  I  will  not  glory  but  in  infirmities 
13.except  that  I  in^  s.  was  not  burdensome  to  you 

Gal.  2.  18.  I  make  7ny  s.  a  transgressor 
Phil.  2.  24.  that  I  also  my  s.  shall  come  shortly 
3.  13.  I  count  not  viy  s.  to  have  apprehended 
Pkilem.  17.  receive  Onesimus  as  »nj/  s. 

Oicn  SELF. 
Exod.'Si.  13.  to  whomihouswarestby  thine  oicn  s. 
.Joh7i  5.  30.  I  can  of  mine  07on  s.  do  nothing 

17.  5.  Father,  glorify  thou  me  with  thine  own  s. 
1  Cor.  4.  3.  yea,  I  judge  not  mine  oion  s. 
Philem.l9.  how  thou  owest  unto  me  even  thine  o.  s. 
1  PcJ.2. 24.  whohis  ow7is.  bare  our  sins  in  his  body 

SELF-SAME. 
Mat.  8. 13.  his  servant  was  healed  the  s.-same  hour 

1  Cor.  12.  11.  worketh  that  one  and  .s.-same  Spirit 

2  Cor.  5.  5.  he  that  wrought  us  for  s.-same  thing 
7.  11.  this  s.-same  thing  that  ye  sorrowed  after 

Sec  Saine  Day. 

Thy  SELF. 

Gen.  13.  9.  separate  thy  s.  I  pray  thee,  from  me 

14.  21.  give  me  the  persons,  take  goods  to  thy  s. 

16.  9.  return,  and  submit  thy  s.  under  her  hands 

33.  9.  brother,  keep  that  thou  hast  unto  thy  s. 
Exoii.  9. 17.  asyetexaltest  thys.  against  my  people 

10. 3.  how  long  wilt  thou  refuse  to  humble  thys.? 

28.  lake  heed  to  thy  s.  see  my  face  no  more,  34, 
12.  Dent.  4.  9.  )  12.  13,  19,  30.  1  Sam.  19.  2. 

18.  14.  he  said,  why  sittest  thou  thy  s.  alone? 

22.  so  shall  it  be  easier  for  thy  s.  and  they  bear 

34.  2.  come  and  present  thy  s.  there  before  me 
Lev.  9.  7.  go  and  make  an  atonement  for  thy  s. 

18.  20.  with  thy  neighbour's  wife  to  lefile  thy  s. 

23.  neither  lie  with  any  beast  to  defile  thy  s. 
19. 18.thoushaltlove  thy  neighbour  as  thys.  T  am 

the  Lord,  Mat.  19. 19. 1 22. 39.  Mark  12. 31. 

34.  the  stranger,  tlmu  shall  love  him  as  thy  s. 

JVum.  11.  17.  that  thou  bear  il  not  th7i  s.  alone 

16.  13.  except  thou  make  thy  s.  a  prince  over  u.' 

Deut.  9.  1.  to  possess  qetions  greater  than  thy  s. 

20. 14.  even  all  the  spoil  shall  thou  take  to  thy  s. 

22. 12.  thy  vesture  wherewith  thou  coverest  thij  s. 
Ruth  4.  B.  redeem  thou  my  right  to  thy  s.  I  cannot 

1  Sam.  20.  8.  if  iniquity  be  in  me,  slay  me  thy  s. 
25.  26.  hath  withholden  thee  from  avenging  thy  s. 

2  .Sam..  5.  24.  thai  then  thou  shall  bestir  thy  s. 
1.  24.  hast  confirmed  to  thy  s.  thy  people  Israel 

13.  5.  lay  dov.m  on  thy  bed  and  make  thy  s.  sick 
14.2.  feign  thy  s.  a  mourner,  and  put  on  apparel 

18. 13.  thys.  wouldest  huve  set  thy  s.  against  me 
22.  26.  thou  wilt  shew  Iky  s.  merciful,  Psal.  1«.25. 

27.with  pure  thou  wiltshew  f/(?/s.pure,P«.18.26. 

1  Kin^s  2.  2.  be  thou  stronj,  and  shew  thy  s.  a  man 
3. 11.  thou  ha<.l  not  asked  for  ihy  s.  long  life,  nor 

riches,  but  understanding,  2  Ch'-o7i.  1.11. 

13.  7.  come  home  with  me  and  refresh  thy  s. 

14.  2.  arise,  I  pray  thee,  and  disguise  thy  .?. 
fi.  why  feignesl  thou  thy  s.  to  be  another  ? 

18.  1.  go  shew  thy  s.  to  .Ahab,  and  T  will  send  rain 

20.  22.  strengthen  thy  s.  and  see  what  thou  doest 
40.  so  shall  thy  judgment  be,  thy  .*.hast  decided  it 

21.20.  because  thou  hast  boM  thy  s.  to  work  evil 

2  Iiings  22. 19.  hast  humbled  thy  s.  2  Chron.  34.27. 
1  Chron.  21.  12.  advise  wi;h  thy  s.  what  word 
2CAron.20.37.  thou  hast  joined  thy  s.  with  Aha/.iah 

21.  13.  hast  slain  thy  brethren,  better  than  thy  s. 
F.sth.A.VX  think'not  with  ^Aws.  thou  shnit  csf-ape 
.Tnh  5.  t  27.  hear  it,  and  know  thou  il  for  thys. 

15.  8.  and  dost  thou  restrain  wisdom  to  thy  s. 

22. 21.  acquaint  thy  s.  with  him,  and  be  at  peace 
30. 21.  with  thy  hand  thou  opposest  thy  s.  agst.  me 

Psal.  7.  6.  O  Lord,  in  thine  anger  lift  up  thy  s. 
10. 1.  why  hidest  thou  thy  s.  in  times  of  trouble? 

35.  23.  stir  up  thy  s.  and  awake  to  my  judgment 
37.  4.  delight  thy  S.  also  in  the  Lord,  shall  give 
49.  IS.  praise  thee,  when  thou  doest  well  to  thy  f. 
,50.  21.  that  I  was  altogether  such  a  one  as  thy  s. 
52.  1.  wliy  boKStest  thou  thy  s.  in  mischief? 

60.  1.  been  di8plea.«ed,  O  turn  thy  s.  to  us  again 
80.  15.  branch  thou  madest  strong  for  thy  s.  17. 
94.  1.  shew  thy  s.  ||  2.  lift  up  thy  s.  thou  judge 
Prov.  6.  3.  do  this,  my  son,  and  deliver  thy  s.  5. 


SEL 

Prov.  9. 12.  if  thou  he  wise,  shall  be  wise  fir  thy  S 
24. 19.  fret  not  thy  s.  because  of  evil  men 
27.  and  make  it  fit  for  thy  s.  in  the  field 
25.6.  put  not  forth  thy  s.  in  presence  of  the  king 
27. 1.  boast  not  thij  s.  of  to-morrow,  knowesl  not 
30.  32.  thou  hast  done  foolishly  in  lifting  up  thys 
£f(;^7.16.henot  righteous  over  much,normakei/(j 
s.  over  wise;  why  shouldest  thou  destroy  thys.? 

22.  that  thou  thy  s.  also  hast  cursed  others 
Isa.  26.  20.  hide  thy  s.  as  for  a  little  moment 

33.  3.  lifting  up  thy  s.  the  nations  were  scattered 
45. 15.  verily  thou  art  a  God  that  hidest  thy  s. 
52.  2.  shake  thy  s.  from  the  dust,  loose  thy  s. 

57.  8.  thou  hast  discovered  thy  s.  to  another 
9.  and  thou  didst  debase  t!iy  s.  even  unto  hell 

58.  14.  then  shall  thou  delight  thy  s.  in  the  Lord 

63.  14.  to  make  thy  s.  a  glorious  name 

64.  12.  wilt  thou  refrain  thy  s.  for  these  things? 

65.  5.  which  say,  si  and  by  thys.  come  not  near 
./er.  2.  17.  hast  thou  not  procured  this  unto  thy  s 

4.30.  tho'  thou  clothest  thy  .5. with  crimson,  in  vain 
shall  thou  make  thy  s.  fair,  lovers  despise  thee 
6.  26.  gird  with  sackcloth,  wallow  thy  s.  in  ashea 
17.  4.  thys.  shall  discontinue  from  thy  heritage 
20.  4.  behold,  I  will  make  thee  a  terror  to  thy  s 
22.  15.  because  thou  closest  thy  s.  in  cedar 
32.  8.  tho  redemption  is  thine,  buy  it  for  thy  s. 

45.  5.  and  seekesl  thou  great  things  for  thy  s.? 

46.  19.  furnish  thy  s.  to  go  into  captivity 

47.  5.  how  long  will  thou  cut  thy  .?.? 

6.  O  sword,  put  up  thy  s.  into  thy  scabbard 
I.am.'i.  18.  give  thys.  no  rest,  let  not  thy  eye  cease 

3.  44.  thou  hast  covered  thy  s.  with  a  cloud 

4.  21.  thou  shall  be  drunken,  make  thy  s.  naked 
F.iek.  3.  24.  go  shut  thy  s.  within  thine  house 

16.  17.  thou  made.st  to  thy  s.  images  of  men 
22.  4.  and  hast  defiled  thy  s.  in  thine  idols 

23. 40.  they  came  for  whom  ihon  didst  wash  thy  s 
31. 10.  because  thou  hast  lifted  up  Ihy  s.  in  height 
38.  7.  prejiaro  for  thy  s.  and  all  thy  company 
Don.  5.  17.  Daniel  said,  let  thy  gifts  be  to  thy  s. 

23.  but  h.ist  lilted  up  thy  s.  against  the  Lord 
10.  12.  and  to  chasten  thy  s.  before  thy  God 

Hos.  13.  9.  O  Israel,  thou  hast  destroyed  thy  s. 
Obad.  4.  though  thou  exalt  thy  s.  as  the  eagle 
.Mic.  1.  10.  in  house  of  Aphrah  roll  thy  s.  in  dust 

5.  1.  now  gather  thy  s. -in  lroop>!,  O  daughter 
.V(iA.  3. 15.  make  thy  s.  many  as  the  canker-worra 
7.ech.  2.  7.  deliver  thy  s.  O  Zion,  that  dwellest 
MntA.Ci.  ifSonofGod,  cast  W(7/.«.  down,  /.!/A:e4.9 

5.  33.  again,  thou  shall  not  forswear  thy  s. 

8. 4.  shew  thy  s.  to  priest,  Mark  1 .  44.  Luke  5. 14 
27.  40.  save  'thy  s.  Mark  15.  30.  Luke  23.  39. 

J.uke  4.  23.  ye  will  say,  physician,  heal  thy  s. 

6.  42.  when  thou  thy  s.  beholdest  not  the  beam 

7.  6.  Lord,  trouble  not  thy  s.  fox  1  am  not  worthy 
10.27.  thou  shall  love  thy  neighbour  as  ?//?/. «.ftom 

13.  9.  Gal.  .5.  14.  .Jam.  2.  a 

17.  8.  will  rather  say,  gird  thy  s.  and  serve  me 
.7i)Anl.22.who  art  thou?  what  saye.st  thou  of  C/i?/5.? 

7.  4.  if  thou  do  these,  shew  thy  s.  to  the  world 

8.  13.  thou  bearest  record  of  thy  s.  il  is  not  true 
53.  prophets  are  dead,  whom  makest  thou  Ihy  a 

10.  33.  thou,  beinir  a  man,  makest  thy  s.  God 
14.  22.  Lord,  how  wilt  thou  manifcsl  thy  s.  unto  ua 
18.34. sayest  thou  this  of  f/i?/.f.?  or  didothers  tell  it? 
21. 18.  wlum  thou  wast  young,  thou  girdeilst  thys. 
Jirts  i^.  29.  so  near,  join  Ihy  s.  to  this  chariot 
12.  8.  gird  thy  s.  \\  16.  28.  do  thy  s.  no  harm 
21. 24.  them  lake,  purify  thy  s.  with  them,  that  all 
may  know  that  thou  thy  s.  walkest  orderly 
24.8.<A7/ .«.  mavest  take  knowledje  of  those  things 
26.  1.  thou  art  permitted  to  speak  for  thy  s. 

24.  Festus  said,  Paul,  thou  art  beside  ihy  .<>. 
Tto)H.  2. 1.  jiulgest  another,  thou  condemnrst  thy  s. 

19.  that  thou  thy  s.  art  guide  of  the  blind 
21.  lliou  that  teachest,  teachest  thou  not  thy  s. 
14.  22.  hast  thou  faith  ?  have  it  to  thy  s. 
Gal.  6.  1.  considering  thy  s.  lest  thou  be  tempted 

1  Tim.  3.  15.  how  thou  oughtest  to  behave  thy  s. 

4.  7.  and  exercise  thy  s.  rather  unto  godliness 
15.  these  thincs,  give  thy  s.  wholly  to  them 
Ifi.lakeheed  tofA;/.<t.and  tollivdoctrine;  in  doing 
this  thou  shall  save  Mt/s.aiid  them  that  hearthte 

5.  22.  nor  partaker  of  others  sins,  keep  thy  '.  mire 

6.5.  men  of corr.  minds,  from  such  withdraw  thy  s 
2T(m.2.15.  study  to  shew  thys.  approved  unloGod 
Tit.  2.  7.  shewins  thv  s.  a  pattern  of  good  works 

SELF-WILL. 

Gen.  49. 6.  in  their  s.-tcilt,  they  digged  down  a  wall 

See  Frkt,  Hipr. 

SELF-WILLED. 

Tit.  1.  7.  for  a  bishop  must  not  be  ,?  -7cillrd 

2  Pet.  2.  10.  prcsumpfuous  are  they,  s.-witlrd 

SELL. 
fn  case  of  extreme  vecessity  the  Hebrews  were 
allowed  to  sell  their  oicn  liberty.  Lev.  25.  39, 
If  thy  brother  that  dwelleth  by  thee  be  waxen 
poor,  and  be  sold  unto  thee;  thou  shall  not 
compel  him  to  serve  as  a  bond-servant.     Thou 


SEL 

tkalt  not  oppress  him,  nor  sell  him  again  as  a 
slace;  he  fhall  abide  with  thee  only  as  a  teork- 
man  for  hire;  and  must  be  used  kindly,  as  a 
brother,  and  as  a  member  of  the  church  of  God 
as  well  as  thyself.  Fathers  had  a  power  of  sell- 
ing the  liberty  of  their  children.  Exod.  il.  " 
If  a  man  sell  liisdtuglite.-  to  be  a  maid-servant, 
ahe  shall  not  go  out  as  the  men-servants  do. 
Her  master  shall  not  dismiss  her,  as  another 
slave  is  dismissed  at  tht  sabbatical  year.  He 
shall  take  her  as  Ms  wife,  or  shall  many  her 
to  his  son.  If  he  cares  to  do  neither  of  these, 
he  shall  set  her  at  liberty. 
They  sold  also  insolvent  debtors,  and  even  their 
children,  as  appears  from  2  Kings  4.  1.  and 
Mat.  18.  '2o.  Sometimes  they  sold  free-men  for 
slaves,  as  Joseph  was  sold  by  his  brethren. 
This  crime  was  called  Plagium,  and  the  laic 
punished  it  with  death.  Exod.  21.  6,  He  that 
staalelh  a  man,  and  selleth  him,  or  if  he  be 
found  in  bis  hand,  he  shall  surely  be  put  to 
death-  The  Jews  confine  this  to  the  theft  of  a 
man  of  their  own  nation.  The  apostle  Paul, 
Uiriting  to 'Vimolliy,  places  plagiaries  amongst 
the  greatest  miscreants,  ITim.  1. 10.  ^Ay^pa.- 
To//ratK,  "I  F.nglish,  Men-sfealers.  Esau 
sold  his  birth-right,  Gen.  23.  33.  and  is  there- 
fore called  a  profane  person,  Heb.  12.  16.  for 
slighting  that  to  which  so  many  glorious  privi- 
leges belonged.  The  birth-righl  was  a  special 
type  of  Christ,  who  was  to  be  a  first-born  :  and 
of  the  church  called  God's  lirst-born,  Ezod.  4. 
a.  and  of  the  great  privileges  of  the  church; 
particularly  adoption,  and  eternal  life.     Heh. 

12.  23.  Jt  is  said,  that  the  Lord  had  sold  his 
people  to  their  enemies,  as  a  master  parts  with 
a  vicious  slave,  to  punish  him  for  his  infidelity 
end  disobedience.  Deut.  S2.  30,  How  should 
one  chase  a  thousand,  and  two  put  ton  thou- 
sand to  flight,  except  their  rock  had  sold  them  ? 
.<tfe  Judg.  2.  14.  I  3.  8.  I  10.  7. 

Thf  prophet  Elijah  said  to  Ahab,  1  ff7nn's21.2n, 
Thou  hast  sold  thyself  to  work  evil  in  the  sijht 
of  the  Lord.  Thou  hast  wilfully  and  wholly 
resigned  up  thyself  to  be  a  slave  to  thine  own 
bad  inclinations,  to  Satan,  and  his  eiriissaries, 
to  do  whatsoever  they  persuade  thee  to  do,  as  a 
slave  is  wholly  in  his  master's  power,  and  must 
employ  all  his  time  and  stren  irth  for  hi  s  service. 
The  like  is  said  of  the  idolatrous  Israelites,  2 
Kings  17.  17.  The  apostle  Paul  says,  Kom.7. 
]4,  But  I  am  carnal,  sold  under  sin.  He  did 
not  sell  himself  to  sin,  or  to  commit  sin,  as  it 
is  said  of  Ahab  ;  but  only  he  loas  overpowered 
sometimes  by  the  tyranny  of  corruption,  like 
a  slave  forced  to  be  subject  to  a  cruel  master ; 
he  Wiis  not  sin's  servant  or  shive,  but  mam/ 
times  he  was  sin's  captive  airainst  his  will,  as 
himself  di'clares,  Rom.  7.  2.1. 

0^.25.31.  Jacob  s;iid,s.me  this  day  thy  birth-right 
37.  27.  come,  let  us  s.  him  to  the  Ishmaelites 

£r/id.  21.7.  if  a  man  s.  his  daughter  to  be  a  servant 
8.  tos.  her  to  strange  nation,  shall  have  no  power 
35.  they  shall  j.  the  live  ox  and  divide  the  money 
22.  1.  if  a  man  steal  an  ox,  and  kill  it,  or .«.  it 

y^ffl.  25.  14.  if  thou  s.  ought  unto  thy  neighbour 
29.  if  a  man  .«.  a  dwelling-house  in  a  walled  city 
47.  if  thy  hrnthcr  s.  himself  unto  the  stranger 

Deut.  2.  28.  thou  shalt  s.  me  moat  for  money 
14.  21.  s.  that  which  dieth  of  itself  unto  an  alien 
21.  14.  thou  shalt  not  s.  her  at  all  for  money 

.Tudg.  4.  9.  .«.  Sisera  into  the  hand  of  a  woman 

1  A"in;^»21.25.. Ahab  dill  s.himsrif  to  workwickedn. 

iKings  4. 7.  ?o .?.  the  oil,  and  pay  ihy  debt,  Rn<]  live 

Jfrh.  5.  8.  and  will  ye  even  s.  your  brethren  1 
10.  31.  bring  viclual-i  on  the  s'abbalh-dav  to  s. 

Pror.23.  23.  buy  truth,  and  .«.  it  not,  also  wisdom 

Eiek.  30. 12.  s.  land  into  the  hand  of  the  wicked 
48. 14.  they  «hnll  not  «.  the  first-fruits  of  Ihf  land 

Joel  3.8.1  wdl  .^.your  sons  and  daughters  into  hand 
of  Juilah,  they  shall  s.  them  to  the  S:ibean3 

JImosP.  5.  n>^w-rnoon  be  gone,  that  we  may  s.  corn 
6.  yen,  and  .♦.  the  refuse  of  the  wheat 

Zerh.W.  5.  r.nd  they  that  ».  them  sav,  I  am  rich 

^oM?1.21.goand  ».lhat  thou  hast,  and  come  and 
follow  me,  Jfnrk  10. 21 .  J.uke  12.  33.  |  18. 22. 
85.9.  but  go  ye  rather  to  them  that  s.  and  buy 

/.uke  2-3.3'i  1.1  him .».  his  larmont,  and  buv  a  sword 

Jam.  4.  i:i.  we  will  buy  and  s.  and  get  gain 

Rev.  13.  17.  that  no  man  misht  buy  or  s.  save  he 
SELLER. 

/«a.  24.  2.  as  with  the  buyer,  bo  with  the  *. 

Ezek.  7. 12.  let  not  buyer  rejoice,  nor  the  s.  mourn 

13.  the  .I.  shall  not  return  to  ilmt  which  is  sold 
.fettlG.  14.  a  woman  named  Lydia,  a  ».  of  purple 

SELLERS. 
JVf  A.13.20  merchants  and  s.  lodged  without  Jemi. 

SELLEST. 
Paal.  44.  12.  lliou  a.  thy  people  fot  nought,  do»l  not 

saa 


SEL 

SELLETH 
Ezod.  21. 16.  he  that  stealcth  a  man  and  i.  him,  he 
shall  surely  be  put  to  death,  Deut.  24.  7. 
Ruth  4.  3.  he  said,  Naomi  s.  a  part  of  laud 
Pror.11.26.  blessing  upon  head  ofhim  thals.corn 

M.  24.  she  maketh  fine  linen  and 
J\ah.  3.4.  that  i.  nations  through  her  whoredoms 
Mat.  13.  44.  he  «.  all,  and  buyeth  tJiat  field 

f  SELVEDGE. 

Ezod.  2G.  4.  from  the  s.  in  the  coupling,  30. 11. 

Our  SELVES. 
Gen.  37. 10.  shall  we  come  and  bow  down  our  s.? 

44.  16.  Judali  said,  how  shall  we  clear  our  s.? 
-Vwrn.  32.  17.  but  wc  our  s.  will  go  ready  armed 
/>fu<.2.35.  cattle  we  took  for  a  prey  unto  our  s.  3.7. 
1  Sam.  14.  S.'we  will  discover  our  s.  unto  them 
Ezra  4.3.  but  weour*.  together  will  build  to  Lord 

8.21.  that  we  might  afflict  oar  s.  before  our  God 
Job  34.  4.  let  us  know  among  our  s.  what  is  good 
Psal.8'^.  12.  let  us  take  to  ours,  the  houses  of  God 

100.  3.  it  is  he  that  made  us,  and  not  wc  our  s. 
Prov.  7.  18.  come,  let  us  solace  our  s.  with  loves 
Isa.  28. 15.  and  under  falsehood  have  we  hid  our  s. 

56.  12.  we  will  fill  our  s.  with  strong  drink 
■fer.  50.  5.  come,  let  us  join  our  s.  to  the  Lord 
Luke  22.  71.  we  our  s.  have  heard,  .John  4.  42. 
.lets  6.  4.  but  we  will  give  our  s.  to  prajer 

23.  14.  we  have  bound  our  s.  under  a  curse 
Rom.  8.  23.  even  we  our  s.  groan  within  our  s. 

15.  1.  we  ought  to  bear  and  not  to  please  our  s. 

1  Cor.  11.31.  if  we  would  judge  our  s.  should  not 

2  Cor.\.i.  wherewith  we  ours,  are  comforted  of  G. 
9.  that  we  should  not  trust  in  our  s.  but  in  God 

3.  1.  do  we  begin  again  to  commend  our  s.  to  you? 

5.  not  that  we  are  sufficientof  ours,  to  think  any 

thing  as  of  our  s.  but  our  sulficieucy  is  of  God 

4.2.  commending  ours,  to  every  man's  conscience 

5.  for  we  preach  not  our  s.  but  Christ  Jesus  the 

Lord,  and  ours,  your  servants  for  Jesus' sake 

5. 12.  for  we  commend  not  our  s.  again  unto  you 

13.  whether  we  be  besides  our  s.  it  is  to  God 

6.  4.  in  all  things  approving  our  s.  as  ministers 

7.  1.  let  us  cleanse  ours,  fromall  filthiness  of  flesh 
10.12.  or  compare  ours,  with  some  that  commend 

14.  we  stretch  not  our  s.  beyond  our  measure 
12. 19.  a3ain,  think  ye  we  excuse  our  s.  unto  you? 

Gal.  2.  17.  we  our  s.  also  arc  found  sinners 

1  Thcss.'H.IO.  how  unblameably  we  behaved  our  s. 

2  Thess.  1.  4.  so  that  we  our  s.  glory  in  you 
3.  7.  we  behaved  not  our  s.  disorderly  among  you 

9.  but  to  make  our  s.  an  ensample  unto  you 
Tit.  3.  3.  for  we  ouf  s.  were  sometimes  foolish 
Hcb.  10.  25.  not  forsaking  the  assembling  of  our  s 

1  John  1.8.  we  deceive  our. 9.  the  trulli  is  not  in  us 
Own  SELVES. 

.lets  20.  30.  also  of  your  own  s.  shall  men  rise 

2  Oir.  8.  5.  but  first  gave  their  own  s.  to  the  Lord 

13.  5.  prove  your  own  .».  know  ye  not  your  own  s. 
2  Tim.  3.  2.  men  shall  be  lovers  of  their  own  s. 
.Jam.  1.  22.  not  hearers,  deceiving  your  oicn  s. 

Four  SELVES.  " 
Gen.  18. 4.  wash,  and  rest  your  s.  under  the  tree 
45.  5.  be  not  angry  with  your  s.  that  ye  sold  me 
49.  1.  gather  your  s.  tojelher, 2.  Jer.'d.  1,  F.zek. 
39. 17,  .Joel  3. 11.  Zrph.  2.  1.  Rev.  19.  17. 
Ezod.  19.  12.  take  heed  unto  vour  s.  Deut.  2.  4. 
I  4.  15,  2;^.  I  11.  16.  ./o,tA,"23,  11.  Jer.  17,  21. 

30,  37,  ye  shall  not  make  like  perfume  to  yours. 
%,  29.  consecrate  your  s.  to-day  to  the  Lord 

Lev.  11.  43.  ye  shall  not  make  yours,  abominable, 
neither  shall  ye  make  your  s.  unclean  with  them 
44.  -anclify  y.  s.  20. 7.  jVum.  1 1. 18.  ./o.«A.  3.5.  |  7. 
13. 1  Sam.  16.  5.  ICAr.  15. 12.2CAr.  29. 5.  |  35.6, 
44.  nor  stiall  ye  defile  your  s.  18,  24,  30, 
19.  4   nor  make  to  your  s.  molten  gods 
.yum.  16.  3.  wherefore  then  lift  you  up  ynnr  s.? 
21.  separate  your  s.  from  this  congregation^ 
31.3.  >Io3essaid,  arm  some  ofyowrs.unto  the  war 

18.  the  women-children  keep  alive  for  your  s. 

19.  purify  both  ynnr  s.  and  your  captives 
Deut.  4.  Ifi.  take  heed,  lest  ye  corrupt  your  s.  2.5. 

11.23.  shall  po,«se.«8  mightier  nations  than  yours. 

14.  1.  ye  shall  not  cut  your  s.  for  the  dead 

31,  14.  and  present  yours,  in  the  tabernacle 
29. 1  know  that  ye  will  utterly  corrupt  vour  s. 

Tush.  2,  16,  and  hide  your  s.  there  three  dnys 
6, 18,  and  in  any  wise  keep  yours,  from  the  accur- 
oed  thing,  lest  ye  make  j^our  s.  accursed 

8.  2,  only  the  spoil  lake  for  a  prey  unto  your  s. 
23, 7,  nor  serve  them,  nor  bow  your  s.  unto  them 

16.  ve  have  served,  and  bowed  your  s.  to  them 
24.25, ye  are  witnesses  against  ynur  ,<.hnve  chosen 

.Tudg.  15. 12,  that  ye  will  not  fall  ur>on  me  pours. 

1  .Sam,  4.9,  quit  j/oiir  »,  like  rnen.O  ye  Phijislines 
10.  19.  present  ynur  ,»,  before  the  Lord  by  tribes 
14.34,  Paul  said,  disperse  W''iir.«.aniong  the  people 

1  Kings  18. 25.  choose  you  one  bullock  for  your  s. 

20.12,  set  your  s.  in  array,  and  they  fct  ihemsclvis 

in  array,  2  CAron.  20,  17.  .Trr.  .SO,  14. 


SEL 

2  CJr,  30,  8,  but  yield  yours,  unto  Lord,  serve ninj 
32.  11,  to  give  over  your  s.  to  die  by  famme 
35.4,  prepare  yours,  by  thehousesofyuur  fathers 
Ezra  10,  11,  separate  your  s.  from  the  people  of 

JVth.  13,  25,  nor  lake  their  daughters  for  your  s. 

Job  19.  3.  that  you  make  your  s.  strange  to  me 

5,  if  ye  will  indeed  magnify  your  s.  against  me 
27,  12,  behold,  all  ye  your  s.  iiave  seen  it 
42,  8,  and  offer  up  for  your  s.  a  burut-offering 

Isa.  8.9.  associate  your  s.  gird  your  s.  .Joel  1. 13. 
29.  9,  stay  your  s.  |{  46.  8.  shew  your  s.  men 
49. 9.  to  them  that  are  in  darkness,  shew  your  a, 
30  1,  for  your  iniquities  have  ye  sold  your  s. 
11,  tliat  compass  your  s.  about  with  sparks 
52.  3.  ye  have  sold  your  s.  for  nought 
57.  4.  against  whom  do  ye  sport  your  s. 
5.by  iiiflaming  your  s.  with  idols  under  every  tree 
61.  6.  in  their  glory  shall  ye  boast  your  «. 

.Jer.  4, 4.  circumcise  your  s.  to  the  Lord,  take  awar 
13,  18.  humble  your  s.  Jam.  4,  10.  1  Pet.  5,  6. 
25,34.wallow  yours.\n  asbes,ye  principal  of  flock 
26,  15,  ye  shall  bring  innocent  blood  upon  yours. 
'.f7.  9,  thus  saith  the  Lord,  deceive  not  your  s. 
44, 8.  that  ye  might  cut  your  s.  off  and  be  a  curse 

Ezek.  14,  6,  repent  and  turn  your  s.  18,  30,  32. 
20. 7.  defile  not  yours,  with  the  idols  of  Egypt,  18. 
31,  ye  pollute  your  s.  \\  43,  loathe  ynur  s.  36,  31. 
44,  8,  have  set  kee])er9  of  tn^  charge  for  your  a. 

Hos.  10.  12.  sow  to  your  s.  in  righteousness 

.Imos  5. 26.  the  star  of  your  God  ye  made  10  your  $, 

Zech.  7.  6.  cat  for  your  s.  and  drink  for  your  a. 

.Mat.  3. 9.thinknotto  say  within  your  s.  Luke3.&. 
6. 19.  lay  not  up  for  your  s.  ||  20.  lay  up  for  yours. 
16,  8.  Jesus  said,  why  reason  ye  among  your  s. 
23.  13,  ye  neither  go  in  your  s.  Luke  11,  52, 
15.  two-fold  more  the  child  of  hell  than  yours. 
31,  wherefore  ye  be  witnesses  unto  your  s. 
25,  9,  but  go  ye  rather,  and  buy  for  your  s. 

Mark  6,  31,  come  ye  your  s.  apart  into  a  desert 

9.33,  what  was  it  that  ye  disputed  among  yoKrs, 

50,have  salt  in  your  s.and  peace  onewith  another 

13.9.buttake  heed  to  yours,  they  shall  deliveryou 

up,  Luke  17.3, 1  21.  34.  .i'cts  5,  35,  |  20.  28 

Luke  11,  46,  ye  your  s.  touch  not  the  burdens 
12.  33.  provide  your  s.  bags  which  wax  not  old 
36.  ye  yours,  like  men  that  wait  for  their  Lord 
57,why  even  ofyours,  judge  ye  not  what  is  right 
13.28,prophets  in  the  kingdom,yeyour  s,thrust  out 

16,  9.  make  to  your  s.  friends  of  the  mammon 
15,  ye  are  they  which  justify  your  s.  before  men 

17,  14,  he  said,  go  shew  your  s.  unto  the  ])riest 

21.  30.  ye  know  of  your  s.  that  summer  is  nigh 

22.  17.  take  this,  and  divide  it  among  your  s. 
23, 28.  but  weep  for  your  s.  and  for  your  childi^n 

John  3,  28,  ye  your  s.  bear  me  witiiess,  that  1  said 
6,  43,  Jesus  said,  murmur  not  among  your  s. 


16,19,  do  ye  inquire  among  your  s.  of  that  I  said 
.9cts  2. 22,  signs  God  did,  as  you  your  s.  also  know 
40.  save  your  s.  from  this  untoward  generation 
13,  46,  seeing  ye  judge  your  s.  unworthy  of  life 
15.  29.  from  which  if  ye  keep  your  s.  ye  do  wel 
20,  10.  trouble  not  your  s.  for  his  life  is  in  him 

34. you  yours. know,  that  these  hands  ministered 

Rom.  6. 11.  reckon  ye  also  your  s.  to  be  dead  to  sin 

13.  but  yield  your  s.  unto  God,  as  tho-^ie  alive 

ifi.  to  whom  ye  yield  your  s.  servants  to  obey 

12,  19,  dearly  beloved,  avenge  not  your  s.  but 
1  Cor.  5.  13.  put  from  your  s.  that  wicked  person 

6.7.why  do  ye  not  rather  suffer  y.  s.lo  be  defraud.? 

7.  5.  ye  may  give  your  s.  to  fasting  and  prayer 

11,  13.  judge  in  your  s.  is  it  comely  that  a  wo 

mm  pray  unto  God  uncovered? 

16. 16,  T  beseech,  that  ye  submit  yours,  unto  such 

20r.7,ll.  yea,  what  clearing  of  your  .?,in  all  thin^ 

ye  have  approved  your  s.  clear  in  this  matter 

11.19.  suffer  fools  gladly, seeing  ye  your  s.  are  wiso 

13.  5.  examine  yours,  whether  ye  be  in  the  faith 
Eph.  2.  8.  through  ftith,  and  that  not  of  your  s. 

5.  19.  speaking  to  your  s.  in  psalms  and  hymns 

2I.sMbmitling"yo«r  s.  one  to  another  in  fearofG. 

r(:/.3.18.  wives,  submit  yours,  unto  your  husbands 

1  Th'ss.'i.l.yonr  s.hreth.  know  our  entrance  to  you 
3.3.yoiir  s.  know  that  we  are  appointed  thereunto 
4.9.  ye  yours,  are  taught  ofG.  tolove  one  another 
5.  2.  your  s.  know  that  day  of  the  Lord  so  Cometh 

11. wherefore  comfort  yours,  together,  and  edify 
13.  and  be  at  peace  among  your  s.  15. 

2  Thrss.'.i.G.  we  command  that  ye  willidiaw  yours. 
7.  ynur  s.  know  how  ye  ought  to  follow  us 

J/ih.  10,34.  knowing  in  yours,  yc  have  in  heaven 
13.  3.  remember,  as  being  yours,  also  in  the  body 
n.submit  i/0Mrs.||,/am,4,7.fubmil  you rs.to  God 

.Tom.  2.  4.  are  ye  not  then  partial  in  your  s.? 

1  Pel.  1. 14.  not  fashioning  your  s.  to  former  lusts 
2.  13.  submit  your  s.  to  every  ordinance  of  man 

4,  1.  arm  your  s,  likewise  with  the  same  mind 
P.aboveall  things,  fervent  charity  among  your  jr. 

5.  5,  ye  younenr,  submit  your  s.  unto  the  elder 
1  ,rnAn5.21,littlo  children,  keep  yours,  from  idols 

2  Chron.  29,  31.  no»  ye  have  consecrated  your  «.l2yoAn8.  look  to  your  »,thatwc  lose  not  Uiose  things 


SEN 

Hdt  20.  bui/ding  up  your  g.  on  most  holy  faith 
21.  keepyours.  in  love  of  God  lookiug  tor  mercy 

See  ASSICMBLK,    KD. 

SENATE. 
Sets  5.  21.  they  called  all  the  s.  of  Israel  together 

SEiVATOKS. 
P5aM05.iS.lo  bind  princes, and  teach  his  ^.wisdom 

SEND. 
Oen.  24.  7.  God  shall  s.  his  angel  before  thee,  40. 
12.  I  pray  thee  s.  me  goud  speed  this  day 
5^4.  he  said  s.  me  away  unto  my  master,  56. 
38.  17.  wilt  thou  give  me  a  pledge,  till  thou  s.  it  ? 
43.  4.  it' thou  wilt  s.  our  brother  with  us 
45.  5.  God  did  s.  me  before  you,  to  preserve  life 
Ezod.  4.  13.  s.  by  hand  of  him  whom  thou  wilt  a. 

7.  2.  that  he  s.  children  of  Israel  out  of  his  land 
9.  IS),  s.  therefore  now,  and  gather  thy  cattle 
12.  33.  that  they  might  s.  them  out  in  haste 
33.1i!.nor  let  me  know  whom  thou  wilt  s.  with  me 

IjCV.  16.  21.  s.  him  away  by  the  hand  of  a  fit  man 
J^um.  13.  2.  s.  thou  men  to  search  land,  of  every 
tribe  shall  ye  s.  a  man  a  ruler  among  ihem 
31.  4.  of  every  tribe  s.  a  thousand  to  the  war 
Deut.  1.  22.  we  will  s.  men  before  us  to  search 
7.  20.  thy  God  will  s.  the  hornet  among  them 
19.  12.  the  elders  shall  s.  and  fetch  him  thence 

24.  1.  give  her  a  bill  of  divorce,  and  s.  her  out 
28.  2U.  Ld.  shall  s.  upon  thee  cursing  and  rebuke 

48. shall  serve  enemies  Lord  shall  s.  against  thee 
Judjr.Vi.S.  let  man  of  God  thou  didst  s.  come  again 

1  Sam   5.  11.  s.  away  the  ark  of  God,  6.  8. 
6.  2.  tell  us  wherewith  we  shall  s.  it  to  hia  place 

3.  if  ye  s.  away  the  ark  of  God,  s.  it  not  empty 

9.  26.  saying,  up,  that  I  may  s.  tiiee  away 

11.  3.  give  us  respite,  that  we  may  s.  messengers 

12.  17.  the  Lord  shall  «.  thunder  and  rain 

16.  11.  Samuel  said  to  Jesse,  s.  and  fetch  David 
19.  Saul  sent,  and  said,  s.  me  David  thy  son 

25.  25.  I  saw  not  tite  young  men  thou  didst  s. 

2  Sam.  11.  6.  David  saying,  s.  me  Uriah  the  Hittite 

14.  32.  come  hither,  that  I  may  s.  thee  to  king 

15.  36.  by  them  ye  shall  s.  unto  mo  every  thing 

17.  16,  now  therefore  s.  quickly,  and  tell  Diivid 
XKings-i}.  9.  all  thou  didst  s.  for  thy  serv-  I  will  do 
9  Kings  2.  16. he  said,  ye  shall  not  s.\\  17.hesaid,  «. 

5.  7.  doth  s.  to  me  to  recover  a  man  of  his  leprosy 

6.  13.  spy  where  he  is,  that  I  may  .5.  and  fetch  him 

7.  13.  let  us  s.  and  see  ||  9.  17.  s.  to  meet  Jehu 
15. 37.  the  Lord  began  to  s.  against  Judah  Rezin 

3  Chron.  13.  2.  let  us  s.  abroad  our  brethren 
fChron.  2.7.5. nie  therefore  a  man  cunning  to  work 

8.  s.  me  nlso  cedar-trees,  fir-trees,  algum-trees 
fi.  27.  then  hear  thou,  and  .s.  rain  upon  thy  land 
28.  16.  Ahazdid  s.  to  king  of  Assyria  to  help  him 
32.  9.  Sennacherib  did  s.  servants  to  Hezekiah 

Kzra  5.  17.  let  the  king  s.  his  pleasure  to  us 
J\refi.  2.  5.  that  thou  wouldest  s.  me  unto  Judah 
6.  so  itpleasedthe  king  to  s  me,  and  I  seta  lime 

8.  10.  eat,  drink,  and  5.  portions  unto  them,  12. 
Job  21.  11.  they  s.  forth  their  little  ones  as  a  flock 

38.  35.  canst  thou  s.  lightnings,  that  they  may  go 
Psal.  20.  2.  s.  thee  help  from  the  sanctuary 
43.  3.  O  s.  out  thy  li.^ht  and  truth,  let  them  lead 
57.  3.  he  shall  5.  from  heaven,  and  save  me  from 
reproach  ;  God  shall  s.  forth  liis  mercy  and  truth 
68.  9.  thou,  O  God,  didst  s.  a  pleiiliful  rain 
33.  he  doth  s.  out  his  voice,  a  mighty  voice 
110.  2.  shall  s.  rod  of  thy  strength  out  of  Zion 
118.  25.  O  Lord,  I  beseech  thee,  s.  now  prosperity 
144.  7.  s.  thine  hand  from  above,  rid  me,  deliver 
Proc.  10.  26.  so  is  the  sliiggard  to  them  that  s.  him 
22.  21.  an3\v.  Words  of  truth  to  them  that  s.  to  thee 
25.13.so  is  a"  faithful  messenger  to  them  thats.him 
Eccl.  10.  1.  ointment  to  s.  forth  a  stinking  savour 
Tsa.  6. 8.  whom  shall  Is.?  I  said,  here  am  I,  s.  me 

10.  16.  Lord  shall  s.  among  his  fat  ones  leanness 

16.  1.  s.  ye  the  lamb  to  the  ruler  of  the  land 

19.  20.  he  shall  s.  them  a  Saviour,  a  great  one 
32.  20.  that  s.  forth  thither  the  feet  of  ox  and  ass 
57.  9.  didst  «.  thy  messengers  far  off,  and  debase 

Jer.  1.  7.  thou  shalt  go  to  all  that'I  shall  s.  thee 
2. 10.  s.  unto  Kedar  1|9. 17.  s.  for  cunning  women 
27.  3.  s.  the  yokes  to  king  of  Edom  and  Moab 

20.  31.  s.  to  all  lliem  of  the  captivity,  saying 
42.  5.  for  the  whicli  the  Lord  shall  s.  thee  to  us 

6.  we  will  obey  the  Lord,  to  whom  we  s.  thee 
Mat.  9.  38.  priiy  ye  therefore  the  Lord  that  he  will 
s.  forth  labourers  into  his  harvest,  Luke  10.  2. 
10.  34.  tliink  not  that  I  am  come  to  s.  peace 

12.  20.  till  he  s.  forth  judgment  unto  victory 

13.  41.  Son  of  man  shall  .5.  forth  his  angels,  and 
they  shall  gath^^all  that  ofl!'end,24.31.  Jlfari  13.27. 
15.  23.  s.  her  away,  for  she  crieth  after  us 

21.  3.  straightway  he  will  s.  them,  Mark  11.  3. 
ifark3.  14.  that  he  might .?.  them  to  preach,  6.7. 

5.  10.  would  not  5.  them  away  out  of  the  country 

12.  bi-sought  him,  saying,  s.  us  into  the  swine 
Luke  16.24.  s.  Lazarus  ||  27. s. to  my  father's  house 
John  14.  26.  whom  the  Father  will  s.  in  my  name 

17.  8.  thsy  have  believed  that  thou  didst  s.  me 

529 


SEN 


SEN 


.Sets  3.20.  he  ahall  s.  Jes.  Christ  who  was  preached  2C%ron.3(5. 15.  s.  to  them  by  his  niessenffers,  Jer.  7 


7.  35.  same  did  God  s.  to  bo  ruler  and  deliverer 

10.  5.  and  now  s.  men  to  Joppa,  32.  |  11.  13. 

11.  29.  disciples  determined  tos.  relief  to  brethren 
15.  sKJ.  to  s.  chosen  men  of  their  company,  25. 

25.  3.  that  he  would  s.  for  him  to  Jerusalem 
27.  ilseemeth  unreasonable  to  s.  a  prisoner  and 

PIUl.  2.  19. 1  trust  in  the  Lord  to  s.  'rimotheus,23. 
25.  I  supposed  it  necessary  to  s.  Epaphroditus 
2  Thess.  2.  11.  for  this  cause  God  shall*,  delusion 
7'it.  3.  12.  when  I  shall  s.  Artemas  unto  thee 
./a;tt.3.11.doth  fountain  s.  sweet  water  and  bitlerl 
liev.l.ll.  write  and  .s.  it  to  seven  churches  in  Asia 
11.  10.  and  they  shall  s.  gifts  one  to  another 

/  SEND. 
Ezod.  23.  20.  behold  /  send  an  angel  before  thee 
JVuin.  22.  37.  did  /  not  earnestly  s.  unto  thee  1 

1  Sam.  20.  12.  if  there  be  good,  and  Is.  not  to  thee 
21.  2.  know  the  business  whereabout  Is.  thee 

2  C/iron.  7.  13.  if /s.  pestilence,  Ezek.  14. 19. 
Isa. 6.  8.  voice  of  the  Lord, say,  whom  shall  Is.? 
Jer.  25.  15.  cause  all,  to  whom  /s.thee  to  driuk  it 
Ezek.  2.  3.  Is.  thee  to  fhe  children  of  Israel,  4. 

14.  21.  when  Is.  my  four  sore  judgments 
Mat.  10.  16.  behold  Is.  you  forth  as  sheep 
11.  10.  behold  Is.  my  messenger  befoie  thy  face 
to  prepare  thy  way,  Marie  1.  2.  Luke  7.  27. 

23.  34.  behold  Is.  you  prophets  and  wise  men 
Marks.  3.  if  Is.  them  away  fasting,  they  will  faint 
J^uke  10.  3.  Is.  you  forth  aslainbs  among  wolves 

24.  49.  I  «.  the  promise  of  my  Father  upon  you 
.lohn  13.  20.  he  that  receiveth  whom  Is.  receiv.  me 

20.  21.  as  my  Father  sent  me,  even  so  .«.  /you 
J3ets  25.  21.  to  be  kept  till  Is.  him  to  Cesar 

26.  17.  from  Gentiles,  unto  whom  now  Is.  thee 
/  wUl  SEND. 

Gen.  27.  45.  I  will  s.  and  fetch  thee  from  thence 

37.  13.  come,  and  I  will  s.  thee  unto  them 

38.  17.  he  said,  /  will  s.  thee  a  kid  from  the  flock 
Ezod.3. 10. 1  will  s.thee  unto  Pharaoh,  .lets  7.31. 

8.  21.  I  will  s.  swarms  of  flies  upon  thee 

9.  14.  I  will  s.  all  mv  plagues  upon  thine  heart 
23.  27.  /  iDill  s.  my  fear  1|  28.  /  will  s.  hornets 
33.  2. 1  will  s.  an  angel  before  thee,  and  drive  out 

Lev.  26.  22.  I  will  s.  wild  beasts  among  you 
25.  I  will  s.  pestilence  1|  36.  I  will  s.  faintness 

Deut.  11.  15.  /  will  s.  grass  in  thy  fields  for  cattle 
32.  24.  I  will  s.  the  teeth  of  beasts  upon  them 

1  Sam.  9.  16.  I  will  s.  thee  a  man  of  Benjamin 
16.  1.  /  will  s.  thee  to  Jesse  the  Bethlehemite 
'20.  I3.t\]pa  I  will  s.  shew  it  thee,  and  5.  thee  away 

1  Kings  18.  1.  an»l  I  will  s.  rain  upon  the  earth 
20.6.yet  /jc/iis.my  servantsuntotheeto  morrow 

34.  I  will  s.  thee  away  with  this  covenant 

2  Kings  19.7.  I  will  s.  a  blast  upon  him,  Isa.  37.  7. 
Isa.  10.  0.  I  wills,  him  against  hypocritical  nation 

06. 19. 1  wills,  those  that  escape  unto  the  nations 
Jer.  8.  17.  behold,  I  will  s.  serpents  among  you 
9.  16.  Iwill  s.  a  sword  after  tliem  till  consumed 
24.10.  1  25.  16,  27.  ]  29.  17.  |  49.  37 
16.  16.  Iwill  s.  for  many  fishers,  many  hunters 

25.  9.  Iwill  s.  and  take  the  families  of  thenoith 
43.  10.  Iwill  s.  Nebuchadnezzar  my  servant 
48.  12.  behold,  Iwill  s.  unto  him  wanderers 
51.  2.  and  Iwill  s.  unto  Babylon  fanners 

Ezek.5.1G.Iwins.  famine,  17.' |  14.13..^mo5  8.  11. 

7.  3.  Iwill  s.  mine  anger  upon  thee  and  judge 

23.  23.  Iwill  s.  into  her  pestilence  and  blood 
.Joel  2.  19.  [  will  s.  you  corn,  and  wine,  and  oil 
Mai.  2.2.  Iwill  s.  a  curse  1|  4.  5.  I  wills.  Elijah 

3. 1.  Iwill  s.  my  messenger,  and  he  shall  prejiare 
Mat.  15.  32.  I  will  not  s.  them  away  fasting 
Luke  11.  49.  I  will  s.  them  prophets  and  apostles 

20.  13.  what  shall  I  do  ?  /  will  s.  my  beloved  son 
.7ohn  15.  26.  the  Comforter  whom  /  will  s.  16.  7. 
j9cJs  22. 21.  Iwill  s.  thee  far  hence  to  the  Gentiles 
lCur.l6.  3.  whom  you  shall  approve,  them  I  wills. 
See  Fire. 
SENDEST. 
Deut.  15.  13.  when  thou  s.  him  out  free,  18. 
.Josh.  1.  16.  whithersoever  thou  s.  us  we  will  go 
2  Kings  1.  6.  that  thou  s.  to  inquire  of  Baal-zebub 
.Job  14.20.  changes!  countenance,  and  s.  him  awa 
Psal.  104.  30.  thou  s.  thy  Spirit,  they  are  created 

SENDETH. 
Deut.  24.  3.  and  if  the  latter  husband  s.  her  out 

1  Kings  17.  14.  till  the  day  that  the  Lord  ,t.  rain 
Job  5.  10.  and  who  s.  waters  upon  the  fields 

12.  15.  he  s.  them  out,  they  overturn  the  earth 
Psal.  104.  10.  he  s.  the  springs  into  the  valleys 

147.  15.  he  s.  forth  his  commandment,  18. 
Prov.  20. 6.  that  s.  a  message  by  the  hand  of  a  fool 
Cant.  1.  12.  my  spikenards,  forth  the  smell  thereof 
Isa.  18.  2.  that*,  ambassadors  by  the  sea  in  vessels 
Mat.  5. 45.  and  s.  rain  on  the  just  and  on  the  unjust 
Mark  11.  1.  he*,  forth  two  of  his  disciples,  14. 13. 
I^uke  14.  32.  5.  and  desireth  conditions  of  peace 
Acts  23.  26.  Claudius  Lvsias  to  Felix  s.  greeting 
SENDING. 

2  Sam.  13. 16.  this  evil  in  s.  m«  away  ia  greater 
3Z 


I  25.  4.  I  2!-.  5.  1  29.  19.  |  35.  15.  |  44.  4. 
Estli.  9.  19.  and  oi s.  portions  one  to  another,  22. 
Psal.  78.  49.  by  s.  evil  angels  among  them 
Isa.  7.  25.  jt  shall  be  for  the  s.  forth  of  lesser  cattle 
Ezek.Y!.  15.  rebelled  in  s.  ambassadors  unto  Egypt 
Rom.  8.  3.  God  «.  his  Son  in  likeness  of  sinful  flesh 

SENSE, 
Or  meaning  of  scripture.  It  is  said,  Neh.  8.  8, 
They  read  in  the  book,  in  the  law  of  God  dis- 
tinctly, and  gave  the  sense,  and  caused  them 
to  understand  the  reading.  ^  learnud  aatkur 
says,  that  these  five  different  Senses  y/iuy  4« 
distinguished  in  the  Scripture.  The  Gram- 
matical Sense.  The  Historical  or  Literal 
Sense.  The  Allegorical  or  Figurative  Sense. 
The  Analogical  Sense.  The  Tropological  or 
Moral  Sense. 

I.  The  Grammatical  Sense  is  that  wliich  the 
words  of  the  text  present  to  the  mind,  according 
to  the  proper  and  usual  signification  of  those 
words.  Thus  when  it  is  said,  that  God  repen  ts, 
that  he  is  in  anger,  that  he  ascends  or  descends, 
that  he  has  eyes  open,  or  ears  attentive,  &;c. 
the  grammatical  Sense  of  all  these  expressions 
might  induce  one  to  think  that  God  is  corporeal, 
and  suljcct  to  the  same  weaknesses  as  our- 
selves. But  as  reason  and  sound  faith  do 
assure  its,  that  he  has  none  of  our  infirmitiea 
and  imperfections;  upon  snchoccasions  we  are 
not  to  abide  by,  or  confine  ourselves  to,  the 
Grammatical  Sense. 

II.  The  Literal  or  Historical  Sense  is  that 
which  belongs  to  the  history  or  fact,  to  the 
Sense  which  the  rehearsal  and  terms  of  the 
Scripture  immediatj^ly  present  to  the  mind. 
Thus  when  it  is  said,  that  Abraham  married 
Hagar,  that  he  afterwards  sent  her  away,  thai 
Isaac  was  born  0/ Sarah,  that  he  received  fir- 
cumcision :  Jill  these  facts,  taken  in  the  his- 
torical and  literal  Sense,  mean  nothing  else 
than  what  is  expressed  in  the  history ;  that  is, 
the marriaseof  AhraXvAm  lorJ/iHagar,  thebtrtk 
of  Isaac,  Sc. 

III.  The  Allegorical  or  Figurative  Sense  is 
that  which  examines  what  may  be  concealea 
under  the  te7-ms,  or  under  the  event  nicntionetl 
in  the  history.  Thus  the  marriage  of  AhtAhavn 
with  Hagar,  who  was  aftertrards  npudiatca 
and  driven  away  because  of  her  insolence,  ana 
that  of  her  son,  is  a  figure  or  representation  0} 
the  ^jnngogue,  which  was  only  as  it  ipere  a 
Slave,  and  which  was  dirorced  and  rejected, 
because  of  its  infidelity  and  ingratitude.  "Sarah 
is  the  figure  of  the  Christian  Church,  avn 
Is;iac  of  the  people  chosen  of  God,  Gal.  4.  22 
23,  24,  ,$c. 

n'.  The  -Analogical  Sense,  or  Sense  of  .Analogy 
and  .Agreement,  is  that  irhich  refers  some  ex- 
pressions of  Scripture  to  eternal  life  and  happi- 
ness ;  because  of  some  conformity  or  similitude 
between  the  terms  that  are  brought  to  express 
something  coming  to  pass  in  this  world,  and 
what  shall  come  to  pass  inhcaren.  For  exam- 
ple, on  occasion  of  the  Sabbath,  or  of  the 
seventh  day's  rest  that  was  enjoined  the  people 
of  God,  a  transition  may  be  made  to  that  re- 
pose or  rest  that  the  saints  enjoy  in  heaven. 
On  occasion  of  the  Israelites  entering  into  the 
land  of  promise,  we  naturally  pass  to  treat  of 
the  entering  of  the  Ehct  into  heaven  :  These 
transitions  the  -Apostle  makes,  Heb.  3.  18,  19. 
I  4.  1,9. 
V.  The  Uli.ral  or  Tropological  Sense,  is  that 
which  deduces  moral  reflections  for  the  conduct 
of  life,  and  fur  the  reformation  of  7nanners, 
from  what  is  related  historically  or  literally  in 
Scripture.  For  example,  on  occasion  of  these 
words  of  Deut.  25.  4,  Thou  shalt  not  muzzle 
the  ox  when  he  treadelh.out  the  corn,  St.  Paul 
says,  that  those  that  preach  the  gospel,  and  in- 
struct us  in  the  way  to  snlvatiov,  ought  to  be 
supplied  with  the  necessaries  of  life,  1  Cor.  9 
9,  10,  n,  14. 
These  five  Senses  may  be  observed  in  this  one 
word,  Jerusalem.  According  to  the  Grammat 
ical  Sense,  it  signifies  the  Vision  of  peace; 
according  to  tlic  literal  or  historical,  the  capi- 
tal city  oWJudea;  according  to  the  allegorical, 
the  church  militant;  according  to  the  analogi- 
cal, the  church  triumphant;  according  to  the 
moral,  a  faithful  soul,  of  wliich  Jerusalem  is  a 
kind  of  figure. 

SENSES. 
.H<-J.5.I4.  have  their  .?.  exercised  to  discern  good 

SENSUAL. 
Jam.  3.  15.  this  wisdom  is  eailhly,  s.  deviliih 
Jude  19.  these  be  s.  havin?  not  the  Sjiirit 

SENT. 
Qen.  37.  32.  they  $.  the  coat  of  many  colour* 


SEN 

©en.  38.  20.  Judah  s.  the  kid  by  hand  of  his  friend 

25.  Tamar  3.  to  her  father-in-law,  saying,  by 
41.  14.  then  Pharaoh  s.  and  called  Joseph 
42. 4.  but  Benjamin  Jacob  s.  not  with  his  brethren 
45.  8.  it  was  not  you  that  s.  me  hither,  but  God 
50.  16.  they  s.  niessengera  unto  Joseph,  saying 

Exod.  3.14.  thou  slialt  say,  I  AM  halh  s.  me  to  you 

5.  22.  Lord,  why  is  it  that  thou  liast  s.  me? 
JVam.  13.  10.  the  names  of  the  men  Moses  s.  14.36. 

22.  10.  Balak  the  king  of  Moab  hath  s.  unto  me 

15.  Balak  s.  yet  again  princes  more  honourable 

Josh.  6.  17.  because  she  hid  the  messengers  we  s. 

14.  7.  forty  years  old  was  I  wheu  Moses  s.  me 
,/u(f^.20.6.I  cut  her  in  pieces  and  s.  her  thro'  Israel 

1  iSam.  31.  9.  s.  into  the  land  of  the  Philistines 

2  Sam.  24.  13.  what  answer  return  him  that  s.  me 
IKingslS.IO.no  nation  whither  my  lord  hath  not  s. 

21.  fl.  the  elders  did  as  Jezebel  had  s.  unto  them 
2  Kings  1. 6.  return  unlo  king  that  s.  you,  and  say 

6.  10°  and  king  of  Israel  s.  to  the  place  the  man 
14.  9.  thistle  s.  to  the  cedar  in  Lebanon,  saying 
16.  11.  Crijah  built  according  as  Ahaz  had  s. 
18.27.  Rab  shakeh  said  to  them,  hath  my  master 

s.  me  to  thy  master  to  speak  words'?    Jsa. 
36.  12. 
19.  4.  his  master  s.  to  reproach  the  living  God 

22.  15.  she  said,  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  Israel, 
tell  man  that «.  you  unto  me,  18.  2C'Ar.  34.23. 

Ezra  4.  11.  this  is  the  copy  of  the  letter  they  s. 
JVch.  6.  4.  they  «.  unto  me  tour  times  after  this  sort 
Psal.  105.  20.  king  s.  and  loosed  him,  the  ruler 
Jsa.  48.  16.  Lord  God  and  his  Spirit  hath  s.  me 
Jer.  14.  3.  their  nobles  have  s.  their  little  ones 

23.  21.  I  have  not  s.  these  prophets,  yet  they  ran 
5}9.  25.  because  thou  hast  s.  letters  in  thy  name 
37.  7.  thus  shall  ye  say  unto  the  king  that  s.  you 
42  9.whom  ye  s.  to  present  your  supplication,  20. 

Ezek.  23.  40.  ye  have  s.  for  men  to  come  from  far 
Dan.  3.  28.  who  hath  s.  his  angel  and  delivered 
Hos.  5. 13.  then  Ephraim  went  and  a',  to  king  Jareb 
Zech.  7.2.  when  they  bads,  unto  theiiouseof  God 
Mat.l0.40.\ie  that  receiveth  me,receivelli  him  that 
s.  me,  JIark  9.  37.  Luke  9. 48.  .Tolin  13.  20. 
21.  1.  then  s.  Jesus  two  disciples,  saying  to  them 
27.  19.  Pilate's  wife  s.  unto  him,  saying,  have 
Mark  6.27.  inimedialely  the  king  s.itn  executioner 
Luke  7.  20.  John  Baptist  hath  s.  us  unto  thee 
10.  1.  Jesus  s.  them  two  and  two  belbre  his  face 
14.  17.  he  .9.  his  servant  at  supper-time  to  say 
19.  14.  they  5.  a  message  after  him,  saying 
23.  11.  mocked  him,  and  s.  him  again  to  Pilate 
John  1.  22.  we  may  give  answer  to  thein  that  s.  us 

4.  34.  my  meat  is  to  do  will  of  him  that  5.  me 

5.  23.  honourcth  not  the  Father  who  hath  5.  me 
24.  that  bciieveth  on  him  that  s.  me,  12.  44. 

30.  but  will  of  him  who  s.  me,  6.  38,  39,  40. 
33.  ye  s.  unto  John,  and  he  bare  witness  to  truth 
36.  tliPB^ime  works  I  do  hear  witness  that  the 

Father  hath  s.  me,  37.  |  6.  57.  |  8.  16,  18 
fi.  44.  exc'-pt  the  father  which  .«.  me  draw  him 

7.  16.  my  doctrine  is  not  mine,  hut  his  that «.  me 
18.  hut  he  ihat  seeketh  his  glory  that  s.  him 
32.  Pliarisees  ;ind  priests  s.  officers  to  take  him 

9.  4.  (  m.ist  work  tlie  works  of  him  that  s.  me 

10.  an.  sav  yi-  of  him  whom  the  Father  hath  s. 
T.  42.  that  tliey  may  believe  thou  hast  s.  me 
12.  45.  he  tliat  secth'mc,  seethhim  that  s.  me 

49.  Father  who  ,?.  me  gave  me  a  ommiindment 

14.  24.  word  is  not  mine,  hut  Father's  who.?,  me 

15.  21.  b'  cause  they  know  not  him  that  s.  me 
in.  5.  but  nov  I  go  my  way  to  li'im  tliat .!.  me 
17.  3.  is  life  eternal,  lo'know  Jesus  whom  thou  s. 

1.=*.  n<  IhoM  h;ist  s.  mo  into  the  worhl,  so  I  s. 
21.  the  wiirld  may  believe  thai  lliou  hast  s.  me 
23.  tliat  '.he  world  may  know  thou  hast  s.  mo 
25.  and  llii'^e  have  known  that  thou  hast  n.  me 
S0.21..\«  Miy  Father  hath  s.  me,  even  so  send  I  you 
^e.l$  .5.  21.  .».  to  the  prison  to  have  them  hrouglit 

10.  ™i.  I  iisk  for  what  intent  ve  have  s.  for  me 

11.  30.  s.  it  to  the  elders  by  Birimb  is  and  Saul 
1 1.  15.  I'll'  r'llers  of  the  synajoume  .?.  imto  them 
15  27.  »>  o  have  therefire  «.  Jud  is  and  Silas 
1(1.  3 '..  the  iiiazisirales  have  .1.  to  let  you  jo 
Ifl.  31.  PiuI'b  friends  «.  unto  him,  desirinj  him 

iCar.  1.  n.Christ  j.menol  to  baptize, but  to  preach 
2  Cnr.  8.  18.  we  have  s.  with  him  th>-  brother, 22. 
Phil.  4.  Hi.  in  Thvssalonica  ye  ■'.  once  ami  again 
1  ./ohn  4.  14.  lestifv  that  tho'Fallnr  a.  the  Son 

SRNT  awnt/. 
(7(!n. 12.20  Pharaoh  ».  away  ,\hrnlinm  ^ndhis  wife 
21.  14.  .Abraham  ».  Uhnmcl  and  M  ig  r  away 
24.  .59.  they  s.  awiiy  R<'bekah  ihi-ir  Hisier 
2.5.  6.  Ahraham  a.  Koturah's  rliildren  ainmj 

26.  27.  seeing  ye  hale  mo  and  lia'  e  a.  rne  njnaii 
29.  as  wo  have  .t.  ihce  aiBay  in  p  a'-e,  llinu  art 

28.  .5.  Isaac  s.  away  Jacob  In  Pa'an-aram 
6.  Isaac  had  hlossed  Jacob  and  .1.  him  amay 

31.  27.  I  might  have  «.  thee  airnii  with  mirth 
42.  surely  thou  hadsl  ».  mo  aurni/  empty 

45  24.  ho  J.  his  brethren  awati,  ihoy  departed 
530 


SEN 


Deut.  24.  4.  f.  her  away,  may  not  take  her  again 
Josh.  2.  21.  Rahab  s.  spies  away,  they  departed 
22.  0.  Joshua  «.  Reubenites  and  Gadites  away,  7. 
Judg.  11.  38.  Jephthah  s.  his  daughter  away 

1  !iam.  10.  25.  Samuel  s.  all  the  people  away 
19.17. Saul  B«  d,why  hast  thou  s.aicaj/my  enemy? 

2  Sam.  3.  21.  Javid  s.  Ahner  away,  and  he  went 
24.  why  is  it  that  thou  hast  s.  him  away? 

10.4.cut  garments,  and  s.  them  away,  1  Chr.  19.4. 
1  Chrun.  12.  19.  lords  of  Philistines  5.  David  away 
Job  22.  9.  thou  hast  s.  widows  away  empty 
Mark  12.  3.  and  they  caught  the  servant  and  beat 
him,  and  s.  h\maway,  4.  Luke'm.  10, 11. 
Luke  1.  53.  and  the  rich  he  hath  s.  empty  away 
8.  38.  but  Jesus  s.  him  away,  saying 
Jicts  13.  3.  laid  hands  on  them,  they  s.  them  away 
17.  10.  brethren  immediately  s.  away  Paul,  14. 

Ood  SENT. 
Oen.  45.  7.  God  s.  me  before  you  to  preserve  life 
Exod.  .3.  13.  the  God  of  your  fathers  hath  s.  me 

15.  the  God  of  Jacob  hath  s.  me  unto  you 
.Judg.  9.  23.  Ood  s.  evil  spirit  between  Abimelech 
1  Cliron.  21.  15.  God  s.  an  angel  unto  Jerusalem 
JVch.  6.  12.  I  perceived  that  God  had  not  s.  him 
./er.  43.  1.  for  which  the  Lord  their  Ood  s.  him 

^.Godhaih  noti.to  thee  to  say,go  not  into  Egypt 
Dan.  6.  22.  God  hath  s.  his  angel,  and  hath  shut 
.fohn  3.  17.  (rod  s.  not  his  Son  to  condemn  world 
34.  he  whom  God  hath  s.speaketh  words  of  God 
Jlcts  3.  26.  Ood  hath  raised  his  Son  Jesus,  s.  him 
10.36.  word  of  Ood  s.  unto  the  children  of  Israel 
Gal.  4.  4.  Ood  s.  forth  his  Son  made  of  a  woman 

6.  God  hath  s.  forth  the  Spirit  of  his  Son 
\Jokn  4.9.  Gods,  his  only  begotten  Son  into  world 
\f).Oods.  his  Son  to  be  a  propitiation  for  oursins 
Rev.  22.  6.  Gods,  his  angel  to  shew  his  servants 

He  SENT. 
Gen.  45.  23.  to  his  father  he  s.  after  this  manner 
46.  28.  he  s.  Judah  before  him  unto  Joseph 
Exod.  18.2.  took  Zipporah,  after  he  had  s.  her  back 
Judg.  11.28.  Ammunhearkenednot  to  words  Ae,?. 

1  .Sam.  17. 31.  rehearsed  words,  and  he  s.  for  David 
30.  26.  he  s.  of  the  spoil  unlo  the  elders  of  Judah 

2  .Sam.  10.  5.  he  s.  to  meet  them,  I  Chron.  19.  5. 
14.  29.  when  he  s.  again,  he  would  not  come 
22.  17.  he  s.  from  above,  he  took  me,  Psal.  18. 16. 

1  Kings  20.  7.  for  he  s.  unto  me  for  my  wives 

2  icings  17.  26.  therefore  he  s.  lions  among  them 
2  Chron.  24. 19.  yet  he  s.  prophets  to  them  to  bring 

25.  15.  he  s.  unto  Amaziah  a  prophet,  which  said 
Esth.  5.  10.  he  s.  and  called  for  his  friends 
Psal.  78.  25.  he  s.  them  meat  to  the  full 

105.  17.  he  s.  a  man  before  them,  even  Joseph 
26.  he  s.  Moses  his  servant  and  Aaron 

28.  he  s.  darkness,  and  made  it  dark 

106.  15.  but  he  s.  leanness  into  their  soul 

107.  20.  he  s.  his  word  and  healed  them 
111.  9.  he  s.  redemption  unto  his  people 

I.<ia.  61.  \.he  s.me  to  bind  up  the  broken-hearted, 
to  proclaim  liberty  to  iheciiptives,  Luke4.  18. 
Jer.  29.  28.  he  s.  unto  us  In  Babylon,  saying 

42.  21.  lor  the  which  he  hath  .5.  me  unio  you 
Lam.  1.  13.  from  above  he  s.  fire  into  my  hones 
Zech.  2.  8.  after  the  glory  hath  hes.  me  to  nations 
.Var21.  36.  again  Acs.  otiier  servts.  more  than  first 
37.  last  of  all  Acs.  unto  them  hisson,  Mark  12.4. 

22.  7.  he  s.  forth  his  armies,  and  destroyed  those 
.John  1.  33.  he  that  s.  me  to  baptize  with  water 

5.  38.  for  whom  he  hath  .s.  him  ye  believe  not 

6.  99.  that  ye  believe  on  him  whom  Ac  hath  s. 

7.  28.  he  that  s.  me  is  true,  ye  know  not,  8.  26. 

29.  but  I  know  him,  and  Ac  hath  s.  me 

8.  29.  and  he  thai  s.  me  is  with  me ;  the  Father 
42.  neither  came  I  of  myself,  but  hes.  me 

Jic.ls  24.  20.  wherefore  Ac  s.  for  Paul  Ihn  oftener 

Hev.  1. 1.  Ae  s.  and  signified  it  liy  hisangtl  to  John 
/  SE.N'T. 

Grv.  32.  5.  /  have  s.  to  tell  mv  lord,  tofindgrace 
3.''.  23.  Is.  this  kid,  snd  thoiih:ist  not  found  her 

F.nid.W.  12.  this  shall  be  a  token  that /have  s.lhee 

JVuni.  32.  8.  thus  did  your  fathers  when  f  s.  them 

Jnsh.  21.  5.  /  .■!.  Moses  also  and  Aaron,  Mic  6.  4. 

.Tii'ltr.  0. 14.  thou  shall  save  Isr.  have  not  f  s.  thee? 

2  Kinirs  5.  6.  I  have  s.  Naaman  my  servant  to  tliee 
17.  13  the  l;iw  which  Is.  to  you  by  my  servants 

IsnA'i.  19.  who  isdeaf,  as  my  messen?'  r  that  I s.7 
43.  14.  for  your  sake  /have  s.  to  Babylon 
5.5.  11.  it  sh^ll  prosper  in  the  thing  whereto  Is.  it 

./cr.7.25. /.«.unlo  you  all  mv  servants  the  prophets 
dnilvrisingupcarly, 26. 5.  |  35.15.  (  44.4 
14.14.  /«. thorn  not,  norciuninandeil,  nnrspake  to 
ihem,  15.  |  23.  21,  32,  |  27.  1.5.  |  29.  9 
20.  31.  In.  him  not,  he  caused  you  Intrust  in  a  lie 
?^2c'.'.3.H.siir>'lvhad  /s.lhee  to  them  would  hearken 
/)'i7i.  10  II.  O  Daniel  undeist.:  loihee  am /now  ». 
.tilt  2.  25  mv  grcMl  army  which  Is.  amonj  ynu 
.■linos  4.  !0.  /have  s.  among  you  the  pestilence 
'/rh  9.  II.  Ihnvi' s.  forth  Ihv  prisoners  out  of  pit 
Mill.  2  4.  and  ye  shall  know  that  /  liave  s.  this 
Luke  4.  43. 1  must  preach,  for  Ihererorp  nm  /  5. 


SEP 

Luke  22.35.  when  Is.  you  without  purse  and  scrip 
John  17.  18.  so  have  Is.  them  into  the  world 
Jlcts  10.  20.  doubting  nothing,  for  /  have  s.  them 

33.  immediately  theref.  Is.  thee,  hast  well  done 

lCo7-.4.17.for  this  cause  have  /s.toyou  Timolheas 

2  Cor.  9.  3.  yet  have  /  s.  brethren,  lest  our  boasting 

12.17.  did  I  make  a  gain  ofyou  by  any  whom  Is.'f 

18.  I  desired  Titus,  and  with  him  /s.  a  brother 
Eph.  6.  22.  whom  /  a.  for  same  purpose.  Col.  4. 8. 
Phil.  2.  28.  Is.  him  therefore  the  more  carefully 

1  7'hcss.  3.  5.  for  this  Is.  to  know  your  faith 
Philem.  12.  whom  /  have  s.  again,  receive  him 

See  Lord. 
SENT  forth. 
frcn.8.7.  Noah  s.  forth  a  ravcnl|10.  s./orJA  a  dove 
ProD.  9.3.  she  hath  s./or(A  her  maidens,  she  crieth 
Mat.  2.  16.  Herod  s.  forth  and  slew  all  the  males 
10.5.  these  twelve  Jesus  s./«r(A,  and  commanded 
22.3.  and  s.  forth  hisservants  tocall  them  bidden 
Jt/ar/.-6.17.  Herod  s  forth  and  laid  hold  upon  John 
Luke  20. 20.  chief  priests  and  scribes  s.  forth  spies 
Jlcls  9.  30.  the  brethren  s.  him  forth  to  Tarsus 
11.  22.  they  s.  forth  Barnabas  as  far  as  Antioch 

SENT  out. 
Gen.  19.29.  God  s.  Lot  out  of  midst  of  overthrow 
l.Sam.26.4.David  therefore s.o«< spies  and  underst. 

2  .Sum.  22.  15.  and  he  s.  out  arrows,  Psal.  18.  14 
Job  39.  5.  who  hath  s.  out  the  wild  ass  free  ? 
Psal.ll.  17.  clouds  poured  out,  skies  s.  out  a  sound 

80.  11.  she  s.  oKt  her  boughs  to  sea,  and  branches 
./cr.24.5.whomI  have  s.oitt  of  this  place  toChaldca 
Eiek.  31.4.  she  hath  s.  out  her  little  rivers  to  tree* 
Jlcts  7. 12.  Jacob  s.  o\it  our  fathers  first 
Jam.  2.  25.  Rahab  had  s.  them  out  another  way 

SENT,I  Passive. 
Gen.  32.  18.  it  is  a  present  s.  to  my  lord  Esau 
1  Kings  14.  fi.  1  arn  s.  to  thee  with  heavy  tidings 
Ezra  7.  14.  forasmuch  as  thou  art  s.  of  the  king 
froD. 17.11. a  cruel  messenger#iall  bes. against  him 

Jer.  49.  14.  an  ambassador  is  s.  unto  the  heathen 
F.zck.  2.  9.  behold,  a  hand  was  s.  unto  me,  and  lo 

3.  5.  art  not  s.  to  a  people  of  a  strange  speech 
23.  40.  unto  whom  a  messenger  was  s.  and  lo 

/)an.'5.24.  then  was  part  of  the  hand  s.from  him 
Obad.  1.  an  ambassador  is  s.  among  the  heathen 
Jl/aM5.24.I  amnots.  but  unto  lost  sheepof  Israel 

23.  37.  and  stonest  them  who  are  s.  Luke  13.34 
Luke  1.19.1  am  Gabriel,  and  am  s.  to  speak  to  theo 

26.angel  Gabriel  wass.  from  God  unlo  Nazareth 

4.  26.  but  unto  none  of  them  was  Elias  s.  save 
/oAnl.fi.a  man  s.from  God,  whose  name  w:;s  John 

8.  John  was  s.  to  bear  witness  of  that  light 
24.  they  who  were  s.  were  of  the  Phari.sees 
3.  28.  I  said,  I  am  not  Christ,  but  s.  before  him 
9.7.  wash  in  Siloam,  which  is  by  interpretation,  s. 
13.  16.  nor  he  Ihat  is  s.  greater  than  he  thtt  s.  him 
.^cts  10.  17.  men  that  were  s.  had  made  inquiry 
21.  Peter  went  to  the  men  who  were  s.  11.  II. 
29.  therefore  came  I  to  you  as  soon  as  I  was  s.  for 
13.  4.  so  they  being  s.  forth  by  the  Holy  Ghost 
26.  to  you  is  the  word  of  this  salvation  s. 
28.  28.  the  salvation  of  God  i?  s.  unto  the  Gentiles 
R(/m. 10. IS.hdw  shall  lheypreach,pxcept  they  be*.? 
Phil.  4.  IH.  received  things  which  were  s.  from  you 
Urb.  1.  14.  spirits  s.  forth  to  minister  for  them 
1  Pet.  1.  12.  with  the  Holy  Ghost  s.  from  heaven 
2. 14.  or  unto  governors,  aslhcm  that  ares. by  him 
Rev.  5.  6.  the  seven  spirits  s.  forth  into  the  earth 

SENTEST. 
Krorf.l5.7.s.forth  thy  wrath, which  consumed  them 
J^''um.  13.  27.  we  came  to  land  whither  thou  s.  us 

24.  12.  spake  I  not  to  the  messengers  thou  s.  us 

1  A'in"'s5.8.havo  considered  things  thou  s.to  me  for 
SENTENCE.  . 

Deut.  17. 9.  they  shall  shew  thee  the  s.  of.judgmonl 

10.  thou  shall  do  according  to  the  s.  11. 
Psal.  17.2.  let  mv  s.  come  forth  from  thy  presence 
Pror.  10.  10.  a  divine  s.  is  in  the  lips  of  the  king 
EccL  8.  II.  because  s.  is  not  executed  speedily 
.Iir.  4.  12.  now  also  will  I  give  s.  ajainst  them 
y,i/<v23.24.Pilate  gave  x.that  it  should  be  as  requlr. 
.lets  15.  19.  my  s.  is,  that  we  trouble  not  them 

2  Cor.  1.  9.  we  had  the  s.  of  death  In  ourselves 
SENTENCES. 

Dnn  5  12.  shewing  of  hards,  found  in  same  Daniel 
8.  23.  a  king  underst anding  dark  s.  shall  stand  up 

SEPARATE 
Signifies,  [1]  To  part,  divide,  or  put  asunder. 
Gen.  30.  40.  [21  To  consecrate  and  sit  apart 
fur  some  special  ministry  or  service.  Arts  13. 
2,  Sepiirnte  me  Barnabas  and  Saul,  for  the 
work  whereunto  I  have  callq^them.  [3)  To 
withdraw,  or  retire  from  worliffy 


y  employments 
and  enjoyments,  and  to  derote  one's  self  to  the 
service  of  God;  thus  the  Naznritcs  separated 
themselves.  Num.  fi.  2.  some  for  life,  others 
for  a  certain  time  only.  See  Nazarits. 
f41  Tn  forsake  the  communion  of  the  church. 
Jiide  19.  [5]  To  ezcommunicate,  Luke  0.  22. 
I     [0]   To  disperse,  or  scatter  abroad  into  dif- 


SEP 

fercnt  parts  of  the  world,  Deut.  32.  8.    [7] 
To  hi  disowned,  disregarded,  and  forsaken  by 
a  person.    Prov.  19.  4,  The  poor  is  separated 
from  his  neighbour;  that  is,  is  forsaken  by 
those  who  arc  most  obliged  to  help  him.     [8] 
Ttf  dislingaisli  persoJisfrom  others,  by  confer- 
ring- upon  them  many  precious  and  valuable 
privileges  and  blessings ;  thus  the  Lord  sepa- 
rated the  Israelites,  from  all  other  nations  in 
the  earth,  and  chose  them  for  his  peculiar  peo- 
ple, 1  Kings  8.  53. 
f?(:);.i:i.!).Abrain  said, s. thyself,!  pray  thee,fromme 
30.  4t).  Jacob  did  s.  the  lambs,  and  set  the  faces 
Jjeu.  15.  31.  thus  shall  ye  s.  the  children  of  Israel 
22.  2.  speak  to  Aaron  and  his  sons  that  they  s. 
JWi«.S.2.  when  man  or  woman  shall  s.  themselves 
to  vow  a  vow,  to  s.  themselves  unto  the  Lord 
3.  the  Nazarite  shall  s.  himself  from  wine 
8.  ]  J.  thusshalt  thou  «.  the  Levites  from  Israel 
|l).'21.s.  yourselves  from  among  this  congregation 
Deut.  19.  2.  thou  shalt  s.  three  cities  in  thy  land,  7. 
29.  21.  Lord  shall  s.  him  unto  evil  out  of  Israel 

1  Kings  8.  53.  didst s.  them  to  be  thine  inheritance 
Ezra  10.  11.  s.  yourselves  from  people  of  the  land 
Mr.  37.  12.  Jeremiah  went  to  s.  himself  thence 
JU'it.M^.'.m.  he  shall .«.  them  as  a  shepherd  his  sheep 
ImIcc  ().  22.  blessed  are  ye  when  men  shall  s,  you 
.^cts  13.2.  s.  me  Barnabas  and  Saul  fur  the  work 
Rom.  8.  35.  who  shall  s.  us  from  love  of  Christ? 

39.  nothing  be  able  to  s.  us  from  love  of  God 
Jude  19.  these  be  they  who  s.  themselves,  sensual 

SEPARATB. 
Oen.  49.  26.  shall  be  on  the  head  of  Joseph  and  of 

him  that  wass.  from  his  brethren,  Deut.  33.  16. 
Josh.  16.  9.  the  s.  cities  of  E|)hraim  were  among 
Ezek.  41. 12.  building  that  was  before  thes.  place 

13.  so  he  measured  the  house  and  the  s.  place 

14.  the  breadth  c^'the  s.  place  toward  the  east 
42.  1.  chamber  over  against  the  s.  place,  10,  13. 

2  Cor.  fi.  17.  come  out  from  among  them,  be  yes. 
i/c4.7.26.:s  holy, harmless, undetiled,s. from  sinners 

SEPARATED. 
Oen.  13.  11.  then  Abram  and  Lot  s.  themselves 
14.  Lord  said,  after  that  Lot  was  s.  from  hini 
2.5.23. two  manner  of  people  bo.?,  from  thy  bowels 
Rzod.  33. 16.  so  shall  we  be  5.  from  people  on  earth 
I^ev.  20.24.  I  am  the  Lord  who  have  «.  you  from 

25.  which  I  have  s.  from  you  as  unclean 
Jifum.  16.  9.  that  the  God  of  Israel  lialh  s.  you 
D"ut.  lO  8.  the  Lord  s.  the  tribe  of  Levi  to  stand 
32.  H.  when  he  s.  sons  of  .'\dam  he  set  bounds 

1  Chrnn.  12.8.  of  the  Gadiies  there  s.  unto  David 
S3.  13.  Aaron  wa«  s.  that  he  should  sanctify 
25.  1.  p.ivid  s.  to  the  service  of  sons  of  Asaph 

2  Chron.  25.  10.  then  Amaziah  s.  them,  the  army 
Kzra  6.  21.  all  that  had  s.  themselves  unto  them 

8.  24.  then  I  s.  twelve  of  the  chief  of  the  priests 

9.  1.  priests  and  Levites  have  not  s.  themselves 
10.8.  who  would  not  come,  be  «.from  congregation 

16.  all  of  them  by  their  names  were  s.  and  sat 
JW/t.  4.  19.  work  is  great,  and  we  are  s.  upon  wall 

9.  2.  Tsnel  s.  themselves  from  all  strangers 

10.  28.  thi^y  that  had  s.  clave  to  the  brethren 
13.  3.  they  s.  from  Israel  the  mixed  multitude 

Pron.  IH.  1 .  through  desire  a  man  having ,?.  himself 

19.  4.  but  the  pour  is  .«.  from  his  neighbour 
Is,i.  .56.  3.  the  Lord  hath  «.  me  from  his  people 

.59.2.  iniquities  haves,  between  you  and  your  God 
Hos.  4.  14.  for  themselves  are  s.  with  whores 
9.10.  they  went  and  s. themselves  unto  that  shame 
^els  19.  9.  Paul  departed,  and  s.  the  disciples 
Rom.  I.  1.  Paul  an  apostle,  s.  to  the  gospel  of  God 
9.  t3.I  conl  1  wish  that  I  were  s.  from  Christ 
Oiil.  1.15.  God  who  s.  me  from  my  mother's  womb 
2.  12.  Peter  withdrew  and  s.  himself,  fearing 

SKPARATRTH. 
JV^im.  fi.  .5.  till  the  days  he  fulfilled  in  which  he  .t. 
6.  the  dnvs  he  .s.  he  shall  come  at  no  dead  body 
Pro7'.  16.  2^.  nnd  a  whisperer  .?.  chief  friends 
17.  9.  he  that  repr-ateth  a  matter  s.  very  friends 
Ezek.  14.  7.  or  of  the  slranjer  which  s.  himself 

SF,PAR.\TION. 
T^iev.  12.  2.  the  days  of  the  s.  for  her  infirmity 
5.  slie  shall  be  unclean  two  weeks,  as  in  her  s. 
1.5.  t  10.  she  shill  be  in  her  s.  seven  days 

20.  beil  she  lieth  U'lon  in  her  s.  shall  be  unclean 
95.  an  issue  of  blood  out  of  the  time  of  her  s. 
26,  pverv  bedsliall  he  to  her  a<  the  bed  of  her  s. 

16.  i  22.  goat  shall  hear  iniquitie-s  to  n  land  of  s 

20.  t  21.  take  his  brother's  wife,  it  is  a  .». 
A^Hm.  fi.  4.  days  of.',  shall  eat  nothing  of  vine-tree 

5.  all  davs  of  his  .s.  no  razor  shall  come  on  head 
8.  all  the  davs  of  his  .?.  he  is  holy  unto  the  Lord 
]2.he  shall  con.secrale  to  Lord  the  days  of  his  s. 
and  bring  a  lamb,  because  his  s.  was  defiled 
13.  when  the  days  of  bis  s.  are  fulfilled 

18.  Nazarite  shall  shave  the  head  of  his  s.  and 

take  the  hair  of  his  .«.  and  put  it  in  the  fire 

19.  nfter  the  hair  of  the  Nazarite's  .«.  is  .shaven 

21.  Iiis  offering  for  his  .».  al'ter  the  law  of*. 

531 


SEP 

JVVm.  19.9.  the  ashes  shall  be  kept  for  a  water  ofs. 

13.  the  water  of  *.  hath  not  been  sjjrinkled,  20. 

21.  he  that  sprinkleth  water  of  s.  shall  wash  his 

clothes,  that  toucheth  water  of  s.  shall  be  unci. 

31.  23.  it  shall  be  purified  with  the  water  ofs. 

Kzek.  42.  20.  it  had  a  wall  round  to  make  a  s. 

Zech.l3.  fl.  fountain  opened  fors.for  uncleanness 

SEPARATLNG. 
Zech.  7.  3.  should  I  weep  in  the  fifth  month,  s. 

*  SEPULCHRE, 

Or  Grave.  The  Hebrews  have  always  taken 
great  care  about  the  burial  of  their  dead.  The 
greatest  part  of  their  Suiiulchres  were  hollow 
places  dug  into  rocks,  as  was  that  bought  by 
Abraham,  for  the  burying  of  Sarah,  Gc7i.  23. 
0.  those  of  the  kings  o/ Judah  and  Israel ;  and 
that  wherein  our  fiaviour  was  laid  in  ntount 
Calvary.  Sometimes  also  their  graves  were 
dug  in  the  ground,  and  commonly  without  their 
towns  in  burying-places,  set  apart  on  purpose. 
Generally  they  used  to  put  somehewn  stone,  or 
other  thing,  over  the  grace,  to  shew  it  was  a 
burying  place,  that  passengers  might  be  warn- 
ed not  to  come  near  it,  that  tliey  might  not  be 
polluted. 
Our  .Saviour,  in  Mat.  23.  27.  compares  the  hypo 
critical  Pharisees  to  whitcd  sej)ulchres,  which 
appeared  fine  without,  but  inwardly  were  full 
of  rottenness  and  corruption.  It  is  said,  that 
every  year,  on  the  fifteenth  of  February,  the 
Jews  took  care  to  whiten  their  sepulchres  anew 
In  Luke  11.  44.  he  compares  them  to  graves 
which  appear  not,  and  the  men  that  walk  over 
them  are  not  aware  of  them,  or  know  not  that 
the  places  are  unclean,  so  that  they  contract 
an  unknown  and  involuntary  impurity.  So 
they  that  conversed  with  the  Pharisees,  being 
deceived  by  their  fair  shews  of  religion  and 
devotion,  were  easily  ensnared  and  drawn  into 
■  sin  by  them.. 

It  is  said,  Mat.  23.  29,  30,  31,  Woe  unto  you 
Scribes  and  Pharisees;  because  ye  build  the 
tombs  of  the  prophets,  and  garnish  the  se- 
pulchres of  the  righteous:  And  say,  if  we 
had  been  in  the  days  of  our  fathers,  we  would 
not  have  been  partakers  with  them  in  the 
blood  of  the  prophets.  Wherefore  ye  be 
witnesses  unto  yourselves,  that  ye  are  the 
children  of  them  which  killed  the  prophets. 
As  if  our  Saviour  had  said.  Ye  pretend  a  great 
deal  nf  respect  to  the  ancient  prophets,  and  tu 
disallow  what  your  fathers  did  to  them,  by 
building  and  garnishing  their  tombs  ;  yet  this 
practice  of  yours  seems  rather  to  be  an  appro- 
bation of  your  fathers'  wickedness,  if  one  look 
upon  it,  either  in  the  nature  of  the  thing,  for 
hereby  you  keep  in  memory  what  your  fathers 
did  against  them  :  whereas,  if  you  did  detest 
it,  you  would  rather  do  all  you  could  that  it 
might  he  utterly  forgotten;  or  if  one  may  judire 
of  your  affections  to  the  dead  prophets,  by  your 
usage  of  the  living,  namely.  Myself  and  my 
Apostles. 
Gen.  23. Ti.  none  shall  withhold  from  thee  his  s. 
Deut.  34. )).  no  man  knoweth  of  his  s.  unto  this  day 
■ludg.  8.  32.  Gideon  was  buried  in  his  father's  s. 

1  Sam.W.  2.  thou  shalt  find  two  men  by  Rachel's  s. 

2  S«m.  2. 32.  they  buried  Asahel  in  his  father's  s. 
4. 12.  the  head  of  Ishboshelh  buried  in  Abner's  s 
17.23.  Ahithophid  buried  in  the  s.  of  his  father 
21.  14.  bones  of  Saul  in  the  s.  of  Kish  his  father 

1  Kings  13.22.  thy  carcase  shall  not  come  to  the  s. 
31.  bury  me  in  the  s.  wherein  man  of  God  is 

2  Kings'i.  28.  Ahaziah  in  the  s.  with  his  fathers 
1.3.  21.  they  cast  the  man  into  the  s.  of  Elisha 
21.  26.  Anion  was  buried  in  his  s.  in  the  garden 
23. 17.  they  said,  it  is  the  s.  of  the  man  of  God 

30.  Josiah  buried  in  his  own  s.  2  Chron.  .35.  24. 
Psal.  5.  9.  tlieir  throat  is  an  open  «.  Rom.  3.  13. 
/sa.  22.  16.  that  thou  hast  hewed  thee  out  a, f.  here 

as  he  that  heweth  out  a  s.  on  high,  and  graveth 
Mnt.Tl.tfi.  he  rolled  a  great  stone  to  thedoor  of  s. 

61.  the  other  Mary,  sitting  over-against  the  s. 

64.  command  that  the  s.  be  made  sure,  66. 
28.  1.  and  the  other  Mary  came  to  see  the  s. 

8.  departed  quickly  from  the  s.  wiih  fear  and  joy 
J\Iark  15.  46.  Joseph  wrapped  him  in  the  linen, 

and  laid  him  in  a  s.  Luke  23.  53.  .lets  13. 
29.  and  rolled  a  stone  to  the  door  of  the  s. 
16.2.  they  came  to  the  s.  at  the  rising  of  the  sun 
3.  who  shall  roll  the  stone  from  the  door  of  the  s. 
5.  entering  into  tjie  s.  ||  8.  they  fled  from  the  s. 
Luke  23.  .55.  and  the  women  also  beheld  the  s. 
24.  I.  early  in  the  morning  they  came  to  the  s. 
2.  they  found  the  stone  rolled  from  s.  .John  20.  1. 

9.  re'urned  from  the  s.  ||  12.  Peter  ran  to  the  s. 
22.  certain  women  which  were  early  at  the  s. 
24.  certain  of  them  with  us  went  to  the  s. 

John  19.  41.  and  in  the  garden  there  was  a  new  s. 
42.  they  laid  Jesus,  for  the  i.  was  nigh  at  hand 


SER 


John  20.  1.  comclh  Mary  when  it  was  dark  to  *. 

2.  they  have  taken  away  the  Lord  out  of  the  t. 

3.  that  other  disciple  came  to  the  s.  4,  8. 
6.  then  cometh  Peter,  and  went  into  the  s. 
11.  Mary  stood  without  at  the  s.  weeping,  as  she 

wept,  she  stooped  down  and  looked  into  the* 
Acts  2.  29.  and  his  s.  is  with  us  unto  this  day 
7.16.  Jacob  laid  in  the  s.  that  Abraham  bought 

SEPULCHRES. 
f?en.23.  6.  in  the  choice  of  our  s.  bury  thy  dead 
2  Kings  23.  16.  Josiah  spied  the  s.  and  took  the 
bones  out  of  the  s.  and  burnt  them  upon  the  altar 
2  CAr«ft.21.  20.  Jehoram  not  buried  in  s.  of  kings 
24.  25.  Joash  not  ||  28.27.  Ahaz  not  in  s.  of  kings 
32.  33.  Hezekiah  buried  in  the  chiefest  of  tlies. 
JVcA.  2.3.  the  place  of  my  father's  .<!.  lieth  waste 

5.  wouldst  send  me  to  the  city  of  my  fiithers*  s 
3. 16.  Nehemiah  repaired  to  place  over-against  s 

.1/««.23.27.woeto  you, for  ye  are  like  unto  whitcd  s 
29.  because  ye  garnish  the  s.  of  the  righteous 
Luke  11.  47.  ye  build  the  s.  of  the  prophets,  48. 

SERAPHIMS. 
Isa.  6.2.  above  it  stood  the  s.  each  had  six  wings 

6.  then  flew  one  of  the  s.  having  a  live  coal 
SERGEANTS. 

■lets  16.  35.  sent  the  s.  saying,  let  these  men  go 
38.  the  s.  told  these  words  unto  the  magistrates 
SERPENT. 
In  Greek,  Ophis;  in  Hebrew,  Nachash.  The 
craft,  the  wisdom,  the  subtilty  of  the  Serpent, 
are  things  insisted  on  in  Scripture,  as  qualities 
that  distinguish  them  from  other  animals. 
Moses  introduces  the  relation  of  i!,ve's  tempta- 
tion by  affirming.  Now  the  serpent  was  more 
subtile  than  any  beast  of  the  field  which  the 
Lord  God  had  made.  Gen.  3.  1.  And  our  Sa- 
viour recommends  to  his  .Ipostles  to  hare  the 
wisdom  of  the  Serpent,  Mat.  10.  16.  They 
bring  several  proofs  of  this  subtilly  of  the  Ser- 
pent. They  say,  th'it  the  Cerastes  hides  him- 
self in  the  sand,  in  order  to  bile  fFe  horse's 
foot,  that  he  might  throw  his  rider.  Jacob 
makes  an  allusion  to  this  in  the  blessing  he 
gave  to  Dan.  Gen.  49.  17,  Dan  shall  be  a  ser- 
pent by  the  way,  an  adder  in'  the  path;  that 
biteth  the  horse-heels,  so  that  his  rider  shall 
fall  backward.  It  is  likewise  said  of  the 
Serpent,  that  wheti  he  is  old,  he  has  the  secret 
cf  throwing  yiiung  again,  and  of  stripping  off 
his  old  skin  or  slouch,  by  squeezing  himself  be- 
tween two  rocks.  He  assaults  n  man  if  he  has 
his  clothes  on,  but  flees  if  he  finds  him  naked. 
Ithtn  he  is  assaulted,  his  chief  care  is  to  se- 
cure his  head;  because  his  heart  being  under 
his  throat,  and  very  near  his  head,  the  readiest 
way  to  kill  him  is  to  squeeze  or  cut  off  his  head: 
Hence  in  the  curse  that  God  gave  the  Serpent 
he  told  him.  The  seed  of  the  woman  shall 
bruise  the  serpent's  head,  that  is,  the  principal 
seat  of  his  life,  Gen.  3.  15.  .^nd  many  have 
supposed  that  his  chief  subtilty,  or  wisdom,  as 
the  gospel  calls  it,  con.tists  in  this,  that  he 
cbooses  to  expose  his  whole  body  to  danger,  that 
he  'may  save  his  head.  IVhen  he  goes  to  drink 
at  a  fountain,  he  first  vomits  up  all  his  poison, 
for  fear  of  poisoningkimself  as  he  is  drinking. 
Thiiugh  this  observation  he  not  assented  to  by 
every  body,  it  has  nevertheless  a  great  many 
defenders. 

It  is  said  further  of  the  Serpent's  subtilty,  that 
it  stops  up' its  ears  that  it  may  not  hear  the 
voice  of  the  charmer  or  enchanter.  The  Psal- 
mist takes  notice  of  this  piece  of  subtilty  of 
the  Adder.  Psal.  58.  4,  They  are  like  the 
deaf  adder,  that  stoppeth  her  ear:  which  will 
not  hearken  to  the  voice  of  charmers,  charm- 
ing never  so  wisely.  It  is  said,  it  applies 
one  of  its  cars  hard  to  the  ground,  and  stops 
up  the  other  with  the  end  of  its  tail.  Others 
say  the  subtilty  of  the  Serpent  consists  in  its 
agility  and  suppleness ;  or  in  a  secret  it  has 
in  recovering  its  sight  by  the  juice  of  fennel. 
Every  one  proposes  his  own  conjectures  on  this 
matter. 

Someplace  the  venom  of  the  Serpent  in. its  gall 
others  in  its  tongue,  and  others  in  its  teeth 
The  Scripture  in  different  passat^es  expresses 
itself  sometimes  as  .supposing  the  enll  of  the 
Serpent  to  be  its  venom.  Job  20.  14,  His  meat 
in  his  bowels  is  turned,  it  is  the  gall  of  asps 
within  him.  David  seems  to  place  it  in  the 
tongue.  Psal.  140.  3,  They  have  sharpened 
their  tongues  like  a  serpent.  .Ind  Solomon  in 
:he  teeth,  Prov.  23.  32,  ,\t  the  last  it  biteth  like 
a  serpent,  and  stingeth  like  an  adder. 

The  Devil  is  colled  a  Serpent,  Rev.  12.  9.  both 
because  he  hid  himself  in  the  body  of  a  real 
serpent  when  he  seduced  the  first  woman,  and 
because  of  his  serpentine  disposition,  being  a 
subtUe  crafty,  and  dangerous  enemy  to  man- 


SER 

kind.  Spe  Devil.  Tnterpreterg  have  much 
speculated  concerning  the  nature  of  the  first 
Serpent,  that  tempted  Eve.  Some  have  thought, 
that  then  the  Serpent,  or  that  kind  of  Serpeiils, 
there  being  several  kinds  of  them,  had  two, 
four,  j>r  many  feet,  or  moved  upon  the  hinder 
part  of  its  body,  with  head,  breast,  and  beHy 
uprtffht.  They  grovnd  their  opinion  on  the 
cur.'i^e  that  (Jod  gave  the  Serpent.  Oen.  3.  14, 
Upon  tliy  belly  slialt  thoii  go.  Whereas  for- 
vicrly  thou  hadst  a  privilege  above  other  kinds 
of  Serpenls,  whereby  thou  didst  go  with  erected 
breast,  and  didst  feed  upon  the  fruit  of  trees 
and  other  plants ;  now  Ihou  shall  he  brought 
down  to  the  same  mean  and  vile  estate  with 
them.  Others  think  that  there  is  no  probability 
that  this  animal  was  otherwise  than  what  it  is 
now  ;  but  what  before  the  fall  was  natural  to 
it,  afterwards  became  painful,  as  nakedyiess 
teas  to  man.  It  is  put  for  wicked  malicious 
persons,  Mat.  23.  .33. 
Jtnother  curse  that  God  gave  the  Serpent  was, 
That  it  sliouM  leefl  upon  dust,  Gen.  3.  14. 
Isiii.ili  says  also,  Dust  shall  be  the  serpent's 
meat,  Isa.  65.  25.  Jind  in  Mie.  7.  17,  Tliey 
shall  lick  the  (lust  like  a  serpent,  ft  is  true, 
however,  that  they  cat  flesh,  birds,  frogs,  fish, 
fruits,  grass,  ^-c.  But  as  they  continually 
creep  upon  the  earth,  it  is  impossible  but  that 
their  food  must  be  often  defiled  with  dust  and 
dirt.  .Some  of  them  may  really  eat  earth  out 
of  necessity,'or  at  least  earth-worms,  which 
they  cannot  swallow  without  a  good  deal  of 
dirt  with  them. 
Among  other  kinds  of  Serpents  mentioned  in 
Scripture  are  those  fiery,  flying  serpents,  that 
made  so  great  a  destruction  among  the  Israel- 
ites, and  were  the  death  of  so  many  people  in 
the  desert.  Num.  21.  G.  The  Hebrew  word  here 
used  far  Serpent,  is  Saraph,  which  properly 
signifi^  to  burn;  and  it  is  thought  Ihut  this 
nunte  was  given  to  it,  cither  because  of  its 
colour;  or  because  of  that  heat  and  thirst  it 
creates  by  its  biting. 
h  was  vpon  this  occasion  that  the  Lord  com- 
manded Moses  to  make  the  brasen  serpent,  or 
the  figure  of  the  Serpent  Saraph,  and  to  raise 
it  upon  a  pole,  that  the  people  who  wire  bit  by 
the  Si:rpenls,i;/  looking  upon  this  image,  might 
be  presently  healed.  Moses  did  so  ;  and  the 
event  was  answerable  to  this  promise.  By  this 
account  from  Scripture,  we  may  understand 
something  of  greatest  consequence  was  repre- 
sented by  it :  For  the  only  wise  God  ordains  no- 
thing without  just  reason.      Why  must  a  Ser- 

,  pent  of  brass  be  elevated  on  a  pole  ?  Could  not 
the  divine  power  recover  them  without  it!  IVIiy 
must  thnj  look  towards  it  ?  Could  not  a  heal- 
ing virtue  be  conveyed  to  their  wounds,  but 
through  their  eijesl  .^11  this  had  a  direct  refer- 
ence to  the  mystery  of  ChrrsI,  and  expressed  the 
monnrr  of  his  death,  and  the  benefits  dirined 
from  it.  Therefore  Christ  being  the  minister 
of  the  circumcision,  chose  this  figure  for  tlif  in- 
struelUni  of  the  .lews,  John  3.  14,  As  Muses 
lifted  np  llie  Serpent  in  the  wilderness,  even  so 
must  the  Son  of  man  be  lifted  up.  The  biting 
of  the  Israelites  by  the  fiery  serpents  doth  na- 
turally represent  the  effects  of  sin,  that  torment 
the  conscience,  and  inflame  the  soul  with  the 
apprihrnsinn  of  future  judgment.  ^Ind  the 
encUng  of  a  brasen  serpent  upon  a  pole,  that 
had  the  figure,  not  the  poison  of  those  serjients, 
doth  in  a  lively  manner  set  forth  the  lifting  up 
j)f  Jpsns  Christ  on  the  cross,  who  only  had  the 
similitude  of  sinful  flesh.  The  looking  to- 
viards  the  brasen  serpent,  is  a  fit  resemblance 
of  believing  in  Christ  crucified  for  salvation. 
The  siirht  of  the  rye  was  the  only  means  to  de- 
rive virtue  from  it ;  and  the  faith  of  the  heart 
is  the  means  by  which  the  sovereign  efficacy  of 
our  Itrdirmrr  is  conveyed.  John  ft.  40,  This  is 
the'  will  of  him  that  sent  me,  that  every  one 
which  seeih  the  Son  and  bcllovetli  on  him,  may 
have  everlasting  life. 

This  brasen  serpent  was  preserved  among  the 
Israelites  down  to  the  time  of  llezekiah,  who 
being  informed  that  the  people  paid  a  supersti- 
tious worship  to  it,  had  it  broken  in  pieces,  and 
by  way  of  contempt  gave  it  the  name  o/Ne- 
linshtan,  that  is,  n  brasen  bauble  or  trifle,  2 
K-ings  IS.  4. 

Oen.  3.  1.  the  s.  wns  more  subtle  than  any  beast 
13.  woninn  saiil,  Iho  a.  bejuiled  me,  2  Cor.  11.3. 
40.  17.  Dan  shall  be  n  ».  by  tiic  wav,  an  adiler 

rrod.  4.  3.  the  rod  became/ a  .«.  7.  !•,  10,  I."). 

•Vkw.  21.  8.  iho  Lord  said,  mak(;  thee  a  fiery  s. 
9.  -Moses  made  n  3.  of  brass  and  put  it  on  a 
pole;  if  a  .t.  had  bitten  any  man,  ho  beheld 
tho  »,  ofllHii 

533 


SER 

2  Kings  18.4.  Hczek.  brake  in  pieces  the  brasen*. 
,/ob  2t).  13.  his  hand  hath  formed  the  crooked  s. 
I'sal.  58. 4.  their  poison  is  like  the  poison  of  a  s. 

140.  3.  they  sharpened  their  tongues  like  a  s. 
/Vou.23.32.  at  last  it  bitethlikea.t.  and  stingeth 

30.  19.  too  wonderful,  the  way  of  a  s.  upon  a  rock 

£ccM0.8.whoso  breaketh  a  hedge, «. shall  bite  liim 

11.  surely  the  s.  will  bite  without  enchantment 

Isa.  14.  29.  out  of  the  s.  root  shall  corne  forth  a 

cockatrice;  his  fruit  shall  be  as  a  fiery  flyjjg  s. 

27. 1.  the  Lord  shall  punish  the  s.  that  crooked  s. 

30.  6.  from  whence  come  viper  and  fiery  Hying  «. 

05.25.  lioneat  straw,  and  dust  shall  be  the  s.  meat 
Jer.  4G.  22.  the  voice  thereof  shall  go  like  a  s. 
Amos  5. 19.  leaned  hand  on  wall,  and  a  s.  bite  him 

9.  3.  I  will  command  the  s.  and  lie  shall  bite  them 
Mic.  7.  17.  they  shall  lick  the  dust  like  a  s. 
Mat.  7.  10.  will  he  give  him  a  s.7  Luke  11.  11. 
.John  3.  14.  as  Moses  lifted  up  the  s.  so  Son  of  man 
Rev.  12.  9.  that  old  s.  called  the  devil,  20.  2. 

14.  where  she  is  nourished  from  the  face  of  the  5. 

15.  the  s.  cast  out  of  his  mouth  water  as  a  flood 

SERPENTS. 

i^rod.7.12.theycastdowu  their  rods,lheybecames. 

J^um.  21.  6.  the  Lord  sent  fiery  s.  among  them 
7.  pray  to  Lord  that  he  take  away  the  a.  from  us 

Dcut.  8.  15.  terrible  wildern.  wherein  were  fiery  «. 
32. 24. 1  will  also  send  the  poison  of  s.  upon  them 

Jer.  8.  17.  behold,  I  will  send  s.  among  you 

Mat.  10.  If),  be  ye  therefore  wise  as  s.uni  harmless 
23. 33.  ye  «.  how  can  ye  escape  damnation  of  hell? 

Mark  10.  18.  they  shall  take  ups.  and  if  they  drink 

Luke  10. 19.  I  give  unto  you  power  to  tread  ons. 

1  Cor.  10.9.  also  tempted,  and  were  destroyed  of*. 

,lam.  3.7.  for  every  kind  of  beasts  and  ofi.is  tamed 

iie«.9. 10. their  tails  were  like  unto  «.and  had  heads 
SERVANT 

Is  taken,  [1]  For  a  slave.  The  Hebrews  had  two 
sortsofsatxanlsorslavcs.  Some  were  strangers, 
either  bought,  or  taken  in  the  wars ;  and  their 
masters  kept  them,  exchanged  them,  sold  them, 
or  disposed  of  them  as  their  own  goods,  Lev. 
25.  44,  45,  &c.  The  others  were  Hebrew 
slaves, who  being  poor,  sold  themselves,orwere 
Sold  to  pay  their  debts:  or  were  delivered  up  for 
slaves  by  their  parents,  in  cases  of  necessity. 
'J'hissortofHvbtowslaves  continued  in  slavery 
but  six  years;  then  they  might  return  to  liberty 
again,  and  their  masters  couldnot  retain  them 
against  their  wills.  If  they  would  continue 
voluntarily  withlheirmastcrs, they  werebrought 
before  the  judges ;  there  they  made  a  declara- 
tion, that  for  this  time  they  disclaimed  the 
j^-ivilrge  of  the  law,  had  their  ears  bored  with 
an  awl,  by  applying  them  to  the  door-posts  of 
their  master;  and  after  that  they  had  no  longer 
any  power  of  recovering  their  liberty,  except  at 
the  next  year  of  jubilee,  E.\od.  21.  2,  3,  &c. 
Lev.  25.  40. 

II.  Servant  is  also  taken  for  a  man  that  dedi- 
cates himself  to  the  service  of  another,  by  the 
choice  of  his  own  will  and  inclination.  Thus 
Joshua  was  the  servant  of  Moses,  Elisha  of 
Elijah,  Gehazi  of  Elisha,  and  the  Apostles 
iccre  servants  o/ Jesus  Christ. 

III.  Servant  is  put  for  the  subjects  of  a  prince. 
The  servant  o/ Pharaoh,  the  servants  o/Saul, 
and  those  u/ David,  are  their  subjects  in  gene- 
ral, and  their  domestics  in  particular,  2  Sam. 
11.  11.  I  12.  19.  1  Chro.n.  21.  3.  In  like  manner 
also  the  Philistines,  the  Syrians,  and  several 
other  nations,  were  servants  of  David  ;  they 
obeyed  him,  they  were  his  subjects,  they  paid 
him  tribute,  2  Sam.  8.  6. 

IV.  Servants  or  slaves,  as  opposed  to  those  that 
are  free,  and  to  the  children  of  the  promises, 
represent  the  Jews  in  contradistinction  to  the 
Christians;  or  those  that  were  under  the  yoke 
ofceremonics,to  tho.ie  that  are  under  the  gospel 
dispensation.  The  Jews  icerc  the  slaves  repre- 
sented by  Ilagar  and  Ishmael;  JAe  Christians 
are  the  children  of  liberty, represented  by  Sarah 
and  by  Isaac,  Gal.  4.  3,  7,  22,  23,  &c 

Servant  or  servants  of  God.  Jls  all  things  are 
subject  to  thejtower  and  pleasure  of  God,andas 
none  can  resist  his  will  or  word;  in  this  sense 
all  creatures  are  God's  servants,  Psal.  119.91. 
But  more  particularly  by  this  name  are  called, 
[1]  .fill  faithful  and  godly  persons,  who  being 
bought  and  reih  emed  from  the  bondage  of  sin 
and  Satan,  do  serve  and  obey  God  in  righteous- 
ness and  holiness,  Rom.  0.  2j2.  [2]  One  that 
serveth  and  obeyeth  God,  not  only  in  acommon 
profession  of  religion,  hut  also  in  some  parti- 
cular function  and  calling  :  Thus  the  apostle 
Paul  £«//.«  Aim«c//lh^  servant  of  God,  liom.X.  1. 
.find  in  this  sense,  Christ  Jesus  is  termed  the 
Father's  servant  to  execute  his  will  asMediator, 
in  working  man's  redemption,  Isa.  .53.  11-,  My 
rijhtcoua  servant.    [3J  One  whom  God  makes 


SER 

use  of  as  an  wstrumerit  to  effect  and  perform 
his  willin  the  work  of  some  particular  mercy  or 
judgment:  Thus  may  Cyrus  be  called  the  ser- 
vant of  God,  his  shepherd  and  anointed,  Isa. 
44.28.  I  45. 1.  Jind  Nebuchadnezzar,  Jir.  25.  9. 

Moses  is  often,  by  way  of  eminence,  called  the 
servant  of  the  Lord.  Deut.  34.  5,  Moses  the 
servant  of  the  Lord  died.  Josh.  1.  2,  Moseg 
my  servant  is  dead.  This  title  is  often  given 
him,  not  only  to  rifltct  honour  upon  him,  but 
also  to  give  authority  to  his  laws  and  writings, 
in  publishing  of  which  he  only  acted  as  God'g 
servant,  in  his  name  and  stead:  Jind  likewise 
that  the  Israelites  niiglit  not  tliink  of  Moses 
above  what  was  meet,  remembering  that  he  was 
not  the  Iiord  himself,  but  only /lis  servant ;  and 
therefore  not  to  be  worshippcd,nor  yet  too  perti- 
naciously followed  in  all  his  institutions,  whtn 
the  Lord  himself  should  come  and  abolish  part 
of  the  Mosaical  dispensation;  it  being  but  rea- 
sonable that  the  servant  should  give  place  to 
the  Son  and  Heir,  Heb.  3.  3,  5,  6. 

Servant  is  also  taken  for  a  person  of  a  servile 
ignoble  condition  and  spirit,  who  is  altogether 
un fi t  for  p laces  of  dignity.  Eccl.  10.  7,  1  have 
seen  servants  upon  horses.  The  Apostle  Paul 
says,  1  Cor.  9.  19,  I  have  made  myself  ser- 
vant unto  all,  that  I  might  gain  the  more.  I 
have  complied  with  their  weaknesses  and  infir- 
mities, so  far  as  they  were  not  sinful:  I  have 
denied  myself  in  my  liberty,  and  determined 
myself  to  that  p^rt  in  my  actions,  which  I  saw 
would  most  oblige,  profit,  and  engage  them  to 
nie  so  as  to  bring  them  in  lore  with  the  gospel. 
The  servant  of  sin,  ./ohn  8.  34.  J5  one  who  is  in 
spiritual  bondage,  and  under  the  power  of  sin 
and  corruption. 

Gen.'.).'25.  Canian,  a  s.  of  servants  shall  he  be 

24.  34.  and  he  said,  I  am  Abraham's  s. 

49.  15.  Issaehar  bowed  and  became  a  s.  to  tribute 
Exod.  21.5.  if  the  s.  plainly  say,  I  love  my  master 
Dept.  5. 15.  remember  that  thou  wast  a  s.  in  Egypt 

23.  15.  thou  shalt  not  deliver  the  s.  that  is  escaped 

1  Sam.  2.  13.  jiriest's  s.  came  and  said,  15. 

9.  27.  Samuel  said,  bid  the  s.  pass  on  before  us 

25.  41.  let  thy  handmaid  be  a  s.  to  wash  the  feet 

29.  3.  is  not  this  David  the  s.  of  Saul  the  king? 

30.  13.  I  am  a  young  man,  s.  to  an  Arnalekite 

2  Sam.  9.2.  of  house  of  Saul, «.  named  Ziba,  19. 17. 
IG.  1.  Ziba  the  5.  of  Me|diibosheth  met  David 

18.  29.  when  Joab  sent  the  king's  s.  and  me  thy* 

1  A^n^.f  11.26.Jeroboam  Solom.'ss.lil't  up  his  hand 
12.  7.  if  thou  wilt  be  a  s.  to  this  people  this  day 

2  Kings  4.24. she  said  to  hers. drive  and  go  forward 

6.  15.  when  the  s.  of  the  man  of  God  was  risen 
JVcA.  2.  lO.Tobiah  the  s.  the  Ammonite  heard,  19. 
,Iob  3.  19.  and  the  s.  is  there  free  from  his  master 

7.  2.  as  a  s.  e'arnestly  desirelh  the  shadow 

41.  4.  wilt  thou  take  Leviathan  for  a  s.  forever? 
Psal.  105.  17.  even  Joseph,  who  was  sold  for  a  s. 
Prov.  11.  29.  the  fool  shall  \>es.  to  the  wise  of  heart 

12.  9.  he  that  is  despised  and  hath  a  s.  is  better 
14.  35.  tho  king's  favour  is  toward  a  wise  «, 

17.  2.  a  wise  *.  shall  have  rule  over  a  son  tliat 

19.  10.  much  less  for  a  6'.  to  rule  over  princes 
22.  7.  and  the  borrower  is  s.  to  the  lender 
29.  19.  a  s.  will  not  be  corrected  with  words 
30.10.accuscnol«.  lohis  master,  lest  he  curse  the* 

22.  Iho  earth  cannot  bear  a  s.  when  he  reigneiL 
Isa.  24.  2.  as  with  the  s.  so  with  his  master 
49.  7.  to  US.  of  rulers  ||  Jer.  2.  14.  is  Israel  a  a.? 
Don.  6.  20.  O  Daniel,  s.  of  the  living  God 
10. 17.  how  can  .?.  of  my  lord  talk  wiih  my  lord  7 
Mai.  1.6.*.  honmirith  hismaster,if  I  be  a  master 
Mat.  10.  24.  nor  is  the  .«.  above  his  lord 
25.  it  is  enough  for  the  s.  to  be  as  his  lord 

18.  26.  the  «.  lell  down  and  worshipped  him 
27.lhe  lord  of  ihats.was  moved  with  compassion 
32. 0  ihou  wicked  s.  I  forgave  thee  all  that  debt 

20.  27.  and  whosoever  will  be  chief  among  you, 

let  him  be  yonr  ,9.  23.  11.  Mark  1ft.  44. 
24. 45. who  then  is  a  faithful  and  wise*. whom  lord 
46.  blisscd  is  that  s.  whom  his  lord,  Luke  12.  43. 
48.  but  if  that  evil  s.  shall  say,  Luke  12.  4.5. 
.'iO.  the  lord  of  that  .«.  shall  come,  Luke  12.  46. 

25.  21.  well  done,  thou  good  and  faithful  s.  enter 
thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord,  23.  I.uhe  19,  17. 

2G.  thou  wicked  and  slothful  *.  Luke  19.  22. 
30.  east  the  unprofitable  s.  into  outer  darkness 

26.  51.  Peter  struck  a  ».  of  the  high-iiriest,  and 

smotoofTbiscar,  Mark  14.  47.  .lohn  18.  10. 
Mark  12.  2.  and  ho  sent  to  the  husbandmen  a  s. 
Luke  12.  47.  that  *.  which  knew  his  lord's  will 
14.  21.  so  that  s.  came  and  shewed  his  lord 
17.  7.  but  which  of  you  having  a  .s\  plowing 
9.  dnlh  he  thank  that  «.?  I  trow  not 
20.  If),  and  at  the  season  ho  sent  a  .•;.  11- 
./uA»8.34.  whoso  C(onmilteth  sin, is  ihe.t.  of  sin 
35.  the  s.  abideth  not  in  the  house  for  ever 

13.  IG.  the  s.  is  not  ^'rcatcr  than  his  lord,  15.  20. 


SER 

John  15. 15.  the  s  knoweth  not  what  his  lord  doeth 
Rom.  ].  1.  Paul  a  s.  ofJjsus  Clirist,  an  apostle 

14.  4.  who  art  Ihou  that  judgost  another  man's  s.? 
16. 1. 1  commend  to  you  Phebc,  a  5.  of  tha  church 

lCor.7.  21.  art  thou  called  being  as.?  care  not  for  it 
22.  is  called,  being  a  s.  is  the  Lord's  free-man 
9.  19.  yet  have  I  made  myself  a  s.  unto  all 
Oal.  1.  10.  I  should  not  be  the  s.  of  Christ 
4  1.  as  a  child  dilferL-th  nothing  from  a  s. 

1.  wherefore  thou  art  no  more  a  s.  but  a  son 
Vhil.  2.  7.  he  took  ujion  him  the  form  of  a  s. 
Col.  4.  12.  Epaphras,  a  s.  of  Christ,  saluteth  you 
27'(m.2.24.s.of  Lord  must  notstrive,  but  be  gentle 
Pkilem.  16.  not  now  as  a  s.  but  above  a  s.  a  brother 
Hcb.  3.  5.  Moses  was  faithful  in  his  house  as  a  s. 
2  Pet.  1.  1.  Simon  Peter,  a  s.  of  Jesus  Christ 
Jade  l.Jude  the  s. of  Jesus  Christ,to  them  sanctified 
See  D.4.VID. 
SERVANT,  and  SERVANTS  of  God. 
Oen.  50.  17.  forgive  the  s.  of  the  God  of  thy  father 

1  Chr.  C.  49.  as  Moses  the  s.  of  God  commanded 

2  C/ir.  24. 9.  the  cidlection,  Moses  the  s.  of  G.  laid 
JVeA.  10.  29.  to  walk  in  God's  law,  which  was 

given. by  Moses  the  js.  of  God  to  observe  all 
commands 

Dan.  6.20.  he  said,  O Daniel,  s.  o/ the  living  God 
9.  11.  written  in  the  law  of  Moses  the  s.  of  God 
Tit.\.\.?i\x\&s.ofGod  II  .Jam.l.X.jAmesas.of  G. 
1  Ptt.  2.  16.  not  using  liberty,  but  as  a  s.  of  God 
Reiy.  7.  3.  till  we  have  sealed  the  s.  o/our  God 

15.  3.  they  sing  the  song  of  Moses  the  s.  of  God 

See  Hired. 
His  SERVANT. 
Gen.  9.  26.  and  Canaan  shall  be  his  s.  27. 
£j;oii.I4.31.  people  believed  Lord  and  Aw  5.  Moses 

21.  20.  if  a  man  smite  his  s.  and  die  under  his  hand 
26.  if  he  smite  the  eye  of  his  s.  that  it  perish 

33.11.  but/i(.'f «. Joshua  departed  notout  oftabern. 
lash.  5.  14.  Joshua  said,  what  saith  my  L.  to  kiss.? 

9.  24.  God  commanded  his  s.  Moses  to  give  you 
Jadg.  7.  11.  Gideon  went  down  with  Fhurali  his  s. 

19.  3.  the  Levite  went,  having  his  s.  with  him 
9.  when  the  man  rose  to  depart,  he  and  his  s. 

1  Sam.  19.  4.  let  not  the  king  sin  against  his  s. 

22.  15.  let  not  the  king  impute  any  thing  to  his  s. 
25.  39.  the  Lord  haih  kept  his  s.  from  evil 

26. 18.  why  dolh  my  Lord  thus  pursue  after  Aiss.? 
19.  let  my  lord  the  king  hear  the  word  of  his  s. 

2  Sam.  9.  11.  as  my  lord  hath  commanded  his  s. 
14.22.  the  king  hath  fulfilled  the  renuest  of  his  s. 
24.  21.  wherefore  is  my  lord  come  to  his  s.? 

1  Kings  1.  51.  swear,  that  he  will  not  slay  his  s. 
^8.  .56.  which  he  promised  by  hand  of  Moses  his  s. 

59.  that  he  maintain  the  cause  of  his  s.  and  Israel 
14.  18.  he  spake  by  hand  of  his  s.  Ahijah,  15.  29. 
19.  3.  Elijah  came  and  left  his  s.  at  Beer-sheba 

2  Kings  9.36.  word  which  he  spake  by  his  s.  Elijah 
14.  25.  the  word  which  he  sjtake  by  his  s.  Jonah 
17. 3.  Ho.shea  became  hiss,  and  gave  him  presents 
24.  1.  and  Jelioiakim  became  his  s.  llirce  years 

1  Cliron.  16.  13.  O  ye  seed  of  Israel  his  s. 

2  Cliron.  32.  16.  spake  against  his  s.  Hezekiah 
JWA.  4. 22.  let  every  one  with  his  s.  lodge  within 
P5«^35.27.Ld.  hath  pleasure  in  prosperity  of  Az'ss. 

105.  6. 0  ye  seed  of  Abraham  his  s.  he  is  our  God 
26.  he  sent  Moses  his  s.  and  Aaron  hi.s  chosen 
42.  for  he  remembered  Abraham  his  s. 
13fi.  22.  gave  even  a  heritage  unto  Israel  his  s. 
Prov.  29.  21.  that  delicately  bringeth  up  Aft  s. 
J.sa.  44.  26.  that  coiifirmeth  the  word  of  his  s. 
43.  20.  Ilie  Lord  hath  redeemed  his  s.  Jacob 
49. 5.  Loril  formed  me  I'rom  the  womb  to  be  his  s. 
50.  10.  who  that  obeyeth  the  voice  of  his  s.? 
Jer.  34.  Ki.  y«  caused  every  man  his  s.  to  return 
Mat  8.  13.  his  s.  was  healed  in  the  same  hour 
J^itke].  iii.hu  hath  holpen  his  s.  Israel  in  mercy 
7.3.beseeching  that  hewould  come  and  heal  his  s. 
14.  17.  and  sent  his  s.  at  supper-time  to  say 
Rev.  1. 1.  signified  it  by  his  angel  unto  his  s.  John 
See  Lord,  M.\id. 
Mm-SEHV.\NT. 
Ezod.^(l.\0.<\o  nowork,thqu  oocman-s.neut.5.Xi. 
17.  notcovet  thy  neighbour's  matis.  Veuf..5.2l. 
21.  27.  and  if  hi?  smite  ou«  his  man-s.  tooth 

32.  if  the  o.v  shall  push  a  mau-s.  or  maid-servnnt 
Deut.  12. 18.  must  eat  them,  thou,  and  thy  mans. 
16.' 11.  rejoice  before  Lord,  thou  and  thy  man-s. 

14.  rejoice  in  thy  feast,  thou,  and  thy  man-s. 
Job  31. 13.  if  I  did  despise  the  cause  of  my  man-s. 
Jer.  34.  9.  should  let  his  man-s.  go  free,  10. 

M;i  SERVANT. 
Jre7i.26. 34. 1  will  iniilti|dy  thy  seed  for  my  «.  sake 
44. 10.  he  wiih  whom  it  is  found  shall  be  my  .5. 17. 
J\l'am,  12.  7.  my  s.  JI.)ses  is  not  so,  who  is  faithfid 
8.  why  were  ye  not  afiaid  to  speak  against  my  s..* 
14.  24.  but  my  s.  C  deb  had  another  spirit 
Josh.  I.  2.  Moses  mij  s.  is  dead,  therefore  arise 

1  Sam.  22.  8.  that  my  son  hath  stirred  up  my  s. 
27.  12.  theritfore  he  shall  be  my  s.  for  ever 

2  Sam.  19.  26.  my  lord,  O  king,  my  s.  deceived  me 

533 


SER 

2  Kings  5. 6. 1  have  therewith  sent  Naaman  my  s. 
21.8.according  to  the  lawjny  s. Moses  commanded 

Job  1.  8.  hast  thou  considered  my  s.  Job?  2.  3. 
19.  16.  I  called  my  s.  and  he  gave  me  no  answer 
42.  7.  ye  have  not  spoken  right,  as  my  s.  Job  hath 
8.  go  to  my  s.  Job,  he  shall  pray  for  you 

Isa.  20.3.  like  as  my  s.  Isaiah  hath  walked  naked 

,  22.  20.  in  that  day  I  will  call  my  s.  Eliakim 

41.  8.  but  thou  Israel,  art  my  s.  fear  not,  9. 

42.  1.  behold  7«y  s.  whom  1  uphold,  mine  elect 

19.  who  is  blind  but  my  s.  that  1  senf? 

43.  10.  ye  are  witnesses,  and  my  s.  I  have  chosen 
44.1.hear,  O  Jacob,  my  s.  II  2.  fear  not,  OJac.mys. 

21.  remember  those,  for  thou  art  j«y  s.  49.  3. 
45.  4.  for  Jacob  my  s.  sake,  and  Israel  mine  elect 
49.  6^  it  is  a  light  thing  thou  shouldest  be  my  s. 
52.  13.  behold,  my  s.  sliall  deal  prudently,  be  very 
65. 8.  60  will  I  do  for  my  s.  sake,  not  destroy  theni 
Jer.  25.  9.  Nebuchadnezzar  my  s.  27.  6.  |  43.  10. 
30.  10.  fear  thou  not,  O  my  s.  Jacob,  46.  27,  28. 
Ezek.  28.  25.  land  I  have  given  my  s.  Jacob,  37. 25. 
Hag.  2.  23.  I  will  take  thee,  O  Zerubbabel  my  s- 
Zech.3-  8.  I  will  bring  forth  my  s.  the  BRANCH 
Mai.  4.  4.  remember  the  law  of  Moses  my  s. 
Mat.  S.  6.  7«y  s.  lieth  at  home  sick  of  the  palsy 

8.  speak,  and  my  s.  shall  be  healed,  Luke  7.  7. 

9.  and  to  my  s.  do  this,  and  he  doth  it,  Luke  7. 8. 
12.  18.  behold,  my  s.  whom  I  have  chosen 

John  12.  26.  where  I  am,  there  shall  also  my  s.  be 

Thy  SERVANT. 
Gen.  18.  3.  pass  not  away,  I  pray  thee  from  thy  s. 

19. 19.  behold,  thy  s.  hath  found  grace,  J^Teh.  2.  5. 

24.  14.  be  she  that  thou  hast  appointed  for  thy  s. 

32.  10.  not  worthy  of  the  mercies  siiewed  to  thys. 
18.  then  thou  shalt  say,  they  be  thy  s.  Jacob's 

33.  5.  the  children  which  God  hath  given  thy  s. 
44. 31.  grey  hairs  of  thy  s.  our  father  to  the  grave 

32.  thy  s.  became  surety  for  the  lad  to  my  father 
Ezod.  4.  10.  nor  since  thou  hast  spoken  unto  thy  s. 
Lev.  25.  6.  be  meat  for  you,  for  ihee,  and  for  thy  s. 
JVam.  11. 11.  wherefore  hast  thou  afflicted  thy  s.? 
/.>c«A.  3.24.  hast  begun  to  shew  thy  s.  thy  greatness 

15. 17.  thro'  his  ear,  and  he  shall  be  t/iy  s.  for  ever 
Judg.  7.  10.  go  thou  down  with  Phurah  thy  s. 

15.  18.  this  great  deliverance  into  hand  of  thy  s. 

1  Sam.  3.  9.  speak.  Lord,  for  thy  s.  heareth,  10. 

17.  36.  thy  s.  slew  botit  the  lion  and  the  bear 
20.  7.  if  he  say  thus,  thy  s.  shall  have  peace 

22.  15.  for  thy  s.  knew  nothing  of  all  this 

23.  II.  O  Lord  God,  I  beseech  thee,  tell  thy  s. 
28.  2.  surely  thou  shalt  knovv  what  thy  s.  can  do 

2  Sam.  7. 19.  hut  thou  hast  spoken  of  tAy  s.  house 

20.  for  thou,  Lord  God,  knowest  thy  s. 

29.  let  it  please  thee  to  bless  the  house  of  thy  s. 
9.  6.  Mephibosheth  answered,  behold  thy  s. 
13. 35.  the  king's  sons  came,  as  thy  s.  said,  so  it  is 
15.  21.  in  death  or  life,  even  there  will  thy  s.  be 

19.  27.  he  hath  slandered  thy  s.  unto  my  lord 

24.  10.  O  Lord,  take  away  the  iniquity  of  thy  s. 
iKings  1.26.but  nie,  even  me  thy  s.  and  Zadok  the 

priest,  and  thy  s.  Solomon  hath  he  not  called 

2.  38.  as  my  lord  the  king  said,  so  will  thy  s.  do 

3.  8.  and  thy  s.  is  in  the  midst  of  thy  people 

9.  give  thy  s.  an  understanding  heart,  to  judge 
8.  28.  have  thou  respect  to  the  prayer  of  thy  s. 

18.  12.  but  I  thy  s.  fear  the  Lord  from  my  youth 
.36.  let  it  be  known  this  day  that  I  am  thy  s. 

20.  32.  thy  s.  Benhadad  saith,  I  pray  let  me  live 
40. as  (Ay  s. was  busy  here  and  there,  he  was  gone 

2  Kings  4.  1.  (Ay  s.  my  husband  is  dead,  and  thou 
knowest  (Ay  s.did  fear  Lord,  the  creditor  is  come 
5.  18.  the  Lord  pardon  thy  s.  in  this  thing 
25.  Gehazi  said,  (Ay  s.  went  no  whither 
8. 13.  hut  what,  is  (Ay  s.  a  dog?  ||  16.7. 1  am  (Ay  s. 
JVeA.  1.  11.  prosper,  I  pray  Ihee,  (Ay  s.  this  day 
Psal.  19. 11.  moreover,  by  them  is  (Ay  s.  warned 

13.  keep  back  (Ay  s.  from  presumptuous  sins 
27.  9.  put  not  thy  s.  away  in  anger,  leave  me  not 
31. 16.  make  thy  face  to  shine  upon  thy  s.  save  me 
69.  17.  hide  not  thy  face  from  (Ay  s.  in  trouble 
86.  2.  O  my  God,  save  (Ay  s.  that  trusteth  in  thee 

16.  give  thy  strength  unto  (Ay  s.  and  save  me 
89.  3;).  thou  hast  made  void  the  covenant  of  (Ay  s. 
116.  16.  truly  I  am  (Ay  s.  119.  12.5.  |  143.  12. 
Keel.  7.  21.  lest  thou  hear  (Ay  s.  curse  thee 
[sa.  63.  17.  return,  for  (Ay  s.  sake,  the  tribes 
Dan.  9.  17.  O  God,  hear  the  prayer  of  thy  s. 
Lukc2.  29.  Lord,  lettest  thou  thys.  depart  in  peace 

SERVANTS. 
Grn.  9.  25.  Canaan,  a  servant  of  s.  shall  he  be 
27.  37.  all  his  brethren  have  I  given  him  for  s. 
/,cv.  2.5.  5.J.  to  me  the  children  of  Israel  are  ;;. 
•Josh.  9. 11.  go  meet  them,  and  say,  we  are  your  s. 
1  Sam.  4.  9." that  ye  be  not  s.  unto  the  Hebrews 
17.  8.  am  I  not  a  Philistine,  and  you  s.  to  Saul  ? 
9.  if  he  kill  me,  then  will  we  be  your  .«.  but  if  I 
kill  him,  then  shall  ye  he  our  s.  and  serve  ua 
22.  17.  but  the  s.  of  the  king  would  not  put  forth 

25.  10.  many  s.  break  away  from  their  masters 
41.  to  wash  the  feet  of  the  s.  of  my  lord 


SER 

2  Sam.  8.  2.  so  the  Moabites  became  David's  s. 

e.theSyriansllU.theyofEdom  became  David's*. 

9.  10.  now  Ziba  had  fifteen  sons  and  twenty  s. 

12.  all  in  the  house  of  Ziba  s.  to  Mephibosheth 

10. 4.  Hanun  look  David's  5.  and  shaved  the  half 

of  their  beards,  and  cut  garments,  1  CAr.  19.4. 

11.  11.  the  s.  of  my  Lord  are  encamped  in  fields 
1  Kings  2.  39.  two  of  the  s.  of  Shimei  ran  away 
2A'iH^5  21.23.  the  s. of  A  mon  conspired  against  him 

1  Cliron.  21.  3.  but  are  they  not  all  my  lord's  «.? 

2  CAr.  8.  9.  of  the  children  of  Isr.  Sol.  made  no  s. 
36.  20.  carried  to  Babylon,  where  they  were  s. 

Ezra  5.  11.  we  are  the  s.  of  the  God  of  heaven 
JVcA.  5.  15.  their  s.  bare  rule  over  the  people 

9.  36.  behold,  we  are  s.  this  day,  s.  in  the  land 
■Job  1. 15.  they  have  slain  the  «.  with  the  sword,  17. 
Psal.  123. 2.  as  the  eyes  of  s.  look  to  their  masters 
Ecel.  2.  7.  1  got  me  s.  and  had  s.  born  in  my  house 

10.  7.  I  have  seen  s.  upon  horses,  and  princes 

walking  as  s.  upon  the  earth 
/sa.14.2.  Israel  shall  possess  them  for  s.and  handm. 
Jer.  34. 11.  caused  the  s.  whom  they  had  let  go  free, 
to  return,  and  brought  them  into  subjection  for  s. 
Lam.  5.  8.  s.  have  ruled  over  us,  none  deliver 
Dan.  3.  26.  ye  s.  of  the  most  high  God,  come  forth 
,Toel  2.  29.  upon  the  s.  will  I  pour  out  my  Spirit 
Zeeh.  2.  9.  behold,  they  shall  be  a  spoil  to  their  s. 
Mat.  22. 13.  then  said  the  king  to  the  s.  bind  him 

25. 19.  the  lord  of  those  s.  cometh  and  reckoneth 
Mark  14.65.  the  «.  did  strike  Jesus  with  their  hands 
Luke  12.37.blessed  are  thoses.  found  watching,38. 

17. 10.  say,  are  unprofitable  «.  have  done  our  duty 
Johnl5.  15.  henceforth  I  call  you  not  s.  for  servant 
Jlcts  16.  17.  these  men  are  s.  of  the  most  high  God 
Rom.  6. 16.  to  whom  ye  yield' yourselves  s.  to  obey 

17.  God  be  thanked,  that  ye  were  the  s.  of  sin 

18.  made  free,  ye  became  the  s.  of  righteousness 

19.  as  ye  have  yielded  your  members  s.  to  sin 

20.  s.  of  sin,  ye  were  free  from  righteousness 
22.  being  free  from  sin,  and  become  s.  to  God 

1  Cor.  7. 23.  ye  are  bought,  he  not  ye  the  s.  of  men 

2  Cor.  4.  5.  and  ourselves  your  s.  for  Jesus'  sake 
Eph.  6.  5.  s.  be  obedient  to  your  masters  according 

to  the  tlesh,  Col.  3.  22.  Tit.  2.  9.  1  Pet.  2.  16. 
6.  not  with  eye-service,  but  as  the  s.  of  Christ 
Phil.  1.  1.  Paul  and  Timotheus  the  s.  of  Christ 
Col.  4.  1.  masters,  give  your  s.  what  is  just 
1  Tim.  6.  1.  let  as  many  .9.  as  are  under  the  yoke 

1  Pet.  2.  16.  not  using  liberty,  but  as  the  s.  of  God 

2  P£(.  2. 19.  they  themselvesare  the  s.  of  corruption 
Rev.  7.  3.  till  we  have  sealed  the  s.  of  our  God 

See  Hired. 

His  SERVANTS. 

Gen.  40.  20.  Pharaoh  made  a  feast  unto  all  his  s. 

Exod.  9.  20.  Pharaoh  made  his  s.  flee  into  houses 

12.  30.  Pharaoh  rose  in  the  night,  he  and  his  s. 
jV(tm.22.22. Balaam  riding, and  Aj's  twos,  with  him 
Deut.3'i.  36.  Lord  shall  repent  himself  for  his  s. 

43.  for  he  will.avenge  the  blood  of  his  s. 

1  Sam.  8. 14.  take  the  best,  and  give  to  his  s.  15. 
17.  ye  will  take  the  tenth,  ye  shall  be  his  s. 

19.  1.  Saul  spake  to  all  his  s,.  to  kill  David 
22.  6.  and  all  his  s.  were  standing  about  him 

2  Kings  5.13.  Aiss.  came  near,  and  spake  unto  him 

1  Chron.  19.3.  are  not  his  s.  come  to  1  bee  to  search? 

2  Chron.  12.  8.  nevertheless,  they  shall  be  his  s. 
32.  16.  his  s.  spake  yet  more  against  the  Lord  G. 

JVth.  2.  20.  therefore  we  his  s.  will  arise  and  build 
./o4  4.18.  behold,  he  put  no  trust  in  his  s.  and  angels 
Psal.  69.  36.  the  seed  also  of  his  s.  shall  inherit  it 

105.25.  turned  their  heart,  to  deal  subt.  with  his  s. 

135.  14.  he  will  repent  himself  concerning  Ais  s. 
Prof.  29. 12.  if  hearken  to  lies,  all  his  s.  are  wicked 
Isa.  56.  6.  to  love  the  name  of  the  Lord,  to  be  his  s 

65. 15.  the  Lord  shall  call  his  s.  by  another  name 

66.  14.  hand  of  the  Lord  be  known  toward  his  s. 
Jer.  22. 4.  riding  in  chariots,  on  horses,  he  and  kis  s. 

.36.  31.  punish  him,  his  seed  and  his  s.  for  initiuity 
Ezek.  46.  17.  if  the  prince  give  a  gift  to  his  s. 
Dan.  3. 28.  and  delivered  his  s.  that  trusted  in  him 
Jfat.  18.  23.  king  who  would  take  account  ofAi's  s. 

21.  34.  hesent  A(.ss.  to  the  husbandmen  to  receive 
Luke  19. 1 3.  he  called  his  ten  s.  and  delivered  them 
Rom.  6.  16.  his  s.  ye  arc  to  whom  ye  obey 

Rev.  1 .1.  to  shew  his  s.  things  that  must  come,  22. 6. 

19.  2.  hath  avenged  blood  of  Ais  s.  at  her  hand 
5.  prai.se  God,  all  ye  his  s.  and  ye  that  fear  him 

22.3.  throne  shall  be  in  it,  and  Ai.fs.shallservehim 

See  Lord,  M.un,  Men. 

My  SERVANTS. 

/.,fu.  25.42.  thevare  mys.  whom  I  brought  out,  5.5. 

1  Sam.  21.  2.  I  have  appointed  my  s.  such  a  j)iace 

1  Kings  5.G.my  s.sbM  be  with  thyserv.  2  CAr.  2. 8. 

20.  6.  yet  I  will  send  my  s.  unto  thee  to-morrow 

22.  49.  let  my  s.  go  with  thy  serv.  in  the  ships,  hut 

2  Kings  9.  7.  that  I  may  avenge  the  blood  of  my  s 
JVfA.  4.16.  the  half  of  my  s.  wronght  in  the  work 

23.  neither  I  nor  my  s.  put  olTour  clothes 
5.10.  t  and  my  s.miglit  exact  of  Ihem  money,  corn 
IC.  all  my  s.  were  gathered  thither  to  the  work 


SER 

,VcA.  13.  19.  and  some  ofmys.  set  I  al  the  galea 
Isa.  t>5.  9.  mine  elect  and  my  s.  shall  dwell  there 

13.  my  s.  shall  eat  ||  14.  my  s.  shall  sing  for  joy 
Jer.  7.  ii5.  I  have  even  sent  to  you  all  my  s.  41.  4. 
JoA7il8.3U.  it'kingd.ofworldithen  would  m/j/s. tight 
Jjcts  2. 18.  on  my  s.  I  will  pour  out  ol'niy  Sjiiril 
Aeu.-.-O.cullslierselfft  proiihetess,  to  seduce  my  i. 

See  Propiikts. 
Thy  SERVANTS.       ' 

Gen.  42.  11.  we  are  true  men,  thy  s.  are  no  spies 
44.  16.  God  hath  found  out  the  miquity  ot't/iys. 
47.3.  t/iy  s.  are  slieplierds,both  we  and  our  fathers 
50.  J8.  his  hrelhreu  said,  hehold,  we  be  thy  s. 

/■;xo</.5.15.wherefore  dealest  thou  thus  with  «/ii/s.? 
11.8.  these  thys.  shall  bow  down  themselves  to  me 
3'i.  13.  remember  A  br.and  IsraeUAy  s.  IJcut.SiSn. 

JVum.  32.i5.  thy  a.  will  do  as  my  lord  command,31. 

Josk.'J.B.  Gibeoeites  said  to  Joshua,  wvATet/iys. 
10.6.  saying,  slack  not  thy  hand  from  thy  s. 

1  Sam.  \~.  lU.  jiray  for  thy  s.  to  the  Lord  thy  God 
'Ji.ll.who  is  rio  faithful  among  all  thy  s.  as  David? 

2  Sam.  19.  7.  and  speak  ccjnilortably  lothy  s. 

14.  they  sent  this  word,  return  thou  and  all  thy  .i. 
1  Kings'i.  39.  they  toldShimei,  thys.  be  inGath 

5.  0.  my  servants  shall  he  with  thy  s.  2  Chr.  2.  8. 

8.2;).  who  keepest  covenant  and  mercy  with  thy  s. 
32.  hear  thou  and  judge  thy  s.  2  Chron.  G.  23. 

10.  8.  happy  are  these  thy  s  2  Chron.  9.  7. 

12.  7.  they  will  be  thy  .?.  for  ever, 2CA)on.  10.7. 
2/li7i'>'s6.3.  one  said,  be  content,  and  go  with  thys. 
JVeh.  1. 10.  now  these  are  thy  s.  and  Ihy  people 

11.  let  thine  ear  be  attentive  to  prayer  of  thy  s. 
Psal.  79.  2.  the  bodies  of  thy  s.  have  they  given 

10.  by  the  revenging  of  the  blood  of  thy  s.  thcii 

89.  50.  remember.  Lord,  the  reproach  of  thy  s. 

90.  13.  Utit  repent  thee  concerning  thy  s. 

IG.  let  thy  work  a|ipear  to  thy  s.  and  thy  glory 

102.  14.  for  thy  s.  lake  pleasure  in  her  stones 

28.  children  u\'  t>ry  s.  shall  continue,  their  seed 

119.  91.  they  coiilmue  this  day,  for  all  are  thy  s. 

Jsa.  37.  24.  by  thy  s.  hast  thou  rejiroached  iheLd. 

JJan.  1.  12.  prove  thys.  I  beseech  thee,  ten  days 

13.  and  as  Ihou  seesl,  deal  with  thy  s. 
^ctsi.i'-l.  grant  unto  f Ay  «.  that  with  all  boldness 

See  Women. 
i?KKVE. 
Oen.  15. 13.  thy  seed  shall  s.  them  400  years 

14.  that  nation  whomtliey  shall  «.  will  1  judge 
So.  23.  and  the  elder  shall  s.  the  younger 
27.29.let  people  s.  thee,  nations  bow  down  to  the 

40.  by  thy  sword  shall  thou  live,  and  s.  brother 

29.  15.  shouldcstthou  therefore  s.  me  fur  nought? 
18.  I  will  s.  thee  seven  years  for  Rachel 

27.  thouishalt  s.  with  me  seven  other  years 
ETod.  1.  13,  they  made  Israel  to  s.  with  rigour 

3.  12.  ye  shall  «.  God  upon  this  mountain 

4.  23.  1  say,  let  my  son  go,  that  he  may  s.  me 

7.  10.  let  my  people  go,  that  they  may  s.  me  in 

the  wilderness,  8.  1, 20. 1 9. 1,  13.  |  10.  3. 
14.  12.  saying,  let  us  alone,  that  wemay S.Egyp- 
tians, for  it  had  been  better  for  us  to  s.  them 
20.5.  not  bow  down  to  them, nor  s.  them,/>cuf.5.9. 
21.  2.  a  Hebrew  servant,  six  years  he  shall  5. 

6.  shall  bore  his  ear,  and  he  shall  s.  hi.ii  for  ever 
ieE.25. 39.  shall  not  compel  him  to  s.asbond-serv 

40.  he  shall  s.  thee  unto  the  year  of  .luhilee 
JVuOT.  4.24.  the  family  of  the  GershoniUs  to  .». 
2(i.  shall  bear  all  made  lor  them,  so  shall  iliey  s 

8.  25.  from  the  age  of  lifty  they  shall  a.  no  more 
18.  21.  the  tenth  of  Levi,  for  tlK;ir  serviee  they  s, 

Jieut.  4.  19.  thou  shouldesl  be  driven  to  .v.  them 

6.13.  thoushalt  fear  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  i.  him, 

10.  12,  20.  I  11.  13.  I  13.  4.  ./o.«A.  2-i   " 

124.14,  1.").  ISam.  7.  3.  |  12.  14,20,  24. 

15. 12.  if  brother  he  sold  to  thee,  and  s.  six  years 

20.1 1,  shall  be  tributaries  to  thee,  and  shall  s.  thee 

28.  4-*.  therefore  shall  thou  s.  thine  enemies 

Joah.i-i.  \r>.  choose  yon  this  day  whom  you  will* 

Juilg.  9.  28.  should  s.  Hliechem,  should  .<i.  Ilamor 

:w.  who  is  Ahimelech,  that  wc  should  s.  him? 

1  .Sxm.  10.  7.  do  thou  ns  occasion  shall  s.  thee 
11. 1,  make  covenant  with  us,  and  we  will  s.  thee 

12.  10.  but  now  ileliver  us,  and  we  will  s.thee 
17.  9.  then  shall  ye  be  our  servants,  and  s.  us 

2  Sam.  10.  19.  w  Ik/id  shouhl  I  s.  ?  should  I  not  .i 
22.44.  a  people  I  knew  not  shall  s.  me,  Psal.  18.43. 

1  Kings  12. 4.  now  therefore  make  ihou  this  heavy 
yoke  lighter,  and  we  will  s.  thco,  2  CAron. 10.4. 

2  Kiiiirs  10.  18.  hut  Jehu  shall  s.  Baal  niui-h 

2.3.  24.  dwell  in  the  land,  and  s.  the  king  (ifHaby- 
Ion,  ./cr.27.  11,  12,  17.  |28.  14.  |  40.  9, 

1  Chron.  28.  SI.  and  .«.  him  wilh  a  perfect  heart 

2  CAron.  29.  II.  the  Lo'dhalh  chosen  you  to. «.  him 
;t4.  .33.  Josiah  made  all  present  to. «.  the  Lord  God 

Juli  21. 15.  what  Almighty,  Ihiit  we  should  .'S.hirii? 

30.  11.  if  Ihoy  obey  and  .«.  him,  Ihey  shall  spend 
39.  9.  will  the  unicorn  bo  willing  to  .i.  llii'e? 

Psal.  22.  30.  n  seed  shall ».  him  and  bo  iiecounlcd 
72.  11.  yea  nil  kingn,  nil  nations  shall  s.  him 
97.  ".confounded  be  all  they  thai  s.  graven  images 
534 


SER 

P^a.  101 -C.  walkelh  in  a  perfect  way,  he  shall  s.  me 
/.>■«. 14.3.tho  bondage  wherein  Ihou  wast  made  to  s. 
19.  23.  the  Egyptians  shall*,  with  the  Assyrians 
4.'). 23.  Ihave  not  caused  thee  to».  with  anoH'ering 

24.  but  thou  hast  made  me  to«.  wilh  thy  sins 
.51).  G.  join  themselves  to  tbe  Lord,  to  s.  him 

GO.  12.  the  nation  that  will  nol  o.  thee  shall  perish 
.ler.  5. 19.  so  shall  ye  «.  strangers  in  land  nol  yours 
17.  4.  I  will  cause  thee  to  «.  thine  enemies 
25. 11.  these  nations  shall  s.  the  king  of  Babylon 

14.  many  nations  shall  »•.  themselves,  27.  7. 
27.  (!.  beasts  of  the  Held  have  I  given  to  *.  him 

8.  the  nation  that  will  noli,  king  of  Bahylon,  13. 

9.  the  prophets  thai  say,  ye  shall  nol  *.  14. 

30.  8.  strangersshall  no  more  s.  themselves  of  him 
34.9.  that  none  should  s.  himself  of  them,  10. 
40.  9.  saying,  fear  not  to  s.  the  Ciialdeans  ;  dwell 

10.  as  for  me,  behold,  I  will  ».  the  Chaldeans 
F.itk.  20.  32.  families  of  the  countries  to  .«.  wood 

39.  O  house  of  Isr.  go  s.  ye  every  one  his  idols 

40.  Israel  all  of  them  in  the  land  shall  *•.  me 
29.  18.  his  army  s.  a  great  service  against  Tyrus 
48.  18.  increase  for  fond  to  them  that  s.  the  cliy 

19.  Ihats.  the  city,  shall  s.  it  out  of  all  tribes 
Dan.  3. 17.  ourGod  whom  we  s.  is  able  to  deliver 

28.  they  might  not  s.  any,  except  their  own  God 
7. 14.  peo[ile,  nations  and  languages  should  s.  him 

27.  and  all  dominions  shall  s.  and  obey  him 
Zcph.'i.y^.caW  on  Lord  to  s.  him  wilh  one  consent 
Mal.'i.  14.  ye  have  said,  it  is  in  vain  U>s.  God 
Mat.  4.  10.  him  only  shall  thou  «.  Luke  4.  8. 
G.  24.  no  man  can  s.  two  masters;  ye  cannot  s. 
God  and  mammon,  J.uke  16.  13. 
I.ukc  1.  74.  that  we  being  delivered,  might  s.  him 
10.  40.  that  my  sister  halh  left  me  tos.  alone 

12.  37.  I  say,  ho  will  come  forth  and  s.  them 
15.  29.  lo,  these  many  years  do  I  s.  thee 

17.8.  will  not  rather  say.  gird  thyself  and  s.  me 
22.20.  and  he  that  is  chief  as  he  tlial  doth  s.  , 
.John  12.  26.  if  any  man  s.  me,  let  him  follow  me 
.Ids  6.2.  thai  we  leave  word  of  God,  and  ;s.  table 
7.  7.  shall  they  come  forth  and  s.me  in  this  place 
27.  23.  stood  by  me  the  angel  of  God,  whom  I  s. 
Horn.  1.  9.  for  God  is  my  witness,  w  hom  I  s.  wilh 
my  spirit  ingosjiel  of  his  Son,  without  ceasin 

6.  G.  that  henceforth  we  should  not  s.  sin 

7.  G.  that  we  should  s.  in  newness  of  spirit,  not  in 

25.  so  then,  wilh  the  mind  I  s.  the  law  of  God 
9. 12.  it  was  said,  the  elder  shall  s.  the  yonnger 
10. 18  for  they  that  are  such  s.  not  our  Lord 

Gal.  5.  13.  but  by  love  s.  one  another 
Col.  3.24.  receive  reward,  for  ye  s.  the  I,ord  Christ 
ITh/ss.  1.9.  ye  turned  from  idols  tos.the  livingG. 
2  'J'im.  1.  3.  I  thank  G.  whom  I  s.  from  my  fathers 
//fA.8.5.  whos.  toihe  e.'cample  of  heavenly  Ihing.s 

9.  14.  purge  from  dead  works  los.  the  living  God 
12.28.  giace  whereby  ye  mays.  God  acceptably 

13.  10.  no  right  to  eat,  which  s.  the  tabernacle 
licv.  7.  15.  they  s.  him  day  and  night  in  his  temple 

22.  3.  of  the  Lamb,  and  his  servants  shall  s.  him 

SERVE  joined  with  gods. 

£io(/.23.24. thou  shall  nols.lheir^orfs,/5fi(<.G.14. 1 

28.14../«.'.A.  23.7.2A'/7.n^sl7.35../<;r.25.6.  |  35.15. 

33.  if  thou  s.  their /,'flrfs  it  will  be  a  snare  to  thee 

Wcut. 4.28.lhere  ye  shall  s.  n-o(/s, the  work  of  men's 

hands,  wood,  28.  36,  64.  .hr.  16.  1.3, 

7.4.  will  turn,  that  they  may  .v.  other^nrf.*,  31.20. 

8. 19.  if  thou  s.  olher^'.  and  worship  them,  11. 16. 

1  30. 17.  ./osh.  24.  20.  2  CArfln.  7.  10 

12.  30.  how  did  these  nations  s.  their  gods  ?      ' 

13.2.  let  us  go  after,  and  s.  olber  gods,  6,  13. 
29,  18.  turnelh  away  from  God  to  s.  other  gods 

.fosh.'ii.  16.  God  forbid  we  should  s.  olUer  go'ls 
.lurtg.  2.  19.  they  corrupted  themselves  more  than 
their  fathers  lo  s.  oiher^oiZ.'!,  ,/«r,11.10.  |  13.10 
1  Sam.  26.  10,  driven  me,  saying,  go  s.  othct  god.- 
./cr.  44.  3.  provoke  me  to  anger,  lo  .?.  other  ^«(A' 
/Jan  .3. 12.tli(ty  .s.nol  thy  gods,twr  worship  the  imn 
14.ilo  ye  nol  ».my  ir.f\\  18.  we  will  noU.lliy  ^'wrfj 
.Sre  LoRIi. 
SERVED. 
Gm.  14.  4.  twelve  years  they  s.  Chedorlaomer 
2i).  20.  Jacob  s.  seven  years  for  Rachel,  30. 
:tO.  26.  give  me  my  children  for  whom  I  s.  thee 

29.  liCBUid,  Ihou  knowcet  how  1  have  .«.  tlice 
ni.  6.  with  all  my  power  I  have  g.  your  father 

41. 1  .f.  thee  14  yours  for  thy  two  daughters 
Diut.  12. 2.  wherein  the  nations  s.  their  gods 

17.3.  hath  gone  and  *•.  other  gods,  and  worshipped 
them,  the  sun  or  moon,  29.  26.  .Josh.  23.  16 

.Jush.  24,2.  your  fathers  a.  other  gods,  15. 

14.  put  away  l\w  gods  which  your  fathers  a. 

31.  and  Israel  s.  Lord  all  the  diiysof  Joshua,  and 

of  the  elileiB  that  ov.-rlivrd  Joshua,  .Jvdg.  2.7. 

Jvttg.'i.  11.  Israel  ».  BoHlim,  13. 1  3.7.  |  10.6,10, 

3.  6.  they  gave  daughters  to  sons,  and  .s.  their  gods 

8  Israels.  Chushan-rishathaim  eight  years 

14.  BO  Israel  .■!.  Eglnn  kingof  Moah  18  years 

8.  l.men  of  Ephr.said,  why  hasi  thou  a.  us  thus? 

10.  13.  yo  have  forsaken  mo,  and  s.  other  gudi 


SER 

Judg.  10. 16.  they  put  away  gods,  s.  L.  1  Sam.  7. 4, 
2  Sam.  10. 19.  the  Syrians  made  peace  and  s.  Israel. 
16.  19,  as  I  have  s.  in  thy  father's  presence 

1  Kingsi.'iX.lhey  brought  presents  ands.  Solomon 
9. 9.  because  they  s.  other  gods,  2  Chron.  7.  22. 
lti.31.  Ahab  s.  Baal  ||  22.  53.  Ahaziah  s.  Baal 

'i  Kings  10.  18.  Jehu  said,  Ahab  s.  Baal  a  little 
18.  7.  Hezekiahs.  nol  the  king  of  Assyria 

21.  3.  Manasseh  s.  host  of  heaven,  2  Chr.  33,  3. 
21.  Anion  s.  idols  his  father  s.  2  Chr.  33.  22, 

2  Chron.  24.  18.  princesofJuduh  s.  grovesand  idols 
J'Teh.  9.  35.  liiey  have  not  s,  thee  in  their  kingdom 
Psal.  lOli.  36.  and  they  s.  their  idols,  which  wer» 

137.  8.  that  rewardelh  thee  as  thou  hast  s.  us 
Keel.  5.  9.  the  king  himself  is  s.  by  the  field 
Icr.  5. 19.  as  ye  have  s.  strange  gods  in  your  land 
8.  2.  before  the  sun  and  moon,  whom  they  ha\  e  s. 
16.  11.  have  walked  after  other  gods  and  a.  theia 

22.  9.  they  worshipped  other  goils  and  i.  them 
34.  14.  when  he  baths,  thee  six  years,  let  him  go 

Kzik.  29.  18.  for  the  service  which  he  had  s.  20. 

34.  27.  delivered  out  of  the  hand  of  those  that  a. 
Uiis  12  12.  Israel  s  for  a  wife,  he  kept  sheep 
J.uke  2.  37.  Annas.  G.  nightand  day  in  the  temple 

/I'A/i  12.2.  they  made  him  a  supper,  and  Marthas. 
.lets  13.  36.  alter  David  had  s.  his  generation 
lion.  1.  25.  who  worshipped  and  s.  the  creature 
Phil.  2.  22.  he  hath  s.  with  me  in  the  gospel 

SERVEDST. 
Deut.  28.47.  thou  .«.  not  the  Lord  with  gladness 

SERVKST. 
Dan.  G.  16.  thy  God  whom  thou  s.  will  deliver 

20.  is  thy  God  whom  thou  s.  able  to  deliver  thco 

SEUVETH. 
A'^«m.3.  36.  under  thechargeof  Metari  all  that  s. 
Mai.  3.  17.  as  a  manspareth  his  son  that  s.  him 

18.  between  him  that  s.  God,  and  him  that  s.  not 
Z.i(At22.27.  whether  greater,  he  thalsilteth  at  meat 

or  he  that  s.  ?  but  I  am  among  you  as  one  that* 
Rom.  14.  18.  he  that  in  these  ftings  s.  Christ  is 
I  Cor.  14. 22.  prophecy  s.  not  them  that  believe  not 
Gal.Z.  19.  wherefore  then  s.  the  law?  it  was  added 

SERVICE. 
^™. 29. 27.forthes. that  thou  shall  servewith  ttto 

30.  26.  thou  knowest  the  s.  which  I  have  done 
F.iod.  1.  14.  in  all  manner  of  s.  in  field;  all  their*. 

wherein  they  made  them  serve  was  wilh  rigour 
12.  25.  come  lo  land,  ye  shall  keep  this  s.  13.  5. 
26.  children  shall  say,  what  mean  you  by  this  s.t 

27.  19.  all  vessels  in  all  the  s.  thereof  be  of  brass 
31. 10.  may  make  the  clolhes  of  the  s.  35. 19. 
36.  5.  people  bring  more  than  enough  for  the  s. 

J\''um.  3.  7.  tribe  of  Levi  to  do  s.  of  tabernacle,  8. 
26.  the  char.ae  of  the  Gershonites  for  the  s. 
31.  s.  of  sanctuary  the  charge  of  Kohalhites,  4.4. 
4. 19.  Aaron  and  sons  shall  appoint  them  lollies 

23.  all  that  enter  in  lo  perform  the  s.  to  do  work 

24.  this  is  the  s.  of  the  Gershonites,  27,  28. 
30.  the  s.  of  the  sons  of  Merari,  33,  43. 

7.  5.  that  they  may  do  Ihes.  of  the  tabernacle  ^ 
8. 11.  the  Leviles  may  execute  the  s.  of  ihe  Lor-. 

24.  they  shall  go  in  to  vvailu[»m  s.  of  labernac" 

25.  from  ,50  years  shall  cease  waiting  on  the  s 
16.  9.  a  small  thing  to  bring  you  lo  do  the  s. 

18.  4.  ihe  Leviles  he  joined  to  thee  for  all  the  s. 

6.  the  Leviles  are  given  ns  a  gift  lo  do  the  s. 

21.  have  given  all  tenth  in  Israel  for  their  s.  31 
.7«sA.22. 27.  be  a  witness,  that  we  might  do  thes 
1  Kings  12.  4.  mtiko  ihou  the  grievous  s.  lighter 

1  Chron.  6.  31.  whom  David  set  over  the  s. 

9.  13.  very  able  men  for  Ihe  work  of  Ihe  s.  2G.  8 
'24.3.  David  dlslrihuted  ihem  in  their  s. 

28.  13.  the  Leviles  for  nil  the  work  of  ihc  s. 
21.  the  priests  shall  be  with  thee  for  all  Ihe  .<. 

29.5.  who  IB  willing  lo  consecrate  his  s.  lo  Lord? 

7.  and  gave  lor  the  s.  of  house  ofGod,  gold,  silver 

2  Gliron.B.  14.  the  courses  of  the  priests  lo  their  * 
12.H.  Ihey  may  know  my  s.  and  s.  of  the  kingdoms 
24.  12.  and  gave  the  money  to  such  as  did  the  a. 
29.35.  so  the  s.  ofthe house  was  set  in  order 

31.  2.  appointed  every  man  ncconlins  to  his  $. 
21.  in  every  work  that  ho  began  in  the  s. 

35.  2.  cnciiurnffed  ihem  to  Ihe  s.  of  Ihe  Lord 
10.  so  Ihe  s.  of  the  Lord  was  prepared,  16. 

f'.zrnCi.  18.  in  their  courses,  for  Ihes.  «fGod,7. 19. 
JV"<A.  10.32.  with  the  third  part  of  a  shekel  tors. 
Psal.  104.14.  causelh  herb  to  grow  for  the  s  of  man 
./rr.22.13.  that  useth  neighbour's  s.  willioiit  waires 
t'.zrk.  29.  1.".  caused  his  army  to  serve  a  great  ». 

44.  14.  keepers  ofthechnr(r<' of  house  for  all  Ihc. 9. 
.r,i//n  lf;.2.wbol(illelli  you  will  think  he  (hielliGods. 
Jiom.'.).  4.  lo  whom  perlninelh  the  ,«.  of  Cod 

12.1.  sacrifice  to  God,  which  is  ynnr  reasonable  s. 

15.  31.  Ihal  my  s.  niny  he  arrepied  of  Ihe  saints 
2  Cor.  9.12.  for  the  ndminislral  ion  ofthis  s.nol  only 

II.  8.  Inking  wages  of  them  to  do  you  s. 
flat.  4.8,  did  s.  lo  ihom  who  by  nnliiro  arc  no  ^ods 
Fph.  6.  7.  wilh  good-will  doinc  s.  ns  to  the  TjOrd 
PliiLI.  17.  if  IbeolTerrd  upon  the  s.  of  yourfaitb 
I     30.  to  supply  your  lack  of  s.  toward  me 


SET 

Tim.  6.  2.  rather  do  s.  because  they  arc  beloved 
Ueb.9. 1.  first  covenant  hud  ordinances  of  divine*. 
6.  the  priests  accoraidisliing  the  s.  of  God 

9.  that  could  not  malie  him  that  did  the  s.  perfect 
Rev.  2. 19. 1  know  tliy  works,  and  charity,  and  s. 

Bond-SKRVICE. 

1  KinirsQ.H.  Solomon  did  levy  a  tribute  ot bond-si 

Eye-SEliVlCE. 
Eph.6.6.uotwitheye-s.a.s  men-pleasers,  butassei. 

SEKVILE. 

Lev.  23  7.  ye  shall  do  no  s.  work,  8,  21,  25, 35, 3G. 

JV«n(.  iM.  18,  25,  2U.  |  2'J.  1,  12,  35. 

SEllVIiNU. 

Ezod.  14.  5.  that  we  have  let  Israel  go  from  s.  us 

l)eiU.l5.l8.  worth  a  double  hired  servant  in  s.  thee 

Luke  10. 40.  Murlha  was  cumbered  about  nmcli «. 

Jlcls  20.  19.  *.  tile  Lord  with  all  humility  of  mind 

26.7.our  twelve  tribes  instantly  s.G.duy  and  night 

Rom..  12.  1 1.  not  slolliful,  fervent  in  spirit,  j-.  Lord 

Tit.  3.  3.  were  sometimes  foolish,  s.  divers  lusts 

SKKVITOR. 
8^i7i"'s4.43.s.eaid.shall  I  set  this  before  100  men7 

sERvrruufc:. 

SC/(7-.10.4.  ease  somewhat  grievous  s.oC  thy  father 
Lam.  1.  3.  Judali  is  guiie  because  of  great  s. 

SET. 
Gen.l.  17.  God  $.  the  stars  in  firmament  of  heaven 
4.  15.  and  the  Lord  s.  a  mark  upon  Cain 
(i.  10.  door  of  the  ark  shall  s.  in  the  side  thereof 

9.  13.  I  do  *.  my  bow  in  the  cloud  for  a  token 

18.  8.  .'\brahani  5.  calf  before  ihem,  they  did  eat 
19. 16.  the  angels  a-.  Lot  without  the  city  Sodom 

31.  37.  «■.  It  before  iny  brethren  and  thy  brethren 
41.  33.  let  Pharaoh*,  him  over  the  land  of  Egypt 

41.  I  have  «.  thee  over  all  the  land  of  Egypt 
43.  9.  if  I  bring  him  not,  and  *■.  him  before  thee 
48.  20.  Jacob  s.  Ephniiin  beltire  Manasseh 
Exod.  7.  2:).  nor  did  he  s.  his  heart  to  this  also 
9. 1 21.  he  that*,  not  his  heat  t  to  the  word  of  Lord 

13.  12.  s.  apirt  t^Kjord  all  iliat  open  the  uiatri.\ 

19.  12.  s.  bounds,  23.  |1  26. 35.  s.  the  table  without 
21.1.  judgments  which  thou  slialt*.  before  them 
23.  31.  I  will  i.  thy  bounds  from  the  Red-sea 
25.;10.  thoushalts.  on  table  shew-biead  before  me 
40.  4.  s.  in  order  things  that  are  to  be  «.  in  order 

5.  «.  altar  of  gold  ||  6.  ,<.  altar  of  burnt-otlHriiig 
7.S.  thelaver  ||  20.  he*,  the  staves  ||  23.  the  btead 

Z-f«.24.8.  every  eabb.he  shalls.it  in  order  beforeL. 
26.  11.  I  will  .».  my  tabernacle  among  you 

A''u/n.2.9.  campofJudah,  these  shall  liists.  forth 

4.  13.  as  the  camp  is  to  s.  fiir«ai'il 

5.  Hi.  the  priest  sliall.":.  her  before  the  Lord 
(?  13.  thou  slialt  .?.tlic  Leviles  before  Aaron 
JO.  17.  *.  forward,  bearing  the  tabernacle 

21.  8.  Lord  said,  s.  the  fiery  seriieiit  upon  a  pole 
27.16.  let  the  Lord  s.a  man  over  1  he  congregation 
Dent.  1.  8.  I  have  «.  the  land  belore  jou,  21. 
4.  8.  as  all  tins  law  which  I  s.  before  you,  44. 
7.  7.  Lr|.  did  not  s.  his  love  on  yon,  because  more 

11.  26.  I  s.  before  you  a  bles.siiig  and  a  curse 
32.  lo  do  all  thejudgments  which  1  s.  belore  you 

14.  21.  choose  to  3.  his  name  there,  JVt/i.  1.  U. 
17.  14.  and  shalt  say,  I  will  .«.  a  king  over  mo 

15. in  any  wiseshall  s.  him  the  Lird  shall  choose 
19.  14.  land-mark,  which  they  of  old  Lime  have*. 
26.  4.  «.  down  ihe  basket  before  the  altar,  10. 
23.  1.  the  Lord  thy  God  will  s.  thee  on  high 

56.  Would  not  s.  sole  of  her  foot  on  the  ground 
30.  15.  I  have  s.  btfore  you  lilt!  and  death,  19. 

32.  8.  he  s.  bounds  of  the  people  by  the  numljijrs 
46  s.  your  hearts  unto  all  the  words  1  testify 

Jo.fk.  24.  25.  lie  .1.  iheni  a  statute  in  Shecliem 
Ju<//,'.(i.\8.  till  I  bring  and .9.  my  present  beforethee 
7.  .5.  that  lappelh,  him  sln^lt  ihoii  S.  by  himself 
19.  and  ihey  had  but  nealy  s.  the  watch 
22.  Lord  .1.  every  man's  sword  ngniiist  his  fellow 
lSajH.2.8.  he  raise:h  uppoor  out  of  the  dusi,  Io.t. 
them  among  princes;  be  hathg.  world  on  them 

4.  t2tl.  she  answi-rcd  not,  nor  s.  her  heart 

5.  2.  the  Philislines  ».  the  ark  of  God  by  Dagon 
9.20>as  for  ihine  asses,  x.  not  thy  mind  on  ibeni 

10.  19.  ye  have  said,  nay,  but  s.  a  king  over  us 

12.  1.3.  the  Lord  Inlh  s.  a  king  over  you 

13.  t  21.  yet  thev  had  a  file  to  s.  the  goads 

17.  2.  Saul  and  Israel  «.  the  baitle  in  array,  8.  2 
.Vfti.i.  10.  17.  1  Khisr."  iO.  12.  1  Chron.  19. 17. 

2  Sara.  fi.  3.  they  •'.  the  ark  of  (Jod  on  n  new  carl 

11.  15.  i.  Uriah  in  forefront  of  the  hottest  battl.- 
19.  28.  yet  didsl  thou  s.  thy  servant  at  thy  t:.bl» 

1  Kings  2.  15.  that  all  Israel  s.  their  faces  on  me 
5.  5.  son,  whom  I  will  s.  on  throne  shall  build 

12.  29.  he.<f.  the  one  in  Beto-el,  the  other  in  Dan 
21.9.  and  «.  Naboth  on  high  amuni;  lliepeople,12. 

S  Kings  4.  4.  thou  shall  .?.  aside  that  which  is  full 

10.  let  us  s.  for  him  there  a  iied  and  a  table 
38.  s.  on  the  grfat  pot,  and  seethe  poliage 
43.'what, should  Is.  this  before  a  hundred  men? 

G.22.».  bread  and  water  before  thiin  to  cat  and  dr. 

20.1.S.  thine  bouse  in  order,  for  shalt  die,  A.?n.38.l. 

1  Ckron.  16.  1.  they  s.  the  ark  in  midst  of  the  lent 

535 


SET 

1  Chr.  22.  19.  s.  your  heart  to  seek  the  L.your  G. 
29.  3.  because  I  s.  my  artection  to  liouse  of  God 

2  Ckron.  11.  16.  s.  their  hearts  to  seek  the  Lord 

20.  3.  he  feared,  and  s.  himself  to  seek  the  Lord 
24.  13.  they  4-.  the  house  of  God  in  his  state 

35.  2.  Josiah  s.  the  priests  in  iheir  charges 
Ezra  6.  18.  they  s.  the  priests  in  their  divisions 
JVtA.  2.  6.  it  pleased  thu  king,  and  1  s.  him  a  tunc 
4.  9.  we  s.  a  watch  agiinst  them  day  and  night 
9.37.  it  yioldeth  much  increase  lo  kings  s.  over  us 

12.  t  47.  they  s.  apart  holy  things  to  the  Leviles 

13.  11.  I  gathered  and  «.  them  in  their  place 
Job.  1  t  8.  hast  thou  *.  thy  heart  on  my  servant? 

6.  4.  the  tenors  of  (lod  s.  themselves  against  nie 

7.  17.  that  thou  shouldest  5.  thine  heart  upon  him 
20.  why  hast  thou  s.  me  as  a  mark  against  thee? 

9.  j9.  who  shall  .v.  mo  a  time  lo  plead? 
19.  8.  and  he  hath  «.  darkness  in  my  paths 
30.1. have  disdained  to  s.wilh  the  dogs  of  my  flock 

13.  they  5.  forward  my  calamity,  have  no  helper 

33.  5.  s.  thy  words  in  order  before  me,  stand  up 

34.  14.  if  he  .<.  his  heart  upon  man,  if  he  gather 

21.  break  mighty  men  and  s.  others  in  their  stead 
38.  33.  canst  thou  s.  dominion  thereof  in  earth? 

Psal.  2.  2.  the  kings  of  ihe  earth  s.  themselves 
6.  yet  have  I  5.  my  king  on  my  holy  hill  ol  Zion 

3.  6.  I  will  nut  be  afraid  if  10,000  s.  themselves 

4.  3.  the  Lord  hath  s.  apart  hiin  that  is  godly 

8.  1.  who  hast  s.  thy  glory  above  the  heavens 
12.  5.  I  will  s.  him  in  safety  from  him  tliat  pulfeth 

16.  8.  I  have  s.  the  Lord  always  before  me 

19.  4.  in  them  hath  he  s.  a  tabeinacle  for  the  sun 
21, 1 6.  for  thou  basis,  him  tobtthles.siiigs  forever 

t  12.  therefore  thou  shall  s.  him  as  a  butt 
31.  8.  thou  hast  ».  my  feet  in  a  large  room 

10.  2.  brought  me  up,  and  s.  my  feet  upon  a  rock 
4^.  t  13.  s.  your  heart  to  her  bulwarks 

.'50.  21.  1  will  s.  them  in  order  before  thine  eyes 
54.  3.  they  have  not  s.  God  before  them 
59.  t  1.  s.  me  on  high  from  such  as  rise  ngainst  me 
62.  10.  if  riches,  .v.  not  your  heart  upon  them 

73.  J8.  surely  thou  didst  s.  them  in  slippery  places 

74.  17.  thou  hast  »•.  all  the  borders  of  the  earth 
78., 7.  that  they  might  «.  their  hope  in  God 

8.  a  generation  that  s.  not  their  heart  aright 
t  43.  how  he  had  s.  his  signs  in  Egypt 

85.  13.  and  shall  s.  us  in  the  way  of  his  steps 

86.  14.  violent  men  have  not  s.  ihco  before  lliem 

90.  8.  iliou  bast  s.  our  iniipiities  beftjre  thee 

91.  14.  because  he  baths,  bis  love  upon  me,  there- 

fore I  will  deliver  him  and  s.  him  on  high 
101.  3.  I  will  «.  no  wicked  thing  before  my  eyes 
104.  9.  hast  s.  bound  thai  they  may  not  pass  over 
109.  (i.  s.  thou  a  wicked  man  over  him,  let  Satan 
113.  8.  that  he  may  s.  him  witli  prince,^,  even  with 
1 18.  5.  Lord  Unsweied,  and  s.  me  in  a  large  place 
132. 1 1.  fruit  of  thy  body,  will  I .«.  upon  thy  throne 

140.  5.  the  proud  have  s.  gins  for  mo 

141.  3.  s.  a  watch,  O  Lord,  before  my  mouth 
I'rov.  1.  25.  ye  have  ».  al  nought  all  my  counsel 

22.  28.  the  land-mark  which  thy  falhers  have  s. 

23.  5.  wilt  thou  s.  thine  eyes  on  that  which  is  not? 

24.  f  32.  then  I  saw,  and  s.  mine  heart  upon  it 

25.  i  6.  s.  not  out  ihy  glory  in  presence  of  the  king 
27.  t  23.  and  s.  thy  liearl  to  thy  herds 

29.  t  8.  scornful  men  s.  a  city  on  fire 
Eccl.  3.  II.  also  he  hath  s.  the  world  in  their  heart 

7.  14.  God  halh  s.  the  one  against  the  other 
12.9.  besought  out,  and  s.  in  order  many  proverbs 
Clint.  8.  6.  .«.  me  as  a  seal  upon  thine  heart 
/.<';.7.6.  let  us  s.  a  king  in  midst  of  it,  son  of  Tabea! 

11.  1.  the  Lord  will  «.  them  in  their  own  land 

17.  10.  and  thoii  shall  s.  it  with  strange  slips 
19.  2.  I  will  s.  Egyptians  aga  nsl  Egyptians 
21.6.  go  s.  a  watchman,  let  him  declare  what 
22.  7.  shall  t.  themselves  in  arr.ny  at  the  gate 
27.  4.  who  would  «.  briers  and  thorn.^  against  me 
41. 19.  1  v\ill  s.  in  the  d'sert,  the  fir-tree  and  [line 
42:  4.  till  be  have  a.  jud;;ment  in  the  carih 

44.  7.  who  as  I,  shall  s.  it  in  order  for  me? 
4t).  7.  they  carry  him,  and  s.  him  in  his  place 
57.  7.  on  a  high  monnlain  hasl  thou  ».  thy  bed 
lij.  6.  I  haves,  watchmen  on  thy  walls,  ./ei'.  6.  17. 
66.  19.  and  I  wills,  a  sign  among  them,  and  senri 
.Irr.  1.  10.  see,  I  have  s.  thee  ovur  the  nations 

5.  26.  lay  wail,  they  s.  a  trap,  they  calch.uiei 

6.  27.  I  have  s.  thee  for  a  tower  and  a  fnrtre.-^s 

7.  12.  the  place  where  I  s.  my  name  at  the  first 
30.  thi  y  .«.  ilieir  abominations  in  the  house 

9.13. have  forsaken  my  law  which  I  s.  holbie  them 
21.  8.  I  ,«.  before  you"  the  way  of  life  and  dcMlh 
24.  6.  for  I  will  s.  mine  eyes  on  Ihem  for  good 

26.  4.  to  walk  in  my  law,  which  I  s.  before  you 

34.  Hi.  his  servant,  whom  h;  had  s.  at  liber! v 

35.  5.  I  5.  pots  of  wine  before  sons  ofRrihahilcs 
38.  22.  women  said,  thy  friends  have  «.  tie  e  on 
39. 1 12.S.  thiiieeyeson"him,anddo  him  no  liarin 
40.  t  4.  loiiie,  and  I  will  s.  mine  eves  upon  thee 
44. 10. nor  walked  in  statutes  which  Is.  before  you 

Lam.  3.6.  bath  a.  me  in  dark  places,  as  dead  of  old 


SET 

Lam.Ti.  12.  he  hath  s.  mo  as  a  mark  for  the  arrow 
Eielc.  5.  5.  I  have  s.  it  in  the  mid.-t  of  the  uatioiiK 
7.  20.  therefore  have  1  s.  it  far  from  them 
9.4.  s.  a  mark  on  the  foreheads  of  men  thatgigii 

12.  6.  for  I  have  s.  thee  for  a  sign  unto  Israel 

16.  18.  thou  hast  s.  my  oil  before  thy  images,  19. 

17.  22.  1  will  take  otf  highest  branch,  I  will  s.  it 
1!^.  8.  then  nations  s.  against  him  on  every  side 
22. 7.in  thee  have  they  s.  light  by  father  and  moth. 
21.  2.  king  of  Babylons.  himself  against  Jeruaai. 

3.  s.  on  a  pot,  s.  it  on,  and  also  pour  water 

7.  her  blood,  she  s.it  upon  the  top  of  a  rock,  8. 
25.when  I  take  them  whereon  they  s.  their  mindg 

2ii.  20. 1  shall  s.  glory  in  the  land  of  the  living 
''27.  10.  they  of  Persia  s.  forth  thy  comeliness 
2"'.  2.  tho'  thou  s.  thy  heart  as  the  heart  of  God 
14.  art  anointed  cherub,  and  I  have  s.  thee  so 

32.  25.  they  s.  her  a  bed  in  the  midst  of  her  slain 
37.26.  I  will  s.  my  sanctuary  in  midst  of  them 

39.  21.  I  will  s.  my  glory  among  the  heathen 

40.  4.  s.  thy  heart  upon  all  that  1  shall  shew  thee 
44.8.1iave.'i.kee|ieisofmy  charge  in  my  sanctuary 

Ijun.  6.  3.  king  thought  to  s.  him  over  the  realm 
14.  he  s.  his  heart  on  Daniel  lo  deliver  him 

9.  10.  to  walk  in  his  laws  which  he  s.  before  ub 

10.  12.  thou  didst  s.  thine  heart  to  utidersland 
Has.  2.  3.  lest  I  s.  her  as  in  day  ihatsbe  was  born 

4.  8.  and  they  s.  their  heart  on  their  iniquity 

6.  11.  C)  .ludab,  he  halh  s.  an  harvest  for  iheo 

11.  8.  how  shall  I  s.  tlico  as  Zeboim? 
.InwsH.Ti.  sabb.be  goiie,llial  we  may  s. forth  wheat 

9.  4.  I  wills,  mine  eyes  upon  ihem  for  evil,  not  for 
Cbnd.  4.  though  thou  s.  thy  nest  among  the  stara 
Hub.  2. 9.  that  he  may  s.  his  nest  on  high,  be  deliv. 
y.qih.  3.  t  19.  and  I  wills,  them  for  a  praise 
Hnij.  ).  1 5. s.  your  heart  on  your  ways,  siiithLord 
Zee//. 3.5. 1  said,  let  them  s.  a  fair  mitre  on  his  head 

5.  II.  it  shall  be  s.  there  upon  her  own  base 

6.  II.  make  crowns,  and  s.  them  on  head  of  Josh. 
8. 10.  I  s.  all  men,  every  one  again  St  his  neighbour 

jMiit.  10.  35.  I  am  come  to  s.  a  man  at  variance 
25.  33.  he  shall  s.  the  sheep  on  his  right  hand 
.Mark  12.  1.  and  s.  a  hedge  about  it,  and  digged 
Luke  4.  13.  to  s.  at  liberly  thein  that  are  bruised 

10.  34.  and  s.  him  on  his  own  beast  and  brough 
11.6.  friend  come,  I  have  nothing  lo  s.  before 
23. 11.  Herod  with  men  of  war  s.  him  al  nought 

.John  2.  10.  every  man  doth  .«.  forth  good  wine 

3.  33.  he  halh  s.  to  his  seal,  that  God  is  true 
J!rt.<!  7.  5.  no  not  in  much  as  to  s.  his  foot  on 

13.  9.  then  Paul  s.  his  eyes  on  him  and  said 
47.  I  have  s.  thee  to  be  a  light  to  the  Gentile* 

18.  10.  no  man  shall  s.  on  llae  lo  hurt  thee 
A;6im.3.25.  whom  God  s.  forth  to  be  a  propitiation 

14.  10.  why  dost  thou  s.  at  nought  thy  brother? 
1  ('or.  4.  9.  God  hath  s.  forth  us  the  apostles  last 

6  4. .5. them  to  judge  who  are  least  e.-teemed  In  ch. 

12.  18.  now  God  halh  s.  the  members  in  the  body 
28.  God  haili  s.  some  in  the  church,  first  apostles 

F.ph.  1.  20.  when  he  s.  him  ni  hisown  right  hand 
C'»/.3.2.s.your  affect,  on  things  above,  not  on  earth 
//cA.2.  7.  thou  didst  s.  him  over  work  of  thy  liaiidi 
Rev.  3.  8.  I  have  s.  before  thee  an  open  door 
20.  3.  and  he  shut  him  n;),  and  s.  a  seal  upon  him 

SET  vp. 
Gcn.~^.  18.  Jacob  look  the  s'oneand  s.  it  j/p  for  a 
pillar,  and  poured  oil  on  ii,22.  |  31.  45.  |  35.  M. 
Kxod.  40.  2.  shalt  s.  vp  Ihe  tabernaeleof  thetent 

8.  then  shalt  s.  vp  the  court  ||  18.  board<  ||  21.  vail 
28.  he  s.  vp  hanging  al  door  of  tabernacle,  33. 

/,r«.  26.  I.  nor  shall  ye  s.  vp  iiny  image  of  stone 
JSOtm.  1.  51.  the  taberiiicle,  Levites  shall  s.  it  v/i 

7.  1.  that  Moses  bad  fully  s.  up  the  tabernacle 
10.  21.  and  other  did  .«.  li  vp  ai'aiiist  they  camfi 

Drvt.  27.  2.  that  thou  shalt  s.  vp  srreiit  stones,  i. 
Jos-li.  4.  9.  Joshua  s.  vp  twelve  stones  in  Jordan 
6   26.  shall  be  s.  vp  gates  of  it,  1  Kiv/rs  IC.  34. 
■Jwli;.  18.  no.  children  of  Dan.  s.  vp  graven  image 
31.  thev  s.  thern  vp  Miciih's  graven  ima:e 

1  Sam.  I."'.  11.  it  repenteih  nic  1  have  s.  vp  Saul 
12.  behohl,  Saul  hath  .1.  him  up  a  place,  iind  gone 

2  s.ini.  3.  10.  to  s.  vp  ihrone  of  David  over  Israel 

7.  12.  I  will  «.  wp  ihy  seed  al'ler  thee,  which  shall 
1  AVh  i'-s15.4  to .«.  vp  his  9<'n  after  him  and  eslohlish 
'2Kiii!SS  17.  10.  ihey  s.  them  vp  images  and  groves 

1  Chrnn.  21.  18.  s.  vp  an  allar  i^i  threslrn:;  floor 

2  '''Anin.25.  14.  Amnz.inhs.  them  i/pio  he  hisgodi 

33.  19.  Manisseh  s. «//  grove-  and  graven  images 
F.ira  2.  68.  ofl'ered  freelvto  s.  vp  God's  house 

4.  12.  Jews  have  ».  up  the  wall-  (hereof,  1.3. 10. 

5.  II.  hnild  (he  house  a  great  kin?  of  Israel,  s.  up 

6.  II.  biing  s.  «p,  let  him  be  hanged  thereon 

9.  9.  to  give  us  a  reviving  lo  s.  vp  house  o'"Go<l 

M'ch.  3.  1.  Ihey  built  shi-ep-gate.lhey  sanrlified  it, 

and  s.  vp  the  door~of  it,  3,6,  13, 14,  I.I.  17. 1 

6.  1  ilio'  at  'hat  'ime  I  had  not  s  vp  the  doors 
.Inb  5.  II.  to  s.  vv  on  high  el.ose  that  be  low 

16.  12  ba'h  "hakenniPi'ind  s.mei/pforhismarX 
rsrt;.-.!0.5.  the  nnme  of  Owe  wills,  vp  .)ur  banner* 

27.  5.  ho  shall  hide  me,  and  s.  me  vp  upon  a  rock 


SET 

ft.  60.  Ti.  let  thy  salvation,  OGo(l,».me  up  on  high 
74.  4.  they  5.  up  their  ensigns  fur  signs 
89  42.  thou  hadtj.  up  right  hand  of  adversaries 

Prov.  8.  23. 1  was  s.  up  from  everlast.  from  begin. 

/«a.9.1l.  Lord  shallot,  up  the  adversaries  nl'Kezin 

11.  12.  he  shall  s.up  an  enHigrt  for  the  nations 
23   13.  they  *.  up  lowers  ihireof,  rai.4ed  palaces 
4.1.  20.  that  3.  up  wood  of  their  graven  image 
49. 22.  behold  I  will  s.  up  my  standard  to  people 
57.  8.  thou  hast  s.  up  thy  remembrance 

Jrr.  4.  ().  s.  up  the  standard  toward  Zion,  retire 
10.  20.  there  is  none  to  s.  up  my  curtains 
11. 13.  have  ye  s.up  altars  to  that  shameful  tliingT 
£1.  4.  and  I  will  s.  up  shepherds  over  them 
.11.  21.  s.  thee  up  way  marks,  make  high  heaps 

50.  2.  ,v.  up  a  standard,  publish,  51.  12,  27. 

51.  12.  s.up  the  watchmen,  prepare  ambushes 
J.am.  2.  17.  he  hath  s.  up  horn  of  ihy  adversaries 
flzek.  14.  3.  these  men  have  s.  up  their  idols 

31.4.  the  deep  s.  him  up  on  high  with  her  rivers 
34.  23.  I  will  .■,-.  xip  one  shepherd  over  them 
I)an.%  44.  God  of  heaven  shall  s.  up  a  kingdom 
3. 14.  nor  worship  the  golden  image  I  have  s.  up 
5.  lU.  whom  he  would  he  .'.  xip  and  put  down 

12.  II.  abominniion  that  maketh  desolate  s.  up 
Hos.  H.  4.  they  have  s.  up  kings,  but  not  by  me 
Mai.  3.  15.  they  that  work  wickedness  are  s.  up 
JWat.  27.  .37.  and  s.  up  over  his  head  his  accusation 
Jlcts  6.  13.  and  s.  up  false  witnesses,  who  said 

15.  IC.  I  will  build  again  the  ruins,  and  s.  it  up 
SET,  Passive. 

Gen.  24.  .33.  there  was  5.  meat  before  him  to  eat 
2a.  11.  sun  was  J.  ||  12.  a  ladder  was  ».  upon  earth 

F.zod.  25.  7.  stones  s.  in  ephod,  28.  11.  |  35.  i),  27. 
2R.  17.  two  tenons  s.  in  order  against  another 
32.  22.  knowest  people,  they  are  s.  on  mischief 
37.  3.  the  rings  «.  ||  39.  37.  the  lamps  s.  in  order 

1  Sam.  18.  30.  so  that  hisname  was  much  .s.  by 
26.  24.  behold,  as  thy  life  was  much  s.  by  this  day 

2  Sam.  12.  30.  crown  s.  on  Dav.  head,  1  Chr.  20.  2. 

1  Kings  2. 19.  a  seat  to  be  s.  for  the  king's  mother 
14.  4.  Ahijah  could  not  see,  for  his  eyes  were  s. 

2  Kings  12.  4.  the  money  that  every  man  is  s.  at 

1  Cliron,  9. 22.  porters  af)pointed  in  their  s.  olfice 
19.  10.  Joab  saw  that  battle  was  s.  against  him 

09.  2.  David  gave  onyx-stones  and  stones  to  be  s. 

2  C/tron.  6.  10.  and  I  am  ».  on  the  throne  of  Israel 
29.  X>.  service  of  the  house  of  L.  was  s.  in  order 
31.  15.  in  their  .».  office  to  give  their  brethren 

18.  in  their  ».  office  they  sanctified  themselves 
Jih  3G.  16.  and  what  should  be  .".  on  thy  table 
Pnal.  10.  8.  his  eyes  are  privily  s.  against  the  poor 
122.  .">.  there  are  s.  thrones  of  jiidgnienf,  of  David 
141.  2.  let  my  prayer  be  s.  forth  before  thee 
Prov.  18.  t  10.  righteous  run  into  it,  and  is  s.  aloft 
29.  t25.  p«ts  trust  in  the  Lord,  shall  be  .".  on  high 
Eccl.  8.  1 1,  the  heart  is  fully  s.  in  them  to  do  evil 

10.  ti.  folly*,  in  great  dignity  ;  rich  sit  in  low  place 
Cant.  a.  12.  his  eyes  are  as  the  eyes  of  doves  fitly  .f. 

14.  his  hands  are  as  gold  rings  s.  with  the  beryl 
1.5.  his  legs  are  s.  upon  sockets  of  fine  gold 

7. 2.  thy  belly  as  a  heap  of  wheat  s.  with  lilies 
Isa.  3.  24.  and  instead  of  well  s.  hair,  baldness 

21.  .8.  I  am  s.  in  my  ward  whole  nights 
Jer.Ct.  23.  s.  in  array,  as  men  for  war,  JoelQ.  5. 

31.  29.  children's  teeth  ares,  on  edge,  Eiek.  18.2. 
.30.  man  that  ea'elh,  his  teeth  shall  be  s.  on  edge 
F.ztk.  22.10.  they  humbled  her  that  was,?,  apart 
Dan.  7.  10.  judgment  was  ,1.  b<ioks  were  opened 
^ih.'i.  13.  (he  gales  of  thy  land  shall  be  s.  open 
Mai.  5.  14.  a  city  s.  on  a  hill  cannot  be  hid 

27.19  when  he  was  s.  on  judgment-seat,  wife  sent 
Mark  1.32.  when  sun  did  s.  they  brought  diseas''d 

4  21.  a  candle,  and  not  to  be  *.  on  a  candlestick 

9. 12.  mii'tsufTer  many  things,  and  be  s.  at  nought 
I.ukr.  2.  34.  this  child  is  s.  for  the  fall  and  rising 

7.  8.  for  I  also  am  a  man  s.  under  authority 

10.  8.  cat  nuch  things  as  are  s.  before  you 
John  2.  6.  there  were  ».  six  water-pots  of  slnne 
Jlrtn  A.  11.  the  stone  s.  at  nought  of  you  builders 

19. 27.  our  craft  is  in  danger  to  bo  s.  at  nought 

26. :)3.  this  man  might  have  been  s.  at  liberty 
1  Cnr.  10.  27.  whiitHoever  is  s.  Imforo  you  eat 
Giil.^.  l.C'hr.  bail  be.n  evidently  s.  forth  crucified 

Phil.  1.  17.  I  om  ».  for  the  defence  of  the  gospel 
H'h.a.  18.  to  lay  hold  on  the  hope  s.  before  us 

R  1.  who  i>  s.  on  right  hand  of  the  throne,  12.  2. 

12.  1.  let  ns  run  Ihe  raco  that  is  ».  before  us 
2.  who  for  joy  that  was  s.  h-fore  him,  endured 

13.  23.  our  brolhnr  Timothy  is  s.  at  liberty 
.Jiiilitl.  the  cities  are  i.  forth  for  an  example 
/.v,..  3.  21.  am  ».  down  with  my  Father  in  throne 

4.  2.  a  throne  was  .«.  in  heaven,  one  sat  on  throne 

SKT  day. 
>Jrts12.21.  on  a  ».  day,  Tlorod  arrayed  in  royal  app. 
Set  Fack,  FAcrs,  Fcasth. 
SKT  time. 
Clm.  17. 21.  Sarah  shall  bear  to  Iheaat  this*.  (im>- 
21.  2.  at  the  j.  time  of  which  God  had  spoken 
C.'ie<i.  0.  5.  the  Lord  appointed  a  #.  lime,  saying 


SET 

i  Sam.  13.  8.  according  to  ».  time  Sam.  appointed 
2  i>am.  20.  5.  Amasa  tarried  longer  than  the  s.  time 
Job  14.  13.  that  thou  wouldest  appoint  me  a  s.  lime 
Psal.  102.  13.  tlie  a.  time  to  favour  her  is  corac 

SETTKU. 
.^cts  17.  18.  seems  to  be  a  s.  forth  of  strange  gods 

8ETTEST 
Deut.  23.  20.  in  all  thou  t  thy  hand  to,  28.  8,  20 
Job  7.12.  ami  a  sea,  that'.hou*.  a  watch  over  me? 

13.  27.  thou  s.  a  print  on  the  heels  of  my  feet 
Pi:al.  21.  3.  thou  s.  a  crown  of  gold  on  his  head 

41.  12.  thou  s.  me  before  thy  face  forever 

SETTETH. 
F.iod.  30.  t  8.  when  Aaron  g.  up  the  lamps 
JVum.  1.  51.  when  the  tabernacle  s.  forward 

4.  5.  when  camp  s.  forward,  Aaron  shall  come 
Dcut.  24.  15.  he  is  poor,  and  s.  his  heart  upon  it 

27.  lb.  cureod  be  he  that  s.  light  by  his  father 
2  Sam.  22.  34.  s.  me  on  high  places,  Psal.  18.  33. 
.Ml  24.  t  15.  the  adulterer  s.  his  face  in  secret 

28.  3.  he  6-.  an  end  to  darkness,  and  scarchelh 
40.  t  17.  he  s.  up  his  tail  like  a  cedar 

P.*a/.36.  4.  has.  himself  in  a  way  that  is  not  good 
(>5. 6.  which  by  his  strength  s.  fast  mounluins 
68.  6.  God  s.  solitary  in  families,  he  brings  out 
75.  7.  he  puttelh  down  one,  and  s.  u«)  anuther 
83.  14.  as  the  flame  s.  the  mountains  on  fire 
107.  41.  yet  s.  he  the  ))Oor  on  high  from  atihclion 
/4a.44.  1 19.  none  s.  to  his  heart,  nor  is  there  know. 
.Icr.  5.  26.  they  lay  wait  as  he  that  s.  snares 
43.  3.  but  Baruch  s.  thee  on  against  us 
F.zek.  14.  4.  that  s.  up  his  idols  in  his  heart,  7. 
Dan.  2.  21.  he  removclh  kings  and  s.  up  kings 
4.  17.  he  s.  up  over  it  the  basest  of  men 
Mat.  4.  5.  and  s.  him  on  a  pinnacle  of  the  temple 
I-.nke  8.  16.  but  s.  it  on  a  candlestick  that  they  sec 
Jam.  3.  6.  tongue  ,<:.  on  fire  the  course  of  nature 

SETTING. 
F.zek.  43.  8.  in  their  s.  of  their  threshold  by  mine 
Mat.  27.  66.  sealing  the  stone,  and  s.  a  watch 
Lukei.  40.  when  sun  was  a.  they  brought  the  sick 

SETTINGS. 
Exod.  28.  17.  thou  shah  set  in  it  s.  of  stones 

SETTLE. 

Kirk.  43. 14.  from  the  ground  even  to  the  lowers. 

17.  and  the  .?.  shall  be  fourteen  cubits  h>ng 

20.  put  blood  on  four  corners  of  the  s.  45.  19. 

SETTLE. 

1  C/iron.  17.  14.  but  I  will  s.  him  in  mine  house 

F.zek.  36.  11.  I  will  .«.  you  after  your  old  estates 

Luke  21.  14.  s.  it  in  your  hearts,  not  to  meditate 

1  Pet.  5.  10.  but  God  stiililish,  stienglhen,  s.  you 

SETTLED. 

1  Kings  8.  13.  built  a  s.  place  for  thoe  to  abide  in 

2  Kings  8.  11.  he  s.  his  countenance  stedfastly 
Psal.  .30. 1 7.  thou  hast.«.3trei!gth  for  my  mountain 

39.  t  5.  every  man  s.  is  altogether  vanity 
1 19.  89.  for  ever,  O  liord,  thy  word  is  s.  in  heaven 
Prov.  8.  25.  before  mountains  were  a.  before  hills 
./fr.48.11.  Moab  been  atease,  helialli  s.  on  his  lees 
y.eph.  I.  12.  punish  men  that  are  s.  on  their  lees 
Col.  1.  23.  if  yo  continue  in  faith  grounded  and  s. 

SETTLEST. 
Psal.  05. 10.  thou  s.  furrows  thereof,  makcst  soft 

SEVEN. 
Besides  theknownsignificution  of  this  word,  it  is 
also  used  in  scripture  as  a  number  of  perfec- 
tion. In  the  sacred  books,  and  in  the  religion  of 
the  Jews, a  great  number  of  events  and  mysteri- 
ous circumstances  are  set  forth  by  the  number 
of  seven.  God  coni^f  crated  the  aesewxn  day,  on 
ichich  he  censed  from  his  irnrks  of  creation,  as  a 
day  of  rest  and  repose.  This  rest  of  the  seventh 
day,  according  to  the  .flposlle,  intimates  eternal 
rest,  lleb.  4.  4,9.  Jind  not  only  the  seventh  day 
is  honoured  among  the  Sews,  by  the  rest  of  the 
sabbath,  but  every  seventh  year  is  also  conse- 
crated to  the  rest  of  the  earth,  by  the  name  of 
asahbutical  year;  us  also  the  seven  limes  se- 
venth year,  or  forty-nine  years,  is  the  year  of 
.Jubilee.  In  the  prophetic  style,  a  week  often 
stands  for  seven  years,  Dnn.9.  24,  2.5.  Jacob 
served  his  father-in-law  Laban  seven  years  for 
each  of  his  daughters.  Pharaoh's  my■^tcrious 
dreamrepresnited  to  his  imagination  Hcvcn  fat 
oxen,  and  seven  lean  ones ;  seven /"«//  ears  of 
corn,  and  as  many  that  mere  blasted:  These 
stood  for  seven  years  of  plenty,  and  (.even  of 
scarcity.  The  golden  candlestick  had  seven 
branches  :  seven  tru7iipil.i,  seven  priests  that 
sounded  them  ;  seven  days  to  surround  the 
Kails  of  Jericho,  Josh.  6.  4,  6,  8,  13,  15.  In 
the  Revelation  are  the  seven  churches,  tcven 
candlesticks,  seven  spirit.',  seven  stars,  seven 
lamps,  seven  seals,  seven  angels,  seven  vials, 
seven  plagues,  >t-c. 
In  certain  passages  the  number  seven  is  put  for 
a  irrent  number:  Isaiah  says,  that  seven  women 
should  lay  hold  of  one  man,  to  ask  hlmtowar- 
ry  them,  Isa.  4.   1.     Hannah   the  mother  of 


SET 

Samuel  says,  that  she  who  was  barren  should 
have  seven  children,  that  is,  several  children. 
1  Sam.  2.  5.  God  Ikrealins  his  people,  to 
sviite  them  seven  tnnes/wr  their  transgression, 
that  iSjSeveraltimcs,  Lev.  26.  24.  V'Ac Psalm- 
ist, speaking  of  very  pure  silver,  says  it  is 
purified  seven  times,  Psal.  12.  B.  jijid  in 
J'sal.  79.  12,  Render  unto  our  nuighbourt seven 
fold  into  their  bosom.  Punish  them  severely, 
and  as  often  us  they  deserve  it.  The  slothful- 
man  thinks  himself  wiser  than  seven  men  that 
can  give  a  reason  fur  their  actions,  I'rov.  26. 
16.  Jn  these  and  Many  other  passages  the  cer- 
tain number  seven,  is  placed  for  an  uncertain 
indejinite  number. 
Gen.  7.  t  2.  of  every  clean  beast  lake  to  thee  s. 
41.  2.  there  came  up  s.  well-1'avoured  kinc 

3.  s.  oilier  kine  came  up,  4,  18,  19,  20,  26, 27 

5.  s.  ears  of  corn  came  up,  rank  and  good 

6.  s.  thin  ears,  and  blasted  7,  22,  23, 24,  26,  27. 
46.  25.  the  sons  of  Eilhah,  all  the  souls  were  s. 

F.xod.'H.  16.  the  priest  of  Midian  had  s.  daughters 
Lev.  23.  15.  s.  sabbaths  shall  be  complete 

25.  8.  shall  number  s.  sabbaths  of  years  to  Ihee 
jYum.  23.  1.  Balaam  said  to  Balak,  build  niehera 

s.  altars,  and  prepare  s.  oxen  and  s.  rams,  29, 

4.  and  he  said,  1  have  prepared  s.  altars,  14. 
Deut.  7.  l.s.  nations  greater  and  might,  than  tliuu 

16.  9.  s.  weeks  ihou  shall  nunjber  to  thee,  begin 

2o.7.Ld.  cause  enemies  to  flee  before  ihees.  ways 

25.  thou  shall  llee  s.  ways  before  them 

Josh.  6.  4.  s.  priests  bearing  s.  irunii)els,  6,  8,  13. 

18.  2.  there  remaiuod  of  Isr.  *•.  tribes  not  received 

5.  and  tiiey  shall  divide  it  into  s.  parts,  6. 

9.  described  it  by  cities  into  s.  parts  in  a  book 
ludg.  16.  7.  if  they  bind  me  with  s  green  wilhs 

13.  if  ihou  weavest  s.  locks  ||  19.  shave  off  s.lockg 

1  .Sonj.  2.  5.  so  thai  the  barren  hath  born  s. 
6.  1.  the  ark  was  with  the  Philistines  s.  montlii 
Ib.lO.Jesse  made  s.of  his  son^lo  pass  before  Sam. 

2  A«7«.21.9.they  fell  all  s.  together  and  put  to  death 

1  Chron.  3.  24.  and  the  sons  of  Elioenai  were  s. 
5. 13.  their  brelli.  of  house  of  their  fathers  were  s. 

2  Chron.  29.  21.  they  brought  s.  bullocks,  s.  rams 
F.zra  7.  14.  sent  of  king  and  of  his  s.  counsellor* 
Esth.  1.10.  s.  chamberlains  that  served  in  presence 

14.  the  s.  princes  which  saw  the  king's  lace 
2. 9.  he  gave  her  s.  maidens  meet  to  be  given  her 

.lob  5.  19.  in  s.  troubles  no  evil  shall  touch  thee 
Prov.  6.  16.  yea  s.  are  an  abomination  unto  him 

9.  1.  wisdom  halh  hewn  out  her  s.  jiillars 

26.  25.  for  there  are  s.  abominations  in  his  heart 
Ecel.  11.  2.  give  a  portion  to  s.  also  to  eight 
/id. 4.1. in  that  day,  s.  women  take  hold  of  one  man- 

11.  15.  the  Lord  shall  smite  it  in  the  s.  slroaiiis 
.ler.  15.  9.  she  that  halh  born  s.  Iangui»heth 
Ezek.  39.  12.  s.  months  shall  they  be  burying  them 
14.  after  the  end  of  s.  months  shall  ihey  search 

40.  22.  they  went  up  unlo  it  by  s.  steps,  26. 

41.  3.  and  ihebreailih  of  the  door  s.  cubits 
/)a?t,t).  25.  unto  the  Messiah,  shall  bes.  weeks 
Mich.  5.  .5.  we  shall  raise  against  him  s.  she|»'iei(U 
Zech.  3.  9.  behold,  upon  one  stone  shall  be  s  eyci 

4.2.  his  s.  lamps  thereon,  and  .«.  pijies  to  s.  Jumps 

10.  plummet  in  hand  of  Zerubbabel  with  tlnise  s 
Mat.  15.  34.  Ihey  said  s.  loaves  36.  Mark  8.  5. 

37.  they  took  np  s  baske:*  full.  Mark  8.  8. 
16.  10.  nor  t)»c  «.  A>aves  among  four  thouAind 
i"2. 25. now  there  were  with  uss.  brethren,  and  Iho 
first  deceased,  Mark  12.  20.  Luke  20.  29. 
23.  in  re«urrcclion  wluise  wife  shall  she  be  of .« 
Mark  12.22.  and  s.  had  her,  23.  Luke  20.  31,  33. 
16.9.  out  of  whom  he  cast  «  devils,  Luke  8.  2. 
'7c<sl3.19.  wJien  he  destroyed  .<!.  nations  in  Canaan 
21.  8.  I'hilip  who  was  one  of  the  s.  deacons 
liev.  1.4.  John  to  s.  churches  in  Asia,  grace  to  you 

11.  write,  and  send  it  to  the  s.  churclirs  in  .^sia 

12.  being  turned,  I  saw  s.  golden  candlesticks 
13  in  midsJ.of.«.  candlesticks  one  like  Son  of  man 
20. .«.  stars  are  the  angels  of  the  churches,  Ihes. 

cnndltsticks  Ihou  sawest  arc  the  s.  churches 

2.1.wl'o  walkolh  in  midst  of  s.  golden  candlesticks 

5.6.  I  Ixdield  Lamb  as  .slain,  haviicgs.  horns,  and 

s.  eyes,  which  are  thes.  spirits  of  God  sent  forth 

8.  2. 1  saw  the  s.  angels  which  stood  before  (Jou 

6.  the  s.  angels  prepared  themselves  to  sound. 

10.  3.  when  he  cried,.*,  thunders  uttered  voices 
4.  seal  up  what  tho  s.  thunders  have  uttered 

.12.3.  behold,  a  great  driiyon,  having .«.  heads,  and      > 
s.  crowns  upon  his  heads,  13.  1.  I  17.  3,  7. 

15.  1. 1  saws,  angels  having  the  t.  last  piagncs,6. 

7.  ffaveto  s.  angels  s.  golilcn  vials  full  ofwralh 

8.  no  man  was  able  to  enter  into  the  temple,  (ill 
tho  s.  plagues  of  tho  s.  anjels  were  fulfillod 

16.  1.  J  beard  a  voice,  saying  to  the.?,  angels 

17.  1.  and  there  come  one  of  the  .i.  angels  which 
had  the  s.  vials,  and  talked  with  mOi 
21.9. 

17.  9.  the  s.  heodsaro  a.  mountains  on  which 
10.  there  are  $.  kings,  five  arc  fallen,  one  is,  other 


SEV 

1«».l7.11.the  beast  is  of  i.and  goeth  iato  perdition 
See  Days,  Hondrkd. 
SEVEN  bullocks. 
Awm.  23  20.  prepare  me  here  s.  bullocks,  s.  rams 
29.  32.  on  the  seventh  day  s.  bullocks,  two  ram* 
ICkron.  13.2(i.  Levitu8oti'<;red  «.  iu//()c/.\«,ii.  lams 
2  Chron.  -9.  21.  they  brought  s.  bullockf,  s.  rams 
Job  42.  8.  take  to  you  now,  s.  bullocks,  s.  rams 
Eiek.  45.  23.  prepare  a  burnt-orteriiig,*.  bullocks 

SEVEN-FOLD. 
Oen.  4.  15.  vengeance  shall  he  taken  on  him  g. 

24.  ifCain  shall  be  avenged  «.  Lainech  70  and  s. 
Psal  79.  12.  lender  s.  into  their  bosom  reproach 
Prov.  6.  31.  but  if  he  be  found  he  shall  restore  s. 
Isa.  30.  2G.  and  the  light  of  the  sun  shall  be  a. 
See  Lames,  Lamps. 
.  SEVEN  men. 
2  Sam.  21.  6.  let  «.  men  of  his  sons  be  delivered 
Prov.  2tj.  10.  than  i.  men  that  can  render  a  reason 
Jer.  52.  25.  took  s.  men  that  were  near  the  king 
./3cfs6.3.look  out  «.m.of  honest  rep.  full  of  Holy  G. 
SEVEN  rams.  See  SEVEN  bullocks. 
See  Seals. 
SEVEN  sons. 
Ruth  4.  15.  thy  daughter  is  better  than  s.  sons 
Job  1.  2.  and  there  were  born  unto  him  ;(.  sons 

42.  13.  he  had  also  s.  sons,  and  three  daughters 
.Jicls  19. 14.  there  were  s.  sons  of  one  Sceva  a  Jew 

SEVEN  spirits. 
^a£.12.45.  then  goeth  he,  and  takethwilh  himself 
s.  other  i'/)m7s  more  wicked,  AaAe  11.  26. 
Bev.  1.  4.  from  s.  spirits  before  the  throne  of  God 

3.  1.  these saith  he  that  hath  the  s.  spirits  u^  Gad 

4.  5.  seven  lamps,  which  are  thes.  5;;iriJ.?of  God 
5  6.  seven  eyes,  which  are  the  s.  spirits  of  God 

SEVEN  stars. 

Amos  5.  8.  seek  him  that  raaketh  the  s.  stars 

Rev.  1.  16.  had  in  his  right  hands.  stars,".\.  \  3.  1. 

20.  mystery  of  «.  stnra,  thou  sawest  in  my  right 

hand;  s.  stars  are  the  angels  of  the  s.  churciies 

SEVEN  and  thirty.  See  Thiri'Y. 

See  Thousand. 

SEVEN  times. 

Gen.  33.  3.  .lacob  bowed  before  Esau  s.  times 

Lev.  4.  6.  |)riest  shall  sprinkle  of  the  blood  s.  times 

17.  1  8.  11.  I  14.  7.  I  16.  14,  19.  JV«m.  19.4 

I4.16.shall  sprinkle  oil  with  his  fingnrs.  /imc^27. 

51.  dip  in  blood,  and  sprinkle  the  house  s.  times 

25.  8.  thou  shalt  number  s.  times  seven  yenrs 

26. 18. 1  will  punish  you  s.  times  more,  21.  24, 28. 

Josh.  6.  4.  he  shall  compass  the  city  s.  times,  15. 

MCings  18.43.8aid  to  his  servant,  go  again,  5.  times 

«^i7i^*-4.35.clijld  snpezeds.ti/nf.5,anil  opened  eyes 

5   10.  Elislia  sent,  go  wash  in  iovAxns.  times,  14 

Psnl.  12.  6l  words  are  as  silver  purified  s.  times 

119.  164.  s.  times  a  day  do  I  praise  thee,  because 

Prov.2i.  16.  ajustman  falleths.  <;mr«,  and  riseth 

7)071.3. 19.  heal  the  furnace  ones,  times  mnye  than 

4.  16.  let  s.  time$  pass  over  him,  23,  25,  32 

Mat.  18.  21.  how  oft  shall  I  forgive?  till  s.  times 

22.  I  say  not,  till  s.  times,  but  until  70  times  s. 

Luke  17.4. if  thy  brother  tre3))ass  agst.  thee  s.limes 

a  dav,  and  s.  times  a  day  turn  again  to  thee 

SEVEN  and  twenty.  See  Twenty. 

8EVEN-YE.\RS. 

Gen.  29.  18, 1  will  serve  thee  s.  years  for  Rachel 

20.  served  s. years  ||  27.  serves,  other  j/ears,30, 

41.  26.  the  seven  good  kine  are  s.  years,  and  the 

seven  good  ears  are  s.  years,  the  dream  is  one 

27.  seven  thin  and  ill-favoured  kine  are  s.  years 

seven  empty  cars  shall  be  s.  years  of  famine 

29.  there  come  s.  years  of  plenty,  34,  47,  48. 

30.  there  shall  arise  s.  years  of  famine,  36,  .54. 
53.  the  .1.  years  of  plenteousness  were  ended 

/,(rp.25. 8.  thou  shalt  number  spven  timess.  jr^ars 

JVum. 13.22.  Hebron  was  built  s.j/ears  before  Zaun 

/)c«t.l5.1.  at  end  ofevery  s.  years  s  release,31.10. 

Jud^.fi.l.  Lord  delivered  Israel  to  Midian  s -years 

25.  take  the  spcnnd  bullock  of  s.  years  old 

12.  9.  Ibzan  of  Bethlehem  judged  Israel  s.  years 

2.Sam.2.  11.  David  was  king  in  Hebron  s.  years  six 

months,  5. .').  1  Kinrs  2.  11. 1  CAron. 29.  27. 

24.  13.  shall  .«.  years  of  famine  come  to  thee  ? 

1  Kinrrs  fi.  3H.  Sol.  was  s.  years  in  building  temple 

2  h'inrrs  8.  1.  famine  shall  come  upon  land  s.  years 

2.  she  sojourned  with  the  Philistines  s.  years 
11.2I..\ihaliah  was  slain,  am!  .i.yearsoW  was.Te- 

hoash  whi-n  he  began  to  reign,  2  CAron. 24. 1. 
.fer.  31.  14.  at  end  of  s.  years  let  ye  go  every  man 
F.'.ek.  39.  9.  .-shall  burn  weapons  with  firKs.  years 
J.uke  2  36.  Anna  lived  with  a  husband  s.  years 

SEVENS. 
Gen.'.  2.  ofevery  clean  boastshaltthou  take  by  s. 

3.  of  fowls  of  the  air  bv  s.  Ihi-  male  and  female 

SEVENTEEN. 
Gen.  37.2.  Jos.  being  .?.  years  old  wa"!  feeding  flock 
47.  28.  Jacob  lived  in  the  land  of  Egypt  s.  years 
Ifi'iii.?.'>14.21.Rehoboam  roignerl  .•{.years  in  Jerus 
ZKims  13.1  ..Ichoahaz  son  ofJehu  reigned  s.  years 
Jer  32.9.  Jorem.  bought  field,  weighed  «.  shekels 
S37 


SEV 

SEVENTEENTH. 
Oen.  7. 11.  on  s.  day  the  fountains  were  broken  up 
8.  4.  ark  rested  un  the  s.  day  in  seventh  month 

1  Kings^i.5\.  Ahaziah  began  to  reign  the  s.  year 

2  Kings  16. 1.  in  s.  year  of  Peknh  son  of  Reiiiuliah 
1  Chron.  24.  15.  the  s.  lot  came  to  Hezir 

25.  24.  ihe  s.  lot  came  to  Joshbekaahah 

HEVE.NTH. 
Ezod.  21.  2.  in  3.  he  shall  go  out  free  for  nothing 

31.  15.  but  in  the  s.is  the  sabbath  u(  rest  to  Lord 
/>«>.  23.  16.  unto  the  morrow  after  the  s.  sabbath 
Josh.  6.  16.  at  the  s.  time  when  the  priests  blew 

19.  40.  and  s.  lot  came  out  for  the  tribe  of  Dan 
1  Kings  18.  44.  at  the  s.  time  there  arose  a  cloud 
1  Chron.  2.  15.  David  was  the  s.  son  of  Jesse 

24.  10.  the  s.  lot  came  forth  to  Hakkoz 

26.  3.  Elioenai  the  s.  son  of  Meshciemiah 
5.  Issachar  was  the  s.  son  of  Obod-edom 

27.  10.  the  .5.  captain  for  the  s.  month  was  Helez 
Mat.  22.  26.  second  also,  and  the  third,  to  the  s. 
John  4.  52.  yesterday  at  s.  hour  the  fever  left  hini 
.Tude  14.  Enoch  the  s.  from  Adam  prophesied 
Rev.  8.  1.  and  when  he  had  opened  the  s.  seal 

10.  7.  in  the  days  of  the  voice  of  the  s.  angel 

11.  15.  the  s.  angel  sounded,  there  were  voices 
16.  17.  s.  angel  poured  out  his  vial  into  the  air 
21.  20.  the  s.  foundation  was  a  chrysolite 

.See  Day. 

SEVENTH  month. 

Gen.  8.4.  aik  rested  ins.  month  on  the  mountains 

Lev.  16.29.  in  s.7n.  afflict  your  souls,  23.  27.  |25.  9. 

23.  24.  in  the  s.  month  shail  ye  have  a  sabbath 
JViim.  29.  1.  in  s.  month  a  holy  convocation,  12. 

1  KingsS.  2.  Israel  assembled  at  feast  of  ihe  s.  m. 

2  Kings  25.  25.  in  .;.  m.  Ishmael  killed  Gedaliah, 

the  Jews  and  Chaldees  with  him,  Jer.  41.  1. 

2  Chr.  7.  10.  in  s.  month  Solomon  sent  them  away 

31.  7.  they  finished  the  heaps  in  the  s.inonth 

Kzra3.1.when  s.month  was  come, and  the  children 

of  Israel  were  in  the  cities,  JVch.  7.  73. 

O.from  the  firstdayofs.montA  began  tlieyto  offer 

JVeh.  8. 2.  on  I  lie  tirstday  of  the.«.77iimtA  I^zia  read 

14. in  feasts  ofs.niorJfAlsrael  shall  dwell  in  booths 

Jer.  28.  17.  so  Hananiah  died  in  the  s.  month 

F.zek.  45.  25.  in  the  s.  month  shall  he  do  the  like 

Mag.  2.  l.in  the  s.month  the  word  came  to  Haggai 

ZccA.  7.  5.  when  ye  mourned  in  filMi  and  s.  month 

8. 19.  the  fast  of  the  .<t.  month  shall  be  to  Judah  joy 

SEVENTH  year. 

F.xod.  23. 11.  but  the  s.  year  thou  shalt  let  it  rest 

/,<;!).  25.  4.  in  the  s.T/Pir  shall  be  a  sabbath  of  rest 

20.  if  ye  say,  what  shall  we  eat  in  the  s.  year  ? 

Deut.  1.5. 9.  saying,  the  s.  year,  year  of  release,  is 

at  hand,  thine  eye  be  evil  against  thy  brother 

12.  in  the  s.  year  thou  shalt  let  him  2o  free 

2  Kings  11.  4.   in  the  s.  year  Jehoiada  sent   and 

set  the  rulers  with  the  captains,  2  Chron.  23.  1. 

12.  1.  in  s.  year  of  Jehu,  Jehoash  began  to  reign 
18.  9.  in  s.  j/earofHoshea  king  of  Assyria  came 

F.ira  7.7.  went  to  Jerus. in  s.  year  of  Artaxerxes,8. 
JiTeh.  10.  31.  leave  #.  year  exaction  of  every  debt 
Es(A.  2.  16.  Esther  was  taken  to  king  in  s.  year 
.Ter.  52.  28.  people  carried  away  captive  in  s.  year 
Ezek.  20.  1.  in  the  .'.  year  elders  came  to  inquire 

SEVENTY. 
(?e)i.4.24.  if  Cain,  truly  Lamechs.  and  seven-fold 
5.  12.  and  Cainan  lived  s.  years  and  begat 
11.  26.  Terah  lived  s.  years,  and  begat  Abram 
12. 4.  .Abram  was  s.five  years  old,  when  he  depar 
F.xod.  1.  5.  of  the  loins  of  Ji}.cob  were  s.  souls 

24.  1.  come  up,  thou,  and  s.  elders  of  Israel,  9. 
3f.  29.  the  brass  of  the  offering  was  s.  talents 

Xum.  7.  13.  his  offering  was  one  silver  bowl  of  s. 
shekels,  19, 25, 31 ,  37,  43, 49, .55, 61,  67, 73,  79, 
85.  each  bowl  weighing  y.  shekels  of  silver 
11.  16.  gather  unto  me  .<:.  men  of  the  elders,  24. 

25.  he  gave  of  the  spirit  unto  the  s.  elders 
Judg.  9.  .56.  wickedness,  in  slaying  his  s.  brethren 
2  Kings  10.  1.  Ahab  had  s.  sons  in  Samaria,  6. 

7.  they  took  king's  sons,  and  slew  s.  persons 
F.ira%  40.  childr.  of  Hodaviah  ,«.  four,  JVeA.  7. 43 
8.  7.  of  sons  of  Elam,  with  Jeshaiah  s.  males 

14.  of  the  sons  ofZftbbud,  with  them  s.  males 
Psal.  90.  t  10.  asfor  our  days,  they  are  s.  years 
Isa.  23.  15.  that  Tyre  shall  be  forgotten  s.  years 

17.  after  end  of  s.  years,  the  Lord  will  visit  Tyre 
.Ter.  25.  11.  shall  serve  king  of  Babylon  s.  years 

12.  when  s.  years  are  accomplislied,  29.  10. 
F.iek.  8.  11.  there  stood  before  them  s.  men 
Dnn.^.i  accomplish  ».  years  indesolat.  of  Jerus. 

24.  s.  weeks  are  determined  upon  thy  people 
7.e.ch.  7.  5.  even  those  s.  years,  did  ye  fast  to  me 
Mat.  18.  22.  not  till  seven  times,  but  until  s.  times 
I.uke  10.  1.  Lord  appointed  others,  also  and  sent 

17.  the  s.  returned  neain  with  joy  saying.  Lord 
SEVER. 
F.xod.  8.  22.  I  will  s.  in  that  day  the  land  of  Goshen 
9.4.  Lord  shall  s.  between  cattle  of  Israel  ami  Eg. 
F.zek.  39. 14.  shall  s.  out  menof  continual  employ 
JI/oM3.  49.  and  5.  the  wicked  from  among  the  just 


SHA 

SEVERED. 
Lev."Q.  26.  I  have  s.  you  from  other  people 
i.'cut. 4. 41. Moses  s.  three  cities    n  this  side  Jordntl 
Judg.  4.  11.  Heber  had  s.  himself  from  Kenitcs 

SEVERAL. 
JVum.  28.  13.  and  a  s.  tenth  deal  of  flour  mingled 
with  oil  for  a  meat-offering,  21,  29.  |  29. 10, 15. 
2Kinga  15.  5.  Azariab  was  a  lejier  to  the  day  of  liis 
death,  and  dwelt  in  as.  house,  2  CArer/.  2lJ.  21. 
i  Chr.  II.  12.  in  every  s.cily  put  shields  and  speari 
28.  2.5.  in  every  s.  city  of  Judah  luaclu  high  places 
31.  19.  also  of  the  sons  of  Aaron  in  every  s.  city 
Mot.  25.  15.  every  man  according  to  his  s.  aliility 
Rev.  21.  21.  every  s.  gale  was  of  one  pearl,  street 
SEVERALLY. 

1  Cor.  12.  11.  dividini  io  every  man  a.  as  he  will 

SEVERl'lY. 

/Jom.11. 22  behold  therefore  the  goodness  and  s.of 
God,  on  them  who  fell  s.tutlolheegiiodnes* 
SEW. 

Keel.  3.  7.  a  time  to  rend  and  a  time  to  .«.  a  time 

Fick.  13. 18.  woe  to  women  s.  pillows  to  arm-holei 
SEWED. 

Gen.  3.  7.  theya.  fig-leaTcs  together,  made  apron* 

Ezra  4.  1 12.  they  s.  together  the  foundations 

./ui  16.  15.  1  have  s.  saekcloth  upon  my  skill 
SEWEST. 

.Tob  14.  17.  in  a  bag,  and  thou  s.  up  mine  iniquity 
"SEWETH. 

J/urA  2.21. no  mans. a  piece  of  new  cloth  on  an  old 
SHADE. 

Psal.  121. 5.  the  Lord  is  thv  s.  upon  thy  right  hand 
SHADOW 

Is  the  rej'resentation  which  any  thing  makes  of 
itself,  being  interposed  between  the  sun  or  a 
light  and  any  solid  body,  Isa.  38.  8.  Acts 
5.  15.  .i^Uso  a  place  sheltered  from  the  su7i 
Job  7.  2,  .\3  a  servant  desiieth  Ihe  shadow. 
TAi!  law  is  called  a  shadow  of  good  things  to 
come,  Heb.  10.  1.  that  is,  the  Mosaical  eco- 
nomy was  only  a  dark  obscure  representation 
of  Christ,  who  was  the  substance  of  the  legal 
types  and  shadows.  Some  are  of  opinion  that 
the  .dposlle  here  allude.s  to  the  custom  of  Pain- 
ters, who  first  make  a  rude  draught,  and  from 
it  draw  a  perfect  and  lively  picture  ;  then  tht 
sense  of  the  words  is  this ;  The  old  eoocnant 
did  contain  only  dark  resemhlanees  and  typcn 
of  heavenly  things,  no  lively  representations 
of  them  ;  thi'i  being  reserved  unto  the  time  of 
the  gospel,  wherein  Christ  and  all  spiritual 
blessings  in  him  are  clearly  and  plainly  mani- 
fested. Others  think  that  the  .'jposlle  alludes 
to  the  shadow  of  a  body,  and  makes  this  the 
sense  ;  That  the  old  covenant  had  only  types, 
wherein  Christ  and  heavenly  things  through 
him  were  darkly  represented,  not  the  substance 
and  truth  of  the  things  themselves. 

.<?  Shadow  being  made  by  the  sun,  follows  its  nio- 
iions,  and  is  in  perpetual  variation,  until  at 
last  it  guitevanish  and  disappear;  in  this  sense 
the  life  of  man  is  compared  to  a  shadow, 
1  Chron.  29.  15,  Our  days  on  earth  are  as  a 
shadow,  and  ihere  is  none  abiding.  Job  says, 
chap.  17.  7,  All  my  members  are  as  a  shadow  : 
that  is,^f  ant  shrunk  to  nothing,  and  become 
a  mere  anatomy  or  ghost. 

The  shadow  of  death,  ./ob  snj/s,  Let  the  .thadow 
of  death  stain  the  day  ivhcrein  I  was  born, 
Job  3.  3.  that  is  such  a  dismal  darkness  as  is 
in  the  place  of  the  dead  ;  or,  so  gross  and  pal- 
pable darkness,  that  by  its  horrors  and  damps 
may  take  away  men's  spirits  and  lives.  The 
morning  is  to  murderers  and  adulterers  as  the 
shadow  iif  death  :  that  is.  terrible  and  hateful, 
because  it  bothdiscovcrs  them  and  their  works 
of  darkness,  and  hinders  their  practices.  Job 
24.  17,  The  valley  of  the  shadow  of  doaili: 
that  is,  the  d/ijith  of  the  most  ttrrible  and  if- 
fri'jhting  dangers,  Psal.  23.  4. 

Gen.  19.  8.  they  came  under  the  s.  of  my  roof 

.Judg.  9.1,'.  then  come  and  put  your  trust  in  my*. 
36.  thou  fieest  the  s.  of  the  mountains  as  if  men 

2  Kings  20.  9.  shall  the  s.  go  forward  ten  degrees  1 

10.  it  is  a  lisht  thing  for  the  s.  to  go  down  ten 

11.  and  he  brought  the  s.ten  degrees  backward 
1  CAr.29.  15.  our  days  <in  ear'h  are  as  a  s.  Job  8.9. 
Job  7.  2.  as  a  servant  earnestly  dcsireth  the  s. 

14.  2.  he  fleeth  also  as  a  s.  and  continuelh  not 

17.  7.  and  all  my  members  are  as  a  .?. 

40.  22.  the  shady  trees  cover  him  with  theirs. 

Psal.  17.  8.  hide  me  under  the  s.  of  thv  wings 
36.7.piit  their  trust  under  the  s. of  thy  wings,57. 1. 
63.  7.  in  the  s.  of  thy  wings  will  I  rejoice 
80.  10.  the  hills  were  covered  with  thes.  of  it 
91.  1.  shall  abide  under  the  s.  of  the  Almighty 
102.  11.  my  davs  are  like  a  s.  that  declineth 
109.  23.  I  am  gone  like  a  s.  when  it  declineth 
144.  4.  man  is  vanity,  his  days  are  as  s.  F.cel.H.  13- 

Eccl.  G.  Vi.  his  vain  lifo  which  he  s^>endeth  a<  &  •. 


SHA 

Caff.  9.  3.  1  sat  under  liis  ».  with  great  dclijlit 
tta.  4t).  a  laberiMcle  lor  a  i.  in  daytime  rroiii  lieat 
iC.  :{.  makf  tliy  s.  aa  tlie  iiijjht  in  the  iioun-iiay 
25.  4.  U  Lord,  lliou  hast  bi;un  a  *.  from  tlio  liuut 

5.  briii^  down  tlie  heat  with  s.  of  a  cloud 

30.  i.  lo  sirengllieii,  and  tiust  in  the  s.  of  Kgypt 
3.  and  the  irust  in  s.  of  Egypt  your  confusiiiii 

3-J.  -J.  as  tlio  »■.  of  a  great  rock  in  a  weary  land 
34.  15.  owl  lay  and  hatch,  and  ^'aijier  un<ler  hor  $. 
3d.  8.  I  will  liring  again  ilie  s.  of  the  degrees 
4<J.  'J.  in  «.  of  his  hand  hath  he  hid  inc,  51.  Hi. 
Jet.  4C  45.  they  stood  under  the  «.  of  llfuhhon 
J^am.  4.  -M.  we  Kaid,  under  lii.s  .*.  we  sliall  live 
Kitk.  17.  -iW.  Ill  the  ».  thereof  shall  Ihey  dwell 

31.  1).  and  under  hia  .*.  dwell  all  grcMt  nations 
IJ.  nil  the  iieople  are  gone  down  friini  his  s. 
17.  that  .Iwelt  under  Ins  .*.  in  mid.st  of  heathen 

Dan.  4.  I-.  the  heasts  of  the  field  had  .5.  under  it 

Hus.  4.  13.  under  elnm,  hecaii.se  *.  thereof  is  good 

14.  7.  they  that  dwell  under  liia  s.  shall  return 

Jona/l  4.  5.  made  a  hootli,  aii<l  sat  under  it  in  s. 

6.  overJoiiili,  that  it  might  he  .•).  over  his  head 
.Mark  4.;)J.  that  fowls  in^  lodge  under  lliea.  of  it 
.9ctso.  15.  ihal  j.of  I'eieniiiglitovershadow  some 
G»/.  -2.  17.  which  are  a  s.  of  things  to  come,  but 
y/c4.  i>.  5.  wlio  serve  unto  the  s.  of  heavenly  things 

1'.'.  1.  the  law  having  a  *-.  ofgood  things  to  come 

Jam.  1.  17.  with  wliuiii  is  no  «.  of  turning 

.>>(!  Dkath. 

SH.\l)OVVS. 

Can£.2.17.  till  the  day  lireak,aiiil  5.  (lee  away,  4.  G. 

Jer.  6.  4.  for  s.  of  the  evening  are  slrelclied  out 

SlI.\I)()WlN(i. 
Isa.  18.  I.  woe  to  the  land  s.  with  wings,  which  is 
F.iek.  31.  3.  Assyrian  was  a  cedar  with  a  jt.  shroud 
Jieb. 9.5.  over  cheruhims  ofiilory  »•.  the  mercy -seat 

SIIAUY. 

Job  40.21.  he  lielh  under  the  s.  Irees  in  the  covert 

a.  tliu  s.  trees  cover  him  with  their  shadow 

SHAFT 

Ezod.  Si5.  31.  his  s.  and  branches,  his  bowls  and 

flowers,  shall  be  of  the  same,  37.  17.  J^itm.  8.  4. 

Isa.  4'J.  -.  and  he  haih  made  nie  a  polished  «. 

SHAKE. 
Ezod.  29.  1 24.  s.  ihein  to  and  fro  for  wave-olTering 
Jadg.  It).  20.  Samson  said,  I  will  go  out  and  s  mys. 
^ek.  5.  13.  also  I  shook  my  lap,  and  said,  so  (J.  s. 
Job  4.  14.  fear  came,  which  made  my  bones  to  .«. 
15.33.  lie  shall  »■.  otf  his  unripe  grape  as  the  vine 
1G.4.I  could  heap  up  words, and  s.  my  head  at  you 
Pnal.  22.  7.  they  shoot  out  the  lip,  they  s.  head 
4fi.  3.  Iho"  the  mountains  s.  with  swelling  thereof 
•)8.  t  9.  thou  didst  s.  out  a  plentiful  rain 
Oil.  23.  and  make  their  loins  continually  to  s. 
72.  Ifi.  the  fruit  thereof  shall  s.  like  Lebanon 
Isn.  2.  19.  when  he  aiiseth  to  s.  the  earth,  21. 
10. 15.  as  if  the  rod  should  .9.  itself  against  them 
32.  he  shall  s.  his  hand  against  the  nionnt 
11.  15.  the  Lord  shall  s.  his  hand  over  the  river 
13.  2.  exalt  the  voice  unto  them,  s.  the  hand 

13.  I  will  f.  heavens,  .Ind  X  16.  Haj,'.  2.  G,  21. 
24.  IS.  the  foundations  of  the  earth  do  s. 
33.  9.  Bashan  and  Carmel  s.  off  their  fruits 
52.  2.  s.  thyself  from  the  dust,  O  .lerusilem 
Jo".  23.  9.  mine  heart  is  broken,  all  my  Ixmes  s. 
Eick.  2G.10.  thy  walls  shall  a.  at  noise  of  horsemen 
15.  shall  not  the  isles.?,  at  the  sound  of  thy  fall? 
27.2H.  thcsuhilrbishiill  s.  at  the  sound  of  the  cry 
31.  Ifi.  I  made  nations  s.  at  the  sound  of  his  fall 
38. 20.  all  men  of  the  earth  shall  k.  at  my  presence 
/)«n.  4.  14.  s.  off  his  leaves,  and  scatter  his  fruit 
Jfmoji  9.  I.  smite  the  lintel,  that  the  posts  may  s. 
Jlan.  2. 7. 1  will  s.  all  nations,  desire  of  all  nations 
Z.ech.  2.  9.  bcdiold,  I  will  s.  my  hand  on  them 
J)faM0.t4.when  ve  depart  out  of  that  hotiBe,or  city, 
#.offthc  dust  of  your  feet,  jVurAfi.  U.  /-m/i:c9.5. 
28.  4.  and  for  fear  of  him  the  keepers  did  s. 
/yutr6.4''.i'tream  beat  that  hou8c,and  could  not  ».it 
Heb.  12.  20.  once  more  I  s.  not  the  earth  only 

SHAKED. 
^5. 100.  25.  they  looked  on  me,  they  5.  their  heads 

SHAKEN. 
I,rn.'i<\  3G  ihesoiind  ofa.^.learshall  chase  them 
1  Kingii  14. 15. shall  smite  Ur. as  a  reed  is  j». in  water 
iKingn  19.21.  halh  despised  thee,  the  daughter  of 
Joriisnli'm  hath  >.  her  head  at  thee,  /.9(i.  37.22. 
•      ^'.k.  5.  13.  even  thus  he  he  s.  out  and  emptied 
Job  16.  12.  taken  me  by  my  neck,  s.  me  to  pieces 
38.  13.  that  the  wicked  might  be  .».  out  of  it 
T-sal.  18.  7.  the  foundations  of  the  hills  were  ». 
JVrt^.  2.  3.  and  the  fir-trees  shall  he;  terribly  ». 
3.  12  if/t.  they  fall  into  the  mouth  of  the  eater 
Mat.  11.  7.  a  rend  x.  with  the  wind,  I.nkr  7.  24. 
24.  2'J.  stars  shall  fall  from  hfaven,  nnil  powers  of 
he  iven  shall  be  ».  Atark  13.  25.  Luke 
21.  26. 
J.nkefi.  .W.  give  good  mpisiire,  pressed,*,  together 
jJcfK  4.31.  wlunlliev  had  prayed  the  place  was*. 
1fi2fi.so  tint  the  fdiindatiniis  of  Ih"  prison  were  ». 
S  TA&ff.S.  3.  leb'jnut  soar  «.  in  miad,  or  troubled 
KB 


SHA 

.ffej.12.27.  removing  of  those  things  that  are  9.  that 
thoi^e  things  which  cannot  be  .5.  may  remain 

Rev.  6. 13.  as  a  tig-tree  when  s.  of  a  mighty  wind 
SHAKETH. 

.Job  9.  6.  which  «.  the  earth  out  of  hcrjilace 

l^sal.  29.  8.  the  voice  of  the  Lord  .<.  the  wilderness 
(iO.  2.  heal  the  breaches  thereof,  for  it  y. 

/*a.l0.15.fliall  saw  magnify  against  liiin  that  j.  it? 

19.  16.  the  hand  of  tlie  Lord  which  he  s.  over  it 

33.  15.  he  that  »•.  his  hand  from  holding  of  bribes 

SHAKING. 

.lob  41.  29.  he  laugheth  at  the  s.  of  a  spear 

I'.-ial.  44.  14.  the  *■.  of  the  head  among  the  people 

l!<a.  17.  C.  as  the  *■.  of  an  olive-tree,  24.  13. 
19.  IG.  shall  fear,  because  of  the  s.  of  the  hand 
30.  32.  and  in  battles  of  s.  shall  ho  fight  with  it 

F.ick.  37.  7.  behold  a  s.  and  bones  came  together 

38. 19.  in  that  day  there  shall  be  a  gieat  «.ia  Israel 

SlIAiMBLES. 

1  Cor.  10.  25.  whatsoever  is  sold  in  the  «.  that  eat 
SHAME 

Is  taken,  (1)  For  that  nffitctinn  which,  ariscth  by 
rea.ion  of  some  civil  di.^hunestij  i,t  JUthiness, 
anil  appears  in  the  cnuiitr.nancc  by  blufking. 
Gen.  2.  25,  They  were  naked,  aird  were  not 
ashamed.  There  was  neither  deformity  in  their 
bodice,  vor  guilt  in  their  svula,  the  cause  vf 
shame.  (2)  Fur  trouhle  and  perturbation  of 
mind  and  conscience,  being  gfievcd  and  cast 
doicn  at  the  remembrance  of  sin  against  God; 
Rom.  fi.  21,  What  fruit  had  ye  in  those  things 
whereof  ye  are  now  ashamed  ?  .find  in  Ezra 
9.  (i,  I  am  ashamed,  and  blush  to  lift  up  my 
face  to  thee,  my  God,  for  our  iniquiiies  are 
increased  over  our  head.  This  is  shame  of 
conscience,  which  in  wicked  men  is  an  evil  af- 
fection, and  part  of  the  torment  of  hell;  but 
in  the  godly  it  is  a  good  affection,  a  sign  and 
fruit  of  their  repentance.  Jer.  31.  19,  F.ph- 
raim  smote  upon  his  thigh,  and  was  ashamed. 
(3j  For  a  shameful  idol,  jchich  would  bring 
the  worshippers  of  it  to  shame  at  last.  Hos. 
9.  10,  They  went  to  Baal  peor,  and  separated 
themselves  unto  that  shame.  (4)  For  scorn, 
derision,  and  contempt.  Ezek.  3G.  C,  Ye  have 
borne  the  shame  of  the  heathen. 

To  uncover  the  shame,  or  nakedness  of  a  person, 
are  si/iionimous  terms.  Isaiah  threatens  the 
Kgypiians,  that  thiy  should  he  led  away  captive 
stark  naked,  without  any  thing  to  cover  their 
shame  or  their  nakedness,  Isa.  20.  4.  .Ind  the 
same  prophet  says.  Thy  nakedness  shall  be  un- 
covered, y^a  tliy  shame  shall  be  seen,  fsa.  47.  3. 
It  is  said,  Prov.  3.  3.5,  Shame  shall  be  the  pro- 
motion of  fools ;  Their  promotion  shall  be  their 
own  shame,  and  the  disgrace  of  those  that  pro- 
mote them.  ..Ind  in  Prov.  9.  7,  He  that  reprov- 
eth  a  scorner,  geticlh  to  himself  shame:  lie 
loseth  his  labour,  and  shall  only  get  discredit 
by  it.  The  apostle  says,  Rom.  5.  5,  Hope 
niaketh  not  ashamed.  Such  hope,  lehich  is  the 
fruit  (if  faith,  patience,  and  experience,  shall 
not  be  disappointed,  hut  shall  certainly  obtain 
the  good  things  hoped  for,  and  so  bring  mut- 
ter of  rejoicing,  and  not  of  shame. 

F.xod.  32.25.  Aaron  made  them  naked  unto  theirs. 

■  ludg.  18.7.  was  none  to  put  them  to  s.  in  any  thing 

1  Sam.  20.  34.  because  his  father  had  done  him  s. 

2  Sam.  13.  13.  whither  shall  I  cause  my  »■  to  go 

2  C'hron.  32.  21.  returned  with  s.  of  face  to  his  land 
.fob  S.  22.  that  hate  thee  shall  be  clothed  with  s. 
Psal.  4.2.  how  long  will  ye  turn  my  glory  into  s.? 
35.  4.  [lilt  them  to  s.  that  seek  after  my  soul 
26.  let  them  be  clothed  with  ».  and  dishonour 
40.  14.  let  them  be  put  to  s.  wish  me  evil,  83.  17. 
15.  let  them  he  desolate  for  a  reward  of  their  s. 
44.  7.  thou  hast  put  them  to  $.  that  hated  us,  53. 5. 

9.  but  thou  hast  cast  off  and  put  us  to  s. 

15.  the  .?.  of  my  face  hath  covered  me,  69.  7. 
69.  19.  thou  hast  known  my  reproach  and  ». 
70.!l.lrt  Ihemhe  turned  back  for  reward  of  their*. 
71.  24.  let  them  be  brought  unl»  .».  that  seek  hurl 
83.  16.  fill  their  faces  with  .«.  O  Lord 
89.  45.  thou  hast  covered  him  with  s. 
109.  29.  lot  mine  adversaries  be  clothed  with  .». 
119. 3L  stuck  to  thy  testimon.  O  L.  put  not  to  ». 
132.  18.  his  enemies  will  I  clothe  with  s. 
Prov.  3.  35.  but  .s-.  shall  be  the  promotion  of  fools 
9.  7.  he  that  reprovcth  a  scorner,  getteth  s. 
lO.S.that  sleeps  in  harvest,  is  a  son  that  causcth  ». 
11.2.  when  pride  cometh,  then  cometh  s. 

12.  16.  but  a  prudent  man  rovereih  .». 

13.  5.  a  wicked  man  is  Inathscime  and  rnmcth  to  s. 
18.*.  sliall  be  lo  him  that  rffn^eth  instruction 

14. .3.5.  but  his  wrath  is  against  him  ihatcnuspth  s. 

17.  2.  shall  have  rule  over  a  son  that  causcth  ». 

18.  13.  nnswereth  before  he  hetireih,  it  is*,  to  him 
19.26.  that  chaselh  bis  mother,  is  a  son  causcth  *. 
25.  8.  when  thy  ni'ighbonr  hath  put  thee  to  3. 

10.  loal  h«  Ihttt  licarvtii  it  but  ihce  to  f. 


SHA 

fVot).29.15.cIiiId  left  to  him.  brings  his  mother  to  *. 
Isa.  20. 4.  their  buttocks  uncovered,  to  s.  of  Egypt 

22.  18.  chariots  shall  he  the  s.  of  thy  lord's  housa 

30.  3.  the  strength  of  Pharaoh  shall  be  your  t.  5 

47.  3.  be  uncovered,  yea  thy  *.  shall  be  seen 
.50.  6.  I  hid  not  my  face  from  s.  and  spitting 
54.  4.  fear  not,  thou  shalt  not  be  put  los.  nor  con 

founded,  for  thou  shall  forget  s.  of  thy  youth 
61.  7.  for  your  s.  you  shall  have  double 
.Icr.  3.  24.  *.  devoured  the  labour  of  our  fathers 
2.5.  we  lie  down  in  s.  and  our  confusion  covers  U8 

13.  2i).  I  will  discover,  that  thy  s.  may  appear 
20.  18.  that  my  days  may  be  consumed  with  s 

23.  40.  and  a  perpetual  s.  not  be  forgotten 

4().  12.  the  nations  have  heard  of  thy*.  Ihy  cry 

48.  39.  how  hath  Moab  turned  back  with  .f. 
51.51.  *.  hath  covered  our  faces,  for  strangers 

F.iek.  7.  18.  s.  shall  be  on  all  faces,  and  baldness 
16.  02.  bear  thine  own  s.  for  thy  sins,  .54. 
63.  never  open  thy  mouth  because  of  thy  *. 
32.  24.  yet  have  they  borne  their  *.  with  them,  25 
30.  bear  their  s.  with  them  that  go  down  lo  pit 

31.  29.  nor  bear  the  s.  of  the  heathen  any  more 
36.  0.  because  ye  have  borne  the  *.  of  the  heathen 

7.  the  heathen,  they  shall  bear  their  *.  44.  13. 

15.  iior  cause  to  hear  in  thee  *.  of  the  heathen 
39.  26.  after  that  they  have  borne  their  s. 

Dan.  12.  2.  many  of  liiein  shall  awake,  some  to*. 
Hos.  4.  7.  therefore  I  will  change  their  glory  intos. 

18.  her  rulers  with  s.  do  love,  give  ye 

9.  10.  they  separated  themselves  unto  that  *. 

10.6.  Ephraim  shall  receive  s.  Israel  be  ashamed 
Obad.  10.  for  thy  violence  *.  shall  cover  thee 
Mic.  1.  11.  pass  ye  away,  having  thy  *.  naked 

2.  6.  shall  not  prophesy,  they  shall  not  take*. 

7.  10.*.  shall  cover  her  which  said,  where  is  Lordt 
jVnA.  3.  5.  I  will  shew  the  kingdoms  thy  s. 
Hah.  2.  10.  thou  hast  consulted  s.  to  thy  house 

16.  thou  art  filled  with  s.  for  glory,  druik  thou 
Zeph.  3.  5.  but  the  unjust  knoweth  no  *. 

19.  get  praise,  where  they  have  been  put  to  *. 
I.nke  14.  9.  tliou  begin  with  s.  to  take  lowest  room 
.>icts  5.  41.  they  were  counted  worthy  to  suffer  *. 

1  Cor.  6.  5.  I  speak  to  your  s.  15.  34. 
11.6.  if  it  be  a  *.  for  a  woman  to  be  shorn 

14.  if  a  man  have  long  hair,  it  is  a  ».  unto  him 

14.  35.  it  is  a  s.  for  a  woman  to  speak  in  church 

2  Cor.  4.  t  2.  but  renounced  the  hidden  things  of* 
F.ph.  5. 12.  a  *.  to  speak  of  things  done  of  them 
Phil.  3.  19.  whose  glory  is  in  their  s.  who  mind 
W^fA.6. 6.  crucify  afresh,  and  put  him  lo  an  open  *. 

12.  2.  he  endured  the  cross,  despising  the  *. 
.lude  13.  raging  waves,  foaming  out  their  owji  *. 
Rev.'i.  13.  that  *.  of  thy  nakedness  do  not  appear 

16.  15.  lest  he  walk  naked,  and  they  see  his  *. 

SHAME. 
Huth  2.t  l.^i.  let  her  glean  among  sheaves,  *.her  not 
1  Cor.  4.  14.  I  write  not  these  things  to  *.  you 

11.  22.  despise  ye  church  of  God,  and*,  tlieml 

SHAMED. 
f?fn.38.  23.  let  her  take  it  to  her  lest  we  be  *. 

1  .S'«m.25.t  7.  thy  shepherds  with  us,  we*,  them  not 

t  15.  men  were  good  unto  us,  and  we  were  not  *. 

2  .Srt7n.l9.5.tlion  hast*,  the  faces  of  all  thy  servants 
Pgal.  14.  6.  you  have  *.  the  counsel  of  the  poor 

SHAMETH. 
rroB.28. 7.  companion  of  riotous  men  *.h:.s  falhef 

SHAMF.rACRHNKSS. 
1  Tim. '2.  9.  that  women  .ndorn  themselves  with  s. 

SHAMEFUL. 
.Ter.  11.  13.  ye  have  set  up  altars  to  that  s.  thing 
Hab.  2.  16.  and  *.  spiieing  be  on  thy  glory 

SHAMEFULLY. 
ffos.  0.  5,  she  that  conceived  them,  hnth  done  ». 
Mark  12.  4.  sent  him  away  s.  handled,  I.ukr  10.11 

1  Thess.  2.  2.  and  were  *.  entreated,  as  ye,  knew 

SHAMELESSLY. 

2  Sam.  6.20.  as  one  of  vain  fellows  *.  uncovcreth 

SHAPE. 
7,H/fc  3. 22.  descended  in  bodily  *.  like  dove  on  him 
■  John  5.  37.  not  heard  his  voice,  nor  seen  his  *. 

SHAPEN. 
Psal.  51.  5.  behold,  I  was*,  in  iniquity,  and  in  sin 

SHAPES. 
Rev.O.  7.  the  s.  of  the  locitsts  were  like  horses 

SHARE. 
1  'f (I ;n. 13.20. went  down  to  sharpen  every  man  his*. 

SHARP. 

P7nrf.4.Q5.  Zipporah  look  a  *.  stone  and  cut  off 

./n.«4.5.2.make  thee  *. knives,  and  circumcise  again 

3.  Joshua  made  *.  knives  ami  circumcised  Israel 

1  .Sam.  14. 4. between  the  passages  there  was  *.  rock 

.fob  41.  30.  s.  stories  are  under  him,  he  spreadelh 

*.  pointed  things  upon  the  mire 

Psnl.  45.  !>.  arrows  *.  in  the  heart  ofkinp's  enem:ei 

.52.2.thy  tongue  like  a  *.  razor  working  dcccitfuny 

.57.4. whose  teeth  are  spears, their  tongue*. sword 

120  4.  *.  arroivs  of  mighty  with  coals  of  jiiniper 

Pror.  5.  4.  but  ho.  (  n.l  is  *.  ns  a  two  edjed  sword 

S25. 18.  a  iiiao  that  bears  false  witness  is  «.  arrow 


SHE 

Tsd  5.  28.  tlipy  shall  come,  whose  arrows  are  s. 
41   15.  I  will  make  thee  a  j".  ihresliiiig  inslruiiient 
4J  2.  lie  hath  made  my  mouth  like  a  s.  sword 
Kirk.  5.  1.  lake  thee  a  a.  knife  and  cause  it  to  pass 
Ads  15.  311.  the  contention  was  so  s.  between  Paul 
lico-  I.  It),  out  of  his  mouth  went  a  s.  two-edijud 
sword,  his  countenance  was  as  the  sun,  19. 15. 
2.  l'.J.  these  things  saith  he  that  hath  the  i.  sword 
14.  14.  tSoa  of  man  in  his  hand  a  s.  sickle,  17. 
Id.  the  angel  cried  to  him  that  had  the  ;;.  sickle 
SHARPEN. 
Veut.  6.  t".  thou  Shalt  a.  them  to  thy  children 

1  Sam.  1.3.  20.  went  down  to  i.  every  man  his  share 

21.  yet  they  had  a  Hie  for  axLS,  and  to  s.  goads 

SHARPENED. 
^sal.  MO.  3.  they  s.  their  tongues  like  a  serpent 
Ezck.  21.  fl.  a  sword  is  s.  and  furbished,  10,  11. 

SHARPEN  ETH. 
Job  16.  9.  mine  enemy  s.  his  eyes  upon  me 
Vrov.  37.  17.  iron  .s.  iron,  so  a  man  .s.  his  friend 

SHARPER. 
J^Iic.  7.4.  thejnost  upright  is  s.  than  a  thorn  edge 
Heb.  4.  12.  the  word  ol  God  is  «.  than  any  sword 

SHARPLY. 
Judg.  8.  1.  and  they  did  chide  with  Gideon  i. 
Tit°\.  13.  rebuke  them  «.  that  they  may  be  sound 
SHARPNESS. 

2  Cor.  13.  10.  lest  being  present  1  should  use  s. 

SHAVE. 

A.fu.13.33.  shall  be  shaven,  hut  scall  shall  he  not  «•. 

14.  8.  the  unclean  person  shall  s.  off  his  hair,  9. 

21.  5.  nor  shall  they  s.  the  corner  of  their  beard 

JVum.  6.  9.  then  he  shall  s.  his  head  in  the  day  of 

his  cleansing,  on  the  seventh  day  shall  he  s.  it 

t8.  Nazarite  shall  *•.  the  head  of  his  separation 

b.  7.  let  them  s.  their  flesh,  and  wash  their  clothes 

/Jeut.21.12.captive  shall  s.  her  head,  pare  her  nails 

Judff.  10.  19.  she  caused  him  to  s.  off  seven  locks 

Jsa.  7.  20.  Lord  shall  s.  with  a  razor  that  is  hired 

Ezck.  44.  20.  neither  shall  they  s.  their  heads 

.ids  21.  24.  be  at  charges,  that  they  s.  their  heads 

SHAVED. 
Clen.  41. 14.  Joseph  5.  and  changed  his  raiment 
2  .Sam.  10  4.  s.  offhalf  their  beards,  1  Chnm.  19.  4 
Job  1.  20.  Job  rent  his  mantle  and  «.  his  head 

SHAVEN. 
J^ev.  13.  33.  be  s.  but  the  scall  shall  he  not  shave 
J\l$in.  6.  19.  afier  the  hair  of  his  separation  is  «. 
Judff.  16.  17.  if  I  be  .?.  my  strength  will  go  from  me 

22.  the  hair  began  to  grow  again  after  he  was  s 
Jer.  41.  5.  fourscore  men  having  their  beards  s. 

I  Cor.  11.  5.  that  is  even  all  one  as  if  she  were  s 

6.  if  it  be  a  shame  to  be  s.  let  her  be  covered 

SHEAF. 

GcTi. 37.7. behold  my«.arose,andalso  stood  upright 

behold,  your  sheaves  made  obeisance  to  my  s 

Lev.  23.  10.  ye  shall  bring  a  s.  of  the  first-friiiis 

11.  ye  shall  wave  the  s.  before  the  Lord,  12. 
/)(•«^24. 19.  hast  forgot  a  s.  shalt  nol  go  to  fetch  .it 
Job2i.  10.  they  lake  away  the  s.  from  the  hungry 
Zeck.  12.  6.  governors  of. I  lulah  like  a  torch  in  a 

SHEAVES. 
Oen.  37.  7.  behold,  we  were  binding  s.  in  the  field 
Buth^.l.  let  me  glean  and  gather  among  the  s.  15. 
Jfeh.  13.  15.  some  on  the  sabbath  bringing  in  .«. 
Psal.  126.  6.  he  shall  come  bringing  s.  with  him 

129.  7.  nor  he  that  bindelh  s.  his  bosom 
j9wi«s2.13.Iam  press'ed  under  you,as  a  cart  full  of*. 
Mic.  4.  12.  the  Lord  shall  gather  them  as  the  s. 

SHEAR. 
Gen.  31.  19.  and  Laban  went  to  s.  his  sheep 
38.  13.  Judah  goeth  to  Timnah  to  s.  his  sheep 
Deut.  15.  10.  nor  shalt  s.  the  tirstlingof  thy  sheep 
lSawi.2.5.4. David  heard  that  Nabal  did  s.his  sheep 

SHEARER. 
Jids  8.  32.  and  like  a  Inmb  dumb  before  his  s. 

SHEARERS. 
Gen.  38.  12.  and  Jndah  went  up  unto  his  sheep  s. 

1  Sam.  25.  7.  now  I  have  heard  that  thou  hast  s. 
11.  shall  I  take  iny  flesh  I  have  killed  for  my.?. 

2  Sam.  13.  23.  Absalom  had  s.  in  Baal-hazor,  24. 
/so.53.7.as  a  sheep  before  her  s.  is  dumhjopens  not 

SHEARING. 
1  Sam.  25.  2.  nnd  Nahal  was  .s.  sheep  in  Carmel 

P!lEAIllNG-HOUSE. 
SA'inn-slO  ■|2.Jehu  metbrcihren  of  Ahaziah  ats.-A. 
14.  he  slew  them  at  the  pit  of  the  s.-h. 
SHEATH. 
1  Sam.  17.  51.  David  drew  the  sword  out  of  hiss. 
2.Srtm.20.  8.  wilh  a  sword  fastened  in  the  s.thereof 
J  Cfirnv.  21 .  27.  the  angel  put  the  sword  into  his  9_. 
i^i'-fc.  21 .  3. 1  will  draw  his  sword  out  of  the  s.  4, 

30. shall  I  cause  it  to  return  into  his.?.?  will  judge 
John  18.  11.  Jesus  said,  put  up  thy  sword  into  s 

SHED. 
2.^(1771.20. 10. Jonb  s.  Amasa's  bowels  to  the  ground 
JVf/;?.2r..  28.  is  s.  for  many  for  the  remission  of  sins 
Actti.  33.  received  the  promise  of  Holy  Ghost,  he 
hath  s.  lor'.)  this  which  ye  now  see  nnd  hoar 
Rom  5.5  love  of  G.is  ».  in  our  hearts  by  Holy  Ghost 
53d 


SHE 

Tit.3.6.which  hes.on  us  abundantly  thro'  Jcs.  Ch. 
See  Blood. 
SHEDDER. 

Ezck.  18.  10.  if  he  beget  a  son  that  is  a  s.  of  blood 

SHEDDETH. 
Gc«.9.6.whoso..s.man's  blood, hisblood  shall  be  eh. 
Eiek.  22.  3.  the  city  s.  blood  in  the  midst  of  it 

SHEDDING. 

Hcb.  9.  22.  and  withouts.  of  blood  is  no  remission 

SHE-GOATS,  sec  Goats. 

SHEEP. 

Gen.  4.  2.  Abel  a  keeper  of  s.  Cain  tiller  of  ground 

29.  6.  Rachel  his  daughter  comelh  with  the  s.  9. 

Ezod.  y.  3.  the  hand  of  the  Lord  is  upon  the  s.    ?■ 

12.  5.  ye  shall  take  it  out  from  the  ,v.  or  the  goats 

20. 24.  thou  shalt  sacrifice  thereon  thy  s.  and  oxen 

22.  I.  if  a  man  steal  a  6-.  and  kill  it  or  sell  it,  4,  9. 

10.  if  a  man  give  to  his  neighbour  a  «.  to  keep 

30.  likewise  do  with  the  tirsiling  of  «.  'M.  19. 

Lev.  1.  10.  if  his  offering  be  of  the  «.  or  goals 

7.  23.  shall  eat  no  manner  of  fat  ofs.  or  of  goats 
22.  19.  ye  shall  offer  a  male  of  the  .s.  or  goats,  21. 

27.  26.  no  man  shall  sanctity  the  firstling  of  a  s. 
.Vum. 18.1 7.the  firstling  ofs.  thou  shalt  not  redeem 

32.  24.  build  ye  cities  and  folds  for  your  s.  36. 
Dcut.  7.  13.  he  will  bless  the  flocks  of  thy  s. 
17.1.  thou  shalt  not  sacrifices,  wherein  is  blemish 
18.  3.  the  priest's  due  from  them  that  offer  «.  4. 
22. 1.  thou  shalt  not  see  thy  brother's  s.  go  astray 

28.  4.  blessed  shall  be  the  flocks  of  thy  s. 

18.  cursed  shall  be  the  Hocks  of  thy  f .  31,  51. 
32.  14.  that  he  might  eat  butter  of  kine,  milk  of  s. 

.Tosh.  0.  21.  they  destroyed  at  Jericho  ox  and  s, 
7.24.Joshua  tookAchan'ss.and  tent,and  allhehad 
Ju.djt.  6.  4.  the  Midiunites  left  neither  s.  nor  oxen 
l.^(i7H.8.  17.  the  king  will  take  the  tenth  of  your  s. 

14.  32.  the  people  flew  upon  the  spoil  and  took  s. 
34.  bring  hither  every  man  his  ox  and  his  s. 

15.  3.  slay  both  ox  and  s.  ||  9.  Saul  spread  the  s. 
14.  what  meaneth  this  bleating  of*,  in  my  ears  7 

21.  the  people  took  of  the  spoil,  s.  and  oxen 

16.  11.  the  youngest,  behold,  he  keepeth  the  ». 

19.  send  me  David  thy  son,  who  is  with  the  *■. 

17.  15.  David  returned  to  feed  his  father's  s. 

20.  he  rose  early  and  left  the  s.  with  a  keeper 
34.. David  said,  thy  servant  kept  his  father's  s. 

25.  2.  Nabal  had  3000  s.  he  was  shearing  his  s. 
18.  AbigSil  hasted,  and  took  five  s.  ready  dressed 
27.  9.  David  took  away  the  s.  the  oxen,  and  asse.s 
2  Sam.  7.  8.  I  took  thee  from  following  the  s. 

17.  29.  Barzillai  brought  David  butter  and  s. 
24.  17.  David  said,  lo,  I  have  sinned,  but  these 

s.  what  ha^they  done?  1  Chron.  21.  17. 

1  Kings  1.  9.  Adonij.slew  s.  oxen  and  fat  catlle,25. 
4. 23.  Solomon's  provision  for  one  day  hundred  s. 

8.  5.  all  the  congregation  sacrificing  s.  and  oxen 
63.  Solomon  offered  s.  2  Chron.  5.  6.  |  7.  5. 

2  Kings  5.  2p.  is  it  a  time  to  receive  s.  and  oxen  ? 
1  Chron.  5.  21.  they  took  from  Hagarites  2.50,000  j. 

12.  40.  they  brought  oxen  and  .>•.  abundantly 
2Chron.  14.  15.  Asa  carried  from  the  Elhiopianss. 
15.  11.  and  they  offered  of  the  spoil  7000  s. 

18.  2.  Ahab  killed  s.  and  oxen  for  Jehoshaphat 

29.  33.  the  consecrated  things  were  3000  s.  ' 
.30.  24.  Hezekiah  the  king  did  give  7000  s.  and  the 

princesgave  to  the  congregation  10,000  s. 
31.  6.  they  brought  in  the  tithes  of  oxen  and  s. 
JW/j.5.18.  furNehemiah  daily  one  ox,  six  choice  s. 
Job\.  3.  his  substance  also  was  7000s.  3000  camels 

16.  the  fire  is  fallen,  and  hath  burnt  up  thcs. 
31.20.  if  he  were  not  warmed  wilh  fleece  of  my  s. 
42.  12.  for  he  had  14,000  s.  and  6000  camels 

Psal.  8.  7.  for  thou  hast  given  him  alls,  and  oxen 
44.  11.  thou  hast  given  us  like  s.  for  meat 

49.  14.  like  s.  are  laid  in  the  grave,  death  feed 
74. 1.  why  doth  thine  anger  smoke  against  thy  s.? 

78.  .52.  but  made  his  own  people  go  forth  like  s. 

79.  13.  so  we  thy  people  and  s.  of  thy  pasture 
95.  7.  nnd  we  are  the  s.  of  his  hand,  100.  3. 
119.  176.  I  have  gone  astray  like  a  lost  s. 
144.  13.  that  our  s.  may  bring  forlh  Ihousnnds 

Cunt.  4.  2.  thy  teeth  arc  like  a  flock  of  s.  6.  6. 
Isa.  7.  21.  in  that  day  a  man  shall  nourish  two  s. 

22.  13.  behold,  joy  and  gladness,  and  killing  of  s. 
53.  6.  all  we  like  s.  are  gone  astray ;  we  have 

.Ter.  12.  3.  pull  them  out  like  s.  for  the  slaughter 

23.  1.  woe  be  unto  the  pastors  that  scatter  the.'. 

50.  6.  my  people  hath  been  lost  s.  their  shepherds 

17.  I.srael  is  as  scattered  s.lionshavcdrivenhim 
E:rk.  34.  6.  my  s.  wander  throngh  the  mouninins 

11.  I  will  search  my  s.  and  seek  them  out,  12. 
Hos.  12.  12.  Israel  served,  nnd  for  a  wife  he  kepts. 
.Tnel  1.  18.  the  flocks  of  s.  are  made  desolate 
Mic.  5.  8.  as  a  young  lion  among  the  flocks  of ». 
ZrcA.13.7.awake,03Word,  smite  the  sliepherd, and 

s.  shall  he  scattered,  J^/a^  26.31  .J»7nr/r  14. 27. 
Mm.  7.  15.  beware  of  false  prophets  in  s.  clothing 
10.fi.  go  rather  to  the  lost  s.  of  the  house  of  Israel 
12.  11.  if  one  s.  fall  into  a  pit  on  the  sabbath 

12.  how  much  then  is  a  roan  bettor  than  as.? 


SHE 

J/(i£.15. 24.1  am  not  sent  but  unto  thelosts.  of  Isr 

18.  12.  if  a  man  have  a  100  s.  and  one  be  gone 

13.  he  rejoiceth  more  of  that  s.  J^uke  15.  4,  C. 

25.  32.  as  a  shepherd  divldeth  his  s.  from  goats 

33.  he  shall  set  s.  on  his  right  hand,  but  goats 

John'i.  14.  he  found  in  the  temple  those  that  sold  s 

15.  he  drove  them  out  of  the  temple,  and  the  s. 

10.  2.  that  entereth  by  door  is  shepherd  of  the  s. 

3.  the  s.  hear  his  voice,  27.  ||  4.  the  s.fidlowhim 

7.  then  said  Jesus,  verily  I  am  the  door  of  the  s. 

8.  were  robbers,  but  the  s.  did  not  hear  them 

11.  the  good  Shepherd  giveth  his  life  for  his  s. 

12.  a  hireling  leavelh  the  s.  and  flceth,  13. 
J4.goodShepherd,I  know  niys.HlO.others.I  have 
15.  the  Father,  and  1  ley  down  my  life  for  the  s. 
26.  because  ye  arc  not  of  my  s.  as  1  said  unto  you 

21.  16.  he  saith  unio  Peter,  feed  my  s.  17. 
Hcb.  13.  20.  Lord  Jesus,  that  great  Shepherd  of  s. 
>ici7.18.13.  none  buyeth  s.  horses,  slaves,  and  souls 

As  SHEEP. 
JS'um.  27.  17.  be  not  as  s.  which  have  no  shepherd 
lhiiigs'i2. 17.1  saw  all  Israel  scattered  on  the  hills, 
ass.  that  have  no  shepherd,  2  Chr.  iS.  16. 
Psal.  44.  22.  we  are  killed  all  the  day  long,  we  are 
counted  as  s.  for  the  slaughter,  Horn.  8.  36. 
fsa.  13.  14.  it  shall  be  as  s.  that  no  man  taketh  up 
53.  7.  and  as  a  s.  before  his  shearers  is  dumb 
Mic.  2.  12.  I  will  put  them  together  os  s.  of  Hozra 
Alat.  9.  36.  conipassiim, because  fainted  and  were 
scattered  as  s.  having  no  shepherd,  Mark  6.  34. 
10.  16.  I  send  you  forth  as  s.  in  midst  of  wolves 
.^cts  8.  32.  he  was  led  as  s.  to  the  slaughter 

1  Pet.  2.  25. ye  were  oss.going  astray, but  returned 

SHEEP-COTE. 

2  Sa7n.  7.  8. 1  tool:  thee  from  the  s.  1  Chron.  17.  7. 

SHEEP-COTES. 
1  Sam.  24.  3.  Saul  came  to  the  s.  after  David 

SHEEP-FOLD. 
John  10.  1.  he  that  enlerelh  not  the  s.  by  the  door 

SHEEP-FOLDS. 
JV-um.  32.  16.  we  will  build  s.  for  our  cattle 
.Itidg.  5.  Iti.  why  abodi'st  thou  anmng  the  s.  ? 
Psal.  78.  70.  he  chose  David,  took  him  from  the  $ 

SHEEP-GATE. 

JVfA.  3.  1.  Eliashib  and  brethren  built  the  s.-gate 

32.  betweert  going  up  of  the  coroBr  to  the  s.-g. 

12.  39.  they  went  on  to  the  s.-ffatr^wii  they  stood 

SHEEP-MARKET. 

John  5.  2.  there  is  at  Jerusalem  by  the  s.-market 

a  jiool,  called  in  the  Hebrew  tongue,  Bethtsda 

SHEEP-M.ASTER. 

2A7)i^s3.  4.  Meshaking  of  Moah  was  ti.s. -master 

.'<ri\  Shearkrs. 

SHEEPSKINS. 

Heb.W.  37.  they  wandered  ins.-s.  and  goats-skins 

SHEET. 
AclsVi.  11.  a  vessel  descending  as  a  great  s.  11.5. 

SHEETS. 

Ju(/n. 14. 12.  then  Iwill  give  you  thirty  s.  and  thirty 

13.  then  shall  give  me  thiriv  s.  and  thirty  change 

SHEKEL. 

Gen.  24.  22.  the  man  took  an  ear-ringof  half  a  s. 

Exod.  30.13.  a  s.  after  the  s.  of  the  sanctuary,  a  s. 

is  20  gerahs,  mtm.  3.  47.  Eiek.  45.  12. 

15.  the  poor  shall  not  give  less  than  half  a  s. 

1  Sam.  9.  8.  I  have  here  the  fourth  part  of  a  s. 

2  Kings  7.  1.  measure  of  fine  flour  fur  a  s.  16,18. 
JV/'A.  10.  32.  charged  yearly  with  the  third  of  a  s. 
Amos8.5.  making  the  ephah  small,  and  the  s.  great 

SHEKELS. 
Gen.  23.  15.  my  lord,  the  land  is  worth  400  s.  16. 
24. 22.  two  bracelets  for  her  hands  often  .v.  weight 
Ezod.  21.  32.  he  shall  give  her  master  thirty  s. 
30.  23.  of  pure  myrrh  500  s.  of  sweet  cinnamon 
250.  s.  of  sweet  calamus  250  s. 
Lev.  5.  15.  the  estimation  by  s.  27.  3,4,  5,6,7,  16. 
Jfum.  7.  14.  one  spoon  often  s.  of  gold  full  of  in- 
cense, 20,  26,  32,  38,  44,  50,  .56,  62,  68,  74, 50. 
Dent.  22.  19.  they  shall  amerce  him  in  100  s. 

29.  man  shall  give  to  the  damsel's  father  fifty  s. 
.Ao.sA.  7. 21.  wheni  snwin  Ihespoils2()0s.  of  silver 
.fndg.  8.  26.  weight  of  golden  ear-rinis  wiis  1700 .?. 

17.  2.  the  1100  s.  I  took  it  ||  3.  had  restored  the  s. 
10.  I  will  give  ihee  ten  ?.  of  silver  by  the  var 

2  S(nn.  14.  26.  Absalom  weighed  his  hair,  200  s. 

18.  11.1  would  hnve  given  thee  ten  s.  nnd  a  girdle 
24.  24.  David  bought  oxen  for  fifty  s.  of  Araunah 

1  Kings  10.  16.  six  hundred  s-  of  gold  to  one  tarjct 

2  Kings  15.20.  exacted  of  each  man  50s.  of  silver 
1  Chron.  21.  25.  so  Pavid  gave  to  Orn-m  (^00  s. 
JVcA.5. 15.  former  governors  had  taken  40s.bv  vcar 
.Ter.  32.  9.  I  bought  the  field  for  17  s.  of  silver 
Eiek.'i.  10.  meat  shall  bo  by  weight  twenty  s.  a  day 

See   SANCTt'ARY. 

SHELTER. 

.Tnh  24.  8.  they  embrace  the  rock  for  want  ofo  s. 

Psaf.61.3.  for  thou  hnst  been  .«.  for  meand  a  tov(«r 

SHEPHERD. 

See  Sigvificatiov  on  Pastor. 

Gf7i.46.34.  every  s.  is  abomination  to  tlifl  Egypt. 


SHE 

Urn.  4O.  C-t.  frnni  tlicncn  in  llio  s.  Btone  of  laraol 
1  Sam.  17.  Hy.  Iii'jiiil  lliuntoiii^it  iiilo  11 .1.  bug  liuliuil 
Piiil.  '.':i.  I.  Iliu  i.inA  in  my  a.  I  »liall  mil  waul 
dO.  I.  eivi)  uiii,  O  a.  ufliiranl,  tliiiu  llial  luutlcat 
F.ccl.  1..  II.  Iliu  w(irri«  wliicliurt'ijivfii  rdinioiio*. 
y«a.:iH.l'.'.  iiiiiiu  uj;u  ii(lc>|iurU'il  iVuiii  iiiv  an  a  x.tuiil 
'III.  1 1  Ik  >.liall  IV'rd  lii«  Hock  liki'  n  .v.  gallirr  lariili>i 
■It   'JH.  Umi  LoiiI  ihal  xalllioI'l.'yiUH,  Ik' In  my  .4. 
I>.')    11.  Ihal  liruiiijlil  Ukmii  ii|i  wiiIj  s.  of  Ink  llrick 
Jir  :il.  to.  and  kutii  liiiii  ax  a  .4   <li>lli  IiIh  ll»>'k 
■>:i.W.  airay  IiiiiihoII  an  a  x.  |miII<'IIi  iiii  IiIh  garment 
4'J.  I'J.  ulio  in  llial  i«.  that  Will  utaii'l,  .Ml.  tt. 
:.l .  '23.  I  will  uliio  l.riNik  III  j.i.  ce^  «.  anil  lii»  lliiok 
/C2i;A.:U.'>.llM'ywfi<!»iMll<)'"<lil'<-'ci'U''"  tlioruimio*. 
8.  my  flock  brraiiir  n  piry,  lii'caiiiii)  lliorc  in  no  *. 
Vi.  ua  1)  »■  HiH-ki'lii  out  Iliu  llock  aiiiuii|,'  tliu  hIiuu|i 
23.  I  will  ml  (i|i  mm  «.  ov(;r   IIkiii,  my  aiirvdlU 
David  Khali  I'imiI  llicm  and  Ini  llimr  «.  37. '24. 
yfnipx3  I'.',  an  liir  j«.  lakrnmil  orimiiilli  ol'tlivlioii 
2»A  III  'J  tln7  WHO  Irmililc^d,  lir-i'.  lli.ri!  wan  iio«. 
J  I.  1.).  lake  lu  lli(!U  llio  iiintriimi!iiU  uTu  fuolinli  n. 
1(1.  lu  I  will  lUiHO  ii|i  11  H.  ill  lliu  land 
17.wo«lollii'  idlu«.l!iulli!avcitli  lliii  t1iirk,Kword 
13.7.  nu  aki',<  >  I'wuriliiiijiiiil.tt  my  .v. and  my  IVIlow 
JuliH  10.  12.  bill  Im  that  m  a  liiri'liii;^,  ami  nut  s. 
14.  I  um  guild  a.  knuw  my  nlioi'|i  uiiil  am  kiMwii 
Hi.  and  llioii!  nliall  lin  iiim  fuld  and  oiKi  .•(. 
Mri.l3.'20.uiir  I/iird  Jitniin  Ihat^rnal  n.  iil'llir  Hlinn|i 
J  I'd.  '2.  '2.')  Iml  yi)  uu'  now  mUinnid  iiiilo  llm  a. 
S.'t.wliuii  tliu  cIiIuI'm.  nliall  a|i|iuar,  yu  hIiuII  rucuivL- 
Sr,-  rtiiKKl-. 

t!iii:iMii;ui)S. 

Ocn.  40.  32.  mm  arr  a.  \\  47. 11.  tliy  norvniili  nrii «. 
y.iod.  '2.  17.  mid  llir  a.  r.iinn-  and  drovii  lliiiiii  away 

lU.  nil  K|;y|>lian  dnlivurcd  iih  out  uriiand  ol's. 
1  .Sum.  '2."i.  7.  niu^liy*.  willi  un,  wo  liiirlllirm  nut 
Canl.  I.  H.  and  ('"d  tliy  kidn  biiiiidu  llm  a.  liMiln 
^      ha.  13.  '211.  iiiir  hliall  tin)  a.  iiiakii  thnr  I'.ddrt  lliiiri- 
31.  4.  wlii'n  mnllitudu  iir«.  incallnd  rorlli  iiR.  Iiiiii 
5(5.  II.  and  tlioy  am  a.  llial  r.aiiiiut  iiiidrrHtamI 

JfT.(S.  3.  till'  x.with  lli(;irl1o<'k«  nliall  <mi unto  iiiir 

i!3.  4.  I  will  Ki'l  ii|i  a.  iiviT  tliiini  wliii  nliall  lund 
23.  34.  Iiowl,  yo a.  ||  Xt.  tliii  a.  \m\v  no  way  In  flua 

;«1.  a  villi rHio  rry  ol'lln,  ».  and  a  Iniwliiijj 

33.  I'2.  Ill  all  tliii  Ritiiin  nliall  Int  a  liiibilalion  ut'«. 

50.  llicir  a.  luno  niiinid  llii'in  to  ({o  antray 
Eltk.  .'14.  '2.  |ift|ilir<y  ii),'iiiiint  llio  .i.iirinraid,  woe 
tu  tlio  a.  orUiaol,  nli.ilild  not  a.  fui'd  tlio  flookn? 
8.  my  lliick  a  (irry,  nor  did  my  a.  noiindi  Tiir  my 
(luck,  bill  a  I'od  tlimiiHi'ho.s  and  not  my  Murk 
10.  tliiin  nailli  tliu  Lord,  liKlnild  I  am  ii;,'aiii'<t  Ilir 
a.  iiuitlior  nlnill  tliii  a.  lord  tliiMiiKolvc-  any  iiion^ 
Jimoa  \M.  and  lli"  liiiliilaliiiii'iorilirji.  nliall  mourn 
•Vir.  .'■>.  .'».  llii'ii  nliall  wo  raini^  ajjainnl  liiiiinoven  a. 
.Viih.  3.IH  lliy /i.nlnmbor.Okliia  nl' Aiinyria,nobloM 
y.fph.  2.  <i.  llio  noil  coanln  nliall  Ih^  oiillatfon  for  a. 
'/.er.k-  Id.  3.  iniiiu  iingur  wiin  kin  Mod  aKaiiintlliu  «. 
11.3.  Iliori!  in  n  voioo  of  tlio  bowling  of  lliu  a. 
5.  ami  lliuir  own  a.  |iilv  Ilium  iiol 
8.  Ibron  a.  iilno  I  rut  ofr  in  0110  nionlli 
Lukei.  H  llioro  woro  in  tlio  »  iinii  ciinntry  a.\n  fiolil 
Irt.  Iliorio  Ibinjn  wliii'li  woro  Inld  lliom  by  llio  .i. 
SO.  lliu  «.  roliiriiod,  :;liiiiryini,'  and  pruining  (iud 
HIIKUI). 
Ua.  30. 14.  Ilicio  nliall  iioi  bo  fmind  a  a.  to  tnko  fiio 

SIIKIIDS. 
Euk.  '23.  34.  Iboii  nball  broak  lliu  *.  tlioroof 

HMHIUri'S. 

Dan.  3.  2.  Nobiiclnidno/./iir  m-nl  to  },'atlior  tlio  a. 

3.  tlinii  tliu  a.  and  riiloin  woraL'nlborod  tii|{utlior 

SIIKW,  Siihalanlivn. 

Ptal.  30.  0.  niiridy  ovory  iiiuii  walkotb  in  n  vain  a. 

Ian.  3.  !1.  tlio  a.  of  tboir  oiiinv iiicodolb  wilnona 

7,uke  20.  47.  and  for  n  a.  niako  Iiiii);  |irayorn 
f7>i{.n.l2.iiHm my  aailoiiroto  iiinko  a  fiiirji.in  llonli 
Co'-'2.l'>-  "jioiloil  poworn,  inado  a  /i.iif  ihoin  iiponly 
23.  wliii'btbiiii!"  Iiavo  a.  nf  wind,  in  -Aill-wornbip 

Hiir.vv  niiK/vn. 

Soo  Sign\f{C(iliiin  on  llRKAn. 
/;/orf.2.'i.30.»li.ilUoliipiiimlablo;(.-/(rr(i(/bororoMio 
M.  13.  in.iko  llio  lablo,  and  tlio  ».  Urnid,  39.  30. 
Kam.  4.  7.  on  t  ablo  of  a.hrrad  xliiill  npn'iid  n  olotli 
1  Sam.  21.  0  tlioro  wiin  nobrond,  but  llio  a.-lirrad 
l/r«M<r'«7.4H.labl«ori(iildwlioroiinHio*./)r(;(i(/wiin 
1  TAr.  0.32. null' of  Kobnlbi Ion  In  proparon./irriir/ 
23.  2!>.  norvioo  both  for  llm  a.-hrrad  and  flmi  flour 
28.  10.  David  javoKold  for  llin  labliin  Mfa.rirrnr/ 
fi  Chroii.  '2.  4.  n  liiiiiio  for  llio  coiitinual  a.-brnid 
4.  10.  inailo  tiililo*  whoroon  tbo  a.hrrnd  wan  not 
13.  II.  lb"  a.brtad  nUn  not  limy  iu  ordor 
'20.1H.liilvflolonil<o(l  tbon.-Arriii/tnblo  with  vniinoln 
.VcA.  10.  XI.  to  cimrgn  oiir«olvo«  for  tbo  a.-hrrad 

Mat.  12.  4.  bow  I ilorod  in'o  lb..  biiiiHonfCJoil, 

and  did  oat  llio  a./imid.  .V'ir*'2.2fl.  /.wArO  .|. 
Htb.  0.  '2.  «  labirnucbi,  wln'roin  wan  Ibu  a.  (irrai/ 

RDRVV. 
E/oi/.  7.0.  Plmraoli  alinll  nponk,  nnyinij,  a.  mirado 
0.  10.  I  rainoil  ibou  up  for  to  f .  in  llioo  my  powor 
10.  1    llial  I  iniitlil  »   my  niijiK  boforo  bun 
13.  6  and  tliuii  nliall  a.  tby  ion  in  iliat  dur 
MO 


SHE 

K/oi/.H. 13.aoo  the  nalvatioiiL.wilU. to  you  lo-dnv 
IH.  '2(1.  nliall  a.  way  tboy  iniinl  walk,  I 'cut.  \.M. 
'.'.'1.  li.  iiiaku  it  according  to  all  tliat  I  a.  tboo 
33.  13.  s.  nio  now  lliy  way  ||  IH.  s.  mo  lliy  ulory 

/>rul.'t.5.  I  niood  to  0.  yon  lliu  wiinl  id'  tbo  I/ord 
7.  2.  inaku  no  covonant,  nor  ».  imroy  iinio  Ilium 
13.  17.  Iliat  till!  I.iiril  iiiav  a.  Ibou  morry 
17,  !l.  tiny  nliall  a.  tboo  lliu  aunlunco  idjiidijinont 

10.  lliiiu  nlialt  do  an  tliny  nball  a.  tlioo,  11. 
'2H.  .11).  not  ro^ard  old,  nor  a.  favour  to  young 
32.  7.  ask  tby  fallior,  mid  bo  will  .v.  tboo 

./««/(.  5.  Ci.  llio  Ijord  evvaro  h«  would  nold.  tbo  land 

JudfT.  1.  '24.  lliu  npic.a  nuid,  a.  un  wo  pray  tliou,  tbo 

ontrnncu  into  Ibucily,  and  wo  will «. tboo  morcy 

0.  17.  Jlion  a.  iiioanign  tliultliou  lalkont  willi  mu 

1  .Sum.  3.  M.  Haniuul  funrod  to  a.  Kb  tbo  vininn 
H.O.  a.  tlii'in  tbo  iiiannor  of  tbn  king  Iliat  nliall  roign 
0.  li.  iiiiiii  of  (ioil  poradvunluru  can  a.  iinoiir  way 

'27.  Hhiiid,  liial  I  may  a.  lliuo  tbo  word  oldod 
1(1.  H.  I  will  ooino  and  a.  tboo  wbnt  Ibou  nball  do 
II.  12.  coitii'  lip  to  iin,  and  wo  will  a.  you  a  tiling 
'211.  '2.  my  fatlior  will  (lo  nntbiiig,  bo  will  a.  it  1110 

l'2.  if!  tbon  send  111 boo,  ami  a.  it  tboo 

22.  17.  tboy  know  wlun  bo  (b  d,  and  did  not  .».  it 
'2.').  H.  ank  tbo  young  mon,  and  tboy  will  a.  Iliio 

2  .Saw.  1.1.2.").  bo  will  a.  mo,bolb  it  and  bin  liiibitnl. 

1  A'lH^j*  1.  r)2.  if  bo  will  a.  Iiimnolf  a  wrulby  man 
2.2.  bc!  Ibou  ntrong  Iboroforo,  and  a.  tbysidlii  man 
IH.  I.  oamolo  Klijab,  go  a.  tbynolfto  Ali.ib,  2. 

'■ih'in'ra  0.1 1. will  yo  nol.i.mo  v\liicli  of  iin  is  fur  king 

2  Chr.  10.  0.  to  a.  Iiimnolf  ntrong  in  In  lialf  id'ibom 
I'.tra  2.50.  Iboy  could  noi  *.  Iboir  fatborn'  lioiino, 

wbutlior  tboy  woro  of  Inriiol,  A7A.  7.01. 
.V<A.  n.  19.  tbo  pillar  of  firo  lo  a.  tbom  light 
Ealh.  1.  II.  lo».  Ibo  pooph'  and  priiioon  her  lioantv 
2.  10.  Mordooai  obargod  lior  not  10  .«.  bor  kiiidr.d 
4.  H.  gavo  liiiii  a  copy  of  tbo  writing  lo.<  I^lbrr 
.loll  10  2.  a.  mu  wburoforo  thou  oonlondoni  with  mo 
11.0.  bo  would  •.■(.  tboo  tbo  nocroin  of  windoin 

32.  0.  1  wan  afraid,  durnl  not  *.  yon  my  opinion 
;t3.  23.  if  a  iiionnonaor  lo  a.  to  man  bin  upriabtnosH 

Psal.  4. 0.  wiiiiy  will  nay,  who  will  a.  un  any  gooin 
0.  14.  than  iiiav  a.  forlli  all  Iby  praiso  in  galos 

10.  11.  will  .V.  mclhop.itliof  lil'o,  in  lliy  pn  sonro 
2.1.  4.  a.  mo  thy  wayn,  ( )  l,oril,  loiioh  1110  lliy  pathn 

14.  llioI,oril  will  .v.  Ihoni  hiH  nivonnnt 
■  51.  15.  and  my  moiilli  »hiill  .-•.  fortli  lliv  |>rni»o 
71.  1.1.  my  mdiilli  hIiiiII  .v,  furlli  lliy  ligP'oiiniionn 

70.  13.  wn  lliy  | ph-  will  .v.  fi.rlli  thy  praiso 

H5.  7.  a.  Ill  morry,  I )  I.onl,  ;;riiiit  ii«  lliy  salvation 
Hli.  17.^.  llio  a  tokon  fm  good,  llial  Iboy  iiiiiy  neo  it 
HH.  10.  will  thou  a.  woiiiIits  lo  thodo'ad 
02.  15.  lo  a.  that  I<ord  is  ii|>riAt,  ho  in  riv  rook 
04.1.l)(!.  whom  vonviani-o  l)fli.iigotli,.<.'iliy.Helf 
lOfi.  '2.  who  can  a.  forth  all  bin  prai.so  ? 
/Vho.  IH.  21.  a  man  iiiii»l  .v.  himsolf  friondlv 
h.i.  '27.  II.  ho  that  foniiod  thorn  will  .v-.  101  favour 
30.  30.  Ihit  Lord  shall  .<.  liglitiiing  ilowii  of  his  arm 

41.  '22.  lot  tbom  briii^'  lb fortli  and  .f.  iin  wb'il 

nball  happi'ii,  lot  llioiii  .«.  llio  fi.rnior  tliiiign 

23.  a.  lb"  Ibiiif'-i  ihiil  aro  In  001110  boron llor 

43   0.  who  aiiioii!;  ihoiii  i"iii  .v.  lis  fiirmor  lliiii!;s7 
'21 .  iioopio  havi'  I  fi.riiiod,  shall  .v.  forih  my  prniso 

44.  7..  thiiign  tliat  aro  coming,  lol  tl 1  .v.  In  tbom 

40.  H.  roniombor  lliin,  and  .v.  yoiirsolvon  mon 
40.  0.  nay  lo  llioiii  in  darkiionn,  a.  yournolvns 
5H.  I.  a.  my  pooplo  lloir  Iranngronnion  and  sina 
III),  li.  Ih.y  shall  .1.  finlh  llio  prainos  of  llin  I.nrd 
.1,-r.  10    III.  Ihoii  shall  .^^  tlioin  rjl  tlioso  words 
13.  iiilo  a  land,  wlioro  I  will  iiol  a.  you  favour 

42.  3.  thy  <5i"l  amy  .•■•.  iis  Ibo  way  wo  may  walk 
51.  31.  lo  *.  Ibo  king  of  llabylon  bin  city  intakoii 

h'.irk.  '22.  2.  thou  nball  .x.  Iior  nil  ber  abomiiialiiiii» 

33.  31.  for  Willi  Iboir  inoiiili  tboy  a.  iiiiiob  lovo 

37.  lr<.  will  tbon  not  a.  un  what  llioii  11 iioHl  ? 

40.  4   nol  Ihiiio  lio.til  upon  all  ibiil  I  shall  .^lln'o 

43.  10.  noil  of  man,  n.thoboinotoboiisoof  Iniaol 

11.  a.  tbom  tbo  liirm  of  llio  boiino  and  fasliion 
Dun.  2.  2   111"  norcorora  for  lo  a.  king  bin  ilroama 

4.  and  wo  will  a.  ibo  inti^rprolalion,  7. 
0.  ifyo  a.  Ibodroam  and  inlorprolnlion,  (borofom 
*.  tbo  droain  and  inlorprolation  Ihoroof 
10.  not  a  man  tliiit  can  a.  tbo  king's  iniiltor 
10.  bo  would  *.  llio  king  tbo  inlorprolation 
27.  Ibo  niioroi  cannot  Ibo  win"  mon  a.  to  lb"  king 

4.  2.  I  Iboiigbl  it  good  to.i.  Ihoniann  anil  wondorn 

5.  7.  wbonoovor  nball  a.  mo  ibo  inlorprotalioii 

0.  23.  commaiid  cnino,  and  I  am  oomo  to  «.  tboo 
Halt.  ^.  3.  wliv  dont  llion  a.  mo  iiiicpiiiyl 
.1/rir  ft  4.  go  ihv  way,  a.  Ihynolf  In  ilio  prioxt.  and 
oir.'r  Ibo  gift,  Mark  I.  44.  I .uke  5.  II.  |  17.  14. 

11.  4.  go  and  a.  John  llinno  Ibinirn  yo  do  boar 

12.  IH.  bo  nlinll  a.  jiidgmoiil  In  Ibo  Oonliloa 
11.2.   hn  in  riaon,  tboroforo  iniifbly  workn  Ho  .». 

fiirlli  ibumnolvi'n  in  bim',  Mark  0.14. 
10.  1.  Ihn  riiarinotia  donirod  bo  wniibl  .«.  n  nign 
'^i.  10.  a.  mo  tbo  Iribnlo  inon.'V,  l.iikt-  20.  24. 
24.  1.  raoin  lo  a.  bim  ibo  bnddiii-  of  lb"  lompio 

24.  for  Ihnro  aball  nrino  false  C'biinls,  and  fball .«. 

groal  aigna  and  wmiduin,  Mark  13.  '22. 


SHE 

Mark  14. 15.  bo  will  a.  you  a  liirgo  iippnr  room  fur* 
ninlio(l,tburo  iiiakoruady  lor  on,  Luke'^i.  I'X 

I.ukr  I.  IU.  1  um  aoiit  lo  a.  tboo  tliono  gladlldingi 
8.  30.  a.  bow  grout  lliingn  (iod  bath  duiio  to  Ibuc 

.John  .1.  '20.  bo  will  a.  bim  groalor  workn  lliaii  llioao 
7.  4.  if  Ibou  do  lliijnu  tliingn  a.  tbynclf  lu  Ibo  woild 
ll..17.ifany  know  wliero  liowanlhoyaboiilddr.il 

14.  H.  a.  un  tbo  Kntbur  and  it  nnHicoth  un,  0. 
10.  13.  and  bo  will  a.  yon  lliingn  lo  coma 

14.  bo  nball  locoivo  of  miiio,  and  a.  it  lo  you,  15 
'25.  but  I  nball  «.  yon  plainly  of  llio  Fiiihor 

y/crs- 1. '24. Lord .i.wbolbor  oflbono  tliini  liasi  clionep 
7.  3.  and  coino  into  tbo  land  which  1  nball  .v.  ibca 
12.  17.  and  bo  aiiid,  gu,  a.  tliono  Ihingn  lo  Jnmea 
10.  17.  till)  mon  who.*,  lo  un  tbo  way  of  salvation 
'24.  '2^.  Foli.x  willing  to  a.  tbo  Juwn  a  ploanurn 
'2li.  '21.  that  bu  nboiild  a.  light  lo  Ibo  puojilo 

Kiiiii   2.  15.  who  .V.  Ibo  work  of  ibo  law  urillon 
0.  17.  I  liavo  raisod  ihoi',  that  I  might  a.  my  powor 
'."2.  what  if  Cod,  willing  lo  a.  bin  wrath,  ondurod 

1  Cm.  11.'20.  yodii  .v.  Iho  Lord'a  iloalh  till  bo  coniv 
l'2.  31.  yet  a.  I  lo  yon  a  inoro  o.\collonl  way 

15.  51.  I  ,s.  you  a  iiiynlory,  wo  nlialT  not  all  nleo|i 

2  fV/r.  H,  '24.  a.  yo  lo  iIiimii  Ibo  proof  of  yonr  lovo 
/■7»A.  2.  7.  thai  bo  iiiigbt  a.  tbo  o.xioiding  rinlioa 

I  7'A^.v .1.1.0. for  llioylhoinHolvoss.ofiis  whalmnnnor 

1  7'im.  I.  Mi.  llial  (;iirinl  iiiigbl  .*.  all  long  snlVoriiig 
5.  4.  lol  llioiii  lo.irn  lirnt  to  x.  pioly  at  Imnio 

0.  15.  whii'li  ill  bin  tiiiion  bo  nball  .v.  who  is  iho 

2  'I'tm.  '2.  15.  study  lo  a.  Ihysolf  approviil  lo  (Jod 
Hell.  0.  11.  thai  i^vory  ono  of  you  a.  tbn  naiiio  dili. 

17.  (Jod  willing  lo  a.  lo  tho'hoirs  of  promino 
./«>«.  2.  M.  a.  Ill"  thy  faiili  wiiboiil  thy  workn 
3.13.  lot  bim  a.  bin  works  out  of  good  oimvorsntion 
1  I'll.  2.  0.  yo  hIuuiIiI  a.  forth  lliu  pr.iisoB  of  bim 
I  .AiAn  1.  '2.  and  a.  unto  you  lliat  olnnal  lifo 
Itev.  I.  1.  bu  aoni  his  an<.'ol  lo.«.  binnurvaiiln,  22.  (i. 

/  tr/»  SIIKW. 
Clrn.  12.  1.  get  tboo  iinio  a  land  llint  I  trill  a.  thee 
F.iod.  33.  10.  I  will  bo  gracionn  to  whom  1  will  bo 
gnicioun,  /r/ii7/ AMiioroy on  whom  lirilla. mercy 
.liidjT.  4  'ii.  I  will  a.  then  man  wboiii  llioii  nookoal 
I  .Sum.  10.  3.  I  will  a.  tbon  what  ihou  nball  do 
'211.  13.  to  do  tboo  ovil,  Ibun  /  will  s.  it  iboo 

1  h'inira  IH.  15.  /  w;// nnroly  a.  iiiyncif  lo  Ahab 

2  A'lHir.s-  7.]'i.l  will  a.  yon  what  Hyriann  have  doin 
.lull  15.  17.  /  will  a.  lino  lliiit  wliii  b  I  liiivo  noon 

32.  10.  /also  will  a    miiio  opinion,  17.  |  30.  2^    . 
/V«/.  0.  1.  /  will  a.  forlh  all  Iby  mm  v.lloiin  woiTii 

.10.  23.  /  will  a.  tbo  salvalion  of  (Jod,  01.  10. 
.Icr.  IH.  17.  I  will  a.  ilioiii  the  back,  and  not  face 

33.  3.  /  will  a.  tboo  groat  and  mighty  things 

42.  12.  /  will  a.  morcion  unto  yon,  cniiso  to  return 
Dim.  2.  21.  /  will  a.  tbo  king  tbo  inlorprolation 

10.  21.  bill  /  will  a.  tboo  what  is  nolod  in  script. 

1 1.  2.  and  now  /  will  a.  tbon  Ibo  truth.     Uolinid 
.furl  2.  30.  /  will  a.  wondorn  in  boavon,  ./»cr«  2. 10. 
Mir..  7.  15.  /  will  a.  lo  bim  mnrvolloiin  ibinijn 
.Viih.  3.  5.  //fi7/  jr.  Ibo  niilioiin  tby  imkodnosn 
'/.fell.  1.0.  iinsol  naid,  /  /ci7/j'.  Iho"  wb  it  tliono  be 
f.ukr  0.  47.  I  will .«.  yon  lo  whom  bo  in  like 
.7rr<0.10.  lwilla.\i\ii\  bow  groal  things  bo  must  niiflT 
.liim.  2.  IH.  I  will  .1.  Iho"  my  fnilli,Jiv  my  works 
Uiv.  4.  I.  /  will  a.  Il thiiign  wliiili  miint  bo 

17.  1.  /  will  a.  tboo  tbo  jiidemonl  of  Ibo  wbnre 

21.  9.  /  loill  a.  Iboo  tho'bridu  Ibo  Lainb'i  wife 

Srr  KiNirNKKS. 
SIIKWKD. 
I.rif.  13.  10.  a  while  spot,  and  11  bo  .«.toprie«t,4fl. 
.Viim.  13.  '20.  and  a.  them  the  frnil  of  Iho  land 
Drul.  34.  12.  which  Moson  .<.  iiillio  sIkIiI  of  Inrnol 
.hidir.  I.  2.1.  and  wboii  bo  .>..  Ilioni  tbo  oiilranco 
4.  12.  a.  Sisorii,  Ibiit  Harak  wan  gone-  up  to  Tabor 
13.10.  th"  wiiniiin  made  linnio,  and  .<.  lor  hiinband 
10.  IH.  come  up,  for  bo  lialli  a.  mo  all  bis  lionrt 
/{H/A2.I1.  il  bath  boon  .v.  iiioall  lliat  ibmi  bast  done 
I  Sam.  II.  0.  came  and  a.  il  to  Ibo  mon  of  Jaboab 
10.  7.  Jonathan  a.  bim  all  lliono  lliingn 

22.  21.  .MMalbiir  ji.Dav. that  Saul  badnlain  priosta 
24.  18.  Saul  naid  to  David,  tbon  bast  .«.  Ibin  day 

bow  tbon  bant  doiilt  well  with  1110 
2.<>im.l1.22.  niessongor  .<.  David  all  Joab  bad  nonl 

1  Kin^a  1.  27.  Ibou  bant  not  ».  it  to  thy  aorvnnl 

10.  '27.  (^iiiri,  and  bis  might  that  bo  .v  22.  45. 

2  Kinifs  0.  0.  wboro  foil  it  T  ho  a.  bim  (ho  place 

11.  4.  look  nil  oath,  and  a.  tbom  Ibo  king'nnon 
20.  13.  Ilo/okiah  hoarkonoil  to  iboiii,  and  ,«.  tbom 

all  Iho  bonne  ofhia  precious  Ihingn,  A«(i..'»0.  2. 

15.  Ibirn  isioilbing  I  bavo  not ,«.  Ilieiii,  /.sa.30.  4. 
F.a.lh.  1.  4.  wlioii  bo.<.rirbon  of  bis  glorious  kinsdom 

2. 10.  r.sibor  bad  nol  a.  Iior  pooplo  nor  kindred, '20 
'\.  0.  for  ibr'v  bad  a.  bim  Ibo  people  of  Mordocui 
./((//O.M.Ioafflictod  pity  nboulil  bo .«. from  bin  friend 
/•s-.i/.  71.  IH.  milil  I  ba'vo  a.  thy  «lrei,;;th  lo  Ibis  gen. 
Ul'i.  '27.  tboy  a.  bin  nigna  among  lliein,  .firia  7.30 
M2.  2.  poiirod  my  complaint,  I  .«.  boforo  bim  my 
riiio.'20.'20.  bin  wickedness nhiill  b"  .«.  before  corg 
Feci.  2.  10.  Iiibnnr,  wboroin  I  have  a  niyaolf  wiie 
ha.  40.  14.  who  tnngbl  bim  knowlo.lc-,  and  *.  tu 
bim  lliu  wuy  of  uiidcrUaniling  1 


SHE 


SHI 


SHI 


Ezck.  22.  26.  Ihey  s.  no  difference  between  clean  \Mat.  -1.  8.  and  s.  Iilm  all  kingdoms  of  the  world 
Mat.  28.  11.  and  s.  to  chief  priests  ail  things  done|-A)An  5.20.  Father  love^h,  anrl^>;.  the  Son  all  things 


J^uke  4.  5.  devil  s.  him  nil  kingdoms  of  the  world 
7.  18.  the  disciples  ^f  John  .s.  him  these  things 
10.  37.  and  he  said,  he  that  s.  mercy  on  him 
14.  21.  that  serv.  came  and  £.  his  lord  these  things 
20.  37.  that  the  dead  are  raised,  Moses  s.  at  bush 
Jolin  10.  32.  many  good  works  have  I  s.  you 
2(1.  20.   he  s.  unio  tlicm  his  hands  and  his  side 
21.1.  Jesus  s.  hims.  again  to  disciples,  M.Jlcts  1.3. 
,icts  4.  2'2.  on  whom  this  miracle  of  healing  was 
7.  2ti.  Moses  a',  himself  to  them  as  they  strove 
3G.  afier  he  had  5.  wonders  and  signs 
52.  which  5.  before  of  the  coming  of  ihc  just  One 
]1. 13.  he.«.  how  heiiad.'icen  an  angel  in  his  house 
19.18.  many  that  believed  confessed,  s.  their  deeds 
20.  20.  but  have  s.  and  have  taught  yon  publicly 
35.  I  have  «.  you  all  things,  how  so  labouring 

23.  22.  tell  no  .man  thou  hast  5.  these  things  tome 
26.  20.  but  first  Paul  «•.  to  ihein  of  Damascus 
28.  2.  the  barbarous  people  «.  no  little  kindness 

21.  none  of  brethren  s.  or  spake  any  harm  of  thee 
1  Cor.  10.  28.  eat  not,  for  his  sake  that  s.  it 
Jicb.  <i.  10.  love  whicii  ye  have  s.  toward  his  name 
Jam.  2. 13.  shall  have  judgment  that  s.  no  mercy 
Hiiv.  21.  10.  angel  s.  me  the  great  city  Jerusalem 
22.  1.  he  ».  me  a  pure  river  of  water  of  life 

8.  I  fell  down  to  worship  the  angel  who  s.  me 
Oud  or  Lord  SH  E  WED,  expressly,  or  implicitly. 
O'cn.  19.  1!).  Ihy  nnncy  *.  10  me  in  saving  ~.y  life 

24.  14.  that  thou  hast  s.  kindness  to  my  master 

32.  10.  not  worthy  of  the  least  of  the  mercies  s. 
3H.2I.the  Lords  Joseph  mercy,  and  gave  favour 
41.  2.5.  God  s.  Pharaoh  what  he  is  about  to  do 

39.  forasmuch  .is  Clod  hathi.  thee  all  this 
48.  11.  and  lo,  God  h.rth  .?.  me  also  thy  seed 
F.xod.  15.  25.  he  cried,  and  the  J^ord  s.him  atree 

25.  40.  look  thou  make  them  after  the  pattern  s. 

thee  in  the  mount,  26.  30.  |  27.  8.  Heb.  8.  5 
/.CD.  24.  12.  that  the  mind  of  the  /yOi-(iniiglit  be  s 
•Vurtj.  8.  4.  to  the  pattern  the  Lord  had  s.  Muses 
14. 11. all  signs  I  haves,  among  them,  Dcut.  6.  22. 
Ijcut.  4.  31).  and  upon  earth  he  s.  thee  his  great  fire 
5.  21.  behold,  the  I^ord  our  God  s.  us  his  glory 
34.  1.  the  fiords,  him  all  the  land  of  Gilead 
Judg.  1:).  23.  nor  would  he  have  s.  all  these  things 

1  A'ino-.v3.6.Solomon  said, thou  hast  s.to  ihy  servant 

David  my  father  great  mercy,  2  Chron.  1 

2  King.'!  8.  10.  T^ord  hath  .s.  me,  lie  shall  surely  die 
l:t.  the  Lord  hath  s.  me  that  thou  shalt  be  king 

2  Chron.  7.  10.  for  goodness  the  J^ord  had  s.  David 
Kzra  9.  8.  grace  hath  been  s.  from  Lord  our  God 
Psal.  31.21.  he  hath  s.  me  his  marvellous  kindness 
60.  3.  thim  hast  s.  thy  people  hard  things 
71.  20.  thou  hast  .?.  me  great  and  sore  troubles 
78.  ll^they  forgat  his  wonders  he  had  s.  them 
96. 2.  his  righteousness  hath  s.  in  sight  of  heathen 
111.  6.  he  s.  his  people  the  powei;  of  his  works 
118.  27.  God  is  the  Lord  who  hath  s.  us  light 
/sa.2G.  10.  let  favour  be  *■.  to  wicked,  yet  not  learn 
43.  12,1  have  s.  when  there  was  no  strange  god 
48.  3.  I  s.  iheni,  I  did  them  suddenly,  came  to  pass 
5.  before  it  came  to  pass  I  s.  it  thee 
Jer.  24.  1.  the  Lord  s.  me  two  baskets  of  figs 
38.  21.  this  is  the  word  that  the  Lord  hath  s.  me 
F.ir.k.  II.  25.  all  things  that  the  Lord  hath  .s.  ine 
20.  11.  g  ive  statutes  and  s.  them  my  judgments 
/imois  7.  1.  thus  hath  the  iMrd  s.  me,  4.  |  8.  1. 
Mic.  6.  S.  he  hath  «.  thee,  O  man,  what  is  good 
Xech.  1.  20.  and  the  Lord  s.  me  four  carpenters 
3.1. he  s.  me  Joshua  standing  before  angel  of  Lord 
Jjuke  1.  51.  he  hath  .•>•.  strength  with  his  arm 

.W.  heard  how  I^ord  had  «.  great  mercy  on  her 

j3(;ti3. 18.  biilthosH  things  which frorf  before  hads. 

10. 23.  God  8.  I  should  not  call  any  man  common 

40.  God  raised  him  the  third  day  and  s.  him 

Rom.  1.  19.  is  manifest,  for  God  hath  s.it  to  them 

2  Pel.  1. 14.  even  as  our  Lord  Jesus  hath  a.  me 

SHEWED3T. 
JVek. !).  10.  and  .9.  signs  and  wonders  upon  Pharaoh 
Jer.  11.  18.J  know  it,  Ihon  tliou  s.  me  their  doings 

SlIKWEST. 
Job  10.  Ifi.  thou  s.  thyself  marvellous  upon  me 
Jer.  32.  18.  thou  s.  loving-kindneBS  to  ihousanils 
Jo/in  2.18.  Jews  8aid,wh:it  sign*,  thou  to  us?  6. 30. 

SHEVVETH. 
^<'n.41.28  whaiGod  is  about  to  do, he  «.to  Pharaoh 
.Vttm.'23.  3.  whatsoever  he  s.  mc,  I  will  tell  thee 

1  .^am.  22.  8.  none  s.  me  that  my  son  made  a  league 

2  Sam.  22.51.  hes.m?rcy  to  his  anointed,  to  David, 

and  to  his  seed  for  evermore,  Psal.  18.  .50. 
Joh  36.  n.  he  s.  them  their  work  and  transgressions 

33.  noise  thereof.?,  concerning  it,  the  cattle  also 
Psal.  19.  1.  and  the  firmament  s.  his  handy  work 

2.  and  night  unto  night  «.  knowledge 
1)2.5.  good  man  3.  favour,  and  Inndeth,  will  guide 
147.  19.  he  .?.  his  word  unto  Jacob,  his  statutes 
Prov.  12.  17.  he  that  speaks  truth,  s.  forth  right. 
27.  25.  the  hav  aiipear.s,  the  tender  grass  .1.  itself 
l*a,  41.  2G.  yoa,  there  is  none  that  s.  your  words 
541 


SHEWING. 

/?jorf.20.6.and«. mercy  unto  thousands,  Deut.  5.10. 
Psai.lB.i.  s.  to  generation  to  come  praises  of  Lord 
Cant.^X'J.  my  beloved  s.  himself  thro' the  lattice 
Dan.  4.  27.  break  otf.thine  iniiiuities  by  s.  mercy 

5.12.  «.of  hard  sentences  found  in  the  same  Daniel 
J^uke  8.  1.  s.  glad  tidings  of  the  kingdom  of  God 
./lets  9.  39.  and  s.  the  coats  which  Uorcas  made 

18.  28.  s.  by  scripture  that  Jesus  was  (Christ 
2  Thess.  2.  4.  as  God,  s.  himself  that  he  is  God 
7'it.2.7.inall  things*. thyself  pattern  ot"good  works 
10.  not  purloining,  but  «.  all  good  fidelity 

3.  2.  but  be  gentle,  5.  all  meekness  to  all  men 
SHEWING. 

Luke  1.80.  was  in  deserts  till  day  of  his  5.  to  Israel 
SHIELD 

Is  apiece  of  defensive  armour  •  The  common  ma- 
tci-ials  of  a  shield  were  wood :  It  was  covered 
with  leathery  with  plates  of  gold,  or  brass. 
Sometimes  t/uy  were  made  all  of  gold,  or  brass. 
Those  that  Solomon  made  icere  of  massy  gold, 
1  Kings  10.  17.  Shishak  king  of  Egypt  took 
these  away,  and  Rehoboam  made  others  of 
brass  to  serve  in  their  stead,  1  Kings  14 
26,  27. 

In  scripture  God  is  often  called  the  shield  of  his 
people:  lam  thy  shield,  say.5  God  to  Abraham, 
Gen.  15.  1.  /  will  protect  and  defend  thee. 
The  Psalmist  says,  Thou,  Lord,  wilt  bless 
the  righteous ;  with  favour  wilt  thou  compass 
him  as  with  a  shield,  Psul.  5.  12.  JVith  thy 
looe  and  gracious  providence  thou  wilt  keep 
him  safe  on  every  side.  Princes  and  great 
men  are  also  called  the  shield  of  the  people, 
because  by  their  office  they  are,  or  should  be, 
the  cominun  parents  and  protectors  of  their 
people,  to  defend  them  from  all  oppressions 
and  injuries.  Psal.  47.  9,  The  shields  of  the 
earth  belong  unto  God,  are  dependent  upon 
him.  Faith  in  .'scripture  is  likewise  called  a 
shield,  Eph.  6.  16.  because  it  derives  strength 
from  Clir'tal  for  overcoming  the  temptations  of 
Satan. 

They  hung  up  their  shields  upon  towers  for  or- 
naments, or  as  trophies  of  victory,  to  make  use 
of  them  upon  occasion.  The  tower  of  David 
was  adorned  with  a  thousand  shields.   Cant.  4. 

4,  Thy  neck  is  like  the  tower  of  David,  builded 
for  an  armoury,  whereon  there  hang  a  thousand 
bucklers,  all  shields  of  mighty  men.  By  neck, 
Co}nmentators  understand  the  grace  of  faith, 
which,  as  is  said,  is  called  a  shield  ;  and  this 
shews  that  by  faith  the  church  is  strong  and 
victorious  over  all  her  enemies. 

Gen.  15. 1.  lam  thy  5.  and  exceeding  great  reward 

Deut.  .33.  29.  saved  by  the  Lord,  the  s.  of  thy  help 

.Judg.  5.  8. 1  Deborah  arose  a  mother  in  Israel,  was 

there  a  s.  or  spear  seen  among  40,000  in  Israel  7 

1  Sam.  17.  7.  one  bearing  a  s.  went  before  him,  41. 
45.  thou  coaiest  to  me  with  a  spear  and  a  s. 

2  Sam.  1.  21.  there  the  s.  of  the  mighty  is  vilely 
ca.«taway,s.  ofSaulas  tho'  not  anointed  with  oil 

22..3.  heismys.  Ps.  3.3.  |23.  7.  I  119.  114.  |  144.2. 
36.  given  me  the  s.  of  Ihy  salvation,  Psal.  18.  35. 

1  Kings  10.17.  three  pounds  of  gold  went  to  one  s. 

2  Kings  19.  32.  he  shall-not  come  before  it  with 
a  s.  nor  cast  a  bank  acainst  it,  ha.  37.  33. 

1  Chron.  12.  8.  the  Gadites  that  could  handle  s. 
24.  the  children  of  Judah  that  bare  .«.  and 
34.  of  Naphtali  with  ».  and  spear  37,000 

2  C/(r.25. 5.  choice  men  that  could  handle  sp.  and  5. 
/ofc39.  23.  glittering  spear  and  s.  rattleth  ag.  him 
Psal.-i.\^.  with  favour  wilt  compass  him  as  with  5. 

33.20.  the  Lord  is  our  s.  59.  11.  |  84.  9.  |  89.  f  18. 
3.5.2.  take  hold  of  the  s.  and  buckler,  and  stand 
76.  3.  there  brake  he  the  arrows  of  bow,  the  .5. 
84.1 1.  L.  G.  is  sun  and  s.  will  give  grace  and  glory 
91.  4.  his  truth  shall  be  thy  .'.  arl  buckle 
11.5.  9.  he  is  their  help  and  their  s.  10,  11. 
Prov-  30.  5.  he  is  k  s.  tothetn  that  put  trust  in  him 
I.<a.  21.  5.  arise,  ye  princes,  and  anoint  the  s. 
22.  R.  Elam  baietniiver,  Kir  uncovered  the  s. 
Jer.  46.  3.  order  buckler  and  «.  draw  near  to  battle 

9.  come  forth,  Libyans,  that  handle  the  s. 
Kzek.  23.  24.  they  shill  set  ag.  thee  buckler  and  .1. 
27.  10.  they  hanged  the  s.  and  helmet  in  thee,  11. 
JVa/i.  2.  3.  the  s.  of  his  mighty  men  is  made  red 
Eph.  6.  16.  above  all  taking  the  s.  of  faith 

SHIELDS. 

2  Sam.  8.  7.  David  took  the.«.  of  eold  that  were  on 

the  servants  of  Hadadezer,  I  Chron.  18.  7. 

lA't'n/r.?  10.17.  Solomon  made  300  j;.  of  beaten  ft)ld, 

the  king  put  them  in  Lcbunon,  2  Chron.  9  16. 

14.  20.  Shishak  took  awav  all,  even  all  «.  of  sold 

which  Solomon  had  made,  2  Chron.  12.  9. 

27.  Rehoboam  made  in  their  stead  brazen  «.  and 

committed  them  to  chief<)fguards,2  Chr.  12)0. 

2  Kings  11.10.  priest  jjnvo  king  Dav.  g.  2  Chr.  23.3. 


spear 


^2  Chr.  11. 12.  in  every  several  city  put.?,  and  spears 
14.  8.  outofUenjamin  that  bare*.  17.  17. 
26.  14.  Uzziah  jirepared  for  them  s.  and  spears 
32.5.  Hczek.  made  darts  ands.  in  abundance,  27 
JVeA.4. 16.  the  other  half  of  them  held  spears  and  *. 
Job  41.  t  15.  strong  pieces  of «.  are  his  pride 
Psal.  47.  9.  the  «.  of  the  earth  belong  to  God 
Cant.4.4.  whereon  hang  buckl.  all  *.  of  mighty  men 
.Jer.  51.  11.  make  bright  the  arrows,  gather  the  «. 
i''zei-.:i8.4.even  great  company  with  buckl.  and  s.  5. 
39.  9.  they  shall  burn  the  s.  and  tho  weapons 

SHIGGAION. 
This  word  is  found  in  the  title  of  Psal.  7.  Tt 
Cometh  from  another  Hebrew  word  which 
signifies  lo  stray  or  wander;  whence  some  do 
conji.cturc,  that  it  was  avarious  song,  running 
from  one  kind  of  tune  into  anotlur ;  and  that  it 
was  used  in  great  anguishes  of  heart,  ichen  as 
the  thoughts  and  stirrings  of  the  hearl,through 
tlic  greatness  of  trouble,  do  vary  and  fall  from 
one  strain  to  another  in  a  straying  and  scat- 
tering manner. 
Some  think  it  is  an  instrument  of  Music ;  others 
translate  it,  The  error  of  David  ;  others,  The 
secret  of  David;  others,  The  delight  of  David; 
and  others  again,  The  disquiet  of  David.  Some 
think  it  ought  to  be  translated,  A  song  of  trou- 
ble, or  A  song  of  consolation  of  David:  The 
Arabic  tpord  Schaga  signifies,  io  be  in  trouble; 
and  the  Hebrew  word  .Schagah,  or  Shagah,  to 
rejoice,  to  be  comforted. 

SHILOH. 
One  of  the  glorious  names  of  the^lessxus, denoting 
him  to  be  the  only  procurer  of  our  happiness  ; 
andour  alone  peace-maker  with  God :  for  it  im- 
porteth  a  Saviour,  or  happy,  blessed, peaceable, 
or  a  peace-maker,  4-c.  fiom  the  root  Shalah,Af 
was  quiet,  and  in  peace  ;  he  was  safe  and  hap 
py.  It  is  found  Gen.  49.  10,  The  sceptre  shall 
not  depart  from  Judah,  nor  a  lawgiver  from 
between  his  feet,  until  Shiloh  come,  and  unto 
him  shall  the  gathering  of  the  people  be.  J]ll 
Christian  commentators  agree,  that  this  word 
ought  to  be  understood  of  the  Messiah  ;  0/ Jesus 
Christ.  Jerom  translates  it  by  Qui  mitlendus 
est.  He  who  is  to  be  sent,  and  manifestly 
reads  Shiloach,  sent,  instead  of  Shiloh.  The 
Scptungint  translate  it,  Until  the  coming  of 
him  to  whom  it  is  reserved;  or,  till  we  see  ar- 
rive that  which  is  reserved  for  him. 
Some  trans:<iU,  The  sceptre  shall  not  depart  from 
Judah,  till  he, comes  to  whom  it  belongs: 
Others,  till  the  coming  of  the  Peace-maker, 
or  the  Pacific  ;  or  of  prosperity  .■  Others,  till 
the  birth  of  him  who  shall  be  born  of  a  wo- 
man, who  shall  conceive  without  the  know- 
ledge of  a  man.  Otherwise,  the  sceptre  shalt 
not  depart  from  Judah,  till  its  end,  till  its  ruin, 
till  llie  downfall  of  the  kingdom  of  the  .feics  : 
Jl  certain  author  derives  Shiloh  from  shalah, 
which  sometimes  signifies  to  be  weary,  lo  suffer; 
till  his  labours,  his  sufferings,  his  passion, 
should  come  to  pass. 

SHINE. 
JV«m.  6.  25.  the  Lord  make  his  face  s.  upon  thee 
./ob  3.  4.  that  day  be  dark  ;  neither  let  light  s.  on  it 
10.  .3.  thou  shouldest  s.on  counsel  of  the  wicked 
1 1. 17. thou  shalt  s.  forth,  thou  shalt  be  as  morning 
18.  5.  and  the  spark  of  his  fire  shall  not  s. 
22.  28.  and  the  light  shall  *.  upon  thy  ways 
36.  32.  the  light  he  commandeth  it  not  lo  s. 
.37. 15.  when  be  caused  the  light  of  his  cloud  to  s. 
41.  18.  by  his  neesings  a  light  doth  s.  and  his  eyes 

32.  he  maketh  a  path  lo  s.  after  him 

Psal.  31.  IG.  make  thy  face  to  «.  upon  thy  servant 

67.  ).  cause  his  faco  to  .«.  upon  us,  80.  3,  7, 19. 

80.  1.  that  dwellesl  between  cherubims,  s.  forth 

104.  15.  and  oil  to  make  his  face  to  s.  and  bread 

1 19.  135.  make  thy  face  to  s.  upon  thy  servant 

F.cel.  8.  1.  a  man's  wisdom  inaketh  his  face  to  s. 

[so.  13.  10.  the  moon  shall  not  cause  her  light  to  s. 

60.  1.  arise,  s.  for  thy  light  is  come,  glory  of  Lord 

.fer.5.  28.  they  are  waxen  fat,  they  ».  they  overpass 

Dan.  9.  17.  cause  Ihy  faco  to  s.  upon  thy  sanctuary 

12.3.that  be  wise,  shall  s.  '.a  stars  foi  ever  and  ever 

.^7a^5.16.let  your  lights:.*,  before  men  to  see  your 

13.43.  then  shall  the  righteous  s  forth  as  the  sun 

17.  2.  his  face  did  s.  as  sun,  and  his  raiment  white 

2  Cor.  4.  4.  lest  light  of  gospel  of  Christ  should  3. 

6. God  whocommanded  light  to  s.  out  of  darkn. 

Phil.  2.  15.  among  whom  ye  s.  as  lights  in  world 

Ren.  18.  23.  light  of  a  candle  shall  «.  no  more  at  all 

21.  23.  city  had  no  need  ofsun  nor  moon  to  s.  in  it 

SniNED. 
Deut.  33.  2.  the  Lord  ».  forth  from  mount  Paran 
.Job  29.  3.  when  his  candle  «.  u|)on  my  head 
31.  26.  if  I  beheld  the  sun  when  it  *.  or  the  moon 
P«(ij..S0.2.oul  of  Zion  perfe."t  .,f  litaulyGod  hath  * 
/si;  9.  2.  upor;  them  hath  i'/te  "tg^'  s. 
F.zek.  43.  2.  and  the  earth  *.  wi'  *  liis  glory 


SHI 

Jlets  9.  3.  sudJenly  there  s.  about  liim  a  I1?ht 

1-2. 7.  tlic  ;iiii;c-l  c:imo,  anj  a  liglil  s.  in  the  prison 
8  Cur. 4.  0.  tor  God  h  ilh .«.  in  our  heatts  togive  light 

SHINETH. 
Job  25.  .5.  bohohl  even  to  the  moun,  and  it  s.  not 
Psul.  I'JO.  12.  but  tlie  ni;,'ht  s.  as  the  day 
ProvA-  IS.  aa  shining  light  thats.  more  and  more 
Mat.  24.  27.  as  lighming  s.  even  to  the  west 
J.uke  17.  24.  and  s.  to  other  pan  under  heaven 
John.  l.S.the  hght  s.  in  dnrliness,  and  tlie  darkness 
2  Pet.  1.  l'.>.  as  to  a  hght  that  s.  in  a  dark  place 

1  John  2.8.  darkness  is  past,  the  true  light  now  s. 
Rnt.  1.  10.  his  countenance  was  as  the  sun  s. 

SIIINI.NG. 

2  .Som.  2:1. 4.  as  grass  springing  by  clear  5.after  rain 
y.zra  8.  127.  and  two  vessels  o\' s.  brass  precious 
I'tuo.  4.  IH.  the  path  ol'tlip  just  is  as  the  s.  liglit 
y.ia.45.  will  create  the  .•>.  of  a  flaming  fire  by  night 
Jorl  2.  10.  the  stars  shall  withdraw  their  s.  3.  15. 
//aA.:i.l  l.iiipy  went  at  the  s.  of  thy  glittering  tpear 
Mirk  9.  :i.  his  raiment  became  s.  white  as  snow 
J.,ukc.  ll.:iti.  wl\en  the  .1.  of  a  candle  giveth  life 

24.  4.  two  men  stood  by  them  in  s.  garnicnU 
John  5.  :15.  he  was  a  burning  and  a  s.  light 
Jicts  ''0  K).  a  ri"hl  above  the  brightness  of  sun  5. 

SHIP. 

Pror\  30.10.  the  way  of  a  s.  in  the  midst  of  the  sea 
Isa.  33.  21.  no  gallant  s.  shall  pass  thereby 
Jonah  \.  3.  Jonah  found  a  .5.  going  to  Tarshish 
4.  a  tempest,  so  that  the  s.  was  like  to  be  broken 
.').  mariners  cast  forth  the  wares  into  the  s. 
J)//(f.  4.  21.  in  a  s.  with  Zebiulee  their  father 
22.  and  they  left  the  s.  and  followed  him 
P.  24.  that  llie  s.  was  covered  with  the  waves  _ 
14.  24.  the  5.  was  tossed  with  waves,  Mark  'i.  37. 
Mark  1.19.  who  were  in  the  s.  mending  their  nets 
20.  they  left  their  father  Zebedee  in  the  s. 
4.  38.  he  was  in  the  hinder  part  of  the  s.  asleep 
8.  14.  neither  had  they  in  the  s.  but  one  loaf 
John  6.  21.  and  immediately  the  ,«.  was  at  the  land 
t\.  0.  he  said  cast  the  net  on  right  side  of  the  5. 
.-cts  20.  "i*.  and  they  accompanied  hijn  to  the  s. 

21.  2.  finding  a  .«.  sailing  over  unto  Phenicia 
27.  2.  and  entering  into  a  .^.  of  Adramyttium 

SHIPS. 
Oi-n.  49.  13.  Zebulun  shall  be  a  haven  for  .5. 
yum.  24.  24.  and  .<i.  shall  come  from  Chittim 
Dnit.  2ri.  (W.  I,,  shall  bring  thee  into  Egypt  with  s. 
.rnila.  5.  17.  and  whv  did  Oan  remain  in  .?.? 

1  A7)(u-.«  9.  20.  king  Solomon  made  a  navy  of.?. 

22.  4rt.  .lehosbaphal  made  s.  of  Tarshish  to  go  to 

Ophir,  the  s.  were  broken,  2  Chron.  20.  37. 
40.  let  my  servants  go  with  tliino  in  the  s. 

2  Chron.  8.  13.  Hnram  sent  him  by  his  servants,  s. 
9. 21.  king's  s.  went  to  Tarshish  every  three  years 

Job  9.  2'i.  they  are  passed  away  as  the  swift  s. 
P.<iJ.  48.  7.  thou  brcakest  the  s.  of  Tarshish 

104.  20.  there  go  the  $.  there  is  that  Leviathan 

107.  23.  they  that  go  down  to  the  sea  in  «.  that  do 
Pruv.  31. 14.  she  is  like  the  merchant  s.  she  brings 
l^n.  2.  10.  the  day  of  Lord  on  the  .t.  of  Tarshish 

23. 1.  howl,  ve.*.  of  Tarshish,  no  entering  in,  14. 

43.  14.  the  Chaldeans,  whose  cry  is  in  the  s. 

00.  9.  the  8.  of  Tarshish  first,  to  bring  thy  sons 
K-.rJ:.  27.  9.  all  '■  of  the  sea  with  their  mariners 
25..'>.  of  Tarshish  did  sing  of  thee  in  thy  market 
29.  the  pilots  shall  come  down  from  their.?. 

30.  9.  the  messengers  go  forth  from  me  in  .?. 
Dan.  11.  30.  for  s.  of  Chittim  shall  come  ag.  him 
40.  king  of  the  north  shall  come  with  many  .?. 

f.uke  5. 1.  they  filled  both  the  s.  they  began  to  sink 

'rim.  3.4.  behold  also  the  ,?.  though  they  be  great 
/i/n-.S.O.  the  third  part  of  the  s.  were  destroyed 

18  17.  the  company  in  .?.  stood  afar  off"  and  cried 

19.  wherein  were  made  rich  all  that  had  s. 

sirip-no.MiDS. 

Ki<Jt.27.5.have  madnall  \\\v  a.-hnards  of  fir-trees 

SHIP-MASTER. 
fimuh  1 .  0. ».  B.iiil,  what  meanest  thou,  O  sleeper  ? 
Hev.  18.  17.  cvurv  .».  and  sailors  afar  off,  cried 

■  SHIP-MEN. 
1  Kinttii  9.27.  Hiram  sent .?.  thai  had  knowd.ofsea 
/icta  'i7. 30.  the  «.  w<re  about  to  (loo  out  of  the  ship 

SIIIPPINO. 

.John  0.  24.  tliey  tniil<  n.  ami  came  to  Capernaiiin 

SIIIPWREfK. 

0  Cor,  1I.2.">.  once  was  1  stoned,  thrice  I  suffered  s. 

1  Tim.  1. 19.  .xoine  concemini  failh  have  mode  ». 

SHITr.AH-TnEE. 
I^a.W.  19.1  will  i.lniit  ill  tlif  wililornossthe.s.-trce 

snnTiM-woon. 

K/i'/.  2.").  ."5.  and  badg.'rs'  skins  and  s.-wnnd,^^.!. 
10.  shall  mi.ke  an  ark  of  ji.-w.  37.1  nnil.  10.3. 
13.  thou  shalt  make  slaves  of  s.-iuooil,  2«.  I  27. 

fi.  I  37.4,  i,'!, 28. 1  -.An. 

21.  thou  shall  mnko  a  table  nTn.-wnotl,  37.  10. 
2<^.  LV  make  bo-irds  for  Inbernnclo  of."/).  30.20. 

20.  thou  shalt  in.\ke  bim  of  .i.-wnnrf,  30.  31. 
12.  upon  four  pillars  nf.i.-wood,  37.  |  30.  30. 

27   1.  thou  shall  imke  nn  altar  oTf.-icoo'l,  30  1. 
5-U3 


SHO 

£lio<f.35.24.eyery  man  with  whom  was  found  ».-vi. 
SHIVERS. 

/i:<:c.2.27.  as  vessels  of  a  potter  shall  bo  broken  to  3. 

SHOCK. 
Job  5.  26.  like  as  s.  of  corn  cometh  in  his  season 

SHOCKS. 
Jud".  15.  5.  Samson  burnt  up  the  s.  and  standing 
SHOD.  [corn 

2  Chron.  2?.  15.  took  the  captives  and  s.  them 
K:ffc.lG.10.I  s.  thee  with  badgers*  skin  and  girdrd 
.Mark  6.  9.  be  5.  with  sandals,  put  not  on  two  coats 
Kph.  6.  15.  s.  with  the  preparation  of  the  gospel 

SHOE 

Uputfor,  [1]  The  ground  under  firt,  Dent.  33. 

25.     [2]  The  weakest  means,  Psal.  00.  8.  |  108. 

9.  [3]  h>ccdom  from  danger,  Cant.  7.  1.  [4] 
Jl  contrmptible  price,  Amos  2.  0.  |  8.  C.  To  cast 
the  shoe  oner  a  country,  is  to  subdue  that  coun- 
try, i<c.  I'sal.  00.  8.  To  loose  the  shoe  lens, 
[\]  Jl  sig^^  of  reverence,  Exod.  3.  5.  [2J  Uf 
disgrace,  Deut.  25.  10.  [3]  Of  a  contract, 
Uuth  4.  7.     [4]  Of  mourning,  Ezek.  24.  17. 

The  .Ipostle  exhorts  the  Ephcsians  to  have  their 
feet  shod  with  the  preparation  of  the  gospel  of 
peace,  Eph.  fi.  15.  that  is,  to  hare  a  prcpjired 
and  resolved  frame  of  heart,  which  the  gospel 
teaches  and  icorks  ;  and  which,  like  leg  or 
foot-harness,  would  enable  them  to  walk  icith 
a  steady  pace  in  the  ways  of  religion,  notwith- 
standing the  hardships,  dangers,  and  difficul- 
ties that  attend  it. 

To  go  barefoot  was  a  sign  of  mourning  and  hu- 
miliation; David  went  up  by  the  ascent  of 
mount  Olivet  b.irefoot,  2  Sain.  15.30.  See  Isa. 
20.  2,  4.  Ezek.  24.  17.  The  man  that  refused 
to  raise  up  seed  unto  his  brother  deceased,  had 
his  shoe  taken  off  liy  his  brother's  wife  in  pre- 
sence of  the  elders,  Deut.  25.  9.  This  was 
done  partly  as  a  sign  of  his  resignation  of  his 
right  to  the  woman,  and  her  husband's  inhe- 
ritance, as  the  plucking  off  the  shoe  signifies 
in  Huh  4.7.  and  partly,  as  a  vote  of  infamy ; 
to  signify  that  he  deserved  to  he  treated  like  a 
servant  or  captive,  who  in  token  of  submission 
and  obedience  went  bore-foot,  Isii.  20.  4.  It  is 
said,  Psal.  00.  8,  Over  Edoni  will  I  cast  my 
shoe.  /  will  take  possession  of  them,  I  will 
trample  upon  them,  and  use  them  like slanes. 
A  pair  of  shoes  in  Amos  2.  Ij.  denotes  a  small 
inconsiderable  bribe.  To  bear  one's  shoes,  or 
untie  the  latchet  of  one's  shoes,  is  to  perform 
the  meanest  services  for  him.  See  Mat.  3.  11. 
Mark  1.  7.  Luke  3.  10. 

Devi.  25.  9.  his  brother's  wife  shall  loose  his  s. 

10.  the  house  of  him  that  hath  his  .».  loosed 
29.  5.  Ihv  s.  is  not  waxen  old  upon  thy  foot 

.Tosh.  5.  1'5.  thy  s.  from  off  thy  foot,  for  the  place 
RuihA.'i.  man  plucked  off  his  i.  and  gave  it  to  him 

8.  buy  it  for  then,  so  he  drew  off  his  s. 
Psal.  60.  8.  over  Edom  will  I  cast  otT  my  .?.  108.9 
/4'a.20. 2.  and  put  off  thy  s.  from  thy  foot,  he  did  so 

SHOE-LATCHET. 
^r7i.l4.23.Iwill  not  lake  from  thread  to  a  s.-latchet 
J«Anl.27.whosc  s.-latchet  I  am  not  worthy  to  loose 

SHOES. 

Erod.  3.  5.  put  off  thy  .?.  from  thy  feet,  .lets  7.33 

12. 1 1,  thus  shall  ye  eat  it  with  your .«.  on  your  feet 

Dent.  33.25.  s.  shall  be  irftn  and  brass,  as  thy  days 

./fl.?/i.9.5.  old  3.  and  clouted  upon  their  feet,  old  gar 

13.  our  .?.  are  become  old  with  a  long  journey 

1  h'ings  2.  5.  put  the  blooj  in  his  ,«.  on  his  feet 
Cant.  7.  1.  how  beautiful  are  thy  feft  with  3.! 
Isa.  5.  27.  nor  the  latchet  oftheir  .?.  be  broken 
F.zek.  24.  17.  put  on  thy  s.  upon  thy  feel,  23. 
Jlmos  2.0.l)ecauso  they  sold  the  poor  for  a  pair  of  s. 

8.  0.  that  wo  may  buy  the  needy  for  a  pair  of  s. 
Mat.  3.  11.  whose  s.  I  am  not  worthy  to  bear 

10.  10.  provide  neither  .?.  nor  staves,  /.uke  10.  4. 

Mark  1.  7.  latchet  of  whose  s.  I  am  not  worlhv 

to  sloop  down  and  unloose,    J.,ukc  3.  10. 

Jicls  13.  25. 

At'*'  15.22.  put  a  ring  on  his  hand,  and  .?.on  his  foci 

22.  35.  when  I  s.  yon  wilhotit  purse  and  .?. 

.sho.m;. 

F.'od.  34.  29.  wist  not  that  the  skin  of  his  face  *. 
no.  the  Hkin  of  his  face  s.  they  were  afraid,  35. 

2  Jfinn--' 3. 22  rose  iipearly,sun  s.  upon  the  walot 
AhAc  2.  9.  glory  of  Lord  s.  round  about  thoin 
.lets  22.  6.  su.lilenly  Ihero  s.  from  heaven  groat 

light  round  about  mo 
Rev.  8.  12.  tho  day  *.  not  for  a  third  part  of  it 

.  SHOOK, 

2  .■?-#.  «.  0.  I'r.zah  look  hold,  for  oren  ,».  the  nrk 
22."  the  earth  s.  Psal.  18.  7. )  tW.  8.  |  77.  18. 
•VcA.  5.  13.  I  a.  my  lap,  and  said,  so  (Jod  shako 
Isa.  23.  11.  he  stretched  out  and  .».  the  kingdoms 
./lets  13.51.  but  Ihoy  a.  offtlie  iliist  oftheir  feet 
M*.  tl.  he  .«.  his  raiment,  ami  said  nnio  thorn 
28.  5.  ho  3.  off  lieB»t  into  tho  firo  and  felt  no  harm 
Heh.  12.  S<J.  whoso  voice  then  *.  tho  earth 


SHO 

SHOOT. 

Ej;o(/.  3G. 33. he  made  the  middle  bar  to  J.  throu'-h 

1  Sam.  20.  20.  I  will  s.  three  arrows  on  the  side 
36.  run,  find  out  now  the  arrows  which  I  s. 

2  .Sam.  11.  20.  knew  ye  not  that  they  would  s.? 
2King3  13. 17.  then  Elisha  said,  3.  and  he  shot 

19.  32.  he  shall  not  s.  an  arrow  there,  Isa.  37.  33. 

1  Chron.  5.  18.  valiant  men  able  to  s.  with  bow 

2  CAr/m.26.  15.  he  made  engines  to  s.  arrows 
Psal.  11.2.  they  may  privily  s.  at  upright  in  heart 

22.  7.  they  s.  out  the  lip,  they  shake  the  head 

.58.  7.  when  he  bendeth  his  bow,  to  «.  his  arrows 

64.  3.  to  3.  their  arrows,  even  bitter  words 

4.  that  they  may  s.  in  secret  at  the  perfect 

7.  but  God  shall  s.  at  them  with  an  arrow 

144.  0.  s.  out  thine  arrows,  and  destroy  them 

./er.  50.  14.  all  ye  that  benii  the  bow,  s.  at  her 

Fzek.  31.  14.  nor  s.  up  their  top  among  boughs 

36.  8.  ye  shall  .?.  forth  your  branches  and  yield 

Luke  21.  30.  when  they  now  «.  forth,  ye  know 

SHOOTERS. 
2  5'am.ll.24..?. shot  from  off  ihe  wall  on  thy  serv. 

SHOOTETH. 
.lob  8.  16.  and  his  branch  s.  forth  in  his  garden 
/a«.27.8.  in  nicas.  when  it  s.  forth,  thou  will  debate 
Mark  4.  32.  mustard  seed  s.  out  great  branches 

SHOOTINt;. 
1  Chron.  12.  2.  could  use  right  hand  and  left  in  g. 
Amos  7.  1.  in  the  *■.  up  of  the  latter  growth 

SHORE. 
Mat.  13.  2.  the  whole  mullltude  stood  on  the  s. 

48.  which  when  it  was  full,  they  drew  to  3. 
John  21.  4.  when  morning,  .lesus  stood  on  the  s. 
.•lets  21.  5.  we  kneelid  down  on  the  s.  and  prayed 
27. 39.  they  discovered  a  certain  creek  with  a  ». 
40.  hoised  up  the  main-sail  and  niudu  toward  3. 
See  Se.\. 
SHORiV. 
Cavt.A.'i.  teelli  like  a  flock  of  sheep  that  arc  evens. 
-■Jr/slg.lS. having  s.  his  head  in  Ccnchrea,had  vow 
ICur.  ll.fl.  if  women  be  not  covered,  let  her  be  s.  if 
it  be  a  shame  to  be  s.ot  shaven, let  lier  be  covered 
SHORT. 
.\'"7«m.l1.23.iMosPssaid,islhe  Lord's  hand  waxen*. 
Jot}  17.  12.  the  light  is  s.  because  of  darkiuss 

20.  5.  the  triiiinpliing  of  the  wicked  is  s. 
Psal.  89.  47.  remember  how  ,«.  my  time  is 
W«m.3.23.all  have  sinned  and  come.s.of  glory  of  R. 
9. 2S.  because  a  s.  work  will  Lord  make  on  earth 
1  Cor.  7.  29.  Ibis  I  say,  hrclhren,  the  lime  is  s. 
1  Thess.  2.  17.  being  taken  from  von  for  a  s.  time 
Hev.  12.  12.  he  knoweth  that  heliaih  liuta  s.tinie 
17. 10.  when  he  comeih,  ye  must  continues,  spaco 
.See  CoMK,  Cut. 
SHORTENED. 
Psal.  89.  4,5.  the  days  of  his  youth  hast  thou  .». 
102.  23.  he  weakened  my  strength,  he  .^  my  days 
Prov.  10.  27.  the  years  ot'the  wicked  shall  be  s. 
lsH.r>0.-i.\s  mv  hand  s.at  all,  that  it  cannot  redeem'? 
59. 1.  behold,  the  Lord's  hand  is  not  s.\wt  to  save 
Ji;n»i24.  22.  except  those  days  should  he  .?.  no  flesh 
be  saved,  but  for  the  ehci's  sake  .s.  .Mark  13. 20. 
SHORTER. 
/sa.28.20.  the  bed  is*.  th;in  that  a  man  can  stretch 

SHORTLY. 
f?C7i.4 1. 32.is  established,  God  wills,  bring  it  to  pass 
./fr.27.IO.vessels shall  s.  bebroiishi  ag.froni  Baby. 
Kzek.  7.8.  now  will  I ,?.  pour  out  my  fury  upon  thee 
Acts  25.4.  that  he  himself  would  depart  i-.  thither 
Worn.  10.20.G. of  peace!  bruise  Sat. uniler  your  feet.?. 
1  Cor.  4.  19.  1  will  cofiie  lo  vou  s.  if  Ihu  Lord  will 
Phil.  2.  19.  I  trust  to  send  Timolheus  s.  unto  jou 
24.  1  trust,  that  I  also  my.oelf  shall  come  *-. 

1  Tim.  3. 14.  1  write,  hoping  lo  come  unto  thee  s. 

2  Tim.  4.  9.  do  thy  diligence  lo  come  .«.  unto  mu 
Heh.  13.21.  «  ilh  whom  if  he  come .?.  I  will  see  you 
2  Pet.  1.  14.  .?.  I  must  put  off  lliis  mv  labernncl<j 
H.Iohn  14.  but  I  trust  I  shall  s.  sec  thee  and  speak 
lirv.  1.  1.  things  that  inu-t  s.  come  lo  pass,  22.  6. 

SIIORT.NESS. 
F.xod.G.  to.  but  thev  hearkened  not  for  .t.ufspiril 

■  SHOT. 
Gen.  40.  10.  it  budded,  and  her  blossoms  s.  forth 
49.  23.  the  nrchefs  .?.  al  him,  and  hali'il  him 
F.Tod.  19.  13.  he  shall  surely  be  stoned,  or .«.  thro* 
JN''Hr?i.2l  .30.WO  have  .t.  at  lhn')i,Hi'shb(m  is  |>erish«(l 

1  Sam.  20.  37.  llie  arrow  which  .lonaihan  li:id  s. 

2  Saoi.  II.  24.  the  shooters  s.  from  off  ine  wall 

2  Kings  13.  17.  then  Elislis  said,  shool,  ami  he  ». 
2  C//r»n.  35.  23.  Ihe  archers  .«.  al  king  .losinb 
Psal.  18.14..?.  out  lighlningH,  and  discoiiifiied  Ihem 
./cr.9.8.Uieirlon'jueis  nn  arrow.?,  out, spnaks  deceit 
F.,ik.  17.  0.  it  b'-caiiie  n  vine,  and  .?.  forth  Hprigi 
7.  this  vino  s.  forlh  her  branchis  low.ird  him 
31    5.  till'  inulliludn  of  wno-rs  when  he  .?.  forlh 
10.  he  hath  s.  up  hi-lopanioni  tho  thick  bought 
SHOT.  Snhstaiilive. 
Gen.  21.  10.  Ilngar  sat  down  as  it  were  a  bow  *. 
./-r.  0.1  0.  hew  down  trees,  pour  out  the  engine  of* 
K.f  24.behold,lhoengiue4of  J.  come  into  the  cit> 


SHO 

Eiek  2G.  t  8-  I'C  simll  iiour  out  the  engines  of  ». 

SHOVEL. 
Sta.  30.  'J4.  lliat  Imili  been  winnowed  witli  the  s. 

SHOVELS. 
Exod.  '27.  A.  ihoii  tiliult  make  his  pans  and  liia  s. 
38.  3.  Iiu  iiiadti  tlie  |>uts,  and  the  s.  aim  the  basuiis 
JV'um.  4.  14.  they  shall  ()Ut  on  the  purple  cloth  ». 

1  Kings  7.  40.  Hiram  made  the  lavers,  the  s.  and 

the  basons  of  brass,  45.  i  Chron.  4.  11,  10. 

2  Kings  2.5.14.  pots  and  .v.  he  took  away,  Jer.5i.l8. 

SllOULDKR 
Is  a  part  of  the  body  well  known.    To  give  or 
lend   liis  shoulder,  for  bearing  of  a  burden, 
tignijies    to   subntit    to   servitude.       Issachar 
bowed   his  shoulder  to   bear,  and   became  a 
servant  unto  tribute,  Gen.  40.  15.     The  Mes- 
siah has  delivered  his  people  from  the  rod,  or 
from  the   yoke,  to   wKich   they  were   subject. 
Isa.  9.  4,  Thou   hast   broken  the  slafi  ot  his 
shoulder.     And  in  Isaiah,  10.  27,  the  prophet 
comforting  Israel  with  the  promise  of  deliver- 
ance from  Assyria,  siiys,  His  burden  shall  be 
taken  away  from  olf  liiy  shoulder.     The  scrip- 
ture calls  that  a  rebellions  shoulder,  a  with- 
drawing shoulder,  that  will  not  submit  to  the 
yoke,  Neh.  9.  t  29.  and  those  that  bear  it  to- 
gether with  joint  consent,  serving  with  one 
shoulder,  Zcph.  3.  t  9. 
Heretofore  they  wore  the  marks  of  honour  and 
command  upun  their  shoulders.   Job  desires  of 
Ood  to  decide  his  cause;  Surely  I  would  take 
it  upon  my  shoulder,  as  a  trophy  or  badge  of 
honour,  and  bind  it  as  a  crown  to  me.  Job  31. 
30.     Isaiah  says  that   the  Messiah  shall  bear 
the  mark  of  his  government  upon  his  shoulder. 
Isa.  9.  6,  The  government  shall   be  upon  his 
shoulder.     God  promises  Eliakim  the  son  of 
Hilkiah,  to  gine  him  the  key  of  the  house  of 
David,  and  to  lay  it  upon  his  shoulder;  so  he 
shall  open,  and  none  shall  shut;  and  he  shall 
shut,  and  none  shall  open. 
To  be  borne  upon  shoulders,  sometimes  stands 
for  a  kind  of  honour  and  distinction.     God 
says  that  he  would  lift  up  his  hand  to  the  Gen- 
tiles, and  set  up  his  standard  to  the  people ;  and 
tliey  shall  bring  thy  sons  in   their   arms,  and 
thy    daughters    shall    be    carried    upon    their 
shoulders,  fsa.  49.  22.     SomHi7nrs  this  denotes 
great  weakness,  or  some  great  disgrace.    God 
commanded  Ezekiel  to  -make  a  breach  in  the 
vail,  and  carry  out  thereby  on  his  shoulders  in 
the  night  lime,  to  represent  the  taking  «/ Jeru- 
salem, and  the  captivity  of  the  king  and  his 
people.     Ezek.  I'2.  (!,  7,  In  their  sight  bear  upon 
thy  shoulders.  Sec. 
't  is   said.  Deut.  33.  12,  That  the  Lord   shall 
dwell  between  Benjamin's  shoulders;  that  is, 
God's  temple,  wherein  he  dwell  shall  be  built 
vpon  ,novnl  Moriali,  which  is  in  the  tribe  of 
Benjamin;  shoulder  being  clseichcre  put  for 
lorder,  or  side,  as  in  Num.  34.  111.    To  fly 
upon  the  shoulders,  Isa.  11.  14.  is  to  rise  up 
against  one,  to  attack  him,  to  offer  violence 
to  him. 
Gen.  il.  14.  pultinj  the  bread  on  Hagar's  s. 
24.  15.  Rebekah  wit'n  her  piicher  upon  her  s.  45 
4-).1.5.  Issachar  bowed  hiss,  to  bear,  becamea  ser 
F.T'ld.  08.  7.  the  ephod  shall  have  two  s.  pieces 
25.  put  the  ends  of  the  chains  on  the  s.  pieces 
29.  07.  sanctify  the  s.  of  the  heave-offering 

39.  4.  they  made  s.  pieces  for  it  to  couple  it 
vVum.  6. 19.  priest  shall  takeaodilen  s.  olthe  ram. 

to  put  in  hands  of  the  Nazarite,  Deut.  18.  3. 
.Tosh.  4.  5.  tak«  ye  every  man  a  stone  upon  his  s. 
.hidir.  9.  48.  Abimeiecli  laid  a  bow  on  his  s. 
1  f!am.  9.  24.  and  the  cook  took^up  the  s. 

10.  t  9.  when  Saul  had  turned  his  s.  to  go 
1  Kings  7.  t  39.  he  put  bases  on  right .«.  of  the  house 
iKings  11.  t  11.  guaril  stood  about  the  king  with 
his  weapons  from  the  right  s.  'iChron.  23.  f  10. 
JWA.9.29.  withdrew  the  «.  and  hardened  their  neck 
.fob  31.  .36.  surely  I  would  take  il  on  my  s.  bind  it 
Psol.  81.  r>.  I  removed  his  s.  from  the  burden 
Isa.  9.  4.  thou  bast  broken  the  sta  (T  of  his  s. 

fi.  and  the  government  shall  be  upon  his  s. 

10.  27.  his  burden  shall  be  taken  from  off  thy  s. 

^i.  22.  the  key  of  David  will  I  lay  upon  his  s. 

40.  7.  thcv  bear  him  upon  the  s.  they  carry  him 
F.zrk.  12.  7.  I  bare  it  on  my  s.  in  their  sight 

12.  prince  shall  bear  upon  his. «.  in  the  twjli^ht 
24.  4.  gather  the  pieces,  even  the  thigh  and  s. 
2.">.  t  0.  therefore  t  will  open  the  s.  of  Moab 
29.  7.  thou  diilst  break  and  rent  all  their  t.  18. 
34.  21.  VI'  have  thru.-^t  with  side  and  with  s. 
IIo.t.G.  t9.  |>riusts  murder  in  the  way  with  ones. 
y.nph.  3.  t  0.  to  serve  ihc  Lord  with  one  s. 
y.crh.  7. 11.  hut  they  refused  and  pulled  awaythes. 
J.vkc  15.  5.  when  fiiund  it  lav>  it  on  his  s.  rejoicing 

SHOULDER-BLADE. 
Joh  31.  22.  then  let  mine  arm  fall  from  my  s. 
543 


//caoc-SIIOULDER. 

Lev.  7.  34.  the  heaves,  have  I  taken,  JVum.  C.  20. 

10.  14.  the  heavc-s.  shall  ye  eat  in  a  clean  place 

15.  the/icaoe-s.  and  wave-brcastsliall  they  bring 

iJj^At  SHOULDER. 

Kxo(2. 29.22.  thou  shall  take  of  the  ram  the  right  s 

Lev.  7.  32.  the  right  s.  shall  ye  give  unto  the  priest 

33.  ollercth,  shall  have  the  right  s.  for  his  part 

8.  25.  Moses  took  the  fat  and  tlio  right  s. 
26.  put  them  on  the  fat,  and  upon  the  right  s. 

9.  21.  the  right  s.  waved  is  thine,  JVaw.  18. 18. 
SHOULDERS. 

Oen.  9. 23.  they  laid  the  garment  upon  both  their «. 
Kzod.  12.  34.  their  troughs  bound  upon  their  s. 

28.  12.  shall  put  two  slones  on  s.  of  ephod,  39.  7. 
M'um.  7.  9.  sons  of  Kohath  should  bear  on  their  «, 
Deut.  33.  12.  and  he  shall  dwell  between  his  «. 
./udg.lG.  3.  Samson  took  bar  and  all,  put  upon  his  s. 
1  Sam.  9.  2.  from  hiss,  and  U))ward  higher,  10.  23. 

17.  C.  he  had  a  target  of  brass  between  his  s. 

1  Chron.  1.5. 15.  the  Levites  bare  the  ark  on  their  s. 

2  Chron.  35.  3.  it  shall  not  be  a  burden  upon  your  s. 
/.<a.  11. 14.  buttliey  shall  fly  on  thes.  of  Philistines 

14.  25.  and  his  burden  depart  from  off  their  s. 
30.  6.  will  carry  riches  upon  the  s.  of  young  asses 

49.  22.  thy  daughters  shall  be  carried  upon  their  s. 
Kick.  12.  0.  in  their  sight  shall  bear  it  upon  thy  s. 
Mat.  23.  4.  they  bind  burdens,  lay  them  on  men's  s. 

SHOUT,  Substantive. 
JVum.  23.  21.  and  the  s.  of  a  king  is  among  them 
.losh.  6.  5.  the  people  shouted  with  a  great  s.  20. 

1  Sam.  4.  5.  with  a  great  s.  so  that  the  earth  rang 
6.  what  meaneth  the  noise  of  this  great  s.? 

2  Chron.  13.  15.  then  the  men  of  Judah  gave  a  s. 
Ezra  3. 11.  with  a  greats,  when  they  praised  Lord 

13.  could  not  discern  the  s.  of  joy  from  weeping 
Psal.  47. 5.  God  is  gone  up  with  s.  Lord  with  sound 
,Ier.  25.  30.  Lord  shall  give  a  s.  as  they  tread  grapes 
51.  14.  they  shall  lift  a  s.  against  Babylon 
JJcts  12.22.the  people  gave  s.saying  voice  of  a  God 
1 7'Aess.4.10.L.8hall  descend  from  heaven  with  a  s. 

SHOUT. 
Exod.  32.  16.  and  he  said,  it  is  not  the  voice  of 
them  that  s.  for  mastery 
./ash.  fi.  5.  when  ye  hear  trumpet,  all  people  shall  s. 

10.  shall  not  s.  till  I  bid  you  s.  then  shall  ye  «. 
16.  s.  for  the  Lord  hath  given  you  the  city 

Psal.  47. 1.  s.  unto  God  with  the  voice  of  triumph 
Isa.  12.  6.  cry  out  and  s.  thou  inhabitant  of  Zion 
42.  11.  let  them  s.  from  the  top  of  the  mountains 
44.  23.  s.  ye  lower  parts  of  the  earth,  break  forth 
./er.  31.  7.  sing  and  s.  among  chief  of  the  nations 

50.  15.  Babylon  had  sinned  s.  ag.  her  round  about 
I, am.  3.  8.  when  1  s.  he  shutteth  out  my  prayer 
Zeph.  3.  14.  s.  O  Israel,  be  glad  with  all  the  heart 
Z<;c/t.y.9.  s.  O  daughter  of  Jerusalem,  king  Cometh 

SHOUTED. 
Exod.  32.  17.  as  they  s.  he  said  there  is  a  noise 
Lev.  9.  24.  when  the  tire  consumed,  they  s.  and  fell 
.losh.  0.  20.  so  the  people  s.  when  the  priests  blew 
Judg.  15.  14.  the  Philistines  s.  against  Samson 
l.S'o/n.4.5.all  Isr.  s.  with  grcatshoutbecause  of  nrk 
10.  24.  the  people  s.  and  said,  God  save  the  king 
17.  20.  as  the  host  was  going  forth  and  s.  for  battle 
.52.  the  men  of  Israel  and  Judah  s.  and  pursued 
2  Chron.  13.  1.5.  as  Judah  s.God  smote  Jeroboam 
Ezra  3.  11.  when  they  praised  the  Lord,  they  s. 
12.  many  of  the  people  s.  aloud  for  joy,  13. 
Sec  Joy. 
SHOUTETH. 
P«.78.65.1ikeamightvman  thnt  s.by  reason  of  wine 

SHOUTING. 
2  Sam.  6. 15.  brought  up  ark  with  .?.  1  Clir.  15.  28. 
2  Chron.  1.5.  14.  they  sware  to  the  Lord  with  s. 
Job  39.  2.5.  he  smell'eth  the  battle  and  s.  afar  otf 
Prov    11.  10.  when  the  wicked  perish,  there  is  s. 
Isa.  II').  9.  the  s.  for  summer-fruits  is  fallen,  10. 
Jer.  20.  16.  let  thein  hear  the  s.  at  noon-tide 
48.33.  none  shall  tread  with  s. their  .'.shall  be  no  s. 
F.zck.  21.  22.  to  lift  up  the  voice  with  s.  to  appoint 
.^mos  1.  14.  a  fire  shall  devour  Rabbah  with  s. 
2.  2.  Moab  shall  die  with  tumult,  s.  and  trumpet 

SHOUTINGS. 
Zcch.  4.  7.  he  shall  brins  firth  head-stone  with  s. 

SHOWER. 
F.zek.  13.  11.  there  shall  be  an  ovcrflowins  s.  13. 
34.  26.  I  will  cau.se  s.  to  come  dnwn  in  his  season 
Ltike  12.  54.  straichtwav  ve  say  there  cometh  as. 

SHOVVERS. 
nput.^-2.  2.  my  speech  shall  distil  ass.  on  the  grass 
.7/7// 24.  8.  the  poor  are  wet  with  s.  of  the  mountains 
Psal.  65.  10.  thou  makest  the  earth  soft  with  s. 
72.6.  king  shall  come  likes,  that  water  the  earth 
.ler.  R.  3.  therefore  the  s.  have  been  wilhholden 
14.  22.  can  cause  rain,  or  can  the  heaven"  give.?.? 
Fzek.  34.  2<i.  in  his  Benson  shall  be  s.  of  blessing 
Mica.  7.  remnant  of  Jacob  shall  be  as  s.  on  grass 
Zech.  10.  1.  the  Lord  shall  ffive  them  ».  of  rain 

SHRANK. 
O'm.32. 32.  therefore  Israel  eat  not  of  sinew  that  s. 


SHU 


SHRED. 
2  AVn^i4. 39.  cameaiid  s.  wild  gourds  into  pottajre 

SCREECH-OWL. 
/sa.34.14.  s  also  shall  rest  there  and  find  for  herself 

SHRINES.      , 
Acts  19.24.Dcmetrius  wiio  made  silvers,  for  Diana 

SHROUD. 
E2e*.3L3. Assyrian  was  a  cedar  with  shadowing  s. 

SHRUBS. 
G'e«.21.15.Hagar  cast  the  child  under  one  of  the#. 

SHUN. 
2  Tim.  2.  16.  but  s.  profane  and  vain  babl)lin''8 

SHUNNED. 
^cte20.  27.  Ihave  nots.  to  declare  counsel  of  God 

SHUT,  Aclincly,  Passively.      . 
Gen.  7.  10.  went  in  of  all  flesh,  the  Lord  s.  him  in 
Exod.  14.  3.  the  wilderness  hath  s.  them  in 
JVuwi.  12.  14.  let  her  be  s.  out  from  camp  seven  days 
15.  Miriam  was  s.  out  from  the  camp  seven  days 
24.  t  3.  the  man  who  had  his  eyes  s.  but  now  ojien 
Vcut.  15.  7.  nor  s.  thy  hand  from  thy  poor  brother 
Josh.  2.  7.  they  s.  the  gate  of  Jericho 
.Tudg.  3.  t  15.  Ehud  was  s.  of  his  right  hand 
9.  51.  they  s.  the  tower  to  them,  and  gat  thorn  up 
1  Sam.  23.7.  for  he  is  s.  in,  by  entering  into  a  town 
JVt/t. 13.19.1  commanded  gates  to  be  s.till  after  sab. 
Psal.  09.  1.5.  let  not  the  pit  s.  her  mouth  uj^ion  me 
Isa.  6. 10.  s.  their  eyes,  lest  they  see  with  their  eyes 
22.22.key  ofDav.on  his  shoulder,  so  he  shall  open 
and  none  shall  s.  lie  shall  s.  and  none  shall  open 

44.  18.  for  he  hath  s.  their  eyes,  they  cannot  see 

45.  1.  to  open  before  him,  and gaiesshall  notbe*. 
52.  15.  the  kings  shall  s.  their  mouths  at  him 
60.  11.  thy  gates  shall  not  be  s.  day  nor  night 
6().  9.  shall  I  s.  the  womb,  sailh  thy  Godl 

£2f/ir;3.24.Spirit  said,  go.?,  thys. within  thine hou.=e 

44.  1.  gate  which  looked  toward  the  east  was  s. 

2.  this  gale  shall  be .«.  it  shall  not  be  opened,  God 

hath  entered  in  by  it,  therefore  it  shall  be  s 

46.  1.  the  gate  shall  be  s.  the  six  working-days 
2.  the  gatu  shall  not  be  s.  till  the  evening 
12.  after  his  going  forth,  one  shall  s.  the  gate 

Dan.  6.  22.  my  God  hath  s.  the  lion's  mouths 
.flcts  5.  23.  the  prison  truly  found  we  s.  in  safelv 
Rrv.'i  1 .6. these  have  power  to  s.lieav.that  it  rain  not 
21.  25.  gates  shall  not  be  s.  by  day,  no  n  ight  there 
See  Door. 
SHUT  up. 
Lev.  13.  4.  then  the  priest  shall  s.  him  up  that  hath 
plague  seven  days,  5,  21,  26,  31,  33,  50,  54. 
11.  the  priest  shall  not  s.  him  up,  he  is  unclean 
14.  38.  the  priest  shall  s.  up  the  house  seven  days 
46.  he  that  goeth  in  while  the  house  is  s.  vp 
Deut.  11. 17.wralh  be  kindled,  and  he.?  up  heaven 
32.  30.  except  their  rock  the  Lord  had  s.  them  up 
36.  when  he  seeth  there  is  none  s.  up  nor  left 
.losh.  6.  1.  now  when  Jericho  wns  straitly  s.  up 

1  •'>am.  1.  5.  the  Lord  had  s.  vp  Hannah's  womb 
6.  because  the  Lord  had  s.  up  her  womb 

6.  10.  hid  them  and  .t.  up  their  calves  at  home 
17.  t  46.  this  day  will  the  Lord  s.  thee  vp 

23.  t  12.  will  the  men  of  Keilah  s.  me  i/ji? 

24.  t  18.  when  T,ord  had  s.  me  up  into  thy  hand 
26.  t  P.  God  hath  s.up  thine  enemy  into  thy  hand 

2  .Sam.  18. 1 28.  blessed  hetheLord  who  hath  s.  up 
20.  3.  concubines  were  s.  up  to  dav  of  their  death 

1  Iiinirs  8.  35.  when heav.  is s.  vp,  2'C/ij-.6.26.|  7.13. 
14.  10.  I  will  cut  off  from  Jeroboam  him  that  is 

s.  vp  and  left  in  Israel,  21.  21.2  Kings  9.  8. 

2  Kinsrs  14.  26.  there  was  not  any  s.  up  nor  left 
17.  4.  therefore  the  king  of  Assvria  s.  him  up 

2  Chron.  28.  24.  A  liaz  s.  vp  doors  of  house,  29. 7. 

AO//.  6.  10.  the  house  of  Shemaiali  who  was  s.  vp 

.lob  3.  10.  because  it  s.  not  up  my  mother's  womb 
1 1.10.  if  he  cutoff,  and  s.up,  who  can  hinder  hinil 
16.  t  II.  God  hath  s.  me  up  to  the  unsodly 
38.  8.  or  who  hath  s.  up  the  sea  with  doors? 
41.  15.  his  scales  arc  s.  up  together  as  a  sen! 

P.TO/.31.8.  hast  nots.  me?//)  into  hand  of  the  enemy 

77.  9.  hath  he  in  anger  .«.  up  his  tender  mercies? 

78.  t  48.  he  s.  vp  also  their  cattle  to  the  hail 
8''.  8.  I  am  s.  up,  and  I  cannot  come  forth 

Cant.  4.  12.  a  springs,  up,  a  fountain  sealed 
Isa.  19.  t  4.  s.  up  into  Ihc  hand  of  a  cruel  lord 
24.  10.  every  house  is  s.up,  no  man  can  come  in 
22.thcy  shall  b«.t.  up  in  the  prison,  and  he  visited 
■ler.  13.  19.  the  cities  of  the  south  shall  be  s.  vp 
20.  9.  his  word  was  as  fire  .?.  up  in  my  hones 
.32.  2.  the  prophet  wns  .«.  up  by  Zcdekiah,  3. 
.33.  I.  word  of  Ld.  came,  while  he  was  s.  up,  .30.15. 
36.  5.  I  am  .e.  vp,  I  cannot  jo  to  the  Lord's  houso 
Dan.  8.  26.  s.up  the  vision  II 12. 4.  .t.  i/p  the  words 
Ohnd.  1 14.  nor  should  have.?.  ?/p  those  that  remain 
.Mat.  23.  13.  ye  s.  vp  kingd.  of  heaven  as.ninst  m>'U 
Luke  3.  20.  added  this,  thnt  he  s.  up  John  in  prisori 
4.  2.5.  when  the  heaven  was  .t.  up  three  years 
Acts  26.  10.  many  saints  did  I  s.  up  in  pr  son 
Rom.  11.  t  32.  God  hath  s.  them  up  in  unbelief 
Gal.  3. 23.  s.  up  to  the  faith  that  should  be  mvpnUA 
Rev.  20.  3.  «.  up  the  devil,  and  set  a  seal  upon  hixn 


SIC 

SHUTTETH. 

Jti  12. 14.  he  s.  up  a  man,  there  can  be  no  opening 
Prov.  10.  ;tO.  he  s.  his eyis  to  devise  froward  things 
17.28. he  that*,  hialips,  i«  a  man  olunilerslaiidiiig 
Isa.  '.i'3.  15.  and  *.  Iiie  eyes  I'rom  seeing  evil 
f.am.  3.  H.  also  when  I  cry,  he  s.  out  my  prnyer 
1  ./uhn  15.  17.  and  a.  up  his  bowels  of  comiiusaion 
/ico.3.7.  openelh,  no  man  ».  and  s.  no  ipan  openeth 

SHUTTING. 
Juih.  2.  5.  aboul  time  of  a.  the  gate,  men  went  out 

SHUTTLE. 
Jab  7.  6.  my  days  are  Bwifler  than  a  weaver's  g. 

SICK 
Is  taken  not  only  fur  une  that  is  under  some 
bodily  indisposition,  a.-t  in  1  Sam. 30.  13.  Luke 
7.  lU.  but  also  for  suck  as  are  srnsihle  of  the 
burden  of  their  sins,  and  earnestly  desire  to  be 
delivered  from  them  by  Chriat  the  great  Phy- 
tician.  Mat.  D.  1-J,  They  thnt  be  wliolo  need 
not  n  phyniciun,  but  they  that  are  »ick.  The 
spouse  says,  Cant.  2.  5,  Slay  me  with  flagons, 
comfort  mi!  with  apples;  for  I  am  sick  of  love: 
that  is,  You  that  are  members  of  the  church, 
ichether  ministers,  or  others,  afford  me  what 
help  you  can,  for  the  supporting,  strengthen- 
ing, and  comforting  of  my  soul,  by  applying  the 
promises  of  the  gospel,  and  such  other  means 
as  may  conduce  to  my  relief;  for  I  am  greatly 
troubled,  and  in  a  languishing  estate,  forwant 
nf  all  that  fall  enjoyment  and  sense  o/ Christ's 
love  tchich  I  so  earni  stly  desire. 
T/ir  efficient  cause  afsicknum  is  God,  Lev.  26. 16. 
Deut.  28.  27,  35,  59,  tiO,  Ul.  The  meritorious 
cause  is  sin,  as  appears  from  the  fore-cited 
places,  where  .sicknc  s.h  and  disease  are  threat- 
ened as  a  punishment  for  sin.  The  instru- 
mental cause  is  either  Satan,  who  sometimes 
is  permitted  by  God  to  inflict  diseases  upon 
persons,  as  he  did  on  Job,  chap.'i.  6,7.;  or  in- 
temperance, as  drunkenness,  incontinency,  and 
the  like.  The  end  of  sickness  is  to  punish  the 
wicked,  1  Sam.  5.  6.  To  try  the  patience  and 
constancy  of  the  godly,  as  in  Job  and  Heze- 
kiah.  Or  to  manifest  the  glory  of  (iod,  John 
9.  3.  I  11.  4. 
fien.  48. 1.  one  fold  Joseph,  behold  thjr  father  h  s. 
J.ev.  15.  3:).  the  law  of  her  that  i^  ».  ot  her  flowers 
Deut.  2^1.  1 22.  wherewith  the  Lord  hath  made  it  s. 

1  Sam.  19.  14.  when  Saul  sent,  she  said,  he  is  s. 
.30.  13.  master  left  me,  because  3  days  ago  I  fell  s. 

2  -Sam.  12.  15.  the  Lord  struck  the  child,  it  was  j. 
13.  2.  Amnon  was  so  vexed,  he  fell  ».  for  Tumnr 

5.  make  thyself  ,y.  ||  fi.  Anmon  made  himself .?. 
1  Kings  14    i.  Abijiih  the  son  of  Jeroboam  fell  s. 
S.wifeof  Jeroh.comeih  to  ask  forson,  forhciss. 
17.  17.  after  this  the  son  of  the  woman  fell  s. 

22.  t34.  .Ababsaid  unto  driver,  carry  me  out.  for 

I  am  made  s.  2  CUron.  18. 1 33.  |  33.  f  23. 
Z/Cings  1. 2.  Ahnziah  fell  down  in  Samaria,  was  s. 
8.  7."Benhadad  the  king  of  Syria  was  .'. 
29.  Ahazinh  kingof  Judnh  went  to  see  Joram  son 
cf  Ahab,  bccanie  he  was  s.  'i  Citron. 'Hi.  6. 
13. 14. Klisha  was  fallen .».  of  sickn.  whereof  he  died 
20.  1.  ill  those  days  was  Hezckiab  s.  unto  death, 
<i  Ckron.fi.  24.  Isa.  38.  1. 
12.  hail  heard  that  Hezek.  had  been  s.  Isa.  39.  1. 
JVcA.  2.  2.  king  .laid,  why  sad,  seeing  thoiuirt  not.?. 
/'j».  35. 13.  when  they  were*,  my  cloiliing  sackcloth 
41.  t  1.  blessed  is  be  that  cnnsiilerelh  the  s. 
Pntv.  13.  12.  hope  deferred  makeih  the  heart  s. 

23.  3.5.  they  have  stricken  me,  and  I  was  nnt  s. 
Cant.  2  5.  comfort  me  with  apples,  Iam.».  of  love 

5.  R.  I  charge  you,  tell  him  that  I  nin  s.  of  love 
ha.  I .  .■>.  whole  bend  is  .t.  and  the  whole  heart  faint 
33.  24.  the  inhabitant  shall  not  say,  I  am  *. 
38. 9.  when  Hiizek.  had  been  s.  and  \tr'*  rerovereo 
.Irr.  14.  18.  b<!hoM  them  that  are  s.  with  fHmino 
f'.zrk.  31.  4.  nor  have  ye  healed  thnt  which  was*. 

16.  and  will  Ntrenglhon  that  which  was  s. 
0(111.8.27.  I  Dan.  fainted, and  was.*,  certain  days 
Ifns.  7.5.  princen  made  him  *.  with  Ijoltlenot' wine 
.Mic.  fi.  13.  will  I  make  ihee  s.  in  smiting  thee 
.Mai.  1.8.  ifyn  ofTr  the  lame  and  s.  is  it  not  evil? 

13.  and  ye  brought  that  torn,  the  In  me,  andth 
^fat.  i.  24.  and  they  brought  to  him  nil  s.  people 
8.  14.  his  wile's  mother/.,  of  n  fever,  Mark  I.  'M. 

10.  and  healed  nil  ihni  were  s.  14.  14. 

9. 12.  ihev  that  be  whole  need  nnt  a  phvsirian,  but 

they  that  are  ,,.  ,V./rA  2.  17.  f.nke  .S.  31. 

10.8,  heal  th.-».  cleanse  the  lei.ers,  /,Hfr/'9.2.|10.9. 

25.  36.  f  wan  ».  and  ye  vi^ileil  me,  I  wns  in  prison 

:19.  saw  we  theo*.  in  prison  and  came  to  thee?  44 

Mark  6.  5.  that  he  Inid  liis  hands  on  a  few  <r.  folk 

56.  ihey  laid  the  s.  in  the  slreris,  .Irts  5.  15. 

16.  18.  lay  hands  on  tUrs.  anil  limy  shall  recover 

I.iihe'.  2.  centurion's  Hcrv.  wns.».  and  ready  lodif 

10.  found  ihn  servnnl  whole  that  had  been  s. 

.lohnA.ACi.  a  certain  nobleman's  son  was  s.  at  Cap. 

11,1. a  ninn,  named  I.nznritsof  Helhnnv,  was*. 2. 

Lord,  behold,  lie  whom  thou  lovol,  i»  ». 

S44 


SID  ,. 

Tohn  11.6.  ho  had  heard  hewoii.ho  abode  3 days 
jlcts  9.  37.  ill  those  days  Dorcas  was  «.  and  died 

19.  12.  were  broughl  unto  the  s.  handkerchiefs 
28.  8.  the  father  of  Publius  lay  a.  of  u  fever 

I'hil.  2.2fi, because  ye  had  heard  that  he  bad  been  a. 

27.  for  indeed  he  was  s.  nigh  unto  death 
27'(rn.4.20.bul  Tiophimus  have  1  leli  at  Miletum  .«. 
Jam.ti.M.  is  any  s.  let  him  call  elders  of  the  church 

15.  prayer  of  faiih  slmll  save  the  ».  Lord  raise  up 

SICKLY.  ISee  Palsy. 

\CoT.  11.  30.  for  this  cause  many  aro«.  among  you 

SICK. NESS. 
K7-oi.23.25. 1  will  takc^.aw.  from  the  midst  of  thee 
/-f  r.20.18.  if  a  man  lie  with  a  woman  having  her ». 
Jieut.  7.  15.  the  Lord  will  take  from  thee  all  s. 

28.  61.  every  s.  that  i.s  not  written  in  ihis  liiw 

1  Kings  8.  37.  whatsoever  s.  there  be,  2  Chr.  ti.  28. 

17.  17.  his  s.  was  so  sore,  there  was  no  breath  lefi 

"iKings  13.14.Eli8ha  sick  of  the  s.  whereof  he  died 

iChron.  21. 15.  thou  slialt  have  great  s.  by  disease 

of  thy  bowels,  by  reason  of  the*,  day  by  day 

]9.his  bowels  fell  oui  by  reason  of  bis  .9.90  he  died 

Psal.  41.3.  thou  wilt  make  all  his  bed  in  his  s. 

Kccl.b.M.  halhtriucli  .lorrow  and  wrath  with  his  jt. 

/aa.  38.  9.  when  Hezekiah  was  recovered  of  hiss, 

12.will  cut  me oflTwith pining .?.from day  tonight 

//e».5.13.wbcn  Ephrnim  saw  his.9.Jud.  hie  wound 

J^/a^4.23.  Jes.  went  about  heulingall  manner  of .». 

9.35.  Jes.  went  about  preaching  and  heal,  every  s. 

10.  1.  power  to  heal  all  manner  of  ».  Mark  3.  15 
.hhn  11.  4.  be  said,  this  s.  is  not  unto  death 

SICKNESSES. 
Dent.  28.  59.  and  sore  s.  and  of  long  continuance 

29.  22.  they  sluill  say,  when  they  see  the  a.  L.  laid 
Mat.  a.  17.  spoken,  saying,  himself  bare  our  *. 

SICKLE. 
Deut.  16.9.  as  thou  beginiiest  to  puts,  to  the  corn 

23.  25.  not  move  a  ».  unio  thy  neighbour's  corn 
.7er.  50.  16.  cut  off  him  that  handlelli  *.  in  harvest 
.fori  3.  13.  put  ye  in  the  s.  for  the  harvest  is  ri))e 
Mark  4.  29.  immediately  he  putteth  in  ihe  ». 
Her.  14.  14.  having  crown,  and  in  his  hand  shiirp.?. 

15.  an  angel  crying,  thrust  in  thy  s.  16,  18,  19. 
17.  another  angel  camp,  he  also  having  a  sharp  .1. 
SIDE. 
Oen.G.  16.  doorof  ihc  ark  shall  set  in  the  ».  thereof 
Frod.  -2.  5.  her  inniilens  walked  along  by  river  s. 
12. .7.  shall  strike  blood  on  the  two  s.  posts,  22. 
23.  when  he  seelh  blood  on  Ihe  lintel  and  s.  posts 
17.12.  Aaron  and  Hurslayed  up  Moses'  hands,  the 
one  on  the  ones-  and  the  other  on  the  other  «. 
32.  26,  v\ho  is  on  the  Lord's  s.  let  him  come  to  me 
27.piil  every  mtin  his  sword  by  his  s.go  in  and  out 
/.er.  1.11.  he  shrill  kill  it  on  .1.  of  altar  northward 
15.  blood  shall  be  wrung  out  at  ihes.  of  theallar 

5.  9.  blood  of  sin-offering  s|)rinkled  on  .«.  of  altar 
J^um.  22.  24.  a  wall  on  Ihis  .s-.  and  a  wall  on  that  3 

24.  6.  they  are  spread  as  gardens  by  the  river's  » 
32.  19.  we  will  not  inherit  on  yontfor  .«.  Joidan 

/>«««.  4.32,  ask  from  one  «  of  heaven  to  the  other 
31.  26.  put  the  book  of  iho  law  in  a.  of  the  ark 
./?/rfn-.19.1.n  Levitesojouinedon.s-.  of  Ephraim,18, 

1  .Srivn.  4.  18.  fell  backward  by  the  a.  of  the  gate 

6.  8.  put  Ihe  mice  in  a  cofl^^r  by  the  s.  of  ihe  ark 

20.  20,  I  will  shoot  three  arrows  on  Ihe  .v.  thereof 
2.').  Ihe  king  sat,  and  .\bner  sat  by  Saul's  s. 

2  .'■'am. 2. 16.  and  thrust  his  sword  into  his  fellow's  ». 
13,  34.  the  king's  sons  came  by  way  of  the  hill  s. 
16.  13.  Shimei  werrt  along  on  Ihe  hill  .«.  against 

2  Kings  9.  32.  Jehu  said,  who  is  on  my  .■».  wlioT 

IChron.  12.  18.  thine  are  we,  David,  and  on  thy  s. 

2CA7-07i.I1.I2.hiiving  Juil  ihand  neiijaminonhis  ». 

A~rh.  4.  1".  every  one  had  his  sword  girded  by  his  .«. 

.M>  18.  12.  and  dwiiuciion  shall  he  ready 'it  his  .v. 

P.'nf.OI.?.  thousand  shrill  fall  altby.^.len  thousnnd 
il8.  6,  Ihc  Lord  is  on  mv  ,».  I  will  not  fear 
1*4.  I.  if  it  had  not  been  Ihe  Lord  on  our  .».  2. 

f'.crf.  1.  I.  on  Ihe  j».  oftheir  oppressors  wiis  power 

/.vn.tVT.  4.  thy  dniighlers  sIimII  he  nursed  at  thy  .•.. 

F.zih.i  8,  thou  slinll  not  (urn  from  one  .t.  toannlbcr 
9.  the  niimher  ofd.ivs  (limi  shaft  lie  upon  thy*. 
9.  2.  with  a  writer's  irrkhorn  hv  his  s.  3,  II. 

25.  9.  I  wilt  open  fhe  s.  of  IWoah  friYm  (he  cities 
34.21  because  ye  have  thriisl  with  s.  and  shninldoT 

Dan.  7.  5,  and  it  raised  up  imelfon  one  s.  three  ribs 

11.  17.  she  shall  not  stand  on  his  s.  nor  be  for  him 
.fnhn  19.  18,  the  two  thieves,  on  either  a.  one 

34.  but  nneof  soldiers  with  a  speir  pierced  his  a. 

20,  20.  he  shewed  urio  them  his  hands  and  his.». 

25.exceptf  Ihrtisl  myhnnd  i:ilo.»,  will  not  believe 

27.  reach  thv  hand,  and  thrust  it  into  my  3. 

Jlrts  12.7.nngel  smole  releron  the.«.  raised  him  up 

16.  13.  on  the  snhbalh  we  went  out  by  a  river  .». 
Rev.  22.  2.  ou  cither  .«.  of  river  wnsthc  tree  of  life 

See  ClIAMeKRW. 

F.rrrti  fWK. 

JN'uT7i.16. 27.  from  tiibernnclcof  Abiriim  onr7i^T-y.N-. 

.hid".  7.  18.  blow  ye  the  trumpets  on  every  s. 

8.3-1  remembered  not  the  Lord,  who  hnd  delivered 

them  from  their  enemies  on  every  J.  15<im.l?,II. 


SIE 

\Sam.  14.  47.  Saul  fought  ag.  enemici  on  epijrjr  # 
lA'in^*5.3.war3  which  were  about  \i\monevcryi 
4.  the  Lord  hath  given  me  rest  on  every  a. 

1  Chr.  22.  18.  hath  he  not  given  you  rest  on  every  s. 

2  Ckron.  14.  7.  he  bath  given  us  roiit  on  every  s, 
32.  22.  thus  Ihe  Lord  guided  ihein  on  every  s. 

Job  I.  10.  put  a  hedge  about  all  be  hath  on  every  s. 

18.  II.  terror  shall  make  him  afraid  on  every  s. 
19. 10.  be  hiHh  destroyed  me  on  eviry  s.  1  am  gon« 

Psal.  12.  8.  Ihe  wicked  walk  on  eviry  a.  while 
31.13.  fear  was  onercry*.  while  Ihey  look  counsel 
6.5.  12.  and  ihe  little  hills  rejoice  on  every  a- 
71.  21.  thou  slialt  comfoil  me  on  even/  a. 

.Jer.  6.  25.  fear  is  on  every  a.  20.  10.  |  49  20. 

KicA-. 16.33.  that  Ihey  may  come  to  thee  on  eEcrys. 

19.  8.  Ihe  nations  set  against  him  on  evei-y  a. 
23.  22.  1  will  bring  Ihein  against  ibeeoii  every  1. 
28.  23.  judged  by  the  .'word  upon  heron  every  3. 

36.  3.  Ihey  hin'C  swallowed  you  up  on  every  a. 

37.  21.  snith  Lord,  I  will  gaiher  them  on  every  3. 
39. 17. gather  yourselves  to  my  sacrifice  on  every  s. 

Luke  19.  43.  enemies  shall  keepiliee  inoncoery  3. 
2  Cor.  4.  8.  we  are  troubled  on  every  s.  7.  5. 

Farther  SIDE. 

Mark  10. 1.  Jesus  came  by  the  farther  a.  of  J8rdan 

See  Lkft. 

On  this  SIDE. 
Kxod.  37.  8.  one  cherub  on  this  a.  other  on  that* 
.Vwrn.  11.  31.  bro't  quails  a  day'sjotirney  onthias 

22.  24.  a  wall  bciig  071  this  s.  and  on  that  3. 
32.  19.  inheritance  on  this  s.  Jordan,  32.  |  :14.  15 
35.  14.  three  cities  of  refuge  on  this  s.  Jordan 

./«»A.  8.  22.  some  071  this  s.  of  A  i,  and  some  on  that 

33.  Israel  and  judges  stood  n7i  this  3.  the  ark 
1  Sar;(.20.  21.  if  I  say,  the  arrows  are  oh  this  s. 

23.  26.  Siiul  went  on  this  s.  of  the  mountain 
K:rfl  4.16.  shall  have  no  portion  on  this  s.  fhe  river 

5. 3.  governor  (171  Ihis  a.  the  river,  6.  j  6.  13. 1 8.  36. 

AV//.  3.7.  to  throne  of  the  governor  071  this  s.  river 

F.tek.  1.  23.  every  one  had  two  wings,  071  this  a. 

40.  39.  were  two  tables  on  this  .0.  and  two  on  that 

41.  four  tables  o7i  this  a.  four  taldes  on  that  a. 

47. 12.  on  bank  of  river  ti7i  this  s.  «hall  grow  trees 

7>an.l2. 5.  there  stood  other  two,  the  one  071  this  a. 

7.ech.  5. 3.  every  one  that  slealetli  shall  be  cut  off  aa 

■»•!  M(>,t.  every  one  thai  swearelh,on  thut  A. 

another  SIDE. 

.Tosh.  24.  2.  your  fathers  dwell  (>7t  other  3.  the  flood 

1  .*r';7n.!4.40.  I  and  JohhiImo  will  beoT?  llie'«f/idrs. 

2  KinfS  3, 22.  saw  water  on  others,  as  red  as  blood 
2  Chr.  9. 19.  twelve  lions  stood  on  one  and  other  s. 
Ohad.  11.  on  the  day  thou  stotidesi  071  iheotAT*. 
./ohn  6.25.  badfoniid  him  on  ihe  oMrr*.  of  theaea 

night  SIDE. 

1  Kings  6.  9.  the  door  for  I  he  middle  chamber  «B» 

in  the  right  s.  of  Ihe  hous* 

7.  39.  pnt  five  bases  on  Ihe  lii'ht  s.  the  house  ;  set 

the  sea  on  ihe  right  s.  the  house,  2C/'t.  4.  H*. 

40.  five  candlesticks  on  Ihe  right  s.  3 Chr.  4.  9. 

F.zrt.  I.  10.  had  the  face  of  a  lion  on  Ihe  right  f. 

4.  6.  lie  again  on  thy  right  s.  and  shall  bear 
47. 1.  from  undem'^'A^.f.  of  house  ran  waters,  2. 

y.rch.  4.  3.  olive-trees,  one  on  right  s.  ihe  bowl,  II. 
Mark  16.5  saw  young  men  on  right  s.  of  sepoIchrB 
/.vke  I.  II.  nneelsiaiulins  on  r/VAf .«.  of  Iho  alia* 
./ohn  21.  6.  cn-t  the  net  on  thorlghl  s  of  the  ship 
See  Sea,  SotTii,  Way,  West. 
SIDES. 
Frod.  32.  15.  the  tables  were  written  on  both  g 
JVum.  33.  tiri.  shall  he  ihorns  in  yoiir  a    Judg.  2.  3. 
.tosh.  23.  13.  they  shall  be  scourges  m  your  a. 
Jvdg.  5.  30  a  prev  of  needle-work  on  both  ». 
f  Snm.  24.  3.  D.ivid  and  his  men  in  .v.  of  the'cavn 
I  Kings  4  24. Solum,  hiid  peace  ott  all .».  round  him 
r,«'iA '48,  2.  benulirni  is7iononthe.r.  of  the  north 

1v."8,3,  thy  wife  ns  a  fruitful  vine  hv  s.  of  Ihy  house 
fsn.  14.  13,  I  will  sit  also  in  the  s.  of  ihc  north 
15,  ihou  sliiilt  he  broughl  down  lo  .♦.  of  Ihc  pit 

66.  12,  ve  shnfl  he  borne  uimn  her.*,  and  dandlnd 
fer.  6,22,  a  great  nation  raised  from  ,«,oriheoarlh 

48.  28.  makeih  her  iie'tt  in  the  s.  of  the  holes 

49.  32.  I  will  bring  Iheir  cnlninily  from  all  a. 
Fzek    1.  T7.  they  went  upon  th-ir  four  .«.  10.  IT. 

32  23,  whose  graven  are  m-l  in  the  s.  of  the  pit 
48.  1,  for  these  are  hfs  s.  east  and  west 
Flan.  7.  T  32.  his  hellv  itnd  his  .«.  were  of  brass 
.■7mi7.T  6.  in.  say  unto  him  that  is  by.",  of  Ihe  hoiisu 
Jonah  1.  5.  Jonnh  was  gone  down  lo  .».  of  I  he  ship 
Hob.  3.  t  4.  he  had  brijht  beams  oiif  of  his  ». 

91  FOR. 
Firnt.  20. 19.  shall  not  cut  'o  eryiplcx-  thf-mr  in  tke  ». 
28  ,53.  thou  shnll  eat  thv  chiMren  in  tliff*. 
55.  heeiiiise  nothing  lefl  him  in  the  s.  S7. 
irVir.  32.  lO.whereondoyetriisi,  thnt  ye  abide  ilt.T. 
fsa.  29.  3.  I  will  Iny  a.  ngilnsi  Ihee  with  a  mount 
Jrr.  19,  9.  shall  eat  Ihe  flesh  of  his  friend  in  the  t 
r:rk.  4    2,  Inv  .',  offninst  it  anil  liiiilil  a  fort,  3. 

5,  2.  when  Ihe  days  of  the  s.  are  fulfilled 
.Wr,5,1.  he  hath  Inid  .«,  agninst  us,  they  shall  smit* 
Aaft.  3,  14.  draw  tbce  watcrt  for  the  *.  fortify 


SIG 

K€ch.  13.  3.  a  cup  of  trembling,  when  in  the  s. 

SIEVE. 
Isa.  30.  28.  to  sift  the  nations  with  the  ».  of  vanity 
Amos  9.  9.  1  will  sift,  like  ns  corn  ia  sifted  in  a  s. 

SIFT. 
Isa.  30. 28.  to  s.  the  nations  with  the  sieve  of  vanity 
Amos  9.  9. 1  will  s.  Israel  as  corn  is  sifted  in  a  sieve 
L.uke  22.  31.  Simon,  Satan  haih  desired  to  $.  you 

SIGH. 
Isa.  24.  7.  wine  mournelh,  uU  merry-hearted  Aos. 
Liam.  1.  4.  her  priests  «.  {|  11.  all  her  people  5. 

21.  they  have  heard  that  I  *.  none  to  comfort  me 
Eiek.  9.  4.  set  a  ninrk  on  foreheads  of  fliien  thats. 
SI.  6.  s.  therefore  with  the  hrealiing  of  thy  loins, 
and  with  bittern(>ss  s.  before  their  eyes 
SIGHED. 
Kzod.  2.  23.  Israel  s.  by  reason  of  the  bondage 
Mark  7.  34.  and  looking  up  to  heaven,  ho  «. 
8.  12.  s.  deeply  in  his  spirit,  and  saitli,  why  doth 

SIGUEST. 
jEzeA:.21.7.  when  they  say  to  thee,  whereforcs.thou? 

SIGHETH. 
Lam.  1.  8.  yea,  she  £.  and  turnoth  backward 

SIGHING. 
«/i>63.24.my.<.  coinelh  before  I  eat,  roarings  poured 
Psal.  12.  5.  for  the  s.  of  the  needy  will  I  arise 
31. 10.  my  life  is  spent  with  grief,  my  years  with  i 
79.  11.  let  Ihes.  of  the  prisoner  come  before  th(^e 
ha.  21.  2.  all  the  «.  thereof  have  I  made  to  cease 
35.10.obtain  joy,  and  sorrow  and  «.  shall  flee  away 
Jer.  45.  3.  1  fainted  in  my  s.  and  I  lind  no  rest 

SIGHS. 
Lam.  1.  22.  for  my  s.  are  many,  my  heart  is  faint 

SIGHT. 
Oen.  2.  9.  every  tree  that  is  pleasant  to  the  i. 
Kxod.  3.  3.  I  will  now  turn  and  see  this  great  s. 
24.  17.  «.  ofglory  of  Lord  was  like  devouring  fire 
Lev.  13.  3.  the  plague  in  s.  be  deeper,  20,  25,  30. 

4.  in  s.  be  not  deeper  than  the  skin,  31,  32,  34. 
14.  37.  if  the  jilague  in  s.  be  lower  than  the  wall 

JVuOT.  13.33.  we  saw  the  giants,  and  we  were  in  our 
own  s.  asgra6shopper.i<,  and  so  we  were  in  theirs. 

27.  19.  before  conj;.  and  give  him  charge  in  theirs. 
Deut.  28.  34.  shaltbe  mad  for  s.  of  thine  eyes,  (57. 
./w.sA.23.  5.  God  shall  drive  tliuni  from  out  ofyour  s. 

24. 17.  whicli  did  those  great  signs  in  our  s. 
2  Sam.  23.  t  21.  he  slew  an  Egyptian,  a  man  of  s 

1  Kingal.  \i.  anil  s.  was  against  s.  in  three  ranks 

2  King.-i  2.  t  7.  fifty  of  sons  of  prophets  stood  in  s 
Job  18.  3.  why  are  we  reputed  vile  in  your  s. 

19. 15.  me  for  a  stranger,  I  am  an  alien  in  theirs 

21.  8.  their  sec^d  is  established  in  theirs,  with  tlieni 

34.26.  he  striketh  tlieni  in  the  open  s.  of  others 

41.  9.  siiall  not  one  be  cast  down  at  thes.  of  him? 

Pial.  79.  10.  be  known  among  the  heathen  in  ours. 

£cc^6.0.  better  is  thes.  of  theeyes  than  wanderin: 

Isa.  5.  21.  them  that  are  i>rudent  in  their  own  s. 

11.3.  he  shall  not  judge  after  the  s.  of  his  eyes 

Jer.  51.  24. 1  will  render  evil  done  in  Ziun  iti  yours 

Eick.  4. 12.  thou  shall  bake  it  with  dung  in  their  s, 

12.  3.  prepare,  and  remove  by  day  in  llieir  s.  4. 

5.  dig  thou  thro'  the  wall  in  their  s.  and  carry  out 
20.  9.  in  whose  s.  I  made  myself  known  to  them 

14.  heathen  in  whose  s.  I  brought  them  out,  22. 

43.  shall  loathe  youi  selves  in  your  own  s.  36.  31. 
21.23.  shall  be  as  a  false  divination  in  their  s. 
2;i.  t  16.  at  the  s.  of  her  eyes  she  doted  on  them 
4:(.ll.  shew  the  forms  thereof,  and  write  in  their  s. 
Dan.  4.  11.  s.  thereof  to  end  of  all  the  earth,  20. 

8.  t5.  the  goat  had  a  horn  ofs.  between  his  eyes 
Hos.  2.  2.  put  away  her  whoredoms  out  of  her  s. 
Mat.  11.  5.  the  blind  receive  their  s.  the  lame  walk, 

the  lepers  are  cleansed,  20.  34.  l^uke  7.  21. 
Luke  4.  18.  preach  the  recovering  of  s.  to  the  blind 

23.  48.  that  came  to  that  s.  smote  their  breasts 

24.  31.  they  knew  him,  he  vanished outof  theirs. 
John  9.  11.  I  went  and  washed,  and  I  received  s. 
Jictt  1.  9.  and  a  cloud  received  him  outof  their  s. 

7.  31.  when  Moses  saw  it,  he  wondered  at  the  s. 

9.  9.  was  three  days  without  s.  nor  eat  nor  drink 
18.  ho  received  s.  forthwith,  arose,  was  baptized 

2  Cot.  5.7.  for  wo  walk  by  faith,  not  by  .». 

Ueb.  12.  21.  60  terrible  was  the  s.  that  Moses  said 

SIGHT  of  God. 
Prov.  3.4.  find  good  understanding  in  the  s.  of  God 
J.ukc  16.  l."?    is  abomination  in  the  s.  of  God 
Acts  4.  19.  whether  right  in  s.  of  God  to  hearken 

8.  21.  thy  heart  is  not  right  in  tlie  s.  of  God 

10.  31.  thy  alms  had  in  remembrance  in  s.of  God 
S  Cor.  2.  17.  in  the  s.  of  God  speak  we  in  Christ 

4.  2.  to  every  man's  conscience  in  the  s.  of  God 
7.  12.  our  care  for  you  in  s.  of  God  might  appear 
Gal.  3.  11.  no  man  justified  by  the  law  in  s.of  God 
lT'/iess.l.3.  remembering  work  of  faith  ins.  of  God 
1  Tim.  2.3.  (his  is  good  and  acceptable  in  a.  of  God 
6.  13.  I  give  thee  charge  in  the  s.  of  God 
I  Pet.  3.  4.  which  is  in  the  s.  of  God  of  great  price 

Ifis  SIGHT. 

F.zod.  I.*).  26.  if  wilt  do  that  which  is  right  in  Ai«  i. 

Ltv.lZ.i.  behold,  If  the  plague  in  his  s.  be  al  a  stay 

543 


^  SIG 

Lev.  13.  37.  but  if  the  scall  be  In  his  s.  at  a  stay 
JVum.  19.  5.  and  one  shall  burn  the  heifer  tnhiss. 
/>e«r.4.37.he  brought  thee  out  inA/ss.outof  Egy()t 
Judg.  6.  21.  the  angel  of  Lord  departed  out  ofAis  s. 
iSam.1-2.  9.  why  despised  Lord,  to  do  evil  in  hiss. 

13.  8.  so  Tamar  went  and  made  cakes  in  his  s. 
2Kinffsn.l8.  remove  them  out  of  A.s.  20,23.  1 24.3. 
1  ChroH.  19.  13.  the  Lord  do  what  is  gooil  in  hiss. 
Job  15. 15.  the  heavens  are  not  clean  in  Ais  s. 

25.  5.  yea,  the  stars  are  nut  pure  in  Ai's  s. 

40.  t  24.  will  any  take  him  in  Ais  s.? 
PsaM0.5.thy  judgments  are  far  above  out  ofAi's  s. 

72.  14.  precious  shall  their  blood  bu  in  his  s 
Kccl.ii.'2ti.God  givcthio  a  man  that  is  good  in  Ais  s. 

8.3.  bo  not  hasty  to  go  out  of  A/ss.  stand  not  in  evil 
Hos.  6.2.  he  will  raise  us,  and  wo  shall  live  in  Ais  s. 
Murk  10.52.  Uartimeus immediately  received  Aiss. 
and  followed  Jesus  in  the  way,  Luke  18.  43. 
■/ohn  9.  15.  asked  how  he  hud  received  Ais  s.  18. 
./lets  9.  12.  a  vision  that  he  might  receive  Ais  s. 
liom.[i.20.  by  law  shall  no  llesh  be  justified  in  Ais  s. 
Col.  1.  22.  thro'  death  to  present  you  holy  in  Ais  s. 
Hcb.  4.  13.  every  creature  is  manifest  in  Ais  s. 

13.  21.  working  what  is  well  pleasing  in  Ais  s. 
UoA;i3.22.do  those  things  that  are  pleasing  in  Aiss. 

I7i  the  SIGHT. 

Gen. 21. 11.  the  thing  wasgrievous  in  Abraham's  s. 
47.  18.  there  is  not  ought  left  in  the  s.  of  my  lord 

Ezod.  4.  .30.  and  did  the  sigiuiit  thes.  of  the  people 
7.  20.  he  smote  the  waters  i/ilhe  s.  of  Pharaoh 
9.8.Mosessi)rinkled  the  ashes  in  (Aes.ofPharaiih 
11.3.  Moses  great  in  thes.  of  Pharaoh's  servants 
17.  6.  Moses  did  so  in  the  s.  of  the  elders  of  Israel 
19. 11.  the  Lord  will  comedown  in  thes.  of  people 
40.38.  fire  by  night  in  £Aes.  of  Israel  all  journeys 

/.ev.  20.  17.  shall  be  cut  ofTinthe  s.of  the  peoi)le 
26.  45.  out  of  Egypt  in  the  s.  of  the  heathen 

JVum.  3.4.  lihainar  ministered  in  the  s.  oi  Aaron 
20.  27.  Aaron  and  Eleazar  wenti'ii^Ac  s.  ofcong. 
25.6.brought  Midiaiiitish  woman  in  tA?s. of  Moses 

33.  3.  went  with  high  hand  in  the  .i.  of  Egyptians 
/^cu<.4.6.for  this  is  your  wisdom  in  (Aes.ofnations 

31.  7.  Moses  said  to  Joshua  in  the  s.  of  all  Israel 

34.  12.  terror  Moses  shewed  in  the  s.  of  all  Israel 
./osA.  3. 7.  to  magnify  ihce  in  the  s.  of  Israel,  4.  14. 

10.  12.  he  said,  in  the  s.  of  Israel,  sun,  stand  slill 

1  Ham.  18.  5.  Uavid  aeeei)ted  in  the  s.  of  the  people 

2  Sam.  12. 11.  lie  with  thy  wives  in  thes.  of  this  sui 

1  Chr.  28.  8.  in.  the  s.  of  all  Israel  keep  cominaiid 
29.  25.  Lord  mtignified  Solomon  in  thes.  of  Israel 

2C'Ai-.32.2;).  Hezekiah  magnified  in  the  s.  ofnations 
Kira  9. 9.  shewed  mercy  i«  the  s.  of  kings  of  Persia 
JVeh.  1.  11.  grant  him  mercy  in  the  s.  of  this  man 

8.  5.  opened  the  book  in  the  s.  of  all  the  people 
I's.  T8.  12.  marvellous  things  did  he  in  s.  of  lathers 

98.  2.  he  opeidy  shewed  in  thes.  of  the  heathen 
Proji.l.  17.  in  vain  net  issjjread  in  thes.  of  any  bird 

4.  3.  tender  and  beloved  in  the  s.  of  my  mother 
Eccl.  II.  9.  and  walk  i«  the  s.  of  thine  eyes 
.fer.  19.  10.  break  the  bottle  in  the  s.  of  the  men 

.32.  12.  1  gave  the  evidence  in  £Aes.  of  Hanameel 

43.  9.  hid  stones  in  tlu:  s.  of  the  men  of  Juduh 
Kzek.5.8.  e.\ecutejndgnienlsi7i  thes.  of  the  nations 

14.  Jerusalem  a  re|iroach  in  s.  of  all  that  pass  by 
16. 41.  judgment  on  thee  in  the  s.of  many  women 
20.  22.  name  not  be  polluted  in.i.  of  the  heathen 
28.  18.  I  will  bring  thee  to  ashes  in  the  s.  of  all 

25.  be  sanctified  in  them  in  s.  of  heathen,. 39. 27. 
.36.  34.  lay  desolate  in  the  s.  of  all  that  passed  by 
llos.'i.  10. 1  will  discover  lewdness  in  s.  of  her  lovers 
Jicts  7.  10.  gave  him  wisdom  in  the  s.  of  Pharaoh 
Horn.  12.  17.  provide  thingshonest  in  s.  of  all  men 

2  Cor.  2.  t  10.  I  forgave  it  in  the  s.  of  Christ 
Hcv.  13.  13.  inaketh  fire  come  down  in  s.  of  men 

14.  miracles  he  hud  power  to  do  in  s.  of  the  beast 

See  Lord. 

Jl/y  SIGHT. 

Gen.  23. 4.  that  I  may  bury  my  dead  out  ofmys.  8. 

Exod.  33.  12.  thou  hast  found  grace  in  my  s.  17. 

1  Sam.  29.  6.  thy  coming  in  is  good  in  my  s. 
9. 1  know  that  thou  art  good  in  my  s.  as  an  angel 

2  Sam.  6.  22.  and  I  will  be  base  in  mine  own  s. 
13. 5.  let  Tamar  come,  and  dress  the  meat  in  mys, 

6.  come,  and  make  me  a  couple  ofcukesinTiij/s. 
1  King.i  8.25.not  fail  thee  a  man  in  my  s.  2  CAr.6.1(>. 

9.  7.  this  house  which  I  have  hallowed  for  my 
name  will  I  cast  out  i>(  my  s.  2  Chron.  7.  20. 

n.  .'18.  if  thou  wilt  do  that  is  right  in  my  s. 

2A"in^.t2I.15.havedoncthatwhicliwasevil  in  mys. 
23.  27.  I  will  remove  Judah  also  out  of  7«y  s. 

1  Chr.  22.  8.  thou  hast  shed  much  blood  in  my  s. 

Psal.  101.7.  thattelleth  lies,  shall  not  tarry  inmy  s. 

T.sa.  43.  4.  since  thou  wast  precious  in  my  s. 

Jer.  4. 1.  will  put  away  abominations  out  of  mys. 
7. 15   1  will  r-ast  you  out  of  my  s.  as  your  brethren 
30.  the  children  of  Judah  Imvedone  evil  inmy  s. 
15.  1.  cast  them  out  of  my  s.  and  let  them  go 
18.  10.  if  it  do  evil  in  my  s.  that  it  obey  not 
34.  15.  ye  turned,  and  had  done  right  in  my  s. 

Ezek.  10. 2.  be  want  in  my  s.  to  fill  his  hand 
4B 


SIG 

Szek.  jO.  19.  mounted  uji  from  the  eauh  In  ?n>  *. 
Amos  9. 3.  be  hid  from  my  s.  in  the  bottom  of  ths  sea 
Mark  10.  51.  what  wilt  thou  I  should  do  to  theej 
Lord,  that  I  might  receive  my  s.  Luke  18. 41. 
7'Ay  SIGHT. 
Gen.  19.  19.  thy  servant  hath  found  grace  in  tAy». 
21.  12.  God  said,  let  it  not  be  grievous  in  thy  s. 
33.  10.  Jacob  said,  if  I  have  found  grace  infAy». 
47.  29.  Kxod.  33.  13,  16.  |  34.  9.  Judg.  0.  17. 
Lev.  25.  53.  shall  not  rule  with  rigour  in  thy  s. 

1  Sam.  15.  17.  when  thou  wast  little  in  thine'owns. 
iSmn.T.O.  have  cut  oft' thine  enemies  outof  tAy  a, 

19.  this  was  yet  a  small  thing  in  tAy  s. 
H.  22.  knoweth  I  have  found  grace  in  tAy  s. 

2  Kings  1.  13.  let  my  lite  be  precious  in  thy  s.  14. 
20.  3.  done  what  was  good  in  thy  s.  /.•.■«.  '.iS.  3. 

Psal.  5.  5.  the  foolish  shall  not  stand  in  thy  s. 
9.  19.  arise.  Lord,  let  heathen  be  judged  in  thys. 
19.  14.  meditat.  of  my  heart  he  acceptable  In  thys. 
51.  4.  I  have  sinned,  and  done  this  evil  in  thi/  s. 
76.  7.  who  may  stand  in  thy  s.  when  once  thou 
art  angry  1 
90. 4.  thousand  years  in  tAy  j.  are  but  as  yesterday 
143.  2.  for  in  tAy  s.  shall  no  man  bo  justified 

Isa.  26.  17.  so  have  wo  been  in  thy  s.  O  Lord 

./cr.  18.  23.  neither  blot  out  their  sin  from  thy  3. 

Jiinah  2.  4.  then  I  said,  I  am  cast  out  of  tAy  s. 

Mat.  11.26.  so  it  seemed  good  in  thys.  Luke  10.21. 

AuAclS.ai.havesinnedagainst heaven  and  inlhyt. 
18.  42.  Jesus  said  unto  him,  receive  tAy  s. 

.'?(:<,v9.17.  sent  me  thai  thou  mightest  receive  tAy  s. 

22. 13.  stood  and  »aid,brollier  Saul,  receive  thy  s. 

See  Favour,  FrND. 

SIGHTS. 

Luke  21.  II.  shall  be  fe:irful  s.  signs  from  heaven 
SIGN, 

Or  token,  is  taken,  I.  for  any  thing  that  serves 
to  express  or  represent  another  thing :  as,  ichen 
the  Lord  gave  to  Noah  the  rainbow,  as  a  sign 
or  token  of  his  covenant,  Gen.  9.  12,  13.  and 
when  he  appointed  AbrhUam  the  use  of  circum- 
cision, as  the  sig7i  and  seal  of  the  covenant  ht 
made  with  him  and  his  posterity,  Gen.  17.  11. 
Rom.  4.  II.  Circumrision  was  asign, evidence, 
or  assurance,  both  of  the  blessing  promised  bf 
God,  and  of  man's  obligation  to  the  duties  re- 
quired. 'J'he  sun  and  moon  are  appointed  At 
(Vod /or  signs  and  seasons.  Gen.  1.  14.  7'Aey 
represent  the  quality  of  the  weather  by  lh» 
manner  of  their  rising  or  setting,  by  their 
eclipses,  conjunctions,  (J-c.  Mat.  16.  2,  3. 
Sometimes  they  are  forerunners  of  great  cala- 
mities, o.nd  remarkable  events  in  thccourse  of 
human  affairs,  by  their  strange  appearances, 
unusual  conjunctions,  Ji-c.  Luke  21.25,  26.  Actj 
2.  19,  20. 

II.  Sign  is  put  for  a  miracle:  Thou  sh.-ilt  take 
this  rod  in  thine  hand,  wherewith  thou  slialt  do 
sign,s,  says  the  Lord  to  Moses,  Exod.  4.  17. 
and  if  the  Egyptians  do  not  believe  the  first 
sign,  they  will  believe  the  second,  Exod.  4.  8 
'J'he  word  sign  is  frequent  in  this  sense  in 
scripture. 

III.  A  sign  or  token  is  often  put  for  the  proof 
or  evidence  of  a  thing,  for  example  :  This  shall 
be  a  token,  or  sign,  unto  thee,  that  I  have 
sent  thee,  Eind.  3.  12.  Shew  mo  a  sign  that 
thou  talkc.nt  with  me,  that  is,  a  proof,  Judg. 
6.  17.  What  shall  he  the  sign,  or  evidence 
that  the  Lord  w ill  heal  me  1  2  A'ino's  20.  a 
This  acceptation  agrees  with  the  first  above 
mrntioned. 

IV.  The  signs  of  heaven  ;  the  signs  of  the  magi- 
cians; are  the  phenomena  of  the  heavens,  the 
motions  of  the  stars  and  planets,  the  appear- 
ances of  meteors,  and  the  like;  and  the  impos- 
tures of  magicians,  which  they  make  use  of  to 
deceive  the  weak.  "The  Lord  trustratcth  the  to- 
kens, or  signs,  of  the  liars,  and  maketh  diviners 
mad,  fsa.  44.  25.  And  in  Jer.  10.  2,  Be  not 
dismayed  at  the  signs  of  heaven,  for  the  heathen 
are  dismayed  a!  tln^m. 

To  be  a  sign  to  the  house  of  Israel,  that  is,  to  hi 
a  prophecy,  type,  or  prediction  of  what  should 
happen  to  the  house  o/Isracl.  7'Aiis  the  prophet 
Ezi'kiel  by  the  type  of  a  siege  shews  what  should 
happen  to  Jerusalem  some  time  after,  Ezek.  4. 
3.  And  in  chap.  14.  8.  the  Lord  pours  down 
his  vengeance  upon  sinners,  and  makes  them  a.i 
a  sign,  as  a  public  and  sensible  proof,  of  his 
wrath.  The  prophet  Isaiah  says:  Heboid,  I 
and  the  children  whom  the  Lord  hath  given  me, 
are  for  signs  and  for  wonders  in  Israel,  Isa. 
8.  18.  fVe  are  a  gazing-stock  to  them,  and 
wondered  at  for  our  folly  in  believing  the  pro- 
mises of  God. 

Exod.  4.  8.  if  they  believe  not  nor  hearken  to  voice 
of  firsts. they  will  believe  the  voice  ofthe  latter*. 
8.2.3. 1  will  put  division,  to-morrow  shall  this*.  b« 
13.  9.  it  shall  be  a  s.  to  ihue  upon  thine  haad 


SIQ 

Ezoil.  31.  13.  my  •nlilmth*  yoliall  konp,  for  it  ii  ft 
$.  betwuon  mo  and  you.  17.  Kick.  M,  lu,  M. 
J^um-  10.  IIH.  anil  tlii:y  iiliull  In;  ii  «.  uiilo  Urui:! 

itO.  lU.  Iir«  liiiviiiiro'l  tliuiii,  ami  lliiiy  tjcviiiriii  ii  ». 
Veul.  (i.  M.  1)111(1  Ilium  lor  ii  *.  on  lliyliaiiil,  II.  Irt. 

i'i.  I.  li' lliureiiriHu  a  |irij|>liul,  fiiiil  gividli  tlii:u  ii />. 

2.  and  K.  coriK!  to  |m»ii  wlicn^ol  liu  niiiiko  tolliui: 
'JH,  40.  tlicy  Hlinll  iiuon  lliiiu  lor  u  «.  and  a  wuiidvr 

./o«/(.  4.  0.  Hint  tliin  may  Iju  a  *.  anion;,'  yon 
JudfrW.  17.  lli.Mi  uliew  nil!  a  «.  llmu  talkent  willi  mo 

\t»:M.viiin  un  n|i|Mmiti'il  a.  Iiiilwucn  Ivraul  anil  liiim 

1  .Sam.  y.  3-1.  lliiri  kIiiiII  lie  a  a.  to  ttiuo,  in  one  day 

lli(7  Hliall  dii!  I.otli  oIlliKin,  i  KiiigH  lU.  ilU. 

14.  10.  wo  will  go  up,  tlim  Hliall  li"  a  e.  iinlo  un 

1  KiitKH  \'.\.  'A.  fjavoii  H.  lliDiiiiiiii!  day,  Kiiyni^,  lliiii 

JH  lliu  A.tlii!  Lord  liatli  H|iiikuii, altar  Hliall  liu  ri;nt 

.V  according  to  lli<:«.  tiiu  man  olOod  liiilli  mvnii 

3  Kings  ao.  «.  wlinl  ulinll  bu  llio  *.  Lord  will  Imal 

•  O.lliiii*.  Kliall  liavo  ol  ],.  ha.  Xl.  M.  \  llrt.  7,  'ii. 

2  i:hr.  ;U.  24.  Ini  upako  lo  liim,  lio  y'^o  liini  a  *. 
Ua.  7.  II.  a«k  llino  u  «.  oltlio  Lord  lliy  (iod,i!lk 

J4.  L.limimlli'lmllKiviiyoiJ  a*.  I.idiold  avir/jiii 
lU.  ^U.  It  iiliall  In:  lor  a  «.  onto  lliu  I^oril  of  lioiitK 
311.  ;i.  an  Inuiali  halli  wulkod  liaro-liiot  lor  n  «. 
.1.1.  l.'t.  it  !tli;ill  111!  I'lir  a  iiami;,  liir  an  DvurlaMting*. 
0(5.  I'J.  I  will  But  a  *.  anions  Ilium  and  will  uund 
Jn.  0.  1.  »iA  ii|i  a  K.  of  firu  in  Hiilli-liatuurom 
41.  211.  and  tliiH  Hliall  liii  a  n.  to  you,  IjiiluM.  12. 
y.ir.k.  4.  U.  tliiH  hIiiiII  I>u  a  u.  to  tliu  hoUHU  ol'iHraul 
12.  li.  1  liavu  H<:t  llii-i:  t'nr  n  n.  to  Inraul,  II. 
14.  H.  I  will  miiku  liiiii  a  ».  a  (irov(,Tli,iind  cut  oil' 
24.24.  tliuN  Kzukiul  ih  u  ».  1|  27.llion  iilialt  ho  a.s-. 
:i'J.  M.  Iliuii  Hliall  liu  ma  u|i  a  «.  Iiy  it  till  ImriuiH 
.Vat.  12.  :tH.  Haying',  MiiMirr,  wo  would  Kiro  a  ». 
from  lliuu,  Iti.  1.  Murli  H.  11.  I.ukc  II.  10. 
31).  an  uvll  and  adulturoiiH  Ri'mfation    iiuokelli 
uliur  u  u.  111.  4.  Mark  «.  12.  J.ukr.  11.  2!t. 
tliurn  Hliall  no  a.  \m  i;ivoii,  lint  llin  «.  ofthu 
pro|iliut  JonaH,  Mark  8.  12.  I.ukr  1 1.  2'.I,:(U. 
.24.  3.  and  wlnii  hImiII  bo  llio  «.  ol"  lliy  (•oiniii;,'7 
'iti.  Ihun  hIiiiII  a|i|iuar  the  a.  of  tliii  Hon  of  man 
2<i.  4H.  now  ho  that  betrayed  him  f,'avo  tliem  a  a. 
Mark  i:).  4.  w  liat  s.  wliun  nil  tlicHO  thin^jn  Hliall  he 
J.ukfi.  :M.  lor  ft  a.  wliicli  Bhiill  he  Hiiokiin  iiKain»t 
John  2.  H.  what  *.  hliuweHt  Ihou  unto  u*  }  <l.  !«). 
Jlcls'i^.  1 1,  a  Hlii|i,wlioHU«.  wait  <..'a»tor  anil  I'olliix 
Xom.  4.  11.  be  received  *.  o('cir«iini(;i»ion,  a  Heal 
\('iir.  1.22.  for  Jew»re(|uirii«  (JreekBHuek  windoin 
14.  22.  wherelore  loiiKueB  are  a.  not  lo  them  that 
hev.  1.).  1. 1  naw  anotliir  a.  in  hi;avun,  Huven  uiigelH 

Ki(;\. 

Dan.  (').  H.  O  king,  i-hLtIiIihIi  decree,  a.  the  writing 

hi(;ni;i). 

Dan.  C.  I),  wherefore  king  l),iriiiH  a.  the  writing 
10.  wlien  Daniel  knew  that  tliu  writing  wan  a. 
12.  they  Hiiake,  haul  tlioii  not  a.  a  ducruu 
SIGNS. 
^;fn.l. 14. let  them  bo  lord,  and  forseaiionB,  fordayH 
Kind.  4.  1(.  if  they  will  not  believe  Ihenu  two  *. 
17.  with  (lliu  rod  in  thy  liitnd  llioii  Hlialt  do  a. 
28.  MoHeH  told  .Aaron  all  words  of  Lord  and  all  a. 
which  he  had  commanded,  31).  ./«»//.  24.  17. 
7.  3.  I  will  mulliiily  my  «.  in  the  land  of  Kgypl 
10.2.  iiiayeHt  tell  thy  Hon  my  a.  which  I  have  done 
Jfum.  14.  II.  for  all  llie*.  wliiih  I  have  Hlicwed 
Dnil.  4. 114.  to  tftke  him  a  nation  by  a.  2ii.  H. 
(i.  22.  Lord  Hhowi.'d  a.  on  Kgyi'l,  on  I'harnoh  and 
on  all  liiH  hoiiHuhold,  JVr/t.  'J.  10.  I'aal.  7H.4:i. 
7.  IS),  the  great  a.  which  thine  eye*  naw,  2i).  3. 
34.  II.  in  all  a.  which  the  Lord  nent  him  to  do 

1  Sam.  10.  7.  when  tliine  «.  are  come  nnio  thou 
0   and  all  iIiohu  a.  came  to  |iiih«  lliiit  day 

2  A'in/f»2;i.f.1.|)iildowii  Iheiii  that  hum  to  twelve  *. 
Job  '.)h.  t  32.  ciuiHt  llioii  bring  forth  the  Iwelvu  ».? 
Paal.  74.  4.  limy  nvX  n|i  their  ennignn  for  *. 

U.  we  HUe  not  oiirx.  tiiere  in  no  more  any  profihel 
10.1.  27.  Hhewed  IiIh  a.  among  them,  and  wouderH 

laa.  H    Iri.  behold,  I  and  the  children  are  tor  a. 

Jrr.  10.  2.  be  not  dinmayed  nt  the  *.  of  luaven 
32.  20.  which  hanliict  *.  and  wondern  in  Kgypl 

21.  hant  hroiigbt  forth  Nrael  out  of  Kgypl  with*. 
Dan.A.'i.  I  Ihoiigbl  it  good  loniiew  *.  and  wonderH 

3.  how  great  are  hi*  a.  I  how  mighty  liin  wonderH 
n.  27.  he  worknlh  a.  in  heaven  and  in  I'arlh 

Mat.  Itf.  3.  rnn  ye  not  iliHcorn  the  a.  of  the  liinoHl 
24. 24.  Ilinin  nbull  nriiie  faJHuCbriHtii  nnd  laiKe  pro- 
phetH,  and  hIihII  Rhew  great  a.  Murk  13.  22. 
Mark  Iti.  17.  Ihene  a.  follow  ibem  llmt  believe 

20.  confirming  (he  word  with  a.  following 
J.uke  l.f)2.  Ihey  made  a.  lo  bin  falliei  Zaciinriiii 
21.  11.  and  great  a.  »\in\\  Iheie  he  from  hnnvun 

2.1.  (hern  nhnll  be  a.  in  (lie  huh,  moon,  and  iKarH 
'o'ln  4.  4H.  except  ye  nee  a.  ye  will  not  believe 
20.  30.  nnd  many  oilier  a.  truly  did  .leiiuii 
^ela  2.  1'.).  I  will  nbew  *.  in  (he  enrlh  benealh 

22.  ft  miiTi  approved  of  (loil  by  ».  whichCiod  did 
43.  mniiy  *.  were  done  by  the  BpomleH,  .1.  12. 

4.  30.  that  ».  may  he  done  by  (he  nnni«-  of  .lemiH 
7. 3fl.  after  he  hndihewed  a.  and  wombrH  in  Kgypl 

5.  13.  then  tiimunwoiidrriid,  buhoiding  tliu  *.  ilunu 

frM 


SIL 

./Ids  14.  3.  granted  a.  wondara  to  ho  done  hy  hnndn 
Kom.  15.  1<J.  thingHChriiit  hath  not  wroughtby  me 
through  ini|^lily«.  und  wondem,  2  Cur.  12.  12. 
2  'I'hiaa.  2.9.  alter  (he  working  ofHalan,  with  a. 
//ci.2.4.<>.  hear  ihuni  witnuait  with  it.  and  wondem 

HIGNKT. 
(le.n.  38.  18.  give  me  (hy  a.  nnd  thy  ulaif,  25. 
Kxiid.  '.M.  II.  widi  work  of  an  engraver  in  Htone, 
like  the  engravingn  of  a /(.  21.  3fi.  |  3!t.  14,  :«). 
.fr.r.'ii.  24.  Iho'  (/'oniali  wore  a.  on  my  right  hand 
/Jan.  ii.  17.  the  king  Healed  it  with  bin  own  a. 
Hag.  ii.  23.  i  will  take  thee  and  make  thcu  ui  a  i. 

HUJNKTW. 
F.xod.  31).  6.  onyx-Htonei  graven  ai  a.  are  gr'ivun 

HIONIKHJANT. 
1  Cur.  14.  1 1),  "o  you,  except  you  utter  wordi  t. 

HlliNll'IC.\Tl(>N. 
I  Cur.  14.  10.  and  none  of  (hem  in  without  a. 

HIGNIFV. 
Mela  21.  2(i.  lo  *.  the  accompliHhment  ofihe  dayii 
23.  1.1.  a.  to  (he  chief  caplnin  that  he  bring  Paul 
2.1.  27.  and  not  to  ji.  the  crimeH  laid  ngainnl  him 
1  I'et.  I.  11.  Higiiii'ying  wha(  ripirit  in  tliem  did  «. 

HKiNiriKIJ. 
Jtr.ta  11.  28.  .AgaliuK  a.  (here  Hhoiild  be  dearth 
Ueo.  1.  1.  a.  it  by  Iiih  angel  to  hiH  Hetvant  .iohii 

HUJNIKtK'ril. 
Ilch.  12.  27.  a.  removing  of  tlioHu  thingM  ahaken 

HIGNIFYING. 
John  12.33.  thiH  he  nail!,  K.  by  whatdi.-ath  he  nhould 
glorify  (;od,  IH.  32.  |  21    li). 
Ilr.b.  1).  H.  the  Holy  (;iiost  tliiH  a.  that  the  way 

HILKNCK. 
77(1*  word  dura  not  only  aignify  Ihc  ordinary  si- 
lence, or  refraining  from  aptiiking  ;  but  alao, 
in  the  alyli:  of  the  TielitewH,  it  ia  lakrn  fur  lo 
be  <piie(,  to  remain  immovi^able.     Joah.  10.  12, 

13,  Sun,  Hdiiid  thou  atill  upon  fJihrnn:  llidiruw, 
be  Kibnt.  And  (he  huh  Htood  Htill,  and. the 
iiiooii  Hliiycd,  ur  were  Hilent  at  Ihf  command- 
mini  »/ JoHbiia.  Jlnd  in  I'rov.  2(i.  20,  Where 
there  in  no  talu-biNircr,  the  htrife  ceanuth,  or  in 
■ileiit.  i^xUnM-.i:  ia  takim  for  an  r.ntirc  rain  or 
diatruclion,  for  a  tutuL  auhjrrt.ion,  Ixa.  1.1.  1. 
Jlr  III'  Miiah  IH  liiid  waide,  and  brought  (o  ni- 
leiice,  «r,  ia  iillirly  destroyed,     .dlao  in  ./cr.  H. 

14,  'I'hu  Lord  our  God  balli  put  iih  to  Hilence, 
or,  haa  hrovght  great  calamiliv.a  upon  ua.  Hi- 
hmco  1.1  alio  loltc.n  for  death  and  the,  granr. 
I'hal.  1)4.  17,  L'nliKS  the  Lord  had  been  my 
help,  Miy  Koiil  hail  alinoHt  dwelt  in  Hilciice. 
JInd  in\'iMi\.  11.1.  17,  'i'bu  dead  (iraiHii  not  the 
Lord,  neither  any  tlial  go  down  into  Hilence. 
7'/(c //n/pArt  .lereniiali  aaya.  Let  iih  enter  into 
the  defem^nd  ciliuH,  nnd  let  iih  be  Hilent  there, 
.ler.  8.  14.  1,1 1  ua  hasten  to  aome,  place  of 
strength  lo  arcurc  ourarlitea,  and  let  ua  ait 
still,  und  not  aay  a  word  to  provoke  au  potent 
an  enemy,  aa  the  (^'hnlileniiH  are. 

.loll  4.  10.  ail  image  wan  before  nic,  there  was  a. 

2'.).  21.  men  gave  ear,  and  kept  a.  nt  my  counael 
l'i,al.'.\\.  18.  let  the  lying  lipH  be  pill  (ox. 

3'.).  2.  I  wiiH  iliiinb  with  a.  1  held  my  pence 

!I4.  17.  my  I'oiil  had  iilmoHl  dwell  in  a. 

11.1.  17.  niitler  any  thai  go  down  iiilo  a. 
laa.  1.1.  I.  Moiih  brought  to  a.  Kir  brought  to  a. 
.ler.  H.  14.  llio  [jord  our  (ioil  lialh  pot  iih  to  a. 
I. am.  3.  28.  he  Hitlelb  alone  and  kiepelh  y.  hccauHC 
Jlnioa  8.  3.  they  Hhall  cant  them  forth  with  a. 
Mat.  22.34.  bad  heard  huhad  put  SiiddnceeH  to  x. 
Jleta  21.  40.  there  wan  made  a  great  a.  he  Kpake 

22.  2.  thai  ho  Hpnke  in  Hebrew,  (hey  kept  rnore«. 
I  'I'im.  2.  It.  let  women  learn  in  a.  with  Huhjecdun 
12. 1  Hiiffer  not  a  woman  to  (each,  nor  to  UHiirp 
aiilhority  over  the  man,  but  lo  he  in  a. 
1  I'el.  2.  1.1.  may  put  to  a.  ignorance  of  foolixh  men 
lien.  8.  I.  there  wan  a.  in  heaven  lialf  an  hour 
Hee  Kkki",  Kici'T. 
HILKNT. 
Joah.  10.  t  12.  hn  Raid,  nun,  he.  a.  upon  Gihuon 
Judg.  Ki.  t  2.  they  were  a.  all  the  night,  miying 
I  .S'lKri.  2.  II.  the  wicked  Mhall  be  a.  in  darkncHH 

7.  t  8.  be  not  *.  from  UH  from  crying  lo  the  Iiiird 
2.Sijm.  li).  t  10.  why  nre  ye  a.  in  bringing  king  back? 
I  Kingati.  t3.  Kamolh  iHoum,  hex.  from  taking  it 
Jail  13.  f  13.  be  a.  from  me,  that  I  may  upenk 

Vaal.  22.  2.  I  cry  inllie  nit'lil-Hea»on,and  amnolx. 

28.  I.  be  not  a.  (o  me,  lent  if  Iboii  be  a.  lo  ine 

30.  12.  my  glory  may  Hing  praine  lo  thee,  not  bo  i. 

31.  17.  let  fho  wicked  be  a.  in  the  grave 

37.  t  7.  bo  a.  lo  the  Lord,  nnd  wnil  patiently 
(12.  t  1.  Iriily  my  noul  ih  a.  upon  God 

()1.  t  1.  praiiie  in  a.  for  Ibei  ,  ()  God,  in  /ion 
rrrin.  20.  t  20.  wlieie  no  tale  lii'iirer,  Hlrifu  in  a. 
laa.  23.  t  2.  bo  a.  Htill,  ye  inbabilanlH  of  ihe  iilo 

47.  .1.  nit  thou  a.  nnd  gel  Ibeeinto  dnrkneni 
,Ier.  8.  14.  enter  defoncod  rilicn,  let  uh  ho  a.  thoro 

38.  t  27.  HO  they  were  a.  froie  him 

h'lr.k.  24.  t  17.  he  ».  m.ike  no  inoiiining  for  dend 
I  .Imoa  H.  t  3.  (liuyihull  cant  forth  dead  budion, hex. 


Sir. 

.fonnh  1.  t  11.  ^'lat  the  lea  may  be  $.  Irom  ui 
4.  t  8.  ihat  (Jod  |ire|iared  a  a.  caHt-wind 
llab.  2.  f  20.  be  a.  all  the  cnrlh  before  him 
'/.eph.  3.  t  17.  he  will  be  a.  in  bin  love,  ho  will  joy 
y.ech.  %  13.  he  a.  O  all  fluHb,  before  the  Lord 

KILK. 
f/fji.  41. 1 42.  Pharnoh  arrnycd  Joseph  in  voit.  of «. 
I'ron.  31.  22.  her  clothing  m  a.  and  |>urplo 
F.iek.  Ki.  10.  1  girded  thee,  I  covered  thec  with  $. 

13.  ihy  raiment  wun  of  a.  and  broidcrcd  work 
Ittv.  18.  12.  no  man  hiiyeth  thcirmcrchaiidino  of« 

SILLY. 
.lob  .1.  2.  (ftid  envy  ilnyeth  Iho  ».  one 
JIo.i.  7.11.  Kphr.  alnoinlike  a«.  dove  wilhoiit  heart 
2  'I'im.  3.  0.  they  who  lead  captive  a.  women  laden 

SILVKR. 
T/ii>  metal  does  not  appear  to  have  been  in  uat 
before  t he  delug c ;  at  boat,  Mo»e»  sayx  nothing 
of  it  before  that  time,  he  apeaku  only  of  tha 
metah  of  brat-i  and  iron.  Gen.  4.  22.     ISut  m 
Abraliain'n  lime,  it  was  become  common,  and 
trajfie.  wiia  carried  on  with  Ihia  rnetnl.     Cicn. 
13.  2,  .flbrahani   wan  very   rich  in   nilver    and 
in  f.'olil :   JIndWi:  bought   a  nepulchre  for   hit 
wife   Snrah  for  four  hundred  Hhekcli  of  (lilver, 
Oen.  23.    1.1.     7'Ai»   silver    was    not    coined, 
according  to  all  appearance,  tint  waa  only  in 
bars,  or  ingots,  and  in  commerce  it  was  alvoayn 
weighed. 
The  hilvur  cord,  Keel.  12.  6.     TSy  this  Cummtn- 
tutors  generally  understand  the  pi th,  or  mar- 
row of  the  back-bone,  which  •cume.a  from  the 
brain,  and  thence goeth  down  to  the  very  lowest 
end  of  the  back-hone,  together  with  the  nervet 
and  ainewa,  which,  aa  JInatomiats  ob.ierve,  are 
vothiiigelsebut  the  prod  uctionandconlinuaf  ion 
of  the  morrow.     .'Iml  this  ia  aptly  comparidto 
a  cord,  both  for  its  figure,  which  is  very  lung 
and  round,  and  for  its  uje,  which  ia  to  draio 
and  oione  the  parts  of  the  body  ;  and  it  is  com* 
pared  to   nilver,  bot'h  for  its   errrlleney  and 
colour,   which  is  white  and  bright,  even  in  a 
dead,  and  much  more  in  a  lining  body, 
(/en.  23.  1.1.  the  land  in  worlh  400  Hhekeln  of*. 
Ki.  and  Abraham  weighed  400  HhekelH  of  8. 
Kxod.  20.  23.  ye  Hhall  not  make  godn  of  ».  or  gold 
20.  li).  Hocketsofx.  21,  2.1,32.  130.24,20,30,38. 
27.  17.  their  hookn  nhnll  he  of ».  38.  11). 
3.1.  24.  they  did  offer  an  offering  of  «.  and  of  hroM 
38.2.1.x.  of  (hem  that  were  numbeicdof  congreg 
/,'  i>.  .1.  15.  ram  with  thy  entimation  by  nhekelii  of*. 
27.  3.  Ihy  estimation  of  male  50  ghukeln  of  x. 
(i.  of  male  five,  of  female  three  nhekein  of«. 
10.  a  homer  of  barley  need  at  fifty  nhekein  ofx. 
JVuin.  7.  13.  liiH  ofToring  wan  one  x.  charger,  10,  25, 
31,  37, 43,  4!),  .15, 01, 07, 73, 7!).  one  x.  bowl 
of  70  Hhekeln,  11),  25,  31,  37,  43,  «tc. 
81.  twelve  charges  of  x.  twelve  a.  bowls 
85.  each  charger  ofx.  weighing  130  shekel* 
10.2.  make  thee  two  truni|M!ls  of. *.  fiir  the  calling 
of  the  ftnsembly,  nnd  journeying  of  the 


21).  shall  give  to  damsel'H  father  .10  shekels  of  5. 
./osh.  7.  21.  1  naw  2(X)  »lickels  ofx.  then  I  coveted 

22.  was  hill  in  bin  lent,  nnd  Ihe  a.  under  il,  24. 
.ludg.  17.2.  1100  shekels  ofx.  that  were  In  ken  from 
thee,  behold,  the  x.  is  with  m>-,  I  look  it 

3.  w-hcn  he  had  restored  the  a.  \\  4.  t.nik  the  #. 

10. 1  will  give  thee  ten  shekels  of  .t.  hy  the  year 

1  .Sum.!).  8.  at  band  fimrlh  part  of  a  nhekel  ofx. 

2  Sam.  18.  1 1.  I  would  have  given  10  sbikels  <jf*. 

12.  tho'  I  Hhoiild  rereive  lOIH)  sliekels  ofx. 

24.  24.  bonglil  floor  and  oten  for  .10  shekels  of#, 

1  Kings  10.  21.  none  were  of  .•».  2  Chron,  1).  20. 
27.  king  made  a.  to  bo  in  JiTUHalem  as  stonei 

20.  3!».  (Inn  thou  slialt  pay  a  talent  ofx. 

2  Kinga  5.22.  give  them,  I  pray  thee,  n  (alcntof«. 
M.  20.  exn/'ted  of  ench  mnn  fifty  slnknln  ofx. 
18.  15.  Hi'/.ekinh  gave  him  nil  a.  llmt  wan  found 
22.  4.  (liMt  Hilkinh  may  sum  Ibi^  x.  brousht 

I  the.  28.  14.  a.  of  all  ins(runicn(s  ofx.  21).  C,  5. 
15.  for  candleklicksof  X.  ||  17.  for  bannnsuf  x. 
'1  Chron.  17.  II.  brought  Jihoshiiphal  presenlnof*. 
JVVA.  5.  15.  former  govor.  had  taken  40shekp|s  of*. 
Job  3.  15.  with  princes  who  filled  boUHcs  with  x. 
22.  25.  Ihy  ilcfence,  ihou  sbnll  have  plenty  of*. 

27.  10.  Iho' he  lii'ap  iipx.  ns  Ihnduai,  nnd  raimrnt 
17.  and  the  innocent  shnll  divide  (be  a. 

28.  15.  nor  Khali  x.  he  weighed  for  prire  ofwisdom 
Vaal.  12.0.  words  of  Iho  Lord  nre  pure,  ns  x.  tried 

lit).  10  for  (hoii,  O  God,  hasKried  us,  an  x.  in  tried 
Prnn.  2.4.  ifsoekest  hernnx.  nnd  searchest  for  her 
3.  14.  iTH^rchnndisii  of  wisdom  Ih  hetler  than  of*. 
8.  10.  receive  my  instruction,  and  not  t. 

10.  nnd  my  revenue  than  rlioico  s. 
1ft.  20.  the  longim  of  the  just  is  as  choice  ». 
10    10.  Ill  gel  iinilcrstanding  chosen  rather  than*, 
17.  3.  fining-pol  is  for  x.  and  the  furnace  foi  gold 

25.  4.  tako  away  Ihu  dross  from  tho  « 


,  SIM 

Eecl.  a.  10.  lovpth  n.  iJiiill  not  l>o  Hnriirflrrl  with  s. 
Cant.  H.  !l.  wn  will  lniilil  on  liiir  ri  |iriliii-(!  nC  n. 
Inn.  I.  '2-2.  Iliy  .«.  la  IxinoTin  droHH,  tliy  wlirit  niixuil 

.14). '."i.  NJiiill  <l(^ni<!  coviirinK  ofMiy  'u,ihi',\^  ol'i 

4H.  10.  Ill  hold  I  hiivo  rrflniril  iIiim',  hut  not  with  n. 

III).  17.  liir  iron  I  will  hrioK  «.  iinil  for  wooil  hrnxM 
Jrr.  fl.  :HI.  ruprohcilR  «.  hImiII  nimi  cnll  tliitio 

ID.D.x.aproiiil  inio  |)liilnitlM  hroiiKht  from  'I'lirNhiHh 

'Jfi.S).  [  wi^\gU<'i\  him  nvvn  iiiiviintiM.-n  HlmkrlH  iil'x 

Kixk.  22.  18.  Jurniil  tlmy  iiro  (-viin  Ihii  iIiohh  of*. 

20.  ua  llii^y  ;;athi<r  ».  mntm,  iiml  iron,  iiiiil  Iniil 

3>i.  IK  s.  in  iiii'llrd  in  tho  iiiiilHl  of  tlir;  riiriinc.u 

27.  I'i.  with  «.  Titmhiiih  Iriidiil  in  iliy  I'liirH 
Dan.  2  !I2.  thiH  iiMii;;i!'H  hriMiHt  iind  iiriiiM  wvr<\  of  t 
Hon.  U.  U.  lh(!  iiluiimtnt  pliicoH  liir  lliiir  .i.  ihIiIoh 
mIiiiII  iinHmNK  itii-in 

13.  2.  thny  inudn  thoin  uioltiMi  iinn^'im  of  tlmir  ji. 
JImoa  2.  (1.  hoRiiUHO  lh»y  hoM  tho  rif;liii^oiiH  Tor  «. 

8.(1.  that  wii  niiiy  Imy  |ioor  for  .i.  mid  I  ho  niiody 
Zqih.  1.  1 1,  howl,  all  ihoy  tiiiil  himr  n.  iin;  ciii  oil' 
Zech.  11.  ■<.  'VyiWH  lii!ii|iitil  n|i  n.  an  dii't  iind  fwn:  \'u\i\ 

III.  0.  iirid  I  will  ri'linii  Ihcin  uii  n.  in  n^lini'd 
Mai.  3.  3.  Im!  Hhiill  nit  (m  a  rnfiiiiT  and  |inrilirr  ofx. 

StC  FlI.I.KTB,  f!oM),  I'iKI.IC.H. 

HII,VKKMN(;ri. 
t*a.  7.23.  lhcr<'  uiro  Ihoiiiiand  vinnHiitthotniiiiid  ;i. 

HILVI'.ll  HMI'I'M. 
^ctl  li).  24.  I)"n)i!lriuH  a  ii.-»milh  iiiudo  Hhrinoit 

TaUntf  of  HILVIill. 
1  Kincn  10.  04.  bought  tho  hill  Hainaria  for  two 
lideiiU  iif  K. 
S  Kingi  a.  a.  Nnrimnn  took  with  him  Ion  t.al.  lift. 
'Zl.  and  hound  two  l.ali'iiln  iif  »■  in  two  \tnn» 
13.  1!).  M-imhom  Riivo  Till  l(H)l)  liilnitK  «/#. 
I  Chriin.  HI.  <i.  Haiiiin  «i-iit  100(1  lalinln  iif  K. 
it2.  14.  I  liuvo  |>r<'|niri'd  lor  tho  honiio  of  tho  Lord 
a  thoimarid  thoiiHand  tiUfnln  iif  ». 
80.  4.  Hnd  novon  tlioiiitand  talrnU  «/roflood  «. 
C/ir.a.'i.n.  hir.Ml  mighly  mon  for  \miiilrnl,i  ,,f  a. 
27.  5.  Amnion  (;«v«  Joiham  KHI  lulrnl.n  uf  i. 
30.  3.  rondooinMl  land  in  100  l.uUntt  »/». 
Kjra7.22»Id<croo  it  lio  dono  to  KM)  lahntu  of  a. 
a  ai.  I  woi(!li>'d  to  thoir  hand  (I.IO  tiilniln  of  n. 
£«a.  3.  0.  I  will  pay  Ion  IhoiiKriiid  lalinU  of  g. 

yrnodH  of  Hii,vr,ii. 
K'uvi.l.Ki.  all  iho*.iif(i»a*  wiM(,'li<!d21(MI  HJiikidM 
2AVini.  ^.  10.  Joiani  hrouf^hl  \i\\.\\\\\inr>e»»rlKof  n. 

1  Kingt  10. 2.5.  ovrry  man  irnipr«i«!nl,«/'*iir'<«  «/«. 

2  Kinut  12.  13.  thorn  woro  not  mado  vmHrln  of  h. 

1  Cliron.  18. 10.  and  willi  liiiti  all  oiiiniior  ttfnrniirh 

of  ji.  gold  aiK^  hrap.M,  2  dhnm.  24.  14. 
Kir/i  l.fi.Ktr(;n;,'llionid  thoir  liaiidH  willnif^.of^.ll. 
9.  XA-vntntl^  of  giM  ami  «.  of  tho  hoii«o  of  tiorl, 
whirli  Nohiirhadopx^ar  took 
0.  S.  Ii(t  llio  L'old«n  and  *.  vfHmin  ho  ro»torod 
R.  2li.  I  w<'i|>hod  K.  vrmrtii  a  hiindrod  taloiilN 
/)(!».  ."i.  2.  '••oiiniandi'd  to  hrini;  (foliloii  and  ».  vrrni. 
11.8.  carry  with  ihcir  proi'ioiu  vt.if.  of  m.  and  gold 

HM.VKK. 
/7en.44.2.pi)i  iny  n.  nip  in  H.ir.k'n  mouth  of  younROKi 
f'rov.  211.23.  li'(o  a  potahoril  rovorod  willi  *.  dro^x 
Ecel.  12.  (1.  or  ovor  ihu  ».  cord   ho  loonod  or  ilio 
golihm  howl  ho  hroknn 
/»«.  40.  111.  thr-  I'nidamlth  i;a«lotli  n.  t:\mim 
Mat.  27.  0.  tho  c.hiof  prionlii  took  tho  t.  jiirrrn 
JlctM  10.24.  flomolriuH  niadit  «.  Nhrinoa  lor  Diana 
Sec  Vkhmki.h  jiiHt  liiforc. 
HIMII-ITIJDK. 
A'um.  12.  a  tho  />.  oflho  Lord  iihall  ho  hohold 
/>«u(.4.12.yn  hoard  voir'oofwordH,hut  Hawiio  x.l.'i. 
10.  lout  yo  inako  you  tho  ».  of  any  figiiro 

2  Cliron.  4,  3.  iindor  it  wa*  ».  of  oxon  round  ahoiii 
P»al.  10(1.20.  clian!;<Ml  thoIr  glory  into  *.  of  an  ox 

144.  12.  nornor  Htonoii  pidiiihod  after  ».  of  a  jiala<!o 
Dan.  10.  10.  on«  liko  tho  ».  of  tho  noun  of  inon 
Horn.  .1.  14.  aftor  tho  ».  of  Adaoi'n  tranHgroimirin 
//eA.  7.  \!i,  aflor  h.  of  MtdohinndnR  ariinMh  a  jirioHt 
Javi.  3.  0.  men  who  nrn  mado  nftor  tho  *.  of  <.'od 

HI.MII,rnj|)P,H. 
Hot.  12.  10.  I  havo  u"oil  K.  \tv  miniiitry  of  prophritu 

HI.VII'M", 
If  laknn  f  1]  For  one  utlio  in  harinUm,  innorr.nt, 
and  frff.  from  ihf.ril,  Kom.  10.  K).  Si.  Paul 
would  hav  tlir.  ltoinaii<  hf.  wiiifi  unto  that  whioh 
in  good,  and  iiim|ilo  nonRnrnin/  ovil,  tknt  in, 
ttinrrrninar  in  Ihr  fluiicf  of  good,  lo  di/itlnffiiin/i 
thr.  good,  from  llir  hail  dortrinr. ;  but  Ihry  nufl 
anoid  m/iotmrr  hnn  Ihf,  appraronrr:  of  f.vll  an 
ihildrm  wlio,  titit/'oul.  murh  rriiiionini/,ft,ii  from 
ftiitry  Hiin<r  l.hot  dor.n  hut  ntfoi  hurtful  to  thitin. 
H'  would,  hani:  them  an  innnrrnt  an  not  lo  dr.- 
t'iv',  and  t/rt  no  prudfvt  an  not  lo  br,  der.eiitiii, 
[2]  Fur  nur.h  an  art,  ignorant,  wf.ak,  and  «u&* 
jeet  to  drlunlon,  yrl  ninr.rrf.  and  willing  lo  he 
taught :  nvr,h  nimnU  onr.n  arr  ini'ilrd  lo  Win- 
doin'n  frnnt;  and  are.  ojiponrd.  to  nurh  an  are 
proud  and  nrlf-eonneil.ed.  I'rov.  !•.  4,  Who«o  In 
►implo,  lot  him  turn  in  liilhrr.  f3)  Hnipio  in 
t'ikrn  for  a  niliy.fnolinh,  r.reduloun  man,  wh/)  in 
eaiil'j  drtciaul  with  the  nmooih  v>urdi  and  fair 
54T 


STN 

prrlencm  offotne  and  dereitful  man,  Prov.  14. 
1.1,  Tho  Hiinpio  holiitvrlh  ovory  word;  oiid  thin 
timple.  man  in  opposrd  to  the  pruilnit  viiin, 
who  lookolh  widl  lo  hill  goiiigii;  inho  not  oviy 
ordi-ri  hin  rnyivernaliiin  and  driilingn  in  thr 
world  with  due  I  irruninprrtion,  hut  alnnjudgen 
of  the  wnrdn  and  prof rnnionn  of  othern  liy  their 
covnerniitionn.  fy  It  it  taken  for  ignorant, 
eany,  and  rreduloiin  pr.rnonn,  who  are  noon 
r.heated  hy  the  wiirld  ond  the  deiiil,  and  who 
do  not  underntand  their  own  intrrn,!,  hut  per 
Hint  in  their  niuful  cournen.  I'rov.  'J2.  3,  llol 
tho  niniplo  paHH  on,  and  am  puiiiiih<'i|.  Simple 
here  in  opponrd  In  the  wine  and  prudent  man, 
who  forenecing  the  eittumiti/  or  judgment  of 
(Jnd  threiitened,  doen  liyprmjrr  andrepevlanre 
put  hivinelf  vndrr  the  prulerlion  of  the  Jll 
mighty.  [.1]  Siiii|ili'iiy  i.i  sooietinien  taken  for 
Jlde.lil'y  and  liberality.  Uoni.  12.  H,  llo  that 
givoth,  h'l  him  do  it  with  Hiniplirily.  ///;  ll,,tl 
ilintrihvten  the  ehureh'n  nlorU  lo  the  poor,  let 
hivi  do  it  fiiilhfulh/,  without  fraud;  iinpar 
tiiilly,  pot  for  fauour  or  ajferliiin;  gently, 
wilhiiiit  fiereenenn  ;  oud.  liberally,  aecording 
to  every  one'n  nerennity. 
I'niil.  Ml.  7.  tho  law  of  Lord  making  wiiin  tho  n.  • 
llll.  0.  Iiord  iiroHorvoth  tho  n.  I  wa«  hroiight  low 
II',).  130.  il  givolh  iiniliTHlanding  lo  tho  n. 
I'rnn.  1.4.  to  givomihlilly  ton,  to  young  kiiowl.-dgo 
22,  how  long,  yo  «.  oiirn,  will  yo  lovo  iiiiii|dii:ity 
32.  tho  turning  away  ol  tho  {«.  nIiiiII  nliiy  llioui 

7.  7.  1  hohold  ifiooiig  tho  n.  oiiiN  a  young  i 

H.  .V  O  yo  n.  iiiidorHland  wiHiloin,  and  yo  l'oid.i 
1).  4.  wliot,o  in  n.  lot  him  turn  in  liilliir,  HI. 

13.  a  fooliah  woiiian  in  n.  and  knowilh  nolliiiig 

14.  l.'i.  ».  hidiovolh  ovcry  word,  hut  priidont  man 

IH.  n.  iiihorit  folly  ||  I'.l.  2.5.  Iho  n.  will  h<:waro 

21.  11.  Iho  Ncornor  in  pimiiihod,  tliii  n.  miido  wiiio 

22,  3.  Iho  n.  \m»*  on  and  aro  piininhud,  27.  12. 
I'heU.  45  20.  ho  thou  iilialt  do  lor  him  that  in  «. 
ftom.lll.lM.  hyl'airMpooch.MdrcivolhiihonrUof/i. 

It),  havo  you  wmo  to  good,  and  f.roiioi'rniiigiivil 

HiMi'Mi  rrv. 

2  Snm.  1.5.  11.  they  wont  in  Ihrir  *.  and  know  not 
/'rn». I  2*2.(10 w  long,yo  Hinipio  onoii,will  yo  lovo  n.7 
Horn.  12.  t^.  hi!  that  givitli,  lot  him  do  it  with  n. 
'I  Cor.  1. 12.  in  *.  wrr  had  our  oonvorHatloii  in  woild 
11.  3.  ho  oorruptiMl  from  tho  n.  that  la  in  (.'liriHl 

HIN 
la  any  thought,  ward,  ortion,ominiiion,ordenire^ 
contrary  to  the  lair  of  (loil,  Hin  la  any  waul  ol 
confurinily  lo,  or  Iraii'ifnaKion  of,  llio  law,  1 
John '.i.  i.  Il  in  ^i:/rrH,|l]  For  original  cor- 
ruption, or  the  depravity  ovd  navghlinem  of 
our  eorrv/it  nature^  which  in  prone  lo  all  enil. 
I'lial.  .51.  .5,  iloliold,  1  waa  ahapod  in  iniipiity, 
and  ill  aio  did  my  molliiT  ronooivo  iiin.  Hum.  7. 
8,  Hin,  taking  orcaaiou  hy  tho  romniamlmcnl, 
wrought  in  1110  all  nianncr  of  oonoiipiaoonRO. 
f2]  For  aetiuil  nin,  whirh  flown  fnim  the  cor- 
ruption of  vii.tore.  .I;iiii.  1.  1.5,  Whon  liial  hath 
coiiri-ivod,  it  lirini,'illi  Corlli  mil.  [3J  //  in  taken 
for  the  guilt  ond  defilement  of  nin.  Panl.  .51. 
2,  WaaTi  mo  Ihoroiighly  from  niinn  inlouity, 
and  olonnHO  mo  from  niy  "in.  Jhid  in  lloh.  10. 
2,  Tim  worahippora  onfo  piirgod,  xhoiild  Ikivo 
hnd  no  moro  conaoioiiRo  of  aina.  |4|  Fur  the 
puninhmr.nt  of  tin,  Hon.  4.  7.  And  if  thou 
dooat  not  woll,  ain  liolli  at  Iho  door:  lie  nure 
thy  nin  will  find,  thee  out ;  thou  nhalt  not  long 
enjoy  the  fruiln  of  thy  wiekednenn,  but  a  drend- 
fuljudirmrnt  nhnll  tread  npon  the  heeln  of  thy 
nin.  And  in  (Jen.  10.  1.5,  l,oat  llioii  ho  con- 
aiiiood  in  Iho  iiiiipiiiy  or  puninhmenl  of  llm 
oily,  .f.5)  Hin  in  taken  both  for  the  guilt  and 
puninhmenl  uf  nin.  I'aal.  32.  1,  Hloaaod  ia  lin 
whoao  ain  ia  covorod.  Jlnd  in  Mat.  0.  2,  Hon, 
thy  aina  ho  forgivon  Ihoo:  The  guilt  nf  Ihnn  in 
pardoned,  and  no  the  puninhvirnt  nhnll  he  re- 
moned.  fO]  77ii!  name  of  ain  in  often  given  In 
the  nar.riflee  of  erpialiov,or  lo  the  nacri flee  for 
nin,  l.ov.  4.  3,  2.5,2!).  IVhot  in  there  rendered 
ain-oOViring,  in  in  Hebrew,  ain.  St.  Paul  noyn, 
that  (lod  wan  pleaned  that  .loam  Chrial,  who 
knew  nn  ain,  nhould  be  our  vie.ltm  of  CTpiiitlon, 
2(;or.  .5.  21,  For  ho  hath  mado  him  lo  hr- ain 
lor  iia  who  kiii'W  no  ain,  llial  wo  niiKht  ho  mado 
tho  righlfoiianoaa  of  fjod  In  hini.  f7]  Hin  in 
taken  for  any  fault,  either  in  durlrine  iir  life. 
John  8.  40,  Which  of  you  nonvincolh  mo  of 
ain?  fH|  For  infidelity  and  unbelief,  .lohn 
10.  (I,  Tho  Hpirit  will  oonvinoo  iho  world  of  am, 
hi-caiHo  ihoy  holiiwo  not  on  mo.  fO)  For  a 
ninful  einirne  of  life.  .lam.  1.  15,  Hiii,  wlo  n 
it  ia  llniahi'd,  hringolh  forlh  doalh.  flO|  For 
the  remaindern  of  nin  in  nneh  on  ore  renewed 
and  regenerated.  Kom  0  12,  I.'-t  not  ain 
thoroforo  r<ign  in  your  mortal  hody:  nince  you 
arr,  regenerated,  and  npiritually  nlire,  let  not 
the  remaindirt  of  corruption  eiercint  an  urr- 


SIN 

tnnlrolled  alniilutf  power  in  yuu.  [Ill  /'  « 
laliin  fur  nin  greuliy  aggrtivatid.  John  1.x 
22,24,  ir  I  liiiirnol  ooino  and  apoki'ii  lo  thorn, 
Ihoy  had  not  hail  aiii ;  'I'hey  had  not  been  guiltt 
of  thin  partli  iiliir  nin  of  infidelity  and  reject- 
ing we ;  or,  their  nin  hud  nut  been  no  heinim» 
an  How  it  in;  or,  thiy  had  hod  more  lo  nay  m 
ereune  for  their  nin.  |  I2J  For  the  iduln,  or 
calnrn  at  Dan  and  llrlh  ol,  inhieh  mere  the  uc- 
coniiin  of  the  nin  of  Hiioiiiria.  Minon  H,  14, 
They  that  awiMir  hy  tho  ion  of  .S'«wi<i/i«. 

Hod  won  not  the  author  of  mii  iir  of  death  ;  it  in 
ineonnintrnt  iiiilh  tin  diiuoeholinenn  and  purity 
to  iniline  the  I  reiituie  III  nin  :  ,Aa  tJoil  niniint 
ho  ti'iiipti'il  to  KVil,  iioilliir  lompta  ho  any  mini, 
.lam.  I.  13.  /(i/«'ain  and  death  cutned  into 
the  world  by  the  vialiee  of  the  ileiiil:  nod  Adam, 
/;//  hin  diniibrdienee,  and  yielding  to  I  he  leiup- 
t'lliiin  nf  Satiin,  hnn  made  nn  all  guilty  in  the 
eyen  iif'dnd.  Hon  DkviI.,  I'aI.I..  Ji-aiia  Clirlat, 
by  hiH  drnlh,  ban  renliirid  life  lo  u,i ;  by  hli 
obedirnee  he  bun  reroneited  un  lo  (/oil  the  Fa- 
ther; inntiad  of  rhildrrn  of  wrath,  an  we  were, 
he  ha.i  merited  forun  the  iharaeter  of  children 
of  (liid.  The  ./lpo.ilte  Paul,  in  neoeral  placin, 
npenkn  of  the  minrry  vhieh  the  firnt  Adiim 
brought  on  hiinnelf  and  hin  ponlerily,  and  of 
the  blenningn  which  Cliriat  the  ne.eund  Adam 
hnn  purefioneil  far  hin  children.  Hon  Itom.  3. 
23.  I  .5,  12.  I  0.  23.  1  for.  1.5.  21,  2>/.  Though 
nin  be  peniiiUed  of  (lod,  he  can  no  viorc  be  Ihn 
outhiir  (if  it,  thon  light  in  the  author  of  dilrk- 
nenii,  I  .lohn  I.  .5.  Hill  in  not  a  crcoture,  or  a. 
being,  but  rut  her  the  prioalion  of  a  being ;  an 
light  in  the  prioalion  of  dm knenn,  no  in  nin  a 
privation  of  hulinenn. 

Proaiimptiioiia  aiiia.  David  prayn  that  (Joil  would 
kiii'p  him  hark  I'loiii  priioiiipiiioiia  aiiia,  I'nal. 
li).  13.  From  hniiirn  ond  eiideut  ninn,  nuttk 
an  proceed  fniin  the  ehnite  uf  the  pernemn 
will  agoinnt  the,  enlightened  mind,  which  are 
r.nmmitled  with  delibrroluni,  with  denign,  rt- 
nolutinn,  and  engernenn,  iigoinnt  the  ehechn  of 
conscience,  and  the  niotionn  of  (Jod'n  .Spirit; 
nuch  ama  are  direct  rebellion  agoiunt  Hod,  a 
denpinivg  of  hin  cominandi,  and  they  provoke 
hin  pure  eyrn. 

Original  ain  won  the  reheltinn  of  the  firnl  man 
Adam  againnt  hin  Creator,  which  wan  a  nin 
of  vvivernal  effieaey,  which  deriven  aguilt  and 
ntiiin  to  mankind  in  all  ago  of  the  world. 
The  ore  limit  the  nrriplure  given  11]  il,in  groond- 
rd  on  the  relation  whiih  nil  men  have  In  Adair 
nn  their  ■niiluriil  and  moral  principle  or  head, 

I.  Tliirir  iialiitiil.  (tiid  creiilid  one  luiin  in  Ihti 
beginning,  from  whom  all  iilhern  derive  their 
beingn:  Jlnd  that  the  unity  might  be  the  mart 
entire,  he  formed  him  that  aid  which  wan  Mh 
crnnary  for  communicating  hin  kind  to  t\t 
world,     llo  hath  mado  of  ono  hlood  all  nntlon* 

ofmon,  forlodwoll  on  all  llm  fiiroof  ili lrll^ 

Jlein  17.  20,  Jlnd  an  the  whnle  lace  nf  majt- 
kind  wan  virtually  in  Adaio'a  loinn,  no  il  wtu 
pt-enunted  to  give  virtual  copnent  to  what  h* 
did;  when  he  broke,  all  nnffered  nhipwreck 
that  were  contained  in  him  un  their  natural 
original. 

II.  He  wan  lk»  viiirol  principle  of  mankind.  In 
the  firnl  Irnilii  between  (lod  ond  man,  Adam 
wan  cnnnidered,  not  an  a  ningle  pirnon,  but  ai 
the  Heprrnintative  of  a  nation,  and  contracleil 
far  all  hit  dencendantn  by  ordinary  generation: 

Hin  jiernon  wan  the  fountain  of  Iheiri.and 
hin  will  the  reprenrnlative  of  theirn.  hVom 
hence  hin  vail  progeny  beeamn  a  party  in  the 
covenant,  nnd  had  a  title  to  the  beneJHn  con- 
tained in  It  upon  hin  nbedienee,  and  wan  liable 
to  the  curie  upon  hin  violation  of  tt.  I/pan 
thin  groond  the  Jliionlle  inntilulen  a  parallel 
between  Adam  anil  (.'hrial.  llom.H.  ]'.),  '/'hat  aa 
hy  ono  maii'a  diaohi'dioiicn  many  woro  niadn 
ainnora;  ao  hy  Iho  ohodiiMir'o  of  ono  ahull  many 
ho  mado  riKlilooiia.  Jin  Cliriat  //;  hin  death  on 
the  cronn  did  nol  nuffrr  an  a  private  prrniin, 
but  an  a  nurely  and  npunnor  repre:ienliog  the 
whole  church,  «f  il  in  naid,  2  Ciir.  5  14,  11  oiin 
dh'd  for  nll,lhin  woro  nil  dind ;  *)  the  frnt 
Adam,  who  waa  iho  figiiro  of  him  Ihat  waa  lo 
eomo,  Horn.  a.  14,  in  hin  dinobe.dlenee  wai 
enteemed  a  public  vernon  reprenenting  the 
whole  race  of  mankind ;  and  by  a  junt  law  il 
wan  nol  rentrained  to  hitnnelf. 
The  .Scripture  pronen  in  loony  plaeen  that  the  nin 
«/ Adam  wan  communicated  to  all  hinpo)Jeritu, 
and  that  il  ban  infi-cted  nod  corrupted  il.  Mph. 
2.  3,  Wo  woro  hy  miliiro  llin  ohildron  nf 
wrath  ;  rA«l!  in,  liable  lo  puninhmenl,  and  that 
hath  relation  to  guilt.  Jlnd  in  Horn.  .5.  12,  Il» 
ono  man  ain  ontorod  into  tho  world,  and  doalb 
by  ain;  >nil  ao  death  paaaiid  upon  all  inon,ui« 


SIN 


mjtist  sentence  upon  the  guilty,  for  that  all  have 
■mned.  Job  describes  this  siyi,  Who  can  bring 
a  clean  thing  out  of  an  unclean  ?  not  one,  Jub 
14.  4.  It  is  the  universal  lata  of  nature,  thai 
every  thing  produces  its  like,not  only  inregard 
of  the  same  nature,  that  is  propagated  from 
one  individual  to  another,  without  a  change  of 
the  species,  but  in  respect  of  the  qualities  with 
vihich  that  nature  is  einincntly  affected.  The 
"Psalmist  David  likewise  speaks  of  this  sin, 
Psal.  51.  5,  Behold,  I  was  shapen  in  iniquity, 
and  in  sin  did  my  mother  conceive  me. 

The  Bin  against  the  Holy  Ghost.  Our  Saviour 
says  la  Mat.  Iv.  31,  32,  Wherefore  I  say  unto 
you.  All  manner  of  sin  and  blasphemy  shall  bo 
forgiven  unto  men,  but  the  blasphemy  against 
the  Holy  Ghost  shall  not  be  forgiven  unto  men. 
And  whoever  shall  speak  a  word  against  the 
Son  of  man,  it  shall  he  forgiven  him  :  but  who- 
soever s|)Caketh  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  it 
shall  not  be  forgiven  him,  neither  in  this  world, 
neither  in  the  world  to  come.  Interpreters 
have  differently  explained  the  sin  against  the 
Holy  Ghost.  St.  Ambrose  in  one  place  makes 
it  to  consist  in  denying  the  deity  of  the  Son: 
In  another  place  he  says,  it  consists  in  denying 
the  divinity  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  in  imput- 
itighis  murks  to  the  power  of  the  devil:  JInd  in 

"  his  book  of  Repentance  he  eztcnds  it  to  heresy 
and  schism.  Hernias  says,  that  thesin  against 
the  Holy  Ghost  is  the  bla.^pheming  of  God; 
and  another  author  says,  that  it  is  the  renounc- 
ing of  God:  Others  think  the  irremissible 
sin,  to  be  that  of  a  hardened,  imprnitcnt,  and 
insolent  sinner:  Grotius  espouses  this  opinion, 
and  gives  for  examples  of  this  crime,  the  sin 
of  Korah,  Pharaoh,  Simon  Magus,  Ananias, 
and  Sapphira. 

The  generality  of  interpreters  place  the  sin 
against  the  Holy  Ghost,  mentioned  by  our  Sa- 
viour, in  the  wilful  malice  of  those  that  with- 
stand the  evidence  of  truth,  and  who  will' not 
acknowledge  the  miracles  of  Christ  fo  be 
rcroughthy  the  finger  of  God,  but  maliciously, 
and  against  the  conviction  of  their  own  con- 
sciences, impute  them  to  the  prince  of  darkness. 
This  was  certainly  the  crime  of  the  Pharisees, 
to  whom  Christ  applied  his  discourse ;  and 
those  also  become  guilty  of  the  same  crime,  who 
oppose,  or  persecute  the  doctrine,  way.^,  and 
servants  of  Christ,  because  they  are  spiritual, 
or  have  any  thing  of  the  Spirit  appearing  in 
them,  and  that  contrary  to  their  own  convic- 
tions. .Such  as  are  guilty  of  this  sin,  are  ex- 
cepted from  pardon,  because  the  death  of  Christ 
was  not  appointed  for  the  expiation  of  it:  Jlnd 
there  being  no  sacrifice,  there  can  be  no  satis 
faction,  and  consequently  no  pardon.  For  if  we 
wilfullysin  after  we  have  received  the  knowledge 
of  the  truth,  there  remainethno  more  sacrifice  for 
sins,  Heb.  10.  26,  27,  tc.  The  wisdom  and 
justice  of  God  require  this  severity  against 
such  sinners :  For  if  he  that  despised  Moses' 
law,  died  without  mercy,  of  how  much  sorer 
punishment  shall  he  he  thought  worthy,  who 
hath  trodden  under  foot  the  Son  of  God,  and 
hath  counted  the  blood  of  the  covenant  where- 
with he  was  sanctified,  an  unlioly  thin?,  and 
hath  done  despite  to  the  Spirit  of  grace!  that  is, 
Thry  renounce  their  Redeemer  as  if  he  were 
not  the  Son  of  God,  andvirtually  consent  to  the 
cruel  sentence  passed  againslhim,  as  if  he  had 
blasphemed  when  he  declared  himself  to  be  so  : 
and  thereby  out-sin  his  sufferings.  How  rea- 
sonable is  it  therefore  that  they  should  be  for 
ever  deprived  of  the  benefits,  who  obstinately 
reject  the  means  that  purchased  them.  The 
same  apostle  speaks  also  of  this  sin  in  [leb.  6. 
4,  5,  6,  For  it  is  impossible  for  tho.se  whg  were 
once,  enlightened,  and  have  tasted  of  the  hea- 
venly gift,  and  were  made  partakers  of  the 
Holy  Ghost:  and  have  tasted  the  ffood  word  of 
God,  and  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come,  if 
thcy»hall  fall  away,  to  renew  them  again  unto 
repentance:  seeing  they  crucify  to  themselves 
the  Son  of  God  afresh,  and  put  him  to  an  open 
shame:  that  is,  .ShcA  as  have  attained  to  some 
acquaintance  with  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel, 
and  have  had  some  erprrience  of  the  power  and 
efficacy  of  the  Holy  Ghost  from  hraven  in  gos- 
pel administrations  and  worship;  yea,  ercn 
some  of  the  extraordinary  gifts  of  the  Spirit ; 
who  have  likewise  relished  comfort  and  sweet- 
ness in  the  doctrine  and  promises  of  the  gos- 
pel:  and  particularly  knvinrr  heard  that  the 
Redeemer  saves  them  from  wrath,  and  instates 
them  in  happiness  beyond  what  is  atlainahlr 
hereon  earth;  their  self-love  has  eitrrnally 
closed  with  the  revelation,  and  mnilf  applica- 
tion of  it  to  itself:  JVow,  says  the  .Apostle,  if 
54iJ 


SIN 

such  shall  turn  ..Apostates,  it  it  tmpossible,  in 
regard  of  any  law,  rule,  or  constitution  of 
God,  to  bring  them  to  repentance,  whereby  they 
should  be  restored  to  their  former  condition; 
and  this  because  they  despise  the  means  of  sal- 
vation, they  shew  themselves  to  be  of  the  same 
opinion  with  those  that  did  crucify  Christ,  and 
they  would  do  it  again,  were  it  in  their  power; 
and  actually  do  it  as  much  as  they  can  by  perse- 
cuting his  members.  The  great  unpardonable 
si7i  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  appears  to  be  a 
presumptuous  sin  against  some  more  than  or- 
dinary illuminations,  convictions,  and  taste  of 
gospel  irace,  whereby  a  man  doth  knowingly 
and  studiously  rebel  against  the  truth,  and 
maliciously  persecute  it  in  himself  and  others 
from  an  universal  hatred  of  it  for  itself, 
Mat.  12.  31,  32.  Heb.  6.  4,  5.  Job  24. 13.  Heb. 
10.  29.  Acts  13.  41.  1  John  5.  16. 

From  the  above-mentioned  passage,  in  Heb.  6.  it 
appears  [1]  That  it  cannot  be  any  sin  that  is 
committed  ignorantly.  St.  Paul  was  a  blas- 
phemer, but  was  forgiven,  because  he  did  it  ig- 
norantly. [2]  It  must  be  a  sin  knowingly  com- 
mitted against  the  operations  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  the  convictions  of  conscience;  it  is  a 
sinning  wilfully  after  having  received  the  know- 
ledge of  the  truth,  and  having  been  made  par- 
takers of  the  Holy  Ghost.  [3]  Jjpostacy  seems 
to  be  an  ingredient  in  it.  If  they  fall  away, 
says  the  apuslle.  [4]  It  takes  in  malice  and 
persecution ;  the  Pharisees  did  not  only  impute 
the  miracles  of  our  Saviour  to  the  devil,  but 
they  spake  it  out  of  malice  designing  to  de- 
stroy him.  [5]  7'AouctA  impenitency  cannot  Ae 
called  that  sin,  yet  it  comes  into  the  number 
of  its  ingredients ;  and  therefore  the  .Hvostle 
says  of  such  sinners.  It  is  impossible  to  renew 
them  again  to  repentance. 

Gen.  4."!.  if  thou  doest  not  well,  s.  licth  at  the  door 

Exod.34.7.  forgiving  iniquity,  transgression,  and  s. 

f.ev.  4.  3.  if  priest  s.  according  to  ihe  5.  of  people 
14.  when  s.  is  known,  congregation  shall  offer 
6.  26.  the  priest  that  ofTereth  it  for  s.  9.  15. 
19.  17.  and  not  suffer  s.  upon  thy  neighbour 
22.  the  s.  which  he  hath  done  shall  be  forgiven 

J^um.  5.  6.  when  a  man  or  woman  shall  commit «. 

12.  11.  I  beseech  thee  lay  not  the  s.  upon  us 
19.  9.  it  is  a  purification  for  s.  17. 
27.  3.  our  father  died  in  his  own  s.  bad  no  sons 

Deut.  15.  9.  cry  to  Lord  and  it  be  s.  to  thee,  24. 15. 
19.  15.  one  witness  shall  not  rise  up  for  any  s. 
21.22.  if  man  have  committed  s.  worthy  of  death 

22.  26.  there  is  in  damsel  no  s.  worlhv  of  death 

23.  21.  L.  shall  require  it,  and  it  wouM  be*. in  thee 
22.  if  thou  forbear  to  vow,  it  shall  be  no  s. 

24.  16.  every  man  shall  be  put  to  death  for  his 
own  s.  2  Kings  14.  6.  2  Chron.  25.  4. 

1  Sam.  15.  23.  for  rebellion  is  as  s.  of  witchcraft 

1  Kings  8.  34.  forgive  the  s.  of  thv  people  Israel 
36.  forgive  s.  of  thv  servants,  2  Chron.  6. 25,  27. 

12.30.  and  this  thing  became  a  s.  13.  34. 

2  Kings  12.  16.  the  s.  money  was  the  priests' 
■lob  20.  11.  his  bones  are  full  of  s.  of  his  youth 
Psal.  32.  1.  blessed  is  he  whose  s.  is  covered 

51.  5.  and  in  s.  did  my  mother  conceive  me 
59.  12.  for  s.  of  their  mouth  let  them  be  taken 
109.  7.  and  let  his  prayer  become  *. 

14.  let  not  the  s.  of  his  mother  be  blotted  out 
Pron.  10.  16.  the  fruit  of  Ihe  wicked  tendeth  to  s. 

19.  in  multitude  of  words  there  wanteih  not  s. 

13.  t  6.  but  wickedness  overthroweth  «. 

14.  9.  fools  make  a  mock  at  «.but  among  righteous 
34.  but  s.  is  a  reproach  to  any  people 

21.  4.  and  the  plowing  of  the  wicked  is  s. 
24.  9.  the  thought  of  foolishness  is  s. 
/.«ffl.5.18.  wo  to  them  draw.?.as  it  were  with  carl-rope 

30.  1.  and  cover,  that  they  may  add  s.  to  s. 

31.  7.  his  idols  which  your  hands  have  made  foTS. 
53.  10.  ihouKlialt  make  his  soul  an  offering  for*. 

12.  he  bare  the  s.  of  many,  and  made  intercession 
./er.  17.  1..5.  of  Jndah  written  with  a  pen  of  iron 
3. 1  will  give  bish  places  for  a  .t.  in  thy  borders 

51.  5.  though  their  land  was  filled  with  5. 
f.am.  4.  6.  than  the  punishment  of  the  s.  of  Sodom 
//».». 4. R.they  eat  up.».  of  my  people,  .set  their  heart 

10.  8.  the  s.  of  Israel  shall  be  destroyed 

12.  8.  they  shall  find  no  iniquity  in  me  that  weres. 
.Imos  8. 14.  they  that  swear  by  the  «.  in  Samaria 
Mic.  1.  13.  she  is  the  beginning  of  «.  to  Zion 

6.  7.  shall  I  give  fruit  of  my  body  for  s.  ofmy  soul 
Zech.  13,  1.  there  shall  bo  a  fountain  opened  for  s. 

14.  t  19.  this  shall  be  the  s.  of  Fcypt 
.WaM2.31.all  manner  of*,  shall  be  forgiven  to  men 
./oltn  1.29.  which  fakoth  away  thos.  of  the  world 

8.  7.  he  that  is  without  s.  among  you,  let  him  cast 
34.  whoso  committe'h  s.  is  the  servant  of*. 

9.  41.  if  ye  were  blind,  ye  sbouM  have  no  s. 
1.5.  22.  if  I  had  not  come,  they  bad  not  had  x.  24. 
16.  8.  Comforter,  he  will  reprove  the  world  of  » 


SIN  ^ 

John  16.  9.  of*,  because  they  believe  not  on  m* 

19.  11.  he  that  delivered  me  hath  the  greater  $. 

.lets  7.  60.  Lord,  lay  not  this  «.  to  their  charge 

Rom.  3.9.  proved  Jewsand  Gentiles  are  all  under5 

20.  for  by  the  law  is  the  knowledge  of  a. 

4.  7.  blessed  are  they  whose  s.  is  covered 

5.  12.  5.  entered  into  the  world,  and  death  by  s. 
13.  for  till  the  law  s.  was  in  the  world 
20.where  s.  abounded,  grace  much  more  abound 

21.  that  as  s.  reigned  unto  death,  even  so  grace 
C.  1.  what  shall  we  say  ?  shall  we  continue  in  a.J 

2.  how  shall  we  that  are  dead  to  s.  live  therein? 

6.  with  him,  that  the  body  of  s.  might  be  des- 
troyed that  henceforth  we  should  not  serves. 

7.  for  he  that  is  dead  is  freed  from  s. 

10.  for  in  that  he  died,  he  died  to  5.  once 
11. reckon  ye  yourselves  to  be  dead  indeed  unto* 

12.  let  not  s.  therefore  reign  in  your  mortal  body 

13.  nor  yield  your  members  as  instruments  to  3. 

14.  for  *.  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you 

16.  his  servants  ye  are,  whether  of  s.  unto  death 

17.  God  be  thanked,  ye  were  the  servants  of*. 

18.  being  then  made  free  from  *.  22. 
20.  for  when  ye  were  the  servants  of*,  ye  were 
2.3.  for  wages  of*,  is  death,  but  the  gift  of  God 

7.  7.  is  law  *.?  God  forbid,  I  had  not  known  *. 
8.*. taking  occasion  wrought  in  me  all  manner  of 

concupiscence:  for  without  the  law  s.  was  dead 

9.  commandment  came,  *.  revived,  and  I  died 

11.  for  *.  by  the  commandment  slew  me 

13.  but  *.  that  it  might  appear,  *.  that  s.  by  the 
commandment  might  become  exceeding  sinful 

14.  law  is  spiritual,  but  I  am  carnal, sold  under*. 

17.  no  more  I,  but  *.  that  dwellelh  in  me,  20. 
23.  and  bringing  me  into  captivity  to  law  of*. 
25.  but  with  the  flesh,  the  law  of*. 

8.  3.  and  for  s.  condemned  s.  in  the  flesh 

10.  if  Christ  be  in  you,  body  is  dead  because  of*. 

14.  23.  for  whatsoever  is  not  of  faith,  is  *. 

1  Cor.  6. 18.  every  s.  a  man  doeth  is  without  body 

15.  56.  O  death,  where  is  thy  sting?  the  sting  of 
death  is  5.  and  the  strength  of*,  is  the  law 

2  Cr)r.5.21.made  him  to  be  s.  for  us,  who  knew  no  *» 
Gal.  2.  17.  is  therefore  Christ  the  minister  of*.? 

3.  22.  the  scripture  hath  concluded  all  under  *. 
2  Thess-  2.  3.  and  that  man  of*,  be  revealed 
Heb.  3.  13.  be  hardened  thro'  thedeceitfulness  of*. 

4.  15.  was  tempted  like  as  we  are,  yet  without  *. 

9.  26.  but  once  hath  he  appeared  to  put  away  *. 
28.  he  shall  appear  without  *.  to  salvation 

10.  6.  in  sacrifices  for  *.  thou  hast  had  no  pleasure 

8.  offering  for  *.  thou  wouldst  not,  nor  pleasure 

18.  where  remission,  is  no  more  offering  for  A. 

11.  25.  than  to  enjoy  pleasures  of*,  for  a  season 
12. 1.  let  us  lay  aside  *.  that  doth  easily  beset  ua 

4.  ye  have  not  yet  resisted,  striving  against  *. 
13.  11.  the  bodies  of  those  beasts  for  s.  are  burnt 

.lam.  1.   15.  when  lust  hath  conceived,  it  bringeth 

forth  *.  and  s.when  finished, bringeth  forth  death 

2.9.  if  ye  have  respect  to  per.>.ons,  ye  commit  *. 

4.  17.  kniiwcth,  and  dolli  not  good,  to  him  it  is  *, 

1  Pet.  2.  22.  who  did  no  .<r.  nor  was  guile  found 
4.  1.  that  suffered  in  flesh  hath  ceased  from  *. 

2  Pet.  2. 14.  having  eyes  that  cannot  cease  from  * 
1  ,T(ihn  1.7.  blood  of  Christ  cleanseth  us  from  all  *. 

8.  if  we  say  we  have  no  *.  we  deceive  ourselves 

3.  4.  whoso  commitleth  s.  transgresselh  also  the 

law,  for  .«.  is  the  transgression  of  the  law 

5.  he  was  manifested,  and  in  him  is  no  *. 

8.  he  that  committeth  s.  is  of  the  devil 

9.  whosoever  is  born  of  God  doth  not  commit  » 
.5.  16.  if  any  man  see  his  brother  *.  a  *.  which  ia 

not  to  death,  there  is  a  s.  unto  death 
17.  all  unrighteousness  is  *.  and  there  is  a  *.  not 
unto  death,  who.soever  is  born  of  G.  sinneth  not 
See  Bear. 
Great  SIN. 
^cn.20.9.  brought  on  mo  and  my  kingdom  ^ea<*. 
Exod.32.  21. thai  hast  brought  this /.'rz-ai*. on  them 
30.  Moses  sa  d,  ye  have  sinned  a  great  s. 
31  and  !iaid,oh,this  people  have  sinned  a  greats. 

1  .Sam.  2.  17.  *.  of  Ihe  young  men  was  very  great 

2  Kings  17. 21.  Jeroboam  made  them  sin  a  great  s. 
His  SIN. 

Lev.  4.3.  bring  for  Ai*  *.  he  sinned  a  young  bullock 

23.  or  if  Ai*  *.  come  to  his  knowledge,  28. 

26.  the  priest  shall  make  an  atonement  for  Am  s. 

and  it  shall  be  forgiven,  .35.  |  5.  6,  10,  13. 

28.  he  shall  bring  a  kid  of  the  ijoats  for  his  ». 

5.  6.  he  shall  bring  his  trespaKs-cWi'ring  for  his  » 

1  Kings  15.  26.  Nadah  did  ovil  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lord,  and  walked  in  the  way  of  his  ». 

34.  Tt.iaslui  walked  in  way  of  Jeroboam  and  A.  ». 
'ifi.  10.  Zimri  walked  inAi.«*.  ||26.  Omrl  in  his 3. 

2  A'in^.<2l.l6.besidoAi**.whorewiih  inadeJiidah 
17.  acts  of  Manasseh,  and  Ai*  *.  that  ho  sinned 

2  CAron.  33.  19.  all  his  s.  before  ho  was  humbled 
.lob  34.  37.  for  he  addelh  rebellion  lo  Ai*  *. 
A«a.27.  9.  this  is  all  the  fruit  to  take  away  kis  I. 
F.iek.  3.  20.  he  thall  die  in  ill  *   IB.  i24. 


SIN 

Sieii.  33.  14.  if  be  turn  from  his  s.  and  do  right 
Hos.  13.  12.  iniquity  is  bound  up,  his  s.  is  hid 
.ilfic.  3. 8.  truly  I  am  full  to  declare  to  Israel  his  «. 

My  SIN.  ■ 

Gen.31 .36.  what  is  my  s.that  thou  hast  pursued  me? 

Exod.  10. 17.  therefore  forgive  my  s.  only  this  once 

£am.l5.23. 1  pray  thee,  pardon  my  s.  turn  with  me 

20.1.  what  is  »ni/s. before  thy  father  to  seek  my  life 
Kings  17. 18.  come  to  call  my  s.  to  remembrance 

Job  10.  6.  that  thou  searchest  after  my  s. 

13.SJ3.  make  me  to  know  transgression  and  my  s. 

14.  16.  dost  thou  not  watch  over  my  s. 

35-  3.  what  profit  if  I  be  cleansed  from  my  s.? 
Psal.  32.  5. 1  acknowledged  my  s.  and  iniquity  to 
thee,  and  thou  forgavest  the  iniquity  o(  my  s. 

38.  3.  nor  rest  "n  my  bones  because  of  my  s. 
18.  mine  iniquity,  for  I  will  be  sorry  for  my  s. 

51.2.  wash  me  thoroughly,  cleanse  me  from  mys. 
3.7ny«.is  ever  before  me||59.  3.  nor  for  my  *.0  L. 

Proo.  20.  9.  who  can  say,  I  am  pure  from  my  s.? 
Dan.  9.  20.  and  whilst  I  was  confessing  my  s. 
See  Offering. 
Our  SIN. 
Exod.  34.  9.  Lord,  pardon  our  iniquity  and  our  s. 
Jtr.  16.  10.  what  is  our  s.  we  have  committed 

Their  SIN. 
Gcn.18.20.  L.  said,  because  their  s.is  very  grievous 
50.  17.  forgive,  I  pray  thee,  Ihdr  s.  2  Chron.  7.  14. 
Exod.  32. 32.  yet  now,  if  thou  wilt  forgive  their  s. 
34.  in  the  day  when  I  visit,  I  will  visit  their  s. 
JVu;n.5.7.  they  shall  confess  their  s.  they  have  done 
Deal.  9.27.  look  not  unto  stubbornness,  nor  their  s. 

1  Kings  8.  35.  if  they  turn  from  their  s.  2  Chr.  (i.  26. 
^eh.  4.  5.  let  not  their  s.  be  blotted  out  from  thee 
Ps.S5.2.forgiven,  tliouhast  covered  all  their  s. 
Isa.  3. 9.  they  declare  their  s.  as  Sodum,  hide  it  not 
Jcr.  16.  18.  I  will  recompense  their  s.  double 

18.  23.  neither  blot  out  their  s.  from  thy  sight 
31.  34.  and  I  will  remember  their  s.  no  more 
36.  3.  that  I  may  forgive  their  iniquity  and  t/teir  s. 

John  15.  22.  now  they  have  no  cloke  for  their  s. 
Thy  SIN. 

2  Sam.  12.  13.  the  Lord  also  hath  put  away  thys. 
/sa.6.7.  thine  iniquity  is  taken  away,  I.  s.  is  purged 

Your  SIN. 
Exod.  32.  30  I  shall  make  atonement  for  your  s. 
J^Tum.  32.  23.  be  sure  your  s.  will  find  you  out 
Deut.  9. 21. 1  took  y.  s.  the  calf  which  ye  had  made 
»A(An  9.4 l.ye  say  we  SI  e, therefore  2/our;s.remaineth 

SIN,  l^erb. 

Gcn.39.9.howcan  Idothis  wickedn.andi.ag.  God) 
42.  22.  Reuben  said,  do  not  s.  against  the  child 
Exod.  20. 20.  his  fear  may  be  before  you, that  s.  not 
23.  33.  not  dwell,  lest  they  make  thee  s.  ag.  me 
L,ev.  4.  2.  if  a  soul  shall  s.  thro'  ignorance  ag.  com 
3.  if  the  priests.  ||  13.  if  congregation  s. 
07.if  any  oneofthe  common  peoples. thro'  ignor. 
5-  1.  if  a  soul  s.  and  hear  the  voice  of  swearing 
15.  if  a  soul  commit  a  trespass  and  «.  thro'  ignor 
in  the  holy  things  of  the  Lord,  17.  A'ura.  15.  27. 
6.  2.  if  a  soul  s.  and  lie  unto  his  neighbour 
JWm.16.22.  shall  ones,  wilt  thou  be  wroih  with  all? 
Deyt.W.  18.  so  should  you  ,?.  against  L.  your  God 
24.4.  thon  shall  not  cause  the  land  to  «.  Lord  gives 
1  .Sam.  2. 25.  if  one  man  s.  against  another,  if  a  man 
s.  against  the  Lord,  who  shall  entreat  for  him? 

12.  23.  God  forbid  I  should  s.  in  censing  to  pray 
14.  33.  behold,  the  people  s.  against  the  Lord 

34.  slay  them,  and  s.  not  in  eating  with  the  blood 

19.  4.  let  not  the  king  «.  against  his  servant 
5.  why  wilt  ihou  s.  against  innocent  blood? 

1  KingsS.iG.  if  they  s.  against  thee,  2  CA™».  6.  36. 
2A'n)nrs21.11.Manasseh  made  Judah  to  .s. with  idols 

2  Chr.  0.  22.  if  a  man  s.  against  his  neighbour 
J\i'rh.  6.13.  that  I  should  be  afraid,  and  do  so,  and  s. 

13.  26.  did  not  Solomon  .i.  by  these  things? 
Job  2.  10.  in  all  this  did  not  Job  s.  with  his  lips 

5.  24.  thou  shalt  visit  thy  habitation  and  not  s. 
10.  14.  if  I  «.  thou  markest  me,  not  acquit 
31.  30.  neither  have  I  suffered  my  mouth  to  s. 
P.''al.  4.  4.  stand  in  awe,  and  s.  not,  commune 

39.  1. 1  will  take  heed  that  I^.  not  with  my  tongue 
119.  11.  that  I  might  not  s.  against  thee 

/^cc/. 5. 6. suffer  not  thy  moiiih  to  cause  thyflesh  tos. 
./i-r.  32.35.do  this  abomination  to  cause  judah  to  «. 
/;ifA.3. 21.  that  righteous  s.  not,  and  he  doth  not  s. 
Hus.  8.  11.  because  F.|)hraim  haih  made  many 
altsirs  to  s.  altars  shall  be  unto  him  to  s. 
13.  2.  and  now  tliev  .s.  more  and  more  and  made 
J\fat.  IS.  21.  Lord,  how  oft  shall  my  brother  s.? 
John  .5.14.  s.  no  more,  lest  worse  thing  come  to  ihee 

8.  11.  neither  do  I  condemn  thee,  s.  no  more 

9.  2.  who  did  s.  this  man  or  his  parents?  A 
fiom.6.15.shall  wes.because  wearenotunderlawT 
1  Cor.  8. 12.  when  ye  5.  so  against  the  brethren  and 

wound  their  conscience,  ye  s.  against  Christ 
1.1.  34.  awake  to  righteousness,  and  «.  not 
Eph.  4.  26.  be  ye  ansry,  and  «.  not,  let  not  the  sun 
1  Tim.  5.  20.  them  that  «.  rebuke  before  all 
Hcb.  10.  26.  if  we  *.  wilfully  after  knowl.  of  truth 
Sin 


SIN 

1  John  2. 1.  these  things  I  write  unto  you  that  ye  s. 
not,  and  if  any  man  s.  we  have  an  advocate 
3.  9.  he  cannot  s.  because  he  is  born  of  God 
5. 16.  if  any  man  see  his  brother  s.  not  to  death,  he 
shall  give  him  life  for  them  that  s.  not  to  death 
SINCE.  [See  Israel. 

Gen, 30.  30.  the  Lord  hath  blessed  thee  5.  my  com. 
44.  28.  the  one  went  out,  and  I  saw  him  not  s. 
46.  30.  let  me  die,  s.  I  have  seen  thy  face 
Exod.  5.  23.  for  s.  I  came  to  Pharaoh  to  speak 
9.  )8.  hail  not  in  Egypt,  s.  the  foundation  thereof 
24.  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  s.  it  became  a  nation 
JVum  22.30.  thou  hast  ridden  on  ever  s.  I  was  thine 
Deut.  34.  10.  there  arose  not  a  prophet  s.  in  Israel 
Josh.  2. 12.  swear,  s.  I  have  shewed  you  kindness 
3.  t  4.  ye  have  not  past  this  way  i.  yesterday 
14.  lO.Lord  kept  me  alive,  even  s.  the  Lord  spake 
Ruth2. 11.  all  thou  hast  done  s.  death  of  thy  husbd. 

1  .^am.  9.  24.  s.  I  said,  I  have  invited  the  people 
21.  5.  about  these  three  days  s.  I  came  out 

29.  3.  I  found  no  fault  in  him  s.  he  fell  to  me 

2  Sam.  7.  6.  the  time  that  1  brought  up  Israel 

11.  and  s.  I  commanded  judges,  1  Chron.  17. 10. 

13.  t  28.  will  you  not  s.  I  have  commanded  you 
2  Chron.  30.  26.  s.  Solomon  not  like  passover 

31.  10.  s.  the  people  began  to  bring  the  offerings 
Ezra  4. 2.  s.  the  days  of  Esar-haddon  king  of  Assur 

5.  16.  s.  that  time  till  now  hath  it  been  in  building 

9.7.  s.  days  of  our  fathers  have  we  been  in  trespass 
Job  20.  4.  s.  man  was  placed  upon  earth 

38. 12.  hast  thou  commanded  morning  s.  thy  days? 
fsa.  14.  8.  s.  thou  art  laid  down,  no  feller  is  come 

16. 13.  hath  spoken  concerning  Moah  s.  that  time 

43.  4.  s.  Ihou  wast  precious  in  my  sight,  hast  been 

44.  7.  s.  I  appointed  the  ancient  people 
64.  4.  s.  the  beginning  men  have  not  heard 

Jer.  15.  7.  s.  they  return  not  from  their  ways 
20.  8.  for  s.  I  spake,  I  cried  out,  I  cried  violence 

23.  38.  but  s.  ye  say,  the  burden  of  the  Lord 
31.20.  S.I  spake  against  him,  I  remember  him  still 
44.  18.  s.  we  left  off  to  burn  incense  to  the  queen 
48.  27.  s.  thou  speakest  of  him,  thou  skippedst 

Dan.  12.  1.  as  never  was  s.  there  was  a  nation 
Hag.  2.  16.  s.  those  days  were  when  one  came 
Mat.  24.  21.  such  as  was  not  s.  the  beginning 
Mark  9.  21.  how  long  is  it  ago  s.  this  came  to  him? 
J^uke  1.  70.  been  s.  the  world  began,  John  9.  32. 
7.  45.  s.  the  time  I  came  in,  she  lialh  not  ceased 
16.  16.  i-.  then  the  kingdom  of  God  is  preached 

24.  21    is  the  third  dav  s.  these  things  were  done 
Jlets  3.  21.  s.  the  world  began,  Rom.  16.  25. 

19.  2.  ye  received  the  Holy  Ghost  s  ye  believed? 
24. 11.  yet  hut  twelve  dayss.  I  went  to  Jerusalem 

1  Cor.l5.21.fors.  by  man  came  death,  by  man  came 

2  Cor.  13.  3.  ye  seek  a  proof  of  Christ  in  me 

Col.  1.  4.  s.  we  heard  of  your  faith  in  Christ  Jesus 
Heb.  7.  28.  but  word  of  oalh  which  was  s.  the  law 
'iPet.  3.  4.  for  s.  the  fathers  fell  asleep,  all  things 
Rev.  16. 18.  as  was  not  s.  men  were  uptin  the  earth 
See  Day. 
SINCERE, 
Or  Sincerity.  This  word  properly  signifies  truth 
and  uprightness,  when  the  heart  and  tongue 
agree  tugetiier.  Sincerity  is  opposed  to  duuble- 
viindediicss  or  deceit,  when  the  sentiments  of 
the  heart  arc  contrary  to  the  language  of  the 
mouth.  The  Latin  word,  sincerus,  is  derived 
from  sine  and  cera,  without  wax,  honey  sepa- 
rated from  the  wax,  or  pure  honey.  In  the 
scripture  sincere  signifies  pure,  or  without 
mixture,  1  Pet.  2.  1,  Desire  the  sincere  ndlk 
of  the  word  ;  that  is,  unmixed  with  errors,  tra- 
ditions, and  heresies,  free  from  deceits.  St. 
Paul  would  have  tAcPhilippians  to  be  pure,  im- 
partial, and  unbiassed. in  their  choice;  that 
the  behaviour  may  be  innocent,  and  give  no 
offence  to  any  body,  Phil.  I.  10,  that  ye  may 
be  sincere  and  without  offence  till  the  day  of 
Christ.  The  same  J]posllc  speaks  o/sinceriiy 
and  truth,  or  purity  and  truth,  which  he  sets  in 
Ojiposition  to  the  leavened  bread  of  impurity 
and  filthiness,  1  Cor.  5.  8,  Let  us  keep  the 
feast,  not  with  old  leaven,  neither  with  the 
leaven  of  malice  and  wickedness;  but  with  the 
unleavened  bread  of  sincerity  and  truth.  That 
is,  Drt  the  whole  of  our  lives  be  like  the 
Jewish  feast  of  the  Passover  and  nnleorened 
bread;  let  us  not  spend  them  with  the  leaven 
of  malice  and  wickedness,  allowing  ourselves 
in  any  way  of  sin,  either  by  corrupt  affections, 
sinful  actions,  or  tolerating  among  iis  any 
scandalous  offence;  but  lit  us  practise  all 
Christian  purity,  and  hold  fast  the  truth  that 
has  been  delivered  to  us.  Jlnd  he  reproaches 
the  false  apostles  with  not  preaching  Christ, 
sincerely, purely,  with  upright  and  disinterest- 
ed sentiments  of  the  heart,  Phil.  1.  16,  The  one 
preach  Christ  of  contention,  not  sincerely. 
Oen.  17.  t  1.  walk  before  me,  and  he  thou  .'. 
Deut.  18. 1 13.  thou  shalt  be  s.  with  Lord  thy  God 


SIN 

Psal.  119.  fl.  blessed  are  the  s.  in  the^vay 
Eph.  4.  t  15.  being  s.  in  love  may  grow  up  into  him 
Phil.  1. 10.  ye  may  be  s.  till  day  of  Christ,  2.  f  15 
1  Pet.  2.2.  as  new  born  babes  de>ire  s.  milk  of  word 

SINCERELY. 
Judg.  9.  16.  now  if  ye  have  done  truly  and  *.  U. 
Phil.  1.  16.  the  one  preach  Christ,  not  s. 

SINCERITY. 
Gen.  20.  t  5.  in  the  s.  of  my  heart  have  I  done  this 
./osh.  24. 14.  fear  and  serve  the  Lord  in  s.  and  truth 

1  Cor.  5.  8.  with  unleavened  bread  of  s.  and  truth 

2  C<;r.l.l2.in  godlys.we  have  had  our  conversation 
2.  17.  but  as  ofs.  in  the  sight  of  God  speak  sve 
9.  8.  and  to  prove  the  s.  of  your  love 

E/)A.6.24. grace  with  them  that  love  our  L.Jee.  ins. 
Tit.  2.  7.  in  doctrine  shewing  gravity,  s. 

SINEW. 
Gen.  32.  32.  Israel  eat  not  of  the  s.  that  shrank, 
because  he  touched  Jacob  in  thcs.  that  shrank 
/sa.  48. 4.  because  thy  neck  is  an  iron  s.  brow  brass 

SINEWS. 

.lob  10.  11.  thou  hast  fenced  me  with  bones  and  *. 

.30.17.  my  bones  are  pierced,  and  my  s.  take  no  rest 

40.  17.  the  J.  of  his  stones  are  wrapped  together 

Eiek.  37.  6.  I  will  lay  .«.  upon  you  and  bring  flesh 

8.  the  s.  and  the  flesh  came  up  upon  ihem 

SINFUL. 

.\'um.  32.  14.  ye  are  risen  an  increase  of  s.  men 

Isa.  1.  4.  ah  s.  nation,  a  people  laden  with  ini(|uity 

.^Hios  9. 8.  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  on  ihe  s.  kingdom 

jMark  8.  38.  shall  be  ashamed  in  this  s.  generation 

I.uke  5.8  depart  from  me,  for  lam  ,«.  man,  O  Lord 

24.  7.  must  be  delivered  into  the  bonds  of  s.  men 

Rom.  7.  13.  that  sin  might  become  e.xceeding  s. 

8. 3.  God  sending  his  Son  in  the  likeness  of  s.  flesh 

SING. 
Exod.  15.  21.  s.  to  the  Lord,  1  Chr.  16.  23.  Psal 
30.  4.  1  95.  1.  I  <i6.  1,  2.  1  98. 1.  I  147.  7. 
I  149.  1.  Isa.  12.  5. 

32.  18.  but  the  noi.se  of  ihem  that  .t.  do  I  hear 
jVum.  21.  17.  spring  up,  O  well,  s.  ye  unto  it 

I  Sam.  21.  11.  did  they  not  s.  one  to  another? 

1  Chron.  16.  9.  s.  unto  him,  s.  psalms  unto  him 
33.  then  shall  the  trees  of  the  wood  s.  out 

2  Chron.  20.22.  when  they  began  to  s.  end  prais* 
29  30.  Hezekiah  commanded  the  Levites  to  .<t. 

.lob  29. 13.  I  caused  the  widow's  heart  to  s.  for  joy 
Psal.  21.  13.  so  will  we  s.  and  piaise  thy  power 

33.  2.  praise  the  Lord,  s.  to  him  with  the  jisallery 

3.  s.  unto  him  a  new  song,  fsa.  42.  10. 

51.  14.  my  tongue  s.  of  thy  righteousness,  145.  7 
65.  13.  the  valleys  shout  for  joy,  they  also  s. 
66.2.  s.  forth  the  honour  of  his  name,  make  praisp 

4.  the  earth  .■!.  to  thee,  they  shall  s.  to  ihy  name 

67.  4.  let  the  nations  be  glad  and  s.  for  joy 

68.  32.  s.  to  God,  ye  kingdoms  of  the  earth 
71.  22.  to  thee  will  I  s.  with  the  harp,  98.  5. 

81.  1.  .<;.  aloud  unto  God  our  strength,  make  noise 

104.  12.  the  fowls  which  s.  among  the  branches 

105.  2.  s.  to  him,  s.  psalms  unto  him,  talk  ye 

137.  3.  saying,  s.  us  one  of  the  ?otig«  of  Zion 

4.  how  shall  we  s.  Lord's  song  in  a  strange  land! 

138.  5.  yea,  they  shall  s.  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord 
149.  5.  let  the  saints  s.  aloud  upon  their  beds 

Pruv.  29.  6.  but  the  righteous  doth  s.  and  n  joice 
/.<a.23.15.after  seventy  years  shallTyre  s.as  harlot 
24.  14.  they  shall  s.  for  the  majesty  of  the  Lord 

26.  19.  awake  and  s.  ye  that  dwell  in  dust 

27.  2.  in  that  day  s.  veto  her,  vineyard  of  red  wine 
.35.  6.  then  shall  the  tongue  of  the  dumb  s. 

38.  20.  therefore  we  will  s.  my  songs  all  days 

42.  II.  let  the  inhabitants  of  the  rock  s. 

44. 23.  .t.  O  ye  heavens,  for  L.  hath  done  il,  49. 13. 

52.  8.  with  the  Voice  together  shall  thev  s. 

9.  s.  to  Ihe  Lord,  ye  waste  places  of  Jerusalem 
54.  1.  s.  O  barren,  Ihou  Ihat  d'dst  not  bear 
65. 14  behold,  my  servants  shall  s.  for  joy  of  hear! 
.ler.  31.  7.  .«.  with  gladnes-s  for  Jacob,  and  shout 

12.  they  shall'come  and  s.  in  the  height  of  Zion 
51.  48.  all  that  is  therein  shall  s.  for  Babylon 
F.zek.  27.  2.5.  the  ships  of  Tarshish  did  s.  of  thee 
ffos.  2.  15.  she  shall  .t.  as  in  the  days  of  youih 
Zeph.  2.  14.  Iheir  voice  shall  s.  in  the  windows 
3.  14.  s.  O  daughter  of  Zion,  Zech.  2.  10. 
.Tam.  5   13.  i.s  any  merry?  let  him  s.  psalms 
Rev.  15.3.  they  s.  song  of  Moses  and  of  the  Lamb 

/  will  SING. 
Fxod.^5.1. 1  will  s.  to  the  Ld.  .ludff.r).:^.  Psaf.}X6 
Psal.  .57.  7.  my  heart  is  fixed,  O  God,  Iici/l  s. 

9.  I  will  s.  unto  thee  among  the  nations 
59.  16.  f  will  s.  of  thy  power,  of  thy  mercy,  89. 1 
17.  unto  thee,  O  my  strength,  jrill  I  s.  for  God  ig 
101.  1.  I  will  s.  of  mercy  and  judgment.  O  Lord 
104.  33.  I  will  s.  to  the  Lord,  as  long  as  I  live 
144.  9.  I  will  s.  a  new  song  unto  thee,  O  God 
Isa.  5. 1.  now  will  Is.  to  my  wcll-beloved  a  song 
Rnm.  15.9.  for  this  cafise  will  Is.  to  thy  name 
1  Cor.  14. 15. 1  will  pray  with  spirit,  /  u-ill  s.  with 
the  spirit,  and  I  will  s.  with  the  understanding 
See  Praise,  Praises. 


SIN 

SINGED. 
Dan.  3.  2*   r.or  was  a  liiiir  of  their  head  s. 

SINGER. 
1  Chron.  6  33.  Heman  a  s.  the  son  of  Joel 
Hcb.  3.  19.  to  chiefs,  on  my  stringed  instruments 

SINGERS. 
lA'i'no-slO.ia.king  made i>siillorie3  for  s.2C/jr.9.11. 

1  Cknni.  9.  33.  tliese  are  the  s.  chief,  15.  10. 

15  19.S0  3.  were  appointed  tosouiii  witli  cymbals 
27.  the  Levilcs  and  the  «.  had  line  linen 

2  Ckr.  5.  13.  the  trumpeters  and  i.  were  as  one 
20.  21.  Jeho.'ihapliat  appointed  a-,  unto  the  Lord 
23.  13.  the  people  rejoiced  and  also  the  s.  29.  "16. 
35. 1  ">.  ihu  s.  the  sons  of  Asajdi  were  in  their  pUce 

Eira  2.  41.  the  .i.  a  hundred  t«enly  and  eight 
70  so  the  s.  dwelt  in  iheir  cities,  JVeA.  7.  73. 
7.  7.  some  of  the  a-,  went  up  unto  Jerusalem 
24.  it  shall  not  be  lawful  to  impose  toll  upon  .•5. 
10.24.  the  s.  gave  their  hands  to  put  away  wives 
.Vt/i.  7.  1.  the  jiorteis  and  the  s.  were  appointed 

10.  29.  the  *.  clave  to  their  brethren,  their  nobles 

11.  22.  the  s.  were  over  the  business  of  the  house 
23.  a  portion  shall  be  for  the  s.  12.  47.  [  13.  5. 

12.  28.  sons  of  .5.  gathered  themselves  together 
29.  the  .?.  had  bnilded  them  villages  round  about 
42.  s.  sang  aloud  ||  45.  s.  kept  ward  of  their  G. 
4lj.  in  the  days  of  David,  there  \\'ere  chief  of  s. 

13.  10.  for  the  Levites  and  the  s.  were  lied 
Psal.  t)8. 25.  s.  went  before,  players  followed  after 

87.  7.  as  well  the  s.  as  the  players  shall  be  there' 
Eick.  40.  44.  the  chambers  of  the  5.  in  inner  court 

.Ve/j-SINGERS,  /Komni-SINGERS. 
Ecd.  2.  8.  I  gat  me  mni-s.  and  women-s. 

SINGETH. 
Prov.  25. 20.  so  is  he  that  s.  songs  to  a  heavy  heart 

SINGING. 
1  .Sam.  18.6.  women  came  out  of  cities  of  Israels. 

1  Ckron.  6.  32.  and  they  ministered  with  s. 

13.  8.  David  and  all  Isr.  played  before  God  with  s. 
S  Chrun.  23.  18.  to  otier  the  bunit-otferings  with  s. 
•  30.  21.  s.  with  loud  instruments  unto  the  Lord 
AH.  12.27  kept  the  dedication  of  the  wall  withs. 
Psal.  30.  t5.  hut  s.  covneth  in  the  morning 

100.  2.  come  before  his  presence  with  s. 

105.  t  43.  he  brought  forth  his  chosen  wiih  s. 

107.  122.  and  declare  his  works  with  s. 

12C.  2.  then  was  our  tongue  filled  with  s. 

t  5.  they  that  sow  in  tears  shall  reap  in  .?. 
Cinl.  2.  12.  the  liine  of  the  s.  of  birds  is  come 
Jsa.  14.7.  earth  is  at  rest,  ihey  brea.'t  forth  iiitos. 

lt\  10.  in  ilie  vincyiirds  there  shall  be  no  s. 

35.  2.  it  shall  blossom  anil  rejoice  with  joy  and  s. 

44.  23.  break  forih  inio  s.  ye  mountains,  O  forest 

48. 20.  Hec  from  the  Chaldeans  with  a  voice  of  5. 

49.  13.  be  joyful,  O  earth,  and  break  forih  into*. 

51.  il.  the  redeemed  shall  come  with  s.  to  Zion 

54.1.  break  forth  into  .!.  O  barren,  and  cry  alouil 

55.  12.  the  miiunlaius  shall  break  forth  into  s. 

Ze;>A.3.17.rest  in  his  love,  will  joy  over  thee  with  s. 

F.pk.  5.  19.  n.  in  your  heart  to  the  Lord,  Cnl.  X  Hi. 

SINCI.VGMEN,  SINGING  WOMEN. 

2  .Sam.  19. 35.  can  I  hear  voice  ofs.-7ncn,s.-womcn 
2  Ckron.  3.').  25.  all  the  s.-iiien  spake  of  Josiah 
Ezra  2.  t)5.  two  hundred  s.-mert,  200  s.-womcn 

I    JVcA.  7.  67.  they  had  245  .i.-men  and  s.-womtn 
SINGLE. 
Eiek.  23.  t  47.  tlio  company  shall  s.  them  out 

SINGLE. 

Mat.  6.  22.  if  therefore  thine  eye  be  s.  thy  whole 

body  shMI  be  full  of  light,  Luke  11.  34. 

SINGLENESS. 

jjc^*  2.4l).did  eat  meat  with  gladness  and  s. of  heart 

Eph.  G.  5.  serv.  obey  in  .i.  of  your  hearl,  Col.  3.  22. 

SI.^JGULAR. 
Lev.  27.  2.  when  a  ninn  shall  make  a  J.  vow 

SINK. 
Job  38. 1 0.  w  hereon  are  the  foundations  made  to  s. 
Psal.  69.  2.  I  .«.  in  dee|i  mire  where  is  no  standing 
14.  deliver  uie  out  of  Ihu  mire,  and  let  me  nots. 
Jer.  51.  04.  thus  shall  Habylon  s.  and  shall  not  rise 
Mat.  14. 30.  beginning  to  s.  he  cried.  Lord,  save  me 
Luke  5.  7.  filled  both  ships,  so.that  they  began  to  3. 
0.  44.  let  these  savinas  .».  riown  into  your  ears 

■  SINNED. 
Kiod.n.S  I.PIi'irnoh  .<.  yet  more,  hardened  his  heart 
32.  30.  Moses  said,  ye  have  ».  a  great  sin,  31. 

33.  whosoever  halh  s.  him  will  I  blot  out 
Lev.  4.  3.  bring  for  the  sin  he  hath  s.  a  bullock 
14.  when  the  sin  the  congregation  have  s. 
22.wlien  ruler «. 23.  ||  2H.one  ofcommon  peoples. 
5.  5.  he  shall  coulees  he  hath  .<i.  in  that  thing 
fi.  for  sin  which  he  hath  a.  shall  bring  a  female 
lO.priest  shall  maki.'  atonement  for  thi^  sin  he  hath 
s.  and  shnll  be  forgiven,  11.  13.  JV«m.  ti.  li. 
C.  4.  because  ho  hath  s.  shnll  restore  what  hu  took 
JVitm.  12.  U.  lay  not  sin  on  us  wherein  wo  have  s. 
32.  2^.  behold,  ye  have  a.  against  the  Lord 
Df.u.t.9.  If).  I  looked,  and  behold  ye  had  s.ng.  Lord 

18.  your  sins  which  ye  ,».  in  doing  wickedly 

j0sA.7.11.1sr.  haths.and  transgrestodmvovunant 

S50 


SIN 

Judg.  11.27.  wherefore  I  have  not  s.  against  thee 
1  Saul.  19.  4.  because  he  hath  not  s.  against  thee 
24.  11.  know  that  1  have  not  s.  against  thee 
1  A'jHo-s8.33.because  they  haves,  against  thee,and 
shall  turn  again  to  thee,  35.2  Chr.  6.24,  26. 
50.  forgive  thy  people  that  s.  2  Chrun.  6.  39. 
15.  30.  sins  of  Jeroboam  which  he  s.  16.  13,  19. 

18.  9.  what  have  I  s.  that  thou  wouliUst  deliver 
i  Kings  17. 7.  Israel  had  s.  against  Lord  their  God 

21.  17.  the  sill  that  Manasseli  had  a.  is  written 
ATe/i.  9-  29.  but  s.  against  thy  judgments 
Job  1.  5.  Job  said,  it  may  be  that  my  sons  have  s. 
22.  in  all  this  Job  s.  not,  nor  charged  G.  foolishly 
8. 4.  if  children  have  s.  against  him  and  have  cast 
24.  19.  so  doth  llie  grave  those  who  have  s. 
Psal.  78.  17.  they  s.  yet  more  against  him,  32. 
Isa.  43.  27.  thy  first  father  hath  s.  and  thy  teachers 
Jcr.  2.  33.  because  thou  sayest,  1  have  not  s. 
33.  8.  theii  iniquity,  whereby  they  have  s.  ag.  me 
40.  3.  because  ye  have  s.  and  not  obeyed,  44.  23. 

50.  7.  becau.-e  they  have  s.  ag.  the  L.  Z.cph.  1.  17. 

14.  for  Uabyloii  hath  s.  against  the  Lord 
J.ain.  1.8.  Jerusalem  hath  grievously  s.  is  removed 

5.7.  our  fathers  have  s.  and  are  not,  we  have  borue 
['.ir.k.  IS.  24.  in  sin  hu  hath  s.  in  them  shall  ho 

28. 10.  have  filled  with  violence,  and  thou  hast  s. 

37.  23.  of  their  dwelling  places  wheiein  they  s. 
Has.  4.  7.  as  they  increased  so  they  s.  against  me 

10.  9.  O  Israel   ihou  hast  s.  from  days  of  Gibeah 
Hub.  2.  10.  and  thou  hast  s.  against  thy  soul 
.John  9.  3.  neither  this  man  .«.  nor  his  jiareiils 
Rom. 2. 12.  for  as  many  as  haves,  wlthmit  law  ;  as 
have  s.  in  the  law,  shall  be  judged  by  the  law 

3.  23.  for  all  have  s.  and  come  short,  5.  12. 

5.  14.  death  reigned  even  over  them  that  had  not  s. 
16.  not  as  it  was  by  one  that  s.  so  is  the  gill 

1  Cur.  7.  28.  but  and  if  thou  marry,  thou  hast  not  s. 

and  if  a  virgin  marry  she  hath  not  s. 

2  Cor.  12.  21.  I  shall  bewail  many  that  have  s. 

13.  2.  1  write  to  them  which  heretofore  have  s. 
Neb.  3.  17.  was  it  not  with  them  that  had  s.  ? 

2  Pet.  2.  4.  for  if  God  spared  not  the  angels  that  s. 
X.luhn  l.lO.if  wesay  wohave  not  s.we deceive  ours. 

/  have  SINNED. 
K3:o(/.9.27.Pharaohsaid,  I  have  $.  this  time,  10. 16. 
JV'um. 22. 34. Balaam  said  to  angel  of  Lord, 7  haves. 
.Jnsk.  7.  20.  indeed  I  have  s.  ag.  Lord  God  of  Israel 

1  Sam.  15.  24.  Saul  said,  I  have  s.  30.  )  26.  21. 

2  Sam.  12.  13.  David  said  to  Nathan,  /  have  s. 

against  the  Lord,  24.  10,  17.  1  C/ir.  21.  8,  17. 

19.  20.  thy  servant  doth  know  that  /  hare  s. 
.Job  7.  20.  I  have  s.  \\  33.  27.  if  any  say  I  hare  s. 
P.ial.  41.4.  heal  my  soul,  for  I  have  s.  against  thee 

51.  4.  against  thee,  thee  only  h.  f  s.  done  this  evil 
Mic.l.'i.I have  a. against  him  till  he  plead  mycause 
Mat.  27.  4.  JuJas  said,  /  have  s.  in  betraying  inno. 
Lake  15.  18.  the  prodigal  said,  faiher,  I  have  s.  21. 

rrcAaue  SINNED. 
Jfum.  12.  11.  lay  not  sin  on  us,  wherein  we  have  .«. 

14.  40.  we  will  go  up,  for  we  haves.  Devi.  1.  41. 
21.  l.we  have  s.  we  have  spoken  against  the  Lord 

Judg.  10.  10.  we  haves,  because  we  have  forsnken 

our  God  and  served  Baalim,  1  Sam.  12.  10. 

15. Kf  have  s.do  to  us  what  seemeth  good  to  thee 

1  •Sam.7.6.  theyfastedthatday,and  said,  wehnves. 

1  Kingf  8.  47.  we  have  s.  and  have  done  perversely 

2  Chr.G.  ;t7.  saying,  ire  have  s.  we  have  done  amiss 
jVeh.  1.  6.  and  confess  the  shis  which  2ce  have  s. 
Psal.  106.6.  we  haves,  with  our  fithers,  we  have 
/sa.  42.24.  the  Lord,  he  against  whom  we  have  s. 

64.  5.  behold  thou  art  wioth,  for  we  have  s. 

.kr.  3.25.  we  lie  down  in  our  shame,  for  toe  haves. 

3.  14.  hath  given  u.<  water  of  gall,  for  we  have  s. 

14.  7.  for  our  backslidings  are  many,  tee  have  s. 

20.  acknowIed2;u  our  wickedness,  for  we  have  s. 

/,nm.5.l6.crown  is  fallen, woo  to  us  that  we  have  s. 

Dan.  9.  5.  we  have  s.  and  have  cotnmitted  iniquity 

8.  to  us  belongelh  confusion,  because  jrcAdiies. 

11.  the  curse  is  poured  on  us,  because  we  haves. 

15.  O  Lord,  we  hare  .«.  we  have  done  w  ickedly 

SINNER. 
Prov.  11.  31.  much  more  the  wicked  and  the  s. 
13.  6.  but  wickedness  overtliroweth  the  s. 

22.  the  wealth  of  the  s.  is  laid  up  for  the  just 
E(<:/.2. 26.  but  to  thes.  he  giv^tli  travail,  to  gather 
7.26.  but  the  s.  shall  he  taki'n  by  her 
8.  12.  tho'  s.  do  ovil  a  hninlred  timci,  yet  I  know 
9.2.  as  is  the  good,  HO  is  the  s.  and  he  lliatsweareth 

18.  hut  one  s.  deslroyeili  mtirli  (Jood 

/:>-n.  65.  20.  s.  being  100  years  idil  shall  be  accursed 

Ah/.c  7. 37.  beliidd  woman  in  the  city  who  was  a  s. 

^9.  woiilil  have  known  this  woman  she  is  a  .». 

15.7.  joy  in  heaven  over  one  .«.  that  rrpcnielh,  10. 

18.  13.  saying,  God  bo  merciful  to  me  a  s. 

19.  7.  lie  was  gone  trf  be  guest  with  man  that  isa  .«. 
./o/i«9.  10.  how  can  a  man  a  .«.  do  such  miracles? 

24.  give  Goil  praise,  wo  know  thi<  man  is  a  ,i. 

25.  he  said,  wdielhor  he  be  a  s.  T  know  not 
tinm.  3.  7.  why  yet  am  I  also  jiidsed  as  a  .». 
Jam.  5.  20.  ho  6iiit  convertuth  a  s.  sliall  save  a  soul 


SIN 

1  Pet.  4. 18.  where  shall  the  ungodly  and  s.  appear 

SINNERS. 
Oen.  13. 13.  the  men  of  Sodom  weres.  e.\coedingIy 
JVuHi.  10.  '.is.  Eleazar,  take  the  censers  of  theses 
1  Sam.  15. 18.  utterly  destroy  the  s.  the  Amalekitej 
Psal.  1. 1.  blessed  thatstandeth  not  in  the  way  ofs 

5.  nor  s.  in  the  congregation  of  the  righteous 
25.  8.  therefore  will  lie  leach  s.  in  the  way 
2t).  9.  gather  not  my  soul  wiih  s.  nor  my  life 
51.  13.  and  s.  shall  be  converted  unto  thee 
104.  35.  let  the  s.  be  consumed  out  of  the  earth 
Prov.  1.  10.  if  s.  entice  thee,  consent  thou  not 
13.  21.  evil  pursueth  s.  but  to  the  righteous  good 

23.  17.  let  not  thine  heart  envy  s.  he  in  fear  of  L. 
/.<a.  1.  28.  the  destruction  of  thes.  shall  be  together 

13.  9.  he  shall  destroy  the  s.  thereof  out  of  it 
33.  14.  the  s.  in  Zion  are  al'raid,  fearfulness 
Jimos  9.  10.  all  s.of  my  people  shall  die  by  sword 
.Wij^.O.lO.many  s.  sat  at  meat  with  Jes.  ^/rtrA2. 15. 
11.  they  said,  why  eateth  year  master  wiih  pub- 
licans and  s.?  jyiark  2. 16.  l^uke  5.  30.  |  15.  2. 
13.  for  I  am  not  come  to  call  the  righteous,  but 
s.  to  repentance,  Mark  2.  17.  Luke  5.  32. 

11.  19.  a  friend  of  publicans  and  s.  Luke  7.  34. 
20.  45.  the  hour  is  at  hand,  anil  the  Son  of  man  is 

betrayed  into  the  hands  of  s.  Mark  14.  41. 
Jjuke  6.  32.  for  s.  also  love  those  that  love  them 

33.  what  thank  have  ye"!  for  s.  also  do  even  same 

34.  for  s.  also  lend  to  s.  to  receive  again 

13.  2.  siippose  ye  that  these  were  s.  above  all,  4. 
15.  1.  drew  all  the  publicans  and  s.  to  hear  him 

.fohn  9.  31.  we  know  ihat  God  hearelh  not  s. 
Rom.  5.  8.  while  we  were  yet  s.  Christ  died  for  us 

19. by  one  man's  disobedience  many  were  made.* 
Gal.  2.  15.  we  Jews  by  nature,  not  s.  of  Gentilei 

17.  but  if  we  ourselves  also  are  found  s. 
1  Ttm.  1.  9.  the  law  is  made  for  s.  for  unholy 

15.  that  Christ  Jesus  came  to  save  s.  I  am  chief 
Heb.  7.  26.  a  high-prie.'t,  holy,  se[>arate  from  s. 

12.  3.  him  that  endured  such  contradiction  of  s. 
./aTH.4.8.cleaiise  your  hands,  yes. purify  your  hearts 
.lude  15.  speeches,  which  ungodly  s.  have  spoken 

SINNEST. 
Job  35.  6.  if  thou  s.  what  doest  thou  against  him? 

SINNETH. 
JVHm.l5.28.make  aionem.for  soul  that  s.ignorantly 

29.  have  one  law  for  him  that  s.  thro'  ignorance 
A)r'HM9. 15. one  witness  shall  not  rise  in  any  sin  hes 
1  A77i^s8.46.  fur  there  is  no  man  thats.  not,  if  they 

sin  against  God,  2  Chron.  6.  36.  Keel.  7.  20 
Prov.S.  36.  he  that  s.  against  nie  wrongeth  his  sou.' 

14.  21.  he  that  despiselh  his  neighbour  s. 

19.  2.  he  that  hiislith  with  his  feel  s. 

20.  2.  whoso  provoketh  a  king,  s.  ag.  his  own  soil 
F.zek.M.IS.  when  the  land  s.then  will  I  strelch  ou 

18.  4.  the  soul  that  s.  it  shall  die,  20. 
3.3.  12.  fi>r  his  righ'eoiisness  in  the  day  he  .c. 
1  Cor.  6. 13.  hut  forniciitor  s.  against  his  own  body 
7.30.  let  him  do  what  he  will  s.  not,  let  them  marry 
Tit.  3.  11.  he  thai  is  such  is  subverted  and  6. 

1  ,fuhn  3.  6.  whosoever  abideih  in  him  s.  not,  who 

soever  s.  hath  not  seen  him  nor  known  him 

8.  is  of  the  devil,  for  devil  s.  from  the  beginning 

5.  18.  we  know  whosoever  is  born  of  God  s.  no« 

SINNING. 
Gev.  20.  6.  for  I  withheld  thee  from  s.  against  me 
/.,C7J.  6. 3.  in  any  of  tin  se  that  a  man  doth,  s.  therein 

SINS. 
lA'iHi'sM. 16  shall  give  Is.up,because  of  s.ofJerob. 

15.  3.  .\liijnm  walked  in  the  .«.  of  Rchohonm 

30.  smote  Niidah  beoanse  of  the  s.  of  Jemhonm 
16. 13.  for  all  the  .t.  of  Baasha,  and  the  .«.  of  RIah 

19.  for  his  s.  which  Zimri  sinned  in  doing  evil 

31.  a  licht  thing  to  walk  in  the  s.  of  Jeroboam 
2A77i^'s3.3.Jehoram  cleaved  to  thes.  of  Jeroboam 

10.  29.  from  the.s.  of  Jeroboam  Jehu  departed  not 
13. 6.  Israel  departed  not  from  the  s.  of  Jeroboam 
1 1.  Joash  li  14.24.  Jeroboam  departed  Crom  the  s. 
15. 9. '/aehariah  ||  18.  Menahem  depnricd  fn-m  s. 

24.  Peknhi.ih  ||  28.  Pekah  departed  not  from  s. 
17.  22.  Israel  walked  in  nil  the  s.  of  Jeroboam 

24.  3.  to  remove  Jiidah  for  the  s.  of  Manassoh 

2  Chron.  2-^.  10.  n'e  there  not  even  with  von  s.? 
JV'7(.  1.6.  and  confess  thes.  of  the  children  of  Israel 
.tob  13.  23.  how  many  arc  mine  iniquities  and  ,«  ? 
P.s(;M9.13.  keep  thy  servant  from  nresiimptnous  s. 

25.  7.  remember  not  the  .».  of  mv  youth 

Prnr.  5.  22.  slnill  be  holden  with  the  cords  of  his  .«. 

)0.12.hnlre(l  Btirrelh  lip  strifes,  love  rovrielh  all  ,s-. 

28.  13.  he  that  coverith  his  s.  shall  not  proS|  er 
Jsa.  40.  2.  she  hath  received  double  for  all  her  .« 

43.  24.  hut  thiiu  Im.sl  lendo  nictoserve  with  thy  5 

25.  I  blot  nut  and  will  not  romember  Ihv  s. 

44.  22.  I  have  blotteil  out  as  a  cloud  Ihy'.c 
./rr.  15. 13. substance  will  I  give  to  spoil  for  all  thy  » 

30.  14.  because  thv  ».  were  increased,  1.5. 
.50.  20.  the  s.  of  Judah  sought  for,  and  not  be  found 
Lnni.  3.  39.  a  man  for  the  punishment  of  his  s. 
4.  13.  for  the  s.  of  her  prophets  nnd  her  priests  ' 

'     22.  O  daughter  of  Edum,  he  will  discover  thv  ■ 


SIN 

EzeA-.lG.5I. nor  hath  Samaria  committed  half  ihyj. 
52.  bear  thou  thine  own  shame  for  thy  s. 
18. 14.  if  he  beget  son  that  seeth  all  his  father's^. 
21.  if  the  wicked  will  tuin  from  all  his  s. 
23.  49.  and  he  shall  bear  the  s.  of  your  idols 
33.  16.  none  of  his  s.  shall  be  mentioned  to  him 
Dan.  4.  27.  break  off  thy  s.  by  rigliteousness 
9.  24.  70  weeks  are  determ.  to  make  an  end  of  s. 
JJ/i'c.  1.5.  for  the  s.  of  the  house  of  Israel  is  all  this 

6.  33.  in  making  thee  desolate  because  of  thy  s. 
Mat.  26.28.  shed  tor  many  for  the  remission  of  s. 
Jl/arfe  1.4.  John  did  baptize  and  preach  the  baptism 

of  repentance  for  the  remission  of  s.  Luke  3.  3. 
/,*Ac24. 47. that  remissionofs. should  be  preached 
John  9.34.  they  said,  thou  wast  altogether  born  in  s. 

20.23.  whose  soever  s.  ye  remit,  whose  s.  ye  retain 
j9cts  2 38.repent  anil  bebaptizedfor  remission  ofs. 

5.  31.  to  give  repentance  and  "mission  of  s. 

10.43. whoso  believeth,shall  receive  remission  of «. 

22. 16.  wash  away  thy  s.  calling  on  name  of  Lord 
Rom.  3.  25.  for  the  remission  of.?,  lliat  are  past 

7.  5.  the  motions  of  s.  did  work  in  our  members 
EpA.2.1.you  hath  quickened, who  were  dead  in  s.5. 
Col. '2. 11.  in  putting  off  the  body  of  s.  of  the  flesh 

1  Tim.  5.  22.  nor  be  partakers  of  other  men's  s. 
24.  some  men's  s.  open  beforehand,  going  before 

2  Tim.S.O.who  lead  capt.  silly  women  laden  with  j. 
ffeb.2. 17.  to  make  reconciliation  for  s.  of  people 

5.  1.  that  he  may  offer  gifts  and  sacrifices  for  s. 
3  for  people,  so  also  for  himself,  to  offer  tors. 
7.  27.  first  for  his  own  s.  then  for  the  people's 

9.  28.  Christ  was  once  offered  to  bear  s.  of  many 

10.  2.  should  have  had  no  more  conscience  of  «. 
3.  there  is  a  remembrance  again  made  of  .s. 
4.nolpossiblebloodof  bulls  andgoats  lake  aways. 
11.  the  same  sacrifices  can  never  take  away  s. 
12.afier  he  had  offered  one  sacrifice  for  s. for  ever 
26.  there  rcmaireth  no  more  sacrifice  for  s. 

Jam.  5. 20.  save  soul,  and  sjiall  hide  multitude  of  s. 
1  Pft.  2. 24.  we  being  dead  to,?,  should  live  to  right. 

3.  18.  for  Christ  also  hath  once  suffered  for  s. 

4.  8.  for  charity  shall  cnver  the  multitude  of  s. 
iPet.  1.  9.  forgotten  he  was  purged  from  his  old  s. 
1  Jo!in  2.  2.  but  also  for  the  s.  of  the  whole  world 
Kev.  18.  4.  that  ye  be  not  partaker  of  her  s. 

5.  for  her  s.  have  reached  unto  heaven 

Sec  Forgive,  Forgiven. 

Mij  SINS. 

Psnl.  51.9.  hide  thy  face  I'rom  my  s.  and  blot  out 

69.  5.  O  God,  nirj  s.  are  not  hid  from  thee 

Isa.  38. 17.  thou  hast  cast  my  s.  behind  thy  back 

Our  SINS. 
1  .Sa7«. 12.19. for  wo  have  added  to  all  our  y.lhis  evil 
£  Cliron.  28-  13.  ye  intend  to  add  more  to  our  s. 
J^Tch.  9.  37.  the  kings  set  over  us  because  of  our  .$. 
Psal.  79.  9.  purge  away  our .?.  for  thy  name's  sake 
90.  8.  nur  secret  s.  in  the  light  of  thy  countenance 
103. 10.  hath  not  dealt  with  us  according  to  our  s. 
Jsa.  .59.  12.  for  our  s.  testify  against  us 
F.zdc.  33.  10.  if  oMr  s.  be  upon  us,  we  pine  away 
Dan.d.ia.  because  ofoars.  thy  people  are  become 
1  Cor.  15. 3.  how  that  Christ  died  for  our .?.  accord. 
Oal.  1.4.  who  gave  himself  for  our  s.  to  deliver  us 
ireb.  1.  3.  when  had  himself  purged  our  s.  sat  down 
1  Fct.  2. 24.  who  his  own  self  bare  ours,  in  his  body 
1  John  1.  9.  if  we  confess  our  s.  he  is  faithful  and 
just  to  forgive  us  our  s.  and  to  cUanse  us 

2.  2.  ke  is  the  piO[)itialion  for  our  s.  4.  10. 

3.  5.  he  was  manifested  to  lake  away  our  s. 
hh}.  1  3.  washed  us  from  our  s.  in  his  own  blood 

Thrir  SINS. 

/,f  ».16.1G.becausn  of  their  tran.^gressions  in  thnir  s. 

21.  shall  confess  over  the  live  goat  all  their  s. 

34.  to  make  atonement  for  their  s.  once  a  year 

.Vuw.  16.  2(5.  lest  ye  be  consumed  in  all  their  s. 

I  Kintrs  14.  22.  ihey  provoked  him  with  their  s. 

16.  2.  to  provoke  me  to  anger  with  their  s. 
.Vc/i.  9.  2.  Israel  stood  and  confessed  their  s. 
^sa.  .58.  1.  shew  the  house  of  J.icob  their  s. 
Jer.  14.  10.  and  visit  their  s.  Jhs.  8.  13.  1  9.  9. 
.1/ic.  7. 19.  cast  all  JAci'rs.  into  the  depth  of  the  sea 
Mat.  1.  21.  he  .chall  save  his  people  from  their  a. 

3.  6.  were  baptized,  confessing  their  s.  Mark  1. 5. 
Mark  4.  12.  and  their  s.  should  be  forgiven  them 
Luke  1.77.of  salvation  by  the  remission  of  their  s. 
Rom.  11.  27.  when  I  shall  take  away  their  s. 
X  T'ie.ts.  2.  10.  to  fill  up  their  s.  always 
Heb.  8.  12.  for  I  will  be  merciful  to  their  s. 

10.17.  their  s.  and  iniquiti"?  I  will  remem.  no  more 

Your  SINS. 
Lev.  16.  30.  that  ye  may  be  clean  from  all  your  s. 

26.18.  punish  you  yet  seven  times  for  yojtr  «.24.28. 
21. 1  will  bring  plngueson  you  accord,  \oyour  s. 

Dent.  9.  18.  nor  drink  water,  because  nfynur  s. 
Josh.24. 19.  is  a  holy  God,  will  not  forgive  yoar  s. 
/sa.1.18.  tho' j/oMrs.bo  as  scarlet, shall  he  as  snow 

59.  2.  and  your  s.  have  hid  his  face  from  you 
/er.  5.  25.  your  s.  have  withholden  good  things 
Ezfi.21.24.  so  thatin  all  yonrdoing.!  your  .5.  appear 

ilmos  5. 12.  fur  I  know  your  transgr.  and  mighty  «. 
551 


SIS 

John  8. 21.  ye  shall  seek  me,  and  die  tn  your  s.  24. 
^cts  3. 19.  rejient,  that  your  s.  may  be  blotted  out 
1  Cor.  15.17.  ifChrist  be  not  raised,  ye  are  in  yours. 
Coi.2.13.you  beingde.adinyw«rs.hathhequickened 
1  John  2.  12.  because  your  s.  aro  forgiven  you 

SIR. 
Oen.  43.  20.  s.  we  came  at  first  time  to  buy  food 
Mat.  13.27.3.  didst  thou  not  sow  good  seed  infield? 
21.  30.  he  said,  I  go  s.  and  went  not 
27.  63.  s.  we  remember  that  that  deceiver  said 
John  4.  11.  s.  thou  hast  nothing  to  draw  with 

15.  s.  give  me  this  water  that  I  thirst  not 
19.  s.  I  perceive  that  thou  art  a  prophet 

49.  the  nobleman  saith,  s.  come  ere  my  child  die 
5.  7.  s.  I  have  no  man  to  put  me  into  the  pool 
12.21. certain  Greeks  saying,  s.wre  would  see  Jesue 
20.  15.  s.  if  thou  have  borne  him  hence,  tell  me 
Rev.  7.  14.  I  said  unto  him,  s.  thou  knovvest 

SIRS. 
.^cts  7.  26.  s.  ye  are  brethren,  why  do  ye  wrong 

14.  15.  crying  out,  s.  why  do  ye  these  things'? 
16.  30.  he  said,  s.  what  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ? 
19.  25.  s.  ye  know  that  by  this  craft  we  have 
27. 10.  s.  I  perceive  this  voyage  will  be  wi0i  hurt 

21.  Paul  said,  s.  ye  should  have  hearkened  to 'me 
25.  wherefore,  s.  be  of  good  cheer,  I  believe  God 
SIRNAME. 
Isa.  44.  5.  and  s.  himself  bv  the  name  of  Israel 

SIRNAME. 
Mat.  10.  3.  Lebbeus,  whose  s.  was  Thaddeus 
.Hets  10.  5.  Simon,  whose  s.  is  Peter,  32.  |  11.  13. 
12.  12.  John,  whose  s.  was  Mark,  25.  |  15.  37. 

SIRNAMED. 
/sa.45.4.Ihaves.thee,tho'  thou  hast  not  known  me 
Mark  3.  16.  and  Simon  he  s.  Peter,  Jlcts  10.  18. 
17.  he  s.  them  Boanerges,  the  sons  of  thunder 
Luke  22.  3.  Satan  entered  into  Judas,  s.  Iscariot 
^cts  1.23.Joseph  calledBarsabas,whowas  s.  Justus 
4.  36.  Joses,  who  by  the  apostles  was  «.  Barnabas 

15.  22.  to  send  Judas,  «.  Barsabas,  and  Silas 

SISTER. 
This  name  has  much  the  same  latitude  as  that  of 
brother.  It  is  used,  not  only  for  s\s{er  by  father 
anil  mother,  but  also  for  her  who  is  a  sister 
only  by  father  or  mother,  or  is  only  a  near 
relation.  Thus  Sarah  is  called  sister  to  Abra- 
ham, though  she  was  only  his  niece  according 
to  some,  or  his  sister  by  the  fathcr^s  side  only, 
according  to  others.  Gen.  12.  13.  |  20.  12.  In 
the  gospel,  the  brothers  and  sisters  of  Jesus 
Christ  are  no  other  than  his  cousins,  the  sons 
attd  daughters  of  the  sister  of  the  firkin  Mary, 
Mat.  13.  56.  Mark  6.  3.  In  Lev.  18.  18.  it 
is  forbidden  to  take  a  wife  to  her  sister;  that 
is,  according  to  some,  to  marry  two  sisters, 
or,  according  to  the  generality  of  inlerpnters, 
to  marry  a  second  icife  when  one  has  one  be- 
fore; so  that  this  passage  forbids  polygamy. 
Sometimes  the  word  sister  shows  a  resemblance 
of  conditions  and  inclinations.  The  prophets 
call  Jerusalem  the  sister  of  Sodom  <ind  Sa- 
maria, because  it  delighted  in  the  imitation  of 
their  idolatry  and  iniquity,  Jer.  3.  8,  10.  Ezek. 

16.  46. 

In  the  Song  of  Solomon,  the  name  of  sister 
given  to  the  .spouse,  is  a  name  of  tenderness, 
love,  and  affection,  and  shews  the  great  af- 
fection which  Christ  has  for  his  church,  which 
cannot  be  sufficiently  expressed  by  any  one  ri  lo- 
tion, but  must  burrow  the  perfections  and  affi  e- 
tions  of  all,  to  describe  it :  this  name  may  Likt- 
wise  shew  that  Christ  and  his  church  have  but 
one  Father,  to  wit,  God,  so  that  the  church 
is  every  way  royal ;  the  daughter  of  a  king, 
the  sister  of  a  king.  Cant.  4.  9,  10,  12.  In 
Cant.  8.  8.  the  spouse  speaking  to  her  beloved, 
says.  We  have  a  little  sister,  and  she  hath  no 
breasts,  what  shall  we  do  for  our  sister  in  the 
day  when  she  shall  be  spoken  for  7  The  be- 
lievers of  the  Jewish  church,  who  here  consult 
with  Christ,  as  it  were,  tell  him  that  they  had  a 
little  sUlitx,  meaning  the  Gentile  church,  which 
as  yet  7eas  not  ripe  for  marriage  with  Christ; 
how  shall  we  promote  their  conversion,  say 
they,  when  the  tenders  of  reconciliation  are 
made  to  them  ?  • 

Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  says.  Mat.  12.  .50,  Who- 
soever shall  do  the  will  of  my  Father  who  is 
in  heaven,  the  same  is  my  brother,  and  sister, 
and  mother:  that  is,  Whosoever  shall  give  real 
evidence  of  true  faith  by  sincere  obedience, 
shall  be  as  dear  to  me  as  my  nearest  natural 
relations;  or,  as  the  nearest  relations  are  to 
any  person.  Job,  in  his  afflictions,  exclaims, 
I  have  said  to  the  worm,  thou  art  my  mother, 
and  my  sister;  thou  art  near  akin  tome,  we 
are  of  the  same  original,  and  thou  art  continu- 
ally with  me.  Job  17.  14.  The  roise  man  ad- 
vises his  pupil  to  say  to  Tl'isdom,  thou  art  my 
Bister;  that  is,  acquaint  and  delight  thyself 


SIT 

with  her,  and  let  her  have  the  command  of  thp 
heart,  find  the  conduct  of  thy  life,  Prov.  7.  4 
•ds  Christians  were  used  to  salute  one  another 
by  the  name  of  brothers  or  brethren,  so  they 
calledC\>{\sUsir\  women,  tcho  professed  the  same 
faith  in  Christ,  by  the  name  vf  sisters ;  Jam. 
2.  15,  16,  If  a  brother  or  sister  he  naked,  and 
destitute  of  daily  food,  Sec. 
Gen.  24.  59.  they  sent  away  Rebekah  their  s. 
60.  thou  art  our  s.  be  thou  moiher  of  thousands 

20.  13.  when  Laban  heard  of  Jacob  his  s.  son 
30.  1.  Rachel  envied  her  s.  and  said  unto  Jacob 
34.  1.3.  beAuse  he  had  defiled  Dinah  their  s.  27. 

14.  we  cannot  give  our  !«.  to  one  uncircumcised 
31.  should  he  deal  with  our  s.  as  with  a  harlot? 
Exod.  2.  4.  his  s.  stood  afar  off  to  wit  what  would 
6. 20.  Amram  took  Jochebed  his  father's,'!,  to  wife 
15.20.  Miriam  «.  of  Aaron  took  a  timbrel  in  hand 
Lev.  13.9.  sha  it  not  uncover  the  nakedness  of  thy  s. 

11.  she  is  thy  s.  ||  18.  not  take  a  wife  to  her  s. 

12.  not  nakedness  of  father's  s.  \\  13.  mother's  s. 

20. 17.  if  a  man  take  hiss,  and  see  her  nakedness 
19.  nor  nakedness  of  thy  mother's  s.  father's  s, 

21.  3.  for  his  s.  a  virgin,  for  her  he  may  be  defiled 
M'uni.Fi.'l.  a  Nazarite  shall  not  bo  defiled  for  his  s. 
IJeut.  27.  22.  cursed  be  he  that  lictli  with  his  s. 
.Tudg.  15.  2.  is  not  her  younger  5.  t'aiier  than  shel 
2  .Snm.  13.  1.  Absalom  had  a  fair  j-.  iip.med  Tamar 

2.  Amnon so  vex. that  befell  sick  for  hiss.Tamar 
4.  I  love  Tamar,  my  brother  Absalom's  s. 
22.  because  he  had  forced  his  ,?.  Tatnar,  32. 

21.  18.  the  king  look  the  five  sons  of  Michal's  3. 
2A7H^sll.2.butJehoshpbaj)-.of.'\liaziah  tookJoash, 

they  hid  him  and  his  nurse,  2  Chron.  22.  11. 

CaH<.8.8.we  have  a  little  s.  and  she  hath  no  breasts, 

what  shall  we  do  for  our  s.  in  the  day! 

Jer.  3.  7.  and  her  treacherous  s.  Judah  saw  it 

8.  her  s.  feared  not  {|  10.  her  s.  ha:h  not  turned 

22. 18.  shall  not  laniPiit  for  him,  s.nying,  ah,  my  ». 
/^:cA.  16.4o.lhou  art  the  .'.of  thy  sisters  who  loath. 

46.  thy  elder  s.  is  Samaria,  thy  younger  s.  Sodom 

48.  Sodom  thy .«.  hath  not  done  as  thou  hast  done 

49.  this  was  tlie  iniquity  of  thy  s.  Sodom,  pride 
56.  for  thy  s.  Sod.  was  not  mentioned  in  the  day 

22.  11.  another  in  thee  hath  hnn^bled  his  s. 

23.  4.  Aholah  the  elder,  and  .Ahnlihah  her  s. 
II.  and  when  her  .».  Aholibah  saw  this 

18.  like  as  my  mind  was  alienated  from  her  s. 

31.  thou  hast  walked  in  the  way  of  thy  s. 

32.  shall  drink  of  thy  s.  cup  ih  ep  and  large,  33. 
44.25.  for  s.  that  hath  no  husband  they  may  defile 

Mat.  12.  50.  the  same  is  my  brotlif  r,  s.  and  mother 
Luke  10.  39.  she  had  a  s.  called  Mary,  .lohn  11  1,5. 
John  11.3.  therefore  his. «.  sent  untn  him,  saying,!.. 

19.  2.5.  there  stood  by  the  cross  his  mother's  ,?. 
.?(•<«  23. 16.  Paul's  s.son  heard  oftheir  lying  in  wait 
Rom.  16. 1. 1  commend  to  yon  Phebe  our  s.  a  serv. 

1  Cor.  7. 15.  a  brother  or  a  «.  is  not  under  bondage 
9.  5.  have  we  not  power  to  lead  about  a  s.  a  wife! 

Col.  4.  10.  Marcus  s.  son  to  Barnabas  saluteth  you 
.Tarn.  2. 1.5.  if  a  brother  or  s.  be  naked  and  destitute 

2  John  13.  the  ciiildren  of  thv  elect  s.  greet  thee 

SISTER-IN-LAW. 
Ruth  1.15.  behold,thy  s.-iV/ttMis  gone  back  to  her 
people  and  gods,  return  thou  after  thy  s.-i«-ZatO 
My  SISTER. 
Gen.  12.  13.  sav,  I  pray  thee,  thou  art  my  s. 

19.  whysaid^■t,sheis  my  s.?  20.2,5, 12."|26.7,9 
30.  8.  I  have  wrestled  with  my  s.  and  prevailed 

2  ■'Ham.  13.  5.  say  to  him,  let  my  s.  Tamar  come,  6 

11.  Amnon  said  to  her,  coma  lie  with  me,  my  a. 

20.  .Absalom  said,  hold  now  thy  peace,  my  s. 
.lob  17. 14. 1  h:ive  said  to  the  worm,  thou  art  my  s 
Prov.  7.  4.  say  to  wisdom,  thou  art  my  s.  and  call 
Cant.  4.  9.  hast  ravished  my  henrl,  mys.  my  spouse 

10.  how  fair  is  thy  love,  my  s.  my  s;'6usel 

12.  a  garden  inclosed  isniys.  my  spouse,  a  spring 
5.  1.  I  am  come  into  my  garden  my  s.  my  spouse 

2.  open  to  me,  my  s.  my  love,  my  undefiled 
Mark  3.  35.  same  is  my  brother,  my  s.  am!  inolher 
Luke  10.  40.  dost  thou  not  care  that  my  s.  left  mel 

SISTERS. 
.Tosh.  2. 13.  swear  yeVill  save  alivemy  fath.tnys. 
1  CAron.2.  IG.  whose  s.  were  Zt'ruiah  and  Ab'gail 
.fob  1.4. they  called  for  their  threes. to  eat  and  drink 
42.  11.  then  came  all  his  brethren  and  all  his  s. 
F.zek.  16.  4.5.  and  thou  art  the  sister  of  thy  s. 
51.  thou  hast  justified  thy  s.  in  all  thy  abom.52. 
55.  when  thy  s.  and  daughters  shnll  return 
fil.  shalt  be  ashamed  when  thou  receive  thy  3 
Hos.  2.  1.  say  ye  unto  your  s.  Ruhamah 
Mat.  13.  56.  are  not  his  s.  with  us?  Mark  6.  3. 
19.29.  that  hath  forsaken  s. or  father,  or  mother,  or 
wife,  for  my  sake,  Mark  10.  20.  Luke  14.  26. 
Mark  10. 30.  shall  receive  100  fold,  houses,  brelh. «. 
1  ri7?j.5.2.intreat  younger  women,  as  ».with  purity 

SIT. 
JVum.  32.fi.  shall  brethren  go  (o  war  and  ye  s.  herei 
.ludg.  5.  10.  speak  ye  that  s.  in  judgment  ami 
walk  by  the  way 


SIT 

JlHtk  3.  18.  ».  still,  my  daughter,  till  thou  know 
4.  1.  ho,  such  a  one,  turn  aside,  s.  down  here,  2. 

15a7n.9. 22.  and  made  them  s.  in  the  cheifeat  place 
16.  11.  we  will  not  s.  down  till  he  come  hither 
SO.  5.  I  should  not  fail  to  s.  with  the  king 

2  Sam.  19.  8.  behold,  the  king  doth  s.  in  the  gate 

1  Kings  1.  13.  Solomon  shall  «.  on  my  throne,  17. 

48.  who  hath  given  one  to  s.  on  my  throne,  3.  6. 

8.25.  there  shall  not  fail  thee  a  man  to  s.  on  the 

throne  of  Israel,  2  Chron.  6.  16.  Jer.  33.  17. 

8  Kivgs  7.  3.  why  *.  we  here  till  we  die?  4. 
10.  30.  thy  sons  shall  s.  ort  the  throne,  15.  12. 

18.  27.  sent  me  to  men  who  «.  on  wall)  /sa.  36. 12. 
Psal.  26.  5.  and  will  not  s.  with  the  wicked 

69. 12.  they  that  f .  in  the  gate  speak  against  me 
107.  10.  such  as  s.  in  darkn.  and  shadow  of  death 

110. 1.  said  to  my  Lord,  s.  thou  at  my  right  hand 
119.23.  princes  also  did  s.  and  speak  against  me 

127. 2.  it  is  vain  for  you  to  rise  early  and  s.  up  late 
132.  12.  their  children  shall  s.  upon  thy  throne 

Eccl.  10.  6.  folly  in  dignity,  and  rich  s.  in  low  place 
Isa.  3.  26.  being  desolate,  shall  s.  on  the  ground 
14.  13.  I  will  s.  upon  mount  of  the  congregation 

16.  5.  he  shall  s.  upon  the  throne  in  truth 
30.  7.  I  have  cried,  their  strength  is  to  s.  still 
42.  7.  bring  them  that  s.  in  darkness  out  of  prison 
47.  1.  s.  in  the  dust,  s.  on  the  ground,  52.  2. 

5.5. thou  silent,get  thee  into  darknes3,0  daughter 
8.  thou  that  sayest,  I  shall  not  s.  as  a  widow 
14.  there  shall  not  be  a  fire  to  s.  before  it 
Jer.  8.  H.  why  do  we  s.  stilH  assemble  yourselves 
13.  13.  I  will  fill  them  that  s.  on  David's  throne 
18.  s.  down  now,  36.  15.  |1  48.  18.  and  s.  in  thirst 
36.  30.  he  shall  haVe  none  to  s.  upon  the  throne 
Lam.\.  1.  how  doih  city  5.  solitary  was  full  of  peo.! 
2. 10.  elders  of  Zion  s.  on  ground  and  keej)  silence 
Kiek.  2G.  16.  they  shall  s.  upon  the  ground 
28.  2.  because  thou  hast  said,  I  s.  in  seat  of  God 
33.  31.  and  they  s.  before  thee  as  my  people 
44  3.  prince  shall  s.  in  it  to  eat  bread  before  Lord 
Dan.  7.  9.  I  beheld  till  the  ancient  of  days  did  s. 
26. but  the  judgment  shall  s.  they  shall  take  away 
Joel  3.  12.  there  will  I  s.  to  judge  the  heathen 
Mie.  4.  4.  tlipy  shall  s.  every  man  under  his  vine 

7.  8.  when  1  s.  in  darkness,  Lord  shall  be  a  light 
Zeck.  3.  8.  thou  and  thy  fellows  that  s.  before  me 

6.  13.  he  shall  5.  and  rule  upon  his  throne 
Jlfoi.3.3.he  shall  5.  as  a  refiner  and  purifier  of  silver 
Mat.  8.  11.  many  shall  s.  down  with  Abraham 

19.  28.  when  Son  of  man  shall  s.  on  throne  of  his 
glory,ye  shall  s.on  12  throne3,25.31./.7Uv;  22.30. 

20.  21.  my  two  sons  may  s.  one  on  thy  right  hand 
23.  but  to  s.  on  my  right  hand,  Mark  10. 37,  40. 

5(2.  44.  s.  thou  on  my  right  hand  till  I  make  thy 
enemies,  Mark  12.  36.  Luke  20.  42.  Heb.  1. 13. 
23.  2.  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  s.  in  Moses'  seat 
20.36.  s.  ye  here  while  I  pray  yonder,  Mark  14. 32. 
Luke  9.  14.  make  them  .?.  by  fifties  in  a  company 

12.  37.  make  thetn  to  s.  down,  and  will  serve  them 

13.  29.  and  shall  s.  down  in  the  kingdom  of  God 

14.  8.  when  bidden  s.  not  down  in  highest  room 
16.6.  take  thy  bill,  s.  down  quickly,  and  write  fifty 

17.  7.  will  say  to  him,  go,  and  s.  down  to  meat 
John  6.  10.  Jesus  said,  make  the  men  s.  down 
^cts  2.  30.  would  raise  up  Christ  to  s.  on  his  throne 

8.  31.  that  he  would  come  up  and  s.  with  him 
lCor.8. 10.  to  see  ihee^.at  meat  in  the  idol's  temple 
Rph.  2.  6.  hath  miide  us  5.  in  heavenly  places 
Jam.  2.  3.  and  say  «.  thou  here  in  a  good  place 
J?eD.3. 21.  will  I  grant  to  s.  with  me  in  my  throne 

17. 3.  IsaVv  a  woman  s.  on  scarlet  coloured  beast 

18.  7.  for  she  sailfi  in  her  heart,  I  j.  a  queen 

SITU. 

i;icA:.35.0.  s.  thou  hast  not  hated  blood,  even  blood 

shall  pursue  ihuc 

SITTEST. 

F.zod.  18.  14.  why  a.  thou  thyself  alone? 

iJeut.a.l.  thou  slialttalk  of  them  when  thou  g.  in 

thine  houai',  and  walkest,  11.  19. 

Ps.  50.20.  thou  .t.  and  spcakest  against  thy  brother 

Prov.  23.  1.  when  thou  s.  to  cat  with  a  ruler 

Ji>r.22.2.h<nr,t')  king  of  Judah,that  .•(.on  the  throne 

^cta  23.  3  ».  thoM  to  jiidce  nie  after  the  law7 

SltTKTH. 

F.zod.  W.a.  from  the  first-born  that  n.  on  hii  throne 
Z,f  P.15.4.evcrylhing  whereon  he  s. shall  he  unclean 

6.  whereon  he  or  i<hc  .i.  be  unclean,  20,  23,  26 
i?eMM7.  l.^.when  he  .i.  on  the  throne  he  shall  write 
1  King  ^"\  ■  4f>.  Solomon  s.im  throne  of  the  kingdom 
F.slh.  6.  10.  do  so  lo  Mordccai  that  s.  at  the  gate 
Psal.  1.  1.  nor .'.  in  the  seat  of  the  scornful 
2.  4.  he  that  f.  in  the  heavens  shall  laugh 
10.  8.  he  s.  in  the  lurking  places  of  the  villngra 
29. 10.  Lord  .•>.  on  the  flood;  yea,  tho  Lord  .?.  king 
for  ever,  tho  L.  will  give  strength  to  his  people 
47.  8.  God  .1.  on  the  throne  of  his  holiness 
99. 1.  Jjord  reignclh,  he  s.  between  the  cherubimB 
Prw.  9.  14.  for  she  .<.  at  the  door  of  hc>r  house 
20.  8  a  king  that  ».  in  the  throne  of  judgment 
31.  23.  when  he  1.  among  the  nidcrs  of  the  land 
5S3 


SIX 

Cant.  1. 10.  while  king  s.  at  his  table  my  spikenard 
/«a.28.6.spiritofjudgm.  to  him  that*,  in  judgment 

40.22.  it  is  he  thats.  ou  the  circle  of  the  heavens 
Jer.  17.  11.  as  the  parti  idge  5.  on  eggs 

29.  16.  saith  of  the  king  that  s.  upon  the  throue 
J^am.  3.  28.  he  s.  alone  and  keepeth  silence 
ZecA.1.11.  behold,  all  the  earth  s.  still, and  is  at  rest 

5.  7.  a  woman  that  s.  in  the  midst  of  the  ephah 
Mat.  2:1.  22.  sweareth  by  him  that  s.  thereon 
Luke  14.  28.  s.  not  down  first  and  cojmteth,  31. 

22. 27.  whether  is  greater,  he  that  5.  at  meat  or  he 
that  servethl  is  not  he  that  s.  at  meat? 

1  Cor.l4.30.if  any  thing  be  reveal. to  anoth.  that  s.hy 
Col.  3. 1.  where  Christ  «.  on  the  right  hand  of  God 

2  Thess.  2.  4.  he,  as  God,  s.  in  the  temple  of  God 
Rev.  5.  13.  power  to  him  that  s.  upon  the  throne 

6.  16.  from  the  face  of  him  that  s.  on  the  throne 
7. 10.  salvation  to  our  God  which  s.  on  the  throne 

15.  he  that  s.  on  throne  shall  dwell  among  them 
17.  1.  the  whore  that  s.  upon  many  waters,  15. 
9.  are  seven  mountains,  on  which  the  woman  5. 
SITTING. 
Deut.  22.  6.  and  the  dam  5.  on  the  young  or  eggs 
Judg.  3.  20.  Eglon  was  s.  in  a  summer-parlour 

1  Kings  10.5. she  saw  s.  of  his  servants,  2.  CAr.9.4. 
13.  14.  found  the  man  of  God  s.  under  an  oak 
22. 19. 1  saw  the  Lord  s.  on  his  throne,  and  all  the 

host  of  heaven  standing,  2  CAr.  18. 18.  /5a. 6.1. 
2X'i7i^s4.38.sons  of  the  prophets  were  s.before  him 

9.  5.  behold,  the  captains  of  the  host  were  s. 
JVeA.  2.  6.  the  king  said,  the  queen  also  s.  by  him 
Ksth.  5.  13.  so  long  as  I  see  Mordecai  the  Jew  s. 
f5aM39.2.thou  knowesi  my  down  i.und  up-rising 
Jer.  17.  25.  kings  s.  on  throne  of  David,  22.  4,30. 

38.  7.  the  king  then  s.  in  the  gate  of  Benjamin 
Jam.  3.  63.  behold  their  5.  down  and  rising  up 
Mat.  9.  9.  5.  at  receipt  of,  Mark  2.  14.  |  Juke  5. 27. 

11.  16.  like  children  s.  in  the  markets,  LukeT.Si. 

20.  30.  behold,  two  blind  men  s.  by  the  way  side 

21.  5.  thy  king  cometh,^.  on  an  ass,  John  12. 15. 

26.  64.  ye  shall  see  the  Son  of  man  s.  on  the  right 
hand  of  God,  coming  in  the  clouds,  Mark  14.62. 

27.  36.  and  s.  down,  they  watched  him  there 
61.  the  other  Mary  s.  over  agninst  the  sepulchre 

Mark  5.  15.  they  .see  him  that  was  possessed  s. 
16.  5.  they  saw  a  young  man  s.  on  the  right  side 

/>nke  2.  46.  they  found  him  s.  in  midst  of  doctors 
5.  17.  the  Pharisees  and  doctors  of  the  law  s.  by 
8.  35.  found  him  s.  clothed,  and  in  his  right  mind 

10.  13.  had  repented,  s.  in  sackcloth  and  ashes 
John  2.  14.  he  found  the  changers  of  money  s. 

20.  12.  ISJary  seeth  two  angels  in  while  s. 
yjcls  2.  2.  it  filled  the  \io\ife  where  they  were  *. 

8.  28.  eunuch  was  returning,  and  s.  in  his  chariot 

Hev.i.  4.  ujion  the  seals  I  saw  twenty-four  elders  s 

SITTING-PLACE. 

2  Chron.  9.  18.  and  stays  on  each  side  of  s.-placc 

SITUATE. 
Ezek.  27. 3.Tyrus,  O  thou  that  art  s.  at  entry  of  sea 
JVuA.  3.  8.  populous  No  that  was  s.  among  rivers 

SITUATION. 
2  Kings  2. 19.  behold,  the  s.  of  the  city  is  pleasant 
P5ai.48.2.beautiful  for  .<;.joyof  earth  is  mount  Zion 

SIX. 
Lev.  24.  fi.  s.  cakes  on  a  row  on  the  pure  table 
JVi/m.  7.  3.  .t.  covered  waggons,  and  twelve  oxen 
25am.21.20.man  of  great  stature  that  had  on  every 
hand  s.  fingers,  every  foot  a.  toes,  1  CAr. 
20.  6. 
1  CAr.4.  27.  Shimei  had  fei.xtecn  sons  and  ,<t.  daught. 
26.17.  east-ward  were  .<t.  Levites,  north-ward  four 
Eick.  46.  4.  the  burnt-oflreriiig  that  the  prince  shall 
offer  to  Lord,  shall  bo  s.  lambs  without 
blemish 
6.  in  the  day  of  the  new  moon  shall  be  t.  lambs 
SIX  boards. 
F.rod.  26. 22.  westward  thou  shalt  make  .».  boards 
36.  27.  for  the  sides  of  tabernacle  he  made  ».  b. 
See  Brancuks. 
SIX  brethren. 
^e<»)1.12.moreover  thaes. brethren  accompanied 

SIX  citie.'>. 
JVum.  35.6.  there  shall  be  «.  cities  for  refuge,  13, 15. 

SIX  cubits. 
lSam.l7.4.Golinth's  height  was.«.r«ftit.»  and  a  span 
1  Kingsf>.r>.thc  middle  cliumber  was  s.cubitshxoad 
F.zek.  40.  .*).  a  measuring-reed  of*,  cubits  long 

12.  the  little  chambi^rs  wore  s.  cubits  on  this  side 

41.1. he  measured  posis  s.cubits  broad  on  one  side 

3.  door  s.  cubits  ||  5.  wall  of  the  house  s.  cubits 

8.  foundations  were  a  full  reed  of  a.  great  cut)ils 

Dan.  3.  1.  the  breadth  of  the  image  of  gold  s.  e. 

SIX  curtains. 

EiO(f.26.9.  couple  s.  curtains  by  them8elve9,36.16. 

See  Dav.i,  Hi'ndrkds. 

SIX  mcasnrrs. 

Ruth  3. 15.  Boaz  gave  Ruth  of  barley  s.  measures 

17.  she  said,  these  s.  m.  of  barley  gave  ho  me 

SIX  TTicn. 

Etek.  9.2. ».  men  came  from  way  of  the  higher  gate 


SIZ 

SIX  months. 
2  Sam.  2. 11.  the  time  David  was  king  in  Hebroo, 
was  seven  years,  *.  7non«A*,  5.  5.  1  CAroTi.  3. 4. 

1  Kings  11. 16.  5.  monZAiJoab  remained  in  Edom 
Kings  15.  8.  Zachariah  reigned  s.  m.  over  Israel 

Esth.  2. 12.  purifying  s.  months  with  oil  of  myrrh, 

and*.7n«7i«A*  with  sweet  odours  and.  other  thing* 

/>uAc4.25.when  the  heaven  was  shut  up  three  years 

and  s.  months,  and  great  famine.  Jam.  5.  17 

^ct*  18. 11.  Paul  continued  at  Corinth  a  year  s.  m 

SIX  names. 
Exod.  28.  10.  g.  of  their  names  on  one  stone,  and 
the  other  *.  names  of  the  rest  on  the  other  stone 
SIX  paces. 

2  Sam.  6. 13.  when  Levites  gone  s.p.  he  sacrificed 

SIXSCORE. 
1  Kings  9.14.Hiram  sent  Solomon  5.  talents  of  gold 

SIX  sheep. 
JVeA.  5  18.  prepared  for  me  daily  *.  choice  sheep 

SIX  sons. 

rVcn.  30.20.  will  dwell  with  me,  I  have  borne  ».  sons 

1  Chron.  3.  22.  and  the  sons  of  Shechaniah,  a. 

8. 38. and  Azel  had  s.  sons,  whose  names  are,  9.44. 

SIX  steps. 

1  Kings  10. 19.  the  throne  had  s.  stfp»,  top  round 
20.  twelve  lions  on  the  «.  steps,  2  Chron.  9.  18. 

SIX  things. 

Prov.  6.  16.  these  s.  things  doth  the  Lord  hate 

SIX  times. 

2  Kings  13.19.  shouldst  havesmitten  five  or  a.  timea 
SIX  troubles. 

Job  5.19.  he  shall  deliver  thee  in  s.  troubles,  in  seven 

SIX  water-pots. 
.John  2.6.  there  were  set  there  s.  water-pots  of  storw 

SIX  wings. 
/jra.6.2.stood  the  seraphims,  each  one  had  s.  wings 
Rev.  4. 8.  four  beasts  had  each  s.  wings  about  him 

SIX  years. 
Oen.  31.  41.  I  served  thee  s.  years  for  thy  cattle 
Exod.  2}.  2.  s.  years  he  shall  serve,  and  in  seventh 
he  shall  go  out  free,  Deut.  15. 12.  Jci: 
34.  14. 
23. 10.  s.  years  thou  shalt  sow  thy  land  and  gather 
Lev.  25.  3.  s.  years  thou  shalt  prune  thy  vineyard 
/)ej(M5.18.double  hired  servant  in  serving  s.years 
,Tudg.  12.  7.  and  Jephthah  judged  Israel  s.  years 

1  Kings  16.  23.  Omri  reigned  s.  years  in  Tirzah 

2  Kings  11.3.  Joash  was  hid  with  bis  nurse  in  the 

house  of  the  Lord  a.  years,  2  Chron.  22.  12. 
SIXTH. 
Gen.  30. 19.  Leah  conceived,  bare  Jacob  the  s.  son 
£Torf.  26.  9.  thou  shalt  double  *.  curtain  in  tabern. 
/>fD.25.21.will  command  myblessingon  yous.year 
.Josh.  19.  32.  the  s.  lot  came  out  for  Naphtali 
2  .90771.  3.  5.  Ithream,  David's  «.  son,  1  Chron.  3.  3. 
'i  Kings  18. 10.  in  s.  year  of  Hezek.  Samaria  taken 
Ezra  (5. 15.  house  was  finished  in*,  year  of  Darius 
Ezek.  4. 11.  drink  water  by  measure,  .<!.  part  of  him 
8. 1.  in  the  s.  year  the  hand  of  Lord  fell  upon  me 
39.  2.  I  will  leave  but  the  *.  part  of  thee 

45.  13.  the  oblation  the  s.  part  of  an  ephah 

46.  14.  a  nieat-oflfiring  the  s.  part  of  an  ephah 
Mat.  20.  5.  again  he  went  out  about  the  *.  hour 

27.45.  there  was  darkness  over  all  the  land  from 
the  *.  to  ninth  hour,  Mark  15.  33.  Luka 
23.  44. 
.John  4.  6.  about  the  *.  hour  Jesus  sat  on  the  well 

19.  14.  and  he  was  crucified  about  the  s.  hour 
.>)cts  10.0.  Peter  went  to  pray  about  the  *.  hour 
Rev.  6. 12.  when  he  opened  s.  seal,  an  earthquake 
9.  13.  the  s.  angel  sounded,  and  I  heard  a  voice 
14.  saying  to  the  s.  angel,  loose  the  four  angcli 
16. 12.  *.  angel  poured  out  vial  on  river  Euphrates 
21.  20.  the  s.  foundation  of  tho  wall  was  sardius 
See  \)k\.  Month. 
SIXTEEN. 
<?c.7i.  46.  18.  Zilpah  bare  to  Jacob  s.  souls 
F.iod.  26.  25.  Bofkets  of  silver,  s.  sockets  36.  30. 
2  Kings  13.10.Jehoash  rrigned  s.  years  in  Samaria 
14.21.  and  made  Azariah,  when  *.  years  old,  kin; 
15.  33.  Jotham  reigned  over  Judah  .5.  years  in  Je- 
rusalem, 2  Chron.  27.  1,  8.  |  28.  I. 

1  Chr.  4.  27.  Shimei  had  ,«.  sons  and  six  daughters 

24.  4.  nmong  sons  of  Eleaznr  were  s.  chief  men 

2  C'At".  13.  21.  Ahijnh  begat  sons  and  s.  daughters 

SIXTEENTH. 
]  Chron.  24.  14.  the  *.  lot  came  forth  lo  Immer 

25.  23.  the  s.  lot  came  forth  to  Hannniah 

SIXTY. 
Ocn.S.I.'i.Mahalaleel  lived  s.years  and  bejnt  Jared 
21. Enoch  lived«.-fivc  years  and  begat  MethuseL 
Lev. '27.  3.  estimation  ofthe  male  from  twenty  lo  .*. 
7.  if  it  be  from  s.  years  old  above  thy  cstimaiioa 
^um.  7.  88.  offer  s.  rams,  .■!.  hn-goais,  s.  lambs 
Mat.  13.  8.  brought  forth  .1.  fold,  23.  J»far* 4. 8, 20 

SIZE. 
F.rod.  36.  9.  the  curtains  were  all  of  one  *.  15. 
1  A'lTif  .?fi.25.both  cherubima  of  one  measure  and  f 
7.  37.  all  tho  bases  of  one  moasurc,  and  of  one  s. 
1  CAr  2;<  29.  for  all  manner  of  *.  Duvid  left  ch&rj^ 


SKI 

SKILL. 

IKings  5.  6 .  llioii  knowMt  iliero  is  not  any  that  can 
s.  toliew  timl)t;r  like  tiie  SiJoiiians,  iJ  CAr.2.8. 
2  Chron.  2  7.  send  me  a  man  that  cans,  to  grave 
34.  1^  all  that  could  s.  ot'instrunients  of  music 

*  SKILL. 

Reel.  9.  11.  nor  yet  favour  to  men  of  s.  but  time 

Da«.1.17.G.gave  theniknowlcdge  and  s.inwisdoin 

9.22.1  am  now  come  for  to  give  iliees.and  underst 

SKILFUL. 

1  Chr.  5. 18.  sons  of  Reuben  and  Gaditess.  in  war 

15.  22.  Clienaniah  instructed,  because  he  was  s. 
28  21. there  shall  be  with  tbf  e  every  willing  s.  man 

2  Ckr.  2.  14. 1  have  sent  a  cunning  man  «.  to  work 
Isa.  3.  13.  the  Lord  taketh  away  the  s. of  speech 
Ezei.21.  31.  give  you  into  the  hand  ofs.  to  destroy 
Van.  1.  4.  children  s.  in  all  wisdom,  and  cunning 
Smos  a.  IG.  bucIi  are  s.  of  lamentation  to  wailing 

SKILFULLY. 
Psal.'i2.3.aing  a  new  song,  play  i.with  aloud  noise 

SKILFULNESS.     , 
Psal.  78.  72.  and  guided  them  by  s.  of  his  hands 

SKIN. 
Eiod.  22.  27.  his  covering,  it  is  his  raiment  for  s. 
29. 14.  bullock's  tieshs.  anddun^burn,  LcvA.  11, 
34.  29  Moses  wist  notthat  s.oflaceshone,  30,35. 
Lev.  7.  8.  the  priest  that  offereth  sliall  have  the  s. 
11.  32.  if  dead  fall  on  s.  or  sack  it  shall  be  unclean 
13.  2.  shall  have  in  thes.  a  rising  like  the  plague 

3.  the  priest  shall  look  on  the  plague  in  the  s.  of 

the  flesh,  and  if  deeper  than  the  s.  of  his  flesh 

4.  if  bright  spot  be  white  in  the  s.  of  his  flesh 

5.  if  the  plague  spread  not  in  the  5.  6,  22,  28. 
7.  if  scab  spread  abroad  in  the  s.  8,  27,  35,  36. 

10.  if  the  rising  be  white  in  the  s.  it  is  a  leprosy 

11.  it  is  an  old  leprosy  in  the  s.  of  his  flesh 
56.  then  ho  shall  rend  it  out  of  garment  or  s 

15. 17. every  .<!.  whereon  is  seed  washed  with  water 
J^um.  19.5.  burn  heifer,  iicrs.  and  flesh  and  blood 
/oft  2.  4.  s.  for  s.  all  a  man  hath  will  he  give  for  life 
7.  5.  my  s.  is  broken,  and  become  loathsome 
10.  )  1.  thou  hast  clothed  me  with  s.  and  flesh 

16.  15.  I  tewed  sackcloth  on  my  s.  and  defiled 

18.  13.  it  shall  devour  the  strength  of  his  s. 

19.  20.  bone  cleaveth  to  my  s.  and  to  my-flesh, 

and  I  am  escaped  with  the  s.  of  my  teeth 
26.  though  after  my  s.  worms  destroy  this  body 
30.  30.  my  s.  is  black  upon  me,  bones  are  burnt 
41.  7.  canst  thou  fill  his  s.  with  barbed  irons  ? 
Psal.  102.  5.  by  groaning  my  bonescleave  to  my  s. 
Jer.  13.  23.  can  the  Ethiopian  change  his  s.  ■? 
Lam.  3.  4.  my  flesh  and  s.  hath  he  made  old 

4.  8.  their  s.  cleaveth  to  their  bones,  is  withered 

5.  10.  our  s.  was  black  like  an  oven  for  famine 
Ezek.  37.  6.  I  will  cover  you  with  s.  put  breath,  8. 
Jilic.  3.  2.  who  pluck  oflf  their  s.  and  their  flesh 

3.  who  eat  flesh,  and  flay  their  s.  from  off"  them 
Mar/i  1. 6.  John  had  a  girdle  of  a  s.  about  his  loins 

SKINS. 
Gen.  3.  21.  Lord  made  coats  ofs.  and  clothed  them 
27.  IG.  she  put  s.  of  kids  of  goats  upon  his  hands 
£;io(/.35.23.  every  man  with  whom  were  found  red 
s.  of  rams  and  badgers' s.  brought  them 
/,«».  13.  59.  this  is  the  law  of  the  plague  ofs. 
16.  27.  they  shall  burn  in  fire  their  s.  and  flesh 
J^um.  31.  20.  purify  your  raiment,  all  made  ofs. 
ffeb.  11.^17.  wandered  about  in  sheep  s.  and  goats. 

SKIP. 
Psal.  29.  6.  he  maketh  them  also  to  s.  like  a  calf 

SKIPPED. 
■  P^al.  Il4.  4.  the  mountains  s.  like  rams,  6. 
SKIPPEDST. 
/^•.4B.27.  since  thou  spakest  of  him,  thou  s.  for  joy 

SKIPPING. 
Cant.  2.  8.  behold,  he  cometh  s.  upon  the  hills 

SKIRT 
h  the  part  of  a  garment  below  the  waist.  Ruth 
says  tn  Bouz,  Cast  thy  skirt  over  me,  Ruth  3. 
9.  that  is,  Take  me  into  thy  protection,  by 
taking  me  to  be  thy  wife.  It  is  spoken  in  allu- 
sion to  the  ancient  custom  or  ceremony  of  the 
bridegroom' s  spreading  the  shirtofhiigarment 
over  "the  bride;  to  signify  his  rig/it  to  her,  his 
authority  over  her,  and  his  obligation  to  protect 
her.  So  also  in  Ezek.  16.  8,  I  spread  my 
skirt  over  thee:  I  betrothed  thee,  and  engaged 
by  covenant  to  love,  cherish,  protect,  andguard 
thee.  The  prophet  Jeremiah  says,  that  the  fil- 
thiness  of  .fcrusalem  is  in  her  skirts,  Lam.  1. 
9.  Her  wickedness  is  evident,  she  is  not  asha- 
med tn  expose  it  to  the  view  of  all.  The  Lord 
threatens  to  discover  the  skirts  of  Israel  and 
Judah  upon  their  faces,  Jer.  13.  26,  I  will 
discover  thy  skirls  upon  thy  face;  I  will 
throw  thy  skirts  upon  thy  face ;  and  so  discover 
thy  nakedness ;  that  is,  I  will  bring  thee  into 
a  most  disgraceful,  contemptible  condition, by 
those  judgments  that  I  will  inflict  upon  thee. 
It  IS  said  in  Deut.  22.  30,  A  man  shall 
not  discover  his  father's  skirt;  th^  skirt  of 
953 


SLA 

the  mothcr^s  garment,  that  is,  her  naked- 
iiess;  which  is  called  hii  father's  skirt;  be- 
cause his  father  and  viother  were  one  flesh, 
or  because  his  father  alone  had  the  right  to 
uncover  it. 

Deut.  22.  30.  man  shall  not  discover  his  father's  s. 
27.  20.  because  he  uncoveretli  his  father's  s. 

Htilh  3.9.spreud  therefore  thy  s.  over  thine  handm. 

1  Sam.  15.  27.  he  laid  hold  on  the  s.  of  his  mantle 
24.  4.  David  cut  off"  the  s.  of  Saul's  rube  privily 

5.  heart  smote  him,  because  he  cut  oft' Saul's  s. 
n.  father,  see  the  s.  of  thy  robe  in  my  hand 
Ezek.  16.  8.  behold,  I  spread  my  s.  over  ihee 
Hag.  2.  12.  if  one  bear  holy  flesh  in  the  s.  and 
with  his  s.  do  touch  bread,  pottage, 
wine,  or  oil 
Zec/t.8.23.shall  take  hold  ofs.  of  him  that  is  a  Jew 

SKIRTS. 
Psal.  133.  2.  that  went  down  to  s.  of  his  garments 
Jer.  2.  34.  in  s.  is  found  blood  of  poor  innocents 
13.  22.  for  thy  iniquity  are  thy  s.  discovered 
26.  therefore  will  I  discover  thy  ».  JVaA.  3.  5. 
Lam.  1.  9.  her  filthiness  in  hers,  remembered  not 
Kzek.  5. 3.  shall  take  and  bind  a  few  hairs  in  thy  s. 

SKULL. 
.Tudg.  9.  53.  cast  a  piece  Of  millstone  to  break  his  s. 
2A'trt^s9. 35.  they  found  no  more  of  Jezebel  than  s. 
Jilat.  27. 33.  were  come  to  Golgotha,  that  is  to  say, 
the  place  of  a  s.  Mark  15.  22.  John  19. 17. 
SKY. 
Deut.  33.  26.  who  rideth  in  his  excellency  on  s. 
Job  37.  18.  hast  thou  with  him  spread  out  the  s.? 
Mat.  16.  2.  it  will  be  fair  weather,  for  s.  is  red,  3. 
Luke  12.  56.  ye  can  discern  face  of  the  s.  and  earth 
Heb.  11. 12.  so  many  as  the  stars  of  s.  in  multitude 

SKIES. 
2Sam.^.  12.  he  made  thick  clouds  of  the  s.  his  pa- 
vilions round  abouthim,  Psal.  18.11. 
Psal.  77. 17.  clouds  poured  out  s.  sent  out  a  sound 
Isa.  45.  8.  and  let  the  s.  pour  down  righteousness 
Jer.  51.  9.  for  her  judgment  is  lifted  up  even  lo  s. 

SLACK. 
Deut.l.  10.  he  will  not  be  s.  tohim  thathateth  him 
/osA.  18. 3.  how  long  are  yes.  to  go  to  possess  land  ! 
/'row. 10. 4. become  poor  that  dealeth  with  a  s.  hand 
Zeph.  3.16.8liall  be  said  to  Zion,  let  not  hands  be  s. 

2  Pet.  3.  9.  Lord  is  not  s.  concerning  his  promise 

SLACK. 
/)cu<.23.21.when  vow  a  vowthou  shalt  nots.to  pay 
Josh.  10.  6.  saying,  s.  not  thy  hand  from  servant 
2  Kings  4. 24.  s.  not  riding  for  me  except  I  bid  thee 

SLACKED. 
Ilab.  1.  4.  law  is  s.  judgment  doth  never  go  forth 

SLACKNESS. 
2  Pet.  3.  9.  Lord  is  not  slack,  as  some  men  count  s. 

SLAIN,  .Active. 
Gen.  4.  23.  for  I  have  s.  a  man  to  my  woundin,^ 
JVum.  14.  16.  therefore  he  hath  s.  them  in  wildern. 
22.  33.  surely  now  1  had  s.  thee,  saved  her  alive 
Deut.  1.  4.  after  he  had  s.  Silion  kingof  Amorites 

21.  1.  and  it  be  not  known  who  hath  s.  him 
Judg.  9.  18.  and  have  s.  his  eons  upon  one  stone 

15.  16.  jaw-bone  of  an  ass  have  Is.  1000  men 
20.  5.  llie  men  of  Gibeah  thought  to  have  s.  me 

1  Sam.  18.  7.  Saul  hath  s.  his  thousands,  21.  11. 
22.21.  shewed  Dav.tliatSaul  had  s.  Lord's  priests 

2  Sam.  1.  16.  saying,  I  have  s.  the  Lord's  anointed 

3.  30.Abner,  because  he  had  s.  their  broth. Asahel 

4.  11.  when  wicked  men  haves,  righteous  person 

12.  9.  hast  s.  Uriah  with  the  sword  of  Amnion 

13.  30.  Absalom  hath  s.  all  king's  sons,  none  left 
32.  they  have  nots.  all,  for  Amnon  only  is  dead 

21. 12.  when  the  Philistines  had  s.  Saul  in  Gilboa 
16.  Ishbi-benob  thought  to  have  s.  David 

1  Kings  l.lO.Adonijah  hath  s.  oxen  and  sheep,  25. 
9.  16.  Pharaoh  had  goneup  and  s.the  Canaanites 
13.  26.  therefore  the  lion  hath  torn  and  s.  him 

16.  16.  people  heard  say,  Zimri  hath  s.  the  king 
19.  1.  Ahab  told  how  he  had  s.  all  the  prophets 

10.  for  Israel  have  s.  thy  prophets,  14. 

2  Kings  14. 5.  he  slew  his  servants  who  had  s.  kins 
2CAron.21. 13.  basts,  thy  breth.  better  than  thyself 

22.  1.  for  the  band  of  men  had  s.  all  the  eldest 
9.  when  they  had  s.  Ahaziah,  they  buried  him 

23.  21.  city  was  quiet  after  they  bads.  Athaliah 
28.9.  have  s.  them  in  rage  that  reacheth  to  heaven 

Fsth.  9.  12.  the  Jews  haves.  500  men  in  Shushan 
Job  1.  15.  the  Sabeans  have  s.  the  servants,  17. 
Prov.  7.  26.  many  strong  men  have  been  s.  by  her 
/sa.l4.20.because  thou  hastdestroyed  and  s.people 
/er.33.5. bodies  of  men  whom  I  have  s.  in  my  anger 

41.  4.  day  after  he  had  s.  Gedaliah,  9,  16,  18. 
Lam.  2.  21.  basts,  them  in  Jay  of  thy  anger,  3.  43. 
Ezek.  16.  21.  that  thou  hast  s.  my  children 

23.  39.  when  they  had  s.  their  children  to  idols 
Hos.  6.  5.  I  have  s.  them  by  words  of  my  mouth 
J}mos  4.  10.  your  young  men  have  Is.  with  sword 
./9c<s2. 23.  ye  have  taken,  by  wicked  hands  haves. 

7.52.  have  s.them  that  shewed  coming  of  just  One 

23.  14.  we  will  eat  nothing  till  wo  have  s.  Paul 
4C 


SLA 

SLAIN,  Passive. 
Gen.  34.  27.  the  sons  ol  Jacob  eamo  upon  the*. 
Ley.  14.  51.  dip  them  in  the  blood  of  the  s.  bird 
26.  17.  and  ye  kliall  be  s.  before  your  enemies 
JVum.  11.  22.  shall  the  Hocks,  and  the  herds  bes.  t 

19.  16.  whosoever  louchcth  any  s.  18.  |  31.  19. 
2.3.  24.  eat  of  prey,  and  drink  the  bluod  of  the  ». 
25.14.name  of  the  Israelite  that  was  s.  was  Zimri 

15.  name  of  woman  that  was  s.  was  Cozbi,  IS. 

31.  8.  besides  the  rest  of  ihcm  that  were  s. 
Deut.  21.  1.  if  one  be  found  s.  in  land  giveth  thee 

3.  the  elders  of  the  city  next  to  the  s.  man 
28.  31.  thine  ox  shall  be  s.  before  thine  eyca 

32.  42.  make  mine  arrows  drunk  with  blood  of  *. 
Josh.  11.6.  will  I  deliver  them  up  all  j-.  before  Israel 

13.  22   Balaiim  also  among  tiiein  that  were  s. 
Judg.  16.  t24.  the  destroyer  who  multijilied  ours. 

20.  4.  the  husband  of  the  woman  that  was  s. 
l*«m.4.11.ark  taken,Ilophni  and  Phinehus  were* 

19.  6.  as  the  Lord  liveth,  he  shall  not  be  s. 

II.  if  thou  save  not,  to-morrow  thou  shall  be  g. 

20.32.  wheref.  shall  he  be  s.  wliat  halh  he  done 

31. 1.  men  of  Israel  fled  before  the  I'liilistines,  and 

fell  down  s.in  mount  Gilboa,  1  Chron.  10. 1. 

8.  when  the  Philistines  came  to  strip  the  s. 
2  Sam.  1.  19.  beauty  of  Israel  is  s.  on  high  places 

22.  from  the  blood  ofs.  fiom  fat  of  the  mighty 

25.  O  Jonathan,  thou  wast  .■-■.  in  thy  higli  places 
18.  7.  when  Israel  were  s.  befuie  David's  servants 

1  Kings  11.  15.  when  Joab  was  gone  to  bury  thes. 

2  Kings  3.  23.  this  is  blood,  the  kings  are  surely  s. 
11.  2.  stole  Joash  from  among  them  that  were  s. 

8.  he  that  comt^th  wiihn  ranges  let  him  be  s. 

16.  they  laid  hands  on  her,  and  there  was  she  s. 

1  Chr.  5.22.  there  fell  down  many  s.  war  wasofG. 

2  CAr^l3. 17.  fell  s.  of  Israel  500,000  chosen  men 
Esth. 7.4.  for  we  are  sold,  I  and  my  ])eople, to  be*. 

9.  11.  number  of  the  s.  in  Sliu.'ban  the  |i»lace 
.Job  39.  30.  and  where  the  s.  are,  theie  is  she 
Psal.  62.  3.  ye  shall  be  s.  all  of  you,  as  bowing  wall 
88.  5.  like  the  s.  that  lie  in  the  grave 
89. 10.  thou  hast  broken  R aha  bin  pieces  as  one  s. 
Prov.  22.  13.  the  slothful  man  sailh,  I  shall  be  s. 

24.  11.  to  deliver  those  that  are  ready  to  be  s. 
Isa.  10.  4.  and  they  shall  fall  under  the  s. 

14.  19.  and  as  the  raiment  of  those  that  are  #. 
22.  2.  thy  s.  nun  were  not  s.  with  t.\vord  or  dead 
26.  21.  the  eanh  also  shall  no  more  cover  her  s. 
27.7.  ishes.  according  to  slaughter,  or  s.  hv  hira 

34.  3.  theirs,  also  shall  be  cast  out,  si  ink  cotrie  up 
66.  16.  and  the  s.  of  the  Lord  shall  be  many 

.Jer.  9.  1.  that  I  might  weep  ("or  s.  of  my  people 
14.  18.  if  I  go  into  the  field,  behold  s.  wiih  sword 
16.21.  let  their  young  men  be  s.  by  sword  in  battle 

25.  33.  s.  of  the  Lord  be  from  one  end  of  earth 
41.  9.  and  Ishmael  filled  the  pit  with  the  s. 

51.  4.  thus  the  s.  .shall  fall  in  land  of  Chaldeans 

47.  and  all  her  s.  shall  fall  in  the  mid.^t  of  her 

49.  as  Babylon  hath  caused  s.  of  Israel  to  fall, so 

at  Babylon  shall  fall  thes.  of  all  the  earth 

IjOm.  2.  20.  shall  priest  and  jiropbet  be  s.  in  sanct. 

4.9.lhey  that  be  s. with  sword,  arebetterthan  ibey 

that  bes.  with  hunger,  for  these  pine  away 

EzfAr.  6.  7.  and  the  s.  shall  fall  in  the  midst  of  you 

13.  when  the  s.  men  shall  be  among  their  idols 

9.  7.  defile  the  house  and  fill  the  courts  with  s. 

11.  6.  ye  have  multiplied  your  s.  in  the  city, 

ye  have  filled  the  streets  w  ith  the  s. 

7.  your  s.  are  the  flesh,  and  this  city  the  caldron 

21.  14.  sword  ofs.  it  is  the  sword  of  great  men  s. 
29.  to  bring  lliee  upon  necks  of  them  that  ares. 

26.  6.  her  daughters  in  field  frhiiU  be  s.  by  sword 
28.  8.  thou  shalt  die  deaths  of  them  that  are  s. 
30.  4.  great  pain  when  the  s.  shall  fall  in  Egypt 

11.  they  shall  fill  tlie  land  with  the  .<t. 
31.17.wpnt  into  hell  with  him  unto  them  that  be  s 

18.  shalt  lie  with  ihem  s.  with  sword,  32.  29. 
32.  20.  thev  shall  fill  in  the  midst  of  ihe  s.  25. 

21.  they  lie  s.  by  the  sword,  22,  2.3,  24. 

25.all  of  ibem  nncircnmciscd  s.  by  sword,  2fi,  ?0. 

31.  even  Phar.  and  all  his  army  s.  by  sword,  32. 

35.  8.  I  will  fill  his  mountains  with  his  s.  men 
37.  9.  come,  O  breath,  breathe  upon  these  s. 

Dan.%  13.  decree  went  forth  that  wise  men  should 

be  s.  thoy  .'.oushl  Daniel  and  his  fellows  to  be  s. 

5.  30.  in  that  night  was  Belshazzar  the  king  s. 

7.11, 1  beheld,  even  till  beast  was. <:. and  destroved 

11.26.army  overflow,  and  many  shall  fall  down  s. 

JVaA.3.3.thcre  is  multitude  ofs. numberof  carcases 

Zeph.  2.  12.  ye  Ethiopians  shall  bes.  by  mysword 

Luke  9.  22.  Son  of  man  must  be  s.  and  be  raised 

J}cts^.  36.  Theudas  was  s.  as  many  as  obeyed  him 

7.  42.  O  Israel,  have  ye  off'ered  lo  me  .t.  beasts  1 

13.  28.  yet  desired  they  Pilate  thathe  should  bt  ». 

Eph.  2.  16.  by  the  cross,  havings,  eninity  therebj 

Heb.  11.  37.  they  were  stoned,  were  s.  with  sword 

Rev.  2.  13.  Antipas,  who  was  s.  among  you 

5.  6.  in  the  midst  stood  a  Lamb,  as  it  had  been  g. 
9.  thou  wasts.  {{  12.  the  Lamb  that  was  s.  13.  8. 

6.  9.  souls  of  them  that  were  a.  for  word  of  God 


SLA 

Rev.  11. 13.  In  the  earthquake  were  t.  ofincn  7000 
na.  -24.  Ill  her  (bund  the  hloud  olull  that  were  ». 

19.  Hi.  reainaiil  s.  with  sword  of  him  that  tut 

SLANUKB. 
JVum.  14.36.  to  murmur  by  briiiijiiig  up  ft  s.  on  land 
Peal.  31.  13.  for  I  have  lieurd  the  s.  ofniuiiy 
Frov.  10.  18.  he  that  uilereih  a  s.  is  u  fool 

SL.'ViMJEKED. 
2  Sam.  19.  27.  he  liuth  s.  thy  servant  to  my  Lord 

SLANUEKF.ST. 
Psal.  50. 520.  thou  .>.  lliine  own  mother's  son 

SL.'iNnERETH. 
Psal.  101.  5.  whoso  s.  his  iioiyh.  him  will  I  cut  oflf 

SLAiNOEREKS. 
1  Tim.  3. 11.  their  wives  must  he  grave,  not  s. 

SLANDEROUSLY. 
Rom.  3.  8.  and  not  rather,  as  we  be  «.  reported 

SLAXUEKS. 
Jer.  0.  28.  they  are  all  revolters  walking  with  «. 
9.  4.  and  every  neiglibour  will  walk  «;th  6'. 

SLANG. 
15am. 17.49.  Dav.took  from  his  bag  a  stone  and  s.it 

SLAVE,  S. 

Jer.  2.  14.  is  Israel  a  servant  7  is  he  home-born  y.? 

Jiev.  18.  J3.  no  man  biiyelhthe  merchandise  of «. 

SLAUGHTER. 

1  Sam.  14.  14.  that  first  s.  which  Jonathan  made 
30.  lor  had  there  not  been  now  much  greater  s. 

17.57.as  David  returned  from  s.of  Philistines,Ab- 

ner  brought  him  before  Saul,  18.  G.  2  .Sam.  1. 1. 

2Sa7n.l7.9.is  ».among  people  who  follow  Absalom 

2  CAro7t.25.  14.  Amaziali  was  come  from  the  s. 
Psal.  44.  22.  we  are  counted  as  sheep  for  the  «. 
Ptov.  7.  22.  he  goeth  after  her,  as  an  ox  to  the  s. 
Jsa.  10.  26.  according  to  the  s.  of  Midian  atOrtb 

14.  21.  prepare  s.for  his  child,  for  iniquity  of  fath. 
27.7.  according  to  «.  of  them  that  are  slain  by  him 

34.2.  he  hath  destroyed,  and  delivered  them  to  s. 
53.  7.  he  is  brought  as  a  lamb  to  s.  Jer.  11.  19. 
65.  12.  and  ye  shall  all  bow  down  to  the  «. 

Jer.  7.  32.  no  moreTophel,  but  valley  of  «.  19.6. 

12.3.  thou  hast  seen  and  tried  my  heart,  pull  them 
out  like  sheep  fors.  prepare  them  for  day  of  s. 

25.  ;i4.  for  the  days  of  your  s.  are  accomplished 
4H.  l.i.  his  chosen  young  men  aregonodown  tos. 
.50.  27.  let  tli(!m  go  down  to  the  s.  woe  to  them 
51.  40. 1  will  bring  them  down  like  lambs  to  the  s. 

F.zek.  9.  2.  and  every  man  a  «.  woilpon  in  his  hand 

21. 10.it  is  sharpened  to  make  sore  s.it  is  furbished 

15.  it  is  made  bright,  it  is  wrapped  up  for  the .?. 

K.  was  divination  to  open  the  mouth  in  the  s. 

28.  the  sword  is  drawn,  for  the  5.  it  is  furbished 

26.  15.  when  the  s.  is  made  in  the  midst  of  thee 
Hos.  5.  2.  and  revolters  are  profod'nd  to  make  s. 
Obad.  9.  of  the  mount  of  Esau  may  be  cut  off  by  s. 
Zcrh.  11.  4.  thus  saith  Lord,  feed  the  flock  oi  s. 

7.  I  will  feed  flock  of  s.  O  poor  flock 
JlclsS.yi.  eunuch  read,  he  was  led  as  a  sheep  to  «. 
9.1.  Saul  yet  breathing  out  s.  against  the  disciples 
Rom.  8.  36.  we  are  counted  as  sheep  for  the  s. 
i/eJ.7.1.Melch.  raetAbra. reluming  from  «.of  kings 
./a;n.5.5.have  nourished  your  hearts,  as  in  day  of*. 
See  Great. 
SLAY. 
Ocn.i.M.  that  every  one  that  findeth  me  shall  ^.me 

20.  4.  Lord,  wilt  thous.  also  a  righteous  nation  ? 
11.  and  they  will  s.  me  for  my  wife's  sake 

27.  41.  then  will  I  s.  my  brother  Jacob 

34. 30.  they  shall  gather  together  ag.  me  and  5.  me 
37.  20.  come  now  therefore  and  let  us  s.  him 
2C.  Judah  said,  what  profit  is  it  if  we  s.  brother? 

42.  37.  s.  my  two  sons  if  I  bring  him  not  to  thee 

43.  16.  bring  these  men  home,  s.  and  make  ready 
Eiod.4.23.  behold,  I  will  s.  thy  son,  even  first-born 

21.  7.  the  innocent  and  liglitcous  a.  thou  not 
29.  16.  thou  ehalt  s.  ram  and  sprinkle  his  blood 
32.12.for  mischief  did  he  bring  them  out  to  s.  ihem 

27.  s.  every  man  his  brother  and  companion 
J.cv.  4.  29. .?.  sin-onfering,  33.  ||  14.13.  «.  the  lamb 

20.  15.  if  a  man  lie  with  a  beast,  ye  shall  s.  beast 
Jfum.  19.  3.  one  shall  s.  red  heifer  before  his  face 

25.5.  s.  ye  every  one  his  men  joined  to  Baal-peor 

35. 19.  revcriierofblood  shall  .s.  the  murderer,  21. 
7>eut.l9.6.  lest  avenier  of  blood  pursue  and  s.  him 
Jo$h.  13.  22.  Israel  did  s.  Halnam  the  eon  of  Beor 
Judg.  8. 19.  had  saved  them  alive,  would  not  s.you 
20.  he  said  to  Jethcrhia  first-born,  up  and.s.thom 

9.  54.  s.  me,  that  men  say  not,  a  woman  slew  him 

1  Sam.  2.  2.'i.  because  the  Lord  would  s.  them 

5.  II.  send  away  the  ark  of  God  that  its.  us  not 

14.  34.  bring  every  man  his  ox,  .?.  here,  and  eat 
15. 3.  spare  them  not,  biit  s.  both  man  and  woinan 

19.  15.  bring  him  up  to  me,  that  I  may  s.  him 

20.  8   if  there  be  in  me  iniipiily,  .■».  me  thyself 

22.  17.  king  said,  turn  and  ».  the  priests  of  the  L. 

2  Sam.  1.  9.  Paul  said  to  me,  stand  upon  me  and  .i. 
I  Kint^.i  1.51.  let  king  swear  to  me  he  will  not  g. 

3.  26.  give  her  livinir  child,  in  no  wise  s.  it,  '27. 

15.  28.  Nadah  did  Haasha  .i.  and  reigned  instead 
Iti.  12  wlieii  ho  cannot  find  thea,  ho  nhall  «.  me 


SLA 

IKingslO.  17.  escaped  sword  of  Hazaelshall  Jehu 
*-.  that  escapeth  sword  of  Jehu  shall  Elisha  «. 

20.30. as  soon  as  thou  art  departed, lion  shall  s.thee 
2  Kings  8.  12.  and  their  young  men  will  thou  s. 

10.  25.  go  in  and  s.  them,  let  none  come  forth 

17.  26.  God  hath  sent  lions,  and  they  s.  them 

2  CAron.  23. 14.  s.  her  not  in  the  house  of  the  Lord 
29.  34.  priests  too  few  to  s.  all  the  burnt-ofterings 
JVeA.  4.  11.  we  will  s.  them  a/id  cause  work  cease 
.Job  9.  23.  if  the  scourge  s.  suddenly,  he  will  laugh 

13.  15.  tlioiigli  he  »'.  me,  yet  will  1  trust  in  him 
20.]6.8hall  suck  poison,  viper's  tongueshall  s.him 

Psal.di.  21.  evil  shall  5.  wicked  that  hate  righteous 
59.  11.  s.  thena  not,  lest  my  people  forget,  scatter 
94.  0.  they  s.  the  widow  and  the  stranger 
109.  16.  that  he  might  s.  the  broken  in  heart 
139.  19. surely  thou  wilt  s.  the  wicked,  O  God 
Prov.l.3'i.  turning  away  of  the  simpleshalls.them 
Isa.  U.  4.  with  breath  of  his  lips  shall  he  s.  wicked 

14.  30.  with  famine,  and  he  shall  s.  thy  remnant 
27.  1.  Lord  shall  s.  the  dragon  that  is  in  the  sea 
65.  15.  for  Lord  God  shall  «.  thee,  call  his  serv. 

Jer.  5.  6.  a  lion  out  of  the  forest  shall  s.  Ihem 
20.  4.  he  shall  carry  Judah  captive  and  s.  them 
29.21.shall  s.Ahab  andZcdekiah  before  your  eyes 
40. 15.  let  me  go  I  pray  thee,  and  I  will  s.  Ishmael, 
son  of  Nethaniaii;  wherefore  should  he*,  thee  1 
41.  8.  ten  men  were  found  that  said,  s.  us  not 
50.27.J.  all  her  bullocks,  w  oe  to  them,  day  is  come 

Ezek.^J.  G.s.  utterly  old  and  young,  both  maids  and 
23.  47.  they  shall  s.  their  sons  and  daughters 

26.  8.  he  shall  s.  with  sword  thy  daughters  in  field 
11.  he  shall  s.  thy  people  by  the  sword 

44.11.  they  shall  s.  the  burnt-offering  and  sacrifice 
Hos.  2. 3.  set  like  a  dry  land  and  s.  her  with  thirst 

9.  16.  tho'  they  bring  forth,  yel  will  I  s.  the  fruit 
.Bmos  2.  3. 1  will  .s.  all  princes  thereof  with  him 

9.  1.  I  will  s.  the  last  of  them  with  the  sword 
4.  will  I  command  sword,  and  it  shall  s.  them 
Zech.  11.5.  whose  possessors  s.  them  and  hold 
y,«ft<'11.49.some  ofthem  they  shall  s.and  persecute 

19.  27.  bring  hither,  and  s.  them  before  me 

To  SLAY. 
Oeii.  18.  25.  that  be  far  from  theeios.the  righteous 

22.  10.  Abraham  stretched  his  hand  to  s.  his  son 

37.  18.  they  conspired  against  him  to  s.  nim 
£iorf.2.15. Pharaoh  sought  to  s.  Moses,  but  he  fled 

5.  21.  to  put  a  sword  in  their  hand  to  s.  us 

21. 14.  if  a  man  come  on  neighbour  to  s.withguile 
CeuJ.9.28.brought  them  outto«.them  in  wilderness 

27.  25.  cursed  that  taketh  reward  to  s.  innocent 

1  Sam.  5.  10.  they  have  brought  the  ark  to  s.  us 

19.  5.  why  then  sin,  to  s.  David  without  a  cause? 
11. Saul  went  to  watch  him  ands.him  in  morning 

20.  33.  it  was  determined  of  his  father  to  «.  David 

2  Sam.  3.  37.  it  was  not  of  the  king  to  s.  Abner 

21.  2.  Saul  sought  to  s.  them  in  his  zeal  to  Israel 
XKings  17.  18.  O  man,  art  thou  come  to  s.  my  son? 

18.  9.  deliver  me  into  the  hand  of  Ahab  to  s.  me 
2  Chron.  20.  23.  utterly  to  s.  and  destroy  them 
JWA.6.10.thcy  will  come  tos.thee,in  night  to  s.thee 
Kst/i.8. 11.  fos.  the  power  that  would  assault  them 
Psal.37. 14.  to  s.such  as  be  of  upright  conversation 

32.  watcheth  righteous,  and  seekest  to  s.  him 
Jer.  15. 3.  will  appoint  the  sword  to  s.  dogs,  to  tear 

18.  23.  thou  knowest  all  their  counsel  to  s.  me 

40.  14.  that  Raalis  hath  sent  Ishmael  to  s.  thee 
Ezek.  13.  19.  to  s.  the  souls  that  should  not  die 

40.  39.  two  tables  to  s.  thereon  the  burnt-oflering 
Dan.  2. 14.  Arioch  was  gone  forth  to  s.  wise  men 
Hah.  1.  17.  and  not  spare  continually  tos.  nations 
.^An5.16.Jewe  persecute  Jesus, and  soughlto;!.  him 
.lets  5.  33.  they  took  counsel  to  s.  the  ajiostles 

9.  29.  but  they  went  about  to  s.  him 
fle».9.15.angelB  prepared  to  s.  the  third  part  of  men 

SLAYER. 
JVKni.35.11.shall  appoint  cities  of  refuge  that  the  .•;. 
may  flee  thither,  DeuLiAI.  |  19.3,4.  ./osh.  20.  3. 

24.  shall  judg(!  between  s.  and  revenger  of  blood 

25.  congregation  shall  deliver  s.  from  revenger 

26.  if  the  .t.  shall  at  any  time  come  without  city 

27.  and  the  revengerof  blood  find  and  kill  the.';. 

28.  but  after  the  death  of  high-priest,  the  s.  shall 

return  into  tlic  land  of  his  pos'sessiun,  .Josh. 

20.6. 

Dcut.  19.  6.  lesl  the  avenger  of  blood  pursue  the  s. 

.fofh.  20.  5.  then  they  shall  not  deliver  the  .?.  up 

21.  13.  gave  Hebron  In  be  a  city  of  refuge  for  s. 

21  ptive  Shcchem||27.Golnnl|32.KideKh  for  the.s. 

:18.  Ramoth  in  Gileud  to  be  acilyof  refuge  for*. 

K2eil.21. 11.  the  sword  1»  furbished  to  be  given  to«. 

SLAYETH. 
Gev.4. 15.  the  Tjord  said  to  him, whosoever  .».Cain 
77fH(. 22.26. risetli  ngninst  his  neighbour  and  s.  him 
Jnh  5.  2.  wraih  killclh  and  envy  .i.  the  silly  one 
Eict.28.9.wilt.thou  say  before  him  that.t.thee,!  am 
God?  shalt  bo  a  man  in  hnnd  of  li,em  that  s.  thee 
SLAYING. 
■  Tnitk.  P.  24.  when  Israel  mnde  nn  end  of*.  10.20. 
Judg.9.56.God  randercd  wirkcdncss  ins.his  breth. 


SLE 

1  Kings  17.  20.  brought  evil  on  widow  by  s.  her  eok 

y.sa.22.13.behold,  s.oxen,  killing  sheep, eating  fleeb 
57.  5.  s.  the  children  in  the  valleys  under  the  rocks 

Kzck.  9.  8.  while  they  were  s.  them,  and  I  was  left 
SLEEP. 

Sleejiing,  slumbering,  is  taken  either  for  the  sleep, 
or  repose  of  the  body,  or  for  the  sleep  of  the 
soul,  which  is  supineness,  indolence,  stvpidity  ; 
or  for  the  sleep  of  death. 

AhasueruB  could  not  sleep,  Esih.  6.  1.  I  will 
both  lay  me  down  in  petice,  and  sleep,  say* 
David,  Psal.  4.  8,  Awake  thou  that  sleepcst, 
and  arise  from  the  dead,  and  Christ  shall  give 
thee  light.  He  speaks  to  those  that  were  dead 
in  sin  andinf  delity, who  were  going  on  securely 
in  sin,  without  sense  of  danger.  I  sleep,  but 
my  heart  waketh,  says  the  spouse.  Cant.  5.  2. 
that  is.  The  flesh,  the  unrenewed  part,  prevails 
tomake  me  slothful  avdsecvre,  and  to  lay  aside 
theezercise  of  grace  at  present ;  but  the  renew- 
ed part  is  sejisible  of,  and  strives  against,  this 
distemper.  This  is  a  sleep  of  sloth,  ease,  and 
security,  which  even  the  godly  may  fall  into. 
There  is  also  the  sleep  of  death.  You  shall 
sleep  with  your  fathers,  you  shall  die  as  they 
are  dead,  1  Kings  1.  21.  That  they  may  sleep 
a  perpetual  sleep,  Jer.  51.  39.  Many  that 
sleep  in  the  dust  of  tho  earth  shall  awake, 
Dan.  12.  2.  jSnd  in  John  11.  11.  Jazarus 
sleepelh,  but  I  go  that  I  may  awake  him  out 
of  sleep:  He  is  dead,  but  I  will  go  and  raise 
him  up.  St.  Peter  says  of  the  wicked,  their 
damnation  slumbereth  not,  2  Pet.  2.  3.  Ood 
is  not  asleep,  he  will  not  forget  to  punish  them 
in  his  own  due  time.  .Hvd  Solomon  says, 
Prov.  23.  21,  Drowsiness  shall  clothe  a  man 
■with  rags:  The  slumberer,  the  slothful,  shall 
come  to  poverty. 

Isaiah  speaks  of  a  superstitious  practice  among 
the  Pagans,  who  went  to  sleep  in  the  temples  of 
their  idols,  to  obtain  prophetic  dreams.     Isa. 

05.  4,  Which  remain  among  the  graves,  and 
lodge  in  the  monuments.  The  word  monuments 
signifies  jilaces  kept,  or  observed:  Some  inter- 
pret it  of  idol  temples;  some  of  cares  and 
dens,  in  which  the  heathens  used  to  worship 
tluir  idols,  and  some  of  tombs,  or  monuments 
for  dead  persons.  The  prophets  speak  of  the 
superstitious  and  idolatrous  Jews,  who,  in 
contempt  of  the  prophets  of  the  temple  of  the 
J^ord,  and  in  imitation  of  the  heathen,  went 
into  the  tombs  and  temples  of  idols,  to  sleep 
there,  and  to  have  dreams  that  might  discover 
future  events  to  them. 

(Vfn.2. 21.  God  caused  a  deep  s.  to  fall  upon  Adam 
15.  12.  sun  going  down,  a  deep  s.  fell  on  Abratn 
28.  16.  Jacob  awaked  out  of  his  s.  and  he  said 
31.  40.  thus  I  was,  my  s.  departed  from  mine  eyei 

Judg.  16.  14.  Samson  awaked  out  of  his  s.  20. 

1  Sam.  26.  12.  a  deep  s.  from  God  fallen  on  them 

Job  4. 13.  when  deep  s.  falleth  on  men,  33.  15. 
14.  12.  shall  not  awake,  nor  raised  out  of  their  s. 

Psal.  13. 3.  lighten  my  eyes,  lest  I  s.  the  s.  of  death 
76.  5.  the  stout  hearted  have  slept  their  s. 

6.  both  chariot  and  hovse  are  cast  into  a  deep  a. 
78.  65.  then  the  Lord  awaked  as  one  out  of  s. 
90.  5.  thou  carriest  them  away,  they  arfcas  a  s. 
127.  2.  for  so  he  giveth  his  beloved  s. 

1.T2.  4.  I  will  not  give  s.  to  mine  eyes  or  slumber 
froi). 3.24.  shalt  lie  down,  oiid  thy  s.  shall  be  sweet 
4.16.their.s.is  taken  away, unless  cause  somelofall 
6.4.  give  not .«. to  thine  eyes,  nor  sluinb.  lo  eye-lids 
9.0  sluggard,  when  wilt  lliou  arise  out  of  thy  s.l 
10.  yet  a  little  «.  a  litilo  slumber,  24.  33. 

19. 15.  slothfulness  castelh  into  a  deep  s. 
20.  13.  love  not  s.  lest  thou  come  to  poverty 

Keel.  5.  12.  the  s.  of  a  labouring  man  is  sweet 
8.  16.  there  is  that  neither  day  nor  night  seeth  s. 

Isa.  29.  10. 1,ord  poured  out  on  you  spirit  ofdeep  .■». 

Jer.  31.  2(i.  I  awaked,  am)  my  s.  was  sweet  lo  mo 
51.  39.  that  they  may  sleep  a  perpetnal  .».  57. 

/)a7i.  2.1. spirit  troubled,  and  his  «.  brake  from  him 
6.  18.  passed  the  night  and  his  s.  went  from  him 
8.  18.  I  was  in  a  deep  s.  on  my  face,  10.  9. 

Z.ech.  4.  1.  aa  a  man  that  is  wakened  out  of.?. 

Mat.  1.  24.  then  Joseph  being  raised  from  .t.  did 

I.uke  9.  32.  they  with  him  were  heavy  with  s. 

John  11.  11.  I  go  that  I  may  awake  him  out  of*. 
13.  that  he  had  spoken  of" taking  of  riat  in  s. 

.9cts  10.  27.  the  keeper  awaking  out  of  big  s. 
20.9.there  sat  Eutychus  being  fallen  into  a  deep* 

Horn.  13.  II.  it  is  high  time  to  awake  out  of  s. 
SLEEP,   fcrb. 

Cfen.  28.  11.  Jacob  lay  down  in  that  place  to  *. 

Find.  22.  27.  it  is  his  raiment,  wherein  shall  he».? 

Drut.  24.  12.  thou  nhalt  not .«.  with  his  pleilge 
13.  he  may  .«.  in  his  own  raiment  and  bless  (hee 

31.16.  thou  shall  .t.  with  thy  fat  hers,  2  Sam.l.  12 
Jtidrr.  10.  10.  and  she  made  him  ?.  upon  her  kncos 
1  Satiu  3.  3.  ond  Samuel  was  laid  down  to  s 


SLE 

I  ^mn-s  1,21.  lord  the  king  shall*,  with  hia  fathers 
Esth.  ti.  1.  on  that  night  could  not  the  king  s. 
Job  7.  21.  for  now  shall  I  s.  in  the  dust 
Psal.  4.  8.  I  will  lay  me  down  in  peace  and  s. 
13.  3.  lighten  my  eyes,  lest  1  s.  the  sleep  of  death 
121.4.  that  keep  Isr.  shall  neither  slumber  nor  s. 
Prov.  4. 16.  they  s.  not  e.xcepl  have  done  mischief 
0.9.  how  long  wilt  thou  s.  O  sluggard'? 

10.  a  little  folding  of  the  hands  to  «.  24.  33. 
Eccl.  5. 12.  the  s.  of  a  labouring  man  is  sweet,  but 
abundance  of  the  rich  will  not  suffer 
him  to  s. 
Cant-  5.  2- 1  s.  but  my  heart  waketli,  it  is  the  voice 
/sa.5.27.none  shall  stumble, none  shall  slumb.  nor  s 
Jer.  51.  3i).  they  may  s.  a  perpetual  sleep,  57. 
Eiek.  34.  25.  and  they  shall  s.  in  the  woods 
Dan.  12.  2.  many  that  s.  in  the  dust  shall  awake 
Mat.  26.45.  s.  on  now,  and  take  rest,  Mark  14.  41. 
Mark  4.27.and  should  s.  and  the  seed  should  spring 
Luke,  22.  46.  he  said,  why  .?.  ye7  arise  and  pray 
John  11.  12.  Lord,  if  he  «.  he  shall  do  well 
1  Cor.  11.  30.  for  this  cause  many  among  you  s. 

15.51.  we  shall  not  all  s.but  we  shall  all  be  changed 

1  T/iess.4. 14.  them  whos.  in  Jesus,  will  God  bring 

5.  6.  therefore  let  us  not  :j.  as  do  others,  but  watch 

7.  for  they  that  s.  sleep  in  the  night 

10.  who  died  for  us,  that  whether  we  wake  or  s. 

SLEEPER. 

iTon. 1.6. what  meanest  thou,0  s.  arise  call  on  thy  G. 

SLEEPEST. 
Psal.  44.23.  awake,  why  s.  thou,  O  Lord?  arise 
Prov.  6.  22.  when  thou  s.  it  shall  keep  thee 
Mark  14. 37.  Sin:)on,  s.thou?  couldst  not  watch  one 
Eph.  5.  14.  he  saith,  awake,  thou  that  s.  and  arise 

SLEEPETH. 
1  Kinffs  18.  27.  Elijah  said,  peradventure  he  a. 
Prow. 10. 5.  he  that  s.  in  harvest  is  son  causeth  shame 
Pfos.  7. 6.  their  bakers,  all  night,  in  morning  burns 
Mat.  9.  24.  he  said  to  them,  give  place,  for  the 
maid  is  not  dead  but  s.  Mark  5.  39.  L,uke8.52. 
John  11.  11.  he  saith,  our  friend  Lazarus  s. 
SLEEPING. 

1  Sam.  26. 7.  behold,  S^  lay  s.  within  the  trench 
Isa.  56.  10.  watchmen  blind,  s.  loving  to  slumber 
Murk  13.  36.  lest  coming  suddenly  he  find  you  s. 

14.  37.  he  Cometh  and  findeth  them  5.  and  saith 
^cts  12.  6.  Peter  was  s.  between  two  soldiers 

SLEIGHT. 
Eph.  4.  14.  and  carried  about  by  the  s.  of  men 

SLENDER. 
Lev.'il.  t20.  a  man  too  «.  not  come  nigh  to  offer 

SLEPT. 
Gen. 2. 21.  Adams.  ||  41.5.  Pharaoh .s.and  dreamed 

2  Sam.  11.  9.  Uriah  s.  at  door  of  the  king's  house 
1  KinffsS.'iO.  took  myson  while  thine  handmaids. 

19.  5.  as  he  lay  and  s.  an  angel  touched  him 
Job  3.  13.  now  should  1  have  been  quieWnd  haves. 
P.'ial.  3.  5.  I  laid  me  down  and  s.  I  awaked,  for  L 

76.  5.  the  stout-hearted  have  s.  their  sleep 
Mat.  13.  25.  while  men  s.  his  enemy  sowed  tares 

25.  5.  whilebridegroom  tarried,  they  slumb.  aiids. 

27.  52.  many  bodies  of  saints  which  s.  arose 

28.  13.  his  disciples  stole  him  away  while  we  s. 
1  Cor.  15. 20.  become  the  first-fruits  of  them  that  s. 

See  Fathers. 
SLEW. 
Ren.4.25.  anotherseed  inst.of  Abel,  whom  Cains. 
34.  25.  they  s.  all  the  males  ||  26.  they  s.  Hamor 
49.6.  for  in  their  anger  theys.  a  man  and  digged 
Exod.  2.  12.  Moses  s.  the  Egyptian,  and  hid  him 

13.  15.  the  Lord  s.  all  the  first-born  in  Egypt 
Lev.  8. 15.  he  s.  bullock  and  took  the  blood,  23. 

9.  8.  Aaron  s.  the  calf  of  the  sin-offering,  15. 
12.  he  s.  the  burnt-offering,  presented  the  blood 
JVum.  31.  7.  they  s.  all  the  males  of  Midian 

8.  they  s.  kings  of  Midian.  Balaam  also  they  s. 
Josh.  8.  21.  they  turned  and  s.  the  men  of  Ai 

9.  26.  delivered  the  Gibeonites,  they  s.  them  not 

10.  26.  Joshua  s.  the  five  kings  and  hanged  them 
Tudg.  1.  4.  they  s.  of  them  in  Bezek  10,000  men 

10.  they  s.  Sheshiii  ||  17.  they  s.  the  Canaanites 
3.  29.  they  s.  of  Moab  10,000  men,  all  lusty 

31.  Shamgar  s.  of  the  Phdistines  600  men 
7.  25.  they  s.  Oreb  and  Zeeb  the  two  princes 
8. 17.hos.men  ofPenuel  ||21.s.  Zebah,  Zalmunna 

18.  what  manner  of  men  were  they  whom  ye  s.? 
9.5.  A  bimelech  s.  his  brclh.  70  persons  on  one  stone 

14.  19.  Samson  s.  thirty  men  of  Askelon 

15.  15.  with  the  jaw-bone  Samson  s.  1000  men 
16.24. hath  delivered  our  enemy,  who  s.many  of  us 

30.  the  dead  which  he  .i.  at  his  death  were  more 
I  Sam.  1.  25.  Elkanali  and  Hannah  s.  a  bullock 
4  2.  the  Philistines  s.  of  Israel  40(X)  men 
11.11.  Israels,  the  Ammonites  until  heatoftheday 
14.  13.  and  his  armour-bearer  s.  after  him 

32.  the  people  s.  oxen  and  calves  on  the  ground 
34.  every  man  brought  his  o.x  and  s.  them  there 

17.  36.  thv  servant  s.  both  the  lion  and  the  bear 
19.  5.  put  his  life  in  his  hand,  and  s.  the  Philistine 
22.  18.  Doeg  s.  85  persons  that  did  wear  anephod 


5^ 


1  Sa»n.B9. 5.  of  whom  they  sang  Saul  i.  thousands 

30.  2.  the  Amalekites  s.  not  any  great  or  small 

31.  2.  the  Philistines  s.  Jonathan  and  Abinadab 

2  Sam.  3.30.  Joab  and  Abishai  his  brothers.  Abner 
4.  12.  David  s.  them  and  cut  off  their  hands 
8.  5.  David  s.  of  the  Syrians  22,000  men 
10. 18.  David  s.  the  men  of  700  chariots  of  Syrians 
21.  1.  for  Saul,  because  he  s.  the  Gibeonites 
23.20.hes.  two  lion-like  men  of  Moab,  he  s.  lion 

in  midst  of  a  pit  in  time  of  ^low,!  Chr.  11.  22. 
21.  he  s.  an  Egyptian,  a  goodly  man,  1  Chr.  11. 23. 
1  Kings'i.  5.  did  to  Abner  and  Aniasa,  wh6m  hes. 
16.  ll.Zimri  on  the  thrones,  all  house  of  Baasha 
18.  13.  what  I  did  when  Jezebel  s.  prophets  of  L. 
40.  they  took  them,  and  Elijah  s.  proph.  of  Baal 
'iKingsSi.'il.  Had  Zimri  peace,  who  s.  his  master? 

10.  9.  behold,  I  s.  him,  but  who  s.  ail  these? 
17.  he  s.  all  that  remained  to  Ahab  in  Samaria 

11.  18.  the  people  s.  Mattan  the  priest  of  Baal 
20.  they  s.  Athaliah,  2  Chron.  23.  15,  17. 

14.  5.  when  kingdom  was  confirmed  Amaziah  s. 
servants  that  had  slain  his  father,  2  Chr.  25.  3. 

6.  but  their  children  he  s.  not,  2  Chron.  25.  4. 

7.  he  s.  of  Ediim  in  valley  of  salt,  1  Chron.  18.  12. 
16. 9.  king  of  Assyria  took  Damascus  and  s.Rezin 

17. 25.  the  Lord  sent  lions  which  s.  some  of  them 

21.  23.  the  servants  of  Anion  conspired  and  s.  him 
24.  people  of  the  land  s.  them,  2  Chron.  33.  25. 

23.  20.  Josiah  s.  all  the  priests  of  the  high  places 
25.7.  Nebuchadnezzar  s.  sons  of  Zedekiah  before 
his  eyes,  and  bound  Zedekiah,  Jer.  39.6.  1 52.10, 

1  Chron.  7.  21.  whom  men  of  Gath  in  that  land  s 

2  Chron.  21. 4.  Jehoram  s.  all  his  breth.  with  sword 

22.  8.  Jehu  found,  and  s.  the  princes  of  Judah 
28.  6.  Pekah  s.  in  Judah  in  one  day  120,000 

JVcA.  9.  26.  they  s.  thy  prophets,  which  testified 
Eslh.  9.  16.  the  Jews  s.  of  their  foes  75,000 
Psal.  78.  31.  wrath  of  God  s.  the  fattest  of  them 
34.  when  he  s.  them,  then  they  sought  him 
105. 29.  turned  waters  into  blood,  and  s.  their  fish 
135.  lO.whos.great  kings  ||  136. 18.s.  famous  kings 
Isa.  66.3.  he  that  killeth  an  o.\  is  as  if  he  s.  a  man 
Jer.  20. 17.  because  he  s.  me  not  from  the  womb 
41.  3.  Ishmael  s.  all  the  Jews  that  were  with  him 

8.  he  forbare,  and  s.  them  not  among  their  breth 
Lam.  2.  4.  and  s.  all  that  were  pleasant  to  the  eye 
Dan.  3.  22.  fire  s.  the  men  that  took  up  Shadrach 

5.  19.  whom  he  would  he  s.  he  kept  alive 
Mat.  2.  16.  Herod  sent,  and  s.  all  the  children 

22.  6.  the  remnant  took  his  servants  and  s.  them 

23.  35.  whom  ye  s.  between  the  temple  and  altar 
Luke  13.  4.  on  whom  tower  in  Siloam  fell  and  s, 
Jlcts  5.30,raised  Jesus,  whom  s.  and  hanged  on  tree 

10.  39.  Jesus  whom  they  s.  and  hanged  on  a  true 
Rom.  7.  11.  for  sin  by  the  commandment  s.  me 
1  John  3.  12.  not  as  Cain  who  s.  his  brother 

SLEW  him. 
Gen.  4.  8.  Cain  rose  up  against  Abel  and  s.  him 
38.  7.  Er  was  wicked,  and  the  Lord  s.  him 
10.  the  thing  disj)leased  the  Lord,  and  he  s.  him 
Judg.  9.54.  that  men  say  not  of  me,  a  woman  s.  him 
12.  6.  they  took  and  s.  him  at  passages  of  Jordan 

1  Sam.  17.  35. 1  caught  him  by  beard  and  s.  him 
50.  David  smote  the  Philistine  and  s.  Am 

2  Sam.  1.  10.  so  I  stood  upon  him  and  s.  him 
4.  7.  they  smote  Ish-bosheth  and  s.  him 

10.  I  took  hold  of  him,  and  s.  him  in  Ziklag 
18.15.  ten  young  men  compassed  Absal.and  s.him 
21.21.  Jonathan  the  son  of  Shimeah  s.  him 
23.21.  he  went  down  and  s.him  with  his  own  spear 
1  Kings  2.  34.  Benaiah  fell  upon  Joab  and  s,  him 
13.24. a  lion  met  him  by  the  way  ands,/n';«,20.  36. 
2'Kings  10.9.1  consp. against  my  master  and  s.him 
14.  19.  Amaziah  fled,  but  they  sent  after  him  to 
Lachish,  and  s.  him  there,  2  Chron.  25.  27. 
15. 10.  Shallum  conspired  against  him  and  s.  him 
14.  Menahem  smote  Shallum  and  s.  him 
30.  Hoshea  conspired  against  Pekah  and  s.  him 

23.  29.  Fharaoh-necho  s.  him  at  Megiddo 

1  Chr.  10. 14.  inquired  not  of  L.  therefore  s.  he  him 

2  Chr.  22. 11.  hid  Joash,so  that  Athaliah  s.  him  imt 

24.  25.  his  own  servants  s.  Am  on  his  bed 

32.  21.  that  came  forth  of  bis  own  bowels  s.  him 

33.  24.  his  servants  s.  Am  in  his  own  house 
./er.26.23.they  fet.  Urijah  to  Johoiakim  who  s.  him 

41.  2.  Ishmael  s.  Am  whom  king  made  governor 
Mat. "I.  39.  they  cast  him  outof  vineyard  ands.him 
yjcts  22. 20. 1  kept  the  raiment  of  them  that  s.  him 

SLEWEST. 
1  Sam.  21.  O.the  sword  of  Goliath  whom  thou  s. 

SLIDE. 
Deut.  32.  35.  their  foot  shall  s.  in  due  lime 
Psal.  26. 1. 1  have  trusted  in  the  Lord,  I  shall  not  s. 
37.  31.  law  of  G.  in  his  heart,  nonoof  steps  shall  s. 

SLIDDEN. 
.7cr.8. 5.  why  then  is  this  people  of  Jerusal.  s.  back? 

SLIDETH. 
Hos.4..  16.  Israel  s.  back  as  a  backsliding  heifer 

SLIGHTLY. 
Jtr.  6.  14.  have  healed  hurt  of  my  people  s.  8.  11. 


SLU 

SLIME. 
Gen.  11.  3.  they  had  brick  for  stone, «.  for  mortar 
Exod.  2.  3.  she  daubed  the  ark  with  s.  and  pitch 

SLIME-PITS. 
Gen.  14. 10.  the  vale  of  Siddim  was  full  of  .'.-ojti 

SLING,  Verb. 
Judg.  20.  16.  every  one  could  s.  stones  at  a  hair 
1  Sam.  25.  29.  thine  enemies,  them  shall  he  s.  out 
Jtr.  10.  18.  I  will  s.  out  the  inhabitants  at  once 

SLING 
Is  an  instrument  of  cords,  made  use  of  to  throw 
slone.s  with  the  greater  violence.  The  Hebrews 
heretofore  made  great  use  of  them.  Those  of 
the  tribe  of  Benjamin  had  so  much  skill  and 
dexterity  in  managing  the  sling,  that  they  could 
hit  their  mark  to  a  hair,  without  the  least  error. 
This  must  be  owned  to  be  an  hyperbolical  ex' 
pression  ;  however,  it  proves  their  great  abili- 
ties in  the  management  of  the  sling,  Judg.  20. 
16.  Il  is  known  what  glory  David  obtained, 
when  he  knocked  down  by  a  stroke  of  his  sling 
the  giant  Goliath,  who  was  the  terror  of  all 
Israel,  1  Sain.  17.  49.  The  scripture  takes 
notice,  that  when  David  was  at  Ziklag,  there 
came  to  him  a  company  of  able  slingers,  who 
could  use  their  left  hands  with  the  same  facility 
as  their  right,  1  Chron.  12.  2.  Uzziah  king 
of  Judah  made  great  cullections  of  arms  in  his 
magazines,  and  particularly  there  were  bows 
andslings /or  casting  of  stones,  2  Chron.  26. 14. 

1  Sam.  17.  40.  David  iiad  his  s.  in  his  hand,  he 
drew  near  to  the  Philistine 

50.  David  prevailed  over  the  Philistine  with  a  s. 
25.  29.  sling  enemies  as  out  of  the  middle  of  a  s. 
Prow.26.8.  as  he  that  bindethastonein  as.  so  is  ha 
SLINGS. 

2  Chron.  26.  14.  Uzziah  prepared  s.  to  cast  stonei 
SLINGERS. 

2  Kings  3.  25.  the  s.  went  about  it  and  smote  it 

SLING-STONES. 
Job  41.  28.  s.  are  turned  with  him  into  stubble 

SLIP. 
2  Sam.  22.  37.  that  my  feet  did  not  s.  Psal.  18. 36. 
Job  12.  5.  he  that  is  ready  to  s.  with  his  feet 
Psal.  17.  5.  hold  up,  that  my  footsteps  s.  not 
Jer.  37.  1 12,  Jeremy  went  lo  s.  away  from  thence 
Heb.  2.  1.  lest  at  any  time  we  should  let  them  s. 

SLIPPERY. 
Psal.  35. 6,  let  their  w  ay  be  dark  and  s.  let  angel 
73.  1'^.  surely  thou  didst  af.  tliem  in  s.  places 
Jer,  23.  12.  their  way  shall  be  to  them  as  s.  ways 

SLIPPETH. 
Deut.  19.  5.  and  the  head  s.  from  the  helve 
Psal.  38.  16.  when  my  foot  s.  they  magnify  thems. 
94.18  vvhenlsaidmy  foot  ,5.  thy  mercy  held  me  up 

SLIPS. 
Isa.  17.10.  therefore  thou  shaltset  it  with  strange*. 

SLIPT. 
1  Sam.  19.  10.  David  s.  out  of  Saul's  presence 
Psal.  73.  2.  as  lor  me,  my  steps  had  well  nigh  s. 

SLOTHFUL. 
.Judg.  18.  9.  be  not  s,  to  go  to  possess  the  land 
Prov.  12.  24.  but  the  s.  shall  be  under  tribute 
27.  s.  roasteth  not  that  he  took  in  hunting 
1.5.  19.  the  way  of  the  s.  is  a  hedge  of  thorns 
18. 9.  the  s.  is  brother  to  him  that  is  a  great  waster 
19.  24.  a  s.  man  hideth  his  hand  in  his  bosom, 

26.  15. 

21.  25.  the  desire  of  s.  killeth  him,  refuse  to  labour 

22.  13.  the  s.  man  saith,  there  is  a  lion,  26.  13. 
24.  30. 1  went  by  field  of  the  s.  and  the  vineyard 

Jl/at.25.26.  his  lord  said,thou  wicked  and  s.  servant 
Rom.  12.  11.  not  s.  in  business,  fervent  in  spirit 
Heb.  6. 12.  that  ye  be  not  s.  but  followers  of  them 

SLOTHFULNESS. 
ProD.lO.lS.s.  casteth  into  a  deep  sleep,  an  idle  soul 
F.ccl.  10.  18.  by  much  s.  the  building  decayeth 

SLOW. 
Exod.  4.  10.  I  am  s.  of  speech,  and  of  a  s.  tongue 
JVeh.  9.  17.  hut  thou  art  a  God  s.  to  anger 
/'ror.14,29,  is  s.  lo  wrath,  is  of  great  understanding 
/Mke  24.  25.  O  fools  and  s.  ol  heart  to  believe 
Til.  1.  12.  the  Cretians  are  liars,  s.  bellies 
Jam.  1  19  every  man  s.  to  speak,  s.  lo  wrath 
See  Anger. 
SLOWLY. 
.^cta  27.  7.  when  we  had  sailed  s.  many  days 

SLUGGARD. 
Prov.  6.  6.  go  to  the  ant,  thou  s.  consider  her  ways 

9.  how  long  wilt  thou  sleep,  O  s.  when  wilt  arise 
10.  26.  as  smoke  to  the  eyes,  so  is  the  s.  to  them 
13.4.  the  Boulof  thes.  desireth,  and  hath  nothing 
20.4. s.  will  not  plow,  therefore  shall  he  beg  in  har. 
26.16.s.is  wiser  in  his  own  conceit  than  seven  men 

SLUICES. 
Isa  19.  10.  all  that  make  s.  and  ponds  for  fish 

SLUMBER,  Substantive. 
Psal.  132.  4.  I  will  not  give  s.  to  mine  eye-lids 
Prov.  6.4.  give  not  sleep  to  thy  eyes,  nor  s.  to  eye-lida 

10.  yet  a  little  sleep,  little  s.  little  folding,  24.  33. 


f. 


SME 

Ron.  11.  8.  God  hath  given  them  tho  Bplrit  of  s. 

SLUMBER. 
Ptal.  121.  3.  he  that  kecpeth  thee  will  not  s. 

4.  lie  that  keei)eth  Israel, shall  neither  s.  nor  sleep 
Ita.  5.  'il.  none  shall  s.  nor  sleep  among  them 
5G.  10.  his  watchmen  lying  down,  loving  to  s'. 
JV'uA.  3.  18.  thy  shepherds  s.  O  king  of  Assyria 

SLUMBERED. 
Mat.  25.  5.  while  the  hridigrooin  tarried  they  all  s. 

SLUMBEUETII. 
2  Pet.2.3.  lingerethnut,  ;ind  i  heir  damnation  i.  not 

SLUMBEULNGS. 
Job  33.  15.  God  speuketh  in  s.  upon  the  bed 

SMALL. 
Gen.30.15.it  is  a  s.niatler  thou  hast  taken  my  husb. 
41.  t23.  behold,  sovon  ears  s.  and  blasted 
JEiiof/.y.'J.it  shall  become  s.dust  in  all  land  of  Egypt 
10.  14.  a  s.  round  thing,  as  s.  as  the  hoar  frost 

16.  22.  every  s.  matter  they  shall  judge,  26. 
30.  36.  thou  shalt  boat  the  spices  very  a. 

//CB.  16.12.  bis  hands  full  of  sweet  incense  beaten  i. 

JV'u/n.  16.  9.a  s.  thing  that  God  hath  separated  you 

13.  is  it  a  s.  thing  that  thou  hast  brought  us  up7 

32.  41.  Jair  went  and  took  the  s.  towns  thereof 

yjtttf.  y.2l.  I  ground  the  calf  s.  even  as  s.  asdust 

32.2.  my  doctrine  shall  distil  as  s.  rain,  speech  as 

2.Sa»«.7.19.and  this  was  yet  a  s.  thing  in  thy  sight,  is 

this  the  manner  of  man,  O  Lord?  1  Ckron.  17. 17. 

17.  13.  till  there  be  not  one  s.  atone  found  there 
22.  4.3. 1  beat  them  as  .i.  as  the  dust,  Psal.  18.  42. 

1  A'i'n^s  2.20.1  desire  ones,  petition  of  thee,  say  not 
I'.l.  12.  and  after  the  fire,  a  still  s.  voice 

2  Kings  19. 26.  therefore  their  inhabitants  were  of 

s.  power,  Ihey  were  dismayed,  fsa.  37.  27. 
23.fi.grove  and  high  place  he  stampts.topowd.15. 
2  Chr.  24.21.  the  Syrians  came  with  a  .?.  company 

35.  8.  gave  for  pai^sover  offerings  2G00  s.  cattle 
y.  to  chief  of  Levltos  gave  5000  s.  cattle 

Jul)  8.  7.  though  thy  beginning  was  s.  yet  thy  end 

15.  11.  are  the  consolations  of  God  s.  with  thee'? 

36.  27.  for  he  maketli  s.  the  drops  of  water 
Psal.  119. 141.  I  am  .«.  yet  do  not  I  forget  precepts 
froo.24. 10.  if  thou  faint  in  adversity,  strength  is  s. 
Jxa.  1.9.  except  the  Lord  had  left  to  us  as.  remnant 

7.  13.  is  it  a  s.  thing  for  you  to  weary  men  ? 

16.  14.  the  remnant  shall  be  very  s.  and  feeble 
22.24.6hall  hang  upon  him  all  vessels  of .«. quantity 
29.5.  mnccover,  thy  clrangers  shall  be  like  s.  dust 
40.  15.  the  nations  are  counted  as  the  s.  dust 
41.15.shaltthrcsh  tho  mountains,  and  beatlhems. 
43.  23.  thou  hast  not  brought  me  the  s.  cattle 
54.  7.  for  a  s.  moment  have  I  forsaken  thee 

60.  22.  a  s.  one  shall  become  a  strong  nation 
./rr.  30.19.  will  glorify  thorn, and  they  shall  not  bes. 

44.28.  yet  a  s.  number  shall  return  out  of  Egypt 

49.  15.  I  will  make  thee  s.  among  the  heathen 
Ezfk.  It).  20.  is  this  of  thy  whoredoms  a  s.  matter? 
t47.  but  that  was  loathed  as  a  ».  thing 

34. 18.  seem,  it  s.  In  have  eaten  the  good  pasture? 
/>an.ll.23.and  shall  become  strong  with  as.peoplc 
/?mns  7.2.  by  whom  shallJacob  arise?  for  he  is  s.  5. 
Obad.  2.  I  have  made  thee  s.  among  the  heathen 
Z.erh.  4.  10.  for  who  hnth  despised  day  ofs.  things? 
Mark  8. 7.  Ihey  bad  a  few  s.  fishes,  and  he  blessed 
Juhn'2.  15.  when  he  had  made  a  scourge  ofs.  cords 

6.9.  who  hath  five  barley-loavi^s  and  two  s.  fishes 
Jlrts  12.  18.  there  was  no  s.  stir  among  the  soldiers 

1.5.  2.  Paul  and  Barnabas  had  no  s.  dissension 
19.  23.  there  arose  no  a.  stir  about  that  way 
24.r)emetrius  brought  no  s.  gain  to  the  craftsmen 
27.  20.  and  no  a.  tempest  lay  on  us 
1  Cor.4.3.vcry  ».  thing  that  I  should  be  judged  of  you 
Jam,  3.  4.  the  ships  are  turned  with  a  very*,  helm 
.<?/•«  Great. 
SMALLEST. 
1  Sam-  9. 2L  am  not  I  a  Benjamite,  ofs.  of  tribes? 
ICor.  6. 2.aro  ye  unworthy 'o  judge  thcs.  matters? 

SMART. 

Proc.l  1 .15.  he  that  i"  so  ret  v  for  Strang,  shall  s.  for  it 

SMELL. 

Pee  SitTnlfirallon  on  Savour. 

Om.  27.27.  Isaac  smclled  the  s.  of  his  raiment, see, 

tho*.of my  sonisBss.of a  field  liordhath  hlessed 

Cnnt. 1.12.my  sjiikenardsendelh  forth  l.^o  s. thereof 

2.13.tlin  vines  with  Ihe  tender  grape  give  a  good  s 

4. 10.  the  .».  of  thy  oinlmnnl  better  than  nil  spices 
11.  then.  ofthyEnrmentH  is  like  the. •>.  of  Lebanon 

7.  P.  and  the  s.  of  thy  nose  like  a()pIos 

13.  mandrakes  give  a  n.nnd  atour  gales  nil  frnils 
/an.  3.  24.  insiead  of  sweet  ».  there  shall  be  slink 
V>nn.  3. 27.  nor  the  ».  ofthe  fire  had  passed  on  them 
Jfiis.  ll.O.hisheaii'y  as  the  olive,  his  a.  ns  Lebanon 
Pkil   4.  18.  the  things  sent  nn  odour  of  sweet  a. 

SMRI,L,  Vfrh. 
/:r()rf.30  38.whn  shall  make  like  lo  that  to  .'.ib.'reto 
y,c?'.26.  31. 1  will  not  .».ihe  savour  of  your  odours 
/>CK«.4.2^.8lmIl  servo  gods, which  neither  scti  nor  s 
1  Kam.  26.  1 19.  if  the  Lord  stirred  thee,  let  him  » 
r»  45.8  nil  :hyg«rm.s. of  myrrh,  nlnrs  nod  cassia 
115.  6.  earl  hear  not,  noses  Uavo  tb«y,  they  s.  not 
350 


SMI 

.^mos  5. 21. 1  win  not  a.  in  your  soleinn  aBsembllcs 
SMELLED. 

Gen.  8.21.  L.  5.  asweet  savour  and  said  in  his  heart 

27.27.Isaac».  smell  of  his  raiment  and  blessed  him 

SMELLETH. 

Job  39. 25.  he  s.  the  battle  afar  off  and  the  shouting 
SMELLING. 

C«nt.5.5.my  fingers  with  sweet  s.myrrh  on  handles 
13.  his  lips  like  lilies  dropping  sweet  s.  myrrh 

EpA.5.2.himsolf  sacrifice  to  God  for  sweet  s.savour 
SMELLING. 

1  Cor.  K.  17.  if  whole  hearing,  where  were  thes.? 
SMITE. 

To  smite  signifies,  to  strike  or  beat.  Mat.  26.  07, 
Others  smote  him  with  the  palms  of  their 
hands,  .^cls  23.  2,  The  high  priest  command- 
ed to  smite  Paul  on  the  mouth.  It  is  often 
used  for  to  put  to  death.  David  smote  titr 
Philistine;  he  put  Goliath  to  death,  1  Sam.  17. 
49.  The  Lord  smote  Nabal ;  he  smote  IJzr.ah  ; 
that  is,  he  put  them,  to  death,  1  Sam.  25.  38. 
2  Sam.  6.  7.  .^nd  in  Exod.  12.  12,  I  will 
smite  all  the  first-born  in  Egypt.  To  smite, 
is  also  put  for  to  afflict;  to  strike  with  fear, 
with  the  pestilence,  with  poverty,  with  ulcer.t, 
with  distempers,  with  wounds,  Num.  14.  12. 
Deut.  28.  22,  27,  28,  35.  To  smite  an  army, 
IS  to  beat  it,  to  rout  it  entirely.  Deut.  29.  7, 
Sihon  and  Og  camo  out  against  us  unto  battle, 
and  we  smote  them,  we  obtained  a  victory  oner 
them.  God  smote  the  Philistines  in  the  hin- 
der parts,  Psiil.  78.  66.  He  sevt  them  the 
piles,  or  hemorrhoids,  or  other  di.<!eases  of  the 
fundament.     To  smite  with  the  tongue.     Jer. 

18.  18,  Come,  lot  us  smite  him  with  the 
tongue.  Let  vl  overwhelm  him  with  injuries 
and  rtpronches ;  let  ws  load  him  with  all  sorts 
of  scandalous  reproaches. 

To  smite  the  thigh,  denotes  indignation,  trouble, 
astonishment.  Jer.  31.  19,  After  I  was  in- 
structed, I  smote  upon  my  thigh.  Being  made 
sensible  of  my  sins,  I  was  brought  to  a  sorrow 
for  them,  and  detestation  of  them.  To  strike 
hand  against  hand,  way  either  be  a  token  of 
amazement ,  sorrow,  and  trouble;  or  it  may  he 
a  token  of  joy  and  pleasure  in  seeing  justice 
executed  on  obstinate  sinners.  Ezek.  21.  14. 
Pro|)besy,  and  smite  thine  hands  together. 
He  shall  smite  the  earth  with  the  rod  of  his 
mouth,  Isa.  11.  4.  He  shall  destroy  ungodly, 
earthly-minded  men,  who  are  enemies  lo  his 
church  and  people,  by  the  -word  of  his  mouth. 
David's  heart  smote  him  for  having  cut  oflf 
the  lappet  of  Saul's  garment;  he  had  a  re- 
morse, his  conscience  being  tender,  cliecked 
him  for  it,  1  Sam.  24.  5. 
Gen.  32.  8.  if  Esau  come  lo  one  company  and  s.  it 

11.  I  fear  him,  lest  he  will  come  and  s.  me 
F.xod.  7. 17. 1  will  s.  upon  tho  waters  in  the  river 
8.  16.  say  to  Aaron,  s.  the  dust  of  the  land 
12.23.  be  will  not  suffer  the  destroyer  lo  ,<t.  you 
17.  6.  behold,  thou  shalt  a.  the  rock  in  Horeb 
21.  18.  if  men  sirive  together,  and  one  s.  another 

20.  if  a  mans,  his  serv.  and  be  die  under  his  hand 

26.  if  a  man  s.  the  eye  o,"  his  servant  or  his  maid 

27.  if  he  s.  out  h'S  man  servant's  or  maid's  tooth 
JVi/,m. 22. 6. 1  shall  prevail,  that  we  may  s.  Ihem 

24.17.  a  sceptre  out  of  Isr.  shall  s.  corners  of  Moab 
2.5.  17.  vex  the  Midianites  and  s.  them 
35.  16.  if  he  s.  him  with  an  instrument  of  iron 
17.  and  if  he  s.  him  with  throwing  a  siur.i 
18.or  ifhes.  him  with  a  hand-weapon  of  wood 

21.  or  in  enmity  .t.liim  with  his  hand  that  he  die 
/?fuf. 7.2.thou  shalt  s.Canaanites  and  destroy  them 

13. 15.  thou  shalt  surety's,  inhabitants  of  that  cily 
19.  11.  if  any  s.  his  neigldmur  mortally  that  he  die 

20. 13.  thou  shalt  s.  every  male  thereof  with  sword 
.fo.y-h.  7.  3.  but  let  two  or  three  thousand  s.  .Ai 

10.  4.  come  and  help  me  that  we  may  s.  Gibeon 

19.  pursue  nfter,  and  s.  the  hindmost  of  them 

12.  6.  then  did  Moses  and  Israel  s.  13.  12. 
Judg.Vt.  16.  thou  shalt  s.  tho  Midianites  as  one  man 

20.31.1  hen  Benjn. began  to  a.  as  at  other  lime*,  39 
21.  10.  go  and  ».  the  inhnbitnnts  of  .labesh-gilend 

1  f!am.  15.  3.gonnd  a.  Amiilck,  and  spare  them  not 

17.  46. 1  will  a.  thee,  and  lake  thy  head  from  ihcc 

18.  11.  Saul  said,  I  will  .■:.  Davirl  lo  the  wall 

19.  in.  Saul  sought  lo  a.  David  to  the  wall 

20.  33.  Said  cast  a  javelin  at  him  to  a.  him 

23.  2.  shall  I  go  and  a.  Philistines?  Go  a.  Philist. 

26. 8.  therefore  let  mn  a.  him  to  the  earth  at  once. 

I  iirav  thee,  I  will  not  a.  the  second  time 

2  I'^ani.  2.  22.  why  should  I  a.  thee  to  the  ground  ? 

13.  28.  when  I  say,  a.  Amnon,  then  kill  him 

15. 14.  lest  he  s.rilv  with  the  edge  of  ihe  sword 
17.  2.  people  shall  flee,  and  I  will  a.  the  king  only 
18. 1  L.Toabsaid,  why  didst  thou  no> .«  him  thore? 

1  /Ting-.':  20. 35.  he  said  in  the  wont  of  Ihe  L.s.  me, 

Ipraylhee,  and  tho  man  refused  tos.  him,  37. 

i  fCijigti.  19.  »hall  $.  every  fenced  cily,  choice  city 


SMI 

2 /rino's6.21.fathcr,shalIIs.  them?  shall! f  :hom1 

22.  thou  shall  not  s.  them,  wouldest  thou  s.  those 

9.  7.  Ihuu  shalt  s.  the  house  of  Aliab  thy  master 

27.  Jehu  said,  s.  him  also  in  the  chariot 

13.17.shalts.  Syrians,  till  thou  have  consum.  them 

18.  he  said  to  the  king,  s.  upon  the  ground 

19.  whereas  now  thou  shalt  s.  Syria  but  thric( 
Psal.  121.  6.  sun  shall  not  s.  thee  by  day  nor  moon 

141.  5.  let  righteous  s.  me,  it  shall  be  a  kindiioea 
Prov.  19.  25.  s.  a  scorner,  the  simple  will  beware 
Isa.  10.  24.  he  shall  s.  thee  with  a  rod  and  lift  up 
49.  10.  neither  shall  the  heat  nor  sun  s.  them 
5fJ.  4.  ye  fast  to  s.  with  the  fist  of  wickedness 
Jer.  18.  18.  come,  let  us  s.  him  with  the  tongue 
21.7.Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  Babyl. shall  sJudah 
43.  11.  he  shall  s.  the  land  of  Egypt,  46.  13. 
49.  28.  Kedar,  Hazor,  Nebucliadrozzar,  shall  ». 
Ezek.  5.  2.  take  a  third  part  of  hair,  and  s.  about  it 
6.  11.  s.  with  thy  hand,  and  stamp  with  thy  fool 
9.  5.  go  ye  after  him  ihrongb  the  city  and  s. 
21.  12.  son  of  man,  s.  therefore  upon  thy  thigh 

14.  prophesy,  and  s.  thine  hands  together 
J}mos  9.  1.  he  said,  s.  the  lintel  of  the  door 
.Mic.  5.  1.  they  shall  s.  judge  of  Israel  on  cheek 
JVa/(.  2. 10.  the  heart  melteth,  the  knees  s.  together 
Zerh.  10.  11.  and  shall  s.  the  waves  in  the  sea 

11.  6.  deliver  the  men,  and  they  shall  s.  the  land 
Mat.  5.  39.  whoso  shall  s.lhee  on  thy  right  cheek 

24.  49.  shall  begin  tos.  his  fellow-servants,  to  eat 
I.uke  22.  49.  Lord,  shall  we  s.  with  the  sword  ? 
.flcts  23.  2.  commanded  to  s.  Paul  on  the  moutii 
2  Cor.  11.  20.  ye  suffer,  if  a  man  s.  you  on  the  face 
P.I  M.  1 1. 6.  two  witnesses  have  power  to  s.  the  eartli 
SMITE,  referred  to  God,  expressly  or  implicitly. 
Gen.  8.  21.  nor  will  I  s.  any  more  every  living  Ihing 
F.xod.  3.20. 1  will  stretch  out  my  hand  and  s.  Egyjit 

8.  2.  behold,  I  will  s.  al!  thy  borders  with  frogs 

9.  15.thatl  may  s.  thee  and  thy  people  with  peslil, 

12.  12. 1  will  s.  all  the  first-born  in  land  of  Egypt 
13.  will  pass  over  you, when  Is. land  ofEgypt,23. 

J\'um.  14.  12.  I  will  s.  them  with  the  pestilence 

Deut.  28.22.  L.shall  s.  with  consumption  and  fever 

27.  L.  shall.?,  with  the  botch  ||  28..s.with  madness 

35.  Lord  shall  a.  thee  in  the  knees  and  the  legs 

33. 11.  .s.  thro'  the  loins  of  them  that  rise  ag.  him 

1  Ham.  26.  10.  David  said,  the  Lord  shall  s.  bim 

2  Sam.  5.  24.  then  bestir  thyself,  for  then  shall  the 

L.  go  out  to  s.  the  Philistines,  1  Chron.  14. 15. 

1  Kings  14. 15.  L.  shall  s.  Israel  as  a  reed  is  shakeo 

2  /u?/e-s6.18.  Elisha  said,  s.  this  people  with  blindn 
2  Chr.  21.  14.  with  a  great  plague  will  the  Lord  s. 
Isu.^.  17.  L.  wills,  with  a  scab  daughters  of  Zion 

11.  4.  he  shall  s.  the  earth  with  rod  of  his  mouth 
1.5.and  shalt  s. Egypt  in  the  seven  streams,  19. 22. 

.Ter.^\.  6.  I  will  s.  the  inhabitants  of  this  city 

F.zek.  21.  17.  I  will  also  s.  mine  hands  together 
32.  15.  whVn  I  shall  s.  them  that  dwell  in  Egypl 
39.  3.  I  will  s.  thy  bow  oiit  of  thy  lell  hand 

Jlmos  3. 15. 1  will  s.  the  winter-house  with  ihesum- 

mer-boiise,  and  the  houses  of  ivory  shall  perish 

6.  11.  Lord  will  s.  the  great  house  with  breachei 

7.reh.  9.  4.  the  Lord  will  s.  her  power  in  the  sea 

12.  4.  in  that  day  I  will  s.  every  bor.^e  and  bis  rider 

13.  7.  awake,  O  sword,  s.  the  she|ilierd,and  sheep 

shall  be  scattered,  Jl/a(.  26. 31.  Mark  14.  27. 

14.  12.  plague  wherewith  L.  will  s.  the  people,  18. 
Mai.  4. 6.  lest  I  come  and  a.  the  earlh  with  a  curse 
Hev.  19. 15.  that  with  it  he  should  s.  tho  nations 

PM  ITERS. 
Isa.  50.  6. 1  gave  mv  Iwck  to  thes.  and  my  cheeka 

SMITEST. 
Frnd.  2. 13.  he  said,  wherefores,  thou  thy  fellow? 
John  18.  23.  if  I  have  spoken  well,  why  s.  thou  me' 

SMITETII. 
iCjr.fi. 21. 12.he  that .«.  man  so  he  die,  be  pnt  lo  death 

15.  he  a.  father  and  mother,  surely  put  to  death 
/)cK(.25.11.ancl  wife  ofonedraweth  neartodeliver 

her  htisbanil  out  of  band  of  bim  that  s.  him 
27.  24.  cursed  be  be  that  s.  his  neighbour  secretly 
.Tosh.  15. 10.  he  that  s.  Kirjath-sephor,  Judg.  1.  l2. 
2  .Srtm.  5.  8.  that  s.  the  Ji  busiles,  1  Chron.  11.  6. 
.fob  26.  12.  by  understanding  he  s.  thro'  the  proud 
Un.  9.  13.  the  people  turn  not  lo  him  iliat  s.  tliein 
f.am.  3.30.  he  givelh  his  cheek  to  him  that  s.  hini 
F.zek.  7. 9.  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord  that  s 
/,uAc6.29.  ihats.  thee  on  onecbcek,  turn  Ihe  other 
SMITH. 

1  Sam.  13. 19.  there  was  no  a.  found  in  land  of  Isr. 
ha.  44.  12.  the  a.  with  tongs  workoih  in  the  coal? 

54. 16.  I  have  created  thes.  ttinlblowelh  thecoali 
.'7crsl9.24.  certain  man  named  Demitrius,  silvers. 

2  Tim.4. 14.  Alexander  cnuprrs.  did  me  much  evil 

SMITHS. 
2  K'mF'24.  14.  Nebuchadnezzar  carried  away  aR 
the  princes,  Ihe  crnfismen  and  a.  16.  .fer.ii.  1 
ler  29  2.  after  the  a.  were  depnited  from  Jcrutal 

PMITLVG. 
rro(/.2.ll.  Moses  spied  an  Eivptinn.*.  a  ITehrew 
2  .S'fim.P.  13.  when  he  returned  from  a.  the  Syrian* 
1  Kinga  20.37.smo'.e  him,  so  that  in  s. wounded  bim 


SMO 

?  Kings  3.  94.  they  went  forward  «.  the  Moabiles 
JUic.  0.  IJ.  therefore  I  will  make  ihee  sick  in  s.  ihee 

SAflTTKN. 
Ezod.  7. 25.  seven  days  alter  the  L.  had  s.  the  river 

9.  31.  and  thf,  fla.\  and  the  bailey  was  s. 
32.  but  the  wheat  and  the  rye  were  not  «. 

22.  2.  if  a  thief  lie  found,  and  be  .v.  that  he  die 

JJ'um.  14.  42.  go  not  u|),tliat  ye  be  not  s.  />ettM.42. 

22.28.what  haveldone  to  thee  tliat  thou  hasis-me"! 

32.wheref  hast  thuu^.  thine  ass  these  three  times'! 

.33.4.  Egyptians  butied  their  first-born  Lord  had  s. 

Deut.W.  7.  Lord  shall  cause  thine  enemies  to  he  s. 

2o.L.  shall  cause  thee  be  s.  before  thine  enemies 

Jtidg.  \.  8.  Judah  had  s.  Jerusal.  and  set  it  on  fire 

20.  32.  Benjarn.  said,  they  are  s.  bcf  us  as  at  first 

3G.Baw  they  were  s.  (|  39.  surely  they  are  s.  down 

1  Sam.  4,  2.  Isr.  was  s.  before  the  Phillslines,  10. 
•  3.  why  liath  Lord  *-.  us  to-day  before  Philistines? 
5  )2.  the  men  that  died  not,  were  s.  with  emerods 
6. 19.  people  lamented  because  Lord  had  s.  raany 

7.  10.  the  Philistines  were  s.  before  Israel 

13.  4.  Saul  had  s.  a  garrison  of  the  Philistines 
30.1.  An.alek  had*-.  Ziklag,  and  burnt  it  with  fire 

2  Haiti.  2.  31.  David's  serv.  iiad  s.  of  Abner's  men 

8.  9.  when  Toi  heard  that  David  hads.  the  host  of 
Hadadezer,  he  sent  to  Dav.  10. 1  Chr.  18.  9, 10. 

10.  15.  when  the  Syrians  saw  that  they  were  s.  19. 
11. 15.  retire  yc  from  him, that  he  may  be  s.and  die 

1  Kings  8.  33.  when  thy  people  Israel  be  s.  down 

11.  15.  after  he  had  s.  every  male  in  Edom 

2  KiviTs  2.  14.  and  when  he  also  had  s.  the  waters 
3.  23.  the  kings  have  surely  »■.  one  another 
13. 19.  thou  shouldst  have  «.  five  or  six  limes,  then 

hadst  thou  s.  Syria  till  thou  hadst  consumed  it 

14.  10.  thou  hast  indeed  s.  Edom,  2  Chron.  25. 19. 
2  Chron.  20.  22.  Moab  and  mount  Seir  were  s. 

25.  IG.  forbear,  why  shouldst  thou  be  s.  ? 

26.  20.  Uzziah  hasted,  because  the  L.  had  s.  him 
28.  17.  the  Edoinites  had  come  and  s.  Judah 

Job  16.  10.  they  have  s.  me  upon  the  cheek 

Ps.  3. 7.  save  me,  for  thou  hast «.  all  mine  enemies 

09.  26.  they  persecute  him  whom  thou  hast  s. 
102.  4.  my  heart  is  s.  and  withered  like  grass 
143.  3.  lie  hath  «.  my  life  down  to  the  ground 

Isa.  5.  25.  therefore  the  Lord  hath  s.  his  people 
24.  12.  and  the  gate  is  s.  with  destruction 
27.7. hath  hes.  him,  as  he  smote  those  smole  him? 
53.  4.  yet  we  did  esteem  him  siricken,  s.  of  God 
Jer.  2.  30.  in  vain  have  I  s.  your  children 
14.19.  why  hast  thous.  us,  and  there  is  no  healing 
37.  10. for  tho'  ye  had  s.  wh<de  army  of  Chaldeans 
f^zc/t. 22. 13.1  have  s.  my  hand  at  thy  dielionestgain 
33.  21.  one  came  to  me,  saying,  the  citj'  is  s. 
40.  1.  in  the  fourteenth  year  alter  the  city  was  s. 
Uos.  6.  1.  he  hath  s.  and  he  will  bind  us  up 
9.  16.  Ephraiin  is  s.  their  root  is  dried  up 
.4;«o.9  4.9.1  haves.you,yet  have  not  returned  to  me 
Acts  23.3.and  commanded  me  to  be  s. against  Ifiw? 
Rev.  8.  12.  and  the  third  pnrt  of  the  sun  was  s. 

SMOKE 
Is  the  black  exhalation  which  ascends  from  fire. 
Gen.  19.  28,  The  smoke  of  the  city  went  U|)  as 
the  smoke  of  a  furnace.  Solsmon  observes, 
that  as  smoke  i.i  hurtful  and  offensive  to  the 
eyes,  so  is  a  sluggish  messenger  unserviceable 
and  vexatious  to  them  that  send  hiiu,  Prov.  10. 
20.  The  anger  arid  wrath  of  God  are  signified 
by  smoke.  Psal.  18.  8,  There  went  up  a 
smoke  out  of  his  nostrils;  God  manifested  his 
great  displeasure  against  my  adversaries.  It 
is  spoken  after  the  manner  nf  men  ;  it  being 
usual  for  persons  transported  with  great  anger 
to  shciB  their  rage  by  their  breathing.  Smoke 
denotes  a  grievous  judgment  or  calamity; 
lither  because  smoke  is  generally  accompanied 
with  fire,  or  because  it  catiseth  a  great  dark- 
ness in  the  air.  Isa.  14.  31,  There  shall  come 
from  the  north  asmoke.  To  create  a  cloud  and 
smoke  upon  Mount  Zion,  denotes  that  God 
vjoubi  not  only  direct  his  people,  as  he  did  the 
Israelites  by  a  pillar  of  cloud,  but  that  he 
would  also  be  their  protector  and  their  glory, 
Tsa.  4.  ."). 
The  smokin;:  flax  shall  he  not  quench,  Isa.  42. 
3.  Mat.  12.  20.  Chriit  will  not  deal  roughly 
andrigorou.tly  withthosethat  cometohim,  but 
Tcill  use  all  aenlleness  and  kindness  to  them, 
passing  by  their  greatest  sins,  hearing  with 
their  present  infirmitiej;,  cherishing  and  en- 
couraging the  smallest  beginnings  of  grace; 
and  comforting  and  healing  wounded  con- 
sciences. In  the  Revelation,  the  perpetuity 
and  elrmify  of  the  torments  of  the  damned, 
is  thus  expressed,  The  smoke  of  their  tor- 
ment ascendeth  up  for  ever  and  ever,  Rev. 
14.  11. 
/rC7t.l9.28..Ahrahnm  looked  toward  Sodom, and  lo, 
the.?,  of  the  country  went  up  ass.  of  a  furnace 
F.Tud.  10.  13.  Mount  Sinai  was  altogether  on  a  s. 
Jush  8  20.  (he  «.  of  Ai  Ascended  up  to  heaven,  21. 

Sir 


SMO 

Judg.  20.  38.  they  should  make  5.  rise  out  of  city 
40.  when  pillar  of  s.  began  to  rise  out  of  the  city 
2  Sam.  SK.  9.  there  went  up  a  s.  out  of  his  nostrils, 
and  fire  out  of  his  mouth  devoured,  Psal.  18. 8. 
Job  41.  20.  nut  of  his  nostrils  goeth  s.  as  caldron 
Psal.  37.  20.  the  wicked  shall  consume  into  s. 
lid.  2.  as  s.  is  driven  away,  so  drive  tliem  away 
102.3.my  days  are  consumed  like  s.  and  my  bones 
119.  83.  for  I  am  become  like  a  bottle  in  the  s. 
Pro«.10.2C.as  s.  to  the  eyes,6o  is  a  sluggard  to  ihem 
Cant.'i.  C.  that  Cometh  out  of  wild,  like  pillars  of  s. 
Isa.A.5.  L.  will  create  on  her  assemblies  as.  by  day 
6.  4.  the  posts  moved,  the  house  was  filled  with  s 
9.  18.  they  shall  mount  up  like  the  lifting  up  of  s, 
14.  31.  for  there  shall  come  from  the  nortli  a  s. 
34.  10.  the  s.  thereof  shall  go  up  for  ever 
51.  6.  for  the  heavens  shall  vanish  away  like  s. 
65.  5.  these  are  as.  in  my  nose,  afire  that  burnelh 
//os.13.3.  they  shall  be  as  the  s.  out  of  the  chimney 
7oc/2.30.ia  the  earth, blood  and  fire  and  pillars  of  s. 
JVaA.  2.  13.  I  will  burn  her  chariots  in  the  s. 
j?c<s2.19.hlood,fire,and  vapour  of  s.shew  wonders 
Rev.  8. 4.  s.  of  the  incense  ascended  up  before  God 
9.  2.  there  arose  a  s.  out  of  the  bottomless  pit 
3.  there  came  out  of  the  s.  locusts  on  earth 

17.  out  of  their  mouths  issued  fire  and  s. 

18.  the  third  part  of  men  killed  by  the  fire  and  s 
14. 11.  thes.  oflheir  torment  ascended  up  forever 
15.8.  temple  was  filled  with  s.  from  glory  of  God 

18.  9.  kings  shall  lament  for  her  when  they  see  s. 
18.  cried  when  they  saw  the  s.  of  her  burning 

19.  3.  and  hers,  rose  up  for  ever  and  ever 
SMOKE. 

/)(;«^29.20.anger  of  Lord  shall  s.  against  that  man 
Psal.  74.  1.  O  God,  why  doth  thine  anger  s.  ? 
104.  32.  he  toucheth  tho  hills,  and  they  s. 
144.  5.  touch  the  mountains,  and  they  shall  s 

SMOKING. 
Gen.  15.  17.  when  it  was  dark,  behold  as.  furnace 
Exod.  20.  18.  all  the  people  saw  the  mountain  s. 
Isa.  7.  4."for  the  two  tails  of  these  s.  firebrands 
42.  3.  tlie  s.  flax  slmll  he  not  quench,  JIat.  12. 20. 

SMOOTH. 
Gen. ^7.  11.  Esau  is  a  hairy  man, and  lam  as.  man 
16.  she  put  the  skins  of  kids  on  the  s.  of  his  neck 
1  Sam.  17.  40.  David  chose  him  five  s.  stones 
Isa.  30. 10.  who  say,  speak  unlo  us  s.  things 
57.  6.  among  s.  stones  of  the  stream  is  thy  portion 
Luke  3.  5.  and  the  rough  ways  shall  be  made  «. 

,  SMOOTH. 

^■£^23.  tSl.Iamag.  prophets  that  s.  their  tongues 

SMOOTHER. 
PsaJ.55.  21. wordsof  his  mouth  were  s.  than  bulter 
Prov.  5.  3.  and  her  mouth  is  s.  than  oil 

SMOOTHETH. 
Isa.  41.  7.  he  that  s.  with  hammer  him  thatsmotc 

SMOTE. 
Gen.  19.  11.  they  s.  the  men  at  door  with  blindness 
30.  35.  s.  Midian  in  field  of  Moab,  1  Chron.  1. 46. 
Kxod.  7.  20.  he  lift  up  the  rod,  and  s.  the  waters 

8.  17.  he  s.  the  dust  ||  9.  25.  the  hail  s.  every  herb 
12.  27.  who  passed  over,  when  he  s.  the  Egyptians 

29.the  Lord  s.  all  the  first-born  in  hind  oi  Egvpt, 
JVKm.3.13.  I  8.17.PsaJ.78.51.  |  105.36.  |  135.8. 
JVum. 11.33. Lord  s.  the  people  with  a  great  plague 
14.  45.  the  Amalckites  came  down  and  s.  them 

20.  1 1.  Mnses  s.  the  rock  twice,  Psal.  78.  20. 
22.  23.  Halaam  s.  the  a.=8  to  turn  her,  2.5,  27. 

24.  10.  Balak  s.  his  hands  together  and  said 
32.  4.  the  country  the  Lord  s.  is  a  land  for  cattle 

Deut.  25.  18.  Amaiek  s.  the  hindmost  of  thee 

29.  7.  Sihnn  and  Og  came  ag.  us,  and  we  s.  them 
.Tosh-  7.  5.  the  men  of  .\i  s.  of^them  about  36  men 

9.  18.  s.  them  not,  because  the  princps  had  sworn 
11.  11.  they  s.  all  the  souls  that  were  tlierein 

12.  and  s.  all  the  kings  with  the  sword,  17. 
20.  5.  because  he  ,«.  his  neighbour  unwittingly 
./u'/rr.  4.  21.  Jael  s.  the  nail  into  Sisera's  temples 
5.2t"i.with  hammer  shes.Sisera,  shos.off  his  head 
7.  13.  came  unto  a  tent,  and  s.  it  that  it  fell 
15. 8. Samson  s.  them  hip  and  thigh  with  slaughter 
20.  35.  the  Lord  s.  Benjamin  before  Israel 

1  Sam.  A.  8.  these  are  the  gods  that  s.  the  Egyptians 
6.  9.  we  shall  know  it  is  not  his  hand  that  .f.  us 

19.  he  s.  the  men  of  Beth-shemesh,  s.  the  people 
17.  49.  David  s.  the  Philistine  in  his  foielicad 
19.  10.  Saul. 9.  the  javelin  into  the  wall :  Dav.  fjcd 

25.  38.  that  the  Lord  s.  Nabal  that  he  died 

30.  17.  David  s.  them  from  twilight  to  next  day 

2  Sam.  14.  7.  deliver  him  that  s.  his  brother 

1  Kint's  22. 24.  Zedekiah  .9.  Micaiah,  2.  Chr.  18.23. 

2  Kings  2.  8.  Elijah  s.  waters  ||  14.  Elishas.  waters 
6.  18.  and  he  .9.  them  with  blimlness 
15.  5.  the  Lord  .9.  the  king,  so  that  he  was  a  leper 

Ifi.  opened  not  to  Menahem,  thrrefore  he  s.  it 

19.  .3.5.  aniel  of  the  Lord  s.  185,000.  Isa.  37.  36. 

2  Chron.  13.  15.  God  s.  .lerohoam  and  all  Israel 

14.  12  the  Lord  s.  the  Ethiopians  before  .\sa 
JWA.13  25.nnd  cursed  them,  and  s.  certain  of  them 
Ps^l.7'i.  31.  and  s.down  the  chosen  men  of  Israel 


SNA 


Psal.  78.  66.  he  s.  liis  enemies  In  the  hinder  parfl 
Cant.  5.  7.  the  watchmen  lound  me,  they  s.  mn 
Isa.  10.20.  shall  no  more  slay  on  him  that  s.  theia 
14.  6.  he  who  s.  tlie  people  is  persecuted 
29.  because  the  rod  of  him  thats.  thee  is  broken 
30. 31.  the  Assyrian  shall  be  beaten  down  which*. 
41.  7.  encouraged  him  that  s.  the  anvil 
60  10.  in  my  wrath  I  s.  thee,  but  in  my  favour 
Jer.  20.  2.  then  Pashur  s.  Jeremiah  the  prophet 
31.  19.  after  I  was  instructed,  I  s.  upon  my  thigh 
41.  2.  then  arose  Ishmael  and  s.  Gedaliah 
46.  2.  Pharaoh-necho,  which  Nebuchadrezzar  s. 
2>a?!.  2.  34.  a  stone  cut  out,  which  s.  the  image,  35. 

5.  0.  Helshazzar's  knetts  s.  one  against  another 
8.  7.  the  he-goat  moved  with  choler  s.  the  ram 

Jonah  4.  7.  a  worm  s.  the  gourd,  that  it  withered 
Hag.  2.  17.  I  s.  you  with  blasting  and  mildew 

Mat.  26.  51.  Peter  drew  his  sword,  s.  oH'his  ear 
68.  prophesy,  who  is  he  that  s.  tiiee,  /.uA«22.64 

Luke  18.  13.  but  the  publican  s.  upon  his  breast 
23.  48.  many  beholding  Jesus,  s.  their  breasla 

Jlcts  12.  7.  angel  .9.  Peter  on  side  and  raised  him  up 
SMOTE  him. 

Exod.  21.  19.  then  shall  he  that  s.  Am  be  quil 

JVam.  35.  21.  he  that  s.  him  shall  surely  die 

1  Sam.  24.  5.  afterwards  David's  heart  s.  Aim 

2  Sam.  2.  23.  s.  him  under  the  fifth  rib,  3. 27.  |  4. 6. 

6.  7.  God  s.  him  there  for  his  error,  1  Chr.  13.  10. 

1  A'i«^s20.  37.  mans,  him,  so  that  he  wound,  him 
2Kings  19.37.his  sons  s.him  with  sword,  /sa;37.38. 

2  Chron.  28.  5.  Syria  s.  him,  king  of  Urael  s.  At« 
fsa.  27.7.  liath  he  smitten  as  hes.  those  thats.  Am 

57. 17.  for  the  iniquity  of  his  covctousness  I  s.  Am 
.Jer.  37.15.  princes  were  w  roth  with  Jer.  and  s.Am 
Mat.  26.  67.  others  s.him  with  palms  of  their  hands 

27.  30.  they  took  the  reed  and  s.  Ai7?i  on  the  head, 
Mark  15.  19.  Luke  22.  63.  .lohn  19.  3. 

..icts  12.  23.  immediately  ancel  of  the  Lords.  Afn» 

SMOTEST. 
Exod.  17.  5.  take  rod  wherewith  thou  s.  the  river 

SNAIL. 
I.ev.  11.  30.  the  lizard,  thes.  and  mole  are  unclean 
Psal.  58.  8.  as  a  s.  leusvery  one  of  them  pass  away 

SNARE. 

Exod.  10. 7.  how  long  shall  this  man  be  s.  unto  ubI 

23.33.  for  if  thou  serve  their  gods,  it  willsurely  be 

a  s.  unto  thee,  Deut.  7. 16.  .Judg.  2. 3. 

34.  12.  make  no  covenant  with  theinhabitanis of 

the  land,  lest  it  be  a  s.  in  the  midst  of  thee 

Judg.  3.  27.  which  thing  became  a  s.  unto  Gideon 

\.Snm.\S.  21.  will  give  him  her,  that  she  maybe  as 

28.  9.  wherefore  then  layest  thou  a  s.  for  my  life? 
Job  18.  8.  he  is  cnst  into  a  net,  he  walketh  on  as. 

10.  the  s.  is  laid  for  him  in  the  ground  and  a  trap 
Ps.  69.  22.  let  their  table  become  a  s.  unto  them, 
and  that  for  their  welfare  a  trap,  Rom.  11.9. 
91.  3.  he  shall  deliver  ihee  from  s.  of  the  fowler 
106.  36.  served  their  idols,  which  were  s.  to  them 
119.  1 10.  wicked  have  laiil  s.  for.me,  yet  erred  not 
124. 7.  our  soul  i.s  escaped  as  a  bird  out  of  thes.of 
the  fowlers:  thes.  is  broken  and  we  are  escaped 

140.  5.  proud  have  hid  a  s.  forme,  spread  a  net 

141.  9.  keep  me  from  the  s.  which  they  have  laid 

142.  3.  in  the  way  have  they  ptivily  laid  s.  for  me 
Prov.  7.23.  as  a  bird  hasteth  to s.  and  knowethuot 

18.  7.  a  fool's  lips  are  the  s.  of  his  soul 
20.25.S.  lo  man  w  hodevoureth  that  which  is  holy 
22.25.  lestlearn  his  ways,  and  get  a  s.  to  thy  soul 

29.  6.  in  the  transgression  of  an  evil  man  is  a  < 
8.  scornful  men  brins  a  city  intos.  but  wise  men 
25.  thefear  of  mnn  bringcth  a  s.  whoso  put.  trust 

Eeel  9.  12.  as  the  birds  that  are  caught  in  the  s. 
Isa.  8.  14.  for  a  s.  to  the  inhabitants  of  .Terusalcin 

24,  17.  fear,  and  the  pit,  and  the  s.  ate  upon  thee, 
O  inhabitant  of  the  earth,  18.  Jer.  48. 
4.1,  44. 

29.  21.  that  lay  a  s.  forliim  that  reproveth  in  gate 
.ler.  50.  24.  I  have  laid  a  s.  for  thee,  O  Babylon 
Lam.  3.  47.  fear  and  a  s.  is  come  upon  us 
F.zek.  12.  13.  he  shall  be  token  in  my  s.  17.  20. 
I/os.  5.  1.  because  yc  have  been  a  s.  on  Mizpah 

9.  8.  hut  the  prophet  isa  s.  of  a  fowler  in  his  ways 
j?mos3.5.can  a  bird  fall  in  as. upon  the  earth  wliere 
nagin  is  for  him  ?  shall  one  take  up  a  s.? 
/,w<v,2I.35.for  as  a  s.shall  it  come  on  all  that  dwell 
1  Oir.  7.  35.  not  that  I  may  cast  a  s.  upon  you 

1  Titn.  3.  7.  lest  he  fall  iino  the  s.  of  the  devil 
6.  9.  they  that  will  be  rich,  fall  into  a  s.  and  lusts 

2  Tim.l.  26.  they  may  ror.nvcr  out  of  s.  of  the  devil 
SNARED. 

DeHt.7.Vt.  not  lake  tho  silver  of  idols.Ipsf  s.  therein 
12.  30.  take  Imed  that  thou  he  not  s.  by  them 
Psal.  9.  Ifi.  wicked  is  s.  in  work  of  his  own  hands 
Prori.  ft.  2.  art  s.  with  words  of  thy  mouth,  12. 13. 
Eeel.  9. 12.  soarelhft  sons  of  men  s.  in  an  evil  limo 
Isa.  8.  15.  many  shall  stumble  and  fall  and  be  t. 
28.  13.  that  they  misht  fall,  and  be  s.  and  taken 
42.22.  they  are  all  of  them  .«.  in  holes,  hid  in  prisoa 

SNARES. 
Josh.  23.  13.  they  shall  be  i.  and  traps  unto  yon 


so 

•  Sow.  S!2.  ft  *•  of  death  prevented  me,  Psal.  18.5. 

Joli  •a   JO.  Uierel'oru  «.  ate  rouiiil  about  Ihec 
40.  '2i.  beheriiolh's  iioat;  piercelh  lliro'  i. 

Ps.  ll.U.  uiiNvicked  liualmil  rum  n.  and  brimr^tone 
38.  12.  they  that  sunk  utter  my  lil'e  lay  s.  for  rae 
M  5.  they  CDiiiinuiie  ot  laying  J.  privily 

Frov.  13.  H.  to  depart  IronHhc  ».  of  deaih,  14.27. 
•a.  5.  thoriiii  and  i.  are  in  liie  way  of  the  Irowaid 

Keel  7.  'M.  the  woman  whose  heart  iss.  and  nets 

Jer.  5.  20.  they  lay  wait  as  he  that  setteth  s. 

16.  -JH.  for  they  have  dig;;«d  and  hid  s.  for  my  feet 

SNATtJU. 
Isa.  9.  20.  he  shall  .<.  on  right  hand  and  be  hungry 

S.NOUTl.NG. 
Jer.  8.  10.  the  i.  of  hid  horses  was  heard  from  Dan 

S.NULT. 
Prov.ll.  2-J.  as  jewel  of  gold  in  a  swine's  s.ao  is  fair 

SiNuVV. 
Kzod.  4.  6.  behold  his  hand  was  leprous  as  s. 
JVu7/t.  12.  10.  Miriam  becuine  leprous,  while  as  s. 
2.'$am.23.  'JO.  slew  lion  in  midst  of  a  pil,  in  time  of  s. 
.2  Kings  5.  27.  Oeliazi  went  out  a  leper  white  as«. 
Job  0.  It),  are  blackish,  and  wherein  the  i.  is  hid 
9.30.if  I  wash  mys.  ins.  wat.  aiKl  make  hands  clean 

24.  ly.  heatcoiisumelh  ».  waters,  to  grave  sinned 

37.  C.  he  saitli  to  the  «.  be  thou  on  the  earth 

38.  22.  hast  thou  entered  into  treasures  of  the  «. 
Psal.  51.  7.  wash  me,  and  I  shall  be  whiter  thans. 

68.  14.  it  was  white  as  s.  in  Suliiioii 

147.  16.  he  giv.  s.  like  wool,  scatterelh  hoar  frost 

148.  8.  fire,  hail,  s.  and  vapour  fultilling  his  word 
Ptov.  25.  13.  as  the  cold  of  s.  in  time  of  harvest 

26.  1.  as  s\  in  summer,  so  himour  is  not  seemly 
31.  2I.sheisnot  afraid  of  the  s.  for  her  household 
/so.  1.18.  tho'  sins  be  as  scarlet  shall  be  white  ass. 
55.  10.  as  the  s.  from  heaven  returneth  not  I  hither 
Jer.  18.  14.  will  a  man  leave  the  s.  of  Lebanon 
J.,am.i.~.  herlS'azar.  purer  than  s.  whiter  than  milk 
J  Jan.  7.  9.  garment  was  white  as  .9.  hair  like  wool 
Mat.  28.  3.  his  raiment  white  as  j.  Mark  SI.  3. 
Kev.  1.  14.  his  head  and  his  hairs  were  white  as  s. 
SNOWY. 

1  Chron.  11.  22.  he  slew  a  lion  in  a  pil  in  a  s.  day 

SNUFFED. 
Jir.l4.  6.  the  wild  asses  s.  up  the  wind  like  dragons 
Mai.  1.  13.  ye  haves.  alit,saith  the  Lord  of  hosts 

SNUFF-DISHES. 
Kzod.  25.38.  s.-dishes  shall  be  of  pul-e  gold,  37.  23. 
JVuin  4.  9.  take  a  cloth,  and  cover  his  s.-dishes 

SNUFFERS. 
£iO(i.37 .23.s.of  pure  gold,  lA:!7i5-s7.50.2CAr.4.22. 

2  Ktnffs  12. 13  .s.  made  of  money  that  was  brought 

25.  14.  pota  and  s.  took  they  away,  Jer.  52.  18. 

SNUFFETH. 
Jer.  2.24.  a  wild  ass  that  s.  up  the  wind  at  pleasure 

SO. 
Oen.12.4.  so  Abraham  departed,  as  L.  had  spoken 
15.5.  as  the  stars,  .«o  shall  thy  seed  be.  Hum.  4.  18. 
25.  22.  Rebeliah  said,  if  it  be  so,  why  am  1  thus? 
31  28.  thou  hast  now  done  foolishly  in  so  doing 
43.  II.  if  it  must  bo  su  now  do  this,  take  fruits 
Exod.  6. 9.  Moses  spake  so  to  the  children  of  Israel 

10.  10.  let  Lord  be  so  with  you,  as  I  will  let  you  go 
25.  9.  after  the  pattern,  even  so  shall  ye  make  it 

39.  43.  as  the  L.  commanded,  so  had  they  done  it 
y,<r».  7. 7.  as  the  sin-offering,  so  is  trespass-offering 

8.  35.  for  so  I  am  commanded,  10.  13. 

24.19.  as  he  hath  done,  so  shall  be  done  to  him,  20. 
'  A'uFn.4.26.bcar  all  that  is  made,  «o  shall  they  serve 

15. 15.  as  ye  are,  .90  shall  the  stranger  be  before  L. 
25.  8.  so  the  plague  was  stayed,  Fsal.  106.  30. 
tJevt.  7.  19.  so  shall  tho  Lord  do  to  all  the  nations 
8.20.as  nations  Lord  destroyelh,  so  shall  ye  perish 

17.  7.  so  thou  shalt  put  the  evil  away  from  ampng 

you,  19.  J9.  I  21.  21.  I  22.  21,  2i,  24. 

22.20.  for  as  when  man  riseth,  even  so  is  this  matt. 
33.  25.  and  as  thy  days,  so  sliall  thy  strenglh  be 

.''o«A.14.1l.aa  strength  iheii,eveii  so  is  slrengih  now 

Jvdir.l.'.aa  I  have  done,  so  God  haili  requited  me 

5.  31.  HO  let  all  Ihine  enemies  perish,  ()  Lord 

8.  18.  thi'V  answered,  as  thou  art,  so  were  they 

21.  for  ns  the  man  is,  so  is  his  strength 

IS.  II.  ns  tlii-y  did  lo  ine,  so  iiave  I  done  to  them 

l>S'am.0.2l.  wherefore  then  spcakestthou  so  lo  inel 

11.  7.  so  slmll  itbo  done  unto  his  exen 

1.').33.  snsh.ill  thy  inolher  be  childl. among  women 

19.  17.  Saul  said,  why  huHt  thou  deceived  mo  so 
25. 25.  as  his  iinme  is,  «»  ia  ho,Nabal  is  his  name 
3U.  24.  so  shall  hispart  bo  that  tarrieth  by  the  stuff 

t  ,Sam.  7.  H.  so  slialt  thou  say  to  my  servitnt  David 
n.So.king'svonicomo,  as  thy  servants  said,. iio  it  is 
10.  10.  so  let  him  curse.  Who  shall  then  say, 
wherefore  hast  thou  done  so?  1  Kings  1.  0. 
22.4.SO  shall  I  besaved  from  my  enemies,  I's.  18.3. 
24.  25.  ho  the  Lord  wos  entreated  for  the  land 
1  Ktnirs  1.  30.  even  so  will  I  certainly  do  this  day 
30.  the  Lord  God  of  iny  lord  the  kingsnyso  too 

20.  40.  Ihe  king  said,  so  shall  thy  judgment  be 
22.8.  he  said,  Let  n^il  king  say  so,  2  f'.hrnn.  IH.  7. 

2/ifi»^sT.'20.  so  it  fcll  oyt  tt  him,  ;>B0.  trode  on  hiin 
.558 


SO 

2  CAr.30.20.  so  be  established,  so  shall  ye  prosper 

3.).ti.  so  kill  the  passover  and  sanctify  yourselves 
Kzra  4.  24.so  itceased  lo  the  second  year  ofDarius 
J^'eli.  2.  4.  so  I  prayed  {|  5.  13.  so  God  shake  out 

8. 17.to  that  day  had  not  children  of  Israel  done  so 

9.  lO.so  didst  thou  get  thee  a  name,  as  it  is  this  day 
Esth..  4.  IC.  and  so  will  I  go  in  unto  the  king   . 
Job  0.  27.  so  it  is,  hear  it  ||  21.  4.  and  if  it  were  so 

9.2. 1  know  It  is  so  oftrutb,  but  how  should  man  be 

23. 7.  so  should  1  be  deliv.  for  ever  from  my  judge 
32. 22.iii  so  doing, my  Maker  would  lake  nie  away 

Psal.'ii.  13.  so  will  we  sing  and  praise  thy  power 

35.  25.  let  them  not  say,  so  would  we  have  it 
37.  3.  do  good,  so  shall  thou  dwell  in  the  land 
42.  1.  so  panielh  my  soul  after  thee,  O  God 
45.  II.  so  shall  the  king  desire  thy  beauly 
48.8.as  we  have  heard,  so  have  we  seen  in  the  city 

10.  So  is  thy  praise  to  the  ends  of  the  earth 
63.2.to  see  thy  glory,  su  as  seen  thee  in  sanctuary 
73.  22.  so  foolish  was  I,  and  ignorant,  as  a  beast 
7b.  72.  so  he  fed  them  {|  79.  13.  so  we  thy  people 

80.  18.  so  will  we  not  go  back  from  thee,  quicken 

81.  12.  su  I  gave  them  U|i  ||  90. 11.  su  is  thy  wr.ath 
103.  13.  so  the  Lord  pitieih  them  that  fear  him 
109.  17.  so  let  it  come,  so  let  it  bo  far  from  him 
1I5.8.SO  is  every  one  that  trusleth  in  them,  135.18. 
147.  20.  he  hath  not  dealt  so  with  any  nation 

Pro».3.4.  soshalltind  favour  and  good  understand. 
22.  so  shall  they  be  life  to  thy  soul,  grace  to  neck 
6.  11.  so  shall  thy  poverty  come,  24.  34. 

10.  25.  as  the  whirlwind,  so  is  the  wicked  no  more 

23.  7.  as  he  tliinketh  in  his  heart,  so  is  ho 
Eccl.  3.  19.  as  the  one  dielh,  so  dieth  ihe  other 

5.  16.  that  in  all  points  as  he  came,  so  shall  lie  go 

9.  2.  as  is  the  good  so  is  sinner,  he  that  swearelh 
Isa.  14. 24.  su  shall  it  come  lo  pass,  su  shall  it  sland 

18.  4.  for  su  Lord  said  lo  me,  1  will  take  my  rest 

24.  2.  as  with  the  people,  so  with  the  priest 
20.  17.  so  have  we  been  in  thy  sight,  O  Lord 

36.  6.  so  is  Pilar,  king  of  Egypt  to  all  trust  in  him 
47.  12.  wherein  thou  hast  laboured,  if  so  be  thou 

shall  be  able  to  profit;  if  so  thou  mayest  prevail 
53.  7.  as  a  lamb,  so  he  openeth  not  his  mouth 
02.5.SO  shall  thy  sons  ;  so  shall  G. rejoice  over  thee 
63.  8.  they  are  my  people,  so  he  was  their  Saviour 
66.13.so  will  I  comfort  you,  ye  shall  be  comforted 

22.  saiih  L.  so  shall  your  seed  and  name  remain 
Jer.  5.  31.  and  my  peojile  love  to  have  it  so 

10.  18.  will  distress  them,  thatthey  may  find  it  so 

11.  4.  so  shall  be  my  people,  I  your  G.Ezek.  37. 23. 

19.  ll.sailhL.  So  will  I  break  this  people  and  city 
35.  II.  come,  let  us  go,  so  we  dwell  at  Jerusalem 
38. 20.  obey  the  Lord,  so  shall  it  be  well  unto  thee 
39.  14.  so  he  dwelt  among  the  people 

42.  17.  so  shall  be  with  all  men  that  set  their  faces 
/,ara.3.29.mouth  indust.ifst  be  there  may  be  hope 
K:et.l2.11.as  I  have  done,  soshall  be  done  to  them 

16. 44.  saying,  as  is  the  mother,  so  is  the  daughter 

18.  30.  rejient,  so  iniquity  shall  not  be  your  ruin 

25.  14.  cherub  that  covereth,  I  have  set  thee  so 
45.20.  so  thou  shall  do,  so  shall  ye  reconcile  house 

7j(m.  3.  17.  ifit  beso,ourGod  is  able  lodeliver  us 

Hos.  3.  3.  shall  abide  for  me,  so  will  1  be  for  thee 

13. 6.  so  were  they  filled  ||./oei2.4.so  shall  they  run 

Jlmosi.  14.  so  the  Lord  of  hosts  shall  be  wilh  you 

Zeph.  3.  7.  so  their  dwelling  should  not  be  cut  off' 

//a^'.  2.  5.  so  my  Spirit  remaiiietham.  you, fear  iiol 

14.  so  18  this  people,  so  is  this  nation  before  me 

Zech.  1.  6.  to  our  doings,  so  hath  he  dealt  with  us 

8.  13.  so  will  I  save  you,  and  ye  shall  be  a  blessing 

14.  15.  so  shall  be  plague  of  horse,  as  this  plague 

J>fat.3.)5.Jes.  said, Sutler  it  to  be  so  now,  il  becom. 

5.  12.  for  su  persecuted  they  prophets  before  you 
10.  let  vour  light  so  shine  II  19.  shall  leach  men«o 

6.  30.  if'God  so  clothe  the  grass  of  the  field 
8.13.  as  thou  hasi,  believed,  so  be  it  done  uiilolhee 
9..33.iiiarvclled,  saying  it  wasnevcr  so  seen  in  Isr. 
11.26.cven  so, Father, for  so  it  seemed, /^uAc  10.21. 
12.40.  soshall  Son  ofinau  bo,  Y-hAcI  1.30.  |  17.24. 

19.  10.  if  the  case  of  the  man  be  so  with  liiswiff 
24.40.whcn  comelh  shall  find  sodoing,/>u/(«12.43. 

Mark!.  18.  are  yo  so  without  understanding  also? 

10.  43.  but  so  shall  it  not  be  among  you 

Kuke  12.  38.  if  ho  come  in  watch  and  finil  them  so 

54.and  so  it  is  ||  24.  24.  found  il  so  as  women  said 

JuKn'i.  16.  God  so  loved  lliu  world  that  ho  gave  his 

12.  50.  even  as  the  Father  said  lo  me,  so  I  speak 

13.  13.  yesay  well,  for  so  I  am  ||  14.  31.  so  I  do 

15.8.  yo  bear  much  ftuil,  so  shall  homy  dis(i|iles 
9.  as  Father  halii  loved  me,  .lo  have  Ilovrd  you 

17.  18.  so  have  I  also  sent  tlieni  into  world,  20.  21. 

18.  22.  saying,  Aiisweriwt  thou  the  high-priest  so? 
Jlcts  1.  11.  this  Jesus  xhall  <o  come  in  like  manner 

3.18.  he  hath  su  fulfilled  ||  7. 1.  are  these  things  .to? 
8.32.  as  a  lamb  dumb,  so  opened  ho  not  his  mouth 
13.  47.  for  so  hath  the  Lord  rommnnded  ug 
14.1. they  so  spake,  thai  a  groat  iiiiillitude  believed 
16.  5.  so  were  Ihe  churches  established  in  Iho  failh 
I9.20.SO  mightily  grew  woril  of(iod  ami  prevailed 
20. 13.  for  so  had  appoinled,  minding  lu  go  afoot  I 


SO 

iWcts  94. 14.  so  worship  I  i\t  God  of  mjr  fathers 

27.44.  so  carne  to  pass  they  escaped  all  salt;  lo  land 
Hum.i.  15.  but  not  as  ihe  ollV-iice,.-'0  also  IS  free  girt 
8.8.S0  they  that  are  in  the  llesh  cannot  pleaseGod 
9.  16.  so  then  it  is  not  of  him  that  willeth  iiorrun. 

11.  26.  so  all  Lrael  shall  be  saved,  us  it  is  w-itteii 
12.20.so  doing  shall  heap  coals  of  fire  an  his  head 

14.  12.  so  every  one  shall  give  account  lo  God 
ICor.3.15.  he  hinis.  shall  besaved,  yet  so  us  by  fira 

4.  1.  let  man  so  account  of  us,  as  iiiiiiisters  of  Chr. 

5.  3.  concerning  hini  that  hath  so  dune  this  deed 

6.  5.  is  it  so  llial  there  is  not  wise  man  among  you? 

7.  17.  so  let  him  walk,  so  ordain  I  in  all  churcbea 
26.  1  say  that  it  is  good  for  a  man  so  to  be 

40.  butshe  is  happier  if  she  so  abide,  my  judgm. 

8.  12.  when  ye  sin  so  against  ihe  brethren 

9. 14.  even  so  hath  Lord  ordained  to  live  by  gospel 
24.  so  run, 26.  ||  11.  28.  so  let  him  eat  that  bread 

12.  12.  all  members  are  one  body,  so  also  is  Christ 

15.  11.  so  we  preach,  and  so  ye  believed 

2  Cur.  10.  7.. as  he  is  (Christ's,  su  are  waK^hrist's 

11.  9.  so  will  I  keep  mys.  from  being  burden.'joiiie 
22.are  they  Hebrews?  so  am  I;  Israelites?  so  am  I 

12.  10.  but  be  it  so.,  I  did  not  burden  you 

(lal.  4. 29.  but  as  then  persecuted,  even  so  it  is  now 

0.  2.  bear  burdens,  and  su  fulfil  the  law  of  Christ 
f^/)A.  2.15.  of  twain,  one  neW  man,  so  making  peace 
Pkil.  3.  17.  brethren,  mark  them  which  walk  so 

4.  1.  my  brethren,  so  stand  fast  in  the  Lord 
Co/. 2. 6.  as  ye  receive  Christ  Jes.  so  walk  ye  in  him 
1  'J'hcss.  2.  4.even  so  we  speak,  not  as  pleasing  men 

4.  17.  and  su  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord 
Neb.  3.  II.  so  I  sware  in  my  wralh.cfiall  not  enter 

7.9.  as  I  may  so  say,  Levi  paid  tilhesiii  Abraham 

1  Het.l.  15.  so  be  ye  holy  ||  2. 15.  so  is  llie  will  ofG. 
3. 17.  it  is  better,  if  the  will  of  God  be  so,  to  sutTer 

IJohn  2.  6.  he  ought  hims.  so  to  walk  as  he  walked 
4. 11.  G.  so  loved  us,  we  ought  tulovu  one  another 

17.  because  as  he  is,  su  are  we  iii  this  world 
Hev.l.'.even  so  amen  j|  22.20.  even  so  come,L.Je«. 

SO  be  it. 
./osA.2.2I.Kaliab  said, Accord. 10  your  vtoids,.<:obeit 
Jer.  11.  5.  I  answered  and  said,  su  be  it,  O  Lord 
See  Did,  Died,  Do,  Grkat,  Lono,  Much. 
J\rot  SO. 
r»'f?i.l9.7.do  not  so  wickedly  {|  18.  oh  not  so  my  L. 
29.  26.  it  must  7iot  be  so  done  in  our  coiinlry 
48.  18.  7iot  so  my  father,  this  is  the  first-born 
Kxud.  10.  II.  ji.so,  go  ye  that  are  men  and  serve  L. 
jVam.  12.7.  servant  Moses  isnof  so,  wliois  faithfu* 
Jitdg.  2. 17.  obeying  the  Lord,  but  they  did  not  so 

14.  15.  is  it  nut  so  7  \\  1  Ham.  20  2.  it  is  not  so 

2  .Sam.  20. 21.  the  matter  is  n.  so,  but  a  man  lift,  up 
23.5.allho'  my  house  be  nut  so  with  God,  yet  hath 

./oA9. 35.  and  ngt  fear  him,  but  it  is  nut  so  wilh  me 

24.  25.  if  il  be  nut  so.,  who  will  make  nic  a  liar 
35.15.  hut  now  beciuse  il  is  not  so  hf  hath  visited 

Psal.  1.4.  ungodly  are  not  so,  but  are  like  the  chaff" 
Prov.  15.  7.  the  heart  of  the  foolish  doeih  nut  so 
/su.l0.7.liowbeit  ineancth  n.  so,  nor  heart  think  so 
16.6.  the  pride  of  Moab,  but  his  lie!i  shall  j,i,t  be  so 
./cr.  48.  30.  not  be  so,  his  lies  shall  not  so  effect  it 
Mat.  19.  8.  bu{  from  the  beginuing  it  was  nut  so 

20.  26.  but  it  shall  nut  he  su  am.  you,  who  will  be 

25.  9.  7io(  so,  lest  there  be  not  enough  fur  us 
J.uke  I.  60.  not  so,  but  he  sihall  be  called  John 

22.26.  e.Yerc.lordshipovorlliem,  hut  shall  o.beso 
./oAn  14.  2.  if  il  were  nut  su,  I  would  have  told  you 
.icts  10.  i4.  but  Peter  said,  .Vvl  so.  Lord,  11.  8. 
Hum.  5.  .3.  not  only  so,  but  we  glory  in  Iribnlationa 
11.  not  only.«a,  but  we  also  joy  in  G.  Ihio' Jesua 
F.jih.  4.  20.  but  ye  have  nut  so  iearned  Christ 
./am.  3.  10.  these  thing.s  ought  not  su  to  be 

SO   t/tot. 
Orn.'il.  C.  so  that  all  that  hear  will  Iniigh  with  me 
28.  21.  so  that  I  come  again  to  my  fatlier's  house 
47.  13.  su  that  land  of  I'.gvpt  and  C'aniiaii  fainted 
Kzod.  10.20.  so  that  he  would  noi  lei  Isr.  go,  II.  10. 

21.  12.  he  ihat  sniiteih  n  man,  so  that  he  die 
/>f««.28.34.s.  t.  thou  shah  be  mad  fiir  sight  of  eyes 
■  liidg.  2.  14.  so  that  lliey  roiilil  not  lunger  sland 

1  .Srim.  4.  5.  shouted,  so  t//>ir.  the  larlli  rang  again 

15.  30.  so  that  his  name  was  niurh  set  hv 

1  Kings  8.  25.  s.  t.  thy  child,  ta  kr  heed,  iChr.  6.  Ifi. 

2  KiiigsH.  15.  spread  it  on  his  face,  s«  that  he  died 

9.  37.  so  that  they  shall  not  say,  this  is  Jezebel 
18. 5.  .40  that  after  him  was  none  like  him  of  kingg 

F.tra  9.  14.  so  Ihat  (here  should  be  no  remnant 

./../)  1.  3.  su  that  this  man  was  greaii'.«l  in  Ihe  cast 
7.  20.  set  a.s  a  murk,  sn  that  I  iiin  a  hiirdrn  to  myg. 

/'.>«/.  40.  12.  .to  that  I  nni  not  able  to  look  up 
.58.  1 1 .  so  Ihat  a  man  shall  say,  there  is  a  reward 
78. .53.  he  led  ihom  mfely,  s«  ijial  lliev  feared  not 
lOii.  32.  s.  t.  it  went  ill  with  Mosms  lor  Ihiir  sakes 

f'.rrl  0.  2;  so  that  he  wanted  nothing  for  his  soul 

/.««  47.7.s.t.  thou  didst  not  lay  these  things  lo  heart 
6(1.  I.'i.  been  forsaken,  s.  i.  no  man  wont  Ihro'  thee       ^ 

hr.  33.  20.  so  that  I  will  not  take  any  of  his  seed 
44.  22.  s"  Ihat  the  Lord  could  no  longer  hear 

Ktek.  21.  24.  so  (Aul  in  all  your  doings  sins  appeu 


SOF 

Ezei.  31.D.  *o  tlmtali  tlie  trees  in  Eden  envied  him 
Dan.  8.  4.  so  tliut  nu  Liua^t  inigiitiitand  before  him 
Zech.  1.  '21.  So  that  no  man  did  lift  up  his  head 
J\Iark  15. 5. Jen. answered  not,  .so  t.  Pilate  marvelled 
I^uke  J6.  'Jti.  so  tkat  they  which  would  pass  to  you 
Rom.  1.  20.  aw  (Aaf  they  are  without  excuse 

1.5.  19.  su  thai,  from  Jerus.  1  have  preached  gospel 
2  Cor.  °2  7.  so  tAat  contrariwise  ye  should  forgive 

7.  7.  so  that  1  rejoiced  the  more 
Oal.  5.17.  su  that  ye  cannot  do  the  things  ye  would 
1  7'Aess.l.7.s.£.ye  were  ensamples  to  all  that  believe 
Hcb.  13  6.  so  t.  we  may  bohiiy  say,  L.  is  my  helper 

IVas  SO,  or  SO  was. 
Gen.  1.  7.  and  it  was  so,  9,  11,  15,  -24,  30. 

41.  13.  as  ho  interpreted  to  us,  so  it  was 
JViiTn.9.16.so  it  lo. always,  cloud  covered  it  by  night 

20.  so  it  was  when  cloud  was  on  tabernacle 

21.  so  it  was  when  the  cloud  abode  from  even 
jMdff .6.38.  dew  be  on  the  fleece  only,  and  it  was  so 

19.30.it  10.  s.  that  all  who  saw  it  said,  no  such  deed 

1  Sam.5.7.  when  men  of  Ashdod  saw  that  it  was  so 
10.  9.  irtbas  so  that  when  he  turned  from  Samuel 
30.25.it  zcas so  from  that  day  forward  madeastat. 

2  Sam.  15.  2.  it  was  so  when  any  came  to  the  king 
5.  it  was  so  that  when  any  man  came  nigh  to  him 

10.  23.  so  was  all  the  counsel  of  Ahithophel 
IKings  13.  9.  so  was  it  charged  mc  by  word  of  L. 
iKings  17.7.  So  it  teas  that  Israel  had  sinned  ag.  L. 
2;j.  so  was  Isr.  carried  away  to  Assyr.  to  this  day 
2  Chron.  29. 25.  so  was  the  commandment  of  Lord 
Luke  2. 6.  and  so  it  was  that  while  they  were  there 

21.  Jesus,  who  was  so  named  of  the  angel 
5. 10.  and  so  was  also  James  and  John  astonished 
jJcts  12.15. Rhodaconstantlv  affirmed  itio.  even  so 

SOAKED. 
Isa.  34.  7.  their  land  shall  be  s.  with  blood,  their 

SOBER. 
2  Cor.  5. 13.  whether  we  be  s.  it  is  for  your  cause 
1  yAf.'s.S.O.Iet  us  not  3leep,butlet  us  watch  and  bes. 
8.  but  let  us  who  are  of  the  day  be  s.  putting  on 
1  Tim.  3.  2.  a  blshup  then  must  be  s.  Tit.  1.  8. 

11. deacons'  wives  must  bes.  faithful  in  all  things 
Tit.  2.  2.  that  aged  men  be  s.  grave,  temperate 
4.  they  may  teach  the  young  women  to  be  s. 
1  Pet.  1.  13.  gird  up  the  loins  of  your  mind,  be  s. 
4.  7.  he  ye  therefore  s.  and  watch  unto  prayer 
5.8.be  s.  be  vigilant,  because  vour  adversary  devil 

SOBERLY. 
/Jom.l2.3.biit  to  think  s.accord.  to  measure  of  faith 
Tit.  2.  12.  teaching  ns  that  we  should  live  s.  right. 

SOBER-MINDED. 
Tit.  2.  6.  likewise  exhort  v"ung  men  lo  be  s.-mind. 

SOBERNESS. 
Acts  26.  25.  but  speak  forth  the  words  of  s. 

SOBRIETY. 
Horn.  12.  \  3.  every  man  ought  to  think  to  s. 

1  Tim.  2.  9.  that  women  adorn  themselves  with  s 

15.  if  they  continue  in  faith  and  holiness  with  s. 
SOCKET. 
Ezod.  38.  27.  a  humlred  talents,  a  talent  for  a  s. 

SOCKETS. 
£j:o<f.  26.19.  make  forty  s.  of  silver,  21.  ]  3P.24,26 
two  .».  under  one  hoard  for  two  tenons,  two 
.?.  under  anolh.T  board.  21,  25.  |  36.  24,  26. 
25.  and  thnir  s.  of  silver,  sixteen  s.  36.  30,  36 
37.  thou  shalt  cast  five  s.  of  brass  for  them,  36..38. 
27.  10.  their  twenty  s.  shall  be  of  brass,  38.  10, 11. 
12.  on  west  side  pillars  ten,  their  s.  ten,  38.  12. 

14.  the  hanjings  on  one  side,  their  s  ihree 

15.  on  the  other  side  shall  be  three  s.  .38.  14, 15. 

16.  their  pillars  shall  be  four,  their  s.  four 

17.  hooks  shall  he  of  silver  and  theirs,  brass,  18. 
35.  11.  make  bar-s,  pillars,  s.  of  the  tabernacle 

17.  hangings  of  the  court,  pillars,  and  their  s. 
3;?  27.  s.  of  the  sanctuary,  s.  of  the  veil,  hundred  s. 

30.  of  the  brass  of  the  offerings  he  made  s. 

31.  s.  of  the  court,  and  the  s.  of  the  court  gate 
40.  18.  reared  the  tabernacle  and  fastened  his  s. 

^Vum.  3.  36.  under  the  custodv  and  charge  of  the 
sons  of  Merari  shall  be  the  s.  37.  |  4.  31,  3'2. 
Cant.  5.  15.  as  pillars  of  marble  set  on  s.  of  gold 

son. 

^pn.25. 29.  Jncob  s.  pottage,  Esau  came  from  field 

2  Chron.  3.5. 13.  other  holv  offerings  s.  they  in  pots 

SODDEN. 
F.zod.  12.  9.  ealnot  of  it  raw,  nor  s.  with  water 
f.ep.  6.  28.  but  the  earthen  vessel  wherein  it  is  s. 
HiM  be  broken,  and  if  it  be  s.  in  a  brasen 
pot  it  shall  be  scoured 
JVum.  6.  19.  the  priest  shall  take  the  s.  shoulder 
lS'7m.2.1.'>.  he  will  not  haves,  flceh  of  thoe  but  raw 
/Mm.  4. 10.  the  women  have  s.  their  own  children 

SODERINO. 
fta.  41.  7.  it  is  ready  for  s.  he  fastened  it  with  naila 

SOFT. 
.Jnb  23.  Ifi.  for  O.  maketh  my  heart  s.  and  troubleth 
41   3.  will  he  speak  s.  words  unto  thee'? 
Pant.  6.5.  10.  thou  makest  it  s.  with  sho'wers 
Pron.  13.  1.  a  s.  answer  turntth  away  wrath 
25.  15.  and  a  i.  tongue  breaketii  tli«  boae 
550 


SOL 

Mat.  11.  8.  a  man  clothed  ins.  ratment;  they  thai 
wear*,  clothing  are  in  kings' houses,  Luke  1. "5. 
SOFTER. 
Ps.  55. 21. words  were  s.  than  oil,  yet  drawn  swords 

SOFTLY. 
Gen.  33. 14.  I  will  lead  s.  as  cattle,  childr.  be  able 
./udg.4.2l.  Jael  went  s.  to  him  and  smote  the  nail 
Huth  3.  7.  she  came  s.  and  uncovered  hie  feet 
lUings  21.  27.  Ahab  fast,  lay  in  sackcloth,  wents. 
Isa.  8.  6.  refuseth  the  waters  of  Shiloah  that  go  s. 
38. 15.  I  shall  go  s.  all  ray  years  in  bittern,  of  soul 
Jicts  27.  13.  when  south-wind  blew  s.  they  sailed 

SOIL. 
Psal.  .37.  t  35.  like  a  tree  growing  in  his  own  s. 
£2e/£.17.8.  it  was  plant,  in  a  goods,  by  great  waters 

SOJOURN. 
Qen.  12.  10.  Abram  went  down  into  Egypt  to  s. 

19.  9.  they  said,  this  one  fellow  came  into  s. 

20.  3.  s.  in  this  land,  and  I  will  be  with  thee 
47.  4.  they  said,  for  to  s.  in  the  land  are  we  come 

Exod.  12.48.  when  a  stranger  wills,  with  thee  and 

keep  passover,  Lev.VJ.  33.  JiTum.  9. 14.  |  15.14. 

/,ep.l7. 8.  of  strangers  who  s.  Ihatoffereth  sacrifice 

10.  of  strangers  that  s.  that  eateth  any  blood 

13.  who  s.  among  you,  that  hunteth  any  beast 

20.2.of  strangers  that  s.  that  giveth  seed  to  Molech 

25.  45.  of  strangers  that  s.  of  them  shall  ye  buy 
Judg.  17.  8.  a  Levite  went  to  s.  where  he  could 

9.  said  to  Micah,  I  go  to  s.  where  I  may  find  place 
Ruth  1.1.  Elimelech  went  to  s.  in  country  of  jloab 

1  Kings  17.  20.  evil  on  the  widow  with  whom  I  s. 

2  Kings  8.  1.  arise,  s-  wheresoever  thou  canst  s. 
Psal.  15.  t  1-  who  shall  s.  in  thy  tabernaclel 

120.5. woe  is  me,that  Is.  in  Meshech,dwell  in  tents 

Isa.  23.7.  her  own  feet  shall  carry  her  afar  off  to  s. 

52.  4.  my  people  went  down  into  Egypt  to  s.  there 

Jer.  42.  15.  if  ye  wholly  set  your  faces  to  enter  into 

Egypt  and  go  to  s.  there,  17.  |  44.  12, 14, 28. 

22.  ye  shall  die  in  the  place  whither  ye  desire  to  s. 

Lam.  4.  15.  they  said,  they  shall  no  more  s.  there 

Eiek.  20.  38.  I  will  bring  them  from  where  they  s. 

47.22.  divide  it  to  you  and  strangers  whos.  among 

JIcls  7.  6.  that  his  seed  should  s.  in  a  strange  land 

SOJOURNED. 
Oen.  20.  1.  from  thence  Abraham  s.  in  Gerar 

21.  34.  and  s.  in  the  Philistines'  land  many  days 
32.  4.  I  s.  with  Laban,  and  stayed  there  until  now 

35.  27.  Hebron,  where  Abraham  and  Isaac  s. 
Deut.  18.  6.  if  a  Levite  come  from  where  he  s. 

26.  5.  s.  in  Egypt  with  a  few,  and  became  a  nation 
Judg.  17.  7.  a  Levite  s.  in  Befhlehem-judah 

19.  10.  an  <dd  man  of  Ephraim  s.  in  Gibeah 
2  Kings  8.  2.  she  s.  in  the  land  of  the  Philistines 
Psal.  105.  23.  and  Jacob  s.  in  the  land  of  Ham 
Heb.  11.  9.  by  faith  he  s.  in  the  land  of  promise 

SOJOURNER. 
f?('R.23.4.  lam  as.withyou,give  meburying-place 
Lev.  22. 10.  a  s.  of  priest  shsdl  not  eat  of  holy  thing 
25.  35.  a  s.  fallen  in  decay  thou  shalt  relieve 
40.  thy  brother  shall  be  as  a  s.  with  thee 
47.  s.  wax  rich  by  thee  and  brother  sell  hims.  to  s. 
J^Tum.  35. 15.  these  six  cities  a  refuge  for  Isr.  and  s. 
Psi  39.  12. 1  am  a  stranger,  a  s.  as  all  my  fath.  were 

SOJOURNERS. 
Lev.  25.  23.  for  ye  are  strangers  and  s.  with  me 
2  Sam.  4.  3.  the  Beerothites  were  s.  in  Gillaim 
1  Chron.  29.  15.  we  are  s.  as  were  all  our  fathers 

SOJOURNETH. 
Ei:od.3.22.every  woman  shall  borrow  of  her  thai  s. 
12.  49.  one  law  shall  be  to  him  that  is  home-born, 
and  to  stranger  that  s.  among  you.  Lev.  16. 29. 
/,ev.  17. 12.  norshall  any  stranger  thats.  eat  blood 
18.  26.  thats.  among  you  shall  keep  my  statutes 
25.  6.  sabbath  of  the  land  meat  for  stranger  that  s 
JVttJn.  15.  15.  one  ordinance  shall  he  foryou  and  for 
the  stranger  that  s.  with  you,  16.  29.  |  19.  10 
26.  and  it  shall  be  forgiven  the  stranger  that  s. 
./osA.  20.  9.  these  cities  of  "-cfuge  for  stranger  that  s 
Ezra  1 .4.  whoso  remaineth  in  any  place  where  he  s 
Ezek.  14. 7.  every  one  that  s.  in  Isr.  who  separatelli 
47.  23.  that  in  what  tribe  stranger  s.  there  give 

SOJOURNING. 
F,xod.\^.  40.  thes.  of  Israel  in  Egy|it  was  4.30  years 
.hidg.  19. 1.  a  certain  Levite  s.  on  Mount  Ephraim 
\Pet.  1.  17.  pass  the  time  of  your  s.  here  in  fear 

SOLACE. 
Prov.  7.  18.  come,  let  us  s.  ourselves  with  loves 

SOLD,  Activehff  Passively. 
Oen.  23.  33.  Esau  s.  his  birth-right  unto  Jacob 
31.  15.  our  father  hath  s.  us,  devoured  our  money 
37.  28.  they  s.  Joseph  to  the  Ishmiielitcs  for  silver 

36.  the  Midianites  s.  him  into  Esypl  to  Potiphar 

41.  56.  Joseph  5.  corn  unto  the  Egyptians 

42.  6.  he  it  was  that  s.  to  all  the  people  of  land 
45.  4.1am  Job.  your  broth,  (vhom  ye  s.  into  Eaypt 

5.  be  not  angry  with  yours,  that  ye  s.  me  hither 
47.  20.  for  the  Egyptians  s.  every  man  his  field 

22.  wherefore  the  priests  s.  not  their  lands 
Erorf.22.3.  if  he  have  nolh.  then  shall  be  s.  for  theft 
Lao.  25.  23.  th«  land  shall  uot  be  a.  for  ever 


SOL 

Z.ce.25.25.then  shall  he  redeem  that  which  br.  th  j. 
33.house  that  wass. shall  go  out  in  year  of  jubilee 
34.  but  the  field  of  the  suburbs  may  not  be  s. 
42.  brethren  shall  not  be  s.  as  bond-men 

27.  28.  no  devoted  thing  shall  be  s.  or  redeemed 
Deut.  15.  12.  and  if  thy  brother  be  s.  unto  thee 

28.  68.  there  shall  ye  be  s.  unto  your  enemies 
32.30.except  their  Rock  had  s.lhem  and  shut  them 

Judg.'i.l-i.h&  s.  them  into  hands  of  their  enemies 
3.8.  s.  them  to  Chushau-rishathaim  ||  4.2.  to  Jabin 
10.  7.  s.  them  into  the  hands  of  the  Philistines 

1  Sam.  12.  9.  he  s.  them  into  the  hands  of  Sisera 

1  Kings  21.  20.  thou  hast  s.  thyself  to  work  evil 

2  A'ln^'S  6.25.  ass's  head  was  s.for  80  pieces  of  silver 
7.  1.  a  measure  of  fine  Hour  s.  for  a  shekel,  16. 
17. 17.  Israels,  themselves  to  do  evil  in  sight  of  Lil 

JVcA.5. 8.  have  redeemed  our  brethren  who  were  s. 

to  the  heathen,  or  shall  they  be  s.  unto  us1 

13.  15.  I  testified  in  day  wherein  they  s.  victual* 

16.  who  brought  ware  and  s.  on  the  sabbath 
Esth.  7.  4.  for  we  are  s.  I  and  my  people  to  be  slain 
and  perish ;  but  if  wo  had  been  s.  for  bond-men 
Psal.  105.  17.  Joseph  who  was  s.  for  a  servant 
Isa.  50. 1.  which  df  my  creditors  is  it  to  whom  I  » 
you'!  for  your  iniiiuities  have  ye  s.  yourselves 
52.  3.  ye  have  s.  yours,  for  nought,  be  redeemed 
Jcr.  31.  14.  let  go  his  brother  who  hath  been  s. 
Lam.  5.  4.  water  for  money,  our  wood  is  s.  unto  u« 
Ezek.  7.13.  seller  shall  not  return  to  that  which  is  s 
Joel  3.  3.  and  they  have  s.  a  girl  for  wine  to  drink 

6.  children  of  Judah  have  ye  s.  lo  tiie  Grecians 

7.  I  w  ill  raise  them  out  of  place  whith.  yes.  them 
Amos  2.  6.  they  «.  the  righteousforsilver  and  poor 
Mat.  10. 29.  are  not  two  sparrows  s.  for  a  farthing  ? 

13.  46.  went  and  s.  all  that  he  had  and  bought  it 
18.  25.  his  lord  commanded  liiin  to  be  s. 
21.12.castout  them  thats.  and  bought,  overthrew 
seats  of  them  that  s.  Mark  11.15.  Luke  19  45. 

26.  9.  for  this  ointm.  might  have  been  s.  for  much 
and  given  to  the  poor,  Mark  14.5.  .hhn  12. 5. 

Luke  12.6.are  not  five  sparrows  s.for  two  farthingg 

17.28.  they  bought,  they  s.  they  planted,  they  built 

John  2. 14.  found  in  the  temple  those  that  s.  oxen 

16.  said  to  them  thats.  doves.  Take  these  hence 

Acts  2. 45.  and  s.  their  possessions  und  goods,  4.  34. 

4.  37.  Joses  having  land  s.  it  and  brought  money 

5.  1.  Ananias  s.  ||  8.  ye  s.  the  land  for  so  much? 
4.  after  it  was  s.  was  it  not  in  thine  own  power'? 

iio;n.7.14.  lawis spirit,  but  I  am  carnal, s.  undcrsin 

1  Cor.10.25.  whatsoever  is  s.  inshambles,  thateat 
Hcb.Vi.  16.  for  one  morsel  of  meat  s.  his  birth-right 

SOLDIER. 
John  19.  23.  and  made  four  parts,  to  every  s.  a  par! 
Acts  10. 7.  Cornel,  called  a  devout  s.  that  wailed  on 
28. 16.  suffered  Paul  to  dwell  by  himself,  w  ith  a  ». 
27^^^.  2.  3.  endure  hardness  as  a  good  s.of  Chriet 
4. may  please  him  who  hath  chosen  him  to  be  as. 
SOLDIERS. 

2  CAroji.  25. 13.  the  s.  fell  upon  the  cities  of  Judah 
F.zra  8. 22.  I  was  ashamed  to  requireof  the  king  j. 
Isa.  15.  4.  the  armed  s.  of  Moab  shall  cry  out 
Mat.  8.  9.  having  s.  under  me,  Luke  7.  8. 

27.  27.  the  s.  took  Jesus  and  gathered  to  him  t. 

28.  12.  they  gave  large  money  unto  the  s. 
Luke  3.14.  s.  demanded,  saying,  what  shall  we  do'? 

23.  36.  the  s.  mocked  him,  offering  him  vinegar 
John  19.  2.  s.  jilatted  a  crown  of  tliorns,  put  i;  oa 

23.  the  s.  took  his  garments,  and  also  his  coat 

24.  these  things  the  s.  did  i|  32.  s.  brake  the  lcg> 

34.  hut  one  of  the  .f .  with  a  spear  pierced  his  side 
AclsVi.i.  delivered  Peter  to  four  quaternions  of  «. 

6.  same  night  Peter  was  sleeping  between  two  t 
18.  there  was  no  small  stir  among  the  s. 
21.  32.  when  they  saw  the  chief  captain  and  s. 

35.  so  it  was,  thai  he  was  borne  of  the  ». 
23.  23.  make  ready  200  s.  to  go  to  Cesarea 
27.  3I-  Paul  said  to  the  s.  except  these  abide 

32.  then  the  s.  cut  off  the  rtjpes  of  the  boat 
42.  the  s.  counsel  was  lo  kill  the  prisoners 
SOLE. 
fien.  8.  9.  dove  found  no  rest  for  the  s.  of  her  foot 
Deut.  28.  35.  with  a  sore  botch  from  s.  of  thy  foot 
56.  would  not  set  the  s.  of  her  foot  upon  ground 
65.  neither  shall  the  s.  of  thy  foot  have  rest 
Josh.  1.  3.  every  place  s.  of  your  foot  shall  tread  on 
2Snm.l4.25.from  s.of  foofto  crown  w.is  no  blejnibh 
■  lob  2.  7.  Satan  smote  Job  from  the  s.  of  his  foot 
/.fa. 1.6.  froms.of  foot  to  he.id  thero  is  no  soundness 
Ezck.l.l.s.  of  their  feet  like  the  s.of  a  calf's  fool 
Sec  Feet. 
SOLEMN. 
-Vum.lO.  10.  in  yours,  days  ye  shall  blow  trumpet! 
}'sal.  92.  3.  to  sine  praise  with  a  s.  sound 
Isa.  1.  13.  it  is  ini(|uity,  even  the  s.  meeting 
Impi.  2.  22.  thou  hast  called  as  in  a  s.  day,  my  terr. 
//os.  9.  5.  vvbut  will  ye  do  in  s.  day,  in  day  of  feait? 
Zcch.  8.  t  19  the  fist  shall  be  Jov  and  .?.  times 
See  Assembly,  Feast,  Feasts. 
SOLEMNITY. 
JDemit.  31.  10.  ia  the  a.  uf  llie  year  uf  rcloaao 


SOM 

♦•.30.29.  sliall  have  song,  as  when  a  holy  s.  is  kept 

SOLKMMTIES. 
ha.  .3.3.  20.  look  upon  Zion,  the  city  of  our  $. 
£iek.  45.  i7.  prince  give  buint-orteriiigain  s.ot'Isr. 
4ti.  li.  ill  the  ^.  meut-oti'uriiig  dhull  bu  un  ejihuh 

SOLEMNLY. 
Gen.  43.  3.  the  man  did  s.  prDtest  unto  us,  saying 
1  Ham.  6.  9.  yet  protest  s.  to  them,  and  shew  them 

SOLITAKV. 
.Yum.  23.  t  3.  Balaam  went  s.  anil  God  met  him 
Job  3.  7.  let  that  niglit  be  s.  let  nu  joyful  voice  come 
30.  3.  for  want  and  famine  they  were  s. 
Psiil.  lis.  6.  God  sctleth  the  s.  m  familicB 
107. 4.  they  wandered  in  the  wilderness  inns,  way 
7sa.35.I.w  ihlern.  and  s.  place  shall  be  glad  for  them 
L.am.\.  1.  how  doth  city  sits,  that  was  lull  of  peop. 
Mark  1.35..lesus  depart,  into  a  s.  place,  and  prayed 

SOLITARILY. 
Mic.  7.  14.  feed  thy  people  which  dwell  s.  in  wood 

SOME. 
Oen.  19.  19.  Lot  said,  lest ».  evil  take  me,  and  Idie 
33.  15.  let  me  now  leave  with  thee  s.  of  the  folk 
37. 20.  let  us  slay  him,  and  cast  him  into  a.  pit,  and 
we  will  say,  s.  evil  beast  h^th  «levourcd  him 
47.2.  took  s.  of  his  brethren  and  pre.sented  to  Phar. 
F.xod.  IB.  17.  and  they  gathered  s.  more,  s.  less 
20.  but  a.  of  ihem  left  of  it  till  the  morning 

27.  s.  went  out  on  seventh  day  to  gather,  found 
Lev.i.  7.  shall  put  s.  of  blood  on  horns  of  altar,  18. 

17.  the  priest  shall  dip  his  finger  in  s.  of  the  blood 
J^iivi.  21.  1.  Arad  took  s.  of  them  prisoners 

27.  20.  thon  shalt  put  s.  of  thine  honour  upon  him 
iy'e«<.24.1.bec.  he  liath  found  s.  uncleanness  in  her 
Ruth'i.  10.  let  fall  s.  of  handfuls  of  purpose  for  her 

1  Sam.  34.  10.  s.  hade  mc  kill  thee,  but  spared  thee 

2  Sam.  17.  9.  he  is  hid  in  a.  pit,  or  in  s.  other  place 

1  ICinga  14.  13.  in  him  there  is  found  s.  good  thing 

2  Kin^s  7.  9.  s.  mischief  will  come  upon  us 
2  Chron.  12.  7.  but  I  will  grant  s.  deliverance 

16.  10.  Asa  oppressed  s.  of  people  the  same  time 
F.ira  10. 44.  s.  had  wives  by  whom  they  had  childr. 
JVeA.  5.  3.  a.  said,  we  have  morigagod  our  lands 

13. 15.  saw  [  a.  treading  wine-presses  on  Sabbath 
19.  and  a.  of  my  servants  set  I  at  the  galea 

.7oh  24.  2.  a.  remove  land-marks,  take  away  flocks 
P.ial.  20.  7.  a.  trust  in  chariots,  a.  in  horses 
09.  20.  I  looked  for  a.  to  take  pity,  there  was  none 
/'r«».4.1t).sleep  taken  away,unles3  they  cause.?. fall 
./cr.  49. 9.  would  they  not  leaves,  gloaning-grapes? 
/Jan.  8. 10.  and  ilcasi  down  s.  of  the  host  and  stars 

11.  35.  a.  of  them  of  understanding  shall  fall 

12.  2.  ,t.  to  everlasting  life,  and  s.  to  shame 
^mws 4.11. overthrown  .«.  aaGod  overthrew  Sodom 
Ohad.  5.  would  they  not  leave  s.  grapes? 
.»/«M3.4.  s.  fell  by  way-side,  Mark  4. 4.  Luke».  5. 

.5.s.fcllon  stony  places,notmiichearih,J>furA-4.5. 

7.  and  a.  fell  among  thorns,  Mark  4.7.  J^vkfS.l. 
16. 14.  .?.  say  thou  art  John  the  Baptist,  s.  Elias, 

others  Jereinia:<,  Mark  8.  28.  J,uke  9.  19. 

28.  there  he  a.  standing  here,  who  shall  not  taste 
of  death  till  Son  of  man,  Mark'J.\.  Luke9.i7. 

19.  12.  a.  eunuchs  which  were  so  horn, .'.  made 
23.34 ..v.  yeshall  kill  and  crucify,.*,  yeshall  scourge 

28.  17.  they  worshipped  him,  but  a.  doubted 
/.nke  S.  6.  a.  fell  upon  a  roi-.k,  and  withered  away 

21. 16.  and  a.  of  you  shall  cause  to  be  put  to  death 
Juhn  6.  64.  there  are  .■».  of  you  that  beliuve  not 
.9rta  5.  1.1.  shadow  of  Peter  overshadow  a.  of  them 

B.  9.  giving  out  that  himself  was  a.  great  one 

31.  how  ran  I  except  a.  man  should  guide  me 

13.  II.  seeking  .«.  to  lead  him  by  the  hand 

17.  4.  a.  of  them  hidieved  {|  21.  hear  a.  new  thin; 

32.  .«.  nioeked  ||  27.  34.  I  pray  you  take  a.  meat 
19.  32.  ».  cried  one  thing, .«.  another,  21.  34. 
27.  41.  a.  on  hoards,  a.  on  broken  pieces  of  the  ship 
^.  2J.  .«.  believed  and  a.  believed  not 

Horn.  1.11.  that  I  may  impart  to  yon  a.  spiritual  gift 
13.  that  I  mijht  have  a.  fruit  among  you  also 
3.  3.  for  what  if  .1.  did  not  believe? 
H.aH.t.  aflirin  that  wesiiy.  Let  us  do  evil  thatjood 

5.  7.  for  a  ?nod  man  a.  would  even  dare  to  die 

11.  14.  if  by  any  means  1  might  sv'e  ,«.  of  ihem 
17.  and  it  a.  of  the  branches  be  broken  off 

lCor.4.IH.  now  a.  are  puffed  up  as  though  not  come 

6.  II.  such  were  a.  of  you,  but  vo  are  washed 

8.  7.  for  a.  with  eonscien're  of  the  idol  eat  it 
0.  2J.  that  I  ini^lil  by  all  means  save  .«. 

10.  7.  neither  be  idolniers  as  were  a.  of  them 

8.  commit  forniraiion,  as  s.  of  Ihem  committod 

9.  as  »•.  lenipted  Christ  and  v.oie  destroyed 

10.  nor  murmur  ye  n«  .«.  of  them  murmured 

12.  28.  and  God  hntli  net  a.  in  the  rhurch 

l."!.  ti.  greater  part  remain,  hut  a.  are  fallen  nileop 
12.  how  say  a.  that  tbere  is  no  resnrreciion? 
34.  for  .«.  have  not  the  knowlod-ji'of  God 
9  Tor. 10. 2.  1 1  h  nk  to  he  hold  ng.  .t.  who  think  of  us 

12.  for  we  dare  not  compare  ourselves  with  a. 
Gril.  1.  7.  but  tbere  be  a.  that  troiilde  yon 
Fj'h.  4.  11.  he  gave  a.  prophets,  a.  evangelists 
run.  1. 15. 1.  ioducil  pD'neh  Christ  orenuf  anyy 
&(iO 


SON 

2  Tfiess.  3.  11.  there  are  s.  am.  you  walk  disorderly 

1  'J'im.  1.  3.  charge  .■*.  that  they  teach  no  other  doct. 

6.  from  which  s.  having  swerved,  have  turned 

19.  a.  having  put  away,  have  made  shipwreck 

4.  l.thal  in  latter  times  a.  shall  dejiarl  from  faith 

5.  15.  a.  are  already  turned  aside  after  Satan 
24.  s.  men's  sins  open  before-hand,  .t.  men  follow 
25. the  good  works  of ».  are  manifest  before-hand 

6. 10.  which  whiles,  coveted  after,  they  have  erred 
27'm.  2.  18.  and  overthrow  the  faith  of  s. 

20.  s.  vessels  to  honour  and  s.  to  dishoiionr 
Hcb.  3.  4.  for  every  house  is  builded  by  a.  man 

16.  for  s.  when  they  bad  heard,  did  provoke 

4.  6.  it  remaineth,  that  s.  must  enter  therein 

10.  2.'>.  not  forsaking  as  the  manner  of  s.  is 

11.  40.  having  provided*,  belter  thing  for  us 

13.  2.  for  thereby  s.  entertained  angels  unawares 

2  Pet.  3. 9.  Lord  is  not  slack,  as  a.  count  slackness 
16.  in  which  are  a.  things  liard  to  be  understood 

.Jiide  22. of  a.  have  compassion, making  a  difference 
Rev.  2. 10.  the  devil  shall  cast  a.  of  you  into  prison 

SOMEBODY. 
f^vke  8.  46.  Jesu.s  said,  s.  hath  touched  me 
./Jets  5. 36.  rose  up  Tlx'ud as,  boasting  hims.  to  be  a. 

SOMETHING. 
1  Sum. 20.  26.  for  bethought,  s.  hath  befallen  him 
Mark  5.  43.  that  s.  should  \m  given  her  to  eat 
LukeW-^i-and  seeking  to  catch.?. out  of  Iiis  mouth 
John  13.  29.  or  that  he  should  give  a.  to  the  poor 
/lets  3.  5.  hegave  heed  e.xpect.  to  receives,  of  them 
23.  15.  as  tho'  ye  would  inquires,  more  perfectly 

18.  this  young  man  who  hath  a.  to  say  to  thee 
Gal.  C.  3.  for  it  a  man  think  himself  to  be  a. 

SOMETIMES. 
Ep/i.  2.  13.  ye  who  were  s.  afar  off  are  made  nigh 

5.  8.  for  ye  were  a.  darkness,  but  now  light  in  L. 
Ciil.  1.  21.  you  that  were  s.  alienated  and  enemies 

3.  7.  in  which  ye  walked  s.  when  ye  lived  in  them 
7Vf.3.3.  we  ourselves  also  were  s.  foolish,  deceived 
1  Pef.3. 20.  whos.  were  disobedient  in  days  of  Noe 

SOMEWHAT. 
Z,e?'.4.13.  have  done  s.  against  commandments,  27. 
22.  when  a  ruler  hath  dones.  through  ignorance 
13.  6.  if  the  plague  be  s.  dark,  21,  26,  28,  56. 

19.  there  be  a  bright  spot,  and  s.  reddish,  24. 
1  Sam.  2.  t  36.  put  me  a.  about  the  priesthood 

1  [Cinga  2.  14.  he  said,  I  have  s.  to  say  unto  thee 

2  A'mn'.' 5.20. 1  will  run  after  him,and  take  s. of  him 
2  Chr.  10.  4.  eases,  giievons  servitiideofthy  father 

9.  ease  s.  the  yoke  {{  10.  make  it  a.  lighter  for  us 
Lvke  7.  40.  Simon,  I  have  s.  to  say  unto  thee 
Jicta  23.  20.  as  to  inquires,  of  him  more  perfectly 
25.  26.  O  king,  that  I  might  have  s.  to  write 
Rom.  15. 24  if  first  I  bes.  filled  with  your  company 
2  Cor.  5   12.  that  you  may  have  s.  to  answer  them 
10.  8.  tho'  Ishould  boast  s.  more  of  our  authority 
Gnl.  2.  6.  but  of  tho.se  who  seemed  to  be  s. 
Hf.l).  8. 3.  of  necessity  this  man  have  s.  also  to  offer 
Rev.  2.  4.  nevertheless,  1  have  s.  against  thee 

SON. 
This  name,  la  g-ivrn  to  a  male  child  conaidered  in 
the  relation  lie  heara  to  liia  parenta,  Selh  wiia 
the  son  of  Adam,  and  Enos  waa  son  to  Selh, 
Gen.  4.  25,26.  It  is  given alao  to  a  grand-son; 
Mephihosheth  is  called  the  son  of  Saul,  2  Sam. 
19.  24.  though  he  tens  the  son  »/ Jonathan,  who 
waa  Saul's  son,  2 Sam.  9.  6.  It  is  put  fur  a 
aucreasor,  or  the  dtacindnnt  of  a  man,  I  am 
the  son  of  the  wise,  the  son  of  ancient  kings, 
laa.  19.  II.  Thua  the  posterity  of  Jacob  are 
called  frequently  the  children  of  Israel.  Son 
is  a  name  given  by  mastera  and  teachers  to 
their  achnlnrs ;  Eli  called  Samuel  hia  son, 
1  Sam.  3.  (i.  .find  Solomon  frequenlhj  rnlla 
hia  pvpil  son,  Prov.  1.  8.  .^nil  this  name  they 
gave  them  to  shew  their  paternal  authority  anil 
affection,  and  to  make  them  more  attentive  and 
obedient.  SI.  Paul  calls  Timothy  A/s  orrn  son. 
1  Tim.  I.  2,  To  Timothy  my  own  son  in  the 
faith;  irhn  truly  rese.mbV\i  ine,  and  has  been 
confirmed  in  the  faith  by  my  means.  Obed  is 
railed  the  son  of  Naomi.  Ruth  4. 17,  There  is 
a  son  born  to  Naomi ;  one  who  irill  rtouriah, 
comfort,  and  assist  her,  as  a  dutiful  son  srtr- 
cmira  hia  parents.  Uazael  calls  Bcn-hadad 
Elisba's  80V,  nne  that  honoured  him  as  a  son 
dnea  hia  folher,  2  Kings  8.  9.  (ind  rails  the 
posterity  of  Jiiioh hi^on.  Exod.  4.  22,  Israel 
is  my  son  even  my  first-born.  They  are  the 
fir.1t  and  only  nation  that  I  have  rhosen  for 
my  peculiar  people.  Frekiel  is  railed  Son  of 
man  about  eighty-nine  times-  ./)nd  Christ rfiewf 
eichty  limes  in  the  F.vangrliats. 
"  SONS  OF  GOD  Sec  on  Ciili.n. 
Oct?.  17.  t  '2.  be  that  is*,  of  eight  days  becircumC 
16.  I  will  give  Ihce  .•:.  of  Sariih,  19.  |  18.  10,  14 

21.  2.  Sarah  barn  Abraham  a  a.  in  bis  old  ago,  7. 
10.  cast  out  this  bond-woman  and  her  s. 

24.  3B.  Sarah  my  master's  wife  hare  a  s. 
44.  Ihe  Lord  halh  appointed  Our  my  master's  ». 


SON 

Gen.  24.  .11.  and  let  her  be  thy  master's  s  wife 

29.  33.  he  hath  theiel'ore  given  mc  this  s.  alao 

30.  6.  God  hath  heard  me,  and  given  me  a  «. 
24.  the  Lord  shall  add  to  me  another  a. 

35.  17.  fear  not,  thou  shalt  have  this  a.  also 

t  18.  the  3.  of  my  sorrow  ;  s.  of  the  right  baitd 
37.  3.  because  he  was  the  s.  of  his  old  age 
F.Tod,  1.  16.  if  it  be  a  a.  then  ye  shall  kill  him 
22.  every  s.  that  is  bom  ye  shall  cast  into  river  . 
2.  10.  the  child  grew,  and  he  became  her  s. 
4.  25.  Zi))porah  cut  olf  the  foreskin  of  her  s. 

12.  t5.  your  himbshall  be  s.ofa  year,  Aee.  12.tfii 
21.  31.  whether  he  have  gored  a  s.  or  a  daughtci 

23.  12.  the  a.  of  thy  handmaid  may  hti  refreshed 
29.  30.  that  s.  that  is  jiriest  in  .^tead  put  them  on 

I,ev.  12.  6.  the  days  of  her  purifying  lor  a  s. 

24.  10.  the  s.  of  an  Israelitish  woman  strove  in 

11.  the  Israelitish  woman's  s.  blasjihemed 

25.  49.  his  uncle,  or  his  uncle's  s.  may  redeem  him 
jVmwi.  23.  18.  hearken  unto  me  thou  .f.  of  Zippor 

27.4.because  be  hath  nos.||  8.  if  die  and  have  no  s. 
Deut.  13.6.  if  s.  of  thy  motlier  entice  thee  secretly 

21.  16.  that  he  may  not  make  tbes.  of  the  bi.lovcd, 

fiist-born,  before  the  s.  of  the  hated,  17. 

18.  if  a  man  have  a -stubborn  and  rebellious  s. 

20.  this  ours,  is  stubborn  and  rebellious,  not  obey 

28.56.  eyeshall  be  evil  toward  her  s.  and  daughter 

,Iuah.  fi.  26.  in  his  youngest  a.  set  up  the  gates  of  it 

15.  8.  biirder  went  by  the  valley  of  s.  of  Hinnom 
/udg.5.  12.  arise,  leadcajitive,  thoiis.  of  Abiiioam 

9.  18.  have  made  the  s.  of  his  maid-servant  king 
28.  Gaal  said,  is  not  he  Ihe  a.  of  Jerubbaal? 

11.2.  for  thou  art  the  s.  of  a  strange  woman 
34.  besides  her  he  had  neither  s.  nor  daughter 

13.  3.  hut  thou  shalt  conceive  and  bear  a  a.  5, 7. 
24.  the  woman  bare  a  s.  and  called  him  Samson 

Ruth  4.  13.  Ruth  bare  a  s.  |l  17.  a  s.  horn  to  Naomi 

1  Sam.  1.23.  Ifannali  gave  hers,  suck  until  weaned 

4.  20.  women  said,  fear  not,  for  thou  hast  born  as. 
9.2.ICish  had  s.  whose  name  was  Saul  a  young  maa 

10.  11.  what  is  this  that  is  come  tos.  of  Kish? 

13.  t  1.  Saul  the  s.  of  one  year  in  his  reigning 

16.  18.  I  have  seen  a  a.  of  .lesso  that  is  cunning 

17.  55.  whose  s.  is  this?  ||  .58.  whose  a.  art  tbouT 

18.  t  n.  only  be  thou  s.  of  valour  for  me  and  fight 
20.  27.  wherefore  conieih  not  the  s.  of  Ji'Sse? 

30.  thou  s.  of  the  pervcr.se  rebellious  woman 

31.  for  as  long  as  thes.  of  Je.-se  liveth  on  ground 
22.7.  will  a.  of  Jesse  give  you  fields  and  vineyards 

9.  Doegsaid,  Tsaw  the  s.  of  Jesse  coming  to  Nob 

12.  Saul  said,  hear  now,  thou  s.  of  Ah'tiih 

25.  lO.whois  s.of  Jes.<!e?||]7.heissiich  a  s.of Belial 

2  Sam.  1.  13.  he  said,  1  am  Ihe  s.  of  a  stranger 

9.  3.  Jonathan  hath  yet  s.  who  is  lame  on  iiis  feet 

9.  given  Ihy  master's  .«.  all  that  pertained  to  S.iul 

10.  that  thy  master's  a.  may  have  food  to  eat; 

but  Mephibosheth  thy  master's  a.  shall  eat 
bread  alway  at  my  table 
10  2.  I  will  shew  kindness  to  the  s.  of  Nahash 

16.  3.  king  sab),  anil  where  is  thy  muster's  a.? 
18.  12.  not  put  forth  my  hanil  again.<t  the  king's  s. 

18.  I  have  no  s.  to  keep  my  name  in  remembrance 

20.  shall  heurno  tidini:s,becau.<e  king's*,  is  dead 

20.  1.  nor  have  we  inheritance  in  the  s.  .^f  Jesse 

1  Kings  3. 6.  thou  hast  given  him  a .?.  to  sit  on  hrone 

26.  for  her  bowels  yearned  upon  her  .». 

5.  7.  hath  given  Davhl  a  wise  s.  over  this  peoilc 
7  14.  Hiram  was  a  widow'ss.  of  tribe  of  Nnphtk'i 
12.  16.  no  inheritance  ins.  of  Jesse,  2  0//r.  10.  16. 

14.  I.  Abijah  the  s.  of  Jeroboam  fell  sick_ 

5.  she  Cometh  to  ask  a  thing  of  thee  for  her  s. 

17.  17.  the  s.  of  the  mistress  of  the  house  fell  sick 
20.  brought  evil  on  the  widow,  by  slaving  her  a, 

22.  20.  carry  him  to  Joash  king's  a.'iChr.  13.23. 
^h'ings  l.n.Jehorain  reigned,  because  he  had  nos. 

4.  6.  she  said  to  her,  s. firing  me  yet  a  vessel 

16.  about  this  sea.-on  thou  shalt  embrace  n  s. 

17.  and  the  woman  bare  a  s.  at  that  season 

28.  did  1  ih'sire  a.f.  of  my  lord?||  37.  took  upliere. 
fi  29.  give  a.  to  eat  hi.n,  and  she  hath  hid  her  ». 

32.  see  ye  how  Ihi.i  .^•.  of  a  murderer  hiith  sent 
8.  I.  Ihe  woman,  whose  .f.  he  had  restored  to  life 

.5.  this  is  her  s.  whom  Elisha  restored  to  life 
11.1.  Athaliasaw  her  s.  was  dead,  2  air.22. 10. 
4.  Jehoiada  shewed  them  the  king's  s. 
12.  he  brought  forth  the  king's  s.  ar;d  put  crown 

1  Chron.  12.  18.  and  on  thv  side,  Ihon  a.  of  Jesse 
20.  0.  and  he  also  was  the  a.  of  the  gi.int 

22  9  behold,  a  s.  shall  be  born  to  thee,  a  man  of  rest 

2  r.'rrnn.  21.  17.  so  that  there  was  never  a  s.  left  him 

22.  9.  buried  him,  becaoso  he  iss.  of  Jehoshaphal 

23.  3.  he  said,  behohl,  the  king's  s.  shall  roign 
.Vcft.  11.  14.  Zah.lieltheiroverseer,s.of  great  man 
.7nh  18.  19.  he  shall  neither  have  s.  nor  nephew 
Psnl.^.\'2.  kissthes.  lesthebennsry,  and  ye  perish 

.50  20.  thou  Btandorest  fhino  own  mother's  ». 
72.  1.  iind  Ihy  righteousness  unto  the  king's  s. 

+  17.  as  a  a.  to  continue  his  father's  name 
86.  16.  and  save  the  t.  of  thine  handmaid  ' 
HO.  22.  nnr  shull  the  3.  of  wickodiies«  afOict  him 


SON 

P««>  ;16  16.  I  am  the  s.  of  thine  handmaid         ' 
Prw     ).  Jii.  a«  a  father  s.  in  whom  he  delighteth 
4-'  >-^asmy  father's  s.only  beloved  of  my  niolher 
10.  1   a  wise  s.  maketh  a  glad  father,  15.  20. 

5.  h(«  that  gathereth  in  summer  ig  a  wise  s.  aleep- 
eth  in  harvests,  causeih  shame,  17. 2.  [  19.  2t). 

13.  1.  k  wise  s.  heareth  his  father's  instruction 
17. 25.  foolish  s.is  a  grief  to  his  father,  and  bittern. 
I'J.  }3.  a  foolish  s.  is  the  calamity  of  his  father 
28.  7.  whoso  keepeth  the  law,  is  a  wise  s. 
31.2.and  what,  the  s.  of  my  womb, «.  of  my  vows'? 

£ccl.  5.  14.  he  begetleth  a  s.  nothing  in  his  hand 
10.  17.  blessed  land,  when  king  is  the  s.  of  nobles 

Isa.  5.  1 1.  a  vineyard  in  the  horn  of  the  s.  of  oil 

7.  4.  not  afraid  of  the  anger  of  the  s.  of  Reinaliah 

6.  let  us  set  a  king  in  it,  even  the  «.  of  Tabeal 

9.  the  head  of  Samaria  is  Remaliah's  s. 

14.  behold,  a  virgin  shall  conceive  and  bear  as. 
9.  6.  unto  us  a  chdd  is  born,  unto  us  a  s.  is  given 
14.12.how  art  thou  fallen, O  Lucifer, s.  of  morning 

22.  I  will  cut  off  from  Babylon  s.  and  nephew 
19.  11.  I  am  s.  ofthe  wise,  the  s.  of  ancient  kings 

21.  1 10.  O  my  threshing,  and  the  s.  of  my  floor 
49.15.  not  have  compassion  on  the  s.  of  her  womb 
56.  3.  neither  let  the  s.  ofthe  stranger  speak 

Jer.  6.  20.  make  thee  mourning,  as  lor  an  only  s. 

33. 21.  should  not  have  a  s.  to  reign  on  his  throne 
JEjcA. 14.20.  they  shall  deliver  neither  s.nor  daught. 

18.  4.  soul  of  the  s.  is  mine, soul  thatsins  shall  die 

10.  if  he  beget  s. that  isa  robber,  shedder  of  blood 
14. a  s.  that  seeth  his  father's  sins  and  doetli  not 

19.  why,  (loth  not  a.  bear  iniquity  of  the  father'? 
when  the  s.  hath  done  what  is  lawful  and  right 

20.  s.  not  bear  iniquity  of  father,  nor  father  of  s. 
44.  25.  for  s.  or  daughter  they  may  detile  thems. 

Hos.  1.  3.  he  took  Gomer,  which  bare  him  as. 8. 

13.13.he  is  an  unwise  s.for  he  should  not  stay  long 

Amos  7.14.Iwas  no  prophet, nor  was  la  prophet'ss. 

8.  10.  I  will  make  it  as  mourning  of  an  only  s. 
Mic.  7.  6.  for  the  s.  disbonoureth  the  father 
^/a/.1.6.s.honourethhisfather,a  servant  hismaster 
JVat.  1.  21.  she  shall  bring  forth  a  s.  Luke  1.  31. 

9.  2.  Jesus  said,  s.  be  of  good  cheer,  Mark  2.  5. 

10.  37.  he  that  loveth  s.  or  daughter  more  than  me 
11.27.  no  man  knoweth  s.  but  Father,  nor  any  the 

Father,  save  s.  and  he  to  whom  s.  Luke  10. 22. 

13.  55.  the  carpenter's  s.  Mark  6.  3.  Luke  4.  22. 

16.  16.  thou  art  Christ  the  s.  ofthe  living  God 

'   21.  28.  and  said,s.  go  work  to-day  in  my  vineyard 

38.  but  when  husbandmen  saw  the  s.  they  said 

22.  42.  what  think  yo  of  Christ?  whose  s.  is  he? 
Mark  12.  6.  having  yet  one  s.  his  well-beloved 

13.  12.  father  shall  betray  the  s.  children  rise  up 
32.  that  hour  knoweth  not  the  s.  but  Father 

14.  61.  art  thou  the  Christ,  the  s.  ofthe  blessed  ? 
Luke  1.  13.  Elisabeth  shall  beartbees.  name  John 

32.  he  shall  be  called  the  s.  of  the  Highest 
36.Elisabeth  conceived  a  s.  1|  57.  brought  forth  *. 

S.  48.  mother  said,  s.  why  hast  thou  dealt  with  us? 

3.23.Jesus  about  30  years,being,as  was  supposed, 
the  s.  of  Joseph,  who  was  the  s.  of  Heli 

7.  12.  dead  man  carried  out,  only  s.  of  his  mother 

10.6.  ifs.  of  peace  be  there,  your  jieace  shall  rest 

11.  11.  if  a  s.  shall  ask  bread  of  any  of  you 

12.  53.  the  father  shall  be  divided  against  the  s. 

15.  13.  the  younger  s.  gathered  all  together 
31.  s.  thou  art  ever  with  me,  all  is  Ibine 

16.  25.  s.  remember,  that  thou  in  thy  life-time 

19.  9.  forasmuch  as  he  also  is  the  s.  of  Abraham 
John  1. 18.  only  begot'.s.who  is  in  bosom  of  Father 

45.  we  have  found  Jesus  of  Nazareth  s.of  Joseph 

3.  35.  the  Father  loveth  the  s.  5.  20. 

36.  that  believeth  on  the  s.  that  believeth  not  s. 

4.  46.  a  certain  nobleman  whose  s.  was  sick 

5.  19.  s.  can  do  nothing  of  himself,  what  things 

Father  do  these  things  doth  the  .■!.  likewise 

21.  even  so  the  s.  quickeneth  whom  he  will 

22.  bm  hath  committed  all  judgment  to  the  s. 

23.  that  all  men  should  honour  the  s.  he  that  ho- 
noureth  not  the  s.  honoureth  not  the  Father 

26.  BO  hath  ho  given  to  s.  to  hav"lifein  himself 
6.40.  every  one  who  seeth  s.  and  believeth  on  'jim 

42.  they  said,  is  not  this  Jesus  the  s.  of  Joseph? 
8.35.  buts.  abideth  for  ever  ||  9. 19.  is  this  your  s.? 

36.  if  s.  theref.  shall  make  you  free,  shall  be  free 
9.  20.  his  parents  said,  we  know  that  this  is  our  s. 
14.  13.  that  the  Father  may  be  glorified  in  the  s. 
17.12.  noneof  them  is  lost,  but  the  s.  of  perdition 
21.15.  Simon  ,?. of  Jonas,  Invest  thou  me  more  than 
;lcts  4.  36.  Barnabas,  s.  of  consolation,  a  Levite 

7.  21.  took  him  up,  and  nourished  for  her  own  s 

13.22.  1  have  found  David  the  s.  of  Jesse,  a  man 

23.  6.  I  am  a  Pharisee,  the  s.  of  a  Pharisee 
16.  Paul's  sister's  s.  heard  of  their  lying  in  wait 

Rom.  9.  9.  at  this  time  Sarah  shall  have  a  s. 

1  Cor.  15.  28.  then  shall  s.  also  himself  be  subject 

&<i{.4.7.no  more  a  serv.but  s.  and  if  s. then  an  heir 

30.  cast  out  the  bond- woman  and  her  s.for  the*. 

of  the  bond-woman  shall  not  be  heir  with  the*. 

Pkil.a.  22.  at  a  s.  with  father,  hegerved  in  gospel 

»61 


SON 

Cot.  4.  10.  and  Marcus  sister's  s.  to  Barnabas 
2  Thess.  2.  3.  that  man  of  sin  the  s.  of  perditioii 

1  Tim. l.lS.lhis  charge  I  commit  to  thee  s. Timothy 
Heb.  1.  5. 1  will  be  a  falh.  and  he  shall  be  to  me  a  s. 

8.  but  to  the  s.  he  saith,  thy  throne  is  for  ever 

3.  6.  but  Christ  as  a  s.  over  Ids  own  house 

5.  8.  tho'  he  were  a  s.  yet  learned  he  obedience 

7.  28.  but  the  word  ofthe  oath  maketh  the  s. 

11.24. refused  to  be  called  s.of  Pharaoh's  daughter 

12.  6.  and  scourgeth  every  s.  whom  he  receiveth 

7.  for  what  s.  is  he  whom  father  chasteneth  not? 

2Pe^2.]5.  following  the  way  of  Balaan;  s.of  Bosor 

IJo/in  2. 22.  is  antichrist  that  denieth  Father  and  s. 

23.W"hosoeverdenieth  thes.the  same  hath  not  the 

Father,  but  he  that  acknowledgeth  the  s. 

24.  ye  also  shall  continue  in  the  s.  and  in  Father 

4.  14.  Father  sent  the  s.  to  be  the  Saviour  of  world 

5.  12.  he  that  hath  the  s.  hath  life  ;  and  he  that 

hath  not  the  s.  of  God  hath  not  life 

IJohn  3.  from  Lord  Jesus  Christ  s.  of  the  Father 

9.he  that  ubideth  hath  both  the  Father  and  the  s. 

See  David. 

SON  of  God. 

Dan.  3. 25.  form  of  the  fourth  is  like  the  s.  of  God 

Mat.  4.  3.  if  thou  be  the  s.  of  God,  command  that 

thesestonesbe  made  bread, 27.  40./,kA(;4.  3,9. 

8.29. to  do  with  thee,  Jesus  thou  s.of  G.?  art  thou 

come  to  torment  us  before  the  time?  I^ukc8.'i6. 

14.  33.  saying,  of  a  truth  thou  art  the  s.  of  God 
26. 63.  tell  us  whether  thou  be  Christ  the  s.of  God 
27.  43.  for  he  said,  I  am  the  s.  of  Gud 

54.  truly  this  was  the  s.  of  God,  Mark  15.  39. 
Mark  1.1.  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  the  s.  of  God 
3.  11.  saying,  thou  art  the  s.  of  God,  .John  1.  49. 
Luke  1.35.thatholy  thing  shall  be  called  s.  of  God 
3.38.  was  the  s.  of  Adam,  w  hich  was  the  s.of  God 
4.41.  devils  came  out  of  many, crying  out,  thou  art 
Christ  the  s.o/f?o(/,./o/m  6.69.  1  11.27. 
22.  70.  they  said,  art  thou  then  the  s.  of  God  ? 
John  1.  34. 1  bare  record,  that  this  is  the  s.  of  God 

3.  18.  not  believed  in  the  only  begotten  s.  of  God 

5.  25.  dead  shall  hear  the  voice  ofthe  s.  of  God 
9. 35.  he  said,  dost  thou  believe  on  the  s.  of  God? 
10.  36.  because  I  said,  I  am  the  s.  of  God 

11. 4. that  the  s.  of  God  might  be  glorified  thereby 

19.  7.  because  he  made  himself  the  s.  of  God 

20.  31.  believe  that  Jesus  is  Ckrist,  thes.  of  God 
Acts  8.  37. 1  believe  that  Jesus  Christ  is  s.  of  God 

9.  20.  he  preached  Christ,  that  he  is  the  s.  of  God 
Rom.  1.  4.  declared  to  be  the  s.  of  God  with  power 

2  Cor.  1. 19.  for  thes.  of  God  was  not  yea  and  nay 
Gal.  2.  20.  I  live  by  the  faith  ofthe  s.  of  God 
Eph.i.\'3.  comein  unity  of  knowledge  ofs.  of  God 
Heb.  4.  14.  a  great  high-priest,  Jesus  the  s.  of  God 

6.  6.  they  crucify  to  themselves  s.  of  Gud  afresh 
7. 3. but  made  like  to  the  s.o/ (lurf  abideth  a  priest 
10.29.  who  hath  trodden  under  foot  thes.  o/  God 

l.John^.S.for  this  purposes. o/fiod  was  manifested 

4.  15.  whoso  shall  confess  Jesus  is  the  s.  of  God 

5.  5.  he  that  believeth  Jesus  is  the  s.  of  God 
10. he  thai  believeth  on  tlies.o/  God  hath  witness 
13.  that  ye  may  believe  on  the  name  ofs.  of  God 
20.  and  we  know  that  the  s.  of  God  is  come 

Rev.  2.  18.  write  these  things  saith  the  s.  vf  God 

His  SON. 
fT'en.4.]7.called  the  city  alter  name  of /it's  s.  Enoch 

9.  24   Noah  knew  what  his  younger  s.  had  done 
21. 11.  thing  was  very  grievous  because  of  his  s 
22.  10.  Abraham  took  the  knife  to  slay  his  s. 

13.ofiercd  him  for  burnt-offtrinz  instead  of  Ai'ss. 
24.48.take  myniaster's  brother's  daughter  tohis  s 
25.  6.  sent  from  Isaac  his  s.  while  he  yet  lived 

11.  after  the  death  of  Abrani,  God  blessed  his  s 
34.  20.  Shechem  his  s.  came  to  gate  of  their  city 
26.  they  slew  Hamor  and  Shechem  his  s. 
37.  34.  Jacob  mourned  for  his  s.  many  days 
Fxod.  21.  9.  if  he  hath  betrothed  her  to  his  s. 
32.  29.  consecrate,  even  every  m.nn  upon  his  s. 
Lev.  21.  2.  but  for  Itis  s.  he  may  be  defiled 
JViiTTi.  20.  26.  and  put  them  on  Elenzar  his  s.  28. 
Z)cu^l.31.  God  harethee,as  a  man  doth  bear  Atss 

7.  3.  thy  daughter  thou  shall  not  give  to  his  s. 
8..i.as  a  man  chasteneth  Ais  s. so  the  L. chasteneth 
18. 10.  not  any  maketh  his  t  tr  yaas  thro'  the  fire 

2  .Sam.  13.  37.  David  mourned  for  his  .'  every  day 

10.  19.  should  I  not  serve  in  presence  of  his  s.  ? 
19.  2.  how  the  king  was  grieved  for  his  s. 

1  Kin/rs  II.  35.  take  kingdom  out  of  his  s.  hand 
36.  and  to  A/ss.  will  I  give  one  tribe,  that  David 

15.  4.  give  him  a  lamp,  to  set  up  Ais  s.  after  him 

16.  13.  for  all  the  sins  of  Elah  his  s.  they  sinned 
'iKivtr's  3.27.  took  his  eldest  s.  should  have  reigned 

10.  3.  .Ahaz  madeAis  s.  to  pass  through  the  fire 

21.  6.  Mannsseh  made  his  s.  pass  through  the  fire 
7.  of  which  Lord  said  to  David  and  to  Solomon 

his  s.  will  T  put  my  name,  2  Chron.  33.  7 
23. 10.  no  man  might  mak«  A(.<  s.  pfiss  through  fire 

2  Chron.  24.  22.  thus  Joash  the  king  slew  Ais  s, 
Prov.  13.24.  he  that  spareth  his  rod,  hateth  Ajs  t. 

29.  21.  shall  have  him  become  kis  s.  at  length 
4D 


SON 

Prov.  30.4.  what  is  Ais  s.  name,  if  thou  canjt  tell 
./er.27.7.allnatioi^s  shall  serve  Ais s. and  Ais  son's«. 
Dan.5.2-2.  thou  Aiss.OBelsliaz.  hast  not  humbltid 
Mai,  3.  17.  spare  them,  as  a  man  spareth  hia  s. 
Mat.  7.  9.  what  man,  whom  if  Ais  s.  ask  bread 

21.  37.  last  of  all  he  sent  unto  them  Ais  s. 

22.  2.  a  king  who  made  a  marriage  for  Ais  s. 
45.how  is  he  then  Ais  s.?  Markli.'il.LukcW.ii. 

John  3.  16.  that  he  gave  Ais  only  begotten  s. 

17.  God  sent  not  Ais  s.  to  condemn  the  world 

4.  5.  the  ground  that  Jacob  gave  to  Ais  s.  Joseph 

47.  that  be  would  come  down  and  heal  Ais  s. 
Acts  3.  13.  God  hath  glorified  Ais  s.  Jesus 

26.  God  having  raised  up  Ais  s.  Jesus,  sent  him 
Rom.  1.  9.  whom  I  serve  in  the  gospel  of  Ais  a. 

5.  10.  were  reconciled  to  God  by  death  of  Ais  s. 
8.  3.  God  eeniling  Ais  own  s.  in  likeness  of  flesh 

29.  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  Ais  s. 

32.  he  that  spared  not  Ais  own  s.  but  delivered 
1  Cor.  1.  9.  called  to  the  fellowship  ol  Aiss.  Jesug 
Gal.  1.  16.  it  pleased  God  lo  reveal  Ais  s.  in  me 
4.  4.  God  sent  forth  Ais  s.  made  of  a  woman 

6.  God  sent  the  spirit  of  Ais  s.  into  your  heart* 
Col.  1. 13.  translated  us  into  kingdom  of  Ais  dears. 
1  Thess.  1.  10.  and  to  wait  for  Ais  s.  from  heaven 
//et.  1.2.  G.  in  last  days  hath  spoken  to  us  by  Ais  s. 
11.  17.  Abraham  offered  up  Ais  only  begotten  s. 
.Jam.  2.  21.  when  had  oflered  Isaac  Ais  s.  on  altar 
l,/wAnl.3. ourfellowsh.  is  witliFath.  and  Aiss.  Jcb. 

7. blood  of  Jes.  Chr.Aiss.cleansethus  from  all  sin 

3.  23.  that  we  believe  on  ihenameof  Aiss.  Jesug 

4.  9.  God  sent  Ais  only  begotten  s.  into  the  world 
lO.andsentAiss.to  be  the  propitiation  foroursins 

5.  9.  the  witness,  which  he  hath  testified  of  Ais  s. 

10.  that  believeth  not  God,  made  him  a  liar,  he 

believeth  not  record  God  gave  of  Aiss. 

11.  this  life  is  in  Ais  s.  ||  20.  we  arc  in  his  s.  Jesui 

SON  in  law. 

Gen.  19.  12.  hast  thou  here  any  besides  1  s.  in  law 

Judg.  15.  6.  Samson  the  s.  in  law  ofthe  Timnile 

19.  5.  the  damsel's  father  said  unto  his  s.  in  law 

1  Sam.  18.  18. 1  should  be  s.  in  law  to  the  king,  23. 

2).  Saul  said,  thou  shalt  thisday  bemy  s.  in  law 

22.  now  therefore  be  the  king's  s.  in  law 

26.  it  pleased  David  well  to  be  king's  s.  in  law 

27.  that  he  might  he  the  king's  s.  in  law 

22.  14.  who  is  so  faithful  as  the  king's  s.  in  law 
~/Cings  8.27.Jehoram  was  s.  in  i.  ofhouseofAhab 
JVcA.  6.  18.  Tobiah  was  s.  inlaw  to  Sheclianiah 

13.  28.  was  s.  in  law  to  Sanballat  the  Horonito 

See  Bki.ovkd. 
Mij  SON. 
Gen.  21.  10.  Ishmael  shall  not  be  heir  with  my  >. 
23.swear  that  thou  wilt  not  deal  falsely  with  mya. 
22.  7.  my  father,  and  he  said,  here  am  1,  my  s. 
8.  my  s.  (3<od  will  provide  himself  a  lamb 
24.3.shall  not  lake  wife  lomj/s.  ofCanaanitcs,37. 
4.  go  to  my  kind  red,  and  take  v, '.  felo  my  s.  7,38. 
6.  iliat  thou  bring  not  my  s.  thilher  again,  8. 
27.  8.  now  therefore  my  s.  obey  my  voice,  43. 
13.  his  mother  said,  upon  me  he  thy  curse,  my  t. 

18.  he  said,  here  am  I,  who  art  thou,  my  s.  ? 
21.  whether  thou  be  myvery  s.  Esau,  or  not,  24, 
27.  see,  the  smell  of  my  s.  is  as  smell  of  a  field 
37.  and  what  shall  I  do  now  unto  thee,  my  s.  ? 

34.  8.  the  8oulof7«y.'!.  longeth  for  your  daughter 

37.  .33.  and  he  knew  it,  and  said,  il  is  my  s.  coat 
.t5.  I  will  go  into  the  grave  lo  my  s.  mourning 

38.  11.  remain,  till  Shelah  my  s.  be  grown 

26.  because  that  I  gave  her  not  to  Shelah  my  s. 

42.  38.  he  said,  my  s.  shall  not  go  down  with  you 

43.  29.  he  said,  God  be  gracious  to  thee,  my  a. 
45.  28.  it  is  enough,  Joseph  viy  s.  is  yet  alive 

48.  19.  Jacob  said,  I  know  it  my  s.  I  know  it 

49.  9.  from  the  prey,  my  s.  thou  art  gone  up 
Exod.  4.  22.  Israel  is  my  s.  even  my  first-born 

23.  let  my  s.  go,  that  he  may  serve  me 

.Josh.  7.  19.  my  s.  give  glory  lo  the  God  of  Israel 
.JudfT.  8.  23.  neither  shall  my  a.  rule  over  you 

17.  2.  mother  said,  blessed  lie  thou  ofthe  L.  my  t. 
3.  dedicated  for  my  s.  to  make  a  graven  image 

1  Sam.  3.  H.  I  called  not  my  s.  lie  down  again 
4.  Ifi.  and  he  said,  what  is  there  done,  my  s.  7 
10.2.  sorroweth,  saying,  what  shall  I  do  foi  my  s.J 

14.  39.  though  it  beui  Jonathan  my  s.  he  shall  die 
40.  land  Jonatha^j/s.  will  be  on  the  other  side 
42.  casts  lots  between  me  and  Jonathan  my  t. 

22.  8.  thai  my  s.  halh  made  a  league  with  son  of 
Jesse,  or  that  mjf  s.  halh  stirred  up  my  servant 
24.  16.  is  this  thy  voice,  my  s-  David  ?  20.  17. 
26.  21.  I  have  sinned,  return,  my  s.  David 
25.  Saul  said,  blessed  be  thou  my  s.  Dav^d 

2  Sam.  7.  14. 1  will  be  his  father,  he  shall  be  my  s. 
13.  25.  king  said,  nay,  my  s.  let  us  not  nil  now  go 
14. 11.  not  suffer  revengers,  lest  they  destroy  nij/s. 

10.  destroy  me  and  mil  s.  out  ofthe  inheritance 
16.11. behold  mys.  who  came  forth  ofmyboweli 

18.  22.  Joab  said,  wherefore  wilt  thou  run  my  s. 
33.ihe  king  was  moved  and  wept,  thus  he  snid.O 

my  a.  Absalom!  my  a.  my  ».  Absalom  !  19.4. 


BON 

X  King*  1.  21.  I  and  my  s.  be  counted  offenders 
3.  20.  she  arose  and  took  my  s.  from  beside  me 

21.  behold,  it  was  not  my  s.  which  I  did  bear 

22.  the  woman  eaid  nay;  but  the  living  is  mys. 

23.  thy  son  is  the  dead,  and  my  s.  is  tlie  living 
17.  12.  that  I  may  dtess  it  lor  me  and  my  s. 

18.  she  said,  art  thou  come  to  me  to  slay  viy  s. 
S  Kings  G.  '28.  and  we  will  eat  my  s.  to-morrow 

29.  so  we  boiled  »;iys.  and  did  eat  liim,  give  thy*. 

'      14.  y.  give  thy  daughter  to  my  s.  2  Chrun.  2o.  Id 

I  Chron.  17.  in.  and  he  shall  be  my  s.  22.  10. 

22.11.  now  mys.  L.  wdl  he  with  thee  and  prosper 

28.0.  I  have  chosen  him  to  be  my  s.  will  be  his  lath. 

9.  thou,  Solomon  my  s.  know  God  of  thy  lather 
29.  1.  Solomon  my  s.  whom  G.  alone  hath  chosen 

19.  give  to  Solomon  mys.  a  perfectheart  to  keep 
P«oZ.2.7.  L.said  to  me,  thou  art  my  s.  this  day  have 

I  begotten  thee,  Jlcts  13. 33.  Hcb.  1.  5.  |  5.  5. 

Prov.  3.  1 1.  my  s.  despise  not  the  chastening  of  the 

Lord,  nor  be  weary  of  his  correction,  Ueh.li.'). 

6.  3.  do  Ibis  now,  my  s.  and  deliver  thyself 
23.20.  mys.  give  me  thine  heart,  observe  my  ways 
24.  21.  my  s.  fear  thou  the  Lord  and  the  king 
27.  11.  nty  s.  be  wise,  and  make  my  heart  glad 
31. 2.  what,  my  s.  7  and  what,  the  s.  of  my  vows  ? 

Eccl.  12. 12.  further  by  these  my  s.  be  admonished 
Jcr.31.20.is  Ephraim  my  dear «.?  is  he  pleas.child  1 
f;zeA.21. 10.it  contemnelh  rod  ofmys.aa  every  tree 
Nus.  11.  1. 1  calledmj/«.  out  of  Egypt,  Mat.  2.  1.5. 
^/at.3.17.a  voice  saying,  this  is  mi/ beloved  s.  17.5. 
17.  15.  Lord  have  mercy  on  my  s.  he  is  lunatic 
21.  37.  they  will  reverence  my  s.  Mark  12.  0. 
Mark  9.  17.  Master,  I  have  brought  to  thee  mys. 
Luke  9.  38.  Master,  I  beseech  thee  look  upon  viys. 
15.  24.  for  this  my  s.  was  dead  and  is  alive  again 
1  Tim.  1.  2.  to  Timothy  viy  own  s.  in  the  faith 
27Vm.  2. 1.  mys.  be  strong  in  grace  that  is  in  Christ 
Tit.  1. 4.  to  Titus  iiiine  own  s.  after  common  faith 
PUilem.  10.  I  beseech  thee  for  viy  s.  Onesiinus 
Hev.  21.  7.  I  will  be  his  God,  he  shall  be  my  s. 

Thy  SON. 
Oen.  22.  2.  take  now  thy  s.  thine  only  son  Isaac 
IC.  thou  hast  not  withheld  thy  s.  thine  only  s.  10. 

24.  5.  nmst  I  needs  bring  thy  s.  again  to  the  land?' 
27.  32.  he  said,  I  am  thy  s.  thy  tirst-born  Esau 
37.  32.  know  now  whether  it  be  thy  s.  coal  or  no 
48.  2.  behold,  thy  s.  Joseph  cometh  unto  tbee 

Ezod.  4.  2;i.  I  will  slay  thy  s.  even  thy  first-born 

10.  2.  tell  in  the  ears  of  thy  s.  and  son's  s. 

13. 8.  thou  shalt  shew  tky  s.jn  that  day,  saying 

14.  whim  thy  s.  asketh  thee,  what  is  this!  shalt  say 

by  strength  brought  from  Egypt,  Deut.G.'iti. 

20. 10.  not  do  any  work,  thou,  nor  thy  s.  seventh 

day  is  the  sabbath,  thou  shalt  not  do, Deut.  5. 14. 

J)eut.  6.  21.  tlicn  thou  shalt  say  unto  thy  s. 

7.  3.  nor  his  daughter  shalt  thou  talte  unto  thys. 

4.  they  will  turn  away  thy  s.  from  following  me 
12.18.eat  them  bi-fore  Ld.  thou  and  thy  s.lG.11,14. 
13.  6.  \(thy  s.  entice  thee  secretly,  saying 

Judg.  6.  30.  bring  out  thy  s.  that  he  may  die 

8.  22.  rule  over  us,  thou,  thy  s.  and  thy  son's  s. 

1  Sam.  16.  19.  Saul  said,  send  me  David  thy  s. 

25.  8.  give  to  thy  servants,  and  to  thy  s.  David 

2  Sam.H.1].lhit(:  shall  not  one  hair  of  (At/ s.  fall 
\Kings  \.  12.  save  thy  life  and  life  oUhy  s.  Solom. 

13.  thy  S.Solomon  shall  reign  after  me,  17,  30. 
3.22.  thedeadisZAy.!.  ||  23.  and  thys.  is  itie  dead 
5.  5.  thy  s.  whom  I  will  set  upon  thy  throne 

11.  12.  1  will  rend  it  out  of  the  hand  of  thy  s. 
13.1  will  give  one  tribe  to  thys.  for  David's  sake 

17.  13.  and  after  make  for  thee  and  for  thy  s. 
I  19.  give  me  thy  s  1|  23.Elisha  said,  see,  (.  «.liveth 
2/rinn-s  4.30.  when  she  came,  he  said,  take  ui>  thys. 
fi.  23.  give  thy  s.  that  we  may  eat  him  to-day,  -'9. 

10.  7.  saying,  [  am  thy  servant,  and  thy  s. 
lCAr.28.6.Solomon  thys.  shall  build  me  my  house, 

I  have  chosen  him  to  be  my  s.  2  Chr.  0.  9. 
Prov.  19.  18.  chasten  thy  s.  while  there  is  hope 
29.  17.  correct  thy  s.  and  he  shall  give  thee  rest 
J.uke  9.  41.  Jesu^  said,  bring  thy  s.  hither 
15. 19.  am  no  more  worthy  to  be  called  thy  s.  21. 
SO.aisonnasthisfAys.  was  come  who  di'voured 
John  4.  .'SO.  go  thy  way,  thy  s.  liveth,  51,  53. 
17. 1.  glorify  thy  .i.l\ml  thy  s.iho  may  glorify  thee 
19.20.he  saith  to  his  mother^voman,  behold  thy  s. 

SON  of  iMn. 
Ezek.  2.  1.  he  said  s.  nf  man,  stand  upon  thy  feet 

3.  ».  of  man,  I  send  thee  lo  the  children  of  Israel 
6.  and  thou,  s.  nfman,  be  not  afraid  of  them 
8.  thou  ».  of  man,  hear  what  I  say  unto  thee 

3.  1.  s.  of  man,  eat  that  thou  findeBt,ent  this  roll 
^..i.ofman,  cause  thy  bidly  to  eat,  fill  thy  howels 

4.  ».  of  man,  go  get  thee  to  the  house  of  Israel 
10.  s.  of  man,  nil  the  words  that  I  speak  receive 
17.  s.  of  man,  I  have  made  thee  a  watchman 
2.5.  O  ».  of  man,  they  shall  put  bands  upon  thee 

4.1.thou  also  .».»/min,  lake  thi-e  n  tile  before  thee 
16. ».  o/man,I  will  break  slafTof  bread  in  Jerus 

5.  1.  thou  s.  of  man,  InHc  thee  a  sharp  knife 
0.  2  t.  of  man,  'el  thv  face  toward  niountaiiu 

568 


SON 

Eick.l.  2.  thou  $.  of  man,  thus  saith  the  Lord  God 
8.  5.  s.  of  man,  lift  up  thine  eyes  toward  north 

6.  he  said,  i.  of  man,  seest  thou  what  they  do  ? 

8.  ho  said,  s.  of  man,  dig  now  in  the  wall 
\'i.S'of  man,  hast  thou  seen  what  ancients  do  ? 
15.  be  said,  hast  thou  seen  this,  O  s.  of  man?  17. 

11.  2.  s.  vf  man,  these  are  the  men  that  devise 
4.  prophesy  against  them,  prophesy,  O  s.  of  man 
15.  s.  of  man,  thy  brethren  are  they  unto  whom 

12.2.S  o/man,  thoudwellestin  a  rebellious  house 
3.  therefore  thou  s.  of  man,  prepare  thee  stuff 

9.  8.  of  man,  hath  not  the  house  of  Israel  said 

18.  s.  of  man,  eat  thy  bread  with  quaking 

22.  s.  of  man,  what  is  that  proverb  ihat  ye  have 
27.  .t.  of  man,  behold,  they  of  house  <d'  Israel  say 

13.  2.  s.  of  man,  pro|)hesy  against  the  prophets 
17. thou  s.  of  man,  set  thy  face  against  thy  people 

14.  3.  s.  of  man,  these  men  have  set  up  their  idols 

13.  4.  vf  man,  when  the  land  sinnelh  against  me 
15.2.*. o/man, what  is  vine-tree  more  than  anytree 

16.  2.  s.  o/ man,  cause  Jerus.  know  her  abominat. 

17.  2.  s.  vf  man,  jiut  forth  a  riddle  and  speak 

20.  3.  s.  vf  man,  speak  to  the  elders  of  Israel 
4.s.»/7ttun,wilttliou  judge  them?  cause  to  know 
27.  therefiire  4".  of  man,  spcdk  lo  house  of  Israel 
40.  s.  of  man,  set  thy  face  toward  the  south 

21.  2.  s.  of  man,  set  thy  face  toward  Jerusalem 
G.  sigh  therefore,  thou  s.  vf  man,  with  bitterness 
\Ks.vfm.  prophesy  and  say,  a  sword,  a  8word,28. 
12.  cry  and  howl*,  of  m.  for  it  shall  be  on  people 

14.  s.  of  man,  prophesy  and  smite  thine  hands 

19.  also  thou  «.  of  man,  appoint  thee  two  ways 

22.  2.  thou  «.  vf  man,  will  thou  judge  the  city  1 
18.*.  of  man,  house  oflsr.  is  to  me  become  dross 

24.  s.  of  man,  say  to  her,  thou  art  the  land  Ihat 
23.2.S.  o/'m.tliere  were  two  women  of  one  mother 

SO.s.e/m.willthoujudge  Aholah  and  Aholibah? 

24.  2.  .V.  vf  man,  write  thee  the  name  of  the  day 
la.s.ofman,  I  take  away  the  desire  ofthine  eyes 

25.  s.  of  man,  shall  it  not  be  in  the  day  when 

25.  2.  s.  of  man,  set  thy  face  against  Ammonites 
20.  2.  .«.  of  man,  because  that  Tyrus  hath  said 
27.  2.  s.  of  man,  take  up  a  lamentation,  28.  12. 
2f.  2.  s.  of  man,  say  unto  the  prince  of  Tyrus 

21.  5.  of  man,  set  ihy  face  against  Zidon 

29.  2.  s.  vf  man,  set  tliy  face  against  Pharaoh 
18.  s.  tf/r/ia7(,  Nebuchadrezzar  caused  his  army 

30.  2.  .<!.  of  man,  prophesy,  and  say,  thussaith  L. 
U.S.  of  man,  I  have  broken  the  arm  of  Pharaoh 

31.2.  s.  of  man,  speak  to  Pliaraoh  kingof  Egypt 

32.2.  s.  of  man,  take  up  a  lamentation  of  Pharaoh 

18.  s.  of  man,  wail  for  the  multitude  of  Egypt 

33.  2.  s.  of  manfspeak  lo  children  of  thy  people 

7.  thou,  Os.o/ man,  Ihave  set  thee  a  watchman 

10.  O  s.  of  man,  speak  to  the  house  of  Israel 
12.  thou  s.  of  man,  Bay  to  the  children  of  Israel 
24.s.o/m«7i,tbey  that  inhabtt  thosewastes  of  ler 
30.  s.  of  man,  thy  people  still  are  talking  ag.  thee 

34.  2.  .s.  of  man,  prophesy  against  the  shepherd; 

35.  2.  6'.  of  man,  set  thy  face  against  mounl  Sei 

36.  1.  thou  .«.  of  man,  prophesy  to  the  mountains 
17.  s.  of  man,  when  the  house  of  Israel  dwelt 

37.  3.  he  said,  s.  of  man,  can  these  bones  live? 

9.  prophesy,  s.  of  man,  and  say  to  wind,  come 
U.S.  of  man,  these  bones  are  the  house  of  Israel 

10.  s.  of  man,  take  thee  one  stick,  and  write  on  it 

38.  2.  s.  of  man,  set  thy  face  again?l  Gog 

14.  thoref.  s.  of  man,  prophesy  and  say  unloGog 

39.  1.  thou  3.  of  man,  prophesy  ag.  Gog  and  say 
17.  thou  .9.  of  man,  thus  sailh  the  Lord,  43.  18. 

40.  4.  s.  of  man,  behold  with  thine  eyes,  and  hear 
43.  7.  he  said,  s.  of  man,  the  place  of  my  throne 

10.  s.  of  man,  shew  the  house  lo  house  of  Israel 
41. 5.  .1.  of  man,  mark  well,  behold  with  thine  eyes 
47.  0.  he  said,  s.  of  man,  hast  thou  seen  this  ? 
See.  Man. 
SONG. 
Ifefind  in  Scripture  several  songs  composed  upon 
important  occasions ;  for  example,  Moses  made 
one  after  the  passage  through  the  Red  sea,  to 
thank  God  for  the  deliverance  of  his  peopli;  and 
crlchrate  the  greatness  of  this  ?;ii>a»ic,  E.vod. 

15.  1,  2,  &-C.  David  composed  a  mournful 
song  upon  the  death  of  Saul  and  Jonathan,  and 
another  upon  the  death  of  Abner,  2. Sam.  1.  18, 
in.  I  3.  33.  Jeremiah  wrote  his  Lamentations, 
ichieh  are  a  song,  wherein  he  deplores  the  cala- 
mities and  ruin  of  Jerusalem  ;  and  he  made 
anntherupon  the  death  n/Jo.siah  king  n/Jud.ih, 
2  Chron.  35.  25.  Deborah  and  Uarak  madr  a 
triumphant  hymn  after  the  defeat  o/.Sisi'ra, 
Judg.  5  I,  2,3,  &c.  The  Canticles,  or  Solo- 
mon's Song,  and  thr  4.5th  Psalm,  are  songs  to 
celebrate  a  spiritual  and  divine  wedding,  such 
sort  of  pieces  as  the  Gri^eks  call  Rpilhalamia. 
Hannah  the  mother  o/Sainurl,  ani kina  lleze 
kiah,  returned  thanks  to  (iod  for  the  favours 
they  had-reeeived,in  solemn  and  spiritual  nonza. 
lSam.2.  l,2,&.c.I»a.38.10,  ll,&c.  TAcsongs 
eoTiposcd  by  the  Virgin  Mary,  by  Zacharia^  tht 


SON 

father  of  3o\m  tAcBaptist,a7!rfoW  Simeon,  art 
of  the  same  nature:  They  arc  thanksgitingi 
to  God  for  blessings  received  from  Aim,  Luk« 

1.  40,  68.  I  2.  29,  30. 

The  Song  of  Songs,  in  Hebrew,  Schir  Has- 
chirim,  (4e  most  excellent  of  all  songs.  The 
Christian  church,  as  well  as  the  synagogue, 
has  always  received  this  book  of  Canticles 
among  the  scriptures  as  generally  owned  to  be 
canonical.  The  form  of  it  is  dramatical, 
wherein  several  parts  of  it  are  uttered  by,  or 
in  the  name  of  several  persons ;  which  are 
chiefly  four,  the  bridegroom  and  bride,  and  the 
friends  or  companions  of  the  one,  and  of  the 
other.  The  design  of  the  book  in  general,  is  tc 
describe  the  jxassionate  loves  and  ha^py  mar- 
riage of  two  persons,  their  mutual  satisfac- 
tion therein,  and  the  blessed  fruits  and  effects 
thereof.  But  then  it  is  not  to  be  understood 
carnally,  concerning  Solomon  and  Pharaoh'i 
daughter,  althiiugh  the  inspired  author  may 
allude  to  that;  but  they  who  would  penetratcthe 
meaning,  and  comprehend  the  whole  mystery  of 
it,  must  raise  their  conceptions  above  things 
relating  tofl'sh  and  blood,  and  contemplate  in 
it  the  espousals  of  Christ  with  the  church,  and 
with  every  believer.  So  that  this  book  is  a 
continued  allegory,  wherein,  under  the  terms 
of  a  common  wedding,  a  divine  and  superna- 
tural marriage  is  expressed. 

The  Hebrews,  apprehending  it  might  be  under 
stood  in  a  gross  and  carnal  manner,  forbade 
the  rending  vf  it  before  the  age  of  thirty ;  and 
indeed  nothing ismore  dangerous  than  to  read 
it  with  carnal  thoughts  and  dispositions  ;  peo- 
ple not  only  being  liable  to  the  hazard  of  losing 
thereby  all  the  esteem  which  they  ought  to  have 
for  this  book,  but  of  even  wounding  the  sout 
instead  of  edifying  it. 

Suck  as  deny  this  spiritual  book  to  be  canonical, 
say,  that  neither  Christ,  nor  his  .Apostles,  have 
ever  cited  it,  and  that  the  name  of  God  is  nc{ 
once  to  be  found  in  it.  To  this  it  is  replied^ 
that  there  are  several  other  sacred  books,  whic/i 
our  Saviour  has  not  expressly  quoted;  and  that 
in  an  allegory,  wherein  the  Son  of  God  is  con- 
cealed under  the  figure  of  a  Husband,  itis  not 
necessary  that  he  should  he  expressed  by  his^ 
proper  name.  If  he  were  by  name  mtntioned,^^ 
it  would  cease  to  be  an  allegory. 

Exod.  15.  1.  then  sang  Moses  and  the  children  of 
Israel  this  s.  unto  the  Lord,  JVum.  21. 17. 

2.  the  Lord  is  my  strength  and  s.  and  he  ie  be- 
come my  salvation,  Psal.  118.  14.  Isa.  12.  i 

Deut-ZX.  19.  write  this  s.  that  this.?,  may  be  witness 
21.  this  s.  shall  testify  {|  22.  Moses  wrote  this* 
30.  Moses  spake  the  words  of  this  .?.  32.  44. 

.Judg.  5.  12.  awake,  awake,  Deborah,  utter  a  s. 

2  Sam.  22.  ].  David  spake  to  Lord  words  of  this  s. 

1  CAr.  0. 31.  they  whom  David  set  over  service  ofs. 
15.22.  Chenaniah  chiefofLevites  was  for  as.  27. 
25.  6.  these  were  under  their  father  for  s.  in  house 

2  C:hr.  29.  27.  s.  of  the  Lord  began  with  trumpeig 
.Job  30.  9.  now  I  am  their  s.  I  am  their  by-word 
Psal.  28.  7.  and  with  my  s.  will  I  praise  him 

33.  3.  sing  unto  him  a  new  s.  Isa.  42.  10. 

40.  3.  and  he  hath  put  a  new  s.  in  my  mouth 
42.  8.  and  in  the  night  his  s.  shall  be  with  me 
09.  12.  and  I  was  the  s.  of  the  drunkards 
30.  I  will  praise  the  nan>€  of  God  with  a  s. 
77.  0.  I  call  to  remembrance  my  s.  in  night 
90.  1.  O  sing  to  the  Lord  a  new  s.  98.  1.]  149.  1. 
137.  3.  for  there  they  required  of  us  a  s.  and  mirtK 
4.  how  shall  we  sing  Lord's*,  in  astranse  land? 
144.  9.  I  will  sing  a  new  s.  unto  thee,  O  <Jod 
F.ccl.  7.  5.  than  for  a  man  to  hear  the  s.  of  fooli 
Cant.  1.  1.  the  s.  of  songs  which  is  Solomon's 
Isa.  5.  \.  now  will  I  sing  a  s.  of  my  beloved 

24.  9.  they  shall  not  drink  wine  with  a  s, 

20.  1.  in  that  day  shall  this  s.  be  sung  in  Judah 
30.  29.  ye  sh.all  have  a  s.  as  in  the  mght 
JMm.  3.  14. 1  was  a  derision  and  theirs,  all  the  day 
Kick.  33.  ,32.  thou  art  to  them  as  a  very  lovely  ». 
Hev.a.  9.  they  sung  a  new  s.  ihou  art  worthy,  14.  3. 

14.  3.  no  man  could  learn  thai  s.  but  the  144,000 

15.  3.  they  sing  the  s.  of  Moses  and  s.  of  the  Lamb 

SONGS. 
Gen.  31.  27.  I  might  have  sent  then  away  with  s. 
.Judj.  9.  t27.  ihey  trod  the  grapes  and  made  «. 
1  Kings  4.  32.  his  s.  were  a  thousand  and  five 
!  Chron.  13.  fS.  David  prayed  Ix-forcGod  with  s. 

25.  7.  that  were  instructed  in  the  .«.  of  the  Lord 
.V(A.  12.  40.  in  the  days  of  David  there  were  i. 
■Job  35.  10.  God  my  maker  who  giveth  .».  in  night 
r.v.32.7.sliiill  compass  about  with  s.  of  deliveinnce 

119.  54.  have  ber-n  my  s.  in  house  of  piljrimage 
137.  3.  saying,  sing  us  one  of  the  s.  of  Zion 
Pruv.  25.  20.  so  is  he  that  singnth .?.  lo  heavy  heart 
Cant.  1.  1.  the  song  of*,  which  is  Solomon's 
Isa  23.  16.  mako  sweot  melody,  ting  many  • 


SON 

/(a.34.16.  from  utter,  patt  of  earth  have  we  heard  ». 

35.  10.  tlie  ransomed  shall  come  to  Zion  with  s. 

3d.  20.  will  #ing  my  «.  to  the  stringed  instruments 
Ezek.'iG.  13.1  will  cause  the  noise  of  thy  5.  to  cease 
Jlmos  5. 23.  take  away  from  me  the  noise  of  thy  s. 

8.  3.  s.  of  the  temple  shall  be  howlings  in  that  day 

10.  I  will  turn  all  your  s.  into  lamentation 
Hab.  3.  tl.  a  prayer  according  to  variable  s. 
/^;>A.5.11).S|)eak.  to  yours,  in  psalms  and  spiritual  s. 
Ctii.3.1t).admoni3h.one  anoth.in  hymns.spirituals. 

SONS. 
Oen  7.  13.  the  s.  of  Noah  entered  into  the  ark 

9.  13.  the  «.  of  Noah  that  went  forth  of  the  ark 
19.  these  are  the  three  s.  of  Noah,  and  of  them 

10.  1.  and  to  them  were  s.  born  after  the  flood 
ID.  14.  Lot  went  out  and  spake  to  his  s.-in-law 
23. 11.  in  the  presence  of  the  «.  of  my  people 
27.  29.  and  let  thy  mother's  s.  bow  down  to  thee 
34.  27.  s.  of  Jacob  came  upon  slain  and  spoiled 
37.  2.  and  the  lad  was  with  the  s.  of  Bilhah 

42.  5.  and  the  s.  of  Israel  came  to  buy  corn 

11.  we  are  all  one  man's  s.  we  are  no  spies,  32. 
46.  5.  the  s.  of  Israel  carried  Jacob  in  waggons 

Exod.  29.  t  30.  he  of  his  s.  that  is  priest  in  his  stead 
32.  2.  break  ofTear-rings  in  the  ears  of  your  a. 
Lev.  96.  29.  ye  shall  eat  the  flesh  of  your  s. 
^um.  16.  7.  ye  take  too  much  on  you,  yes.  of  Levi 
27.  stood  in  door  of  their  tents  their  wives  and  s. 

27.  3.  our  father  died  in  his  own  sin,  and  had  nos. 
36.3.  if  they  be  married  to  s.  of  other  tribes 

Deut.  23.  17.  nor  a  sodomite  of  the  s.  of  Israel 
32,  8.  when  he  separated  the  s.  of  Adam 
Jush.  1.5. 14.  Caleb  drove  3  s.  of  Anak,  Judg.  1.20. 
Judg.8.  19.  there  were  even  the  s.  of  my  mother 
30.  G ideon  had  70  s.  ||  10.  4.  Jair  had  thirty  s. 

12.  14.  Abdon  had  forty  s.  and  thirty  nephews 

19.  22.  certain  s.of  Belial  beset  house  round  about 
Ruth  1.  11.  are  thereyetany  more*. in  my  womb? 

1  .Sam.  1.  8.  am  not  I  better  to  thee  than  ten  s.  ? 

2.  12.  s.  of  Eli  were  s.  of  Belial,  knew  not  Lord 

8.  11.  will  take  yours,  and  appoint  them  for  hims. 
26. 1 16.  as  the  Lord  livelh,  ye  are  the  s.  of  death 

2  Sam.  2.  18.  there  were  three  s.  of  Zeruiah  there 

3.  39.  these  men  s.  of  Zeruiah  be  too  hard  for  me 

9.  11.  Mephibosheth  eat  as  one  of  the  king's  s. 

13.  23.  and  Absalom  invited  all  the  king's  s. 
30.  saying,  Absalom  hath  slain  all  ihe  king's  .?. 

16.10.what  to  do  with  you,  ye  s.of  Zeruiah?  19.  K!. 
23.6.but  s.  of  Belial  shall  be  as  thorns  thrust  away 
I  Kings  1.  9.  he  called  all  the  king's  s.  19.  2.'>. 
2.  7.  but  shew  kindness  tos.  of  BarzillaiCileadite 

4.  31.  for  he  was  wiser  than  Ihe  .s.  of  Mahol 

20.  35.  a  certain  man  of  the  s.  of  the  prophets 
21. 10.  set  two  men,  s.  of  Belial,  before  him 

KX'ino-s  4.5.  she  shut  door  upon  her  and  upon  her  s. 

10.  3.  look  out  the  meetest  of  your  master's  s. 
8.  they  have  brought  the  heads  of  the  kind's  s. 

11.2.  stole  him  from  thi;  king's  s.2  C/iroji.22. 11. 

25.7.  they  slews.  ofZedekiah  before  his  eves,  and 
put  out  eyes  ofZedekiah,  .Ter.  39.  O.'j  .52. 10. 

1  Chr.  5.  l.his  birth-right  was  given  to  s.  ofJosiph 
21.20.  Oman  and  his  four  s.  with  him  hid  thenu. 
24.  28.  of  Mahli  came  Eleazar,  who  had  no  s. 

28.  4.  among  the  s.  of  my  fathers,  he  liked  me 

2  Chron.  2:1.  3.  as  the  Lord  sn id  of  the  s.  of  David 
24.  25.  for  blood  of  the  s.  of  Jehoiada  the  priest 
25. 1 13.  s.  of  the  band  fell  on  the  cities  of  judah 
28. 1 6.  Pekah  slew  in  oneday  120,000  s.  of  valour 

JVeA.  13. 28.  oneof  thes.  of  Joiada  was  son-in-law 
Estk.  9.  10.  the  ten  s.  of  Haman  slew  they 

13.  let  Haman's  ten  s.  be  hanged  on  gallows,  14. 
Job  .5.  t7.  asthes.  of  the  burning  coal  lift  up  to  (iy 
Psal.  18.  t  44.  s.  of  stranger  shall  yield  obedience 

29.  t  L  O  ye  s.  of  mighty  gi  ve  to  the  Lord  glory 
89.  6.  who  among  s.  of  mighty  can  be  likened  ? 
144.  12.  that  our  s.  may  be  as  plants  grown  up 

Prov.  31 . 1 5.  pervert  judgment  of  all  s.  of  affliction 
t8.  in  the  cause  of  such  as  are  s.  of  destruction 

Eccl.  2.  t  7. 1  got  maidens,  and  had  s.  of  my  house 

Cant.  2.  3.  as  apple-tree  so  is  my  beloved  among  s. 

ha.  51. 18.  there  is  none  to  guide  her  among  all  s. 
58.6.  s.  of  stranger  that  join  themselves  to  Lord 
57.  3.  draw  near  hither,  ye  s.  of  the  sorcerers 
60. 10.  the  s.  of  the  stranger  shall  build  thy  walls 

14.  the  s.  of  them  that  afflicted  thee  shall  come 
61.  5.  the  .5.  of  the  alien  shall  be  your  plowmen 

62.8.  s.  of  the  stranger  shall  not  drink  thy  wine 
Icr.  6.  21.  the  fathers  and  s.  shall  fall  upon  them 

13.  14.  even  fathers  and  s.  together  will  I  dash 

19.  5.  they  built  the  high-places  to  burn  their  s. 
29.  6.  take  wives,  beget  s.  take  wives  for  your  s. 
35.5. 1  set  before  s.ofRcchabites  pots  full  of  wine 

6.  yeshill  drink  no  wine,  ye,  nor  your  s.  for  ever 
49.  1.  hath  Israel  no  s.?  hath  he  no  heirl 

//fflm.3. tl3. caused  s.  of  his  quiver  to  enter  my  reins 
4.2.  precious  s.  of  Zion,  comparable  to  fine  gold 

Ezek.  5. 10.  fatliera  shall  eat  their  s.  s.  their  fathers 

20.  31.  when  ye  make  your  .5.  pass  through  the  fire 
23.37.  they  caused  theirs,  to  pass  through  the  fire 

f{os.  I.  16.  ye  are  the  .«.  of  the  living  God 
503 


SON 

Amos  2.  II.  I  raised  up  of  your  ».  for  prophets 
Jific.  6.  f  6.  shall  Icomewithcalves,  s.  of  ayearold 
Zcclt.  4.  tl4.  he  said,  these  are  the  two  s.  of  oil 
Mat.  3.3.  he  shall  purify  s.  of  Levi,  and  purge  them 

6.  therefore  ye  s.  of  Jacob  are  not  consumed 
Mark  3. 17.  Boanerges,  which  is,  the  s.  of  thunder 
Luke  11.  19.  by  whom  do  your  s.  cast  them  out 
1  Cor.  4.  14.  but  as  my  beloved  s.  I  warn  you 
Oal.  4. 5.  that  we  might  receive  the  adoption  of  s. 

6.  because  ye  are  s.  God  hath  sent  forth  Spirit 
/f*;A.2.10.bringing  many  s.  to  glory  to  make  captain 
11. 21. Jacob  bles.sed  both  s.ol  Joseph  and  worship. 
12.7.  ifchastened,  God  dealeth  with  you  as  with  s. 

S.if  not  chastened, then  are  ye  ba.stards,and  nots. 

See  Aaron,  Daughter. 

SONS  of  God. 

Oen.  6. 2.  the  s.  of  God  saw  the  daughters  of  men 

4.  the  s.  of  God  came  in  to  the  daughters  of  men 
.fob  1.6.  s.o/  God  came  to  present  thetnselves,  2. 1. 
rj8.  7.  when  all  the  s.  of  God  shouted  for  joy 
Hos.  1. 10.  shall  be  said,  ye  ares,  of  ihe  living  God 
■John  1.12.  he  gave  them  power  to  become  s.vf  God 
fioOT.8.]4.as  are  led  by  spirit  of  God,  are  s.of  God 

19.  waiteth  for  the  manifestation  of  s.  of  God 
Phil.  2. 15.  that  ye  may  be  harmless,  the  s.  of  God 
1  .fohn  3. 1.  that  we  should  be  called  the  .«.  of  God 

2.  beloved,  now  are  we  thes.  of  God,  notappear 

Nis  SONS. 
Gcnl.l.  Noah  went  into  ark  and  his  s.  and  his  wife 

8.  18.  Noah  went  forth,  and  his  s.  and  his  wife 

9.  1.  God  blessed  Noah  and  A/ss. and  said  to  them 
25.  9.  his  s.  Isaac  and  Islimael  buried  him  in  cave 
30.  35.  he  gave  them  into  the  hands  of  A?s  s. 

.35.  29.  his  s.  Esau  and  Jacob  buried  him 

49.  33.  had  made  an  end  of  commanding  A(S  s. 

50.  12.  his  s.  did  unto  hija  as  he  commanded 

13.  his  s.  carried  him  into  the  land  of  Canaan 
Erod.l8.5.Jeth.came  with  Aiss.and  wife  to  Moses 

28.  1.  take  Aaron  and  A!s  s.  to  minister  to  me 

41.  thou  shall  put  the  garments  on  A«s  s.  29.  8. 

29.20.  putblood  on  the  tip  of  the  rightear  nfhis  s. 

21.  thou  shalt  sprinkle  the  blood  upon  A«s  s. 

27.  sanctify  that  which  is  fur  his  s.  Lev.  8.  30. 

7!,ei'.6.22.  priest  of  Ais  s.  that  is  anointed  shall  offyr 

J\rum,  21. 35.  they  smote  Og  and  Ai's  s.  and  people 

Deut.  2.  33.  we  smote  Sihon,  Ai's  s.  and  his  people 

18.  5.  Lord  hath  chosen  him  and  A(s  ».  to  minister 

21. 16.  when  he  maktth  his  s.  to  inherit  what  hath 

.Tudg.'A.^S.Ua.vG  slain  his  s.  70  persons  on  one  stone 

17.5. Mica h consecrated  one ofAiss.became priest 

11.  the  Lcvite  was  to  him  as  one  nfhis  s. 

18.  30.  he  and  Ai's  s.  were  priests  to  tribe  of  Dan 
1  Sam.  2.  22.  now  Eli  heard  all  that  his  s.  did 

3.  13.  because  his  s.  made  themselves  vile 

8. 1.  Sam.  when  old  made  his  s.  judges  over  Israel 

3.  his  s.  walked  notin  his  ways,  but  turned  aside 
16.  1.  I  have  provided  me  a  king  ainong  A;s  s 

30.  6.  all  people  was  grieved,  every  man  for  hiss. 

31.  2.  the  Philistines  followed  hard  upon  Saul  and 
upon  his  s.  and  slew  Jonathan,  1  Chron.  10.2. 

2.9rt>n.21.fi.let  seven  men  of  Aiss.be delivered  to  us 

1  Kings  13. 11.  Aj's  s.  came  and  told  him  all  works 

12.  his  s.  had  seen  what  way  the  man  of  G.  went 

21.  29.  but  in  his  s.  days  will  I  bring  the  evil 

2 ^iH^s  9.26.1  have  seen  blood  of  Naboth  and  hiss. 

19.  37.  his  s.  smote  him  with  sword,  Tsa.  37.  38. 

2  Chr.  11. 14.  Jeroboam  andA/ss.  had  cast  them  off 

13.  5.  even  to  him  and  A>s  s.  by  a  covenant  of  salt 
21.7.  to  give  a  light  to  him,  and  to  his  s.  for  ever 

17.  carri-rad  away  his  s.  save  the  youngest  of  Aw  s. 
36.  20.  vvhere  they  were  servants  to  him  and  Aj's  s. 
Ezra  6. 10.  and  pray  for  life  of  the  king  and  his  s. 
Esth.  9.25.  that  he  and  his  s.  be  hanged  on  gallows 
Job  1.  4.  and  hiss,  went  and  feasted  in  their  houses 

14.  ?1.  his  s.  come  to  honour,  he  knoweth  it  not 
.38.92.  or  canst  thou  guide  Arcturus  with  his  s.? 
42.  16.  after  this,  Job  saw  his  s.  and  his  s.  sons 

./er.  35.14.Jonadab  comm.Aiss.  not  to  drink  wine 
F.zek.  46.  16.  if  prince  give  a  gill  to  any  of  his  s. 
Dan.  11. 10.  his  s.  shall  be  stiried  up  and  assemble 
Sfe  Man. 
My  SONS. 
Gen.  48. 9.  Joseph  said  to  his  father,  they  are  mys. 
1  .Sam.2,24.nay,7nys.  for  it  is  no  good  report  I  hear 
12.  2.  Samuel  saiil,  behold,  my  s.  are  with  you 

1  CAr«n.2S.  5.  ofallmys.  he  hathcho-en  Solomon 

2  CAr.  29. 11.  Hezekiah  said,  my  s.  be  not  negligont 
.Tob  1.  5.  Job  said,  it  may  be  that  my  s.  have  sinned 
/sa.45. 11.  ask  me  of  things  to  come  concern.  7ny  t. 
1  Cor.  4.  14.  but  as  my  beloved  s.  I  warn  you 

See  Seven. 

Thy  SONS. 

Gen.  6. 18.  thou  shalt  come  into  ark,  thou  and  t.  s. 

8. 16.  go  forth  of  ark,  thou,  thy  wife,  and  thy  s. 

F.xnd.  19. 24.ordinan.to  thee  and  thys.  JWm.18.8. 

22.  29.  firs'-born  of  thy  s.  shalt  thou  give  to  me 
34.  16.  make  thy  s.  go  a  whoring  after  their  gods 

20.  all  the  first-horn  of  thy  s.  thou  shalt  redeem 
Lev.  10.9.  do  not  drink  wine,  nor  thys.  with  thee 

14.  because  it  is  thy  due,  and  thy  s.  due 


soo 

JV*«m.  18. 1.  thou  and  thy  s.  shall  bear  the  iniquity 

2.  but  thou  and  thy  s.  with  thee  shall  minister 
7.  thou  and  thy  s.  shall  keep  your  priests'  office 
9.  shall  be  most  holy  for  thee  and  for  thy  s. 

11.  I  have  given  them  to  thee  and  to  thy  s. 
Deut.  4.  9.  but  teach  them  thy  s.  and  thy  s.  sons 

1  .Sam.  2.  29.  and  honourest  thy  s.  above  me 

8. 5.  thou  art  old,  and  thy  s.  walk  not  in  thy  way3 

28. 19.  to-morrow  shall  thou  and  thys.  be  with  me 

2  .Sam.  9. 10.  thou  and  thy  s.  shall  till  land  for  him 
2  Kings  4.  4.  shalt  shut  door  upon  thee  and  thys. 

15. 12.  L.  said  to  Jehu,  thys.air.M  sit  on  throne  of 

Israel  to  fourth  generation,  1  Chron.  17.  11. 

20. 18.  thys.  shall  be  eunuchs  in  Babyl.  Isa.39.  7. 

fsa.  49.  22.  and  they  shall  bring  thys.  in  their  arms 

51.20.  t.  s.havefainted,  they  lie  at  head  of  streets 
00.4. ihey  come  to  thee, «.  s.  shall  come  from  far,9. 
62.  5.  as  young  man  marrieth  virgin,  soshall  thy  s. 

.Ter.  48.  46.  thys.  and  daughters  are  taken  captives 
ZccA.  9. 13.  and  raised  up  thy  s.  O  Zion,  ag.  thy  s. 

Two  SONS. 
Gen.  10.  25.  to  Eber  were  born  two  s.  1  Chr.  1. 19. 
34  25.  two  of  the  s.  of  Jacob  slew  the  males 

41.  50.  to  Joseph  were  horn  two  s.  before  famine 

42.  37.  slay  my  two  s.  if  I  bring  him  not  to  thee 
44.  27.  ye  know  that  my  wife  bare  me  two  s. 
48.  1.  and  he  look  with  him  his  two  s.  5. 

Ezod.  18.  3.  Jcthro  took  Zipportih  and  her  two  s. 
Lev.  16. 1.  after  Ihe  death  of  the  two  s.  of  Aaron 
Ruth  l.l.ho,his  wife, /wos.  Miihlon  andChilion,2. 

3.  shewasleftandhertraos.  ||  5.  left  of  her /tco  s. 

1  Sam.  2.  34.  that  shall  come  upon  thy  two  s. 
4.  4.  the  two  s.  of  Eli  were  there  with  the  ark 

17.  thy  tico  s.  Hophni  and  PhiuKhas  are  dead 

2  .Sam.  14.  6.  thy  handmaid  had  two  s.  they  strove 
15.  36.  they  had  there  with  thein  their  two  s. 
21.  8.  but  the  king  took  the  two  s.  of  Rizpah 

2  Kings  4.  1.  creditor  to  take  <!oos.  to  be  bondmen 
Mat.  20.  21.  grant  that  these  my  two  s.  may  sit 
21.  28.  a  certain  man  had  tico's.  Luke  15.  li 
26.  37.  took  with  him  Peter  and  two  s.  of  Zebed. 
.'JcZs  7.29.stranger  in  Midian, where  he  begat  twos. 
Gal.  4.  22.  it  is  written  that  Abraham  had  twos. 

SOON. 
Exod.  2. 18.  how  is  it  that  ye  are  come  SOS.  to-day? 
/>e«?.4.26.  that  ye  shall  s.  utterly  perish  from  land 
./o4  32.  22.  in  so  doing  my  Makers,  take  me  away 
Psiil.  37. 2.  they  shall  s.  be  cut  down  like  the  grass 
68.  31.  shall  s.  stretch  out  her  hands  unto  God 
81.  14.  I  should  s.  have  subdued  their  enemies 
90.  10.  for  it  is  s.  cut  off,  and  we  fly  away 
106. 13.  they  s.  forgat  his  works,  they  waiieil  not 
Prov.  14.  17.  he  that  is  s.  angry  dealeth  foolishly 
J\{at.  21.  20.  how  s.  is  the  fig-tiee  withered  away 
Gal.  1.  6. 1  marvel  that  ye  are  so  s.  removed  from 
27'Afss.2.2.  ye  benot  s.shaken  in  mind  or  troubled 
7'iM.7.  notself  will,  not s.angrv,not  given  to  wine 

Jls  SOON  as. 
Exod.32. 19.  ass.  as  he  came  nigh  unto  Ihe  camp 
.fnsh.S.  19.  ran  as  s.  as  he  had  stretched  his  hand 
2  .Sam.22.45.  as  s.  as  Ihey  hear  they  shall  be  obedi- 
ent to  me,  strangers  shall  submit,  Psal.  18.  44. 
Psal.  .58.3.  they  go  astray,  as  s.  as  they  be  born 
Lukel  .23.  as  s.  as  his  ministration  were  accomplish. 
Phil.  2.  23.  as  s.  as  T  see  how  it  will  go  with  me 

SOONER. 
Neb.  13. 19.  that  I  may  be  restored  to  you  Ihe  s. 
Jam.  1. 11.  sun  is  no  s.  risen,  hut  it  withereth  grass 

SOOTHSAYER, 
Diviner  or  Magician.  Some  derive  this  word 
from  riaanan,  which  signifies  a  cloud  ;  because 
this  kind  of  diviners  raised  their  conjectures 
from  the  various  figures  and  motions  of  ihe 
clouds  and  sky;  or  from  the  flight  and  chatter- 
ing of  birds  and  fowls  in  the  air.  Others  de- 
rive the  word  from  Haajin,  an  eye,  to  signify 
astrologers,  who  foretell  future  contingent 
things,  by  the  superstitions  observation  of  the 
stars  and  planets.  Others  think,  that  the  word 
signifies  such  magicians,  who,  by  playing 
hocus  pocus  tricks,  endeavour  thereby  to  im- 
pose upon  the  rt/es  and  understanding  of  the 
spectators :  making  things,  by  their  magical 
skill,  appear  otherwise  than  in  truth  they  are. 
Others  again  understand  b)/  it  such  as  irive 
antwers  to  those  that  repair  to  them  for  advice 
and  direction  in  their  affairs,  deriving  it  from 
a  word  that  signifies  to  answer.  Lastly,  same 
suppose  it  may  be  derived  from  a  word  which 
signifies  a  set-time,  and  by  it  understand  such 
as  observe  days  and  times,  as  gond  or  bad, 
lucky  or  unlucky ;  svch  a.s  those  that  did  cast 
lots  before  Haman,  Esth.  3.  7. 
fn Exod.  7. 11. (Aere is  me.ntionmadr  o/Pharaoh's 
sorcerers  or  magicians,  who  artril  by  the  powet 
of  the  devil,  whom  by  certain  ritrs  and  cere- 
monies they  engaged  to  their  assist ar\ce,re.tisted 
Moses,  and  by  their  enehavtmrnts  connterfeiteA 
his  true  miracles  before  Pharaoh.  Of  these  t\a 
two  chief  were  Jannes  and  Jambres,  2  Tim.  3 


soo 

8,  These  names  are  not  to  be  found  tn  tke 
story  of  t lie  Old  Testament,  but  are  taken  out 
of  utker  records  of  tke  Jews,  or  were  known  in 
St.  Paul's  time  by  tradition.  The  Paraphrast 
Junatlian  says,  tliat  tlicy  were  the  two  sons  of 
Balaam,  who  accompanied  him,  when  he  went 
to  Bal:ik  king  of  Moah. 

These  magicians  wrought  no  true  miracle,  but 
only  in  shew  and  appearance,  which,  by  Ihi;  per- 
mission of  God,  was  not  difficult  for  the  devil 
to  do,  either  by  altering  the  air  and  the  specta- 
tor's sight,  and  by  causing  their  rods  both  to 
look  and  mooc  like  serpents;  or  by  a  sudden 
and  secret  conveyance  of  real  serpents  thither, 
and  removing  the  rods.  Moses  however  ex- 
presses himself  throughout  in  such  a  manner 
as  might  persuade  one,  that  Pliaraoli's  magi- 
cians really  operated  the  same  effects  as  he  him- 
self produced:  so  that  Plinraoli  and  his  whole 
court  were,  persuaded,  that  the  power  of  their 
maincians  was  equal  to  that  of  Moses,  till  the 
Egy|)tiaiis,  7iot  being  able  to  produce  lice,  as 
Moses  had  done,  were  constrained  to  own,  that 
tlio  tiiigcr  of  God  was  concerned  in  it,  Ezod.  8. 
18,19.  Till  then  they  had  acknowledged  nothing 
divine  or  supernatural  in  any  thing  he  did. 
Jtnd  it  is  agreed,  that  magic  and  juggling 
tricks,  eotl  angels  and  sorcerers,  may  some- 
times imitate  very  nearly  true  miracles  and  the 
operations  uf  the  Mmighty.  Moses's  manner 
of  eiprcssing  himself  is  a  great  evidence  of  the 
truth  of  scripture  story,  and  that  it  ions  not 
written  by  fiction  and  design.  For  if  Moses 
had  written  these  books  to  deceive  the  world, 
and  to  adnance  his  own  reputation,  as  some 
take  the  liberty  to  say,  it  is  ridiculous  to  think 
that  he  would  have  put  in  this,  and  many  other 
passages,  which  might  seem  so  much  to  eclipse 
Ms  lionour,  and  the  glory  of  his  works. 

Daniel  also  .speaks  of  njagicians,  and  the  diviners 
that  were  m  Clialdea  under  king  Nebuchad- 
nezzar. Ifc  names  four  sorts  of  them,  Dan.  3. 
2.  I.  Cliartuiniin,  which,  according  to  Theo- 
dotion,  signifies  enchanters  ;  according  to  tke 
Septuagint,  sophists :  according  to  St.  Jerom, 
ario\os,dininrrs,fortunctelters,  casters  of  na- 
tioities.  II.  Asapliiin.  This  word  has  a  great 
resemblance  to  the  Greek  word  sojihoi,  wise 
OT«n.  Grotlus  thinks  it  is  derived  from  the 
Greek.  Theodotion  and  Jerom  have  rendered 
it  by  masicians,  and  the  Septuagint  by  philoso- 
()hers.  III.  Meca9|)hiin,  which  by  St.  Jerom, 
and  the  Greeks,  is  translated  malifici 
chanters  :  such  people  as  make  use  of  noxious 
herbs  and  drugs,  the  blnod  of  victims,  and  the 
bones  of  the  dead,  for  their  superstitious  opera 
tions.  IV.  Casdim,  or  Chaldeans.  This  word 
has  two  different  significations.  The fi 
timates  the  Chaldean  people,  who  had  then 
Nebuchadnezzar  for  their  monarch.  The  se 
cond  expresses  a  sort  of  philosophers  called 
also  Chiddeans,  who  dwelt  in  a  separate  part 
of  the  city,  and  were  exempt  from  all  public 
offices  and  employments.  Their  study  was 
physic,  astrology,  divination,  the  foretelling 
of  future  evetits  by  the  observation  of  the 
stars,  the  interpretation  of  dreams,  the  science 
«/  auguries,  the  worship  of  the  godg,  ice. 

9li  these  inquisitive  and  superstitious  arts  arc 
strictly  forbidden  by  the  lawofOod,  all  where- 
in any  conjurations,  or  invocations  of  the 
devil  are  used;  in  a  word,  all  the  black  art, 
and  all  superstitious  ceremonies  made  use  of 
by  magicians,  sorcerers,  enchanters,  witches, 
Ktiards,  necromancers,  exorcists,  astrologers, 
soothsayers,  interpreters  of  dreams,  fortune- 
tellers, casters  of  nativities,  &c.  in  practising 
their  diabolical  arts,  whetk'r  it  be  to  hurt 
mankind,  or  to  procure  them  health,  or  any 
other  advantages.  God  has  forbidden  to  con- 
sult such  persons  upon  pain  of  death,  I.ov.  20. 
C.  Saul  did  what  he  could  to  drive  them  out 
of  the  country  of  Israel,  1  Sam.  28.  .3.  But, 
for  all  this,  many  were  still  to  be  found;  and 
tke  Isrneliles  were  always  much  addicted  to 
these  sorts  of  superstitions.  .Ind  the  same 
prince  who  had  been  so  caoer  in  driving  them 
out  of  his  dominions,  at  last  went  to  consult 
one  himself,  1  Sum.  28.  7,  8,  &c.  See  Divina- 
tions, F,.voRrisT,>!. 

Josh.  1.3.22.  Kalaam  son  of  P.eor  s.  did  Isrnol  slay 
HOOTIISAYRRS. 

r<'i.2.fi.hast  forsaken  thyi"''>|>lo,boron«o  thflynre  s. 

f)nn.2.27.  the  secret  cannot  the  s.  shew  to  the  king 

5.7.  kms  cried  aloud  to  bring  (;hahlenn«  nnil  s. 
1 1,  whom  the  king  made  master  of  the  s. 

Mic.  .5.  12.  and  Ih.in  shall  have  no  more  §. 
SO()TIIS.\YI.\'G. 

Jlcts  IG.  IG.  which  brought  her   masters  much 
gain  by  s. 
5M 


SOR 


SOR 


SOP.  '  Psal.  38. 11.  my  friends  stand  aloof  from  my  *. 

John  13. 26.  he  it  is  to  whom  I  shall  give  a  s.  when  '.   77.  2.  my  s.  ran  in  the  night  and  ceased  not 
he  had  dipped  the  s.  he  gave  it  Judas  Iscariot  Rev.  16.  2.  there  fell  a  grievous  s.  u]^  the  men 


27.  after  the  s.  Satan  entered  into  him,  30. 
SOAP. 

.hr.  2.22.  for  tho'  thou  wash  and  take  thee  much  s. 
■1/u/.3.2.whomayabide  his  corning?  is  like  fuller'ns. 

SORCERER. 

Acts  13.6.  found  a  certains,  u  false  prophet,  a  Jew 

8.  but  Elymas  the  s.  withstood  them,  seeking 

SORCERERS. 

i5a;o<i.7.Il.lhen  Phara.  also  called  wise  men  and  s. 

hr.  27.  9.  therefore  hearken  not  to  your  s. 


SORES. 

Isa.  1.  6.  but  wounds,  and  bruises,  and  pulrifyinga 
Eiek.il.\Vi.  leaf  thereof  shall  oe  for  bruises  and  ». 
/-uAe  16.20.  beggar  Lazarus  at  his  gate  full  of s.  21 
Rev.  16.  11.  blasphemed  God  because  of  their 
pains  and  «. 
SORELY. 
Gen.  49.23.  archers  s.  grieved  him  and  shot  at  him 
/sa.  23. 5.  so  shall  be«.  pained  at  the  rejiort  of  Tyre 

SORER. 


/>an.  2. 2.  Nebuchadnezzar  commanded  to  call  s.\lieb.  10.2D.  of  how  muchs.  punishment  suppose  ye 

J\1al.  3  5.  I  will  be  a  swift  witness  against  the  s.\  SORROW 

/?(■».  21. 8.  and  s.  shall  have  their  part  in  ihe  lake  [s  a  passion  that  contracts  the  heart,  sinks  the 


22.  15.  for  without  are  dogs  and  s.  murderers 

SORCERESS. 
Isa.  57.  3.  but  draw  near  hither,  ye  sons  of  the  s. 

SORCERY. 
Acts  8.  9.  a  man  Simon,  who  before-time  used  «. 

SORCERIES. 

Isa.  47.  9.  they  shall  come  on  thee  for  thys. 

12.  stand  now  >vith  the  multitude  of  thy  s. 

.^c/sH.  11. that  of  long  time  bewitched  them  with*. 

Rev.  9.  21.  neither  repented  they  of  their  s. 

18.  23.  for  by  tjiy  s.  were  all  nations  deceived 

SORE. 
Gen.  19.9.  they  pressed  s.  upon  the  man,  even  Lot 
31.30.  because  ihou  i.  longest  after  father's  house 
41.  50.  the  famine  waxed  s.  in  the  land  of  Egypt 
57. «.  in  all  lands  \\  43. 1.  s.  in  Canaan,  47.  4,  13. 
50.  10.  they  mourned  with  a  s.  lamentation 
/.'rHM).22.Lord  shewed  signs  great  and  s.  on  Egypt 
2H.  35.  the  Lord  shall  smite  thee  with  a  s.  botch 

59.  s.  sicknesses,  and  of  long  continuance 
.Tudg.  10.  9.  so  that  Israel  was  .s.  distressed 
14.  17.  <ie  told  her,  because  she  lay  s.  upon  him 
15. 18.  Samson  was  i.  athirst,  and  called  on  Lord 
20.34.ten  thousand  came  ag.Gibeah, the  batllewas 
«.  1  Sam.  31.  3.  2  Sam.  2.  17.  2  Kini'S  3.  26. 
21.2.  the  people  lifted  up  theirvoices  and  wept  s. 

1  Sam.  1.  6.  her  adversary  also  provoked  her  s. 
10.  Hannah  prayed  to  the  Lord,  and  wept  s. 

.5.  7.  his  band  is  s.  on  us,  and  on  Dajon  our  god 
14.  52.  there  was  s.  war  against  the  Philistines 
28.  15.  Saul  answered,  I  am  s.  distressed,  21. 

2  Sam.  13.  36.  the  king  and  his  servants  wept  ,?. 

1  Kings  17.1 7. sickness  so  s.nobreathwas  left  in  him 
18.  2.  and  there  was  a  s.  famine  in  Samaria 

2  Kings  6.  11.  the  king  of  Syria  was  s.  troubled 
20.  3.  and  Hezekiah  wept  s.  Isa.  38.  3. 

2  Chron.  21.  19.  so  Jehoram  died  of  s.  diseases 

28.  19.  ,\haz  transgressed  s.  against  the  Lord 
35.  23.  have  me  away,  for  I  am  s.  wounded 

F.zra  10.  1.  for  the  people  wept  very  «. 

JVfA.  13.  8.  it  grieved  me  s.  therefore  I  cast  forth 

.Jnh  2.  7.  Satan  smote  Job  with  s.  boils 

Psal.  2.  5.  and  vex  them  in  his  s.  displeasure 

6.3. my  soul  is .?.  vexed,  but  thou  O  Lord, how  lonf 

10.  let  mine  enemies  be  ashamed,  and  .f.  vexetl 

38.  2.  arrows  stick  fast,  thy  hand  presseth  me  «. 

a.  I  am  feeble  and  s.  broken,  I  roared  by  disquiet 

44.  19.  tho'  hast  s.  broken  us  in  place  of  dragons 

55.  4.  my  heart  is  s.  pained  within  me  and  terrors 

71.  20.  thou  hast  shewed  me  great  and  s.  troubles 

H8.  13.  thou  hast  thrusts,  at  me,  that  I  might  fall 

18. L. hath  chastened  me  s.  but  not  given  me  over 

Prnv.  11. 1 15.  he  that  is  surety,  shall  be  s.  broken 

F.ce.l.  I.  13.  this  s.  travail  hath  God  given,  4.  8. 
5.  13.  there  is  s.  evil  I  have  seen  under  sun,  16. 

Isa.  27. 1.  with  s.  and  greatsword  punish  leviathan 
.59.  11.  we  roar  like  bears,  mourn  s.  like  doves 
64. 9.  be  not  wroth  very  s.  O  Ijord,  nor  remember 
12.  wilt  thou  hold  thy  peace,  afflict  us  very  .s-.? 

.Ter.  13.  17.  mine  eye  shall  weep  s.  and  rim  dojyn 
22.  10.  hut  weep  s.  for  him  that  goelh  away 
.52.  6.  famine  was  s.  in  city,  there  was  no  bread 

I.am.  1  2.  she  weeprlh  .■!.  in  the  night  and  her  tears 
3.  .52.  mine  enemies  chased  ma  s.  like  a  bird 

F.zrh.  14.  21.  when  I  send  my  four  s.  judgments 
21.  10.  it  is  sharpened  to  make  a  .«.  slaughter 

Dan.Ci.  14.  the  king  wns.'.displeascil  with  himself 

.lf/V.2.10.itshall  destroy  you  even  with  s.  deBtriicl. 

7.rr.h.  1.  2.  Ihe  Lord  hath  been  .».  displeased,  15. 

Mat.  17.  15.  for  ho  is  lunatic,  ami  ,«.  vexed 
21.  15.  saving,  Flosanna,  they  wore  s.  displeased 

Mark  6.  51.  they  weuo  s.  amazed  in  themselves 
9. 26.  spirit  cried,  rent  him  s.  and  camn  out  of  him 
14.  33.  Ji'xus  began  to  he  s.  amazed  and  heavy 

Acts  20.  37.  they  all  wept  s.  and  kissed  Paul 
See  .\FRAin. 
SORE. 

Gen.  34.  25.  on  the  third  dav,  when  they  were  s. 

Job  5.  18.  hemakoth  s.  and  bindelh  up,  woundelh 
SORR. 

I,ev.  13.  42.  if  n  white  reddish  s.  if  is  a  leprosy 
43.  if  rising  of  ».  be  white  reddish  in  his  head 

2  Chron.  6.  28.  whatsoever  .•!.  or  sickness  there  be 

29.  when  every  one  shall  know  his  own  s.  grief 


pirits,  and  spoils  the  health  of  the  body.     St. 
Paul  advises  the  Thessalonians,  not  to  suffer 
themselves  to  be  overcome  with  sorrow  for  the 
godly  that  are  dead,  not  to  sorrow  after  a  hea- 
thenish manner,  as  those  that  had  no  hope  of 
a  future  resurrection,   1  Tliess.   4.   13.     The 
Apostle  here  docs  not  condemn  their  sorrow,  but 
only  the  excess  of  it.  Gracedestroysnot  nature, 
but  regulates  it ;  nor  takes  it  away  the  affec 
tions,  but  moderates  them.     For  to  mourn  for 
the  dead,  especially  those  that  die  in  the  Lord, 
is  a  duty  that  both  nature, grace,  and  the  prac- 
tice of  godly  men,  teach,  and  which   God  re- 
quircth.  Abraham  mourned  and  wept  for  S&T&h 
his  wife.  Gen.  23.  2.     Jacob  for  his  son  Joseph, 
supposing  he   had  been  turn  by  wild  beasts, 
Gen.  37.  34.     And  Joseph  nnd  his  brethren  for 
their  father  Jacob,  Gen.  50.  10.    The  contrary 
is  reproved  by  God  himself.     Isa.  57.  1,  The 
righteous  perisheth,  and   no  man  layeth  it  to 
heart;  and  merciful  men  are  taken  away,  none 
considering  that  the  righteous  is  taken  away 
from  the  evil  to  come;  And  to  die  vnLimented 
is  reckoned  as  a  curse.     Jer.  22.  18,  They  shall 
not    lament    for    Jehoiakim,   saying,    ah    my 
brother,  or  ah  my  sister,  &c.     It  is  only  then 
immoderate   sorrow  the  Apostle  here  means; 
which  is  likewise  forbidden  in  the  Old   Testa- 
ment, Lev.  19.  28.     Deut.  14.  1,  Ye  shall  not 
make  any  cuttings  in  your  flesh  fur  the  dead; 
which  was  a  practice  among  the  heathen,  both 
in  the  worship  of  their  idols,  and  in  their  so- 
lemn mournings. 
The  Apostle  in  2  Cor.  7.  10.  distinguishes  two 
sorts  of  sorrow,  one  a  godly,  and  the  other  a 
worldly  sorrow.     Godly  sorrow  is  that  which 
is  wrought  in  the  soul  by  the  Spirit  of  Ood, 
which  arises  from  a  sense  of  sin;  the  root  of 
it  is  a  love  to  God,  and  the  manner  of  it  such 
as  was   agreeable  to  the  will  of  God.     The 
Apo.<>tle  in  the  following  verse  makes  it  appear 
that  this  sorrow  of  the  Corinthians  was  godly, 
by  the  excellent  fruits  and  effects  of  it.     Be- 
hold, nays  he,  what  carefulness  it  wrought  in 
you   to  amend  what  had  been  amiss?     What 
clearing  of  yourselves.      You  shewed  that  you 
did  not  approve  of  the  fault  of  other  members 
of   your    church.      Yea,    what    indignation? 
namely,  against  the  offender,  and  yourselves 
for  your  neglect.     Yea,  what  fear?  namely,  of 
divine  vengeance,  if  you  should  persist  in  that 
neglect,  or  of  transgressing  again.  Yea,  what 
vidiement  desire?      To  take  away  the  scandal, 
and  to  give  every  good  man  satisfaction.    Yea, 
what  zeal  ?    For  the  glory  of  God,  nnd  to  per- 
form what  I  had  commanded  in  my  former 
F./iislle  concerning  Ihe  incestuous  person.  He 
adds,  yea,  what   revenge  it  wrought  in  you 
against  the  offender,  by  punishing  of  him  ? 
Worlilly  sorrow  is  a  sorrow  occasioned  by  worldly 
troubles,  nnd  carnal  considerations,  which,  the 
Apostle  says,  worketh  death  ;  while  men  bow 
down  under  their  burdens,  and  through  impa- 
tience destroy  themselves,  as  .'\hithophel,  Ju- 
das, i<-c.      Or  when  men  fix  their  thoughts  upon 
and    objects,    and    so   afflict   themselves   with 
them,  that  they  bring  themselves  into  diseases 
which  issue  in  death. 
Gen.  3.  16.  I  will  greatly  multiply  thv  .«.  nnd  con- 
ception, in  .«.  Ihou  shalt  bring  forth  children 
17.  in  s.  shalt  thou  oat  of  it  nil  days  of  thy  life 
35  t  18.  she  called  bis  name,  the  son  of  my  s. 
42.  38.  if  mischief  befall  him,  then  shall  ye  brinj; 
down  my  gray  hairs  with  s.  to  grave,  44. 
29,  31. 
y.rnd.  15. 14. s. take  hold  ofinhabilants  of  Palestina 
r.ev.  2fi.  ir>.  terror  shall  cause  .f.  of  heart 
Dent.  28.  65.  the  Lord  shall  giv(>  thee  s.  of  mind 
1  Chron.  4.  9.  saying,  because  I  bare  him  with  s. 
.Veh.  2.  2.  this  is  nothing  else  but  s.  of  heart 
F.sth.  9.  22.  the  mouth  was  turned  from  s.  lo  joy 
Toll  3.  10.  because  it  bid  not  ».  from  >nine  oye» 
fi.  10.  vea,  I  would  hurdi-n  myself  in  .». 
17. 7.  mine  eye  is  dim  by  reason  off  my  memowt 


SOR 

Job  41  32.  and  s.  is  turned  into  joy  before  bim 
Psal.  13.  2.  having  £.  in  my  heart  daily 
3S.  17.  and  my  s.  is  continually  before  me 
39.  2.  I  held  my  peace,  and  my  «.  was  stirred 
55. 10.  mischief  also  and  s.  are  in  the  midst  of  it 
90.  10.  yet  is  their  slreijgth  labour  and  s. 
107.  39.  again  they  are  brought  low  through  i. 
116.3.1  found  trouble  and  s.  called  Ion  the  Lord 
Prov.  10.10.  he  that  wiiiketh  with  eye,  causeth  s. 
22.  Lord  maketh  rich,  he  addeth  no  £.  with  it 

13.  13.  but  by  s.  of  heart  the  spirit  is  broken 
17.  21.  he  that  begetteth  a  fool,  doth  it  to  his  s. 
23.  29.  who  hath  woe  ?  who  hath  s.1  contentions 

Eccl.  1.  18.  he  that  incre<iseth  knowl.  increaselhs. 
5.  17.  he  hath  much  s.  and  wrath  with  sickness 
7.  3.  6'.  is  better  than  laughter,  heart  made  better 
11.  10.  therefore  remove  «■.  from  thy  heart 

Jsa.  5.  30.  if  one  look  unto  the  land,  behold  5. 

14.  3.  the  Lord  shall  give  thee  rest  from  thy  s. 
17.  11.  shall  be  a  heap  in  the  day  of  desperate*. 

29.  2.  I  will  distress  Ariel,  and  there  shall  be  s. 
35.  10.  and  s.  and  sighing  shall  flee  away 

50.  11.  this  shall  ye  have,  ye  shall  lie  down  in  s. 

51.  11.  and  s.  and  mourning  shall  tlee  away 

65.  14.  my  servts.  shall  sing,  but  ye  shall  cry  fors. 
Jer.  8.  18.  when  I  would  comfort  myself  against  5. 

20.  18.  out  of  the  womb  to  see  labour  and  s.l 

30.  15.  why  criest  thou'!  thy  s.  is  incurable 
31. 13.  I  will  make  them  rejoice  from  their  s. 
45.  3.  for  the  Lord  hath  added  grief  to  my  s. 
49.  23.  there  is  .s.  on  the  sea,  it  cannot  be  quiet 

L,am.  1.  12.  see  if  there  bo  any  5.  like  unto  my  s. 
18.  behold  my  s.  |{  3.  05.  give  them  s.  of  heart 
Eiek.  23.  33.  thou  shall  be  filled  with  drunk,  and  s. 
J^uke  22.  45.  he  found  them  sleeping  for  s. 
John.  16.  6.  said  these  things,  s.  filled  your  heart 

20.  sorrowful,  but  your  «.  shall  be  turned  to  joy 

21.  a  woman  when  she  is  in  travail,  hath  5. 

22.  and  ye  now  therefore  have  s.  but  I  will  see 

I      you  again,  and  your  heart  shall  rejoice 
Rom.  y.  2.  that  I  have  continual  s.  in  my  heart 
2  Cor.2.3.when  I  came,  I  should  have  s.  from  them 
7.  lest  be  swallowed  up  with  overmuch  s. 
7.  10.  for  godly  s.  workelh  repentance  to  salva- 
tion, but  the  s.  of  the  world  worketh  death 
Phil.  2.  27.  but  on  me  also,  lest  I  have  s.  upon  s. 
Rev.  18.  7.  so  much  s.  give  her,  and  shall  see  no  s. 

21.  4.  there  shall  be  no  more  (ieath,  neither  £. 

SORROW,  Verb. 
Jer.  31.  12.  and  they  shall  not  s.  any  more  at  ail 

51.  29.  and  the  land  shall  tremble  and  s. 
Jios.  8.  10.  they  shall  s.  a  little  for  the  burden 

1  T/iess.  4.13.  that  ye  s.  not  as  ol  hers  have  no  hope 

SORROWS. 
Eiod.3.7. 1  have  heard  thoit  cry,  for  I  know  their  s. 

2  Sa7n.  22. 6.  s.  of  hell  compassed  me  about,  snares 

ofdeath  prevented  me,  Psal.  IS.  4, 5.  |  1 16. 3. 
Job  9.28. 1  amafr.  ofall  my  s.  not  hold  me  innocent 

21.  17.  God  distributeth  .s.  in  his  anger 

39.  3.  they  bow  themselves,  they  cast  out  their  «. 
Psal.  16.4.  s.  shall  be  multiplied  that  hasten  after 

32.10.  many  s.  shall  be  to  wicked  but  he  that  trust. 

127.  2.  it  is  vain  to  rise  up,  to  eat  the  bread  of  s. 
Eccl.  2.23.  for  all  his  days  ares,  and  his  travel  grief 
/.?a.  13.  8.  pangs  and  5.  shall  take  hold  of  them 

53.  3.  a  man  of «.  and  acquainted  with  grief 
4.  surely  he  hath  boine  griefs  and  carried  ours. 
Jer.  13.  21.  shall  not  s.  take  as  a  woman  in  travail 

49.  24.  s.  have  taken  her  as  a  woman  in  travail 
J)an.  10.  16.  by  vision  my  s.  are  turned  upon  me 
If  OS. 13. 13.  s.  of  travail,  woman  shall  come  on  him 
Mat.  24.  8.  these  are  beginning  of  s.  Mark  13.  8. 

1  Tim.  6.  10.  pierced  themselves  ihro'  with  many  s. 

SORROWED. 

2  Cor.  7.  9.  now  I  rejoice  that  ye  .9.  to  repentance 
11.  self-same  thing  that  ve  .'.  after  a  godly  sort 

SORROWETH. 
1  Sam.  10.  2.  and  lo,  thy  father  s.  for  you 
SORROWFUL. 

1  ftam.  1.  15.  my  lord,  I  am  a  woman  of  a  s.  spirit 
Job  6.  7.  things  my  soul  refused  are  as  my  «.  meat 
Ps.  69. 29.  r  am  poor  and  s.  lei  salvation  set  me  up 
Prov.  14.  13.  even  in  laughter  the  heart  is  s. 
Jer.  31.  2.5.  I  have  replenished  every  s.  soul 
y.cph.  3.  18.  I  will  gather  them  that  afe  s. 
Zech.  9.  5.  Gaza  also  shall  see  it,  and  be  very  s. 
Mat.  19.  22.  he  went  away  .1.  Luke  18.  23,  24. 

20.  22.  and  they  were  exceeding  «.  Mark  14.  19. 

37.  and  he  began  to  be  s.  and  very  heavy 

38.  my  soul  is  exceed. ,«.  unto  death,  Mark  14.34. 
.Tohn  16.20.  ye  shall  be  «.  but  sorrow  shall  be  turned 

2  Cor.  6.  10.  as  s.  yet  alwiiys  rejoicing,  as  poor  yet 
Phil.  2.28.  may  rejoice  and  f  may  be  the  less  s. 

SORROWING. 
I.iike  2.4s.  behold,  thy  father  and  I  sought  thees. 
j?ct«20.  38.  8.  they  should  see  his  face  no  more 

SORRV. 

1  Snm.  22.  8.  there  is  nonr;  of  you  that  is  s.  for  rae 

JVVA.  8. 10.  thiiiday  is  holy  to  Lord,  neither  be  ye  s. 

Psal.  38. 18.  declare  iniqiiiiy  I  will  be  s.  for  my  sin 

563 


SOU 

Isa.  51. 19.  two  things  come,who  shall  be«.  for  thee 
Mat.  14.  9.  and  the  king  was  s.  Mark  6.  26. 

17.  23.  and  they  were  exceeding  s. 

2  Cor.  2. 2.  if  I  make  you  s.  same  which  is  made  s. 

7.  8.  tho'  I  made  you  s.  same  epistle  made  you  s. 

9. 1  rej.  not  that  ye  were  made  s.  for  ye  were  s. 

SORT. 

Gen.  6. 19.  two  of  every  s.  shaltbringinto  ark,  20. 

7.  14.  every  bird  of  every  s.  went  into  the  ark 

I  .Sam.  15.  t  9.  they  spared  of  second  s.  and  lambs 
1  Chron.  24.  5.  they  divided  one  s.  with  another 

29. 14.  that  we  should  be  able  to  offer  afier  thiss. 
Ezra  1.10.  basons  of  gold,  silver  basons  of  seconds. 

4.  8.  they  wrote  to  Artaxerxes  king  after  this  «. 
JVeA.  6.  4.  yet  sent  10  me  four  times  after  this  s. 
Eiek.  23.  42.  with  men  of  the  common  s.  Sabeans 

39.  4. 1  will  give  thee  to  ravenous  birds  of  every  s. 

44.  30.  the  first  of  every  oblation  of  every  s. 
Dan.  1.  10.  worse  liking  than  children  of  yours. 

3.  29.  there  is  no  other  G.  can  deliver  after  this  s. 
Jicts  17.  5.  but  took  lewd  fellows  of  the  baser  s. 
Rom.  15.  15.  I  have  written  more  boldly  in  some  s 

1  Cor.  3.  13.  try  every  man's  work,  of  what  s.  it  is 

2  Cor.  7.  11.  that  ye  sorrowed  after  a  godly  s. 
2Tim.  3.  6.  of  thiss.  are  they  who  creep  into  houses 

3  John  6.  bring  on  their  journey  after  a  godly  s. 

SORTS. 
Deut.  22. 11.  shalt  not  wear  a  garment  of  divers  s. 
JW'A.  5.  18.  once  in  ten  days  store  of  all  s.  of  wine 
Psal.  78.  45.  he  sent  divers  s.  of  flies,  105.  31. 
Eccl.  2.  8.  I  gat  musical  instrum.  and  that  of  all  s. 
Eze.k.  27.  24.  were  thy  merchants  in  all  s.  of  things 
38.  4.  all  of  them  clothed  with  all  s.  of  armour 

SOTTISH. 
Jer.  4.  22.  my  people  is  foolish,  they  are  s.  children 

SOUGHT. 
Oen.  43. 30.  he  s.  where  to  weep,  entered  his  cham. 
£2:od.2.]5.when  Pharaoh  heard,  he  s.  to  slay  Moses 

4.  19.  for  all  the  men  arc  dead  which  s.  thy  life 
24.  that  the  Lord  met  him  and  s.  to  kill  him 

33.  7.  every  one  that  s.  Lord  went  out  to  tabern. 
Lev.  10. 16.  Moses  diligently  s.  goatof  sin-offering 
J^Tum.  35.  23.  was  not  his  enemy,  nor  s.  his  harm 
Deut.  13.10.becausehes.  to  thrust  thee  away  fr.  L. 
Josh.  2.22.  pursuers  s.  the  spies,  but  found  them  not 
Jiidg.  14.  4.  Samson  s.  occasion  against  Philistines 

18.  1.  Danites  s.  them  an  inheritance  to  dwell  in 

1  Sam.  19.  10.  Saul  s.  to  smite  David  to  the  wall 
27.  4.  Saul  s.  no  more  again  for  him 

2  Savi.  3.  17.  ye  s.  for  David  in  times  past  to  be  king 
4.  6.  the  head  of  thine  enemy  that  s.  thy  life 

21.  t  1.  and  David  s.  the  face  of  the  Lord 

2.  SanI  s.  to  slay  them  in  his  zeal  to  Israel 
1  Kings  1. 3.  they  s.  for  a  fair  damsel  thro'  Israel 

10.  24.  all  the  earth  s.  to  Solomon  to  hear 

11.  40.  Solomon  s.  therefore  to  kill  Jeroboam 
'ifCings  2.17.  s.  three  days  for  Elijah,  found  him  not 

1  Chron.  26.  31.  among  the  Hebronites  were  s.  for 

2  Chron.  14.7.because  we  have  s.  the  Lord  our  God 

16.  12.  yet  in  his  disease  he  s.  not  the  Lord 

17.  3.  Jehoshaphat  s.  not  unto  Baalim 
4.  but  s.  to  the  Lord  God  of  his  father 

22.9.  hes.Ahaziah,  and  they  caught  him;  because 
Jehoshaphat  s.  the  Lord  with  all  his  heart 

25.  15.  why  hast  thou  s.  after  gods  of  Edom7  20. 

26.  5.  he  s.  God  in  the  days  of  Zechariah  ;  as  long 

as  he  s.  the  Lord  God  made  him  to  prosper 
Ezra  2.  62.  these  s.  their  register,  JVfA.  7.  64. 
JsTch.  12.  27.  they  s.  the  Levites  out  of  all  places 
Esth.  2.  21.  they  s.  to  lay  hand  on  the  king,  6.2. 

3.  6.  wherefore  Haman  s.  to  destroy  all  the  Jews 

9.  2.  to  lay  hand  on  such  as  s.  their  hurt 
Psal.  34.  4.  I  s.  the  Lord,  and  he  heard  me,  77.  2. 

86.  14.  assemblies  of  violent  men  s.  after  my  soul 
111.  2.  s.  out  ofall  that  have  pleasure  therein 
119.  10.  with  my  whole  heart  have  I  s.  thee 
94.  save  me,  for  I  have  s.  thy  precepts 
Prvv.  28.  t  12.  but  when  wicked  rise,  man  is  s.  for 
Eccl.  7.  29.  they  have  s.  out  many  inventions 

12.  9.  preachers,  out  and  set  in  order  many  prov. 
10.  the  preacher  s.  to  find  acceptable  words 

fsa.  62.  12.  shalt  be  called,  s.  out,  city  not  forsaken 

65. 1.  lam  s.  of  them  thatasked  not  foi  mo;  I  am 

found  of  them  thats.  me  not,  Rom.  10.  20. 

10.  shall  be  a  place  for  my  people  that  have  s.  me 

.fer.  8.  2.  before  sun  and  moon,  whom  they  have  s. 

10.  21.  for  the  pastors  have  not  s.  the  Lord 
26.  21.  the  king  s.  to  put  him  to  death 

44.  30.  I  gave  Zedekiah  to  Nebu.  that  s.  his  life 
.W.  20.  iniquity  of  Israel  shall  be  s.  for,  bo  none 
/.am.  1.19.  while  they  s.  meat  lo  relieve  (hcirsouls 
Ejek.  22.  30.  and  I  s.  for  a  man  among  them 
26.  21.  tho'  s.  yotshalt  thou  never  be  found  again 

34.  4.  neither  have  ye  e.  thnt  which  was  lost 
DanM.  13.  theys.  Daniel  and  his  fellows  to  be  slain 

4.  36.  my  counsellors  and  my  lords  s.  unto  me 
6.  4.  the  princes  *.  occasion  against  Daniel 

8.  15.  when  I,  even  I,  had  s.  for  the  meaning 
Obnd.  6.  how  are  Esau's  hidden  things  s.  up 
Zeph.  1.  6.  and  those  that  hove  not  s.  tho  Lord 


SOU 

Zeck.  6.  7.  and  the  bay  went  forth  and  ».  to  go 

Mat.  2.  20.  they  are  dead  which  s.  the  child's  lifl 

21.  46.  s.  to  lay  hands,  Mark  12.  12.  Luke  20.  19 

26.  16.  covenanted  with  him,  and  from  that  time 

he  s.  opportunity  to  betray  him,  Luke  22.  6. 

59.  theys.  false  witness  against  Jesus  to  put  him 

to  death,  but  found  none,  Mark  14.  55. 

Mark  11.  18.  tlie  scribes  heard  it,  and  s.  how  they 

might  destroy  him,  14.  1.  Luke  19.  47.  |  22.2. 

Luke  2.  48.  thy  father  and  I  s.  thee  sorrowing 

49.  how  isitthat  yes.  me?  wist  ye  not  that  I  must 

5.  18.  and  they  s.  means  to  bring  him  in 

6.  19.  the  whole  muliitudes.  to  touch  him 

11.  16.  others  s.  of  him  a  sign  from  heaven 
13.  6.  he  s.  fruit  thereon,  and  found  none 
19.  3.  Zaccheus  s.  to  see  Jesus  who  he  was 

John  5.  16.  the  Jews  s.  to  slay  him,  18.  |  7.  1. 

7.  II.  then  the  Jews  s.  him  at  the  feast,  11.  56. 
30.  then  theys.  to  take  him,  10.  39. 

11.8.  Master,  the  Jews  of  late  s.  to  stone  thee 
19.  12.  from  thenceforlh  Pilate  s.  to  release  him 

/Ids  12.  19.  and  when  Herod  had  s.  for  Peter 
17.  5.  they  s.  to  bring  them  out  lo  the  people 

Rom.  9.  32.  because  s.  it  not  by  faith  but  by  works 

1  Thess.  2.  6.  nor  of  men  s.  we  glory,  neither  of  you 

2  Tim.  1. 17.  in  Rome  be  s.  me  out  very  diligently 
Hcb.  8.  7.  no  place  should  have  been  s.for  second 

12.  17.  though  hes.  it  carefully  with  tears 

SOUGHT  Am. 
1  Sam.  10. 21.  when  he  s.  him  he  could  not  be  found 

13.  14.  the  Lord  hath  s.  him  a  man  to  be  captain 
23.  14.  Saul  s.  him  every  day,  God  delivered  him 

1  Chron.  15.  13.  we  s.  him  not  after  the  due  order 

2  Chron.  14.  7.  have  s.  him,  he  hath  given  us  rest 
15.  4.  when  they  s.  Aim,  he  was  found  of  them 

15.  for  they  s.  Aim  with  their  whole  desire 
Psal.  37.  36.  I  s.  Aim,  but  he  could  not  be  found 
78.  34.  when  he  slew  them,  then  they  s.  Aim 
Can(.3.1.by  night  on  my  bed  I  s.Aim  whom  my  sou. 
loveth  ;  I  s.  him  but  I  found  him  not,  2.  |  5.  6. 
Luke  2.  44.  and  they  s.  Aim  among  their  kinsfolk 
4.  42.  and  the  people  s.  him,  and  came  unto  him 
SOULDIER,  See  Soldier. 
SOUL. 
This  word  in  scripture,  especially  in  the  style  of 
the  Hebrews,  is  very  equivocal.     Jt  is  taken, 

I.  For  that  spiritual,  reasonable,  and  immorta, 
substance  in  man,  which  is  the  origin  of  our 
thoughts,  of  our  desires,  of  our  reasonings ; 
which  distin  guishes  us  from  the  brute  creation, 
and  which  bears  some  resemblance  to  its  divine 
Maker.  Mat.  10.  28,  Fear  him  which  i« 
able  to  destroy  both  soul  and  body.  This  sub- 
stance must  be  spiritual,  because  it  thinks;  it 
must  be  immortal,  because  it  is  spiritual.  The 
scripture  indeed  ascribes  to  beasts  a  soul,  a 
spirit,  life,  and  respiration,  which  may  be  a 
second  acceptation  of  the  word,  as  in  Gen.  1. 24, 
Let  the  earth  bring  forth  the  living  creature, 
in  Hebrew,  the  living  soul.  So  in  Lev.  17. 
11,  The  life,  in  Hebrew,  the  soul,  of  the 
flesh  is  in  the  blood,  ./jnd  in  Eccl.  3.  21, 
Who  knoweth  the  spirit  of  the  beast  that 
goeth  downward  1  Tliis  soul  is  the  spirit,  the 
breath,  which  is  the  principle  of  animal  life, 
and  which  is  common  to  men  and  brutes  :  But 
the  scripture  allows  to  man  alone  thrprivileges 
of  understanding,  the  knowledge  of  God,  wis- 
dom, immortality,  thehope  of  future  happiness, 
and  of  eternal  life.  It  only  threatens  menwith 
the  punishment  of  another  life  and  the  pains 
of  htll. 

II.  Soul  is  taken  for  the  wholeperson,  both  soul 
and  body;  Give  me  tlfc  persons,  in  Hebrew 
souls,  and  take  the  goods  to  thyself,  says  the 
king  (//Sodom  to  Abraham,  Gen.  14.  21.  .^nd 
in  Gen.  12.  ,5,  Abram  took  Sarai  his  wife,  and 
Lot  his  brother's  son,  and  all  their  substance 
that  I  hey  had  gathered,  and  the  souls  that  they 
had  gotten  in  Haran  ;  that  is,  the  servants  they 
had  purchased,  or  the  children  that  kad  been 
born  to  them. 

III.  It  is  taken  for  the  life  of  man.  Psal.  33. 
19,  To  deliver  the  soul  from  death  ;  to  save 
them  alive.  And  in  Psal.  7.  5,  Let  the  enemy 
persecute  my  soul,  and  lake  it,  let  him  take 
away  my  life.     And  often  in  the  Psalms. 

IV.  ft  is  taken  sometimes  for  death,  or  a  dead 
body.  Num.  9.  6,  Some  were  defiled  by  the 
dead  body  of  a  man,  in  Hebrew,  by  the  soul 
of  a  man.  And  in  Num.  6.  6,  He  shall  come 
at  no  dead  body,  in  Hebrew,  dead  soul.  Also 
in  I'sal.  10.  10,  Thou  wilt  not  leave  my  soul  in 
hell ;  that  is,  thou  wilt  not  suffer  my  body  to 
continue  long  in  the  grave,  or  in  a  slate  of 
death.  Sometimes  it  is  taken  for  a  living  body. 
Psal.  105.  18,  He  was  laid  in  iron,  in  Hebrew, 
his  soul  came  into  iron. 

V.  ft  is  used  for  desire,  love,  inclination.  Gen 
23.  8,  If  it  be  your  mind ;   in  Hebrew,  if  it 


sou 

please  or  be  agreeable  to  your  goul.  1  Sam. 
18.  1,  The  soul  of  Jonathan  was  knit  with  the 
aoul  of  David  ;  he  had  a  great  love  and  affec- 
tion for  him.  So  in  Prov.  27. 7,  The  full  soul, 
that  tg,  a  man  whose  denire  or  appetite  is  fully 
saiiifitji. 
Oen.  1  f  20.  the  moving  crcafure  that  halh  s. 
t  30.  to  every  thing  wherein  there  is  a  living  s. 

2.  7.  God  breathed  and  rnan  became  a  living  s. 

34.  8.  the  s.  of  tny  son  hmgetli  for  your  daughter 

35. 18.  as  her  s.  was  in  departing,  for  she  died 
Kzod.  a.  t  16.  save  that  which  every  s.  must  eat 

23.  t  y-  for  ye  know  the  «.  of  a  stranger 
Lev.  i.  2.  if  a  s.  shall  sin  through  ignorance 
t  27.  and  if  any  .?.  of  the  common  people  sin 

5.  1.  if  a  «.  sin,  and  hear  the  voice  of  swearing 
2.orifs.touch  any  unclean  thing,shall  be  unclean 
4.  if  a  s.  swear  |1  15.  if  a  s.  commit  a  trespass 

17.  if  a  s.  sin  and  commit  any  of  these  things 
0.2.  if  as.  lie  II  17. 12.no  s.  of  you  shall  eat  blood 
17. 11.  it  is  blood  maketh  an  atonement  for  the*. 

22.  II.  if  the  priest  buy  any  s.  with  his  money 

23.  30.  what-soever  s.  doeth  any  work  in  that  day 
36.  1.5.  or  if  your  «.  abhor  my  judgments 

43.  because  their  s.  abhorred  ray  statutes 
J^'um.  9.  13.  even  the  sames.  shall  be  cut  off 

21.  4.  the  s.  of  the  people  was  much  discouraged 

30.  4.  every  bond  wherewith  she  hath  bound  her 

s.  shall  stand,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9,  10,  11,  12,  13 

31.  28.  one  «.  of  five  hundred  for  the  Lord 
J')eut.  M.  13.  and  to  serve  him  with  all  your  s. 

18.  ye  shall  lay  up  these  my  words  iri  your  s. 
13.  3.  (noveth  you  know  w hether  vou  love  the  Ld. 

God  with  all  your  s.  Josh.  22.  5.  1  Kings  2.  4. 
Juilg.  18.  t  25.  lest  fellows  hitter  of  s.  run  on  thee 

1  Sam.  18.  l.s.  of  Jonathan  was  knit  toy.  of  David 

22.  t  2.  every  one  bitter  of  s.  came  to  David 
25.  29.  s.  of  my  lord  bound  up  in  bundle  of  life 
30.6.  because  the  s.  of  all  the  people  was  grieved 

2  Sam.  5.  8.  the  blind  that  are  hated  of  David's  s. 
13.  39.  the  a.  of  David  longed  to  go  to  ."Vhsalom 
17.  t  8.  thy  father  and  his  men  be  hitler  of  s. 

1  Kings  8.  48.  and  so  return  to  thee  with  all  their  s. 

17.  21.  let  this  child's  s.  come  into  him  again 

2  Kings  4.  27.  let  her  alone  for  her  s.  is  V(^\ed 

23.  3.  to  keep  his  commanilhients  with  all  their  s. 

1  Chron.  22.  19.  now  set  your  s.  to  seek  the  Lord 

2  Chr.  6.  38.  if  they  return  to  thee  with  all  theirs. 
15.  12.  to  seek  the  Lord  God  with  all  their  .5. 

Job  3.  20.  why  is  life  given  to  the  bitter  in  «.? 
12. 10.  in  whose  hand  is  the  s.  of  every  living  thing 
Hi.  4.  if  your  i.  were  in  my  soul's  stead 

24.  12.  and  the  s.  of  the  woumled  crieth  out 
31.  t39.  if  I  caused  the  s.  of  the  owners  to  expire 
36.  t  14.  their  s.  dieth  in  youth,  and  their  life  is 

Psal.  17.  t  9.  hide  from  my  enemies  against  the  s. 
19.  7.  the  law  of  Lord  is  perfect  converting  the  s. 

33. 19.  to  deliver  theirs,  from  death  and  keep  alive 
34.  K.  the  Lord  redeemeth  the  s.  of  his  servants 
49.  8.  the  redemption  of  their  s.  is  precious 
72.14.  he  shall  redeem  their .?.  from  deceit  and  viol. 
74.  19.  O  deliver  not  the  s.  of  thy  turtle-dove 
78.  50.  he  spared  not  their  s.  from  death 

86.  4.  rejoice  the  s.  of  thy  servant,  O  Lord 

94.  21.  liiey  gather  against  the  s.  of  the  righteous 

106.  15.  but  he  sent  leanness  into  their  s. 

107.  5.  hungry  and  thirsty  their.?,  fainted  in  them 
y.  he  satisfieth  longing*,  and  filleth  hungry  s. 

18.  ihiiir  s.  abhorreth  all  manner  of  meat 
26.  their  s.  is  melted  bijcause  of  trouble 

Pruv.  10.  3.  not  suffer  the  s.  of  righteous  to  famish 
11.2.).  liberal  s.  shall  be  made  fat  that  watereth 
13.  2.  but  the  .9.  of  transgressors  shall  eat  violence 
4.  the«.  of  the  sluggard  desireth  and  hath  not 

19.  the  desire  accomplished  is  sweet  to  the  s. 

10.  24.  pleasant  words  are  sweet  to  the  s. 

19.  2.  the  *.  he  without  knowledge  it  is  not  good 
IS.  and  an  idle  .i.  shall  suffer  hunger 

21.  10.  the  a.  of  the  wicked  desiretn  evil 

22. 23  fjord  will  spoil  s.  of  those  that  spoiled  them 

2.'}.  13.  for  h«  refresheth  the  s.  of  his  masters 

2.5.  as  cold  waters  to  n  thirsty  s.  so  is  good  news 

27.  7.  ihii  full  8.  Inatheth   a  honeycomb;    but 

to  the  hungry  a.  every  bitter  thing  is  sweet 

t  9.  so  u  man's  friend  by  the  counsel  of  the  s. 

31.  t  6.  give  wine  to  them  that  are  bitter  of,?. 
ha.  3.  9.  woe  lo  their  .i.  they  have  rewarded  evil 

t  20.  J  will  lake  away  tin-  houses  of  the  a. 
10.  t  18.  it  "hall  consume  from  the  a.  to  the  flesh 

32.  6.  to  make  empty  the  ».  of  the  hungry 
46   t  2.  but  their  a.  is  gotie  into  captivity 

49  t  7.  thuiisailh  Ld.  loliiin  that  is  despised  in  s. 
55.  2.  lot  your  a.  delight  itxolf  in  futnrss 

3.  come  unto  me,  hear,  and  your  a.  shall  livo 
.58.  10.  and  if  ihoii  satisfy  the  nlTlicleil  a. 
60.  3.  their  a.  deligbtoth  in  their  abominations 
Jer.  4.  10.  whereas  tlio sword  renchoth  to  the  s. 

20.  13.  he  harti  delivered  the  a.  of  the  poor 
31.  12.  their  a.  shall  be  as  a  watered  gnnlen 

1 1.  and  I  will  satiate  the  a.  of  the  priests 

366 


SOU 

Jer.  31.25.  thus  laith  Ld.  I  havs  satiated  the  weary 
a.  and  I  have  replenished  every  sorrowful  a. 

38. 16.  as  the  Lord  liveth,  that  made  us  this  s. 

40.  t  H.  hath  sent  Ishmael  to  strike  thee  in  *. 

44.  t  14.  they  have  lift  up  their  a.  to  return 
f.am.  1.  11.  hath  given  for  meat  to  relieve  the  s. 

2.  12.  when  their  s.  was  poured  out  into  bosom 

3.  25.  the  Lord  is  good  to  the  s.  that  seeketh  him 
Eielc.  18.  4.  all  souls  are  mine,  as  s.  of  father,  so  s. 

of  son  is  mine,  thes.  thatsinneth,itshalldie,20. 
24.  21.  what  your  s.  pilielh  shall  fall  by  sword 
t  25.  I  take  from  them  the  lifting  u|i  of  the  s. 
2.5. 16.  thou  hast  rejoiced  in  s.  with  all  thy  despite 
Hos.  9.  4.  theirs,  shall  not  come  into  house  of  Lord 
./oHa/i2.5.waters  compassed  me  about  even  to  the  s. 
Mat.  10.  28.  but  are  not  able  to  kill  the  a.  fear  him 
that  can  destroy  both  s.  and  body  in  hell 
Mark  12.  33.  lo  love  him  with  all  the  heart  and  .<t. 
.^?c<s2.43.fear  came  on  every  a.  many  wonders  done 

3.  23.  every  s.  which  will  not  hear  that  prophet 

4.  32.  multitude  that  believed  of  one  heart  and  s. 
Rom. '2.0.  anguish  on  every  .?.  of  man  that  doeth  evil 

13.  1.  kt  every  s.  be  subject  to  the  higher  powers 
1  Theaa.  5.  23.  that  yours,  and  body  be  preserved 
Heb.  4.  12.  word  of  God  piercing  to  dividing  of  s. 

6. 19.  which  hope  we  have  as  an  anchor  of  the  s. 

10.  39.  but  of  them  that  believe  to  saving  of  the  .9. 
Jam.  5.  20.  he  shall  save  a  s.  from  death  and  hide 

1  Pet.  2.  11.  from  fleshly  lusts  which  war  ag.  thes. 

2  Pet.  2.  8.  liOt  vexed  his  right,  s.  from  day  to  day 
Rev.  16.  3.  and  every  living  a.  died  in  the  sea 

Sec  Afflicted,  BiTTERNEas. 
His  SOUL. 
Gen.  34.  3.  A/ss.  clave  to  Dinah  Jacob's  daughter 
42.  21.  are  guilty,  when  we  saw  anguish  i>(hiss. 
F.xod.  30.  12.  shall  give  a  ransom  for  his  s.to  Lord 
J^um.  30.  2.  orswear  an  oath  to  bind  his  s.  to  Lord 
J)&ut.  24.  t  15.  he  is  poor,  and  lifteth  his  s.  to  it 
Judg.  10.  16.  his  s.  was  grieved  for  misery  of  Israel 

16.  16.  she  urged  him,  so  that  his  a.  was  ve.xed 
2  Kings  23.  25.  there  was  no  king  like  Josiah  who 
turned  lo  the  Lord  with  all  his  a.  2  C/iron.34.31. 
Job  14.  2-.).  and  his  s.  within  him  shall  mourn 
18.  t  4.  he  teareth  hiss,  in  his  anger 
21.  25.  another  dieth  in  the  bitterness  of  hiss. 

23.  13.  what  his  s.  desireth,  even  that  he  doeth 
27.  8.  the  hypocrite,  when  God  taketh  away  hiss. 

31.  30.  neither  to  sin,  by  wishing  a  curse  to  hiss. 

32.  t  2.  he  justified  his  a.  rather  than  God 

33.  18.  he  keepeth  back  his  s.  from  the  pit 
20.  and  his  s.  abhorreth  dainty  meat 

22.  yea,  his  s.  draweth  near  unto  the  grave 
28.  he  will  deliver  his  s.  from  the  pit,  30. 
Psal.  10.  t3.  the  wicked  boastelh  of  Az's  s.  desire 

11.5.  but  the  wicked  Inveth  violence,  Ai's  s.  hateth 

24.  4.  who  hath  not  lifted  up  his  a.  to  vanity 

25.  13.  his  a.  shall  dwell  at  ease,  and  seed  shall 

inherit  the  earth 
40.  18.  thoujh  while  he  lived  he  blessed  his  s. 
89.  48.  shalfhe  deliver  liis  s.  from  the  grave? 
105  1 18.  feethurtwith  fetters,  Aiss.  came  into  iron 
109.  31.  to  save  from  those  that  condemn  his  s. 
Prrrn.  6.  f  16.  seven  are  an  abomination  to  his  s. 
30.  if  ho  steal  lo  satisfy  Afs  s.  when  he  is  hungry 
13.  25.  the  righteous  eateth  to  satisfying  of  his  s. 
1().  17.  he  that  keepeth  his  way,  preserveth  his; 
18.  7.  a  fool's  lips  are  the  snare  of  his  s. 

21.  23.  whoso  keepeth  his  mouth,  keepeth  his  s 

22.  5.  that  doih  keep  hiss,  shall  be  far  from  them 
2:i.  14.  iinil  shalt  deliver  his  a.  from  hell 

29.  10.  hate  the  upright,  but  the  just  seek  his  s 
/.Vc/.2. 24.  that  he  should  make  his  s.  enjoy  good 
6.  2.  so  that  he  wantelh  noihing  for  Ai's  s. 

3.  and  his  a.  be  not  filled  with  good 
Isa.  29.  8.  but  he  nwaketh  and  his  s.  is  empty; 
•  behold  he  is  f.iint  and  hia  a.  hath  appetite 

44.  20.  that  he  cannot  deliver  his  s.  nor  say 
53.  10.  when  shalt  make  hia  a.  an  off.ring  for  sin 

11.  he shallseeof  travail  of  A'S.?.  and  be  satisfied 

12.  because  he  poured  out  Ais  a.  unto  death 
.Icr.  .V).  19.  hia  a.  shall  be  satisfied  on  mount  Ephr 

51.6.  flee  and  deliver  every  man  hia  a.  45. 
KzeA-.18.  27.  doeth  what  is  right,  he  shnll  save  A.  a. 

33.  5.  he  that  takelh  wnrnin:.',  shall  didivor  Ai's  a. 
Amos'i.  t  14.  neither  shall  th.- mighty  drliver  Ajs 
Mic.  7.  t3.  the  great  man  ullereth  niisnhief  of  Ai's. «. 
Hub. 1.4. hia  a.  that  is  lifted  ii|i,  isnot  upright  in  him 
.Mat.  lO.iO.ifgain  whole  world,  and  lose  Ai's  own  a 
what  can  man  give  in  cxrhangi-for  s.?JV/rtrA-8.37 
j9ct»2. 3I.AISS.  wasnolli'O  in  hell  nor  flesh  did  see 

M;/  SOt'L. 
^ri-Ti.  12.  13.  an<l  mij  a.  shnll  live  because  of  Iheo 

19.20.Oh  lei  me  escape  thither,  and  my  ». shnll  lix'c 

27,  4.  that  mtj  a.  may  bless  thee  before  I  die,  25. 

49.  6.  O  my  a.  come  not  thou  into  their  secret 
/.en.  26.  II.  and  m)i  a.  shall  not  abhor  you,  30. 
.V>i7ii,  23. 1 10.  let  my  a.  dii-  death  of  the  righteous 
Jiidg.Ti.'iX  Omy  s.tbou  hast  Irodih-n  down  strength 

10.  t30.  let  my  a.  die  with  the  Philistines 
1  .Sam.  1.  15.  but  have  poured  out  my  s.  before  Lil 


SOU 

I.Sam.  24.  11.  yet  thou  huntest  my  t.  to  take  it 

26.  21.  because  my  s.  was  precious  in  thine  eye* 
2  Sam.  4.  9.  David  answered  Recbab,  as  the  Lorn 

liveth,\who  hath  redeemed  my  a.  1  Kings  1.7S. 
.Job  t).  7.  the  things  my  s.  refused,  are  as  my  met*. 
7.  15.  so  that  my  a.  chooseth  strangling  and  deatb 
9.  21.  though  perfect,  yet  would  I  not  know  myt 
10.1  .my  s.\a  weary  of  lifc,speak  bitterness  of  my  a 
19.  2.  how  long  will  ye  vex  my  s.  with  words? 

27.  2.  and  the  Almighty,  who  hath  vexed  my  s. 
30.  15.  they  pursue  my  s.  as  the  wind 

16.  and  now  my  s.  is  poured  out  upon  me 
25.  was  not  jny  s.  grieved  for  the  poor  ? 

Psal.  3.2.  who  say  of  my  s.  there  is  no  help  in  God 

6.  3.  my  s.  is  sore  vexed,  but,  O  Lord,  how  long? 

4.  deliver  7ny  s.  17.  13. )  22.20.  |  116.  4.  |  120.2 

7.  2.  lest  he  tear  my  s.  like  a  lion,  rcndinj;  it 

5.  let  the  enemy  persecute  7ny  s.  and  take  it 

1 1.1. how  say  ye  tomy  s.  flee  as  a  bird  lo  inounlaia 
l.'l.  2.  how  Ions  shall  I  take  counsel  in  my  s.? 
16. 10.  Ihou  wilt  not  leave  mys.  in  hell,  Jlcts  2.  27 
23.  3.  he  restoreth  my  s.  \\  25. 1.  to  thee  I  lift  my  s 
25. 20.  O  keep  my  s.  and  deliver  me,  I  trust  in  thee 
2fi.  9.  gather  not  my  s.  with  sinners,  nor  my  life 

30.  3.  thou  hast  brought  up  my  a.  from  the  gravs 
t  12.  that  my  a.  may  sing  praise  to  Ihee 

31.  7.  thou  hast  known  my  a.  in  adversities 
9.  yea  my  s.  and  my  belly  are  consumed 

34.  2.  my  s.  shall  make  her  boast  in  the  Lord 

35.  3.  say  unto  my  s.  I  am  thy  salvation 

4.  let  them  be  put  to  shameihat  seek  aOermy  » 

7.  without  cause  they  have  digged  a  pit  for  mj;* 
9.  and  my  s.  shall  be  joyful  in  the  Lord 

12.  they  rewarded  me  to  the  ispoiling  of  my  ». 

13.  as  for  me,  I  humbled  my  s.  with  fasting 

17.  rescue  viy  s.  from  their  destructions 
40.14.1et  thembe  confounded  that  seek  aOer  my  * 
41.  4.  heal  jny  s.  for  I  have  sinned  against  thee 
42.1. as  the  heart,  so  panleth  mys.  after  lhee,OG 

2.  my  s.  thirslelh  for  the  living  God,  143  6. 

4.  when  I  ri-membcr,  T  pour  out  my  a.  in  me 

5.  why  art  Ihou  cast  down,  O  my  s.?  II.  |  43.5 

6  O  my  God,  my  a.  is  cast  down  within  ine 
49.  15.  God  will  redeem  my  .t.  from  the  grave 

54.  3.  and  oppressors  seek  after  my  s. 

4.  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  ujihold  my  a. 

55.  18.  he  hath  delivered  my  a.  in  peaco  from  bat 
56.6. they  mark  my  sti'ps,  when  they  wait  formy  » 

13.  for  thou  hast  delivered  my  a.  from  death 
57.  ].  be  merciful,  O  G.  for  my  a.  trustethin  thee 

4.  my  a.  is  among  lions  ||  6.  my  a.  is  bowed  down 
59.  3.  for  lo,  ihcy  lie  in  wait  for  my  s. 

62.  1.  truly  my  a.  waited  upon  God,  my  salvation 
5. ray .?. wail  thou  only  upon  God,  my  expectation 

63.  1.  OGod,  mys.  thirsteth  for  thee  in  a  dry  land 

5.  my  s.  shall  he  satisfied  as  with  marrow  and  fat 

8.  my  s.  followeth  hard  aOerlhee,  Ihy  right  hand 

9.  but  those  that  seek  mys.  to  destroy  it  shallgo 

06.  16. 1  will  declare  what  God  hath  done  for  my  s 

69.  1.  for  the  waters  are  come  in  unto  my  a. 

10.  when  I  wept  and  chastened  mys.  with  fasting 

18.  draw  nigh  to  rays,  and  redeem  It,  deliver  ma 

70.  2.  confoundud  that  seek  after  my  s.  71.  13. 
7l.23.my  s.shall  rejoice  which  thou  hast  redeemed 
77.  2.  my  sore  ran,  my  a.  refused  lo  he  comforted 
84.  2.  wiy  s.  longeth  fur  the  courts  of  the  Lord 
86.2.preserve  nni  s.  ||  13.  Ihoii  hast  delivered  mys. 

4.  for  to  thee,  O  Lord,  do  I  lift  U|)  my  a.  143.  8. 

14.  assemblies  of  valiant  men  sought  after  mys. 
88.3. 7nys.  is  full  of  troubles,  my  life  draweth  nigh 

14. L. why  easiest  thou  off  my  s./why  hidestthou 
94.  17.  my  s.  had  almost  dwelt  in  silence 

19.  in  thoughts  within  thy  comforts  dolirht  my  a, 
103.  1.  blcs.s  the  Lord,  O  my  a.  2,22.  ]  lOt.  1,  35. 
109.  20.  reward  of  them  that  speak  against  mys. 
116.  7.  return  unto  thy  rest,  O  my  a. 

8.  for  Ihou  hast  delivered  my  s.  from  death 

1 19.  20.  my  a.  bronketh  for  the  longing  it  hath 
25.  my  s.  cleaveth  to  the  dust,  quicki'n  thou  mc 
28.  my  a.  mellelh  for  he  iviness,  slrenilhen  me 
81.  7;iy  s.  fnintoth  for  salvation,  but  I  hope 
lOO.mys. is  continually  in  my  hand, yet  not  forget 
12!l.  therefore  doth  my  a.  keep  them 

167.  my  a.  bath  kopi  Ihy  testimonies 

175.  lei  my  a.  live,  and  it  shnll  praise  thee 

120.  2.  deliver  my  ».  O  Lord,  from  lying  lips 

6.  my  s.  hath  dwelt  with  him  that  halolh  peace 

130.  5. 1  wail  for  the  liord,  my  a.  dulh  wail,  0. 

131.  2.  my  a.  is  even  lis  a  weiined  child 

13K.  3.  and  strengthen  mo  with  slronslh  in  my  s. 
Hi9,  14.  and  that  my  a.  knnwelh  right  well 

141.  8.  in  thee  is  my  trust,  leave  not  mij  s  destitute 

142.  4.  refuge  faih'd  mc,  no  man  eared  for  my  a 

7  bring  my  s.  om  of  prison,  that  I  may  praise  thy 

143.  3,  for  the  enemy  halh  persecuted  mys. 

1 1.  O  Lord,  btiiig  my  a.  out  of  iruuble 

146.  1.  praise  the  Lord,  iiriiise  the  Lord,  Omy  s 
Frrl.  4.  8.  for  whom  do  I  bereave  my  s.  of  good? 

7.  28.  which  yel  my  a.  seeketh,  but  (  find  not 
Cant.  1.7.0tfiou\v'hommys.lovelh,  3.1,2,3,4 


sou 

Cant.  5. 6.  my  s.  failed  when  hespakc,!  sought  him 

6.  l'2.Tnys.  made  me  like  chariots  of  Ammi-nadib 
fca.T.  14.  your  new  moons  and  feasts  my  s.  hateth 

26.  9.  iviih  my  s.  have  I  desired  tlice  in  the  night 
38.  17.  thou  liast  in  love  to  my  s.  delivered  it 
42. 1.  behold  mine  elect,  in  whom»nj/s.  deliglitetli 
61.  10.  my  s.  shall  be  joyful  in  my  God 
7er.  4.  19.  hast  heard,  O  my  s.  sound  of  the  trumpet 
31.  my  s.  is  wearied  because  of  murderers 
5.  9.  shall  not  my  s.  be  avenged  1  29.  |  9.  9. 
C.8  be  instructed,  OJer.lest  wys.depatt  from  thee 
12.7.  beloved  of  ;nys.  into  the  hand  of  her  enemies 
13.17.my  s.sh.  weep  in  secret  places  for  your  pride 

18.  20.  for  they  have  digged  a  pit  for  my  s. 

32. 41. 1  will  rejoice  over  them  with  my  whole  s. 

J,am.l.  16.  the  comforter  that  should  relieve  my  s. 

3.  17.  thou  hast  removed  my  s.  far  off  from  peace 

20.  my  s.  hath  them  still  in  remembrance 

24.  Lord  is  my  portion,  saith  my  s.  will  I  hope 

58.0  Lord,  thou  hast  pleaded  the  causes  of  my  s. 

F.iek.  4.  J4.  behold,  my  s.  hath  not  been  polluted 

Jonah  2. 7.  when  my  s.  fainted  within  me,I  remem. 

Mic.  6.  7.  the  fruit  of  my  body  for  the  sin  of  my  «. 

7.  1.  my  .'.  desired  the  first  ripe  fruit 

Zech.  11.8.  three  shepherds  I  cut  off,  my  5.  loathed 
J(faM2.16.my  beloved,  in  whommys.is  well  plea.-r. 

26. 38.  my  s.  is  exceeding  sorrowful,  Mark  14.34. 
lAike  1.  4r>.  my  s.  doth  magnify  the  Lord 

12.  19.  I  will  say  lo  my  s.  soul,  eat,  drink 
John  12.  27.  my  s.  is  troubled,  and  what  shall  Isayl 
3  Car.  1.  23.  I  call  God  for  a  record  upon  my  s. 
ffeb.  10.  38.  my  s.  shall  have  no  pleasure  in  him 

Our  SOUL. 
A"Mm.  ll.G.ojtr.t.  isdried  away,  nothingbutmanna 

21.  5.  no  bread,  our  s.  loatheth  this  light  bread 
Ps.  33.  20.  our  s.  waiteth  for  Lord,  he  is  our  help 

35. 1 25.  let  them  not  say,  ah,  our  s.  would  have  it 
44.  25.  for  our  s.  is  bowed  down  to  the  dust 
66.  9.  bless  our  God,  who  holdcth  our  s.  in  life 

123.  4.  our  s.  is  exceedingly  tilled  with  scorning 

124.  4.  the  stream  had  gone  over  our  s.  5. 

7.  our  s.  is  escaped  as  a  bird  out  of  the  snare 
isa.  26.  8.  the  desire  of  our  s.  is  to  thy  name 

Own  SOUL. 
Dent.  13. 6.  if  a  friend  is  as  thine  own  s.  entice  thee 
i  Sam.  16.  1.  the  soul  of  Jonathan  was  knit  to  Da- 
vid, and  he  loved  him  as  his  own  s.  3.  |  20. 17. 
Psal.  22.  29.  and  none  can  keep  alive  his  own  s. 
Prov.  6.  32.  he  that  doeth  it,  deslroyeth  his  own  s. 

8.  36.  hut  he  that  sinneih,  wrongeth  his  own  s. 
11. 17.  the  merciful  man  doeth  good  to  his  owns. 
15  32.hethatrefuseth  instruction  despis.  his owrts. 

19.  8.  he  that  getteth  wisdom,  loveili  his  own  s. 
16.  he  that  keep,  commandment*  keep. his  own.?. 

20.  2.  that  provokfth  king,  sinneih  aga.  his  own  s. 
29.24.  whoso  is  partner  with  thief,  hatelh  own  .". 

Mat.  16. 26.  what  is  a  man  profiled,  if  he  shall  gain 

whole  world  and  lose  his  owji  s.l  Mark  8.  36. 

Z.uic2. 35.  sword  shall  pierce  iliro'  thy  own  n.  also 

That  SOUL. 

Gen.  17.  14.  not  circumcised,  that  .i.  shall  be  cut 

olTfrom  his  people,  F.xod.  31.  14.  J^ev.  7.  20, 

21,  25,  27.  I  19.  8.  JVum.  15.  30. 

Ezod.  12. 15.  whoso  eateth  leavened  bread,  that  s. 

shall  be  cut  off  Irom  Israel,  J^Tum.  19.  13. 

19.  whoso  eateth  leavened  bread,  (ftafs. shall  be 

cutoff  from  congregation  of  I.s-ael,  JVurn.  19.20. 

/yft?.  17.  10. 1  will  set  my  face  against  that  .1. 20. 6. 

22.  3.  that .«.  shall  be  cutoff  from  my  i)rc.sence 
2:5.  30.  thnt  s.  will  I  destroy  from  his  people 

A'um.  15.  31.  that  s.  shall  n'terly  be  cut  off 

Thy  SOUL. 
frcn.  27.  10.  eat,  thnt  thy  s.  may  bless  me,  31. 
Drul.  4.  9.  take  hei^d,  and  keep  thy  s.  ddigently 
29.  shall  find  him,  if  seek  him  with  all  thy  s. 

f>.  .5.  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  s.  30.  6. 

10.  12.  to  serve  the  Lord  thy  God  with  ;ill  thy  s. 

12.  15.  wliRtsocver  thys.  lusteth  after,  14.  25. 

26.16.  do  with  all  £Ay  s.  \\  30. 2.  obey  with  all  thyss. 

30.  2.  obey  his  voice  with  all  thy  heart  and  thys. 

10.  if  thou  turn  unto  the  Lord  with  all  thy  s. 

I  Sam.  2  16.  then  lake  as  mucn  as  tAy  s.  desireth 
20.  4.  whatsoever  thy  s.  desiretn,!  will  do  for  thee 
23.20.come  according  to  all  the  desire  of  thys. 
25. 29.  yet  a  man  is  risen  to  pursue  and  seek  thy  s. 

1  Kinirs  1 1.  37.  sh.alt  reign  according  all  (Ay  s.dcsir. 

Psnl.  121.  7.  the  Lord  shall  preserve  tity  .«. 

Pron.  2.  10.  when  knowledge  is  pleasant  lo  thy  s. 
3.22  so  shall  be  life  to  «Ay.?.  and  grace  to  thy  neck 
19.  13.  and  let  not  tAy  s.  spare  for  his  crying 
22.  25.  learn  his  ways,  and  get  a  snare  In  thy  s. 
24. 12.  he  Ihat  keepeth  thy  .s.  doth  not  he  know  it? 
14.  so  shall  the  knowledge  of  wi.!il(ini  lie  to  thy  s. 
29.  17.  yea,  he  shall  give  di'lighl  to  thy  s. 

Isa.  51.  23.  which  have  said  to  thy  s.  bow  down 
58.  10.  if  Ihou  draw  out  thy  s.  lo  the  hungry  ■ 

11.  the  Lord  shall  satisfy  iky  s.  in  drought 
JVr.H.ig.halh  rA?/.«.loathod  Zion?  wbv.«millen  usi 

38.  17.  en  forth  then,  thy  s.  shall  live,  20. 
Eiek.  3. 19.  thou  host  delivered  thy  s.  21.  I  33. 9. 
567 


SOU 

Hab.  2.  10.  and  thou  hast  sinned  against  thy  s. 
Mat.  22. 37.  thou  shall  love  Lord  with  all  thy  heart 
and  with  all  thys.  Mark  J2.30.  Luke  10.27. 
Luke  12.20.this  night  (Ay  s.shall  be  required  of  thee 
3./oAn2.thou  mayesl  prosper,even  as  thys.  prosper. 
Rev.  18.14.  the  fruits  thy  s.  lusted  after  are  departed 
See  LivETH. 
SOULS. 

Oen.12.  5.  Abraham  took  s.  they  had  got  in  Haran 
14.  t21.  give  me  the  s.  and  take  goods  to  thyself 

36.  to.  Esau  took  all  the  s.  of  his  house 
46.  15.  the  s.  by  Leah  were  thirty  and  three 

18.hy  Zilpahsi.'steens.ll  22.  by  Rachel  fourteen  «. 

25.  all  the  iJ.  Jacob  had  by  Bilhah  were  seven 

26.  all  the  s.  that  came  into  Egypt,  si.xty  and  six 
27. the  sons  of  Jo.seph  in  Egypt  were  twos.all  the 

s.  of  house  of  Jacob  were  seventy  s.  Exod.  1.5. 
Exod.  12.  4.  take  a  lamb  according  to  number  of  s. 
16. 1 16.  a  homer  according  to  the  number  of  s. 
30. 15.  an  offering  to  Lord,  to  make  an  atonement 
for  yours.  16.  Lev.  17.  11.  JV*iim.31.  50. 
A,CB.18.29.eveii  s.  that  committheni  shall  be  cutoff" 
20.  25.  ye  shall  not  make  your  .?.  abominable 
Awm.  16.38.  of  these  sinners  ijgainst  their  own  «. 
30.  9.  every  vow  wherewith  have  bound  their  s. 
Josh.\0,iS^  he  utterly  destroyed  them  and  all  the  s. 
that  were  tlierein,  30,  32.  |  11.  11. 
23. 1 11.  take  good  heed  therefore  unto  your  s. 

14.  ye  know  in  all  your  hearts  and  in  all  your  s. 
I  S<im.25. 29.  *.  of  thine  enemies  shall  he  sling  out 

1  Chron.  5.  t21.  they  took  ofs.  of  men  100,000 
Esth.^.  1 31  .these  days  they  had  decreed  for  their  j. 
Psal.  72.  13.  and  shall  save  the  s.  of  the  needy 

97.  10.  he  preserveth  the  s.  of  his  saints 
Prov.  11.  30.  and  he  that  winneih  .■;.  is  wise 

14.  25.  a  true  witness  delivereih  s. 
fsa.  47.  t  14.  they  shall  not  deliver  their  s. 

57.  16.  spirit  should  fail,  and  s.  which  I  made 
.rer.  2.  34.  in  thy  skirts  is  found  the  blood  of «. 

6.  16.  ye  shall  find  rest  for  your  s.  Mat.  11.  29. 
26. 19.  thus  might  we  procure  great  evil  ag.  our  s. 

37.  t9.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  deceive  not  yojir  s. 
42.  t  20.  you  have  used  deceit  against  your  s. 
44. 7.  why  commit  this  great  evil  against  your  s.? 

/.am.  1.  li3.  they  sought  meat  to  relieve  their  s. 
Exek.  7.  19.  they  shall  not  satisfy  theirs. 
13. 18.  to  hunt  s.  will  ye  hunts,  of  my  people,  20. 
will  ye  save  the  s.  alive  that  come  unto  yo<i? 
19.  to  sloy  the  s.  that  should  not  die 

14.  14.  they  should  deliver  but  their  own  s. 
18.4.  all  s.  are  mine  ||  22.25.  they  have  devoured  s. 
22.  27.  her  princes  are  like  wolves  to  destroy  s. 

Luke  21.  19.  in  your  patience  possess  your  s. 
.^ct.':  2.  41.  there  were  addi  d  to  them  3000  s. 

7.  14.  he  called  Jacob  and  his  kindred  75 .». 

14. 22.  cotnfirming  the  s.  of  the  disciples,exhorting 
15.24.  have  troubled  you  subvertini;  your  s. 
27.  37.  we  were  in  all  in  the  ship  276  s. 

2  Cnr.  12.  t  15.  I  would  be  spent  lor  your  s. 

1  T/ie~^s.  2.  8.  lo  have  imparted  our  own  e.  lo  you 
Heb.  13. 17.  obey  them,  for  they  watch  for  your  s. 
Jam.  I.  21.  the  word  which  is  able  to  save  your  s. 

1  Pet.  1.  9.  end  of  your  faith  the  salvation  of  yours. 
22.  seeing  have  purified  yours,  in  obeying  truth 

2.  25.  are  returned  lo  the  Shepherd  of  your  s. 

3.  20.  wherein  few,  that  is,  eight  s.  were  saved 

4.  19.  commit  the  keeping  of  their  s.  to  him 

2  Pf(.2.14.  cannot  cease  fr.  sin  beguiling  unstable.5. 
liev.  6.  9. 1  saw  under  the  allar  tlies.  of  them  slain 

18.  13.  no  man  buyelh  slaves  and  s.  of  men 

20.  4.  I  saw  the  s.  of  them  that  were  beheaded 

.'iee  .Afflict. 

SOUND,  Substantive. 

F.xod.  28.  35.  his  s.  sliall  he  heard  when  he  gocth  in 

/,ev.  25.  to.  cause  the  trumpet  loud  of  s.  to  sound 

26.  36.  the  s.  of  a  shaken  leaf  sliall  chase  them 

Josh.  6.  5.  when  ye  hear  the  s.  of  the  trumpet,  20. 

2Sani.5.  24.  when  thou  hearest  the  s.of  agoingin 

the  tops  of  the  mulberry-trees,  1  Chron.  14.  15. 

6. 15.  they  broueht  up  the  ark  with  shouting  and 

the  s.  of  the  trumpet,  1  Chron.  15.  28. 

15.  10.  when  ye  hear  the  s.  say  Absalom  reigns 
1  Kin^s  I.  40.' the  earth  rent  with  the  s.  of  them 

41.  when  Jonb  heard  the  s.  of  the  trumpet 
14.  6.  when  Ahijah  heard  the  s.  of  her  feet 
18.  41.  for  there  is  a  s.  of  abundance  of  rain 
2fi'inD-.sG.32.is  not  s.ofhis  master's  feet  behind  him? 

1  CAro7i.l6. 5.  hut  Asaph  made  as.  with  cymbals 
42.with  trumpets  and  those  that  nhould  make  a  s. 

2  Chr.  5.  13.  as  one,  to  make  one  s.  lo  be  heard 
JWA.  4.20.  in  what  place  ye  hears,  of  the  trumpet 
Job  15.21.  a  dreadful  s.  in  his  ears,  in  prosperity 

21.  12.  and  n-joice  at  the  s.  of  the  organ 

.37.  2.  hear  the  s.  that  goelh  out  of  his  mouth 
39.  24.  nor  believeth  he  it  is  the  s.  of  the  Irnmpet 
Psal.il.  5.  the  L.gone  up  with  thes.  of  a  trumpet 
77. 17.  cloud  poured  out  water,  skies  sent  out  a  s. 
89.  1.5.  blessed  are  people  that  know  the  joyful  s. 
92.  3.  sing  upon  the  harp  with  a  solemn  s. 

98.  6.  sing  Mith  tiumpeUi  and  s.  of  comet 


SOU 

Psal.  150.  3.  praise  him  with  the  *.  of  the  trempet 
F.ccl.  7.  t6.  as  the  s.  of  thorns  under  a  pot 

12.  4.  when  the  s.  of  the  grinding  is  low 
Jer.i.  19.  hast  heard,  O  my  soul,  the  s.of  trumpet 
21.  how  long  shall  I  hear  the  s.of  the  trumpet  ? 

6.  17.  saying,  hearken  lo  the  s.of  the  trumpet  ? 

8.  16.  the  land  trembled  at  the  s.  of  the  neighing 
25.  10.  I  will  lake  from  them  s.  of  the  millstones 
42.  14.  where  we  shall  hear  no  s.  of  the  trumpet 

50.  22.  s.  of  battle  is  in  the  land,  and  of  destruction 

51.  54.  a  s.  of  a  cry  cometh  from  Babylon 
i?:fA:.10.5.lhe  s.of  the  cherubims'  wings  was  heard 

26. 13.  the  s  of  thy  harps  shall  be  no  more  heard 
15.  shall  not  the  "isles  shake  at  the  s.  of  thy  fall.' 
27.  28.  suburbs  shall  shake  at  s.  of  cry  of  thy  pilots 
31.  16.  I  made  nations  lo  shake  at  s.  of  his  fall 
33.  4.  heareth  the  s.  and  taketh  no  warning 
5.  he  heard  s.  of  trumpet  and  look  not  warning 
Dan.  3.  5.  at  the  time  when  ye  hear  the  s.  7, 10, 15. 
Jimos  2.  2.  Moab  shall  die  with  s.  of  trumpet 
6.5.  that  chaunt  to  the  s.  of  the  viol,  and  invent 
Mat.  24.  31.  he  shall  send  his  angels  wiih  a  greats. 
John  3.8.  hearest  the  s.  but  canst  not  tell  whence 
Arts  2.2.  suddenly  there  came  a  s.  from  heaven 
Rom.  10.  J8.  verily  their  s.  went  into  all  the  earth 
1  Cor.  14.  7.  even  things  without  life  giving  s. 

8.  for  if  the  trumpet  give  an  uncertain  s. 
Heb.  12. 19.  ye  are  not  come  lothe  s.  of  a  trumpet 
Rev.  1. 15.  and  his  voice  as  the  s.  of  niaiiy  waters 

9.  9.  the  s.  of  their  wings  was  as  the  s.  ot  chariots 
18. 22.  the  s.  of  a  millstone  shall  be  heard  uo  more 

SOUND,  Adjective. 
Psal.  119.  80.  let  my  heart  be  s.  in  ihy  statutes 
Prov.  2. 7.  he  layeth  up  s.  wisdom  for  the;  righteous 

3.  21.  my  son,  keep  s.  wisdom  and  discretion 
8.14.  counsel  is  mine  and  ,?.  wisdom,  I  am  underst. 
14.30.  a  s.  heart  is  the  life  of  the  flesh,  but  envy 

jAike  15.  27.  because  hath  received  him  safe  and  s. 

1  Tim.  1.  lO.if  any  other  thing  contrary  tos.  doctri. 

2  T'/'m.  1.7.  for  God  hath  given  us  spirit  of  as.  mind 

13.  hold  fast  iheformofs.  words  thou  hast  heard 

4.  3.  when  they  will  not  endure  s.  doctrine 
Tit.  1.  9.  he  may  be  able  by  s.  doctrine  lo  exhort 

13.  rebuke  them,  tl»at  they  may  be  s.  in  the  faiih 
2.  1.  speak  the  things  which  become  s.  doctrine 
2.  that  the  aged  men  be  s.  in  faith,  in  charity 
8.  s.  speech  that  cannot  be  condemned 
SOUND,  Verb. 
/..ft'.  25.  9.  trumpet  of  jubilee  tos.  in  day  of  atone- 
ment make  the  trumpet  s.  through  all  the  land 
J\r«m.l0.7.  shall  blow,  but  you  shall  not*,  an  alarm 
1  Chr.  15. 19.  HeniHU  and  Asaph  were  appoint. lo  s. 
[stt.  16. 11.  wherefore  my  bowels  shall  s.  for  Monb 
Jer.  48.  36.  my  heart  shall  s.  for  Moab  like  pipes 
.Joel  2.  1.  and  s.  an  alarm  in  my  holy  mountain 
Jl/at.6.2.  therefore  do  not  s.  alrumpel  beforelhee 

1  Cor.  15.  52.  for  the  trumpetshalls.  dead  be  raised 
flfu.8.6.  the  seven  angels  prepareil  themselves  tos. 

13.  trumpet  of  the  three  angels  who  are  yet  lo  s. 

10.  7.  when  the  seventh  angel  shall  begin  to  s. 

SOUNDED. 
Exnd.  19. 19.  when  the  voice  of  the  trumpet  s.lonj 
l.S(7m.20.12.  Jonathan  said,  when  I  haves,  my  fatli. 

2  Chron.  7.  6.  the  priests  s.  trumpets,  13.  14. 

23.  13.  ihe  people  rc-joiced,  and  s.  with  trumpets 
29.  28.  the  singers  sang  and  the  trumpeters  s. 
JVcA.  4.  18.  he  ihat  s.  the  trumpet  was  by  me 
Luke  1.44.  a.«soon  as  voiceofsaluiat.  s.  in  my  ears 
I  Tlwss.  1.8.  from  you  s.  out  the  word  of  the  Lord 
Rev.  8.  7.  the  first  angel  s.  and  there  followed  hail 
8.  the  second  s.  ||  10.  third  s.  I|  12.  fourth  angel  ». 
9.  1.  the  fifth  s.  II  13.  sixth  s.  ||  11.  15.  seventh  «. 

SOUNDED. 

■/ids  27.  28.  they  s.  and  found  it  twenty  fathoms; 

they  s.  again  and  foimil  it  fifteen  fathoms 

SOUNDETII. 

F.xod.  19.  13.  when  the  trumpet  s.  long,  come  np 

SOUNDING. 

1  Chr.  15. 16.  singers  with  instruments  of  music  t. 

2  Chron.  5.  12.  and  with  them  120  priests  s. 

13. 12.  his  priests  with  s.  trumpets  to  cry  alarm 
Psal.  150.  5.  praise  him  upon  the  high  .'^.  cymbals 
Isa.  63. 15.  where  is  thy  zeal  and  s.  of  thy  bowels 
Ezck.  7.  7.  and  not  the  s.  again  of  mountains 
1  Cor.  13. 1.  and  have  not  charity,  1  am  as  s.  brass 

SOUNDNESS. 
Psal.  38.3.  there  is  no  s.  in  my  flesh  forthy  angi"r,  7. 
Isa.  1.6.  there  isnos.  in  it,  but  wounds  and  bruises 
j3c(s3.16.  hath  given  him  this  perfect  s.bel".  you  all 

SOUNDS. 
1  Cur.  14. 7.  except  thev  .?ive  a  distinction  in  the  s. 

SOUR. 

VsalS.S.when  ihes.  urape  is  ripening  in  the  flower 

yer.3I.29.  thcfathnr.s  have  eaten  a  s.  griipe  and  Ihq 

children's  teeth  are  set  on  edee,  F.zek.  18.  2. 

30.  every  maii  ihat  eateth  the  s.  grape,  teeth  bo 

Hos.  4.  18.  their  drink  is  s.  thev  have  committed 

SQUTII.  ■ 
Ocn.  12.  9.  and  Abram  journeyed  toward  the  s. 
13. 1.  Abram  weutup  into  the  «.  U  3.  went  from  • 


sow 

Cen.Sa.H.thoii  slmlt  spread  abroad  fo  norlli  and  s. 
Exod.  26.;15  on  side  oflhe  tabernacle  toward  the .«. 
J^um.  ]3.  29.  Amalekitcsdwell  in  Iheland  of  Iho  ». 
Deut.  33.  23.  O  Naphtali,  possess  thou  west  and  s. 
Josh.  10.  40.  Joshuii  Binote  tlio  cour)try  of  the  s. 
18.  5.  Judah  shall  abide  in  their  coa.'it  on  the  s. 
Judff.  1.  9.  to  fight  against  the  Cnnannites  in  the.'. 

1  Sam.W.  41.  Uavid  arose  out  of  a  place  toward  s. 
27.  10.  againslthe  j.of  Judah,  s.  of  Jerahmoelites 
30.  1.  the  Amalekitcs  had  invaded  the  s.  14. 

2  Sam.  24.  7.  they  went  out  to  the  s-  of  Judah 

1  Kings  1.  2.5.  three  looking  toward  s.  2  Chr.  4.  4. 
1  Chron.  9.  24.  the  porters  were  toward  the  s. 
2CArun.28.  18.  Phi'lisl  iocs  invaded  the  .'(.of  Judah 
Job  9.  9.  which  makelh  the  chambers  of  the  s. 
37.  9.  out  of  the  s.  conicth  the  whirlwind 

39.  2t').  and  streich  her  wings  toward  the  s. 
PiaZ.  75.6.  promotion  comcth  not  from  east  nor  5. 

89.  12.  the  north  and  s.  thou  hast  created  them 

107.  3.  and  gathered  them  from  the  north  and  s. 

136.  4.  turn  mir  captivity  as  the  streams  in  the  s. 
F.ccl.  1.  6.  the  wind  goeth  toward  the  .«. 

11.  3.  if  the  tree  fall  toward  the  ».  or  the  north 
Jsa."\.  1.  as  whirlwinds  in  the  s.  pass  through 

30.  6.  the  burden  of  the  beasts  of  the  .?. 

43.  6.  and  I  will  say  to  the  s.  keep  not  back 
Jer.  13.  19.  the  cities  of  the  ».  shall  be  shut  up 

17.  26.  from  the  s.  bringing  burnt-offerings 

32.  44.  men  shall  buy  fields  in  the  cities  of  the  s. 

33.  13.  in  the  cities  of  the  s.  eliall  the  flocks  pass 
F.zck.  20.  46.  set  thy  face  toward  thes.  and  droi>tby 

word  toward  ihes.  prophesy  against  the  s  fielil 
47. say  to  forest  of  s. faces  from  s.to  north  be  burnt 
21.  4.  my  sword  against  all  flesh  from  .?.  to  north 

40.  2.  by  which  was  as  the  frame  of  a  city  on  s. 
34.  after  that  he  brought  nie  toward  the  s. 

44.  and  their  prospect  was  toward  the  s. 

41.  11.  and  another  door  was  toward  the  s. 

46.  9.  shall  go  out  by  way  of  the  s.  gate;  and  he 
that  cnterelh  by  the  way  of  a.  go  forth  by  north 

Dan..  8. 9.  a  little  horn  waxed  great  toward  the  s. 
11.  .5.  anil  the  king  of  the  s.  shall  be  strong 
C.  king's  daughter  of  the  s.  shall  come  to  north 
9.  king  of  the  s.  shall  come  into  his  kingdom 
11.  king  of  the  s.  slinll  bo  moved  with  cholor 
>5.  and  the  arms  of  the  5.  shall  not  withstand 
25.  and  the  king  of  the  s.  shall  he  stirred  up 
29.  he  shall  return,  and  come  toward  the  s. 
40.  the  king  of  the  .t.  shall  push  at  him 
OJaa.19.  they  of  5.  shall  posso.-is  themonnt  of  Esnu 
2t).  the  captivity  shall  possess  the  cities  of  the.?: 
Hah.  3  f  3.  God  came  from  .•?.  from  mount  Paran 
Z,cch.  7.  7.  when  men  inhabited  the  s.  and  the  plain 
9.  14.  God  shall  go  with  whirlwinds  oflhe  s. 
14.4.  half  of  the  mountain  remove  toward  the  .?. 
JSInt.  VI.  42.  queen  of  the  s.  shall  rise  in  judgment 
Luke  13.29.comefrom  ,5.tosit  down  with  Abraham 
.1r.U  8.^.  saying,  ari^e,  and  go  toward  the  ». 
/(er.21.13.  on  ihes.  three  gates,  on  the  west  three^ 

SOUTH-BORDKR. 
^Mm.34.3.  .t.-Zion^er  the  outmost  coast  of  salt-sea 
Josk.  15.  2.  the  s.-hnrder  of  Judah  from  iho  shore 

SOUTH-COUNTRY. 
Gen.  20.1.  Abraham  .sojourned  toward  the  s.-cov.n. 
24.  62.  for  Isaac  dwelt  in  the  s.-country 
Josh.  II.  16.  Joshua  took  all  the  s.-cnunlry,\'2.f.. 
ZccA.0. 6.  the  grlsled  go  forth  toward  the  s.-coun. 

SOIJTH-FIKM). 
F.zek.  20.  46.  prophesy  ag.  the  forest  of  ihe  s.-fidd 

SOUTH-LAND. 
J()»A.  15. 19.  i;)ou  hast  given  ir\r-n.i.-l.  Judg.  1.  15. 

SOUTII-QUARTKR. 
Jf iim.M. 2. s. -quarter Uom  Zin  by  roast  of  Edom 
Jo/<h.  18.  15.  s.-c/unWfr  from  eiiil  of  Kirjalh-jearini 

SOUTII-RAMtrni. 
1  Sam.  30.27.  to  them  which  were  in  s.-Ramotk 

SOUTII-SIDK. 
F.xitd.lft.  18.  twenty  hoards  on  Ihe  s.side,  36.23. 
Jfiim.'l.  10.  on .'(.-sirfc shall  he  standard  of  Reuben 
10. 6.  camps  which  lie  on  the  s.-niJr.  co  forward 
F.iek.  42.  |H.  he  measured  the  s.-sidr  500  reeria 

47.  I.  the  watirs  came  iit  Ihe  s.-.iide  of  the  altar 

48.  16.  and  the  n.^tidr  4.'>(H1  measures,  33. 

SOUTH  WARD. 
<7/!n.  13. 14.  Lord  said  to  Abraham,  look  s.-irarJ 
JV*»m.  3.  '29.  Kohaih  pitch  cm  nide  of  labern.  .t.-te. 

13.  17.  Moseii  said,  gi^t  ye  up  Ihin  way  s.-ward 
Dan.  8.  4.  I  saw  the  rnm  pmhing  s.-ward 

aOUTII-WKST. 
.acts  27.  12.  Plionire  Ivir.jr  low.iril  the  s.-ICOt 

SOUTH-WIND. 

Jiih  37.  17.  ho  quieteth  the  I'arlh  by  the  .t.-wind 

f,%.7H.26.  by  his  power  hf^  brou'.'ht  in  Iho  o.-mind 

Cant.  4. 16.  come,  thou  «.-irinr/,  biciwon  my  garden 

l.uke  V2.."i.5.when  sen  s.-w.  blow,  Ihcre  will  bn  heal 

^cts  27.  13.  and  when  the  s.-wind  blew  aofllr 

SOW. 

Pet.i.K.  thos.  washfd.to  her  wallowing  inmiro 

SOW 

Cigiiifies,  [11  To  tcattrr  needs  on  the  earth,  Geo. 

S68 


SOW 

26. 12.  Z,et».25.  3.  [2]  Topreach  the  gospel,  Mat. 
13.  19.  1  Cor.  9.  11.  [3]  To  dhperse  worldly 
goods  among  the  poor,  aCor.  9.  6.  [4]  To  be  bu- 
ried and  laid  like  seed  in  the  earth,  nubjecl  to 
rottenness  and  putrefaction,  1  Cor.  15.  42,  43. 

He  that  sowelh  to  the  flesh,  Oal.  6.8.  One  that 
leads  such  a  course  of  life  as  is  agreeable  to  hi.i 
corrupt  nntnrc,  that  laycth  out  his  estate,  and 
br.^tows  all  his  time  and  pains  in  the  service 
of  the  flesh,  and  so  makes  provision  only  for 
this  present  life. 

He  that  soweth  to  the  spirit,  Oal.  6.  8.  Jfe  that 
layctk  out  his  estate,  or  sprndeth  his  time, 
strength,  and  talints,for  the  glory  of  God,  in 
obedience  to  the  commands,  motions,  and  die 
laics  of  the  Spirit ;  and  particularly  that  nsith 
his  estate  for  the  maintenance  of  the  gospel, 
and  upholding  the  ministry  of  it. 

He  that  aowi'th  and  he  that  reapeth,  .fohn  4.  36 
the  prophets  and  John  the  lliipli.si,  who  have 
sowed  the  seeds  of  instruction  among  the  peo- 
ple formerly,  and  taught  them  the  principles 
of  saving  truth;  and  you,  my  disciples,  that 
succeed  them,  whose  ministry  I  will  use  in 
bringing  people  to  embrace  me  and  viy  doc 
trine,  thereby  to  perfect  tho.ie  truths  which 
were  formerly  taught  them  concerning  me. 

^«;n.47.23.hi're  Is  seed  for  you  and  ye  sh.*.  the  land 

F.iod.  23.  10.  si-x  years  s.  thy  land.  Lev.  25.  3. 

/-w.l9.19.9hallnots.with  mfngledaeed,/>fuf.K.9. 

25.  4.  in  the  seventh  year  thou  shall  not  a.  11. 
20.  we  shall  not  s.  nor  gather  in  our  increase 
22.  ve  shall  ,9.  the  eighth  year 

26.  16.  ye  shall  s.  your  seed  in  vain,  for  enemies 
2  Kings  19.  29.  in  the  third  year  s.  ye,  Isa.  37. 30, 
Job  4.  8.  they  that  s.  wickedness  reap  the  same 

31.  8.  then  let  me  .f.  and  let  another  eat 
Psal.  107.  37.  s.  fields,  and  plant  vineyards 

12li.  5.  they  thnt  s.  in  tears  shall  reap  in  joy 
F.ccl.  11.4.  he  that  observulh  the  wind,  shall  not  s 

6.  in  the  morning  .•«.  thy  seed,  and  in  the  eveidnf) 
I.^a.  ^.  24.  doth  the  pliiwmaii  plow  all  day  to  s.? 

3(1  03.  give  rain  ofseed  thou  slinlt,'.  ground  withal 

32.  20.  blessed  are  ye  that  s.  beside  all  waters 
,7>r.  4.  3.  break  fallow-ground,  .9.  not  among  thorns 

31.  27.  I  will  s.  the  house  of  Israel  with  seed 
35.  7.  neither  shall  ye  hiiild  house  nor  *.  seed 
Hos.  2.  23.  and  I  will  .t.  her  unto  me  in  the  earth 
10.12.,?.  to  yourselves  in  righieousn.  reap  in  mercy 
Mic.  6.  1.5.  thou  shall  s.  but  thou  shall  not  reap 
7,rch.  10.  9.  I  will  .•?.  them  among  the  people 
Mnt.  6.  26.  the  fowls  of  the  air  .<.  not,  nor  reap 
13. 3. a  sower  went  forth  to  a.  when  he  sowed  some 
seeils  fell  by  the  way-side,  Mark  4.  3.  J.uke  8. 5 
27.  didst  not  thou  s.  good  seed  in  thy  field  7 
l.xike  12.24. consider  ravens  they  neither.?,  nor  reap 
19.  21.  reai)e9t  that  thou  d'dsl'not  s.  22. 

SOWED. 

fTfn.26.12.Isanc.?.  in  that  land  same  year,  received 
.fndg.  9.  45.  Abimelech  6i.  Shechem  with  suit 
..V«t.l3.4.whpn  he  s.  some  fell  by  the  way  side,and 
the  fowls  devoured  ihem,  Mark  4. 4.  jAike  8.  5 
24.  which  5.  good  seed  |'i  25.lhe  enemy  s.  tares,  39. 
25.  26.  I  reap  where  I  s.  not 

SOW.   See  Sew. 

SOWEDST. 

Deut.  11.  10.  not  a«  Kivpt,  where  thou  s.  thy  seed 

SOWN. 
J.eyy.  11.37.  if  a  carcase  fall  on  sowing  seed  tobe.< 
l)eut.^i\.  4.  to  a  rough  valley  neither  oareil  nor  s 
22.  9.  lest  Ihe  fruit  of  thy  seed  s.  bo  defiled 
29.  23.  eenerations  Bee  that  land  is  not.?,  norbcai 
./udir.  6. 3.  when  Israel  had  .'.  the  Midianites  rami 
Psnl.^l  II. light  ixs.for  the  righteous, and  gladno'^s 
Isa.  19. 7.  every  thing  .?.  bythe  brooks  Khallwiihor 
40.  24.  shall  not  be  planted,  yea,  shall  not  hi'  .s-. 
61.11.  ns  the  garden  causeth  the  tbingi.?.  tospring 
./er.  2.  2.  thou  wentest  nfier  mo  in  a  land  not  »•. 
12.  13.  they  have  s.  wheal,  but  shall  reap  Ihorn-s 
FzfA:.36.9. 1  am  for  you, and  ye  shall  be  tilled  nnd  .«. 
//■(>,<. H.7. they  have  .?.lho  wind,shall  reap  whirlwinl 
.VrtA.  1.  14.  that  no  more  of  thy  name  be  s. 
f/a!T.  I.  6.  yn  hav  s.  much,  and  bring  in  littlo 
Mat.  13.19.  calchcth  away  that  was  .?.  Mnrk  4.  15. 
25.24  nliard  man,  reaping  where  thon  hast  not.?. 
JllirA- 4.16.  these  nrelhi'v  which  .?.  on  stony  grnuriil 
/8.  »,  among  thorns  ||  20.  are  .?.  on  goo'l  ground 
31.  which  wliiii  it  i*  s.  is  less  than  all  the  needs 

1  Cor.  9.  11.  ifwp  havi-  5.  to  yon  splritiinl  things 
15.  42.  it  is .».  in  corruption  ||  43.  is  s.  in  dishonour 

41.  it  i".?.  a  natural  body,  raised  n  spirilual  b"dy 

2  r'or.9.10.  niul'iply  yoursfcd  .?.  and  increase  fniiis 
./am.  3. 13.  the  fruit  of  rii/htnousness  it  s.  in  pcacr 

SOWER. 
r?a.  55. 10.  that  it  may  give  Bocd  to  the  .■».  and  hreii! 
Jrr.  .50.  Ifi.  cut  ofr.?.'from  Rabvlon,  and  him  tli  i 
jTfat.  13.  3.  behold,  ns.  went  forth  to  bow,  wh"n  li. 
sow.  some  seeds  b  v  way -aide,  .^fcri  4.3  l.uke  9  5 
18.  bear  yo  thcreftire  the  pirahlc  oflhe  .». 
JUark  4.  H.  s.  sowelh  the  word,  tl>e»o  by  \T»y  aide 


SPA 

2  Ctr.  9. 10.  now  he  timt  miniMereth  seed  to  the  f 
SOWEST. 

1  Cor.  15.  36.  that  which  thou  s.  is  not  quickened 
37.  thou  3.  not  that  body  that  shall  be,  but  bars 

SOWETH.  [grain 

Pror.  6.  14.  he  s.  discord  ||  19.  he  that  s.  discord 
lI.lH.to  Mm  thata.righleousnessbe  asare  reward 

16.  2H.  a  froward  man  s.  strife,  and  a  whisperer 
22.  8.  he  that  s.  iniquity  shall  reap  vanity 

.imos^.  13.  trcarler  shall  overtake  him  that  ».  seed 
Mat.  13. 37.  he  that  s.  good  seed,  is  the  Son  of  man 
Mark  4.  14.  sower ,?.  the  word,  these  by  way-side 
./ahn  4.  36.  both  he  that ,?.  nnd  renpelh  may  rejoico 
37.  that  saying  true,  one  s.  nw\  another  reapeth 

2  Cfrr.9.6.he  who.?,  sparingly, he  who  .?.  bonnlifully 
Gal.  6.  7.  for  whatsoever  a  man.? .that  shall  lie  reap 

8.  that  3.  to  his  fi(?sb,9liall  reap  corruption;  but  be 
that  .9.  to  the  Spirit,  shall  reap  life 
cverlastin? 
SOWING. 
/.er.  11.37.  if  their  carcase  fall  on  any  .?.to  te  gown 
26.  5.  and  the  vintage  shall  reach  to  the  «.  time 

SPACE. 
(7f7i. 29.14.  Jacobabode  with  him  the.?.ofa  month 
.32.  16.  and  put  a  s.  betwixt  drove  and  drove 
/.er.  25.8.  the .?.  of  seven  s.ibhalbs  of  years  shall  be 
.10.  if  it  be  not  redeemed  in  the  .?.  of  a  full  year 
Josh.  3.  4.  there  shall  be  a  s.  between  you  and  it 
1  Sam.  26.  13.  .A  betw.  David's  company  and  Sanl'g 
F.zra  9.  8.  for  a  little  j.  grace  hath  been  shewed 
./er.  28.  11.  within  the  .?.  of  two  full  years 
J.uke  22.  59.  about  the  y.  of  one  hoor  after 
.^ets  5.7.  about  .?.  of  three  hours  his  wife  came  in 
34. commanded  to  put  Ihe  apostles  forth  a  little .•». 
7.42.  offered  slain  beiisis  by  the  s.  of  forty  years 

13.  20  gave  judges  about  the  .?.  of  4.50  years 
21.  God  gave  Ihi'm  Saul  for  the  .?.  of  40  years 

19.  8.  he  spake  boldly  Ih'^ .?.  of  three  months 
10.  and  tbia  continued  by  ihe  .?.  of  two  years 
34.  all  with  one  voice  about .?.  of  two  hours  cried 
30.  31.  by  the  *.  of  throe  years  I  ceased  not 
./irm.  5.  17.  it  rained  not  by  ihe  .s.  of  three  years 
Rev.  2. 21. 1  ga»<>  her  .?.  to  repent  of  her  fornicalion 

8.  1.  there  wrs  silence  about  the,?,  of  half  an  hour 

14.  20.  and  blood  canio  by  ihe  s.  of  1600  furlongs 

17.  10.  when  come,  ho  most  conlinue  a  short  *. 

SPACES. 

1  Kinssl.  1 5. .?.  and  pillars  were  square  in  prospect 
M'h.  7.  t  4.  now  the  city  was  broad  in  .?. 
/.sa.2>.tl8.lie  shall  toss  thee  into  connlry  large  of.?. 

33. 1 21.  the  Lord  will  be  to  us  a  place  broad  of  s. 

SPAKE. 
Gen.  19.  14.  Lot  went  out,  and ,?.  to  his  sons  in  law 
24.  .30.  saving,  thus.?,  the  man  unto  me 

29.  9.  while  ho  ytt .?.  with  them,  Rachel  cnnie 
39. 10.it  came  to  pass  as  she,?  to  Joseph  day  t>y  day 
4214.  thai  is  it  that  I .?.  to  you,  saying,  yt-  are  spies 

23.  for  he  s.  unto  them  by  an  interpreter 

43  27.  the  old  man  of  whom  ye  .?.  is  he  yet  alive? 
29.  is  this  your  younger  brother  of  whom  ye  s.T 

.50.  17.  and  Jose|ih  wi-|il  when  they  s.  onto  him 
J^'um.  12.  1.  Miriam  and  Aaron  .?.  iigain.st  Moses 

21.  .5.  and  the  people  .?.  against  God  and  Mo.ses 
Deut.  I.  43.  so  I  .?.  to  you,  and  ye  would  not  heat 

28.  68.  Lord  shall  bring  Ihee  by  wav  whereof  I  t. 
.hidg.  19.  22.  they  .?.  'o  the  master  of  the  house 
Ruth  4.  1.  behold,  the  kinsman  of  whom  Boaz  s. 
l.S/im.  1.13.  now  Hannah.?,  in  her  heart,  lips  moved 

18.  24.  told  him,  saving,  on  this  manner.?.  David 
20.26.  neverlheli'ssSauI.?.  not  anything  that  day 

30.  6.  for  the  jieople  .?.  of  stoning  him 

2  .Srirn.  12.  18.  while  child  was  alive,  we  .?.to  him 

1  /\'ings  1.  42.  while  he  yel  ».  behold,  Jonathan 
3.  22.  thus  ihev  .?.  before  king  Solomon 

2  /\'ivgs2.  22.  MCCDrdin?  to  saying  which  Elishs  *. 

9.  12.  and  he  said,  lliiis  and  thus  s.  he  to  me 
ICAr.  21.19.  David  went  up  atsavinir  which  Gad*. 
2  Chron.  18.  19.  one  a.  savins  after  this  manner 

30.  2>,  Hezekiah  ».  comfortnbly  lo  them,  .32.  «. 

32.  16.  his  servants  ,*.  vet  more  ag.  the  Lord  God 
19.  they  .?.  against  the  Go'l  of  Jerusalem 

33. 18.  that  ,?.  lo  Mainssih  in  ihe  name  ofliord 
.Vr/i  13.24.  their  childr.  s.  half  in  speech  of  AsliHod 
Fslh.'^A.  it  came  lop;i»!i,  when  I  hey  s.  daily  to  him 
Jfb'i.  13.  Ibey  sit  d"wn,  an'l  none.?,  a  word  to  him 

19.  IR.  I  arose,  ami  they  s.  aeainsl  mo 
211  22.  after  my  wor'ls  thev  .?.  not  ajain 

32.16.  for  they  s.  not,  bii'  stood  stll,  answered  not 
Psnl.  39.3.  fire  burncil,  Iheii  .«.  I  with  my  tongue 

7''.  19.  yea,  they  s.  against  God,  ihey  siid,  can  G. 

106.  33.  BO  that  be  s.  unadv^s.-dlv  wiih  his  lip* 
rniii.  30.  1.  the  man  .?.  lo  Ilhiel  and  Ucal 
Cnnt.'i.  10.  my  beloved.?,  and  said,  rise  up,  my  Iov« 

.5.  6.  my  soul  failed  when  he  .?.  I  Bought  him 
.Jer.  8  6. 1  hearkened  and  beiird,  they  .?.  not  aright 

20  8.  for  since  I  .?.  I  cried  out,  I  cried  violonco 
'■'lek.  24.  18.  so  I  .?.  lo  the  people  in  the  morning 
Dan.T.  11.  voice  of  great  wor.ls  which  Ihe  horn  i. 
W.).?.13.1.when  K|>hra'm.?.lrembrinB  evnlled  hinis 
.Voi  3. 18.  that  feared  Lord  f.oflcD  one  to  another 


SPA 

Wae.O  18.  while  he  «.  these  tothem, 17.5.  |  26.47. 

Mark  5.  35.  |  14  43.  Luks  8.  4'J.  |  22.  47,  tW. 

33.  dev.  wascastout,dumh£.  12.22.Auie  11. 14. 

21.  45.  they  perceived  that  he  s.  of  Ihein 
Luke  1.  55.  as  he  s.  to  our  lathers,  to  Abraham 

2.  50.  they  understood  not  the  saying  which  hec. 

9.  11.  he  s.  unto  them  oftlie  kingdom  of  God 
31.  who  s.  of  his  decease  to  be  at  Jerusalem 

22.  65.  other  things  blasidiemously  £.  lliey  ag.  him 
24.  6.  remember  liow  lie  £.  to  yuu  in  Uulilee 

36.  as  they  thus  s.  Jesus  stood  in  midst  of  them 
John  1.  15.  John  said,  this  wus  he  of  whom  1  s. 

7.  13.  no  man  s.  openly  of  him  for  fear  of  Jews 
46.  the  otiicers  said,  never  man  a',  like  this  man 

8.  27.  they  understood  not  that  he  »-.  of  the  Father 

10.  6.  what  things  they  were  which  he*,  to  them 
41.  all  things  that  John  s.  of  this  man  were  true 

11.  13.  howbeit  Jesus  f.  of  his  death 

51.  this  s.  henotof  hims.  he  prophesied  that  Jes. 

12.  29.  others  said,  an  angel  s.  to  him 

38.  saying  might  be  fultilled  which  he  s.  18.9,32. 
41.  when  he  saw  his  glory,  and  «.  of  him 

13.  22.  disriples  looked,  doubting  of  whom  he  s. 
24.  he  should  ask  who  it  should  be  of  whom  hes. 

13.  2d.  no  man  knew  for  what  intent  he  s.  this 

21.  19.  this  *■.  he,  signifying  by  what  death  he 
^cts  6.  10.  not  able  to  resist  spirit  by  which  he  s. 

8.  6.  gave  heed  to  those  things  which  Philip  s. 
10.  44.  whilePeteryct  s. these  words, H.  Ghost  fell 

13.  45.  Jews  s.  ag.  those  things  that  were  spoken 

14.  1.  and  so  s.  that  a  great  multitude  believed 

19.  9.  but  6-.  evil  of  that  way  before  the  multitude 

20.  38.  sorrowing  most  for  the  words  which  he  «. 

22.  9.  they  heard  not  voice  of  him  that  s.  to  me 
26.  24.  as  he  thus  i.  for  himself,  Festus  said 
28.25. wells.the  Holy  Ghost  by  Esaias  the  prophet 

1  Cor.  13.  II.  when  I  was  a  child,  I  s.  as  a  child 
14.  5.  I  would  that  ye  all  s.  with  tongues 
Oal.  4.  15.  where  is  then  the  blessedness  ye  s.  of! 
Heb.l.  14.  of  which  tribe  Moses  s.  nothing  of  priest 

12.  25.  who  refused  him  that  s.  on  earth 
2Pe£.l.  21.  holy  men  of  God  s.  ns  they  were  moved 
Rev.  1. 12. 1  turned  to  see  the  voice  that  s.  with  me 

13.  11. 1  beheld  another  beast  s.  as  a  dragon 

Ood  SPAKE. 
G'en.35.15.Jacob  called  place  whereGot/s. Beth-el 
Exod.'iO.l.Gods.  all  these  words  saying,  I  am  Ld. 
r>eut.  1.  6.  the  Lord  our  God  s.  to  us  in  Horeb 
yosA.23.14.not  one  thing  failed  ofgood  things  G.s. 
Mark  12.  26.  how  in  the  bush  Gud  s.'lo  him 
John  9.  29.  we  know  that  God  s.  unto  Moses  ^ 
^cts  7.  6.  and  God  s.  on  this  wise,  that  his  seed 
Ueb.  1.  1.  Gad  who  *.  in  time  past  to  the  fathers 
See  Lord,  expressly. 
Lord  or  God  SPAKE,  implicilhj. 
Oen.'iA.l.  G.  who  i.  to  me,  and  sware  to  me  saying 

1  Sam.  9.  17.  behold  the  man  whom  I  «.  to  thee  of 
28.  17.  and  the  L.  hath  done  to  him  as  hes.  by  me 

2Som.7.  7.  s.  I  a  word  with  any  of  tribes  of  Israel  ? 

23.  3.  God  said,  the  rock  of  Israel  s.  to  me 
IKings&.l'i.viaxA  which  1  s.  unto  David  thy  father 

2  Chron.  6.  4.  who  hath  fulfilled  that  which  he  s. 
32.  24.  he  s.  to  him,  and  gave  him  a  sign 

Psal.  33.  9.  he  s.  and  it  was  done,  he  commanded 
99.  7.  he  s.  unto  them  in  the  cloudy  pillar 
105.  31.  he  s.  and  there  came  Hies  and  lice 
34.  he  s.  and  the  locusts  came,  and  caterpillars 
ha.  65.  12.  when  I  s.  ye  did  not  hoar,  613.  4. 
Jer.  7.  13.  I  s.  to  you,  rising  up  early  and  speaking 
22.  I  s.  not  to  your  fathers,  I  brought  them 

14.  14.  I  sent  them  not,  neither  s.  unto  them 
19.  5.  which  I  commanded  not,  nor  s.  it 

22.  21.  I  s.  unto  thee  in  thy  prosperity,  butsaidst 
31.  20.  for  since  I  s.  against  him,  I  remember  him 

Eiek.  1.  28.  I  heard  a  voice  of  one  that  jt.  2.  2. 
10.  2.  he  s.  unto  the  man  clothed  with  linen 

Dan.  9.  12.  he  confirmed  his  words  which  he  s. 

Hos.i^.i.  found  him  in  Beth-cl,  there  he  s.  with  us 

Luke  1.  70.  as  he  .'.  by  mouth  of  his  holy  prophets 

24.  44.  these  are  the  words  which  I  s.  to  you 
Ucb.  4.  4.  he  s.  in  a  certain  place  on  this  wise 

SPAKEST. 
Judg.  13.  11.  art  thou  the  man  s.  to  the  woman  1 
17.  2.  the  silver  thou  s.  of  also  in  mine  ears 
1  Sam.  28.  21.  hearkened  to  words  which  thou  s. 
1  Kings  8.  24.  thou  s.also  with  thy  mouih,and  liasi 
fulfilled  it  with  thine  hand,  2  Chron.  6.  15. 
26.  let  thy  word  be  verified  which  thou  s.  to  Dav. 
53.  didst  separate  them,  as  thou  jf.  by  Moses 
AVA.  9.  13.  and  s.  with  them  from  heaven 
Psal.  89. 19.  then  thou«.  in  vision  to  thy  Holy  One 
Jer.  48.  27.  since  thou  s.  of  him,  skippodstfor  joy 

SPAN. 

Ezod.  28.  16.  a  s.  shall  be  the  length,  and  a  s.  the 

breadth  of  the  breast-plate  of  judgment, 

39.9. 

1  Sam.  17.  4.  Goliath's  height  six  cubits  and  a  s. 

/ia.40.12.  who  hath  meted  outlieavrn  with  the  «.? 

/<«a(.3J20.  ihall  women  eat  their  cbildr.of  a  $.  long 

560 


SPE 

Eiek.  43.  13.  the  border  of  the  altar  shall  be  a  «. 

SPANNED. 
Isa.  48.  13.  my  right  hand  hath  s.  tlie  heavens 

SPANGLED. 
Isa.  3.  1 19. 1  will  take  away  the  s.  ornaments 

SPARE. 
Gen.  18.  94.  not  s.  the  place  for  the  fifty  righteous 
26.  then  I  will  s.  all  the  ])lace  for  their  sakes 
45.  t20.  let  not  your  eye  s.  your  stufi" 
Deut.  13.  8.  thou  shall  not  «.  nor  conceal  him 

29.  20.  Lord  will  not  «.  him,  but  anger  of  Lord 

1  ^iam.  15.  3.now  go,  destroy  Anialek,*-.  them  not 
Jfeh.  13.  22.  and  *.  me  according  to  thy  mercy 
.lob  0.10.  let  him  not «.  1  have  not  concealed  words 
16.  13.  he  cleavcth  my  reins  asunder,  doth  not  *. 

20.  13.  though  he  s.  it  and  forsake  it  not 

27.  22.  for  God  shall  cast  upon  him,  and  not  s. 

30.  10.  they  s.  not  to  spit  in  my  face 

Fsal.  39.  13.  O  s.  mo  that  1  may  recover  strength 
72.  13.  he  shall  s.  the  poor  and  needy,  and  save 

Prov.  6.  34.  he  will  not  s.  in  the  day  of  vengeance 
19.  18.  let  not  thy  soul  s.  for  his  crying 

Isa.  9.  19.  people  as  fuel,  no  man  shall  s.  brother 
13.  18.  their  eye  shall  not  s.  children 

30.  14.  and  he  shall  break  it,  he  shall  not  s. 
54.  2.  s.  not,  lengthen  cords,  strengthen  stakes 
58. 1.  cry  aloud,  s.  not,  lift  up  voice  like  a  trumpet 

Jtr.  13.  14.  I  will  not  s.  them,  Eiek.  24.  14. 

21.  7.  he  shall  not  s.  them  ||  50.  14.  s.  no  arrov^■s 
51.  3.  s.  ye  not  her  young  men,  destroy  her  host 

£2^/1:.  5.11.1  willdimin.  thee,  nor  shall  mine  eyes, 
nor  will  I  have  any  pity,  7. 4, 9.  I  8. 18. 
I  9.  10. 
9.  5.  let  not  your  eye  s.  neit.her  have  ye  pity 
Juel  2.  17.  let  them  say,  s.  thy  peojile,  O  Lord 
Jonah  i.  ll.shouldnot  Is.Nmeveh  that  great  city? 
JJab.l.n.  and  nots.  continually  toslay  thenations 
Mai.  3.  17.  1  will  s.  them  as  aman  spareth  his  son 
Luke  15. 17.  hired  servants  have  bread  enough  lo«. 
Rom.  11.  21.  take  heed,  lest  he  also  s.  not  thee 
1  Cor.  7.  28.  such  shall  have  trouble,  but  I  s.  you 
2C«r.l.23.that  tos.you  I  came  not  as  yet  to  Corinth 
13.  2.  that  if  I  come  again,  I  will  not  s. 
SPARED. 

1  Sam.  15.  9.  but  Saul  and  the  people  s.  Agag 
15.  for  the  peoples,  the  best  of  the  sheep 

24.  10.  some  bade  me  kill  thee,  but  mine  eye  s. 

2  .Sam.  12.  4.  s.  to  taka  of  his  own  Hock,  and  herd 
21.  7.  the  king  s.  Mepliibushetli  son  of  Jonathan 

2  Kings  5.  20.  master  hath  s.  Naaman  this  Syrian 
Psal.  78.  50.  he  s.  not  their  son!  from  death 
Ezck.  20.  17.  mine  eye  s.  them  from  destroying 
Jonah  4.  1 10.  Lord  said,  thou  hast  s.  the  gourd 
Horn.  8.  32.  he  that  s.  not  Ids  own  Son  but  delivered 
11.  21.  if  God  s.  not  the  natural  brandies 
2  P(t.  2.  4.  if  God  s.  not  the  angels  that  sinned 
5.  and  s.  not  the  old  world,  but  saved  Noah 
SPARE7^H. 
Prov.  13.  24.  he  thats.  his  rod,  hateth  his  son 
17.  27.  he  that  hath  knowledge,  s.  his  words 
21.  26.  but  the  righteous  givelh,  and  s.  not 
Mai.  3.  17. 1  will  spare  them,  as  a  man  s.  his  son 

SPARING. 
.£cls  20.  29.  v^olves  shall  enter  in,  not  s.  the  flock 

SPARINGLY. 
2Cor.  9. 6.  this  Isay,  he  whosoweth  s.  shall  reaps. 

SPARK. 
.Tob  18.  5.  and  the  s.  of  his  fire  shall  not  shine 
Isa.  1.  31.  and  the  maker  of  it  shall  be  as  a  s. 

:•  SPARKS. 

Job  5.  7.  man  is  born  to  trouble,  as  s.  fly  upward 
41.  19.  out  of  mouth  go  burning  lamps,  s.  of  fire 
Prt)«.26.  1 18.  as  madmen  whocastelhs.am!  death 
Isa.  50.  11.  that  compass  yourselvesabout  wiihs. 
Dan.  3.  122.  the  s.  of  the  fire  slew  those  men 

SPARKLED. 
Eick.  1.  7.  s.  like  ihe  colour  of  burnished  brass 

SPARROW. 
Psal.  84.  3.  yea,  the  s.  bath  found  a  house 
102.  7.  I  am  as  a  s.  alone  upon  the  houso-top 

SPARROWS. 
Lev.  14.  t  4.  take  for  him  two  s.  alive  and  clean 
M/it.  10.29.  are  not  two  s.  sold  for  a  farthing? 

31.  are  of  more  value  than  many  s.  Luke  12.7. 
Luke  12.  6.  are  not  five  s.  sold  for  two  fartliings? 

SPAT. 
John9. 6.when  he  had  ihus  spoken,  hes.  on  ground 

SPEAK. 
Gen.  18.  27.  I  have  taken  on  nie  to  s.  to  God,  31. 
24.  50.  we  cannot  s.  unto  thee  bad  or  good 

31.  24.  take  heed  thou  s.  not  to  Jacob  good  or  bad 

32,  4.  thus  shall  yo  s.  to  my  lord  Esau,  19. 
44.  16.  what  shall  we  say  ?  what  shall  we  s.  ? 

Ezod.  4.  14.  Aaron,  1  know  that  he  can  .«.  widl 
.5.  23.  since  I  came  to  s.  to  Pharaoh  in  thy  name 
7.  2.  thou  shall  s.  all  that  I  command  thee 
23.  2.  shall  not  s.  in  a  cause  to  decline  after  many 
29.  42.  where  I  will  meei  you,  to  s.  there  to  thee 
32.  12.  wherefore  sliouhl  Egyptians  «.  atul  tay  1 
4  B 


SPE 

Kx.id.  34.  ;!5.  until  ho  went  in  to  ».  with  the  Lord 
J^um.  12.8.  were  ye  notafrai  I  to  s.  against  Moses 
14.  15.  who  have  heard  the  fame  of  ihee  will  *. 

21  27.  why  they  tliat  s.  in  proverbs,  say,  come 

22  8.  1  will  bring  word,  as  the  Lord  shall  s.  to  ma 
35.  the  word  I  s.  to  Ihee,  thai  thou  shall  s. 

23.  5.  return  to  Balak,  and  thus  thou  shall  s. 
12.  must  1  not  take  heed  to  s.  that  which  the  Ld. 

27.  7.  the  daughters  of  Zelophehad  s.  right 
Deut.  18.  19.  words  which  he  shall  s.  in  my  nama 

20.  who  shall  presume  to  s.  a  word  m  my  namo 

26.  5.  and  thou  shall  s.  and  say  before  the  Lord 
Josh.  22.  24.  your  children  might  s.  to  our  children 
lA'afH.25.  17.  asonofUelial  that  a  man  cannots.  to 
2  Ham.  3.  19.  and  Abner  went  also  to  s.  to  David 

27.  Joab  took  him  aside  to  s.  with  him  quietly 
7. 17. accord. to  this  vision  so  diil  Nathan  s.to  Dav. 

19.  10.  why  s.  ye  not  one  word  of  bringing  back 

20.  16.  come  near  hither  that  1  may  s.  with  thee 
18.  they  were  wont  to  s.  in  old  time,  saying 

1  Kings  2.  19.  she  went  to  s.  to  him  for  AdonijaU 

12.  7.  wilt  s.  good  words  to  them,  2  Chron.  10.7. 
10.  saying,  thus  shall  thou  s.  to  this  people 

22.  24.  spirit  from  me  to  s.  to  thee,  2  Chr.  18.23. 

2A"iH^sl8.27.halli  my  master  sent  me  to  thy  master 

and  to  thee  lo  s.  these  words  7  Isa.  36. 12. 

1  Chron.  17.  18.  what  can  David  s.  more  to  thee? 

2  Chron.  32. 17.  wrote  letters  to  rail  ands.  ag.  God 
JVfiA.  13.  24.  and  could  nots.  in  the  Jews' language 
Esth.  6.  4.  to  s.  to  the  king  to  hang  Mordecai 
Job  8.  2.  bow  long  wilt  thou  s.  these  things  ? 

11.  5.  but,  oh  that  God  would  s.  against  thee 

13.  7.  will  yes.  wickedly  for  G. and  talk  for  him  T 
18.  2.  mark,  and  afterwards  we  will  s. 

27.  4.  my  lips  shall  not  s.  wickedness  nor  deceit 
32.  7.  I  said,  days  should  s.  and  teach  wisdom 
.''6.  2.  shew  that'  I  have  yet  to  s.  on  God's  behalf 

37.  20.  if  a  man  s.  he  shall  be  swallowed  up 
41.  3.  will  he  s.  soft  words  unto  thee  ? 

Psal.  2.  5.  then  shall  he  s.  to  them  in  his  wrath 

5.  6.  thou  shall  destroy  them  thats.  leasing 

12.  2.  they  s.  vanity,  they  s.  with  a  double  heart 
17.  10.  with  their  mouth  they  s.  proudly 

28.  3.  which  s.  peace  to  their  neighbours 

29.  9.  in  lii-(tem[.le  doth  every  one  s.  of  his  glory 
31. 18.  w  hich  s.  grievous  things  proudly  ag.  right. 
35.  20.  for  they  s.  not  peace,  but  devise  deceitful 

28.  my  tongue  shall  s.  of  thy  righteousness 

38.  12.  they  s.  mischievous  things  all  day  long 
40  5.  if  I  would  declare  and  s.  of  them 

41.  5.  enemies  s.  evil  of  me,  when  shall  he  die? 

49.3.  my  mouth  shall  s.  ofwisdomand  meditation 
52.  3.  lovest  lying  ralher  than  tos.  righteousnes* 
5'.l.  12.  and  for  cursing  and  lying  which  they  s. 
63.  11.  mouth  of  them  thats.  lies  shall  bestoppei; 
69.  12.  they  that  sit  in  the  gate  s.  against  me 
71.  10.  for  mine  enemies  s.  against  me 

73.  8.  iliey  are  corrupt,  they  s.  wickedly,  s.  lofliH 

85.  8.  1  will  hear  what  the  Loid  will  s.  he  wills. 

peace  lo  his  people,  but  let  them  not  turn  to  foil/ 

94.4.  how  long  shall  they  utler  and  s.  hard  things". 
109.  20.  lei  this  be  the  reward  of  them  ihats.  ev£ 
J 15.  5.  they  have  mouths,  but  they  s.  not,  135.  IB. 
119.  23.  princes  also  did  sit  ami  s.  against  ine 

172.  my  tongue  shall  s.  of  thy  word 
127.  5.  they  shall  s.  with  the  enemies  in  the  gate 
139.  20.  for  they  s.  against  thee  wickedly 
145.  6.  men  shall  s.  ol  might  of  Ihy  terrible  acts 

II.  they  shall  s.  of  the  glory  of  thy  kingdom 

21.  my  mouth  shall  s.  the  praise  of  Ihe  Lord 
Prov.  8.7.  my  mouth  shall."!,  truth,  and  wickednesg 

2^3.  16.  my  reins  rejoice,  when  lips  s.  right  thiogg 
Eccl.  3.  7.  a  time  lo  be  silent,  and  a  time  lo  s. 
Cant.l.  9.  causing  lips  of  those  that  are  asleep  tos. 
Isa.  8.  20.  if  they  s.  not  according  to  this  word 

14.  10.  all  they  shall  .f.  and  say  unto  thee 

19. 18.  five  cities  in  Egypt  shall  s.  lang.  of  Canaan 
28.1 1,  with  another  tongue  shall  hes. to  Ibis  people 
29.  4.  and  thou  shall  s.  out  of  the  ground 
32.  4.  tongue  of  the  stammerers  shall  s.  plainly 

6.  for  the  vile  person  will  s.  viUany 

50.  4.  that  I  should  know  how  to  s.  in  season 
52.  6.  they  shall  know  that  I  am  he  that  doth  s. 
59.  4.  trust  in  vanity,  and  s.  lies,  conceive  misch 
hr.  1. 7.  whatsoever  I  command  thee,  thou  shall ». 
5.  14.  saith  the  Lord,  because  ye  s.  ibis  word 
7.  27.  thou  shall  s.  all  these  words  to  them 

9.  5.  they  will  not  s.  the  truth,  taught  to  s.  Ilea 

10.  5.  idols  are  upright  as  palm  trees,  they  s.  not 

12.  6.  believe  not,  thu'  they  s.  fair  words  unto  the* 

13.  12.  therefore  thou  shall  s.  this  word  to  them 
18.  7.  at  what  instant  I  shall  s.  abniit''a  nation, 9. 

20.  I  Blood  before  thee  to  s.  good  for  them 
20.  9.  I  said,  1  will  not  s.  any  more  in  his  nana* 
2.1.  16.  they  s.  a  vision  of  their  own  heart 
26.  2.  s.  all  the  words  I  command  thee  to  1.  8. 

15.  the  Lord  hath  sent  me  lo  s.  these  word* 
29.  24.  thus  shall  thou  also  ».  to  Sheraaiab 
32.  4.  and  shall  $.  with  him  mouth  to  moutk 


SPE 

Jer.  34.  3.  he  shall  ».  with  thee  mouth  to  mouth 
T.itk.  2.  7.  and  thou  shall  s.  my  words  to  them 
3.  10.  all  my  words  that  I  shall  «.  receive  in  heart 
30.  49.  they  say  of  me,  doth  he  not  s.  parables  7 
24.  27.  and  thou  shall  s.  and  be  no  more  dumb 

32.  21.  strong  among  the  mighty  shall  s.  to  him 

33.  8.  if  dost  not  s.  to  warn  wicked  from  his  way 

10.  thus  ye  s.  \\  30.  and  s.  one  to  another 
37.  18.  when  the  children  of  thy  people  shall  *. 

I^an.  2.  9.  ye  have  prepared  corrupt  words  to  s. 

3.  29.5.  anything  amiss  a?.  theGod  of  Shadrach 
7.  25.  he  shall  s.  great  words  agst.  the  Most  High 
11.  27.  shall  s.  lies  at  one  table,  but  not  prosper 

Hab.  2.  3.  but  at  the  end  it  shall  .?.  and  nut  lie 
7.eck.  9.  1 17.  corn  shall  make  the  young  men  *. 
Mat.  10.  19.  how  or  what  yeshall  s.  Mark  13. 11. 
20.  for  it  is  not  ye  that  «.  Mark  13.  11. 
\i.  34.  how  can  ve  being  evil  s.  good  things'? 
3G. every  idle  word  that  men  shall  s.give  accoiint 
4li.  his  mother  stood  without,  desiring  to  s.  with 
Mark  2.  7.  why  dot  h  this  man  thus  s.  blasphemies? 
9.39.  shall  do'  a  miracle,  that  lightly  s.  evil  of  me 
14.71.  saying,  I  knownot  this  man  of  whom  ye«. 
16. 17.  in  my  name  they  shall  s.  with  new  tongues 
J.ukt  1.  19.  [  am  sent  to  .•>.  to  thee  and  to  shew  thee 
20.  not  able  to  j.  till  these  shall  be  performed 
22.  when  he  came  out  he  could  not  s.  to  them 

4.  41.  he  rebuking  them,  suffered  them  not  to  s. 
0.2!).  woe  to  you,  when  all  men  shall «.  well  ofyou 

11.  53.  and  to  provoke  him  to  s.  of  many  things 

12.  10.  whosoever  shall  .9.  a  word  ag.  Son  of  m:in 
Johrd.W.  verily  we. «.  that  wedo  know,  and  testify 

9.21.  he  is  of  age,  ask  him,  he  shall  s.  for  himself 
16.  13.  he  shall  not  s.  of  himself,  that  shall  he  s. 
25.  when  I  shall  no  more  s.  to  you  in  proverbs 
£cU  2.  7.  arc  not  all  these  which  s.  Galileans'? 

11.  we  do  hear  them  s.  in  tongues  works  of  God 
4.  17.  that  thev  s.  to  no  man  in  this  name 

18.  not  to  «.  at  all,  5.  40.  ||  20.  we  cannot  but  s. 
SJ9.  that  with  all  boldness  they  may  i.  thy  word 
6.  11.  we  have  heard  him  s.  blasphemous  words 

13.  this  man  ceaselh  not  to .«.  blasphemous  word; 
10.  32.  when  he  Cometh  shall .?.  unto  thee 
11. 15.  as!  began  to  s.  ||  14.  9.  same  heard  Paul  s 
21.  :}9.  I  boscech  thee  suffer  me  to  s.  lo  people 
23.  5.  thou  shall  not .?.  evil  of  ruler  of  thy  people 
26.  1.  Paul,  thou  art  permitted  to  .s.  for  thyself 
2.1.  I  a.  forth  the  words  of  truth  and  soberness 
Ham.  15.  18.  I  will  not  dare  lo  s.  of  any  of  those 
things  which  Christ 
ICor.l.lO.lhat  ye  all .?. same  thing  and  no  divisions 

2.  13.  wliieh  things  also  we  s  not  man's  wisdom 

3.  l.I  could  not  .9.  to  you  as  to  spiritual  but  carnal 
12.  30.  do  all  s.  with'tongucs  ?  ||  14.  2.T  if  all  5. 

14.  35.  it  is  a  shame  for  women  lo  s.  in  church 
39.  and  forl)i<l  not  to,?,  with  tongues 

2  Cor.  2.  17.  in  the  sight  of  God  «.  we  in  Christ 

4.  13.  we  also  believe  and  therefore  s. 
12. 19.  wcs.  before  God  in  Christ,  but  for  edifying 

Kfh.  5.  12.  it  is  a  shame  to.'.of  those  things  d^me 
Oo/.  4.  4.  that  I  may  make  manifest, as  I  ought  to  s. 
1  Tlinss.  1.  8.  so  that  we  need  not  to  s.  any  thing 

2.  4.  even  so  we  s.  not  as  pleasing  men  but  God 
10.  forbidding  us  to  «.  lo  the  Gentiles 

Tit.  3.  2.  put  them  in  mind  lo  «.  evil  of  no  man 
Jicb.  2.  5.  the  world  to  come,  whereof  we  s. 
6.  9.  Iho'  we  thus  ».  \\  9. 5.  of  which  we  cannot  s. 
Jam.  1.  19.  brethren,  let  every  man  be  slow  to  s. 
1  /'( t.2. 12.  whereas  they  ^against  you  as  evildoers 

3.  10.  let  him  refrain  his  lips  that  they  s.  no  guile 
10.  whereas  they  s.  evil  of  you,  as  of  evil  doers 

IPft.  2.  10.  they  are  not  afraid  lo  s.  evil  ofdignilies 

12.  A.  evil  of  ihe  things  that  tiny  understand  not 

13.  for  when  they .9. grealsv/ell.  wordsof  vanity 
1  ./oAn4.5.  are  of  world,  therefore  s.  they  of  world 
Jude  8.  thi-.-e  filthy  dreamers*,  evil  ofdignilies 

10.  but  these  s.  evil  of  those  things  they  know  not 
Rrt).  2.  21.  not  know  depths  of  Satiin,  as  they  .i. 

15.  IS.  that  Ihe  image  of  the  beast  should  bolhs. 

SPKAK,   Imperatively. 
Kind.  20.  19.  s.  Ibou  with  us,  and  we  will  hear 
Jfujii.  20.  8.  .».  ye  to  the  rock  before  their  eyes 
Deut.^.  20. 1,  said, .«.  no  more  to  me  of  this  matter 

5.  27.  t.  thou  to  us  nil  that  Loril  shall  .i.  lo  thee 
Judg.  S.  10.  «.  yo  that  ride  on  white  asses 

19.  30.  consider,  take  advice,  and  s.  your  minds 
1  .Sam.  3.  9.  a.  Lord,  for  thy  servant  heareth,  10. 
S.Sam.  17.  (i.  fhnll  wi-  do  after  this  siiy.  if  not  .•;.  llio'i 

1  Kings  22. 13.  .<.  that  which  is  irood,  2  Chr.  18.  12. 

2  Kingf  18.  20.  s.  in  Syrian  language,  /no.  30.  11. 
/>tA.  5.  14.  and  to-morrow  s.  thou  to  the  king 
Jiib  12.  8.  or  .».  lo  the  earth,  and  it  shall  leach  liiee 

13.  22.  or  let  mo  n.  and  answer  Ihou  me 

33.  .32.  s.  for  1  desire  lo  justify  ihoe 

34.  33.  therefore  s.  what  thou  knowest 
7>*a/ 7.'>.  .'>.  lift  not  your  horn .«.  not  with  a  stiff  neck 
Proo.  23.  9.  ».  not  in  the  ears  of  a  fool 
fna.S.  10.  s.  word,  it  shall  not  stand,  G.  is  with  us 

30.  10.  who  say,  $.  unto  us  smooth  things 
570 


SPE 

/ia.40. 2. «.  ye  comfortably  toJerus.  and  cry  lo  her 
41.  1.  let  them  come  near,  then  let  them  5. 
Sfi.  3.  neither  let  the  son  of  a  stranger  5.  saying 

Jer.  1.  17.  s.  to  them  all  that  I  command  thee 
23.  28.  halh  my  word,  let  him  s.  word  faithfully 

Dan.  10.  19.  and  I  said,  let  ray  lord  s. 

Zech.  8.  16.  «.  every  man  the  truth,  F.ph.  4.  25. 

Jfiit.  8.8.  only  g.  word,  my  servant  shall  be  healed 

10.  27.  what  I  tell  in  darkness,  that  s.  ye  in  light 
.'l/ar/i:13. 11.  what  shall  be  given  in  that  hour, ».  ye 
f.nke  12.13.  s.  lo  my  brother  that  he  divide  inherit. 
Jict.t  2.29.let  me  freely  s.  to  you  of  patriarch  David 

5.  20.  go,  stand  and  a.  in  the  temple  to  the  people 
18.  9.  be  not  afraid,  but  s.  hold  not  thy  peace 

1  Cor.  14.  28.  let  him  s.  lo  himself  and  to  God 

29.  let  prophets  s.  two  or  three,  the  other  judge 
Tit.  2.  1.  s.  the  things  that  become  sound  doctrine 

15.  these  things  s.  and  exhort,  and  rebuke 
./am.2.l2.80  s.  ye  and  do,a9  they  that  shall  bejudg. 
4.  11.  s.  not  evil  one  of  another,  brethren 
1  Pet.  4.  11.  let  him  s.  as  the  oracles  of  God 

/  SPE.'^K. 
F.xod.  19.  9.  that  the  people  may  hear  when  Is. 
23.  22.  but  if  thou  shall  obey  and  do  all  that  /  s. 
JVum.  22.38.  G.  puttethin  my  mouih  that  shall  Is. 
Deut.  5.  1.  hear  judgments  which  Is.  in  your  eats 

11.  2.  /i.  notwithyour  cbil.  who  have  not  known 
I  Kings  22.  14.  what  the  Lord  saith,  that  will  Is. 
.Job  9.  19.  if  /  s.  of  strength,  lo,  he  is  strong 

35.  then  would  Is.  and  not  fear  him 
13.  3.  surely  /would  s.  to  the  Almighty 
13.  hold  your  peace,  let  me  alone,  that  /  may  «. 

16.  4.  /  also  could  s.  as  ye  do,  I  could  heap  words 
6.  though  Is.  my  grief  is  not  assuaged 

37.  20.  shall  it  be  told  him  that  Is.?  if  a  man  «. 
Psal.  45.  I.  Is.  of  things  which  I  have  made 

77.  4.  I  am  so  troubled  that  /  cannot  s. 

120.  7.  but  when  /  s.  they  are  for  war 
/«a.  45.  19.  /ihe  Lord  s.  righteousness,  I  declare 

•53.  1.  /  thai  s.  in  righteousness,  mighty  to  save 
./er.  1.  C.  ah.  Lord,  I  cannot  s.  for  I  am  a  child 

6.  10.  to  whom  shall  Is.  and  give  warning'? 
28.  7.  hear  this  word  that  /  *.  in  thine  ears 

38.  20.  obey  the  voice  of  the  Lord  which  Is. 
Kick.  3. 27.  when  /  s.  with  thee,  I  will  open  mouth 
iJan.  10.  II.  O  Daniel,  understand  words  that /s. 
Mat.  13.  13.  therefore  );.  /to  them  in  parables 
.John  4.  26.  Jesus  sailh,  /thai  s.  to  thee  am  he 

6.  t)3.  the  words  that  Is.  to  you,  they  are  spirit 

7.  17.  whether  it  be  of  G.  or  whether  Is.  of  inys. 
8  26.  I s.lo  the  world  those  things  1  heard  of  b 

28.  as  my  Father  taught  me  Is.  these  things 
38.  /*•.  that  which  I  have  seen  with  my  Father 

12.  49.  he  gave  commandment  what  /should  s. 
50.  what  Is.  as  the  Father  said  to  me  so  Is. 

13.  18.  /  s.  not  of  all,  I  know  whom  I  have  chosen 

14.  10.  the  words  that  Is.  Is.  not  of  myself 

17.  13.  and  these  things  Is.  in  the  world 
./*cti21.37.inay  Is.  to  thee?  ||  26.26  /also  s. freely 
Kum.  3.  5.  is  God  unrighteous  ?  /s.  as  a  man 

6.  19.  Is.  after  the  manner  of  men,  (}al.  3.  15. 

7.  1.  for  Is.  to  thrm  that  know  the  law 
11.  13.  Is.  loyou  Gentiles,  I  am  apostle  of  Gent. 

1  Cor.  0.  5.  /  ,<.  to  your  shame,  15.  34. 
7.  6.  /«.lhis  by  permission,  not  of  commandment 

12.  but  to  the  rest  5.  /,  not  the  Lord 
35.  and  this  Is.  for  your  own  profit 
10-  15.  Is.  as  to  wise  men,  judge  ye  what  I  say 

13.  1.  though  /«.  with  tongues  of  men  and  angels 

14.  6.  except  /shall  s.  lo  you  by  revehition 

18.  Is.  with  tongues  more  than  you  all 

19.  /had  rather. s. five  words  with  understanding 

2  Cor.  6.  13.  Is.  as  to  my  chddrcn,  be  ye  enlarged 
7.  3.  /  s.  not  this  lo  condemn  you,  for  I  have  said 
11.  17.  that  which  Is.  Is.ii  not  after  the  l-ord 

21.  /  s.  as  concerning  reproach,  /  .«.  foolishly 

23.  are  they  ministers?  /  ».  as  a  fool,  I  am  more 

Fph.  5.  32.  but  Is.  concerning  Christ  and  church 

0.20.  thai  therein  /  may  «.  boldly,  as  I  ought  lo.^. 

Pliil.  4.  11.  not  that  /  s.  in  respect  of  want 

1  TVm.  2.  7.  1 .1.  \\)K  truth  in  Christ,  I  lie  not 
I  will  SPKAK,  or  viU  I  SI'KAK. 

ncn.  IH.  30.  let  not  Ld.  be  angry,  and  /  vill  s.  32. 
jVuin.  12.  6.  and  /  icill  s.  lo  him  in  a  dream 

8.  with  him  u>i/{  /«.  mouth  lo  mouth  apparently 

24.  13.  but  what  L. saith,  that  ?/)iH  /.<;.  cannot  go 

beyond  command,  1  Kin/rs^.  14.  2  Chr.  18.  13. 

J)eul.  32.  1.  give  ear,  O  ye  bciivens,and  Iicill  s. 

.ludg.  6.  39.  Gideon  saiil,  I  will  s.  but  this  once 

2  .Sam.  14.  15.  thy  hiindmaid  said,  I  wills,  lo  king 
1  Kings  2.  18.  well,  /  will  s.  for  thee  lo  the  king 
Job  7.  11.  I  wills,  in  the  anguish  of  my  s|iirit 

10.  1.  /  icill  s.  in  the  bitterness  of  my  soul 

32.  20.  /  will  s.  that  I  may  bo  refreshed 

33.  31.  mark  v^cll,  hold  thy  peace,  and  twill  s. 
42.  4.  hear,  I  bcsrcch  lliee,  and  /  will  ». 

Psal.  .10.  7.  hear,  O  my  people,  and  /  will  s. 
73.  15.  if  I  sav,  /  will  s.  thus,  1  should  offend 
119.  46.  /  will  I.  of  thy  testimoniaa  befor*  kings 


SPE 

Vsal.  145.  ^.  J  wills,  of  the  honour  of  thy  mftjesty 
Prov.a.  6.  hear,  for  I  will  s.  of  excellent  things 
./cr.  5.  5.  I  will  gel  me  to  great  men,  and  /  will  s. 
F.zek.  2.  1.  stand  on  thy  feet,  and  /  will  s.  to  thee 
12.  25.  /  will  s.  and  word  I  s.  shall  conielo  pasa 
Hos.^.H.  I  w.  allure  her,  and*,  comfortably  to  her 
1  Cor.  14.  21.  with  other  lips  will  Is.  lo  this  people 

SPEAKER. 
Pi.  140. 11.  let  not  an  evil*,  be  established  in  earth 
Mcts  14.  12.  because  he  was  the  chiefs. 
SPEAKEST. 

1  .'iam.  9.  21.  wherefore  then  s.  thou  so  to  mel 

2  Sam.  19. 29.  why  s.  thou  any  more  of  Ihy  matters? 
2A'i?!^s6.12-  the  words  thou*,  in  thy  bed-chambe' 
.lob  2.  10.  thou  .<r.  as  one  of  the  foolish  women 
Psal.  50.  20.  thou  siltest  and  s.  against  thyhroihe' 

51.  4.lhat  thou  mighlestbe  justified  when  thou* 
Isa.  40.  27.  why  s.  thou,  O  Israel,  my  way  is  hid 
.Jer.  40.  16.  for  thou  *.  falsely  of  Ishmael 

43.  2.  thou  s.  falsely,  the  Lord  hath  notsenlthce 
F.zek.  3.  18.  thou  givesl  him  not  warning,  nor  5. 
7.ech.  13.  3.  for  thou  s.  lies  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
Mat.  13.  10.  why  s.  thou  to  Ihem  in  parables  ? 
Luke  12.41.  L.  s.  thou  this  parable  to  us  or  to  all  ? 
.John  16.  29.  now  «.  thou  plainly,  and  s.  no  proverh 

19.  10.  Pilate  saith  to  him,  s.  thou  not  unto  me? 
Acts  17.  19.  may  we  know  this  whereof  thou  *.  1 

SPKAKETH. 
Gen.  45.  12.  that  it  is  my  mouth  that  s.  to  you 
F.zod.  33.  11.  spake  lo  Moses  as  a  mans,  to  friend 
JVwm.  23.  26.  all  thai  the  Lord  s.  that  must  I  do 
Dcut.  18.  22.  when  a  prophets,  in  the  name  of  Ld. 
.fob  17.  5.  he  that  s.  flattery  lo  his  friends 

33.  14.  for  God  s.  once,  yea,  twice,  yet  man 
Psal.  12.3.shallcutofftongue  thats.  proud  ihingf 

15.  2.  and  he  that  s.  the  truth  in  his  heart 
37.  30.  the  mouth  of  the  righteous  s.  wisdom 
41.6.  and  if  he  come  lo  see  me,  he  s.  vanity 
144.  8.  whose  mouth  s.  vanity,  II. 

Prov.  2.  12.  from  the  man  that  s.  froward  things 

6.  13.  lies,  with  his  feet,  he  teachelh  with  fingers 
19.  a  false  witness  that  s.  lies  and  soweth  discord 

10.  32.  the  mouth  of  the  wicked  s.  frowardness 
12.  17.  he  thats.  truth, sheweth  forth  righteousn 
18.  there  is  that  s.  like  the  piercings  of  a  sword 
14.  25.  but  a  deceitful  witness  s.  lies 

16.  13.  and  they  love  him  that  s.  right 

HI.  5.  that  s.  lies  not  escape  ||  9.  s.  lies  shall  perish 
21.  28.  but  the  man  that  heareth,  s.  constantly 
26.  25.  when  he  s.  fair,  believe  him  not 
Isa.  9.  17.  an  evil  doer,  and  every  mouth  s.  folly 

32.  7.  to  destroy,  even  when  the  needy  s.  right 

33.  15.  he  that  s.  uprightly  shall  dwell  on  high 
.Jer.  9.  8.  their  tongue  s.  deceit ;  one  s.  peaceably 

10.  1.  hear  the  word  which  the  Lord  s.  lo  you 
28.  2.  thus  s.  the  Lord  the  God  of  Israel,  29.  25 

1  30.  2.  Hag.  1.  2.  7,ech.  6.  12.  |  7.  9 

F.iek.  10.  5.  as  a  voice  of  Almighty  God  when  he  ». 

Jimos  5.  10.  they  abhor  him  that  s.  uprightly 

Mat.Vi.  20.  but  Spirit  of  your  Father  whos.  in  yon 

12.  32.  whoso  s.  a  word  against  the  Son  of  man  ; 

but  whosoever  s.  against  the  Holy  Ghost 

34.  how  can  ye  being  evil  speak  good  ?  for  out  of 

abundance  of  the  heart  mouth  s.  I.ukeG.45, 

.John  3.  31.  be  that  is  of  ihe  earth,  s.  of  the  earth 

34.  he  whom  God  sent,  .?.  the  words  of  God 

7.  18.  he  that  s.  of  himself,  seekeih  hisown  glory 
26.  but  lo,  ho  ».  boldly,  they  say  nothing  to  him 

8.  44.  when  he  s.  a  lie,  he  .■;.  of  his  own 

19.  12.  who  maketli  himself  a  king,  s.  ag.  Cesar 

Jlcts  8.  34.  1  pray,  of  whom  s.  the  prophet  ihij^? 

Ut/m.  10.  6.  rigliteous-ness  of  faiih  s.  on  this  wise 

1  Cor.  14.  2.  be  Ihiit  .s.  in  an  unknown  tongue; 

how  boil  in  the  ppirit  he  s.  mysteries 

3.  he  that  prophesieth,  s.  unto  men  to  edification 

4.  that  s.  in  an  unknown  longue  edifieth  himself 

5.  greater  is  he  that  prophesieth,  than  he  that  5. 
II.  I  shall  be  lo  him  that  s.  a  baibarian 

13.  lei  him  that  s.  in  an  unknown  longiie 
I  Tim.  4.  1.  now  Spirit  s.  expressly  in  latter  times 
//(-A.  II.  4.  and  by  it  he  bftng  dead,  yet  s. 
12.  5.  forgiitlon  the  exhnrtaiion  which  s.  to  yoa 

24.  that  s.  better  things  than  that  of  Abol 

25.  see  that  ye  refuse  not  him  that  ».  much  more 
if  we  turn  away  from  him  thats.  from  heaven 

.Jam.i.  II.  he  that  s.  evil  of  his  brother  and  jiidgetb 
lii>  brother,  s.evilof  Ihe  law  and  jiidgeih  iho  law 

■  Judc  16.  and  their  mouth  .«.  creat swelling  words 
SPEAKING. 

Gen.  24.  15.  before  ho  had  done  s.  Ri  bekah  came 
45.  and  before  I  had  done  s.  in  mine  heart 

r^nit.  r>.  26.  God  s.  out  of  Ihe  midst  oflhi^  fire 

11.  19.  s.  of  them  when  Ihou  siMe>l  in  thine  house 
/tolh  1.  18.  then  she  left  s.  unto  her 

Fslh.  10.  3.  and  s.  peace  lo  all  his  seed 
lob  I.  16.  while  he  was  vet  s  anolliercame,  17, 18 
4.  2.  birt  who  can  withhold  himself  from  s.  f 
32.  1.5.  they  answered  no  more,  they  left  ofTf. 
Psal.  34.  13.  and  thy  lips  from  s.  guila 


SPE 

Psal.  58. 3.  go  astray  as  soon  as  they  be  born,  s.  lies 
Ao.  58.  9.  if  thou  take  away  from  thee  s.  vanity 

13.  nor  s.  thine  own  words  on  my  holy  day 
59.  13.  in  lying,  and  s.  oppression  and  revolt 
65.  24.  and  while  they  are  yet  s.  I  will  hear 
Jer.  7.  13.  rising  up  early  and  s.  25.  3.  |  35.  14. 
38.  4  he  weakeneth  the  hands  in  s.  such  words 
27.  they  left  oil's,  the  matter  was  not  perceived 
Dan.  7.  8.  and  a  mouth  s.  great  things,  Rev.  13.  5. 

8.  13.  I  heard  one  saint  s.  and  another  said 

9.  20.  whiles  I  was  s.  praying  and  confessing,  21. 
Jlcts  14.  3.  they  abode,  s.  boldly  in  the  Lord 

30.  30.  s.  perverse  things,  to  draw  away  disciples 
I  Car.  12.3.no  mans,  by  Spirit calleth  Jesus  uccurs. 
2Cor.  13.  3.  since  ye  seek  a  proof  of  Christ  s.  in  me 
Eph.  4.  15.  but  s.  the  truth  in  love  may  grow  up 

5. 19.  s.  to  yourselves  in  psalms,  hymns,  and  songs 

I  7'jm.4.2.shall  depart  from  faith,  s.lies  in  hypocrisy 

5. 13.  busy-bodies  s.  things  which  they  ought  not 

IPet.  4.  4.  to  the  same  excessof  riot,  s.  evil  of  you 

See  End. 

SPEAKING. 

Jtfat.  6.  7.  think  they  shall  be  heard  for  much  s. 

Eph.  4.  31.  let  all  evil  s.  be  put  away  from  you 

SPEAKINGS. 
1  Pet.  2.  1.  laying  aside  all  guile,  envies,  and  evil  s. 

SPEAR. 
Josh.  8.  18.  the  Lord  said,  stretch  out  thy  s.  26. 
Jkidg.  5.  8.  was  there  a  s.seen  among  40,000  in  Isr. 
1  Sam.  13.  22.  s.  with  any,  but  with  Saul  and  Jona. 
17.  7.  and  the  staff  of  his  s.  was  like  a  weaver's 
beam,  2  Sam.  21.  19.  1  Chron.  20.  5. 
45.  thou  comest  with  a  sword,  and  with  a  s. 
47.  the  Lord  saveth  not  with  sword  and  s. 
21.  8.  is  there  not  here  under  thy  hand  s.  or  sword 
26.  7.  and  Saul's  s.  stuck  at  his  bolster,  11. 
8.  let  me  smite  him,  I  pray  thee,  with  the  s. 
16.  now  see  where  the  king's  s.  is,  and  the  cruse 
8  Sam.  1.  6.  behold,  Saul  leaned  upon  his  s. 
2.  23.  Abner  with  the  end  of  the  s.  smote  Asahel 
23.  7.  must  be  fenced  with  iron  and  staff  of  a  s. 
8.  he  lift  up  his  s.  against  800,  whom  he  slew 
18.  he  lifted  ups.  against  300,  \Chron.  11. 11,  20. 
21.  he  slew  Egyptian  with  hisowns.  lCAr.11.23. 
Job  39.  23.  quiver  rattleth,  glittering  s.  and  shield 
41.  26.  s.  of  him  that  biyeth  at  him  cannot  hold 

29.  leviathan  laugheth  at  the  shaking  of  a  s. 
Tsol.  35.  3.  draw  out  also  the  s.  stop  the  way 
46;  9.  he  breaketh  bow  and  cuttelh  s.  in  sunder 
Jer.  6.  23.  they  shall  lay  hold  on  bow  and  s. 
Jfah.  3. 3.  the  horseman  lifteth  up  the  sword  and  s. 
Hob.  3.  1 1.  at  the  shining  of  the  glittering  s. 
John  19.  34.  a  soldier  with  a  s.  pierced  his  side 
SPEARS. 

1  Sam. 13. 19.  lest  Hebrews  make  them  swords  ors. 

2  KingsW.  10.  to  captains  did  priest  give  king  Da- 

vid's s.  that  were  in  the  temple,  2  CAr.  23.  9. 
2  CTr.ll.  12.  in  ev.  several  city  he  put  shields  ands. 
26.  14.  Uzziah  prepared  for  them  shields  and  s. 
JVfA.  4.  13.  I  set  the  people  with  their  s.  and  bows 

Ifi.  the  other  half  of  them  held  the  s.  21. 
Psal.  57.  4.  whose  teeth  are  s.  and  arrows 
/sa.2. 4.  shall  beats,  into  pruning  hooks,  Mic.A..  3. 
Jer.  46.  4.  furbish  the  s.  and  put  on  the  brigandines 
Eiek.  39.  9.  they  shall  burn  s.  with  fire  seven  years 
Joel  3.  10.  heat  your  pruning-hooks  into  s. 

SPEARMEN. 
Psal.  68.  30.  rebuke  the  company  of  s.  the  bulls 
Acts  23.  23.  saying,  make  ready  two  hundred  s. 

SPECIAL. 
Dett.  7.  6.  Lor(f  hath  chosen  thee  to  be  a  s.  people 
Mai.  3.  \  17.  when  I  make  up  my  s.  tieasure 
Jlcti  19.  11.  s.  miracles  done  by  the  hand  of  Paul 
See  Especially. 
SPECKLED. 
Oen.  30.  32.  removing  from  thence  thes.  cattle 

31.  8.  the  s.  sh:ill  be  thy  wages,  the  cattle  bare  s. 
Jer.  12.  9.  mine  heritage  is  to  me  as  a  s.  bird 
Zech.  1.  8.  behind  were  red  horses,  s.  and  white 

SPECTACLE. 
1  Cor.  4.  9.  for  we  are  made  a  s.  to  the  world 

SPED. 
Jwrffi'.S.SO  have  thev  not  s.l  have  they  not  divided 

SPEECH. 
<?«n.4.23.Iieark.  tomy  s.  ||  11.1.  earth  was  of  ones. 
Exod.A.W.  Moecssaid,0  my  Lord,  I  am  slow  of  s. 
Deut.  22.  14.  and  s\ve  occasions  of  s.  against  lier 

32.  2.  my  .'.  shalldistil  as  dew,  as  the  small  rain 

1  Sam.  16.  t  18.  a  son  of  Jesse,  prudent  in  s. 

2  Sam.  14.  20.  to  fetch  about  this  form  of  s. 

19.  11.  seeing  the  s.  of  all  Israel  is  come  to  king 
1  Kings  3.  10.  and  Solomon's  s.  pleased  the  Lord 
JWA   13.  24.  their  child,  spake  half  ins.  of  Ashdod 
Job  12.  20.  he  removeth  away  the  s.  of  the  trusty 
13.  17.  hear  diligently  mv  s.  and  mv  declaration, 
21.  2.  Psal.  17.  fi.  Tsa.  28.  23.  |  32.  9. 
15  t  4.  and  thou  restrainest  s.  before  God 
24  25.  who  will  make  my  s.  nothing  worth? 
29  22.  and  my  s.  dropped  upon  them 
37  19.  we  cannot  order  our  s.  by  reason  of  darkn 
571 


SPE 

P»aM9.2.  day  unto  day  utteretn  s.  night  unto  nigtit 
3.  there  is  no  s.  where  their  voice  is  not  heard 

64.  t  5.  they  encourage  themselves  in  an  evil  s. 
Prov.  1.  t  6.  to  understand  an  eloquent  s. 

7.  21.  with  her  fair  s.  she  caused  him  to  yield 

17.  7.  excellent  s.  becomelh  not  a  fool 
Cant.  4.  3.  thy  lips  are  like  scarlet,  thy  s.  is  comely 
Isa.  3.  t  3.  I  will  take  away  the  skilful  of  s. 

26.  t  16.  they  have  poured  out  a  secret  s. 

29.4.  shall  be  brought  down,  thys.  shall  below  out 
of  the  dust;  thy  s.  shall  whisper  out  of  the  duet 

33.  19.  of  a  deeper  s.  than  thou  canst  perceive 
Jer.  31.  23.  as  yet  they  shall  use  this  s.  in  Judah 
Ezek.  1.  24.  the  voice  of  s.  as  the  noise  of  a  host 

3. 5.  thou  art  not  sent  to  a  people  of  a  strange  s.  6. 
Hab.  3.  2.  O  Ld.  I  have  heard  thy  s.  and  was  afraid 
Mat.  26.  73.  art  one  of  them,  thy  s.  bewrayeth  thee 
Mark  7.  32.  one  that  had  an  impediment  in  his  s. 

14.  70.  art  a  Galilean,  and  thy  s.  agreeth  thereto 
John  8.  43.  why  do  ye  not  understand  my  s.? 
.^cts  14. 11. their  voice,  saying  in  thes.  of  Lycaonia 

20.  7.  preached  and  continued  his  s.  till  midnight 

1  Cor.  2.1. 1  came  not  with  excellency  ofs.  or  wisd 
4.s.wa8  not  with  enticing  words  of  man's  wisdon 

4.  19.  I  will  know,  not  the  s.  but  the  power 

2  Cor.  3.  12.  we  use  great  plainness  of  s. 

7.  4.  great  is  my  boldness  ofs.  toward  you 
10.10.  bodily  presence  weak,  hiss,  is  contemptible 
11.  6.  though  I  be  rude  in  s.  yet  not  in  knowledge 

Col.i.  6.  let  your  s.  he  always  wilhgrace,  seasoned 

Tit.  2.  8.  sound  s.  that  cannot  be  condemned 
SPEECHES. 

J\rum.  12.  8.  I  will  speak  with  him  not  in  dark  s. 

Job  6.  26.  and  the  s.  of  one  that  is  desperate 

15.  3.  or  with  s.  wherewith  he  can  do  no  good? 
32.  14.  neither  will  I  answer  him  with  your  s. 

t  15.  they  removed  s.  from  themselves 
Rom.  16.  18.  by  fairs,  deceive  the  hearts  of  simple 
./ude  15.  to  convince  them  of  all  their  hard  s. 

SPEECHLESS. 
Mat.  22. 12.  not  a  wedding  garment,  and  ho  was  s. 
Juke  I.  22.  Zacharias  beckoned  them  and  rem.  s. 
..^cts  9.  7.  men  which  journeyed  with  him  stood  s. 

SPEED. 

Cfen.  24.  12.  O  Lord,  I  pray  thee,  send  me  goods. 

Ezra  6.12.have  made  a  decree,  let  it  be  done  withs. 

Isa.  5.  26.  behold,  they  shall  come  with  s.  swiftly 

.ilcts  17.  15.  for  to  come  to  him  with  all  s. 

2  -Tohn  10.  receive  him  not,  ngr  bid  him  God  s. 

11.  that  biddeth  him  God  s.  is  partaker  of  evil 

Sec  M.*.KE,  Made. 

SPEEDY. 

ZepA.l.lS.shall  make  even  a  s.  riddance  of  all  them 

SPEEDILY. 

1  Sam.  27. 1.  than  that  1  should  s.  escape  to  Philist. 

2  Sam.  17.  16.  lodge  not  in  plains,  but  s.  pass  over 
2  Chron.  35.  13.  other  holy  offerings  divided  they  s. 
Ezra  6.  13.  as  the  king  hnd  sent,  so  they  did  s. 

7.  17.  that  thou  mayest  buy  s.  with  this  money 

21.  that  what  Ezra  shall  require,  it  be  done  s. 

96.  let  judgment  be  executed  s.  upon  him 

F.sth.  2.  9.  he  s.  gave  her  things  for  purification 

Psal.  31.2.  delivermes.  ||69.  n.hearmes.  143.7. 

79.  8.  let  thy  tender  mercies  s.  prevent  us 

102.  2.  in  the  day  when  I  call,  answer  me  s. 
Eccl.  8.  11.  because  sentence  is  not  executed  s. 
Isa.  58.  8.  and  thy  health  shall  spring  forth  s. 
Joel  3.4.  and  if  ye  recompense  mo,  s.  will  I  return 
Z.ech.  8.  21.  let  us  go  s.  and  pray  before  the  Lord 
Luke  18.  8.  I  tell  you,  that  he  will  avenge  thems. 

SPEND. 
Deut.  32.  23.  I  will  s.  mine  arrows  upon  them 
JoA21.13.theys.  their  days  in  wealth,  and  go  down 

36.  11.  they  s.  their  days  in  prosperity,  and  years 
Psal.  PO.  9.  we  s.  our  years  as  a  tale  that  is  told 
/sa.55.2.  why  s.  money  for  that  which  is  not  bread? 
.ficts  20.  16.  because  he  would  not  s.  time  in  Asia 
2Cor .12.15. 1  will  very  gladly  s.and  be  spent  for  you 

SPENDEST. 
Luke  10.  35.  whatsoever  thou  .«.  more,  I  will  repay 

SPENDETH. 
Prov.  21.  20.  but  a  foolish  man  s.  it  up 

29.  3.  that  keepeth  com.  with  harlots,  s.  substance 
Ecci.6.12.day8  of  vain  life,  which  hes.  as  a  shadow 

SPENT. 
Oim.  21.  15.  and  the  water  was  s.  in  the  bottle 

47. 18.  we  will  not  hide  it  hov\' that  our  money  is.«. 
Lev.  26.  20.  and  your  strength  shall  he  s.  in  vain 
./urfo'.lO.l  l.when  they  were  by  Jehus, day  was  far  s. 
1  Sam.  9.  7.  for  the  bread  is  .«.  in  our  vessels 
Job  7.  6.  my  d.iys  are  s.  without  hope 

17.  t  1-  niv  spirit  is  .i.  mv  days  are  extinct 
Psal.  31.  10.  for  my  life  is  .«.  \vilh  grief 
Isa.  49.  4.  I  have  s.  mv  strength  for  nought 
.Tcr.  37.  21.  till  all  the  bread  in  the  city  was.'. 
Mark  5. 26.  and  had  s.  all  that  she  had,  I.uke  8. 43. 

6.  35.  when  the  day  was  far  .«.  Luke  24.  29. 

l.uke  15.  14.  when  the  prodigal  hail  s.  all 
.ficts  17.  21.  s.  their  time  to  tell  some  new  thing 
Rom.  13. 13.  the  night  is  fur  s.  the  day  is  at  hand 


SPI 

a  t.^or.  H.  15.  1  will  gmdiy  spend  and  be  t.  for  yon 

SPEW,  See  SpuB. 

SPICE. 

Exod.  35. 28.  rulers  brought  s.  and  oil  for  the  light 

Cant.  5. 1.  I  have  gathered  my  myrrh  with  rays. 

SPICES. 
Gen.  43.  11 .  carry  down  man  a  present,  balm  and  » 
Exod.  25.  6.  and  s.  fur  anointing  oil,  35.  8. 
30.  t  7.  Aaron  shall  burn  thereon  incense  ofs. 
23.  take  thou  unto  thee  principal  s.  of  myrrh,  34. 
37.  29.  he  made  the  pure  incense  of  sweet  s. 
39.  t  38.  they  brought  incense  of  sweet  s. 

1  Kings  10.  2.  camels  that  bare  s.  10.  2  CAron.  9. 1 

25.  they  brought  to  Solomon  s.  2  Chron.  9.  24. 

2  Kings  20. 13.  Hezekiah  shewed  them  s.  ointment 

and  all  that  was  found  in  his  treasures,  /sa.39.2. 

1  Chron.  9.  29.  some  were  appointed  to  oversee  s. 
30.  sons  of  the  priests  rtiade  the  ointment  ofs. 

2  Chron.  9.  9.  the  queen  of  Sheba  gave  Solomons. 
16.  14.  divers  s.  prepared  for  the  burial  of  Asa 
32.  27.  Hezekiah  made  treasures  tor  s.  and  gold 

Cant.i.  10.  the  smell  of  thine  ointments  than  alls. 
14.  myrrh  and  aloes,  with  all  the  chiefs. 
16.  blow  upon  my  garden,  that  s.  may  flow  out 

5.  13.  his  cheeks  are  as  a  bed  of  s.  as  sweet  flower* 

6.  2.  my  beloved  is  gone  down  to  the  beds  ofs. 
8.  14.  like  to  a  young  hart  on  the  mountains  of  s. 

Ezek.  27.  22.  occupied  in  fairs  with  chief  of  all  i. 
Mark  16. 1.  Mary  had  bought  sweets.  Lukc'M.  1. 
/^«i-e 23.56. returned  and  prepared  s.and  ointment* 
John  19.  40.  they  wound  it  in  linen  with  the  s. 

SPICE. 
Ezek.  24.  10.  consume  the  flesh  and  s.  it  well 
SPICE-MERCHANTS. 

1  Kings  10.  15.  of  the  traffic  of  the  s.-vierchants 

SPICED. 
Cant.  8.  2.  I  would  cause  thee  to  drink  ofs.  wina 

SPICERY. 
Gen.  37. 25.  Ishmaelites  hearing  s.  balm  and  myrrh 

2  A'in  crs  20. 1 13.  shewed  house  of  hiss,  /sa.39.  |2. 

SPIDER. 

,Tob  8.  14.  and  whose  trust  shall  be  a  s.  web 

Prov.  30.  28.  the  s.  taketh  hold  with  her  hauda 

Isa.  59.  5.  hatch  cockatrice  eg!.'S  and  weaves,  web 
SPIE,  See  Spy. 
SPIKENARD. 

Ca7it.l.  12.  mys.  sendeth  forth  the  smell  thereof 
4. 13.  with  pleasant  fruits,  campliirc  withs.  14. 

MarkM.3.  there  came  a  worn,  having  an  alabaster 
boxof  ointmentof  s.  very  precious, ./oAn  12.3. 
SPILLED. 

Gen.  38.  9.  Onan  s.  his  seed  on  the  ground 

JI/arA 2. 22.  bottles  burst,  and  wine  iss.  Luke 5.37. 
SPILT. 

2  Sam.  14.  14.  we  are  as  water  s.  on  the  ground 
SPIN. 

Exod.  35.  25.  women  that  are  wise-hearted,  did  s. 

Mat.  6.  28.  they  toil  not,  neiiher  s.  Luke  12.  27. 
SPINDLE. 

Prov.  31.  19.  she  layeth  her  hands  to  the  s. 
SPIRIT, 

In  Hebrew,  Ruach  ;  in  Greek,  Pnouma.  In  scrip- 
ture the  word  Spirit  is  taken,  [1]  For  the  Holy 
Ghost,  the  third  person  oftheholy  Trinitij,who 
inspired  theprophets,  animates  good  men,  pourf 
his  grace  into  our  hearts,  imparts  to  us  light 
and  comfort,  in  whose  Name  we  are  baptized, 
as  well  as  in  those  of  the  Father  and  Son  ;  that 
enlivening  Sp\:\t  xoho  prpceeds  from  the  Father 
and  Son,  Mat.  3.  16.  John  3.  8.  |  15.  26.  The 
Holy  Ghost  is  called  Spirit,  being,  as  it  were, 
breathed,  and  proceeding  from  the  Father  and 
Son,  who  inspire  and  move  our  hemts  by  him; 
or,  because  he  brealheth  where  he  listeth;  stir- 
ring up  spiritual  moti(jns  in  the  hearts  of  be- 
lievers, purifying  and  quickening  them  ;  or 
because  he  is  a  spiritual,  inrisihlc,  and  iiicur- 
poreal  essence.  He  is  cnllcdho^y,  both  became 
he  is  most  holy  in  himself,  and  the  Sanctifier, 
the  fi'orker  of  holiness  in  the  creature.  He  is 
called  a  person,  because  whatsoever  belongs  tf 
a  person,  as  to  understand,  to  will,  to  give,  to 
call,  to  do,  to  subsist  of  himself ,  doth  agree  ttt 
the  Spirit;  who  appeared  in  a  visible  shape, 
Luke  3.  22.  Acts  2.3.  gare  the.^postles  sundry 
tongues.  Acts  2.  4,  8.  hath  power  to  confer  and 
bestow  on  the  church  the  gift  of  tongues,  of 
miracles,  of  faith,  of  healing,  of  prophecy,  S-c. 
1  Cor.  12.  8,  9,  10,  11,  12.  which  cannot  be  at- 
tributed to  any  quality  or  motion  created. 
Lastly,  he  is  called  the  third  person,  not  in 
order  of  time,  or  dignity  of  nature,  but  in  order 
and  manner  of  subsisting. 

[2]  Spirit  is  taken  for  the  immediate  inspiration, 
and  extraordinary  help  of  the  .'Spirit  of  Gad. 
Mat.  22.  43,  flow  then  doth  David  in  spirit  call 
him  Lord,  that  is,  by  the  inspiration  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  1  Cor.  14.  15,  I  will  pray  with 
the  Spirit,  that  is,  by  the  immediate  gift  and 
extraordinary  help  of  the  Spirit.    [3]  For  th« 


SPI 

txtraordinary  gifts  <fnd  graces  of  tits  Sptra, 
Gal.  3.  2.     [4]  For  the  counsels,  motions,  and 
directions   of  the  Spirit.      Rom.  8.  1,  Who 
walk  not  afier  the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit. 
[5]  Spirit  is  taken  for  the  renewed  nature,  or 
spiritual  part  in  man.    Mat.  2(3.  41,  The  Spi- 
rit is  willing,  but  ihe  flesh  is  weak.     [tJ]  For 
spiritual  zeal.     1  Tim.  4.  12,  Be  thou  an  ex- 
ample of  believers  inspirit.     [7]  Fur  judgment, 
authority,  and  consent,  1  Cor.   5.  4.      [8]  It 
signifies,  pure,  hulij,  and  spiritual.    John  3.  6, 
That  which  is  born  of  the  Spirit,  is  spirit;  that 
is,  that  which  is  wrought  by  the  Spirit  of  God 
is  of  a  spiritual  nature,  and  so,  suitable  to  the 
kingdom  vf  God.      [D]    It   is    taken  for    the 
gospel,  which  is  the  mtnistralion  of  the  Spirit, 
and    by    whose    influence  it  becomes  effectual 
to  change  the  hearts  of  sinners,  to  turn  them 
from  the  power  of  Satan  unto  God,  and  to 
make  them  truly  spiritual  and  holy.    2  Cor. 
3.0,8,  Who  hath  made  us  able  ministers  of 
the  new  testament,  not   of   the   letter,  but  of 
the  spirit.      [10]  For  the  thoughts,  affection, 
aiul  care.     Col.  2.  5,  Though  I  be  absent  in 
the  flesh,  yet  I    am    with   you    in   the   spirit. 
[11]   For  a  temper,  frame,  or  disposition  of 
soul  or  spirit.     Psal.  51.  W,  Renew   a  right 
spirit  within  me. 
1 12]  Spirit  signifies  the  reasonable  soul,  which 
continues  in  being  even  after  the  death  of  the 
body;  That  spiritual,  reasoning,  and  choosing 
sub.-itance,  capable  of  eternal  happiness.    Acts 
7.  5!),  Ii<ir(i  Jesus,   receive   my   spirit,  or,  n)y 
soul.     [i:{]  Good  angels  are  called  spirits,  im- 
material ami  inttliigcnt,  but  created  and  de- 
pendent beings.    Heb.  1.  14,  Are  they  not  all 
ministering  spirits?     [14]  T/ie  deoils  are  often 
called    unclean   spirits,   evil   spirits,    Mark  ."). 
13.  Luke  7.  21.      So   in   1  Sam.  18.  10,   The 
evil  spirit  from  God  came   upon  Saul.      [1')] 
Spirit  sitrnifus  an  apparition  or  ghost.     Mat. 
34.  26,  When  the  disciples  saw  Jesus  walking 
on   the  sea,  they  were  troubled,  saying,  it   is 
a  spirit.     Jlnd  our  Saviour,  after  his  rcsur 
reetion,  appearing  to  his  disciples,  thoy  were 
affrighted,  and  supposed  they  had  seen  a  spirit, 
or,  ghost;  but   he   said   to  them,  handle  nie, 
and  see,  for  a  spirit  halh  not  flesh  and  bones 
as  yn  see  me  have,  Luke  24.  37,  3'J.     [Ifi]  // 
is  taken  for  a  person   that    pretended   to   be 
inspired,  or  for  a  doctrine  offered  as  the  im 
mediate  revelation  of  the  Spirit.     1  John  4.  1, 
Believo   not   every  spirit.      [17]   Fur  passion, 
wrath,  or  anger.     Eccl.  10.  4,  If  the  spirit  of 
the  ruler  rise  up  against  thee.     [18]  Fur  the 
breath,  the  respiration,  the  animal  life    that 
is  in  beasts.      Eccl.  3.  21,  The  spirit  of  the 
beast  that   goeth  downward.      [10]    Spirit  is 
also    taken  for  the   wind.    Amos  4.  13,  He 
that  createth  the  wind,  or  spirit.     These   are 
the  four  spirits  of  the    heavens,  in   Hubre 
winds,  Zech.  6.  .■>.     Jlnd  in  John  3. 8,  The  wind 
bloweth  where  it  listeth,  in  Greek,   pneuma, 
the  spirit. 
The  spirit  of  a  sound  mind  ;  the  spirit  of  wisdom 
and  underslnnding ;  the  spirit  of  knowledge  ;  the 
spiril  of  grace  and  prayer ;  the  spirit  of  prophecy, 
and  the  like,  signify  several  effects,  works,  and 
gifts,  loirctlirr-iri'th  the  author  and  cause,  which 
is  the  Holy  Spirit  infusing  them.     On  the  con- 
trary, the  spirit  of  pride,  covetonsness,  fury, 
uncleannn^s,  do  signify  these  vices,  and  the 
dnit,  that  wicked  .'spirit,  the  author  of  them. 
Grieve  not  the  Holy  Spirit,  Kph.  4.  30.  Men  may 
he  said  to  grirre  the  .'Spirit  of  God,  by  with- 
standing his  holy  inspirations,  the  motions  of 
his  grace,  or'Uy  living  in  a  lukewarm   and 
negligrvt  manner.  ^Iso  by  despising  his  gifts, 
or  neglecting  them ;  by  abusing  his  favours, 
either  out  of  vanity,  curiosity,  or  negligence. 
^nd  in  a  contrary  sense,  we  stir  up  the  .Spirit 
of  God  which  is  in  us  {as  St.  Paul  advises 
Timothy,  2  Tim.  1.  fi.)  by  the  practice  of  god- 
liness, hy  our  Madness  in  complying  with  his 
motions,  by  fervour  in  his  service,  by  renew- 
ing our  pTatitudr,  ^-e.     See  tho  Significations 
on    DtscKRN,   Earnest,    Prison,  CIuencu, 
Sow. 
Gen.  7.  t  22.  in  whom  wns  hrenth  of  tho  s.  of  life 
21.  t  3.').  which  were  a  blttl•rm■^<•of  ».  to  Isaac 
41.  8.  Pharaoh's  s.  was  troubled  in  the  morning 
45.  27.  Iho  ».  of  Jacob  their  father  revived 
KTodA.9.  hoarkoned  not  to  Mos'n  for  antruish  of  ,9. 
a.i.  21.  every  one  whom  his  ».  mnde  willing 
jVum.  11.  17.  I  will  take  of .».  that  i»  on  the.',  "S. 
2*1.  the  ».  rested  upon  Ihem  nnri  Ihey  prophesied 
2!).  thai  the  Lord  would  put  his  ».  upon  Ihom 
14.24.  Caleb,  because  he  had  another  ».  with  him 
07.  18.  lalte  jonhun,  a  man  in  whom  is  tho  .«. 
Dtvt  S  30.  fortlioLord  thy  God  hnrdenodhu  J. 
572 


SPI 

Josh.  a.  1.  nor  was  mere  t.  m  tliein  any  more 
Judg.  8.  t  3.  then  their  s.  was  abated  toward  him 
15.  19.  when  he  had  drunk  his  £.  came  again 

ISam.  30. 12.  when  he  had  eaten  his 5.  came  to  him 

1  Kings  10.  5.  there  was  no  «.  in  her,  2  Chron.  9.  4. 

21.  5.  Jezebel  his  wife  said,  why  is  thy  5.  so  sadt 

22.  21.  there  came  forth  a  s.  2  Chron.  18.  20. 

2  Kings  2.9.  let  a  double  portion  of  thy  s.  be  on  me 
I.l  they  said,  s.  of  Elijah  doth  rest  on  Elisha 

1  Chron.  5.  26.  the  Lord  stirred  up  the  s.  of  Pul 
12.  18.  then  the  4.  came  upon  Amasai,  and  said 
28.  12.  the  pattern  of  all  that  he  had  by  the  s. 
i  Chron.  21.  l(i.  against  Jehoram  s.  of  Philistines 
F.zra  1.  5.  with  them  whose  s.  God  raised  to  go  up 
JVVA.  9.  30.  testificdst  by  the  s.  in  thy  prophets 
Job  4.  15.  then  a  s.  passed  before  my  face 

15.  13.  that  thou  turnest  thy  s.  against  God 

20.3.  s.  of  my  understanding  causeth  me  to  answer 
26.  4.  and  whose  s.  came  from  thee? 

13.  by  his  s.  he  garnished  the  heavens,  his  hand 
32.  8.  there  is  a  s.  in  man,  inspiration  of  Almighty 

18.  the  s.  within  me  constraineth  me 
34.  14.  if  he  gather  to  hims.  his  s.  and  his  breath 
Psal.  32.  2.  and  in  whose  s.  there  is  no  guile 
51.  10.  a  clean  heart,  renew  a  rights,  within  me 

12.  and  uphold  me  with  thy  free  s. 
70.  12.  he  shall  cut  off  the  s.  of  princes 
78.  8.  and  whose  .s-.  was  not  stedfast  with  God 
104.  30.  thou  sendest  forth  thy  «.  they  are  created 
106.  33.  they  provoked  his  s.  so  that  he  spake 
unadvisedly  with  his  lips 
139.  7.  whither  shall  I  go  from  thy  s.? 
143.  10.  s.  is  good,  lead  me  to  land  of  uprightness 
Prov.  14.  29.  he  that  is  hasty  of  s.  exalteth  folly 

15.4.  but  perverseness  therein  is  a  breach  in  tho  5. 

16.  18.  and  a  haughty  s.  goeth  before  a  fall 
32.  that  ruleth  s.  better  than  he  that  taketh  city 

18.  14.  the  s.  of  a  man  will  sustain  his  infirmity 

20.  27.  the  s.  of  a  man  is  the  candle  of  the  Lord 
25.  28.  that  hath  no  rule  over  his  s.  is  like  a  city 

F.ccl.  3.  21.  who  knowcth  the.?,  of  man,  s.  of  beast 

7.  9.  be  not  hasty  in  thy  s.  to  be  angry 

8.  8.  no  man  hath  power  over  s.  to  retain  the  s. 

10.  4.  if  the  .•>■.  of  the  ruler  rise  against  thee 

11.  .5.  thou  knowest  not  what  is  ihe  way  of  the  s 

12.  7.  and  the  s.  shall  return  to  God  who  gave  it 
fsa.VJi.  3.  thes.  of  Egypt  shall  fail  in  midst  thereof 

21).  10.  Ld.  hath  poured  011  you  thes.  of  deep  sleep 
24.  lliey  that  erred  ins.  shall  come  to  understand. 

31.  3.  and  llieir  horses  fl(>sh  and  not  s. 

32.  15.  till  the  s.  be  poured  upon  us  from  on  high 
34.  16.  and  his  s.  it  hath  gathered  them 
37.  t  7.  behold,  I  will  put  a  s.  into  him 
42.  5.  he  that  giveth  s.  to  them  that  walk  therein 
48.  16.  the  Lord  God  and  his  s.  hath  sent  me 
54.  6.  as  a  woman  forsaken  and  grieved  in  s. 
57.1(1.  s.  shall  fail  before  me  and  souls  I  have  made 
Rl.  1.  the  s.  of  Lord  God  is  on  me,  I.uke  4.  18. 

3.  the  garment  of  praise  for  the  s.  of  heaviness 
Jer.  51.  11.  Lord  raised  the  .<!.  of  king  of  Medes 
Ezek.  1.  12.  whither  s.  was  to  go,  tiny  went,  20. 

21.  for  the  s.  was  in  the  wheels,  10.  17. 
3>  2.  s.  entered  into  me  when  ho  spake  to  me,  3.  24. 

3.  12.  then  the  s.  took  me  up  and  I  heard,  11.  24. 
14.  so  s.  lifted  me  up,  and  took  me  away,  and  I 

went  in  the  heat  of  my  s.  8.  3.  |  11.  1. 

13.  3.  woe  to  prophets  that  follow  their  own  s. 

21.  7.  ev.  s.  shall  fiin(,  all  knees  be  weak  as  water 
Dan.  2.  1.  Nebuchadnezzar's  s.  was  troubled 

4.  8.  and  in  whom  is  thes.  of  the  holy  gods,  before 
him  I  told  the  dream,  9,  18.  |  5.  11,  14. 

5.  12.  an  excellent  s.  found  in  Daniel,  6.  3. 
Hos.  9.  t7.  prophet  is  a  fool, man  of  thes.  is  mad 
Imiis  4.  t  13.  for  lo,  he  that  createth  the  s. 
Mic■'i.^  l.ifa  man  walking  in. 9.  and  falsehood  do  lie 
Hag.'l.M.  the  Lord  stirred  upthe  s.  of  Zerubbabel 
y.eeli.  7.  12.  hath  sent  in  his  s.  by  former  prophets 

12.  1.  and  formeth  s.  of  man  within  him 
Jl/ai.2.15.y«tliad  ho  tho  residue  ofs.  therefore  take 

heed  to  your  s.  deal  not  treacherously,  Ifi. 
Mat.  4.  1.  Jesus  was  led  up  of  the  s.  I.uke  4.  1. 

14.  26.  were  troubled ;  saying,  it  is  a  s.  Mark  6.49. 

22.  43.  how  ihcii  doth  David  in  s.  call  him  Lord  ? 
26.  41.  the  s.  indeed  is  willing,  Mark  14.  33. 

Mark  1.  10.  tho  .'.  descending  on  him,  John  1.  32. 
12.  thes.  driveth  him  into  the  wilderness 

8.  12.  and  he  sighed  deeply  in  his  s.  and  salth 

9.  20.  8.  tare  him  ||  26.  the  s.  cried  and  rent  him 
Luke  1. 17.  he  shall  go  before  him  in  thos.  of  Elias 

80.  and  the  child  waxed  strong  in  .«.  2.  40. 

2.  27.  and  he  came  by  the  s.  into  tho  temple 
4.  14.  Jesus  retiiined  in  power  of«.  into  Galileo 
8. .55.  her  s.  came  again,  and  she  arose  straightway 

9.  .55.  ye  know  not  what  mnnniT  ofs.  yo  are  ol^ 

10.  21.  in  that  hour  Jesus  rejoiced  in  s.  and  said 

13.  11.  a  woman  who  had  a  s.  of  infirmity 
21.  37.  they  supposed  that  Ihey  had  seen  a  ». 

39.  fur  a  ».  hath  not  flesh  and  bones  as  I  havo 
.Tchn  1.  33.  on  whom  thou  shall  see  s.  descending 

3.  34.  God  giveth  uut  tlie  t.  by  measure  to  him 


sn 

John  4.  23.  worship  the  Father  in  3.  and  In  troth 

24.G.isas.  they  must  worship  him  ins.  and  truik 

6.  63.  it  is  the  s.  that  quickcneth ;  words  that  1 

speak  unto  you,  they  are  s.  and  (hey  are  life 

7.  39.  this  spake  he  of  s.  ||  1 1 .  33.  he  groaned  in  t. 

13.  21.  he  was  troubled  in  s.  and  testified  and  said 
.^cts  2.  4.  they  spake  as  s.  gave  them  utterance 

6.  10.  and  they  were  not  able  to  resist  the  s. 

8.  29.  then  thes.  said  to  Philip,  go  near  and  join 

10.  19.  the  s.  said  unto  Peter,  11.  12. 

11.28.  Agabussignif  by  s.  there  should  be  dearth 

16.  7.  they  assayed,  but  the  s.  suffered  them  not 

17.  16.  his  s.  was  stirred  within  him  when  he  saw  " 
18.5.Paul  was  jires.sed  in  s.  ||  25.  being  fervent  in  s. 

20.  22.  now  I  go  bound  in  the  s.  to  Jerusalem 

21.  4.  the  disciples  said  to  Saul  through  tlie  s. 
2;l.  8.  Sadducees  say  that  there  is  no  angel  nor  8. 

9.  but  if  a  s.  or  an  angel  hath  spoken  to  him 
Rom. 1.4.  Son  of  God  according  to  the  s.  of  holinesi 

2.  2il.  circumcision  is  that  of  heart  in  the  s. 

8.  1.  who  walk  not  after  the  flesh,  but  after  s.  4. 

2.  the  law  of  the  s.  of  life  hath  made  me  free 
5.  they  that  are  after  the  s.  the  things  of  the  s. 
-0.  ye  are  not  in  the  flesh  but  s.  if  so  be  that  3. 

10.  but  the  s.  is  life  because  of  righteousness 
ll.ifs.  ofhim  that  raised  up  Jesus  from  Ihe  dead, 

shall  quicken  your  mortal  bodies  by  his  s. 
13.  but  if  ye  thro'  the  s.  mortify  deeds  of  body 

16.  thes.  itself  beareth  witness  with  ours. 

23.  but  ourselves  who  have  first-fruits  of  the  «. 

26.  the  s.  also  hclpeth  our  infirmities  ;  but  the«. 

maketh  intercession  for  us  wilh  groanings 

27.  he  knowcth  what  is  the  mind  of  the  s. 

12.  11.  fervent  in  s.  ||  15.  30.  for  the  love  of  tho  s. 
1  Cor.  2.4.  but  indomonslrationof  s.  and  of  power 

10.  but  God  hath  revealed  them  lo  us  by  hiss,  for 
s.  searcheth  all  things,  the  deep  things  of  God 

11.  save  the  s.  of  a  man  which  is  in  luni 

12.  nots.  of  the  world,  but  thes.  which  is  of  God 

5.  3.  I  verily,  as  absent  in  body,  but  present  in  s. 
5.  that  s.  may  be  saved  in  day  of  the  Lord  Jeaus 

6.  17.  he  that  is  joined  to  the  Lord  is  one  s. 
20.  glorify  God  in.  your  body  and  in  your  s. 

7.  34.  that  she  may  be  holy  both  in  body  and  3. 
12.  4.  arc  diversities  of  gifts,  but  same  s.  8,  9, 11. 

8.  lo  one  is  given  by  the  s.  the  word  of  wisdom 

13.  forby  ones,  are  weall  baptized  into  one  body; 

liave  been  all  made  to  diink  into  one  s. 

14.  2.  howbeit  in  the  s.  he  speaketb  mysteries 
15. 1  willsingwiths.il  16.  shaltbless  witlithe*. 

15.  45.  tho  last  Adam  was  made  a  quickening  s. 
2Cor.  3.  6.  ministers  of  new  testament,  not  of  letter 

bulofthe  s.  letter  killeth,but  thes.  giveth  life 
8.  how  shall  not  minislrat.  ofs.  be  rather  glorious 

17.  the  Lord  is  thats.  where  the  s.  of  Lord  is 
4.  13.  we  having  the  same  .?.  of  faith,  we  believe 
7.  I.  cleanse  from  all  fillhiness  of  the  flesh  and  s. 

13.  because  his  s.  was  refreshed  by  you. all 

11.  4.  another  s.  which  ye  have  not  received 

12.  18.  walked  we  not  in  same  s.  and  same  steps? 
<?u7.3. 2.  received  ye  thes.  by  the  works  of  the  law 

3.  are  ye  so  foolish?  having  begun  in  the  s. 
5.  he  therefore  that  ministereth  to  you  the  s. 

14.  might  receive  the  promise  of  the  s.lbro'  faith 

4.  6.  God  hath  sent  forth  the  s.  of  his  Son 

5.  5.  for  we  thro' s.  wait  for  hope  of  righteousness 

16.  walk  ill  Iho  s.  ||  18.  but  if  yo  be  led  by  the  a. 

17.  for  tho  flesh  lusieth  against  the  .■!.  and  the  s. 

against  the  flesh,  and  these  ore  contrary 

25.  if  we  live  in  tho  s.  let  us  walk  in  the  s. 

6.8.  soweth  to  s.  shall  of  the  s.  reap  life  cvcrla^Ag 

IS.graccof  our  Lord  be  wilh  yours.  Philem^S. 

Fph.  2.  2  the  s.  that  now  workotli  in  Ihe  children 

18.  we  have  access  by  one  s.  to  the  Father 

22.  for  a  habitation  ofGud  through  the  s. 

3.  5.  as  it  is  now  revealed  to  his  aposiles  by  the  ». 
16.Btrengiliencd  with  might  by  hiss,  in  inner  man 

4.  3.  to  ki'ep  unity  of  the  s.  in  the  bond  of  peace 

4.  there  is  one  body,  and  one  s.  as  ye  are  called 

23.  and  be  renewed  in  the  s.  of  your  mind 

5. 18.  be  not  drunk  with  wine, but  bo  filled  with  s. 

6.  17.  take  sword  of  the  s.  which  is  word  of  God 
IH.  praying  always  with  all  prayer  in  the  s. 

Phil.  1. 19.  and  the  supply  of  thes.  of  Jesus  Chiist 
27.  that  ye  stand  fast  in  one  s.  wilh  one  mind 

2.  I.  iftherebo  any  fellowship  of  the  s.  if  bowels 

3.  3.  tho  circumcision,  which  worship  G.  in  the  s. 
Col.  1.  8.  who  declared  to  us  your  love  in  Ihe  s. 

2.  5.  Iho'  absent  in  flesh,  yet  am  I  wilh  vou  in  «. 

1  7'/if.?.'!.5.19.quench  not  s.dospisc  not  prophesyinga 
23.  jiray  your.?,  soul,  and  body  ho  preserv.  blame. 

2T/ir.f.«.2.2.or  be  troublfHl,  neither  by  .--.nor  by  word 
8.  Lord  sliall  consume  wilh  the  s.  of  his  mouth 
13.  chosen  you  thro'  sanctificat.  ofs.  and  belief 

1  Tirn.  3. 16.  G.  manifest, justified  in  s.  seen  nfang 

4.  1.  now  the.*,  speaketb  oxpro.'isly  in  latter  limes 
12.  ho  thou  an  example  in  .«.  in  faith,  in  purity 

ITim.  4.  22.  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  thy  » 
Hrh.  4.  12.  to  the  dividing  asunder  of  soul  and  a 

5.  14.  who  thro' tlie  etoroal  f.oirered  himself  to  O 


SFI 

Jam.  2. 28.  for  as  the  body  without  llie  s.  is  dead 
4.  5.  the  s.  that  dwelleth  in  us  lustetli  to  envy 
1  Pet.  1.2.  lliro'sanctificatioi!oftlie  s.  to  obedience 
22.  ye  have  purified  in  obeying  truth  thro'  ihes. 

3.  4.  even  the  ornament  of  a  nieelt  and  quiet  «. 
IS.beiiig  put  10 death  in  flesh,  butquiclienedbys. 

4.  6.  but  live  according  to  God  in  the  «. 

1  .hkn  3.  24.  by  th^  s.  wliich  he  hath  given  us 
4. 1.  beloved, believe  not  every  «.  but  try  the  spirits 

2.  every  s.  that  con fesseth  Jesus  Christ  is  come 

3.  every  s.  that  cojifesseth  not  that  Jesus  is  come 

13.  dwell  in  him, because  hath  given  us  of  hiss. 

5.  6.  it  is  the  s.  that  heareth  witness,  s.  is  truth 
8.  witness  in  earth,  the  s.  the  water,and  the  blood 

Jude  19.  these  be  sensual,  not  having  the  s. 
Rev.  1.  10.  I  was  in  the  «.  on  the  Lord's  day 
•    2.  7.  hear  what*,  saith  to  churches,  he  that  hath 
an  e:ir  let  him  hear,  11,  17,29.  |  3.6,  13,22. 
4.  2.  and  immediately  I  was  in  the  s.  and  behold 

11.  11.  the  s.  of  life  from  God  entered  into  them 

14.  13.  blessed  are  the  dead,  yea,  saith  the  s. 
17.  3.  so  he  carried  me  away  in  the  «.  21.  10. 
22.  17.  and  the  s.  and  the  bride  say,  come 

SPIRIT  of  adoption. 
Rom.  8.  15.  but  ye  have  received  the  s.o/adwjKiion 

SVIKVT  of  antichrist. 
\.Tohn  4.  3.  and  this  is  that  s.  of  antichrist  ye  heard 

SVmW  of  bondage. 
Rom.  8. 15.  ye  have  not  received  the  s.  of  bondage 

Burn  of  the  SPIRIT. 
Ji)Ait3.5.except  man  be  JorTi  of  the  s.he  cannot  enter 
6.  iliat  which  is  born  of  the  s.  is  spirit 
8.  so  is  every  one  that  is  born  of  the  s. 
Go/.  4.29.  persecuted  him  that  was  born  a0.et  the s. 

Broken  SPIRIT. 
Psal.  51.  17.  the  sacrifices  of  God  are  a  broken  s. 
Prov.  15. 13.  by  sorrow  of  the  heart  the  s.  is  broken 
17.  22.  but  a  broken  s.  drieth  the  bonea 
.S'ee  Contrite. 
SPIRIT  o/A«rHm^. 
Isa.A.i.ihe  blood  of  Jerusalem  by  the  s.  of  burning 

SPIRIT  of  Christ. 
Rom.  8.  9.  if  any  man  have  not  the  s.  of  Christ 

1  PeM.ll.  v/bidlhe  s.  of  Christ  in  them  didsignify 

SPIRIT  of  counsel. 
Isa.  11.  2.  the  s.  of  counsel  shall  rest  upon  him 

SPIRIT  of  divination. 
4cts  16. 16.  a  damsel  pussessed  with  a  s.  ofdivina. 

Jhunb  SPIRIT. 

Mark9.  17. 1  brought  my  son,  who  hath  a.  dumb  s. 

25.  thou  dumb  s.  I  charge  thee,  come  out  of  him 

Eai-nest  of  the  SPllllT. 

2  Cor.l.22.who  hai  h  given  us  the  earn,  ofthes.  5. 5. 

SPIRIT  o/«rror. 

\Johni.G.  hereby  know  we  the^.  »/truth  and  error 

Sr.c  Evil. 

Faithful  SPIRIT. 

Prov.  11.13.he  that  is  of  faithful  s.  concealeth  mat. 

See  F.VMILIA.R. 

SPIRIT  of  fear. 

2  Tim.  I.  7.  God  hath  not  given  us  the  s.  of  fear 

FoulSPXRVT. 
J\fark  9.  2.'>.  he  rebuked  the  fuul  s.  saying  to  him 
Rcv.XS.I.  Babvl.is  become  the  hold  of  every /ou/ 5. 

Fruit  of  the  SPIRIT. 
fral.!i.^2.\hfi  fruit  of  the  s.  is  love,  joy,  peace 
Fph.  5.  9.  for  the  fruit  of  the  s.  is  in  all  goodness 

Oood  SPIRIT. 
JVeh.  9.20.  thou  gavest  thy  n-ood  s.  to  instruct  them 
Psal.  143.  10.  thv  s.  is  good,  lead  ine  into  the  land 

A  SPIRIT  of  God. 

Gm.  1.2.  s.  o/(?od  moved  on  theficeofthe  waters 
41.  38.  as  this  is,  a  man  in  whom  the  s.  of  God  is 
Exod.  31.3.  and  I  have  filled  Bezaleel  with  ihe.». 
of  God,  35.  31. 
JVum.  24.  2.  nnd  the  s.  of  God  came  on  Balaam 

1  Sam.  10.  JO.  the  s.  of  God  came  on  Saul,  and  he 

prophesied  among  them,  11.  6.  |  19.  23. 
19.  20.  s.  of  God  came  on  the  messengers  of  Saul 

2  Chron.  15.  I.  the  s.  of  God  came  upon  .^zariah 
Job  27.  3.  and  the  «.  of  God  is  in  my  nostrils 

33.  i.s.  of  God  hath  made  me,  breath  of  Almighty 
i?z-?/l.  11.24.  in  vision  bv  the  s.  0/ r;»rrmlo  Chaldea 
Jifnt.^.  16.  ho  saw  «.  o/^od  descending  like  a  dove 

12.23.  but  if  least  out  devils  by  the  s.  of  God 
Horn.  8.  9.  if  so  be  that  the  .i.  of  God  dwell  in  you 

14.  for  as  many  as  are  led  by  the  s.  of  God 

15.  19.  mighty  signs  by  the  power  of  the  s.  of  God 
.   Cor,  2.  1 1.  kriowelh  no  man,  but  the  s.  of  God 

14.  receiveth  not  the  things  of  the  s.  of  God 
3.  16.  and  that  the  .?.  of  God  dwelleth  in  you 

6.  II.  ye  are  sanctified  by  the  s.  of  out  God 

7.  40.  I  think  also  that  I  have  the  5.  of  God 

12.  3.  no  man  speaking  by  the  s.  of  God,  calleth 
2  Cor.  3.  3.  written  with  the  s.  o/the  living  God 
Eph.  4.  30.  and  grieve  not  the  holy  s.  of  God, 

1  Prl.  4.  14.  for  tlie  s.  of  God  rcsteth  on  you 
1  .hkn  4.  2.  hereby  know  ye  the  s.  of  God 

SPIRIT  of  glory. 
,  Pet.  4.  14.  for  the  e.  of  elory  resleth  on  you 
573 


SPI 

'  SPIRIT  of  grace. 

ZfcA.lS.lO.Iwill  pour  on  house  of  David«.o/^rfl<;e 
//<?6. 10.29.  and  liath  done  despite  to  the  s.  of  grace 
Sec  Holy. 
Hu7nble  SPIRIT. 
Prov.  16.  19.  better  is  it  to  be  of  an  humble  s. 

29.  23.  hut  honour  shall  uphold  the  humble  in  s. 
Isa.  57. 15.  with  him  also  that  is  of  an  humble  s- 

SPIRIT  of  jealousy. 
JVum.  5. 14.  and  s.  of  jealousy  come  upon  him,  30. 

SPIRIT  of  judgment. 
ha.  4.4.  purged  blood  of  Jerusalem  by  s.  ofjudgm. 
28.6.  the  Lord  shall  he  for  a  s.  of  judgment  to  him 

SPIRIT  of  knowledge. 

Isa.  11.  2.  the  s.  of  knowledge  shall  rest  upon  him 

See  Lord,  Lying. 

SPIRIT  of  meekness. 

lCor.4.21. shall  I  come  to  you  in  the  s.of  meekness? 

Oal.  6.  1.  restore  such  a  one  in  the  s.  of  meekness 

My  SPIRIT. 
Gen.  6.  3.  my  s.  shall  not  always  strive  with  man 
Job  6.  4.  the  poison  whereof  drinketh  up  my  s. 
7. 11.  I  will  speaK  in  the  anguish  of  ray  s. 
10.  12.  and  thy  visitation  halh  preserved  my  s. 
21.  4.  if  80,  why  should  not  my  s.  be  troubled 
Psal.  31.  5.  into  Ihiiie  hand  I  commit  my  s. 
77.  3.  I  complained,  and  7717/  s.  was  overwhelmed 

6.  and  my  s.  made  diligent  search 

142.  3.  when  my  s.  was  overwhelmed  in  me 

143.  4.  therefore  is  my  s.  overwhelmed  in  me 

7.  hear  me  speedily,  O  Lord,  my  s.  faileth 
Prov.  1.  23.  behold,  I  will  pour  out  my  s.  unto  you 
fsa.  26.  9.  yea,  with  mys.  will  I  seek  thee  early 

30.  1.  that  cover  with  a  covering,  but  not  of  7nys. 
38.  16.  in  all  these  things  is  the  life  of  jh^s. 

42. 1.  I  have  put  my  s.  upon  him,  shall  bring  forth 

44.  3.  I  will  pour  7flj/s.  upon  thy  seed 

59.21.  my  s.  that  is  upon  thee  shall  not  depart 

Kzek.  3.  14.  and  I  went  in  the  heat  of  my  s. 
36.  27.  and  I  will  put  my  s.  within  you,  37.  14. 
39. 29.  for  I  have  poured  out  my  s.  on  house  of  Isr. 

Dan.2.3.my  s.  was  troubled  ||  7.15.  grieved  in  my  s. 

Joel  2.  28. 1  will  pour  out  my  s.  upon  all  flesh,  your 
sons  and  daugh.  shall  prophesy,  29. ./Jets 2. 17,  18, 

Hag.2.5somy  s.  reniaineth  among  you, fear  ye  not 

Zech.  4. 6.  not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  my  s. 

6.  8.  these  have  quieted  my  s.  in  the  north  country 
Mat.  12.  18. 1  will  put  mys.  upon  him,  shall  shew 
J.uke  1. 47.  my  s.  halh  rejoiced  in  God  my  Saviour 

23.  46.  Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  3. 
Acts  7. 59.  Stephen  said,  Lord  Jesus,  receive  my  s. 
Rom.  1.  ?f.  whom  I  serve  with  jny  s.  in  the  gospel 
ICor.  5.4.  when  ye  are  gathered  together  and  Tnys. 
14.  14.  my  s.  prayeth,  but  my  understanding  Is 
16.  18.  for  they  have  refreshed  ?n7/  s.  and  yours 
2  Cor.  2. 13.  I  had  no  rest  in  my  s.  bee.  1  found  not 

JVcw  SPIRIT. 
Ezek.  II.  19.1  will  put  a  7ie(cs.  within  you,  36.  26. 
18.  31.  and  make  you  a  new  heart  and  a  new  s. 

jVewness  of  SPIRIT. 
Rom.7.6.  that  we  should  serve  in  newness  ofihes. 

Patient  SPIRIT. 
Eccl.7.8.patientins.  isbetterthan  proud  inspirit 

Perverse  SPIRIT. 
Isa.  19.  14.  the  Lord  hath  mingled  a.  perverse  s. 

Poor  SPIRIT.      . 
jl/ai.  5.3.blessed  are  the, poor  in  s.  theirs  the  kingd. 

$riR\T  of  promise. 
Eph.  1. 13.  were  sealed  with  that  holy  s.  of  promise 

SPIRIT  of  prophecy. 
Rev.  19. 10.  testimony  of  Jesus  is  the*,  of  prophecy 

SPIRIT  of  slumber. 
Rom.  11.  8.  God  hath  given  them  the  s.  of  slumber 

.^urroicful  SPIRIT. 
ISam.  1.15.  my  lord,  I  .im  a  woman  of  a.  sorrowf.s. 

SPIRIT  of  truth. 
.TohnMi'.s.  of  truth  whom  world  cannot  receive 
1.5.  26.  even  the  .f.  of  truth  who  proceedeth 
16.  13.  when  s.  of  truth  is  come,  will  guide  you 
1  ./ohn  4.  6.  hereby  know  we  s.  of  truth  and  error 
See  Vkxation. 
Unclean  SPIRIT. 
Zech.  13.  2. 1  will  cause  unci.  s.  to  pass  out  of  land 
Mat.  12.  43.  when  the  unclean  s.  is  gone  out  of  a 
man,  he  walketh  thro'  dry  places,  Lukc\].U. 
Mark  1.23.  in  their  synagogue  a  man  with  an  un.s. 
26.  and  when  the  unclean  s.  had  torn  him 
3.  .30.  because  they  said,  he  hath  an  unclean  s. 
5.  2.  there  met  him  a  man  wifh  an  unclean  s. 

8.  come  out  of  the  man,  thou  unct.s.  lAike  8.  29. 

7.  25.  whose  young  daughter  had  an  unclean  s. 
Z/u/i:e9.42.Jesiis rebuked  unclcans.a.nA  healed  him 

S^'IRFT  of  understanding, 
fsa.  11.  2.  the  .».  of  understand,  shall  restupon  him 

SPIRIT  of  whoredoms, 
flos.i.l^.forlhes. of  whoredoms  caused  ihemtoerr 
5.  4.  for  s.  of  whoredoms  is  in  the  midst  of  them 

SPIRIT  of  wisdom. 
F.zod.  28.  3.  whom  I  have  filled  with  s.  of  wisdom 
Deut.  34.  9.  Joshua  was  full  of  the  t.  of  wisdom 


SPO 

ha.  11.2.  the  j.  of  wisdom  shall  rest  upon  hira 
Eph.  1.  17.  that  God  may  give  toyou*.  ofwiidom 

Hounded  SPIRIT. 
Prov.  13.  14.  but  a  wounded  s.  who  can  bear? 

SPIRITS. 
JVum.  16.  22.  O  God,  the  G.  ofs.  of  all  flesh,  27. 15. 
Psal.  104.  4.  who  maketh  his  angels  s.  Heb.  1.  7 
Prov.  16.  2.  but  the  Lord  weigheth  the  s. 
Zech.  6.  5.  these  are  the  four  s.  of  the  heavens- 
Mat.  8.  16.  and  he  cast  out  the  s.  with  his  word 
lO.I.he  gave  them  power  ag.  unclean  s.  Mark^.1. 
Mark  1.  27.  for  with  authority  commandeth  he  tha 
unclean  s.  and  they  obey  him,  I^uke  4.  36. 
3.  11.  unclean  s.  fell  down^l)eforo  him,  and  oried 
5.  13.  the  unclean  s.  entered  into  the  swine 
Luke  10.  20.  rejoice  not  that  s.  are  subject  to  you 
Jlcts  5. 16.  were  vexed  with  unclean  s.  were  healed 

8.  7.  for  unclean  «.  crying,  came  out  of  many 
1  Cor.  12.  10.  to  another  discerning  of  s. 

14. 32.  s.  of  the  prophets  are  subject  to  the  proph. 
F.ph.  6.  t  12.  for  we  wrestle  against  wicked  «. 
1  7"im.4.1. depart  from  faith,  giving  heed  to  seduc. «. 
Heb.  1.  14.  are  they  not  all  ministering  s. 
12.  9.  be  in  subject,  to  Father  of  s.  sent  to  minister 
23.  and  to  the  s.  of  jnst  men  made  perfect 
I  Pet.  3.19.  he  went  and  preached  to  the  s.  in  prison 
1  ./ohn  4.  1.  try  the  s.  whether  they  are  of  God 
Rev.  16.  13. 1  saw  three  unci.  s.  like  frogs  come  out 
14.  they  are  the  i.  of  devils,  working  miracles 
See  Evil,  F.vmiliar,  Seven. 
SPIRITUAL. 
flos.  9.  7.  the  prophet  is  a  fool,  Ihe  s.  man  is  mad 
Rom.  1.  11.  that  I  may  impart  to  you  some  s.  gift 

7.  14.  we  know  that  the  law  is  s.  but  I  am  carnal 
15.27.  have  been  made  partakers  of  theirs,  things 

1  Cor.  2.  13.  we  speak,  comparing  s.  things  withs. 
_  15.  hut  he  that  is  s.  judgeth  all  things 
3.1.Icould  not  speak  to  you  as  untos.but  as  carnal 

9.  11.  if  we  have  sown  unto  you  s.  things 

10.  .3.  and  did  all  eat  the  s:irae  s.  meat 

4.  drink  of  the  same  s.  drink,  drank  of  thats.  rock 

12.  I.  now  concerning  s.  gifts,  brethren 

14.  1.  desire  .s.  gifts  ||  12.  ye  are  zealous  of*,  gift* 
37.  if  any  man  ihink  himself  a  prophet  or  5. 

15.  44.  it  is  raised  a  s.  body,  there  is  a  s.  body 
46.  that  was  not  first  which  is  ,•;.  hut  that  which  19 

natural ;  and  afterwards  that  which  is  ». 
Gal.G.l.  ye  which  are  5. restore  such  a  one  in  mepk. 
Eph.  1.3.  who  hath  blessed  us  with  all  s.  blessings 

5.19. speaking  to  yourselves  in  psalms  and  s.  songs 

6. 12.  wrestle  against  «.  wickedness  in  high  places 
Col.  1.9.  that  ye  might  be  filled  with  all  s.  undersU 

3. 16.  admonish  one  another  in  psalms  and  s. songs 
lPc£.2. 5.  are  built  up  ns.  house,  to  offers,  sacrifice 

SPIRITUALLY. 
Rom.  8.  6.  but  to  be  s.  minded  is  life  and  peace 
ICor.  2.14.  nor  know  them,because  ares,  discerned 
Rev.  11.  8.  which  s.  is  rall"d  Sodom  and  Egypt 

SPIT. 
Lev.  15.8.  that  hath  the  issue,.",  on  him  that  is  clean 
JVj/,7n.  12.  14.  if  her  father  had  but  s.  in  her  face 
Deut.  25.  9.  she  shall  s.  in  his  face  and  shall  say 
,Tob  30.  10.  and  they  spare  not  to  s.  in  my  face 
Jl/ai. 26.67.  they  did  s.  in  his  face,  and  buffeted  him 

27.  ^0.  and  they  s.  upon  him  and  smote  him 
Mark  7.  .33.  and  he  s.  and  touched  his  tongue 

8.  23.  when  he  had  s.  on  his  eyes,  he  asked  hira 
10.34.  they  shall  s.  upon  him  and  shall  kill  him 
14.  65.  and  some  began  to  s.  on  him,  15.  19. 

SPITE. 
Psal.  10.  14.  for  thou  beholdest  ,<t.  to  requite  it 

SPITEFULLY. 
Mat.  22.  6.  they  entreated  them  s.  and  slew  them 
AuAelS.  32.  he  shall  he  s.  entreated  and  spitted  on 

SPITTED. 
/,Mi-eI8.32.he shall  be  spiti'fnllv  entreated  and  j.on 

SPITTING. 
Tsa.  50.  6.  I  hid  not  my  face  from  shame  and  s. 

SPITTLE. 
1  Sam.  21.  13.  he  lot  his  s.  fall  down  on  his  beard 
.Toh  7.  19.  let  alone,  till  I  swallow  do\vn  my  5. 
30.  t  10.  they  withhold  not  s.  from  my  face 
.lohnO.  6.  he  madeclayofs.  and  anointed  the  eyes 

SPOIL,  Substantive. 
Gen.  49.  27.  and  at  night  he  shill  divide  the  g. 
Exod.  15.  9.  the  enemy  said,  I  will  divide  the  s. 
JSfum.  31.  9.  Israel  took  the  s.  of  their  cattle,  11. 
12.  and  they  brought  the  prey  and  ,9.  to  Moses 
Deut.i.35.  cattle  we  took  for  prov  and  the*,  of  the 
cities  which  we  look,  3.7.  ./os/i.  8.27.  |  11.  14. 

13.  16.  thou  shiilt  gather  all  the  s.  and  burn  it 
20.  14.  the  s.  thou  shall  take  to  thyself,  ./osA.8.2, 

.ludg.  .5.  30.  meet  for  the  necks  ofthem  that  take  s. 

14.  19.  Samson  slew  thirty  men  and  took  their  s 
1  Sam.  14.  30.  if  had  eaten  freely  to-day  ofthe«. 

32.  the  people  flew  upon  the  s.  and  took  sheep 

15.  19.  but  didst  fly  upon  the  s.  and  didst  evil 
21.  but  the  people  took  of  the.?,  sheep  and  oxen 

30.  16.  because  the  great  .9.  tliat  they  had  taken 
19.  neither  *.  nor  any  thing  was  lacking 


SPO 

ICoffl.  30.20.took  the  fiocki  and  said,  this  is  Bnv.  $. 

22.  we  will  not  give  them  ought  of  the  s. 

26.  he  sent  uf  the  «.  to  the  elders  of  Judah  and  his 

friends;  behold,  a  present  of  the  s.  of  enemies 

V  Sam.  3.  iJ'2.  Joab  tjrought  in  a  great  «.  with  them 

12.30.  be  brought  forth  of  the  s.  of  Kabbah 
S  Kings  3.  23.  now  therefore,  Moab,  to  the  s. 
21.  14.  they  shall  become  a  s.to  their  enemies 
1  Chron.  -JO.  2.  from  Kabbah  he  brought  much  s. 
SC'Ar.  14.13.  they  carried  aw. s. from  Ethiopians,  14. 
15.  11.  they  ottered  to  Lord  at  same  timeofllies. 
20. 25.  when  Jehoshaphat  came  to  take  the  «.  they 
were  three  days  in  gathering  thes.it  was  so  much 
24. 23.  the  Syrians  sent  s.  to  the  king  of  Damascus 
US.  13.  smote  3000  of  them,  and  took  much  *. 

28.8.  they  look  much  «.  and  brought  s.  to  Samaria 

14.  80  the  armed  men  left  the  cajitives  and  the  s. 

15.  with  the  s.  they  clothed  all  that  were  naked 
Ezra  9.  7.  our  kings  have  been  delivered  to  a  s. 
Esth.  3.  13.  to  take  the  s.  of  them  for  a  prey,  8.  11. 

y.  10.  but  on  the  s.  laid  they  not  their  hand 
Job  29.  17.  I  plucked  the  s.  out  of  his  leeth 
I'sal.titf.  li.  she  that  tarried  at  home,  divided  the  s. 

119.1t>2.rejiiice  at  thy  word,  as  one  findeth  great  s. 
Proii.  1.  13.  we  shall  fill  our  houses  with  s. 

Hi.  19.  tlien  to  divide  the  s.  with  the  proud 

31.  11.  so  that  he  shall  have  no  need  oi's. 
!sa.  3.  14.  the  s.  of  the  poor  is  in  your  houses 

8.  4.  the  s.  of  Samaria  shall  be  taken  away 
9. 3.  and  as  men  rejoice  when  they  divide  thes. 
10.  6.  I  will  give  him  a  charge  to  take  the  s. 
33.  4.  your  s.  shall  be  gathered,  like  the  gathering 

23.  then  is  the  prey  of  a  great  s.  divided 

42.  22.  they  are  for  a  «.  and  none  saith,  restore 

24.  who  gave  Jacob  for  as.?  did  not  the  Lord 
53.  12.  he  shall  di,vide  the  i.  with  the  strong 

Jer.'2.]U.  is  Isr.  a  servant"!  why  is  Isr.  become  a  *.? 

6.7.  violence  and  s.  is  heard  in  her,  before  me  grief 

15.  13.  thy  substance  and  treasures  will  fgive  tos. 

17. 3. 1  will  give  thy  substance  and  treasures  to  «. 

20.  8.  since  1  spake,  I  cried  violence  and  s. 

30.  1<).  and  they  that  s.  tliee  shall  be  a  .s. 

49.  32.  the  multitude  of  their  cattle  shall  be  a  s. 

.50.  10.  and  Chaldea  shall  be  a  s.  saith  the  Lord 
Kiek.  7.  21.  I  will  give  it  to  the  wicked  for  a  s. 

25.  7.  Ammonites  for  a  s.  ||  20.  5.  Tyrus  a  s.  12. 

29.  19.  Nrhuch.idre/.zar  shall  take  .i.  of  Egypt 

38.  12.1  will  go  up  to  take  as. and  to  take  a  prey 
1.3.  shall  say  to  thee,  art  thou  come  to  take  a  s. 

45.9.  O  princes  of  Israel,  remove  violence  and  s. 
Dan.  11.  24.  he  shall  scatter  among  them  the  s. 

33.  yet  they  shall  fall  by  s.  many  days 
Jfof.  9.  t  •)■  for  lo,  they  are  gone,  because  of  s. 
Jimn^  3.  t  10.  who  store  up  s.  in  their  palaces 

5.  t  9.  that  sircngtheneth  .t.  against  the  strung 
JV'aA.  2.  9.  take  the  s.  of  silver,  take  the  s.  of  gold 
Hab.  2.  17.  the  s.  of  beasts  shall  cover  thee 
Zeck.  2.  9.  they  shall  be  a  s.  to  their  servants 

14.  1.  thy  s.  shall  be  divided  in  the  midst  of  thee 

SPOIL,  Verb. 
Ezod.  3.  22.  and  ye  shall  s.  the  Egyptians 
1  .Sam.  14.  .3fi.  and  s.  them  until  morning  light 
i.  Sam.  23.  10.  people  returned  afier  him  only  to  .9. 
Psal.  44. 10.  and  they  who  hate  us  s.  for  themselves 

89.  41.  all  that  pass  by  the  ways,  him 

109.  )1.  and  let  the  slfanger  .s.  his  labour 
Prffv.  22.  23.  will  x.  soul  of  those  that  spoiled  them 

24.  15.  O  wicked  inMn,  s.  not  hia  resting-place 
Cant.  2.  15.  lake  us  lh(!  foxes  that  s.  the  vines 
/wii.  11.  14.  they  shall  .«.  them  of  the  east  together 

17.  14.  ihis  is  the  portion  of  them  that  s.  us 

33.  1.  when  shall  cease  to  s.  thou  shall  be  spoiled 
Jtr.  5.  0.  a  wolf  of  the  evening  shall  s.  them 

20.5.  I  wiUirive  Jerusalem  to  them  that  shall  s.  it 

30.  16.  and  they  that  s.  thee  shall  be  a  s. 

47.  4.  the  day  that  cometh  to  s.  the  Philistines 
49.  2H.  po  up  lo  Kedar  and.?,  the  m^n  of  the  cast 
.SO.  10.  nil  that  s.  her,  shall  be  satisfied,  saith  Ld. 
F.zek.  14.  15.  and  they  s.  it,  so  that  ii  hi-  desolate 

32.  12.  and^^iey  shall  s.  the  pomp  of  Egypt 

39.  10.  Ihey  shall  s.  those  that  spoiled  them 
Jios.  10.  2.  shall  break  their  altars,  s.  their  images 

13. 15.  he  shall ».  the  trens.  of  all  pleasant  vessels 
Jfab.  2.8.  all  the  remnant  of  the  people  shall  s.  I  hoe 
y.rph.  2.  9.  the  rcHiduo  of  my  people  shall  .«.  them 
Mai.  12.29.  or  else  how  can  ime  enter  into  a  strong 
man's  house,  ami  n.  his  goods?  Mark  3.  27. 
Ci?I.2.8.bcwarelehtanv  man  s.you  thro'  philosophy 

SPOILED. 
Of.v.  34. 27.  the  sons  of  Jncoh  came  and  s.  the  city 

29.  they  «.  all  that  was  in  Ilnmor's  house 
Ezod.  12.  36.  and  Ihey  .'.  the  Egyptians 
Dent.  28.  29.  thou  shalt  bo  only  oppressnd  and  .«. 
Jxidg.  2.  14.  into  the  hand  of  apoilers  thai  s.  them 

16.  out  of  the  hand  of  those  that  «.  them 

1  .Sam.  14. 4H.  delivered  Isr.  from  them  that  a.  ihem 
17.  53.  and  they  s.  the  PhiiislincH'  Innis 

2  fCinvs  7.  16.  Israi'l  s.  the  tents  of  the  Syrinns 
2  Chrnv.  14.  14.  Asa  s.  all  thi'  cities  of  Gorar 
hb  12.  17.  ho  Icadeih  oounscllorB  away  ». 

574 


SPO 

Job  12.19.  leads  prlnce»  aways.  overthrowg  mighty 
Fsal.  76.5.  the  stout-hearted  ares,  they  have  slept 
Fruu.22.23.  and  spoil  the  soul  of  those  that  s.  tliem 
/.vu.l3.16.tiieir  houses  shall  bes.theirwivesravished 
18.  2.  a  nation  whose  land  the  rivers  have  s.  7. 

24.  3.  the  land  shall  be  utterly  empli'd  and  s. 

33. 1.  woe  to  thee  that  spoilesi,  and  wast  not  s. 
42.  22.  but  this  is  a  people  robbed  and  s. 

Jer.  2.  14.  is  Israel  a  servant  ?  why  is  he  s.  ? 

4.  13.  woe  unto  us,  for  we  are  s. 

20.  for  whole  land  is  s.  suddenly  my  tents  are  s. 

30.  and  when  thou  arts,  what  wilt  thou  do? 
9.  19.  how  are  we  s.  ?  ||  10.  20.  my  tabernacle  iss. 
21.  12.  and  deliver  him  that  is  s.  22.  3. 

25.  36.  for  the  Lord  hath  s.  their  pasture 

48.  1.  Nebo  is  s.  ||  15.  Moab  is  s.  and  gone,  20. 

49.  3.  howl,  for  Ai  is  s.  ||  10.  Esau,  his  seed  is  s. 
51.  5.5.  because  the  Lord  hath  s.  Babylon 

Eiek.  18.  7.  and  hath  s.  none  by  violence,  16. 
12.  hath  oppressed,  hath  s.  by  violence,  18. 

23.  46.  I  will  give  them  to  be  removed  and  s. 

39.  10.  they  shall  s|)oil  those  that  s.  them 
Hos.  10.  14.  and  all  Ihy  fortresses  shall  be  s. 
Jimos  3.  11.  and  thy  palaces  shall  be  s. 

5.  9.  that  strenglheneth  ihe  s.  against  the  strong 
Mic.  2.  4.  shall  lament,  and  say,  we  be  utterly  s. 
Hab.  2.  6.  because  thou  hast  s.  many  nations 
Zich..  2.  8.  he  sent  me  to  the  nations  which  s.  you 

11.2.  howl,  because  the  mighiy  ares. 

3.  their  glory  is  *.  for  the  pride  of  Jordan  is  s. 
Col.  2.  15.  and  having  s.  principalities  and  powers 

SPOILEK. 
/sa. 16.4. bethou  acovertfrom  face  ofs.thes.ceaseth 
21.  2.  the  s.  spoileth,  go  up,  O  Elani ;  besiege 
Jer.  6.26.  for  Ihe  s.  shall  suddenly  come  on  us 
15.  8.1  have  brought  upon  them  as.  at  noon-day 
48.  8.  the  s.  shall  come  upon  every  city 
18.  for  the  s.  of  Moab  shall  come  upon  thee 
32.  the  s.  is  fallen  upon  Ihy  summer  fruits 
51.  56.  because  the  s.  is  come  upon  Babylon 
SPOILERS. 
Judg.  2. 14.  anger  of  Ihe  Lord  was  hoi,  and  he  deli- 
vered them  into  Ihe  hand  of  thes.  2  A'higs  17.20. 
1  .Sam.  13. 17.  thes.  cameout  of  camp  of  Philistines 
14.  15.  the  garrison  and  the  s.they  also  trembled 
./cr.  12.  12.  the  s.  are  come  upon  all  high  places 
51.  48.  for  Ihe  s.  shiill  come  to  her  from  thenorth 
53.  yet  from  me  shall  s.  come  lo  her,  eaith  Lord 
SPOILEST. 
/sa.33.1.woe  to  theethat.?.iind  thouwast  not  spoiled 

SPOILETH. 
Psal.  35. 10.  who  deliverest  needy  from  him  that  s. 
/.«a.21.2.the  spoilers.  {|  A/«s.  7.1. troop  of  robbers  s. 
jVah.  3.  16.  the  canker  worm  .■}.  and  Uieth  away 

SPOILING. 
Psal.  35. 12.  me  evil  lor  good,  to  thes.  of  my  soul 
/.•;a.22.4.  because  of  thes.  of  the  daughter  of  people 
./rr.49.3.  a  voice  from  Horoiiaims.  and  destruction 
/fab.  1.  3.  for  s.  and  violence  are  before  me 
Neb.  10.  34. for  ye  took  joyfully  Ihe  s.  ofyour  goods 

SPOILS. 
.7osk.  7.  21.  I  saw  among  the  s.  a  goodly  garment 
1  Chron.  26.  27.  out  of  s.  in  battle  did  they  dedicate 
/."a.  25.  II.  shall  bring  down  their  pride  with  lltes. 
I.ukc]  1.22.he  taketh  iiis  armour  and  dividclh  his  s. 
Heb.  7.  4.  Abraham  gave  \\\<-  tenth  of  the  s. 

SPOKEN. 
^''71. 18. 19.  Lord  may  bring  what  he  hath  s.  of  him 
J^''um.  14. 28.  as  ye  have  s.  in  mine  ears,  so  will  I  do 
21.  7.  for  we  have  s.  against  the  Lord  and  thee 
23.  19.  hath  he  s.  and  shall  he  not  make  il  good? 
Dcut.  5. 28. 1  have  heard  the  words  Ihey  have  s.  to 
thee,  they  have  well  said  all  that  Ihey  haves. 
13.5.  b(tcau-e  he  hath  s.  tolurn  you  away  from  L. 
IH.  17.  they  have  well  s.  that  which  Ihey  have  s. 

1  .Sam.  25.  30.  the  Lord  bath  done  all  he  hath  s. 

2  .Sam  2.27.  unless  thou  hudsts.peoplehad  gone  up 
14.  19.  turn  from  ought  my  lord  Ihe  king  hath  s.' 

17.  6.  Ahithophel  liaih  s.  after  this  manner 

1  Kitiirs  2.  23.  if  Adonijah  have  not  s.  this  word 
12.  9.  what  counsel  give  ye,  that  we  may  answer 

Ihis  people  who  have  s.  lo  me?  2  Ckr.  10.  9. 

18.  24.  and  all  Ihe  people  said,  it  is  w(dl  s. 

2  King.i  4. 13.  wouldest  thou  be  s.  for  to  the  king? 
.fob  33.  2.  behold,  my  longiie  hath  s.in  my  mouth 

34.a5.  Job  hath  .«.  without  knowledge  and  wisdom 
42.  7.  ye  have  not  x.  of  me  as  my  servant  Job,  8. 

Psal.  66.  14.  my  mouth  halh.*.  when  in  trouble 
87.  .3.  glorious  things  are  s.  of  thee,  O  city  of  God 
109.2.  they  have  s.  agninsl  me  with  alyingtongue 

/'ro«.15.2.3.  a  word  s.  in  due  season, how  good  isit ! 
25.  II.  a  word  filly  s.  is  like  apples  of  gold 

Er.ct.  7.  21.  take  no  heed  lo  nil  words  that  are  S. 

Cnnt.  8.  8.  in  the  day  when  she  shall  bo  s.  for 

ha  23.  4.  for  the  sea  hnlh  s.  H  38.  15.  ho  hath  a. 
.59.  3.  your  hands  are  defiled,  your  lips  haves,  lies 

Jrr.  2fi.  16.  he  hath  ».  lo  us  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
29.  23.  and  have  s.  lying  words  in  my  name 
33  21.considerostthou  nolwhni  this  people  haves. 
44.23.ye  and  your  wiv'es  have«.\«ith  your  mouthi 


SPO 

EitK  l3.  7.  have  ye  not  s.  a  griiig  divlnatloit 
8.  because  ye  have  s.  vanity,  and  seen  lies 
Dan.  4.3I.O  king  Nebuchadnezzar,  totheeilisj 
Hos.  7.  13.  yet  they  have  s.  lies  against  me 
10.  4.  they  have  s.  words,  swearing  falsely 
JImus  5.  14.  Lord  shall  be  with  you,  as  ye  have  s 
OAad.l2.norshouldest  thou  haves.proudly  indislr 
Mic.  6.  12.  the  inhabitants  thereof  have  s.  Wet 
Ztc.  10.  2.  for  Ihe  idols  have  .s'.  vanity  and  divinert 
Mai.  3.  13.  what  have  wes.so  much  against  thee? 
JV/at.26. 65.high  priest  saying,  he  haths.  blasphemy 
Mark  14.  9.  shall  be  s.  of  for  a  memorial  of  her 
Luke  2.33. marvelled  at  things  which  were  s.  of  him 

34.  and  for  a  sign  which  shall  be  s.  against 

12.  3.  what  ye  have  s.  in  darkness,  what  s.  in  ear 

18.  34.  nor  knew  they  the  things  which  were  s. 
John  15.  22.  if  I  had  not  come  and  s.  to  them         ' 
.9c<s  3.24.  as  many  as  have  s.  foretold  of  these  day3 

8.  24.  none  of  these  things  ye  have  s.  come  on  me 
13.40.  lest  that  come  on  you  s.  of  in  Ihe  propheia 
46.  the  word  should  first  have  been  s.  lo  you 
16.  14.  Lydia  attended  to  the  Ihing.s  that  were  s. 

19.  36.  seeing  that  these  things  cannot  bes.  again*! 
23.  9.  but  if  a  spirit  or  angel  huth  s.  to  him 

27.  11.  more  than  those  things  that  weres.  byPau. 

35.  when  had  thus  s.  took  bread  and  gave  thanks 

28.  22.  we  know  that  every  where  it  is  s.  against 
Rvm.  1.  8.  your  faith  iss.  of  thro'  Ihe  whole  world 

4. 18.  according  to  that  which  was  s.  so  thy  seed  ba 

14.  16.  let  not  then  your  good  be  evil  s.  of 

15.  21.  to  whom  he  was  not  s.  of  they  shall  see 

1  Cor.  10.  30.  wliy  am  I  evil  s.  of  for  that  for  which 

14.  9.  how  shall  it  be  known  what  is  s.  ? 

Heb.  1.2.  hath  in  these  last  days  s.to  us  by  hisSoa 

2.  2.  for  if  the  word  s.  by  angels  was  steadfast 

3.  5.  for  a  testimony  of  those  things  to  be  s.  afler 
4.8.he  would  not  afterward  have  s.  of  another  day 

7.  13.  for  he  of  whom  ihese  things  ares.  pertainetl» 

8.  1.  of  things  which  we  have  s.  this  is  the  sum 
12.]9.intreated  the  word  should  not  be  s.any  more 

13.  7.  who  have  s.  unto  you  the  word  of  God 

1  Pet.  4.  14.  on  their  part  he  is  evil  s.  of 

2  Pet.  2.  2.  Ihe  way  of  truth  shall  be  evil  s.  of 
3.2.  ye  may  be  mindful  of  worrls  which  weres.bef. 

Jude  IS.which  ungodly  sinners  have  s.  against  him 
17.  remember  the  words  which  were  s.  before 
SPOKEN  with  God,  expressly. 
Oen.  21.  2.  at  set  time  of  which  God  hads.tohiras 
i>^«t.26.  19.  a  holy  pec^letoihy  G.  as  he  hath  s. 
Psal.  60.  6.  God  hath  s.  in  his  holiness,  108.  7. 
62.  11.  God  halh  s.  once,  twice  have  I  heard 
Mat.  22.  31.  that  which  was  s.  to  you  by  God 
Jicts  3.  21.  which  God  hath  s.  by  his  holy  prophets 
See  Lord. 
Thave,  or  kavc  I  SPOKEN. 
Gen.  28.  15.  I  have  done  which  I  have  s.  tothsd 
41.  28.  this  is  Ihe  thing  I  have  s.  lo  Pharaoh 
Exod.  .32.  1,3.  all  this  lan<l  I  have  s.  of  will  I  give 

34.  lead  people  to  the  place  of  which  /  have  s. 
1  Sam.  1.  16.  out  of  my  grief  Aaof  Is.  hitherto 
3.  12.  perform  ag.  Eli  all  things  which  /  have  s. 

20.  23.  as  touching  the  matter  which  /  have  s. 
.fob  21.  3.  and  after  that  I  haves,  mock  on 

40.  5.  once  have  Is.  but  I  will  not  answer 
Psal.  116.10. 1  will  walk  before  L.  inland  of  living, 
I  believed  therefore  haie  Is.?  2  Cor.  4.  13. 
Isa.  45.  19.  I  have  not  s.  in  secret,  48.  16. 
46.  11.  I  have  a.  il,  I  will  also  bring  it  lo  pass 
48.  15.  /,  even  I,  have  s.  yea  I  have  called  him 
./rr.  4.  28.  Ih.  s.  il,  I  have  proposed  it,  will  not  rep. 
23.  21.  I  have  not  s.  lo  Ihem  yet  they  prophesied 
25.3.  Ih.s.  to  your  rising  early, and  6|ieaking,35.]4. 
30.  2.  write  thee  all  words  I  have  s.  lo  thee,  36.  2 

35.  17.  because  /Aajics.  but  they  have  not  heard 
pzrk.  12.28.  but  word  which  Ihaves.  shall  be  done 

13.  7.  ye  say.  Lord  saith  it,  albi'il  I hane  not  s. 
26.  5.  "for  /  have  s.  il,  saith  the  Lord,  28.  10. 

36.  5.  surely  in  Ihe  fire  of  my  jealousy  kove  Is.  6. 
38.  17.  art  thou  he  of  whom  I  have  s.  in  old  time 

19.  for  in  jeahuisy  and  fire  of  my  wrath  have  Is. 

39.8.  it  is  come,  this  is  the  day  whereof /Aare  s. 

Hos.  12.  10.  I  have  also  a.  by  Ihe  prophets 

.fohn  12.  4H.  Ihe  word  that  /Aare.?.  shall  judge  hira 

49.  fur  I  hare  not  a.  of  myself  but  the  Father 

14.2,5.  Ihese  things  Aare  Is.  15.  II.  1  16.  1,25,33. 

15.  3.  ye  are  clean  thro' the  word  /Aaoc  s.  loyou 
18. 23.  if/ Aauc  a.  evil,  hear  witness  of  Ihe  evil 

Had  SPOKEN. 
Gen.  44.  2.  according  lo  the  word  Joseph  had  a. 
.Winn.  23.  2.  and  fialak  did  as  liiilniim  had  a. 
1  h'ings  13.  II.  told  father  words  he  Am/ s.  to  king 

21.  4.  which  Naboth  the  Jezreelite  had  a.  tp  him 
2A7n£'sl.l7.accordingtoword  which  Elijah  Aad a. 

7.  18.  it  came  lo  pass  as  the  man  of  God  had  a. 
K:ro8.  22.  because  we  Anrf  s.  unto  the  king 
.VfA.  2.  18. 1  told  also  king's  words  that  ho  had  a. 
Esth.  7.  9.  Morderai,  whoAni/s  sood  for  the  king 
■  Job  32.  4.  now  Elihu  had  wnil.d  till  Job  Aarf  s. 
Jrr  36.  4.  Barurh  wrol?  words  L.  had  s.  by  Jercm 
Van.  Id  II  and  when  be  Aad  t.  this  word  to  me 


SPO 

Don.  10. 15.  when  he  had  g.  words,  I  became  dumb 
19.  when  he  had  s.  unto  me,  I  waB  strengthened 
Mark  lAi.aa  scon  as  he  had  a. the  leprosy  departed 
12.  12.  for  they  knew  that  he  had  s.  the  parable 
against  lliem,  and  they  left  him,  Luke  20.  19. 
I.uke  19. 28.  when  he  had  thus  s.  24. 40.  John  9. 6. 
I  11.  43.  I  IS.  22.  Jicts  ID.  41.  |  20.  ,36.  |  26.  30. 
Jbhn  4.50.  the  man  believed  word  that  Jesus  hads. 
11.  13.  they  thought  he  had  s.  of  taking  rest 
21.  19.  when  he  had  s.  this,  he  eaith,  follow  me 
.ficts9.27.Barnabas  declared  that  heAaiii. unto  him 
28.  25.  departed,  after  Paul  had  s.  one  Word 
Ueb.9. 19.  when  Moses  Aad«.  every  precept  topeo. 

SPOKEN  with  prophet. 

Deut.  18.22.  but  prupAct  hath  s.  it  presumptuously 

Ezek.  14.  9.  if  prophet  be  deceived  when  he  hath  s. 

Jlfut.2.17.whal  was5.  by.Icremy  the/>ropfte(,27. 9. 

23.  that  it  might  be  fulfilled  which  was  *.  by  the 

prophet,  be  called  a  Nazarene,  13.  35.  |  27.  35. 

3.  3.  this  is  he  that  was  s.  of  by  tboprophet  Esaias 

4.  14.  that  it  might  be  fulfilled  which  was  s.  by 

Esaias  the  prophet,  8.  17.  |  12.  17.  ]  21.  4. 

24. 15.  when  ye  shall  see  the  abomination  of  deso- 
lation s.ofby  Daniel  thepropAct,  Mark  13.14. 

/>uJte24.  25.  to  believe  all  that  the  prop  Acf.5  have  j. 
^cts  2.  16.  this  was  s.  of  by  the  prophet  Joel 
Jam.5. 10.  take,  my  brethren,  propActs  who  have  .s. 

Thou  hast  SPOKEN. 
Oen.  19.  21 .  this  city  for  the  which  thou  hast  s. 
F.zod.  4.  10.  nor  since  thou  hast  s.  to  thy  servant 

10.  29.  Moses  said,  thou  hast  s.  well,  not  see 

3S.  17.  I  will  do  this  thing  that  thou  hast  s. 
JVum. 14.17.  power  of  Lord  be  great,  as  thou  hast  s . 
Deut.  1.  14.  the  thing  which  thou  hast  s.  is  good 
Ruth^-l^.thouhasts.  friendly  to  thine  handmaid 
S  Sam. 6. 22.  the  maid-servants  which  tliou  hasts.  of 

7.  19.  but  thou  hast  s.  also  of  thy  servant's  house 
for  a  great  while  to  come,  25.  1  Chr.  17. 17,  23. 
2^171^5  20.  19.  then  said  Hezekiah  to  Isaiah,  good 
is  the  word  of  Lord  which  thou  hast  s.  Isa.39.8. 
Esth.  6. 10.  let  nothing  fail  of  all  that  thou  hast  s 
Job  33.  8.  surely  thou  hast  s.  in  my  hearing 
Jer.  3.  5.  behold,  thou  hast  s.  and  done  evil  things 

32.  24.  and  that  which  thou  hast  s.  is  come  to  pass 

44. 16.  a.a  for  the  word  which  thou  hast  s.  unto  us 
51.  62.  O  Lord,  thou  hast  s.  against  this  place 

Ezek.  35. 12.  I  have  heard  blasphemies  thou  hast  s 

SPOKES. 
1  Kings  7.  33.  their  felloes  and  s.  were  all  molten 

SPOKESMAN. 
Exod.  i.  16.  he  shall  be  thy  s.  unto  the  people 

SPOON. 
JVuwt.  7.  14.  one  s.  of  ten  shekels  of  gold,  full  of 
incense,  20,  26,  32,  38,  44,  50,  56,  62. 
SPOONS. 
Exod.  25.  29.  make  the  dishes  thereof  and  s. 
37.  16.  he  made  his  dishes  and  his  s.  and  bowls 
\'um.  4.  7.  and  put  thereon  the  dishes  and  the  s. 
7.  84.  twelve  silver  bowls,  twelve  s.  of  gold,  86. 

1  Kings!.  50.  the  s.  were  of  pure  gold,  2  Chr.  4.22. 
i  Kings  25.  14.  the  s.  took  he  away,  Jer.  52. 18, 19. 
i  Chron.  24. 14.  of  rest  of  the  money  s.  were  made 

SPORT. 
^udn'.16.25.thatSams.  mny  makes,  and  he  mades. 
27.  thousands  that  beheld  while  Samson  made  s. 
Prov.  10.  23.  it  is  s.  to  a  fool  to  do  mischief 
21.  t  17.  he  that  loveth  s.  shall  be  a  poor  man 
26. 19.  that  deceiveth  and  saith,  am  not  1  in  s.? 

SPORT. 
Tsa.  57.  4.  against  whom  do  ve  s.  yourselves  1 

SPORTING. 
Oen.  26.  8.  Isaac  was  s.  with  Rebekah  his  wife 

2  Pet.  2. 13.  s.  themselves  with  theirowndcceivings 

SPOT. 
J^um.  19.  2.  bring  thee  a  red  heifer  wilhout  s. 
28.  3.  two  lambs  without  s.  9. 11.  |  29.  17,26. 
Deut.  32.  5.  their  s.  is  not  the  s.  of  his  children 
Job  11.  15.  thou  shalt  lift  up  thy  face  without  s. 
tant.  4.  7.  ihou  art  all  fair,  there  is  no  s.  in  thee 
EpA.  5.  27.  a  glorious  church,  not  having  s. 
1  Tim.  6.  14.  keep  this  commandment  without  s. 
Heh.  9. 14.  who  ofT.'red  himself  without  s.  to  God 

1  Pet.  1.  19.  .-IS  of  a  lamb  without  s.  or  blemish 

2  Pet.  3.  14.  that  ye  may  be  found  without  s. 

See  Brioht. 

SPOTTED. 

G'«n.30. 32.  removing  from  thence  all  thes.  cattle 

33.  everv  one  that  is  not .?.  shall  be  counted  stolen 

39.  the  flocks  brought  forth  cattle  speckled  and  .«. 

Jude  23.  haling  even  the  garment  s.  by  the  flesh 

SPOTS. 
Jer.  13.  23.  or  can  the  leopard  change  his  s.? 
2  Pet.  2.  13.  s.  they  are  and  blemishoa,  sporting 
Jude  12.  these  are  s.  in  your  feasts  of  charity 

SPOUSE. 
Cant.  4.  S.  come  with  me  from  Lebanon,  my  s. 

9.  thou  hast  ravished  my  heart,  my  sister,  my  s. 

10.  how  fi'ir  is  thy  love,  my  sister,  my  s. 

11.  thy  lips,  O  my  s.  drop  as  the  honeycomb 

12.  a  garden  inclosed  is  my  sister,  my  ». 

575 


SPR 

Cant.  5. 1.  am  come  into  my  garden,  my  sister,  my  t. 

SPOUSES. 
Hos.  4.  13.  and  your  »-.  shall  commit  adultery 
14.  I  will  (lot  punish  your  s.  when  they  commit 
SPOUTS.     .See  Water-spouts. 
SPRANG. 
Mark  4.  8.  and  did  yield  fruit  that  s.  up,  Luke  8. 8. 
Jlcts  16.  29.  then  he  called  for  a  light  and  s.  in 
Heb.  7. 14.  for  it  is  evident  our  Lord  s.  out  of  Juda 
11. 12.  therefore  there  s.  of  one  so  many  as  the  stars 
See  Sprung. 
SPREAD. 
^en.33.19.  field  where  Jacob  had  s.  his  tent,  35. 21. 
Lcv.l3.  5.  and  the  plague  s.  nolin  the  skin,  6,23,28. 

32.  and  behold,  if  the  scall  s.  not,  34. 
35.  but  if  the  scall  s.  much  in  the  skin,  36. 
51.  if  the  plague  be  s.  in  a  garment,  14.  39,  44. 
53.  and  if  the  plague  be  not  s.  55.  |  14.  48. 

JVum. 4.7.  on  the  table  they  shall «.  cloth  of  blue,  1 1 . 

8.theyshaIls.ascarletcloth  ||  13.  s. a  purple  cloth 

14.  they  shall  s.  on  it  a  covering  of  badgers'  skins 

Deut.  22. 17.  s.  the  cloth  before  the  elders  of  city 

Judg.  8.25.  they  s.  a  garment,  and  oast  in  ear-rings 

15.  9.  then  the  Philistines  s.  themselves  in  Lehi 

1  .Sam.  4.  t  2.  and  when  the  battle  was  s. 

2  Sam.  5. 18.  the  Philistines  also  came  and  s.  them- 
selves in  valley  of  Rephaim,  22. 1  Chr.  14.9, 13. 

16.  22.  they  s.  Absalom  a  tent  on  top  of  the  house 

17.  19.  woman  s.  a  covering  on  the  well's  mouth 

21.  10.  Rizpah  s.  sackcloth  for  her  on  the  rock 

1  Kings  6. 32.  carved  upon  them  carvings  of  cheru- 
binis,  and  s.  gold  upon  cherubims  and  palm-trees 

8.  54.  he  arose,  with  his  hands  s.  up  to  heaven 

2  Kings  8.  15.  Hazael  s.  a  thick  cloth  on  his  face 
19.  14.  s.  the  letter  before  the  Lord,  Isa.  37.  14. 

Psal.  105.  39.  he  s.  a  cloud  for  a  covering 
140.  5.  they  have  s.  a  not  by  the  way-side 
Prov.  1. 17.  surely  in  vain  net  is  s.  in  sight  of  bird 
Isa.  14. 11.  worm  is  s.  under  thee,  worms  cover  thee 

19. 8.  they  that «.  nets  on  the  waters  shall  languish 
33.23.  they  could  not  .s.  the  sail,  lame  lake  the  prey 
58.  5.  and  to  s.  sackcloth  and  ashes  under  him 

Jer.  8.  2.  and  they  shall  s.  them  before  the  sun 

10.9.  silvers,  into  plates  is  brought  from  Tarshisli 
Aam. 1.13.he baths,  net  for  my  feet,  turned  me  back 
Ezek.  2.  10.  and  he  s.  the  roll  before  me 

12.  13.  my  net  also  will  I  s.  upon  him,  17.  20. 

26.  14.  Ihou  shall  be  a  place  to  s.  nets  upon 
//o.s.5.1.  because  ye  have  been  a  nets,  upon  Tabor 

7. 12.  when  they  shall  go,  1  will  s.  my  net  on  them 

14. 6.  hi.=  branches  shall  s.  his  beauty  as  olive-tree 
./oel  2.  2.  as  the  morning  .?.  upon  the  mountains 
Hab.  1.  8.  their  horsemen  shall  s.  themselves 
Mai.  2.  3.  behold,  I  will  s.  dung  upon  your  faces 
Mat.  21.  8.  and  a  very  great  multitude  s.  their  g.ir 
ments  in  the  way,  Mark  11.  8.  Luke  19.  .36. 
Mcts  4.17.  but  that  it  s.no  I'urther  among  the  people 

SPREAD  abroad. 
Oen  lO.lS.familiesoflheCanaanites  weres.aJroad 

28.  14.  thou  shalt  s.  abroad  to  the  west  and  east 
Exod.  9.  29. 1  will  s.  abroad  my  hands  to  the  Lord 

33.  Moses  s.  abroad  his  hands  to  the  Lord 
40.  19.  he  s.  abroad  the  tent  over  the  tabernacle 

Lev.  13.  7.  but  if  the  scab  .t.  much  abroad,  22,  27. 
JVum.11.32.  they  .?.  abr.  the  quails  round  the  camp 

1  .Sam.  .30.  16.  they  were  s.  abroad  8n  the  earth 

2  .Snm.22.43. 1  did  stamp  and  s.  abr.  mine  enemie: 

1  Chron.  14.13.  the  Philistines  s.  themselves  abroad 

2  Chron.  26.  8.  Uzziah's  name  s.  abroad,  15 
Zech.  1. 17. .my  cities  thro'  prosperity  be  s.  abroad 

2.  6.  I  have  s.  you  abroad  as  the  four  winds 
Mat.  9.  31.  but  they  when  departed  s.  abroad  his 
fame  in  all  that  country,  Mark  1.  28.  |  6. 14. 
I  Thess.  1.  8.  your  faith  to  God-ward  is  s.  abroad 

SPREAD  forth. 
JVum.  24.  6.  as  valleys  are  they  s.  forth  as  gardens 
1  Kings  8. 7.  the  cherubims  s.  forth  their  two  wings 

22.  Solomon  s.  forth  his  hands,  2  Chron.  6. 12,13. 
38.  know  the  plague  of  his  own  heart,and  s.  forth 

his  hands  toward  this  house,  2  Chr.  6.  29. 
/sa.1.15.  when  you  s.  forth  your  hands,  I  will  hide 
25.11.  ho  shall  s. firth  hands, as  he  thatswimmclh 
42.  5.  thus  saith  God,  he  that  s.  forth  the  earth 
Ezek^  47.  10.  they  shall  be  a  place  to  s.  forth  nets 

SPREAD  over. 
JV)im.4.6.  they  shall  s.oocr  it  a  cloth  wholl5'of  blue 
Ruth^.9.  .I.  therefore  thy  skirt  ourr  thine  hand  ma  id 
Tsa.  25.  7.  and  the  vail  that  is  s.  over  all  nations 
./rr.  43. 10.  he  shall  s.  his  royal  pavilion  over  them 

48.  40.  and  he  shall  .■!.  his  wings  over  Moab 

49.  22.  and  he  shall  s.  his  wings  aver  Bozrah 
F.zek.  16. 8. 1  s.  my  skirt  over  thee  ai<d  covered  thy 

19.  8.  then  the  nations  s.  their  net  over  him 

SPREAO  out. 
Exod.  37.  9.  cherubims  s.  out  wings,  1  Chr.  2^.  18. 
Ezra  9.  .5.  I  s.  out  my  hands  to  the  Lord  my  God 
.Tnb  29.  19.  my  root  was  s.  out  bv  the  waters 

37.  18.  hast  Ihou  with  him  s.  out  the  sky? 
Tsa.  4*^.  1 13.  palm  of  my  hand  hath  s.  out  heaven 

65. 2.  have  «.  out  my  hands  to  a  rebellious  people 


SPR 

Lam.  1.  10.  the  adversary  hath  s.  ovt  his  hand 
E2cA.  32. 3. 1  will  therefore.?,  out  my  net  over  the* 

SPUEADEST. 
Ezek.Tl.  7.  fine  linen  which  thou  s. forth  for  thy  sail 

SPREADETll. 
/,f».  13.  8.  if  the  priest  see  that  scab.?,  in  theskio 
Deut.  32.  II.  as  an  eagle  s.  abroad  her  wings 
•fob  9.  8.  God  who  alone  s.  out  the  heavens 

20.  9.  and  he  s.  his  cloud  upon  it 

30.  30.  behold,  he  s.  his  light  upon  it,  and  covereth 

41.  .30.  he  s.  sharp-pointed  things  on  the  mire 
Prov.19. 5  a  man  that  flattereth  his  neighb.  s.  a  net 
Isa.  25. 11.  as  he  that  swimmeth  s.  forth  his  hands 

40.  19.  and  the  goldsmith  s.  it  over  with  gold 
22.  that  s.  the  heavens  as  a  lent  to  dwell  in 

44.  24. 1  the  Ld.  that  s.  abroad  the  earth  by  myself 
Jer.  4.  31.  the  daughter  of  Zion  s.  her  hands 

17.  8.  a  tree  that  s.  out  her  roots  by  the  river 
jLam.l.n.Zions.  forth  her  hands,  none  comforther 

SPREADING. 
Lev.  13.  57.  and  if  it  appears,  it  is  a  s.  plague 
Psal.  37.  35.  I  have  seen  the  wicked  s.  himself 
Ezek.  17.  6.  and  it  grew,  and  became  a  s.  vine 

SPREADING. 
Ezek.  26.  5.  it  shall  be  a  place  for  the*,  of  nets 

SPREADINGS. 
^04.36.29.  can  any  understand  thes.  of  the  cloudsl 

SPRIGS. 
Isa,  18.  5.  for  afore  harvest  he  shall  cut  off  the  a 
Ezek.  17.  6.  it  became  a  vine,  and  shot  forth  ». 

SPRING. 
2  Kings  2.  21.  he  went  forth  to  the  s.  of  the  wateri 
Prot). 25.26.  is  as  a  troubled  fountain  and  corrupt* 
Cant.  4.  12.  my  sister,  my  spouse,  is  a  s.  shut  op 
A«a.58.11.shaltbelike  s.of  water,whose  waters  fail 
i/os.]3.15.hiss.Bhal!  become  dry  and  fountain  dried 

SPRINGS. 
Deut.  4.  49.  to  the  plain  under  the  s.  of  Pisgah 
.Tosh.yO.  40.  Joshua  smote  all  the  country  of  the  s. 
12.  8.  the  kings  in  the  plains  and  in  the  s. 
15.19.give  mes.of  water,gavc  her  op.s.Judg.l.'Hi. 
.lob  38.  16.  hast  thou  entered  into  the  s.  of  the  seaJ 
Psal.  87.  7.  all  my  s.  are  in  thee 
104.  10.  he  sendeth  the  s.  into  the  valleys 
107.  33.  he  turneth  the  water  s.  into  dry  ground 
35.  he  turneth  dry  ground  into  water  s. 
Isa.  .35.7.  and  the  thirsty  land  become  s.  of  water 
•41.  18.  I  will  make  the  dry  land  s.  of  water 
49.  10.  even  by  the  s.  of  water  shall  he  guide  them 
./cr.51.36. 1  will  dry  up  her  sea  and  make  hers,  dry 

SPRING. 

IS'am.g.  26.  about  s.of  the  day  Samuel  called  Saul 

See  'D\Y-spring. 

SPRING. 

Ezek.  17. 9.  it  shall  wither  in  all  the  leaves  of  her  «. 

SPRING. 
JVum.  21. 17.  Israel  sang,  .?.  up,  O  well,  sing  ye  to  it 
DeiU.8.7.  and  depths  that  s.  out  of  valleys  and  hills 
Judg.l9.25.v/her\  the  daybeganlos. theylet  hergo 
.lob  5.  6.  neither  doth  trouble  s.  out  of  the  ground 
38.  27.  to  cause  bud  of  the  tender  herb  to  s.  forth 
P.fal.  85.  11.  truth  shall  s.  out  of  the  earth 
92.  7.  when  the  wicked  s.  as  the  grass 
Isa.  42.  9.  before  they  s.  forth,  I  tell  you  of  them 
4.3. 19.  I  will  do  a  new  thing,  now  it  shall  s.  forth 
44. 4. they  shall  s.up  as  among  the  grass,  as  willows 

45.  8.  and  let  righteousness  .?.  up  together 
58.  8.  and  thine  health  shall  s.  forth  speedily 
CI. 11.  as  snrden  causeth  things  that  are  sown  to  ,«. 

Lord  will  cause  praise  to  s.  forth  before  nationi 
.Joel  2.  22.  be  not  afraid,  for  the  pastures  do  s. 
Mark  4.  27.  the  seed  should  .s.  he  knoweth  not  how 
SPRINGETH.  • 

1  Kings  4.  33.  even  to  hyssop  that,?,  out  of  the  wall 

2  Kings  19. 29.  ye  shall  eat  in  the  second  year  that 

which  s.  of  same,  and  in  third  sow,  fsa.'ST.ZO. 
Hos.  10.  4.  thus  judsment  .<i  up  as  hemlock  in  field 

SPRINGING. 
Psal.  65.  10.  thou  blestest  the  .«.  thereof 

SPRINGING. 
Orn.  26.  19.  they  found  there  a  well  of.?,  water 
2  .Sa7n.  23.  4.  as  the  tender  gr.ass."?.  out  of  the  earth 
.fnhn  4.  14.  shall  be  in  him  a  well  of  water  s.  up 
//fi.  12. 15.  lest  any  root  of  bittern,  s.  up  trouble  you 

SPRINKLE. 

F,Tod.9.  K  let  Mosps  s.  the  ashes  toward  the  heaven 

f^rr.  H.  7.  he  shall  s.  on  him  Ihit  is  to  be  clcnnsea 

16.  the  priest  shall  s.  of  the  oil  with  his  finger 

27.  priest  shall  s.  of  the  oil  with  his  right  finger 

51.  and  shall  s.  the  house  seven  times 

16. 14.  he  shall  .■?.  on  the  mercy  seat  east-ward,  15 

JViim.  8.  7.  ».  water  of  purifying  upon  them 

19. 18.  shall  s.  it  upon  the  tent,  and  all  the  vessels 

19.  (he  clean  person  shall  s.  it  on  the  unclonn 

Isa.m.  15.  RO  shall  he  ,?.  many  nations,  kings  shall 

F.zek.  36.  25.  then  will  I  s.  clean  water  upon  yog 

SPRINKLED. 
KTod.9.  10.  Moses  s.  the  ashes  up  toward  heaven 
JVum.  19.  13.  because  water  was  not  s.  on  him,  20 
Job  2. 12.  and  «.  dust  on  their  heads  toward  hearea 


STA 

Ita.  59.  fS.  that  which  is  ».  as  if  there  brake  out  a 
viper,  their  wehs  shall  not  become  garinenU 
Has.  7.  fO-  S^^y  hairs  are  s.  here  and  there 
Heb.  9.  19.  he  s.  both  the  book  and  all  the  people 
10.22.  having  our  hearts  s.  from  an  evil  conscience 
See.  Blood. 
SPRINKLETH. 
Lev.7. 14.it  shall  bo  the  priest's  that  s.  the  blood 
JVttm.  19.  21.  he  that  s.  the  water  of  separation 

SPR1NK.LING. 
/fei.tg.  13.  the  ashes  of  a  heifer  s.  the  unclean 
11.  28.  through  faith  he  kept  the  s.  of  the  blood 
12.24.  we  are  come  to  blood  of  .?.(hat  speaketh  bet. 

1  Pet.  1.  2.  and  the  s  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ 

SPROUT. 
Ji)6 14. 7.  there  is  hope  of  a  tree  that  it  will  s.  again 

SPRUNG. 
Oen.  41.  6.  seven  thin  ears  s.  up  afler  them,  23. 
L,ev.  13.  42.  it  is  a  leprosy  s.  up  in  his  bald  head 
Jlfat.4.16.thpm  who  sal  in  shad,  of  death,  light «.  up 
13.  5.  and  forthwith  they  s.  up,  Mark  4.  5. 
7.  the  thorns  s.  up  and  choked  them,  Luke  8.  7. 
26.  but  when  blade  was  s.  up  and  brought  forth 
Luke  8.  6.  as  soon  as  it  was  5.  up,  it  withered  away 

•  SPUE. 

Lev-is.  28.  that  the  land  .1.  you  not  out  also,  20.  22. 
Jer.  2.5.  27.  driiii;,  s-  and  fall,  and  rise  no  more 
liev.  3.  10.  so  then  I  will  s.  thee  out  of  my  mouth 

SPUED. 
LevAQ.  28.  as  it  s.  out  nations  that  were  before  you 

SPEWING. 
Hid.  2.  16.  and  shameful .?.  shall  be  on  thy  glory 

SPUN. 
i;iorf.35.2.'>. women  brought  that  which  they  had  s. 
35.  26.  and  all  the  women  .1.  goats'  hair 

SPUNGE. 
Jlfat.27.48.  one  of  them  took  a  .s.nnd  filled  it  with  vi- 
negar, gave  him  to  drink,  JlfarA  1.5.36../oAn  19.29. 
SPY. 
JVum.  13.  IR.  men  which  Moses  sent  to s.  land,  17. 
21.  32.  and  Moses  sent  to  s.  out  Janzer 
Josh.  2. 1.  Joshua  Rent  two  men  to  s.  secretly,  6. 2."). 
Judff.  18.  2.  the  Daniles  sent  to  .1.  the  land,  14,  17. 
2 Sam.  10.  3.  David  hath  sent  his  servants  to  s.  out 
the  city,  and  overthrow  it,  1  Chron.  19.  3. 
^  Kings  6.  13.  he  said,  go  and  s.  where  he  is 
Oal.  2.  4.  who  came  in  privily  to  s.  out  our  liberty 

SPIED. 
Eiod.  2.  11.  he  s.  an  Egyptian  smiting  a  Hebrew 
.Jo.ih.  C.  2-2.  two  men  that  had  s.  the  i-ountry 

2  rCinirsO.  17.  a  watchman.'!,  the  company  of  Jehu 
13.  21.  behold,  they  .t.  a  band  of  men 

23. 16.  he  s.  sepulelires  that  were  there  in  mount 
See  Espv,  Espied. 
SPIES. 
Ocn.  42.  9.  Joseph  said  to  them,  ye  are  s.  14,  16. 
II.  we  are  no  .9.  31.  ||  30.  the  man  took  u.^  fors. 
34.  then  shall  I  know  ye  are  no  s.  but  true  men 
AVm.  21.  1.  Israel  came  by  the  way  of  the  .?. 
Josk.  6.  23.  the  young  men  that  were  s.  went  in 
yudn-.  1.24.  the.?,  saw  a  man  come  out  of  the  city 
15am.2fi.4. David theref  sentouts.  and  understood 
2  Sam.  1.5. 10.  Absalom  sent  s.  thro'  tribes  of  Israel 
I.uke  20.  20.  they  watched  him  and  sent  forth  5. 
//ci. 11.31.  when  Raljnh  had  received  s.  with  peace 

SQUARE. 

1  h'lngiiT.a.n.W  doors  and  posts  were  .?.with  windows 

F.iek.  45.2.  ».  routid  about,  and  .50  cubits  round  ab. 

Sec  Foursquare. 

SQUARED. 

Eiek.  41.  21.  the  posts  of  the  temple  were  ». 

SQUARES. 

Etek.i^.m.  twelve  broad,  sijuare  in  four  s.  thereof 

17.  and  fourteen  broad  in  Ihir  four  s.  thereof 

STABILITY. 

/la.  33. 6.  knowledge  shall  be  the  ».  of  thy  times 

STABIiR,  SubHtanfive. 
Ezek.  25.  5.  I  will  mnke  Rahbah  a  s.  for  cameig 

STABLE. 
1  Chr.  16.  30.  world  also  sliall  be.i.  not  to  be  moved 

STAIILENESS. 
P$al.  37.  t3.  in  truth  and  it  thou  shall  be  fed 
See  EMTAni.TSH,  kd,  ktii. 
STACKS. 
Ezod.  22.  B.  to  that  tlin  .?.  of  corn  be  consumed 

STACTE. 
Thiit  Greek  wnrd  sianifirsthe  gum  that  ili.ttili 
from  the  myrrh- Irrc.i.  Wcises  upeaks  nf  atacte 
in  the  rnnmrralinn  nf  the  tlrutrs  that  were  to 
enter  into  the  compnuilinn  of  the  perfume, 
tcMch  wan  In  he  nfftrrd  in  the  hnly  plaee  upnn 
the  pnldrn  altar.  'Hie  Melirew  read.i  Netoph, 
mhir.h  ninnifirs  liquid  myrrh,  or  the  purest  ant 
noH  rnluahir  port  of  the  myrrh,  which,  a-t 
tome  think,  wan  hmnght  from  it  by  contusion. 
Some  take  it  for  balm. 
Eii>(f.30.31.tikc  to  thee  u  wpet  spiccs,  s.  and  onychn 

STAFF. 
Oen.  '.n  10.  with  mv  s.  I  pas«ed  ovnr  thii  Jordan 
38.  18.  ihe  laid,  five  me  thr  lignel  and  «.  35. 

in 


STA 

Exod.  12.  11.  oat  it,  with  your  s.  in  your  hand 
21. 19.  if  he  rise  again,  and  walk  abroad  on  hia«. 
JVum.  13.  23.  they  bare  grapes  between  two  on  a  «. 

22.  27.  Balaam  smote  the  ass  with  a  s. 
Judg.  C.  21.  Ihe  angel  put  forth  the  end  of  his  s. 

1  Sam.  17. 7.  the  ».  of  his  spear  was  like  a  weaver's 

beam, one  bare  a  shield  before  him,  2S'am.21.19. 
40.  David  took  his  s.  in  his  hand,  and  his  sling 

2  SaTO.3.29.1et  there  not  fail  one  that  leanelh  on  as. 

23.  7.  he  must  be  fenced  with  tlie  s.  of  a  spear 
21.  he  went  down  to  him  with  a  5.  1  C'Aron.11.23. 

2  icings 4. 29.  take  my  s.  lay  my  s.  op  child's  face 
31.  Gehazi  laid  the  s.  on  the  face  of  the  child 
18.21.  thou  truetest  on  s.  of  this  reed,  Isa-  30.  6. 
Psal.  23.  4.  thy  rod  and  thy  s.  they  comfort  me 
fsa.  3.  1.  the  Lord  will  lake  from  Judah  the  s. 

9.  4.  for  thou  hast  broken  the  ».  of  his  shoulder 

10.  5.  and  the  s.  in  their  hand  is  mine  indignation 
15.  or  as  if  the  s.  should  lilt  up  itself  as  no  wood 
24.  and  shall  lifl  up  his  s.  against  thee 

14.  5.  Ihe  Lord  hath  broken  the  s.  of  the  wicked 
28.  27.  but  the  fitches  are  beaten  out  with  a  s. 
.30.  32  in  every  place  where  grounded  s.  shall  pass 
./i?r_48.  17.  say,  how  is  the  strong  s.  broken 
KicA.29.0.  have  been  a  s.  of  reed  to  house  of  Israel 
f/os.  4.  12.  and  their  s.  declareth  unto  them 
y.ech-  8. 4.  every  man  with  his  s.  in  his  hand  for  age 

11.  10.  and  I  took  my  s.  even  beauty,  and  cut  it 

14.  then  I  cut  asunder  my  other  s.  even  bands 
Mark  0. 8.  take  nothing  for  joutiffty,  save  a  *.  only 
ffeb.l\.  21.  worshipped,  leaning  on  the  lop  of  his  s. 

I  .See  Bread. 

STAGGER. 
.Toh  12.  05.  to  s.  like  a  drunken  man,  Psal.  107. 27. 
Psal.  99.  1 1.  the  Lord  reigneth,  let  the  earth  s. 
Isa.  29.  9.  they  s.  but  not  with  strong  drink 

STAGGERED. 
Rom.  4.  20.  he  .».  not  at  the  promise  of  God 

STAGGERETH. 
Isa.  19.  14.  as  a  drunken  man  s.  in  his  vomit 

STAGGERING. 
1  .Sam.  25.  1 31.  that  this  shall  be  no  s.  unto  thee 

STAIN. 

.Tub  3.  5.  let  darkness  and  the  shadow  of  death  s.  it 

/.s(i.  23.  9.  Lord  purposed  to .«.  Ihe  pride  of  all  glory 

03.  3.  their  blood  sprinkled,  I  will  s.  my  raiment 

STAIRS. 

1  Kings  6.  8.  and  they  went  up  with  winding  s. 

2  Kings9.  13.  and  p\it  it  under  him  on  top  of  the  s. 
JVr/j.  9.  4.  then  stood  on  the  s.  Jeshua  and  Bani 
Cant-  2.  14.  that  art  in  the  secret  places  of  the  s. 
F.zek.  43.  17.  and  his  5.  shall  look  toward  the  east 
.^cts  21.  40.  Paul  stood  on  the  s.  and  beckoned 

STAKES. 
/9(i.  33.  20.  not  one  of  the. S-.  shall  ever  be  removed 
.54.  2.  lengthen  thy  cords  and  strengthen  thy  s. 

STALK. 
Ocn.  41.  5.  seven  rank  ears  came  up  on  one  s.  22. 
-Trr.  11.  1 19.  let  us  destroy  the  i.  with  his  bread 
Hos.  8.  7.  it  hath  no  .«.  the  bud  shall  yield  no  meal 

STALKS. 
./osh.  2.  6.  and  she  hid  fhern  with  the  s.  of  flax 

STALL. 
.ler.  46.  t21.  her  hired  men  like  bullocks  of.*. 
Jlmo.iG.  4.  ea^  the  calves  out  of  the  midst  of  the  s. 
Mai-  4.  2.  ye  shall  grow  up  as  calves  of  the  s. 
Luke  13.  15.  on  sabhnth  loose  his  ox  from  the  s. 

STALLS. 

1  Kings  4.  20.  Solomon  had  forty  thousand  .«.  of 

horses,  and  12,000  horsemen,  2  Chrun.  9.  25 

2  Qiron.  32.  28.  Hozekiah  had  s.  for  all  manner  of 

beasts,  and  coles  for  flocks 
//a6.3. 17.  although  there  shall  be  no  herd  in  the. 5. 

STALLED. 
Prov.  15.  17.  than  a  s-  ox  and  hatred  therewith 

STAMMERERS. 
Isa.  32.  4.  the  loniue  of  the  s.  shall  speak  plainly 

STAMMEIUNG. 

f.»n.28.11.  with  .1. lips  and  another  tongue  will  speak 

33.  19.  thou  shall  not  see  a  people  of  a  s.  tongni' 

STAMP. 

2. Sam.  22.  43.  Idid.i.  them  as  the  mire  of  the  street 

Eiek.  0.  11.  smile  with  thv  hand,  ».  with  thy  fool 

STAMPED. 
neut.9.  21.  I  .1.  Ihe  calf  and  ground  it  very  small 
2  Kings  23. 0.  Josiah  s.  the  grove  small  to  powder 

15.  s. high  places  small  to  powder  and  burnt  grove 
1  Chron.  15.  16.  Asa  cut  down  her  idol  and  s.  it 
Fiek.  25.  0.  because  thou  hast  s.  with  Ihe  feel 
Dan-  7. 7.  a  fourth  beast  s.  residue  with  the  feel,  19. 

8.  7.  Ihe  he-goat  cast  down  and  s.  upon  the  ram 

10.  it  cast  down  snrne  of  stars,  and  .».  upon  them 

STAMPING. 

./cr.47.3.  at  noise  of  the  .».  ofihe  hoofsof  the  horses 

STANCHED. 
I.uke  8.  44.  immodiately  woman's  issue  of  blood  s. 

STAND. 
F.zek-  29.  7.  thou  mailest  their  loinii  to  bo  at  a  s. 

STAND,  yrrb- 
BKod.  38.  KX  p*opl«  Mw  cloudy  pillar  $.  at  door 


STA 

Aev .27.14.  as  priest  shall  estimate  it,  seshall  it  «.i7 
JVum-  30.  4.  then  all  her  vows  shall  s.  5,  7,  11. 

12.  then  her  vows  or  bond  shall  nots.  her  huiibind 
Deut.  18.  5.  God  halh  chosen  him  lo  s.  to  minister 

25.8.  if  he  «.  lo  it,  and  say,  I  like  not  to  take  her 
./osh.  20.  4.  when  he  shall  »•.  al  entering  gale  of  cily 
I.Sam.  12.10.  now  j.  and  see  this  great  tiling  Ld.  will 

19.  3. 1  will  go  out  and  s.  beside  my  father  in  field 

1  Kings  8. 11.  cloud  filled  the  house,  priests  could 

not  5.  lo  minister,  because  of  clouds,  2  CAr.5.14. 
17. 1.  Elijah  said  to  -Ahab,  as  the  Lord  livelh,  be- 
fore whom  I  s.  18.  15.  2  Kings  3.  14.  |  5.  16. 

2  Kings  5.  11.  I  thought  he  will  come  oul  and  *. 
10.4.  two  kings  stood  not,  how  then  shall  wo  s.? 

1  Chr.  21.  10.  David  saw  the  angel  of  the  Lord  3. 
23. 30.  lo  ,■<.  every  morning  to  thank  and  praise  Ld. 

2  Chron.  34.  32.  he  caused  all  present  10  s.  lo  it 
Ezra  10.  14.  let  all  the  rulers  of  ccnigregalion  s, 
F.slh.  3.  4.  to  see  if  Mordecai's  mailers  would  s. 

8- 11.  to  gather  themselves,  and  lo  «.  for  their  life 
.lob  8.  15.  he  shall  lean  on  iiis  house,  it  shall  not  t. 
19.25.  and  that  he  shall  5.  al  the  latter  day  on  earth 
38.  14.  it  is  turned,  and  ihey  s.  as  a  garment 
Psal,  38.  11.  and  mv  kinsmen  s.  afar  off 

45.9.  on  right  bani^  did  s.  queen  in  gold  of  Ophit 
78.  13.  and  he  made  the  waters  lo  s,  as  a  heap 
102.  t20.  they  shall  perish,  but  thou  shall  3. 
107.  t25.  he  muketh  to  s.  the  stormy  wind 

109.  6.  and  let  Sulan  s.  at  his  right  hand 
31.  he  shall  s.  at  the  right  hand  of  the  poor 
122.  2.  our  feet  shall  s.  within  thy  gates,  O  Jera». 
1.30.  3.  if  mark  iniquities,  O  Lord,  who  shall  ».? 
Prov.  12.  7.  but  Ihe  house  of  the  righteous  shall  s 

19.  21.  nevertheless  counsel  of  the  Lord  shall  j 
25.  6.  and  s.  not  in  the  place  of  great  men 

Kccl.8.3.  s.no\  in  an  evil  thing, he  doelh  what  pleas 
Isa.  7.  7.  thus  saith  Lord  God,  It  shall  not  s.  8. 10. 

11.10.  shall  be  a  root  of  Jesse,  shall  «.  for  an  ensign 
14.  24.  and  as  I  have  purposed,  so  it  shall  s. 

21.  8.  my  lord,  I  s.  continually  on  watch-lower 
28.  18.  and  your  agreement  with  hell  shall  not  a. 
32.  8.  and  by  liberal  things  shall  he  s. 
40.  8.  but  the  word  of  our  God  shall  s.  for  ever 
40.  10.  counsel  shall  s.  and  I  will  do  all  my  pleaa. 
47.  12.  s.  now  with  thine  inchanlm.  and  sorceries 
61.  5.  and  strangers  shall  j*.  and  feed  your  flocki 

Jer.G.\6.  s.  ye  in  the  ways  and  sec,  ask  for  old  pathn 
44.  28.  know  whose  word  shall  s.  mine  or  theirs 
40.  21.  did  not  s.  because  day  was  come  on  them 

F.zek-  17. 14.  but  by  keeping  of  his  cov.  itrnights. 

Dan.  2.  44.  and  the  kingdom  shall  s.  for  ever 
11.  6.  king  of  Ihe  north  shall  not  s-  nnr  his  arm 
25.  but  the  king  of  the  south  shall  not  .». 

./Imosl.  15.  nor  shall  ho  s.  ihat  hnndleth  the  bow 

Mic.  5.4.  he  shall  s.  and  feed  in  eireng'h  of  the  Ld. 

JVah.  2.  8.  s.  shall  they  cry,  none  shall  look  back 

Mai.  3.  2.  and  who  shall  .t.  when  he  appearcth? 

Mat.  12.  2.5.  a  house  or  kingdom  divided  ag.  ilsolf 
shall  not  i.  20.  MarkW.  24,  25.  Luke  11.  18. 

Mcrk  11.  2.5.  and  when  ye  «.  praying,  forgive 

.ficts  1.  II.  why  s-  ye  gazing  up  into  heaven  ? 
5.20.  go, .«.  and  speak  in  Ihe  temple  to  the  people 
25.  10.  Paul  said,  I  s.  nl  Cesar's  judgment-seat 
20. 6.  now  I  s.  and  am  judged  for  hope  of  promise 

Horn.  5-2-  have  access  into  this  grace  wherein  wes. 
9.1 1. purpose  ofGiul  according  lo  election  mights. 
14.  4.  for  God  is  able  to  make  him  s. 

1  Cnr.  15.  1.  I  declare  the  gospel  wherein  ye  ,». 
.30.  and  why  s-  we  in  jeopardy  every  hour? 

2  r«r.l.24.  are  helpers  of  your  joy,  for  by  faith  ye  5 
Fph.  0.  13.  lo  withstand  and  having  dune  all  lo  t 

14.  s.  having  your  loins  girt  about  with  truth 
1  Pet.  5-  10.  this  is  true  grace  of  God  wherein  ye  ». 
Rev.  3.  20.  behold,  I  s.  at  the  door  and  knock 
fi.  17.  great  day  is  coiue,  who  shall  be  able  to  »..' 
18. 15.  nierchanls  .«.  afar  off  for  fear  of  l*r  lorm. 

STAND  abroad. 
Deut.  24. 11.  «.  abroad,  man  shall  bring  the  pledge 

STAND  a;riiinst. 
I.rv.  19.  10.  norshall  s.  ag.  blood  of  thy  neighbour 
.Yiim.  :tO.  9.  (?very  vow  of  a  widow  shall  s.  ag.  her 
.frr.  •14.29.  that  rny  words  shall  s.  ag-  you  for  evil 
Fph.  0. 11.  that  mav  be  able  to  s.  o^.  wiles  of  dovil 

STAND  aloof. 
Psal.  .38.  11.  my  lovers  and  mv  fVicnds  .■!.  aloof 

STAND  back. 
f7en.l9.9.  said,  s.  bark,  this  fellow  came  in  to  sojo. 

ST  AND  bef ore- 
f.'iorf.  8.  20.  rise  np  caT\y,s- before  Pharaoh,  9. 13 
9.  II.  Ihe  magicians  could  not  .«.  brfnre  Moses 
17.  0.  I  will  s.  before  thee  on  the  rock  in  Horeb 
lev- 18.  23.  nor  shall  any  woman  .i.  before  a  beast 

20.  37.  and  ye  shall  have  no  power  to  .«.  befort 

your  enemies,  .Tosh-  7.  12,  13.  -Judg-  2.  14. 
JVum. 10.9  Ins- brfnre  the  congregation  lo  minister 
27.  21.  and  ho  shall  s-  before  Elenzar  the  priest 
35.  12.  till  ho  5.  before  congregation,  .fosh.  20.  0. 
Deut-  7. 24.  there  slinll  no  man  ho  abb?  lo  s-  before 
then,  II.  2,5.  Josh.  1.  .5.  |  10.  8.  |  23.  9 
0.  3.  who  can  «.  before  the  childien  of  Anaki 


STA 

Deul.  10  8.  tribe  of  I.i;vi  lo  s.  before  'he  Lord  to 
minister  to  liiin, '-'  C/ir.  '29.  11   Kitk  4-J.  11,  15. 
li).  17.  belli  tlie  men  shall  »■.  before  lliu  Lord 
29.  10.  yc  s.  tliis  day  all  of  yon  before  llie  Lord 

1  ^<im.  ft.  -JO.  who  is  able  lo  s.  before  lioly  Lord  G.? 
10.  22.  lot  David,  I  jiray  thee,  s.  before  me 

1  Kings  J.  2.  let  a  young  virgin  s.  before  the  king 
IT).  6.  happy  are  these  thy  servants  wlio  s.  before 

thee  and  hear  thy  wiailoni,  2  Chron.  9.  7. 
19.  U.  go,  and  s.  on  the  mount  before  the  Lord 

2  C/tr.  20.  9.  we  5.  before  this  house  in  thy  presence 
£zra  9.15.  wc  cannot  s.  tf/wra  thee  because  of  this 
Job  41.  10.  who  then  is  able  to  s.  before  me'? 
Psal.  5. 1 5.  the  foolish  shall  not  s.  before  thine  eye.s 

147.  17.  cast  forth  ice,  who  can  s,  before  his  cold  ! 

Prov.  22. 29.  a  man  diligent  in  business,  he  shall  s. 

before  k:<ngs,  he  sliall  not  «.  before  mean  men 

27.  4.  but  who  is  able  to  s.  before  envy  7 

'cr.  7.  10.  come  and  s.  before  rile  in  this  house 

15.  19.  if  thou  return,  thou  shalt .«.  before  me 

35.  19.  .loiiadab  shall  not  want  a  man  lo  s.  hrf.  ine 

40.  t  10.  I  will  dwell  at  Mizpah,  to  s.  before  Chald. 

49.19.  who  is  like  me  7  who  will  appoint?  who  is 

that  shepherd  that  will  s.  before  me  7  50.  44. 

Dan.  1.  5.  that  at  the  end  they  might  s.  before  king 

8.  4.  so  that  no  beasts  might  s.  before  him 
7.  there  was  no  power  in  the  ram  to  s.beforehtm 

H.  16.  none  shall  s.  before  him,  he  shall  stand 
J^ah.  i.  6.  who  can  s.  before  iiis  indignation  t 
/-u/£c21.3fi.  and  worthy  lo  s.before  the  Son  of  man 
Rom-U.  10.  all  shall  s. Ac/ore  judgment-seat  of  Chr. 
Rcv.'m.li.  I  saw  dead  small  and  great  s.beforcGoA 

STAND  by. 
Gen.  24.  4^.  behold  I  s.  by  the  well  of  water 
JExod.  7.  15.  and  thou  shall  s.  by  the  rK-cr's  brink 

18.  14.  and  all  the  people  s.  by  thee  till  even 
Ji'am.  23.  3.  s.  by  thy  burnt-offering,  and  I  will  go 
JVcA.  7.  3.  while  they  s.  by  let  them  shut  the  doors 
/sa.65.5.who  say,.?. fry  thyself,  I  am  holier  than  thou 
Jer.iS.  19.  s.  by  the  way,  and  ask  what  is  done? 
F.zek.  46.  2.  pnncc  shall  s.  by  the  post  of  the  gate 
ZecA.3.7.  give  places  to  walk  amonc  these  thai  6-.  by 

4.  14.  are  two  anointed  ones  thai  s.  by  the  Lord 
Jokn  11.  42.  but  because  of  the  jieople  which  s.  by 

STAND  fast. 
Psal.  80.28.  and  my  covenant  shall  s.fast.  with  him 
111.8.  all  hiscommaudm.  s.fast  for  ever  and  ever 
Jer.  46.  14.  say  ye,  «.  fast,  and  prepare  thee 

1  Cor.  16.  13.  watch  ye,  s.fast  in  faith,  be  strong 
(fal.  5. 1.  s.fast  therefore  in  liberty  Christ  made  us 
Phil,  i.'il.  s.fast  in  one  spirit  ||  4.1.  s./asf  in  Lord 
lTAess.'.i.  8.  for  now  we  live,  if  ye  s.  fast  in  Lord 

2  Tltejs.  2. 15.  s.fast,  and  hold  traditions  tauglit 

STAND  forth. 
Jer.  46.  4.  get  up,  and  s.  forth  with  your  helmets 
Mark3.  3.  he  saitli  to  the  man,  s.  forth,  Luke&.S. 

STAND  here. 
Oen.  24.  13.  behold,  I  s.  here  by  the  well  of  water 
JVum.  23.  15.  he  said,s.  Acre  by  thy  hurnt-on"eririg 
Dent.  5.  31.  but  as  for  thee,  .«.  thou  here  by  me 
2  Sam.  18.  30.  the  king  said,  turn  aside,  and  s.  here 
uT/aJ.20.6.  saitli  to  them,  why  5.  ye  here  all  day  idle? 
Mark  0.  1.  some  s.  here  who  shall  not  taste  death 
.^cts  4. 10.  even  by  him  doth  this  man  s;  here  whole 

STAND  in. 

.hidg.  4.  20.  s.  in  the  door  of  the  tent,  and  say 

2  Chr.  35.  5.  s.  in  holy  place  according  to  divisions 

Psal.  1.5.  the  ungodly  shall  not  s.  m  the  judgment 

4.4.  s.  171  awe,  sin  not,  commune  with  your  heart 

5.  5.  foolish  shall  not  s.  in  thy  sight,  thou  halest 
24.  3.  and  who  shall  s.  in  his  holy  place? 
33.8.  let  all  theinhttbitantsof  the  worlds,  in  awe 
76.  7.  who  may  s.  in  thy  sight  when  once  angry  ? 
K!(.  43.  and  hast  not  made  him  to  «.  in  the  battle 
134.  1.  who  by  night.?,  in  house  of  Lord,  13.5.2. 

./(■r.  7. 2>».  in  gate  of  Lord's  htjuse,  and  proclaim 
14.  6.  the  wild  asses  did  s.  in  the  high  places 
17.  19.  s.  in  the  gate  of  the  children  of  the  pi-ople 
26.2.  s.  in  the  court  of  the  Lord's  house  and  speak 
Eiek.  13.  5.  ye  have  not  gone  up  to  .?.  in  the  battle 
22. 30.  that  should  «.  in  gap  before  me  for  the  land 
44.  24.  in  controversy  they  shall  s.  ?'n  judgment 
Dan.  1.  4.  a^  had  ability  in  them  to  s.  in  king's  pal. 
11.  16.  and  he  shall  s.  in  the  glorious  hind 
12. 13.  and  f  hall  s.  in  thy  lot  at  the  end  of  the  days 
ZccA.M  4  feetshulls.inthatday  in  mount  of  Olives 
Mat.  24.  15.  whin  ye  see  abomina.  s.  in  holy  place 
/,u*f  1. 19.  I  am  Habriid,  ihats.  in  presence  of  God 

1  Cor  .2.5.  vour  faith  should  nol.t.  in  wi.sdom  of  men 
f7a2.4.20.tu  change  mv  v«ioe,for  I  s.in  doubt  of  you 

STAND  on. 
Exod.  17.  9.  to-mo;row  I  will  .?.  on  top  of  the  hill 

2  ITinj^g  6.  31.  if  the  head  of  Rlisha  shall  .t.  on  hi 
/)an.I1.17.she  shall  not  s.on  his  side  nor  be  for  him 

31.  arms  shall .?.  on  hi-;  part, pollute  the  sanctuary 
ilet).15.2.  s.on  sea  nfglass,  having  the  harps  of  God 
STAND  ovt 


SPA 

ST  AST)  still. 

Exod.  14.  13.  M.iBcs  said,  fear  ye  not,  s.  still,  and 

SB»  the  salvation  of  God,  2  Chron.  20.  17. 

JVnm.9.8.  s.  still,  I  will  hear  what  L.will  command 

.fosh.  3.  8.  that  bear  ark,  ye  shall  s.  still  in  Jordan 

10.  12.  sun,  s.  s.  upon  Gibeon  and  moon  in  Ajalon 

1  Sam.  9.  27.  s.  thuu  still  a  while,  that  I  may  nhew 
12.  7.  now  s.  still  that  1  may  reason  with  you 
14.  9.  then  we  will  s.  still  in  our  place  and  not  go 

■fob  37. 14.  s.  still  and  consider  the  works  of  God 
./er.  51.  50.  ye  that  have  escaped  sword,  s.  not  stilt 
Acts  8.2S.euttach  commanded  the  chariot  to  s.  still 

STAND  strong. 
Psal.  30.7.  thou  hast  made  niountafn  io  s.  strong 

STAND  there. 
JVam.  11.  16.  that  they  may  s.  there  with  thee 
Deut  lb.  7.  as  Lev  lies  who  a.  tiKre  before  the  Lord 
./am  2.  3.  and  say  to  the  poor,  s.  thou  there 

STAND  together. 
/sa.50.8.  let  us  s.  toiret.'ier,  who  is  mine  adversary? 

STAND  up.  " 
Exod.  9.  flC.  for  this  cause  1  made  thee  s.  vp 
J\reh.  9.  5.  s.  up,  and  bless  Lord  your  God  for  ever 
Job  30.  20.  I  s.  up,  and  thon  regardest  me  not 

33.  5.  set  thy  words  in  order  betore  me,  s.  vp 
Psal.  35.  2.  lake  hold  of  shield,  «.  up  for  my  help 

94.  J6.  who  will  s.  up  for  me  against  the  workers? 

Eccl.  4.  15.  with  child  that  shall  s.  vp  in  his  stead 
[sa.  27.  9.  the  groves  and  images  shall  not  s.  up 

44.  11.  let  thenfl^i'Pi  yet  they  shall  fear 

47.  13.  let  the  monthly  prognosticators  s.  up 

48.  13.  when  1  call  to  them,  they  s.  up  together 
51.  17.  awake,  awake,  s.  up,  O  Jerusalem 

Kzek.  31.  14.  nor  their  trees  s.  up  in  their  height 
Dan.  8..22.  four  kingdoms  shall  s.  up  out  of  nation 
23.  a  kins  of  fierce  countenance  shall  s.  up 
25.  he  shall  also  .t.  up  against  prince  of  princes 
11.2.  behold,  there  shall  s.  up  three  kings  in  Persia 
3.  and  a  mighty  king  shall  s.  up  and  shall  rule,  4. 
7.  out  of  a  branch  of  her  roots  shall  one  s.  up 
14.  many  shall  s.  up  against  king  of  the  south 

20.  then  shall  s.  up  in  his  estate  a  raiser  of  taxes 

21.  and  in  his  esiate  shall  s.  up  a  vile  person 
12.  I.  and  at  that  time  shall  Michael  «.  up 

JVah.  ].  t  6.  whos.  up  in  the  fierceness  of  his  anger 
Jlcts  10.26.Petersaid,  s.vp,  I  myself  also  am  a  man 

STAND  upon. 
Exod.^3.  21.  Lord  said,  thou  shalt  s.  upin  a  rock 
Devi.  27.  12.  these  shall  s.  upon  mount  Gerizim 

13.  these  shaJ'  s.  upon  mount  Ebal  to  curse 
Josh.  3.  13.  a.nd  they  shall  s.  upon  a  heap 

2  .S(im.l.9.Saul  8aid,s.«/>o7i  me,  I  pray  ihec,  slay  me 
1  Kings  19.  11.  5.  vpon  the  mount  before  the  Lord 
Ezek.'i.  1.  son  ofTnan,s. u7)on  thy  feet,  Jlcts^Q.  16. 

27.  20.  the  pilots  of  ihe  sea  shall  s.  upon  the  land 
33.  26.  ye  «.  upon  your  sword,  ye  work  abominat. 
47.10.fishers  shall  s.  ii.it  from  Engedi  toEncglaim 
Dan.  7.  4.  and  made  s.  upon  the  feet  as  a  man 
8.  1 18.  and  he  made  me  s.  upon  mystamling 
Hab.'i.  1. 1  will  i.  «pore  rrjy  watch,  set  me  on  tower 
ZfcA.  14.  12.  flesh  consume,  while  they  s.  upon  feet 
/if  u.lO.S.angel  I  saw  s.vpon  sea,  lifted  up  his  band 

STAND  upright. 
Psal.  20.  8.  but  we  are  risen  and  s.  upright 
Dan.lO.Xl.  O  Daniel, understand  words,  s.upright 
Aets  14.10.  be  said  lo  Ihe  cripple,  s.upright  on  feet 

STAND  with. 
JV«m.  1. 5.  names  of  the  men  that  shall  s.  with  you 

STAND  without. 
F.ira  10.  13.  and  we  are  not  able  to  s.  without 
Mat.Vl.il.  s.  without,  desiring  to  speak,  Aaie  8.20. 
I.,^lke  13.  25.  ye  begin  to  s.  tnilhout,  and  to  knock 

STANDARD. 
JVum.  1.52.  and  every  man  by  his  own  s.  2.  2,  17. 
2.  3.  on  Ihe  east  side  shall  the  s.  of  Judah  pitch 
10.  on  the  south  side  shall  be  the  s.  of  Keuben 
18.  on  the  west  side  shall  be  the  .<!.  of  E[)hraim 
25.  on  the  norlh  side  shall  be  the  s.  of  Dan 
10.  14.  in  the  first  place  went  the  «.  of  Judah 
Isa.  49.  22.  behold,  I  will  set  up  my  s.  to  people 
.50.  19.  the  Lord  shall  lift  up  a  .■?.  against  him 
62.  10.  go  through,  lift  up  a  s.  for  the  people 
.Jer.  4.  6.  set  up  a  .t.  toward  Zion,  retire,  stay  not 
21.  how  long  shall  I  see  the  s.  and  hear  trumpet? 
50.  2.  set  ye  up  a  .s.  in  the  land,  51.  12,  27. 

STANDAKD-^icaicr. 
/.sa.lO.IS.they  shall  be  as  when  a.i.-Jrarer  faintetb 

STANDARDS. 

JVi/m.  2.  31.  Dan  shall  go  hindmost  with  their  s. 

34.  so  they  pitched  by  their  s.  and  set  forward 

STANDEST. 

Oen.  24.  31.  come  in,  wherefore  s.  thou  without? 

Exod.  3.  5.  put  off  thy  shoes,  the  place  whereon 

Ihou  s.  is  holy  ground,  .Tosh.  5.  15.  JictsLJU. 

Psal.  10.  1.  why  s.  thou  afar  off,  O  Lord 

Rom.U.  20.  they  were  broken  off,  thou  i.  by  faith 

STANDETH. 


Ptal-T^.T.  their  eves  s.  out  with  fatresa,  have  more  JVjjm.  14.  14.  and  that  thy  cloud  ».  over  them 

STAND  perfect.  /)«:«(. 1.38.  but  Josh. son  of  Nun,  whos.  before  Ihec 

0/.4.I2.  ye  may  a.perf.  and  complete  in  willof  G.I  17. 12.  that  will  not  hearken  lo  the  priest  that  *. 
sr  4F 


STA 

r)™<.30.I5.ljut  will)  him  thats.hercw  4h  us  tfiii,  daj 
■ladg.  10.  yb.  to  fill  pillars  whereon  Ihe  house  s. 
F.stu.  6.  5.  behold  Hainan  s.  in  the  court 

7.  9.  behold  also  the  gallows  s.  in  Haman's  house 
Psal.  1.  1.  nor  s.  in  the  way  of  sinners,  nor  silteth 

26  12.  my  loots,  in  an  even  place,  in  coiig.  bless  Ld. 

33.  11.  the  counsel  of  Ihe  Lou!  s.  for  ever 

82.  1.  God  s.  in  the  cimgregiilion  of  the  mighty 

1 10.  t  90.  thuu  hasl  established  the  earth,  and  it  s. 
161.  but  my  heart  s.  in  awe  of  Iby  word 
Prov.  8.  2.  wisdom  s.  in  the  lo;)  of  high  places 
Ciin«.2.9.  behiilil,he  s. behind  wall,  he  lookelh  forth 
ha.  3.  13.  Lord  s.  up  lo  plead,  s.  lo  judge  peopk 

46.  7.  they  set  liiin  in  his  place,  and  he  .>■. 

59.  14.  justice  .i.  aliir  off,  truth  is  fallen  in  aireet 
Dan.  12.  1.  the  gre.il  prince  who  a.  for  ihy  people 
Zer.h.  11.  10.  n.ir  shall  he  feed  that  that  .v.  still 
.lohn  1.  26.  s.  one  among  you,  whom  ye  know  not 

3.  29.  the  friend  ol  the  bridlpgroom  .v.  and  hearelli 
Horn.  14.  4.  to  hi.<  own  master  he  s.  or  fallelh 

1  Cor.  7.  37.  iiiverthelesshe  thats.  stedfast  in  heart 

8.  13.  1  will  eat  no  Hesh  while  the  world  s. 
10.  12.  let  him  that  thinketh  he  s.  take  heed 

2  Tim.  2.  19.  tlie  foundation  of  God  s.  sure 
/AA.  10. 11. every  priests. daily  ministering  and  offer 
.Jam.  5.  9.  behold,  the  judge  s.  before  the  door 
Rev.  JO.  8.  angel  who  s.  on  the  sea  and  the  earth 

STANDING,  ■■Substantive. 

1  Kings  10.  t5.  ([ueen  saw  ihes.  of  his  ministers 

2  Chron.  30.  f  16.  they  stood  in  s.  according  to  law 
JVtA.n  tH.  I  gathered  them  and  setlhim  in  theirs 
Psal.  69. 2.  I  sink  in  deep  mire  where  there  is  no  s. 
Dan.  8. 1 18.  but  he  made  me  stand  upon  my  s. 

10. 1 11.  (>  Dan.  undersiaiid,  and  stand  upon  thy  ». 
Mic.  1.  11.  he  shall  receive  of  vou  his  s. 

STANDING.' 
Ac«.26. 1.  make  no  idols  nor  rear  you  up  a  s.  image 
.Vi/;h.22.  23.  angel  of  the  Lord  s.  in  the  wajt,  31. 
1  .Sum. 1 9. 20.  and  Samuel  s.as  appointed  over  them 

22.  6.  all  his  servants  were  s.  about  him 

1  Kings  13.  25.  and  the  lion  s.  by  Ihe  carcase,  28. 
14. 1 23.  they  also  built  them  s.  imiigi's  and  groves 
22.  19.  host  of  heaven  s.  by  him,  2  Chron.  18. 18. 

"2  Chron.  9.  18.  and  two  lions  s.  by  the  slays 
KsiA.5.2.  when  king  saw  Esth.  the  queen  s.  in  court 
Psal.  107.  35.  he  turneth  wilderness  into  a  s.  water 
114.  8.  which  turned  the  rock  into  a  s.  water 
Amos  0.  1.  I  saw  the  Lord  s.  upon  the  altar 
Mic.  5.  13.  I  will  cut  off  thy  s.  images  from  the« 
Zerh.  3.  1.  Satan  s.  at  his  right  hand  to  resist  him 

6.  5.  which  go  forth  from  s.  before  Lord  of  earth 
Mat.  6.  5.  they  love  to  pray  s.  in  the  synagogue* 

16.  28.  I  say  to  you,  there  be  some  s.  here  which 
shall  not  taste  of  death  till,  J.vke  9.  27. 

20.  3.  he  saw  others  s.  idle  in  the  market,  6. 
Murk  3.  31.  his  brethren  and  his  mother  s.  without 

13.  l4.  the  abomination  s.  where  it  ought  not 
Luke  1   11.  an  angel  s.  on  the  righi  side  of  the  altar 

18.  13.  the  publican  s.  afar  off  smote  on  his  breast 
./ohn  8. 9.  Jesns  was  alone,  and  woman  s.  in  midst 

20.14.  she  saw  Jesus  ,t.  and  knew  not  that  it  was  J. 
Acts%  14.  but  Peters.  u|)  with  eleven  said  to  them 

4. 14.  and  beholding  the  man  healed  s.  with  thera 

5.  23.  saying,  we  found  the  keepers  s.  without 
25.  men  are  .?.  in  the  teinjile  leaching  the  people 

7.  55.  and  Jesus  s.  on  the  right  Imml  of  Gud,  56. 
22.  20.  I  was  s.  by  and  consenting  lo  his  death 

I/eb.  9.  8.  while  the  first  tabernacle  was  yet  s. 

2  Pet  3.  5.  earth  s.  out  of  Ihe  water  and  in  water 
Rrv-  7.1.  fiur  angels  s.on  four  corners  of  the  earth 

11.4.  two  candlesticks  s.  before  the  God  of  earth 

18.  10.  .?.  afar  off  for  the  fear  of  her  turment 

19.  17.  I  saw-  an  angel  s.  in  the  sun,  and  he  cried 

.s'ce  Corn. 

STANK. 

Exod. 7.  21.  fish  in  the  river  died,  and  Ihe  river  ». 

8   14.  they  gathered  frogs  on  heaps,  and  land  s. 

16.  20.  \fh  of  It,  the  manna  bred  worms  and  s. 

2  Sam.  10.  6.  Amnion  saw  tbey  s.  before  David 

STARE. 
Ps. 22.17.may  tell  my  bones,  they  look  and  s.  on  me 

STAR. 
fn  Hebrew,  Chochab.  Under  the  name  of  stars 
the  ancient  Hebrews  comprehended  all  the  hea- 
venly bodies,  eonstelhitions,  plat<et.<,  and  all  the 
luminaries,  except  the  sun  and  vwon.  The 
idolatrous  Israelites  called  the  svv  and  »won 
the  king  and  queen  of  heaven;  and  the  stars 
were  as  it  were,  their  army  or  militia,  Deul.  4. 
10.  I  17.  3.  Jer.  7.  18.  Tlu  beauty  and  splen- 
dour that  men  have  observed  in  the  sliirs,  and 
the  great  advantages  that  thy  drrive  from 
thence;  the  wondeiful  order  that  they  have  dis- 
covered in  their  courses;  the  inflaevce  that  has 
been  ascribed  to  them  in  the  produeliim  and 
preservation  of  animals,  of  fruits,  /ilants,  and 
minerals,  have  prevailed  with  a  great  numbu^ 
of  people  in  the  world  to  impute  to  them  life, 
knowledge,  power,  andlopay  them  atoverei^ 
vorthip  and  adoration. 


STA 

To  givi  the  Hebrews  a  caution  againtt  Ike  idola- 
try that  prccaikd  through  almost  all  the  East, 
of  irorfhijjping  the  sun,  inuun,aud  sLari',  Muses 
iiijurnis  them  that  God  gace  them  their  being, 
and  that  he  separated  thetn  from  that  mass  of 
matter  which  he  had  produced  out  of  nothing, 
Gen.  I.  14,  15,  16.  .9nrf  in  l)eut.  4.  19.  he  lelU 
them  IhfU  they  were  not  made  for  the  worship, 
but  for  the  use  of  men,  even  of  the  meanest  and 
most  barbarous  people  under  heaven ;  which 
the  Lord  h;ith  divided  to  ull  nalions  under  tlie 
whole  lieavcn. 

The  number  of  the  stars  was  looked  upon  as  ioji- 
nite:  ^nd  the  Psalmi.^t,  to  ezalt  the  power, 
magnificence,  and  infinite  knoicledge  of  (iod, 
says,  that  he  numbers  the  stars,  and  calls  them 
by  their  names.  He  is  described  as  a  king, 
taking  a  reeiew  of  his  army,  and  gives  every 
<me  of  his  soldicrj^such  a  name  as  he  thinks 
fit.  fVhen  the  scWptare  would  express  a  very 
eztraordinary  increase  and  multiplication,  it 
uses  the  similitude  of  the  stars  of  heaven,  or 
of  the  sand  of  the  sea;  I  will  multiply  thy 
seed  as  the  stars  of  heaven,  and  as  the  sand 
which  is  ujion  the  sea-shore,  (ren,  15.  5.  |  22. 
17.  I  2*).  4.  Bildad,  Job's  friend,  says,  that  in 
the  eyes  of  God  the  stars  themselves  are  im- 
pure; that  he  can  discern  many  spots  and 
blemishes  in  them  which  we  cannot  sec.  Job  25. 
5.  Jlnd  in  chap.  9.  ver.  7,  it  is  said,  that,  God 
locks  them  up  as  with  a  key,  and  hinders  them 
from  appearing,  hut  witen  he  pleases.  IVhen 
the  scripture  describes  a  time  of  public  cala- 
mity, of  sorrows,  fears,  troubles,  and  pcrplezi- 
ties,  it  is  said,  the  stars  withhold  their  light, 
and  are  covered  with  darkness,  that  they  I'ali 
from  heaven  and  disappear,  Ezek.  32.  7.  .Mai. 
24.29. 

The  sacred  bonks  sometimes  seem  to  ascribe 
knowledge  to  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars:  They 
are  excited  to  praise  the  J.ord,  Psalm  148.  3. 
The  moon  is  said  to  withdraw  her  light,  Ezek. 

32.  7.  to  obey  the  voice  o/ Joshua,  Josh.  10.  12. 
That  the  sun  stopped  its  course, at  the  com.mand 
of  this  General  of  God's  people :  That  the  sun 
rises  as  a  bridegroom,  that  comes  out  of  his 
nuptial  chamber,  Psal.  19.  5.  Moses  seems  to 
favour  their  opinion,  who  impute  influences  to 
the  sun  and  moon,  when  he  promises  to  Joseph 
the  precious  fruits  brought  forth  by  the  sun,  and 
the  precious  things  put  forth  by  the  moon,  /)eut. 

33.  14.  The  Psalmist  says,  that  the  sun  knows 
the  time  and  place  of  his  sitting,  Psal.  104.  19. 
Jlnd  Solomon,  that  the  sun  also  aviseth,  and 
the  sun  goeth  down,  and  hasteth  to  his  place 
where  he  arose,  F.ccl.  1.  5.  Hut  these  expres- 
sions, which  are  merely  popular,  are  nut'to  be 
understood  literally ;  for  then  it  must  be  said, 
that  the  earth,  the  trees,  and  the  waters  are 
animatrd,  there  being  expressions  in  scripture 
that  would  insinuate  as  much.  Ml  the  crea- 
tures glorify  God,  bless  the  Lord,  and  obey 
him,  each  in  its  way.  ff  any  thing  more  be 
allowed  to  the  sun,  the  moon,  or  the  stars,  it 
is  because  they  are  creatures  of  greater  per- 
fection, and  by  which  the  glory  and  majesty  of 

God  shine  forth  in  a  more  eminent  and  con- 
spicuous manner. 

Amofl,  speaking  of  the  idolatry  of  the  Israelites 
in  the  wildirncss,  informs  us,  that  they  carried 
along  with  them  the  star  of  their  God,  Jinios 
5.  20.  St.  Stephen,  in  Acts  7.  43.  quoting  this 
passage  of  Amos  according  to  the  Septuagint, 
says.  Ye  took  up  the  tabernacle  of  Moloch, 
and  the  star  of  your  pod  Remphan.  This  last 
word  has  given  occasion  to  a  great  number  of 
eonjecturrs.  Grotius  thinks  it  to  have  been  the 
same  deity  as  Rimmon,  an  idol  of  the  people 
of  Damascus.  Rimmon  signifies  high,  which 
Grotius  lakes  for  Saturn,  because  this  planet 
is  the  most  elevated  of  all;  but  others  take  it 
for  the  tun.  Some  derive  Remphan  froiii  the 
Flebrow  word  Kapha,  to  he  negligent,  soft,  or 
slothful ;  /<fr(i«w  Suturn  is  the  slowest  or  most 
slothful  of  all  the  planets.  The  Arabic  word 
Rcph,  signifies  voracity,  a  quality  very  well 
agreeing  ^nSaturn,  irbo,  accordin<r  to  the  fable, 
devoured  his  own  children.  Vossius  believes 
Remphan,  or,  as  Amoa  has  it,  C,Wn\m,was  the 
moon.  Others  think  Remphan  to  he  the  name 
of  a  king  of  Esypt,  who  was  placed  by  his 
people  in  the  rank  of  the  gods.  Piodonis  Sicu- 
lus,  lib.  I.  pai'e  39.  says  that  Inn^  Remphis 
succeeded  Protein.  But  this  author  does  vol 
say  that  he  ever  had  been  deifird,  and  speaks 
of  him  as  a  prince  very  unworthy  of  having 
divine  honour  paid  to  him.  The  opinion  that 
is  most  common  is,  that  it  was  a  representa- 
tion of  thrplioel  Saturn. 

Tie  (tar  foretold  by  Balaam  in  Num.  24.  17, 
i78 


STA 

There  shall  come  a  star  out  of  Jacob,  ani^  a 
sceptre  shall  arise  out  of  Israel,  and  shall  smite 
the  corners  of  Moab,  and  destroy  all  llie  chil- 
dren of  Sheth.  By  this  star  is  meant  a  ruler, 
a  conqueror,  a  great  prince,  which  according 
to  some  was  king  Uavid,  who  conquered  the 
Moubites;  but  it  primarily  and  chicjty  points 
at  Jesus  Christ  the  Messiah,  who  is  of  the  seed 
and  posterity  of  Jacob,  who  is  the  true  star 
which  Jills  the  world  with  its  brightness,  and 
who  is  called  the  blight  and  iiiorniiig  star,  Rev. 
22.  16.  Home  have  thought,  that  in  this  place 
Balaam  foretold  the  appearance  of  that  real 
star,  which  arose  at  the  time  of  our  Saviour's 
birth,  and  which  guided  tlie  Magi  into  Judea, 
to  see  the  person  whose  birth  was  declared  by 
that  star.  But  this  star  did  not  come  out  of 
Jacob ;  and  that  cannot  be  applied  to  this  star, 
which  is  said  tlicre;  which  plainly  points  at  a 
ruler,  a  king,  a  conqueror. 

The  star  that  ajfpeared  to  the  Magi,  or  wise  men, 
and  conducted  them  to  Belh-lehem,  where  our 
Saviour  was  bom,  has  furnished  matter  for 
many  conjectures.  Some  ancient  authors  have 
asserted,  that  it  was  a  new  star  purposely  cre- 
ated to  declare  to  men  the  birth  of  the  Messiah. 
Others  take  it  for  a  kind  of  comet,  which  ap- 
peared preternaturally  in  the  air.  Liglilfoot 
thinks,  that  the  same  light  which  appeared  to 
the  shepherds  near  Betli-leMfti,  might  also  be 
vi.iiblc  afar  off  to  the  M:ig\,'hanging  over  Ju- 
dea, and  so  be  their  guide  to  find  our  Saviour. 
Others  have  pretended  that  it  was  an  angel 
clothed  with  a  luminous  body  inform  of  a  star, 
which  taking  his  cour.te  towards  Judea,  deter- 
mined the  Magi  to  follow  him  :  They  found 
their  opinion  upon  this  ;  that  this  star  appear- 
ed to  be  rational  and  intelligent,  appearing 
and  disappearing,  stopping,  and  going  fur- 
ward,  in  such  manner  as  was  necessary  for 
the  Conduct  of  the  Magi,  to  the  proper  place. 
It  is  said,  that  some  writers  believed  this  star 
was  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  appeared  to  the 
Miigi  under  the  form  of  a  star,  as  he  appeared 
at  the  baptism  of  Christ  under  the  form  of  a 
dove.  J^astly,  Calniet  says,  that  this  star  was 
an  inflamed  meteor,  in  the  middle  region  of 
the  air,  which  having  been  observed  by  the 
Magi  with  miraculous  and  extraordinary  cir- 
cumstances, was  taken  by  them  for  the  star  so 
long  foretold  by  Balaam;  and  that  afterwards 
they  resolved  to  follow  it,  and  to  seek  the  new- 
born king,  whose  coming  it  declared.  It  was 
therefore,  says  he,  a  light  that  moved  i7i  the 
air  before  them,  something  like  the  pillar  of 
cloud  in  the  desert.  Inward  inspiration,  th 
light  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  solicitation  of 
grace,  were  the  motives  which  engaged  them 
to  follow  this  phenomenon. 

The  time  which  the  Magi  took  up  in  their  journey 
to  Judea,  is  a  point  that  has  much  exercised 
the  Chronologers.  Those  who  suppose  they 
came  from  the  remotest  part  of  Persia,  allow 
them  two  years  for  their  journey  ;  supposing 
that  the  sl^T  appeared  to  them  two  years  before 
the  birth  of  our  Saviour.  In  this  the  text  of 
the  gospel  seems  something  favourable  to  them, 
saying  that  Herod  put  to  death  the  children  of 
Beth-lehem,  from  two  years  old  and  under,  ac- 
cordiniT  to  the  time  that  the  Magi  had  shewed 
him.  Mat.  2.  16.  Others  will  have  it,  that 
the  star  did  not  arise  till  the  moment  of  our 
Saviour's  biith;  and  these  are  yet  divided; 
for  some  think  that  the  Magi  did  not  arrive  at 
Bethlehem  till  two  years  after  the  birth  of 
our  Saviour.  Others  make  them  arrive  there 
thirteen  days  after  his  birth;  and  that  they 
might  make  the  greater  haste,  they  assign  them 
dromedaries  to  ride  upon.  There  are  those 
that  think  that  the  star  appeared  from  the  mo- 
ment of  Christ's  incarnation,  or  even  from  the 
conception  o/ John  the  Baptist.  Hut  tlu:  exact 
time  of  their  departure  is  not  fixed;  though 
most  have  agreed  that  the  day  of  their  arrival 
at  Rctli-lchcm  should  be  on  the  thirleentli  day 
from  our  Lord's  birth. 

There  arc  still  some  difficulties  started,  whether 
this  star  was  seen  by  every  body,  or  only  by  the 
M.igi.  Some  think  that  every  body  saw  it, 
that  all  people  were  witnesses  of  this  pheno- 
menon ;  that  some,  not  knowing  the  mystery  of 
it,  contented  themselves  to  wonder  at  it;  and 
that  it  was  to  the  Mngi  only  that  God  re- 
vealed the  signification  of  it,  and  gave  them 
an  inclination  to  follow  it.  Others,  on  the 
contrary,  believe  that  few  people  saw  it ;  that 
the  Magi  themselves  only  saw  it  by  fits,  and 
from  time  to  time,  when  it  was  necessary  to 
them  as  a  guide,  and  to  incourntxr  them  to  per 
severe  in  tieir  resolution.     Lastly,  the  gene- 


STA 

rality  will  have  it,  that  the  Magi  saw  it  for  the 
greatest  part  of  their  journey, and  that  it  dis- 
appeared to  thtm  only  when  they  arrived  at 
Jerusalem  ;  then  they  found  themselves  undet 
a  necessity  of  inquiring,  where  they  might  find 
the  new-bom  King  of  the  Jews. 
i'y  stars  are  sometimes  meant  the  princes  and 
nobles  of  a  kingdom,  Uan.  8.  10.  fastors  or 
ministers  of  the  gospel,  who  ought  to  shine  like 
stars  ire  respect  of  the  brightness  and  purity  of 
their  lives  and  doctrine,  are  also  called  stars, 
Rev.  1.  20.  In  Job  38.  7,  the  angels  are  called 
stars,  who  joined  togither  in  extolling  and 
praising  God  for  his  wonderful  work  of  cre- 
ation. 
By  day-star,  2  Pet.  1.  19.  is  meant  either  a  more 
full,  clear,  and  explicit  knowledge  of  Christ, 
and  the  mysteries  of  the  gospel,  which  in  com- 
parison of  the  dark  shadows  and  prophetical 
writings,  was  a  morning-star,  bringing  a 
fuller  manifestation  of  the  truths  of  God,  than 
the  prophets  did,  whose  predictions  are  now 
accomplished.  Or,  bj/  day-slar  may  be  under 
stood  that  full  and  perfect  knowledge  which 
believers  shall  have,  when  in  heaven  they  shall 
see  God  face  to  face;  and  this  day  is  opposed 
to  the  whole  time  of  this  life,  which,  notwith- 
standing all  our  endeavours  after  knowledge, 
may  be  called  a  night  of  error  and  ignorance. 
JVum.  24.  17.  there  shall  come  a  .«.  out  of  Jacob 
Jinios  5.  26.  but  ye  have  borne  the  s.  of  your  god 
Mat.  2.  2.  for  we  have  seen  his  s.  in  the  east 
7.  Herod  inquired  of  them  what  time  s.  appeared 

9.  lo,  s.  which  they  saw  in  east,  went  before  thetn 

10.  when  they  saw  s.  they  rejoiced  with  great  joy 
Jlcts  7.  43.  ye  took  up  the  j'.  of  your  god  Remphan 

1  Cor.  15. 4i.one».  differelhfroni  another  s. in  glory 
Rev.  8.  10.  there  fell  a  great  s.  from  heaven,  11. 

9.  1.  a  s.  fell  from  heaven  unto  the  earth 
iioy-STAR. 

2  Pet.  1.  19.  till  the  days,  arise  in  your  heart! 

JitorningST  AR. 
Rev.  2.  28.  and  I  will  give  him  the  moming-i. 
22.  16.  1  am  the  bright  and  mornings. 

STAR-GAZERS. 
Isa.  47. 13.  let  the  s.-gaiers  stand  up  and  save  tbeo 

STARS. 
Gen.  1.  16.  God  made  two  lights,  he  made  s.  also 
15.  5.  tell  the  s.  if  thou  be  able  to  number  them 

37.  9.  sun,  moon,  and  eleven  .?.  made  obeisance 
/^cu£.4.l9.when  seest  ^.should  be  driven  loworship 
Judg.  5. 20.  the  s.  in  their  courses  fought  ag.  Sisera 
JVcA.  4.  21.  from  the  morning  till  the  «.  appeared 
.lob  3.  9.  let  the  s.  of  the  twilight  thereof  be  dark 

9.  7.  who  commandeth  sun,  and  sealeth  up  thes. 
22.  12.  behold  height  of  the  s.  how  high  they  are 
25.  5.  yea,  the  s.  are  not  pure  in  his  sight 

38.  7.  when  the  morning  .?.  sang  tugelher 

Psal.  8.  3.  moon  and  5.  which  thou  hast  ordained 
1.30.  9.  the  moon  and  s.  to  rule  by  night 

147.  4.  he  telleth  the  number  of  the  s.  he  calleth 

them  all  by  their  names 

148.  3.  praise  him,  sun,  moon,  all  ye  «.  of  light 
F.ccl.  12.  2.  while  the  sun  or  s.  be  not  darkened 
Isa.  14.  13. 1  will  exalt  my  throne  above  ,v.  of  God 
.!er.  31.  35.  givoth  the  s.  for  a  lisht  by  night 
Fzek.  32.  7.  I  will  make  the  s.  thereof  dark 
Dan.  8.  10.  it  cast  down  some  of  the  s.  to  ground 

12.  3.  they  shall  shine  as  the  s.  for  ever  am'  ever 
■loil'i.  10.  s.  shall  withdraw  thoir  shining,  3.  15. 
Obad.  4.  though  thou  set  thy  nest  among  the  s. 
/,uA'c21.25.  there  shall  be  signs  in  the  sun.  and  io 
the  moon,  ami  in  the  >. 
Jlcts  27.  20.  when  neither  sun  nor  s.  appeared 

1  C<>r.  15.  41.  and  another  glory  of  .i.  for  one  star 
Ileb.  11.  12.  so  many  as  s.  of  the  sky  in  maltitude 
■  hide  13. those  are  raging  wavcs,wandcrings.whoni 
ftw.  8.  12.  the  third  part  of  the  s.  was  smitten 

12.  1.  and  upon  her  head  a  crown  of  twelve  *. 

See  Heaven,  Skvkm. 

STATE. 

P.«a/.30.5.  ev.  man  nt  his  best  s.  is  altogether  vanity 

Mat.  12.  45.  seven  spirits  more  wicked,  the  Inst  s. 

of  that  man  is  worse  than  tholirsi,  Luke  11.36. 

See  Estate. 

STATELY. 

F:fA-. 23.41.  sattest  upon  a  sAw\  and  iiible  prepared 

STATION. 

2  Chron.  35.  t  15.  sons  of  Asupli  were  in  their  ». 
Isa.  22.  19.  I  will  drive  then  from  thy  .•!.  and  stale 

STATI'Rr.. 
.Vi;m.  13.32.  the  peo|>le  we  saw  are  men  nfgreat  A 

1  Sam.  16.  7.  look  not  on  the  height  of  his  A 
28.  t20.  Saul  foil  with  the  fiilncss  of  his  ». 

2  Sam.  21. 20.  a  man  of  gro  it .«  with  six  fiiigom  00 

each  hand,  and  six  loi^s  on  uach  foot, 
1  CAron.  II.  2.3.  I  20.6. 
Cant.  7.  "i.  this  thy.?.  i«  like  a  palm-tree  and  broaitt 
Isa.  10.  33.  the  high  ones  »fs.  shall  be  h.vvii  ilowo 
45.  14.  loen  ofs.  idiall  come  over  uuio  llioe 


STA 

F.ick.  13.  18.  innke  kprchiefs  on  head  of  every  ». 

17.  6.  jjrew  and  became  a  siireadiiig  vine  of  low  s 

19.  11.  Iicr  s.  was  exalted  among  thick  branches 

31.  3.  the  Assyrian  was  a  cedar  of  a  liigh  s. 
Mat.  6.  37.  not  add  one  cubit  to  his  «.  J^ke  13.  25. 
Luke'i.  .52.  Jes.ificreased  in  wisdom  and  s.  in  fa  v. 

19.  3.  Zaccheus  little  of  s.  climbed  up  to  see  Jesus 
Eph.  4.  13.  measure  of  the  «.  of  fulness  of  Christ 

STATUTE. 
Ezod.  15.  25.  there  he  made  a  s.  and  ordinance 

2!).  9.  priests'  office  shall  be  theirs  for  |)erpetual  s. 
J.CV.  3. 17.  a  perpetual  s.  Itj.  34. 1 24.  9.  jVum.  19.21. 
JV«m. 27. 11  itshall  be  for  a  «.  of  judgment,  35.29. 
Josh.  24.  25.  and  he  set  them  a  ;$.  in  Shechem 
i  Sam.  30. 25.  David  made  it  a  s.  lor  Isr.  to  this  day 
Psal.  81.  4.  for  this  was  a  s.  for  Israel  and  a  law 
Uau.d.  7.  captains  consulted  to  establish  a  royal  s. 
15.  that  no  s.  king  establisheth  may  be  changed 
STATUTES. 
Exod.  18.  16.  I  do  make  them  know  the  s.  of  God 
L,ev   10.  II.  that  ye  may  leach  Israel  all  the  s. 
Jf-um.  30.  10.  ihcseare  the.5.  the  Lord  cornn)anded 
Deut.  4.  6.  whichsball  hear  all  theses,  and  sayings 

6.  24.  the  Lord  commanded  us  to  do  all  these  s. 

16.  12.  and  thou  shall  observe  and  do  these  s. 

17.19.  that  he  may  learn  to  keeji  these  s.to  do  them 

1  Kind's  3.  3.  walking  in  the  s.  of  David  his  father 

2  Kings  17.  8.  and  walked  in  s.  of  the  heathen,  19 
34.  neither  do  they  after  their  s.  or  ordinances 
37.  the  .«.  he  wrote,  ye  sliall  observe  to  do 

2  Chron.  33.  8.  that  they  take  heed  to  do  the  s. 
JVe/t.  9.  14.  thou  commandedsl  them  s.  and  laws 
Psal.  19.  8.  s.  of  Lord  are  right,  rejoicing  the  heart 
Eiek.  20.  25.  I  gave  them  s.  that  were  not  good 

33.  15.  if  the  wicked  walk  in  the  s.  of  life 

rfWjc.6.16.for  s.of  Orari  are  kept  and  worksof  Ahab 

See  Statute  for  Ever. 

His  STATUTES. 

Ezod.15.26.  if  thou  will  give  ear  to  his  commandm 

and  keep  all  his  s.  Deut.  H.  17.  |  10. 13. 1 11. 1 

Deut.  27.  10.  shall  do  Aiss.  which  [command  thee 

28.  15.  if  thou  wilt  not  observe  to  do  his  s. 
2  Sam.  22.  23.  his  s.  I  did  not  depart  from  them 
1  /r7n  a-s8.6I.let  your  hearts  be  perfect  to  walk  inA.s 
iKina-slT.  15.  they  rejected  hiss,  and  his  covenant 

23.3.  made  a  covenant  to  keep  his  s.  'iChr.  34.  31. 
Ezra  7. 11.  to  Ezra  even  a  scribe  of  Ais  «.  to  Israel 
Psal.  18.  22.  I  did  not  put  away  his  s.  from  me 

105.  45.  that  they  might  observe  his  s.  and  laws 
Jer.  44.  23.  nor  walked  in  his  law,  nor  in  his  s. 

See  .TUDSMENTS. 

My  STATUTES. 
Oen.  2fi.  5.  because  Abraham  kept  mj/. 9.  and  laws 
Lev.  13.  5.  ye  shall  iheref.  keep  my  s.  26  |  19.  19. 

25.  18.  ye  shall  do  my  s.  \\  215.  3.  if  ye  walk  in  my  s. 
2fi.l5.  if  ye  despise  my  s.\\  43.  they  abhorred  my  s. 

1  Kings  3. 14.  if  thou  wiltkeep  my  s.  as  David  did 
9.6.will  not  keep  my  s.  ||  11. 11.  hast  not  keptTnys. 
11.  34.  he  kept7«ys.  ||  'i  Kivgs  17.  13.  keepj«j/s. 

iChron.  7.  19.  if  ye  turn  away,  and  forsake  mys. 

Psal.M.  16.  what  hast  thou  to  do  10  declare  mys. 
89.  31.  if  they  break  my  s.  keep  not  commandm. 

Jcr.  44.  10.  neither  have  they  walked  in  my  s. 

Ezek.  5.  6.  hath  changed  mys.  more  than  nations 
7.  Ld.saith,  because  ye  have  not  walked  in  my  s. 
11.  20.  they  n)ay  walk  in  my  s.  and  do  them 
18.  19.  when  the  sun  hath  kept  all  my  s. 

36.  27.  and  I  will  cause  you  to  walk  in  my  s. 
Zech.  1.  6.  my  s.  did  tnke  hold  of  your  fathers 

Thy  STATUTES. 

ICAr.  29.  19.  give  him  a  perfect  heart  to  keep  tAyjt. 

Psal.  119.  12.  blessed  art  thou  O  Lord,  teach  me 
thy  s.  2fi,  33,  64,  68,  124,  135. 
16.  I  will  delight  myself  in  «Ays.  not  forget  word 
23.  but  thy  servant  did  meditate  in  thy  s. 
48.  and  I  will  meditate  in  thy  s. 
54.  thy  s.  have  been  my  son^s  in  my  pilgrimage 
71.  I  have  been  afflicted,  that  I  might  learn  thys. 
80.  let  my  heart  be  sound  in  tAys.be  not  ashamed 
83.  I  am  like  a  bottle,  yet  do  I  not  forget  thy  s. 
112.  I  inclined  my  heart  to  perform  t/iys.alway 

117.  I  will  have  respect  to  thy  s.  continually 

118.  hast  trodden  down  Ihem  that  err  from  thys. 
155.  for  the  wicked  seek  not  thy  s. 

171.  my  lips  praise,  whpn  thou  hast  tauchUAws. 
STAVES. 
£iod.2.5.13.thou shall  makes,  ofshittim-wood  and 
overlay  with  gol.l,  28.  t  27. 6.  |  30.  .5.  |  37. 4. 
14.  put  s.  into  rings,  15.  |  27.  7.  |  37.5.  |  38.7. 

37.  15.  he  made  s.  of  shittlm-wood,  28.  ]  38.  5. 
40.  20.  he  set  s.  on  the  ark  and  put  mercy-sent 

JVrtm.  4.  6.  they  shall  put  in  s.  thereof,  8,  1 1,  14. 
2).  18.  nobles  of  the  people  digged  with  their  s. 
1  .Sum. 17  43.  am  I  a  dog,  that  comesttome  with  s.? 
1  Chron.  15.  15.  the  Leviles  carried  the  ark  with  s. 
Hnh.  3.  14.  thou  didst  strike  through  with  his  s. 
'/.eeh.  11.7.  I  took  unto  me  two  .s.  I  fed  the  flock 
Mat.  10.  10.  nor  take  two  coats  nor  s.  I^ukc  9.  3. 

26.  47.  Jiidns  came  and  with  him  a  great  multi 

lude  with  s.from  chief  priests,  Mark  14.  43. 
3T9 


STE 

Jtfaf. 26.55.are  ye  come  as  ag.thief  with  swords  and 
s.  for  to  take  me7  MiirkW.  48.  iuAe22.52 
STAY. 
Lev.  13.  5.  behold,  if  plague  in  his  sight  be  at  a  s. 

37.  but  if  the  scall  in  his  sight  be  at  a  s. 
2  Savi.  22.  19.  but  the  Lord  was  my  s.  Psal.  18. 13. 
Isa.'i.  1.  the  Lord  doth  take  away  the  s.  and  staff, 
the  whole  s.  of  bread,  and  the  whole  s.  of  water 

19.  13.  even  they  that  are  the  s.  of  tribes  thereof 
1  Tim.  3.  t  15.  church  of  God,  pillar  and  s.  of  truth 

STAYS. 
I  Kings  10. 19.  there  was  s.  on  either  side  throne ; 
two  lions  stood  beside  the  s.  2  Chr.  9. 18. 
Jer.  50.  t  36.  a  sword  is  upon  the  chiefs. 

STAY. 
Qen.  19. 17.  neither  s.  thou  in  all  the  plain,  escape 
Exod.  9.  28.  I  will  let  you  go,  ye  sliall  s.  no  longer 
/>eo.  13.  23.  if  bright  spol  s.  in  his  place,  28. 
Josh.  10. 19.  s.  not,  but  pursue  after  your  enemies 
/iufA1.13.would  yes.  for  them  from  hav.  husbands 

1  Sam.  15. 16.  s.  and  I  will  tell  thee  what  Lord  sa?d 

20.  38.  Jonathan  cried,  make  speed,  haste,  s.  not 

2  6a;«.  24.  10.  s.  now  Ihiue  hand,  1  Chron.  21.  15. 
Job  37.4. he  will  not  s.  them  when  his  voice  is  heard 

38.  37.  or  whocan  s.  the  bottles  of  heaven 
Psal.  59. 1 15.  let  them  wander  for  meal  il'  they  be 
not  satisfied,  then  they  will  s.  all  niglit 
Prov.  28.  17.  sliall  flee  to  pit,  let  no  man  s.  him 
Cant.  2.  5.  s.  me  with  flagons,  I  am  sick  of  love 
Isa.  10.  20.  shall  no  mores,  on  him  that  smote  him 

29.  9.  s.  yourselves  and  wonder,  cry  ye  out  and  cry 

30.  12.  because  ye  trust,  and  s.  on  oppression 

31.  1.  woe  to  them  s.  on  horses,  trust  in  chariots 
48.  2.  for  they  s.  themselves  on  the  God  of  Israel 
50.  10.  let  him  trust  in  Lord,  and  s.  on  his  God 

Jer.  4.  0.  s.  not,  for  I  will  bring  evil  from  north 
20.  9.  I  was  weary  with  forbearing,  I  could  nots. 

lian.  4.  35.  none  can  s.  his  hand,  or  say  unto  him 

Hos.  13.  13.  not  s.  in  the  place  of  breaking  forth 
STAYED. 

Gen.  8.  10.  and  Noah  s.  yet  other  seven  days,  12. 
32.4.  with  Laban,  and  I  have  s.  there  until  now 

Eiod.  10.  24.  only  let  your  flocks  and  herds  be  s. 
17.  12.  and  Aaron  and  Hur  s.  up  Moses'  hands 

JVum. 16.  48.  stood  between  dead  and  living,  plague 
was  s.  50. 1  25. 8.  2  Sam.  24. 25.  Psal.  106. 30. 

Deut.  10.  10.  I  s.  in  mount  forty  days  and  nights 

JosA.lO.  13.  and  the  sun  stood  still,  and  the  moon  s. 

1  Sa7n.  20.  19.  and  when  thou  hast  s.  three  days 
24.  7.  David  3.  his  servanis  with  these  words 
30.  9.  where  those  that  were  left  behind  s. 

2.5ara.  17.  17.  now  Jonathan  s.  by  En-rogel 
24.21.  thatlheplague  may  be.*.  1  CA7on.21.22. 

1  Kings  22.  35.  the  king  was  s.  up  in  his  chariot, 
and  died,  and  blood  ran  into  the  chariot, 
2  CAroji.  J8.  34. 

2  Kings  4.  6.  there  is  not  a  vessel  more,  and  oil  s. 
13. 18.  smite  on  ground,  and  he  smote  thrice,  and  s. 
15.  20.  the  king  of  Assyria  s.  not  in  the  land 

Job  38.  11.  and  here  shall  thy  proud  waves  be  s. 
Isa.  26.  3.  wilt  keep  him  whose  mind  is  s.  on  thee 
I^am.  4.  6.  that  was  overthrown,  no  hands  s.  on  her 
Ezek.  31.  15.  and  the  great  waters  were  s. 
Hag.  1. 10.  heaven  iss.  the  earth  iss.  from  her  fruit 
Luke  4.  42.  the  people  came  to  him  and  s.  him 
Acts  19.22.  but  he  himself  s.  in  Asia  for  a  season 

STAYETH. 
7sa.27.8.  he  s.  his  rough  wind  in  a  day  of  east-wind 
Jer.  48.  t  30.  those  on  whom  he  s.  Jo  not  right 

STEAD. 
Gen.  2.  21.  he  closed  up  the  flesh  in  s.  thereof 

4.  25.  God  appointed  me  another  seed  in  s.  of  Abel 
22.  13.  Abraham  offered  the  ram  in  s.  of  his  son 
30.  2.  am  1  in  God's  s.\\  44. 33.  abide  in  s.  of  the  lad 

Exod.  4.  10.  he  shall  be  thy  spokesman,  he  shall 
be  to  thee  in  s.  of  a  mouth?  shall  be  to 
him  in  s.  of  God 
5. 12.  people  scattered  to  gather  stub,  in  s.  of  .straw 
29.  .30.  that  son  that  is  priest  in  his  s.  Lev.  Ifi.32. 
.7V«7;(.3  12. 1  have  taken  the  Levitesin  s.ofall  first- 
born, the  Levites  shall  be  mine,  41.  4.5.  |8. 16. 
41.  cattle  of  the  Levites  in  s.  of  cattle  of  Isr.  45. 

5.  19.  with  another  in  s.  of  thy  husband,  20,  29. 
10.  31.  and  thou  mayest  be  to  us  in  s.  of  eyes 

32.  14.  behold,  ye  are  risen  up  in  your  father's  s. 
Deut.  2.  12.  the  children  of  Esau  dwelt  in  theirs. 

21.  the  Ammonites  dwelt  in  their  s.  22,  23. 
10.  6.  Eleazar  Aaron's  son  ministered  in  his  .f. 

.70.9A.  5.  7.  their  children  whom  he  raised  in  their  s. 

.Judg.  15.  2.  take,  I  pray,  her  sister  in  s.  of  her 

2  Sam.  16.  8.  Saul,  in  whose  s.  thou  hast  reigned 
17.  25.  he  made  Amasa  captain  in  .9.  of  Joab 

1  Kings  1.  30.  Solomon  thy  son  shall  reign  after 

me,  and  shall  sit  on  mv  throne  in  my  s. 

35.  sit  on  my  throne,  for  he  shall  be  king  in  my  .s. 

3.  7.  Lord,  thou  hast  made  me  king  ins.  of  David 

14.  27.  Rehoboam  made  in  their  s.  brasen  shields 

IKings  17.24. placed  in  citicsofSamaria  ins.oflir. 

F.slh.  2.  4.  let  her  be  queen  in  .">.  of  Vashti,  17. 

Joh  16.  4.  if  your  soul  were  in  my  soul's  *. 


STE 

Joh  31.  40.  if  rny  land  cry  against  thee,  let  tJiist.ei 
grow  ins.  of  wheat,  and  cockle  ins.  of  barley 

33.  6.  behold,  I  am  accord,  to  thy  wish  in  God's  s. 

34.  24.  and  he  shall  set  others  in  their  s. 

Psal.  45.  10.  in  s.  of  thy  faihersshall  be  thy  children 
fruv.  11.  8.  and  the  wicked  Cometh  in  hiss. 
A;cc/.4.15.with  the  child  thatshall  stand  up  in  hiss. 
Isa.  3.  24.  it  shall  come  to  pass  that  in  s.  of  sweet 
smell  there  shall  be  stink,  in  s.  of  a  girdle  a  rent 
55.  13.  ins.  of  the  thorn  shall  come  up  tir- tree,  and 
in  ».  of  the  brier  shall  come  up  myrtle-tree 
Ezek.  16.  32.  who  taketh  strangers  in  s.of  lier  husb. 
Hos.  1. 1  10.  in  s.  of  that  where  it  was  said  to  tliein 
2C«r.5.20.we  pray  you  inChrist'ss.be  ye  reconciled 
PAi7ei7i.l3.thatin  thys.mighthave  ministered  tome 
See  Reigned. 
STEADS. 

1  Chr.  5.  22.  they  dwell  in  their  s.  till  the  capti-'ity 

STEADY. 
Piod.l7.12.Mose3'  hands  weres.goingdown  of  sun 

2  Tim.  2.  f  19.  the  foundaiion  of  God  standeth  s. 
STEAL. 

Jlmang  the  Hebrews  Ihrj'l  was  not  punished  with 
death.  Prov.  6.  30,  31,  Men  do  not  despise  a 
thief,  if  he  steal  to  satisfy  his  soul  when  he  is 
hungry.  But  if  he  be  found,  he  shall  restore 
seven-fold  ;  he  shall  give  all  the  .substance  of  his 
house.  The  law  allowed  the  killing  of  a  night 
robber,  Exod.  22.  2.  because  it  teas  supposed 
his  intention  was  to  murder  as  well  as  to  rob: 
It  condemned  a  common  thief  to  make  double 
restitution,  if  the  beast  he  stole  were  found  in 
his  hand  alive,  Exod.  22.  4.  //  Ao  stole  an  ox 
and  killed  it,  he  was  to  restore  it  five-fold,  if 
a  sheep,  only  four-fold,  Exod.  22.  1.  It  is 
thought  that  the  theft  of  an  ux,  or  of  any  of 
that  kind,  was  punished  the  more  severely,  be- 
cause this  animal  is  of  more  use  than  others, 
and  likeicise  because  it  argued  <{  greater  bold- 
ness and  customariness  in  the  thief  to  steal 
that  which  more  easily  might  be  discovered 
If  the  thief  did  not  make  restitution,  they 
seized  what  was  in  his  house,  put  it  up  to  sale, 
and  even  sold  himself,  if  he  had  not  where- 
withal to  make  satisfaction,  Exod.  22.  3.  In 
thepassage  just  quoted,  Prov.  6.  31.  the  wise- 
man  says,  that  the  thief  was  to  restore  seven- 
fold the  value  of  the  thing  stolm.  But  seven- 
fold mriy  here  be  put  for  many-fold,  he  shall 
make  abundant  satisfaction. 
Though  there  was  no  penalty  annexed  to  the  lav 
forbidding  thefl,  except  restitution;  yet  to  steal 
away  a  freeman,  or  a  Hebrew,  and  to  ■'educe 
him  to  the  state  of  servitude,  was  pmiished  with 
death.  E.\od.  21.  16,  He  that  slealeth  a  man 
and  selleth  him,  or  if  he  be  found  in  his  hand, 
he  shall  surely  be  put  to  d'ath.  The  Jews  do 
not  think  that  the  stealing  of  a  man  of  any 
other  nation  deserves  death,  but  only  the  theft 
of  a  free  Hebrew.  If  it  be  a  stranger  that  is 
stole,  they  were  only  condemned  to  restitution. 
They  found  this  distinction  upon  a  law  in 
Deut.  24.  7.  which  limits  this  law  concerning 
man-stealing:  If  a  man  be  found  stealing  3ny 
of  his  brethren  of  the  children  of  Israel ;  which 
exception  the  Septuagint  and  Onkelos  have  in- 
serted in  the  text  of  Exnd.  21.  10.  This  crime 
is  called  Plagium.  See  Sell. 
Some  have  thought  that  mere  theft  among  /Ac  He- 
brews had  no  particular  mark  of  infamy  an- 
nexed to  it  in  some  cases.  Solomonsnys,  Prov. 
6.  30,  Men  do  not  despise  a  thief,  if  he  steal  to 
satisfy  his  soul  when  he  is  hungry:  The  law 
inflicts  no  particular  punishment  on  him,  and 
he  is  not  made  to  undergo  any  shameful  or  ig- 
nominious penalty:  If  he  is  found,  ho  shall  re- 
store seven-fold,  he  shall  give  all  the  substance 
of  his  house.  7'A(S  is  all  the  danger  he  is  ex- 
posed to  in  stealing,  except  he  hod  not  where- 
withal to  make  rcstitjition,  in  which  case  he  was 
reduced  to  bonda/rc.  Many  people  inhabiting 
round  about  Judea,  seem  to  have  made  robbery 
a  kind  ofprofssion.  Isaac  foretold  to  Esau 
that  he  should  live  by  his  .<iword,  that  is,  that 
he  should  inaintain  himself  by  jihinderin<T,Gei\. 
27.  40.  Ishmacl,  the  son  0/  Abr.iham,  had  no 
other  trade  than  war  and  rapine;  he  was  a  wild 
man  and  an  archer,  he  was  always  at  war  with 
his  neighbours:  His  hand  will  be  ngainst  every 
man,  and  every  man's  hiind  aSMinst  him.  Gen. 
16.  12.  I  21.  20.  His  posterity  the  Ishmaeliles 
followed  the  example  of  their  father,  and,  03 
some  affirm,  made  no  scruple  to  rob  upon  the 
high-wav. 
When  the  Israelites  were  just  upon  the  pnint  of 
departing  out  of  Egvpt,  they  borrowed  of  their 
Egyptian  neighbours,  valuable  garments,  ves- 
sels of  gold  and  silver,  and  carried  them  along 
with  them  into  the  wilderness.  Exod.  11.  2,  3, 
Speak  now  in  the  ears  of  the  pccylc,  and  let 


STB 

every  man  borrow  of  liis  neiglibour,  and  every  | 
wonlan  of  her  neij;lil>our,  jewels  of  silver,  anii 
juwels  of  gold.  And  the  Lord  gave  the  people 
favour  ill  the  sight  of  the  Egyptians,  ll  is  in- 
quired, wUctker  the  Hebrews  could  lawfully 
borrow  ikest  tilings  of  the  EgyptiaiKs,  which  Ihey 
had  no  intention  to  restore  to  lluin  again!  and 
ichttkcr  this  was  not  to  commit  a  manifest  theft 
and  injuslice?  Coinmentaturs  give  seciral 
answers  to  this  question.  Some  say,  that  upon 
this  occasion,  (wod plainly  dispensid  with  that 
law;  by  which  he  had  obliged  the  Hebrews  not 
to  commit  any  theft ;  ur  rather,  i/iat  being  the 
absnlutc  Master  of  every  thing,  he  transferred 
to  the  Hebrews  that  right  that  the  Egyptians 
had  to  these  things.  Others  in.^inaute  another 
reason,  which  i.i,  that  (lud  would  recompense 
the  Hebrevvs/«r  the  Inbours  that  they  had  suf- 
jfired  in  Egypt,  and  allowed  them  to  pay  thcm- 
telcis  by  ihrir  own  hands,  by  detaining  what 
they  borrowed  of  the  Egyptians.  This  way  of 
paying  one's  self  cannot  be  allowed  regularly; 
but  in  th'ise  circumstances,  halting  no  other 
xoay  of  doing  themseloes  justice,  and  being 
authorized  by  the  express  command  of  (iod, 
they  might  have  recourse  to  this  expedient. 

Others  look  upon  this,  not  as  a  Ikeft,  but  as  a 
fair  booty  got  in  a  just  war.  The  Egyptians 
wtre  enemies  to  the  Hebrews ;  they  had  unjustly 
jicrsecated  them  for  a  long  time,  and  took  from 
them  the  means  of  defending  themselves,  and 
of  recovering  their  liberty:  They  might  there- 
fore lawfully  deprive  them  of  their  goods  by  a 
wile,  and  a  hind  of  slratagcm,  by  pretending 
to  borrow  of  them  what  they  never  intended  to 
return. 

Some  here  distinguish  between  s«cA  Israelites  who 
acted  in  the  simplicity  of  their  hearts,  and  sin- 
cerely obeyed  the  cmniiiands  of  Ood,  and  those 
that  followed  the  mot  ions  of  their  own  covetous 
desires.  The  first  are  excused  from  sin  by  the 
vpria-htness  of  tlieir  intentions,  bat  not  the 
second,  who  were  ready  enough  to  rob  the 
Egyptians,  if  they  could  do  it  with  impunity, 
even  tliough  (iod  had  not  allowed  them  to  bor- 
row any  thing  from  them. 

Others  observe,  that  the  Egyptians  were  indebted 
til  the  Hebrews,  not  only  for  their  goods,  but 
for  their  liiii'S  also,  because  of  the  benefits  they 
had  received  from  the  Patriarch  Joseph,  when 
tliey  were  under  the  greatest  necessity.  The 
Israelites  were  unjustly  oppressed  by  a  cruel 
slavery  in  Egypt:  TAe  Egyptians cjerci.fcrfaH 
kinds  of  violences  again<t  them,  and  over- 
whelmed them  with  cnlmnities,  even  to  the  ren- 
dering their  livesu  neasy  to  them.  The  Hebrews 
had  built  them  cities,  and  had  very  much  im- 
proved the  riches  of  these  inhuman  masters; 
teho,  instead  vf  acknowledging  these  services, 
intended  even  to  take  away  their  lives  from 
them.  >K//«£  injustice  therefore  could  therehe, 
if  the  Israelites  should  take  again  a  small  part 
of  that  which  tkiy  hud  prnenred  for  the  Egyp- 
tians? Jlnd  if  they  should  receive  a  small  rc- 
compencc  for  so  many  .services  they  had  done 
them?  They  came  poor  out  of  Egypt,  whereas 
th'y  ought  to  have  got  much  riches  together, 
if  they  had  not  been  reduced  into  an  unjust 
servitude:  J]nd,  just  as  a  freeman,  who  had 
been  stolen  away  and  sold  for  a  slave,  might, 
without  injustice,  set  himself  at  liberty,  and 
pay  himself  for  his  labour,  by  taking  from 
his  master  a  small  reward  for  his  service:  So 
the  Israelites,  at  their  departure  out  of  Egypt, 
might  receive  something  as  arccompcnce,  since 
a  great  deal  was  due  to  them. 

Orn.'.i  1 .  27.  wherefore  didst  thou  s.  away  from  mc 
44.  8.  how  then  should  we  s.  silver  or  fold  ? 

F.zod.  20.  15.  thou  shilt  not  s.  J.ev.  10.  11.  neut. 
.•>.  19.  Mat.  19.  18.  Rom.  13.  9. 

•22.  1.  if  a  nnn  s.  an  ox,  he  shall  restore  five 

2  Sam.  10.  3.  as  people  s.  away  when  flee  in  battle 

Prov.  6. 30.  if  he  s.  to  satisfy  his  soul  when  hungry 
30.9  or  h-M  I  be  poor  and  s.  and  take  name  of  Ood 

Jrr.  7.  9.  will  ye  s.  murder,  and  commit  adultery 
23.  30. 1  am  against  the  prophets  that  *.  my  worda 

Mat.  6. 19.  and  where  thieves  break  through  and  s. 
20.  whorc  thieves  do  not  break  through  nor  s. 
27.  fi-l.  lovl  his  disciples  como  and  ».  iiirn  away 

Mark  10.  10.  do  not  kill,  do  not  s.  Luke  18.  20. 

John  10.  10.  the  thief  cornel  b  not,  but  for  to  s. 

/?nm.2.21.thnt  preneli  mHiiHboiild  nols.dost  thou  ». 

F.ph.  4  28.  let  him  that  stole,  s.  no  mote,  but  labour 
STR.M,ER.S. 

I  Tim.  1.  10.  but  the  law  was  made  for  mon-s. 
STEALETH. 

F.iod.  21.  IR.  he  that  s.  a  imin  and  pellelh  him 

Jph1\.  t  18.  and  as  chair  that  the  «torm  s.  away 
27.  20   a  tempest  s.  him  away  in  the  night 

Zcch.  i.  3.  fur  evury  one  that  (.  iball  be  cut  ofT 
380 


STE 

STEALING. 
Dcut.U.l.  if  a  man  l)e  found  s.  any  of  his  brethren 
Hos.  4.  2.  by  swearing  and  s.  they  break  out 

STEALTH. 
2  Sam.  19. 3.  the  people  gal  them  by  s.  into  the  city 
Job  i.  t  12.  now  a  tiling  was  by  «.  brought  to  nie 

STEUFAST. 
.fob  II.  IS.  yea,  thou  shall  be  s.  and  shall  not  fear 
Psal.  78.  8.  whose  spirit  was  not  s.  with  God 

37.  neither  were  they  *.  in  his  covenant 
Dan.  *).  2(5.  he  is  the  living  God,  and  4.  for  ever 
1  Cor.  7. 37.  he  that  stand,  in  his  heart  s.  doeth  well 

15.  58.  theiefore,  my  beloved  bretiiren,  be  ye  s. 
•iCor.  1.  7.  and  our  liope  of  you  is  «.  knowing 
Heb.  2.  2.  for  if  the  wunl  spoken  by  angels  was  s. 

3.  14.  if  we  hold  our  contidence  s.  to  the  end 
6. 19.  whicli  hope  we  have  as  an  anchor  snie  and  *■. 

1  Pet.  S.  9.  wlioin  resist  «.  in  the  faith,  knowing 

STEOFASTLY. 
Ruth  I.  18.  when  she  saw  that  she  was  s.  minded 
'iKings  8.  11.  and  lie  settled  his  countenance  s. 
Luke  y.  51.  he  s.  set  his  face  to  go  to  Jerusalem 
.^cts  1.  10.  while  they  looked  s.  behold,  two  nan 
2.  42.  they  continued  s.  in  ihe  apostle's  doctiine 
(J.  15.  they  all  looking  s.  on  him, saw  bis  face  as  if 
7. 55.  Stephen  looked  uji  s.  into  heaven,  saw  glory 
14.9.  who  s.  beholding  him  and  pcrceivinglie  had 

2  Cor.  3.  7.  Israel  could  not «.  behold  face  of  Moses 

13.  could  nut  £.  look  to  ihe  end  of  thai  abolished 
STEDFASTNESS. 
Psal.  5.  t  9.  fur  there  is  no  s.  in  their  mouth 
Col.  2.  5.  beholding  the  i.  of  your  faith  in  Christ 
2  Pel.  3.  17.  beware  lest  ye  fall  from  your  own  s. 

STEEL. 

2  .Sam.  22. 35.  a  bow  of  s.  is  broken,  Psal.  18.  34. 
Job  20.  24.  the  bow  of  s.  shall  strike  him  through 
■Icr.  \f>.  12.  shall  iron  break  northern  iron  and  s.7 

STEEP. 

F.iek.  38.  20.  the  «.  places  shall  fall  and  every  wall 

Mic.  1.  4.  as  waters  thai  are  poured  down  as.  place 

Mat.  8.32.  the  swine  ran  violently  down  a  s.  place 

into  the  .sea,  and  perished  in  waters,  Mark 

5.  13.  Luke  8.  33. 

STEM. 
/sa.G.t  13.  as  a  teil-tree  and  oak  whose  s.  is  in  them 

11.  1.  there  shall  come  a  rod  out  of  the  s.  of  Jesse 

STEP. 

1  Sam.  20.3.  there  is  but  a  s.  between  me  and  death 
Job  31.  7.  if  my  s.  hath  tunied  out  of  the  way 

STEPPED. 
Tohn  5.  4.  whosoever  first  s.  in  was  made  whole 

STEPPETH. 
./uAn  5.7.wljile  lam  coming  another  s.down  bef.me 

STEPS. 
Ezod.  20.  26.  neither  go  up  by  s.  to  mine  altar 

2  Slim.  22. 3".  thou  hast  enlarged  my  s.  Ps.  18.  36. 

1  Kings  10.  19.  the  throne  had  sixs.  2  Chron.  9.  18. 
20.  twelve  lions  stood  on  the  s.  2  Chron.  9.  19. 

.fob  14.  16.  for  now  thou  numberest  my  s. 
18.  7.  the  s.  of  his  stringih  shall  be  strailened 
23.11.  my  footbath  held  hiss,  his  way  have  I  kept 
29.  6.  when  I  washed  my  s.  with  butter,  and  rock 
31.  4.  doth  he  not  see  my  ways  and  count  my  &•. 
37.  I  would  declare  to  him  the  number  of  my  s. 

Psal.  17. 11.  they  have  now  compassed  us  in  our  s. 
37.  23.  s.  of  a  good  man  are  ordered  by  the  Lord 
31.  Ihe  law  in  his  heart,  none  of  bis  s.  shall  slide 
44.  18.  nor  have  our  s.  declined  from  thy  way 
.Vi.  (i.  llii'y  mark  my  s.  when  they  wait  for  my  soul 
57.  fi.  they  have  prepared  a  net  for  my  s. 
73.  2.  but  as  for  me,  my  s.  had  well  nigh  slipped 
85.  13.  and  shall  set  us  in  the  way  of  his  s. 
119.  133.  order  my  s.  in  thy  woid,  let  not  iniquity 

Pruv.i.  12.  when  goesl  thy  .S-.  shall  not  be  straitened 
5. 5.  her  feet  go  down  to  death,  s.  take  hold  on  hell 

16.  9.  but  the  Lord  directelb  liis  s. 

Isa.  26.  6.  the  s.  of  the  needy  shall  tread  it  down 
.fer.  10. 23.  it  is  not  in  man  that  walk,  to  direct  his  s. 
Lam.  4.18.  they  hunt  our  *.  we  cannot  go  in  streets 
F.iek.  40.  22.  they  wont  up  to  it  by  seven  .?.  26. 

31.  anil  the  coing  up  to  it  bad  eight  s.  S-l,  37. 

49.he  brought  me  bys.whereby  they  went  up  to  it 
Dan.  II.  43.  the  Ethiopians  shall  be  at  his  s. 
Rom.  4. 12.  but  walk  in  s.  of  that  fiith  of  Abraham 

2  Ciir.  12.  18.  walked  we  not  in  the  same  s.1 

1  Pet.  2. 21.  an  example  that  ye  should  follow  his  s. 

STER.N. 
Jlcts  27.  29.  Uiey  cast  four  nnrhors  out  of  the  «. 

STEWARD. 
Gen.  15.  2.  and  the  s.  of  my  house  is  this  Eliezer 
43.  19.  they  eame  near  to  the  s.  of  Joseph's  bouse 
I  Kings  16.9.  drinking  drunk  in  the  house  of  his  s. 
Dan.  1.  t  11.  then  sniil  Daniel  to  the  s. 
Mat.  2IJ.  8.  the  lord  of  ihe  vineyard  saith  to  his  s. 
Luke  8.  3.  Joanna  the  wife  of  Clniza,  llerutl's  s. 

12.  42.  who  then  is  that  faithful  and  wise  s. 

16.  1.  there  was  a  certain  rich  man  who  had  n  s. 
2.  give  account,  for  thou  ninyevt  be  no  longer  s. 
8.  and  the  Lord  coinminded  Ihe  unjust  s. 
Tit.  1.7.  abithop  must  be  btain>'lesj  us  Ihul.  ofG. 


STI 

STEWARDS. 
1  Chr.  28. 1.  and  David  assembled  captains  and  g 
1  Cor.  4.  1.  as  ministers  and  i'.  of  mysteries  of  God 

2.  moreover,  it  is  recjuired  in  «.  llial  a  man  be 

found  faithfU' 

1  Pit.  4.  10.  as  good  s.  of  manifold  giace  of  God 

STEWARDSHIP. 
Luke  16.  2.  he  said  to  him,  give  an  acct.  of  Iby  t 

3.  for  my  lord  takeih  awav  from  me  the  s.  •!. 

STICK. 
.fob  33.  21.  his  bones  that  were  not  seen,  s.  out 
41.  17.  his  scales  are  joined,  tlicy  s.  together 
Psal.  .iS.  2.  for  thine  arrows  s.  fast  in  me 
Ezik.  29.  4. 1  wilt  cause  the  fish  to  s.  to  thy  scales 

STICKETH. 

rroB.18.24.  there  isafiieiid  s.  closer  than  abrulku' 

STICK. 

2  Kings  6.  6.  cut  down  a  s.  and  cast  it  in  ihitlier 
/.aiH. 4. 8. their  skin  is  withered  and  becuiiie  like  a  j 
£:<7i:.37.  16.  take  one*,  write  on  ii,  take  another  s 

17.  and  join  them  one  to  another  into  one  a.  19 
STICKS. 
JVum.  15.  32.  a  man  that  gathered  s.  on  the  sabbath 
33.  they  that  found  him  gatherings,  brought  him 

1  Kings  17. 10.  the  widow  woman  was  gatherings. 

12.  behold,  I  am  gathering  two  s.  to  go  in 
Ezek.  37.  20.  and  the  *.  whereon  thou  wrilest 
yicts"8.2.  when  Paul  had  !.'alliered  abundle  ot's. 

STIFF. 
.Ter.  17.23.  they  obeyed  not,  but  made  their  neck* 

STIFF-IIEARTED. 
Ezek.%  4.  they  are  impudent  cliildr.  and  s.-hearted 

STIFF-NECK. 
Deul.  31.  27.  I  know  thy  rcb'-llion  and  thy  s.-neck 
Psal."!!}.  5.  lift  your  horn,  speak  not  with  a  s.-neek 

STIFF-NECKED. 
Erod.2'2.^.  behold,  this  people  is  as.-neckedpcople 

33.  3.  thou  art  a  s.-necked  people,  Deut.  9.  6. 
5.  say  to  Isiael,  ye  are  a  s.-ncckcd  people 

34.  9.  for  it  is  a  s.-necked  people,  Deut.  9.  13. 
Deut.  10.  16.  circumcise  therefore  the  foreskin  of 

your  heart,  and  be  no  more  s.-necked 

2  CAron. 30.  8.be  not  s.-necked  as  your  fathers  were 
.^cts  7.  51.  ye  s.-necked  ye  always  resist  II.  Ghost 

STIFFENED. 
2  C/tr.  36. 13.  lies,  his  neck  and  hardened  his  heart 

STILL. 
Oen.  41.  21.  but  they  were  s.  ill-favoured  as  at  first 
F.xod.  9.  2.  if  thou  refuse,  and  wilt  hold  them  s. 
Lev.  13.  57.  and  if  it  appea;  s.  in  the  garment 
JVum.  14.  38.  but  Joshua  and  Caleb  lived  s. 
Josh.  24.  10.  therefore  Balaani  blessed  you  s. 

1  Sam.  12.  25.  but  if  ye  sliall  *•.  do  wickedly 
20.  25.  Saul  said,  tliou  also  sbalt  s.  prevail 

2  So?n.l4.32.  it  bad  been  good  to  have  been  there*. 
16. 5.  Sbimeicame  forth,  and  cursed  s.  as  became 

2  Kings  7.  4.  and  if  we  sit  s.  here,  we  die  also 
12.  3.  the  people  sacrificed  s.  and  burnt  incense 
in  the  high  places,  15.4,  35.  2  CArun.  33. 17. 
2  C/(rn7i.22.  9  had  no  power  to  keep  s.  the  kingdom 
Job  2.  3.  and  s.  he  holdetb  fast  his  integrity 
O.his  wife  said,  dost  thou  s.retain  thine  iniegrit^'? 
3.  13.  for  now  should  I  have  lain  «•.  and  been  quiet 
20.  13.  though  he  keep  it  t   within  his  moutli 
r.S(ii.49.9.that  he  should  s.  live  for  ever  and  not  see 
68.  21.  such  a  one  as  goeth  on  s.  in  his  trespasses 
78.  32.  for  all  this  they  sinned  »-.  and  believed  not 
84.  4.  in  thy  house  they  will  bo  .«.  praising  thee 
92.  14.  Ihey  shall  s.  bring  forth  fruit  in  oM  age 
i:t9.  18.  wiien  I  awake,  I  am  s.  with  thee 
F.ccl.  12.  9.  he  s.  taught  the  people  knowledge 
Isa.  5.  25.  his  anger  is  not  turned  away,  but  hit 
hand  is  si  retched  out  s.  9.  12, 17,21.  |  10.4. 
.Ter.  8.  14.  why  do  we  sit  s?  assemble  yourselves 
23.  17.  they  say  s.  unto  them  that  des;<4se  me 
27. 11.  those  will  I  let  remain  s.  in  their  own  land 
31.  20.  [  doeanii'sily  remember  him  s.  my  bowels 
42.I0.if  ye  will  *-.  abide  in  this  land,  will  build  you 
Lam.  3.  20  my  rout  hath  them  s.  in  remembrance 
Ezek.  33.  30.  thy  peo|)le.'.  are  talking  n^'aiiist  thee 
41.  7.  there  was  a  winding  about  s.  upward 
Zech.  11.  10.  nor  feed  that  that  standelh  s. 
./i//t«  7.9. when  had  said  these  words,  abode*.  11.6. 
.■lets  15.  34.  it  pleased  Silas  to  abide  s.  17.  14. 
/?«m.ll.23.iflhev  bide  not*,  in  unbelief,  liegrnflTcd 
1  7V»H.  1.  3  I  be'sought  Ibec  to  abide  *■.  at  Epbesui 
Rev.  22.  11.  let  him  be  unjust  *.  filthy  *.  holy  «. 
See  Stand,  Stood. 
STILL. 
ri«ri.l5.16.  they  shall  be  ass.  n»  a  stone,  f.ll  people 
./uilg.  18.  9.  the  land  is  very  gi'od,  and  are  ye  s.7 
1  Kings  19.  12.  and  after  the  fire  a  ».  small  voics 
2-.'.  3.  Rarnoth  in  Gilcad  is  ours,  and  we  bo  *. 
./»/;  4.tI6.tliere  was  silence,  I  boird .".  voici>,  sayin| 
Psal.  4.  4.  commune  with  your  hrarl  and  be  ». 
8.  2.  thatthoii  niightest*. lliu  enenivand  tivenga 
23,  2.  he  Icndclh  mo  beside  the  s.  waters 
46.  10.  be  ».  and  know  ;S.l     k^.  Go  '• 
70.  8.  the  earth  feared,  a-d  was  *. 
83.  1.  hold  not  thy  peaoo,  and  bo  not  *.  O  God 


STO 

P}  J07.29.  storm  a  calm,  that  waves  thereof  are  s. 
Isa.  23.  'i.  be  s.  ye  inli;ibitants  of  the  isle 
30.7.  I  have  criei'.,  their  strength  is  to  sit  s. 
42.  14.  t  have  been  s.  and  refrained  myself 
^er.  47.6.  O  thou  sword  of  the  Lord,  rest  and  be  s. 
.tfar4  4.39.h8  arose  and  said  to  the  sea, peace,  be  5. 

STILLED. 
J\rum.  13.  30  Caleb  s.  the  [>eople  before  Moses 
JVe/i.  8.  11.  so  the  Levitos  s.  all  the  people 

STILLEST. 
Psal.  89  9.  when  the  waves  arise  thou  *.  them 

STILLETH. 
Fsal.  65.  7.  who  s.  the  noise  of  the  seas,  of  waves 

STING. 
I  Cor.l5.55.  where  is  thy  s.?  ||56.  s.  of  death  is  sin 

Sri.N'GS. 
Rev  9.  10.  weres.  in  their  tails,  power  to  hurt  men 

STfNGETH. 
Prov.  23.  32.  at  the  last  it  s.  like  an  adder 

STINK,  Sut>sta7ilive. 
/.^a.  3. 24.  instead  of  sweet  smell,  there  shall  be  *. 
34.  3.  their  s.  shall  come  out  of  their  carcases 
Joel  2.20.1iis  «.shall  come  U|i,and  ill  savour  come  up 
■Jimos  4.10.have  made  «.  of  your  carap.s  to  come  up 

STINK. 
Gen.  34.  3U.  j'e  have  made  me  to  s.  in  the  land 
F.zod.5.\  21.  have  made  our  savour  to  s.in  the  eyes 
7.  18.  the  fish  shall  die,  and  the  river  shall  s. 
16.  24.  the  manna  that  was  laid  up  did  not  s. 
1  Sam.  13.  t  4.  Israel  did  s.  with  the  Philistines 
27. 1 12.  he  hath  made  his  people  Israel  to  s. 

1  Ckr.  19.  t  6.  Amnion  saw  thny  made  them  to  s. 
Psal  38.  5.  my  wounds  s.  and  are  corrupt 

STINKETH. 

Isa.  50.  2.  their  fish  s.  because  there  is  no  water 

John  11.  39.  Martha  said,  Lord,  by  this  time  he  s. 
STINKING. 

Psal.  14. 1 3.  they  are  become  s.  altogether 

Eccl.  10.1.  cause  ointment  to  send  forth  as.savour 
STIR. 

^um.  24.  9.  he  lay  as  a  lion,  who  shall  s.  him  up? 

Joh  17.8.  innocent  s.  up  himself  ag.  the  hypocrite 
41.  10.  none  is  so  fierce  that  dare  s.  him  up 

Psal.  35.  23.  s.  up  thyself,  and  awake  to  judgment 
78.  38.  and  he  did  not  s.  up  all  his  wrath 
80.  2.  s.  up  thy  strength,  and  come  and  save  us 

Prov.  15.  1.  but  grievous  words  s.  up  anger 

Cant.  2.  7.  that  ye  s.  not  up  my  love,  3.  5.  |  8.  4. 

Isa.  10.26.  the  Lord  shall  s.  up  a  scourge  for  him 
13. 17.  behold,  I  will.?,  up  the  Medes  against  them 
42.13.  he  shall  s.  up  jealousy  like  a  man  of  war 

/Jan. 11.2.  he  shalL'.iip  all  against  realm  of  Grecia 
25.  he  shall  s.  up  his  power  against  the  kint 

0  Tim.  1.  fi.  that  thou  s.  up  the  gift  of  God  in  thee 

2  Pel.  1.  13.  I  think  it  meet  to  s.  you  up,  3.  1. 

STIR. 

Jli-ts  12.18.  there  was  no  small  s.  among  the  soldiers 
19.  23.  there  arose  no  small  s.  about  that  way 

STIRS. 
/sa.  22. 2.  thou  that  art  full  of,?,  a  tumultuous  city 

STIRRED. 
F.zod.  35.  21.  whose  heart  s.  him  up,  26.  1  36.  2. 
1 .9am.22.8.  that  my  son  hath  s.  up  my  scrv.  aga.  me 
26.  19.  if  the  Lord  have  5.  thee  up  against  me 
IKings  11.14.  Lord  s.U|)  an  adversary  to  Solomon 
23.  God  s.  him  up  another  adversary,  Rezon 
21.25. none  like  Ahab,whom  Jezebel  his  wife  ^. up 

1  Chron.  5.  26.  and  God  s.  up  the  spirit  of  Pul 

2  Chron  ■'i\.  16.  L.  s.up  ag.  Jehoram  the  Philistines 
.36.  22.  Lord  s.  up  the  spirit  of  Cyrus,  Ezra  1. 1. 

Psal.  39.  2.  I  was  dumb,  and  my  sorrow  was  s. 
Z)«n.  11.10.  but  his  softs  shall  be  s. up  and  assemble 
25.  the  king  of  the  south  shall  be  s.  up  to  battle 
Harr.  1.  14.  the  Lord  s.  up  the  spirit  of  Zerubhabel 
Jicts  6.  12.  they  s.  up  the  people,  17.  13.  |  21.  27. 

13.  50.  but  the  Jews  s.  up  the  devout  women 

14.  2.  the  unbelieving  J"W3  s.  up  the  Gentiles 
17.  16.  at  Athens,  Paul  his  spirit  was  s.  in  him 

STIRRETH. 
/)<'Kf.32.n.asaneagle«.uphernesf,fluttereth  over 
Prov.  10. 12.  hatred  s.  up  strifes,  but  love  covereth 

15.  18.  a  wrathful  man  s.  up  strife,  29.  22. 
28.  25.  he  that  is  of  a  proud  heart  s.  up  strife 

Isa.  14.9.  hell  from  beneath*,  up  the  dead  for  thee 

64.  7.  none  s.  up  himself  to  take  hold  on  thee 
I^uhe  23.5.  he  s.  up  people  teaching  thro'  all  Jewry 

STOCK. 
I.m.  25.  47.  or  to  the  s.  of  the  stranger's  family 
.Tnb  14.  8.  though  the  s.  thereof  die  in  the  ground 
Isa.  40.  24.  vea,  their  s.  shall  not  take  root  in  earth 

44.  19.  shall  I  fall  down  to  the  s.  of  a  tree? 
./it.  2.  27.  saying  to  a  s.  thou  art  my  father 

10. 8.  are  brutish,  the  s.  is  a  doctrine  of  vaaities 
.tr.ts  13.  26.  children  of  the  s.  of  .\braham 
Phil. 2.  5.  of  the  5.  of  Israel,  a  Hebrew  of  Hebrews 

STOCKS. 
Jith  13.  27.  thou  puttcst  my  feet  also  in  the  3. 

33. 11.  he  putteth  my  feel  in  s.  makcth  my  path* 
Prnv.  7. 22.  or  as  a  fool  to  the  correction  of  the  «. 

Ter.  3. 9.  she  committed  adultery  with  stones  and  s. 
,      581 


Jer.  20. 9.  then  Pashur  put  Jeremiah  in  the  «.  3. 
29.26.  that  thou  shouldst  put  him  in  prison  and  «. 
Has.  4.  12.  my  people  ask  counsel  at  their  ». 
..icts  16.  24.  who  made  their  feet  fast  in  the  s. 

GAZING-STOCK. 
JVuft.  3.  C.  and  I  will  set  thee  as  a  gazing-s. 
//eA.10.33.ye  were  made  a  gazing-s.by  reproaches 

STOICS 
IVere  a  sort  of  heathen  philosophers,  who  took 
their  name  from  the  Greek  word  iVo^e,  sig- 
nifying aporch  or  entry,becausc  Zeno,  the  head 
of  the  Stoics,  kept  his  school  in  a  porch  of  the 
city  of  Athens.     They  htld,  that  a  wise  man 
ought  to  be  free  from  all  passions,  never  to  be 
moved  either  with  joy  or  grief,  esteeming  all 
things  to  be  ordered  by  an  inevitable  necessity 
and  fate.    Josephus  says,  that  the  Pharisees 
approach  very  near  to  the  sentiments  of  the 
Stoics.     They  affected  the  same  stiffness,  pa- 
tience,  apathy,   austerity,   and  i7isensibility. 
The  sect  of  the  Stoics  was  still  considerable  at 
Athens,  when  St.  Paul  came  thither,  since  he 
had  conferences  with  them,  Acts  17.  18. 
STOLE. 
Clen.  31.  90.  Jacob  s.  away  unawares  to  Laban 
2  Sam.  15.  6.  so  Absalom  s.  the  hearts  of  Israel 
iKings  11.2.Jehoshebas.Joash  from  among  king's 
sons,  they  hid  him  from  Athalia,2  CAron.22.  11. 
jMat.  23.  13.  his  disciples  s.  him  while  we  slept 
EpA.4.28.  let  him  that  s.  steal  no  more,  but  labour 

STOLEN. 
Gen.  30.  33.  that  shall  be  counted  s.  with  me 
31.19.  and  Rachel  had  s.  her  fathen's  images,  32. 
26.  that  thou  hast  5.  away  unawares  to  me 
30.  yet  wherefore  hast  thou  «.  my  gods? 
39.ilidst  require  it,whother  s.by  day, or  s.by  night 
40.  15.  indeed  I  was  s.  away  out  of  the  land 
Exod.'22.  7.  if  the  stuff  be  s.  out  of  the  house 

12.  if  it  be  s.  from  him,  he  shall  make  restitution 
.losh.  7.  11.  they  have  s.  and  dissembled  also 
2  Sam.  19.41.  why  have  men  of  Judahs.lhee  away 
21. 12.  the  men  of  Jabesh  had  s.  the  bones  of  Saul 
Prot).9.17.  s.  waters  are  sweet, bread  eaten  in  secret 
Ofta(/.5. would  they  not  have  .s.till  they  had  enough 

STOMACH. 
1  Tim.  5.  23.  but  u.se  a  little  wine  for  thy  s.  sake 

STOMACHER. 
Isa.  3.  24.  instead  of  a  s.  a  girding  of  sackcloth 

STONE 
Is  a  mineral  well  known,  of  which  there  are  di- 
vers kinds.  -Is  to  the  precious  stones,  or  gems, 
of  which  mention  is  made  in  Scripture,  all 
that  can  be  found  concerning  them  in  the  Com 
mentators,  is  not  much  to  be  relied  on,  since 
neither  the  Jews,  nor  even  the  ancient  Greek 
Interpreters,  seem  to  have  had  a  sufjici'nt 
knowledge  of  the  proper  signification  of  the 
original  terms. 
The  corner-stone,  or  the  head-stone  of  the  corner, 
PsaJ.  118.  22.  This- is  that  ickich  is  put  as 
the  angle  of  a  building,  whether  at  the  founda- 
tion, or  at  the  top  of  the  wall.  Jesus  Christ  is 
that  corner-stone  which  was  rejected  by  the 
Jews,  but  is  become  the  corner-stone  of  the 
church,  and  the  stone  that  bivlt  ind  unites 
the  Jews  and  Gentiles  in  the  urion  of  the  same 
faith.  Mat.  21.  42.  Eph.  2.  15,  20.  JInd  as 
corner  stones  and  foundation  str-itr.  in  build 
ings  used  to  be  chosen  ici'h  C:  re,  and  to  be 
thoroughly  examined  by  the  builder  :  so  Christ 
!>  called  a  tried  stone,  a  sure  foundation.  Isa. 
28.  16,  I  lav  in  Zion,  a  tried  stone,  a  sure  foun- 
dation. /  have  tried,  I  have  approved  of  him 
as  every  way  sufficient  to  be  the  foundation 
and  head  of  the  church.  Jlnd  because  this 
stone  is  not  set  up  by  man,  but  sent  by  God, 
therefore  he  is  said  to  be  cut  out  of  the  moun- 
tain without  hands,  Dan.  2.  45.  .find  because 
unbelievers  refuse  to  be,  laid  upon  this  stone 
and  so  perish,  therefore  it  is  called  a  stone 
of  stumbling,  a  rock  of  offence,  that  is,  an  oc- 
casion of  sin.  and  ruin,  at  whom  they  will  take 
offence  and  stumble,  so  as  to  fall  and  be 
broken,  Tsa.  8.  14,  15.  1  Pet.  2.  8.  This  was 
accomplished  at  the  coming  of  the  Messiah, 
whom  the  Jews  rejected  to  their  own  destruc- 
tion, as  not  answering  their  carnal  ejpecta- 
tiont,  nor  suiting  with  their  way  of  building  : 
that  is,  not  to  be  made  use  of  for  promoting 
and  carrying  on  their  worldly  projects  and.  in- 
terest. Christ  is  likewise  called  a  precious 
stone,  because  of  his  excellency,  glory,  and 
beauty;  he  is  called  a  chosen,  an  elect  stone, 
because  he  was  chosen  and  appointed  by  the 
Father  to  the  work  of  redemption  before  the 
foundation  of  the  world,  1  Pet.  1.  20.  |  2.  4,  0. 
He  is  likewise  termed  a  living  stone,  1  Pel.  2. 
4.  fic  communicates  spiritual  life  to  those 
that  close  with  him,  and  ore  built  upon  him. 
Lastly,  this  Btohe  ii  gaid  to  have  nevcn  eyes, 


STO 

Zech.  3.  9.  to  note  that  the  Messiah  should 
be  endued  with  perfect  wisdom  and  knowledge, 
to  order  all  things  in  the  church,  to  watch 
over  it,  and  to  take  care  of  all  the  concern* 
thereof. 
jJs  Christ  the  Head  is  called  a  stone,  so  also  his 
members,  true  believers,  wito  are  built  upon, 
and  derive  spiritual  life  from  the  foundation, 
Christ,  are  called  stones.  1  Pel.  2.  5,  Ye  also 
as  lively  stones  are  built  up  a  spiritual  house. 
.Is  the  law  was  engraven  on  two  tables  of 
stones,  so  believers  have  the  law  written  in  tluir 
liearts.  They  are  stones  for  their  constancy, 
strength,  and  unmovublencss  in  all  the  storms 
of  life.  They  are  stones  for  continuance  and 
durableness.  Jls  stones  are  dug  out  of  a  quar- 
ry, sii  believers  are  selected  and  chosen  from 
the  rest  of  mankind.  They  are  united  with 
Christ  a;i(2  true  Christians  in  one  body;  like 
the  stones  of  a  house,  compact  among  them- 
selves, and  upon  the  foundation. 
A  heart  of  stone.  Job,  speaking  of  tht  Levia- 
than, says,  that  his  heart  is  as  firm  as  a 
stone,  yea,  as  hard  as  a  piece  of  the  nether 
millstone,  .lob  41.  24.  That  is,  he  is  of  a  very 
extraordinary  strength,  boldness,  and  courage. 
It  is  saiil,  1  Sam.  25.  37.  that  Nabal's  heart 
died  within  him,  and  he  became  as  a  stone, 
wheji  he  was  told  of  the  danger  he  had  incurred 
by  his  imprudence.  His  heart  became  immove- 
able like  a  stone,  it  was  contracted,  or  con- 
vulsed, and  this  convulsion  was  the  occasion 
of  his  death.  Ezekiel  says,  that  the  Lord  will 
take  away  from  his  people  their  heart  of  stone, 
and  give  them  a  heart  of  flesh,  Ezeh.  31).  26. 
that  he  will  take  away  the  stubborn,  senseless, 
and  untractable  disposition  of  the  heart,  that 
receives  no  kindly  impressions  from  the  word, 
providence,  or  .Spirit  of  God  in  his  ordinary 
operations  and  influences,  that  hardens  itself 
in  a  day  of  provocation,  that  is  hardened 
by  the  deccitfulness  of  sin ;  he  will  take  this 
away,  and  give  a  tender,  tractable  temper 
and  disposition.  Much  to  the  same  sense  is 
that  which  John  the  Baptist  said,  Mat.  3.  9, 
That  God  is  able  to  raise  up  children  unto 
Afcaham  even  of  stones;  that  is,  from  among 
the  heathen ;  or  even  of  the  stones  of  the  de- 
sert, God  was  able  to  raise  up  a  spiritual  seed 
to  Abraham. 
A  stone  is  sometimes  put  for  an  idol  of  stone, 
Hub.  2.  19,  Woe  unto  him  that  sailh  to  the 
wood,  awake,  and  to  the  dumb  stone,  arise, 
it  shall  teach.  Hezekiah  in  his  prayer  saijs. 
The  kings  of  Assyria  have  cast  the  gods  of 
the  nations  into  the  fire;  for  they  were  no 
gods,  but  the  work  of  men's  hatids,  wood  and 
stone,  Isa.  37.  19.  J3nd  in  Jer.  2.  27,  Say- 
ing to  a  stock,  thou  art  ray  father,  and  to  a 
stone,  thou  hast  brought  me  forth.  To  b« 
reduced  to  a  heap  of  stones,  if  said  of  a 
city  or  house  which  is  entirely  ruined  anil  de- 
molished. Mic.  1.  6,  I  will  make  Samaria  as 
a  heap  of  the  field,  and  as  the  plantings  of 
a  viney.ird.  So  in  Isa.  17.  1,  Damascus  ia 
taken  from  being  a  city,  and  it  shall  be  a 
ruinous  heap.  yVius  also  our  Saviour,  speak- 
ing of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  says, 
that  one  stone  shall  not  remain  upon  anotlur, 
Mat.  24.  2. 
The  white  stone,  Rm.  2.  17,  I  will  give  him  a 
while  stone;  I  will  give  him  a  full  and  public 
pardon  and  absolution.  It  is  spoken  in  allu- 
sion to  an  ancient  custom  of  delivering  a  white 
stone  to  such  as  they  acquitted  in  judgment. 
They  used  likewise  to  give  a  white  stone  as  a 
reward  to  such  as  conquered  in  their  games  ; 
such  as  allude  to  this,  make  tjiis  the  sense;  1 
will  gice  him  a  full  and  ample  reward. 
Solomon  says  in  Proverbs  26.  8,  As  he  that 
bindeth  asione  in  a  sling,  so  is  helhatgiveth  ho- 
nour to  a  fool.  When  a  stone  is  fastened  to 
the  sling,  the  slinger  hinders  his  own  design  of 
throwing  it,  he  loses  his  labour :  so  does  the  man. 
wh4)  gives  honour  to  a  fool.  But  the  words  may 
be  otherwise  rendered,  as  he  that  putteth  a  pre- 
cious stone  in  a  heap  of  stones,  where  it  is  ob- 
scured and  lost:  Jind  as  this  little  stone  does  not 
augment  the  heap,  nor  is  so  much  as  seen  upon 
it;  so  honour  heaped  upon  a  fool,  dots  not  ren- 
der him  wore  worthy  of  consideration.  Others 
translate  it,  to  lie  a  stone  in  a  piece  of  purple, 
is  to  give  honour  to  a  fool,  .^s  nothinir  can  be 
so  ill  placed  as  a  stone  in  a  piece  of  fine  cloth; 
so  are  honours  ill  placed  upon  a  fool. 
Great  heaps  of  stones,  raised  up  for  a  witness  of 
any  memorable  event,  and  to  preserve  the  re- 
membraifc  of  somematter  of  great  importance, 
are  the  most  nncicvt  monuments  among  the 
Hebrews.  In  those  elder  ages,  before  the  use  of 


STO 

teriting  these  monument*  were  insttad  of  in- 
ncriptiun.'',  vtejnls,  or  hiaturirs.  Jacob  and  La- 
ban  raised  such  a  monument  upon  mount  Gi- 
Icad,  in  memory  of  their  covenant.  Gen.  31.  46. 
Jushua  erected  one  at  Gilgal  made  of  Bloiies, 
taken  out  of  the  Jurdan,  to  jireacroe  the  memo- 
rial of  his  miraculous  jtussage  over  this  river, 
.losh.  -1.  5,  C,  7.  The  Israelites  thai  dwelt 
beyond  Jordan,  also  raised  one  upon  the  banks 
of  the  river,  as  a  testiutuny  that  they  consti- 
tuted but  one  nation  with  f  heir  brethren  on  the 
other  side,  Josh.  22.  10. 
The  Hebrews  also  give  the  name  o/ stones  to  the 
weights  they  use  in  commerce,  Lev.  19.  36, 
Ju8l  weights  shall  ye  have:  The  Hebrew  says, 
just  stones.  yJnd  in  Deut.  25.  13,  Thou  shall 
not  have  in  thy  has  divers  weights,  a  great 
and  a  small ;  The  Hebrews  say,  A  stone  and 
a  stone,  .ilso  Prov.  11.  1,  A  just  weight  is  his 
delight ;  in  Hebrew,  a  perfect  stone.  See  also 
Prov.  16.  11.  I  20.  10.  Stones  are  likewise 
taken  for  a  violent  shower  of  hail.  Jo.sh.  10. 
11,  The  Lord  cast  down  great  stones  from  liea- 
ven  ujion  them.     The  punishment  of  stoning; 

See  PUNISH.MB.NT. 

Oen.ll.S.they  had  brick  for  s.  and  slime  for  mortar 
28. 18.  Jacob  set  up  a  s.  for  a  pillar,  22.  ]  31.45. 
29.  3.  they  ro.led  s.  from  the  well's  mouth,  8,  10. 
35.  14.  Jacob  set  up  a  pillar  of  s.  in  the  place 
49. 24.  from  thence  is  the  shepherd,  the  s.  of  Israel 

Kzod.  4.  25.  Zipporah  took  a  sharp  5.  and  cut  off 
15.  5.  they  sank  into  the  bottom  as  a  s. 
IG.by  greatness  of  thy  arm  they  shall  be  still  as  s. 

17.  12.  and  they  took  a  s.  and  put  it  under  him 

20.  25.  if  thou  wilt  make  me  an  altar  of  s. 

21.  18.  and  if  one  smite  another  with  a  s. 
28.10.  sixof  their  names  on  ones,  six  on  another  s. 

11.  with  the  work  of  an  engraver  in  s. 
/.,eB.26.1.nor  shall  ye  set  up  any  image  of  s.in  land 
JtTum.  35. 17.  if  he  smite  him  with  throwing  a  s.  23. 
Deut.'ia.  1 13.shalt  not  have  in  thy  bag  a  s.  and  a  s. 
Josh.  4.  5.  take  ye  up  every  man  of  you  s.  on  shoul. 
15.  6.  the  border  went  up  to  the  s.  of  Bohan 

18.  17.  the  border  descended  to  the  s.  of  Bohan 
21.  27.  behold,  thig.«.  shall  be  a  witness  unto  us 

Judg.  9.  5.  he  slew  seventy  persons  on  one  s.  18. 

Sam.  6.  18.  which  s.  remaineth  unto  this  d«y 

7.  12.  Samuel  set  up  a  s.  and  called  it  Eben-pzer 

17.49.  David  look  from  his  bag  a  s.  and  slang  it, 

the  s.  sunk  into  the  Philistine's  forehead 

50.  David  prevailed  over  the  Philistine  with  a.s. 

20.  19.  and  thou  shalt  remain  by  the  s.  Ezel 
25.37.  Nabal's  heart  died  in  him,  he  became  as  a  s. 

2  Sam.  5.  t  11.  Hiram  sent  hewers  of  s.  of  the  wall 

17.  13.  till  there  be  not  one  small  s.  found  there 

lA'inn's6.7.house  was  built  of «.  made  ready  before 

18.  all  was  cedar,  there  was  no  s.  seen 

2  Kings  3. 25  on  good  land  cast  every  man  his  s. 

1  Chron.  22.  15.  there  are  with  thee  hewers  of.?. 

2  Chron.  2.  14.  skilful  to  work  in  gold,  silver,  and  s. 
JfTeh.  9.11.  thou  threwest  as  a  s.  into  mighty  waters 
Job  28.  2.  and  brass  is  molten  out  of  the  5. 

33.  .30.  waters  are  hid  as  with  a  s.  deep  is  frozen 

41.  24.  his  heart  is  as  firm  as  a  s.  yea  us  hard  as 

Psal.  91.  12.  angels  shall  bitar  thee  up,  lest  thou 

dash  thy  foot  against  a  .■».  Mat.  4.  6.  Luke  4. 11. 

118.  22.  s.  which  the  builders  refu.ied,  is  become 

head  s.  of  the  corner,  ^fat.  21. 42.  Mark  12. 10. 

Prov.  11. 1 1.  but  a  perfect  s.  is  his  delight 

20. 1 10.  a  s.  and  a  s.  are  alike  abomination  to  L. 

26.  8.  as  he  that  bindelh  a  .9.  in  n  sling,  so  is  he 
27.  as  ho  thai  rolleth  a  s.  U  will  return  upon  him 

27.  3.  a  s.  is  heavy,  a  fool's  wrath  is  heavier 
Jer.  2.  27.  and  to  a  s.  thou  hast  brought  me  forth 

51.26.  they  shall  not  take  of  thee  as.  for  a  corner, 
nor  a  s.  for  foundations,  but  shalt  bo  desolate 
Lam.  3.  53.  they  have  east  a  s.  upon  me 
Dan.  2.  34.  a  s.  was  cut  out  of  the  mountain,  45. 

6. 17.  and  ns.  was  laid  upon  the  mouth  of  the  don 
^mos  9.  t  n.  vet  shall  not  (he  leasts,  fall  on  earth 
Hab.  2.  II.  for  the  s.  shall  cry  out  of  the  wall 

19.  woe  to  him  that  sailh  to  (he  dumb  s.  arise 
ffag.^AS.fniin  before  a  ».  was  laid  upon  a  s.  in  lorn. 
Zech.  3.  9.  for  behold,  the  ».  that  I  have  laid  be- 
fore Ji>!^hua,  upon  om-  s.  shall  bo  seven  eyes 

4.  7.  he  shall  hrin^'  forth  the  head  s.  thereof 
7.  12.  they  made  their  hi-arls  as  an  adamant  .i. 
;»/a«. 7.  9.  if  ask  bread, will  he  gives.?  AmAtII.  II. 

21.  44.  whosoever  shall   fii'l  on  this  s.  shall  h>- 
broken,  but  on  whorna.  it  shall  fall,  T^ukr  20.  IS. 

24.2.  verily  I  say,  there  shull  not  be  left  here  one 
«.  upon  another,  .War/.-  1:1.2.  f.ukc  I9.44.  |21.6. 
27. 6fi.  sealing  the  ».  1|  28. 2.  nngel  rollwl  hack  s. 
J.uke  4.  3.  command  this  a.  thai  it  be  made  breiid 
20.17.S.  which  tin-  builders  re  jeried,  is  become  the 
head  of  the  corner,  .Iris  4.  11.  1  Prt.  2.  7. 

22.  41.  he  was  withdrawn  from  them  n  «.  c;ist 
24.2.found  s.  rolled  awav,  Mark  16.  4.  .fohn  20.  1. 

John  1.42.  Cephas  which  i*  by  inierprelntion  a  s. 

2. 6.  and  there  were  set  there  six  water  pots  of  j. 

382 


STO 

John  B.7.that  is  without  sin,let  him  first  cast  5.at  her 

11.  38.  it  was  a  cave,  and  a  s.  lay  upon  it 

39.  take  ye  away  s.  ||  41.  they  took  away  the  s, 

.^cts  17.  29.  that  the  Godhead  is  like  to  s.  graven 

Rev.  16.21.  hail  fell  every  a.  the  weight  of  a  talent 

18. 21.  au  angel  took  up  a  s.  like  a  great  millstone 

Burdensome  STOWE. 

Zech.  12.3. 1  will  make  Jerusalem  a  burdensome  s. 

See  Corner,  Great,  Hewed. 

Hewn  STONE. 

F.zod.  20. 25.  thou  shalt  not  build  altar  oC  hewn  s. 

2Kings  22. 6.  to  b.ilders  and  masons  to  buy  limber 

and  Acwns.lo  repair  the  house,  2  Chron.34.ll. 

Lam.  3.  9.  he  hath  inclosed  my  ways  w  ith  hewn  s. 

Ezek.  40.  42.  the  four  tables  were  ofheicn  s. 

y}mos  5. 11.  ye  have  built  houses  of  Acwn  s.  but  not 

Luke  23.53.  laid  it  in  sepulchre  that  was  hewn  in  s. 

Living  STONE. 
1  Pet.  2.  4.  to  whom  coming  as  to  liv.  s.  chosen  of  G. 

Precious  STONE. 
Prov.  17.8.  a  gift  is  apreciouss.  to  him  that  hath  it 

26. 18.  pultelh  &  ])recious  s.  in  a  heap  of  stones 
Cant.  5.  t  12.  his  eyes  are  set  as  a  p.  s.  in  a  ring 
I.^a.  28. 10.  I  lay  in  Zion  a  p.  corner  s.  1  Pet.  2.  fi. 
F.iek.  28.  13.  every  precious  s.  was  thy  covering 
liev.  17.  4.  she  was  decked  with  gold  and  p.  s. 

21.  11.  her  light  was  like  to  a  s.  most  precious 

See  Stumbli.no. 
STONE  saUARERS. 
1  Kings  5.  18.  builders  and  s.-s.  did  hew  them 

Tables  of  STONE. 
Kzod.  24.  12.  I  will  give  thee  tables  of  s.  31.18. 
34.1.L.said,  hew  thee  two  tables  of  s.  Deut.  10. 1. 

4.  and  he  hewed  two  tables  of  s.  Deut.  10.  3. 
Deut.  4. 13.  he  wrote  on  the  two  tables  of  s.  5.  22. 
9. 9. when  I  was  gone  up  to  receive  the  tables  ofs. 

10.  the  Lord  delivered  to  me  two  tables  of  s. 

11.  the  Lord  gave  me  the  two  tablrs  of  s. 

\  Kings  8.9.was  nothing  in  ark  save  two  tai/eso/s. 
'iCor.  3.3.  not  in  t.  ofs.  but  in  fleshly  tables  of  heart 

Tried  STONE. 
Isa.  28. 16.  behold,  I  lay  in  Zion  a  stone,  a  tritds. 

White  STONE. 
Rev.  2.  17. 1  will  give  him  a  whites,  and  new  name 

STONE  joined  with  wood. 
Ezod.  7. 10.  may  be  blood  in  vessels  of  wood  and  s. 
Deut.  4.  28.  there  serve  gods  the  work  of  men's 
han.ls,  wood  and  s.  28.  36,  64.  |  29.  17. 
2  Kings  19. 18.  Isa.  37. 19.  Ezek.  20.  32. 
Dan.  5.  4.  praised  the  gods  of  gold,  wood,  and  s.  23. 
/if«.  9.20.  should  not  worship  idols  of  wood  and  s. 

STONE  of  Zoheleth. 

1  Kings  1.9.  Adonijah  slew  sheep  bys.ofZoAe/eM 

See  Wall. 

STONE,  Verb. 

E3:od.8.26.shall  we  sacrifice, and  will  they  not  s.us? 

17.4. what  shall  I  do?  they  be  almost  ready  to  s.me 

/,™.  20.  2.  people  of  land  shall  s.  him  with  stones 

27.  they  shall  s.  the  wizards  with  stones 

24.  14.  let  congregation  s.  him  that  cursed,  16, 23. 

JVum.  14.10.  congregatioiAade  s.them  with  stones 

15.  35.  they  shall  s.  the  sabbath-breaker,  36. 

Deut.  13.  10.  shalt  s.  with  stones  enticers  to  idolat. 

17.  5.  shalt  s.  idolaters  ||  21.  21.  s.  rebellious  son 

22.  21.  they  shall  s.  her  that  playeth  the  whore 
24.  ye  shall  s. adulterers  with  stones,  that  they  die 

1  Kings2\.  10.  carry  Naboth  vul,s.  him  that  he  die 
Ezek.  10.  40.  and  they  shall  s.  thee  wiih  stones 

23.  47.  the  company  shall  s.  them  with  stones 
Luke  20.  6.  if  we  say  of  men,  the  people  will  s.  us 
John  10.31.  the  Jews  took  up  stones  again  lo  s.him 

32.  for  which  of  those  good  works  do  ye  s.  mc7 

33.  saying,  for  a  good  work  we  s.  thee  not 

11.  8.  Master,  the  Jews  of  late  sought  to  .s-.  thee 
Jlcts  14.  5.  there  was  an  assault  made  to  s.  them 

STONED. 
F.zod.  19.  13.  he  shall  surely  be.',  or  shot  through 
21  2ft.  thon  the  ox  shall  be  sundy  s.  29,  32. 
.hsh.l.  2.').  nil  Israel  s.  Aehan  with  stones 

1  Kings  12. 18.  nil  Israel  s.  Adorani,  2  Chr.  10.  18. 
21.  13.  they  s.  Naboth  with  stones,  14,  15. 

2  Chron.  24.  21.  they  s.  Zechariah  in  the  court 
Mai.  21.  35.  the  husbondmen  beat  one,  s.  another 
.lohn  8.5.  Moiiescommandeil  that  such  should  he  .«. 
j9r(.-(5.26.  they  feared  lost  Ihiy  should  have  been  s. 

7.  58.  they  s.  Stephen,  calling  upon  God,  .59. 

14. 19.  having  s.  Paul,  drew  him  out  of  the  city 
2  Cnr.  11  2.5.  thrice  was  I  beaten,  once  was  I  s. 
llrh.  11.37.  they  were*,  they  were  sawn  asunder 

12.  20.  if  a  boast  touch  ihe  niount  it  shall  bo  s. 

STONKfl. 
Clen.'W-  46.  Jacob  said  to  his  l>rethrcn,  gather  s. 
F.ri)d.2S.  II.  thou  shalt  engrave  the  two  s.  12. 
17.  set  it  in  sellings  of .«.  oveii  four  rows  ofs. 
21.  the  s.  shall  be  with  the  names  of  Israel 
39.7.  that  thoy  should  be  s.  for  a  memorial  lo  Israel 
/,(r?).  14.  40.  command  that  they  lake  away  the  s. 
42.  shall  put  oilier  .«.  in  Ihe  place  ofthoso  s. 
4.').  he  shall  break  down  the  house,  Ihn  s.  of  it 
19, 1 36.  just  J.  a  just  opiiali,  an<l  him  shall  ye  have  1 


STO 

Lev.  21. 20.  or  hath  his  s.  broken,  shall  not  offer 
Deut.  8. 9.  a  land  whose  s.  are  iron,  and  out  of  bilb 
23.  I.  that  is  wounded  in  the  s.  sii-all  not  enter 

27.  4.  ye  shall  set  up  these  s.  in  mount  Ei>«l 

5.  build  an  altar  ofs.  ||  8.  write  on  the  s.  words 
Josh.  4.  3.  and  take  you  hence  twelve  ».  9. 

6.  saying,  what  mean  you  by  these  s.  ?  21. 

8.  and  took  twelve  s.  out  of  the  midst  of  Jordan 
20.  those  twelve  s.  did  Joshua  pilch  in  Gilgal 

8.  32.  he  wrote  on  the  s.  a  copy  of  Ihe  law 
7ud|^.20.16.ev.  one  could  slings,  at  a  hair-breadth 

1  Sam.  17.  40.  David  chose  him  five  smooth  s. 

2  Sam.  16.  6.  Shimei  cast  s.  at  Duvid  and  serva.  13. 

1  Kings  5. 18.  so  they  prepared  limber  and  s.  to  build 
7.  10.  s.  of  eight  cubits,  and  s.  of  ten  cubits 
10.27.king  made  silver  to  be  in  Ji'tusalem  as  s.  and 

cedars  as  sycamore  trees,  2  Chr.  1. 15.  |  9.27. 

15.  22.  took  away  the  s.  of  Ramah,  2  Chr.  Iti.  6. 
18.  31.  Elijah  took  twelve  s.  according  to  number 

32.  with  the  s.  he  built  an  altar  in  name  of  Lord 

2  Kings  3. 19.  mar  every  good  piece  of  lai)d  with  s. 
25.  or>)y  in  Kir-haraseth  left  they  the  s.  thereof 

16.  17.  and  put  it  upon  a  pavement  ofs. 

1  Chron.  12.  2.  in  hurling  ofs.  and  shooting  arrows 

2  Chron.  26. 14.  Uzziah  prepared  slings  to  cast  s. 
JVipA.  4.2.  will  they  revive  the  s.  out  of  the  heapsi 
.fob  5.  23.  thou  shalt  be  in  league  with  s.  of  field 

6.  12.  is  my  strength  the  strength  ofs.? 
8. 17.  his  roots  are  wrapped,  and  seeth  place  of  s. 
14. 19.  Ihe  waters  wear  the  s.  thou  washest  away 
22.  24.  the  gold  of  Ophir  as  the  s.  of  the  brooks 

28.  6.  the  s.  of  it  are  Ihe  place  of  sapphires 

40. 17.  the  sinews  of  his  s.  are  wrapped  together 
Psal.  102. 14.  thy  servants  lake  pleasure  in  her  s. 

137. 9.  that  dasheth  thy  little  ones  against  the  s. 
Prov.  16.  t  11.  all  the  s.  of  the  b:ig  are  his  work 
Eccl.  3. 5.  a  time  lo  cast  away  s.  a  lime  to  gather  .t. 

10.  9.  whoso  removeth  s.  shall  be  hurt  therewith 
Isa.  5.2.he  fenced  it  and  gathered  out  the  s.  thereof 

14.  19.  that  go  down  to  the  .?.  of  the  pit 

27.  9.  he  maketh  the  s.  of  the  altar  as  chalk  s. 
54. 11.  behold,  I  will  lay  thy  s.  with  fair  colours 

12. 1  will  make  thy  borders  of  pleasant  s. 
57.  6.  among  the  smooth  s.  of  the  stream 
60.  17.  bring  for  s.  iron  ||  62.  10.  gather  out  the  s. 
./cr.  3.9.  she  committed  adultery  with  s.  and  stocks 
43. 10.  and  I  will  .set  his  throne  on  these  s. 
J^am.  4.  1.  Ihe  s.  of  the  sanctuary  are  poured  out 
Ezek.  26.  12.  they  shall  lay  thy  s.  in  the  water 

28.  14.  thou  hast  walked  in  midst  of  the  s.  of  fire 
16. 1  will  destroy  tliee  from  midst  of  the  s.  of  fire 

Mic.  1.  6. 1  will  pour  down  the  s.  into  the  valley 
y.ech.  5.  4.  shall  consume  it  with  the  s.  thereof 

9.  18.  for  they  shall  he  as  s.  of  a  crown  lifted  up 
Mat.  3. 9.  of  these  s.  lo  raise  up  children,  Luke  3. 8. 

4.  3.  command  that  these  s.  be  made  bre.id 
Mark  5.  5.  crying,  and  cutting  himself  with  .t. 

12.  4.  and  at  him  they  cast  s.  and  wounded  him 

13.  t.  Master,  sec  what  manner  ofs.  are  here 
/.jjie  19.  40.  the  s.  would  immediately  cry  out 
.Tohn  8.  59.  Ihey  look  up  s.  to  cast  at  him,  10.  31. 
2  Cor.  3.7.  if  ministration  engraven  ins.  was  glori. 

1  Pel.  2.5.  ye  as  lively  s.  are  built  up  spiritual  house 

See  Stonk,  Verb. 

Corncr-STONES. 

PsaM44. 12.  that  our  daiisht.  may  be  as  cornw-s. 

See  Co.stly. 

STONES  »/  darkness. 

.Job  28.  3.  he  searcheih  out  the  s.  of  darkness 

STONES  of  emptiness. 
/sa.34.11.hesliall  stretch  out  upon  hs. of  emptiness 

(ilistcring  STONES. 
ICAr.  29.2. 1  have  prepared  ^'/rsfeWn^s. for  house 

Gravel  STONES. 

/.aHi.3.16.  he  hath  broken  my  teeth  with ^rai)c/«. 

Sec  Great. 

ITcnp  of  STONES. 

/'o.»A.7.2fi.  they  raised  a  great  heap  ofs.  on  Achan 

8.29.  anil  raise  agrealAcnp  n/s.  on  Ihe  king  of  A  i 

2  Sam.  18.  17.  thev  laid  a  heap  of  s.  on  .Absalom 
Hewed  STONES. 

1  Kln^rsH.  17.  Ihey  broujlil  hrwrds.\o)ny  founilat. 
~.  y.  according  to  the  measures  ot  hvwcd  s.  11. 

Hrirn  STO.\ES. 

A*a.  9. 10.  bricks  fallen,  but  we  will  build  with*,  s. 

Marble  STONES. 

1  Chron.  29.  'i.  T  have  prepared  m.  s.  in  abundance 
Precious  STONES. 

2  Slim.  12.  30.  was  a  talent  of  gold  with  /irrcioMS  s. 
1  Kings  10  2  queen  of  Sheba  came  wilh/^-rcioi/sji. 

II.  navy  of  Hiram  brought  preci.  s.  2  Chr.  9. 10. 

1  Chron.  29.  2.1  prepared  all  mannerofpr/'c/oii^s. 
8.  with  whom/»rrei()ii«  .'.  were  found,  gave  tlieni 

2  Chr.  3.  0.  ho  enrnished  Ihe  house  u  ilh;»'rciou.4S 
32.27.  he  made  himself  tr<-nsiiries  (nt  precious  s. 

F.zrk.2t.  22.  they  occupied  in  I  by  fairs  with /(rcc..* 
I^an.  11.33.  a  god  shall  ho  honour  wilh  precious  s 
1  Cor.  3.12.  if nny  man  build  on  this  foundaliuii;>. .«. 
ReiK  18.  12.  for  no  man  buvolh  prfc.  a.  any  more 
10.  that  groat  ciiy  decked  with  gold  and  prec.s. 


STO 

Hev-^l- 19.  foundalioneKarnislied  williprcct'ous*. 

ly/iule  STOCKS. 
Deut.  -27.  G.  sliuk  tiiiild  ilie  altar  oi' id.  s.  Josh.  8. 31. 

h^roug/it  STUNES. 
1  Ckron.  22.  ii.  lie  sei  masons  to  liew  wrought  s. 

'  tJTONEST. 

J/at.23.37.6-.tlieii  llial  are  sciit  to  thee,  Lulu  13.34. 

STONY. 
Ps.  141. 6.  whenjudges  are  ov:rtlirown  in  s.  places 
Kiek.  11.  li).  I  will  take  the  s.  heart,  36.  26. 
Mat.  13.  5.  some  fell  on  »'.  places,  20.  Mark  4. 5, 16. 

STONING. 
1  Sam.  30.  6.  for  the  people  spake  of «.  David 

STOOD. 
Gen.  18.  22.  but  Abraham  «.  yet  before  the  Lord 
29.  t35.  his  name  Judah,  and  Lcali«.  t'rum  bearing 
Eiod.  14.  19.  the  pillar  of  cloud  s.  behind  them 
JVum.  16.  48.  he  5.  between  the  dead  and  the  living 
Dtut.i.  II.  ye  came  near  and  s.  under  the  mount. 
5.  5.  I  s.  between  the  Lord  and  you,  to  shew  you 
Josh.  3.  16.  the  waters  s.  and  rose  up  on  a  heap 

4. 3.  take  twelve  stones  where  the  priests'  feet  y.  9. 

Jadg.  6.  31.  Joash  said  to  all  that  s.  against  him 

16.  29.  two  middle  pillars  on  whif.h  the  house  ^. 

1  Sam.  3.  10.  the  L.  s.  and  called  Samuel,  Samuel 

4.  1 15.  Eli's  eyes  s.  that  he  could  not  see 

10.23.when  he  s.  among  the  peopla,  he  was  higher 

17. 8.  Goliath  s.  and  cried  to  the  armies  of  Israel 

2"2.  7.  Saul  said  to  the  servants  that  «.  about  him 

17.  the  king  said  to  footmen  that  s.  about  him 

1  Kings  S.  14.  the  king  blessed  all  the  congregation, 

and  all  congregat.  of  Israel  «.  2  C/ir.  6.  3.  |  7.6. 
55.  Solomon  s.  and  blessed  all  the  congregation 
14.  14.  Aliijah,  his  eyes  jf.  for  hoatiness 

2  Kings  2. 7.  sons  of  the  prophets  s.  to  view  afar  off 
23.  3.  and  all  the  people  s.  to  the  covenant 

2  Chr.  6. 13.  and  on  the  brasen  scatfold  Solomon  s. 
.Veh.  9.  2.  they  4'.  and  confessed  their  sins  and  their 
F.sth.  9.  16.  the  other  Jews  «.  for  their  lives 
Psal.  33.  9.  he  commanded  and  it  s.  fast 
/sa.6.2.above  it  «.the  suraphinis  each  had  six  wings 
/er.  46. 15.  they  s.  not  because  Lord  did  drive  them 
48.  45.  they  s.  under  the  shadow  of  Heshbon 
Ezek.  1.  21.  and  when  those  s.  these  s.  10.  17. 
24.  when  they  s.  they  let  down  their  wings 
2.).  and  there  was  a  voice  when  they  s. 
Dan.  8.  17.  Gabriel  came  near  where  I  s. 

10.  11.  when  he  had  spoken  this,  I  .s.  trembling 

11.  1.  I  s.  to  confirtii  and  to  strengthen  him 

12.  5.  I  looked,  and  behold,  there  s.  other  two 
Jonah  1.  1 15.  and  the  sea  s.  from  her  raging 
Hab.  3.  6.  he  «.  and  measured  the  earth,  he  beheld 
Z,ech.  1.  8.  he  «.  among  the  myrtle-trees,  10,  11. 
•Yat.  12.  46.  his  mother  and  brethren  s.  without 
Luke  6.  8.  he  that  had  the  withered  hand  s.  forth 

18.  11.  the  Pharisee  s.  and  prayed  thu.<!  with  hims. 
John  18.  25.  Sim^m  Peter  5.  and  warmed  himself 

20.  11.  hut  Mary  s.  without  at  sepulchre  weeping 
Acts  3.  8.  the  lame  man  hjaping  up  s.  and  walked 

9.  7.  the  me!)  that  were  with  him  s.  speechless 
16.  9.  there  s.  a  man  of  Macedonia  and  prayed 
27.  21.  but  Paul  s.  fonh  in  the  midet  of  them 
Wc6.9.10.s.only  in  meals,  and  driiiks,and  washings 

STOOD  abuve. 
Gen.  23.  13.  belioM,  iho  Lord  s.  above  the  ladder 
2  Ckrun.  24.  20.  Zecliariah  s.  above  the  people 
Psal.  104.  6.  the  waters  5.  above  the  mountains 

STOOD  afar. 
Exod.  2.4.  his  sister  «.  afar  olf,  to  wit  what  be  done 

20.  18.  the  people  removed  and  s.  afar  off,  21. 
J.,uke  17.  12.  ten  that  were  lepers  who  y.  afar  off 
23.  4'';t.  all  his  acquaintance  s.  afar  off  beholding 
Hev.  18.  17.  as  many  as  trade  by  sea  s.  afar  off 

STOOD  at. 
jKiorf.  10.17.  they  .«.  aMhe  nelherpart  oflhe  mount 
33.  8.  they  s.  every  man  at  his  tent-door 
9.  the  cloudy  pillar.?,  at  the  door  of  the  t.ibernac. 
2  Kings  5.9.  Nnanian  «.  at  door  of  house  of  Elisha 
2  Chron.  5.  12.  singers  s.  at  the  east  end  of  the  altar 
23.  13,  the  kings,  at  his  pillar,  at  the  entering  in 
Ezek.  10.  19.  chernbims  .s.  at  door  of  the  east-gate 

21.  21.  the  king  .«.  at  the  parting  of  the  way 
Luke  7.  3X.  wiim.nn  .«.  at  his  feet  behind  him,  weep. 
John  18.  16.  but  Peter  .».  at  the  dnor  without 
Rev.  8.  3.  another  aneel  came  and  s.  at  the  altar 

STOOD  before. 
frtn.  19. 27.  to  ihe  place  where  he  s.  before  the  Ld. 

43. 15.  went  down  to  Esypt,  and  .?.  6f/«rf  Joseph 
F.iod.9.  10.  they  took  ashis  and  .<t.  A'/nrc  Pharaoh 
Lev.  9.  5.  the  congregation  s.  brfiire  the  Lord 
Num.  27. 2.  daughters  of Zetophehnd  s.  brf.  Moses 
Josh.  20.  9.  until  he  s.  hfure  the  consregalion 
Judg.  20  28.  Phinihas  s.  bifure  ark  in  those  days 
1  Sam.  16.  21.  David  came  and  s.  before  Saul 
1  Kings  1.  28.  Beth-sheba  .s.  before  king  David 

3.  15.  Solomon  s.  before  the  ark  of  the  covenant 
16.  two  women  that  were  harlot"  .".  before  him 

8. 2=2.  Solomon  a.  before  the  altar,  2  Chmn.  6.  12. 

12. 6.  old  men  that  s.  befure  Solomon,  2  Chr.  10. 6. 
583 


STO 

1  Kings  12. 8.  young  men  that  s.  J.  him,  2  Chr.  10.8. 

22.  21.  spirit  s.  before  the  Lord,  2  Chron.  18.  20. 

2  Kings  4.  12.  the  Shunaniite  i'.  before  Elisha 
5.  15.  Naanian  returned  and  s.  before  Elisha 

25.  Gehazi  went  in  and  s.  before  his  master 
8.  9.  Hazael  came  and  «.  before  Elisha 

10.  4.  behold,  two  kings  s.  not  before  him 
Esth.  8.  4   so  Esther  arose,  and  «.  before  the  king 
Psal.  106.  23.  had  not  Moses  his  chosen  s.  bef.  him 
Jer.  15. 1.  though  Moses  and  Samuel  s.  befure  iim 
18.  20.  1  s.  before  thee  to  speak  good  for  them 
52.  1 12.  captain  which  s.  before  king  of  Babylon 
Ezek.  8.  11.  there  s.  before  them  seventy  men 
Dan.  1.  19.  therefore  they  s.  before  the  king,  2.  2. 

2.  31.  O  king,  this  great  image,  «.  before  thee 

3.  3.  they  s.  bef.  the  image  Nebuchadnez.  set  up 
7. 10.  ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand  s.  bef.  him 
8.  3.  behold,  there  s.  before  the  river  a  ram 

15.  there  s.  bef.  me  as  the  appearance  of  a  maa 
Zech.  3.  3.  now  Joshua  s.  before  the  angel 

4.  and  he  spake  to  those  that  s.  before  him 
Mat.  27.  11.  and  Jesus  s.  before  the  governor 
Jicls  10.  17.  behold,  three  men  «.  before  the  gate 
30.  a  man  s.  before  me  in  bright  clothing 
12.  14.  she  told  how  Peter  s.  before  the  gate 
24.  20.  let  these  say,  while  1  s.  before  the  council 
Rev.  7.9. 1  saw  great  multitude  «.  before  the  throne 

8.  2. 1  saw  the  seven  angels  which  j.  before  God 
12.  4.  and  the  dragon  s.  before  the  woman 

STOOD  beside. 
2  Sam.  15. 2.  Absalom  s.  beside  the  way  of  the  gate 
1  Kings  10.  19.  and  two  lions  s.  beside  the  stays 
,/er.  36.  21.  the  princes  which  s.  beside  the  king 
Ezek.  9.  2.  the  six  men  s.  beside  the  brasen  altar 

10.  6.  then  he  went  in  and  s.  beside  the  wheels 

.  STOOD  by. 

Oen.  18.  2.  he  looked,  and  lo,  three  men  s.  by  him 
24.  30.  behold,  he  s.  by  the  camels  at  the  well 
41. 1.  Pharaoh  dreamed,  and  lo,  he  «.  by  the  river 
45. 1.  not  refrain  himself  before  all  that  s.  by  him 

Ezod.  18. 13.  Moses  sal,  and  the  people  «.  by  Moses 

J^um.  23.  6.  Balak  s.  by  his  burnt-sacrifice,  17. 

Judg.  3.  19.  all  that  s.  by  him  went  out  from  him 

18.  16.  the  men  s.  by  the  entering  of  the  gate 

1  Sam.  1.  26.  the  woman  that  «.  by  thee,  praying 

2  Sam.  13.  31.  servants  s.  by  with  clothes  rent 

1  Kings  13. 1.  and  Jeroboam  s.  by  the  altar  to  burn 
24.  ass  s.  by  it,  the  lion  also  s.  by  the  carcase 

2  Kings  2.  7.  and  they  two  s.  by  Jordan,  13. 

11.  14.  behold,  the  king  s.  by  a  pillar,  23.  3. 

18. 17.  they  «.  iyconduit  of  upper  pool,  /sa.36.  2. 

1  Chron.  21.  15.  the  angel  s.  by  the  threshing-fioor 
Jer.  44.  15.  then  the  women  that  s.  by  answered 
Ezek.  43.  6.  and  the  man  s.  by  me  and  said 
Dan.  7.  16.  I  came  near  to  one  of  them  that  s.  by 
Zech.  3.  5.  and  the  angel  of  the  Lord  s.  by 
Mark  14.  47.  one  of  them  that  s.  by  drew  a  sword 

15.  35.  some  of  them  that  s.  by  when  they  heard 
Luke  5.  1.  he  s.  by  the  lake  of  Gennesareth 

19.  24.  he  said  to  them  that  s.  by,  take  from  him 
24.  4.  two  men  s.  by  them  in  shining  garments 

.fohn  18.  22.  an  olBcer  that  s.  by  struck  Jesus 
19.  25.  there  «.  by  the  cross  of  Jesus  his  mother 
Jicts  1.  rO.  two  men  s.  by  them  in  white  apparel 

9.  39.  and  all  the  widows  s.  by  him  weeping 
22.25.  Paul  said  to  the  centurion  that  s.  by 

23.  2.  commanded  them  that  s.  by  to  smite  him 
4.they  that  s.by  said, re  vilest  thou  tl'o.high-priestl 
11.  the  night  following  the  Lord  «.  by  him 

27.23.  there  s.  by  me  this  night  the  angel  of  God 

STOOD  in. 
F.xod.^.'iO.met  Moses  and  Aaron, who  s.in  the  way 

32.  26.  then  Moses  s.  in  the  gate  of  the  camp 
jVum.  12.  5.  Lord  *.  in  the  door  of  the  tabernacle 

16. 18.  they  laid  incense  thereon,  and  y.  in  the  door 
27.  Dathan  and  Ahiram  s.  in  door  of  their  tents 

22.  22.  the  angel  of  the  Lord  s.  i}i  the  way,  24. 

26.  angel  went  further  and  s.  in  a  narrow  place 
Josh.  3.  17.  the  priests  s.  in  midst  of  Jordan,  4.  10. 
Judg.  9.  7.  Jotham  s.  in  the  top  of  mount  Gerizim 

35.  Gaal  s.  m  the  entering  of  the  gate  of  the  city 
44.Abitnelech  ||  16.17.the  pric^sts  s.in  the  entering 

2  S'lm.  23.  12.  he  s.  in  the  midst  of  the  ground 

1  Kings  \9.  13.  and  he  s.  in  entering  in  of  the  cave 

2  Kings  3.  21.  they  gathered,  and  «.  in  the  border 

4.  15.  the  Shnnamite  s.  in  the  door,  and  he  said 
2  Cliron.  30.  16.  and  they  s.  in  their  place,  35.  10. 

34.  31.  king  .■:.  in  his  place,  and  made  a  covenant 
JVcA.  8.  7.  and  the  people  s.  in  their  place 
Esth.  5. 1.  Esther  s.  in  the  inner-court  of  the  bouse 
.fer.  19. 14.  Jeremiah  s.in  court  of  the  Lord's  house 

23.  {r>.  for  who  hath  s.  in  counsel  oflhe  Lord 
22.  but  if  they  had  s.  in  my  roun«el  and  caused 

Eiek.  8.  11.  Jaazaniah  s.  in  the  midst  of  ihem 
OiarZ.  14. nor  shouldst  s.in  cross  way  lo  cut  offt  hose 
Lukei4.  36.  Jesus  himself  s.  in  the  midst  of  them, 

and  sailh  to  them,  peace  be  to  voii,  John 

20.  19,  26. 
jdcts  17.  22.  then  Paul  g.  in  the  midst  of  Mars-bill 


STO 

Rev.  5.  6.  in  the  midst  of  the  elders  s.  a  lamb 
C^l  OOD  on. 

1  Sam.  17.3.  Philistines  .<.«?»  a  mountain  on  the  one 

side,  Israel  s.  on  a  niounlnin  on  the  other  side 
26. 13.  then  David  s.  on  the  top  of  a  hil! 

2  Saiu.  2.  25.  Benjamin  «.  on  the  lop  of  a  hill 

1  Chron.  (i.  39.  Asaph,  who  s.  on  his  right  hand 
44.  the  sons  of  Merari  »•.  on  the  left  hand 

2  Chron.  3.  1.''.  the  clierubims  s.  on  their  feet 
F.zek.  10.  3.  the  clierubims  s.  on  the  right  side 
Mat-  13.  2.  the  whole  multilude  «.  on  the  shore 
John  21.  4.  when  morning,  Jesus  s.  on  the  bhore 
Acts  21.40.Paul  s.  on  stairs  and  beckoned  to  people 
/iev.  14.  1.  and  lo,  a  lamb  «.  on  the  mount  Sioii 

STOOD  over. 
M'um.  7. 1 2.  who  s.  over  them  that  were  numbered 
J)exU.  31. 15.  the  pillar  of  cloud  s.  over  the  door 
.Tosh.  5.  13.  behold,  a  man  s.  otjer-against  him 
Ezek.  10.  4.  glory  of  the  Lord  s.  over  the  threshold 

18.  glory  of  the  Lord  s.  over  clierubims 
Jl/a«.2.9. 1  he  star*.  o«er  where  the  young  child  was 
Luke  4.  39.  he  s.  oner  her  and  rebuked  the  fever 

STOOD  round. 
Gen.  37.  7.  behold,  your  sheaves  s.  round  about 
Acts  14.  20.  as  the  disciples  s.  round  about  him 
25.7.Jews«.rouHdaboutPaul,and  laid  complaints 
Rev.  7. 11.  all  tiie  angels  s.  round  about  the  throne 

STOOD  still. 
Josh.  10.  13.  the  sun  s.  still,  and  the  moon  stayed 

11.  13.  as  for  cities  that«.  still  in  their  strength 
2  Sam.  2.  23.  as  many  as  came  to  the  place  «.  still 
28.  Joabblew  a  trumpet  and  all  the  people  s.iiiZI 
20.  12.  when  the  man  saw  that  all  people  s.  utill 
JVeA.  12.  39.  and  they  s.  still  in  the  piison-gate 
Job  4.  16.  a  spirit «.  still  hut  I  could  not  discern 
32.  16.  for  they  spake  not,  but  s.  still 
flab.  3.11.  sun  and  moon  .?.  still  in  their  habitation 
Mat.  20.  32.  and  Jesus  s.  still  and  called  them 
Mark  10.  49.  Jesus  s.  s^ill  and  commanded  him 
Luke  7.  14.  and  they  that  bare  him  s.  still 

STOOD  there. 
Exod.  34. 5.  the  L.  descended  and  s.  with  him  thern 
1  Sam.  6. 14.  the  ark  came  into  the  field  and  s.  there 
1  Kings  10. 20.  twelve  lions  s.  there,  2  Cliron.  9. 19. 
Ezek.  3.  23.  behold,  the  glory  of  the  Lord  ».  there 
Hos-  10.  9.  from  the  days  of  Gibeah  there  they  s. 
Mat0!.  47.  some  of  them  that  s.  there,  Mark  11. 5. 
John  18.  13.  the  servants  and  officers  .«.  there 

STOOD  up. 
Gen.  23.  3.  Abraham  s.  up  from  before  his  dead 

7.  Abraham  «.  up  and  bowed  himself  to  people 
Exod.  2.  17.  but  Moses  s.  up  and  helped  them 
Mum.  11.  32.  thepeoplcs.K;?  all  that  day  and  night 

1  Chron.  21. 1.  Satan  s.  up  ag.  Israel  and  provoked 
28.  2.  then  David  the  king  s.  up  upon  his  feet 

2  Chron.  13.  4.  Atijali  s.  up  and  said,  hear  me 
20.  19.  the  Levites  s.  up  to  praise  the  Lord  God 

23.  Ammiin  and  Moab^".  a;;  against  mount  Seir 

28. 12.  s.  up  against  them  that  came  from  the  war 

Ezra  2.63.  not  eat  of  holy  things  till  there  s.  up  a 

priest  with  Urim  and  Thunimim,  JVcA.  7.  65. 

Meh.  8.  5.  when  he  opened  the  book  people  s.  up 

9.  3.  they  s.  up  in  their  place  and  read  the  law 
4.  then  5.  up  upon  the  stairs,  of  the  Levites' 

Esth.  5.  9.  Haman  saw  that  Mordecai  s.  not  vp 
7.  7.  Haman  .i.  up  to  make  request  for  his  life 
Job  4. 15.  a  spirit  passed,  the  hair  of  my  flesh  s.  up 
29.8.young  men  saw  me,  and  aged  arose  and  s.  up 
30.  28.  1 .5.  up  and  cried  in  the  congregation 
Ps.  106.  30.  then  s.  up  Phinehas  and  cveculed  judg. 
F.zek.  37.  10.  they  lived,  and  s.  up  U|ion  their  feet 
/)a7i . 8.22. that  being  btokcn,whercas  foiirs.wpforit 
Luke  4.  10.  Jesus  «-.  iip  to  read  in  the  synagogue 

10.  25.  a  certain  lawyer  f.  up  and  tempted  him 
Acts  1.  15.  in  those  days  Peter  s.  up  and  said 

4. 26.  the  kings  of  the  earth  s.  up  ag.ainst  the  Lord 
5.  34.  then  .«.  tip  one  Gamaliel  a  doctor  of  law 

11.  28.  .Agabiis  s.  up,  and  signified  by  the  spirit 
13.  16.  Paul  5.  up  and  beckoning  with  his  hand 
25.  18.  against  whom  when  the  accusers  s.  up 

STOOD  upon. 
Gen.  41.  17.  beholil,  I  s.  upon  the  bank  of  the  river 

1  .'•'am.  17.'51.  David  ran  and  5.  upon  the  Philistine 

2  Sam.  1.  10.  so  I  s.  upon  Saul  and  slew  him 

1  A'/«^s7.25.the  sea  s.upon  twelve  oxen,  2CAr.4.4. 

2  Kings  13.  21.  he  revived  and  s.  upon  his  feet 
JW/i.  8.  4.  F.zrn  the  serine  .«.  upon  a  jiulpit  of  wood 
F.zek.  11.  '21.  glory  oflhe  Lord  .«.  upon  the  mount 
Amos  7. 7.  the  Lord  s.  upon  a  wall  made  by  a  line 
lieo.  11.  II.  the  two  prophets  «.  upoti  their  feet 

13. 1.  and  I  s.  upon  Ihe  sand  of  the  sea  and  saw 

STOOD  with. 
Gen.  45. 1. .  lore  s.  with  him  no  man,  while  Joseph 
2  Kings  11 .1 1.  every  man  s.  u>.  his  weapons  in  hand 
2  Chriin.  29.  20.  ihe  Levites  s.  with  instruments 
Ezra  3. 9.  then  Joshua  .<i.  with  his  sons  .ind  brethren 
Lam.  2.  4.  he  s.  with  his  right  hand  as  an  adversary 
f,uke9.  32.  Ihoy  saw  the  Iwo  men  that  s.  with  him 
John  18.  5.  Judas  also,  who  betrayed  s.  with  tha.Ti 


STO 

John  18.18.  Peter  4.  tcith  them  and  warmed  liimBeir 
S'/'i/K.  4.10.  no  Mian  ,s.  withn\^\y  17.  Lorila.  it'it/jnie 

STOODKST. 
M'am.  22.  34.  I  knew  not  lliut  lliou  ».  in  tlie  nay 
JJeut.  4.  10.  llie  day  tiiat  thou  i.  ht-fore  the  Lord 
Oi/aU.  II.  Ill  the  duy  that  thoa  s.  on  thu  ulhursidc 

STOOL. 
i  Kings  i.  10.  let  U3  set  for  him  a  bed,  table,  and  a  £. 

STOOLS. 
2izod.  1. 10.  be  laid,  when  ye  see  them  upon  the  s. 

STOOr. 
Job  9.  \'.i.  the  proud  heljier^-  do  s.  under  him 
Prov.  Ii.'-i5.  Iioavinessinuketh  llio  heart  of  man  s. 
Jjit.  41).  '2.  they  s.  they  bow  down  togetlier 
Mark  I.  7. 1  am  not  worthy  to 3.  down  and  unloose 

STOOPED. 
Gtn.  49.  9.  Jiulah  s.  down,  he  Touched  afl  a  lion 
1  Ham.  '24. «.  David  s.  ||  iS.  14.  Saul  s.  to  the  ground 
■2  C/iron.  3ti.  17.  hud  no  comjiassion  on  him  tiiat  s. 
v/i/Atttt.b.JeBUSs.down  and  wrote  with  his  finger,  8. 
2U.  11.  and  as  slie  wept,  she  s.  down,  and  looked 

STOOPETH. 
/so.  46.  1.  Bel  boweih  down,  Nebo  s.  their  idols 

STOOl'INU. 

/.uA:e24.12.s.down saw  the  linen  clothes,  ,/oArt  20.5. 

STOP. 

1  Kings  18  44.  get  down,  that  the  rain  s.  thee  not 
t  Kings  3.  19.  ye  shall  s.  all  wells  of  water,  25. 

2  C/iron.  32.  3.  he  took  counsel  to  s.  the  waters 
Fsal.  35.  .3.  s.  the  way  ag.  them  that  persecute  me 

1U7.  42.  and  all  iniquity  shall  s.  her  mouth 
Ezek.  39. 1 1.  it  shall  s.  the  noses  of  the  passengers 
2, Cor.  11.  10.  no  man  shall  s.  me  of  this  boasting 

STOPPED. 
Oen.  8.  2.  and  the  windows  of  heaven  were  s. 
20.  15.  the  Philistines  had  s.  the  wells,  18. 
JL,eo.  15.  3.  or  his  llesh  be  «.  from  his  issue 
2  Ckron.  32.  30.  Hezokiah  s.  the  water-course 

4.  who  s.  all  the  fountain  and  the  brook 
AVA.  4.  7.  and  that  the  breaches  began  to  be  s. 
Fsal.Vi.  U.  the  mouth  thatspeakelh  lies  shall  be  s. 
Jer.  51.  32.  and  that  the  passages  are  s.  and  reeds 
Z.er.)u  7.  11.  but  they  refused,  am!  s.  their  ears 
Acts  7.  57.  they  s.  their  ears,  and  ran  upon  him 
/{oni.3.J9.  that  every  mouth  may  be  s.  and  be  guilty 
TU.  1.  11.  whose  mouths  must  be  s.  who  subvert 
Ueb.  11.  33.  who  thro'  faith  s.  the  mouths  of^ions 

STOPPERS. 
Ezek.  27.  t  S-  tbe  wise  men  were  thy  5.  of  chinks 

STOPPETH. 
Job  5. 16.  poor  hath  hojie,  and  iniquity  s.  her  mouth 
Psal.  58.  4.  like  the  deaf  adder  that  s.  her  ear 
Prov.  21.  13.  whoso  s.  his  eurs  at  the  cry  of  the  poor 
Isa.  33.  IS.  and  £.  his  ears  from  hearing  of  blood 

STORE. 
yimos  3.  10.  saith  the  Lord,  who  a.  up  violence 
and  robbery  in  their  palaces 
STORE. 
Oea.26.14.Isnachad  flocks  and  grcat.«. of  servants 
41.  3b.  that  food  shall  be  for  «.  to  land  in  famine 
J.ev.  25.  22.  ye  shall  eat  of  the  old  s.  26.  10. 
IJeiit.  28.  5.  blessed  shall  be  thy  banket  and  thy  s. 

17.  cursed  shall  be  thy  basket  and  thy  s. 
32.34.  is  not  this  laid  up  in  a.  with  me  and  sealed 

1  Kings  II).  10.  she  gave  king  ofspiccs  very  great  s. 

2  Kings  20. 17.  fathers  have  laid  up  in  sAo  this  day 
1  Ckron.  2'.).  Iti.  all  this  s.  comeili  of  thine  hand 
SCViron.  11.  II.  he  put  s.  of  victuals,  wine  in  them 

31.  10.  and  ihnt  which  is  left  is  this  gri:at  s. 
JVcA.  5.  18.  9.  of  all  sorts  of  wine  was  prepared 
Psa[.  144. 13.  our  garners  atTording  all  manner  of  3. 
Isa.  39.6.  that  wliicli  thy  fathirs  have  laid  up  in  s. 
JV'iA.  2.  9.  for  there  is  none  end  of  the  s.  and  glory 
1  Cvr.  16.  2.  let  every  one  ofyou  Iny  by  him  in  5. 

1  'Am.  6.  19.  laying  up  in  s.  a  good  foundation 

2  Pel.  3.  7.  which  by  the  same  word  are  kept  in  s. 

STORE-(;iTIES. 

1  Kings  9. 19.  citiis  of.*.  Solomon  had,  2  CAr.  8.  6. 

2  Chron.  8  4.  and  all  the  s.  cities  which  he  built 

16.  4.  they  smote  all  the  s.-citics  of  Nnplitali 

17.  12.  Jehonlmphat  built  s.-r,itins  in  .ludah 

STOREHOUSE. 
Mai.  3.  10.  hrin;;  all  Ihf  tithes  into  the  s.-house 
L.ukb  12.  24.  the  nivciiB  have  no  s.-house  nor  barn 

STORE-HOUSES. 
Clcn.  41.  .56.  Jospph  o|ifned  all  the  s.-k.  and  sold 
J/cul.  28.  8.  command  blessing  on  thee  in  thy  .'.-A. 

1  Chron.  27.  2.5.  over  Iho  .s.A.  waii  Ichonaihan 

2  Chron.  32.  2«.  H.T.ikinl.  mad.'  s.-h.  also 
J'sat.  33.  7.  he  layjth  up  the  ilcplh  in  s.-h. 
Jer.  .50.  26.  open  her  .?.-/i.  cast  her  u|)  us  heaps 

STORK, 
jj  kind  of  bird;  the  Helimwn  rail  it  Chaseda,  or 
Chasidah,  icAi'cA  signifies  pity  or  merry ;  pro 
bahly  because  of  the  ttndrr-nrss  it  shows  to  it.i 
dam,  irhich  it  never  forsr.krs,  but  feeds,  and 
defends  even  to  death.  The  stork  is  a  bird 
of  passage,  vhieh  in  winter  goes  into  the  hoi 
countries.  Jer.  8.  7,  The  »tork  in  the  heaven 
584 


STR 


STR 


knoweth   her   appointed  lime,  and   the  turtle,  I. Vac'.  4.20.  and  they  .?.  left  their  nets,  .VjtA- 1.  19 


nd  the  ciane,  and  the  swallow,  observe  th 
time  of  their  coming.  Jerom  and  the  Septua- 
giiit  sometimes  render  the  Hebrew  vord  Cha- 
sidah  by  Herodius  the  heron,  and  sometimes  by 
pelican  or  kite;  but  interpreters  are  prttty  well 
agreed,  that  it  signifies  a  stork.  Moses  places 
it  among  unclean  birds.  Lev.  11.  19.  The 
Psalmist  says,  As  for  the  stork,  the  fir-trees 
are  her  house,  Psal.  104.  17.  They  for  ordi- 
nary make  their  nests  upon  some  high  tower, 
or  the  top  of  a  house ;  but  in  Palestiiip,  where 
the  coverings  of  their  houses  were  flat,  they 
built  in  the  highest  trees. 

The  stork  has  its  beak  and  its  legs  long  and  red  ; 
it  feeds  upon  serpents  andfrugs,  and  insects: 
Its  plumage  would  be  quite  white,  if  it  was 
nut  that  the  extremity  of  its  wings  arc  black, 
and  also  some  small  part  of  its  head  and 
thighs  :  It  sits  for  the  space  of  thirty  days, 
and  lays  but  four  eggs.  Formerly  they  would 
not  eat  the  stork,  but  at  present  it  is  much 
esteemed  for  tlie  deliciousness  of  its  Jlesh. 
Tliey  go  away  in  the  midst  of  August,  and 
return  at  Spring.  BuUonius  says,  that  when 
they  go  away,  the  stork  that  comes  last  to  the 
place  of  rendezvous  is  killed  upon  the  spot. 
They  go  away  in  the  night  to  the  southern 
countries. 

Lev.  11. 19.  the  s.  thou  shall  not  eat,  Deut.  14. 18. 

Job  39.  tl3.  gavest  thou  leathers  to  the  s.? 

Psal.  104. 17.  as  fur  the  s.  the  fir-trees  are  her  house 

Jer.  8.  7.  the  s.  knowelh  her  ajipointod  times 

Zech.  5.  9.  they  had  wings  like  the  wings  of  a  s. 
STORM. 

JobiX.  18.  and  as  chaff  that  the  ».  carrieth  away 

27.  21.  and  as  «.  huileth  him  out  of  his  place 
fi'ai.55. 8.1  would  hasten  my  escape  from  wiudys. 

83.  15.  and  make  them  afraid  with  thy  s. 
107.  29.  he  makeih  the  s.  a  calm,  so  that  the 
waves  thereof  are  slill 
Isa.  4.  6.  and  for  a  covert  from  s.  and  from  rain 
25.  4.  for  thou  hast  been  a  refuge  from  the  s. 

28.  2.  which  as  a  destroying  «.  shall  cast  down  to 
the  earth  with  the  hand 

29.  6.  thou  shalt  be  visited  with  s.  and  tempest 
F.zek.  38.  9.  thou  shalt  ascend  and  coine  like  a  s. 
JVaA. 1.3.  Lord  hath  his  way  in  the  whirlwind  ands. 
Mark  4.  37.  and  there  arose  a  great  s.  of  wind 
LukcS.  23.  there  came  down  a.<.  of  wind  on  the  lake 

STORMY. 

P«aM07.25.he  commandeth  and  raiseth  the  s.  wind 

148. 8. snow  and  vapour  «.  wind  fulfilling  his  word 

Kzek.  13.11.  hail -stones  shall  fall,s.  wind  shall  rend 

13. 1  will  even  rend  it  with  a  s.  wind  in  my  fury 

STORY. 

2  Chron.  13. 22.  the  acts  of  Abijah  in  the  s.  of  Iddo 

24.  27.  written  in  the  s.  of  the  book  of  the  kings 

STORIES. 
Gen.G.  16.  with  second  and  third  s.  make  the  ark 
Kz<^A.  41.16.  galleries  three  s.  over  against  ihedoor 
42.  3.  was  gallery  against  gallery  in  three  s.  6. 
Jimos^.  6.  it  is  he  that  buildi^h  his  s.  in  the  heaven 
STOUP,  See  Stoop. 
STOUT. 
.lub  4. 11.  the  s.  lion's  whelps  are  scattered  abroad 
Jsa.  10.  12.  I  will  punidh  the  fruit  of  the  s.  heart 
/Jan.  7.20.  whose  look  was  mores,  than  his  fellows 
Mai.  3.  13.  your  words  have  been  s.  against  nie 

STOUT-HEARTED. 
Psal.  76.  5.  s.-A.  are  spoiled,  they  slept  their  sleep 
Isa.  46.  12.  hearken  unto  me,  ye  s.-hearted 

STOUTNES.S. 
Isa.  9.  9.  that  say  in  the  pride  and  s.  of  heart 

STRAKJHT. 
./nsh.  6.  5.  shall  ascend  every  man  ».  before  him,  20. 
1  Sfim.  0.  12.  the  kinc  took  s.  way  to  Ueth-sbemesli 
Psal.  5.  8.  make  thy  way  s.  before  my  face 
Prov.  4.  25.  lot  thine  Dye-lids  look  s.  before  thee 
F.ccl.\.  15.  that  which  is  crooked  cannot  he  made  s. 
7.  13.  O^r  who  can  mnkethat  s.  he  made  crooked? 
ha.  40. 3.  make  s.  in  dnscrt  a  highway  for  our  (Jod 
4.  the  crooked  slwU  he  mndr  s.  and  the  rough 
pianos  plain,  42.  16.  |  45.  2.  Juke  3.  5. 
Jer.  31.9.  I  will  cause  them  to  walk  in  a  s.  wny 
F.ick.  1.7.  and  tlieir  leitwcre  ».  feet,  ihcy  Kparkled 
0.  they  went  i^vory  one  s.  forward,  12.  |  ID  22. 
23.  under  the  firnianient  were  their  wings  ». 
JIfat.  3.3.  prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  I/ord,  make  his 
paths  a.  Mark  I.  3.  I.uke  3.  4.  .hhn  1.  23 
l.uke  13.  13.  sho  was  made  s.  and  florifiod  fiod 
Jicts9.  II.  arise  and  go  into  street  which  is  called  s 
lleb.  12.  13.  and  make  s.  pilhi  for  your  feet 

STKAinilTW.W. 
1  .Tom.  9.  13.  ya  shall  $.  find  liim  before  ho  po  up 
W.  20.  Ihfn  Saul  fill  s.  nil  along  on  the  earth 
Prov.  7.  22.  he  goeth  afler  her  ».  as  an  ox  goeth 
/)itn.  10.  17.  s.  thuru  remained  no  slrongth  in  me 
Mat.  3  16.  Jesus  went  s.  out  uf  water,  M*rk  1. 10. 


21.  3.  ye  shall  say,  the  Lord  hath  need  of  thuiii, 
and  s.  he  will  send  them  hither,  Mark  11.  3. 

27.  48.  a.  one  of  them  ran  and  took  a  spunge 
jl/arA.5.29.s.  the  fountain  (jf  her  blood  was  dried  up 

6.54.S.  they  knew  hini{|  Lukeh.'M.  s.dcsirelh  new 
Juke  14. 5.  will  not .';.  pull  him  out  on  sabbath-day7 
John  13.  32.  and  God  shall  s.  glorify  him 
^c?.«5.10.then  fell  she  down  s.at  his  I'eet  and  yielded 

9.  20.  and  s.  he  preached  Christ  in  thesynagoguei 

111.  33.  the  jailer  was  baptized,  he  and  all  his  s. 

22.  29.  then  a.  they  de,->arted  from  him 

23.  30.  when  it  was  told  me,  I  sent  s.  to  thee 
Jam.  1.24.S.  forgetleth  u  hat  manner  ofinan  he  was 

STRAIN. 

Jl/at.  23.24.  guides  s.  at  a  gnat  and  swallow  a  camiA 

STRAIT. 

1  Sam.  13. 6.  when  Israel  saw  that  they  were  in  a  s 

2  Sam.  24.  14.  1  am  in  a  great  s.  1  Chron.  21.  13. 
.lub  36.  J6.  would  have  removed  thee  out  of  the  s. 
Dan.'.K  1 25.  the  street  and  wall  built  ins.  uf  times 
Phil.  1.  23.  for  I  am  in  a  s.  betwi.xt  two,  desire 

STRAITS. 
Job  20. 22  in  fuln.  of  his  sufficiency  he  shall  be  in  3. 
I.am.  1.  3.  persecutors  overtook  her  between  the  *. 

STRAIT. 
2  Kings  6. 1.  behold,  place  we  dwell  is  too  s.  for  us 
/su.49.20.  the  place  is  toos.  for  me,give  place  to  me 
Mat.l.  13.  enter  ye  in  at  s.  gate,  for  wide  is  the  gate 
14.becau8cs.i3  gate  and  way  narrow, AuA(;13.24. 
STRAITEN. 
.fer.  19.  9.  they  that  seek  their  lives,  shall  s-  thera 

STRAITENED. 
.Ivb  18.  7.  the  steps  of  his  sirenglh  shall  be  a. 
37.  10.  and  the  breadth  of  the  waters  is  s. 
Pro7>.4.12.when  ihougoest.thy  steps  shall  not  be*. 
Ezek.  42.6.  therefore  Ihebuihlingwass.  murethais 
Mic.  2.  7.  is  spirit  of  the  Lord  a.?  these  his  doiiiM 
Ijuke  )2.  50.  how  am  I  s.  till  it  be  accomplished! 
2  Cor.  6.  12.  ye  are  not .'.  in  us,  are  s.  in  your  bowolfl 

STRAITEN  ETH. 
.Tob  12.23.  he  enlargerh  nations  and  s.  thorn  again 

STRAITEST. 
Jlcts'iG.  5.  after  the  most  s.  sect  of  our  religion 

STRAITLY. 
<7fn.  43.7.  man  asked  us.s.  of  our  stale  and  kindred 
F.xud.  13.  19.  for  Joseph  had  .«.  sworn  I.srael 
./osA.6.1. Jericho  was  s.  shut  up;none  went  out,  and 
1  .V«m. 14.28.  thy  father  .s.  charged  people  with  oath 
Mat.  9.  30.  he  s.  chaiL'ed  them,  saying,  see  that  no 
man  know  it,  Marled.  12.  |  5.  43.  Juke^.H. 
Mark  1.  43.  he  s.  charged  him  aivl  sent  him  away 
./1cts4. 17.  but  let  us  s.  threaten  them  not  tospeail 
5.  23.  did  not  we  s.  command  vou  not  to  teach  T 

STRAITNESS. 
Kro(Z.6.t9.ilieyliearkinednotioMoaefifor.*.of»fMrit 
/;fi;«.  28.53.  shalt  eat  flesh  of  thy  childr.  in  s.  .5.5,57. 
.fob  36. 16.  into  a  broad  place  where  there  is  no  «. 
[sa.  42.  1 16.  I  will  make  crooked  things  into  s. 
.fir.  10.  9.  they  shall  eat  llfsh  of  his  fri(Mid  in  thn  *. 
Hcb.  1.  t8.  a  sceptre  of.s.  i.^i  sccpire  of  thy  kingdom 

•       STRAKE. 

JJcts  27.  17.  they  fearing  s.  sail,  and  go  were  driven 

Srr  SxRirrK. 

STRAKES. 

(7cv,  30.  37.  .lacob  piled  white  s.  in  rods  of  hascl 

Jcv.  14.37.  if  plague  he  in  tlie  walls  with  hollows. 

STRANGE. 
Ofn.42.  7.  but  Joseph  made  himself  s.  unto  them 
Job  19.  3.  nolasiiame  I  that  ye  make  yours..',  tome 
17.  my  breath  is  .<.  lo  my  wife,  Iho'  I  cn'rcuted 
Prov.  21.  8.  the  way  of  man  is  froward  and  s. 
Jer.  18.  til. will  nvm  leave  snow  of  I.ebanoii?  shall 
running  svalers  be  r)rsirken  for  the  s.  cold  water? 
1  Pet.  4.  4.  wherein  they  think  it  s.  ye  run  not  with 
them  to  the  name  excrsa  of  riot 
12.  think  it  not.i.  eonc-rrnin;  trial,  ns  tho's.  thing 
STRANG!',  art. 
/.■.•a.28.21.  that  vp  mnv  bring  to  pn-s  his  act,  his*,  act 

STRANGE  apparel. 

y.eph.  1.  8.  iinuislisnch  are  clolhed  with  s.  apparti 

.'!ee  ^IlII.nRK^f. 

STRANGE  riyiVs. 

Jlcts  26.  11.  I  pors.'cntpd  them  oven  to  ».  cities 

STRANGE  ro«n«i-y. 
rirb.  II.  9.  he  snjounird  as  in  a  s.  conntiy 

STRANGE  doctrines. 
fleb.  13.  9.  bo  not  nuriid  about  with  *.  doctrine* 

STRANGE./rr«. 

Arc.  10.  1.  Nadab  nnd  .Ahihii  oflTiMod  s.  .ffrr  hrforo 

tho  Lord,  and  llev  diod,  JViim.  3.  4.  |  26.  61. 

STRANGE /r.-A. 

7'u'/e7.a9 Sodom  nnd  G'Mnorrah,  going  after  »./«»* 

See  Gop,  Gotis. 

STRAN(;E  inrmse. 

F.iod.  30.  9.  ye  slmll  ofTir  no  s.  incense  thereon 

STRANGE  land. 
Fro//.  2  22.  have  been  a  stranger  in  ns.  land,  18.3 
Paal.  137.4.  how  ihnll  we  sing  Loid's  B-jng  in  a  «  / 


STR 

4ets  7. 6.  that  hia  sned  should  sojourn  in  a  s.  land 

STRANGE  language. 
Psal.  114.  1.  Isriul  went  from  a  people  of  s.  I. 

STRANGE  nation. 
Etod.  21. 8.  to  sell  her  to  a  s.  n.  ho  hath  no  power 

STRANGE  punishment. 
Job  31.  3.  a  s.  p.  to  the  workers  of  iniquity 

STRANGE  lips. 
[sa.  17.  10.  and  tliou  shall  pet  it  witli  s.  lips 

STRANGE  speech. 
Ezek.  3.  5.  thou  art  not  sent  to  a.  people  of  s.  s.  fi. 

STRANGE  thing. 
Hos.  8.  12.  hot  they  were  counted  as  a  s.  thing 

1  Pet,  4.  ]2.  as  tho'  some  s.  thing  happened  to  you 

STR.\NGE  things. 
Tivlce  .5. 26.  saying,  we  have  seen  s.  things  to-day 
j3ct5l7.20.lliou  hiinffestcortain^.Miji^stoourcats 

STRANGE  vanities. 
Jer.  8.  19.  why  provoked  mu  to  anger  with  s.  jj.? 

STRANGE  vine. 
Jer.3.21.  how  turned  intodogcner.  plant  of  a*,  cine 

STRANGE  waters. 

2  Kings  19.  24. 1  have  digjjcd  and  drunk  s.  waters 

STRANGE  reives. 
lA7no-.sll.  8.  and  I  ike  wise  did  he  for  all  \i\ss.7oives 
Ezra  10.  2.  we  have  taken  s.  wives,  JO,  14,  17.  44. 

11.  and  separate  your.selves  from  the  s.  wives 
18.  sons  of  priests  were  found  to  have  taken .'.  w. 

JVcA.  13.27.  to  transgress  ag.  God,  in  marrying  s.  w. 
STRANGE  looman. 

Judg.  11.  2.  for  thou  art  the  son  of  a  s.  jeoman 

ProiK  2.  10.  to  deliver  thee  from  the  s.  woman 
5.  3.  tJie  lip.s  of  a  s.  woman  drop  as  a  honey-comh 
20.  why  wilt  tliou  be  ravished  with  a  s.  woman 
6. 24.  to  kce|)  thee  from  flattery  of  s.  woman,  7.  .5. 
20.16.  lake  a  pledge  of  him  for  as.  jcoman,  27. 13. 
23.  27.  and  a  s.  woman  is  a  narrow  pit 
STRANGE  women. 

1  Kings  11. 1.  king  Solomon  loved  many  s.  women 

Prop.  22.  14.  the  mouth  of  s.  women  is  a  deep  pit 

23.33.thine  eyes  shall  beholds,  women,  heart  utter 

STRANGE  work. 

ha.  23.  21.  that  he  may  do  his  work,  his  s.  work 

STRANGER, 
1]  One  that  is  in  a  strange  land,  being  at  a  dis- 
tance from  the  place  of  his  natimly.  Gen.  23.  4, 
I  am  a  stranger  with  you.  [2]  One  that  is 
not  a  Jew,  but  of  some  other  nation,  Isa.  14. 
1.  The  strangers  shall  be  joined  with  thein  ; 
that  is,  many  of  the  Gentiles.  [3]  J]}>y  one 
that  was  not  of  Aaron's  seed,  notwithstanding 
be  were  an  Israelite.  jYmn.  3.  10,  The  stran- 
ger that  comuih  nigh,  shall  be  put  to  death. 
See  Num.  IG.  40.  |  18.  4.  [4]  One  that  uses 
this  world  as  if  he  used  it  not,  who  does  nut 
think  himself  at  home  while  in  this  world,  lint 
has  his  mind  and  eye  fixed  on  his  country  which 
is  above.  Psal.  39.  12,  I  am  a  stranger  with 
thee,  and  a  sojourner,  as  all  my  falhcrg  were. 
Heb.  11.  13,  They  confessed  that  they  were 
strangers  and  pilgrims  on  earth.  [5]  Such 
as  were  without  all  title  to,  or  interest  in, 
either  the  outward  privileges,  or  saving  bless- 
ings of  the  covenant  of  grace.  E)ih.  2.  12, 
At  that  lime  ye  were  strangers  from  the 
covenant  of  promise,  namely,  during  your 
heathenism.  [H]  Otic  who  is  not  of  the  king's 
stock  and  family.  Mat.  17.  25,  26,  Of  whom 
do  the  kings  of  the  earth  take  custom  or  tri- 
bute 1  of  their  own  children,  or  of  strangers? 
[7]  One  who  being  made  a  captive,  has  lost  his 
former  liberty  and  dignity,  which  he  enjoyed  in 
his  own  country.  Obad.  12,  Thou  shauidest  not 
have  looked  on  the  day  of  thy  brother,  in  the 
day  that  he  became  a  stranger.  [8]  jJ  woman 
that  is  not  a  man's  own  toife.  Prov.  5.  20, 
Why  wiit  thou  embrace  the  bosom  of  a 
stranger?  [9]  Profane,  or  unclean  persons. 
Jool  3.  17,  There  shall  no  slmngers  pass 
through  her  any  more.  JVoTie  of  the  enemies 
of  the  church  shall  invade  and  subdue  it  any 
more,  nor  profane  persons  mingle  themselves 
with  it,  so  as  to  corrupt  her  doctrine  or  wor- 
ship. [10]  Persons  of  a  perfidious  and  bar- 
barous disposition,  who,  though  of  the  same 
nation,  yet  carry  themseloes  as  if  thnj  were 
void  of  all  piety  and  humanity.  Thus  David 
r.alls  the  Ziphiles,  though  Israclitps,  stranirers, 
V*a\.  .54.  3.  [II]  Persecuted,  or  banished 
Christians.  Hub.  13.  2,  Be  not  forgetful  to 
entertain  strangers.  [12]  False  teatjicrs,  such 
ns  are  strangers  to  a  sound  doctrine.  John  10. 
5,  And  a  stranger  will  they  not  follow.  Jis 
to  the  two  sorts  of  strangers  among  the  Jews, 
namely,  Advena  justiliiE,  and  Advena  portae, 
See  Prosblvtk. 

Crm.l5.l3.know  that  thy  seed  shall  be  ns.  in  a  land 
17.  8.  give  land  wherein  thou  art  a  s.  28. 4.  |  37. 1. 

12.  or  that  is  bought  with  money  of  any  s. 
37.bought  with  money  of  the  s.  were  circamcisod 

585 


STR 

f?fn.23.4.  lama  s.  with  you,  Psal.  39. 12. 1 119.19. 
Exod.  2.  22.  I  have  been  a  s.  in  a  strange  land 
12. 19.  shall  be  cut  off,  whether  a  s.  or  born  in  the 
land,  Lev.  16.  29.  |  17.  15.  A'um.  15.  .30. 
43.  there  shall  no  s.  eat  thereof,  29.  33. 

48.  wlien  a  s.  will  ktep  the  passover,  JV/nn.  9. 14 

49.  one  law  shall  be  to  him  that  is  home-born  and 
the  s.  Lev.  24. 22.  jXum.  9.  14.  |  15. 15, 16,  29 

18.  t3.  the  name  of  the  one  was  a  .t.  there 

20.  10.  nor  s.  that  is  within  thy  gates,  Deut.  5. 14 

22.  21.  thou  shalt  not  vex  or  ojipress  a  s. 

23.9. ye  know  heartof  a  s.  seeing  ye  were  strangers 
12.  shalt  rest,  that  the  s.  may  be  refreshed 

30.  33.  whosoever  pulleth  any  of  it  upon  a  s. 
/,«;.  17. 12. neither  shall  any  s.  among  you  eat  blood 

19.  10.  thou  shalt  leave  lh«m  for  s.  23.  22.  |  25.  0. 

33.  if  s.  sojourn  in  the  land  ye  shall  not  ve.v  him 

34.  thes.  be  as  one  born  among  you,  M'um.  15.15. 
22. 10.  there  shall  no  s.  eat  of  the  holy  thing,  13. 

12.  if  she  be  married  to  a  s.  she  may  not  eat 

25.  neither  from  a  s.  hand  shall  ye  offer  the  bread 

24. 16.  as  well  s.  when  blasphemeth  put  to  death 

25.  35.  yea,  tho'  he  he  a  s.  thou  shall  relievo h 

47.  if  as.  wax  rich  by  thee,  and  thy  poor  brother 

sell  himself  to  the  s.  or  his  family 

JWm.  1.  51.  Levites  set  up  tabernacle,  the  s.  that 

Cometh  nigh  shall  be  put  to  death,  3.  10,  38. 

15. 14.  and  if  a  s.  sojourn  and  will  offer  an  offering 
16.  40.  that  no  s.  come  near  to  offer  incense  bef  L. 

18.  4.  and  a  s.  shall  not  come  nigh  unto  you 

7.  the  s.  that  cometh  nigh  shall  be  put  to  death 

19. 10.  it  shall  be  to  Israel  and  s.  a  statute  for  ever 
35.  15.  six  cities  of  refuge  for  s.  ./osh.  20.  0. 

Deut.  1. 16.  hear  and  judge  righteously  bet  W.I  he  s. 

10.  18.  ihe  Lord  loveth  the  s.  in  giving  him  food 

19.  love  the  s.  for  ye  were  strangers  in  Egypt 

14.  21.  shalt  give  that  which  dieth  of  itself  to  s. 

17. 15.  not  set  a  s.  over  thee  who  is  not  <lhy  broth. 

23.  7.  because  thou  wast  a  s.  in  his  land 

20.  unto  a  s.  thou  mayest  lend  upon  usury 
25.  5.  the  wife  shall  not  marry  without  to  a  s. 
26.11. thou  shalt  rejoice,tliou,and  the  .5.amongyou 
28.  43.  the  ,■!.  shall  get  up  above  thee  very  high 

29. 11.  and  thy  s.  to  enter  into  covenant  with  God 
22.  s.  shall  say,  why  hath  the  Lord  done  thus 

31.  12.  gather  thy  s.  that  he  may  hear  and  learn 
.Tosh.  8.  33.  the  s.  stood  to  hear  words  of  law  read 
.ludg.  19. 12.  we  will  not  turn  aside  to  city  of  as. 
Ruth^.Vi.  why  have  I  found  grace,  seeing  I  am  as.? 
2  Sam.  1.  13.  I  am  the  son  of  a  s.  an  Amalekite 

15.  10.  for  thou  art  a  s.  and  also  an  exile 

1  Kings  3. 18.  there  was  no  s.  with  ns  in  the  house 
8  41.  moreover  concerning  a  s.  2  Ckron.  6.  32. 
43.  do  according  to  all  the  s.  calloth,  2  CAr.6.  .33. 
.Tub  15.  19.  and  no  s.  passed  among  them 

19.  15.  and  my  maids  count  me  for  a  s. 

t27.  whom  mine  eyes  shall  behold,  and  not  a  s. 
31. 32.  the  s.  did  not  lodge  in  street,  bul  I  opened 

Psal.  69.  8.  I  am  become  a  s.  to  my  bn'thren 
94.  6.  they  slay  the  widow  and  the  s.  and  murder 
109.  11.  and  let  the  s.  spoil  his  labour 
137.  t4.  how  shall  sin?  Lord's  song  in  land  of  s.? 

Prov.  2.  16.  to  deliver  thee  even  from  the  s. 

5.  10.  and  tliy  labours  he  in  the  house  of  a  s. 
20.  why  wilt  thou  embrace  the  bosom  of  a  s.7 

6.  1.  if  tliou  hnsl  stricken  thine  hand  with  a  s. 

7.  5.  they  may  keep  thee  from  the  s.  who  flatters 

11.  15.  he  that  is  surety  for  a  s.  shall  smart  for  it 
14.  10.  and  as.  doth  not  intermeddle  with  his  joy 

20. 16.  take  his  garm.  that  is  surety  for  a  s.  27.  13. 
27.  2.  let  a  s.  praise  thee,  and  not  thine  own  lips 

F.ccl.  6.2.  not  power  to  eat  thereof,  but  a  s.  eateth  it 

Isa.  56.3.  neither  let  the  son  of  a  s.  speak,  saying 

6.  the  sons  of  Che  s.  that  join  themselves  to  Lord 

62.  8.  the  sons  of  the  s.  shall  not  drink  thy  wine 
.Ter.  14. 8.  why  shouldest  thou  be  as  a  s.  in  the  land 
F.iek.  14.  7.  every  s.  that  setteth  up  his  idols 

22.7.  they  dealt  by  oppression  with  the  s.  29. 

44.  17.  brought  into  my  sanctuary  children  of  as. 

9.  no  s.  uncirciimcised  shall  enter  my  sanctuary 
47.  23.  that  in  what  tribe  the  s.  sojourneth 

Obad.  12.  in  the  day  that  he  became  a  s. 
Mnl.3.5.  and  that  turn  aside  the  s.  from  Iiis right 
Mat.  25.  35.  I  was  a  s.  and  ye  look  me  in,  43. 

38.  when  saw  we  thee  a  s.  and  took  thee  in?  44. 
Luke  17.  18.  not  found  that  returned,  save  this  s. 

24.  18.  art  thou  only  a  s.  in  Jems,  and  not  known 
./oAnlO.  5.  s  will  they  not  follow,  hut  floe  from  him 
.lets  7.  29.  Moses  was  a  s.  in  the  land  of  Midian 

See  Fatherless. 
STRANGERS. 
Gen.  31.  15.  are  we  not  counted  of  him  s.  ? 
36.  7.  tho  land  wherein  they  were  s.  F.xod.  6.  4. 
Ezod.  22.  21.  for  ye  were  s.  in  the  land  of  Egvpt, 
23.  9.  Lev.  19.  34.  |  25.  23.  Deut.  10.' 19. 
Lev.  17.  8.  s.  that  offer  an  oblation,  22.  18. 

10.  whatsoever  of  the  s.  that  eateth  any  blood 
13.  the  s.  that  hunleth  shall  pour  out  the  blood 

20.  2.  of  the  s.  that  give  his  seed  to  Molech 

25.  45.  of  the  children  of  the  s.  shall  ye  buy 

4G 


STR 

DeKt.24. 14.  thou  shall  not  oppress  a  serv.  tho'  of  # 

31.16.  wjll  go  a  whoring  after  gods  of  the  s.of  land 
Josh.8. 35.  the  s.  that  were  conversanl  among  them 
./udg.  10.  t  16.  they  put  away  the  gods  of  s. 

2  Sam.  22.  45.  s.  shall  submit  themselves  unto  me 
.46.  s.  shall  fadeaway  and  be  afraid,  Ps.18.44,45. 

1  Chr.  16.  19.  when  ye  were  s.  in  it,  Psal.  105. 12. 
22. 2.  David  commanded  to  gather  the  .s.  in  Israel 

29.  15.  fir  we  are  s.  as  were  all  our  fathers 

2  Chron.  2.  17.  and  Solomon  lumihered  all  the  s. 
15.  9.  and  Asa  gathered  all  Judah  and  the  s. 

30.  25.  the  s.  of  Israel  and  all  Judah  rrjoiced 
Jfth.i).  2.  seed  of  Isr.  separated  thems.  from  all  s. 

13.  30.  thus  cleansed  I  them  from  all  s. 

Ps.  54.  3.  for  s.  are  risen  uj)  ag.  me  and  oppressors 
146.  9.  the  Lord  preservolh  the  s.  he  relievelh 
Pror.  .5.  10.  lest  s.  be  filled  with  thy  wealth 

17.  let  them  he  only  Ihine  own,  not  s.  with  thee 

Isa.  1.7.  your  cities  burnt,  your  land,  s.  devour  it  in 

your  presence,  it  is  desolate  as  oviti  brown  by*. 

2.  6.  they  please  thaoiselves  in  the  children  of  s. 
5.  17.  the  waste  places  of  the  fat  ones  shall  s.  eat 

14.  1.  and  thes.  shall  be  joined  with  them 

25.  2.  thou  hast  made  a  palace  of  s.  to  be  aocity 
5.  thou  shall  bring  down  the  noise  of  s. 

29.  5.  multiiude  of  thy  s.  shall  he  like  small  dust 

60.  10.  the  sons  of  s.  shall  build  up  thy  walls 

61.  5.  and  s.  shall  stand  and  feed  your  flocks 
./rr.  2.  25. 1  have  loved  s.  and  after  them  will  I  go 

3.  13.  thou  hast  scattered  thy  ways  to  the  s. 

5. 19.  so  shall  ye  servo  s.  in  a  land  that  is  not  yours 

30.  8.  s.  shall  no  more  serve  themselves  of  him 
35.  7.  that  yc  may  live  in  the  land  where  ye  be  ». 
51.51.  for  s.  are  come  into  tho  sanctuaries  of  Lord 

A«m.  5.2.our  inherit. is  turned  to  s.  houses  to  aliens 
Eiek.  7.21. 1  will  give  it  into  hand  of  s.  for  a  prey 
11.  9.  I  will  deliver  yon  into  the  hands  of  s. 
16.32.a  wife  who  taketh  s.  instead  of  her  husband 
28.  7.  behold  therefore  I  will  bring  s.  upon  thee 

10.  thou  shall  die  the  deaths  by  the  hand  of  s. 
30. 12. 1  will  make  the  land  waste  by  the  hand  of » 

31.  12.S.  have  cut  him  off,  and  have  left  him 
44. 7.  in  that  ye  have  brought  into  my  sanctuary  *. 
47.  22.  for  an  inheritance  to  you  and  to  the  s. 

//os.7. 9.  s.  have  devoured  his  strength,  knows  it  not 
8.  7.  if  so  be  it  yield,  the  s.  shall  s>vallow  it  up 
.Tori  3.  17.  there  shall  no  s.  pass  thro'  her  any  more 
Obad.  11.  in  the  day  that  s.  carried  away  captive 
Mat.n.  25.  of  whom  take  tribute?  ofchild.  or  of  s.? 
26.  Peter  saitli  to  him,  of  s.  ||  27.  7.  to  bury  s.  ia 
.John  10.  5.  for  they  know  not  the  voire  of  s. 
.^cts  2.  10.  and  .s.  of  Rome,  Jews  and  proselytes 

13. 17.  when  they  dwelt  as  s.  in  Ihe  land  of  Egypt 
Eph.  2.  12.  were  s.  from  Ihe  covenants  of  promise 

19. therefore  ye  are  no  more  s.  but  fellow-citizens 
1  Tim. 5. lO.ifshe  have  lodged  s.  ifshe  have  washed 
/T'ft.ll.lS.confessed  they  weres.  and  pilg.  on  earth 
13.  2.  be  not  forgetful  to  entertain  s.  for  some 
1  P("^  1. 1.  so  the. s.  scattered  Ihro' Ponttis,  Galatia 
2. 11. 1  beseech  you  ass.  pilgrims,  ahst.  from  lusts 
3yoAn5.dost  faithfully,  whatsoever  thou  dost  to  *. 

STRANGELV. 
Z)cBt.32.27.1e3t  adversaries  should  behave  thems.*, 

STRANGLED. 
JVaA.  2. 12.  the  lion  did  tear  and  s.  for  his  lione.ssM 
.^cts  15. 20.  that  Ihev  abst.  from  things s.  29. 1  21.25. 

STRANGLING. 
■/ob  7.  15.  80  that  mv  soid  chooseth  s,  and  death 

STRAW. 
f?fn.24.25.  we  have  boths.  and  provender  enough 

32.  he  gave  s.  and  provender  for  tho  camels 
Exod.  5.  7.  ye  shall  no  more  give  s.  10,  16,  18. 

11.  go  ye,  get  yoo  s.  where  you  can  find  it 
Tudg.  19.  19.  yet  there  is  both  s.  and  provender 

1  A7nn-s4.2S.broughtbarIoyal30  and  s.for  tho  horses 
■lob  41.27.  esteemeih  iron  as  s.  brass  as  rotten  wood 
Isa.W.  7.  and  the  lion  .shall  eats,  like  Ihe  ox,  C5.  25. 

25.  10.  Moab  shall  he  trodden  down,  oven  as  s. 

STRAWED. 
Kxod.  32.  20.  he  ground  the  calf,  s.  it  on  Ihe  water 

2  Chron.  34.  4.  he  s.  upon  the  graves  of  them  tl^at 
Jfi«.2I.8.cutdown  branches  ands.lhei7i,7l/(7rill.8. 

25  24.  and  gathering  where  thou  hast  not  s. 

26.  and  gather  where  I  have  not  s. 

STREAM. 
JVitm.  21.  15.  what  he  did  at  the  s.  of  the  brooks 
■Tab  n.  1.5.  and  as  the  s.  of  brooks  they  pass  away 
Psal.  124.  4.  then  the  s.  had  gone  over  our  soul 
/:?n.  27.12.  the  Lord  shall  beat  nfl'lo  thes.  of  Egypt 
30.  28.  his  breath  as  an  overflowing  s.  shall  reach 

33.  like  a  s.  of  brimstone,  doth  kindle  it 

.57.6.  among  smooth  stones  of  thes.  islhy  portion 
66.  12.  the  glory  of  the  Gentiles  like  a  flowing  s. 

/?an.7.10.fiery  s.  issued  and  came  forth  before  him 

Amos  5.  24.  and  righteousness  as  a  mighty  s. 

A>u4e6.48.  the  s.  beat  vehemently  on  that  house,  49. 
STREAMS. 

F.xod.  7. 19.  stretch  out  thine  hand  on  their  ».  8. 5. 

Psal.  46.  4.  s.  whereof  shall  make  glad  city  of  God 
78. 18.  hs  brought  s.  also  out  of  rock,  and  waters 


STR 

Paal  78.20.lhe  waters  gushed  out,th6<. overflowed 
126.4.  turn  again  our  captivity  as  £.  in  the  soutli 
Cant.  4. 15.  well  of  living  waters,  s.lroin  Lebanon 
Jsa.  11.  15.  the  Lord  shall  smite  it  in  the  seven  s. 
30.  25.  on  every  high  hill  shall  be  s.  of  waters 

33.  21.  will  he  to  U6  a  place  of  broad  nvere  and  «. 

34.  9.  the  ».  thereof  shall  be  turned  into  pitch 
35.6.  waters  break  out,  and  .>-.  in  the  desert 

STREET. 
Oen.  19.  2.  but  we  will  abide  in  the  s.  all  night 
JJeul.  13.  10.  thou  shall  gather  all  the  spoil  into  »-. 
Josh.  2.  19.  any  go  out  of  tliy  house  into  the  s. 
Judg   19.  15.  he  sat  down  in  a  s.  of  the  city,  17. 

20.  the  old  man  said,  only  lodge  not  iii  the  s. 
^am.  21. 12.  had  stolen  from  the  «.  of  Betli-shan 

22.  43.  I  did  6t.unp  tht.m  as  the  mire  of  the  s. 
2  Chr.  29.  4.  and  gathered  them  in  the  east  s.  32.  6. 
i'.zra  10.  9.  all  the  people  sat  ins.  of  house  of  God 
JS'eA.e.l.  the  people  gathered  as  one  man  into  the  »■. 
3.  he  read  therein  before  the  s.  that  was  before 
16.  so  people  made  booths  in  the  s.  of  water-g-ite 
Estk,  (j.  9.  hruig  liim  on  horseback  thro'  the  s.  11. 
Job  18.  IT.  and  he  shall  have  no  name  in  the  s. 

29.  7.  when  1  prepared  my  seat  in  the  «. 

31. 32.  slrang.r  did  not  lodge  in  the  s.  but  I  opened 
Prov-  7.  8.  paioing  thro'  the  s.  near  her  corner 
Jsa.  42.  2.  bis  voice  not  heard  in  s.  Mat.  12.  19. 

51.  23.  and  tliou  hast  laid  thy  body  as  the  s. 

59.  14.  for  truth  is  fallen  in  the  s.  and  equity 
Jer.  37.  21.  give  him  daily  bread  out  of  bakers'  s. 
Ji,am.'2.  19.  that  faint  for  hunger  in  top  of  every  s. 

4.  1.  stones  are  poured  out  in  the  top  of  every  4. 
Ezek.  10. 24.  made  thee  a  high  place  in  every  4. 31. 
Dan.  9. 25.  the  s.  shall  be  built  again  and  the  wall 
.^cts  9.  11.  and  go  into  the  s.  called  Straight 

12.  10.  Peter  went  on,  and  passed  througli  one  s. 
JRfC.11.8.  their  dead  bodies  shall  lie  in  the*,  of  city 

21.  21.  and  the  s.  of  the  city  was  pure  gold 

22.  2.  iii  the  inidjst  of  the  s.  was  the  tree  of  life 

STREETS. 
J^um.  22.  t39.  and  they  came  to  a  city  of  s. 
2  Sam.  1.  20.  publish  it  not  in  the  s.  of  Askelon 
1  Kings  20.  34.  thou  shalt  make  s.  in  Damascus 
Psal.  18.  42.  I  did  cast  them  out  as  dirt  in  the  s. 
55.  11.  deceit  and  guile  depart  not  from  her  s. 
144. 13.  sheep  may  bring  forth  ten  thous.  in  our  s. 
14.  that  there  be  no  complaining  in  our  s. 
Prov.  1.  20.  wisdom  uttereth  lier  voice  in  the  s. 

5.  16.  and  rivers  of  water  in  the  «. 

7.  12.  now  is  she  without,  now  in  the  s.  and  licth 
12.  13.  there  is  a  lion  without,  I  shall  be  slain  in  s. 
26.  13.  the  slothful  man  saith,  a  lion  is  in  the  s. 
Eccl.  12.  4.  and  the  doors  shall  be  shut  in  the  s. 

5.  and  the  mourners  go  about  the  s. 
Cant.  3.  2.  I  will  go  about  the  city  in  the  s. 
Isa.5. 25.  and  their  carcases  were  torn  in  midst  of «. 
10.  6.  to  tread  them  down  like  the  mire  of  the  s. 
15.  3.  in  their  s.  they  shall  gird  themselves 
24.  11.  there  is  a  crying  for  wine  in  the  s. 
51.  20.  thy  sons  lie  at  the  head  of  all  the  s. 
Jer.  5. 1.  run  ye  to  and  fro  thro'  thes.  of  Jerusalem 
7.17.8eestthou  not  whattheydo  ins.  of  Jerusalem 
34.  cause  to  cease  from  the  s.  of  Jerusalem  mirth 
9.  21.  death  come,  cut  off  young  men  from  Ihes. 
11.6.  proclaim  these  words  in  the  x.  of  Jerusalem 
13.according  to  the  number  of  the  s.  of  Jerusalem 
14.16.  people  shall  be  cast  out  in  the  s.of  Jerusalem 
33. 10.  mirth  shall  be  heard  in  the  s.  of  Jerusalem 
44.6.  my  nnger  was  kindled  in  the  s.  of  Jerusalem 
9.wickednes8  they  have  committed  in  s.of  Jerus. 
21.  the  incense  that  ye  burn  in  s.  of  Jerusalem 
48.38.  there  shall  be  lamentation  in  the  s.  of  Moab 
49.  26.  her  young  men  shall  fall  in  her  s.  50.  30. 
51.  4.  and  they  that  are  thrust  through  in  her  ». 
Lam.2. 11.  sucklings  swoon  in  the  s.  of  the  city,  12. 
21.  the  young  and  the  old  lie  on  ground  in  the*. 
4.5.  they  that  did  feed  delicately,  are  desolate  ins. 
8.  her  Nazarites  aro  not  known  in  the  t. 
14.  they  have  wandered  as  blind  men  in  the  s. 
IS.they  hunt  our  steps  that  we  cannot  go  in  our  s. 
F.iek.  7.  19.  they  shall  cast  their  silver  in  the  s. 
11.6.  ye  have  filh'd  the  s.  thereof  with  the  slain 
2r),ll.willitli(!li(ii)fs  of  his  horses  tread  down  thys. 
28. 2.').  I  will  send  pestilence  and  bhiod  into  hers. 
Amai  5.  16.  wailing  shall  be  in  all  the  s.  and  they 
shall  say,  alas,  alas! 
Mid.  10.  shall  bo  trodilen  down  as  mire  of  the  ». 
JVaA.  2.  4.  cliaririis  shall  rage  in  the  s.  shall  justio 
3.  10.  were  iliished  in  pieces  at  the  top  of  the  s. 
ZepA.  3. 6.  I  made  iheir  «.  waste,  none  passeth  by 
Zeek.  8.  4.  old  men  and  old  women  shall  dvrell  in  s. 
5.  thos.  of  the  city  shall  be  full  of  boys  and  girls 

9.  3.  Tyros  heaped  up  fine  gold  ns  mire  in  the  «• 

10.  5.  who  trend  down  their  cncmioi  in  the  ,t. 
Mai.  6.2.  do  not  soiinil  a  truin|>et  before  theo  in  ». 

5.  for  they  love  to  prny  standing  in  comors  of  a. 

Mark  6.  .W.  they  laid  the  <lck  in  the  .«.  Jlcts  5.  15. 

Luke  1(1.  10.  gMiiil  into  the  .t.  of  the  samo,  and  say 

13.  2fi.  shall  lii'i;in  losny  ihou  hast  taught  in  our .». 

14. 21.  go  out  (luicklv  inio  i.  snd  lanef  of  the  city 

588 


STR 

STRENGTH. 

Oen.  4. 12.  ground  shall  not  henceforth  yield  hers, 
fiof/.  13.3.  by  s.  the  Lord  brought  you  out,  14,16. 
J^'um.  23.  22.  he  hath  the  s.  of  an  unicorn,  24.  8. 
.fudg.  5.  21.  O  my  soul,  thou  hast  trodden  down  s. 

1  Sam.  2.  4.  they  that  stundded  aie  girt  with  s. 

9.  wicked  be  silent,  for  by  s.  shall  no  man  prevail 

10.  he  shall  give  s.  unto  his  king,  and  exalt  horn 
15.  29.  the  s.  of  Israel  will  not  lie,  nor  repent 
28.22.and  eat,  that  thou  mayest  have  s.in  going  on 

2  Sam.  22. 40.  thou  hast  girded  me  with  s.  to  battle, 

hast  subdued  them  under  me,  t'sul.  18.  32, 39. 

1  Kings  7.  t  21.  he  set  up  pillars  in  the  temple,  he 

called  the  left  pillar,  in  it  is  s.  2  Ckron.  3.  j  17. 

2  Kings  2.  f  16.  there  be  with  us  fifty  sons  of  s. 

18.  20.  I  have  counsel  and  s.  for  war,  Isa.  36.  5. 

19.  3.  and  there  is  no  s.  to  bring  forth,  Isa.  37.  3. 

1  Ckron.  16.  27.  s.  and  gladness  are  In  his  place 
28.  give  to  Lord  glory  and  s.  Psal.  29. 1.  |  96.  7. 

2G.8.  they,  their  sons,  and  brethren,  able  men  for  s. 

29.  12.  ill  thine  hand  it  is  to  give  s.  unto  all 
1 14.  that  we  should  obtain  s.  to  offer  willingly 

2  Chr.  2.  16.  hath  obtained  s.  to  build  him  a  house 
13.  20.  neither  did  Jeroboam  recover  s.  again 

30.  t21.  singing  with  instruments  of  s.  to  Lord 
Kzrai.  \  13.  thou  shalt  endamage  the  s.  of  kings 
J^eh.  4.  10.  s.  of  the  bearers  of  burdens  is  decayed 
Job  9.  1 13.  the  helpers  of  ,s-.  do  stoop  under  him 

10.  if  I  speak  of  s.  lo,  he  is  strong,  if  of  judgment 
12. 13.  w  ith  him  is  wisdom  and  s.  hath  counsel,  16. 
21.  and  he  weakeneth  the  s.  of  the  mighty 

17.  1 9.  he  that  hath  clean  hands,  shall  add  s. 

18.  13.  it  shall  devour  the  s.  of  his  skin 

22.  t25.  and  thou  shalt  have  silver  of  s. 

23.  6.  no,  but  he  would  put  s.  in  me 

30.  3.  whereto  might  s.  of  their  hands  profit  me 
t21.  v,'\\.h  s.  of  thy  hand  thou  opposest  ag.  me 

31.  139.  if  eaten  the  s.  thereof  without  money 
36.  19.  he  will  not  esteem  all  the  forces  ofs. 
39.  19.  hast  thou  given  the  horse  s.? 
41.22.in  his  neck  remaineth  s.sorrow  turned  to  joy 

P.stt/.  8.  2.  out  of  mouth  of  babes  hast  ordained  s. 

20.  6.  with  the  saving  s.  of  his  right  hand 

27.  1.  Lord  is  the  s.  of  my  life  of  whom  be  afraid 

28.  8.  and  he  is  the  saving  s.  of  his  anointed 

29.  II.  the  Lord  will  give  s.  to  his  people 

30.  t7.  thou  hast  settled  s.  for  my  mountain 

31.  12.  be  thou  to  me  for  a  rock  ofs.  a  defence 
33.  16.  the  mighty  is  not  delivered  by  much  s. 
39.13.0  spare  me,  that  I  luay  recovers,  before  I  go 
46.  1.  God  is  our  refuge  and  s.  a  help,  81.  1. 
60.  7.  Ephraim  is  the  s.  of  mine  head,  108.  8. 

19.  who  will  bring  me  into  the  city  ofs.? 
62.  1 11.  I  heard  this  that  s.  helongeth  unto  God 
68.  34.  ascribe  ye  .?.  unto  God,  his  s.  is  in  clouds 

3.5.  God  of  Israel  is  he  that  giveth  s.  and  power 

73.  26.  hut  God  is  the  s.  of  my  heart  and  portion 

74.  1 15.  thou  driedst  up  rivers  ofs. 
81.  1.  sing  aloud  unto  God  our  s.  make  a  noise 
84.  5.  blessed  is  the  man  whose  s.  is  in  thee 

7.  they  go  from  s.  to  s.  every  one  of  them  in  Zion 
90.  10.  and  if  by  reason  ofs.  they  be  fourscore 
93.  1.  the  Lord  is  clothed  with  majesty  and  g.  ■ 

95.  4.  the  s.  of  the  hills  is  his  also 

96.  6.  s.  and  beauty  are  in  his  sanctuary 
99.  4.  the  king's  s.  also  lovelh  judgment 
138.3.  thou  strengthenedst  me  with  s.  in  my  soul 
140.  7.  O  God  the  Lord,  the  s.  of  my  salvation 

Prov.  8.  14.  I  have  s.  ||  10.  29.  way  of  Lord  is  s. 

14.  4.  but  much  increase  is  by  the  s.  of  ox 

21.22.  a  wise  man  casteth  down  the  s.  thereof 

24  5.  yea,  a  man  of  knowledge  increaseth  s. 

31.  17.  she  girdeth  her  loins  with  s.  strengthencth 
25.  s.  and  honour  arc  her  clothing,  she  shall  rcj. 
F.ccl.  9.  16.  then  I  said,  wisdom  is  better  than  s. 

10.  10.  if  iron  be  blunt,  then  inunt  put  to  tnore  s. 

17.  princes  eat  for  s.  and  not  for  drunkenness 
Isa.  a.  22.  and  men  ofs.  to  mingle  strong  drink 

10.  13.  by  the  s.  of  my  hanil  I  have  done  it 
23.  4.  the  sea  hath  spoken,  even  the  s.  of  the  sea 
25.  4.  thou  hast  been  a  s.  to  the  poor,  a  s.  to  the 
needy  in  his  distress,  a  refuge  from  the  storm 
26.4.  ill  ihe  Lord  Jki'ovah  is  everlasting  s. 
28.  6  for  s.  to  them  that  turn  the  battle  to  gate 
30.  3.  the  4.  of  Pharaoh  shall  bo  your  i>hame 
33.  6.  wisdom  shall  be  stability  and  s.  of  salvation 
40.  9.  O  Jerusalem,  lift  up  thy  voice  with  s 
29.  to  Ihein  that  have  no  might,  ho  increaseth  s. 
42.  25.  ho  halh  poured  on  him  the  .*.  of  battle 
44.  12.  he  workelh  it  with  the  s.  of  his  arms 
4.5.  24.  in  tho  Lord  have  I  righteousness  nnd  s. 
51.9.  awake,  awake,  put  on  thy  s.  O  arm  of  Lord 
./rr.  20.  ."i.  moreover  I  wdl  deliver  all  s.  of  this  city 
51.  .W.  tho'  she  should  fortify  tho  height  of  her  s. 

/.am.  1.6.  ihcy  aro  gone  without  s.  before  pursuer  I  00.  10.  yet  Is  theirs,  labour  and  sorrow 
Ezrk.  30.  15.  will  pour  my  fury  on  sin,  s.  of  Egypt   f'rnv.  20.  29.  the  glory  of  young  men  is  their  t. 

18.  the  pomp  of  her  s.  shall  cease  in  her,  33.  2H.   I.ia.  IIO.  7.  I  have  cried,  their  .«.  is  lo  sit  .'Jtill 
Dan.  2.  .37.  God  hath  given  tho  power,  s.  glory         40.31.  they  that  wait  on  Lord  shall  renew  their* 

41.  but  there  shall  be  in  it  of  llie  s.  of  Ihe  iron        41.1.  and  Jet  the  people  renew  their  s. 
I   3.  [20.  he  commanded  llt«  mighty  off.  to  bind    I  G3.  6.  1  will  bring  down  (A^ir  «.  to  tho  avth 


STR 

Dan.ll.lS.neither  shall  there  be  any  s.to  wrthstand 
17.  to  enter  with  the  s.  of  his  whole  kingdom 
31.  they  shall  pollute  the  sanctuary  ofs. 

Joel  3. 16.  the  Lord  the  s.  of  the  children  of  lerae 

■J  BIOS  6.13.  have  we  not  taken  horns  by  our  owns.? 

JVaA.  1.  t7.  the  Lord  is  s.  in  the  day  of  trouble 
3.9.Ethiopia  and  Egypt  were  her  s.Put  and  Lubim 

11.  thou  also  shalt  seek  ,■!.  because  of  the  enemy 
Hag.  2. 22. 1  will  destroy  s.  of  kingdoms  of  heathen 
Luke  1.  51.  he  hath  shewed  s.  with  his  arm 
jlcts  3.  7.  his  feet  and  ancle-bones  received  a. 
Rom.  5.  6.  when  yet  without  s.  Christ  died 

1  Cor.  15.  56.  sting  is  sin,  the  s.  of  sin  is  the  law 

2  Cor. 1.8.  we  were  pressed  out  of  measure,  above  s 
//c6.  II.  11. Sara  herself  received  s.  to  conceive  seed 
Rev.  3.  8.  for  tliou  hast  a  little  s.  hast  kept  my  word 

5. 12.  worthy  is  Lamb  lo  receive  s.  and  honour 

12.10.a  voice  saying,  now  is  come  salvation  and  «. 

17. 13.  these  shall  give  their  power  and  s.  to  beaal 

His  STRENGTH. 
Ezod.  14.  27.  and  the  sea  returned  to  A.  s. 
Deut.  21.  17.  he  is  the  beginning  of  A.  s. 
Judg.  8.  21.  rise  thou,  for  as  the  man  is,  so  is  A.  s 

16.  5.  entice  him,  see  wherein  A.  great  s  lieth 
9.  A.  s.  was  not  known  ||  19.  A.  s.  went  from  him 
2  Kings  9.  24.  Jehu  drew  a  bow  with  Ais  full  s. 
1  Chr.  16.  11.  seek  the  Lord  and  /;.  s.  Psal.  105.  4 
Job  18.  7.  the  steps  of  A.  s.  shall  be  straitened 

12.  A.  s.  shall  be  hunger-bitten,  destruction  ready 

13.  even  first-born  of  di-ath  shall  devour  A.  s. 
21.  23.  one  dieth  in  Ais  full  s.  being  wholly  at  ease 
37.  6.  he  saith  to  the  great  rain  of  A.  s. 

39. 11.  wilt  thou  trust  him  because  A.  s.  is  greati 
21.  rejoiceth  in  A.  s.  ||  40.  16.  A.  s.  is  in  loins 
Psai.  33.  17.  nor  shall  he  deliver  any  by  Ais  great* 
52.  7.  this  is  the  man  that  made  not  God  A.  s. 
59.  9.  because  of  A.  s.  will  I  wait  upon  thee 
65.  6.  who  by  A.  s.  setteth  fast  the  mountains 
68.  34.  ascribe  s.  to  God,  A.  s.  is  in  the  clouds 
78.  4.  shewing  to  the  generation  to  come  A.  a. 

61.  delivered  A.  s.  into  captivity  and  his  glory 
fsa.  .31.  t9.  he  shall  pass  over  to  A.  s.  for  fear 
44.  12.  he  is  hungry,  and  A.  s.  faileth 

62.  8.  the  Lord  hath  sworn  by  the  arm  of  A.  *. 

63.  1.  travelling  in  the  greatness  of  A.  s. 

Dan.  11.2.  by  A.  s.  shall  stir  up  all  against  Grecia 
If  OS.  7.  9.  strangers  devoured  A.  s.  he  knoweth  not 
12.  3.  and  by  A.  s.  he  had  power  with  God 
Rev.  1. 16.  his  countenance  wk  as  the  sun  in  A.  s, 

In  STRENGTH. 
<7en.49. 24.  but  his  bow  abode  in  s.  and  the  arm« 

1  Kings  19.8.  went  in  the  s.  of  that  meat  forty  days 
Job  3.  1 17.  and  there  the  wearied  in  s.  be  at  rest 

9.  4.  he  is  wise  in  heart,  and  mighty  in  s.  36.  5. 
Psal.  71.  16.  I  will  go  in  the  s.  of  the  Lord  God 

103.  20.  bless  Lord,  ye  his  angels  that  excel  in  a. 

147.  10.  he  delighteth  not  in  the  a.  of  a  horse 
Prov.  24.  1 5.  a  wise  man  is  in  s.  yea  increaseth  a. 
fsa.  8.  til-  Lord  spake  thus  to  me  in  s.  of  hand 

30.  2.  to  strengthen  themselves  in  s.  of  Pharaoh 
Mic.  5.  4.  and  he  shall  feed  in  the  s.  of  the  Lord 
.^cts  9.  22.  but  Saul  increased  the  more  in  a. 

My  STRENGTH. 
(Vcn.  49. 3.  Reuben,  thou  art  the  beginning  of  my  5. 
Ezod.  15. 2.  Lord  is  my  s.  and  song,  2  Sam.  22.  "33. 
Psal.  18.  2.  I  28.  7.  I  118.  14.  Jsa.  12.  2. 
.7<>.'!A.14.  II.  as  my  s.  was  then,  even  so  is  my  a.  now 
Judg.  16. 17.  if  I  be  shaven,  my  s.  will  go  from  me 
Job  6.  II.  what  is  my  s.  that  1  should  hopel 

12.  is  my  s.  of  stones'?  or  is  my  flesh  ofbroisl 
Psal.  18.  1.  I  will  love  thee,  O  Lord,  my  a. 
19.14. 0  Ld.  my  s.  22. 19.  ||  22. 15.  my  s.  is  dried  up 

31.  4.  pull  me  out  of  the  net,  for  thou  art  my  s. 
10.  my  s.  fails  bee.  of  my  iniquity,  38. 10.  |  71. 9. 

43.2.  thou  art  the  God  of  my  s. why  go  I  mourninifl 
.59.  17.  to  :.hee,  O  my  s.  will  I  sing ;  God  is  defence 
62. 7.  art  rock  ofmy  s.  ||  102.23.  he  weakened  my  s. 
139.  t  m.  my  a.  was  not  hid  from  thee,  when  I  was 
144.1.  blessed  be  L.  my  s.  who  teacheth  my  hands 

fsa.'iT.  5.  lot  him  take  hold  of  my  s.  lo  make  peace 
49.  4.  I  have  spent  my  s.  for  pought,  and  in  vain 
5.  vet  I  shall  be  glorious,  my  God  shall  he  my  s. 

.hr.  16.  19.  O  Lord  jny  s.  ||  Hah.  3.  19.  God  is  my». 

/><:m.1. 14.  they  are  wreathed,  homadeTny*.  to  fall 
3. 18. 1  Raid  my  a.  and  hope  is  perished  from  Lord 

y.ech.  12.5.  shall  be  my  s.in  Lord  of  hosts  iheir  God 

2  Cor.  12. 9.  for  my  s.  is  made  perfect  in  vN'caknesf 

See  No. 
Their  STRE.N'GTH. 
.losh.  II.  13.  as  for  cities  that  stood  still  in  their  a 
Psal.  37^.39.  ho  is  their  a.  in  the  time  of  trouble 
73.  4.  are  no  hands  in  their  de:ith,  their  s.  is  firi» 
78.  51.  he  smote  the  chief  of /Arir  s.  10.5.  38. 
89.  17.  for  thou  art  the  glory  of  tArir  s. 


STR 

Etek,  24.  35.  -jfhen  I  lake  from  them  their  $. 

Joel  ii.  22.  tlie  tig-tree  and  vine  do  yield  their  3. 
T/iy  STRENGTH. 

Exod.  13.  13.  thou  hust  guided  tlicm  in  thy  s. 

Deut.  33.  2.5.  and  as  thy  days,  so  shall  Iky  s  be 

Judg.  IG.  tj.  tell  liic  wherein  thy  s.  lieth,  15. 

8  CArurt.  6.  41.  thou  and  urk  of  thy  s.  Psal.  132.  8. 

Psal.  21.'  1.  the  king  sliall  joy  in  tky  s.  O  Lord 
13.  he  thou  e.xulled,  O  Lord,  in  thine  own  s. 
54.  1.  save  me  by  thy  name,  judge  me  by  thy  s. 
68.  28.  thy  Gud  halli  commanded  thy  s. 
71. 18. until  I  have  shewed  thy  s.  to  this  generation 
74.  13.  Ihuu  didst  divide  the  sea  by  thy  s. 
77. 14.  thou  hast  declared  thy  s.  among  the  people 
80.  2.  stir  up  tUy  s.  and  come  and  save  us 
86.  lli.  O  turn  to  nie,  give  tky  s.  to  lliy  servant 
liO.  2.  Lord  shall  send  rod  ij(  tky  s.  out  ol'Zion 

Prov.  0.  1 10.  lest  strangers  be  filled  with  thy  s. 

24.  10.  iflaint  in  day  ol  adversity,  </ii(  s.  is  small 

31.  3.  give  not  thy  s.  unto  women,  nor  thy  ways 
Isa.  17. 10.  hast  not  been  mindful  of  rock  oithys. 

52.  1.  awake,  awake,  put  on  tky  s.  O  Zion 

63.  15.  where  is  tliy  zeal  and  thy  s.  the  sounding 
Jimos  3.  11.  he  shall  bring  down  tky  s.  from  thee 
Mark  12.30.  thou  shall  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with 
all  thy  heart  and  with  all  thy  s.  33.  Luke  10.27. 
iour  STllKNGTH. 
Lev.  2G.  20.  and  yuur  s.  shall  be  spent  in  vain 
J^ch.  8.  10.  for  the  joy  ofthe  Lord  is  your  s. 
Isa.  23.  14.  howl,  ye  shi|is,  yuur  s.  is  laid  waste 

30.  15.  in  quietness  and  conlidence  shall  be  yours. 
£zck.H.  21.  my  sanctuary,  excellency  oCyours. 

STRENGTHEN, 
/.eu.  25.  t35.  if  thy  brother  be  poor  s.  hitn 
y.>eu^3.28.butcharge  Joshua,  encourage  and s. him 
Judg.  l(j.  28.  s.  mo,  I  pray  thee,  only  Ibis  once 

19.  fS.  s.  thine  heart  with  a  morsel  of  bread 
1  Kings  20.  22.  go  «.  Ihys.  mark  and  see  what  dost 
Ezra  G.  22.  to  s.  their  hands  in  the  work  of  house 
JVeA.  6.  9.  now  therefore,  O  God,  s.  my  hands 
Job  16.  5.  but  1  would  «.  you  with  my  mouth 
Psai, '20. 2.  Lord  send  thee  help,*,  thee  out  of  Zion 

27. 14.  wait  on  Lord,  he  shall  «.  thy  heart,  31.  24. 

41.3.  Lord  will  .<.  him  on  the  bed  of  languishing 
68.  28.  s.  that  which  thou  hast  wrought  for  us 
89.  21.  be  established,  mine  arm  also  shall  £.  him 
119.  28.  s.  thou  me  according  to  thy  word 

Isa.  22.  21.  and  1  will  s.  him  with  thy  girdle 
30.  2.  to  s.  themselves  in  the  s.  of  Pharaoh 

33.  23.  they  could  not  well  «.  their  mast 

35.  3.  s.  ye  the  weak  hands  ||  41.  10.  I  will  s.  thee 
54.  2.  lengthen  thy  cords,  and  s.  thy  stakes 

/er.  4.  tG.  set  up  the  standard,  s.  stay  not 
23.  14.  they  s.  also  the  hands  of  evil  doers 

Eiek.  7.  13.  nor  shall  any  s.  himself  in  iniquity 

16.  49.  neither  did  she  s.  hand  of  poor  and  needy 
30.  24.  I  will  s.  arms  ofthe  king  of  Babylon,  25. 

34.  16.  and  i  will  s  that  which  was  sick 

Dan.  11.  1.  even  [  stood  to  confirm  and  to  s.  him 
Avios  2.  14.  and  the  strong  shall  not  s.  his  force 
Zech.  10.  6.  and  I  will  s.  the  house  of  Judah 

12.  I  will  s.  them  in  the  Lord,  they  shall  walk 
Luke  22.  32.  when  thou  art  converted,  s.  brethren 
1  Pet.  5. 10.  God  make  you  perfect,  stablish,  s.  you 
Rev.  3.  2.  he  walchful  and  s.  thmgs  which  remain 

STRENGTHENED,  .actively.  Passively. 
Oen.  48.  2  Israel  «.  himself,  and  sat  upon  the  bed 
Jud^.  3.  12.  the  Lord  s.  Eglon  against  Israel 

7.  II.  and  afterwards  shall  thine  hands  be  s. 

9.  t24.  which  s.  his  hands  to  kill  his  brethren 

1  Sam.  23.  IG.  Jonathan  went  and  s.  hand  in  God 

2  Sam.  2.  7.  therefore  now  let  your  hands  be  s. 

1  Chron.  11.  10.  who  s.  themselves  with  David 

2  Chron.  1.  I.  and  Solomon  was  s.  in  his  kingdom 
11.  17.  so  they.?,  the  kingdom  of  Judah 

12. 1.  when  Ruhob.  had  s.  himself,  he  forsook  law 
13.7.  and  have  s.  themselves  against  Rehoboam 

17.  1.  Jehoshaphat  s.  himself  against  Israel 

21. 4.  Jehorain  y.  himself  and  slew  all  his  brethren 
23.  1.  Jehoiada  s.  himself  and  took  the  captains 
24. 13.  they  set  hou.<e  of  God  in  his  state,  and  s.  it 

25.  11,  Amaziah  s.  himself,  and  led  forth  people 
?6.  8.  for  Uzziah  s.  himself  e.xcoedingly 

28.  20.  came  and  distressed  Ahaz,  but  s.  him  not 

32.  5.  Hezekiah  s.  himself,  and  built  the  wall 
Ezra  1.  G.  all  that  were  about  them  s.  their  hands 

7.  28.  I  was  s.  as  hand  of  my  God  was  upon  me 
JVcA.2.  18.  they  s.  their  hands  for  this  good  work 
Job  4.  3.  and  thou  hast  .?.  the  weak  hands 

4.  and  thou  hast .«.  the  feeble  knees 
/'.«o/.'.'i2.  7.  and  .?.  himself  in  his  wickedness 
147.  ]'.i.  for  he  halh  s.  the  bars  of  thy  gates 
Prov.  7.  1 13.  she  s.  her  face  and  said  to  him 

8.  28.  when  he  s.  ihe  fountains  ofthe  deep 
/sa.45.tl.fiaitli  to  Cyrus,  whose  right  hand  I  haves. 
Ezek.  13. 22.  ye  have  s.  the  hands  of  the  wicked 

34.  4.  the  diseased  have  ye  not  s.  nor  healed  sick 

Dan.  10.  18.  one  touched  me,  and  s.  me,  19. 

II.  6.  he  that  begat  her  and  s.  her  in  these  limes 

12.»hall  taat  down  many,  but  he  shall  not  bes.by 

587 


STR 

Hot.  7. 15.  though  I  have  bound  and  ».  their  arms 

j«ct« 9.19.Saul  wuas.||i<;;;/(.3.]G.to  be  s.wilh  might 
Col.  1. 11.3.  with  all  might  according  to  his  power 
2  Tim.  4.  17.  the  Lord  stood  with  me  and  a.  me 

STRENGTH  ENEDST. 
Psal.  138.  3.  and  *.  me  with  strength  in  my  soul 

STRENGTHEN ETH. 
Job  15.  25.  he  «.  himself  against  the  Almighty 
Psal.  104.  15.  and  bread  which  s.  man's  heart 
Prov.  24.  15.  yea,  a  man  of  knowledge  s.  might 
31.  17.  she  girdeih  her  loins,  and  s.  her  arms 
Eccl.  7. 19.  wisdom  s.  the  wise  more  than  ten  men 
ha.  44.  14.  the  cyjiress  and  oak  ho  s.  for  himself 
yimos  5.  9.  that  »'.  the  spoiled  against  the  strong 
/'A;7. 4.13.  lean  do  all  things  thro'  Christ  wlios.  me 

STRENGTHENING. 
Luke  22.  43.  there  appeared  an  angel  s.  him 
Wc£»18.23.  Paul  went  to  Galatia,  »•.  all  the  disciples 

STRETCH. 
Ezod.  7. 19. 3.  out  thy  hand  ujjon  waters  of  Egypt 
8.  5.  s.  Ibrth  thine  hand  over  streams  ond  rivers 
10.  s.  out  thy  rod  and  smite  dust  of  land 

25.  20.  cherub,  shall  a-,  forth  iheir  wings  on  high 
Josk.  8.  18.  s.  out  spear  thai  is  in  thy  hand  to  Ai 
2  Kiyigs  21. 13. 1  will  s.  over  Jerus.  line  of  Samaria 

1  Ckron.  21.  1 10. 1  s.  out  three  things,  choose  one 
Jub  11.  13.  if  thou  s.  oul  thy  hands  to  him 

39.  26.  doth  the  hawk  s.  her  wings  toward  south  ? 
Psal.  68.  31.  shall  soon  5.  out  her  hands  to  God 
I.ia.  28.  20.  shorter  than  that  a  man  can  5.  himself 
34.  11.  he  shall  s.  ui)on  it  the  line  of  confusion 
54.  2.  s.  forth  the  curtains  of  thy  habitat,  let  them 
.Jer.  10.  20.  there  is  none  to  s.  forth  my  tent 
Ezek.  30.  25.  king  of  Baby,  shall  s.  out  iny  sword 
Jlinus  G.  4.  and  *.  themselves  upon  their  couches 
jMal:  12.  13.  Jesus  said  to  man,  s.Jbrth  thy  hand 
./okn  21.  18.  thou  shall  s.  forth  thy  hands 

2  Cor.  10. 14.  for  we  s.  not  ourselves  beyond  nieas. 

STRETCHED,  .Actively,  Passivdy. 

Oen.  22.  10.  Abraham  s.  forth  hand  to  slay  his  son 
48. 14.  Israel  *.  out  right  hand,  laid  it  on  Ephraim 

Ezod.  8.  6.  Aaron  s.  out  his  hand  over  waters,  17. 
9.23.  Moses  *.  forth  his  rod  toward  heaven,  10.  13. 
10.  22.  Moses  s.  forth  hand  to  heaven,  14.  21,  27. 

Josh.  8.  18.  and  Joshua  s.  out  the  si)ear,  26. 
19.  they  ran  as  soon  as  he  had  s.  out  his  hand 

2  Sam.  6.  f  17.  set  ark  in  tabernacle  David  had  s. 

1  Kings  6.  27.  the  cherubinis  s.  forth  their  wings 
17.  21.  he  .?.  himself  on  child,  2  Kin^s  4.  34,  35. 

1  CAro7i.  21.  16.  angel  with  a  sword  s.  over  Jerusal. 

Job  38.  5.  who  hath  s.  the  line  upon  it? 

I'sal.  44.  20.  or  s.  our  hands  to  a  strange  god 
88.  9.  I  have  s.  out  my  hands  unto  thee 
136.  G.  to  him  that  s.  out  the  earth  above  waters 

Prov.  1.  24.  because  I  have  *.  out  my  hand 

Isa.Q.  16.  because  they  walk  with  s.  forth  necks 
5.  25.  he  hath  s.  forth  his  ha«d  against  them ; 
his  hand  is  s.  o^:  still,  9.  12,  17,  21.  ]  10.  4. 
14.  2G.  this  is  the  hand  that  is  s.  oui  on  all  nations 
27.  hand  is  s.  out,  and  who  shall  turn  it  back? 
16.  8.  her  branches  are  5.  out,  are  gone  over  sea 
23.  11.  he  s.  out  his  hand  over  sea,  shook  kingdom 
42.  5.  that  s.  out  the  heavens,  45.  12.  |  51.  13. 

.hr.  6.  4.  the  shadows  ofthe  evening  are  s.  out 
10.  12.  he  s.  out  the  heavens  by  his  discretion 
51.  15.  he  s.  oul  heaven  by  his  understanding 

Lam.  2.  8.  the  Lord  hath  5.  out  a  line 

Ezek.  1.  II.  and  their  wings  were  *.  upward 
10.  7.  one  cherub  s.  forth  his  hand  to  the  fire 
16.  27.  behold,  I  have  s.  out  my  hand  over  thee 

Hos.  7.  5.  he  s.  out  his  hands  with  scornera 

Jlmos  6.  7.  that.*,  themselves  shall  be  removed 

Zech.  1. 16.  a  line  shall  be.s.  forth  upon  Jerusalem 

Mat.  12.  13.  and  he  s.  forth  his  hand,  Mark  3.  5. 

Luke  22.  53.  ye  s.  forth  no  hands  against  me 

Jicts  12.  1.  Herod  s.  his  hands  to  ve.t  the  church 

Rom.  10. 21.  all  dav  long  I  have  s.  forth  my  hands 

See  Arm. 

STRETCH EDST. 

Ezod.  15.12.  thou  s.  out  thy  riffht  hand,  earth  swal. 
STRETCH  EST. 

Psal.  104. 2.  'vho  s.  out  the  heavens  like  a  curtain 
STRETCH  ETH. 

Job  15.  25.  for  he  s-  out  his  hand  against  God 

26.  7.  he  s.  out  the  north  over  the  empty  place 
Prov.  31.  20.  she  s.  out  her  hand  to  the  poor 
fsa.  40.  22.  that  s.  oul  the  heavens  as  a  curtain 

44.  13.  the  carpenter  s.  out  his  rule,  marketh 
24.  that  s.  forth  the  hesivens  alone,  Zech.  12.  1. 
STRETCHING. 
fsa.  8.  8.  s.  of  his  wings  shall  fill  thy  land,  O  Imm. 
.ficts  4.  30.  by  s.  forlli  thy  hand  to  heal 

STRIFE. 

Oen.  13.  7.  there  was  a  s.  between  the  herdmcn 

8.  Abram  said,  let  there  be  no  s.  between  nio 

Exod.  17.  t7.  he  called  the  name  ofthe  place  s. 

J^um.  20.  1 13.  this  is  the  water  of  s.  because  Israel 

27.  14.  ye  rebelled  in  the  s.  ofthe  congregation 
Deut.  1. 12.  how  can  I  myself  alone  bear  your  ».? 
Judg.li.i.l  and  people  were  at  great  s.  with  Amm. 


STR 

2  Sam.  19. 9.  all  the  people  were  at  *.  thro'  Israel 
Psal.  31.  20.  shall  keep  them  from  s.  of  tongues 
55.  9.  for  I  have  seen  violence  and  «.  in  the  city 
80.  6.  thou  makesl  us  a  s.  to  our  neighbours 
106.  32   they  angered  him  at  the  waters  of  s. 
Prov.  15.  18.  a  wrathful  man  siirrclh  up  s.  29.  2i 
but  he  that  is  slow  to  anger  appeaseth  s, 

16.28.  a  froward  man  soweth  s.  and  a  whigperej 
17.  1.  than  a  house  full  of  sacrifices  with  s. 

14.  beginning  of  s.  is  as  when  one  lelteth  out 

19.  he  loveth  transgression,  that  loveth  s. 

20.  3.  it  is  an  honour  for  a  man  to  cease  from  a. 
22.  10.  cast  out  the  scorner,  and  s.  shall  cease 
26. 17.  he  that  inedillelh  with  s.  belong,  not  to  him 

20.  where  there  is  no  tale-bearer,  the  s.  ceaseth 

21.  so  is  a  contentious  man  to  kindle  s. 

28.  25.  he  that  is  of  a  proud  heart  siirrelh  up  *. 

30.  .33.  the  forcing  of  wrath  bringeth  forth  $. 
Isa.  41.  til.  the  men  of  thy  s.  shall  perish 

58.  4.  behold,  ye  fast  for  «•.  and  debate,  to  smite 
.Ar.ilo.  10.  that  thou  hast  born  me  a  man  of  a. 
Ezek.  47.  19.  even  to  the  waters  of  s.  48.  28. 
Hah.  1.3.  there  are  that  raise  ups.  and  contention 
J^uke  22.  24.  there  was  a  s.  among  the  disciples 
RoiH.  13.  13.  walk  honestly,  not  in  s.  and  envyirg 
1  Cor.  3.  3.  there  is  among  you  s.  and  envying 
Oal.  5.  20.  the  works  ofthe  flesh  are  s.  wrath 
Phil.  1.  15.  some  indeed  preach  Christ  even  of ». 

2.  3.  let  nothing  be  done  through  s.  or  vain  glor) 

1  Tim.  6.  4.  whereof  cornel  li  envy,  s.  railings 
Hcb.  G.  16.  and  an  oath  is  to  them  an  end  of  all ». 
Jam..  3.  14.  but  if  ye  have  bitter  envying  and  s. 

16.  where  s.  is,  there  is  confusion  and  evil  work 

STRIFES. 

Prov.  10. 12.  hatred  stirreth  up  .■!.  love  covers  sing 

2  Cor.  12.  20.  lest  there  be  envyings,  wraths,  s. 

1  Tim.  G.  4.  doting  about  questions  and  s.  of  wordi 

2  Tim.  2.  23.  knowing  that  they  do  gender  s. 

STRIKE. 
Exod.  12.  7.  and  ,?.  blood  on  the  two  side-posts,  22. 
Deut-  21.  4.  and  shall  i,  oft' the  heifer's  neck  there 
2  Kvigs  5.  11.  will  come  and  .«.  his  hand  over  placa 
./uhTi.  3.  who  is  he  that  will  s.  hands  with  mel 
20.  24.  and  the  bow  of  steel  shall  s.  him  through 
Psal.  1 10.  5.  shall  «.  thro'  kings  in  day  of  his  wrath 
Prov.  7.  23.  till  a  dart  s.  through  his  liver 
11.  tl5.  that  hateth  those  that  s.  hands  is  sur« 
17.  26.  it  is  not  good  to  s.  princes  for  equity 

22.  26.  be  not  thou  one  of  them  that  s.  hands 
./tr.  40.  1 14.  hath  sent  Ishmael  to  s.  thee  in  soul 
Ezek.  3il.  t2.  I  will  5.  thee  with  si.t  plagues  ' 
Hos.  14.  +  5.  be  shall  s.  forth  his  roots  as  Lebanon 
Hab.  3.  14.  thou  didst  s.  through  with  bisstaves 
Mark  14.  65.  did  .?.  Jesus  with  palms  of  their  hands 

STRICKEN,  ..Iclively,  Passively. 
Oen.18. 11.  Abram  and  Sarah  well  s.  in  age,  24. 1 ' 
.Josh.  13.  1.  now  Joshua  was  s.  in  years,  23.  1,  2. 
.Judg.  5.  26.  when  .lael  had  s.  through  his  temples 
1  Kings  1.  1.  king  David  was  old  and  5.  in  years 
Prov.  6. 1.  if  thou  hast  s.  thy  hand  with  a  stranger 

23.  35.  they  have  s.  me  and  I  was  not  sick 

Isa.  1.5.  why  should  ye  be  4.  any  more?  revolt  more 

16. 7.  surely  they  are  s.  \\  53.  4.  did  esteem  him  s. 

53. 8.  for  the  transgression  of  my  people  was  he  *. 
.ler.  5.  3.  thou  hast  3.  them,  they  have  not  grieved 
I^am.4  9.S.  through  for  want  ofthe  fruits  of  field 
Luke  1.7.  Zacli.  and  Elisabeth  well  s.  in  years,  18. 

STRIKER. 
1  Tim.3. 3.  a  bishop  must  be  sober,  no  s.  Tit.  1.7. 

STRIKETH. 
.fob  34.  26.  he  s.  them  as  wicked  men  in  sight 
Prov.  17. 18.  a  man  void  of  undersianding  s.  handi 
fie?).  9. 5.  as  torment  of  scorpion,  when  he*,  amao 

STRING. 
Psal.  11.  2.  they  make  ready  their  arrow  upon  *. 
Mark  7.  35.  s.  of  his  tongue  was  loosed,  he  spak* 

STRINGS. 

Psal.  21. 12.  shall  make  ready  thine  arrows  upon*. 

33.  2.  sing  to  him  with  the  psalterv,  with  an  in- 

sirument  often  s.'92.  3.  I  144.9. 

STRINGED. 

1  .Sam.lB.fG.women  came  with  three .».  instruments 
P.«aM50.4.  praise  him  withs  instruments  and  org. 
fsa.  38.20.  we  will  sing  my  songs  to  s.  instrument! 
Hab.  3.  19.  to  chief  singer  on  my  5.  instruments 

STRIPE. 
Exod.  21. 2.5.  shall  give  wound  for  wound,  s.  for*. 
STRIPES. 
See  the  Signification  of  SrouROE. 
Deut.  25.  3.  forty  s.  he  may  give  him,  and  not  ex- 
ceed ;  if  he  beat  him  above  these  with  many  s. 

2  Sam.  7.  14.  and  with  .5.  ofthe  children  of  men 
Psal.  89.  32.  then  I  will  visit  their  iniquity  with  s, 
Prov.  17.  10.  than  a  hundred  s.  into  a  fool 

19. 29.  and  s.  are  prepared  for  the  back  of  fools 
20.  .30.  so  do  s.  the  inward  parts  ofthe  belly 

Isa.  53.  5.  wilh  his  s.  we  are  healed,  1  Pet.  2.  24. 

Luke  12.  47.  he  who  knew,  be  b  aten  with  many*. 

48.  he  who  knew  not  shall  bo  beaten  with  fow  • 

Jlcts  16.  23.  when  they  had  laid  many  s.  upon  tliani 


STR 

^clsl6-3n.tooktliemsamehouranJ  wnshcd  their*, 
S  Cur.  U.  5.  ill  s'.  in  imprisunmentH,  in  tumults 
11.  'Zi.  in  £.  above  nitasurv,  in  pritione,  in  deutli! 
24  of  Jews  five  times  received  I  Ibily  s.  save  one 
STRIP. 
JV'um.  20.  20.  and  s.  Aaron  of  his  garments 
1  Sum  3l.8.1*liilisliiie3Canielo5  slain,  1  CAr.lC.8, 
I.^a.'M  11. s.ye,makeye  bare, gird  sackul.  on  loins 
F.zvk.  10. :W.  tlicy  shall s.lheo  »l  lliy  clothes,  23. 20. 
Uos.'i,  3.  lest  I  ».  her  naked,  and  set  her  as  in  day 

STR11'1'1:D. 
Gtn.  37.  23.  that  Ihey  «,  Jostph  <iut  of  his  coat 
Exad.  33.  0.  Israel  s.  tlieiiiselvesof  their  ornaments 
.Vu.re.  20.  28.  Moses  *.  Aaron  or' his  garments 

1  Ham.  18. 4.  Jonalfians.  hiiuselfof  theroheon  him 
ly.  24.  Saul  5.  oil'  his  clothes  also,  and  prophesied 
31.  9.  tlie  Pliilisiuies  g.  Saul  of  his  armour 

2  Ch-on.  20.  2.j.  precious  jewels  which  they  s.  off 
Job  19.  9.  he  i.  me  of  my  glory,  and  taken  crown 

22.0.  for  thou  Imst  s.  the  naked  of  their  clothing 
Jilic.  1.  8.  therefore  I  will  go  s.  and  naked 
.Mat.  27.28.  they  s.  Jesus,  put  on  him  scarlet  robe 
JLukc  10.30.  thieves,  which  s.  him  of  his  raiment 
STRll'LING. 

1  Sam.  17.  5G.  king  said,  iinjuire  whose  son  the  s.  is 

STRIVE. 
Gen.  R.  3.  my  sjiiril  shall  not  always  s.  with  man 
2l).  20.  the  herdinen  of  Gerar  did  s.  with  Isaac's 
Exod.'2\.  l!*.  if  men  s.  together,  and  one  smite  an. 
22.  if  man  s.  and  hurt  a  woman  with  child,  he 
shall  be  surely  punished.  Dent.  25.  11. 
Deul.  33.  8.  with  whom  thuu  didst  s.  at  Meribah 
Judg.  II.  2.1.  did  hecveri.ag.  Isr.  or  light  ag.  them 
Jub  33.  13.  why  dost  thou  s.  again,U  him? 
ys.  3a.  1.  plead  my  cause  with  them  thats.  with  me 
Proo.  3.  30.  s.  not  with  a  man  without  cause 
25. 8.  go  not  forth  hastily  to  s.  lest  thou  know  not 
Jsa.  41.  II.  and  they  that  s.  with  thee  shall  perish 
45.  9.  let  tiie  poLsherd  s.  with  potsherds  of  earth 
Has.  4.  4.  let  no  man  s.  thy  people  are  as  they  that  s. 
Mat.  12. 19.  he  shall  not  s.  nor  shall  any  hear  voice 
/.uAc  13.  24.  s.  lo  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate 
Rom.  15.  30.  s.  with  me  in  your  prayers  to£!od 

foT  me 

2  Tim.  2.  5.  and  if  a  man  also  s.  for  mastcrii's 
14.  that  they  «.  not  abnut  words  to  no  prolit 
24.  and  the  servant  of  the  Lord  must  not  i-. 

STRIVEO. 
Rom.  15.  20.  so  have  I  .«.  to  preach  the  gospel 

STRIVEN. 
Jcr.  50.  24.  because  thou  hast  «.  against  the  Lord 

STRIVETII. 
ha.  45.  0.  woo  to  him  that  «.  with  his  Maker 

1  C«r.9.25.  ev.  man  that .».  for  mastery,  is  temperate 

STRIVING. 
Phil.  1. 27.  with  one  mind  s.  for  faith  of  the  gospel 
Col.  1.  29. .«.  accord,  to  his  working  which  worketh 
4.  1 12.  always  s.  fervently  for  you  in  prayers 
Heb.  12.  4.  ye  have  not  resisti^d  lo  blood,  s  ag.  sin 

STRIVINGS. 
2Sam.  22.  44.  hast  delivered  me  from  the  s.  of  the 
people,  and  made  headof  heathen,  Psal.  18.  43. 
Tit.  3.  9.  avoid  comentions  and  s.  about  the  law 

STROKE. 
Deut.  17.  8.  if  a  matter  too  hard  between  s.  and  s. 
19.5.  and  his  hand  fetcheth  a  s.  with  the  axe  to  cut 
21.  5.  by  Iheir  word  shall  every  s.  be  tried 

2  Sam.  20.  flO.  Jonbdoublid  not  hiss.  Amasa  died 
2  C4r. 21.  1 14.  with  a  greats,  will  the  Lord  smile 
F.slh.  9.  5.  Jews  smote  their  enemies  with  the  s. 
Jub  21.  2.  my  s.  is  heavier  than  my  groaning 

.30.  18.  beware  lest  he  take  thee  away  with  his  s. 
Psal.  38.  t  '1-  my  friends  stand  aloof  from  my  s. 
39.  10.  remove  thy  s.  away  from  me 
Isa.  14.  6.  he  smote  the  people  wilh  a  continual  s. 
30.  20.  the  Lord  healclh  the  s.  of  their  wound 
53.  t8.  for  he  was  cut  off  out  of  the  land,  for  the 
transgression  of  my  people  w.-is  the  .«.  upon  him 
Eiek.  24.  IC.  I  take  desire  of  thine  eyes  with  a  s. 

STROKES. 
Prov.  18.  6.  a  fool's  mouih  calleth  for  s. 

STRONG. 
den.  49.  14.  Is.jaclmr  is  a  s.  ass,  couching  down 

24.  and  till'  arms  of  his  hands  were  made  s. 

Erod.  0.  1.  with  a  «.  hand  shall  let  them  go,  13.9. 

10.  19.  the  I,iiril  turned  a  mighty  s.  west-wind 

14.  21.  Ld.  caused  sea  to  go  back  by  a  s.  east-wind 

JVitm.20. 20. 1'dom  came  against  him  with  as. hand 

21.  24.  border  of  the  children  of  Aininon  was  s. 
24.  21.  Balaam  said,  s.  is  thy  dwelling-place 
23.  7.  the  ».  wine  to  bo  poured  out  to  the  Lord 

Deut.  2.  30.  there  was  not  one  city  too  s.  for  us 

22.  t25.  if  man  lake. ».  hold  of  hir,  and  lie  with  her 

23.  f.'JO.  a  nation  s.  of  face,  which  shall  not  regard 
Jush.  14. 1 1,  as  yet  I  am  as  s.  tlfHday.as  I  was  day 

17.  13.  when  Nrael  wore  wiixeii  s.  Judg.  I.  28. 

23.  9.  Tjord  hath  driven  out  gnat  nations  and  ». 

Judg.  0.  t2.  the  hand  of  Midian  was  ».  ng,  Israel 

t2<5.  build  an  altiir  on  the  lop  ofthi*  ».  place 

9  SI.   but  tliarc  wai  u  «.  towar  within  the  city 

i88 


STR 

■Juig.  14.  14.  out  of  the  *.  came  forth  sweetncsg 
18.  20.  Micah  saw  that  they  were  too  s.  for  him 
l.Sa7«.14.52.wlien  Saul  saw  any  s. man, he  took  him 
2  Sam.  2.  \  10.  that  place  was  called  field  of  s.  men 
3.  0.  Abner  made  himself  s.  lor  the  house  of  Saul 

10. 11.  if  the  Syrians  be  loo  s.  for  me,  if  Amnion 
be  too  s.  for  thee,  1  will  help,  1  Chr.  19.  12. 

II.  25.  make  thy  battle  more  s.  against  the  city 

15. 12.  the  conspiracy  waes.  the  [leople  increased 
22.  18.  he  delivered  me  from  my  s.  enemy,  for 

they  were  loo  s.  for  me,  Vsal.  18.  17. 

1  Kings  2,  t8.Sliimei,whocurseil  mo  with  as.curse 
8. 42.  for  they  shall  hear  of  thy  name  and  s.  hand 

III.  11.  a  great  and  s.  wind  rent  the  mountains 

2  C/iron.  11.  12.  he  made  the  cities  e.vcueding  s. 
17.  so  they  made  Rehuboam  s.  three  years 

10.  9.  eyes  run  to  shew  himself  s.  in  behalf  of  them 

20.  10.  when  Uzziah  was  ».  he  was  lifted  up 
JVe/i.  1.  10.  thou  hast  redeemed  by  thy  s.  hand 

9.  25.  and  they  took  s.  cities  and  a  fat  land 
Jub  8.  2.  words  of  thy  mouth  be  like  a  s.  wind 

9.  10.  if  I  speak  of  strength,  lo,  he  is  s. 

30.  21.  with  thy  s.  hand  thou  ojiposest  thyself 

37.  18.  hast  thou  spread  out  the  sky  that  is  s.? 
40.  18.  bones  are  as  s.  pieces  of  brass,  like  bars 

P.'iul.  19. 5.  and  rejoiceth  as  a  s.  man  to  run  a  race 
24.8.  Lord  s.  and  mighty.  Lord  mighty  in  battle 

30.  7.  ihou  hast  made  my  mountain  to  stand  s. 

31.  2.  be  thou  my  s.  rock,  and  house  to  save  me 

21.  he  hath  shewed  me  his  kindness  in  a  s.  city 
35.  10.  the  poor  from  him  that  is  loo  s.  for  him 

1 18.  I  will  praise  thee  among  s.  people 

38.  19.  mine  enemies  are  lively  and  they  are  s. 
fiO.  9.  who  will  bring  me  into  s.  cityl  108.  10. 

01.  3.  thou  hast  been  a  s.  tower  from  the  enemy 
71.3.  be  inys.  habitation  ||  7.  thou  art  my  s.  rej"uge 
80.  15.  the  branch  thou  madest .?.  for  Itiyself,  17. 
fc'9.  8.  O  Lord,  who  is  a  s.  Lend  like  unto  thee? 

13.  s.  is  thy  hand,  and  high  is  Ihy  right  hand 
130.  12.  with  a  s.  hand  and  a  stretched-out  arm 

thou  hast  brought  them  out,  .fer.  32.  21. 
Prot).7.20.  yea,  many  s.  inon  have  been  slain  by  her 

10.  15.  rich  man's  wealth  is  his  s.  city,  18.  11. 

11.  10.  woman  retains  honour,  and  s.  men  retain 
14.  20.  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  s.  confidence 
18.  10.  the  name  of  the  Lord  is  a  s.  tower 

19.  a  brother  is  harder  to  be  won  than  a  s.  city 

21.  14.  a  reward  in  the  bosom  pacifieth  s.  wrath 
24.5.wise  men  is  s.  ||  30.25.  antji  are  a  people  not  s. 

Keel.  9.  11.  I  saw  that  the  battle  is  not  lo  the  s. 

12.  3.  when  the  s.  men  shall  bow  themselves 
Cant.  8.  0.  set  me  as  a  seal,  for  love  is  s.  as  death 
Isa.  1.31.  the  s.  shall  be  as  tow,  maker  asa  spark 

8.  7.  Lord  bringeth  on  them  waters,  s.  and  many 

11.  the  Lord  spake  thus  to  me  with  a  s.  hand 
17.  9.  his  .1.  cities  shall  be  as  a  forsaken  boiijh 
25.  3.  therefore  shall  the  s.  people  glorify  thiTo 
2fi.  1.  shall  this  song  be  sung,  we  have  a  s.  city 

27.  I.  with  his  s.  sword  shall  punish  Leviathan 

28.  2.  behold  the  Lord  hath  a  mighty  and  s.  one 
22  be  ye  not  mockers,  lest  your  hands  be  made  s. 

31.  1.  that  trust  in  horsemen,  because  they  ares. 
40.  10.  behold,  the  Lord  will  come  with  a  s.  hand 

20.  for  that  he  is  s.  in  power,  not  one  faileth 
4 1 .21. bring  forth  your  s. reasons, aaith  King  of  Jac. 
53.  12.  and  he  shall  divide  ihe  spoil  with  life  s. 
.'50.  til.  yea,  they  are  s.  of  appetite 
00.  22.  a  small  one  shall  become  a  s.  nation 
.fir.  5    t  0.  because  their  back»lidings  are  s. 
21.  5.  I  will  fight  against  you  with  a  s.  arm 
48. 14.  how  say  ye,  we  are  mighty,  s.  men  for  war 

17.  all  about  him  say,  how  is  the  s.  staff  broken! 

49.  19.  he  shall  come  against  habitation  of  the  s. 

50.  34.  their  Redeemer  is  s.  the  Lord  of  hosts 
44.  he  shall  come  up  to  the  habitation  of  the  s. 

51.  12.  make  the  watch's,  set  up  the  watchmen 
KtfA-.3. 8. 1  have  made  thy  face  ».  thy  foreheads. 

14.  but  the  hand  of  the  Iy)rd  was  s.  upon  me 
7.  24.  I  will  make  Ihe  poin|i  of  the  s.  to  ceaso 
I'.l.  II.  had  s.  rods  for  sceiitres  of  them  that  rule 
12.  her  s.  rods  were  broken  ami  withered 

14.  BO  she  hath  no  s.  rod  to  be  a  sceptre  to  rule 
20.  II.  thy  s.  garrisons  shall  go  down  to  ground 

17.  the  renowned  city  which  was  s.  in  the  sea 
30.  21.  to  bind  it,  to  make  it  s.  to  Indd  the  sword 

22.  anil  I  will  break  the  s.  arms  of  Pharaoh 

32.  21.  s.  shall  speak  lo  him  out  of  midst  of  hell 
34.  10.  but  I  will  di-slroy  the  fal  and  the  s. 

Dan.  4.  II.  the  tree  grew,  and  was  s.  20. 
22.  it  is  thoii,  O  king,  art  grown  and  become  s. 
7.  7.  the  fourth  beast  terribly  s.  exceedingly 
R.  8.  when  he  wn«  s.  the  great  horn  was  broken 
11.  23.  he  shall  become  ».  with  a  small  people 

.Toel  1.  0.  for  nation  is  come  up  on  my  land,  s.  2.  2. 

2.  a.  as  the  noise  of  a  s.  pi'oplo  Ret  in  ballle-orray 
II.  for  he  is  s.  that  e.tei-iitelh  his  word 

3.  10.  let  Ihe  weak  say,  I  am  ». 

.Imot  2.  9.  the  Amorile  was  .».  ns  Ihe  onkf 
14.  and  the  s.  shall  not  slreneihen  bis  forc« 
t  10.  he  that  ii  t.  of  heart,  khall  flue  away 


STR 

.^inos  5.  9.  that  strengthcnelh  the  spoiled  ag.  the  $ 
Mic.  4.  3.  he^hall  rebuke  s.  nations  afar  off 
7. 1  will  make  her  that  was  cast  farofi',  s.  natioo 

0.  2.  hear,  ye  s.  foundations  of  the  earth 
^V(iA.  2.  1.  make  thy  loins  s.  fortify  thy  power 
ZecA.  0.  t3.  in  fourth  chariot  gtisled  and  s.  horsci 

8.  22.  s.  nations  shall  come  to  seek  the  Lord 
,/1/a£.12.29.how  can  one  enter  into  a  s.  man's  house 
except  he  first  hind  the  s.  man?  Jifark  3.  27 

14.  t30.  but  when  he  saw  wind  s.  he  was  afroia 
Luke  1.  80.  the  child  grew  and  waxed  s.  2.  40. 

11.  21.  when  a  s.  man  armed  kee|)eth  his  palaco 
JJets  3.  10.  thro'  faith  hath  made  this  man  s. 
lioin.  4.  20.  was  s.  in  faith,  giving  glory  to  God 

15. 1.  we  that  ares,  ought  to  bear  infirm,  of  weak 

1  Cor.  4.  10.  we  are  weak,  but  ye  are  s. 

2  Cur.  12.  10.  for  when  I  am  weak,  then  am  I  s. 
13. 9.  W('  are  glad  when  we  are  weak,  and  ye  are  s. 

2  Tlicss.  2.  11.  God  shall  send  them  s.  delusion 
//fA.5.7.\vhen  had  olfered  up  prayers  with  s.  cryine 

12.  such  as  have  need  of  milk,  and  not  of  s.  meat 
14.  s.  meat  belongs  to  them  that  are  of  full  age 

0.  18.  we  might  have  as.  consolat.  who  have  Bed 

11.  34.  who  out  of  weakness  were  made  s. 

1  ./o/in  2.  14.  ye  are  s.  word  of  God  abideth  in  you 

Kev.ry.i.  I  saw  as.  angel  proclaim,  with  loud  voice 

18.  2.  he  cried  with  a  s.  voice,  Rabylon  is  fallen 

8.  for  s.  is  the  Lord  God  who  judgeth  her 

Be  STRONG. 

JVam.  13.  18.  see  whether  they  be  s.  or  weak 

28.  the  people  be  s.  that  dwell  in  Ihe  land 
/)fuMI.8.  keep  commandments,  that  ye  may  be  s. 

12.  t23.  only  be  s.  that  thou  eat  not  the  blood 
./os /i.l7.18.driveout  Canaanites,  though  they  bes. 

1  .Sam.  4.  9.  be  s.  and  ijuit  yoursidves  like  men 

2  .Sam.  10.  21.  the  hands  of  all  with  Ihee  shall  bet. 
I  Kings  2.  2.  be  thou  s.  and  shew  thyself  a  .man 

1  Chrun.  19.  12.  if  the  Syrians  be  too  s.  for  me,  If 

Amnion  be  too  s.  for  thee  I  will  help  thee 

23.  17.  if  he  be  s.  to  do  my  commandments 
10.  the  Lord  hath  chosen  thee,  he  s.  and  do  it 

2  Chron.  15.  7.  be  s.  your  work  shall  be  rewarded 
25.  8.  if  thou  wilt  go,  do  it,  be  s.  for  the  battle 

Ezra  9.  12.  that  ye  may  bcs.  and  eat  good  of  land 
Psal.  144.  14.  that  our  oxen  may  be  s.  lo  labour 
ha.  35.  4.  say  to  them  of  a  fearful  heart,  be  s. 
Ezek.  22. 14.  can  thy  hands  he  s.  in  the  days  1  deal 
Dan.  2.  40.  the  fourth  kingdom  shall  be  s.  as  iron 
42.  the  kingdom  shall  be  partly  s.  partly  broken 

10.  19.  he  said,  peace  be  to  thee,  be  s.  yea,  be  s. 

11.  5.  the  king  of  the  south  shall  be  s.  and  he  sbaM 

be  s.  above  him  and  have  dominion 

32.  but  people  that  know  their  God  shall  be  s 

//an-.  2.  4.  bes.  OZerubhabel.ic  s.  O  Joshua,  bes. 

all  ye  people  of  land,  saitli  the  Lord,  and  work 

ZfcA.8. 9.  let  handsJe  s.  ye  that  hear  in  these  daya 

13.  fear  not,  but  let  your  hands  be  s.  [be  s. 

1  Cur.  10.  13.  stand  fast  in  faith,  quit  you  like  men, 
Kpli.  0.  10.  finally,  brothrtn,  he  s.  in  the  Lord 

2  Tim.  2. 1.  my  son,  be  s.  in  grace  that  is  in  Christ 

.*^«e  CouR.voE,  Drink. 
STRONG  kold  and  hulJs. 
jV«m.  13.  19.  whether  in  tents  or  in  s.  holds 
.fiidg.  0.  2.  Israel  nitide  them  caves  and  s.  holds 

1  Sam.  23. 14.  David  abode  in  wilderness  in  s.  holds 

19.  doth  not  David  hide  himself  wilh  us  in  s.  h.T 

29.  anil  David  dwell  in  s.  holds  at  En-gedi 

2  .Sam.  5.  7.  David  tocik  the  s.  hold  of  Zion 

24.  7.  and  they  came  to  the  s.  hold  of  Tyre 

2  Kings  8.  12.  their  s.  holds  wilt  thou  set  on  firo 
2  Oiron.  11.  11.  Rehoboam  fortified  the  a.  holds 
Psal.  89.  40.  thou  hast  brought  his  s.  holds  lo  ruin 
Isa.  23.  11.  lo  destroy  the  s.  holds  thereof 
31. 9.  and  he  shall  pass  over  to  his  .«.  hold  for  fear 
Jer.  48.  18.  the  piioiler  shall  destroy  thy  s.  holds 

41.  Keriiith  is  taken,  the  s.  holds  are  surprised 
Lam.  2.  2.  he  hath  thrown  down  s.  holds  of  Judah 

5.  the  Lord  hath  destroyed  his  s.  holds 
Dnn.\  1.24.  forecast  his  devices  against  Ihe s.  holds 

39.  llins  shall  he  do  in  the  most  s.  holds 
Mie.  4.  8.  the  s.  hold  of  ilie  daii;,'liler  of  Zion 
J^'ah.  1.  7.  Lord  is  a  s.  hold  in  the  day  of  trouble 
3.  12.  all  thy  s.  holds  shall  be  like  fis-irees 

14.  draw  thee  waters  for  siege,  fortify  thy  s.hold 
Hah.  1.  10.  they  shall  deride  every  s.'hold 
7.r,h.  9.  3.  and  Tyrus  did  build  herself  a  .«.  hold 

12.  turn  ye  lo  the  s.  hold,  ye  pri-soners  of  hope 
2  Cot.  10.  4.  but  mightv  lo  pulline  down  of  s.Aolds 

STRONG  ones. 
Psnl.  10.  10.  that  the  poor  may  fall  by  his  s.  otiet 
Jcr.  8.  10.  at  sound  of  the  noishing  of  his  s.  oaes 

STRONGER. 
CIrn.  25.  23.  one  people  shall  he  s.  than  the  other 
30.  41.  whensoever  Ihe  .«.  ratile  did  conceive 

42.  SCI  the  feebler  wero  Lillian's,  and  s.  Jacob'i 
.Vwrn.  13.  31.  wo  bo  not  able,  tiny  are  .'.  than  wa 

ludir.  14.  18.  the  men  said,  what  is  s.  than  a  lion? 

2.'>Viw.  1.23. Siiul  and  Jonathan  were  .<.  tlinn  lions 

3.  I.  hnl  David  waxed  s.  and  ».  and  Pnul  weakif 

13.  14.  hut  .Vmnun  buing  i  than  she,  forced  her 


STU 

1  Kings  20.23.  Uieir  gods  are  gods  of  hills,  therefore 

^.  surely  we  shall  be  s.  than  ihcy,  25. 

Job  17.  9.  he  that  hath  clean  hands  shall  bos. and  s. 

J'sal.  105.  24.  he!  made  them  s.  than  their  enemies 

142.  6.  deliver  me,  for  they  are  s.  than  I 
Jer.  20.  7.  thuu  art  s.  than  I,  and  hast  prevailed 
31.  11.  ransomed  from  him  that  was  s.  than  he 
Ijuke  i  1.22.  when  a  s.  than  he  shall  cume  upon  him 
1  Cor.  1.  25.  the  weakntsi  of  God  is  s.  than  men 
10. 22.  do  we  i)r()voke  Lord  ?  are  wo  s.  than  he  1  . 

STKONGEST. 
Frov.  30.  30.  a  liun  which  is  s.  among  beasts 

STRONG  LV. 
Judg.  8.  t  1.  Ephruimiles  did  chide  Gideon  s. 

1  Chroii.  11.  t  10.  these  men  held  s.  with  David 
JEzraH.  3.  let  the  I'uuiidatiun  thereuf  be  s.  laid 

STROVE. 
Gen.  2G.  20.  called  Ezok.  bee.  they  f.  with  him, 21 
22.  diggtd  another  wi'll,  arid  for  that  they  s.  not 
I'xod.  2.  13.  two  men  of  the  Hebrews  s.  together 
Lev.  24.  10.  and  a  man  of  Israel  s.  in  the  camp 
.V«7H.  20.  13.  the  children  of  Israels,  with  the  Lord 
2().  9.  this  is  that  Dathan,  who  s.  against  Moses 

2  .sViin.  14.  C.  they  two  s.  togother  in  the  field 
J)an.  7  2.  the  four  winds  s.  upon  the  great  sea 
Ju/taG.  52.  the  Jewss.  among  themselves,  saying 
.'ictsLW.  Moses  shewed  himself  to  them  as  they  s. 

23.  9.  and  s.  saying,  we  find  no  evil  in  this  man 
STRUCK. 

1  .Sjm.  2. 14.  he  s.  it  into  the  pan  or  kettle  or  pot 

2  .flint.  12.  15.  the  Lord  s.  the  child,  and  it  was  sick 

20.  lU.  Joab  s.  him  not  again,  and  Amasa  died 
2  Ckron.  13.20.  the  Lord  s.  Jeroboam,  and  he  died 
.1/;^  26. 51.  one  of  them  s.  a  servant  of  high-priest's 
Lake  22.  64.  tbey  s.  Jesus  on  the  face,  Jo/m  16.  22. 

STRUGGLED. 
Cen.  25.  22.  the  children  s.  together  within  her 

STUBBLE. 
Exoil.  5. 12.  scatiered  to  gathers,  instead  of  straw 
15.7.sei)test  thy  wrath  which  consumed  them  as  s. 
Job  13.  25.  and  w  ilt  thou  pursjue  the  dry  s.  ? 

21.  18.  they  are  ass.  befoiethe  wind,  and  as  chaff 
41.  28.  sling-stones  are  turned  with  him  into  s. 

2;1.  darts  are  ccmnted  as  s.  he  laugheth  at  a  spear 
Psal.  St.  13.  make  them  as  s.  before  the  wind 
J.<a.  5.  24.  as  fire  devoureth  the  s.  so  their  root  be 
33.  11.  slie  shiill  conceive  ciiaffand  bring  forth  s. 

40.  24.  wliirlwind  shall  take  them  away  as  s. 

41.  2.  he  gave  ihom  as  driven  s.  to  his  bow 
47.  14.  they  shall  be  as  s.  the  fire  shall  burn  them 

Jer.  13.  24.  therefore  will  I  scatter  ihem  as  s. 

Joel%a.  like  noise  of  aflame,  that  devoureth  the  s. 

ObaJ  18.  and  the  house  of  Esau  shall  be  for  s. 

vVuA.  1.  10.  they  shall  be  devoured  as  s.  fully  dry 

Mai.  4.  1.  all  that  do  wickedly  and  proud  be  s. 

1  C»r.3. 12.  on  this  foundation  gold,  wood,  hay  s. 
STUBBORN. 

Deut.  21. 18.  ifa  man  have  a  s.  and  rebellious  son 
20.  and  they  shall  say  to  elders,  this  our  son  iss. 

JudiT.  2.  19.  they  ceased  not  from  their  s.  way 

Psal.'S.  8.  might  not  be  as  fathers,  a  s.  generation 

Prov.  7. 11.  she  is  loud  and  s.  her  feet  abide  not 
STUBBORNNESS. 

Drut.  9.  27.  look  not  to  s.  of  this  people  nor  sin 
29.  t  19.  peace,  tho'  I  walk  in  s.  of  mine  heart 

J  Sam.  15.  23.  and  s.  is  as  iniquity  and  idolatry 

Jir.  3.  j  17.  nor  walk  after  the  s.  of  their  heart 
7.  t  24.  but  they  walked  in  s.  of  iheir  evil  heart, 
9.t  14.  I  II.  18.  1  13.  t  10.  I  Hi.  t  12. 
23.  t  17.  say  to  them  tliat  walk  in  s.  no  evil  come 
STUCK. 

1  .Sam. 20.  7.  hisspear  s.  in  the  ground  at  his  bolster 

P.-iiil.  1 19.  31.  I  have  s.  unto  thy  testimonies 

.IcU  27.  41.  for  par"  of  the  ships,  fast  and  remained 
STUDS. 

Cttnt.l.ll.will  make  borders  of  gold  withs.  of  silver 
STUDY. 

T!ic  chief  study  of  t/ie  Hebrews  was  always  the 
law  of  the  l.urd.  The  practice  of  this  is  re- 
commended throuff/uiutthe  wiiideOldTcstamcnt. 
Bloses  commanded,  that  the  law  of  the  Lord 
should  always  be  in  their  mouths  day  and  night; 
that  it  should  be  as  a  memorial  befoie  their 
eyes,  and  a  signal  in  their  hand.f:  He  would 
have  them  engrave  it  on  their  hearts ;  that  they 
should  teach  it  their  children:  that  they  should 
always  meditate  upon  il,irhetlur  sitting  in  their 
houses,  walking  in  tiie  fields,  in  the  night  time, 
while  they  slept,  and  when  they  awoke  in  the 
morning  ;  that  they  should  wear  it  as  a  brace- 
let to  their  arm,  and  write  it  upon  their  door- 
posts. This  was  the  study  of  the  prophets,  the 
patriarchs,  and  all  good  Lsraeliies,  E.\od.  13.9. 
Deut.  6.  7. 

But  their  study  was  not  confined  only  to  their 
laws  and  ceremimifs  prescribed  by  M^cs: 
They  studied  their  histories,  and  coen  their  ge- 
nealogies ;  so  that  the  children  of  the  Jews, 
nerording  to  Ji  rom,  knew  at  their  finger-ends 
all  the  genealogies  that  are  found  in  the  Chro- 
58a 


STU 

nicies.  From  their  tendcrest  infancy,  as  Jose- 
phuB  relates,  they  were  accustomed  to  study  the 
laws  of  God,  to  learn  them  by  heart,  to  prac- 
tise them,  and  they  were  so  addicted  to  them, 
that  they  were  ready  to  lay  down  their  lives 
for  their  observation.  Jifter  they  had  the 
writings  of  the  prophets,  they  applied  them- 
selves very  earnestly  to  know  the  sense  of  the 
prophecies,  and  to  study  the  hidden  meaning 
of  them.  fVe  see  it  by  Daniel,  who  applied 
himself  with  so  much  care  to  unfold  the  mean- 
ing of  his  own  revelations,  and  of  those  of  the 
piophet  Jeremiah,  who  fixed  Ihe  time  for  the 
completing  the  capliiiity  of  llic  people  of  God, 
Dan.  7.  28.  |  9.  2,  3,  22,  23,  24.  Jind  the 
jlpostle  Peter  informs  us,  what  was  the  study 
of  the  prophets.  They  searched  what  times  and 
what  other  citcumstances  the  Spirit  of  Christ, 
who  spoke  in  them  had  marked  out,  when  they 
predicted  the  sufferings  of  our  Saviour,  and  the 
glory  that  was  to  follow,  1  Pet.  1.  11. 
Jifter  the  coni/ucsts  of  Alexander  the  Great,  the 
Jews,  who  were  mingled  with  the  Grecians,  in 
the  greatest  part  of  the  provinces  of  the  East, 
began  to  have  a  taste  fur  thcit  language  and 
their  studies.  In  imitation  of  the  Grecian 
philosophers,thcy  divided  themselves  into  differ- 
ent sects.  Home  of  them,  as  the  Pharisees, 
espoused  some  of  tile  opinions  of  the  Stoics  and 
Platonicians  ;  others,  as  the  Sadducees,  em- 
braced some  of  the  notions  of  tlie  Epicureans; 
others,  as  the  Essenians,  says  Philo,  had  a 
contempt  for  logic,  physics,  and  metaphysics ; 
which  they  thought  useless,  and  matter  of  mere 
curiosity.  They  only  applied  themselves  to 
morality  and  the  laws  of  God,  which  they  ex- 
plained after  a  sublime  and  allegorical 
n^mcr. 
In  our  Saviour''s  time  it  appears,  that  the  main 
study  of  the  Jewish  doctors  was  chiefly  the  tra- 
ditions of  their  fathers.  Clmsl  upbraids  then 
fregueiitly  v?ith  having  forsaken  the  law  of 
God  and  its  true  meaning,  to  ascribe  meanings 
and  applications  to  it,  contrary  to  the  sense  of 
the  law  and  the  intention  of  the  lawgiver.  St. 
Paul,  toho  had  been  bred  up  in  these  prin- 
ciples, shows  also  the  absurdity  of  them  in  his 
Epistles,  always  calling  back  the  laws  to  their 
original  and  to  their  true  sense.  But  all  this 
was  not  able  to  cure  the  spirit  of  the  Jews 
upon  this  article;  at  this  day  they  are  more 
bigoted  to  their  traditions  than  ever,  and 
they  make  them  the  greatest  part  of  their 
study. 
Eccl.  12.  12.  and  much  s.  is  a  weariness  of  the  flesh 
1  Thcss.  4.  11.  that  ye  s.  to  be  (juiet  and  to  work 
27'm.2. 15.  s.  to  shew  thv.'self  approved  unto  God 

STUDIETII. 
Prov.  15.  28.  heart  of  the  righteous  s.  to  answer 

24.  2.  for  their  heart  s.  destruction,  their  lips  talk 
STUFF. 

Gen.  31.  37.  whereas  thou  hast  searched  all  mys. 

45.  20.  regard  not  your  s.  good  of  Egypt  is  yours 
Exod.  22.  7.  ifa  man  deliver  money  or  s.  to  keep 

36.  7.  the  s.  they  had  was  suthcieni  for  the  work 
Josh.  1.  11.  they  have  put  it  even  am.  their  own 
I  Sam.  10.  22.  he  hath  hid  himself  among  the  s. 

25.  13.  and  two  hundred  abode  by  the  .«. 

30.  24.  so  shall  his  part  be  that  tarrinth  by  s. 
Eiek.  12.3.prepare  llice  s.  for  removing  and  remove 

4.  then  shall  thou  bring  forth  thy  s.  by  day,  7, 

Luke  17.  31.  be  on  house-top,  and  his  s.  in  house 
STUMBLE. 

Prov.  3.  23.  Shalt  walk,  and  thy  foot  not  s.  4.  12. 
4.  19.  the  wicked  know  not  at  what  they  s. 

Isa.  5.  27.  none  shall  be  weary,  nor  s.  among  them 
8.  15.  and  many  among  them  shall  s.  and  fall 
28.  7.  they  err  in  vision,  they  s.  in  judgment 
59.  10.  we  grope,  we  s.  at  noon  day  as  in  night 
63.  13.  that  led  them  that  they  should  not  s. 

Jer.  13.  16.  before  your  feet  s.  on  dark  mountains 
18.  15.  they  have  caused  them  tos.  in  their  ways 
20. 11.  theref.  my  persecutors  shall  s.  not  prevail 

31.  9.  to  walk  in  a  way  wherein  they  shall  not  s. 
4t>.  f).  they  shall  s.  and  fall  toward  the  north 
50.  32.  and  the  most  proud  shall  s.  and  fall 

Dan.  11.  19.  but  he  shall  s.  and  fall,  not  be  found 
JV'tA.  2.  5.  they  shall  s.  in  their  walk 

3.  3.  multitude  of  slain,  they  «.  upon  their  corpses 
Mai.  2.  8.  ye  have  caused  many  to  s.  at  the  law 
1  Pet.  2.  8.  a  rock  of  offeni-e  to  them  that*,  at  word 

STUMBLED. 
1  Sam.  2.  4.  and  they  thats.  are  girt  with  strength 
1  Chron.  13.  9.  to  hold  the  ark,  for  the  oxc-n  .*. 
/'sa?.27.2.  when  they  came  to  eat  up  myfle6h,theys. 
Jer.  46.  12.  for  the  mighty  man  hath  s.  ag.  mighty 
Horn.  9.  32.  for  ihey  s.  at  that  Blumbling-stone     • 

11.11. 1  say  then,have  they  >j.t  hat  they  should  fall? 

STUMBLETH. 
Pro  I- ,24. n.and  let  not  thy  heart  be  glad  when  he*. 


SUB 

.Tohn  11.  9.  if  any  man  walk  In  the  day,  he  ».  not 

10.  but  ifa  man  walk  in  the  night,  he  s. 
Rom.li.-il.no!  to  tat  anything  whereby  thy  broth.« 

STUMBLING. 
lJohn%  10.  and  there  is  none  occasion  ofs.  in  him 
STUMBLING-BLOCK. 
See  Signification  on  Offence. 
I^v.  19.  14.  thou  Shalt  not  put  a  s.  before  Ihe  blind 
Ps.llO.t  105. that  love  thy  law  they  shall  have  no  s. 
/stt. 57.14. lake  up  thes.out  of  the  way  of  my  people 
Eiek  3.  20.  and  I  lay  a  s.  before  him,  he  shall  die 

7.  19.  because  it  is  the  s.  of  their  iniquity 
14.  3.  they  put  the  s.  of  their  iniquity,  4,  7. 
44.  t  12.  they  were  a  s.  of  iniquity  to  Israel 

Rom.  11.  9.  let  their  table  be  made  a  trap,  a  s. 

14.  13.  that  no  man  put  as.  in  his  brother's  way 
1  Ck)r.  1.  23.  we  preach  Christ  crucified,  to  Jews  as 
8.9.  take  heed  lest  this  liberty  ofyours  bfcomeas 
fleu.2.14.wh()  taught  Biihik  to  cast  a  .s.  before  Israel 

STUMBLING-BLOCKS. 
Jer.  6.  21.  behold,  I  will  lay  s.  before  this  people 
Zeph.  1.  3.  I  will  consume  the  s.  with  the  wicked 

STUMBLING-STONE. 
Isa.  8.  14.  he  shall  be  for  a  stone  of  s.  to  Israel 
Rom.  9.  32.  for  they  stumbled  at  that  s.-stone 

33.beliold,  I  lay  in  Sion  as.-st.and  rock  of  offence 
1  Ptt.2.8.a  stone  ofs.  to  them  that  stumble  at  word 

STUMP. 
1  Sam.  5.  4.  only  the  s.  of  Dagon  was  left  to  hini 
Dan.  4.  15.  yet  leave  the  s.  in  the  earth,  23,  26. 

SUBDUE. 
Gen.  l._28.  God  said,  replenish  the  earth  and  s.  it 
1  Chr.  17.  10.  moreover  I  wills,  all  thine  enemies 
Psal.  47.  3.  he  shall  s.  the  people  under  us 
127.  t  5.  they  shall  s.  thine  enemies  in  the  gate 
[sa.  45.  1.  I  have  holilen,  to  s.  nations  before  him 
Dan.  7.  24.  another  rise,  and  he  shall  s.  three  kings 
Mic.l.l%.\ie  will  turn  again, he  will  s.  ouriniquilies 
Zf<:A.9.15.they  shall  devour  and  s.  with  sling  stones 
Phil.  3.  21.  he  is  able  to  s.  all  lliings  to  himself 

SUBDUED. 
JSTum.  32.  22.  and  the  land  be  s.  before  the  Lord 

29.  and  the  land  shall  be  .s.  before  you 
Deut.  20.20.thou  shalt  build  bulwarks,  until  it  bes. 
33.  t  29.  and  thine  enemies  shall  be  s.  unto  thee 
Josh.  18.  1.  and  the  land  was  s.  before  them 
.hidg.  3.  30.  so  Moab  was  s.  1|  4.  23.  God  s.  Jabin 

8.  28.  thus  Midian  wass.  ||  11.  33.  Ammon  wass. 
l.S'am.7.13.the  Philistines  were  s.hand  of  Lord  was 

against  them,  2Sa»i.  8  1.  1  Chr.  18. 1.  |  20.  4. 
25am.8.11.silver  and  gold  of  all  nations  which  he  s. 
22.  40.  girded  me  with  strength,  them  that  rose  up 
against  me  hast  thou  s.  under  me,  Psal.  18.  3i. 
1  Chron.  22.  IS.  and  the  land  is  s.  before  the  Lord 
Psal.  81.  14.  I  should  soon  have  s.  their  enemies 
lCor.I5.28.and  when  all  things  shall  bes.  unto  him 
Htb.  11.  33.  who  through  faith  s.  kingdoms 

SUBDUEDST. 
Kch.  9.  24.  thou  s.  the  inhabitants  of  the  land 

SUBDUETH. 
Ps.  18.47.  it  is  G.lhat  s.  the  people  under  me,  144. 2. 
Z)a)i.240.forasmuch  .is  iron  breaks  ands.all  things 

SUBJECT. 
Gen.  3.  t  16.  thy  desire  shall  be  s.  to  thy  husband 

4.  f  7.  his  desire  shall  bes.  to  thee,  thou  shalt  rule 
Luke  2.  51.  Jesus  went  down,  and  was  s.  to  them 

10.  17.  saying.  Lord,  even  the  devils  are  s.  to  us 
20.  rejoice  not  that  the  spirits  are  s.  to  you 
Rom.  3.rl9.world  may  bes.  to  the  judgment  of  God 
8.  7.  for  it  is  not  s.  to  the  law  of  God,  nor  can  be 
20.  for  the  creature  was  made  s.  to  vanity 
13.  1.  lut  every  soul  be  s.  to  the  higher  powers 
S.whereforeye  must  needs  bes.notonly  for  wrath 
1  Cor.  H.32.tlie  spirits  of  prophets  are  .«.  to  prophets 
15.  28.  then  sliall  the  Son  also  himself  be  s.  to  him 
KpA.5.24.a8  the  church  iss.loChrist,6olet  Ihe  wives 
Col.  2.20.why,as  tho'  living,  are  ye  s.  to  ordinances 
Tit.  3.  1.  put  them  in  mind  to  be  s.  to  powers 
Hcb.   2.  15.   who  were  all   their  life-time  s.  to 

bondage 
Jam.h.  17.  Elias  was  s.  to  like  passions  as  we  are 
1  Pel.  2.18.  servants  be  s.  to  your  mast.with  all  fear 
3.  22.  angels  and  powers  being  made  s.  to  "lim " 

5.  5.  vea,  all  of  you  he  .«.  one  to  another 
SUBJECTED. 

Rom.  8.  20.  of  him  who  hath  g.  the  same  in  hope 

SUBJECTION. 
Psal.  106.  42.  their  enemies  were  brought  into  s. 
.Ter.  34.  11.  and  they  brought  them  into  s.  16. 

1  Cur.  9. 27. 1  keep  under  and  bring  my  body  into  s. 

2  Cor.  9. 13.  Ihey  glorify  God  for  your  professed  s. 
<7n/.2.5.to  whom  we  gave  place bys. not  foran  hour 
lT'rni.2.11.1et  the  women  learn  insilimce  with  alls. 

3.  4.  having  his  children  in  s.  with  all  gravity 
Hcb.  2.  5.  hath  be  not  put  in  .•!.  tho  world  to  come 
8.  thou  hast  put  all  things  ins  under  his  feet 
12.9.  rather  be  in  s.  to  the  Fatherof  spirits  and  live 
1  Pet.  3.  1.  wives,  be  in  s.  to  your  husbands,  5. 

SUBMIT. 
Gen.  16.  9.  return  and  s  thyself  under  hor  hands 


SUB 

.  Sam.  22.46.  strangers  shnll  s.themaelveB  to  me,  as 

soon  as  they  hear,shallbe  obed.to  nie,P.s.l8.44. 

Ps.  66.  3.  shall  thine  enemies  s.  themselves  to  thee 

68.  3»X  till  everyone  s.  himself  with  pieces  ofailv. 

1  Cor.  16.  16.  that  ye  s.  yourselves  unto  such 

£,pk.  5.  22.  wives,  s.  yourselves  to  your  own  hus- 

bands,  as  unto  the  Lord,  Col.  3.  18 

ffeb.  Ij.  17.  s.  yourselves  for  they  watch  for  souls 

Jam.  4.  7.  s.  yourselves  therefore  to  G.  resist  devil 

1  Pel.  2.13.  s.  yourselves  to  every  ordinance  of  man 

S.S.Iikewise,  ye  younper, .?  yourselves  to  the  elder 

SUBMITTED. 

1  Chron.  29.  24.  tlie  sons  of  Uavid  s.  to  Solomon 

P*-.  81. 1.5.llie  haters  of  the  L.  should  haves,  to  him 

Hon.  10.  3.  have  not  s.  !o  the  ri^'hteousncss  ofGod 

SUBMITTING. 
Eph.  5. 21.  s.  yoursf^lves  one  lo  anoth.  in  fear  of  G. 

SUBORNED, 
jjrtsfi.ll.theu  they  s.  men  who  said,  we  have  heard 

SUBSCRIBE. 
Isa.  44.5.  another  shall  wiili  his  hand  .;.  unto  the  L. 
Jer.  32.  44.  men  shall  s.  evidences,  and  seal  them 

SUBSCRIBED. 
Jer.  32.  10.  I  s.  the  evidence,  and  sealed  it 
12.  in  presence  of  the  witnesses  that  s.  the  book 
SUBSTANCE. 
Omi.7.4!  I  will  destroy  every  living  .5.  from  offearth 
23.  every  livings,  was  destroyed,  man  and  cattle 
12.  5.  Abram  took  all  the  s.  they  had  gathered 
13.6.their  s.was  great,  so  that  they  could  not  dwell 
15.14.  afterward  they  shall  come  out  with  great  s. 
34.  23.  shall  not  their  cattle  and  their  s.  be  ours  7 
36.  6.  and  Esau  took  his  cattle  and  all  his  s. 
DeutW.  6. the  earth  swallowed  them  up  all  their  s. 
33.  11  bless.  Lord,  his  .?.  and  accept  the  work 
JosA.14.4.  thoy  gave  to  the  Levites  cities  for  their  s. 

1  Sam.  9.tl.  his  name  wasKish,  a  mighty  man  ofs. 
1  Chron.  27.  31.  all  these  were  the  rulers  of  the  s. 

28.  1.  the  stewards  overall  the  ».  of  the  king 
2CAr.21.17.lhey  carried  away  all  is.  in  king's  house 
31. 3.  he  appointed  also  the  king's  portion  of  his  s. 
32.  29.  God  had  given  Hezekiah  s.  very  much 

35.7.  Josiahgavc  bullocks,  these  were  of  king's  s. 
Ezra  8.  21.  to  seek  of  him  a  right  way  for  our  s. 

10.8.  would  not  come,  all  hiss,  should  be  forfeited 
Job  1.  3.  Job's  s.  also  was  seven  thousand  sheep 

10.  and  his  s.  is  increased  in  the  land 

5.  5.  and  the  robbers  swiillowed  up  their  s. 

6.  22.  did  I  say,  give  a  reward  for  me  of  your. 9.  ? 
15.29.  he  shall  not  be  rich,  nor  shall  hiss,  continue 
fp.  18.  according  to  his  s.  shall  the  restitution  be 
22. 20.  whereas  our  s.  is  not  cut  down,  but  remnant 
30.  22.  thou  lifiest  me  up  and  dis-solvcst  my  s. 

Psal.  17.  14.  they  leave  their  s.  to  their  babes 
lO.').  21.  he  made  Joseph  ruler  over  all  his  s. 
139. 15.  my  s.  was  not  hid  from  thee,  when  made 
16.  thine  eyes  did  see  my  s.  yet  being  imperfect 

Prov.  1.  13.  we  shall  find  all  precious  s.  we  shall  fill 
3.  9.  honour  the  L.  with  thy  s.  and  the  first-fruits 
6.  31.  he  shall  give  all  the  s.  of  his  house 
8.21.  that  I  may  cause  those  that  love  mo  inherits. 

10.  3.  but  he  castcth  away  the  s.  of  the  wicked 
12.  27.  but  the  s.  of  a  diligent  man  is  precious 
28.  8.  he  that  by  usury  increaseth  his  s. 
29.3.  keeps  company  with  harlots,  spondeth  his  s. 

Cant.  8.  7.  if  a  man  would  give  all  his  s.  for  love 
ha.  (J.  13.  as  a  teil-tree  and  as  an  oak  whose  .s.  is 
in  them,  so  the  holy  seed  shall  be  .i.  thereof 
Jer.  15.  13.  thy  s.  will  I  give  to  the  spoil,  17.  3. 
ffo.1. 12.8.1  am  become  rich,  I  have  found  me  out*. 
Obad.\3.  nor  laid  hands  on  their  s.in  their  calamity 
Mic.  4.  13.  I  will  consecrate  their  s.  to  L.  of  earth 
J.uke  8.  3.  which  ministered  to  him  of  their .?. 

15. 13.  the  prodigal  wasted  hiss,  with  riotous liv. 
Hrh.  10.  34.  knowing  that  ye  have  in  heav.  better  s. 

11.  1.  now  faith  is  the.<.  of  things  hoped  for 

SUBTIL. 
<7f)i.3.1.now  the  serpent  was  more  s.than  any  beast 

2  •'iam.  13.  3.  and  Jonadab  was  a  very  s.  man 
Prov.y.  in.  Willi  altire  of  a  harlot,  and  s.  of  heart 

SUBTILLY. 
I.Sam.  23.22.  for  it  is  told  me  that  hedealelh  very  ». 
Paat.  ID.'i.  2.">.  to  deal  s.  »vith  his  servants 
.^cta  7.  19.  the  same  dealt .«.  with  our  kindred 

SUBTILITY. 
Oen.  27.  35.  h"  said,  thy  brother  came  with  s. 
SATin^s  10. 19. Jehu  did  it  in  ».  that  he  might  destroy 
/Vol).  1.4.  to  give  5.  to  the  simple,  to  the  youns  man 
8.  I  12.  I  wisdom  dwell  wiih  .i.  and  find  out 
Mat.  20.  4.  they  might  take  Jesus  by  s.  and  kill  liim 
^cls  13. 10.  Paul  said,  O  full  of  all  s.  and  mischief 
2  Cor.  11.3.  the  serpent  beguiled  Eve  through  hiss. 

SUBVERT. 
I.am.  3.  3fi.  lo  .».  a  man  the  Lord  approvoth  not 
Tit.  1.  11.  who  ».  whole  houaiH  teacliing  things 

SUBVERTED. 
Tit.  3.  11.  ho  that  is  such  is  .«.  and  sinnelh 

SUBVERTING. 
J)r.t.f^5.  24.  have  troiiblod  yon  with  words, .«.  snnis 
I  Tim.  2. 14.  words  to  no  profit,  but  to  i.  of  huururs 

suo 


sue 

SUBURB3. 

Lev.  25.  34.  but  the  field  of  the  s.  may  not  be  sold 
jVum.  35.  3.  the  .».  of  them  shall  be  for  their  cattle 

7.  forty-eight  cities  shall  ye  eive  with  their  s. 
./«sA.  14.  4.  save  cities  with  s.  tor  their  cattle,  21.  2. 
2A"in^s  23.11. he  took  away  horses  by  chamber  ins. 
■2C/>r.  11. 14.  Levites  left  their  ».  and  cameto  Judah 
Ezek.  27.28.  the  s.  shall  shake  at  the  sound  of  jiilots 

45.  2.  fifty  cubits  round  about  for  the  s.  thereof 
48.  15.  be  profane  place  for  dwelling  and  for  s. 

17.  the  s.  of  the  city  shall  be  toward  the  north 
"  See  Cities. 
SUCCEED. 
Deul.  25.  6.  the  first-born  shall  s.  bis  brother  dead 

SUCCEEDED. 

Devt.  2.  12.  but  the  children  of  I^sau  .«.  them,  22. 

Sl.theAmmonitess.ihem,anddWftlt  in  their  stead 

SUCCEEDEST. 

Dcut.  12.  29.  when  thou  s.  them  in  their  land,  19. 1. 

SUCCESS. 
.Tosh  l.S.  for  then  thou  shall  pros,  and  have  good  s. 
.lob  22.  t  2.  not  be  profitable  to  God,  if  he  may  be 
profitable,  doth  his  good  s.  depend  thereon  ? 
Psal.  111.  1 10.  good  s.  have  they  that  do  his  com. 
Prov.  3.  t  4.  so  slialt  thou  find  favour  and  good  s. 

SUCCOUR. 

2  Sam.  8.5.  when  the  Syrians  came  to  s.  Iladadezer 

18.  3.  it  is  better  that  thou  s.  us  out  of  the  city 

Hcb.  2.  18.  he  is  able  to  s.  them  that  are  tempted 

SUCCOURED. 
2  Sam.  21.  17.  .'Vbishai  s.  him,  and  smote  Philistines 
2  Cor.  6.2.  and  in  the  day  ofsalvation  bavo  Is.  thee 

SUCCOURER. 
/fom.l6.2.shehatli  been  a  s.  of  many  and  of  myself 

SUCH. 
(?e7i.4.20. Jabal  was  the  father  of  s.as  dwell  in  tents 
21.  Jubal  was  the  faiher  ofs.  as  handle  the  harp 
27.4.  make  me  savoury  meat,  s.  as  1  love,  9.  14. 

46.  Jacob  lake  a  wifeofdaught  of  Heth, s.as  these 
30.  32.  speckled  and  spotted,  ofs.  shall  be  my  hire 
41.  19.  s.  as  I  never  saw  in  Egypt  for  badness 
44.  15.  wot  ye  not  that  s.  a  man  as  I  can  divine? 

Exod.O.  IH.  s.  hail  as  hath  not  been  in  Egypt,  24. 

10.  14.  were  no  s.  locusts  as  they,  nor  shall  be  s. 
ll.6.shall  be  a  great  cry,s.as  there  was  none  like  it 
18.  21.  thou  shall  provide  able  men,  s.  as  fear  God 
34.  10.  s.  as  have  not  been  done  in  all  the  earth 

/^ev.  11.  34.  meat  on  which  s.  water  comelh  be  un- 
clean, all  drink  that  be  drunk  in  every  s.  vessel 
14.22.  two  pigeons  s.  as  he  is  able  to  get,  30.  31. 
20.  6.  the  soul  that  turneth  after  s.  I  will  cut  oif 
22  6. soul  that  hath  touched  any  s. shall  be  unclean 
27.  9.  giveth  ofs.  lo  the  Lord,  shall  be  holy 

JVum.  8.  16.  instead  ofs.  as  open  every  womb 

Deut.  4.  .32.  whether  there  hath  been  any  s.  thing 
5.29.0lhat  there  were  s.a  heart  in  them  to  fear  me 
13.  11.  shaltdo  no  more  any  s.  wickedness,  19.  20. 
14.  that  s.  abomination  is  wrought  am.  you, 17. 4. 
16.  9.  s.  lime  as  thou  beginnest  to  put  the  sickle 

./urfi''.3.2.  at  least  s.  as  betore  knew  nothing  thereof 
19.30.tliere  was  no  s.  deed  done  or  seen  to  this  day 

1  Sam.  4.  7.  hath  not  been  s.  a  thing  heretofore 
25.  17.  he  iss.  a  son  ofBelial.  a  man  cannot  speak 

2  .Sa77i.9.8.thou  shouldest  look  on  s.  a  dead  dog  as  I 

1 1.  12.5.  for  the  sword  devoureth  so  and  s. 
13.  18.  for  with  s.  robes  were  virgins  apparelled 
14. 13.  wherefore  then  hast  thou  thoughts,  a  thing 
16. 2.  that  s.  as  bo  faint  in  wilderness  may  drink 
19.36.  why  should  recompense  mo  with  s.  reward? 

l/Ti/i^sIO.lO.there  came  no  more  s.abund.of  spices 

12.  there  came  no  s.  almug-trees,  2  Chron.  9.  11. 

2  Kinf^a  6.  9.  beware  that  thou  pass  not  s.  a  place 

7.  19.  if  Lord,  make  windows,  might  s.  a  thing  be? 

21.12.  am  bringing  s.  evil  on  Jerusalem  and  Judah 

23.  22.  sur?Iy  there  was  not  holden  s.  a  passover 

1  Chron.  12.  :13.  s.  as  went  forth  to  battle,  36. 

29.  25.  the  Lord  bestowed  on  him  s.  royal  majesty 

2  Chron.  1.  12.  s.  as  none  of  the  kings  have  had 
9.9.nor  wasanys.spicnas  ihoipieengaveSol'inion 
11.  16.  s.  as  set  their  hearts  to  seek  the  Lord  God 

23.13.  people  rejoiced,  ands.  taught  losing  praise 

24.  12.  gave  it  to  s.  as  did  the  work  of  the  house 

30.  5.  they  had  not  done  ilof  n  longtime  in  s.  sort 
F.zra  4.  I().  peace,  and  at.i.  a  time,  11,17.  |  7.12. 

6.  21.  all  s.  as  had  separated  themselves  to  them 

7.  25.  all  s.  as  km>w  the  laws  of  thy  God 
27.  which  hath  put  .».  a  thine  in  the  king's  heart 

8.  31.  and  ofs.  as  lay  in  wait  by  the  way 

9.  13.  and  ha.st  given  s.  deliverance  as  this 

10.  3.  put  away  tlie  wives,  and  s.  are  born  of  Ihem 
Xvh.  6.  11.  I  said,  should  .t.  a  imin  as  I  flep  ? 
Ks<A.4. II. excepts. to  whom  the  king  shall  hold  out 

14.  thou  an  come  to  the  kiiiedoni  fors.  a  time 
9.  2.  lo  lay  hand  on  s.  as  soiisht  their  hurt 
27,  and  upon  all  s.  as  joined  ihomselvos  to  them 
Job  15.  13.  and  letlesl  ».  wordsgo  out  of  thy  moulli 
18.  21.  surely  ».  are  the  dwellings  of  the  wicked 
Panl.  25.  10.  to  s.  as  keep  his  covenant,  103.  18. 
27.  12.  s.  as  breathe  out  crnelly  risen  up  ag.  mo 
37.  14.  to  slay  .t.  as  bo  of  upright  conversation 


sue 

Pa.  37. 23.  *.  aa  be  blessed  ofhim  shall  inherit  earth 
40.  4.  respecteth  not  proud  nor  s.  turn  aside  to  lie* 

16.  let  s.  as  love  thy  salvation  say,  70.  4. 
55.20.  his  hands  against  s.  as  be  at  peace  with  him 
73.  1.  God  is  good  to  s.  as  are  of  a  clean  heart 
107.  10.  s.  assit  in  darkness,  and  shadow  of  death 
125.  5.  as  for  s.  as  turn  aside  to  crooked  ways 
139.  G.  s.  knowledge  is  too  wondiuful  for  me 
144.  15.  happy  is  that  people  that  is  in  s.  a  case 
Prov.  II.  20.  but  s.  as  are  upright  are  bia  delight 
28.  4.  but  s.  as  keep  the  law  contend  with  them 
31.8.  in  cause  ofs.  as  are  appointed  to  deslruclion 
F.ccl.  4.  1.  behold,  the  tears  ofs.  as  were  oppressed 
/■•a. 9.1.  dimness  shall  not  be  s.  as  was  in  her  ve.tat. 
10.20.  and  s.  as  are  escaped  of  the  bouse  of  Jacob 
20.6.  behold,  s.  is  our  expectation,  whither  we  flee 

37.  30.  ye  shall  eat  this  years,  asgrowelh  ofitself 
58.  5.  is  it  s.  a  fast  that  I  have  chosen  ? 
6i).  8.  who  bath  beard  s.  a  thing?  who  hath  seen  a 

Jer.  2.  10.  consider,  and  see  if  there  be  s.  a  thing 
5.  9.  my  soul  be  avenged  on  .s.  o  nation,  29.  |  9.  9. 
15.2.s.as  are  for  death  to  death,  s.as  arc  for  sword, 
s.  as  are  for  famine,  s.  as  are  forC'iptivity,43. 11. 
21.  7. 1  will  delivers,  as  are  left  in  this  city  for  pest. 

38.  4.  in  speaking  .v.  words  unto  them 
44.14.  for  none  shall  return,  but  s.as  shall  escape 

Dan.  1.4. s.as  had  ability  in  them  tosiand  in  palace 

10.  15.  and  when  be  had  spoken  s.  words  lo  me 

11.  32.  s.  as  do  wickedly  shall  be  corrupt 
12.1. there  shall  be  a  time  of  trouble,*,  as  nev.  waa 

-?mos5.16.  tbey  shall  call  s.as  are  skilful  to  wailing 

jVic.  5.  15.  in  anger  and  fury  s.  they  have  not  heard 

y.eph.  1.  8.  s.  as  are  cloihed  with  strange  apparel 

JI/((<.9.8.glorified  G.who  had  given  s.  power  lo  men 

18.  5.  whoso  shall  receive  ones.  little  child  in  my 

name,  receivcth  me,  Mark  9.  37. 

19. 14.  suffer  little  children  to  come  tome,  for  ofs. 

is  the  kingdom  of  G.  Mark  10.  14.  Luke  18. 16. 

24.  21.  then  shall  be  great  tribulation,  s.  as  was 

not  since  beginning  of  ihe  world,  Mark  13.  19. 

44.  in  s.  an  hour  as  ye  think  not,  the  Son  Cometh    ' 

26. 18.  he  said,  go  into  the  city  to  s.  a  man  and  say 

Jl/ar/f  4.18.  gown  among  thorns,  s.  as  hear  the  word 

20.  sown  in  good  ground,  ares,  as  hear  the  word 

33.  with  iniiiiy  s.  parables  spake  he  to  them 

,/nAn  4.23.  for  the  J'ather  scekeths.  to  worship  him 

8.  5.  Moses  commanded  that  s.  should  he  stoned 

9.  16.  can  a  man  that  is  a  sinner  do  s.  miracles? 
.^r.t.i'2.  47.  IheL.  added  daily  s.as  should  be  saved 

3.  6.  s.  as  I  have,  give  I  ihee,  rise  up  and  walk 
1.5.  24.  to  wifffm  we  gave  no  s.  commandment 
16.21.  who  having  received  s.a  charge  thrust  them 
18.  15.  for  I  will  be  no  judge  ofs.  mailers 
21.25. have  concluded.thatihey  observe  nos.thing 
22.  22.  said,  away  wiih  s.  a  fellow  from  ihc  earth 
25.20.hecau.se  I  doubted  ofs.  manner  of  questions 
26.  29.  were  almost,  and  altogether  s.  as  I  am 
Rnm.  16. 13.  they  that  are  s.  serve  not  onr  L.  Jesus 

1  Cor.  5. 1.  s.  fornication  as  is  notso  much  as  named 
6.  II.  and  s.  were  some  of  you,  but  ye  aie  washed 
7. 15.  brother  or  sister  is  not  under  bond.  ins.  case 

28  s.  shall  have  trouble  in  liesh,  but  I  spare  you 

10.  13.  no  tem|itation,  buts.  asis  common  loman 
1 1.16. seem  to  be  contentious,  we  have  no  s.  custom 

15.  48.  s.  arc  they  that  areenrlby,  s.  are  they  that 
16.16.thnt  ye  submit  yourselves  to  s.  and  everyone 

18.  therelbre  acknowleilge  ye  them  thai  are  s. 

2  Cor.  2. 6.  sufiicicnt  to  s.  a  man  is  this  punishment 
3.  4.S.  trust  have  we  through  Christ  to  God-ward 

12.  seeing  then  that  we  have  s.  hope,  we  use 
10  11.  let  s.  a  one  think,  s.  as  we  are  in  word  by 

letters,  s.  will  we  be  indeed  when  we  are  present 

11. 13.  for  s.  are  false  apostles,  deceitful  workers 

12.  20.   I  fear,  1  shall  not  find  you  s.  as  I  would ; 

anil  that  I  shall  be  found  to  you  s.as  ye  would  not 

Citl.  5.  23.  meekness,  against  s.  there  is  no  law 

F7)A.5.27.not  having  spot  or  wrinkle,or  any  s.  thing 

Phil.  2.  29.  receive  him,  and  hold  s.  in  reputation 

1  Th'S.<i.  4.0.  because  the  Lrl.  is  theavcigerofull  s. 

2TAr.vs.  3.  12.  now  them  that  are  s.  we  command 

1  Tim.  6.  5.  corrupt  men,  from  s.  wilhrlraw  thyself 
"iTiin.  3.5.  traitors,  heady,  from  s.  turn  away 
7>7.  3.  II.  that  he  that  is. -j^is  subverted  and  sinnelh 
Hrb.  5. 12.  ye  are  becomes,  ns  have  ni'od  of  milk 

7.  26.  a,  a  high  priest  liecame  us,  who  is  holy 

8.  1.  haves,  a  high  priest,  who  is  set  on  right  band 
12.  3.  him  that  einlured^!.  contradiction  ofsinner* 
13. 16.  for  with  s.  sacrifices  God  is  well  pleaseji 

.Jaw.  4.  1.3.  to-morrow  wo  will  go  into  ,«.  a  city 
16.  in  your  bonslings,  all  s.  rejoicinc  is  evil  f 

2  Pet.  1.  17.  when  there  canie  s.  a  voirolo  him 

3  John  a,  we  therefore  onghi  lo  receive  s.  lo  be 
Per.  5.  13.  and  s.  as  are  in  ibe  sea  heard  I,  saying 

16.  18.  s.  aa  was  not  since  men  were  on  the  earth 
20.  6.  on  s.  the  second  deaMi  bath  no  power 

sum  /i7.f. 
F.irk.  18.  14.  and  considi'relh,  and  doelli  no'  s.  like 
flat.  a.  21.  drunkenness,  revellings  and  s.  like 

SUCII  .1  »»«. 
Oen.  41.  3^.he  said,  can  wo  find  s.  a  07i«  as  tills  U 1 


SUD 

Ruth  4.  1.  ho,  «.  a  one,  turn  aside,  alt  down  h«re 
Job  14.  3.  dost  tliou  open  lliine  eyes  on  s.  a  oneJ 
Fsal.  50.  •■21.  tlioughtesllliati  was  s.u  one  as  thyself 
6ri.'21. hairy  scalp  ofi.  aone  as  goelh  on  in  trespass. 
J  Cor^  5.  5.  to  deliver  s.  a  one  unto  Satan 

n.  if  a  drunkard,  with  «.  »  mc  no  not  to  eat 

2  Cor.^.Ls.a  one  should  bcswallowcd  up  with  sorr. 

10.  ll.let£.  aone  think  this,  that  such  as  we  are 

Vi.  2.  £.  a  one  caught  up  to  the  third  heaven 

5.  of*,  a  one  will  I  glory,  yet  not  of  myself 

Gal.  ().  1.  restore  A\  aoiic  in  the  spirit  of  meekness 

Philcm.  9.  I  beseech,  being  s.  a  otic  as  Paul  the  aged 

SUCH  and  SUCH. 

1  Sam.21.2.  appointed  my  servants  to  s.ands.  place 
"  Sam.  li.  8.  I  would  have  given  i.  and  s.  things 

2  Kings  t).  8.  in  5.  and  s.  a  place  shall  be  my  camp 

SUCH  t/unfs. 
Exod.  12.  36.  they  lent  s.4hings  as  they  required 
JLei'.  10.  19.  and  s.  things  have  befallen  me 
Deut.25.l^.  they  that  do  s.t/iiHO's  are  an  abominat. 
Judg.  13.  23.  nor  have  told  us  «.  things  as  these 

1  A'«;n.2. 23.  Eli  said  to  them,  why  do  yes.  things? 
2 A'mjf.v  19.29. shall  ea^l s.things  asgrowofthemsel. 

25.  15.  the  captain  took  .?.  things  as  were  of  gold 
JV(7t.  ().  8.  there  are  no  s.things  done  as  thou  saycst 
F.sth.  2.  9.  with  s.  things  as  belonged  to  her 
Job  Vi.  3.  yea,  who  knoweth  not  s.  things  as  theset 

It).  2.  Job  said,  I  have  heard  many  .5.  things 

23.  14.  and  many  s.  things  are  with  him 
Jcr.  18.  13.  ask  ye  now  who  hath  heard  s.  things 
Ezck.17. 15.  shall  he  escape  that  doeth  s.  things? 
Dan.  2.  10.  there  is  no  king  that  asked  s.  things 
Mark  7.  8.  many  other  s.  like  things  ye  do,  13, 

13.  7.  be  not  troubled,  s   things  must  needs  be 
Z,ukc9.  9.  but  who  is  this  of  whom  I  hears,  things 

10.  7.  remain,  eating  s.  things  as  they  give,  8. 

11.  41.  but  give  alms  of  s.  things  as  ye  have 
13.2. were  sinners,  because  they  suffered  s.things? 

John  7.  32.  that  the  people  murmured  s.  things 
^cts25. 18.  they  brought  no  accusation  ofs.things 

28.  10.  laded  us  with  s.  things  as  were  necessary 
iioi'n.l.32.who  commits. tAm^s  are  worthyof  death 

2.2.  judgment  against  them  who  commit  s.tAni^s 

3.  O  man,  that  judgost  them  which  do  s.  thijigs 

<?aZ.5.21.tlmt  do  s.t/«'rt^sshiill  not  inherit  kingdom 

Heb.  11. 14.  they  that  say  s.  things  declare  plainly 

13.  5.  be  content  with  s.  things  as  ye  have 

2  Pct.3.14.  beloved,  seeing  that  ye  look  for  s.  things 

SUCK,  Substantive. 
Ocn.'il.  7.  that  Sarah  should  have  given  children  s. 
1  Sam.  1. 23.  so  Hannah  abode  and  gave  her  son  s. 
1  Kings  3.  21.  when  I  rose  to  give  my  child  s. 
fsa.  40.  t  11.  he  Bhall  gently  lead  those  that  gives. 
l.am.  4.  3.  the  sea-monsters  give  s.  to  their  young 
^iat.24.l0.wo(!  to  them  with  child, and  to  them  that 
give  s.  in  those  days,  Mark  13. 17.  /.uie21.23. 
Lukei'i.  29.  blessed  are  the  paps  that  never  gave  s. 

SUCK. 
J9fiuf.32.13.  he  nradehim  tos.  honey  out  of  t^ie  rock 
33.  19.  they  shall  s.  of  the  abundance  of  the  seas 
Job  3.  12.  or  why  the  breast  that  I  should  s.? 
20.  16.  he  shall  s.  the  poison  of  asps 
39.  .30.  her  young  ones  also  s.  up  blood 
/so.  60. 16.  thou  slialt  s.lhe  milk  of  the  Gentiles,  and 
shall  s.  the  breast  of  kings  and  know  the  Lord 
66. '11.  that  ye  may  s.  and  be  satisfied  with  breasts 
12.  then  shall  ye  ,«.  ye  shall  be  borne  on  her  sides 
F.ir.k.  23.  34.  thou  shall  even  drink  it  and  s.  it  out 
Joel  2. 16.  gather  children  and  those  that  s.  breast 

SUCKED. 
Cant.  8.  1.  that  s.  the  breasts  of  my  mother 
JLuke  II.  27.  blessed  nre  the  paps  that  thou  hast  s. 

SUCKING. 
AVm.  11. 12.  as  a  nursing  father  bearcth  thes.  child 
1  Sam.  7.  9.  Samuel  took  a  s.  lamb  and  offered  it 
Isa.  11.8.  s.  child  shall  play  on  the  hole  of  the  asp 
49.  15.  can  a  woman  forget  hers,  child  ? 
Lam.  4.  4.  tongue  of  the  s.  child  cleavcth  to  mouth 

SUCKLING. 

Deut.  32. 2.'i.  the  s.  also  with  the  man  of  grey  hairs 

15am. 15. 3.  slay  both  man  and  woman,  infant  ands. 

Jer.  44.  7.  to  cut  olf  fioin  vou  child  and  s. 

SUCKLINGS. 

1  5am.  22.  19.  Doeg  s^le  children  and  s.  of  Nob 
PsaZ.  8.2.  out  of  mouth  of  bubesand  s.  Jl/at.  21.16. 
Lam.  2.  11.  the  st  swoon  in  the  streets  of  the  city 

SUDDEN. 

Job  22.  10.  therefore  s.  fear  troublellt  thee 

Ftov.  3. 2j.  he  not  afraid  ofs.  fear  nor  of  desolation 

17'Aess.5. 3.  then  s.  destruction  cometli  upon  them 
SUDDENLY. 

Auni.  6.  9.  and  if  any  man  die  very  s.  by  him 
12.4.  t!ie  Lord  spake  s.  unto  Moses  and  Aaron 
35.  22.  hut  if  he  thrust  him  s.  without  enmity 

Dent.  7. 4.  the  anger  of  the  Lord  will  destroy  you  s. 

Josh.  10.  9.  Joshua  came  unto  them  s.  11.  7. 

25am.  15. 14.  lest  he  overtake  uss.  and  smite  the  city 

2  Chron.  -2".  'Xt.  rejoiced,  for  the  thing  was  done  s. 
Jub  5.3.  lakiijg  root,  but  s.  I  cursed  his  habitation 

0  23.  if  tlio  scourge  slay  s.  he  will  laugh  at  trial 

m 


SUP 

P»al.  6.  10.  let  them  return  and  be  ashamed  «. 

64.  4.  s.  do  they  shoot  at  him  and  fear  not 

7   with  an  arrow  s.  shall  they  be  wounded 
Pn  V.  (i.  15.  therefore  his  calamity  shall  come  a. 
ho  shall  be  broken  s.  without  remedy 

7. 1  22.  he  goeth  after  her  s.  as  an  ox  to  slaughter 

34.  22.  fur  their  calamity  shall  rise  s. 

29.1. shall  s.bedestroyed,  and  that  without  remedy 
Eccl.  9.  12.  when  it  I'alleLh  s.  upon  them 
Ua.  29.  5.  yea,  it  shall  be  at  an  instant  s.         v 

30,  13.  as  a  breach,  whose  breaking  cometh  s. 

47.  11.  and  desolation  shall  come  upon  ihee  s. 

48.  3.  I  did  them  s.  and  they  came  to  (lass 

,ler.  4.  20.  s.  are  my  tents  spoiled  and  my  curtains 
6.  26.  for  the  spoiler  shall  s.  come  upon  us 

15.  8.  I  haTe  caused  them  to  fall  upon  it  s. 

18.  23.  when  thou  shall  bring  a  troop  s.  on  them 

49.  19.  but  I  will  s.  make  him  run  away,  50.  44. 
51. 8.  Bab.  is  s.  fallen  and  destroyed,  howl  for  her 

Hab.  2. 7.  shall  they  not  rise  up  s.  that  shall  bite  thee 
JUal.  3.  1.  the  Lord  shall  s.  come  to  his  temple 
Mark9.8.  s.  saw  no  man  any  more,  save  Jesus  only 

13.  30.  lest  coming  s.  he  find  you  sleeping 
J^ukc  2.  13.  s.  there  was  with  the  angel  a  multitude 

9.  39.  a  spirit  takelh  him,  and  he  s.  crieth  out 
Mcts  2.  2.  and  s.  there  came  a  sound  from  heaven 

9.  3.  s.  there  shined  a  light  fiom  heaven,  22.  6. 

16.  26.  and  s.  there  was  a  great  earthquake 

28.  6.  when  he  should  have  fallen  down  dead  s. 
17V7H.5.22.1ay  handss.on  no  man,  keep  thyself  pure 

SUE. 
Mat.  5.  40.  and  if  any  man  will  s.  thee  at  the  law 

SUFFER. 
£iod.l2.23.the  Ld.will  not  s.  the  destroyer  to  come 

22.  18.  thou  shall  not  s.  a  witch  to  live 
Lev.  2. 13.  nor  shall  s.  salt  of  the  cov.  to  be  lacking 

19. 17.  thou  shall  rebuke  him,  not  s.  sin  Jpon  him 

22.  16.  or  s.  them  to  bear  the  iniquity  of  trespass 
JVum.  21.  23.  Sihon  would  not  s.  Israel  to  pass 
Deut.  21.  1 12.  and  she  shall  s.  her  nails  to  grow 
Josh.  10.  19.  s.  them  not  to  enter  their  cities 
Judg.  1. 34.  not  s.  them  to  come  down  to  the  valley 

15.  1.  but  her  father  would  not  s.  him  "to  go  in 
16.26.Samsonsaid,».  me  that  I  may  feel  the  pillars 

2  Sa»i.l4.1l.not  s.  the  revengers  of  blood  any  more 

1  Kings  15  17.  that  he  might  not  s.  any  to  go  out 
E^th.  3.  8.  it  is  not  for  the  king's  profit  to  s.  them 

6.  t  10.  s.  not  a  whit  to  fail  of  all  thou  hast  spoken 
Job  9.  18.  he  will  not  s.  me  to  lake  my  breath 
21.3.  s.  me  that  I  may  speak,  after  that  mock  on 
24.  II.  tread  their  wine-presses,  and  s.  thirst 
.36.  2.  s.  me  a  little,  and  I  will  shew  thee 
Psal.9.  13.  consider  my  trouble  which  I  s.  of  them 
16. 10.  thou  wilt  not  leave  my  soul,  nor  wilt  thou  s. 
thine  holy  One  to  see  corruption, J^cfs  2.27. 1 13.35. 
34.  10.  the  young  lions  do  lack  and  s.  hunger 
55.  22.  he  will  never  s.  the  righteous  to  be  moved 

88.  15.  while  I  s.  thy  terrors,  I  am  distracted 

89.  33.  nor  will  I  ».  my  faithfulness  to  fail 

101.  5.  a  high  look  and  a  proud  heart,  will  not  Is. 
121.  3.  he  will  not  s.  thy  foot  to  be  moved 
Pr»i).10.3.Ld.will  nots.  soul  of  righteous  to  famish 

19.  15.  and  an  idle  soul  shall  s.  hunger 

19.  a  man  of  great  wrath  shall  s.  punishment 
Keel.  5.  6.  s.  not  thy  mouth  to  cause  thy  flesh  to  sin 

12.  the  abundance  of  the  rich  nots.  him  to  sleep 
Ezek.  44.  20.  nor  s.  their  locks  to  grow  long 
/fos.5.t4.their  doings  will  not  s. thorn  to  turn  to  God 
Mat.  3.  15.  Jesus  said  to  him,  s.  it  to  be  so  now 

8.  21.  s.  me  first  to  bury  my  father,  Lui'.e  9.  59. 
31.  s.  us  to  go  away  into  the  swine,  Auie8. 32. 

16.  21.  that  he  must  s.  many  things  of  the  elders, 
17.  12.  Mark  8.  31.  |  9.  12.  J.ukc  9.  22. 1 17. 25. 

17.  17.  how  long  shall  I  s.  you  1  bring  him  hither 

to  me,  Mark  9.  19.  Luke  9.  41. 

19. 14.  s.  little  children,  Mark  10. 14.  J.uke  18. 16. 

23. 13.  neither  s.  ye  them  that  are  entering  to  go  in 

Mark!,  l^.ye  s.liim  no  more  to  do  ought  for  his  lath. 

11.16.  Je.'-us  would  not  s.ony  man  to  carry  a  vessel 

/,wie22.  15.  desired  toeat  this  passover  before  Is. 

51.  s.  ye  thus  far, he  touch,  his  ear  and  healed  him 

24.  46.  it  behoved  Christ  to  s.  .^cts  3.  18. 126.23. 

.Sets  3.18.  God  before  shewed  that  Christ  should  s. 

5.  41.  they  were  counted  worthy  to  s.  shame 

7. 24.  seeing  one  of  them  s.  wrong  he  defended  him 

9.  16.  how  gr.  things  he  must  s.  for  my  name's  sake 
21.  39. 1  beseech  thee,  s.  me  to  speak  to  the  people 

flc(m.8.17.ifsob»that  wes.wilh  him  that  we  maybe 
lC<ir.3.15.if  any  man's  work  be  burnt, he  slin II. s. loss 
4.12.being  reviled, we  bless;  being  persecuted, we .s. 

6.  7.  why  not  rather  s.  yourselves  to  be  defrauded? 
9. 12  we  have  not  used  this  power  but  s.  all  things 
10.13.God  will  nots. you  lobe  tempted  above  that 
12.  26.  if  one  member  ».  all  members  s.  with  it 

2  Cor.  1.  6.  the  same  sufferings  which  we  also  ». 
11.  19.  for  ye  s.  fools  gladly  seeing  ye  are  wise 

20.  for  ye  ».  if  a  man  brin^  you  into  bondage 
<?n;.  5   11.  if  I  preach,  why  do  I  yets,  persecution? 

6.12.  lest  I  hey  should  ^.persecution  for  cross  of  Ch. 
PAiZ.1.39.^v«D  you  to  believe  and  tos.  for  bii  sake 


SUP 

Phi.  4. 13. 1  am  instructed  to  abound  and  to  s.  new! 

17'Aess.3. 4.  we  told  you  before,  that  we  should  s 
277tcss.l.5.  the  kingdom  ofGodlijr  which  ye  alsos. 

1  Tim.  2. 12. 1  s.  not  a  woman  to  teach  nor  to  usurp 
4. 10.  for  therefore  we  both  labour  and  s.  reproach 

2  7'm.l.l2.for  the  which  cause  I  also  s. these  things 
2.9.  wherein  Is.  trouble  as  an  evil  doer  to  bonds 

12.  if  we  s.  we  shall  also  reign  with  him 

3.  12.  all  that  live  godly  shall  s.  persecution 
Heb.li.'25.  choosing  rather  tos.  aflliction  withpeo. 

13.  3.  remember  them  who  s.  adversity 

22.  brethren,  s.  the  word  of  exhortation 
Jam.5.  t7.  s.  therefore  with  long  patience,  brethren 
1  Pet.  2.  20.  but  if  when  ye  do  well,  and  s.  for  it 

3.14.  but  if  yes.  for  righteousn.  sake,  happy  are  ye 
17.  it  is  better  that  ye  s.  for  well  doing  than  evil 

4. 15.  but  let  none  of  you  s.  as  a  murderer  or  thief 
16.  yet  if  any  mans,  as  a  Christian,  not  be  asham. 
19.  let  them  that  s.  according  to  the  will  of  God 

Hev.  2.  10.  fear  none  of  those  things  thou  shells. 
11.9.  nots. dead  bodies  to  be  put  in  their'graves 

SUFFERED. 
Oen.  20.  6.  therefore  s.  I  thee  not  to  touch  her 
31.  7.  but  God  s.  him  not  to  hurt  me 
28.  and  hast  not  s. me  to  kiss  my  sons  anddaughu 
Deut.  8. 3.  he  humbled  thee,  and  s.  thee  to  hunger 
18. 14.  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  not  s.  Ihee  so  to  do 
.Judg.  3.  28.  and  they  s.  not  a  man  to  pass  over 

1  Sam.  24.  7.  David  s.  them  not  to  rise  against  Saul 

2  Sam.  21. 10.  and  s.  not  the  birds  to  rest  on  them 

1  Chron.  16. 21.  he  s.  no  man  to  do  them  wrong,  ho 

reproved  kings  for  their  sakes,  Psal.  105.  14. 
Job  31.  30.  neither  have  I  s.  my  mouth  to  sin 
Jer.  15.  15.  know  that  for  thy  sake  I  s.  rebuke 
jVia£.3.]5.  Jesus  said,  suff.  it  to  be  so  ;  then  he  s.  him 
19.  8.  Moses  s.  you  to  put  away  your  wives 
24. 43.  nor  s.  his  house  to  be  broken,  Luke  12. 39. 
27. 19.  I  have  s.  many  things  .this  day  in  a  dream 
Mark  1.34.  he  s.  not  the  devils  to  speak,  J.ukei.H. 
5.  19.  howbeit,  Jesus  s.  him  not,  but  said  to  him 
26.  and  had  s.  many  things  of  many  physicians 
37.  and  he  s.  no  man  to  follow  him,  save  Peter 

10.  4.  Moses  s.  to  write  a  bill  of  divorcement 
Luke  8.  32.  he  s.  them  to  enter  into  the  swine 

51.  hes.no  man  logo  in,savePeler,  James,  John 

13.  2.  were  sinners,  because  tJiey  s.  such  things? 

24.26.0  fools,ought  nolChr.to  ha>  <;s.these  things? 

Jicts  13.  18.  about  forty  years  s.  he  their  manners 

14.16.who  s.  all  nations  to  walk  in  their  own  ways 

16.  7.  they  essayed,  but  the  Spirit  s.  them  not 

17.  3.  alleging  that  Christ  must  needs  have  s. 
19. 30. disciples  s.  him  not  to  enter  in  unto  people 
28.  16.  but  Paul  was  s.  to  dwell  by  himself 

2  Cor.  7. 12.  I  did  it  not  for  his  cause  that  s.  wrong 

11.  25.  once  was  I  stoned,  thrice  I  s.  shipwreck 
Oal.  3.  4.  have  ye  s.  so  many  things  in  vain  ? 
Phil.  3.  8.  for  whom  I  have  s.  the  loss  of  all  things 
IThess.  2.  2.  but  e*en  after  that  we  had  s.  before 

14.  ye  have s.likelhings of yourown countrymen 
7/ci.2.18.  for  in  that  he  hims.  hath  s.  being  templed 
5.  8.  ho  learned  obedience  by  things  which  he  s. 
7. 23.  they  were  not  s.  continue  by  reason  of  death 
9.26.  for  then  must  he  often  have  s.  since  foundaU 
13.  12.  wherefore  Jesus  also  s.  without  the  gate 
1  Pet.  2.  21 .  Christ  s.  for  us,  leaving  us  an  example 

23.  when  he  s.  he  threatened  not,  but  committed 
3.18.  for  Christ  hath  once  s.  for  sins,  just  for  unjust 

4.  1.  as  Christ  hath  s.  for  us  in  the  tlesh,  he  that 

hath  s.  in  the  flesh  hath  ceased  from  sin 

5.  10.  after  ye  have  s.  a  while,  make  ye  perfect 

SUFFEREST. 
Rev.  2.  20.  because  thou  s.  that  woman  Jezebel 

SUFFERETH. 
rsaZ.66.9.  bless  God  who  s.notour  feet  to  be  moved 
107.  38.  blesseth,  and  s.  not  their  cattle  to  decrease 
Mat.  11.  12.  the  kingdom  of  heaven  s.  violence 
Jicts  28.  4.  yet  vengeance  s.  him  not  to  live 
1  Cor.  13.  4  charitv  s.  long  and  is  kind,  envieth  not 

SUFFERING, 
.^cts  27. 7.  the  wind  nots.us,  we  sailed  under  Crete 
./am.5.10.  for  an  exampleofs.affliction,and  patience 

1  Prt.  2.  19.  if  a  man  endure  grief,  s.  wrongfully 
,/urf«7.  an  example, .«.  the  vengeance  of  eternal  fire 

SUFFERING. 
Hcb.  2.  9.  for  the  .t.  of  death,  crowned  with  glory 

SUFFERINGS. 
Rom.8.  18. 1  reckon  that  thes.  of  this  present  tinje 

2  Cor.  I.  5.  for  as  the  s.  of  Christ  abound  in  us 

6.  enduring  the  same  s.  which  we  also  suffer    , 

7.  ye  arc  partakers  of  thes.  so  of  the  consolation 
Pkil.  3.  10.  that  I  may  know  the  fellowship  of  his*. 
Col.  1.  24.  who  now  rejoice  in  my  s.  for  you 
Heb.^.lO.  makecaptain  of  salvation  perfect  thro'  *. 
1  Pel.  1. 11.  it  testified  before-hand  the  .t.  of  Christ 

4. 13.  inasmuch  as  ye  are  partakers  of  Christ'i  «. 
5.1. 1  am  a  witness  of  the  s.of  Christ,  and  partaker 
SUFFICE. 
JWm.  11. 22.  shall  herds  be  slain  tos.  them?  orkhall 
the  fish  of  the  sea  be  gathered  together  to  .'J.themT 
£>mU.3>26.  let  it  t.  thee,  speak  no  more  to  me  oftliit 


SUN 

1  KingsV).  10.  If  dust  of  Snmaria  shall  s.  for  people 
Ezck.  44. 6.  let  U  s.  you  of  nil  your  abominut.  45.  9. 
Hos.  Vi.  1 8-  Ephraim  said,  i>ll  my  labours  a.me  not 

1  PetA,2.  for  the  tune  past  inay  ».lo  have  wrought 

SUFFICED. 

./ud^.21. 14. gave  them  wives, yet?o  theys.lheai  not 

Rutli  %  14.  she  did  eat,  and  was  s.  and  \e(l 

Ijj.gave  her  that  she  had  reBerved,after  the  was  s. 

SUFFICETH. 

John  14.  8.  Lord,  shew  us  the  Father  and  it  ».  us 

SUFFICIENCY. 

Lev-  5. 1  7.  if  his  hand  cannot  reach  to  the  i.  of  a 

lamb,  thenlwo  turtle-dovi'sor  pigeons,  12.  fS. 

25.  1  '20.  if  his  hand  hath  found  s.  to  redeem  it 

Job  20.22.  in  fulness  of  his  s.  he  shall  be  in  straits 

2  CV>r.  3.5.  we  are  not  suilicient,  but  ours.isof  God 
9.8.  ».  in  all  thini;s  ve  niuy  abound  in  good  work 

SUFFICIENT. 
Kxod.  36. 7.  for  the  stutT  liicy  had  was  s.  for  work 
J)ait.  15.  8.  thou  shall  lend  him  ».  for  his  need 
33.  7.  let  his  hand  be  s.  for  him,  thou  »  help  to  him 
Prov.  25.  l(i.  eat  ?(>  much  honey  as  is  s.  for  thee 
/«fi»40.  16.  and  Lebanon  is  not  s.  to  burn,  nor  the 
bi^asts  thereof  a.  for  a  bnrnt-otTering 
Mat.  6.  34.  s.  to  the  day  is  the  evil  tlicreof 
J^uke  14.  28.  whether  he  have  s.  to  finish  it 
Jokn&.l.  two  hund.  penny-worth  of  bread  is  not  s. 
2  Cor.  2.  G.  a.  to  such  a  man  is  this  punishment 
16.WC  are  a  savour,  and  who  is  a. for  these  things? 

3.  5.  not  that  we  are  s.  of  ourselves  to  think 
12.  9.  he  said  to  ine,  my  "race  is  s.  for  thee 

SUFFICIENTLY. 
2  Chr.  30. 3.  priests  had  not  sanctified  themselves  5. 
Isa.  23.  Id.  that  dwell  before  the  Loid  to  eat  a. 

SUIT. 
Judg.  17.  10.  I  will  give  thee  a  a.  of  apparel 
iSam.  15.  4.  thatev.  man  who  hath  any  a.  or  cause 
Job  11.  19.  yea,  manv  shall  make  a.  untu  thee 

SUITS. 
ha.  3.  22.  will  lake  away  cliana;eable  a.  of  apparel 

SUM,  Sibslantivc. 
/Trofi.,21.30.  if  there  be  laid  on  him  a  a.  of  money 
30. 12.  when  thou  takes!  ihe  a.  of  children  of  Israel 
;18.  21.  this  is  the  a.  of  tin,'  tabernacle  of  testimony 
Ji'iim.  1.2.  take  the  a.  of  all  the  congregation,  20.  2. 
49.  tliou  shall  not  take  the  a.  of  ihe  Levites 

4.  2.  take  the  a.  of  the  suns  of  ICohath 

22.  lake  also  the  ».  of  the  sons  of  Grrshon 
26. 4.  take  the  s.  of  people  from  twenty  years  old 
31.  2fi.  lake  the  a.  of  the  prey  that  was  taken 
49.  have  taken  the  a.  of  the  men  of  war 
2  Sam.  24.  9.  Joab  ?ave  up  .«.  to  king,  1  CAr.  21.  .">. 
/:«(*.  4.7.  the  a.  of  monev  that  Ilaman  promised 
Psal.  1.39.  17.  how  greit'is  the  a.  of  them ! 
Kzek.  2a.  12.  thou  sealesi  up  the  a.  full  of  wisdom 
J)an.  7.  1.  Daniel  told  the  a.  of  the  ilream 
./]ets  7.  IC.  .Abraham  bought  for  a  .v.  of  money 
22.  28.  with  a  great  a.  obtained  I  this  freedom 
//efr.8. 1.  of  the  things  we  have  sjioken  this  is  the  s. 
%  SUM. 

2  Kiifs  2i4  4.  that  he  may  a.  the  silver  brought 

SUMMER. 
7?e7i.8.22.  a.  and  wint.  day  and  night  shall  not  cease 
I'nal  32. 4.  my  moisture  is  turned  into  drought  of  a. 
74.  17.  thou  hast  made  a.  and  winter 
I'rm.  6.  8.  which  provideth  her  meat  in  a.  30.  25. 
1(1.  .5.  he  that  gatliereth  in  a.  i.<  a  wise  nun 
20.  I.  as  snow  in  a.  and  as  rain  in  harvest 
lua.  28.  4.  and  as  the  hasty  fruit  before  the  a. 
./er.  8.  20.  the  harvest  is  past,  the  a.  is  end(|d 
Dan.  2.  35.  aa  the  chaff  of  the  a.  threshing-floors 
7.eck.  14.  H.  in  a.  and  in  winter  shall  it  be 
Mai.  24.  32.  when  fig-tree  puts  forth  leaves,  ye 
know  that  a.  is  nigh,  Mark  13.  28.  l.-ukt  21.  :t0 
aUMMEK  chambfT. 
yu(/ff.3.24.snrelv  he  covers  his  feet  in  his  a.  chamber 

SUMMER-FRUIT. 
2  .S"(ini.U!.2.bri'nd  and  s. -fruit  for  young  men  to  cat 
^mos  8.  1.  beh'iM,  a  basket  of  x.- fruit,  2. 

SIIMMEU-FRriTS. 
2  Sam.  16. 1.  7-itm  brought  100  bunches  of  a. -/rui^a 
/»«.  16.  fl.  for  Ihu  shoiiliug  lor  thy  f.-frvif-  is  falhn 
Jrr.  40.  111.  but  ye,  gather  ye  wino  and  .i. -fruit",  12 
48.  32.  the  8|>oder  is  fallen  ii|ion  thy  s.fruits, 
and  upon  thv  vintage 
^/ie.7.1.  lamas  when  Ihey  have  gathered  a.  /ruits 

SUMMrfR  HOUSE. 
.AmosS.  15. 1  «ill  Kinilc'winior  lioiiHC  with  a. -Aouae 

SUMMER  l'.\KLOUu. 
Judp.  3.  20.  Eglon  was  silting  w  a  n.-parlour 

SUMMKR. 
ha.  18.  6.  and  tin-  fowls  shnll  a.  upon  them 

SUMPTUOrm.V. 
AuJkfl  16.  19.  the  rich  man  fared  a.  every  day 

SU.M. 

Tht.i  I'a  the  prrat  luminary  that  Hod  created  at 
the  be^innintr,  toprefidf.  over  the  dny,  as  also 
he  crrnlid  the  noon  to  rule  ovrr  the  night. 
Gen.  1.  10.  The  sun  has  been  the  object  of 
wcrfhif  and  adoration  to  the  greatest  part  of 


SUN 


SUN 


the  people  of  the  East.  It  is  thought  to  be  <AeI2  5a*i.23.  4.  as  the  light  of  morning  when  »  ri»ctj 
Bu<i  that  the  Phcnicians  icorshipped  under  the  -  Kings  3.  22.  they  rose  up  early  in  the  morning 
name  u/Baal,  the  Moabitea  under  the  name  of  and  the  a.  shone  upon  the  watsr 

Cheinosh,  the  Jlmmonites  by  that  of  Moloch,  I  23.  5.  them  also  tliut  burn  incense  to  a.  and  mcon 
ond  the  Israelites  by  the  name  uf  Baal,  and  by\      11.  and  burnt  llie  chariots  of  the  a.  with  fire 
the  king  of  the  host  of  heaven.     They  did  no'  'i^liron.  14. t5.  Asa  look  high-places  and  a.  image* 
separate  hii  worship  from  that  uf  the  moon,'   34.  t4.  Josiah  brake  down  the  a.  images  on  high 
whom  they  called  Aptaria,  and  the  queen  of  jVfA.  7.  3.  let  not  ga'tes  he  opened  till  tne  a.  be  hot 
heaven.      'J'hey  paid  this  wur.-ihip  upon  high  -fob  8.  16.  Ihe  hypocrite  is  green  before  the  a. 
places,  i7t  groves,  and  upon  the  roofs  of  their  i   9.  7.  which  conunandeth  the  a.  and  it  riscth  not 
houses.     The  Israelites  had  a  caution  against ,   'W.  28.  I  went  mourning  without  the  s.  I  stood 
this  worship.     Deut.  4.  15,  19,  Take  ye  tliere- 1  31.  26.  if  I  beheld  e.  when  it  shineil,  or  tlie  moon 

fore  good   heed  unto  yourselves, lost  thou  1  Paai.  19. 4.  in  them  hath  he  set  a  tabernacle  for  a. 

lift  up  thine  eyes  unto  heaven,  and  when  thou;   58.  8.  pass  away,  that  they  may  not  see  the  .?. 
seesl  the  aun,  and  the  moon, and  the  stars,  evenj   72. 5,  shall  fear  thee  aslong  asa. and  moon  endure 


all  the  host  of  heaven,  shouUlcxl  be  dri 
worship  them,  and  servo  them,  which  the  Lord 
thy  God  hath  divided  unto  all  nations  under  the 
whole  heaven.  .'Jnd  in  Deut.  17.  3,  4,  5.  aucA 
are  condemned  to  death,  as  shall  be  perverted 
to  tile  worship  of  strange  gods,  of  the  sun,  or 
of  the  moon.  Josiah  king  of  .luduh  took  away 
out  of  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  the  horses,  and 


17.  his  name  shall  be  continued  as  loivj  as  the  a. 
74.  10.  thou  bast  prepaied  the  light  and  the  s. 
H4.  11.  for  the  Lord  God  is  a  a.  and  shield 
89.  36.  his  throne  shall  endure  as  the  a.  before  me 
104.  22.  the  s.  ariseth,  they  gather  themselves 
121.  6.  the  a.  shall  not  smite  Iht^e  by  day 
136.  8.  to  him  that  made  the  a.  to  rule  by  day 
148.3.praise  ye  him,  a.  and  moon,  and  stars  of  light 


burnt  the  chariots,  that  the  kings  Aia /<rf<ie-   KcfM-5.  the  o-.al3oari6etli,and  thea.goelhdown 
cessors  had  consecrated  to  the  sun,  2  Kings  23.     C.  5.  moreover,  he  hath  not  seen  the  a.  nor  known 


11.  Job  says,  that  he  looked  upon  it  as  a  I'ery 
great  crime,  and  as  renouncing  the  (lod  that 
is  above,  to  kiss  his  hand  as  a  taken  of  adora- 
tion, 7Dhen  he  saio  the  sun  in  all  its  glury  and 
splendour,  Job  31.  26,  27,  28.  Kzikicl  saw  in 
the  Spirit,  in  the  temple  of  the  J.ord,  five  and 
twenty  men  of  Judah,  who  turned  their  backs 
upon  the  sanctuary,  and  had  their  faces  to- 
wards the  Kast,  worshipping  the  sun  at  his 
rising,  Ezek.  8.  16. 
The  son  is  frcqueiitly  alluded  to  in  a  great  part 
of  the  nolle  similitudes  that  the  sacred  authors 
make  uac  of.  To  represent  a  very  great  cala- 
viity,  they  say,  the  sun  was  obscured,  nnd  the 
moon  withdrew  her  light,  Isa.  13.  10.  |  24.  23. 
Jer.  1.5.  9.  F.zek.  32.  7.  JImos  8.  9.  To  express 
a  long  continuance  of  any  thing  that  is  v'.ori- 
ous  and  illustrious,  in  scripture  style  it  is  said. 
It  shall  continue  as  long  as  the  sun  endures, 
Psal.  72.  5,  17.  The  compass  of  the  whole 
earth  is  marked  out  by  tlwse  words,  from  Ihe 
rising  of  the  sun  In  the  going  down  of  tlie  same, 
Psal.  50.  1.  I  113.  3.  'J'o  be  hung  upon  a  gib- 
bet in  the  face  of  the  sun,  to  be  exposed  in  the 
fields  to  the  birds  of  the  air,  and  to  the  heat  of 
the  sun,  expresses  a  particular  degree  of  igno- 
miny. Num.  25.  4.  Jer.  8.  2.  Uniler  the  sun; 
that  is  to  say,  in  the  world,  Eccl.  1.  9,  14,  &c. 
Jesus  Cliiist  la  called  the  sun  of  fighleousnejis, 
Mai.  4. 2.  he  enlightens,  quickens,  and  comforts 
his  people.  A  woman  clothed  with  the  sun,  and 
tile  moon  under  her  feel,  signifies  the  church 
diithed  with  the  righteousness  of  ('hrist,  purity 
of  doctrine,  and  a  holy  conversation ;  condemn- 
ing and  under luiluin.ir  worldly  things,  and  the 
Mosaical  worship,  Rev.  12.  1 


11.  by  it  there  is  profit  to  them  that  hee  the  a. 
11.7.  a  pleasant  thing  for  the  eyes  to  behold  the*. 
12.  2.  while  ihe  a.  or  the  stars  be  not  darkened 
Cant.  1.  6.  becausi^  ihe  a.  hath  looked  upon  mo 
fi.lO.thillooketh  forth,  fair  as  moon,  clear  as  the*. 
Jsa.  19.  1 18.  one  s^hall  be  called  the  city  of  the  .■>■. 
24.  23.  the  a.  shall  be  ashamed  w  hen  thu  Lord  of 
hosts  shall  reign  in  mount  /.ion 
30. 26.  thelight  of  the  moon  shall  be  as  ihe  light  of 
the  a.  and  the  light  of  the  a.  shall  be  sevenfold 
38.  8.  is  gone  down  in  a.  dial,  so  the  a.  returned 
49.  10.  nor  shall  'he  heat,  nor  a.  smite  ttiem 
(iO.  19.  the  a.  shall  be  no  more  thy  light  by  day 
20.  a.  shall  no  more  go  down,  nor  moon  withdiuw 
Jer.  8.  2.  they  shall  8|iread  the  bone.>i  before  the  a 
15.  9.  her  a.  is  gone  down  while  it  is  yet  day 
I'.l.  t2.  which  is  by  the  entry  of  the  a.  gate 

31.  3.").  which  giveth  the  a.  lor  a  light  by  day 
43.  1 13.  he  shall  break  the  house  ol  the  a. 

F.zek.  8.  10.  they  worshipped  the  a.  toward  the  east 

32.  7.  I  will  cover  the  a.  with  a  cloud 

.loeli.  10.  thea.  and  the  moon  shall  be  darkened, 3. 

15.  MafiA.U-'J.  Mark  13.24.  y^wAc  2.3.  45. 

31.  a.  shall  he  turned  into  darkness,  moon  into 

.Imos  8.  9. 1  will  cause  the  a.  to  go  down  at  noon 

.firnah  4.  8.  when  the  a.  did  ai  ise,  and  the  s.  beat  on 

the  head  of  Jonrih  that  ho  wished  lo  dio 

Mic.  3.  fi.  the  a.  shall  go  down  over  the  [irophels 

jVaA.  3. 17.  but  when  thea.  :iri9eth,  they  flee  away 

Hub.'i.W.s.  and  moon  stood  still  in  their  habitation 

Jlfai.  4.2.  to  you  shall  ihe.s  of  righ;eoii6nes»  arisa 

Mat.^.A5.  he  niaketli  his  a.  lo  rise  on  evil  and  good 

13.C.whena.wa6uplhcy  were  scorched,  jUu  J  A  4.6. 

43.  then  shall  the  righteous  shine  as  the  a. 

17.  2.  his  face  did  shine  as  the  a.  Rev.  l-lii.  1 10. 1 

Mark  1..32.  wheiithe  J.  did  act  Ihey  brought  the  sick 


The  scripture  acquaints  us  with  three  very  fi-l  /,i//cc4.40.now  when  tlica.was..'elting,hroughl8ick 


traordinary  and  miraculous  things  relating  to 

ths  sun.     The  first  wa-t,  when  it  .■itood  still  at 

the  command  of  .Joshua,  Josh.  10.  12,  13.     The 

second,  when  it  returned  back  in  the  time  of 

king  Jlezr.kinh,  2  Kings  20.  11.    J^nd  the  third, 

when  it  was  iiiroloed  in  darkness,  though  the 

moon  ujo-s  then  at  the  full,  at  the  time  uf  our 

Saviour's  crucifiiion.  Mat.  2T.  45. 

Oen.  15.  17.  it  came  lo  pass  when  the  a.  went  down 

19.  23.  the  a.  was  riFcn  when  Lot  entered  Jioiir 

2i  1 1.  Jacob  tarried  all  night,  bee.  Ihe  a.  was  sia 

32.  31.  as  ho  passed  over  Penuul,  the  a.  rose  on  him 

37. 9.th(!  a.  moon  and  stars  made  obeisance  to  i.i? 

F.xod.  16.  21.  and  when  thea.  wa.<ied  hot  it  mcltnl 

^.  3.  if  a.  be  risen,  blood  shall  be  shed  for  him 

/>ey.22.7.and  when  the  a.  is  down,  he  shall  becloun, 

and  afterwards  cat  holv  things,  Dent.i'i.  II. 

JVum.2j.4.  Iianglhom  u))  before  the  Lord  .ig.  thea. 

Deut.  4.  lil.  le.it  when  thou  seesl  the  a.  and  moon 

17.  3.  and  halh  worshipped  either  thp  a.  or  moon 

24.  15.  nor  shall  thu.'Vgo  down  upon  it,  he  is  poor 

33. 14.  for  iho  preciun*  fruits  brought  forth  by  a. 

Josh.  1.4.  to  si'Q,  toward  the  going  down  of  Ihe  a. 

8.  29.  as  soon  as  the  a.  was  down,  Joshua  coin- 

mnnded  ihat  hi-i  carcase  should  be  taken  down 

10.  12.  a.  Hinnil  thou  still  upon  Gibf.'on,  and  moon 

13.  and  Ihu  a.  stond  still,  and  thi;  moon  sinyed 

./ud^.  5. 31.  lot  thim  that  love  him,  bi^  as  a.  in  mighl 

8.  13.  Gideon  leturned  before  the  a.  was  up 

9.  33.  as  soon  as  the  a.  is  up,  thou  shall  rimi  early 
14.  18.  they  said  lo  him  hrforn  the  s.  want  ilowit 
19.  14.  a.  wont  down  when  thoy  wore  by  Gibeah 

1  Sam.  11.  0.  by  ths  a.  bu  hot,  ye  shall  have  Ix^lp 

2  .Snm.2.21.lhea.  went  down,  Ihi-y  wcroat  Ainmah 
3.  35.  if  taste  bread  or  ought  till  Ihe  a.  ho  down 
12.  11.  shall  lie  with  thy  wives  in  sight  of  this  .1. 

12.  for  thou  didsi  it  Herrctly,  but  I  will  do  this 
thing  before  all  Lirael,  and  beforo  the  a. 


21.2.).  there  shall  be  sicca  in  thea.  and  ihe  moon 
yjcta 2. 20.  thea.  into  diirkni'S",  the  moon  into  blood 

13. 11.  shall  bu  blind,  not  seeing  the  a.  for  a  season 

26. 13.  I  saw  a  light  above  the  brightness  of  the  a. 

27.  20.  when  neither  a.  nor  siar.o  appeared 
1  Cor.  1.5. 41.  there  is  one  glory  of  the. S-.  and  anolI»PT 
F.ph.  4.  2fi.  let  not  the  a.  go  down  upon  your  wrath 
Jam.  1.  II.  a.  is  no  sooner  risen  with  a  burning  heat 
Rev.a.  12.  the  a.  became  black  as  sackcloth  of  hair 

7.  16.  nor  shall  the  a.  light  on  lliem  nor  any  heal 

8.  12.  and  a  third  part  of  the  a.  was  smillon 

9.  2.  the  a.  nnil  the  air  were  d.irkencd  by  sinokc 
12.  1.  there  app^and  a  woman  cluthed  with  the  a. 
16.  8. ^he  fourth  angil  poured  out  his  vial  on  thea. 
19.  17.  I  saw  an  angel  siaiiding  in  the  t.  ho  cried 
21.  23.  an.l  the  ciiy'lmd  no  need  of  the  a.  22.  5. 

Sec  GoETii,  GoiM<:,  Riiii.NO. 
Under  the  SUN. 
F.ccl.\.%  what  profit  of  all  labour  which  lip  Inknih 
under  the  sj  2.  18,  19, 20,  22.  |  5.  18.  |  9. 9. 
9.  and  lliero  is  no  newliiiig  under  the  a. 
11. 1  havoseen  all  the  wmks  iloiie  under  the  a.  all 
is  vanity  and  vexation,  2.  17. 1 4. 3.  |  8. 17.  |9.  3. 

2.  II.  and  there  was  no  profit  under  the  a. 

3.  16.  I  saw  under  tkr  a.  the  pl.nce  of  judgment 
4. 1.  all  the  oppres.-iuns  that  are  done  under  thea. 

7.  then  I  reiiiriUMl,  unil  snv  vaniiy  under  the  a. 

5.  13.  an  evil  I  have  seen  under  the  a.  fi.  1.  |  10.  5. 

6.  12.  tell  what  shall  be  aflrr  him  under  the  a. 

8  9.  I  n;iplioil  my  heart  lo  every  "ork  under  that. 
!.■).  mirlh,Bmanh  ilh  noUiller  Ihtiig  i(nrfiTtA<a 
9.  6.  nor  any  portion  in  any  thing  under  tha  a. 
9.  all  days  which  he  hath  given  ih^c  under  the  » 
11.  I  saw  iiu'lerthes.  Ihnt  rare  is  not  lo  the  swift 
13.  this  wisdom  hnv<<  I  s  en  also  under  the  t. 
SUNDER. 
r.ia/.4fi.9.hc  breaks  the  bow,  culteth  the  tpeai  is • 
107.  14.  and  ho  bruks  iboir  bands  in  « 


SUP 

i'ial.  107. 16.  and  he  hath  cut  the  bars  of  iron  ia  s. 
Itt.  27.  0.  as  chalk  stones  that  are  beaten  ia  s. 
45.  2.  I  will  cut  in  s.  the  bars  of  iron 
•VoA.  1.  13.  for  now  I  will  burst  thy  bonds  in  s. 
.Luke  12.  46.  he  will  come  and  cut  him  in  a. 

SUNDEUED. 
J(?6  41.17.hi6BCales8lick  together,  they  cannot  be  s. 
P«ai.22.tl4.all  my  bones  are  5.  my  heart  is  like  wax 

SUWDRY. 
Heb.  1. 1.  God  who  at  s.  limes  spake  to  the  fathers 

SUMG. 

£:ra3. 11.  they  s.  together  by  course  in  praising  L. 

Isa.  2(>.  1.  in  that  day  shall  this  song  be  »'.  in  Judah 

Jitat.  26.  30.  wlieii  they  had  s.  a  hynin,  tliey  went 

out  into  the  mount  of  Olives,  Mark  14.26. 

Af  o.5.9.tliey  s.  a  new  song,  saynig,  thou  art  worthy 

14.3.  they  s.  as  it  were  a  new  sung  bet',  the  throne 

SUNK,  j3cUvely,  Passively. 

JVum.  11.12.  wlion  Moses  prayed  to  the  L.  the  fires. 

1  Sam.  17.  49.  that  the  stune  s.  into  his  forehead 

2  Kings  9.24.  and  Jchoram  s.  down  in  his  chariot 
Psal.i).l5.  heathen  are  s.  down  in  the  pit  they  made 
Jer.  38.  6.  ihey  let  him  down,  so  Jer.  s.  in  the  mire 

22.thy  feet  are  s.ia  the  mire,  they  are  turned  hack 
I^am.  2.  9.  her  gales  are  s.  into  the  ground 
^i:to2U.9.Eutycliusf.down  withslecp,aod  feildown 

SUP. 
/•a.  42.  t  H.  I  will  destroy  and  s.  up  at  once 
Obad.  1 16.  yea,  all  the  heathen  shall  drink  and  s.ap 
Hab.  1.  9.  their  faces  shall  s.  up  as  the  east  wind 
Luke  17.  8.  say,  make  ready  wherewiih  I  may  s. 
Hev.  3.  20.  I  will  £.  with  him,  and  he  with  me 
SUPPED. 

1  Car.  11.  2o.  he  took  the  cup,  when  he  had  s. 

SUPERFLUITY, 
/am.  1.21.  lay  apart  all  lillhlness,  s.  of  naughtiness 

SUPERFLUITIES. 
Amos  6.  t  1.  lie  on  beds  uf  ivory  and  abound  withs. 

SUPERFLUOUS. 
L.ev.  21.  18.  whatsoever  man  hath  any  thing  *. 
22.  2.t.  a  bullock,  or  lamb,  that  hath  uny  thing  s. 

2  Cor.  9.  1.  for  as  touching  the  ministering  to  the 

saints,  it  is  s.  for  me  to  write  to  you 
SUPERSCRIPTION. 
Il  was  a  custom  among  the  Romans  to  write  the 
crime  fur  which  any  man  suffered  death,  in  a 
table,  and  carry  it  before  him  to  execution ; 
and  as  of  other  kinds  of  death,  so  in  particular 
of  those  that  were  crucified.  IVhencc  appears 
the  propriety  of  all  these  expressions  in  the 
Evangelists,  i-zriyfix^if  ti);  anixg,  the  super- 
scription of  the  cause  of  his  crimes.     Mark  15. 

27.    H    ctiTix'j.TSvu)    Tijs    X£?«\>|,-    ■yiyfxlxjj.ivy^. 

Vie  charge,  or  cause  written   over  his   head, 
Mat.  27.  37.     And  simply  smyfx^ii,   super- 
scription,   Luke  23.  38.      And  TiTA.os,   title, 
.John.  19.  19. 
Mat.  22.  20.  Jesus  saith  unto  them,  whose  is  this 
image  and  s.7  Mark  \i.  IG.  /,uAc  20.  24. 
Mark  15. 26.  the  j.  of  his  accusation,  Luke  23.  38. 

SUPERSTITION. 
.^c{s25.19.buthad  que'-tj/'ns  ag.  him  of  theirowna. 

SUPER''  riTlOUS. 
ActsVl.'iZ.  I  perceive  .lat  in  ail  things  ye  are  too  s. 

f  >PPER. 
Jlfor*6.2I.Herod  or  .is  birth-d.made  as. to  his  lords 
Luke  14.  12.  wher,  thou  makest  a  dinner  or  s. 

16.  a  certain  men  made  a  great  s.  and  bade  many 

17.  and  sent  his  servant  at  s.  lime  to  say  to  them 
24.  none  of  those  were  bidden  shall  taste  of  my  s. 

22.20.  likewise  also  lliecupafiers.  8ayii)g,lhiscuj) 
John  12.2.  there  Ihey  made  Jesus  as. Martha  served 
13.  2.  and  s.  being  ended  ||  4.  Jesus  riseth  fjom  s. 
21.  20.  disciple  who  also  leaned  on  his  brejisl  at  s. 
1  Cor.  11.  2U.  this  is  not  to  eat  the  Lord's  s. 

21.  for  every  one  taketli  before  other  his  own  s 

Rev.Vi.^.  blessed  that  are  called  to  the  marriage*. 

17.  be  cried,  come  to  the  s.  of  the  great  God 

SUPPING. 

Hob.  1. 19-  thes.  up  of  their  faces  as  the  east  wind 

SUPPL.ANT. 
Jer.  9.  4.  for  cvcrv  hi  other  will  utterly  s. 

S'UPPL.\NTED. 
O'en.  27.  36.  for  he  haih  .».  me  these  two  timss 

SUPPL.\NTER. 
OcK.  27.  1 36.  he  said,  is  not  he  rightly  Darned  a  s. 

SUPPLE. 
Etek.lG.  4.  neither  wiist  washed  in  water  to  s.  thee 

SUPPLL\NTS. 
Z<yA.  3.  10.  my  s.  shall  bring  mine  oSering 

SUPPLICATION. 
1  Sam.  13.  12.  and  I  have  not  made  s.  to  iheLord 
1  KingsS.  28.  have  respect  to  his  s.  2  Chron.  6. 19. 
30.  hearken  thou  to  the  s.  45.  49.  2  Chron.  6.35. 
33.  and  make  ».  to  thee,  47.  2  Chron.  6.  24. 
52.that  thine  eyes  may  be  open  to«.of  thy  servant 
54.  had  made  end  of  praying  all  this  prayer  and  s. 
69.  these  my  words  wherewith  I  have  made  a. 
9.  3.  I  have  heard  thy  s.  that  thou  hast  made 
?  Chron.  6.  29.  what  s.  shall  be  made  of  aoy  man 
593 


sua 

2  Chron.  33. 13.  the  Lord  heard  Manasseh'e  s.  then 

he  knew  thai  the  Lord  he  was  God 

Esth.i.  8.  and  should  make  s.  to  him  for  her  people 

Job  8. 5.  and  wouldest  make  thy  s.  to  the  Alinigliiy 

9.  15.  but  1  would  nmke  my  s.  to  my  judge 
Ps.  6. 9.  the  L.  hath  heard  my  s.  receive  iny  prayer 

30.  8.  and  unto  the  Lord  1  made  my  a.  142.  1. 

55.  1.  give  ear,  and  hide  not  thyself  from  my  s. 

119.  170.  let  my  s.  come  before  ihee,  deliver  ine 
Isa.  45.  14.  tliey  shall  make  s.  to  thee,  saying 
Jer.  36.  7.  it  may  be  they  will  present  their  s.  to  Ld. 

37.  -20.  O  king,  let  my  s.  bo  accepted  before  thee 

38. 26. 1  presented  my  s.  bef.  the  king  not  to  return 

42.2.  let  our  s.be  accepted  bef.  tiiee  a  nd  pray  for  us 

9.  to  whom  ye  sent  me  to  present  your  s.  but.  him 

Dan.  6.  li.  then  these  men  Ibund  Uaiiiel  iiiakijig  s. 

9.  20.  while  I  was  presenting  my  s.  before  niy  Uod 
//us. 12.4.  he  wept  a«id  made  s.  unto  him, found  him 
Acts  1.14.  continued  with  one  accord  in  pray.  ands. 
£/>A.6.18.wilh  all  prayer  and  s.iii  spirit  lor  all  saints 
Phil.  4.  6.  but  in  every  thing  by  prayer  and  s. 

SUPPLICATIONS. 
2  Chr.  6.  21.  hearken  to  s.  of  Ihy  servant  and  people 

39.  then  hear  thou  their  prayer  and  their  s. 
Job  41.3.  will  Leviathan  make  many  s.  untolhee? 
Psal.  28. 2.  hear  voice  of  my  s.  when  I  cry,  140.  6. 
6.  he  hath  heard  voice  of  my  s.  31.  22.  |  116.  1. 

86.  6.  give  ear  and  attend  to  the  voice  of  my  s. 

130.  2.  let  thy  ears  be  altcntive  to  my  s.  143.  1. 
Jer.  3.  21.  weeping  and  s.  of  Israel  were  heard 

31. 9.  come  with  weep,  and  with  s. will  I  lead  them 
Dan.  9.  3. 1  set  my  face  to  seek  by  prayer  and  s. 

17.  hear  the  prayer  of  thy  servant  and  his  s. 

18.  we  do  not  present  our  s.  for  our  righteousness 
23.  at  the  beginning  of  thy  s.  the  command  caine 

Zcch.a.W  and  I  will  pour  the  Spirit  ofgrace  ands. 

1  Tm.  2.  1.  that  first  of  all,  s.  be  made  lor  all  men 
5.5.sheconlinuethiiis.  and  prayers  night  and  day 

Heb.  5.  7.  when  he  had  oflered  up  prayers  and  s. 

SUPPLY,  Hubstantive. 
2Cur.8  14. that  your  abundance  may  be  as.  for  their 
want,  that  their  abundance  a  ».  for  your  want 
PAi7.1.19.lhro'  prayer  and  the  s.of  the  Spir.  of  Jesus 

SUPPLY,  Ferb. 
PAi7.2.30.  not  regarding  his  life  to  s.  lack  of  service 
4.  19.  but  inyG.  shall  .5.  all  your  need  by  Chr.Jesus 

SUPPLIED. 

lCor.l6. 17.  what  lacking  on  your  part,  they  haves. 

2C«r.  11.9.  what  was  lacking  lo  me,  the  brethren  s. 

SUPPLIETH. 

2  Cor.  9.  12.  not  only  s.  the  want  of  the  saints 
Eph.  4. 16.  coinjiacled  by  that  which  e^■ery  joint  s. 

SUPPORT,  ED. 
Gen.  27.  t37.  with  corn  and  wine  have  I  s.  him 
Psal.  20.  t  2.  the  Lord  s.  thee  out  of  Zioii 
Acts  20.35.  ye  ought  to  ?.ihe  weak,  1  Thess.5. 14. 

SUPPOSE. 
2  Sam.  13. 32.  lei  not  iny  lord  s.  that  they  have  slain 
L^tke  7.  43.  I  s.  that  he  to  whom  he  forgave  most 
12. 51.  s.  ye  that  I  am  come  to  give  jieace  on  fearth 
13.  2.  s.  ye  that  these  Galileans  were  sinners 
Juhti  21. 25.  I  s.  the  world  could  not  contain  books 
Acts  2.  15.  for  these  are  nol  drunken,  as  ye  s. 
1  Cor.  7.  26.  I  s.  thai  this  is  good  for  the  present 
2Cur.U.5.  Is.I  was  nut  behind  ihechiefest  apf>stlL'S 
Heb.  10.  29.  of  how  much  sorer  punishment  s.  ye 
1  Pet.  5. 12.  by  Sylvanus,  a  faithful  brother,  as  I  s. 

SUPPOSED. 
Mat.iO.  10.  they  s.  they  should  have  received  more 
MarkG.id.  they  s.  it  had  been  a  spirit,  and  cried  oul 
I^uke  3.  23.  Jesus  being,  as  was  s.  the  son  of  Joseph 

24.  37.  terrified  and  s.  lliat  they  had  seen  a  spirit 
Acts  7.25. for  he  s.his  brethren  wuuld  have  underst. 

2J  .29. whom  they  s.lhalPuuI  had  brought  totemple 

25.18.  brought  none  accusal,  of  such  things  as  I  s. 

PAj^.2.25.  ls.it  necess.  to  send  toyouEpapliroditus 

SUPPOSING. 
/^7(Ac2.44.  they  s.  him  to  have  been  in  the  company 
John  20.  15.  she  s.  him  to  be  gardener,  saith  lo  him 
Acts  14.19.  who  drew  Paul  oul,  s.  he  had  been  dead 
16.  27.  keeper  s.  that  the  prisoners  had  been  fled 
27.  13.  s.  that  they  had  obtained  their  purpose 
Phil.  1.  16.  s.  lo  add  affliction  to  my  bonds 
1  Tjm.6.5.inen  of  corrupt  minds,  s.gain  is  godliness 

SUPREME. 
1  Pet.  2. 13.  submit,  whether  it  be  to  the  king  as  s. 

SURE. 
(7cn.23.17.  borders,  field,  and  cave  were  mades.  20. 
F.iod.  3.  19.  I  am  s.  the  king  will  not  let  you  go 
J^um.  32.  23.  and  be  s.  your  sin  will  find  you  out 
Deut.  12. 23.  only  be  s.  Ihat  thou  eat  not  the  blood 

1  Sam.  2.  35.  and  I  will  build  liim  a  s.  house 

20.  7.  then  be  s.  that  evil  is  determined  by  him     , 

25.  28.  for  the  Lord  will  make  my  lord  a  s.  house 

2  Sam.  1. 10.  because  I  was  s.  that  he  could  not  live 
23.5.with  mecovenantordcred  in  all  things  ands. 

1  Kings  11.  38.  Ihat  I  will  build  thee  a  s.  house 
F.zra  9. 1 8.  and  to  give  us  a  constant  and  s.  abode 
.V>A.  9.  38.  we  make  a  s.  covenant,  and  write  it 
ll.t23.  that  a  s.uidinance  should  be  for  the  singers 
4U 


SLR 

Job  24.  22.  he  riselh  up,  and  no  man  is  s.  of  life 
Psa/.19.7.  the  tesiimony  oi  tliuL.  iss.  making  wiM 

93.  5.  thy  testimonies  are  very  s.  O  Lord 

111.  7.  all  his  coiiimandmenls  are  s. 
Prov.  6.  3.  humble  thyself  and  make  s.  thy  friend 

11.  15.  and  he  that  halelli  suretiship,  is  s. 

18.  to  him  Bowcth  righteousness  shall  be  s. reward 
/sa.2i.23. 1  will  fasten  him  as  a  nail  in  as.place,25. 

28.  16.  behold,  I  lay  in  Zion  for  as.  foundation 
32.  18.  my  j>eople  shall  dwell  in  s.  dwellings 
33. 16.  bread  shall  be  given  him,  waters  shall  be  s. 
55.  3.  even  the  s.  mercies  of  David,  Acts  13.  34. 

Jer.  15.  t  13.  thou  be  to  me  as  waters  that  be  not «.? 

/Jan.  2.  45.  and  the  inlerpretation  thereof «. 
4.  26.  thy  kingdom  shall  be  s.  unto  thee 

Mat.  27.  64.  that  the  sepulchre  be  made  s.  66. 
65.  he  said,  go  your  way,  make  itass.as  you  can 

Luke  lO.U.bes.oflhis  thekingdomof  God  is  come 

./oAh  6.69.  we  believe  and  ares,  that  thou  art  Christ 
16.  30.  now  we  are  s.  that  ihou  knowesl  all  thinga 

A(H«.2.2.  we  ares,  that  ihe  judgment  ol  God  is  true 
4. 16.  to  end  the  promise  might  he  s.  to  all  the  seed 
15.  29.  I  am  s.  that  when  1  come  unto  you 

2  7'i7n.  2.  19.  the  foundation  of  God  slandelh  s. 

Heb.  6. 19.  hope  we  have  as  anchor  s.  and  stedfast 

2  Pet.l.  10.  give  all  diligence  lo  make  your  calling  s. 

19.  we  have  also  a  more  s.  word  of  prophecy 

SURELY. 
Gcn.2.]7.inday  thou  eatesl  lhereof,thou  shalts.die 
3. 4.  serpent  said  lo  the  woman,  ye  shall  not  s.  die 
9.  5.  and  s.  your  blood  of  your  lives  will  I  require 

18.  18.  Abraham  shall  s.  become  a  great  natioa 

20.  7.  if  thou  restore  her  nut,  thou  shall  s.  die 
11.  s.  the  fear  of  God  is  nol  in  this  place 

28.1G.Jacobsaid,s.L.isin  this  place,I  knew  it  not 

22.  I  will  s.  give  the  tenth  unio  thee 
29.l4.Labanoaid,s.tliou  art  my  bone  and  my  flesh 

32.  s.  the  Lord  hath  looked  upon  my  aihiclioD 

30.  16.  come  in  unto  me,  for  s.  I  have  hired  thee 

31.  42.  s.  thou  hadst  sent  me  away  now  empty 

32.  12.  and  thou  saidst,  I  will  s.  do  thee  good 
42.16.  s.  ye  are  spies  ||  44.28.  s.  he  is  torn  in  pieces 
43.  10.  s.  now  we  had  returned  this  second  time 
46.  4.  and  I  will  also  s.  bring  thee  up  again 

50. 24.  I  die,  God  will  s.  visit  you, 25.  Exod.  13.19. 
Exod.  2.  14.  Moses  said,  s.  this  thing  is  known 

3.  7.  I  have  s.  seen  the  affliction  of  Israel,  16. 

4.  25.  she  said,  s.  a  bloody  husband  an  thou  to  me 
11.  1.  he  shall  s.  thrust  you  out  hence  altogether 
18. 18.  Ihou  will  s.wear  away,  thou  and  this  people 

19.  13.  but  he  shall  s.  be  stoUL-d,  or  shot  through 

21.  20.  if  he  die,  he  shall  be  s.  punished,  22. 

28.  if  an  ox  gore,  then  the  o.\  shall  be  s.  stoned 
36.  he  shall  s.  pay  ox  for  ox,  dead  shall  be  his  own 

22.6.  he  that  kindleth  fire  shall  s.  make  restitution 

14.  if  it  be  hurt  or  die,  he  shall  s.  make  it  good 
16.  if  lie  with  her,  shall  s.cndow  her  lobe  his  wife 

23.  if  they  cry  at  all  lo  me,  I  will  s.  hear  their  cry 
23.  4.  thou  shall  s.  bring  ii  back  to  him  again 

5.  if  thou  see,  thou  shall  s.  help  him 

SS.ifserve  their  gods,will  s.be  snare,  IKivgs  11.2. 

40. 15.  anointing  shall  s.  be  an  everlast.  priesthood 

JiTum.  13.27.  and  s.  ilflowelh  with  milk  and  honey 

14. 23.  s.  they  shall  not  see  the  land  which  I  sware 

35.  I  will  s.  do  it  to  all  this  evil  congregation 

18.  15.  the  first-born  of  man  shnit  thou  s  redeem 

22. 33.  s.  now  I  had  slain  thee,  and  saved  her  alive 

23.  23.  s.  there  is  no  eiichantmcnl  against  Jacob 

26.65.Ld.  had  said,  they  shall  s.  die  in  the  wildero. 

27.7.  thou  shalts.give  them  a  possession  of  inherit. 
32.  II.  s.  none  from  twenty  years  old  and  upward, 

shall  see  the  land  which  I  sware  unto 
Abraham,  Deut.  1.  35. 
Deut.  4.  6.  s.  this  great  nation  is  a  wise  people 
8. 19. 1  testify  this  day  that  ye  shall  s.perisli,  30.18. 
13.  9.  but  Ihou  shall  s.  kill  the  idolater 

15.  thou  shall  s.  smite  the  inhabitants  of  thatcity 

15.  8.  ihou  shall  s.  lend  him  sufficient  for  his  need 
10.  shall  s.  give  thy  poor  brother  not  to  be  grieved 

16.  15.  thou  shall  s.  rejoice  in  Ihe  feast  of  tabern. 

22.  4.  thou  shalt  s.  help  him  to  lift  them  up  again 

23.  21.  the  Lord  will  s.  require  thy  vow  of  tlwe 
31.  18.  and  I  will  s.  hide  my  face  in  that  day 

Josh.  14.  9.  s.  the  land  shall  be  thine  inheritance 
Judg.  3.  24.  they  said,  s.  he  covercth  his  feet 
4.  9.  and  Deborah  said,  I  will  s.  go  with  Ihee 
6. 16.  the  Ld.  said  to  Gideon,  s.  I  will  be  with  thee 
11.31.cometh  forthlomeetme,slialls.  betheLd.'s 
15. 13.  we  will  bind,  but  s.  we  will  not  kill  Ihoe 
20.39.  s.  they  aresmitlen  down  before  us  as  in  first 
1  !>am.  9.  6.  all  that  he  saith  comelh  s.  to  pass 
15.  32.  Agag  sairf,  i'.  the  bitterness  of  death  is  past 

17.  25.  they  said,  s.  lo  defy  Israel  is  he  come  up 
20.  26.  for  Saul  thought,  s.  he  is  not  clean 

22.  22.  I  knew  it  that  Doeg  would  s.  tell  Saul 

24.  20.  I  know  well  that  thou  shall  ».  be  king 

25.  21.  s.  in  vain  have  I  kept  all  this  fellow  hath 
34.  s.  there  had  not  been  left  to  Nabal  any 

28. 2.  s.  thou  shalt  know  what  tby  servant  can  do 
29.  6.  s.  as  the  Lord  liveth,  thou  bast  been  upright 


SUR 

ISam  30.8.  puriue,  for  thou  shall  s.  overtake  them 

2  Sam.  2.27.  s.  the  people  had  gone  up  every  one 

9.7. 1  wilU.showlhee  kiiidDosM  (orJonathMirs  sake 

11.  23.  he  said,  s.  the  men  prevailed  against  us 

15.  21.  ».  where  the  king  shall  be,  there  will  I  be 
18.  2.  I  will  i.  go  forth  with  you  myselt'alno 

20. 18.  Hhe  spake,  they  shalU.  ask  couobcI  at  Abel 
24.  24.  nay,  but  I  will  s.  buy  it  of  thee  at  a  price 

1  Kings  S.  13. 1  have  3.  built  thee  house  to  dwell  in 
11.  11.  I  will  3.  rend  the  kingdom  from  thee 
13.32.  saying  against  the  altarthall  s.  come  to  pass 
18.  15.  i  will  3.  shew  myself  unto  him  to-day 
20.  23.  and  s.  wo  shall  be  stronger  than  they,  25. 

22.  32.  they  said,  s.  it  is  the  king  of  Israel 

2  Kings  3.  14.  s.  were  it  not  I  regard  Jehoshaphat 

23.  they  said,  this  is  blood,  the  kings  are  s.  slain 
5.  11.  behold,  I  thought,  he  will «.  come  out  to  nie 
8.  14.  he  told  nie  that  thou  shouldest  «.  recover 
9.26.5. 1  have  seen  yesterday  the  blood  of  Naboth 
18.  30.  the  Lord  will  s.  deliver  us,  Jsa.  36.  15. 

23.  22.  s.  there  was  not  holden  such  a  passover 
24.3. «.  at  command  of  the  Ld.  came  this  on  Judah 

f'slk.  6. 13.  not  prevail,  but  shalt  *.  fall  before  him 
Joi  8.6.if  pure  and  upright,  s.would  awake  for  thee 

13.  3.  «.  I  would  speak  to  the  Almighty 

10.  he  will  s.  reprove  you,  if  ye  accept  persons 

14.  18.  s.  the  mountain  falling  cometh  to  nought 

18.  21.  s.  such  are  the  d  sellings  of  the  wicked 
20.  2U.  £.  he  shall  not  fuel  quietness  in  his  bully 

28.  1. «.  there  is  a  vein  for  the  silver,  place  for  gold 
31.  3€.  s.  take  it  upon  my  shoulder,  and  bind  it 
33.  8.  s.  thou  hast  spoken  in  my  hearing 
34.12.yea,».  G.will  notdo  wickedly,  nor  Almighty 
3.5.  13.  8.  God  will  not  hear  vanity  nor  regard  it 

Psal.  32.  f>.  s.  in  the  floods  they  shall  not  come  nigh 

39.  G.  s.  every  man  walketh  in  a  vain  shew 

11.  his  beauty  consumes,  s.  every  man  is  vanity 
73.  18.  s.  thou  didst  set  them  in  slippery  places 

76.  10.  s.  the  wrath  of  man  shall  praise  thee 

77.  11.  s.  I  will  remember  thy  wonders  of  old 
85.  9.  s.  his  salvation  in  nigh  them  that  fear  him 
91.  3.  s.  he  shall  deliver  thee  from  snare  of  fowler 
112.  6.  s.  be  shall  not  bo  moved  for  ever 

131. 2.s.have  behaved  and  quieted  myselfas  achild 
132.  3.  s.  I  will  not  come  into  my  house 

139.  19.  s.  thou  wilt  slay  the  wicked,  O  God 

140.  13.  s.  riehleous  shall  give  thanks  to  thy  name 
Prov.l.n.s.in  vain  the  lie.  is  spread  insight  of  bird 

3-  34.  s. scorneth  the  scorners,  but  giveth  grace  to 
10.  9.  he  that  walketh  uprighlly,  walketh  s. 
22.16.  that  giveth  to  the  rich,  shall  *-.  come  to  want 
23.18.  i.thereis  an  end  ||  30.2.  s.  I  am  more  brutish 
30.  33.  s.  the  churn,  of  milk  bringeth  forth  butter 
Ke£^4.16..f.thi6  is  also  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit 

7.  7.  s.  oppression  maketh  a  wise  man  mad 

8.  12.  X.  it  shall  bo  well  with  them  that  leur  God 
10.11. 5.  (he  serpent  will  hite  without  enchantment 

fsa.l.O.  will  not  believe, s.  ye  shall  not  he  eslahlish. 

14.24.  s.  us  I  have  thought  so  shall  it  come  to  pass 

IG.  7.  for  the  foundaliuns  of  Kir-hares<tlli  ye  sliall 

mourn,  s.  the^  are  stricken 

19.  11.  s.  the  princes  of  Zoan  are  fools 

22.14  s.  this  iniquity  shall  not  bo  purged  from  you 

17.  behold,  the  Lord  will  s.  cover  thee 

18.  he  will  3.  violently  turn  and  toss  thee  like  ball 

29.  16.  3.  your  turning  of  things  upside  down 

40.  7.  the  grass  withcreth,  s.  the  people  is  grass 
45.  14.  s.  God  is  in  thee,  and  there  is  none  else 

24.  3.  in  the  L.  have  I  righteousness  and  strength 
49.  4.  yet  s.  my  judgment  is  with  the  Lord 
53.4.».hc  hath  borne  our  griefs.and  carried  oiirsor. 
54.  15.  they  shall  s.  gather  together,  but  not  by  me 
60.9. s.  the  isles  shall  wait  for  me,shi|>8ofTarBliisli 
62.  8  ».  I  will  no  more  give  thy  corn  to  ihyenemies 
63.8.  h«8ai(l,».  they  are  my  people,  childr.  not  lie 

Jer.'i.  35.  thousaycsts.  his  anger  sh;i II  turn  from  me 
3.20.  X.  as  a  wife  treacherously  depart,  from  hush. 
4.  10.  ».  thou  hast  greatly  deceivid  this  people 
5.2. «. they  swear  falselyll ''..  l8aid,s.lhc8earepoor 
8.  13.  I  will  3.  CfiiiHUme  them,  sailh  the  Ijord 

16.  19.  3.  our  fathers  have  inherited  lies,  vanity 
22.  6.  yrl  «.  I  will  make  Ihoe  a  «ilderni"ss 

22.  .«.  timii  shiill  li.'  asliained  for  tliy  wi(-k<'dness 

24.  8.  3.  sailh  the  Lord,  so  will  I  give  Zedekiah 
06. IS.ye  shall  ».brine  innocent  blood  on  yourselves 
3L  18.  have  3.  heard  Ephraim  bemoaning  himself 

19.  3.  after  that  I  was  turned,  I  p'p-nled 

20.  therefiri- 1  will.?.  Imve  mercy  mi  liitn, sailh  I,. 
34.  3.  but  thou  shall  3.  be  taken  and  delivered 
M.  16.  we  will  3.  tell  thr  king  of  all  these  words 

37.  9.  the  Chaldeans  shill  .>r.  depart  from  us 

38.  3.  this  cily  shall  3.  ho  given  to  the  king  of  Bab. 

39.  18.  I  will  .1.  deliver  thee,  thou  shnlt  not  fall 
44.  25.  wc  will  .«•  piTform  our  vows  that  we  vowed 

29.  that  my  words  shall  ».  stand  ag.  you  for  evil 
46.  18.  3.  as  rarmcl  by  the  sea,  ko  shall  be  come 
49.12.  thou  shall  not  so  unpunished,  hiii  s.  drink  it 

20.  «.the  least  of  Ihe  flock  shall  dm  w  them,  50. 45. 
51.  14.  snyin;,  3.  I  will  fill  theo  with  men 

5C.  for  the  L.  God  cfrecompences  shall  3.  requite 
694 


SUR 

Eick.  3. 21.  he  shall  s.  live,  becnuso  he  1  warn<y], 
18.  9,  17,  19,  21,  28.  |  3.3.  13,  15,  16. 
5.  11.  3.  because  thou  hast  defiled  my  sanctuary 
17.  16.  8.  in  the  place  where  the  king  dwelleth 
20.  33.  s.  with  a  mighty  hand  will  I  rule  over  you 

31. 11.  he  shall  ff.  deal  with  him,  I  have  driven  him 

33.  27.  s.  they  in  the  wastes  shall  fall  by  the  sword 

34.  8.  as  1  live,  3.  because  my  flock  became  a  prey 
3l).  5.  s.  in  the  fire  of  my  jealousy  have  I  spoken 

7.  s.  the  heathen,  they  stiall  bear  their  shame 
38.  19. ».  in  that  day  there  shall  be  a  great  shaking 

//os.5.9.  Ihavemade  known  that  which  shall  s.  be 
12.  11.  s.  they  are  vanity,  they  sacrifice  bullocks 

.4mos3. 7.  «.  theL.  will  do  nothing,  but  he  reveals 
5.5.  for  Gilgal  shall.?,  go  into  captivity,  and  Bethel 

7.  11.  Israel  shall  «.  be  led  away  captive,  17. 

8.  7.  s.  I  will  never  forget  any  of  their  works 
Mic.  2. 12. 1  will  s.  assemble,  O  Jacob,  all  of  thee,  I 

will  s.  gather  remnant  of  Isr.  as  sheep  of  Bozrah 
Hah.  2.  3.  because  it  will  s.  come,  it  will  not  tarry 
Zeph.  2.  9.  as  I  live,  s.  Moab  shall  be  as  Sodom 

3.  7.  s.  thou  wilt  feat  me,  and  receive  instruction 
Mat.  2G.  73.  s.  thou  art  one  of  them,  Mark  14.  70. 
XuAel.l.thin^s  which  are  most*. believed  amongus 

4.  23.  ye  will  s.  say  unto  me  this  proverb,  physi- 

cian heal  thyself 
John  17. 8.  have  known.?. that  I  came  out  from  thee 
ffcb.  6.  14.  saying,  s.  blessing,  I  will  bless  thee 
/ie».22.20.6ailh,s.I  come  quick ly , even  80  comeL.  J. 
See  Die. 
SITRELY  be  put  to  death. 
Gen.  26.  1 1.  touclieth  this  man,  shall .?.  beput  to  d. 
F.jod.  19. 12.  touchelh  mount,  shall  s.  be  put  to  d. 

21. 12.  he  that  killeth  a  man,  shall  .?.  be  put  to  d. 

15.  he  that  smitelh  his  father,  shall  5.  be  put  to  d. 

16.  he  that  stcaleth  a  man  shall  s.  be  put  to  d. 
n.that  curseth  his  father  uiiall  s.p.to  d.  /,et).20.9. 

22.  19.  whosoever  lieth  with  a  beast,  shall  «.  be 

put  to  death,  Leo.  20.  15,  16. 

31.  14.  thatdcfileth  the  sabbath, *-.*(;;)«£  to  <l.  15. 

/>ei).  20. 2.  giveth  his  seed  to  Moloch,  s.  be  put  to  d. 

10.  adulterer  and  adulteress  shall  s.  be  put  to  d. 

11.  lieth  with  father's  wife,  both  shall  s.bep.to  d. 

12.  lie  with  hisdaughl.-in-law,botli^\  beput  tod. 

13.  if  a  man  lie  with  mankind,  both  s.4e  put  to  d. 
24.  16.  he  that  hlasphomeih,  shall  s.  beput  to  d. 

17.  and  he  that  killeth  any  man,  shall  s.  beput 

to  death,  ^Tum.  35.  16,  17,  18,  21,  31. 
27.  29.  not  be  redeemed,  but  shall  s.  be  put  to  d. 

.Judg.  21.  5.  who  came  not  up,  shall  .«.  be  put  to  d. 

Jer.  ;18.  15.  wilt  thou  not  s.  put  me  to  death? 
SURETY 

Is  one  who  undertakes  to  pay  another  man's  debt, 
in  case  the  principal  delitur,  either  through  un- 
faithfulness or  poverty  should  prove  insolvent. 
ft  was  an  ancient  custom  in  .luretiship  for 
the  surely  to  give  his  hand  to,  or  strike  hands 
with  the  creditor,  thereby  obliging  himself  to 
the  payment  of  the  debt,  in  case  of  the  insol- 
oenr.y  of  the  present  debtor.  Thus  it  is  said 
in  Job  17.  3,  Who  is  he  that  will  strike  hands 
with  me  ?  jfnd  in  Prov.  6. 1,  2,  My  son,  if  thou 
ho  surety  for  thy  friend;  if  thou  hast  stricken 
thy  hand  with  a  stranger ;  thou  art  snared  with 
the  words  of  thy  mouth.  Solomoii  in  this  pas- 
sage does  not  condemn  sureliship,  which  itt 
sotne  cases  is  not  only  laxcful,  but  even  as  an 
act  nf  justice,  of  prudence,  and  charity  ;  thus 
Judah  became  surely  to  his  father  for  his  bro- 
ther Henjamin,  Gen.  42.  37.  |  44.  32.  and  Paul 
to  Philemon  for  (■>nf.'!imi/.'!,Pliilein.  18, 19.  Solo- 
mon only  forbids  his  disciple  to  become  surety 
ra.'ihly,  without  covsidcring  for  whom,  or  how 
far  he  does  oblige  himself,  or  how  he  could  dis 
charge  the  debt,  if  oceasiim  should  require  it. 

In  Ikl).  7.  22,  .lesus  Christ  is  called  the  surity 
of  a  b"tler  testament.  .V171.5  nre  by  analogy 
called  debts:  Fur  as  a  debt  obliges  the  dibtor 
to  payment,  so  sin  doth  the  sinner  to  puni.ih 
ment.  Christ,  according  to  the  covenant  of 
redemption,  or  agreement  brtireen  the  Father 
and  him,  interposrd  n.s' wwr  surely  ;  and  enter- 
ing into  this  reliitinn,  he  sustained  the  persons 
of  sinners  (fur  in  the  estimate  of  the  law,  thi 
surely  and  diditor  nre  hut  one  person)  and 
being  judiciallti  one  irith  them,  areording  to 
the  order  of  justice,  he  was  liable  to  their 
punishment.  For  though  the  displeasure  of 
Uod  was  primnrihj  and  directly  against  the 
3inner,  yet  the  effects  of  it  fell  upon  Christ, 
who  undertook  fir  him.  ,1nd  according  to  this 
undertaking,  Christ  as  our  surety,  futjtll'd 
the  preceptive  part  of  thr  moral  law,  by  Ih 
innoeeney  and  holiness  of  his  life;  anil  he 
underwent  the  penalty  of  the  law  when  he  of 
fered  up  himself  n  sacrifice  to  satisfy  divine 
justice,  and  rreoncile  us  to  Gnd.  Jlnd  in  eon 
sri/urnce  of  the  atonement  made  by  this  sacri- 
fice, the  f/iily  Spirit  is  given,  to  enable  man  to 
perform  what  is  required  of  him  in  the  gospel; 

\ 


SWA 

nameiy,  to  repent,  to  believe,  and  obey  the  R^ 
deemer,  and  wholly  to  rely  upon  his  sacr\fict 
for  obtaining  the  favour  of  Uod;  and  Christ, 
by  his  intercession,  secures  to  believers  all  ths 
blessing-i  of  God's  covenant  for  time  and  eter- 
nity.    To  which  the  Psalmist  alludes,  Psalm 
119.  122,  Be  surety  for  thy  servant  for  good; 
J)o  tliou  undertake  and  plead  my  cause  against 
all  mine  enemies,  as  a  surety  rescues  the  poor 
persecuted  dibtor  from  the  hands  of  a  severe 
and  merciless  creditor. 
Gen.4'3.9. 1  will  be  s.  for  him,  sbalt  require  hira  of 
44.  32.  for  I  by  servant  became  ^.  for  the  lad 
.lob  17.  3.  lay  down  now,  put  me  in  a  s.  with  thee 
Psal.  119.  122.  be  s.  for  thy  servant  for  good 
Prov.  6.  1.  my  son,  if  thou  be  s.  for  thy  friend 

11.  15.  he  that  is  5.  for  a  stranger  shall  smart  for  it 

17.  18.  and  becometh  s.  in  presence  of  his  friend 
20. 16.  his  garment  I  hat  is  «.  for  a  stranger,  27. 13. 

Hcb.  7. 22.  was  Jesus  made  s.  of  a  better  testament 

SURETIES. 
Prov.  22.  26.  be  not  one  of  them  that  are  3.  for  debts 

0/ a  SURETY, 
frfn. 15.13.  know  of  as.  thy  seed  shall  be  a  stranger 

18.  13.  sliall  I  of  a  s.  bear  a  child,  who  am  old  1 
26.9.Abiineleclisaid,  behold,  o/as.she  is  thy  wife 

Jlcts  12.11. 1  know  0/ (I.e.  the  Ld.hathsenthii  angel 

SURETISHIP. 
Ptbv.  U.  15.  and  he  ihat  hateih  s.  is  sure 

SURFEITING. 
At4A:e21.34.  lest  your  lieavis  be  overcharged  with  s. 

SURMISINGS. 

ITim.  6.  4.  whereof  cometh  envy,  strife,  evil  s. 

SURNAME,  .s>f  SiRN.vME. 

SUKPLUSAt.E. 

F.zod.  26.  t  13.  a  ciibil  on  the  other  side  in  the  s. 

SURPRISED. 
Isa.  33. 14.  sinners  afraid,  tearfulness  3.  hypocritei 
./er.iS.  41.  Kerioth  is  taken,  tlio  strong  holds  are*. 
51.  41.  how  is  the  praise  of  the  whole  earth  s.! 

SUSPENSE. 
Luke  3.  tI5.  as  people  were  in  s.  and  all  men  mused 

12.  t29.seek  not  what  shall  eat,Iive  not  in  careful  3. 

SUSTAIN. 
l/ir!nn'.'!l7.9.commanded  a  widow  woman  to  f.thee 
JVV/t.  it.  21.  yea,  forty  yeais  didst  thou  s.  them 
Ps.  55. 22.  cast  thy  burden  on  Lord,  he  shall  *•. thee 
ProB.  18. 14.  the  spirit  of  a  man  wills,  his  infirmity 

SUSTAINED. 
fi'e7i.27.  37.  and  with  corn  and  wine  have  I  s.  him 
Psal.  3.  5.  I  awaked,  for  the  Lord  s  me 
Isa.  59.  16.  and  his  righteousness,  it  s.  him 

SUSTENANCE. 
.Tudg.6. 4.  Midianitcs  left  no  s.  for  Israel,  nor  shnep 
2.Sani.  19.  32.  Barzillni  had  provided  the  king  of  ». 
Jlcts  7.1 1,  dearth  in  Canaan,  our  fathers  found  no#. 

SWADDLED. 

Lam.  2.t20.  women  eat  children  s.  with  their  liandi 

22.  those  that  I  have  *.  and  brought  up,  hath 

mine  enemy  consumed 

Ezek.  16.  4.  thou  wast  not  salted  at  all  nor  s.  at  all 

SWADDLING. 
.lob  38.  9.  I  made  thick  darkness  a  s.  band  for  it 
Luke  2.  7.  and  she  wrnpped  him  in  s.  clothes,  12. 

SWALLOW, 
In  Hebrew,  Sis,  is  a  plaintive  bird,  and  a  bird 
of  passage.  Mintion  is  made  of  the  swallow 
IH  Isa.  2^.  14,  Like  a  crane  or  a  smallow,  so 
did  I  chatter.  My  complaint  and  cry  were  like 
to  the  noise  of  a  swallow,  yufct  and  frequent ; 
and  like  that  of  a  crane,  loud  and  frightfuL 
Jlnd  in  Jer.  8.  7,  The  stoik  in  the  heaven  know- 
eth  her  appointed  times,  and  the  turtle,  and  the 
crcne,  and  the  stcallow,  observe  the  time  of 
I  heir  coming. 
The  swallow  is  of  a  black  colour,  with  some  spots 
of  a  dirty  black  under  her  belly  ;  its  flight  i« 
very  unequal,  and  its  sight  is  very  quick.  It 
appears  in  spring  and  summer,  and  goes  away 
in  autumn.  It  is  thought  that  it  passes  tht 
sea,  and  withdraws  into  hotter  climates,  where 
it  either  hides  itsitf  in  holes  in  the  earth,  or 
even  in  marshts,  and  under  the  water,  wherein 
somrtime3  great  lumps  of  swallows  hare  been 
fished  up,  filed  tnc  to  another  by  the  claws  and 
beak;  and  when  they  are  laid  in  a  warm  place, 
they  move  and  recover,  though  before  they 
seemed  to  be  dead.  It  is  called  Chelldon  in 
Greek,  whence  comes  the  name  of  the  herb  Che- 
lidon,  in  Knglish,  Celandine,  or  swallow  wort, 
because  it  is  pretended,  that  with  this  herb  tht 
swallow  opens  the  eyes  of  her  young  ones,tho}igk 
they  should  even  be  blinded  on  purpose.  It  is 
sriid  that  the  flesh  of  thc.ic  birdi,  burnt  to  ashes, 
is  txcellent  for  distempers  of  the  eyes.  The 
swallotv  is  said  to  breed  twice  a  year,  ones  in 
thcclimate  to  which  she  Iransjiorls  herself  white 
our  winter  lasts  :  and  again  in  those  sir  months 
shecontinues  in  this  country.  Their  chief  food 
are  Ihcjlics  that  they  catch  as  they  fly.     T^li 


SWA 

tornttifinly  make  their  vest  in  chmmyii,  and 
every  year  return  to  the  same  place.  Their  nestn 
arc  made  of  clay,  mingled  with  bits  of  straw 
or  chaff:  and  it  issaid,  that  when  they  want  clay 
or  mud,  they  plunge  themselves  in  water,  then 
rolling  in  the  dust,  make  clay  for  themselves. 
Psal.  84.  3.  the  s.  lialh  found  a  nest  for  herself 
Prov.^G.i.  as  the  s.  by  flying,  so  the  curse  causeless 
Isa.  38.  14.  like  a  crane  or  a  s.  so  did  I  chatter 
JerS.l.  crane  and  s.  observed  time  of  their  coming 

SWALLOW,  Verb. 
J\,\im.  IC.  30.  if  the  earth  open  and  s.  them  up 
34.  for  lliey  said,  lest  the  earth  s.  us  up  also 
5  f^am.  20. 19.  why  wilt  thou  s.  up  inheritance  of  L. 
20.  far  be  it  from  me,  that  I  should  s.  up  ordest. 
7i>i2.t3.thou  movcdst  me  to.s.him  up  without  cause 
7.  1!).  nor  let  me  alone  till  I  s.  down  my  spittle 
20.  18.  he  shall  restore,  and  not  s.  it  down 
P-^nl.  21.9.  the  Lord  shall  s.  them  up  in  his  wrath 
56. 1.  be  merciful  to  ine,  O  O.  man  would  s.  me  up 
2.  mine  enemies  would  daily  s.  me  up 
57.3.from  the  reproach  of  him  that  would  s.  me  up 
69.  15.  neither  let  the  deep  ».  me  up 
Prov.  1.  12.  let  us  s.  them  up  alive  as  the  grave 
Eccl.  10.  12.  but  thelipsof  afool  wilK«.  up  himself 
Isa.  3.tl2.  they  lead  me,  s.  up  the  way  of  thy  paths 
10.  t  3.  iind  I  will  s.  up  the  counsel  thereof 
2.5.  t  "•  he  will  s.  up  the  face  of  the  covering 
8.  will «.  up  death  in  victory,  Ld.  will  wipe  away 
42.  t  14.  I  will  destroy  and  s.  up  at  once 
Hos.  8.  7.  if  so  be  it  yield,  the  strangers  shall  s.  it  up 
JImos  8.  4.  hear  this,  O  ye  that  .«.  up  the  needy 
Obad.  16.  they  shall  drink,  and  they  shall  s.  down 
Jonah  1.17.  the  Lord  prepared  a  fish  tos.  up  Jonah 
Jlfai.23.24. guides  who  strain  at  a  gnat,and  s.camel 

SWALLOWEh. 
Exod.  7.  12.  but  Aaron's  rod  s.  up  their  rods 

15.12.stretchedst  thy  right  hand,  the  earths,  them 
J^um.  1(3.  32.  earth  opened  ands.  2fi.  10.  Deut.W.  6. 
2  .Sum.  17.  16.  but  pass  over,  lest  the  king  be  s.  up 
Jnh  6.3.  heav.  than  sand,  theref.  my  words  are  s.  up 
20.  l."*.  he  hath  s.  down  riches,  he  shall  vomit  them 
37  20.  if  a  man  s|)eak,  surely  he  shall  be  .'.  up 
Psal.  35.  25.  let  them  not  say,  we  have  s.  him  up 

106.  17.  the  earth  opened  and  5.  up  Dathan 

107.  t  27.  staffger,  and  all  their  wi.=dom  is  s.  up 
124.  3.  then  Ibey  had  .s.  us  up  quick 

f<a.  9.  t  Ifi.  they  that  are  led  of  them  are  s.  up 
28. 7.  the  priest  and  the  prophet  are  s.  up  of  wine 

49.  19.  they  that  s.  thee  up,  shall  be  far  away 
Jer.  51.  34.  he  hath  s.  me  up  like  a  dragon 

44. will  bring  out  of  his  mouth  that  which  hath  s. 

Lam.  2.2.  Lord  baths,  up  all  the  habitat,  of  Jacob 

5. he  hath  s.up  Israel,  be  hath  .<.up  all  her  palaces 

16.  they  hi.ss  and  say,  we  have  s.  her  up 

F.iek.'^fi.  3.  because  they  haves,  you  up  on  ev.  side 

Hns.  8.  8.  Israel  is  s.  up  among  the  Gentiles 

1  Cor.  15.  54.  death  is  s.  up  in  victory 

2  Cor.l.'l.  lest  such  one  should  bes.up  with  sorrow 
5.  4.  that  mortality  might  be  s.  up  of  life 

Rev.  12.  16.  the  earth  opened  and  s.  up  the  flpod 

SWALLOWETII. 
Job  5.  5.  and  the  robber  s.  up  their  substance 
39.  24.  lie  s.  the  ground  with  fierceness  and  rnge 

SWAN. 
Lev.W.  18.  the  s.  the  pelican,  unclean,  Z)«uM4. 16. 

SWARE. 
Oe7i.21.31.Reer9hebn,  because  they  s.hotb  ofthem 

24.  7.  the  Lord  fiod  of  heaven  that  s.  to  me 
9.  the  servant  «.  to  him  concerning  that  matter 

25.  33.  Jacob  saiil,  swear  to  me,  and  he  s.  to  him 
26.3.1  will  perform  the  oath  which  I  s.to  Abraham 

31.  Abimclech  and  Isaac  s.  to  one  anoth 
31.53.  and  Jacobs,  by  the  fear  of  his  father  Isaac 
47.  31.  Joseph  s.  to  Jacob  his  father 

50.  24.  Cod  will  bring  you  to  land  he  s.  to  Abrah 
Ezod.  13.  5.  the  land  which  the  Lord  ».  to  thy  fa- 
thers to  give  thee,  II.  |33. 1.  J^um.  14.16,30. 
I  32.  11.  Dent.  1.  8,  35.  |  6.  10,  18,  23.  |  7.  13. 
I  8.  1.  I  11.9,21.  I  26.3.  128.11.  |  30.20.131, 
21,  23.  I  34.  4.  .Tosh.  1.  6.  (  5.  6.  |  21.  43. 

JVMm.32.10.ibe  Lord's  anger  %vas  kindled,  and  he  s 

savins,  none  of  the  men  shall  enter,  /)fwM.34. 

Drut.  2.14.  till  men  ofwar  were  wasted,  as  Lord  s. 

4.  21.  liord  s.  that  I  should  not  go  over  Jordan 

31 .  he  will  not  forgot  the  covenant  which  he  s. 

7.  12.  keep  merov  which  he  s.  to  thy  fathers 

8.  18.  m.Tv  establish  hi*  covenant  which  he  s.  9.  5. 
Josh.  6.  22.  bring  out  Rabab,  as  ye  s.  unto  her 

9.  15.  princes  of  congregation  s.  to  the  GibeonitCH 
20.  because  of  the  oath  which  wo  s.  to  them 

14.9.  M OSes  s.  on  that  day,  saying,  suro'y  the  land 
21.44.  T#.  gave  them  rest  according  to  all  that  he  s. 
.?«'/xr  .2.1.  brought  to  land  which  !.«.  to  your  fathers 

1  .«/im.  19.  6.  Saul  ».  that  David  shall  not  be  slain 

20.  3.  Dnvld  s.  moreover  to  Jonathan,  and  said 

21.  22   David  s.  to  Saul,  and  Saul  went  home 
28.  10.  Saul  s.  by  the  Lord  to  the  witch  at  En-dor 

2  S/im. 3. 35. Dnv.s. he  would  not  eat  till  sun  be  down 
19.  23.  king  David  ».  to  Shimei,  1  Kin^i  2.  8. 

59S 


SWE 

1  Kings  1.  29.  king  David  s.  to  Bath-sheba,  30. 
2.  23.  Solomon  s.  that  Adonijah  should  die 

2  Kings  2.5.  34.  Gedaliah  s.  to  them,  Jer.  40.  9. 
2CAr.  15. 14.  theys.  to  the  Lord  with  a  loud  voice 
Rzra  10.  5.  they  s.  to  put  away  the  strange  wives 
Psn?.  95. 11.  to  whom  Is.  in  my  wrath,  iTcft.  3.  II. 

132.2.  how  hes.  to  Ld.  and  vowed  to  G.  of  Jacob 
Jer.  38.  16.  so  the  king  s.  secretly  to  Jeremiah 
E2fi.l6.8.  Is.  and  entered  intocovenunt  with  thee 

20. 1 5.  when  I  s.  to  the  seed  of  Jacob,  47.  t  14. 
/)an.l2.7.s.  by  himthatliveth  forever,  Rev.  10.6. 
Mark  6.  23.  Herod  s.  to  the  daugliter  of  Horodias 
/.M&c  1.73.  to  remember  oath  which  hes.  to  Abrah. 
Heb.^.Vd.  to  whoms.  he  that  they  should  not  enter 

6.  13.  he  could  swear  by  no  greater,  he  s.  by  liims. 

7.  21.  that  said,  the  Lord  s.  and  will  not  repent 
See  Their  Fathers. 

SWAREST. 
F.iod.  32.  13.  to  whom  thou  s.  by  thine  own  self 
J^uvi.  11. 12.  carry  them  to  land  thou  s.  to  fathers 
Deul.  26.15.  land  given  us,  as  thou  s.  to  our  fathers 
1  Kings  1.  17.  thou  s.  that  Solomon  shall  reign 
Psal.  89.  49.  kindnesses  thou  s.  to  David  in  truth 

SWARM. 
Exod.  8.  24.  there  came  a  grievous  s.  of  flies 
.Tudg.\i.9.  as. of  bees  and  honey  in  carcute  of  lion 

SWARMS. 
Ezod.8.  21.  I  will  sends,  of  flies  upon  thee,  houses 
of  the  Egyptians  shall  be  full  of  s.  of  flies 
22.  that  no  s.  of  Hies  shall  be  in  Goshen 
29.  that  the  s.  of  flics  may  depart  fromPharaoh 
31.  he  removed  the  s.  of  flies  from  Pharaoh 
SWEAR. 
God  hath  prohibited  all  false  oaths,  and  all  use 
less  and  customary  swearing;  but  when  neces 
sity  and  the  importance  of  the  matter  require 
it,  he  allows  us  to  swear  by  his  name,  but  not 
in  the  name  of  any  false  gods,  or  in  the  name 
of  inanimate  things,  whether  on  earth,  or  in 
heaven,  or  by  the  stars,  or  by  the  life  of  any 
man  whatever,  Lev.  19.  12.  Exod. 20. 7.  |  23.  13. 
Deut.  6.  13.  Jer.  4.  2.  Our  Saviour,  who  came 
into  the  world  not  to  destroy  the  law,  but  to 
fulfil  it,  forbids  all  kinds  of  oaths.  Mat.  5.  34. 
.^nd  the  primitive  Christians  understood  and 
obs'erved  this  comviandin  a  literal  sense,  as  may 
be  seen  from  Tertullian,  Eusebius,  Chrysostom, 
Basil,  .Jerom,  S,-c.  However,  it  is  acknow- 
ledged, that  neither  the  .Spostles,  or  Fathers 
have  absolutely  condemned  sioearing,  or  the  use 
of  oaths  upon,  every  occasion,  and  all  subjects. 
There  are  circumstances  wherein  we  cannot 
morally  be  excused  from  it :  But  we  never 
ought  to  swear  but  upon  vrge^it  necessity,  and 
to  do  sotne  considerable  good  by  it. 
That  a  person  swear  lawfully,  he  must  have  a 
regard,  [1]  7'o  the  objncl;  that  he  swear  by  the 
Lord  alone;  for  seeing  xce  deify  and  make 
that  our  God  which  we  swear  by,  therefore  we 
forsake  the  true  God  if  we  swear  %  that  which 
is  no  God,  .ler. 5. 7.  [2]  To  the  manner;  that 
he  swear  in  truth,  in  judgment,  and  in  righte- 
ousness, Jer.  4.  2.  that  he  swear  not  falsely,  or 
deceitfully,  but  that  which  is  agreeable  to 
truth;  that  he  swear  not  rashly,  but  upon  due 
consideration  of  all  circumstances :  and  that 
he  swear  nothing  but  what  is  agreeable  to 
justice  and  equity.  [3]  We  viust  have  a  re- 
gard to  the  end ;  that  God  may  be  glorified, 
our  duly  dischargtd,  controversies  appeased, 
our  brethren  satisfied,  or  our  own,  or  others' 
innoccnnj  cleared. 
Ocn.  21.  23.  Abimelech  said  to  Abraham  s.  to  me 

24.  and  Abraham  said,  I  will  s. 
24.  3.  and  I  will  make  thee  s.  by  the  Lord  God 

37.niy  master  made  mes.  saying,  not  take  a  wife 

25  33.  Jacob  said  s.  to  me,  and  ho  sware  to  him 

47.  31.  Jacob  said  unto  Jo.seph,  s.  unto  me 

.'iC.  5.  father  made  me  s.  |I  Lev.  5.  4.  if  a  soul  s 

F.xod.  6.  8.  bring  to  land  concerning  which  I  did  s 

I^ev.  19. 12.  and  ye  shall  not  s.  by  my  name  falsely 

JVuwi.  30.  2.  if  a  man  s.  an  oath  to  bind  his  soul 

Deut.  6.  13.  and  thou  shalt  s.  by  bis  name,  10.  20. 

./o.4A.2. 12.  Rahabsaid  to  spies,  s.  to  me  by  the  Lord 

17.  this  thy  oath  which  thou  hast  made  us  s.  20. 

23.  7.  nor  cause  to  s.  by  their  gods  nor  servo  them 

.Tudg.  15.  12.  s  to  me  that  ye  will  not  fall  upon  ine 

1  Sum.  20.  17.  Jonathan  coused  David  to  s.  again 
24.21. s.  that  tbou  wilt  not  cut  off  my  seed  aOer  me 
30.  1.5.  s.  by  God  that  thou  wilt  neither  kill  me 

2  Sam.  19.  7.  I  s.  by  the  Lord,  if  thou  go  not  out 

1  Kings  I.  13.  didst  tbou  not  .<t.  Solomon  shall  reign 
51.  saving,  let  king  Solomon  s.  unto  me  to-day 

2.  42.  did  I  not  make  thee  to  .9.  by  the  Lord  ? 
8.  31.  if  any  man  trespass,  and  an  oath  be  laid  on 
him  to  cause  him  to  s.  2  Chron.  6.  22. 

2  Chr.  36. 13.  Nebuchadnezzar  made  him  s.  by  G. 
F.ira  10.5. then  Ezra  made  Levitesand  all  Isr.  tos. 
JVeA.  13.  25.  and  I  made  them  s.  by  God,  saying 
ha.  3. 7.  in  thatday  ihallhei.  Iwillnotbc  a  healer 


SWE 


Isa.  19. 18.  five  cities  in  Egypt  shall  s.  to  the  Lord 
45.23.  word  gone,  that  to  me  every  tongue  shall ». 
48.  1.  which  s.  by  the  Loid,  but  not  iu  Uuth 
65. 16.  that  sweareth,  shalls.  by  the  Gud  of  truth 
.Jer.  4.  2.  thou  shalt  a.  the  Lord  liveth  in  truth 
5.  2.  tho'  they  say,  the  Lord  liveth,  they  s.  falsely 
7.  9.  will  ye  steal,  murder,  conmiit  adultery,  and  ». 
12.16.ifthey  will  learn  the  ways  of  my  people,  tos. 
by  my  name,  as  they  taught  peojile  to  s.  by  Baal 
22. 5.  I  s.  by  myself,  saitb  Ld.  this  house  become 
32.  22.  hast  given  them  this  land  thou  didst  s. 
Hos.  4.  15.  neither  go  ye  up  to  Beth-aven  nor  s. 
Jimos  8.  14.  they  that  s.  by  the  sin  of  Samaria    ■- 
Zrph.  1.5.  that  s.  bv  the  Lord,  thals.  by  Mulcham 
Mat.  5.  34.  s.  not  at  all  ||  36.  s.  not  by  thy  head 
23. 16.  shall  s.  by  the  temple,  s.  by  gold  of  temple 
18.  whoso  shall  s.  by  the  altar,  il  is  nothing 

20.  whoso  therefore  shall  s.  by  the  altar,  sweareth 

21.  shall  s.  by  the  temple  |{  22.  shall  s.  by  heaven 
26.  74.  then  began  he  to  curse  and  s.  Mark  14.  71. 

//?A.t>.  13.he  could  s.  by  no  greater,  hes.  by  himself 
16.  for  men  verily  s.  by  the  greater,  and  an  oath 
Jam.  5.  12.  above  all  things,  my  brethren,  s.  not 

SWEARERS. 
Mai.  3.  5.  I  will  bea  swifi  witness  against  false  s. 

SWEARETH. 
Lev.G.Xor  have  found  what  was  lost,  and  s.  falsely 
Psal.  15.  4.  that  s.  to  his  hurt,  and  changeth  not 
63.  11.  every  one  that  s.  by  him  shall  glory 
Eccl.  9.  2.  and  be  that  s.  as  he  that  feareth  an  oatn 
fsa.  65. 16.  he  that  s.  shall  swear  by  God  of  truth 
Zech.  5.  3.  and  every  one  that  ?.  shall  be  cut  ofT 

4.  it  shall  enter  into  the  house  of  him  s.  falsely 

Mat.  2.3.  18.  whosoever  s.  by  the  gift,  he  is  guilty 

20.  s.  by  the  altar  ||  21.  s.by  teinple,  and  by  him 

22.  s.  by  throne  of  God,  and  by  iiini  thatsitteth 
SWEARING. 

Lev.  5.  I.  if  a  soul  sin,  and  hear  the  voice  of  ». 
Jer.  2.3.  10.  for  because  of  .s.  the  land  mourneth 
Hos.iJi  by  s.  and  lying,  and  stealing  they  breakout 
10.  4.  spoken  words,  s.  falsely  in  making  a  coven. 
Heb.  7.  t  21.  thosepriRstswcremadowithouts.au 
SWEAT.  [oath 

Gen.  3. 19.  in  the  s.  of  thy  face  shall  tbou  eat  bread 
£2e*.44.18.  shall  gird  with  any  thing  that  causeth  s. 
A«A(;22.44.hiss.  was  at  it  were  great  drojis  of  blood 

SWEEP. 
Isa.  14. 23. 1  will  s.  it  with  the  besom  of  destruction 
23.  17.  the  bail  shall  s.  away  the  refuge  of  lies 
Luke  15.8.  doth  not  .s.  the  bouse  and  seek  diligently 

SWEEPING. 
Prov.  28.  3.  is  like  a  s.  rain  which  leaveth  no  food 

SWEET. 

Exod.  15.  25.  tree  east  into  the  waters,  the  waters 

were  made  s. 

30.23.take  of  myrrh  and  s.  cinnamon  half  so  much 

2.Sam.l.t2.3.Saul  and  Jonathan  weres.  in  their  lives 

23.  1.  David  the  s.  psalmist  of  Lsrael  said 
JVeA.8.10.  go  your  way,  eat  thofaf,  and  drink  the  s. 
.Job  20.  12.  though  wickedness  be  s.  in  his  mouth 

21.  33.  the  clods  of  the  valley  shall  be  s.  to  him 
38. 31. canst  thou  bind  thes.  influences  of  Pleiadest 
Ps(77.55.14.  we  took  s.  counsel  together  and  walked 
104.  34.  my  meditation  of  him  shall  be  s. 
119.  103.  how  s.  are  thy  words  unio  my  taste  I 
141.  6.  they  shall  hoar  my  words,  for  they  are  s. 
Prov.  3.  24.  shall  lie  down,  and  thy  sleep  shall  be*. 
9.17.slolen  waters  ares,  bread  in  secret  is  pleasant 
13.  19.  the  desire  accomplished  is  s.  to  the  soul 
16.  24.  [ileasant  words  are  s.  to  the  soul  and  health 
20.17.bread  of  deceit  is  s.  to  a  man,  but  afterwards 
23.  8.  thou  shalt  vomit  np,  and  lose  thy  s.  words 
24.13.  eat  the  honey-comb,  which  iss.  to  thy  taste 
27.  7.  to  the  hungry  soul  every  hitler  thing  is  s. 
Feci.  5.  12.  the  sleep  of  a  labouring  man  is  s. 
11.  7.  truly  tho  light  is  a  s.  and  a  pleasant  thing 
Cant.  2.  3.  his  fruit  was  .«.  ||  14.  fors.  is  thy  voice 
5.  5.  my  fingers  dropped  with  s.-smelling  myrrh 
IS.his  cheeks  areas  a  bed  of  spices,  as  s.flowers, 
his  lips  like  lilies,  dropping  .'.-smelling  myrrh 
16.  bis  mouth  is  most  s.  yea,  he  is  altogoth.  lovely 
ha.  3.  t  19.  the  Lord  will  take  away  the  s.  balls 

24.  in.stead  of  s.  smell,  there  shall  be  stink 
5.20. woe  to  them  that  put  bitter  for  s.nnd  s.  for  bit. 
23.1(i.make  s.melody,ging  songs  to  be  remembered 

.Jer.  6.  20.  nor  your  sacrifices  s.  unto  me 
31.  26.  I  awaked,  and  my  sleep  was  s.  unto  mc 
.fam.  3.  11.  send  at  same  place  s.  water  and  bitter'? 
/?c»).  10.9.  it  shall  he  in  thy  mouth  «.  as  honey,  10. 
18.  t  12.  no  man  huvelh  their  s.  wood  any  more 

SWEET  calamus. 
Exod.  30.  23.  take  of  s.  calamus  250  shekels 

SWEET  cane. 
7sa.43.24.thou  hast  brought  me  no  ».  c.with  money 
Jer.  6.  20   the  .?.  eane  came  from  a  far  country 
Set  Incense,  Onouas,  Savour. 
SWEET  spices. 
/CTOfZ.30.34.take  to  thee  s.  spices  with  frankincense 
37.  29.  he  made  the  pure  incense  of  s.  spices 
Mark  IG.I.  bought  s.  s.  that  they  might  anoint  him 


SWI 

SWEET  Kine. 
Ita.  49.  26.  be  drunkea  with  blood  as  with  s.  wine 
Jlmos9.  13.  the  mount  shall  drop^.  ictne,  hills  melt 
Mie.  6.  15.  and  s.  wine,  but  shall  not  drink  wine 

SWEETER. 
./uii^.l4.18.men  of  city  said,  what  is  «.  than  honeyl 
Paal.  19.  10.  tby  word  is  s.  than  the  honey-comb 
119. 103.  thy  words  are  s.  than  honey  to  my  mouth 
SWEETLY. 
Job  24.  SiO.  worm  shall  feed  s.  on  him,  not  rememb. 
Cant.l.  9.  hke  the  best  wine,  that  goeth  down  a'. 

SWEETENED. 
Psal.  55.  t  !■!•  we  s.  counsel  together  and  walked 

SWEETNESS. 
Judff.  9. 11.  should  I  forsake  my  s  and  good  fruit? 

14.  14.  and  out  of  the  strong  came  forth  5. 
Prov.  16.  21.  the  s.  of  the  lips  increascth  learning 
27. 9.60  doth*,  of  a  man's  friend  by  hearty  counsel 
£ze/t.  3. 3.  the  roll  was  in  my  mouth  as  honey  for  s. 

SWELL, 
^um.  5. 21.  thy  thigh  to  rot,  and  thy  belly  to*.  22. 

27.  her  belly  shall  s.  and  her  thigh  shall  rot 
Deut.  8.  4.  nor  did  thy  foot  s.  these  forty  years 

SWELLED. 
JVeA.  9.  21.  yea,  forty  years  their  feet  s.  not 

SWELLING. 
PsalA6.2.  though  mountainsshake  withs.  thereor 
Isa-  30.  13.  as  a  breach  s.  out  in  a  high  wall 
Jer.  12.  5.  then  how  wilt  thou  do  in  the  s.of  Jordan 
49.  19.  like  a  lion  from  the  s.  of  Jordan,  50.  44. 
2  Pzt.  2.  18.  speak  great  s.  words  of  vanity 
Jude  10.  and  their  mouth  spcaketh  great  s.  words 

SWELLINGS. 
2Cor.l2.20. 1  fear  lest  there  be  s.tumults  among  you 

SWEPT. 
Judg.  5.  21.  the  river  of  Kishon  s.  them  away 
Jer.  40.  15.  why  are  thy  valiant  men  s.  away? 
Ma.1.  12.44.  I  will  return  to  my  bouse,  when  come, 
hefindeth  it  empty,  s.  and  garnished,  Lu4c  11.25. 
SWERVED. 
1  Tim.l.  6.  which  some  having  s.have  turned  aside 

SWIFT. 
Deut.  28. 49.  shall  bring  a  nation  as  «.  as  the  eagle 
1  Kings  4.  t  28.  straw  for  the  horses  and  s.  beasts 

1  Chr.  12.  8.  were  as  5.  as  roes  on  the  mountains 
Job  9.  26.  they  are  passed  away  as  the  s.  ships 

24.  18.  he  is  s.  as  the  waters,  he  brhuldeth  not 
Prov.  fi.  18.  feet  that  be  s.  in  running  to  mischief 
Keel.  9.  11.  I  saw  that  the  race  is  not  to  the  s. 
Jsa.  18.  2.  go,  ye  s.  messengers,  to  a  nation  peeled 

)9.  1.  behold  the  Lord  rideih  upon  a  s.  cloud 

30.  16.  but  ye  said,  no,  for  we  will  ride  on  the  s. 
therefore  shall  they  that  pursue  you  be  s. 

66.  20.  they  shall  bring  your  brethren  on  .s.  beasts 
./cr.2.23.  thou  art  as.  dromedary  travers.  her  ways 

46.  6.  lei  not «.  flee  away,  nor  mighty  man  escape 
Amos  2. 14.  therefore  the  Might  shall  perish  from  s. 
15.  he  that  is  s.  of  foot  shall  not  deliver  himself 
JUic.  1. 13.  O  Lachish,  bind  the  chariot  to  s.  beast 
Mal.'i.^.  I  will  be  «.  witness  against  the  sorcerers 
Rom.  3.  15.  their  feet  are  s.  to  shed  blood 
.lam.l.  19. let  every  man  be  s.  to  hear,  slow  to  .'speak 

2  Pel.  2.  1.  shall  bring  on  themselves  s.  destruction 

SWIFTER. 
2  Sam.\ .  23.  were s.  than  eagles,  stronger  than  lions 
Job  7.  6.  my  days  are  .s.  than  a  weaver's  shuttle 
9.25?howmy  days  are.5.than  a  post,i hey  fleo  away 
Jer.  4.  13.  his  horses  ares,  than  eagles,  woe  unto  us 
/-am.  4. 19.  our  persecutors  are  s.  than  the  eagles 
Hob.  1.  8.  their  horses  are  .«.  than  the  leopards 

SWIFTLY. 
Psal.  147.  15.  his  word  runneth  very  s. 
Isa.  5.  2fi.  behold,  they  shall  come  with  speed  s. 
/.)an.9.21  .Gabriel  being  caused  to  fly .--.  touched  me 
Joel  3.  4.  if  ye  recompense  me  s.  and  speedily 

SWIM. 
i  K'ingsG.  fi.  he  cast  in  the  slick,  and  the  iron  did  s. 
Psal.  C.  fi.  all  the  night  make  I  my  bed  to  s. 
Isa. 2!).  11.  thatswimmeih  spread,  forth  handsto*. 
Kzek.iT.a.  for  the  waters  were  risen,  waters  to  s.  in 
^cM27.42.leBt  any  of  them  should  s.out  and  escape 
43.  and  command<'d  that  they  who  could  s. 
SWI.MMEST. 
Etek.  33.  6.  I  will  water  the  land  wherein  Ihous. 

SWIMMETH. 
Isa.  25.  11.  as  he  that  .c.sprendcth  forth  his  hands  - 
SWINE 
an  animal  tretl  known,  Ike  use  of  whieh  was 
forbid  to  the  Ilrhretrs,  Lev.  11.7.  It  is  said, 
they  held  the  fl-rsk  nf  this  animal  in  suck  de-. 
testation,  that  thry  would  not  so  mueh  as  pro- 
noance  its  name,  but  instrail  of  it  said,  "That 
beast.  That  thing.  In  2  Maer.  (>.  IR,  S,c.  when 
old  Eleaiar  was  taken  by  thr  servants  of  An- 
tioehus  F,piphanes,he  irc  nhcmrntUj  urged  to 
taste  f\v\ne'»  flesh, or  at  ttnst  tojirttmd  to  taste 
it.  They  opened  his  miiuth  by  furrr,  to  compel 
hrm  to  eat  of  it ;  but  he  chose  rather  tn  suffer 
death  than  to  break  the  law  nf  Hod,  and  In  give 
pffince  tu  the  weaker  people  of  hit  natio-^. 
S96 


swo 

Porpnyry  affirms,  that  the  Hebrews  and  Phenr- 
ciuns  abstained  from  pork,  because  there  was 
none  in  their  country.  He  might  rather  have 
said,  there  was  none,  or  but  very  little,  because 
they  bred  no  hogs,  by  reason  of  that  abhor- 
rence they  had  conceived  for  theoi :  For  it  is 
certain  they  might  have  had  them  if  they  had 
pleased;  and  that  there  were  herds  o/ swine  i>i 
our  Saviour's  time,  is  evident  from  Mat.  8.  30, 
31.  Marks.  11. 

Our  Saviour,  in  Mai.  I.Q.  forbids  his  disciples  to 
cast  their  pearls  before  swine,  lest  ihey  trample 
them  under  their  feet  and  turn  again  and  rend 
you.  He  would  haoe  them  to  use  discretion  in 
dispensing  holy  things,  especially  by  way  of 
admonition,  or  reproof.  Preach  not  the  gospel 
to  those  that  persecute  you  for  your  message, 
neither  apply  the  promises  to  the  profane.  The 
prodigal  son,  in  Luke  15.15.  when  he  had  spent 
all,  was  reduced  to  such  distress  us  to  be  glad 
to  feed  swine;  tAis  denotes  the  base  work  and 
drudgery  that  sinners  employ  themselves  about. 
It  is  said,  in  Prov.  11.  22,  As  a  jewel  of  gold 
in  a  swine's  snout,  so  is  a  fair  woman  who 
is  without  discretion.  Both  the  Jewish  and 
Arabian  women  sometimes  used  to  wear  rings 
in  their  nostrils  to  adorn  themseloes.  But 
nothing  can  be  more  ridiculous  than  to  put  a 
gold  ring  or  a  jewel  in  a  swine's  snotit.  St. 
Peter  compares  those  sinners  that  frequently 
relapse  into  their  former  sins,  to  a  sow  that, 
as  soon  as  she  is  washed,goes  again  to  wallow 
in  the  mire,  2  Pet.  2.  22. 

I,ev.  11.  7.  the  s.  is  unclean  to  you,  Deut.  14.  8. 

Prov.  11.22.  as  a  jewel  of  gold  in  a  s.  snout,  so  is 

/sa.tJ5.4. which  eat  s.  flesh  and  broth  of  abominable 
60.  3.  an  oblation,  as  if  he  offered  s.  blood 
n.eatings. flesh, and  abomination, and  the  mouse 

Mat.  7.  6.  neither  cast  ye  your  pearls  before  s. 
8.  30.  a  herd  of  s.  feeding,  Mark  5. 11.  J.ukeS.  32. 

31.  suffer  us  lo  go  into  the  herd  of  s.  Mark  5.  12. 

32.  they  went  into  the  s.  Mark  5.  13.  Luke  8.  33. 

the  whole  herd  ot's.  ran  violently  down 

Mark  5.  14.  and  they  that  fed  the  s.  fled  and  told 
IG.  they  told  them  also  concerning  the  s. 

Luke  15.  15.  he  sent  him  into  his  fields  to  feed  s. 

16.  have  filled  his  belly  with  husks  the  s.  did  eat 

SWOLLEN. 

Acts  23.  6.  they  looked  when  he  should  have  s. 
SWOON. 

Lam.  2.  11.  because  the  children  s.  in  the  streets 
SWOONED. 

Lam.  2.  12.  w'hcii  they  s.  as  the  wounded  in  the 
streets  of  the  city 
SWORD. 

The  sword  in  scripture  is  often  used  for  war. 
Lev.  26.  25,  I  will  bring  a  sword  upon  you  ;  / 
will  cause  war  to  come.  liy  the  sword  slialt 
thou  livi!,  Gen.  27.  40.  Thou  shalt  support 
thyself  by  war  and  rapine.  /J^  sword  are  un- 
derstood the  vengeance  and  judgments  which 
God  inflicts  upon  sinners.  Deut.  32.  41,  42, 
If  I  whet  my  glittering  sword:  My  sword  shall 
devour  flesh.  Also  the  imilrument  which  God 
uses  to  employ  fur  executing  his  judgments, 
Psal.  17.  13,  D'jliver  my  soul  from  the  wicked, 
which  is  thy  sword.  Sword  is  figuratively 
put  for  power  and  authority.  Rom.  13.  4,  lie 
beareth  not  the  sword  in  vain.  The  magis- 
trate hath  not  received  his  power  to  no  pur- 
pose; but  that  he  may  punish  offenders,  and 
defend  tile  good.  The  apostle  alludes  to  the 
custom  of  princes,  who  had  certain  officers  go- 
ing before  them,  bearing  the  ensigns  of  their 
authority.  All  they  that  take  the  sword,  shall 
perish  with  the  sword,  Mat.  26.  50.  Tliry  that 
take  up  the  sword  hy  their  own  authority,  and 
would  do  justice  to  themselves,  deserve  tu  be 
put  to  death  by  the  sword  of  authority  :  Or,  ] 
those  that  take  the  swoid  to  smite  another, 
generallii  suffer  by  it  themselves.  The  word 
of  (;od  is  called  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  Kph. 
6.  17.  It  is  a  spiritual  sword,  or  a  means  pro- 
vided by  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  made  effectual 
by  him  lo  cut  the  sinews  of  the  strongest 
temptations,  tn  kill  or  mortify  the  inward 
lust»  and  corruptions  of  thr  heart,  to  subdue 
the  most  fii.ed  obstinacy  of  the  mind,  and  thr 
most  resolute  purposes  of  the  will,  Heb.  4. 
12.  Mosrs  calls  Goil  the  sword  of  Israel's 
excclleney,  Deut.  33.  29.  He  is  thrir  strength, 
the  author  of  all  their  past  or  approaehini' 
victories,  by  whose  assistance  they  did  excel, 
and  gloriously  conquer,  and  triumph  over  their 
enemies.  Our  Saviour  says,  Mat.  JO.  34,  I 
came  not  to  send  pcnre,  but  a  sword.  My 
coming  and  preaching  the  po.tpel  will  prove 
in  the  event,  through  the  devil's  malice,  the 
corruptions  of  men's  hearts,  and  thrir  madness 
on  their  idolatry  and  superstition,  an  occasion 


SWO 

of  much  variance  and  division,  even^betieeen 
nearest  relations,  yea,  and  of  bodily  death,  and 
many  calamities  and  persecutions. 

Gen.  3.  24.  he  placed  cherubims,  and  flaming  s. 
34.  25.  took  each  man  his  s.  and  camo  on  the  city 

Exod.  5.  21.  to  put  a  s.  in  their  hands  to  slay  us 

32.  27.  he  said,  put  every  man  his  a.  by  hie  side 
Lev.  26.  6.  nor  sliall  the  s.  go  through  your  land 

25.  I  will    bring  a  s.  ujion   you,  Kiek.  5.  17 

I  6.  3.  I  14.  17.  1  29.  8.  I  33.  2. 
33.  and  I  will  draw  out  a  s.  alter  you 
37.  they  shall  fall  as  it  were  befo.'o  a  s. 

J^um.  22. 23.  the  angel's  s.  drawn  in  his  hand,  31. 
29.  I  would  there  were  a  s.  in  mine  hand 

Deut.  32.  25.  the  s.  without,  and  terror  within 

33.  29.  and  who  is  the  s.  of  thy  excellency 
Josh.  5.  13.  stood  with  his  s.  drawn  in  iiis  band 

24.  12.  but  not  with  thy  s.  nor  with  thy  bow 
Judg.  7.  14.  this  is  nothing  save  thes.  of  Gideon 

18.  say,  the  s.  of  the  Lord,  and  of  Gideon,  20. 
22.  and  the  Lord  set  every  man's  s.  against  hia 
fellow  through  all  the  host,  1  Sam.  14.  20. 

8.  10.  for  there  fell  120,000  men  that  drew  s. 
20.  the  youth  drew  not  hia  s.  for  he  feared 

9.  5-1.  he  said  unto  him,  draw  thy  s.  and  slay  rue 
20.  2.  four  hundred  thousand  that  d.-ew  s.  17. 

15.  twenty  and  si.x  thousand  men  that  drew  s. 
2.5.  eighteen  thousand  men  ;  all  these  drew  the  t. 
35.  Israel  destroyed  25,100  inen  that  drew  the  s. 
40.  all  that  fell  were  25,000  that  drew  the  s. 

1  Sam.  13.  22.  neither  s.  nor  spear  was  found 
15.  33.  as  thy  s.  hath  made  women  childless,  bo 

17.  39.  David  girdeth  his  s.  on  his  armour,  25. 13. 

50.  but  there  was  no  s.  in  the  hand  of  David 

51.  David  ran  and  took  his  s.  and  slew  him 

18.  4.  even  to  his  s.  and  to  his  bow  and  girdle 
21.8.  is  there  not  hereunder  thy  hand  as(jearor  s 

9.  the  s.  of  Goliath  is  hero  wrapt  in  a  cloth 

22.  10.  and  he  gave  him  the  s.  of  Goliath 

13.  in  that  thou  hast  given  him  bread,  and  a  s, 

25.  13.  David  said,  gird  ye  on  every  man  his  s 

and  they  girded  on  every  man  his  s. 

31.4.  draw  thy  s.  and  thrust  me  through  therewith, 

therefore  Saul  took  a  .v.  and  fell  upon  it 

5.  his  armour-bearer  fell  also  ujion  hiss. and  died 

2  Sam.  1.  22.  the  s.  of  Saul  returned  not  empty 

2.  16.  and  thrust  his  s.  in  his  fellow's  side 

26.  Abner  said,  shall  the  s.  devour  for  ever? 

3.  29.  not  fail  one  that  falleth  on  the  «. 

11.  25.  the  i.  devoureth  one  as  well  as  another 

12.  10.  the  s.  shall  never  depart  from  thy  house 

18.  8.  and  the  wood  devoured  more  than  the  s. 

20.  10.  Amasa  took  no  heed  to  the  s.  in  his  hand 

23.  10.  and  his  hand  clave  unto  the  s. 

24.  9.  in  Lsrael  800,000  men  that  drew  the  s. 

1  Kings  3.  24.  bring  me  a  s.  and  they  brought  a  *. 

19.  17.  him  that  escapelh  the  s.  of  Uazael 

1  Chron.  5.  18.  men  able  to  bear  buckler  and  3. 

10.  4.  draw  thy  s.  and  thrust  mo  through  there- 

with, so  Saul  took  a  s.  and  fell  upon  it 
5.  his  armour-bearer  fell  likewise  on  the  s. 

21.  5.  a  hundred  thousand  men  that  drew  s.  and 

'  Judah  was  470,000  that  drew  s. 

12.  while  that  the  s.  of  thine  enemies  overtake, 

or  else  three  days  the  s.  of  the  Lord 

16.  the  angel  having  a  s.  drawn  in  his  haml 

27.  and  he  put  up  his  s.  again  into  the  sheath 
.30.  he  was  afiaid,  because  of  the. «.  of  the  angel 

2  Chron.  20.  9.  as  when  the  s.  of  judgment  conreth 
F.ira  9.  7.  we  and  our  kings  aredeliveied  to  the  s. 
A'fA.  4.  18.  every  one  had  hiss,  girded  by  his  side 
F.slh.  9.5.  Jews  smotcall  iheirenemicswith  tlie«. 
./()//  5.  20.  in  war  to  deliver  from  power  of  the  s. 

15.  22.  and  he  is  waited  for  of  the  s. 

19.  29.  be  ye  afraid  of  the  s.  for  wrath  bringcth 

the  punishment  of  the  s, 

20.  25.  the  glittering  s.  Cometh  out  of  his  gall 
27.  14.  if  children  be  multiplied,  it  is  fur  the  s. 
40.  19.  can  make  his  s.  to  appioach  unto  him 
41.26.  thes.  of  him  that  layeth  at  him  cannot  hold 

Psnl.  7.  12.  if  he  turn  not  ho  will  whet  his  s. 

I".  13.  deliver  from  the  wicked,  which  is  Ihy  .». 

37.  14.  the  wicked  have  drawn  out  tho  s. 
15.  thoir  s.  shall  enter  into  their  own  heart 

45.  3.  gird  thy  s.  on  thy  thigh,  with  thy  glory 

57.  4.  and  their  tongue  a  sharp  5. 

61.  3.  who  whet  their  tongue  like  a. «.  and  bend 

76.  3.  there  brake  he  thn  shield  and  the  s. 

7H.  62.  ho  gave  his  people  over  unto  the  s. 

M9.  6.  and  a  two-edged  s.  in  their  hand 
Prov.  5.  4.  but  her  end  is  sharp  as  n  two-edged  9. 

12.  18.  that  epeaketh  like  the  piercings  of  a  s. 

25.  18.  a  man  that  beiiretli  false  witness  is  a  s. 
(ant.  3.  8.  every  man  hath  hia  s.  upon  his  thigh 
Isa.  2.  4.  nation  shall  not  lift  up  s.  against  natios 

31.  8.  the  s.  not  of  a  mean  man  shalldevour  him 

34.  6.  the  s.  ofthe  Lord  is  filU  d  with  blood 
41.2.  ho  gave  them  as  the  ilust  lo  his  s. 

49.  2.  he  haih  made  my  mouth  like  a  sharp  g. 
51.  19.  the  famine  and  the  s.  are  come  to  tliM 


swo 

Isa.  65. 12.  therefore  will  I  number  you  to  the  s. 
66. 10.  by  Ills  s.  will  the  Lord  plead  with  all  tlcsli 
Je.T.  2.  30.  your  own  s.  devoured  your  prophets 

4.  10.  whereas  the  s.  reacheth  unto  the  Boul 

5.  12.  neither  shall  we  see  s.  nor  famine,  14.  13. 

5.  25.  for  the  s.  of  the  enemy  is  on  every  side 
9.16.1  will  send  as. after  tliem  till  I  have  consumed 

them,  24.  10.  |  25.  27.  |  29.  17.  |  49.  37. 

12  12.  fur  the  s.  of  the  Lord  shall  devour 

14.  13.  the  prophets  say,  ye  shall  not  sec  the  5. 
15.  says,  and  famine  shall  not  be  in  this  land 
16  shall  be  cast  in  the  streets  because  of  the  *. 

15  2.  such  as  are  for  the  s.  to  the  s.  43. 11. 

3  I  will  appoint  the  s.  to  slay,  and  dogs  to  tear 
9.  the  residue  of  them  will  1  deliver  to  the  s. 

18.  21.  pour  out  their  blood  by  the  force  of  the  s. 

25.  16.  and  they  shall  be  mad  because  of  the  s. 
29.  for  I  will  call  for  a  s.  Ezrk.  38.  21. 

31.  he  will  give  them  that  are  wicked  to  the  s. 

31.  2.  the  people  left  of  the  s.  found  grace 

32.  24.  the  city  is  given  because  of  the  s. 

34.  17.  I  proclaim  a  liberty  for  you  to  the  s. 
42.  16.  the  s.  ye  feared  shall  overtake  you  then 
44.  28.  yet  a  small  number  which  escape  the  s. 

46.  10.  the  s.  sliiill  devour  and  be  satiate,  14. 

47.  6.  O  thou  s.  of  the  Lord,  how  long  ere  quiet 

48.  2.  O  madmen,  the  s.  shall  pursue  thee 

^  10.  cursed  that  keepelh  back  his  s.  from  blood 

50. 16.  for  fear  of  the  oppressing  s.  they  shall  turn 

every  one  to  his  people 

35.  a  s.  is  on  the  Chaldeans,  saith  the  Lord 

36.  a  s.  is  on  the  liars,  a  s.  is  on  her  mighty  men 

37.  a  s.  is  on  their  horses,  a  s.  on  her  treasures 
51.  50.  ye  that  have  escajied  the  s.  go  away 

f.am.  5.9.  we  gat  bread  by  peril  because  of  the  s. 
Ezek.  5.  2.  I  will  draw  out  a  *.  after  them,  12. 
17.  and  [  will  bring  the  .9.  upon  thee,  6.  3. 

6.  8.  ye  may  have  some  that  shall  escape  the  s. 

7.  15.  the  s.  is  without,  the  pestilence  within 
11.  8.  ye  h.ive  feared  the  s.  and  I  will  bring  a  s. 

4.al7.  If  I  bring  a  s.  and  say,  s.  go  through 
21.  when  I  send  my  four  sore  judgments,  the  s. 
21.9.  prophesy  and  say,  a  s.  a  .?.  is  shiirpcned,  11. 

12.  terrors,  by  reason  of  the  s.  of  my  people 

13.  and  what  if  the  s.  contemn  even  the  rodi 

14.  let  their  s.  be  doubled,  the .«.  of  the  great  men 

slain,  it  is  the  s.  of  great  men  that  are  slain 

15.  set  the  point  of  the  s.  agninst  the  gates 

19.  appoint  two  ways,  that  the  s.  may  come 

20.  appoint  a  way,  that  s.  m.ay  come  to  Rabbatb 
28.  the  s.  the  s.  is  drawn  for  the  slaughter 

30.  4.  and  the  s.  shall  come  upon  Egypt 

21.  to  bind  it,  to  make  it  6trr)ng  to  hold  the  .?. 

22.  I  will  cause  the  s.  to  fall  out  of  his  hand 

32  11.  the  s.  of  the  king  of  Babylon  shall  come 

33  3.  if  when  he  seeth  the  s.  come  on  the  land 

4  if  the  s.  come  and  take  him  away,  6. 

6.  but  if  the  watchman  see  the  s.  come,  if  the  s. 
come  and  take  any  person  from  among  them 
26.  ye  stand  upon  your  s.  and  ye  defile 

35.  5.  thou  hast  shed  blood  by  the  force  of  the  s. 
Hos.  2.  18.  and  I  will  break  the  bow  and  the  s. 

11.  6.  and  the  s.  shall  abide  on  bis  cities 
Jlmos  9.  4.  thence  will  I  command  the  s. 
J\Iir.  4.  3.  nation  shall  not  lift  up  s.  against  nation 

6.  14.  thou  deliverest,  will  I  give  up  to  the  s. 
JV«A.  2.  13.  the  s.  shall  devour  the  young  lions 

3.  3.  the  horsemen  liftelh  up  both  the  bright  s. 

15.  there  the  s.  shall  cut  thee  off 
Zech.  9.  13.  made  thee  as  the  s.  of  a  mighty  man 

11.  17.  the  s.  shall  be  upon  his  arm,  and  hie  eye 

13.  7.  awake,  O  .5.  against  my  shepherd 
Mat.  10.  34. 1  came  not  to  send  peace,  hut  a  s. 

26.  51.  one  of  them  drew  his  s.  and  struck  a  ser- 

vant, Mark  14.  47.  John  18.  10. 
52.  put  up  again  thy  s.  John  18.  II. 
lAike.  2.  35.  a  n.  shall  pierce  through  thy  own  soul 
22.  36.  he  that  halh  no  s.  let  him  buy  one 
Jlcts  16.  27.  he  drew  his  s.  and  would  have  killed 
Rom.  8.  35.  shalls.  separate  us  from  love  of  Christ 

13  4.  for  ho  beare'h  not  the  s.  in  vain 

Kph.  0.  17.  s.  of  S|iirit,  which  is  the  word  of  God 
Urb.  4.  12.  and  sharper  than  any  two-edged  s. 
Rr.v.  1.  16.  out  of  his  mouth  went  a  two-edged  s. 
2.  12.  which  hath  the  sharp  s.  with  two  edges 
6.  4.  and  thire  was  given  to  him  a  great  a. 

19.  15.  out  of  his  mouth  cocth  a  sharp  ».  21. 

By  the  PWORD. 
Gen.  27.  40.  htj  thy  s.  Ihou  shalt  live  and  serve 
J,rii.  20.  7.  they  shall  fall  before  you  by  the  s.  8. 
2  !\(im.  1.  12.  bi:cause  they  were  fallen  hy  the  s. 
2  Chron.  29.  9.  our  fathers  have  fallen  by  the  s. 
Jnb  .33.  18.  and  bis  life  from  perishing  by  the  s. 

36.  12  they  oli»-y  not,  they  shall  perish  by  the  s.. 
Psal.  44.  3.  they  got  not  the  land  by  th'-ir  s. 

78.  64.  their  priests  fell  by  the  s.  their  widowg 
Jer.  11.  22.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  their  young  men 
.shall  die  by  the  s.  18.  21.  f,am.  2.  21. 
,     14.  12.  but  I  will  consunie  them  by  the  s. 

i5.bys.  and  fam.  shallthose prophets bcconsum. 
397 


SWO 

Jer.  16.  4.  shall  be  consumed  by  the  s.  44. 12, 18,27. 

19.  7.  and  I  will  cause  them  to  fall  by  the  s. 
21.9.  abideth,  shall  die,  by  the  s.  38.  2.  |  42. 17,22. 
27.  13.  why  will  ye  die  by  the  s.  by  famine^ 

32.  36.  this  city  shall  be  delivered  by  the  s. 
3.3.  4.  houses  which  are  thrown  down  by  the  s. 
34.  4.  O  Zedekiah,  thou  shall  not  die  by  the  s. 
44.  13.  as  I  have  punished  Jerusalem  by  the  s. 
Rzek.  26.  6.  her  daughters  shall  be  slain  by  the  s. 

11.  he  shall  slay  thy  people  by  tlie  s. 
28.23.lhe  wounded  shall  be  judgfd  in  her  by  the  s. 
31.18.  lie  with  them  that  he  slain  Ay  f Ac  .i.  32. 20, 
21,  22,  25,  30.  I  33.  27. 
39.  23.  they  trespassed,  so  they  fell  all  by  the  s. 
Has.  1.  7.  I  will  not  save  Iheni  by  bow,  nor  by  s. 
Jlmos  7.  11.  Jeroboam  shall  die  by  the  s. 
9.  10.  the  sinners  of  my  people  shall  die  by  the  s. 
Hag.  2.  22.  every  one  by  the  s.  of  his  brother 
Rev.  13.  14.  had  the  wound  by  a  s.  and  did  live 
See  Edge,  Fall. 
From  the  SWORD. 
F.xod.  18.  4.  delivered  ma  from  the  s.  of  Pharaoh 
Lev.  26.  36.  they  shall  flee,  as  fleeing /ront  a  .t. 

1  Kings  19.17.hini  thatescapeth/rom/Af  .'.of  Jehu 

2  Chron.  30.  20.  that'escaped  from  the  s.  carried  he 
.lob  5.  15.  but  he  savelh  the  poor  froin  the  s. 

39.  22.  neither  turneth  he  back  from  the  s. 
Psal.  22. 20.  deliver  my  soul/;-om  the  s.  my  darling 
from  the  posver  of  the  dog 

144. 10.  who  delivereth  David /r(»n  <Ae  hurtful  s- 
fsa.  21.  15.  for  they  fled  from  the  drawn  s. 

31.  8.  but  he  shall  flee  from  the  s. 

./fr.  21.7.  such  as  are  left/roni  thes.  from  famine 
46.  16.  arise,  let  us  go  from  the  oppressing  .s. 
jKjci.12.16.  I'll  leave  a  few  menofthem/ro7«(Aes. 
38.  8.  the  land  that  is  brought  back  from  the  s. 

My  SWORD, 
(rcn. 48. 22.  which  I  took  from  Amorite  with  my  s. 
Ezod.  15.9. 1  will  draw  my  s  my  hand  shall  destroy 
Deut.  32.  41.  and  if  I  whet  mi/ glittering  s. 

42.  and  my  s.  shall  devour  flesh 
1 -Sam.  21.  8.  neither  brought  wy  s.  nor  my  weapons 
Psal.  44.  6.  neither  shall  my  s.  save  me 
fsa.  34.  5.  for  iny  s.  shall  be  bathed  in  heaven 
Eiek.  21.  3.  I  will  draw  my  s.  out  of  his  sheath 
4.  therefore  my  s.  shall  go  out  of  his  sheath 
.5.  T  the  Lord  have  drawn  my  s.  out  of  bis  sheath 

30.  24.  [  have  put  my  s.  in  bis  hand,  25. 

32.  10.  be  afraid,  when  I  shall  brandish  tot/  s. 
Zeph.  2.  12.  Ethiopians,  ye  shall  be  slain  by  my  s. 

IVith  the  SWORD. 
Oen.  31.  26.  daughters  as  captives  taken  with  thes. 
F.io'l.  5.3.  le.st  he  fill  on  us  with  the  s.  or  pestilence 

22.  24.  and  I  will  kill  you  with  the  s. 
jVam.  19. 10.  whoso  touchelh  one  slain  with  the  s. 

20.  18.  lest  I  come  out  against  thee  icith  the  s. 

31.  8.  Balaam  also  they  slew  with  the  s. 
Deut.  28.  22.  the  Lord  shall  smite  thee  with  th"  s. 
.Tosh.  10. 11.  whom  Israel  slew  with  thes.  13.  22. 

11.  10.  ho  smote  the  king  of  Hazor  with  thes. 

1  Sam.  17.4.5.  thou  comest  to  me  with  a  s.  and  spear 
47.  the  Lord  savelh  not  with  s.  and  spear 

2  .Sarn.  12.  9.  thou  hast  killed  Uriah  with  the  s. 

20.  8.  a  girdle  7cith  a  s.  fastened  upon  his  loins 

21.  16.  Islibi-benob  being  girded  with  a  s. 

1  Kings  1.  51.  will  not  slay  his  servant  with  thes. 
2.  P.  I  will  not  put  thee  to  death  with  the  s. 

32.  better  than  be,  and  slew  them  with  thes. 
19. 1.  how  he  had  slain  all  the  prophets  with  the  s. 
10.  and  slain  thy  prophets  with  the  s.  14. 

2  Kin!rs8. 12.  young  men  wilt  thou  slay  with  thes. 
11.  15.  have  Alhaliah  forth,  and  him  that  fol- 

loweth  her,  kill  with  the  s.  2  Chron.  23.  14. 

20.  they  slew  Athalia  with  Ihr.s.^  Chron.  23.  21. 

19.  37.  his  son  smote  Sennacherib  king  of  Assyria 

tnilk  the  s.  2  Chron.  32.  21.  Isa.  .37.  .38. 
2  CAi-on.21.4.  and  slew  all  his  brethren  with  thes. 

36.  17.  who  slew  their  ynnng  men  with  the  s. 
P.9.42.10.  as  withas.  inmv  bonesencmies  reproach 
fsa.  1.  20.  rebel,  ye  shall  be  devoured  with  the  s. 

14.  10.  that  are  slain,  thrust  through  with  a  s. 

22.  2.  thy  slain  men  are  not  slain  with  thes. 
27.  I.  the  Lord  tcith  his  strong  .•?.  shall  punish 

Jer.  .5.  17.  shall  impoverish  thy  cities  with  the  s. 
14.  18.  then  behold  the  slain  with  the  s. 

20.  4.  and  he  shall  slay  Judah  with  the  s. 

26.  23.  who  slew  Urijah  with  the  s.  and  cast 

27.  8.  that  nation  will  I  punish  -with  the  s. 
29.  18.  I  will  persecute  them  with  the  s. 

41.  2.  smote  Gedaliah  with  the  s.  and  slew  him 
Lam.  4.9.  they  that  be  slain  with  thes.  are  better 
than  they  that  be  slain  with  hunger 
F.zek.  7.15.  he  that  is  in  the  field  shall  die  with  the  s. 

23.  10.  the  Assyrians  slew  her  with  the  s. 

26.  8.  shall  slay  the  daughters  of  Tyrup  with  thes. 
31.  17.  thev  aHo  went  down  to  hell  with  them 
that  be  slain  icilh  the  s.  32.  28,  32.  I  35.  8- 
JImos  1.  11.  he  did  p.ursue  his  brother  with  the  s. 
4.  10.  your  young  men  have  I  -lain  with  the  s. 
7.  9.  rise  against  house  of  Jeroboam  with  the  s. 


SYC 

.^mos  9.  1.  I  will  slay  the  last  of  them  with  the  t 

Mic.  5.6.  shall  waste  the  land  of  Assyria  with  thes. 

Mat.  26. 52.  that  take  the  s.  sliall  perish  with  the  s. 

Luke  22.  49.  Lord,  shall  we  smite  with  the  a.  7 

Jlcts  12.  2.  Herod  killed  James  with  the  s. 

Heb.  11.37.  were  tempted,  were  slain  with  tlie  s. 

Rev.  2.  16.  I  will  fight  against  them  with  the  s. 
6.8.  and  power  to  kill  with  s.  and  with  hunger 
13.  10.  that  killeth  with  s.  must  be  killed  with  S. 
19.  21.  the  remnant  were  slain  with  the  s. 
SWORDS. 

1  .Sam.  13. 19.  lest  the  Hebrews  make  them  s. 

2  Kings  3.  26.  took  with  him  700  men  that  drew  t, 
./VeA.  4.  13.  I  even  set  the  peojjle  with  their  s. 
Psal.  55.  21.  yet  his  words  were  drawn  s. 

59.  7.  behold,  they  belch  out,  s.  are  in  their  lips 
Prov.  30.  14.  a  generation,  whose  teeth  are  as  s. 
Cant.  3.  8.  they  all  hold  s.  being  expert  in  war 
Isa.  2.  4.  and  they  shall  beat  their  ^'.  into  plough- 
shares, their  spears  into  pruning-hooks,  Mie:  4. 3. 

21.  15.  Ihey  fled  from  the  s.  and  from  the  bow 
F.iek.  16.  40.  shall  thrust  thee  th(4>ugh  with  their  «. 

23.  47.  and  shall  dispatch  them  with  their  s. 

28.  7.  strangers  shall  draw  their  s.  and  they  shall 
defile  thy  brightness 

30,  11.  they  shall  draw  their  s.  against  Egypt 
D2. 12.  by  the  s.  of  the  mighty  will  I  cause  to  fall 

27.  they  have  laid  their  s.  under  their  heads 
./oel  3.  10.  beat  your  plough-shares  into  j. 
Mat.  26.  47.  with  Judas  was  a  great  multitude 
with  s.  from  the  chief  priests,  Mark  14.  43. 
55.  are  ye  come  out  as  against  a  thief  with  s.  and 
stave's  to  take  me?  Mark  14  48.  Luke2i.  52. 
Luke  22.  38.  Lord,  behold  here  are  two  s. 

SWORN. 
Gen.  22.  16.  by  myself  have  I  .5.  saith  the  Lord, 
Isa.  45.  23.  .Ter.  49.  13.  |  51. 14.  .^mosG.  8. 
Exod.  13.  19.  Joseph  had  straitly  s.  Israel 
17.  16.  the  Lord  hath  s.  that  he  will  have  war 
f.en.  6.  5.  that  about  VN'hich  he  halh  s.  falsely 
Dtut.  7.  8.  would  keep  the  oath  he  had  s.  ./er.  11.  5. 
13.  17.  multiply  thee,  as  he  hath  s.  to  thy  fathers 

19.  8.  if  he  enlarge  thy  coast,  as  he  bath  s. 
28.  9.  shall  establish  thee,  as  he  hath  s.29.  1.3. 

31.  7.  bring  thee  to  land  Lord  halh  s.  JVeh.  9. 15. 
Josh.  9.  18.  because  the  princes  had  s.  to  them 

19.  we  have  s.  to  them  by  the  Lord,  2  Sam.  21. 2. 
Judg.  2.  15.  against  them  for  evil,  as  Lord  had  s. 
21.  1.  now  the  men  of  Israel  had  s.  in  Mizpeh 
7.  we  have  s.  not  to  give  them  wives,  18. 

1  f^am.  3.  14.  I  have  s.  unto  the  house  of  Eli 

20.  42.  go  in  peace,  forasmuch  as  we  have  s. 

2  Sam.  3.  9.  except  as  the  Lord  hath  s.  to  David 

21.  2.  children  of  Israel  had  «  to  Gibeonites 

2  Chron.  15.  15.  they  had  s.  with  all  their  hearts 
JVcA.  6.  18.  there  were  many  in  Judah  s.  to  him 
9.  15.  the  land  which  thou  hadst  s.  to  give  them 
Psal.  24.  4.  who  hath  not  s.  deceitfully 
89.  3.  I  have  s.  unto  David  my  servant 
35.  once  have  I  s.  by  my  holiness,  .,1mos  4.  2. 
102.  8.  that  are  mad  against  me,  are  s.  against  me 
110.  4.  the  Lord  hath  .s.  and  will  not  repent 
119.  lOG.  I  have  s.  and  I  will  perform  it 
1.32.  11.  the  Lord  hiith  s.  in  truth  to  David 
Isa.  14.  24.  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  s.  saying 
45.  2.3.  I  have  s.  by  myself,  the  word  is  gone  out 
54.9.Ihave  s.that  waters  of  Noah  no  more  ^  o^r 
the  earth,  so  have  \  s.\  would  not  be  wroth 
02.  8.  the  Lord  halh  .«.  by  his  right  hand 
Jer.  5.  7.  they  have  s.  by  them  that  are  no  gods 
44.  20.  behold,  I  have  s.  by  my  great  name 
F.zck.  21.  23.  to  them  that  have  s.  oaths 
.Smos  8. 7.  Lord  hath  s.  by  the  excellency  of  Jacob 
.Mie.  7.  20.  wilt  perform  the  mercy  thou  hast  s. 
Jlcts  2.30.  knowing  God  halh  s.  with  an  oath  to  him 
that  he  would  raise  up  Chrirt 
7.  17.  time  of  promise  drew  nigh  which  God  had  s. 
Heb.  4.  3.  I  have  s.  in  my  wrath,  if  they  enter 

SYCAMINE. 
/>h4c  17. 6.  say  to  this  .«.  tree,  he  thou  plucked  up 

SYCAMORE 
Is  a  tree  called  the  Egyptian  fig-tree ;  its  name 
is  composed  of  sycos,  a  fig-tree.,  and  moros,  c 
mulberry-tree.  It  partakes  of  the  nature  of 
each  of  thfse  trees ;  of  the  mulberry  tree  in  its 
//■(inc.-',  and  of  the  fig-tree  in  its  frnit,  whirh  is 
pretty  like  a  fig  in  its  shape  and  bigness.  This 
fruit  grows  neither  in  clusters^  uor  at  the  ends 
of  the  branches,  but  sticking  to  the  trunk  of  the 
tree.  Its  taste  is  pretty  much  like  a  wild  fig. 
.9mns  says,  I  was  no  prophet,  neither  was  I  a 
prophet's  son,  but  I  was  a  herdman,  and  a 
gatherer  of  sycamorc-frmt,  or  wild  fig.',  Amos 
7.  14.  Pliny  and  other  nalurali.'^t.i  observe, 
that  this  fruit  does  not  grow  ripe  till  it  is 
rubbed  with  iron  combs,  eifter  which  rubbing 
it  ripens  in  four  days  Jlnd  .hrom  upon 
Amos  soys,  that  without  this  management  the 
figs  cannot  bceatcn,  because  of  lhciri7itolcrahlt 
bitterness. 


SYN 

To  make  this  tree  fruitful,  they  made  chinks  and 
clefts  in  the  bark,tkroug/i  which  a  kind  of  milky 
liquor  continually  distils.  This,  they  say, 
causes  a  little  bough  to  be  formed,  somt times 
having  siz  or  seven  figs  upon  it.  They  are  hol- 
low, without  grains,  and  there  is  found  a  little 
yellow  matter  lohich  is  generally  a  nest  of 
grubs.  These  figs  are  sweet,  but  not  good  fur 
the  stomach:  thiy  weaken  it,  and  create  a  loath- 
ing, but  at  the  same  time  7iioisten  and  refresh. 
^  great  many  of  these  sycamores  grovo  in 
Egypt;  and  same  of  them  aresaidto  he  of  such 
substance, that  three  men  can  hardly  graspthcm. 
There  icere  also  some  in  Judea,  as  appears  from 
Luke  19.  4,  where  Zacchrus  is  said  to  have 
climbed  up  into  a  sycamore-tree  to  see  ,/csus 
pass  by,  being  of  so  low  a  stature  that  he  could 
not  otherwise  see  him  because  of  the  multitude. 
t5YCAM(MlK-FRUIT. 

Amos  7.  14.  a  liprdm.m  anil  u  snthHrer  oi s.-fruit 
SYCAMOKK-TllEE. 

Luke  19.  4.  Zarclieiis  climbfil  up  into  a  s.-tree 
SYCAMORE-TREES. 

liri'nffilO.ST.SoIomon  made  cedars  to  be  as  s.-trees 
for  abundance,  2  Chron.  1.  15.  ]  9.  27. 

1  Chron.  27. 2.S.  over  the  s.-trees  was  Baal-hanaii 

Psal.7ii.  47.  he  destroyed  their  s.-trees  with  frost 
SYCAMORES. 

Isa.  9. 10.  the  s.  are  cut  down,  but  we  will  change 
SYMPHONY. 

This  word  is  taken  for  the  agreement  of  several 
voices,  and  a  concert  of  several  instruments, 
or  for  a  particular  sort  of  instrument.  St. 
Liuke  takes  it  in  the  first  sense,  when  he  says, 
that  the  brother  of  the  prodigal  son,  returning 
out  of  the  field,  heard  in  his  father's  house  a 
concert  of  instrumental,  and  the  rejoicing  of 
those  that  danced,  or  the  voices  of  those  that 
sung,  >)xiio-£  crvfipjjvix;  x«i  xo?'''^,  Luke  1.5. 
25.  Daniel  takes  it  in  the  second  sense,  for 
an  instrument  of  music,  Dan.  3.  5,  which  some 
think  was  a  rial,  or  sotne  instrument  approach- 
ing thereto. —  tn  our  English  translation  it  is 
called  a  dulcimer. 

Dan.  3.  t  5.  sound  of  the  cornet,  flute,  harp,  s. 
SYNAGOGUE. 

In  Greek  a-w^.y^-yvi,  of  o-uvayfii',  to  gather  to- 
gether, s;>n//ifs  an  assembly,  as  in  Rev.  2.  9.  || 
3.9.  where  St..fohn  calls  thf  false  and  hypocriti- 
cal prof  elisors  in.  Smyrna  and  I'hiladrlphia,  the 
synagogue  of  Satan,  a  congrrgation  or  assem- 
bly 1^' men,  who  worship  and  serve  the  devil  by 
errors  and  prufaneness,  and  yet  pretend  they 
are  the  only  true  church  of  Ood.  But  most 
commonly  the  word  synagogue  is  used  to  denote 
the  place  where  the  Jews  assemble  to  pray,  to 
read,  and  to  hear  the  reading  of  the  holy  hooks, 
and  other  instructions.  It  is  often  mentioned 
in  the  (ruspels  and  the  Acts  because  Christ 
and  his  apostles  generally  went  to  preach  in 
the  synagogues. 

Authors  arc  not  agreed  about  the  time  when  the 
Jews  first  began  to  have  synagogues :  Some  will 
have  it  that  they  are  as  ancient  as  the  ceremo- 
nial law.  It  cannot  be  denied,  sny  they,  that 
the  Jews  did  worship  (iod  publicly  every  snb- 
WhtQ,  and  on  other  holy  occasions,  even  thru 
when  they  neither  did,  nor  could  go  up  to  ./e- 
rusalem  ;  it  i»  therefore  vertj  presumable  that 
both  conscience  and  prudence  did  direct  them 
to  appoint  convenient  places  for  that  purpose. 
Some  footsteps  of  them  were  to  be  seen  so  early 
as  in  the  time  of  F.liska.  Devout  persons  in 
the  time  of  this  prophet  assembled  themselves 
to  him  on  the  sabbath-dny,  to  hear  the  law  rend 
tn  them,  2  Kings  4.  2.1.  J)nd  the  author  of 
Psal.  74tA,  describing  the  havoc  that  the  army 
of  J^ebuchadnezzar  had  made  in  .Terusnlrm, 
says,  ihcy  have  burned  up  all  the  synagogues 
of  (Jod  in  the  land,  t'sal.74.  8. 

On  the  contrary,  many  learned  men  have  thnurrht 
them  of  but  a  late  institution.  Dr.  I'ridraur 
affirms,  that  they  had  7i«  synagogues  before  the 
Babylonish  captivity,  for  the  main  service  of 
the  »ynagogui!,  says  he,  being  the  reading  of 
the  law  unto  the  people,  where  there  was  no 
book  of  the  law  to  be  read,  there  certainly  could 
be  no  synngot'ue.  Hut  how  rare  the  book  of 
the.  law  was  through  nil  Judea  beforr  the  Hn- 
bylonish  enplirity,  mnny  lerts  of  scripture  tell 
us.  fVhen  .hhoshnphat  sent  teachers  through 
all  .Tvdea,  to  instruct  the  people  in  the  law  of 
flod,  they  carried  a  book  of  the  lain  with  them, 
2  Chron.  17.  9.  which  they  needed  not  have 
done,  if  there  had  been  any  copies  of  the  law  in 
those  cities  to  which  they  went ;  wliich  certain- 
ly thoe  would  have  been,  had  there  been  any 
synasfogUBS  in  them.  .Ind  when  llilkinh  found 
the  lam  in  the  temple,  2  Kings  2i.  H.  neither  he 
nor  king  Josiah  needed  to  have  been  so  tur- 


SYN 

prised  at  tt,  had  books  of  the  law  been  common 
in  those  times.  Their  behaviour  on  that  occa- 
sion sufficiently  proves,  they  had  never  seen 
it  before,  which  could  not  be  the  case,  had 
there  then  been  any  other  copies  of  it  to  be 
found  among  the  people.  And  if  there  were  no 
copies  of  the  law  at  that  time  among  them, 
there  could  then  be  most  certainly  no  synagogues 
for  them  to  resort  to,  for  the  hearing  of  it  read 
unto  them.  From  whence  he  coucluites,  there 
could  be  no  synagogues  among  the  Jews,  till 
after  the  liahylonish  captivity. 

This  learned  author  says,  that  if  it  be  examined 
into,  how  it  came  to  pass  that  the  .feics  were  so 
prone  to  idolatry  before  the  liahylonish  capti- 
vity, and  so  strongly  and  cautiously,  even  to 
superstition,  fii.ed  against  it  after  that  capti- 
vity, the  true  reason  hereof  will  appear  to  be, 
that  they  had  the  law  and  the  i)rophets  every 
week  constantly  readunto  them  after  that  capti- 
vity which  they  had  not  before.  For  before  that 
captivity,  they  having  no  synagogues  fur  pub- 
lic worship,  or  public  instruction,  nor  any 
places  to  resort  to  for  either,  unless  the  temple 
at  Jerusalem,  or  the  cities  of  the  I.evites,  or  to 
the  prophets,  when  God  was  pleased  to  send 
such  among  them,  for  leant  hereof  great  igno- 
rance grew  among  the  people :  God  was  little 
known  among  them,  and  his  laws  in  a  7nanncr 
wholly  forgotten.  And  therefore  as  occasion 
offered,  they  were  easily  drawn  into  all  the  su- 
perstitious and  idolatrous  usages  of  the  neigh- 
bouring nations ;  till  at  length,  fur  the  punish- 
ment hereof,  God  gave  them  up  to  a  dismal 
destruction  in  the  Uabylonish  captivity:  Hut 
after  that  captivity,  and  the  return  of  the  Jews 
from  it,  synagogues  being  erected  among  them 
in  every  city,  to  which  thry  constantly  resorted 
for  public  worship,  and  where  every  week  they 
had  the  law  from  the  first,  and  after  that  from 
the  time  of  ./intiochus'  persecution,  the  pro- 
phets also  read  unto  them,  and  were  by  sermons 
and  exhortations  there  deliv/red,  at  least  every 
sabbath,  instructed  in  their  duty,  and  excited 
to  the  obedience  of  it:  This  kept  them  in  a  tho- 
rough knoioledge  of  God  and  his  laws.  And 
the  threats  they  found  in  the  prophets  against 
the  breakers  of  them,  after  these  also  came  to 
be  rend  among  them,  deterred  them  from  trans- 
gressing against  them.  So  that  the  laic  of 
J)Ioses  was  never  more  strictly  observed  by 
them  than  from  the  time  of  Ezra  {when  syna- 
gogues /irs/.  came  into  use  among  them)  to  the 
time  of  our  Saviour ;  and  they  would  have  been 
unblamable  herein,  had  they  not  overdone  it, 
by  adding  corrupt  traditions  of  their  own  de- 
vising, whereby,  at  length,  they  made  tlte  law 
itself  of  none  effect,  as  our  Saviour  chargelh 
them.  Mat.  15.  6. 

.Is  to  Psal.  74.  8,  They  have  burned  up  nil  the 
sijiiagogues  of  God  in  the  land ;  In  theoriginal. 
Col  moadhe  El,  that  is,  all  the  assemblies  of  God, 
by  which,  says  Dr.  Prideauz,  I  acknowledge 
must  be  understood  the  places  where  the  people 
did  assemble  to  worship  God.  But  this  doth 
not  infer,  that  those  places  were  synagogues; 
and  there  are  none  of  the  ancient  versions,  ex- 
cejjting  that  of  Aquila,  that  so  render  this  pas- 
sage. The  chief  place  where  the  Israelites  as- 
sembled for  tlte  worship  of  God,  was  the  temple 
at  .lerusnlem,  and  before  that  was  built,  the 
tabernacle ;  and  the  open  court  before  the  altnr 
wns  that  part,  in  bjth  of  them,  where  the  people, 
assembled  to  offer  up  their  prayers  unto  God. 
Hut  those  thiit  lived  at  a  di.i'tance  from  the 
tabernnele,  while  that  wai  in  being,  and  after- 
words  from  the  temple,  when  that  wns  built,  not 
being  able  at  all  times  to  resort  thither,  they 
built  courts,  like  those  in  which  they  prayed  at 
the  tabernnele  and  at  the  temple,  therein  to 
offerup  their  prayers  unto  God, wbichin  after- 
times  we  find  called  by  the  name  of  proseuclim. 
Into  one  of  them  our  Saviiiur  is  said  to  have 
gone  to  prat/,  and  to  have  continued  therein  a 
whole  niffhl',  Luke  (i.  12.  IV hat  our  English 
translation  there  renders,  and  continued  all 
night  in  prayer  lo  God,  is  in  the  original  «»'' 
i]w  JcifUJCTipiu^v  IV  Tti  rtportuyi'^  Tcy  Bi3u,  that 
is.  And  he  continued  nil  night  in  n  prosuucha 
of  (Jod.  In  another  of  them,  St.  Paul  taught 
the  people  at  Philippi,  Acts  If..  13, 10.  In  these 
two  verses,  what,  we  render  in  our  English 
vrr.iion  by  the  word  prayer,  i.v  in  the  original 
a  proseueha,  or  place  of  prayer. 

The  proseurhu'  differed  from  the  synngoguns  in 
several  particulars,  fl]  In  synagogues  the 
prayers  were  offered  up  in  public  forms  in  com- 
mon for  the  whole  congregation  ;  but  in  the 
proseuchm  they  prayed,  as  in  the  temple,  every 
one  apart  for  himself ;   and  so  our  Saviour 


SYN 

prayed  in  the  proseuchae  he  went  into.  [2]  Tht 
synagogues  were  covered  houses;  but  the  pro 
seucho;  were  open  courts;  they  had  no  covering^ 
except  perhaps  the  shade  of  some  trees,  or  some 
covered  galleries.  [3]  The  synngugut&were  all 
built  on  elevated  places,  within  the  cities  to 
which  they  did  belong ;  but  the  proseuchiE  were 
without  the  cities,  in  ihcfulds,  especially  near 
rivers.  So  this  author  concludes,  that  when 
the  Psalmist  says,  that  they  burnt  up  the 
synagogues  o^GoA,  he  may  be  understood  of  tht 
prosuuclue,  or  of  the  schools  of  the  prophets, 
vr  the  places  where  the  Levites  taught  the  peo- 
ple in  their  cities. 

After  the  time  of  the  JMaecabees,  synagogues  b»- 
came  freyuent  in  Israel.  It  is  ajfirmed,  that 
in  the  city  of  .Jerusalem,  ulune,  were  no  less 
than  four  hundred  and  sixty,  or  even  four  hun- 
dred  and  eighty  ;  but  herein  they  are  .•'uppostd 
to  have  spoken  hyperbolically,  and  to  have  ex- 
pressed an  uncertain  large  number  by  a  certain 
one.  Every  trading  fratirnity  hud  a  syna- 
gogue ()/  their  own,  and  even  strangers  built 
some  for  those  of  their  own  nation.  Hence  it 
is,  that  in  Acts  6.  9.  mention  is  n\adc  of  the 
synagogues  of  the  Libertines,  Cyrcnians,  Alex- 
andrians, Cilicians,  and  Asiatics;  which  were 
appointed  for  the  use  of  such  of  the  inhabitants 
of  these  cities,  or  of  these  nations,  as  should  at 
any  time  be  at  Jerusalem. 

The  ./cwish  authors  give  this  general  rule  for  the 
construction  of  synagogues.  M'hcrever  there 
are  ten  batelnim,  a  synagogue  ought  to  be 
built.  The  signification  of  tl,e  word  balelninn, 
has  been  much  controverted.  Buxtorf  thinks 
them  to  be  persons  receiving  a  stipend  for  duly 
assisting  at  divine  service,  that  there  may  be 
always  ten  persons,  at  least,  to  assemble  to- 
gether. Ughtfoot  imagines  them  lo  have  been 
ministers  andojficers  of  the  synagogue.  Others 
think  this  the  most  probable  opinio-,  naiHely, 
that  they  were  persons  of  a  mature  age,  fr^, 
and  in  a  condition  to  assist  constantly  at  the 
S(rvice,  on  all  days  of  assembling,  which  were, 
at  least,  two  days  a  week,  beside  the  Sahbath  : 
So  that  always  upon  these  days  there  were  pre- 
sent that  number  of  assistants,  without  which 
the  service  could  not  be  performed.  fVhen  there 
were  ten  such  persons  in  a  towti  or  city,  they 
called  it  a  great  city,  and  here  they  might  build 
a  synagogue. 

.^s  the  synngogae-service  was  to  be  on  three  days 
every  weik,  for  the  sake  of  hearing  the  law  ;  so 
it  was  to  be  thrice  vu  those  days,  for  the  sake 
of  their  prayers.  For  it  was  a  constant  rule 
amona  them,  that  all  were  to  pray  untu  God 
three  times  every  day,  that  is,  in  the  morning, 
at  the  time  of  the  morning  sacrifice  ;  and  in  the 
evening,  at  the  time  of  the  evening  sacrifice; 
and  at  the  beginning  of  the  night, pecnuse  till 
then  the  evening  sacrifice  was  still  left  burning 
■upon  the  altar.  It  was  ancieiitly  among  God's 
people  the  steady  practice  of  good  and  religious 
persons,  to  offerup  their  prayers  to  God  thrice 
everyday.  This  we  find  David  did.  PsnI.  55. 
17,  ftveniiig,  morning,  and  at  noon,  will  I  pray. 
And  Daniel,  notwithstanding  the  king's  de- 
cree to  the  contrary,  says,  that  he  kneeled 
upon  his  knees  three  times  a  day,  and  prayed, 
and  gave  thanks  unto  his  God,  Dan.  0.  10. 
By  which  it  is  implied,  that  he  did  not  only  at 
that  time  thus  pray,  but  that  it  was  always  his 
constant  custom  so  to  do. 

Jl'hen  synagogues  were  erected  among  the  .Jews, 
the  hours  of  public  devotion  in  them  on  their 
Hynagiigiic  days,  were,  as  to  morning  and  even- 
ing prni/ers,  the  same  hours  in  which  the  morn- 
ing and  evening  sacrifices  were  offered  up  at 
the  temple,  .find  the samehours  were  also  ob- 
served in  their  private  prayers  wherever  per- 
formed. For  the  offeriner  of  the  incense  on  the 
gidden  altnr  in  the  holy  place,  at  every  morning 
and  evening  sacrifice  in  the  temple,  wns  insti- 
tuted on  purpose  inoffer  up  unto  find  the  pray- 
ers of  the  people, who  were  then  without, praying 
unto  him.  Ifrnce  it  was,  that  St.  I.uke  tells 
us,  that  while  Zneharias  went  into  the  temple 
to  burn  incen.«f,  the  whole  multitude  of  the  peo- 
ple were  praving  without  at  the  lime  of  incense, 
/.uke  1.  9,  10.  .Ind  for  the  same  reason  it  is 
that  David  prayed.  Let  my  prayer  he  sot  forlli 
before  thee  ns  incense,  and  the  liftini:  up  of 
niy  hands  as  the  evening  sacrifice,  Psal.  I4T.  2. 
.Ind  according  to  this  vsarre  is  tn  be  explained 
what  we  find  in  Pcv.  8.  3,  4,  5,  where  it  is 
said,  that  an  angel  came  and  stood  nt  the 
altar,  having  n  goldi'n  censir,  and  there  wsn 
given  unto  him  much  inconse,  that  he  should 
Pilfer  it  up  with  the  iirayers  of  all  saints,  upon 
the  golden  altnr,  which  was  before  the  throne: 


SYN 


SYPf 


and  the  iQioko  of  the  incense,  which  came  wKcn  (Key  mere  to  read  it.  In  the  midst  of  th* 
with  the  prayers  of  the  saints,  ascended  up'  synagogue  was  a  dealt  or  pulpit,  upon  which 
before  God  out  of  the  angel's  hand.   Tlie  an^reli     thelioo/c  or  roll  of  tke  lawwax  readvcrysoleiiiiUy . 


iere  mentioned,  is  the  angel  of  the  covenant. 
Christ  our  Lord,  who  intercedes  for  us  with 


There  likewise  he  stood  who  intended  to  ha- 
rangue the  people. 


God,  and,  as  our  Mediator,  constantly  offers  -^s  to  <Ae  seats  or  pews  whereon  the  people  sat  to 


up  our  prayers  unto  him.     Jind  the  manner  of 
his  doing  this  is  set  forth  by  the  manner  of  the 
typical  representation  of  it  in  the  temple, 
hor  as  Uiere,al  every  morning  and  evt ning  sacri- 
Jice,  the  priest,  in  virtue  of  that  sacrifice,  en- 
tering into  the huly  place,  and  presenting  him- 
self at  the  golden  altar,  which  stood  directly 
before  the  mercy-seat,  {the  throne  of  God's  visi- 
ble presence  among  them  during  the  tabernacle 
and  the  first  temple)  did  bum  incense  thereon, 
while  the  people  were  at  their  prayers  without, 
thereby,  as  an  intercessor  to  God  for  them,  to 
offer  up  thcirprayers  to  him  for  his  gracious  ac 
ceptancc,  and  to  make  them  ascend  up  before 
him  from  out  of  his  hands  as  a  swcet-smclling 
savour  in  his  presence;  so  Christ,  our  true 
priest,  and  most  powerful  intercessor,  by  virtue 
of  that  one  sacrifice  of  himself  once  offered  U|>, 
being  entered  into  the  holy  place,  the  heaven 
above,  is  there  continually  present  before  the 
throne  of  mercy,  tu  be  a  constant  intercessor 
for  us  unto  God;  and  while  we  arc  here  in  the 
outer  court  of  his  church  in  this  world,  offering 
up  our  prayers  unto   God;  he  there  presents 
them  unto  him  for  us,  and  through  his  hands 
they  are  accepted  as  a  sweet-smelling  savour  in 
his  presence. 
Snd  it  being  well  understood  among  the  Jews 
that  theoffering  up  of  the  daily  sacrifices,  and 
the  burning  of  incense  upon  the  altar  of  in- 
cense, at  the  time  of  those  sacrifices,  was  for 
the  rendering  of  God  propitious  to  them,  and 
making  their  prayers  to  be  acceptable  in  his 
presence,  they  were  very  careful  to  make  the 
times  of  these  offerings,  and  the  times  of  their 
prayers,  both  at  the  temple,  and  every  where 
■   else,  to  be  exactly  the  same. 
The  most  pious  and  devout  persons  that  were  at 
Jerusalem,  chose  on  those  times  to  go  up  into 
the  temple,  and  there  to  offer  up  their  prayers 
unto  God;  thus  Peter  and  John  are  said  to  go 
up  into  the  temple  at  the  hour  of  prayer,  being 
the  ninth  hour  of  the  day,  which  was  at  three 
in  the  afternoon,  the  time  of  the  offering  up  the 
evening  sacrifice,  Acts  3.  1.     Those  who  were 
in  other  places,  or  being  at  .Jerusalem,  had  not 
leisure  to  go  up  to  the  temple,  performed  their 
devotions  elsewhere:  If  it  were  a  synagogue- 
day,  they  went  into  the  synagogue,  and  there 
prayed  with  the  congregation  :  and  if  it  were 
not  a  synagogue-day  they  then  prayed  in  pri- 
vate by  thrinsclvfs  ;  and  if  they  had  leisure  to 
go  to  the  synagogue,  they  chose  that  for  the 
place  to  do  it  in,  thinking  such  a  holy  place 
Vie  properest  for  such  a  holy  exercise,  though 
performed  there  in  their  private  persons  only ; 
but  if  they  had  not  leisure  to  go  to  such  a  holy 
place,  then  they  prayed  wherever  they  were  at 
the  hour  of  prayer,  though  it  were  in  the  street 
or  market-place,     .find  for  this  it  was  that 
Sauiour  found  fault  loith  them,  when  he  told 
tliem.    Mat.   6.  5,    that    they    loved    to    pray 
standing  in  the  synagogues,  and  in  the  corners 
of  the  streets,   thereby   affecting  more  to   he 
ieen  of  men,  than  to  be  accepted  of  by  God. 
But  many  of  them  had  upper  rooms  in  their 
houses,  which  were  as  chapels,  particularly  set 
apart,  and  consecrated  for  this  purpose.    In 
such  a  one  Ciirncliits  loas  prayiiigat  the  ninih 
hour  of  the  day,   that   is,  at   the  time  of  the 
evening  sacrifiee,when  the  angel  appeared  unto 
him.  Acts  10.  30.     Jind  such  a  one  Peter  went 
up  into  to  pray  about  the  sixth  hour  of  the  day, 
^ets  10.  9.  when  he  had  the  vision  of  the  great 
sheet,  Iknl  is,  at  half  an  hour  past  twelve  or 
thereabout ;  for  then  the  evening  sacrifice  did 
begin  on  great  and  solemn  days,  and  such  a 
»ne  it  seems  hereby  that  was.    Jind  in  such  an 
upper  room  where  the  apostles  assembled  to- 
gether   in    prayer,   when  the  Holy    Ghost  de- 
scended upon  them.  Acts  1.13. 
In  the  synagogue  was  the  ark  or  chest,  wherein 
lay  the  book  of  the  lair,  that   is,  the  Penta- 
teuch, or  five  hooks  of  Jloses.    This  chest,  they 
fay,  was  made  after  the  model  of  the  ark  of 
the  covenant,  and  alirays  placed  in  that  part  of 
tAe  synagcgiie  which  looked  towards  tAi;  Holy 
J.and,  if  the  synagogue  was   out  of  it;  but 
tf  it  was  within  it,  then  the  chest  was  placed 
towards  .Jerusalem  ;  and  if  the  synagogue  itoorf 
in  this   city,  the   chest  was  set   towards  the 
holy   of  holies.     Out  of  this  ark  it  was  ihei/ 
look,  toith  a  great  deal  of  ceremony,  and  before 
the  whole  congregation,  the  book  of  the  law, 
599 


hear  the  law  read  and  expounded ;  of  these  some 
were  more  honourable  than  others.  'I'he  former 
wire  for  those  who  were  called  Elders,  not  so 
■much  upon  the  account  of  their  age  as  of  their 
gravity, prudence,  and  authority.  These  Elders 
sat  with  their  backs  towards  the  foremeutioned 
chest,  and  their  faces  towards  the  congregation, 
who  looked  towards  the  ark.   7'Acst'beaia  ofthe 
Elders  are  those  which  are  called  in  Mat.  23. 
6,  the  chief  scats,  and  which  our  Haviour  or- 
dered his  disciples  not  to  contend  for,  or  affect, 
as  the  Pharisees  did.   The  women  were  therein 
distinct  from  the  men,  and  sealed  in  a  gallery 
inclosed  with  lattices,  so  that  they  might  see 
and  hear,  but  not  be  seen. 
To  regulate  and  take  care  of  all  things  belonging 
to  the  synagogue  service,  there  was  appointed 
acouncil,or  assembly  of  grave  andwise  persons, 
well  versed  in  the  law,  over  whom  was  set  a 
president,  who  is  called  the  ruler  of  the  syna- 
gogue, Luke  S.  41.     He   presided   in  the  as- 
semblies,   and    in  judicial   affairs   that   were 
sometimes  decided  there,  against  those  who  had 
given  any  scandal,  and  transgressed  the  law  in 
any  important  matter,  jis  for  scourging,  some 
are  of  opinion,  that  it  was  a  punishment  not 
falling  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  rulers  of 
the  6ynagogues,iut  belonging  to  the  civil  courts, 
which  they  take  to  be  meant  by  the  synagogues, 
where  our  Saviour  tells  his  disciples  theyshould 
be  scourged.  Mat.  10.  17.     Others  on  the  con- 
trary, maintain,  that  by  We  word  synagogues  m 
the  place  here   quoted,  we  are  to  understand 
synagogues  properly  so  called.     Jis  to  the  man 
ner  o/ scourging,  see  ScouROic. 
The  same  presidents  invited  those  to  speak  in  the 
synagogue,  whom  they  thought  capable  of  it, 
and  offered  that  honour  to  strangers,  if  there 
were  any  that  seemed  to  have  the  gift  of  speak- 
ing.    i>t.  Paul  being  at  Jinlioch  of   Pisidia, 
was  invited  by  the  rulers  of  the  synagogue  to 
make  a  discourse  to  them  for  their  edification. 
Acts   13.    14,    15.      ^7i(Z  it  is  very  probable, 
that  whenever  our  iiaviour  preached  in  the 
synagogues  it  was  not  without  the  permission 
of  the  president,  or  chief  ruler,  though  it  be 
not  expressly  said  so  in  the  gospel,  because  it 
was  a  known  custom. 
The  rulers  of  the  synagogue  were  likewise  bound 
to  take  care  of  the  poor.      There  were  in  every 
synagogue  two  treasury  chests,  one  for  poor 
strangers,  and  the  other  for  their  own  poor. 
Those  who  were  charitably  inclined,  put  their 
alms  into  these  chests  at  their  coming  into  the 
synagogue  to  pray.    Upon  extraordinary  occa- 
sions they  sometimes  made  public  collections  ; 
in  which  cases,  the  rulers   of  the  synagogue 
ordered  the  person  whose  business  it  was  to 
collect  the  alms,  to   ask   every  body  for  his 
charily.     Every  one  promised  according  as  he 
was  disposed,  and  afterwards  they  gathered 
from  house  to  house  what  had  been  promised, 
for  the  .lews  meddUd  not  with  money  on  their 
sabbath  day. 
These  rulers  likeieise  taught  the  people.  This  they 
did  somctimesby  way  of  dispute  andconference 
by  questions  and  answers,  or  else  by  continued 
discourses  like  sermons.    Jill  these  different 
ways  of  teaching  they  called  by  the  general 
name  of  searching ;  the  discourse  they  styled. 
a  search,  or  inquisition,  and  him  that  made  it, 
a  searcher.     The  Hebrew  word  derafch,  signi- 
fies,   to     dive     into    the     sublime,    profound, 
mystical,   allegorical,    and    prophetical   senses 
of  h(ily  scripture. 
The  synagogue  of  the  Llliertines,  or  freed  men, 
Jicts  6. 9.  was,  according  to  many  interpreters, 
that  of  those  .Jews,  who  having  been  led  away 
captive  by  Pompey  and  by  Sosias,  had  after- 
wards recovered  their  liberty,  and  were  retired 
to  .Terusnlcm,  when   Tiberias  drove  awny  the 
.fcws  out  of  Italy.     Others  will  have  it,  that 
St.   Luke  wrote  L'byslinorum,  (i7i(/ not  Lilier- 
linorum;  and  that  the  Lihyslini  were  people  of 
Libya,  joining   to    Egypt.     Others   by  these 
Libertines  understood  the  sons  of  such  .feus  as 
were  free  denizens  of  Rome. 
Mat.  12.  9.  when  departed,  he  went  into  their  s. 
13.  54.  he  taught  them  in  their  s.  Mark  6.  2. 
Mark  1.  23.  and  there  was  in  their  s.  a  man  with 
an  unclean  spirit,  Lukei.  33. 
29.  when  they  were  come  out  of  s.  Luke  4.  38. 
5.  22.  Jairus  by  n,ame,  one  of  the  rulers  of  the 
«.  besought  Jesus  36  38^  Luke  8.  41,  49. 


TAB 

Luke  4.  16.  as  his  custom  was,  he  w-ent  info  the 
s.  on  the  sabbath-day 
20.  the  eyes  of  all  in  the  s.  were  lustened  on  him 
7.  5.  he  loveUi  our  nation  and  hath  built  us  a  s. 
John  6.  59.  these  things  said  he  in  the  s. 
9.  22.  that  he  should  be  put  out  of  the  s, 

12.  42.  lest  they  should  be  put  out  of  the  *. 
18.  20.  I  ever  taught  in  the  s.  and  leujple 

Jlcts^M.  then  arose  certain  of  the  i.  which  is  called 
the  s.  of  Libertines,  disputing  with  Stephen 

13.  14.  they  went  into  the  s.  on  tlie  sabbath-day, 

and  sat  down 
15.  the  rulers  of  the  *.  sent  to  them,  saying 
42.  and  when  the  Jews  were  gone  out  of  the  s 

14.  1.  Paul  and  Barnabas  went  both  into  the  .f. 

17.  1.  to  Thcssaliinica  there  was  a  s.  of  the  Jews 
17.  therefore  he  disputed  in  the  s.  with  the  Jews 

and  wiih  devout  persona 

18.  4.  and  he  reasoned  in  the  s.  every  sabbath 

7.  Justus,  whose  house  joined  hard  to  the  s, 

8.  Crispus  the  chief  ruler  of  the  s.  believed 
17.  Greeks  took  Soslhenes  chief  ruler  of  the  s. 
2().  Apollos  began  to  speak  boldly  in  the  .e. 

22.  19.  beat  in  every  s.  such  as  believed,  26.  11. 
Jam  2.  t2.  if  there  come  into  ytvura.  a  man 
Itev.  2.  9.  but  are  the  s.  of  Satan 

3.  9.  I  will  make  them  of  I  he  s.  of  Satan 

syNAGOGUES. 
Psal.H.S.  they  have  burned  up  all  tlie  s.  of  God 
jWut.4.23.Jes.  went  teaching  in  their*,  and  preach- 
ing the  gospel,  9.  35.  Mark  1.  39.  Luke 
13.  10. 
6.  2.  as  the  hypocrites  do  in  the  s. 
5.  fur  they  love  to  pray  standing  in  thei*. 
10.  17.  they  will  scourge  you  in  their  s.  23.  34. 

23.  6.  and  love  the  chief  seats  in  the  s.  Mark  \i. 

39.  Luke  11.  43.  |  20.  4t5. 
Mark  13.  9.  and  in  the  s.  ye  shall  be  beaten 
Luke  4.  15.  he  taught  in  the  5.  being  glorified 
44.  and  he  preached  in  the  s.  of  Galilee 

12.  41.  and  when  they  bring  you  uiuo  the  s 
21.  12.  delivering  you  up  to  the  s.  and  prison* 

John  10.  2.  they  shall  put  you  out  of  the  *. 
Jlcts  9.  2.  Saul  desued  of  him  letters  to  the  s. 
20.  straightway  he  preached  Christ  in  the  j. 

13.  5.  Paul  and  Barnabas  preached  in  the  s. 
15.  21.  being  read  in  the  s.  every  sabbath-day 

24.  12.  neither  raising  up  the  people  in  the  s. 


T. 


TABERNACLE 

Signifies,  [1]  A  tent  or  pavilion  raised  on  posts  t» 
lodge  under,  Num.  24.  5.  Mat.  17.  4.  [2]  Jl 
house  or  dwelling.  Job  II.  14.  |  22.  23.  [3]  ..i 
hind  of  tent  to  take  up  and  down,  as  occasion 
required;  which  icas  as  it  were  the  palace  of 
the  Most  High,  the  dwelling  of  the  God  of 
Israel;  wherein  the Israclites,during  their jour- 
neyings  in  the  wilderness,  performed  the  chief 
of  their  religious  exercises,  offered  their  sacri- 
fices, and  worshipped  God :  It  was  thirty  cubits 
in  length,  and  ten  in  breadth  and  in  height. 
It  was  divided  into  two  partitions :  the  first 
was  called,  The  Holy  Place,  which  was  twenty 
cubits  long,  and  ten  wide:  here  were  placed  the 
table  ofshew-bread,  the  gulden  candlestick,  and 
the  golden  altar  of  incense.  The  second  was 
called.  The  most  Holy  Place,  ishose  lungth  was 
ten  cubits,  and  breadth  tm  cubits,  wherein, 
before  the  building  of  the  temple,  the  ark  of 
the  covenant  was  kept,  which  was  a  symbol 
of  God's  gracious  presence  with  the  Jewish 
church.  'I'he  most  Holy  was  divided  from  the 
Holy  Place  by  a  curtain,  or  veil  of  very  rich 
cloth,  which  hung  upon  four  pillars  of  shit.tim- 
wood,  that  were  covered  with  plates  of  gold, 
Exod.  2(;.  1.  Heb.  9.  2,  3.  [4]  Christ's  human 
nature,  of  which  the  .Tewish  tabernacle  icas  a 
type,  wherein  God  dwells  really,  substantially, 
and  personally,  Heb.  8.  2.  |  9.  11.  [5]  The 
true  church  militant,  Psal.  15.  1.  [6]  Our 
natural  body;  in  which  the  soul  lodges  as  in 
a  tabernacle,  2  Cor.  5.  I.  2  Pet.  1.  13.  [7] 
The  tokens  of  God's  gracious  presence,  Rev. 

The  feast  of  fabernaclps.  Lev.  23.  .34.  was  so 
called,  because  the  Israelites  kept  it  under 
green  tents  or  arbours,  in  memory  of  their 
dwelling  in  tents  in  their  passage  through  the 
wilderness.  It  was  one  of  the  three  great 
solemnities,  wherein  all  the  males  were  obliged 
to  present  themselves  before  the  Lord,  tl  was 
celebrated  after  harvest,  on  the  i^th  day  of 
the  month  Tisri,  which  answers  to  our  month 
of  September.  The  feast  continued  eight  days 
tut  the  first  day  and  the  last  were  Uu  mo4 


TAB 

tolemn.    Herein  they  returned  thanks  to  Ood 
for  the  fruits  of  the  earth  theyhad  then  gathered 
in,  and  mere  also  put  in  mind  that  tfiey  were 
but  pilgrims  and  travellers  in  this  world. 
Kiod.  25.  9.  make  it  after  the  pattern  of"  the  t. 

26.  1.  thou  shall  make  the  t.  with  tea  curtains 

6.  couple  the  curtain8,and  itshall  be  one  t.3t).  13. 

7.  thou  slialt  make  curtains  ul'goata'  hair  to  be 

a  covering  upon  the  t.  35.  11.  |  36.  14. 
15.  ghalt  make  boards  lor  the  t.of  shittim  wood, 
17,  20,  it).  I  36.  20,  22,  23,  23,31,  32. 
36.  make  bars  tor  tlie  t.  27.  |  30.  rear  up  the  t. 

27.  9.  and  Ihou  alialt  make  the  court  of  the  t. 
19.  all  the  vessels  of  the  t.  of  brass,  39.  40. 

29.  43.  the  t.  shall  be  sanctified  by  m    §lory 
31.  7.  they  may  make  all  the  furniture  of  the  t. 
33.  7.  Moses  pitched  the  t.  without  the  camp 

11.  but  Joshua  departed  not  out  of  the  t. 
35. 16.  the  pins  of  tlie  t.  38.  20,  31. 
'id.  8.  them  that  wrought  the  work  of  the  t. 
39.  32.  thus  was  the  work  of  the  t.  finished 

33.  and  they  brought  the  t.  to  Moses,  the  tent 
40.42.  thou  slialt  set  up  the  t.  \\  9.  anoint  the  t. 

17.  on  the  first  month,  on  the  first  day,  the  t. 
was  reared  up,  18.  JW/n.  7.  1. 

19.  he  spread  abroad  the  tent  over  the  t. 

21.  he  brought  the  ark  into  the  t.  and  set  up 

33.  he  reared  up  the  court  round  about  the  t. 

34.  the  glory  of  the  Lord  filled  the  t.  35. 

36.  the  cloud  was  taken  up  from  over  the  t. 

Js~um.  9.  17.  I  10.  11.  I  12.  10. 

33.  for  the  cloud  of  the  Lord  was  on  the  t.  by 

day,  and  fire  by  night,  JVum.  9.  18,  19,  22. 

//«».  8.  10.  Moses  anointed  the  t.  and  all  tiierein 

15.  31.  that  they  die  not  when  they  defile  my  t. 
17.4.  bringeth  not  an  oft'ering  before  the  t. 

26. 11. 1  will  set  my  t.  among  you,  not  abhor  you 

/Cum.  1.  50.  appoint  Lovitesover  the  t.  shall  bear 

the  t.  shall  encamp  round  about  the  t.  53. 

51.  and  when  the  t.  setteth  forward,  and  when 

the  t.  is  to  be  pitched,  Levites  set  it  up 

S3,  the  Levites  shall  keep  the  charge  of  the  t.  of 

testimony,  3.  7,  25.  |  18.  3.  |  31.  30,  47 

3.  7.  before  the  t.  to  do  the  service  of  the  t. 
'Zi.  the  Gershonites  shall  pilch  behind  the  t. 

35.  the  Merarites  shall  pitch  northward  of  the  t. 
38.  those  that  encamp  before  the  t.  eastward 

4.  16.  the  oversightof  the  t.  pertaineth  to  Eleazar 

25.  they  shall  bear  the  curtains  of  the  t. 

HI.  shall  bear  the  boards  of  the  £.  and  bars  thereof 

5.  17.  the  priest  shall  take  of  the  dust  of  the  t. 
7.  3.  they  brought  llieir  offering  before  the  t. 

9.  15.  on  the  day  that  the  t.  was  reared  up,  the 
cloud  covered  the  t.  namely  the  tent  of  testimony 

10.  21.  the  Kohalhites  did  set  up  the  t. 

11.  24.  Moses  set  seventy  elders  roundabout  the  £. 

26.  but  they  went  not  out  unto  the  t. 

16.  9.  seeineth  it  small  to  do  the  service  of  the  t. 
24.  get  you  up  from  about  the  t.  of  Korah,  27. 

17.  13.  whoso  Cometh  near  to  the  t.  shall  die 
Deut.  31.  15.  L.  appeared  in  t.  in  a  pillar  of  cloud 
.hsh.  22.  19.  wherein  the  Lord's  t.  dwelleth 

1  Sam.  2.  t  32.  see  the  affliction  of  the  t. 

2. Sam.  6.  47.  they  set  the  ark  in  the  midst  of  tlie  t. 
7.  6.  but  1  have  walked  in  a  tent  and  in  a  t. 

\  Kings  1.39.  Zafloktooka  horn  of  oil  out  of  the  £. 
f  28.  Joab  fled  to  the  t.  of  the  Lord  and  aitar 
8.4.  vessels  in  the  t.  were  brought  up,  2  C/jr.  5.5. 

1  Chron.f).  48.  the  Levites  for  the  service  of  the  t. 
9.  19.  Korahites  were  keepers  of  the  gates  of  the  £. 

23  they  had  the  oversight  of  the  house  of  the  t. 

16.  39.  the  priests  before  t.  of  the  Lord 

17.  5.  but  have  gone  from  one  t.  to  another 

21.  29.  for  the  t.  which  Moses  made  in  wilderness 
2'}.  26.  they  shall  no  more  carry  the  t. 

2  Chron.  1..5.  he  put  the  brazen  altar  before  the  t. 
Job  5.  24.  shiilt  know  that  thy  t.  shall  be  in  peace 

18.6.tlie  light  shall  bo  dark  in  his  t.  and  his  candle 
14.  his  confidence  shall  be  rooted  out  of  his  t. 
IS.dcstriiction  shall  dwell  in  his  t. because  not  his 

19.  12.  hi^  troops  encamp  round  about  my  t. 

5!0.2fi.  it  shall  go  ill  with  him  that  is  left  in  his  t. 

29.  4.  whfn  the  sccrnt  of  (ioil  was  upon  my  t. 

31.  31.  if  the  men  of  my  t.  said  not,  oh  that 

36.  29.  can  any  undnrstand  the  noise  of  his  t.  ? 
P»al.  15.  1.  Lord,  who  shall  abide  in  thy  t.  ? 

19.  4.  in  them  hath  he  set  a  t.  for  the  sun 

26.  t  P.  I  have  loved  the  t.  of  thy  honour 

27.  5.  in  the  secret  of  bis  t.  slinll  he  hide  me 
6.  I  will  offer  in  his  t.  sacrifices  of  joy 

6).  4.  I  will  abide  in  thy  t.  for  over 
76.  2.  in  Salem  is  hi-s  t.  his  dwelling-place  in  Zion 
78.  60.  so  that  he  forsook  the  t.  of  Shiloh 
67.  moreover  ho  refnsc^d  the  t.  of  Joseph 
132. 3. 1  will  not  como  into  the  t.  of  my  house,  7. 
Prov.  14.  II.  the  t.  of  the  upright  sliall  flmirisli 
ha.  4.  6.  there  shall  be  a  t.  for  a  shadow  from  heat 
16.  5.  he  shall  sit  upon  it  in  the  I.  of  David 
33.  20.  n  (.  that  shall  not  be  taken  down 
Jtr.  10.  20.  my  (  is  apoiled  all  my  cordi  broken 
600 


TAB 

Lam.  2.  4.  he  slew  all  that  were  pleasant  In  the  (. 

6.  he  hath  violently  taken  away  his  t. 
Ezek.  37.  27.  my  (.  also  shall  be  with  them 

41.  1.  which  was  the  breadth  of  the  ^ 
jSmios  5.  26.  but  ye  have  borne  the  t.  of  Moloch 

9.  1 1,  in  that  day  will  I  raise  up  the  I.  of  David 
Jicts  7.  43.  ye  took  up  the  t.  of  Moloch 
46.  who  desired  to  find  a  t.  for  the  God  of  Jacob 

15.  16.  and  will  build  again  the  t.  of  David 
2  Cor.  5.  1.  if  our  house  of  this  t.  be  dissolved 

4.  we  that  aie  in  this  t.  do  groan,  being  burdened 
Heb.  8.  2.  the  true  t.  which  the  Lord  pitched 

5.  when  Moses  was  about  to  make  the  t. 

9.  2.  there  was  a  (.  made,  called  the  sanctuary 
3.  the  t.  which  is  called  the  holiest  of  all 

6.  the  priests  went  always  into  the  first  t. 
8.  while  as  the  first  t.  was  yet  standing 
1 1.  a  high  priest  by  a  greater  and  more  perfect  t. 
21;  he  sprinkled  with  blood  the  t.  and  vessels 

13.  10.  tjiey  have  no  right  to  eat  which  serve  t. 
2  Pet.  1. 13.  think  it  meet,  as  long  as  I  am  in  this  t 

14.  knowing  that  shortly  1  must  put  off  my  t. 
Rev.  13.  6.  to  blaspheme  his  name  and  his  t. 
15.  5.  behold  the  temple  of  the  (.  was  opened 
See  CoNORKGATioN,  Door. 
TABERNACLE  of  witness. 
JVum.  17.  7.  Moses  laid  up  the  rods  in  the  t.  of  w. 
8.  on  the  morrow  Moses  went  into  the  t.  of  w. 
18.  2.  shall  minister  before  the  t.  of  witness 
2  Chron.  24.  6.  to  bring  the  collection  for  t.  of  w. 
Acts  7.  44.  our  fathers  had  the  (.  of  witness 

TABERNACLES. 
J^um.  24.  5.  hew  goodly  are  thy  t.  O  Israel 
Job  11.  14.  let  not  wickedness  dwell  in  thy  t. 

12.  6.  the  t.  of  robbers  prosper,  and  they  that 
15.  34.  and  fire  shall  consume  the  t.  of  bribery 
22.23. thou  shall  put  away  iniquity  far  from  thy  t. 

Psal.  43.  3.  let  them  bring  me  unto  thy  t. 
46.  4.  make  glad  the  holy  place  oft.  of  Most  High 
78.  51.  smote  chief  of  their  strength  in  t.  of  Ham 

83.  6.  the  t.  of  Edom  have  consulted  together 

84.  1.  how  amiable  are  thy  t.  O  Loid  ofHosia 
118.  15.  salvation  is  in  the  t.  of  the  righteous 
132.  7.  we  will  go  into  his  t.  and  worship 

/Jan.  11.  45.  he  shall  plant  the  t.  of  his  palace 
Hos.  9.  6.  thorns  shall  be  in  their  t. 

12.  9.  I  will  yet  make  thee  to  dwell  in  t. 
Mat.  2.  12.  Lord  will  cut  off"  the  man  out  of  the  t. 
Mat.  17.  4.  Lord,  if  thou  wilt,  let  us  make  here 
three  t.  Mark  9.  5.  f.uke  9.  33. 
Heb.  11.  9.  Abraham  dwelling  in  t.  with  Isaac 
See  Feast. 
TABLE 
Signifies,  [Ij  .S  frame  of  wood  made  for  several 
uses,  1  Kings  2. 7.  [2]  The  altar  of  God,  Mai.  1 . 

7.  12.  [3]  Provision,  for  food,  cither  for  body  or 
soul,  Psal.  09.  22.  [4]  7Vie  iwo  tables  of  stone 
whereon  the  law  was  written,  Exod.  32.  15. 

That  ye  may  eat  and  drink  at  my  table,  Luke^2. 

30.  That  ye  may  partake  of  the  highest  de- 
lights which  1  have  prepared  for  you,  and  enjoy 
the  nearest  communion  with  me  in  glory. 

To  serve  tables,  Acts  6.  2.  To  provide  fur  the 
poor,  that  they  may  have  whereof  to  eat  at  their 
tables. 

T-.'xui/.  25. 23.  shall  also  make  at.  ofshittim  wood 
27.  places  of  staves  to  bear  the  t.  28.  |  37.  14. 
26.  35.  thou  shall  set  the  t.  without  the  vail 

30.  27.  Ihou  shall  anoint  the  f.  and  all  his  vessels 

31.  8.  Bezaleel  shall  make  the  t.  and  the  altar 
37.  10.  he  made  the  t.  \\  16.  the  vessels  on  the  t. 

39.  33.  they  brought  the  t.  unto  Moses,  the  tent 

40.  4.  thou  slialt  bring  in  the  t.  and  set  in  order 
22.  put  the  t.  in  the  tent  of  the  congregation 

J,ev.  24.6.  shall  set  si.v  on  a  row  on  the  pure  t. 
JVam. :i.3l.  the  Kohathites'  charge  shall  be  the  t. 
Jiidg.  1.  7.  kings  gathered  their  meat  under  my  t. 
1  Sam.  20.  29.  he  comelh  not  to  the  king's  f. 

31.  Jonathan  arose  from  the  t.  in  fierce  anger 
2Sam.0.7.Davld  said, Mcphiboshplh  shall  cut  bread 

at  my  t.  continually,  10,  11,  13.  |  19.  2>». 

1  Kings  2.  7.  let  them  be  of  those  that  eat  at  thy  t 
4.  27.  for  all  llial  came  to  king  Solomon's  t. 

10.  5.  when  the  queen  of  Slicba  saw  the  mont  »f 
his  t.  and  the  ntterJance,  2  Chron  9  4. 

13.  20.  as  v^ioy  s(t  at  t  the  word  cf  Lord  came 
18.  19.  L'le  v>rophcti  vliich  eat  at  Jezebcrs  t. 

2  Ktngl  i  .0.  let  us  set  for  him  a  t.  and  a  stool 
JVcA.  5.  i7  there  were  at  my  t.  150  Jews 
Job  36.  16.  that  which  should  bo  set  on  thy  (. 
Psal.  23.  5.  thou  preparest  a  t.  before  me 

(i9.  22.  let  their  t.  become  a  snare  before  them 
78.  19.  can  God  furnish  a  t.  in  the  wilderness 
128.  3.  thy  children  like  olive  plants  about  thy  (. 

Prov.  3.  3.  write  them  on  the  t.  of  thy  heart,  7.  3. 
9.  2.  wisdom  hath  also  furnished  her  t. 

Cant.  1.  12.  while  the  king  sittcth  at  liii  I. 

Isa.  21.  5.  prepare  the  t.  eat,  watch,  drink,  arise 
30.  8.  now  go  write  it  before  them  in  a  (. 
65.  11.  that  prepare  a  (.  fur  that  troop 


TAK 

.Ter.  17.  1.  !t  is  giaven  cr  If*  t.  of  their  heart 
Eiek.  23.  41.  and  (  t  jxt'^iared  before  it 
39.  20.  thus  ye  t:'*    \m  filled  at  my  {.  with  bor»e« 

41.  22.  this  is  \ile  t  that  is  before  the  Lord 
44.  16.  and  tiey  shall  come  near  to  my  t. 

Dan.  11.  2^   they  shall  speak  lies  at  one  t. 
Mai.  1.  7  the  t.  of  the  Lord  is  contemptible 

12.  yr,  tay,  the  t.  of  the  Lord  is  polluted 
Mat  Ji.27.  she  said,  yet  the  dogs  eat  the  crumbs 
which  fall  from  their  master's  t.  Mark!.  28 
Luke  16.  21.  crumbs  which  fell  from  rich  man's! 
22.  21.  that  betrayeth  me,  is  with  me  on  the  t. 
30.  that  ye  may  eat  and  drink  at  my  t. 
John  12.  2.  Lazarus  was  one  of  them  that  sat  at  {. 
13.  28.  no  man  at  the  t.  knew  for  what  intent 
Rom.  11.9.  lettheir  t.  be  made  a  snare  and  a  trap 
1  Cor.  10.  21.  cup  of  Lord  and  devils,  ye  cannot  be 
partakers  of  the  Lord's  t.  and  of  the  t.  of  devils 
See  Siiew-Bread. 
WRITING-TABLE. 
Luke  I.  63.  Zacharias  asked  for  a  w.-t.  and  wrote 

TABLES. 
Ezod.  32.  15.  the  t.  were  written  on  both  sides 
16.  t.  were  the  work  of  God,  graven  on  the  (. 
19.  hecast  the  t.  oulof  his  hands,  and  brake  them 
34.  1.  I  will  write  on  these  t.  the  words  in  first  t. 
Deut.  10.  4.  he  wrote  on  the  t.  according  to  first 
5.  and  put  the  t.  in  the  ark,  Heb.  9.  4. 

1  CAr.  28.  16.  David  gave  gold  for  t.  of  ehew-bread 

2  Chron.  4.  8.  Solomon  also  made  ten  I.  and  placed 
19.  the  t.  whereon  the  shew-bread  was  set 

Isa.  28.  8.  all  t.  are  full  of  vomit  and  filihiiiess 
Ezek.  40.41.  eight  t.  whereupon  they  slew  sacrifices 

42.  fourt.  were  of  hewn  stone  for  burnt-offering 
Hab.  2.  2.  write  the  vision,  and  make  it  plain  on  t. 
Mat.  21. 12.  he  overthrew  the  t.  of  the  money 

changers,  and  sellers  of  doves,  Mark  11.  15. 
Mark  7.  4.  as  the  washing  of  cups,  pots,  and  t. 
.John  2.  15.  drove  them  out  and  overthrew  the  t. 
Acts  6.  2.  leave  the  word  of  God,  and  serve  t. 
2  Cor.  3.  3.  noting,  of  stone,  but  fleshly  t.  of  heart 
See  Stone,  Two. 
TABLETS. 
Exod.  35.  22.  they  brought  t.  all  jewels  of  gold 
JVum.  31.  50.  we  brought  t.  tomakeanatonemeDl 
Isa.  .3.  20.  I  will  take  away  the  t.  and  ear-rings 

TABRET. 
r?cn.31.27.have  sent  thee  away  with  t.  and  harp 
1  .Sam.  10. 5.  coming  from  the  high  place  with  a  t 
.fob  17.6.  a  by-word,  and  aforetime  I  was  as  a  t. 
Isa.  5.12.  the  t.  pipe,  and  wine  are  in  their  feasts 

TABRETS. 
1  Sam.  18.  6.  women  came  to  meet  Saul  with  t. 
Isa.  24.  8.  the  mirth  oft.  ceaseth,  joy  ceasetli 
30.  32.  it  shall  be  with  t.  and  harps 
Jer.  31.  4.  thou  shall  again  be  adorned  wilh  thy  L 
Ezek.  28.  13.  the  workmanship  of  thy  t-  and  pipes 

TABERING. 
JVa/i.  2.  7.  the  voice  of  doves  t.  on  their  breasts 

TACHE3. 

Ezod.  26.  6.  thou  shall  make  fifty  t.  of  gold 

11.  thou  shall  make  fifty  t.  of  brass,  35.  II. 

33.  thou  shall  hang  up  the  vail  under  the  t. 

36.  13.  he  made  fifty  t.  of  gold,  and  brass,  18. 

39.  33.  they  brought  his  t.  his  boards,  his  bars 

TACKLING. 

Acts  27. 19.  third  day  we  cast  out  the  t.  of  the  ship 

TACKLINGS. 
Isa.  33.  23.  thy  t.  are  loosed,  could  not  strengtbca 

TAIL 
Signifies,  [1]  The  train  of  a  beast,  fowl,  or  fish, 
E.xod.  4.  4.     [2]   Low,  base,  or  contemptible, 
Doiil.  28.  13.     [3]  The  power,  policy,  and  flat- 
teries, by  which  the  devil  and  his  instruments 
corrupt  and  allureministtrs  of  the  ehureh  from 
the  simplicity,  and  purity  of  their  doctrine,  to 
error,  superstition,  and  profaneness,  Roi  .12.4. 
[4]  An  army,  l.=a.  7.  4. 
F.xod.  4.  4.  put  out  thine  hand,  take  it  by  th)  t. 
Drut.  28.  13.  rnake  thee  the  head,  not  iho  t.  44. 
.hish.  10.  t  If*-  pursue,  cut  off  the  t.  ofthrm 
Judg.  15.4.  Siimson  caught  foxes  anil  turned  t.  to  (. 
.fob  40.  17.  behemoth  movolh  his  I.  like  a  cedar 
Isa.  9.14.  Lord  will  cutoll'from  Israel  hi-nd  and  I. 

15.  the  prophet  that  tearheth  lies,  he  is  the  t. 
19.  l.").  no  work  which  the  head  or  t.  may  do 
Rev.  12.  4.  his  t.  drew  the  third  part  of  the  stars 

TAILS. 
Judg.  15.  4.  and  put  a  firebrand  brtwccn  two  t. 
rsa.7.4.  fortho  two  t.  of  these  smoking  firebrands 
[irv.  9.  10.  (.  like  to  scorpions,  slings  in  their  t. 
19.  power  in  their  t.  their  /.  were  like  serpents 
TAKE 
Signifies,  [11   To  lay  hold  on  or  seize,  1  King* 
18.40.     {2]  To  receive  from  anothfr,  2Klnes 
5.  1.5.     [3]  To  yidd,  2  Theis.  1.  t  8.     f4)  To 
bear,  John  I.  t  29.     [5]  To  give,  Dent.  I.  t  13. 
[6]  To  spoil,  Deut.  20.  t  14.   (71  Topnssejs  or 
impoverish,  Judg.  14.  f  15.     [8J  To  be  chosen, 
1  Tim.  5.  t  9.    [9]  To  remove,  John  2.  10. 


TAK 

Otn.  13.  9.  if  thou  wWtt.  the  left  hand,  I  will  go 
J4  21.  give  me  the  persone,  t.  the  goods  to  Uiyself 
19   15.  arise,  t.  thy  wife  und  thy  two  daughters 
22  2.  t.  now  thy  son,  thine  only  son  Isaac 
S4.  3.  thou  shall  not  t.  a  wife  to  my  son  of,  37. 

48.  to  t.my  master's  brother's  daughter  to  his  son 
31.  32.  discern  what  is  thine  with  nie,  t.  it  to  thee 

50.  if  thou  t.  other  wives  besides  my  daugliteia 
34.  9.  and  t.  our  daughters  unto  you 

16.  nnd  we  will  t.  your  daughters  to  us 
38.  23.  let  her  t.  to  her,  lest  we  be  shamed 
Ezod.  6.  7.  I  will  t.  you  to  me  for  a  people 

10.  26.  for  thereof  must  we  t.  to  serve  the  Lord 
17.  5.  and  thy  rod  t.  in  thine  hand  and  go 

20.  7.  thou  shalt  not  t.  the  name  of  the  Lord  thy 
God  in  vnin,  not  hold  guiltless,  Deut.  5.  11. 
31. 14.  t.  him  from  mine  altar,  that  he  may  die 

23.  8.  and  thou  shalt  t.  no  gift,  Dcut.  16.  19. 

34.  9.  pardon  and  (.  us  for  thine  inheritance 

16.  lest  thou  t.  of  their  daughters,  Deut.  7.  3. 
Len.  18.  IT.  neither  shalt  thou  t.  herson's  daughter 

18.  neither  shalt  thou  t.  a  wife  to  her  sister 

20.  14.  and  if  a  man  (.  a  wife,  aud  her  mother 

21.  7.  the  priests  shall  not  t.  a  wife  that  is  a 
whore,  nor  t.  a  woman  put  away,  jE:cft.44.22. 
13.  he  shall  t.  a  wife  in  her  virginity 

25.  36.  t.  thou  no  usury  of  him,  or  increase 

46.  ye  shall  t.  them  as  an  inheritance  for  children 
J^um.  8.  6.  (.  the  Levites  from  among  Israel 

11.  17.  I  will  t.  of  the  Si)irit  that  is  <m  thee 

16.  3.  Korah  said,  ye  t.  too  much  upon  ynu,  7. 

35.  31.  ye  shall  t.  no  satisfaction  for  the  life,  32. 
Deut.  1.  ]3.  t.  ye  wise  men  and  understanding 

4.  34.  and  t.  him  a  nation,  from  the  midst  of  nation 

15.  17.  then  thou  shalt  (.  an  awl  and  thrust 

22.  18.  the  elders  of  that  city  shall  t.  that  man 
30.  a  man  shall  not  t.  his  father's  wife 

24.  4.  may  not  t.  her  again  to  be  his  wife 

6.  no  man  shall  t.  a  millstone  to  pledge 

17.  nor  t.  a  widow's  raiment  to  pledge 

25.  8.  if  he  say,  I  like  not  to  t.  her 

Josh.  6.  18.  when  ye  t.  of  the  accursed  thing 

7.  14.  the  family  which  the  Ld.  shall  ^the  house- 

hold which  the  Lord  shall  t.  shall  come 
8.29.  they  should  t.his  carcase  down  from  the  tree 
10.  42.  their  land  did  Joshua  t.  at  one  time 

20.  4.  they  shall  t.  him  into  the  city  to  them 

22.  19.  then  t.  ye  possession  among  us,  rebel  not 
Judg.  5.  30.  for  the  necks  of  them  that  t.  spoil 

14.  3.  that  thou  goest  lot.  a  wifeofuncircumcised 
15.  have  ye  called  us  to  t.  that  we  have  ^ 

19.  30.  consider,  (.  advice,  and  speak  your  minds 
Ruth  2.  10.  thou  shouldest  t.  knowledge  of  me 

1  San.  2. 16.  then  t.  as  much  as  thy  soul  desiretli, 

and  if  not  I  will  t.  it  by  force 

8.  II.  he  will  t.  your  sons  for  himself,  his  chariots 

13.  he  will  t.  your  daughters  ||  14.  (.  your  fields 
15.  t.  the  tenth  of  your  seed  ||  16.  t.  men-servants 

17.  18.  how  thy  brethren  fare,  and  t.  their  pledge 
46.  and  f.  thine  head  from  thee 

19.  14.  Saul  sent  messengers  to  t.  David,  20. 

21.  9.  if  thou  wilt  t.  that,  t.  it,  there  is  no  other 

24.  11.  yet  thou  huntest  my  soul  to  t.  it 

25.  II.  shall  I  then  t.  my  br^iad,  and  my  water 

26.  11.  t.  now  the  spear  that  is  at  his  bolster 

2  Sam.  12.  4.  he  spared  to  t.  of  his  own  flock 
11.  I  will  (.  thy  wives  before  thine  eyes 

28.  t.  it,  lest  I  t.  the  city,  and  it  be  called 

16.  9.  let  me  go  over,  and  t.  off  his  head 

19.  19.  the  king  should  t.  it  to  his  heart,  13.  33. 
30.  Mcphibosheth  said,  yea,  let  him  t.  all 

1  Kings  11.  31.  he  said  to  Jeroboam,  Men  pieces 
:V4.  I  will  not  t.  the  whole  kingdom 

14.  3.  t.  ten  loaves  ||  18.  40.  t.  projihets  of  Baal 

20.  18.  come  lor  war  or  peace,  t.them  alive 

21.  15.  arise,  t.  possession  of  the  vineyard,  16. 

22.  26.  t.  Micaiah,  carry  him  back,  2  Chr.  18.  25. 

2  Kings  4.  1.  the  creditor  is  come  to  t.  my  eons 

29.  t.  my  staff  and  go  ||  5. 15.  t.  a  blessing 

5.  16.  urged  him  to  t.  it  ||  20.  I  will  t.  somewhat 
23.  t.  two  talents  ||  8.  8.  t.  a  present  and  go 

9.  1. 1.  this  box  of  oil  in  thine  hand,  3. 

10.  6.  t.  yo  tlie  heads  of  your  master's  sons 

14.  t.  thern  alive  ||  12.  .5.  let  the  priests  t.  it 
13.  15.  Ellsha  said,  t.  bow  and  arrows,  18. 

19.  30.  shall  vet  t.  root  downward,  Isa.  37.  31. 
1  Chron.  21.24.  I  will  not  t.  that  which  is  thine 
£iro5. 14.  those  did  Cyrus  t.  |{  15.  t.  vessels 

9.  12.  not  t.  their  daughters,  JV«A.  10.  30.]  13.  25. 
Kstk.  6. 10.  t.  the  apparel,  and  do  so  to  Mordecai 

hb  23. 10.  he  knoweth  the  way  that  I  t. 

24.  3.  they  t.  the  widow's  ox  for  a  pledgo 
9.  and  theyt.  a  pledge  of  the  poor 

30.  17.  and  my  sinews  t.  no  rest 

31.  36.  surely  I  would  t.  it  upon  my  shoulder 

41.  4.  wilt  thou  £.  him  for  a  servant  for  ever  7 

42.  8.  therefore  t.  to  you  now  seven  bullocks 
Psal.  2.  2.  tne  rulers  t.  counsel  against  the  Lord 

7.  5.  let  the  enemy  persecute  my  soul,  and  t.  it 
SO.  9.  I  will  t.  no  bullock  out  of  thy  house 

601 


TAK 

Pjrtf.  50. 16.  shouldest  t.my  covenant  in  t>y  mouth 

51. 11.  and  t.  not  tliy  Holy  Spirit  from  me 

71.  11.  t.  him,  tor  there  is  none  to  deliver  him 
75.  f  2.  when  1  shall  t.  a  set  time,  I  will  judge 
81.  2.  t.  a  psalm  ||  83. 12.  t.  the  houses  of  God 
89.  33.  my  kindness  will  I  not  utterly  I.  from  him 
109.  8.  and  let  another  t.  his  olhce 
116.  113.  I  will  t.  the  cup  of  salvation,  and  call 
119.  43.  t.  not  the  word  of  truth  utterly  out 
139.  9.  if  I  t.  the  wings  of  the  morning 

20.  and  thine  enemies  t.  thy  name  in  vain 
Prov.  5.  22.  his  own  iniquities  shall  t.  the  wicked 

6.  25.  neither  let  her  t.  thee  with  her  eyelids 

27.  can  a  man  t.  fire  in  his  bosom,  not  be  burned 
7. 18.  let  us  t.  our  fill  of  love  till  the  morning 
20.  16.  t.  his  garment  that  is  surety  for  stranger, 

t.  a  pledge  of  him  for  a  strange  woman,  27. 13. 
30.  9.  and  t.  the  name  of  my  God  in  vain 
Eccl.  5.  15.  and  shall  t.  nothing  of  his  labour 

19.  and  to  t.  his  portion  and  rejoice  in  his  labour 
Cant.  2.  15.  t.  us  the  foxes,  the  little  foxes 
Isa.  27.  6.  he  shall  cause  them  of  Jacob  to  t.  root 

28.  19.  from  the  time  it  goeth,  it  shall  t.  you 

30. 14.  not  a  shred  to  t.  fire  from  the  hearth 
33.  23.  the  prey  is  divided,  the  lame  t.  the  prey 
40.  24.  their  stock  shall  not  t.  root  in  the  earth 

44. 15.  he  will  t.  thereof  and  warm  himself 
47.2.  t.  the  millstones,  and  grind  meal 

3.  I  will  t.  vengeance,  I  will  not  meet  as  a  man 
57.  13.  vanity  shall  t.  them,  wind  carry  thera 
.58.  2.  they  I.  delight  in  approaching  to  God 
66. 21. 1  will  also  t.  of  them  for  priests  and  Levites 
Jrr.  2. 22.  t.  thee  much  soap  |{  3. 14.  t.  one  of  a  city 

13.  4.  t.  the  girdle  that  thou  hast  got,  6. 

21.  shall  not  sorrows  i.thee  as  a  woman  in  travail 
15.  19.  if  ihou  t.  forth  the  precious  from  the  vile 
16. 2.  thou  shalt  not  t.  thee  a  wife  in  this  place 

18.  22.  for  they  have  digged  a  pit  to  t.  me 

19.  1.  t.  of  the  ancients  of  the  people  and  priests 

20.  10.  and  we  shall  t  our  revenge  on  him 
25.  9.  I  will  t.  all  the  families  of  the  north 

10.  I  will  t.  from  them  the  voice  of  mirth 

28.  if  they  refuse  to  t.  the  cup  at  thine  hand 

29.  6.  t.  ye  wives,  and  beget  sons  and  daughters 
^l.  24.  they  are  come  to  the  city  to  (.  it 

25.  buy  the  field  for  money,  and  t.  witnesses,  44. 

28.  Nebiichadrezzar  king  of  Babylon  shall  t.  it 
39.  12.  t.  Jeremiah,  and  look  well  to  him 

46.  11.  go  up  into  Gilead,  and  t.  balm,  51.  8. 

50. 15.  t.  vengeance  upon  her;  as  she  hath  done,  do 
51. 26.  they  shall  not  t.  of  thee  a  stone  for  a  corner 

36.  behold  I  will  t.  vengeance  for  thee 
Lam.  2.13.  what  thing  shall  I  t.to  witness  for  thee? 
Ezck.  4.  1.  t.  thee  a  tile  ||  3.  t.  an  iron  pan 

9.  t.  unto  thee  wheat,  barley,  and  beans 
5.  1.  t.  a  sharp  knife,  t.  a  rasor,  t.  balances 

10.  6.  t.  fire  from  between  the  wheels 

11.  19.  I  will  t.  the  stony  heart  out  of  their  flesh 
14.  5.  that  I  may  t.  the  house  of  Israel 

15.  3.  will  men  t.  a  pin  of  it  to  hang  any  vessel 

21.  26.  remove  the  diadem,  t.  off  the  crown 

22.  16.  thou  shalt  t.  thine  inheritance  in  thyself 
24.  5.  t.  the  choice  of  the  flock,  and  burnt  bones 

8.  it  might  cause  fury  to  come  up  to  t.  vengeance 
25.  when  I  t.  from  them  their  strength 
29.  19.  t.  a  multitude,  t.  her  spoil,  t.  her  prey 
33.  2.  if  peoi)le  of  the  land  t.  a  man  of  their  coast 
36.24.  I  will  t.  you  from  among  the  heathen 

37. 16.  t.  thee  one  slick,  t.  another  stick,  write 
19.  I  will  t.  the  stick  of  Joseph,  and  will  put 

38. 12.  to  t.  a  spoil  and  to  t.  a  prey 

13.  art  thou  come  to  t.  prey,  to  t.  a  great  spoil? 
46.  18.  the  prince  not  t.  the  people's  inheritance 
Dan.  7. 18.  but  the  saints  shall  t.  the  kingdom 
11.  15.  the  king  shall  t.  the  most  fenced  cities 
18.  he  shall  turn  to  the  isles,  and  shall  t.  many 
Hae.  I.  2.  go  t.  unto  thee  a  wile  of  whoredoms 
11.  4.  I  was  as  they  that  t.  off  the  yoke  on  jaws 

14.  2.  t.  with  your  words,  and  turn  to  the  Lord 
Jlmos  5.  11.  ye  t.  from  him  burdens  of  wheat 

12.  they  afflict  the  just,  they  t.  a  bribe 

9.  2.  thence  shall  mine  hand  t.  them,  3. 
.Jonahi.  3.  t.  I  beseech  thee,  my  life  from  me 
Mic.  2.  2.  they  covet  fields  and  (.  them  by  violence 
6.shall  not  prophesy,  that  they  shall  not  t.  shame 
JV''rtA.1.2.  the  Lord  will  t.  vengeance  on  adversaries 

2.9.  t.  ye  the  spoil  of  silver,  t.  the  spoil  of  gold 
hfab.  1.  10.  forlhey  shall  heap  dust  and  t.  it 
Hair.  1.  8.  build  the  house,  I  will  t.  pleasure  in  it 

2.  23.  will  I  t.  thee,  O  Zerubbabcl,  my  servant 
Zech.  6.  10.  t.  of  them  ofthe  captivity,  of  Heldai 

11.  15.  t.  yet  instruments  of  a  foolish  shepherd 
Mat.  1.  20.  fear  not  to  t.  unto  thee  Mary  thy  wife 

2.  13.  and  t.  the  young  child  and  its  mother 

6.25.  t.  no  thought  for  your  life,  2=^,  31,  34.  |  10. 
19.  Mark  13.  11.   I.uke  12.  11,  22,  26. 

11.  12.  and  the  violent  t.  the  kingdom  by  force 

29.  (.  my  yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me 

1.5.  26.  not  meet  to  t.  children's  bread,  Jlfori  7. 27. 

16.  5.  they  had  forgotten  to  (.  bread,  Mark  8. 14. 

41 


TAK 

JlfaM7.25.orwhom  the  kings  ofthe  earth  t.  custom 

18.  16.  then  t.  with  thee  one  or  two  raoro 

20.  14.  t.  that  thine  is  and  go  thy  way 

24.  17.  let  him  on  house  top  not  come  down  to  U 

any  thing  out  of  his  house,  Mark  13.  15. 

25.  28.  t.  therefore  the  talent  from  hiin  give  it 

26.  4.  that  they  might  t.  Jesus,  Mark  14.  1,  44 
26.  Jesus  took  bread  and  said,  t.  cat,  this  is  mjr 

body,  Mark  14.  22.  1  Cor.  II.  24L 

45.  sleep  on  now,  and  t.  your  rest,  Mark  14.41. 

52.  they  that  t.  the  sword  shall  perish  by  sword 

55.  with  swords  and  staves  to  t.  me,  Mark  14.  48, 

Mark  6.  8.  t.  nothing  for  their  journey,  Lnke  9.  3. 

12.  19.  his  brother  should  t.  his  wife,  Luke  20.  2S. 

15.  24.  casting  lots  what  every  man  should  t. 
36.  whether  Elias  will  come  to  t.  him  down 

Luke  6.  4.  David  did  t.  and  eat  the  shew-bread 
29.  forbid  him  not  to  t.  thy  coat  also 

10.  35.  t.  care  of  him  ||  12.  19.  soul,  t.  thine  ease 
14.  9.  then  begin  with  shame  to  t.  the  lowest  room 

16.  0.  t.  thy  bill,  7.  ||  22. 17.  t.  this  and  divide  it 

19.  24.  t.  from  him  the  pound,  and  give  it  to  biin 
22.  36.  he  that  hath  a  purse,  let  him  t.  it         * 

John  2. 16.  Jesus  said  to  them,  t.  these  things  henca 

6.  7.  that  every  one  of  them  may  t.  a  little 

15.  that  they  would  come  and  t.  him  by  force 

7.  30.  they  sought  to  t.  him,  32.  1  10.  39.  |  11.  57. 
10.17. therefore  my  father  loveth  me,  because  I  lay 

down  my  life,  that  1  might  t.  it  again,  18. 
16. 15.  he  shall  t.  of  mine,  and  shew  it  unto  you 

17.  15.  thou  shouldest  t.  them  out  ofthe  world 

18.  31.  t.  ye  him,  and  judge  him  according  to  your 

19.  6.  Pilate  saith,  t.  ye  him,  and  crucify  him 
^Icts  1.  20.  and  his  bishoprick  let  another  t. 

12.  3.  Herod  proceeded  further  to  t.  Peter  also 
15. 14.  to  t.  out  of  them  a  people  for  his  name 

37.  Barnabas  determined  to  t.  with  them  John 

38.  Paul  thought  not  good  to  t.  him  with  them 
20.13.  sailed  to  Assos,  there  intending  lo  t.  in  Paul 

26.  wherefore  1 1.  you  to  record  this  day 

21.  24.  them  t.  and  purify  thyself  with  them 

27.  33.  Paul  besought  them  to  t.  meat,  34. 

1  Cor.  6.  7.  why  do  you  not  rather  t.  wrong  7 
15.  shall  I  then  £.  the  members  of  Christ 

9.  9.  doth  God  t.  care  for  oxen  1 

2  Cor.  8.  4.  and  t.  upon  us  the  ministering  to  sainta 

11.  20.  for  ye  suffer,  if  a  man  t.  of  you 

12. 10.  therefore  I  t.  pleasure  in  infirmities 
Eph.  6.  13.  t.  to  you  the  whole  armour  of  God 
17.  and  t.  the  helmet  of  salvation,  and  sword 

1  Tim.  3.  5.  how  shall  he  take  care  ofthe  church 

2  Tim.  4.  11.  t.  Mark,  and  bring  him  with  thee 
Heb.  7.5.  a  commandment  to  t.  tithes  of  people 
Jam.  5. 10.  t.  my  brethren,  the  prophets  an  example 

1  Pet.  2.  20.  if  ye  t.  it  patiently,  it  is  acceptable 
Rev.  3.  11.  hold  fast,  that  no  man  t.  thy  crown 

5.  9.  thou  art  worthy  to  t.  the  book,  and  to  open 

6.  4.  power  given  him  to  t.  peace  from  the  earth 

10.  8.  t.  the  little  book  ||  9.  t.  it  and  eat  it 

22.  17.  let  him  t.  the  water  of  life  freely 

TAKE  away. 
Gfn.30.1.5.wouldestthou  2.az«.my  son's  mandrakes 
42.  36.  and  ye  will  t.  Benjamin  away 
Ezod.  2.  9.  t.  this  child  away,  and  nurse  it  for  ma 

8.  8.  that  he  may  t.  away  the  frogs  from  me 

10.17.  that  he  may  t.  aw.  from  me  this  death  only 

23.  2.5.  and  I  will  t.  sickness  away,  Dcut.  7.  15. 
33.  23.  I  will  t.  aw.  mine  hand,  and  thou  shalt  sea 

Lev.  3.  4.  it  shall  he  t.  away,  10,  15.  |  4.  9.  )  7.  4 

4.  31.  he  shall  t.  away  all  the  fat  thereof,  35. 
14.  40.  command  that  they  t.  away  the  stones 

JN'mn.  4. 13.  shalt  t.  away  the  ashes  from  the  altar 

17.  10.  thou  shalt  quite  t.  auiny  ihoir  murmuringa 
21.7.pray  that  he  may  t.aw.  the  .serpents  from  us 

.Tosh.  7.  i3.  until  ye  t.  away  the  accursed  thing 

2  Sam.  4. 11.  shall  I  not  t.  you  away  from  the  earth 

5.  6.  except  thou  t.  away  the  blind  and  the  lame 
24. 10.  t.  n^riTj/ the  iniquity  of  thy  servant 

1  Kings  2.  31.  mayest  (.  away  the  innocent  blood 
14. 10.  t.a.  the  remnant  ofthe  house  of  Jeroboam 
16.  3.  t.  away  the  posterity  of  Baasha  ||  21.  21. 

of  Ahab 

19.  4.  it  is  enough  now,  O  Lord,  t.  away  my  life 
10.  and  they  seek  my  life,  to  t.  it  away,  14. 

20.  6.  what  is  pleasant,  shall  my  servants  t.  away 
24.  t.  the  kings  a.  and  put  captains  in  their  rooms 

2  Kings  2.  3.  the  Lord  will  t.  away  thy  master,  5. 
f).  ;J2.  see  how  he  hath  sent  to  t.  away  m'xne  head 

18.  32.  till  I  come  and  t.  you  away,  Isa.  36.  17. 
ICAr.  17.13. 1  will  not  t.  my  mercy  away  from  him 
Estk.  4.  4.  sent  to  t.  away  his  sackcloth  from  him 
.fob  7.  21.  why  dost  thou  not  t.  away  mmu  iniquity 

9.  34.  let  him  (.  his  rod  away  from  me 

24.  2.  they  violently  t.  away  flocks 

10.  they  t.  away  the  sheaf  from  the  hungry 
32.  22.  in  so  doing,  my  maker  would  soon  t.  me  a. 

36.18.  beware,  lest  he  t.  thee  away  with  his  strok« 
Psal.  26.  t  9-  t.  not  away  my  soul  with  sinrerg 

31.  13.  they  devised  to  t.  aioay  my  life 

52.  5.  he  shall  t.  thee  away  and  pluck  thee  oat 


TAK 

Psal.  53.  9.  he  shall  t.  them  away  with  a  whirlwind 
KK.  'H.  I.  mo  not  aicay  ui  Uie  midst  of  my  clays 

Frou.'H.'Si.  why  dhuuld  iiet.  aw.  ihy  b>'tl  I'roin  thcu 
25.  4.  (.  away  liio  drusd  Irom  the  silver 
S.  (.  away  Ihe  wicked  from  bvlure  the  king 

Jsa.  1.  25.  and  I  will  t.  awaij  all  thy  tm 
3.1. (.  away  the  Blay  and  etuli"l|  ]S.t.away  bravery 
4.1.  to  t.  aw.  our  reproach||5.5.  I  will  /.  aw.  hedge 
S.  23.  t.  away  the  righteouaiiess  of  the  righteous 

10.  2.  to  t.  away  the  right  from  the  poor 

25.  8.  the  rebuke  ot  his  people  shall  be  t.  away 
27.  9.  thi«  is  all  the  Truit,  to  t.  away  his  sin 

39.  7.  and  of  thy  sons  shall  they  t.  away 

40.  24.  Ihe  whirlwind  shall  t.  tlicm  away 
58.  9.  if  thou  I.  away  from  the  midst  of  thee 

Jer.  4.  4.  t.  away  the  foreskins  of  your  heart 
5. 10.  destroy  and  t.  away  her  battlements 
15.  15.  t.  me  not  away  in  thy  long-sutfering 

Ezek.  II.  IB.  shall  t.  away  the  detestable  things 

23.  25.  thev  shall  t.  away  thy  nose  and  thine  ears 
26.t.  awiiy  Ihy  fair  jewels||'2'J.«.  away  thy  labour 

24.  10.  behold,  I  t.  away  the  desire  of  thine  eyes 
t3.  4.  if  the  sword  come,  and  (.  him  away,  6. 
3S.  2(5.  and  I  will  t.  away  the  stony  heart  out  of 
45.  9.  t.  away  your  exactions  from  my  people 

Van.  7.  20.  and  they  shall  t.  away  his  duniiiiion 

11.  31.  they  shall  t.  away  the  daily  sacrifice 
Has.  1.  6.  but  I  will  utterly  t.  them  away 

2.  9.  and  t.  away  my  corn  in  the  time  thereof 

17.  for  I  will  t.  away  the  names  of  Baalim 
4.11.whored()m,  wine,  and  new  wine  t.a.lbe  heart 
5.  14.  I  will  t.  away  and  none  shall  rescue 
14.  2.  say  unto  him  t.  a.  all  iniquity,  receive  us 
Amos  4.  2.  that  he  will  I.  you  away  with  hooks 
5.  23.  t.  away  from  me  the  noise  of  thy  viols 
.^fic.  2.  2.  they  covet  houses,  and  (.  them  away 
Zeph.'i.  11.  I  will  f.  flicay  out  of  tlie  niiilst  of  thee 
Zech.  3.  4.  t.  away  the  filthy  garments  from  him 

9.  7.  I  will  t.  away  his  blood  out  of  his  mouth 
Mai.  2.  3.  and  one  shall  t.  you  away  with  dung 
Mat.  5.  40.  and  t.  away  thy  coat,  let  him  have  thy 

22.  13.  t.  away  and  cast  him  into  outer  darkness 
Mark  14.  3(3.  Y  ather,  I.  away  this  cup  from  me 
J^uke  1.  25.  to  t.  away  my  reproach  among  men 

17.  31.  let  him  not  come  down  to  t.  it  away 
John  11.  39.  Ji'sns  said,  t.  away  the  stone 

48.  tlie  Romana  shall  t.  a.  our  place  and  nation 
Rom.  11.  27.  when  I  shall  t.  away  their  sins 
Heb.  10.  4.  that  blood  of  bulls  should  t.  away  sins 
1  Jokn  3. 5.  he  was  manifested  to  t.  away  our  sins 
Rev.  22.  19.  if  any  man  (.  aioay  from  the  words  of 
the  book,  God  shall  (.  a.  his  part  out  of  book 
See  Counsel. 
TAKE  HEKD. 
f?en.31 .24.<.  heed  t  hat  thou  speak  not  to  .Tacob,  29. 
Ezod.  10.  2S.  I.  heed  to  thyself,  34.  12.  r}eut.  4.  9. 
12.  13,  19,  30.  1  Sam.  19.  2.  1  Tim.  4.  10. 
19. 12.  t.  heed  to  vourselvcs,  Deut.  2. 4.  |  4. 15, 23. 
1  11.  16.  Josh.  23.  11.  .Jcr.  17.  21. 
^um.  23. 12.  must  I  not  t.heedio  speak  that  which 
Deut.  24.  8.  t.  heed  in  the  plague  of  leprosy 
27.  9.  t.  heed  and  hearken,  O  Israel,  this  day 
Josk.22.  5.  t.&ihgvntheedlo  do  the  commandment 
1  Kings  2.  4.  if  thy  children  t.  heed  to  their  way, 
8.  25.  2  Chron.  6.  10. 
1  Chr.  28. 10.  t.  heed  for  the  Lord  hath  chosen  thee 
9  Car.l9.6.t.  A/-frf  whatyedo,  ye  judge  not  for  men 
7.  let  the  fear  of  the  Lord  bo  on  you,  t.  heed 
33.  8.  so  that  they  will  t.  heed  to  do,  Ezra  4.  22. 
Job  36.  21.  t.  herd,  regard  not  iniquity 
Psal.  39.  1.  I  saiil,  I  will  I.  .heed  to  my  ways 
Kcct.  7. 21.  t.  no  heed  to  all  words  that  are  spoken 
Ifa.T.i.  say  unto  him,  t.  heed  and  be  (piiet,  fear  not 
Jrr.  9.  4.  (.  hrr.d  every  one  of  his  neighbour 
J/os.  4. 10.  they  have  left  o(T  to  t.  heed  to  the  Lord 
Mai.  2.  15.  ther(^forc  t.  herd  to  your  spirit,  16. 
Mat.  6. 1.  t.  heed  that  you  do  not  alms  before  men 
Ifi.  6.  t.  A.  of  I  he  leaven  of  Pharisees,  Mark  8.  15. 

18.  10.  t.  heed  that  ye  despise  not  one  of  these 
24.  4.  f.  heed  that  no  man  deceive  you,  Mark  13.5. 

Mark  4.21.  he  said  to  them,  t.  heed  what  von  hear 

13.  9.  I.  herd  to  yourselves,  /.vke  17.  3.1  21.  34. 

Jlcts  5.  3.1.  I  20.  28. 

23.  t.  h.  I  have  foretold  vou||33.  t.  h.  watch,  pruy 

l^vke  8.  18.  t.  head  therefore  how  yo  hear 

11.35.  t.  Keel  that  Ihe  light  in  thee  bo  not  darkness 

12.  15.  t.herd  nnil  beware  of  covctousness 
21.  8.  he  said,  (.  heed  that  yc  be  not  deceived 

.4«f.»  22.  26.  sHviri?,  l.  herd  what  thou  doest 
Rom.  11.  21.  t.  heed  lest  he  also  spare  not  thee 

1  Cor.  3. 10.  lot  every  man  t.  heed  how  he  buildcth 
8.  9.  f.  heed  lest  this  liberty  of  yours  become 

10.  12.  let  him  that  standclli  t.  heed  lest  he  full 
Oal.a.M/.t.heed  yc  bo  not  consumed  one  of  another 
Col.  4.  \~.t.  Arcdio  the  ministry  thouhast  received 
J{rh.  3.  12.  t.  herd  of  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief 

2  I'et.  1.  19.  wherennto  ve  do  well  to  I.  hrcd 

'IWKEAoW. 
EtoJ.IS.I  I.  sorrow  shall  t.  koUnn  Ihe  inhabitants 
LS.  trumbhnz  shall  t.  hold  upon  tlioin 
602 


TAK 

Ezod.  26.  5.  that  the  loops  t.  hold  one  of  another 
Deut.  32.  41.  and  if  mine  hand  t.  Ai/W  of  judgment 
.loh  27.  vJO.  terrors  t.  hold  on  him  as  waters 

30.  IT.  judgment  and  justice  t.  hold  on  liiee 
38.  13.  It  might  (.  hold  on  the  ends  of  the  earth 

Psal.  35.  2.  {.  Itold  of  shield  and  buckler,  and  help 
09.  24.  let  thy  wrathful  anger  I.  hold  of  them 
Prov.  2.  19.  not  t.  tliee  hold  of  the  paths  of  life 

4.  13.  t.  fast  hold  of  instruction,  let  her  not  go 

5.  5.  her  feet  go  down,  her  steps  t.  hold  on  bell 
Eccl.  7.  16.  it  IS  good  that  tliou  t.  hold  of  this 
Cant.  7.  8.  I  will  t.  hold  of  the  houghs  thereof 
Isa.  3.  G.  when  a  man  shall  t.  huld  of  his  brother 

4. 1.  seven  women  shall  t.  hold  of  one  man,  saying 

13.  S.  Jiangs  and  sorrows  shall  t.  hold  of  them 
27.  5.  or  lot  him  t.  hold  of  my  strength,  and  make 
50.  4.  to  the  eunuchs  that  t.  huld  ui  my  covenant 
1)4.  7.  that  etirreth  up  himself  to  t.  hold  of  thee 

Mie.6. 14.  thou  shall  t.  hold  but  shalt  not  deliver 
Zech.  1.  0.  did  they  not  (.  hold  of  your  fathers  1 

8.  23.  ten  men  shall  t.  Ao^iof  him  that  is  a  Jew 
J.,uke  20.  20.  that  they  might  t.  hold  of  his  words 

20.  and  they  could  not  t.  huld  of  his  words 
TAKE  up. 
Gen.  41.  34.  t.  up  the  fifth  part  of  the  land  of  Egypt 
J.eo.  6.  10.  and  the  priest  shall  t.  up  the  ashes 
A'um.  16.  37.  t.  up  the  censers  out  of  the  burning 
Josh.  3.  0.  t.  up  tlie  ark  of  the  covenant,  6.  0. 
4.  5.  t.  vp  every  man  a  stone  out  of  Jordan 
2  Kings  2.  1.  when  the  Lord  would  t.  up  Elijah 

4.  30.  he  said  t.  vp  thy  son  ||  0.  7.  t.  up  the  iron 

9.  2.).  {.  up  and  cast  him  into  the  portion  of  field 
.AroA.5. 2.  we  t.  up  corn  for  them  that  we  may  eat 
I'sal.  10.  4.  nor  t.  up  their  names  into  my  lips 

27.  10.  then  tlie  Lord  will  t.  me  up 

ha.  14.  4.  that  thou  shalt  t.  up  this  proverb 
.57.  14.  t.  up  the  stumbling-block  out  of  the  way 
,/er.  7.  29.  t.  up  a  lamentation  on  the  high  places 

9.  10.  for  the  mountains  will  t.  up  weeping 

18.  t.  up  wailing  for  us  ||  38. 10.  t.  up  Jeremiah 
Ezek.  19.  1.  t.  up  a  lamentation  fur  the  princes 
20.  17.  t.  up  a  lamentation  for  Tyrus,  27.  2,  32. 

28.  12.  t.  up  a  lamentation  upon  king  of  Tyrus 
;t2.  2.  I.  up  a  lamentation  for  Pharaoh 

Jimos  3.  5.  shall  one  t.  up  a  snare  from  the  earth 

5.  1.  hear  this  word  which  I  t.  up  against  you 
0.  10.  and  a  man's  uncle  shall  t.  him  up 

Jonah  1. 12.  t.  me  up  and  cast  me  forth  into  the  sea 
Mic.  2.  4.  in  that  day  shall  one  t.  up  a  parable 
Hob.  1.  15.  they  t.  up  all  of  them  with  the  angle 

2.  0.  shall  not  all  these  t.  up  a  parable  againsthim 
J/at.9.  6.  Jesussaith,  arise,  t.  up  thv  bed,  Mark'i. 

9.  11.  Luke5.  24.  John  5.8,  11,  12. 

16.24.  let  him  t.  up  his  cross  and  follow  me,  Mark 

8.  3-t.  I  10.  21.  Luke  9.  23. 

17.  27.  and  t.  up  the  fish  that  first  comcth  up 
Mark  16.  18.  they  shall  t.  up  serpents 

TAKEN. 

Gen.  2.  22.  rib  which  Lord  God  had  t.  from  man 

23.  called  woman,  because  she  was  t.  out  of  man 

3.  19.  for  out  of  the  ground  wust  thou  I.  2;i. 

4.  1,5.  vengeance  shall  be  t.  on  him  seven  fold 
12.  l.'i.  the  woman  was  t.  into  Phuraidi's  house 

19.  so  I  might  have  t.  her  to  mo  to  wife 

14.  14.  Abruin  heard  that  his  brother  was  t. 

18.  27.  I  have  t.  upon  me  to  speak  to  the  Lord 

20.  3.  for  Ihe  woman  which  thou  hast  /.  is  a  wife 
27.  33.  who,  where  is  he  that  hath  I.  venison 

31.  10.  Ihe  riches  God  halh  I.  from  our  father 
34.  now  Rachel  had  t.  the  images,  and  put  them 

Ezod.  2.5.  15.  staves  shall  not  be  t.  from  the  rings 
/>(■«.  7.  34.  the  heave  shoulder  have  I  t.  of  Israel 
JVum.  3.  12.  behold  I  have  t.  the  Leviles  for  the 
fir.m-born  of  Israel,  8.  10,  18.  |  18.  C. 
a.  13.  neither  she  be  (.  with  the  manner 

10.  17.  and  the  tabernacle  was  t.  down 

10.  l.'i.  I  have  not  t.  one  ass  from  them,  nor  hurt 
31.  49.  we  have  t.  the  sum  of  the  men  of  war 
36.  3.  their  inheritance  be  I.  from  the  lot 
/>™<.4.20.  Lord  hath  «.  you  out  of  the  iron  furnace 
20.  7.  hath  belrotheil  a  wife,  and  halh  not  t.  her 
24.  1.  when  a  man  hath  (.  a  wile,  and  married 

5. when  a  man  hath  t.  a  new  wife,  be  shall  be  tree 
at  home,  and  cheer  up  his  wifi^  which  he  hnth  t. 
Josh.  7.  11.  they  have  t.  of  the  accursed  thing 

1.5.  he  that  is  t.  shall  be  burnt  with  firu 

16.  nnd  the  tribe  of  Judah  was  (. 

17.  Zabdi  was  /.  H  18.  and  Aehiin  was  t. 
.fud/r.  11.  30.  as  the  Lord  hath  t.  vengi'micc 

14.  9.  he  told  not  them  that  be  had  /.the  honey 

15.  6,  because  he  had  t.  his  wife,  and  given  her 
17.  2.  the  1100  shekels  thai  were  I.  from  thee 

1  .Snm.4.  II.  Ihe  ark  of  God  was  t.  17.  19,21,  22. 
7.  14.  the  cities  which  the  Philistines  had  t. 
10.  21.  Saul  was  t.  ||  12.  3.  whose  ox  have  I  1. 1 
12.  4.  nor  hnsi  thou  t.  ought  of  any  man's  hand 
14.  41.  and  Saul  nnd  Joiiuihan  were  t. 
■12.  Suul  said,  cast  lots,  and  Jonathan  wns  t. 
30.  5.  and  David's  two  wives  were  t.  captives 
1!>.  was  nothing  lacking  that  tliey  had  (.  tu  them 


TAK 

1 2  Sam.  12.  a  bast  t.  his  wife  -o  be  thy  wife,  10 
27.  and  I  have  t.  the  city  of  v  aters 
10.  8.  behold,  thou  art  t.  in  tliy  mischief 

23.  0.  because  tlicy  cannot  be  t.  with  handi 
lA^iH^jf  10.18.  w  hen  Ztmri  saw  that  the  city  wmC 

21.  19.  hast  thou  killed  and  also  (.  possession  ? 
'iKings  2.10.  if  thou  see  me  when  I  am  t.  from  thee 

18.  10.  the  nintJi  year  of  ilosca,  Samaria  was  t. 

1  Chron.  24.  6.  one  principal  household  being  I 

for  Eleazar,  and  one  t.  for  llhainai 

2  CAro«.  28.  11.  dcUvcr  the  captives  you  have  I 
30.  3.  king  had  t.  counsel  to  keep  the  passover 

Ezra  9.  2.  for  they  have  t  of  their  daughters 
10.  2.  and  we  have  t.  ktrango  wives,  14,  17,  18. 
44.  all  these  had  t.  strange  wives 
JVeh.  5.  15.  and  had  t.  of  them  bread  and  wine 
Esth.  2.  15.  who  had  t.  Esther  for  his  daughter 

16.  BO  Esther  was  t.  to  king  Ahasuerus 

8.  2.  king  took  off  his  ring  he  had  t.  from  Haman 
Job  16.  12.  he  hath  also  t.  me  by  my  neck 

19.  9.  he  hatli  t.  the  crown  from  mine  head 
a.  6.  thou  hast  t.  a  pledge  from  lliy  brother 

24.  24.  they  are  t.  out  of  the  way,  as  all  other 
28.  2.  iron  is  t.  out  of  the  earth,  brass  is  molten 

Psal.  9.  15.  in  the  net  they  hid  is  their  own  foot  f. 
10.  2.  let  them  be  t.  in  the  devices  that  they  have 
59.  12.  let  them  even  be  t.  in  their  pride 
83.  3.  have  t.  crafty  counsel  against  thy  people 
119.  111.  tliy  test,  have  I  /.as  a  heritage  forever 

Prov.  3.26.  the  Ld.  shall  keep  thy  foot  Irom  being  I. 

6.  2.  thou  art  t.  with  the  words  of  thy  mouth 

7.  20.  ho  hath  t.  a  bag  of  money  with  him 
11.6.  transgressors  shall  be  {.  in  their  ow  n  naoght 

Eccl.  2.  18.  I  hated  my  labour  which  I  had  t. 
3.  14.  nothing  put  to  it,  nor  any  thing  t.  from  it 

7.  26.  but  the  sinner  shall  be  t.  by  her 

9.  12.  as  the  fishes  tliat  are  t.  in  an  evil  net 
Isa.  7.  5.  have  t.  evil  counsel  against  thee 

8.  15.  many  shall  be  broken,  and  snared,  and  t. 

23.  8.  who  hath  /.  this  counsel  against  Tyre  ? 

24.  18.  shall  be  t.  in  tlie  snare,  Jer.  48.  44. 

2'!.  13.  thai  they  might  be  broken,  snared,  and  t. 

33.  20.  a  tabernacle  that  shall  not  b<;  /.  down 
41.  9.  thou  whom  I  have  /.  from  ends  of  the  eartk 
49.  24.  shall  the  prey  be  t.  from  the  mighty 

51.  22.  behold,  I  have  t.  the  cup  of  trembling 
53.  8.  he  was  t.  from  prison  and  from  judgment 
Jer.  6.  11.  the  husband  with  Ihe  wife  shall  be  t. 

8.  9.  the  wise  men  are  ashamed,  dismayed,  and  (. 
12.  2.  thou  hast  planted,  ihey  have  t.  root 

34.  3.  but  thou  shall  surely  be  I.  38.  23. 

38.  28.  till  the  day  that  Jerusalem  was  t. 

39.  5.  when  they  had  t.  him,  they  brought  him 

40.  I.  when  he  had  (.  him,  being  bound  in  cbaiu 
10.  and  dwell  in  your  cities,  that  ye  have  t. 

48.  1.  Kirialhaim  is  t.  ||  7.  thou  shalt  be  t. 

3.3.  joy  and  gladness  is  t.  from  Ihe  plentiful  fitid 

41.  Kirioth  is  t.  ||  46.  thy  sons  are  t.  captives 
49.20.  hear  the  counsel  he  halh  (.  against  Edom 

24.  anguish  and  sorrows  have  t.  Damascus 

30.  Nebuchadnezzar  huth  (.  counsel  against  you 
50.2.  publish  and  say,  Babylon  is/.  24. 1  51.31, 41. 

Attm.  4.  20.  the  anointed  of  the  Lord  was  t. 

Ezek.  12.  13.  the  prince  of  Israel  De  /.  in  my  snare 

15.  3.  shall  wood  he  /.  thereof  to  do  any  work  1 
10. 17.  thou  hast  also  /.  thy  fair  jewels  of  gold 

20.  thou  hast  /.  thy  sons  and  thy  daughters 

17.  12.  is  come,  and  hath  /.  the  king  thereof 

13.  /.  of  the  king's  seed,  hath  (.  an  oath  of  him 
20.  and  be  shall  be  /.  in  my  snore 

18.  8.  not  upon  usury,  neither  huth  t.  any  incrosM 
13.  hath  given  upon  usury,  and  halh  /.  incroase 

17.  that  lialh  /.  oft"  his  hand  from  Ihe  poor 

19.  4.  heard  of  him,  he  was  /.  in  their  pit,  8. 

21.  2.3.  cull  to  remembrance,  that  Ihey  may  be  t. 

22.  12.  in  thee  have  they  /.  gifts,  host  /.  usury 

25.  15.  have  /.  vengeance  with  a  despiteful  heart 
Dan.  5.  2.  vessels,  which  his  father  had  (.  oat,  3. 
Joel  3.  5.  because  ye  have  t.  my  silver  and  ^old 
.^imos  3.  4.  will  he  cry  out,  if  he  have  /.  nothing,  5. 

12.  so  shall  Israel  be  /.  that  dwell  in  Samaria 
0.  13.  have  we  not  /.  to  us  horns  by  our  strength 
Zeeh.  14.  2.  the  city  shall  be  /.  and  houses  rilled 
Mat.  9.  15.  the  bridegroom  shall  be  /.  from  them 

16.  7.  it  is  because  we  bare  (.  no  bread 

21.  43.  the  kingdom  of  God  shall  be  /.  from  you 
24.  40.  one  shall  be  /.  J.uke  17.  34,  35,  :10. 
28. 12.  and  had  /.  counsel,  they  gave  Inrge  innneT 
Mark  4.  25.  from  him  t.  even  that  which  he  hath 
0.  41.  when  he  had  /.  the  five  loaves  he  looked  up 

9.  36.  when  he  had  (.  him  in  his  arms,  he  said 
I.uke  5.  .5.  we  toiled  all  night,  ond  have  t.  nothing 

9.  at  the  draught  of  fishes  winch  thi  y  had  t. 

19.  8.  if  I  have  /.  any  tiling  from  any  man 
.fohn  7.  44.  and  some  of  them  would  have  t.  hiaa 

8.  3.  brought  to  him  a  woman  /.  in  odulteryj  4. 
.^r/v  2.2.3.  ye  have  /.and  by  wiiked  hands  ci^ucified 

8.  33.  for  his  life  is  /.  from  Ihe  earth 

2.1.  27.  this  man  was  /.  of  the  Jews 

27.  33.  and  continued  faiiLing  having  (.  DOthiog 


TAK 

Rom.  9.  G.  not  as  tho'  the  word  hatli  t.  none  ofToct 
I  Cor.  10.  Vi  there  hath  iiolenipiatiDii  t.  you 

1  T/iess.  -i.  17.  being  t.  from  you  lor  a  short  time 

2  Theas.  '2.  7.  will  let,  until  he  be  (.  out  of  the  way 

1  Tim.a.9.  let  not  a  widow  be  t.iuto  tho  iiurnbur 
9  Tim.  2.26.  who  arc  I  captive  by  him  at  his  will 
Jieb.  5.  1.  every  high  priest  t.  from  among  men 

2  Pet.  2.12.  made  to  be  t.  and  destroyed,  speak  evil 
Keo.  5.  8.  and  when  he  had  I.  the  book,  the  beasts 

11.  17.  thou  hast  t.  to  thee  thy  great  power 
ly.  20.  and  the  beast  was  t.  and  with  him 

TAKEN  away. 
<?ffn.21.2.5.  a  well  Abimelcoli's  servants  had  t.  a. 
27.  35.  Jacob  came  and  hath  t.  away  thy  blessing 
36.  behold  now  he  hath  t.  away  my  blessin 

30.  23.  Kachcl  said,  G.  halh  t.  away  my  reproach 

31.  1.  Jacob  hath  (.  away  all  that  is  our  lather's 
9.  thus  God  halh  (.  away  the  cattle  of  your  father 

Kzod.  14. 11.  hast  thou  t.  us  a.  to  die  in  wilderness 
Lev.  4.  31.  as  the  fat  is  t.  a.  from  the  sacrifice,  35 
6.  2.  trespass  in  a  thing  t.  away  by  violence 
14.43.  aflei  lijat  he  hath  t.  away  the  stones 
Deut.  2(i.  14.  nor  t.  away  ought  for  any  unclean  use 
2d.  31.  thine  ass  shall  be  violently  t.  away  from 
Judg.  18. 24.  ye  have  t.  a.  my  gods  which  I  made 
1  .Sam.  21.  6.  in  the  day  when  it  was  t.  away 

1  Kiiiffs  22.  43.  the  high  places  were  not  t.  away. 

2  Kings  12.  3.  I  14.  4.  2  Chr.  15.  17.  | 
20.  33. 

2  Kings  2.  9.  ask,  before  I  bo  t.  away  from  thee 
18.22.  and  whose  altars  Hezekiah  hath  t.  away, 

2  C/iron.  32.  12.  Isa.  36.  7. 
2  Chron.  19.  3.  in  that  thou  hast  t.  away  the  groves 
Job  1. 21.  the  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  t.  away 
20.  19.  hath  violently  t.  a.  a  house  he  built, not 
27.  2.  ae  God  liveth,  who  hath  i.  a.  my  judgment 
34.  5.  and  God  hath  t.  away  my  judgment 
20.  and  the  mighty  shall  be  t.  away  without  hand 
Psal.  85.  3.  thou  hast  t.  away  all  thy  wrath 
Prov.  4.  16.  Iheir  sleep  is  t.  away  unless  they  cause 
Jsa.  6.  7.  thine  iniquity  is  t.  away,  thy  sin  purged 
8.  4.  the  spoil  of  Samaria  shall  be  t.  away 
10. 27.  the  burden  shall  bo  t.  a.  from  the  shoulder 
16. 10. gladness  is  t.  a.  \\  17. 1.  Damascus  is  t.  away 
49.  25.  the  captives  of  the  mighty  shall  be  t.  away 
52.  5.  that  my  people  is  t.  away  for  nought 
57,  1.  merciful  men  are  t.  away,  righteous  is  t.  a. 
04.  6.  our  iniquities  like  wind  have  t.  us  away 
Je.r.  1G.5. 1  have  t.  away  my  peace  from  this  peojili 
J.am.  2.  6.  hath  violently  I.  away  his  tabernacle 
Eick.  .33.  6.  he  is  t.  away  in  his  iniquity 
Dav.  7.  12.  they  hud  their  dominion  t.  away 
8.  11.  by  him  the  daily  sacrifice  was  t.  a.  12.  11. 
Has.  4.  3.  the  fishes  of  the  sea  also  sliall  be  t.  away 
,iinos  4.  10.  and  I  have  t.  away  your  horses 
Mic.  2.  9.  ye  have  t.  away  my  glory  for  ever 
Zep/i.  3.  15.  the  Lord  hath  t.  away  thy  judgments 
Mat.  13.  12.  from  him  shall  be  t.  away  even  that 
he  hath,  25.  2a.  J.uke  8.  18.  1  19.  26. 
J>/arA2.20.  the  bridegroom  shall  be  t.a.  Luk<'.  5.35. 
I.uke  10.  42.  that  good  part  which  shall  not  be  t.  a. 
11.  52.  ye  have  t.  away  the  key  of  knowledge 
John  19.  31.  and  that  they  might  be  t.  away 
20.  1.  seeth  the  stone  (.  away  from  the  scjiulchre 
2,  they  have  t.  away  tho  Lord  ||  13.  t.  a.  my  Lord 
."lets  8.  33.  in  his  humiliation  hisjudgment  was  t.  a. 
27. 20.  all  hope  that  we  should  be  saved  was  t.  a. 

1  Or)?-.  5.  2.  he  that  hath  done  this,  might  be  t.  away 

2  Cor.  3.  10.  nevertheless  the  veil  shall  be  t.  away 

TAKEN  kold. 

1  Kings  9.  9.  and  have  t.  hold  uponftther  gods 
Job  30.  16.  days  of  affliction  have  t.hold  upon  mc 
Psal.  40. 12.  mine  iniquities  have  t.  hold  upon  mc 

119. 143.  tronlile  and  anguish  have  t.  hold  on  me 
Isa.  21.  3.  pangs  have  t.  hold  on  nie,  as  of  a  woman 
./or.  6.  24.  anguish  hath  t.  hold  on  us,  and  pain 

TAKEN  up. 
F.xod.  40. 36.  cloud  was  I.  up  from  over  tabernacle 

.37.  if  the  cloud  were  not  t.  up  till  it  was  t.  vp 
J^um.  9.  17.  when  the  cloud  was  t.  up,  21. 
22.  but  when  it  was  t.  up  they  journeyed,  10. 11. 

2  .Sam.  18.  9.  Absalom  was  t.  up  between  heaven 
Isa.  10.  29.  they  have  t.  up  their  lodging  at  Geba 
Jer.  29.  22.  of  them  shall  hct.  vp  a  curse  byjudah 
Ezek.  36.  3.  ye  are  t.  up  in  the  lips  of  talkers 
Dan.  6.  23.  so  Daniel  was  t.  vp  out  of  the  den 
I.uke  9.  17.  there  was  t.  up  oi  the  fragments 
Acts  1.  2.  till  the  day  in  which  he  was  t.  up 

9.  while  they  beheld,  he  was  t.  up,  and  a  cloud 
11.  this  same  Jesus  which  is  (.  vp  from  you 
22.  unto  that  same  day  he  was  t.  vp  from  us 
20.  9.  Eulychus  fell  down,  and  was  t.  up  dead 
27.  17.  had  t.  up  the  boat  ||  40.  t.  up  tho  anchors 

TAKEST. 
F.xod.  4.  9.  the  water  thou  t.  out  of  the  river 
30. 12.  when  thou  t.  the  sum  of  children  of  Israel 
Judg.  4.  9.  journey  thou  t.  not  be  for  thy  honour 
Psal.  104. 2J.  thou  t.  away  their  breath,  they  die 
144.3.  what  is  man  that  thou  I.  knowledge  of  himl 
Isa.  58.  3.  atflictad  our  soul,  and  thou  I.  no  knowl. 
C03 


TAL 

Luke  19. 21.  thou  t.  up  that  thou  laycdat  not  down 
TAKEST  heed. 

1  Chr.  22.  13.  if  thou  t.  heed  to  fulfil  the  statutes 
TAKETH. 

Ezod.  20.  7.  that  t.  his  name  in  vain,  Deut.  5. 11. 

Deut.  10.  17.  rcgardeth  not  persons  nor  t.  reward 
24.  6.  for  he  t.  a  man's  life  to  pledge 
25. 11.  putteth  her  hand  and  t.  him  by  the  secrets 
27.  2.5.  cursed  be  he  that  t.  reward  to  slay  innocent 
32.  11.  as  an  eagle  t.  them,  beareth  them  on  her 

Josh.  7. 14.  the  tribe  which  the  Lord  t.  shall  come 
15.16.  smiteth  Kirjath-sepher  and  t.  it,  Judg.  1.12. 

1  Ham.  17.  26.  and  I.  away  reproach  from  Israel 

1  Kings  14.10.as  a  man  t.awaydung.till  all  begone 

Job  5.  5.  and  t.  it  even  out  of  the  thorns 

13.  he  t.  the  wise  in  their  craftiness,  1  Cor.  3. 19. 
9.  ^.  behold,  he  t.  away,  who  can  hinder  him? 
12. 20.  and  t.  away  the  understanding  of  the  aged 
24.  he  t.  away  the  heart  of  the  chief  of  the  people 
27.8. what  is  the  hope,  when  God  t.  away  his  soul? 
40.  24.  he  t.  it  with  his  eyes,  his  nose  pierceth  it 

Psal.  15.  3.  nor  t.  up  reproach  against  his  neighb. 
5.  nor  t.  toward  against  the  innocent 
118.  7.  Lord  t.  my  part  with  them  that  help  me 
137.  9.  happy  shall  he  bo  that  t.  and  dasheth  little 
147.  10.  he  t.  not  pleasure  in  the  legs  of  a  man 
11.  the  Lord  t.  pleasure  in  them  that  fear  him 
149.  4.  for  the  Lord  t.  pleasure  in  his  people 

Prov.  1.  19.  which  £.  away  the  life  of  the  owners 
16.32.rule3  his  spirit,  is  better  than  he  that  t.  a  city 

17.  23.  a  wicked  man  t.  gift  out  of  the  bosom 
25.20.as  he  that  t.away  a  garment  in  cold  weather 
26.  17.  is  like  one  that  t.  a  dog  by  the  ears 

Eccl.  1.3.of  all  his  labour  which  he  t.  under  the  sun 
2.  23.  his  heart  t.  not  rest  in  the  night 

Isa.  13.  14.  and  as  a  sheep  that  no  man  t.  up 
40.  15.  he  t.  up  the  isles  as  a  very  little  thing 
44.  14.  the  carpenter  t.  the- cypress,  and  the  oak 
51.  18.  nor  is  there  any  that  t.  her  by  the  hand 

£:(;A-. 16.32.  who  t.  strangers  instead  of  her  husband 
33.  4.  and  t.  not  warning  ||  5.  he  that  t.  warning 

Mmos  3. 12.  as  the  shepherd  t.  out  of  mouth  of  lion 

Mat.  4.  5.  the  devil  t.  him  up  into  the  holy  city 
8.  t.  him  up  into  an  exceeding  high  mountain 
9.  16.  t.  from  garment  and  rent  worse,  Mark2.  21. 
10. 38.  that  t.  not  his  cross  and  followeth  after  me 
12.  45.  he  goeth,  t.  seven  other  spirits,  Luke  11.26. 
17.1.  Jesus  t. Peter,  James,  and  John,  and  bringeth 
into  a  high  mountain,  Mark  9.  2.  |  14.  33. 

Mark  4.  15.  Satan  cometh  and  t.  away  the  word 
that  was  sown  in  their  hearts,  I.uke  8.  12. 
5.  40.  he  t.  the  father  and  mother  of  the  damsel 
9.  18.  wheresoever  he  t.  hini  he  tenreth  him 

Luke  6.  29.  him  that  t.  away  thy  cloak,  forbid  not 
30.  and  of  him  that  t.  thy  goods,  ask  them  not 

9.  39.  a  spirit  t.  him,  and  he  sudd.;nly  crieth  out 
11.  22.  a  stronger  t.  from  him  all  his  armour 
16.  3.  my  lord  i.  away  from  me  the  stewardship 

./tiArtl.  29.  LambofGod  wlio  «.  away  sin  of  world 
10. 13.  no  man  t.  it  from  nie,  I  lay  it  down  of  mys. 

15.  2.  branch  that  beareth  not  fruit,  he  t.  away 

16.  22.  and  your  joy  no  man  t.  from  you 
21. 13.  Jcs.  then  cometh,  t.  bread  and  givelh  them 

liom.  3.5.  is  God  unrighteous,  who  t.  vengeance  ^ 

1  Cnr.  11. 21.  in  eating  every  one  t.  before  another 
Hrb.  5.  4.  no  man  t.  this  honour  to  himself  but  he 

10.  9.  he  t.  away  the  first  that  he  may  establish 
TAKETH  hold. 

./bft21.  6.  afraid,  and  trembling  (.  hold  on  my  flesh 
Prov.  30.  28.  the  spider  t.  hold  with  her  hands 
Isa.  56.  6.  every  one  that  t.  hold  of  my  covenant 
TAKING. 

2  Chro7i.  19.  7.  with  God  there  is  no  t.  of  gifts 
.fob  5.  3.  I  have  seen  the  foolish  t.  root,  hut  cursed 
Psal.  119.  9.  by  t.  heed  thereto,  according  to  thy 
.fer.  50.  46.  at  noise  oft.  of  Babylon  earth  moved 
Ezck.  25.  12.  dealt  against  Judah  by  t.  vengeance 
Hos.W.  3. 1  taught  Ephraim  also  to  go,  t.  them  by 

their  arms, but  they  knew  not  that  I  healed  them 
Mat.  6.27.  which  of  you  by  t.  thought,  Luke  12.25. 
Mark  13.34. Son  of  man  is  as  a  man  t.a.  far  journey 
LvkcA.  5.  the  devil  t.  him  up  into  a  high  mountain 
19. 22.  t.  up  that  I  laid  not  down,  and  reaping  that 
John  11.  13.  he  had  spoken  oft.  rest  in  sleep 
Rom.  7.8.  sin  t.  occasion  by  the  commandment,  II. 
2  Cor.  2. 13.  t.  my  leave  of  them,  I  went  to  Maced. 

11.  8.  t.  wages  of  them  to  do  you  service 
Eph.  6. 16.  above  all  t.  the  shield  of  faith 

2  Thcss.  1.  8.  in  flaming  fire  t.  vengeance  on  them 
1  Pet.  .5.2.  t.  the  oversight  thereof  willingly 

3  John  7.  they  went  forth  t.  nothing  of  the  Gentiles 
TALE. 

Psal.  90.  9.  we  spend  our  years  as  a  t.  that  is  told 

TALE-BEARER. 
/.?». 19.10.  shalt  not  go  up  and  down  as  a  f .-bearer 
Prov.  11.  1.3.  a  t.-bcarer  revcaletli  eecrets,  20.  19. 

18.  8.  the  words  of  a  t.-h.  are  as  wounds,  26.  22. 
26. 20.  where  there  is  no  t. -hearer  strife  ceaseth 

TALES. 
Eiek.  22.  9.  are  men  that  carry  t.  to  shed  blood 


TAL 

Luke  24. 11.  their  words  seemed  to  them  as  Wla  ( 

TALE. 
Exod.  5.  8.  the  t.  of  bricks  which  they  did  make 

18.  no  straw, yet  shall  he  deliver  the  t.of  bricks 
1  Sam.  18.  27.  gave  the  foreskins  in  full  t.  to  king 

1  Chron.  9.2b.  should  bring  vessels  in  and  out  bv  {. 
TALENT 

Signifies,  [1]  j9  weight  among  the  Jeics,  contain- 
ing 3,{V)0  shekels ;  which,  computing  the  shekel 
at  three  shillings  sterling,  amounts  to  450 
pounds  for  a  talent  of  silver :  and  allowing  the 
proportion  oj  gold  tn  silver  to  be  as  sixteen  to 
one,  a  talent  of  gold  will  amount  to  7,200 
pounds.  Others,  making  the  shekel  of  lesa 
value,  compute  a  talent  of  silver  to  be  in  Eng- 
lish money,  34'2 pounds,  3  shilli7igs  and  9 pince. 
The  talent  of  gold  5,i15pounds,  E.xud.  25.  39. 
1  38.  25.  [2]  The  gifts  of  God  bestowed  on 
men,  Mat.  25. 15. 

F.rod.ji5.  39.  of  a  t.  of  pure  gold  make  it,  37.  24. 

38.  27.  a  hundred  .sockets,  a  t.  for  a  socket 

2  ,Sam.  12.  30.  the  weight  of  the  crown  was  a  t. 

1  Kings  20.  39.  else  thou  shalt  pay  a  t.  of  silver 

2  Kings  5. 22.  give  them  a  t.  of  silver  and  changes 
23.  33.  a  tribute  of  a  t.  of  gold,  2  Chron.  36.  3. 

Z.cck.  5.  7.  behold,  there  was  lifted  up  a  t.  of  lead 
Mat.  25.  25.  I  went  and  hid  thy  t.  in  the  earth 

28.  take  therefore  the  t.  from  him  and  give  it 
Rev.  16.  21.  every  stone  about  the  weight  of  a  t. 

TALENTS. 
Eiod.  38.  24.  the  gold  of  the  oflTering  was  29  t. 

27.  of  100  t.  of  silver  were  cast  the  sockets 

1  Kings  16.24.bought  the  hill  of  Samaria  for  two  t 

2  Kings  5. 5.  Naaman  took  ten  t.  \\  23.  take  two  t 
15.  19.  Menahem  gave  Pul  1,000  t.  of  silver 
18.14.  appointed  to  Hezekiah  300  t.  and  30  of  gold 

23.  33.  land  to  a  tribute  of  100  t.  2  Chron.  ,36.  3. 

1  Chron.  19.  6.  Ammonites  sent  1,000  t.  of  silver 
29.  4.  David  gave  3,000  t.  of  gold  to  the  house 

7.  gave  of  gold  5,000  t.  and  of  silver  10,000  t. 

2  C/iron.  25.  9.  what  shall  we  do  for  the  100  t.  ? 
27.  5.  tho  children  of  Amnion  gave  him  100  t. 

Mat.  18.  24.  one  which  owed  him  10,000  t. 
25.  15.  to  one  he  gave  five  t.  to  another  two 
■Sec  GoLB,  Silver. 
TALK. 
Job  11.  2.  should  a  man  full  oft.  be  justified? 
15.  3.  should  he  reason  with  unprofitable  t.  ? 
Prov.  14.  23.  the  t.  of  the  lips  tendeth  to  penury 
Eccl.  10.  13.  end  of  his  t.  is  mischievous  niadnes* 
Mat.  22.  15.  thev  might  entangle  him  in  his  t. 

TALK. 
JVum.  11.  17.  I  will  come  down  and  t.  with  thee 
Deut.  5.  24.  have  seen  that  God  doth  t.  with  man 
6.7.  shalt  t.  of  them  when  thou  sitlcst  in  thy  house 

1  Sam.  2.  3.  (.  no  more  so  exceeding  proudly 

2  Kings  18.26.  t.  not  with  us  in  the  Jews"  language 
1  Chron.  16.  9.  sing  unto  him,  sing  psalms,  t.  ye  of 

all  his  wondrous  works,  Psal.  105.  2 
.Job  13.  7.  and  will  ye  t,  deceitfully  for  him  ? 
Psal.  69.  26.  they  t.  to  the  grief  of  them  whom 
71.  24.  my  tongue  shall  t.  of  thy  righteousness 
77.  ti.  I  will  meditate  and  t.  of  thy  doings 
119.  27.  so  shall  I  t.  of  thy  wondrous  works 
145. 11.  speak  of  thy  kingdom  and  t.  of  thy  power 
Prov.  6. 22.  when  thou  awakest  it  shall  t.  with  thee 

24.  2.  heart  sludieth,  and  their  lips  t.  of  mischief 
Jer.  12.  1.  let  me  t.  with  thee  of  thy  judgments 
Ezck.  3.  22.  arise  and  I  will  there  t.  with  thee 
Dan.  10.  17.  how  can  thy  servant  t.  with  my  lord 
John  14.  30.1  will  not  t.  much  witJi  you,  for  prince 

TALKED. 
Gen.  45.  15.  after  that  his  brethren  t.  with  him 
Kj-O(i.20.22.3een  that  I  have  t.  with  you,  Deut.5.A 

33.  9.  and  the  Lord  (.  with  Moses 

34.  29.  the  skin  of  his  face  shone  while  ho  t. 

1  Sam.  14.  19.  while  Saul  t.  unto  the  priest 

2  Chron.  2.5.  16.  it  came  to  pa.ss  as  he  t.  with  him 
.Fer.  38.  25.  if  the  princes  hear  that  I  have  t. 
/.k/itc  9.  ;tO.  f .  with  him  two  men,  Moses  and  Elias 

24. 32.  heart  burn  while  he  t.  with  us  by  the  way 
John  4.  27.  marvelled  that  he  t.  with  ihe  woman 
Jlcis  10.27.  as  Peter  t.  with  Cornelius  he  went  ia 
20.  11.  and  t.  long,  even  till  break  of  day 
26.  31.  they  t.  between  themselves,  saying 
Rev.  21.  15.  he  that  t.  with  me  had  a  golden  reed 

TALKERS. 
Ezek.  36.  3.  ye  are  taken  up  in  the  lips  of  (. 
Tit.  1.  10.  there  are  many  unruly  and  vain  t. 

TALKEST. 
Judg.  6.  17.  shew  me  a  sign  that  thou  t.  with  me 
1  Kings  1.  14.  while  thou  yet  /.  with  the  king 
John  4.  27.  no  man  said,  whv  t.  thou  with  her  1 

TALKETH. 
Psal.  37.  30.  and  his  tongue  t.  of  judgment 
John  9.  37.  seen  him,  ami  it  is  he  that  t.  with  thue 

TAI,KING. 
Cten.  17.  22.  and  he  left  ofTt.  with  him 
1  Kings  18.  27.  he  is  a  god,  he  is  t.  or  pursuing 
F.sth.  6.  14.  while  they  wore  t.  with  him 


TAR 

Kzek  Xi.  TO.  (Iiv  people  arc  atill  t.  against  thee 
Mm  I'M-  iMose's  -iiKi  EUas  t.  wiili  liiiii,  Mark'X  4. 
Jiev.  4.  1.  as  the  voice  of  a  trumpet  t.  witli  me 

TALKING. 
Jo629.9.the  princes  retrained  t.  and  laid  their  hand 
Eph.  5.  4.  neither  tilthiness,  nor  I'ooiish  t. 

TALL. 

Deut.  2.  10.  a  people  t.  as  the  Anakima,  21.  1 9.  2. 

2  Kings  19.  2.'(.  and  will  cut  down  the  t.  cedar  trees 

and  tlie  choice  fir  troi'S  thereof,  laa.  37.  24. 

TALLKIl. 

Devt  1   23-  the  pcoidc  is  ^'rcater  and  t.  than  we 

TAME, 
^ari  5.4.often  bound, nntlier  could  any  man  t.him 
Jam.  3.  8.  but  the  tongup  can  no  man  t.  is  unruly 

TAMED. 
Jam.  3.  7.  things  of  the  .sea  i.s  t.  and  hath  been  t. 

TANNER. 
Jicls  9.  43.  Peter  tarried  with  one  Simon  a  t. 
10.  6.  he  !odgi;d  with  one  Simon  a  t.  32. 
Tapestry,  si:e  Coverings. 
TARE. 

0  .'iam.  13.  31.  the  king  arose  and  t.  his  garments 
2  Kinrrs  2.  21.  two  she-bears  t.  forty-two  children 
.UarA'y.20..straiglitway  the  .spirit  I.  him,  Luke'J.Aii. 

TARES 

Signify,  j9  land  of  p«/.ie  noziou.<s  and  hurtful  to 
corn,  Mat.  13.  29.  To  which  are  compared, 
T/lc  wicked  in  the  world,  but  especially/  hypo- 
crites, Mat.  13.  38. 

Jllut.  13.  2.'>.  his  enemy  sowed  t.  among  the  wheat 
211.  the  blade  sprung  up,  then  appeared  the  t.  also 
27.  sow  good  see<l,  from  whcnee  then  hath  it  t.? 
29.  lest  while  you  gather  up  the  t.  you  root  up 
36.  declare  to  us  the  parable  of  the  t.  of  the  field 
TARGET. 

1  Sam.  17.  6.  Goliath  had  a  t.  of  brass 

1  King^-  10.  Ifi.  beaten  gold,  six  hundred  shekels 
of  gold  went  to  one  t.  2  Chron.  9.  15. 
TARGETS. 

1  Kings  10.  If).  Polomon  made  two  hundred  t. 

2  CAr.l4.8..\sa  had  an  armv  that  bare  t.  and  spears 

TARRY 

Signifies,  Tl]  To  abide  and  continue.  Gen.  27.  44. 
{21  To  stay  behind,  Exod.  12.  39.  [3]  To  zcait 
or  stay  for,  K\od.  24.  14.  [4]  To  delay,  defer, 
or  put  off,  Gen.  4.').  9.  [.5]  7'«  be  established, 
P.sal.  101.  t  7.  [in  To  [fuard,  1  Sam.  30.  24. 
[7]  To  lodge,  Gen.  19.  2. 

Oen.  19.  2.  and  t.  all  night,  and  wash  your  feet 

27.  44.  and  t.  with  Lahan  a  few  days  till  fury 
30.  27.  if  I  have  found  favour  in  thine  eyes  t. 
45.  9.  thus  saith  thy  son,  come  down  to  me,  t.  not 

Exod.  12.  39.  they  were  thrust  out,  and  could  not  t. 

24.  14.  I.  ye  here  for  us  till  we  come  again  to  you 
/,cii.l4.8.the  leper  shall  <.  out  of  his  tent  seven  days 
JVum.  22.  19.  I  pray  you  t,  here  also  this  night 
Judg.  .5.  28.  why  t.  the  wheels  of  his  chariots  7 

fi.  18.  he-said,  I  will  t.  until  Ihou  come  again 

19.  fi.  t.  all  night,  9.  ||  10.  the  man  would  not  t. 
P.ulh  1.13. would  ye  t.for  them  till  they  were  grown 

3.  13.  t.  this  night,  and  it  shall  be  in  the  morning 

1  .Sam.  1.  23.  t.  until  thou  have  weaned  him 

10.  8.  seven  days  shall  thou  t.  till  I  come  to  thee 
14.  9.  if  they  say  t.  till  we  come  to  you 

2  Sam.  10.  5.  t.  at  Jericho  till  your  beards  be 

grown,  and  then  return,  1  Chron.  19.  5. 
11.12. «.  hereto-day  II  l.").  28. 1  will  t.  in  the  jdain 

18.  14.  ,Ioab  said,  I  may  not  t.  thus  with  thee 

19.  7.  there  will  not  t.  one  with  thee  this  night 

2  Kings  2.  2.  t.  here  the  Lord  hath  sent  me,  4.  6. 

7.9.  the  lepers  said,  if  we  (.  till  the  morning  light 

9.  3.  then  open  the  door  and  flee,  and  t.  not 
,    14. 10.  smitten  Edom,  glory  of  this,  and  t.  at  home 
Psal.  101.  7.  a  liar  shall  not  t.  in  my  sight 
Prov.  23.  30.  they  that  t.  long  at  the  wine 
Isa.  4fi.  13.  not  far  off,  and  my  salvation  shall  not  t 

Jtr.  14.  8.  that  turneth  aside  to  t.  for  a  night 
Jtab.'i..  3.  though  it  t.  wait  for  it,  for  it  will  not  t. 
Mat.  2fi.  3«.  t.  ye  here  and  watch,  Mark  14.  34. 
J.,\nke  24.  29.  arid  he  went  in  to  t.  with  them 

49.  but  t.  ye  in  the  city  of  Jerusalem,  till  endued 
John  A.  40.  hcRmight  that  he  would  t.  with  them 

2L  22.  if  I  will  that  he  (.  till  I  come,  23. 
J}cls  10.  4H.  \h<:y  prayed  Peter  to  t.  certain  days 

18.20. they  desireil  Paul  to  {.longer  time  with  them 

28.  14.  were  desired  to  t.  with  them  seven  days 
J  Cor.  II.  3.3.  wherefore  t.  one  for  another 

If). 7. 1  trust  to  t.  a  while  with  you,  if  Lord  permit 
8.  but  I  will  t.  at  EphiHus  uiilil  Pentecost 
1  Tim.  3.  15.  but  if  I  t.  long,  that  thou  mayest 
Jleb.  10  37. he  that  sbnil  coi„o,  will  come,  and  not  t 

TARRIED. 
Cm.  24.  54.  AbrnhamV  Kcj-vant  t.  nil  night 
28. 11.  Jacob  (.  there  all  night  and  took  stones 
31.  .54.  Jacob  and  Laban  t.  all  night  in  the  mount 
JVitm.  0.  19.  when  the  cloud  I.  long,  22. 
Judg.  3.  25.  they  t.  till  they  were  n»hamed 
26.  Ehud  escaped  while  they  (.  and  pnesed 
19.8.thcy  t.  till  afternoon  and  did  eat  botli  ofthem 
604 


TAU 

Ruth  2.  7.  save  that  she  t.  a  little  in  the  house 

1  Sam.  13.  8.  he  t.  seven  days  according  to  set  time 

2  Sam.  11.  1.  but  David  t.  still  at  Jerusalem 
15.  17.  the  king  t.  in  a  place  that  was  far  otT 

29.  Zadok  and  Abiathar  t.  at  Jerusalem 
20.  5.  but  he  t.  longer  than  the  set  lime 

2  Kings  2.  18.  when  they  came,  for  he  t.  at  Jericho 
A'so/.t)8.12.and  she  that  t. at  home  divided  the  spoil 
Mat.  2.5.  5.  while  the  bridegroom  t.  they  all  slept 
l^uke  1.  21.  the  |)Cople  marvelled  that  he  t.  so  long 

2.  43.  the  child  Jesus  t.  behind  in  Jerusalem 
John  3.  22.  then  he  t.  with  them,  and  baptized 
Jlcts  9.43.  Peter  t.  many  days  in  Jojjpa  with  Simon 

15.  3;i.  Judas  and  Silaa  exhorted  anil  t.  at  Antioch 

18.  18.  Paul  t.  a  good  while  at  Corinth  and  sailed 

20.  5.  these  going  before  t.  for  us  at  Troas      y 

21.  4.  and  finding  the  disciples,  we  (.  seven  i«)'6 
10.  as  we  t.  many  days  at  Cesarea  came  Agmus 

25.  6.  Festus  t.  at  Jerusalem  more  than  ten  days 
27.  33.  this  is  the  fourteenth  day  ye  have  t.  fasting 
2^.  12.  landing  at  Syracuse,  we  t.  three  days 

TARRIEST. 
Acts  22.16. and  now  why  t.  tlioul  arise,bc  baptized 

TARRIETH. 
1  Sam.  30.  24.  so  shall  his  part  be  that  t.  by  stuff 
vWic.5. 7.  thatt.  not  for  a  man,  nor  waitcth  for 

TARRYING. 
Psal.  40.  17.  make  no  t.  O  my  God,  70.  5. 

TASK. 
Ezod.  5.  19.  ye  shall  not  niinish  from  your  daily  t. 

TASKS. 

Exod.  5. 13.  saying,  fulfil  your  works,  your  daily  t. 

li.  why  not  fulfilled  vour  t.  in  niaking  brick 

TASK-MASTERS. 

Ezod.  1.11.  set  over  them  t.-masters  to  afflict  them 

3.  7.  hoard  their  cry  by  reason  of  their  t.-masters 
5.  fi.  and  Pharaoh  commanded  t.-7uasters,  saying 

lO.t.- masters  toUl  them||13.«.-nias(.  hasted  them 
14.  officers  which  the  t.-mast.  had  set  over  them 
TASTE 
Signifies,  [1]  To  prove,  or  try  the  relish  of  any 
thing  by  the  palate,  or  tongue,  Job  34.  3.  [2] 
To  have  anintcard  experimental  knoielrdgeof 
a  thing,  Psal.  34.  8.  [3]  To  eat  a  little,  1  Sam. 
14.  29,  43.  [4]  To  drink,  Dan.  5.  2. 
Have  tasted    of  the  heavenly  gift,    Heb.  6.  4. 
Have  had  some  transient   experience   of  the 
power  and  efficacy  of  the   Holy   Ghost  from 
heaven,  in  go.<pel  adminislratiun  and  worship, 
so  as  to  relish  comfort  and  sweetness  in  the 
doctrine  and  promises  of  the  gospel. 
To  taste  death,  Heb.  2.  9.    To  feel  the  bitterness 
of  death,  yet  not  be  long  detained  under  it. 
TASTE,  Substantive. 
Exod.  16.  31.  the  t.  ol^  manna  was  like  wafers 
.Vu7n.  11.  8.  the  t.  of  it  was  as  the  t,  of  fresh  oil 
./ob  6.  6.  is  there  any  t.  in  the  white  of  an  egg? 

30.  cannot  my  I.  discern  perverse  things  1 
Psal.  119. 103.  how  sweet  are  thy  words  to  my  t.! 
Prov.  24.  13.  the  honey-(M)mb  is  sweet  to  the  t. 
Cant.  2.  3.  and  his  fruit  was  sweet  to  my  t. 

Jcr.  48.  11.  therefore  his  t.  remained  in  liiin 

TASTE,  Verb. 
1  Sam.  14.  43. 1  did  but  t.  a  little  honey,  and  lo 
2Sa7n.3.35.ifI  t.bread  or  ought  else  till  sun  be  down 

19.  35.  can  thy  servant  t.  what  I  eat  or  drink  1 
Job  12.  11.  doth  not  the  mouth  t.  his  moat? 
Psal.  34.  8.  O  t.  and  see  that  the  Lord  is  good 
.lonah  3.  7.  neither  herd  nor  flock  t.  any  thing 
Mat.  Ifi.  28.  there  be  some  standing  here  which 

shall  not  /.  of  death,  Mark^.  1.  Luke  9.  27. 
I.vke  14.  24.  none  bidden  shall  t.  of  my  Bujiper 
John  8.  .52.  keep  my  saying,  he  shall  never  t.  death 
Ciil.  2.  21.  touch  not,  t.  not,  handle  not 
Heb.  2.  9.  that  he  should  t.  death  for  every  man 

TASTED. 
1  Sam.  14.  24.  so  none  t.  any  food  ||  29.  I  t.  honey 
/;nn.5.2.RelBha7.zar,  whilst  he  (.wine,  commanded 
Mat.  27.  34.  when  he  had  t.  thereof,  ho  would 
.John  2.  9.  the  ruler  had  t.  the  water  made  wino 
Ileh.  fi.  4.  and  have  t.  of  the  heavenly  gift 

5.  have  t.  the  good  word  of  God  and  powers  of 
1  Pet.  2.  3.  if  ye  have  t.  that  the  Lord  is  gracious 

TASTETH. 
.Tob  34.  3.  ear  tricth  words  as  the  mouth  t.  meat 
Prov.  31.  t  18.  t.  that  her  merchandise  is  good 

TATLERS. 

1  Tim.  5.  13.  not  only  idle  but  f.  and  busy  bodice 

TAVERNS. 
Acts  28.  15.  came  to  meet  iis  as  far  as  the  three  (. 

TAUGHT. 
Deut.  4.  .5.  I  have  t.  you  ptatiites  and  judgments 

31.  22.  Moses  (.  the  childroii  of  Israel  this  »ong 
Judg.  8.  Ifi.  with  them  he  t.  the  men  of  Succotli 

2  Kings  17.  28.  and  t.  them  how  to  fear  the  Lord 
2  Chron.  0.  27.  thou  hast  t.  them  the  good  way 

17.  9.  the  LevitM  t.  the  people  in  Jiidah 
2:1.  13.  people  rejoiced,  such  as  t.  lo  sing  praise 
30.  22.  that  t.  the  good  knowledge  of  the  Lord 
35.  3.  Josiuh  said  to  the  Lovitei  that  t.  all  Israel 


TEA 

j\'eh.  8.  9.  the  Lovites  that  t.  the  pcop\e  said 
Psal.  71.  17.  O  God,  thou  hast  t.  me,  119.  102. 
119.  171.  when  thou  hast  t.  me  thy  statutes 
Prov.  4.  4.  he  t.  me  also,  and  said,  let  thine  heart 

11.  I  have  t.  thee  in  the  way  of  wisdom 

31.  1.  the  prophecy  that  his  mother  t.  him 
Eccl.  12.  9.  ho  still  t.  the  people  knowledge 

Isa.  29.  13.  their  fear  is  t.  by  the  precepts  of  mea 
40.  13.  or  being  his  counsellor  hath  t.  him,  14. 
54.  13.  all  thy  children  shall  be  (.  of  God 

Jer.  2.  33.  therefore  hast  thou  t.  the  wicked 

9.  5.  they  have  t.  their  tongues  lo  speak  lies 
14.  after  Baalim,  which  their  fathers  t.  them 

12.  16.  as  they  t.  ray  people  to  swear  by  Baal 

13.  21.  for  thou  hast  t.  them  to  be  captains 

28.  16.  thou  hast  t.  rebellion  against  the  Lord 

29.  32.  he  hath  t.  rebellion  against  the  Lord 

32.  33.  though  I  have  t.  them,  rising  up  early 
Eiek.  23.  48.  women  t.  not  to  do  after  lewducs* 
Hos.  10.  11.  Ephraim  is  as  a  heifer  that  is  t. 

11.3.1 1.  Ephraim  to  go,  taking  them  by  their  arms 

'/.cell.  13.  5.  for  man  t.  me  to  keep  cattle  from  youth 

Mat.  7.  29.  he  t.  them  as  one  having  authority, 

and  not  as  the  scribes.  Murk  1.  22 

28.  15.  they  took  money,  and  did  as  they  were  t 
l^fark  6.30.  told  him  all  things  they  had  done  and  t 

10.  1.  as  he  was  wont  he  t.  them  again 

Luke  11.1.  teach  ustopray,  as  John  t.  his  disciples 
13.  26.  and  thou  hast  t.  in  our  streets 
John  6.  45.  and  they  shall  be  all  t.  of  God 
7.  14.  Jesus  went  up  into  the  temple,  and  t.  281 
Mark  12.  35.  J.uke  19.  47.  1  20.  1 
8. 2.  all  the  people  came,  he  sat  down  and  t.  Uiem 
28.  as  my  father  hath  t.  me,  I  speak  these 
18.  20.  I  ever  t.  in  the  synagogue  and  temple 
Acts  4.  2.  being  grieved  (hat  they  t.  the  people 

5.  21.  they  entered  into  the  temple  early  and  t. 
11.26.  Paul  and  Barnabas  t.much  people,  14.21. 
15. 1.  certain  men  t.  the  brethren,  and  said,  except 
18.  25.  Apollos  t.  diligently  the  things  of  the  Lord 
20.  20.  I  have  shewed  you,  and  t.  you  publicly 
22. 3.  t.  according  to  the  perfect  manner  of  the  law 

Gal.  1.  12.  nor  was  I  t.  it  hut  by  revelation 

6.  6.  let  him  that  is  t.  in  the  word  communicate 
Eph.  4.21.  if  so  be  ye  have  been  t.  by  him  as  truth 
Col.  2.  7.  stablished  in  the  faith,  as  ye  have  been  t. 

1  Tkess.  4.  9.  ye  are  t.  of  God  to  love  one  another 

2  Thcss.  2.  15.  hold  the  traditions  ye  have  been  t. 
Tit.  1.  9.  holding  the  word,  as  he  hath  been  t. 

1  .John  2.  27.  even  as  the  anointing  hath  {.  you 
Reo.2.li.  who  t.  Balak  to  i-ast  a  stumbling-block 

TAUNT. 
.Jer.  24.9. 1  will  deliver  them  to  be  a  t.  and  a  curse 
Eiek.  5.  15.  so  it  shall  be  a  reproach  and  a  t. 

TAUNTING. 
ha.  14.  t  4.  thou  shall  take  uj)  this  t.  speech 
Hub.  2.6.  all  these  take  up  a  t.  proverb  against  him 

TAXATION. 

2ICi7tgs  23.35.  exacted  of  every  one  according  to  t. 

TAXED,  Active,  Passive. 

2  Kings  2,3.  35.  but  Jehoiakim  t.  the  land  to  give 
Luke  2. 1.  a  decree  that  all  the  world  should  be  t, 

3.  all  went  to  be  t.  ||  5.  Joseph  went  to  be  I. 
TAXES. 
Dan.  11.  20.  then  shall  stand  up  a  raiser  oft. 

TAXING. 
Luke  2.2.  and  this  t.  was  first  made  when  Cyrenius 
.'lets  5.  37.  rose  up  Judas  in  the  days  of  t)ie  t. 

TEACH 

Signifies,  [1]  To  instruct  or  cajise  to  learn,  Psal. 

119.  25.  Mat.  28.  19.  [2]   To  accustom  to,  Jcr. 

9.  5.  [3]  To  admonish,  Mark  8.  31.  |  9.  31.  [4] 
To  suggest  or  put  into  one's  mind,  Luke  12.  12. 
[5]  To  signify  and  give  notice,  Prov.  G.  13.  [6] 
To  counsel  and  direct.  Hah.  2.  19. 

Exod.  4.  15.  and  I  will  t.  you  what  ye  shall  do 
35.  31.  God  hath  put  in  his  heart  that  he  may  t. 

Lev.  10.  11.  that  ye  may  t.  Israel  all  the  statutes 
14  57.  to  t.  when  it  is  unclean  and  when  clean 

Dent.  4.1.  hearken  to  the  judgments  which  1 1.  you 

10.  and  that  they  may  t.  their  children 

M.  the  Lord  commanded  mo  to  t.  you,  6.  I. 
20.18.tliey(  you  not  to  do  after  their  abominations 
24.  8.  to  lill  that  the  priests  the  Levitcs  shall  t.  you 
31. 19.  write  and  t.  the  children  of  Israel  this  song 

33.  10.  they  shall  t.  Jacob  thy  judgments 
.Tndg.  13.  8.  /.  us  what  we  shall  do  lo  the  child 

1  .Vnm.  12.  23. 1  will  t.  vou  the  good  and  ripiit  way 

2  .Sam.  1.  18.  bade  them  t.  the  use  of  the  bow 
2  Chron.  17.  7.  to  t.  in  the  cities  of  Judah 
f;!rrt7.10.and  to  Mn  Israel  statutes  and  judgment! 
.Job  21.  22.  shall  any  t.  God  knowledge  f 

27.  11.  I  will  I.  you  by  the  hand  of  God 
32.  7.  and  multitude  of  years  should  t.  wisdom 
37.  19.  t.  us  what  we  shall  say  unto  him,  for  we 
Psnl.'ia.  8.  therefore  ho  will  t.  sinners  in  the  way 
9.  the  meek  will  he  guide  and  t.  his  way 

12.  him  that  fcareth  Lord  shall  ho  (.  in  the  wuj 
34. 11.  I  will  t.  vou  the  fear  of  the  Lord 

51.  13.  tlicn  will  I  t-  truusgressors  thy  way* 


TEA 

Ps.  90. 12  so  t.  as  to  number  our  days  that  we  may 

i05. 22.  to  bind  priiicus,  and  t.  his  senators  wisdom 
Prov.  9.  9.  t.  a  just  man,  and  lie  will  increase  in 
Isa.  2.  3.  and  he  will  t.  us  of  his  way.s,  J\Iic.  4.  2 

28.  9.  whom  shall  he  t.  knowledge,  and  to  unders. 

26.  for  his  G.  doth  iniilruct  and  t.  him  discretion 

Jer.  9.  20.  and  t.  yout  daughters  wailing  and  lam. 

31.  34.  they  shall  t.  no  more  every  man  his  neigh- 
bour, for  all  shall  know  the  Lord,  Mcb.  8. 11. 
Ezek.  44.  23.  t.  my  people  the  difierence  between 
JDaa.lA.wliom  tliey  might  i. learning  ofChaldeans 
JUi<^  3.  11.  priests  thereof  t.  for  hire  and  propheU 
Ufao.  2.  19.  saith  to  the  dumb  stone,  arise,  it  shall  t. 
Mat.  5.  19.  shall  t.  nv^n  so  |{  28.  19.  t.  all  nations 
JLuke  11. 1.  Lord,  t.  us  to  pray,  as  John  taught  his 

12.  12.  the  Holy  Ghost  shall  t.  you  what  to  say 
Juhn  7.  35.  t.  the  Gentiles  ||  9.  34.  dost  thou  t.  us? 

14.  26.  the  Holy  Ghost  shall  t.  you  all  things 
.4ci5  1. 1.  treatise  of  all  that  Jes.  began  to  do  and  t. 

4.18.  to  speak  nor  t.  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  5.28. 

5.  42.  they  ceased  not  to  t.  and  preach  Jesus  Chr. 
16.  21.  t.  customs  which  are  not  lawful  for  us 

1  Cur.  4.  17.  as  1 1.  every  where  in  every  church 

11.  14.  doth  not  even  nature  itself  £.  you 
14.  19.  that  by  my  voice  I  might  t.  others 

1  Tim.  1.  3.  charge  some  they  t.  no  other  doctrine 

2.  12.  but  I  sutler  not  a  woman  to  t.  nor  usurp 

3.  2.  a  bishop  must  be  apt  to  t.  2  Tim.  2.  24. 

4.  11.  these  things  command  and  t. 

6.  2.  these  things  t.  and  cvhort 

3.  if  any  man  I,  otherwise,  he  is  proud 
2TVm.2.2.faithful  men  who  shall  be  able  to  {.others 
Tit.  2.  4.  that  they  t.  young  women  to  be  sober 
Heb.  .5.  12.  ye  have  need  that  one  t.  you  again 
1  John  2.  27.  and  need  not  that  any  man  t.  you 
Hcv.  2.  20.  thou  sutVerest  that  woman  Jezebel  to  t. 
See  Bkg.vn. 
TEACH  me. 
Job  6.  04.  t.  mc  and  I  will  hold  my  tongue 
34.  32.  that  which  I  see  not,  t.  thou  me 
Psal.  25.  4.  t.  mc  thy  paths  |  5.  lead  me  and  t.  me 
27. 11.  t.  me  thy  way,  O  L.  and  lead  me,  86.  11. 
119. 12.  t.  me  thy  statutes,  26, 33,  64,  68, 124, 135. 
66.  t.  me  good  judgments  ||  108.  t.  me  thy  judgm. 
143. 10.  t.  me  to  do  thy  will,  for  thou  art  my  God 

TEACH  thee. 
Ezod.  4.  12.  I  will  t.  thee  what  thou  shall  say 
Deut.  17.  11.  the  sentence  which  they  shall  t.thee 
Job  8.  10.  thy  fathers,  shall  not  they  t.  thee  1 

12.  7.  but  ask  the  beasts,  and  they  shall  t.  thee 
8.  or  speak  to  the  earth,  and  it  shall  t.  thee 

33.  33.  hold  thy  peace,  I  shall  t.  thee  wisdom 
Psal.  32.  8.  I  will  t.  thee  in  the  way  thou  shalt  go 

45.  4.  thy  right  hand  shall  t.  thee  terrible  things 

TEACH  them. 
i?:iO(f.l8.20.thou  shall  t.f/tera ordinances  and  laws 

24.  12.  I  have  written  that  thou  mayest  (.  them 
Dcut.  4.  9.  t.  them  thy  sons,  and  thy  sons'  sons 

5.  31.  the  judgments  which  thou  shalt  I.  them 

6.  7.  t.  them  diligently  to  thy  children,  11,  19. 
Judo-.  3.2.  that  Israel  might  know  to  t.  them  war 

1  KingsS.3<i.\hat  thou  t.thein  thegood  waywherein 

2  Kings  17.27.  let  him  t.  them  the  manner  of  the  G. 
F.:ra  7.  25.  and  (.  ye  them  that  know  them  not 
Psal.  132.12.  keep  my  testimony  that  Ishall  t.  them 
J\lat.  5.  19.  whosoever  shall  do  and  t.  them  shall  be 
Mark  6.  34.  he  began  to  (.  them  many  things 

8.  31.  to  t.  them  that  the  son  of  man  must  suffer 

TEACHER 
Siffnifies,   [1]   A   tutor.,  master,   or  instructor, 
1  Chron.  25.  8.  [2J  A  public  minister,  who  by 
wholesome   doctrine    instrnctcth   the    church, 
E]ih.  4.  n.  [3]  Such  as  privately  instruct  others 
in  the  knowledge  of  spiritual  things.  Tit.  2.  3. 
1  CAron.25.8.  cast  lots,  as  well  the  t.  as  the  scholar 
Joel  2.  t  23.  hath  given  you  a  t.  of  righteousness 
Hab.  2.  18.  what  profitelh  the  image,  a  t.  of  lies 
.Tohn  3.  2.  we  know  thou  art  a  t.  come  from  God 
Jiom.  2.  20.  confident  that  thou  art  a  t.  of  babes 
1  Tim.  2.  7. 1  am  a  t.  of  the  Gentiles,  2  Tim.  1. 11. 

TEACHERS. 
Psal.  110.  99.  more  understanding  than  all  my  t. 
Prov.  5. 13.  and  have  not  obeyed  the  voice  of  my  t. 
Jsa.  30.  20.  yet  shall  not  thy  t.  be  removed  into  a 
corner  any  more,  but  thine  eyes  shall  see  thy  t. 
43.  27.  thy  (.  have  transgressed  against  me 
Dan.  12.  f  3.  they  ihat  be  t.  shall  shine 
.9cts  13. 1.  at  Antioch  were  certain  prophets  and  t. 
1  Cor.  12. 28.  hath  set  prophets,  t.  \\  29.  are  all  t.? 
JC/)A. 4.11.  he  gavesomeevangelists,  pastors,  and  t. 

1  Tim.  1.7.desiring  to  be  t.  of  law,  understanding 

2  Tim.  4. 3.  they  shall  heap  to  themselves  (.  having 
Tit.i.  3.  that  the  aged  women  be  t.  of  good  things 
Heb.  5.  12.  when  for  the  time  ye  ought  to  be  t. 

2  Pet.  2.  1.  as  there  shall  be  false  I.  among  you 

TEACH  EST. 
Psa.l.  04.  12.  blessed  is  the  man  whom  thou  t. 
Mat. ^2. 16.  we  know  that  thou  art  true,  and  t.  the 
way  of  God  in  Unlh,  Mark  12.14.  LukeW.il, 
^e2i-21.  21.  thou  t.  the  Jews  to  forsake  Mosos 

eo3 


TEA 

liom.  2.21.  thou  that  t.  another,  t.  thou  not  thysein 

TEACHETH. 
2  Sam.  22.  35.  he  t.  my  hands  to  war,  Psal.  18. 34. 
Job  15.  t  5.  thy  mouth  t.  thine  iniquity 

35. 11.  who  t.  us  more  tliaii  the  beasts  of  tho  earth 

36.  22.  behold,  God  exaltelh,  who  t.  like  him  1 
Psal.  94.  10.  he  that  t.  man  knowledge,  not  know 

144.  1.  which  t.  my  hands  to  war,  and  lingers 
Prov.  6.  13.  a  wicked  man  t.  with  his  fuigers 

16.  23.  the  heart  of  the  wise  t.  his  mouth 
Isa.  9.  15.  tho  prophet  that  t.  lies,  he  is  the  tail 

48.  17.  I  am  thy  God  which  t.  thee  to  profit 
Acts  21.  23.  the  man  that  t.  all  men  every  where 
Rom.  12.  7.  or  he  that  t.  on  teaching 
1  Cur.  2.13.  we  speak  not  in  the  words  which  man's 
wisdom  t.  but  which  the  Holy  Ghost  t. 
Gal.  6.  6.  let  him  communicate  to  him  that  t. 

1  John  2. 27.  as  the  same  anointing  t.  you  all  things 

TEACHING. 

2  Chr.  15.  3.  Israel  hath  been  without  a  t.  priest 
Jer.  32.33. 1  taught  them  rising  up  early  and  t.  them 
Mat.  4.  23.  Jesus  went  about  Galilee,  t.  in  their 

synagogues  preaching  gospel,  9. 35.  Luke  13. 10. 
15.  9.  m  vain  they  do  worship  me,  t.  for  doctrines 
the  commandments  of  men,  Mark  7.,  7. 
21.  23.  tho  elders  came  unto  him  as  he  was  t. 
26.  55.  I  sat  daily  with  you  t.  in  the  temple 
23.  20.  t.  them  to  observe  all  things  whatsoever 
Luke  23.  5.  t.  throughout  all  Jewry  from  Gahlee 
Acts  5. 25.  the  apostles  t.  the  people  in  tho  temple 
15. 35.  Paul  and  Barnabas  in  Antioch  t.  preaching 

15.  11.  Paul  t.  the  word  of  God  at  Corinth 
28.  31.  Paul  t.  at  Rome  with  all  confidence 

Rom.  12.  7.  or  he  that  teacheth  on  t. 
Col.  1. 28.  warning  and  t.  every  man  in  all  wisdom 
3.  16.  t.  and  admonishing  one  another  in  psalms 
Tit.  1.  11.  t.  things  which  they  ought  not 
2.  12.  t.  us,  that  denying  ungodliness  and  lusts 

TEAR 
Signifies,  [1]  To  rend  or  pull  in  pieces,  Hos.  13. 8. 
[2]  To  destroy,  Psal.  7.  2.  Amos  1.  11.  [3]  To 
slander  or  reproach,  Psal.  35. 15.  [4]  To  thresh, 
Judg.  8.  t  7. 
Judg.  8.  7.  then  will  1 1.  your  flesh  with  thorns 
Psal.  7.  2.  lest  he  t.  my  soul  like  a  lion,  rending  it 
3.5.  15.  they  did  t.  me  and  cea.sed  not 
50.  22.  consider  this,  lest  I  t.  you  in  pieces 
Jer.  15.  3.  I  will  appoint  over  them  tho  dogs  to  t. 

16.  7.  nor  shall  men  t.  themselves  for  them 
Eiek.  13. 20.  your  pillows  I  will  t..  from  your  arms 

21.  your  kerchiefs  will  1 1.  and  deUver  my  people 
Hos.  5.  14.  I,  even  I,  will  t.  and  go  away 
13.  8.  I  will  devour,  the  wild  beast  shall  t.  them 
Amos  1.11.  castotr pity,  his  anger  did  t.  perpetually 
J\rah.  2.  12.  the  lion  did  t.  enough  for  his  whelps 
Zech.  11.  16.  tlie  shepherd  shall  t.  their  claws 

TEARETH. 
Deut.  33. 20.  Gad  d  welleth  as  a  lion,  and  t.  the  arm 
.hb  16.  9.  he  t.  me  in  his  wrath,  who  liateth  me 
18.  4.  he  t.  himself  in  his  anger,  shall  the  e.arth  be 
Mic.  5.  8.  as  a  young  lion  t.  in  pieces,  nonedcliver 
Mark  9. 18.  wheresoever  he  taketh  him,  he  t.  him 
and  he  foameth  and  pineth  away,  Luke  9.  30. 
TEARS 

Signify  [1]  Drops  of  water  issuing  out  of  the 
eyes,  Psal.  6.  6.  ]  42.  3.  [2]  Sorrow  and  afflic- 
tion, Psal.  120.  5.  Isa.  25.  8. 
2  Sam.  16.  f  12.  may  be  the  Lord  will  look  on  my  t. 
2  Kings  10.  5.  I  have  seen  thy  (.  Isa.  38.  5. 
.Tob  16.  20.  but  mine  eye  poureth  out  t.  unto  God 
Psal.  6.  6.  I  water  my  couch  with  my  t.  all  night 
39.  12.  O  Lord,  hold  not  thy  peace  at  my  t. 
42.  3.  my  t.  have  been  my  meat  day  and  night 
51).  8.  i)ut  thou  my  t.  in  thy  bottle,  are  in  thy  book 
80.  5.  thou  feedcst  them  with  the  bread  ott.  and 
givest  them  (.  to  drink  in  great  measure 
116.  8.  thou  hast  delivered  mine  eyes  from  t. 
126.  5.  they  that  sow  in  t.  shall  reap  in  joy 
Eccl.  4. 1.  behold  the  t.  of  such  as  were  oppressed 
Isa.  10.  9.  I  will  water  thee  with  t.  O  Hcshbon 
25.  8.  the  Lord  will  wipe  away  t.  from  all  faces 
Jer.  9.  1.  Oh  that  mine  eyes  were  a  fountain  off. 
18.  our  eyes  may  run  down  with  t.  and  eye-lids 

13.  17.  and  mine  eyes  shall  run  down  with  t. 

14.  17.  let  mine  eyes  run  with  t.  night  and  day 
31.  10.  refrain  from  weeping,  thine  eyes  from  t. 

Aam.  1.2.  she  weeps,  and  her  t.  are  on  her  cheeks 
2.  11.  mine  eyes  do  fail  with  t.  my  bowels 
18.  let  t.  run  down  like  a  river  day  and  night 

Ezek.  24.  16.  neither  shall  thy  t.  run  down 

Mai.  2.  13.  covering  the  altar  of  the  Lord  with  t. 

Mark9.  24.  the  father  said  with  t  Lord,  I  believe 

ii/if  7.38. and  she  began  to  wash  his  feet  with  her  t. 
44.  but  she  hath  washed  my  feet  with  (. 

Acts  20.  19.  serving  the  Lord  with  many  t. 
31.  I  ceased  not  to  warn  every  one  with  t. 

2  Cor.  2.  4.  I  wrote  to  you  with  many  (. 

2  Tim.  1.  4.  to  see  thee,  being  mindful  of  thy  t. 

Jleb.  5.  7.  when  he  offered  up  supplications  with  t. 
12.  17.  though  he  sought  it  carefully  with  t. 


TEL 

Rev.  7.  17.  God  shall  wipe  away  all  t.  21.  4. 

TEATS. 
Isa.  32.  12.  they  shall  lament  for  the  (. 
Eiek.  23.  3.  there  they  bruised  the  t.  21. 

TEDIOUS. 
Acta  24.  4.  that  I  be  not  further  t.  to  thee 

TEETH 
Signifies,  [1]  That  wherewith  a  creature  ckewslU 
food,  Num.  11.  33.  [2]  Slanderous  speeches  and 
pernicious  calumnies,  Psal.  57.  4.  Prov.  30.  14. 
Break  their  teeth,  Psal.  58.  6.    Take  away  their 
power  and  instruments  of  doing  mischief,  and 
disable  them  from  hurting  me. 
Oen.  49.  12.  and  his  t.  shall  be  white  with  milk 
jVum.11.33.  while  the  flesh  was  yet  between  their  t. 
Deut.  32.  24. 1  will  send  the  t.  of  beasts  upon  them 
1  Sam.  2.  13.  came  with  a  flesh-hook  of  three  t. 
1  Kings  10.t22.  bringing  elephants'  t.  2  Chr.  9.t21 
Job  4. 10.  the  t.  of  the  young  hons  are  broken 
13.  14.  wherefore  do  I  take  my  flesh  in  my  t.  ? 
19.  20.  I  am  escaped  with  the  skin  of  ray  t. 

29.  17.  and  plucked  the  spoil  out  of  t.  of  wicked 
41.  14.  Leviathan's  t.  are  terrible  round  about 

Psal.  3.  7.  thou  hast  broken  the  t.  of  the  ungodly 

57.  4.  whose  t.  are  spears  and  arrows,  and  tongue 

58.  0.  break  their  t.  O  God,  in  their  mouth 
124.  6.  hath  not  given  us  as  a  prey  to  their  t. 

Prov.  ID.  26.  as  vinegar  to  the  t.  so  the  sluggard 

30.  14.  whose  t.  are  swords,  jaw-«.  as  knives 
Caiit.  4.  2.  thy  t.  are  like  a  flock  of  sheep,  6.  6. 
Isa.  41.  15.  make  thee  an  instrument  having  t. 
Jer.  31.29.  children's  t.  are  set  on  edge,  Eiek.  18.2. 

30.  catelh  sour  grapes,  his  t.  shall  bo  set  on  edge 
Lam.  3. 16.  hath  broken  my  t.  witli  gravel-stones 
Dan.  7.  5.  it  had  three  ribs  between  the  t.  of  it 

7.  a  fourth  beast  had  great  iron  t.  19. 
Joel  1.  6.  he  hath  the  cheek  t.  of  a  great  lion 
Amos  4.  6.  I  have  given  you  cleanness  of  t. 
Mic.  3.  5.  that  bite  with  their  t.  and  cry  peace 
Zech.  9.  7.  his  abominations  from  between  his  t. 
Mat.  27.  44.  was  crucified,  cast  the  same  in  his  t. 
Rev.  9.  8.  their  t.  were  as  the  t.  of  liona 
See  Gnash. 
TELL 
Signifies,  [1]  To  count,  number,  or  reckon,  Gen. 

15.  5.  [2]  To  declare  or  make  known.  Gen.  12. 

18.  1  21.    26.    [3]     To    teach,    E.\od.    10.    2. 

Deut.   17.   11.   [4]     To  confess.  Josh.  7.    19. 

[5]  To  publish,  2  Sam.  1.  20.  [0]   To  explain 

and  unfold,  Ezek.  24.  19.  Dan.  2.  36. 
Gen.  15.  5.  t.  the  stars  if  thou  be  able  to  number 
32. 5.  and  I  have  sent  to  t.  my  Lord  to  find  grace 
43.  6.  as  to  t.  the  man  whether  ye  had  a  brother 

22.  we  cannot  t.  who  put  our  money  in  our  sacks 

45.  13.  t.  my  father  of  all  my  glory  in  Egypt 
Exod.  10.  2.  mayest  t.  in  the  ears  of  thy  son 
Lev.  14.  35.  t.  the  priest,  saying,  it  secmeth  to  me 
JVum.  14.  14.  they  will  t.  it  to  the  inhabitants 

1  .Sam.  6.  2.  t.  us  wherewith  we  shall  send  it  to  his 
9.  8.  give  to  the  man  of  God,  to  t.  us  our  way 

17.  .55.  as  thy  soul  liveth,  O  king,  I  cannot  t. 

22.  22.  I  knew  that  he  would  surely  t.  Saul 

23. 11.  O  God  of  Israel,!  beseech  thee  «.  thyserv. 
27. 11.  lest  they  should  t.  on  us,  saying  so  did  Dav 

2  Sam.  1.  20.  t.  it  not  in  Oath,  publish  it  not  in 

7.  5.  go  t.  my  servant  David,  1  Chron.  17.  4. 
12.  18.  feareS  to  t.  him  that  the  child  was  dead 

22.  while  the  child  was  ahve,  I  said,  who  can  t 
15.  35.  thou  shalt  t.  to  Zadok  and  Abiathar 

18.  21.  go  t.  the  king  what  thou  hast  seen 

1  Kings  1.  20.  that  thou  shouldst  t.  who  shall  reign 
18.  8.  go,  t.  thy  lord,  Elijah  is  here,  11.  14. 

12.  when  I  come  and  t.  Ahab,  he  will  slay  me 
20. 9.  t.  my  lord  the  king,  all  thou  didst  send 

11.  t.  him,  let  not  him  that  girdeth  on  his  harness 

2  Kings7.  9.  that  we  may  t.  the  king's  household 

9.  12rand  they  said,  it  is  false  ;  t.  us  now 
15.  let  none  escape  to  go  to  t.  it  in  Jezrecl 

22. 15.  t.  the  man  that  sent  you,  2  Chron.  34.  23. 
Psal.  22. 17. 1  may  t.  all  my  bones  they  stare  on  me 
26.  7.  [)ublish  and  t.  of  all  thy  wondrous  works 

46.  12.  go  round  about  her,  t.  the  towers  thereof 

13.  that  ye  may  t.  the  generation  following 
Prov.  30.  4.  what  his  son's  name,  if  thou  canst  t. 
Eccl.  6.  12.  who  can  r.  what  shall  be  after,  10.  14. 

8.  7.  for  who  can  t.  him  when  it  shall  be  f 

10.  20.  that  which  hath  wings  shall  t.  the  matter 
Cant.  5.  8.  t.  hiin  that  I  am  sick  of  love 

Isa.  6.  9.  go  and  t.  this  people  ||  48.  20.  t.  this 
.Tcr.  15.  2.  (.  such  as  are  for  death,  to  death 

23.  27.  by  their  dreams  which  they  t.  28.  32. 
36.  16.  we  will  t.  the  king  of  all  these  words 

17.  t.  us  now  how  thou  didst  write  these  word* 
48.  20.  t.  it  in  Arnon,  that  Moab  is  sjioiled 
Ezek.  34.  19.  wilt  thou  not  t.  us  what  thing?  are? 
Dan.  2.4.  O  king,  t.  thy  servants  the  dream,  7,  9. 
36.  we  wiir«.  the  king" the  interpretation  thereof 
Joel  1.3.  t.  ye  your  children,  let  your  children  t. 
Jonah  3.  9.  who  can   t.  if  God  will  turn   anij 

repent 


TEL 


TEM 


Mat.  8.  4.  see  thou  t.  no  man,  Mark  8.  20,  30. 

I  "J.  y.  Luke  5.  14.  1  S.  5(5.  ./itt.*  i!3.  22. 

l(j.  20.  he  charged  his  disciples  that  they  siiould 

t.  no  man,  jWarA  7.  3t>.  Ltike  9.  21. 

17.  9.  t.  the  vision  to  no  man,  until  the  Son  of  man 
JS.  15.  t.  him  his  fault  ||  17.  t.  it  unto  the  church 
21.5.  t.  ye  the  daughter  of  Sion,  htliold  thy  king 
24.  3.  t.  us  when  shall  tliese  things  be,  Mark  13. 4. 
2U.  63.  that  thou  t.  us,  whrther  thou  be  the  Christ 

the  Son  of  God,  Luke'^i-i.  07.  .Mm  10.  24. 
23.  7.  go  and  t.  his  disciples  that  he  is  risen 

9.  as  they  went  to  t.  his  disciples,  Mark  16.  7. 
Mark  1.  30.  and  anon  they  t.  him  of  her 

5. 19.  t.  them  how  great  things  the  Lord  hath  done 
11.  33.  we  cannot  t.  Mat.  21.  5.  J.uke  20.  7. 

Lukel.  22.  t.  John  what  things  ye  have  seen 
13.  32.  go  ye,  (.  that  fox,  I  cast  out  devils 

John  3.  8.  but  canst  not  t.  whence  it  cometh 
4.  25.  when  he  is  come,  he  will  t.  m  all  things 
H.14.ye  cannot  {.whence  I  come,  and  whither  1  go 

16.  18.  a  little  while  ■?  we  cannot  t.  w  hat  he  sailh 

18.  34.  or  did  others  (.  it  theo  of  mel 
Jicts  15.  27.  who  shall  t.  you  the  same  things 

17.  21.  but  cither  to  t.  or  hear  some  new  thing 

23.  17.  he  hath  a  certain  thing  to  t.  him 
2  Cor.  12.  2.  whether  out  of  the  body  I  cannot  t.  3. 
Ueb.  11.  32.  for  the  time  would  fail  to  t.  of  Gideon 

TELL  me. 
Gen.  12. 18.  why  didst  not  t.  me  she  was  thy  wife? 
21.  26.  nor  didst  thou  t.  me  nor  heard  I  of  it 

24.  23.  t.  me  whose  daughter  art  thou  1 
49.  t.  me,  and  if  not,  t.  me  that  I  may  turn 

29.  15.  t.  me  what  shall  thy  wages  be  I 
31.  27.  steal  away  from  nip,  and  didst  not  t.  me 
32.29.«.m«  thy  name||37.  16.  t.  me  where  they  feed 
./osA.7.19.t.me  now  whatthou  hast  done, hide  it  not 
Judg.  16.  6.  t.  me  wherein  thy  great  strength  lietli 
Jivth  4.  4.  if  thou  wilt  not  redeem  it,  t.  me 

1  Sam.  9.  18.  t.  me  where  the  seer's  house  is 

10.  15.  t.  me  I  pray  thee  what  Samuel  said  to  you 
14.  43.  Saul  said,  t.  me  what  thou  hast  done 
20. 10.  David  said  to  Jonathan,  who  shall  t.  me  ? 

2  Sam.  1. 4.  how  went  the  matter,  t.  me,  I  pray  thee 
13.  4.  why  art  thou  lean,  wilt  thou  not  t.  vie  ? 

1  Kings  22.16.  that  thou  t.  mi"  nothing  but  tho  truth 

2  Kings  i.  2.  what  shall  I  do  for  thee,  t.  me  ? 
8.  4.  t.  me  the  great  things  that  Elisha  hath  done 

Job  34.  34.  let  men  of  understanding  t.  me 
Cant.  1.  7.  t.  me,  O  thou  whom  my  soul  loveth 
JIfot.  21.24.  ask  you  one  thing  which  if  you  t.  me 
J.vJce  7.  42.  t.  me  which  of  them  will  love  most 
.John  20.  15.  t.  me  where  thou  hast  laid  him 
Jlcts  5.8.t.  me  whether  ye  sold  the  land  for  so  much 

22.  27.  t.  me  art  thou  a  Roman  ^  he  said,  yea 

23. 19.  asked  him  what  is  that  thou  hast  to  t.  me  ? 
Oal.  4. 21.  t.  me  ye  that  desire  to  be  under  the  law 

TKLL  tfire. 
Ocn.  22. 2.  on  one  of  the  mountains  I  will  t.thee  of 

26.  2.  dwell  in  the  land  which  I  will  t.  thee  of 
J^j;od.l4.12.  thisisthe  wordwedid  t.thr.em  Egypt 
JV«7n.23.3.whatgoever  he  sheweth  me,  I  will  t.  thee 
Jieut.  17. 11.  the  judgment  which  they  shall  t.  thee 

32.  7.  ask  thy  elders,  and  they  will  t.  thee 
Judg.  14. 16. 1  have  not  told  it  and  shall  1 1.  it  thce7 
Huth  3.  4.  he  will  t.  thr.e  what  thou  shalt  do 
1  Sam.Q.  19.  I  will  t.  thee  all  that  is  in  thine  heart 

15. 16. 1  will  t.  thee  what  the  Lord  huth  said  to  mo 

19.  3.  and  what  I  see,  that  I  will  t.  thee 

20.  9.  if  1  knew,  then  would  not  I  t.  it  thee? 
1  Kinas  14.  3.  t.  thee  what  shall  become  ofthe  child 

22.  18.  did  I  not  t.  thee  that  he  would  prophesy 
no  good  thing  of  me,  but  evil,  2  CAr.  18. 17. 
1  Chr.  17.  10.  I  t.  thee  that  Lord  will  build  thee 
Job  1.  1.5. 1  am  escaped  alone  to  t.  thee,  16.  17,19. 

8. 10.  shall  not  thy  fathers  teach  theo  and  t.  thee 

12.  7.  ask  fowls  of  the  air,  and  they  shall  t.  thee 
Psal.  50.  12.  if  I  were  hungry  I  woidd  not  t.  thee 
ha.  19. 12.  let  thy  wise  men  t.  thee  now  and  know 
Jrr.  19.  2.  proclaim  the  words  that  I  shall  t.  thee 
iMke  12. 59.  I  t.  thee,  thou  shalt  not  deiiart  thence 

22.  34.  I  t.  thee,  the  cock  shall  not  crow  twice  till 
Jlcts  10.  6.  (.  thee  whatthou  oughtcst  to  do,  11. 14. 
Hev.  17.  7. 1  will  t.  thee  the  mvslery  of  the  woman 

/  TELL  yuu,  or  TKLL  I  you. 
Oen.  49. 1.  that  /  may  t.  you  what  shall  befall  you 

ha.  5.  5.  /will  t.  you  what  I  will  do  to  my  vineyard 

42.  9.  b'fore  they  spring  forth,  / 1.  you  of  tliem 
Mat.  10.27.  what  /  t.  yuu  in  darkness,  that  ipeak 

21.  27.  neither  t.  I  you.  by  what  authority  I  do 
these  things,  Mark  11.  33.   Aji«v20.  8. 

Mark  11.  2!».  /  will  t.  yon  by  what  authority  I  do 

Luke  4.  25.  but  /  t.  you  of  a  truth,  9.  27. 

10.  24.  / 1.  ynu  that  many  prophets  and  kings 

12.  51.  ft.  you  nay,  hut  rathir  division 

13.  3.  /  t.  you  nay,  but  except  ye  repent,  5. 
27.  / 1.  you  I  know  not  whence  you  are 

17.  34.   /  t.  you  there  shall  be  two  in  one  bed 

18.  8.  /  t.  yuu  that  he  will  avenge  thi'm  speedily 
14.  ft.  you  this  man  went  to  bis  house  justified 

19.40.  /«.  «ou  that  if  tln'se  should  hold  their  pence 
600 


[AiJie'i-2.  C7.  he  said,  if  / 1.  you  ye  will  not  believe 
,/ohn  3.12.  how  shall  ye  believe  if  I  t.y.  of  heavenly 
8.  45.  because  / 1.  you  the  truth,  (/al.  4.  16. 
13.  19.  now  It.  you  before  it  come,  that  when  it  is 
16.  7.  / 1.  you  the  truth,  it  is  expedient  for  you 
Gal.  .5.21.  of  which  /  t.  you  before,  as  I  have  told 
Phil.  3.  18.  of  whom  /  now  t.  you  even  weeping 

TELLEST. 
Psal.  56.  8.  thou  t.  my  wanderings,  put  my  tears 
Isa.  40.  t  9.  O  thou  that  t.  good  tidings 

TELLETH. 
2  Sam.  7.  11.  the  Lord  t.  tiiec  that  he  will  build 
2  Kings  6. 12.  Elisha  t.  tlie  king  of  Israel  the  words 
Psal.  41.  6.  when  he  goeth  abroad  he  t.  it 
101.  7.  he  that  t.  lies  shall  not  tarry  in  my  sight 
147.  4.  he  t.  the  number  ofthe  stars,  nallelh  them 
.fer.  33.  13.  under  the  hands  of  him  that  t.  them 
./uhn  12.  22.  Pliilip  cometh  and  t.  Andrew 

TELLING,  Substantively. 
Judir.  7. 15.  when  Gideon  heard  the  t.  ofthe  drearn 

TELLING. 
2  Sam.  11.  19.  hast  made  an  end  of «.  the  matters 
2  Kinirs  8.  5.  as  he  was  t.  the  king  how  he  restored 

TE.M1'ERANCE. 
Acts  24.  25.  as  he  reasoned  of  t.  and  judgment 
Gal.  5. 23.  meekness,  t.  against  such  there  is  no  law 
2  Pet.  1.  6.  add  to  knowledge  t.  and  to  (.  patience 

TEMPERATE. 
1  Cor.  9.  25.  that  striveth  for  the  mastery,  is  t. 
Tit.  1.  8.  a  bishop  must  be  t.  \\  2.  2.  aged  men  t 

TEMPER. 
Eiek.  46.  14.  a  bin  of  oil  to  t.  with  fine  flour 

TEMPERED. 
Kxod.  29.  2.  take  cakes  and  unleavened  t.  with  oil 
30.  35.  a  perfume  t.  together,  pure  and  holy 

1  Cor.  12.  24.  but  God  hath  t.  the  body  together 
TEMPEST 

Signifies,  [1]  almost  violent  commotion  of  the  air, 
eithrr  with  or  without  rain,  hail,  or  snow,  Acts 
27.  18,  20.  [2]  Grievous  and  vncjpccted  afflic- 
tion, Job  9.  17.  [3]  God's  terrible  judgments 
on  the  wicked,  Psal.  11.  6.  |  83.  15. 
Job  9.  17.  for  he  breaketh  me  with  a  t. 
27.  20.  a  t.  stealeth  him  away  in  the  night 
Psal.  11.  6.  on  the  wicked  shall  he  rain  a  t. 
55.  8. 1  would  hasten  from  tho  windy  storm  and  t. 
83.  15.  so  persecute  them  with  thy  t.  and  make 
Isa.  28.  2.  hath  a  strong  one,  which  as  a  t.  of  hail 
20.  6.  thou  shalt  be  visited  with  storm  and  t. 
30.  30.  the  Assyrian  shall  be  beaten  with  a  t. 
32.  2.  and  a  man  shall  be  a  covert  from  the  t. 
.54.  11.  O  thou  afflicted,  tossed  with  t.  behold 
.flmos  1.  14.  with  a  (.  in  the  day  of  the  whirlwind 
Jonah  1.  4.  there  was  a  mighty  t.  in  the  sea 

12.  for  my  sake  this  groat  t.  is  come  upon  you 
Mat.  8.  24.  there  arose  a  great  t.  in  the  sea 
Acts  27. 18.  being  exceedingly  tossed  with  a  t. 

20.  no  small  t.  lay  on  us,  hope  was  taken  away 
Heb.  12.  18.  ye  are  not  come  to  darkness  and  t. 

2  Pet-  2.  17.  clouds  that  are  carried  with  a  t. 
TEMPESTUOUS. 

P.ial.  .50.  3.  it  shall  be  very  t.  round  about  him 
.lonah  1.  11.  the  sea  wrought  and  was  t.  13. 
II ab.  3.  t  14.  they  were  t.  to  scatter  mo 
Acts  27.  14.  there  arose  against  it  a  I.  wind 

TEMPLE 
Signifies,  A  house  or  dwelling  nf  God,  a  liuilding 
erected  and  set  apart  for  the  worship  of  the  true 
God.  It  is  s|)oken,  First,  Of  that  mngnificeiil 
building  erected  by  Solomon  at  Jerusalem,  Ihi 
foundations  whereof  were  laid  in  the  year  of  thi 
world  2992,  before  Christ  1008,  before  the  vul 
•rarirra  1012;  and  it  teas  fini.'ih'-d  in  the  year 
0/  the  world  3000,  and  dedicated  in  3001 ;  before 
Christ  999,  before  the  vulgar  (era,  1003.  The 
glory  of  this  temple  jpa.<  not  in  the  bigness  if 
it;  fur  that  alone  wa."  but  a  small  pile  of  build- 
ing, containing  no  more  than  a  hundred  nnd 
fifty  feet  in  length,  and  a  hundred  and  fire  in 
breadth, taking  the  sanctuary , the  sanctum,and 
the  porch  or  entrance,  from  nut  to  out.  The 
main  grandeur  and  eicellcncy  of  it  consisted, 
[1]  In  its  ornaments;  its  workmanship  bring 
rver-ij  where  exceeding  curious,  and  its  over- 
layings  rich  and  costly.  [2]  In  its  material!) ; 
being  built  of  new  large  stones,  hewn  out  in 
the  most  curious  and  artful  manner.  [3]  In  its 
oiit-biiildings;  jchichwere  large,  beautiful,  and 
sumptunvs.  liul  what  still  was  the  main  glory 
of  this  teniplo,  were  those  extraordinary  marks 
of  the  divine  favour  with  which  it  was  honour- 
ed, namely,  [1]  The  ark  of  tho  covenant,  in 
which  were  put  the  tables  of  the  law,  nnd  the 
mercy-scat  which  was  upon  it,  from  whence  the 
divine  oracles  were  given  out  hi/  an  audihlr 
voice,  as  often  ns  God  was  consulted  in  behalf 
of  his  people.  [2]  The  Shochinah,  or  the  divine 
prcsevre,  manifested  bij  a  visible  cloud  resting 
oner  the  mercy-seat.  [3]  The  Urim  and  Thuni- 
mim,  by  which  the  high  priest  consulted  God 


TEM 

in  difficult  and  momentous  cases  relating  to  tht 
public  interest  of  the  nation,  and,  [4]  The  holy 
lire  which  came  down  from  heaven  upon  the 
altar  at  the  consecrating  of  the  temple,  1  Kings 
18.  38.  2  Chron.  7. 1.  It  is  spoken,  Secondly,  Oj 
the  tabernacle,  which  was  of  the  same  use  and 
significancy  as  the  temple  irai,  1  Sam. 1.9.  |3.3 
Thirdly,  Of  Christ's  body  or  human  nature,  in 
■which  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  dwells  bodily, 
as  the  glory  of  God  did  visibly  in  the  temple, 
John  2. 19,  21.  Col.  2.  9.  Fourthly,  Of  heaven, 
whiehis  God's  throne,  Psalm  11.4.  Rev.  7. 15. 
Fifthly,  Of  the  church  of  God,  [1]  Uistribu- 
tively,  considered  in  the  particular  members 
thereof,  who  are  set  apart  from  profane  uses, 
and  dedicated  to  the  service  of  Gol  ;  and  to 
whom  he  manifests  his  gracious  presence  by  his 
Spirit,  1  Cor.  .3.  16.  [2]  Collectively,  in  respect 
of  the  whole,  Eph.  2.  21. 

1  Sam.  1.  9.  Eli  sat  on  a  seat  by  a  post  ofthe  t. 

2  Sam.  22.  7.  he  did  hear  my  voice  out  of  his  t. 
and  my  cry  did  enter  into  his  ears,  Psal.  IS.  6. 

1  Kings  fi.  17.  the  t.  before  it  was  40  cubits  loi,ig 

2  Chron.  3.5.  20.  when  Josiah  had  prejiared  the  t. 
36.  7.  and  put  the  vessels  in  his  t.  at  Babylon 

Ezra  A.  1.  that  they  builded  the  t.  unto  the  Lord 
5. 14.  ve.'-sels  took  out  ofthe  t.  brought  to  t.  6.  5. 
JVeA.  6.10.hid  ourselves  in  the  t.  shut  doors  ofthe  t. 
Psal.  27.  4.  beauty  of  L.  and  to  inquire  in  his  t. 
29.  9.  in  his  t.  doih  every  one  speak  of  his  glory 
48.  9.  we  have  thought  (d'  thy  loving  kindness,  O 
God,  in  the  midst  of  thy  t. 
63.  29.  because  of  thy  t.  at  Jerusalem  shall  kings 
Isa.  6.  1.  and  lifted  up,  and  his  train  filled  the  t. 
44.  28.  and  to  the  t.  thy  foundation  shall  ho  laid 
66.  6.  a  voice  I'rom  the  t.  a  voice  of  the  Lord 
.Jer.  50.  28.  declare  the  vengeance  of  his  I.  51.  11. 
Ezck.  41. 1.  afterward  he  brought  me  to  the  t. 
Dan. 5.  2.  the  golden  vessels  taken  out  ofthe  t.  3. 
'Imos  8.  3.  llie  songs  of  the  t.  shall  be  bowlings 
that  day 
Zech.  8.  9.  let  your  hands  be  strong,  that  the  t. 
might  be  built 
Mai.  3.  1.  the  Lord  shall  come  suddenly  to  his  t. 
Mat.  A.  5.  set  him  on  a  pinnacle  of  the  t.  Luke  A.  9. 
12.  6.  that  in  this  place  is  one  greater  than  the  (. 
23.  16.  blind  guides,  who  say,  whosoever  shall 
swear  by  the  t.  or  by  the  gold  of  the  t.  17.  21. 
3.5.  whom  ye  slew  between  the  (.  and  the  altar 
24.1.to  shew  him  tlie  buildings  of  the  t.  Lnkell.o. 
2ti.  61.  I  am  able  to  destroy  the  t.  of  God 
27.  40.  thou  that  deslroyest  the  t.  Mark  15.  20. 
51.  behold  the  vail  of  the  t.  was  rent  in  twain, 
Mark  15.  38.  Luke  23.  45. 
MarkW.  16.  should  carry  any  vessel  ihro'  the  t. 

14.  58.  I  will  destroy  this  t.  made  with  hands 
7,1/ A-f  2.37.  Anna  a  widow  departed  not  from  t.he  t. 
John  2.1.5.  he  drove  them  all  out  ofthe  t.  and  sheep 

19.  destroy  this  t.  \\  21.  he  spake  of  ^  of  his  body 

20.  forty  and  six  years  was  this  (.  in  building 
Acts  3.2.  whom  tlioy  laid  daily  at  the  gate  ofthe 

t.  to  ask  alms  of  them  that  entered  the  (.  10. 
19. 27.  tho  r.  of  goddess  Diana  .should  he  despised 
21.  30.  they  took  Paul  and  drew  him  out  of  the  t. 
94.  6.  who  also  hath  gone  about  to  profane  the  t. 

25.  8.  neither  against  the  t.  nor  against  Cesar 

1  Cor.  3. 16.  know  ye  not  that  ye  are  the  t.  of  God 
17.  if  any  man  defile  the  t.  of  God,  him  shall  God 

destroy,  for  the  t.  of  G.  is  holy,  which  t.  ye  uie 
6.  19.  your  body  is  the  t.  ofthe  Holy  Gho.st 
8.  10.  see  these  sit  at  meat  in  ilie  idol's  /. 
9. 13.  tbi^y  wlio  minister  live  ofthe  things  ofthe  t. 

2  Cor.  6.  16.  what  agreement  hath  the  I.  of  God 
with  idols  1  for  ye  arc  the  t.  ofthe  living  God 

Rev.  7.  1.5.  and  serve  him  day  and  night  in  his  t. 
11.  1.  saving,  rise  and  measure  tlie  (.  of  God 
19.  the  /.  of  God  wa.s  opened  in  heaven,  and  the 
ark  of  the  testament  was  seen  in  his  t. 
M.  15.  another  angel  came  out  ofthe  (.  17. 

15.  5.  the  t.  of  the  tabernacle  was  opened 
6.  and  the  seven  angels  came  nut  of  tSe  t. 
8.  t.  WHS  filled  with  smokefroni  ihegli  ry  of  God 

16.  1.  and  1  heard  a  groat  voice  out  ot  the  t.  17. 
21. '.S.  and  I  saw  no  t.  therein,  for  the  '.onl  God 

olmightv  and  the  Lamb  arc    lie  t.  of  it 

^>c•  Hor.v,  Loan. 

In,  or  into  the  TEMPLE. 

2  Kinn-s  11.  10.  king  David'ssp-arstbal  «eroiit  t 

1  rAivTri.fi.  10.  executed  the  priest's  ollii  « in  the  t 
10.  10.  and  fastened  his  head  in  the  f.  of  Dagon 

2  Chron.  4.  7.  he  set  ten  candlesticks  i»  tXe  t.  8. 
F.ira  a.  15.  go  carry  these  ve.ssels  into  tkt  t. 
.Y'-b.  fi.  11.  would  go  into  the  1. 1<>  save  h'.e  life 
.Milt.  12. 5.  the  priests  in  the  t.  profane  the  sabbnth 

21.  12.  went  into  the  t.  cast  onl  all  tliiin  that  »nld 
and  bought  in  tbet.  .MarkW.  1.5.  f.uke  19.1.5. 
14.  the  blind  and  the  lame  came  to  him  in  the  t. 
1.5.  children  crving  in  the  t.  and  saying,  Hosar.ne 

26.  .55.  I  sat  dally  leaching  in  the  i.  Luke  21  17 
27. 5.  ho  cast  down  the  pieces  of  silver,  in  tht  t 


TEM 

Mark  14.49. 1  wus  daily  tcacli.  in  the  t.  Luke  22.53. 

Luke  I.  "21.  mil  1  veiled  ihal  ho  tarried  60  long  int.  t. 

SB.  they  perceived  that  ho  had  seen  a  vision  in  t. 

2.  -7.  and  he  camo  by  the  spirit  into  the  t. 

4G.  they  tuuiid  him  in  the  t.  silting  in  llie  midst 
18.  10.  two  men  vent  up  into  the  t.  to  pray 
24.  .W.  and  were  continually  in  the  t.  praising  God 
4cts  '2.  40.  continuing  with  one  accord  in  the  t. 

3.  1.  Peter  and  John  went  up  together  into  the  t. 
3.  about  to  go  into  1. 1|  5.-20.  stand  and  speak  in  t. 

5.25.  the  men  are  standing  in  the  t.  and  teaching 
21. 2G.  Paul  entered  into  t.  \\  27.  saw  him  in  the  t. 
28.and  further,  brought  Greeks  also  i7tlo  the  t.2y. 
22. 17.  even  while  I  prayed  (it  1. 1  was  in  a  trance 
24.  12.  they  neither  found  me  in  the  t.  disputing 

18.  certain  Jews  found  me  purified  in  the  t. 

26.21.  for  these  causes  the  Jews  caught  ine  in  I. 

2  Tkess.i  4.  so  that  he  as  God  sitteth  in  the  t.  of  G. 

Rev.'i.Vi.  hiin  will  I  make  a  pillar  in  the  t.  of  my  G. 

15.  8.  and  no  man  was  able  to  enter  into  tke  t. 

TEMPLES. 
Judff.  4.  21.  Jael  smote  the  nail  into  his  t.  22. 
5.  26.  when  she  had  stricken  through  his  t. 
Cant.  4.  3.  thy  t.  hkc  a  piece  of  pomegranate.  6.  7. 

TEMPLES. 
Hos.  8.14.  for  Isr.  forgot  his  Maker,  and  buildeth  t. 
Joel  3.  5.  ye  carried  into  your  t.  my  goodly  things 
^cts  7. 48.  howheit  the  Most  High  d welleth  not  in 
(.  made  with  hands,  17.  24. 
TEMPORAL. 
S  Cor.  4.  18.  for  the  things  which  are  seen  are  t. 

TEMPT 
Is  spoken  [I]  Of  Ood,  Gen.  22.  1.  who  does  not 
tempt  or  try  men  in  order  to  know  their  tevipers 
and  dispositions,  as  if  he  were  ignorant  of 
them;  bnt  to  exercise  their  graces,  toprove  their 
faith,   love,    and  obedience;    to   confirm    and 
strengthen  them  by  such  trials,  and  to  gine  suc- 
ceeding ages  patterns  of  obrdiaice,to  shew  them 
his  satisfaction  icithsuch  as  obey,  and  his  dis- 
pleasure at  such  as  da  not.  [H]   Of  men,  who 
arc  said  to  tempt  the  Lord,  [1]  IVhcn  they  un- 
seasonably rrqiilrcofhiiii  srnsible  proofs  of  his 
divine  presence,  of  his  power,  or  of  kis  good- 
ness :    Thus  the  Israelites  in  the  desert  often 
tempted  tke  Lord,  Exod.  17.2,  7.  as  if  they  had 
had  reason  to  have   doubted  of  his  presence 
among  them, of  his  goodness  orpcwer^  after  all 
he  had  done  in  their  favour  [2]  When  men  ex- 
pose themselves  to  such  dangers,  from  which 
they  cannot  escape  but  by  the  miraculous  inter- 
position of  his  providence ;  for  Ood  requires 
of  men  the  performance  only  of  such  actions 
as  are  within  the  ordinary  7neM.sures  of  their 
strength,  being  under  no  obligation  to  work 
miracles  in  their  Javour,  Mat.  4.  7.  [3]  fVhen 
men  set  tliemselves  to  commit  sin  so  impudent- 
ly, as  if  they  did  it  on  purpose  to  try  whether 
Ood  teas  just  or  powerful  enough  to  punish 
them  for  it,  Mai.  3.  1.5.  [HI]  Of  Satan,  who 
tempts  us  to  bring  us  to  evil,  to  sin,  to  distrust, 
to  a  contempt  of  God  qnd  his  laws,  to  pride, 
vanity,  .t-c.   ffe  lay^  snares  for  us,  even  in  our 
best  actions,  to  moke  us  lose  the  benefit  of  them, 
by  imputing  the  merit   of  them  to  ourselves 
only,  and  not  to  Ood.  He  tempted  David,  and 
prevailed  with  him  to  number  the  p'ople  out  of 
confidence  and  vain  curiosity,  1  Cliron.  21.  1. 
He  tempted  our  .Saviour  in  the  wilderness,  and 
in  vain  endeavoured  to  infuse  into  him  senti- 
ments of  pride  and  ambition,  Luke  4.  2,  3,  4. 
He  temp'.ed  .Ananias  and  Sapphira,  to  make 
them  lie  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  Acts  5.  3. 
<7en. 22. 1.  God  did  t.  .\brahatn  and  said  unto  him 
F.zod.  17.  2.  Moses  said,  wherefore  do  ye  t.  the  L.? 
JOeut.  6.  16.  yc  shall  not  (.  the  Lord  your  God 
Isa.  7.  12.  I  will  not  ask,  nor  will  I  t.  the  Lord 
Mai.  3.  15.  yea,  they  that  (.  God  are  delivered 
Mat.  4.  7.  Jesus  said,  it  is  written  again,  thou  shalt 
not  (.  the  Lord  thy  God,  Luke  4.  12. 
22.  18.  why  t.  ye  me  1  Mark  12.  15.  /.u4f  20.  23. 
^cts  5.9.  ye  have  agreed  together  to  t.  the  Spirit 
15. 10.  now  therefore  why  t.  ye  God  to  put  a  yoke 
10>r.7.5.lliatSatan  (.you  not  for  your  incontinency 
10.9.Deither  let  us  t.  Chr.  as  some  of  them  tempted 
TEMPTATION 
Signifies,  [1]  Those  means  and  enticements  which 
the  devil  makes  use  of  to  ensnare  and  allure 
mankind.  Mat.  6.  13.  |  26.41.  [2]   Those  af 
Jiictions  and  troubles,  whereby  Ood  tries  his 
people,  Jam.  1.  2,  12.  [3]  Persecution  for  re- 
ligion, Luke  8.  13. 
Ktod.  17.  t  7.  called  the  name  of  the  place  t. 
y«ai.95.8.  hear  his  voice,  harden  not  your  hearts, 
as  in  the  day  oft.  in  the  wilderness,  Heb.  3.8. 
Mat.  6.  13.  and  lead  us  not  into  t.  Luke  IL  4. 
26  41.  watch  and  pray,  that  vc  enter  not  into  t. 
Mark  14.  38.  Luke  22.  40,  46. 
jMke  4.  13.  when  the  devil  had  en<led  all  his  t. 
8.  13.  have  no  root  and  in  time  oft.  fall  awa^ 
607 


TEN 

1  Cor.  10.  13.  no  t.  hath  taken  you ;  will  with  t. 

Oal.  4.  14.  and  my  t,  in  my  flesh  ye  despised  not 
1  7'im.  6.  9.  they  that  will  be  rich  fall  into  t. 
Jam.  1.  12.  blessed  is  the  man  that  endureth  t. 
Rev.  3,10.1  will  keep  thee  also  from  the  hour  of  t. 

TEMPTATIONS. 
Deut.  4.  34.  take  a  nation  out  of  a  nation  by  (. 

7. 19.  the  great  t.  tliiiie  eyes  saw,  and  signs,  29. 3. 
Luke  22.  28.  ye  have  continued  with  me  in  my  t. 
Acts  20.  19.  serving  God  with  many  tears  and  t. 
Jam.  1.  2.  count  it  joy  when  ye  fall  into  divers  t. 
1  Pet.  1.6.  ye  are  in  heaviness  thro'  manifold  t. 
2i'et.2.9.L.know8  how  to  deliver  the  godly  out  oft. 

TEMPTED. 
Exod.  17. 7.  and  because  they  t.  the  Lord,  saying 
J^Tum.  14.  22.  and  have  t.  me  now  these  ten  limes 
Deut.  6. 16.  not  tempt  God  as  ye  t.  him  in  Massah 
Psal.  78.  18.  and  they  t.  God  in  their  heart,  41. 

5G.  yet  they  t.  and  provoked  the  most  high  God 

95.9.wlien  your  fathers  t.  me,  proved  me,//ci.3.9. 

106.  14.  but  lusted,  and  t.  God  in  the  desert 
Mat.i.X.  to  be  t.  of  tho  devil,  Mark  \.Vi.Lukei.2. 
Luke  10.  25.  a  lawyer  t.  him,  saying,  master 
1  Cor.  10.  9.  as  some  of  tliem  t.  and  were  destroyed 

13.  who  will  not  suffer  you  to  be  t.  above  that 
Oal.  6.  1.  considering  thyself,  lest  thou  also  be  t. 
1  Thess.  3.  5.  lest  by  some  means  the  tempter  t.  you 
Heb.  2.  18.  he  himself  hath  suffered,  being  t. 

4.  15.  but  was  in  all  points  t.  like  as  we  arc,  yet 

1 1.37.  they  were  sawn  asunder,  were  t.  were  slain 

Jam.  1. 13.  let  no  man  say  when  he  is  1. 1  am  t.  of 

God,  for  God  cannot  be  t.  with  evil,  nor  tempteth 

14.  but  every  man  is  t.  when  he  is  drawn  of  lust 

TEMPTER. 
Mat.  4.  3.  when  the  t.  came  to  him,  he  said 
1  Thess.  3.  5.  lest  by  means  the  t.  have  tempted  you 

TEMPTETH. 
Jam.  1. 13.  cannot  be  tempted,  neither  t.  any  man 

TEMPTING. 
Mat.  16.  1.  the  Pharisees  t.  Christ,  and  seeking  a 
sign,  Mark  8.  11.  Luke  11.  16. 

19.  3.  the  Pharisees  also  came  to  him,  t.  him 
22.  35.  the  lawyer  asked  him  a  question,  t.  him 

Mark  10.  2.  a  man  to  ppt  away  his  wile,  t.  him 
John  8.  6.  this  they  said  t.  him,  that  they  might 

TEN. 
Gen.  16.  3.  Abraham  dwelt  t.  years  in  Canaan 
18.  32.  peradventure  t.  shall  be  found  there,  and 
he  said,  I  will  not  destroy  it  for  t.  sake 

24.  10.  the  servant  took  t.  camels  of  his  master's 
22.  took  bracelets  for  her  hands  oft.  shekels 

32.  15.  Jacob  took  t.  bulls  and  t.  foals  for  Esau 

42.  3.  Joseph's  t.  brethren  went  to  buy  corn 

43.  23.  Joseph  sent  t.  asses  and  t.  she  asses 
Kxod.  2P.  1.  make  a  tabernacle  with  t.  curtains 

27.  12.  their  pillars  t.  and  their  sockets  t. 

34. 28.  wrote  t.  commandments,  Deut.A.\Z.  \  10.4. 
IjCv.  26.  26.  t.  women  shall  bake  your  bread 

27.  5.  and  lor  the  female  t.  shekels,  7. 
JVo.m.  7.  14.  one  spoon  of  t.  shekels,  20.  26. 

II.  32.  he  that  gathered  least  gathered  t.  homers 

29.  23.  and  on  the  fourth  day  f.  bullocks 
Josh.  17.  5.  there  fell  t.  portions  to  Manasseh 

21.  5.  Koh-ath  had  by  lot  out  of  Ephraini,  Ma- 

nasseh, and  Dan,  t.  cities,  1  Chr.  6.  61. 

22.  14.  Israel  sent  with  Phinehas  t.  princes 
Judg.  6.  27.  Gideon  took  t.  men  of  his  servants 

12. 11.  Elon  a  Zebulonite  judged  Israel  t.  years 
17.  10.  I  will  give  thee  t.  shekels  of  silver 

20.  10.  we  will  lake  t.  men  of  a  hundred 
Ruth  1.  4.  they  dwelt  in  Moab  about  t.  ye.ars 

4.  2.  Boaz  took  t.  men  of  the  elders  of  the  city 

1  Sam.  1 . 8.  am  not  I  be  ttrr  to  thee  than  t.  sons  7 

17.  17.  take  these  (.  lonves  and  run  to  the  camp 
18.  carry  these  t.  cheeses  to  the  captain 

25.  5.  David  sent  out  t.  young  men  to  Nabal 

2  .Sfl7n.l5.1G.David  leftt.  concubines  to  keephou.se 

18.  II.  and  I  would  have  given  thee  t.  shekels 

15.  t.  young  ineti  smote  Absalom  and  slew  him 

19.  43.  they  said,  we  have  t.  parts  in  the  king 
20.3.  the  king  took  his  t.  concubines  and  put  Ihem 

1  Kings  4. 23.  t.  fat  o.\en  in  one  day  for  Solomon 
7.24.  t.  knops  in  a  cubit  compassing  the  sea  round 

27.  and  he  made  (.  bases  of  brass,  .37. 
38.  he  made  t.  lavers  of  brass,  4.3.  2  Chron.  4.  6. 
1 1.  31.  take  thee  t.  pieces ;  I  will  give  t.  tribes,  35. 

14.  3.  take  with  thee  t.  loaves  to  .Ahijah 

2  Kings  5.  5.  Naaman  took  f.  tali.'nt.s,  t.  changes 
13.  7.  li^uve  but  fifty  horsemen  and  t.  chariots 

15.  17.  M(mahrni  reigned  t.  years  in  Samaria 
25.  25.  Ishmael  cnmc  and  t.  men  with  him,  and 

smote  Gedaliah,  .Tcr.  41.  1,2. 
2  Chron.  4.  7.  he  made  t.  candlesticks  ||  8.  t.  tables 
Ezra  8.  24.  and  t.  brethren  were  with  them 
JVeft.  11.  1.  bring  one  oft.  to  dwell  at  Jerusalem 
Eslh.9.  10.  the't.  eons  of  Hainan  slew  they,  12. 

13.  and  let  Haman's  t.  sons  be  hanged,  14. 
ria/.33.  2.^in9trument  of  t.  strings,  92.  3.  [  144.  9. 
Eccl.l.  10.  more  than  t.  mighty  men  in  the  city 
ha  5. 10.  t.  acres  of  vineyard  shall  yield  one  bath 


TEN 

Eick.  43. 14.  a  homer  of  t.  baths,  t.  batlig  a  homei 
Dan.  7.  7.  the  i'ourlh  beast  had  t.  horns,  20,  24. 
Amos  5.  3.  shall  leave  t.  to  the  house  of  Israel 

6.  9.  if  t.  men  remain  in  one  house  they  shall  die 
Hag.  2.  16.  since  those  days  when  one  came  to  a 

heap  of  twenty  measures,  there  were  but  t 
Zech.  5.  2.  the  breadth  of  the  roll  is  t.  cubits 
8.23.  t.  men  shaii  take  hold  of  him  that  is  a  Jew 
Mat.  20.  24.  and  when  the  t.  heard  it,  Mark  10. 41 
25.  1.  the  kingdom  shall  be  likened  to  t.  virgina 
28.  and  give  it  to  him  that  hath  t.  talenta 
I^ke  15. 8.  what  woman  having  t.  pieces  of  silvet 

17.  12.  there  met  him  t.  men  that  were  lepera 
17.  Jesus  said,  were  there  not  t.  cleansed? 

19. 13.  and  delivered  them  t.  pounds,  and  said 
IG.  Lord,  thy  pound  hath  gained  t.  pounds 
17.  well,  have  thou  authority  over  t.  cities 

24.  and  give  it  to  him  that  hath  t.  pounds 

25.  they  said.  Lord,  he  hath  t.  pounds 

Rev.  12.  3.  a  dragon  having  t.  horns,  13.1.  |  17.  3. 
17.7.woman  and  beast  of  seven  heads  and  (.  horiva 
12.  and  the  t.  horns  thou  sawest  are  the  t.  kings 
16.  the  t.  horns  thou  sawest  shall  hale  the  whore 
See    Cubits,    Days,    Degrees,    Thousand, 
Thousands. 
TEN  times. 
Ofn.31.7.  and  hath  changed  my  wages  t.  times,  41 
J^um.  14.  22.  and  have  tempted  me  now  these  t.  t 
JVeA.  4. 12.  when  Jews  came,  they  said  unto  us  t.  ( 
Job  19.  3.  these  t.  times  have  ye  reproached  me 
Dan.  1.20.  he  found  Ihem  t.  times  better  than  all 

TENS. 
Exod.  18. 21.  place  over  them  to  be  rulers  of  t.  25 
Deut.  1.  15.  1  made  them  heads,  captains  over  ( 

TENTH. 
Gen.  28.  22. 1  will  surely  give  tlie  t.  to  thee 
Lev.  27.  32.  the  t.  shall  be  holy  to  the  Lord 
JVu/n.  18.  21. 1  have  given  children  of  Levi  the  t. 
Deut.  23  2.  a  bastard  not  enter  to  t.  generation,  3 
1  Sam.  8.  15.  king  will  take  the  t.  of  your  seed 
17.he  will  take  the  t.  of  your  sheep  and  vineyarda 

1  Chr.  12.  13.  t.  captain  of  sons  of  Gad,  Jeremiah 
24.  11.  the  t.  lot  came  forth  to  Shecaniah 

2,5.  17.  the  t.  lot  came  forth  to  Shimei 
27,  13,  the  (,  captain  for  the  t,  month,  Mahari 
Isa.  6.  13,  but  yet  in  it  shall  be  a  t.  and  return 
Jcr.  32, 1,  in  the  t.  year  of  Zedekiah  kingof  Judali 
John  1.  39.  for  it  was  about  the  t.  hour 
Rev.  21.  20.  the  t.  foundation  a  chrysopraeus 
See  Day,  Deal,  Month,  Part. 
TEND, 
Prov.  21. 5.  thoughts  of  diligent  t.  to  plenteousncsa 

TENDETH. 
Prov.  10.  16.  the  labour  of  the  righteous  t.  to  life 
11. 19.  as  rightcousn.  t.  to  life,  so  he  that  pursues 
24,  there  is  that  wilhholdeth,  but  it  t,  to  poverty 

14.  23.  the  talk  of  the  lips  t.  only  to  penury 
19.  2.3.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  t.  to  life 

TENDER 

Signifies,  [1]  JVcak  and  feeble.  Gen.  33.  13.  [2] 
JVice  and  delicate,  Deut.  28.  5fi.  [.3]  Young 
and  carefully  educated,  Prov.  4.  3.  [4]  Pitiful, 
or  of  a  compassionate  and  forgiving  temper, 
Eph.  4.  32. 

Gen.  1.  t  11.  let  the  earth  bring  forth  t.  grass 

18.  7.  Abraham  ran  and  fetched  a  calf  I.  and  good 
33.  13.  my  Lord  knowelh  that  the  children  are  t 
41.  t  4.3.  they  cried  before  him,  t.  father 

Deut.  28.  54.  so  the  man  that  is  t.  among  yotj 
56.  the  t.  and  delicate  woman  among  you 
32.  2.  shall  distil  as  the  small  rain  on  the  t.  herb 

2  Sam.  3.  t39. 1  am  this  day  t.  tho'  anointed  king 
23.  4.  as  the  t.  gra.ss  springing  out  of  the  earth 

2Kings  22.19.becaiisc  thy  heart  was  t.2  C7ir.34.27. 

1  Chron.  22.  5.  Solomon  is  young  and  t.  29.  1. 
Job  14.  7.  Ihat  the  t.  branch  wiUjiot  cease 

38.  27.  to  cause  the  bud  of  the  t.  herb  to  spring 
Psal.  23.t  2.  to  lie  down  in  pastures  oft.  grass 
Prop.  4.3.  t.  and  beloved  in  sight  of  my  mother 

27.25.  hay  appears,  and  the  t.  grass  sheweth  itself 
C«nt.2.13.  the  vines  with  t.  grape  give  a  good  smell 

15.  foxes  spoil  vines,  for  our  vines  have  t.  grapes 

7.  12.  lot  us  see  whelher  the  t.  grape  appear 
Isa.  7.  t  4.  fear  not,  neither  let  thy  heart  be  t. 

47. 1,  thou  shall  no  more  be  called  t.  and  delicate 
.53.  2.  he  shall  grow  up  licfore  him  as  a  t.  plant 
F.iek.  17.  22.  I  will  crop  off  a  t.  one  and  plant  it 
7;an.  1.  9.  now  God  brought  D.iniid  into  t.  love 
4.  15.  leave  the  stump  in  earth,  in  the  t.  graf^K,  2,3 
Mat.  24.  :I2.  when  his  brancb  is  (.  Mark  13.  28 
Luke  1.  78.  through  the  t.  mercy  of  our  God 
Jam.  5.  11.  the  Lord  is  pitiful,  and  oft.  mercy 
TENDKR-HE.ARTED. 

2  Chr.  1,3,  7.  when  Rcliohcam  was  young  and  t.-h 
Eph.  4,  32,  be  kind  and  t.-hearted  one  to  another 

See  Mkrciks, 

TENDERNESS. 

Deut.  28,  56.  to  set  her  foot  on  the  ground  for  t 

TENONS, 
Exod.  26.  17.  two  L  in  one  board,  19  I  36.22,84 


TEN 

TENOR. 
Oen.  43  7.  according  to  the  t.  of  these  words 
i!;ioa'.34."27.al'ler  t.  ol  these  words  1  made  a  coven. 

TKi\T 

Signifies, [l]^n  apaTtmnit,ur  ladg  in^'-place  made 
of  canvas,  or  other  clut/i  07t  pules,  tlen.  4.  2U 
I\uin.  1.  52.  [2]  'J'he  covering  of  the  tabernacle, 
£.xod.  26.  11.     [3]  The  church,  Uant.  1.  H. 
Oen.  9.  21.  and  Noah  was  uncovered  in  his  t. 

12.  8.  Abram  removed  and  pitched  his  t.  13.  3. 

13.  12.  Lot  pitched  hie  t.  toward  Sodom 

If).  Abraham  removed  his  t.and  dwelt  m  the  plain 

18.  1.  he  sat  in  t.  door||tj.  he  hastened  into  tiie  t. 

9.  where  is  Harah  thy  wile?  he  said,  in  the  t. 

24.  67.  he  brought  her  into  his  mother  Sarah's  t. 
•Mi.  17.  and  Isaac  pitched  his  t.  in  the  valley 

25.built  an  altar,  and  pitched  his  t.  at  Beer-sheba 
31.  25.  Jacob  had  pitched  his  t.  in  the  mount 

33.Laban  went  into  Jacob'st.Lieah'sf.Rachel'st. 
33.  18.  Jacob  pitched  his  t.  before  Shalein,  19. 
35.  21.  Israel  spread  his  t.  beyond  the  tower 
Exod.  18.  7.  Moses  and  Jethro  came  into  the  t. 
26.  11.  couple  the  t.  together  that  it  may  be  one 
33.  8.  stood  every  man  at  his  t.  door  and  looked 

10.  they  worshipped  every  man  in  his  t.  door 

35.  11.  make  the  tabernacle,  his  t.  and  covering 

36.  18.  he  made  taches  U>  couple  the  t.  together 

19.  he  made  a  covering  for  the  t.  of  ranis' skins 

39.  33.  and  they  brought  the  t.  to  Moses 
40.19.  he  spread  abroad  llie  t.over  the  tabernacle, 

and  put  the  covering  of  the  t.  above  upon  it 

J^ev.  14.  8.  leper  shall  tarry  outof  his  t.  seven  days 

JVum.  3.25.  the  charge  of  Gershon  shall  be  the  t. 

9.  15.  the  cloud  covered  the  t.  of  the  testimony 

11.  10.  heard  the  people  weep  every  man  in  his  t. 

19. 14. the  lawwhen  a  man  dieth  in  a  i.all  that  come 

into  the  t.  and  is  in  the  t.  shall  be  unclean 

18.  and  a  clean  person  shall  sprinkle  the  t. 

25.  8.  ho  went  after  the  man  of  Israel  into  the  1. 
Josh.  7.  21.  hid  in  the  earth  in  the  midst  of  my  t. 

22.  they  ran  into  the  t.  and  it  was  hid  in  his  t. 

23.  they  took  them  out  of  the  midst  of  the  t. 

24.  all  Israel  burnt  his  (.  and  all  that  he  had 
Judff.  4. 17.  Sisera  fled  on  his  feet  to  the  t.  of  Jael 

20.  he  said  to  her,  stand  in  the  door  of  the  t. 

21.  Jael  took  a  nail  of  the  t.  and  a  hammer 

5.  24.  blessed  shall  she  be  above  women  in  the  t. 
7.  8.  ho  sent  the  rest  of  Israel  every  man  to  his  t. 

7.  13.  a  cake  of  barley-bread  came  unto  a  t. 

19.  t  9.  that  to-morrow  thou  mayest  go  to  thy  t. 

20.  8.  saying,  we  will  not  any  of  us  go  to  his  t. 

1  Ham.  4.  10.  and  they  lied  every  man  into  his  t. 

2  Sam.  13.  17.  I  19.  8. 
13. 2.  rest  of  the  pcojilc  he  sent  every  man  to  his  t. 
17.  54.  David  put  Goliath's  armour  into  his  t. 

2  Sam.  7.0.  but  I  have  walked  in  a  t.  1  Chr.  17. 5. 
16.22.they  spread  .\bsalom  a  t.on  the  top  of  house 

30.  22.  and  they  retired  every  man  to  his  t. 

2  Kings  7. 8.  these  lepers  went  into  one  ^.another  t. 

1  Chron.  15.1.  David  pitched  a  «.  for  the  ark  of  God 
IG.  1  they  .set  it  in  midst  of  the  t.  2  Chron.  1.  4. 

2  Chron.  25.  22.  and  they  fled  every  man  to  his  t. 
Job  21.  t  28.  where  is  the  t.  of  the  tabernacsle  of 
Psal.  78.  fiO.  the  t.  which  ho  placed  among  men 
f-ia.  13.  20.  nor  shall  the  Arabian  pitch  t.  there 

38.  12.  mine  age  is  removed  as  a  shepherd's  t. 

40.  22.  spreadeth  them  out  as  a  t.  to  dwell  in 
54.  2.  enlarge  the  place  of  thy  t.  let  them  stretch 

.Irr.  10.  20.  there  is  none  to  stretch  forth  my  t. 
'SI.  10.  llioy  should  rise  up  every  man  in  his  t. 

TENT-MAKERS. 
JlctaVd.Z.hy  their  occupation  they  were  t.-makers 

TENTS. 
<Vrn.4.20.  Jabal  wa.s  the  father  of  sucli  as  dwell  int. 
9.  27.  Japheth  ?hall  dwell  in  the  t.  of  Shem 
13.  5.  hot  also  had  flocks,  and  herds,  an<l  t. 
25.  27.  Jacob  was  a  plain  man,  dwelling  in  t. 

31.  33.  Laban  went  into  the  maid  servants*  t. 
F.zod.  16.  16.  gather  5'e  for  them  that  are  in  I. 
Jfum.  I.  52.  children  of  Israel  shall  pitch  their  /. 

9. 17.  where  the  cloud  abode,  they  pitched  t. 

18.  cloud  abode,  they  rested  in  their  t.  20, 22,  23. 
13.  19.  whether  they  dwell  in  t.  or  strong  holds 
16.  26.  depart  from  the  t.  of  these  wicked  men 

27.  came  out,  and  stood  in  the  door  of  their  t. 
24.  2.  and  Balaam  saw  Israel  abiding  in  his  t. 

S.how  goodly  are  thy  I.  O  Jacob,  and  thy  tabern. 
Deul.  1.  27.  and  yo  murmured  in  your  t.  and  said 

33.  to  search  ynu  out  a  place  to  pitch  your  t.  in 
5.  ,30.  go  say  to  them,  gel  yo  into  your  t.  again 
\\.  0.  the  earth  swallowed  them  up  and  their  t. 
16.  7.  and  thou  shall  turn  and  go  unto  thy  t. 
3.3.  18.  he  said,  rejoice,  Issachar,  in  thy  I. 
Josh.  22.  4.  return  ye,  and  get  you  into  your  t.  6. 

P.  return  with  njuch  riches  unto  your  t. 
iiirtrr.  6.  5.  the  Midianitps  came  with  thoir  t. 

8.  11.  went  by  the  way  of  them  that  dwell  in  t. 

1  Sam.  17.  .'53.  they  spoiled  the  rhilistines'  t. 

2  ■'•om.'l^.  11.  nrk,  Israel  and  Juilah  abide  int. 
20.1.cvery  man  to  his  t.  1  Kin.  12. 16.2  Chr.  10.16. 

608 


TER 

1  ffi'n n'j  8. 66.  Israel  wentto  thcir£.2CAron  7.10. 
20.  T  1^-  was  drinking,  he  and  the  kings,  in  t. 

2  Kings  7.  7.  and  the  Syrians  lel\  their  t.  10. 
16.  Israel  spoiled  the  t.  of  the  Syrians 

8.  21.  and  the  people  fled  into  tJieir  t.  14.  12. 

13.  5.  the  ciiildren  of  Israel  dwelt  in  their  t. 

1  Chron.  4. 41.  they  came  and  smote  the  t.  of  Ham 
5.  10.  and  they  dwell  in  the  llai,'aritcs'  t. 

2  Chron.  14.  15.  tlicy  smote  also  the  (.of  cattle 

31.  2.  to  praise  in  the  gates  of  the  t.  of  the  Lord 
Ezra  6.  15.  at  Ahava  we  abode  in  t.  three  days 
Fsal.  69.  25.  and  let  none  dwell  in  their  t. 

78.  55.  made  tribes  of  Israel  to  dwell  in  their  i. 
84.  10.  than  to  dwell  in  the  t.  of  wickedness 
106.  25.  murmured  in  their  t.  and  hearkened  not 
120.  5.  woe  is  rae,  that  I  dwell  in  the  t.  of  Kedar 

Cant.  1.5. 1  am  black, but  comely,  as  the  t.of  Kedar 
8.  and  feed  thy  kids  beside  the  shepherds'  (. 

Jer.  4. 20.  suddenly  are  my  t.  spoiled,  and  curtains 
6.3.they  shall  pitch  their  t. against  her  round  about 
30. 18.  will  bring  again  the  captivity  of  Jacob's  I. 
35.  7.  but  all  your  days  ye  shall  dwell  in  t. 

10.  but  we  have  dwelt  in  t.  and  have  obeyed 
49.  2it.  their  t.  and  flocks  shall  they  take  away 

Nab.  3.  7.  I  saw  the  t.  of  Cushaii  in  aflliction 

Zech.  12.  7.  the  Lordshallsave  the  «.of  Judah  first 

14.  15.  so  shall  be  the  plague  of  all  in  these  t. 

TERMED. 

Isa.  62.  4.  thou  shall  no  more  bo  t.  forsaken, 

neither  shall  thy  land  any  more  be  t.  desolate 

TERRACES. 

2  Chron.  9.11.  made  of  alguin-trees  t.  to  the  house 

TERRESTRIAL. 

1  Cor.  15.  40.  there  are  bodies  (.  tlie  glory  of  the  t. 

TERRIBLE. 

Exad.  34.  10.  for  it  is  a  t.  thing  that  I  will  do 

Dent.  1.  19.  went  thro'  that  t.  wilderness,  8.  15. 

7.  21  .  the  Lord  thy  God  is  a  mighty  God  and 

t.  10.  17.  I  M-ek.  1.  5.  I  4. 14.  1  9.  32. 

10.  21.  hath  done  for  thee  t.  things,  2  Save.  7. 23. 

Judg.  13.  6.  was  like  an  angel  of  God,  very  t. 

.Job  37.  22.  with  God  is  t.  majesty 
,■59.  20.  the  glory  of  his  nostrils  is  t. 
41.  14.  his  teeth  are  t.  round  about 

Psn.1.  4,5.4.  thy  right  hand  shall  teach  thee  t.  things 
47.  2.  for  the  Lord  Most  High  is  t.  he  is  king  over 
65.  5.  by  t.  things  in  righteousness  wilt  answer  us 
66.3.  say  unto  God,  how  t.  art  thou  in  thy  works  ! 
5.  t.  in  his  doing  toward  the  children  of  men 
68.  35.  thou  art  t.  out  of  thy  holy  places 
76.  12.  he  is  (.  to  the  kings  of  the  earth 
86.  t  14.  assemblies  of  (.  men  sought  my  <oul 
99.  3.  let  them  praise  thy  great  and  t.  name 
106.  22.  who  had  done  t.  things  by  the  Red  Sea 
145. 6.  men  shall  speak  of  the  niifht  of  jy  t.  acts 

Cant.  6.  4.  thou  art  t.  as  an  army  with  banners 

Isa.  13.  11.  I  will  lay  low  the  haughtiness  of  the  t. 
18.  2.  go  to  a  people  t.  \\  7.  from  a  people  t. 
21.  1.  it  coineth  from  the  desert,  from  a  (.  land 
25.  3.  the  city  of  the  t.  nations  shall  fear  thee 

4.  when  the  blast  of  the  t.  ones  is  as  a  storm 

5.  the  branch  of  the  t.  ones  shall  be  brought  low 
29.  5.  the  multitude  of  the  t.  ones  shall  be  as  cliafl" 

20.  for  the  t.  one  is  brought  to  nought 
4U  25.  and  the  prey  of  the  t.  shall  be  delivered 
64.  3.  when  tliou  didst  t.  things,  which  we 
.Ji'r.  15.  21.  redeem  thee  out  of  the  hand  of  the  t. 
20.  11.  the  Lord  is  with  me  as  a  mighty  i.  one 
Jjam.  5.  10.  skin  was  black,  because  oft.  famine 
F.zek.  1.  22.  was  as  the  lolour  of  the  1.  crystal 
28.  7.  behold  therefore  I  will  bring  the  t.  of  the 
nations  upon  thee,  30. 11.  \  31.  12. 

32.  12.  I  will  cause  to  fall  the  t.  of  the  nations 
Dan.  2.  31.  the  form  of  the  image  was  t. 

7.7. 1  saw  a  fourth  beast  dreadful  and  t.and  strong 
Joel  2. 11.  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  great  and  very  t.' 
31.  before  the  great  and  t.day  of  the  Lord  come 
Ifab.  1.  7.  the  Chaldeans  are  t.  and  dreadful 
y.eph.'i,  11.  the  Lord  will  be  t.  unto  Moab 
Heb.  12.  21.  so  /.  was  the  sight  that  Mosos  said 

TERRIBLENKSS. 
Dent.  26.  8.  the  Lord  brought  us  out  with  great  (. 
IC'Ar. l7.21.tomak(^  thee  »  name ofgrealness  and  t. 
Jcr.  49.  16.  thvt.  hath  dt^ceived  thee  and  the  pride 

TERRIBLY. 
f.ta.  2.  10.  he  ariselh  to  shake  t.  the  earth,  21. 
JVaA.  2.  .3.  and  the  fir-trees  shall  be  t.  shaken 

TERRIFY. 
Job  3.  .■;.  let  the  blackness  of  the  day  t.  it 
0.  34.  let  him  take  his  rod,  and  let  not  his  fear  t. 
31.  34.  or  did  the  contempt  of  families  t.  me? 
Psal.  10.  t  18.  man  of  the  earth  may  no  more  t. 

2  Cor.  10.  9.  seem  as  if  I  would  t.  you  by  loiters 

TKRRHTEn. 
<7m.  45.  t  3.  for  they  wore  t.  at  his  prr  «ence 
Drut.  20.  3.  fear  not  nor  be  t.  bccai-se  of  (hem 
I  .SflTTi.  16.  t  14.  anovil  spirit  from  the  Lord  t.  him 
IiUkr  21.  9.  when  ye  shall  Imnr  of  warn,  bo  not  t. 
24.  37.  but  tliny  wore  f.  and  affrighted 
}  hil.  1  28.  (Ujd  in  iiutliing  t.  by  your  advcrsorioa 


TES 

TERRIFIEST. 
Job  7.  14.  then  thou  t.  rae  through  visions 

TERROR. 
Signifies,  [1]  Great  fear  or  dread,  Gen.  35.  5 
[2J  JJrcartful  and  unexpected  judgments, Paa\ 
73.  19.      [3]  yjn  example  striking  terror  into 
others,  Ezek.  27.  36.    [4]  'J'hose  Ihrcatcnings, 
whereby  the  wicked  endeavour  to  a^ect  goodmen 
with  fear,  1  Pet.  3.  14.  [5]    The  great  and  ter- 
rible day  of  judgment,  2  Cor.  5.  11. 
Oen.  35.  5.  and  the  t.  of  God  was  upon  thecitiea 
JL,ev.  2b.  16.  I  will  even  appoint  over  you  t. 
Dent.  32.  25.  the  sword  without  and  t.  within 
34.  12.  in  all  the  great  t.  which  Moses  shewed 
Josh.  2.  9.  and  that  your  t.  is  fallen  upon  us 
Job  31.  23.  destruction  from  God  was  a  t.  to  me 
33.  7.  behold,  my  t.  shall  not  make  thee  afraid 
Psal.  91.  5.  shalt  not  be  afraid  for  the  t.  by  night 
Isa.  JO.  33.  the  Lord  will  lop  the  bough  with  t. 

19.  17.  the  land  of  Judah  siiall  be  a  t.  to  Egypt 
33.  18.  thine  heart  shall  meditate  t.  where  is 
54.  14.  thou  shalt  be  far  from  t.  it  shall  not 

Jer.  17. 17.  be  not  a  t.to  me  ||  20.  4.  a  t.  to  thyself 

32.  21.  and  hast  brought  forth  Israil  with  great  (. 

Ezek.  26.  17.  cause  t.  to  be  on  all  that  haunt  it 

21.  I  will  make  thee  a  t.  27.  36.  [  28. 19. 

32.23.  which  caused  i.  in  the  land,  24,25,26,27. 

30.  with  their  t.  they  are  ashamed  of  their  might 

32.  I  have  caused  my  t.  in  the  land  of  the  living 

Horn.  13.  3.  for  rulers  are  not  a  t.  to  good  workjs' 

2  Cor.  5.  11.  knowing  therefore  the  £.  of  the  Lord 

1  Pet.  3.  14.  be  not  afraid  of  their  t.  nor  troubled 

TERRORS. 

Dcut.  4.  34.  a.ssayed  to  take  a  nation  by  groat  t. 

.Job.  6.  4.  the  t.  of  God  do  set  themselves  ;.  array 

18.  11.  t.  shall  make  him  afraid  on  eTsry  wide 

14.  and  it  shall  bring  him  to  the  king  aft. 

20.  25.  the  sword  cometh,  t.  ar  j  upon  him 

24.  17.  they  are  in  tho  t.  of  !Jjo  shadow  of  death 
27.  20.  t.  take  hold  on  him  as  waters,  a  tempesl 
30.  15.  t.  are  turned  upon  me,  they  pursue  me 
39.  t  20.  the  glory  of  his  nostrils  are  t. 

Psal.  ,55.  4.  the  t.  of  death  are  fallen  upon  me 
73.  19.  they  are  utterly  consumed  with  t. 
88.  15.  while  I  sutler  thy  t.  I  am  distracted 
16.  wrath  goelh  over  me,  thy  I.  have  cut  me  olT 

.Jer.  15.  8.  I  caused  t.  to  fall  upon  the  city 

J^am.  2.  22.  tliou  hast  called  my  t.  round  about 
5.  t  10.  our  skin  black  as  an  oven,  because  oft. 

Ezek.  21. 12.  t.  by  reason  of  tho  sword  shall  be  on 

Testament 

Signifies,  [I]  JJn  act  of  the  last  icill  of  a  perron 
who  hath  death  in  his  view,  and  disposes  of  hij 
estate,  and  gives  orders  as  to  what  he  wovtd 
have  done  after  his  decease,  lleb.  9.  17.  [II] 
Thecovenant  which  (r'odioasgraciouslypUa.s- 
ed  to  make  known  aflir  the  fall  of  jldam, 
which  contains  the  method  in  which  sijtners 
may  be  saved ;  namely,  by  the  blood  of  Christ 
only.  This  covenant  is  called  \i\A,  lleb.  8. 13. 
not  because  it  differed  in  substance  from  the 
new  ;for  it  did  not  bind  such  as  icerc  under  it 

■  to  obtain  just  ijication  liy  works  :  for  its  being 
delivered  with  blood,  Exod.  21.  8.  taught  them 
that  justification  was  to  be  had  only  by  fail/k 
in  Christ's  blood  ;  but  it  is  callrd  old  in  regard 
of  the  manner  of  its  dispensation,  because  it 
was  administered  to  the  .Jews  in  many  figures, 
shadows,  rites,  and  sacrifices,  with  other  ob- 
scure and  dark  revelations  and  prophecies  : 
Jind  also  in  regard  it  if  a,<;  to  be  abrogated, 
and  the  New  Testament  or  Covenant  to  come 
in  its  stead,  which  is  so  called,  [1]  Jlecavse  it 
is  ratified  by  the  blood  and  actual  siifferings 
of  Christ,  which  were  tiijiified  by  the  sacrificer 
and  sprinkling  of  blood,  under  the  old  dispen- 
sation. [2]  ft  contains  a  more  full  and  clear 
revelation  of  the  mysteries  of  religion,  and  i> 
attended  with  a  larger  measure  of  the  gifts  and 
graces  of  the  Holy  .'Spirit,  Joel  2.  28.  2Tiin.  I. 
10.  [3]  //  is  propounded  and  cxtetided  to  all, 
and  not  confined  to  one  nation  only,  as  it  Jro.; 
to  the  .Jews  under  the  legal  di.ipcnsation,  Mat. 
28.  19.  [41  It  is  never  to  wax.  old  or  be  abo- 
lished. [Ill]  The  books  or  inspired  wrilingg 
of  Moses  and  the  prophets,  which  contain  tA» 
substance  of  God's  covenant  with  the  Jews 
under  the  legal  di.ipcnsation,  2  Cor.  3.  14. 

,fl/nt.2fi.28.  this  is  my  blood  in  new  t.  Mark  14.  24. 

I.uke  22.  20.  this  cnp  is  the  new  t.  1  Cor.  11.  25. 

^Cor.  3.6.wbo  made  us  able  ministers  of  tho  new  t. 
14.  remains  the  same  vail,  in  rcadins  the  old  t. 

t7n/.3.  flS.tho'  it  bo  but  n  man's  t.  yet  if  confirmed 

Ifeb.  7. 22.  was  Jesus  made  a  surely  of  a  better  ( 
9.  1,5.  he  is  the  modintnr  of  the  new  f.  for  the  re- 
demption of  the  transgressions  under  Ijie 
first  t. 

16.  whore  n  t.  is  there  must  also  be  the  death 

17.  for  a  f.  iflof  forro  after  men  nro  dead 
20.  this  is  tbo  blood  of  the  t.  God  enjoined 


TES 

Heb.  12.  t  24.  to  Jesus  the  Mediator  of  tlie  new  t. 
13.  t  20.  through  the  bhiod  of  the  everlasting  t. 
Rev.  11.  I'J.scuii  ill  Ills  Lt:iii|il..-,  the  urii  ul  liib  t. 

TESTATOR. 
Ueb.  9. 16.  must  of  necessity  he  tlie' death  of  the  t. 
17.  it  is  of  110  strength  at  all  while  the  t.  livcth 
TESTIFY 
Signifies,  f  1]  To  bear  iciliicss.  Acts  20. 24.  |  26.  5 
[2]  To  avouch,  or  ajjirm,  John  3.  11.  [3]    7'o 
publish  and  declare  freely  and  boldly,  Acts  20. 
21.    [4]    To  declare  a  chargt,  or   indictment 
affaiitst  one,  I'sal.  50.  7.  [jj    7'i»  protest,  or 
speak  against,  Neh.  13.  13. 
JVu/H.  35.  30.  one  witness  not  t.  against  any  person 
Deut.  8.  19.  I  t.  against  you  tlial  ye  sliall  perish 
I'J.  lt>.  if  a  false  witness  t.  against  any  man 

31.  21.  this  song  shall  t.  aganisl  them  as  witness 

32.  40.  set  your  hearts  to  the  words  wliicli  1 1. 
JVcA.  9.  34.  wherewith  thou  didst  t.  against  t.'iem 
Job  I').  6.  yea,  thine  own  iijis  f.  against  thee 
Psal.  M.  7.  O  Israel,  I  will  t.  against  Ihee,  81.  8. 
/so.  59.  12.  hclure  thee,  and  our  sins  t.  against  us 
.fir.  14.  7.  though  our  iniquitiLS  t.  against  us 
Has.  5.  5.  the  pride  of  Israel  doth  t.  to  liis  face 
^mos  3.  13.  hear  yc,  and  t.  in  the  house  of  Jacob 
Jlftc.6.3.  O  people,  what  have  I  done?  f  .against  in 
L,uke  16.  2d.  send  Lazarus,  that  he  may  t.  to  them 
Jukti  2.  25.  needed  not  tliat  any  should  t.  of  man 

3.1  Land  t-  that  we  have  seen  {{  5.  39.  they  t.  of  me 
7.  7.  because  I  t.  of  it  ||  15.  26.  he  shall  t.  of  me 
^cts  2.  40.  with  many  other  words  did  he  t. 
10.42.  to  t.  that  it  is  he  who  was  ordained  of  God 

20.  24.  to  t.  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God 
2i>.5.iny  manner  of  life  know  they,  if  they  would  t. 

finl.  .5.  3.  1 1.  to  every  man  that  is  circumcised 
F.ph.  4.  17.  this  I  say,  and  t.  in  the  Lord,  that  ye 

1  ,hihn  4.  14.  and  we  have  seen  and  do  t.  that 
Reii.  22.  16.  I  Jesus  have  sent  my  angel  to  t. 

18.  1 1.  to  everv  man  that  hearcth  the  words 
"TESTIFIED. 
Kind.  21.  29.  and  it  hath  been  t.  to  his  owner 
Ucut.  19.  18.  hath  t.  falsely  against  his  brother 
Ruth  1.  21.  seeing  the  Lord  hath  t.  against  me 

2  Sam.  1.  16.  thy  mouth  hath  f.  against  thee 
2  Kings  17.  13.  yet  the  Lord  t.  against  Israel 

15.  liis  testimonies  which  he  t.  against  them 

2  Chr.  24.  19.  prophets  t.  aga!n.<l  them,  JVtA.  9.  26. 
J\"c7i.  13.  1.).  I  t.  against  them  when  tiiey  sold,  21. 
Jer.  42. 1 19.  know  certainly  I  have  t.  against  you 
John  4.  39.  far  the  saying  which  the  woman  t. 

44.  Jesus  himself  £.  that  a  prophet,  13.  21. 
SeUs  8.2.J.  when  they  had  (.  and  preached  the  word 
18.  5.  Paul  t.  to  the  Jews,  that  Jesus  was  Christ 
23.  11.  tor  as  thou  hast  t.  of  me  at  Jerusalem 
i-'.  23.  to  whom  he  (.  the  kingdom  of  God 
I  Cor.  15.  l.'j,  are  false,  because  we  have  f.  of  God 
1  Thesf.  4.  6.  as  we  have  forewarned  you  and  t.  ' 
I  Tim.  2. 6.  who  gave  himself,  to  be  t.  in  due  time 
Hcb.  2.  6.  but  one  in  a  certain  jilace  t.  saying 
1  Pet.  1.  II.  when  it  t.  beforehand  the  sulierings 
I  .hhn  .'i.9.the  witness  which  God  hath  (.of  his  Son 

3  .fohn'.i.  and  t.  of  the  truth  that  is  in  thee 

TESTIFIKDST. 
JVt*.  9.29.  and  t.  against  them  by  thy  Spirit,  30. 

TESTIFIETH. 
//tf«.  7. 10.  the  pride  of  Israel  t.  to  his  face 
Jiihn  3.  32.  what  he  hath  seen  and  heard  that  he  t. 

21.  24.  Uie  disci|)te  which  t.  of  these  things 
Heb.  7.  17.  for  he  t.  thou  art  a  priest  for  ever 
Rev.  22.  20.  he  which  t.  thesp  things,  saith 

TESTIFYING. 
^rf5  20.21.  f.  both  to  the  Jews  and  to  the  Greeks 
Heb.  11.  4.  obtained  witness,  God  t.  of  his  gifts 
1  Pet.  5. 12.  t.  that  this  is  the  true  grace  of  God 

TESTIMONY 
Signifies,  [1]  .>}  witnessing  evidence,  or  proof, 
Acts  14.  3.  [2]    The  wkote  scripture,  err  word 
of  frod,  which  declares  what  is  Id  be  helievcd, 
pmelised,  and  rzpe.cted  by  us,  Psal.  19.  7.  [3] 
The  two  tables  of  stone,  whereon  the  law,  or 
ten  comniaiidments   were  written,  which  were 
trilnessis  of  that  covenant  made  between  find 
and  his  people,  Exod.  2.5.  10,  21.  [  31.  18.  [4] 
The  book  of  the  law  wltir.k  testifies  of  Ood's 
will  and  man''s  duty,  2  Kings  11.  12.   [5]    The 
goij^-l,  wliich  testifies  of  Chri.it,  and  declares 
the  will  of  Cfod  concerning  the  way  of  saving 
tinners,  1  Cor.  1.  6.  |  2.  1.  2  Tim.  1.  8.  [6] 
The   ark,  in  which   the    law   was  deposited 
Exod.  16.  34. 
Erod.  16.  34.  laid  the  pot  of  manna  before  the  t. 
25.  16.  thou  shalt  put  into  the  ark  the  t.  21. 
27.  21.  without  the  vail  which  is  before  the  t. 

30.  6.  mercy-seat  that  is  over  the  t.  /.en.  16.  13. 
36.  beat  it  small,  and  put  it  before  the  t. 

31.  18.  and  he  gave  to  Moses  two  tables  oft. 
32. 15.  the  two  tables  of*,  were  in  his  hand,  .34.29. 
38.  21.  this  is  the  sum  of  the  tabern.acle  oft. 

^um.  1.  50  the  Levites  over  the  labi'rnacle  oft. 
53.  LovitM  shall  pitch  about  the  tabernacle  oft 
G09 


THA 

J^um.  9.  15.  the  cloud  covered  the  tent  of  the  t. 
10. 11.  the  cloud  was  taken  off  the  tabernacle  oft, 

17.  4.  thou  slialt  lay  ii|i  tliu  rods  buforc  llie  t. 
10.  bring  Aaron's  rod  again  buloru  the  t. 

Ruth  4. 7.  gave  his  shoe,  and  this  wa.s  a  (.  in  Israel 

2  Kings  11.  12.  gave  the  king  the  t.  2  Chr.  23.  11. 

Psal.  78.  5.  for  he  established  a  t.  in  Jacob 
81.  5.  this  ho  ordained  in  Joseph  for  a  t. 
119.  H8.  so  ehall  I  keep  the  t.  of  thy  mouth 
)22.  4.  the  tribes  go  up  to  the  t.  of  Israel 
132.  12.  if  thy  children  will  kueji  my  t. 

fsa.  8.  16.  bind  up  the  Z.||  20.  to  llie  law  and  to  the  t. 

Mat.  8.  4.  oiler  the  gift  Moses  commanded  l(>r  a  t. 
Mark  1.  44.   /,ul;c  5.  14. 

10.  18,  for  a  t.  against  them,  Mark  13.  9. 
Mark  6.  11.  shake  off  the  dust  for  a  t.  JmIcc  9.  5. 
Luke  21.  13.  and  it  shall  turn  to  you  for  a  t. 
John  3.  32.  and  no  man  receivelh  his  t. 

33.  he  that  receive-th  his  t.  hath  set  lo  his  seal 
8.  17.  it  is  written,  ihe  t.  of  two  men  is  true 

21.  24.  and  we  know  that  his  t.  is  irue 
Mets  13.  22.  to  whom  also  he  gave  t.  and  said 

14.  3.  who  gave  t.  to  the  word  of  his  grace 

22.  18.  for  they  will  not  receive  thy  t.  of  me 

1  (;or.  1.  6.  as  the  t.  of  Christ  was  conrirmed  in  you 
2.  1.  I  came,  declaring  unto  you  the  t.  of  God 

2  Cor.  1.  12.  the  t.  of  our  conscience,  in  simplicity 
2  yViess.l.lO.  because  our*,  among  you  was  beiiev. 

1  Tim.  2.  t  6.  gave  himself  to  be  a  t.  in  due  time 

2  Tim.  1.8.  be  not  a»hained  of  the  t.  of  our  Lord 
Heb.  3.  5.  for  a  t.  of  those  things  which  were 

11.  5.  Enoch  had  this  t.  that  he  pleased  God 
Rev.  1.2.  who  bare  record  of  the  t.  of  Jesus  Christ 

9. 1  was  in  the  isle  of  Palnios  for  the  i.  of  Jesus 
6.  9.  the  souls  of  them  that  were  slain  for  the  t. 

11.  7.  when  they  shall  have  finished  their  t. 

12.  11.  th(fy  overcame  by  the  word  of  their  t. 
17.  make  war  with  them  which  have  t.  of  Jesus 

15.  .5.  tabernacle  of  the  t.  in  heaven  was  opened 
19.  10.  of  thy  brethren  that  have  the  t.  of  Jesus 

for  the  t.  of  Jesus  is  the  Spirit  of  prophecy 
See  .\rk. 
TESTLAIOxNIES. 
Deut.  4.  45.  these  are  the  t.  which  Moses  spake 
6.  17.  you  shall  diligently  keep  the  t.  of  your  God 
20.what  mean  the  t.  which  God  commanded  you 

1  Kings  2. 3.to  keep  his  statutes  and  his  t.  2  Kings 
23.  3.  1  Chron.  29.  19.  2  Chron.  34.  31. 

2  Kings  17.  15.  rejected  his  t.  and  followed  vanity 
W/t.  9.  34.  nor  have  our  kings  hearkened  to  thy  t. 
Psal.  25.10.  to  such  as  keep  his  covenant  and  his  t. 

78.  56.  and  keep  not  his  t.  \\  93.  5.  thy  t.  are  sure 
99.  7.  they  kept  his  f.  and  the  ordinance  he  gave 
119.2.blessed  are  they  that  keep  hi3  t.and  seek  him 
14. 1  have  rejoiced  in  the  way  of  thy  t.  as  much 
22.  for  I  have  kept  thy  t.  167.  168. 
24.  thy  t.  are  my  delight  ||  31.  I  stuck  to  thy  t. 
36.  incline  my  heart  to  thy  t.  not  to  covetousness 
46.  I  will  speak  of  thy  t.  also  before  kings 
59.  and  I  turned  my  feet  to  thy  t. 
79.  let  those  that  have  known  thy  t.  turn  to  me 
95.  the  wicked  waited,  but  I  will  consider  thy  t. 
99. 1  have  uaderst.  for  thy  t.  are  my  meditation 
111.  thy  t.  have  I  taken  as  a  heritage  for  ever 
119.  I  love  thy  t.  \\  125.  that  1  may  know  thy  t. 
129.  thy  t.  are  wonderful,  therefore  doth  my  soul 
138.  thy  t.  are  righteous  and  very  faithful 
144.  the  righteousness  of  thy  t.  is  everlasting 
146.  I  cried,  save  me,  and  I  shall  keep  thy  t. 
152.  concerning  thy  t.  I  have  known  of  old 
157.  yet  do  I  not  decline  from  thy  t. 
Jer.  44.  23.  because  ve  have  not  walked  in  his  t. 

TEIL-TREE. 
/sa.6.13.as  a  t.-tree  and  as  an  oak  whose  substance 

THANK. 
I.uhc  0.32.  that  love  you,  what  t.  have  youl  33, 34. 

THANK. 

1  Chron.  10.  4.  he  appointed  Levites  to  t.  the  Lord 

7.  David  delivered  this  psalm  to  (.  the  Lord 

23.  30.  to  stand  every  morning  to  t.  the  Lord 
29.  13.  we  t.  Ihee  and  praise  thy  glorious  name 

Dan.  2.  2:1.  I  t.  thee  and  praise  thee,  O  God 
Mat.  11.  25.  at  that  time,  Jesus  said,  I  t.  thee,  O 
Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  /-wtelO.  21. 
I,uke  17.  9.  doth  he  t.  that  servant?  I  trow  not 

18.  11.  God,  I  t.  thee,  that  I  am  not  as  other  men 
.Mm  11.41.  Father,  I  t.tliee,  that  thou  heardest  me 
Rom.  1.8. 1  t.  my  God  through  Jesus  Christ,  7.25. 
1  C'vr.  i.  4.  I  t.  my  God  always  on  your  bi'half 

14.  I  /.  God  that  I  baptized  none  of  you,  but 

14.  18.  I  (.  my  God  I  speak  with  tongues  more 

Phil.  1.  3.  I  t.God  on  every  remembrance  of  you 

I  Thrss.  2.  13.  for  this  cause  also  t.  we  God 

2T/(f.'s.l.3.  we  are  bound  to  t.  God  always  for  you 

1  Tim.  1.  12. 1  t.  Jesus  Christ  who  hath  enabled  me 

2  Tim.  1.  3. 1 1.  God,  whom  I  serve  with  pure  consc. 
Philcm.  4.  I  t.  my  God,  making  mention  of  thee 

See  Offkhino. 

THANKED. 

2  Sam.  14.  M.  Joab  bowed  himself  and  t.  the  king 

4  K 


THA 

1  K:  ngs  8.  t60.  and  the  people  t.  the  king,  and  wmi 

Acts  28.  15.  Paul  I.  God  and  took  courage 
Rom.  6. 17.  but  God  be  t.  tliat  ye  were  the  servants 

'i'UAJNKl'UL. 
Psal.  100.4.  be  t.  to  him,  bkss  his  name,  Col.  3. 1.5. 
Rom.  1.21.  they  giorilied  him  not,  neither  were  t. 

THANKFULNESS. 

./?cts 24.3.WC  acce[it  it,  most  noble  Felix,  with  all  t 

THANKING. 

2  Chr.5. 13.  the  singers  were  as  one  in  t.  the  Lord 

THANK-WORTH  V. 
1  Pet.  2.  19.  for  this  is  t.-w.  if  a  man  endure  griel 

THANKS. 
jVch.  12.  31.  I  appointed  companies  that  gave  t 
40.  so  stood  the  two  conijianies  that  gave  t. 
Dan.  6.  10.  he  jirayed  and  gave  t.  before  his  God 
Mat.  26.27.  he  took  the  cup  and  gave  £.  J.uke  22.17. 
Mark  8.  6.  he  took  the  seven  loaves  end  gave  t. 

14.  23.  when  he  had  given  t.  he  gave  it  to  them 
J^uke  2.  38.  Anna  gave  t.  to  the  Lord,  and  spake 

22. 19.  he  took  bre.id,  and  gave  t.  and  brake  it 
.fohn  6.  11.  when  he  had  given  t.  he  distributed 

23.  they  did  eat  bread,  after  the  L.  had  given  t. 
■/lets  27. 35.  Paul  took  bread,  and  gave  I.  to  God 
idem. 14.6.  he  that  eateth,  eatetli  to  the  l.,cid,  for  he 
giveth  God  t.  he  eateth  not,  and  giveili  God  t. 

1  Cvr.  11.  24.  when  he  had  given  i.  he  brake  it 
14. 17.  Hir  Ihou  verily  givest  t.  well,  but  the  other 

15.  57.  t.  be  to  God,  who  giveth  us  the  victory 

2  Co?-.  1. 11.  /..  may  be  given  lo  many  on  our  behalf 
2.  14.  t.  be  to  God  whocauseth  us  lo  triumph 

8.  16.  t.  lo  God,  who  put  the  same  care  in  Til  us 
9. 15.  t.  be  to  God  for  his  uns|eakable  gift 

F.ph.  5.  20.  giving  t.  always  for  all  things  to  God 

1  Thess.  3.  'J.  what  t.  can  we  render  to  God  again 
Heb.  13.  15.  offer  sacrifices  of  praise,  giving  t. 
Rcc.  4.  9.  give  t.  to  him  that  sat  on  the  throne 

Sec  Give,  Giving. 
THANKSGIVING 
Signifies.  [I]  yin  achnuwlcdging and  confe.'isivg, 
with  ^iadness,  the  benefits  and  mercies,  which 
God  bestows  either  vpon  ourselves  or  others, 
Phil.  4.  6.    1  Tim.  2.  1.     [2]   The  sacrifice  of 
thanksgiving.  Lev.  7.  12,  15.     [3]  Psalms  of 
thanksgiving,    JVcA.   12.  f  8.     \Ve  are  to  give 
thanks  to  God,  [1]  For  spiritaalblessings,stich 
as  willing  hearts  to  do  works  of  piety  and  eha 
rity,  1  Chron.  29.  13,  14.    [2]  For  moral  bless- 
ings, as  wisdom  and  knoietedge,  Dan.  2. 23.  [3] 
For  saving  graces,  Rom.  1.  8.    1  Cor.  1.  4.  [4] 
For  the  judgments  of  God  upon  the  wicked, 
Psal.   9.   1,  2,  3.      [.5]   For  the   enlarging  „f 
ChrisVs  kingdom,  Rev.  11.  17.     [61   For  deli- 
verance from  the  body  of  death,  Rom.  7.  25. 
1  Cor.  15.  57.     [7J   For  temporal  deliverances, 
Exod.  15.  1,2.     [8]  For  Chri.'tt,  the  unspeak- 
able gift  of  God,  Luke  2.  38.  [9]  For  the  deli- 
verance of  God's  ministers,  2  Cor.  1.  11. 
Lev.  7.  12.  if  he  offer  it  for  a  t.  13,  15.  |  22.  29. 
JVcA.  11.  17.  the  principal  to  begin  the  t.  in  prayer 
12.  8.  which  was  over  the  t.  he  and  his  brethren 
46.  there  were  songs  ofprai.se  and  t.  lo  God 
Psal.  26.  7.  that  I  may  |iublish  with  thy  voice  of  t. 
50. 14.  offer  unto  God  t.  and  pav  the  vows  to  most 
69.  30.  and  I  will  magnify  him  with  t. 
95.  C.  let  us  come  before  his  face  with  t. 
ITO.  4.  enter  into  his  gates  with  t.  and  praise 
y07.  22.  let  them  sacrifice  sacrifices  oft. 

116.  17.  I  will  offer  to  thee  sacrifices  oft. 
147.  7.  sing  to  the  Lord  with  t.  sing  praise 

Isa.  51.  3.  t.  and  melody  shall  be  found  therein 
Jfr.  30.  19.  and  out  cd'them  shall  proceed  t. 
Jlmosi.  5.  oiler  a  sacrifice  oft.  with  leaven 
.Tonah".  9. 1  will  s.acrificeto  thee  with  voice  oft. 

2  Csr.  4. 1.5.  thro' t.  of  many  grace  might  redound 

9.  11.  which  causoth  through  lis  t.  lo  God 
Phil.  4.  6.  w  ith  t.  let  your  re(|uesls  bo  made  knowt 
Col.  2.  7.  in  the  faith,  abounding  therein  with  t. 

4.  2.  continue  and  watch  in  the  same  with  t.         * 

1  Tim.  4.  3.  God  created  to  be  received  with  t. 
4.  every  creature  is  good  if  it  be  received  with  t 

Rev.  7.  12.  t.  and  honour  bo  to  our  God  for  ever 

THANKSGIVINGS. 
JV»A.  12.  27.  to  keep  the  dedication  with  t. 

2  Cor.  9.  12.  but  is  abundant  bv  many  t.  to  God 
THANK-OFFERINGS. 

Kick.  43.  t  27.  the   priests   shall  make  your  t. 

offerings 

4.5.  t  IS.and  fort. -offerings  to  make  reconciliation 

1 17.  shall  prepare  Ihe  sin-offering  and  t.-offrrings 
Amos  5.  t  22.  neither  will  I  regard  the  t.-offerings 

THAT. 

Gen.  2.  11.  t.  is  it  which  conipasseth  the  land 
19.  what  Adam  calleil  t.  was  the  name  thereof 
18.  25.  t.  he  far  from  thee,  to  slay  the  righteous 
30.  33.  t.  shall  be  counted  stolen  with  me 
F.xnd.  30.  38.  w  bosoever  shall  make  like  to  t. 
I.rv.  10.  20-  when  Moses  heard  t.  be  was  content 
26.  44.  yet  for  all  t.  I  will  not  cast  thorn  away     •> 
JV«JH.  6.  21.  heBidos  t.  t.  hia  hand  shall  get 


THA 

Jfvm.  22. 20.  the  word  which  I  sny,  t.  ehnlt  trioii  do 
1!4.  in.  J. Old  Siiilli  t.  will  I  speak,  1  Kiiiiris  'JJ.  H. 

Judg.^.'A.  unjji^r  was  uhalod,  when  lu'  had  .>aiil  f. 
H.  M.  do  according  to  t.  which  procecdod 

1  Sim.  9. '24.  behold,  t.  which  i»  lufl,  set  it  before 
•2\.  y.  Goliath's  sword,  it"  thou  wilt  take  I.  take  it 
24.  li).  lor  «.  thou  hasi  Juiitf  to  me  this  day 

30.  -iJ.  with  I.  which  the  Lord  hath  given  us 
iSam.  1-J.  ri.  ilt.  had  been  too  little,  1  wuuld 
]•).  ti.  in  t.  thou  lovesl  thine  enemies  and  hatcst 
24.  24.  oiler  oft.  which  doth  cost  me  notliing 
a  Kisiirs  14.  (j.  according  to  t.  which  was  wriiten 
in  the  law  orMosea,  2  Chrun.'ii).  20. 

10.  20.  t.  wliich  thou  hast  prayed  to  me  against 

2  Clirun.  6.  lo.  t.  which  thou  hast  jiromised,  Ki. 
E:ra  (i.  I),  t.  which  Ihey  have  need  of  be  given 

7.  li*.  t.  do  alter  the  will  of  your  God 

Job  3.  25.  I.  which  I  was  afraid  of  is  come  to  mc 

15.  17.  (.  which  I  have  seen  1  will  declare 

20.  20.  he  shall  not  save  of  r.  which  he  desired 
2:1.  13.  what  his  soul  desircth  even  t.  he  doth 
34.  32.  t.  which  I  see  not,  teach  thou  mo 
¥aaL  27.  4.  t.  will  I  seek  after,  that  I  may  dwell 

09.  4.  then  I  restored  t.  which  I  took  not  away 

10.  when  I  wept,  t.  was  to  my  reproach 
F.cil.  1.9.  the  things,  hath  been,  it  is  t.  which  shall 

be  ;  t.  which  is  done,  is  t.  which  shall  be  done 
1,5.  t.  which  is  wanting  cannot  be  numbered 
2. 3.  see  what  was  t.  good  for  the  sons  of  men 
3.  9.  what  profit  in  t.  wherein  he  laboureth  ! 

15.  and  God  requireth  t.  which  is  past 
5.  4.  when  thou  vowest,  pay  t.  thou  hast  vowed 

11.  0.  thou  knowe.st  not  whether  this  or  t.  prosper 
Jsa..  21.  10.  t.  which  I  have  hoard  of  the  ]jord 

52.  15.  for  t.  which  had  not  been  told  them  shall 

they  see,  t.  they  had  not  heard  shall  consider 

Jcr.  15.  4.  for  t.  which  .Manasseh  did  in  Jerusalem 

45.  4.  t.  which  I  have  built,  t.  which  I  planted 
l)(iii.  6.  13.  t.  Daniel  regardeth  not  thee,  O  king 

11.  35.  for  t.  t.  is  determined  shall  be  done 
7.rch.  11.9.  (.  t.  dieth,  letitdic,  1. 1.  i.s  to  becut  olf 
J\lal..  1.  20.  for  I.  which  is  conceived  in  her  is  of 

9.22.  woman  was  made  whole  from  I.  hour,  1.5.28. 

10.  1.5.  for  Sodom  than  for  t.  city,  Markd.  II. 
13. 12.  taken  away  t.  he  liuth,  25.  29.  Mark  4. 25. 

20.  7.  t.  ye  shall  receive  ||  23.  3.  t.  observe  and  do 
27.  4.  they  said,  what  is  t.  to  us  ?  see  ihou  to  t. 

Mark  7.  20.  t.  which  cometh  out,  t.detileth  man 

13.  U.  what  shall  be  given  in  t.  Iiour,  t.  speak 
J.iikc  4.  (i.  all  will  I  give,  for  t.  is  delivered  to  me 

f .  18.  shall  be  taken,  even  t.  he  scenicth  to  have 

11.  40.  did  not  he  t.  made  t.  which  is  w  ithout 

make  I.  which  is  within  also  ? 

16.  12.  not  faithful  in  t.  which  is  another  man's 
1.5.  t.  which  is  highly  esteemed  among  men 

17.  10.  we  have  done  t.  which  was  our  duty  to  do 
24.  12.  wondering  at  i.  which  was  come  to  pass 

Juliii  1.  8.  he  was  not  t.  light  ||  9.  t.  was  the  light 

3.  fi.  I.  which  is  born  of  flesh,  I.  born  of  the  Spirit 

1 1.  we  speak  t.  we  know,  testify  i.  we  have  seen 

4.  18.  is  not  thy  husband,  in  t.  saidst  thou  truly 
37.  herein  is  t.  saying  true,  one  soweth  another 

5.  12.  what  man  is  t.  which  said  to  thee,  lake  up 
B.  27.  labour  for  t.  meat  which  endureth 

32.  Mo.se»  gave  you  not  t.  bread  from  heaven 
48.  I  am  t.  bread  of  life  ||  5-5.  this  is  t.  bread 

8.  38.  I  speak  t.  I  have  seen  with  my  father;  ye 

do  t.  which  ye  have  seen  with  your  father 
13.27.  t.  thou  doest,  do  (luickly  ||  14.13.  t.  will  1  do 
II).  13.  what  he  shall  hear,  {.shall  he  spc:ak 

21.  22.  what  Is  t.  to  thee,  follow  thou  me,  24. 
2;i.  went  abroad,  that  t.  disciple  should  not  die 

^cf.«2.  ifi.lhis  Is  t. which  was  spoken  by  prophelJoel 
4.  21.  all  glorified  God  for  t.  which  was  done 

24.  when  they  hoard  t.  they  lifted  up,  5.21,  33. 
7.  37.  ihis  is  t.  Moses  which  said  unto  Israel 
10.  37.  I.  word  you  know,  which  was  published 

Uam.  1.19.  because  I.  which  maybe  known  of  God 
4.  18.  according  to  t.  which  was  spoken,  so  shall 
«,  10.  in  t.  he  died,  in  I.  he  liveth,  he  liveth  to  God 

7.  0.  t.  being  dead  wherein  we  were  held,  t.  we 
13.  wan  then  I.  which  is  good  made  dcMth  to  me? 
1.5.  t.  I  do,  I  allow  not  ||  19.  (.  I  would  not,  (.  I  ilo 

1  Cor.  5.  13.  put  away  from  you  t.  wicked  person 
ft.  3.  nay,  you  defraud,  and  t.  your  brethren 

10.  4.  t.  Hpiritual  rock,  and  (.  rock  was  Christ 
30.  iipokcn  of,  for  t.  which  I  s,\ve  thanks 

11.23.  t.  which  also  I  delivered  unto  you 
28.  let  him  cat  of  f.  bread,  and  drink  oft.  cup 
1.1.  10.  I.  which  is  porfecl,  I.  which  is  in  part 

14.  21.  and  yet  for  nil  t.  thoy  will  not  hear  mo 

15.  37.  and  (.  which  thou  sowput  thou  sowcst  not 

(.  bony  that  shall  be,  but  bare  grain 
40.  (I.  wnn  not  first  which  iaspirilunl,  hut  t.  which 

2  Car.  3.  11.  if  t.  which  is  done  uway  was  glorious 

8.  12.  it  is  nccnpti'd  according  lo  t.  n  man  hath 

11.  12.  what  I  do,  t.  I  will  do,  that  I  may  cut  off 
Gal.  6.  7.  what  n  man  soweth,  I.  shall  he  reap 
Phil.  3. 12.  that  I  may  approhend  t.for  which  I  am 
1  Tlitti.  3.  10.  might  perfect  U  which  ii  lacking 

010 


THE 

T  TVicss.  5.  21.  prove  all  thingp,  hold  fust  i.  is  good 
I  'J'iin. 4.8.  life  t.  now  m,  and  ot  t.  which  is  to  come 

t).  20.  keep  t..  which  is  commuted  to  thy  trust 
I'lulcm.  18.  if  he  oweth  put  t.  on  mine  account 
Heb.  5.  7.  and  was  heard  in  t.  he  toured 

(i.  19.  which  entercth  into  t.  within  the' veil 

12. 20.  Could  not  endure  t.  which  was  commanded 

13.  17.  for  t.  is  unprolitnble  for  you 

/am.  4. 15.  if  L.  will,  we  shall  live,  and  do  this  or/. 
1  f<;£.  3.  13.  who  is  ho  t.  will  harm  you,  if  ye  be 
fojlowers  oft.  which  is  good  ?  3  .lohii  11. 
1  John  1.  1.  t.  which  was  from  the  beginning 
3.  t.  which  we  have  seen  and  heard,  2.  24. 

2.  24.  let  t.  abide  in  you  which  ye  have  heard 
liev.  2.  25.  t.  which  ye  have,  hold  fast  till  1  comd 
.See  Aftkk,  Uay,  M.^NjI'lack, So, SSoui., Thing, 

TiMK. 

THEATRE. 
./lets  19. 29.  they  rushed  with  one  accord  into  the  t. 
31.  that  he  would  not  adventure  himself  into  t. 
THEE. 
Gen.  7. 1.  t.  have  I  seen  righteous  before  me 
17.2.  and  I  will  multiply  t.  e.\ceedingly 
22. 17.  that  in  ble.ssing  I  will  bless  t. 
23.  11.  the  field  give  1  t.  and  the  cave  give  I  t. 
39.  9.  neither  kept  back  any  thing  from  me  but  t. 
Dcut.  28.  43.  the  stranger  shall  get  above  t. 

1  .Sam.  8.  7.  they  have  not  rejected  I.  but  me 
20.  22.  behold  the  arrows  are  beyond  t.  37. 

2  .Sarn.  18.  12.  the  king  charged  t.  and  Abishai 
Pi-al.  8li.  14.  they  have  not  set  t.  before  them 
./it.  15. 11.  I  will  cause  enemy  to  entreat  t.  well 
Kzek.  7.  9.  I  will  recomjieiisc  t.  according  to  thy 

29.  5. 1  will  leave  t.  and  all  the  fish  of  thy  rivers 
Mat.  25.  37.  when  saw  we  t.  a  hungered,  and  fed  t. 
38.  when  saw  we  t.  a  stranger  ||  39.  saw  t.  sick 
lAikc  14.  9.  he  that  bade  t.  and  him  come  and  say 
Jium.  11.18.  but  the  root  1. 1|  21.  lest  he  spare  not  t. 

.Iboiit  THEE. 
Job  11.18.  thou  shaltdigaioutt.andtake  thy  rest 
fsa.  2t).  20.  shut  thy  doors  about  t.  hide  Ihy.-ielf 
,/cr.4t).14.  sword  devour  round  aioKt  t.  Kick.  5.12. 

49.  .5.  bring  fear  from  all  those  that  be  about  t. 
Kzck.  5. 14.  among  nations  that  are  round  about  t. 

15.  nn  astonishment  to  the  nations  round  alwut  t. 
Luke.  19.43.thy  enemies  shall  cast  a  trench  uiu«t  t. 
Acts  12. 8.  cast  thy  garment  about  t.  and  follow  ine 

'Jiflcr  THEE. 
Gen.  17. 7.  to  thy  seed  a.  t.  8, 9, 10. 1  35.  12.  ]  48.  4. 
Deut.  4.  40.  with  thy  children  after  t.  12.  2."i,  28. 
Judir.  5.  14.  ajter  U  Benjamin  among  thy  people 
2  Sam.  7.  12.  and  I  will  set  up  thy  seed  after  t. 
IKhiff.i  1.14.1  also  will  come  in  after  t.and  confirm 

3.12.  nor  a.  t.  shall  any  arise  like  thee,  2  C/ir.1.12. 
P.sal.  42. 1.  so  panteth  my  soul  after  t.  O  God 

()3.8.my  soul  followeth  hard  after  t.thy  right  hand 

143.  6.  my  soul  thirsteth  after  t.  as  a  thirsty  laud 
Caut.  1.  4.  draw  me,  we  will  run  after  t. 
f.-a.  45.  14.  they  shall  come  after  t.  in  chains 
./er.  12.  0  they  have  called  a  multitude  after  t. 
Dan.  2.  39.  after  t.  shall  rise  another  kingdom 
Hos.  5.  8.  cry  at  Betli-aven,  after  t.  O  Uenjamin 

Jlgaiust  THEE. 
Kiod.  1.5.  7.  overthrown  them  that  rose  against  t. 

2:1.29. lest  the  beastof  the  field  multiply  aifain.st  t. 
jV«7«.21.7.wehave8iimed,tbr  we  have  spokena^.t. 
iJe.ut.  G.  1,5.  the  anger  of  the  Lord  be  kindled  aff.  t. 

15.  9.  and  he  cry  to  the  Lord  ag^ainst  t.  24.  15. 

2:i.  4.  because  they  hired  Balaam  ag:  t.  to  curse 

28.  7.  they  shall  come  out  ag.  t.  one  way,  and  lice 
48.  enemies  which  the  Lord  shall  send  ag.  t.  49. 

31.21!.  that  it  may  be  there  fora  witne.is  against  t. 
.ludg.  9. 31.  behold  they  fortify  the  citv  against  t. 

lO.lO.wct  have  sinned  ag.  t.JVrh.  l.t).  ./.r.14.7,  20. 

1 1.  27.  I  have  not  sinned  against  1. 1  Sam.  24. 11. 

1  .Sam.  19.  4.  because  he  hath  not  sinned  against  t. 

2  S(im.  1.1(1.  for  thy  mouth  hath  testified  a/fainstt. 

12.  11.  behold,  I  will  raise  upevil  an'aiiist  t. 
18.  31.  avenged  thee  of  all  that  rose  up  ag.  i.  32. 

1  Kings  H.  33.  because  they  have  sinned  against 

t.  :15.   2  Caron.  0.24,20. 

40.  if  they  sin  against  t.  and  repent,  2  Clir.  0.  30. 

50.  forgive  thy  people  that  have  sinned  against 

t.  and  all  their  trnnsaressions,  2  Chron.  0.  .39. 

20.22.  the  king  of  Syria  will  come  up  against  t. 

2  Kingn  19. 9.  he  i.«  come  out  to  fight  against  t. 
2('Ariiji.  14.  U.O  Lord,  lot  not  man  pr(!vail  n^.  t. 

18.  22.  and  the  Lord  hath  spoken  evil  against  t. 

20.2.  there  cometh  a  great  multitude  agnin.it  t. 

35.  21. 1  come  not  against  t.this  day,  biitasainst 
J^eh.  1.7.  wo  have  dealt  very  corruptly  against  I. 

9.  2ti.  nevertheless  they  rebelled  against  t. 
./i)t7.20.wliy  hast  thou  set  mn  as  a  mark  against  t. 

11..5.  bul,oh  that  Goil  would  open  his  lips  n^.  (. 

15.  0.  yea,  thino  own  lips  listily  against  t. 

42.7. my  wrath  is  kindled  nfrtin.tt  t.and  thy  friends 
Psal.  5.10.  mux  then)  out,  ihey  have  rel.elh-il  ag.  t. 

21. 11.  for  thny  intended  evil  ag.  t.  they  imaginn 

41.4.  Lord,  honl  my  loiil,  fori  have  sinned  ag.  t. 

50.  7.  hoar,  O  Israel,  and  I  wiU  testify  agaimt  t. 


THE 

Psat.  51. 4  ag.  t.  have  I  sinned,  and  done  this  evK 
74.  2;i.  that  rise  up  against  t.  V.VJ.  21.  F.ccl.  J(J.4 
119.  11.  thy  word  I  hid,  thai  1  mighl  not  sin uw-.t 
139.  20.  for  they  speak  against  t.  wickedly 
Jsa.  7.  5.  have  taken  evil  counsel  against  t.  saying 
10.  24.  the  Assyrian  shall  hit  up  his  stall  ag.  t. 
Jcr.  1. 19.  they  shall  fight  against  I.  but  Ihey  thalt 
not  iirevail  ag.  t.  for  1  am  with  thee,  15.  20 
21.  13.  behold  I  am  against  t.  50.  31.  |  51.  25 
Ezek.  5.8.  [  21.  3.  [  20.  3.  |  2-i.  22.  |  29.  3,  10 
1  35.  3.  1  38.  3.  I  39. 1.  AVi/i.  2.  13.  |  3.  5. 
iMm.  2.  Iti.  thy  enemies  opened  their  mouth  ag.  t 
Ezek.  33.  30.  thy  peo|ile  still  are  talking  against  t 
.4;««s7.10.  saying,  Ainoshath  conspired  afi  ainstt 
jV(i/.3.13.what  have  we  spoken  soniuchu^'a.  •>*.£ 
Mat.  5.  23.  that  (by  brother  halli  aught  against  t. 
18.  15.  if  thy  brother  trespass  ag.  t.  l.ukc  17.  3, 4 
20.  02.  which  these  w  itn.  ag.  t.  Mark  14.C0.  ';  15.4 
Jiev.  2.4.  nevertheless,  I  have  somewhat  against  t 
14.  but  I  have  a  few  things  against  t.  20. 
M  THEE. 
2  Kings  19.21. hath  shaken  her  head  at  t.  /so.37  22 
Isa.  14.  8.  yea,  the  fir-trees  rejoice  at  t.  and  cedari 
52.  14.  astonish,  alt.  Ezek.2li.  10.  |  27.  35  |  2ri.  I'J 
Lam.  2. 15.  all  that  pass  by  clap  their  hands  at  t, 
Kzek.  27.  30.  the  merchants  shall  hiss  at  t. 
32. 10.  I  will  make  rnaiiv  people  amazed  at  t. 

Before  THEE. 
Gen.  13.  9.  is  not  the  whole  land  before  t.  separatl 

17. 18.  said,  O  thatlshmael  mighi  live  before  t. 
20. 15.  behold  my  land  is  *(/.  t.  dwell  where, 47.  6 

24.  7.  the  Lord  God  of  Heaven  shall  send  his  angel 

before  I.  Kxod.  23.  20,  23.  |  32.  34.  |  33.  2 

51.  behold,  Kehekali  U  before  t.  take  her,  and  ga 

31.  ;1.5.  let  it  not  displease,  1  cannot  ri.M.-  wf  before  t. 

33. 12. 1  will  go  b.  t.  Isa.  45.  2.  I  43.  9.  set  hitn  b.  t 

Kind.  17.  0.  behold,  I  will  stand  before  t.  there 

2:t.  27.  I  will  send  my  fear  before  t.  and  destroy 

28.   I  will  send  hornets  before  1.  which  shaB 

drive  out  the  Canaanites  before  t.  29,  30,  31 

I  34.   11.    JJeut.  4.   38.  |  9.   4,  5.  |  18    12. 

33.  19.  I  will  make  all  my  goodness  pass  before  U 

and  I  will  proclaim  the  name  of  the  Lord  before  t* 

.34.24. 1  will  cast  out  b.  t.  JJeut.  0. 19. )  7. 1. 19.4. 

JV«jn.  10.  35.  let  them  that  hate  thee  tlee  before  t. 

7>cHt.7.24.no  man  able  to  stand  b.t../osk.l.5.  jlO.S 

28.  7.  they  shall  flee  before  t.  seven  ways         ^ 

30.  15. 1  have  set  before  t.  this  day  life  and  good 

31.  3.  and  Joshua,  he  shall  go  over  before  t.  8. 

32.  .52.  yet  thou  shall  see  tli.-  land  before  t. 

33. 10.  shall  leach,  they  shall  put  incense  Ac/or*;  L 
Jndg.  4.  14.  is  not  the  Lord  gone  out  before  t.  ? 

0. 18.  bring  forth,  and  set  it  before  t.  1  .Sam.  9.  24. 

1  Sam.  28.  22.  let  me  set  a  morsel  of  bread  before  t. 

2  Sam.  5.  24.  then  shall  the  Lord  go  out  before  t. 
7.15.  as  1  took  it  from  Saul,  whom  I  put  away  A.  t. 

16.  be  established  for  ever  brf.  t.  20. 1  Chr.  17. 24. 
1  Kings  3.0.  OS  he  walked  i.f.||l2.none  like  Ihee  b.U 

8. 2:i.  thy  servants  that  walk  before  f.  2  Chr.  C.  It. 

10.8.  which  stand  continually  before  t.  2  Chr.  9. 7. 

14.  9.  hast  done  evil  above  all  that  were  before  t. 
2A'i;ii--.«20.3.how  I  have  wuliced  before  t.  Isa.'M3. 
1  Chr.  14.  15.  go  out,  for  God  is  gone  foilli  before  t. 

17. 13.  as  I  took  it  from  him  thai  was  before  t. 
Ezra  9.  15.  behold,  we  are  before  t.  in  our  trea- 
liasses,  we  cannot  slaiiii  before  t.  because  of  ihis 
JVrA.  4.  5.  let  not  their  sin  be  blottcil  out  before  I. 

9.  8.  and  foundost  his  heart  faithful  before  t. 

32.  lit  not  all  the  trouble  seem  little  before  t. 
/'.in/.  38.9.  L.  all  mydcftire  is  before  t.and  groaning 

39.  5.  and  mine  age  is  as  nothing  before  t. 

09.  19.  mine  a<lversaries  are  all  before  t. 

73.22.  so  foolish  was  I,  I  was  as  u  beast  before  t 

79. 1 1.  let  the  sighing  of  the  prisoner  come  Af/»rrt. 
P8. 2.  let  my  prayer  come  before  i.  incline,  141.  3. 
00.  8.  thou  hnsi  oet  our  iniipiitios  before  t. 
I19.lfi8.my  ways  are  i.t.||ll>9.1el  my  cry  comeA./. 

Prov.  2:i.  1.  consider  diligently  what  is  before  t. 
Isa.  9.3.  Ihey  joy  before  t,  as  men  when  Ihey  divido 

.58.  8.  and  ihy  righteousness  shnll  go  before  t. 
.hr.  17. 16.  came  out  of  my  lips,  was  right  before  t. 

18.  20.  I  stood  before  t.  lo  turn  nway  thy  wrnlh 
28.  8.  the  prophi'ts  that  have  been  before  I.  of  idil 

40.4.  all  the  land  \abefore  t.fio  whilher  it  seemcth 
I.am.  1.  22.  let  all  their  wickedness  come  before  t. 
Ezek.  33.  31.  and  Ihey  sit  before  t.  n.«  my  p.-'oplo 
/^iiH.6.22.  also  before  t.O  king,  have  1  done  vi  hurt 
.V/V.0.4.I  sent  before  t.  Moses,  Aaron,  rind  Miriam 
y.ech.  3.  8.  thou  and  Ihy  fillows  that  sit  before  t. 
Mat.  fi.  2.  do  not  goiind  a  Iruinpet  before  t. 

Jl.  10.  behold  I  send  my  messenger,  which  shall 

prepare  Ihy  way  before  t.  Mark  1.  2.  I.iike'.l^. 

Luke  15. 18.  I  will  say,  father,  I  have  sinned  iff  t. 

.'7rtj«23..30.  to  nay  before  t.  wliatlhey  hadag.nim 

24.19.  who  ought  to  have  heoii  here  brf.t.  lo  oliJi>«t 

25.  2»).  and  especially  before  t.  ()  king  Agrippa 
liev.  3.  8.  behold,  I  have  sei  before  t.  an  ojien  dool 

Behind  TUKK. 
Gen.  10.  17.  escape  for  thy  life,  look  not  behind  t. 
Veut.  25.  IQ.  Aiiialek  luiute  the  iWblo  ^dUtd  k 


THE 

Psal.  50.17.8ccin2  thou  easiest  my  words  behind  t. 
Isa.  30.  «1.  tliiiiuours  shall  liuar  a  word  behind  t. 

Besides  THEE. 
Ruth  4.  4.  for  there  is  none  to  redeem  it  besides  t. 
J^)a//i.;J.  ii.  lorllicre  isuouc  iciii/t*  t.'i  auiu.l.'H. 
1  Chrun.  17.  ;.'0. 
Psal.  7.1.  25.  none  on  earth  that  I  desire  l/csidrs  t. 
tsarHt.l'.i.  other  loid.s  be.tidcs  t.  have  had  dominion 

64.  4.  utiitiiei  iiulh  liiu  eje  seen,  U  Ooil,beiiidcs  t. 

Between  TllEE. 
Gf/i. 3.15.1  will  put  euiuity  betw.  t.  and  the  woman 
17.  i.  1  will  make  my  covenant  bet.  mo  and  t.  7. 

31.  44.  let  it  bo  lor  a  witness  bet.  me  and  t.  46.  50. 
411.  Lord  watch  h.  nio  and  t.  when  we  are  absent 

1  Sam.  iO.  -iS.  the  Lord  be  4. 1,  and  mo  lor  ever,  42. 
£zck.  4.  :f.  set  it  lor  a  wall  of  iron  b.  t.  and  the  city 
Mal.i.  14.  the  Lord  hath  been  witness  bet.  t.  and 
jMat.  IS.  15.  tell  him  liis  fault /ict.t.  and  him  alone 

By  TUEE. 
Eiod.  18. 14.  the  peojilo  stand  by  t.  from  morning 
lA"anj.l.!2().  I  am  the  woman  thatstood  by  t.praying 
I).  2J.  portion  of  which  1  eaid  to  thoc,  set  it  by  t. 

2  Ham.  ill.  30.  by  t.  1  ran  thro'  a  troop,  Psal.  18. 2U. 
Psal.  71. 6.  by  t.  Iiave  1  been  holpen  from  the  wondi 
P/'uu.3.26.  when  hast  it  by  t.||-J'.).dwell  securelyi;/ 1. 
Jia.  2(5.13.  by  t.  we  will  make  mention  ol'thy  name 
Kick.  1(5.  l5.  when  I  passed  by  t.  and  saw  ihee,  8. 
Jicts  24.  2.  seeing  that  by  t.  we  enjoy  ([uietnoss 
i^Ai7i;»t.7.the  bowels  ofthe  saints  arc  refreshed  4yt. 

Conccrnin"^  TllEE. 

Josh.  14. 6.  the  tliinjj  the  L.  said  concern,  t.  and  mc 

1  Ham.  25.  30.  the  good  that  he  hath  sjioken  con.  t. 

USaiii.li.  8.  tliekingsaid,  I  will  give  charge  con.  2. 

1  Kintrs  22.  23.  the  Lord  hath  spoken  evil  con.  t. 

Jt'ak.  1.14.  the  L.  hath  given  commandment  con.  t. 

Mat.  4.  6.  shall  give  his  angels  charge  concern,  t. 

Acts  2S.  21.  neither  received  we  letters  concern,  t. 
For  TIIEK. 

«?cn.6.2I.food/ffr(.and  them||20.7.shall  pray /or  t. 

Ezod.  y.  3ci.  but  as  for  t.  and  thy  servants,  1  know 

7^11.  25.  G.  sabbath  shall  be  meat /or  t.  and  them 

jV«m.  16.  9.  shall  be  most  holy  for  t.  and  thy  sons 

JJciit.S.'Sl.asfor  t.stand  by  me,  18.14.  2.S'(i«i. 13.13. 

Judg.  7.  4.  and  I  will  try  them /or  t.  there 
13.  15.  till  we  shall  have  made  ready  a  kid /or  t. 
18.19.better/or  t.to  be  a  priest  to  house  of  one  man 

Ruth  3.1.siiall  I  not  seek  rc^t/or  i.||4.8.buy  it/or  t. 

1  .Sam.  9.  24.  to  this  time  hath  it  been  kept /or  t. 
20.  4.  what  thy  soul  dcsirelh,  I  will  do  it  for  t. 

iSam.  1.  2(5. 1  am  distressed /or  (.  brother  Jonathan 
10.  11.  if  the  Svrians  be  too  strong /or  t.  help  me 
IS.  33.  would  God  I  had  died  for  t.  O  Absalom 
I'.l.  38.  what  thou  requirest,  that  will  I  do  for  I. 

1  Kin^s  2.  16. 1  will  speak  for  t.  unto  Ihe  king 
17.  13.  and  after  make  for  t.  and  for  thy  son 
20.  34.  thou  shalt  make  streets /or  C.  in  Damascus 

2/v7>i;'s2.9.Elijah said, ask  whal  Ishall  do/or  «.4.2. 
4. 13.  say  now  unto  her,  what  is  to  be  done /or  1.2. 

2  CAron.'7.17.  and  as  for  t.  Dan.  2.  29.  Z''cA.9. 11. 
Job  8.  6.  if  upright,  surely  he  would  awake  for  t. 

Iri.  4.  shall  the  earth  be  forsaken  for  t.  % 
Psnl.  63.1. 0  God,  my  soul  thirsteth /or  t.  my  flesh 

65.  1.  praise  waltelh /or  t.  O  God,  in  Sion 
1 19.  12(5.  it  is  time /or  t.  O  Lord,  to  work 

Cim<.7.13.fruitslhavelaid  up/or  t.  O  my  beloved 
Isa.  14.9.  hell  from  beneath  is  moved /orf.  to  meet 

2().  8.  O  Lord,  we  have  waited /or  t.  33.  2. 

43.  .3.  I  gave  Ethiopia  and  Seba /or  t. 
4.  I  loved  thee,  therefore  will  I  give  men  for  t. 

48.  9.  and  for  my  praise  will  I  refrain /or  t. 

r>l.  19.  these  are  coinc,  who  shall  be  sorry /or  t. 
J^r.  32. 17.  behold,  there  is  nothing  too  hard  for  t. 

34.  5.  .ao  shall  they  burn  odours  for  t.  and  lament 

4H.32.t  will  weep  for  1. 11.50.24.  Ilaid  a  snare /or  t. 

.SI.  3(5.  therefore  will  I  takeivcngeance  /or  t. 
/^am.2.13.  what  thing  shall  I  take  to  witness/ort. 
14.  thv  prophets  have  soon /or  t.  false  burdens 
F.zek.  7.  0.  it  walcheth  for  t.  behold,  it  is  come 

32.  10.  their  king  shall  be  horribly  afraid  for  t. 
J{ns.X3.  shalt  not  he  for  another,  so  will  I  bo  for  t. 

fi.  11.  also,  O  .ludah,  he  hath  set  a  harvest /or  t. 
JN'aA.  3.  7.  whence  shall  I  seek  comfort  for  t. 
Mat.  5.  29.  for  it  is  profitable /or  t.  30. 

11.24.  be  more  tolerable  for  Sodom  than /or  t. 

14.4.itis  not  lawful /or  t.  to  have  her,  Mark  (i.13. 

17.4.one/or  Cone  for  Moses,. Ifrtr/,- 9.5.  ^,ut/>9.33. 

]3.8.bettcr /or  f.to  enter  into  life,9.  j>fnr/;  9.43,45. 
jUnrk  1.  37.  they  said  unto  him,  all  men  seek /or  t. 

3.  32.  thy  mntli'er  and  thy  brethren  seek  for  t. 

.5.  19.  how  groat  things  the  Lord  hath  donn/or  t. 
7,h/,c  22.32.  but  I  have  prayed /or  I.  that  thy  faith 
John  1 1 .  28.  the  mn.ster  is  come,  and  calleth  for  t. 
Jtrt.i  9.  5.  hard /or  t.  to  kick  against  pricks,  2(i.  14. 

10.  22.  to  send  for  t.  into  his  house  and  to  hear 

24.23.  have  a  convenient  season,  I  will  call/or  t. 

2  Cor.  12.  9.  ho  said,  mv  grace  is  sufficient /or  (. 

FromTFlER. 

^/■n.  18.25.  that  he  (aj  from  t.  to  slay  the  righteous 

27.  (5.  unlil  thv  brother's  anger  turn  awav/rom  t. 

SO.  2.  hath  wjlliheld  from  t.  tbo  fniil  of  the  womb. 
611 


THE 

iCj-0(/.8.29.and  Moses  said,  behold,  I  go  out  from  t. 
33. 5.  theretbre  now  put  olfthy  ornuments/rowi  t. 
Deut.  12.  21.  if  the  place  be  too  iar  from  1. 14. 24. 

15.  12.  thou  shalt  let  him  go  Wee.  from  t.  13,  18. 
It).  1  will  not  go  away  from  I.  ||  20.  15.  cities 

tixi  from  t. 

30.  11.  it  is  not  hidden  from  t.  neither  is  it  fur  off 
l.Suni.  17.  2.  the  shekels  that  were  taken  from  t. 
Juilg.  1.  14.  Eli  said  to  her,  put  away  thy  wine/,  t. 

15,28.hath  rent  tlie  kingdom/ro/ni.lA'Hi^^i  11.11. 

17.  40.  smite  thee,  1  will  take  thine  head  from  t. 

20.  y.  far  be  ilfram  t.  Mat.  1(5.  22. 
2  ■•Sam.  13. 13.  for  he  will  not  withhold  me /rom  t. 
2/w/i^.f  2.9.  what  1  shall  do, before  1  be  takeii/r.  t. 

20.1b.of  thy  sons  thatshall  issue/ront  t.  fsa.'.i'J.l. 
Ezra  4.  12.  the  J'ows  which  came  up/rom  (.  to  us 
.lob  42.  2.  no  thought  can  bo  wilhholden  from  t. 
Psal.  38.  9.  and  rny  groaning  is  not  hid  front  t. 

09.  5.  O  God,  my  eiiis  are  not  hid  from  t. 

73.  27.  they  that  are  1'a.T  from  t.  shall  perish 

60.  IS.  so  will  we  not  go  back /rom  t.  quicken  us 

139. 12.  yea,  the  darkness  hideth  not  from  t. 
15.  my  substance  was  not  hid/!-o/«£.whenI  was 
Isa.  .'54.  8.  in  a  little  wrath  1  hid  my  face /rom  t. 

10.  biitmy  kindness  shall  not  depart /ro;n  t. 
.Ttr.  (5.  8.  be  instructed,  iest  my  soul  depart /i-om  t. 
Ezck.  21.  3.  1  will  cut  oS from  t.  the  righteous,  4. 

22.  5.  those  that  be  far/row  t.  shall  mock  thee 

24.16. 1  take  away/j-owi  £.  the  desire  of  thine  eyes 

28.  3.  there  is  no  secret  that  they  can  hide/ronit. 
.Uic.  1. 16.  for  they  are  gone  into  captivity /rom  t. 
Zech.'iA.  I  have  caused  thine  iniquity  to  pass/r.i. 
Mat.  5.29.  pluck  it  out  and  castit/r.  t.  30  |  18.8,9. 
.hhn  17.  8.  known  surely  that  I  came  out  from  t. 
.icts  23.  21.  ready,  looking  for  a  promise /ront  t. 
See  Uei'arted. 
In  THEE. 
Gen.  12.3.  in  t.  shall  all  families  be  blessed,  28. 14. 

48.  20.  int.  shall  Israel  bless,  saying,  God  make 
E2od.\).16.l  raised  thee  up,  to  shew  in  t.my  power 
Deut.  23. 14.  that  he  see  no  unclean  thing  in  t. 
21.  it  would  be  sin  in  1. 1|  22.  shall  be  no  sin  in  t. 

1  .Sam.  18.  22.  behold  the  king  huth  delight  in  t. 
25.  28.  evil  hath  not  been  found  in  t.  29.  6. 

2  .Sam..  15.26.  but  if  ho  say,  I  have  no  delight  in  t. 
2  Chron.  19.  3.  there  are  good  things  found  in  t. 
Psal.  5.  11.  put  trust  in  t.  7. 1.  1  9.  10.  |  16.  1.    | 

17.  7.  I  25.  2,  20.  1  31.  1,  19.  |  .55.  23.  let 
them  tnat  love  thy  name  he  joyful  in  t. 

S.  2.  rejoice  in  t.  40. 10.  |  70.  4.  |  85. 6.  Cant.  1.  4. 

22.  4.  our  fathers  trusted  int.  they  trusted,  5. 

31.14.  I  trusted  in  J.  ||33.22.  hope  in  f.  38.15.  |  39.7. 

5(5.  3.  trust  in  t.  57. 1.  |  84.  12.  |  86.  2.  |  141.  8. 

81.  9.  there  shall  no  strange  god  be  in  t.  [  |  143. 8. 

84.  5.  bhssed  is  the  man  whose  strength  is  in  t. 

87.  7.  all  my  springs  are  m  t. 
Cant.  4. 7.  thou  art  all  fair,  there  i.s  no  spot  in  t. 
Isa.  26.  3.  keep  him  because  he  trusteth  in  t. 

45.  14.  surely  God  is  in  t.  and  there  is  none  else 

62.  4.  Hephzibah,  for  the  Lord  dclighteth  in  t. 
.Ter.  2.  19.  an  evil  thing,  that  my  fear  is  not  in  t. 
Eiek.  5. 9.  I  will  do  in  t.  what  I  have  not  done 
10.  and  I  will  executejudgments  in  t.  15. 

16.  34.  the  contrary  is  in  t.  from  other  women 
20.  47.  I  will  kindle  afire  in  t.  it  shall  devour 
22.  6.  were  in  t.  to  their  power  to  shed  blood 

7.  in  t.  have  they  set  light  by  father  or  mother 
9.  ?n  t.  aremim  that  carry  talcs  to  shed  blood 

12.  int.  have  they  taken  gifts  to  shed  blood 
25.4. they  shall  set  their  palaces  in  t.  dwellings  in  t. 

27.  8.  thy  wise  men,  O  Tyrns,  that  were  in  t.  9. 

28.  15.  was  perfect,  (ill  iniquity  was  found  in  t. 
38. 16.  when  I  shall  be  sanctified  in  t.  O  Gnd 

/)(fn.4.  9.  spirit  of  the  holy  gods  is  in  t.  18.  |  5. 14. 
Hos.  14.  3.  for  in  t.  the  fatherless  findeth  mercy 
,,V(>.  1.13.  for  transgressionsof  Isr.  were  found  in  t. 

4.  9.  why  dost  thou  cry  ■?  is  there  no  king  in  t.  ? 
Mat.  0.  23.  if  the  light  that  is  in  t.  be  darkness 

11.  23.  mighty  works  which  have  been  done  in  t. 
7,n/rc3.22.  my  beloved  Son,  int.  I  am  well  |)lcnsod 

11.35.  the  light  which  is  in  t.  bo  not  darkness 

19.  44.  not  leave  in  t.  one  stone  upon  another 
.Tohn  17.  21.  as  thou.  Father,  art  in  mc,  and  I  in  t. 
Pom.  9.  17.  that  I  might  shew  my  power  in  t. 
Gal.  3.  8.  in  t.  shall  all  nations  be  blessed 

1  Tim.  4.  14.  neglect  not  the  gift  that  is  in  t. 

2  Tim.  1. 5.  the  unfeigned  faith  that  is  in  t.  first  in 

TjOis  and  Eunice,  and  I  am  persuadi^d  in  (.also 
6.  that  thou  stir  up  the  gift  of  God  which  is  int. 
3.roAn3.  brethren  testified  of  the  truth  that  is  int. 
Rrr.  18.  22.  shall  be  heard  no  more  at  all  in  t. 
23.  a  candle  shall  shine  no  more  at  all  in  t. 
Into  THEE. 
Isa.  52.  1.  no  more  come  into  t.  the  uncircumciscd 

0/THEE. 
Gen.  12.  2. 1  will  make  of  t.  a  great  nation,  17.  6. 
I  35.  11.  1  46.  3.  I  48.  4.  Eiod.  32.  10. 

13.  nnd  my  soul  shall  live  liecanse  of  t. 

41.  15.  I  have  heard  say  of  t.  thnt  thou  rnnst 
Xum.  14. 13.  which  have  hoard  tlio  fame  of  t. 


THE 

Deut.  3.  25.  begin  to  put  tiie  dread  of  t.  and  thtt 

fearo/£.  tremble  and  be  in  anguish  because  o/t 

10.  12.  what  doth  the  L.  require  of  t.  Mic.  b.  8. 
Ruth'2.  19.  he  that  did  take  knowledge  oft. 

1  6'am.  19.  3.  I  will  commune  with  my  faUiero/t 
24.  12.  Lord  judge,  and  the  Lord  avenge  meo/t. 

2  i'din.  3.  13.  hut  one  thing  1  will  require  of  t. 
24.  24.  but  I  will  surely  buy  it  of  t.  at  a  ptic* 

1  Kinifsi.l^.  and  now  1  ask  one  petition  o/ 1.  jlB» 

11.  11.  Lord  said,  forasmuch  as  this  is  done  o/t. 
1  Chron.  22.  11.  build  the  house  as  he  said  of  t. 

2'.).  12.  both  riches  and  honour  come  of  t. 

14.  all  things  come  of  t.  of  thine  have  wo  given 
Job  II.  6.  that  God  exactcth  oft.  less  than  thine 

68.  3.  for  1  will  demand  of  t  40.  7.  |  42.  4. 

42.  5.  1  have  heard  of  t.  by  the  hearing  of  the  ear 
Psal.  22. 25.  my  praise  shall  be  of  t.  71.  6. 

87.  3.  glorious  things  are  spoken  o/  t.  O  city  of  G. 
Proo.  25.  17.  lest  he  be  weary  of  t.  and  hate  theo 

30. 7.  two  things  have  I  required  of  t.  deny  nie  not 
Isa.  58.12.  they  thatshall  be  oft.  shall  build  places 

64.  7.  none  stirreth  up  himself  to  take  hold  oft. 
Jer.  30.  11.  I  will  not  make  a  full  end  of  t.  46.  28. 

34.  4.  thussaith  the  Lord  of  t.  thou,.shalt  not  dia 

51. 26.  they  shall  not  take  of  I.  a  stime  i'm  a  corner 
Ezck.  29.  8.  1  will  cut  off  man  and  beast  out  of  t. 

32.  6.  nnd  the  rivers  shall  be  full  of  t. 
Dan.  2.23.  hast  made  known  what  we  desired  oft. 

6.  7.  shall  ask  a  petition,  save  of  t.  O  King,  12. 
.Mic.  2.  12.  I  will  surely  assemble  all  of  I. 

5.  2.  yet  out  of  t.  shall  come  forth  the  ruler 

7.  17.  and  they  shall  fear  because  of  t. 
.Va/i.l.ll.one  is  come  outo/(.a  wicked  counsellor 
Zrph.  3.  18.  who  are  of  t.  to  whom  the  reproach 
Mat.  2.  6.  for  out  of  t.  shall  come  a  governor 

3.  14.  saying,  I  have  need  to  be  baptized  of  t. 

5.  42.  nnd  from  him  that  would  borrow  of  t. 
Mark  II.  14.  no  man  eat  fruit  of  t.  hereafter 
Luke  1.  35.  holy  thing  which  shall  be  born  of  t. 

6.  30.  give  to  every  man  that  nskcth  oft. 

12.  20.  this  night  thy  soul  shall  be  required  oft, 
16.  2.  he  said,  how  is  it  that  I  hear  this  of  t.  7 

.lohn  17.7. whatsoever  thou  hast  given  me  are  of  t. 

Jlcts  10. 22.  send  for  thee,  and  to  hear  words  of  t. 

28.21.  neither  shewed  nor  spake  any  harm  of  t. 

22.  we  desire  to  hear  of  t.  what  thou  thinkest 

1  Cor.  12.  21.  say  to  the  hand  I  have  no  need  of  t, 

Philem.  20.  let  liie  have  joy  of  t.  in  the  Lord 

Sec,  In  /Ac  Midst. 

Off  THEE. 

Gen.  40. 19.  Pharaoh  shall  lift  up  thy  head  from  ojf 

t.  and  the  birds  shall  eat  thy  flesh  from  off  U 

JVah.  1.  13.  now  will  1  break  his  yoke  from  off  t. 

On  or  vpon  THEE. 

f?en.l6  S.mywrongbe  «.(.||38.29.thls  breach  be  u.t. 

ii;io(/.15.26.[  will  putnone  of  thesediseases  upon  £. 

Eev.  19. 19.  nor  linen  nor  woollen  come  w;ion  t. 

JVum.  6.  2.).  the  Lord  make  his  face  shine  npon  t. 

26.  the  Lord  lift  up  his  countenance  vpon  t. 

11.  17.  I  will  take  of  the  spirit  Which  is  upon  t. 

Deut.  4.  30.  all  these  things  are  come  upon  t.  -30. 1. 

13.17.the  Lord  may  have  compassion  »;;on  /.30.3. 

19.10.sobloodbei/pon«.||28.2.ble8singecomeont. 

28. 15.  all  these  curses  shall  come  vpon  t.  20.  45. 
.ludff.  16.  9.  the  Philistines  be  upon  t.  12,  14,  20. 
l.Sdin.  9. 20.  is  it  not  iipon  t.  and  thy  father's  house 

24.  12.  but  mine  hand  shall  not  bo  w;)on  (.  13. 

1  Kings  1.  20.  Ihe  eyes  of  all  Israel  are  upon  t. 

13.  2.  O  allar,  upon  t.  shall  he  ofifer  the  priests, 

nnd  mf'n's  bones  shall  be  burnt  7tpon  t. 
21.  21.  behold,  I  will  bring  evil  upon  t.  and  fako 

2  Kings  4. 4.  thou  shall  shut  door  vpon  t.  nnd  pour 
2  Chron.  14.11.  help  us,  OLord,  for  we  rest  vpon  t. 

19.  2.  therefore  is  wrath  upon  t.  from  the  Lord 
20.12.  we  Know  not  what  to  do,hut  our  eyes  upon  t, 

.Toh  4.5  but  now  it  is  come  upon  (.and  thou  faintest 

Psal.  17. 6. 1  have  called  upon  t.  31.  17.  |  86.  5, 7. 

I  88.  9.  Dam.  3.  57. 

22.10.1  was  cast  up.  f.||25.3.waitw;).  t.5,21.  |  .59.9. 

63.6.  meditate  on  £.||  I04.27.thcso  wait  u.  M45.15. 
Canf.6.13.return,  return,  that  we  may  look  upon  t. 
Isa.  1.25.and  I  will  turn  my  hand  upon  (.and  purge 

24. 17.  fi'nr,  and  the  pit,  and  the  snare  are  vpon  t. 

26. 3.  wilt  keep  liim,  whose  mind  is  stayed  upon  t. 

47.  9.  they  shall  come  upon  t.  in  their  perfectioa 
11.  evil  and  desolation  shall  come  vpon  t.  13. 

49.  13.  nnd  bind  them  on  (.  as  a  bride  doth 

54.  R.  with  kindness  will  I  have  mercy  on  t.  10. 

.59.  21.  my  spirit  that  is  upon  t.  shall  not  depart 

rO.  1.  ami  the  clnry  of  the  Lord  is  risen  upon  I.  2. 
.Trr.  14.  22.  therefore  we  will  wait  i/pon  (.  for  thou 

15.5. for  who  shall  have  pity  vpnn  t.O  Jerusalem  t 

30. 16.  all  that  prey  upon  t.  will  I  give  for  a  prey 
F.iek.XZ^.  behold,  they  shall  put  bands  upon  t.  4.a. 

5. 17.  nnd  I  will  bring  the  sword  wpon  (.  29.  8. 

20.  7.  when  they  leaned  upon  t.  thou  brakest 
.Vo(.1S.33.had  compassion, even aslhad  pi^yup.t. 

21.  19.  \fl  no  fruit  grov.-  on  t.  henceforward 
I.uke  1.  3.5.  Ihe  Holy  Ghost  shall  come  vpon  t. 

19.  43.  for  the  days  »hali  oomo  upon  t.  thai  thins 


THE 

ficis  Kt.ll.  bolioltl,  the  hand  of  the  Lord  is  upon  t. 

18.  lU.  no  man  shall  sul  uii  t.  lu  hurl  ihce 
Sh2.1U.tlioykno\viliat  1  healtncinthatbelieved  ont. 

I'J'iin.  1.  13-  prophecies  winch  went   before  o«  t. 
Hev.  3.  3.  I  will  come  on  I.  as  a  thief,  and  thuu 
shall  not  know  what  liour  1  will  come  upon  t. 
Outr  TUCli. 
Qcn.  3.  IC.  thy  husband,  and  he  shall  rule  over  t. 
lieut.  15.  ti.  bill  they  shall  nol  reign  ovtr  t. 
17. 15.  ihou  shall  in  any  wise  set  him  king  over  t. 
thou  mayest  nol  set  a  struu^'er  uoer  t.  iS.  31). 
30. 9.  the  Lord  will  again  rejoice  over  t.  for  good 
i^sai.Dl.  I l.give  his  angels  charge  outrt.iuA-e  4.10. 
Isa.  Ui.  5.  so  shall  thy  God  rejoice  ovvr  t. 
Jcr.  13.  21.  ha.st  taught  them  to  be  chief  ooerf. 
L.am.'i.  17. caused  Ihinc  enemy  to  rejoice  over  t. 
Kzck.  16.  8.  1  spread  my  skirl  over  t.  and  covered 
3-2.  3. 1  will  thi^refore  spread  out  my  nel  over  t. 
J)an.  4.  'ij.  and  seven  times  shall  pass  over  t.  32. 
J\u/i.3.iy.  all  that  hear  shall  cla|i  the  hands  otcrt. 
Z,eph.'i.Vi.  he  will  rejoice  over  I.  he  will  joy  over  t. 

Through  THEE. 
Fa.H.i).  throagli  I.  will  we  push  down  our  enemies 

To  or  uhIo  thee. 
Gt'nA.  7.  unto  t.  shall  be  his  desire,  thou  shall  rule 
J3.  15.  to  I.  will  I  give  it,  17. 1 17.  8.  |  2(j.  3.  ]  28. 
4,  13.  I  35.  12. 
18.  10.  he  said,  I  will  certainly  return  unto  t.  14. 
20.  10.  behold,  he  is  to  t.  a  covering  of  the  eyes 

27.  2!l.  let  peojile  and  nations  bow  down  to  t. 

28.  15.  done  thai  wiii<:h  1  have  spoken  to  t.  of 
22. 1  will  surely  give  the  tenth  of  all  untu  t. 

21).  19.  better  I  give  her  to  t.  than  to  another 
31. 12.  I  have  seen  all  that  Lalian  doth  nnto  t. 
lG.now  then  whatsoever  God  hath  said  unto  t.do 
32.  discern  what  is  thine  with  ine,  and  take  to  t. 
39.  that  which  was  lorn  1  brought  not  unto  t. 
52.  that  I  will  nol  pass  over  this  heap  to  t. 
3d.  16.  go  to,  I  pray  thee,  let  me  come  in  mito  t, 
42.  37.  if  I  bring  him  not  to  t.  43.  9.  [  44.  32. 
44. 8.  behold,  thi;  money  we  brought  again  uvto  t. 
50.17. forgive,  I  pray  thee,  for  tlu^y  did  unto  t.  evil 
£zoil.  3. 12.  and  this  shall  be  a  token  unto  t. 
4.  16.  he  shall  be  to  I.  instead  of  a  mouth 
13.  9.  it  shall  be  unto  t.  for  a  sign,  2  Kings  19.  29. 
7*0.  38.  7. 
18.  22.  a  great  matter  they  shall  bring  unto  t. 
2^.  1.  take  unto  t.  Aaron  thy  brother  and  his  sons 
'M.  23.  take  thou  al.-so  unto  t.  principal  spices 
33.  5.  that  I  may  know  what  to  do  unto  t. 
J.co.  21.  8.  he  shall  be  holy  unto  t.  for  I  am  holy 
24.  2.  that  lliey  bring  iniio  t.  pure  oil  olive 
JV*«m.  6.  25.  the  Lord  he  gracious  unto  t. 
11.23.whetIior  my  word  shall  come  to  pass  unto  t. 
18.2.that  the  tribe  of  Levi  may  be  joined  unto  tA. 
19.it  is  a  covenant  of  salt  uitto  t.  and  to  thy  seed 
22.3^.Balaam  said  lo  Ba!ak,  lo,  I  am  come  unto  t. 
DcvlA.'Ao.  unto  t.it  was  shew  cd  that  thou  mightest 
7.  25.  shall  not  take  the  gold  of  their  gods  nnto  t. 

15.  U.  hecry  to  (jord  and  it  be  sin,  unto  t.  24.  15. 
18.  1.5.  the  Lord  will  raise  up  unto  t.  a  prophet 

18.  I  will  raise  them  up  a  proiihet  like  unto  t. 

22.  7.  let  the  dam  go,  and  take  the  young  to  t. 

23.  15.  servant  escaped  from  his  master  unto  t. 
33. 29.  who  is  like  unto  1. 1  Ham.  20. 15.  Psnl.  .35. 

10.  1  71.  19. 
Joi>k.  1.17.  as  to  Moses,  so  will  we  hearken  unto  t. 

2.18.bring  all  thy  father's  household  home  unln  t. 
Juitg.  7. 4.  of  whom  I  say  unto  t.  this  Bhall  not  go 

17.  3.  now  therefore  I  will  restore  it  unto  t. 
Jiulii  3.  13.  if  he  will  perform  unto  t.  the  part  of 

4.15.he  shall  be  unto  t.n  restorer  of  thy  lile,  daugh- 
ter-in-law who  is  better  to  t.  than  seven  sons 
1  .fnm.  1.  8.  am  not  I  better  to  t.  than  ten  sons  ? 

8.7.in  all  thatlhey  say  unto  t.||8.Bodo  they  unfo  t. 

9. 17.  Iichold  the  man  I  speak  to  t.  of  shall  reign 

11.  3.  and  then  we  will  come  out  to  t. 

16.  3.  thou  shall  anoint  him  whom  I  name  unto  t. 

17.  45.  hut  I  come  to  t.  in  the  nnine  of  the  Iiord 
50.21.  for  there  is  peace  tot.  \\  2.').  6.  peace  he  to  t. 
38.8.  bring  me  him  up  whom  I  shall  name  unto  t. 

10.  there  shall  no  pnnishmcnl  happen  to  t. 
iSnm.  3. 12.  to  bring  about  all  Israel  unto  t. 
12.14.  the  child  that  is  horn  unto  {.shall  surely  die 
17.  3.  and  I  will  bring  back  all  the  people  vnto  t. 

19.  7.  that  will  be  worse  unto  I.  than  all  the  evil 
20.21  .hid  head  shall  Ik!  thrown  to /.over  the  wall 
22.  50.  I  will  give  thanks  uvto  t.  I's.  18.  40.  |  30. 

12.  1  75.  1.  I  119.  02. 
2-1.  12.  choose  thee  one  itint  I  may  do  it  unto  t. 
1  fCing.i^.  12.  neither  »li  ill  any  nriKft  like  unto  t. 
8.  .K.  hearken  in  all  that  thiv  call  for  unto  t. 
11.  31.  and  I  will  cive  tin  tribes  unto  t. 
38.1  will  be  with  Ih.e,  and  will  give  Israel  unto  t. 
14.  R.  for  I  am  sent  to  I.  with  heavy  tidings 

19.  20.  go  back  again,  for  what  have  I  done  to  t. 

20.  6.  I  will  send  mv  gervan's  nntn  I.  lo-niorrow 

21.  3.  irivc  the  inhi'riiaiirc  of  my  fiilhers  unto  I. 
2^!.  24.  wrni  the  spirit  from  nic  to -peak  uulu  t.  ? 

S  Kinrti.  10.  if  tliuu  see  me,  it  shall  be  so  unto  (. 
612 


THE 

2A7ji^6'5.6.no\v  when  this  letteris  come  a.  t. behold 
27.  the  leprosy  of  iNa.iman  shall  cleave  unto  t. 

6.  7.  take  it  up  to  t.  \\  6. 14.  what  said  Klislia  to  t. 

9.  5.  he  said,  1  have  an  errand  to  t.  U  cajitain 
11.  wherefore  came  this  mad  lellcw  to  t.  ? 

20.14.  from  w  hence  came  they  unto  t.  ?  Isa.  39.3. 

1  C/ir.  12.  18.  peace  be  unto  t.  and  thine  helpers 

16. 18.  unto  t.  will  1  give  the  land,  I'sal.  103.  11. 

2  CAr.  26.  18.  it  Hiipertainelh  not  unto  t.  Uzziah 
Kzra.  10. 4.  arise,  lor  this  matter  beloiigelh  unto  t. 
JM'eh.  9.26.  leslilied  against  them  to  turn  them  to  t. 
Kstk.  3. 11.  the  silver  is  given  to  t.  the  people  also 
Jol>  7.20.  1  have  sinned,  what  shall  1  do  unto  t.  ? 
I's.  5.2.  hearken  unto  me,  for  unto  t.  will  1  pray,  3. 

10.  14.  the  poor  coinmittelh  himself  U7<to  t. 

16.  2.  my  Lord,  my  goodness  exteiideth  not  to  t. 

22.  5.  they  cried  unto  t.  and  were  delivered 
■io.l.unto  t.  O  L.  do  I  lift  up  my  soul,  h6.4.  |  143.8. 

27.  6.  my  heart  said  u7ito  t.  ihv  face  w  ill  1  seek 

28.  1.  nnto  t.  will  I  cry,  2.  1  30.8.  |  31.  22.  |  56. 
9.  I  61.  2.  I  86.  3.  1  68.  13.  |  130.  1.  |  141.  1. 

30.  12.  may  sing  praise  to  t.  56.  12.  |  59.  17.  I 
66.  4.  I  71.  22,  23. 
32.  5. 1  acknowledged  my  sin  unto  t.  and  iniquity 
(52.  12.  also  «7ito  t.  O  Lord,  belongeth  mercy 
65.  1.  and  unto  t.  shall  the  vow  be  performed 
2.  thou  hearest  prayer,  u7(tot.  shall  allllesh  come 
69.  13.  my  prayer  is  unto  t.  in  an  acceptable  lime 
86.  8.  among  the  gods  there  is  none  like  unto  t. 
89.8.  O  Lord  G.who  is  a  strong  Lord  like  tutto  t.  7 
101.  1.  untu  t.  O  Lord,  will  I  sing,  108.  3.  |  138. 1. 
I  144.  9.  Hcl/.  2.  12. 
102.1. hear  my  praypr,and  let  my  cry  come  untot. 
120.3. what  shall  be  given  «7ito  t.thon  false  tongue 
123.  1.  unto  t.  will  I  lift  up  mine  eyes,  141.  8. 
139.  ]2.  darkness  and  light  are  both  alike  to  t. 
I'ruv.  22. 19.  made  known  to  t.  this  day,  even  to  t. 

23.  7.  eal  and  drink,  saith  he  to  t.  but  his  heart 
2.5.  7.  better  it  be  said  unto  t.  come  up  hither 

Isa.  14.  10.  all  they  shall  sjieak  and  say  unto  t. 

30. 19.  he  will  he  very  gracious  unto  t.  at  thy  cry 
36.  12.  hath  my  master  sent  me  to  t.  to  siieak 

47.  9.  but  these  two  things  shall  come  to  t. 
1.5.  thus  shall  Ihey  be  unto  t.  with  whom  thou 

49.  18.  all  these  gather  together  and  come  to  t. 
51.  19.  these  two  things  are  come  uvto  t. 
55.  5.  nations  that  knew  notthee  shall  run  unto  t. 
60.19.  neithershall  the  moon  give  light  unto  t.  the 
Lord  shall  be  «7(to  t.  an  everlasling  light 
./fT". 2.31. we  are  lords, we  will  come  no  more  unto  t. 
3.22.  behold,  we  come  7t7(to  t.for  thou  art  our  God 
10.  6.  forasmuch  as  there  is  none  like  unto  t. 
7.  who  would  not  fear,  for  to  t.  doth  it  appertain 
3 1.20.for  unto  t.  have  I  revealed  my  cause,  20. 12. 
15.  19.  let  them  return  7(7i(o  t.  but  return  not  thou 
20.  15.  man-child  is  born  unto  t.  making  him  glad 
22.  21.  I  spajie  7/71  to  t.  in  thy  prosperity,  but  thou 
30.  15. 1  have  done  these  things  7i7ito  t. 
38.20. which  I  speak  101  to  t.so  it  shall  bo  welluTi.f. 
40.4. if  thou  come  with  me,  I  will  look  well  «7ito  t. 
44. 16. as  for  the  word,  we  will  not  hearken  K7(to  t. 
45.  5.  but  thy  life  will  I  give  w7(to  t.  for  a  prey 

48.  27.  for  was  not  Israel  a  derision  unto  t.  7 
I.am.  2.  13.  what  thing  shall  I  liken  to  t.  O  Jems. 

what  shall  1  eipial  to  t.  that  I  may  comfort  thee  1 

4.  21.  the  cup  also  shall  jiass  through  vnto  t. 

5.  21.  turn  thou  us  u7(to  t.  and  we  shall  be  turned 
F.zeli.  3.  6.  they  would  have  hearkened  «;ji'o  t. 

7.  the  house  of  Israel  will  not  hearken  ii7(to  t. 
K).  5.  no  eye  pitied  thee,  to  do  any  of  these  1/71/0  t. 
6.  I  said  u7(to  t.  when  thou  wast  in  thy  blood, live 
34.giveBt  a  reward, and  no  reward  isglven  u7jto  t. 
PO.I  will  establish  TiTitot. an  everlasting  covenant 
61.  and  I  will  give  them  unto  t.  for  daughters 
Dan.  4.  20.  thy  kingdom  shall  be  sure  KTito  t. 

31.  to  t.  it  is  spoken,  the  kingdom  is  departed 
9.  7.  O  Lord,  righteousness  belongeth  uTito  t. 
Ilos.  n.  4.  O  E|>liriiim,  what  shall  I  do  «7ito  t.  ? 
.JoH  1.  19.  to  t.  will  I  cry||20.  the  beasts  cry  unto  t. 
./y/«o.«4.!2.lhus  will  I  do  7/7ito  t.I  will  do  this  unto  t. 
.Jonah  1.  1).  they  said,  whatshall  we  do  unto  t.  7 
2.  7.  my  prayer  came  in  jiTito  t.  into  thy  temple 
Mir.  2.  11.  saying,  I  will  prophesy  j/7ito  t.  of  wine 
4.8.u7ito  /.shall  itcome||6.3.what  have  I  done  u.t. 

7.  12.  he  shall  come  to  t.  even  from  Assyria 
Hub.  I.  2.  I  oven  cry  ont  7(jt/o  t.  of  violence 

2.I6.C11P  ofilie  Lord's  right  hand  be  turned  unto  t. 
7.tth.  2.  11.  the  I^ord  of  hosts  hath  sent  nic  7/71/0  /. 

9.  9.  behold,  thy  king  comelh  unto  t.  Mat.  21.  5. 
.^//it.8.i:!.a8lhoii  hiislhi  li('vid,so  be  itdoneW7//o/. 

Ifi.  17.  flesh  and  blood  hath  not  revealed  it  «;i/o  t. 

18.  and  I  say  also  unto  t.  that  thou  art  Peter 

19.  I  will  give  w7ito  /.  the  keys  of  the  kingdom 
22.  bo  it  far  from  thee,  this  sliall  not  be  unto  t. 

18.17.  let  Iiimhe«/ito  t.  as  a  heathen  and  publican 
22.  Jesus  saith,  I  say  not  hti to  t.  till  seven  times 
20.  14.  I  will  give  unto  ibis  last  even  as  unto  t. 
2.''.  37.  thou  fllmiest  them  sent  unto  t.  /.uAe  13.  34. 
2.5.  44.  or  in  prison,  and  ilid  not  ininisler  u7//o  t. 
Mark  5. 4L I  say  yML»  t.  arise,  lAikt  5.  24. 1 7. 14. 


THE 

Mark  10.51.  what  wilt  thou  I  do  un.t.  7,i/le]fl.4i. 
7,7//i:el.l9.I  am  sent  to  sjieak  tt7tto  t.  and  sheiv  (he« 

7.  7.  I  thought  not  myself  worthy  lo  come  <iv.to  ». 
40.1  have  somewhat  to  say  u7ito  l.liesa:th,a(iyoj 

8. 39.  how  great  things  God  hath  done  untt  t. 
.John  4. 26.  Jesus  saith,  I  that  speak  unto  t.  am  he 

5.  14.  sin  no  more,  lest  a  worse  thing  ronie  i/h(o  ( 
9.2().what  did  he  to  t.  ||  11.  40.  said  Inotu/ito  t. 
17. 11.  these  are  in  the  world,  and  I  c/inc  to  '..  13  ■ 

18.  30.  we  would  not  have  delivered  him  u7ito  t. 
19. 11.  he  that  delivered  mcu.  t.  hath  the  great,  sin 
21.  22.  what  is  lliat  to  t.  follow  thou  nie,  23. 

J}cts  9.  17.  Jesus  that  appeared  unto  t.  sent  me 
10.  32.  who  when  he  conicth,  shall  speak  unto  t. 
33.  immediately  therefore  I  sent  to  t. 
21.37.  he  said  to  the  captain,  may  I  speak  unto  t.I 
26.16.  for  1  have  appeared  u7ito  t.  for  this  jiurpose 
hoin.  15.  9.  for  this  cause  will  I  confess  to  t. 
■2Tim.\.li.  that  good  thing  committed  unto  t.  keep 
Philem.  11.  but  now  protilable  to  t.  and  nie 

16.  a  brother  to  me,  but  how  much  more  to  t. 
Rev.  11.  17.  thou  hast  ta*en  to  t.  thy  great  power 

Towards  THEE. 
\Sam.  19.  4.  his  w  orks  have  been  very  good  tovi.  t 
2  Kings  3. 14.  I  would  not  look  totr.  t.  nor  seetlies 
.Jcr.  12.3.  thou  hast  tried  mine  heart  towards  t. 
Eiek.  16.  42.  so  will  I  make  my  fury  tow.  t.  lo  rest 
63  because  of  shame,  when  I  am  pacified  t.  I. 
Rom.  11. 22.  but  tow.  t.  goodness,  if  thou  continue 

r7i//fr  THEE. 
Deut.  2?.  23.  the  earth  that  is  under  t.  shall  be  iron 
Psal.  45.5.  arrows  whereby  the  people  fall  under  t. 
Pro7.' .22.27. why  .should  he  take  thy  bed  fromun.  t, 
Isa.  14. 11.  worm  is  spread  mti.  t.  worms  cover  thee 
Obad.'.ihat  eat  thy  bread  have  laid  a  wound  «7i.t. 

iVith  THEE. 
Oen.  6. 18.  with  t.  will  I  establish  mv  covenant 
17.4. my  covenant  is  with  t.  £x. 34.27. />cut.29.12 

19.  9.  now  will  we  deal  worse  7P.  f.  than  wilhlhem 
21. 22.  saying,  God  is  7t!(tA  t.  in  all  that  ihou  doesl 

24.  40.  the  Lord  will  send  his  angel  ir/7A  t. 

26.  3.  I  will  be  with  t.  \\  24.  I  am  with  t.  28.  15. 

I  31.  3.  I  46.  4.  Kxod.  3.  12.  Deut.  31.  23. 

Josh  1.  5.  1  3.  7.  1 1  Kings  11. 38.  Isa.  43.  2. 

28.  we  saw  certainly  that  the  Lord  was  in'tA  (. 

F.xod.  18.  19.  hearken,  and  God  shall  be  with  t. 

25.  22.  and  there  I  will  meet  with  t.  30.  6,  36. 
33.  14.  my  presence  shall  go  with  t.  Deut.  31.6.8 

.Judg.  6.  16. 
Dev.  19. 13.  wages  shall  not  abide  with  t.  all  night 
JV7/7«.5.19.  if  no  man  hath  lien  with  t.  be  thou  free 
20.some  man  hath  hen  u-itA  /.beside  thyhusband 
22.9.G.said  to  Balaam, w  hat  men  are  these  with  t.I 
Deut.  2.  7.  the  Lord  thy  <>od  hath  been  with  t. 
4.  40.  that  it  may  go  well  7r)7A  /.  5.  16.  |  6.  3.  18. 
I  12.  25,  28.  I  19.  13.   |  22.  7. 
15. 16.  if  he  will  not  go  because  he  is  well  jcitA  t. 
20. 1.  the  Lord  thy  God  is  with  t.  .losh.  1. 9.  .ludg. 
6.  12.  2  *'a7n.  7.  "3. 
20.  against  the  city  that  maketh  war  with  I. 
23.  16!  he  shall  dw  ell  with  t.  even  among  you 
.Judg.  4.  9.  and  she  said,  I  w  ill  surely  go  with  t. 
7.  2.  the  people  that  are  7citk  t.  aie  too  many 

4.  this  shall  go  with  t.  \\  19.  20.  peace  be  witht. 
Ruth  3. 1.  rest  for  thee,  that  it  may  be  well  with  t. 

1  .S«/7/.  10.  7.  for  God  is  7i!i7A  t.  J.uke  1.  28. 

14.  7.  behold,!  am  with  t.  accoidinslothine  heart 
17.  37.  the  Lord  be  7f  itA  t.  20.  13. 1  CAr.  22.11,16. 
21.  1.  why  art  thou  alone,  and  no  man  if  (tA  t.  ? 
28.19.1  will  deliver  Israel  with  t.  to  Philistines 
29.f  .hast  thou  fouiid,so  long  as  I  have  been  with  t. 

2  Saw.  3. 12.  and  behold  my  hand  shall  be  with  t, 
7.9.1  was  w.  t.  lCAr.l7.8.|ri3.20..'\mi!Oii  been  w.  t 
13. 26.  king  said  to  him,  why  shoiilil  he  go  with  t 

14.  17.  Lord  thy  God  will  be  ttj/A  t.  1  CAr.  28.20. 

15.  20.  return  thon,  mercy  and  liuili  he  with  t. 
18.14.  then  said  Joab,  I  may  not  tarry  thus  witht. 
19.  7.  there  will  not  tarry  one  with  t.  ihis  night 

1  A77io'.«2.8.thou  hast  with  t.Shiniei  who  cursed  me 
3.  6."as  he  walked  in  uprightness  of  heart  rri7A  t 

6.  12.  then  will  I  perform  my  word  with  t. 

13.  8.  I  will  not  go  in  jc/tA  t.  nor  cut  bread,  IC. 
17.  18.  what  have  I  lo  do  witA  /.  2  A"i7i^.«  3.  13 

2  Chrnn.  35.  21.  Jlark  5.  7.  J.uke  8.  28. 
./oAti  2.  4. 
2A.'i7ro's4.26.is  it  well  w.t  ||.5.2fi.wenf  nnt  heart  w.t. 
14.lfl.even  thou  and  Jiidah  with  t.  2Chron.  25.1'J 

2  Citron.  14.  W.  Lord,  it  is  nothing  with  t.  to  help 
1H.  3.  and  we  will  be  with  t.  F.zra  10.  4. 

2.5.  7.  O  king,  lei  not  the  army  of  Israel  go  witA  t, 
.Joli  .5.  2;i.  the  beasts  shall  he  ttl  peace  zpi/A  t. 
10. 13.  I  know  that  ihis  is  with  t. 

14.  3.  and  hringest  me  into  judgment  with  t. 

5.  seeing  the  number  of  his  ninnths  are  iritA  U 

15.  II.  are  lie  consolations  of  God  small  iri'tA  t. 

is  there  any  secret  thing  tritA  t  t 
36.  4.  he  that  is  perferl  in  knowledge  is  with  t 
■10.15. behold  now  1ieliemolh,whicli  I  made  wtthU 
Psal.  .5.  4.  neither  shall  evil  dwell  7fi7A  (. 
36. 9.  foi  with  t.  is  tbo  fuuutain  of  life 


THE 

Ps.  39. 12. 1  am  a  stranger  uiitli  t.  ami  a  sojourner 

73.  23.  iievertheloss  I  am  conlinuallv  witli.  t. 

04.  20.  sliall  iiii(|uily  have  fellowsln].  leilh  1. 1 

116.  7.  tlic  Lord  liaih  dealt  Ijouiilifiilly  wMi  t. 

r2H.  2.  Iiappy  slialt  tliou  bo,  it  sluill  be  well  with  t. 

130.  4.  Liwl  lliere  is  tbigivenuss  wit/i  t. 

13!).  18.  wiicii  [  awaky,  I  am  still  with  t. 
Prov.  2. 1.  and  liide  my  coinmaiidineiits  loith  t. 

.5. 17.  I>e  only  tliiiie  own,  and  not  strangers  with  t. 

G.22.  it  shall  talk  with  i.||23.7.iiis  heart  is  not  w.  t. 
Clint,  (i   1-  that  wo  may  seek  him  with  t. 
Isa.  16.  4.  let  mine  outcast  dwell  witht.  Moab 

41.  10.  I  am  with  t.  43.  5.  Jcr.  1.  8,  I'J.  |  15.  20. 
30.  11.  I  40.  28.  ^c«s  18.  10. 
11.  they  that  strive  with  t.  shall  perish,  12. 

49.  25.  contend  with  him  that  contendelh  with  t. 

54.9.  I  have  sworji  that  I  would  not  bo  wroth  w.  I. 
/(?r.2.;J5.l  will  plead  !r;V.'i  <. 1112.1. when  I  jilead  w.t. 

34.  3.  and  he  shall  speak  wtlh  t.  mouth  to  mouth 

51.20.  with  t.  will  1  break  in  pieces  the  nations 

21.  with  t.  will  I  break  in  pieces  horse  and  rider 

22.  with  t.  will  I  break  in  pieces  old  and  young 
1'^.wilkt.vl\\\  1  break  shepherd  and  husbandman 

Ezck.  2.  6.  though  briars  and  thorns  be  with  t. 
3.  22.  go  into  the  plain,  I  will  there  talk  with  t. 
Ifi.  8.  and  I  entered  into  a  covenant  with  t. 
.59.  I  will  even  deal  with  t.  as  thou  hast  done 
62.  and  I  will  establish  my  covenant  with  t. 
22.  14.  in  the  days  that  I  shall  deal  icitk  t. 
27.  21.  Ihey  occupied  with  t.  in  lambs  and  rams 
32.  4.  I  wiil  fill  the  beasts  ofthe  earth  with  t. 
38.6.  his  bands  and  many  people  w.  t.  9.  15.  |  39.4. 
Hns.  4.  5.  the  prophet  shall  fall  with  t.  in  the  .".ight 
Jimos  6.  10.  and  shall  say,  is  there  yet  any  with  t. 
Obad.  7.  the  men  that  were  at  peace  wit'h  t. 
Z,ech.  14.  5.  shall  como,  and  all  the  saints  with  t. 
Mai.  l.S.  will  he  be  pleased  ic.  t.  or  accept  person  ? 
^fu£.8.29. behold, thev  cried  out, what  have  we  to  do 
with  t.  Mark  1.  24.  I.uJie  4.  34. 
12.47.  stand  without,  desirin;^  to  speak  with  t. 
IS.  16.  then  take  tcith  t.  one  or  two  more 
2(>.35.Petcr  saidjtho'  I  should  die  7c.t.  Mark  14.31. 
J.vkr  22.33.  I  am  ready  lo  go  70.  t.  both  into  prison 
John  3.26.  he  that  was  with  t.  beyond  Jordan 
9.  37.  seen  him,  and  it  is  he  that  talketh  with  t. 
17.  5.  with  the  glory  which  I  had  icith  t.  before 
21.  3.  they  say  unto  him,  we  also  go  with  t. 
^ct.f  8. 20.  Peter  said,  thy  money  perish  icith  t. 
Epk.  6.3.honour  thy  father  thai  it  may  be  well  w.t. 
lTim.6.-li.  grace  lie  7f.(.||2Tm.4.11.bringio.i.l3. 

fVithiii'VHEE. 
Dent.  28. 43.  the  stranger  wit/iin  t.  shall  gel  above 
I'.tal.  122.  8.  I  will  now  say,  peace  be  within  t. 
147.  13.  he  hath  blessed  tliy  children  within  I. 
Pro7;.22.18.is  pleasant,  if  thou  keep  them  withint. 
Jer.  4.  14.  shall  thy  vain  thoughts  lodge  within  t. 
Zytticl9.44.and  thev  shall  Inv  thv  children  witkint. 

mthoul  TIIER. 

Oen.i\.^.witkout  I.  shall  no  man  lift  up  his  hand 

See  Teach.  Tell. 

THEFT,  S. 

Exod.  22.  3.  then  be  shall  be  sal.l  for  his  t. 

4.  if  the  t.  be  certainlv  founain  his  hand  alive 
Mat.  15.  19.  out  ofthe  heart  procei^d  t.  Mark7.22. 
Rev.  9.  21.  neither  repented  ihey  of  their  I. 

THEIRS. 
Orn. 15.13. shall  he  a  stranger  in  aland  that  is  not*. 

34.  23.  shall  not  every  beast  off.  be  ours  1 

43.  34.  mess  was  five  times  as  much  as  any  oft. 
Exod.  29.  9.  and  the  priests'  olTice  shall  be  t. 

J. en.  18.  10.  for  t.  is  thine  own  nakedness 
JViim.  16.  26.  depart  and  touch  nothing  off. 
18.9.  evctv  oblation  oft.  every  meat-otfering  of  t. 
.ToKh.  21.  10.  for  t.  was  the  first  lot,  1  Chron.  6.  54. 
2  Chron.  18.  12.  let  thy  word  be  like  one  oft. 
,Trr.  44.28.  whose  words  shall  stand,  mine  or  t. 
Ezrk.  7.  11.  none  shall  remain,  nor  any  oft. 

44.  29.  every  delicate  thing  in  Israel  shall  be  t. 
ffab.X.  6.  to  possess  dwelling  places  that  are  not  f . 
Mat.  5.  3.  for  t.  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  10. 

1  Cor.  1.  2.  call  on  our  Lord,  boMi  t.  and  ours 

2  Tim.  3.  9.  folly  shall  be  manifest,  as  f.  was 

THEM. 
Oen.  1.  27.  male  and  female  created  he  f.. 
J^Tum.  14.  31.  your  little  ones,  t.  will  I  bring  in 
r>(!iit.  28.  61.  i.  will  the  liord  bring  upon  thee 
1  .Snm.  2.  30.  t.  thiit  honour  me,  I  will  honour 
25.29.  f.  shall  he  sling  out,  as  out  of  a  sling 

1  rCmffs  13.  11.  f.  they  told  also  to  their  father 

2  h'infrs  23.  5.  I.  that  burnt  incense  unto  Baal 

1  Chron.  15.  2.  t.  hath  the  Lord  chosen  to  carry 

2  Cliron.  8.  8.  t.  did  Solomon  make  to  pay  tribute 
P.tn/.  5.  11.  let  I.  shout  for  joy,  let  t.  that'lovo 

35.  19.  nor  let  t.  wink  with  eye  that  hate  me 
68.  1.  let  I.  also  that  hate  him  flee  before  him 

Isn.  41.  12.  even  t.  that  contenilod  with  thee 
56.  7.  even  t.  will  I  bring  to  my  holy  mountain 
Van.  6.  34.  they  cast  t.  into  the  den  of  linns 
Zi^th.  1.  5.  I.  that  worship  the  host  of  heaven 
3.  IL  take  awaj  (.  that  rcyoice  in  thy  nrido 
613 


THE 

Mat.  13.  41.  shall  gather  out  t.  which  do  iniquity 

24. 16.  then  let  t.  which  be  ni  Judea  llec  into  the 

mountains,  Mark  13.  14.  jMke  21.  21. 

Mark  16. 13.  they  told  it,  neither  believed  they  t. 

Lukei.  18.  to  set  at  liberty  I.  that  are  bruised 
11.  52.  and  f.  thai  were  entering  in  ye  hindered 
19.  45.  cast  out  t.  that  sold  and  f.  that  bought 

24.  33.  lijuud  the  eleven,  and  t.  that  were  with  t. 
.John  lO.lti.  other  sheep  I  have,  f.  also  must  1  bring 
jicta  15. 19.  my  sentence  is,  that  we  trouble  not  f. 

21.  24.  t.  take  and  purify  thyself  with  t. 

22.  19.  that  I  beat  t.  that  believed  on  thee 
Rom.  8.  30.  moreover,  t.  he  also  called,  t.  he  also 

justilied,  and  t.  he  also  glorified 
11.  14.  provoke  to  emulation  t.  which  are  my  flesh 
1  Cor.  5.  12.  to  judge  i.  also  thai  are  without 
13.  but  t.  that  are  without  God  judgoth 
If).  18.  therefore  acknowledge  ye  f .  that  are  such 

1  Thtss.  4.  14.  even  so  t.  also  that  sleep  in  Jesus 

2  Thess.  3.  12.  now  t.  that  are  such,  we  command 
1  Tm.  4.16.  shall  save  thyself  and  t.  that  hear  thee 

5.  20.  t.  that  sin  rebuke  before  all,  that  others 
Heb.  10.  14.  hath  perfected  t.  that  are  sanctified 
13.  3.  remember  t.  that  are  in  bonds,  as  bound 

1  Pet.  4.19.  let  t.  that  suffer  according  to  will  of  G. 
Rev.  9.  17.  thus  I  saw  horses  and  f.  that  sat  on  t. 

11.  1.  and  measure  f.  that  woishi|)  therein 

13.  6.  lo  blaspheme  t.  that  dwell  in  heaven 

19.  20.  beast  was  taken,  and  f.  that  worshipped 

Move'Vi\V.U. 
Exod.  18.  11.  Ihey  dealt  proudly,  he  was  above  t. 
A''am.3.  49.  of  them  that  were  over  and  above  t. 

2  Sam.'ii.  49.  lifted  above  t.  that  rose  against  me 
2  CAj'.  34. 4.  images  that  were  above  f.  he  cut  down 

Moat  THEM. 
Qcn.  35.  5.  terror  was  on  the  cities  round  about  t. 
Ruth  1.  19.  that  all  the  city  was  moved  about  t. 
2Kivgs  17. 15.  after  the  heathen  that  were  about  t. 
2  Chron.  14.  7.  and  make  about  t.  walls  and  towers 
Ezra  1.  6.  all  about  t.  strengthened  their  hands 
Ezck.  1.  18.  were  full  of  eyes  round  about  t.  four 

28.  20.  all  those  that  despise  them  round  about  t. 
Mark  9.  14.  he  saw  a  great  multitude  about  t. 
Lukcl.65,  fear  came  on  all  that  dwelt  round  ab.  t. 

2.  9.  the  glory  of  the  Lord  shone  round  about  t. 
Jude  7.  and  the  cities  about  t.  in  like  manner 

4/-ter  THEM. 

Gcn.41.3.  seven  other  kine  came  up  after  1. 19.27. 

23.  and  seven  ears  withered  sprung  up  after  t. 

30.  shall  arise  after  t.  seven  years  of  famine 

48.  6.  thy  issue  which  thou  begettost  after  t. 
Exod.  10.  14.  neither  after  t.  shall  be  such  locusts 

14.4.  he  shall  follow  af.  t.  and  I  will  be  honoured 
Lev.  20.  6.  that  turneth  to  go  a  whoring  after  t. 
Deut.  1.8.  to  give  it  to  them  and  their  seed  n/tert. 

4.  37.  therefore  he  chose  their  seed  after  t.  10. 15. 

12. 1 30.take  heed,  tl/at  thou  be  not  snared  after  t. 
Josh.  2. 5.  pursue  after  t.  quickly  ye'sball  overtake 
7.the  men  pursued  af.  t.  8.10.  ./u(/^.8.12.  ]  20.45. 
.Tudg.2. 10.  there  arose  aiiollier  generation  after  t. 
Ruth  2.  9.  the  field  that  they  reap,  go  thou  after  t. 
1  Ham.  6.  12.  the  lords  ofthe  Philistines  went  af.  t. 

14.  22.  they  followed  hard  after  t.  in  the  battle 

1  Kings  9.  21.  upon  their  children  that  were  left 
after  t.  did  Solomon  levy  tribute,  2  Chron.  8.  8. 

2  Kings  7.15.  they  went  after  t.  to  Jordan,  and  lo 
10.  29.  .lehu  departed  not  from  after  t.  to  wit 

1  Chr.  14.14.  go  not  ui)  af.  t.|| JVtA.12.38.and  I  af.  t. 
.lob  30.  5.  they  cried  after  t.  as  after  a  thief 
.fer.  2.  25. 1  loved  strangers,  and  after  t.  will  I  go 

9.  16.  I  will  send  a  sword  after  t.  49.  37.  Ezek. 
5.2,  12.  I  12.  14. 

25.  26.  the  king  of  Sheshach  shall  drink  after  t. 
32.  18.  thou  recompensest  the  iniquity  of  the  fa- 
thers into  the  bosom  of  their  children  after  t. 

39.  fear  me,  fur  the  good  of  their  children  after  t. 

39.  5.  hut  the  Chaldeans'  army  pursued  after  t. 

50.  21.  waste  and  utterly  destroy  after  t. 
Ezek.  29.  16.  when  they  shall  look  after  t. 

.34.  6.  was  scattered,  none  did  search  or  seek  a.  t. 
Dan.  7.24.  and  another  king  shall  rise  after  t. 
Zeeh.  6.6.  and  the  white  horses  go  forth  after  t. 

7.  14.  thus  the  land  was  desolate  after  t. 
I.uke  17.  23.  see  here,  or  see  there,  go  not  a.  t.  21.8. 
Jlcts  20.  30.  to  draw  away  disciples  after  t. 

Jlgainst'niEU. 

Oen.  14. 15.  he  divided  himself  against  t.  by  night 

Exod.'Vi.W.  that  my  wrath  may  wax  hot  a1rain.1l  t. 

jVum.  12.  9.  Deut.'H.  15.  (31.  17.  Judg.^.  15. 

JVHm.16.19.Korah  gathered  I  he  congregation  ag.t. 

21.  33.  Og  king  of  Bashan  went  out  n^ain.it  t. 
Deut.  20. 19.  destroy  trees  by  forcing  an  axe  ag.  t. 

28.  25.  thou  shall  go  out  one  way  ag.  t.  and  flee 

31.  21.  this  song  shall  testify  ag.  t.  as  a  witness 

28.  and  call  heaven  and  earth  to  record  ag.  t. 

.Tnsh.  8.  22.  the  other  issued  out  of  the  city  ag,  t. 

22.  33.  did  not  intend  to  go  up  «"■.  t.  in  battle 
Judrr.  11.  25.  did  he  ever  strive  or  fight  ag.  I. 
2sV7m.24.1.  ho  movc^d  llav.  <7i'.f.  tosay,  go  number 

2  Kings  17.15.  testimoniea  which  he  testified  ag.  t. 


THE 

1  citron.  5.  11.  children  of  Gad  dwelt  over  ag.  U 
20.  lliey  were  helped  ag.  t.  for  they  cried  to  God 

2  Cliron.  20.  16.  to-morrow  go  ye  down  ag.  t.  17. 
24. 19.  prophets  testified  ag.  t.  jVf A.9.2li,29,30,34. 
28.  12.  stood  up  ag.  t.  that  came  Irom  llie  war 

Ezra  4.  5.  hired  counsellors  against  t.  to  fruslrate 

8.  22.  but  his  wrath  is  against  t.  that  forsake  him 
JVV/(.  4.  9.  we  set  a  watch  ag.  t.  day  and  night 

5.  7.  and  1  set  a  great  assembly  against  t. 

9.  10.  knevvest  that  they  dealt  proudly  againstt. 

12.  9.  brethren  were  over  ag.  t.  in  the  watches 

13.  2.  hired  Balaam  a."-.  f.||15. 1  testified  on-,  t.  21. 
Psal.  17.  7.  savest  from   those  that  rise  up  a<r.  t, 

34.  16.  the  face  of  the  Lord  is  against  t.  iha 

do  evil,  1  Pet.  3.  12 
/.';a.3.9.  their  countenance  doth  witness  against  t, 

5.  25.  he  hath  stretched  forth  his  hand  againstt. 

13. 17.  behold,  I  will  stir  up  the  Modes  ag.  t. 

14.22.1  will  rise  up  ag.  t.  ||03.  10.  he  fought  ag.  t, 
Jer.  1.  16.  and  I  will  utter  my  judgments  ag.  t. 

4.  12.  I  will  give  sentence  a.  f.||23.  32.  I  am  a.  t. 

25.  .30.  prophecy  a.  t.  Ezek.  6.  2.  |  13.  17.  ]  25.  2. 

26. 19.  evil  he  pronounced  ag.  t.  35.  17.  |  36.  31. 
Lam.  1.  13.  he  sent  fire,  and  it  prevaileth  ag.  t. 
Ezek.  15.  7.  and  I  will  set  my  face  against  t. 

20.  8.  to  accomplish  my  anger  ag.  t.  in  Egypt 

35.  11.  thou  hast  used  out  of  Ihy  hatred  ag.  t, 
38.  17.  that  I  would  bring  thee  against  t. 

Dan.  7.21.  and  the  same  horn  prevailed  against  t. 
Has.  8.5.  mine  anger  is  kindled  agaiiistt. 

10.  10.  the  peoide  shall  be  gathered  against  t. 
Mat.  10.18.  for  a  testimony  against  t.  Mark  6. 11. 

I  13.9.  LvkeQ.5. 

Markl2.\'2.  spoken  that  parable  ag.t.  Luke  20.19. 

.4(;tsl3.51.shookoft"thednstof  their  feet  fl^oiwsf  4 

16.  22.  the  multitude  rose  up  together  against  t. 

19.16.iii  whom  evil  spirit  was,prevailed  againstt. 

26. 10.  I  gave  my  voice  a.  t.  \\  11.  being  mad  a.  t. 

Rom.  2.  2.  judgment  of  God  is  ag.  t.  that  commit 

Col.  3.  19.  love  your  wives,  and  be  not  bitter  ag.  t. 

2  Pet.  2.  11.  bring  not  railing  accusation  against  t. 

Rev.  11.  7.  the  beast  shall  make  war  against  t. 

See  Fight,  Over. 

..imong  or  Jimongst  THEM. 

Cten.  47.  6.  knowesl  any  man  of  activity  among  t. 

Exod.  7.  5.  bring  children  of  Israel  from  among  t. 

10.2.  tell  my  signs  which  I  have  done  amongst  t 
25.  8.  that  I  may  dwell  am.  t.  29.  46.  Psat.  68.  18. 
30. 12.  that  there  be  no  plague  a.t. when  numbered 

Lev.  15.  31.  defile  my  tabernacle  that  is  among  t. 
J^Tujn.  1.  47.  the  Levites  were  not  numbered  am.  t. 

11.  1.  and  the  fire  of  the  Lord  burnt  among  t.  3. 
4.  the  raixt  multitude  among  t.  fell  a  lusling 

16.3.  and  the  Lord  is  among  t.  Psal.  68.  17. 

18.  20.  Aaron  shall  have  no  (lart  am.  t  ..fosh.14.3, 
23.  21.  and  the  shout  of  a  king  is  among  t. 

LJeut.l.iO.  the  Lord  will  send  the  hornetamow^- 1. 

Josh.  8.33.  the  stranger,  as  he  that  was  born  am.  t. 
35.  the  strangers  that  were  conversant  among  t, 

9.  16.  they  understood  that  they  dwelt  among  t. 
20.  4.  give  him  a  place  that  he  may  dwell  am.  t. 

24. 5.  according  to  that  which  I  did  amongst  t. 
Judg.  1.  30.  but  the  Canaanites  dwelt  among  t, 

10.  16.  put  away  the  strange  gods  from  a.  t. 
ISam.  6.  6.  when  he  wrought  among  t.  J^Teh.  9. 17. 

9.22.  made  them  sit  in  the  chiefest  place  among  t. 
10.10.  prophets  met  him,  and  he  prophesied  a.t. 
2  Sam.  19.  (28  set  thy  servant  n.  t.  that  did  oat 
2  Kings  17.  2.5.  therefore  the  Lord  sent  linns  a.  t. 
ICViro/i.  21.6.  Levi  and  Benjamin  not  counted  a.t. 
21).  31.  there  were  found  mighty  men  among  t. 
2  Chron.  20.  25.  found  a.  t.  abundance  of  spoil 
28.  1.5.  and  clothed  all  that  were  naked  among t 
F.zra2.  65.  there  were  among  t.  200 .ringing  men 
JVcA.  4. 11.  till  we  come  in  the  niid^t  a.  t.  and  slay 
E:sth.  9.  21.  wrote  to  establish  Ihe  Purim  a.  t. 
.fob  1.  6.  and  Satan  came  also  among  t.  2.  1. 
15.  19.  and  no  stranger  passed  among  t. 
Psal.  22. 18.  they  part  my  garments  among  t.  and 
ca.st  lots  on  my  vesture.  Mat.  27.3,5.  .hhn  19.  24. 
55.  15.  let  death  seize  them,  wickedness  is  a.  t 
.57.  4.  and  I  lie  even  a.  t.  that  are  set  on  fire      / 
68.  25.  a.  t.  were  damsels  )daying  with  timbrels 
78.  45.  he  sent  divers  sorts  of  flies  among  t. 
49.  trouble,  by  sending  evil  angels  among  t. 

99.6.  and  Samuel  a.  t.  that  call  upon  his  name 
105.  27.  they  shewed  his  signs  a.  t.  and  wondera 
136.  11.  and  brought  out  Israel  from  among  t. 

Cant.  4.  2.  and  none  is  barren  amona  t.  6.  6. 

fsa.  5.  27.  none  shall  be  weary  nor  stumble  o.  t. 
8. 15.  and  many  a.  t.  shall  stumble  and  fall 
41.  28.  for  I  beheld,  and  there  was  no  man  a.  t. 
43.  9.  who  a.  t.  can  declare  this,  and  shew  thirds 
48.  14.  which  a.  t.  bath  declared  these  things 
66.  19.  I  will  set  a  sign  amnnir  t.  and  will  send 

Jer.  6.  15.  they  shall  fall  among  t.  that  fall,  8. 12. 

18.  and  know,  O  congregation,  what  is  a.  t 
12.  14.  pluck  out  the  house  of  Judab  from  a.  t 
24.  10.  I  will  send  fainim'  and  peslilenre  a.  t. 
35. 16.  becatise  ofthe  eword  that  I  will  Bend  a.  t. 


THE 

/er.  37. 10.  thcro  remaiiK^il  but  woundeil  rnen  a.  t. 

41.8.tfn  men  found  among  t.\\\aX  said,  sliiy  us  not 
/yam. 1.17.  Jerusalem  as  a  menstruous  woman  a.  t. 
Jizek.  S-  5.  there  hutli  lieuii  a.  propliet  a.  t.  U3.  ;{X 

3.  15.  and  remained  there  aman/r  i.  seven  days 
'i5.  and  thou  shall  not  go  out  anwng  t. 

9.  i.  and  one  man  a.  t.  had  a  writer's  inkhorn 

Vi-  10.  conccrneth  all  Israel  that  are  among  t. 
I'i.  and  the  prince  that  is  among  t.  sliull  hear 

99^3(i.  I  am  proph.  a.  t.  \\  :IU.  1  sought  a  man  a.  t. 

as.  'Xi.  they  shall  know  that  a  projihet  heen  a.  t. 

31.  i!4.  and  my  servant  David  a  prmce  among  t. 

35.  U.  1  will  mak<;  myself  known  among  t. 
JJan.  1.  19.  a.  t.  was  Ibund  none  like  Uaiiiol 

7.  H.  there  came  up  among  t.  another  little  horn 

11.  -24.  he  shall  scatter  o.  (.  the  prey  and  spoil 
Hos.  7.  7.  there  is  mini;  a.  t.  that  calltth  to  mo 
Zeck.  1-2.  8.  that  is  feehle  a.  t.  shall  be  as  Uavid 

14.  13.  tumuli  from  the  hord  sliiill  be  among  t. 
Jilat.  11.  11.  I  say,  a.  t.  that  are  born  of  women 
Mark  6.  41.  and  the  two  fishes  divided  he  a.  t. 
Luke  y.  4().  then  (here  arose  a  reasoning  a.  t. 

22.  iM.  and  there  was  also  a  strife  among  t. 

55.  Peter  .sat  down  among  t.  in  the  ball 

■7oArt  'J.  Ifi.  and  there  was  a  division  among  t. 

1.3.  24.  if  I  had  not  done  a.  t.  the  works  which 
^cts  4.34.  nor  was  there  any  among  t.  that  lacked 

17.  33.  so  Paul  dejiarted  from  among  t. 

18. 11.  continued,  leaching  the  word  of  God  a.t. 

20.  32.  inheritance  a.  t.  that  aro  sanclilieil,  2().  18. 
Horn.  11. 17.  a  wild  olive  tree,  were  grafted  in  a.  t. 

1  Cor.  2.  C.  we  speak  wisdom  a.  t.  that  are  i)Crfecl 

2  Cor.  fi.  17.  come  out  from  a.  I.  and  be  ye  separate 

2  Pet.  2.  8.  that  righteous  man  dwelling  a.  I. 

3  ./u/m  '.*.  who  lovelli  the  pre-eminence  among  t. 
.Jude  15.  10  cr)nvince  all  that  are  ungodly  a.  t. 
Hcv.  7.  15.  siltelh  on  the  throne  shall  dwell  a.  t. 

./jrrnro.M. 

^«m.21 .30.  wo  have  shot  att.  Heshbon  is  perished 
Drnt.  7.21.  thou  shall  not  be  atlriglited  at  t. 
Psal.  10.  5.  as  for  all  his  enemies,  be  |)ulfeth  at  t. 
5'.>.  8.  but  thou,  O  Lord,  shall  laugh  at  t. 

64.7.  but  God  shall  shoot  at  t.  with  an  arrow 
Jcr.  10.  2.  for  the  heathen  are  dismayed  at  t. 

Brfore  TlWiM. 
Gtn.  18.  8.  and  set  it  4.  «.1|33.3.  he  passed  over  b.  t. 
F.rod.  10.  H.  before  t.  there  were  no  such  locusts 
13.21  the  Lord  went  brfore  t.  by  day,A'"Min.M.14. 

21.  1  jndjments  which  thou  shall  set  brfore  t. 
JVitm.  10.33.  and  the  iirk  of  the  Lord  wenl  before  t. 

27.  17.  to  go  out  and  in  before  t.  1  .Saw.  IH.  Hi. 
Dcut.  2.  12.  destroyed  Ihum  from  before  t.  21,  22. 

1  CArnn.  5.  25.  jYeli.  9.  2J. 

28.  2.').  and  thou  shall  flee  seven  ways  before  t. 
Jn.tA.n.l3. armed  men  went  brfore  t.rereward  after 

18.  1.  and  the  lau'l  was  subdued  before  t. 

21.  44.  Blood  not  a  man  of  their  enemies  before  t. 
Jvdg.XTi.  Khud  brfore  I.  \\  7.24.  take  b.  t.  waters 

1  .Sam. 10..5.with  a  labrct,  a  pipe  and  harp,  before  t. 

2  Sam.  10. 16.  and  Shobach  went  b.  1. 1  CItr.  19.  16. 

20.8.  when  they  were  in  Gibeon,  Amasa  went  h.t. 

1  h'ingn  8.50.give  them  com(iassion  h.t.  2(';Ar.30.9. 

22.  10.  'irophetg  prophesied  before  t.  2  Olir.  18.  9. 

2  fCing-i  3.  24.  so  that  the  Moiibites  Hed  before  t. 
4.31.  Gehazi  jHisspdon  b.  t.  \\  44.  so  beset  it  A.t. 
6.22.act  bread  and  water  bef.  t.  th;it  lliey  may  eat 
17.  11.  whom  the  Lord  carried  away  before  I. 

S  Cliron.T.  6.  the  pri«st  sounded  trumpets /jr/orct. 
JV'7i.  12.  36.  and  K/.ra  the  scribe  before  t. 
/'■i<i/.22.25.ril  pav  my  vowh  before  t.\h:\\  fear  him 

."il.  3.  they  have 'not  set  God  before  t.  86.  14. 

78.  .55.  he  cast  out  the  heathen  also  before  t. 

105.  17.  ho  sent  a  man  before  t.  even  .losepli 
F.rr.}.  4.  16.  no  end  of  all  ilmt  h:ive  been  before  t. 

9.  1.  eiiher  love  or  hatred  by  nil  that  is  before  I. 
Jun.  30.  8.  now  go  write  it  before  I.  in  a  table 

4-2.  II).  T  will  make  rtarknesslighl  before  t. 

(13.  12.  ihal  led  them,  dividing  ib- wiUer  brfore  t. 
Jcr.  1.17.  notd'siiayed,  lest  I  cm  found  thn-hef.  t. 

0    13.  hiive  forsaken  mv  law  which  I  set  before  t. 

32.  13    and  Icharired  njrucli  before  I.  saying 

33.  21.  they  should  no  more  he  a  nation  before  t. 
49.  37.  to  he  dinnnyed  lief  tret,  that  seek  their  life 

F.'.ek.  8.  II.  nndtlier,.  stiiorl  before  l.n  venlv  men 

16.  18.  hast  sit  mine  oil  and  incense  brfore  I.  19. 
23.24. 1  will  set  JMdzment  before  f.they  shall  judge 
32.  10.  \yhen  I  »liall  brandish  my  sword  before! 
44.  II.  shall  stand  before  I.  to  minister  lo  them 

Joel  2.  3.  n  fire  devourelb  brf.  I.  and  behind  them, 

the  land  is  as  the  siircbn  of  Fdon  before  t. 

10.  the  earth  shall  quake /irfi.rrt.lho  sun  be  ilnrk 

/}ninK  2.  9.  yet  I  destroyed  tlir;  .\moritp  before  I. 

.Vie.  2. 13.  the  breaker  is  come  un  bef  t.  and  their 

kiii2  shall  ynnth.t.  and  Lonl  on  head  of  them 

Z'-'-A.12.8.  David  n«  the  iinu'el  of  the  Lord  brfore  t. 

Jlf'ir2.9.lo,  the  star  which  ihevsMW  \vi'ii\  brfore  I. 

14.  fi.  she  danced  b   I.  II  26.  70.  but  he  d.Miird  b.  I. 

17.  2.  and  was  transfienred  hrfirr  I.  .Mori.-  9.  2. 
Jir-rAt;.  n.g:lveto  his  disripli'Sloset  A. /.H.fi,7. 

10. 32.  JoauB  wont  before  t.  and  iboy  weru  aiiiuzod 
4U 


THE 

/Mke  22.17.  Judas  went  6.  t.||24.43.  ho  did  cat  b.  t. 

19. 2.^.  ascending  up  to  Jerus.  Jesus  went  Ac/ore  t. 
Ju/m  10.  4.  shcpliord  goeth  before  t.  sheep  follow 

12.37.  tbo'  he  had  dune  so  many  miracles  before  t. 
.■Ict.i  Ki.  34.  he  set  meat  A.  t.  \\  22.  30.  -set  Paul  b.  t. 
G'at.2.14. 1  suid  lo  Peter  before  I.  all,  iflhou  being 

lirkind  TUKM. 
KioJ.11.19.  the  pillar  removed  and  stood  behind  t. 
./osh.S.  2U.  when  the  ineu  of  Ai  looked  behind  I. 
.ladg.  20.  40.  the  Peiijamites  looked  behind  t. 
2  .Sii»i.  5.  23.  but  fetch  a  compass  behind  t. 
-Chron.  13.13.  un  ambushmenllo  come  about  A.  t. 
Joel  2.  3.  A.  t.  a  llame  burnetii,  A.  t.  a  wilduriioss 

Bt!<ides  THKM. 
lob  1.  14.  and  the  asses  were  feeding  beside  t. 
Kzek.  10.10.  wheels  turned  not  from  A.  1. 19.111.22. 
jl/ut. 25.20. 1  have  gained  besides  t.  live  talunti>,22. 

Between  TllE.M. 
KxofZ.22.11.an  oath  of  the  Lord  shall  be  between  t. 

iW.  33.  and  bells  of  gold  between  t.  round  about 
./uiA.H.ll.nowtherc  wasa  valley  Aet;cfP7i  t.and  Ai 

1  .Sam. 17.  3.  a  valley  between  t.  and  llie  Philistines 
)().  13.  David  stood  a  great  space  being  between  t. 

2  .SnHi.14.t6.  and  there  was  no  deliverer  Aet:«ec7»  t. 

21.  7.  because  of  the  Lord's  oath  bcticecr.  i. 

1  Kings  18.  6.  so  they  divided  the  land  between  t. 
.Job  41.  1().  that  no  air  can  come  between  t. 
ZfcA.O.Ki.counsel  of  peace  shall  bo  Atticcmt.both 
.^Icts  15.39.  the  contention  was  so  sharp  between  t. 

yyy  THEM. 
Aep.  19.  31.  nor  after  wizards  to  be  defiled  by  t. 
.losh.  23.  7.  nor  cause  to  swear  by  t.  nor  serve 
Jndg.  3.  l.thc  Lord  left,  to  prove  Israel  by  t.  4. 

2  .Sam.  15.  :t0.  by  t.  ye  shall  send  to  me  every  thing 
2  Chron.  24.  13.  and  the  work  was  perfected  by  t. 
.Job  3(1.  31.  for  by  t.  judgcth  ho  the  people 
I'.ial.  19.  11.  moreover  by  I.  is  thy  servant  warned 
fsa.  7.  20.  namely  by  t.  beyond  the  river 

fir.  5.  7.  and  have  sworn  by  t.  that  arc  no  gods 
F.iek.  1.  19.  creatures  went,  the  wheels  went  by  t. 

14.  3.  should  I  be  enquired  of  at  all  by  t.  ? 

I  tab.  1.16.  because  by  t.  their  portion  is  fat 
Jtat.  5.  21.  that  it  was  said  by  t.  of  old,  27,  33. 
.Mark  6.18.hecometh,and  would  have  passed  by  t. 
/,«^c21.  t.two  men  stood  by  t.  in  white,  Jlets  1.10. 
.■lets  4.  16.  a  notable  miracle  has  b^en  done  by  t. 

15.  12.  what  wonders  God  bad  wrought  by  t. 
Rom.  10.  5.  who  doeth  those  things  shall  live  by  t. 

19.  I  will  provoke  you  to  jealousy  by  t. 
1  (.'or.  1.  11.  Ay  t.  which  are  of  the  house  of  Chloe 
1  7Vm.  1.18.thou  byt.  mightesl  war  a  good  warfare 
Heb.  2.  3.  confirmed  to  us  by  t.  which  heard  him 
1  Pet.  1.  12.  which  are  now  reported  to  you  by  t. 

Concerning  TIIH.M. 
jVam.  32.28.  so  con.  t.  Moses  commanded  Eleazar 
./«'/n-.15.3.  Samson  said  eon.  t.I  shall  be  blameless 
jYrh.  11.23.  it  was  the  king's  commandment  con.  t. 
1  7'A^.«.«.4.l3.to  be  ignorant  con. '.  which  are  asleep 
1  John  2.  26.  have  1  written  eon.  t.  that  seduce  you 

/•'or  Til  EM. 
Gen.  6.  21.  it  shall  be  for  food  for  thee  and /or  t. 

34.  21.  the  land,  behold  it  is  large  enough /or  t. 

43.  32.  and  they  set  on  bread  for  t.  by  tbcm.selves 
F.Tod.  14.  25.  let  us  fleo,  the  Lord  fightolh/or  t. 
/,ev.  4.20.  and  the  priest  shall  make  an  atonement 
for  t.  9.  7.  I  10.  17.  .mm.  8.  21.  |  16.  46. 

7.  7.  there  is  one  law  for  t.  the  priestshall  have  it 
A'lim.  10.  33.  to  search  out  a  resting-place  for  t 

I  l.22.Khall  herds beslain/«rt.fi.shes gathered/.* 
I>rnt.  28.  32.  fail  with  longing /or  t.  all  the  day 

33.  2.  from  his  right  hand  went  a  llerv  law /or  t. 
Josh.  IH.  10.  Joshua  ca-^t  lois/«r  /.  inShiloh 

19  9.  the  part  of  Jiidah  was  too  much /or  t. 
47.  the  coast  of  Dan  went  out  too  little/or/. 
Jiidg.  21.  16.  bow  shall  we  do  for  wives /or  t.  ? 

17.  there  most  be  an  inherit.ince/or  t.  escaped 
lliith  1.13.wou|rl  yetarry/ort.tillthcv  were  grown 
2'^7i™w.3(l.  IH.  but  Ilc'zekiah  priyed/or  t  saying 

34.  21.  L'o  I  iHiuire  of  the  Lord  for  me  nnd/or  t. 
.V'A.  1.5.  (;ol  keepelh  mercy  /or  t.  that  love  him 

5.2."  e  take  op  corn  for  t. that  we  may  eat  and  live 
'\.  15.  brou'.'blisl  forth  water /or  t.  out  of  the  rock 

/•>fA.5.H.come  lo  the  banipiei  I  shall  prepare /or  I. 

Job  6.  19.  the  companies  of  .''heba  waited  /or  I. 

22.  17.  and  what  can  \\y  Alniiirblv  do  for  I.  7 
24.  ."5.  wil  lerness  yieldelh  food  for  I.  anil  children 

P»al.  31.  19.  which  thou  bust  laid  up  for  t.  ihnt 
fear  thee,  /or  /.  thnt  trust  in  tliec 
101.8.  tothc  place  which  thou  hast  founded /«rt. 
KHi.  45.  and  be  remembered  for  t.  his  covenant 
126.  2.  the  Lord  hath  done  creat  things  for  t. 

Isa.  23.  13.  till  the  Assyrian  founded  it  /or  t. 
18.  ffir  her  merchnndisi'shnll  be  for  I.  that  dwell 
34. 17. Ill-  hath  cast  the  lot /or  t.  be  divided  lo  then; 

35.  1.  the  seditarv  place  shall  be  srlad  for  t 
.fcr.3.2.  in  the  wnvs  hast  thou  sat  fort,  ns  .Arabiai 

7.  16.  neilliir  lift  up  cry  nor  prayer  for  t. 
16.fi. nnrhlmll  inen  lamiMil/nrf.nnrciit  ihemselvcs 
7.  n.Mllier  hIkiII  men  tear  themselves  for  I. 
18. 20.  I  ktuod  before  tliuu  to  spoak  good  for  t. 


THE 

.Ter.  28.13.  but  thou  shall  make/or  t.  yokes  »f  Iron 
F.iek.  7. 11.  neither  shall  there  be  wailing /or  t, 
11.21.  hut  iUi  for  t.  uhosu  heart  walketh  after 
Hi.  21.  to  cause  ihem  lo  pass  thro'  ihc  lire /or  t 
iH).  6.  lo  bring  into  a  land  1  had  espied  ^ur  t. 
34.  10.  that  my  Hock  may  iiol  be  meat/ur  t. 

29.  and  1  wil'h  raise  up /or  t.  a  plant  ul  renowa 
36.  37.  1  will  yet  be  eniiuiied  of  lo  do  it  for  t. 

45.  15.  one  lamb  to  make  luconciliation  for  t. 

46.  17.  but  his  inheritance  shall  be  his  son's  for  t. 
48.  10.  fort,  even  for  the  priests  siiull  be  ubiatioii 

I  Jan.  2.  35.  no  place  was  found  for  t.  Uev.  20.  1 1. 

Ilos.  2.  18.  make  a  covenant/or  t.  with  the  beast* 

y.ech.  10.  8.  1  will  hiss  for  t.  and  gather  them  lot 
lU.  into  Lebanon  place  shall  not  be  found /or  (. 

J\lat.  5.  44.  pray /or  t.  which  despitefully  use  you 
and  persecute  you,  J.,uke  6.  28. 
12.  4.  nor  lawful /or  f.  that  were  with  him 
18.  19.  it  shall  be  done /or  t.  of  my  I-'ather 

Mark  10.  24.  how  hard  for  t.  that  trust  in  riche* 

Luke  2.7.  there  was  no  room  lor  t.  in  the  inn 
/oA»i  6.  7.  is  not  sutficieni /or  t.  that  every  one 
17.  9.  I  pray /or  t.  1  pray  not  for  the  world,  20. 

.HctsS.  1.5.  Peter  and  John  jirayed /or  t.  that  they 
lt(.24. Cornelius  waited/,  f.  and  had  called  friends 

17.  16.  now  while  Paul  wailed  for  t.  at  Athena 

1  Cor.  2.  9.  things  which  God  hath  prepared  for  t. 
7.  8.  it  is  good  for  I.  if  they  abide  even  as  I 

14.  22.  but  prophesying  serveth  for  t.  that  believe 

2  Cor.  5.  15.  should  live  unto  him  which  died /or  (, 
Col.  2.  1.  knew  what  great  cunllict  I  haio /or  t. 

4.13.  hath  a  great  zeal/or  t.  that  are-in  Laodicea 
lieb.  1. 14.  spirits  sent  forth  to  niininUr/or  t.heir* 

7.  25.  he  ever  liveth  to  make  inlerc.'weion  for  t. 

11.  16.  for  he  hath  prepared /or  t.  n  e.ty 
2  I'et.  2.  21.  it  had  been  better^or  (.  not  to  known 
1  John  5.  16.  give  life  for  t.  that  »tn  nut  to  death 

/•romTIIEM. 
Gen.  11.  0.  now  nothing  will  be  restrained  from  t. 

42.  24.  be  took  from  t.  Simeon  and  bound  him 
.Vwn;.  16.  15.  I  have  not  taken  one  as»Jrom  t. 

18. 20.  the  tithes  which  I  have  given  you  from  t. 

35.8. /rom  t.  that  have  many  ye  shall  gi\e  many  ; 

but  from  t.  that  have  few  ye  shall  give  few 

Deut.  22.1.  sheep  go  astray, and  hide  Ihysidf/.  t.i. 

31.17.  hide  my  race/.t.:K.'20.  F.zek.  '.'ii  Mtc.Xi. 

1  .Som.  6.  7.  and  bring  their  calves  home  from  t. 
\Chron.  14.14.  go  not  after  lhem,turn  away /rom  t. 
2Chron.  20  10.  but  they  turned  f.  t.  and  dentroyed 
Psal.  31.  15.  deliver  me  from  t.  that  persecute  mo 

59.  1.  defend  me /rom  t.  that  rise  up  against  ma 
84. 11.  no  good  thins  will  he  williliold/rom  t. 
Prow.  3.  27.  withhold  not  good  from  t.  to  whom 

22.  5.  thatiloth  keep  his  soul  shall  be  fur  frovt  t. 
Keel. 2.  10.  what  mine  eyes  desired  1  kept  not/,  t. 
Cant.  3.  4.  it  was  but  a  little  that  I  passed  from  t. 
Jer.a.  13.  things  I  have  given  shall  pans  from  t, 

9.  2.  that  I  might  leave  my  people  and  go /rom  t. 

18.  20.  I  stood  to  turn  away  thy  wrath  from  t. 
25.  10.  1  will  take /rom  t.  the  voice  of  mirth 
:W.  40. 1  will  not  turn  away  fr.  i.  to  do  tlicr;  «ood 

F.zek.  7.  20.  therefore  I  have  set  it  far /rom  t. 

23.  17.  and  her  mind  was  alienaieil /com  c. 

24.  2.5.  the  day  when  I  take  fro/H  t.  their  strcnpll; 
39.  23.  therefore  hid  1  my  face  from  t.  24. 

29.  niither  will  I  hide  my  face  any  more  from  f. 
Ilos.  5.  6.  he  hath  withdrawn  himself/rom  t. 

11.  2.  as  they  called  ihim,  so  they  weni  from  t. 
Mie.'i.S.  iMill  oH'tlie  robe  with  the  garment  from  t. 
.Mat.  9.  15.  the  bridegroom  shnll  be  taken  from  t. 
Mark  2.  20.  J.vke  5.  35. 
Mark  14.  .52.  he  left  thecloih,  and  lied  fr.  t.  naked 
/  ji*T9.45.uiideistood  not,  it  was  hid/rom  1. 18.34. 

24.51.hewas  parted  from  t.and  carried  toheavpn 
.lohn  12. ;W).  departed,  and  did  hide  himself/rom  t, 
.lets  7.  39.  would  not  obey,  but  thrust  him  from  t. 
limn.  15.  31.  that  I  may  be  delivered  from  t.  that 

2  ('or.  2.  3.  I  shoulil  have  sorrow  from  t.of  wSom 
1 1.12. 1  may  cut  oH'ocoasion/rom  (.  which  desire 

Heb.  7.  6.  whose  descent  is  not  coiintpd /rom  I. 

2  Pel.  2.  18.  clean  escaped  from  t.  who  live  in  error 

/;(0.9.  6.  desire  lo  rlie,  and  death  shall llec /rom  t, 

Srr  DvpMtT,  Kn. 

/nTIIEM. 

A.'roi/.  20. 11.  for  the  Lord  miiile  heaven  and  earth, 

the  sea,  and  nil  thai  in  t.  is,  .'lets  4.24 

29.  29.  lolie  anointed  and  be  consecrated  in  t. 
f.rr.  10.  3.  I  will  bcsanclified  in  t.  thnt  come  n^eh 

18.  5.  he  shnll  live  in  f.  JWA.  9.  29.  F.ze!.:  20.  11, 
13,21.  r;«/.  3.  12. 
.Vwm.OO.  13.  strove,  and  he  was  sanctified  in  I. 
/>r«f.5.29.  ()  thnt  there  were  such  a  heart  int. 

32.  28.  nor  is  there  any  unilerstanding  in  t. 
.lush.  .5.  1.  nor  was  thrie  spirit  in  I.  any  more 

24.  13.  cities  which  ve  built  not,  and  ve  dwidl  in  t. 
2  h'iiiirs  5.  12.  may  I  not  wash  i;i  I.  and  be  clean  T 
./oA4.  21.  doth  not  their  evcillencv  in  I.  go  away 
;'.■■■"/.  19.  1.  in  I.  he  set  a  lalierniiclo  for  the  sua 

107.  5.  hiiicry,  lliiisly,  llw  ir  s<iul  fainted  in  I. 

115.  8.  DO  ii  every  one  that  tiu«la  in  (■  135.  IS. 


THE 

Psal.  147. 11.  Lord  takeUi  jileaBurc  in  f.tliat  fear 
fruv.0.6.  there  in  no  luiig  Iruwurd  oriiuivcrau  («i. 
iCcci.  .i.  i'i.  1  kiiuw  tliul  lliere  is  no  good  in  t. 

a.  11.  Uicir  lioarl  is  lully  buI  in  t.  to  do  evil 

12.  1.  tliou  shall  suy  1  iiuvo  iiu  pioasuiu  in  t. 
Jsa.a.l'.i.  teil-liue  uuil  oak,  wliosusuhsiaiico  u  in  t. 

8.  ifl).  it  is  becuuso  llicre  is  no  liyhl  in  t. 
Jer.  'i.  37.  and  thou  blialt  not  prosjiDr  i/i  t. 

6  Ut  thu  word  IH  nut  in  t.||H.'J.\vliut  wisdom  is  in  t. 

JO  j  cannot  do  uvil  nor  is  it  in  t.  to  do  good 
U.  and  tiiere  is  no  bruuth  in  t.  51.  17. 

•in.  i.  build  ye  houses,  and  dwell  in  t.  iJ8. 
t^lck  f^  (>■  my  statutes  they  have  nut  w  alked  in  t. 
Vi.  when  1  have  uccom|ilished  my  I'ury  in  t. 

10.  n.  the  K|iiril  of  the  living  ureaiure  vvas  in  t. 

Id.  'H.  Ill  tiesjiass  and  sin,  in  t.  shall  he  die,  '2tJ. 

'26.  '.lo.  and  wlien  1  shall  be  saiictilied  in  t.  in  sight 

33.  10.  jiineaway  i«  t.  \\  37.  S.  was  no  biealli  in  I. 
Van.  5.  3.  his  wives  and  concubines  drank  in  t.  ii'.i. 
hos.  1-1.  '.I.  are  right  and  the  Just  shall  walk  in  t. 
M/iwa  j.ll-  built  houses,  but  ye  shall  not  dwell  ijii. 
(Jbad.  16.  they  shall  kindle  in  t.  and  devi>urtheni 
Mai.  "2.  17.  that  uoelli  evil,  he  deliglitelh  m  t. 
Mat.  13.  14.  in  I.  is  t'uilllled  the  projihecy  ot'Ksaias 
J^uke  13.  14.  in  t.  therefore  come  and  be  healed 
Ju/i)i  5.  3il.  in  t.  ye  think  ye  have  eternal  life 

17.  lU.  thine  are  mine,  and  1  tun  glorified  in  t. 
'£.\.  1  ia  t.  thou  in  ine  ||  ;2U.  may  hu  int.  and  1  in  t. 
lioin.  1.  lU.  may  be  Known  of  (Jod,  is  manilesi  int. 

'a.  but  have  jileasure  in  I.  that  do  them 
9  Cor.  'i.  15.  in  t.that  are  saved,  in  I.  that  [lerisli 

6.1(5.  God  said,  1  will  dwell  in  t.  and  walk  in  t. 
J'lyk.  '2. 10.  liod  ordained  that  we  should  walk  in  I. 

4. 18.  alienated  thro,.gli  the  ignorance  that  is  in  t. 
Oil.  3.  7.  Ill  which  ye  walked,  when  ye  lived  in  t. 
2  'I'he^s.'i.  10.  all  deceivableness  in  t.  that  perish 
1  'J'lin.  4.  10.  continue  in  t.  lor  in  doing  this 
Hcb.  4.  i.  not  being  mixed  with  faith  in  I.  that 

1  I'd.  1.  11.  the  sjiirit  of  Christ  wlncli  was  m  t. 
S  I'd.  3.  11).  siieaking  in  I.  of  these  tilings 

/{cv.  5.  13.  and  all  that  are  in  t.  heard  1,  saying 
Vi.  12.  rejoice,  ye  heavens,  and  ye  thai  dwell  in  I. 

15.  1.  for  in  t.  is  tilled  up  the  wrath  of  God 

20.  13.  delivered  up  the  dead  which  were  in  t. 

21.  14.  Ill  t.  the  names  of  the  twelve  unosilea 

y«(uTIIEM. 
F.tek.  37.10.  the  breath  came  into  t.  and  tiity  lived 
^/ort.5.12.soiid  that  we  may  enter  <«.«.  Lukcii.'.i'i. 
ftcu.ll.ll.the  spirit  of  life  from  God  entered  into  t. 

Of  THEM. 
<7c7i.i7.  the  eyes  o/t.  both  were  opened  and  knew 
19.  13.  the  cry  of  t.  is  waxen  great  before  God 
£j:o(/.20.5.generalion  uf  t.  that  hate  me,  /7cui.5.9. 
0.  to  thousands  of  t.  that  love  me,  iJvnt.  5.  10. 
35.  35.  of  t.  that  do  any  work  and  that  devise 
Lev.  4.  2.  if  a  soul  shall  do  against  anv  of  t. 
11.4.  t-/t.ye  shall  not  eat|i2-2.o/£.eat,/;d/t.20.19. 

22.  22.  nor  make  an  olVering  by  lire  of  t.  on  altar 
25.  44.  of  t.  buy  bond-men  and  bond-maids,  45. 
2().  43.  the  land  also  shall  be  left  of  I.  and  enjoy 

J^'um.  1.21.  tliose  that  were  numbered,  of  t.  23.25. 

1  2.  4,  13.  I  3.  22,  .•i4. 

3. 49.  took  money  of  t.  that  were  over  and  above 

7.5.takeit  c/t.||  11.26.  were  o/ t.that  were  written 

14.  23.  nor  shall  any  of  t.  that  provoked  me  see 

16.  34.  fled  at  the  cry  of  t.  \\  26.  64.  not  a  man  oft. 
33.  55.  that  those  which  ye  let  remain  of  t. 

Dent.  1.  29.  neither  be  afraid  of  t.  7. 18.  |  20.  1, 

3.  .losh.  11.  6.  jVVA.  4.  14. 

2.6.  ye  sh.buy  meat  ofl.hay  water  of  I.  for  money 

33.  1 1.  loins  «/ t.that  rise,  and  o/i.  that  hate  him 
Josh.  10.  8.  there  shall  not  a  man  of  t.  stand  before 

2  Sam.  0.2-2.  and  of  I.  shall  1  be  had  in  honour 

fi  Kingx  10. 14.  and  slew  them,  nor  left  he  any  oft. 
1  Chron.  5.  20.  they  cried,  he  was  intrealcd  of  t. 
F.rra  6.  20.  all  of  t.  were  expressed  by  name 
JVVA.  10.  31.  would  not  buy  it  of  t.  on  the  sabbath 
Job  14.  21.  are  low,  but  he  percciveth  it  not  of  t. 
Psal.  19.  11.  in  keopina:  of  (.  there  is  great  reward 

21.  12.  make  ready  arrows  against  the  face  of  I. 

24.  0.  this  is  the  generation  ojf  t.  that  seek  him 

34.  19.  but  the  Lord  delivered  him  out  oft.  all 
22.  none  of  t.  that  trust  in  him  shall  be  desolate 

40.5.  if  I  would  speak  of  t.  they  are  more  than 
65.  5.  and  of  t.  that  are  afar  off  upon  the  sea 
84.  5.  in  whose  heart  arc  the  ways  oft. 
102.  26.  all  of  t.  shall  wa.x  old  like  a  garment 
Prop.  21. 6.  tossed  to  and  fro  of  t.  that  seek  death 
Keel.  7. 18.  that  fearcth  God  shall  come  forth  of  t 
Lia.  0.  16.  they  that  are  led  oft.  an?  destroyed 
17.  14.  this  is  the  portion  of  t.  that  spoil  us 
19.  22.  he  shall  be  intreaied  of  t.  and  heal  them 
39.  2.  Flezekiah  was  glad  of  t.  and  shewed  them 

41.  2?.  that  when  I  asked  of  t.  could  answer 

42.  9.  before  they  spring  forth  I  tell  you  of  t. 
22  s|«>iled,  they  are  all  of  t.  snared  in  holes 

44  9.  that  make  an  image,  are  all  of  t.  vanity 
05.1. 1  am  sought  o/f.  that  asked  not  for  me,  I  am 
found  of  t.  that  sought  mo  not,  Horn.  10.  20. 
6G.  19.  and  I  will  send  thoso  that  encofu  of  U 


THE 

Isa.  60. 21. 1  will  take  of  t.  for  priests  and  Levltcs 
Jcr.  8.  19.  because  of  t.  that  dwell  in  lar  I'ountry 

10.  5.  be  not  alraid  of  t.  Kick.  2.  6.  J.uU  12.  4. 

23.  14.  they  are  all  of  t.  unto  me  as  iSodoni 

25.  14.  great  kings  shall  serve  liieiiiselves  of  t. 

29.  22.  and  of  t.  shall  be  taken  up  a  curse  by  all 

30.  19.  and  out  of  t.  sliall  proceed  thanksgiving 
34.  9.  that  none  should  serve  himself  u/t.  10. 
42.  17.  and  none  of  t.  shall  remain,  J:zck.  7.  11. 

i'J:t7i.7.1(i.all  oft.  mourning  every  one  lor  iniquity 

20.  40.  all  of  t.  in  the  land  shall  serve  nie 
23.  6.  all  oj  t.  ilesirable  young  men,  12.  23. 

15.  in  dyed  attue,  all  uf  t.  princes  to  look  to 
38.  4.  all  uf  t.  clothed  with  all  sorts  ol  armoui 

11.  and  gates  all  of  t.  dwelling  without  walls 
Hon.l'i.'I.  they  say  oft.  let  the  men  kiss  the  calves 
^'i;««»-9.1.cut  111  the  bead  all  u/t.he  that  Heelh  of  t. 
Mic.  3.  2.  who  pluck  off  llieir  .<kiii  from   oJf'  t.  3. 

7. 13.iand  desolate  because  ti/ t.that  dwell  therein 
'/.cell.  11. 13.  goodly  price  that  1  was  jitized  aloft. 
Mat.  21.  31.  whether  of  t.  twain  did  the  willol  his 

45.  they  jiereeived  that  he  spake  of  t. 
jU<irA12.23.vvhose  wile  shall  she  be<//t./.uAt20.33. 
J-,ukei}.  13.  oft.  he  chose  twelve  named  apostles 

7.  42.  tell  me,  which  oft.  will  love  him  must? 
9.  46.  which  of  t.  should  be  greatest?  22.  24. 
22.23.  which  of  t.  it  was  that  should  do  this  thing  ? 
58.  anothei  saw  him  and  said,  thou  art  also  of  t. 
John  4.  52.  then  eiuiuired  he  of  I.  the  hour  wlien 
16.  4.  ye  may  remember  that  1  told  you  oft. 
18.9.  oft.  which  thou  gavest  me,  have  I  lost  none 
^icls  15.  14.  to  take  out  uf  t.  a  people  fur  Ins  name 
2;).  21.  there  he  in  wuit  of  t.  more  than  furly  men 
Rom.  11.  12.  if  the  fall  uf  t.  be  the  riches  of  world, 
and  diminishing  of  t.  the  riches  of  the  Gentiles 
15.  if  the  casting  away  of  t.  be  the  reconciling 
2  Tim.  3.  11.  out  of  t.  all  the  Lord  delivered  me 
i/(i.l0.39.weare  nut u/t.whodraw  ba(  k.buto/t. 
./am.  3.  18.  is  sown  m  peace  oft.  that  make  peiice 
licv.  22.  9.  of  t.  which  keep  the  sayings  uf  this 
Hcc  Both,  Onk,  Somk. 
On  or  upon  THKM. 
Gen.  31.  34.  Rachel  had  taken  images  and  sat  u.  t. 
48.  16.  Jacob  said,  let  my  name  be  named  on  t. 
Kxud.  15.  9.  my  lust  shall  be  satisfied  upon  t. 
19.22.  lest  the  Lord  break  forth  upon  t.  24. 
32.21.  that  thou  hast  brought  so  great  a  sin  upon  t. 

34.  nevertheless  1  wjU  visit  their  sin  upon  t. 
Aci;.20.11.  their  blood  shall  be  upon  1. 12, 13, 16,27. 

26.  36.  upon  t.  that  are  left  will  1  send  a  faintness 
J\rum.  11. 17.  and  1  will  put  of  the  spirit  upon  I.  29. 

16.  33.  the  earth  closed  upon  t.  and  they  jjerished 
Dcut.  7.  16.  thine  eye  shall  have  no  pity  upon  t. 

25.  shall  not  desire  the  silver  or  gold  that  is  on  t. 
9.10.  on  t.  was  written  according  to  all  Lord  spake 

27.  .5.  thou  shalt  not  litl  up  any  iron  tool  upon  t. 
32.  23.  I  will  heap  mischiefs  upon  t.  I  will  spend 

35.  the  things  that  shall  come  upon  t.  make  haste 
Josli.  10. 11.  the  Lord  cast  down  great  stones  u.  t. 
JudjT.  9.  57.  and  u.  t.  came  the  curse  of  Jotham 

1  Kings  18.28.  till  the  bioud  gushed  out  upon  t. 

2  Kings  18.  23.  if  able  to  set  riders  u.  t.  Isa.  36.  8. 

23.  20.  he  burnt  men's  bones  u.  t.  and  returned 

1  Chron.  9.  27.  because  the  charge  was  upon  t 

2  Chron.  29.  23.  and  they  laid  their  hands  on  t. 

Mctx  6.  6.  I  8.  17.  I  13.  3. 
32.26.  so  that  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  came  not  u.  t. 
.33.  11.  Lord  brought  «;!;.  t.  king  of  Assyria 
36.  17.  he  brought  up  t.  the  king  of  the  Cbaldces 
Kira  3.  3.  for  fear  was  u.  t.  because  of  the  people 
F.sth.  8.  17.  for  the  fear  of  the  Jews  fell  upon  t. 
9.  3.  because  the  fear  of  Mordecai  fell  upon  t. 
27.  Jews  took  u.  t.  to  keep  the  days  of  Puriin 
.lob  4. 19.  how  much  less  on  t.  that  dwell  in  houses 

21.  9.  neither  is  the  rod  of  God  upon  t. 

I'sal.  33.  18.  eye  of  the  Lord  is  u.  t.  that  fear  him 

48.  6.  fear  took  hold  u.  t.  there,  and  jiain  as  of 
62.  10.  if  riches  increase,  set  not  your  heart  u.  t. 
69.  21.  pour  out  thine  indignation  upon  t. 

7.-'.  24.  and  had  rained  down  manna  7/.  t.  to  cat 
27.  he  rained  flesh  also  u.  t.  as  dust  and  fowls 
49.  he  cast  upon  t.  the  fierceness  of  his  anger 
94.  23.  he  shall  bring  upon  t.  their  own  iniquity 
103.  17.  mercy  to  everlasting  u.  I.  that  fear  him 
106.  29.  and  the  plague  brake  in  upon  t. 
118.  7.  therefore  shall  I  see  my  desire  u.  t.  that 
Lia.  9.  2.  upon  t.  hath  the  light  shined 
26.  16.  a  prayer,  when  thy  chastening  was  u.  t. 
27. 11.  that  made  them  will  not  have  mercy  on  t. 

49.  10.  he  that  hath  mercy  on  t.  shall  lead  Iheni 
.Trr.  2.  3.  evil  shall  come  upon  t.  sailh  the  Lord 

11.8.  I  will  bring  It.  1. 11. 123.  12.  ]  36.  31.  |  49.37. 

12.  15.  I  will  return,  and  have  compassion  on  t. 

24.  fi.  I  will  set  mine  eyes  u.  t.  for  good,  32.  42. 
33.  26.  to  return,  for  I  will  have  mercy  upon  I. 

46.  21.  the  day  of  their  calamitv  was  come  u.  t. 
Eirk.  23. 16.  she  doted  n.  1. 1|  37.  8.  flesh  came  h.  t. 

44.17.no  wool  shall  come  «.  t.  while  they  minister 
Dan.  3.  27.  nor  the  smell  of  fire  had  parsed  on  t. 
Uo».  5. 10. 1  will  pour  out  my  wrath  tt.  t.  liho  watci 


THE 

Ifot.  7. 19.  they  sliall  go,  I  will  spread  my  not «.  t. 
jImo&Si.  4.  I  will  set  mine  eyesu.  t.  for  evil  and  nut 
Hall.  1.  13.  wherelbre  loukesi  thou  u.  t.  that  deal 
ZtcA.10.6.  bring  them  again,  lo.  J  have  mercy  u.  t. 

14.  17.  who  will  not  come  up  u.  (.shall  be  no 
JUat. 19. 13.  should  put  his  hands  u.  t.  Mark  10. 16. 
Jyuke  1.  50.  and  lus  mercy  is  on  t.  thai  fear  bin 

2. 9.  and  lo,  the  angel  of  the  Lord  came  upon  t, 

John  20.  22.  when  he  said  this,  he  breathed  on  L 

Jlcts  4.  1.  as  they  spake,  the  Jiadducees  came  u.  t, 

3.  they  laid  hands  on  I.  \\  33.  great  grace  «  as  u.  t 

5.5.great  fear  came  un  all  t.that  heaid  these  tliinga 

11.  l5.  the  Holy  Ghost  lell  on  t.  as  on  us,  19.  6. 

19.  13.  took  upon  t.  to  call  over  them  which  had 
16.  and  the  man  leapt  on  t.  and  overcame  them 

21.  23.  we  have  four  men  which  have  avow(/«t. 
Uoni.  11.  22.  on  t.  which  fell,  severity  but  to  theo 
(ial.  6.  16.  peace  beo7i  t.  and  niefCy,  and  on  Israel 

1  'J'licss.  2. 16.  wrath  is  come  u.  t.  to  the  uttermost 
5.  3.  then  sudden  destruction  cometli  upon  t. 

2  'I'hess.  1.  8.  taking  vengeance  on  t.  that  know  not 
JIcO.  5.  2.  and  un  t.  that  are  out  of  the  way 
Hav.  6.  10.  avenge  our  blood  on  t.  that  dwell  on 

7.  16.  nor  shall  the  sun  light  on  t.  nor  any  heat 
11.  11.  and  great  fear  fell  it.  t.  which  saw  them 
16.  2.  and  upon  t.  which  worshijiped  his  image 

Over  THKM. 
F.xod.  1.  11.  they  did  set  over  t.  task-masters 
5. 14. which  Pharaoh's  task-mastetshad  set  over  t. 

18.  21.  ])lace  such  over  t.  to  be  rulers  of  thousanda 
JVuvi.  7.  2.  and  were  oi;cr  t.  that  were  numbered 

14.  )4.  have  heard  that  thy  cloud  staiidelh  over  t 

./udg.  9.  8.  the  trees  went  to  anoint  a  king  over  t, 

11.  11.  the  people  made  Jephlhab  captain  i/ctrt. 

1  ^S'a»H.8.7.rejected  me  that  I  should  not  reign  oecr  t. 
9.  the  manner  of  the  king  that  shall  reign  over  t.  . 

19.  20.  and  Samuei  standing  as  appointed  over  t. 

22.  2.  and  Uavid  became  a  captain  over  t. 

2  .Sam. 2.  7.  Juiiah  have  anointed  me  king  over  t. 

1  Chron.  9.  20.  Phinehas  was  the  ruler  over  t. 
27.  26.  and  ov(r  t.  that  did  the  work  was  Ezri 

2  Chron.  2. 11.  he  hath  made  thee  king  over  I.  9.  8 
JVcA.  9.  28.  so  that  they  had  the  dominion  over  t. 
F.sth.  9.1.  the  enemies  hojied  to  have  power  over  t. 
/^.'ui  49.14. the  upright  shall  have  dominion  over  L 

106.  41.  and  they  that  hated  them  ruled  over  t. 
Prov.  20.  26.  a  wise  kiiiig  bringeth  the  wheel  overt 
y«(t.3.4. babes  shall  rule  over  t.||  12. women  rule  o.t. 
19.  4.  a  fierce  king  shall  rule  owfrt.  saitli  the  Lord 
52.  5.  they  that  rule  over  t.  makfe  them  to  howl 
./rr.  15.3.  and  I  will  appoint  over  t.  four  kinds 

23.  4  i  will  set  shepherds  over  t.  which  shall  feed 
31.28.  like  as  I  have  watched oVfr  t.  to  jiluck  up, 

so  will  1  watch  over  t.  lo  build  mid  to  plant 

32.  41.  yea,  1  will  rejoice  over  t.  to  do  them  good 
44.  27.  1  will  watch  overt,  for  evil,  not  for  good 

Ezrk.  10.  1.  appeared  over  t.  as  a  sapjihire-stone 
19.  glory  of  the  God  of  Israel  was  over  t.  11.  22L 

34.  23.  and  I  will  set  up  one  shejiherd  over  t. 
37.  24.  David  my  servant  shall  be  king  over  t. 

Dan.  2.  38.  and  fiath  made  thee  ruler  over  t.  all 
.foel  2.  17.  that  the  heathen  should  rule  over  t. 
Mie.  3.  6.  and  the  day  shall  be  dark  over  t. 
4.  7.  the  Lord  shall  reign  over  I.  in  mount  Zion 
Huh.  1.  14.  creeping  livings  that  have  no  ruler  o.  t. 
y.ech.  9.  14.  anil  the  Lord  shall  be  seen  over  t. 
Mat.  20.  25.  the  princes  of  the  Gentiles  exercise 
dominion  orer  t.  Mark  10.  42.  J.uke  22.  25. 
Ai/Acn.  44.  the  men  that  walk  0.  t.  arc  not  aware 

19.  27.  v\  ho  would  not  that  I  should  reign  overt, 
.'lets  19.  13.  !o  call  over  t.  that  had  evil  spirits 
Worn.  5.  14.  even  over  t.  that  had  not  sinned  after 
Col.  2. 15.  a  shew  of  them,  triumphing  over  t.  in  it 
liev.  9.  11.  they  had  a  king  over  t.  whose  name  is 

11.  10.  earth  shall  rejoice  over  t.  and  make  merry 

Througlir\\V.^\. 

./M'/f.2.22.that  t/iro'  1. 1  may  prove  Israel  whether 

Jtr.9.10.are  burnt  up,so  that  none  can  pass  tAro'  t 

To  or  vnto  THKM. 
Crn.  37.  13.  come,  and  1  will  send  thcc  vnto  t. 
42.  7.  strange  unto  t.  and  spake  roiiylily  unto  t. 
25.  give  them  provision,  thus  did  Joseph  unto  . 
50.21 .  Joseph  comforted  them,  spoke  kindly  J'7».  < 
/■.J  wr/.2.25.and  G.liad  respect  vn.  t.  2  King.^- 13.23. 
3.13.  what  shall  I  say  it7!tu  t.||  14.20.  darkness  lo  t. 
14.  22.  the  waters  were  a  wall  to  t.  on  the  right 

20.  5.  thou  shall  not  bow  down  thyself  lo  t.  nor 

serve  them,  Josh.  23.  7.  2  Kings  17.  .15. 

30.  21.  shall  be  a  statute  for  ever  to  t.  Lev.  17.  7 
/,<•?>.  6.  17.  I  have  given  it  j/nt«  t.  for  their  portion 
JV«7n.  4.19.but  thus  do  vv..t.\\?i  22.  so  did  they  7/n.t. 

16. 30.  sw  allow  up,  with  all  that  appertain  unto  t. 

33.  .le.  I  shall  do  lo  yon,  as  I  thought  to  do  unto  t. 

35.  0.  and  to  t.  ye  shall  add  forty  and  two  citiiji 
Dcut.  l.S.which  the  L.  sware  to  jive  7/7;to  t.  31.23. 

4.  7.  what  nation  who  hath  God  so  nigh  imto  1. 1 

./«.<A.9.20.tliis  we  will  do  un.  t.||20.  so  did  hcTtn.  t 

Judir.  2.  17.  and  they  bowed  IhemBpIves  unto  t. 

9.  53.  niayest  do  to  t.  as  thou  shalt  find  occasion 

15k  11.  u  ihoy  did  unto  oie,  so  have  I  done  unto  I. 


THE 

1  Stm.  30.  19.  tlierc  was  nutliing  lacking  to  t. 

27.  sciil  spoil  to  t.  « liicli  w  cru  in,  •X-',  -".', :«),  31. 

5  Hum.  jo.  S.  iiii.l  :'.J(1  Iliciii,  hilt  Weill  iiol  in  itiiln  I. 

1  Kiuir.i  I'i.'i.  il'lliou  will  S|io:ik  yuoil  worils  lu  t. 

S  Kiii^si).  lc<..sayinj;,lliuini;siii;nj;i;rt;iiini;  Cul.-O. 

12.  .'5°  lei  lli<!  (iriuslii  tukij  it  to  t.  cvury  iiiaii 

1  Ckruii.  i).  iJ7.  lliu  (iiicniiig  lliemifiiortiiinuil  tu  t. 

2  C/iruu.  :t'i.  (J.  untl  simkc  coiiirorluljly  tu  t. 
Ezra  4. '20.  triOulu  iinil  custom  wu-s  jiuiil  itnto  /. 

<5.  21.  such  us  liud  6c|iur:itf<l  llic'insclvcs  unto  t. 
JVeh.a.  11.  restore  tut.  lliistlay  it'uir  lunds,  liousos 
EslJi.  'J.-Z-2.  monlli  uastuiiiuil  uittut.  from  sorrow 
Job  H.  l-i.  yet  Goil  layc^li  not  lolly  to  I. 

IT.  morning  is  tu  t.  cvoii  as  ihc  shallow  ofdcatli 
Psal.  iW.  •».  give  ihiMii,  rciulur  tu  t.  their  dosert 

34.  !t.  lor  there  is  no  want  to  t.  that  tear  him 

44.  3.  because  tlu>u  hadst  a  favour  nntu  t. 

eS.i).  do  unto  t.  ami)  l\ic  Miiliaiiitcs,  as  to  Sisirra 

ll.j.  8.  tliey  that  make  iheiii  are  likr  un.t.  135.  Ih. 

12j.  4.  do  good  tu  I.  lliat  arc  u|irij;ht  in  heart 
Pruv.  2.  7.  a  buckler  lu  I.  that  walk  uprightly 

3.  IH.  a  tree  of  life  tu  I.  that  lay  hold  on  her 

8.  !).  they  arc  right  to  £.  that  find  knuwleilgo 

10.  2ii.  so  is  the  sluggard  to  t.  that  send  him 

14.  22.  mercy  am'  truth  lie  to  t.  that  devise  good 
2."i.  13.  so  is  a  faithful  niessonger  to  t.  tliat  send 
311.  3.  a  shii'ld  unto  I.  that  put  their  trust  in  him 

F.ccl.  7.  12.  wisdom  gives  life  tu  t.  that  have  it 

Jsa.  10.  3.  seek  to  I.  that  liave  fainiliar  spirits 
2H.  13.  the  word  was  unto  t.  precept  upon  precept 
40.  2U.  lu  t.  that  have  no  might  he  increasiah 
42.  5.  hath  given  s|iirit  to  t.  to  walk  therein 

l(i.  these  things  will  I  do  unto  l-  and  not  forsake 
4!l.'.l.t«  t.thut  are  in  darkness,  J/at.4.1<i.AKAe  1.7'J. 
Wi.  'i.  to  t.  will  I  give  in  my  house  a  place  and  name 
57.  (i.  to  t.  hast  liiou  poured  a  drink-oHering 

'5'.).  2(1.  to  t.  that  turn  from  transgression  in  Jacob 
01.  7.  everlasting  joy  shall  be  unto  t. 

Jer.  .).  13.  thus  shall  it  be  done  u)Uo  t. 
(5.  1(1.  the  word  of  the  I/ord  is  unto  I.  a  reproach 

15.  lit.  let  tliem  return,  but  return  not  thou  untu  t. 
Iri.  8.  repent  of  the  evil  I  thought  to  do  unto  t. 
31.32.  brake  ciivcnaiii,tlio'  [  was  husband  untu  t. 

J.ani.  1. 22.  and  do  unto  t.  as  thou  hast  done  to  me 
3.  2.').  the  Lord  is  good  unto  t.  that  wail  for  him 
0.1.  give  lliem  sorrow  of  heart,  il:y  curse  unto  t. 
Kzck.'i.  4.  I  do  send  thee  uiitu  t.  and  thi;u  slialt  say 
3.  (■>.  hud  r  sent  thee  unto  t.  they  had  hearkened 
21).  and  ihou  shalt  not  be  to  t.  n  reprover 

11.  Ifi.  yet  will  I  be  to  t.  as  a  little  sanctuary 

12.  II.  as  I  have  dime,  so  shall  it  be  done  unto  t. 
2l».il.  in  whose  sight  I  made  myself  known  unto  t. 
33.  :^2.  lo,  thou  art  -unto  t.  ns  a  very  lovely  song 
3!).  13.  and  it  shall  be  to  t.  a  renown 

44. 12.  because  they  ministered  untu  t.  before  idols 
4K.  12.  oblation  shall  be  unto  t.  a.  thing  most  holy 
18.  shall  be  for  food  unto  I.  that  serve  the  city 
Dan.  4.  19.  the  dream  be  to  t.  that  hate  thee 
6.  2.  that  the  (irinces  might  give  account  unto  t. 

9.  4.  and  keeping  mercy  to  I.  that  love  him 

11.  34.  but  many  shall  cleave  to  t.  with  flatteries 

Ha.*.  4.  12.  and  their  slafTdeclaretli  unto  t. 
7.i:i.dcstruction  untu  I.  because  they  transgressed 
II.  4.  I  was  lo  t.  as  llicy  that  take  ofTlhe  yokij 

Jonah  3. 10.  evil  that  be  said,  lie  would  do  iinto  t. 

Mic.  2.  6.  prophesy  yc  not,  say  they  lo  t.  that 
prophesy,  liiey  shall  not  prophesy  to  t 

Mat.  (5.8.  be  ve  not  like  uiitol.\\7. 12.  doyo  so  to  t 
17.  13.  that  "he  spake  unto  t.  of  John  the  Ilaiitist 
21.  3n.  other  servants,  they  did  nnlo  t.  likewirio 
2.>.  0.  but  go  ye  rather  to  t.  that  sell,  and  buy 

Mark  4.  II.  but  to  I.  thatare  without  in  parables 
V).  40.  shall  be  given  to  I.  for  whom  it  is  prepared 

Lnkri.  51.  howcntdown,  and  was  subject  «H<o  t 
C.  31.  that  men  do  to  you,  do  yc  also  lo  I.  likcsvise 

33.  if  ye  do  good  to  t.  that  do  good  lo  you 

34.  if  ye  lend  In  I.  of  whom  yc  hope  to  receive 
11.  13.  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  t.  that  ask  him 
in.  i-*.  that  he  miiy  testily  ««'»  t.  lest  they  come 
20.1.'i.  what  shall  Lord  ol^he  vineyard  do  unto  1.1 

23.  28.  Jcsu-i  turning  nnlo  t.  said,  weep  not  for  me 

24.  11.  their  words  seemed  unto  t.  as  idle  tales 
27.  bo  expounded  unto  t.  in  all  the  scriptures 

Tohn  1.  12.  to  I.  gave  be  power  to  become  the  sons 
uf  (<od,  even  tut.  that  believe  on  his  name 

22.  we  may  give  iin  answer  to  t.  that  sent  us 
2.  24.  but  Ji'«ua  did  not  commit  himself  unto  (. 
8.  27.  that  be  spake  to  t.  of  ihe  Father 
20.  2:1.  sins  yc  remit,  they  are  remitted  unto  i. 
Jlcts  1.  lO.  who  was  guide  lo  t.  that  took  Jesun 
2.3.lhere  appeared  untu  t. cloven  tonguc8,asof  fire 

41.  there  were  added  unto  t.  about  3,00(1  8ou)« 
5.  13.  of  the  rest  durst  no  man  join  himself  lo  t. 

32.  whom  Cod  halh  given  lo  t.  that  obey  him 
14.  18.  that  they  had  not  done  »Hi-iifice  unto  t. 
1().  10  had  called  us  to  preach  the  gonpel  unto  I. 
5i!0.  34.  my  iieressities,  and  lo  t.  that  wore  with  me 

25.  11.  no  man  may  deliver  me  untu  t.  I  appeal 
llom.  1.19.  is  manife:it,  for  G.  halh  shewed  it  unto  t. 

2.7.  to  I.  who  by  patient  ronliui  ttilCO  in  well  doing 
010 


THE 

Ilom.  8.28.  work  together  for  good  fo  t.  tbnt  love  G. 
l().20.iiiitde  manitest  un.  t.  that  asked  iiiit  alter  me 

1  Co;-.  1. 2.  unto  t.  that  are  sanctified  in  ("lirisi . Ions 
24.  uuto  t.  that  are  called,  both  Jews  and  (Greeks 

9.  3.  my  answer  to  I.  thai  do  examine  me,  is  this 

14.  34.  for  it  is  not  permitted  untu  t.  to  speak 

2  Car.  4.  3.  if  gospel  hid,  it  is  hid  tu  t.  that  arc  lost 
(lid.  1.  17.  tu  t.  which  were  ajioslles  before  me 

G.  10.  untu  t.  who  are  of  the  liousehold  uf  faith 
Kph.  2.  17.  and  (ireached  peace  to  t.  that  were  nigh 
I'kil.  1.  28.  is  tu  t.  an  evident  token  of  perdition 
2  'J'hr.ts.  1.  0.  tribulation  lu  t.  tiiat  trouble  you 

1  'I'im.  4.  15.  iiiedilate,  give  thyself  wholly  lu  t. 

2  7'n/i,  4.  8.  lull  unto  all  t.  that  love  his  appearing 
7'il.  3.  lit.  that  nothing  be  wanting  unto  I. 
Hcb.  3.  18.  not  enter,  but  to  t.  that  believed  not 

4.2. to  us  was  the  gospel  preached  as  well  as  unto  t. 

6.  10.  I  will  be  to  t.  u  God,  they  to  me  a  people 
12.  11.  yieldeth  unto  I.  that  arc  exercised  thereby 

19.  word  should  not  be  spoken  lo  t.  any  more 
■fant.  1.  12.  Lord  promised  tut.  that  love  him,  2.  5. 

1  Pet.  4.  ().  gospel  preached  also  to  t.  that  are  dead 

2  Pet.  I.  1.  to  t.  that  obtained  like  precious  faith 
2.  22.  happened  uhIo  t.  according  to  the  proverb 

licD.  9.  3.  UHlu  t.  was  given  power  as  Ihe  scorpions 

5. to  t.  it  was  given  that  they  should  not  kill  them 

20.  4.  they  sat,  and  judgment  was  given  unto  I. 

Src  Say,  Wok. 

■roicanlTllEM. 

P.fal.  103. 1 1.  so  great  his  mercy  toiranit.  that  fear 

.Mat.  14. 14.  Jesus  was  moved  with  compassion  to- 

icnrd  t.  and  healed  their  sick,  Alark 

O.-M. 

0)/.4.5.  walk  in  wisdom  toward  t.  that  arc  without 

1  TUcss.  4.  12.  honestly  toicanl  t.lhat  are  without 

l/wi/irTllEM. 
^VH»n.lfi.31  .ground  clave  asundiM- that  wasuHi^cr  t. 
.Jub  20.  8.  and  the  cloud  is  not  rent  under  t. 

tVitk  TIIEM. 
<7ni.K).9.  we  will  deal  worse  with  thee  than  with  t. 
34.  8.  Ilainor  communed  witli  t.  saying,  my  son 
43. 10.  when  Joseph  saw  Benjamin  willi  I.  he  said 
F.xod.  0.  4.  I  have  established  my  covenant  with  I. 
23.  32.  shall  make  no  covenant  with  t.  Dcut.  7. 2. 
/,(■/'.  20.  39.  that  are  left  shall  pine  away  with  t. 

44.  and  to  break  my  covenant  with  t. 
JVHW/.22.  l2.lhou  shalt  not  go  w.  t.||20.arisc,  goto.  t. 
32.  19.  we  will  not  iiilierit  icith  t.  on  yonder  side 
Dcut.  2.  5.  take  good  heed,  meddle  not  with  1. 19. 
5.  29.  would  fear  nie,  that  it  might  be  well  with  t. 

7.  3.  neither  make  marriages  with  t.  .h.ih.  23. 12. 
5.  thus  shall  yc  deal  with  I.  destroy  iheir  altars 
9.  who  kecpeth  covenant  with  t.  that  love  him 

.Tosh.  9.  15.  and  Joshua  made  peace  rcith  t.  10. 
.fud<f.  1. 22.  lliey  also  went,  and  the  Lord  was  w.  I. 
19.21.  and  do  with  t.  what  seemnth  good  unloyou 

1  Saoi.  10.0.  and  Ihou  shalt  prophesy  with  t. 

15.  0.  go,  gi!l  you  down,  lest  I  destroy  you  with  I. 

2  .Srt)n."12.  17.  he  woulrl  not,  nor  did  he  eat  with  I. 
15.  30.  they  have  there  with  t.  their  two  sons 

1  Kinsr-i  8.40.and  thou  be  angry  with  t.2  C/(;-.(l.3fi. 

2  Kinos  0.  10.  are  more  than  they  that  be  inlh  t. 
11.  O"  with  t.  that  should  go  out  on  llie  salibath, 

and  came  to  Jelioiada,  2  Chrnv.  23.  8. 
22.  7.  tlicro  was  no  reckoning  made  with  t. 

1  Chron.  9. 25.  their  brethren  were  to  come  with  t. 

2  Chron.  5.  12.  and  with  t.  120  priests  sounding 
14.  11.  with  many,  or  with  t.  that  have  no  power 
17.  H.  with  I.  he  sent  Lcvites,  and  with  I.  Elishama 

9.  had  the  book  of  Ihe  law  oflhe  Lord  with  t. 
22.12.  and  he  was  »)/■//(  t.  hid  in  the  limise  of  (iod 
F.ira  5. 2.  with  I.  wrrv  the  prophets  of  (Ji.il  helping 
^WA.  9.  13.  thou  spakrsi  with  t.  from  heaven 
21.  that  lliey  inighl  do  with  1.  as  they  would 
l:i.  2.">,  and  I  ronletided  with  t.  and  cursed  them 
F..ilh.'.\.  11.  lodo  irilh  t.  as  it  seemeth  good  lotliee 
./«//2l.8.  their  seed  is  established  in  their  sight  w.t 
P^lll.  9.  0.  llieir  memorial  is  perished  with  I. 
25.  14.  sorrel  of  the  Lord  is  with  I.  that  fear  him 
35. 1.  plead  my  cause  with  t.  that  strive  with  me 
42.  4.  I  went  with  t.  to  the  house  of  Ood 
.54.4. the  Lord  is  with  t.lhat  uphold  my  soul,  118.7. 
88.  4.  I  am  eonnled  with  t.  thai  go  down  into  pit 
119.  93.  for  with  I.  thoii  hast  ipiickened  me 
Proii.l.l.i.myson,  wnlk  nut  thou  in  the  way  Ki'tA  t. 
21.  1.  evil  men,  neither  desire  to  bo  with  t. 
28.  4.  but  snch  as  keep  the  law  contend  with  t. 
F.rxl.S.  12.  it  shall  be  well  with  t.  that  fpnr  (.'od 
ha.  14.  1.  and  Ihe  Btrnnger  shall  he  joined  irilh  1. 

20.  thou  shalt  not  hi' joined  with  I.  in  burial 
34.  7.  and  the  unicorn  shall  come  down  with  1. 
.57. 8.  enlarged  thy  bed  and  made  a  rovenani  7r.  1. 
.59. 21.  this  is  my  covenant  with  t.  sailh  the  Lord 

00.  9.  lo  bring  tiioir  silver  and  their  gold  with  t. 

01.  8.  I  will  make  an  everlasting  eovenani  with  I. 
0.5.  23.  blessed  of  Lord,  and  their  ofTspring  wi'l/i  t. 

.frr.  18.23.  drill  thus  with  t.  in  time  of^  I  bine  anger 
27.  18.  and  if  ihe  word  of  the  Loril  be  with  I. 
31.  8.  I  will  jalherwilAt.  the  blind  andlhehime 
32.40. 1  will  make  an  everlasting  covenonl  with  (. 


THE 

F.iek.  16.17.  thou  madest  images  ofmcn,  and  didsl 

commit  whoredom  with  I.  28.  |  23.  7,  4:1. 

20.  20.  bring  lliee  (low  ii  with  I.  ihai  go  dinvii  lo  pit 

31.  14.  w.  I.  ihut  go  down  lo  pit,  32.  18, 24, 2.5, 29 
34.  2.5. 1  will  make  w.  t.  covenant  of  peace,  37.20. 

30.  1  the  Lord  their  God  am  iritA  '..  Zcch.  10.  i 

37. 27.  my  labcriiacte  shall  be  u;itA  t.  i  their  God 
Has.  5.  5.  Judah  also  shall  tiill  w'lh  t. 
Mat.  9.  15.  can  the  chiUlren  fast  as  lung  as  the 
bridegroom  is  with  t.  ?  Mark  2. 19.  J^ukr  5. 34. 

13.  29.  lest  yu  root  up  also  the  wheat  with  I. 

2^1.  30.  we  would  not  have  been  partakers  i;/tA  t. 

25.  3.  took  their  lamps,  and  took  no  oil  u-itA  t. 
Mark  10.20.lbey  preache<l,  the  L.  working  with  t. 
J.ukc  15.  2.  he  ealelh  w.  t.|,18. 7.  tho'  he  bear  w.  t 

24.  33.  found  the  eleven  and  them  that  were  w.  t 
.Tohn  17.12.  while  I  wasicilA  t.  in  the  world,  I  kep 

18.  5.  Judas  which  betrayed  him  sIoikI  ailh  t. 

20.  24.  but  Thomas  was  not  w.  t.  when  Jes.  came 

Jlclg  9. 28.  he  was  icilA  t.  coming  in  and  going  out 

39.  which  Dorcas  made  while  she  was  iritA  t. 

10.  20.  arise,  and  go  icitA  t.  ||  11.3.  didsl  cat  w.  t. 

11.  12.  spirit  bade  me  go  with  t.  nothing  doubting 
21.  and  the  hand  oflhe  Lord  was  icilh  t. 

12.  25.  they  took  with  I.  John  surnamed  Mark 
14. 27.  rehearsed  all  that  God  had  dune  ic.  1. 15.  4 
15.  :18.  Paul  thought  not  good  to  take  him  if  (lA  t 

20.  30.  he  kneeled  down  and  prayed  with  I.  all 

21.  24.  be  at  charges  tf  I'tA  t.  that  they  may  shave 
Horn.  11.  17.  and  with  I.  partakes!  oflhe  root 

12.  15.  bless  and  curse  not,  rejoice  with  1.  that 

do  rijoice,  and  weeji,  with  t.  that  weejj 
F.ph.  5.  7.  be  yc  not  therefore  partakers  iritA  t. 
0.  24.  grace  be  with  I.  that  love  our  L.  Jesus  Clir 

1  Thcss.A.  17.  shall  be  caught  up  together  rei'lA  I. 

2  Tim.  2.  22.  peace  iritA  l.'thnt  call  on  the  Lord 
Hcb.  3.  17.  was  it  not  joitA  t.  that  had  ginned? 

8.  8.  for  finding  fault  with  I.  he  saiih,  behold 

10.  10.  this  is  the  covenant  1  will  make  w  ith  t. 

11.  31.  the  harlot  Rahab  perished  not  with  t. 

13.  3.  them  that  are  in  bonds,  as  bound  iritA  *. 

1  Pel.  3.  7.  ye  husbands,  dwell  with  I.  according 
4.  4.  that  yo  run  not  uji'lA  t.  to  the  same  excess 

2  Pet.  2. 20.  latter  end  is  worse  w.  t.  than  beginning 
Hen.  9.  19.  had  heads,  and  with  I.  they  do  hurt 

21.  3.  tabernacle  with  men  will  dwell  rci'lA  t. 

IVithoul  Til  KIM. 
Lev.  26.  43.  while  she  lieth  desolate  without  t. 
.svr  Tkacii. 

themsi:lves. 

Oen.  19.  11.  they  wearied  t.  lo  find  the  door 

43.  32.  for  them  by  t.  for  the  Egyptians  by  t. 
F.iud.  5.  7.  let  them  go  and  gather  si  raw  for  t. 

12.  39.  nor  had  they  prcpare-il  for  t.  victual 

32.  7.  for  tjiy  people  have  corrupted  t.  Drut.  9 

*■      12.  1  .'K.  5.  .Tud-^.  2.  19.  //u^■.  9.  9 
j\rum.S.  7.  let  them  wash,  and  so  make  t.  clean 
Deal.  32.  31.  even  our  enemies  t.  being  judges 
1  Sunt.  3.  13.  iHJcause  his  sons  made  t.  vile  and  he 

14.  11.  both  of  tlieui  discovered  t.  lo  Ihe  uarrisor 
1  Kimrs  8.  47.  if  they  shall  bethink  I.  2  Chr.  0.37 

18.  23.  let  them  choose  one  bullock  for  t. 
iKinas  8.20.  Edom  made  a  king  over  t.  2  Cbr.  21.8 

17.  17.  sold  t.  to  do  evil  in  Ihe  sight  of  the  Lord 
32.  made  to  t.  of  the  lowest  of  ihem  priests 

19.  29.  ye  shall  eat  such  things  as  grow  of/. 

1  Chron.  19.  0.  they  had  made  t.  odious  In  DavM 

2  Chrun.  7.  14.  if  my  people  shall  humble  t. 
12.  0.  the  princes  and  the  king  humbled  t.  7. 

20.  25.  precious  jewels  which  they  stript  ofi'  for  (. 
35. 14.  afterw.  they  made  rciidy  for  t.  and  priost» 

F.ira  9. 2.  they  have  taken  od'lhclrdnnsliters  for  t. 

F..-ith.  9.  31.  aiid  as  tliev  had  decreed  for  I.  and  seed 

.tub  24.  10.  himses  which  they  had  marked  for  t. 
30.  14.  in  Ihe  desolation  lliey  rolled  1.  upon  mC 
41.  2.3.  Ihev  are  firm  in  1.  they  cannot  be  moved 

P.iiil.  2.  2.  the  kings  of  Ihc  rnrlh  set  t.  against  God 

9.  20.  the  nations  inav  know  t.  lo  be  but  men 

44.  10.  and  they  wliiili  hale  us  spoil  for  t. 

.57.  fi.  into  Ihe  midst  witcreof  lliey  nrr  fallen  t. 

100.  28.  they  joined  t.  also  lo  Ilaal-peor  and  nio 

140.  8.  grant  not  their  desires,  lest  Ihcy  exult  t. 
Pror.  23.  5.  riches  make  t.  wings,  they  fly  awny 
F.rrl.  3.  18.  lliey  might  sec  that  Ihcy  t.  are  bensH 
fsn.  2.  0.  and  they  please  1.  in  cliildten  of  ulrangen 

3.  9.  for  Iheyha've  rewarded  evil  to  t. 

4(i.  2.  lint  t.  are  gone  into  capliviiy 

47.  14.  they  shall  not  deliver  /.  from  Ihe  flnma 

48.  2.  for  I'hey  rnll  t.  oflhe  holy  city,  and  slay 
.50.  0.  sonsofihestrnnger  thai  join  t.  tollie  Lord 

.//  r.  2.  24.  all  they  thai  seek  her  will  not  weary  I 
4   2.  and  Ihe  nations  shall  bless  I.  in  him 
7.  19.  do  they  not  provoke  t.  ||  9.  5.  they  weary 
11.17.  for  the  evil  they  have  done  n^ninsl  t. 
12.  13.  have  put  t.  to  pain,  but  shnll  nol  profit 
Hi.  0.  nor  rut  I.  nor  make  I.  bald  for  Ihem 
27.  7.  and  great  kings  shall  serve  f.  of  him 
30.  21.  and  Iheir  nobli  s  shall  be  i>fl. 
M.  10.  that  none  should  serve  t.  oflliem  any  moi« 

F.zck.  10.  17.  they  wcro  lilted  up,  these  lift  up  L 


THE 

E:e)t.IO.(S.was  the  sunie,  llieir  appearanr.>3  arni  t. 

14.  18.  but  tlioy  only  sliall  bu  delivered  t. 

31.  ~  woe  to  sheplierds  ol'  Israel  tliat  do  feed  t. 

10.  iior  shall  the  shepherds  feed  t.  any  moro 
4.j.5.sluill  also  the  Levites  of  the  liouse  have  lor  t. 
Hus.  4.  14.  lor  t.  are  sejiacat^d  with  wliorea 

7.  14.  they  assembled  t.  tor  corn  and  wine 

5.  10.  but  they  separat-yi  t.  to  that  shame 
Ilab.  1.  7.  their  judgments  siiu.l  proceed  oft. 

2.  i;).  tlie  people  shall  weary  t.  for  very  vanity 
Z'c/i-  4.  li  which  empty  the  golden  oil  out  ol' t. 

11.5.  who  slay  tliem,  and  hold  t.  not  guilty 
Mat.  14.  2.  John  Baptist  is  risen,  therefore  mighty 
works  do  shew  forth  t.  in  him,  Mark  li.  14. 

16.7.  reasoned  among  t.  .Mark  8.  16.  Luke  20. 14. 

lil.  12.  there  be  eunuchs,  wlio  made  t.  eunuchs 

21.  25.  reasoned  with  t.  Mark  11.  31.  Luke  20.  5. 
2.<.  4.  but  they  t.  will  not  move  them  with  ono 

Mark  4.  17.  receive  it,  and  have  no  root  in  t. 
il.  10.  and  tliey  kept  that  saying  with  t. 
L,ukcl.30.  rejected  the  counsel  of  God  against  t. 

15.  9.  he  spake  to  certain  which  trusted  in  t. 
20.  20.  sent  spies  wliicli  should  feign  t.  just  men 
2;J.  12.  lor  liefore  they  were  at  emnity  between  t. 

John  17. 13.  they  might  have  my  joy  I'ullilled  in  t. 
18.  28.  they  t.  went  not  into  the  judgment  hull 
4cts  15.  32.  Judas  and  Silas  being  projihets  also  t. 

16.  37.  but  let  them  come  t.  and  li^tch  us  out 
18.  6.  and  when  they  opposed  t.  and  blasphemed 

21.25.  that  they  keep  t.  from  things  oHered  to  idols 

23.  12.  certain  Jews  bound  t.  under  a  curse,  21. 

24.  15.  a  resurrection  which  they  t.  also  allow 
28.  25.  and  when  they  agreed  not  among  t. 

29.  the  Jews  had  great  reasoning  among  t. 
/<om.l.22.i)rofessing  J. to  be  wise,tliey  became  fools 
24.  to  dishonour  their  own  bodies  between  t. 
27.  receiving  in  t.  that  recompense  of  their  error 
2.  14.  these  not  having  the  law,  are  a  law  to  t. 
10.3.have  not  submitted  f.to  righteousness  of  God 
13. 2.  they  that  resist  sliall  receive  to  t.  damnation 
]  Cor.  6.  9.  nor  abusers  oft.  with  mankind 
iCor.  5. 15.  ehould  not  henceforth  live  to  t  but  to 

8.  3.  beyond  their  power  they  were  willing  oft. 

10.  12.  measuring  t.  by  t.  comparing  t.  with  t. 

11.  13.  transforming  t.  into  the  apostles  of  C'hrisl 
Cfal.  6.  13.  for  neither  do  they  t.  lieep  the  law 
Kph.i.l^.  who  have  given  (.  over  to  laseiviousncss 
I'hii.  2.  3.  let  each  esteem  other  better  than  t. 

1  'JtiRss.  1.  9.  for  they  I.  shew  of  us  wliat  manner 
I  Tim.  1.  10.  them  that  defile  i.  with  mankind 

2.9.  women  adorn  t.  in  modest  apparel,  1  Fct.  3.5. 

3.1.3.thcy  purchased  to  i.good degree  and  boldness 

6.  19.  laying  up  in  store  for  t.  a  good  foundation 
8  Tim.  2.  25.  instructing  those  that  oppose  t. 

26.  may  recover  t.  out  of  the  snare  of  the  devil 
4.  3.  but  they  shall  heap  to  t.  teachers,  having 
Tit.  1.  12.  one  of  t.  even  a  prophet  of  their  own 
Hcb.  6. 6.  seeing  tliey  crucify  to  t.  the  Son  of  God 
I  Pet.  1.  12.  that  not  to  (.  but  us  they  did  minister 
S  Pet.  2.  1.  and  bring  uiMjn  t.  swift  destruction 
13.  sporting  t.  with  their  own  deceivings  while 
19.  they  t.  are  the  servants  of  corruption 
Jude  7.  giving  (.  over  to  fornication,  going  after 
10.  they  corrupt  1. 1|  12.  feeding  t.  without  fear 
19.  who  separate  t.  sensual,  having  not  the  Spirit 
See  Gather,  Hidk,  Spread. 
THEN. 
Gen.  4.  26.  t.  began  men  to  call  upon  the  Lord 

13.  7.  the  Canaanite  dwelt  t.  in  the  land 
10.  t.  shall  thy  seed  also  be  numbered 

27.  41.  t.  will  I  slay  my  brother  Jacob 

28.  21.  t.  shall  the  Lord  be  my  God 

44.26.  if  our  brother  be  with  us  t.  will  we  go  down 
49.  4.  t.  defilest  thou  it ;  he  went  up  to  my  conch 

£,ev.  28.  41.  if  t.<their  hearts  be  humbled,  and  they 
t.  accept  of  the  punishment  of  their  iniquity 

42.  t.  I  will  remember  my  covenant  with  Jacob 
Josh.  14.  II.  as  my  strength  was  £.  so  is  it  now 

12.  if  the  Loril  be  with  me,  t.  I  shall  be  able 
Juilg.'S  S.they  choose  new  gods,  (.  was  war  in  gates 
1  Sam  15.14.  whatmeanetht.  this  bleating  of  sheep 

25.  31.  f.  remember  thine  handmaid 

1  Kinas  8.  32.  t.  hear  thou  in  heaven,  34,  36,  39, 

4.5,  49. 

22.  47.  there  was  t.  no  king  in  Edom,  a  deputy 

2  Kin^s  1.  10.  t.  let  fire  come  down  from  heaven 

8.  16.  Jehoshaphat  bemg  t.  king  of  Israel 

9.  3.  t.  open  the  door  and  flee  and  tarry  not 

1  CAron.  11.  16.  and  David  was  t.  in  the  hold 
tCAroji.33.13.  t.  Mana«ses  knew  the  Lord  was  God 
F.rra  5.  1.  t.  the  prophets  prophesied  to  the  Jews 
2.  f.  rose  Zerubhabcl  to  build  the  house  of  God 
Efth..  5.  9.  I.  went  Ilamnn  forth  that  day  joyful 

14.  (.  said  Zeresh  his  wife,  and  his  frienda  to  him 

7.  10.  t.  was  the  king's  wrath  pacified 

Joh  3.  13. 1  should  have  slept,  t.  had  I  been  at  rest 
11.  11.  he  seeth  also,  will  he  not  t.  consider  if! 
22.  26.  t.  Shalt  thou  have  dcliglit  in  the  Almighty 

29.  t.  thou  shall  say  there  is  lifting  up 
S&  21.  kauwaat  Uiou  iL  b(>cau8i:  thtxi  vrajt  I.  born 


Vr 


THE 

Psal.  57.  10.  J.  the  Lord  will  take  mo  tjp 
51.  13.  t.  will  1  teach  transgressors  thy  wa)'9        < 
55. 12.  was  not  an  enemy,  1. 1  could  have  borne  it 
69.  4.  t.  I  restored  that  which  I  took  not  away 
106.  12.  t.  believed  they  his  words,  they  sang 
119.  6.  t.  shall  I  not  be  ashamed,  when  I  have 

Prov.  2.5.  (.  shall  thou  understand  the  fear  of  Lord 

9.  t.  slialt  thou  understand  righteousness 
24. 14. 1,  there  shall  be  a  reward,  thy  expectation 

/.«n..32.16.  (.judgment  shall  dwell  in  the  wilderness 
58.8.  t.  shall  tliy  light  break  forth  as  the  morning 
9.  t.  shalt  thou  call,  and  the  Lord  shall  answer 

Jer.  4.  1.  (.  shalt  thou  not  remove 

11.  15.  when  thou  dost  evil,  t.  thou  rejoicest 
18.  t.  thou  shewedst  me  their  doings        . 

23.  22.  t.  they  should  have  turned  them  from 
33.  26.  t.  will  I  cast  away  the  seed  of  Jacob 

Ezek.  39. 2b.  t.  shall  they  know  that  i  am  the  Lord 
Van.  5.  24.  t.  was  part  of  the  hand  sent  from  him 
Mai.  3. 16.  (.  they  that  feared  the  Lord  spake  often 
Mat.  5.  24.  and  t.  come  and  olier  thy  gift 

9.  15.  t.  shall  they  fast,  Mark  2.  20.  J,uke  5.  35. 

12.  29.  t.  will  he  spoil  his  house,  Mark  3.  27. 
16.27.and  t.  he  shall  reward  everv  man  accordin 
17.  26.  Jesus  saith,  t.  are  the  children  free 
19.25.were  amazed,  saying,  wlio  (.  can  be  saved  1 

Mark  10.  26.  Luke  18.  26 

24.  14.  for  a  witness  to  all,  t.  shall  the  end  come 
21. for  t.  shall  be  great  tribulation,  such  not  since 

26.  56.  (.  all  the  discii)les  forsook  him  and  fled 
Mark  12.  37.  and  whence  is  he  t.  his  son  ■? 

13.  14.  t.  let  them  that  be  in  Judca  flee  to  the 

mountains,  Luke  21.  21 
I^uke  6.  42.  (.  shalt  thou  see  clearly  to  pull  out 
John  1.  21.  he  asked  what  (.  art  thou  Elias  1 
25.  they  asked  him,  why  baptizest  thou  (.  ? 

7.  33.  and  t.  I  go  unto  him  that  sent  me 

8.  28.  t.  shall  ye  know  that  I  am  he,  and  that  I  do 
.lets  2.38. (.  Peter  said  to  them, repent  and  be  ba|>t. 

41.t.theytliat  gladly  received  his  word  were  bapt. 
11. 18.  t.  hath  God  to  the  Gentiles  granted,  26.  20 
Ro7n.  6.  21.  what  fruit  had  ye  t.  in  those  things  ? 
7.  7.  what  shall  we  say  (.  is  the  law  sin"?  9.  14. 
8. 17.  if  children,  t.  heirs,  heirs  of  God,  joint  heirs 

11.  5.  so  (.  at  this  present  there  is  a  remnant 

1  Cor.  4.  5.  (.  shall  every  man  have  praise  of  God 

10.  19.  what  say  I  t.  that  the  idol  is  any  thing 

13.  12.  but  t.  face  to  face,  now  I  know  in  part, 

t.  shall  I  know  even  as  also  I  am  known 

14.  15.  what  is  it  t.1\\2  Cor.  12.  10.  t.  am  I  strong 
rr'aZ.2.21.  come  by  the  law,  (.Christ  is  dead  in  vain 

3. 29.  if  ye  be  Christ's,  (.  are  ye  Abraham's  seed 

4.  29.  but  as  (.  he  that  was  born  after  the  flesh 

6.  4.  (.  shall  he  have  rejoicing  in  himself 
lTAc.';s.5.3.(.suddende8truction  Cometh  upon  them 

2  Thcis.  2.  8.  (.  shall  that  wicked  one  be  revealed 
I/eb.  7. 27.  first  for  his  own  sins,  (.  for  the  people's 

12.  8.  t.  are  ye  bastards,  and  not  sons 
1  John  3.  21.  t.  have  we  confidence  towards  God 

THENCE. 
Cien.  24. 7.  thou  shalt  take  a  wife  to  my  son  from  ( 

27.  45.  then  I  will  send  and  fetch  thee  from  (. 
49.  24.  from  (.  is  the  shepherd,  the  stone  of  I.';rael 

JViim.  13.  23.  they  cut  down  from  (.  a  branch,  24. 
23.  13.  Balaksaid,  curse  me  them  from  (.  27. 
Dcut.  4.  29.  if  from  (.  thou  shalt  seek  the  Lord 

5.  15.  the  Lord  brought  thee  out  (.  6.  2.3.  |  24.  18 
19.  12.  the  elders  shall  send  and  fetch  him  (. 
30.  4.  from  (.  will  the  Lord  gather  thee,  and 

from  (.  will  he  fetch  thee,  J^Tch.  1.  9. 
.Judg.  19.  18.  to  mount  Ephraim,  from  (.  am  I 
1  Sam.  4.  4.  might  bring  from  (.  the  ark  of  the  cove 
nant  of  the  L.  of  hosts,  2  .Sam.  6.  2. 1  Chr.  13.  6. 

1  King's  2.  36.  go  not  forth  from  (.  any  whither 

2  King.s  2. 21.  shall  not  he  from  (.  any  more  death 
23.  and  he  went  up  from  (.  to' Beth-el 

25.  from  (.  to  Carmel,  and  from  (.  to  Samaria 

7.  8.  the  lepers  carried  (.  silver  and  gold  and  hid  it 
2  Chron.  26.  20.  they  thrust  out  Uzziah  from  (. 
Ezra  6.  6.  now  therefore,  be  ye  far  from  (. 

/.sa.  .52.  11.  depart  ye,  depart,  go  ye  out  from  (. 
65.  20.  there  shall  be  no  more  t.  an  infant  of  days 

Jer.  5.  6.  every  one  that  goes  (.  shall  be  torn 
22.  24.  were  the  signet  yet  would  I  pluck  thee  ( 
36.  29.  cause  to  cease  from  (.  man  and  beast 
37. 12.  went  forth  to  separate  himself  < 
43.  12.  and  he  shall  go  forth  from  (.  in  peace 
49.  16.  as  the  eagle  I  will  bring  thee  down  from  (. 

F.zek.  11.  18.  shall  lake  all  abominations  from  (. 

Hos.  2.  15.  I  will  give  her  her  vineyards  from  (. 

Amos  6.  2.  from  (.  go  ye  to  Ilamath  the  great 
9  2.  dig  into  hell,  (.  shall  my  hand  laki;  them,  3, 
4.  (.  will  I  command  the  sword,  it  shall  slay 

Obad.i.  among  stars,  t.  will  I  bring  thee  down 

Mat.  5.  26.  thou  shalt  by  no  means  come  out  (. 
10.  11.  who  worthy,  and  there  abide,  till  ye  go  t. 

Mark  6.  11.  when  ye  depart  (.  shake  off  the  dust 

I.uke  16. 26.  that  would  come  from  t.  to  us  cannot 
THK.VCEFORTH. 

Ljb.  ^  S7.  t.  it  ahaM  ba  nacoftM  for  ynx 


THli 

2  Chron.  32.  23.  Ilezckiah  was  lagnlfled  from  1 
Mat.  5. 13.  is  t.  good  for  noliiing  but  to  be  cast  out 
John  19. 12.  from  t.  Pilate  sought  to  release  him 

THKUK. 
Ocn.  2. 8.  (.  he  put  the  man  whom  he  had  formed 
I'd.  28.  if  1  find  forty-five  t.  I  will  not  destroy  it 
32.  29.  he  blessed  hiin  (.  ||  35.  7.  (.  God  appeared 
49.  31.  t.  they  buried  Abiaham  and  Sarah,  t. 
I  hey  buried  Isaac  and  Rebckah  his  wifn 
Kxod.  8. 22.  Goshen,  no  swarms  of  Hies  shall  be  (. 

15. 25.  t.  he  made  a  statute,  t.  he  proved  them 
17.  6.  behold  I  will  stand  before  (.  in  lloieb 
24.  12.  Come  up  into  tlie  mount,  and  be  (.  34.  2. 

34.  28.  and  he  was  (.  with  the  Lord  forty  day» 
Lev.  8.  31.  (.  eat  it  ||  16. 23.  shall  leave  them  t. 
Mum.  11.  17.  I  will  come  and  talk  with  thee  (. 

13.  28.  moreover  we  saw  the  children  of  Anak 
(.  33.  Deut.  1.  28.  .losh.  14.  12. 

20.  1.  and  Miriam  died  (.  and  was  buried  (. 
26.  and  Aaron  shall  die  (.  28.  Dcut.  10.  6. 

Deut.  4.  28.  t.  ye  shall  serve  gods,  work  of  men's 
hands,  wood  and  stone,  28.  36,  64.  Jir.  16.  13. 

10.  5.  and  (.  they  be  unto  this  day,  .hsh.  4.9. 
12.  5.  your  God  shall  choose  to  put  his  name  (. 

14.  23.  I  16.  2,  11.  1  Kings  8.  29.  |  9.  3. 

31.26.  it  may  be  (.  for  a  witness  against  lliee 
Judg.  5.  27.  where  he  bowed,  (.  he  lell  down  dead 

7.  4.  bring  them  down,  I'll  try  them  for  thee  (. 

21.  9.  none  of  the  inhabitants  of  Jahesh-gilcad  (. 
liuth  1.  17.  where  thou  diest,  (.  will  I  be  buried 

1  .Sam.  1.  3.  the  priests  of  the  Lord  were  t.  4.  4. 
28.  and  Hannah  worshipped  the  Lord  (. 

11.  14.  go  to  Gilgal,  and  renew  the  kingdom  t. 
15.  (.  they  made  Saul  king  before  the  Lord  t. 

they  sacrificed,  and  (.  they  rejoiced 

21.  7.  a  certain  man  of  the  servants  of  Saul  (. 

22.  22.  I  knew  when  Doeg  the  Edomito  was  t. 

2  .Sa77i.3. 27.  Joab  smote  Abnert.  under  the  fifth  ril< 
6. 7.  God  smote  Uzzah  (.and  (.he  died  by  ark  of  G. 
15.  21.  even  (.  also  will  thy  servant  lie 

35.  hast  thou  not  (.  Zadok  and  Abiathar 

1  Kings  8.  8.  staves,  and  (.  they  are  lo  this  day 
11.  36. 1  have  chosen  to  put  my  name  (.  2  King.f 

23.  27.  2  Chron.  6.  5,  6'.  ]  7   16.  mii.  1.  9. 

17.  4.  I  commanded  the  ravens  to  feed  thee  (. 

18.  10.  when  they  said  he  is  not  (.  he  took  an  oath 

19.  3.  came  to  Beer-sheha,  and  lell  his  servant  (. 

2  Kings'i.  21.  Elisha  went,  and  cast  the  salt  in  (. 
4.  11.  he  came  and  lay  (.||7.  4.  and  we  shall  die  (. 
7.5.  when  they  were  come,  there  was  no  man  (.  10. 

1  Chron.  14.  12.  when  they  left  their  gods,  (. 

2  Chron.  28.  9.  but  a  prophet  of  the  Lord  was  (. 

32.  21.  they  slew  Sennacherib  (.  with  the  sword 
EzraG.  12.  God  hath  caused  his  name  to  dwell  ( 
Job  3.  17.  (.  the  wicked  cease  from  troubling,  and 

(.  the  weary  be  at  rest 

18.  (.  the  prisoners  rest  together,  and  hear  not 

19.  small  and  great  are  (.  the  servant  is  free  from 

23.  7.  (.  the  righteous  might  dispute  with  him 
35. 12.  (.  they  cry,  but  none  giveth  answer 
39.  30.  and  where  the  slain  are,  (.  is  she 

Psal.  14.  5.  (.  were  they  in  great  fear,  53.  5. 
45.12.  the  daughterofTyreshallbe(.  with  a  gift 
48.  6.  fear  took  hold  upon  them  (.  and  pain 
66.  6.  went  through  flood,  (.  did  we  rejoice  in  him 
69.  35.  will  build  cities  that  they  may  dwell  (. 
87.  4.  Philistia  and  Tyie,  this  man  was  born  (.6 
7.  singers  and  plavers  on  instruments  shall  be  t. 
104.26.  (.  go  the  ships,  (.  is  that  Leviatlinn 
133.  3.  (.  the  Lord  commanded  the  blessing 
139.  8.  Ihou  art  (.  ||  10.  shall  thy  hand  lead  ma 

Prov.  8.  27.  I  was  (.  ||  9.  18.  that  the  dead  are  (. 

26.  20.  where  no  wood  is,  (.  the  fire  goelh  out 
Eccl.  3. 16.  that  wickedness  was  (.  iniquity  was  (. 

17.  for  there  is  a  time  (.  for  every  purpose 

11.  3.  where  the  tree  falleth,  t.  it  shall  be 
Cant.  8.  5.  (.  thy  mother  brought  thee  forth 

Tsa.  13.  20.  nor  shall  shepherds  make  their  fold  t. 
21.  hut  wild  beasts  of  the  desert  shall  lie  (. 

22.  18.  (.  Khalt  thou  die,  and  (.  the  chariots 

23.  12.  lo  Chittim,  (.  also  shalt  thou  have  no  rest 
28.  10.  line  upon  line,  here  a  little  and  (.  a  littla 

33.  21.  (.  glorious  Lord  will  be  a  place  of  rivers 

35.  8.  and  a  highway  shall  be  (.  and  a  way 
9.  no  lion,  but  ihe  redeemed  shall  walk  (. 

48.  16.  (.  am  I  ||  6.5.  9.  my  servant  shall  dwell  L 
Jer.  8.22.  is  (.  no  balm  in  Gilead,  no  physician  (.  t 
18.  2.  (.  will  I  cause  thee  to  hear  my  words 

20.  fi.  (.  thou  shalt  die,  and  shalt  be  buried  (. 
22.  26.  another  country  (.  shall  ye  die,  42.  16. 

27.  22.  and  (.  shall  they  be  till  I  visit  them 
3H.  28.  he  was  (.  when  Jerusalem  was  taken 
•i%  14.  will  go  into  Egypt,  and  (.  will  we  dwell 
47.  7.  against  Askelon,  (.  hath  he  appointed  it 

Ezek.  3.22.  go  to  the  plain,  I  will  (.  talk  with  thee 

12.  13.  he  shall  not  see  it,  though  he  shall  die  (. 
17.  20.  I  will  plead  with  him  (.  for  his  trespass 
20.28.  and  they  ofi'ered  (.  their  sacrifices,  (.  th«jr 

presented  the  provocation  of  their  offerinf 
SI  and  (.  will  I  p1««id  «4lli  ]|w  <«£•  to  &e« 


THE 

fiHftj60.40.(.wUl  I  aOtcpt  them,t.  require  offerings 
ta.  M.  ami  1  will  leavo  yoa  t.  and  melt  you 
2;t.  3.  t.  were  llieir  breiisls  iire^ud,  t.  iliiy  bruiaoii 
2'J.  M.  and  thoy  shall  be  t.  a  baeo  kiugdom 
3i!.  vf2.  Asliur  is  t.  an<l  all  her  ci)mi)aiiy 
3j.  lU.  Wo  will  poBsegs  it,  whereiib  tliu  Lord  was  t. 
4H.  35.  name  of  the  city  shall  be,  the  Lord  iu  t. 
JIus.  '2.  io.  and  she  shall  siii^  t.  as  in  )ier  youth 
7.  'J.  yea,  grey  haire  arc  here  and  t.  U|ion  hini 
'J.  1j.  t.  1  haled  them  ||  ]2.  4.  t.  he  spake  wiUi  us 
Joel  3.  '■i.  I  will  plead  wiili  them  t.  lor  my  people 
,iiiws  ti.  J-J.  will  one  plow  t.  with  oxeiil 
7.  liJ.  into  Judah,  t.  eal  bread  and  prophesy  t. 
JSticA.  lO.t.  be  delivered, «.  Lord  shall  redeem  thee 
'/.ipk.  \.  14.  the  miglity  man  shall  try  t.  bitterly 
Jilal.  i  13.  be  thou  t.  till  I  bring  iheo  word 

5.  ii3.  t.  rememhcresl  that  thy  brother  halh  ought 
SJl.  leave  t.  thy  gilt  belore  the  altar 

C.  iil.  where  treasure  is,  t.  will  your  heart  be  also 
f .  \i.  t.  shall  be  gnashing  of  teeth,  22.  13.  |  34.  51. 
ii.  45.  they  enter  in,  and  dwell  t.  J.ukc  11.  iiti. 
ly.  20.  in  my  name,  (.  am  I  in  the  midst  of  them 

24.  23.  lo  here  is  Christ,  or  t.  Mark  13.  21. 

25.  25.  I  hid  thy  talent,  t.  thou  hast  that  is  thine 
27.  3fi.  and  sitting  down,  they  watched  him  t. 
2S.  7.  in  Galilee,  t.  shall  ye  see  him,  Mark  10.  7. 

Mark  1.  :i"l.  let  us  go,  that  I  may  preach  t.  also 

6.  5.  and  he  could  t.  do  no  mighty  work,  save  that 
Luke  10. 6.  and  if  the  son  of  peace  be  t.  your  peace 

12.  IH.  t.  will  I  bestow  all  my  fruits  and  goods 
Jiihn  12.  26.  where  I  am  t.  shall  my  servant  bo 

14.  3.  that  where  I  am,  t.  ye  may  he  also 
Acts  20.  22.  the  things  that'shall  befall  me  t. 

22.  10.  t.  it  shall  be  told  thee  of  all  things  which 
Hum.'.).  20.  t.  be  called  the  rhildren  of  living  God 
liev.  21.  25.  for  there  shall  be  no  night  t.  22.  5. 

THKIIE.MJOUT. 
Luke  24.  4.  as  they  were  much  perplexed  t. 
See  Abode,  Is,  None,  One,  Strand,  Stood, 
Was. 

THERE.\T. 
F.tod.  30.  in.  wash  their  hands  and  feet,  t.  40.  31. 
Mat.  7. 13.  and  iiianv  there  be  which  go  in  t. 

TIIKHEDY. 
Gen.  24.  14.  t.  shall  I  know  thou  hn»t  shewed 
J.ev.  11.  43.  that  ye  should  be  defiled  t. 
Job  22.  21.  with  God,  (.  good  will  come  unto  thou 
Prov.  20.  1.  whoso  is  deceived  t.  is  not  wise 
F.crl.  10.  9.  cleaveth  wood,  shall  be  endangered  t. 
Isa.  33.  21.  nor  shall  gallant  ships  jia.ss  t. 
Jcr.  18.  10.  passeth  t.  shall  bo  astonished,  19.  8. 
.■)!.  43.  neither  dolh  any  son  of  man  [ia.is  t. 
F.zfk.  12.  5.  dig  througl;  wall  and  carry  out  t.  12. 
33.  12.  he  shall  not  lall  t.  \\  18.  he  shall  die  t. 

Iil.  and  do  what  is  lawful,  he  shall  live  t. 
Zrch.  9.  2.  and  Ilamath  also  shall  border  t. 
John  11.  4.  that  Son  of  God  might  be  glorified  t. 
r.ph.  2. 10.  by  the  cross,  having  slain  the  enmity  t. 
Ht:h.  12.  11.  yields  to  them  who  are  exercised  I. 
15.  root  springing  up,  and  t.  many  be  defiled 

13.  2.  for  t.  some  have  entertained  angels 

1  Pet.  2.  2.  milk  of  the  word  that  ye  may  grow  t. 

THEREFORE. 
G?n.2.24.t.shall  a  man  leave  his  father  and  mother 

17.  9.  God  said,  thou  slialt  keep  my  covenant  t. 

42.21.  guilty,  t.  is  this  distress  come  upon  us 
F.iod.  1.  20.  t.  God  dealt  well  with  the  mid  wives 

4.  12.  I.  go  II  5.  8.  Ihey  be  idle,  t.  they  cry,  17. 

12.  17.  t.  shall  ye  observe  this  day,  13.  10. 

10.  29.  t.  he  giveth  you  on  llie  sixth  day  bread 

31.  14.  yo  shall  keep  the  sabbath  t.  for  it  is  holy 
7.rt).11.44.  ye  shall  £.  be  holy,  I  am  holy,  45.  |  21.0. 

15.  2.5.  t.  I  do  visit  the  iniquity  thereof  upon  it 
20.  ye  shall  t.  keep  my  statutes  and  judgments 
30. 1,  keep  mv  ordinances,  19.  37.  ]  20.  22. )  22.  9. 

25.17.  y(!dhall  not  f.  oppress  one  anothc'r,  but  fear 
Js'am.  3.  12.  t.  the  Lfvites  shall  be  mine 
J)cut.5.\!>.f.  thi'  Lord  lliv  God  commanded  Ihec  to 
keep  the  sabbath-day,  15.  11,  15.  |  24.  18,  22. 

^.  41^.  t.  thou  shalt  servo  thine  enemies 
Judir.  II,  8.  t.  we  turn  again  to  thee  now 

1  Sam.  1.  1^.  t.  also  I  have  lentliim  to  the  Lord 
2".  18.  /.  bath  the  Lord  done  this  thing  lo  then 

2  Sam.  0.  23.  t.  Michal  had  no  child  to  her  death 
1  fCinirs  2.  2.  ho  Rlronff  t.  and  shew  thyself  a  man 

a<i.  42.  /.  Ihv  life  shall  go  for  his  life,  and  people 

3  KingK  1.  rt.  t.  thoimhalt  not  come  down,  10. 
10.  18.  t.  they  have  deslroyed  them 

1  TTiron. 10.14. 1.  he  slmv  Saul,  and  turned  kingdom 

I  Chrnn.  t.  1.  22.  hath  he  brought  Kll  tills  evil 
30.  7.  t.  gave  them  up  to  deyolalion,  a.i  ye  sefl 

A'»A.2.  20.  t.  we  his  «ervnntn  will  ariso  anil  build 
13.  28.  (.  I  chased  him  from  mo 

Job  21.  14.  (.  they  sav  to  God, depart  from  us 
35.  14.  judgment  is  before  hitii,  t.  trust  in  him 
42.  8.  t.  lake  unto  you  seven  hullockn.  seven  rams 

Psal.  10.  9.  I.  my  heart  is  glad  ||  31.  3.  t.  lead  me 

SB.  7. 1,  the  rhililren  of  men  put  their  trust  in  thee 

45.  2.  t.  God  hath  blessed  Iheo  for  over 

T.  L  €U>d  hatb  anoiii(<vl  Oiee  with  oil  e^cladncw 


THE 

Pial.  45. 17.  (.  shall  the  people  praise  thee  for  ever 
55.  19.  have  no  changes,  t.  thoy  fear  not  God 
03.  7.  t.  in  shadow  ol  thy  wings  1  w  111  rejoice 
73.  10.  t.  his  people  return  liitlier 
yL  14.  set  his  love  on  mo,  t.  will  I  deliver  him 
1U6.  23.  I.  he  said,  that  he  would  destroy  them 
110.  10.  I  believed,  £.  have  I  spoken,  2  Lor.  4. 13. 
119.  104.  t.  I  hate  every  false  way 
129.  are  wonderful,  t.  dolh  my  soul  keep  them 
139.  19.  depart  from  mo  t.  yo  bloody  men 

Prov.  17.  14.  t.  leavo  oil" contention  nelbre  it  be 

£ccZ.  5. 2.  God  is  in  heaven,  t.  let  thy  words  be  few 
S.  0.  t.  the  misery  of  man  is  great  upon  him 
11.  t.  the  heart  of  men  is  set  in  Ihein  to  do  evil 

Isa.  3.  17.  i.  the  Lord  will  smite  with  a  .scab 

10.  10.  f.  the  Lord  of  ho^ts  shall  send  leannosa 
24.  0.  t.  halii  the  curse  devoured  the  earth 

42.  25.  t.  he  hath  poured  the  fury  of  his  anger 
59.  10.  t.  his  arm  brought  salvation  unto  him 
Jcr.  0. 15.  /.  they  shall  lall  among  them  that  fall 
40.  3.  ye  obeyed  not,  t.  this  thing  is  come  on  you 
I^ain.  3. 24.  Lord  is  my  portion  f .  will  I  hope  in  him 
Jonah  4.  2.  t.  I  fled  belore  unto  Tarshish 
Zcck.  1. 10. 1,  h  am  returned  to  Jerus.  with  mercies 

7.  12.  t.  came  a  great  wrath  from  the  Lord 
Mai.  3.  0.  t.  ye  sons  of  Jacob  are  not  consumed 
Mat.  5.  48.  bo  ye  t.  perluit  ||  10.  31.  fear  ye  not  t. 

19.  0.  what  t.  God  hath  joined  together  let  not 
27.  we  have  forsaken  all,  what  shall  we  have  t.  ? 

24.  42.  watch  t.  44.  |  25.  13.  Mark  13.  35. 

28.  19.  go  ye  t.  teach  all  nalions,  baptizing  them 
Mark  1.  ;Jo.  t  came  I  forth  ||  12.  27.  yet  t.  do  err 
J^uke  4.  43.  for  t.  am  1  sent  |{  0. 30.  be  ye  t.  merciful 

11.  19.  by  whom  t.  shall  tliey  be  your  judges 
49.  t.  also  said  the  wisdom  of  God,  I  will  send 

14.  20.  I  married  a  wife,  and  t.  I  cannot  come 

20.  15.  what  t.  shall  the  Lord  of  the  vineyard 

do  unto  them  7  Mark  12.  9. 
33.t.in  the  resurrection  whose  wife  of  them  is  she 
.John  3.  29.  this  my  joy  t.  is  fulfilled 

8.  47.  ye  t.  hear  them  not,  because  not  of  God 

9.  41.  but  ye  say,  we  see,  t.  your  sin  remainelh 

10.  17.  t.  doth  my  Father  love  mc,  because  1  lay 

12.  50.  what  I  speak  t.  as  Father  said,  so  1  speak 
15. 19. 1  have  chosen  you,  t.  the  world  hatetli  you 

.9cis3. 19.  repent  ye  t.  and  be  converted,  that  your 
/<07n.4.22.t.it  was  imputed  to  him  for  righteousness 
12.  20.  t.  if  thine  enemy  hunger,  feed  him 

1  Cor.  0.  20.  t.  glorify  God  in  your  body  and  spirit 

12.  15.  not  the  hand,  is  it  t.  not  of  the  body,  10. 
■  15.  .58.  /..  be  ye  stedfast,  unmoveable,  always 

2  Cor.  8.  7.  t.  as  ye  abound  in  every  thing,  in  faith 
Fph.  5.  7.  be  not  ye  t.  jiartakers  with  them 

24.  t.  as  the  church  is  subject  to  Christ,  so  wives 

2  Tim.  l.S.  be  not  t.  ashamed  of  the  testimony  ofL. 

See  Now. 

THEREFROM. 

.7osh.  23. 0.  that  ye  turn  not  aside  t.  to  right  or  left 

2/un/'i-3.3.sinB  of  Jeroboam, he  departed  iiotM3.2. 

THEREIN. 
Gen.O.  7.  multiply  t.  ||  18.  24.  for  fifty  righteous  t. 
23.  11.  the  cave  that  is  t.  I  give  it  to  thee,  17,  20. 
34.  10.  the  land  before  you,  dwell  and  trade  t.  21. 
F.rod.  10. 2-1.  neither  was  there  any  worm  t. 
31.  14.  doeth  any  work  t.  be  cut  otf,  35.  2. 
40.  3.  shalt  thou  put  t.  the  ark  of  the  testimony 
9.  anoint  the  tabernacle  and  all  t.  Leo.  8.  10. 
Lev.  0.  3.  sinning  t.  ||  7.  done  in  trespassing  t. 

13.  21.  no  white  hairs  t.  \\  37.  black  hairs  \. 

18.  4.  ordinances  to  walk  t.  Judg.  2. 22.  Jsa.  42. 5. 

22.  21.  perfect,  there  shall  be  no  blemish  t. 

23.  3.  ye  shall  do  no  work  t.  it  is  the  sabbath  of 
the  Lord,  Deut.  10.  8.  J^um.  29.  7.  .Jn.  17. 24. 

7.  ye  shall  do  no  servile  work  <.  8,  21,  25,  ;)5, 
30.  Jfum.  28.  18.  |  29.  35. 
2.5.  19.  shall  cat  your  fill  and  dwell  t.  in  safety 
JVijm.  13.  20.  whether  there  bo  wood  t.  or  not 
10.  7.  put  fire  t.  and  put  incense  in  them,  40. 
Deut.  7.  25.  nor  take  it,  lest  thou  he  snared  t. 
13.  15.  destroy  nil  that  is  t.  ./osh.  10.  28,  39. 

15.  21.  if  there  be  any  blemish  t.  if  it  be  himo 
17.  19.  he  shall  read  t.  all  the  days  of  his  life 
20.  11.  peo|)le  that  is  found  t.  shall  he  tributaries 

29.  23.  nor  bearcth,  nor  any  grass  growcth  t. 
Josh.  1.  8.  thou  shalt  meditate  t.  day  and  night 

0.  17.  the  city  and  all  t.  shall  be  accursed,  24. 

1  Kings^.  10.  a  house,  that  my  name  might  be  t. 

2  Kings  2.20.  bring  me  a  new  cruse,  and  put  salt  i. 
1  Chron.  10.  32.  let  the  fields  rejoice,  and  all  that 

is  t.  Vsal.  90. 12. 
P.zra  4. 19.  rebellion  and  sedition  been  made  t. 
JVVA.  0.  1.  wall,  Ihal  there  was  no  breach  led  t, 
7.  4.  city  was  largo,  but  llio  iieople  were  few  t. 

5.  fi)unil  it  written  (.  13.  I.  ||  8.  3.  he  read  t. 
9.  0.  made  the  earth,  the  seas,  and  all  that  is  t. 
Psnl.2\.  1.  I  09.  34.  I  98.  7. 
Job  3.  7.  night  solitary,  let  no  joyful  voice  come  (. 

20.  18,  restitution,  and  he  kIlmII  not  r.-joicT- 1. 
P.9nl.  37.29.  tho  righteous  shall  dwell  t.  for  over 
00.  30.  anil  tlioy  that  lovo  liti  miao  »hall  dvcll  L 


THE 

Psal.  107.  34.  a  IVuitful  land  into  barrenneea,  fo? 
wickedness  of  them  that  dwell  t.  Jcr.  12.  4, 

111.  2.  sought  out  of  uU  that  have  jileasure  t. 

119.  35.  thy  com.randmtnis,  t.  do  1  delight 

140.  G.  God  who  made  the  sea  and  all  t.  is,  Jicl^ 
14.  15.  1  17.  24.  Jicc.  10.  «x 
Proy.  22.14.  shall  fall  t.  20.27.  Jcr.23. 12. //o«.  14.9 
Isii.  7.  0.  and  let  us  make  a  breach  t.  for  us 

3.3.  24.  the  iieopin  that  dwell  t.  shall  be  forgivfn 

35.8.  the  wayfaring  men, tho'  fools,  shall  uulert  t. 

51.  3.  joy  and  gladness  shall  be  found  (. 
0.  they  that  dwell  t.  shall  die  in  like  manner 

59.  8.  whosoever  goeth  I.  shall  not  know  peace 
,/er.O.lO.  good  way  and  walk  t.  we  will  not  walk  t. 

9. 13.  have  not  obeyed  my  voice, neither  walked  ( 

44.  2.  and  no  man  dwellelh  t.  48.  9.  j  oO.  3,  40. 

51.  48.  and  all  that  is  t.  shall  sing  for  Ilabylou 
Ezck.  14.  22.  behold,  t.  shall  be  left  a  remnant 

24.  C.  woe  to  bloody  city,  to  pot  whose  scum  is  (. 
Hos.  4.  3.  every  one  shall  mourn  that  dwellelh  t. 
^mos  8.  8.  1  9.  .5. 
Zech.  13.  8.  Lord  saith,  two  parts  t.  shall  be  cut 
oifand  die,  but  the  third  part  shall  be  lelt  t. 
Mark  10.  15.  he  shall  not  enter  t.  Luke  18.  17. 
Jicts  1.  20.  be  desolate  and  let  no  man  dwell  t. 
Hoiii.].n.  for  t.  is  the  righteousneus  of  G.  revealed 

0. 2.  how  (hat  are  dead  to  sin,  live  any  longer  t.  ? 

1  Cor.  7. 24.  wherein  he  is  called,  t.  abide  with  God 
Eph.  0.  20.  that  t.  I  may  speak  boldly  as  I  ought 
Phil.  1.  18.  and  1 1.  do  rejoice,  and  will  rejoice 
Cvl.  2.  7.  taught,  abounding  t.  with  thanksgiving 
Hib.  4.  G.  it  reinaineth  that  some  must  enter  t. 

10.  8.  otVering  wouldesl  not,  nor  liad»t  pleasure  t 

Jam.  1.  25.  whoso  looketh  into-  and  eontinuetb  t 

2/'ct.3. 10.  the  earth  and  works  i.  siiall  be  burnt  up 

Rev.  11. 1.  rise  and  measure  them  that  worship  t 

13. 12.  causeth  them  that  dwell  t.  to  worship  beast 

21.  22.  uud  I  saw  no  temple  t.  God  is  the  templo 

See  Dwelt. 

THEREINTO. 

Luke  31.  21.  let  not  them  in  the  countries  enter  t. 

THEREOF. 

Ocn.  2. 17.  in  the  day  thou  eatest  i.  surely  die,  3.5. 

£i(H/.3.20.all  my  wondcrsvvhich  Iwill  do  in  midst  t 

10. 20.  for  t.  must  we  take  lo  serve  the  L.  our  God 

12.  43.  no  stranger  shall  eat  t.  45.  48. 2  Kings  7. 2. 

44.  when  circumcised,  then  shall  he  eat  t. 

Dent.  26.  14.  I  have  not  eaten  t.  in  my  mourning 

2  Kings  4.  43.  they  shall  eat  and  leave  I.  44. 
./oA  24.  13.  they  know  not  the  ways  t.  nor  abide 
i'sa/.  34.  2.  the  bumble  shall  hear  t.  and  be  glad 
Proi).  10.  33.  the  whole  disposing  t.  is  of  the  LorQ 
Eccl.  0.  2.  God  giveili  him  not  power  lo  eat  t. 

THEREON. 
Eiod.  20.  24.  shalt  sacrifice  t.  the  burnt-ofTerings 

40.  .35.  because  the  cloud  abode  t.  J^Tum.  9.  22. 
2  Sam.  17.  19.  the  woman  spread  ground  corn  t. 

19.  20.  I  will  saddle  me  an  ass  that  1  may  ride  L 
1  Chron.  12.  17.  the  God  of  our  fathers  look  t. 
Ezra  0. 11.  and  being  set  up,  let  him  he  hanged  t. 
Esth.  7.  9.  then  the  king  said,  hang  Haman  i. 
Jsa.  30.  12.  and  trust  in  perverseness,  and  stay  t. 
Ezck.  15.  3.  will  take  a  pin  of  it  to  hang  a  vessel  t. 
Mat.21.7.  they  set  him  t.  Luke  19.35.  John  12. 14 
19.  and  found  nothing  t.  Mark  11. 13.  J.ukc  13.6. 
Mark  14.  72.  and  whin  he  ihought  t.  he  wept 
1  Cor.  3.10.  laid  the  foundation,  another  buildctl/ 1. 
Pev.  5.  3.  was  not  able  to  open  book  or  look  t.  4. 

0.  4.  and  power  was  given  to  him  that  sat  t, 

21.12.  city  had  twelve  iiales,  and  names  written  t. 

THEREOUT. 
Lev.  2.  2.  he  shall  take  t.  his  handful  of  flour 
Judg.  15.  19.  in  the  jaw,  and  there  came  water  t. 

TIII'.RETO. 
Ezod.  30.  38.  shall  make  like  unto  thnt  to  smell  t. 
Ler.  5. 10.  add  the  firth  part  t.  0.  5.  |  27. 13,  31. 

18.  23.  neither  stand  before  a  beast  to  lie  down  (. 
JVum.  19.  17.  running  water  shall  bo  put  t.  in  a 

vessel 
Deut.  12.  32.  thou  shnlt  not  add  t.  nor  diminish 
./i('/j.ll.l7.but  king  of  Edom  would  not  hearken  £. 

1  Chron.  22. 14. 1  prepared,  and  thou  niaye^t  add  t. 

2  Chron.  10. 14.  your  yoke  heavy,  but  1  w  ill  add  t. 
21.  II.  Jehoram  compel'ed  Juuab  t. 

7'.<nM19.9.by  taking  heed  f. according  to  thy  word 
/.sv;.  44.  15.  niaketh  an  imago,  and  fnllelh  down  t. 
Mark  14.70.  a  Galilean,  thy  speech  ngreeth  t. 
Gal.  3.  15.  no  man  liisanniilleth  or  addelh  t, 

THEREI'NTO. 
K/or/.32.8.thevmade  a  molten  crilf,niid  sacrificed  t, 
Deut.  1.  7.  and  go  lo  all  the  places  nigh  t. 
Eph.a.  18.  and  watching/,  with  all  persevprnnce 
1  Thes.f.  3.3.  for  you  know  that  we  are  appointed  t 
Ifeb.  10.  1.  ran  never  make  the  comers  t.  perfect 
1  Pet.  3. 9.  knowinc  Ihni  ve  are  t.  culled,  that  ye 

TflEREirON. 
Frr7;.10.10.lhou  deckeilst  n  nd  olnyedsl  the  harlot  t. 
y.rph.  2.  7.  the  renmnnl  of  Jndnh  shnll  feed  /. 
1  Cor.  3.  10.  »nke  heed  how  lin  hiiildolh  t. 
X'^.  uij  oiao'i  work  abitlo  vlrfcii  he  Imlii  b«i]t  1 


THE 

THEREWITH. 

1  Sam.  12.  3.  any  bijljo  lo  blind  mine  eyes  f. 

17.  51.  drew  liis  sword,  and  cut  od'liis  head  t. 

lU.  -1.  and  llirust  nie  tliroujli  1. 1  Chroii.  JO.  1. 

i  Kings  .5.  t).  1  liavu  t.  si'.nl  iNaiiniiin  my  sui'vant 

lii.  J4.  and  repaired  t.  llie  house  ul'llie  Lord 

froo.  15.  Iti.  than  great  treasure  and  iruuble  t. 

17.  ano.v,  and  liatrud  t.  ||  17.  1.  niiielness  t. 
2.>.  Iti.  lest  thuu  be  tilled  I.  and  vuniilit 
■  Keel  1. 13.  hatli  given  sore  travel  to  be  e.xercised  t. 

lit.  U.  wlioso  reniovetb  stones  shall  be  hurt  t. 
Ezik.  4.  15.  and  thou  shall  prepare  thy  bread  t, 
Jucl  i.  19.  Corn,  oil,  wine,  ye  shall  be  satislied  t. 
Phil.  4.  11.  state,  1  have  learned  I.  lo  be  content ' 

1  'lUiii.  (3.  8.  l'oo<l  and  raiment,  let  us  be  t.  content 
Jam.  3.  y.  t.  bless  we  liod,  and  t.  curse  we  men 

3  John  10.  prating  again.sl  us,  and  not  content  t, 

TUESK. 
Gcn.lO.a.by  t.wcro  the  isles  ofGentiles  divided,  32. 
27.  Ifj.  il'Jacob  lake  a  wile  ol'such  as  /.  whutgood 
31.  4.'J.  t.  daughters,  t.  children,  t.  cattle  is  mine 
3'i.  17.  asketh,  saying',  whose  are  t.  before  thee 
43.  If).  Joseph  said,  bring  t.  men  home,  make 
ready,  lor  t.  meii  shall  dine  wiili  me  at  noon 
Ezod.  11. 'JU.  but  the  cloud  gave  light  by  night  lo  t. 
21. 11.  and  if  he  do  noil,  three  unto  her,  then  she 
3-2.  4  t.  be  thy  gods,  O  Israel,  which  brought,  8. 
JLcv.  5.  13.  his  sin  that  ho  hath  sinned  in  one  of  t. 
11.  4. 1,  ye  shall  not  eat  ||  •£).  t.  shall  be  unclean 
«.  t.  shall  ye  eat,  21.  22.  Dmt.  14.  <J. 
24.and  fori,  ye  shall  be  unclean,  whoso  toucheth 

22.  22.  ye  shall  not  oiler  t.  lo  the  Lord,  25. 
JVh;«.  2ij.  .53.  unto  t.  the  land  shall  be  divided,  for 

04.  but  among  t.  there  was  not  a  man  of  them 
Jjciit.  27. 12.  t.  stand  on  mount  Gerizini  to  bless 

13.  and  i.  shall  stand  upon  mount  Ebal  to  curse 

X.Va/7(.lfi.I0.Samuul  said,  the  Ld.hath  not  chosen  t. 

17.  39.  Pavid  said  to  Saul,  I  cannot  go  with  t. 

2.S«m.l0.2.  the  king  said,  what  meanest  thou  by  t.? 

IKiiigs  10. 10.  as  t.  which  the  queen  of  Shebagave 

11.  2.  Solomon  clave  lo  t.  strange  women  in  love 

17.  1.  Ihere  shall  not  be  dew  nor  rain  t.  years,  but 

22    11.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  wiUi  t.  shall  thou 

push  the  Syrians,  2  Chron.  18.  10. 

17.  Lord  said,  t.  have  no  master,  2  Chron.  18.  10. 

2  Kings'ia.  20.  Nebuzar-adan  tool' t.  and  brought 
2  Chrun.  35.  7.  t.  were  of  the  king's  substance 
F.zrn  2.  62.  t.  sought  their  register  among  those 
JW'A.  7.61.  t.  went  and  could  not  shew  Iheir  house 

lO.l.now  I.  that  sealed  the  covenant  were  Nehem. 
Job  12.  3.  yea  who  knowcth  not  such  things  as  t.? 
Fsal.  104. 27.  t.  wait  all  on  thee,  that  thou  mayest 
£ccl.  7. 10.  that  the  former  days  were  better  than  t. 

12.  12.  further,  by  t.  my  son,  be  admonished 
/sa.lii.lG.  no  onoof  i.  shall  fail,  none  waiither  mate 

39.3.  what  said  t.  men  ||  44. 21.remembcr  i.O  Jacob 
4y.  12.  t.  shall  come  from  far,  t.  from  the  north, 
and  from  the  west,  and  t.  from  Sinim 
21.  who  hath  begotten  me  t.  who  brought  up  t.  ? 
1  was  left  alone,  t.  where  had  they  been? 
57.  6.  should  I  receive  comfort  in  t.  ? 
Jcr.  5.  5.  but  t.  have  altogether  broken  the  yoke 
38.  9.  t.  men  have  dune  evil  in  all  they  have  done 
16.  nor  will  I  give  thee  into  hand  of  t.  men  that 
52.  22.  and  the  pomegranates  were  like  to  t. 
J^am.  4.  9.  for  t.  pine  away,  stricken  thro'  for  want 
JEzc/c.  1.  21.  when  those  went,  t.  went,  and  when 
those  stood,  t.  stood,  10.  17. 

8.  la.  thou  shall  see  greater  abominations  thanf. 
14.  3.  t.  men  have  set  \ip  their  idids  in  Iheir  heart 
16. 5.  none  eye  pitied  thee,  to  do  any  of  t.  to  thee 

20.  and  t..  hast  thou  sacrificed  unto  them  to  be 

23.  10.  t.  discovered  her  nakedness,  they  took  her 
27.  21.  in  (.  were  they  thy  merchants 

37. 18.  saying,  shew  us  what  thou  meanest  by  t. 
Van.  3.  13.  they  brought  t.  men  before  the  king 

21.  t.  men  were  bound  ||  27.  princes  saw  t.  men 
6.2.over£.  Darius  set  Ihme  presidents,  Daniel  first 

11.  then  t.  men  assembled,  and  found  Daniel,  15. 
7.17.  {.great  beast--;,  which  arc  four,  are  four  kings 
Jfair.  2. 13.  if  OIV3  unclean  by  a  dead  Ijody  touch  t. 
Z'-ch.  1.  9.  I  will  shew  thee  what  t.  be,  4.  5,  13. 
19.  I  said  to  the  angel,  what  bo  t.  ?  21.  |  4.  12. 
Mat.  5.  37.  what  is  more  than  t.  comcth  of  evil 
().  29.  Solomon  wa.s  not  arrayed  like  one  oft. 

21.  IB.  they  said,  hearest  thou  what  (.  say  ■? 

22.  40.  on  t.  commandmoiils  lian?  all  the  law 
2.3.23. t.ought  ye  to  have  done,  and  not  leave  other 
25.  40.  as  you  have  not  done  it  to  the  least  of  I. 

45.  as  ye  did  it  not  to  one  of  the  least  of  t. 

46.  and  t.  shall  go  into  everlasting  puni.<!hment 
2(5.  62.  what  is  it  which  *.  witness  1  Mark  14.60. 

Marl:  12.31.no  other  commandmeni  greater  than  t. 
40.  t.  shall  receive  greater  ilamnalion 

13.  2.  Jesus  said,  seest  thou  t.  great  buildings  1 
J, like  \.  19.  and  am  sent  to  shew  thee  t.  glad  tidinss 

3.8.thal  God  is  able  of  A. stones  to  raise  up  children 

9.  U.  let  t.  sayings  sink  down  into  yonr  ears 
Jiikn  1.  .50.  thou  .'Jhalt  see  greater  things  than  t. 

5.  3.  ill  (.  lay  a  groat  muUituJc  of  iinnotont  folk 

613 


THE 

John  5. 10.  what  he  doth,  t.  doUi  the  Son  likewise 
20.  he  will  shew  him  greater  works  than  t. 
G.  5.  whence  shall  we  buy  bread  that  t.  may  eat  ? 
7.  31.  and  said,  will  ho  do  more  miracles  than  t.  7 

17.  20.  neither  pray  1  for  t.  alnnu,  but  for  them 
25.  and  t.  have  known  that  thou  hast  sent  mo 

18.  8.  if  therefore  ye  seek  me,  let  t.  go  their  way 

21.  15.  Si.iion,  lovest  Ihou  me  more  than  t.1 
Jicts  1.  21.  of  (.  which  companied  with  us 

24.  shew  whither  oft.  two  thou  hast  chosen 
2.  13.  others  said,  t.  men  are  full  of  new  wino 
3.24.  all  prophets  have  likewise  foretold  oft.  days 

4.  16.  saying,  what  shall  we  do  to  t.  men  7 

5.  36.  belbre  t.  days  rose  up  Theudas,  boasting 
38.  refrain  from  f.  men,  and  let  them  alone 

10.47.can  any  forbid  that  t.  should  not  be  baptized 
17.  6.  t.  that  have  turned  the  world  upside  down 
11.^  were  more  noble  than  those  iuThessalonica 
Rom.'i.li.t.  having  not  the  law,  are  a  law  to  Ihems. 
11.  24.  how  much  more  shall  t.  be  gratfed 
31.  even  so  have  t.  also  now  not  believed 
1  Cor.  12.  23.  upon  t.  we  bestow  more  honour 

13.  13.  t.  three,  but  the  greatest  oft.  is  charity 
2Cor.7.1.having  t.promi.scS|let  us  cleanse  ourselves 
Gal.  2.  6.  but  oft.  who  seemed  to  be  somewhat 
Col.-i.iX.  t,  only  are  my  fellow-workers  to  kingdom 

1  Tim.  3.  10.  and  let  t.  also  tirst  be  proved,  then 

2  Tim.  2. 21.  if  a  man  puree  himself  from  t.  he  shall 
Hcb.  0.  23.  patterns  should  be  purified  with  t.  but 

heavenly  things  with  better  sacrifices  than  t. 
10.  18.  now  where  remission  oft.  is,  there  is  no 
2  Pet.  1.4.  by  t.  might  be  partakers  of  divine  nature 
2.  12.  but  t.  as  brute  beasts  made  to  be  taken 
,Judc  14.  Enoch  also  prophesied  off.  saying,  behold 
19.  t.  be  they  who  separata  themselves,  sensual 
Rev.  11.  6.  f.  have  power  to  shut  heaven,  thai  it 

14.  4.  t.  were  redeemed  ||  17.  13.  t.  have  one  mind 

22.  0.  he  said,  f.  sayings  are  faithful  and  true 

See  Abominations. 

THESE  are,  or  are  THESE. 

frc«.33.25.by  the  man  whose  t.a;7||18.8.  whose  t.a. 

Exod.  6.  20.  t.  arc  that  Aaron  and  Moses,  to  whom 

2J.1.  t.  are  the  judgments,  Jycv.  26.  46.  Dcut.  6.1. 
Lev.  11.31.  t.  arc  unclean||23.2.t.  arc  my  feasts,  4. 
JV«m.22.n.aud  God  said,  what  men  aret.  with  thee 
Dent.  22. 17.  t.  are  the  tokens  of  her  virginity 
IKittgs  9.13. what  cities  are  t.  thou  hast  given  mo  1 

10.  8.  happy  are  t.  thy  servants,  which  stand 

1  C/ir.2.18.her  sons  are  t.l|4.22.t.  arc  ancient  things 
JVe/i.  1. 10.  now  f.  are  thy  servants,  and  thy  people 
.Job  26.  14.  t.  are  part  of  his  ways,  but  how  little 
Pa-«/.73.12.  behold,  t.are  the  ungodly,  who  prosper 
Isa.  60. 8.  who  are  t.  that  flee  as  a  cloud,  as  doves 

G.5.5.  t.  are  a  smoke  in  my  nose,  a  fire  that  burneth 
.Jcr.  5.  4.  surely  t.  are  poor,  they  are  foolish 

7.  4.  saying,  the  temple  df  the  Lord  are  t. 
Kick.  11.  2.  t.  are  the  men  that  devise  mischief 

36.  20.  they  said,  t.  are  the  people  of  the  Lord 
Dan.  2.  28.  visions  of  thy  head  on  thy  bed  are  t. 
Mic.2.T.  is  the  spirit  straitened  ■?  are  t.  his  doings? 
Zcch.  1.9.  then  said  I,  Omy  Ld.what  arc  t.4.4.|0.4. 
Mark  4.  15.  and  t.  arc  they  by  the  way-side 
16.  on  stony  ||  18.  thorny  ||  20.  good  ground 

13.  8.  famines,  t.  are  the  beginnings  of  sorrows 
Tjuke  8.  21.  my  mother  and  brethren  are  t.  which 
.lohn  10.  21.  t.  are  not  the  words  of  him  that  hath 

17.  11.  but  t.  arc  in  the  world,  and  I  come  to  thee 
20.  31.  but  t.  are  written  that  ye  might  believe 

Jlcts  2.  1.5.  t.  are  not  drunken,  as  ye  suppose 
RavL.  9.  8.  t.  are  not  the  children  of  God 
Gal.  5.  17.  t.  are  contrary  the  one  to  the  other 
19.the  works  of  the  flesh  are  manifest,  which  are  t. 

2  Pit.  2.  17.  t.  arc  wells  without  water,  clouds 
.Jude  16.  t.  are  ranrniurers,walking  after  their  lusts 
Rev.  7. 13.  what  arc  t.  which  are  arrayed  in  white? 

14.  t.  are  they  which  came  out  of  great  tribulat. 

14.4. t.  arc  they  which  are  not  defiled  with  women 

t.  are  they  which  follow  the  Lamb  whitherso. 

19.  9.  t.  are  the  true  sayings  o.f  God,  22.  6. 

See  Things,  \Vords. 

THEY. 

JiTum.  14.  12.  of  thee  a  nation  mightier  than  t. 

16.  33.  t.  and  all  theirs  went  down  into  the  pit 

lS.3.not  come  nigh,  that  neither  t.nor  you  also  die 

22. 15.  sent  more,  and  more  honourable  tlian  t. 

1  Kiiigs  20.23.surely  we  shall  be  stronger  than  t.25. 

2  h'iiigs  6.  16.  are  more  than  f.  that  be  with  them 
Pgnl.  C)0.  4.  f.  that  hate  me,  t.  that  would  di^slroy 
F.ccl.  5.  8.  regardeth,  and  there  bo  higher  than  t. 
Ixa.  9.  21.  and  t.  together  shall  be  against  Judah 

28.  7.  but  t.  also  have  erred  through  wine 
.30.  10.  therefore  t.  that  pursue  you  be  swift 
.57.  6.  t.  are  thy  lot,  to  them  thou  hast  oflfcred 
,53.  12.  t.  that  shall  bo  of  thee  shall  build  the  old 

.Tcr.  2.  26.  so  t.  their  kings  and  jiriests  ashamed 
9.  16.  whom  neither  t.  nor  their  fathers   have 
known,  10.  4.  1|  44.  3. 
49. 12.  t.  who=e  judgment  was  not  to  drink  of  cup 

F.zrk.  2.  3.  t.  and  their  fathers  have  transircsseil 

18.  47.  thou  wast  corrupted  more  than  t.  iu  wajw 


THI 

F.zck.  16.  51.  multiplied  abominat.more  than  (.&9 
34.  30.  they  shall  know  that  t.  are  my  people 
Mat.  12.  3.  what  David  did  when  a  hungered,  and 
t.  tliat  wore  with  him,  Mark  2.  25.  huke  6.  3. 

19.  11.  receive  this,  save  t.  to  whom  it  is  given 

20.  25.  t.  thai  are  great  exercise  authority  upon 
J)/«Wi2.17.t.tliatare  whole  have  no  need,  /.m.5.31. 

8.  9.  and  f.  lliat  had  eaten  were  about  4000 
10.23.  how  hardly  shall  t.  which  have  riches 
11.9.  t.  that  went  before  and  t.  that  followed  cried 
Luke  7.10.  and  t.that  were  sent,  returning  to  liouso 

8.  13.  t.  on  the  rock  are  t.  which  receive  the  word 
22.  28.  ye  are  t.  which  have  continued  wiih  me 

John  4.  45.  for  t.  also  went  unto  the  feast 
5.  25.  dead  shall  hear,  and  t.  that  hear  sholl  livo 

29.  t.  thai  have  done  good,  f.  that  have  done  evil 
39.  scriptures,  and  t.  are  t.  which  testify  of  me 

6.9.  two  fishes,  but  what  are  t.  amongst  so  many  f 

9.  39. 1  am  come,  that  t.  which  see  not  might  see, 

and  that  t.  which  see  might  be  made  blind 

17.  16.  t.  are  not  of  the  world,  even  as  1  am  not 
21.  that  t.  all  may  be  one,  as  thou  art  in  uio 

23.  that  f.  may  be  made  perfect  in  ono 

24.  Father,  I  will  that  t.  whom  thou  hast  given 
me  be  with  me,  that  t.  may  behold  my  g!ory 

18.  28.  t.  went  not  in,  lest  t.  should  be  defiled 
Jicts  11.  2.  t.  of  circumcision  contended  with  him 

19.  now  t.  that  were  scattered  abroad  on  perscc. 
13.  27.  t.  that  dwell  at  Jerus.  bee.  t.  knew  him  not 

15. 11.  through  grace  we  shall  be  saved  even  as  i, 

21.12.  wo  and  t.  of  that  place  besought  him 
Rom.  3.  9.  are  wo  better  than  t.  ?  no,  in  no  wise 

4.  14.  for  if  t.  which  are  of  the  law  bo  heirs 

8.  8.  t.  that  are  in  the  ilesh  cannot  please  God 
23.  not  only  t.  but  ourselves  also  groan  within 

9.  8.  t.  which  are  the  children  of  the  lleBli,  are  not 
11.  23.  f.  also,  if  t.  abide  not  still  in  unbelief 

16. 18.  for  t.  that  are  such  serve  not  our  Ld.  Jesus 
1  Cor  7.  29.  t.  that  have  wives,  as  tho'  (.had  none 

30.  t.  thai  weep,  t.  that  rejoice,  t.  that  buy 

31.  (.  that  use  this  world,  as  not  abusing  it 

9.  24.  that  t.  who  run  in  a  race  run  all,  but  one 
11.  19.  that  t.  which  are  approved  may  be  made 
15.11.whetlier  it  were  I  or  t.so  we  preach,  and  so 
18.  then  t.  also  which  are  fallen  asleep  in  Christ 

23.  afterward  t.  that  are  Christ's,  Gal.  5.  24. 
48.  as  is  earthy,  such  are  t.  that  are  earthy 

Gal.^.  6.  t.  who  seemed  somewhat  added  nothing 
9.  t.  gave  the  right  hand  of  fellowship  to  me 

3.  7.  know  ye,  that  t.  which  arc  of  faith,  9. 

5.  12.  I  would  f.  were  cm  off  that  trouble  you 
21.  t.  who  do  such  things  shall  not  inherit  liingd. 

6.  13.  nor  t.  who  are  circumcised  keep  the  law 

1  Thess.  1.9.  t.  shew  of  us  what  entering  in  we  had 
5.  7.  for  t.  that  slee;),  t.  that  be  drunken 

1  Tim.  3.  13.  f.  that  used  the  office  of  a  deacon 

5.  17.  t.  who  labour  in  the  word  and  doctrine 

25.  and  t.  that  are  otherwise  cannot  be  hid 

6.  9.  t.  that  will  be  rich  fall  into  temptation 

2  Tim.  3.  6.  of  this  sort  are  t.  which  creep  into 
Tit.  3.  8.  that  t.  which  have  believed  in  God  might 
//eJ.1.4.hath  obtained  more  excellent  name  than  t. 

4.  6.  seeing  (.  to  w  horn  it  was  first  preached 
11.  40.  that  t  without  us  should  not  be  perfect 

13.  17.  they  watch,  as  t.  that  must  give  account 

24.  salute  all  the  saints,  t.  of  Italy  salute  you 
.Jam.  2.  12.  as  t.  that  shall  be  judged  by  the  law 
\John  2.  19.  they  wentont  that  t.  might  be  made 

manifest,  that  t.  were  not  all  of  ug 
4.  5.  t.  are  of  the  world,  t.  speak  of  the  world 
Ji/rfel9.thcsebe  f. who  separate  thcmselves,5ensunl 
Rev.  1.  7.  t.  who  pierced  him,  kindreds  shall  wail 
3.  4.  for  t.  are  worthy,  16.  (5.||7.13. whence  came  t. 

7.  14.  these  are  t.  who  came  out  of  great  tribulat. 

14.  4.  for  t.  are  virgins,  these  are  t.  which  follow 

the  liamb  whithersoever  he  gocth 
12.  here  are  t.  that  keep  the  commandments 

21.  27.  but  t.  that  are  written  in  Lamb's  book 

THICK. 
Dmt.  32. 15.  thou  art  waxen  fat,  thou  art  grown  t, 
2  Sam.  18.  9.  the  mule  went  under  the  t.  bongli.s 
2  Kings  8. 15.  he  took  a  t.  cloth  and  dipt  it  in  water 
JVc/i.  8.15.f(;trh  branches  of  t.  trees  to  make  booths 
.Toh  1.5.  20.  runneth  on  the  t.  bosses  of  his  bucklers 
Psal.  74.  5.  as  he  lifted  up  axes  on  the  f.  trees 
Ezek.  6.  13.  their  slain  shall  be  under  every  t.  oak 
19. 11.  her  stature  was  exalted  among  t.  branches 
31.  3.  his  top  was  among  the  t.  boughs,  10,  M. 
Hnb.  2. 6.  to  him  that  ladeth  himself  with  t.  clay 
Luke  11.29.  when  people  were  gathered  t.  together 
See  Ci.nrns,  Darkness. 
THinCER. 
1  Kings  12. 10.  say  to  them,  my  little  finger  jhall  ha 
t.  than  my  father's  loins,  2  Chron.  10.  10. 
THICKET. 
Oen.  22.  13.  a  ram  caught  in  a  t.  by  his  horni 
Jcr.  4.  7.  the  lion  is  come  up  from  bis  t. 

THICKETS. 
1  Sam.  13.  6.  Tsr.  did  hide  ihr-mselvcB  in  t.  In  roe'if 
laa.  9. 18.  vrickcdueM  shall  kindle  in  tho  t.  of  fbieal 


THI 

ha.  10. 84.  ho  •hall  cut  down  the  I.  of  the  fbreit 
Jer.  4.  "29.  llie  wlioli;  city  simll  llco  and  go  into  ^ 

THICKNESS. 
1  Kings'!.  t46.  castthera  in  llie  t.  of  the  ground 
2CAn/n.4.  5.  the  t.  of  the  sea  wiiaa  haml-bruadth 
Jcr.  o2.  21.  the  t.  of  the  (lillar  was  four  lingers 
Kzek.  41.  0.  the  t.  of  tlie  wall  was  live  cubits 
42.  10.  the  chambers  were  in  the  t.  of  the  wall 
Zech.  14.  t  6.  the  light  sliall  not  be  clear,  nor  t. 

TlllKF 
Signifies,  [1]  One  that  takes  away  any  thing  un- 
lawfully from  another,  ichcthcr  privately  or 
violently,  Job  31).  5.  Luke  10.  30.  [2]  ji  se- 
ducer who  by  false  doctrines  steals  from  the 
church  of  God  the  true  meaning  of  the  scrip- 
ture, John  10. 10.  [U]  Such  as  exercise  fraud- 
ulent dealing  and  unlawful  gain,  Mat.  21.  13. 
Eiod.  22.  2.  if  a  t.  be  found  breaking  up,  7. 

8.  if  the  t.  be  not  found,  then  the  master  of  house 
Dcut.  24.  7.  be  found  stealing,  then  that  *.  shall  die 
Job  24.  14.  the  murderer  in  the  night  is  as  a  t. 

30.  .5.  they  cried  after  them  as  after  a  t. 
Psal.  .50.  18.  when  thou  sawest  a  t.  then  thou 
Pror.0.30.nien  do  not  despise  t.if  he  steal  to  satisfy 

29.  24.  whoso  is  partner  with  a  t.  hateth  his  soul 
,Jcr.  2.  21).  as  a  t.  is  ashamed  when  he  is  found 
Mos.  7.  1.  thet.  Cometh  in,  and  robbers  without 
Joel  2. 9.  they  shall  enter  at  the  windows  like  a  t. 
Zech.  5.  4  it  shall  enter  into  the  house  of  the  t. 
J/at  24.43.  what  watch  i. would  come,  Luke  12.39. 

2tj.  55.  are  ye  come  as  against  a  f. with  swords  and 

staves  to  take  me  7  Mark  14.48.  iiiit  22..')2. 

Luke  12.  33.  in  heaven,  where  no  t.  ai)proachcth 

John  10.1. by  the  door,  the  same  is  a  t.  and  a  robber 

10.  the  t.  Cometh  not  but  to  steal  and  to  kill 

12.  ti.  but  because  he  was  a  t.  and  had  the  bag 
1  7'Ae.<.'.5.2.day  of  the  L.  cometh  as  a  t.  2  f  ci.3.10. 

4.  that  that  day  should  overtake  you  as  a  t. 
1  Pel.  4.  15.  but  let  none  of  you  aulfer  as  a  t. 
Rev.  3.  3.  I  will  come  on  thee  as  a  t.  16.  15. 

THIEVES. 
Jsa.  1.  23.  thy  princes  are  companions  oft. 
Jer.  48.  27.  wa.s  not  Israel  found  among  t.  ? 

49.  9.  if  t.  by  night,  they  will  destroy,  Obad.  5. 
J\fat.  0.  19.  and  where  t.  break  through  and  steal 

20.  and  where  f.do  not  break  through  nor  steal 
21.13.madeit  adcnoft.  Mark  11.17.  LukclO.iG. 

27.  38.  two  t.  crucified  with  him,  Mark  15.  27. 
44.  the  t.  also  cast  the  same  in  his  teeth 

JLuke  10.30.  went  down  to  Jericho  and  fell  among  t. 
36.  which  was  neighbour  to  him  that  fell  amongt..' 
John  10.  8.  all  that  ever  came  before  me  are  t. 

1  Cor.  6.  10.  nor  t.  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God 

THIGH. 
Oen.  24.  2.  put  thy  hand  under  my  t.  9.  |  47.  29. 

32.  25.  he  touched  the  hollow  of  Jacob's  £. 
31.  and  as  he  pas.sed  ho  halted  upon  his  t. 

W.  ^26.  that  came  out  of  Jacob's  t.  Eiod.  1.  \5. 
JVum.  5.  21.  the  Lord  maketh  thy  t.  to  rot,  22,  27. 
Judg.  3.  16.  Ehud  did  gird  a  dagger  on  his  right  t. 

21.  Ehud  took  the  dagger  from  his  right  (. 

fi.  t30.Gideon  hadscventy  sons  going  out  of  his  t. 

15.  8.  and  Samson  smote  them  hip  and  t. 
Fsal.  45.3.  gird  thy  sword  on  thy  t.  O  most  mighty 
Cant.  3.  8.  every  man  hath  his  sword  on  his  t. 
Isa.  47.  2.  uncover  the  t.  pass  over  the  rivers 
Jer.  31.  19.  I  was  instructed,  I  smote  upon  my  t. 
F.zek.  21. 12.  cry  and  howl,  Hmilc  therefore  upon  t. 

24.  4.  gather  the  t.  and  shoulder  into  the  pot 
Ken.  19.  16.  he  hath  on  his  /.  a  name  written 

TH1(;HS. 
7Cxod.28.42.br;echfis  shall  reach  from  loins  to  thet. 
Cant.l.l.  the  joints  of  thy  <.  arc  like  jewels 
Dan.  2.  32.  his  belly  and  his  t.  wore  of  brass 

THIN. 
nrn.  41.  G.  and  behold  seven  t.  ears,  7,  23,  24. 

27.  the  seven  (.  kine  are  seven  years 
Kind.  39.  3.  they  heat  ihe  gold  into  (.  platen  y 
/,i*o.  13.  ;10.  and  tliero  ho  in  it  .i  yellow  t.  hair 

2  Siim.  13.  t  4.  why  art  thou  t.  from  day  lo  day  ? 
1  King.%  7.  29.  certain  additions  made  of  d.  work 
Jsa.  17.  4.  the  glory  of  Jacob  shall  be  rnado  t. 

THINE. 
f]rn.  14.  23.  I  will  not  lake  any  thing  that  is  t. 
2<1.  7.  Ihuu  slialt  die,  Ihou  and  all  that  are  t. 

31.  32.  discern  what  is  t.  wilh  mo  and  take  it 

33.  t  9.  Ksau  said,  be  that  to  thee,  that  is  (. 
48.  6.  and  thy  issue  after  them  sliall  be  t. 

Lev.  10.  15.  it  shall  be  t.  and  Ihy  sons  with  thee, 
JViim.  18.  9, 11,  13,  14,  1.5,  18. 
JViim.  22.  30.  hast  ridden  on  ever  since  I  was  t. 
JJrut.  15.  3.  what  is  t.  with  Ihy  brother,  release 

28.  t  41.  shall  bcgel  sons,  buriliuy  shall  not  bet. 
■.tt).  4.  if  any  oft.  bo  driven  into  outmost  parU 

Josh.  17. 18.  but  the  mountiiins  shall  be  t.  and  the 
out-goings  of  il  sliall  be  t. 
Judg.  15.  t  2.  her  younger  sister,  li-t  her  be  t. 
1  .Sam.  2. 33.  the  man  ol  /.  wliom  I  simll  not  cut  ofT 

15.  28.  and  hatheiveii  it  to  a  m-iu'libour  of( 
iSam.iC.i.t.ttm  all  Uiat  [Hiriaui«<llo  MophibpaheOi 


THI 

1  Kings  3. 26.  lot  ft  neither  bo  mlno  nor  t.hat  divide 

20.  4.  O  king,  I  am  t.  and  all  that  I  have 
21. 19. in  the  piacedogs  shall  lick  thy  blood,  even  t. 

1  CVjron.  12.  18.  t.  are  we,  David,  and  on  ihy  side 

21.  24.  for  I  will  not  take  that  which  is  t. 
29.   11.  t.  O  Lord,  is  tho  greatness,  power,  and 

the  glory,  the  earth  is  t.  t.  is  the  kingdom 
f  .'!(2/.71.10.menlion  thy  righteousness  even  t.  only 

74.  16.  the  day  is  t.  tho  night  also  is  t. 

89.  11.  the  heavens  are  t.  the  earth  also  is  (. 

119.  94.  I  am  t.  save  me,  L  sought  thy  precepts 
fsa.  45.  14.  tho  labour  of  Egypt  shall  bo  t. 

ti3. 19.  \^e  are  t.  thou  never  barest  rule  over  them 
,fnr.  32.  8.  for  the  right  of  inheritance  is  t. 
Mat.  6.13.  t.  is  the  kingdom  ||  20. 14.  take  that  is  t. 

25.  2.5.  hid  thy  talent,  lo,  there  thou  hast  that  is  t. 
J.uke  4.  7.  if  thou  wilt  worship  me,  all  shall  be  t. 

5.  33.  but  t.  cat  and  drink  ||  15.  31.  all  I  have  is  t. 

22.  42  nevertheless,  not  my  will  but  t.  bo  done 
John  17.  6.  t.  they  were  ||  9.  for  they  arc  t. 

10.  and  all  mine  arc  t.  and  t.  arc  mine 
THING. 
Gen.  21. 11.  the  t.  was  very  grievous  to  Abraham 

24.  50.  the  t.  proccedeth  from  tho  Lord 
■.14.7.  which  t.  ought  not  to  bo  done,  2  Sam.  13. 12. 

19.  the  young  man  doferrcil  not  to  do  Ihe  t. 
38.10.and  the  t.  which  ho  did  displeiisod  the  Lord, 
2  Sam.  11.27. 

41.  32.  because  tho  t.  is  established  by  God 
F.xod.  10.  15.  remained  not  any  green  /.  in  the  tree; 

18.11.  in  the  t.  wherein  they  dealt  proudly  he  was 
17.  Jcthro  said,  the  t.  that  thou  doest  is  not  good 

22.  9.  for  any  manner  of  lost  t.  which  another 

15.  if  it  be  a  hired  t.  il  came  for  his  hire 
.34. 10.  a  terrible  t.  that  I  will  do  with  thee 
Jjcv.  2.  3.  a  t.  most  holy  of  your  ofTerings,  10. 
4.  13.  and  the  t.  be  hid  from  the  eyes  of  assembly 

6.  2.  trespass  in  a  t.  taken  away  by  violence 
4.  the  t.  deceitfully  gotten,  or  the  lost  t. 

12.  4.  she  shall  touch  no  hallowed  t.  nor  come 
20.  17.  it  is  a  wicked  t.  they  shall  be  cut  off 

JVum.  16.30.  but  if  Lord  make  a  new  t.  earth  open 
Deut.  1.  14.  the  t.  which  thou  hast  spoken  is  good 
12.32.  what  t.  soever  I  command  you,  observe 

13.  14.  if  it  be  truth,  and  the  t.  certain,  17.  4. 

18.  22.  if  the  t.  follow  not,  nor  come  to  pass 

32.  47.  it  is  not  a  vain  t.  for  vou,  it  is  your  life 
Josh.  6.  18.  keep  yourselves  from  tho  accursed  t. 

22.  33.  the  t.  pleased  the  children  of  Israel 
.Tadg.  8.  27.  which  t.  became  a  snare  to  Gideon 

19.  24.  but  unto  this  man  do  not  so  vile  a  t. 
Ruth  3.  18.  till  he  have  tiriislied  the  t.  to-day 
LSam.  3.11.  behold,  I  will  do  a  t.  in  Israel  at  which 

17.  what  is  the  Mhattho  Lord  hath  said  to  thee? 
4.  7.  there  hath  not  been  such  a  t.  heretofore 
8.  6.  the  t.  displeased  Samuel,  when  Ibey  said 

14. 12.  come  up  to  us,  and  we  will  sliew  you  a  t. 
18.  20.  tbev  told  Saul,  and  the  t.  pleased  him 

2.S'«7n.  13.  33.  let  not  my  lord  take  the  t.  to  heart 

14. 13.  wherefore  hast  thou  thought  such  at.? 
IS.  hide  not  tho  t.  that  I  shall  ask  thee 

15.  35.  whal  t.  thou  shall  hear,  tell  lo  Zadok 
17.  19.  she  spread  corn,  and  the  t.  was  not  known 

1  Kings\\St.l\\p  wife  of  Jeroboam  conietli  lo  ask  t. 
2h'ings  2.10.  Elijah  said,  thou  hast  asked  a  hard  t. 

7.19.  make  windows  in  heaven,  might  such  a  /.  be 

20.  9.  have  this  sign,  that  the  Lord  will  do  the  t. 
IChr.  13.  4.  t.  was  right  in  the  eyes  of  the  people 

17.23.  let  the  t.  thou  hast  spoken  be  eslablished 

2  Chron.  29.  36.  for  the  t.  was  done  sudth^ily 
30.  4.  the  t.  pleased  the  king  and  congregation 

Ezra  7.  27.  hath  put  such  a  t.  in  the  king's  heart 
Kslh.  2.  4.  tlio  t.  pleased  the  king,  and  he  did  so 
22.  Ihe  t.  was  known  to  Mordecai,  who  told  it 
.5.14.lhe  t.  pleased  Hainan,  and  he  caused  gallows 
8.  5.  and  if  the  t.  seem  right  before  Ibo  king 
.fob  3.  25.  the  1. 1  greatly  feareil  is  come  upon  me 
4.  12.  now  a  t.  was  secretly  brought  lo  mo 
6. 8.  O  that  God  would  grant  me  ihe  1. 1  long  for 
13.  2H.  be  as  a  rollen  /..  consumelh,  as  a  garment 
14.4.  who  can  bring  a  clean  t.  mil  of  an  unclean? 
22.28.  Ihou  shall  decri^e  a  I.  it  shall  bcesliiblishcd 

23.  14.  ho  |>orforinetli  Ihe  t.  is  appointed  for  mo 
26. 3.  how  hast  plentifully  declared  llie  t.  as  il  is  1 

42.  7.  not  spoken  of  mo  Ihe  t.  that  is  right,  8. 
Psal.  2.  1.  why  do  Iho  peoide  imagine  a  vain  t.  ? 

33.  17.  a  horse  is  a  vain  t.  for  safely 
.3-^.  20.  because  I  follow  iho  t.  that  good  Is 
89.  34.  nor  alter  the  t.  that  is  gone  out  of  my  lips 
101.  3.  I  will  sot  no  wicked  t.  before  mine  oyes 

Prop.  4.  7.  wisdom  is  Iho  principal  t.  thoroforc  got 
22.  18.  for  it  is  a  pleasant  t.  if  thou  keep  them 

25.  2.  it  is  Iho  glory  of  God  lo  conceal  a  t. 
Eccl.  1.  0.  tho  t.  lliat  hnlh  bei-n,  it  is  that  which 

shall  bo,  and  there  is  no  n^'W  t.  iindei  the  sun 

7.  P.  better  is  the  end  of  a  t.  than  the  boginninjf 

8.  I.  and  who  knoweth  the  inler[)ri'lalioii  of  a  t.? 
15.  a  man  hath  no  beltiT  /.  ibaii  lo  eal  and  ilriiik 

1 1.  7.  a  pleasant  I.  it  is  for  eyes  lo  btliold  the  sun 

lia.  T.  13.  il  it  e  small  I.  for  you  lo  wo«ry  moo 


Tlil 

/?a.  1.1. 8.  there  Is  no  green  1. 1|  17. 13.  a  rolling  ». 
29.10.  shall  thet.  framed  say  of  him  that  fra.-|iedt 
21.  that  turn  aside  the  just  for  a  t.  of  nought 

40.  15.  he  taketh  up  the  isles  as  a  very  hill*  t    ■ 

41.  12.  and  they  shall  be  as  a  I.  of  nought 

43.  19.  I  will  do  a  new  t.  it  shall  spring  forth 
55.  11.  it  shall  prosper  in  the  t.  whereto  I  sent  it 
66.  8.  who  halh  heard  such  a  t.  who  hath  seen 

./cr.  2.  10.  consider,  and  see  if  there  be  such  a  t. 

3.  30.  a  horrible  t.  is  committed  in  the  land 
11. 13.  ye  set  up  altars  to  that  shameful  t.  lo  Baal 
14.  14.  they  prophesy  unto  you  a  t.  of  nought 
18.  13.  the  virgin  of  Israel  hath  done  a  horrible  I 
23.  14.  I  have  seen  in  ihe  prophets  a  horrible  1. 
31.  22.  Lord  hath  created  a  new  t.  iu  the  earth 

38.  14.  I  wiil  ask  thee  a  t.  hide  nothing  from  mo 
42.3.thatGod  may  show  us  the  t.  that  we  may  do 

4.  that  whatsoever  f.  the  Lord  shall  answer  you 

44.  17.  we  will  do  what  t.  goeth  out  of  our  mouth 
Lam.  2. 13.  what  t.shall  I  take  to  witness  for  thee  1 

what  t.  shall  I  liken  to  thee  7 
Kzek.  14.  9.  if  deceived  when  he  halh  spoken  at. 

16.  47.  but  as  if  il  were  a  very  little  f. 
Dan.  2. 5.  Ihe  king  said,  the  t.  is  gone  from  me,  8w 

11.  and  it  is  a  rare  t.  that  the  king  rcqiiirelh 
15.  Arioch  made  the  t.  known  to  Daniel 
17.  Daniel  made  the  t.  known  lo  llananiah 

4.  33.  the  same  hour  was  tho  t.  fulfilled  on  Xeh. 

5.  15.  could  not  shew  the  inleriirelalion  of  the  (. 
26.  this  is  the  interpretation  of  ihe  t.  SIcno 

6. 12.  the  t.  is  true,  according  lo  the  law 

10. 1.  at.  was  revealed  lo  Daniel,  and  tho  1.  wa» 
true,  and  he  understood  the  t.  and  Ihe  vision 
Hos.  6.  10.  I  have  seen  a  horrible  t.  in  Israel 

8.  12.  but  they  were  counted  as  a  strange  t. 
.'Imos  6.  13.  yo  which  rejoice  in  a  t.  of  nought 
Mai.  1.14.  and  sacrificcth  to  the  Lord,  a  corrupt!. 
Jl/arA1.27.what  t.is  thisTwhat  new  doctrine  is  tliisT 
Luke  12.  11.  how  or  whal  t.  ye  shall  answer 
John  5.14. sin  no  more,  lest  a  worse  t.  come  to  thee 

9.30.  the  man  said,  herein  isa  marvellous  t. 
Jicts  10.  28.  it  is  unlawful  t.  for  man  that  is  a  Jew 

17.  21.  but  eilHer  lo  tell  or  hear  some  now  t. 
21.  25.  have  written,  that  they  observe  no  such  U 
23.  17.  for  he  halh  a  certain  t.  to  tell  him 

25.  26.  of  whom  I  have  no  certain  t.  lo  write 

26.  8.  why  should  it  be  thought  a  t.  incredible 
10.  which  1. 1  also  did  in  Jerusalem,  and  many 

flom.9.20.  shall  t.  formed  say  lo  him  that  formed  it 

1  Cor.  1.  10. 1  beseech  that  ye  all  speak  Ihe  same  U 
4.  3.  with  me  it  is  a  very  small  t.  that  I  he  judged 
8.  7.  some  eal  it  as  a  t.  offered  unto  an  idol 

20)r.  5.5.  halh  wiouglit  US  for  the  self-same  t.  isG. 
7. 11.  this  self-same  t.  that  yc  sorrowed  after 
Phil.  3.  16.  n('verthelcs3,  let  us  mind  the  same  t. 

2  Thcss.  1.  6.  seeing  it  is  a  righteous  t.  with  God 
//cft.l0.29.lhe  blood  of  the  covenant  an  unholy  t. 

31.  a  fearful  t.  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  living  G 
1  Pet.  4. 12.  as  thimgh  some  strange  t.  happened 
1  John  2.  8.  which  t.  is  true  in  him,  and  in  you 
Rev.  2.15.  doctrine  of  Nicolailans,  which  1. 1  hata 
See  Aici  RSKD. 
J}ny'V\WSO. 
Gen.  14.  23.  I  will  not  take  any  t.  that  is  thine 

18.  14.  is  niiy  t.  loo  hard  for  ihe  Lord 

19.  22.  cannot  do  any  t.  till  thou  be  come  thither 
'22.  12.  neither  do  thou  any  t.  unio  the  lad 

30.  31.  Jacob  said,  thou  shall  not  give  me  any  t, 
39.  9.  neither  hath  he  kepi  back  any  t.  from  me 

23.  he  looked  not  to  any  t.  under  his  hand 
Exod.  20.  4.  thou  shall  nol  make  unio  ihee  any 
likeness  of  any  t.  Dent.  4.  18,  23,  25.  |  .5.  8. 

]7.nor  any  t.  thai  is  thy  neighbour's,  Dcut.  5. 2L 
Lev.  6.  7.  forgiven  him  for  any  t-  he  halh  done 

13.  48.  in  any  t.  made  of  skin,  49,  .52,  .53,  57,  .59. 

15.  6.  that  siltelli  on  any  t.  whereon  ho  sat,  23. 
10.  who  louchelh  any  I.  that  was  under  hini,3& 

19.  26.  ye  shall  not  cat  any  t.  wilh  the  blond 

21.  18.  or  that  halh  any  t.  supertluoiis,  22,  23. 
JV«m.20.19.I  will  go  thro'  willioul  doing  nriy  t.  else 

22.  ;18.  have  I  now  any  power  at  all  lo  say  any  t.  7 
35.  22.  cast  upon  him  any  t.  wilhoul  laying  wait 

Drul.  4.  32.  if  there  bath  been  any  such  t.  aa  Uiia 
8.  9.  Ihou  shall  not  lack  any  t.  in  the  land 

14.  3.  Ihou  sliall  nol  eat  any  abominable  t. 
21.  ye  shall  nol  eal  any  t.'lhat  dielh  of  itself 

16.  i.  nor  shall  there  any  t.  of  the  flesh  remaia 

23.  19.  usury  of  any  t.  thai  is  lout  upon  usury 

24.  10.  wheii  Ihou  dosi  lend  Ihy  brother  any  t. 

31.  13.  Iheir  children  who  have  nol  known  anyt 
./o,>iA. 21.45.  there  failed  nol  ought  of  any  t.  spokoG 
Judg.  11.25.  art  thou  any  t.  heller  than  Kalak? 

18.7.  that  might  put  ihoin  lo  shniiic  in  any  t. 
lO.a  place  where  there  is  no  want  of  any  1. 19.19 
1  Sam.  3. 17.  God  do  so  lo  lliee,  if  thou  hide  any  I. 

20.  26.  but  Snul  spnkenol  any  t.  that  day 

39.  hut  Ihe  lad  knew  nol  any  t.  only  Jonalhao 

21.  2.  let  no  man  know  ntiyl.  of  tli«  bnsinesn 
22. 15.  lei  nol  the  king  impute  any  t.  lo  his  servant 
25. 15.  v«  woi«  Dot  butt,  Rciihor  mifacd  w«  any  <• 


THI 

1  Sam  .30. 19.  there  was  not  lacking  any  f.had  talccn 
t  Sam.  \'i.  2.  he  thought  it  hard  to  do  any  t.  to  her 

15.11.they  went  in  simplicity,  they  knew  not  anti  t. 
'I  Kings  10.  3.  tliorc  was  uot  a.  t.  hid  IVom  the  king 

15.  5.  turned  not  aside  troni  anij  t.  commanded 
20.  33.  whether  antj  t.  would  come  from  him 

2  Kings  4.  2.  hiith  not  any  t.  save  a  pot  of  oil 

1  (Sliroiu  26.  2d  whosoever  had  dedicated  anyt. 

2  Chron.  y.  20.  silver  was  not  anyt.  accounted  of 
23.  I'J.  that  none  unclean  in  any  t.  should  enter  in 

Job  15.  11.  is  there  any  secret  t.  with  thee  1 
33.  32.  if  thou  hast  any  t.  to  say,  answer  mo 

rsal.'Ji.lO.  that  seek  L.  shall  not  want  any  good  t. 
141.  4.  incline  not  my  heart  to  a7>y  evil  t. 

JEccl.l.lO.any  t.  whereof  it  may  he  said,  this  is  new 
3. 14.  nothing  he  put  to  it,  nor  any  t.  taken  from  it 

5.  2.  heart  not  he  hasty  to  utter  any  t.  before  God 
9. 5.  dead  know  not  any  t.  nor  have  they  a  reward 

Jer.  32.  27.  is  there  any  t.  too  hard  for  me  1 

38.  5.  for  the  king  is  not  he  that  can  do  any  t. 
42.21.  nor  any  (.Tor  which  he  hath  sent  me  to  you 

.  Dan.  3.  29.  which  speak  any  t.  aniLss  against  God 
Jonah  3.  7.  let  neither  man  nor  beast  taste  any  t. 
Mat.  \A.  19.  if  two  shall  agr<'0  touching  any  t. 

24.17.  to  lake  any  t.  out  of  his  house.  Murk  13.15. 
Mark  4. 22.  nor  was  any  t.  kept  secret,  Luke  8. 17. 

0.  22.  if  thou  canst  do  any  t.  have  compassion  on 

11.  13.  if  haply  he  might  find  anyt. thereon 

16.  8.  neit'ier  said  they  any  t.  to  any  man 
L,ukc  19.  8.  if  I  have  taken  any  t.  from  any  man 

22.  35.  lacked  ye  any  t.  ?  and  they  said,  nothing 
Jo/in  1.  3.  and  without  him  was  not  any  t.  made 

46.  can  there  any  good  t.come  out  of  Nazareth  ? 

7.4.  there  is  no  man  that  doeth  any  t.  in  secret 
14.  14.  if  ve  ask  any  t.  in  my  name,  I  will  do  it 

^cts  10.  14.  I  have  never  eaten  any  t.  common 

17.  2.5.  as  tho'  he  needed  any  t.  seeing  he  giveth 
25.  8.  nor  against  Cesar,  have  I  offended  any  t. 

11.  or  if  I  committed  anyt.  worthy  of  death 
Rom.  8  33.  lay  anyt.  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect 

13.  8.  owe  no  man  any  t.  but  to  love  one  another 

14.  21.  nor  any  t.  whereby  thy  brother  stumbleth 

1  Cor.  2.  2.  nor  to  know  dny  t.  save  4csus  crucified 
3. 7.  neither  is  he  that  planteth  any  t.  nor  watereth 
8.2.  if  any  man  think  that  he  knoweth  any  t. 
10.  19.  what  say  I  then  1  that  the  idol  is  anyt. 
14.  35.  if  learn  any  t.  let  them  ask  their  husbands 

2  Cor.  2.  10.  to  whom  ye  forgive  any  1. 1  forgive,  for 
if  I  forgive  any  1. 1  forgave  in  thejierson  of  Christ 

3.5.  not  sufficient  to  think  any  t.  as  of  ourselves 

6.  3.  giving  no  offence  in  any  t.  that  the  ministry 

7.  14.  for  if  I  have  boasted  any  t.  to  him  of  you 
Gal.  5.  6.  neither  circumcision  availeth  any  t.  not 
F.ph.  5.  27.  not  having  wrinkle,  or  any  such  t. 
Phil.  3.  15.  if  in  any  t.  ye  be  otherwise  minded 

1  Thess.  1.  8.  so  that  we  need  not  to  speak  any  t 
1  Tim.  1.  10.  and  if  there  be  a7iy  other  t.  contrary 
Jam.  1.  7.  that  he  shall  receive  any  t.  of  the  Lord 
1  John  5. 14.  if  we  ask  any  t.  according  to  his  will 
Rev.  9.  4.  that  they  should  not  hurt  any  green  t. 
21.  27.  in  no  wise  enter  any  t.  that  dehleth 

F.r^ery  THING. 
Oen.  6.  17.  every  t.  that  is  in  the  earth  shall  die 

8.  1.  God  remembered  Noah  and  every  living  t. 

9.  3.  rvery  moving  I.  that  liveth  shall  be  meat 
Ap/1.  1.).  4.  every  t.  whereon  he  sitteth,  unclean 

20.  every  t.  she  sitteth  on  shall  be  unclean 

23.  37.  ye  shall  offer  every  t.  uimn  his  day 

27.  2,-*.  every  devoted  t.  is  most  holy  to  the  Lord 
JVum.  18.  14.  every  t.  devoted  in  Israel  shall  be 
thine,  Ezek.  44.  29. 
15.  every  t.  that  openeth  the  matrix  bo  thine 
31.  23.  every  t.  that  may  abide  fire,  make  it  go 
Pent.  23.  9.  then  keep  thee  from  every  wicked  t. 
Josh.-i.W.the  priests  stood  till  every  t.  was  finished 

1  .Sam.  15.  9.  every  t.  that  was  vile  they  destroyed 

2  .Sam.  15.  30.  send  unto  me  every  t.  ye  can  hear 
Kslh.  fi.  13.  told  every  t.  that  had  befallen  him 
Job  28.  10.  and  his  eye  seeth  every  precious  t. 

39.  8.  and  he  searchelh  after  every  green  t. 
42.  2.  I  know  that  thou  canst  do  every  t. 

PsaM.50.6.let  every  (.that  hath  breath  praise  Lord 

Prov.  27.  7.  to  the  hungry  every  bitter  t.  is  sweet 

Eccl.  3.  1.  to  every  t.  there  is  a  season  and  a  time 

11.  hath  made  every  t.  beautiful  in  his  time 

12.  14.  work  into  judgment  with  every  secret  t. 
I.ia.  19.  7.  every  t.  sown  by  the  brooks  shall  wilher 
F.zck.  47.  9.  every  t.  shall  live  where  rivers  come 
Jlfa<.  8.  33.  told  every  t.  and  what  was  befallen 

1  Cur.  1.  5.  in  every  t.  ye  are  enriched,  2  Cor. 9. 11. 
20»r.8.7.as  ye  are  bound  in  every  t.in  faith,  in  love 

10.  5.  and  every  high  t.  that  exalteth  itself 
F.ph.  5.  24.  be  subject  to  their  husbands  in  every  t. 
Phil.  4.  6.  in  every  t.  by  prayer  and  supplication 
1  Thess.  5.  18.  in  every  t.  give  thanks,  for  this  is 

Se^.  Creepeth,  Crkepino,  Evil, 
Goni>,   Great,    Holy,   Liout, 
LiviNo.  OsE,  Small. 
That  THING. 
Oom.  18.  IT.  Iiicio  from  Abra^ham  that  t.  which  I  do 
G31 


THI 

Eiad.  0. 0.  and  the  Lord  did  that  t.  on  the  morrow 
Z,ct).5.5.shall  confess  that  ho  hath  sinned  in  that  t. 
DciLt.  17.  5.  which  have  committed  that  wicked  t 
Luke  9.  21.  he  charged  them  to  tell  no  man  that  t. 

12.  26.  if  yc  be  notable  to  do  that  t.  which  is  least 
ii:um.l4.22.nothims(drin  that  t.  which  hoalloweth 

This  THING. 
Gen.l^.  21. 1  have  accepted  thee  concerning  this  t. 

20.  10.  sawest  thou  that  thou  hast  clone  this  t. 

21.  26.  I  wot  not  who  hath  done  this  t.  neither 

22.  16.  done  this  t.  and  not  withheld  thy  son 
30.  31.  if  wilt  do  this  t.  I  will  again  feed  flock 
34.  14.  we  cannot  do  this  t.  to  give  our  sister 
41.  28.  this  is  the  t.  I  have  sjjoken  to  Pharaoh 
44.  7.  that  we  should  do  according  to  this  t. 

F.zod.  1.  18.  why  have  ye  done  this  t.  and  saved 
2.  14.  and  Moses  said,  surely  this  t.  is  known 
15.  Pharaoh  heard  this  (.he  sought  to  slay  Moses 

9.  5.  to-morrow  the  Lord  shall  do  this  t.  in  land 
12.  24.  observe  this  t.  for  an  ordinance  to  thee 
16. 16.  this  is  the  (.  which  the  Lord  commanded, 

32.  I  35.  4.  Lev.  8.  5.  I  9.  6.  |  17.  2.  J^-um. 
30.  1.  I  36.  6.  Deut.  lo.  15.  |  24.  18,  22. 
18. 14.  what  is  this  t.  thou  doest  to  the  people  ? 
IS.  this  i.  is  too  heavy  for  thee,  thou  art  not  able 
23.if  thou  shalt  do  this  t.  and  God  command  thee 
29.  1.  this  is  the  (.  that  thou  shalt  do  to  them 
33.  17.  I  will  do  this  t.  that  thou  hast  spoken 
JN'am.  32.20.  if  ye  will  do  this  t.  if  ye  will  go  armed 
36.  6.  this  t.  Lord  commands  about  daughters 
Detit.  1.  32.  yet  in  this  t.  ye  did  not  believe  God 
15.10. for  this  t.  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  bless  thee 
22.  20.  if  this  t.  be  true,  and  tokens  be  not  found 
.32.  47.  thro'  this  t-  ye  shall  prolong  your  days 
./o.'A.  9.  24.  we  were  afraid,  anW  have  done  this  t. 
22.  24.  have  not  rather  done  it  for  fear  of  this  t. 
.Tudg.  6.  29.  they  said  one  to  another,  who  hath 
done  this  t.  ?  Gideon  hath  done  this  t. 
11.  37.  let  this  t.  be  done  for  me,  let  me  alono 

20.  9.  this  shall  be  the  (.  which  we  will  do 

21.  11.  and  this  is  the  (.  that  ye  shall  do 

1  .Sam.20.2.  why  should  my  father  hide  1. 1.  from  me 
24.  6.  the  Lord  forbid  that  I  should  do  this  t. 
26.  16.  this  t.  is  not  good  that  thou  hast  done 
28.  10.  no  punishment  happen  to  thee  for  this  t. 

18.  Lord  hath  done  this  t.  unto  thee  this  day 

2  -Sam.  2.  6.  requite,  because  ye  have  done  this  t. 

11.  11.  as  thy  soul  liveth,  I  will  not  do  this  t. 
2.5.  say  to  joab,  let  not  this  t.  displease  thee 

12.  5.  the  man  that  hath  done  this  t.  shall  die 

6.  because  he  did  this  t.  and  had  no  pity 
12.but  I  will  do  this  t.  before  all  Isr.  and  the  sun 

13.  20.  he  is  thy  brother,  regard  not  this  t. 

14.  13.  the  king  dolh  speak  this  t.  as  one  faulty 

15.  1  am  come  to  speak  of  this  t.  unto  the  kinf 
20.  my  lord,  thy  servant  Joab  hath  done  this  t. 

24.  3.  why  doth  my  lord  the  king  delight  in  thi.i  t.? 

1  Kings  1.  27.  is  this  t.  done  by  my  lord  the  king  1 
3.10.pleased  Lord  that  Solomon  had  asKed  (.(.  11. 
11. 10. he  had  commanded  him  concerning  this  t. 
12.'  24.  return  every  man,  for  this  t.  is  from  me 

30.  made  two  calves,  and  this  t.  became  a  sin 
1.3.  33.  after  this  t.  Jeroboam  returned  not 
34.  this  I.  became  sin  to  the  house  of  Jeroboam 

20.  9.  tell  my  lord  thp  king  this  t.  I  may  not  do 
24.  do  this  t.  take  the  kings  away,  every  man 

2  Kings  5.18.  in  this  t.  the  Lord  pardon  thy  servant 
6.  11.  the  king  of  Syria  was  troubled  for  this  t. 
7. 2.  Lord  would  make  windows,  misrht  this  t.  be 
11.  .5.  this  is  th(!  (.  that  ye  shall  do,  2  CAr.  23. 4. 
17.  12.  the  Lord  had  said,  ve  shall  not  do  this  t. 

1  Chron.  n..l9.  God  forbid  that  I  shojtid  do  this  t. 

21.  3.  why  then  doth  my  lord  require  this  t.  ? 

7.  and  God  was  displeased  with  this  t. 

8.  I  have  sinned,  because  I  have  done  this  t. 

2  C/(r»n. 11.4.  return  every  man,  this  (.done  of  me 
16.  10.  was  in  rage  with  him,  because  of  this  t. 

F.zra  9.3.  when  I  heard  this  I.  I  rent  my  garment 

10.  2.  there  is  hope  in  Israel  concerning  this  t. 

13.  we  are  many  that  have  transgressed  in  this  t. 
JWA.  2.  19.  what  is  this  t.  that  ye  do  ?  will  yo  rebel 
fsa.  38. 7.  Lord  will  do  this  t.  that  he  hathsiiokcn 
./fr.  7.  23.  but  this  is  the  (.  that  I  command  them 

22.4.  if  ye  do  (.  (.  indeed,  then  shall  enter  in  kings 
40.  3.  therefore  this  t.  is  come  upon  you 

16.  Gedaliah  said,  thou  shalt  not  do  this  t. 
44.  4.  oh  do  not  this  abominable  (.  that  I  hate 

J)far/>5.:i2.ho  looked  to  see  her  that  had  done  this  t. 
Luke  2.  15.  and  see  this  t.  which  is  come  to  pass 

22. 23.  which  of  them  it  was  that  should  do  this  t. 
.John  18.  34.  sayest  thou  this  t.  of  thyself? 
.lets  5. 4.  why  hast  thou  cnnrrived  this  t.  in  heart? 

26.  26.  for  this  t.  was  not  done  in  a  corner 
Horn.  13.  6.  atlendins  continnallv  upon  this  very  (. 
ICor.  9.17.  if  I  do  this  t.  willinglv,  I  have  a  reward 
2  Cnr.  12.  8.  for  this  1. 1  bcsniijht  l\w  Lord  thrice 
P.';//.l  .e.lK'ing  confident  in  this  very  (.  that  he  who 

3.13.  but  this  one  (.  I  do,  I  pre.;s  toward  the  mark 

Unclean  THING. 
Lev.  5.  9.  or  if  a  sou!  touch  any  unclean  (■  7.  21. 


THI 

2,eD.7.19.fle8h  that  toucheth  unclean  (.not  be  eaten 
20.  21.  take  his  brother's  wife,  it  is  an  unclean  U 

Deut.  23.  14.  that  he  see  no  unclean  t.  in  tiiea 

.ludg.  13.  4.  and  eat  not  any  unclean  t.  7,  14. 

Isa.  52.  11.  touch  no  unclean  t.  2  Cor.  6.  17. 
fJ4.  6.  we  are  all  as  an  unclean  t.  we  all  do  fada 

Acts  10. 14.  have  never  eate'n  any  (.  that  is  unclean 
THINGS. 

(7cn.45.23.tcn  asses  laden  with  the  good  (.of  Egypt 

Lev.  4.  2.  if  a  soul  sin  thro'  ignorance  concerning 
(.  which  ought  not  to  be  done,  13,  22,  27. 

Deut.  4.  9.  lest  thou  forget  (.  thine  eyes  have  seen 
22.3.and  with  all  lost  (.of  thy  brother's  he  hath  lost 
29  29.  the  secret  (.  belong  unto  the  Lord  our  God 
32.  35.  the  (.  that  shall  come  on  them  make  hasta 
.33.  15.  for  the  chief  (.  of  the  ancient  mountains 

.Judg.  18.  27.  took  the  (.  which  Micah  had  made 

1  Sam.  12.  21.  for  then  should  ye  go  after  vain  t. 
15.  21.  but  the  peojile  took  the  chief  of  the  (. 

2  fSam.  24. 12.  I  otter  thee  three  (.  1  Chron.  21.  10 

1  Kings  7. 51.  Solomon  brought  in  the  (.  dedicated 

15.  1.5.  Asa  brought  in  the  (.  2  Chron.  15.  18. 

2  Kings  17.  11.  and  Israel  wrought  wicked  (.  to 
provoke  the  Lord  to  angei 

1  Chron.  4.  22.  and  these  are  ancient  (. 
9.  31.  the  office  over  (.  that  were  made  in  pans 
29.  2.  prepared  gold  for  (.  of  gold,  silver  for  (.  of 

silver,  brass  for  (.  of  brass,  iron  for  (.  of  iron 

2  Chron.  12.  12.  and  also  in  Judah  (.  went  well 
F.sth.  2.  3.  let  (.  for  jiurification  be  given  them,  12. 
Job  5.  9.  who  doth  marvellous  (.  without  number 

0.  7.  the  (.  that  my  soul  refuseth  to  touch 
30.  cannot  my  taste  discern  perverse  (.  ? 
12.  22.  he  discovereth  deep  (.  out  of  darkness 
13.20.only  do  not  two  (.  to  me,  then  will  I  not  hide 

20.  for  thou  writest  bitter  (.  against  me 

41.  34.  be  beholdeth  all  high  (.  is  king  over  prido 

42.  3.  I  have  uttered  (.  too  wonderful  for  me 
Psal.  12.  3.  cut  off  tongue,  that  speakcth  proud  I. 

17.  2.  thine  eyes  behold  the  (.  that  are  equal 

31.  18.  which  speak  grievous  (.  i)roudly 
35.  11.  they  laid  to  my  charge  (.  I  knew  not 
38.  12.  tliat  seek  my  hurt,  speak  mischievous  t. 
45.  1.  I  speak  of  the  (.  which  I  have  made 

4.  thy  right  hand  shall  teach  thee  terrible  (. 
60.  3.  thou  hast  shewed  thy  people  hard  (. 
65.  5.  by  terrible  (.  wilt  thou  answer  us,  O  God 
72.18.the  G.  of  Israel,  who  only  dolh  wondrous  t. 
78.  12.  marvellous  (.  did  he  in  Egypt,  98.  1. 
86.  10.  thou  art  great,  and  doest  wondious  (. 
87.3.  glorious  (.  are  spoken  of  thee,  O  city  of  God 
94.  4.  how  long  shall  they  utter  and  speak  hard  (.? 
106.  22.  who  had  done  terrible  (.  by  the  Red  sea 
113.  6.  himself  to  behold  the  (.  that  are  in  heaven 
119.  18.  I  may  behold  wondrous  (.  out  of  Ihy  law 
131.  1.  in  great  matters,  or  in  (.  too  high  for  me 
Prov.  2. 12.  from  the  man  that  speaketh  f'roward  U 
8.  6.  I  will  speak  of  excellent  (.  of  right  (. 

16.  30.  he  shutteth  his  eyes  to  devise  froward  (. 
22.  20.  1  have  written  to  thee  e.xcellent  (. 
23. 16.  shalt  rejoice,  when  thy  lips  speak  right  U 

33.  and  thine  heart  shall  utter  perverse  (. 
30.7.  two  (.have  I  required  of  thee,  deny  them  not 

15.  there  are  three  (.  that  are  never  satisfied 

18.  there  be  three  (.  that  be  too  wonderful 

21.  for  three  (.  the  earth  is  disquieted 
24.  four  (.  which  arc  little  on  the  earth 
29.  there  be  three  (.  which  go  well,  yea  four 

Feci.  1. 11.  nor  any  remembrance  of  (.  to  come 

7.  25.  to  seek  out  wisdom,  and  the  reason  of  (. 
/«'/.12. 5.  singtoLord,  for  he  hath  done  excellent  t. 

25.1.  sing  to  Lord,  for  thou  hast  done  wonderful  ( 
6.  Ld.  shall  make  unto  all  people  a  feast  of  fat  t. 
2.1.  16.  surely  your  turning  of  (.  upside  down 

30.  10.  which  say,  prophesy  not  to  us  right  (. 

32.  8.  but  tho  liberal  deviseth  liberal  (.  and  by 
liberal  (.  shall  he  stand 

41.  23.  shew  the  (.  that  are  to  come  hereafter 

42.  9.  former  (.  come  to  pass,  and  new  (,  I  declare 

16.  I  will  make  crooked  (.  straight 

44.  7.  the  (.  that  are  coming  and  shall  como 

45.  11.  ask  mc  of  (.  to  come  concerning  my  son 

19.  I  the  Lord  speak,  I  declare  (.  that  are  right 
48.  6.  I  have  shewed  thee  new  (.  even  hidden  (. 
.56.4.the  eunuchs  that  choose  the  (.  that  please  ma 

64.  3.  thou  didst  terrible  (.  we  looked  not  for 
II.  and  all  our  pleasant  (.  are  laid  waste 

65.  4.  broth  of  abominable  (.  is  in  their  vessi  is 
.Ter.  2.  8.  walked  after  (.  that  do  not  profit,  16. 19 

8.  W   the  (.  I  have  given  them  shall  pass  away 

31.  5.  the  planters  shall  eat  them  as  common  (. 
Lnm.  1.  7.  Jerusalem  remembered  her  pleasant* 

11.  they  have  given  her  pleasant  (.  for  meat 
2.  14.  thy  prophets  have  seen  foolish  (.  for  thee 

Eiek.  11.5.  I  know  the  (.  that  come  in  your  mind 
10.  16.  like  (.  shall  not  come,  nor  shall  it  be  so 
38.10.at  tho  same  time  shall  (.  come  into  Ihy  mind 

Dan.  2.  22.  he  revealelh  the  deep  and  secret  (. 
11.36.  shall  speak  marvellous  (.  against  G.  ofgodf 

Joel  3.  5.  carried  into  your  temple*  wy  goodly  t 


THI 

Ohad.  6.  how  aro  tlio  t.  of  Esan  Bcarclied  out ! 
ho'.v  are  liis  hidden  t.  smiijlit  iiji! 
JUic.  7.  15.  I  will  sliew  iinlo  liiiii  niarV'-lloiis  t. 
y.,cUA  Id.ror  who  h:ith  di;«|iisL-il  thu  day  ul.siiuill  t. 
Mill.  (>.  31.  morrow  luku  tlioiiyhl  Cor  t.  of  iu-iulf 
i:).  .W.  brings  out  of  his  tre.i.-.uru  t.  ii«w  uud  old 
10. 2;i.  Buviiuicst  not  t.  that  be  of  G.  Mark  8. 33. 
SJ2.  a),  render  iherofore  lo  Cusiir  llic  t.  that  are 
Co.sar'9,  and  to  God  the  t.  that  are  God's, 
Mark  12.  17.  Luke  20.  S.'i. 
JIT'irk  4.l'J.lnsl3  of  other  t.  enlerins  in,  choke  word 

7.  15.  but  ihe  t.  which  come  onl  of  iiini  defile 
Luke  5.  2r>.  saying,  we  iiavo  seen  strange  t.  lo-iiny 

fi.  4fi.  call  mo  Lord,  and  do  not  the  t.  which  I  s>iy 
10.23.  bli-ssed  the  eves  which  see  the  t.  that  yesee 
12.  15.  in  the  nbiind.incc  of  the  t.  he  possesseLh 
48.  and  did  commit  t.  worthy  of  stupes 
18.27.  the  t.  which  are  impossible  with  men  are 

"  ]9.42.hadst  known  the  t.  which  belong  to  thy  peace 
22.  37.  for  the  t.  concerning  me  have  an  end 
23.48.  all  people  beholding  the  t.  which  were  done 
24.18.hi'sl  not  known  the  (.wlii(;li  are  come  to  pass 
27.  he  expounded  the  t.  concerning  himself 

John  J.  50.  thou  shalt  fee  greater  t.  than  iheso 

3.  12.  if  1  have  told  you  earthly  t.  heavenly  t. 
It).  13.  ihe  Sjiirit  will  shew  yoii  t.  to  come 

Jlctn  1.3.  speaking  of  £.  pertaining  to  the  kingdom 

4.  20.  we  cannot  but  speak  the  t.  we  have  seen 
2.").  and  whv  did  the  people  imagine  vain  t.  ? 
32.  that  oUL'ht  of  the  t.  he  pos.sessod  was  his  own 

8.  12.  preaching  the  £.  concerning  the  kingd.ofG. 
15.  20.  that  they  abstain  from  t.  stranghd,  2U. 
]().  14.  she  attended  to  the  ^  sjTOken  of  Paul 
18. 25.  ApolUis  taught  diligently  the  t.  of  the  Lord 
]!).  8.  persuading  t.  concerning  the  kingdom  of  (i. 

20.  22.  not  knowing  the  (.  that  shall  befall  mo 
30.  shall  men  arise,  speaking  perverse  t.  to  draw 

21.  25.  that  they  keep  from  (.  offered  to  idols 
24.  13.  neither  can  they  prove  the  t.  whereof 
2fi.  22.  siiying  none  other  t.  than  the  prophets 
28.  24.  .some  bi'lieved  the  t.  that  were  spoken 

Rom.  1.  20.   Ihe  invisible  t.  of  him  arc  clearly 
seen,  being  understood  by  the  t.  that  are  made 
2.  1.  for  thou  that  jndgpst,  doest  the  same  t. 
14.  Gentiles  ilo  by  nature  t.  contained  in  the  law 
18.  and  approvest  the  t.  that  are  more  excellent 
8.  5.  mind  the  t.  ofllie  flesh,  mind  J.  of  the  Spirit 
38.  nor  (.  present,  nor  t.  to  come,  1  Cor.  3.  22. 
12.  10.  mind  not  h:;h  t.  ||  17.  provide  t.  honest 
J4.19.fol!ow  after  t.that  make  for  peaee,and  edify 
35.4.  v/hatsoover  t.  were  written  aforetime 

27.  if  Gentiles  made  partakers  of  spiritual  t. 
their  duty  is  to  minister  to  them  in  carnal  t. 

1  Cur.  1.27.  God  hath  chosen  the  foolish  «.  ofthi; 

world,  weak  t.  to  confound  t.  which  are  mighty 

28.  base  I.  and  (.  despised  hath  God  i-hosen 
2.  9.  the  t.  which  God  hath  pn-pared  for  them 

10.  the  Spirit  searcheth  the  deep  t.  of  God 

11.  Whatman  knoweth/,.  of  man,  so  Ihe  (.of  God 

knoweth  no  man,  but  the  Spirit  of  (Jod 

12.  we  might  know  the  /..  that  are  freely  given  us 

13.  which  t.  wo  sfieak,  comparing  spiritual  t. 

14.  man  rrcoiveth  not  the«.  of  the  S|iiril  of  God 
4.  5.  will  bring  to  light  Ihe  hidden  t.  of  darkness 
fi.  3.  much  morn  t.  that  pertain  to  this  life,  4. 
7.  32.  unmarried  careth  for  the  «.  of  the  Lord,  34. 

33.  married  careth  f'>r  llie  t.  that  are  of  the  worlil 
e.  1.  now  as  touching  t.  ofleretl  lo  iilols,  we  know 
II.  11.  if  we  h!ive  sown  spiritual  t.  if  reap  carnal  t. 

10.  20.  that  the  t.  which  the  Gentiles  siicnfice 
13.11. when  I  became  a  man, 1  put  away  childish  t. 
14.  7.  and  even  l.  withonl  life  givi/ig  sound 

:r7.  acknowledge  that  the  t.  that  I  write  to  you 
16.  14.  lit  all  your  t.  be  done  with  charity 

2  Vor.  1. 13.  for  we  write  none  other  t.  unto  you 
n.orlheMliatl  piirpo8e,dol  purpose  according 

4.2.h'jt  have  renounced  the  liiilden  t.  of  dishonesty 

18.  whde  we  look  not  at  the  t.  which  are  seen,  /. 

Been  are  temporal,  t.  not  seen  are  iternal 

5.10.  every  erne  may  receive  the  t.  done  in  his  body 

17.  old  I.  are  piissed  away,  all  t.  are  become  new 
H.21.proviiling  for  honest  t.  in  sight  of  L.  and  men 
10.7.do  ye  hmk  on  t.n.f\M  the  outward  api)enrance 

1 3.  we  will  not  lioasi  oft.  without  our  mea'-ure,  15. 

If),  and  not  lo  boa-t  in  another  man's  line  oft. 

11.  30.  I  will  irlory  oflhe  t.  which  concern  mine 
Onl.  2. 18.  if  I  huilil  again  the  t.  which  I  deslniyed 

4.  21.  which  t.  are  an  allegory,  for  these  arc  two 
a.  17.  so  lliat  ye  cannot  do  the  t.  that  yo  would 
y.ph  fi.  0.  nnd,  ye  niasteri,  do  the  same  t.  to  them 
i'Aif.  1.10.  that  ye  may  iip|irovi'Mhat  are  excellent 
l-Tiherwhicfi  happened  inito  me, have  fallen  out 

2.  4.  look  not  every  man  on  his  own  t.  but  every 

man  alsd  on  the  t.  of  oihi.TS 
10.  of  t.  in  heaven,  f.  in  i-artli,  t.  iimler  earth 
21.  seek  not  the  l.  which  are  Jesus  Thrisl's 

3.  t.  to  write  Ihe  same  t.  \\  10.  who  mind  earthly  t. 
4.H.  whatsoever /.are  true, li.mesl.jusi, pure, liively 

IS.  lam  full,  having  received  Ihe  t.  sent  from  you 
Oil.  1.  20.  whuthcr  t.  in  earth,  ot  L  in  licavoo 
623 


THI 

CtiJ.2.17.whlcliarcBliadowofMocome,  WcJ.  10.1. 
2).  which  t.  have  indeed  a  8howt)f  wisdom 
3.2.sct  your  affection  on  (.aliove,not  on  t.  on  earth 

6.  for  which  t.  sake  llie  wrath  of  tJod  conielh 
1  7'Acs.«.2.l4.foryenisohayesulVered  likot.  olyour 
iT/ir.is.  3.  4.  an.i  will  do  the  t.  which  we  coiumand 

1  Tim.  a.  13.  speaking  /.  which  ihuy  ought  not 

2  Tim.  2.  2.  the  t.  which  ihou  hast  heard  of  mo 

3.  14.  continue  in  t.  which  thou  hast  learned 
'J'it.  1.  5.  thou  shoiddeslset  in  order  the  t.  wanting 

11.  teaching  t.  they  ought  not  for  lucre's  sake 
2.  1.  speak  Ihou  t.  which  become  sound  doctrine 

Hfh.  2.  1.  give  heed  to  tir;  t.  which  we  have  heard 
n.befailhful  high  priest  in  t.  pertaining  toG.5.1. 
5. 8.  yet  learned  he  obedience  by  the  t.  he  sutfered 
C.  9.  but,  beloved,  waare  persuaded  belter  t.  of 
you,  and  t.  that  accompany  salvation 
18.  that  by  two  immutable  t.  in  which  it  was 
8.  1.  of  the  t.  we  have  spoken  this  is  the  sum 
5.  to  the  exatnple  and  shadow  of  heavenly  t. 
0. 23.  that  the  patterns  oft.  in  the  heavens  be  puri- 
fied, hut  heavenly  t.  with  better  sacrifices 

11.  1.  now  faith  is  the  substance  of  t.  hoped  for, 
the  evidence  of  t.  not  seen 

3.  t.  seen  were  not  made  oft.  which  do  appear 

7.  Noah  being  warned  of  God  oft.  not  seen  as  yet 
2i).l>lossed  Jacob  and  Esau  concerning  t.  to  coino 

12.  24.  that  speakclh  better  t.  than  that  of  Abel 
.7atn.  3.  7.  nnd  t.  in  the  sea  are  tamed  of  mankind 

1  I'ct.  1.  12.  they  did  minister  t.  which  are  now  re- 
ported ;  which  t.  the  angels  desire  to  look  into 

18.  ye  were  not  redeemed  with  corruptible  t. 

2  Pi^t.  2.  12.  speak  evil  oft.  they  undcistand  not 
1  .Mn  2.  15.  neither  the  t.  thal'arc  in  the  world 
Rev.  1. 1.  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ  to  shew  to 

his  servants  t.  must  shortly  come  to  pass,  22.  6. 

1.  19.  write  the  t.  which  thou  hast  seen,  the  t. 
which  are,  nnd  f.  which  shall  be  hereafter 

2. 14.  but  I  have  a  few  t.  against  thee,  to  eat  t. 
sacrificed  to  idols,  and  to  commit  fornication,  20. 
3.2.  strengthen  the  t.  which  remain,  ready  to  die 

4.  1.  I  wdl  shew  thee  the  f.  must  be  hereafter 
10.  6.  and  sware  by  him  who  created  heaven, 

earth,  sea,  and  all  t.  that  therein  are 
21.  4.  for  the  former  t.  are  passed  away 
22. 10  take  his  |>art  from  (.  written  in  this  book 
Sec  Creei-ino,  Dedicate,  Detestable,  For- 
mer, Precious. 

Ml  THINGS. 
Oen.  9. 3.  as  the  green  herb  have  I  given  you  all  t 
24.  1.  the  Lord  hath  blessed  .Abraham  in  nil  t. 

fifi.  the  s'Tvant  told  Isaac  all  t.  that  h(!  had  done 
F.xod.  23.  13.  in  nil  t.  I  have  said,  be  circumspect 
20.  35.  do  according  to  all  t.  I  cominanded  thee 
A,ei.'.8.36.  Aaron  and  hissonsdid  hW  t.  commanded 
jViim.  1.  50.  the!  Levites  over  nil  t.  that  belong  to  it 
31.  20.  and  purify  all  t.  made  of  wood  ami  skins 
Deul.  1.  18.  I  cornmanded  you  all  I.  ye  should  do 

4.  7.  as  the  Lord  <mr  God  is  in  all  t.  we  call  for 

12.  8.  ye  shall  not  do  after  all  t.  that  we  do  here 
28.  47.  served?!  not  for  the  abundance  of  all  t. 

48.  shall  serve  thine  enemies  in  want  of  alt  t. 
57.  eat  them  for  want  of  all  t.  secretly  in  siege 
.7o.«A.  1.  17.  as  we  hearkened  to  Moses  in  nil  t. 

2.  23.  the  spies  told  him  all  t.  that  befel  ihem 
Rulli.  4.  7.  this  was  the  manner,  to  confirm  all  t. 

1  .Slim.  3.  12.  perforiTi  all  f.  concerning  Eli's  house 
17.  if  iIkpu  hill"  nnv  of  «//  t.  he  said  to  iheo 

10.  7.  and  Jonathan  shewed  Diivid  all  those  t. 

2  .Sam.  11.  18.  .loah  sent  and  told  David  all  the  t. 

1 1.  20.  lo  know  (ill  t.  that  are  in  the  earlh 
23. 5.  he  made  a  covenn  nl  ordered  in  all  I.  and  sure 

I  fCinff.o  21.  20.  ho  did  nil  t.  as  did  the  Amoriles 

2/('/M'".«l  I.O.tbe  captains  did  according  lo  nil  /.thai 

Jeholada  the  priest  cninmnnded,  2  CAr. 23. 8. 

14.  3.  Ama/.iah,  accordinc  to  alH.  that  Joasli  did 

20.  15.  they  have  seen  all  t.  thai  aro  in  my  house 

1  Chr„n.  20.  14.  all  t.  come  of  thee,  nnd  of  thine 

2  Cltrov.  5.  1.  So'omon  hroUiiht  all  I.  dedicated 
31.  5.  tithe  of  all  t.  brmuiht  thev  in  abundantly 

mil.  9.  0.  the  Lord  made  all  I.  .'Icl.f  14.  15.  ||  17. 
24,25.  a,l.  1.  Ifi.  Iiev.\.  11. 

./i;A  41.  34.  he  behiddeih  nil  hiffh  I.  be  is  a  king 

P»ai. 8.0.  thou  hast  put  all  I.  umliT  his  feet,  I  Cor. 
1.-..  27.  f>A1.22. 
57.  2.  cry  lo  God  that  performeth  all  I.  for  mo 
110.  \'2!*.  preaepis  concerning  all  t.  to  be  risht 

rroH.3.15.wisdnm  is  more  precious  than  all  t  8.1 1. 
Ifi.  4.  the  Lord  hath  made  nil  t.  for  himself 
20. 10.  Ihe  great  f  Jod  that  formed  all  I.  rewardeth 
28.  .5.  they  thai  s'ck  the  Lord  understand  nil  I. 

F.r.cl.  1.8.  nllt.nri!  full  of  labour,  man  cannot  utter 
7.  15.  all  t.  have  I  seen  in  days  id"  my  vanity 

9.  2.  nil  I.  come  alike  lo  all,  there  is  one  event 
3.  Ibis  is  an  evil  among  n'/  I.  done  under  the  sun 

10.  19.  hot  mon"V  nnswirelh  nil  I. 
hn.  41.  24.  I  am  the  Lord  that  miketh  nf/ 1.  fiO.  2. 
Jrr.  10.  IIV  for  lie  is  the  former  of  nil  t.  51.  19. 

17.  9.  the  hear'  in  deceitful  above  n/Zt.  nud  wicked 
42.5.  ifwedonotovonttOOordin;{  to  aiZ  t.  for  which 


THI 

yfr.44.18.wo  wonted  all  t.and  liavo  been  cnnaumod 
f':zc/;.11.25.[spcak  all  I.  the  Lord  halhshewed  ma 
3-f.  20.  all  creeping  t.  shall  shake  at  my  presence 
44.  30.  the  firsl  of  ull  I.  shall  be  the  pn.si's 
fJiin.  2.  40.  forasmuch  as  imn  subdueih  all  I. 
7,' ph.  1.2.  I  will  consume  nil  t.  ftor.i  oif  llie  land 
.jl/ii/.7.12.a//t.  ye  would  that  men  should  do  lo  you 
1 1.  27.  all  t.  aro  delivered  lo  me,  J.ukc  10.  22. 
13.  41.  they  shall  gather  all  I.  that  oflVnd 
17.  1 1.  Eliiis  shall  restore  all  t.  Mark  9.  12. 
19. 2i>.  with  man  this  is  iinpos>ible,  hut  with  God 
all  t.  are  possible,  Mark  10.  27.  |  14.  36. 
21.  22.  all  I.  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  prayer 
22. 4.  tell  ihem  which  arc  biddiii,  behold  all  I.  ,tra 
ready,  come  unto  the  mairiage, /,uAe  14.  17. 

23.  20.  swearcth  by  it,  and  by  nil  I.  thereon 
2'i.20.tenching  them  to  observe  a//t. I  commanded 

Mark  4.  34.  he  expounded  all  I.,  to  his  di-ciphs 
f).  30.  they  told  him  all  t.  what  they  had  dune 
7.  37.  astonished,  saying,  ho  halh  done  all  I.  well 
9.  23.  all  t.  are  possible  to  him  that  brlii'Veth 
13.  23.  take  heed,  I  have  foretold  you  all  I. 

Luke  2.  20.  pr;iislng  God  for  all  t.  they  had  heard 
39.  performed  all  t.  according  to  the  law  of  God 

9.  43.  they  wondered  at  all  t.  which  Jesus  did 
11.  41.  nnd  behold,  all  t.  are  clean  unto  you 
18. 31.  all  t.  written  concerning  .Son  of  man  shall 

be  accomplished,  21.  ^2.  |  24.  44.  John  19.  28. 
■Tohn  1.  3.  ull  t.  were  made  bv  him 

3.  .3.5.  nnd  hath  given  all  I.,  into  his  hand,  13.  i 

4.  25.  when  he  is  come,  he  wdl  tell  us  all  t. 

29.  see  a  man  who  told  me  all  I.  that  ever  I  did 

5.  20.  the  Father  slieweth  the  Son  all  t.  he  doeth 

10.  41.  all  t.  that  John  spake  of  him  were  true 
14. 2!).  the  Comforter,  Ihe  Holy  Ghost,  shall  teach 

you  nil  t.  and  bring  nil  t.  lo  your  remembrance 

1.5.  15.  all  I.  I  have  beard,  I  hive  made  known 
II).  15.  all  t.  that  the  F.itlier  li  ith,  are  mine 

30.  now  are  we  sure  that  tlioii  knowest  all  I. 

17.  7.  that  alii,  thou  hast  given  ine,  are  of  thc« 

18.  4.  Jesus  therefore  knowing  all  t.  19.  28. 

21.  17.  Peter  Sfiid,  Ijord,  thou  knowest  all  t. 
.lets  2.44.  that  J^lieved  had  all  t.  coii'mon,4.32 

3.  21.  till  the  times  of  restitution  ofaW  t. 
22.  him  shall  ye  hear  in  all  t.  he  shall  sav  to  yoQ 

10.  33.  to  hear  all  t.  commanded  tliee  of  (!od 

39.  wc  are  witnesses  of  all  t.  which  he  did 

13.  39.  all  that  believe  are  justified  from  nil  t. 

14.  15.  G.  who  made  heaven,  earth, sea,  and  nZ/t 
20.  35.  I  have  sli"wed  von  all  t.liow  ye  ought 

22.  10.  and  there  il  shall  be  told  ibee  of  all  t. 

24.  14.  believing  nil  I.  which  are  written 
20.  2.  tmiching  nil  the  t.  whereof  1  am  accused 

/Jrtm.8.28.  and  we  know  that  a/Zt.  work  for  good 
32.  how  shall  he  not  also  freely  give  us  nil  t.  ? 

11.  3fi.  of  him,  and  thro'  bin),  anil  lo  him,  are  nil  t 
14.  2.  for  one  believeth  lint  he  may  eat  nil  t. 

20.  all  t.  indeed  are  pure,  but  il  is  evil  for  him 

1  Ciir.  2.  10.  the  Spirit  search'-lh  all  I.  deep  things 
15.  but  he  that  is  spiritual  judL'eili  nil  t. 

3.  21.  let  no  man  glory  in  men,  for  nil  t.  are  yours 

4.  13.  are  the  oOVconring  of  all  t.  to  this  day 
G.  12.  all  t.  are  lawful  unio  me,  l.ni  all  t.  are  not 

expedient,  nil  t.  nrv  lawful  for  me,  10.  23 

8.6.  one  God  the  Father,  of  whom  are  all  t.  one 
.   TiOrd  Jesus  Christ,  bv  whom  are  all  t. 

9. 12  sufl'er  all  1. 1|  22.  I  am  made  nil  t.  lo  all  men 
25.  every  man  that  strivrth  is  temperate  in  all  t. 

10.  33.  even  as  [  please  all  men  in  nil  t. 

11.  2.  T  praise  you  that  ve  remember  me  in  all  t. 
12.  but  nil  t.  are  of  Grid,  2  Cor.  .5.  18. 

13.  7.  charily  benrclh  all  t.  bclievi  lb  nil  t.  hopetb 
all  I.  endnreth  all  t 

14.  26.  lei  all  t.  be  done  linio  edifying 

40.  let  nil  t.  be  done  decinlly  anil  in  order 
15.2-*.  when  «?//.  shall  be  «iibilned,theii  shall  tlt» 

Sen  he  subject  to  him  that  pit'  nil  I.  nniler  him 

2  Cnr.  2.  9.  know  whether  ve  bo  olndienl  in  all  t 
4.  15.  for  all  t.  are  for  your  sakes,  that  grace 
5.I7.11I1I  things  are  passed  away,iill  t. become  new 

6.  4.  in  nil  t.  approving  ourselves  as  niinisleri 

10.  as  having  nolliin;,  yet  imsse'sing  aft  t. 

7.  11.  in  all  t.  \e  have  approved  yourselves 

14.  as  w*  spake  nil  I.  lo  you  in  Iriitli,  even  so 
Ifi.  that  I  have  confidenci-  in  you  in  nil  I. 

9.  8.  that  yo  having  all  sulliciencv  in  all  t. 

1 1 .  fi.  we  have  been  made  inanife!-!  lo  vou  in  all  t. 
9.  in  nllt.  I  kept  mvself  from  being  Inirdensumo 

12.  19.  but  we  do  nil  t.  for  your  clifving 
finl.  3.  10.  cursed  that  conlimielh  not  in  nJlf. 
Kjih.  1.  10.  gathir  together  in  one  nil  t.  in  Christ 

11.  worketh  nil  t.  nfter  the  counsel  of  his  will 
22.  cave  him  lo  he  head  over  all  t.  lo  the  church 

3.  9.  in  God,  who  erinted  nil  t.  bv  Ji>«U8  Christ 

4.  10.  he  ascended  up,  llia'  he  mislit  fill  all  t. 

15.  grow  up  into  him  in  nil  I.  which  is  Ihe  hi^ad 

5.  13.  all  t.  that  are  ri-proved  are  made  inrinil'esl 
•20.  "iving  thanks  always  for  nllt.  unto  Gud 

fi.  21    shall  make  knoun  lo  you  nil  t.  Col.  4.  9. 
Phil.  2.  14.  do  cM  t.  without  miuuiiuin^ 


THI 

PAi/.3.f?.  I  tonnt  all  t.  but  loss  for  know,  of  CIi.  my 
Lui<l,lor  whoin  I  liuve  siiirorcti  iliu  lousol'uW  I. 

21.  Iio  IS  ablo  even  to  subdue  iitl  t.  to  liiiiiself 
4. 1-i.  every  wIhto,  and  in  all  t.  1  am  instructed 

I'J.  I  Ciiu  do  all  I.  lliro'  Cli.who  streii^'lhoneth  mo 
Col.  1.  17.  lie  is  before  all  t.  by  Iiim  all  t.  consist 

16.  in  all  t.  he  might  have  the  pre-eniiiienca 
•20.  and  by  him  to  reconcile  all  t.  to  himself 

3.  *J0.  children,  obey  your  parents  in  all  t. 
~i.  servants,  obey  in  all  t.  your  masters 

1 7'AfijJ.5.'21. prove  all «. holdfast  iliat  which  is  good 
1  7V;h.  3.  11.  their  wives  nmst  be  faithful  iu  iU,l  t. 

4.  b.  but  godliness  is  jirolitable  unto  all  t. 

ti.  i;i.  in  the  sight  of  God  who  quickeiioth  all  t. 

17.  living  God  who  giveth  us  richly  u/i  t.  to  enjoy 
27"i//i.0.7.ilie  Lord  give  thee  understanding  inallt. 

JO.  therefore  I  endure  all  t.  for  the  elect's  sake 
i.  a.  but  watch  tliou  in  all  t.  endure  atllictions 
Tit.  1.  15.  unto  the  jmro  all  t.  are  pure 
2.  7.  in  all  t.  showing  thyself  a  pattern  of  good 

9.  to  be  obedient,  and  please  them  well  in  all  t. 

10.  they  may  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  in  all  t. 
Hrb.  1.  "2.  whom  he  hath  apjioinied  heir  o\'  all  t. 

3.  upholding  all  t.  by  tlie  word  of  his  power 

2.  8.  thou  hast  put  all  t.  in  subjection  under  liis 

feet ;  but  now  wc  sec  not  yet  u//  t.pnt  und.  him 

10.  for  whom  are  all  t.  and  by  whom  are  all  t. 
17.  in  all  t.  it  behoved  him  to  be  like  his  brethren 

3.  4.  he  that  built  all  t.  is  God 

4.  13.  all  t.  are  naked  and  opened  unto  the  eyes 

8.  o.  make  all  t.  according  to  the  pattern  shewed 

9.  22.  almost  all  t.  are  by  the  law  purged  by  blood 
13.  18.  in  all  t.  willing  to  live  honestly 

Jam.  5.  12.  above  all  t.  my  brethren,  swear  not 

1  Pit.  4.  7.  the  end  of  all  t.  is  at  hand,  be  sober 

8.  above  nil  t.  have  fervent  charity  among  yours. 

11.  that  God  in  all  t.  may  be  glorified  thro'  Jesus 

2  Pet.  1.  3.  hath  given  us  all  t.  that  pertain  to  life 

3.  4.  all  t.  continue  as  they  were  from  beginning 

1  .  John  2.20.  ye  have  an  unction,  and  ye  know  all  t. 
27.  as  the  same  anointing  teachetli  you  all  t. 

3.20.  God  is  greater  than  lieart,  andknoweth  all  t. 

3  .John  2.  I  wish  above  all  t.  that  thou  |)rosper 
Kfr.  1.  2.  who  bare  record  of  all  t.  that  lie  saw 

4.  ll.ili')U  hast  created  all  t.  and  for  thy  pleasure 
21. 5. 1  make  all  I.  new.  {{  7.  he  shall  inherit  all  t. 

See  Evil,  Holy,  Many,  Such. 
TAfse  THINGS. 

<?f  71.2 1.2?^.  told  thcin  of  her  mother's  house  these  t 
42.  30.  Jacob  said,  all  these  t.  are  against  me 

Acf.j.o.when  he  shall  be  guilty  in  one  lA' these  M7. 
18.  24.  defile  not  yourselves  in  any  of  these  t. 
20.  2:).  for  th"y  committed  all  these  t.  therefore 
26.  2:).  and  if  ye  will  not  be  reformed  by  these  t. 

JVhih.  4. 1.5.  these  t.  the  burden  of  sons  of  Koliath 
15.  13.  all  born  of  the  country  shall  do  these  t. 
29.  39.  these  t.  ye  shall  do  to  the  Lord  in  feasts 
35.  29.  these  t.  shall  be  for  a  statute  of  judgment 

Ueut.  4.  30.  when  all  these  t.  are  come  upon  me 
18.  12.  all  that  do  these  t.  are  an  abomination 
39. 1.  when  all  these  t.  are  come  upon  ihee,  then 

Josh.  2.  11.  we  heard  these  t.  our  hearts  did  melt 

JuJg.  13. 23.  nor  would  he  have  shewed  us  these  t. 

'.   Sam.  25.  37.  when  his  wife  had  told  him  these  t. 

2  Sam.  23.  17.  these  t.  did  these  three  mighty  men, 

1  Chron.  11.  19. 

22.  these  t.  did  Benaiah,  1  Chron.  11.  24. 
24.  23.  these  t.  did  Araunah  give  to  the  king 

1  Kings  18. 30. 1  have  done  all  these  t.  at  thy  word 

2  R'ings  23.  17.  proclaimed  these  t.  thou  hast  done 
2  Chron.  3.  3.  in  these  t.  was  Solomon  instructed 
JVeh.  13. 26.  did  not  king  Solomon  sin  by  these  t.  7 
Joh  8.  2.  how  long  wilt  thou  speak  these  t.  ? 

10.  13.  these  t.  hast  thou  hid  in  thine  heart 
33.  29.  lo,  all  these  t.  worketh  God  with  man 

Ps.  15.5.he  that  doeth  these  t.  shall  never  be  move4 
42.  4.  I  remember  these  1. 1  pour  out  my  soul 
50.21.  these  t.  hnst  thou  done  and  I  kept  silence 

Tror.').  10. M-.5C  six  f. doth  the  Lord  hate,  yea  seven 
24.  23.  these  t.  also  belong  to  the  wise 

Erel.M.O.  for  these  t.  God  will  bring  theelo  judgm. 

fsa  38.  IG.  O  Lord,  by  these  t.  men  live,  and  in  all 
these  t.  is  the  life  of  my  spirit 
40.  2fi.  and  behold,  who  hath  created  these  t.  ? 
42.  16.  th.se  t.  will  I  do,  and  not  forsake  them 
45.  7.  I  form  the  light,  I  the  Lord  do  all  these  t. 

47.  7.  so  that  Ihon  didst  not  lay  these  t.  to  heart 

9.  these  two  t.  shall  come  to  thee  in  a  moment 
13.  let  the  astrologers  save  thee  from  these  t. 

48.  14.  which  among  them  hath  declared  these  t. 
.51 .  19.  these  two  t.  are  come  unto  thee,  who  shall 
64. 12.  wilt  ihou  refrain  thyself  for  these  t.  O  Lord 
Trr.  3.  7.  I  said,  after  she  had  done  all  these  t. 

4. 18.  thv  doings  have  procured  these  t.  to  theo 

5.  9.  shall  I  not  visit  for  these  1. 1  29.  |  9.  9. 
2.5.  vour  iniquities  have  turned  away  these  t. 
9. 21.  for  in  these  t.  do  I  deli2ht,  saith'ihe  Lord 

13.  22.  if  Ihou  sav,  wherefore  come  these  l.nn  me  1 

J4.  22.  wait  on  thee,  thou  hast  ma<le  nil  these  t. 

SO  13  (bi  thy  sing  I  luivo  dooe  tlu»e  t.  to  thee 

ti23 


Tin 

Lrnn.  1. 10.  ft>r  thcso  1. 1  weep,  mine  oye  rnnncth 

5.17.  our  heart  is  faint,  foi  t/ifsct.our  eyes  uio  dim 

Kze/c.  10.  30.  seeing  thou  dost  nil  these  t.  17.  18. 

43.  because  thou  hast  fretted  7«e  in  all  these  t. 

17.  12.  know  ye  not  what  these  t.  mean,  tell  them 

18.  10.  that  doeth  the  like  to  any  one  of  tiie.^-e  t. 

23.  30.  I  will  do  these  t.  unto  thee,  because  thou 

24.  19.  wilt  thou  not  tell  \vba.l  Ihecc  t.  are  to  us  ? 
IJan.  10. 21.  none  that  holdeth  with  me  iu  these  t. 

12.  7.  all  these  t.  shall  be  fniishud 

8.  O  my  Lord,  what  shall  be  the  end  of  tJtcsc  t.  ? 
Has.  14.9.  who  is  wise,  he  shall  understand  these  t. 
Zech.  8.  16.  these  arc  the  t.  which  ye  shall  do 

17.  for  all  these  are  t.  that!  Iiate,  saith  the  Lord 
Mat.  1.  20.  but  while  he  thought  on  these  t. 

2.  3.  when  Herod  heard  these  I.  he  was  troubled 

6.  32.  after  all  these  t.tio  the  Gentiles  seek,  knows 

that  ye  have  neeii  of  all  these  t.  J.ukc  12.  30. 

33.  all  these  t.  shall  bo  added  to  you,  I^uke  12. 31. 
11. 25. hast  hid  these  t.  from  the  wise,  J^hc  10. 21. 
y2.  51.  Jesus  sailb,  have  ye  understood  these  t.  ? 

50.  whence  then  hath  this  man  these  t.  Mark  G.  2. 
15.  20.  these  are  the  t.  wliich  defile  a  man 

19.  20.  all  these  t.  have  I  kept  from  my  youth 
21.  23.  by  what  authority  dost   thou   these   t. 

Mark  11.  28.  Luke  20.  2. 

24.  I  will  tell  you  by  what  authority  I  do  these  t. 

27.  Mark  11.  29,  33.  L-.tke  20.  8. 

23.36.  all  these  t.  shall  come  on  ibis  generation 

24.  2.  Jesus  said  to  them,  see  ye  not  all  these  t.  ? 

3.  when  shall  these  t.  be  J  Mark  13. 4.  J.ukc  21.7. 

6.  all  these  t.  must  come  to  pass,  I^uke  21.  9,  28. 

33.  when  ye  shall  see  all  these  t.  know  that  it 

is  near,  Mark  13.  29.  Lttkc'M.  31. 

34.  till  all  these  t.  be  fulliilcd,  Mark  13.  30. 
Luke  1.  20.  till  the  day  that  these  t.  be  performed 

2.  19.  but  Mary  kept  these  t.  and  pondered  them 
14.6.  they  could  not  answer  him  to  these  t. 

15.  20.  he  called,  and  asked  what  iAcsc  t.  meant? 

18.  34.  and  they  understood  none  of  these  t. 
21.  36.  to  escape  all  i.'iese  t.  that  shall  come 

23.  31.  for  if  they  do  these  t.  in  a  green  tree 

24.  21.  to-day  is  third  day  since  these  t.  were  done 
26.  ought  not  Christ  to  have  suficred  these  t.? 
48.  and  ye  are  witnesses  of  these  i. 

John  2.  16.  he  said  to  them,  take  these  t.  hence 

18.  what  sign,  seeing  that  thou  dost  these  t. 

3. 9.  A'icodemus  said  to  him,  how  can  these  t.  bo  1 

10.  a  master  of  Israel,  and  knowest  not  these  t.  ? 
5.  16.  he  had  done  these  t.  on  the  sabbath-day 

7.  4.  if  thou  do  these  «.  shew  thyself  to  the  world 
12.  16.  these  t.  understood  not  his  disciples,  they 

remembered  that  these  t.  were  written  of  him 
41.  these  t.  said  Esaias,  \vlicn  he  saw  his  glory 
13.17.ifye  know  these  t. happy  are  ye  if  ye  do  them 
15.  21.  all  these  t.  will  they  do  unto  you,  10.  3. 

19.  24.  these  t.  therefore  the  soldiers  did 
36.these  t.were  done,that  the  scriptures  should  be 

./lets  5.  32.  and  we  are  his  witnesses  of  these  t. 
7. 1.  these  t.  so  ?  ||  14. 15.  sirs,  why  do  ye  these  t.  ? 

50.  hath  not  my  hand  made  all  these  t.  ? 

54.whcn  they  heard  these  t.llu-.y  were  cut  to  heart 
8.24. pray  for  me,  that  none  of  these  t.  come  on  me 
15.  17.  saith  the  Lord,  wlio  doeth  all  these  t. 
17.  20.  we  would  kriov.'  what  these  t.  mean 

19.  36.  seeing  these  t.  cannot  be  spoken  against 

20.  24.  none  of  these  t.  move  me,  neither  count  I 
24.  9.  the  Jews  assented,  saying,  these  t.  were  so 
2.5.  9.  and  there  be  judged  of  these  t.  before  me 
26.  10.  to  make  thee  a  witness  of  the se  t. 

26.  the  king  knoweth  of  th^se  t.  before  whom 
Rom.  8.  31.  what  shall  we  then  say  to  these  t.  ? 
10. 5.  the  man  that  doeth  these  t.  shall  live  by  them 
14.  18.  for  he  that  in  these  t.  serveth  Christ 

1  Cor.  9.  8.  say  I  these  t.  as  a  man,  or  saith  not  law 

15.  I  used  none  of  these  t.  nor  have  I  written 
10.  6.  these  t,  were  our  examples,  to  the  intent 

2  Cor.  2. 10.  and  who  is  Bulfuient  for  thenc  t.  ? 
Kph.  5.  6.  because  of  these  t.  conicth  wraih  of  God 
Phil.  4.  8.  if  there  bo  any  ptnijn,  think  on  these  t. 
Col.  3.  14.  and  above  all  these  t.  put  on  charity 

1  Tim.  4. 6.  put  brethren  in  remembrance  of  these  t. 

11.  these  t.  command  {{  15.  meditate  on  these  t. 

5.  7.  these  t.  give  in  charge  ||  21.  observe  these  t. 

6.  2.  these  t.  exhort.  Tit.  2.  1.5.  ||  11.  flee  these  t. 

2  Tim.Z.  14.  of  these  t.  put  tlicin  in  remembrance 
Tit.  3.  8.  these  t.  I  will  that  thou  nllirm  con- 
stantly, these  t.  are  good  and  profiiable  to  men 

ffeli.  7.  13.  for  he  of  whom  thrse  t.  arc  spoken 
.Tarn.  3.  10.  brelhren,  these  t.  ought  not  so  to  be 
2  Pet.  1.  8.  for  if  these  t.  bo  in  you  and  abound 

9.  but  ho  that  lacketh  these  t.  is  blind 

10.  for  if  ye  do  these  t.  ye  shall  never  fall 

12.  I  will  put  you  in  remembrance  of  these  t. 
1.5.  to  have  these  t.  always  in  remembrance 

3.  11.  seeing  all  these  t.  shall  be  dissolved,  what 

16.  ill  his  epistles,  speakins  in  them  of  these  t. 

17.  s'-eing  ye  know  these  t.  before,  beware 
Ror.  22. 8.  the  feet  of  ancel  who  .sliowed  me  these  t. 

16.  to  testify  to  you  tketc  t.  in  tlu)  clnircfacs 


THI 

Rov.  Z3, 20.  he  which  testificth  i..  t.  ealth,  I  com* 

Those  THINGS. 
£iO(/.29.33.cat«Ao«t  i.whcrewith  atonement  made 
l^v.  22.  2.  in  those  t.  which  they  hallow  unto  me 
/>eHt.29.29.  those  t.w  hich  are  revealed  belong  lo  ug 
2  Kings  17.  9.  children  of  Israel  did  secretly  those  t. 
Ps.  107.  43.  whoso  will  observe  those  t.  they  shall 
Isa.  06.2.  for  all  those  t.  hath  mine  hand  made,  and 
all  those  t.  have  been,  saith  the  Lord 
Ezek.A'i.M.  ajiproach  to  those  t.  that  are  for  jieoplo 
Mat.  13.  n.desired  to  sete  those  t.  which  ye  see,  and 
liear  those  t.  which  ye  hear,  J.uke  10.  24. 
Mark  1.44.  offer  tAo.se  t.  which  Moses  commanded 
/^M/.<;1.45.a  performance  of  those  t. which  were  told 
2. 18.  wondered  at  those  t.  told  them  by  shepherds 
12.20.  wliose  shall  those  t.  be  thou  hastjicovided 
JohnH.  29.  I  do  always  those  t.  that  please  him 
JJets  3. 18.  but  those  t.  lie  hath  so  fulfilled 
8.  6.  gave  heed  to  those  t.  which  I'liilij)  spako 
13.  45.  spake  against  those  t.  which  weresjioken 

17.  11.  they  searched  whether  those  i.  were  so 

18.  17.  and  Gallio  cared  for  none  of  those  t. 

20.  16.  of  those  t.  in  which  I  will  appear  to  tlieo 
27.  11.  more  than  those  t.  spoken  by  I'aul 

Rom.  1.  28.  to  do  those  t.  which  are  not  convenient 
4. 17.  callelh  those  t.  which  be  not,  as  though  were 
0.21.  what  fruit  had  you  in  those  t.  whereof  ye  aro 
now  ashamed,  for  the  end  of  those  t.  is  death 
15.17.1  may  glory  in  those  t.  which  pertain  to  God 
18.  I  will  not  dare  to  sjieak  of  any  of  those  t. 

1  Cor.  8.  4.  eating  of  those  t.  offered  to  idols,  10, 

2  Cor.  11.  28.  besides  those  t.  which  are  witlioat 
Kph.  .5.  12.  it  is  a  shame  even  to  sjieak  of  those  t. 
}hil.'i.l3.  forgetting  those  t.  which  are  behind, and 

reaching  to  those  t.  which  are  before 
4.  9.  those  t.  which  ye  have  learned  and  seen  do 
Col.  2.  18.  intruding  into  those  t.  he  hath  not  seen 
3.  1.  seek  those  t.  which  are  above,  where  Christ 
Heb.  3.  5.  was  faithful  for  a  testimony  of  those  t. 
12.27.  the  removingof  (.  t.  which  are  shaken,  that 
those  t.  which  cannot  be  shaken 
may  remain 
.Tam.2.  16.  yc  give  not  those  t.  which  are  needful 

1  ,/o/jn3.22.  do  those  t.  that  are  ]ileasing  in  his  sight 

2  .lohn  8.  we  lose  not  those  i.  wo  have  wrought 
Judc  10.  but  speak  evil  of  those  t.  ll:ey  know  not 
Rev.  1.  3.  blessed  are  they  that  keep  those  t. 

2.  10.  fear  none  of  those  t.  which  thou  shalt  suffer 
10.  4.  seal  up  those  t.  the  seven  thunders  uttered 
20.12.the  dead  were  judged  out  of  those  t.  written 

Unclean  THINGS. 
IIos.  9.  3.  and  thev  shall  eat  tnielean  t.  in  Assyria 

What  THINGS. 
F.xod.  10.  2.  tell  thy  son  what  t.  I  have  wrought 
Mat.  6.  8.  Father  knows  v-hat  t.  ye  have  need  of 
Mark  9.y.shouldtell  no  man  lehnt  t.  they  iiad  seen 

10.  32.  began  to  tell  them  what  t.  should  liajipen 

11.  24.  what  t.  soever  ye  desire  when  ye  pray 
Luke  7.  22.  go,  tell  John  tchot  I.  yc  have  seen 

24.  19.  ichat  t.  they  said  to  him  concerning  Jesus 
35.  and  they  told  lehat  t.  were  done  in  tlie  way 
.fohn  5.  19.  u'hat  t.  he  doth,  the.se  doth  the  Son 

10.  6.  tliey  uiiderslood  not  vhat  t.  they  were 

11.  46.  some  told  them  trhat  t.  Jesus  had  done 
.flcts  21.  19.  what  t.  God  wrought  among  Gcntilea 
Phil.  3.  7  what  t.  wore  gain  to  me,  I  counted  loss 

THINK. 
Oen.  40.14.  but  (.  on  me,  when  it  be  well  with  thee 
JVuni.  36.  6.  let  them  marry  lo  whom  they  t.  best 
2  Snm.  13.  33.  to  t.  that  all  the  king's  sons  are  dead 
2  Chron.  13.  8.  ye  t.  to  withstand  kingdom  of  Lord 
JVeh.  5.  19.  t.  on  me,  my  God,  for  good,  according 

6.  6.  reported,  that  thou  and  the  .lews  t.  to  rebej 
14.  my  God,  t.  thou  on  Tobinh  and  Sanballat 
Ksth.  4.13.  t.  not  Ihou  shalt  escape  in  king's  house 
Joh  31.  1.  why  then  should  1 1.  upon  a  maid  1 

41.  32.  one  would  t.  the  deep  to  be  hoary 
KccZ.8. 17.  further,  though  a  wise  man  /.  lo  know  it 
fsa.  10.  7.  nor  dotli  his  heart  t.  so,  but  in  his  licart 
.7rr.  23.  27.  t.  to  cause  my  people  forget  my  name 

29.  11.  I  know  the  thoughts  that  I  t.  toward  you 
Kzek.  38.  10.  and  thou  shalt  t.  nn  evil  thought 
Dan.  7.  25.  he  shall  t.  to  change  times  and  laws 

11.  t24.  t.  his  thoughts  against  the  strong  holds 
Jonah  1.6.  if  so  be  that  God  will  t.  upon  us 
7,ech.  11.  12.  if  ye  t.  good  give  me  my  l>rice,  if  not 
Mai.  3.  9.  and  t.  not  to  say  within  yourselves 

.5.  17.  t.  not  that  I  am  come  to  destroy  the  l.-iw 

6.  7.  (.  they  shall  he  heard  for  much  speaking 

9.4. why  t.  ye  evil  in  your  hearts  |{  18. 12.  how  ^ye 

10.  34.  t.  not  I  am  come  to  send  peace  on  earth 

21.  23.  what  (.  you  7  a  certain  man  had  two  sons 

22.  42.  what  t.  ye  of  Chri.st  ?  26.  66.  Mnrk  14.  64 
24. 14.  in  such  an  hour  as  ye  t.  not,  Luke  12.  40. 

Luke  13.  4.  t.  ye  that  were  sinners  above  nil 
.John  5.  39.  in  them  ye  t.  ye  have  eternal  life 
45.  do  not  t.  I  will  accuse  you  to  the  Father 

11.  .56.  what  *.  ye,  that  he  will  not  come  to  fcnst 
16.  2.  killeth  you,  will  t.  tliat  ho  doth  Rod  scrvica 

AtU  13«^  Aviiott)  L  yc  that  I  am  1 1  erm  not  bo 


THl 

Jlctt  ]7.29.not  to  t.that  the  Godhead  is  like  to  gold 

2(i.  'J.  1  t.  mysuirhaiipy,  king  Agrijiiia,  bucuuau 

JioiH-  )-■  3-  ""'  tx  ^- "'  I'uiisull  iiiuru  iiiglily  than  lie 

ought  to  L.  but  to  t.  soberly  as  Uod  iiath  iltalt 

1  0)r.  4.  6.  ye  iiiigbl  leurii  in  us  not  to  t.  of  men 

9.  I  t.  that  God  halh  set  I'orlli  us  the  apostles 

7.  30.  ifaiiy  man  t.  that  lie  behaveth  uncomely 
4U.  I  t.  aUo  that  1  have  the  Spirit  of  God 

8.  'J.  if  any  man  I.  that  he  knowuth  any  thing 

12.  i!;).  of  body,  which  wo  t.  to  be  less  honourable 
14.  37.  if  any  man  I.  himself  to  be  a  jirophet 

S  Cor.3.5.ofourselves  to  t.any  thing  asof  ourselves 
lU.  i.  I  £.  to  be  bold  against  suiiie  which  t.  of  us 
7.  tliat  he  is  Chri.-t,  lei  him  t.  this  again,  11. 
IJ.  lU.  1  say  a^ain,  let  no  man  t.  me  a  fool 
I'J.ti.lest  any  i.of  me  above  what  lie  seeth  mo  to  be 
Old.  6.  3.  if  a  man  t.  himself  to  be  soniellung 
Kpk.  3.  'JO.  is  able  to  do  above  all  that  we  ask  or  t. 
fhil.  4.  8.  if  there  be  any  jiraise,  t.  on  these  things 
Jam.  I.  7.  let  not  lliat  man  t.  he  shall  receive 

4.  f).  do  ye  t.  that  the  scripture  saitli  in  vain? 

I  I'd.  4.  4.  wherein  tliey  t.  strange  that  yo  run  not 

ii.  t.  it  not  strange  concerning  the  fiery  trial 
ZPct.\.Vi.  I  £.it  ineei  as  long  as  1  am  in  this  tabern. 

TllLNKLriT. 

S  Savt.  10.  3.  t.  thuu  that  Uavid  doth  honour  thy 

father,  in  sending  coinforleA?  1  Ckron.  19.3. 

Job  35. 2.  t.  thou  this  right,  that  thou  saidst  my 

Jilat.  17.  25.  Jesus  said,  what  t.  tliou  7  22.  17. 

2(i.  53.  t.  thou  that  1  cannot  pray  to  my  Father 

L-uke  10.  3li.  which  t.  thou  was  neighbour  to  nini  7 

^cts  2.-i.  22.  we  desire  to  hear  of  thee  what  thou  t. 

Hum.'i.  3.  t.  lliou  this,  O  man,  that  judgest  them 

THLNKETII. 

1  Sam.  20. 1 4.  whatsoever  thy  soul  t.  I  will  do 

2  Ham.  Jd.  27.  me  t.  the  running  of  the  foremost  is 
Psal.  40.  17.  I  am  poor,  yet  the  J..ord  t.  on  me 
Prov.  23.  7.  for  as  he  t.  in  his  heart,  so  is  he 
jMkc  H.  T  If^.  he  taken  that  which  he  t.  he  hath 

1  Cur.  10. 12.  let  him  that  t.  he  slandeth,  take  heed 

13.  5.  charity  seeketh  not  her  own,  f.  no  evil 
Phil.  3.  4.  if  any  other  man  I.  he  hatli  whereof 

TlIINKliNG. 

2  Sam.  4.  10.  t.  to  have  brought  good  tidings 

5.  G.  t.  David  cannot  come  in  hither 

TJIIKI). 
Gcn.32.19.  so  commanded  he  the  second  and  the  t. 

50.  23.  saw  Ephraim's  children  of «.  generation 
Ezod.  20.5.  to  the  t.  and  fourth  generation  of  thern 
that  hate  me,  34.  7.  jVuwi.  14.  18.  J)eut.  5.  9. 

2fl.  19.  and  the  t.  row  a  ligure,  an  agate,  39.  12. 
JsTuvi.  2.  24.  the  camp  of  Eiihraim  in  the  t.  rank 
/-'ewt.23. 8.  an  Edoniite  shall  enter  in  t.  generation 
Josh.  19.  10.  the  t.  lot  came  up  for  Zebiilun 
2  Kings  1.  13.  he  sent  again  a  captain  of  the  t.  fifty 

1  Chron.  24.  8.  the  t.  lot  came  forth  to  Haram 
25.  10.  the  I.  lot  came  forth  for  Zaerur 

27.  5.  the  t.  captain  of  the  host  for  the  t.  month 
Jsn.  19.  24.  Israel  shall  he  the  t.  with  Egypt 
K-.ek.  JO.  14.  and  the  t.  was  the  face  of  a  lion 
Dan.  2.  39.  and  another  t.  kingdom  of  brass 

5.7.  and  shall  be  the  t. ruler  in  the  kingdom,  Ifi,  29. 
Zech.  6.  3.  and  in  the  t.  chariot  white  horses 
Mat.  20.  3.  and  he  went  out  ahnul  the  t.  hour 

22.  26.  likewise  t.  died,  Mark  12.  21.  Luke  20.  31. 
Mark  15.25.it  was  t.  hour,  and  they  crucified  liim 
Luke  12.  38.  come  in  the  t.  watch,  and  find  them  so 

20.  12.  he  sent  the  t.  and  they  wounded  him 
Jicts  2.  15.  seeing  it  is  but  the  t.  hour  of  the  day 

20.  9.  Eutychus  fell  down  from  the  t.  loft 
2.').  23.  be  ready  at  the  t.  hour  of  the  night 

2  f 'or.12.2.  such  a  one  caught  up  to  the  t.  heaven 
Rev.  4.  7.  and  the  I.  beasi  had  a  face  as  a  man 

C.  5.  hnd  opened  the  t.  seal,  I  heard  the  I.  beast 
8.  10.  the  I.  angel  sounded,  there  fell  a  star 
11.  14.  and  behold,  the  t.  woe  cometh  (piickly 

14.  9.  and  the  t.  angel  followed  them,  saying 
10.4.  the  I.  angel  poured  out  his  vial  on  the  rivers 

21.  19.  the  t.  foundation  was  a  chalcedony 

See  Day,  Month,  Part. 
TIURn  time. 

1  .Sam.  3.  8.  the  Lord  called  Samuel  the  t.  time 
10.21.  Saul  Heiit  messengers  again  the  t.  time 

l/rin;fj»18.34.<!o  it  the  f. time,  they  did  it  the  t.  lime 
F.irk.  21.  14.  let  the  sword  he  doubled  the  I.  time 
Jl/'rt<.2ti.41.  and  he  priiycd  ihct.  time,Mark  14.  41. 
John  21.  14.  tlio  t.  time  Jesus  showed  himself 
17.  saith  unto  him  the  (.  time,  lovest  Ihou  tnc? 
Peter  was  grieved,  bee.  he  said  to  him  I.  lime 
iCor.  12. 14.  the  t.  time  I  am  ready  to  come,  13.  1. 

TlllUn  yciir. 

r>eut.  2(i.  10.  t.  year,  which  is  the  year  of  tithing 

l/rijii'»15.28.  in  ryrorof  Atia,did  Hiia^ha  slay,  33. 

]H.  I.  word  oftheljord  ramrMo  Elijiih  in  t.  year 

22.2.in  r.wcrtr,  Jehoshaphiit  came  to  king  of  Nrael 

2  h'ine.i  IH.  l.inthe  (.  i/c/ir  of  Uoslica  mm  ofKlah 
10.29.  ill  the  t.  yeartnvi  yo  unci  reap,  /»(i.37.  30. 

t  Chrnn.  17.  7.  in  t.  year  of  Jehoshuphat'd  riign 
27.  5.  the  Ammonites  paid  the  second  and  t.  year 
EtCtn  1.3.  iulhot.  ufiir  "fthe  «clsn  of  Ahanicrus 

cut 


THI 

Dan.  1.  1.  in  the  t.  year  of  tlic  rclgn  of  Jehoiakim 

8.  1.  in  the  t.  year  of  the  reign  ol  Helshazzar 
10.  1.  in  the  t.  year  of  Cyrus  king  of  Persia 
TIUKULY. 

1  Cor.  12.  28.  t.  teachers,  after  that  miracles 

THIRST,  ifubstantive. 
Ezod.  17.  3.  to  kill  us  and  our  children  with  t. 
JJeut.  28.  48.  Ihou  slialt  serve  thine  enemies  in  t. 
29. 19.  imagin.  of  heart,  to  add  drunkenness  to  t. 
Judg.  15.  18.  and  now  1  shall  die  for  t.  and  fall 

2  Chron.  32.  11.  doth  jiersuade  you  (o  die  by  t. 
jVch.  9.  15.  thou  broughtcst  water  for  tluir  t.  20. 
./ob  24.  11.  tread  their  wine-presses  and  sulfur  t. 
Fsal.  09. 21.  in  my  t.  they  gave  me  vinegar  to  drink 

104.  11.  the  wild  asses  ijuench  their  t. 
ha.  5.  13.  and  their  multitude  dried  up  with  t. 

41.  17.  and  when  their  tongue  faili^h  for  t. 

50.  2.  their  fish  stinketh,  and  dietli  lor  /. 
.Jer.  2.  25.  and  withhold  thy  throat  from  t. 

48.  18.  come  down  from  thy  glory,  and  sit  in  t. 
Lam.  4.  4.  cleaveth  to  the  roof  of  liis  inoulli  fort. 
//o*-.2. 3.  lest  I  strip  her  naked,  and  slay  her  with  t. 
.rlmos  8.11.  not  a  t.  for  water,  butof  hearing  words 

13.  the  virgins  and  young  men  shall  faint  for  t 
2  Cor.  11.  27.  in  hunger  and  t.  in  fastings  often 

THIRST,  Fcrb. 
Isa.  49.  10.  they  shall  not  tiunger,  nor  t.  nor  Iieat 
Mat.  5.0.  which  hunger  andt.  after  righteousness 
John  4.  13.  drinketh  of  this  water,  shall  t.  again 

14.  whosoever  drinketh,  shall  never  t.  0.  35. 

15.  sir,  give  me  this  water,  lliat  I  t.  not 

7.  37.  if  any  t.  let  him  come  to  me  and  drink 
19.  28.  after  this  Jesus  saith,  I  t. 
Rom.  12.  20.  if  thine  enemy  t.  give  him  drink 

1  Cur.  4.  11.  even  to  this  present  hour  we  t. 
Rev.  7.  10.  and  tlicv  shall  not  t.  any  more 

THIRSTKIJ. 
Exod.Vl.X  people  t.  there  for  w  ater  and  murmured 
Isa.  48.  21.  they  t.  not  wlien  he  led  them  through 

TIIIRSTKTH. 
Psal.A%  2.  my  soul  t.  for  God,  03.  1.  ]  143.6. 
Isa.  55. 1.  ho,  every  one  that  t.  come  to  the  waters 

THIRSTY. 
.Judg.  4.  19.  give  mo  a  little  water,  for  I  am  t. 

2  Sam.  17.  29.  the  people  is  t.  in  the  wilderness 
Psal.  63.  1.  my  flesh  longeth  in  a  t.  land,  143.  6. 

107.  5.  hungry  and  t.  their  soul  fainted  in  them 
Pron.  25.  21.  if  thine  enemy  be  t.  give  him  drink 
25.  as  cold  water  to  a  i.  soul,  so  is  good  news 
29.  10.  the  blood-t.  hate  the  upright,  but  the  just 
Isa.  21.  14.  brought  water  to  him  that  was  t. 
29.  8.  it  shall  be  as  when  a  t.  man  dreanieth 
32.  6.  ho  will  cause  the  drink  of  the  t.  to  fail 
35.  7.  the  t.  land  shall  become  springs  of  water 
44.  3.  for  I  will  pour  water  upon  him  that  is  t. 
65.  13.  my  servants  shall  drink,  but  ye  sliall  be  t. 
F.zek.  19.  13.  she  is  planted  in  a  dry  and  t.  ground 
Mat.  25.  35.  for  I  was  t.  and  ye  gave  me  drink 
37.  when  saw  we  thee  t.  and  gave  thee  drink  1 
42.  for  I  was  I.  and  ye  gave  me  no  drink 
THIRTEEN. 
Oen.  17.  25.  Ishniael  his  son  was  t.  years  old 
JYum. 29.  13.  ye  shall  offer  t.  young  bullocks,  14. 
1  Kings  7.  1.  was  building  his  own  house  t.  years 
1  Chron.  20.  11.  the  sons  and  brethren  of  Hosaht. 
Ezck.iO.  11.  the  Icnirth  of  the  gate  t.  cubiU 

THIRTEENTH. 
Oen.  14.  4.  and  in  the  t.  year  they  rebelled 
1  Chron.  24.  13.  the  t.  lot  came  forth  to  Huppah 
25.  20.  the  t.  lot  came  forth  to  Shubaid 
Jer.  1.  2.  in  the  t.  year  of  the  reign  of  Joaiah 
25.  3.  from  the  t.  year  of  Josiali  the  son  of  Anion 

Sre  DvY. 

THIRTIETH. 

^Kings\'j.  13.  Shallum  to  reign  in  nine  and  t.  year 

17.  in  the  nine  and  t.  year  of  king  .Azariuh 

25.  27.  in  the  sevmi  and  t.  year  of  the  captivity  of 

Jehoiachin  king  ofjudah,  ./<t.  ,52.  31. 
2rAi-.  15.  19.  no  war  to  the  five  and  <.  year  of  .^sa 

10.  1.  in  the  six  and  (.  year  of  the  reign  of  .Asa 
JW/i.  5.14.  the  two  and  t.  viar  of  Artaxerxes,  13.6. 

THIRTY. 
Oen.  6.  15.  the  height  of  the  ark  was  t.  ciihita 

11.  14.  Salah  lived  t.  years,  and  begat  Eber 

18.  Peleg  lived  I.  years,  and  begat  Reu 
22.  He.rug  lived  t.  years,  and  hegnl  Nalior 

18.  .30.  pcradvenliire  there  shall  be  t.  found,  he 
said,  I  will  not  do  it  if  I  find  t.  there 
32. 1.5.  t.  milch  camels  with  their  colls,  forty  kinc 
41.  46.  Joseph  was  «.  years  old  when  he  stood 
Krot/.  21.32.  shall  give  to  their  master  t.  shekels 

26.  8.  the  length  of  one  curtain  t.  cubits,  36.  15. 
Lev.  27.  4.  thy  estimation  shall  hi"  I.  shekels 
JVum.  4.  3.  from  t    vears  old  and  upwards  even  to 

fifly,  23,  30,35,  39,  43,  47.  1  Chron.  23.  3. 

.Tudg.  10.  4.  Jairhad  t.  sons,  and  llicy  hud  t.  cities 

12.9.  Ibzan  had  t.  sons  and  t.  daiighiers  he  seni 

abroad,  look  in  /.  dauffhlers  for  his  sons 

14.  Abdon  had  forty  sons  and  /.  nephews 

14. 1 1.  llioy  brought  L  companions  lo  ba  with  bim 


Till 

Ju/I^.14.13.glve  you  {.sheets, (.change  of  garraenti 
13.  ye  shall  give  t.  sheets,  t.  change  of  gariiienis 
19.  Samson  slew  t.  men,  and  took  their  spoil 
20.  31.  to  smite  about  t.  men  of  Israel,  39. 

1  .Sam.  9.^.  Saul  sat  among  thern,  about  t.  persons 

2  Sam.  5.4.  David  was  t.  years  old  when  he  began 

23.  13.  and  three  of  the  t.  chief  went  down 

23.  llenaiah  was  more  honourable  than  the  (. 

1  Chron.  11.  15,25.  |  27.  0. 

24.  Asahel,  brother  of  Joab,  was  one  of  the  t. 

1  Kings  4.22.  provision  for  one  day  was  t.  measure* 
6. 2.  height  of  the  house  of  the  Lord  w^st.  cubits 
7. 2.  height  of  the  house  of  the  forest  was  t.  cuhitj 

6.  the  breadth  of  the  popch  was  t.  cubits 
2:).  a  line  oft.  cubits  did  compass  it  about 

2  Kings  18. 14.  ajipoiiited  to  Hezekiah  t.  talents 

1  Chron.  11.  42.  Adina  a  captain,  and  I.  with  liini 
Ezra  1.  9.  the  number  of  them  was  (.  chargers 

10.  t.  basons  of  gold,  silver  basons  410 
Jer.  38.  10.  take  from  hence  t.  men  with  theo 
Ezek.  40. 17.  t.  chambers  were  on  the  jiavement 
41.  6.  and  the  side  chambers  were  t.  in  order 
40.  22.  there  were  courts  joined  of  t.  cubits  broad 
y.ech.  11.  12.  they  weighed  for  my  price  t.  pieces 

13.  and  I  look  the  t.  pieces  of  silver,  Mat.  27.  9. 
Mat.  13.  8.  brought  some  t.  fold,  23.  Mark  4.  8,  20. 

26.  15.  they  covenanted  with  him  for  (.  pieces 

27.  3.  Judas  brought  again  the  t.  pieces  of  silver 
I,uke  3.23.  Jesus  began  to  be  about  t.  years  of  age 
John  6.  19.  had  rowed  about  25  or  t.  furlongs 

See  Days. 

THIRTY  one. 

.Tosh.  12.  24.  the  kings  Joshua  subdued  t.  and  ono 

1  Kings  16.  23.  in  the  (.  and  one  year  of  king  Asa 

2  Kings  22.  1.  Josiah  eight  years  old,  and  reigned 

t.  and  one  years  in  Jerusalem,  2  Chron.  34.  1. 
THIRTY  two. 
0671.11.20.  Reu  lived  t.  two  years,and  begat  Seruy 
jVum.31.  40.  the  Lord's  tribute  was  t.  (iro  persons 

1  Kings 'iO.l.t.tico  kings  were  with  Ben-hadad,  16. 
22.  31.  the  king  commanded  his  t.  two  captains 

2  Kings  8.17.  Jehorani  was  t.  tiro  years  old  wjien 

he  began  to  reign,  2  Chron.  21.  5,  20. 

THIRTY  three. 
Oen.  46.15.  all  the  sonls  of  sons  and  daughters  t.  L 
Lev.  12.  4.  in  hlooil  of  purifying  t.  three  days 
2  Sa7n.5.5.Davul  reigmd  in  Jerusalem  t.  and  thre» 
years,  1  Kings  2.  11.  1  Chron.  3.  4.  1  29.  27 

THIRTY /our. 
6en.ll.l6.Ebcr  lived  t.four  vears  and  begat  P«lcs 

THIRTY  ifipe. 
Oen.  11.  12.  Arphaxad  lived  fine  and  t.  years 

1  Kings  22.  42.  Jihoshaphat  was  t.firc  years  old 

when  he  began  to  reign,  2  Chron.  20.  31. 

2  Chron.  3. 15.  made  two  pillars  t.Jivc  cubits  high 

THIRTY  six. 
Josh.  7.  5.  the  men  of  Ai  smote  t.siz  men  of  Israel 

THIRTY  seven. 
2  Sam.  23.  39.  Uriah  the  Hitliie,  t.  seven  in  all 
2  Kings  13. 10.  in  the  t.  and  stvinth  year  of  Joash 

THIRTY  eight. 
73c«(.2.14.till  come  over  brook  Zcred,t.ei«-A(  year* 

1  Kings  16.  29.  in  the  t.  and  eighth  year  of  Asa 

2  Kings  15.  8.  in  the  t.  and  eighth  year  of -Azariah 
John  5.  5.  which  had  an  infirmily  t.  eight  years 

THIRTY  nine. 

2  Chron.  10.  12.  .Asa  in  the  t.  and  n.  year  diseased 

See  Tiior.sAND. 

THUS. 

Ofn.5.29.  (.same  shall  comfort  us  concerning  work 

15.4.  saying,  (.  shall  not  be  thine  heir,  but  he  shall 

18.  32.  and  I  will  speak  yet  but  (.  onco 

19.  9.  they  said,  (.  one  fellow  came  in  to  sojourn 

29.  27.  we  will  give  thee  (.  also  for  the  sirvico 
34.  15.  but  in  (.  will  we  consent  unto  you 

37.  32.  sent  the  coat,  and  said,  (.  have  we  found 

38.  28.  bound  a  thread,  saying,  t.  came  out  first 
44.  5.  is  not  (.  it  in  which  my  Lord  drinketh? 

29.  if  ve  take  t.  from  me,  and  mischief  befall  him 
F.jod.  3.  12.  (.  shall  bo  a  token  that  I  sent  thee 
7.  17.  in  t.  thou  shnit  know  that  I  am  the  Lord 
23.  neither  did  he  set  his  heart  to  (.  also 

30.  13.  (.  thcv  shall  give,  each  half  a  shekel 
Ji/'um.  18.9.  (.'shall  be  thine  of  the  most  holy  ihingf 

from  the  fire,  Dcut.  18. 3. 

24.  23.  alas,  who  shall  live  when  God  dooth  (.7 
Dent.  32. 29.  O  thai  they  were  wise  and  underst.  L 

34.  is  nni  (.  laid  up  in  store  with  me  and  scaled 
.hidg.  7.  4.  (.  shall  go  with  thee,  (.  shall  not  go 
Ifi.  18.  come  up  (.  once,  for  he  hath  i-hewid  all 

1  .S^ani.  16.  8.  niitlier  halh  the  Lord  chosen  (.  0. 

20.  3.  and  he  saith,  let  not  Jonathan  know  t. 

25.  31.  that  (.  shall  bo  no  grief  unto  thee 

2  Sam.  7.  19.  (.  was  a  small  thing  in  thy  sight 
19.  21.  shall  not  Shimei  be  put  to  death  for  (.  7 
23.  17.  is  not  (.  the  blood  of  the  men  that  went 

I  Kinrrs  3.  9.  to  judge  (.  tliy  so  great  a  people 
II.  27.  and  (.  was  llii'  cause  ihiit  he  lifl  his  hand 
39.  I  will  for  (.  nniicl  the  !>i  cd  of  David,  but  not 

IT.  24.  by  M  ku(nv.(ha(  ttiou  art  a  aiao  of  God 


THI 

S  fCingsi.  43.  should  I  set  L  before  a  hundred  men 
14.  IC.  glory  of  i.  and  tarry  at  lionio 
iJ4.  3.  at  conmiiindiiieiit  ol"  Lord  came  (.  on  Judah 

S  C'Ar.  1.11.  because  t.was  in  thine  licart, not  asked 
25.  y.  ilie  Lord  is  able  to  give  thee  mure  than  t. 

Kirab.  17.  le^him  send  his  pleasure  concerning  £. 
t).  1 1,  let  his  house  be  made  a  dunghill  lor  t. 

7.  27.  put  such  a  thing  as  t.  in  the  king's  heart 

8.  'i.i.  BO  we  tasted,  and  besought  our  God  lor  t. 

9.  13.  and  hast  given  us  such  deliverance  as  (. 
1-5.  we  cannot  stand  before  tliee  because  oft. 

JW/t.  13.  14.  remember  me  concerning  t.  22. 
Ksth.  4.  14.  art  come  to  kiiigd.  for  such  a  time  as  t 
Job  5.  27.  lo,  t.  we  uave  searched  it,  so  it  is 

12.  y.  the  hand  of  tne  Lord  hath  wrought  t. 

17.  8.  upright  men  shall  be  astonied  at  t. 

20.  2.  fur  1. 1  make  haste  |{  4.  knowest  thou  not  t. 

21.  2.  hear  and  let  t.  be  your  consolation 
'Si.  12.  in  t.  tliuu  art  not  just,  I  will  answer 
35. 2.  thinkcst  thou  t.  to  he  right,  that  thou  saidsl 

Psal.  11.  G.  t.  shall  be  the  portion  of  their  cup 
27.  3.  though  war  rise,  in  t.  will  I  be  confident 
32.  (i.  for  t.  shall  every  one  that  is  godly  pray 

35.  22.  t.  thou  hast  seen,  keep  not  silence 
41.  11.  by  t.  1  know  that  thou  favourest  me 
44.  21.  shall  not  C«od  search  t.  outi  he  knoweth 
48.  14.  fort.  God  is  our  Uod  for  ever  and  ever 
4y.  13.  t.  their  way  is  their  folly,  yet  their 

50.  22.  now  consider  t.  ye  that  forget  God 
56. 9.  shall  turn  back,  1. 1  know,  for  God  is  for  me 
62.  11.  twice  have  1  heard  t.  that  power  belongs 
69.  31.  t.  also  shall  please  the  Lord  belter  than  ox 
32. the  humble  shall  see  t.aiid  be  glad,  your  heart 
73.  Iti  when  I  thought  to  know  t.  it  was  painful 
78.  21  the  Lord  he.iid  t.  and  was  wroth,  59. 
81.  4.  for  I.  was  a  statute  for  Israel  and  a  law 

5.  t.  he  ordained  in  Josejjh  for  a  testimony 
92.  b.  neither  doth  a  fool  understand  I. 

joy.  20.  let  t.  be  the  reward  of  mine  adversaries 
Ijy.  50.  t.  I  had,  because  I  kept  thy  precepts 
149.  9.  t.  honour  have  all  his  saints,  praise  Lord 
Keel.  4.  4.  fort,  a  man  is  envied  of  his  neighbour 

6.  5.  (.  hath  inore  rest  than  the  other 

7.  10.  thou  dost  not  inquire  wisely  concerning  t. 

18.  it  is  good  that  thou  shouldest  take  hold  oft. 

yea  also  from  t.  withdraw  not  thine  hand 

27.  t.  have  1  found  ||  29.  lo,  t.  only  have  I  found 
11.  G.  whether  shall  prosper,  either  t.  or  that 

Jsa.  1.  12.  who  hath  required  t.  at  your  hand? 

6.  7.  and  he  said,  lo,  I.  hath  touched  thy  lips 

9.  7.  the  zeal  of  tin;  Lord  r)f  hosts  will  perform  t. 

22.  14.  surely  I.  iniquity  shall  not  bo  purged 

27.  9.  by  t.  shall  the  iniquity  of  Jacob  be  purged 

28  29.  I.  also  cometh  forth  from  the  Lord 

29  11.  saying,  read  I.  I  pray  thee,  12. 
3fc.  7.  therefore  have  I  cried  concerning  t. 

43.  9.  who  among  them  can  declare  t.7  45.  21. 

46.  8.  remember  t.  \\  48.  20.  declare  ye,  tell  t. 

47.  8.  therefore  hear  now  t.  48.  1,  Ki.  |  51.  21. 
50.  11.  t.  shall  ye  have  of  mine  hand,  ye  shall 
5t).  2.  blessed  is  the  man  that  doclh  t. 

58.  5.  wilt  thou  call  t.  a  fast,  an  acceptable  day" 

6.  is  not  I.  the  fast  that  I  have  chosen"! 

6fi.  14.  when  ye  see  t.  your  hearts  shall  rejoice 
Jcr.  2.  12.  be  astonished,  O  ye  heavens,  at  t. 
17.  bast  thou  not  procured  t.  unto  thyself? 

4.  8.  for  t.  gird  you  with  sackcloth,  lament 

28.  for  t.  shall  the  earth  mourn,  and  heavens 

5.  7.  how  shall  I  pardon  thee  for  t.7 

9.  be  avenged  on  such  a  nation  as  t.  29.  |  9.  9. 

9.  24.  but  let  him  that  glorieth,  glory  in  t. 

10.  21.  I  will  t.once  cause  them  to  know  my  hand 

22.  16.  was  not  t.  to  know  me,  saith  the  Lord? 
21.  I.  hath  been  thy  manner  from  thy  youth 

2;t.2fi.how  long  shall  t.  be  in  the  heart  of  prophets 

31.  3*1.  t.  shall  be  the  covenant  that  I  will  make 

32.  8.  I  knew  that  t.  was  the  word  of  the  Lord 
f^am.  3.  21.  £.  I  call  to  mind,  therefore  I  hope 

5.  17.  for  t.  our  heart  is  faint,  our  eyes  are  dim 
Eif/£.  8. 15.  he  said,  haet  thou  seen  U  17.  |  47.  6. 
16.  49.  t.  was  the  iniquity  of  thy  sister  Sodom 

20.  27.  in  t.  your  fathers  have  blasphemed  me 

21.  26.  saith  the  Lord,  t.  shall  not  be  the  same 

23.  J  I.  and  when  her  sister  Aholibah  saw  t. 

24.  24.  t.  Cometh,  ye  shall  know,  33.  33. 

36.  37.  I  will  yet  for  (.  be  inquired  of  by  Israel 

44.  2.  t.  gate  shall  be  shut,  no  man  shall  enter 
/5(i»i.6.5.8hal.  not  find  occasion  againstt.Daniel,28. 
Hu.i.  7.  16.  £.  hhall  be  their  derision  in  Egypt 
j9m«j  4.  5.  t.  liketh  you,  O  children  of  Israel 

7.  3.  the  Lord  repented  for  t.  it  shall  not  be,  6. 

8.  8.  shall  not  the  land  tremble  for  t.l 

9.  12.  stiilh  the  Lord  that  doth  t. 

Jonah  4.  2.  was  not  t.  my  saying  in  my  country? 
y.rpli.  2.  10.  t.  shall  they  have  for  their  pride 
ZccA.R.lS.t.shnll  come  to  pass  if  ye  will  obey  Lord 
14.  12.  t.  shall  be  the  plague  wherewith,  15. 

19.  t.  shall  be  the  punishment  of  Egypt 
Mai.  I.  9.  (.  hath  been  by  your  means 

13.  should  I  accept  t.  of  your  bandji?  stitliLord 
025 


THI 

Mai.  2. 12.  the  L.  will  cut  off  the  man  thai  doeth  t. 
Mat.  12.  7.  but  if  ye  had  known  what  I.  meaneth 
13.  55.  is  not  t.  the  carpenter's  son  !  jMurk  0.  3. 
J.u/cc  4.  22.  Jo/in  ti.  42. 
16.  22.  saying.  Lord,  t.  shall  nut  be  unto  thee 
24.  43.  know  t.  that  if  the  good  man  of  the  house 
had  knosvn  in  what  watch,  l^uke  12.  39. 

26.  13.  shall  also  t.  that  I.  woman  hath  dune 

27.  54.  saying,  truly  t.  was  the  Son  of  God 

28.  14.  and  if  t.  come  to  the  governor's  ears 
Mark  12.  31.  and  the  second  is  like,  namely,  t. 
Luke  1.  lo.  whereby  shall  1  know  t.  for  I  am  old 

34.  how  shall  t.  be,  seeing  1  know  not  a  man? 
66.  saying,  what  manner  of  child  shall  t.  be? 

.3. 20.  added  yet  t.  above  all,  that  he  shut  up  John 
6.  3.  have  ye  not  read  so  much  as  t.  what  David 

10.  11.  be  sure  of  t.  ||  20.  in  t.  rejoice  not 

15.  24.  t.  my  son  was  dead  and  is  alive  again 

22.  17  take  t.  and  divide  it  among  yourselves 
37.  that  t.  must  yet  be  accomplished  in  me 

23.  47.  certainly  t.  was  a  righteous  man 
John  1.  15.  saying,  t.  was  he  of  whom  I  spake 

2.  22.  his  disciples  remembered  he  had  said  t, 

4.  27.  on  t.  came  his  disciples,  and  marvelled 
29.  is  not  t.  the  Christ?  ||  5.  28.  marvel  not  at  t. 

6.  0.  t.he  said  to  prove  him,  for  he  himself  knew 

7.  25.  is  not  t.  he  w  horn  they  seek  to  kill  ? 
8.40.  t.  did  not  Abraham  ||  11.  26.  believcst  thou  *. 

11.  51.  t.  spake  he  not  of  himself,  but  prophesied 

12.  6.  t.  he  said,  not  that  he  cared  for  the  poor 

13.  28.  for  what  intent  he  spake  t.  unto  him 

35.  by  t.  shall  all  men  know  ye  are  my  disciples 
15.  13.  greater  love  hath  no  man  than  t. 

16.30.  by  t.  we  believe  that  thou  earnest  from  God 
jlcCs  1.  11.  t.  Jesus  shall  so  come  in  like  manner 
2. 12.  what  meaneth  £.?  |{  31.  he  seeing  I.  before 

32.  t.  Jesus  hath  God  raised  up,  whereof  we  all 

33.  he  hath  shed  forth  t.  which  ye  now  see 
37.  when  they  heard  t.  they  were  pricked 

3.  12.  ye  men  of  Israel,  why  marvel  ye  at  t.? 

5.  24.  they  doubted  whereunto  t.  would  grow 
6.14.  that  t.  Jesus  of  Nazareth  shall  destroy  t. place 

7.  35.  t.  Moses  whom  they  refused,  did  God  send 
40.  as  for  t.  Moses,  we  wot  not  what  is  become 

8.  22.  repent  therefore  oft.  thy  wickedness 

32.  the  place  of  scripture  which  he  read  was  f. 

9.  21.  is  not  t.  he  that  destroyed  them  which 
13.  48.  when  the  Gentiles  heard  t.  they  were  glad 

15.  15.  to  I.  agree  the  words  of  the  prophets 

16.  18.  t.  did  she  many  days,  but  Paul  turned 

19.  5.  when  they  heard  t.  they  were  baptized 

24.  14.  but  1. 1  confess  to  thee,  that  after  the  way 
Rom.  2.  3.  thinkesl  thou  t.  O  man,  that  judgest 

6.  6.  knowing  t.  that  our  old  man  is  crucified 
9.  10.  not  only  t.  but  when  Rebecca  conceived 
15.  28.  when  therefore  I  have  performed  t. 

1  Cor.  1. 12. 1. 1  say,  every  one  saith,  I  am  of  Paul 

9.  3.  my  answer  to  them  that  examine  me  is  t. 
11.  17.  in  t.  that  I  declare  to  you,  1  jiraisc  not 

22.  shall  I  praise  you  in  t.?  1  praise  you  not 
15.  34.  have  not  knowledge,  I  speak  t.  to  shame 

2  Cor.  5.  2.  in  t.  we  groan  earnestly,  desiring 

7.  3.  I  speak  not  t.  to  condemn  you,  for  I  said 

8.  5.  £.  they  did,  not  as  we  hoped,  but  first  gave 

10.  7.  let  him  of  himself  think  t.  again,  11. 

13.  9.  and  t.  also  we  wish,  even  your  perfection 
Cfal.  3.  2.  t.  would  I  learn  of  you,  received  yo 

5.  14.  the  law  is  fulfilled  in  one  word,  even  in  t. 
F.ph.i.  17. 1. 1  say  therefore,  and  testify  in  the  Lord 

5.  5.  for  t.  ye  know,  that  no  whoremonger 

Phil.  1.9.  t.  I  pray,  that  your  love  may  abound 

19.  I  know  that  t.  shall  turn  to  my  salvation 

27'AcM.3.  lO.when  with  you,  t.we  commanded  you 

1  7'i7n.  1.9.  knowing  t.Jajn.  1.3.  2  Pet.  1.20.13.3. 

4.  10.  in  doing  t.  thou  shalt  both  save  thyself  and 
//fA.  7. 21.  but  t.  with  an  oath  ||  27.  t.  did  he  once 
1  John  3.  10.  in  t.  the  children  of  God  are  manifest 

4.  9.  in  t.  was  manifested  the  love  of  God 
5.2.  by  t.  we  know  that  we  love  children  of  God 
Judch.yaiyoM  in  remembrance,tho'yeonce  knewt. 
Rev.  2.  6.  t.  thou  hast,  that  thou  hatest  the  decils 
See  All,  After,  Book,  Cause,  Child,  City, 
Day,   Doctrine,   Do,   Done,  Evil,  House, 
Land,  Law,  LjIfe,  Man,   Month,  People, 
Thing,  Woiid,  World. 
Is  THIS. 
Gen.  3.  13.  Lord  said  to  the  woman,  what  is  t. 
that  thou  hast  done?  12. 18.  |  26.  10.  |  29.  25. 
24.  65.  what  man  is  t.  that  walketh  in  the  field? 

42.  28.  what  is  I.  that  God  hath  done  unto  us? 

43.  29.  is  t.  your  younger  brother,  of  whom 
44. 15.  what  deed  is  t.  that  ye  have  done? 

Erod.  13.  14.  saying,  what  is  t.7  .Turlir.  18.  24. 

17.  3.  wherefpre  is  t.  that  thou  hast  brought  us 
Josh.  22.  15.  wtiat  trespass  is  t.  ye  committed? 
Judir.  15.  11.  what  is  t.  that  thou  hast  done  unto 

us?  2  Kam.  12.  21. 

20.  12.  what  wickedness  is  t.  done  among  you? 

1  Sam.  10.  11.  what  is  t.  come  to  the  son  of  Kish? 

24.  16.  Saul  said,  ii  t.  thy  voice,  my  son  David? 

4M 


THI 

2  Sam.'l.l^.  is  t.  tho  manner  of  man,  O  Lord  God) 

16.  17.  is  t.  thy  kindness  to  thy  friend? 
2  KivffS  18.  19.  what  confidence  is  t.  wherein 
Ezra  10.  13.  nor  is  I.  a  work  of  one  day  or  two 
./ob  38.  2.  who  is  t.  that  durkencth  counsel? 
Cant.  3.  6.  who  is  t.  cometh  out  of  the  wilderness? 

8.5.  who  is  t.  that  cometh  up  from  the  wilderness? 
Isa.  23.  7.  15  t.  your  joyous  city,  whose  antiquity 

63.  1.  who  is  t.  that  cometh  from  Edom,  with 
Jer.  30.  21.  for  who  is  I.  that  engaged  his  heart? 

46.  7.  who  is  t.  that  cometh  up  as  a  flood 
Ezek.  16.  20.  is  t.  of  thy  whoredoms  a  small  matter 
Zcch.  3.  2.  is  not  t.  a  brand  plucked  out  of  the  fir»T 

5.  5.  and  see  what  is  t.  that  goeth  forth 
Mat.  8.27.  saying,  what  manner  of  man  is  t.  that 
the  winds  obey  him?  Mark  4.41.  y.uAc8.  25 

12.  23.  peojile  said,  is  not  t.  the  son  of  David? 
21. 10.  who  is  t.l  II  Mark  1.  27.  what  thing  is  t.l 

l^uke  1.43.  whence  is  t.  to  me, that  mother  of  inyL. 

4.  36.  what  a  word  is  t.  with  auth.lie  commandeth 

5.  21.  who  is  t.  which  speaketh  blasphemies? 

7.  49.  who  is  t.  that  forgivelh  sins  also? 

9.  9.  but  who  is  t.  of  w  lioin  I  hear  such  things? 
20.  17.  he  said,  what  is  t.  then  that  is  written 
John  7.  36.  what  manner  of  saying  is  t.  he  said 
9. 19.  is  t.  your  son,  who  ye  say  was  born  blind? 

16.  17.  what  is  t.  that  he  saith  unto  us?  18. 

2  Cor.  1.  12.  for  our  rejoicing  is  t.  the  testimony 
Kph.3.8.to  me  is  t.grace  given, to  preach  toGentilet 
Jam.  1.  27.  pure  religion  and  undcfiled  is  t. 

THIS  is. 
Gen.  2. 23.  Adam  said,  t.  is  now  bone  of  my  bonei 
20.13.t.  is  thy  kindness  which  thou  shalt  shew  me 
28.  17.  Jacob  said  t.  is  none  other  but  the  bouse 
of  God,  and  t.  is  the  gate  of  heaven 
32.2.when  Jacob  saw  them, he  said  t.is  God's  host 
41.38.  Pharaoh  said, can  we  find  such  a  one  as  t.it 
48.  18.  not  so,  father,  for  t.  is  the  first-born 
Exod'S.lo.t.is  my  name  for  ever, and  my  memorial 

8.  19.  the  magicians  said,  t.  is  the  finger  of  God 
16.  23.  t.  is  that  which  the  Lord  bath  said 

Lev.  10.  3.  t.  is  that  the  Lord  spake,  saying 
J^'um.  8.  24.  t.  is  it  that  belongeth  to  the  Levilog 

18.  11.  and  f.  is  thine,  the  heave-offering  of  gift 
Dcvt.  13.  11.  do  no  more  such  wickedness  att.  i« 

15.  2.  and  t.  is  the  manner  of  the  release 
1  Sam.  16.  12.  arise,  anoint  him,  for  t.  is  he 

1  Kings  11.  11.  forasmuch  as  t.  is  done  of  thee 

13.  3.  t.  is  the  sign  which  the  Lord  hath  spoken 

2  Kings  3.  18.  t.  is  but  a  light  thing  in  sight  of  Ld 

6.  19.  t.  is  not  the  way,  neither  is  this  the  city 

8.  5.  O  king,t.  is  the  woman,  and  t.  is  her  son 

9.  37.  so  that  they  shall  not  say,  t.  is  Jezebel 
2  Chron.  28.  22.  t.  is  that  kingAhaz 

JWA.  2.  2.  t.  is  nothing  hut  sorrow  of  heart 
9. 18.  t.  is  thy  God  that  brought  thee  out  of  Egypt 

.Job  8.  19.  behold,  t.  is  the  joy  of  his  way 
30.  13.  I  know  tliat  t.  is  with  thee 
18.31.  t.  is  the  place  of  him  that  knoweth  not  God 
20.  29.  t.  is  the  portion  of  a  wicked  man,  27.  13. 

Ps.  24.6.  t.  is  the  generation  of  them  that  seek  him 
68.  16.  t.  is  the  hill  God  desireth  to  dwell  in 
77.  10.  t.  is  my  infirmity,  but  I  will  remember 
109.  27.  that  they  may  know  that  t.  is  thv  hand 

118.  23.  t.  is  the  Lord's  doing.  Mat.  21.  42. 

119.  50.  t.  is  my  comfort  in  mine  afHiction 
132.  14.  f.  is  my  rest  for  ever,  here  will  I  dwell 

Feci.  1.  10.  whereof  it  may  be  said,  see,  t.  is  new 
5.  19.  to  rejoice  in  labour,  t.  is  the  gift  of  God 

12.  13.  for  (.  is  the  whole  duty  of  man 

Cant.  5.  IG.  t.  is  my  beloved,  and  t.  is  my  friend 
Isa.  12.  5.  sing  to  Lord,  t.  is  known  in  all  the  earth 
25.  9.  lo,  t.  is  our  God,  we  have  waited  for  him 

27.  9.  t.  is  all  tho  fruit,  to  take  away  his  sin 

28.  12.  t.  is  tho  rest,  and  t.  is  the  refreshing 
30.  21.  saying,  t.  is  the  way,  walk  ye  in  it 

54.  9.  for  t.  is  as  the  waters  of  Noah  unto  me 

17.  t.  is  the  heritage  of  the  servants  of  the  Lord 
.59.  21.  as  for  me  t.  is  my  covenant  with  them 

Jrr.  4.  18.  t.  is  thy  wickedness,  it  is  bitter 

7.  28.  t.  is  a  nation  that  obeveth  not  the  Lord 

10.  19  t.  is  a  grief  II  13.  2.5.  t.  is  thy  lot 

23.  C.  t.  is  the  name  whereby  he  shall  be  called, 
The  Lord  our  Righteousness,  33.  16. 

30.  17.  t.  is  Zion,  whom  no  man  seeketh  after 
Ezrk.  5.  5.  t.  is  Jerusalem,  I  set  it  in  the  midst  of 

19. 14.  t.  is  a  lamentation,  and  shall  be  for  a  lam 

31.  18.  t.  is  Pharaoh  and  all  his  multituilr 
Dan.  5.  2.5.  t.  is  the  writing  that  was  written 
Mie.  2.  10.  arisn,  depart,  for  t.  is  not  your  rerf 
Zrph.  2.  15.  t.  is  the  rejoicing  city  that  dwelt 
Zerh.  5.  3.  t.  is  the  curse  that  goeth  forth 

6.  he  said,  t.  is  an  Ephah  ||  8.  t.  is  wickednes* 
Mat.  3.  3.  for  t.  is  he  that  was  cpoken  of  by  Esniaa 
J7.t.is  my  beloved  Son, 17.5.JI/ar/.-9.7.7,u/t(!9.35. 
7.  12.  for  t.  is  the  law  and  the  prophets 
11. 10.  t.  is  he  of  whom  it  is  written,  I^ukt  7.  27 

14.  t.  is  Elias  which  was  for  to  come 

13.  19.  t.  is  he  which  received  sfed  by  the  way 
19.  26.  Jesus  laid,  with  men  (.  is  impossiblo 


THI 

MatZX. 3a  t.  is  Iho  hoir,  ^fark  12. 7. 1.uke  20. 14. 
22.  ^f.  1. 1»  (lie  firal  cuiniiiurKliiient,  Murk  12.  'M. 
a>.  Ji;.  Jisus  d.ird,  Uku,  ijul,  «.  M  my  bu.ly 
:W.  t.  is  Miy  Ulooil,  Mark  II.  --,  -I.   /wiAc  22. 
I'J,  2U.  1  Cur.  11.  -24,  'J.V 
JUark  14.09.  I.  Moncortlmiii,iuiJlni(li.iiiLd  uyuii 
V-u/it7.;i'J.li.ivi;  known  wliiil  inunnur  ol'  wuinun  t.is 
y-i.  5:i.  t.  li  your  hour  ami  llie  power  ot'darknuaa 
Ju/in  1.  I'J.  and  I.  ia  the  record  of  John 
;tU.  t.i.i  he  ot'wiiiiin  I  duid, niter  nic  conictli  a  man 
31.  I  bure  record  that  I.  is  the  Son  of  (J»d 

3.  r.l.  t.  is  the  condeinniition.  lUut  lii;ht  m  come 

4.  4i.  that  t.  is  nuloed  the  (Jhrist,  7.  !.'(),  41. 
ti.  2'.».  /.  IS  the  work  of  Uod,  that  yo  believe 

:i',l.  I.  is  the  Fallier'd  will  which  aeiit  me,  40. 
50.  t.  ii  the  brund  which  coineth  from  heaven 
M.t.is  that  bread  which  came  down  from  liuavon 
GO.  I.  is  a  hard  aayin",  who  can  hear  il? 
9.  U.  some  Baid,t.  in  he  ||  20.  wc  know  t.  is  our  ion 
]j.  12.  I.  is  my  commandment,  that  ye  love 
17.  n.  I.  is  life  olurnal,  that  they  mijjlit  know 
/lets  2.  I'i.  I-  is  lliat  which  wai  sjioken  by  Joel 
7.  J7.  t.  is  that  Moses  which  Baid  unto  Israel 

'JH.  i.  is  he  that  was  in  the  church  in  wilderness 
9.J2.  S.iiil  iiicieased, proving  thai  I.  is  very  Christ 
KoHi.  11.  27.  t.  is  my  covenant,  Jleb.  H.  10.  |  10.  10. 
1  (,»)•.  1 1.  20.  t.  is  not  to  eat  the  Lord's  snpjier 
Kph.  f).  1.  obey  your  pareiit.s,  for  t.  is  rijjlit 
riiil.  1.  2  J.  iff  live,  I.  is  the  fruit  of  my  labour 
Cvl.  '.t.  20.  for  t.  is  well  pleasing  to  the  Loid 
1  'J'hcss.  4.  '^.  for  t.  is  llio  will  of  God,  ."5.  18. 
1  7V/n.l.l5.t.is  a  faithful  saying,  3.1.  |  4.'J.  7Vt.3.8. 
2.  3.  for  t.  is  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  God 
1  I'rl.  2.  I'J.  I.  is  tliaiik-worthy,  if  a  man  endure 
20.  lake  il  patiently,  t.  is  acceptable  with  God 

1  JoAii  1.  ."i.  t.  is  lh(!  message  wo  liiive,  3.  11. 
2.  25.  and  I.  is  llie  promise,  even  denial  life 
3.21I.J.U  his  commanilmenl  lliat  we  should  believe 
4.  3.  and  t.  is  thai  spirit  of  uniichrist 

5.3.  t.  i.slhe  love  of  God, that  we  keep  his  comm. 
4.  and  I.  is  the  victory,  even  our  faith 
fi.  t.  is  lie  Ih.tt  came  by  water  anil  blood 
9.  t.  is  Ihe  witness  of  God  which  ho  It'stificul 
11.  I.  is  Ihe  record,  thai  God  hath  given  life 
14.  t.  is  ihe  confidence  that  we  have  in  him 
20.  t.  is  the  true  God,  and  eternal  life 

2  loliii  ii.t.is  love  that  wc  walk  after  his  command. 
7.  t.  it  a  deceiver  and  an  antichrist 

]{ev,  20. 5.  vears  were  finished,  t.  is  ihe  first  resurr. 

14.  into  lake  of  fire,  t.  is  the  second  death 

TIMS'I'LK. 

2  Kings  14.  9.  the  t.  that  wiis  in  Lebanon,  a  wild 

bcasi  Irod  down  the  l.  2  Cliriin.  2.>.  18. 

IIos.  10.8.  thorn  and  (.  shall  come  upon  llieir  altars 

TIMSILKS. 
(Itn.  3.  18.  thorns  and  t.  shall  it  bring  forlli 
Job  31.  40.  let  I.  grow  instead  of  wheat 
Mat.  7.  10.  do  men  !;atlicr  fi^'s  oft.? 

TIIITIIKR. 
Gen.  19.  20.  ihis  city  is  mar,  oh  Ir-t  me  escape  t. 
22.  habile  then,  escape  t.  till  thou  be  come  t. 
21.  6.  that  thou  bring  not  my  son  t.  again,  8. 
F.iod.  20.  33.  that  thou  mayest  Iiring  in  /..  the  ark 
J^um.  35.  6.  that  the  slayer  may  tlee  t.  11.  15. 
I)tu.l.  4.  42.  I  19.  3,  4.  .lush.  20.  3,  9. 
Dnil.  1.  37.  savin?,  th<m  sbnlt  not  go  in  t.  38,  39. 
12.  5.  unio  \\\*  habitation,  t.  ihou  shall  conio 
fi   /.  ye  shall  bring  your  biirnl-oflerings,  11. 
Jude.  8.  27.  rsrael  went  t.  a  whoring  after  It 

9.  .*1.  and  t.  fleil  ali  the  men  and  women 
1  Slim.  2.  11.  so  tliev  dill  to  Israelites  thai  came  t. 

5.  8.  and  they  carried  tlio  ark  of  God  nboul  t. 

10.  22.  Ihcy  inipiired  if  the  man  should  come  t. 

1  Kingf  (1.7.  made  ready  lioforo  il  was  brought  t. 

2  h'lni.rti'i.  S.  waters  werodivided  hither  and  1. 14. 
4.  H.  Klishn  turned  in  t.  to  eal  brinid,  11. 
r>.  t  2.'i.  he  said,  ihy  servant  went  not  hither  and  t. 
0.  9.  for  t.  the  Syrians  are  come  down 
17.  27.  saying,  carrv  t.  one  of  Ihe  jiriests  whom 

A".  A.  4.  21).  resort  ye  t.  to  us,  God  shall  fight  for  iis 
13.  9.  t.  hfouglit  I  again  Iho  vessels  of  the  house 
Jnb  fl.  20.  they  cnnie  t.  and  were  n.shained 
/»(!.  .Vi.  10.  the  r  liii  rrtiirnelh  not  t.  iijfiiin 
Jer.  22.  11.  he  sliiill  not  return  t.  any  more 

27.  but  In  the  land,  I.  shall  they  not  return 
r.irk.  I.  20.  they  went,  I.  was  their  spirit  to  go 
11.  IP.  Israel  shall  come  t.  and  shall  take  away 
47.  9.  because  these  waters  kIihII  come  I!. 
Jorl^.  II.  I.  r.iwfn  thy  mighlyones  In  comedown 
Milt.  2. 22.  he  wns  afraid  to  i;ii  t.  but  being  warned 
7,11 /re  17.  ;n.  (.  will  the  eagles  he  galiiernil  logi'ihcr 
John  7.  34.  where  I  am,  (.  ye  cannot  come,  .30. 
II.  8.  to  stone  thee,  nnd  goesi  thou  t.  ngainl 
]fi. 2.  Jesus  oft-times  resorted  f.  with  his  disriplon 

3.  JiidnH  pomelh  t.  with  lanterns  and  torches 
^rts  f.  30.  Philip  ran  t.  lo  him.  and  lieiird  him 
16.  13.  spake  to  the  women  'vliirh  resorted  t. 

TIIITIIF.IlWAnii. 

J'lirf;''.  1».  MS.  turned  t.  and  came  to  Mieah's  li<in«' 

Jer.  50.  5.  aik  llio  wnv  to  Zlon,  with  their  faces  I. 

020 


TIIO 

TUONGS, 
jlcts  22.  2j.  OS  tliey  bound  him  with  t.  Paul  laid 

'I'lloKN 
Is  a  prickly  thrub  will  known.  It  was  with 
thorns  tItiU  (ridtun  cUa.ittscd  the  men  uf  .^uc 
cuUi,  who  njunud  to  rilicoc  his  aritii/,  when 
thci/  were  pursuing  '/.cba  and  '/.ulmuuna,  two 
kinj/s  of  MtUtan,  Judg.  ti.  7,  lij.  Kilhcr  he 
cliustisedyorbeal  their  naked  boUtis  with  thorny 
Tods  till  they  died;  or,  he  laid  them  down 
ujJOH  llioriis,  OH  the  ground,  and  brought  the 
cart-wheel  upon  thim,  which  did  both  tear 
their  JU.ih,  and  bruise  them  lo  dealli.  'I'lioriis 
are  put  for  great  dijiculties  and  iiiipidimeuts. 
Job  5.  5,  W'liusu  harvest  llie  hungry  eaielli  up, 
and  takelh  it  even  out  of  the  thorns.  .'Ind  in 
Uok.  2.  U,  i  will  hedge  up  thy  way  with  thorns; 
I  will  bring  thee  into  straits  and  dijjieulties. 
It  is  likewise  put  for  the  heat  of  aJirekinUled 
by  thorns.  I'sal.  ofi.  9,  lielore  your  jiois  can 
leel  the  thorns.  !it.  I'aul  says,  2  Cor.  12.  7. 
that  lest  he  should  have  been  cjealled  abooe 
vicasure,  through  the  abundance  of  the  reve- 
lations which  he  had,  there  was  given  to  him  a 
thorn  111  the  Hcsli,  that  is,  some  racking  pain 
in  his  body  ;  or  terrors  of  conscience,  or  some 
diabolical  riolent  temptation. 
The  Lord  tuld  the  Israelites,  that  such  of  the 
inJiabilanls  of  Canaan,  as  they  should  let  re- 
main in  the  land,  would  be  pricks  in  their  eyes 
and  thorns  in  their  sides ;  that  is,  they  would 
be  very  hurtful  and  pernicious  to  Hum,  Auiii. 
33.  55.  'I'he  wicked  are  compared  to  thorns, 
not  only  because  of  their  barrenness,  and  un- 
profitableness in  any  thing  that  is  good.  Mat. 
7.  JO,  19,  IJo  men  gather  grapes  of  thorns  ? 
but  also  because  of  their  pernicious  hurtful 
dispusilioH  towards  the  church  and  people 
of  Uod,  Josh.  23.  13.  Ezek.  28.  24.  To  sow 
among  thorns,  is  to  preach  the  woi  d  to  worldly 
and  carnal  hearts,  Mat.  13.  7,  22.  Many 
are  dduded,  and  betrayed  to  a  ni gleet  of  their 
Souls,  through  an  ejLccssive  care  about  get- 
ting, keiping,  and  managing  their  estates  . 
so  that  prosperity  is  their  snare.  'I'he  sut 
diers,  to  insult  our  Haiiiour,  and  to  despise 
his  royalty,  platted  a  crown  oi'  thorns,  and  jiul 
it  upon  his  head,  Mat.  27.  29.  Thorns  were 
the  fruit  of  the  curse  for  man's  sin.  Gen.  3. 
Id.  Christ  bears  our  curse,  and  takes  it 
away  from  us. 
2  Chron.'io.  ^  18.t.  in  Lebanon,  sent  lo  the  cedar 
./o/i41.2.caiistlhou  bore  his  jaw  through  with  at. 7 
/VuD.20.9.as  a  t.  goeth  into  the  hand  of  a  drunkard 
ha.  55.  13.  instead  of  llie  t.  shall  come  the  lir-tree 
/■-'zct.  28.24.  there  shall  be  no  more  any  grieving  t. 
IIos.  10.  8.  the  (.  shall  come  up  on  their  altars 
Mic.  7.4.  the  most  upright  is  sharper  than  a  t. hedge 
2  Cor.  12.  7.  there  was  given  mu  a  t.  in  the  flesh 

TUOK.NS. 
Gen.  3. 18.  t.  and  thistles  shall  it  bring  forth  to  thee 
f-Uod.  22.  6.  if  fire  break  out  and  catch  in  t. 
.7/um. 33.55.  they  shall  be  t.  in  your  sides,  Judg.  2.3. 
./osh.  2.'!.  13.  but  they  shall  be  I.  in  your  eyes 
2  .Sam.  2;».  G.  the  sons  of  Belial  shall  be  as  I 
2  CAron. 33.11.  which  look  Manasseh  among  the  t. 
/'.?.58.  9.  before  your  pots  can  feel  the  £.  lake  them 

118.  12.  they  are  quenched  as  the  fire  of  t. 
I'ror.  15.  19.  way  of  slothful  man  is  a  hedge  oft. 
22.  5.  t.  and  snares  are  in  Ihe  way  of  the  froward 
24.  31.  and  lo,  it  was  all  grown  over  with  t. 
Keel.  7.  0.  as  Ihe  crackling  off.  under  a  pot 
Cant.  2.  2.  as  the  lily  among  t.  so  is  my  love 
Isa.  7.  19.  they  shall  rest  upon  all  t.  and  bushes 

33.  12.  as  t.  cut  n|>  shall  lliey  be  burnt  in  fire 

34.  13.  and  t.  shall  come  up  in  her  palaces 
Jir.  4.  3.  break  your  ground,  and  sow  not  among  I. 

12.  13.  liny  have  sown  wheal,  but  shall  reap  (. 
Hos.  2.0.  behold,  I  will  hedge  up  thy  way  with  t. 
9.  <i.  (.  shiill  be  in  their  tabernacles 
JVuA.  1.  10.  while  Ihey  be  folden  together  ns  t. 
Mat.  7. 10.  do  men  pather  <rapes  of  (.?  I.uke  0.  4  I. 
13.7.  fell  among  I.  22  Murk  4.7,  IH.  I.ukr>^.  7, 14. 
27.29.  \\\»\\  Ihey  liad  platted  a  crown  of  <.  they 
put  il  on  Ins  head,  .ViirA  15.  17.  John  19.2. 
Sff  Bkiki's. 
TIIOROW,  sir  TiiRouoii. 
TIIOSI". 
Grn.  33.  5.  F.snii  saiil,  who  are  t.  with  lliec7 
I   ATin/.M  2.  7.  lei  them  beof  Mhat  eat  at  thy  table 
9.  21.  upon  I.  did  Solomon  levv  a  tribute 
F.ira  1.  8.  I.  did  Cyrus  king  ofPersia  bring  forth 
f:»«A.9..^.diil  what  they  would  to  t. lliat  bated  them 
,lob  5.  II.  lo  set  up  on  high  (.  that  be  low 
21.  22.  seeing  he  judgelh  t.  that  ai#liigh 
24.  13.  they  are  oft.  that  rebel  againsl  ihft  light 

19.  so  doih  Iho  grave  I.  «IimIi  have  vinncil 
27.  I5.f  .that  remain  ofhiin  sIkiII  be  buried  in  death 
I'snl.  37.  9.  I.  that  wail  on  tlie  l.oid  ^hnll  inherit 
50.  5.  t.  tiiai  liavo  made  a  cuveiiaut  with  uio 


THO 

Ps.  92. 13.  (.  planted  in  house  of  Ld.  shall  flourish 

119. 79.1et  t.  tiiutte4r  thee  turn  lo  me,  and  t.  ihul 

hate  known  Ihy  lesliinomel 

132.  as  thou  useiUt  lo  do  lo  t.  that  love  lliy  nuuiO 

139.  21.  am  not  1  grieved  willi  (.  that  rise  up 
froo.  ti.  li.  t.  thai  seek  me  eaily  shall  tuid  lue 
r.cel.  1.  11.  with  t.  that  siiull  come  alter 
Isa.  35.  8.  u  liigh-way,  but  it  shall  be  lor  t. 

04.5.  t.  that  leniembcr  ihee  in  Ihy  ways,  in  thoM 
is  continuance,  we  shall  be  aavud 
Jer.  27.  11.  t.  w  ill  1  let  reiiiain  in  their  land 
I  Jan.  4.  37.  t.  that  walk  in  piide  he  in  able  lo  abaM 
'/.cph.  1.  0.  and  1.  thai  havt>  not  sought  lhi>  Lord 
Mat.  10.23.  thou  savouresl  t.  Uiiiigs  thai  be  uf  iiivn 
I.uke  7.  2ri.  among  t.  that  ai  Aiorii  of  woman 

19.27.  but  t.  mine  eneuiies  bring  hither  and  siay 
.lohn  8.  10.  woman,  wheie  are  (.  thine  accusers} 

17, 11.  keep  thru' thy  name  t.  thou  hastgiteii  nio 

12.  (.  that  thou  gavesl  nie  1  have  kepi,  none  lost 

jlcts  3.  24.  from  baniuel  and  t.  thai  follow  alter 

1  Cor.  14.  23.  there  come  in  (.  llnit  are  unltained 

I'hil.'i.'i.  what  things  gain,  1. 1  counted  loss  for  Ch. 

1  7'iHi.  4. 10.  Saviour,  e.-.pecially  of  t.  lliat  believe 
Ileb.  5.  14.  beluiigelh  lo  t.  who  by  reason  uf  use 

2  I'd.  2.  0.  an  eiisample  to  (.  that  live  ungodly 
18.  they  allure  t.  lliut  were  clean  escaped 

■Ste  Days,  Tui.NUi. 

Tiioi;. 

r,Vn.3.12.lbe  woman  w  bom  t.gavesl  to  be  with  me 
20.7.  if  not  restore,  know  tlion,  that  (.  shall  ."urely 
die,  t.  and  all  that  are  thine,  1  .Sani  22.  10. 
24.00.  t.  art  our  sister,  be  t.  mother  uflbousaudl 
20.  29.  t.  art  now  the  blessed  of  the  Lord 
41.  39.  there  is  none  so  discreet  and  w  ise  as  t.  art 

40.  oiily  111  the  throne  w  ill  I  be  greater  than  t. 
45.  10.  f.  shall  be  near  to  nie,t.  and  ihy  children 
49.  8.  t.  art  he  whom  Ihy  brelhreii  shall  praise 
7;xui/.19.24. (.shall  come  iip,t.and  Aaruii  with  Ihca 
J\''uvi.  10.  11.  t.  and  all  Ihe  coiiipany  are  gmhered 

10.  be  (,  and  they,  and  Aaron  before  the  Lord 
iJcul.  5. 14,  lliat  thy  servant  may  rest  as  well  as  t. 
7. 1.  hath  cast  out  nations  niiglilier  than  t.  20.  1. 

13.  G.  t.  hast  not  known,  t.  nor  thy  fatbeis,28.G4. 
30,  19.  that  both  t.  and  thy  seed  may  live 

1  .Sam.  15  28.  lo  a  neighbour  that  is  better  Ihanf. 

24,  17,  he  said,  t.  art  more  righteous  than  I 

25.  33.  blessed  be  t.  that  kejil  me  from  coming 

2  .Sam.  12.7.  Nathan  said  to  David,  (.  art  Ihe  i.ian 
15,  2.  then  Absalom  said,  of  what  cily  an  (.,' 
19,29,1  have  said,  C,  and  Ziba  divide  Ihe  land 

1  Kings  8,39,  t,  even  t.  knowest  the  beans  of  » 

18,  18,  t,  and  thy  father's  bouse  trouble  Israel 
20,  14,  who  shall  order  the  bailie?  he  said  (, 

2  Kings'J.  25,  that  when  I  and  t.  rode  after  .\hab 

14,  10,  why  meddle,  that  t.  sbouldest  fall,  even  ^ 

and  Judiih  with  thee,  2  Chroii.  25.  19, 

19,  15.  t,  art  the  God,  even  t,  rdoiie  of  all  the 

kingdoms,  19,  A>A.  9.  fi.  /.•,«.  37.  20. 
JV7A.  9.  17.  but  t.  art  a  (Jod,  ready  to  pardon 
i:.'th.  4.  14.  hut  t.  anil  thy  father's  hou^e  shall  be 
destroyed,  who  knowelh  whether  t.  art  coma 
.lob  35.  5.  the  clouds  winch  are  higher  than  t. 
I'sal.  23.  4.  I  will  fear  no  evil,  fiir  t.  art  with  mo 
.55.  13.  but  it  was  t.  a  man,  mine  e(]ual,  my  guide 
7I.C.<.nilhe  that  took  meoutniy  iiiulber'sbowcls 
7U,  7,  I.  even  t.  art  to  be  feared,  and  who   may 
stand  III  thy  sight  when  once  t.  art  angryl 
83.  18.  t.  w  hose  name  is  Jehovah,  art  must  high 
102.  27.  bill  /.  art  Ihe  same,  thy  years  have  no  cnil 
109.27.  they  may  know,  that  I.  liOrd  hast  done  it 
IIR  i!H.  t.  art  my  (iod,  and  I  will  praise  then 
119.  114.  f.  art  my  hiding-place  and  my  shield 
132.8.  arise  into  thy  rest,  (.  and  ark  of  Ihy  strength 
i:i9.  8.  if  I  iiscenduii  into  heaven,  t.  art  Ihero 
Cant.  1.  7.  tell  me,  O  (.  whom  my  soul  loveth 
Isa.  41.9.  t.  art  my  servant,  I  have  chiwn  lh«o 

44.  17.  and  !.aith,  deliver  me,  for  (.  art  my  god 

45.  15,  verily  t.  art  a  God  that  hidest  thyself 
51.  12  who  art  t.  thai  r.  sbouldest  be  afraid  ofmnn 
03,  10,  t.  art  our  falhiir  t.  ()  Lord,  nil  our  folher 
O.I.  5,  come  not  near  lo  me,  1  am  holier  than  t. 

Jrr.  17.  4.  t.  shall  continue  from  thv  heiitiigo 
'JO.  0.  ihiro  t.Shalt  die  t.  and  all  thy  friends 
27.13.  why  will  yedie,  t.  and  Ihy  iM>o|de,  by  sword 

l.ttvi.  5  19.  t.  O  LiTil.remiiinest  for  evcr,t|iy  throne 

h.irk.  7.  7.  O  t.  thai  dwellesl  in  the  land,  the  time 
10.  5'X  lliev  are  more  righteous  than  t. 

I>an.  4.2',>.'il  is  t.  O  king,  ihiit  art  become  strong 
5.  22.  /.  his  son  bast  not  humbled  Ihine  heart 

.lovnh  1.  8.  when'C  comest  /.  of  what  people  art  t.? 

.Mic.  2.  7.  O  t.  that  an  named  tne  bouse  of  Jacob 
•1.  P.  t.  O  lower  of  Ihe  flock,  lo  thee  shall  il  come 

Hall.  1.  12.  art  t.  not  from  evcrhisting,  O  Lord? 

Z<rA.4.7.wlio  art  t.O  great  mountain, beforeZeiiib 

.V.I/.  0.  0.  but  t.  when  t.  praye.t,!  ntor  Ihy  closet 
17.  hut  t.  when  t.  faslesi,  anoiiil  iMne  head 
10.  10.  t.  art  Chris',  the  Son   of  the  Icvini:  GorL 
Mark  .".  2<1.  I.iikr  4.41.  .Tobn  1 1.  27 

20,  30.  nevertln  les«,  not  ns  I  will,  but  ns  I.  wilt 
G9.  laying  t.  alio  wiut  with  Je«uii,  Mark  14  67 


THO 

Lulcc  \.  28.  hail  t.  thnt  art  highly  favourfid 
■  7.  I'J.  eayiiig,  art  t.  \\v  that  «ln>ul(l  conic?  i!0. 
14.  r*.  lest  a  more  liuiiourable  llmii  t.  be  lji(l<lcn 
Iti.  5.  liesaiil,hu»'iiiuuho\vcst  t.  iiiilo  my  lurd!  7. 
25.  t.  ill  thy  liru-liiiie  receiveilst  tliy  good  tilings, 
but  now  he  is  comforted,  and  t.  art  torineiitid 
10.4i.ir  Ihouliadst  liiiown,  even  t.  in  tliis  lliy  day 
J^lin  1.  I'J.  to  ask  him,  who  art  t.  -2'i.  |  8.  -Jd.  |  -Jl.l^. 
HI.  they  asked,  art  t.  Ehas.'  art  t.  that  prophet! 
4°J.  t.  art  Simon,  thou  slialt  be  called  Ceplias 

3.  10.  art  t.  a  master  ot'  Israel,  and  knowest  not 

4.  y.  that  t.  being  a  Jew,  askest  drink  ofino 

7.  5J.  thoy  said  to  linn,  art  I.  also  ot' Galileo? 

8.  5.  but  what  say«st  t.?  ||  U.-.2S.  (.  art  his  disciple 
!>.  riT.  t.  hasi  seen  him,  and  hetalketh  with  thee 
I7.i2.1. 1  ill  them, and  Mii  mc, that  they  may  be  pert' 
18.  17.  ait  not  t.  one  ol'tliis  man's  disciiiles.' 

Mcts  1.  '24.  t.  Lord,  who  knowest  the  liearis  of  all 
b.  '.i'.i.  that  t.  art  in  the  gall  of  bitterness  and  bond 
U.  14.  whereby  t.  anil  thy  house  shall  be  saved 
13.  10.  I.  child'of  the  devil,  t.  enemy,  wilt  t.  not 
cease  to  pervert  the  right  wny.«  of  the  Lord? 
33.  t.  art  my  son,  this  day  have  I  begotten  thee 
21.  ;W.  art  not  t.  thai  Egyptian  which  inadeal 
Hi.  27.  tell  me,  art  t.  a  Roman?  he  said,  yea 
3(].  2<l.  I  would,  that  not  only  (.  hut  all  that  hear 
JioiH.  2.  21.  ^  therefore  which  teachos-t  anoiher 
1  'I'im.i.  12.  hut  be  I.  an  example  of  Ihe  believers 
6.  II.  but  t.  O  man  of  God,  Hee  tlieje  things 
8  7V/H.  1.  6.  he  not  t.  nshamed  of  the  testimony 
2.  \.  t.  therefore,  my  son,  be  strong  in  grace 
I'liilem.  12. 1,  iherefore  receive  him  that  is  mine 
Hell.  I.  10.  t.  Lord,  hast  laid  foundation  of  earth 

12.  Iliey  shall  be  changed,  but  t.  art  the  same 
Jnin.  4.  12.  who  an  t.  that  judgesl  another? 
Ren.  4.  1 1.  «.  art  worthy,  O  Lord,  to  receive  glory 
5.  9.  t.  art  worthy  lo  lake  the  book,  and  to  open 
Scf,  Alone. 
THOUGIL 
•  Ocn.  40.  ]0.  and  the  vine  was  as  t.  it  budded 
Lev.  rt.  17.  t.  he  wist  it  not,  yet  is  he  guilty 
2.>.  S.'i.  ilmu  shalt  relieve  him,  I.  he  bn  a  stranger 
Deut.  2'1.  l'.».  1. 1  walk  in  the  iinaginalion  of  heart 
Jush.  17.  Iri.  for  thou  shalt  drive  out  Canaanites,  t. 
they  liave  iron  chariots  and  t.  they  be  strong 
Ju(l/r.  V.i.  !().  t.  thou  detain  me,  I  will  not  eat 

l.'i.  7.  t.  ye  have  done  this,  yet  will  I  be  avenged 
itiitk  2.  13.  t.  not  like  one  of  thy  handmaidens 

1  .'<aiii.  14.  3'.).  t.  it  be  in  .lonathan,  he  shall  die 

20.  20.  I  will  shoot  arrows,  as  1. 1  shot  at  a  mark 

21.  .^.  t.  it  were  sanrtilied  this  day  in  Ihe  ve.isel 

2  .Sam.  .'t.  3!).  I  am  this  day  weak,t.  anointed  kuig 
]H.  12.  t.  I  should  receive  a  thousand  shekels 

JV'fA.  1.9  t.  there  were  of  you  east  out  to  uttermost 
Job  13.  1.1.  t.  he  slay  ine,  yet  will  1  trust  in  him 
20.  12.  t.  wickedne.s.1  he  S'veet  in  his  mouth 
27.  8.  what  the  hypocrite's  hope,  t.  he  hath  gained 
10. ^  he  heap  up  silver  as  Ihi'  dust,  and  piep.ire 
Psi^.  35.  14.  as  t.  ho  had  been  my  fricn<l  or  liroiber 
37.  04.  t.  he  fail,  he  shall  not  utterly  he  cast  down 
13i^.  6.  t.  the  Lord  be  high,  yet  haih  he  respect 
Prov.  II.  21.  t.  hand  join  in  hand,  Ki.  5. 
^.  fi.  than  he  that  is  perverse,  /..  he  be  rich 
29.  lit.  t.  he  understand,  he  will  not  answer 
/.•!(i.  35.  8.  Ihe  way-fayng  men  t.  fools,  shall  not  err 
45.4.  siirnamed  thee,  ?.  thou  hast  not  known  mo,5. 
/,(im..1..'t2.t.liecaiisegriof,he\vill  have  compassion 
Kiel:.  2.  C.  t.  briers  and  thorfts  be  with  thee,  t. 
they  be  a  rebellious  house,  3.  9.  |  12.  3. 
14.  14.  (.  these  three  men  were  in  it,  )6,  18,  20. 
2(5.  21.  1.  thou  he  sought  for,  yet  never  be  lijiind 
Dan.  5.  22.  not  humbled,  t.  thou  knewcst  all  this 
Jt/!>.5.2.r  thou  he  little  among  thousands  of  Judali 
JViiA.  1.  12.  t.  they  be  quiet,  and  likewise  many 
Jfah.  1.  5.  ye  will  not  believe,  t.  it  he  told  you 
2.  3.  t.  it  tarry,  wait  for  it,  it  will  surely  come 
Mai.-2t\.  35. 1. 1  should  die  with  thee,  yet  not  deny 
Luke  9..53.  face  was  as  I.  he  would  go  to  Jerusaleiii 
18.  7.  avenge  his  elect,  t.  he  bear  long  with  them 
21.2.^.  he  made  as  t.  hi;  would  have  gone  further 
JoUn  R  6.  wrote  on  the  ground,  as  t.  he  heard  not 

10.  3i1.  t.  ve  believe  not  me,  believe  the  works 

11.  2.'>.  t.  he  were  dead,  yet  shall  he  live 
4cts  3.  12.  as  t.  by  our  power  we  made  him  walk 

13.  41.  ye  shall  not  believe,  t.  a  nia'n  derlnre  it 
17.  2.5.  as  t.  he  needed  any  thing,  seeing  he  gives 
27.  t.  ho  be  not  far  from  every  one  of  us 
'   23.  15.  as  t.  ye  v/ould  inquire  something,  20. 
28.4.  whom  /.  he  hath  escaped  the  sea, yet  veng. 
Horn.  4.  17  thing-"  whir-h  be  not,  as  t.  they  were 
7.3.  she  is  no  adiiltercss,f.shnis  married  loanolher 

1  C»r. 7. 29.that  have  wives, be  ast.  Ibeyhnd  none 
30.  as  I.  they  wept  not,  as  t.  they  rejoircd  not 

2  Crir.  4.  Ifi.  but  t.  our  outward  man  perish,  yet 
8.  9  I   he  was  rich,  yet  for  ii"  he  beo.ime  poor 
10.  3.  for  t.  we  walk  in  the  flesh,  we  do  not  war 

12.  II.  in  nothing  iim  I  behind,  t.  I  be  nothing 

13.  7.  do  what  is  honest,  t.  we  be  us  reprobates 
Oaf.  }.f*.t.  wp  or  nn  anjel  preach  another  cospcl 

4. 1.  heir  diffcrclli  notning  t.  he  bo  lord  of  ail 
627 


THO 

I  Phil.  3.  4.  1. 1  might  also  have  confidence  in  flesb 
12.  not  as  t.  I  had  aliained  or  wore  perfect 
Col.  2.  5.  for  t.  I  be  abatiit  in  the  lUsli,  vel  am  1 
2U.  why,  us  I.  living,  are)  e  subject  to  oi'diiiaiiees 
Met).  5.  8.  (.  he  were  a  son,  yet  learned  obedience 
ti.  9.  are  persuaded  belter  tilings,  t.  wc  thus  spcuk 
12. 17.  t.  he  sought  it  carefully  with  (ears 
Jam. 2.14. ^  a  man  say  lie  halb  luilh,  and  not  works 
1  Pet.  4.  12.  as  t.  some  blrange  tiling  happened 
2/'tt.l.l2.putyouin  reniembranee,t.ye  know  them 
Ju(ic  j.put  you  in  remembrance, t.yc  once  knew  this 

THUUGUT. 

Ocn.  20. 11. 1 1.  the  liar  of  God  is  not  in  this  jdace 

38.  J5.  Judah  saw  her,  he  t.  her  to  be  a  harlot 

48.  II.  Israel  said,  I  had  not  t.  to  see  thy  face 

50.  20.  but  as  for  you,  ye  t.  evil  against  mo 

F.xod.  32.  14.  Lord  repented  of  the  evil  he  t.  to  do 

JV«H(.24.  U.  I  t.  to  promote  thee  to  great  honour 

3.'i.  5(j.  I  shall  do  unto  you,  us  1  t.  lo  do  to  them 

y-'cut.I9.19.  shall  ye  do  lo  him,asyeMohavedone 

JuUtr.  15.  2.  1  verily  t.  that  thou  liadst  hated  her 

20.  5.  the  men  of  Gibeali  t.  lo  have  slam  me 

1  .Sum.  1   13.  therefore  Eli  t.  she  had  been  drunken 
18.  25.  Saul  t.  to  make  David  fall  by  I'hilislines 

2  .Vum.4.10.vvho  t.l  would  have  ^iven  liim  a  reward 
13.  2.  Aninon  t.  it  h.ud  to  do  any  thing  to  her 

21.  IG.  Ishbi-benob  t.  lo  have  slain  David 
2  Kings  5.  II.  I  t.  he  will  surely  come  out  to  mo 
2  Chiuii.  11.22.  Rehoboam  t.  to  make  Abijali  king 

32.  1.  Sennacherib  I.  to  win  them  for  himself 
jVeh.  0.  2.  but  they  t.  to  do  me  mischief 
iC.>tA.:!.O.he  i.scorn  to  lay  hands  on  iMordccai  alone 

b.G.  Haninii  t.  in  his  heart, to  whom  would  the  king 
Psnl.  48.  9.  we  have  t.  of  thy  loving  kindness 

73.  IG,  when  I  t.  to  know  this,  it  was  tooiiainful 

119.59. 1 1.  on  my  ways, and  turned  my  feet  to  test. 
Prov.  30.  32.  if  thou  hast  t.  evil,  lay  liiino  hand 
/■'•a.  14.  24.  as  I  have  t.  so  shall  it  come  to  pass 
./er.  18.  8.  I  will  repent  of  the  evil  1  t.  to  do 
■lutiu/i  1.  t  4.  so  that  the  ship  was  t.  to  be  broken 
Zii^.  1.  (■).  like  as  the  Lord  of  hosts  t.  to  do  to  us 

8.  14.  as  1  t.  to  )iniiisli  you  ||  15.  1  t.  to  do  well 
Mai.  3.  I().  a  book  for  llieiu  thai  t.  on  his  naino 
JlaL  1.  20.  but  while  he  t.  on  these  things 
Mark  14.  72.  and  when  he  t.  thereon  he  wept 
I.uUr.  7.  7.  nor  (.  [  myself  worthy  to  come  to  thee 

12.  17.  he  t.  within  iiimself,  what  shall  I  do 
19. 11.  they  t.  the  kingdom  of  God  should  appear 
.lului  11.  13.  they  t.  he  had  spoken  of  taking  rest 
~'}cts  8.  2((.  t.  the  gift  of  God  may  be  purchased 
10.  19.  while  Peter  t.  on  the  vision.  Spirit  said 
12.  9.  wist  not  it  was  true,  but  t.  he  saw  a  vision 
15.  38.  Paul  t.  not  goed  to  lake  him  with  him 
2()  8.  why  should  it  be  t.  a  thing  incredible? 
9.  IM  ought  to  do  many  things  contrary  to  Jesus 
1  Cor.  13.  IJ.  when  I  was  a  child,  I  t.  as  a  child 
Pkil-  2.  6.  t.  it  not  robbery  to  be  etjual  with  God 
Hcb.  10.29.  much  sorer  pnni.'-hinent  he  bc£.  worthy 

THOUtMlTEST. 
Psal.  50.  21.  thou  t.  i  was  such  a  one  as  thyself 

THOUGHT, 
Or  thinking,  is  not  atwatj.i  taken  for  the  pure 
operation  of  the  mind  while  it  thinks,  without 
passing  a  judgment, or  taking  any  resolution. 
'J'/ie  thought  often  includes  a  formed  design 
of  doing  something,  as  in  Psal.  ,5G.  5,  All  their 
Ihnughts  are  against  me  for  evil :  Their  pur- 
poses and  resolutions  arc  to  do  me  niischief. 
So  in  Prov.  12.  5,  Tlio  thoughts  of  the  right- 
cons  are  right :  Mis  constant  purpose  is  to  dr.al 
justly  and  truly.  Jlnd  Psal.  33.  11,  The  coun- 
sel of  the  Lord  standeih  for  ever,  Ihe  thought! 
of  his  heart  to  all  gfcneralions :  Jill  his  pur- 
poses, designs,  and  undertakings,  are  success- 
ful and  irresistible.  Jlnd  Psal.  Mli.  4,  In  thai 
very  day  his  thoughts  perish  :  .111  his  design 
and  endeavours,  cither  for  himself  or  for 
others.  St.  Paul  says,  Rom.  2.  I.l,  'I'licir 
thoughts  the  mean  while  accusing,  or  else  ex 
cusing,  one  another;  ichen  their  conscience 
hears  testimony  to  them,eilher  for  good  or  evil. 
Thought  is  put  for  inward  reasoning.    Luke 

9.  4fi,  47, There  arose  a  reasoninj  among  them: 
And  Jesus  perceiving  Ihe  thought  of  Iheir  henrl. 
Jllso  for  immoderate  or  anxious  care.     Mat. 

10.  19,  Take  no  thought  wliiit  vo  sh.ill  speak. 
It  is  taken  for  the  opinion.  Job  12. 5,  He  thai 
is  ready  lo  slip  wilh  his  feet,  is  a  lamp  de- 
epi.ied  in  iho  thought  of  him  that  is  at  case; 
or,  in  the  opinion  of  such  as  arc  in  a  plenti- 
ful rondilion. 

y?fH/,.I5.9.tbat  there  bo  not  a  ^  in  I  by  wicked  heart 
1  Sam.  9.  5.  return,  lest  my  father  take  I.  for  us 
.Job  12.  5.  is  despised  in  the  t.  of  him  lint  is  at  oase 
42.  2.  that  no  t.  can  be  wiihholden  from  lliee 
Psal.  49. 11.  Iheir  t.  is,  Iheir  houses  shall  rontinue 
fi4.  (i.  till'  inward  /.  of  every  one  of  them  is  deej) 
139.  2.  thou  uiidcrslandest  my  t.  afar  oft' 
Pror.  24.  n.  the  t.  of  fooli.«hne?fl  is  sin 
Eccl.  10.  20.  curse  not  the  king,  no  not  in  thy  t. 


TIIO 

Tsa.  26.  t  3.  keep  him  whose  t.  is  stayed  on  thos 
F.iik.  38.  10.  and  thou  shall  Hunk  an  mil  t. 
jJinos  4.  13.  lie  ileclareili  lo  man  what  is  his  t. 
Mat.  G.  25.  1  say  lo  you,  take  no  t.  for  your  life, 

31.  34.  I  10.  19.  Mark  13.  11.  Lukt 

12.  11,22. 

27.  which  of  you  by  taking  t.  can  add  one  cubit 
lo  his  slalure!  J.u/cc  12.  25. 

28.  why  take  ye  t.  for  raiment?  J.uke  12.  26. 
Jicts  8.  22.  if  the  J,  of  thy  heart  may  be  forgiven 
2  Cur.  10.  5.  bring  into  captivity  every  £.  lo  Christ 

THOUGHTS. 
Gen. 6.5.  Ihe  imagination  oft.  of  his  heart  wag  evil 
./udg.5. 15.  for  Reuben  there  weregreatt.  of  heart 
1  Kings  18.  f  21.  how  long  halt  ye  between  two  £.7 
1  Chron.  28.  9.  the  Lord  understandelh  the  t. 
29.  Irt.  kei;i>  this  in  the  iinaginalion  of  the  t, 
.loll  4.  13.  in  (.  Ironi  the  visions  of  Iho  nif;ht 
17.  t  7.  mine  eye  is  dim,  all  my  t.  are  as  a  shadow 
11.  my  purposes  are  broken  ofl',  even  my  t. 

20.  2.  ilierefme  do  my  t.  cause  ino  to  answer 

21.  27.  I  know  your  /..  and  devices  ye  imagine 
I'sal.  10.  4.  will  not  seek  God,God  is  not  in  all  his  t, 

33.  11.  and  ihe  (.  of  his  heart  to  all  generations 
4(1.  5.  thy  t.  cannot  be  reckoned  up  in  order 
5(i.  5.  all  iheir  t.  are  against  mc  lor  evil 
"3.  t  7.  they  puss  the  t.  of  the  heart 
92.  5.  how  great  are  thy  «  orks?  thy  t.  very  deep 
94.  11.  the  Lord  kiiowelh  ihe  I.  of  man,  vanity 

19.  in  the  mullilude  of  my  t:  within  me  thy 
119.  113.  I  hate  vain  t.  but  thy  law  do  1  love 
139.  17.  how  precious  are  thy"^.  lo  me,  O  God 
23.  search  me,  O  God,  try  me,  and  know  my  t. 
14G.  4.  in  lliat  very  day  bis  t.  perish 

Prov.  12.  5.  the  t.  of  the  righteous  are  right 
15.  26.  the  t.  of  the  wicked  are  an  abomination 
IG.  3.  commit — and  thy  (.  shall  be  established 
21.  5.  the  t.  of  the  diligent  tend. to  plenteousnesi 

Isa.  ,55.  7.  let  the  unrighteous  man  forsake  his  t. 

8.  for  my  (.  are  not  your  t.  sailli  the  Lord 

9.  so  are  my  /.  higher  than  y<nir  t. 
59.7.  their  feet  run  to  evil,  their  t.  ore  t.  of  iniquity 
(!.').  2.  jieople  walketh  after  their  own  t. 
()G.  18.  for  I  know  their  works  and  their  t. 

./er.  4.  14.  how  long  shall  vain  t.  lodge  in  theot 
(i.  19.  evil  on  people,  even  the  fruit  of  Iheir  t. 

23.  20.  till  he  liave  performed  the  /.  of  his  heart 
29.  11.  I  know  the  (.  that  I  think  toward  you  t. 

of  peace  anil  not  evil,  lo  give  an  e.vpect'ed  end 
Wrtn.  2.  30.  Ihou  mighlest  know  the  /.of  thy  heart 

4.  5.  Nebuchadnezzar's  «.  upon  bod  troubled  him 
19.  Daniel  was  astonished, and  his  t.lroiibled  him 

5.  6.  then  king  Rclshazzar's  t.  troubled  him 

10.  the  queen  said,  let  not  thy  t.  trouble  theo 
11.  t  24.  think  his  t.  against  Ihe  stroiux  holds 

.l/i'c.  4.  12.  but  they  know  not  the  t.  of'lhe  Lord 
Mat.  9.  4.  Jesus,  knowing  their  t.  said,  12.  25. 
jAikc  5.  22.  I  6.  8.  ]  9.  47.  |  1 1.  17. 
15. 19.  out  of  the  heart  proceed  eviU.  Mark  7.21. 
AhAt  2.  35.  Ihe  t.  of  many  hearts  may  be  revealed 

24.  38.  and  why  do  t.  ari.se  inyour  hearls? 
Horn.  2.  15.  their  t.  accusing,  or  else  excusing 

14.  t  1.  hut  not  to  judge  his  doubtful  f. 
1  Cor.  3.  20.  Ihe  Lord  knoweth  ihe  I.  of  Ihe  wire 
lfeb.4.  12  Iho  word  of  God  is  adisrerner  of  the  t. 
./am.  2.  4.  ye  are  become  judges  of  evil  (. 

THOUSAND. 
Gen.  20.  10.  I  have  given  thy  brother  a  *.  pieces 
JVOim.  31.  4.  of  every  tribe  a  t.  send  lo  war,  5,  0. 

35.  4.  suburbs  of  cities  are  t.  cubit.s  round  about 
I/eut.  1. 11.  the  Lord  make  you  a  t.  times  so  many 

7. 9.  God  who  keepolh  covenant  to  a  t.gem  ralioni 

32.  .30.  how  should  one  chase  n  (.?  .los/i.  23.  JO. 
.hidir.  (i.  f  J5.  my  t.  is  the  monncst  in  Manasseh 

9.  49.  thi^  men  of  .'^hecliem  died,  abmit  a  t.  men 

15.  15.  Samson  slew  a  I.  mon  therewith,  Ki. 
20.  10.  a  hundred  of  a  t.  a  t.  out  oflcn  Ihonsnnd 

I  Sam.  17.  18.  len  cheeses  to  the  captain  of  their  t. 

18.  13.  Saul  made  David  his  captain  over  a  t. 

25.  2.  Nabal  had  three  t.  sheep  and  a  t.  goals 
2*am.  8.  4.  and  David  look  from  him  a  /.chariots 

and  seven  hundred  horsemen,  1  Chron.  18.4. 
IP.  12.  Iliough  I  should  receive  a  /.  shekels 

19.  17.  lliere  were  a  t.  men  of  nenjamin  with  him 

1  Kings  3.  4.  u_  (.  biirnt-ofl'erings  did  Solomon 
ofl'er  upon  that  altar,  2  Chron.  1.  C. 

2  Kings  1.5.  19.  Menalicm  gave  Piil  a  /.  talents 
24.  10.  carried  away  craftsmen  and  smiths  a  /. 

1  Chron.  12.  14.  and  the  greatest  was  over  a  /. 

34.  of  Naphlali  a  t.  captains,  and  wilh  them 

16.  15.  word  he  commanded  to  a  /.generations 
19.  6.  iho  children  of  Aniinon  sent  a  /.  talenia 
39.  21.  they  sacrificed  sacrifices  unto  th"  Lord  « 

/.  bullocks,  a  /.  rams,  and  a  /   lambs 
0  C/iron.  30.  21.  Hezokinh  ilid  give  a  /.  bullocks 
F.irn  1.  9.  Cyrus  did  bring  forth  n  /.  chnrgnrs 

10.  thirty  basins  of  gold,  and  oil  er  vessels  a  (. 
Tnh  9.  3.  ho  cannot  answer  him  one  of  a  /. 
33.  23.  if  there  be  an  inlerpreicr,  one  of  a  t, 
12  12.  Job  had  a  /.  yoke  ufu.xcn,  a  (.  Ehe-aisst 


THO 

t>tal.  50.  10.  the  cattlo  on  a  (.  hilh  are  mln* 
84.  10.  a  day  in  thy  courts  is  better  tlian  a  t. 
'JO.  4.  a  t.  years  in  ll>y  eiijlit  aro  but  ue  yesterday 
91.  7.  a  t.  khan  tall  at  thy  side,  and  ten  thousand 
Eccl.  6.  6.  yea,  though  he  live  a  t.  years  twice  told 
7.:^.  one  man  among  a  t.  have  I  found,  but  awum. 
Catit.  4.  4.  whereon  there  hung  a  (.  bucklers 
ti.  11.  for  the  truit  was  to  brmg  a  t.  pieces 

I'i.  thou,  U  Sjolonion,  must  have  a  t. 
ha.  7.  23.  where  were  a  t.  vines,  at  a  t.  silvcrlings 
aO.  17.  one  I.  shall  liee  at  the  rebuke  ot  one 
00.22.  a  little  one  shall  become  a  I.  and  a  small  one 
Kick.  47.  3.  the  man  measured  a  t.  cubits 

4. again  he  measureil  a  (.  and  brought  me  thro', 5. 
Dan.  5.  1.  Belshaz/.ar  made  a  great  least  to  a  t. 

of  his  lords,  and  drank  wine  before  the  t. 
..Imos  5. 3.  the  city  that  went  out  by  a  t.  shall  leave 
ftj'el.  3.  8.  be  not  ignorant,  one  day  is  with  the 
Lord  as  a  t.  years,  and  a  t.  years  as  one  day 
Rev.  20.  2.  and  he  bound  Satan  a  t.  years 
3.deceive  nations  no  more,  till  I.  years  be  fulfilled 
4.  and  lliey  reigned  with  Christ  a  t.  years 
7.  and  when  the  t.  years  aro  expired 

Une  TilOUS.\NU  two  hundred  sixtrj. 
Jiev.  11.  3.  they  shall  prophesy  one  t.  2()0  day« 
12.  6.  they  should  feed  her  one  t.  200  days 
One  TIIOUS.AJv'U  two  hundred  ninety. 
Dan.  12.  11.  there  shall  be  one  t.  2'JO  days 

Une  TIIOUS.VND  three  hundred  thirty-five. 
Dan.  12.  12.  blessed  that  coineth  to  the  t.  3H5  days 

One  TIIOUS.ANU  six.  hundred. 
liev.  14.  20.  by  the  space  ufune  t.  000  furlongs 

r«)o  TllOlJSAiND. 
«Vum.  35.  .5.yo  shall  measure  on  the  east-side  two  t. 
cubits,  on  the  west-side  two  t.  south-side  two  t. 
.Tosh.  3.  4.  sjiace  between  you  and  the  ark  two  t. 

1  h'ing.f  7.20.  the  molten  sea  contained  two  t.  baths 
Si  Kings  18.  23.  and  I  will  deliver  thee  two  t.  horses 

if  thou  be  able  to  set  riilers  upon,  /.sa.aO.ti. 
JV'tA.  7.  72.  the  jieople  gave  twot.  pounds  of  silver 
Mark  5. 13.  about  two  t.  swine  were  choked  in  sea 

Two  'I'llOUS.AND  two  hundred. 
JVch.  7.71.  faihirs  gave^iro  t.  200  jiounds  of  silver 

Two  TUdUS.ViND  three  hundred. 

Dan.  8.  14. to  twot.  300  ilays,  sanctuary  cleansed 

7'iro  hundred  TilOUSA.N'  I). 

2  Chron.  2d.  C<.  carried  captive  of  brclhrnn  200  t. 

Two  hundred  eighty  THOUSAM). 
2  Chron.  14.  8.  and  out  of  llenjamin  two  hundred 

eiffhty  t. 
Two  hundred  THOUSAND  THOUSAND. 
Rev.  0. 10.  the  number  of  horsemen  were  two  hun- 
dred thousand  thousand. 
Three  THOUSAND. 
Frod.  32.  28.  there  fell  of  the  people  three  t. 
.fosh.  7.  4.  there  went  to  Ai  about  three  t.  men 
Judg.  15.  11.  three  I.  went  to  bind  Samson 

10.  27.  there  were  upon  the  roof  three  t.  men 
1  Sam.  13.  2.  Saul  chose  three  t.  men  of  Israel 

24.  2.  then  Saul  took  three  t.  chosen  men,  2l).  2. 

25.  2.  Nabal  had  three  t.  sheep  and  a  t.  goats 

1  Kings  4.  32.  Solomon  spake  three  t.  proverbs 

2  Chron.  4.  5.  the  molten  sea  held  three  t.  baths 
.fob  1.  3.  hia  substance  was  three  t.  camels 
Jer.  52.  28.  carried  away  captive  three  t.  Jews 
.Acts  2.  41.  were  added  to  I  hem  three  t.  souls 

/bar  THOUSAND. 
1  Sam.  4.  2.  they  slew  of  Israel  about /our  t.  men 

1  Chron. '£i.  5. /our  t.  porter.-<,/oHr  t.  praised  Lord 

2  Chron. it.  2.5.  Solomon  had  four  {.stalls  for  horses 
Mat.  1.5.38.  they  that  cat  v,crc  four  t.  Mark  H.  9. 

10.  10.  seven  loaves  among /our  t.  Mark  8.  20. 
yicts'Zl.  38.  leddest  into  the  wilderness /our  t.  men 

Fowr  THOUSAND/ue  hundred. 
Eiek.  48.  10.  on  the  north-side  of  the  city /our  t. 
500  measures,  east-side,  south-side,  west-side 
four  t.  500  measures,  30,  32,  33,  34. 
/•Vwe  THOUSAND. 
Jo.fh.  8.  12.  and  he  took  about  live  t.  men 
./udg.  20.  45.  they  gleaned  of  them /re  (.  men 

1  CArwn.  20.  7.  and  gave  of  gold /ue  t.  talents 

2  Chron.  3.5.  9.  for  oifcrings/re  t.  small  cattle 
Jlzra  2.  09.  they  gnvc  fine  I.  pounds  of  silver 
Mat.  14.  21.  they  that  had  eaten  were  about/re  t. 

10.  9.  nor  remember  tlic  five  loaves  of  the/rir  t. 

Mark  0.  44.  |  8.  19.  l.uke  9.  14.  .T„hn  0.  10. 

ielt  4.  4.  number  that  lulievcil  were  about/»c  t. 

/■VreTHOUSA.Nl)  f„ur  hundred. 
E-.raX.  11.  vesselB  iif!:.,lil  „n(l  silver/oe  (.400. 

Six  TIIDISAM). 
1  Sam.  13.  5.  against  Israel  with  six  t.  horsemen 
S  Kings  5.  5.  Naaman  look  sir.  t.  pieces  of  gold 
I  Chron.  23.  4.  and  six  t.  were  oHicers  and  judges 
Job  42.  12.  for  Joli  had  six  t.  camels 

.Sii  THOUSAND  seven  hundred  and  twenty. 

Ezra  2.  67.  their  asses,  sii  t.  srrrn  hundred  and 

twrnfi,  A\h.  7.  09. 

Seven  TUOV?.\yi). 

1  Kings  19.  18.  yet  I  have  left  mo  seven  t.  in  Isr. 

who  have  not  bowed  to  Baal,  Rom.  11.  4. 

028 


THO 

1  Kings  00. 15.  children  of  Israel,  being  seven  t, 
'2Ki?igs'2i.  10.  carried  away  men  of  might,  sev.  t. 

1  Chron.  12.  2.5.  of  Simeon,  mighty  men,  seocn  t, 

18.  4.  David  took  from  him  seven  t.  horsemen 

19.  IS.  David  slew  of  the  Syrians  seven  t.  men 

29.  4.  I  prepared  seven  t.  talents  of  silver 

2  Chron.  15.  11.  they  offered  seven  t.  sheep 

30.  24.  Hezekiah  gave  congregation  seven  t.  sheep 
Job  1.  3.  his  substance  also  was  seven  t.  sheep 
Rev.  11.  13.  in  earthquake  were  slain  icucK  t.  men 

Seven  T110US.\ND  seven  hundred 
2  Chron.  17.  11.  Arabians  brought  Jehoshaphat 
seven  t.  700  rams,  seven  t.  700  he-goats 
7'cn  THOUSAND. 
Lev.  20.  8.  a  hundred  shall  put  ten  t.  to  flight 
JVum.  10. 1 30.  return  to  the  ten  t.  thousands  of  Isr. 
Deut.  32.  30.  how  should  two  i)ut  ten  I.  to  fiight  ? 
33.  2.  Lord  came  with  ten  t.  of  saint.'*,  .fude  14. 
Judg.  1.  4.  they  slew  of  them  in  Hezek  ten  t.  men 

3.  29.  they  slew  of  Moah  ten  t.  men,  all  lusty 

4.  0.  Barak,  go,  and  take  ten  t.  men  of  Na|ihtali 
10.  ho  went  up  with  ten  t.  men  at  his  feet,  14 

7.  3.  and  there  remained  to  Gideon  ten  t. 

20.  34.  there  came  against  Gibcah  ten  t.  men 
2  Sam.  18.  3.  but  now  thou  art  worth  ten  t.  of  us 

1  Kings  5. 14.  sent  them  to  Lebanon,  te?i  t.  a  month 

2  Kings  13.  7.  leave  to  Jehoahaz  ten  t.  footmen 
14.  7.  Amaziah  slew  of  Edom  in  the  valley  ten  t. 
24.  14.  he  carried  away  even  ten  t.  capiives 

2  CAiV)n.25. 11.  smote  of  the  children  of  Seir  ten  t 
12.  other  lent,  left  alive,  did  Judahcarry  away 
27.  5.  the  Ammonites  gave  Jotliam  the  same  year 
ten  t.  measures  of  wheat,  and  tent,  of  barley 
30.  24.  Hezekiah  gave  congregation  ten  t.  shoe] 
Ksth.  3.  9.  I  will  pay  ten  I.  talents  of  silver 
Fsal.  91.  7.  ten  t.  shall  fall  at  thy  right  hand 
Cant.  5.  10.  my  beloved  is  the  chiefest  among  ten  t. 
Kick.  45.  1.  the  breadth  of  the  land  shall  he  ten 
t.  3.  5.  I  48.  9, 10,  13,  18. 
Dan.  7.  10.  ten  t.  times  ten  t.  stood  before  him 
Mat.  18.  24.  which  owed  him  ten  t.  talents 
l.uke  14.  ill.  w  hether  he  be  able  with  ten  t.  to  meet 
1  Cor.  4. 15.  for  though  you  have  ten  t.  instructors 
11.  19.  than  ten  t.  words  in  an  unknown  tongue 
Rev.  5.  11.  number  of  them  was  ten  t.  times  ten  t. 

7Vn  THOUSANDS. 
Deut.  33.  17.  they  arc  the  tent,  of  Ephrnim 
l.Sam.l8.7.Dav.  slain  his  (f  71  (.8.  |  21.  II.  |  29.5. 
Psal.  3.  0.  1  will  not  be  afraid  often  t.  of  people 
141.  13.  that  our  sheep  may  bring  forth  ten  t. 
Dan.  11.  12.  ho  shall  cast  down  many  ten  t. 
Mic.O.  7.  or  be  pleased  with  ten  t.  of  rivers  of  oil 

Twelve  THOUSAND. 
.7o*A.  8.  25.  all  that  fell  of  Ai  were  twelve  t. 
Judg.  21.  10.  sent  twelve  t.  men  to  Jabesh-gilead 
1  Kinirs  4.  20.  Solomon  had  twelve  t.  horsemen, 
10.  20.  2  CAroM.  1.  14.  |  9.25. 
Tict'.  7.5.of  tribe  of  Juda,  Reuben,  Gad,  sealed  tw.t. 
0.  of  .Vser,  Nepblhalim,  RIanasses,  scaled  tw.  t. 

7.  of  Simeon,  Levi,  Issachar,  were  scaled  tw.  t. 

8.  of  Zabulon,  .lo.seph,  Benjamin,  sealed  tw.  t. 

21.  10.  he  measured  the  cilv  twelve  t.  furlongs 

Fourteen  THOUSAND. 
.hb  42.  12.  for  .loli  had  fourteen  t.  sheep 

Fourteen  THOUS.\ND  seven  hundred. 
JVum.  10. 49.  that  died  in  the  plague /ourtccn  t.  700. 

Sixteen  THOUSAND. 
JVum.  31.  40.  the  iiersons  were  sixteen  t.  40. 

Sixteen  THOUS.'VND  seven  hundred  fifty. 
JVum.  31.  52.  gold  of  otfering  sixteen  t.  seven  hun- 
dred am]  fifty  shekels 
Seventeen  THOUSAND  two  kundral. 
I  CAron.7.  11.  sonsof.Iediael  seven  t.  two  hundred 

Eighteen  THOUSAND. 
Judg.  20.  25.  destroyed  of  Israel  eighteen  t.  men 
44.  there  fell  of  Benjamin  eighteen  t.  men 

1  CAr.  12.  31.  of  half-tribe  of  Rfanasseh  ri,fAfM7i «. 
18.  12.  Abishai  slew  of  the  Kdomites  eighteen  t. 
29.  7.  they  gnve  of  brass  rishtren  t.  talents 

Twenty  THOUSAND. 

2  Sam.  8.  4.  David  took  from  Hinliidezcr  king  of 

Zobah,  twenty  t.  footmen,  1  Chron.  18.  4. 
10.  B.  the  children  of  Ammon  hired  Syrians,  20  /. 
18.  7.  slaughter  of  Absalom's  company  twenty  t. 

1  Kings  i.  11.  Solomon  gave  Hiram  twenty  r.mea- 

stiies  of  wheal,  2  Chron.  2.  10. 
.WA.  7.  71.  fathers  gave  to  w.>rk  20  /.  drams,  72. 
I'eal.  08.  17.  the  chariots  of  God  are  twenty  t. 
/.uA'cl4.31.to  meet  him  thai  comelh.wlth  twenty  t. 

Twenty  two  THOUSAND. 
^im.  3.  39.  the  number  of  Fjevites  twenty  two  t. 
43.  the  first-born  males  were  twenty  two  t. 
20.  14.  of  families  of  Simeonitrs  twenty  two  t. 
Tudg.  7.  3.  there  returned  of  (hHi'oh's  army  22.  t. 
20.  21.  Benjamin  destroyed  of  Israel  twenty  two  t. 

2  Sam.  8.5.  David  slew  oftlie  Svri;ins  twenty  two  t. 

men,  1  CAron.  18.  ."i. 
1  Jr<n/*8.63.  Solomon  ofrered  Iwentiilwo  t.  oxen, 
'iCAnm.  7.  5. 
1  Oiron.  7.  2.  of  Tolo  22  (  1|  7.  of  Ecla  22  t 


THO 

I  Twenty  three  THOUSAND. 

.Vum.  20. 02.  numbered  of  Levites  twenty  three  I 

1  Cur.  10.  8.  and  fell  in  one  day  three  and  twenty  ( 

Twenty  four  THOUSAND. 
JVum.  25.  9.  died  in  the  plague  twenty  four  t. 
1  Chron.  2;i.  4.  24  t.  Levites  to  lurwaid  the  work 
27. 1.  the  oliicers  thatserved  were  twenty  four  t. 
Twenty  five  THOUSAND. 
.Judg.  20.  35.  destroyed  of  Beiijamites  25  t.  46. 
Kick.  45. 1.  holy  portion  of  land  twenty  fivet.xeeAn 
in  length,  3,  5,  0.  |  4.-i.  8,  9,  10, 13 
Twenty  six  TliOCSAxND. 
.Tudg.  20.  15.  Benjamin  numbered  twenty  six  t. 
1  Chron.  7.  40.  ol  Aslier,  apt  to  v,ac,  twenty  six  t 

Twenty  seven  THOUS.AND. 
1  Kings  20.  30.  a  wall  fell  on  twenty  seven  t.  men 

Twenty  eight  THOUS.VND. 
1  Chron.  12.  35.  Daintes,  expert  in  war,  28  t. 

Thirty  THOUSAND. 
JVum.  31.  39.  and  the  asses  were  thirty  t.  45. 
Josh.  8.  3.  Joshua  chose  thirty  t.  miglity  men 

1  Sam.  4.  10.  there  fell  of  Israel  thirty  t.  footmen 
11.8.  and  the  men  of  Judah  were  thirty  t. 
13.  5.  Philistines  gathered  thirty  t.  chariots 

2  .Su/n.  0.  1.  David  gathered  thirty  t.  chosen  men 
1  Kings  5.  13.  and  the  levy  was  thirty  t.  men 

7'Anry  two  THOUSAND. 
vVum.  31.35.  thirty  twot.  women  taken  captivei 

1  Chron.  19.  7.  Ammon  hired  thirty  two  t.  chariota 
'J'hirly  two  THOUSAND  two  hundred. 

A''utn.  1.  35.  number  of  Manasseh  32  I.  200,  2.  21. 

7'Airry  tiro  THOUSAND  five  hundred. 
JVum. 20.  37.  of  Epliraiin  were  iiumhered  32.  t.500. 
7'Airry  lArce  THOUS.\ND. 

2  CAron.  35.  7.  gave  thirty  three  t.  bullocks 
Thirty  five  THOUSAND. 

JVum.  1.  37.  of  Benjamin  were  thirtii  five  t. 

Thirty  six  THOUSAND. 
JVum  31.  38.  the  beeves  were  thirty  and  six  t. 

44.  pertained  to  congregation  (A  ir(y«-ij  t.  beevea. 
1  Chron.  7.4. the  bands  ot  soldiers  were  thirty  six  t 

Thirty  seven  THOl.'SAND. 
1  Chron.  12.  34.  of  Naphtall  thirty  and  seven  t. 

Thirty  eight  THOUSAND. 
1  Chron.  23.  3.  Levites  from  thirty  years,  38  t. 

Forty  THOUSAND. 
■hsh.  4.  13.  about  forty  t.  prepared  for  war 
.ludg.  5.  8.  was  there  a  shield  seen  amon^ forty  1. 1 
'2  Sam.  10.  18.  David  s\kv/  forty  t.  horsemen 
1  Kings  4.  20.  Solomon  had  forty  t.  stalls  of  horsef 
1  Chron.  12.  30.  of  Asher,  expert  in  war,  forty  t. 

19.  18.  David  slew  of  Svrians, /orry  t.  Iijotmen 
Forty  THOUSAND/rc  hundred. 

JVum.  1.  33.  of  Kphraim  were /orty  t.  500,  2.  19. 

20.  18.  of  Gad  were  numbered /orry  t.  and  500. 
Forty  one  THOUSAND /re  hundred. 

JVum.  1.  41.  of  Asher  numbered  41  t.  500,  2.  29. 

J'orty/ujo  THOUSAND. 
.Tudg.  12.  6.  fell  of  L])hraimit(s  J'orly  two  t. 
Ezra  2.   04.   whole    congregation  fi'rty   two   t 
jXeh.  7.  06 
Forty  three  THOUSAND  seven  hundred  thirty, 
JVum.  20.  7.  of  Reubeiiiles /or(y  three  t.  730. 
Forty  four  TIIOUS.WD  seven  hundred  sixty, 
1  CAr./7i.5.  18.  of  llenbeiiitcs  to  war  44  t.  700 
Forty  five  THOUS.AND  four  hundred. 
JVum.  20.  50.  of  Naphtali  wvrc  forty  fire  t.  400 

Forty  five  THOUS.VNI)  six  hundred. 
;Vum.20.41.  numbered  of  Benjamln/orty/rf  r.COO 

Forty  five  THOUS.AND  six  hundred  fifty. 
JVum.  1.  25. were  numbered  of  (iad,  45 1.  050, 2. 15 

Forty  six  TilOUSAND/uc  hundred. 
JVum.  1.  21.  of  Reuben  forlv  six  t.  and  500,  2. 11. 

F./ry  THOUSAND. 
1  .Snm.0.19.the  Lord  smote//tyt.  and  seventy  men 

1  CAron.  .5.  21.  look  of  the  ilapariles  sheep//ty  I. 
12.  33.  of  Zcbiiliin//ty  t.  could  keep  rank 

.^cts  19.  19.  the  price  oi'the  books//rjr  i.  piecci 

Fifty  two  "I'HOUS.AND  sei'en  hundred. 
JVum.  20.  34.  of  Manasseh ///y  two  t.  and  700 

Fifty  three  '/'HOI IS.AND  four  hundred. 
JVum.  1.  43.  of  Naphtali/f/i/  (Arrr  t.  400,  2.  3a 

Fiftufour  TH(JUSAND/«i«r  hundred. 
JVum.  1.  29.  of  Issachar  fifli,  four  t.  400,  2.  H. 

7''i//T/  seven  TIIOUSAiNJ) /our  hundred. 
JVum.  I.'3I.  of  '/.vhn\\\\\fiflu  seven  t.  400,  2.  8. 

Fifty  nine  TllDUSAND  three  hundred. 
JVum.  1.23.  of  Simeon  fifty  nine  t.  300,  2.  13.         I 
.SuryTliol^SAND. 

2  CAron. 12.3. Phishak  rnme  with  sixty  I.  horscmea 
Silly  THOUSAND/rr  hundred. 

A'Hm.20. 27.  of /ehiilnnites  .<t;r/>/  t.  and  500 

.Sizfy  one  Till  )US.\M). 
.Xum.  31.  34.  the  booty  was  sixty  one  t.  asRe» 
/•.":r(i  2.  09.  thev  pave  .«i/rw  one  t.  drams  of /(old 

Sixty  two  THOUS.AND  seven  hundred. 
.Viim.  1.'39.  of  tribe  nf  Dnn  .-ijly  two  t.  700,  2.28 

Sixty  four  Till  H'SAND  f  Arre  hundred. 
JVum.  2H.'2,5.  of  Issachar  sirly  four  t.  and  300 
43.  oftlie  Shuhamitci  sixty  four  I.  400 


THR 

Seventy  THOUSAND. 
S  Sam.  24.  15.  there  died  of  the  people  senmty  t. 
i  Kings  5.15.3olomon  had  seventy «.  that  bare  bur- 
diMis,  'J  Cliron.  '.i.  2, 18. 
1  Chi  on.  21.  14.  there  fell  of  Israel  .icnenty  t. 

Seventy  two  THOUS.\Nl). 
Jfum.  31.  33.  bouiy  of  beeves  was  seventy  two  t. 

.Seventy  four  THOUSAND  six  hundred. 
jy*u;n.  1. 27.  numberol'  Judah  74  t.  and  tiUO,  2.  4. 

Seventy  Jive  THOUSAND. 
JVufrt.  31.  32.  the  booty  was  seventy  Jive  t.  sheep 
JCsth.  9.  IG.  Jews  slew  of  their  Ihe.s  seventy  Jive  t. 

Seventy  six  TH0US.\ND7i«<;  hundred. 
JVum.  2t>.  22.  numbered  ol' Judah  seventy  six  t.  500. 

Eighty  THOUSAND. 

1  Kintrs  5w  15.  Solomon  had  eighty  I.  liowcrs  in  the 

mountains,  2  Chron.  2.  2,  18. 

Eighty  seven  THOUSAND. 

1  Chron.  7.  5.  ollssachur,  reekoneil  eighty  seven  t. 

THOUSAND  THOUSAND. 

1  Chron.  21.  5.  all  they  of  Israel  were  a  t.  t. 

22.  14.  I  hiive  prepared  a  t.  t.  talents  of  silver 

2  Chron.  14.  9.  the  Kthiopian  came  with  a  t.  t. 

Two  hundred  THOUSAND  THOUSAND. 
Rev.  9.  It),  array  of  horsemen  two  hundred  1. 1. 

THOUSANDS. 
<?rr(.  24.  fiO.  be  thou  the  mother  oft.  of  millions 
F.xod.  J8.  21.  place  such  over  them  rulers  of  t.  25. 
20.  6.  shewing  mercy  to  t.  of  them,  Deut.  5.  10. 

34.  7.  keeping  mercy  for  t.  forgiving  iniipiity 
J\/'um.  1. 16.  there  were  the  princes  of  tribes,  heads 

ot't.  in  Israel,  10.  4.  Josh.  22.  14,  21,  30. 
10.  36.  return,  O  Lord,  to  the  many  t.  of  Israel 
31.  5.  tiiere  were  delivered  out  of  the  t.  of  Israel 
}>eut.  1.  15.  so  I  made  them  captains  over  t. 
33.  17.  and  they  arc  the  t.  of  Manasseh 

1  Sam.  8.12.  he  will  appoint  him  captainsover  t. 
10.  19.  therefore  present  yourselves  by  your  t. 
18.  8.  and  to  me  they  have  ascribed  but  I. 

.  'H.l.  will  the  son  of  Jesse  make  you  captainsof  t.  ? 

23.  23.  I'll  search  him  (liroughout  the  £.  of  Judah 
29.  2.  the  lords  of  the  I'hilislmes  passed  on  by  t. 

2  Sam.  18.  4.  and  all  the  people  came  out  by  t. 
Psal.  119.  72.  thy  law  is  better  than  t.  of  gold 
Jer.  32.  18.  thou  shewest  loving  kindness  to  I. 
J)an.  7.  10.  thousand  t.  ministered  unto  him 
Jl/i'c.S.  2.  Iho' thou  be  little  among  the  t.  of  Judah 

fi.  7.  will  the  Lord  be  pleased  with  t.  of  rams  1 
Jlcts'il.  20.  how  many  I.  of  Jews  which  believe 
Hev.  5.  11.  the  number  of  them  was  t.  of  t. 
Sec  Captains. 
THKKAD. 
Oen.  14.  23.  I  will  not  take  from  a  t.  to  a  latchct 
38.  28.  she  bound  on  his  hand  a  scarlet  t.  30. 
Josh.  2.  18.  shalt  bind  this  scarlet  t.  in  the  window 
Judg.  16.  9.  he  brake  the  withs  as  a  t.  of  tow 

12.  he  brake  the  ropes  from  his  arms  as  u  t. 
Cant.  4.  3.  thy  lips  are  like  a  t.  of  scarlet 

THREATEN,  ED. 
Wc(«4. 17.butlet  usstraitly  t.thein  not  to  speak,  21. 
1  Pet.  2.  23.  when  he  suflered  he  t.  not 
THREATENING,  INGS. 
.^r.ts  4. 29.  Lord,  behold  their  t.  and  grant  thy  serv. 
9.  1.  Saul  yet  breathing  out  (.  and  slaughter 
Eph.  6.  9.  do  the  same  things  to  them,  forbearing  t. 

THREE. 
Gen.  16.  2.  he  looked,  and  lo,  t.  men  stood  by  him 
Eind.  21.  11.  and  if  he  do  not  these  t.  unto  her 
25.  32.  t.  branches  of  the  candlestick,  37.  18. 
33.  t.  bowls  made  like  unto  almonds,  37.  19. 
27.1.  the  height  of  the  altar  shall  be  t.  cubits,  38. 1. 

14.  pillars  t.  their  sockets  t.  15.  |  38.  14,  15. 

Lev.  14.10.  shall  take  t.  tenth  deals  of  fine  flour  for 

a  mcat-ofTering,  JV*«m.  15.  9.  |  2H.  12. 

27.  6.  thy  estimation  for  the  female,  (.  shekels 

JV«m.  12.  4.  come  out,  ye  I.  and  thev  t.canie  out 

2S.  20.  t.  tenth  deals  for  a  bulUick,  28.  |  29. 3, 9, 14. 

35.  14.  ye  shall  give  t.  cities  on  this  side  Jordan 
Deut.  4.  41.  Moses  served  t.  cities,  19.  2,  3,  7,  9. 

17.  6.  at  the  mouth  oft.  witnesses,  19r  15. 
Joh-B,  15. 14.  and  Caleb  drove  thence  the  t.  sons  of 

Anak,  .Tudg.  1.  20. 
18.4  <.  men  of  each  tribe  to  describe  the  land 
Judf  1.  20.  the  t.  companies  blew  the  trumpets 

9.  43  he  divided  the  people  into  t.  companies 

1  Sam.  1.  24.  Hannah  took  with  hor  t.  bidlocks 
2.  13  servant  came  with  a  flesh-hook  of  t.  teeth 

21.  ifannah  bare  t.  sons  and  two  danghlers 

10.  3.  there  shall  meet  thee  t.  men,  one  carrying  t. 

kids,  another  carrying  t.  loaves  of  bread 

11.  n.  Saul  put  the  people  in  t.  companies 
17.13  the  (.eldest  ofJesse's  sons  followed  Saul,  14. 
20.20.  I  will  shoot  t.  arrows  on  the  side  thereof 
31.  f).  Saul  died,  and  his  I.  sons,  1  Chron.  10.  6. 

8.  thev  found  Saul  and  his  t.  sons  fallen 

2  Sam.  14.  27.  to  .Mi-salorn  there  were  born  I.  sons 

18.  14.  Joab  thrust  I.  darts  through  Absalom 
2.3. 9.  Eleazar  one  of  the  I.  mighty,  1  Chr.  11.  12. 

13.  t.  of  tlie  thirty  chief  went  down  to  David 
IG.  t.  mighty  brake  through  the  rhiliilines,  17. 

620 


THR 

2  Sam.  23.18.  Ablshai  br.  of  Joab  chief  among  1. 19. 

19.  howbeit,  he  attained  not  to  the  lirst  (.  23. 
22.  Benaiah  had  the  name  among  i.  mighty  men 

24.  12.  I  offer  thee  t.  things,  1  Chron.  21.  10. 

1  Kings  6. 36.  he  built  the  inner  court  with  t.  rows 
7.  4.  and  there  were  windows  in  (.  rows 

25.  it  stood  upon  t.  oxen  looking  toward  the  north 
t.  to  the  west,  t.  to  the  south,  t.  to  the  east 
10.  17.  t.  a  pound  of  gold  went  to  one  shield 

2  Kings  3. 10.  Lord  hath  called  these  t.  kings,  13. 
1  CArci«.2.  16.  the  sons  of  Zeruiah  were  (. 

3. 23.  the  sons  of  Neariah  t.\\  23.23.sons  of  Mushi  t. 

25.5. (lod  gave  Ilcman  fourteen  sons  and  t.daught. 
jKzra  6.4.  let  the  foundations  be  laid  with  t.  rows 
Job  1.  2.  were  born  to  Job  t.  daughters,  42.  13. 
n.the  Chaldeans  made  out  t.  bands  and  fell 

2.  11.  Job's  £.  Wends  heard  of  all  this  evil 
Prov.  30.  15.  t.  things  which  are  never  satisfied 

18.  there  be  t.  things  too  wonderful  for  me 
21.  for  t.  things  the  earth  is  disquieted 

29.  there  be  I.  things  which  go  well,  yea  four 
Isa.  17. 0.  two  or  t.  berries  in  he  top  of  the  bough 
Eiek.  14.  14.  though  these  t.  n.en  were  in  it,  16,  18. 

40.  10.  the  little  chambers  were  t.on  this  side,  21. 

41.  6.  the  sidechamburs  were  t.  one  over  another 
48.  31.  t.  gates,  after  names  of  tribes,  32,  33,  34. 

Dan.  3.  24.  did  not  we  cast  I.  men  bound  into  fire  ? 

6.  2.  and  Darius  set  over  these  t.  presidents 

7.  5.  it  had  t.  ribs  in  the  mouth  between  the  teeth 
8.  t.  of  the  first  horns  were  plucked  up,  20,  24. 

10.  2.  I  Daniel  was  mourning  t.  full  weeks,  3. 

11.  2.  there  shall  stand  up  t.  kings  in  Persia 
Amos  1.  3.  for  t.  transgressions. of  Damascus 

6.  of  Gaza  ||  9.  Tyrus  |1  11.  Edom  1|  13.  Ammon 
2.  1. 1.  transgressions  of  Moab  ||  4.  Judah  ||6.Israel 
4.  8.  so  two  or  t.  cities  wandered  lo  one  city 
Zech.  11.  8.  t.  shepherds  I  cut  otV  in  one  month 
Vl/at. 13.33.  hid  in  t.  measuresof  meal,  Luke  13. 21. 
17.  4.  if  thou  wilt,  let  us  make  here  t.  tabernacles, 
Mark  9.  5.  Luke  9.  33. 
18.16.  in  mouth oftwoort.  witnesscs,2  Cor.  13. 1. 

20.  where  two  or  t.  are  gathered  in  my  name 
f.uke  10.36.\vhich  of  these  t.  was  neighbour  to  him? 

11.  5.  shall  say  to  him,  friend,  lend  me  t.  loaves 

12.  52.  divided,  t.  against  two,  and  two  against  t. 
Aets  5.  7.  t.  hours  after,  when  his  wife  canio  in 

10.  19.  behold,  I.  men  seek  thee,  11.  11. 

28.  15.  came  to  meet  us  as  far  as  the  t.  taverns 
1  Cor.  13.13.  now  abideth  these  t. faith, hope,charity 

14.  27.  by  two,  or  at  most  by  t.  and  that  by  course 
29.  let  the  prophets  speak  two  or  t.  and  other 
1  Tim.  5.  19.  but  before  two  or  t.  witnesses 
Heh.  10.  28.  died  under  two  or  t.  witnesses 

1  John  5.  7.  there  are  t.  that  bear  record  in  heaven 
8.  t.  bear  witness  in  earth,  and  these  t.  agree 

Rev.  6.  6.  and  t.  measures  of  barley  for  a  penny 

8.  13.  trumpet  oft.  angels  who  are  yet  to  sound 
9. 18.  by  these  t.  was  the  third  part  of  men  killed 
16.  13.  I  saw  t.  unclean  s|)irits  like  frogs  como 

19.  the  great  city  was  divided  into  t.  parts 

21. 13.  on  the  east  t.  gates,  on  the  north  t.  gates,  on 

the  south  t.  gates,  and  on  the  west  t.  gates 

See  Days. 

THREE  months. 

Oen.  38.  24.  about  t.  months  after,  it  was  told 

Kxod.i.'i.  was  a  goodly  child, she  hid  him  t.  months 

2  .Sam.  6.  11.  the  ark  of  the  Lord  continued  in  the 

house  of  Obed-edom,  t.  month.i,  1  Chr.  13.  14. 

24.13.wilt  thou  flee  t.T/iojitA.ibefore  thine  enemies, 

while  they  pursue  thee  ?  1  Chron.  21.  12. 

2  Kings  23.  31.  Jehoahaz  son  of  Josiah  reigned  t. 

months  in  Jerusalem,  2  Chron.  30.  2. 

24.  8.  Jehoiachin  reigned  t.  months,  2  Chr.  36.  9. 

.fimos  4.  7.  there  were  yet  t.  months  to  harvest 

Acts  7.  20.  Moses  was  nourished  up  t.  months 

19.  8.  Paul  spake  boldly  the  space  oft.  months 

23.  Paul  abode  in  Greece  t.  months 

Hcb.  11. 23.  Moses  was  hid  t.  months  of  his  parents 

THREE  limes. 

Eiod.  23. 14.t.  timMthoushalt  keep  a  feast  tome 

17.  t.  times  in  the  year  all  thy  males  shall  appear 

before  the  Lord  God,  Deut.  10.  16. 

mim.  22.28.thonhast  smitten  me  these  t. times,  32. 

33.  the  ass  turned  from  me  thcBO  t.  times 

24.  10.  thou  hast  blessed  them  these  t.  timr.t 
.Tudg.  16.  1.').  thou  hast  mocked  me  these  t.  timers 
1  .*;flni.  20.  41.  David  arose  and  bowed  t. times 

1  Kings  9,  25.  Solomon  ofl'ered  t.  times  a  year 
17.21. Elijah  stretched  himself  on  the  child  t.  times 

2  Kings  13.  25.  t.  times  did  Joash  beat  Ilazael 
iChrnn.  8.  13.  oflering  t.  times  in  the  year 
Don.  a.  10.  he  kneeled  on  his  kneos  t.  limes  a  day 

13.  Daniel  maketh  his  petition  t.  times  a  day 
Acts  11. 10.  this  was  done,  t.  times,  and  drawn  up 

THREE  years. 
Gen.  15.  9.  take  a  heifer  oft.  j/fdr.'!  old,  a  she-goat 

I.  yiirs  old,  and  a  ram  t.  years  old 
T.ev.  19.  23.  fruit  as  uncirciimcised  t.  years 
2.5.  21.  it  shall  bring  forth  fruit  for  t.  years 
Deut.  14. 23.  at  the  end  of  t.  years  bring  the  tithe 


THR 

Jurf^.  9.22.  when  Abimelcch  had  rclgncdf.  year 
2  Sam.  13. 38.  Absalom  was  in  Geshur  t.  years 

21. 1.  was  a  famine  in  the  days  of  David  t.  years 

1  Kings~.\V.i.ix\.  the  end  oft.ycurs  Shimei's  serv.  ran 
10. 22.  once  in  t.  years  came  the  navy  of Tarshishi 

bringing  gidd  and  silver,  'iChron.  9.  31 

15.2.  Abijani  reigned  t.yf(t»-sin  Jcrus.2  Chr.  13.2. 
22.  1.  they  continued  t.  years  without  war 

2  Kings  17.  5.  Assyrians  besieged  Samaria  t.  ye€r» 
18.  10.  and  at  the  end  oit.  years  they  took  it 
24.  1.  Jehoiakim  became  Ins  servant  t.  years 

1  Chron.  21. 12.  choose  thee  either  t.  years'  famine, 

or  three  months  to  be  destroyed,  itc. 

2  Chron.  11.17.  made  Rehoboam  strong  t.  years,  t 

y.  they  walked  in  way  of  David  and  Solomon 
13.  2.  Abijali  reigned  t.  years  in  Jerusalem 
31.  16.  males,  from  t.  years  old  and  upward 
Isa.  15.  5.  unto  Zoar,  a  heifer  off.  years  old 
16.  14.  within  t.  years,  as  years  of  a  hireling 
20.  3.  as  Isaiah  walked  barefoot  t.  years 
Jer.  48.  34.  as  a  heifer  oft.  years  old 
Dan.  1.  5.  BO  nourishing  thetn  t.  years 
Amos  4.  4.  and  bring  your  tithes  after  t.  years 
Luke  4.  25.  heaven  shut  up  t,  years,  Jam.  5.  17. 
13.7.  these  t.  years  I  come  seeking  fruit,  find  non« 
.^ct.?20. 31.  (.  years  I  ceased  not  to  warn  every  on« 
Gal.  1.  18.  after  t.  years  1  went  up  to  Jerusalem 
See  HiiNnaiiD. 
THREEI'OLD. 
Eccl.  4.  12.  and  a  t.  cord  is  not  quickly  broken 

THREESCORE. 
Gen.  25. 20.  Isaac  t.  years  old  when  she  bare  them 
Deut.  3.  4.  took  from  them  t.  cities,  .hsh.  13.  30. 
2  Sam.  2.  31.  so  that  three  hundred  and  t.  died 

1  Kings  4.  13.  to  him  pertained  t.  great  cities 
22.  his  provision  was  t.  measures  of  meal 

6.  2.  the  length  of  the  Lord's  house  was  t.  cubiU 
and  breadth  thereof  twenty  cubits,  2  Chr.  3.  3. 

2  Kings  25. 19.  and  he  took  t.menofthe  people 

1  Chron.  2.  21.  Ilezron  married  when  t.  years  old 

2  Chron.  11.  21.  Rehoboam  took  t.  concubines 
Ezra  6.  3.  height  of  temple  t.  cubits,  breadth  U 
Cant.  3.  7.  t.  valiant  men  are  about  it 

6.  8.  there  are  t.  queens,  fourscore  concubines 
Jer.  .'J2.  25.  put  to  death  t.  men  of  the  people 
Dan.  3.  1.  an  image,  whose  height  was  t.  cubita 
jMke  24.  13.  fro[n  Jerusalem  about  t.  furlongs 
1  Tim.  5.  9.  let  not  a  widow  be  taken  under  t. 
See  Sixty. 
THREESCORE  and  one. 
J^um.  31.  39.  Lord's  tribute  of  asses,  t.  and  one 

THREESCORE  and  two. 
1  Chron.  26.  8.  able  men  t.  ajid  two  of  Obed-edom 
Dan.  5.  31.  Darius  about  t.  and  two  years  old 
9.  25.  In  t.  orif/two  weeks  the  street  shall  b(^  built 
26.  after  t.  and  tirn  weeks  Messiah  be  cut  off 
THREESCORE  aiid  five, 
fsa.  7.  8.  within  t.  and  five  years  Ephraim  broken 

THREESCORE  and  six. 
r?cn.4G.26.the  souls  that  came  with  Jarobt.nnrf »ix 
//cy.12.5.  in  blood  of  her  purifying  t.  and  six  day* 

THREESCORE  and  seven. 
JVcA.  7. 72.  peo.  save  t.  and  seven  priests,  garment* 

THREESCORE  and  eight. 
I  CAr.16.38.  Obed-edom  with  brethren  t.  and  eight 

THREESCORE  and  ten. 
Gsn.46.27.  all  the  souls  ofthehousc  of  Jacob  which 
came  into  Egypt,  were  t.  and  ten,  Deut. 
10.  22. 
."iO.  3.  they  mourned  for  Israel  t.  and  ten  days 
Exod.  15.  27.  in  E'.im  were  twelve  wells  of  water, 
and  t.  and  ten  palm-trees,  JVum.  33.  9. 
.Tudg.  1.  7.  t.  and  tin  kings,  their  thumbs  cut  off 

8.  30.  and  Gideon  had  t.  and  ten  sons,  9.  2. 

9.  4.  they  gave  him  t.  and  ten  pieces  of  silver 

5.  he  slew  t.and  ten  persons  on  one  stone,  18,24. 
12. 14.  sons  and  nephews,  that  rode  on  t.  a.  t.  ass-c. 
2rArn??.  29.  32.  brought  t.  and  ten  bullocks  * 
.36. 21. land  kei)t  sabbath,  to  fulfil  t.and  ten  yean 
Psal.  90. 10.  the  days  of  our  years  are  t.  and  ten 
Zech.  1.12.  hast  had  indignation  t.  and  ten  years 
Acts  23.  23.  make  ready  t.  and  ten  horfsonien 
See  Skvrnty. 
THREESCORE  and  twelve. 
JVum.  31.  38.  Lor<rs  tribute  t.  and  twelve  beeves 

THREESCORE  and  fifteen. 
Acts  7.  14.  Jiisepli's  kindred  t.  and  fifteen  souls 

THREESCORE  and  seventeen. 
.Tudg.  8.  14.  the  elders  of  Siircolh  t.  and  seventeen 

THRESH. 
.Tudg.  8.  t  7.  then  I  will  t.  your  flefih  with  thorns 
Tsa.  41.  15.  (hou  shalt  t.  the  mountains  and  boat 
.Ter.  51.  33.  is  like  a  floor,  it  is  time  to  t.  her 
Mic.  4.  13.  arise,  and  t.  O  daughter  of  Zion 
Hab.  3.  12.  thou  didst  t.  the  heathen  in  anger 

THRESlIEn. 
.Tudg.  fi.  11.  Gideon  t.  wheat  bv  the  wine-preBl 
Isa.  25.  t  10.  Moab  shall  be  t.  down  umler  him 
28.  27.  fitches  not  t.  with  a  threshing  instrument 
Amos  1. 3.  because  they  t.  Gilcad  with  instrumenU 


THR 

THRESHETH. 
Df.XLt.  25.  t  4  not  nmzile  tlie  ox  when  ho  t.  corn 

1  Cut.  y.  10.  t  111  hopi;,  l>u  jKirleikcr  ol'his  hope 

TllllESlIlMJ. 
I,f0.  26.  5.  your  t.  sliuU  roach  unto  the  vinlngo 

2  Aix.H. -1.-'.;.  Iiurehct.  iiistruiiiuiils,  X  CAr.  -1.  -X 
2  h'liigd  13.  7.  had  made  them  liku  the  dust  by  t. 
I  C/irvii.  -I.  -U.  now  Uiuaii  was  t.  wlieat 

y.iu.  -,'1.  lU.  O  my  t.  and  tlii!  com  ol'iny  lloor 
•Si.  -'d.  btcause  lie  wdl  not  ever  be  t.  it 
41.  l.i.  will  make  thee  a  new  sharp  t.  instrument 

Jud  3.  t  11-  multitudes  in  the  valley  ol' t. 
Hce  Fl.(ioi'.,  Floors. 
TllKErillOLU. 

Judff.  19.  27.  beliuld,  her  hands  were  upon  the  t. 

1  ^ant.  5.4.  the  palms  ul'his  hands  cut  oil' on  the  C. 
5.  5.  tread  not  on  tlie  I.  of  bagon  iKito  tljis  day 

1  Kings  14. 17.  when  she  came  lo  t.  the  child  died 

a  Airt°  i  1-2.  t  !t.  ki  ej.er  of  t.  -Ji.  f  4.  |  '25.  f  Id.  A.itA. 
:•.  t  ^1-  I  ti-  t  i-  -Vcr.  :io.  t  4.  I  o->.  t  -24. 

Psal.Si.  t  lU-  1  "ould  rather  choose  tositatthe  t. 

Isa.  0.  t  4.  'he  posts  of  the  t.  moved  at  the  voice 

Kiek.  "J.  3.  the  giory  ol'  God  was  gone  up  to  1. 10.  4. 
10.  18.  tlie  glory  ol'  God  departed  from  the  t. 
43.f^.  in  their  setting  of  their «.  by  my  thresholds 
4ii.  'i.  the  prince  shall  wor.shipat  the  t.  of  the  gate 
47.1.  waters  issued  out  from  under  tliet.  eastward 

Ztpk.  1.  U.  1  will  imnish  all  that  leap  on  the  t. 
TIlRESUOLUtJ. 

1  CAron.9.  f  19.  keepers  of  the  (.  '2  Ckron.  23.  f  4. 
JVcA.  1-.  i!5.  keeping  ward  at  the  t.  of  the  gates 
i'.ick.  43.  a.  ill  setting  of  llieir  threshold  by  my  t. 
Z.ruli.'i.  14.  desolation  shall  be  in  the  t.  for  he  shall 

'J'llKEW. 

2  Sam.  16.  13.  Shiniei  t.  stones  at  David  and  cast 
2  Kings  'J.33.  they  t.  Je/.ebid  down,  and  he  trod  her 
2  Cliroii.  31.  1.  and  lliey  t.  down  the  high  places 
JIark  12. 42.  there  came  acertam  poorwidow  and 

she  t.  in  two  miles,  which  make  a  larlliing 
J.uke  It.  42.  the  devil  (.  him  down,  and  tare  liiiii 
ylcU  22.  23.  us  thev  cried,  and  t.  dust  in  the  air 

TllREVVEST. 
JVe/i.  9. 11.  their  persecutors  thou  t.  into  the  deeps 

TllKICE. 
Kzod.  34.  23.  t.  in  the  year  shall  all  appear,  24. 
2  Kings  13.  Irf.  and  Joash  smote  t.  and  suyed 

19.  whereas  now  thou  simit  smite  Sypa  imt  t. 

Jiih  33.  t  2il.  these  things  workelh  God  twice  and  t. 

Mai.  213.  34.  thou  shalt  deny  mo  t.  75.  Mark  14. 

30,  72.  Luke  22.  34,  61.  John  13.  3ei. 

..ids  10. 16.  this  was  done  t.  vessel  was  received  up 

2  Cor.  11.  25.  t.  was  I  beaten  with  rods,  once  was 

1  stoned,  I.  [  sull'eied  shipwreck 

12.  8.  for  tills  thing  I  besought  the  Lord  t. 

THKO.\T. 
r.'a^S.  9.  tlieirt.  is  an  open  sepulchre,  Horn.  3.13. 
G'.l.  3.  I  nm  weary  of  my  crying,  my  t.  is  dried 
3 15.  7.  neither  s|ieak  they  Ihroiigh  their  t. 
149.  t6.  let  ihe  high  prai.*esof  Clod  be  in  their  t. 
Prov.%i.i.  put  a  knife  to  thy  t.  if  given  lo  apjietite 
Isa.  .)«.  t  1.  cry  with  the  /.  lift  U|i  ihy  voice 
Jer.  2.  2.5.  and  withhold  thy  I.  from  thirst 
Mai.  10.  2d.  the  servant  look  hiin  by  the  t. 

THRO.N'E. 
Isusfdforlhalmagnijiccnlseatwlierconsoverdgrt 
princes  uauallij  sit,  to  recr.ioc  tlie.  humac^e  vf 
llicir  subjects,  or  to  give  audience  to  ainbus.sa- 
durs ;  whrre  they  a\>rtear  with  pomp  and  cere- 
vinnij,  and  f ruin  wience  tkeij  dispense  justice. 
Tut  scripture  di-srrihns  (Ae  throne  of  Hulomon, 
as  the  finest  and  richest  throne  in  the  world, 
1  Kings  10.  20,  There  was  not  the  liko  made 
in  liny  kingdom,  /t  was  all  of  ioory,  anil 
plated  with  pure  gol  I.  The  aseint  vas  by  six 
strps  ;  the  back  waf  round,  and  tiro  arms  sup- 
portc'l  the  sent.  Tioclnc  golden  lions,  one  on 
each  siilii  of  enrry  strp,  made  a  principal  part 
of  its  ornainrnt.  Tiiione  is  nl.io  put  for  sove- 
reign potcrr  nnildignlty,  it  beinv  the  symbol  nf 
royalty  iind  rriral  authority;  thus  Pharaoh  tills 
.loseph.  Gi'n.  41.  40,  Only  in  the  throne  will  1 
he  greater  than  tlion. 
IJinnen  is  the  t'lrono  of  Hod,  laa.  60.  1.  The 
highest  henrins  are  the  place  ichere.  he.  most 
manifesti  his  power  and  s'lory,  and  shews  him- 
self 111  his  miijrsty.  Ju^iire  and  judgment  are 
tUi:  hnbilntion  of  Ihe  throne  of  the  Eiird,  I'sal. 
89.  14.  .fust  judgmrni,  or  justice  in  judging,  is 
thr  b'isis,  or  fiiiinihilionief  alikis  proceedings, 
and  the  slahililiiofhis  Ihrone  and govrrnmmt. 
C'hri-'t  Jeiiiig  is  set  down  at  Ihe  right  hand  of 
the  throne  of  (im\,  llrb.  12.  'J.  and  from 
thcnre  he  discovers  himsrif  in  his  state  and 
g'ory,  as  Ihe  great  Kuhr  of  the  world,  thr 
Kinir  of  kings,  and  fjord  of  lords.  Our  Sa- 
viour, to  erpriss  the  rest  and  sntisfnrtion,  Ihi 
pinrii,  hiinonr,  and  dignity,  which  th"  saints  of 
Clod  fhnll  be  possessed  of  in  heaven,  tells  his 
di.-e.iples,  I.iiko  22.  31),  That  vn  inav  nil  on 
tArunts,  ludgiiig  the  twolvu  Icibcs  of  Imaul. 
030 


THR 

'     7%«  eherubims  that  were  vpon  the  ark  of  the 

coccnant,  were  also  coustUercd  us  a  kind  of 
throijo  of  (rod:  From  whence  it  is  said  in 
many  places,  that  God  dwelleth  between  the 
cheruhims,l  Huiu.-i.  4.  2  Ham.  6.  2.  2  Kitigs  19. 
15.  ~Jngiis  arc  ciillid  thrones,  Lol.  1.  iti.  as 
having  Uinglij  power ;  and  they  are  also  called 
cniel  princes,  JJan.  10.  1.!. 
Gai.  41.  40.  only  in  the  t.  will  1  be  greater 
iJcut.  17.  Id.  when  he  snleth  on  t.ol  his  kingdom 

1  Ham.  2.  8.  to  make  them  iiiheiit  the  t.  of  glory 

2  Sam.  3. 10.  to  set  uji  the  t.  ol  David  over  Israel 

7. 13.  1  willslablish  t.  of  his  kingdom  forever,  16. 

1  A'ini''A'l,l;j.t5ulomoii  shall  sit  on  my  (.  17,24,30,35. 
4d.  Iiatli  given  one  to  sit  on  my  t.  tins  day 

2.  4.  there  shall  nut  fail  thee  a  man  on  the  t.  of 

^I.<rael,  d.  25.  |  9.  5.  2  Vhr.  6.  Ki.  .Icr.  33.  17. 

lS'-Solonu)ii  sat  on  t.  of  David  his  father,  24. 

I  S.  20.  I  10.  9.  1  Chr.  29.  23.  2  Clir.  ti.  10. 

10.  18.  Ilie  king  made  a  great  t.  'iVhron.  9.  17. 

2  Kings  10.  3.  set  him  on  liis  laiher's  t.  and  tight 
30.  to  fourth  generalion  shall  .-it  on  the  t.  15. 12. 

11.  19.  Joash  sat  on  the  t.  iChrun.  23.20. 
J\'eh.  3.  7.  repaired  to  tiie  t.  of  the  governor 
.lob  36.  7.  but  with  kings  are  they  on  the  t. 
I'sal.  9.  4.  thou  satttst  in  the  t.  judging  right 

11.  4.  Ihe  Lord's  t.  is  in  heaven,  his  eyes  behold 
45.6. thy  t.  U  God,  is  for  ever,/.(i/«.5.19.  Hcb.  1.  8. 
47.  d.  God  sitlelli  on  the  t.  of  Ins  holiness 
d9.  4.  1  will  build  thy  t.  to  all  generations 

14.  justice  and  judgment  arehabitalion  of  Ihy  f. 
y4.20.shall «. of  inu|uityliave  fellowship  wiih  lliee? 
132.  11.  of  fruit  of  thy  body  will  1  set  on  thy  t. 

12.  their  children  shall  sit  on  thy  t.  for  ever 
Pruv.  20.  8.  a  king  that  sitteth  in  (.  of  judgment 
Isa.  6.  1.  1  saw  al.so  the  Lord  sitting  ujioii  a  t. 

9.  7.  on  t.  of  David  and  his  kingdom,  lo  order  it 
14.  13.  1  will  e.\alt  my  t.  above  the  stais  of  God 
2-2.  23.  Eliakim  shall  be  for  a  glorious  t. 
47.  1.  there  is  no  t.  O  naugliler  of  Chaldeans 
66.  1.  the  hetiven  is  my  I.  and  earth,  .dels  7.  49. 
Jer.  3.  17.  shall  call  Jerusalem  the  t.  of  the  Lord 

13.  13.  I  will  till  the  kings  that  sit  on  David's  t. 

14.  21.  do  not  disgrace  the  t.  of  thy  glory 
17.  12.  a  glorious  high  i;.  from  the  beginning 

25.  king,  silling  on  the  t.  of  David,  22.  4,  30. 

22.  2.  O  king,  that  sitlest  upon  the  I.  29.  16. 

36.  30.  he  shall  have  none  to  sit  on  the  t.  of  David 

49.  3d.  1  will  set  my  t.  in  Elam,  and  will  destroy 
ICick.  ].  26.  was  the  likeness  of  a  t.  10.  1. 

43.  7.  the  place  of  my  t.  shall  Israel  no  more  defile 
Hag.  2.  22.  1  will  overthrow  the  t.  of  kingdoms 
Mat.  5.  34.  by  heaven,  for  it  is  God's  t.  23.  22. 

19.  2d.  the  t?on  of  man  shall  sit  in  the  t.  25.  31. 
Luke  1.  32.  the  Lord  shall  give  him  Ihe  /.  of  David 
Heb.  4.  16.  let  us  come  boldly  to  the  t.  of  grace 

d.  1.  on  the  right  hand  the  t.  of  God,  12.  2. 
liev.  3.  21.  to  him  will  1  grant  to  sit  in  my  t. 

4.  2.  a  t.  was  set  in  heaven,  and  one  sat  on  thc£. 

3.  thero  was  a  rainbow  round  about  the  t. 

4.  about  the  t.  were  four  and  twenty  seats 

5.  and  out  of  Ihe  (.  proceeded  lightnings  and 
lliunderiiigs,  there  were  seven  lamps  before  t. 

6.  before  the  t.  therewasa  scaof  glass,  in  t.  and 
round  about  the  t.  were  four  beasts  full  of  eyes 

9.  be.isis  gave  thanks  lo  him  that  sat  on  the  t. 

10.  fall  before  him  that  sat  on  the  t.  7.  II. 

5.  1.  in  the  hand  of  him  that  sat  on  the  t.  a  book 

6.  and  lo,  in  the  midst  of  the  t.  stood  a  Lamb 

7.  took  Ihe  book  oulof  hand  of  him  that  sat  on  t. 

11.  the  voice  of  many  angels  ahotit  the  t. 

13.  glory  be  to  him  that  sittrlh  on  lln^  t. 

(\  16.  hide  us  friim  him  that  ^ittelh  on  the  t. 

7.  9.  a  grciit  mul'.itude  stood  before  the  t. 

10.  salvalion  lo  our  (Jod  wliiili  sitlelli  on  Ihe  *. 

15.  they  arc^  before  Ihe  t.  of  Gmlaiid  serve  him, 
he  Ilia;  sitlelli  on  the  {.  shall  dwell  among  them 

17.  Ihe  hinih  in  miilst  of  Ihe  t.  shall  leed  them 

8.  3.  the  gidilen  altar  which  was  before  the  t. 
14.3.  they  sung  as  it  were  a  new  song  before  the  t. 

5.  they  are  without  fault  before  the/,  of  God 
16.  17.  there  ciimo  a  voice  from  the  (.  19.  5. 

19.  4.  they  worshipped  Goil  that  sat  on  the  /. 

20.  II.  I  saw  a  great  white  t.  and  him  that  sal  on  it 
21.5.  he  that  sat  on  t.  sa^l,  lieliold,  I  make  all  new 
22.  1.  a  pure  river  proceeiliiij  out  of  the  I. 

3.  Ihc  t.  of  God  and  of  ihe  Lamb  shall  ho  in  it 

Jlis'VmWSK. 

Kroi.W.'S.  from  lirsl  born  lliiit  sits  nnAiX.  12.29. 

2  Sam.  14.  9.  and  tho  king  and  his  t.  be  gniltlesa 

1  Kings  1.  37.  Ihe  I-ord  make  his  t.  greater,  47. 
2.  r.l.  he  bowed  himself,  anil  sat  down  on  his  t. 

3:i.  upon  his  seed,  and  on  his  t.  shall  bo  iieacu 
16.  1 1.  as  soon  OS  /iiiiri  sat  on  his  t.  he  slew 
22.  10.  the  kjng  of  Israel,  and  Jehoshnph.it  king  of 
Jiidiih,  sal  enrh  on  his  t.  2  CArnn.  18.  9. 

19.1  saw  thr  Lord  silling  on  his  t.^Chran.  18. 18. 

2  Kings  13.  13.  and  Jeroboam  sat  upon  his  t. 
25.  i'?.  set  his  I.  iibove  t.  of  kincs,  .Irr.  52.  32. 

Job  26.  0.  hu  liuMulli  bdck  the  l'>iv,u  \j(  his  t. 


THR 

Psal.  9.  7.  he  hath  prepared  his  t  for  jud^eat 

Ci).  29.  his  t.  lo  eiiilure  as  liie  days  of  heaven 
36.  his  t.  shall  endure  as  tiie  sun  before  me 
44.  thou  hast  cast  his  t.  dt.wii  lo  ilie  ground 

97.  2.  and  judgment  llie  hahiialiun  ui ins  I. 

103.  19.  Lor>l  lialh  prepared  his  I.  iiillic  lieaveni 
Prov.  20.  2d.  and  his  I.  is  u|iholileii  by  mercy 
Jer.  1.  15.  set  each  bis  t.  at  ine  galesof  Jerusalem 

33.  21.  that  David  should  not  ha\e  a  sun  on  hig  t% 

43.  10.  and  1  will  set  his  I.  upon  these  slones 
/Jan.  5.  21).  he  was  deposed  Irom  his  kingly  (. 

7.  9.  his  t.  was  like  the  liery  liaine,  Ins  wlieels 
.lonali  3.  6.  Ihe  king  of  Aincveh  lose  from  kis  t, 
Zcch.  6.  13.  he  shall  sit  and  rule  upon  his  I.  and  h« 

shall  be  a  priest  on  his  t.  and  counsel  ol  peaco 
Mcls  2.  30.  would  raise  up  Christ  to  sit  on  his  t. 
Hcv.  1.  4.  from  seven  siiirits  which  aie  beloie  his  t 

3.  21.  as  1  am  set  down  wiili  my  Father  in  his  t 
12.5.  her  child  was  caught  up  lo  God,  lo  ha  I. 

iiee  EsTAULISII,  rsTAUHSIlED. 

'I'liKU.NLS 
Psal.  122.  5.  for  the:  j  are  set  t.  of  judgment 
Isa.  14.  9.  ithalh  raised  up  t'rom  their  t.  the  kings 
Kick.  26.  16. princesshall  come  down  from  Iheir  (. 
iJau.  7.  9.  1  beheld,  till  the  t.  were  cast  dow  n 
Mat,  19.  2d.  ye  shall  sit  upon  twelve  (.  judging 
the'twelve  tribes  of  Israel,  Luke  22.  30 
Col.  1.  16.  all  created  by  him,  w  hetlier  they  be  t. 
Hcc.  20.  4.  and  1  saw  t.  and  they  sat  upon  them 

TIIKOAG. 
Mark  3. 9.  the  multitude,  lest  ihcy  should  (.  him 
Luke  8.  45.  the  multilude  t.  thee  and  press  Iheo 

TUUUXGLD. 
Marks.  24.  and  much  people  t.  him,  Luke  8.  42. 

TUKUAGl.NG. 
Mark  5.  31.  thou  seesl  the  iiiullitude  t.  thee 

TUKUUGll. 
JV'i/OT.  25.  8.  Phinehas  thrust  both  of  thorn  t. 
•2  Kings  1.  2.  Alriziah  fell  t.  lattice,  and  was  sick 
.lob  14.  9.  yet  t.  the  scent  of  water  it  will  bud 
Psal.  73.  9.  their  tongue  walkeih  t.  the  earlli 
Keel.  10.  18.  t.  idleness  the  house  droppeth  t. 
Cant.  2.  9.  he  lookelh,shewing  himself  I-  the  latticf 
Isa.  27.  4.  1  would  go  t.  them,  1  would  burn  tlieiB 

43.  2.  when  thou  pussesl  f.  waters,  t.  the  lire 

62.  10.  go  t.  go  t.  Ihe  gates,  prepare  the  way 
Kick.  46.  19.  after  he  brought  me  t.  the  entry 

47.  4.  he  measured,  and  brought  me  t.  waters 
y.ech.  13.  9.  1  will  bring  the  third  part  t.  fire 
JIat.  12. 43.  he  walketh  t.  dry  idaces,  seeking  rest 
/.like  5.  19.  they  let  him  down  t.  the  tiling 
.luhn  1.5.3.  ye  are  clean  t.  the  word  I  have  spokea 

17.  11.  keej)  t.  thine  own  name  those  given  me 

17.  sanctify  them  t.  thy  truth,  thy  word  is:  'tJi 
20.  31.  believing  ye  might  have  life  t.  his  name 

Hum.  5. 1.  we  have  peace  with  G.  (.  our  Lord  ie» 
6.  23.  gift  of  CJod  is  eternal  life  t.  Jesus  Clirisl 

8.  l.'l.  but  if  ye  t.  the  spirit  mortify  the  deeds 
IJ.  36.  of  him,  t.  him,  to  him,  are  all  things 

Jli.  27.  lo  God  only  wise  be  glory,  «.  Jesus  Chris'. 
2  Cor.  4.  15.  t.  the  thanksgiving  of  many  ledouofl 
fial.  2.  19.  for  I  t.  the  law  am  ilcad  lo  the  law 
Eph.^2.  7.  in  his  kindness  toward  us  t.  Christ  Jes. 
22.  for  an  habitation  of  God  t.  the  Spirit 

4.  6.  one  God,  who  is  above  all,  and  t.  all,  in  ell 

18.  t.  the  ignorance  that  is  in  them  because  of 

1  'I'iin.  6.  10.  pierced  themselves  t.  with  sorrows 
llib.Sh  14.  whoMhe  eternal  Spirit olfered  himself 

10.  20.  t.  the  vail,  that  is  lo  sav,  his  Hesli 

13.  20.  t.  the  blood  i-f  Ihe  eveiliisting  covenant 

THROUGHLY. 
r.xod.  21.  19.  and  shall  cause  him  to  he  t.  healed 

2  Kings  II.  18.  his  images  brake  they  in  pieces  U 
.toh  6.  2.  oh  that  my  grief  were  t.  weighed  ! 
I'sal.  51.  2.  washme  t.  from  mine  iniquity,  rlennso 
Jer.  6.  9.  they  shall  t.  glean  the  reminint  of  Israel 

7. 5.  if  ye  t.  iimind  your  ways  and  your  doings,  if 
ye  t.  e.vecute  jiidgnipiit  hrtween  man  and  man 
.■SO.  '34.  he  shall  t.  plead  their  cause  lo  give  ri'st 
Kick.  16.  9.  I  t.  washed  awav  lliv  hloort  from  thee 
.Vat.  3.  12.  he  will  (.  purge  his  lloor,  I.vkeX  17. 
2  Cor.  11.  6.  but  we  have  hei'ii  t.  made  nianlfegt 
2  7'im.3.17.maii  of  G.  t.furnislied  lo  all  good  works 

TMROIIGIIOHT. 
.Tosh.  04.  3.  I  led  Abraham  /.  Ihe  land  of  Cannnn 

1  Sam.  23.  23.  search  him  t.  ihmisiinds  of  Jmlah 

2  CArnn.  31.20.  thus  did  Ilezekiah  /.  all  Jmlah 
.l/'irA- I4.9.lhe  gospel  shall  he  prcachiil.l.  Ihe  wyrld 
.lohn  19.  23.  wilhout  seam,  woven  frimi  Ihe  top  U 
Horn.  1.  8.  your  faith  is  spoken  oft.  the  world 

See  Gkverations. 

THROW. 

Jndi'.l.'i.  ye  shall  /.down  their  iiltnrs.hnl  have  not 

6.  {;.■).  t.  down  the  alliir  of  Raal  lliy  fallnr  hmh 
2  Kings').  33.  t.  her  down,  fo  ihey  threw  her  down 
.lir.  1.  10.  I  set  llioe  over  Ihe  nali(>n.«  In  t.  ilown 

31.  28.  n«  1  have  wnlehril  over  ihem,  lo  I.  down 
F.iek.  16.  39.tlievsli.'ill  /.  clown  thine  eminent  plac* 
Mir.  Ti.  II.  I  will  t.  tlowii  all  thy  firons  holds 
Mai.  L  4.  Ihcy  iliall  build  but  t  will  t.  down 


^ 


THU 

THROWING. 
A*rt»n.  53.  17.  if  lie  siiiitu  liim  with  t.  a  stone 
TUKOVVN. 

Exod.  15.  1.  tlie  Ijoise  and  lils  rider  hiith  be  t.  21. 
Judg.  tj.  '6~.  because  lie  liatli  t.  duwii  Ins  ultur 
2i,aiii  yO.  Jl.  Ins  liead  bo  t.  to  tliee  over  the  wall 
1  KinKa  I'J.  lU.  Israel  have  t.  down  thy  altars,  14. 
Jcr.  ;jl.  4t).  it  sliall  not  bo  I.  down  any  more 

5U.  15.  loundations  lallen,  her  walls  art;  t.  tlowii 
Lam.  -2.  '2.  the  Lord  halh  t.  down  in  his  wralli 

17.  he  hath  t.  down,  and  halli  not  jiitied 
F.zi'k.  iii).  5. 1  will  leave  ihee  t.  nilo  the  wilderness 

Ja.  xJU.  and  the  rnouniains  shall  be  t.  down 
JV'aA.  1.  ti.  and  the  locks  are  t.  down  by  him 
Mat.  24.  i.  not  one  stone  lelt  U)ion  another,  that 
shall  not  bo  t.  down,  JJar/i  J3.  2.  Luke  21.  ti. 
Lukci.'J5.  when  the  devil  had  t.  him  in  ihe  nndst 
Jice.  IS.  21.  the  city  of  Habylon  shall  be  t.  down 

THRUST. 
Ezod.  11.  1.  he  shall  snioly  t.  you  out  hence 

I'i.  yy.  because  they  were  t.  out  of  Egypt 
JV'um.  --.  2o.  lialaani's  ass  t.  herself  to  liio  wall 
25.  ti.  I'hinelias  t.  both  of  them  through 
35.  20.  but  if  he  t.  him  of  hatred,  that  he  die 
22.  bui  if  he  t  him  suddenly  without  enmity 
VtiU.  IS.  5.  halh  spoken  to  t.  thee  out  of  the  way 
ID.  because  he  sought  to  t.  thee  fiom  the  Lord 
15.  17,  t.  the  awl  through  his  ear  to  the  door 

33.  t  14.  precious  things  t.  Ibjtli  by  the  moon 
27.  he  shall  t.  out  the  enemy  from  before  thee 

JuJ^r.  3.  21.  Khud  t.  the  dagger  into  hie  belly 
ti.  M.  he  t.  fleece  together,  and  wiinged  ihedcw 

9.  41.  and  Zebul  t.  out  Gaal  and  his  brethren 
54.  his  young  men  t.  Abimelech  through 

11.2.  wives'  sons  grew  up,aiid  they  t.out  Jephthah 

ISam.  11.2.  that  1  may  t.  out  all  your  right  eyes 

31.4.  Saul  said,  t.  me  ihrougli  therewith,  lest  these 

uncircumcised  come  and  t.  me,  lC7iru7i.lU.4. 

2. Sam.  2.  It),  and  t.  his  sword  in  his  fellow's  siile 

15. 1 14.  lest  Absalom  overtake  us,  and  t.  ujioii  us 

18.14.Joab  t.3d<irts  through  the  heartof  Absalom 

2:1.  (i.  thosons  of  IJelial  shall  be  as  thorns  t.  away 

1  AVh "■»■  2.27.Solomon  t. out  Abiathar  from  jiriesth. 

2  h'lni/s  4.  27.  but  (iehazi  came  near  lo  £.  her  away 
2  C/tiuii.  21).  20.  they  t.  Uzziali  out  from  thence 
P:<at.  life.  13.  ihou  hast  t.  at  me,  ihall  might  fall 
/i'u.  13.  15.  every  one  found  shall  be  I.  through 

14.  l!l.  as  the  raiment  of  those  that  are  t.  through 
Jit.  51.  4.  they  that  are  t.  through  in  her  streets 
J'hck.  16.  40.  they  shalU.  thee  through  with  swords 

21.  t  12.  princes  are  t.  down  to  the  sword  with 

34.  21.  because  ye  have  t.  with  side  and  shoulder 
4ti.  18.  10  t.  them  out  of  their  possessions 

Joel  2.  8.  neither  shall  one  t.  another,  shall  walk 
i;ccA.13.3.shalU.hini  through  when  he  iiruphesieth 
Jilat.  11.  t  l".i-  ll'ey  that  t.  men  take  it  by  foice 
Luke  4.  29.  they  rose  and  t.  him  out  of  the  city 
5.  3.  and  prayed  him  he  would  t.  out  a  little 

10.  15.  thou  Capernaum,  shall  be  t.  down  to  hell 
13.28.  Jacob  in  heaven,  and  you  yourselves  ^out 

John  20.  25.  and  t.  my  hand  into  his  side,  27. 
^cU-  7.  27.  he  that  did  the  wrong  t.  him  away 
3y.  but  our  fathers  t.  him  from  them 
Ifi.  24.  who  t.  them  into  the  inner  prison 
37.  and  now  do  they  t.  us  out  privily  1 
27.  39.  minded,  if  it  were  possible,  to  t.  in  the  ship 
Jifb.  12.  20.  it  shall  be  stoned  or  t.  through  with 
/iev.  14.  15.  t.  in  ihy  sickle,  for  the  harvest  is  ripe 
Ifi.hesat  on  Ihecloud,  t.  in  his  sickle  on  the  earth 

18.  t.  in  thy  sharp  sickle  and  gather  the  clusters 

19.  the  angol  t.  in  his  sickle  into  the  earth 

TliRUrfTKTH. 

Job  32. 13.  God  t.  him  down,  not  man 
THUMB. 

£iO(i.  29.20.  then  shalt  thou  put  it  on  the«.  of  their 
right  hand,  Lev.  8.  23,  24.  I  14.  14,  17,  25,  28. 
THUMBS. 

Jiidg.  1.  6.  they  caught  him  and  cut  off  his  t. 
7.  seventy  kings  having  tli'^ir  t.  and  Iocs  cut  oil 
THUMMl.M. 

Urim  and  Tliuininim ;  .lir.eordintr  to  the  Hebrew.'!, 
Kxod.  28.  ;}0.  the  literal  S'friiijicalion  of  the.ii 
twu  words  IS,  light  nni/  perfection,  orthe  shining 
and  the  perfect.  Aocordinir  to  St.  .Jerome,  dor- 
trine  and  judgment,  jiccordivg-  to  the  l^XX, 
declaration  or  manifestation,  and  trulli.  .So 
will  have  it,  that  the  Urim  and  Tliuinmim  are 
only  epithets  or  ciplavntions  nf  the  stnnes  of 
the  breast-plate  of  the  liii'li-pricst ;  as  if  it  were 
gaid.  Thou  shalt  put  (herein  stones  that  are 
shininfr  and  perfect.  Others,  to  prove  that  the 
Urim  nnd  Tliuminim  were  not  the  same  thing 
with  the  twelre  stones  in  the  breast-plate,  giiie 
the  fallowing  reasons.  (1)  Because  the  stones 
were  set  and  engraven  in  the  brenst-plate, 
Kxod.  28.  17,  21.  the  Urim  and  Thunimim 
07i/v  pui  into  it,  tchich  is  a  word  of  guile  differ- 
ent and  tnjrc  lonsn  nndlarge signification,  and 
therefore  probably  does  not  design  the  sa/ne 
thing.  (2)  /(  i«  ■not  liktly,  that  in  tiich  a 
631 


THU 

brief  account  of  the  sacred  utensils,  the  tame 
command  would  be  repeated  again;  especially 
in  mure  dark  and  general  words  than  it  was 
mentioned  before.  ^Jiid  how  could  Moses/dtt  it 
in,  when  the  workmen  had  fastened  it  there 
before  i  Or,  why  should  he  be  required  to  put 
it  in  the  breast-plate,  when  it  was  fastened  lo 
it  already,  and  could  nut,  wilhuut  violence,  be 
taken  from  it  7  (3)  Because  the  stones  were 
put  in  it  by  the  workmen.  Exod.  39.  10.  the 
Urim  and  Thummim  by  Moses  himself,  Lev. 
8.  8.  Jt  is  objected,  that  where  the  stones  are 
mentioned,  there  is  no  mention  of  Urim  and 
Thummim,  as  in  Exod.  3U.  10.  jQud  that 
where  the  Urim  and  Thummim  are  mentioned, 
there  is  no  mention  made  of  the  stones,  us  in 
Lev.  8.  8.  wliich  seems  to  shew  they  were  one 
and  the  same  thing.  To  which  they  answer, 
that  there  is  an  evident  reason  for  both  these 
omissions ;  of  the  former  in  Kxodus,  because 
Moses  mentions  only  those  things  which  were 
made  by  the  workmen,  whereas  the  Utim  ana 
Thummim  seems  to  have  beenniade immediately 
by  God,  or  by  Muses  with  God's  direction  :  Of 
the  latter  in  J^eviticus,  because  the  stones  are 
implied  in  the  breast-plate  as  a  part  of  it,  and 
fastened  to  it,  whereas  there  Moses  only  men- 
tions what  was  put  in  by  himself.  Home  say, 
that  the  Urim  and  Tliuminim  were  two  Utile 
gulden  figureswhieh  gave  rcsponscs,wiiich  were 
shut  up  in  the  breast-plate  as  in  a  purse,  and 
which  answered,  with  an  articulate  voice,  to  all 
such  questions  as  were  put  to  them  by  thehigk- 
priesl.  Others  think,  that  the  name  jElloViH 
written  upon  a  plate  of  gold,  was  that  the  scrip- 
ture calls  Urim  and  Tiiummim.  There  are 
various  other  conjictures  concerning  the  Urim 
a/ii^  Thummim, //ut  nothing  certain,  because  the 
scripture  is  silent  in  this  mailer.  It  may  suf- 
fice us  to  know,  that  this  was  a  singular  piece 
of  divine  xcorkmansliip,  which  the  high-priest 
was  obliged  to  wear  upon  solemn  occasions,  as 
one  of  the  conditions  upon  which  God  engaged 
to  give  him  answers. 

There  is  a  great  diversity  of  opinions  likewise 
concerning  the  manner  in  which  (-lod  was  con- 
sulted by  Urim  and  Thummim.  Jt  is  agreed, 
that  this  way  of  consultatiun  was  vscdonly  in 
affairs  of  very  great  imjiortance :  that  the  high- 
priest  was  tlie  only  officiating  minister  in  this 
ceremony  ;  and  that  fur  this  he  was  to  he  clothed 
in  alt  his  pontifical  habits ;  particularly  he  was 
to  have  on  his  breast-plate,  to  which  the  Urim 
and  Thummim  was  affixed;  and  lastly,  that  he 
was  not  allowcdtiiperformthis  siilemn  consulta- 
tiun fur  a  private  person,  but  only  for  the  king, 
fur  the  president  of  the  Haiihedrim,  for  the 
general  of  the  army  of  Israel,  or  for  other  pub- 
lic prr.yons :  And  even  llien,  not  upon  any  affair 
of  a  private  nature,  but  for  things  that  relate 
to  the  public  welfare  uf  church  or  state. 

When  the  Urim  and  Thummim  was  to  be  con- 
sulted, the  high  priest  put  on  his  robes,  and  pre- 
sented himself ,  nut  in  tAc  sanctuary, -Mj/to-e  Ac 
could  nut  enter  but  once  a  year,  but  in  tin 
holy  place,  before  the  curtain  that  parted  thi 
most  holy /)-o/H  tAc  holy  place.  There  stand 
ing  upright,  and  turning  his  face  toward  the 
ark  of  the  covenant,  upon  which  the  divine 
presence  reposed,  he  proposed  the  matter  for 
which  he  had  been  consulted,  llchind  him,  at 
some  distance  out  nf  the  holy  place,  stood  the 
person  for  whom  God  was  consulted,cxpceting-, 
with  humility  and  reverence,  the  answer  that  it 
should  please  the  Lord  to  give  him.  The  Rab- 
bins, who  are  followed  by  .lusephiis,  }'hilo,and 
several  nf  the  ancient  fathers,  arc  of  opinion, 
that  the  high-priest  having  thni  his  eyes  fixed 
vpon  the  stones  of  the  breast-plate,  which  was 
before  him,  he  there  rend  the  answer  of  the  Lord. 
Tlie  letters  that  raised  themselves  out  uf  their 
places,  and  that  shincd  with  more  than  ordinary 
lustre,  were  fanned  into  t'hc  answer  desired. 
For  example,  when  La  vid  inquired  of  Gud,iche- 
ther  he  should  go  vp  to  one  of  the  cities  of  .lii- 
dah,  2  Sam.  2.  1.  it  was  answered  him,  Ahili, 
go  up.  The  tbrflc  letters  Ain,  Lamed,  anrf  Hi, 
came  out  uf  their  places,  as  it  were,  and  raised 
themselves  aburr  the  rest,  to  compose  that  word 
which  contained  the  answer. 

But  there  arc  some  dificnlties  in  this  opinion. 
Jill  the  letters  of  the  Hebrew  alphabet  were 
not  found  in  the  hrcnst-plate :  there  were  four 
wanting,  Helh,  Teth,  Zade,  and  Koph.  To 
supply  these,  the  Habbins  pretend  that  the 
names  of  Jlbraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  were 
nlsn  upon  the  brrnst-platr :  but  fur  all  that, 
Teth  would  be  still  wanting.  Tin  ref ore  they 
any,  that  this  title  also  was  read  there,  Col- 
eUc-»chibttt'liciiel See   here   all   the   tribes 


THU 

of  Israel.    But  all  this  is  advanced  teithcut 

proof,  and  without  the  leastprobubility.  yi  kv 
cond  difficulty  is  this  that  though  one  should  ad- 
mit all  that  the  Hebrew  doctors  guggest  in 
this  affair,  yet  by  what  ruUs  did  the  high- 
priest  make  acombination  of  these  letters,  and 
how  put  he  them  together?  For  it  is  not  said 
that  they  came  out  of  their  places,  but  that  thef 
only  raised  themselves  above  the  rest.  i>uppose, 
for  example,  that  any  six  uf  the  Utters  should 
have  swelled  andshined  withmorc  ihanordinary 
lustre  ;  how  must  the  high-priest  dispose  them, 
vihich  must  be  first  or  last?  Jt  is  answered, 
that  in  this  circumstance,  he  was  always  in- 
spired and  filled  with  the  spirit  of  prophecy  ; 
but  if  it  were  so,  then  the  Uriin  and  Thuinmim 
would  have  been  unnecessary  :  Jur  why  must 
tniraclis  be  multiplied  without  any  occasion^ 
The  high-priest  needid  only  speak  himself.  Jind 
perhaps  the  whole  use  of  the  Urim  and  Tlium- 
inim was  this,  to  be  a  sign  to  the  high-priest 
that  the  J.onl  would  replenish  him  with  an  in- 
ternal and  supernatural  light,  and  make  him 
know  his  will  in  what  was  inquired  after. 

Others  think,  with  a  great  deal  of  probability, 
that  God  then  gave  his  answers  in  articulate 
voices,  which  wireheard  within  the  sanctuary, 
and  from  between  the  cherubijns,  which  covered 
the  ark  or  the  propitiatory,  h  hen  /Ac^jroei- 
ites  made  peace  with  the  Gibeonitis,  they  were 
blamed  for  not  having  inquired  at  the  mouth 
of  the  Lord,  Josh.  9.  14.  which  insinuates  that 
he  had  been  used  to  make  his  voice  heard  when 
he  was  consulted. 

Jf  it  be  inquired  how  long  the  custom  of  consult- 
ing God  by  Urim  and  Thummim  subsisted  in 
Israel;  the  Rabbins  think,  that  it  ccntinued 
no  longer  than  under  the  tabernacle.  Jtisa 
maxim  among  them,  that  the  Huly  Spirit  spake 
to  the  children  of  Israel  by  Urim  onrf 'I'hum- 
mim  white  the  tabernacle  remained ;  andnnder 
the  first  temple,  that  is,  the  temple  of  Solomon, 
by  the  prophets  ;  and  under  the  second  temple, 
or  after  the  coplivity  of  Babylon,  by  the  Uath- 
kol,  or  the  daughter  of  the  voice.  Jiy  this 
they  mean  a  voice  sent  from  heaven,  as  that 
which  was  heard  at  the  baptism  of  Christ,  and 
at  his  transfiguration,  Biat.  3.  17.  |  17.  5. 

Spencer  hasadopted  this  upini on,an dendeavoured 
to  support  it  by  these  two  arguments.  The 
first  is,  that  the  Urim  and  'I'hummim  were 
a  consequence  of  the  divine  government,  or  of 
the  Theocracy  uf  the  Hebrews.  While  the  Lord 
immedintdy  governed,  his  people,  it  was  neces- 
sary that  there  should  always  be  a  means  at 
hand  to  consult  him,  and  to  have  recourse  t» 
him.  Secondly,  that  this  method  was  esta- 
blished lo  consult  God  upon  affairs  that  con- 
cerned the  common  interest  of  thewhole  nation. 
But  the  Theocracy  erased,  soys  he,  when  the 
kingdom  became  hereditary  in  the  person  and 
family  of  Solomon.  The  interests  of  the  na- 
tion ceased  to  be  common,  after  the  division 
of  Israel  into  two  monarchies  ;  one  governed  by 
Rehoboam,  and  the  other  by  .Jeroboam.  Lastly, 
what  seems  to  be  more  eunvincing  than  any- 
reasons  drawn  from  a  conformity  of  things,  it 
does  not  appear  from  the  sacred  history,  that 
there  are  any  f  outsteps  of  con.'ulting  the  J.ord 
by  Urim  and  Thummim,  after  the  coiistruc- 
tion  of  the  temple  of  Solomon  to  the  time  of  its 
destruction;  and  after  its  destruction,  all  art 
agreed,t  hat  thiswasneverrestnredtol  hem  again 

F,zod."8.  30.  thou  shalt  put  on  the  breast-plate  of 
judgment,  the  urim  and  the  t.  Lev.  8.  8. 

l^eut.  3.1. 8.  let  thy  t.  and  urim  be  with  Ihy  holv  one 

K:ra2.tJ3.3toodup  priest  with  urim  and<.j\'VA.7.()5. 
THUNDER. 

Exod.  9.  23.  the  Lord  sent  t.  and  hail,  the  fire  raa 
29.  the  t.  shall  cease,  no,r  shall  there  be  hail 

1  Sam.  7.  10.  the  Lord  thundered  with  ereat  t. 
12.  17.  he  shall  send  t.  ||  Ife.  tlie  Lord  smt  /. 

.Job  2fi.  14.  the?,  of  his  power  who  can  nndnrstnndl 
28.  21).  a  way  for  the  lighlnini  of  the  t.  38.  25. 
39.  19.  hast  thou  clothed  his  neck  with  t.  ? 
25.  he  smelh^th  the  t.  ofthe  cnpl.nins  afar  off 

Psnl.  77.  18.  the  voice  of  thy  /.was  in  the  hoMvrn 
81.  7.  1  answered  ihce  in  ihe  secret  place  of  thy  t 
104.  7.  at  the  voice  of  thy  (.  they  hasted  nwiiy 

Isa.  29.  f).  thou  shalt  be  visited  ofthe  Lord  with  t. 

.Mark  3.  17.  Boanerge.o,  which  is  tlie  sons  oft. 

Her.  li.  1.  I  heard,  as  it  were,  the  noise  of  t. 
14.  2.  I  heard  a  voire,  as  the  voice  of  a  great  t. 
THUNDER. 

1  Sam.  2.  10.  out  of  heaven  shall  he  t.  upon  them 

Job  40.  9.  or  canst  ihoii  t.  wjih  n  voice  like  hiro? 
THUNDEFP. 

Frod.  9.  33.  and  the  t.  and  hail  ceasrd,  34. 
19.  IG.tliero  wore  t.  and  liirhlninjs,  Rev.  16.  18 
See  Seven. 


TIP 

THUNDEBBOLTS. 
Ptal  '9.  43.  ho  gave  Ihoir  tlocks  to  hot  t.     '^' 

TIIUNDEREI). 
1  Sam.  7.  10.  the  Lord  t.  with  a  great  thunder 
8  Sam.  2-J.  14.  the  Lord  t.  from  he:ivcn,  /'iu/.18.13. 
John  12.  '29.  lliev  that  heard  It,  said  liiat  it  t. 

THUNDKUETH. 
Job  37.  4.  he  t.  with  the  voice  ofhis  excellency 

5.  God  t.  marvellously  with  his  voice 
Pjo/.2y.3.the  God  ofglnry  t.  the  Lord  is  on  waters 

THUADKIUNGS. 
Kiod.  9.  28.  that  there  be  no  more  mighty  t. 

20.  18.  and  all  the  people  saw  the  t. 
licv.  4.  5.  out  of  the  throne  proceeded  t.  19.  6. 

8.  5.  and  there  were  voices  and  t.  11.  19, 

THUS. 
Oen.  G.22.<.did  Noah,  according  as  G.  commanded 

20. 10.  t.  she  was  reproved  ||  25. 22.  why  am  1 1. 1 
Kzod.  5.  15.  wherefore  dealest  thou  t.  with  us  1 

12.  11.  t.  shall  ye  eat  it,  with  your  loins  girded 

14.  11.  wherefore  hast  thou  dealt  t.  with  us  ? 
Htn.  15.  31.  (.  separate  the  children  of  Israel 

in.  3.  I.  shall  Aaron  come  into  the  holy  place  • 
J^iim.  8.  14.  I.  shall  thou  separate  the  Levites 

11.  ].'>.  if  ihou  deal  I.  with  me,  kill  mo 
J)cul.  29.  24.  wherefore  hath  the  Lord  done  t. 
Josh.  7.  10.  wherefore  liest  thou  t.  on  thy  face  t 
Sucl^.  8.  I.  men  said,  why  hast  thou  served  us  t.  ? 

l.'l.  W.  why  askest  thou  t.  after  my  name  1 

1  Ham.  14. 9.  if  they  say  t.  to  us,  tarry  till  we  come 

10.  but  if  they  say  t.  come  up  to  us,  then  we  will 
2U.  7.  if  he  say  t.  it  is  well,  2  Savi.  15.  21). 

2  Sam.  0.  22.  I  will  yet  he  more  vile  than  t. 
18.  14.  Joab  said,  I  may  not  tarry  t.  with  thee 

.13.  as  he  went,  t.  he  said,  O  my  son  Absalom 
1  Kinns  3.  22.  t.  they  spake  before  the  king 
iChron.  32.  22.  t.  tlie  Lord  saved  Hczekiah 
F.ira  5.  11.  and  t.  they  returned  us  answer 
6.  2.  and  therein  was  a  record  I.  written 
JWA.  5.  13.  even  (.  be  he  shaken  out  and  emptied 
F.slh.  fi.  9.  t.  shall  it  be  done  to  the  man  whom,  U. 
Jab  27. 12.  why  then  are  ye  t.  altogether  vain  ? 
Psul.  73.  15.  it  I  say  I  will  sj)eak  t.  behold 

21.  H.my  heart  wasgricvfd,  and  I  was  pricked 
128. 4.  t.  shall  the  man  be  bles.'^ed  that  fearelh  L. 

/.«n.  24.  13.  when  t.  it  shall  be  in  the  midst  of  land 
47.  15.  t.  shall  be  unto  thee  with  whom 
Jrr.  X.  27.  for  (.  Iiaili  the  Lord  sai.I,  C.  6. 
5.  13.  I.  shall  it  he  done  unio'thcm 
]ft.  23.  deal  t.  with  them  in  time  of  thine  anger 
K.S.why  hath  the  Lord  done  t.  to  this  great  city  7 
20.  19.  t.  might  we  procure  evil  against  our  souls 
y.ick.  31.  18.  to  whom  art  thou  t   like  in  glory  t 
JImos  2.  II.  is  it  not  even  t.  O  children  of  Israel 
Mai.  1. 13.  f.  ye  brought  an  offering  should  I  accept 
JUal.  2.  5.  t.  it  is  written  of  the  prophet,  /,uA-c24.4G. 
3.  15.  t.  it  becomes  us  to  fulfil  all  righteousness 
20.  54.  scriptures  be  fulfilled,  that  t.  it  must  be 
J.uki- 1.25.  t.  Iiaih  Lonl  dealt  with  me  in  the  days 
2.  48.  son,  why  hast  thou  t.  dealt  with  us? 
II.  45.  master,  t.  saying,  thou  reproachest  us  also 

17.  30.  t.  shall  it  be  when  Son  of  man  is  revealed 

18.  11.  Pharisee  prayed  t.  God,  I  thank  thee 

22.  51.  Jesus  answered  and  said,  suffer  ye  {.  far 

23.  40.  Jesus  having  said  t.  he  gave  up  the  ghost 

24.  30.  as  they  (.  spake,  Jesus  himself  in  the  midst 
40.  when  he  had  I.  spoken,  he  shewed  his  hands 
40.  it  is  written,  (.  it  behoved  Christ  to  sufTiT 

John  4.0.  Jesus  wearied  withjourney,  sat  t.on  well 
1 1.43.  when  hail  t.  spoken,  he  cried, Lazaruscome 
48.  if  we  let  him  I.  alone,  all  will  believe 
Jirl.i  21.  11.  ho  said,  t.  eaith  the  Holy  Ghost 
/?nin.!l.2fl.  thing  formed  sav,  why  hast  made  me  1. 1 

1  Ojr.  14.25. (.are  secrets  of  his  heart  made  manifest 

2  Cor.'i.W  hiveofChrisI  constrains  us,  because  we 

f.judse,  tlialif  one  died  for  all,  then  all  dead 
f  A/7.  3.  15.  let  as  many  as  he  perfect,  be  t.  minded 
]fi-b.  0.  0.  heller  lliinzs  of  you,  thoush  we  t.  speak 
Hiiv.  9.  17.  l.  I  saw  hmses  in  vision,  them  thatsnt 
16.  5.  art  righteous,  Mrause  thou  hast  judged  I. 
Srr  nil).  Do,  Loiin. 
TIM'S  fl;.(/TIItTS. 
Jofh.  7.  20.  A'-linn  said  t.  and  I.  have  T  done 
.Tudff.  18.  4.  I.  and  I.  ihaleih  Mieali  with  mo 
2  .?«;«.  17.  15.  f.  «n</  t.  dill   Ahithophel  counsel 
Ah-ialiMH,  and  f.  and  I.  have  I  counselled 

1  h'imrn  14.5.  t.  and  t.  shall  sav  to  Jeroboam's  wife 

2  A7»/.»  .5.  4. 1,  and  t.  saiil  the  ma  d  of  Israel 
y.  12.  he  said,  t.  and  I.  spiike  he  to  mc,  saying 

TIIYIXK. 
Bro.  IP.  12.  none  hiiv  the  merchandise  of  <.  wood 

TiniNGS. 
F.rnd   33.  4.  when  the  people  heard  these  evil  I. 
1  H.im.  4.  19.  wh«-n  riiinehas'  wife  hoard  the  t. 
11.  4.  Ihev  told  the  t.  of  ihn  men  of  JabcHh,  .5. 
27.  II.  Duvid  snv.d  none  alive  to  brinj  Mo  fJalli 
2.">nm,  4.  4.  when  1.  came  of  Saul  and  Jonathan 
13.  30.  I.  came,  saying,  Alisalnm  hnlli  slan  the 
18.  19.  let  me  now  run  and  boar  the  king  I. 
20.  Joab  said  thou  slinlt  not  bear  t.  thin  day 
C32 


TIM 

2  Sam.  18. 22.  why  wilt  run  1  thou  halt  no  t.  ready 

31.  Cuslii  came,  Cushi  said,  t.  my  lord  the  king 
1  Kings  2.28.  then  t.  caine  to  Joab  and  Joab  lied 

14.  (i.  for  I  am  sent  to  Ihco  with  heavy  t. 
1  Citron.  10.  <J.  and  sent  to  carry  t.  to  their  idols 
I'sal.  112.  7.  he  shall  not  be  afraid  of  evil  t. 
Jcr.  20.  15.  cursed  bo  the  man  that  brought  t. 

49.  23.  for  they  have  heard  evil  1.  faint-liearted 
Ezek.  21.  7.  that  tliou  shalt  answer  for  the  I. 
Dan.  11.  44.  t.  out  of  the  east  shall  trouble  him 
Luke  1.  ]9.1am  sent  to  shew  thee  these  gludt.2.10. 

8.  1.  shewing  the  glad  t.  of  the  kingdom  of  God 
.^Us  11.22.  t.  of  these  things  came  to  tlie  church 

13.  32.  and  wedeclarc  uiitu  you, glad  2. the  promise 
21.  31.  t.  came  to  the  chief  ca|>tain  of  the  band 

Horn.  10.  15.  that  bring  glad  (.  of  good  things 

TIE.  [.Sec  Good. 

I  Sam.  6.  7.  and  (.  the  kine  to  the  cart,  10. 

1  Kings  18.  t  44.  t.  thy  chariot,  and  get  thee  down 
20.  t  14.  who  shall  t.  the  battle  7  he  said.  Thou 

I'rov.O.  21.  bind  on  thy  heart  and  t.  about  thy  ueck 

TIED. 
F.Tod.  30.  31.  and  they  t.  to  it  a  lace  of  blue 

2  Kings  7.  lU.  no  man  there,  but  horses  t.  asses  (. 
MaCUi.^.yc  shall  fi:id  an  asst.  and  a  colt  with  her, 

bring  them  to  mc,  Mark  11.  2,  4.  XuAe  19.  30. 
TILE. 
Ezek.  4.  1.  thou  also,  son  of  man,  take  the  (. 

TILING. 
Luke  5.19.they  let  him  down  thro'  the  l.with  coucli 

TILL. 
Gen.  19.  22.  do  any  thing  t.  thou  be  come  thither 
1  .Saw.  22.  3.  t.  I  know  what  God  will  do  for  me 
•2  Sam.  3.35.  if  I  taste  bre.id  t.  the  sun  be  down 
'iCIiron.  20.  15.  ho  was  helped  t.  he  was  strong 
30. 10.  t.the  wrath  arose,  t.  there  was  no  remedy 
Kzra  2.  03.  t.  there  stooil  up  a  priest,  A'tA.  7.  6.5. 

9.  14.  be  angry  with  us  I.  thou  hast  consumed  us 
Job  14. 14.  all  days  will  I  wait  I.  my  change  como 

27.  5. 1. 1  die  II  Isa.  '■i'i.  14.  not  purged,  t.  ye  die 
VsaL  10.  15.  seek  his  wickedness  t.  thou  find  none 
ProB.  29. 11.  a  wise  man  kee|)eth  it  in  t.  afterwards 
F.ccl.  2.  3.  t.  I  might  see  what  was  that  good 
Cant.  2.  7.  stir  not  up  my  love  t.  he  please,  3.  5. 
Isa.  5.  8.  that  lay  field  to  field,  t.  there  benojilacc 

02.  7.  end  give  him  no  rest,  (.  he  establish,  and  t. 
he  make  Jerusalem  a  jiraise  in  the  earth 
Jer.  49.  9.  destroy  t.  they  have  enough,  Obad.  5. 

52.  3.  t.  he  had  cast  them  out  from  his  presence 
Lam.  3.  50.  I.  the  Lord  look  down  from  heaven 
Kzfk.  28.  15.  was  perfect  t.  iniquity  was  found  in 
Dan.  4.  23.  I.  seven  times  pass  over  him 

12.  13.  hut  go  thou  thy  way  t.  the  end  be 
}{os.  5.  15.  t.  they  acknowledge  their  ofl'ence 

1(1.  12.  t.  he  rain  righteousness  upon  you 
Mat.  1.  25.  t.  she  had  brought  forth  her  first-born 

5.  18.  t.  heaven  and  earth  pass;  one  jot  not  jiass 
Luke  12.  .50.  I  am  straitened  t.  it  he  accomplished 

15.  8.  doth  not  seek  diligently  t.  she  find  it 

19.  13.  he  said  unto  them,  occupy  (.  I  come 
.John  21.  22.  if  I  will  that  he  tarry  t.  I  come,  23. 
^c^«7.I8.t. another  king  arose  who  kncwnolJoseph 

23.  12.  not  eat,  t.  they  had  killed  Paul,  14,21. 
F.ph.  4.  13.  t.  we  all  come  in  the  unity  of  faith 
PA/7.  1.  10.  without  offence,  t.  the  day  of  Christ 

1  Tim.  4.  13. 1. 1  come,  give  attendance  to  reading 
lirv.  2.25.  that  which  ye  have,  hold  fast  t.  I  come 

7.  3.  t.  we  have  sealed  the  servants  of  our  God 
15.  8.  t.  the  seven  plagues  were  f'llfilled 

20.  3.  t.  the  thousand  years  should  be  fulfilled 
See  CoNSL-MKn,  Mornino,  Until. 

TILL,   Verb, 
frfn.  2.  5.  was  not  a  man  to  t.  the  cround,  3.  23. 

2  Sam.  9.  10.  and  thy  servants  shall  t.  the  land 
Icr.  27.  11.  they  shall  t.  it,  and  dwell  therein 

TILLAGE. 
1  CAron.  27. 20.  Ezri  was  over  them  !hat  wore  fort. 
.■WA.  10.  ;n.  Levites  might  have  the  tithes  off. 
Prov.  13.  23.  much  food  is  in  the  t.  of  the  poor 

TILLED. 
F.irk.  30.  9.  I  am  for  voii,  ve  shall  be  t.  and  sown 
30.  34.  and  the  desolate  land  shall  be  t. 

TILLER. 
Cien.  4.  2.  but  Cain  was  a  f.  of  the  ground 

TILLEST. 
Gen.  4.  12.  when  thou  t.  ground,  it  shall  not  yield 

TILLETII. 
Prnv.  12.  11.  he  that  t.  his  land  shall  he  sntisfiod 
28.  19.  ho  that  t.  his  liinrl  shall  have  plenty 

TIMHEK. 
/,/•!'.  14.  45.  he  shall  break  down  the  t.  thereof 
1  Kings  5.18.SO  they  prepared  t.nnd  stones  to  build 
the  house,  1  Chron.  22.  14.  2  CAron.  2. 9. 
15.  22.  nnd  they  look  away  the  1.  of  Hamah 
F.ira  5.  8.  t.  is  laid  in  the  walls,  work  prosperclh 
0.  II.  let  t.  he  pulled  down  from  his  house 
Kch.  2.  8.  Ihal  ho  may  ffive  nie  t.  to  make  beams 
F.irk.  20.  12.  they  shiill  lay  thy  t.  in  the  water 
Unh.  2   11.  the  beam  (Uit  of  the  t.  shall  answer 
7.eth.  5.  4.  it  shall  consume  it  with  tliu  (.  theraof 


TIM 


TIMBREL. 
t-Tod.  15.  20.  and  Miriam  took  a  t.  in  her  hand 
Job  21.  12.  they  take  the  t.  and  harp,  and  rvjoicf 
Psal.  81.  2.  take  a  psalm,  bring  hither  the  t. 
149.  3.  let  them  sing  praises  to  him  with  the  (. 
loU.  4.  iiraisc  him  with  ihe  I.  and  dance,  praise 

TlMliUELS. 
F.iod.  15.  20.  all  the  women  went  out  after  with  t. 
.ludg.  11.  34.  his  daughter  came  out  wiih  t. 
2  Sam.  6.  5.    David  and  house  of  Israel  played 
before  the  Lord  on  t.  1  Chron.  13.  &. 
Psal.  68.  25.  were  the  damsels  j/layiiig  with  t. 
Jer.  31.  t  4.  thou  shall  be  adorned  willi  thy  t. 

TIME. 
This  term  is  eommonlij  taken  fur  the  measure  of 
motion,  or  for  the  duration  of  any  thing.     Jl  is 
also  taken  fur  opportunity,  or  the  facourabl* 
momcnlof  doing  or  oiailitng  any  thing.     J-^cel. 
8.    5,    A    wise    man's    heart   disceriieth     both 
time  and  judgment :  He  knows  buth  what  h* 
ought  tu  do,  and  what  are  thejiilcsl  seasons  for 
doing  it.     Our  Saviour  says,  in  John  7.  ti,  8, 
My  time  is  nut  yet  come;  by  lehich  some  un 
dtr stand,  the  time  of  his  drath;   others,    tha 
season  of  his  appearing  publicly  in  tlie  world; 
and  others,  the  time  oj'  his  guivg  vp  to   the 
feast  of  tabcrnaelcs :  that  is,  I  know  my  time 
to  go,  when  it  will  be  must  safe  and  prupcr fur 
vie.   I  shall  be  there  some  time  during  the  feast, 
but  my  time  is  not  yet  come.     'J'he  lime  of  the 
vengeance  of  God  is  sometimes  called  the  tii/i« 
oftSe  Lord,  the  <i/iic  of  his  visiting.     Jcr,  50. 
27,  31,  Woe  unlo  them,  tor  their  day  is  come 
the  time  of  their  visitation. 
To  gain  Ihe  tiii-e,  i>   mentioned  in  Dan.  2.   8 
I  know  of  certainty  that  ye  would   gain  the 
time.    The  magicians  required  a  length  of  lime 
from  the  king  tu  ejplain  his  dream, hoping  that 
his  desire  of  hvuwing  might  have  passed  away, 
or  that  the  dream  might  have  come  into  hit 
mcmury.     St.  Paul  advises  the  faithful  to  re- 
deem the  time,  because  the  days  are  evil,  F.ph 
5.  10.     Time  is  redeemed,  whin  we  car'.fiSf 
embrace  and  improve  all  the  oesusioKS  and  up- 
pnrtunitics  which  the  J.ordprcstnts  unto  us  for 
his  glory,  and  the  guod  ufuursilw  s  and  others; 
nut  ."iifftring  these  sea.suns  to  be  stolen  frnmus, 
and  lust  by  cares  and  thoughts  about  the  world  ; 
Jlnd  vhcreas  we  have  lust  and  misimpruccd 
much  lime,  ire  uught  therefure  to  double  our 
diligrnec,  and  do  the  mure  guod  iHtiine  to  come. 
King  Jihasuerus  covsulttd  with  the  wise  men  who 
knew  the  times,  Esih.    1.  13.   'J'hat  is,  he  ad- 
vised with  his  cotinsillors  that  understoud  the 
history,  the  customs,  and  the  laws  of  the  Per- 
sians.     The  knowledge  of  histury  is  one  of  the 
principal  i/nalijieatiuns  of  a  Statesman.     Fot 
how  should  he  knuw  the  interest  of  his  country, 
if  he  is  ignorant  of  its  times,  revolutions,  and 
remarkable  occurrences'!    St.  Jcrom  has  it  in 
his  translalion,he  consulted  IhcSages  that  were 
always  near  his  person,  according  to  the  custom 
of  kings.   The  Chaldci  paruphrast  will  have  it 
that  he  consulted  the  children  of  /ssachar,  who 
■were  skilful  in  the  knutelcdge  o/ times  and  sea 
sons.    This  tribe  was  noted  fur  their  knowledge 
of  the  times.     1  Chron.  12.  32,  Of  llic  children 
of  Issachar,  which  were  men  lhal  had  under- 
standing of  the  <i/»c«,  to  know  what  Israel  ought 
to  do.   Some  by  thisunderstandthet'rknowledge 
of  the  stars,  and  of  the  several  seasons  and 
changes  of  the  air  ;  which  might  be  of  good  use 
in  husbandry,  to  which  this  tribe  was  addicted. 
Others  think,  that  by  this  is  to  be  unacrflood 
their  political  prudence  in  disiern^ng  and  em- 
bracimr  the  fit  seasons  for  all  Ihitr  act  tens. 
Christ  .lesus  says  to  his ^Ipostles,  trhoasked  nim 
if  he  was  soun  tu  restore  the  kingdom  tu  Israel, 
It  is  not  for  you  to  knoxv  the  times  nnd  seasons, 
which  the  Father  haih  put  in  his  own  power, 
Acts  1.7.      They  still  thought  that  Ihe  kingdom 
of  Ihe  Messiah  was  tu  be  a  temporal  kingdom  : 
Put  aftirwards  they  were  undeceived,  and  the 
Huty  Ghost,  which  they  received  at  Ihelimfof 
Pentecost,  instrueled  them,  that  the  complete 
kingdom  of  the  Messiah,  the  renewing  of  all 
thincs,  was  not  In  take  place  before  the  end  of 
the  wurld,  Ac<s  3.    20,   21.    where    St.    Peter 
speaking  to  the  .lews,  calls  this  lime,  a  liineof^ 
refreshing,  and  the  /i/h/-.<  of  llie  reslilulinn  of 
all  things.     St.  Paul,  1  Thess.  5.  1,  2.  makes 
use  of  utmost  the  same  terms,  in  which  our  Sa- 
viour eipressed  himself  to  his  .Ipostles,  eon 
cerning  his  la.it  coming.     Hut  of  Ihe  times  and 
seasons  yo  have  no  need  ihiit  I  wrile  unto  you: 
For  ye  know  that  Ihe  day  of  the  Lord  cometh 
ns  a  thief  in  the  nieht. 
Time  is  put  for  a  year.  Seven  limes,  that  is,  seven 
years,  Dan.  4.  10.  Accepliihlr  time,  is  the  lime 
of  the  favour, of  theguodnc$t,andofihtmcrc)i,of 


TIM 

Ood,  Psal.  (JD.  13,  My  prayer  is  untc  thee  in 
au  acceptable  time.  J  pray  in  a  lime  of 
grace.  1  seek  thee  when  tkuu  viayest  be  found, 
in  a,  good  day,  in  the  day  of  grace  and  mercy. 
The  devils  cumplained,  Mat.  8.  2U.  that  Christ 
teas  come  to  tormunt  tliein  before  the  time: 
that  is,  before  the  last  judgment,  at  which  the 
devils  will  be  thrown  for  ever  into  thejire  pre- 
pared for  them.  Tiie  fulness  of  time,  is  the 
lime  which  God  had  appointed  and  predicted  as 
the  fittest  season  for  the  coming  of  the  Meesiali, 
(ial.  4.  4.  The  Psalmist  says,  Paul.  ^1.  15, 
Bly  limes  are  in  thy  liaiid  :  that  is,  the  time  of 
my  life,hoic  long  J  shall  live  -or,  all  the  affairs 
and  events  of  my  life  are  wholly  in  thy  power, 
to  dispose  and  ordir  as  thou seest  fit. 
Oen.  la.  10.  return  according  to  the  t.  of  life,  14. 

24.  11.  the  t.  that  women  go  out  to  draw  water 
3'.).  5.  from  tlie  t.  he  had  made  him  overseer 

47.  i!9.  the  t.  drew  nigh  that  Israel  must  die 
Exod.  21.  19.  only  he  shall  pay  for  loss  of  his  t. 
Lev.  15.  25.  if  beyond  the  t.  of  her  separation 

lb.  16.  a  wife  besides  the  other  in  her  life-(. 
J\i'am.  13. 20.  the  t.  was  the  t.  of  first  ripe  grapes 

26.  10.  what  t.  the  fire  devoured  250  men 
Oeut.  16.  9.  such  t.  thou  put  the  sickle  to  the  corn 
Josh.  10.  27.  at  the  t.  of  the  going  down  of  the  sun 
Joshua  commanded,  2  Chron.  18.  34.  | 
42.  and  their  land  did  Joshua  lake  at  one  t. 
Judg.\S.'.i\.a.\\l\\(i  t.  the  house  of  God  wasinShilol 
2  Sam.  7.  11.  since  the  t.  I  commanded  judges 

11.  1.  at  the  (.  when  kings  go  forth  to  battle 

23.  8.  against  eight  hundred  he  slew  at  one  t. 
2  Kingsi.  26,  is  it  t.  to  receive  money  and  garments 
1  Chron.  9.  25.  were  to  come  from  t.  to  t.  with  them 
Ezra  4.  10.  peace,  and  at  such  a  t.  17.  |  7.  12. 

10.  13.  people  are  many,  and  it  is  a  t.  of  rain 
JVcA.2.6.  when  wilt  thou  return  1  and  I  set  him  a  t. 
Job  6. 17.  what  t.  they  wax  warm  they  vanish 

9. 19.  if  of  judgment,  who  shall  set  me  a  t.  to  plead 
15.  32.  it  shall  be  accomplished  before  his  t. 
ii2.  16.  wicked,  which  were  cut  down  out  oft. 
38. 23.  which  I  reserved  against  the  t.  of  trouble 
^  39.  1.  knowest  thou  the  (.  they  bring  forth  7  2. 

Psal.  32.  6.  in  a  t.  when  lliou  mayest  be  found 
37.  19.  they  shall  not  be  ashamed  in  the  evil  t. 
41.  1.  the  Lord  will  deliver  him  in  t.  of  trouble 
.56.  3.  what  t.  I  am  afraid,  I  will  trust  in  thee 
69.  13.  my  prayer  is  to  thee  in  an  acceptable  t. 
81.  15.  their  t.  should  havs  endured  for  ever 
89.  47.  remember  how  short  my  t.  is 
105.  19.  until  the  t.  that  his  word  came 

Eccl.  3.  1.  there  is  a  £.  to  every  purpose,  17.  |  8.  C. 
2.  a  t.  to  be  born,  and  a  t.  to  die;  a  t.  to  plant 
7.  17.  why  shouldest  thou  die  before  thy  t.  ? 
8.5.a  wise  man's  heart  discerneth  t.  andjudgment 
9.  11.  but  t.  and  chance  happeneth  to  them  all 
12.  so  are  the  sons  of  men  snared  in  an  evil  t. 

Isa.  26.  17.  that  draweth  near  the  t.  of  her  delivery 
28.  19.  from  the  t.  it'gocth  forth  it  shall  take  you 
4.5.  21.  who  hath  declared  thic  from  ancient  t.  ? 

48.  16.  from  the  t.  that  it  was,  there  am  I 

49.  8.  in  an  acceptable  t.  have  I  heard  thee,  and 
in  a  day  of  salvation  helped  thee,  2  Cor.  6.  2. 

60.  22.  I  the  Lord  will  hasten  it  in  his  t. 
Jer.  6.  13.  at  the  1. 1  visit,  they  shall  be  cast  down 
8. 7.  crane  and  swallow  observe  the  t.  of  comio" 

15.  looked  for  a  (.  of  health,  and  behold  trouble 
14.  8.  the  Saviour  thereof  in  t.  of  trouble 

19.  and  for  the  t.  of  healing,  and  behold  trouble 

30.7.  it  is  even  the  t.  of  Jacob's  trouble 
46.  21.  and  the  t.  of  their  visitation,  .50.  27. 
49.  8.  the  t.  that  I  will  visit  him,  50.  31. 

19.  and  who  will  appoint  me  the  t.  ?  50  44. 
51.  33.  Babylon  like  a  floor,  it  is  t.  to  thresh  het 
F.iek.  4.  10.  from  t.  to  (.  shalt  thoj  cat  it 

16. 8.  thy  t.  was  the  t.  of  love,  I  spread  my  skirt 
57.  as  at  the  t.  of  thy  reproach  of  daughters 

30.  3.  diyis  near,  it  shall  be  the  t.  of  the  heathen 
Van.  2.  8.  I  know  that  ye  would  gain  the  t. 
9.  to  speak  before  one,  till  the  t.  be  changed 

16.  Daniel  desired  that  ho  would  give  him  t. 
3.  5.  at  what  t.  ye  heai'the  sound  of  cornet,  1.5. 

7.  12.  yet  their  lives  were  prolonged  for  a  t. 
22.  the  t.  came  that  ihe  saints  possessed  kingdom 

25.  until  a  t.  and  the  dividing  oft.  12.  7.  ' 

8.  17.  at  the  t.  of  the  end  shall  be  the  vision 

9.  21.  touched  me  about  the  (.  of  evening  oblation 

11.  24.  he  shall  forecast  his  devices  for  a  t. 
35.  to  make  them  white,  to  the  t.  of  the  end 
40.  atthet.  of  the  end  shall  the  king  of  the  south 

12.  1.  and  there  shall  be  a  t.  of  tHkuble 
4.  seal  the  book,  even  to  the  t.  of  the  end,  9. 
11.  from  the  Mho  daily  sacrifice  be  taken  away 

ffos.  10.  12.  it  is  t.  to  seek  the  Lord,  till  he  come 
Mic.  5.  3.  till  the  t.  that  she  which  tiavaileth 
ffag-.  1.  4.  is  it  t.  to  dwell  in  your  ceiled  houses  7 
Zf«S.  14.  7.  that  at  evening  t.  it  shall  be  light 
Wat.  3.  11.  nor  vine  cast  her  fruit  before  the  t. 
Mat.  )    11.  about  the  t.  they  were  carried  away 
633 


TIM 

Mat.  2. 7.  Herod  inquired  what  t.  star  appeared 
8.  29.  art  thou  come  to  torment  us  beloie  the  1. 1 
21.  34.  and  when  the  t.  of  the  fruit  drew  myir 
26.  18.  the  master  saith,  my  (.  is  at  hand 

Mark  1.  15.  the  t.  is  fullillud,  repent  and  believe 
4.  17.  have  no  root,  and  so  enduie  but  tor  a  t. 
0.  35.  this  is  a  desert,  and  now  the  I.  is  I'ar  iiassed 
11.  13.  lor  the  t.  of  tigs  was  not  yet 

13.  33.  watch,  for  ye  know  not  when  the  t.  is 
J^uke\.  57.  Elisabeth's  full  t.  came  to  be  delivered 

4.  5.  shewed  him  all  kingdoms  in  a  moment  oft. 

7.  45.  but  this  woman,  suice  the  t.  1  came  in 

8.  13.  which  in  t.  of  temptation  fall  away 

13.  35.  ye  shall  not  see  me,  till  the  t.  come  when 

19.  44.  thou  knewest  not  the  t.  of  thy  visitation 

John  7.  6.  my  I.  is  not  come,  your  t.  is  always  ready 

16.  2.  the  I.  Cometh  thai  whosoever  kiUeih  you 
25.  the  t.  Cometh  when  I  shall  no  more  speak 

Acts  1.  21.  all  the  t.  the  Lord  went  in  and  out 
7.  17.  but  when  the  t.  of  the  promise  drew  nigh 
20.  in  which  t.  Moses  was  born,  and  was  fair 

17.  21.  si)ent  their  t.  in  nothing  else,  but  to  tell 
Rom.  13.  11.  it  is  high  t.  tq  awake  out  of  sleep 
1  Cor.  4.  5.  therefore  judge  nothing  before  the  t. 

7.  5.  defraud  not,  except  with  consent  lor  a  t. 
29.  but  this  1  say,  brethren,  the  t.  is  short 
Eph.  5.  16.  redeeming  the  t.  Col.  4.  5. 

1  'J'hess.  2. 17.  being  taken  from  you  for  a  short  t. 

2  Thess.  2.  6.  that  he  might  be  revealed  in  his  t. 
2  Tim.  4.  3.  t.  come,  when  they  will  nut  endure 

0.  and  the  t.  of  my  departure  is  at  hand 
JJeb.  4.  16.  may  find  grace  to  help  in  t.  of  need 

5.  12.  when  for  the  t.  ye  ought  to  be  teachers 

9.  9.  whicli  was  a  figure  for  the  t.  then  present 
10.  imposed  on  them  till  the  t.  of  reformation 

11.  32.  the  t.  would  fail  me  to  tell  of  Gideon 
Jam.  4.  14.  a  vapour  that  appeareth  a  little  t. 
1  Fct.  1. 11.  what  manner  of  t.  the  Spirit  of  Christ 
17.  pass  the  t.  of  your  sojourning  here  in  fear 

4.  2.  he  no  longer  should  live  the  rest  of  his  t. 
Rev.  1.  3.  for  the  t.  is  at  hand,  22.  10. 

10.  6.  sware,  that  there  should  be  t.  no  longer 

11.  18.  t.  of  the  dead,  that  they  should  bejuilged 

12.  12.  he  knoweth  that  he  halJi  but  a  short  t. 
14. she  is  nourished  for  at.  and  times,andhalf  a  t. 

Any  TIME. 
/.«).  25.  32.  the  Levitcs  may  redeem  at  any  t. 
iViuH.  35.  26.  ifthoslayer  at  an»/t.  come  without 
1  .Sani.20.12.sounded  my  father  to-morrow  at  any  t. 
1  A7nn'i  l.O.father  had  not  displeased  him  at  any  t. 
Mat.i.  6.  angels  shall  boar  thee  up,  lestai«;i?^  t. 
thou  dash  thy  foot  against  a  stone,  J^uke  4. 11. 

5.  25.  lest  at  any  t.  the  adversary  deliver  thee 

13.  15.  lest  at  any  t.  they  should  see.  Murk  4.  12. 
lyuke  15.29.  nor  transgressed  I  at  any  I.  thy  com. 

21.  34.  lest  at  any  t.  your  hearts  be  overcharged 
■John  1.  18.  no  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  t. 

5.  37.  nor  have  ye  heard  his  voice  at  luiy  t. 
Acts  11.  8.  nothing  unclean  hath  at  any  t.  entered 
1  C«r.9.7.who  goeth  a  warfare  at  a.t.  on  his  charges 
*1  Thess.  2. 5.  nor  at  any  t.  used  we  flattering  words 
Hcb. 1.5.  to  which  oftheangelssaid  he  alanyt.  13. 

2.  1.  lest  at  any  t.  we  should  let  them  slip 
.fohn  4.  12.  no  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  t. 
See  AiToi.NTED,   Ekfore,   Comk,  Day,    Due. 

In  the  TIME. 
^871.  38.  27.  come  to  pass  in  the  t.  of  her  travail 
Kxod.  34.  18.  commanded  in  the  t.  of  month  Ahib 
,Judg.  10.  14.  let  them  deliver  in  the.  t.  of  tribulation 

15. 1.  in  the  t.  of  wheat  harvest  Samson  visited 

1  Kings  15. 23.  in  the  t.  of  old  age  he  was  diseased 

2  Chron.  28.  22.  in  the  t.  of  his  distress  did  he  tres- 

pass yet  more  against  the  Lord 
J^eh.  9.  27.  in  the  t.  of  their  troubte  thou  heardest 
Psal.  4.  7.  more  than  in  the  t.  when  corn  increased 
21.  9.  as  a  fiery  oven  in  the  t.  of  thine  anger 
27.  5.  in  the  t.  of  trouble  he  shall  hide  me 
37.  .39.  he  is  their  strength  in  the  I.  of  trouble 
71.9.  cast  me  not  ofTi'n  the  t.  of  old  age 
Prov.  25. 13.  as  the  cold  of  snow  in  the  t.of  harvest 
19.cpnfidenccin  unfaithfulmanm  tAct.of  trouble 
Tsa.  33.  2.  be  thou  oursalvation  in  the  t.  of  trouble 
Jer.  2.  27.  in  the  t.  of  trouble  they  will  say 
28.  if  they  can  save  thee  in  the  t.  of  trouble 
8.12.  in  the  t.  of  visitation  they  shall  be  cast  down 
10.  1.5.  in  the  t.  of  visitation  they  perish,  51. 18. 
11.12.  shall  not  save  them  at  all  in  J/k;  <.  of  trouble 

14.  I  will  not  hear  them  in  the  t.  that  they  cry 
15.  II.  verily  I  will  cause  enemy  to  entreat  thee 

well  in  Ihct.  of  evil,  and  in  the  t.  of  affliction 

18.  23.  deal  thus  with  them  in  the  t.  of  thine  anger 
.50.  16.  handlelh  the  sickle  in  the  t.  of  harvest 

Kirk.  27.  34.  in  the  t.  when  thou  shalt  be  broken 
35.  5.  had  a  perpetual  haired,  in  the  t.  of  their 
calamity,  in  the  t.  thai  their  iniquity  had  an  end 
Hos.2. 9.  I  will  take  away  my  corn  in  the  Mhertof 
Zerh.  10.  1.  ask  rain  in  the  t.  of  the  latter  rain 
Mat.  13.30.  in  the  t.  of  harvest  I  will  say  to  reapers 
Luke  4.  27.  were  many  lepers  in-the  t.  of  Eliscus 
See  L.^sT  Long,  Many,  Old,  Past,  Process. 
4N 


I 


TIM 


Same  TIME. 

jYum.  32.  10.  Lord's  anger  wasliindled  lhe*«njet 

JJeut.  9.  20.  I  prayed  lor  Aaron  also  the  samet. 

2  Kings  8.  22.  yet  Edom  revolted,  ihen  Libnab  re>- 
volted  at  the  same  t.  2  Ch  'on.  21. 10. 

■2  Chron.  15.  11.  ihey  ollcrcd  the  some  t.  700  oxen 
16.  10.  Asa  oppressed  the  pcojile  at  the  samB  t. 

Ezra  5.  3.  at  tlie  same  t.  came  to  them  Tatnai 

.Jer.  39.  10.  gave  them  vineyards  at  the  same  t. 

Eiek.  38.  10.  at  the  same  t.  shall  thou  thmk  evil 

Dan.  4.  36.  at  the  same  t.  my  reason  returned 
12. 1.  trouble,  such  as  never  was  to  Xhalsame  t. 

Acts  19.  23.  the  samet.  there  aro.se  no  small  stir 

See  Secomd,  Skt. 

That  TIME. 

.Judg.  11.  26.  why  did  ye  not  recover  in  that  I. 

1  Sam.  11.  y.  to-niorrow  by  that  t.  the  sun  be  hoi 

Ezra  5. 16.  since  that  I.  hath  it  been  in  budding 

A'eA.  4.  16.  to  pass  from  that  t.  forth,  13.  21. 

Isa,  10.  13.  spoken  concerning  Moab  since  that  U 
18.  7.  in  that  t.  shall  the  present  be  brought 
44.8.  havel  not  told  iheelrom  thatt.aiid  declared 
45.  21.  who  halh  told  it  from  tAat  1. 1 
48.  8.  from  that  t.  that  thine  ear  was  not  opened 

Jer.  50.  4.  that  t.  ]»rael  shall  come  weejiing 
2U.  in  that  t.  ihe  iniquity  of  Israel  nut  be  found 

Amos  5.  13.  the  prudent  keep  silence  in  that  t. 

Mat.  4.  17.  from  thai  t.  Jesus  began  to  preach 
16.  21.  from  that  t.  began  to  shew  his  disciples 
26.  16.  from  that  t.  Judas  sought  oi)portunity 

JMke  16. 16.  since  that  t.  kingdom  of  G.  is  preached 

JuAnO.  66.  from  thai  t.  many  disi'iples  went  back 

Acts  12.  1.  about  that      Herod  stretched  to  vex 
At  that  TIMP:. 

JVum.  22.  4.  Balak  was  king  of  Moab  at  that  t. 

JUcut.  1.  9.  and  i  spake  to  you  at  that  t.  saying 
16.  I  charged  your  judges  <i£  that  t.  saying 
18.  I  commanded  you  at  that  t.  3.  18. 
3.  21.  1  commanded  Joshua  at  that  t.  saying 

23.  I  besought  Ihe  Lord  at  that  t.  saying 
5.  5. 1  stood  between  the  Lord  and  you  at  that  U 
9. 19.  the  Lord  hearkened  to  me  at  that  I.  10.  10. 

1  Sam.  14.  18.  the  ark  was  at  that  t.  with  Israel 

2  Chron.  13.  18.  Israel  brought  under  at  that  t. 
30.  3.  they  could  not  keep  the  passovor  at  that  t. 
35.  17.  Israel  kept  the  passover  at  that  t. 

Jer.  3.  17.  at  that  t.  they  shall  call  Jerusalem 
8.  1.  at  that  t.  shall  Ihey  bring  out  the  bones 
33.15.  at  that  t.  cause  the  hninch  of  righteousness 
]>av.  12.  1.  at  Ihatt.  shall  Michael  stand  up 
Jilic.  3.  4.  will  hide  bis  face  from  them  at  that  t. 
Zcph.  1.  12.  at  that  t.  I  will  search  Jerusali  in 
3.  19.  at  that  t.  I  will  undo  all  that  attlici  i. 

20.  at  that  t.  will  I  bring  you  again,  in  time 
/yuf.'c  23. 7.  himself  was  at  Jerusalem,  at  that  L 
Acts 8.  1.  at  that  t.  was  a  great  persecution 
Eph.i.  12.  at  that  t.  ye  were  wiliiout  Christ 
See  Third. 
TAis  TIME. 
Oen.  29.  34.  this  t.  will  my  husband  be  joined 
Exod.  8.32.  Pharaoh  hardened  his  heart  at  thit  t. 
9  14  I  will  at  this  t.  send  all  my  plagues 
18.  to-morrow  ahont  this  1. 1  will  cause  it  to  rain 
27.  and  Pharaoh  said,  I  have  sinned  this  t. 
JVum.  23.  23.  according  to  this  t.  it  shall  be  paid 
Judg.  13.  23.  nor  would  as  mthis  t.  haveloM  us 
21.  22.  for  ye  did  notgive  unto  them  at  ihi.tt. 

1  Sam.  9. 13.  fur  about  this  t.  ye  shall  find  him 

2  Sam.  17.  7.  the  counsel  is  not  good  at  this  t. 

1  Kings  2. 26. 1  will  not  al  this  t.  put  thee  to  death 
19.2. lo- morrow  this  t.20  6.2  Kinffs7.],  18. 1 10.  6. 
.VcA.  13.  6.  in  all  this  t.  was  not  I  at  Jerusalem 
Esth.  4.  14.  for  if  thou  boldest  thy  peace  at  this  t, 
art  come  to  the  kingdom  for  such  n  t.  as  this 
Psnl  113.  2.  blessid  be  the  Lord  from  this  t.  forih 
115.  IS.  we  will  bless  th(!  Lord  from  this  t.  forth 
121.  8.  he  will  preserve  tlice  from  this  t.  forth 
Isa.4^.  6. 1  have  shewed  new  things  from  this  t.  < 
Jer.  3.  4.  wilt  thou  not  from  thi.i  t.  cry  unto  me  ? 
51.  6.  this  is  the  I.  of  Ihe  Lord's  vengranie 
Mic-  2.  3.  nor  go  haughtily  for  this  t.  is  evil 
Mat.  24.  21.  tribulation  such  ns  was  not  sin'e  Iha 
beginning  of  the  world  lo  this  t.  Mark  13.  19. 
Mark  10.  30.  hut  be  shall  receive  a  hundred  fold 
now  in  this  t.  and  eternal  life,  /,vke  18.  30. 
Evke  12.  56.  how  is  it  ye  do  not  discern  this  t.  7 
.John  11.  39.  Lord,  by  this  t.  he  stinkelli 
Acts  1.  6.  wilt  thou  at  this  t.  restore  Ihe  kingdom  t 
24.  25.  Fcli.x  answered,  go  thy  way  for  this  t. 
Rom.  3.  21}.  lo  declare  at  this  t.  his  rigbleousncss 

8.  13.  that  the  siiflTcrings  of  this  present  t. 

9.  9.  at  this  t.  will  I  come,  Sara  shall  have  a  son 
11.  5.  BO  at  this  present  t.  there  is  a  rcmnnnt 

1  Cor.  16.  12.  his  will  was  not  to  come  nt  this  t. 

2  Cor.  8.  14.  that  now  nl  this  t.  your  abundanco 

TIMES. 
Gen.  27.  36.  he  hath  sujiplnntcd  me  these  two  /. 
I.ev.  19.  26.  yo  shall  not  observe  t.  Dent.  18. 10, 11 
Deut.  4.  42.  the  slaver  baled  him  not  in  t.  past 
Judg.  13.  25.  tne  Spirit  began  lo  ttiove  him  ai  t. 


TIT 

JvAg- 16. 30. 1  will  go  out  as  at  other  t.  and  shake 
SO.  30.  put  themselves  in  array  as  at  other  (. 

31.  the  BenjaniiteB  began  to  kill  as  at  other  t. 
I  Sam.  3. 10.  the  Lord  called  as  at  other  (.  Samuel 
]d  10.  David  played  with  his  hand  as  at  other  t. 

20.  25.  the  king  sat  on  his  seat  as  at  other  (. 
2A'in^«  19. 25.  hast  thou  not  heard  long  ago  how  of 

oncient  U  that  I  have  formed  ill  Isa.  37.  20. 

21.  6.  Manasseh  observed  t.  2  Chron.  33.  6. 

1  Chr.  12. 32.  men  that  had  understanding  of  the  t. 

29.  30.  the  t.  that  went  over  him  and  over  Israel 
S  Chron.  15.  5.  in  those  t.  there  was  no  peace 
Kslh.  1.  13.  the  wise  men  which  knew  the  t. 
Job  24.  1.  t.  are  not  hidden  from  the  Almighty 
Psal.  9.  9.  Lord  will  be  a  refuge  in  t.  of  trouble 

10.  1.  why  hidest  thou  thyself  in  t.  of  troublel 

31. 15.  my  t.  are  in  thy  hand,  deliver  mo  from  enem. 
44.  1.  what  works  tliciu  diilst  in  the  t.  of  old 

77.  5.  I  have  considered  the  years  of  ancient  t. 
Iia.  33.  6.  knowledge  shall  be  the  stability  of  thy  t. 

4C.  10.  from  ancient  t.  things  not  yet  done 
Ezek.  12.  27.  he  prophesied  of  the  t.  far  off 
Dan.  2.  21.  he  changeth  the  (.  and  the  seasons 

7.  25.  he  shall  think  to  change  (.  and  laws 

9.  25.  the  streets  shall  be  built  in  troublous  t. 

11.  14.  in  those  t.  there  shall  many  stand  up 

12.  7.  for  a  time,  t.  and  a  half,  Jiev.  12.  14. 
^af.lH.S.but  canye  not  discern  the  signs  of  the  t.? 
Luke  21.  24.  till  the  t.  of  the  Gentiles  be  fulfilled 
Jets  1.  7.  it  is  not  for  you  to  know  the  t.  or  seasons 

3.  10.  when  the  t.  of  refreshing  shall  come 

21.  till  the  t.  of  restitution  of  all  things 

14. 16.  who  in  t.  past  sulTured  all  nations  to  walk 
17.  26.  hath  determined  the  t.  before  appointed 

30.  the  t.  of  this  ignorance  God  winked  at 
Rom.  11.  30.  ns  ye  in  t.  past  have  not  bdievedGod 
2  Cor.  11.  24.  of  Jews  five  t.  received  I  forty  stripes 
Qal.  1.  23.  that  he  which  ])ersecuted  us  in  t.  past 

4.  10.  ye  observe  days  and  months,  t.  and  years 
jEpA.  1.  10.  in  the  dispensation  of  the  fulness  oft. 
1  Ttiess.  .5.  1.  of  the  t.  ye  have  no  need  that  I  write 
1  Tim.  4.  ] .  in  latter  t.  some  shall  depart  from  faith 

6.  15.  which  in  his  t.  he  shall  shew  who  is  king 
ZTim.  3.  1.  in  lust  days  perilous  t.  shall  come 
Tit.  1.  3.  hath  in  due  t.  manifested  his  word 
Hcb.l.  1.  God  who  at  sundrv  t.  spake  to  the  fathers 

Ml  TIMES. 
I.tv.  16. 2.  that  he  come  not  at  all  t.  within  th-^  v^il 
\Kings  8.  .50.  maintain  cause  of  his  people  at  ah  I. 
P.ial.  .34.  1.  I  will  bless  the  Lord  at  all  t.  his  praise 
62. 8.  trust  in  him  at  all  t.  ye  people  pour  out  heart 
106.3.  hles.-^ed  is  he  that  dotlj  righteousness  a.1  all  t. 
119.20.for  longing  it  hath  to  thy  judgments  at  aH  t. 
Prov.  5-  19.  let  her  breasts  satisfy  thee  at  all  t. 
17.  17.  n  friend  loveth  at  all  t.  a  brother  is  born  for 
See  Appointed,  Many,  Seven,  Ten,  Three. 
TINGLE. 
1  Sam.  3.  11.  at  which  the  ears  of  every  one  that 
hkiars  it  shall  t.'i  Kings  21. 12.  Jer.  19.  3. 
TINKLING. 
Isa.  3.  10.  mincing  and  making  a  J.  with  their  feet 
IS.  take  away  the  bravery  of  their  t.  ornaments 
1  Cor.  13. 1.  I  am  become  as  a  (.  cymbal 

TIN. 
JV«ni.31 .22.(.lhat  mny  abide  fire,  make  go  thro'  fire 
Isa.  1.  25.  and  I  will  tjike  away  all  thy  t. 
Eir.k.  22.  IS.  all  they  are  brass,  and  t.  and  iron 
20.  as  they  gather  lead  and  t.  into  the  furnace 
27.  12.  Tarshish  was  Ihv  mercfiant  in  t.  and  lead 

Tip. 

Luke  10.  24.  mav  dip  the  t.  of  his  finger  in  water 

Sec  Rishl  Ear. 

TIRE. 

Eick.  24.  17.  bind  the  (.  of  thy  head  upon  thee 

TIRED. 
^  Kings  9.  30.  Jezebel  I.  hor  head,  and  looked 

TIRES. 
Ua.  3.  13.  the  Lord  will  take  away  their  t. 
Eick.  24.  23.  and  ynnr  t.  shall  be  on  your  heads 

TITHE. 
The  practice  of  paying  tilling  is  very  ancient; 
for  we  finil,  Gen.  14.  20.  that  Jfhraham  gave 
tithes  to  Mclchiicdck,  king  of  Salrm,  at  his 
return  from  his  ripi-dilion  against  Chedur- 
laomcr,  and  the  four  kings  in  confederacy 
teith  him.  .Abraham  gave  him  the  tithe  of  all 
tJlc  booty  taken  from  the  enemy.  .Tacob  imi- 
tated this  piety  of  his  grandfather  when  he 
vowed  to  the  f^rd  the  titlie  of  all  the  substance 
he  might  acquire  in  .Mrsnpotamia.     Gen.  28. 

22,  Of  nil  tl.at  thou  shalt  jivc  me,  I  will  surely 
give  the  (fjitA  unto  thee;  for  the  mainte- 
nance of  thy  worship,  and  othr-r  pious  uses. 
Under  th'-  law,  Moses  ordained,  l.e.v.  27.  30, 

31.  32,  All  the  tithe  of  the  lnnH,  whether 
of  the  seed  of  the  land,  or  of  the  fruit  of 
the  tree,  is  the  Lord's;  it  is  holy  unto  the 
Lord,  kc. 

There  were  three  sorts  o/ tithes  to  be  paid  from 
the  people  (besides  those  from  the  I^evitej  to 
034 


TIT 

the  priests,)  Num.  28.  26,  27,  &e.  (1)  To  the 
/.evites,fortheirmai7Uenance, Nam.  18.21,24. 
(2)  For  the  Lord's  feasts  and  sacrifices,  to  be 
eaten  in  the  place  which  the  Lord  should 
choose  to  put  his  name  there ;  to  wit,  where 
the  ark  should  be,  the  tabernacle  or  temple. 
This  tenth  part  was  either  sent  to  .lerusalem 
in  kind,  or,  if  it  was  too  far,  thnj  sent  the 
value  in  money,  which  was  to  be  laid  out  for 
oxen,  sheep,  wine,  or  what  else  they  pleased, 
Dcut.  14.  22,  23,  24,  <$-c.  (3)  Besides  these 
two,  there  was  to  be,  every  third  year,  a  tithe 
for  the  poor,  to  be  eaten  at  their  own  dwell- 
ings, Ueut.  14.  28,  29.  Some  are  of  opinion 
that  this  third  tithe  was  not  different  from  the 
second  before  taken  notice  of,  except  that  in 
the  third  year  it  was  not  brought  to  the  temple, 
but  was  usedjipon  the  spot  by  every  one  in 
the  city  of  his  habitation.  So  that  there  were 
only,  according  to  them,  two  sorts  of  tithes, 
that  which  was  given  to  the  Levites  and  priests, 
and  that  which  was  applied  to  making  feasts 
of  charity,  either  in  the  temple  of  Jerusalem, 
or  in  other  cities. 

Tithes  were  paid  to  (rod  at  a  sign  of  homage 
and  gratitude :  thus  Jibraham's  giving  iUhos, 
of  the  spoil  to  Melchiiedek,  icas  a  token  that 
he  owned  his  victory  and  success  to  be  from 
God;  and  when  tithes  were  kept  back  from 
the  priests,  the  Lord  complained  that  he  was 
robbed,  Mai.  3.  H.  The  paying  of  them  was 
an  honouring  of  God,  Prov.  3.  9.  Hence  the 
..Apostle  proves  the  superiority  of  Melehizedek 
and  his  priesthood  above  the  patriarch  .^bra- 
ham,  and  the  priesthood  of  Levi,  because 
Jlbraham,  and  Levi  in  his  luins,  paid  tithes 
unto  him,  as  the  lesser  unto  the  greater,  Ileb 
7.  4,  5,  6,  &c. 

fn  the  New  Testament,  neither  our  Saviour  nor 
his  apostles  have  commanded  any  thing  in  this 
affair  of  tithes:  only  when  our  Lord  sent  his 
..Apostles  to  preach  in  the  cities  of  Israel,  he 
forbad  them  to  carry  their  purse  or  provisions 
along  with  them,  but  to  enter  into  the  houses 
of  those  that  were  willing  to  receive  them,  and 
tc  eat  what  should  be  set  before  them;  for  the 
labourer,  says  he,  is  worthy  of  his  hire,  and  of 
his  maintenance,  Mat.  10.  10.  Luke  10.  7,  8. 
St.  Paul  would  have  it,  that  he  that  receives 
instruction,  should  administer  some  of  his  good 
things  to  him  that  gives  it  him,  Gal.  6.  6.  It 
is  agreeable  to  nature  and  reason,  that  they 
which  wait  at  the  altar  should  live  by  the  altai-, 
1  Cor.  9.  13.  And  as  God,  uruier  the  law  or 
dained  and  appointed  a  living  or  maintotance 
for  his  ministers,  so  as  they  needed  not,  as 
other  men,  to  labour  with  their  hands  to  get 
bread  to  eat ;  so  under  the  jYew  Testament, 
God  has  ordained,  that  those  who  are  taken  off 
from  worldly  employments,  and  spend  their 
time  in  the  study  and  preaching  of  the  gospel, 
should  have  a  livelihood  for  their  labour. 
1  Cor.  9.  14,  Even  so  halh  the  Lord  ordained, 
that  they  which  preach  the  gospel,  should  live 
of  the  gospel,  .^nd  in,  the  llh  verse,  Who  goeth 
a  warfare  at  his  own  charges'? 

The  most  barbarous  nations,  and  the  heathen 
Greeks  and  Romans,  out  of  a  principle  of  re- 
ligion common  to  all  men,  have  often  dedicated 
their  tithes  to  their  gods.  Some  have  made  it 
a  standing  obligation,  others  have  done  it  upon 
particular  occasiojis,  and  by  the  impulse  of  a 
transient  devotion.  I.aertius  says,  that  xrhen 
Pisistratus,  tyrant  at  Jlthens,  wrote  to  Solon, 
to  persuade  him  to  return  to  Jlthens,  he  tells 
him,  "  that  every  one  there  pays  the  tithe  of 
his  goods  for  the  offering  of  sacrifices  to  the 
gods."  Lnert.  Lib.  1.  Pliny  says  that  the 
Jjrabianmerchants  who  traded  in  spices, durst 
not  sell  any  till  they  had  paid  the  tilho  to  their 
god  Sabis:  Jlnd  Plutarch,  in  more  places  than 
one,  mentions  a  custom  of  the  Romans,  of  of- 
fering to  Hercules  the  tithe  of  what  they  took 
from  their  enemies. 

Lev.  27.  30.  all  \.\\c  t.  of  the  land  is  the  Lord's 
32.  roiiTrning  the  t.  of  the  herd  or  the  flock 

.Vum.  IH.  20.  ye  shall  offer  a  tenth  [inrf  of  the  t. 

Dent.  1-2.  17.  not  o:it  within  thy  gales  the  t.  of  corn 
14.  23.  eat  t.  in  the  pl.iro  the  Lord  shall  rhooflc 
28.  at  the  inil  of  thrro  years  bring  forth  llic  t. 

2  CAr.31.5.  theybrouehl  in  the  first-friiitjiof  corn 
and  the  t.  of  all  things,  fi,  12.  Neh.  13.  12. 

JVfA.  10.  38.  the  Levites  shnll  bring  up  t.  of  tithes 

Mat.  23.  23.  yc  pay  t.  of  mint,  anise,  and  cummin 
TITHE,   Verb. 

^rHM4.02.thou  shall  surely/,  increase  of  thy  send 

I.nke  1 1.  42.  for  yc  t.  mint,  and  rue,  and  all  herbs 
TITHES. 

Oen.  14.20.  Ahraljam  give  Melehizedek  t.  of  all 

Aco.  27.  31   if  a  man  will  redeem  ought  of  bis  t. 


TOK 

JVum.  18.  24.  the  t.  1  have  given  to  the  Levitei 
2H.  when  ye  take  of  the  children  of  Israel  t. 
28.  offer  a  heave-offering  to  Lord  of  all  your  t. 

Dcut.  12.  6.  thither  ye  shall  bring  your  t.  11. 
26.  12.  thou  hast  made  an  end  of  tithing  the  t. 

M'eh.  10.  37.  that  the  Levites  might  have  the  t, 

12.  44.  and  some  were  appointed  for  the  t. 

13.  5.  where  aforetime  they  laid  the  t.  of  corn 
.47«o«4.  4.  bring  your  sacrifices  every  morning,  and 

your  f.  after  three  years,  Mai.  3.  10. 
Mai.  3.  8.  ye  have  robbed  me  of  t.  and  offerings 
Luke  18.  12.  I  give  t.  of  all  that  I  possess 
Heb.  1. 5.  the  priests  have  commandment  to  take  I. 

6.  he  received  t.  of  Abrahiim  and  blessed  him 

8.  and  here  raenthat  die  r<y'.eive  t. 

9.  Levi  who  received  t.  paid  t.  in  Abraham 
TITHING. 

lieut.  26. 12.  made  end  oft.  third  year  is  year  of  t. 

TITLE. 
2  Kings  23.  17.  he  said,  what  t.  is  that  that  I  see 
hhn  iO.  19.  Pilate  wrote  a  t.  and  put  it  on  the  cross 

20.  this  t.  then  read  many  of  the  Jews 
TITLES. 

Job  32.  21.  nor  let  me  give  flattering  t.  to  man 
22.  for  I  know  not  to  give  Haltering  (. 
TITTLE. 
Mat.  5. 18.  one  t.  shall  in  no  wise  pass  from  the  law 
Luke  10.  17.  than  for  one  t.  of  the  law  to  fail 
TO  and  FRO,  See  Fro. 
TOE. 
Kxoi.  29.  20.  upon  the  great  t.  of  their  right  foot, 
Lev.  8.  23,  24.  |  14.  14,  17,  25,  28. 
TOES. 
Judg.  1.  6.  cut  off  his  thumbs  and  his  great  t. 

7.  seventy  kings  having  thumbs  and  t.  out  off 
1  Chron.  20.  6.  whose  fingers  and  t.  were,  24. 
Dan.  2.  41.  thou  sawest  the  t.  part  of  iron,  42 

TOGETHER. 
Dcut.  22. 10.  thou  shall  not  plow  with  ox  and  ass  t, 
.Tudg.  19.  29.  he  divided  her,  t.  with  her  hones 

1  Sam.  31.  6.  all  his  men  died  that  same  day  t. 
\  Kings  3.18.  and  we  were  t.  there  was  no  stranger 

11.  1.  women,  t.  with  the  daughter  of  Pharaoh 

2  Kings  9.  25.  when  thou  and  I  rode  t.  after  Ahab 
Kira  4.  3.  we  ourselves  t.  will  build  to  the  Lord 
J\reh.  6.  7.  let  us  take  counsel  t.  \\  10.  let  us  meet  t. 
.Job  3.  IS.  there  the  prisoners  rest  t.  they  hear  not 

10.  8.  have  fashioned  me  t.  round  about 
17.16.  shall  go  down,  when  our  rest  t.  is  in  the  dust 
24.  4.  the  poor  of  the  earth  hide  themselves  t. 
34.1.5.all  fli'sh  shall  perish  t.  man  shall  turn  to  dust 
Psal. 2.  2.  the  rulers  lake  counsel  <.  against  the  Ld. 

14.  3.  they  are  all  t.  become  filthy,  Rom.  3.  12 
34.  3.  magnify  the  L.  and  let  us  exalt  his  name  t. 
37.  38.  the  transgreesorsbe  destroyed  t.  Isa..    28. 

Pro».22.2.  the  rich  and  jioor  meet  t.  Lord  is  maker 
29.  13.  the  poor  and  the  deceitful  man  meet  t. 
Keel.  4.  11.  if  two  lie  t.  then  they  have  heat 
Isa.  9.  21.  and  they  t.  shall  he  against  Judah 
20.  19.  t.  with  my  dead  body  shall  they  arise 
41.  23.  do  good  or  evil,  that  we  may  behold  it  L 
.'52.  8.  with  the  voice  t.  shall  they  sing,  9. 
65.  25.  the  wolf  and  the  lamb  shall  feed  t. 
F.iek.  37.  7.  the  honesxame  t.  bone  to  his  bone 
Jimos  1. 15.  go  into  ca[mvity,  he  and  his  princes  t, 
3.  3.  can  two  walk  t.  except  they  be  agreed  ? 
Mat.  18.  20.  where  two  or  three  are  gathered  t. 
19.«.  what  God  hath  joined  t.  Mark  10.  9. 
Luke  15. 6.  ho  calleth  t.  his  friends  and  neighbour* 
Jicts  2.  44.  and  all  that  believed  were  t.  and  had 
5.  9.  that  ye  have  agreed  t.  to  tempt  the  Spirit 
Rom.f^.'iS.  we  know  that  all  things  work  t.  for  good 
Fph.  2,  .">.  hath  quickened  ns  1. 1|  6.  halh  raised  us  t. 

21.  in  whom  all  the  building  fitly  framed  ^22. 
rAi7.  1.  27.  striving  t.  for  the  faith  of  the  gospel 

3.17.  breth.  befidlowers  f.  of  me,  and  mark  them 

Cnl.  2.  2.  he  comforted,  being  knit  t.  in  love,  19. 

13.  you  being  dead  in  sins,  hath  he  quickened  ( 

1  Thess.  4.  17.  shall  be  caught  up  t.  ||  5. 10.  live  t. 

2Thess.  2.  1.  we  beseech  you  by  our  gathering  t. 

IPet.  3.  7.  as  being  heirs  t.  of  the  grace  of  life 

See  Dwell. 

TOIL. 

Gen.  .5.  29.  comfort  us  concerning  our  work  and  (. 

41.  51.  God,  said  he,  hath  made  inc  forget  my  I, 

TOIL,  Verb. 
Mat.  6.  28.  they  t.  not  nor  spin,  I.uke  12.  27. 

TOILED. 
I.uke  5  5.  Simon  sniil,  Mailer,  wo  hax-e  t.  all  uigh 

TOILING. 
Mark  0.  48.  and  he  s  iw  them  t.  in  rowing 

m    TOKEN. 
Gen.  9. 12.  this  ™he  t.  of  the  covenant,  13,  17. 
17.  11.  and  it  shall  be  a  t.  of  the  covenant 
Fiod.X  12.  this  shall  he  a  t.  that  1  sent  iheo 

12.  13.  the  bl.iod  shall  ho  fi-r  n  /.  on  the  hous« 

13.  16.  it  shall  bo  for  a  t.  upon  thine  hand 
Jifum.  17.  10.  to  ho  kept  for  a  t.  a<;ainst  the  rebela 

fosh.  2.  12.  swear  unto  me,  and  give  me  n  true  t. 
Psal.  86.  17.  shew  me  a  t.  lor  good,  that  tliey 


TOL 

Mark  14.  44.  Judas  had  given  them  a  t.  saying 
Phil.  1.28.  iB  to  them  an  evident  t.  ot'porditioii 
4  Thess.  1.  5.  a  manifest  t.  of  righteous  judginont 

3.  17.  of  Paul,  which  is  the  t.  in  every  ejiistle 

TOKENS. 
Deut.^.  15.  bring  t.  of  damsel's  virginity,  17, 2U. 
Jod  21.  29.  and  do  ye  not  know  their  t. '! 
Psal.  ti.i.  8.  they  also  are  afraid  of  tliy  t. 

135.  i).  who  sent  t.  in  the  midst  of  tliee,  O  Egypt 
ha.  44.  25.  that  frustratetli  the  t.  of  the  liars 

TOLD. 
Gen.  3.  II.  who  t.  thee  that  thou  wast  naked  t 

y.  22.  and  Ham  f.  his  two  brethren  witiiout 

24.  J'i.  I  will  not  eat  till  1  have  t.  mine  errand 
37.  5.  Josei>h  t.  his  brethren  iho  dream,  'J. 

lU.  he  t.  It  to  his  father  and  his  brethren 
JV*««i.23.2G.  «.  not  I  thee,  all  that  the  Lord  speaketh 
Jjcut.  17.  4.  it  be  t.  thee,  and  buhold  ii  be  true 
JuUif.  ti.  13.  his  miracles  which  our  fathers  t..  of 
7.13.  therp  was  a  man  that  t.  a  dream  to  his  fellow 
13.  6.  1  asked  not,  neither  t.  iie  me  his  nahie 
23.  nor  would  at  this  time  have  t.  such  things 
14.2.  he  came  up,  and  t.  his  falher  and  mother 
Ij.  but  he  t.  not  his  father,  9,  16.  1  Sam.  14.  1. 

17.  on  the  seventh  day  het.  her,  she  t.  the  riddle 
Itj.  17.  she  urged  him,  he  I.  her  all  his  heart,  18 

1  Sam.  10.  Iti.  he  t.  us  that  the  asses  were  found 

25.  19.  but  Abigail  t.  not  her  husband  Nabal 

2  Ham.  11.  5.  and  the  woman  sent  and  t.  David 

17.  17.  a  wench  went  and  t.  them,  they  t.  David 
1  Kinirs  10.3.  Solomon  t.  her  all  her  questions,  not 

any  thing  which  he  t.  her  nut,  2  Chron.  9.  2. 

13.  11.  the  words  they  t.  also  to  their  father 
25.  t.  it  in  the  city  where  old  prophet  dwelt 

1  Chron.  17.  25.  hast  I.  thou  wilt  build  a  house 
£zraS.  17. 1 1.  them  what  they  ohould  s;iy  to  Iddo 
£o>t/i.  5.  11.  Haman  t.  of  the  glory  of  his  riches 

8.  1.  for  Kslher  liad  t.  what  he  was  unto  her 
Job  15.  18.  which  wise  men  have  t.  from  fathers 
P^al.  44.  I.  and  our  fathers  have  t.  us,  78.  3. 
Isa.  44.  8.  have  nut  I  t.  thee  from  that  timel 

45. 21.  who  hath  t.  it  from  that  time  ?  have  not  I  ? 

52.  15.  what  bad  not  been  t.  them,  shall  they  see 
Jonah  1. 10.  the  men  knew,  because  he  had  t.  them 
JUat.>i.:yj.  they  went  into  the  city  and  t.  everything 

14.  12.  took  up  the  body,  and  went  and  t.  Jesus 
Mark  Hi.  13.  they  went  and  t.  it  to  the  residue 
John  5.  15.  the  man  t.  the  Jews  it  was  Jesus 
JJcts  9.  (j.  be  t.  thee  what  thou  must  do,  22.  10. 

23.  It),  he  entered  into  the  castle  andt.  Paul 

2  Cur.  7.  7.  when  he  t.  us  your  earnest  desire 

TOLD  him. 
Oen.  22.  3.  the  place  of  which  God  had  t.  him,  9, 
1  *'a/)i.  3.  13. 1  have  t.  him,  1  will  judge  his  liouse 

18.  Samuel  t.  him  every  whit  and  hid  nothing 
10.  16.  of  the  matter  of  the  kingdom  he  t.  him  not 
2.').  3tj.  she  t.  him  nothing  till  morning  light 

'i  Kings  G.  10.  to  the  jilaoe  the  man  of  God  t.  him 
Job  37.  20.  shall  it  be  t.  him  that  I  speak 
Mark  5.  33.  but  the  woman  (.  him  all  the  truth 

TOLD  me.. 

Judg.  16.10.  thou  hast  mocked  me  and  t.me  lies,  13. 

15.  hast  not  I.  me  wherein  thy  strength  lielh 

1  .Som.23.  22.  it  is  t.  me  that  he  dealeth  subtilely 

2  Sum.  4  10.  when  one  t.  me,  saying,  Saul  is  dead 
1  Kings  10.  7.  the  half  was  nott.  me,  2  Chron.  9.6. 

14.  2.  t.  VIC  I  should  be  king  over  this  people 
8  Kings  4.  27.  hid  it  from  me  and  hath  not  t.  me 

8.  14.  he  t.  mn  that  thou  shouldest  surely  recover 
John  4.  29.  see  a  man  which  t.  me  ail  things,  39. 
Jicts  27.  25.  it  shall  he  even  as  it  was  t.  me 

TOLD  you. 
/.*a. 40. 21.  hath  it  not  been  t.-you  from  beginning? 
Hab.  1.  5.  ye  will  not  believe  though  it  be  I.  you 
J>/itt. 24. 25.  behold,  I  have  t.  you  before 

28.  7.  there  ye  sliall  see  him,  lo,  I  have  t.  you 
.fnhn  3.  12.  if  I  have  t.  you  earthly  things 

8.  40.  seek  to  kill  me,  a  man  tliathalh  t.  ynu  truth 

9.  27.  he  said,  I  have  t.  you  already,  10.  25. 
14.  2.  if  it  were  not  so,  I  would  have  t.  you 

29.  now  I  have  t.  you  before  it  come  to  pa.ss 
16.  4.  these  things  have  I  t.  you,  that  when  time 
shall  come,  ye  may  rememb.  that  1 1.  y.  of  them 

18.  8.  Jesus  said,  I  have  t.  you  that  I  am  he 
i  Cor.  13.  2.  I  t.  you  before,  and  foretell  you 
Oul.  a.  21.  as  I  have  also  t.  you  in  time  past 
Phil.  3. 18.  many  walk  of  whom  I  have  t.  you 

1  Thrs.t.  .3.  4{  we  t.  you  that  we  should  suffer 

2  T^.e.i.t.  2.  5.  when  with  yoii,l  t.  i/uu  these  things 
Jade  18.  they  t.  you  there  should  be  mockers 

TOLD,  Passive. 
Jo'h.  9.  24.  it  was  certainly  t.  thy  servants 

1  Kivg.i  8.  5.  the  sheep  and  oxen  could  not  be  (. 
18.  13.  w.isil  not  t.  my  lord,  what  I  did  when 

2  Kings  12. 11.  and  they  gave  the  money,  being  t. 
Psal.  90.  9.  we  spend  our  years  as  a  tale  that  is  t. 
ha.  7.  2.  it  was  t.  the  house  of  David,  saying 
Dan.  8.  26.  and  the  vision  which  is  t.  is  true 
Mat.  26.  13.  there  shall  this  be  t.  for  a  mr-morinl 
Luke  1.  45.  a  performance  of  things  which  were  t. 

635 


TON 

Luke  2.18.wondered  at  those  things  t.by  shepherds 
TOLEKABLE. 

Mai.  10.  15.  it  shall  be  more  t.  for  Sodom  and 
Gomorrah,  11.  24.  Mark  6.  II.  Luke  10.  12. 
11.  22.  more  t.  for  Tyre  and  Sidoii,  Luke  10.  14. 
TOLL. 

Ezra  4.  13.  then  will  they  not  pay  I.  and  cuBtom 
20.  t.  tribute  and  custom  was  paid  to  them 
7.  24.  it  sliall  not  be  lawful  to  impose  t.  on  them 
TOMB. 

Job  21.  32  and  he  shall  remain  in  the  t. 

Mat.  27.60.  Joseph  laid  the  body  in  his  own  new  t. 

Mark  6.  29.  his  disciples  laid  John's  corpse  in  a  I. 
TOiMBS. 

Mat.  8.  28.  met  him  two  possessed  with  devils, 
coining  out  of  the  t.  Mark  5. 2,  3,  5.  J^ukc  8.  27. 
23.  29.  because  ye  build  the  t.  of  the  prophets 
TONGS. 

Exod. ^5. 33.  shalt  make  thee  ^/thereof  of  pure  gold 

jViiW.4.9.  tliey  shall  cover  hist,  with  a  cloth  of  blue 

1  Kings'.  49.  lamps  and  t.  of  gold,  2  Chron.  4.  21. 

Isa.  b.  6.  a  coal  wliich  he  had  taken  with  the  t. 
44.  12.  the  smith  with  the  I.  worketh  in  coals 
,      'IJONGUE. 

This  word  is  taken  in  three  different  senses.  (1) 
For  the  material  tongue,  or  organ  of  speech. 
Jam.  3.  5,  The  tongue  is  a  little  member.  (2) 
For  the  tongue  or  language  that  is  spoken  in 
any  country.  Dent.  28.  49,  The  Lord  shall 
bring  a  nation  against  thee,  whose  tongue  thou 
shalt  not  understand.  (3)  For  good  or  bad  dis- 
course.  Prov.  12.  18,  But  the  tongue  of  the 
wise  is  health :  Mis  discourse  is  sound  and 
wholesome  in  itself,  and  tends  to  the  comfort 
and  benefit  of  others.  Onthe  contrary, Ha  that 
hath  a  perverse  tongue  falleth  into  mischief, 
Prov.  17.  20.  that  is,  7fe  that  speaks  deceitfully 
or  wickedly.  Man.yquestionsareproposedabout 
tongues,  taken  in  the  second  sctise,  or  for  lan- 
guage. It  is  asked,  (1)  Jf  Gad  was  the  author 
of  the  first  tongue  7  and  if  he  gave  it  to  JJdain 
by  infusion  ?  ur  if  .Sdam  incented  it,  and  ac- 
quired it  by  industry  and  labour  7  (2)  Jf  this 
language  is  still  in  being  7  Jind,  (3)  If  so, 
then  which  is  it  ? 

Profane  authors,  and  such  as  had  no  knowledge 
of  the  holy  scriptures,  or  of  the  history  of  the 
creation  of  the  world,  imagined  that  men  were 
produced  by  chance  in  different  parts  of  the 
world,  and  came  out  of  the  ground,  as  also 
all  other  animals  besides  ;  that  at  first  they 
had  no  language,  nor  any  notions  of  t/iings ; 
that  first  of  all  mere  necessity,  and  afterwards 
conveniency  taught  them  to  invent  certain 
sounds,  or  words,  by  whichlocuminunicale  their 
notions  to  one  another  :  that  hence  languages 
were  formed,  which  became  different  from  each 
other,  because  they  were  invented  separately, 
and  their  authors  had  no  communication  with 
one  another. 

But  the  knowledge  we  have  now  of  the  origin  of 
mankind  docs  not  leave  us  airy  room  to  doubt, 
but  as  Ood  created  Jldam  perfect,  so  he  endued 
him  with  language  to  express  his  thoughts  and 
conceptions.  Therefore  we  find,  that  the  first 
man  presently  after  his  creation,  returns  a« 
swcrs  to  God,  speaks  to  his  wife,  and  giee: 
names  to  the  brute  creatures.  His  children  and 
successors  probably  spake  the  samilanguage  as 
himself,  down  to  the  deluge ;  and  after  the  de 
luge,  till  the  confusion  of  tongues  that  happen- 
ed at  Babel. 

Men  are  not  agreed  as  to  the  manner  jji  which 
this  famous  confusion  was  brought  about.  It 
is  doubted  whether  all  of  a  sudden  God  mi'^ht 
not  make  all  men  forget  their  own  language, 
and  give  them  a  new  one,  entirely  different 
from  the  former ;  or,  whether  by  confounding 
their  ideas,  and  disturbing  their  imaginations, 
he  put  into  their  mouths  different  dialects  of 
the  first  language :  So  that  theprimitive  tongue 
remaining  uncorrupt  in  some  families,  became 
at  once  a  foreign  tongue  to  those  that  spoke  it 
before  ;  as  also  that  the  dialects  of  the  primi- 
tive languagebeeamebarbarous  audunknoicnto 
those  who  were  the  depositaries,  as  it  were,  of 
the  ancient  language.  Ur,  whether  Godmight 
not  permit  that  men  should  be  perplexed,  and 
become  unintelligible  to  each  other,  and  there- 
fore separate,  and  that  their  separation  should 
give  occasion  to  this  change  of  language,  by 
the  necessary  consequence  of  distance  of  place, 
and  want  of  communication  with  each  other. 
These  several  opinions  have  each  hadtheir pa- 
trons and  maintainers. 

..Is  to  the  first  Xangae  which  God  communicated 
to  Jiiam  at  his  creation,  there  hane  been  but 
few  nations  in  the  world,  which  have  not  had 
the  ambition  of  having  it  for  their  own  tongue  ; 
Bui  the  generality   of  critics  have  declared 


ION 

for  the  Hebrew  tongue,  and  given  it  the  pre- 
ference before  all  others.  The  conciseness  , 
simplicity,  energy,  and  fertility  of  it,  and  the 
relation  tt  has  to  the  most  ancient  oriental  Ian-, 
guages,  which  se-m  to  derive  their  origin  from 
It,  the  etymology  j/  the  names  whereby  the  first 
of  mankind  were  called,  which  naturally  occurs 
in  this  language :  the  names  of  animals  ichich 
are  all  significant  in  the  Hebrew  tongue, 
and  describe  the  nature  and  property  of  these 
very  animals,  particulars  which  are  not  to  be 
observed  in  any  other  language:  all  these  cha- 
racters meeting  together,  raise  a  jircjudice  very 
much  in  favour  of  its  primacy  and  excellency. 
It  has  further,  another  privilege,  namely,  that 
the  most  ancient  and  venerable  books  in  Hit 
world  are  written  in  Hebrew. 

IVeverthcless  several  other  very  able  critics  are  of 
opinion,  that  the  Hebrew  tongue,  such  as  we  see 
it  at  present  in  the  Bible,  and  as  it  was  in  the 
time  of  Moses,  is  not  the  primitive  language 
pure,and  uncorrupted;they  observe  many  words 
in  the  Bible,  the  originals  whereof  are  not  to 
be  found  in  Hebrew.  They  are  willing  to  al- 
low, that  there  are  more  footsteps  of  JJdam's 
language  preserved  in  the  Hebrew  Ihanin  any 
other  tongue;  but  this,  they  say, has  undergone 
divers  changes  and  alterations,  and  in  the  se- 
ries of  so  many  agcs,fronu6dam  down  to  Moses 
■many  roots  ofthislanguagewcrelost,andothers 
of  a  foreign  extraction,  received. 

To  gnaw  one's  tongue,  is  a  token  of  fury,  despair 
and  torment.  The  men  that  worship  the  beast 
are  said  to  gnaw  their  tvngues  for  pain.  Rev. 
16.  10.  A  tongue  of  the  sea,  a  tongue  of  land, 
are  terms  used  in  scripture  for  the  extremity  or 
point  of  the  Dead  sea;  as  in  Josh.  15.  f  2, 
Their  south  border  was  from  the  shore  of  the 
salt  sea,  from  the  tongue  that  looketh  south- 
ward. Ur,fura peninsula,  a  cape,  apromontory 
of  land,  stretching  out  into  the  sea,  Josh. 
18. 1 19.  The  scourge  of  the  tongue.  Job.  5.  21. 
By  this  are  to  be  understood,  malicious  dis- 
courses, scandal,  calumny,  insulting,  and  offen- 
sive speeches. 

The  gift  of  tongues,  which  God  granted  tn  the 
Jlpostles  and  disciples  assembled  ut  .ferusalem 
on  the  day  of  Penteccst,  Acts  2.  3,  4,  &c.  was 
comiminicatrd  to  the  faithful,  as  maybe  seen 
by  the  epistles  of  St.  Paul,  which  regulate  the 
manner  in  which  this  great  privilege  was  to  be 
made  \ise  of  in  their  assemblies,  1  Cor.  12. 
10.  I  14.  2,  &.C.  U  continued  in  the  church  as 
long  as  God  thought  it  necessary,  for  the  con- 
version of  the  heathen,  and  the  confirming  of 
believers.  In  1  Cor.  13.  1,  St.  Paul  says. 
Though  I  speak  with  the  tongues  of  men  and 
of  angels,  and  have  not  charily,  I  am  become 
as  sounding  bra.ss,  or  a  tinkling  cymbal.  By 
which  is  not  to  be  understood  that  the  angelt 
have  any  sensible  tongue,  either  common  or  pro- 
per :  the  Jlpostleintcnds  to  use  a  kind  ofhyper^ 
bole;  that  is,  I  would,  have  every  one  set  a  due 
value  upon  the  gift  of  longues  ;  but  though  A 
man  should  have  all  the  eloquence  that  can  be 
imagined,  could  he  speakas  well  as  angclsthcm- 
selves,  this  inestimable  gift  would  be  of  little 
use  to  him  as  to  salvation,  if  he  is  without  cha- 
rity,or  a  principle  of  true  love  to  God  and  man 
in  his  heart. 

Kj:(«Z.11.7.ngainstIsraeI,shallnotadogmovehis  t. 
.Tosh.  10.  21.  none  moved  his  t.  against  Israel 
Judg.  7.  5.  that  Jappeth  of  the  water  with  liis  t. 
.fob  5.  21.  shall  be  hid  from  the  scourge  of  the  t. 

15.  5.  and  thou  choosest  the  t.  of  the  crafty 

20.  12.  though  he  hide  w-ickcdness  under  his  t. 
16.  poison  of  asps,  the  viper's  t.  shall  slay  him 

29.  10.  their  t.  cleaved  to  roof  of  their  mouth 
Psal.  5.  9.  they  flatter  with  their  t. 

10.  7.  under  his  t.  is  mischief  and  vanitf 

12.  3.  shall  cut  olTthe  Mhat  speaketh  proud  thingi 
4.  who  have  said,  with  our  t.  will  we  prevail 

15.  3.  he  that  backbitoth  not  with  his  t.  nor  doeth 

34.  13.  keep  thy  t.  from  evil,  1  Pet.  3.  10. 

37.  30.  and  his  t.  talkcth  of  judgment 

."iO.  19.  and  thy  t.  fiameth  deceit 

52.  2.  thy  t.  deviseth  mischiefs  like  a  razor 

.W.  4.  and  their  t.  is  a  sharp  sword 

64.  3.  who  whet  their  t.  like  a  sword,  and  bend 
8.  shall  make  their  t.  to  fall  on  themselves 

68.23.  t.  of  thy  dogs  may  be  dipped  in  (he  samo 

73.  9.  and  their  t.  wnH<eth  through  the  earth 

109.  2.  they  have  spoken  against  me  with  a  lying  t. 

120.  3.  what  shall  be  done  to  thee,  thou  false  t.? 

126. 2.  then  was  our  t.  filled  with  singing 
Prov.  6.  17.  God  hateth  a  proud  look,  a  lying  L 
24.  from  theflattery  of  the  /,.  of  a  ftrange  womal 

10.  20.  the  t.  of  the  just  is  as  choice  silver 
31.  but  the  froward  t.  shall  bo  cut  out 

12.  18.  but  tha  t.  of  the  wise  is  health 


TON 

Prov.  12.  19.  but  a  lying  t.  ia  but  for  a  moment 
Ijl.  2.  the  t.  of  the  wise  useth  knowledge  aright 
4. a  wholesome  t.  is  a  tree  of  life,  butpervcrseness 
It).  1.  and  the  answer  of  the  I.  is  from  the  Lord 

17.  4.  and  a  liar  giveth  ear  to  a  naughty  t. 

iO.  he  that  hath  a  perverse  t.  falls  into  mischief 
It*.  21.  death  and  life  are  in  the  power  of  the  t. 
"1.  6.  getting  of  treasures  by  a  lying  t.  is  vanity 

2;i.  whiiso  kecpetb  his  t.  kee|ielh  iiis  soul  from 
2.").  Ij.  and  a  soil  t.  breaketh  the  bone 

li;t.  so  dolh  an  angry  countennnce  a  backbiting  I. 
2fi.  is.  a  lying  t.  Iiatuth  tliose  afflicted  by  it 
2d.  23.  than  he  that  tiatlereth  wiih  the  t. 
30. 1 10.  hurt  not  with  thy  (.  a  servant  to  master 

31.  2U.  and  in  her  t.  is  the  law  of  kindness 
Eccl.  10.  t  11.  the  master  of  ihe  t.  is  :io  better 
Cant.  4.  11.  honey  and  milk  are  under  thy  t. 
Isa.  3.  8.  because  their  t.  is  agaiiist  the  Lord 

5.  t  -i-  as  the  t.  of  tire  devoureih  the  stubble 
30.  27.  and  his  t.  is  as  a  devouring  tire 

32.  4.  thet.  of  the  stammerers  shall  speak  plainly 

33.  I'J.  thou  shall  not  see  people  ofa  stammering!. 
'Xy.  tj.  then  shall  the  t.  of  the  dumb  smg 

41.  17.  and  when  their  t,  faileth  for  thirst 
4.5.  23.  that  unto  me  every  t.  shall  swear 
50.4  the  Lord  liatii  given  mo  the  t.  of  the  learned 
54.  17.  every  t.  that  shall  rise  against  thee 
57.  4.  against  whom  draw  ye  out  the  1. 1 
5'J.  3.  your  t.  hath  muttered  perverseness 
Jer  9.  3.  they  bend  their  t.  like  their  bow  for  lies 

5.  they  have  taught  their  t.  to  speak  lies 

8.  their  t.  is  as  an  arrow  shot  out,  itspeaketh 

18.  18.  come,  and  let  us  smite  him  with  the  t. 
Lam.  4.  4.  the  t.  of  the  sucking  child  cleaveth 
Ezek.  3.  1 5.  art  not  sent  lo  a  people  heavy  of  t. 

2^).[  will  make  thy  t.  cleave  to  roof  of  thy  mouth 
Hos.  7.  1().  priacesshall  fall  for  the  rage  of  their  t. 
Hub.  1.  13.  boldest  thy  (.  when  wicked  devoureth 
Z.ech.  14.  12.  their  t.  shall  consume  in  their  mouth 
Mark  7.  33.  and  he  spit,  and  touched  his  t. 

35.and  straightway  hist,  was  loosed,  l^ike  1.64. 
Jam.  1.  2ti.  scemeth  religious,  and  bri<lleth  not  hist. 

3.  5.  so  the  t.  is  a  little  member,  and  boasteth 

6.  the  t.  is  a  fire  ||  8.  the  t.  can  no  man  tame 

1  John  3.  18.  nor  let  na  love  in  t.  hut  in  truth 

Sec  DECEtTFri,,  Hold. 
My  TO.VGUK. 

2  Sain.23. 2.  Spirit  spoke,  and  his  word  was  in  my  t. 
Kstk.  7.  4.  if  we  had  been  sold,  I  had  held  my  t. 
Job  ().  30.  is  there  iniquity  in  my  t. 

27.4. not  speak  wickeiln. nor  shall  mi/ 1. utter  deceit 
33.  2.  behold,  my  I.  hath  spoken  in  my  ipouth 
P.^al.  22.  1.1.  and  my  t.  cleaveth  to  my  jaws 
35.  23.  and  myt.  shall  speak  of  thy  righteousnf>ss 
and  praise  all  daylong,  51.  14.  ]  71.  24. 
39.  I.  I  will  take  heed  that  I  sin  not  with  my  t. 
3.  my  heart  was  hot,  th(m  spake  1  wilh  my  t. 
45.  1.  my  t.  is  the  pen  of  a  ready  writer 
f)6.  17.  anil  God  was  extolled  with  my  t. 
119.  172.  my  t.  shall  speak  of  thy  word 
1:17.  6.  let  my  t.  cleave  to  the  roof  of  my  mouth 
13^1.  4.  not  a  word  in  my  t.  but  thou  knowest  it 
I.ukf  Ifi.  24.  may  diji  his  finger,  and  cool  my  I. 
^cU2.'Ai.  my  heart  did  rejoice,  7/iu  t.  was  glad 

TONGUR. 
Josk.  7.  t  21.  I  saw  a  t.  of  gold,  and  coveted  it 

TONGOE. 

Josh.  15.  t  2.  from  the  t.  that  looketli  southwatd 

18.  t  10.  out-goings  at  the  north  t.  of  the  salt-sea 

/ia.11.15.  Lord  shalldestroy  thet.  ofEgyptian  sea 

TOiVGUE  for  Lan^tiage,  Speech. 
Ocn.  10. 5.  isles  were  divided  every  one  after  his  t. 
F.zod.  4.  10.  [  am  slow  of  speech,  and  of  a  slow  t. 
lJeut.''iH  4'.'.  a  nation  whose  t.  shall  not  understanri 
Kzra  4.  7.  Ihe  writing  of  the  letter  was  written  in 
the  Syrian  t.  and  interpreted  in  the  Syrian  t. 
I.^a.  2S.  11.  for  with  another  t.  will  he  speak 
J)an.  1.4.  they  might  teach  thet.  of  the  Chaldeans 
John  5  2.  a  pool,  called  in  the  Hebrew  t.  Bethesda 
jlcts  1.10.  a  field  called  in  their  proper  t.  Aceldama 
2.  8.  anil  how  hear  we  every  man  in  our  town  t.? 
2t).  14.  a  voice  saying  in  the  Hebrew  t.  Saul,  Saul, 
Tiom.  14.  11.  and  every  t.  shall  confess  to  God 
l(V«-J4.2.lhat8peak9in  unknown  t.4,13,14,19,27. 
y.cTcept  ye  utter  by  the  t.  words  easy  understood 
2fi.  every  one  of  you  hath  a  psalm,  hnth  a  t. 
Phil.  2.  11.  that  every  t.  c.-jnfeBB  that  Jesus  is  Lord 
Hev.  .5.9.  thou  hast  icrlcemed  us  out  of  every  t. 
9.  11.  whose  natce  in  the  Hebrew  t.  is  Abaddon 
14.  f).  having  Ihe  gospel  to  preach  to  every  t. 
IC.  16.  called  in  thi-  Hebrew  t.  Armageddon 
TONGITED. 
1  TVm.  3.  8.  deacons  must  be  grave,  not  double-t. 

TO.NGUF.3. 
Of  It.  10.  20.  the  sons  of  Ham,  after  their  t. 

31.  these  tin:  Ihe  gons'of  Sbem,  after  thi.-ir  t. 
Pn.^.'i.'iO.  thou  shall  keep  them  from  the  strife  of  t. 
5.5.  <i.  destroy,  O  Lord,  and  divide  their  t. 
79.  y^.  and  they  lied  to  him  with  their  t. 
14U.  3.  tbcy  tharnened  their  (.  like  a.  serpent 
036 


TOO 

/sa.no  IS.ihall  oome,I  will  gather  all  nations  and  t. 
-hr.  23.  31.  that  use  their  t.  and  say,  he  saith 
Mark  Iti.  17.  they  shall  speak  with  new  t. 
.•Ids  2.  3.  there  appeared  to  them  cloven  t. 
4.  and  they  began  to  speak  with  other  t. 
11.  we  hear  in  our  t.  the  wonderful  works  of  God 
10.  4C.  for  they  heard  them  speak  with  t. 
19.  6.  and  lliey  sjiake  with  t.  and  prophesied 
tiom.  3.  13.  with  their  t.  they  have  used  deceit 
1  Cor.  12.  10.  to  another  divers  kinds  oft.  28. 
30.  do  all  speak  with  t.  ?  do  all  interpret  t 
13. 1.  though  I  speak  with  Ihe  t.  of  men  and  angels 
8.  whether  there  be  t.  they  shall  cease 
14.  5.  I  would  ye  all  spake  with  t.  but  rather 
6.  brethren,  if  I  come  to  you  speaking  wilh  t. 
18.1  thank  God,l  speak  with  f.  more  than  you  all 

21.  with  men  of  other  t.  will  I  speak  to  people 

22.  t.  are  for  a  sign  ||  23.  if  all  speak  with  t. 
39.  brethren,  forbid  not  to  speak  with  t. 

Rev.  7.  9.  people  and  t.  stood  before  the  throne 

10.  11.  must  prophesy  again  before  nations  and  t. 

11.  9.  t.  and  nations  shall  see  their  dead  bodies 

13.  7.  and  power  was  given  him  over  all  t. 
l(i.  10.  and  they  gnawed  their  t.  for  pain 

17.  15.  the  waters  thou  sawest  are  nations  and  t. 

TOOK. 

Oen.  5.  24.  and  Enoch  was  not,  for  God  t.  him 
21.  21.  his  mother  t.  him  a  wite  out  of  Egypt 
24.  7.  God,  which  t.  me  from  my  father's  house 
■12.  .30.  the  lord  of  the  land  t.  us  for  spies 

JVum.  3.  49.  Moses  t.  the  redemption-money,  50. 

11.  2.5.  the  Lord  t.  of  the  Spirit  that  was  on  him 

21.  I.  king  .'Xrad  t.  some  of  them  prisoners 
2:1.  II.  I  t.  Ihee  to  curse  mine  enemies,  and  lo 

Deut.  1.  15.  so  I  t.  the  chief  of  your  tribes 
2. 35.  only  the  cattle  we  t.  for  a  prey  lo  ourselves 
3.  4.  there  was  not  a  city  we  t.  not  from  them 
9. 21.  1 1.  your  sin,  the  calf  which  ye  had  made 

22.  14.  I  t.  this  woman  and  found  her  not  a  maid 
lo.ih.  7.  21.  then  I  coveted  them,  and  t.  them 

9.  14.  Ibe  men  t.  of  their  victuals,  and  asked  not 

24.  3.  I  t.  your  father  Abraham  from  other  side 
Jiidg-.IG.  21.  Philistines  t.  Samson,  put  out  his  eyes 

J7.~2.  behold,  the  silver  is  with  me,  I  t.  it 

19.  15.  no  man  t.  them  into  l;is  house  to  lodging 
25.  Ihe  man  t.  his  concubine,  and  brought  her 

20.  6.  I  t.  my  concubine,  and  cut  her  in  pieces 

1  Sam.  2.  14.  brought  up,  the  priest  t.  for  himself 

5.  1.  and  Ihe  Philistines  t.  the  ark  of  God,  2. 

10. 1.  Samuel  t.  a  vial  of  oil  and  poured  on  Saul 

14.  47.  so  Saul  t.  the  kingdom  over  Israel 

15.  21.  the  people  t.  of  the  spoil,  sheep  and  oxen 
l(i.  13.  Samuel  t.  horn  of  oil  and  anointed  David 

18.  2.  Saul  t.  him,  would  not  let  him  go  home 
26.  12.  David  t.  the  spear  from  Saul's  bolster 

2  Sam.  1. 10. 1 1.  the  crown  and  brought  it  hither 
R.  C.  Uzzah  t.  hold  of  it  for  the  oxen  shook  it 
7.  8.  I  t.  thee  from  the  sheep-cote,  to  be  ruler 

15.  my  mercy  shall  not  depart,  as  I  t.it  from  Saul 

12.  4.  but  t.  the  poor  man's  lamb  and  dressed  it 

1  h'inirs  1.  39.  Zadok  the  priest  t.  a  horn  of  oil 
3.  20.  she  arose  and  t.  my  son  from  beside  me 

20.  34.  the  cities  my  father  t.  I  will  restore 

2  ft'in  n-.tlO.Sl.bul.Ielin  t. no  heed  to  walk  in  the  law 

1  Chron.  11.  5.  yet  David  t.  the  cnstle  of  Zion 

2  Chron.  33.  11.  which  t.  Manasseh  among  thorns 
Eirrt5.  14.  vessels  which  Nibuchadnezzar  t.  (i.  5. 
F.sth.  2.  7.  whom  Mordecai  t.  for  his  own  daujhter 

6.  11.  then  I.  Haman  the  apparel  and  the  horse 

9.  27.  t,  on  Ihem,  that  Iliey  would  keeii  Purim 
.Toll  10.  t8.  thine  hands  t.  pains  upon  me 

Psal.  22.  9.  h(!  that  t.  me  out  of  Ihi'  womb,  71.  6. 
48.  (>.  fear  t.  hold  on  thom  there,  and  pain 
.55^14.  we  t.  sweet  counsel  together,  and  walked 
73./0.lie  chose  David,  and  t.  from  the  sheep-fiilds 

fsa.  8.  2.  1 1.  me  faithful  wilnesers  to  record 
40.  14.  with  whom  t.  he  counsel,  who  inslriictcd 

Jer.  25.  17.  then  t.  \  the  cup  at  the  Tjord's  hand 
31.  32.  In  the  day  1 1.  them  by  the  hand,  WcA.  8.  9. 
39.  14.  even  they  t.  .lerrmiah  out  of  prison 

Kzek.  8.  3.  and  hot.  me  by  a  lock  of  oiitie  head 

10.  7.  he  t.  fire  from  hclwoen  thee heriihims 
33.  5.  he  hi'ard  the  trumpet,  and  t.  not  warning 
Omos  7.  1.5.  the  Lord  I.  me  as  I  fiillowedthe  (lock 
Zcrh.  II.  7.  I  t.  mc  two  staves,  b'-nuty  and  bund 

13.  I  t.  the  thirty  pieces  and  c;ist  to  the  potter 
Viit.  8.  17.  liiniscif  t.  our  infirMiiti<-s,  and  bare 
13.33.  like  leaven  which  a  woman  t.  I.ukrAW.  21. 

25.  3.  Ihn  foolish  virgins  /.  no  oil  ||  35.  ye  t.  me  in 
43.  I  was  a  stranger  and  ye  t.  nie  not  in 

Mnrk  12.  20.  the  first  t.  a  wife,  ami  li'fi  no  seed 
21.  the  second  t.  her  and  died,  /,ii/rc20.29,30. 

11.  49.  in  Ihe  temple  teachinj,  and  ye  t.  mo  not 
Tnhn  19.  27.  that  lisriple  t.  her  to  his  own  home 
'Irl^  1.  If),  who  wasgiiide  to  then  who  t.  Jesus 
9.  27.  hut  narnaha"  t.  him,  and  doc-lared  to.lhcm 
12.25.t.witli  them  John  who«c  nirname  wn'Mark 

19.  13.  t.  on  Ihem  to  call  over  th>-m  which  had 

21.  fi.  whom  we  t.  and  wniilil  hav.>  jiidced  by  law 

23.  15.  Paul  thanked  God  and  t.  c'ouraga 


TOO 

Oal.  2.  1.  I  veent  up  and  1 1.  Titus  with  m«  alsit 
t'hil.  2.  7.  and  t.  Ujion  hiin  the  form  of  a  ser/uitl 
Ciil.  2.  14.  t.  it  outof  the  way,  nailing  itlo  his  ooai 
Uib.  2.  14.  he  also  himself  t.  part  of  the  same 

10.  34.  ye  t.  joyfully  the  spoiling  of  your  goood 
Reo.^.l'.hc  t.  the  book  ||  8.5.  angel  t.  the  censer 

10.  10. 1 1.  the  little  book  outof  Ihe  angel's  hand 

I'OOK  away. 
Gen.  27.  36.  he  f.  away  my  birth-right,  behold 
Ezud.  10.  19.  a  west-wind  t.  away  ihe  locusts 

13.  22.  he  t»  not  away  the  pillar  of  cloud  by  da» 
y>ei".  I).  4.  he  shall  resiore  that  which  he  t.  away 
Judg.  8.  21.  Gideon  t.  away  their  ornaments 

11. 13.  Israel  t.  away  my  land  when  they  came  up 
15.  Israel  t.  not  away  the  land  of  Moab 

1  .Sam.  27.  9.  David  t.  away  the  sheeji  and  oxen 

1  Kings  14.  21).  Shishak  t.  away  Ihe  treasures 

15.  12.  Asat.  away  the  Sodomites  out  of  the  land 
22.  and  ihey  t.  away  the  stones  of  Kaniah 

2  Kingsii.  11.  Josiali  t.  away  the  horses  of  the  sun 

25. 14.  all  the  vessels  wherewith  they  ministered, 
the  Chaldeans  t.  away,  15.  Jer.  .52.  18,  19. 

2  Citron.  14.  3.  Asa  t.  away  the  altars  ||  5.  images 

17.  0.  Jehoshaphal  t.  away  the  high  places 

30.  14.  Hezekiah  t.  away  the  altars  in  Jerusalem 

33.  15.  Manasseh  t.  away  the  strange  gods 
Psal.  09.  4.  I  restored  that  which  I  t.  not  away 
Cant.  5.  7.  the  keepers  t.  away  my  vail  from  me 
Rzek.  10.  50.  I  t.  them  away  as  I  saw  good 
Hos.  13.  11.  and  1  t.  the  king  away  in  my  Wrath 
Mat.  24.39.  the  flood  came  and  t.  them  all  away 
John  II.  41.  then  they  t.  azcaj/ the  Stone  from  place 

He  TOOK. 
Gen.  34.2.Shechemsaw  her,  Ac  t.  her,  and  lay  with 
Eiod.  4.  t).  when  Ac  t.  it  out,  his  hand  was  leprous 
24.  7.  he  t.  the  book  of  the  covenant  and  read 
32.  20.  and  Ac  t.  the  calf  which  they  had  made 

34.  34.  he  t.  the  vail  off,  until  he  came  out 
Lev.  8.  If).  Ac  t.  all  the  fat  on  the  inwards,  25. 
Jud^.  8.  10.  Ac  t.  the  elders  of  ihe  city  and  lliornB 
Ruth  4.^.  he  I.  ten  men  of  the  elders  of  the  city 

1  Sam.  1 1.7.  Ae  t.  a  yoke  of  o.ven,  and  hewed  them 
14.52.  Saul  saw  any  valiantman,  Ae  t.  him  tohiin 
15.  8.  he  t.  Agag  king  of  the  Anmlekites  alive 
17. 40.  Ae  t.  his  stalf  in  his  hand,  and  chose  him 

2  Sam.  13.  ll.Ae  t.  hohl  of  her,  and  said,  lie  with  me 

18.  14.  Ac  t.  three  darts,  and  thrust  them  through 
22.  17.  he  sent  from  above,  Ac  f.  me,  Psal.  18. 16. 

1  Kings  17.  19.  Act.  her  son  out  of  her  oosorn 

2  Kings  2.  14.  Ae  t.  the  mantle  of  Elijah  that  full 

3.  27.  Ac  t.  his  eldest  son  and  offered  him  for  a 
.5.  24.  he  t.  them  from  their  hand  and  bestowed 

8.  15.  Ae  t.  a  thick  cloth  and  dipt  it  in  water 

13.  15.  and  Ac  t.  unio  him  bow  and  arrows 
Job  2.  8.  Ae  t.  him  a  potsherd  lo  scrape  himsel 
Prov.  12.  27.  slolhful  roasteth  not  that  which  Ae  t 
Has.  12. 3.  he  t.  his  brother  by  the  heel  in  the  worn! 
Mnt.  15.  36.  Ac  t.  the  seven  loaves,  Mark  8.  6. 

21!.  27.  Act.  the  cup,  Lukc2-i.  17.  1  Cor.  11.  25. 

37./ie  t.with  him  Peter,  James,  John,  AitAe  9.  28. 
27.  24.  Ac  t.  water  an<l  washed  his  hands,  saying 
Mark  8. 23.  and  Ae  t.  the  blind  man  by  the  hand 

9.  3G.  Ac  t.  a  child  and  set  him  in  the  midst 
AuAc  9.  16.  Ac  t.  the  five  loaves  and  two  fishes 

10.  .35.  het.  out  two-pence  and  gave  lo  the  host 
22.  19.  and  he  t.  bread.  24.  30.  .■lets  27.  .35. 

.'?c^?I6.  33.  Ac  t.  them  the  same  hour  and  washed 
21.  11.  he  I.  Paul's  girdle  and  bound  his  hands 

Heh.  2.  Ifi.  Ae  t.  not  on  him  the  nature  of  angeli 
9.  19.  Ae  t.  the  blood  of  calves  and  of  go.ats 
7'AfyTOOK. 

r?cnfi.2.  they  t.  them  wives  which  they  chose 

14.  II.  and  thiy  t.  oil  the  goods  of  Sodom 
12.  and  Ihnj  t.  Lot,  Abram's  brother's  son 

JVinn.  H).  IH.  and  thry  t.  every  man  his  censer 
l>tul.  1.  25.  and  Ihey  t.  of  the  fruit  of  Ihe  land 
./i/.«'/.0.  20.  the  people  went  up  and  Ihey  t.  the  city 
8.  23.  Ihe  kingof  Ai,  they  t.  alive  and  brought  him 

11.  19.  save  Hiviles,  alfolher  tkry  t.  in  baltle 
.fiidg.  3.  6.  they  I.  their  daughters  to  be  wives 

2  Kings  10.  \4.  they  t.  them  alive  and  slew  them 
Lnm.  5.  13.  they  t.  the  young  men  to  grind 
Fzek.  23.  13.  I  saw  ihat  they  t.  both  one  way 
Dun.  5.  20.  and  tAei/  t.  his  slory  from  him 
Mm.  21.  40.  because  they  t.  him  for  a  prophet 
2H.  15.  so  they  t.  the  money,  and  did  as  lausrht 
Mnrh  12.8.  tAef/t. him,  and  killed  him,  and  ea'thim 
l.iiUi  22.  54.  tlifv  I.  liiiu  and  led  him,  John  19.  16. 
.^rt.s-  4.  13.  anil  Ihey  t.  hnowlodgo  of  them  that 
13.  29.  they  t.  him" down  from  the  tree  and  laid 
18,2!(.  tAfw  t.  him,  and  expounded  the  way  of  God 
TOOK  vp. 
.Yum.  23.  7.  Tialaam  (.  vp  his  parable  and  i>aid, 
18.  1  24.  3,  1.5,  90.  21,  23 
.WA.3.fi.the  priests  t.  up  the  ark,  6.12.1  KinirsB.S. 
Jiidg.  19.  28.  then  the  man  t.  vp  his  conruhme 
I  Sam.  9.  24.  and  ihe  cook  t.  vp  iho  shoiilrler 
•2  Sam.  2.  32.  they  t.  up  ,\Baliel  and  buried  him 

4.  4.  Mephihosheih's  nurse  t.  him  up  and  fled 

1  Kinirs  13.  2'J.  and  the  prophet  t.  vp  the  curcaao 


TOP 

t  Kirgs  3.  13.  he  (.  up  also  the  irantle  of  Elijah 
4.  37.  the  Shunamite  t.  up  her  n>ii  and  went  out 
10.  15.  and  he  t.  him  up  to  him  into  llie  chariot 
JVc/i.S.  1. 1  I.  up  the  wine  and  gsve  it  to  the  king 
Jer.  3d.  13.  ihey  <.  Jeremiah  «;>  out  of  the  dungeon 
Ezek.  3. 12.  then  theSi)ir:t  t.me  vp,  11.24.  [43.5. 
JJan.  3.  22.  the  flame  slew  men  that  t.vp  Shadrach 
Jonah  1. 1.5.  so  they  t.  up  Jonah,  and  cast  him  forth 
Utat.  14.12.  they  t.up  tliebody  of  Jolm,  Markd.^'d. 
20.  they  f.  up  of  the  fragments  that  remained, 
15.  37.  Mark  6.^3.  |  8.  8,  20. 
Ifi.  9.  and  how  many  baskets  ye  t.  up,  10. 
JUark  2.  12.  and  t»  t.  up  tlie  bed  and  went  forth 
10.  IC.  he  t.  tliem  up  in  his  arms  and  blessed  them 
Luke  2.28.  t.\\\mvp  in  his  arms  and  blessed  God 
John  8.  59.  (.  up  stones  to  cast  at  hiin,  10  31. 
jicts  7.  21.  Pharaoh's  daughter  t.  Moses  up 
43.  yea,  ye  ',.  un  th"?  tabernacle  of  Moloch 
m  2ti   but  Peter  t.  him  up.,  saying,  stand  up 
21.15.we  t.up  our  carriages  and  went  to  Jerusalem 
hcv.  18.  21.  and  a  mighty  angel  t.  up  a  stone 

TOOKEST. 
Ps.  99.  8.  tho'  thou  t.  vengeance  of  their  inventions 
Kztk.  16.  18.  and  t.  tliy  broidered  garments 

TOOL. 
F.xod.  20.25.  if  lift  up  thy  t.  thou  hast  polluted  it 

32.  4.  and  he  fashioned  it  with  a  graving  t. 
Dcut.  27.5.  thou  shalt  not  lift  up  any  iron  t.  on  them 
1  Kings  6.7.  nor  anv  t.  of  iron  heard  in  tlie  liouse 

TOOTH 

Is  an  useful  member  of  the  body  known  by  every 
body.  The  Hebrews  call  ivory,  tooth,  or  the 
elephant's  tooth,  1  Kings  10.  t  22.  They  soyie- 
times  also  called  the  prominence  of  a  rock  by 
the  name  o/ tooth,  1  .Sam.  14. 14.  Between  the 
passages  there  was  a  sharp  rock ;  in  Hebrew, 
the  tooth  of  a  rock,  .^nd  the  rock  fram  which 
God  caused  the  water  to  gvsh  out, for  quench- 
ing Samson's  thirst,  is  culled  maktesb,  that  is, 
the  jaw-tooth,  Judg.  15.  19.  It  was  ordered 
by  the  law  of  retaliation,  that  they  should  give 
tooth  for  tooth,  E.\od.  21.  24.  This  law  is,  by 
viost  interpreters,  reclioncdonly  minatory ;  yet 
su  as  that  it  was  literally  to  be  inflicted,  ex- 
cept the  injuring  party  would  give  such  satis- 
faction as  the  injured  person  accepted,  or  the 
judges  determined. 

To  giiasli  the  teeth  is  a  token  of  sorrow,  rage, 
despair,  haired,  and  passion.  The  Psalmist 
says,  Psal.  35.  Itj,  That  his  enemies  gnash  upon 
htm  with  their  teeth,  out  of  rage  and  hatred. 
.9nd  the  gospel  in  several  places  speaks  of  the 
gnashing  of  the  teeth  of  the  damned  ont  of  rage 
and  despair.  God  breaks  the  teeth  of  the  wick- 
ed, Psal.  3.  7.  he  puts  it  out  of  their  power 
to  injure  good  men.  The  wicked  complain, 
that  the  fathers  have  eaten  sour  grapes,  and 
their  children's  teeth  arc  set  on  edge,  F.zek.  18. 
2.  .Is  if  they  had  said,  "  Our  fathers  have 
"  sinned,  and  we  are  obliged  to  undergo  the 
'■^ puuishnient  thereof,  thovgh  we  are  not 
"guilty."  .imos  tells  the  idolatrous  .fews, 
that  God  had  sent  them  cleanness  of  teeth, that 
is,  famine.  They  should  not  have  where- 
withal to  defile  their  tevth,  Amos  4.  6. 

Exud.  21.  24.  thou  shult  give  t.  for  t.  Lev.  24.20. 

Deut.  19.  21.  Mat.  5.  38. 

27.  if  lie  smite  out  his  man-servant's  or  his  maid- 

servnnt's  t.  he  shall  let  him  go  free  for  his  (.sake 

Proo.  25.  19.  is  like  a  broken  t.a.  foot  out  of  joint 
TOP. 

Gen.ll.i.  tower  whose  t.  may  reach  unto  heaven 
28.  12.  the  t.  of  the  ladder  reached  to  heaven 
I.''.  Jacob  poured  oil  on  the  t.  of  the  stone 

Exud.  10.20.  Lord  ciinedownoni.  of  mount  Sinai, 
and  called  Moses  to  t.  of  the  mount,  34.  2. 

24.  17.  like  devouring  fire  on  the  t.  of  the  mount 

28.  32.  there  shall  be  a  hole  in  the  t.  of  it 

30.  3.  shall  overlay  the  I.  with  pure  gold,  37.  26. 

A"«JH.  14. 40.  they  gat  up  into  the  t.  of  tlie  mountain 

20.  26.  Aaron  died  there  in  the  t.  of  the  mount 
23.  9.  for  from  the  I.  of  the  rocks  I  see  him 

Deut.  3.  27.  get  up  into  the  t.  of  Pi?gah,  34.  1. 
•iS.  35.  from  sole  of  foot  to  the  t.  of  thy  head 

33.  16.  on  t.  of  the  head  of  him  that  was  separated 
Judg.  6.  20.  build  an  altor  on  the  t.  of  this  rock 

9.  51.  the  people  gat  up  to  the  t.  of  the  tower 
15.  8.  Samson  dwelt  in  the  (.  of  the  rock  Etam 

1  .S"am.9.2.>.  ccmimuncd  on  the  t.  of  the  house,  20. 

2.S/i»n.  16.^.  spread  a  lent  on  the  t.  of  the  house 

1  Kings  10.  19.  the  t   of  the  throne  round  hehind 
^  21.  +9.  and  set  Xaboth  on  the  t.  of  the  [leople 

2  Kings  9.  13.  put  it  under  him  on  t  of  the  stairs 
C  L'hron.  25.  12.  cast  them  from  the  /..  Tif  the  rock 
Kslh.a.  2.  Esther  touched  the  t.  of  the  sceptre 
Psal.  72.  16.  handful  of  corn  on  /,.  of  mountains 

102.  7.  I  am  aa  a  sparrow  alone  on  the  house  t. 
Prof.  8.  2.  sho  .standeth  in  the  t.  of  high  places 

21.  9.  l)<>tter  dwell  in  corner  of  housc-(.  2.'>.  24. 
23  34.  or  as  he  that  licth  on  the  t.  of  a  mast 

637 


TOP 

Cant.  4.  8.  look  from  the  t.  of  Amana,  from  the  t. 
Isa.  2.  2.  the  Lord's  house  shall  be  estabUshed  in 
the  t.  of  the  mountains,  and  bee.xalted,  jWjc.4.1. 
17.  6.  two  or  three  berries  in  the  t.  of  the  bow 

30.  17.  lell  as  a  beacon  on  the  t.  of  a  mountain 

42.  11.  let  them  shout  from  the  £.  of  the  mountains 
Lam.  2.19.  that  faint  for  hunger  in  t.  of  every  street 

4.  1.  the  stones  of  the  sanctuary  are  jioured  out 

in  the  t.  of  every  street 

Ezek.  17.  4.  he  cropt  off  the  t.  of  his  young  twigs 

22. 1  will  crop  ott  from  the  t.  of  his  young  twigs 

24.  7.  her  blood,  Blie  set  it  on  the  t.  of  a  rock 

8.  I  have  set  her  blood  on  the  t.  of  a  rock 
26.  4.  1  will  make  her  like  the  t.  of  a  rock,  14. 

31.  3.  his  t.  was  among  the  thick  boughs,  10,  14. 

43.  12.  law  of  the  house  on  the  t.  of  llie  mountain 
jVuA.3.10.her  children  dashed  at  t.  of  all  the  streets 
Mat.  24.  17.  let  him  who  is  on  the  house-i.  not 

come  down,  Mark  13.  15.  Luke  17.  31. 
27.51.  vail  rent  from  t.  to  thebottom,  Mark  15.38. 
Luke  5. 19.  they  went  on  the  Bouse-t.  and  let  down 
John  19.  23.  was  woven  from  the  t.  throughout 
//e6. 11. 21. and  worshipped, leaning  on  t.  of  Ids  staff 
Hee  Cakmel,  Hill. 
TOPS. 
Gen.  8.  5.  the  t.  of  the  mountains  were  seen 
2  i'ttm.5.24.when  thou  hearest  the  sound  of  a  going 
in  the  t.  of  the  mulberry-trees,  1  Chron.  14.  lo. 
2  Kings  19. 26.  were  as  the  green  herb,  as  the  grass 
upon  tlie  house-i.  Psal.  129.  6.  Isa.  37.  27. 
.Tab  24.24.  and  cut  off  as  the  t.of  the  ears  of  corn 
Isa.  2.  21.  to  go  into  the  t.  of  the  ragged  rocks 
15.  3.  on  the  t.  of  houses  every  one  shall  howl 
22.  1.  that  thou  art  wholly  gone  up  to  the  house-«. 
./e'r.48.3'!i.there  sliall  be  lamentation  on  all  house-^. 
jE.'zct.6.13.their  slain  men  shall  bein  t.of  mountains 
Hus.  i.  13.  they  sacrilice  on  the  t.  of  the  mountains 
Zrph.  1. 5.  worship  tlie  host  of  heaven  on  house-«. 
Mat.  10.  27.  that  preach  ye  upon  the  house-£. 
Luke  12.  3.  shall  be  proclaimed  on  the  house-£. 

TOPAZ, 
In  Hebrew,  Pitdath.  The  sei^enty,  St.  Jcrom, 
Junius,  and  the  greatest  part  of  the  modern 
interpreters :  translate  Pitdath  by  Topaz  ;  the 
Paraphrasts,  Onkelos,  and  Joiiathan,  by  a 
green  stone  ;  which  agrees  perfectly  well  with 
the  Topaz,  of  which  the  finest  are  green,  as 
Pliny  observes,  lib.  37.  cap.  8.  itt  others 
maintain  that  the  most  beautiful  Topazes  are 
of  the  colour  of  gold.  It.  is  pretended  this 
stone  took  its  name  of  Tojiaz  from  an  island 
in  the  Red-sea,  which  has  the  same  name. 
Pliny  will  have  Juba,  king  of  Mauritania,  to 
have  been  the  first  that  found  them  :  But  if  h 
was  known  to  Moses,  it  must  be  much  more 
ancient  than  .Tuba.  Job  speaks  of  the  Pitdath 
of  Cash,  or  Ethiopia,3o\i'i8.W.  which  may  con- 
firm their  opinion  irho  make  ?Ae  Topaz  to  come 
from  the  Red-sea;  because  there  was  a  country 
of  Cush,  lying  upon  the  eastern  shore  of  this 
sea.  This  stone  was  thf  second  of  the  first 
row  in  the  breast-plate,  and  had  the  name  of 
Simeon  upoji  it,  E.\od.  28.  17. 
Eiod.  28.  17.  the  fir.*t  row  a  Sardius,  a  t.  39.  10. 
Job  28.  19.  the  t.  of  Etiiicpia  shall  not  equal  it 
Ezek.  28. 13.  the  Sardius,  tho  t.  was  thy  covering 
Rev.  21.  20.  the  eighth,  bervl,  the  ninth  a  t. 

TOPHET. 

It  is  thought  that  Tophct  was  the  butchery,  or 
place  of  slaughter  at  Jerusalem,  lying  to  the 
south  of  the  city,  in  the  valley  of  the  children 
of  Hinnom.  It  is  also  said,  that  a  constant 
fire  used  to  be  kept  there,  for  burning  the  car- 
cases, and  other  filthiness,  that  were  brought 
thither  from  the  city.  It  was  in  the  same 
place  that  they  cast  away  the  ashes  and  rr- 
~  mains  of  the  images  of  false  gods,  when  they 
demolished  their  altars,  and  broke  down 
their  statues.  Isaiah  seems  to  allude  to  this 
custom,  of  burning  dead  carcases  in  Tophct, 
when  speaking  of  fir  defeat  of  the  army  nf 
Sennacherib,  he  says  ;  For  Tophct  is  ordaimd 
of  old  ;  yea,  for  the  king  if  is  prepi'.ied  ;  he 
hath  made  it  deep  and  lar^e.  The  pile  there- 
of is  fire  and  much  wood  ;  the  breath  of  the 
Lord,  like  a  stream  of  brimstone,  doth  kindle 
it.  TVinugh  this  may  be  figuratively  under- 
stood of  hell. 
Others  think  the  name  of  Tophet  is  given  to  the 
valley  of  Hinnom,  because  of  the  sacrifices  that 
were  offered  there  to  the  ^od.  Moloch,  by  beat  of 
drum,  which  in  Hebrew  is  colli dTo\'ih.  It  was 
in  this  manner  that  thise  sacrifices  werf  offered: 
The  statue  of  Moloch  leas  of  brass,  hollow 
within,  with  its  arms  extended,  and  stooping  a 
little  forward.  They  lighted  a  great  fire  within 
the  statue,  and  another  before  it.  They  put 
upon  its  arms  the  child  they  intended  to  sacri- 
fice, which  soon  fell  into  the  fire  at  the  foot  nf 
the  statue,  putting  forth  erics,  as  may  easily 


TOS 

be  imagined.    To  stifle  the  noise  of  these  enet 
and  bowlings,  they  made  a  great  rattling  of 
drums  and  other  instruments,  that  the  sp»c- 
lators  viigjit  7iot  he  moved  with  compassion  at 
the  clamours  of  these  miserable  victims,     /ind 
this,  as  they  say,  was  the  manner  of  sacri- 
ficing in  Tuphet. 
Jeremiahupbraids  the  Israelites  wilhkaving  built 
temples  to  Moloch,  in  the  valley  of  Hinnom,  in 
Tophet,  to  burn  their  children  there  in  the  fire 
Jer.  7.31.  The  same  prophet  shews,  that  Tophet 
was  a  polluted  and  unclean  place,  7chere  they 
used  to  throw  the  carcases  to  which  they  re- 
fused burial,  Jer.  7.  32.  |  19.  11,  12, 13.     Kirig 
Josiah  defiled  the  place  of  Tophet,  where  the 
temple  of  Moloch  stood,  that  nobody  might  go 
thither  any  more  to  sacrifice  their  children  to 
that  cruel  heathenish  deity,  2  Kings  23.  10. 
2  Kings  23.  10.  Josiah  defiled  t.  in  the  valley 
Isa.  30.33.  for  t.  is  ordained  of  old,  for  the  king 
Jer.  7.  31.  they  have  built  the  high  places  of  t. 
32.  that  it  shall  no  more  be  called  t.  19.  6. 

19.  11.  they  shall  bury  in  t.  till  there  be  no  place 

12.  saith  the  Lord,  I  will  even  make  this  city  as  t, 

13.  Jeru.salcm  shall  be  defiled  as  (. 

14.  then  came  Jeremiah  from  t.  whither  eent 

TORCH. 
Zeeh.  12.  6.  make  the  governors  of  Judah  like  a  t 

TOUCHES. 
.Tudg.  7.  t  16.  he  put  t.  within  the  pitchers 

15.  t  4.  Samson  caught  300  foxes  and  took  (. 
JVaA.  2.  3.  the  chariots  shall  be  with  flaming  t- 

4.  the  chariots  shall  seem  like  t.  they  shall  rua 
John  18.  3.  Judas  cometh  with  lanterns  and  t. 

TORMENT. 

Luke  10.  28.  lest  they  come  into  this  place  off. 

1  John  4.  18.  no  fear  in  love,  because  fear  hath  t 

Rev.  9.  5.  their  t.  was  as  the  t.  of*  scorpion 

14.  11.  the  smoke  of  then-  t.  ascendeth  for  ever 

18.  7.  so  much  t.  and  sorrow  give  her,  I  sit  a  queen 

10.  standing  afar  off  for  the  fear  of  her  t.  15. 

TORMENTS. 

..Vaf.4.24.thatwere  taken  withdiversdiseases  and£. 

Luke  16.  23.  in  hell  he  lift  up  his  eyes,  being  in  t. 

TORMENT. 
J/(ii.8.29.  art  thou  come  lo  t.  us  before  the  timet 
Mark  5.  7.  that  thou  t.  me  not,  LukeS.  28. 

TOR.MENTED. 
Mat.  8.  6.  Lord,  my  servant  lieth  grievously  t. 
I^uke  16. 24.  send  Lazarus,  for  I  am  t.  in  this  flara* 

2.5.  but  now  he  is  comforted,  and  thou  art  t. 

Heb.  11.37.  wandered,  being  destitute,  afflicted,  t 

Rev.  9.  5.  but  that  they  should  be  t.  five  months 

11.  10.  because  these  two  prophets  t.  them  that 

14.  10.  he  shall  be  t.  with  fire  and  brimstone 

20.  10.  and  shall  be  t.  d»v  and  night  for  ever 

TORMENTORS. 
Mat.  18.  34.  his  lord  delivered  him  to  the  t. 

TORN. 
f?fn.31.39.  that  which  was  t.ofbeasts  I  brought  not 
44.  28.  and  I  said,  surely  he  is  t.  in  pieces 
Exod.  22.  13.  if  t.  in  pieces,  let  him  bring  it  for 
witness,  he  shall  not  make  good  what  was  t. 
31.  be  holy,  nor  shall  eat  any  flesh  t.  of  beasts 
Leo.  7.  24.  fat  of  that  which  is  t.  may  be  used 
17. 15.  if  any  eat  that  which  was  t.  he  shall  wash 
'  22.  8.  dieth  of  itself  or  (.  of  beasts,  shall  not  eat 
1  Kings  13.  26.  to  the  lion,  which  hath  t.  him 

28.  the  lion  had  not  eaten  carcase  nor  t.  the  asg 
/Isrt.  .5.  25.  carcases  (.  in  the  midst  of  the  streets 
.ler.  5.  6.  wery  one  that  goeth  out  shall  be  t. 
F.zek.  4.  14.  I  have  not  eaten  of  that  which  is  t. 
44. 31. the  priests  shall  not  eat  anything  that  ist. 
Has.  6.  1.  for  he  hath  t.  and  he  will  heal  us 
Mill.  1.  13.  and  ye  brought  that  which  was  t. 
Mark  1.  26.  when  the  nnrlean  spirit  hath  t.  him 

TORTOISE, 
InHebrew  C\wV'.A,tchich  the  Scptuagint  tran.'ilate 
by  land  crocodile,  others  by  green-frog.  It  is 
numbered  among  the  unclean  animals.  Lev.  11. 
20.  This  land  crocodile  is  a  sort  of  lizard, 
which  feeds  upon  the  sweetest  flowers  it  can 
find ;  this  makes  its  entrails  to  be  very  much 
valued  for  their  agreeable  smell.  St.  .fernm 
says,  that  the  .Sj/nans  used  to  cat  crocodilcB 
of  this  kind,  tghich  live  upon  the  land  only. 
Lev.  11.  29.  the  t.  Rhall  he  unclean  unto  you 

TORTURED. 
.^ets  22.  t  29.  departed,  who  should  have  t.  him 
/■/<:*. 11.35.others  were  t.  not  accepting  deliveranc* 

TOSS. 
Isa.  22.  IS.  he  will  turn  and  t.  thee  like  a  ball 
Jer.  5.  22.  though  the  waves  thereof  t.  themselves 

TOSSED. 
Psal.  109.  23.  I  am  t.  up  and  down  as  the  locust 
Prov.  21.  6.  is  a  vanifv,  t.  to  and  fro  of  them  that 
Isa.  54.  11.  O  thou  afflicted,  t.  with  tempest 
Mat.  14.  24.  but  the  ship  was  now  t.  with  waves 
lets  27.  18.  being  e.xccedinffly  '■  with  a  tempest 
Eph.  4.  14.  we  be  no  more  ciiildren  t.  to  and  fro 


TOU 

/am.  1.  6.  for  he  tlial  wavereth  is  like  a  wave  t. 

TOSSl>rGS. 
.'ob  7.  4.  I  am  full  oft.  to  the  dawning  of  the  Jay 
3  Cor.  6. 1 5.  approving  ourselves  in  t.  in  labours 

TOTTERING. 
Psal.  62.  3.  ye  shall  be  all  of  you  mat.  fence 

TOUCH. 
Gen.  3.  3.  not  eat  of  it,  iior  shall  ye  J.  it  lest  ye  die 
aO.  6.  therefore  sulfercd  I  ihee  not  to  £.  her 
Exod.  19.  12.  that  ye  t.  not  the  border  of  it 

13.  there  shall  not  a  hand  t.  it,  but  shall  die 
Lev.  5.  2.  or  if  a  soul  t.  any  unclean  thing 

3.  or  if  he  t.  the  unclcanness  of  man,  7.  ^1. 
C.  27.  whatsoever  shall  t.  the  flesh  thereof 

11.  8.  their  carcase  ye  shall  not  t.  2)eiit.  14.  8. 
31. whosoever  doth  t.them  when  dead, be  unclean 

12.  4.  he  shall  t.  no  hallowed  thing,  nor  come 
Xam.  4.  1.5.  they  shall  not  t.  any  holy  thing 

It).  26.  depart  and  t.  nothing  of  theirs 
Josh.  9.  11).  now  therefore  we  may  not  t.  them 
HiUh  2.  t».  1  charged  that  they  should  not  t.  thee 
2  Sam.  14.  lU.  and  he  shall  not  t.  thoe  any  more 

18.12.beware  that  none  Mhe  young  man  Ab.^alom 

23.  7.  the  man  that  shall  t.  tiiem  must  be  fenced 
1  Clir.  16.  22.  t.  not  mine  anointed,  Psal.  lUo.  15. 
Job  1.  11.  but  t.  all  he  haih  and  he  will  cur.so  thee 

2.  5.  t.  his  bone  and  his  flesh,  lie  will  curse  thee 

5.  19.  in  seven  there  shall  no  evil  t.  thee 

6.  7.  the  things  that  my  sold  refused  to  t. 

Ps.  144.  3.  t.  the  mountains  and  they  shall  smoke 
Isa.  6.  t  7.  he  caused  it  to  t.  my  mouth,  and  said 
52.  11.  t.  no  unclean  thing,  2  Car.  6.  17. 
Jcr.  12.  14.  that  t.  the  inheritance  of  my  people 
J, am.  2.t  2.  iStrong  holds  he  hath  made  to  t.  ground 
4.  14.  so  that  men  could  not  t.  their  garujcnts 
15.  they  cried,  it  is  unclean,  depart,  t.  not 
Hag.  2.  12.  if  one  with  his  skirl  do  t.  bread 
13.  if  one  that  is  unclean  t.  any  of  these 
Mat.  9.  21.  if  I  may  but  t.  his  garment,  Mark  3. 2?. 
14.  36.  besought  him  that  tliey  might  f.  the  hem 
of  his  garment,  Mark  5.  28.  f  6.  56.  |  8.  22. 
Mark  3.10.iliey  pressed  on  him  to  t.hini,AuAc6.1"J. 

8.  22.  they  besought  him  to  t.  the  blind  man 
J^ulic  11.  46.  ye  yourselves  t.  not  the  burdens 

18.  15.  brought  infants,  that  he  would  t.  tliem 
John  20.  17.  je>us  sailh  unto  her,  I.  me  not 

1  Cor.  7.  I.  it  is  good  for  a  man  not  to  t.  a  woman 
Col.  2.  21.  t.  not,  taste  not,  handle  not 
//e6.11.2^.tliat  destroy  the  fnsl-born, should  /.them 

12.  20.  if  so  much  as  a  beast  t.  the  mountain 

TOUCHED. 
Or.n.  26. 29.  do  us  no  hurt,  as  we  have  not  /.  thee 

'.a.  23.  he  t.  the  hollow  of  Jacob's  thigh,  32. 
/,eti  22.  6.  tiie  soul  whicli  hath  t,  any  such 
JVuTO.  31.  19  and  whosoever  hath  t.  any  slain 
Jiidg.  6.  21.  the  angel  of  the  Lord  t.  the  flesh 
1  Sara.  10.  26.  a  band,  whose  hearts  God  had  t. 

1  h'in^s  6.27.the  wings  of  cherubims  t.one  another 

19.  5.  an  angel  t.  liira  and  said,  arise,  eat,  7. 

2  Kings  13.21.  when  the  man  t.  the  bones  of  Elisha 
Estk.  5.  2.  .«o  Esther  t.  the  top  of  the  sceptre 
Job  19.21. pity  me,  for  the  hand  of  God  hath  t.  me 
Isa.  6. 7.  lo,  this  hath  t.  thy  lips,  ihy  sin  is  purged 
Jer.  1.  9.  then  the  Lord  t.  my  mouth,  ami  said 
iJati.  8.  3.  and  the  he-goat  t.  not  the  ground 

l<*.  but  he  I.  me,  9.  21.  |  10.  10,  16,  IH. 
Mat.  8.3.  and  Jesus  t.  him,  Mark  1.41.  f.nkc  5. 18. 
15.  and  he  t.  her  hand,  and  the  fever  left  her 

9.  20.  a  woman  diseased  with  an  issue  of  blood  t. 
the  hem  of  his  garment,  Mark  5.  27.  I.uke  8. 44. 
29.  then  t.  he  their  eyes,  saying,  20.  34. 

14.  36.  as  many  as  t.him  made  whole,  Mark  6.  .W. 
JI/nrA- 5.  30.  who  t.my  cloihes,  31.  /,7</re  8.  45, 47. 

7.  33.  was  deaf,  and  he  .ipi',  and  t.  his  tongue 

J  uki-.l.  14.  he  ciinie  and  t.  the  bier,  they  stoud  still 

8.  47.  she  declared  for  what  cause  she  had  t.  him 
22.  51.  and  Jesus  t.  his  ear  and  healed  him 

Jjcts  27.  3.  and  the  iie.xt  day  we  t.  at  pidon 
Ilnb.  4.  15.  n'>t  a  high  priest  which  cannot  be  t. 

12.  18.  rtot  come  to  the  mount  that  might  be  t. 

TOUCIIETH. 
Clcn.  26.  U.  he  that  t.  this  man  shall  surely  die 
y.rod.  19.  12.  whosoever  t.  the  mount,  shall  die 

25).  37.  whatsoever  /..  the-  allar  alinll  be  lioly 

30.  29.  that  t.  Ihem,  shall  be  holy,  I.cv.  0.  18. 
J.fV.  7.  19.  the  flesh  that  t.  any  imclean  thing 

11.  24.  whosoever  (.  their  carcase,  27,  36,  .39. 
26.  cvirry  one  ihnt  f.  them  shall  be  unclean 

15.  5.  whoio  t.  his  bed,  elmll  wash  his  cloihes 
7.  t.  his  flesh  ||  10.  t.  any  thing  under  him 

1 1  whomsoever  he  /.  that  hath  the  issue 

12  the  vessel  of  earth  that  he  (.  shall  be  broken 
10.  whosoever  /.  her  ||  21.  wliesoever  t.  Iiir  bed 
02.  whnsoever  t.  any  thing  that  she  sal  upon 
23.  if  on  her  bed,  when  he  t.  it  he  fhnll  ho  nn- 

clean  till  the  ovcn,27. 1  22.  4,  5.  JVi/m.  19. '.-2. 
Kiim.  19.  11.  ho  that  f.  the  dead  body,  13,  16. 
18.  (.  a  hone  ||  21.  t.  the  water  of  separation 
Jitdff.  16.  9.  ns  a  thread  is  broken,  when  it  /.  fiic 
Job\.  5.  now  it  I.  thee  and  thou  art  troubled 
638 


TOW 

Psal.  104.  32.  he  t.  the  hills  and  they  smoke 
Prov.G.  29.  whosoever  t.  her,3hall  not  be  innocent 
Ezek.  17.  10.  shall  wither,  when  the  east-wind  t.  it 
Has.  4.  2.  they  break  out,  and  blood  I.  blood 
Amos  9.  5.  the  Lord  of  hosts  is  he  that  t.  the  land 
Zech.  2.  8.  he  that  t.  you,  t.  the  apjde  ol  Ins  eye 
Luke  7. 39.  known  what  woman  this  is  that  t.  him 
1  John  3.  18.  and  that  wicked  one  t.  him  nut 

TOUCHING. 
Gen.  27. 42.  Esau,  as  t.  thee,  doth  comfort  himself 
Lev.  5. 13.  for  him,  as  t.  his  sin  that  he  hath  sinned 
jVu/n.  8.  26.  thus  do  to  the  Leviles  t.  their  charge 

1  Sam.  20.  23. 1,  matter  thou  and  1  have  sjioken  of 

2  Killers  22. 18.  t.  the  words  wiiich  thou  hast  heard 
Job  37.  23.  t.  the  Almighty,  we  cannot  find  him  out 
Psal.  45.  1.  tilings  whicli  1  have  made  t.  the  king 
Jsa.  5.  1.  a  song  of  my  beloved,  t.  his  vineyard 
Jcr.  1.  16.  utter  judgments  t.  all  their  wickedness 

21.  11.  t.  the  house  of  the  king  of  Judah,  say 

22.  11.  thus  saitli  Lord  t.  Sliullum  king  of  Judah 
Ezek.  7.  13.  the  vision  is  t.  the  whole  multitude 
Mat.  18.  19.  as  t.  any  thing  that  ihey  shall  ask 

22.31.  but  as  t.  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  have 
ye  not  read,  Mark  12.  26.  Jicts  21.  21. 
Luke  23. 14.  t.  those  things  whereof  ye  accuse  him 
Acts  5.  33.  what  ye  intend  to  do  as  t.  these  men 

21.25.  as  t.  the  Gentiles  who  believe  have  written 
Rom.  11.  28.  as  t.  the  election,  they  are  beloved 

1  Cor.  8.  1.  now  as  t.  thing*  otlercd  unto  idols 
16.  12.  t.  our  brother  Apollos,  1  desired  him 

2  Cor.  9.  1.  as  t.  the  ministering  lo  the  saints 
Phil.  3.  5.  of  the  Hebrews,  as  t.  the  law  ,a  Pharisee 

6.  t.  the  righteousness  in  the  law,  blameless 
Col.  4.  10.  t.  whom  ye  received  conimandinents 

1  Thess.  A.  9.  t.  brotherly  love,  ye  need  not  that 

2  Thcfs.  3.4.  we  have  confidence  in  the  Lord  t.you 

TOW. 
Judg.  16.  9.  break  wiihs,  as  a  tliread  of  t.  is  broken 
Asa. 1.31. and  the  strong  shall  be  as  t.  and  the  maker 
43.  17.  they  are  e.\tinct,  they  are  quenched  as  t. 

TOWARD,  or  TOWARDS. 
Gen.  48.  13.  Joseph  took  them  both,  Ephraim  t. 
Israel's  left  hand,Manasseh  t.  Israel's  right  hand 
J^um.  24.  1.  he  set  his  face  t.  the  wilderness 
Veut.  28.  54.  his  eye  shall  be  evil  t.  his  brother 
56.  shall  be  evil  t.  her  husband,  son,  daughter 
.fudg.  5.  9.  my  heart  is  t.  the  governors  of  Israel 
1  Sam.  20.  12.  behold,  if  there  be  good  t.  David 

1  Kings  8.29.  mayesl  hearken  to  i  he  prayer  thy  .ser- 

vant shall  make  (.  this  place,  30. 33. 2  Chr.  6.  21. 

2  Chron.  24.16.  because  Jehoiada  had  done  good  in 

Israel,  both  t.  God,  and  t.  his  house 
Ezra  3.  11.  his  mercy  endurelli  for  ever  t.  Israel 
Psal.  5.  7. 1  will  worship  t.iUy  holy  temple,  138.  2. 
25.  15.  mine  eyes  are  evert,  the  Lord,  for  he  shall 
28.  2.  when  I  lift  my  hands  t.  thy  holy  oracle 
Prov.  14.  35.  the  king's  favour  is  t.  a  wise  servant 
Isa.  (i3. 7.  the  great  goodness  t.  the  house  of  Israel 
Jcr.  15.  1.  my  mind  could  not  be  t.  this  people 
Dan.  6.  10.  his  windows  being  ojien  t.  Jerusalem 
8.  9.  the  litlle  horn  waxed  great  t.  the  south 
Jonah  2.  4.  yet  I  will  look  t.  thy  holy  temple 
Mat.^f.l.as  it  began  to  dawn  t.first  day  of  the  week 
Lvke  2.  14.  on  earth  peace,  good  will  t.  men 
12. 21.  that  layetli  up  treasure,  and  not  rieh  t.  God 
24.  29.  saying,  abide  with  us,  for  it  is  t.  evening 
ActsHi).  21.  testifying  to  Jews  and  Greeks  repent- 
ance t.  God,  and  faith  t.  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
24.16.couscience  void  of  olfiMice  I.  God  and  /.men 
Phil.  5.  hearing  of  thy  love  and  faith  which  thou 
hast  /.  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  /.  all  saints 
See  Hkaven,  HiM,iME,  Thkk,  Tiikm,  Us,  You. 

TOWKL. 
John  13. 4.  he  riseth,  and  took  a  t.  and  girded  hims. 
5.he  be^an  to  w.ash  and  wipe  their  feet  with  the/. 
TOWER, 
In  Mcbrr.in,  Migdal.  [1]  //  i.v  pvt  for  jmiud  lofty 
wen,  Isa.  2.  15.  1  30.  2.5.  [2J  The  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  Psal.  01.  3.  Prov.  18.  10. 
The  scripture  mentions  several  towers.  The 
tower  of  Sdonm  mentimivd  in  Luke'  13.  4.  was 
probably  near  the  fonmain  of  that  numc,to  the 
east  of  Jerusalem  :  Or,  ns  others  think,  it  7t>as 
over  the  fountain,  and  fell  upon  the  people  who 
had  come  thither  to  wash  thcmsclKCS,  or  to  re- 
ceire  benefit  by  the  loaters. 
The  tower  of  Iho  floek,  Mic.  4.  8.  Some  refer 
this  to  the  towOr  of  F.dnr,  which  teas  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  '  Urthlebem,  Gen.  35.  21. 
They  say  likewise,  that  the  shepherds,  lo  whom 
the  angHrevealed  the.  birth  of  our  Saviour,were 
near  to  this  tower,  I.uke  2.  8,  15.  Many  in- 
terpreters assert  that  thr  pnssnge  of  Micnh, 
trhrrfin  mention  is  made  of  the  tower  of  the 
flock,  stood  for  the  city  of  Heth-lehem,  out  of 
which  our  Saviour  was  to  come.  Others  main- 
tain, that  the  prophet  intended  it  for  the  city 
of  Jerusalem,  in  which  there  was  a  lower  of 
this  name,  through  wbicJi  the  Jloeks  of  sheep 
were  driven  into  the  sheep-market. 


TOW 

The  lower  oflho  watchmen,  2  Kings  17.  9,  From 
the  tower  of  the  watchmen  to  the  lisnced  city  ; 
this  form  of  speaking  expresses  in  general  all 
the  places  of  the  country,  from  the  least  to  thk 
greatest.     The  towers  oj'  the  watchmen,  or  uf 
the  shepherds,  stood  alone  in  the  midst  of  the 
plain,  to  lodge  the  shepherds  and  herdmeii,who 
looked  after  the  Jloeks,  or  to  set  watchmen  in 
to  keep  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  or  to  give  notice 
of   the    approach   of  e7tcmi(s.     King   Vizia/l 
caused  several  towers  to  be  built  for  the  skep 
herds  in  the  desert,  and  made  many  cistern* 
there,  because  he  had  a  great  number  of  Jlocksy 
2  Chron.  26.  10.      The  tower   Edar  menliontel 
before,  and  that  which  Isaiah  takes  notice  of^ 
which  was  built  in  the  midst  of  the  vineyard, 
Isa.  5.  2.  were  of  the  same  kind. 
The  tower  of  Shechein,  .ludg.  9.  40,  &.C.     This 
tower  was  as  a  citadel  or  fortress,  standing 
upon  higher groun d than  thertstof  thecity,uiid 
capacious  enough  to  receive  above  a  thousand 
persons.   After  Abimclech  had  taken  and  rased 
the  city  of  Shcchcm,  he  endeavoured  to  take 
possession  of  this  tower,  to  which  a  great  part 
of  the  inhabitants  of  the  city  had  retired  :  out 
as  he  could  not  take  it,  because  it  was  exceed- 
ingly strong,he  resolved  to  set  it  on  fire.  To  this 
purpose  he  went  up  to  mount  Zalnion,  cut  down 
an  arm  of  a  tree, and  laid  it  upon  hi.i  shoulders, 
and  commanded  all  his  people  to  follow  his  ex- 
ample.    They  therefore  brought  with  them  a 
gnat  quantity  of  fuel,  filled  the  ditch  with  it, 
and  set  it  on  fire:  So  that  all  those  who  had 
taken  refuge  in  the  tower,  either  perished  by 
the  Jlamcs,  or  were  stifled  by  the  smoke. 
'I'he  scripture  speaks  of  the  tower  of  Phanuel, 
of  the  tower  of  Succoth,  of  Bubel,  and  of  some 
others,  which  were  also  a  kind  of  citadels  and 
fortresses  of  these  cities.    Let  us  build  us  a 
city  and  a  tovier.  Gen.  11.  4,  5. 
Ocn.  11.4.  go  to,  let  us  build  us  a  city  and  a  /. 
5.  the  Lord  came  down  to  see  the  city  and  /. 
35.  21.  Isr.  spread  his  tent  beyimd  the  /.  of  Edar 
Judg.  8.  9.  when  I  come,  I  will  break  down  this  L 
17.  he  beat  down  the  /.  of  Penuel  and  slew  men 
9.  46.  men  of  the  /.  of  Shechem  entered  a  hold 
31.  but  there  was  a  strong  t.  within  the  city 
2  Sum.  22.  51.  he  is  the  /.  of  salvation  for  hiskiii> 
2  Kings  5. 24.  when  he  can.e  to  the  /.  he  took  them 
Psal.  61.  3.  hast  been  a  siiong  t.  from  the  entmy 
Prov.  18.  10.  the  name  of  the  Lord  is  a  sirong  t. 
Cant.  4.  4.  thy  neck  is  like  the  /.  of  Davi« 
7.  4.  thy  neck  is  as  a  /.  of  ivory,  thy  nose  is  as 
the  /.  of  Lebanon,  looking  toward  Damascus 
Isa.  5.  2.  he  built  a  £   in  the  midst  of  the  vineyard 
./er.  6.  27.  I  have  set  thoe  for  a  /.  and  a  fortress 
31.38.  the  city  shall  be  built  from  /.  of  Hananeel 
Ezek.  29.  10.  Egypt  desohite,  from  the  t.  of  Syeiia 
30.  6.  fiom  the  /.  of  Syeiie  shall  ih<7  fall  in  it 
Mic.  4.8.  lliou,0  t.  of  the  flock,to  thee  shall  it  come 
Ilab.  2.  1.  I  will  set  me  upon  the  /.  and  watch 
y.cch.  14.10.  shall  be  inhabited  from  /.of  Hananeel 
Mat.  21.  33.  built  a  /.  and  let  it  out  to  husbandmen 
Mark  12.  1 
Luke  13. 4.  those  13  on  whom  the  /.  in  Siloam  fell 
14.  28.  which  of  you  intending  to  build  a  /. 
High  TOWER. 
2  .9am.  22.  3.  God  is  my  high  t.  Psal.  18.  2. )  144.  a 
Jsa.  2.  15.  the  dav  of  the  Lord  on  every  hig.'i  t. 

■  TOWERS. 
2  Chron.  14.  7.  let  us  build  cities  and  make  t. 
21).  9.  moreover  Uzziali  built  /.  in  Jerusalem 
10.  he  built  /.  in  the  desert  and  digged  wells 
27.  4.  Jollinm  built  castles  and  /.  in  the  forests 
:?2.  5.  Ilezekiah  raised  up  the  wall  to  the  t. 
Psal.  48.  12.  go  round  about  Zion  and  toll  her  t. 
Cunt.  8.  10.  1  am  a  wall,  and  my  hrea.sls  like  /. 
Isa.  23.  13.  the  Assyrian  set  up  the  /.  thereof 
.30.  25.  on  every  h  gli  hill  rivers,  whim  the  /.  fait 

32.  14.  the  forts  and  /.  shall  bo  for  dens  for  ever 

33.  18.  where  is  he  that  counted  the  /.? 
Ezek.  26.  4.  thev  shall  break  down  her  /.  9. 

27.  11.  .and  the'Gamniadims  were  in  thy  t. 
Zepk.  3.  6.  their  /.  are  desolate,  streets  wa*lo 

TO  WIT. 
Oen.  21.  21.  to  wit  whether  Lord  made  journey 
Fzod.  2.  4.  /()  wit  what  would  be  done  lo  him 
2  Ciir.  5.  19.  to  «•!/,  God  was  in  Christ  rornnoiline 

8.1. we  do  you  to  wit  of  the  grace  of  God  bestow  ed 

TOWN. 
.To.oh.  2.  15.  Rahah's  house  was  on  Ihc  /.  wall 
1  .Sum.  16.  4.  and  the  elders  of  the  t.  trembled     ^ 

23.7.  sliul  in,  by  entering  into  n  /.  that  hnth  ga(c^ 

27.  5.  lot  them  give  nic  o  phioo  in  some  /. 
/fob.  2.  1 J  woe  lo  him  that  hiiiMs  a  /.  with  bUto*! 
Mat.  10.  11.  into  whatsoever  /.  ye  shall  enter 
Mark  8.  23.  he  led  the  blind  man  out  oflho  t 
26.  nor  go  into  the  /.  nor  tell  rt  lo  anv  in  /. 
.Tohn  7.  42.  Christ  enmeth  nut  oflho  /.o'"belhlciiCm 

11.  1.  the  t.  of  Mary  and  her  sister  Martha 


TRA 

fokn  11. 30.  now  Jesus  was  not  yet  come  into  the  t. 

TOWNS. 
Esth.  9.  19.  the  Jews  ihut  dwelt  in  unwalleil  i. 
Jer.  19.  15.  I  will  bring  on  all  her  t.  the  evil 
Z.eck.  2.  4.  Jerus.  be  inhabited  as  f.  without  walls 
Lvike  9.  6.  they  departed  and  went  through  the  t. 
\%.  that  tliey  may  go  into  the  t.  and  lodge 
TOVVN-CLEKK. 
y9ct«  19.  35.  when  the  t.  bad  appeased  the  people 

TRADE. 
QeK.  46.  32.  their  t.  hath  been  about  cattle,  34. 

TRADES. 
TiV  3. 1 14.  let  ours  also  learn  to  profess  honesty. 

TRADE,  Vtrb. 
Gen.  34.  10.  dwell  and  t.  you  therein,  21. 
lico.  18.  17..  as  many  as  I.  by  sea,  stood  afar  off 

TRADED. 
Etek.  27.  12.  Tarshish  t.  in  thy  fairs  with  tin 

13.  Javan,Tubal,  Mo8hech,'(.  the  persons  of  men 

14.  they  of  house  of  Togarmah  t.  witli  horses 
17.  Judali  and  Israel  t.  ui  thy  market  wheat 

JUat.  25.  l(j.  received  hve  talents,  went  and  t. 
TRADING. 

Luke  19. 15.  how  much  every  man  had  gained  by  t. 
TRADITION, 

[ij  Is  put  fur  a  doctrine  first  delivered  by  speech 
from  God  and  afterwards  writ  in  his  book  fur 
the  ttse  of  the  church.  This  is  an  object  of  our 
faith,  1  Cor.  11.  t  2.  ■  2  Thess.  2.  15.  [2]  Ji 
human  ordinance  or  cereinuny,  handed  down 
from  one  to  another,  as  the  Jews''  oral  Law 
These  are  good  or  bad,  according  as  they  agree 
with,  or  deviate  from  the  word  of  Oad,  which 
is  our  only  rule  of  faith  and  practice. 

Our  Saviour  in  the  gospel  has  often  declared 
against  the  traditions  of  the  Pharisees,  Mat 

15.  2,  3,  The  Scribes  and  Pharisees  said  to 
Jesus,  Why  do  thy  disciples  transgress  the  tra 
dition  of  the  clJers?  for  they  wash  not  their 
hands  when  they  eat  bread.  This  washing 
was  a  ceremony  not  contrary  to  the  law  of 
God,  but  rather  a  matter  of  decency,  which 
they  might  freely  use,  in  a  cii:il  way,  so 
long  as  they  placed  nothing  of  religion  in  it: 
but  in  this  they  were  to  be  condemned,  be- 
catcse  they  placed  religion  in  it,  and  had  no 
divine  warrant  for  it.  Our  Saviour  answers 
them  by  another  question;  Why  do  ye  also 
transgress  the  commandment  of  God  by  your 
tradition  ?  .ind  though  Christ  dues  not  say 
that  this  tradition  of  washing,  was  contrary 
to  the  command  (though  others  were)  yet  by 
an  instance  which  he  gives  in  the  following 
verses,  he  shews  that  none  of  their  traditions 
toerc  bindinir  ;  for  otherwise  his  reply  would 
he  invalid.  The  law  he  instances  in,  is  the  fifth 
commnndment.  Honour  thy  lather  and  mother; 
Jchich  includes  maintenance  and  relief;  but  by 
your  traditions,  says  he,  ye  warrant  children  to 
give  this  answer  to  their  parents  who  arepuor, 
and  seek  relief  and  support  from  them.  It  is  a 
gift  by  whatsoever  thou  mightest  be  profited  by 
me;  that  is,  I  have  consecrated  all  the  over- 
plus of  my  estate,  more  than  will  serve  fur  my 
own  maintenance,  as  a  religious  offering  or 
gift  to  God,  and  therefore  you  must  ezrasc  me; 
this  you  think  frees  them  from  any  obligation 
to  relieve  their  parents,  and  consequently  froin 
any  transgression  of  the  law  ;  but  I  tell  you, 
that  thus  ye  have  made  the  commandment  of 
God  of  none  effect  by  your  tradition. 

The.fews  call  their  traditions  tAeOral  Ijnvi, pre- 
tending that  God  delivered  them  to  Muses  by 
Word  of  mouth  upon  Mount  Sinai,  at  the  same 
time,  that  he  gave  him  t/te  written  law  :  That 
this  lawgiver  taught  them  to  the  ciders  of  th 
people,  nvd  committed  them  to  them  as  a  trust, 
which  they  were  to  convey  down  to  their  suc- 
ecssiirs,  and  so  on. 

Fhe  church  of  Rome  is  very  near  akin  to  the 
.Tews  in  this  matter.  She  holds,  that,  besides 
what  ice  have  in  the  JiTcw  Testament,  the  .'Ipos- 
tles  delivered  many  things  to  the  primitive 
church  only  by  word  of  mouth,  whichhave  since 
that  timebeen  imparted  to  sucercding churches; 
to  the  observation  of  which,  Christians  are  as 
much  nhligcil  as  to  the  written  word.  The 
ccuncil  of  Trent  say.'!,  cuncrrning  Iriditions, 
"  That  the  truth  and  discipline  of  the  Catholic 
Church  are  comprehended  both  in  the  sacred 
books  and  in  the  traditions,  which  have  berm 
received  from  the  viouth  of  .Testis  Christ  him- 
self, or  of  his  ./jpostlcs,  and  which  have  been 
preserved  and  transmitted  to  us,  by  an  unin- 
terrupted chain  and  succession.'^ 

Tlie  doctrine  of  the  reformed  churches  concerning 
traditions  is,  "  That  the  holy  scripture  contatn- 
eth  all  things  necessary  tn  salvation ;  so  that 
I'Jiatsnever  is  not  read  therein,  nor  may  be 
proved  thereby,  is  not  to  be  required  of  (iny 


TRA 

man,  tliat  it  should  be  believed  as  an  article 


of  faith,  or  be  thought  requisite,  or  necessary 
'"  saloation.'" 


TRA 

to  TRANSFORMED. 

Kom.  12. 2.  but  be  ye  £.  by  ronewinc 


Mat.  15.  2.  why  do  thy  disciples  transgress  the  t. 
of  the  elders,  not  wash  their  hands?  Mark  7.  5. 
3.  Jesus  said  to  them,  why  do  you  transgress  the 
commandmentofGod  by  your  £.?  Markl.'i. 
6.  thus  ye  have  made  the  commandmentofGod 
of  none  effect  by  your  t.  Mark  7.  IJ. 
Mark  7.  3.  holding  the  t.  of  the  elders,  8,  9. 
Col.  2.  8.  lost  any  spoil  you  after  the  t.  of  men 
2  Thess.'i.a.nol  alter  the  t. which  he  received  of  us 
1  Pet.  1.  18.  received  by  t.  from  your  fathers 
TRADITIONS. 

1  Cor.  11.  t  2.  keep  the  t.  as  I  delivered  them 
Gal.  1.  14.  being  zealous  of  the  t.  of  my  fathers 

2  Thess.  2.  15.  hold  the  t.  ye  have  been  taught 
TRAFI'IUK. 

Gen.  42.34.  your  brother,  and  ye  shall  t.  in  the  land 

TRAFFICK,  Substantive. 

1  Kings  10, 15.  besides  that  had  of  t.  of  merchants 

Ezek.  17.  4.  he  carried  it  into  a  land  of  t. 

28.  5.  by  thy  t.  hast  thou  increased  thy  riches 

18.  hast  detilod  thy  sanctuaries  by  iniquity  of  i. 

TRAFFICKERS. 

Tsa.  23. 8.  whose  t.  are  the  honourable  of  the  earth 

TRAIN. 

1  A7h^sI0.2.  shecame  to  Jerusalem  with  a  great  <. 
ha.  ti.  1.  Lord  lifted  up,  and  his  t.  tilled  the  temple 

TRAIN. 
froo.22.6.  t.  up  a  child  in  the  way  he  should  go 

TRAINED. 
Geji.  14.  14.  Abram  armed  his  t.  servants,  318. 

TRAITOR. 

Luke  G.  16.  and  Judas  Iscariot,  which  was  the  /. 

TRAITORS. 

2  Tim.  3.  4.  in  the  last  davs  shall  men  be  t.  heady 

tramPle. 

Psal.  91.  13.  the  drag((h  shalt  thou  t.  under  feet 
104.  t  S20.  all  the  beasts  do  t.  on  the  forest 

/sa.  G3.  3.  for  I  will  t.  them  in  my  fury 

Mat.  7.  0.  pearls,  lest  tliey  t.  them  under  their  feet 
TRAMPLINGS. 

Judg.  5.  t  22.  tfie  horse-hoofs  broken  by  their  t. 
TRANCE. 

JVum.  24.  4.  saw  the  vision  falling  into  a  (.  16. 

.'ids  10. 10.  he  fell  into  a  t.  and  saw  heaven  opened 

11.  5.  I  was  praying,  and  in  a  t.  I  saw  a  vision 

22. 17.  while  I  prayed  in  the  temple,  I  was  in  a  t. 

TRANaUlLLITV. 

Dan.  4.  27.  if  it  may  be  a  lengthening  of  thy  t. 
TRANSFERRED.  . 

1  Cor.  4.  6.  these  things  I  have  in  figure  t.  to  myself 
TRANSFIGURED. 

The  history  of  Christ's  transfiguration  is  recorded 
by  St.  Matthew,  Mark,  and  Luke.  JJll  three 
agree  that  this  transfiguration  was  celebrated 
upon  a  muuntain,which  most  interpreters  think 
to  be  mount  Tabor.  Matthew,  cba[\  17.  ),says, 
but  siz  days  ;  Luke  9.  28.  mcutions  eight  days 
after  the  promise  our  Saviour  made,  that  some 
of  them  should  not  taste  of  death,  till  tlioy  saw 
the  Son  of  man  coming  in  his  kingdom.  .Some 
think  it  probable,  that  St.  Luke  counted  inclu- 
sively,reckoning  the  day  ofthepromisc,{takiiig 
the  Son  of  man's  coming  in  his  kingdom, ?o  mean 
his  transfiguration)  atid  the  day  of  the  execu- 
tion :  Whereas  St.  Matthew  had  regard  only 
to  the  six  intermediate  days. 

It  is  thought  that  this  transfiguration  happened  in 
thenight;  and  from  thence  proceeded  the  sleep, 
with  which  the  apostles  were  oppressed.  More 
over,  St.  J^uke  observes,  that  the  next  day  they 
came  down  from  the  mountain,  Luke  9.  37. 
therefore  they  had  passed  the  preceding  night 
there.  The  fathers  say,  that  the  design  of  this 
transfiguration  was,  tu  fulfil  the  promise  which 
Christ  had  made  some  d'lys  bifore,thalhe  wnufd 
let  some  of  his  disciples  sec  a  glimpse  of  his 
gliiry  before  their  death  ;  and  to  fortify  them 
against  tiie  scandal  of  the  cross,  and  of  the 
d'.ath  he  was  to  suffer,  ly  giving  them  this  con- 
vincing proof  that  he  was  the  Messiah.  It  is 
observed,  that  the  condition  in  which  .Testis 
Christ  appeared  among  men,  humble,  prtnr, 
despised,  was  a  true  atid  continual  xrnnsdgu- 
ration  ;   whereas  the  transfiguration   itself,  in 

•  which  he  sheioed  himself  in  the  real  splrndmir 
of  his  glory, loas  his  true  and  natural  condition. 
Jis  tn  the  appearing  of  .\foses  and  Klia",  it  is 
asked  how  the  Jlpostles  could  know  thrm?  Tu 
which  it  is  answered,  that  our  Lurd  .Tcsus 
Christ  might  call  them  by  their  names,  or  that 
he  might  tell  them  afterwards,  that  they  were 
those  two  great  men  ;  or  they  knew  them  by 
immediate  revelation.  It  is  ohscrvi  d  in  this 
apparition,  that  the  law  represented  by  .Moses, 
and  the.  prophets  represented  by  Elias,  give 
testimnny  to  our  Saviour. 
JUaL  17.  2.  and  he  was  t.  before  them,  Mark  9. 2. 


„  of  your  mind 

2  Cor.  11.  14.  for  Satan  is  t.  into  an  angel  of  light 

15.  it  is  no  great  thing  if  his  ministers  also  be  t 

TRANSFORMING. 

2  Cor.  11. 13.  t.  themselves  into  apostles  of  Chri«t 

TRANSGRESS. 
JiTum.  14. 41.  wherefore  now  do  ye  t.  the  command- 
ment of  the  Lord?  not  prosper,  2  Chr.  24.  20. 
1  Sam.  2.  24.  ye  make  the  Lord's  peoide  to  t. 
JWA.  1.  8.  if  ye  t.  1  will  scatter  you  abroad 
13.  27.  shall  we  hearken  to  you  to  e.  against  God 
Psal.  17.  3.  I  am  purposed  my  mouth  sliall  not  t. 
25.  3.  let  them  be  ashamed  who  t.  without  cause 
Prov.  28.  21.  for  a  piece  of  bread  that  man  will  t. 
./fr.2.  20.  burst  bands,  and  thou  saidst  I  will  not  t. 
F.iek.  20.  38.  and  I  will  purge  out  them  that  t. 
.,1mos  4. 4.  come  to  Belh-el  and  t.  bring  your  tithes 
Mat.  15.2.  why  do  tJiy  disciples  t.  the  tradition? 

3.  why  do  ye  also  t.  the  commandment  of  God? 
Rom.  2.  27.  who  hy  circumcision  dost  t.  the  law 

TRANSGRESSED. 
Tieut.  26.  13.  I  have  not  t.  thy  commandments 
Josh.  7.11.  Israel  hath  sinned,  and  they  have  also 
t.  my  covenant  I  commanded  thern,  15. 
23. 16.  when  ye  have  t.  covenant  of  Lord  your  G. 
1  Sam.  11.  :t3.  ye  have  t.  roll  a  stone  unto  nie 
1.5.  24.  I  liave  t.  the  commandment  of  the  Lord 
1  Kings  8.  .W.  wherein  they  have  t.  against  thee 

1  Chron.  2.  7.  Achar,  who  t.  in  the  thing  accursed 
5.  25.  they  t.  against  the  God  of  their  fathers 
lO.f  13.Sau!died  for  his  transgression  which  he  t. 

2  Chron.  12.  2.  because  they  t.  against  the  Lord 
2fi.  16.  Uzziah  t.  against  the  Lord  his  God 
28.  19.  and  Aliaz  t.  sore  against  the  Lord 
36.  14.  the  priests  and  the  people  t.  very  much 

Ezra  10.  10.  ye  have  t.  and  taken  strange  wives 

13.  we  are  many  that  have  t.  in  this  thing 
Tsa.  24.  5.  because  they  have  t.  the  laws 
43.  27.  and  tliy  teachers  have  t.  against  me 
66.  24.  sihall  look  on  men's  carcases  that  have  t. 
.Tcr.2.  8.  the  pastors  t.  against  me  and  prophets 
29.  why  will  ye  plead?  ye  all  have  f.  against  me 
3.  13.  only  acknowledge  that  thou  haste. 
3.3.  8.  I  will  pardon  iniquities  whereby  they  i!. 
34.  18.  I  will  give  the  men  that  t.  my  covenant 
J^am.  3.  42.  we  have  t.  and  have  rebelled 
Ezek.  2. 3.  t  hoy  and  their  fathers  have  t.against  me 
lP.31.caBt  away  your  transgressions  whereby  ye  t. 
Dan.  9.  11.  yea,  all  Israel  have  t.  thy  law 
//tf.s.7.13.  destruction  to  them, because  they  have  t. 
Zcph.  '3.11.  not  ashamed  fur  doings  wherein  thou  t. 
Luke  15. 29.  nor  1. 1  at  any  time  thy  commandmenl 
See  Covenants. 
TRANSGRESSEST. 
Esth.  3.3.  whv  Mhou  the  king's  commandmenti 

TRANSGRESSETH. 
Piov.  16.  10.  his  niouih  t.  not  in  judgment 
Hab.2.  5.  because  he  t.  by  wine,  he  is  a  proud  man 

1  ./ohn  3.  4.  whoso  committeth  sin,  t.  the  law 

2  .John  9.  whoso  t.  and  aliideth  not  in  doctrine 
TRANSGRESSING. 

/)puM7.2.any  that  wrought  wicliedness  in  f.coven. 
Tsa.  59.  13.  in  '.  and  lying  against  the  Lord 

TRANSGRESSION. 
Exod.  31.  7.  forgiving  {.  and  sin,  JVum.  14.  18. 
.Tosh.  22,  22.  or  if  it  be  in  t.  against  the  Lord 
1  Sam.  24.  11.  that  there  is  no  t.  in  my  hand 

1  Chr. 9.  1.  who  were  carried  toBabylonfortheir  <. 
)0.  13.  so  Saul  died  fiar  his  t.  he  committed 

2  Chr.  29.  19.  vessels  which  Ahaz  cast  away  in  t 
Ezra  9.  4.  because  oft.  of  those  carriid  away 

10.  6.  for  ho  mourned  because  of  their  (. 
.Tub  1.  21.  and  why  dost  ihou  not  pardon  my  t 
8.  4.  and  he  have  cast  them  away  for  their  t. 

13.  23.  make  me  to  know  my  t.  and  my  sin 

14.  17.  my  (.  is  sealed  up  in  a  bag,  thou  sewesi 
3r!.  9.  I  am  clean  without  I.  I  am  innocent 
34.  6.  my  wound  is  incurable  without  t. 

Psal.  19. 13. 1  sliall  be  innocent  from  the  great  t. 
32. 1.  blessed  is  he  whose  t.\g  forgiven,\vl'osesio 
36.  1.  the  t.  of  the  wicked  saith  within  my  heart 
.')9.  3.  they  lie  in  waif  for  my  soul,  not  for  my  t, 
89.  :12.  then  will  I  visit  their  t.  with  a  rod 
107.  17.  fools  because  of  their  t.  are  afRicted 

Prov.  12. 13.  the  wicked  is  snared  by  t.  of  his  Iipt 
17.  9.  he  that  coverefh  a  t.  srcketh  love 

19.  he  loveth  t.  that  lovelh  strife 
19.  11.  and  it  is  his  glory  to  pass  over  a  (. 
28.  2.  for  the  t.  of  a  land  many  are  tnc  princMi 
24.  whoso  robbeth  father,  and  eailli,  it  is  no  I 
2'i.  6.  in  the  t.  of  an  evil  man  there  is  a  snare 
16.  wli'Mi  the  wicked  are  iviultiplied,t.  increaseth 
22.  and  a  fnriou?  man  aboundeth  in  t. 

Tsa.  24.  20.  the  I.  thereof  phall  be  heavy  on  it 
53.  8.  for  the  (.  of  my  [>eople  was  he  stricken 
.'57. 4.  are  ye  not  chiMrcn  of  t.  apeedofliilsehoodi    ' 
.W.  1.  cry  nioud,  and  shew  my  people  their  t. 
.59.  20.  and  to  them  that  turn  from  (.  in  .Tacob 

£:eA-.33.l2.s!uiII  not  deliver  him  in  the  dav  of  hit  t 


TRA 


Pan.S.12.against  Ihe  daily  sacrifice  by  reason  oQ. 

13.  concerning  sacrifice,  and  the  t.  of  Ueaolatioii 
9.  :i4.  seventy  weeks  are  deterniineJ  to  finibli  the  t. 

Amos  4.  4.  at  Gilgal  multiply  t.  bring  your  titlies 

Mic.  1.  5.  for  the  t.  of  Jacob  is  all  fliis,  and  fur 

the  sins  of  Israel ;  what  is  the  t.  of  Jacob 

3.8. 1  am  lull  of  power  to  declare  to  Jacob  his  (. 

t).  7.  shall  I  give  my  first-born  for  my  I.  and  sin? 

■'.  \\i.  thatpasseth  by  the  t.  of  the  remnant  of  his 
Acts  1.  i3.  ministry  from  which  Judas  by  t.  fell 
}iom.  4.  15.  for  where  no  law  is,  there  is  no  t. 

5.  14.  had  not  sinned  after  simililude  of  Adam's  <. 
1  Tim.2.14.the  woman  bemg  deceived  was  in  the  I. 
i/eA.2.-2.everyt.receivedjustri'Compenceofreward 
1  John  3.  4.  for  sin  is  Ihe  t.  of  the  law 

TRANfjGRESSIO.NS. 
Eiod.  23.  21.  for  he  wdl  not  pardon  your  t.  for  my 
/.«j.  16.  le.shall  make  atonement  because  of  their  I. 
tfl.  Aaron  shall  confess  over  the  goat  all  their  t. 
Josh.  24.  19.  he  will  not  forgive  your  t.  nor  sins 
)  Kings  8.  50.  forgive  thy  peo))le  all  their  t. 
Job  31.  33.  if  I  covered  my  t.  as  Adam,  by  hilling 

35.G.ifthy  t.  be  multi|)lied,what  dost  thou  to  him? 

30.  9.  then  he  sheweth  them  their  work  and  t. 
Peal.  5. 10.  cast  them  out  in  multitude  of  their  t. 

25.7.  remember  not  the  sins  of  my  youth,  nor  my  t. 
32.  .5.  I  said  I  will  confess  my  I.  unto  the  Lord 

39. 8.  deliver  me  from  all  my  t.  and  make  ine  not 
51.  1.  have  mercy  upon  me,  blot  out  all  my  t. 

3.  for  I  acknowledge  my  t.  my  sin  is  before  mc 
65.  3.  as  for  our  t.  thou  shalt  purge  them  away 
103.  12.  so  far  hath  he  removed  our  t.  from  us 

Isa.  43. 25. 1,  even  1  am  he  that  blotteth  out  thy  t. 
44.  22. 1  have  blotted  out  as  a  thick  cloud  thy  t. 

50.  1.  and  for  your  t.  is  your  motli?r  put  away 
53..5.but  he  was  wounded  for  our  t.  he  was  bruised 
59.  12.  our  t.  are  multiplied  before  thee,  and  our 

sins  testify  against  us,  for  our  t.  are  with  us 
Jer.  5.  6.  shall  be  torn  because  their  t.  are  many 
J  jam.  1.  5.  for  the  multitude  of  her  t.  gone  into 

14.  the  yoke  of  my  t.  is  bound  by  his  hand 

22.  do  to  them,  as  hast  done  to  me  for  all  my  t. 
F.zek.  14. 11.  nor  be  polluted  any  more  with  llieir  t, 
IH.  22.  all  his  t.  they  shall  not  be  mentioned 
28.  becaufe  he  turneth  away  from  all  his  t. 

30.  repent  and  turn  yourselves  from  your  t. 

31.  cast  away  all  your  t. whereby  ye  transgressed 
21.24.  in  that  your  r.  are  discovered  that  your  sins 
Xl.  10.  if  onr  t.  be  upon  us  and  we  pine  away 
37.  23.  nor  defile  themselves  any  more  with  I. 
39.  24.  according  to  their  t.  have  I  done  to  them 

Jimos  1.  3.  for  three  t.  of  Damascus,  and  for  four 
6.  for  three  t.  of  Gaza  ||  9.  Tyrus  ||  11.  Kdom 
13.  for  three  I.  of  Amnion  ||  2. 1.  Moab  ||  4.Judali 
2.  6.  Israel  !|  3.  14.  I  will  visit  the  t.  of  Israel 
5.  12.  1  know  your  manifold  t.  and  your  sins 
Jl/ic.  1.  13.  for  the  t.  of  Israel  were  found  in  thee 
Gal.  3. 19.  the  law  was  ;idd.(l  liccau.se  of  t.  till  seed 
//eft.  9. 15.  for  the  riMl-iniitiiin  of  the  t.  that  were 

TRANSflKF.SSOR. 
Prov.  21.18.  the  t.  shall  be  a  ransom  for  the  upright 
22.  12.  he  overthroweth  Ihe  words  of  the  t. 
Jsa.  48.  8.  thou  wast  called  a  t.  from  the  womb 
Oal.  2.  18.  if  1  build  again,  I  make  myself  a  t. 
Jam.  2.  11.  yet  if  thou  kill,  thou  art  become  a  t. 

TRANSGRlvSSORS. 
P.ial.  37. 38.  but  the  t.  shall  be  destroyed  together 

51.  13.  then  will  I  teach  t.  thy  ways  and  sinners 
.59.  5.  be  not  merciful  to  any  wicked  t. 

Prov.  2.  22.  and  the  t.  shall  be  rooted  out  of  it 
11.3.  but  the  perverseni'ss  off.  shall  destroy  them 
»>.  but  t.  shall  bo  taken  in  their  own  naughtiness 
13.  2.  but  the  soul  of  the  t.  shall  er^  violence 

15.  givelh  favour,  but  the  way  oft.  is  hard 
2.3.  2^.  and  she  increasoth  the  t.  among  men 

26. 10.  thegreat  God  rewardoth  the  fool  and  the  /. 
ha.  1.  2-1.  the  destruction  oft.  shall  be  tojeiher 
46.  8.  remember,  bring  it  again  to  mind,  O  ye  /. 
53. 12.  ho  was  numbered  with  the  t.  and  bare  the 
sin  of  many,  and  made  intercession  for  the  t. 
Dan.  8. 23.  when  the  t.  are  rome  to  the  full  a  king 
Hos.  14.  9.  but  the  I.  shall  full  therein,  just  walk 
Jitark  1.5.28.  he  was  numbered  with  t.  I.vke^i.  37. 
Jam.  2.  9.  yo  an-  ronvincod  of  the  law  as  t. 

TRANHI.ATK. 
S  Sam.  3.  IT),  to  l.  th"  kingdom  from  house  of  Saul 

TRANSLATKI). 
Col.  1.  13.  i.  U"  into  the  kingdom  of  his  dear  Son 
//eft.ll.S.Enofh  wn-Mhni  li.>  should  not  see  death 

TRANSLATION-. 
Jitb.  11.  5.  before  his  t.  \\i>  had  this  testimony 

TRANSI'.ARKNT. 
Hen.  21.  21.  Mreol  of  city  was  ns  it  were  (.  glass 

TRANaPORTATK).\. 
Ezra  1. 1 11.  these  did  Hhoshba/./ar  bring  of  the  I. 

4.  t  1.  the  sons  of  the  t.  builderl  tho  ti-mplo 
6.  t  lU-  the  'ons  of  thi!  t.  kept  tho  dedication 

TRAP,  S. 
Jesh.  23.  13.  but  ihey  .»hnll  bo  t.  and  snnros  to  you 
Job  16.  10  and  a  t.  U  laid  for  him  in  the  way 


TRE 

Pa.  09. 22.  have  been  for  welfare,  let  it  become  a  t. 
Jcr.  5.  20.  they  lay  wait,  set  a  t.  ihey  tatch  men 
Horn.  11-  9.  let  their  table  be  made  a  snare,  u  t. 

TRAVAIL. 
Gen.  38.  27.  in  the  time  of  her  t.  behold,  twins 
Psal.  48.  6.  fear  and  pain  took  hold  upon  them  as 
of  a  woman  in  t.  Jcr.  6.  24.  |  13.  21.  |  22. 
23.  I  49.  24.  I  50.  43.  Mic.  4.  9,  10. 
Isa.  23.  4. 1 1.  nut  {|  53.  11.  see  the  t.  of  his  soul 
54.  1.  sing,  thou  that  didst  nut  t.  with  cliild 
Jer.  4.  31. 1  have  heard  a  voice  as  of  a  woman  in  t. 
30.  6.  see  whether  a  man  dolh  t.  why  every  man 
with  his  hands  on  his  loma  as  u  woman  in  t. 
John  16. 21.  a  woman  when  she  is  in  {.  hath  sorrow 
Gal.  4.  19.  my  children,  of  whom  I  I.  in  birth 
1.  Thess.  5.  3.  destruction  Cometh,  as  (.on  a  woman 

TRAVAILED. 
Gen,  35.  10.  Rachel  t.  ||  ;«.  28.  Tamar  t. 

1  Ham.  4. 19.  Pbinehas'  wife  bowed  herself,  and  t. 
Jsa.  66.  7.  before  she  t.  she  brought  forth 

8.  as  soon  as  Zion  t.  she  bruuglii  forth  children 

TRAVAILLSJT. 
Gal.  4.  27.  break  forth  and  cry,  thou  that  t.  not 

TRAVAlLtTH. 
.Tub  15.  20.  wicked  man  t.  with  pain  all  his  days 
Psal.  7.  14.  behold,  he  t.with  iniquity,  conceived 
Isa.  13.  8.  they  sliull  be  in  paiu  as  a  woman  that  t. 
21.  3.  as  the  |)angs  of  a  woman  that  t. 
Jer.  31.  8.  unit  with  them  her  that  t.  with  child 
Jlic.  5.  3.  till  she  who  I.  hath  brought  forth 
yjom.  8. 22.  the  whole  creation  t.  in  pain  until  now 

TRAVAILLNG. 
Isa.  42.    14.  now  will  I  cry  like  a  i.  woman 
Hos.  13.  13.  the  soruws  of  a  t.  woman  shall  come 
Hev.  12.  2.  a  woman  cried,  t.  in  birth  and  pained 

TRAVEL. 
F,.tvd.  18.  8.  Moses  told  Jethro,  the  t.  by  the  way 
jVuiii.  20. 14.  thou  knowest  the  t.  tJiat  hath  befallen 
Keel-  1.  13.  this  sore  t.  hath  God  given  to  men 

2.  23.  for  all  his  days  are  sorrows,  his  t.  is  grief 
26.  but  to  the  sinner  he  givcth  t.  to  gather 

3.  10.  I  have  seen  the  t.  God  hath  given  to  men 

4.  4.  again  I  considered  all  t.  and  every  work 
6.  than  both  the  hands  full  with  t.  and  vexatioo 
8.  this  is  also  vanity,  yea  it  is  a  sore  t. 

.5.  14.  but  those  riches  perish  by  evil  t. 
Lam.  3.  5.  he  hath  compassed  me  with  ga'  -i.oi  t. 
.'lets  19.  29.  Gains,  Paul's  companion  in  t. 

2  C'or.8.19.  was  chosen  of  the  churches  to  t.  with  u.s 

1  7'Ae.«s.  2.  9.  for  ye  remember  our  labour  and  t. 

2  Thess.  3.  8.  but  wrought  with  t.  night  and  day 

TRAVELLED. 
Jlcls  11.  19.  t.  as  far  as  Phenice  and  Cyprus 

TRAVELLER. 
2  Sam.  12.  4.  there  came  a  t.  to  the  rich  man 
.fob  31.  32.  but  I  opened  my  <loors  to  the  t. 

TRAVELLERS. 
Judff.  5.  0.  and  the  t.  walked  through  by-wavs 

TRAVELLETH. 
Prov.  6.  11.  poverty  come  as  one  lliat  t.  24.  34. 

TRAVELLING. 
Isa.  21.  13.  in  Arabia  lodge,  O  ye  t.  companies 
63.1.  who  is  this «.  in  the  greatness  of  his  strength? 
jWut.  25. 14.  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  as  a  man  t. 

TRAVERSING. 
Jer.  2.  23.  thou  art  a  swift  dromedary  Mier  ways 

TREACHEROrS. 

Isa.  21.  2.  /.  dealer  dealeth  treacherously,  24.  16. 

./er.  3. 7.  turned  not,  and  her  t.  sister  J  udah  saw  it 

8.  yet  her  /.  sister  J  udah  feared  not,  but  played 

10.  her  I.  sister  Judali  hath  not  turned  to  me 

II. Israel  hath  Justified  herself  more  thnnt.Judah 

9.  2.  for  ihey  be  an  assembly  of  t.  men 
Zevh.  3.  4.  her  prophols  an-  light  and  I.  persons 

TREACHEKOIJSLY. 
./«(/^.9.23.men  ofShechem  dealt /.with  Abimeloch 

1  .Sam.  14.  t  33.  yo  have  dealt  t.  roll  a  great  stone 
ha.  33. 1.  thou  dealest  t.  they  dealt  not  t.  with  thee 

48.  8.  for  I  know  that  thou  wouldesi  deal  very  t. 
Jer.  3. 20.  as  a  wife  t.  dopartelh  from  her  husband 

5.  11.  the  house  of  Judah  hath  dealt  (.  Mal.'i.  11. 
12.  1.  why  are  all  they  happy  that  deal  very  /.? 

6.  even  they  have  dealt  t.  with  thee 
I. am.  1.2.  all  her  friends  have  dealt  t.  with  her 
Hos.  5.  7.  they  havo  dealt  t.  against  the  Lord 

6.  7.  there  havo  they  dealt  t.  ngaiiist  me 

Mnl.  2.  10.  why  do  we  deal  t.  cverv  man  neninst 

14.  thy  wife  against  whom  thou  iiast  dealt  (. 

15.  let  none  deal  t.ogiiiisl  Iho  wilijof  his  youth 

16.  lake  heed  to  voiir  spirit,  that  yc  deal  not  {. 

TREACIIERV. 

2  King)  9.  23.  Joram  said,  there  is  (.  O  Ahoxiah 

TREAD. 
Dfvt.  11.  24.  whoreou  Ihe  soles  of  your  foot  t. 
2.5.  tho  dread  of  yon  liU  all  tho  land  that  ye  / 
33.  2''.  thou  shall  I.  upon  their  high  places 
I  .Sam.  5.  5.  none  t.  nn  Iho  threshold  of  Dagon 
Job  24.  11.  t.  their  wine-pro»«es,  and  Buffer  thirst 

40.  12.  nnil  (.  dirwn  Iho  wicked  in  their  place 
I  V»al.  1.  5.  let  him  I.  down  my  life  on  ihe  earth 


TRE 

Psal.  44.5.  through  thy  name  will  we  t.  them  undej 
CO.  12.  he  shall  t.  down  our  enemies,  108.  13. 
91.  13.  thou  shall  t.  upon  the  lion  and  adder 

Isa.  1.  12.  who  hath  rei|uired  this,  to  t.  my  court* 
10.  6.  to  t.  them  down,  like  the  mire  o/  the  streets 
14. 25.  and  upon  my  mountains  I.  him  under  foot 
16.  10.  the  treaders  shall  t.  out  no  wine  in  presses 
26.  6.  the  foot  shall  t.  it  down,  feet  of  Ihe  jioor 
63.  3.  for  I  will  t.  them  in  mine  anger,  6. 

Jer.  25.  30.  a  shout,  as  they  that  t.  the  grapes 
48.  33.  wine  to  fail,  none  shall  t.  with  shoutin' 
50.i  26.  t.  her  as  heaps,  and  destroy  her  utterly 

EzeK.  26.  11.  with  hoofs  of  his  horses  shall  he  t. 
34.  18.  but  ye  must  t.  the  residue  with  your  I'cet 

Dan.  7.  2:j,  the  tijurth  beast  shall  t.  it  down 

Hos.  10.  11.  Ephraim  loveth  to  t.  out  the  corn 

jVic.  1.  3.  the  Lord  will  t.  on  the  high  places 

5.  5.  when  Ihe  Assyrian  shall  t.  in  our  palaces 

6.  18.  thou  shall  k  olives,  bi\,t  not  anoint  thee 
JVaA.  3.  14.  t.  Ihe  mortar,  make  strong  brick-kiln 
Zech,  10.  5.  as  mighty  men  which  t.  their  enemies 
jyial.  4.  3.  and  ye  shall  t.  down  the  wicked 
J^uke  10. 19.  I  give  you  power  to  t.  on  scor)>ions 
Rom.  16.  t  20.  God  shall  t.  Satan  under  your  li^i 
litv.  11.  2.  the  holy  citv  shall  they  t.  under  fgot 

tri:ader,  S. 

Isa.  16. 10.  the  t.  shall  Iread  out  no  wine  in  pressos 
j3/KOs9.13.the  t.  of  grapes  shall  overtake  the  sower 

TREADETH. 
Deut.  25.  4.  thou  shalt  not  muzz.e  the  oi  wlien 
he  I.  out  the  corn,  1  Cor.  9.  9.  1  Tim.  5.  18. 
Job  9.  8.  which  t.  upon  the  waves  of  the  sea 
Prov.  27.  t  7.  full  soul  t.  under  foot  a  honey-comb 
Isa.  18.  t  2.  a  nation  that  melethout  and  t.  down 

41.  25.  he  shall  come  as  the  potter  t.  clay 
63.2.  thy  garments  like  him  that  t.  in  the  wine-fr.t 

-Smos  4.1^  he  that,  t.  on  the  high  places  of  the  earth 
Mic.  5.  6.  and  when  he  t.  wiihin  our  borders 

8.  if  he  go  through,  he  both  t.ilown  anil  loareth 
flee. 19. 15.  he  t.the  wine-priss  of  the  wrath  of  God 

TREADING. 
2  Chr.  22.  f  7.  the  t.  down  of  Ahaziah  was  of  God 
.Yeh.  13. 1.5.  1  saw  some  f.  wine-presses  on  sabbath 
, "ia  7  25  it  shall  be  for  Ihe  t.  of  les.ser  cattle 
22.  5  it  is  a  day  of  trouble  and  of  t.  down 

42.  t  22.  thoy  arc  for  a  t.  and  none  saiih,  restore 
Amos  5.  11.  forasmuch  as  vour  t.  is  on  the  jioor 

TREASON. 

1  Kin<rs  16. 20.  the  rest  of  acts  of  Zimri  and  his  t. 

'iKivirs  11.  14.  Aihaliah  cried,  I.  t.iChr.  23.  13. 
TREASURE, 

In  Hi-brew,  Ozer.  The  loord  treasure,  among  the 
Hcbreirs,siffnijies  any  thing  collected  together, 
provisions,  magazinis.  So  Ihey  say,  a  treai-ure 
of  com,  of  wine,  of  oil,  of  honey,  Jer.  41.  8. 
.So  also  treasures  of  gold,  silver,  brass,  Ezek. 
28.  4.  Dan.  11.  43.  Snoir,  winds,  bail,  rain, 
■waters,  are  in  ihe  treasuries  of  God,  Job  38. 
22.  Psal.  135.  7.  This  devotes  thai  God  hath 
them  as  mvch  at  his  dispvsul  as  any  man  bath 
that  which  he  hath  laid  vp  in  his  stores.  The 
wise  men  opened  their  treasures,  that  is,  their 
packets  or  bundles,  to  offer  presents  to  our 
Saviovr,  Mat.  2.  11. 

Lay  up  treasures  in  heav<'ii,  Mat.  6.20.  I.ayovt 
your  wraith  upon  the  poor  members  of  Chiist, 
for  he  that  halh  pity  upon  the  poor,  Icndelh 
unio  the  Lord,  and  he  will  pay  him  again, 
Prov.  19.  17.  Or,  let  heavenly  and  spiritual 
things,  such  ns  the  light  of  Godis  counlenunee, 
the  graces  nf  his  Spirit,  and  those  things  which 
accompany  saloation,  be  of  greater  account 
with  you  than  all  worldly  things ;  make  them 
the  treasure  on  which  yc  set  your  hearts.  The 
steward  of  Joseph's  house  acquainted  hi?  bre- 
thren, when  they, found  their  money  returned 
in  their  sackn,  that  God  had  given  them  trea- 
sure \i\  their  sacks  ;  by  his  power  and  prnvi- 
denee  secretly  putting  it  thire.  Gun.  4.3.  2;l. 
Treasures  of  wirkedni**  ttand  for  all  ill-got 
riches,  Prov.  10.  2  Treasures  of  wickudneM 
wilt  bring  w »  »^n  frrnft. 

Treasure  :«  often  used  to  ripresa  any  thing 
whatever  in  great  abundance ;  as  in  I'ol.  2.  3, 
In  Jesus  rhrist  are  liiil  all  the  treasurei  of 
wi>^d<.m  and  knowledge.  St.  Paul  says,  Rom 
2.  5,  Thou  Ireasurest  up  wrath  agninsl  Ihe  ilay 
of  wralh:  that  is,  Thou  prorokrst  more  and 
more  the  wrath  of  God  again.^t  thee;  /.;/  heap- 
ing vp  sins,  thou  heapest  vp  Ihe  judgments  of 
God  upon  thyself:  .9s  men  add  to  their  trcn- 
suro  of  wealth,  so  dost  thou  mid  to  fAi/ttoasuro 
of  punishment.  It  is  put  for  the  knowledge 
of  the  gospel,  and  the  ministry  thereof.  2 
("or.  4.  7,  Wo  havo  this  treasure  in  eajlhon 
vi'ssris.  Tho  good  treasure  of  the  heart,  is 
a  holy  frame  of  heart,  together  with  that 
stock  and  plenty  of  holy  thoughts  and  affec- 
tions that  are  there,  Mat.  12.  35.  The  Lord 
tells  the  children  of  Israel,  Exod.   19.  5,  If 


TRE 

yc  will  obej"  my  voice  iiidood,  and  keep  my 
covenant,  tlien  ye  shall  be  n   peculiar  treasure 
unto  me.    Ye.  shitU  be  highly  prized  and  loved, 
and  carefully  kept  by  me,  us  men's  treasures 
generally  are. 
Gev.  43.  23.  God  hath  given  you  t.  in  your  sacks 
F.xod.\9.!i.  ye  shall  be  a  peculiar  t.  to  me,  Ps.l3o.4. 
/Jeiit.^iS.li.  the  Lord  shall  open  to  thee  his  good  t. 
1  Cliron.  20.8.  gave  I  hem  to  the  t.  of  house  of  Lord 
F.ira  2.  60.  gave  after  their  ahility  to  t.  of  work 
JV<A.  7.  70.  the  Tirshatha  gave  to  t.  1000  drams 

71.  the  fathers  gave  to  the  t.  of  the  work 
Psal.  17.  14.  whose  belly  thou  fillest  with  hid  t. 
135.4.  liord  hath  chosen  Israel  for  his  peculiar  t. 
Pron.  15.6.  in  housoof  the  righteous  is  much  t. 
16.  a  little,  than  great  ^  and  trouble  therewith 
21.  20.  there  is  a  t.  to  be  desired,  and  oil  in  dwell. 
f.ccl.  2.  8.  1  gathered  the  peculiar  t.  of  kings 
Isa.  33.  ().  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  his  (. 
Eiek.  22. 25.  h;; ve  taken  the  (.  and  precious  things 
Hos.  13.  1.5.  be  shall  spoil  t.  of  all  pleasant  vessels 
Mai.  3.t  17.  be  mine,  when  I  make  up  my  special  t. 
Mat.  6. 21.  for  where  your  (.  is,  there,  Luke  12.  34. 

12.  35.  a  good  man  out  of  the  good  t.  of  his  heart, 

an  evil  man  out  of  the  evil  t.  JAike  6.  45. 

13.  44.  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  to  a  t.  hid 
52.  whobringeih  out  of  his  t.  things  new  and  old 
t).  21.  go  and  sell  that  thou  hast,  and  ihou  shall 

have  «.  in  heaven,  Mark  10.  21.  Luke  18.  2-2. 
jMke  12.  21.  so  is  he  that  layeth  up  t.  for  himself 
33.  provide  a  t.  in  the  heavens,  which  faileth  not 
.^r.ts  8.27.  a  eunuch,  who  had  charge  of  all  her  t. 
8  Cor.  4.7.  we  have  this  t.  in  earthen  vessels,  that 
Jam.  5.  3.  ve  have  heaped  t.  for  the  last  days 

■  TREASURE-CITIES. 
Exod.  1.  11.  and  thev  built  for  Pharaoh  t.-cities 

TREASURE-HOUSE. 
/Jirrt  5.17.  let  search  be  made  in  the  king's  t.-house 

7.  20.  bestow  it  out  of  the  king's  t.-hoxise 
AV-A.  10.38.  the  Levites  bringtlie  tithe  \ntot.-house 
Dan.  1.  2.  brouzht  vessels  into  t. -house  of  his  god 

TREASURED. 
Isa.  23.  18.  Tyre,  it  shall  not  be  t.  nor  laid  up 

TREASURER. 
Kzra  1.  8.  Cyrus  brought  forth  the  vessels  by  the  t. 
Isa.  22.  15.  get  thee  unto  this  t.  even  Unto  SheWa 

TREASURERS. 
F.zra  7.  21.  I  .\rtaxerxes  make  a  decree  to  all  t. 
AeA.  13.  13.  and  I  made  t.  over  the  tieasuries 
Van.  3.  2.  Nebuchndnez/ar  jalhered  the  t.  3. 

TREASURES. 
Deut.  32.  34.  is  not  this  seeled  up  among  my  t. 
33.  19.  thev  shall  suck  of  t.  hid  in  the  sand 
IKtnifs  7.  51.  ho  put  dedicated  things  among  ihet. 

14.  26.  Shislmk  took  away  the  t.  of  the  house 

15.  18.  Asa  took  gold  left  in  the  t.  2  Chr.  16.  2. 
8  A'/no-.t  12. 18.  Jehoash  took  gold  found  in  1. 14. 14. 

16.  8.  Ahaz  took  gold  that  was  found  in  the  t. 
18.  15.  llczekiah  gave  him  silver  found  in  the  t. 
20. 13.  Hezekiah  showed  them  silver  and  gold  and 

ail  that  was  found  in  his  (.  15.  Isa.  39.  2,  4. 
24. 13.  Nel)ucliadnezzar  carried  out  thence  all  the 
t.  of  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  the  t.  of  the 
king's  house,  2  Chron.  36.  18. 

1  Chron.  20.  20.  Ahijah  was  over  t.  of  the  house 
22.  Joel  II  24.  Shebuel  was  ruler  of  the  t. 

26.  Shelomith  and  his  brethren  were  over  the  t. 
27.  25.  and  over  the  king's  t.  was  Azmaveth 

2  Chr.  8. 15.  king's  eonimandnient  concerning  the  t. 
J\'eh.  12.  44.  some  were  appointed  for  the  t. 

Job  3.  21.  which  dig  for  it  more  than  for  hid  t. 
33.  22.  hast  thou  entered  into  the  (.  of  the  snow? 
or  hast  thou  seen  the  t.  of  the  hail? 
Prov-  2.  4.  if  thou  searchest  for  her  as  for  hid  I. 

8.  21.  I  will  till  the  t.  of  those  that  love  me 
10.  2.  £.  of  wickedness  profit  nothing 

21.6.  the  getting  of  t.  by  a  lying  tongue  is  vanity 
Jsa.  2.  7.  neither  is  there  any  end  ol  their  t. 

11).  13.  for  he  saitb,  I  have  rohbeS  their  t. 

30.  6.  they  will  carry  their  t.  on  bunches  of  camels 

45.  3.  and  I  will  give  thee  the  t.  of  darkne,«s 
Jer.  1(1.  13.  he  bringeth  wind  out  of  his  t.  51.  16. 

15.  13.  thy  «.  I  willgivelolhefpoil,17.  3.  |20.  5. 

41.8.  slay  us  not,  for  we  have  t.  in  the  field 

48.  7.  because  thou  liast  trusled  in  thy  t. 

40.  4.  backKliilinc  daughter,  that  trusted  in  her  t. 

50.  37.  a  sword  is  on  her  t.  tlicy  shall  be  robbed 

51.13.that  dwellcst  on  many  waters  abundant  in  t. 
Kzek.  28.  4.  bast  gotten  silver  and  gold.inio  thy  t. 
Dan.  11.43.  he  shall  have  power  over  the  t.  of  gold 
JUi'c.  6.10.  are  there  yet  the  t.  of  wickcdn.  in  house? 
Mat.  2.  11.  and  when  they  had  oi>cned  their  t. 

6.  19.  lay  not  up  for  yourselves  (.  on  earth 
20.  but  lay  up  for  yourselves  t.  in  heaven 
Col.  2.  3.  in  whom  are  hid  all  the  t.  of  wisdom 
Ucb.  11.  26.  greater  rirhes  than  the  t.  in  Egypt 

TREASUREST. 
Rom.  2.  5.  (.  up  wrath  against  the  day  of  wrath 

TREASURY. 

Josh.  6.  19.  cold  and  silver  shall  come  into  (.  94. 

611 


TRE 

.Ter.  38.  11.  went  into  the  house  under  the  t. 

Mat.  27.  6.  it  is  not  lawful  to  put  them  into  the  t. 

Mark  12.  41.  Jesus  sat  over-against  the  t.  and  be- 
held how  the  people  cast  money  into  the  t. 

Luke  21.  1.  Jesus  saw  rich  men  casting  gills  into «. 

John  8.  20.  these  words  spake  Jesus  in  the  t. 
TREASURIES 

1  Chron.  9.  26.  these  Levitcs  were  over  the  t. 
28.  11.  David  gave  Solomon  pattern  of  the  t.  12. 

"Chron.  32.  27.  Hezekiah  made  t.  for  silver 

JVcA.  13. 12.  Judah  brought  the  tithe  unto  the  t. 
13.  and  I  made  treasurers  over  the  t. 

F.stk.  3.  9.  I  will  pay,  to  bring  it  into  the  king's  (. 
4.  7.  that  Haman  promised  to  pay  to  the  king's  t. 

Psal.  135.  7.  he  bringeth  the  wind  out  of  his  t. 
TREATISE. 

.^cts  1. 1.  the  former  t.  have  I  made,  OTheophilus 
TREE. 

Both  good  and  wicked  7nen  are  compared  to  trees. 
The  godly,  says  the  Psalmist,  shall  be  like  a 
tree  planted  by  the  rivers  of  water,  that  bringeth 
forth  his  fruit  in  his  season,  Psal.  1.3.  His  soul 
shall  be  plentifully  fed  from  heaven  with  the 
never-failing  influences  of  grace  and  consola- 
tion, whereby  he  shall  be  made  fruitful  in  every 
.good  word  and  joork.  John  the  Baptist  says, 
Mat.  3.  10,  The  axe  is  laid  to  the  root  of  the 
trees ;  therefore  every  tree  which  bringeth  not 
forth  good  fruit,  is  hewn  down  and  cast  into  the 
fire ;  that  is,  "  The  judgment  of  God  hangs 
over  your  heads,  ready  to  seize  upon  you,  if 
you  be  either  barren,  or  do  not  bring  forth 
good  fruit:  Vengeance  is  as  nigh  initnyon,  as 
the  tree  is  to  falling,  to  whose  root  the  axe  is 
already  applied."  Our  Saviour  speaks  to  the 
same  purpose  in  the  latter  part  of  his  sermon 
upon  the  mount,  Mat.  7.  19.  The  godly  are 
called  trees  of  righteousness,  that  is,  persons 
bringing  forth  the  fruits  of  righteousness, 
Isa.  61.  3.  The  wicked  are  called  trees  whose 
fruit  withereth ;  whose  lives  are  full  of  all 
wickedness,  Jude  12.  The  king  of  .Assyria's 
army  are  called  trees.  Isa. 10.  19,  The  restof 
the  trees  of  his  forest  shall  be  few,  that  a  child 
may  write  them  ;  The  remainder  of  his  mighty 
host  shall  be  so  few,  that  the  meanest  accompt- 
ant  may  be  their  muster-master. 

There  is  mention  made  in  scripture  of  several 
ki7ids  of  trees  and  plants,  but  there  is  hardly 
any  thing  less  certain,  than  the  Hebrew  names 
of  them.  When  the  Jews  had  planted  a  vine  or 
fruit-tree,  they  were  not  allowed  to  cat  of  the 
fruit  for  the  first  three  years,  Thnj  offered  to 
God  that  of  the  fourth  year,  and  afterwards 
might  use  whatever  those  trees  produced  at 
their  discretion.  Lev.  19.  23.     See  .Fruit. 

Tree  of  life,  Oen.  2.  9.  so  called,  because  it  wa 
a  natural  means  of  preserving  man's  life,  and 
freeing  him  from  all  infirmities,  diseases,  and 
decays,  during  his  abode  on  earth;  and  also  a 
sacramental  pledge  of  his  continuance  in  that 
life,  upon  condition  of  his  perfect  obedience. 
But  this  tree  of  life  was  to  him  a  tree  of  death 
because  of  his  infidelity  and  disobedience. 
The  tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil.  Gen.  2. 
9,  17.  so  called,  because  by  the  eating  of  it  man 
came  to  know  experimentally  the  luist  difference 
between  good  and  evil;  and  the  greatness  of 
that  good  he  formerly  enjoyed,  by  the  loss  of  it; 
and  the  greatness  of  that  evil  he  had  brought 
upon  himself,  by  the  feeling  of  it.  ,6nd  this 
was  another  sacramental  pledge,  which  sealed 
death  spiritual,  temporal,  and  eternal,  in  case 
of  disobedience. 
Jesus  ^Christ  is  called  the  tree  of  life.  Rev.  2.7.  | 
22.  2.  He  will  be  to  all  his  members  as  a  tree 
of  eternal  life,  satisfying  and  refreshing  thtm 
with  fellowship  and  communion  with  himself. 

Gen.  1.  29.  I  h.ive  given  you  every  t.  for  meat 

2.9.  God  made  every  t.  to  grow,  ihe  t.  of  life  also, 
and  the  t.  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil 

16.  of  every  t.  of  the  garden  thou  mayesl  eat 

17.  but  of  the  t.  of  knowledge  shall  not  eat,  3.  3. 
3.  6.  when  the  woman  saw  that  the  t.  was  good 

11.  and  he  said,  hast  thou  eaten  of  the  t  ?  17. 

12.  the  woman  gave  me  of  the  t.  and  I  did  eat 

22.  and  now  lest  he  take  also  of  the  t.  of  life 
24.  cherubims,  to  keep  the  way  of  the  t.  of  life 

18.  4.  wash  your  feet,  rest  yourselves  under  the  t. 
8.  he  stood  by  them  under  the  t.  they  did  cat 
21.  t  33.  and  Abraham  planted  a  t.  in  Decr-sheba 
40.19.  in  three  days  Phar'h.  shall  hang  thco  on  a  t. 
Exod.  9.  25.  the  hail  brake  every  t.  of  the  field 
10.  5.  the  locusts  shall  eat  every  <.  which  growcth 
15.  25.  he  cried,  and  the  Lord  showed  him  a  t. 
/>ec.27.  30.  tithe  ofland,  seed  or  fruit  of  Ms  Lord's 
Deut.  19.  5.  fetchcth  a  stroke  to  cut  down  the  t. 

20.  19.  for  the  t.  of  the  field  is  man's  life 

21.  23.  and  if  thou  hang  him  on  a  t. 

23.  his  body  shall  not  remain  all  night  on  the  t. 

A  O 


TRE 

7)(;t/<.22.6.  a  bird's  nest  chance  in  the  w.iy  in  affy< 
.losh.  B.  20.  take  Ihe  king  of  Ai  down  from  the  :. 

1  Sam.  22. 6.  now  Saul  abode  under  a  t.  in  Ramah 
31.  13.  they  buried  them  under  a  t.  at  Jabesh 

2  icings  3. 19.  and  shall  fell  every  good  t. 
Ksth.  2.  23.  they  were  both  hanged  on  a  t. 

5.  t  14.  let  a  t.  be  made  of  fifly  cubits  high 
7.  t  9.  behold  also  the  t.  fifty  cubits  high 
./ob  14.  7.  there  Ik  hope  of  a  t.  if  it  be  cut  down 

19.  10.  and  mine  hope  harh  he  ren:ovcd  like  a  i. 
24.  20.  and  wickedness  shall  be  broken  as  a  t. 

Psal.  1.  3.  like  a  t.  planted  by  the  rivers  of  water 

Prov.  3.18.  she  is  a  t.  of  life  to  them  lay  hold  on  her 
11.  30.  the  fruit  of  the  righteous  is  a  /..  of  life 
13.  12.  but  when  thedesire  Cometh,  it  is  a  t.  of  life 
15.  4.  a  wholesome  tongue  is  a  (.  of  lilb 

F.ccl.  11.  3.  if  the  t.  fall  toward  the  south  or  tho 
north;  where  the  t.  faileth,  there  it  shall  be 

Isa.  30.  t  17.  ye  be  left  as  a  t.  bereft  of  branches 
40.  20.  he  choospth  a  t.  that  will  not  rot 
44.  19.  shall  I  fall  down  to  the  stock  of  a  t.l 
50.  3.  neither  let  the  eunuch  say,  I  am  a  dry  t. 

65.  22.  as  days  of  a  t.  are  the  days  of  my  people 

66.  17.  that  purify  themselves  behind  one  t. 
■Icr.  10.  3.  for  onecutleth  a  t.  out  of  the  forest 

11.  19.  let  tis  destroy  the  t.  with  the  frnit 

17.  8.  he  shall  be  as  a  t.  planted  hy  the  waters 
F.zek.  15.  2.  what  is  the  vine  t.  more  than  any  t. 
17. 24.  brought  down  the  high  t.  exalted  the  low  t. 
dried  up  the  green  t.  made  dry  t.  to  flourish 

21.  10.  it  contemtieth  rod  of  my  son,  as  every  t. 
31.  8.  nor  any  <.  in  the  garden  of  God  waslikehirn 
34.  27.  the  t.  of  the  field  shall  yield  her  fruit 

36.  30.  I  will  multiply  the  fruit  of  the  t. 
Dan.  4.  10.  and  behold  a  t.  ||  11.  the  t.  grew,  20 

14.  he  cried,  and  snid  thus,  hew  down  the  t.  23. 
.Tocl  2.  22.  fear  not  for  the  t.  beorelh  her  fruit 
Alat.  3.  10.  every  t.  that  bringeth  not  forth  good 

fruit  is  cast  into  the  fire,  7.  19.  I^uke  3.  9. 

7. 17.  every  good  r  bringeth  forth  good  fruit,  but  a 

corrupt  t.  bringeth  forth  evil  fruit,  Luke  6.  43. 

15.  a  good  t.  cannot  bring  forth  evil  fruit 

12.  33.  either  make  the  t.  good  and  his  fruit  good; 

for  the  I.  is  known  by  his  fruit,  Luke  6.  44. 

13.  32.  mustard  seed  bccometh  a  t.  Luke  13.  19. 
Luke  17.  6.  ye  might  say  to  the  sycamine  (. 
.^rts  5.  30.  Jesus  whom  ye  slew  and  hanged  on  a  t. 

10.  39.  Jesus,  whom  they  slew,  and  hanged  on  a  £. 

13.  29.  they  took  him  down  from  the  t.  and  laid 
Gal.  3.  13.  cursed  is  every  one  that  hangethonat. 
1  Pet.  2.  24.  bare  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  tho  t. 
Rri'.  2.  7.  to  him  will  I  give  to  eat  of  the  t.  of  life 

7.  1.  that  ilie  wind  slioidd  not  blow  on  any  t. 

9.  4.  they  should  not  hurt  any  green  thing,  nor  t. 

22.  2.  in'the  midst  was  there'  the  t.  of  life 

14.  that  they  may  have  right  to  the  t.  of  life 

Sf  Grekn. 

TREES. 

Gen.  3.  8.  hid  themselves  amongst  the  ^  of  garden 

23.  17.  all  the  t.  were  made  sure  to  Abratiam 
F.zod.  10.  15.  Ihe  locusts  did  eat  the  fruit  of  the  t. 
Lev.  19.  23.  ve  shall  have  planted  all  manner  oft. 

23.  40.  ye  sliall  tnke  the  botishs  of  goodly  t. 
26.  4.  and  Ihe  t.  of  the  field  shall  yield  their  fruit 

20.  neither  shall  the  t.  of  the  land  yield  fruits 
JVii/n.24.  6.  a..?  Z.oflign-aloes  which  tlie  Lord  hafU 

phmtcd,  and  as  cedar  t.  beside  thu  waters 
Deut.  16.  21.  thou  shall  not  plant  a  grove  of  any  £. 
20.  IP.  thou  shalt  not  destroy  the  t.  thereof  by  axa 
20.  the  t.  Ihou  knnwost  not  to  be  t.  for  meat 
28.  42.  all  thy  t.  and  fruit  shall  the  locust  consume 
,Iosh.  10.  26.  Joshua  hanged  them  on  five  t. 

27.  and  Ihey  look  thi>m  down  oft'  Ihe  t. 
.Judg.  9.  8.  ihe  t.  went  forth  to  anoin'  a  king 

9.  and  go  to  be  promoted  over  the  t.  11.  13. 

10.  the  t.  snid  to  ihe  fii;-lree,  reign  over  us 

12.  t.  said  to  the  vine  ||  14.  t.  said  to  the  bramble 
48.  Abiinelcch  cut  down  a  bough  from  tho  t. 
I  Kings  i.  33.  ho  spake  of  t.  from  cedar  in  Lebanon 
'iKings  3.  2.5.  nnd  thev  felled  nil  thr  cood  t. 
IChron.  16.  33.  then  >hall  the  t.  of  the  wood  sing 
at  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  Psal.  96.  12 
JVcA.  10.  3.5.  to  bring  the  first-fruits  of  all  t.  37. 
.Tob  40.  21.  ho  lielh  imder  the  shady  t.  22. 
Psal.  74.  5.  ns  he  had  lifted  up  axes  on  thick  /. 
78.  47.  he  destroyed  their  sycamore  (.with  frost 

104.  16.  the  t.  of  the  Lord'are  full  of  sap 

105.  33.  and  brake  the  (.  of  their  coasts 
148.  9.  fruitfiil  /.  and  cedars  praise  the  Lord 

F.ccl.  2.  5.  I  planted  t.  of  all  kind.i  of  fruit 

C(mt.2.3.  ns  the  appl.-trce  among  the  t.  of  the  wood 
4.  14.  with  all  t.  of  frankincense,  myrrh,  aloeg 

Isa.  7. 2.  his  heart  was  moved  as  the  t.  of  the  woud 

t  19.  they  shall  rest  upon  all  commendable  (. 
10.  19.  thereslof  Ihet.  of  his  forest  shall  be  few 
44.  1-1.  which  he  strengtheneth  among  the  f. 
.55. 12.  all  tbe  t.  of  Ihe  fields  shall  clap  their  hands 
61.  3.  thev  in'ght  be  culled  t.  of  righteousness 

fer.  6.  6.  Lord  sai'i,  hew  down  t.  and  cast  amount 
7.  20.  iny  fury  shall  bo  pouted  out  upon  the  t 


TRE 

Ej«».  17.  24.  all  the  t.  of  the  field  shall  know 
20.  'J8.  they  saw  all  the  thick  t.  and  otFered 

31.  5.  his  height  wii9  exalted  above  all  the  '.. 
'J.  8o  that  all  the  t.  ol'  Eden  envied  him 

47.  7.  many  t.  on  the  one  side  and  on  the  other 
12.  by  the  rivers  shall  grow  all  t.  for  meat 
Joft  1.  12.  all  the  I.  of  the  lield  are  withered 

ly.  the  flame  hath  hurnl  all  the  t.  of  the  fiisld 
Mat.  'i.  10.  the  axe  ie  laid  to  the  root  oft.  AuAe  3.  9. 
•Jl.  8  others  cut  down  branches  from  the  t.  and 
strewed  them  in  the  way,  Jlark  11.  8. 
Mark  8.  24.  he  said,  I  see  men  as  t.  walking 
J.uka  21.  29.  behold  the  tig-tree  and  all  the  t. 
Jude  12.  Ihcy  are  I.  uhose  fruit  wilhereth 
Jtev.  7.  3.  hurt  not  the  t.  till  we  have  sealed 
8.  7.  and  the  third  part  of  the  t.  was  burnt  up 
See  Palm. 
TREMBLE. 
Deut.  2.  25.  the  nations  shall  t.  because  of  thee 

20.  3.  fear  not  and  do  not  (.  because  of  them 
Ezra  10.  3.  of  those  that  I.  at  the  commandment 
Job  9.  6.  shaketh  the  earth,  the  pillars  thereof  (. 

2C.  11.  the  pillarsof  heaven  «.  and  are  astonished 
J'sal.  60.  2.  thou  hast  made  the  earth  to  t. 

9'J.  1.  the  Lord  reigiieth,  let  tlie  people  t. 

114.  7.  t.  thou  earth  at  the  presence  of  the  Lord 
Keel.  12.  3.  when  the  keepers  of  the  house  shall  t. 
Jsa.  5.  25.  the  hills  did  t.  their  carcases  were  lorn 

14.  16.  is  this  the  man  that  made  the  earth  to  t. 

32.  11.  t.  ye  women  that  are  at  ease,  be  troubled 
64.  2.  that  the  nations  may  t.  at  thy  presence 
66.  5.  hear  word  of  Lord,  ye  that  t.  at  his  word 

Jer.  5.  22.  will  ye  not  t.  at  my  presence  who  placed 
10. 10.  at  his  wrath  the  earth  shall  (.  and  nations 
3.1.  9.  and  they  shall  t.  for  all  the  goodness 
51.  2i'.  the  land  of  Babylon  shall  t.  and  sorrow 
Ezek.  26.  10.  they  shall  t.  at  every  moment,  32. 10. 
18.  now  shall  the  isles  t.  m  the  day  of  thy  full 
Oan.  6.  26.  that  men  t.  before  the  God  of  Daniel 
Has.  11. 10.  then  the  children  shall «.  from  the  west 
11.  they  shall  «.  as  a  bird  out  of  Egypt,  as  a  dove 
Joel  2.  1.  let  all  the  inhabilanU  of  the  land  (. 

10.  the  earth  shall  quake,  the  heavens  shall  t. 
JImos  8.  8.  hliall  not  the  l.md  t.  for  this  and  mourn? 
Hab.  3.  7.  the  captains  of  the  landof  Midiandid  t. 
Jam.  2.  19.  the  devils  also  believe  and  t. 

TREMBLED. 
Oen.  27. 33.  Isaac  t.  very  e.\ceedingly,  and  he  said 
F.xod.  19.  16.  the  people  that  was  in  the  camp  I. 
Judg.  5.  4.  the  earth  t.  and  the  heavens  dro|iped, 
2  Sam.  22.  8.  Psal.  18.  7.  |  77.  18.  \  97.  4. 
1  .Sam.  4.  13.  Eli's  heart  (.  for  the  ark  of  God 
14.  15.  the  spoilers «.  |(  16.  4.  the  elders  of  town  t. 
28.  5.  Saul  was  afraiil,  and  his  heart  greatly  t. 
F.ira  9. 4.  were  assembled  to  me  every  one  that  t. 
Jer.  4.  24.  and  lo  the  mountains  t.  Hab.  3.  10. 
8. 16.  whoh;  land  t.  at  neighing  of  hi.ii  strong  ones 
T>an.  .').  19.  all  people  and  nations  t.  before  him 
■Uab.  3.  16.  when  l  heard,  my  belly  t.  rottenness 
entered  into  my  bones,  and  I  t.  in  myself  that 
I  nrght  rest  in  the  day  of  trouble 
Mark  16.  8.  fled  from  the  sepulchre,  for  they  t. 
Aclt  7.  32.  then  Moses  t.  \\  24.  25.  Felix  t. 

TREMBLETH. 

Job  37.  1.  at  this  also  my  heart  t.  and  is  moved 

Pgal.  104.  32.  he  lookeih  on  the  earth  and  it  t. 

119.  12f).  my  flesh/,  for  fear  of  thee  and  am  afraid 

ha.  66.  2.  I  will  look  to  him  that  t.  at  my  word 

TREMBLING. 
Ofii.  27.  t  33.  Isaac  trembled  with  a  great  t. 
J';iorf.l5.15.<.takeholdonthemighlymenof  Moab 
Deut.  28.  65.  the  Lord  shall  give  thee  a  t.  heart 
1  .Voin.  13.  7.  and  all  the  people  followed  him  t. 
14.  15.  in  the  host  there  was  a  very  ^rcat  (. 
V.ira  10.9.  all  people  sal  (.  because  ot  this  matter 
Joh  4.  14.  fear  came  upon  me  and  t.  which  made 

21.  6.  I  am  afrairl  and  I.  takcth  hold  on  my  flesh 
Pfkl.  2.  11.  serve  Lord  with  fear  and  rejoice  with  t. 

55.  5.  fearfulncKs  and  t.  are  come  upon  me 
Isa.  51.  17.  h  ist  drunken  the  dre;,'R  of  the  cup  oft. 

22.  I  have  taken  out  of  thy  hnnd  the  cup  oft. 
JtT.  30.  5.  we  have  heard  a  voice  off.  of  fear 
F.uk.  12.  IH.  son  of  man,  drink  thy  water  with  t. 

26.  16.  ihey  shall  clothe  themselves  with  t. 
Dan.  10.  11.  when  he  had  spoken  this,  I  stood  (. 
Hos.  13.  1.  when  Ephraim  spake  t.  he  exalted 
ZrcA.  12.  2.  I  will  make  Jerusalem  a  cup  oft. 
Mark  5.  33.  the  woman  fi^nring  and  t.  I.uke,  8.  47. 
.Irtjt  9.6.  Saul  t.  said,  L.whal  will  have  melodo? 

16.  29.  gaoler  r.ime  I.  and  fell  down  before  Paul 
1  Cor.  2.  3.  I  was  with  vou  in  6'ar  and  much  t. 
S  Cnr.  7.  15.  how  with  fear  and  t.  yc  received  him 
F.ph  6.  5.  servants,  be  obi'dieut  with  fi-ar  and  t. 
/"Air  2.12.  work  out  Toursalvation  with  fear  andt. 

TRENCH. 
1  fam.  17.  20.  David  came  to  the  t.  arid  shouted 

26.  5.  Haul  lay  slc-ping  within  the  t.  7. 
1  A'lTi^.*  18.  32.  Elijah  made  n  t.  about  the  altar 

35.  and  he  filled  the  t.  also  with  water,  :t8. 
Luke  19.  43.  thy  enemies  shall  cast  a  (.  about  thee 
MS 


TRI 

TRESP.^SS. 
Gen.  31.  36.  what  is  my  I.  that  thou  hast  pursued 

50.'17.  we  pray  thee,  lorgive  llie  I.  of  thy  servants 
Liod.  22.  9.  for  all  manner  oft.  whether  for  ox 
AeD.5.15.  he  shall  bring  for  his  t.  to  the  Lord  a  ram 

26.  40.  if  they  shall  confess  their  t.  trespassed 
J\rum.  5.  6.  when  any  do  a  t.  against  the  Lord 

7.  he  shall  recompense  his  t.  with  the  |>rincipal 

8.  if  he  have  no  kinsman  to  recoiiipenife  the  t. 
27.  if  she  have  dune  t.  against  her  hubband 

1  Sam.  25.  28.  forgive  the  t.  of  thine  handmaid 

1  CAr.  21.  3.  why  will  he  be  a  cause  of  t.  to  Israel? 

2  CAr.  24.  18.  wrath  came  on  Judali  for  their  I. 
28.  13.  ye  intend  to  add  more  lo  our  sins  and  t. 
33.  19.  Manasseh's  prayer  and  t.  arc  written 

F.zra  9.  2.  the  rulers  have  been  chief  in  this  t. 

6.  and  our  t.  is  grown  up  unto  the  heavens 

7.  we  have  been  in  a  great  t.  to  this  day,  13. 
lO.lU.  taken  strange  wives,  to  increase  t.  of  Israel 

19.  they  otlered  a  ram  of  the  Hock  for  their  t. 
Ezek.  17.  20.  I  will  plead  with  him  there  for  his  I. 

18.  24.  in  his  t.  he  hath  trespassed,  he  shall  die 
Dan.  9.  7.  because  of  their  t.  they  trespassed 

TRESPASSES. 
Eira  9.  15.  behold,  we  are  before  thee  in  our  t. 
Paal.  68.  21.  such  a  one  as  goeth  on  still  in  his  t. 
Ezek.  39.  26.  they  have  borne  their  shame  and  t. 
Mat.  6.  14.  for  if  ye  forgive  men  their  t. 
15.  but  if  ye  forgive  not  men  their  t.  neither  will 
your  father  forgive  your  t.  18.  35. 
Mark  11.  25.  your  father  may  forgive  you  yourt. 

20.  neither  will  your  father  forgive  your  t. 
2  Cur.  5.  19.  not  imjiuting  their  t.  unto  them 
£j;A. 2.1. you  quickened  who  were  dead  int. and  sins 
Col.  2. 13.  be  quickened,  having  forgiven  you  allt. 

See  CoM.niT,  Committkd, 

Offering. 

TRESPASS-MONEY. 

i  Kings  12.  16.  the  l.-moncy  was  not  brought 

TRESPASS. 

1  Kings  8.  31.  if  any  man  t.  against  his  neighbour 

2  Chron.  19.  10.  warn  that  they  t.  not  against  Lord 

28.  22.  Ahaz  did  I.  yet  more  against  the  Lord 
Mai.  18.  15.  if  brother  t.  tell  him  his  fault 
Lake  17.3.if  thy  brother  t.  against  thee,  rebuke  him 

4.  if  he  I.  against  thee  seven  times  in  a  day 
TRESPASSED. 
I,ev.  5.  19.  he  hath  certainly  t.  against  the  Lord 
2i).  40.  if  they  confess  their  trespass  which  they  f. 
JSTum.  5.  7.  recompensed  to  him  against  whom  he  t. 
/Jeut.'.i2.5\.  because  ye  t.  against  mo  among  Israel 
2  Clir.  26.  18.  go  out  of  sanctuary,  for  thou  hast  t 

29.  6.  for  our  fiUhers  have  t.  and  dune  evil  in  eyes 

30.  7.  be  not  like  fathers  who  t.  against  Lord  God 
33.  23.  but  Amon  t.  more  and  more 

EzralO.  2.  we  have  t.  against  our  G.  strange  wives 
Ezek.  17.  20.  his  trespass  that  he  t.  against  me 
39.  23.  because  they  t.  against  me,  26. 
iJan.  9.  7.  their  Ire.-spaBS  that  they  t.  against  thee 
/lus.  8.  1.  because  they  have  t.  against  my  law 

TRESPASSING. 
I^ev.  0.  7.  "or  tny  thing  that  he  hath  done  in  t. 
Eiek.  14.  13.  the  land  sinneth  against  me  by  t. 

TRIAL. 
.rob  9.  2:1.  he  ■;Till  laugh  at  the  t.  of  the  innocent 
Ezek.  21.  13.  because  it  is  a  t.  what  if  the  sword 
2  Cor.  8.  2.  how  that  in  a  great  t.  of  aflliction 
ffrb.  11.  36.  others  had  t.  of  cruel  miickings 
1  Pet.  i.  7.  thatthet.  of  your  faith  might  be  found 
4.  12.  think  it  not  slrangn  concerning  the  fiery  t. 
TRIBE. 
.facoh  having  twelve  soJH,who  leerc  tlut  heads  of  so 
many  grellt  families,  which  altogether  formed 
a  great  nation;  everyone  of  these  families  ica 
called  a  tribe.      Hut  Jacob  on  his  death-bed 
adopted  Ephraim  and  Manassfh,  the  sons  of 
./oseph,  and  would  have  them  also  to  constitute 
tu-u\x\\)f»nf  Israel,  Gen.48.5.   Instead  of  twelve 
tribes,  there  were  note  thirteen,  that  of  Joseph 
being  divided  intotiBO.    However,  in  thedistri 
buliiin  oflanih  to  the  peojile  made  by  .foshua,by 
the  command  of  God,  they  counted  but  twelve 
tribes,  and  made  but  twelve  lots.  For  the  tribeu/ 
/.evi,  which  iras  appointed  to  the  service  of  the 
tabernacle  of  the  Lord,  had  no  share  in  the  dis 
tribution  of  the  land,  hut  only  some  cities  to 
dicell  in,  and  the  first  fruits,  tithes  and  obla 
lions  of  the  people,  which  iras  all  their  sub- 
sistence. Num.  35.  2.  Josh.  13.  7,  H,  14,  33. 
The  twelve  tribes,  while  they  were  in  the  desert, 
encamped  round  about  the  tabernacle  of  the 
covenant,  every  one  according  to  its  order.    To 
the  east  were  those  nf  .Judoh,7.ebulun,and  Issa- 
char.     To  the  west  were  Ephraim,  Manasseh, 
and  lievjamin.    To  the  south,  Reuben,  Simeon, 
and  God.    .^nd  lu  the  north  were  Dan,  Jlshcr, 
and  J^aphtali.      The  I.evites  were  distributed 
round  about  the  tabernacle,  nearer  the  holy 
place  than  the  other  tribrc,  J^'um.  2.  2,  3,  f-e. 
In  the  marches  nf  the  army  of  Israel,  the  twelve 


TRI 

tribes  were  divided  into  four  great  bodies,  eacl 
composed  of  three  tribes.  The  first  body,  which 
was  the  front  of  the  army,  was  made  up  oftha 
tribes  of  Judah,  Issac/tar,  and  Zebuluu.  Tha 
second  was  composed  of  Reuben,  Simeon,  and 
Gad.  Between  the  second  and  third  body  of 
troops,  came  the  J.ecUes  and  priests,  with  the 
ark  of  the  Lord,  the  curtain,  the  planks,  the 
pillars,  and  all  the  other  furniture  of  the 
tabernacle.  The  third  body  of  the  army  was 
composed  of  the  tribes  of  I'.phraim,  Manasseh, 
and  Benjamin.  The  fourth  and  last,  which 
brought  up  therear,was  made  up  of  the  tribes 
of  J  Jan,  .isher,  and  J^apthtali,.\'um.  10.  5,  6, 
14,  it-c.  H'e  have  an  account  of  the  disision  of 
the  land  of  Canaan  among  the  twelve  tribes  in 
the  book  of  Jo.ihua. 

The  twelve  Irihes  continued  united  under  one  headf 
making  but  one  state,  one  people,  and  one  mo- 
narchy, till  after  the  death  of  Solomon  :  Then 
ten  of  the  tribes  of  Israel  revolted  from  the 
house  of  David,  and  received  for  their  king  Je- 
roboam, the  son  of  J^''i:bat ;  and  only  the  iribea 
of  .Judah  and  Benjamin  continued  under  the 
government  of  Hehoboam,  1  Kings  12.  16,20. 
7'Ai«  separation  may  be  looked  upon  as  the  chief 
cause  of  those  great  calamities  that  aflsrwarda 
hnppenrd  to  those  two  kingdoms,  and  to  the 
whole  Hebrew  nation.  For  it  was  the  cause  of 
the  alteration  and  change  of  the  old  religion, 
and  nf  the  ancient  worship  of  their  forefathers. 
Jeroboam,  the  son  of  JVebat,  substituted  the 
worship  of  golden  calves  instead  of  the  worship 
of  the  Dord;  which  was  the  occasion  of  the  ten 
tribesforsaking  the  temple  of  the  I.ord,  1  Kings 
12.  26,  27,  &c.  7'Ai,*  schism  likewise  caused 
an  irreconcitcable  hatred  between  theli^  tribes 
and  those  of  Judah  and  Benjamin,  and  created 
a  great  number  nf  wars  and  disputes  between 
them.  The  J.ord  being proroked,delivered  them 
up  to  their  enemies.  Tiglath-pileser  first  carried 
away  captives  the  tribes  of  Reuben,  Gad,  jVaph- 
tali,  and  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh,  which 
were  beyond  .Jordan,  and  carried  them  brijnnd 
the  Euphrates,  2  Kings  15.  29.  1  Chron.  5.  26. 

Some  years  after,  Sholmaneser,  king  of  .Assyria, 
took  the  city  of  Samaria,  destroyed  it,  took 
away  the  rest  of  the  inhabitaytis  of  Israel,  car- 
ried them  beyond  the  Euphrates,  and  sent  other 
inhabitants  into  the  country  to  cultivate  and 
possess  it,  2  Kings  17.  6,  24.  1 18.  10,  11.  Thu3 
ended  the  kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes  of  Israel. 
It  has  been  a  great  question  among  th-e  Fathers 
and  Interpreters,  whether  these  ten  tribes  stilt 
continued  in  their  settlement  beyond  the  Eu- 
phrates, or  whether  they  returned  again  into 
their  own  country.  The  greatest  part  arc  of 
opinion,  that  they  never  did  return.  Others, 
on  the  contrary,  think  they  did  return;  but  at 
the  same  time  acknowledge,  that  this  relnm  it 
not  clearly  made  out  byhistoi-j,  because  it  was 
perj'ormcii  by  insensible  degrees:  and  was  not 
to  complete  and  entire,  but  that  a  great  num- 
ber of  Israelites  stilt  remained  beyond  the 
Euphrates. 

.,1s  to  the  tribes  of  .Tvdah  and  Benjamin,  who  re- 
mained under  the  government  oj'  the  kings  of 
the  family  of  David,  they  continued  a  much 
longer  time  in  their  own  country:  But  at  last, 
after  Ihey  had  fulfilled  the  measure  of  their 
iniquity,  God  delivered  them  into  the  hands  of 
their  enemies.  J^'ebuchadneizar  took  the  city 
of  .Jerusalem,  entirely  ruined  it,  burnt  the 
temple,  and  look  away  all  the  inhabitants  of 
Judah  and  Benjamin  to  Babylon,  and  to  the 
other  provinces  of  his  empire.  This  captivity 
continued  for  seventy  years,  as  the  prophet 
had  foretold  them,  Jvr. '25.11,  }i.  |  29.  10.  The 
return  from  this  captivity  is  plainly  assigned 
in  2  Chron.  36.  20,  21,  22,  23.  and  in  the  booka 
of  Ezra  and  jWAcraiaA. 

Chronologers  fii  the  end  of  the  kingdom  of  the 
ten  tribes  in  the  year  of  the  world  3283,  before 
Christ,  717.  .1nd  the  ciiptii'ity  of  .Judah  and 
Benjamin  in  the  year  of  the  world  3416,  before 
Christ,  584. 

J^'um.  1.  4.  and  with  you  there  shall  bo  a  man  of 
ev.  f.  head  of  house  of  his  fathers,  13. 2.  |  .34.18. 
4.  IH.  cut  ye  not  ofl'the  t.  of  the  Kohatliiios 
18.  2.  the  t.  of  thy  father  bring  thou  with  thee 
31.  4.  of  every  t.'  n  thousand  sent  lo  war,  5,  6. 
36.  5.  the  t.  of  the  sons  of  Joseph  hath  said  well 
6.  they  f  hall  marry  only  lo  the  family  of  the  t.  h. 
y. neither  shall  the  inheritance  remove  from  one  L 
to  another  I.  hut  keep  lo  his  owninhcrilnncB 

Deut.  1.23.  I  look  one  of  a  t.  .'o,<A.  3.  12.  |  4.  2,4. 
20.  18.  family  or  (.  who»c  hearl  tiirncth  away 

.fosh.  7.  14.  t.  which  ihc  Lord  lakcth  shall  come 
18.  4.  (five  out  from  you  three  men  for  each  (. 

Judg.  18. 19.  or  that  ihou  be  a  priest  to  a  ( 


TRI 


Judg.  21.  3.  should  be  one  (■  lacking  in  Israel,  G. 
\Kings  11.13.  but  will  give  one  t.  lolliy  son,  ;W,  3(5. 
\Chr.  6.  61.  who  were  left  ofllie  family  of  that  i 
Kick.  47.  23.  in  what  t.  the  strangur  sojuurnelh 
Ueb.  7   13.  for  he  pertainuth  to  another  t. 

14.  of  Juduh,  of  which  1.  Moses  spake  nothing 

See  Rkubkn,  Simkon,  and  ike  rest. 

TKIUES. 

Ezod  28.  21.  his  name  according  to  the  12 1. 39.14. 

JVam.  24.  2.  abiding  in  tenls  according  to  their  t. 

33.  54.  according  to  t.  of  your  falliers  sliall  inherit 

34.  13.  to  give  to  the  nine  t.  Josh.  13.  7.  1  14.  2. 

15.  the  two  t.  and  the  half  have  received  their 
inheritance  on  this  side  Jordan,  Jusk.  14.  3. 

/?euM.I3.take  ye  wise  men,  known  among  your  t. 

12.  5.  the  place  which  the  Lord  shall  choose  out 

of  all  your  t.  to  put  his  name  there,  14. 

18.  5.  thy  God  hath  cjjosen  him  out  of  all  thy  t. 

Josh.  7.  14.  ye  shall  be  brought  according  to  your  t. 

lSam.l0.19.prcsent  yourselves  before  L.  byyour  t. 

IKings  11.  31.  and  1  will  give  ten  t.  to  thee 

13. 31 .  twelve  stones  according  to  number  of  the  t. 
Psal.  105.  37.  was  not  one  feeble  among  their  t. 
122.  4.  whither  the  t.  go  up,  the  t.  of  the  Lord 
Isa.  19.  13.  they  that  are  the  stay  of «.  thereof 
49.  C.  be  my  servant  to  raise  up  the  t.  of  Jacob 
63.  17.  return  for  the  t.  of  thine  inheritance 
Eiek.  45.  8.  give.lo  Israel  according  to  their  t. 
Hab.  3.  9.  according  to  the  oaths  of  the  t. 
Mat.  24.  30.  then  shall  all  the  t.  of  the  earth  mourn 
jicts26.7.unto  which  promise  our  12  t.hope  to  come 
Jam.  1.  I.  to  the  twelve  i.  which  are  scattered 
Reo.  7.  4.  were  sealed  144,000  of  all  the  t. 
See  Israel. 
TRIBULATION. 
Deut.  4.  30.  when  thou  art  in  t.  if  thou  turn  to  Ld 
Judg.  10. 14.  let  them  deliver  you  in  the  time  of  t 
I  Sam.  2l3.  24.  let  him  deliver  nie  out  of  all  f. 
JUat.  13.  21.  when  t.  ariseth,  he  is  offended 
•  24.  21.  then  shall  be  great  t.  such  as  was  not 

29.  immediately  after  the  t.  Mark  13.  24. 
John  1(5.  33.  in  the  world  ye  shall  have  t.  but  be 
^ctsl4.22.we  must  through  much  t.  enter  kingdom 
Hom.i.^.t.  and  anguish  on  every  soul  that  doth  evil 
5.  3.  knowing  that  (.  worketh  patience 
8.  35.  shall  t.  separate  us  from  tlie  love  of  Christ  1 
12.  12.  rejoicing  in  hope,  patient  in  t. 
2 Cor.  1.  4.  who  eomforteth  us  in  all- our  t. 
7.  4.  I  am  exceeding  joyful  in  all  our  t. 
IThess.  3.  4.  we  told  you,  that  we  should  suffer  t. 
STAess.l.G.reccinpense  £.  to  them  that  trouble  you 
Rev.  1.  9.  I  John,  who  am  your  companion  in  t. 
2.  9.  I  know  thy  works,  and  t.  and  poverty 
10.  behold,  ye  shall  have  t.  ten  days 
22.  I  will  cast  them  into  great  t.  except  repent 
7.  14.  these  are  they  which  came  out  of  great  t. 

TRIBULATIONS. 
ISam.  10.  19.  himself  saved  you  out  of  all  your  t. 
Rom.  5.  3.  not  only  so,  but  we  glory  in  t.  also 
£ph.  3.  13.  I  desire  that  ye  faint  not  at  my  t. 
S  Tliess.  1.  4.  for  your  faith  in  all  I.  that  ye  endure 

TRIDUTARY. 
•  Isa.  31.  t  8.  and  his  young  men  shall  be  t. 
2/ani.l.l.she  that  was  great,  how  is  slie  become  t.! 

TRIBUTARIES. 
Deut.  20. 11.  the  people  found  therein  shall  be  t. 
Judg.  1.  30.  the  Ciinaanitcs  became  t.  33,  35. 

TRIBUTE. 
In  Greek.,  Phoros ;  in  Hebrew.,  Mass ;  which  is 
derived  from  the  verb  Masns,  to  melt,  or 
liquefy.  The  Hebrews  acknoicledged  none  for 
sovereign  over  theiii,  but  God  alone:  Whence 
Josephits  calls  their  government  a  Theocracy, 
or  divine  government.  They  acknowledged 
the  sovereign  dominion  of  God  by  a  tribute,  or 
capitation,  of  half  a  shekel  a  head,  which 
every  Israelite  paid  him  yearly,  E.vod.  30.  13. 
Our  Sauinur,  in  Mat.  17.  25.  thus  reasons  with 
Peter;  What  thinkest  thou,  Simon'!  Of  whom 
do  the  kings  of  the  earth  take  custom,  or  tri 
bute  ?  of  llieir  own  children,  or  of  strangers? 
Meaning,  that  as  he  was  the  Son  of  Ood,  he 
ought  to  be  exempt  from  the  capitation. 
Iribute  is  a  sum  of  money  paid  to  princes,  or 
rulers,  in  token  of  the  duty  and  subjection 
which  suhject.'i  owe  unto  them,  and  as  a  reeom 
pence  for  their  care  and  protection,  and  in 
order  to  support  them  in  their  authority  and 
dignity.  Jiftrr  the  Jews  were  conquered  by  the 
Romans,  they  still  continued  very  te7iacious  of 
'  their  liberty,  and  gloried  much  in  the  right 
they  had  to  it;  as  appears  from  John  6.  33. 
They  made  it  a  gvfstion,  whether  it  was 
agreeable  to  the  law  of  God,  to  pay  taxes  to  a 
Pagan  conqueror,  and  therefore  they  lisk  our 
Saviour,  Mat.  22.  17,  What  thinkest  thou  7  Is 
A  lawful  lo  give  tribute  unto  Cesar  or  notl 
Christ  in  his  answer  plainly  shows  them,  that 
religion  did  not  exempt  then  from  their  civil 
duties,  and  obedience  to  ptinces  in  things 
643 


TRO 

wherein  they  have  power  to  command;  Render 
unto  Cesar  the  ihingx  that  are  Cesar's.  .Indthc 
JJpusllc  I'aul  rccovunends  and  inculcates  to  the 
faithful  Christians  submission  and  obeduncc 
lo  princes,  and  a  conscientious  discharge  of 
their  duty  in  paying  Ihcm  their  tributes.  Jiom. 
13.  7,  Render  to  all  their  dues;  tribute  lo  whom 
tribute  is  due,  custom  to  whom  custom. 

Solomon,  at  the  beginning  of  his  reign,  com- 
pelled the  Canaanitcs,  who  were  left  in  the 
country,  to  pay  him  tribute,  and  to  perform  the 
drudgery  of  the  public  works  he  had  under- 
taken: And  us  to  the  children  of  Jsracl,  he 
loauld  not  suj'er  them  to  be  employed  therein, 
but  made  them  his  soldiers,  his  ministers,  his 
chief  ojicers,  to  command  his  u7-mics,  his  cha- 
riots, and  his  horsemen,  1  Kings  9.  21 J  22,  23. 
2  Chron.  8.  9.  Yet  however,  towards  the  end 
of  his  reign,  he  imposed  a  tribute  upon  them 
and  made  them  work  at  the  public  buildings; 
which  much  alienated  their  minds  front  him, 
and  Sowed  the  seeds  of  that  discontent  which 
afterwards  appeared  in  an  open  revolt,  by  the 
rebellion  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  A'ebal,  1  Kings 
5.  13,  14.  I  9.  15.  I  11.  27.  Jeroboam  was  at 
first  obliged  to  take  shelter  in  Egypt;  but 
afterwards  the  defection  became  general,  by 
the  total  revolt  of  the  ten  tribes.  Jt  was  upon 
account  of  these  taxes  and  levies,  that  the 
Israelites  said  to  Rehoboam  the  son  of  Solo- 
mon, Thy  fatlier  made  our  yoke  grievous;  now 
therefore  make  thou  the  grievous  service  of  thy 
father,  and  his  heavy  yoke  which  he  put  upon 
us,  lighter,  and  we  will  serve  thee,  1  Kinirs 
12.4. 

Gen.  49.  15.  Issachar  became  a  servant  to  t. 

JVuni.  31.  28.  levy  a  t.  to  the  Lord  of  men  of  war 

37.  the  Lord's  t.  of  the  sheep  was  675 

38.  beeves.  Lord's  t.  72.  ||  39.  asses.  Lord's  t.  61. 
40.  the  persons  16,000,  the  Lord's  t.  32  persons 

Deut.  16.  10.  with  a  (.  of  a  free-will  offering 
Josh.  16.  10.  Canaanites  serve  under  t.  17.  13. 
2Sam.  20.  24.  and  Adoram  was  over  the  t.  IKings 
4.  6.  I  12.  18.  2  Chron.  10.  18. 
IKings  9.  21.  upon  these  did  Solomon  levy  a  t. 
IKings  17.t  3.  Hoshea  became  servant  and  gave  t. 

23.  'Si.  Pharaoh-necho  put  the  land  to  a  t. 
2  Chron.  8.  8.  them  did  Solomon  make  to  pay  t. 

17.  11.  some  of  the  Philistines  brought  t.  silver 

Ezra  4.  13.  then  will  they  not  pay  t.  and  custom 

20.  and  toll,  t.  and  custom  was  paid  to  them 

6.  8.  of  the  (.  e.xpenses  be  given  to  these  men 

7.  24.  not  lawful  lo  impose  t.  on  the  Levites 
JVcA.  5.  4.  we  have  borrowed  money  for  king's  t. 
Prov.  12.  24.  but  the  slothful  shall  be  under  t. 
Isa.  31.  t  8.  and  his  young  men  shall  be  for  t. 
Mat.  17.  24.  they  that  received  t.  money  came  ii 

Peter  and  said,  doth  not  your  master  pay  t.? 
25.  of  whom  do  the  kings  of  the  earth  take  t. 
22. 17.  what  thinkest  thou7  is  it  lawful  to  give  t. 
to  Cesar,  or  no?  Mark  12.  14.  I.nkc  20.  22. 
19.  show  me  the  t.  money;  they  brought  a  penny 
Luke  23.  2.  and  forbidding  to  give  t.  to  Cesar 
Rom.  13.  6.  for  this  cause  pay  ye  t.  also 
7.  render  therefore  t.  lo  whom  t.  is  due,  custom 
TRICKLETH. 
Lam.  3.  49.  mine  eye  t.  down,  and  ceaseth  not 
TRIE,  See  Try. 
TRIMMED. 
2  5am.  19.  24.  Mephibosheth  had  not  t.his  beard 
Jl/ot.  25. 7.  all  those  virgins  arose  and  t.  their  lamps 

TRIMMEST. 
Jer.  2.  33.  why  t.  Ihou  thy  way  to  seek  love? 

TRIPPING. 
Isa.  3.  1 16.  walking  and  t.  nicely  as  they  go 

TRIUMPH. 
2.9am.  1.  20.  lest  daughters  of  the  uncircumcised  t. 
Psal.  25.  2.  let  not  mine  enemies  t.  over  me 
41. 11.  because  mine  enemy  doth  not  (.  over  me 
60.  8.  Philistia,  t.  thou  because  of  me 
92.  4.  I  will  t.  in  the  works  of  thy  hands 
94.  3.  Lord,  how  long  shall  the  wicked  /-.? 
106.47.gather  us  to  give  thanks  and  t.  in  thy  praise 
108.9.Moab  is  my  wash-pot,  over  Philistia  will  1 1 
2  Cor.  2.14.which  alwavs  ciuseth  us  to  t.  in  Christ 

TRIUMPH. 
Psal.  47.  1.  shout  unto  God  with  the  voice  of  t. 

TRIUMPHED. 
Exod.  15.  1.  for  he  hnth  t.  gloriously,  21. 

TRIUMPHING,  Substantive. 
Job  20.  5.  that  the  t.  of  the  wicked  is  short 

TRIUMPHING. 
Col.  2. 15.  made  a  show  of  them,  t.  overtliem  in  it 

TRODE. 
J'i/rf^.9.27.they  t.  the  grapes  and  cursed  Abimelech 
20.  43.  Israel  t.  the  Benjamites  down  with  ease 
2A'f7in's7.17.the  people  t.  upon  him  in  the  gate, 20. 
9.  33.  Jehu  t.  Jezebel  under  foot 
14. 9.  H  beast  t.  down  the  thistle,  2  Chron.  25. 18. 


TRO 

TRODDEN. 

Z?cii«.1.3G.toCaleb  will  1  give  the  land  that  he  hath 

t.  upon,  because  he  followed  Lord,  ./osA.14.9. 

.ludg.  5.  21.  O  my  soul,  thou  hast  t.  down  strength 

./ob  22. 13.  the  old  way  which  wicked  men  havet. 

28.8.the  lion's  whelps  have  not  t.  it,  nor  fierce  lion 
Psal.  119.  118.  thou  hast  t.  down  all  that  err 
Isa.  5.  5.  and  the  vineyard  shall  be  t.  down 

14.  19.  art  cast  out,  as  a  carcase  t.  under  feet 

18.  2.  go  to  a  nation  meted  out  and  t.  down,  7. 
25. 10.  Moab  shall  be  t.  under  him  as  straw  is  t. 
28.  3.  the  drunkiirds  of  Ephruim  shall  he  t.  under 

18.  scourge  pass  through  then  ye  shall  be  t.down 
63.  3.  I  have  t.  the  wine-press  alone,  and  of  the 
people  there  was  none  with  ma 
18.  our  adversaiies  have  I.  down  thy  sanctuary 
■ler.  12.  10.  they  have  t.  my  portion  under  fool 
Lam.  1.  15.  the  Lord  hath  I.  under  foot  the  mighty 
men,  he  hath  t.  the  virgin  the  daughter  of  J  udah 
Ezek.  16.  t  6.  when  I  saw  ihee  f.  under  foot 
27.  t6.  they  have  made  hatches  of  ivory  well  t. 
34.  19.  my  flock  eat  what  ye  have  t.  under  feet 
Dan.  8.  13   give  the  sanctuary  and  host  to  be  t. 
Jilic.  7. 10.  now  shall  she  be  t.  as  mire  of  the  streeta 
Mat.5.\3.  salt  unsavoury  lobe  t.  und''r  lootof  men 
Z^ii/ff8.5.soine  tl'll  by  the  way-side  and  wast. down 

21.  24.  Jerusalem  shall  bet.  down  of  the  Geiilile* 
Heb.  10.  29.  who  hath  t.  under  foot  the  Son  of  God 
Rev.  14.  20.  the  wine-press  was  t.  without  the  city 

TROOP. 
Gen.  .30.  11.  a  t.  cometli;  fshe  called  his  name  at 
49.  19.  Gad,  a  t.  shall  overcome  him,  he  at  last 

1  Sam.  30.  8.  saying,  shall  I  [lursue  after  this  t.? 

2  .S'«m.  2.  25.  childien  of  Benjamin  became  one  {. 
3.  22.  behold,  Joab  came  from  pursuing  a  t. 

22.  30,  by  thee  have  1  run  thro'  a  t.  Psal.  18.  29. 

23.  11.  the  Philistines  were  gathered  into  a  t. 
13.  the  t.  pitched  in  the  valley  of  Rephaim 

Isa.  6.1.  11.  are  thev  that  jirepare  a  table  for  that  t, 
Jer.  18. 22.  when'sTialt  bring  a  t.  suddenly  on  Iheiii 
Hos.  7.  1.  the  t.  of  robbers  spoilelh  without 
.'imos  9.  6.  he  hath  founded  his  t.  in  the  earth 

TROOPS. 
E20(i.38.f8. looking-glasses  of  women  assem.  by  t. 
■hh  6.  19.  t.  of  Tenia  looked,  companies  of  Sheba 

19.  12.  his  t.  come  together  and  raise  their  way 
Jer.5.  7.  they  assembled  by  t.  in  the  harlots'  housei 
Hos.  6.  9.  and  as  t.  of  robbers  wait  for  a  man 
Mic.  5.  1.  gather  thyself  in  t.  O  daughter  oft. 
Hab.  3.  16.  he  will  invade  them  with  his  t. 

TROUBLE. 

1  Chr.  22. 14.  in  my  1. 1  prepared  for  hou.se  of  Lord 

2  Chr.  15.  4.  when  they  in  t.  did  turn  and  sought  t/ie 
Lord,  he  was  found  of  them,  jYeh.  9.  27. 

jVcA.  9.  32.  let  not  all  tlief.  seem  little  before  thea 
Job  3.  26.  neither  was  I  quiet,  yet  t.  came 
5.  6.  neitlier  doth  t.  spring  out  of  the  ground 
7.  yetman  is  born  tot.  as  the  sparks  fly  upward 

14.  1.  man  is  of  a  few  days  and  full  oft. 

15.  24.  t.  and  anguish  shall  make  him  afraid 
27.  9.  will  God  bear  his  cry  when  t.  cometh? 

30.  25.  did  not  I  weep  I'or  him  that  was  in  t.? 
34.  29.  he  giveih  quietness,  who  can  make  t.? 
38.  23.  which  I  reserved  against  the  time  oft 

Psal.  9.  9.  Lord  will  be  a  refuge  in  times  oft 
13.  O  Lord,  consider  my  t.  which  I  suffer 
10.  1.  why  hidest  thou  thyself  in  times  oft./ 
22.  II.  be  not  far  from  me,  for  t.  is  near 

27.  5.  for  in  time  off.  he  shall  hide  me 

31.  7.  I  will  be  glad,  thou  hast  considered  my  £. 
9.  have  mercy  upon  me,  O  Lord,  for  I  am  In  t. 

32,7.  thou  shall  jireserve  me  from  t.  and  compaia 
mo  about  with  songs  of  deliveranco 
.17.  39.  he  is  their  strength  in  the  time  oft. 
41.  1.  the  Lord  will  deliver  him  in  time  oft. 
46.  1.  God  is  our  refuge,  a  present  help  in  t. 
54.  7.  for  he  hath  delivered  me  out  of  t. 
60. 11.  give  us  liclfi  from  t.  vain  is  the  help  of  man 
66.  14.  my  mouth  hath  spoken  when  I  was  in  t. 
69.  17.  hide  not  thy  face  from  me  for  1  a'ln  in  t. 
73.  5.  they  are  not  in  t.  as  other  men 
78.  33.  and  their  years  did  he  consume  en  t. 

49.  he  cast  upon  them  indignation  and  t. 
81.  7.  Ihou  calledst  in  t.  and  I  delivered  thee 
91.  15.  I  will  be  with  him  in  t.  1  will  deliver  him 
102.  2.  hide  not  thy  face  from  me  when  I  am  in  t. 
107.  fi.  they  cried  to  the  Lord  in  Iheir  t.  13.  19. 

26.  their  soul  is  melted  because  of  t. 

28.  then  they  cry  unto  the  Lord  in  their  t. 
1 16.  3.  the  pains  of  hell  gat  hold  on  me,  T  found  I. 
110.  143.  t.  and  anguish  have  taken  hold  on  me 
138.7. Ilio'  I  walk  in  mirlsl  oft.  thou  will  revive  ma 

142.  2.  I  poured  out  my  complaint  before  him,  I 
showed  before  him  my  t. 

143.  11.  O  Lord,  bring  my  soul  out  oft. 
Prov.  11.  3.  righteous  is  delivered  out  of  t.  12.11 

15.  6.  but  in  the  revenues  of  the  wicked  is  t. 

16.  little,  than  great  trcnsure  and  t.  therewith 
25. 19.  confidence  in  an  unfaithful  man  in  t.  it  lik» 


Luke  12. 1.  insomuch  that  they  t.  one  on  another! /ja.  1.  14.  your  new-moons,  they  are  a  t.  to  me 


TRO 

tsa.  8.  K.  ihcy  shall  look  to  the  carlh  and  bchoIJ  t 
17.  H.  uiid  behold,  at  evening  ticl«  t.  and  before 
26.  16.  L.  in  t.  have  they  visited  thee,  poured  out 
30.  6.  into  the  land  oft.  they  will  tarry  riches 
33.  2.  be  thou  our  balvution  also  in  time  oft. 
46.  7.  yet  can  he  not  save  him  out  of  hi:!  t. 
65.  23.  they  shall  not  bring  forth  for  t.  are  need 
Jer  2.  27.  in  time  oft.  they  will  say,  save  us 

28.  if  they  can  save  thee  in  the  time  of  thy  t. 
O.  iC. '•"'  'ookcil  for  health,  and  buhold  (. 
11. 12.  but  sna.i  ..ut  «""»  them  at  all  in  time  oft. 

14.  in  the  time  that  they  cry  lo  me  Tor  'heir  t. 
Ji.  8.  the  Saviour  of  Israel  in  time  oft. 

19.  ws  looked  for  time  of  hialing,  and  behold  t. 
30.  7.  that  day  is  (,'"-"at,  it  is  the  time  of  Jacob's  t. 
I^am.  1.  21.  all  mine  enemies  have  heard  of  my  t. 
Dan.  12.  1.  and  there  shall  be  a  lime  of  t.  such  as 

1  Cor.  7.  28.  such  eliall  have  t.  in  the  flusi 

2  Cor.  1.  4.  be  able  to  comfort  them  which  are  in  t. 
8.  we  would  not  have  you  ignorant  of  our  t. 

2  TVni.  2.  U.  wherein  I  suffer  t.  as  an  evil-doer 
See  D.VY. 
TKOUULES. 
Deut.  31. 17.  many  evils  and  t.  shall  befall  them,  21. 
Job  5.  19.  he  snail  deliver  thee  in  si.xt.  yea  in  seven 
Peal.  25.  17.  the  I.  of  mine  heart  are  enlarged 
2-2.  redeem  Israel,  O  God,  out  of  all  his  t. 

34,  6.  the  Lord  saved  him  out  of  all  his  t. 

71.  20.  thou  which  hast  shewed  me  sore  t.  shall 

88.  3.  incline  thine  ear,  for  my  soul  is  full  oft. 
Prov.  21.  23.  his  tongue,  he  keepeth  his  soul  from  t. 
Isa.  65.  16.  because  former  t.  are  forgotten  and  hid 
Mark  13.  8.  and  there  shall  be  famine  and  t. 

TROUHLE. 
Josh.  6.  18.  lest  ye  t.  the  camp  of  Israel 

7.  25.  Joshua  said,  the  Lord  shall  t.  thee  this  day 
Judg.  11.  35.  thou  art  one  of  them  that  t.  nie 
2  CAr.32.18. they  cried  in  Jews'  language  to  t.them 
Psal.  2.  t  5-  and  t.  them  in  his  sure  displeasure 

3.  1.  Lord,  how  are  they  increased  tliat  L.  me  1 

13.  4.  those  that  t.  me,  rejoice  when  I  am  moved 
Kzek.  32.  13.  neither  shall  the  foot  of  man  t.  them 
any  more,  nor  the  hoofs  of  beasts  t.  them 
Dan.  4.  19.  let  not  the  interprctalion  t.  tlieo 

5.  10.  O  king,  let  not  thy  thoughts  t.  thee 

11.  44.  but  tidings  out  of  the  north  shall  t.  him 
Mat.  26.  10.  why  t.  ye  the  woman  1  Mark  14.  6. 
[.uke  7.6.  Lord,  t.  not  thyself,  for  I  am  not  worthy 

II.  7.  he  shall  say,  t.  me  not,  the  door  is  shut 
^cts  15.  19.  that  we  t.  not  Gentiles  turned  to  God 

16.  20.  those  men  do  exceedingly  t.  our  city 

20.  10.  t.  not  yourselves,  for  his  life  is  in  hirn 
(fal.  1.  7.  but  there  bo  some  that  t^  you  and  pervert 

5.  12.  I  would  they  were  cut  off  who  t.  you 

6.  17.  from  henceforth  let  no  man  t.  me,  for  I  bear 
2  7'/icss.  1.  6.  tribulation  to  thi.'in  that  t.  you 
Hcb.  12.  15.  lest  any  root  of  liittuiness  t.  you 

TROUBLED. 
Gen.  34.  30.  ye  have  t.  me,  to  make  me  lo  stink 
41.  8.  in  the  morning  Pharaoh's  spirit  was  t. 

45.  3.  his  brelhrcn  were  f.  at  his  presence 
Kzod.  14. 24.  the  Lord  t.  the  host  of  the  Egyptians 
Josli.  7.  25.  Joshua  said,  why  hast  thou  t.  us  7 
15am.  14.  29.  Jonrilh.said,my  father  hath  t.  the  land 

16.  14.  and  an  evil  spirit  from  the  Lord  I.  him 
28.  21.  the  woman  saw  that  Saul  was  sore  t. 
2. Sam.  1.  1.  Abncr  dea'd,  all  the  Israelites  were  t. 
1  /iing-s  18.  13.  I  have  not  t.  Israel,  but  thou  and 
iKingst).  11. the  kingofSyria  wa.«  sore  t.  for  this 
£zra  4.  4.  then  the  people  t.  them  in  building 
Job  4.  5.  now  it  toucheth  thee  and  thou  art  t. 

21.  4.  if  it  were  Bii,  why  should  not  my  spirit  bet.  ? 
23.  15.  therefore  am  I  t.  at  his  presence 
34.  20.  and  the  people  shall  be  t.  at  midnight 

Psal.  30.  7.  Ihou  didst  hide  thy  face  and  I  was  (. 
."W.  6.  I  um  t.  II  77.4. 1  am  so  t.  that  I  cannot  speak 
39.  t  2.  I  held  my  peace  and  my  sorrow  was  t. 

46.  3.  though  the  waters  thereof  roar  and  he  t. 
48.  5.  for  the  king*  were  t.  and  hasted  away 
77.3. 1  remembered  God  and  was  1. 1  complained 

16.  the  waters  were  afraid, ;hc  dei>ihs  also  were  t. 

83.  17.  lot  thcni  be  confounded  and  I.  for  ever 

90.  7.  consumed  hy  anger, by  Ihy  wrath  are  wet. 

104.  29.  thou  hid.st  ihv  face, they  arc  t. 
Prov.  2.5.  2ti.  is  ann  t.  I^iunluin  and  corrupt  spring 
Isa.  32.  10.  many  davB  and  years  shall  ye  he  t. 
II.  tremble,  ye  women,  be  t.  yo  carelcsa  ones 

57.  20.  but  the  tvickod  are  liko  (lie  t.  sea 
.Tcr  31.  20.  therefore  my  bnwiN  are  t.  fur  him 
J. am.  1.20.1  am  in  distress,  my  bowels  are  t.  2. 11. 
F.trk.  7.  27.  Iho  han.ls  of  the  people  shall  bo  t. 

26.  18.  the  isles  thai  are  in  the  soa  shall  be  t. 

27.  35.  their  kings  shall  be  (.  in  coMiitenance 
T>nn  2.  I.  Nel)iichadne7.7,ar'B  sjiirit  was  t.  3. 

4   5.  and  Iho  visions  of  my  head  (.  nie,  7.  15. 

19.  Daniel  astonished,  his  thnnghlji  t.  him 
5.  6.  Relshnzzar'g  thoughts  t.  him,  9. 

7.  98.  as  for  mc,  my  cogilalinns  much  t.  me 
T.ick.  10.  2.  were  t.  because  th<  re  was  no  shophcrd 


TRU 

.1/ijt.ll.2G.saw  him  on  sea,  they  were  t.  Mark  0.50. 
24.  6.  see  that  ye  be  not  t.  for  all  ihc.ie  tilings  must 
come  to  pass,  Mark  13.  7.  John  14.  1,  'J?. 
Luke  I.  12.  Zacharius  was  t.  {j  29.  Mary  was  t. 
lU.  41.  Martha,  thou  art  t.  about  many  things 
24.  38.  why  are  ye  t.  and  why  do  thoughts  arise  7 
John  5.  4.  an  angel  went  down  and  t.  the  water 
7.  1  have  no  man  when  water  is  t.  to  put  me  in 
11.  33.  Jesus  groaned  and  was  t.  12.  2T.  |  13.  21. 
..lets  2.  t  6.  the  multitude  were  t.  in  mind 
15.  24.  some  that  went  from  us  have  t.  you 
17.  8.  and  they  t.  the  people  and  Iho  rulers 
2  Cor.  4.  8.  we  are  t.  on  every  side,  7.  5. 
2  T/icss.  1.  7.  and  to  you  that  are  t.  rest  with  us 
2  2.  that  ye  be  not  f.  neither  by  spirit,  by  word 
1  PU.  3.  14.  not  afraid  of  their  terror,  nor  be  t. 

TROUBLEUST. 
Eiek.  32.  2.  and  thtu  I.  the  waters  A'ith  thy  feet 

TROUBLEK. 
1  C/tr.  2.7.  Achat,  the  t.  of  Israel,  who  transgressed 

TROUBLESOME. 
Job  16.  t  2.  I  have  heard  I.  comforters  are  ye  all 
20.  t  22.  every  hand  of  the  t.  shall  come  on  him 

TROUBLEST. 
Mark  5.  35.  why  t.  thou  the  Master  any  further  7 

TROUBLETH. 
1  Sam.  16. 15.  an  evil  spirit  from  God  t.  thee 

1  Killers  18.17.Ahab  said, art  thou  he  that  t.  Israel  7 
./ob  22.  10.  therefore  sudden  fear  t.  thee,  snares,  and 

2ii.  16.  God  makelh  my  heart  soft.  Almighty  I.  me 
ProB.  11.  17.  he  that  is  cruel  t.  his  own  Hesh 
29.  he  that  (.  his  own  house  shall  inherit  wind 
15.  27.  he  that  is  greedy  of  gain  t.  his  own  house 
I)an.  4.  9.  I  know  that  no  secret  t.  thee,  tell  ine 
i.,ukc  18.  5.  because  this  widow  t.  me  I  will  avenge 
Gal.  5.  10.  he  that  t.  you  shall  bear  his  judgment 

TROUBLING. 
Job  3. 17.  there  the  wicked  cease  frftmt.  and  weary 
Ju/tn  5.  4.  who  stepped  in  first  after  t.  of  the  water 

TROUBLOUS. 
/>an.  9.  25.  the  wall  shall  be  built  again  in  t.  limes 

TROUGH,  S. 
Gen.  24.  20.  she  emptied  her  pitcher  into  the  t. 
30.  3S.  Jacob  set  the  rods  in  the  watering  t. 
Erod.  2.  16.  they  filled  the  t.  to  water  their  Hock 
8.  3.  the  frogs  shall  go  into  thy  kneading-t. 
12.  34.  their  kneading-t.  bound  up  in  their  clothes 

TROW. 

Lukcl~.9.  doth  he  thank  that  servant 7  I  t.  not 

TRUCE-BREAKERS. 

2  7'im.  3. 3.  in  the  last  days  men  shall  be  t.-breaktrs 
TRUE. 

See  Signification  on  Truth. 
C?cn.42. 11.  woare  t.  men,  31.  ||  19.  if  ye  be  t.  men 
33.  hereby  shall  I  know  that  ye  are  t.  men,  :J4. 
Dcut-  17.  4.  if  ye  be  t.  and  thing  certain,  22.  20. 
Josh.  2.  12.  swear  unto  me,  and  give  nic  a  t.  token 
Ruth.  3. 12.  it  is  t.  that  I  am  thy  near  kinsman 
2  Sam.  7.  28.  thou  art  that  God,  and  thy  words  be  t. 

1  Kings  10.  G.  it  was  a  t.  report  I  heard,  2  Chr.  9.5. 
22.  16.  tell  nie  nothing  but  that  which  is  t. 

JVt'A.  9. 13.  thou  gavestthcm  t.  laws,  good  statutes 
Psal.  19.  9.  the  judgments  of  the  Lord  are  t. 

IL).  160.  thy  word  is  t.  from  the  beginning 
Prov.  14.  25.  a  t.  witness  delivereth  souls 
Jiir.  42.  5.  the  Lord  be  a  t.  witness  between  us 
Kzck.  18.  8.  he  that  hath  executed  t.  judgment 
Dan.  3.  14.  is  it  t.  O  SImdrach,  do  not  ye  serve 
24.  f.  O  king  ||  6.  12.  king  said,  the  thing  is  t. 

8.  26.  vision  which  is  told  is  t.  shut  up  vision 

10.  1.  a  thing  was  revealed  and  the  thing  was  t. 
Zcch.  7.  9.  execute  t.  judgment  and  shew  mercy 
.W(U.22.  ]6.  we  know  that  thou  art  t.  Mark  12.  14. 
J.iikc  16.  11.  will  commit  to  your  trust  the  t.  riches 
John  1.  9.  that  was  the  t.  light  which  lighteUi  every 

4.23.when  tliet.  worshippers  shall  worship  Father 
37.  and  herein  is  thai  saying  t.  one  sowsth 

5.  31.  if  I  witness  of  myself,  my  witness  i^  not  t. 
32.  the  witness  which  he  wilnesseth  of  nie  ii  {. 

6.  32.  but  my  Father  giveth  you  the  t.  brtfd 

7.  18.  the  same  is  t.  ||  8.  13.  thy  record  is  nov  '■. 
28.  he  that  sent  me  is  t.  whom  ye  know  not,  8.  2? 

8.  14.  yet  my  record  is  t.  ||  16.  my  judgment  is  t. 
17.  it  is  written,  the  lestimony  of  two  men  is  t. 

10.41. all  thingsthat  Johnspakcofthis  man  were  t. 

15.  1. 1  am  the  t.  vine,  my  Father  the  hu^bandman 

19.35.  he  bare  record,  and  his  record  is  t.  21.  24. 

Jlr,l3  12.  9.  wist  nut  that  it  was  t.  which  was  done 

2  Cor.  1.  18.  hut  as  God  is  t.  our  word  was  not  yea 
6.  8.  approving  ourselves,  as  deceivers,  and  yett. 

F.ph.  4.24.now  man  after  G.  is  created  in  t.  holiness 
Phil.  4.  3.  I  entreat  thee  also,  t.  yoke-fellow,  help 

8.  whatsoever  things  arc  (.  think  on  these 
1  Tim.  3.  1.  this  is  a  t.  saying,  if  a  man  desiro 
7'it.  1.  13.  this  witness  is  t.  wherefore  rebuke 
llih.  8.  2.  t.  tabernacle  which  the  Lord  pitched 

9.  24.  holy  places  which  are  figures  of  the  t. 

10.  22.  let  us  draw  near  with  a  t.  heart  in  ftill 
1  P/-t.5.  12.  tlial  this  is  the  (.  grace  of  God  wheiein 


Mat.i.2.  Herod  waft,  and  all  Jerusalem  with  him:  2  Pet.  2.  22.  according  to  the  t.  proverb,  the  dog  is 
644 


TRtJ 

1  /oAnS.  8.  which  thing  is  t.  in  him  and  inyoo,  be 

cause  darkness  past,  the  t.  light  now  shineti 

5. 20.  that  we  may  know  him  that  is  t.  and  we  art 

in  hiiu  that  is  t.  even  in  his  Son  Jesus  Christ 

3  .foltn  12.  and  we  know  that  our  record  is  t. 

Hev.  3.  7.  these  things  saith  the  holy,  he  that  is  ( 

14.  these  things  sailh  the  faithful,  and  t.  witneu 

C.  10.  they  cried,  how  long,  O  Lord,  holy  and  t.  ? 

15.  3.  just  and  t.  are  thy  ways,  thou  king  of  saitits 

16.  7.  t.  and  righteous  are  thy  judgmeuis,  19.  2. 
19.  y.  these  are  the  t.  sayings  of  God,  22.  6. 

11. he  that  sat  upoiihim  was  calledl'aithfulandT' 

21.  5.  write,  for  these  words  are  t.  and  taiihful 

TRUE  God. 
iChron.  15.  3.  Israel  hath  been  without  the  t.  Gad 
./cr.  10.  10.  the  Lord  is  the  t.  God,  the  living  God 
John  17.3.  thistierual  lite,  to  know  the  only  t.  God 
1  Thess.  1.  9.  turned  from  idols  lo  serve  the  t.  GoU 

1  John  5.  20.  this  is  the  t.  God  and  eternal  life 

TRULY. 
Gen.  24.  49.  and  now  if  ye  will  deal  t.  47.  29. 
4«.  19.  t.  his  younger  brother  shall  be  greater 
JVicm.  14.  21.  as  t.  as  I  live,  saith  the  Lord,  28. 
JJeut.  14.22.  Ihou  shall  t.  tithe  the  increase  of  seed 
.losh.±  14.  that  we  will  deal  t.  and  kindly  with  thee 

24.  t.  the  Lord  hath  delivered  all  the  land 
Judg  9.  16.  if  ye  have  dune  t.  and  sincerely,  19. 
lA'a/H.20.3.(. there  is  bulslephetween  me  and  death 
Job  36.  4.  for  t.  my  words  shall  not  be  false 
i's«Z.62.  1. 1.  my  soul  waiteth  upun  God,  from  him 
73.  1.  t.  God  is  good  to  Israel,  even  to  such  as  are 
116.  16.  t.  1  am  thy  servant,  1  am  thy  servant 
I'ruu.  12.  22.  they  that  deal  t.  are  his  delight 
Keel.  11.  7.  t.  the  light  is  sweet,  and  pleasaiii  thing 
Jer.3.  23.  t.  in  vain  is  salvation  hoped  for  from  hills, 
t.  in  the  Lord  (jod  is  the  salvation  of  Israel 

10.  111.  t.  this  is  a  grief  and  I  must  bear  it 

28.  9.  be  known  that  Uie  Lord  hath  t.  sent  him 
Kzeh.  18.  9.  hath  kept  my  judgments  to  deal  t. 
.I/ic.  3.  8.  but  t.  I  am  full  of  power  to  declare 
.1/at  9.  37.  the  harvest  t.  is  plenteous,  /.ttke  10.2. 

17.  U.Elias  t. shall  first  come  and  restore  all  thing! 
27.  54.  saying,  t.  this  was  the  Son  of  God 

Mark  14. 38.  the  spirit  t.  is  ready,  the  Hesh  is  weak 
f.uke  20.  21.  hut  Ihou  teachcst  the  way  of  God  t. 

22.  22.  t.  Son  of  man  goeth,as  it  was  determined 
John  4. 18. 1  have  no  husband,  in  that  saidst  thou  f. 

17.  t  19.  that  thty  also  might  be  t.  sanctified 
Jlcts  1.  5.  fur  John  t.  baptized  with  water,  ye  shall 
3.  22.  for  Moses  t.  said  to  the  fathers,  a  prophet 

5.  2.3.  the  prison  t.  found  we  shut  with  safety 

2  Cur.  12.  12.  t.  signs  of  an  apostle  were  wrought 
Hcb.  7.23.  and  they  t.  were  many  priests,  because 

ll.M.t.  if  Ihey  had  been  niindfulof  that  country 
1  .John  1.  3.  t.our  fellowship  is  with  the  Father 

TRUMP. 
1  Cur.  15.  52.  at  the  lust  t.  the  dead  shall  be  raised 

1  Thess.  4.  lO.Lord.-^hall descend  with  thct.  ofGoU 

TRUMPET.  ^ 
See  Signification  on  Fe.vst.  ' 

Exod.  19.  16.  the  voice  of  the  t.  exceeding  loud 
20.  18.  the  pcoi)le  hoard  the  noise  of  the  t. 
jViiin.  10.  4.  and  if  llicy  blow  but  with  one  t. 
.Iiidg.  7.  16.  and  he  put  a  t.  in  evr.ry  man's  hand 

1)-'.  when  I  blow  with  a  t.  then  blo>v  ye  also 
Psal.  HI.  3.  blow  up  the  t.  in  the  new  moon 
[sa.  18.  3.  and  when  he  blowe;!i  r.  t.  hoar  yo 
27.  13.  that  the  great  t.  shall  bo  blown  and  coint 
58.  I.  cry  aloud,  lift  up  thy  voice  like  at. 
Jir.  4.  5.  blow  ye  the  t.  in  the  land,  cry,  gather 

6.  1.  blow  the  t.  in  Tekoah  un<l  set  up  n  sign 
51.  27.  blow  the  t.  among  the  nations,  prepare 

Eiek.l.  14.  they  have  blown  the  t.to  make  read; 
33.  3.  if  hi'  blow  the  t.  and  warn  the  peoplu 

6.  but  if  Itie  watchman  blow  not  the  t. 
Hos.  5.  8.  blow  ye  the  t.  in  Ramali,  cry  aloud 

8.  I.  set  the  t.  to  thy  muiiib,  he  shall  come 
./ofl  2.  1.  blow  the  t.  in  Zioii,  sound  alarm,  1.1. 
.^/n().'!3.6. shall  a  t.  be  blown,  and  people  not  ufraidi 
P.rph.  1.  16.  a  dav  of  the  t.  against  lenceil  cili"«ii 
reeh.  9.  14.  and  {he  Lord  God  shall  blow  tJie  i 
Hr:".  1.  10.  I  heard  a  grtnt  voice,  as  of  a  t.  4.  1. 

H.  iT   bv  r<:«son  of  the  other  voices  of  the  t. 

9.  11.  sj-inp  t;>  the  sixth  aneel  wh^ch  htd  '.as  t. 

See  Blew,  Soi-vn,  Subst.  y.n-b. 

tr;'mpf,t3. 

f.rr.  23.  24.  »  niBLiorial  of  blowing  t.J^iim.lSk.l 
JV^tvt.  10.  2.  make  lw»j  t.  of  s-.lvor  o.'  a  whcle  piMjn 

8.  the  sons  of  .Aaron  shell  blow  with  the  t. 

9.  then  shall  ye  blow  an  alarm  wi'h  Ihe  t. 

10.  shall  blow  with  t.  over  your  burnl-ofrcrinfj 
31.  6.  and  with  the  t.  to  hloxv  in  his  hand 

./ash.  6.  4.  Iho  priests  shall  blow  with  the  t. 

8.  priests  bearing  ihc  seven  t.  of  rams'  horn* 

9.  the  priests  that  blew  with  the  t.  13,  16,  20. 
■fudg.  7.  8.  Iho  two  hundred  men  look  t.  10. 

IH.when  I  blow,  then  blow  ye  the  t.  on  every  lide 
19.  Ihi'y  blew  the  t.  brake  the  pitchers,  20,  22. 

2  Kinirs'.lAX  ihey  blew  with  t.  saying,  Jehu  is  kinj 

11.  H.  and  trumpeters  blew  with  (.  and  cymball 


TRU 

2/rt'nff-sl2.  VI  woronot  innde  for  house  of  tlieLcI.t 
IChron.  lit.  8.  piuyeil  with  cjiabals  uiid  wiih  l. 
»i>.  24.  the  priests  did  blow  with  t.  bcloro  urk  of 
God,  le.  6,  42.  2  C/ir.  5. 12.  |  7. 0.  |  K(.  12, 14. 
28.all  Israel  brought  up  tlie ark  with  (.und  ci-inh. 
S  Chroii.  5.  i;{.  when  they  lift  up  liieir  voice  witli  l. 
2y.  27.  the  song  of  the  Lord  began  witli  the  t. 
Job  li'J.  25.  the  horse  saiih  aiiiooi;  tl>e  t.  ha,  im  I 
Psai.  98.  6.  with  t.  make  u  joy fut  noise  before  Lord 
See  tJKVKN. 
TRUMPETERS. 
8  Kings  11.  14.  princes  and  t.  stood  by  tlie  king 
2  ChroH.  5.  13.  as  the  t.  and  siiigers  were  as  one 
3U.  28.  the  singers  sang,  and  the  t.  sounded 
Rev- 1^-  22.  tlic  voice  of  t.  shall  be  heard  ao  more 
'    ■  ,    TRUST. 

1  Chron.  9.  f  22.  whom  David  did  ordain  in  their  I. 
t  2b.  thelour  chief  porters  were  in  their  t. 

t  31.  Mattithiali  had  the  t.  over  things  in  pans 

Job  8.  14.  an<l  wliose  I.  shall  be  a  spider's  web 
15.  15.  behold,  he  puttetii  no  t.  in  his  sainis 

PsalAOA.  blessed  is  he  that  makcth  the  Lord  his  t. 
71.  5.  O  Lord  God,  thou  art  my  £.  from  my  youth 
141.  8.  in  thee  is  my  t.  leave  not  my  soul  destitute 

-roi).  i2.  19.  that  thy  t.  may  be  in  the  Lord 
S8.23.  that  puts  his  t.  in  the  Lord  shall  be  made  fat 
29.  25.  who  puttelh  his  t.  in  the  Lord  shall  be  safe 

'sa.  30.  3.  the  t.  in  Egypt  shall  he  your  confusion 

57. 13.  that  putteth  t.  in  me  shall  possess  the  land 
LuUe  16.  11.  commit  to  your  (.  the  true  riches'! 

Cur.S. 4. such  t.  have  we  thro'Uhrist  to  God-ward 

kTim.  1.11. gospel,  which  was  committed  to  my  £. 

6.  20.  keep  that  which  is  committed  to  thy  t. 

Sec  Put. 

TRUST,  reri. 

Rutk  2.12.  under  whose  wings  thou  art  come  to  t. 

2  Sam.  22.  3.  in  him  will  1 1.  Psul.  18.  2.  1  91.  2. 
31.  a  buckler  to  all  that  I.  in  him,  Psal.  18.  30. 

iKings  18.  20.  now  on  whom  dost  thou  t.  thaire- 

bellest  against  me  ?  2  CUr.  32.  10.  ha.  35.  5. 

21.S0  Is  Pliaraoh  to  all  that  t.  in  him,  Isa.'.i'o.ii. 

22.  if  ye  say,  wo  t.  in  Lord  our  God,  Ua.  3tj.  7. 

30.  neither  let  Hezekiah  make  you  t.  in  the  Lord, 

saying.  Lord  will  deliver  us,  Isa.  30.  15. 

Job  13. 15.  though  he  slay  me,  yet  will  I  t.  in  him 

15.  31.  let  nothim  that  is  deceived  t.  in  vanity 

35. 14.  judgment  is  before  him,  therefore  t.\n  him 
39.  11.  wilt  thou  t.  him  because  he  is  strong! 

P*aZ.  20.  7.  some  (.in  chariots,  and  some  in  horses 
25.  2.  I  t.  in  thee,  31.  0.  |  55.  23.  |  50.  3.  j  143.  8. 
31.  19.  thou  hast  wrought  for  thuni  tbati.  in  thee 
34.  22.  none  that  t.  in  him  shall  be  desolate 
37.  3.  t.  in  the  Lord,  5.  ]  40.  .3.  |  62.  8.  |  115.  9, 
10,  11.  Prov.  3.  .5.  ha.  26.  4. 
40.  he  shall  save  them,  because  they  t.  in  him 
44.  6. 1  will  not  I.  in  my  bpw,  nor  shall  sword  save 
49.  6.  they  thatt.  in  their  wealth,  and  boast 
52.  8. 1  ^.  in  the  mercy  of  God  for  ever  and  ever 
61.  4.  I  will  t.  in  the  covert  of  thy  wings 
02.  10.  t.  not  in  oppression,  become  not  vain 
'    64.  10.  the  righteous  shall  be  glad,  and  t.  in  him 
91.  4.  and  under  his  wings  shalt  thou  t. 
118. 8.  it  is  belter  to  t.  in  the  Lord  than  to  put,  9. 
119.  42.  Ishallhavetoanswer,  for  l£.  in  thy  word 
125. 1.  that «.  in  the  Lord  shall  be  as  mount  Zion 
144.  2.  my  fortress,  my  shield,  and  he  in  whom  1 1. 
Pro«.  31. 11.  the  heart  of  her  husband  doth  Mn  her 
y.?(i.l2.2.God  my  salvation, Iwill  (.and  not  be  afraid 
14. 32.  Zion,  and  the  poor  of  his  people  shall  (.  in  it 
30.2.  and  to  (.  in  the  shadow  of  Egyj)t 

10.  because  ye  (.  in  opjiression  and  perverseness 
31.1.  and  t.  in  chariots,  because  they  are  inany 
42.  17.  he  ashamed  that  I.  in  graven  images 

50. 10.  let  him  (.  in  the  name  of  the  Loid  and  stay 
51.  .5.  wait  on  me,  and  on  mine  arm  shall  they  (. 
50.4.they  t.\n  vanity  and  speak  lies,  they  conceive 

Jcr.  7. 4.  (.  ye  not  in  lying  wonls,  saying,  the  temple 

8.  ye  (..  in  lying  words  that  caiuiot  profit 

14.  which  is  called  by  my  name,  wherein  yc  t. 

B.  4.  take  ye  heed,  and  t.  ve  not  in  any  brother 

23.  15.  makest  this  pcople'to  t.  in  a  lie,  29.  31. 

46.  25. 1  will  punish  Pharaoh  and  all  that  (.  in  him 

49. 11.  them  alive,  and  let  thy  widows  (.  in  me 
Ezek.  16.  15.  but  thou  didst  (.  in  thy  beauty 

33.13.  ifhci;.  to  his  own  righteousness  and  commit 
Ilos.  10.  13.  because  thou  didst  t.  in  thy  way 
Jimo.i  6. 1.  them  that  (.  in  the  mountain  of  Samaria 
Jl/ic.  7.  5.  (.  ye  not  in  a  friend,  |)ut  nut  confidence 
JVuA.  1.  7.  the  Lord  knoweth  them  that  (.  in  him 
y.c.ph.  3.  12.  they  shall  t.  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
Mat.  12.  21.  and  In  his  name  shall  the  Gentiles  (. 
Rom.  15.  12. 
Mark  10.  24.  how  hard  for  them  that  t.  in  riches 
Tohn^.ih.  one  that  accuscth,  JNIosesin  whom  ye  I. 
Rom.  15.  24.  for  I  (.  to  see  you  in  my  journey 
I  Cor.  Ifi.  7.  but  I  t.  to  tarry  awhile  with  you 
8Cyr.l.9.  that  we  should  not  (.  in  onrsrlv.  but  inG. 
10.  m  whom  we  (.  that  he  will  yet  deliver  us 
13  I.  (.  you  shall  acknowledge  even  to  the  end 
6. 11.  I  t.  aro  made  manifest  in  ycur  consciences 
64S 


TRU 

2  Cor.  10.7.  ifmant.  to  himself,  that  he  is  Christ's 
13.  G.  1  t.  ye  shall  know  we  aro  not  reprobates 
Plul.  3.  4.  if  any  thinketh  he  hath  whereof  to  (. 

1  'y'im.4.  10.  because  we  (.  in  the  living  God 

6.  17.  that  they  t.  not  in  uncertain  riches,  but  in 
Hcb.  13.  18.  for  we  t.  we  have  a  good  conscience 

2  .John  12.  but  1  (.  to  come  unto  you  and  sjieak 

3  Jolm  14.  but  I  (.  I  shall  shoi  i  ly  see  thee  and  speak 

TRUSTED. 
Dcul.  32.  37.  where  is  their  rock  in  whom  they  (..' 
.ludg.  11.  20.  Sihon  (.  not  Israel  to  pass  through 
20.  36.  because  tiicy  t.  to  the  liers  in  wait 
2  Kings  18.  5.  he  i.  in  the  Lord  God  of  Israel 
f  S.13.  5.  but  I  have  t.  in  thy  mercy,  my  heart  shall 
22.  4.  our  fathers  (.  in  thee;  they  have  /.  and  thou 
didst  deliver  them,  5. 
6.  he  t.  on  the  Lord  that  he  would  deliver  him 
26. 1.  I  have  t.  also  in  the  Lord,  28.  7.  |  31.  14. 

33.  21.  because  we  have  t.  in  his  holy  name 

41.9.  mine  own  familiar  friend  in  whom  I  I. 
52.  7.  but  (.  in  the  abundance  of  his  riches 
78.  22.  because  they  t.  not  in  his  salvation 

ha.  47. 10.  for  thou  hast  (.  in  thy  wickedness 
Jcr.  13.  25.  because  thou  hast  (.  in  falsehood 

48.  7.  for  because  thou  hast  (.  in  thy  works 

49.  4.  O  daughter  that  (.  in  her  treasures,  sayin^ 
7)071.3.28.  G.deliverethhis  servants  that  (.  in  him 
Zcpk.  3.  2.  she  t.  not  in  the  Lord,  she  d  rew  not  near 
^>/u(..27. 43.  he  (.  in  God,  let  him  deliver  him  now 
L,%ikc  11.  22.  laketh  all  his  armour  wherein  he  (. 

18.  9.  he  spake  to  certain  which  t.  in  themselves 
24.  21.  we  t.  it  had  been  he  that  redeemed  Israel 

Eph.  1. 12.  praise  of  his  glory,  who  first  Mn  Christ 
13.  in  whom  ye  also£.  after  ye  heard  the  word 

2  Tim.  1.  t  12.  for  I  know  whom  I  have  I. 

1  Pet.  3.  5.  holy  women  who  (.  in  God,  adorned 

TRUSTEDST. 

Deut.  28.  52.  thy  walls  come  down  wherein  thou  ( 

J(7r.5.17.shall  impoverish  thy  cities  wherein  thou  t 

12.  5.  if  in  the  land  of  peace  wherein  thou  (. 

TRUSTEST. 

2  Kivgs  18.19.  thus  saith  the  king  of  Assyria,  what 

confidence  is  this  wherein  thou  t.?  ha.  3(i.  4. 
21.  thou  (.  on  stalfof this  bruised  reed,  ha.  .30.  ti. 

19. 10.  lot  not  thy  God  in  wlmm  thou  (.  ha.  37.  10. 

TRUSTETH. 
Job  24.  t  22.  he  riseth  up  and  t.  not  his  own  life 

40.  23.  he  (.  that  he  can  draw  up  Jordan  into  his 
Psal.  21.  7.  for  the  king  t.  in  the  Lord  thro'  mercy 

32.10.that  t.  in  the  Lord  mercy  shall  compass  him 

34.  8.  Lord  is  good,  blessed  is  the  man  that  (.  in 

him,  84.  12.  Prov.  16.  20.  ./cr.  17.  7. 
57.  1.  be  merciful  unto  me,  for  my  soul  (.  in  thee 
86.  2. 0  my  God,  save  thy  servant  that  (.  in  thee 
115.8.  so  is  every  one  that  (.  in  them,  135.  18 
Prov.  11.  28.  he  that  t.  in  his  riches  shall  fall 
26.  26.  be  that  t.  in  his  ov/n  heart  is  a  fool 
/sa.26.3.will  keep  him  in  peace  because  he  (.in  thee 
./«-.  17.  5.  cursed  be  the  inan  that  (.  in  man 
Hub.  2.  18.  the  maker  of  his  work  (.  therein 
1  Tim.  5.  5.  she  (hat  is  a  widow  indeed,  (.  in  God 

TRUSTING. 
Psal.  112.  7.  his  heRrt  is  fi.xed,  (.  in  the  Lord 

TRUSTY. 
Job  12.  20.  he  removeth  away  the  speech  of  the(. 

TRUTH 
h  taken  (1)  For  what  is  opposed  to  a  falsehood, 
a  lie,  a  deceit.  Prov.  12.  17,  He  that  speaketh 
truth,  sheweth  forth  righteousness  ;  but  a  false 
witness  deceit,  .^nd  St,  Paul  says,  I  speak 
the  truth  in  Christ,  I  lie  not.  (2)  For  fidcli 
ty,  sincerity,  and  punctuality  in  kerjiing  pro- 
mises. Generally  to  truth,  taken  in  this 
sense,  is  joined  mercy  nr  kindness,  as  iti  Gen. 
24.  27.  Eliezcr,  the  servant  of  JJbraham,  gives 
thanks  to  God,  that  ho  had  not  left  dcslitu-te 
his  master  of  his  mercy  and  his  truth:  He  hath 
shewed  him  his  mercy  in  giving  him  plenty  of 
good  things,  andhis  truth  in  fulfilling  and  per- 
forming  all  his  promises  to  him.  Or,  mercy 
and  truth  may  express  a  stable,  constant,  and 
permanentmercy  or  kindness ;  that  is,  "Illns.<:- 
cd  be  the  f.ord,  who  has  favoured  my  mrt.s(cr 
.Abraham  in  so  constant  and  uniform  a  man- 
ner." The  Psalmist  in  several  places  (ottils 
the  mercy  and  truth  of  God,  It  is  his  mercy 
that  prevents  and  promises,  and  it  is  his  truth 
that  executes  and  performs.  In  Psal.  57.  10. 
he  says,  Thy  mercy  is  great  unio  the  heavens, 
and  thy  truth  unto  the  clouds.  This  erprcsses 
their  greatness,  immensity,  and  extent :  and 
that  all  creatures  partake  of  them.  (3)  Truth 
is  put  for  the  true  doctrine  of  the  gospel.  Gal. 
3.  1,  Who  halh  bewitched  you,  that  you  should 
not  obey  the  truth?  (4)  Trulli  is  put  for  the 
substance  of  the  types  and  ceremonies  of  the 
law.  John  1.  17,  The  law  was  given  by  Moses, 
but  grace  and  truth  came  by  Jesus  Christ; 
The  fulfilling  of  all  the  types  and  prophecies 
in  the  law,  wot  by  and  in  Christ.  So  in  John  14. 


TRU 

C,  lam  the  (rii(A  "/am  the  truth  and  tub- 
stance  of  all  the  types  and  shadows  of  ..fta 
law  .•"  Or,  say  others,  "  /  am  the  great  doctiT 
of  my  church,  who  teach  them  what  course  to 
take  to  get  to  heaven."  (5)  True  is  put  for 
reality,  and  is  opposed  to  that  which  is  not  ori- 
ginal and  of  itself.  Eph.  4.  21.  John  1.  9. 
That  was  the  true  light:  Christ  has  light  m 
himself,  and  from  himself^  he  is  the  original 
fountain-light,  from  whence  light  is  derived  to 
all  others,  ifi)  True  is  opposed  to  hypocrisy, 
dissimulation,  or  formality.  IJeb.  10.  22,  Let 
us  draw  near  with  a  true  heart;  that  is, 
with  uprightness,  integrity,  and  sincerity^  of 
heart. 

Gen.  24.  27.  hath  not  left  destitute  master  of  his  t. 
32.  10.  I  am  not  worthy  of  the  least  of  all  the  £. 
42.  16.  he  proved,  whether  there  be  any  (.  in  you 

Kxod.  18.  21.  men  of  (.  ||  34.  6.  Lord  abundant  in  ( 

Deut.  13.  14.  behold  if  it  be  (.  ||  32.  4.  a  God  of*. 

2  Sam.  2.  0.  the  Lord  shew  kindness  and  (.  toyoUl* 
15.  20.  return  thou,  mercy  and  t.  he  with  thee 

\Kings\l.  24. the  wordof  thoLd.  inthy  mouth  is <. 

2A'ir(irs20.iy.if|)eace  and  (.be  in  my  days,/sa.39.8. 

2  Chron.  18. 15.  that  thou  say  nothing  but  the  (. 
31.  20.  Hezekiah  wrought  that  which  was  {. 

JW7i.  9.  t  13.  and  thou  gavcst  them  laws  oft. 

/;■>(//.  9. 30.  sent  letters  wiih  words  of  peace  and  ( 

Psal.  15.  2.  he  that  spcakuth  the  (.in  his  heart 

25.  10.  the  paths  of  the  Lord  are  mercy  and  (. 
31.  5.  thou  hast  redeemed  me,  O  Lord  God  oft. 
45.  4.  ridu  thou  prosperously,  because  oft. 

51.  6.  thou  desirest  (.  in  theinwaid  parts 
57.  3.  God  shall  send  forth  his  mercy  and  liie't. 
(0.  4.  banner  may  be  displayed  because  of  the  t. 
61.7.  O  prepare  mercy  and-  (.  which  may  preserve 
85. 10.  mercy  and  (.  are  met  togeiher,  right,  peace 
11.  (.  shall  spring  out  of  the  earth,  and  righteous 
86.  15.  thou  art  plenteous  in  mercy  and  (. 
89.  14.  mercy  and  t.  shall  go  before  thv  face 
91.  4.  his  (.  shall  be  thy  shield  and  buckler 
96.  13.  he  shall  judge  the  people  wiih  his  (. 
98.  3.  he  hath  remembered  his  mercy  ami  hiw  t. 
100.  5.  his  t.  endurelh  to  all  gentration.'s,  117.  2 
119.  30. 1  have  chosen  the  way  of/,  thy  judgment* 
119.  142.  and  thy  law  is  the  (.  151. 
146.  6.  the  Lord  is  God  who  keepcth  t.  for  ever 

Prov.  3.3.  let  not  mercy  and  (.  forSMke  thee 
8.7. for  my  mouth  shall  speak  (.wickedness  aboni. 
12.  17.  he  that  speaks  (.  sheweth  righteousness 

19.  the  lip  of  (.  shall  be  established  for  ever 
14.  22.  mercy  *nd  (.  be  to  them  that  devise  good 
16.6.  by  mercy  and  (.  iniquity  is  purged  by  the  ftar 
20.2.-'.  mercy  and  t.  preserve  the  king,  his  throne 
22.21.  mi^hlmake  thee  know  the  cerlaitity  ofthe 
words  ot  (.  thou  mightest  answorth(!  words  oft 
2.S.  23.  buy  the  (.  and  sell  it  ma,  also  wisdom 

F.ccl.  12.  10.  what  was  written  were  words  oft. 

ha.  25.  1.  thy  counsels  are  faithfulness  and  (. 

26.  2.  the  nation  whicli  keepelh  (.  may  enter  in 

42.  3.  he  shall  bring  fiirth  judgment  unto  (. 

43.  9.  or  let  them  hear,  and  s.iy,  it  is  (. 

59.  4.  nor  any  pl(!adeth  for  (.  they  speak  lies 

14.  fort,  is  fallen  in  the  street  and  equity  cannot 

15.  yea  (.  failetli,  and  he  thatdepaitcth  trom  evil 
■/f  r.  5.  1.  if  there  be  any  thatseekcth  the  (. 

3.  O  Lord,  are  not  thine  eyes  upon  the  t.f 
7.  28.  t.  is  perished  and  cut  of)' from  tlicii  mouth 

9.  3.  they  are  not  valiant  for  the  (.  on  the  earth 
5.  they  will  deceive  and  will  not  speak  the  t. 

10.  t  10.  hot  the  Lord  is  the  God  of  (. 

14.  t  13.  I  will  give  you  pence  of  (.  in  this  place 
33. 6.  rercaird  to  Ibf-m  abundance  of  peace  and  t. 
Dari.A.W'i.lhc  king  of  heaven, all  whose  works  are  t. 

7.  16. 1  asked  him  the  (.of  all  \h\?,  19. 

8. 12.  and  it  cast  down  the  (.  to  ihe  ground 

10.  21.  whiihis  noted  in  the  scripture  oft. 

11.  2.  and  nuw  will  I  shew  thee  the  t.  behold 
Jfos.  4.  1.  there  is  no  (.  nor  mercy  in  the  land 
JUicl.  20.  thou  wilt  perform  the  (.  to  Jacob 
Zceh."!.  t9.  fnyinp,jiidpo  judgment  of  (.  and  shew 

8.  3.  Jerusalem  shall  be  called  n  city  oft. 

16.  speak  ye  every  ninn  the  t.  F.ph.i.  25.  execute 

the  judgment  oft.  and  peace  in  your  gates 
19.  therefore  love  the  t.  and  [loace 
.Mtil.".  6.  the  law  oft.  was  in  his  mouth 
Jl^it.l5.27.she  said,(.LoFd,  yet  dogs  ent  the  crumbs 
Mark  a.  33.  Ihe  woman  feaiing  told  him  all  the  t. 
12..32.<cribcssaid,well,Master,tliou  li.istsaid  thet. 
John  T.  11.  the  only-begotten,  full  of  grace  and  ^ 

17.  but  grace  and  (.  came  by  Jesus  Christ 

5.  .33.  ve  sent  John,  he  bare  witness  unto  ihe  t. 
8.32.yc  shall  know  the  t.  the  (.  s-hall  make  you  free 
40.  ye  seek  to  kill  me,  a  man  tnat  told  you  the  t. 

44.  abode  not  in  (.  because  there  is  no  (.  in  him 

45.  becau-^e  I  tell  you  Ihe  t.  ye  believe  me  not 
40.  and  ifi  say  the  t.  why  do  ye  rot  believe'? 

14.  6.  1  am  the  way,  ai.d  the  (.  and  ihe  life 
16.  7.  I  tell  you  (.  it  is  r-Tpodient  thai  I  go  r.wny 
13.  Ihe  Ppi.'it  oft.  will  guide  you  into  all  t. 


TRU 

JUr  17. 19.  thay  might  be  sanctified  through  the  t. 
lb.  37.  1  caiim  thai  1  should  bearwiineiib  lu  thet. 
every  one  that  is  of  the  t.  heareth  my  voice 
38.  Pilate  saiih  unto  hiiu  what  is  t.  ? 
Sets  2li.  i23.  but  1  speak  t'orih  tiie  words  oft. 
Honi.  I.  Id.  who  hold  the  t.  in  unrighteousness 
ii5.  who  changed  the  t.  of  God  iuio  a  lie 

8.  'i.  tiie  judgment  of  God  is  according  to  t. 
8.  but  unto  tiieni  that  do  not  obey  the  t. 

20.  which  hast  the  form  of tlie  t.  in  the  law 

3.  7.  for  if  the  t.  of  God  hath  more  abounded 

9.  1. 1  say  the  t.  in  Christ,  I  lie  not,  my  conscience 
15.8.  was  a  minister  of  circumcision  for  t.  of  God 

1  Cor.  5.  8.  but  with  the  unleavened  bread  of  t. 

2  C<)r.4.i.but  by  manifestation  of  theJ. commending 
7.  14.  even  so  our  buusting  I  made  is  found  u  (. 

11.  lU.  as  the  t.  of  Christ  is  in  tne  none  shall  stop 

12.  <).  1  shall  not  be  a  fool,  for  I  will  say  the  t. 

13.  8.  we  can  do  nothing  against  I.  but  fur  the  {. 
Oal.  2.  5.  the  (.  of  the  gospel  nii«;ntcontinue  with 
^h4.  they  walked  not  according  to  t.  of  the  gospel 

aTl.  that  ye  should  not  obey  the  I.  5.  7. 

4.  16.  your  enemy,  because  I  tell  you  the  t.  7 
Epk.  4.  15.  but  speaking  the  t.  in  love,  may  grow 

21.  iiave  been  taught  by  him  as  the  t.  is  in  Jesus 
t24.  alter  God  is  created  in  holiness  oft. 

5.  9.  for  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  in  all  t. 

6.  14.  stand  having  your  loins  girt  about  with  t. 
S  Thess.  2.  10.  they  received  not  the  love  of  the  t. 

12.  might  be  damned,  who  believed  not  t. 

13.  hath  chosen  to  salvation,  thro' belief  of  the  £. 

1  Tim.  2.  4.  to  come  to  the  knowled'ge  of  the  t. 

7.  I  speak  the  t.  in  Christ  and  lie  not 

3.  15.  the  church,  the  pillar  and  ground  off. 
A.  3.  to  be  received  of  them  which  know  the  t. 
6.  5.  men  of  corrujit  minds,  and  destitute  of  the  t. 

2  Tim.  2.  18.  who  concerning  the  t.  have  erred 
2.5.  give  repentance  to  acknowledging  of  the  t. 

3.  7.  not  able  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  t. 
S.  asJannesand  Jambres,  so  do  these  resist  the  t. 

4.  4.  they  shall  turn  away  their  ears  from  the  t. 
Til.  1.  I.  according  to  the  acknowledging  of  the  ^ 

14.  commandments  of  men  that  turn  from  the  t. 
Hcb.  10.  2t).  after  we  received  knowledge  <»fthc^ 
Jam.  3.  14.  glory  not,  and  lie  not  against  the  t. 

a.  19.  brethren,  if  any  of  you  err  from  the  t. 

1  Pet.  1.32.  have  purified  your  souls  in  obeying  t. 

2  Hut,  2.  2.  the  way  off.  shall  be  evil  spoken  of 
IJoAn  1.6.  walk  in  darkness  we  lie  and  do  not  the  f. 

8.  we  deceive  ourselves,  the  t.  is  not  in  us 

2.  4.  the  t.  is  not  in  him  [j  27.  is  t.  and  is  no  lie 
21. 1  have  not  written,  because  ye  know  not  the  t. 

but  because  ye  know  it,  and  no  lie  is  of  the  t. 

3.  19.  and  hereby  we  know  that  we  are  ofthe  t. 
a.  6.  benreth  wiiness,  because  the  Spirit  is  t. 

2  Jolin  I.  but  also  all  they  that  have  known  tlie  t. 
2.  for  the  t.  sake  that  dwelleth  in  us,  and  with  us 

3  John  3.  came  ami  testified  of  the  t.  that  is  in  thee 
8.  that  we  might  be  fellow-helpers  to  the  t. 

12.  hath  good  report  of  all  men  and  ofthe  t. 
hi  TRUTH. 
Josh.  24.  14.  serve  him  in  1. 1  Sam.  12.  24. 
Judg.  9.  15.  if  jTi  t.  ye  anoint  me  king  over  you 

1  Kingsi.  4.  walk  in  1. 1|  3.  6.  as  he  walked  in  t. 

2  Kingn  20.  3.  remember  how  I  have  walked  in  t. 
Fsal.  33.  4.  all  his  works  are  done  iyi  t.  111.  8. 

37.  t  3.  simit  dwell,  and  in  t.  thou  shalt  be  fed 
132.  11.  the  Lord  hath  sworn  in  t.  to  David 
145.  18.  liOi  d  is  ni£;h  lo  all  I  hat  call  ujion  him  in  t. 

ha.  10.  20.  shall  stay  on  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  in  t. 
10. 5.  he  shall  sit  upon  it  in  t.  judging  and  seeking 
48, 1.  make  mention  of  God  of  Israel,  but  not  m  t. 
61.  8.  I  will  diri'Ct  their  work  in  t.  and  make 

Jer.  4.  2.  thou  shall  swear,  the  Lord  liveih  in  t. 
;K.  t  41.  1  will  plant  them  in  this  land  jn  t. 

y.rrh.f*  H.  I  will  be  their  God  in  t.  and  righteousness 

Mat.-2-i.  le.tenchest  the  way  of  G.  in  t.  Mark  12.14. 

John  4.  23.  shall  worship  him  in  spirit  and  in  t.  24. 

2  Cor.  7.  14.  as  we  speak  all  things  to  you  in  t. 

Phil.  1.  18.  whether  in  t.  Christ  Is  preached 

Col.  1.  6.  sin'-e  ye  knew  the  grace  of  God  in  t. 

1  Thesf.  2.  13.  but  as  it  is  in  t.  the  word  of  God 

1  John  3.  18.  lit  us  not  lovp  in  tongue,  but  in  t. 

2  John  3.  the  Son  ofthe  futhrr,  in  t.  and  love 

4. 1  rejoiced,  that  I  found  of  thy  children  walking 
tnt.  as  commanded  from  the  Father,3  Ju/in  4. 
In  the  TRUTH. 
P.ial.  60.  13.  hear  mo  in  the  t.  of  ihy  salvation 
John  8.44. he  was  a  murderer  and  abode  not  In  the  t. 

1  Cor.  13.  •).  but  charity  njoiceth  in  the  t. 

2  Pet.  1.  12.  tho'  ye  bo  established  in  the  present  t. 
i  .John  1.  elect  lady,  whom  I  lovein  (lAc  «.  3,/oAn  1. 
3.fohn  3.  even  as  thou  wnlkest  in  the  t. 

Of  a  TRUTH. 
1  .1ttm.^^.!i.  of  a  t.  women  have  been  kept  from  us 
tilings  in.  l7.  of  a  t.  Liird,  the  kings  of  Assyria 
have  destroyed  the  nations,  Isa.  37.  18 
Job  9.  2.  I  know  it  is  so  of  a  t.  but  how  should  man 
ha.  f>  9.  of  a  I.  many  houses  shall  be  desolate 
Jtr.  26.  15.  for  of  a  t.  the  Lord  bath  sent  me  to  you 
648 


TUM 

Dan.  2.  47.  of  a  t.  it  is,  your  God  is  a  God  of  gods 
Mat.  14.  33.  of  a  t.  thou  art  the  Son  of  God 
J.uke  4.  25.  but  1  tell  you  of  a  I.  9.  27. 

12.  44.  of  a  t.  I  say  unto  you  he  will  make,  21. 3. 

22.  59.  uf  a  t.  this  fellow  also  was  with  him 
.lohn  0.  14.  this  is  of  a  t.  that  prophet,  7.  40. 
Jicla  4.  27.  of  a  t.  against  thy  holy  child  Jesus 

10.  34.  of  a  t.  I  perceive  that  God  is  no  respecter 
ICar.  14.  25.  will  report  that  God  is  in  you  of  a  t. 

iee  Spirit 
Thy  TRUTH. 
Psal.  25.  5.  lead  me  in  thy  t.  and  teach  me 

20.  3.  before  my  eyes  and  I  have  w  alked  in  thy  t. 

30.  9.  shall  the  dust  praise  and  declare  thy  t. 

40.  10.  and  thy  t.  from  the  great  congregation 
11.  let  thy  t.  continually  preserve  me 

43.  3.  send  out  thy  light  and  thy  t.  let  them  lead 

54.  5.  to  mine  enemies,  cut  iheni  otFin  thy  t. 

57.  10.  and  thy  t.  unto  the  clouds,  108.  4. 

71.22. 1  will  praise  thy  1. 1|  80.11.  will  walk  in  thy  t. 

89.  49.  which  thou  swarest  to  David  in  thy  t. 

115. 1.  to  thy  name  give  glory  fort,  f.sake,  138.  2. 
/«a.38.18.that  go  into  the  pit  cannot  hope  for  thy  t. 
19.the  father  to  children  shall  make  known  Iky  t. 
Dan.  9.  13.  that  we  might  understand  thy  t. 
John  17.  17.  sanctify  them  through  thy  t.  thy  word 

IVord  of  TRUTH. 
Psal.  119.  43.  take  not  t^iortfo/f.  out  of  my  mouth 
ii'or.  6.  7.  approving  ourselves  by  the  word  of  t. 
F.ph.  1.  13.  alier  that  ye  heard  the  toord  of  I. 
Col.  1.  5.  whereof  ye  heard  before  in  the  irurd  of  t. 
'iTim.  2.  15.  rightly  dividing  the  word  of  I. 
Jam.  1. 18.  of  his  own  will  begat  he  us  by  word  of  t. 

TRY. 
.Judg.  7.  4.  and  I  will  t.  them  for  thee  there 
iChron.  32.  31.  howbeit  God  left  him  to  t.  him 
.lob  7.  18.  that  thou  shouldest  t.  him  every  moment 

12.  11.  doth  not  the  ear  f.  words  and  mouth  taste? 
Psal.  11.  4.  his  eye-lids  t.  the  children  of  men 

26.  2.  (.  my  reins  and  my  heart  ||  139.  23.  t.  me 
Jcr.  6.27.  that  thou  mayest  know  and  t.  their  way 

9.  7.  I  will  melt  them  and  (.  them,  7.ech.  13.  9. 

17.  10.  I  the  Lord  search  the  heart,  t.  the  reins 
Lam.  3.  40.  let  us  search  and  t.  our  ways,  and  turn 
Dan.  11.  35.  some  of  them  shall  fall  to  t.  them 
I  Cor.  3.  13.  the  fire  shall  t.  every  man's  work 
Phil.  1. 1  10.  ye  may  t.  things  that  are  excellent 
\Pct.  4.  12.  the  fiery  trial  which  is  to  t.  you 
\John\.  \.t.  thespirits  whether  they  are  of  God 
Rev.  3. 10.  hour  of  temptation  to  I.  them  on  earth 

TRIED. 
Dexit.  21.  5.  by  the  Levites  shall  every  stroke  be  t. 
2.Sam.22.31.  the  word  of  the  Lord  is  t.  Psal.  18.  30. 
./oi>23.10.  when  hehath  t.  me,  I  shall  come  as  gold 

34.  36.  my  desire  is  that  Job  may  be  t.  to  the  end 
Psal.  12.  6.  as  silver  is  t.  in  a  furnace  of  earth 

17.  3.  thou  hast  t.  me  and  shalt  find  nothing 

66.  10.  for  thou,  O  God,  hast  t.  us,  as  silver  is  t. 

105.  19.  the  word  ofthe  Lord  t.  him 

119. 1 140.  thy  word  is  t.  therefore  I  love  it 
ha.  28.  16.  behold,  I  lay  in  Zion  a  t.  stone 
Jer.  12.  3.  thou  hast  t.  mine  heart  toward  thee 
Dan.  12.  10.  many  shall  be  purified  and  t. 
Zech.  13.  9.  and  I  will  try  them  as  gold  is  t. 
Heb.  11.  17.  by  faith  Abraham  when  he  was  t. 
Jam.  1.  12.  when  t.  he  shall  receive  the  crown 
\Pet.\.l.  than  of  gold,  though  it  be  t.  with  fire 
Rrv.2.  2.  hast  t.  them  which  say  they  are  apostles 
10.  cast  some  ofyou  into  prison, that  ye  may  be  t. 

3. 18. 1  counsel  thee  to  buy  of  me  gold  t.  in  the  fire 

TRIKST. 
ICAi-on.  29.  17.  I  know  that  thou  t.  the  heart 
./er.  1 1.  20.  O  Lord,  that  t.  the  reins  and  heart 

20.  12.  but,  O  Lord  of  hosts,  that  t.tho  righteous 

TRIETH. 
.fob  34.  3.  ear  t.  words,  as  the  mouth  tastetb  meat 
Psal.  7.  9.  the  righteous  God  t.  the  hearts  and  reins 

11.  5.  the  Lord  t.  the  righteous,  hatelh  the  wicked 
Prov.  17. 3.  furnace  for  gold,  but  Lord  t.  the  hearts 
1  Thess.  2.  4.  not  men,  but  God  who  t.  our  hearts 

TRYING. 
Jam.  1  3.  the  t.  of  your  faiih  worketh  patience 

TtJMnLED. 
Judg.  7.  13.  a  cake  of  barley  bread  t.  into  tho  host 

TUMULT, 
l.^am.  4.  14.  what  mcanelh  the  noise  of  this  t.? 
2.Sam.  18.  29.  I  saw  a  t.  but  knew  not  what  it  was 
2King3  19.  28.  because  thy  rage  against  nic  and  thy 
t.  is  come  up  into  mine  ears,  ha.  37.  29. 
P.ial.  65.  7.  which  stilleth  the  t.  ofthe  people 
74.  23.  the  (.  of  those  that  riso  up  against  thee 
83.  2  for,  lo,  thine  enemies  make  a  t. 
ha.  33.  3.  at  the  noise  of  the  t   the  people  fled 
.Jer.  11.  16.  with  noiso  ofa  great  t.  he  kindled  fire 
Jfos.lO.  14.  therefore  shall/,  rise  among  thy  peojile 
^mo.<2. 2.  and  Moab  shall  die  with  (.with  shouting 
Tech.  i4.  13.  a  great  (.  from  the  Lord  among  them 
Mai.  27.24.but  rather  a  I.  was  made,  ho  took  water 
Mark  5.  38.  he  seeth  tho  t.  and  thorn  that  wejit 
.^ctsii.  34.  lie  could  not  know  th«  certainty  kir  t. 


f^ 


TUR 

.^cta  24.  18.  neitlier  with  multitude,  nor  with  L 

TUMULTS. 
JJmos3.  9.  behold  the  great  t.  in  the  midst  thereof 
2C<ir.  6.  5.  approving  ourselves  as  ministeis  in  t. 

12.  20.  lest  there  be  whisperings,  swelliugs,  t. 

TUMULTUOUS. 
Isa.  13.  4.  a  t.  noise  ofthe  kingdoms  g.ithered 
22.  2,  ihou  that  art  a  t.  city,  a  joyous  city 
.Jer.  48.  45.  shall  devour  the  head  of  the  t.  ODOS 

TUR.N. 
Esth.  2.12.  w  hen  every  maid's  t.  was  come  to  go  ire 
15.  now  when  the  t.  of  Esther  w  as  come  to  go  m 
TURN,  ferb. 
Gen.  24.  49.  that  I  may  t.  to  the  right  hand  or  left 
F.zod.  23.  27.  make  thine  enemies  t.  their  back 
32.  12.  L.  IVcmi  thy  fierce  wrath  jind  rejient  of  i 
Lev.  19.  4.  t.  ye  not  uniu  idols,  nor  make  goda 
JVum.  14.  25.  to-morrow  t.  you,  get  to  wilderneai 

20.  17.  we  will  not  t.  to  the  right  hand  nor  left 

21.  22.  we  will  not  t.  into  the  fields  or  vineyards 

22.  23.  he  smote  the  ass  to  t.  her  into  the  way 
26.  where  was  no  way  to  t.  to  the  right  or  left 

y>'<;««.1.7.r.you,andgo  lo  the  mount  of  theAnjorilet 
40.and  f.ye,take  your  journey  into  ihe  wilderness 
13. J7. that  Lord  may  t. from  fierceness  of  liisanger 
14.  25.  then  shall  t.  it  into  money  and  bind  it  up 
30.  3.  then  the  Lord  will  I.  their  captivity 
31 .20.then  will  they  t.to  other  gods  and  serve  thera 

■Josh.  1.  7.  t.  not  from  it  to  the  righl  hand  or  left 
22.  23.  an  altar  to  t.  from  following  the  Lord, 29. 
24.20. then  be  will  t.  and  do  you  hurl  and  coniirne 

.Judg.  20.  8.  nor  will  any  of  us  t.  into  hi--  'a\   ■ 

I.Sam.  14.  7.  t.  thee,  behold,  1  am  wil"  • 

22.  17.  t.  and  slay  the  priests  ofthe  '^3      tthin 

2.sa7n.  14.  19.  none  can  t.  to  the  righi  '.xj^nn  hiiind 
24.  the  king  said,  let  him  f.  to  his  own  i',  Ispe 
15.31.  Lord,(.  Ahiihophel's  counsel  to  foi.'    hnesa 

Ih'ings  8.  35.  t.  from  their  sin,  2  Chron.  !.».  H),  37. 

1  7.  14. 
9.  6.  if  you  shall  at  all  t.  from  following  me 
17. 3.  get  hence,  t.  thee  eastward  and  hide  thyself 

22.  34.  he  said,  t.  thine  hand,  2  Chron.  18.  33. 
i/iings'J.  18.  and  Jehu  said,  £.  thee  behind  me,  19. 

17.  13.  f.  ye  from  your  evil  ways  and  keep  my 

commandments,  Jer.  18.  8.  |  26.  3.  Zech.  1.  3,  4. 

U:hrun.  12.  23.  to  t.  the  kingdom  of  Saul  to  him 

iCIiron.  35.  22.  but  Josiah  would  not  t.  his  face 

JVVA.  1.  9.  if  ye  t.  and  keep  my  commandments, 

Eiek.  3.  20.  \  18.  21.  \  33.  11,  14,  19. 

4.  4.  and  t.  their  reproach  on  their  own  head 

9.  26.  prophets  which  testified  to  t.  them  to  thee 
Job  5.  1.  and  to  which  of  the  saints  wilt  thou  t  ? 

14.  n.  t.  from  him  that  he  may  rest  till  he  shall 

23.  13.  but  he  is  in  one  mind,  and  who  can  f.  him  7 

24.  4.  they  t.  the  needy  out  of  the  way,  the  poor 
f.9u/.4.2.how  long  will  yet.  my  glory  into  shame  ? 

7.  12.  if  he  t.  not,  he  will  vvhet  his  swurd 

20.  1 3.  the  Lord  t.  to  ashes  thy  burnt-saciifice 

21.  12.  thou  shalt  make  them  t.  their  back 
2.5.  16.  t.  thee  unto  me,  69.  16.  |  86.  16. 

K5.  4.  ;.  us,  O  God  of  our  salvation,  and  cause 
119.  79.  let  those  tliat  fear  thee  t.  unto  me 
132.  11.  Lord  hath  sworn  to  David, he  will  not  t. 
Prov.  1.  23.  t.  you  at  my  reproof,  I  will  pour  out 
4.  15.  pass  not  by  it,  t.  from  it  and  pass  away 

27.  t.  not  to  the  right  hand  nor  to  the  left 
Eccl.  3.  20.  all  are  of  dust,  and  all  t.  to  dust  again 
Cant.  2.  17.  t.  my  beloved,  and  be  thou  like  a  roe 
/.<«.  I.  25.  I  will  I.  my  hand  on  thee  and  purge 

13.  14.  they  shall  every  man  t.  to  his  own  people 
19.  6.  and  they  shall  t.  the  rivers  far  away 

22.  18.  he  will  violently  t.  and  loss  thee  like  a  ball 

23.  17.  she  shall  t.  to  her  hire,  and  shall  commit 
28.  6.  for  strength  lo  them  that  t.  the  battle 

30.  21.  when  ye  t.  to  the  right  hand  and  left 

31.  6.  /.  ye  to  him  from  whom  Israel  hath  revolted 
.59.  20.  to  them  Ihat  t.  from  transgression  in  Jacob 

Jer.  2.  35.  surely  his  angi'r  shall  t.  from  me 

3.  7.  and  1  said,  t.  unto  me,  but  n'lurned  not,  14. 

13.  16.  before  be  t.  it  into  the  shadow  of  death 
31.  13.  for  1  will  t.  their  mourning  into  joy 

18.  t.  thou  me,  and  I  shall  be  lurncd,  thou  art 
44.  5.  hearkened  not  to  t.  from  their  wickedness 
.50.  10.  they  shall  t.  every  one  lo  his  people 

/.am.5. 21.  t.  us  unto  thee,  O  L.  we  shall  be  turnea 
Eitk.  3.  19.  he  t.  not  from  his  wickedness,  33.  9. 

4.  8.  shalt  not  t.  thee  from  one  side  lo  another 
7.  22.  my  face  will  I  t.  also  from  them 

14.  6.  repent  and  t.  yourselves  from  your  idols,  18. 

30,  32.  I  :«.  9,  11.  Ihs.  12.'6.  .Joel'i.  12. 
.16.  9. 1  will  t.  unto  you,  and  ye  shall  bo  tilled 
38.  12.  to  /.  thine  hand  upon  the  desolates  placet 
Dan.  9.  13.  that  we  might  t.  from  our  inirjuities 

11.  18.  shall  he  t.  his  face  unto  Ihe  isles,  and  lake 

many  ;  shall  cause  reproach  lo  I.  upon  hint 

19.  then  he  shall  t.  his  face  tov\ard  Ihe  fort 

12.  3.  anil  they  that  I.  many  to  righteousness 
Hos.  5.  4.  they  will  not  frame  their  doings  to  t. 

12.  6.  therefore  t.  thou  to  thy  God,  keep  mercy 
jSmos  I.  8.  and  I  will  (.  mine  baud  against  Bkroii 


TUR 

Mmot  5.  7  ye  who  t.  jufignient  to  wormuood 
6.  10.  und  1  will  t.  your  leasts  Into  mourning 
JunaU'3.  8.  let  them  £.  every  one  I'roin  his  evil  way 
Zeph.  3.  i>.  then  will  1 1.  to  peojilea  pure  language 
Zeck.\).  12.  t.  ye  to  elrong  hold  ye  prisoners  olhope 

13.  7.  I  will  t.  mine  hand  U|ion  the  little  ones 
JI/a/.4.  ti.  he  shall  (.the  heart  ol'talhers  to  children 
•Mae.  5.  39.  on  thy  right  cheek,  t.  to  him  the  other 
Luke  1.17.  to  t.  the  hearts  ofthe  lathers  to  children 

SI.  13.  and  it  shall  t.  to  you  lur  a  testimony 
jlUs  13.  40.  of  hte,  lo  we  t.  to  the  Gentiles 

14.  15.  that  ye  should  t.  from  these  vanities 
26.  18.  and  to  t.  them  from  darkness  to  light 

20.  that  they  should  repent  and  t.  to  God 
Phil.  1.  I'J.  I  know  this  shall  t.  to  my  salvation 
Tit.l.H.  commandments  of  men  that  t.  from  truth 
Jam.  3.  3.  and  we  t.  about  their  whole  body 
S  Pel.  2.  21.  to  t.  from  the  holy  commandment 
Rev.  11.  6.  and  have  power  to  t.  waters  to  bloud 

TURN  again. 
/>ec. 13.16.  if  the  raw  flesh  t.  again  and  be  changed 
Judg.  11.  8.  therefore  we  f.  again  lo  thee  now 
HuUi  1.  11.  she  said,  t.  again,  my  daughters,  12. 
I  Sam.  15.  25.  I  pray  thee,  t.  again  with  me,  30. 

1  Kings  8.  33.  when  Israel  shall  t.  again  to  thee 
12. 27.  heart  of  this  people  t.  again  to  tbeir  lord 
13.  9.  eat  not,  nor  t.  again  by  the  same  way,  17. 

2  Kings  1.  6.  go  t.  again  to  the  king  thatsent  you 
20.  5.  f.  again  and  tellHezekiah  the  captain 

SCAron.30.tJ.  t.  again  to  the  Lord  ||  9.  if  ye  t. again 
Job  34.  15.  and  man  shall '.  again  into  dust 
Psai.l8.37.nor  did  1 1.  ag.  till  they  were  consumed 
CO. I. hast  been  displeased,©  (.thyself  to  us  again 

80.  3.  t.  as  again,  O  Lord  God  of  hosts,  7,  19. 

bS.S.speak  peace,but  let  them  not  t.  again  to  folly 

104. 9.  that  they  t.  not  again  to  cover  the  earth 

126. 4.  t.  again  ourcaptivity,  as  streams  in  south 
yer.25. 5.  t.  ye  u^uiji  every  one  from  his  evil  way 

31.21. {.  again,0  virgin  of  Israel,  t.again  to  cities 
£,ani.3.40.let  us  try  our  ways  and  t.againlo  theL. 
Ezek.  8.  6.  t.  again  and  thou  shaltsee,  13.  15. 
Jl/ic.7.19.  he  will  £.  again,he  will  have  compassion 
ZecA.10.9.shall  live  with  their  children  and  t.again 
Mat.  7.  6.  lest  they  t.  again  and  rend  you 
L,uke  10.  6.  if  not,  it  shall  t.  to  you  again 

17.  4.  and  seven  times  in  a  day  t.  again  to  thee 
Gal.  4.9.  how  t.  ye  again  to  the  weak  elements 

TURN  atide. 
Ezud.  3.  3.  I  will  now  t.  aside  and  see  this  sight 
Deut.  5.  32.  shall  not  f.  aside  lo  the  right  hand 

11.  16.  and  ye  t.  aside  and  serve  other  gods,  28. 

17.  20.  that  he  t.  not  aside  from  commandment 
31.29.  after  my  death  ye  will  t  aside  from  the  way 

Josh.  23.  6.  that  ye  t.  not  aside  therefrom  to  the 

right  hand  or  the  left,  1  Sam.  12.  20,  21. 

Ruth  4. 1.  ho,  such  a  one,  t.  aside  sit  down  here 

2  Sam.  2.  21.  Asahel,  I.  aside  and  take  his  armour 

23.  howbeit  he  refused  to  t.  aside 

18.  30.  the  king  said,  t.  aside,  and  stand  here 
Job  36.  t  18.  a  great  ransom  cannot  t.  thee  aside 
Psal.  40.  4.  respecteth  not  such  as  t.  aside  to  lies 

101.3.  I  hate  the  work  of  them  that  t.  a«ide 
125.  5.  as  for  such  as  t.  aside  to  crooked  ways 

Jsa.  10.  2.  to  (.  aside  the  needy  from  judgment 
29.  21.  t.  aside  the  just  for  a  thing  of  nought 
TO.  11.  get  out  of  the  way,  t.  (is/f/e  out  ofthe  path 

£.am.3.35.to  t.  aside  the  right  of  a  man  before  thee 

.,9mos  2.  7.  and  that  t.  aside  the  way  ofthe  meek 
5.  12.  and  they  t.  aside  ihe  poor  in  the  gate 

Mat.  3.  5.  and  that  t.  aside ihe  stranger  from  right 
TURN  away. 

Gen.  27.  44.  tarry  till  thy  brother's  fury  t.  away 
45.  till  thy  brother's  anger  t.  away  from  thee 

A'am.  32.  15.  for  if  ye  t.  away  from  after  him, 
J)eat.  30.  17.  .hsh.'i.i.  16.2  Chron.  7.  19. 

/)cut.".  4.  they  will  t.away\\\y  son  from  following 
13.t.he  iiath  spoken  to  t.  you  awn;/ from  the  Lord 
17.  17.  multiply  wives,  that  his  heart  t.  nol  away 
23.  14.  that  he  see  no  unclean  thing  and  t.  away 

1  Kings  2. 1 16.1  ask  one  petition,  t.not  aw.my  face 
11.2.  surely  they  will  t.  away  your  heart 

i.firtn^sl8.24.how  wilt  ihoii  (.  oicay  thefaceof  one 
captain  and  put  thy  trust  on  Egypt  ? /ga.36.9. 

1  Chron.  14.  14.  go  not  up,  t.  away  from  them 

2  Chron.  6. 42.  O  Lord  God  t.  not  away  the  face  of 
thine  anointed,  remember  mercies,  P^af.  132.10. 

25.27.  Amaziahdid  t.  away  {mm  following  Lord 

29.10.  to  make  a  covenant  with  God  of  Israel,  that 

wrath  may  t.  ajray,  30. 8. P«.  100.23.  Prov.ii.iS. 

30. 9.  the  Lord  will  not  ».  away  his  face  from  you 

Job  9.  t  12.  who  can  t.  him  away  ?  1 1,  t  10. 

P<f.]19  37.f.a!ca!/ mine  eyes  from  beholding  vaaitv  ' 
39.  t.  away  my  reproach  which  I  fear  " 

Prov.  25.  10.  and  lest  thine  infamy  t.  notavxi;^ 
29.8.  but  wise  men  t.  away  wrath 

Cant.  6  5.  t.  away  thine  eyi«  from  me,  for  they 

Jsa.  47.  t  ll).  thy  wisdom  onuaed  thee  to  t.  away 
58.  13.  if  Ihoii  t.  atpay  thy  foot  from  the  sabbath 
kr  2.  24.  in  her  occasion  who  can  t.  her  away  1 
3.  19  and  thou  chait  not  t.  away  from  me 
«47 


TUR 

Ji»r.  8. 4.  saith  L.  shall  he  t.  aicajf  and  not  return"! 
18.20.  Istood  to  t.  away  thy  wrath  from  them 
29.  H.  1  will  t.  away  your  captivity,  Zeph.  2.  7. 
32.  40.  that  I  will  not  t.  away  Irom  them 
/.,am.2. 14. not  discovered  iniquity,  to  t.  a.  captivity 
Ezck.  14.6. «.  aicayyour  f^ces  from  abominations 
jimosl.3.a.ad  for  four  I  will  not  t.  away  the  punish- 
ment thereof,  6,  9,  11,  U.  \  2.  1,4,  6. 
Jonah  3.  9.  God  willt.  away  from  his  tierce  ungef 
Mai.  2.  6.  and  did  /.  many  away  from  iniquity 
Mat.  5.  42.  would  borrow  of  thee,  t.  nolUiou  away 
Acts  13.8.  seeking  to  t.  away  the  deputy  from  faith 
Rom.  11.  26.  shalt  t,  away  ungodliness  from  Jacob 
2  Tim.  3.  5.  traitors,  heady,  from  such  t.  away 
4.  4.  they  shall  t.  away  their  ears  from  truth 
Heb.  12.  25.  how  escape,  if  we  f .  away  from  him? 

TURN  back. 
/)(!ut.23.]3.t.  J.and  cover  that  which  comes  fr.  thee 
2  Kings  19.  28. 1  will  put  a  hook  in  thy  nose  and  t. 
thee  back  by  the  way  thou  camest,  Isa.  37.  29. 
Psal.  44. 10.  makest  us  to  t.  back  from  the  enemy 
56. 9.  when  I  cry,  then  shall  mine  enemies  t.  back 
/sa.14.27.  his  hand  stretched,  who  shall  t.  it  back! 
Jcr.  4.  28.  neither  will  I  £.  back  from  it 
0.  9.  t.  back  thine  hand  as  a  grape-gatherer 
21.4.  behold,  I  will  t.  back  the  weapons  of  war 
49.  8.  flee  ye,  t.  back,  dwell  deep,  O  inhabitants 
Ezek.  38.  4.  and  I  will  t.  thee  iac/c,39.  2. 
Zeph.  3.  20.  when  I  £.  back  your  captivity 
Mark  13.  16.  not  t.  back  to  take  up  his  garment 
Gal.  4.  t  9.  how  t.  ye  back  to  beggarly  elements'! 

TURN  in.     " 
Oen.  19. 2.  behold  now,  my  lords,  t.  in,  I  pray  you 
Judg.  4.  18.  t.  in,  my  lord,  t.  in  to  me,  fear  not 

19.  11.  let  ust.  in  to  this  city  ofthe  Jebusites 
2  Kingsi.W.  that  the  man  ofGodshaltt.  in  thither 
Prov.  9.  4.  whoso  is  simple,  let  him  t.  in  hither,  16. 

TURN  to  the  Loid. 
Deut.  4.  30.  if  thou  /.  to  the  Lordxhy  God,  30.10. 
2  Chron.  15.  4.  in  their  trouble  did  t.  to  the  Lord 
Psal.  22.  27.  ends  of  the  world  shall  t.  to  the  Lord 
Lam.  3.  40.  let  us  try  our  ways  and  t.  lo  the  Lord 
Hos.  14. 2.  take  with  you  words  and  t.  to  the  Lord 
Joel  2.  13.  rend  your  heart  and  t.  to  the  Lord 
Luke  1.  16.  many  of  Israel  shall  he  t.  to  the  Lord 
2C'or.3.16.  ncverthelcsp,w  hen  it  shall  £.  to  the  Lord 

.    TURNED. 
Gen.  3.  24.  a  flaming  swoid  which  (.  every  way 
42.  24.  Joseph  t.  about  from  them  and  wept 
Exod.  7.  15.  the  rod  which  wast,  to  a  serpent 
17.  the  waters  which  are  in  the  river  shall  be  t. 
to  blood,  20.  Psal.  78.  44.  I  105.  29. 

14.  5.  heart  of  Pharaoh  was  t.  against  the  people 
Lev.  13.3.  when  the  hair  is  t.  white,  10. 17,  20,  25. 
J^Tum.  21.  33.  they  t.  and  went  by  way  of  Bashan 

22.  33.  the  ass  saw  me  and  t.  from  me  three  limes 
Deut.  23. 5.  t.  the  curse  into  a  ble.saing,  JVcA.  13. 2. 

31.  18.  in  that  they  are  t.  unto  other  gods 
Josh.  7.  26.  Lord  (.  from  the  fierceness  of  his  anger 
Judg.  2.  17.  they  t.  quickly  out  ofthe  way 

15.  4.  Samson  look  fire-brands  and  t.  tail  to  tail 

20.  42.  therefore  they  t.  their  backs  before  Israel 
\Sam.  4. 1 19.travailed, for  her  pains  were  £.  oaher 

10.  6.  and  thou  shalt  be  t.  into  another  man 
14.  21.  even  they  also  t.  to  be  with  the  Israelites 
47.  whithersoever  he  t.  himself  he  ve.xed  them 
15.27.  as  Samuel  t.  about  to  go  away,  he  laid 
17.  30.  and  David  t.  from  him  toward  another 
2  Sam.  2.  19.  Asahel  t.  not  from  following  Abner 

19.  2.  the  victory  that  day  was  t.  into  mourning 

1  Kings  2.  15.  howbeit  the  kingdom  is  t.  about 
28.  Joabl.  after  Adonijah,  Iho'not  after  Absalom 

8.  14.  the  king  t.  his  face  about,  and  blessed  Israel 
11.9.  because  his  heart  was  t.  from  the  Lord 

2  Kings  5.12.SO  Naaman  t.  and  went  away  in  r.nge 
16.18.Ahaz£.  the  covert  from  the  house  of  theLd. 
20. 2.  t.  his  face  to  the  wall,  and  pYaycd,  Isa.  38.2. 
23. 16.  as  Josiah  t.  himself  he  spied  sepulchres 

25.  was  no  king  that  f.  to  the  Lord  like  him 

26.  Lord  t.  not  from  the  fierceness  of  his  wrath 

1  Chron.  10. 14.  he  t.  the  kingdom  unto  David 

2  Chron.  12. 12.  the  wrath  ofthe  Lord  I.  from  him 

20.  10.  they  t.  from  them  and  destroyed  them  not 
29.  6.  for  our  fathers  have  t.  their  backs 

Ezra  6.  22.  (.  the  heart  ofthe  king  of  Assyria 
10.  14.  until  the  wrath  of  our  God  be  t.  from  us 
JVVA.  9.  35.  neither  Mhey  from  their  wicked  works 
E.«£A.9.1. though  it  was  t.  to  the  contrary  that  Jews 
22.  the  month  which  was  (.  to  them  from  sorrow 
.Job  16. 11.  God  t.  me  into  the  hands  of  the  wicked 

19.  19.  and  they  whom  I  loved  are  t.  against  me 

20.  14.  yet  his  meat  in  his  bowels  is  t.  it  is  the  gall 
2^.  5.  and  undei;  it  is  t.  up  as  it  were  fire 
30.15.  terrors  are  t.  upon  mc,  they  pursue  my  goul 

31.  my  harp  is  t.  to  mourning,  aiid  my  organ 
31.  7.  if  my  step  hath  £.  out  of  the  way,  my  heart 
38.  14.  it  is  t.  as  clay  to  the  seal,  they  stand  as 

41.  22.  and  sorrow  is  t.  into  joy  before  him 

42.  10.  and  the  Lord  t.  the  captivity  of  Job 
Ptal.  9.  17.  the  wicked  shaU  bo  t.  into  beil 


TUR 

Psal  20. 11. ihou  hast  t.  my  mourning  into  da  icing 
66.  6.  ho  t.  the  sea  into  dry  land,  they  wenlthr? 
81.  14.  and  t.  my  hand  against  their  adversaries 
105.  25.  he  t.  their  heart  to  hate  Ins  people 
114.  8.  which  t.  the  rock  inio  a  standing  water 
119.  59.  I  t.  my  feel  unto  Ihy  testimonies 

Eccl.H.  12.  and  I  (.  myself  to  behold  wisdom 

Isa.  21.  4.  night  of  my  pleasure  he  t.  into  fear 
29.  17.  Lebanon  shall  be  t.  into  a  fruiltui  field 
34:  9.  theitreams  thereof  shall  be  (.  into  pitch 
53.  G.  we  have  t.  every  one  to  his  own  way 
tj3.  10.  therefore  he  was  t.  to  be  tbeir  enemy 

Jcr.2.2y.  how  art  thou  t.  into  a  degenerate  plant? 
27.  they  have  I.  their  back  to  me,  not  their  face 
S.lO.Judiih  hath  not  (.  tome  with  her  whole  heart 
6.  12.  their  houses  shall  be  t.  unto  otheis 
8. 6.  no  man  repented,  every  one  t.  to  his  course 
23.22.they  should  have  £.  them  from  their  evil  way 

31.  18.  and  I  shall  be  t.  ||  19.  alter  thai  I  was  I. 

32.  33.  they  t.  unto  me  the  back,  and  not  the  face 
34.  15.  and  ye  were  now  £.  and  had  done  right 

16.  but  ye  t.  and  polluted  my  name  and  caused 
48.  39.  how  hath  Moab  t.  thee  back  with  shame? 
Lam.  1.20.  behold, Lord,  mine  heart  is  (.within  me 

3.  3.  surely  against  me  is  he  (.  he  turnuth  his  hand 
5.  2.  our  inheritance  is  t.  to  strangers,  our  houses 

15.  joy  is  ceased,  our  dance  is  t.  into  mourning 
21.  turn  us  unto  thee,  O  Lord,  and  wesliH.lbet. 

Ezck.  1.  9.  they  (.  not  when  they  went,  12.  |  10. 11. 
17.  6.  a  vine,  whose  branches  (.  toward  him 
20.  2.  she  is  i.  unto  me,  I  shall  be  rcjilenished 

Dan.  10.  8.  my  comeliness  was  I.  into  corrujilioo 

16.  by  the  vision  my  sorrows  are  (.  upon  me 
/fu«.7.8.amongthe  people  Kjihraim  is  a  cake  not  ( 

11.  8.  Ephraim,  mine  heart  is  (.  within  me 
Jodi.  31.  sun  shall  be  t.  into  darkness,  Jlcls  2.20. 
JiiHos  6.  12.  for  ye  have  (.  judgment  into  gal! 
Jonah  3.  10.  that  they  t.  from  their  evil  way 
//aA.2.16.  the  cup  of  Lord's  right  hand  he  (.  to  thee 
Zcch.  14. 10.  all  the  land  shall  be  (.  into  a  plain 
Mark  5.  30.  Jesus  t.  about  in  the  pres.s,  and  said 
jAike  22.  61.  the  Lord  (.  and  looked  upon  Peter 
John  IG.  20.  but  your  sorrow  shall  be  (.  inio  joy 
.lets  7.  42.  God  t.  and  gave  them  up  to  worship 

9.  35.  all  at  Lyddasaw  him  and  (.  to  the  Lord 
11.21.  a  great  number  believed  and  f.  to  the  Lord 
15.  19.  which  from  the  Gentiles  are  (.  to  God 
17.  6.  these  that  have  t.  the  world  upside  down 
IThcss.  1.  9.  shew  how  ye  (.  to  God  from  idols 
2Tim.  4.  4.  and  they  shall  be  (.  unlo  fables 
Neb.  11.  34.  (.  to  flight  the  armies  ofthe  .nliens 

12. 13.  lest  that  which  is  lame  be  (.  out  of  l^ie  way 
Jam.  3.  4.  yot  are  they  (.  with  a  very  small  helm 

4.  9.  let  your  laughter  be  (.  to  mourning 

2  Pet.  2.22.  the  dog  is  (.  to  his  own  vomit  again 

TURNED  a»-ar7i. 

Exod.A.  7.  behold  it  was  t.  again  as  his  other  flesh 

Judg.  3,  19.  Ehud  (.  again  from  the  quarries 

8.33.Israel  t.again,  went  a  whoring  after  Baalim 

20.  41.  when  Israel  (.  a/fain,  Bcnjamites  amazed 

1  Sam. 15.31.SO  Samuel  t.  again  after  Saul,BndSaul 

2  Sam.  22.  38. 1  t.  not  again  till  I  had  consumed 

2  Kings  5.  26.  when  the  man  (.  a.  from  his  chariot 
P5.126. 1.  when  Lord  (.  again  the  captivitv  ofZion 

TURNED  aside. 
Exod.  3.  4.  the  Lord  saw  that  he  (.  a.<'ide  to  see 

32.  8.  they  have  (.  a.^ide  quickly,  Drut.  9. 12, 16 
Judg.  14.  8.  he  (.  a.'.ide  to  see  the  lion's  carcase 
1  Sam.  6.  12.  the  kine  (.  not  aside  lo  the  right 

8.  3.  but  (.  aside  after  lucre,  and  took  bribes 
1  Kings  15.  5.  David  (.  not  a.^idc  from  "iny  thing 

20.  39.  a  man  (.  asidr  and  brought  a  man  to  ine 
2Kings22. 2.  Josiahf.nol  a.-ide  lo  right  hanrl  or  left 
Job  6.  18.  the  paths  of  their  way  are  (.  aside 
Psal.  78.  i)7.  ihev  were  (.  asid^like  a  deceitful  bow 
Cant.  6.  1.  whither  is  thy  beloved  (.  aside  ? 
Isa.  44.  2(1.  a  deceived  heart  hath  (.  him  aside 
Lam.  3.  11.  he  halh  t.  aside  my  ways  and  pulled 
1  Tim.  1.  6.  have  (.  aside  unto  vnin  jangling 

5.  15.  for  some  are  already  /.  aside  after  Satan 

TURNED  utonj/. 
J^'um.  14.  43.  because  ye  awl.  away  from  the  Lord 

20.  21.  wherefore  Israel  (.  away  from  him 

2.'>.  4.  that  the  anger  ofthe  Lord  may  be  (.  away 
11.  Phinehas  hath  (.  my  wrath  away  from  Israel 

1  Kings  11.  3.  and  his  wives  (.  awayh\s  heart,  4. 

21.  4.  and  Ahab  t.away  and  would  eat  no  bread 

2  Chron.  29.  0.  our  fathers  t.  away  their  faces 
Psal.  6C.  20.  which  hath  not  (.  airny  my  prayer 

78.  38.  vea,  many  a  time  t.  he  his  anger  owiy 
Isa.  5.  25.  for  all  this  his  anger  is  not  (.  away,  but 
his  hand  is  stretched  out  still,  9  12,17,21.]  10.4. 

12,  1.  thy  anger  is  t.  awny  \\  50.  5  nor  (.  J  away 
59.  14.  and  judgment  is  t.  away  backward 

.7fr.5. 25.  your  iniquities  have  (.  away  these  things 
38.  22.  thy  feet  arc  sunk,  they  are  (.  away  back 
46.  5.  wherefore  have  I  seen  them  (.  awny  backl 
50.  6.  shepherds  have  (.(/iOn  away  on  mountains 
Dan.  9. 16.  let  thy  fury  be  (.  awny  from  Jerusa.em 
Ho:  14.  i.  for  miDe  dnger  ii  t,  away  bom  bia 


TWA 

A*aA.2.2.  tlio  Ld.  hath  t.  away  excclltncy  of  Jacob 
<itfcCi«  iJ.  °2(i.  tliiti  Puul  hutli  t.  away  much  j><.'u|ile 
S  Tim.  I.  10.  ull  thtiy  in  Asia  be  L.  away  iruiii  mc 

TUKiNKD  back. 
Josh.  8.  20.  the  peojile  t.  back  ujion  the  pursuera 

11.  10.  Ju^hua  at  that  time  t.  back  uiiJ  luuk 
1  Sam.  15.  11.  Saul  IB  t.  back  Iruiii  li>llu%viiig  iiie 
S  Sam.  1.  ^i'i.  the  bow  ul' Juiiathuii  t.  nut  back 
1  JCingx  18.  37.  that  thou  hast  C.  their  heart  back 

''^2.  'M.  saw  it  was  nut  kiiij,'  ol'liiraci,  lliey  t.  back 
ilCingi  l..i.wheii  the  messengers  t.dack,\\hyt.back 

'2.  *2-l.  he  t.  back  and  louked  un  tliein,  and  cursed 

lli.  20.  so  the  liing  of  Assyria  t.  back  and  stayed 
1  OiroH.  -1.  20.  Oman  I.  back,  and  saw  the  angel 
Job  M.  27.  becnuse  tliey  t.  back  Iroin  him 
I'gal.  'J.  3.  wlien  mine  enemies  are  t.  back,  shall  fall 

^•>.  4.  let  them  be  I.  back  that  devise,  7U.  2,  '.i. 

♦4.  Id.  our  heart  is  not  t-  back  iVoin  thy  way 

7D.9.  children  ufKiihraim  t.  back  in  day  ol' battle 
41.  yea,  they  t.  back  and  temjited  God,  57. 

VH).  3.  and  let  them  be  t.  back  that  hate  Zion 
fsa.  42.  17.  they  shall  be  (.  back  that  tiustin  images 
Jer.  4.  ti.  the  anger  of  the  L>ord  is  not  (.  back 

11.  10.  they  are  t.  back  to  iniquities  of  lathers 

41).  21.  lliey  also  are  t.  back  and  are  tied  away 
I.,am.  1.  13.  he  liaiiit.  me  back,  and  made  me  faint 
7,eph.  1.  G.  them  that  are  I.  back  from  the  Lord 
Luke  2. 45.  t.  back  again  to  Jerusalem  seeking  him 

17.  15.  one  of  theleiiersf.  back,  and  glorified  God 
John  20.  14.  she  t.  herself  6aci  and  saw  Jesus 
dels  7. 30.  in  their  hearts  t.  back  again  into  Egypt 

TURNKD  in. 
Gen.  19.  3.  the  two  angels  t.  in  unto  Lot 

3S.  1.  Judah  t.  in  to  iiirah  the  Adullamite 
Judg.  4.  \6.  when  Siseia  had  t.  in  unto  Jaol 

Itf.  3.  the  Danites  t.  in  thither  and  said  to  him 
i  Kings  i.  8.  Klfsha  I.  in  thither  to  eat  bread 
11.  lie  t.  into  the  chamber  and  lay  tlicre 
TUKNEriT. 

1  Kings  2.  3.  muyest  prosjier  w  hithersoevcr  thou  t. 
Jut)  l.>.  13.  that  lliou  t.  thy  Spirit  against  God 
Pjal.  'M.  3.  thou  t.  man  to  destruction,  and  eayest 

TUllNETll. 
L^B.  20. 6.  soul  that  t.  after  wizards  logo  after  them 
/>eui.29.18.whose  heart  £.  away  this  day  I'rom  God 
Ji»iA.7.B.what  shall  1  say,wheii  Israeli,  their  hacks 

2  Kings  21. 1 13.  he  wipeth  and  t.  it  ujion  the  face 
Job  'J'.).  22,  tiie  horse  t.  not  back  from  the  sword 
Psal.  107.  33.  he  I.  rivers  iino  a  wilderness 

35.  he  I.  the  wilderness  into  a  standing  water 
14l>.  9.  the  way  of  the  wicked  he  I.  upside  down 
Pruv.  la".  1.  a sol't  answer  t.  away  wrath,  but  word; 
17.  8.  a  gift,  whithersoever  it  t.  prospereth 
21.  1.  lie  t.  the  king's  heart  whithersoever  h<)  will 
20.  14.  as  the  door  (.  upon  his  hinges,  so  doth 
28.  9.  that  t.  away  his  ear  from  hearing  the  law 
30.  30.  a  lion  that  t.  not  away  for  any 
Kccl.  I.  a.  the  wind  t.  about  unto  the  north 
CanL.  1  7.  why  should  I  be  as  one  thatt.  aside? 
Isa.  9.  13.  the  people  t.  not  to  him  that  smitcth 
24.  1.  the  Lord  /.  the  earth  upside  down 
44.  2.).  that  t.  wise  men  hackw.ird,  and  maketh 
Jer.  14.  8.  that  {.  aside  to  tarry  for  a  night 
49.  24.  Uamascus  is  feeble,  and  I.  herself  to  flee 
Lam.  1.  8.  yea,  she  sigheth  and  t.  backward 
3.  3.  he  t.  Iii.^  hand  against  me  all  the  day 
Kzek.  18.  24.  when  righteous  t.  away,  2r,.  j  33.  18. 
27.  when  the  wicked  man  t.  away,  28.  |  33.  12. 
Amos  5.  8.  t.  the  shadow  of  death  into  morning 

TURNING. 
2 /ruin's 21. 13. 1  will  wipe  Jerusalem  as  a  dish  t.  it 
2  CA70K.3I).  13.  he  hardened  his  heart  from  t.  toL. 
ProD.  1.  32.  the  t.  away  of  pimple  shall  slay  them 
'Jsa.  20.  Ifi.  your  t.  of  things  upside  down  as  clay 
57.  t  17.  I  hill  me  aruj  was  wroth,  went  on  t.  away 
Mic.  2.  4.  t,  away  he  hath  divided  our  fields 
.4eCj)3.2ri.to  hles^  you  in  t.  you  from  your  iniquities 
Jam.  1.  17.  with  whom  is  no  shadow  of  <. 
2  Pel.  2.  li.  t.  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  into  ashes 
Jude  4.  (.  the  grace  of  fJod  into  lasciviousness 

TURTLE,  S. 
Oen.  15.  9.  takn  a  t.  dove  and  a  young  pigeon 
i.ev   I.  14.  nhall  bring  his  olTering  of  t.-dovea 
5.  7.  he  BJiall  biing  for  his  trespass  two  t. -doves  or 
young  pigeons,  12.  8.  |  14.  22,  3U.  J  15.  14,  29. 
11.  if  he  hi!  iMit  able  to  bring  two  f.^iioves 
12.  6.  bIic  bIikII  liriiig  a  t.-dove  for  a  sin-ofTering 
Jfum.  fi.  10.  on  eighth  day  he  shall  bring  two  I. 
Psal.  74.  19.  O  deliver  not  the  soul  of  thy  (.-dove 
Cant.  2.  12.  the  voice  of  the  t.  \n  heard  in  our  land 
Jer.  8.  7.  t.  and  crane  observe  the  lime  of  coming 
Luke  2.  21.  to  ofiiT  n  sacrifice,  a  pair  of  t.-doves 

TUTORS. 
Oa/.4.2.  the  heir  while  a  child  is  under !.  and  gov. 

TWA  11^. 
I  ."fam.  18.  21.  he  my  son-in-law  in  the  one  of  the  f. 
I  Kingf  4.  33.  shut  the  door  on  thcni  I.  and  prayed 
Isn.  '^2.  the  seraphims,  with  t.  he  covered  his  face 
wiih  t.  he  ••overed  hi«  feet,  and  willi  t.  li-  iliJ  fly 
Jer.  34. 18.  whoD  (hey  cut  the  calf  ir  (.  anc  pasaod 
018 


TWE 

Eiek.  21.  19.  both  t.  -hall  come  out  of  one  land 
.Mat.  5.41.  compel  thee  to  go  a  inik',go  with  liim  t 
19.  5.  cleave  to  wife,  and  tiiey  t.  shall  be  one  tlesl 
0.  wherefore  they  are  no  more  t.  Atark  10.  8. 
21.  31.  wh<jtlicr  oft.  d:d  the  will  ul  his  father'? 
27.  21.  whether  of  the  t.  will  ye  that  1  release  } 
51.  the  vail  of  temple  was  rent  in  t.  .Mark  15.38 
Ej)/i.  2.  15.  to  make  in  himself  of  t.  one  new  man 

TWELFTH. 
i  Kings  19.  19.  twelve  yoke  of  o.\en,  he  with  the  t. 

1  Chrun.  24.  12.  the  t.  lot  came  foilli  to  Jakim 
25. 19.  the  {.  lot  came  forth  to  liashabiah 

27.  15.  the  t.  captain  for  the  t.  iiionth,  llelilai 

2  Chron.  34.  3.  in  the  I.  year  of  Josiah's  reign 
Ksth.  3.  7.  in  the  t.  year  of  king  Ahasnerus 
Kick.  32.  1.  in  the  t.  year,  in  tlw  t.  iiionth 

17.  ill  the  t.  year  and  littceiith  day  ol  the  month 
33.  21.  ill  the  t.  year  of  our  captivity,  tenth  month 
Hcv.  21.  20.  the  t.  foundation  was  an  amethyst 
Sec  Day,  Mo.nth. 
TWELVE. 
Gen.  14.  4.  t.  years  they  served  Chedorlaomer 
17.  20.  t.  princes  shall  Ishinael  beget,  25.  16. 
35.  22.  now  the  sons  of  Jacob  were  t. 
42.  13.  they  said,  thy  servants  are  t.  brethren, 32, 
49.  28.  all  these  are  the  t.  tribes  of  Israel 
Kxod.  15.27.they  came  to  Elim,  where  were  t.  wells 
24.  4.  t.  pillars  according  to  the  t.  tribes  of  Israel 

28.  21.  shall  be  t.  precious  stones,  39.  14. 
Lev.  24.  5.  and  thou  shall  bake  I.  cakes  thereof 
J\'um.  1.  44.  t.  princes  1|  7.  3.  they  brought  t.  o.xeii 

7.  84.  t.  chargers,  t.  silver  howls,  t.  spoons 
87.  t.  bullocks,  t.  rams,  t.  lambs  of  the  tirslycar 

17.  2.  t.  rods,  according  to  house  of  fathers,  (5. 

29.  17.  on  second  day  offer  t.  young  bullocks 
JJeut.  1.  23. 1  took  £.  men  of  you,  one  of  a  tribe 
Josh.  3.  12.  takc^ye  t.  men  out  of  the  tribes,  4.  2. 

4.  3.  take  ye  t.  stones  out  of  Jordan,  8,  9,  20. 
2  Sam.  2. 15.  there  arose  and  went  over  by  number 
t.  of  Benjamin,  and  t.  of  the  servants  of  David 
1  Kings  4.1.  Solomon  had  t.  officers  over  all  Israel 

7.  25.  the  sea  stood  on  t.  oxen,  44.  2  Chrun.  4.  15. 

10.  20.  t.  lions  on  the  one  side,  2  Chron.  9.  19. 

11.  .30.  Ahijah  rent  Jeroboam's  garm.  in  t.  pieces 

18.  31.  Elijah  took  t.  stones  and  built  an  altar 

19.  19.  found  Elislia  jilowing  with  t.  yoke  of  oxen 
1  Chr.  25. 9.  with  brethren  and  sons  t.  So  to  the  end 
Kzra  (i.  17.  for  a  Biii-oHering  t.  he-goats,  8.  35. 

8.  24.  there  I  separated  t.  of  the  chief  of  priests 
JVcA.  5.  14.  t.  years  noteatenbrcadof  the  governor 
.lob  38.  t32.  canst  thou  bring  forth  the  t.  signs  ? 
.7cr.52.20.£.hrazen  hulls,  Nebuzar-adan  took  away 
£ic/ir.43.16.  the  altar  shall  be  t.  cubits  long,  t.  broad 

47.  13.  inherit  the  land  according  to  the  t.  tribes 

Dan.  4.  29.  at  end  of  t.  months  he  walked  in  iialace 

JMal.  9.  20.  a  woman  was  diseased  with  an  issue  of 

blood  t.  years,  Mark  5.  25.  J^uke  8.  43. 

10.  2.  the  names  of  the  (.  apostles,  Luke  6.  13. 
14.  20.  they  took  up  of  fragments    t.    baskets, 

Mark  6.  43.  |  8.  19.  Luke  9.  17.  .John  6.  13. 

19.  28.  ye  also  shall  sit  upon  t.  thrones,  judging 
the  t.  tribes  of  Israel,  Luke  22.  30. 

26.  20.  now  when  even  was  corno,  he  sat  down 

with  the  t.  Mark  14.  17.  Luke  22.  14. 

47.  while  he  yet  spake,  Judas  one  of  the  t.  came, 

Mark  14.  10,  43.  Lukeiti.  47.  .John  6.  71. 

53.  shall  give  me  more  than  I.  legions  of  angels 

.Var/i5.42.3he  was  of  the  age  of  t.  years, /-w/ie  8.42. 

14.  20.  it  is  one  of  the  t.  thatdippcth  with  me 

Luke  2.  42.  and  when  Jesus  was  t.  years  old 

.fohn  f).  70.  Jesus  said,  have  I  not  chosen  you  t.  ? 

11.  9.  are  there  not  t.  hours  in  the  day  f 

20.  24.  Thomas  one  of  the  t.  was  not  with  them 
.lets  7.  8.  and  Jacob  bogal  the  t.  patriarchs 

19.  7.  projihesied,  and  all  the  men  wore  about  t. 
24.  11.  hut  (.  days  since  I  went  up  to  Jerusalem 
2fi.  7.  to  which  promise  our  t.  tribes  hope  to  conic 
1  Cor.  15.  5.  he  was  seen  of  Cephas,  then  of  the  t. 
./am.  1.  1.  to  the  l.tribe.i  which  are  scattered  abroad 
Hev.  12.  1.  and  upon  her  head  a  crown  of  t.  stars 

21.  12.  the  city  had  t.  gates,  at  the  gates  t.  angels 
14.  the  wall  of  the  city  had  t.  foundations,  and  in 

them  the  names  of  the  t.  apostles  of  the  Lamb 
21.  the  t.  gates  were  t.  pearls,  street  pure  gold 

22.  2.  the  tree  of  life  bare  t.  manner  of  fruits 
See  Ht'Nr>RKn,TiiousANB. 

TWENTY. 
Oen.  18.  31.  pcradvcnture  there  shall  bo  t.  found 
(hero,  ho  said,  1  will  not  destroy  it  for  t.  sake 

31.  38.  this  t.  years  have  1  been  with  thee,  41. 

32.  14.  for  a  present  for  Esau,  (.  he-goats,  t.  rams 
1.5.  and  ten  bulls,  t.  she  asses,  and  ten  foals 

37.  2-f.  they  sold  Joseph  for  t.  pieces  of  silver 

Ezod.  30.  13.  a  shekel  is  t.  gernhs.  Lev.  27.  25. 

Jfum.  3.  47.  I  18.  Ifi.  P'.zck.  45.  12. 

14.  from  t.  years  old  and  aliove,  38.  26.  A''itm.  I. 

3,  18,  ^.  1  14.  29.  1  20.  2.  |  :«.  II.  1  Chron. 

23.  2»,27.2CAron.25. .'-,.  |31.  17.  Kira3.  8. 

Lev.  27.  3.  thy  estimation  of  the  male  from  f.  years 

5.  from  five  year*  old  to  (.  years,  C.  sIioIiuIb 


TWI 

A'um. Il.19.sha1)  not  eat  neither  ten  day3,n(>r<.dsr3 

18.  10.  the  shekel  of  the  sanctuary  is  t.  gerahi 
.Judg.  4.3.  Jabbiii  niighlilv  oppressed  Israel  t.yeara 

11.  33.  Jephihah  smote  fiom  Aroer  even  t.  cities 
15.  20.  Samson  judged  Israel  t.  years,  10.  31. 

1  6u;;i.7.  2.  theark  was  in  Kirjath-jearim  t.  years 
14.14.  Jonathan  and  his  armour-bearer  slew  (.  men 

2  Sam.  3.  20.  Abner  came  to  David  with  t.  men 
9. 10.  Ziba  had  fifteen  sons  and  (.  servants,  19. 17. 

1  Kings  4.  23.  Solomon's  provision  daily,  t.  oxea 

9.  10.  came  to  pass  at  the  end  of  t.  years,  when 
Solomon  had  built  the  two  houses,  2  CAron.8.L 
11.  Solomon  gave  Hiram  (.  cities  iu  Galilee 

2  Kings  4. 42.  brought  the  man  of  God  t.  loaves 
Kzra  8.  27.  I  even  weighed  t.  basons  uf  gold 
Ezek.  4.  10.  thy  meal  by  weight,  t.  shekels  a  day 

40.  49.  the  length  of  the  porch  was  t.  culms 

41.  2.  the  breadth  of  the  door  was  t.  cubits 
Jiag.  2.  10.  when  one  came  to  a  heap  of  t.  mca 

sures,  to  draw  out  fifty  vessels,  there  were  but  ( 
Zcch.  5.2.  the  length  of  the  Hying  roll  (.  cubits 
Jicts  27.  28.  and  sounded,  and  found  it  t.  fathom* 

TWENTY  (ICO. 
Judg.  10.  3.  Jair  judged  Israel  t.  two  years 

1  Ki7:gs  14.  20.  Jeroboam  reigned  t.  two  years 

10.  2y.  Ahab  reigned  over  Israel  t.  two  years 

2  Kings  8.  26.  Ahaziah  was  (.  and  twa  years  old 
21.19..Amon  (.  two  years  old,  when  began  to  reign 

1  Chron.  12.28.of  his  father's  house  (.  two  captains 

2  Chron.  13.  21.  but  Ahijah  begat  t.  and  two  sons 
TWENTY  three. 

.Judg.  10.  2.  Tola  judged  Israel  t.  (Aree  years 
2  Kings  23.  31.  Jehoaliaz  was  t.  (Aree  years  old 

1  Chron.  2.  22.  Jair  had  t.  three  Cities  in  Gilead 
Jer.  25.  3.  from  13th  year  of  Josiah  to  (.  third  year 

52.  30.  in  the  t.  third  year  of  Nebuchadnezzar 

TWENTY /our. 
JVum.  7.  83.  the  offerings  were  t.  and  four  bullocks 

2  Sam.  21.  20.  lingers  and  toes  t.J'our  in  number 
1  Kings  15.  33.  Baasha  reigned  /.  and /our  years 
//a^.2.18.consider  from£./our(Adayand  ninth  inon. 
/id'. 4. 4.  round  about  the  throne  were  t.four  eeata, 

and  on  the  seats  1  saw  t.four  elders  sitting 
5.  8.  the  t.four  elders  fell  down,  11.  16.  1  19.  4. 

TWENTY /Be. 
JV«m.  8.  24.  from  I.  five  years  old  and  upward 

1  ATin D-s  22.  42.  Johoshaphat  reigned  t.  and  y! pa 
years  in  Jerusalem,  2  Chron.  20.  31. 

2  Kings  14.  2.  ,'Vmnziah  was(./oe  years  old  when 
he  began  to  roign,  'i  Chron.  25.  1. 

15.  33.  Jotham  t.Jive  years  old,2  CAron.  27.  l,a 

18.  2.  Ilezckiah  t.  five  years  old,  2  CArow.  29.  1. 

23.  30.  Jchoiakim  t.five  years,  2  Chron.  36.  5. 

JV(A.  6.  1.5.  the  wall  finished  in  t.fifthday  of  Elul 

.for.  52.  31.  t.  fifth  day  Evil-Merodach  lifted  up 

TWENTY  siz. 
1  Kings  \C>.B.\n  t.  .?/j(Aof  Asa,  Elah  began to.reign 

TWENTY  seven. 
Oen.  8.  14.  (.  scc.dayof  second  month,  earth  dried 

1  Kings  16.  10.  t.sfvejith  of  Asa,  Zimri  reigned,  JS. 
2Kinirs  25.27.  on  (.  srvrnlh  day  of  twelfth  month 

TWENTY  eight. 
Erod.  26.  2.  Irn^lli  of  curtain  (.  fiVA(  cubits,  36.  9 

2  Kings  10.36.  Jehu  roigncd  t.  and  eight  years 
2  CAron.  11.  21.  Rolmboam  begat  t.  eight  sons 

TWENTY  7iin«. 
Oen.  11.  24.  Nahor  lived  (.  vine  years  and  begat 
i  Kings  14.  2.  .Amaziah  reigned  (.  nine  years 
18.  2.  Ilezekiah  (.  nineyears,  2  CAr.25.'l.  |  29.  1. 
See  TnofSAND. 
TWICE. 
Oen.  41.  32.  for  that  the  dieam  was  doubled  t. 
43.  t  10.  surely  now  we  had  returned  t.  by  this 
Eiod.  16.  5.  and  it  shall  be  (.  as  much,  22. 
J^um.  2fl.  11.  with  his  rod  ho  smote  the  rock  t, 
1  Snm.  IP.  11.  David  avoided  out  of  his  presence  t 

1  King.f  II.  9.  which  had  appeared  unto  him  t. 

2  Kings  6.  10.  saved  himself  there  not  once  nor  t 
JVeh.  IX  20.  lodged  without  Jeriifalem  once  or  t 
.lob  33.  14.  for  God  speakeih  once,  yea  (.  yet  man 

40.  5.  yea  (.  hut  I  will  proceed  no  furliier 
42.  10.  Lord  give  Job  t.  as  much  oa  he  had  before 
Psiil.  62.  11.  (..have  Ihcard,  power bolongeth  toC. 
Eirl.  6.  6.  though  he  live  a  thousand  years*,  told 
Mark  14.  30.  cork  crow  (.  tliniishalt  deny  me,  TV. 
Luke  18.  12.  I  fast  (.  in  the  week,  I  give  tithes 
Jude  12.  (.  dead,  pliirkod  up  by  the  roots 

TWIGS. 

Ezek.  17.  4.  h"  crop|ied  off  the  top  of  his  yoiinj  L 

22.  I  will  crop  off  from  the  top  of  his  yonn«  t. 

TWILIGHT. 

1  Snm.  30.  17.  and  David  smote  them  from  the  t. 

2  Kinrrs  7.5.  the  lepers  rose  in  the  (.  to  go  to  ramp 
7.  iRe  Syrians  arose  and  fled  in  llin  f.  loft  tents 

.T,ib  3.  9.  let  the  stars  of  th"  (.  thereof  ho  dark 
24. 1.').  the  eye  of  the  adulterer  wniteth  for  the  (. 
Pror.  7.  9.  he  went  the  way  to  her  house  in  lh«  t. 
Ezrk.M.  6.  in  sight  thon  shall  carry  it  forth  in  the  t. 
7.1  digged, and  brought  it  forth  in  tho  /.  and  I  bar« 

12.  Ihc  i>rinco  shall  bear  it  in  the  (.  and  ^o  forlh 


TWO 

TWINED,  See.  Fink. 

TVVINKjLIiNG. 

I  Ctfr.  15.  j2.  be  all  changed,  iu  the  t.  uf  an  eye 

TVVliNS. 
Oe7i.2o.24.Rebekah  had  1. 1|  38.27.Taniarhaa  <. 
Cant.  4.  2.  wliereoC  every  one  boareUi  t.  ii.  (j. 
J.  tiiy  broaBiB  like  two  ruwa  that  are  I.  7.  3. 
TWO. 
Gen.  4.  19.  and  Lamech  took  unto  him  t.  wives 
6.  J9.  t.  of  every  sortshalt  thou  bring  into  tlie  ark 
7  2.  of  beasts  lliat  are  not  clean  by  t.  It.  J5. 
its.  23.  t.  nations  are  iu  tliy  womb,  and  t.  manner 
ot  (leojile  shall  be  separated  t'roiii  thy  bowels 
37.  3ti.  he  iiath  supplanted  nie  these  t.  times 
31^.10.  over  Jordan,  and  now  1  am  become  t. bands 
49.14.l6sachar  isan  ass  couching  between  t.  bunl. 
Kxod.  16.  S>2.  they  jjathered  t.  omers  lor  one  man 
iil.!^l.  it' he  continue  a  day  or  t.  not  be  jiuniihed 
Lev. 5.  7.  sh.ill  bring  t.  turtle-doves  or  t.  pigeons, 
12.  S.  I  14.  i-i.  I  iJ.  14,  U'J.  JV"u<H.  0.  10. 
11.  if  he  be  not  able  to  bring  t.  turtle-doves 
12. 5.  il  a  maid,  then  she  shall  be  unclean  t.  weeks 
H).7.Aaron  shall  take  t.  goats  ||  8.  cast  lots  upon  t. 
24.  6.  sha';  set  the  cakes  in  t.  rows,  six  on  a  row 
A'um.  7.  3  brought  a  waggon  for  t.  of  the  princes 

17.  I.  oten,  '.'3,  29,  35,  41,  47,  53,  59,  (55,  71. 
10. 2.  make  thee  (.  trumpets  of  silver  tor  calling 
22. 22.  his  ass,  Balaam's  t.  servants  were  with  liim 
29.  14.  the  t.  rams,  17,  20,  23,  2(i,  29,  32. 

31.  27.  and  divide  the  prev  into  t.  pans 
/>e^J^3.  8.  t.kings,  21. J  4.  47.  Jos/i.'i.  10.  |  9.  10 

17.  b.  at  the  inouih  oft.  or  three  witnesses  be  put 
to  death,  19.  15.  jVal.  Id.  Iti.  2  Cur.  13.  1. 
21.  15.  if  a  man  have  t.  wives,  one  beloved 

32.  30.  how  should  t.  put  ten  thousand  to  flight? 
'o»A.  14.  3.  t.  tribes,  4.  |  21.  16.  ]  21.  25.  t.  cities 

Judg.  5.  30.  divided  to  every  man  a  damsel  or  t. 
11.37.  let  me  alone  t.  months,  that  I  may  bewail 

16.  23.  that  I  may  be  avenged  for  my  t.  eyes 
Ruth  l.iO.they  t.went  till  they  came  to  Belh-lehem 

4.  11.  which  t.  did  build  the  house  of  Israel 

1  Sam.  1.  2.  f.  wives,  27.  3.  |  30.  5,  IM.  2  .Sa;/i.2.2. 

2  Sam.  8.2.  even  with  t.  lines  measured  ho  to  put 

1  Kings  2.  5.  and  what  he  did  to  the  t.  captains 
3.  18.  there  was  none  save  we  t.  in  the  house 

5.  12.  Hiram  aud  Sol.  t.  made  a  league  together 
14.  and  t.  months  they  were  at  home 

11.  29.  and  they  t.  were  alone  in  the  field 

12.  28.  Jeroboam  made  I.  calves,  2  Kings  17. 16. 

17.  12.  I  am  gathering  t.  sticks  to  dress  it 

18.  21.  how  long  halt  ye  between  t.  opinions? 
20.  27.  Israel  pitched  like  t.  little  flocks  of  kids 

2  Kings  1. 14.  fire  burnt  up  the  t.  former  captains 

2.  6.  the^  t.  went  on  ||  24.  came  forth  t.  she-bears 
5.  22.  give,  I  pray  thee,  /.  changes  of  garments 

23.  be  content,  take  t.  talents,  and  he  urged  him 
7.  1.  t.  measures  of  barley  fir  a  shekel,  16.  18. 

10.  4.  behold,  t.  kings  stood  not  before  him 

1  CAr.4.  5.  Ashur,  father  of  Tekoah,  had  t.  wives 
11.21.  of  three, he  was  more  honourable  than  the£. 

2  Chron.  24.  3.  Jehoiada  took  for  Joash  t.  wives 
Job  13.  20.  only  do  not  t.  things  unto  me,  then 

42.  7.  my  wrath  is  kindled  against  thy  t.  friends 
Prot'.  30.  7.  t.  things  have  I  required  of  thee 
Keel.  4. 9.  t,  are  better  than  one, because  they  have 
11.  if  I.  lie  together  ||  12.  t.  sliall  withstand  him 
Ca7it.  4.  5.  thy  t.  breasts  are  like  t.  young  roes,  7. 3. 

6. 13.  Shulamite,  as  it  were  company  of  t.  armies 
fan.  17.  fi.  t.  or  three  berries  in  top  of  the  bough 

47.  9.  but  these  t.  things  shall  come  to  thee 

51.  19.  these  t.  things  are  come  unto  thee 
Jer.  2.  13.  my  people  have  committed  t.  evils 

3.  14.  I  will  take  one  of  a  city,  and  t.  of  a  family 
F.zek.'i}.  19.thou  son  of  man  appoint  thee  t.  ways 

23.2.there  were  £.women,dau^hter8  of  one  mother 
3.5.  10.  hast  said,  these  I.  nalions  shall  be  mine 
37.  22.  and  ihey  shall  he  no  mon;  t.  nations 
47. 13.  tribes  of  Isr.  Joseph  shall  have  t.  portions 

J)an.  12.5.  looked, and  behold,  there  stood  other*. 

^mo.t  3. 3.  can  t.  walk  togother,except  thsy  be  agr. 

4.  8.  so  t.  or  ihree  cities  wandered  unto  one  city 
Zcch.A.  3.  t.  olive  trees  by  it,  1],  12. 

14.  these  af.  the  t.  anointed  ones  that  stand 

5.  9.  there  came  out  t.  women  who  had  wings 

6.  1.  four  chariots  from  between  t.  mountains 

11.  7.  1  look  unto  me  f.  staves  and  fed  the  flock 
13.  8.  t.  parts  therein  shall  be  cut  off  and  die 

Mat.(S.^\.no  man  can  serve  (masters,  Luke  10. 13. 
IH.  8.  than  having  t.  hands  or  t.  feet,  .A/arA 9. 43. 
9.  rather  than  having  t.  eyes,  Mark  9.  47. 
16.  not  hear,  then  take  with  thee  one  or  t.  itiore 

19.  that  if  t.  of  you  shall  agree  on  earth  touching 
2(1.  where  t.  or  three  are  gathered  in  my  name 

22.  40.  on  these  t.  hang  all  the  law  and  prophets 

24.  40.  then  shall  t.  he  in  the  field,  one  taken 

25.  17.  he  that  had  received  t.  he  gained  other  (. 
Mark  0. 7.  he  began  to  send  them  forth  by  t.  and  t. 

11.  1.  he  sendelh  t.  disciples,  14. 13.  Luke  19.29. 
12. 42.  she  threw  in  t.mite8,which  make  a  farthing 
16. 12.  after  that  Jesus  appeared  to  (.  of  them 


UNB 

Lvke  3.  11.  he  that  hath  t.  co  t«,  let  him  impart 
7.  41.  a  certain  creduor  whieli  liud  t.  ai  blois 
9. 3.  neither  lake  money,  nor  Jiave  t.  coau  ajnece 
10.35.  took  out  t.  pence  and  gave  them  lo  the  liosi 
Jlcts  1.24.sliew  wliuthutol  tliuse  MJiou  bust  ohoatii 
1  Cur.  6.  10.  for  t.  shall  be  one  Hush,  Lpk.  it.  31. 
14.  27.  let  it  be  by  t.  or  at  the  iiiosl  by  three 
29.  let  prophets  speak  t.  or  three,  and  let  othet 
Gal.  4.24.an  allegory,  for  these  are  the  t.  coveiiuiiis 
FliU.  1.  23.  for  1  am  m  a  strait  betwi.tt  t.  a  desire 
1   Tun.  5.  19.  but  belbie  t.  or  three  witnesses 
Hcb.  6.  18.  that  by  t.  immutable  tilings  we  iniglil 

10.  28.  died  without  mercy  under  t. or  three  witn. 
liev.  9.  12.  there  come  I.  woes  nioie  iieiealier 

11.  3.  1  will  give  power  to  my  t.  witnesses 
4.  these  are  t.  olive  trees  and  t.  candlesticks 
10.  because  these  t.  prophets  tormenled  tlicin 

12.  14.  aud  to  the  woman  were  given  t.  wings 

13.  11.  and  he  had  t.  horns  like  u  lamb,  spaKe  as 
See    Daugutkrs,    Days,    Kidnkys,    Itambs, 

Sons. 

TWO  men. 
Exod.  2. 13.  t.  men  of  the  Hebrews  strove  together 
J\i'um.  11.  26.  there  remained  t.  men  in  the  camp 
./ash.  2.  1.  he  sent  out  i.  meii  to  spy  secretly 

4.  Ilahab  hid  the  t.  men  ||  23.  the  t.  vieti  returned 

1  Sam.  10.  2.  find  t.  men  by  Rachel's  sepulchre 

2  Sam.  12.  1.  there  were  t.  men  in  one  city,  one  rich 
1  Kings  2. 32.  lell  on  t.  men  more  righteous  than  he 

21. 10.  sett.  7Hcn  sonsof  Belial  beloreWaboih,  13. 
Mat.  9.  27.  t.  blind  men  followed  him,  crying 
Luke  9.  30.  behold,  there  talked  with  him  t.  men 

17.  34.  t.  men  in  one  bed  ||  36.  t.  men  in  the  field 

18.  10. 1,  men  went  up  to  the  temple  to  pray 
24.  4.  as  they  were  perplexed,  behold,  t.  men  stood 

by  them  in  shining  garments,  .dels  1.  10. 
John  S.  17.  that  the  testimony  oft.  men  is  true 
Jicts  9.  38.  they  sent  t.  men  to  I'eter,  desiring  him 

TWO  tables. 
Exod.  31.  18.  gave  to  Moses  t.  tables  of  testimony 
32.  15.  the  t.  tables  were  in  his  hands,  34.  •-:[). 
34.  1.  hew  thee  t.  tables  of  stone,  Vcut.  10.  1. 

4.  he  hewed  t.  tables  of  stone,  heut.  10.  3. 
Deut.  4.  13.  he  wrote  upon  the  1.  tables,  5.  22. 
9.  10.  the  Lord  delivered  unto  nie  t.  tables,  11. 
1  Kings  S.  9.  there  was  nothing  in  the  ark  save  thi 
t.  tables  of  stone  put  at  Horeb,  2  Chr.  5.  10 
EiekA0.2\).t.tables  on  this  side  1|  iO.t.tables  on  that 

TWO  years. 
Gen.ll.lQ.  begat  Arphaxad  t.  years  after  the  flood 
45.6.  these  t.  year*  hath  thelamine  been  in  land 
1  i>am.  13.  1.  when  Saul  had  reigned  t.  years 
•2  .Sam. 2. 10.  Ish-bosheth  Saul's  son  reigned  t.j^car* 
13.  23.  after  t.  years,  Absalom  had  sheep-shearers 
14. 2d.  Absalom  dwelt  /.  years  in  Jerusalem 

1  Kings  15.  25.  Nadab  reigned  over  Israel  I.  years 
16.  8.  Elah  II  22.  51.  Ahaziah  reigned  t.  years 

2  Kings  15.  23.  Pekahiab  ||  21.  19.  Amon,  2  Chr. 

33.  21. 

2  Chron.  21.  19.  after  t.  years  his  bowels  fell  out 
.7<r.  28.3.  within  t.  years  I'll  bring  again  vessels, 11. 
Jimos  1. 1.  words  of  Amos,  t.y.  belbre  earthquake 
Mat.  2.  16.  slew  children  from  t.  years  and  under 
Mcls  19.  10.  t.  years  they  in  Asia  heard  the  v^ord 
28.  30.  Paul  dwelt  t.  years  in  his  hired  house 

TWO-FOLU. 
Mat.  23. 15.  ye  make  him  t.  more  the  child  of  hell 
See  Twenty,   Thirty,  Forty,  Fifty,   Huk- 
£RED,  Thousand. 

TYPES. 
1  Cor.  10.  til.  these  things  happened  to  them  for  t 


UNC 


U. 


UMPIRE. 
Job  9.  t  33.  neither  is  there  any  u.  betwixt  us 

UNACCUSTOMED. 
Jer.  31.  18.  Ephraim,  as  a  bullock  a.  to  the  yoke 

UNADVISEDLY. 
Psal.  106.  33.  so  that  he  spake  u.  with  liis  lips 

UNAWARES. 
Gen.  31.  20.  Jacob  stole  away  u.  to  Laban,  2fi 
J^uin.  35.  11.  slayer  may  flee  thither,  who  killelh 
any  person  «.  15.  Deut.  4.  42.  Josh.  20.  3,  9. 
Psal.  35.  8.  let  destruction  come  on  him  at  «. 
Luke  21.  34.  and  so  that  day  come  upon  you  «. 
Gal.  2.  4.  because  of  false  brethren  u.  brought  in 
Neb.  13.  2.  for  some  have  entertained  angels  u. 
.fade  4.  for  theee  are  certain  men  crejit  in  u. 

UNBELIEVERS. 
Luke  12.  46.  will  appoint  him  his  portion  with  u. 

1  Cor.  6.  6.  but  brother  goetli  to  law  before  u. 
14.  23.  and  there  come  in  those  that  are  «. 

2  Cor.  6.  14.  be  ye  not  unequally  yoked  with  u. 
UNBELIEVING. 

^cts  14.  2.  the  u.  Jews  stirred  up  the  Gentiles 
1  Cor.  7. 14.  tor  the  u.  husband  is  sanctified  by  the 
wife,  the  u.  wife  is  sanctified  by  the  husband 
15.  but  if  the  u.  depart,  let  him  depart,  a  brother 
4P 


Tit.  1.  15.  unto  them  ilmt  are  «.  i»  nothing  pnr« 
liev.  21.  6.  the  u.  bhall  have  their  pail  in  the  laia 

UNBELILF 
Is  taken  sometimes  jvr  weak  faith,  ai  in  Mark 
9.  24,  Lord,  1  believe,  lielp  ihoii  mine  unbelief, 
h  IS  a  cajiital  and  fountain  evtl  ;  and  gene- 
rally it  IS  taken  fur  a  prication  anUutlir  want 
uf  faith,  whtn  the  promises  ana  threaleittngt 
in  God's  word  are  whuily  distrusted.      'J  hose 
Jews  who  aid  not  rtly  on  Gou's  uurd,  but  re- 
jected the  promises,  nbdlid  ugiiin.'<t  the  pre- 
cepts,  und  murmured  against  the  proviuence 
of  Gud,cvuldnut  enter  into  the pruiuised  land, 
but  were  consumed  m  the  iinldeiness,  Uelj.  3.19. 
Wnii  this  nation  was  afterwards  nje.ct.d  by 
God,  because  of  their  uiibeliol ;  they  uuuld  not 
aeccjil  (//Ciiribt;  nor  ucUnowledge  him  for  the 
Messiah,  AuHi.  U.  1.0,  because  oi  uiibtliif,  they 
weie   broken   olK     .And  as  the  Jsruilites,  by 
reason  of  unbelief,  were  not  allowed  to   enter 
into  Canaan,  so   unbelievers  shall   not  enter 
into  heaven.     The  law  of  Jaith  is  unalterable. 
John  3.  30,  He  that  believtth  not  the  Son  shall 
not  sen  lift;. 
Unbelief  rcni/<r.s  the  benefits  of  Christ  fruitless 
and  inegecluul;  it  is  said.  Ma  k  6.  5,  6.  that 
Christ  could  do  no  mighty  uurhs   in  his  own 
country,  because  of  tlieir   unueitef ;    it  made 
them   unfit  for  receiving  benefl  Jroiii  his  mi- 
racles, and  therefore  he  suspended  his  mira- 
culous power.  Unbelief  often  bcgrts  confusion, 
and  disables  men  to  do  that  which  otherwise 
they  Would  have  been  able  to  do,  if  they  had 
believed;  thus  when  the  man  brought  his  son, 
who  wa.s  a  lunatic,  to  the  apostlis,  to  be  cured 
by  them  ;  ihty  seeing  his  condition  so  bad,  by 
reason  of  the  devil  that  possessed  him,  and 
that  for  so  long  a  time  together,  questioned 
whither  the  power  they  had  received,  would 
inable  them  to  cast  him  out  and  cure  the  man, 
Mat.    17.    16.     Unbelief  hath   often   corporal 
punishment  attending  it :  Zachurias,  because 
he  believed  not  the  words  of  the  angi-l,  was 
struck  dumb  for  a  season,  Luke  1.  20.     Unbe- 
lievers have  Iheir  part  in   the   lake   ihat  burns 
with  fire  and   brimstone,   Ucv.  Hi.  8.     Christ 
died  not  to  expiate  final  infidelity.     This  sin 
charges  all  the  guilt  of  simiers   upon  them- 
selves :    It  renders   the   sufferings  of  (Jirtst 
fruitless  as  to  them  :  For  a  is  not  the  prepa- 
ration of  a  sovereign  remedy  that  cures  the 
disease,   but   the    application    of  it.     JJs  our 
fins   were    imputed  to  Christ,  upon    account 
of  his  union  with  us  in  nature,  und  his  con- 
sent to  become  our  surety  ;  so  his  righteous- 
ness  is  meritoriously  imputed  unto  us,  upon 
vur  union  with  him  by  a  true  and  livily  faith. 
It  is  not  from  any  defect  of  nierey  in  Goii,  or 
righteousness  in  Christ,  but  for  the  obstinate 
refusal  of  it,  that    men   certainly  perish   in 
unbelief. 
Mat.  13.  58.  he  did  not  many  works,  because  of  h 
17.  20.  couht  not  ea>.l  him  out,  because  of  your  u. 
Mark  6.  6.  and  he  marvelled  because  of  tlieir  u. 
9.  24.  Lord,  I  believe,  hcl|>  ihou  mine  u. 
IG.  14.  and  upbraided  them  with  their  u. 
/}o7;i.  3. 3.  shall  their  ii.make  lailh  wiihout  effectt 
4.  20.  he  staggered  not  at  the  promise  through  u. 
II.  20.  well,  tiecause  of  u.  iliey  were  broken  off 
23.  if  they  abide  not  still  in  u.  shall  be  grafted 
.30.  yet  have  now  obtained  mercy  thro'  their  tu 
.32.  for  God  hath  concluded  them  all  in  u. 
Eph.  5.  t  6.  the  wrath  of  God  on  the  children  of  a, 
1  Tim.  1.  13.  because  I  did  it  ignorantiv  in  u. 
Heb.  3. 12.  lest  Ijc  in  any  of  you  an  evil  jieaitofu. 

19.  they  could  not  enter  in  because  of  w.  4.  6. 
4.  11.  lest  unv  fall  afici  tin:  siime  example  of  a. 

UNHL.AMEABLE. 
Col.  1.  22.  to  present  you  holy,  u.  in  his  siglit 
1  Thess.  3.  J3.  he  may  stablish  vour  hearis  v. 

UNDL.AMFABLY. 
1  Thcss.'i.  10.  how  V.  we  have  behaved  ourselve* 

UNCERTAIN. 
1  Cor.  14.  8.  if  the  trumpet  give  an  «.  sound 
1  Tim.  C.  17. nor  trust  in  u.  riches,  but  in  God 

UNCERTAINLY. 
1  Cor.  9.  2(i.  I  therefore  f  o  run,  not  as  u.  so  fight  I 

UNCHANGEABLE. 
Heb.  7.  34.  but  llil>!  man  hnfh  an  u.  priesthood 

UNCIRCUMCIPED. 
Oen.  17.  14.  the  u.  man-child  shall  be  rut  off 
34.  14.  cannot  give  our  sister  lo  one  that  is  ii. 
i'^xod.  6.12.  Pharaoh  hear  me  who  am  of  «.  lips, 30. 
12.  48.  for  no  u.  person  sliiill  eat  of  the  passovcr 
Lev.  19.  23.  shall  count  the  fruit  u.  three  years 
26.  41.  if  then  their  u._heart9  be  humbled 
Josh.  .5.  7.  Joshua  circumcised,  for  they  were  «. 
Judg.  14.  3.  that  thou  goest  lo  t!ike  a  wife  of  the  ic. 
1.5. 18.  now  shall  I  fall  into  the  hiinds  of  these  v. 
1  Sam.  14.  6.  lot  tu  go  to  tha  garrisou  of  tli«  «k 


UNC 

1  $«ni.  17.  36.  for  who  ii  this  u.  Philistine  1  36. 
31. 4.  lest  these  u.  come  anil  abuse  ine,  1  CAr.  10. 4. 
B  Sam.  I.  '20.  lest  the  daughters  of  the  u.  triumph 
/ta.  ii.  1.  there  shall  no  rnorccume  into  ihcethe  u. 
Jer.  6.  10.  tlieir  ear  is  u.  they  cannot  hearken 
9.  ^.  I  will  punish  the  circumcised  with  the  u. 

2(>.  these  naliuns  are  u.  all  house  of  Israel  are  u. 
Ezek.  i!0.  10.  thou  shalt  die  the  death  of  the  u. 
31. 18.  thou  Shalt  lie  in  the  midst  of  the  u.  32.  19, 
21,  24,  25,  2t),  27,  28,  2'J,  30,  :t2. 
44.  7.  ye  have  brought  strangers  u.  in  heart  and  u. 
in  flesh  into  my  sanctuary  to  pollute  it,  9. 
Jlctsl.  51.  yestitf-necked  and  u.  in  heart  and  ears 
i\.  3.  thou  wentesi  in  to  men  u.  and  didst  eat 
Rom.  4.  11.  lailh  which  he  had  yet  being  u.  12. 
1  Cor.  7.  let.  circumcised,  let  him  not  become  u. 

LfNClKUUMCISlON. 
Ram.^.25.  if  a  breaker,  thy  circumcision  is  madeu. 

26.  if  the  a.  keep  the  righteousness  of  the  law, 
shall  not  his  u.  be  counted  for  circumcision? 

27.  shall  not  u.  which  is  by  nature  judge  thee  ? 

3.  30.  which  shall  justify  the  u.  through  faith 

4.  9.  Cometh  '.Hs  blessedness  on  circumcision  orjt. 
lO.how  was  it  then  reckoned?  when  he  was  in  cir- 
cumcision or  in  u.  not  in  circumcision  hutu. 

1  Cor.  7. 18.  is  any  man  called  in  m.?  let  hira  not  be 

19.  circumcision  is  nothing,  and  u.  is  nothing 
0'a2.2.7.when  sawthe  gospel  of  «. committed  to  me 

5.  6.  neither  circumcision  availeth  nor  u.  6.  15. 
Spk.  2.11. who  are  calleil  u.  by  that  called  circum. 
<.-o<.2.13.  nnd  you  being:  dead  in  the  u.  of  your  flesh 

3.  11.  neither  circumcision  nor  u.  but  Christ  is  all 
UNCLE. 
JL,?o.  10.  4.  the  son  of  Uzziel,  the  u.  of  Aaron 
20.20.  if  a  man  lie  with  his  u.  wife,  he  hath  unco- 
vered his  u.  n-ikediiess,  they  shall  bear  their  sin 
9^.  49.  either  his  u.  or  u.  son  may  redeem  him 
I  Sam.  10.  14.  and  Saul's  u.  said  unto  him,  IS. 

14.  50.  captain  was  Abner,  son  of  Ner,  Haul's  u. 
I  Chron.  27.  32.  Jonathan  David's  u.  a  counsellor 
Eslk.  2.7.Mordecai  brought  up  his  u.  daughter,  15. 
Mr.  32.  7.  Hanameel  the  son  of  Shallum  t'jine  u. 
8.  10  Hanameel  my  u.  son  came  unto  me,  9, 12. 
Amos  6   10.  and  a  man's  u.  shall  take  him  up 

UNCLEAN. 
Lev.  t>.  2.  if  a  .^oul  touch  any  u.  thing  the  carcase 
of  u.  cattle  or  u.  things,  he  shall  be  u.  11. 2(). 

10.  lU.  |«itdiflVrence  between  u.  and  clean,  11.47. 

11.  4.  it  is  K.  to  you,  5,  fi,  7,  29.  Dcut.  14.  19. 
S.they  are  u.unto  you,  2t>,  27, 28,  31.  JJeut.  14. 7. 
24.  for  these  ye  shall  be  u.  u.  until  the  evening, 

2.'i,  2H,  31,  32,  33,  39,  40.  |  14.  40. 
i  15.  5,  6,  7,  8,  10,  11,  16,  17,  18, 
19,  21,  22,  23,  27.  |  17.  15.  \  22.  6. 
JVum.  19.  7,  8,  10,  21,  22. 
32.  it  Bhall  be  u.  33,  34,  35,  36,  38.  |  1.5.  4,  9, 
20,  24,  26. 

12.  2.  then  she  shall  be  u.  seven  days,  .5.  |  15.25. 

13.  3.  priest  shall  look  on  him  and  pronounce 
him  u.  8,  U,  I.'),  20,  22,  25,  27,  30,  44,  59. 

It.  for  he  is  u.   14.  3ii,  44,  46.   |   15.  2,  24. 
45.the  lcper,in  whom  the  plague  is,  shall  cry,K.u. 
14.40.  they  shall  cast  them  into  an  m.  place,  41,45. 
57.  to  leach  when  it  is  u.  and  when  it  is  clean 
22..'i.who«o  louchcth,  whereby  he  may  be  made  u. 
•Vuin.  6.  7.  he  shall  not  make  himself  u.  for  father 
Dtut.  12.  15.  u.  and  clean  cat  thereof,  22.  1 15.22. 
J'lxh.  22.  19.  if  the  lanil  of  your  possession  be  u. 
F.ira  9.  II. the  hind  ve  go  to  possess  is  an  u.  land 
.Inh  36.  I  \.  the  life  of  hypocrites  is  among  the  u. 
f.r.il.  9.  2.  there  is  one  cvnnt  to  the  clean  and  u. 
ha.  6.  5.  I  am  undone,  f  am  a  man  of  u.  lips,  I 
dwell  in  the  midst  of  a  people  ofu.  lips 
3>.  8.  be  a  way,  the  «.  shall  not  pass  over  it 
52.  1.  there  shall  no  more  come  into  thee  the  u. 
/.(i(n.4.15  (l"p:irt  ye, it  is  u. depart, ilepart,touch  not 
I'.ifk.  22.2')  |iiil  no  dilFi'rence  between  clean  and  u. 
44.2  l.ciii.^i'  them  discern  between  theu.and  clean 
Hos.  9.  3.  ilipy  shall  eat  u.  things  in  Assyria 
///"-.  2.  13.  if  (ine  that  is  u.  touch  it,  shall  it  be  u. 

14.  and  tlinl  which  they  ofler  there  is  u. 

l.uk'  4.33.  a  man  who  had  a  spirit  of  an  «.  devil 

Jlcls  10.  2i.  not  rail  any  man  common  or  u.  11.  8. 

Hon.  14.  It.  nothing  is  u.  of  itself,  but  to  him  that 

estncmeth  any  thing  to  be  u.  to  him  it  is  u. 

1  Cyr.  7.  14.  else  were  your  children  u.  but  now 

2  Cor.  6.  17.  touch  not  u.  thing,  I  will  receive  you 
F.pK.  5.  .5.  that  no  u.  jierson  hath  any  inheritance 
Heh.  9.  13.  the  ashes  of  a  heifer  sprinkling  the  u. 
hev.  18. 2.Hal)vlon  is  become  a  cageof  every  u.bird 

See  Hkaht,  Spirit,  Tiiino. 

n.-^CLEAN   SpiriU. 

Mat.  10.   1.  ho   gave   power  against  u.  ajriritu, 

Mark  6.  7. 

Mark  1.27.  he  cornmandcth  u.  .ipiril.i^  f,uke\.  36. 

3.  II.  and  «.  npiritn,  when  they  fnv/  him,  cried 

5.13.lhe  K. spirits  went  out  and  entered  into  swine 

Jictn  5.  16.  then  which  wore  ve.xed  withu.«pirif,» 

8.  7.  for  «.  .ipirit.n  came  out  of  mnny  po^srHscd 

Bmt.  16.  13.  I  taw  tliree  u.  gpiriit  lik«  frun  cuioa 

•SO 


UND 

UNCLEANNESS. 
Lev.  5.  3.  if  he  touch  the  u.  of  man,  whatsoever  u. 
it  be,  a  man  shall  be  defiled,  7.  21.  |  22.  5. 
7.  20.  that  eatetii,  having  his  u.  on  him,  22.  3. 

14.  19.  for  him  that  is  to  be  cleansed  from  his  u. 

15.  31.  thus  ye  shall  separate  Israel  from  their  u. 

18.  19.  as  long  as  she  is  put  apart  for  her  u. 
JVum.  5.  19.  il  thou  hast  not  gone  aside  to  u. 

19.  13.  he  shall  be  unclean,  his  u.  is  yet  upon  him 
JJeut.  23.  10.  by  reason  ofu.  that  chanceth  him 

24.  1.  because  he  hath  found  some  u.  in  her 
2  Sam.  11.  4.  for  she  was  purified  from  her  v.. 
2  Chron.  29  16.  the  priests  brought  out  all  the  u. 
Ezra  9.  11.  they  have  filled  the  land  with  their  u. 
Eiek.  36.  17.  way  ag  the  u.  of  a  removed  woman 

39.  24.  accordmg  to  their  u.  have  I  done  to  them 
Zecli.  13. 1. shall  be  a  fountain  opened  for  sin  and  a. 
Mat.  23. 27.  but  are  within  full  of  bones,  and  all  u. 
Rom.  1.  24.  wherefore  God  also  gave  them  U))  to  u. 

6. 19.  ye  have  yielded  your  members  servants  to  u. 
2  Cor.  12.  21.  and  have  not  repented  of  the  u. 
Gal.  5.  19.  the  works  of  the  flesh  are  these  u.  strife 
Eph.  4.  19.  to  work  all  u.  with  greediness 

5.  3.  all  u.  let  not  be  once  named  among  you 
Cul.  3.5.mortify  therefore  fornication,  u.  and  covet. 

1  T/tess.  2.  3.  for  our  exhoitation  was  not  of  u. 
4.  7.  God  hath  not  called  us  to  u.  but  to  holiness 

2  Pet.  2. 10.  them  that  walk  in  the  lust  ofu. 
UNCLEANNES3ES. 

Ezek.  36.  29.  I  will  save  you  from  all  your  u. 

UNCLOTHED. 
2  Cor.  5.  4.  not  for  that  we  would  be  u.  but  clothed 

UNCOMELY. 

1  Cor.  7.  36.  that  hebehaveth  u.  toward  his  virgin 

12.23.ouru.  parts  have  more  abundant  comeliness 

UNCONDEMNED. 

J)cts  16.  37.  they  have  beaten  us  openly  u.  Romans 

22.  25.  to  scourge  a  man  that  is  a  Roman  and  u. 

UNCORRUPTNE3S. 
T^t.2.  7.  in  doctrine  shewing  u.  gravity,  sincerity 

UNCOVER. 
Lev.  10.  6.  u.  not  your  heads  neither  rend  clothes 
18.  6.  not  u.  nakedness  of  one  that  is  near  of  kin 

7.  the  nakedness  of  thy  father  shalt  thou  not  u. 

8.  nakedness  of  thy  father's  wife  ||  9.  of  thy  sister 

10.  nakedness  of  thy  son's  daughter  shalt  not  u. 

11.  the  nakedness  of  thy  father's  wife's  daughter 

12.  father's  sister  ||  13.  mother's  sister,  20.  19. 

14.  not  u.  the  nakedness  of  thy  father's  brother 

15.  thy  daughter-in-law  ||  16.  thy  brother's  wife 
17.notu.thenakcdnessof  awoman  andherdaugh. 
18.  shalt  not  «.  the  nakedness  of  thy  wife's  sister 
19.not  u.nakednesB  of  a  woman  put  apart,20.18. 

21.  10.  the  high-priest  shall  not  u.  his  head 
JVum.  5.  18.  the  priest  shall  u.  the  woman's  head 
Ruth  3.  4.  that  thou  shalt  go  in  and  u.  his  feet 

1  .Sa7n.20.t  2.he  will  u.  mine  ear  |j  1 12.  u.thine  ear 
Isa.  47.  2.  u.  thy  locks,  u.  the  thigh,  pass  over 

UNCOVERED. 
Gen.  9.  21.  and  Noah  was  u.  within  his  tent 
Lev.  20.  II.  he  hath  u.  his  father's  nakedness 

17.  u.  his  sister's  |{  20.  u.  his  uncle's  nakedness 

18.  she  hath  u.  the  fountain  of  her  blood 
Ruth  3.  7.  she  came  softly  and  u.  his  feet  and  laid 

2  Sam.  6.  20.  who  u.  himself  as  the  vain  fellows 
rsa,  20.  4.  led  away  even  with  their  buttocks  u. 

22. 0.  Elain  bare  the  quiver,  and  Kir  u.  the  shield 
47.  3,  thy  nakedness  shall  he  u.  thy  shame  seen 
Jer.  49.  10.  but  I  have  u.  his  secret  places 
K:et.  4.  7.  and  thine  arm  shall  bo  u.  shalt  prophesy 
Hab.  2.  16.  drink,  and  let  thy  foreskin  be  u. 
Mark  2.  4.  they  u.  the  roof  where  he  was 
1  Cor.  11.  5.  that  prophesietli  with  her  head  u. 

13.  is  it  comely  that  a  woman  pray  unto  God  u.  7 
UNCOVERETIl. 

Lev.  20.19.fhr  he  u.  his  near  kin,  bear  their  iniquity 
Dcut.  27.  20.  because  he  u.  his  father's  skirt 

1  .Sam.  22.  t  8.  there  is  none  that  u.  mine  ear 

2  .Sam.  6.  20.  as  one  of  the  vain  fellows  u.  himself 
Job  .33.  t  16.  ho  u.  the  ears  of  men  and  scalcth 

UNCTION. 
1  John  2.  20.  but  ye  have  an  u.  from  the  Holy  One 

UN  DEFILED. 
Paal.  119.  1.  blessed  are  the  u.  in  the  way 
Cant.  5.  2.  open  to  me  my  love,  my  dove,  my  u. 

6.  9.  my  dove,  my  u.  is  one  ;  she  is  the  only  one 
ffeb.  7.  26.  a  high-priest  who  is  holy,  harmless,  u. 

13.4.  marriage  is  honourable  in  all,  and  the  bed  u. 
./am.  1.  27.  pure  religion  and  u.  bcfoio  God 
1  Pet.  1.  4.  to  an  inheritance  incorruptible,  u. 

UNDER. 
Gen.  49.  2,'>.  blessingii  of  the  deep  that  lieth  u. 
Ezod.  6. 6. 1  will  bring  you  out  from  u.  the  burdens 
.fo.ih.  1.  21.  in  the  midst  of  my  tent  and  silvern,  it 
Ruth  2.  12.  u.  whoso  wings  thou  art  come  to  trust 
1  .V(i;n.21.3.  what  is  u.  thy  hand  give  me  five  loives 

1  Kinir'  18.  23.  lay  It  on  wood,  and  put  no  fire  u. 

2  Kinirs  H.20.Edom  revolted  from  u.hand  of  Judah 
13.  5.  Israel  went  out  from  u.  the  Syrians 

2  Gtr  28. 10.  ye  purpote  to  keep  v.  Judah  for  bond. 


UND 

P^aZ.  44 .5.  through  thy  name  will  we  tread  them  u, 
Cant.  8.  3.  his  right  hand  should  be  u.  my  head 
Isa.  57. 5.  with  idols  u.  every  green  tree,  .ler  2.  20 
.Jer.  10.  11.  the  gods,  they  shall  perish  from  iha 
earth,  and  from  u.  these  heavens,  Aam.  3. 66 
Dan.  4.  14.  let  the  beasts  get  away  from  u.  it 
9.  12.  u.  the  whole  heaven  haih  not  been  done 
JJos.  4.  12.  have  gone  a  whoring  from  u.  their  God 
Mat.  2. 16.  slew  children  from  two  years  old  and  u 

8.  9.  [  am  u.  authority,  having  soldiers  u.  me 
I^uke  7.  6.  that  thou  shouldest  enter  u.  my  roof 
./oAh  1.48. when  thou  wast  u.the  fig-tree,  I  saw  thee 
Rom.  3. 9.  we  have  proved  that  they  are  all  u.  sin 

6.  15.  because  we  are  not  u.  the  law,  but  u.  grac« 
7. 14. the  law  is  spiritual, but  I  am  carnal, sold  u.sin 
1  Cor.  6.  12.  I  will  not  be  brought  u.  power  of  any 

9.  20.  to  them  that  are  u.  the  law,  as  u.  the  law 
27. 1  keep  u.  my  body  and  bring  it  into  subjectioo 

10.  1.  how  that  all  our  fathers  were  u.  the  cloud 
Oal.  3.  10.  u.  the  curse  ||  22.  concluded  all  u.  sin 

23.  before  faith  came,  we  were  kept  u.  the  law 
25.faith  is  come,  we  are  no  longer  u.a  school-ma». 
Phil.  2.10.of  things  in  earth  and  things  u.  the  earth 
1  Tim.  6.  1.  as  many  servants  as  are  u.the  yoke 
Hcb.  7.  11.  for  «.  it  the  peojile  received  the  law 
Jude  6.  he  hath  reserved  in  chains  w.  darkness 
See     Feet,    Hi.m,    LAw,    Me,    Sun,    Thee, 
TUE.M,   Us. 

UNDERGIRDING. 
.'Jets  27.  17.  they  used  helps,  u.  the  ship,  fearing 

UNDERNEATH. 
Deut.  33.  27.  and  u.  are  the  everlasting  arms 
UNDEKSETTERS. 

1  Kings  1.  30.  the  four  corners  thereof  had  u.  34. 
UNDERSTAND. 

Gen.  11.  7.  they  may  not  u.  one  another's  speech 
41.  15.  I  heard  say  that  thou  canst  u.  a  dream 
J^um.  16.  30.  ye  shall  u.  that  these  have  provoked 
Z>cu«. 28.49.a  nation  whose  tongue  thou  shall  no!  u 

2  AVh^s18.26.  speak,  I  pray  thee, to  thy  servants  in 
the  Syrian  language,  for  we  u.  it,  Jsa.  36. 11 

1  Chron.  28.  19.  the  Lord  made  me  ii.  in  writing 
JVch.  8.  3.  he  read  before  those  that  could  «. 

7.  theLevitee  caused  the  people  to  u.the  law,8,13 
.Job  6.  24.  cause  me  to  u. wherein  I  have  erred 

23.  5.  I  would  u.  what  he  would  say  unto  me 
2t).  14.  the  thunder  of  his  power  who  can  u  7 

32.  9.  neither  do  the  aged  u.  judgment 
36.  29.  can  any  u.  the  epreadings  of  the  clouds? 

Psal.  14.  2.  if  there  were  any  that  did  u.  53.  2. 
19.  12.  who  can  u.  his  errors  ?  cleanse  thou  idc 
82.  5.  they  know  not,  neither  will  they  u. 
92.  0.  knoweth  not,  neither  doth  a  foul  u.  this 
94.8.  u.  ye  brutish  among  the  people,  ar>d.  ye  fools 
107.  43.  they  shall  u.  the  loving  kindness  of  the  L 
119.  27.  make  me  to  u.  the  way  of  thy  precepts 
100.  I  H.  more  than  the  ancients,  because  I  keep 

Prov.  2. 5.  then  shalt  thou  u.  the  fear  of  the  Lord 

9.  then  shalt  thou  u.  righteousness  and  equity 

8.  5.  O  ye  simple,  il.  wisdom,  and,  ye  fools,  be  of 
14.  8.  the  wisdom  of  the  prudent  is  to  u.his  way 

19.  25.  reprove  one,  and  he  will  u.  knowledge 

20.  24.  how  can  a  man  then  «.  his  own  way  ? 

28.  5.  evil  men  u.  not  judgment,  hut  they  that 
seek  the  Lord  tt   all  things 

29.  19.  for  though  he  u.  he  will  not  answer 
Isa.  0.  9.  he  said,  hear  ye  indeed,  but  u.  not 

10.  lest  thiy  u.  with  their  heart,  .John  12.  40. 
28.  9.  whom  shall  he  make  to  u.  doctcine? 

19.  it  shall  be  a  vexation  only  to  u   the  report 
.32.  4.  the  heart  of  the  rash  shall  u.  knowledge 

33.  19.  a  stammering  tongue  that  thou  canst  not  u 
40. 1 14.  and  who  made  him  «.  and  taught  hifri  ? 
41.  20.  u.  together  that  the  Lord  hath  done  this 
43.  10.  that  ye  may  know  and  u.  that  I  am  he 
44. 18.  he  halh  shut  their  nearts,  that  they  cannot  u 
56.  11.  and  they  are  shepherds  that  cannot  w. 

./rr.  9.  12.  who  is  the  wise  man  that  may  u.  this  ? 
F.irk.  3.6.  to  people  whoso  words  thou  canst  not  u 
Dan.  8.  16.  make  this  man  to  u.  the  vision 
17.  but  ho  said  unto  me,  u.  O  son  of  man 

9.  13  and  u.  thy  truth  ||  23.  w.  the  mailer,  25. 

10.  12.  from  the  day  thou  didst  set  thy  heart  Ion 
14.  I  am  come  to  make  Ihee  u.  what  shall  l>ofatl 

11.  33.  and  they  that  u.  shall  instriirl  many 

12.  10.  the  wicked  shall  not  u.  the  wise  shall  u. 
IJos.  4.  14.  the  people  that  doth  not  u.  shall  fall 

14  9.  who  is  wise,  and  ho  shall  a.  those  ihingn? 
Mic.  4.  12.  neither  u.  they  the  counsel  of  the  Lord 
Mnt.  13.  13.  ihcy  hnnr  not,  neither  do  they  u. 
14. hear  and  not  «.||  15.  10.  hearand  H.^fnr*7.14 

15.  17.  do  mil  ye  yet «.  ?  16.  9,  1 1.  Mark  8.  17,  21 

24. 15.  whoso  rcadelh,  let  him  ii.  Mark  13.  14. 
Mark  4.  12.  nnd  not  perceive,  that  henrine  th^ 
mnyhearandiiotu.  /,i(*r8.  10.  .^ets^.K 

14.  CH,  1  know  not  nor  v.  I  whril  thou  sayest 
J.uke  24.  45.  Chat  they  might  u.  the  scriptures 
.lohn  8.  43.  why  do  ye  not  u.  my  sp'"och  ? 
Rom.  15.  21.  thov  that  have  not  hcanl  shall  k. 
I  Cor.  13.  2.  and  tho'  I  u.  nil  myslerici  am  nothinf 


UND 

Heb.llM.  thro'  faith  we  u.  the  worlds  were  fVamcd 
2Fe£.2  12.  but  these  speak  evil  of  things  tliey  a.  not 

UNDERSTANDEST. 
Job  15.  9.  what  «.  thou,  which  is  not  in  lis  1 
I'sal.  139.  2.  thou  m.  my  thoughts  afar  off 
Mr.  5.  15.  neither  u.  thou  wliat  they  say 
Acts  8.  30.  PliiUp  said,  u.  thou  wliat  thou  readest 

UNDERSTANDETH. 
lCAron.23.9.  Lord  u.  the  imaginations  of  thoughts 
Job  2ei.  2;}.  God  «.  the  way  thereof  and  knowetli 
Psitl.  49.  -0.  man  that  is  in  honour  and  u.  not 
I'rov.  S.  fl.  they  are  all  plain  to  him  that  u. 

14.  6  but  knowledge  is  easy  unto  him  that  u. 
Jer.  C  24.  let  liim  glory  in  this,  that  he  u.  me 
*tfa<.1.119.when  any  heaieth  the  word  and  u. it  not 

23.  is  he  that  heareth  the  word  and  u.  it 
Jinm.  3.  inhere  is  none  that  u.  none  seckcthGod 
1  Cor.  14.  2.  speaketh  not  to  men,  for  no  man  u. 
Iti.  say  amen,  seeing  he  u.  not  what  thou  sayest 
UNDERSTANDING. 
£zo(/.31.3. 1  have  filled  Bezaleel  with  wisdom  and 
u.  and  in  knowledge,  35.  31.  |  36.  1. 
Dcut.  4.  6.  for  this  is  your  wisdom  and  your  u. 
32.  28.  neither  is  there  any  «.  in  them 
lAV/i^j,-3.11.  but  hast  asked  for  thyself  u.  to  discern 
4.  29.  and  God  gave  Solomon  wisdom  and  u. 
7.  14.  Hiram  was  tilled  with  wisdom  and  u. 

1  Chr'.-n.  12.  32.  were  men  that  had  u.  of  the  times 
22.  12.  only  Ihe  Lord  give  thee  wisdom  and  u. 

2  C/ir.  2. 12.  given  David  a  wise  son  endued  with  u. 
2ti.  5.  Zecliariah  had  u.  in  the  visions  of  God 

Ezra  8.  It),  for  Joiarib  and  EInathan  men  of  it. 
'    J^e.h.  8.  2.  before  all  that  could  hear  with  u. 

10. 28.  every  one  having  knowledge  and  having  n. 
Job  12.  3.  but  I  have  u.  as  well  as  you 

12  in  length  of  days  is  u.  ||  13.  he  hath  u. 

20.  he  taketh  away  the  u.  of  the  aged 
17.  4.  for  thou  hast  hjd  their  heart  from  u. 
20.  3.  the  spirit  of  my  «.  causeth  me  to  answer 
2().  12.  and  by  hisu.  he  smiteth  through  the  proud 
28.  12.  and  where  is  the  place  of  u.?  20. 

28.  to  man  he  said,  to  depart  from  evil  is  u. 
32.  8.  the  inspiration  of  Almighty  giveth  them  u. 
31.  10.  therefore  hearken  to  me,  ye  men  of  u. 

It),  if  now  thou  hast  m.  hear  this,  hearken 

34.  let  men  of  «.  tell  me,  let  a  wise  man  hearken 

38.  -1.  wh.?re  wast  tliou?  declare,  if  thou  hast  u. 
3fi.  or  who  hath  given  u.  to  the  heart  7 

39.  17.  neither  hath  he  imparted  to  her  if. 
P.-.-al.  32.  9.  be  ye  not  as  the  mule  that  hath  no  u. 

47.  7.  God  is  the  King,  sing  ye  praises  with  «. 

40.  3.  the  meditation  of  my  heart  shall  be  of  u. 
119.34.  gi/e  me  u.  7.3,  125,  144,  169. 

99.  I  have  more  u.  \\  130.  thy  word  giveth  u. 

104.  thro*  thy  precepts  I  get  u.  therefore  I  hate 
147.  Tj.  great  is  our  Lord,  his  u.  is  infinite 
Proc. 1.2.  to  know  wisdom,  to  perceive  words  of  u. 
2.  2.  so  that  thou  apply  thine  heart  to  u. 

3.  and  if  ihou  liftcst  up  thy  voice  for  -u. 

6.  out  of  his  mouth  con)eth  knowledge  and  u. 

11.  discretion  preserve  thee,  w.  shall  keep  thee 
1.  5.  trust  in  the  L.  and  lean  not  to  thine  own  u. 

13.  happy  is  the  man  that  getteth  «. 

19.  by  u.  hath  he  established  the  heavens 

4.  1.  ye  children,  attend  to  know  u.  ||  5.  get  u.  7. 

5.  1.  my  son,  bow  thine  ear  to  my  u. 

6.  32.  whoso  committeth  adultery,  lacketh  u. 
7.4.  thou  art  my  sister,  and  call  «..  thy  kinswoman 
S.  1.  and  doth  not  u.  put  forth  her  voice? 

14.  I  am  u.  II  9.  6.  and  go  in  the  way  of  m. 
9.  4.  as  for  him  that  wnnteth  «.  she  sailh,  16. 

10.  and  the  knowledge  ofthe  holy  is  71. 
10. 13.  in  lips  of  him  that  hath  u.  wisdom  is  found 
14.  29.  he  that  is  slow  to  wrath  is  of  great  u. 

33.  wisdom  resteth  in  heart  of  him  that  hath  u 
\'<.  14.  Iieart  of  him  that  hath  u.  seeks  knowledge 

:>2.  but  he  that  heareth  reproof  gcltetli  ?/. 
Ifi.  16.  to  get  u.  rather  to  be  chosen  than  silver 

22.  u.  is  a  well-spring  of  life  to  him  that  hath  it 
17.  24.  wisdom  is  before  him  that  hath  v. 
1".  2.  a  fool  Iraih  no  delight  in  w.  but  that  his  heart 
19.  8.  he  that  keepeth  u.  shall  find  jooil 

25.  reprove  one  that  hath  u.  he  will  understand 
21. 16.  a  in  an  that  wandereth  out  ofthe  way  of  m. 

.30.  there  is  no  n.  nor  counsel  ae.iinst  the  Lord 
2.3.  23.  bnv  also  wisdom,  and  inslrnction,  and  u. 
04.  3.  and  by  ?;.  a  home  is  established 

28.  11.  tlje  poor  tliat  hath  n.  searcheth  him  out 
Ifi.  the  prin  :e  that  wanleth  i(.  is  an  oppressor 

30.  2.  and  have  not  the  u.  of  a  man 
F.rcl.  9.H.bread  to  wise  nor  yet  riches  to  men  ofu. 
ha.  11.  2.  the  8i)irit  ofu.  shall  rest  upon  him 
3.  make  him  of  oiiick  u.  in  the  fear  ofthe  Lord 

27. 11.  for  it  is  a  people  of  no  u.  therefore  he  that 

29.  14.  the  u.  of  their  iirudent  men  shall  be  hid 
16.  say  of  him  that  framed  if,  he  had  no  u.? 

24.  they  also  that  erred  in  spirit  shall  come  tou. 
40.  14.  lind  who  shewed  to  him  the  way  of «.? 

25.  the  Lord,  there  is  no  searchins  of  his  u. 
44.  J9.  neither  is  there  knowledge  nor  u.  to  foy 

6SI 


UND 

.Ter.  3. 15.  give  pastors  which  shall  feed  you  with  u. 

4.  22.  for  my  people  is  foolish,  they  have  no  u. 

5.  21.  heat,  O  foolish  people  and  without  u. 

51. 15.  he  hath  stretched  out  the  heaven  by  his  u. 
Kick.  28.  4.  with  thy  u.  thou  hast  got  riches 
J)an.  1.  17.  Daniel  had  u.  in  visions  and  dreams 
20.  in  all  matters  ofu.  he  found  them  better 

2.21.  he  giveth  knowledge  to  them  that  know  u. 

4.  34.  mine  u.  returned  to  me,  I  blessed  Most  High 

5.  11.  light  and  u.  was  found  in  him,  12,  14. 

9.  22.  I  am  now  come  forth  to  give  thee  u. 

10.  1.  and  Daniel  had  u.  ofthe  vision 

11.  35.  some  of  them  ofu.  shall  fall,  to  try  them 
//o5.13.2.have  made  idols  according  to  their  ownu. 
Obad.  7.  a  wound  under  thee,  there  is  no  u.  in  him 

8.  shallX  not  destroy  u.  out  ofthe  mount  of  Esau? 
jlfat. 15.  10.  are  ye  also  yet  without  u.?  Mark"!. 18. 
Mark  12.  33.  and  to  love  him  with  all  the  u. 
J.uke  1.  3.  to  me,  having  had  perfect  u.  of  things 

2.  47.  all  that  heard  were  astonished  at  his  u. 

24.  45.  then  opened  he  their  a.  that  they  might 
Rom.  1.  31.  without  u.  covenant-breakers 

1  Cor.  1. 19.  bring  to  nothing  the  u.  of  the  prudent 

14.  14.  my  spirit  prayeth,  but  my  u.  is  unfruitful 
15.  I  will  pray  with  the  u.  sing  with  the  u. 

19.  I  had  rather  speak  five  words  with  my  u. 

20.  be  not  children  in  u.  but  in  u.  be  men 
Eph.  1.  18.  the  eyes  of  your  it.  being  enlightened 

4.  18.  having  the  u.  darkened,  being  alienated 
Phil.  A.  7.  the  peace  of  God  which  passeth  all  u. 
C0M.9.  that  ye  might  be  filled  with  all  spiritual  it. 

2.  2.  to  all  riches  ofthe  full  assurance  of  it. 

2  Tim.  2.  7.  the  Lord  give  thee  u.  in  all  things 

1  .Tohn  5.  20.  the  Son  of  God  hath  given  us  an  u. 
Rev.  13. 18.  him  that  hath  u.  count  number  of  beast 
See  G0011. 
Man  0/ UNDERSTANDING. 
F.zra  8.  18.  and  they  brought  us  a  man  ofu 
Prou.l.S.a  man  o/«.shall  attain  untowise  counsels 

10.  23.  but  a  man  ofu.  hath  wisdom 

11.  12.  but  a  man  ofu.  holdeth  his  peace 

15.  21.  but  a  man  ofu.  walketh  uprightly 
17.  27.  a  man  of  u.  is  of  an  excellent  spirit 

28.  that  shutteth  his  lips,  is  esteemed  a  man  nf  u 
20.  5.  but  a  man  ofu.  will  draw  out  counsel 

23.  2.  by  a  man  ofu.  the  state  shall  be  prolpnged 

Void  0/ UNDERSTANDING. 
Prov.  7.  7.  I  discerned  a  young  man  void  of  u. 
10.  13..  a  rod  for  back  of  him  that  is  void  nf  u. 

12.  11.  that  followeth  vain  persons  is  void  ofu. 
17.  18.  a  man  void  of  u.  striketh  hands,  is  surety 

24.  30.  by  the  vineyard  otVhe  man  void  ofu 

UNDERST.^NDINGS. 
.toh  32.  t  n.  behold,  I  gave  ear  to  your  it. 
Isa.  40. 1 14.  and  who  shewed  to  him  the  way  ofu. 

UNDERST.\NDING,  .adjective. 
Deut.  1.  13.  take  ye  wise  men  and  a.  and  known 
4.  6.  surely  this  great  nation  is  an  u.  people 
1  Kinvs  3. 9.  give  thy  servant  an  u  heart  to  judge 
12.  fo,  I  have  given  thee  a  wise  and  an  it.  heart 
Prov.  8.  5.  and,  ye  fools,  be  ye  of  an  u.  heart 
Dan.  1.  4.  u.  science  ||  8.  23.  u.  dark  sentences 
Kph.  5.  17.  but  It.  what  the  will  ofthe  Lord  is 
1  Tim.  1.  7.  teachers,  u.  neither  what  they  say 

UNDERSTOOD. 
Gen.  42.  23.  they  knew  not  that  Joseph  it.  them 
Dent.  32.  29.  O  that  they  were  *ise,  that  they  u. 
1  .'iam.  4. 6.  they  «.  that  the  ark  of  Lord  was  come 
26.  4.  Drivid  u.  that  Saul  was  come  in  very  deed 
2.9am.3.37.  peoide  u.itwas  nr.t  of  Dav.to  slayAhner 
JVeh.  8.  t  2.  the  law  before  all  that  u.  in  hearing 
12.  they  had  u  the  words  that  were  declared 

13.  7.  I  u.  of  the  evil  Eliashib  did  for  Tobiah 
Job  13.  1.  lo,  mine  ear  hath  heard  and  u.  it 

42.  3.  therefore  have  I  uttered  that  I  u.  not 
Psnl.  73.  17.  went  to  sanctuary,  then  it.  I  their  end 
81.  5.  where  I  heard  a  language  that  I  u.  not 
106.  7.  our  fathers  u.  not  thy  wonders  in  Egypt 
75<7.40.21.  have  ye  not  it.  from  foundations  of  earth 
44.  18.  not  known  nor  u.  for  he  shut  their  eyes 
Drtn  8.27.  was  astonished  at  the  vision,  but  none  u. 
9. 2. 1  Daniel  «.  by  books  ||  10.  1.  he  it.  the  vision 
12.  8. 1  heard,  but']  u.  not,  then  said  I,  O  my  Lord 
Mat.  13.  51.  have  ye  a.  all  these  things?  yea.  Lord 
16. 12.  then  u.  they  how  he  bade  them  not  beware 
17.  13.  they  it.  that  he  spake  of  .Tohn  the  Baptist 
Mark  9. 32.'  but  they  it.  not  that  sn  ving,  T.ulir  2. 50. 
I  9.  45.  John  8.  27.  j  10.  6. 
Luke  18.  34.  and  they  it.  none  of  these  things 
Jnbn  12.  16.  these  things  u.  not  his  disciples 
.1et.i7.iX  hesuppo.sed  they  would  have  «. that  God 
hv  his  hand  won'd  deliver  them,  hut  they  u.  not 
23.  27. 1  rescued  him,  having  u.  he  was  a  Roman 

34.  and  when  T  it.  that  he  was  of  Cilicia 
Rom.  1.  20.  being  u.  by  the  thinffs  that  are  made 

1  Cor.  13.  II.  when  I  was  n  child,  T  u.  as  a  child 
14.9.  except  ye  utter  by  tongue  words  ensv  to  be  u. 

2  Pel.  3. 16.  in  which  are  some  things  hard  to  beu. 

UNDERTAKE, 
/iff.  38.  14.  O  Lord,  I  am  oppressaJ,  u.  for  mo 


UNI 

UNDERTOOK. 

Esth.  B.  23.  the  Jews  u.  to  do  aa  they  had  boftm 

UNDO. 

Isa.  58.  0.  is  not  this  the  fast?  to  u.  heavy  burdeoa 
Zfp/t.  3. 19.  at  thai  time  I  will  u.  all  that  afflict  t^«e 

UNDONE.  * 

JVitm.  21.  29.  thou  art  u.  O  people  of  Chemosh 
./o«/t.ll.l5.Joshualeft  nothing  u.ofall  commanded 
Isa.  6.  5.  woo  is  me,  for  I  am  u.  I  am  of  unclean  lips 
Mat.  23. 23.  not  to  leave  the  other  u.  Luke  11.  43. 

UNDRESSED. 
Lev.  25.  5.  nor  gather  grapes  of  thy  vine  it.  11. 

UNEQUAL. 
Ezck.  18.25.  hear  now,  are  not  your  ways  u.?  39. 

UNEUUALLY. 
2  Cor.  6.  14.  be  not  it.  yoked  with  unbelievers 

UNFEIGNED. 
2  Cor.  6.  6.  by  kindness,  by  Hcdy  Ghost,  by  love  u. 

1  Tim.  1.5.  charity  out  of  a  pure  bean  and  faith  u. 

2  Tim.  1.5.  when  I  call  to  remembrance  the  u.  faith 
1  Pet.  1.22.  thro'  Spirit  unto  It.  love  ofthe  brethren 

UNFAITHFUL. 
Prov.  25.  19.  confiilence  in  an  u.  man  in  trouble 

UNFAITHFULLY. 
Psal.  78.  57.  they  dealt  u.  like  their  fathers 
Mai.  2.  t  15.  let  none  deal  u.  against  the  wita 

UNFRUITFUL. 
JV/aM3. 22.  care  of  this  world  and  deceitfulness  of 
riches,  choke  word,  and  he  becometh  u. 
Mark  4.  19. 

1  Cor.14.14.  spirit  prays,  but  my  understanding  is  u. 
Ep/i.  5.  11.  have  no  fellowship  with  the  u.  works 
Tt(.3.14.to  maintain  goodworks,that  Iheybe  not.u. 

2  Pet.  1.8.  ye  shall  neither  be  barren  nor  u.  in  the 

UNGIRDED. 
fJeii.  24. 32.  the  man  u.  the  camels,  and  gave  straw 

UNGODLY. 
25(im.22.5.when  thewaves  of  death  compassed  me, 
the  floods  of  w.  men  made  me  afraid,  I's.  18.4. 
2  Chr.  19.  2.  Jehu  said,  shouldest  thou  help  the  u. 
.lob  10.  11.  God  hath  delivered  me  to  the  it. 
34.  18.  is  it  fit  to  say  to  prmces,  ye  are  it..' 
Psal.  1. 1.  that  walkethnot  in  the  counsel  ofthe  «. 
4.  the  u.  are  not  so  ||  5.  u.  not  stand  in  judgment 
6.  but  the  way  ofthe  u.  shall  |)erish 
3.  7.  thou  hast  broken  the  teeth  ofthe  u. 
43.  1.  and  plead  my  cause  against  an  it.  nation 
73.  12.  these  are  the  u.  who  prosper  in  the  world 
r?-or. 16.27. an  w.man  diggeth  up  evil, and  in  his  lips 
19.  28.  an  u.  witness  scorneth  judgment 
Rom.4.5.  hut  believeth  on  him  tiiat  justifieth  the  u. 
5.  6.  in  due  time  Christ  died  for  the  u. 
1  Tim.  1.  9.  the  law  is  for  the  it.  and  for  sinners 

1  Pet.  4. 18.  where  shall  the  11.  and  sinner  appear! 

2  Pet.  2. 5.  bringing  in  the  flood  on  world  of  the  u. 
6.  ensample  to  those  who  after  should  live  u. 

3.  7.  to  day  of  judgtnent  and  perdition  ofu.  men 
Jude  4.  u.  men  turning  the  grace  of  our  God  into 
15.  to  convince  all  that  are  u.  of  their  u.  deeds 
18.  who  should  walk  after  their  own  u.  lusts 
UNGODLINESS. 
Rom.  1.18.  the  wrath  of  God  revealed  against  all  u 
11.  26.  and  he  shall  turn  away  it.  from  Jacob 
2  Tim.  2.  16.  they  will  increase  unto  more  u. 
Tit.  2.  12.  that  denying  u.  and  worldly  lusts 

UNHOLY. 
Aci'.lO.lO.ftav  put  difference  between  holy  and  « 

1  Tim.l.'J.  the  law  was  made  for  the  Jt.  and  profane 

2  Tim.  3.  2.  for  men  shall  be  unthankful  it. 
Neb.  10.  29.  counted  blood  of  covenant  an  u.  thing 

UNICORN. 

In  Hreek,  Monoceros  ;  in  Hebrew,  Reem.  It  it 
much  disputed  among  the  learned, whet  her  there 
be,  or  ever  was,  such  a  creature  as  ive  call  the 
unicorn ;  or  lehether  this  Reem  be  the  Rhino' 
ceros,  as  some  would  have  it;  or  a  certain  kind 
of  wild  goat,  called  Oryx,  which  is  very  large 
and  strong,  and  untractabte ;  or  one  of  that 
kind  nf  wild  oren,  or  bulls  called  Uri ;  which 
some  think  the  most  probable  opinion,  as  best 
agreeing  with  the  scripture  accounts  of  it.  It 
is  said  to  have  but  one  horn,  growing  out  of 
its  forehead  between  its  eye-lids,  but  as  hard  as 
iron.  Jnb  ;}9.  10,  Canst  thou  bind  Ihe  unietirn 
with  his  hand  m  the  furrow  ?  Moses,  magnify- 
ing the  strength  of  .Joseph,  says,  that  his  horns 
are  like  the  horns  of  unicorns  ;  that  is,  his 
strength  and  power  shall  be  very  great,  DeuU 
33.  17.  .^7i<i  the  Psahnist  says^  Thou  hast 
heard  me  from  the  horns  ofthe  unicorns;  thou 
hast  delivered,  me  when  I  was  in  great  danger 
of  being  destrovcd  by  the  power  of  mine  e»^ 
lilies.  Ps.il.  22  21. 

JVitm.  23. 22.  as  it  were  the  strength  of  an  v.  04. 1 

.Fob  39.  9.  will  the  u.  be  willing  lo  serve  thee? 
10.  canst  thou  bind  the  u.  in  the  furrow? 

Psnl.  29.  6.  Lebanon  and  Sirion  like  a  ynnoxs 

92.  10.  my  horn  shall  exalt  like  horn  of  ati  ft 

UNICORNS. 

Deut.  33.  17.  his  horns  are  like  the  horni  of  j 


UNP 

Paul.  22.  21.  heard  ine  from  the  ho.ng  of  the  u. 
Jsa.  31.  7.  aiid  Uic  u.  £liull  cuint;  dnwa  with  liiuni 

UNITK. 
f'fol.  SS.  II.  u.  my  iieart  to  Tear  thy  name 
^  UMTEU 

t^i.49.6.  to  Iheir  assembly,  mine  honour,  be  nut  u. 

UMTY. 
Psal.  133.  1.  for  brcUuen  to  ilwcll  togetlier  in  u. 
£p/t.  4. 3.  ei»leavouriiig  lo  ki;i:|)  tlie  a.  of  llie  Spirit 
13.  till  via  uome  in  tnc  u.  ui  tiie  laitli 
t'NJL'ST. 
Psal.  43.  J.  O  God,  doliver  me  from  tlic  a.  m;in 
Fruo.  II.  7.  and  the  hope  ol'u.  men  perislielii 
i8.  6.  w'nii  by  u.  gain  increuijcjlh  his  BubBtance 
2°.),  UT.  un  u.  man  is  an  alioniinalion  to  the  just 
y.tph.  3.  .1.  but  liie  u.  kuowrilh  no  shame 
Mai.  5.  4j.  ho  genilo'di  rain  on  the  ju^t  and  u. 
L.uUe  It).  8.  ilie  Lord  commended  the  u.  steward 

10.  he  that  IS  u.  in  the  least,  is  u..  aUo  in  mucli 
16. 6.  ihe  Lord  said,  hear  what  the  u.  Judge  saith 

11.  I  thank  thee,  I  ain  not  as  oiher  men  are,  u. 
Jets  'H.  15.  a  resuriection  both  of  the  just  and  u. 
1  Ciir.  li.  1.  dare  any  of  you  go  to  iuvv  before  the  u.? 
1  yu.  3.  id.  Cinist  surfereii,  the  just  for  the  u. 

3  Ptl.  2.  y.  reserve  the  u.  to  tlio  day  of  judgment 
Rev.  22.  11.  he  tiiat  is  u.  let  hmi  be  u.  stdl 

U.\JU.STLV. 
Psal.  f*2.  2.  how  long  will  ye  judge  u.  and  accept 
ha.  2tj.  lU.  in  land  of  uprijlitness  will  he  deal  u. 

U.\  KNOWN. 
Acts  17.  21.  with  this  inscription,  to  the  u.  God 

1  Cic-.  14.2.  Ihatspeakeihinan  «.  tongue,  4, 13,27. 
•14.  if  I  pray  in  an  u.  tongue,  rny  spirit  prayoth 
I'.l.  than  ten  thousand  words  in  an  u.  tongue 

8  Cor.  0.  9.  IIS  u.  and  yet  woil  known;  as  dying 
Gal.  1.  a.  I  was  a.  by  face  unio  the  churches  of 
jndea  which  were  m  ChrioL 
U.\L.\UE. 
Jlcts  21.  3  there  the  shio  was  to  u.  her  burden 

UNL.VWFQL. 
Jicts  10.  28.  an  u.  thing  for  a  man  that  is  a  Jew 

2  Pet.  2.  8.  vexed  his  soul  with  their  u.  deeds 

U.N'LI'.VRNED. 
Jicln  4.  13.  they  purceived  that  they  were  v. 

1  Cur.  14.  11^  he  that  oocupictli  the  room  of  t!iea. 
21.  and  there  come  in  tlio-;.;  that  are  u.  24. 

2  'f'tm.  2.  'Xi.  but  foolish  and  u.  rpiestions  avoid 
2  Put.  3.  lb.  which  th.iv  that  are  u.  wrest  to  their 

UNLEAVE.\El5. 
F.ioil.  12.  3.1.  they  baked  u.  cakes  of  the  dough 
hcv.  2.4.  it  shall  be  an  a.  cake  of  fine  flour  mingled 
with  oil,  or  u.  wafers  anoinied  with  oil,  5. 

7.  12.  he  shall  offer  u.  cakes  mingled  with  oil 

8.  2(i.  and  Moses  took  one  u.  cake,  and  wafers 
J^'um.  fi.l9.  the  priest  shall  t:ike  one  u.  cake,  one  «. 

wafer,aiid  pulihemonthe  hamlsof  IheNa/arite 
Josh.  5.  II.  they  did  eat  of  old  corn  of  the  land  u. 
Jadg.  G.  I'J.  Gideon  made  ready  a  kid  and  u.  cakes 

20.  take  the  fle^h  and  the  //.  cake<,  and  lay  them 

21.  the  angel  touched  the  fle-ih  and  «.  cnkcs ;  fire 
out  of  tlii.-rock  coiLSUincd  tlitdesh  and  «.  cakes 

1  Ckrvn.  23.  2!).  their  ofiico  for  flour  and  u.  cakes 

1  Cor.  5.  7.  that  ye  may  be  a  new  lump,  as  ye  are  u. 

Sr.f.  IIread. 

UNLESS. 
/,«r.22.6.he  unclean  it.hc  wa^h  his flcsk  with  water 
J\'um.  22.33.  h.  she  hid  turned  from  m  *I  had  slain 

2  !^am.  2.27.  u.  ihou  hadstspoken,  |>eop!e  had  gone 
Psid.i'.  13. 1  had  fainted, u.  I  had  believed  to  see 

94.  17.  u.  the  Lord  had  been  my  h-'lp,  my  soul  had 

li;i.  n-2.  II.  thy  law  had  been  niy  delight,  [  should 

Prop.  4.  If),  sleep  not,  u.  they  cnnso  some  to  fall 

1  Cor.  15.2.  ye  are  s:ivcd,Kve  hive  believed  in  vain 

ITNLOf^SE. 

^arH.7.ihc  latchctofwhoscshoesTam  not  worthy 

tostoopdown  andj/.  f.u/.-r^.  16.  J«A»i  1.  27. 

UN.NMRRIED. 

1  Or.  7.  R.  T  say  to  the  u.  1|  11.  let  her  remain  u. 

32.  he  that  is  u.  ||  34.  th'^  «.  woman  carcth  for 

UNMERCIFUL. 

Ptal  43.  t  1-  (ilcad  my  cnuse  against  an  u.  nation 

/(cm. 1.31.  without  immral  affection,  implacable  u. 

UN.MINOFUL. 
Deut.  32.  18.  of  rock  thnt  bejat  thee  thou  art  u. 

UN  MOVEABLE. 
jfrr»27.41.  and  the  forepart  nf  the  ship  remained  u. 

1  Cor.  15.  58.  my  brethren,  be  ve  stcd:'ast,  u. 

UNOf:r;upiEn. 

Juig.  5.  B.  in  days  of  ><hnm?ar,  high-wayi  were  u. 

IINt'ERFKCT. 

Ptal.  130.  IC.  did  un-  my  siih«lance,  yet  bein^  u. 

UNPREPAREO. 

2  Cor.  9.  4.  if  they  rotnc  wi'h  nir>,  and  find  you  u. 

UNPROFITAULE. 
Jnh  l.V  3.  shonld  ho  rotkson  wiih  i/.  talkl 
JIfa'.  •i'l.  30.  rastlhe  «.  fervnni  in'o  ouiir  darkness 
J.nkc  17.  10.  likewise  say  ye,  we  are  71.  servants 
Hnm.  3.  12.  they  are  altogciher  become  u. 
Til.  3.  9.  ^encnlo»ie«,  for  thry  arc  u.  and  vain 
PluUm.  11.  which  in  timn  post  wtJ  to  tlite  a. 
OSS 

t 


UNT 

Heb.  13.  17.  not  with  grief,  for  that  is  u.  for  you 

UNI'ROFITAULENKriS. 
Heh.  7.  16.  for  the  weakness  and  u.  thereof 

UNPUNISHED. 
ProD. 11.21.  join  in  hand,  the  wicked  shall  not  be  u. 
U>.  5.  hand  join  in  hand,  the  proud  shall  not  be  u. 
17.  5.  that  is  glad  at  calamities,  shall  nut  be  u. 
19.  5.  a  false  witness  shall  nut  be  u.  9. 
28.  t20.  maketli  haste  to  be  rich  shall  not  be  u. 
Jer.  25.  29.  should  ye  be  utterly  it.  shall  not  be  u. 
30.  11.  I  will  not  leave  thee  altogetlier  u. 
its.  28.  yet  will  I  not  leave  thee  wholly  u. 
49.  12.  shalt  thou  go  u.?  thou  shait  not  "o  u. 

UNaUENCIlABLE. 

Milt.  3.  12.  gather  his  wheat  into  the  garner,  but 

burn  up  the  chatf  with  u.  tiie,  Luke  3.  17. 

UNREASONABLE. 

.^cts  25. 27.  it  seemeth  to  me  u.  to  send  a  prisoner 

2  Tktss.  3.2.  that  we  may  be  delivered  from  u.  men 

UNREBUKEABLE. 
1  Tjm.  6. 14.  that  thou  keep  this  commandment  u 

UNREPROVEABLE. 
Cul.  1.  22.  to  present  you  holy,  u.  in  his  sijfht 

UNRIGHTEOUS. 
F.xod.  23.  1.  put  not  thy  hand  to  be  an  u.  witness 
Jub  27.  7.  that  riseth  against  me,  be  as  the  u. 
Psal.  71.  4.  deliver  me  out  of  the  hand  of  the  u. 
Isa.  10.  1.  woe  unto  them  that  decree  u.  decrees 
55.  7.  let  the  u.  man  forsake  his  thoughts 
Luke  16.  11.  not  been  faithful  in  the  u.  mammon 
lloiii.  3.  5.  is  God  u.  who  taketh  vengeance  % 

1  Cor.  U.  9.  the  u.  shall  not  inherit  the  kingdom 
//t6.6. 10.  for  Gol  is  not  u.  to  forget  your  works 

UNRIGHTEOUSLY. 
Dent.  25.  16.  all  I'lat  do  u.  are  an  abomination 

I'NRIGHTEOUSNESS. 
Lro.  19.  15.  ye  shall  do  no  u.  in  judgment,  35. 
/'.■ju/.  92. 15.  he  is  my  rock,  there  is  no  u.  in  him 
■ler.  22.  13.  lo  him  that  buildeth  his  house  by  u. 
I, like  IG.  9.  make  friends  of  the  mammon  of  «. 
■  !ijhn  7.  18.  the  same  is  true,  and  no  u.  is  in  him 
Hum.  1.  18.  all  v..  of  men  who  hold  the  truth  in  u 
29.  being  filled  with  all  u.  fornication,  envy 

2.  b.  but  to  them  that  obey  u.  indignation,  wrath 

3.  5.  if  our  u.  commend  tiie  rightcou.sness  of  God 
C.  13.  nor  yield  members  .is  instruments  of  u. 

9.  14.  is  there  u.  with  God  ?  God  forbid 
2C«r.  6. 14.  what  fellowship  righteousness  with  «.? 

2  T/tess.  2.  10.  and  with  all  deceiveahleness  of  u. 
12.  who  boiievcd  not,  but  had  pleasure  in  u. 

ffeb.  8.  12.  for  I  will  be  merciful  to  their  a. 
2  /V/.  2.  13.  and  shalltreceive  the  reward  of  m. 

15. tiie  w.iy  of  Balaam  who  loved  the  wages  of  u. 
1  ./u/irt  1.  9.  is  faithful  to  cleanse  us  from  all  it. 
5.  17.  all  u.  is  sin ;  there  is  a  sin  not  unto  death 

UNRIPE. 
Job  15.  33.  he  shall  shake  off  his  u.  grape  as  vine 

UNRULY. 
1  Thess.  5.  14.  brethren,  wurn  tliom  that  are  u. 
Tit.  1.  6.  children,  not  accused  of  riot,  or  u. 
10.  for  there  are  many  u.  and  vain  talkers 
.fam.  3.  8.  tha»  tongue  is  an  v.  evil,  full  of  poison 

UNSATIABLE. 
Eiek.  16.28.  with  Assyrians,  because  thou  wastu. 

UNSAVOURY. 
Job  6.  6.  can  wl^it  is  u.  be  eaten  without  salt? 
.ler.  23.  f  13.  I  Iwve  seen  an  u.  ihing  in  prophets 

UNSEARCHABLE. 
Job  5.  9.  God  which  doeth  great  thing."  and  it. 
Psal.  145.  3.  great  is  the  Lord,  his  .greatness  is  u. 
Priie.  25.  3.  and  the  heart  of  kings  is  «. 
Hnm.  11.33.  how  it. are  his  judgments,  and  his  ways 
F.vk.  3.  8.  I  should  preach  the  it.  riches  of  Christ 

UNSEEMLY. 
/?07H.l.  27.  men  with  men  working  that  which  is  u. 

1  Cor.  13.  5.  charity  doth  .::>t  behave  itself  «. 

UNsiion. 

.Ter.  2.  25.  withhold  thy  foot  from  being  u. 

UNSKILFUL. 
Ueb.  5. 13.  babe  is  11.  in  the  woiil  of  rigli^cousncss 

UNSOCIABLE. 
fiom.  1.  t  31.  covenant-breakers,  it.  imjilacabic 
UNSPEAKABLE. 

2  Cor.  9.  15.  thanks  be  to  (lod  for  his  it.  gift 

12. 4.  canglit  up  into  paradive  and  heard  it.  words 

1  Pet.  1.  8.  in  whom  ve  rejoice  with  joy  it.  full  of 

UN.-SPOTTEn. 
.fam.  1.  27.  to  keep  himself  1/.  from  the  world 

UNSTABLE. 
ncn.  49.  4.  u.  OS  water,  tlmn  shalt  not  excel 
Jam.  1.8.  a  double  minded  man  is  11.  in  all  his  ways 

2  /'f(.2.I4.cannotceaii>'  from  sin,  heguiline  it.  souls 
3. 16.  which  they  that  arc  unlearned  and  it.  wrest 

UNSTOPPED. 
fsa.  35.  5.  and  the  enr«  of  the  deaf  sh:ill  be  u. 

IINTAKEN. 
2  Cor.  3.  14.  remnincih  tlic  ►nm"  vail  u.  away 

UNTEMPEREn. 
Ezck.  13.  10.  ono  built  up  n   wall,  nnd  lo  other* 
daubed  it  with  u.  mortar,  11,  14,  15.  |  22.  28. 


UP 

UNTHANKFUL. 
Luke  6. 35.  for  he  is  kind  to  the  u.  and  to  the  evN 
2  7'int.  3.  2  men  shall  be  blasphemers,  it   unholy 

UNTIL. 
Gen.  28.  15.  it.  I  have  done  that  I  have  spoken 
32.  4.  I  have  sojourned  and  stayed  there  it.  now 
46.  34.  our  trade  from  our  youth,  even  u.  now 
49.  10.  nor  a  lawgiver  depart,  it.  Shiloii  come 
J^um.  14.  19.  hast  forgiven  this  peojde  it.  now 
./uiYo-.18.30.sons  were  priests  toDan  u.the  captivity 

1  .Slim.  9. 13.  for  the  people  will  not  eat  it.  he  com« 
15.35.Samuelcame  no  mure  to  sceSaulu.his  death 

2  .Sam.  19.  7.  that  befell  thee  from  thy  youth  u.  now 
24.  nor  trimmed,  11.  the  day  he  came  in  peace 

1  King^s  22.27.  feed  him  with  bread  and  water  of 

affliction,  It.  1  come  in  peace,  2  Chrun.  18. 2C 

2  flings  8.  G.  restore,  since  he  left  the  land,  it.  now 
A'zrti  4.21.city  be  not  built,  u.  another  command 

5.  16.  since  then  u.  now  hath  it  been  building 
10.  14.  It.  the  fierce  wrath  of  God  be  turned 
Jub  14.  13.  keep  me  secret  u.  thy  wrath  he  past 
I'.^al.  36.  2.  It.  his  iniquity  be  found  to  he  hateful 
73.  17.  u.  I  went  into  the  sanctuary  of  God 
132. 5.  It.  I  find  out  a  place  for  the  Lord,  a  liabiL 
Can<.2.17.it.thedaybreak  and  the  shadows  flee,4.G. 
fsa.  32.  15.  u.  the  spirit  be  poured  upon  us 
36.  17.  It.  I  come  and  take  you  away  to  a  land 
G2.  1.  u.  the  righteousness  thereof  go  forth 
.ftr.  32.  5.  and  there  shall  he  be  a.  1  visit  him 
44.  27.  be  consumed  it.  there  be  an  end  of  them 
F.iek.  21.  27.  overturn,  ».  he  come  whose  right  it  m 
.l/tc. 7. 9.  bear  indignation,  u.  he  plead  my  cause 
Mat.  2.  13.  be  thou  there  11.  I  bring  tliee  word 
11. 13.  for  all  the  law  and  the  prophets  prophesied 
It.  John,  this  is  Elias,  Luke  16.  16. 
Au/i:t;21.24..Toru6alein  be  trodden  down  it. the  timtg 
of  the  Gentile.^  be  fulfilled,  }iom.  11.  25. 
21.  49.  It.  ye  he  endued  with  power  from  on  high 
Acts  1.  2  It.  the  day  in  which  he  was  taken  up 
Rom.  5.  1.3.  for  it.  the  law,  sin  was  in  the  world 

1  Cur.  4.  5.  judge  nothing  it.  the  Lord  come 
Phil.  1. 6.  will  jierform  it  u.  the  day  of  Jesus  Chrikt 

2  Thess. ^.7.  will  let  it.  he  betaken  out  of  the  way 
1  7"tni.  G.  14.  it.  the  appearing  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Rev.  17. 17.  II.  the  words  of  God  .shall  be  fulfilled 

20.  5.  lived  not  it.  the  1000  years  were  tinisheU 

UNTIMELY. 
.hb  3.  16.  or  as  a  hidden  u.  birtli  I  had  not  been 
Psal.  58.  8.  pass  away  like  the  it.  birth  of  a  woman 
F.ccl.  6.  3  I  say  that  an  it.  birth  is  better  than  he 
Rev.  6.  13.  even  as  a  hg-tree  casteth  her  u.  figs 

UNTOWARD. 
.$cts2.  40.  save  yourselves  from  this  u.  generation 

UNWALLED. 
Devt.  .3.  5.  we  look  si.xty  cities,  bes-des  it.  town< 
F.sih.  9.  19.  the  Jews  that  dwelt  in  the  it.  towns 
E:fA.38.  U.I  will  go  up  to  the  land  of  u.  villages 

UNWASHEN. 
Mat.  15.  20.  these  things  defile  a  man,  but  fo  eat 
withu.  handsdcfilcilinot  a  man,  Mark'i.i.o. 
UNWEIGHICD. 
1  Kings  7.  47.  Solomon  lefl  all  the  vessels  u. 

UNWISE. 
/!>nt^32.6.do  you  thus  requite  the  L.  Oit.  people? 
Itus.  13. 13.  he  is  an  it.  son,  he  should  not  slay  lung 
Rom.  1.  14.  I  am  di'htor  to  the  wise  and  to  the  it 
E;tA.5.17.wherefore  he  ve  not  11.  hut  understanding 

UNWITTINGLY. 
/-<;i'.  22.  14.  if  a  man  eat  of  the  holy  thing  v. 
.fosk.  20.  3.  the  slaver  that  killeth  a.ny  person  U.S. 

ITNWORTHV. 
.Iris  13.  46.  seeing  ye  judge  yourselves  u.  of  lif~ 
1  Cor.  6.  2.  are  ye  it.  to  indge  the  smallest  matter? 

UNWORTHILY. 
I  Cor.  n.  27.  shall  drink  this  cup  of  the  Lord  jt. 
29.  for  he  that  cateih  and  drinkotli  it.  cateth 
UP,  Fn-b. 
Gen.  19.  14.  Lot  sa'd,  u.  get  ye  out  of  thi<  place 
44.  4.  Joseph  said,  it.  follow  after  the  men 
F.iuii.  32.  1.  It,  make  us  gods  that  shall  go  before  II 
tosh.  7. 13.  It.  sanctify  the  people,  and  eay  sanctify 
Judi^.  4. 14.  It.  for  this  is  the  day  in  wnich  the  Lord 

8.  20.  he  said  to  his  first-horn,  it.  and  slay  thein 

9.  32.  It.  thou  and  the  people  that  is  wi:h  thee 
10.28.  It.  and  let  us  be  suing,  but  none  answered 

1  .Vtim.0. 20.  s.aying,  it.  Unit  I  may  send  thee  awar 

UP. 

,Viim.l4. 40.  they  rose  it.  early  and  gat  them  u.  «ay- 

in?,  we  lie  here  and  will  go  ti.  fiir  we  have  sinned 

42.  go  not  It.  for  the  Loid  is  not  among  you 

44.  they  pirsumed  lo  go  It.  unto  the  hill  lop 

■  Tiiilij.?.  13.  Gideon  romrned  from  ba'tle  bpf.  sun  M 

9.  .31.  OR  soon  as  sun  is  «.  thou  shult  rise  early 

1  Snm.  29.  10.  as  soon  as  ve  he  n.  early,  deinrt 

2  Sam.  24. 11.  wjien  llavid  was  1/.  the  wi^d  came 
Mat.  13.  6.  and  when  the  sun  wss  11.  (hey  were 

scorched,  because  they  had  not  root,  Mark  A.  6. 
UP. 
Psnl.  W.  l.S.  T  nm  ready  to  di"  from  my  voulh  H. 
E:ek.  41.  16.  from  the  ground  a.  lo  the  window! 


UPR 

Mat   19.  20.  these  things  I  kepi  from  my  youth  it. 
Luke  IS.  21.  all  these  1  kept  from  my  youth  u. 
John  2.  7.  and  they  tilleJ  'liein  u.  to  the  brim 
See  Down. 
UPBRAID. 
Tudg-  8. 15.  Zehah  and  ZaI.  with  wliom  yedid  «.me 
Mat.  ll.  20.  then  bigan  he  to  u.  the  cities  wherein 

UPBRAIDED. 
Mark  16.  14.  he  u.  thini  wiili  ilieir  unbelief 

UPBRAIDETH. 
Jam.  1.  5.  thatgivL'th  to  all  men  liberally  and  u.  not 

UPHELD. 
/»a.63.5.arin  brought  sal  valioFi  andmy  furyitu.  ine 

UPHOLD. 
Job  36.  t  !"•  judgment  and  justice  should  u.  thee 
Psal.  51.  1'2.  and  «.  nie  with  thy  free  Sjjirit 
."14.  4.  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  u.  my  soul 
119.  IIB.  u.  me  according  to  thy  word 
I'rov.  29.  23  honour  shall  u.  the  humble  in  spirit 
Isa.  41.  10.  I  will  u.  thee  with  the  right  hand  cJ'  my 
42.  1.  behold  my  servant  whom  I  u.  mine  elect 
63.  5.  and  1  wondered  that  there  was  none  to  u. 
Ezek.  30.  6.  thev  also  that  u.  Egypt  shall  fall 

" UPHOLDER. 
Job  4.  4.  thy  words  have  u.  him  that  was  falling 
Prof.  20.  ~i.  the  king's  throne  is  u.  by  mercy 

UPHOLDKST. 
Psa/.  41 .  12.  as  forme,  thou  u  uje  in  mine  integrity 

UPHOLDETH. 
Psal.  37.  17.  but  the  Lord  «.  the  righteous 

24.  for  the  Lord  a.  him  with  his  hand 
63.  ^  my  soul  followeth,  thy  right  hand  u.  me 
145.  14.  the  Lord  u.  all  that  fall,  and  raiseth  up 

upholding: 

Hcb.  1.  3.  u.  all  things  by  the  word  of  his  power 

UPPER. 

F.Tod.  12.  7.  shall  strike  blood  on  the  u.  door-|iosts 

Lev.  13.  45.  he  shall  put  a  covering  on  his  u.  lip 

Jjeut.  24.  6.  no  man  take  the  u.  millstone  to  pludge 

Josh.  15. 19.  he  gave  her  the  ?(.  springs,  Judg.l.  15. 

2  Kings  1S.17.  when  they  were  come  up, tliey  stood 

by  the  conduitof  the  K.  pool,  Isa.1.3  |  36.  2. 

Ezek.  24.  t  17.  and  cover  not  thy  u.  lip 

Zr-pk.  '2.  14.  cormorant  shall  lodge  in  the  u.  lintels 

,Mark  14.15.  he  will  shew  you  u.  room,  Luke2'i.  12. 

^cts  1.  13.  they  went  up  into  an  u.  room 

19.  1.  Paul  having  passed  through  the  u.  coasts 

.Sec  Chambkr. 

UPPERMOST. 

Gen.  40.  17.  in  the  «.  basket  were  all  bake  meats 

Jsa.  17.  6.  two  or  three  in  the  top  of  the  u.  bough 

9.  his  strong  cities  shall  be  as  an  u.  branch 
J>faf.23.6.  they  love  theu.  room.sat  feasts  and  chief 
seats  in  synagogue.?,  Murk  12.  39.  iMke  11.  43 
UPRIGHT. 
Gen.  6. 1 9.  Noah  was  an  u.  man  in  his  generations 
17.  +  1.  I  am  God,  walk  before  me  and  be  thou  u. 
37.  7.  and  lo,  my  sheaf  arose  and  also  stood  u. 
Lev.  2t5  13.  broken  vour  yoke  and  made  you  gou. 
Josh.  10.  1 13.  in  the'book  of  the  u.  2  .Saw.  1.  f  18. 

1  ^am.  29.  G.  said  lo  David,  surely  as  Lord  liveth, 

thou  hast  been  u.  with  nie,  2  CAron. 29. 34. 

2  .9 1)71.22. 24. 1  was  also  u.  before  him,  Psal.  i'i.  23. 
•26.  with  the  merciful  merciful,  and  with  the  u. 

man  thou  wilt  shew  thyself  jt.  Psal.  18.25. 
2  Cpron.  29.  34.  lor  Levites  vyere  more  u.  in  heart 
Job  1.  1.  Job  was  a  perfect  and  !/.  man,  8.  |  2.  3. 
8.  6.  if  thou  wert  u.  he  would  awake  tor  thee 
12.  4.  tl^  just  u.  man  is  laughed  to  .scorn 
17.  8.  K.Siicn  sIi.tII  be  astomshed  at  this 
Psal.  11.  7.  his  countenance  doth  behold  the  u. 
10. 13.  then  shall  I  be  u.  1  sh^^ll  be  innocent 
25.  8.  the  Lord  is  good  and  u-  92.  15. 
33.  1.  rejoice,  for  praise  is  comely  for  the  u. 
37.  14.  to  slay  such  as  he  of  u.  conversation 
38.  the  Lord  knowi-th  the  days  of  the  n. 
37.  mark  the  peri<?ct  man  and  behold  the  u. 
49.  14.  the  u.  shall  have  dominion  over  them 
lll.l.I  ^vill  praisetheLd.in  the  assembly  of  the  ?t 
112.  2.  the  generation  of  the  w.  shall  be  blessed 
4.  unto  the  u.  there  ariseih  light  in  darkness 
119.  137.  art  righteous  and  u.  art  thy  judgments 
12.5.  4.  do  good  to  them  that  are  u.  in  their  hearts 
140.  13.  the  u.  shall  dwell  in  Ihy  presence 
Prov.  2.  21.  for  the  u.  shall  dwell  m  the  land 

10.  29.  the  way  of  the  T^ord  is  strength  to  the  u. 

11.  3.  the  integri'y  of  the  a.  shall  guide  them 

6.  the  risrhteousness  of  the  u.  shall  deliver  them 
11.  by  the  blessing.s  of  the  n.  the  city  is  exalted 
20.  such  as  areu.  in  their  way  are  his  delight 

12.  6.  the  mouth  of  the  it.  shall  deliver  them 

13.  T).  righteousness  keepetli  the  it.  in  the  way 
14-  11.  the  tabernacle  of  the  it.  shall  Hourish 
]5.  8.  hut  the  piayer  of  the  it.  is  his  delight 

16.17.  the  high-way  of  the  n.  is  to  depart  from  evil 

21. 18.  the  transgressor  shall  be  a  ransom  for  theu. 
29.  but  as  for  the  it.  he  directeth  his  way 

98  10.  the  u.  shall  have  good  things  in  possession 

2ti.  10.  the  blood-thirsty  hate  the  «.  but  the  just 

'27  ho  th:it  is  u.  is  an  abomination  to  the  wicked 

G53 


US 

F.r.cl.  7.  29.  have  found  that  God  hath  made  man  u. 

12.  10.  what  was  written  was  u.  words  of  truth 
Cant.  1.  4.  remember  thy  love,  the  u.  love  thee 
/«tt.  26.7.  thou  most  u.  do  t  weigh  the  pathol  just 
./er.  10.  5.  they  are  u.  as  palm-tree,  but  speak  not 
Dan.  8.  18.  but  he  touched  me  and  set  me  u. 

11.  17.  set  his  face  to  enter  and  it.  ones  with  him 
Mic.  7.  2.  is  none  u.  among  men,  all  lie  in  wait 

4.  the  most  u.  is  sharper  than  a  thorn  hedge 

Hab.'i.  4.  behold,  hissoul  lifted  up  is  not  u.  mhim 

See  Hkart,  Stand,  Stood. 

UPRIGHTLY. 

Psal.  15.  2.  walketh  u.  shall  abide  in  thy  tabernacle 

58.  1.  do  ye  judge  it.  ?  ||  75.  2.  I  will  judge  u. 

84.  11.  withhold  no  good  from  them  that  walk  it. 
Prov.  2.  7.  he  is  a  buckler  to  them  that  walk  u. 

10.  9.  he  that  walketh  u.  walketh  surely 

15.  21.  but  a  man  of  understanding  walketh  u. 

28.18.whoso  walketh  it.shallbe  saved, butperverse 
/ia.  33.  15.  he  that  speaketh  u.  shall  dwell  on  high 
Amos  5.  10.  they  abhor  him  that  speaketh  u. 
Jl/tc.2. 7.  my  wordsdogood  to  him.that  walketh  it. 
Gal.  2.  14.  when  I  saw  t-hat  they  walked  not  u. 

UPRIGHTNESS. 
1  Kings  3.6.  as  he  walked  before  thee  in  it.  of  heart 
1  CAru7i.29.17. 1  know  that  thou  hastiileasure  in  u. 
Job  4.6.  is  not  this  thy  hope  and  the  u.  of  thy  w  ays  ? 

33.  23.  an  interpreter,  to  shew  unto  man  his  u. 
P«uZ.9.8.  he  shall  minister  judgment  to  people  in  u. 

2.1.  21.  let  integrity  and  u.  preserve  me,  1  wait 

HI.  8.  they  stand  fast  for  ever  and  are  done  in  it. 

143.  10.  thy  spirit  good,  lead  me  into  land  of  it. 
Prov.  2.  13.  who  leave  the  paths  of  it.  to  walk 

14.  2.  he  that  walketh  in  u.  fearelhthe  Lord 

28.  6.  better  is  the  poor  that  <valketh  in  his  u. 
Isa.  20. 7.  the  way  of  the  just  is  u.  thou  dust  weigh 

10.  in  the  land  of  it.  will  he  deal  unjustly 

57.2.  rest  in  their  beds  each  one  walking  in  his  a 

Dan.  11. 1 17.  set  his  face  to  enter,  and  u.  with  him 

See  He.art. 

UPRISING. 

Psal.  139.  2.  thou  knowest  my  down-sitting  and  u. 

UPROAR. 

1  Kings  1.  41.  this  noise  of  the  city  being  in  an  it 
Mat.  2G.  5.  lest  there  be  an  it.  Mark  14.  2. 
Acts  17.  5.  the  Jews  set  all  the  city  on  an  it. 

19.  40.  to  be  called  in  question  lor  this  day's  it. 

20.  1.  after  the  u.  was  ceased,  Paul  called  to  him 
21.31.  tidings  came  that  all  Jerusalem  w  as  in  an  u 

38.  art  not  thou  that  Egyptianwho  niadest  an  it.  ? 
UPSIDE  down. 

2  Kings  21.  13.  wiping  Jerusiilem  as  a  manwipetl 

a  dish,  turning  it  u.  dotcn 
Psal.  146. 9.  way  of  the  wicked  he  turneth  u.  dotcn 
Isa.  24.  1.  the  Lord  turneth  the  earth  u.  dotcn 

29.  16.  surely  your  turning  of  things  u.  doicn 
Acts  17.  6.  that  have  turned  the  world  u.  down 

UPWARD. 
Exod.  38.  2G.  from  twenty  years  old  and  it.  A"u)«.  1 

3,  20,  22,  24,  26,  28.  |  14.  29.  1  Chron.  23. 

24.  2  Cliron.  31.  17.  Ezra  3.  8. 
JVum.  3. 15.  shalt  number  every  malfe  from  a  month 

old  and  it.  22,  28,  34,  39,  40,  43.  |  26.  62. 

4.  3.  from  thirty  years  old  and  it.  even  to  fiftv, 

23,  30,  35,  39,  43,  47.  1  Cliron.  23.  3 
8.  24.  from  twenty  and  five  years  old  and  it. 

1  5am.9.2.Saul  was  higher  from  shoulders  u.  10.23, 

2  Kings  19.30. remnant  shall  bear  fruitit. /5(Z.37.  31. 
2  Cliron.  31.  16.  males  from  three  years  old  and  it. 
Job  5.  7.  man  is  born  to  trouble  as  sparks  tiy  u. 
Eccl.  3.  21.  the  spirit  of  man  that  goeth  it. 

Isa.  8.  21.  curse  their  king  and  God,  and  look  it. 

;t8.  14.  mine  eyes  fail  with  looking  u.  undertake 
F.zek.  I.  27.  from  appearance  of  his  loins  it.  8.  2. 

41.  7.  and  there  was  a  winding  about  still  u. 
Hag.  2.  15.  consider  from  this  day  and  it.  18. 

URGE. 
Luke  11.  53.  scribes  and  Pharisees  began  to  u.  him 

URGED. 
Qen.  33.  11.  Jacob  it.  Esau,  and  he  look  it 
.fudg.  16.  16.  Delilah  it.  Samson,  and  he  told  all 

19.  7.  rose  to  depart,  his  father-in-law  it.  him 
2  Kings  2.17.wheii  they  •.  him  till  he  was  nshained 

5.  16.  Naamnn  u.  Elisha  {|  23.  he  it.  Gehuzi 

URGENT. 
F.iod.  12.  33.  the  Egyptians  were  it.  on  the  people 
Dan.  3.  22.  the  king's  commandment  was  u. 
URIM. 
See  Signification  on  Tlii'MMiM. 
Ezod.  28.  30.  thou  shalt  put  in  the  breast-plate  of 
judgment,  the  it.  and  the  thuminim,  Lev.  8.  8. 
.\"«m.  27.21.  ask  counsel  after  the  judgment  of  it. 
Deut.  33.  8.  let  thy  it.  be  with  thy  Holy  One 
1  Sum.  28.  6.  neither  by  dreams,  by  it.  nor  prophets 
Ezra  2.  63.  nor  eat  till  there  stood  up  a  priest  with 
u.  and  with  thunimlin,  j^Tch.  7.  65. 
tjS. 

Deut  5.  3.  with  it.  even  «.  who  are  all  of  it.  alive 
AuAf  23.  39.  if  thou  he  Christ,  save  thyself  and  u. 
Rum.  9.  24.  even  u.  whom  he  hath  called,  not  only 


US 

1  C<ir.  4.  9.  God  hath  set  forth  u.  the  apostles 

6.  14.  and  will  also  raise  up  it.  by  hisownpowei 

2  Cur.  1.  14.  you  have  acknowledged  it.  in  part 
21.  he  which  cslablisheth  u.  with  you,  is  God 

5.  18.  who  hath  reconciled  u.  to  hmis.  by  Christ 
Pkil.  3. 17.  brelhreii,  as  ye  havcH.  tor  an  ensampla 
1  'J'hc.'.s.  5.  8.  let  «.  who  are  of  the  day  be  sober 

9.  for  God  hath  not  ajipointed  it.  to  wrath 
Jam.  1. 18.  of  his  own  will  begat  he  u.  by  the  word 

About  US. 
/Vitm.  22.  4.  lick  up  all  that  are  round  about  u. 
JVcA.5.17.thut  came  from  heatnen  that  are  about  u 

6.  16.  the  heathen  about  it.  saw  these  things 
Dan.  9.  10.  thy  people  a  reproach  to  all  about  u 

After  US. 
Josh.  8.  6.  for  they  w  ill  come  out  after  u. 
•."2. 27. it  may  he  witness  to  our  generaiionsa/fer  u 
Mat.  15.  23.  send  her  away,  fcr  she  crieth  after  it. 

Jl gainst  U'S. 
Gen.  43.  IS.  that  he  may  seek  occasion  a^oi'iiit  it 
Ezod.  1.  lU.  join  our  enemies  and  f\g\\\.  ag ainst  u 
16.  7.  what  are  we  that  ye  murmur  against  it.  1 
8.  your  murmurings  are  not  against  it.  but  God 
/;cut.2.32.  Sihon  came  out  aguinstu.^.T.  i|3.1.0g 
Joak.  8.5.  when  the  men  of  Ai  came  out  agaitist  u. 
lO.S.the  kings  of  the  Ainoriles  galheredugainst  u. 
22.  19.  rebel  not  against  the  Lord,  nor  against  u, 
.Ivdg.  15.  10.  saiil,  why  areyecome  up  against  u.1 

1  .Sam.  30.23.  delivered  company  ihatcame  ag.u. 

2  Ham.  11.  23.  surely  the  men  prevailed  against  u. 
21.  5.  the  man  that  devised  against  u. 

2  A7n^*22.13.gr(at  isihe  wrath  ol  Loid  againstu. 

2  C'Ar.20.12.  this  great  comjiany  that  conieth  ag.  u. 
Psal.  44.  5.  tread  them  under  that  rise  against  u. 

79.  8.  remember  not  against  u.  former  iniquitiei 
124.  2.  Lord  lor  us,  \vhen  men  rose  up  against  u. 
3.  when  their  wrath  was  kindled  against  it. 

Isa.  14.  8.  no  feller  is  come  up  against  it. 
59.  12.  and  our  sins  testify  against  v.  Jer.  14.  7. 

./er.  IG.  10.  Lord  pionounced  all  this  evil  against  u. 

21.  2.  Nebuchadnezzar  niaketh  war  against  it. 
13.  which  say,  who  shall  come  down  ag.  u.l 

43.  3.  but  Bavuch  seiteth  thee  on  against  v. 
Lam.  3.  46.  have  opened  their  mouth  against  u. 

5.  22.  rejected  us,  thou  art  very  wroth  against  it. 
Dan.  9.  12.  confirmrd  his  words  he  spake  ag.  u. 
Mark  9.  40.  Jesus  said,  forbid  him  not,  he  that  if 
not  against  it.  is  on  our  part,  Luke  9.  50. 
Rom.  8.  31.  it' God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  ag.  u. 
Col.  2.  14.  blotting  out  the  hand-writing  ag.  u. 

3  John  10.  prating ao'aiwit  it.  w  ith  malicious  woidt 

Among  or  Amongst  US. 
Gen.  23.  6.  thou  art  a  mighty  prince  among  it. 
Exod.  17.  7.  spying,  is  the  Lord  among  u.  or  not  t 
34.  9.  let  my  lord,  I  pray  thee,  go  among  it. 
IJctit.  31. 17.  because  our  God  is  not  among  u. 
■Josh.  9.  7.  pcradventiirc  ye  dwell  among  it.  22. 

22.  19.  jiass  over  and  take  possession  among  u. 
31.  we  perceive  the  Lord  is  among  u. 

Jiidg.  18.  25.  let  not  thy  voice  be  heard  among  u. 
1  .Sam.4.3.when  itcomcth  among  u.  it  may  save  it. 
1  Kings5.G.r\(itamong  u.n\iy  can  skill  to  hewlimber 
Job  34.  37.  he  chippeth  his  hands  amongst  it. 
P.9.  74.9.  not  ainonn- It.  any  that  knowethhow  long 
Prov.  1.  14.  cast  in  thy  lot  among  u.  let  us  have 
Isa.  33. 14.  who  among  u.  shall  dwell  with  the  de- 
vouring fire  ?  who  wi'h  everlasting  burnings 
Mic.  3.  11.  they  will  say,  is  not  the  Lord  among  u. 
Luke  7.  16.  a  groat  prophet  is  risen  up  among  it. 
John  1. 14.  Word  was  made  flesh  and  dwelt  am.  u. 
Acts  1.  21.  Lord  Jesus  went  in  and  out  among  u. 

15.  7.  God  made  choice  among  u.  that  Gentiles 

At  VS. 

1  Pet.  4.  17.  if  it  first  begin  at  it.  what  the  end  be 

Eefore  US. 
Eiod.  32.  23.  for  they  said  unto  me,  make  usgodi 
which  shall  go  before  u.  Acts  7.  40. 
Devt.  1.  22.  ye  said,  we  will  tend  men  before  u. 

2.  33.  the  Lord  r^ur  God  delivered  him  before  u. 
.Josh.  4.  23.  which  he  diied  uji  from  before  it. 

8.6.'  hoy  flee  before  u.  \\  24.  18.  drave  out  before  a. 
Jvdg.  11.  24.  the  L^rd  shall  drive  out  before  u. 

20.  32.  smittin  down  before  u.  as  at  the  first,  39. 

1  .Sam.  8. 20.  kii:g  may  judge  u.  and  go  out  before  u. 
9.27.  Samuel  said,  bid  thy  servant  pussonif/.  u. 

2  Chron.  14.  7.  while  the  land  is  yet  before  v. 
/«a.30.11.ran.»:e  Holy  One  of  Isrml  cease  brfnr'U- 
Dan.  9.  10.  lo  walk  in  his  laws  which  he  set  Ar/.  u 
Heb.  6.  18.  lo  lay  hold  on  the  hope  set  before  it. 

12.  1.  let  us  run  the  race  that  is  set  before  u. 

Behind  US. 
fJcn.  32.  18.  and,  hihold,  nlso  he  is  behind  v.  Sft 

Between  or  betwixt  US. 
Gen.  26.  28.  let  there  be  now  an  onlh  betwiit  u. 
31.37.  that  Ihry  may  judge  'itwixt  u.  both 
53.  Ihe  God  of  ,^braham  judgi;  betwixt  v. 
.Josh.  22.25.  Lord  made  Jordan  a  border  brttrcem  u. 

27.  that  it  may  he  a  witness  bcttrirn  u.  28,  34. 
.f)idp.  11. 10.  L<iid  be  witnes,</)C/?rfC7iit.  .Tir.  42.  !S 
Job  9.  33.  neither  is  there  any  days-man  betwixt  u 


us 

fjuke  16.26.  betnefn  v   and  you,  is  a  groat  gulf 
^ct3  15.  9.  put  iiuiiittereiice  beticeen  u.  mid  them 

Eph.%  14.  the  iiiidiJle  wall  ofparlitiuii  between  u 

B,j  L>d. 

A*Hm.  13. 1.  hath  nut  the  Lurd  spoken  also  by  u.7 

8  Kings  AM^.tUii  is  amunoru.  which  passuth  by  u. 

2  Cot  1.  lit    Jesus  was  preached  among  you  by  u. 

lit),  are  in  him  amen,  to  the  glory  ol'God  by  u. 

2.  14.  manifest  the  savour  ol'  his  knowledge  by  u. 

3.3.  to  he  the  epistle  of  Christ,  ministered  by  u. 

5.  20.  as  tho'  God  did  hesecch  you  by  u.  we  pray 
7.  l).  ye  might  receive  <lamage  by  u.  in  nothing 
8. 19.  whicli  isailministered  by  u.to  glory  of  L.  20. 

Concerning  VS. 
2  Kings  22. 13.  do  accordiii:;  to  all  written  cone,  u. 

Fur  VS. 
Oen.  20. 22.  now  the  Lord  hath  made  room  fur  u. 
31.  14.  is  there  yet  any  inlioritiince/ur  m. 
tUod.  14.  12.  belter /«/■  ii.  to  serve  the  Egyptians 

24.  14.  lurry  ye  here  for  u.  until  we  come  nguin 
A'liin.  14.  3.  belter /or  u.  to  return  into  Egypt 

9.  fear  not  the  people,  for  they  are  bread /or  u. 
Dent. '2.  3t).  there  was  not  one  city  loo  strong/or  u. 

30.  12.  say,  who  shall  go  up /or  u.  to  heaven? 
IJ.  shouldest  say,whoshall  go  over  the  sea/,  u.? 

JosJi.  0. 13.  art  thou  for  u.  or  for  our  ailversarice? 
22.  17.  is  the  iniquity  of  Poor  too  little /or  «.? 
Jndg.l.l.  who  go  up/or  u. against  the  Canaaniles? 

1  tiam.  7.  8.  ce  ise  not  to  cry  unto  the  Lord  for  u. 
9.  5.  come,  lest  my  father  take  thought /or  u. 
14.  6.  it  may  be  the  Lord  will  work /or  u. 

2  Sam.  18.  3.  if  we  Hee  they  will  not  care /or  u. 
21.  4.  neither /or  u.  shall  thou  kill  any  man 

2  Kings  4. 13.  behold  thou  hast  been  careful  for  u. 

6.  1.  the  place  where  wedwell  is  loo  strait /or  u. 
2  Chron.  13.  10.  as /or  u.  the  Lord  is  our  Gud 
Fzra  8.  21.  to  seek  of  him  a  right  way  for  u. 
JVrh.  4.  20.  re.-iort,  our  God  shall  tight /or  u. 
Psal.  47.4.  he  shall  choose  our  inheritance /or  u. 

62.  8.  trust  in  him,  God  is  a  refuge /or  m. 

6H.  28.  strengthen  that  thou  hast  wrought /or  u. 

12ti.  3.  the  Lord  hath  done  great  things /or  u. 
Isn.  0.  H.whoin  shall  I  send,  and  who  will  go  for  u. 

2(5.  12.  Lord,  thou  wilt  ordain  peace /or  u. 
Jrr.  9.  IH.  let  llieni  take  up  a  wailing/or  «. 

14. 10.  hast  sinii;eii,and  there  is  no  healing /or  w. 

21.  2.  inquire  I  pray  thee,  of  the  Lord /or  u. 

37.  3.  pray  to  the  Lord  our  God /or  u.  42.  2,  20- 
J. am.  A.  17.  as/or  v.  our  eyes  as  yet  failed 
Mat.  17. 4.  Peter  said  to  Jesus,  Lord,  it  is  good  for 
u.  to  be  here,  Mark  9.  5.  Luke  9.  33. 

2.1.  P.  not  so,  lest  there  be  not  enough /or  u. 
Mark  14.  I5.an  upper  room, there  make  ready /or  u. 
/.like  1.  69.  hast  raised  up  a  horn  of  salvation/or  u. 

9.  50.  for  he  that  is  not  agriinst  us  is  for  u. 
Pom.  4. ^i.  for  n.  to  whom  it  shall  be  imputed 

5.  8.  while  we  were  sinners,  Christ  died /or  u. 

8.  20.  the  Spirit  makelli  intercession /or  u. 

31.  if  God  be  for  u.  who  can  be  against  us? 

32.  spared  not,  but  delivered  him  up /or  u.  all 
34.  Christ  also  nitikcth  iniercrssion /or  tj. 

1  Cor.  5.  7.  even  Christ  is  sacrificed /or  k. 

2  Ccr.  1.  11.  helping  together  by  prayer  for  u. 

4.  17.  our  light  affliction  workoth /or  v. 

5.  81.  he  hath  made  him  to  be  sin /or  u. 
Oal.  3.  13.  Christ  redeemed  us,  made  a  curse /or  u. 
F.jih.  5.  2.  hath  loved  us,  and  given  hiin.solf/or  u. 
Col.  4.  3.  withal,  praving  for  v.  that  God  would 
t  Thr.is.  5.  10.  who  died /or  «.  1  ./uAn  3.  Hi. 

25.  pray  for  u.  2  TItess.  3.  1.  Heb.  13.  18. 
Til.  2.  14.  who  gave  him.«elf/or  u.  that  he  might 
tfi:h.  6.  20.  whither  the  forerunner  is  for  u.  entered 

9.  12.  having  obtained  eternal  redemption /or  u. 
24.  now  toappcirin  the  preseneeof  God /or  u. 

10  2ll  living  way, which  he  hath  ronserrii  ted /or  u. 

11.40  G.  havint:  provided  someho'lor  thing/or  k. 
1  /'ft.2.21.  because  Christ  hat h  suffered /or  u.  4.  I. 

F,om  US. 
rim.  2'i.  1*).  Ahimelc'-h  said  to  Isaac,  go  from  u. 

1  ■*>  in.  (!.  20.  and  to  whom  shall  he  gonp/mmu.? 

14.  17.  nuMihcr  now,  and  see  who  i*  gone  f.-um  u. 

2  r'A'-.2<).  10   his  wrnih  liirn/;-om  u.  Fira  10.  14. 
Vml.  2.  3.  Irl  ii-t  r-isi  away  their  cords/r.^oi  n. 

103.12  lin'l)  riMnovcd  nor  transgre.ssii>ns/roHi  u. 
Inn.  59.  0.  tliercfi.rf  14  judgment  ftr from  n. 
11.  wo  look  for   alvnl'ion.but  it  is  far  off/rom  u. 

64.  7.  for  thou  hasi  hid  Ihy  faCB/rom  u. 
J-r.  4.**.  the  angni  oPllie  Lord  is  not  turned  from  u. 

21.  2.  that  N'-hu'-hadnn/./nr  may  go  up  from  u. 

3fl.25.  hide  it  not /rom  n.  we  will  not  kill  thee 
Jlrts  I.  22.  to  the  dav  Im-  was  taken  iip/rom  M. 

15.  21.  heard  that  eertnin  wlici  went  out /rom  ji. 
9  VV/'-yj  2. 2.  nor  by  word,  nor  by  Irt'er  as  from  a. 
1  ./oAn  2.  19.  they  went  mil  from  u.  but  not  of  us 

See  Dki'art. 
fn  IS. 
A'lim.l  18.  if  the  Lord  delight  in  »/.  ho  will  bring  us 
^n'/I.'i.O.wlril  undorstandest  thou, which  is  nolio  w. 
hi.  2rt.  12   ihoii  lm«  wroiiglii  all  our  works  inn. 
John  17.  21   that  they  also  may  bo  one  in  u. 
654 


US 

R<nn.  8.  4.  that  the  law  might  be  fulfilled  in  H. 
18.  wilh  the  gloiy  which  shall  be  revealed  la  u 

1  Cor.  4.  6.  ye  might  learn  in  u.  not  10  think 

2  Cor.  I.  5.  as  sultt^ring-  of  Christ  abound  i/i  u. 
4.  12.  BO  death  workelh  in  u.  but  hie  in  you 
6.  12.  ye  are  not  straitened  in  u.  but  111  yourselves 

Kph.  3.  20.  according  to  power  that  workelh  in  u. 
2  7'im.  1.  14.  by  Holy  Ghost  which  dwelteth  in  u. 
./am.  4.  5.  the  spirit  that  dwelleth  in  u.  lusteth 

1  ./vhn  1.8.  truth  is  not  in  u.  ||  10.  his  word  not  inn. 

3.  24.  hereby  we  know  that  he  ubidelh  in  u. 

4.  12.  if  we  love,  God  dwelleth  in  u.  13. 

2  John'i.  for  the  truth's  sake  which  dwelleth  in  u. 
Of  VS. 

<7en.3.22.  behold,  the  man  is  become  as  one  of  u. 
JVuni.  31.  49.  and  there  lacketh  nut  a  man  of  u. 
./o.iA.  2.  24.  the  inhabitants  faint  because  of  u. 
.IvUg.  16.  24.  our  enemy,  which  slew  many  of  u. 

20. 18.  which  of  u.  shall  go  up  tirst  to  the  battle? 
2  Kings  6. 11.  w  hich  of  u.  is  for  the  king  of  Israel? 
Eira  8.  23.  we  besought  G.  he  was  entreated  of  u. 
Psal.  115.  12.  the  Lord  hath  been  mindful  of  u. 
Isa.  53.6.  he  hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquities  o/u.  all 

63. 16.  our  father, Iho'  Abraham  be  ignorant  o/u. 
Jer.ti.  24.  anguish  hath  taken  hold  of  u.  and  piiin 

14.  9.  yet  thou,  O  Lord,  art  in  the  midst  of  u. 
.lets  17.27.  iho' he  be  not  far  from  every  one  o/u. 
Rom.  4.  16.  Abraham,  »ho  is  the  father  o/u.  all 

1  Cor.  4. 1.  so  account  of  u.  us  ministers  of  Christ 

2  Cor.2.11.  lest  Satan  get  an  advantage  of  u.for  we 
4.  7.  that  the  power  may  bo  of  God  and  not  of  u. 
10.  2.  some  who  think  of  u.  as  if  we  walked 

Gal.  4.26.  Jerusalem,  which  is  the  mother  of  u.  all 
F.ph.  A.  7.  but  to  every  one  of  u.  is  given  grace 

1  T/iess.  1. 6.  ye  became  followers  of  u.  and  of  Ld. 
9.  th<;y  themselves  shew  ofu.  what  entering  in 

2. 13.  ye  received  the  word  which  ye  heard  ofu. 
3.  6.  ye  have  good  remembrance  o/u.  always 
4   1.  that  as  ye  have  received  of  u.  how  to  walk 

2  T/ics.  3.  6.  not  after  tradition  he  received  ofu. 
2  Pel.  3.  2.  the  commandment  0/  u.  the  apostles 
1  JoAn  2.19. ihey  were  not  of  u.  for  iflhey  had  been 

of  u.  they  might  shew  they  were  not  all  of  u. 
On  US,  or  upon  VS. 
Gen.  25.  10.  shouldest  have  brought  guilt  upon  u. 

42.  21.  therefore  is  this  distress  come  upon  u. 

43.  18.  fall  i/;>o?r  u.  and  take  us  for  bond-men 
F.xod.  5.  3.  lest  he  fall  upon  u.  wilh  pestilence 
JViim.  12. 11.1  beseech  thee,  lay  not  the  sin  upon  u. 
/Jcnt.3\.  17.  are  not  these  evils  come  upon  u.7 
.losh.  9.  20.  let  them  live  lest  wrath  be  \ipon  u. 
.fuilg.8.  21.  they  said,  rise  thou  and  full  upon  u. 
1  Sam.  5.  7.  his  hand  is  sore  upon  u.  and  IJagon 

1  Kings  12.  A.  make  thou  this  heavy  yoke  which  he 
put  upon  u.  lighter,  9.  2  Chron.  10.  4,  9. 

2  Kings  7.  9.  some  mischief  will  come  upon  u. 

1  CAr.  15. 13.  Lord  our  God  made  a  breach  upon  u. 

2  CAr.  20. 9.  if  when  evil  Cometh  upcii  v.  as  sword 
.34.  21.  for  great  is  the  wrath  poured  upon  u. 

Ezra  8.18.  by  the  good  hand  of  our  God  upon  k.31 
9.  13.  afier  all  that  is  com.)  upon  u.  for  our  evil? 

wVeA.  9..32.  the  trouble  little  that  hath  come  upon  u 
33.  thou  art  just  in  all  that  is  brought  upon  u. 
13. 18.  did  no^_oiir  God  bring  all  thisevil  upon  u.? 

.fob  9.  33.  that  might  lay  his  hand  upon  u.  both 

P.ial.  4.  6.  lilt  up  light  of  thy  countenance  upon  u. 
33.  22.  let  thy  mercy,  O  Lord,  be  upon  u. 

44.  17.  all  this  is  come  upon  u.  yet  have  we  not 
67. 1.  God  bless  us,  cause  his  face  to  shine  upon  u. 
90.  17.  the  beauty  of  the  Lord  our  God  be  upon  it. 
]23.2.oureyes  wait  on  L.iill  ho  have  mercy  up.  u. 

3.  have  mercy  upon  u.  O  L.  have  mercv  upon  u. 
Mat.  9.  27.  I  20.  30,  31.  /.u'kc  17.  13. 
fsa.  32.  !.■>.  until  the  Spirit  be  poured  upon  u. 
Aim.  3.  47.  fear  and  a  snare  is  come  upon  u. 
5.  1.  remember,  O  Lord,  what  is  come  iipun  u. 
F.irk.  33.10.  if  our  transgressions  and  sins  be  up.  u. 
Dan.  9.  11.  therefore  the  curse  is  pound  upon  u. 

12.  by  bringing  upon  u.  a  great  evil,  13,  14. 
Hos.  10.8.  they  shall  siy  lo  mountains,  cover  us, 
and  lo  hills,  fall  on  u.  /■,HA-/i2.3.3fl.  Rrv.  6.  16. 
.Tonah  I.  7.  for  whoso  caii.so  this  evil  is  on  u.  8. 
.1/ir.3.1 1,  they  will  «ay,ngne  evil  can  Romuu;>on  u. 
7. 19.  he  will  turn  and  have  compassion  upon  u. 
Mai.  27.  2.).  his  blood  he  011  «.  and  our  children 
Jlet.t  3.  4.  look  on  u.  ||  5.28.  this  man's  Wood  u;i.v. 
12.  or  why  look  yo  so  earnestly  on  u.  as  though 
11.  15.  Spirit  fell  on  lhem,ns  on  u.  at  the  beginning 
Worn. 16.6.  Mary,  who  bestowed  much  labour  on  u. 
Tit.  3.6.  which  he  shod  on  u.  abundantly  thro'  Jes. 
1  ./oAn  3.  1.  lo-vo  tho  Father  hath  bestowed  on  u. 

Over  rs. 
<?fn.  37. 8.  said,  «halt  Ihon  imlocd  reign  oner  u.? 
^ro(/.2.14.who  made  Ihi^e  jiidgoouer  u.  .icls7.7i. 
jVum.  16.  13.  thou  make  thyself  a  prinre  oirr  u. 
./«r/if.  8.  22.  Israel  said  to  (iidoon,  rule  over  u. 
9.  8.  tho  trees  said  lo  tho  tlivo-tree,  reign  orrr  v. 
10.  to  Iho  fig-troell  12.  to  vine  ||  14.  lo  bramble 
I  Snm.P.  19.  but  we  willhav,>a  kingoi'iru.  10.  19., 
11.  12.  who  said,  shall  Saul  reign  over  u.?  { 


US 


12  .Sa>n.5.2.  in  time  past  when  Saul  was  king  ovtr  11 
19.  lU.  and  .Absalom  whom  we  anointed  over  it. 
A*rA.9.  37.  thf  Kt<°f  whom  thou  hast  set  over  u. 
P.sal.  12.  4.  lips  are  our  o»n,  who  is  Lord  over  u 
Jsa.  26.  13.  oiher  lords  have  had  dominion  over  u 
/^ani.S.S.servants  have  ruled  over  u.nune  lo  deliver 
J.,uke  19. 14.  uill  nut  have  this  man  to  reign  orcr  lu 

Through  VS. 
2  Cor.  9.  ll.causeth  through  u.  ihanksgiving  to  G 

To  or  unto  US. 

Gen.  19. 31.  there  is  not  a  man  to  come  in  unto  u. 

20.  9.  said,  what  hast  thou  done  unto  u.?  26. 10. 

34.21.  let  us  take  their  daughters  to  u,.  for  wivea 

39.  14.  brought  in  a  Hebrew  nnto  u.  lo  mock  ut 

42.28.  afraid  of  saying  one  lo  another,  what  is  thia 

that  God  hath  dune  unto  u.?  Jcr.  5.  19. 

J^um.  10.  31.  thou  inayest  be  to  u.  instead  of  eye« 

32. what  guoilness, Lord, shall  do  uiito  u.the  same 

JJeut.  5.  27.  speak  thou  unto  u.  and  we  will  hear 

29.  29.  but  the  things  revealed  belong  unto  u. 

30.  12.  go  up  lo  heaven  and  bring  it  unto  u. 
13.  shall  go  over  the  sea  and  bring  it  unto  u. 

.losh.  9.  25.  we  are  in  thy  hand,  as  it  seemeth  good 

and  right  to  thee  to  do  unto  u.  do,  Juiig.  10.  15. 

.ludg.  13.  8.  let  the  man  of  God  come  again  unto  u. 

15.  10.  we  come  to  do  to  him,  as  he  hath  done  to  u. 
18.19.go  wilh  us,  and  be  (0  u.a  father  and  a  priest 

1  Sam.  4.  8.  woe  unto  u.Jer.A.\2.  \  6.  4.  l.am.b.XQ, 
14.  9.  iflhey  thus  say  unto  u.  tarry  till  we  come 

25.  15.  but  the  men  were  very  good  unto  u. 
16.  they  were  a  wall  unto  u.  by  night  and  by  day 

I  Chron.  13.  3.  bring  again  the  ark  of  God  to  u. 
F.zra  4. 12.  the  Jews  which  c<ime  from  thee  to  u. 
JVeh.  5.  8  shall  y.our  brethren  be  sold  ujito  u. 
./o4  34.  4.  let  us  choose  (0  «.  judgment,  let  us  know 
P.va/.60.I.  hast  scattered,©  turn  thyself /o  u.  again 
1 15.1. not  unto  u.O  Lord, not  u7ito  u.bul  ihy  nuniA 
A*a.  1.  9.  except  had  lel\  untou.  a  very  small  remn. 

9.  6.  unto  u.  a  child  is  born,  unto  u.  a  sun  is  given 

14.10.  thoy  phall8.iy,art  thou  become  like  unto  u.7 
28.  15.  the  scourge  shall  not  come  unto  u. 
30.  10.  prophesy  not  unto  u.  right  things,  speak 

unto  u.  smooth  things,  prophesy  deceits 
33.21.  Lord  will  be  unto  u.a  place  of  broad  rivert 
36.  11.  speak  not  to  u.  in  the  Jews'  language 
.frr.  5.  24.  he  reserveth  to  u.  the  appointed  weeki 

26.  16.  hath  spoken  to  u.  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
42.  5.Jbr  which  the  Lord  shall  send  ihee  to  u. 
44.  16.  as  fur  the  word  thou  hast  spoken  unto  u. 

Aam. 5. 4. water  for  money,  our  wood  is  sold  untv  u. 
F.zrk.  11.15.  unto  u.  is  this  land  given  in  possession 
24.  19.  tell  us  what  these  things  arc  to  u.7 
Dan.  9.  7.  but  unto  u.  confusion  offices,  8. 
ffns.  6.  3.  he  shall  come  unto  u.  as  the  rain 

10.  3.  what  then  should  a  king  do  to  u.7 
■  fonah  1.11.  that  the  sea  may  be  calm  un^o  u. 
Zerh.  1.  6.  like  as  the  Lord  thougiit  to  do  unto  u. 
Mat.  20.  12.  thou  hast  made  them  equal  unto  u. 

25. 11.  saying,  Lord,  Lord,  open  to  u.  AuA;  13. 25 

27.  4.  what  is  that  to  v.7  see  thou  to  that 
I.ukc  1.  2.  even  as  they  delivered  ihem  unto  u. 

2.  15.  which  ihc  Lord  hath  made  known  unto  u. 
10.  17.  even  ihc  devils  are  subject  unto  u. 

12.  4).  spoakest  thou  this  parable  unto  u..? 

16.  26.  neither  can  they  pass  to  u.  that  would 
.liihn  2.  18.  what  sign  siiewest  thou  unto  u.7 

14.  22.  that  lliou  wilt  manifest  thyself  unto  u.* 
16.  17.  what  is  this  that  he  sayetti  unto  u.7 
.^cts  7.38.who  received  ihe  oracles  lo  give  unto  u.7 

10.  41.  to  u.  who  did  cat  and  drink  with  him 

11.  17.  God  gave  them  llie  like  gift  as  unto  u. 

13.  33.  God  tilth  fulfilled  the  same  unto  u. 
WoHi. 5.5.  by  the  Holj  Ghost  which  is  given  unto  u 

1  Cor.  1.  18.  but  unto  u.  it  is  the  power  of  God 
30  in  Christ,  who  of  God  is  made  unto  u.  wisilom 

2.  10.  God  revealed  them  unto  u.  by  his  Spirit 
8.  6.  but  to  V.  there  is  but  one  Go<l,  the  Father 

2  Cor.  5. 19.  committed  to  u.  word  of  reconciliation 
8.  5.  gave  themselves  unto  w.  by  the  will  of  Gud 

7.  thoreforo  us  ye  abound  in  your  love  to  u. 
Ccl.  1.8.  who  declared  unto  m.  your  love  in  Spirit 
4. 3.  that  God  would  open  unto  u.  a  door  of  utter 
HeJ>.  4.  2.  for  unto  u.  was  the  ffospel  preached 

1  Pet.  1.  12.  hut  unto  u.  ihov  did  minister  the  tliingj 
To  US- WARD. 

Psal.  40.  5.  Ihy  thoughts  which  are  to  u.-vard 
F.ph.  1.  19.  tho  greatness  of  his  power  to  u.-u-arj 

2  Pet.  3.  9. but  his  Inog-BtitToring  to  u.-u».r.ot  willing 
Toward  VS. 

Psal.  85.  4.  cause  Ihine  anger  toward  v.  to  cease 
117.  2.  his  nieiriful  kindness  is  great  lotcard  u 

lio'ti.  5.  .''.  God  commendolh  his  love  toward  u 

F.ph.  1.  8.  wherein  he  hath  abounded  toirard  k 
2.  7.  in  hia  kindness  toward  v.  ihroiish  Christ 

l./oAn  4.9.  was  muni foHted  I  he  loveof  G.toieariiii. 
Vndrr  US. 

Psal.  47.  3.  ho  shall  subdue  the  people  under  u. 
JVith  US. 

Cfrn.  31.  .50.  no  man  is  irilh  u.  see,  God  iswitnei< 
34.  9.  and  make  ye  ninrringui  uiitA  H.  and  give 


USE 

OtnOi  lO.ye  shall  dwell  ic.  u.\\  23.  Iliey  dwell  k.  it. 

43.  4.  if  thou  send  ciur  brnther  aith  u.  44.  26. 

44.  30.  geeth  lliut  the  tail  is  iinl  wit/i  u.  31. 
£iod.3.18.the  God  of  the  Hebrews  met  with  u.5.3. 

14.  11.  wherefore  hast  thou  dealt  thus  with  «.? 

20.19.«pcBk  thou  witk  u.let  not  God  epciik  tcitAu. 

33.  16.  is  it  not  in  that  lliou  goesl  with  u.? 

JVuni.  10.20.  come  thou  wilh  u.wa  will  do  thee  good 

32.  it  shall  \>e,  if  thou  go  inith  u.  that  goodness 

11.  18.  for  it  was  well  with  u.  in  Egypt 

14.  9.  and  the  Lord  is  with  u.  fear  them  not 

22.  14.  Balaam  refuscth  to  come  with  u. 
Detit.  5.  2.  the  Lord  made  a  covenant  with  u.  3. 

29.  15.  hut  with  him  thai  sluodelh  here  wilh  u. 
also  with  liim  that  is  not  here  with  n.  thisduj' 
Josh.  9.  6.  therefore  make  a  league  with  u.  11. 
Judg.  6.  13.  O  my  lord,  if  the  Lord  be  with  u. 

11.  8.  we  turn  agnin,  tliut  thou  mayest  go  wilh  u. 

18.  19.  they  said,  hold  thy  peace  and  go  with  u. 

1  Sam-h."!.  the  ark  of  God  shall  not  ahiiie  willi  u. 

2  Sam.  111.  2li.  let  my  brother  Amnon  go  with  u. 
2).  17.  shall  go  no  more  out  wilh  v.  to  battle 

i  Kings  3.1H.thcre  wa.")  no  stranger  with  u.in  house 

8.  .57.  the  Lord  our  God  be  wilh  u.  ns  he  was 
^Kinjs  6.16.  fear  not,  thiiy  that  be  with  u.are  more 

than  they  that  ho  with  ihem,  2  Shron.  32.  7. 
2  Chron.  13.  12.  behold,  God  is  icilh  u.  32,  8. 
K7rn  4.3.  you  have  nothing  to  do  withu.  to  build 

9.  14.  woiildst  not  thou  he  angry  with  u.  till  thou 
Jub  15.  10.  with  u.  are  the  grey-lieaded  and  aged 
Psal.  46.  7.  the  Lord  of  hosts  is  with  u.  11. 

85.  5.  wilt  thou  be  angry  with  u.  for  ever? 

103.  10.  he  liaih  not  dealt  zcith  u.  after  our  sins 
Prov.  I. II.  come  withu.  \\  Isa.  8.10. God  is  withu. 
Isa.  59.  12.  lor  our  transgressions  are  with  n. 
Jer.  8. 8.  wc  are  wise,  the  law  of  the  Ld.  is  with  u. 

14.  21.  remember,  breiik  not  thy  covenant  wilh  u. 
42.6.  that  it  may  he  well  withu.  when  we  obey 

J/us.  12.4.  found  in  Bethel,  there  he  spake  with  u. 
y.ech.  1.  6.  as  our  doings,  so  hath  he  dealt  with  u. 
Mat.  1.  23.  being  inierpreted,  is,  God  wilh  u. 

13  .56.  his  sisters  are  all  with  u.  Mark  6.  3. 

22.  2-5.  now  there  were  with  u.  seven  brethren 
LuUri.  48.  son,  why  hast  thou  thus  dealt  with  u.? 

9.49.forbdd  him,  because  he  followc'h  not  with  u. 

24.  29.  ahiile  wilh  u.  ||  32.  while  he  talked  with  u. 
Mcls  1.  17.  for  he  was  numbered  with  u.  and  had 

2.  29.  his  Rppnlchre  is  with  u.  unto  this  day 

1  Cor.  16.  16.  to  every  one  that  helpelli  with  u. 

2  Ciir.  H.  19.  who  was  chosen  to  tr;ivel  with  u. 

2  Thcas.  1.  7.  to  you  who  are  troubled,  rest  with  u. 
2  I'll.  1. 1.  Iiiivo  obtained  like  precious  faith  Kj/fA  u. 
1  John  I.  3.  that  ye  may  have  fellowship  wilh  «. 

2.  19.  would  no  dmibl  have  c.  nlinued  withu, 
iJ  .John  2.  the  truth  slnll  he  wilh  u.  for  ever 

IVitkin  US. 
Lt.ke  24.  32.  did  not  orir  hearts  burn  witkin  v.. 
.  H-ilhout  VS. 

1  Cor.  4.  8.  ye  have  rei:n"d  as  kinzs  without  «. 
//e4.11.40.  th;ittliey  withmit  li.nutbe  made  perfect 

USE. 
f.ev.  7.  24.  the  fat  may  b"  used  in  any  other  u. 
Deut.  26.  14.  nor  taken  out  for  anv  unclean  u. 

2  .Sam.  1  18.  haile  thim  iCMcli  .ludali  u.  of  the  bow 

1  Chron.  2^.  15.  according  to  the  u.  of  candNatick 
Rnm.  1.  26.  for  women  did  chaiiire  ihi:  naiural  u. 

27.  the  men  Icaviiigthe  natural  u.  of  the  women 
F.ph.  4.  29.  v»hich  is  good  to  the  it.  of  edifying 

2  Tim.i  21.  shall  be  a  vesucl  meet  for  master's  a. 
Heb.  5.  14.  by  u.  have  their  senses  exercised  to 

USES. 
Tit. 3. 14.  to  itiainia'n  good  works  for  iieccs'sary  u. 

USE,   fan-live. 
J,'V.  11.  26.  neither  shall  ye  «.  enchnntment 
.Vi/m.  10.2.  u  trumpels  forcaMingof  the  assembly 

15.  30.  aOer  which  ye  k.  to  gn  a  whoring 
/)f"<.2.t9.u.  no  hostility  niain-^l  Moob  nor  contend 
1  Chrnn.  12.  2.  could  u.  both  right  hand  and  led 
Jrr.  2:).3I.ihit  II.  their  tongues,  and  sav,  he  snilh 

31.  23.  as  yet  t#-y  fb  ill  u   this  speech  in  .Tudah 
46.  11.  in  vain,  shalt  thou  «.  many  medicines 
E'r.k.  12.  23.  thev  shall  no  more  u   it  as  H  prov.-rb 
Jfi.  44.  shall  «.  this  proverb  against  thee,  saying 
JS  2.  what  mean  ye,  thn'  y  «.  this  proverb  ? 
3.  ve  shall  nnt  hnve  occasion  to  u.  (his  proverb 
21.21. the  king  of  nnbylon  stood  to  k.  divination 
Joel  2.  t  1".  should  «.  a  hy-word  aeainst  ihem 
Mat.  5.  44.  do  snod  to  then  that  hale  you,  prav 
for  them  lint  despitcfully  u.  you,  r^uke  6.  23. 
6.  7.  when  y  p^ay,  ii   not  vain  re;ietitio-i8 
Acts  14.  .5.  nisault  made  to  u.  apostles  desiii'efullv 
1  Cor.  7.21.  ifthou  mnyest  1)>  mide  fr  e,  u.  it  rather 
31.  titev  that  u.  this  world  as  not  abusinj  it 

3  Cor.  1. 17.  when  thus  minded,  did  I  u.  lighlnoss? 

3.  12.  have  hope,  we  a.  3r"at  plainness  of  speech 
13. 10.  l"8l  beinc  present,  I  should  ?;.  f  harpncss 

Onl.  5.   1.  «.  no'  liberty  for  an  of-casion  to  the  flesh 
1  TVi).  1.3.  the  law  is  good  if  a  man  u.  it  lawfully 
3.  10.  'hen  let  them  u.  the  oTi"e  of  a  dein-n 
i  Tjin.  5. 23.  u.  a  little  wine  for  thy  stomacb'i  sake 
6U 


usu 

1  Pit.  4.  9.  u.  hospitality  one  to  another  without 

USED. 
f;iorf.21.36.  if  the  ox  bath  u.  to  push  in  time  past 
Lev.  7.  24.  the  fat  may  be  u.  in  any  other  use 
.Judg.  14.  10.  for  so  u.  the  young  men  to  do 
20.  whom  Samson  had  it.  as  his  friend 

2  Kings  17. 17.  it.  enchantments,  21.  6.  2  CAr. 33. 6. 
Jer.  2.  24.  a  wild  ass  u.  to  the  wilderness  that 
A.'ze*.22. 29.  the  people  of  land  have  «.  oppression 

35.  II.  according  to  thy  envy  which  thou  hast  u. 
Hos.  12.  10.  and  u.  similitudes  by  llio  prophets 
Mark  2.  18.  the  disciples  uf  John  tt.  to  fast 
Jlcls  8.  9.  Simon  Magus  before-time  u.  sorcery 
19.  19.  many  also  of  them  which  u.  curious  arts 
Rum.  3.  13.  with  their  tongues  they  tt.  deceit 
1  Cor.  9.  12.  we  have  not  it  this  power,  but  suffer 

15.  but  I  have  u.  none  of  these  things 
1  Thess.  2.  5.  nor  at  any  time  it.  we  flattering  words 
1  T'im.3.13.  they  that  have  v.  the  office  of  a  deacon 
Heb.  10.  33.  companions  of  them  that  were  so  u. 

US  E.ST. 
P.saM19.132.  as  thoutt.  to  those  that  fear  thy  name 

USETH. 
Deut.  18.  10.  not  be  found  any  that  u.  divination 
F.sth.  6.  8.  apparel  which  the  king  u.  to  wear 
Prov.  15.  2.  the  tongue  of  the  wise  u.  knowledge 
18.  23.  the  i)ooru.  entreaties,  but  rich  answereih 
./rr.22.13.  u.  his  neighbour's  service  without  wages 
tZiek.  16.  44.  that  it.  proverbs,  shall  it.  this  proverb 
Heb.  5.  13.  every  one  that  u.  milk  is  unskilful  iu 

USING. 
Cul.  2.  22.  which  all  are  to  perish  with  the  u. 
1  Pet.  2.  16.  and  not  u.  your  liberty  for  a  cloak  of 

USURP. 
1  Tim.  2.  12.  I  suffer  not  a  woman  to  u.  authority 

USURER. 
Exod.  22. 25.  thou  sHalt  not  be  to  him  as  an  u. 

USURY. 

By  usury  is  generally  understood  the  gain  of  any 

thing  above  the  principal,  or  that  which  was 

lent,  exacted  only  in  consideration  of  the  liiav, 

whether  it  be  in  money,  corn,  wares,  or  the  like. 

ft  is  most  comma  nly  taken  for  an  unlawful  projit, 

ichich  a  person  makes  of  his  money  or  goods. 
The  Hebrew  word  for  usury  signifies  Biting. 
The  law  of  Ogd  prohibits  rigorous  imposing 
of  eo7iditions  of  gain  for  the  loan  of  money  or 
goods,  and  exacting  them  withoul  respect  to 
the  condition  of  the  borrower,  whether  he  gain 
or  lose;  whether  poverty  occasioned  his  bor- 
rowing, or  a  visible  prospect  of  gain  by  em- 
ploying the  borrowed  goods. 
It  is  said  in  Exod.  22.  2.5,  26,  Ifthou  lend  money 
to  any  of  my  people  that  is  poor  by  thee,  thou 
shalt  not  be  to  him  as  an  usurer,  neither  shall 
thou  lay  upon  him  usury,  &c.  .^nd  in  Lev. 
2.).  35,  36,  37,  If  thy  brother  be  waxen  poor,  and 
fallen  in  decay  with  thee,  then  thou  shalt  re- 
lieve him.  yen,  though  he  be  a  stranger,  or  a  so 
joiirner,  that  he  may  live  with  thee  :  Take  thou 
no  usury  of  him,  S-e.  This  law  forbids  the 
taking  of  usury /rom  a  brother  that  was  poor, 
an  Israelite  reduced  to  potierty,  or  from  a  pro- 
selyte. Hut  in  Deut.  23.  '2t).^God  seems  to 
tolerate  Mnury  toward  strangers  ;  Unto  a  stran- 
ger thou  mayest  lend  upon  usury.  By  stran- 
gers, in  this  passage,  some  understand  the 
Gentiles  in  general,  or  all  such  as  were  not 
.Tew,  excrpting  proselytes  :  Others  think  that 
by  strangers  arc  meant  the  Canaonitrs,  and  the 
other  people  that  were  devoted  to  slavery  and 
subjection  ;  of  these  the  Hebrews  were  per- 
mitted to  exact  usury,  but  not  of  such  strangers 
with  whom  thnj  had  no  quarrel,  and  against 
whom  the  Lord  had  not  denounced  his  judg- 
ments. 
The  Hebrews  were  plainly  commanded  in  Exod. 
22.  25,  Sec.  not  to  receive  usury /or  money  from 
any  that  borrowed  for  necessity,  as  in  that 
case  in  Neb.  5.  5, 7.  .-lid  such  provision  Vie 
law  made  for  the  preserving  of  estates  to  their 
families  by  the  year  of  .Jubilee ;  for  a  people 
that  hod  little  concern  in  trade,  could  vol  be 
supposed  to  borrow  money  but  out  of  necessity; 
but  they  were  allotceAl  to  lend  upon  usury  to 
strangers,  whom  yet  they  must  not  oppress. 
This  law,  therefore,  in  the  strictness  of  it, 
seems  to  have  been  peculiar  to  the  .Jewish 
slate;  hut  in  the  equity  of  it,  it  oblin'th  us 
to  shew  merey  to  those  we  hare  advantage 
asrainst,  and  to  be  content  to  share  with  those 
we  lend  to  in  loss,  as  well  as  profit,  if  Provi- 
dence cross  them  :  .Ind  upon  this  condition,  a 
vnlunhle commentator  says,  "ft  seems  a.l  law- 
ful, for  me  to  receive  interest  for  money ,  which 
another  tikes  pains  with,  improves,  but  run^ 
the  hazard  of  in  trad',  as  it  is  to  rereine  rent 
for  my  land  which  another  tak'S  pains  with, 
improves,  but  runs  the  haiard  of  in  hus- 
bandry." 


UTT 

Kxod.  22.  2.5.  neither  shalt  thou  lay  upon  him  «. 
Afu.25.36.  take  thou  no  it.  of  him  or  increase,  37 
fJeut.  23.  19.  shalt  not  hind  on  u.  to  thy  brother 

20.  unto  a  stranger  thou  mayest  lend  upon  u. 
JVf/j.  5.  7.  ye  exact  u.  ||  10.  let  us  leave  off  this  ». 
Psal.  15.  5.  he  that  puiteth  not  his  money  to  u. 
Prov.  28.  6.  he  that  by  «.  incrcaseiii  substance 
[sa.  24.  2.  as  with  taker  of  it.  so  with  giver  of  u. 
Jer.  15. 10. 1  have  neither  lent  on  u.  nor  men  hav« 
lent  to  me  on  ii.  yet  every  one  doth  curse  me 
Ezek.  18.  8.  that  have  not  given  forth  on  it.  17. 

13.  given  forth  on  it.  ||  22. 12.  thou  hast  taken  u 
MatSii.H.  received  mine  own  with  it.  Luke  19.23 

UT.MOS'r,  OUTMCJSr. 
(7CJI.  49.  26.to  llie  it.  bound  of  the  everlasting  hilla 
vVum. 22.41.  might  see  the  u.  of  the  people, 23.13. 
f)cul.'3Q.4.  if  any  of  you  be  driven  out  to  a.  parts 
.fer.  9.  26.  I  will  punish  Egypt,. ludah,  Edom,and 
all  that  are  in  the  u.  corners,  25.  23.  ]  49.  32. 
J^uke  11.  31.  came  from  it.  parts  to  hear  Solomon 

UTTER. 
/.fD.S.l.if  he  do  not  it.  it  then  he  shall  bear  iniquity 
Josh.  2.  14.  our  life  if  ye  u.  not  thisour  business 

20.  ifthou  u.  it,  we  will  be  <iuif  of  thine  oath 
.Tudg.  5.  12.  awake,  Deborah,  u.  song,  arise  Barak 
Job  8.10.  shall  not  they  it.  words  out  of  their  heart 

15.  2.  should  a  wise  man  u.  vain  knowledge? 

27.  4.  nor  shall  my  tongue  it.  deceit 

33.  3.  and  my  lips  sli.ill  u.  knowledge  clearly 

Psal.  78.  2.  I  will  It.  dark  sayings  of^old 
94.  4.  how  long  shall  they  tt.  bard  things 
106.  2.  who  can  u.  the  mighty  acts  of  the  Lord 
119. 171.  my  lips  shall  u.  praise,  when  thou  hart 
145.  7.  they  shall  u.  the  memory  of  thy  goodness 

Prov.  14.  5.  but  a  false  witness  will  u.  lies 
23.  33.  thine  heart  shall  u.  perverse  things 

Eccl.  1.8.  all  things  full  of  labour  man  cannot  u.  it 
5.  2.  let  not  thine  heart  be  hasty  to  tt.  before  God 

Isa.  32.  6.  a  vile  person  will  u.  error  against  Lord 
48.  20.  tell  this,  u.  it  even  to  the  end  of  the  eart> 

•Jer.  1.  16.  I  will  it.  my  judginenis  against  them 

25.  30.  u.  his  voice  from  his  holy  habitation 
51.  t  14.  they  shall  it.  a  shout  against  Babylon 

Ezek.  24.  3.  u.  a  parable  unto  the  rebellious  house 
./(c/  2.  II.  Lord  shall  u.  his  voice  before  his  army 

3.  16.  u.  his  voice  from  Jerusalem,  .fimos  1.2. 
Mat.  13. 35. 1  will  u.  things  have  been  kepi  secret 

1  Cor.  14. 9.  except  it.  words  easy  to  be  understood 

2  Cor.  12.  4.  which  is  not  lawful  for  a  man  to  u. 

UTTER,  Jidjective. 
ynm..  21.  t  3.  he  called  the  pbice,  it.  destruction 
1  A'in^s20.  42.  a  man  T  appointed  to  tt.dpstructioa 
J^Tah.  1.  8.  he  will  make  an  it.  enil  of  the  place 
Zech.  14.  11.  there  shall  he  no  more  u.  destruction 

UTTER. 
Ezek.  10.  5.  the  sound  was  heard  to  ihe  it.  court 
42.  1.  he  brought  me  forth  into  the  it.  court 

UTTER.\NCE. 
.flcls  2.  4.  they  sp  ikc,  as  ihe  Spirit  save  them  « 

1  Cor.  I.  5.  that  ye  are  enriched  by  him  in  all  u. 

2  Cor.  8.  7.  as  ye  abound  in  it.  nnd  knowledge 
F.ph.  6.  19.  praying,  thnt  u.  mav  be  given  to  n)e 
Col.  4.  3.  that  God  would  operi  to  us  a  door  of  u. 

UTTERED. 
A*iti7i.30.  6.  if  she  had  ii  husband  when  she  it.  8. 
.fudg.  11. 11.  and  Jephthah  u.  all  his  words  before 
the  Lord  in  Mizpeli 
2  Sam.  22.  14.  the  Most  Hish  u.  his  voire,  Ps.  40.  fi. 
.fob  26.  4.  to  whom  hast  thou  it.  words  1 
42.  3.  therefore  have  I  «.  that  I  understood  not 
Psnl.  66.  14.  which  my  lips  u.  when  in  trouble 
Hab.  3.  10.  deep  it.  his  voice  and  lifted  his  hnnd» 
Horn.  8.  26.  wilh  groanings  which  cannot  bn  u. 
Heb.  5.  11.  many  things  to  say  and  hard  to  be  ». 
/?fi'.!0.3.hnd  cried,  seven  thunders  tt.  their  voie<=s 
4.  when  the  sevm  thund.rs  had  u.  tlieir  voices 
UTTBRETH. 
Job  15.  5.  for  thy  mouth  it.  thine  iniquities 
P.'(aM9.2.day  unto  day  it.  speech,  nieht  unto  night 
Pi-fti'.  1.  20.  wisdom  it.  her  voice  in  the  streets 

21.  in  the  city  she  it.  her  words,  saying  how  long 
10.  18.  and  he  that  u.  a  slander,  is  a  fool 

29.  II.  a  fool  it.  all  his  mind,  but  a  wise  man  keeps 
.Jrr.  10.  13.  when  ho  u.  his  voice,  51. 16. 

Mic.  7.  3.  the  great  man  ii.  his  mischievous  desire 

UTTERING. 
Isa.  59.  13.  It.  from  the  heart  words  of  falsehood 

t;TTERLY. 
Frod.  17.  14.  it.  put  out  remembrance  of  Amalek 

22.  17.  if  her  father  it.  refuse  to  give  her  to  him 

23.  21.  thou  shalt  u.  overthrow  their  idols 

Ler.  13.44.  priest  shall  pronounce  him  it.  unclean 

26.  44.  in  land  of  enemies  I  will  not  destroy  m. 
A^um. 15.31. that  soul  shall  it.be  cast  off,  his  iniqaity 

21.  2.  then  I  will  u.  destroy  their  cities 

30.  12.  if  her  husband  hath  u.  made  Ihem  void 
Deut  3. 6.  It.  destroying  'nen,  ^vomen,  and  childr«<ii 

4.  26.  if  ye  corrupt  yourselves,  ve  shall  u.  perish 
7.  2.  thou  shalt  u.  destroy  the  Canaanites,20. 17, 

36.  shalt  «.  detoet  Ihe  silver  and  gold  of  irasfw 


VAI 

Deut.  19  2.  ye  shall  u.  destroy  tlie  hig!i  places 
13.15.dcslroying  u.tlie  city  of  idolutiTs  with  sword 
31.  29.  after  my  death  ye  will  u. corrupt  yourselves 

Josh.  11.  20.  thnt  he  might  u.  destroy  them 
17.  13.  the  children  of  Isr.  put  Caiiaanitfs  lo  tri- 
bute, but  did  not  u.  drive  ihem  out,  Jtidg.  1.23. 

Judg.  15.  2.  I  thought  thou  hadst  u.  hated'hur 
21.  11.  ye  shall  «.  destroy  every  mule  aod  woman 
gam.  15.  3.  smite,  u.  destroy  the  Amalckitfs,  18. 

S27.  12.  he  hath  made  Israel  w.  to  abhor  liini 

1  .Sam.  17.  10.  he  that  is  valiant  shall  u.  melt 

23.  7.  the  sons  of  Belial  as  thorns  shall  be  a.  burnt 
\ Kings  y.21.theCanHanite8  Isnel  could  not  u.dnst. 
2Kings  19. 11.  what  the  kings  of  Assyria  have  (h>ne 

lo  all  lands,  by  destroying  Ihem  «.  Isa.Zl.  11. 

2  Chron.  20.  23.  ».  to  slay  them  of  mount  9eir 
.Vrh.  9.  31.  thou  didst  not  «.  consume  them 

'  Ps.  37.  24.  though  he  fall  shall  nof.u.  be  cast  down 
7.3.  19.  the  wicked  are  u.  consumed  with  terrors 
69.  X).  my  loving  kindness  not  «.  take  from  him 
119.8.  Twill  kee|)  thy  statutes,  O  forsake  me  not  u. 
43.  lake  not  the  word  of  truth  «.  out  of  my  mouth 
Can^8.7.8ubstance  for  lovp,it  would  «. be  contemn. 
Isa.  2.  18.  and  the  idols  he  shall  a.  iibolish 
6.  II.  he  answered,  until  the  land  bt?  u.  desolate 

11.  15.  Lord  u.  destroy  the  tongue  of  Egyptian  sea 

24.  3.  land  be  u.  emptied  {|  19.  earth  is  u.  broken 
37. 11.  Assyria  have  done  by  des'roying  them  «. 
40.  30.  and  the  young  men  shall  u.  fall,  but  they 
56.3.  Lord  halh  u.  soparnted  me  from  his  people 
60.  12.  yea,  those  nations  sliail  be  u.  wasted 
Jer.  9.  4.  for  every  brother  will  u.  supplant 

12.  17.  if  ihey  will  not  obey,  I  will  u.  pluck  up 
14.  19.  hast  thou  u.  rejeclod  Judah,  loathed  Zion 
23.  39.  behold,  I,  even  I  will  u.  forget  vou 

2.'j.  9. 1  will  u.  destroy  them,  50.  21,  26.'I  51.  3,  .58. 
29.  and  should  ye  be  u.  unpunished? 
/,ara.  5.  22.  but  thou  hast  u.  rejected  ns,  art  wroth 
Ezek.  9.  6.  slay  «.  old  and  young,  maids,  children 

17.  10.  being  planted,  shall  it  not  u.  wither'? 

27.  31.  and  ihey  shall  make  themselves  u.  bald 

29.  10.  I  will  make  the  land  of  Egypt  u.  waste 
J)a7i.  11.44.  ,hail  go  forth  u.  lo  make  away  many 
Hos.  1.  fi.  but  I  will  u.  lake  them  away 

10.  15.  shall  the  king  of  Israel  be  u.  cut  off 
dittos  y.  8.  I  will  u.  destroy  the  house  of  Jacob 
Mic.  2.  4.  that  day  shall  one  say,  we  be  u.  spoiled 
JVuA.  1.  15.  for  the  wicked  he  is  u.  cut  off 
Xepli.  1.2.1  will  u.  consume  all  things  from  land 
Zeck.  II.  17.  his  right  eye  shall  be  u. darkened 
•  Cur.  6.  7.  now  there  is  u.  n  fault  among  you 
2  Pet.  2.  12. shall  u.  perish  in  their  own  corruption 
Rev.  18.  8.  Babylon  shall  he  u.  h'lrnt  willi  fire 
See  OKSTR(»YKn. 
UTTERMOST. 
I  Kings '.S.who.n  lepers  came  to  u.part  of  camp,8. 
JV/A.  1.  9.  there  were  of  you  cast  rjut  to  u.  part 
I'fid.  2.  8.  I  will  give  u.  parts  for  thy  possession 
Mat.  5.  2t).  till  thou  hast  paid  the  u.  farthing 

12.  42.  she  came  from  the  «.  parts  to  hear  Solomon 
Mark  13. 27.  shall  gather  his  elect  from  the  u.  part 
.lets  2-1.  22.  I  will  know  the  u.  of  your  matter 
1  Thess.  2.  16.  wrath  is  come  on  them  to  the  u. 
.tfcft.7.25.is  able  to  save  them  to  u.tbul  come  loGod 
See  Utmost. 

V. 


VAGATIOND. 

Orn.  4. 12.  a  fugitive  and  r.  shall  thou  be  in  earth 
11.  I  shall  he  a  fugitive  and  v.  in  iho  earth 

.acts  19.  13.  then  certain  r.  .lews  took  on  them 
VAGAnONn.S. 

Fsal.  109.  10.  let  his  cliildren  he  r.  and  beg 
VAII,,  OR  VEIL. 

Jl  cvrtain,  or  eotier,  which  the.  .Tcvi.th  teamen 
icore  over  thrir  heads  and  faces,  in  token  of 
modesty,  of  reverr.nee,  and  stihjeetinn  to  their 
/iu.t4ffin<i.t,'Gcn.2}.f..5.  1  Cor.  11.3,6,7,10.  The 
Jjord  cnmmaniird  Moses  to  mike  a  vail  of  blue, 
and  purple,  and  scarlil,  and  therewith  to  di- 
vide the  holy  of  holies,  which  represented  the 
highest  hearrm,  from  the  holy  phcc,  where  th' 
church  militant,  or  its  representalines,  met 
and  serned  find,  R^od.  20.  31,  :!2,  33.  This 
vail  typified  the  human  -nature  of  CItrisi, 
adorned  with  ercllent  gifts  and  graeea,  by 
which  he  has  opened  fnr  vt  a  wny  into  heai-en, 
Hcb.  10.  10,  20.  It  signified  also  the  separa- 
tion between  the  -Tews  and  Gentiles,  which  is 
now  remnncd  hy  Christ,  l',|>h.2.  14  and  there- 
fore at  the  death  of  Chri.'t,  this  vail  was  reni 
in  twnin,  Mai..  27.  .11.  which  shewed  that  the 
-partition  wall  belirii.l  Jews  and  flrntites  was 
pulled  down  :  that  Ond  was  lemming  his  tem- 
ple, and  abolishinir  all  legal  and  ceremonial 
Korship.  The  .fpostle  speaks  of  t.he  vail  of 
ignorance,  blindness,  and  hardness  of  heart. 
vMch  keeps  the  Je ITS  from  undemanding  the 
656 


VAI 

scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament,  the  spiritual 
sense  and  vicaning  of  the  law,  and  from  seeing 
that  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteous 
ness;  this  \>\\\was  cast  over  them,  for  their 
wilful   and  -inalicioua   rejecting    the    gospel- 
light,  John  9.  39.  2  Cor.  3.  14,  lo. 
fit7t.24. 65.  Rebekahlook  au.  and  covered  herself 
38. 14.  Tamar  covered  herself  with  a  v.  wrapped 
F.xod.  26.  31.  and  thou  shall  make  a  v.  of  blue 
34.  33.  Moses  put  a.  v.  on  his  face,  35. 
36.  35.  and  he  made  a  v.  of  blue,  2  Chron.  3. 14. 
411.  3.  thou  shall  cover  the  ark  with  the  v. 
Lev.  16.  2.  come  not  into  holy  place  wilhin  the  v. 

15.  and  bring  his  blood  wilhin  the  v. 

21.23.  oidy  he  shall  not  go  in  unto  the  u.  nor  come 

24.  3.  without  the  v.  shall  Aaron  order  it 

Ituth  3.  15.  bring  the  v.  that  thou  hast  upon  thee 

Cant.  5.  7.  keepers  of'lhe  walls  took  away  my  tj. 

Isa.  25.  7.  destroy  the  v.  spread  over  all  nations 

JV/at.  27.51.  ihea.  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  twain 

from  top  to  bottom,  Mark  15.  38.  J.-ake  23.  45. 

2  Cor.  3. 13.  not  as  Moses  which  put  a  r.  over  face 

14.  for  to  this  day  remaineth  the  same  v.  untakeii 

away,  which  v.  is  done  away  in  Christ 

1.5. hut  oven  lo  this  day  the  v.  is  upon  their  heart 

16.  nevertheless,  the  v.  shall  be  taken  away 
Hcb.  6.  19.  which  entereth  into  that  wilhin  the  ii. 

9.  3.  and  after  the  second  v.  the  tabernacle,  called 

10.  20.  through  the  n.  that  is  to  say,  his  flesh 

VAILS. 

/«a.3.23.  in  that  day  the  Lord  will  take  away  the  r. 
VAIN, 

.Ind  vanity,  are  taken  in  several  senses  »n  scrip- 
ture,. (1)  for  that  which  is  unprofitable  with- 
out fruit.  Eccl.  1.  2,  Vanity  of  vanities,  all  is 
vanity.  .^11  worldly  things,  and  all  men's  de- 
signs, and  studies,  and  works  about  them,  are 
uhsolutely  vain,  ariii  insufficient  to  procure 
satisfaction  and  happiness.  (2)  It  signifies 
empty,  without  any  substance  ;  as  emptiness  r'.'i 
opposed  to  that  ichich  is  full,  ur  heavy,  or  true 
1.  To  fulnes.i ;  so  promises  not  fulf,lted  an 
said  to  be  vain  promises.  Jind  .fob  calls  the 
days  of  his  affliction  mimtlis  of  vanity ;  that 
is,  empty  of  solid  joy,  peace,  or  comfort.  Job 
7.  3.  Jind  in  Psal.  2.  1,  Why  do  the  people 
imagiiio  a  vain  tiling  ?  that  is,  an  empty  thin^ 
without  reason  or  /tops.  2.  .,'ls  it  is  opposed 
to  gravity;  ns  light  and  inconstant  vien  are 
called  vain  men ;  in  which  sense  idolaters  are 
called  vain  persons,  like  the  wind,  and  idols 
are  called  vanity,  because  of  their  volhin^ness 
and  impotence.  2  Kings  17.  15,  Thev  fol{i)wed 
vanity  and  became  vain.  So  in  Isa.  41.  29, 
They  are  all  vanity,  their  works  are  notliing  ; 
their  molten  images  arc  wind  and  confusion.  3. 
.^s  it  is  opposed  to  Uulh  ;  as  dccitful  men 
and  liars  are  called  vain  men,  and  lies  are 
called  vanity.  P.'^al.  4.  2,  How  long  will  ye 
love  vanity  and  seek  after  leasing?  ^nd  in  2 
Kings  18.20,  They  are  but  vain  words:  thy 
words  come  not  from  thy  heart ;  thou  .■tpeaktst 
aarainst  thy  knowledge.  Vain  is  often  put  fo 
false.  E.xod.  20.  7,  Thou  shall  not  take  th 
name  of  the  Lord  thy  God  in  vain.  "  Thou 
shnlt  not  smear  to  confirm  a  thing  that  is 
false;  thou  shall  not  appeal  to  the  I,nrd  as  a 
witness  of  thy  lies;  or,  thou  shalt  not  take 
uselessly,  needlessly,  and  toithout  very  good 
and  substantial  reasons,  the  name  of  (hid  to 
witness  lohal  thou  afjirmcst."  The  flcbrcre 
word  shave,  which  is  here  translated  by  vain, 
is  p  lit  for  fa  Ise  j;i  some  places  of  scripture  ;  as 
Kxod.  20.  16.  IIos.  10.  4.  (3)  Vanity  is  Uiken 
for  that  which  frustrates  and  disappoints  o 
person  of  his  end;  in  this  sens:  the  ho}>r.  and 
confidence  of  every  nnregenerate  man,  may 
justly  be  catted  vain,  because  it  tcill  dec:  ' 
and  disappoint  him  at  the  last,  when  he  sha'l 
stand  in  most  need  of  help  and  comfort,  ft  i 
said,  Ps  il.  f)0. 1 1,  rain  is  the  help  of  man  ;  that 
is,  a  deceitful  safegnaxd,  a  disappointing  help, 
only  feeding  the  ezpeetntion  with  a  fruitless 
hope.  (4)  ft  signifies  that  which  is  weak,  and 
obnorious  to  change  and  corruption  Thus  nil 
worldly  things  are  but  vanity,  Ecel.  1.2.  Jlnd 
the  creature  wa*  made  nuhjuct  lo  vanity,  to  d' 
orders  and  destrucli'in,  Rom.  8. 20  .Vnn  also, 
as  to  his  continuance  in  the  world,  is  like  vanitv, 
he  is  like  a  vapour  or  breath,  which  is  gone  in 
an  instant.  (5)  ft  signifies  mt]u\l\-.  Psal.  119, 
37,  Turn  away  my  eves  from  beholdin.'  vanity, 
that  is,  iniijuity,  and  the  drceitfulness  of  sin 
when  by  I  may  he  ensnared  and  drawn  away 
from  the  truth.  (6)  It  signifies  foolishness 
joined  with  ignorance  nod  blindness.  Job  11 
12,  For  t>«in  man  would  ha  wiso  ;  that  fo  dish 
creature  man,  lobo  since  the  fall  ts  void  of  all 
true  wisdom  and  snlid  knowledge,  and  judg- 
ment of  tilt  things  of  God. 


VAI 

Vain  man,  does  not  only  signify  men  pvfed  B)» 
with  pride,  and  full  of  vanity,  but  also  tcorth- 
Icss  and  insignificant  persons,  toithout  reli 
gion,  without  rule  or  conduct,  as  in  2  Chron 
13.  7,  There  arc  enthered  li>   Jeroboam   vain 
men,  the  children  of  Helial.    T/ic  Hebrew  says, 
men  void  of  sense,   or    beggars ;    miserabU 
children,  without  a  yoke,  worthless  children. 
F.xod.  .5.  9.  and  lot  them  not  regard  v.  words 
l)cut.  32.  47.  for  it  is  not  a  v.  thnig  for  you 
Judg.  9. 4.  wherewiili  Abiinelecli  lureil  v.  person* 
II.  3.  there  were  gathered  v.  men  to  Jephlhah 

1  Sam.  12.21.  for  then  should  ye  go  after  r.  things, 

which  oiinnot  profit  nor  deliv.  for  tliey  aro  but  v. 

2  Sam.  0.  20.  as  one  of  the  v.  fellows  uncoverelU 
2  Kings  17. 15.  became  v.  and  went  after  heathen 

18.  ?<).  bul  they  are  but  r.  words,  I.sa.  36.  5. 
2  Chron.  13.  7.  are  gathered  to  Jeroboam  v.  men 
lob  11.11.  ho  knoweth  v.  men,hesteili  wiekednesn 
12.  for  V.  man  would  he  wise,  tho'  man  be  born 

15.  2.  should  a  wise  man  utter  v.  knowledge  ? 

16.  3.  Job  said,  shall  v.  words  have  an  end  1 
27.  12.  why  then  are  ye  thus  ahoeether  v.? 

Psal.  2.1. the  people  imagine  a  v.  thing,  Jicts  4.25. 
26.  4.  I  have  not  sat  with  v.  persons 
33.  17.  n  horse  is  a  v.  thing  (or  safety 
39.  6.  surely  every  man  walketh  in  a  p.  shew 
60.  II.  for  v.  is  the  help  of  man,  108.  12. 
62. 10.  become  not  v.  in  robberv,  if  riches  increase 
119.113.  I  hate  f.  lhou2ht=,biit  thy  law  do  I  lova 
127.  2.  il  is  V.  for  you  to  rise  up  early,  to  sit  up 

Prov.  12.  11.  he  that  followeth  v.  persons  is  void 
of  understanding 
28.19.  that  followolhr.  persons  shall  ha\e  pove.-ty 
31.  30.  favour  is  deceitful  and  beauty  is  v. 

Eccl.  6.  12.  all  days  of  his  v.  life  which  he  spend* 

Isa.  1.  13.  bring  no  more  v.  oblniions,  incense  is 
36.  5.  they  are  but  v.  words,  I  have  counsel 

.Ter.  2.  5.  walked  after  vanitv,  and  arc  become  r. 
4.14.  how  long  thy  T>.  thoughts  lodge  within  thee  ? 
10.  3.  for  the  customs  of  the  people  are  v. 
23.  16.  the  prophets  m'lke  you  p.  they  speak 

Lam.  2.  14.  thy  prophets  have  se^n  v.  things 
4.  17.  as  for  ii.s,  our  eves  failed  for  our  v.  hflp 

F.zek.  12.  24.  there  shall  be  no  more  any  v.  vision 
13.  7.  have  ve  not  seen  a  v.  vision  and  spoken 

Mai.  3. 14.  ye  have  said,  it  is  v.  to  serve  God 

Mat.  6.  7.  when  ye  pray,  use  not  v.  ropeli lions 

liom.  1.  21.  but  became  v.  in  their  imaginations 

1  Ctir.  3.  20.  the  thoughts  of  the  wi.^e  are  v. 
15.  14.  and  if  Christ  he  not  risen,  then  is  O'lr 
preaching  r.  and  yotir  faiih  is  also  v.  17 

Fjih.  5.  6.  lot  no  mtin  ileceive  vou  with  v.  words 

Ce/.2.8.  lest  any  ni.in  spoil  you  thronsh  ph;Ioso])hV 
and  v.  d"ce'l,  after  the  tradition  of  men 

I  Tim.  1.  6.  have  turned  a.^ide  to  v..  inos'ing 
6  20.  avoidi-.g  prof,  and  v.  babblings,  '2Tim.  2.  IG 

Tit.  1.  in   there  are  mnnv  unru'y  and  v.  talicr.* 
3.  9.  f.ir  they  are  unprofitah'e  and  v. 

.lam.  1.26.  deceives  his  heart,  this  nitn'srel'g.  is  9 

2.  29   wilt  thoii  know,  O  r.  man,  that  faith 

1  Pet.  1.  18.  redeemed  from  vour  p.  conversa'ion 
In  VAl.V. 

F.xod.  20.  7.  thou  shall  not  Like  name  of  Lord  in 
V.  Dnit.  5.  11 

T.ev.  26.  16.  and  ye  shni!  sow  vour  seed  in  v. 
20.  and  vour  strength  shall  bo  spent  in  v. 

1  Sam.  25.' 21.  in  v.  htve  I  kept  all  Nabal  hnlh 

./(>*  9.  29.  if  I  be  wicked,  why  then  labonr  1  in  v.t 
21.  34.  how  then  comfort  ye  me  th  v.  seeing 
35.  16.  therefoio  doth  Job  open  hi-i  mnulh  in  v. 
39.  1R.  liTlih.mr  is  in  v.  without  foar 
41.  9.  b'diold,  the  hope  of  him  is  in  v, 

Psal.  39.  6.  surely  they  are  disquiel.-d  in  v. 
73.  13.  verily  I  have  cleansed  my  heart  in  n. 
81.  47.  wheref  >rR  hnst  thou  made  all  men  in  «.» 
127.  1.  they  labour  in  v.  wa'ehmen  wnkelh  |»  w 
139.  -in.  and  Ihino  enemies  take  t'ly  name  in  r. 

Prov.  1.  17.  snrely  in  i>.  the  net  is  spread  in  si;ht 
30.  9   lest  I  take'  the  name  of  mv,God  rn  f. 

Isa.  30.  7.  fir  the  K;v|ilinns  shall  hel|>  ii»  ». 
45.  H.  he  cren'ed  it  not  I'a  r.  ho  formed  it 

19.  I  «'iid  not  to  seed  of  Jacob,  seek  ye  me  in  ». 

49.  4.  then  I  said,  1  h.ivc<   laboured  in  v.  I  hnvn 

spent  inv  srrenjlh  for  nought  an.l  in  i>. 

O.").  23.  thev  shall  not  hhonr  in  v.  nor  bring  fnilh 

.Irr.  2.  30.  in  v.  hnv.)  I  smillen  vour  chrlbcii 

3.  23.  in  r.  is  snUation  hoped  r>r  from  bills 

4.  30.  in  V.  "dinli  thou  make  ihvself  fair 

6.  -in.  bellows  burnt,  the  fiiunder  m'dieth  in  b. 

8.  8.  bow  1I0  ve  say  w«  arc  wise,  lo,  rertainly  in 
V.  made  he  il,  the  pen  of  the  scr  heii  is  in  V- 
*46.  11.  in  n.  shall  thou  use  minv  mediemes 

."iO.  9.  their  arrows,  none  shall  ri'tnrn  in  v. 

51.  5^.  and  the  iieoidi'  shMlI  hhour  in  v. 
F-.'k.  6.  10   ah  ill  know  that  I  hiive  nol  R'\id  in  n 
Hah.  2  t  13.  pj-op'e  shall  wearv  themselves  in  p 
y.ee.h.  10.  2.  and  the  diviners  comfort  in  r. 
.Mat.  15.  9.  but  in  i>.  ihev  worship  me,  Mark!.  7 
\Rom.  13.  4.  for  ho  boarvth  not  th* sword  in  v. 


VAL 

t  Cor  15.  2.  unless  ye  have  believed  in  v. 

lU.  liis  giiice  busloweil  upon  mo  wiis  not  in  v. 

Z^    tliui  your  labour  is  nol  in  V-  in  tlie  Lord 

2  Cot.  li.  1.  je  receive  nol  llie  grace  of  God  in  v. 

y.  ;j.  kst  our  boasting  of  you  sliould  be  in  v. 

Gal.  2.  2.  lest  by  any  means  I  sliould  run  in  v. 

21.  collie  by  I  lie  law,  lliin  Clirist  im  dead  in  v. 
•*).  4.  ai e  ye  so  I'oolisli  !  have  ye  suH'ei  ed  so  many 
tilings  ;»  V.  ?  il  it  be  yet  in  v. 
4.  ll.  lest  I  have  bestowed  on  you  labour  in  v. 
I'htl.  -.  lb.  holding  lorlli  word  oriil'e,  tliul  I  may 
rejoice  that  I  have  not  run  J«  u.iior  laboured  in  v. 
1  'J'/ins.  ii.  1.  our  entrance,  that  it  was  not  in  v. 
3.  5.  have  tein|iled  you,  and  our  labour  be  in  v. 
Jam.  4.  5.  do  ye  think  the  scripture  saiih  in  u.  ? 

VMM  ffhr;/. 
Oal.  5.  26.  let  us  not  he  desirous  of  «.  glory 
Pliil.  %  3.  let  nothing  be  done  through  v.  glory 

VAIxNLV. 
Co/.  2.  18.  o.  puffed  up  by  his  fleshly  mind 

VALi:. 

Gen.  11.3.  kings  were  joined  in  then.  ofSiddim,8. 

10.  the  0.  ofrfiddini  was  full  of  slime-pits 

37.  14.  be  sent  Joseph  out  of  the  v.  of  Hebron 

Deul.  1.  7.  go  to  a:l  places  in  the  hills  ai.d  in  tlie  v. 

Josh.  10.  40.  Joshua  smote  the  country  of  the  v. 

IKings  10.  27.  Solomon  made  silver  to  be  as  stones 

and  cedars  as  sycamore  trees  in  the  ».2CAr.l.l5. 

Jcr.  33. 13.  in  the  cities  of  the  v.  shall  Hocks  pass 

VALI.\JNT. 

1  Sam.  14.  52.  when  Saul  saw  any  ?j.  man,  he  took 
16.  18. 1  have  seen  a  son  of  Jesse,  a  mighty  v.  man 
18.  17.  be  V.  for  nie,  and  tight  the  Lord's  battles 
2tj.l5.  David  said  to  Abner,  art  not  thou  a  v.  man? 
31.  12.  all  the  u.  men  took  the  body  of  Saul 

2  Sam.  2.  7.  ye  be  v.  13.  28.  ||  17.  10.  he  that  is  v. 
11. 16.  to  Uriah,  where  he  knew  thatu.  men  were 
83.  20.  Benaiah  the  son  of  Jehoiada,  the  son  of 

a  V.  man  of  Kabzcel,  1  Citron.  11.  22. 
1  Kings  1.  42.  come  in,  for  thou  art  a  v.  man 

1  Chron.  7.  2.  the  sons  of  Tola  wore  v.  men 
11.  2G.  the  V.  men  of  the  armies  were  Asahel 

2  Chron.  2(j.  17.  and  wiih  him  eighty  prie5t.s,ii.  men 
Cont.3.7.beliold  his  bed  which  is  Solomon's  tliree- 

scofeo.  men  are  about  it,  of  thee,  of  Israel 
Isa.  10.  13.  put  down  inhabitants  like  a  v.  man 
33.  7.  behold,  their  v.  ones  shall  cry  without 
Jcr.  9.  3.  hut  they  are  not  v.  for  the  truth 
4f).  15.  why  are  thy  v.  men  swept  away  ? 
/{'ak.  2.  3.  the  i;.  men  are  in  scarlet,  the  chariots 
3.  t  15.  thy  V.  ones  shall  dwell  in  the  dust 
Ileb.  11.  34.  who  Ihrongh  faitli  waxed  v.  m  fight 

VALIANTl'.ST. 
Judir.  21.  10.  senf,io  Jabesh  12,000  men  of  the  v. 

VALIANTLY. 

J^um.  24.  18.  Edom  a  possession,  Israel  shall  do  v. 

1  Chron.  19.  13.  and  let  us  behave  ourselves  v. 

Psal.  60.  12.  throush  God  we  shall  do  v.  108.  13. 

118.  15.  the  right  band  of  the  Lord  doeth  v.  16. 

VALLEY. 
There  art  sci-eraZ  valleys  mentioned  in  scripture; 
as  the  valley  of  Beracliah,  or  of  blesning,  in 
the  tribe,  of  Judah,  to  the  west  of  the  Dead 
Sea,  2  Chron.  20.  26. 
The  vale  of  Siddim,  Oen.  14.  3.  In  the  He- 
brew il  is  the  valley  of  Hashediin,  which  some 
translate  the  vale  of  the  fields,  others  the  vale 
of  chalk;  the  Scptuagint,  the  vale  o/salt.  It 
was  in  this  vale  that  the  cities  of  ttodom 
and  Gomorrah  loerc  built;  and  where  after- 
wards the.  lake  Msphaltilcs,  or  the  Dead  Sea, 
was  formed. 
The  valltv  of  Sliavch,  or  otherwise,  the  king's 
dale,  (I'en.  14.  17.  2  Sam.  18.  18.  Sliavth  is 
a  city  lying  in  the  king^s  dole,  ovcr-against 
Jerusalem,  according  to  Kusebius.  It  was  in 
this  valley  that  Jilelchizcdek  met  Abraham,  at 
his  return  from  his  victory  over  the  five  kings. 
Hut  some  think  this  interview  was  at  the  foot 
ofmovnt  Tabar. 
The  veuley  of  Eshcol,  or  the  valley  of  grapes, 
J^-um.  32.  9.  This  name  wu.%  given  to  the 
valley  of  the  land  of  promise,  ichcrein  the  spies 
of  the  children  of  Israel  gathered  the  bunch  of 
grapes,  which  they  brought  to  the  camp  at 
Kndrsh,  upon  a  pole  beltcecn  two  mm,  Num. 
13.  23,  ai.  This  va!li;y  was  to  the  south  of 
the  promised  land. 
The  valley  of  Jezreel,  .Tosh.  19.  18.  This  val- 
ley ejtcnds  itself  east  and  west  from  Scytho- 
potis  to  the  foot  of  mount  Carmel ;  in  it  there 
was  a  celebrated  city  built,  of  the,  same  name, 
which  belonged  to  the  tribe  of  Issachar.  Jlhab 
had  a  palace  there,  1  Kings  21.  1,  2.3.  and 
this  city  became  famous  on  the  score  of 
J^abotli's  vineyard,  and  the  vcnsreance  which 
God  executed  on  Jciebel  at  Jezrecl,  2  Kings 
9.  33.  S.C. 
riis  valley  of  Achon,  Josh.  1.  24.  This  valley 
waa  in  the  territory  of  Jericho  and  in  the 
657 


VAL 

tribe  of  Benjamin,  where  .^chan^  his  soni  and 
daughters,  wtrcstonedto  death,  (,'od soyf,thul 
he  will  give  the  valley  of  Aclior  lor  a  dour  of 
liojie,  Hos.  2.  15.  that  is,  some  beginnings  of 
mercy  and  blessings,  as  the  earnest  ana  pledges 
of  future  favours  :  As  this  valley  was  a  door 
of  hope  to  Israel  of  their  enjoyment  of  the  pro- 
inesed  land,  so  would  God  deal  with  repenting 
Israel  al  the  times  there  pointed  out. 

The  valley  of  Jehoshaphiit,  .loel  3.  2.  Some 
are  of  opinion  that  this  valley  is  that  where 
king  Jehoshaphat  obtained  so  signal  a  victory, 
and  with  so  much  ease,  against  the  jyioubites, 
Ammonites,  and  their  covfiderates,  2  (  hroii. 
20.  1,  2,  &c.  This  valley  lay  towards  the  Dead 
Sea,  beyond  the  wilderness  of  Tckoah  ;  unfl 
after  this  ev>e.nt  it  was  called  the  valhy  oi 
blessing,  2  Chron.  20.  26.  because  of  the  so- 
lemn blessings  and  praises  that  were  ginen  tu 
God  in  it  upon  this  occasion.  Others  think, 
t/<uMlie  valley  of  Jehoshaphat  Zi'cs  between  the 
walls  of  .lerusalem  and  the  mount  of  Olives, 
and  that  il  is  watered  with  the  broi/k  h'idron, 
•which  runs  through  the  midst  of  this  vale. 
There  arc  likewise  soine  who  viaintain,  that  the 
ancient  Hebrews  had  no  distinct  knowledge  of 
any  particular  place  under  the  name  of  thr 
valley  of  Jehoshaphat ;  and  that  .Joel  intended 
by  it  to  shew  in  general  the  place  where  God 
was  to  execute  his  judgments  against  the  Sta- 
tions, and  will  appear  at  the  last  judgment 
with  all  the  brightness  of  his  majesty.  Jeho- 
shaphat, in  Hebrew,  signifies  the  judgment  of 
God.  And  it  is  very  probable,  that  the  valh'y 
of  Jehoshaphat,  or  God's  judgment,  mentioneii 
in  Joel,  is  symbolical.  From  this  passage  the 
.lews,  and  many  Christians,  hare  been  of 
opinion,  that  the  last  judgment  will  be  solem- 
nized in  the  valley  of  .lehoshaphat. 

The  valley  of  Hinnom,  in  Hebreic,  it  is  Gehen- 
non,  whence  comes  the  word  Gehenna.     See 

ToPHET. 

The  valley  of  vision,  Isa.  22.  1.  in  the  propheti- 
cal andjigurative  style,  signifies  Jerusalem.  It 
is  called  a  valley  by  antiphrasis,  because  it 
stoodupon  amountain;  or,  according  toothers, 
it  is  called  a  valley  comparatively  to  those 
higher  mountains  wherewith  it  was  encompas- 
sed. And  the  additional  name  o/ vi.sion  wa.i 
given  to  it,  because  of  the  many  and  cleai 
visions  and  revelations  of  God^s  mind  in  that 
place  above  all  other  parts  of  the  world ;  or,  as 
others  will  have  it,  because  the  temple  of  Jeru- 
salem 7oas  built  upon  mount  Moriah,  which  is 
the  mountain  of  vision,  Gen.  22.  14. 

The  fat  vclleys,  Isa.  28.  1.  are  those  which  lie 
below  and  about  the  city  of  Samaria.  This 
C'untry  was  very  fat  and  fruitful.  Samaria 
stood  upon  arising  ground  that  commanded 
these^Weys. 

The  vamy  of  paspengers,  F-zek.  39.  11.  It  is 
thought  that  this  stands  for  the  great  road, 
which  was  at  the  foot  of  mount  Carmel,  to  go 
from  .ludea,  Egypt,  and  the  country  of  the 
Philistines,  into  Phanicia ;  and  back  from 
rheenicia  into  those  countries.  This  road  was 
to  the  east  of  the  Mediterranean  sea. 

The  iiaZ/cj/ of  Succoth,  was  beyond  .Jordan,  and 
near  the  city  of  Succoth.  The  Psalmist  puts 
the  valley  of  Succoth  for  the  witole  country 
beyond  .Jordan,  Psal.  60.  6. 

The  valley  of  Elah,  1  Sam.  J7.  2.  Saul  was 
here  encamped  with  tlie  army  of  Israel,  when 
the  giant  Goliath  came  to  insult  the  troops  of 
the  Hebrews.  This  valley  was  to  the  south  of 
.Jerusalem,  towards  .Sochoh  and  Azeknh. 

^cn. 14.17.  king  of  Sodom  met  him  at  a.of  Shaveh 

A'um.  32.  9.  for  when  they  went  up  tot),  of  Eshcol 

/>ctt<.1.24.theycame  toi'.of  Eshcnl,Bearched  it  out 

21.  4.  elders  shall  bring  the  heifer  to  a  rough  v. 

and  strike  olTthe  heifer's  neck  in  the  v. 

34.3.the  plain  of?),  of  Jericho,  a  city  of  palm-trees 

6.  he  buried  Moses  in  a  v.  in  the  land  of  Mo^ib 

.Josh.  7.  24.  they  brought  them  to  the  v.  of  Achor 
10.  12.  and,  thou  moon,  in  the  v.  of  Ajnion 
LI.  8.  which  is  at  the  end  of  the  v.  of  the-  giants 

.Judg.  1.  19.  not  drive  out  inh:ibitants  of  the  v. 
5.  15.  Barak,  he  was  sent  on  foot  into  the  i). 

7.  8.  the  hostof  Midian  was  beneath  in  the?!.  12. 
16.  4.  Samson  loved  a  woman  in  the  v.  of  Sorek 

1  Sam.  6. 13.  reaping  their  wheat-harvest  in  the  v. 
21.  9.  whom  thou  slewest  in  the  v.  of  Elah 

2  .Sam.  5.  18.  the  Philistines  also  came  and  spread 

themselves  in  Iheu.  of  Rephaini,  22.  |  23.  13. 

8.  13.  from  smiting  the  Syrians  in  the  v.  of  sail 

2  Kings  2.  IG.  the  Spirit  hath  cast  Wm  into  some  v. 
3.  16.  he  said,  make  this  v.  full  of  ditches 
14.  7.  he  slow  of  Edom  in  the  r. of  salt, 1  CAr.18.12 

2  Chron.  20.26.  they  assembled  in  r.  of  Beracliah 
28.  3.  Ahaz  burnt  incen»o  in  the  v.  of  Hinnoni 

4a 


VAN 

2  Chr.  nS.  22.  Josiah  came  to  fight  in  v.  ofMcgiildi 
.lob  21.33.  the  clods  of  thee,  saall  be  sweet  to  liiia 

3U.21.lie  pa  Weill  in  the  u.anil  njoicelli  iostrengll* 
FsaLiA.  4.  yea,  though  I  walk  thro"  the  v.  of  death 

60.  6.  I  will  mete  out  ilie  v.  if  Succoth,  108.  7. 

84.  6.  who  passing  thro'  v.  ol  liacii,iMalie  it  a  wel. 
Pror.  30.  17.  the  ravens  of  the  v.  shall  pick  it  out 
Cant.  6.  11.  I  went  down  to  see  the  fi  nils  of  I  he  o 
Isa.  1".  5.  thiitgatlierelh  ears  in  the  «.  ofltejihaiin 

22.  1.  the  burden  of  the  «.  of  vision 
5.  for  it  is  a  day  of  trouble  in  .he  v.  of  vision 

28.  4.  beauty  which  is  on  the  head  of  the  fat  r. 
21.  he  shall  he  wroth  as  in  the  «.  of  (iibeon 

40.4.  evi'ry  w.shall  be  exalted,  every  lull  made  In  » 

•iO.  10.  iJ.  of  Achor  a  jihice  for  herds  lolie  dowu 
.Jer.  2.  23.  see  thy  way  in  the  v.  know  what  thou 

7.  32.  V.  of  Hinnoni,  but  v.  of  slaughter,  19.  6. 

21.  13.  I  am  against  lliee,  O  inhabitant  of  the  v. 

48.8.  thee,  also  ^hall  polish,  and  plain  destroyed 

4'.).  4.  why  gloriesl  thou  in  thy  llowiiig  u.  ? 
F.zek.  37.  i.  ill  till'  v.  wliirh  was  full  of  bones 
lli).<.  1.5.  breiik  ihe  bow  of  Isr.  in  ilie  v.  of  Jezreel 

2.  15.  I'lve  iIk;  v.  of  Achor  for  a  door  of  hope 
Joel'.i.  2.  bring  them  inio  the  v.  of  Jehoshaphat 
14.  mnltitiides,  imiltiludes  in  the  e.  of  decision 
]H.  a  fount,-. ill  shall  water  the  o.  of  Shitlim 
y.eeh   12.  11.  as  ihc  mciriiiiig  in  the  v.  of  Rlegiddoa 

14.  4.  nioiiiit  cleave,  and  lln-re  shall  be  a  ^reat  v. 
5.  ye  shall  Hee  tothe  o.  of  Ihe  mouniains 

l.uke'i.  5.  every  v.  be  filled,  every  hill  brought  low 

See  Gatk. 

VALLEYS. 

.Vum.  24.  6.  as  the  i).  are  they  spread  forlh 

IJe7it.  8.7.  depths  thai  siiringoul  of  Ihe  r'.aiid  hilll 

11.  11.  hilt  tlie  land  is  a  land  nf  hills  and  i;. 
1  Kings  20. 2f<.  God  of  hills,  but  he  is  nol  Goi]  of  Jj. 
.Job  30.  6.  to  dwell  in  clifia  of  d.  in  caves  of  earth 

39.  10.  or  will  h.-  harrow  ihe  v.  after  thee  7 
Psai.  65.  13.  the  i>.  are  covered  over  wiih  corn 

104.  8.  ihey  g"  down  by  the  v.  unto  the  jilaee 

10.  be  sendelh  the  springs  into  the  v.  wliicli  run 
Cayit.'-.l.  1. 1  am  thi' rose  of  Sharon,  Ihe  lily  of  the  » 
l..!a.  iS2.  7.  thy  choicest  v.  i-hall  he  full  of  charwU 

24.  t  15.  wherefore  slorify  the  Lord  in  the  v. 

28.  1.  which  are  on  ihe  head  of  the  fat  v. 

41.  IS.  I  will  open  fonnta.ns  in  midst  of  the  v, 

H'.'i.  slayinj  the  children  in  ihe  v.  under  rncka 
.ler.  49.  4.  wherefore  gloriesi  thoii  in  the  v. 
F.zek   6.  3.  thus  s.aitli  the  Lord  to  the  v.  36.  4,  0, 

7.  16.  be  on  the  nioen-iiins  like  doves  of  the  c. 

VALOI'R. 
Judg.  3.  29.  they  s'rw  of  Moab  10,01)0  men  of  r. 

6.  12.  Lord  is  wi:!i  thee,  thou  mit'h'v  n.an  of '>. 

11.  1.  Jiphthah  Ihe  <Mi  adite,  a  mighty  man  of* 

1  Sam.  18.  t  1".  only  be  Ihou.a  son  of  n.  for  mo 

2  Sum.  2.  t  7.  and  be  ye  Ihe  sons  of?).  13.  t  28. 

1  Kings  H.  28.  Jeroboam  was  m  nrglilv  miinof  o 
2A'V.s5.1.Naa.nan  |1  1  r7ir.I2.28.Z:i(lok  man  of  p. 

2  Citron.  17.  17.  Eliada  a  niij/hty  man  oft). 

See  J\lis;bi7i  Men. 

V.VLUE. 

. /»M3.4. forgers  oflies, ye  are  all  physicians  of  no» 

Mat.  10.  31.  fear  ye  not  therefore,  ye  are  tfinofs 

t).  than  manv  sparrows,  Duke  12.  7. 

VALUE. 

I,er.  27.  8.  present  himself,  Ihe  priest  shall  v.  him 

12.  priest  shall  V.  it,  whether  it  be  ?ood  pr  had 

Mat.  27.  9.  whom  ihr-v  of  ihilHren  of  Israel  dido. 

V.ALUEI). 
I,rv.  27. 16.  houicr  of  barley-sei-d  r.  at  ."SO  shekeli 
./(;*  28.  16.  wisdom  cannot  ]>•■  r.  wi  h  soM  of  Ophir 

19.  neither  shall  it  be  v.  with  pure  gcdd 
Mat.  27.1).  of  silver,  the  prioM  of  him  that  was  o 

^  VALUEST.  , 

A.et).27.12.nsthou  r.  ii  who  nr'  priest,  so  .•.hall  it  bo 

VANISH. 
.fob  6.  17.  whrit  time  ilfv  wax  warm,  ihey  v. 
Isa.  51.  6.  Ill'-  heavens  slnll  v.  awav  like  smolte 
\('or.  13.  8.  wlie|h.^r  knowleilgp,  it  sh^rll  r.  aw.iy 
Itch.  8.  13,  which  wnx-ih  iiM,is  ready  to  o.awa) 

VANISfMMr 
.//!r.49.7.siiTli  thi-Loril  of  hosts, is  their  wisdom  n.1 
l.uke  24.  31.  ami  he  v.  o.ii  of  ili-ir  sight 

VANISHETH. 
.Job  7.  0.  ns  'he  eloinl  is  ronsnmcd  and  v.nwny 
.Jam.  4.  14.  life  is  ov^n  a  vipour  that  v.  awav 
\  ANITY. 
See  Siirnijicatiim  on  V.mn. 
2  Kinir.t17.  15.  they 'bllowed  r.and  heennievain 
Job  7.  3.  so  am  I  made  to  jiossoss  iiionlhs  of  i). 
16.  let  mp  alone,  for  mv  davs  are  v. 

15.  31.  let  not  him  that  is  deceiverl  tru^t  in  v.  fiw 

W.  shall  tie  his  recompcneo 
3.5.  thev  conceive  mischii  f  and  bring  forth  v. 
31.  5.  if  I  have  walked  with  ti.  or  hastrd  to  decei* 
S.i.  13.  surely  God  will  nol  he.ir  v.  nor  roi'ard  it 
Psal.  4.  2.  O'sons  of  men,  how  lonj  will  ye  l9ve  * 
10.  7.  under  his  tongue  is  mischipf  and  v. 

12.  2.  they  speak  t).  every  one  to  his  neighhcw 
24.  4.  who  hath  not  lift  op  his  soul  unto  v 


VtiN 

Ptal.  36.  t  4.  the  wicked  devisctli  v.  upon  Iii«  bcil 

39.  5.  every  iiKiii  at  liia  be.it  estale  ib  alioijetiRT  v. 
II.  every  iiiuii  is  17.  |{  D4.  11.  liiuuijhu  ul  111:111  c. 

41.  6.  come  to  see  mc,  he  g|>eaku(li  i-.  144.  ti,  11. 

6iJ.  9.  men  ol"  low  dej-ree  are  v.  ligliler  thiin  v. 

78.  33.  tlierel'ore  iheir  dayi  did  hi;  consume  in  v. 

IIU.  37.  luni  awuy  iiiiiiu  eyi-a  iVom  beholding  v. 

144.  4.  iiiHii  is  like  to  v.  hin  days  are  us  a  shadow 
frou. 13.11.  svcallli  golteii  by  v.  sliall  be  diinini^hed 
s21.  ti.  getting  of  treasures  by  a  lying  tongue  is  (j. 

2i.  8.  lie  tbut  suweth  ini()Uity  shall  reap  0. 

30.8.  remove  from  nie  v.  and  lies,  give  not  poverty 

JCccl.  I.  2.  V.  of  vanities,  saitli  the  preacher,  nil  is 

V.  14.  I  3.  lU.  (  11.  8.  I  1-i.  8. 

2.  1.  this  is  also  v.  Vt,  I'.l,  >JI,  '23.  1  4.  8,  Jli.  |  5. 

10.  I  li.  -J,  9.  I  7.  li.  I  8.  10,  14. 
11.  behold,  all  was  r.  and  vexation,  17,  -26.  ]  4.  4. 
4.  7.  I  saw  I'.  II  6.  4.  tor  he  comeih  in  with  v. 

6.  11.  there  be  miiiiy  things  that  increase  v. 

f  l-J.  the  lunnhor  of  the  days  of  the  life  of  his  v. 

7.  15.  all  things  have  1  seen  in  the  days  of  my  v. 

8.  14.  there  is  a  v.  that  is  done  on  the  earth 
9.9.  live  joyfully  with  wili;  all  the  days  of  tliy  v. 
11.  10.  for  childhood  and  youth  are  11. 

/»-a.5.18.\voetolliem  that  draw  inici-with  cords  off. 
30.  28.  10  sift  the  nations  with  the  sieve  of  1;. 

40.  17.  all  naliiHis  to  him  are  counted  t). 

23.  he  inakeih  the  judges  of  the  earth  as  v. 

41.  29.  behold,  they  arc  all  a.  44.  9. 

57.  13.  wind  shall  carry  them,  i).  shall  take  them 

58.  9.  if  thou  take  away  v.  ||  59.  4.  they  trust  in  v. 
Jer.  2.  5.  they  have  walked  after  v.  become  vain 

10.  t  3.  tor  the  statutes  of  the  people  are  v. 

15.  they  are  c.  and  the  work  of  errors,  51.  18. 
16.  19.  surely  our  fathers  have  inherited  f. 
18.  15.  my  people  have  burnt  incense  to  w. 
E:eV.I3.G.  they  have  seen  ».  and  divination,  22. 28. 

8.  because  ye  have  spoken  «.  and  seen  lies 

9.  proph.  see  /!.2I.29.  ||  13.  23.  shall  see  no  more  o. 
//o«.12.11.suridy  they  are  c.  theysacrifice  bullocks 
//o*.2.13.people  shall  weary  themselves  for  very  u. 

3.  t  7.  I  saw  the  tents  of  Cuslian  under  u. 
Xrch.  10.  2.  for  the  idols  have  spoken  v. 
Horn.  8.  20.  the  creature  was  made  subject  to  v. 
F.ph.  4.  17.  not  as  Gentiles  walk  in  v.  of  iheir  mind 
?  Fet.  2. 18.  they  speak  great  swelling  words  of  v. 

VANITIES. 
£>(rut.32.  21.  they  have  provoked  me  to  anger  with 
their  .;.  1  Kings  16.  13,  2fi.  Jer.  8.  19. 
Pso/.31.  6. 1  have  hated  them  that  regard  lying  v. 
F.ccl.  1.  2.  vanity  of  u.  saith  the  preacher,  12.  8. 
5.7.  in  the  multitude  of  dreams  there  are  v. 
hr.  10.  8.  foolish,  the  stock  is  a  doctrine  oft). 
14.22.  are  any  among  the  v.  that  can  cause  rain 
Jonah".S.  lli'^y  that  observe  lying  v.  forsake  their 
Acts  14.  15.  that  ye  should  turn  from  these  v. 

VAPOUR. 
./jh  3fi.  27.  they  pour  down  rain  according  to  the  B. 

33.  the  cattle  also  concerning  the  t;. 
Psal.  148.8.  hail,  snow  and  a.  fulfilling  his  word 
Acls  2.19.  w  ill  shew  signs  in  the  earth,  v.  of  smoke 
Jam.  4.  14.  for  what  is  voiir  lifel  it  is  even  a  v. 

VAPOURS. 
Psal.  135.7.  he  causeth  the  v.  to  ascend  from  the 
ends  of  the  earth,  Jer.  10.  13.  |  51.  16. 
VARIABLE. 
Hab.  3.  t  !■  a  prayer  according  to  v.  songs 

VARIAIU-KNESS. 
Jam.  1.  17.  Father  of  lights,  with  whom  is  no  v. 

VARIANCE. 
Mat.  10.  35. 1  am  come  to  set  a  man  at  ti.  ag.  father 
Oal.  5.  20.  the  works  of  the  flesh  arc  hatred,  v. 

VAUNT. 
Judir.l.i.  lest  Israel  v.  themselves  against  mo 
VAUNTETH. 

1  Cor.  13.  4.  charity  v.  not  itself,  is  not  puffed  up 

VKIIE.MENT. 
Cant.  8.  6.  love  is  as  fire  that  hath  a  ».  flame 
Jonah  4.  8.  that  God  prepared  a  v.  east-wind 

2  Cor.  7. 11.  yea,  what  v.  desire  it  wrought  in  you? 

VF'MEMENTLV. 
Mark  14.31.  hui  Peter  spake  the  more  v.  not  deny 
J.ukc  6.  41.  the  stream  beat  p.  on  that  house,  49. 
11.  !)3.  \h{-  Pharisees  began  to  urge  him  v. 
23.  10.  the  scribes  stood  and  1;.  accused  him 

VEIN. 
Jab  28.  1.  surely  there  is  a  v.  for  the  silver 

VENERABLE. 
Phil.  4.  t8.  finally,  whatsoever  things  are  v. 

ven(;eance. 

Oen.  4.  15.  v.  shall  be  taken  im  him  sevenfold 
Dent.  32.  35.  lo  mo  belongeth  c.  and  roroiniience, 
VKnl.^i.  1.  Iltb.  10.30 
41.  I  will  render  e.  lo  mine  enemies 
43.  for  he  will  render  v.  to  his  adversaries 
Jxidtr.  II.  30.  the  Lonl  hath  taken  r.  for  thro 
Psal.  ."iP.  10.  shal)  rejoice,  when  he  seelh  the  r. 
99.  R.  Ihoii  tooke-t  V.  of  their  inventions 
149.7.to  'xeriiiri  II. upon  the  heathen  nnil  punishm 
Prov.  6.  34.  I18  will  not  spare  in  the  day  of  c. 
058 


VER 

/sa.34.  8.  it  is  the  day  of  the  Lord's  w.  and  the  year 
of  reconipeiices  for  yCioii,  til.  2.  Jtr.  51.  G. 

35.  4.  behold  your  (iod  will  come  wi'Ji  v. 

47.  :■    1  will  take  u.  .ler.  51.  36. 

59. 17. and  he  put  on  the  garments  of  r. for  clothing 

03.  4.  lor  the  day  of  v.  is  in  mine  heart 
.l(r.  11.  20.  let  me  see  thy  v.  on  them,  20.  12. 

40.10.  a  day  of  w.  ||  50. 15.  the  c.  of  the  Lord,  28. 

50.  28.  the  v.  of  Lord,  the  u.of  his  temple,  51. 11. 
I.am.  3.  60.  thou  hast  seen  all  their  v.  against  me 
Kick.  24.  8.  might  caur-e  fury  eonie  Uj)  to  lake  c. 

25.  12.  Kdoin  by  taking  v.  hutli  greatly  otliiided 

14.  I  will  lay  my  11.  on  Kdoin  by  hand  uf  Israel 

15.  because  the  Philistines  have  taken  v. 
17.  when  I  shall  lay  my  v.  on  the  Philistines 

Mic.  5.  15.  1  will  «.vecute  great  11.  F.uk.  25.  17. 
JVuA.  1.  2.  Lord  will  take  o.  on  his  adversaries 
Luke  21.  22.  lor  these  be  the  days  of  r.  that  all 
Jicts  28.  4.  whom  c.  sulferelh  nut  lo  live 
Hum.  3.  5.  is  God  unrighteous  who  taketh  i'.  ? 

12.  19. 1',  is  mine,  I  w  ill  repay,  sailh  the  Lord 
2  7'Af.«.1.8.Lord  revealed  in  tlaming  lire,  taking  r. 
.Midc  7.  an  example,  siiliering  the  y.  of  eternal  tire 

VENISON. 
f;c7i.25.28.Isaac  loved  Esau,  beeau.  he  eat  ofhis  v. 

27.  3.  go  to  the  field  and  take  me  some  r.  7. 

19.  arise,  I  pray  tliee,  and  eat  of  my  v.  31. 
25.  bring  it  near,  ami  1  will  eat  of  my  son's  v. 
33.  Isaac  said,  whei^  is  he  that  hath  taken  v.7 

VENOM. 
Dent.  32.  33.  their  wine  is  the  cruel  v.  of  asps 

VENOMOUS. 
Acts  23.  4.  the  barbarians  saw  the  v.  beast  hang 

VENT. 
.fob  32.  19.  my  belly  is  as  wine  which  hath  no  v. 

VENTURE. 

1  Kings  22.  34.  a  certain  man  drew  a  bow  at  a  v. 

and  smote  the  king  of  Israel,  2  Chron.  18.  33. 

VERIFIED. 

Gen.  42.  20.  so  shall  your  words  be  v.  and  not  die 

1  Kings  8.  20.  let  thy  word  be  v.  2  Chron.  6.  17. 

VERILY. 
Gen.  42.21.  we  are  v.  guilty  concerning  our  brother 
Ezod.'.W.  13. saying,  v.  my  sabbaths  ye  shall  keep 
Judg.  15.  2.  I  V.  thought  thou  hadst  hated  her 
\Kings  1.43.c.our  Lord  hath  made  Solomon  king 
1  Kings i.  14.  u. she  hath  no  child,  her  husha.  Isold 
1  Chron.  21.  24. 1  will  v.  bring  it  for  the  full  price 
.fob  19. 13.  my  acquaint,  are  u.  estranged  from  nie 
Psal.  37.  3.  do  good,  and  v.  thou  shall  be  fed 
39.  5.  V.  every  man  at  his  best  state  is  vanity 
58. 11  V.  there  is  a  reward  for  the  righteous,  v.  he 
is  a  God  that  judgeth  in  the  earth 
66.  19.  but  V.  God  hath  heard  me,  hath  attended 
73.  13.  V.  I  have  cleansed  my  heart  in  vain 
Isa.  45.  15.  V.  thou  art  a  God  that  hidest  thyself 
Jer.  15.  11.  v.it  shall  be  well  with  thy  remnant,  v. 
I  will  cause  the  enemy  to  entreat  thee  well 
Mat.  5.   18.  V.   I   say   unto   you,   0.   2,   5,   Iti 
I  R.  10.  I  10.  1.".,  23,  42.J  11.  11 
13.17.  I  16.28.  ]  1T.2#|  18.3 
n,  18.  I  19.23,28.  I  21.  21,31. 
I  23.  36.  I  24.  2,  34,  47.  |  25.  12, 
40,  45.  1  26.  13.     Mark  3.  28 

16.  11.  I  8.  12.  I  9.1,41.  I  10.  l.'i, 
99.  I  11.  23.  I  12.  43.  j  13.  30, 
I  14.  9,  18,  2.').  l.uke  4.  24 
I   11.51.  I   12.37.  I  13.35.  |  IR 

17,  29.  I  21.  32. 
25.  o.  I  say  unto  tbeo,  26.  34.   Mark  14.  30. 

l.uke  23.  43 

Mark  9.  12.  Elias  r.  comcth  first  and  restoieth  all 

Jicts  16.  37.  nay,  v.  let  them  come  and  fetch  us 

19.4.  John  V.  baptized  withbjptism  of  repentance 

22.3.  am  v.  a  man  which  am  u  Jew,  born  in  Tarsus 

20.  9.  I  V.  thought  I  ought  to  do  many  things 
/<am.2.25.for  circumcision  v.  profiteth  if  thou  keep 

10.  18.  V.  their  sound  wenl  into  nil  the  earth 
15.27.  it  hath  pleased  them  v.  debtors  they  nre 
1  Cor.  5.  3.  I  V.  as  absent  in  body,  present  in  spirit 
Gal.  3.  'Jl.  t).  righteousness  had  been  by  the  law 
fleb.%  16.  I),  he  took  not  on  him  nnliire  of  angels 
6.  16.  for  men  v.  swear  by  the  greater,  an  oath 
12.  10.  for  they  v.  for  a  few  dayn  chastenfjd  us 
I  I'et.  1.20.  who  n.was  foreordained  before  foiindat. 
1  .John  2.  5.  in  him  r.  i«  tln'  love  of  God  perfected 

VERILY,  VERILY. 
.fohn  1.  51.  V.  V.  I  K.iy  unto  vou,  .5.  19,  24,25.  |  6. 
26,  32,  47,  X\.  I  8.  34,  51,  .58.  |  10.  1,  7.  1  12. 
24.  I  13.  10,  20,  21.  I  14.  12.  |  16.  20,  23. 
3. 3.  V.  V.  I  say  unto  thee,  5.  11.1  13.  38.  |  21.  18. 

VERITY. 
Pral.  111.  7.  Ilie  works  of  h's  hands  arc  v. 
1  T\m.1.~.  a  teacher  of  the  Gentiles  in  faith  and  c. 

VERMILION. 

trr.  22.  14.  reili^l  with  rrdar  and  painted  with  1'. 

A."2f*.  23.14.  imn2e»nf('linl<leaii«|iotlrayed  with  v. 

VKIITI'E,  .SV,-  ViKTUK. 

VERY. 

Gen.  27.  21.  whether  thou  ho  my  v.  son  Esau 


VES 

F.xod.  9.  16.  in  v.  deed  for  this  I  raised  thee  up 
A'u'H.  12.3.  now  the  man  Moses  was  v.  meek 
iJeut.  30.  14.  but  the  word  is  v.  nigh  unto  thee 

1  .Sam.  25.  34.  in  c.  deed  except  thou  hadst  hasted 
26.  4.  understood  that  Saul  was  come  in  v.  deed 

2  Sam.  24.  10.  for  I  have  done  u.  foolishly 

2  Chrun.  20.  32^  king  .Miaziah  did  v.  wickedly 
A"<A.  1.  7.  we  have  dealt  v.  corruptly  against  the« 
P.sal.  5.  9.  their  inward  part  is  v.  wickedness 
35.  8.  into  that  v.  dektruclion  Icl  him  fall 
71.  19.  thy  righteousness  also,  O  Goo.,  is  v.  high 
89.2.  ihy  faithfulness  establish  in  the  v.  heaven* 

92.  5.  O  Lord,  thy  thoughts  are  v.  deep 

93.  5.  thy  lestiinonics  are  v.  sure,  holiness  become* 
119.  138.  thy  testimonies  are  o.  faithful 

140.  thy  word  is  «.  pure,  therefore  I  love  it 

146.  4.  in  that  v.  day  his  thoughts  perish 

147.  15.  his  word  runneth  v.  swiftly 

ProD.  17.9. repeats  a  matter,  heseparateth  v.  friend* 
Isa.  10.  25.  lor  yet  a  v.  lillle  while,  29.  17. 

33.  17.  shall  behold  the  land  that  is  v.  far  off 

40.  15.  he  taketh  up  the  isles'as  a  v.  little  thing 
.Jer.  2.  12.  be  ye  v.  desolate,  sailh  the  Lord 

4.  P.).  my  bowels,  I  am  pained  at  my  v.  heart 
F.:ek.  2  3.  they  have  transgressed  to  this  v.  day 

16.  47.  but  as  if  that  were  a  c.  little  thing 
Hab.  2.  13.  the  people  shall  labour  in  the  u- tire  and 
the  people  weary  themselves  for  v.  vanity 
Mat.  10.30.  the  r.  hairs  of  your  head  arc  numbered 

24.  24.  if  it  were  possible,  shall  deceive  the  v.  elect 
.John  7.  26.  that  this  is  the  v.  Christ,  Acts  9.  22. 

8.  4.  this  woman  was  taken  in  adultery,  in  o.  act 

14.  11.  else  believe  me  for  the  v.  work's  sake 

1  Thess.  5.  23.  the  v.  God  of  peace  sanctify  you 
Heb.  10.  I.  and  not  the  0.  image  of  the  things 
Jam.  5.  11.  the  Lord  is  v.  pitiful,  of  lender  mercy 
See  Grkat,  Much. 
VESSEL. 
Z)cut.  23. 24.  eat  grapes,  but  not  put  any  in  thy  n. 
1  Sam.  21.  5.  though  sanctified  this  day  in  the  v. 

1  Kings  17.  10.  fetch  me  a  little  water  in  a  r. 

2  Kings  4.  6.  bring  yet  a  v.  there  is  not  a  v.  more 
Psal.  2.  9.  dash  tiiem  in  pieces  like  a  potter's  r. 

31.  12.  I  am  forgotten,  I  am  like  a  broken  v. 
Prov  25.  4.  there  shall  come  forth  a  v.  Ixjr  the  finer 
Isa.  66.  20.  Israel  bring  an  offering  in  a  clean  r. 
Jer.  18.  4.  the  v.  was  marred  in  hand  of  the  potter 

22.  28.  is  he  a  v.  wherein  is  no  pleasure  ? 

2.5.  34.  and  ye  shall  fall  like  a  pleasant  v. 

48.  11.  Moab  hath  not  been  emptied  fn'mr.  to  v 
38.  for  I  have  broken  Moab  like  a  v. 

51. 34. Nebuchadnezzar  hath  made  mean  empty  », 
F.zek.  4.  9.  put  Ihem  in  one  v.  and  make  bread 

15.  3.  or  will  men  take  a  pin  of  it  lo  hang  anyt>.» 
JJos.  8.  8.  shall  bo  as  a  v.  wherein  is  no  |)leasure 
Mark  11.  16.  should  carry  any  v.  thro'  the  tcaipU 
J.ukc  8.  16.  no  man  covcrrlh  a  candle  with  a  c. 
Acts  9.  15.  for  he  is  a  chosen  v.  unto  me 

10.  II.  Peter  saw  a  certain  v.  descending,  11.  5. 
Rom.  9.  21.  hath  power  to  make  one  v.  lo  honour 

1  'J'hess.  4.4.  know  to  possess  his  r.  in  sanctification 

2  Tim.'i.  21.  he  shall  be  a  r.  lo  honour,  sanctified 
I  Pcf. 3.7.  dwell  with  them  according  lo  knowledge, 

giving  honour  to  wife  as  to  weaker  0. 
VESSELS. 
Gen.  43.  11.  take  of  the  best  fruits  in  your  r. 
F.iod.  40.  10.  anoint  the  altar  and  v.  Lev.  8.  11. 
JVam.  18.3.  Levites  not  come  nigh  r.  of  sanctuary 

1  .Sam.  9.  7.  for  the  bread  is  spent  in  our  v. 

21.  5.  anil  the  p.  of  the  young  men  nre  holy 

2  Kings  4.  3.  go  borrow  the  11.  abroad  of  all  tky 

neiglihoiirs,  even  empty  r.  borrow  not  a  few 
2  CArun.  29.  19.  the  0.  king  Ahnz  did  onst  nwny 
Ezra  1.  7.  ('yrus  the  king  brought  forth  the  v. 
5. 15.  take  Ihcso  v.  \\  7.  19.  v.  are  given  to  ihee 
8.  25.  he  weighed  the  silver  and  the  v.  33. 
.VcA.  13.9.  thither  brought  I  again  the  v.  of  house 
/.«(!.  18.  2.  even  in  c.  of  bulrushes  on  tin-  waters 

22.  21.  nil  ?).  of  small  quantity,  the  p.  of  cups 
.VJ.  U.  he  ye  clean  that  bear  the  t».  of  the  Lord 
65.  4.  broth  of  abominable  things  is  in  their  t>. 

.frr.  14.  3.  they  returned  with  ihoirr.  empty 
27.  16.  t).  of  the  Lord's  bouse  brought  acnin,  28.  3 
/)an.  5.  23.  they  have  brought  the  v.  ofhis  bouse 
Hos.  13.15.  he  shall  spoil  treasure  of  nil  iilensanlc 
Jfag.  2.  16.  to  draw  out  fifty  r.  out  of  the  press 
Mat.  13.  48.  they  gnthorpd  ihe  gnod'inio  v. 
25.  4.  hut  the  wise  look  oil  in  Iheir  r.  with  lamps 
linm.  9.  22.  Ihe  v.  of  wrath  ||  23.  the  r.  of  mercy 
licv.  2.  27.  ns  It.  of  a  potter  shall  thev  lie  hroken 
See  Brass,  Eartiirn.  CJoih,  Sii.vkr. 
VESTMI'.NT.M. 
"  Kin^s  10.  22.  brine  forth  r.  for  the  worshipper* 

VESTRY. 
^Kings  10.22.JehM  said  to  him  that  was  over  ihew. 

VESTURE,  S. 
Gen.  41.42  and  nrrnyeil  Josrph  in  r.  of  fine  linen 
Deut.'H.  12.  make  fringes  on  thequariers  of  thy  C. 
Ptal.  22.  18.  they  pnri  mv  earmmt'',  ihev  cast  lots 
I  upon  my  v.  Mat.  27.  35.  John  19.  St 


VIE 

hsal.  102.  26.  ns  a  v.  shalt  thou  change  them 
ffcb.  1.  I'J.  iiiid  as  a  v.  nhalt  tliuu  t'uid  tlicni  up 
Hev.  I'J.  13.  he  was  clothed  with  a  t).ili|)t  in  hluod 
lb.  uii  liis  c.  and  on  his  thigii  a  name  written 
VEX. 
Ezad.  22.  21.  Ihoii  shalt  neither  v.  a  stranger,  nor 
oppress  liini,  J^ev.  li).  33. 
Aew.  18. 18.  nor  take  a  wife  to  her  sister  to  v.  her 
jYum.  25. 17.  v.  the  Midiauites  and  smile  tliem 
IH.  lor  they  v.  you  with  their  wiles  and  beguiled 
3;{.  55.  those  which  ye  let  remain  shall  v.  you 
2  i'niH   12.  18.  how  will  he  v.  hinisell'if  we  tell 
SC/iroK.  15.  0.  God  did  v.  them  with  advejslty 
Job  ly.  2  how  long  will  ye  v.  my  soul  and  hreak 
i'sal.'i.  5.  and  v.  tiiem  in  his  sore  diiijileusure 
J.ia.l.  a.  let  us  go  up  against  Judah  and  v.  it 

11.  13.  and  Judah  shall  not  u.  Ephraim 
Kzck.  32.  9. 1  will  «.  the  hearts  of  many  pco|)le 
Hab.  2.7.  shall  they  not  awake  that  shall  o.  thee  ? 
.ids  12.  1.  llerod  did  v.  certain  ol'tlie  church 

VKXATIOiN. 
T)exit.  23.  20.  the  tord  shall  send  on  thee  v.  \ 

Eccl.  1.  14.  is  vanity  and  v.  ot'spiric,  2.  11,  17. 
17.  this  also  is  v.  of  spirit,  2.  2(i.  |  4.  4, 10.  |  (j.  9, 

2.  22.  what  hath  man  of  the  v.  of  his  heart? 
4.  0.  than  both  the  hands  full  wiih  v.  of  spirit 

Isa.  9.  1.  shall  not  be  such  as  was  in  her  v. 
28.  19.  be  a  v.  only  to  understand  the  report 
65.  14.  but  ye  shall  howl  for  v.  of  spirit 
VEX,\TIONS. 

2  Chron.  15.  5.  great  v.  were  on  all  the  inhabitants 
VEXED. 

J^um.  20. 15.  the  Egyptians  v.  us  and  our  fathers 

Jadg.  2.  18.  by  reason  of  then)  that  v.  tliera 
10.  8.  that  year  the  Ammonites  v.  Israel 
1().  10.  so  that  his  soul  was  v.  unto  death 

1  Sam.  14.  47.  Saul  v.  his  enemies  on  every  side 

2  Sam.  13.  2.  Aninon  was  so  v.  that  he  fell  sick 
2  Kings:  4.27.  let  her  alone,  for  her  soul  is  v. 
AVA.y.  27.  thoudeliveredst  to  enemies  who  v.  them 
Job  27.  2.  the  Almighty,  who  hath  ».  my  soul 
Psal.  6.  2.  my  bones  arei#<.  ||  3.  my  soul  is  sore  v. 

10.  let  mine  enemies  be  ashamed  and  sore  v. 
T.ia.  03.  10.  they  rebelled  and  v.  his  Holy  .Spirit 
Kzek.  22.  5.  which  art  infamous  and  much  v. 

7.  in  thee  they  b.  the  fatherless  ||  29.  v.  the  poor 
..*/aM5.22.my  daughter  is  grievously  1).  with  devil 

17. 15.  Ij.have  mercy,  for  he  is  lunatic  and  sore  v. 
LukeO.  18.  and  they  that  were?),  with  unclean  spi- 
rits, and  they  were  healed,  Jlcts  5.  10. 
2  Ptt.  2.  7.  delivered  just  Lot  v.  with  conversation 

8.  V.  his  righteous  soul  from  day  to  day 

VIAL. 
I.Sam.  10.  1.  Samuel  took  a  v.  of  oil  and  poured  it 
Jiev.  10.  2.  the  first  angel  poured  his  v.  on  the  earth 

3.  second  v.  on  the  sea  ||  4.  third  v.  on  the  rivers 
8.  fourth  V.  on  sun  ||  10.  fifth  v.  on  seat  of  beast 

12.  sixth  V.  on  Euphrates  ||  17.  seventh  u.into  air 

VIALS. 
Rev.  5.  8.  having  golden  v.  full  of  odours 

15.  7.  gave  the  seven  angels  seven  golden  v. 

16.  1.  go  and  pour  out  the  i;.  of  the  wrath  of  God 
17. 1.  one  of  the  angels  which  had  seven  v.  21.  9. 

VICTORY. 
1  Sam.  15. 1 29.  also  the  ji.  of  Israel  will  not  lie 
'2  Sam.  19.2.  v.  that  day  was  turned  to  mourninj; 
23.  10.  the  Lord  wrought  a  great  v.  that  day,  12. 
iKings5.  t  Iby  him  the  Lord  had  given  w.  to  Syria 
lCAron.2D.  11.  thine,  O  Lord,  is  the  a.  and  majesty 
P.?ai.98. 1.  his  holy  arm  hath  gotten  him  the  v. 
Prov.  21.  t  31.  day  of  battle,  but  ?>.  is  of  the  Lord 
ha.  25.8.  he  will  swallow  up  death  in«.  and  wipe 
away  tears  from  all  faces,  1  Cut. 
15.  54. 
^fat.  12.  20.  till  he  send  forth  judgment  unto  v. 
ICor.  15.55.  thy  sting,  O  grave,  where  is  thy  v.? 
.57.  but  thanks  be  io  God,  who  giveih  us  the  v. 
\John  5.  4.  and  this  is  the  ».  even  our  faith 
Rev.  15.  2.  them  had  gotten  the  v.  over  the  beast 

VICTUAL,  S. 
Gen.  14.  11.  they  took  the  gooils  of  Sodom,  and  v. 
F.xod.  12.  39.  neither  had  they  prepared  any  v. 
Iav.  25.  37.  nor  lend  him  thy  v.  for  increase 
/)<Mt.23.  I9.u-iury  of  money, usury  of  w.  of  anything 
Jitsh.  1.  11-  prepare  v.  {|  9.  11.  take  v.  with  you 
9.  14.  the  men  look  of  their  w.  and  asked  not 
Jadg.  17.  10.  I  will  give  a  suit  of  apparel  and  v. 
1  Sam.  22. 10.  he  gave  him  v.  and  sword  of  Goliath 
I  Kings  4.  7.  which  provided  v.  for  the  king,  27. 
11.  18.  Pharaoh  appointed  him  r.  and  gave  land 
I  Chron.  12.  t40.  they  that  were  nigh  Ijrought  v. 
J^F.h.  10.  31.  if  the  people  bring  v.  on  the  sabbath 
13.  15.  I  testified  against  them  in  day  they  sold  v. 
.7er.4<l.5.so  captain  gave  .Kremiah  i!.  and  a  reward 
44. 17.  for  then  had  we  plenly  of)',  and  were  well 
^/aM4.15.went  into  villages  to  hiivti.  /.uAcO.  12. 

VICTUALLED.' 
1  Kings  20.  t  27.  the  children  of  Israel  were  v.    . 

VIEW. 

Joih.  2.  T.  go  V.  the  lan'l  ||  7.  2.  v.  the  country      | 

659 


VIN 

2Kings  2. 7.  llie  sons  of  the  prophets  stood  to  v.  15. 
Vlli;WED. 

Josh.  7.2.the  men  ti.  Ai  ||  Kzra  8. 15. 1  v.  the  people 
A'cA.  2.  13.  and  I  v.  the  walls  of  Jerusalem,  15. 

VIEVVEKS. 
Jsa.  47.  t  13.  let  the  v.  of  the  heavens  stand  up 

VIGILANT. 

1  Tim.2.  2.  a  bishoj)  must  be  v.  of  good  behaviour 
IFet.  5.  8.  be  sober,  be  v.  because  your  adversary 

VIGOUU. 
Dan.  10.  t8.  my  u.  was  turned  into  corruption 

VILE. 
Dcut.  25.  3.  lest  thy  brother  should  seem  v.  to  thee 
.ludg.  19.  24.  but  to  this  man  do  not  so  o.  a  thing 
l.'iani.  3.  13.  because  his  sons  made  themselves  v. 
1.5.  9.  every  thing  thai  was  v.  they  destroyed 

2  Sam.  0.  22.  and  1  will  yet  be  more  v.  than  thus 
Job  18.  3.  why  are  we  reputed  v.  in  your  sight  1 

40.  4.  behold,  I  am  v.  what  shall  I  answer  thee  ? 
Psal.  15.  4.  in  whose  eyes  a  v.  person  is  contemned 
Isa.  32.  5.  the  v.  person  be  no  more  called  liberal 

0.  for  the  «.  person  will  speak  villany 
Jrr.  15.  19.  take  forth  the  precious  from  the  v. 
29.  17.  and  1  will  make  them  like  o.  ligs 
J. am.  1.  11.  see,  O  Lord,  for  I  am  become  v. 
iJan.  11.  21.  in  his  estate  shall  stand  ujiajj.  person 
jV'uA.  1.  14.  I  will  cut  otr  the  graven  and  molten 
image,  and  will  make  thy  grave,  for  thou  art  u. 
3.  6.  I  will  cast  filth  on  thee  and  make  thee  v. 
Rom.  1.  20.  God  gave  them  up  to  v.  affections 
Pkil.'i.  21.  who  shall  change  our  w. body  that  it  may 
./a/«. 2. 2.  there  come  in  a  poor  man  in  v.  raiment 

VILELY. 
'iSam.  1.21.  the  shield  of  the  mighty  is  u.  castaway 

VILER. 
Job  30.  8.  of  base  men,  they  were  v.  than  the  earth 

VILEST. 
Psal.  12.  8.  the  wicked  when  the  v.  men  are  exalted 

VILLAGE. 
jMat.  21.  2.  go  into  the  v.  over-against  yon,  and  ye 
shall  tind  an  ass,  Mark  11.  2.  huke  19.  ^iO 
iu4e24.13.  twoof  them  went  that  same  day  to  a  v. 
28.  they  drew  nigh  unto  the  v.  whither  they  went 
VILLAGES. 
Exod.  8.  13.  and  the  frogs  died  out  of  the  v. 
Ae«.25.  31.  the  houses  of  the  v.  counted  as  fields 
Judg.  5.  7.  the  inhabitants  of  the  v.  ceased 
J^ch.  6.  2.  let  us  meet  together  in  one  of  the  v. 
Est/i.  9. 19.  Jews  of  v.  made  the  14th  day  of  Adar 
Cant.  7.11.  come,  my  beloved,  let  us  lodge  in  t 
£icA-,38.  11.  1  will  go  up  to  the  land  of  un walled  v. 
Hab.  3.  14.  thou  didst  strike  the  head  of  his  v. 
Mat.  14. 15.  multitude,  that  they  may  go  into  the  v. 
and  buy  themselves  victuals,  Mark  6.  30. 
See  CiTiKS. 
VILLANY. 
Isa.  9. 1 17.  and  every  mouth  speaketh  v. 

32.  0.  for  the  vile  person  will  speak  v. 
.lev.  29.  23.  they  have  committed  v.  in  Israel 
Hus.'i.  1 10.  and  now  will  1  discover  her  v. 

VINE. 
Vineyards.  There  were  in  Palestine  many  excel- 
lent vineyards,  ,/acob,  in  his  blessing  to  ./udah, 
says,  Binding  his  foal  unto  the  vine,  and  his 
ass's  colt  unto  the  choice  vine;  he  washed 
his  garments  in  wine,  and  his  clothes  in  the 
blood  of  grapes.  Gen.  49.  11.  This  was  to 
shew  the  abundance  of  vines,  that  should  fall 
to  his  lot.  The  spouse  in  Cant.  1.  14,  com- 
pares her  beloved  to  a  cluster  of  camphire,  or 
cypress,  that  grows  in  the  vineyards  of  E; 
gedi.  The  cypress-tree  is  a  shrub  that  grows 
as  high  as  a  pomegranate-tree  ;  its  leaves  are 
like  those  of  the  olive-tree,  its  blossom  is  while 
and  sweet,  and  its  fruit  hangs  like  clusters 
of  grapes,  and  is  of  a  very  agreeable  scent 
I'hose  grapes  of  the  cypress  that  came  froii. 
the  vineyards  of  En-gedi  were  of  great  rcpu 
tation. 
God  compares  his  people  to  a  vine,  ichich  he  had 
brought  out  of  Egypt,  and  planted  in  Pa- 
lestine, as  a  good  soil,  but  which,  instead  of 
bringing  forth  good  fruit,  brought  forth  only 
bitter  fruit,  and  wild  grapes,  Psal.  80.  8. 
Isa.  5.  1,  &c.  He  alludes  to  the  custom  of 
transplanting  trees  for  their  more  advantage- 
ous growth.     Oar   Saviour  says,    that  "  the 


VIN 


church;  his  servants  are  theprophett  and  apos- 
tles, scut  to  stir  them  vp  to  faith   and   obe- 
dience, or  holiness  of  lijc ;  his  .Sojj  is  Jesui 
Christ  ;  and  the  scope  of  this  parable  is  to  shew 
the  Jews  their  obstinate  impeiiileney  under  all 
means,  and  tlieir  incurableness,  in  their  tvilen- 
trcatiug  God's  messengers  from  time  to  time, 
and   their    crucifyiug  of  Christ;  fur    which 
God  will  unchurch  them,  and  set  up  a  church 
among  the   Gentiles,  and   ruin  the  common- 
wealth of  the  Jews.      In  John   15.  1,    Christ 
says,  I  am  the  true   vine,  and  my    I'ather  ia 
the  husbandman.     "  /  am  the  root,  fountain, 
"  and  head,  of  iiijluince,  whence  my  people  and 
"  members  derive  life,  grace,  friiilfuLness,  and 
''all  good;  jind  my    Eaiher  orders  all  thiwi 
"concerning  my  branches  or  members,  by  in- 
"  grafting  them  into  mc,by  visiting,  drfindiiia; 
"  suppvTiing,  pruning,  and  purging  them  con- 
"  lihually,  to  wake  llicm  fruitful." 
The  vine  ol  Sodom,     Deul.  32.  32.     Their  vine 
IS  the  vine  of  Sodoin :    'J'hat  is,  a  vine  of  a  plant 
from  Sodom,  which  brings  forth  only   bitter 
grapes,  and  of  which  no  use  can  be  made,     ft 
is  ujirmed,  that  the  fruits  wliirh  grow  about  the 
JJead  Sea  are  all  rotten  within  ;  and  when  they 
arc  opened,  arc  full  only  of  dust.     Moses  by 
this  would  sh(  w,  that  the  people  of  Israel  were 
degenerated,  that  their  principles  andpractice» 
were  all  corrupt  and  abominable.   'Jo  express  a 
time  of  public  Irant/uiUtty,  of  profound  peace, 
it  is  said,  that  every  one  lives  in  (|uiet  under 
his    own    vine,    and    under   Ins   own    fig-tree, 
1  Kings  4.  25.     Mic.  4.  4 
jVoah  planted  the  vine  after  the  deluge,  and  teas 
the  first  that  culttvattd  it.  Gen.  9.  2U.     Many 
are  of  opinion,  that  wine  was  not  unknown  be- 
fore the  deluge,  and  that  this  J'niriuich  only 
continued  to  cultivate  the  vine  after  this  great 
catastrophe,  as  he  had  done  before :  hut  the 
fathers  think  that  he  knew  not  the  force  of 
wine,  having  never  used  it  before,  nor  hnvina 
ever  seen  any  one  use  it.    Ue  is  supposed  to  bt 
the  first  that  pressed  out  the  juice  of  the  grape, 
and  to  have   reduced  it  to  a  potable   liquor, 
liefirre  him,  men  only  ate  the  grapes,  like  other 
fruit. 
Gen.  40.9.  in  my  dream,  behold,  a  v.  was  before  me 

10.  and  in  the  o.  were  three  bianches,  it  budded 
49.  U.  Judah  is  a  lion's  whelp,  binding  his  foal 
to  the  V.  and  his  ass's  colt  to  the  choice  v.' 
/.ft). 25.  5.  nor  gather  grapes  ofthyK.  undressmi,  11, 
JV'«m.().  4.  heshall  eat  noihing  made  of  the  n.treo 
Dcut.  .32.  32.  for  their  v.  is  of  the  v.  of  Sodoin 
Jurlg.  9.  12.  the  trees  said  to  the  v.  reign  over  ua 
13.  14.  not  eat  any  thing  that  comeih  of  the  v. 
1  Kings  4.  25.  dwelt  safely  every  man  under  iii»  o 
i Kings i.'A't).  found  a  \\\\i\  v.  and  gathered  gourds 
18.  31.  eat  ye  every  man  of  his  own  v.  Jsa.'M.  16 
Job  15.33.  sliall  shake  otfhis  nnripegrapeas  the  v. 
Psal.  80.  8.  thou  hast  brought  a  v.  out  of  Egypt 

14.  look  down,  and  behold,  and  visit  this  v. 
128.  3.  thy  wife  shall  he  as  a  fruitful  o.  by  the  sides 
Cant.  0.  11.  to  see  whether  the  «.  flouri.ilied,  7. 12. 

7.  8.  thy  breasts  shall  be  as  clusters  of  the  w. 
Isa.  5.  2.  he  planted  it  with  the  choicest  v. 

it).  8.  for  the  v.  of  Sibmah  languishelh 
9.  I  will  bewail  the  v.  of  Sibmah,  .,'er.  48.  32. 
24.  7.  the  new  wine  mourneih,  the  v.  laiiguisheth 
32.  12.  they  shall  lament  for  the  fruitful  v. 
34.  4.  an  the  leaf  falleth  off  from  the  v.  as  a  fif 
Jcr.  2.  21.  yet  I  had  planted  thee  a  noble  v.  how 
then  turned  into  degenerate  jjlant  o 
strange  v.  ? 
0.  9.  shall  glean  the  remnant  of  Israel  as  a  it. 

8.  13.  there  shall  be  no  grapes  on  the  v.  nor  figg 
Ezrk.  15. 2.  what  is  the  v.  tree  more  than  any  lro« 

6.  as  the  v.  tree  which  I  have  given  for  fuel 
17.  0.  it  became  a  spreading  i».  of  low  stature 

7.  this  V.  did  bend  her  roots  toward  hini 
19.  10.  thy  mother  is  like  a  v.  in  thy  blood 

Hos.  10.  I.  Israel  is  an  empty  V.  he  bringelh  fruit 
14.  7.  they  shall  revive  as  corn,  grow  as  the  ». 
fori  1.7.  he  laid  my  v.  waste,  barked  my  fig-tree 
12.  the  71.  is  dried  up,  the  fig-treee  languisheth 
2.  K.  the  fig-tree  and  the  v.  yield  their  strength 
Mic.  4.  4.  they  shall  sit  every  man  underhis 


'  householder  havinglclhis  vineyard  to  tcnants,\  Hag.  2.  19.  as  yet  the  7).  hath  not  brought  forth 
"  who  ought  to  have  rendered  him  the  fruit  of  Zeeh.  3. 10.  shall  ye  call  every  man  untler  the  v. 
"  it,  instead  of  that,  they  abused  his  servants,]  8.  12.  the?;,  gh.illgive  her  friiit,  the  heavens  dew 


"  and  killed  his  own  Son,  who  went  to  regiii 
"  the  payment  of  what  was  firing  to  him,"  Mat. 
21.  33,  &c.  In  this  parable,  the  householder 
ts  God  the  Father:  his  planting  a  vineyard, 
denotes  his  establishing  a  church  among  the 
.lews,  and  furnishing  it  icitk  all  needful  helps 
and  means  to  make  it  spiritually  fruitful ;  his 
letting  it  out  to  husbandmen,  denotes  his  com- 
mitting the  care  of  it  to  the  public  pastors, 
the  priests,  and  Lcvites,  and  governors  of  the 


Mai.  3.  II.  neither  shall  your  7).  cast  her  fruit 
Jl/ai.26.29.1  will  not  drink  of  this  fruit  of?;,  till  in 
my  Father's  kingdom,  Mark  14.  25.  Xu4« 
22.  18. 
.Tuhn  15.  1.  I  am  the  true  v.  and  my  Father  ii  the 
hn.sbandman,  SL 
4.  branch  cannot  hear  fruit,  e,vce[>t  it  abide  in* 
.Jam.  3. 12.  my  brethren,  can  a  v.  bear  figs  T 
flf|j.]4.  18.  gather  clusters  of  the  ».  of  the  earth 
19.  the  angel  gathered  the  jj.  of  the  earth 


VIN 

VINES. 
jVum.CO.  5.  it  is  no  i)latu  of  v.  or  pomogrnnatcs 
iJcal.  6.S-  a  luiid  ul  wiieat,  barley,  uiid  v.  Iionuy 
I'sai.  <d.  47.  liu  dcslruyvd  tliuir  o.  wjlli  liait 

IV.J.  Xi.  lie  siiiijLc  ibtir  c.  also  and  lig-lrccn 
C^;i2.  i2.  13.  and  itiu  i;.  give  a  good  siiilII 

1  j.taku  us  ihu  luxt'S,  (lie  liltie  lo.ves,  tliat  sjiuil  tlie 
r.  liir  our  v.  Iiave  tender  grapes 
ha.  7.  2H.  where  there  were  a  tlmusand  v. 
Jer.  5.  17.  Ihey  siiall  eat  ii)i  Ihy  o.  and  tig-trees 
31.  U.  tliou  eliall  yet  plant  v.  nil  the  niuuntains 
Hvs.'i.  I'i.  1  will  distroy  lier  «.  and  her  lig-tiees 
Hab.  3.  17.  neither  sliuU  fruit  he  in  the  v. 

VlAi;  UKEdtfLKS. 
2  A'tH;,''s25.12.liieeaplum  iil'Uie  guard  left  the  poor 
of  ihe  hinil  to  he  v.-drtsscm,  Jer.  y2.  Hi. 
2CAr.20.IU.Uzi!iah  ii^il  husband  in.  and  v.-tlrcsucrs 
y^a.  (il.  5.  sons  of  aln-ii  sliall  be  your  o.-drcsscrs 
Juel  1.  II.  be  ashamed,  howl,  U  ye  v.-drcsucrg 

VIN  EG  All 
/j  made  of  wine,  beer,  cider,  and  even  of  icater. 
'J'Ue   ancients    had   sevcrul  kinds  uf  vinegar, 
whidi.  tlicy  made  use  uf  fur  drink,     lloai  told 
Huth,  lliul  site  might,  come  and  dip  her  morsel 
in  the   vinegar,  alung  lotth  hi.^  people,  Kutli 
2.  14.     Harvesters  made  use  of  this  liijuurfor 
their  refreshment :  Jlnd  this  was  a  custuni  nut 
only  amon/r  the  .lews,  but  also  amunir  the  Ho- 
inans.      'J  he  emperor  Fescenvius  J\'igiT  navr 
orders,  that  his  soldiers  should  drink  nothing 
but  vinegar  on  thur  marches.     Jlnd  tJunstan- 
tine  the  (Jrcat  allowed  his  soldiers  wtne  a.Ti 
.vinegar  alter naVly  every  day. 
It  is  thought  that  the  vinegar  ichich  the  Unman 
solditrs  offered  to  uurSavionr  at  his  crucifixion, 
was  the  vinegar  thnj    made   use  of  fur  their 
own  drinking,  Mat.  U7.  48.     This  vinegar  wa. 
Kot  of  that  sort  that  wcmnkc  u.'ic  uf  for  salad. 
and  sauces,  but  a  small  wine  called  pesca,  or 
•era.     7'hey  make  great  use  of  it  in  !>pai7i  and 
llalii,  in  harvest-time.     They  use  it  likewise 
on  Mipboard,  to  correct  the  ill  taste  of  water 
The  scripture  forbids  the  jVaznrites  to  use  v'lus 
giir,  and  all  sorts  uf  liquors  that  come  from  the 
vine,  nnd  ichich    arc  capable   of  inebriating, 
Num.  ti.  ;l. 
llowrner,  there  wa.i  a  kind  of  strong  vinejlar, 
which  was  not  proper  for  drinking,  or  which 
was  not  used  till  it  was  well  diluted.  Solomon 
says,  I'rov.  lit.  20,  As  vinegar  to  the  toclh, 
BO  i:i    the    slu^'gard    to    them   that    send    liini  : 
"  .'In  vinegar  by  its  cold  and  sharpness  offends 
"  the  teeth  and  the  palnte,  su  a  sluggish  mes- 
"  scnger  is  unserviceable  and  rexatiouj  In  those 
"  who  employ  him."     Jlnd   in   I'rov.   2.5.   20, 
As  vinegar  upon    nitre,  so  is  ho  that  Binjeili 
songs  to  a  heavy  lijart.     That  is,  "  as  vind- 
"  gar  being  thrown  v]ion  nitre  is  a  thing  im- 
"proprr,  for  it  renders  it  less  useful  and  not 
"  to  effectual  to  take  out  spots  or  blemishes, 
"so  he  th'tt  singeth  songs  to  a  heavy  heart, 
"  does  that  whirh  is  unseasonable  and  iffensive, 
"for  his  grief  is  thereby  rather  increased  than 
"diminished." 
A'uin.O.  3.  a  Nazarito  shall  drink  no  v.  of  winn 
Kuth  2.  14.  ent  bread  and  di|i  thy  morsel  in  the  v. 
Psal.  <)'.'.  21.  tli'-y  gave  ine  gall  for  my  meal,  in  my 
thirst  Ihey  gave  mo  v.  to  drink,  Jilat.  27.  '.i-i. 
Prnv.  10. a*),  as?},  to  the  teeth,  so  is  the  sluggard 
2').  20.  as  V.  upon  nitre,  so  is  he  that  singeth 
J/a£.27.'4-!.  tliev  look  a  sponge  and  filled  it  with  v. 
Mark  15.'  30.  /,uke  23.  lifi.  .fohn  19.  21),  ;)0. 
VINEYARD. 
Oen.  n.  20.  No-ili  plantcid  a  i).  and  ilrank  wino 
f>0'/.2'2.5.  if  a  man  shall  cause  a  v.  to  he  eaten 
23.  II.  in  like  manner  thou  shalt  deal  with  thy  i'. 
f,ev.  10.  10.  nnd  thou  shalt  not  glean  thy  v. 
25.  3.  and  six  years  Ihoii  shalt  prune  thy  v. 
4.  neiilier  sow  thy  field,  nor  prune  thy  v. 
Deut.iO.  ti.  what  man  is  he  ihnt  hiith  planted  a  v.  ^ 
22.  U.  thou  shalt  not  sow  thy  v.  with  divers  sends, 
IfisI  the  fruit  of  Ihy  seed  and  n.  be  defiled 
03.  24.  when  Ihnu  rornest  inio  thy  neighbour's  v. 
24.21.  when  thou  gith'-rest  the  grapes  of  ihy  v. 
'2^.  30.  thou  sh:ilt  plant  a  t».  and  not  gather grapi;s 
lA'inys2l.  1.  Naholh  had  n  v.  hard  by  the  palnec 
2.  give  mo  ihv  i".  I  will  give  thee  a  better  v.  0. 
7.  ent  breail,  1  will  give  Ihce  the  i).  of  Naboth 
fsat.  80.  1.").  the  i).  Ihy  rizhl  baud  hath  planted 
(Voi).24.30.I  went  bv  v.  of  the  man  void  of  undersl. 
31.  Hi.  with  fruit  of  her  hand  bIii-  plnnteth  a  v. 
4^anl.  1.  <",.  but  mine  own  v.  have  I  not  kept 
?.  11.  SidoMion  had  a  v.  he  let  ihii  v.  to  keepers 
12.  my  V.  wbicli  is  mine, is  before  me,0  Solomon 
/*n. 1.8. daughter  of  Zion  is  leftas  acollnge  inn  v. 
.<.  14.  for  ye  have  eaten  up  the  v.  spoil  of  the  poor 
1.  1.  sin;  a  8on:».of  my  beloved  toiirhing  his  v. 
T.for  ihe  v.  of  Lord  nfliosls  is  lh<-  house  (if  Israel 
11).  ya,  ten  acres  of  r.  shall  yield  one  halh 
'f7.3.  in  that  day  ime  vo  *^  '»»  •  r   Cf<"'i>rf  wit* 


VIO 

Jer.  12.  10.  many  pastors  have  dcslroycd  ray  o. 
','3.  7.  the  Kechuhitessliad  not  plant  v.  0. 
jMic.  1.  ti.  I  will  make  Kamariu  as  plantings  of  at). 
.!/at.  20. 1.  went  early  to  hire  labourers  inlo  his  v. 
4.  he  said  unto  tbein,  go  ye  also  inlo  the  v.  7. 

21.  28.  he  said,  son,  go  work  to-day  in  my  v. 
33.  u  eertaiu  householder  iilanted  a  u.  and  let  it 

out  to  husbandmen,  Mark  12.  I.  J^uke  20.  9. 
J.ukel'i.G.  a  man  had  a  lig-tree  planted  in  his  v. 
7.  tlieii  said  he  to  the  dresser  of  his  v.  behold 
1  Cor.  i).  7.  who  planteth  u  jj.  and  eatelh  not  fruit? 

VINEYAIIUS. 
J\rum.  16.  14.  hast  not  given  us  inheritance  of  v. 
20. 17., we  will  notjiass  through  the  c.  21.  22. 

22.  24.  angel  of  the  Lord  stood  in  u  path  of  the  v. 
iJeut.  ().  II.  he  swore  to  give  thee  o.  and  olive-trees 

which  thou  plantedst  not,  Josh.  24. 13.  jXeh.  U.  25. 
28.  'i'i.  tliou  shalt  plant  t;.  and  dress  Ihem 
Judg.  15.  5.  the  fo\ee  burnt  up  the  v.  and  olives 

21.  20.  saying,  go  and  lie  in  wait  in  the  v. 

1  Ham.  8. 14.  he  will  take  your  fields  and  your  v. 

22.  7.  will  the  son  Jesse  give  everyone  of  you  v.  7 

2  Kings  5.  20.  is  it  a  lime  to  receive  v.  and  sheep  1 
18.  32.  till  I  take  you  to  a  land  uf  bread  and  v. 
19. 2y.  in  the  third  year  sow,  reap,  and  plant  v. 

1  Chron.  27.  27.  over  the  v.  was  Shiniei,  over  thc^ 
increase  of  the  v.  for  the  wine-cellars  was  Zabdi 
J\'th.  5.  3.  wo  have  mortgaged  our  v.  and  houses 

11.  restore  to  them  their  v.  and  olive-yards 
Job  24.  18.  he  beholdelh  not  the  way  of  the  v. 
Psal.  107.  37.  sow  the  fields  and  plant  v.  to  yield 
Keel.  2.  4.  I  budded  mc  houses,  1  planted  nie  v. 
Cant.  1.  0.  they  made  nie  the  keeper  of  the  v. 

14.  as  a  cluster  of  campbire  in  the  v.  of  En-gedi 

7. 12.  let  ns  get  up  early  to  the  v.  let  us  see  if  vine 

Isa.  10.  10.  in  the  v.  there  shall  be  no  singing 

05.  21.  they  shall  build  houses  and  inhabit,  shall 

plant  V.  and  eat  the  fruit  of  them,  Jlvius  9.  14. 

./cr.32. 15.  houses  and  v.  shall  be  possessed  again 

39.  10.  Nebuzar-adan  gave  the  jioor  v.  and  fields 
Ezek.  28.  26.  they  shall  build  houses  a!:d  plant  v. 
Jfos.  2.  1.1.  I  will  give  her  her  v.  from  thence 
.fhnos  4.  9.  the  palmer  worm  devoured  your  v. 

5.  II.  ye  have  planted  v.  but  ye  shall  not  drink 

17.  and  in  all  v.  shall  be  wailing,  I  will  jiass 
ZmA. 1.13. they  shall  plant  v.  but  aot  drink  the  wine 

VINTAGE. 
Lev.  20.  5.  your  thrcshirtg  shall  reach  to  the  v.  and 
the  V.  shall  reach  to  the  sowing  time 
Jndg.  8.  2.  is  it  not  better  than  the  it.  of  Abiezer  7 
.lob  24'.  fi.  they  gather  the  v.  of  the  wicked 
fsa.  10. 10. 1  have  made  their  v.  shouting  lo  cease 

24.  13.  as  the  gleaning  grapes  when  ?).  is  done 
32. 10.  the  V.  shall  fail,  gathering  shall  not  como 

.fer.  48.  32.  the  spoiler  is  fellcn  upon  thy  n. 
J[ie.  7.  1.  I  am  as  the  grape-gleanings  of  the  v. 
y.ech.  11.  2.  the  forest   of  the  jj.  is  come  down 

vior... 

fsa.  5. 12.  harp  and  r.  and  wine  are  in  their  feasts 
Jimosij.5.  that  chant  lo  sound  of  the  r.  and  invent 

VIOLS. 
Tsa.  14.  11.  the  noise  of  thy  v.  is  brought  down 
Amos  5.  23. 1  will  not  hear  the  melody  of  thy  v. 

VIOLATED. 
Ejct.22.26.her  priests  havci'.mv  law  and  profaned 

VIOLENCE. 
den.  fi.  11.  and  the  earth  was  filled  with  v.  12. 

40.  t  •>.  their  swords  aie  weapons  of?). 

Lev.G.  2.  if  one  lie  in  any  thing  taken  away  by  v. 
2.S'i)n.22.  3.  my  Saviour,  thou  savest  me  from  v. 
1  f^hron.  12.  t  17.  seeing  there  is  no  v.  in  my  hands 
Job  10.  t  7.  I  cry  out  of  u.  but  I  am  not  heard 
Psal.  11.  5. him  that  lovcth  v.  his  soul  liateth 
18.  t48.  bait  delivered  mo  from  the  man  of  o. 

25.  t  10.  and  they  halo  me  wiili  haired  of  c. 
55.  0.  I  have  seen  ».  and  strife  in  the  city 

.58.  2.  voti  weijh  the  v.  of  your  hands  in  earth 

72.  14.  \w  sbail  redeem  their  soul  from  r. 

73.  0.  therefore  v.  coverelh  them  as  a  garment 
Prov.  3.  t  31.  envy  thou  not  a  man  oft). 

4.  17.  for  they  drink  the  wine  of  n. 

10.  fi.  ti.  c»)verclh  the  mouth  of  the  wicked,  11. 

13.  2.  the  soul  of  the  transgressors  shall  eat  p. 

28.  17.  a  man  that  dnoth  v.  lo  the  blood  of  any 
Isa.  .53.  O.bccause  he  bad  done  no  v.  nor  was  deceit 

.59.  fi.  and  the  act  oft),  is  in  iheir  bands 

fit).  IS.  V.  shall  no  more  be  beard  in  tliy  land 
,7cr.  fi.  7.  1).  and  spoil  is  hi'ard  in  her,  before  mo 

20.  8.  for  since  I  spake,  I  cried  v.  anil  spoil 

22.  3.  and  do  no  wrong,  do  no  v.  lo  llio  stranger 

17.  thine  eyes,  thy  heart  arc  for  j).  lo  do  it 

23.  1 10.  their  v.  is  evil,  Ihcir  force  not  right 
5l.35.r.  done  lo  me  and  my  flesh  be  upnn  Unbylon 

4fi.  a  rumour,  v.  in  th"  land,  ruler  ngninst  ruler 
Kick.  7.  II.  I',  is  risenup  inlo  a  rod  of  wickedness 

23.  make  a  chain,  for  the  city  is  full  ofn. 
8.  17.  Ihev  have  filled  the  land  wilh  r.  28.  16. 
12.  10.  because  of  the  D.  of  llicm  Ibiit  dwell 

18.  7.  if  a  man  bnlh  spol.'d  none  bv  r.  10. 

IC  biH  if  Im  lnHh  sp^iJed  ami  omircssed  by  v.  18. 


VIR 

Kzck.  22.126.  licr  pi  iests have  offered  ».  to  my  Un 
45.  i).  O  princes  of  Israel,  remove  v.  and  Bjjoil 

Jucl2.  19. Edoin  shall  be  a  wilderness  for  llic  v. 

JImos  3.  JO.  who  store  up  t).  in  their  palaces 
0.  3.  ye  that  cause  the  seal  off.  to  come  near 

Obad.  10.  for  thy  v.  shame  shall  cover  Iheo 

.lonah  3.  8.  let  tiiein  turn  every  one  from  the  v. 

Mic.  2.  2.  they  covet  fields,  nnd  lake  them  by  v. 
6.  12.  for  the  rich  men  tlnreof  are  full  of  c. 

Hab.  1.  2.  how  long  shall  I  cry  out  to  thee  oft). 
3.  V.  is  before  me  ||  9.  they  shall  come  all  for  e 

2.  8.  and  for  the  v.  of  the  land,  of  the  city 
17.  t!.  of  Lebaimn  cover  thee,  v.  of  the  land 

Zc/iA.I.O.fill  Iheir  maslers'bouses  with  D.and  deceit 

3.  4.  her  priests  have  done  o.  to  the  law 

jl/ni.  2.  10.  for  one  coverelh  v.  with  his  garment 
Mot.  II.  12.  Ihe  kingdoni  of  heaven  sutjercth  v. 
J.uke  3.  14.  do  v.  to  no  man,  nor  accuse  any  falsely 
Jlcts  5.  20.  the  captain  brought  them  without  v. 
21.  35.  Paul  home  of  soldiers  for  v.  of  the  people 
27. 41. the  hinder  part  was  broken  forr.of  waves 
Hcb.  11.34.  through  faith  queiiehed  the  v.  of  fire 
'Rev.  18  21.  with  ti.  shall  Babylon  bo  thrown  dowa 

VIOLENT. 

Q'Sam.  22. 49.  thou  hast  lifted  nie  up  on  high,  thou 

hast  delivered  nie  from  the  c«  man,  Psal.  18.  48. 

Psal.  7.  10.  his  v.  dealing  come  on  his  own  pate 

80.  14.  the  assemblies  of  v.  men  sought  my  soul 

140.  1.  preserve  me  frcnii  the  v.  man,  4. 

II.  evil  shall  hunt  the  v.  man  to  overthrow  hiiD 
Prov.  16.  29.  a  v.  nian  enficuth  bis  neighbour 
Keel.  5.  8.  if  thou  seest  v.  perverting  of  judgment 
Mat.  11.  12.  the  r.  lake  it  bv  force,  heaven 

VIOLENTLY. 
(jen.  21.  25.  Abimolech"s  servauis  had  v.  taken 
l^ev.  0.  4.  he  shall  restore  that  which  be  took  r. 
l)eut.  28.31.  thine  ass  shall  be  u.  taken  away 
Job  20. 19.  he  halh  v.  taken  away  a  bouse 
24.  2.  they  ?).  take  away  fiocks,  and  feed  thereof 

tlO.  drought  and  heat  v.  take  the  snow  water* 
Isa-  22. 18.  he  will  surely  v.  t,urn  and  toss  thee 
I. am.  2.  6.  he  hath  v.  taken  away  bis  tabernacle 
Jiy<(t.S.32.lhe  whole  herd  of  swine  ranti.iiitoiheeea 
and  perished  in  waters,  Mark  5. 13.  Luke  S.  Xi 
VIOLET. 
Ksth.  1. 1  6.  where  were  green  and  v.  hangings 
8.  1 15.  Mordecai  went  out  in  apparel  oft). 

VIl'ER. 
Jl  little  serpent,  about  half  a  yard  in  length,  but 
the  inust  poiso7iovs  in  its  bite  of  oil  the  F.uro- 
pean  serpents.     It  is  called  vipera,  quasi  vivi- 
jiara,  because  it  brings  forth  its  young  alive. 
(irnerally    the  vipei   is    not    viry    long,  tht 
largest  being  not  above  half  an  ell  long,  and 
its  thickness  not  above  an  inch.     It  has  a  flat 
head  with  a  snout  rising  up,  like  that  uf  a  pi^. 
The  male  has  only  two  teeth,  but  thr  femaU 
has  several;  and  the  male  is  said  to  be  com- 
monly blacker   than  the  female.      It  is  said, 
that  when  the  viper  brings  forth,   the  young 
ones  kill  the  dam:    but    this  is    contradicted 
by  experience.      'Though  she  brings  forth  her 
ijnang  alive,  Ihey  arc  inclosed  in  little  skins, 
that  break  open  on  the  third  day.     The  poison 
of  the  viper  is  very  dangerous,  but  ilsjl^sh  is 
good  in  many  distempers. 
The  viper  is  mentioned  inscrcralplacesofsrrtp 
tare,    .lob  20.  10,  The  i)i;ifr's  tongue  shall  slay 
him.    The  Hebrew  word  Pc.\en,  thry  say,  rather 
signifies    the    asp    than    the    viper.       Isaiah 
speaks  also  of  the  viper.  Isa.  30.6.  where  tlit 
Hebrew  has  Eidiee;  which  is  thought  to  be  the 
true  name  of  the  viper,     .hhn  the  linplist,  and 
aftrrirards  our  Saviour,  called  the  Scribes  and 
Phttrisrcs,a  gencrnlion  of  ripcrs,  a  wicked  brood 
of  wicked  parents,  who  by  their  poisonous  doc- 
trines ruined  the  souls  of'nirn.  Mat.  3. 7.  |  12.  34. 
.Tob  20.  10.  of  asps,  the  v.  tongno  shall  slay  him 
Isa.  30.  6.  from  whence  como  llio  v.   nnd  serpent 
41.  t  24.  yniir  work  is  worse  than  of  a  r. 
.511.5.  that  which  is  crushed  brmiks  out  into  a  v. 
.9c(s28.3. there  came  7i.niid  fastened  on  Paul's  {land 

VIPERS. 
Mat.  3.  7.  O  cenerntion  of  v.  12.  34.  |  2"?.  33. 
VIRGIN.  (/.1/A.C3.  7. 

In  f?rr/-J,  Partlicnos;  in  Hebrew,  Mm-^h.  These 
words  properly  signify  an  unmarried  yonng 
woman,  that  has  preserved  the  purity  of  her 
body.  In  tbis  sense  we  meet  with  it  in  tht 
famous  passage  of  Isaiah,  Hi  bold,  a  virgin 
shall  conceive  anil  bear  n  son,  Isa.  7.  14, 
meaning,  she  ironld  he  «  virgin  as  well  after  ai 
before  her  bringing  firlh.  It  at  sometimes  vir- 
gin i.«  made  use  of  to  express  (i  yonng  woman, 
whelhrr  slie  has  kept  her  rirginilv  or  no. 
Joel  1.  8,  I,'iment  like  a  virgin  j»irded  wilh 
sMck'-lolb  fi.r  the  hnvbnnd  of  her  yonb.  Tht 
more  precisely  In  express  the  state  of  virginit}/^ 
Ihe  seriplnre  nfien  adds  In  the  words,  miid  o» 
virgin,  th'se,  or  suck  like  words,  neither  bad 


VIN 

8ny  man  known  her,  Gen.  24.  10.    JVum.  31. 

The  Hebrew  word  Alniali,  signifies  a.  person  con- 
cealed ;  fur  young  unmarried  women  lived  in 
retired  apartments,  where  the  men  did  not  use 
to  go:  .Ind  when  yoinig  women  were  obliged 
to  go  out,  they  were  always  vailed,  and  never 
appeared  uncovered,  but  before  their  nearest 
relations.  IVhen  .Imnuv,  the  son  of  Davidf 
had  conceived  a  violent  passion  for  his  sister 
Tamar,  he  could  not  get  private  converse  with 
her,  because  she  was  a  viri^in,  and  kept  up  very 
close.  2  Siim.  13.  2,  For  slic  was  a  virgin,  and 
Amnon  tliouglil  it  liard  for  liini  to  do  any  thing 
to  her.  .^nd  in  the  bonk  of  Maccabees,  it  is 
said,  that  v^hen  JIHiodurus  came  to  .Terusalem, 
to  take  away  the  treasures  of  the  temple,  the 
most  recluse  virgins  came  out  of  their  retire- 
ments;  some  appeared  in  the  streets,  some  at 
their  windows,  and  others  upon  the  walls,  2 
Mace.  3.  U).  And  it  is  well  known  that  young 
women  in  the  east  do  not  appear  in  public,  but 
are  shut  up  in  their  houses  and  in  their  mo- 
ther's apartments. 

Virgin  ii  often  used  in  scripture  for  a  people,  a 
eity,  a  nation.  The  virgin,  the  daughter  of  Ba- 
bylon, the  virgin,  the  daughter  of  Zion,  the 
virgin,  the  daughter  of  Israel,  &e.  These 
phrases  si:.'nify  the  province,  the  land,  the  peo- 
ple of  Babylon,  Zion,  Israel,  &c.  The  pro- 
fessors of  religion  in  general  are  called  virgins, 
such  as  arc  not  defiled  with  any  scandalous 
sin,  nor  erroneous  opinion.  Mat.  2.5.  1,  The 
kingdom  of  heaven  shall  be  likened  unto  ten 
virgins,  which  took  their  lamps.  They  are 
all  called  virgins,  because  they  made  profession 
of  holine»s;  yet  only  five  deserved  the  name, 
they  baring  not  only  a  professioii,  bnt  a  true 
faith  and  love,  to  feed  their  profession  :  The 
athers  made  a  profession,  but  had  not  the  truth 
ff  grace  in  the  heart.  The  character  of  vir- 
gins is  principally  given  to  those  that  adhere 
utedfaslly  to  Christ,  and  n.bbor  evn-y  thinsr  that 
las  any  show  nf  violating  their  fidelity  to  him 
Kcv.  14.  4,  These  arc  they  which  are  not  do- 
tiled  with  women,  that  are  not  corrupted  with 
the  erroneous  doctrine  and  idolatrous  worship 
of  the  anti-christian  church,  for  they  are  vir- 
gins :  They  keep  close  to  Christ  in  all  his  or- 
dinances, and  are  led  by  his  word  and  Spirit. 
Tlie  Apostle  says,  I  have  espoused  you  to  one 
husband,  that  I  may  present  you  as  a  chaste 
virgin  to  Christ,  2  Cor.  11.2. 

Oen.  24.  If).  Rehekah  was  fair  to  look  upon,  a  v. 
43.  when  the  v.  cometh  forth  to  draw  water 

/,fp.  21.  3.  for  hi*:  sister,  a  v.  he  may  be  defiled 
14.  he  shall  lake  a  v.  of  his  own  people  to  wife 

Dent.  22.  19.  he  brought  an  evil  name  upon  a  v. 
23.  a  V.  betrothed  ||28.  a  v.  not  betrothed 
32.  2-'>.  destroy  hoih  the  young  man  and  the  v. 

5  .S»m.l3.2.Amnon  fell  sick  forTainar,she  was  a  v. 

2  Kings  19.  21.  the  v.  the  daughter  of  Zion  hath 
despised  thee  and  laughed  thee  to  scorn, 
Isa.  37.  22. 

Isa.  1. 14.  behold  a  71.  shall  conceive,  JIfat.  1.  23. 
23. 12.  shalt  no  more  rejnire,  O  thou  oppressed  v. 
4~.  l.eome  down  and  sit  in  the  dost,  O  v.  of  Bah. 
Cii. .").  for  Hs  a  young  man  marrieth  a?>.  so  thy  sons 

.Trr.  14. 17.  the  rj.  daughter  of  my  people  is  broken 
IH.  13.  r.  of  Israel  ha'h  done  a  horrible  thing 
31.  4.  and  thou  shalt  be  built,  O  v.  of  Israel' 
13.  then  shall  the  v.  rejoice  in  the  dance 
21.  turn  again,  O  v.  of  Israel,  to  these  thy  cities 
An.  11.  tMke  balm,  O  n.  the  daughter  of  Ejvpt 

J, am.  1.1.5.Ti0rd  ha'h  trodden  i!.da\igliterof.Iudah 
C.  13.  what  slialll  erjiial  to  thee,  that  I  ma  v  com- 
fort thee,  O  V.  daughter  of  Zion? 

Jorl  1.  «.  lament  like  a  v.  girded  with  sackcloth 

^inns  .T.  2.  the  v.  of  Israel  is  fallen,  no  more  rise 

J.uk~  1.  27.  the  angel  was  sent  from  Rod  to  a  v. 

1  C'or.  7.  2^*.  if  n  v.  marry,  she  hath  not  sinned 
34.  there  is  difference  between  a  wife  and  a  v. 
37.  decreed  that  he  will  keep  his  v.  doetli  well 

2Cor.  11.2.  that  I  mnv  uresent  you  as  a  chaste  v. 
VIRGINS. 

Kro'/.  22.17.  slmll  pay  accordinsto  the  dowry  of  j». 

C  ■'fam.  13.  IS.  were  kings'  dauzhlers  v.  apparelled 

F.fth.  2.  17.  F.sther  found  favour  above  all  the  v. 

P.tal.  4.5. 14.  the  V.  her  companions  that  follow  her 

Cant.  1.3.  as  ointment,  therefore  do  thejj.love  thee 
6.  8.  threescore  qifens  and  v.  without  number 

fsa.  23.  4.  t  travail  not,  nor  do  I  brini  up  v. 

J^nm    1.  4.  Iter  priests  sish,  her  n.  are  afflieted 

18.  mv  ti.  and  voun»  men  are  jjone  into  captivity 

2.  10.  Ilier.  of  Jerusalem  hang  down  their  heads 

21.  Ti.  and  young  men  are  fallen  by  the  sword 

Mmos  H.  13.  in  that  day  shall  the  fair  n.  faint 

.If nf .  25.  1 .  kingdom  of  hea yi  n  is  likened  to  ten  »'. 

.liet^  21.9.  Philip  had  four  daughters,  v.  prophesied 

1  Cor.  7. '25.  conocrningn.l  have  no  commandment 
661 


VIS 

fico.  14.  4.  which  are  not  dcfded,  for  ihey  are  x>. 

Young  VIRGIN,  S. 
.Tudg.  21.  12.  among  the  inhabitants  of  Jabcsh- 

gilead  were  four  hundred  young  v. 
1  Kings  1.2.1et  there  bo  sought  for  king  a  young  v. 
Esth.'i.l.  let  there  be  fair  j/oHH"-?;.  sought  for  king 

3.  they  may  gather  together  all  the  fair  i/oiini- 1-. 

VIRGINITY.  • 

Lev.  21.  13.  he  shall  take  a  wife  in  her  v. 

Deut.  22.  15.  bring  the  tokens  of  her  v.  17,  20. 

.Tudg.  11.  37.  that  I  may  bewail  my  v.  38. 

Ezek.^3.  3.  they  bruised  the  teats  of  their  v.  8. 

Luke  2.  36.  Anna  lived  seven  years  from  her  v.  , 
VIRTUE,  ' 

In.  Greek,  Arete,  or  Dynamis.  Tt  is  in  opposition 
to  vice,  and  is  taken,  (1)  For  moral  virtue, 
probity  of  manner.^  among  men,  as  the  generi- 
cal  word  that  contains  all  moral  and  Christian 
virtues  under  it;  in  this  sense  it  is  used,  Phil. 

4.  8,  If  there  be  any  virtue,  think  on  these 
things.  If  there  be  any  other  commendable 
practice  amongst  any,  diligently  consider  and 
practise  it.  (2)  It  is  taken  for  the  power,  the 
■wisdom,  the  goodness,  and  truth  of  God,  which 
he  manifests  in  bringing  the  elect  out  of  a  state 
of  ignorance  and  unbelief  into  his  marvellous 
light.  1  Pet.  2.  9,  That  ye  should  shew  forth 
the  praises  [or  virtues]  of  him  who  hath  called 
you  out  of  darkness  into  his  marvellous  light. 
Jllso  in  Mark  5.  30,  virtue  is  put  for  power, 
Jesus  knowing  that  virtue  had  gone  out  of  him. 
(3)  Tt  is  taken  for  Christian  courage  and  re- 
solution in  all  dangcr\and  troubles  that  per- 
sons may  meet  with.  2  Pet.  1.  .5,  Add  to  your 
faith,  virtue.  (4)  It  is  put  for  miracles.  Mat. 
7.  22,  Have  we  not  done  many  wonderful 
works  in  thy  name,  hi  the  original  it  is 
Juva/.t£i;  n-o\A.xc,  many  virtues. 

jV/ar/c  5.  30.  Jesus,  knowing  in  himself  that  v.  had 

gone  out  of  him,  JmUc  G.  i6.  |  8.  46. 

Phil.  4.  8.  if  there  be  any  v.  think  on  these  things 

'2  Pet.  1.3.  of  him  that  hath  called  us  to  glory  and  v. 

5.  add  to  your  faith  v.  and  to  ;;.  knowledge 

VIRTUES. 
1  Pet.  2. 1 9.  that  ye  should  shew  forth  the  v.  of  him 

VIRTUOUS. 
Puth  3.  11.  all  know  that  thou  art  a  v.  woman 
Prnv.  12. 4.  a  c.  woman  is  is.  crown  to  her  husband 
31. 10.  who  can  find  v.  woman?  price  above  rubies 

VIRTUOUSLY. 
Proo.  31.29.  many  dauffhters  have  done  u.  but  thou 

VISAGE. 
Tsa.  .52. 14.  his  v.  was  marred  more  than  any  man 
Lam.  4.  8.  their  v.  is  blacker  than  a  coal 
Dan.  3. 19.  and  the  form  of  his  v.  was  changed 

VISIBLE. 

CtiM.lG.by  him  were  all  things  created,  r.  and  inv. 

VISION. 

See  the  Signification  on  Prophet, 

Gratle,  Thcmmim,  Visit. 

IN'um.  24.  4.  which  saw  the  v.  of  the  Almighty,  16. 

1  Snm.S.l.word  was  precious,  there  was  no  open  v. 

15.  and  Samuel  feared  to  shew  Eli  the  v. 

2  Sam.  7.  17.  according  to  all  these  words  and 

this  V.  so  did  Natlian  speak  to  David, 

1  Chron.  17.  15. 
2  Chr.  32.  32.  they  are  written  in  the  v.  of  Isaiah 
.Tab  20.  8.  be  chased  away  as  a  v.  of  the  night 
Psal.  89.  19.  thou  spakeat  in  v.  to  thy  Holy  One 
Prov.  29. 18.  where  there  is  no  v.  the  people  perish 
Isa.  1.  1.  the  V.  of  Isaiah  |{  Obad.  1.  v.  ofObadiah 

21.  2.  a  grievous  v.  is  declared  unto  me 

22.  1.  the  burden  of  the  valley  of?).  .5. 

28.  7.  they  err  in  v.  they  stumble  in  judgment 

29.  7.  they  shall  be  as  a  dreaiu  of  a  night-w. 
11.  the  V.  is  become  as  a  book  that  is  sealed 

.Ter.  14.  14.  they  prophesy  unto  you  ff  false  v. 

23.  16.  Ihev  speak  a  v.  of  their  own  heart 
Lam.  2.  9.  her  prophets  find  no  v.  from  the  Lord 
F.iek.  7.  13.  >'.  is  touching  the  whole  multitude 

26.  then  shall  thev  seek  a  v.  of  the  prophet 

8.  4.  according  to  ther.that  Isaw,  11.24.  |  43.3. 
12.22.  days  are  pr(vloijgpd  and  every  ».  fnileth 

23.  say  to  them,  the  eff  ct  of  every  v.  is  at  hand 

24.  the."  shall  be  no  more  any  vain  v.  nor  flat- 

tering divination  within  the  house  of  Israel 

27.  the  V.  that  he  seeth  is  for  inanv  days  to  come 
13.  7.  have  ye  not  seen  n  vain  7\  and  spoken  7 

Van   2.  19.  was  revealed  to  llaniel  in  a  iiight-?j. 
7.2. 1  saw  in  my  ».  by  night,  the  four  winds  si  rove 

8.  1.  a  »i.  appeared  unto  me,  even  unto  me  Daniel 

13.  how  long  shall  beihe  p.concernin?  sacrifice? 

16.  Gabriel,  make  this  man  to  understand  the  v. 

17.  for  at  the  time  of  the  end  shall  be  the  tt. 
26.  shut  up  the  v.  \\  27. 1  was  astonished  at  the  v. 

9.  21.  whom  I  had  seen  in  the  ».  at  the  heirinning 
23.  consider  the  v.  ||  24.  and  to  seal  up  the  v. 

in.  1.  and  he  had  under-landing  of  the  ji. 
7.  I  alone  saw  the  v.  men  with  me,  saw  nott).  8. 

14.  for  yet  tlic  r.  i«  for  many  dnyg 


VIS 

Dan.  10. 16.  bye.  mysBrrowe  are  turned  upon  mo 
II.  14.  shall  e.xnlt  themselves  to  establish  the  t). 
.Mie.  3.  6.  night  to  you  that  ye  shall  not  have  a  o 
A'ijA.  1.  1.  the  book  of  tlie  v.  of  Nahum 
/fffift.2.2.  write  then,  and  make  it  plain  on  table? 
3.  for  the  v.  is  yet  for  an  appointed  time,  at  end 
Zech.l^.i.  prophets  he  Rshamed  everyone  of  his  c. 
Mat.  17.9.  charged,  saying,  tell  the  v.  to  no  man 
Luke  1.  22.  they  perceived  that  ho  had  seen  a  v. 
24.  23.  saying,  that  they  had  seen  a  v.  of  angelt 
Acts  10.  17.  while  Peter'duuhted  of  the  v.  19. 
11. '5.  in  a  trance  I  saw  a  v.  a  vessel  descend 
12.9.  wist  not  it  was  true,  hut  thought  he  saw  a  t». 
16.  9.  a  v.  appeared  to  Paul  in  ihenight,  18.  9. 
26.  19.  I  was  iu)t.disobc<lient  to  the  heavenly  v 
liev.  9.  17.  and  thus  I  saw  the  horses  in  the  v. 

In  a  VISION. 
Gen.  15.1.  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  Abram  in  art. 
^Hm.12.6. 1  will  make  myself  known  to  hi  nun  a  d. 
Ezct.l  1.24.  brought  mem  at),  by  the  Spirit  of  God 
Dan.  8. 2. 1  saw  in  a  v.  and  I  was  by  the  river  Ulai 
Acts  9.  10.  to  Ananias  said  the  Lord  in  a  v. 
12.  Saul  hath  seen  in  a  v.  a  man  named  Ananiaa 

10.  3.  Cornelius  saw  in  a  v.  an  angel  of  God 

VISIONS. 
Gen.  46.  2.  God  spake  to  Israel  in  v.  of  the  night 
2  Chron.  9.  29.  written  in  the  v.  of  Iddo  the  seer 
26.5.  Zechariah  had  understanding  in  p.  of  God 
.Tob  4.  13.  in  thoughts  from  the  v.  of  the  night 

7.  14.  then  thou  terrifcst  me  through  v. 

Kiek.  1.1.  heavens  opened,  and  Isaw  thec.ofGotl 

8.  3.  he  brought  me  in  the  t).  of  God  to  Jerusalem 
13.  16.  prophets  which  see  v.  of  peace  for  her 
40.  2.  in  V.  he  brought  me  to  the  land  of  Israel 

Dan.  1.  17.  Daniel  had  understanding  in  all  v. 
2.  28.  the  V.  of  thy  head  on  thy  bed,  are  these 

4.  5.  and  the  v.  of  my  head  troubled  me 

7.  1.  Daniel  had  v.  of  his  head  upon  his  bed 
7.  I  saw  in  the  night  v.  and  behold,  13. 
15.  and  the  v.  of  my  head  troubled  ms 
ITos.  12. 10.  I  have  midtipliedi).  I  used  similitudes 
.Toel  2. 28.  your  young  men  shall  see  v.  Acts  2. 17. 
2  Cor.  12.  1.  I  will  come  to  v.  and  revelations 

VISIT. 
God  visits  men  both  in  mercy  and  in  wrath.    Hi 
visited  Sarah  in  his  mercy,  and  gave  her  a  son, 
Gen.  21.  1.   He  visited  the  Israelites  in  Egypt, 
and  sent  Muses  to  deliver  them,  E.\od.  3.  16. 
He  visited   Hannah  the  mother  of   Samuel, 
and  gave  her  sons  and  daughters,  1  Sam.  2. 2], 
And  he  visited  and  redeemed  his  people  by  the 
coming  of  the  Messiah,  Luke  1.  68.  God  visit* 
also  in.  his  wrath  and  in  his  venge^anee.     He 
visits  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon  tho  chil- 
dren, to  the  third  and  fourth  generation,  Ezod. 
20.  5.  visiting,  that  is,  remembering,  inquiring 
into,  or  punishing.     He  threatens  to  visit  the 
iniquity  of  the  worshippers  of  the  golden  calf 
in   the  day  of  his  vengeance,  Exod.  32.  34. 
J^othing  is  more  frequent  in  the  language  of 
the  prophets,  tlian  tlie  verb  to  visit,  taken  in 
the  sense  of  punishing,  chastising,  and  reveng- 
ing.    To  visit  7.9  also  taken  for  paying  visiti 
of  civility,  friendship,  or  duty.     Moses  went 
to  visit  his  brethren.  Acts  7.  23.     And  Paul 
and  Barnabas  went  to  visit  the  churches  they 
had  planted,  Acts  15.  36. 
Vision  is  a  revelation  from  God,  which   among 
the  .Tews  were  of  four  sorts  ;  [1]  By  the  Holy 
Spirit  immediaieiy.  Acts  9.  10.     [2]  By  Vrirn 
and  Thummim.     [3]  By  a  voire  from  heaven 
spoken  by  an  angel.  Arts  10.  3.     [4]  By  pro- 
phecy, which  were  twofold,  either  in  dreams, 
or  when  awake,  in  a  trance,  or  ecstasy,  Ada 
10.3.  17.  I  12.9.  I  16.  9. 
Gen.  50.  24.  God  will  surely  r.  you,  and  bring 
you  out  of  this  land,  25.     F.iod.  13.  19. 
F.Tod.  32.  .34.  when  I  71. 1  will  v.  their  sin  on  them 
Lev.  IP.  25.  I  do  71.  tho  iniquity  thereof  upon  it 
.Tob  5.  24.  thou  sh.ilt  t'.  thy  habitation  and  not  sin 
7.  18.  that  thou  shouldesi  v.  him  every  morning 
Psal.  .59.  5.  O  Lord,  awake  to  v.  all  the  heathen 
PO.  14.  look  down  from  heaven  and  v.  this  vine 
89.  32.  then  will  I  v.  their  transgression  with  rods 
106.  4.  remeuiber  me,  O  v.  me  with  thy  sahvition 
I'o.  lO.t  12.  I  will  ?•.  upon  the  stout  heart  of  king 
93.  17.  the  Lord  will  v.  Tyre,  she  shall  turn 
24.  t21.  Lord  shall  v.  upon  the  host  of  hish  ones 
.Ter,  3.  16  neither  shall  they  7!.  the  ark  of  the  Lord 

5.  9.  shall  I  not  v.  for  thise  things?  29.  (  9.  9. 

6.  15.  at  time  I  71.  them,  they  shall  be  cast  down 
9.  t2.5.  I  w  II  7).  upon  all  that  are  circurneisod 

11.  t22.  I  will  7-.  upon  the  nifn  of  .Anatholh 
13.t21.  wilt  thou  say  when  he  shnll  ♦).  on  tht- 

14.  10.  will  remember  iuinnitv  and  v.  their  sins 

15.  15.  O  Lord,  thou  knowrst,  remember  and  » 
23,  2.  I  will  V.  on  yon  the  evil  of  your  doings      . 

t34.  I  will  r.  upon  that  man  and  his  house 
95. +  12.  that  I  will  7'.  upon  the  kins  of  Babylon 
27.  22.  and  tliere  shall  they  be  till  I  v.  them" 


vol 

Jer3S.  10. 1  will  p  jou  and  perform  my  good  word 
32.  5.  and  llu.-re  shall  lie  bu  till  I  v.  Iiiia 
49.8.  lliu  time  I  will  c.  Eaau  ||  5U.  31.  i\  ISabylun 
J^am.  4.  2-2.  he  will  v.  tliine  iiiuiuity,  O  Kiioiu 
Hos.  2.  13.  I  will  V.  un  htr  the  days  of  Huuliin 
8.  13.  reinomher,  now  will  he  v.  their  siii.s,  !).  U. 
^mos  3.  14.  1  will  also  jj.  the  altars  of  Beth-el 
Zepli.  2.  7.  Lord  .-ilmll  v.  and  turn  their  captivity 
y.fck.W.  IC.  M  ho  .shall  not  c.  those  that  be  cut  off 
J)cU  7.  i'l.  it  cuine  into  his  heari  to  v.  his  brethren 
15.  14.  hatli  declared  how  God  did  v.  the  (icntilcs 
3G.  let  us  go  again  and  v.  our  brelliren  in  every 
Jan.  1. 'i7.  islhis,  to  ».  the  laiherlcas  and  widows 

VISITATION. 
A*um.l6.29.  if  they  be  visited  after  the  v.  of  all  men 
Job  10.  1'2.  thy  V.  hatli  preserved  my  spirit 
Isa.  10.  3.  what  will  ye  do  in  the  day  oft;.  ? 
Jer.  8.  li.  in  time  of  their  v.  shall  be  cast  down 
lU.  13.  in  the  time  of  v.  they  shall  perish,  51.  18. 
11.  23.  I  will  bring  evil  on  the  menof  Anatholh, 
even  in  the  year  of  their  v.  23.  12.  |  48.  44. 
46.  21.  the  lime  of  their  c.  was  come,  50.  27. 
50.  t21.  go  up  against  the  inhabitants  of  >;. 
Ho3. 9. 7.  the  days  of  u.  are  come,  Israel  shall  know 
JHic.  7.  4.  thy  v.  cometh,  now  shall  be  perplexity 
I.tLkc  19.  44.  thou  knowest  not  the  time  of  thy  v. 
\  Pet.  2.  12.  they  may  glorify  God  in  the  day  of  c. 

VISITED. 
Gen.  21.  1.  and  the  Lord  c.  Sarah  as  he  had  said 
Ezod.  3.  Ifi.  saying,  1  have  surely  v.  you 
4.31.  they  heard  that  the  Lord  had  v.  Israel 
Jfum.  It).  29.  if  ihe.v  be  v.  after  visitation  of  all  men 
Judg.  15.  1.  that  Samson  d.  his  wife  with  a  kid 
AufAl.6.  she  heard  how  the  Lord  had  v.  his  people 
1  Sam.  2  21.  the  Lord  v.  Hannah, she  conceived 
Job  35. 15.  now  it  is  not  so,  he  hath  v.  in  his  anger 
Psal.  17.  3.  Ihou  hast  v.  me,  thou  hast  tried  nie 
Pron.  19.  23.  he  shall  not  be  v.  with  evil 
Isa.  24.  22.  after  many  days  shall  they  be  v. 
2ti.  14.  therefore  hast  thou  v.  and  destroyed  them 
16.  Lord,  in  trouble  have  they  v.  thee 
29.  6.  thou  shah  be  v.  of  the  Lord  with  thunder 
Jrr.  6.  6.  Jerusalem  is  the  city  to  be  v.  oppression 
23.  2.  ye  scattered  rny  flock  and  have  not  v.  them 
Kiek.  38. 8.  after  many  days  ihou  shalt  be  v. 
Zech.  10.  3.  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  v.  his  Hock 
JUat.  25.  36. 1  was  sick,  ye  b.  me  |{  43.  ye  v.  me  not 
i^i/ie  1.  68.  he  hath  v.  and  redeemed  his  people 

78.  the  day-spring  from  on  high  hath  v.  us 
7.  16.  saying,  that  God  hath  v.  his  people 

VISITEST. 
Psal.  8. 4.  son  of  man  that  thou  v.  him,  fieb.  2.  6. 
65.  9.  thou  B.the  earth  and  waterest  it,  enrichest 

VISITETH. 
Job  31. 14.  when  he  v.  what  shall  I  answer  him? 

VISITING. 

Exod.  20.  5.  V.  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers  tipoB  the 

children,  34.  7.  JVum.  14.  18.  JJeut.  5.  9. 

VOCATION. 

Eph.4.  1.  I  bescgch  Hint  ye  walk  worthy  of  then. 

VOICE. 
By  this  word  is  not  only  undrrstood  the  voice  of 
a  man  or  beast,  but  all  other  sorts  of  soui:ds, 
noises,  or  cries  :  Jlnd  even  thunder  has  often 
the  name  of  the  voice  of  God  given  to  it. 
Pharaoh  brffged  of  .Muses  to  entreat  the  J.ord 
that  there  might  ho  no  more  mighty  thundcr- 
ings,  in  Hebrew,  voices  of  God,  Kzod.  9.  28. 
Klihu  says,  Ifear  attentively  the  noise  of  his 
voice.  Mnd  in  I'sal.  29.  the  voice  of  the 
Lord  is  frequently  put  fur  thunder.  To  hear 
or  to  hearken  to  any  one's  voice,  is  to  obey 
him.  Exod.  15.  26,  If  thou  wilt  diligently 
hearken  to  the  voire  of  the  Loid  thy  God,  I 
will  put  none  of  these  diseases  upon  thee, 
which  I  have  brought  upon  the  Egyptians. 
Our  Saviour  says,  that  his  sheep  hear  his 
voice,  and  follow  him;  that  is,  they  obey  him, 
they  depend  vpon  his  ministry,  and  imitate  his 
riample,  John  10.  27.  The  Spouse  says. 
Cant.  2.  ri,  The  voice  of  my  beloved  ;  /  hear 
tJie  voice  of  Christ,  in  the  ministry  of  the  word 
and  motions  of  his  Spirit. 
To  change  the  voic.  Gal.  4.  20,  I  dcsirn  lo 
change  my  voire.  The  apostle  was  forced  to 
write  somewhat  roui;hty  and  sharjily,  as  in 
chnp.  3.  ver.  1.  A'lw  he  wishes  to  he  present 
leith  the  ftalntions,  and  to  order  matters  so, 
that  if  possible,  he  vi>i;ht  hare  occasion  to  re- 
joice with  them  and  comfort  them,  instead  of 
complaining  of  them  ami  reproving  them. 
The  ilaiighter  of  the  voice,  rolled  in  Hebrew, 
Bath  kol,  was,  as  the  Jewish  writers  soy,  a 
preternatural  way  in  which  f/od  diseorered 
his  willto  them,  after  the  word  of  jiriiiiheey  had 
ceased  in  Israel.  The  generalilu  of  their  tra- 
ditions, and  the  customs  of  their  nation,  are 
Jounded  on  this  Ilnlhkol.  They  pretend  that 
fjod  revealed  them  to  their  elders,  not  by  any 
articulate pruyhecy, hut  by  some  secret  inspira- 
603 


vol 

Hon,  or  by  tome  tradition,  which  they  call  the 
daughter  of  the  voice.  They  pretend,  that  the 
daughter  of  the  voice,  is  a  voice /iohi  heaven, 
heard  m  an  articulate  manner,  much  after  the 
same  way  as  the  voice  which  called  young  Sa- 
muel,when  (iod  revealed  to  him  what  icon  to  bc- 
fal  the  high-priest  Eli  and  his  family:  God  then 
called  him  three  times  with  an  articulate  voice; 
and  Samuel  replied  in  the  same  manner  as  he 
would  have  answered  a  man,  not  knowing  as 
yet  how  to  distinguish  the  voice  of  (iod,  1  Sam. 
3.  4,  5,  &.C.  Or,  The  daughter  of  the  voice,  re- 
sembles that  which  was  uttered  from  the  sanc- 
tuary, when  the  L,ord  spake  to  Jiloses,  or  an- 
swered the  high-priest,  who  consulted  him  by 
the  Uriin  and  Thuinmim.  These  two  sorts  of 
voices  were,  as  one  may  say,  the  mother  of  that 
other  voice  which  succeeded  them,  and  was 
called  Bath-kol,  daughtcr-ooicc,  or  daughter  of 
the  voice,  because  it  was,  as  it  were,  the  daugh- 
ter of  this  first  voice. 

The  Bath-kol,  asDr.  I'rideaux shews,  was  afan- 
tastical  way  of  divination,  invented  by  the 
.lews,  like  the  Sortes  Virgiliana;  among  the 
heathens.  For  as  with  them  the  wordisjirst  dipt 
at  in  the  book  of  that  poet,  was  the  oraelc 
whereby  they  prognosticated  those  future 
events  which  they  desired  to  be  informed  of :  so 
with  the  ./ews,  when  they  appealed  to  liath-kul, 
the  neil  words  which  they  should  hear  from 
any  one's  mouth  icere  the  same  oracle  to  them. 
It  is  said  in  the  Talmud,  that  two  Habbins, 
desirous  of  visiting  their  friend  Rabbi  Samu- 
el, Doctor  of  Babylon,  said  one  to  another,  let 
vs follow  the  direction  of  Bath-kol;  as  they 
were  passing  by  a  school,  they  heard  a  young 
lad  reading  this  passage  of  the  first  book  of 
Sa7nitel,  chap.  25.  ver.  1,  And  Samuel  died. 
from  thence  they  concluded  that  Sainuel  was 
dead:  The  event  justified  what  they  had  prog- 
nosticated, for  they  found  that  at  that  time 
liabbi  Samuel  of  Babylon  had  departed  this 
life.  These  casual  and  odd  oracles  were 
esteemed  as  voices  of  God's  appointment. 

Gen.  4.  10.  the  v.  of  thy  brother's  blood  crielh 
27.22.the  v.  is  Jacob's  u.  but  the  bunds  are  Esau's 
29.  11.  and  Jaco'j  lifted  uphisr.  and  wept 

39.  15.  when  he  heard  that  I  lifted  up  my  v. 
F.xod.  4.8.  they  will  believe  the  v.ofthe  latter  sign 

19.  19.  Moses  spake,  God  answered  him  by  a  v. 

23.  21.  beware  of  him,  obey  his  v.  provoke  not 

24.  3.  and  all  the  people  answered  with  one  ». 
32.  18.  it  is  not  the  v.  of  them  that  shout 

f.ev.  5.  1.  if  a  soul  hear  the  v.  of  swearing 
JVum.  14.  3.  the  congregation  lifted  up  their  r. 
Veut.  4.  30.  if  thou  shalt  be  obedient  to  his  v. 
8.  20.  because  ye  would  not  be  obedient  to  his  v. 
./"sA.  6.  10.  nor  make  any  noise  with  your  v. 
Judg.  18.  3.  they  knew  the  v.  of  the  Levite 

1  Sdm.  24.  16.  is  this  thy  B.mvBnn  David?  26.  17. 

2  Sam.  22.  14.  and  the  Most  High  uttered  his  v. 

i  Kings  18.26.  was  nor.  nor  any  that  answered,  29. 
t  27.  at  noon  Elijah  said,  cry  wiih  a  great  v. 
19.  12.  and  after  the  fire  a  still  small  v. 
2  icings  4.  31.  there  was  neither  v.  nor  hearing 
7.  10.  there  was  no  v.  of  man,  but  horses  tied 
19.  22.   against  whom  hast  thou   e.valled  thy  r. 
and  lifted  up  thine  eyes  on  high?  Jsa.  37.  23. 
1  Chron,  15.  16.  by  lifting  up  the  v.  with  joy 
'iChron.  24.  1 9.  made  av.  thro'  Judali  and  jeius. 
Ezra  1.  t  1.  Cyrus  caused  a  v.  to  pass  through- 
out all  his  kingdom 
.Tob  2.  12.  Job's  friciitls  lifted  up  their  v.  and  wept 
3.  7.  night  be  solitary,  let  no  joyful  v.  come  there 

29.  t  10.  the  v.  of  the  nobles  was  hid 

30.  31.  my  organ  into  the  v.  of  them  that  weep 
37.  4.  a  ?'.  roarclh,  he  thundereth  with  the  v. 

5.  God  thundereth  marvellously  with  his  v. 

40.  9.  or  canst  thou  Ihunder  with   a  v.  like  him? 
Psal.  18.  13.  and  the  Highest  gave  his  v. 

26.  7.  I  may  publish  with  the  v.  of  thanksgiving 
31   22.  llioiiheardost  the  v.  of  my  supplJcntionK 
42.  4.  I  went  lo  house  of  God  with  the  v.  of  joy 
44.  16.  for  the  v.  iifbirn  that  reproaclieth 

46.  6.  he  uttered  his  v.  the  earth  melted 

47.  1.  slioiii  unto  God  with  the  v.  oflriumph 
66.  J9.  he  halh  attended  to  the  v.  of  my  prayer 
68.  33.  he  seiidi'lli  out  his  r.  and  that  a  mighty  r. 
74.  2.3.  forget  not  the  r.  of  thine  enemies 

77.  1.  I  cried  unto  the  Lord  with  my  v.  142.  1. 

18.  the  t).  ipf  lliy  thunder  wat  in  heaven 
P<).  6.  nitend  to  the  r.  of  my  supplications 
93.  3.  f)  Lonl,  the  floods  have  lifted  up  ihcir  v. 
98.  5.  sing  unto  the  Lord  with  the  v.  of  a  psalm 

102.  5.  by  reason  of  the  v.  of  mv  groaning 

103.  20,  hearkening  lo  the  ?■.  ofliiii  word 
101.7.  at  i>.  of  thy  thunder  ihey  hiialed  away 
118. 15.  V.  of  rejoicing  in  Inbernaclos  of  righleoui 
1 II.  1.  sivo  par  lo  my  v.  when  I  cry  unio  Iheo 

Prov.  1.  20.  she  utlercth  liur  v.  in  tlicstroeli 


vol 

Prov.2. 3.  if  thou  liftest  up  thy  c.for  underitandinf 
.0. 13.  1  have  not  obeyed  the  t*.  of  my  teacher* 
8.  1.  doth  not  understanding  put  lijrth  her  v. 

4.  to  you,  O  men,  1  call,  my  v.  is  to  sons  of  mer 
26.  t  25.  when  he  iiiuketh  his  v.  gracious 

Eccl.5.3.a  fool's  e.is  knosvn  by  nuiltiiude  of  vorrt* 
6.  wherefore  should  God  be  angry  at  thy  v.  7 
10.  20.  for  a  birdofthe  air  shall  carry  the  r. 

12.  4.  he  shall  rise  up  at  the  v.  of  the  bird 
C'aHt.2. 8.  the  ti.ofmy  beloved,  behold,  he  Cometh 

12.  the  ti.  ol  the  turtle  is  heard  in  our  land 

5.  2.  it  is  the  V.  of  my  beloved  that  knocketh 
Isa.  6.  4.  posts  moved  at  the  v.  of  liiiii  that  cried 

13.  2.  exalt  the  v.  unto  them,  shake  the  hand 

29.  4.  thy  v.  be  as  one  that  hath  a  familiar  spirit 

30.  19.  be  gracious  to  Ihee  ai  the  v.  of  thy  cry 

31.  4.  the  lion  will  not  be  afraid  of  their  v. 

40.  3.  the  V.  of  liiiii  that  crieth  in  the  wilderness, 
.Wat.  3.3.  Mark  1.  3.  J.uke  3.  4. 
6.  v.  said,  cry  ||  48.  20.  with  the  r.  of  singing 

50.  10.  that  obeyelli  the  v.  of  his  servant 

51.  3.  joy,  tliank.sgiving,  and  the  v.  of  melody 

52.  8.  with  the  v.  together  shall  they  sing 

65.  19.  I  will  joy  in  my  people,  the  v.  of  weeping 
shall  be  iioSnore  heard  in  her,-  nor  i;.  of  cryin" 
60.  6.  a  V.  of  noise,  a  v.  from  teiii|ile,  a  v.  of  Lord 
Jer.  2.  t  15.  the  young  lions  gave  out  their  f. 
4.  15.  a  V.  declareth  from  Dan  and  pubiisheth 
16.  give  out  their  v.  against  the  cities  of  Judah 

6.  23.  their  v.  roareth  like  the  sea,  50.  42. 

7. 34. thee,  ofinirih,  c.  of  gladness,  r.of  the  bride- 
groom, f.  ofbride,  16.  9.  |2.'».10.  |  33.  11. 
8.  19.  V.  of  the  cry  of  the  daugluer  of  my  people 
10. 13.  when  he  utiercih  his  v.  there  is  a  niulti(iide 
of  waters  in  the  heaveiis,SI.  16. 
.  25.  36.  a  V.  of  the  cry  df  shepherds  and  a  howling 
30.  19.  and  the  v.  of  them  that  make  merry 
3i.  15.  a  V.  was  heard  in  Rainuh,  lameniation 

16.  saith  the  Lord,  refrain  thy  v.  from  weeping 
46.  22.  ilie  u.  thereof  shad  go  like  a  serpent 
48.3.  a  v.  of  crying  shall  be  from  Horonaim 
50.  28.  the  i'.  ol  them  that  floe  and  escape 
51.55.  Lord  halh  destroyed  outof  lior  the  greate 
Ezek.  1.  24.  I  heard  as  the  c.  of  the  .Almighly 
10.5.  as  the  I',  of  Almighty  God  wheiihespeaketh 

23.  42.  and  a  7^of  a  niulliliide  bring  al  ease 
33.32.  a  lovely  song  of  one  that  hatha  pleasant  v. 
43.2.  and  his  v.  was  like  the  noi.se  of  many  waters, 

and  the  earth  shintd  with  his  glory, 
liev.  1.  15. 
Dan.  4.  31.  there  fell  a  v.  from  heaven,  saying 
6.  20.  he'cried  with  a  himeiUablo  r.  to  I);uiiel 
10.  6.  V.  of  his  words  like  thee,  of  a  multitude 
Joel'i.  11.  Lord  shall  utier  his  v.  before  his  army 
3.  16.  shall  uller  his  r. from  Jerusalem,. '^moj  1.2. 
.lunah  2.  9.  I  will  sacrifice  with  r.  of  thanksgiving 
A'uA.  2.  7.  shall  lead  her  as  with  the  r.  of  doves 
.Wa(.3.17.nu.from  heavcn,this  is  my  btlovedSoiiia 
whom  I  am  well  pleased,  J\lark  1.  lI./,uA-e3.22. 
17. 5. a  I'  out  of  the  cloud, this  is  my  beloved  Son  In 
whom  I  am  well  p\eastd,Mark  i).1.Luke  9. 
35,  36. 
I,uke\.  44.  as  soon  nav.  of  thy  salutation  sounded 
Joh7i  1.  23.  the  I',  ofone  crying  in  the  wilderness 
3.  29.  rejoiceih  because  of  the  bridegroom's  v. 
10.  4.  the  sheep  follow  him,  lor  they  know  his  r. 

5.  for  they  know  not  the  i'.  of  .Hrangers 

12.  28.  then  came  a  v.  saying,  I  hove  glorified  it 
30.  this  V.  came  not  because  of  me,  bui  for  you 

18.  37.  he  that  is  of  the  truth  heareth  my  v. 
.Sets  9.  7.  hearing  a  v.  but  seeing  no  man 

10.  13.  came  a  )•.  saying,  rise,  Peter,  kill  and  eat 
15.  and  the  f.S|iake  unto  him  again,  11.  9. 

12.  14.  when  she  knew  Peter's  r.  she  opened  not 
22.  it  is  the?',  of  a  god,  and  not  of  a  man 

19.  .'14.  all  with  one  r.  cried,  Great  is  Diana 

24.  21.  except  il  ho  for  this  one  r.  that  I  cried 
2K.  10.  put  lo  death,  I  gave  mvo.  against  them 

1  Cor.  14.  11.  if  I  know  not  the'mcunliig  of  llietj. 

]^.  thai  by  my  v.  1  might  leach  others  also 
Gal.  4.  20.  I  deuire  now  In  change  tny  r. 

1  '/"A*-*.".  4. 16. Lord  descend  with  r.of  the  archangel 
//eb.  12.26.  whose  v.  then  shook  thj-ciirlli 

2  Pet.].  17.  there  came  n  v.  frmiiihe  excellent  glory 
2.  16.  the  dumb  0"s  speaking  willi  man's  v. 

Fev.  1.  12. 1  turned  to  see  the  V.  Ihal  spaSie 
16.  17.  there  cuiiie  a  great  >'.  f  ivinj,  it  is  done 
VOICE  joined  with  hear. 

Gen.  4.  23.  hear  my  r.  ye  wives  of  Liimech 

Deut.  4.  33.  did  ever  peopleArnr  r.  ofGod  and  live 

36.  out  of  heaven  he  mnde  thee  l»  Ariir  his  p. 
S.a.'S.  if  we  hear  ihe  v.  of  God,  we  shall  die 
33.7.  h-said,A'(jr  Lord  the  1.  of  Judah 

2  Sam.  19.  .35.  en»  I  hear  the  r.  of  .«inging-men  ? 
22.  7.  and  ho  did  hear  my  v.  out  of  his  Icinple 

.fob  3.  18.  they  hear  not  ilie  r   of  iho  oppressor 
37.  2.  hear  altenlively  ihe  noise  of  his  v. 

Psal.  5.  3.  mv  r.  Hhnlt  ihnii  hear  in  llie  rrorn'of 

27.7.A<nr,  6  Lord,  win  n  I  crv  with  mv  e.  2S.  2 

|04. 1.  1119.149.  I  130.  2.  1  UO.  8 


VOL 

Psal.y>.2.  hear  tiif,  liccamtuf  the  c.  of  the  enemy 

17.  1  will  cry  uloiiil  ttiiJ  lie  ehall  Aiur  my  v. 
96.7.  lu'day  il  yu  will  /tear  his  ii.liurduii  nut  your 
liourts  ddiii  lliu  w'ilderiiciis,  Jitb.'.i.  7, 15. 
I  4.  7. 
Cant.  2.  K.  let  ine  kear  tliy  v.  for  swecl  ia  thy  r. 
/na.  33.  H.  Aear  >iiy  ti.  ye  cureless  duughtera 
Jer.  n.  10.  nor  cun  men  /tear  the  :;.  of  the  cattle 
JUat.  I'i.  I'J.  ncitlier  gliull  iiny  man  hear  his  v. 
John  5.  '25.  liie  dead  hear  v.  of  Son  of  God,  2d 

lU.  'i.  porter  opens,  and  sheep  hear  his  v.  10,  27. 
^ct«2'2.  H.and  hhouldest/ieur  tlie  v.  uf  his  mouth 
Hee-  S  20.  if  any  niaii  hear  my  v.  and  open  door 
-Sec  Hkaku. 
VOICE  witli  hearken,  hearkened. 
Gfn.3.17.  because  h^M  hearkened  ton.  of  thy  wife 
16.  2.  and  Abrum  hearkened  to  lire  v.  of  Sara) 
21.  12.  in  all  Surah  hath  said  hearken  to  her  v. 
Exod.3.  18.  and  lliey  sliall  hearken  to  thy  v. 
4.  1.  behold,  they  will  not  hearken  unto  my  v. 

8.  nor  hearken  to  the  v.  of  the  first  sign 

9.  if  they  will  not  hearken  to  thy  v.  shall  take 
15.  26.  if  diligently  AcaWfcn  to  the  v.  of  the  Lord 

18.  ly.  hearken  to  my  v.  I  will  give  thee  counsel 
24.  ami  Moses  hearkened  to  the  v.  of  Jelhro 

JVum.  14.  22  they  have  tempted  me  ten  times  and 
not  hearkened  to  ray  o.  Dcut.  9.  23. 
I  28.  45. 

21.  3.  the  Lord  hearkened  \o  the  v.  of  Israel 
Lfcut.  1. 45.  the  Lord  would  not  hearken  to  yourt). 

13.  J8.  when  ihou  shall  hearken  to  the  u.  of  Lord 

35.  5.  only  if  thou  carefully  hearken  to  the  t).of  the 

'Lord  thy  God,  20. 17.  |  28.  1,  2.  [  30.  10. 

28.  15.  if  thou  wilt  not  hearken  to  the  v.  of  Lord 

Josh.  10. 14.  llieLoid  AearAcxtfito  the  v.  of  a  man 

Jadg.i.itt.  this  people  have  mtlhearkcned  to  my  v. 

13.  y.  and  God  hearkened  to  ihe  v.  of  Manoaii 

20.13.  Benjamin  would  woihcarkcn  to  I'.of  Israel 

lSani.2. 25.  they  hearkened  not  to  v.  of  their  father 

y.  7.  hearken  lo  the  v.  of  the  people,  9.  22. 

12.  1.  I  have  hearkened  lo  your  o.  in  all  ye  said 

19.  6.  Saul  hearkened  lo  the  v.  of  Jonathan 

25. 35.  go  in  peace,  see,  1  have  hearkened  to  thy  v. 
28.  22.  hearken  thou  to  the  v.  of  thy  handmaid 
2  >>am.  12.  18.  he  wuufil  not  hearken  to  our  v. 

13.  14.  howbeit,  he  would  not  hearken  to  her  v. 

1  Kings  20.  25.  Ben-hadad  hearkened  to  their  v. 

2  Kings  10.  tj.  if  ye  will  hearken  to  my  v. 

Job  9.  10.  not  believe  he  had  hearkened  lo  my  v. 

34.  10.  hearken  to  ilie  v.  of  my  words 
Pial.  5.  2.  hearken  to  the  v.  of  iny  cry,  my  King 
58.  5.  will  not  hearken  to  the  v.  of  charmers 
81.  II.  my  people  would  not  hearken  to  my  v. 
Cant.  8.  13.  the  companions  hearken  to  thy  v. 
Jer.  J8.  19.  hearken  to  v.  of  lliem  that  contend 
See  Lift,  Lord,  Loud,  Obey,  Obeyed. 
VOICES. 
Exod.  9.  t  28.  that  there  be  no  more  v.  of  God 
I,uke  17.  13.  the  ten  lepers  lifted  up  their  v. 
23.23.they  were  instant  with  loud  u.  that  he  might 
be  crucified,  the  c.  of  iheni  and  priests 
prevailed 
•^cts  13.27. beci|use  knew  not  the  v.  of  the  prophets 

22.  22.  they  lift  up  their  v.  and  said,  away  with 
1  Cor.  14.  10.  there  are  so  many  v.  in  the  world 
Aet'.  4.  5.  out  of  the  throne  proceeded  v.  16.  18. 

8.  5.  angel  castcenscr  into  earth  and  there  wereu. 
13.  V  -e,  by  reason  of  the  other  ti.  of  the  trumpet 

U'.  ''   the  seven  thunders  uttered  their  v.  4. 

11.  15.  and  there  were  great  v.  in  heaven 
19.  the  temple  was  opened,  and  there  were  v. 
VOID. 
Oen.  1.  2.  the  earth  was  wnhout  form  and  v. 
^um.  30.  12.  but  if  her  husband  made  theme.  15. 
Ueut.  32.  28.  they  are  a  people  «.  of  counsel 
1  Kings  22. 10.  kings  sal  in  a  v.  place,  2  Chr.  18. 9. 
•WA.  5.  t  13.  even  thus  be  ye  shaken  out  and  ti. 
Job  1.5.  t  4.  makest  v.  fear  and  restraint'th  prayer 
f^al.  89.  39.  made  v.  the  oovt-nant  of  I  hy  servant 

307.  t  40.  caui'elh  them  to  wander  in  a  v.  place 

119.  120.  for  they  have  made  o.  thy  law 
Prov.  1 1.  12. »).  of  wisdom,  despiseth  his  neighbour 

15.  t  21.  lolly  is  joy  to  him  that  is  v.  of  heart 
Isa.  55.  1 1.  my  word  shall  not  return  lo  me  v. 

*".  4.  2.T.  the  earth  was  williout  form  and  v. 

^.  7.  I  will  m.ike  v.  the  counsel  of  Judah 
\ah.  2.  10.  Nineveh  is  empty,  v.  and  waste 
Hcts  24.  If),  to  have  a  conscience  v.  of  ofTcnco 
Rom.  1. 1  2^.  giive  them  over  to  a  mind  o.  ofjndgm. 

3.  31.  do  we  then  maker,  the  law  through  faith? 

4.  14.  if  they  of  the  law  be  heiis,  faith  is  made?). 
1  Cor.  9.  15.  lest  any  should  make  my  glorying  v. 
Tit.  1.  t  16.  lo  every  good  work  v.  of  judgment 

See  Undbrstanpino. 

VOLUMK. 

PsaL  40.  7.  then  Raid  I,  lo  I  come,  in  the  v.  of  the 

book  it  is  wiitien  nf  me,  Heb.  10.  7. 

VOLUXT.'VRV. 

L.ev.  1.  3.  he  shall  offer  it  of  his  own  v.  will 

7.  16.  a  11  oflering  shall  be  eaten  the  lame  day 

6C3 


VOW 

Ezek.iG.  12.  princes  shall  prepare  a  v.  burnt-offer. 
Cul.  2. 18.  in  a  v.  humility  and  worshipping  angels 

VOLUNTAIULY. 
Ezck.  46.  12.  prepare  oHerings  v.  to  the  Lord 

VOMIT. 
Job  20.  15.  he  swallowed  riches  and  shall  v.  them 
Proo.  33.  8.  the  morsel  eaten  thou  shall  v.  up 
25.  10.  lest  thoQ  be  tilled  with  honey  and  v.  it 

VOMIT. 
Prov.  26.  11.  as  the  dog  returneth  to  his  v.  bo  a  fool 
Jsa.  19.  14.  as  a  drunken  man  stuggereth  in  his  o. 
28.  8.  for  all  tables  are  full  of  v.  and  lilthmess 
Jer.  48.26.  Moab  also  shall  wallow  in  his  v. 
2  Pet.  2.  22.  the  dog  is  turned  to  his  own  o.  again 

VOMITED. 
Jonah  2.  10.  the  6sh  v.  out  Jonah  on  dry  land 

VOMITETH. 
Lev.  18.  25.  theland  v.  out  her  iuhabitanla 

VOW 
Is  a  promise  made  to  God,  of  doing  some  good 
thing  hereof ter.  The  use  of  vows  is  observable 
in  many  places  of  scripture.  H'hen  .lacob  went 
into  Mesopotamia  he  vowed  to  God  the  tenth  of 
his  estate,  and  promised  to  offer  it  at  Bethel 
lo  the  honour  and  service  of  (rod,  Gen.  28.  20 
22.  There  are  several  laws  for  the  ?  Kulatiou 
and  due  execution  of  vows.  A  man  tight  de 
Vote  himself,  or  his  children,  to  .  W  Lord. 
Hiamuel  was  vowed  and  consecrated  fe.^  \e  ser- 
vice of  the  Lord,  and  was  offered  V  um,  to 
serve  in  the  tabernacle,  1  Sam.  1.  22,  IS.  If  a 
man  or  woman  vowed  themselves,  or  their 
children  to  the  Lord,  they  were  obliged  to  ad- 
here strictly  to  his  service,  according  to  the 
conditions  of  the  vow  ;  if  not,  they  were  to  be 
redeemed.  The  price  for  redeeming  persons  of 
such  and  such  an  age  is  particularly  limited, 
Lev.  27.  2, 3,  &.C.  Only  if  the  person  was  poor, 
and  could  not  procure  the  sum  limited,  the 
priest  imposed  a  ransom  upon  him  according 
lo  his  abilities. 
If  any  one  had  vowed  an  animal  that  was  clean, 
he  had  not  the  liberty  of  redeeming  it,  or  of 
exchanging  it,  but  was  obliged  to  sacrifice  it  to 
the  Lord,  or  give  it  to  the  priest,  according 
to  the  manner  of  his  vow.  If  it  was  an  un- 
clean animal,  and  such  as  jcas  not  allowed  to 
be  sacrificed,  the  priest  made  valuation  of  it; 
and  if  the  proprietor  would  redeem  it,  he  added 
a  fifth  part  lo  the  value,  by  way  of  forfeit. 
They  did  the  same  in  proportion,  when  the 
thing  vowed  was  a  house  or  afield.  See  Lev. 
27.  9,  10,  &.C.  They  could  not  devote  the  first- 
lings of  beasts,  because  of  their  own  nature 
they  belonged  to  the  l^ord.  Lev.  27. 26.  IVhat- 
soever  was  solemnly  devoted  to  the  Lord  could 
not  be  redeemed,  of  whatever  nature  or  quality 
it  was,  Lev.  27.  28.  Concerning  the  vows  of 
the  Nazarites,  See  Nazarite. 
The  vows  and  promises  of  children  were  void, 
except  they  were  ratified,  either  by  t/te  ex- 
press, or  tacit  consent  of  their  parents.  Jind 
it  teas  the  same  with  the  vows  of  married 
women  ;  they  were  of  no  validity,  except  they 
were  confirmed  by  the  express,  or  tacit  consent 
of  their  husbands,  Num.  30.  1,  2,  3,  &c. 
Under  the  J^ew  Testament,  avow  is  either  gene- 
ral to  all  Christians,  as  that  which  is  made  at 
our  baptism;  or  particular  and  special,  as  when 
we  bind  ourselves  to  a  greater  endeavour,  to 
leave  some  sin,  or  perform  some  duty.  Jl  vow, 
OS  one  observes, must  bemade  deliberately  and 
devoutly,  for  a  sudden  pass  ion  makes  nut  a\ow\ 
and  we  ought  to  vow  nothing  but  what  is  in 
our  power  to  perform.  Some  vows  are  of  evil 
things  to  anevilend ;  such  vows  oughtneilhcr 
to  be  made  nor  kept ;  of  this  kind  was  the  vow 
orcuise  which  the. lews  bound  themselves  under, 
who  conspired  to  murder  Paul,  Acts  2.'^.  12. 
Some  vows  are  of  good  things  in  an  evil  )nnn- 
ner,  such  may  be  made,  and  ought  to  be  kept 
in  respect  of  the  matter,  but  not  in  respect  of 
the  end  ;  thus,  we  may  vow  to  give  alm.i,  but 
not  to  be  seen  of  men.  Other  vows  are  of 
good  things  in  a  good  manner  ;  and  such  may 
be  made,  and  ought  to  be  performed.  St.  Paul 
made  a  vow  either  of  JVazarilrship,  or  by  way 
of  gratitude  for  some  particular  mercy.  Acts 
18.  18.  But  commentators  are  not  agreed 
whether  this  be  spoken  of  Paul,  or  of  Aquila, 
who  is  mentioned  in  the  same  verse. 
The  performance  of  solemn  vows  is  strictly  en- 
joined us  in  scripture.  Eccl.  5.  4,  When  thou 
vowest  a  vow  unio  God,  defer  not  lo  pay  it; 
Perform  it  while  the  sense  of  thy  obligation  is 
fresh  and  strong  upon  thre,  lest  either  thou 
seem  to  repent  of  thy  promises,  or  lest  delays 
endin  denials  and  resolutions  of  non-perform- 
ance. Solomon  adds,  For  the  Lord  hath  no 
pleasure  in  fools ;  that  m,  t'n  hypocritical  and 


VbL 

perfidious  persons,  who,  when  they  are  rn  du 
Irvss,  make  liberal  vows,  and  when  the  danger 
is  past,  neglect  and  break  Ihim,  yindso  discover 
the  highest  fully,  in  thinking  to  m^ck  and  de- 
ceive the  Jill-seeing  and  .ilmighty  God.  Jtloses 
speaks  almost  in  the  same  words.  Ueut.  23.  2) . 
When  thou  shall  tow  a  vow  unto  the  Lord  my 
God,  thou  shall  not  slack  lo  pay  it;  for  'lie 
Lord  will  st;rely  require  it  of  thee.  The 
Psalmist  in  several  places  declares  that  l)«> 
would  pay  his  vows  to  the  Lord,  Psal.  22.  25 
I  60.  13. 

Gen.  28.  20.  Jacob  vowed  a  v.  saying,  31.  13. 

J^ev.  7.  16.  if  the  sacrifice  he  a  v.  22.  18,  21. 

22.  23.  but  for  a  v.  it  shall  not  be  accepted 
27.  2.  when  a  man  shall  mt.ke  a  singular  v. 

J^''um.  6.  2.  when  either  man  or  woman  shall  se- 
parate themselves  lo  vow  a  «.  of  a  Nazarite 
5.  the  days  of  the  v.  ||  21.  according  to  the  v. 
15.  3.  or  a  sacrifice  in  performing  a  c.  8. 
21.  2.  Israel  vowed  a  v.  to  the  Lord,  and  said 
30.  2.  if  a  man  vow  a  v.  \\  3.  if  a  woman  vow  a  v. 

4.  and  her  father  hear  her  v.  and  hold  his  peace 

9.  every  v.  of  a  widow  shall  stand  against  her 

13.  every  v.  her  husband  may  estabhsh  it,  or 
her  husband  may  make  voi<^ 

Dcut.  23. 18.  not  bring  the  price  of  a  dog  for  a  t> 
21.  when  thou  shall  vow  a  ji.  not  slack  to  pay  it 

./udg.  11.  30.  Jephthah  vowed  a  v.  unto  the  Lord 
30.  who  did  with  her  according  to  his  v. 

1  Sam.  1. 11.  Hannah  vowed  a  v.  and  said,  O  Lord 
21.  Elkanah  went  up  to  offer  to  the  Lord  his  o. 

2  Sam.  15.  7.  I  pray  thee  let  me  go  and  jiay  my  v. 
8.  for  Ihy  servant  vowed  a  v.  at  Geshur  in  Syria 

Psal.  G5.  1.  to  thee  shall  the  v.  be  performed 
Eccl.  5.  4.  when  thou  vowest  a  v.  defer  not  to  pay 
Isa.  19.  21.  they  shall  vow  a  v.  unto  the  Lord 
Jlcts  18.  18.  Paul  having  shorn  his  head  in  Gen 
clirea,  for  he  had  a  v. 
21.  23.  we  have  four  men  which  have  a  v.  on  them 

VOWS. 
Lev.  22. 18.  thai  will  offer  his  oblation  for  all  his  v. 

23.  38.  beside  your  gifts  and  beside  all  your  v. 
J^Tum.  29.  39.  these  ye  shall  do  beside  your  v. 

30.  4.  then  all  her  v.  shall  stand,  7,  9,  11. 

5.  not  any  of  her  v.  or  bonds  shall  stand,  8,  IS. 

14.  then  he  established  all  her  v.  on  bonds 
PJeul.  12.  0.  thither  bring  your  j>.  II,  17,  26. 
.fub  22.  27.  and  thou  shall  pay  thy  v. 
Psal.  22.  25.  I  will  pay  my  r.  60. '13.  |  116.  14,18 

50. 14.  pay  thy  J).  ||  5().12.thy  ».  are  upon  nie,  OG 
01.  5.  for  thou,  O  God,  hast  heard  my  v. 
8.1  will  sing  praise  that  I  mayduily  jierforminyc 
Prov.  7. 14.  this  day  have  I  paid  my  v. 

20.  25.  it  is  a  snare  after  v.  lo  make  inquiry 

31.  2.  what  my  son  ?  and  what  the  son  of  mv  i». 
.ler.  44.  25.  we  will  surely  perform  our  v. 
JonaJi  1.  10.  the  men  feared  the  Lord  and  made  v 
JVaA.1.15.  keep  thy  solemn  feasts,  perform  thy  o 

VOW. 
.^''l^n.  6.  2.  shall  separate  themselves  lo  r.  n  vow 
Ueut.  23.  22.  if  forbear  to  v.  shall  be  no  sin  in  ihec 
Psal.  76. 1 1.  and  r.  and  pay  to  the  Lord  your  Goo 
Eccl.  5.  5.  better  is  it  that  thou  shouldest  not  v. 

VOWED. 
Gen.  28.  20.  Jacob  v.  n  vow,  saying,  31.  13. 
/>f  11.27. S.according  lo  his  ability  that  b. shall  priey 
JV«m.  fi.  21.  the  law  of  the  Na/.ariles  who  halJi 

21.  2.  Israel  v.  a  vow  to  the  Lord  and  said 
30.  6.  if  she  had  at  all  a  husband  when  ske  v 

10.  and  if  she  r.  in  her  husband's  house 
Dent.  23.  23.  shall  keep  according  as  Ihou  ha  ■  •. 
.fudg.  11.  30.  Jephthah  v.  a  vow  unto  the  Lorrt 
Psal.  1:12.  2.  and  v.  to  the  mighty  God  of  Jacob 
Eccl.  5.  4.  defer  not,  pay  that  which  thou  hast  » 
JonaJi  2.  9.  I  will  pav  that  that  I  have  v. 

VOWEST. 
Eccl.  .5.  4.  when  thou  r.  a  vow,  defer  not  to  pay  it 

VOWETH. 
Mai.  1.  14.  who  r.  to  ihe  Lord  a  corrupt  thing 

VOYAGE. 
Acts  27.  10.  I  perceive  this  r.  will  be  with  hurt 

VULTURE, 
A  bird  of  prey,  which  was  declared  unclean.  Let 

11.  14.  It  is  said  that  vultuies  feed  upin 
human  flesh;  whence  it  was  that  the  ancimtt 
placed  them  among  birds  of  illomen.  In  Levi 
liens  the  Hebrew  word  for  vnlliire  is  Doah,  of 
flying ;  but  in  Deul.  14.13,  it  ;.i  Roah,  of  seeing, 
because  the  vulture  sees  and  sm:lls  hrr  prey 
from  far ;  hence  it  is  said,  that  in  Hierogly- 
phics, the  vulture  signifies  sharpnfss  of  sight. 
Job  speaks  of  Ihe  vultnrp,  as  having  a  very 
quick  ei/e.  job  28.  7,  There  is  a  path  which 
the  vulture's  eye  hath  not  seen. 

Lev.  11.  14.  the  t).  and  the  kite  after  his  kind 

shnll  not  be  eaten,  Dcut.  14.  13. 

.fob  28.  7.  a  path  which  the  v.  ey.»  hath  not  seen 

/sa.34.15.  there  cball  the  v.  also  be  gailicred,  every 

one  wiib  her  aiata 


W. 


WAFER, 
dod.  29. 23.  oncio.outofilie  basket  of  the  unlea- 
vened bread  that  is  before  llie  Lord,  J.ev.S-2tJ. 
A'um.  6. 19.  one  cake,  one  to.  on  hands  ofNazurile 

WAFERS. 
F.zoil.  16.  31.  manna,  the  taste  of  it  was  like  a. 
21).  2.  and  w.  unleavened  anointed  with  oil 
L,ev.  2.  4.  w.  anointed  with  oil,  7. 12.  JVmw.6.  15. 

WAG. 
Jer.lSlO.everyone  that  passeth  by  slialljc.hishead 
jAimS.  15.10.  their  heads  at  dauglitcr  of  Jerusalem 
iieuA.2.15.cvery  one  that  passelli  shall  ic.  his  hand 

WAGES. 
•  Oen.  29.  15.  tell  mo  what  shall  thy  7C.  be? 

30.  28.  appoint  me  thy  w.  and  I  will  give  it 

31.  7.  your  father  changed  my  w.  ten  times,  41. 
£.  the  speckled  shall  he  thy  w.  then  the  cattle 

f.rod.  2.  9.  nurse  thin  child,  1  will  give  thee  w. 
y>fB. 19.13.  10.  of  hirecl  no',  abide  with  ihec  all  night 
Jer.  22.  1.3.  useth  neighbour's  service  without  w. 
Eick.  29.  18.  yet  had  he  no  w.  nor  his  army 

19.  her  spoil  shall  lie  the  lo.  for  his  army 
Hag.  1.  6.  earnith  ir.  lo  put  into  a  bag  with  holes 
Mai.  3.  5.  that  oppress  the  hireling  in  his  w. 
Jyuke  3.  14.  and  be  content  with  your  xd. 
John  4.  36.  and  he  that  reapeth  receivetli  v>. 
Horn.  0.2;).  for  thc7r.  of  sin  isdeath,  but  gift  ofG. 
2  Cor.  11.  8.  taking  w.  of  them  to  do  you  service 
2Pet.2. 15.  Balaam  loved  the  v>.  of  uiirightcousree* 

WAGGING. 
Mat.  27.  39.  and  they  that  passed  by  reviled  him  lo. 
their  heads,  Mark  15.  29. 
WAGGON. 
JVum.  7.  3.  brought  a  w.  for  two  of  the  princes 

WAGGONS. 
Oen.  45. 19.  take  you  k.  out  of  Egypt,  21. 

27.  when  Jacob  saw  the  w.  Joseph  had  sent 
^um.  7.  7.  two  lo.^our  oxen  to  sons  of  Gershon 
8.  four  w.  and  eight  oxen  to  the  sons  of  Merari 
F.zek.  23.  24.  they  shall  rome  against  thee  with  lo. 

WAIL. 
F.tek.  32.  18.  w.  for  the  multitude  of  Egypt 
Mic.  1.  8.  therefore  I  will  ic.  and  howl,  go  stript 
Jiev.  1.  7.  all  kindreds  of  the  earth  sliali  w.  for  him 

WAILED. 
JUark  5.  33.  he  seeth  them  that  wept  and  w.  greatly 

WAILING. 
F^tk.  4.  3.  whither  his  decree  came  there  was  w. 
Jcr.  9:   10.  for  the  mountains  will  I  take  up  w. 

18.  let  them  take  up  a  w.  for  us  that  our  eyes 

19.  for  a  voice  of  ic.  is  heard  out  of  Zion 

20.  O  ye  women,  teach  your  daughters  w. 
F.zek.  1.  11.  neither  shall  there  be  w.  for  thiMu 

27.  31.  they  shall  weep  for  thee  with  bitter  w. 
Amos  5.  Ifi.  u>.  shall  be  in  all  streets,  and  say  alas, 
alas  I  Giiih  as  are  skilful  of  lamentation  to?o. 
17.  and  in  all  vineyards  shall  be  to. for  I  will  pass 
Mic.  1.  8.  I  will  make  a  w.  like  the  dragons 
Mat.  13.42.tliere  shall  bo  w.  and  gnashing  teeth, 50. 
Hcv.  18.  15.  the  merchaiil'"  stand  afar  off,  w.  19. 

WAIT. 
Kum.  35.  20.  if  he  hurl  at  him  by  laying  of  to. 

22.  oi  'est  on  him  any  thing  without  laying  lo. 
Jer.  9.  8.  t^.   in  his  heart  he  layeth  his  lo. 

WAIT. 

A''um. 3.10.  Aaron  and  sonsshnll  lo.on  theirjiriests' 

office,  8. 21.1  CAron.23.28.2CAr.5.  U.j  13.10. 

SA'/nffs  6.  33.  should  I  w.  for  the  Lord  any  longer? 

Jill)  X  t  21.  which  w.  for  death  but  it  Cometh  not 

14.  14.  of  my  time  I  will  w.  till  iny  change  come 

17.  13.  if  I  to.  the  grave  is  my  house 

/'».25. 3.  let  none  that  ?o.  on  thee  be  nshamed,  r>9. 6. 

.5.  art  God  of  salvation,  on  thee  do  I  to.all  the  day 

21.  let  intesrity  preserve  me,  for  I  jo.  on  ihce 
27.  H.  10.  on  the  Lord,  37.  34.  Ptov.  20.  Sf2. 

37.  7.  10.  patiently  ||  52.  9.  I  will  lo.  on  thy  name 
9.  that  10.  on  the  Loril  shall  inherit  the  earth 

38.  t  15.  for  in  thee,  O  Lord,  do  I  lo.  thou  wilt 
39. 7.  Lord,  what  lo.  I  for  ?  ||  62.5.  jo.  only  <m  God 
Sfi.U.they  mark  my  steps  when  they  to.  for  my  sonl 

50.  9.  because  of  his  strength  will  I  to.  upon  thee 
B9.  3.  mine  eyes  fail  while  I  w.  for  my  God 

104.  27.  thi'so  all  w.  upon  thee,  145.  15. 
123.  2.  CO  our  ey.-s  w.  on  the  Lord  our  God 
130.  5.  1 10.  for  the  Loid,  my  soul  doth  w. 
ha. P.M.  I  willM.on  the  Lord  whohidiith  his  face 
30.  18.  therefore  will  the  Lord  w.  lo  be  grarioiis 
to  you,  blessed  are  all  they  that  lo.  for  him 
40.31  .they  thai  m.  on  L.shiill  ri'ni-w  their  strength 
42.  4.  the  idles  shall  w.  for  his  law 
49.  23.  shall  not  bo  ashamed  that  w.  for  me 

51.  .5.  and  the  isles  nhall  lo.  upon  mo 

5!».  ».  we  w.  for  lieht,  but  behold  obscurity 
fiO.  9.  surely  the  isles  shall  w.  for  mo 
Jtr.  14.  22.  ther<^fore  we  vrill  v>.  upon  then 
l.nm  3.  25.  Lord  is  eood  to  thorn  Ihat  lo.  for  him 
Sill  it  ii  good  that  a  min  hope  and  (juictly  le 
fHA 


WAL 

fr"i.5    '  ••.  as  troops  of  robbers  to.  for  a  man 
rj       /"ep  mercy  and  lo.  on  thy  God  continually 
Mic.  i    ~   t  will  10.  for  the  God  of  my  sahatiun 
/Jab.  2.  J.  though  vision  tarry  lo.  for  it,  it  will  coiiio 
Zcph.  3. 8.  therefore  w.  ye  upon  me,  saitb  the  Ijurd 
Mark  3.  9.  that  a  small  ship  would  lo.  on  him 
t,uke  12.  36.  like  unto  men  that  lo.  for  their  Lord 
Jlcts  1.  4.  but  w.  for  the  promise  of  the  Father 
Hovi.  8.  25.  then  do  we  with  patience  lo.  lor  it 
12.  7.  or  ministry,  let  us  lo.  on  our  ministering 
1  Cor.  9.  13.  which  w.  at  the  altar  are  partakers 
Gal.  5.  5.  we  through  the  Spirit  lo.  for  the  liojie 
1  Thcss.  1.  10.  and  to  to.  fur  his  Son  from  heaven 
See  L.vY,  Laid,  Li.\hs. 
WAITEU. 
Gen.  49.  18.  I  have  to.  for  thy  salvation,  O  Lord 

1  Kings'2t).  38.  the  juophet  to.  forking  by  the  way 

2  Kings  5.  2.  a  little  maid  w.  on  Naaman's  wile 

1  Chrun.6.  32.  and  then  they  lo.  on  their  office,  33. 
9.18.  porters  that  w.  in  king's  gate,  2  GAron.35.15. 

2  Chron.  7.  6.  and  the  jiriesls  to.  on  their  ottices 
j\'ik.  12.  44.  for  the  priests  and  Levites  that  lo. 
.Job  6.  19.  the  companies  of  Shcba  lo.  for  them 

15.  22.  and  he  is  to.  for  of  the  sword 

29.  21.  to  me  men  gave  ear,  to.  and  kept  silence 

23.  and  they  to.  for  me  as  for  the  rain 

30.  26.  and  when  I  to.  for  light  darkness  came 

32.  4.  now  Elihu  had  w.  till  Job  bad  sjioken 
Psul.  40.  1.  I  JO.  patiently  for  the  Lord,  he  heard 

106. 13.  forget  his  works,  they  lo.  not  Ibr  counsel 
119  95.  the  wicked  have  to  for  me  to  destroy  nie 
Isa.  05.  9  this  is  our  God,  we  have  w  for  him 
21).  S.  ill  way  of  tliyjudgmentshave  we  to. for  thee 

33.  2.  be  gracious  unto  us,  we  have  to.  for  thee 
£zf/i.I9.5.sheaaw  that  she  had  w.nnd  her  hope  lost 
JV/iC.l.lO.for  the  inhabitants  of  Maroth  lo.carefully 
Zcclt.  11. 11.  the  poor  of  thertock  that  to.  upon  me 
jl/arAl  5.43.  Joseph  of  .\rimathea,  who  alsoio.forlhe 

kingdom  of  G.  craved  body  of  Jesus,  Luke  il.Sl. 
/yjiAcl.21.  the  people  of  to. for  Zacharias  marvelled 
.^cts  10.7.  Cornelius  called  a  soldier  that  u).  on  him 

24.  Cornelius  w.  for  Peter  and  certain  brethren 
17.16.while  Paul  w.  for  them  hissplrit  was  stirred 

If  et.3.20.  long-sutl'ering  of  God  to.in  days  of  Noah 

WAITETH. 
./bA24.15.the  eye  of  the  adulterer  lo.for  the  twilight 
Psal.  33.20.  our  soul  to.  for  Ld.  our  help  and  shield 

62.  1.  truly  my  soul  to.  upon  God,  130.  0. 

65.  1.  i)raise  w.  for  thee,  O  God  of  Zion 
Prov.  27.  18.  he  that  to.  on  his  master  be  honoured 
/sa.64. 4.  he  hath  prepared  for  him  that  to.  for  him 
7->ati.l2. 12. blessed  that  tt>. and  cometh  to  1335d;iys 
Mic.5.  7.  as  showers  that  to.  not  for  the  sons  of  men 
Rom.  8.  19. 70.  for  manifestation  ot"  the  sons  of  God 
Jam.5.  7.  the  husbandmen  to.  for  the  precious  ffuit 

WAITING. 
JVum.S.  2.5.  from  the  age  of50  years  shall  cease  to. 
Prov.  8.  34.  70.  nt  g'ltes,  to.  at  posts  of  my  duors 
Lukei.  25.  Simeon  to.  for  the  consolation  of  Lrael 
.John  5.  3.  folk  w.  for  the  moving  of  the  water 
/i(j7«.8. 23.  weourselvesgroan,  to.  for  the  adoi)ti(m 

1  Car.  1.7.  w.  for  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

2  Thcaa.  3.  5.  and  into  the  patient  to.  for  Christ 
WAKE. 

Psal.  139.  18.  when  I  to.  I  nm  still  with  thee 
tcr.  51.  .39.  may  sleep  a  perpetual  sleep  and  not  V) 
Joel  3.  9.  prepare  war,  to.  U|>  the  mighty  men 
1  Tliesa.  5. 10.  whether  we  w.  or  sleep  live  with  him 

WAKED. 
Zech.  4.  1.  the  angrl  came  again  and  lo.  mo 

WAKENED. 
.foel  3.  12.  let  heathen  bo  w.  and  come  up  to  valley 
Zech.  4.  1.  as  a  man  that  is  to.  out  of  his  sleep 

WAKENETH. 

Isa.  50.  4.  to  speak  in  season,  ho  i».  morning  by 

morning,  he  to.  mine  earto  hear  as  the  learned 

WAKETH. 

P.saZ.127.1. except  Lord  keep  watchmen  70.  in  vain 

Cant.  5. 2. 1  sleep  but  my  heart  to.  voii;e  of  beloveil 

W.'VKING. 
Paul.". A  thou  holdesi  mine  eves  w.  I  nm  troubled 

WALK.' 
To  walk  in  one  of  the  actions  of  the  body  that 
dcnoten  motion  jfrom  one  plarr  to  another^  and 
it  often  uned  in  .fnripluTe,  for  the  ronrrrsiition 
or  manner  of  life,  Rom.  6.  4.  F.pli.  4.  I,  17. 
To  walk  in  darkness,  1  .Tuhn  1.  6,  7.  in  to 
live  in  a  eonr.ie  of  innoranre,  error,  and  sin; 
and  to  walk  in  the  light,  i*  to  liee  in  the  iray.i 
of  truth  and  holines.i.  To  ton/A  by  fai'h,2  Cor. 
5.  7.  IS  to  rely  upon  Cliri.it  for  aalvation,  and 
to  live  in  thr  firm  hrlirf  that  the  prowi.te.i  of 
the  word  will  be  fulfilled  and  accomplished.  To 
walk  through  Iho  fire,  ha.  43.  2.  i.»  lo  he  exer- 
ciaed  with  many  afflictions.  To  7on/*  afifr 
the  flesh,  Horn.  8.  I.  i.<  lo  be  [rnidcd  by  the  sen- 
sual appetite,  andthe  privriplis  or  dictates  of 
corruvt  nature.  To  walk  in  the  flciit/,  2  Cor. 
10.  3  i.f  to  live  a  natural  life,  that  is  sahiert  lo 
11    ■njbrmitiet*ndcalamitie».  To  too/i  witli 


WAL 

God,  Gen.  5.  24.  is  to  live  in  awed  eovfmvnu 
icith  God, having  a  lively  si  use  of  his  prcsenct 
and  endeavouring  above  all  things  to  pleas* 
him,  and  t-i  be  approved  and  acciptid  of  him. 
To  walk  after  the  Spirit,  Jiom.S.  I,  is  to  be  I- d 
and  guided  by  his  counsels  and  motions,  to  re- 
gulate and  order  our  whole  conversation  ac- 
cording to  the    rule  and  direction  of  God's 
word  a7i.i  Spirit. 
Gen.  24.  40.  the  Lord  ludbre  whom  I  to.  will  send 
48.  15.  God  before  whom  my  fathers  did  to.  blesn 
F.zod.  16.  4.  whether  they  will  to.  in  my  law  or  no 
18.  20.  shew  them  the  way  wherein  they  must  to. 
21. 19.  ifhe  w.  abroad,  he  that  smote  shall  be  quit 
J.ev.  18.  3.  nor  shall  to.  in  their  ordiiianees,20.  23. 
26.  3.  if  ye  to.  in  my  statutes  and  keep  my  com- 
mand, 1  Kings  6.  12.  F.iek.  Xt.  15.  Zech.  3.  7 

12.  1  will  to.  among  you,  aud  will  be  your  God 
21.  if  ye  70.  contrary  lo  me  I  will  bring,  23,  27. 
24.  then  will  I  to.  contrary  to  you  and  punish,  2S 

X)eK^5. 33.  you  shall  w.  in  all  \\w  ways  of  the  Lord 
that  ye  may  live,  13.  4.  |  28.  9.  Kick.  37.  24. 
8.  19.  ifye  w.  after  other  god.<  ye  shall  perish 
29.  19.  tho'  1  to.in  the  imagination  of  my  heart 
Josh.  22. 5.  take  diligent  heed  to  w.  in  all  his  wayt 
Judg.  .5.  10.  speak,  ye  that  to.  by  the  way 
lSawt.2.30.  thy  house  should  to.  before  me  for  ever 

35.  he  shall  w.  before  mine  anointed  for  ever 
8.  5.  thou  art  old,  thy  sons  w.  not  in  thy  ways 
IKings  3.  14.  iftliou  wilt  ir.  tokeep  my  command- 
ments as  thy  fathe#David  did  to. 8.25.  |  9. 
4.  I  11.38.2  Chron.  ~.  17. 
8. 23. who  keepcst  covenant  with  thy  servants  that 
w.  before  thee  with  all  their  heart,  2  Chr.  6. 14. 
36. teach  lliem  thegooil  way  wherein  they  should 
w.  and  give  tain  mi  thy  land,  2  ('Aj-oji.6.  27 
Psal.M.  8.  the  wicked  w.  on  every  nide  w  hen  vilest 
2:!.  4.  tho'  I  w.  thio'  the  valley  of  shadow  of  death 
26.  11.  but  as  for  me,  I  will  to.  in  mine  integrity 
56.  13.  that  I  may  w.  hnfore  God  in  lisht  of  living 
82.  5.  they  know  not,  they  to.  on  indarkmss 
84.  11.  withhold  no  good  from  thim  w.  uprightly 
86.  II.  teach  me,  O  Lord,  I  will  to.  in  thy  truth 
89.  1.5.  they  shall  w.  in  ligjit  of  thy  countenance 

30.  if  his  children  w.   not  in  my  jndgmenia 
101.  2.  I  will  to.  in  my  house  with  a  perfect  heart 
11.5.  7.  feet  have  tln'y,  but  they  to.  not 
1 II).  9.  I  will  to.  before  tho  Lord  in  land  of  living 
119.  3.  they  do  no  iniquity,  thi'y  w.  in  his  ways 
45.  I  will  to.  at  libi:ity,  lor  I  s<ek  thy  precepts 
l.i8.7.  tho'  I  to.in  niidsi  ofironble,ihou  wilt  reviv* 
143,8.caui'e  me  lo  know  w  ay  wheiein  I  should  to 
Prov.  2.  7.  heisal)Uckli'i-1o  ihcm  that  to.  uprightly 
20.  that  thou  irayest  to.  in  the  way  of  good  men 
3.  23.  then  shall  thou  w.  in  thy  way  sni't'ty 
Isa.  2.  3.  we  will  w.  in  his  paths,  Mic.  4.  2. 
5.  O  Jacob,  let  us  to.  in  the  light  of  the  Lord 
3.  16.  they  w.  with  stretched  forth  necks 
H.  II.  that' I  should  not  (o.  in  the  »ny  ofthispcopi? 
35.  9.  but  the  rcdeenied  shall  w.  tlieie 
40.  31.  they  thai  w  ait  on  Ld.  shall  w.  and  not  faint 
4'i.  5.  that  giveth  spirit  to  tlicni  that  w.  therein 
24. for  theywould  luH  rein  his  wa*s  nor  obedient 
.59.  9.  wait  for  brightness,  but  we  70.  in  darkm-ss 
.fer.  3.  17.  nor  w.  after  imagination  of  their  heart 
18.  the  house  of  Judah  sfrnll  w.  with  Israel 

6.  16.  but  they  said,  we  will  not  jr.  llicrcin 

7.  6.  ifye  10.  not  after  other  ptuls  to  your  hurt 

9. will  ye  w.  aOer  other  gods  whom  ye  know  not? 

9.4.  every  neighbour  will  to.  with  slinders 

13. 10.  this  evil  peoplc,which  w.  in  imagination  of 
their  heart, and  to. after  other  god.<,  16.12.  j  18.12. 

23.  14.  Ihey  commit  adultery,  and  to.  in  lies 

42.  3.  God  may  shew  us  way  whoieiirwe  may  w. 
f.am.  5.  18.  Zion  is  desolate,  the  foxfs  70.  upon  it 
F.zek.  II.  20.  that  they  may  to.  in  my  stnlnles 

37.  24.  they  shall  70.  in  my  judgments  and  slalutei 
Dan.  4.  :t7  those  thai  w.  inpt'de  he  is  able  to  phase 
Ilos.  II.  10.  shall  to.  after  th>-  Lord,  roarlikeii  I'on 

14.9.  wiivsof  Lord  right,  the  just  shiill  re.  in  them 

.Joel  2.  8.  they  shall  t.".  every  one  in  lii.s  |inlh 

./ftiin.e  3,3.cn n  two  tr.togeth.  except  thev  be  asroedT 

Mic.  4.  5.  every  one  will  to.  in  name  ofhis  Goil.and 

wcwirho.  in  the  n;imoof  the  Lord  our  God 

6.  16.  and  yi-io.  in  the  counsels  of  Omri  and  Ahnb 
/lab.  3.  15."th.in  did^l  ir.  thro'  the  sea,  with  horses 
Zrfth.  I.  17.  that  till  y  shall  w.  like  Mind  men 
Z'fh.  6.  7.  they  might  ic.  10  and  fro  through  earlh 

10.  12.  ihi'V  sh.ill  70.  fio  and  down  in  b's  name 
Mat.  11.5.  the  himoir.  lepers  cleansed,  /.«*<•  7.22. 
Jilnrk  7.  5.  why  to.  not  thy  disciples  according  to 
J.vkeW.  44.  men  that  ir.  over  them,  are  not  nwnro 

13.  33.  I  must  to.  today  and  tomorrow  and  day 
24.l7.whnlconununirnlinnsnsye  w  .and  are  sad' 

.John  7.  I.  for  Jesin  would  not  10.  in  Jewrv 

8.  12.  sha:i  not  .0.  in  darkni  ss  hut  have  ligiii  of  life 

11.  9.  if  any  miin  to.  in  the  day,  he  sli  nlilclhnot 
10.  if  a  man  10.  in  the  night,  he  stumhleth 

/?()rn.4.l2.wlioio.  in  steps  ol  that  failli  of  AbrahiuB 
G.  4.  eveo  so  wo  should  to.  in  ncwoess  of  li(« 


WAL 

Rom.  S.  T.  who  w.  not  after  flesh,  but  after  Spirit,  4. 
2C*r.  5.  7.  for  we  w.  by  faith,  not  by  siylit 
6. 10.  1  will  dwell  in  tiieni  unii  w.  la  the  in 
10.3.  tho'  we  zc.  in  the  Hesh,  not  wur  after  the  flesh 
OaL  6.  16.  as  many  aa  w.  acconJiiig  to  tliis  rule 
Epii.  2.10.God  hath  oriJaineU  we  should  id.  in  tliem 
4. 1.  that  ye  w.  worthy  of  Ihu  vocation  wherewith 

17.  that  ye  w.  not  as  other  Geiiliies  in  vanity 
5.15.sce  then  that  ye  m. circumspectly ,not  as  IboU 
Pkil.  3.  17.  brethren,  mark  them  wlucli  w.  so 

18.many  w.  of  whom  I  told  you,  and  tell  weeping 

Cut.  1.10.  thai  ye  might  to.  worthy  of  the  Lord  unto 

all  pleasing,  being  fruitlul,  1  'J'/iess.  '2.  1'2. 

1  T/iess.  4. 1'2.  ye  may  w.  honestly  to  those  without 

2  T/iess  3.11.  some  which  w.  among  you  disorderly 
iPet.  2  10.  but  chiefly  them  that  w.  after  the  flesh 
IJoAnl.G.if  say  we  have  fellowship,  and  w.  in  dark 

7.  but  if  we  w.  in  the  light  as  he  is  in  the  light 
ijo/iii  0.  w.  after  his  coiiimandmonts,  as  ye  have 
heard  from  the  beginning  ye  should  w.  in  it 
3John  4.  to  hear  that  my  (  hildren  w.  in  the  truth 
Jude  IS.mockers  should  m. after  their  ungodly  lusts 
Hev.  3.  4.  and  they  shall  w.  with  ine  in  white 

9.  20.  idols  that  cannot  see,  nor  hear,  nor  w. 

16.1.1. blessed  is  he  that  watclieth,  lest  he  w. naked 

81.24.  the  nations  shall  id.  in  the  light  of  tlie  city 

WALK,  Jmperativelij. 
Gen.  13.  17.  arise,  ?c.  through  the  land,  Josh.  18.  8 

17. 1.  Almighty  God,  w.  belbre  me,  and  be  perfect 

Ps.  48.  12.  w.  about  Zion  and  go  round  about  hei 

Prov.  1.15.  my  son,  w.  not  in  the  way  with  them 
Keel.  11.9.  w.  in  tho  ways  of  thy  liearl  and  eyes 
Isa.2.5.  O  Jacob,  let  us  oj.in  the  light  of  the  Lord 

30.21.  a  voice  saying,  this  is  the  way,  w.  ye  in  it 

50. 11.  ID.  in  the  light  of  your  hre  and  in  sparks 

Jer.  6.  16.  ask,  where  is  the  good  way,  w.  therein 

25.  go  not  forth  into  fields,  nor  le.  by  the  way 

7.  23.  70.  ye  in  all  the  ways  1  commanded  you 
Eiek.  20.  i8.  w.  ye  not  in  statutes  of  your  fathers 
Zech.  6.  7.  they  might  w.  to  and  fro  thro'  the  earth 
Mat.  9.  5.  or  to  say,  rise  and  >d.  Murk  2.9.  J^uke 
5.  23.  .John  5.  8,  11,  12.  jicts  .3.  6. 
John  12.35.!r.while  ye  have  the  light,  lestdarkness 
Rom.  13.  13.  let  us  w.  honestly  as  in  the  day 
lOr.  7.  17.  as  Lord  called  every  one,  so  let  him  id. 
Gal.  5.  16.  w.  in  the  S|)irit,  and  not  fulfil  lusts,  25. 
Eph.  5.  2.  w.  in  love  ||  8.  w.  aa  children  of  light 
PA!7.3.16.1et  us  zo.by  the  same  rule  and  mind  same 
Col.  2.  6.  as  ye  have  received  Christ,  so  w.in  him 

4.  5.  w.  in  wisdom  toward  them  that  are  without 

To  WALK. 
f.sv.lS.-i.to  tD.  in  my  ordinances,  for  I  am  the  Lord 
Ijtut.  8.  6.  to  10.  in  his  ways,  and  fear  him,  10.]2. 
I  11.  22.  I  13.  5.  1  19.  9.  I  26.  17.  |  30.  16. 
Josh.  22.  5.  Jadrr.  2.  22.  1  Kings  2.  3. 
I  8.  58.  2C/iro7!.6.  31. 
1  Kings  2.  4.  take  heed  to  w.  before  me  in  truth 

8.61.  heart  perfect,  to  w.  in  his  statutes,  Ez.  36.27. 

16.  31.  a  light  thing  to  w.  in  the  sins  of  Jeroboam 
ifCingg  10.31.  Jehu  took  no  heed  to  ?o.  in  law  of  L. 

23.  3  Josiah  made  a  covenant  tow.  after  the  I,. 

to  keep  his  commandments,  2Chron.  34.  31. 

2CAr.  6.16.  that  children  take  heed  to  ti'.  in  my  law 

JVcA.  5.  9.  ought  ye  not  to  w.  in  the  fear  of  God? 

10.29. they  entered  into  an  oath  to  v>.  in  God's  law 
Psal.  78.  10.  they  refused  to  w.  in  his  law 
Prov.  2.13.  leave  upright.to  w.  in  ways  of  darkness 
Eccl.  6.8.  poor  that  knoweth  to  w.  before  the  living 
Jer.  18.  15.  to  w.  in  paths,  in  a  way  not  cast  up 

26.  4.  if  ye  will  not  hevken  to  w.  in  my  law 

31.  9.  I  will  cause  them  to  w.  in  a  straight  way 
Eiek.  36.  12.  I  will  cause  men  to  w.  upon  you 
Dan.  9.  10.  nor  have  we  obeyed  to  w.  in  his  laws 
JUir..  6.  8.  and  to  lo.  humbly  with  thy  God 
Hab.  3.  19.  ho  will  make  me  to  w.  on  high  places 
7.crk.  1.  10.  whom  Lord  hath  sent  to  io.  to  and  fro 

3.7. will  give  places  to  w.  amg.  these  that  stand  by 
Mat.  15.31.  saw  tho  lame  to  m.  they  glorified  God 
/..ukeW.  40.  the  scribes  desire  to  id.  in  long  robes 
/lets  3. 12.  as  though  we  had  made  this  man  to  id. 

14. 16.  suffered  all  nations  to  id.  in  their  owh  ways 

21.21.  to  circumcise,  nor  to  1».  after  their  customs 
1  Thess.  4.1. how  you  ought  to  w.  and  to  pleaseGod 
IJohn  2.  6.  ought  himself  so  to  w.  as  ho  walked 

WALKED. 
Gen.  5.  24.  Enoch  u).  with  God,  and  was  not,  22. 

6.  9.  Noah  was  a  just  man,  and  w.  with  God 
Exod.  14.  29.  Israel  w.  upon  the  dry  land  in  the  sea 
T^fv.  26.  40.  that  also  they  have  w.  contrary  to  me 
Josh.  5.  6.  Israel  v>.  forty  years  in  the  wilderness 
^Kdn-.2.17.turned  out  ofthe  way  their  fathers  w.  in 

5.0.  in  days  of  Jael  the  travellers  w.  thro'  by-paths 

11.  ]6.  when  Israel  w.  through  the  wildernes* 
\Sam.  8.  3.  Samuel's  sons  70.  not  in  his  ways 
iSam.  2.  29.  Abner  and  his  men  w.  all  that  night 

11.  2.  David  ;r.  on  tho  roof  of  tho  king's  house 
l/r«na's8.25.thatthev  walk  bef.  me  as  thou  hast  w. 

9.  4.  as  David  thy  father  w.  2  Chr.  6.  16.  |  7.  17. 

11.  33.  have  not  w.  in  my  ways,  to  do  right  in  my 
eyes,  £11*.  5.  6,  7.  J  Hi  12.  |  20.  13,  16,  21. 


,      '  WAL 

XKings  15.26.  hew.  in  the  way  of  his  father,  22..52. 

34.Jiaaslia  did  evil  in  sight  of  Lord  and  mj.iu  m  ay 

of  Jerciboain,  16.  '.i.  things  13.  6.  [  17.  22. 

'Miiiigs  4. 35. he  returned, and  w.iii  house  to  and  fro 

17.  b.  lioi^hea  10.  in  the  statutes  ofthe  liuatliini 

19.  Judah  kept  not  commands  of  Lord,  but  w.  in 

statutes  of  Israel  which  they  made,20Vir.21.13. 

2J.  22.  Anion  lursook  the  Lord,  and  w.  not  in  way 

of  Lord,  Jer.  9.  13.  [  32.  23.  |  44.  10,  23. 

22.  2.  Josiah  w.  in  tho  ways  of  David,  2C7i>'.34. 2. 
2CAr.lJ.17.for  three  years  tliey  w.  in  way  of  David 

17.  4.  Jelioshaphat  w.  in  God's  commandments 

21.  12.  hast  not  w.  in  the  ways  of  Jelioshaphat 
Job  21J.  3.  when  by  his  light  1  w.  through  darkness 

31.7.  if  mine  heart  io. alter  mine  eyes,  and  any  blot 
Ps.  55. 14.  we  w.  to  the  liouse  of  God  in  company 

81. 12. to  hearts'  lusts, they  ic.la  their  own  counsels 
13.  O  that  Israel  had  w.  in  my  ways  I 

142.  3.  in  the  way  1  m.  have  they  laid  a  snare 
fsa.  9.2.  people  that  w.  in  darkness  seen  great  light 

20.3.;is  my  servant  Isaiah  hath  w.  naked  for  a  sign 
./tr.  2.  5.  that  they  have  lo.  after  vanity,  8. 

7.  24.  but  20.  in  counsels  of  tlieir  evil  heart,  IL  8. 

8.  2.  after  whom  they  have  w.  9.  14.  |  J6.  il. 
F.zi:k.  16.  47.  yet  hast  not  thou  w.  alter  their  ways 

18.  9.  hath  u>.  in  my  statutes  and  judgments,  17. 

23.  31.  thou  hast  w.  in  the  way  ol  thy  sister 
28.  14.  iiast  w.  in  tlie  midst  ofthe  stones  of  lire 

Amos  2.  4.  after  the  way  which  their  fathers  id. 
jVcih.  2.  11.  where  the  lion,  even  the  old  lion,  w. 
ZccA.l.ll.wc  have  w.  to  and  fro  through  earlli,6.7. 
j)Ial.  3. 14. what  profit  that  we  have  w.  mournfully? 
Mark  5.42.  straightway  the  damsel  arose  and  20. 

10.  12.  Jesus  appeared  to  two  of  them  as  they  w. 
.John  6.  66.  many  disciples  10.  no  more  v.itli  hini 

11.  54.  Jesus  (0.  no  more  openly  among  the  Jews 
Jlcts  3.  8.  and  he  leaping  up,  stood  and  w.  14.  10, 

14. 8.  a  cripple  from  the  womb,  who  never  had  w. 
2Cur.lO.  2.  who  think  as  if  we  !/>.  according  to  tlesh 

12.  18.  did  Titus  make  gain  of  you?  w.  we  not  in 
the  same  spirit?  w.  we  not  in  the  same  steps'; 

Gal.  2. 14.  but  when  I  saw  thee  w.  not  uprightly 
Eph.  2.  2.  wherein  in  time  past  ye  w.  Col.  3.  7. 
IPtt.  4. 3.  when  we  w.  in  lasciviousness,  in  lusts 

He.  WALKJED. 
IKings  3. 6.  to  David,  as  he  to.  before  thee  in  trntl 
15.3.  v\bijam  w.  in  all  the  sins  of  his  father,  whici: 
he  had  done  before  him,  'iKiiigs  21.  21, 
16.  26.  for  Ac  id.  in  all  the  way  of  Jeroboam 

22.  43.  Ac  ID.  in  all  the  way  of  Asa,  2f  Ar.  20.  32. 
IKings  8. 18.  and  he  w.  in  the  way  of  the  kings  of 

Israel,  10.  3.  ^Chron.  21.  6.  |  iii!^. 
27.  and  he.  w.  in  the  way  of  the  kings  of  Israel 
as  did  the  house  of  Aliab,  2Chrvn.  22.  3,  5. 
IChron.  17.  3.  Ac  w.  in  the  first  ways  of  David 
/)an.4.29.Ncbuchadn.  w.  in  the  palace  of  Babylon 
Hos.  5. 11.  Ac  willingly  w.  after  the  commanilment 
Mai.  2.  6.  he  w.  with  me  in  peace  and  equity 
Mat.  14.29.  Peter  w.  on  the  water  to  go  lo  Jesus 
1  John  2.  6.  ought  himself  to  walk  even  as  he  w 

I  have  WALKED. 

Lev.  20.  41.  5ind  that  /  have  w.  contrary  to  them 

I.Sam.  12.  2.  /  have  w.  before  you  from  childhood 

'ilSam.  7.  6.  I  have  w.  in  a  tent  and  tabernacle 

7.  in  all  places  wherein  I  have  w.  with  Israel 

2Iungs  20. 3.  remember  how  1  have  w.  before  thee 

Job  31.  5.  if  I  have  w.  with  vanity  or  foot  hasted 

Ps.  26.  1.  judge  me,  for  I  have  lo.  in  my  integrity 

3.  and  /  Aauc  w.  in  thy  truth,  /,so.  38.  3. 

WALKEDST. 

.hhn  21.18.when  young,  w.  whither  thou  wouldest 

WALKEST. 
Deut.  6.  7.  shall  talk  of  them  when  thou  w.  11.19 
1  King.'!  2.42. on  the  day  thou  w.abroad  any  whither 
fsa.  43. 2.  when  thou  id.  thro'  the  fire  not  be  burnt 
./?cf.?21.24.thou  thyself w.  orderly  and  keepestlaw 
ftnm.l4.I5.if  brnthcrgrieved  now  ?/).not  charitably 
3  ,/«A7i  3.  truth  in  thee  even  as  thou  w.  in  the  truth 

WALKETH. 
Gen.  24.  65.  what  man  is  this  that  w.  in  the  field? 
Deut.  23. 14. Lord  thy  God  w.  in  mid.st  ofthe  camp 
l.Sr/7n.  12.  2.  beliold,  the  king  jc.  before  you 
.Job  18.8.  ho  is  cast  into  a  net,  and  he  70.  on  a  snare 
22.  14.  he  w.  in  the  circuit  of  heaven 
34.  8.  goeth  in  company,  and  id.  with  wicked  men 
Ps.  1.  1.  blessed  that  w.  not  in  counsel  of  ungodly 
15.  2.  he  that  w.  uprightly  shall  dwell  in  holy  hiil 
39.  6.  surely  every  man  w.  in  a  vain  shew 
73.  9.  and  their  tongue  w.  through  the  earth 
91.  6.  nor  for  tho  pestilence  that  w.  in  darknt  s» 
101.  0.  he  that  w.  in  a  perfect  way  shall  serve  nic 
104.  3.  who  w.  upon  the  wings  ofthe  wind 
128.  1.  blessed  is  every  one  thatjn.  in  his  ways 
Pro7).6.12.a  wicked  man  tp.  with  a  froward  mouth 
10.  9.  he  that  w.  uprightly  w.  surely,  28.  18. 

13.  20.  he  that  w.  with  wise  men  shall  be  wise 

14.  2.  he  that  w.  in  uprightness  fcareth  the  Lord 

15.  21.  a  man  of  understanding  w.  uprightly 

19.  1  better  is  poor  that  w.  in  integrity,  28.  6. 
30.7,  juat  man  w.  in  his  integrity,  children  bleued 

4  R 


WAL 

'Prot).  23.20.  whosow.  wisely,  he  shall  be  dolivored 
t.ccl.  2. 14.  but  the  Ibol  w.  111  darkness,  I  perceived 
10.  3.  when  he  that  is  a  fool  w.  by  the  way 
ys(i.33.15.he  that  w.  righteously  shall  dwell  on  high 
5U.  10.  that  w.  in  darkness  and  hath  no  light 
65.  2.  which  w.  in  a  way  that  was  nut  good 
Jc7-.10.23.  il  is  not  in  man  thai  w.  lo  direct  his  step* 

23.  17.  that  w.  alter  Die  iiiiagiiiaiion  of  his  bean 
Eiek.  11.  21.  heart  w.  alter  their  detestable  thing* 
^i7i;.2.7.my  wows  do  good  to  him  that  «■.  Ujirightly 
Jlut.  12.  43.  when  the  unclean  spiritisgoneout,ha 

w.  throughdry  places,  seeking  rest,  J^uke  11.24. 
John  12.  35.  he  lliat  w.  in  dafkiicss  knoweth  not 
2  7  AtAi-.3.6.withdr.  from  brother  that  jc.  disorderly 
liv^5.8.devil  w.  about  seeking  whom  he  may  dev. 
l.Jnhn  2. 1 1.  who  haleth  his  brother,  w.  in  darkness 
Ucv.'2.l.w.m  midst  of  Uit  seven  golden  canuicsticks 

■      WALKlNCi. 
(7c7i.3.  H.thcy  heard  the  voice  of  Lord  w.'m  garden 
y>'c«t.2.7.Loi(l  kiiowevh  tliy  w.  through  wilderness 
1  htiigs  3.  3.  bolomon  lovtd  the  Lord,  w.  as  David 

16.  19.  Zimri  w.  in  the  way  of  Jeroboam 
,)vli  1.  7.  from  w.  up  and  down  in  the  earth,  2.  2. 

31.  20.  or  beheld  the  moon  jc.  in  brightness 
Eccl.  10.  7.  1  have  seen  princes  to.  as  servants 
I  Isa.  3.  10.  haughty,  w.  and  mincing  as  they  go 

20.  2.  and  he  Uid  so,  w.  naked  and  bare-loot 

57.  2.  shall  rest,  each  one  w.  in  his  uiirightncss 
Jcr.a.  28.  all  grievous  rtvolters,  w.  with  slanders 
Jjan.  3.  25.  1  see  four  men  loose  w.  in  the  fire 
Jlie.  2. 11.  if  a  man  ic.  in  spirit  and  falsehood  do  lie 
Mat.  14.  25.  Jesus  went  lo  them  id.  on  the  sea 

2ii.saw  him  ic.  on  sea  were  troubled,  Mark  6.48 
Mark  8.  24.  blind  man  said,  1  see  men  as  trees  to 
J.uke  1.  6.  w.  in  all  the  commandments  blameless 
Jlcts  3.8.laiiie  man  w.  leaping,  and  praising  God,9 

9.  31.  were  cdified,7C.  in  the  fear  ofthe  Lord 
"Cor.  4.  2.  not  w.  in  craftiness,  nor  handling  word 
~l'Lt.  3.  3.  scolfcrs  ID.  alter  their  lusts,  Jude  16. 
'i.ivhn  4.  that  1  found  thy  children  w.  in  truth  ' 

WALL. 
Gen.  49.  C.  in  their  sell-will  they  digged  down  a  10 

£2.  a  bough  wlio.-e  branches  run  over  the  w. 
Exod.  14.  22.  and  the  waters  were  a  w.  to  them 
J^cv.  14.  37.  if  plague  in  sight  lower  than  the  w. 
A''inn.i'2.2i.  a  (t. being  on  this  side,  a.w.on  that  side 
25.  the  ass  crushed  Balaam's  foot  against  the  w 
.'vsh.  2.  15.  lor  Rahub  dwelt  upon  the  town-M. 

6.  5.  the  ID.  ofthe  city  shall  fall  down  flat.  20. 
LSam.  18.  n.  I  will  sm'ite  David  to  the  w.  19.  ]0. 

20.  25.  and  the  king  sat  upon  his  seat  by  the  w. 

25.  16.  they  werea/r.  lo  us  bctli  by  night  and  day 
22.  if  I  have  by  the  morning  light  any  thai 
jiisselh  against  the  w.  34.  \Ki71gs  14.  10.   16. 
11.  I  21.21.  ihivgs'J.S. 

31.  10.  and  they  fastened  Saul's  body  to  the  vj. 

2.S'a77i. 11.20.  knew  ye  not  they  would  shoot  from  10. 

21. millstone  from  the  jn.wliy  went  ye  nigh  the  lo. 

2U.J5.  the  people  haltered  the  w.lo  throw  it  down 
21.  behold,  his  head  shall  be  thrown  over  the  w. 

22. 30.  by  my  God  have  leaped  over  a  70.  /"«. 18.29. 
]/u7jo-s4.33.to  the  hyssop  tliat  springs  out  ofthe  jo. 

20.  30.  a  w.  fell  upon  27,000  ofthe  men  left 

21.23.  the  dogs  shall  eat  Jezebel  by  w.  of  Jczrecl 
2Kings  3.  27.  offered  him  for  burnl-olTering  on  tc 

4.  10.  let  us  make  a  little  chamber  on  the  w. 

6.  26.  tlie  king  of  Israel  was  passing  by  on  the  w 

9.  33.  Jezebel's  blood  was  sprinkled  on  the  w. 

18.  26.  talk  not  in  the  Jews'  language  in  ears  of 
the  [leople  that  are  on  the  id.  Isa.  36. 11. 

20.  2.  then  llezekiah  turned  his  face  to  the  id.  and 

prayed  to  the  Lord,  saying,  Isa.  38.  2. 

'iChrov.  25.  2.3.  Joash  brake  down  the  70.  of  Jerus 

38.  19.  Nebuchadnezzar  brake  down  the  w. 
/':ra5.3.who  hath  command,  you  to  make  this  w.7 

9.  9.  to  give  us  a  7^.  in  .luduh  and  Jerusalem 
JWA.  1.  3.  the  70.  of  Jerusalem  is  broken  down 

2.  15.  I  viewed  the  w.  \\  17.  let  us  build  the  w. 

4.  3.  a  fox  shall  even  break  down  their  stone  w 
6.  so  built  we  the  w.  all  the  to.  was  joined  logeth. 
15.  that  we  returned  all  of  us  'o  the  id.  every  one 

6.  6.  for  which  cause  thou  buildcst  the  w.  to  be 

15.  so  the  w.  was  finished  in  the  month  Elul 
J2.  27.  at  the  dedication  ofthe  id.  of  Jerusalem 
13.  21.  I  said  to  thimi,  why  lodge  yeaboutthe  w. 
Ps.  62.  3.  as  a  buwing  a.  shall  ye  be,  as  a  tottering 
Prov.  18.  11.  as  a  high  w.  in  his  own  conceit 

24.  31.  the  stone  w.  thereof  was  bjoken  down 
Cnnl.  2.  9.  my  beloved  standeth  behind  our  w. 

8.  9.  if  she  be  a  w.  will  build  ||  10.  I  am  a  aj. 
Isa.  2.15.  the  day  ofthe  Lord  on  every  fenced  w. 

5.  5. 1  will  break  down  the  w.  of  my  vineyard 

25.  4.  when  the  blast  is  as  a  storm  against  the  vi> 
.30.  13.  as  a  breach  swelling  out  in  a  high  w. 

59. 10.  we  grope  for  tho  w.  like  the  blind 
Jer.  15.  20.  I  will  make  thee  a  fenced  brazen  w. 
49.  27.  I  will  kindle  a  fire  in  the  w.  of  Damascus 
51.  44.  yea  the  w.  of  P.abylon  shall  fall 
Z,n7n.2.8.  to  destroy  tho  w.  ofthe  daughter  of  Zion 
18.  their  heart  cried,  O  w.  ofthe  daughter  of  Zior 


WAN 

EickA.3.  for  S  w.  of  iron  between  thee  and  the  city 

8.  7.  a  hole  in  the  w.  ||  ti.  dig  in  the  te.  I'i.  5. 
10.  tliu  idols  ot'Uraei  pourtrayed  uii  the  w. 

13.  12. 10.  is  fallen,  15.  ||  M.  SO.  every  w.  shall  fall 
IS.  then  i  will  accomplish  my  wrath  on  llie  tc. 
41.  5.  after  he  measured  the  w.  of  the  house 
43.  8.  in  setting  the  w.  between  me  and  them 
Jian.  5.  5.  fingers  wrote  on  the  plaster  of  the  w. 

9.  25.  the  street  shall  be  built  again,  and  the  w. 

even  in  troublous  times 
JIos.  2.  6.  I  will  make  a  w.  that  shall  not  find 
Jeel  2.  7.  they  shall  climb  the  w.  like  men  of  war 

9.  they  shall  run  upon  the  «■.  and  climb  up 
Jimos  1.  7.  I  will  send  a  fire  on  the  w.  of  Gaza 

10.  on  the  w.  of  Tyrus  ||  14.  in  the  w.  of  Kabbah 
5.  19.  leaned  his  hand  on  the  w.  a  serpent  bit  him 
7.  7.  behold,  the  Lord  stood  upon  a  w.  made  by 

JVaA.  2.  5.  they  shall  make  haste  to  the  ic.  thereof 
Mab.  2.  11.  for  the  stone  shall  cry  out  of  the  u>. 
Jicts  U.  25.  then  the  disciples  by  night  let  Saul 
down  by  the  w.  in  a  basket,  2  Cor.  11.  33. 
23.  3.  <jod  shall  smite  thee,  thou  whited  w. 
Kpk.'2.  14.  Christ  hath  broken  down  the  middle  w. 
i<et;.21.14.the  ui.of  the  city  had  twelve  foundations 
18.  the  building  of  the  te.  of  it  was  of  jasper 
See  Built. 
WALLED. 
/>ejj.25.29.if  a  man  sell  a  dw  elling-house  in  a  w.city 
30  the  house  in  the  w.  city  shall  be  established 
A'um. 13.28.thc  cities  ic.  and  very  grcat,/Jeu£.1.2fi. 

WALLOW. 
Jer.  6.  26.  gird  with  sackcloth,  w.  thyself  in  ashes 
25.  34.  ye  shepherds,  cry,  w.  yourselves  in  ashes 
4ii.  26.  Moab  shall  tc.  in  Ills  vomit,  be  in  derision 
Kzek.  27. 30.  they  shall  lo.  themselves  in  the  ashes 

WAL1>0\VEU. 
2  Sam.  20.  12.  Amasa  w.  in  blood  in  the  high-way 
Mark  9.  20.  he  fell  on  the  ground  and  tc.  foaming 

WALLOWliSG. 
2  Pet.  2.  22.  and  the  sow  washed  to  tc.  in  the  mire 

WALLS. 
/-.ev.  14.  37.  if  plague  bein  the  je.  of  the  house,  39. 
25.  3r.  but  the  houses  of  the  villages  having  no 
tc.  counted  as  fields 
Deut.  3.  5.  these  cities  were  fenced  with  high  w. 
28.  52.  till  thy  high-fenced  a.  come  down 
iKings  25.4.  the  men  of  war  Hed  between  two  to. 
10.  the  army  of  the  Cimldees  brake  down  the  tc. 
of  Jerusalem  round  about,  Jer.  311.  8. 
Ezra  4.  13.  if  this  city  be  built  and  to.  set  up,  16. 
5.  8.  timber  is  laid  in  the  tc.  work  goeth  fast  on 
AVA.4.  7.  heard  that  the  tc.  of  Jerus.were  madeup 
Job  24.  11.  which  make  oil  within  their  a>. 
Pstil.  51.  18.  build  thou  the  tc.  of  Jerusalem 
55.  10.  day  and  night  they  go  about  on  to.  thereof 
122.  7.  peace  be  within  thy  le.  and  prosperity 
Projj.25.  28.  is  like  a  city  broken  down,  without  m. 
Cant.  5. 7.  the  keepers  of  the  tc.  took  away  my  vail 
Isa.  22.  5.  it  is  a  day  of  breaking  down  the  tc. 
25.  12.  the  fortress  of  thy  tc.  shall  he  bringdown 
26.1.salvation  willG.appoint  for  ic.and  bulwarks 
49.  16.  behold,  thy  tc.  are  continually  before  me 
5().  5.  within  my  tc.  a  place  and  a  name  better 
6(1.  10.  the  sons  of  strangers  shall  build  on  thy  tc. 

18.  thou  shalt  call  thy  tc.  salvation  and  gates 
62.6.  I  have  sot  watchmen  on  thy  j/j.O  Jerusalem 
Jer.l.  15.  settheir  thrones  against  the  ic.of  Jcrus. 
5.  10.  go  ye  up  upon  her  ic.  and  destroy,  make  not 
50. 15.  Babylon's  tc.  are  thrown  down,  51.  58. 
Eiek.  26.  4.  they  shall  destroy  the  tc.  of  Tyrus,  12. 
27.  11.  the  men  of  .Arvad  were  upon  thy  tc. 
33.  30.  still  are  talking  against  lliee  by  the  tc. 
38.  II.  all  of  them  dwelling  without  to.  or  gates 
Mic.  7.  II.  in  the  day  that  thy  to.  are  to  bn  built 
ZccA.2.4.Ji'riisulem  inhabited  as  towns  without  tc. 
Heb.  II.  30.  by  faith  the  to.  of  Jericho  fell  down 

WANDER. 
Oi>n.  20.  13.  when  God  caused  nie  to  to.  from  my 
J^um.  14.  33.  your  children  slmll  ic.  in  the  wilder- 
nras  forty  years,  32.  13.  I'.iiil.  107.  40. 
Deut.  27.  18.  cursed  is  he  that  cansi-tli  blind  to  tc. 
Jab  12.  21.  he  caiiseth  them  to  to.  in  a  wilderness 
38.  41.  when  his  young  ravens  tc.  lor  lack  of  meat 
Vaal.  .55.  7.  then  would  I  uj.  far  off  and  remain 
59.  15.  let  them  tc.  up  and  down  lor  meal 
119.10.  ()\.-\  me  'Ot  10.  from  thy  cominanclmonts 
Isa.  47.  15.  thev  h'.iall  tr.  every  one  to  his  ([unrter 
Jer.  14.  Kl.  Lord  salth,  thus  have  they  loved  to  tc. 
48. 12.  send  wanderers  that  shall  cause  him  to  tc. 
Amos  8.  12.  ami  they  shall  te.  from  sen  to  sea 

WANKKRERS. 
Trr.  48.  12.  days  come  that  I  will  send  to  him  jo. 
Has.  9.  17.  they  shall  b"  i/>.  among  the  nations 

WAMDKRKI). 
f?cn.21.l4.I!agBr  10.  in  the  wildern.  ofBeer-shcba 
.'o.fA.14.10.  the rhlMren  of  Israel  w.in  the  wildern. 
Ptal.  107.  4.  they  xc.  in  the  wililerni'ss,  Isa.  16.8. 
I, am.  4.14.  they  have  w.  as  blind  min  in  the  streets 
F.zck.  34.  6.  my  sheep  w.  through  all  tlic'  iimiintnins 
4nio«4.8.twooi  Uiree  cities  10  to  one  city  to  drink 

ectf 


WAR 

Hcb.\  1. 37.  to.  about  in  sheep-skins  and  goat-skins 
38.  they  tc.  in  deserts,  in  mountains  and  in  dens 

WANULRKST. 
Jer.  2.  20.  when  under  every  green  tree  thou  lo 

WANDERLTU. 
.7o415  23.he  jo. abroad  for  bread,8aying,where  isit7 
Pr<;i-.21.10.that  lo.outofthe  way  of  understanding 
27.  8.  as  a  bird  that  tc.  from  her  nest,  so  is  o  man 
that  10.  troin  his  place 
Isa.  16.  3.  take  counsel,  bewray  not  him  that  lo. 
Jer.  49.  5.  and  none  shall  gather  up  him  that  lo. 

WAxNDEKLNG. 
Gen.  37.  15.  behold,  he  was  lo.  in  the  field 
yrov.  26.  2.  as  the  bird  by  tc.  as  swallow  by  flying 
F.ccl.%.  9.  better  is  the  sight  of  the  eyes  than  the  lo. 
/ia.16. 2.  it  shall  be  as  a  lo.  bird  cast  out  of  the  nest 
1  7'iTn.5.13.to  be  idle,  lo.  about  from  house  to  house 
Jude  13.  JO.  stars  to  whom  is  reserved  darkness 

WAi\UEUL\GS. 
Psal.  56.  8.  thou  lellest  my  lo.  put  thou  my  tears 

WANT. 
Dcttt.  28.  48.  thou  shalt  serve  thy  enemies  in  jo. 

57.  she  shall  eat  them  for  lo.  of  all  things  secretly 
.fxidg.  18.  10.  a  place  where  is  no  lo.  19.  19. 
Job  24.  8.  they  embrace  the  rock  for  ir.  of  shelter 

30.  3.  for  10.  and  famine  they  were  solitary 

31.  19.  if  I  ha'^e  seen  any  perish  tor  ic.  of  clothing 
I'sal.  34.  9.  there  is  no  tc.  to  tluin  that  tear  him 
Prov.  6.  11.  and  thy  w.  as  an  armed  man,  24.  34. 

10.  21.  but  fools  die  for  tc.  of  wisdom 

13.23. there  is  thalisdesiroyc^d  for  to.  of  judgment 

14.  28.  in  w.  of  people  is  destruction  of  the  prince 

21.  5.  but  of  every  one  that  is  hasty  only  to  tc. 

22.  16.  that  givoth  to  rich  shall  surely  come  to  lo. 
Lam.  4.  9.  stricken  thro'  fur  tc.  of  the  fruits  of  field 
.dffi«.?4.6. 1  have  giv.  you  lo. of  bread  in  your  places 
Mark  12.  44.  she  of  her  w.  cast  in  all  she  had 
l.xtke  15.  14.  a  famine  arose,  he  began  to  be  in  tc. 
2Ct)r.8.14.  your  abundance  be  a  supply  for  their  tc. 

9.  12.  not  only  supplieth  the  tc.  of  the  saints 
Phil.  4.  11.  not  that  I  speak  in  respect  of  lo. 

V/ANT.S. 
.htdg.  19.  20.  howsoever,  let  all  thy  w.  lie  on  me 
Pktl.  2.  25.  Epaphroditus  that  ministered  to  my  lo. 

M'ANT. 
/'.>-.  23.  1.  the  Lord  is  my  shepherd,  I  shall  not  tc. 
34. 10.  they  that  seek  iLord  shall  not  tc.  any  good 
f'roc.  13.  25.  but  the  bvjily  of  the  wicked  shall  to. 
Ijsa.  34.16.  !io  one  shall  fail,  none  shall  lo.  her  mate 
.Icr.  33.  17.  David  not  tc.  a  man  to  sit  on  the  throne 
18.Levitesnot  10.  a  man  ||  'Xi.  19.  Jonadab  not  tc. 
Act.  4.  17.  that  they  may  tc.  bread  and  water 

WANIED. 
.fer.  44.  18.  wo  have  lo.all  thing.",  been  consumed 
.lolm  2. 3.  when  they  lo.  wine,  mother  of  Jesus  saith 
2C'or.  1 1.  9.  when  1  lo.  I  was  chargeable  to  no  man 

WANTEl'H. 
Dctit.V).  8.  shall  lend  him  lor  his  need  in  that  he  lo. 
Prov.  9.  4.  for  him  tliatio.  understanding  she  saith 
to  him,  16. 

10.  19.  in  tnnltitudo  of  words  there  tc.  not  sin 
28.16. [irince  that  ic.undiTstandiiig  is  an  opjiressor 

f'.ccl.  6.  2.  so  that  he  tc.  nothing  tor  his  soul 
Cant.  7.  2.  like  a  round  goblet  that  tc.  not  liquor 

WANTING. 
2Kings  10.  19.  call  all  prophets  of  Baal  and  all  his 
priests,  let  none  he  lo.  whoso  be  to.  shall  not  live 
Prov.  19. 7.  pursueth  with  words,  yet  they  are  lo.  to 
F.ccl.  1.  15.  that  which  is  tc.  cannot  be  numbered 
Oan.  5.  27.  thou  art  weighed  in  the  balances  and 
art  found  lo. 
Ti'r.l.S.shouIdest  set  in  order  the  things  that  are  to. 
3.  13.  that  nothing  be  lo.  unto  them 
./am.  1.  4.  ye  may  he  perfect  and  entire,  to.  nothing 

WANTON. 
/.«n.3. 16.  thedaughtersofZion  walk  with  lo.  eyes 

1  7'/ni.  5.  1 1.  to  wax  to.  against  Christ,  they  marry 
.lam.  .").  5.  ye  have  lived  in  pleasure  and  been  to. 

WANTONNESS. 
/<<)m.l3.13.walk  lioneHtly.not  In  eluunbering  andio. 

2  Pel.  2.  H.  they  allure  throiigb  lusts  and  iiiueh  tc. 

WAR. 

IVhen  tlie If rhreios  dmc  out  thiir  armies  and tccnt 
In  war  against  Vnir  enemies,  and  the  time  of 
battle  mas  at  hand,  the  high-jiriest  presented 
himsilf  at  the  hrad  of  the  army,  and  spoke  to 
the  people  in  this  manner  :  Hear,  O  Israel,  and 
be  noi  in  fear  of  your  enemies;  for  the  Lord 
your  God  fights  for  you.  Jlfler  tchuh  the  offi- 
cers proclaimed  alotid  at  the  hrad  of  evrrij 
troop :  Is  there  any  one  here  that  hath  hnilt  a 
new  house,  and  hath  not  yet  inhabited  it?  let 
him  depart  and  return  to  his  house,  for  fear  that 
another  should  romc-  and  live  in  it  first,  &c.  as- 
in  Deut.  20.  2,  3,  4,  &c. 

7'Ac  llcbretcs  tcere  formerlij  a  very  trarlike  nr.- 
tion.  The  hooks  that  inform  us  of  their  wars, 
are  neither  flattering  dttlliors,nor  ignornnt.hul 
iPf  re  authors  inspired  by  the  .Spirit  oftrvth  and 
Ktsaom.     Their  warriors  tcuri  none  of  those 


WAR 

fabulous  heroes,orprofessed  conquerors  jtchott 
business  it  teas  to  ravage  cities  and  provtrytc*t 
and  lo  reduce  foreign  nations  under  luetr  do- 
minion,merely  for  the  sake  of  governing  theia, 
or  for  purchasing  a  name.  'J'hey  tcere  commonly 
tcise  and  valiant  Oetierals,  raised  up  by  God  tu 
light  the  battles  of  the  Lord,  and  to  extirmiiiale 
his  enemies.  77if«eiofre6'ucA  as  Joshua, Caleb, 
Gideon,  Jephthah,  Samson,  David,  and  Josiab, 
tchose  names  alone  are  a  sujicinit  nii.omium. 

Their  wars  were  not  undertaken  upon  slight  occa- 
sions, nor  performed  icith  a  small  number  of 
people.  Under  Joshua,  the  affair  teas  of  no  lens 
importance,  than  to  make  himself  master  uf  a 
large  country,  tchich  (iod  had  given  to  the  la- 
raelites;  to  root  out  several  powerful  enemicn, 
tchich  (Iod  had  devoted  to  destruction;  and  to 
vindicate  an  offended  l)eity,and  human  nature, 
tchich  had  been  debased  by  a  wicked  and  corrupt 
people,  who  had  filed  tip  the  measure  of  their  ttf 
iijtiities.  Under  the  Judges,  the  matter  was  to 
assert  the  liberty  of  the  Israelites,  by  shaking 
off  the  yoke  of  powerful  kings,who  kept  them  in 
subjection.  Under  Isaul  and  iJavid,  the  same 
motives  prevailed  to  undertake  wariniiJ  to  these 
tcere  added  a  further  motive,  the  making  a  con- 
quest of  such  provinces  asOod  had  promised  to 
his  people;  so  far  teas  it  from  their  intention 
merely  to  reduce  the  power  of  the  Philistines, 
the  ..Jmmonttts,  the  J\loabites,the  ldumeans,the 
jlrabians,  the  Syrians,  and  the  several  princet 
that  were  in  possessioti  of  those  countries. 

In  the  latter  times  of  the  kingdoms  of  Israel  and 
Judah,  we  may  observe  their  kings  bearing  th* 
shock  of  the  greatest  kings  in  the  world,  name- 
ly, those  of  ..-Isia,  the  kings  of  ./Issyria  and 
Chaldea,  Hhalmaneser,  Sennacherib, Fsai-had- 
don,  and  J^Tebuehadn eziar,  who  made  the  whole 
east  tremble.  Under  the  Jilaccabees,  the  chosen 
people,  tcith  a  handful  ofmen,opposed  the  whole 
power  of  the  Ani  "•.■■■  of  JJssyria,  and  against  all 
theirpoicer  upheld  (hcreligion  of  their  fathers, 
and  shook  off  the  yoke  of  their  authority,  who 
had  a  design  both  against  their  religion  and 
liberty.  In  the  latter  times  of  their  nalion,with 
what  courage,  with  what  intrepidity  and  con 
stancy,  did  they  sustain  the  wars  against  ti« 
liomans,  who  tcere  the  masters  of  the  tcorld! 

But  how  great  armies  did  they  bring  into  the 
Jicid  7  In  the  beginning,  under  Moses  and 
./oshua,  they  were  all  soldiers,  and  men  bear- 
ing arms.  They  came  out  of  Kgypt  to  the 
number  of  six  hundred  thousand  fighting  men. 
When  Joshua  entered  into  the  land  of  (  anaan, 
he  fought  sometimes  with  detachments  nf  his 
troops,  and  sometimes  with  his  tchole  army, 
according  as  exigencies  required.  God  would 
often  give  the  victory  to  very  small  ariuies,  tt 
signalize  his  omnipotence,  and  to  humble  the 
pride  of  man.  For  example,  under  Gideon 
where  God  ordered  this  Gnieral  to  send  awatf 
the  greatest  part  of  his  army,  and  only  to  keep 
with  him  three  hundred  men,  with  which  he  de- 
feated an  innumerable  multitude  of  Midianite^ 
and  .Iti^alekites.  Sometimes  numerous  armies 
were  brought  into  the  field;  .ibijah,  king  of 
Judah,  with  an  army  of  four  hundred  thou- 
sand tnen,  made  war  tcith  Jerobonm,  king  of 
f.trael,  tcho  had  to  the  number  of  eight  hundred 
thousand:  Jlnd  of  th^e  eight  hundred  thou- 
sand, thirc  were  Jive  hundred  thousand  slain 
in  one  battle,  2  Chron.  13.  3 — 17.  Prkah,  son 
of  Hemaliah,  king  of  Israel,  in  one  day  killed 
one  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  men  of  the 
troops  of  Judah,  2  Chron.  28.  6.  Jlsa  king  of 
.ludah,  having  an  army  of  five  hundred  and 
figbty  thousand  tnen,  teas  attacked  by  y.erah, 
king  of  Cush,  who  hud  ati  army  of  a  million  of 
mrn  :  y.erah  teas  entirely  routed  by  the  troops 
,)/ ^.ta,  2  Chron.  14.9—13. 

lie  may  distinguish  two  kinds  of  wars  amorg 
the  Hebrews.  Snmr  tcere  of  obligation  as  being 
expressly  commanded  by  the  Lord ;  but  others 
were  free  and  voluntary.  The  first  irere  such 
as  God  appointed  them  to  undertake  :  For  ex- 
ample, against  the  .'1tnalekites,and  theCanaar^ 
ites,  tchich  were  nations  devoted  to  destruction 
for  their  sins.  The  others  tcere  undertaken 
by  the  captains  of  the  people,  to  revenge  some 
injttries  offered  to  the  nation,  to  punish  some 
insults  or  offences :  Sueh  teas  that  tchich  the 
Ilebreirs  made  against  the  city  of  Giheah,  and 
against  the  tribe  of  llenjamin,  which  would 
uphold  fiem  in  their  fault,  Judg.  20.  8.  ..^nd 
sueh  teas  that  which  I^arid  made  against  tkt 
.Immonites,  trhnse  king  bad  affronted  his  am- 
bassadors, 2  Sam.  10.  1 — 14.  Or  to  maintain 
and  aefend  their  allies  ;  as  that  of  .foshtia 
against  the  kings  of  thr  Canaanites,  to  protect 
the  Gibconites.Jotk.  10.  6—11.     Lasth,wluit 


WAR 

tvtrjust  reasont  may  authorise  a  nation  or  a 
prince  to  make  war  against  another,  seems  to 
have  obtained  among  the  Hebrews.  War  is 
threatened  by  God  in  scripture  as  one  of  the 
greatest  judgments,and  may  justly  be  reckoned 
among  the  many  dreadful  miseries  which  sin 
has  entailed  on  mankind. 

The  common  acceptation  of  war,  in  scripture,  is 
a  state  of  Itostiliiy  between  nations,  states, 
provinces,  or  parties,  as  in  1  Kings  14.30  Luke 
14.  31,  and  many  other  places:  But  it  is  taken 
in  a  spiritual  sense  in  2  Cor.  10.  3,  where  the 
apostle  says.  We  jcar  not  after  tlic  flesh,  that  is, 
'  "/f'e  do  not  use  outward  force  and  strength; 
but  as  the  end  of  our  warfare  is  spiritual,  so 
are  the  means:  the  gospel  we  preach  has  its 
effects  on  the  minds  and  inward  part  of  men; 
and,  through  the  power  of  divine  grace,  is  made 
effectual  for  the  subduing  and  sanctifying  their 
corrupt  and  sinful  natures." 
Eiod.  1.10.  when  there  is  2fl.  they  join  ourenemics 

13.  17.  lest  the  people  repent  when  tliey  see  w. 

17.  16.  the  Lord  will  have  w.  with  Amalek 

32.  17.  there  is  a  noise  of  w.  in  the  camp 
JVtt?tt.  1.  3.  from  twenty  years  old,  all  that  are  able 
to  go  forth  to  w.  20.  22.  |  20.  2.  JJeut.  3.  18. 

JO.  9.  if  ye  go  to  w.  ye  shall  blow  an  alarm 

31.  3.  Moses  spake,  arm  some  of  yourselves  to  w. 
4.  of  every  tribe  1000  shall  ye  send  to  w. 

22.6.  shall  your  brethren  go  to  w.  and  ye  sjt  there? 

20.  if  ye  will  go  armed  before  the  Lord  to  w.  27. 

JDeu*. 4.34. hath  God  assayed  by  w.  to  take  a  nation 

20.  12.  but  will  make  w.  against  thee,  19,  20. 

21.10.  when  thou  goest  forth  tow.  against  eneri^ies 
24.  5.  when  hath  taken  a  wife  shall  not  go  to  w. 

Josh.  11.  23.  and  the  land  rested  from  w.  14.  15. 

14. 11.  so  is  my  strength  now  for  w.  to  go  out 
Judg.3.~.  that  Israel  might  know  to  teach  them  w. 

5.  8.  chose  new  gods,  then  was  w.  in  the  gales 
11.  27.  but  thou  dost  me  wrong  to  w.  against  me 
21. 22.  we  reserved  not  to  each  his  wife  m  the  w. 

ISam.  14.  52.  was  sore  w.  against  Philistines,  19. 8. 

23.  15.  for  the  Philistines  make  w.  against  me 
2.Sa?n.3.1.long  ic. between  house  of  Saul  and  David 

11.  7.  David  demanded  how  the  w.  prospered 
iKinirs  2.5.shed  the  blood  o(w.  put  the  blood  of  w. 
14.30.  w.  between  Rehoboam  and  Jeroboam, 15. 6. 
15.7.there  was  w.  between  Abijam  and  Jeroboam 

16.  there  was  w.  between  Asa  and  Baasha,  32. 

20.  18.  or  be  come  out  for  w.  take  (hem  alive 
22.  1.  they  continued  three  years  without  w. 

iKings  18.20.  I  have  counsel  and  strength  for  (c. 
lCAr(;rt.5.10.  they  made  tc.  with  the  Hagarites,  19. 

22.  many  slain,  because  the  70.  was  of  God 
2Chron.  15.  19.  no  w.  to  the  35th  year  of  Asa 

35. 21.  but  against  the  house  wherewith  I  have  w. 
Job  5.  20.  in  w.  redeem  from  power  of  the  sword 

10.  17.  changes  and  w.  are  against  me 

38. 23. which  I  have  reserved  against  the  day  of  jo. 
Psal.  27.  3.  though  w.  should  rise  against  me 

55.  21.  words  smooth,  but  w.  was  in  his  heart 

68.  30.  scatter  thou  the  people  that  delight  in  w. 

120.  7.  but  when  I  speak,  they  are  for  w. 

140.  2.  continually  are  gathered  together  for  w. 
Prov.  20.  18.  and  with  good  advice  make  w. 

24.  6.  for  by  wise  counsel  thou  shaltmake  thy  w. 
Eccl.  3.  8.  a  time  ofw.  and  a  time  of  peace 

8.  8.  of  death,  there  is  no  discharge  in  that  w. 
/so.2.4.nor  shall  they  learn  w.  any  more,  Mic.  4.  3. 

3.  25.  thy  mighty  shall  fall  in  the  w. 

21.  15.  they  fled  from  the  grievousness  of  io. 
.36.  5.  I  have  counsel  and  strength  for  w. 

Jer.  4.  19.  because  thou  hast  heard  the  alarm  of  tc. 

6.  4.  prepare  ye  w.  against  her,  arise,  let  us  go  up 

23.  Sft  in  array  as  men  for  w.  against  thee 
21.  2.  Nebuchadnezzar  maketh  w.  against  us 
42.  14.  will  go  to  Egypt,  where  we  shall  see  no  w. 

48.  14.  how  sny  ye,  we  are  mighty  men  for  w.7 

49.  2.  an  alarm  of  w.  to  be  heard  in  Kabbah 
F.iek.  17.  17.  nor  Pharaoh  make  for  him  in  w. 
Dan.  7.  21.  the  same  horn  made  w.  with  the  saints 

9.  26.  to  the  end  of  the  w.  are  desolitions 
Joel  3.  9.  prepare  w.  wake  up  the  mighty  men 
Jitic.  2.  8.  that  pass  by,  as  men  averse  from  w. 

3.  5.  they  even  prepare  w.  against  him 
T.nke  14.  31.  or  what  king  going  to  make  w.J 
Rev.  11.  7.  the  beast  shall  make  w.  against  them 

J2.  7.  there  was  w.  in  heaven  against  the  dragon 

17.  to  make  w.  with  the  remnant  of  her  seed    ■ 
13.  4.  who  is  able  to  make  to.  with  the  beast? 

7.  given  to  him  to  make  w.  with  saints,  17.  14. 

10.  11.  in  righteousness  doth  he  make  ro. 
19  the  beast  and  kings  gathered  to  make  v>. 

See  E.XPKRT,  Man,  Men. 
Weapons  nf  W.'\R. 
T)eut.  1.41.  when  ye  had  girded  on  weapons  ofw. 
./i(rf^.l8.  Il.six  hundred  with  weapons  ofw.  16,17. 
iSam,  1. 27.  how  are  the  weapons  of  ic.  perished 
Keel.  9.  18.  wisdom  is  better  than  weapons  of  w. 
Jer.  21.  4.  I  will  turn  back  the  weapons  of  10. 
667 


WAR 


WAS 


Jer.  51. 20.  thou  art  my  battle-axe  and  Mca;).  0/ 10  '  WARMETH 

£:2(;A.32.27.gonedownto  hell  with  weapons  ufw.  Job  .39.14.  the  ostrich  that  w.  hei  eggs  in  thedurt 
WAR,  kerb.  y;.a.44. 16.  he  u;.  himself  and  saith  alia, lum  warm 

2Sam.  22.  35.  the  Lord  teaclieth  my  hands  to  2C.  a  WARAUiNG. 

bow  of  steel  is  broken  by  me,  Ps.  18. 34.  1 144. 1.  Mark  14.  67.  when  she  saw  Peter  w.  himself 
2Kings  16.  5.  the  kings  Kezin  and  Pekali  came  WARN. 

up  to  Jerusalem,  to  w.  against  it,  Jsa.  7.  1.  2CAron.l9.  10.  shall  u).  them  that  they  trespass  not 
2CAroK.  6.  34.  if  thy  people  go  to  if.  against  enemy  £tek.  3.  18.  nor  speakest  to  w.  the  wicked,  33.  8. 
Isa.  41. 12.  they  that  w.  against  thee  be  as  nothing  j  19.  yet  if  thou  w.  the  wicked,  33.  9. 
aCor.  10.  3.  walk  in  fle.sh,  do  not  lo.  aller  the  flesli  21.  if  thou  li.  righteous  ||  33. 3.  w.  the  people,?. 
1  Tim.  1.  18.  that  thou  mightest  w.  a  good  w  aifare  |  .'lets  20.  31.  I  ceased  not  to  w.  every  one  with  lean 
Jain.  4.  1.  of  your  lusts  that  w.  in  your  inenibers  ICor.  4.  14.  but  as  my  beloved  sons  I  w.  you 
2.ye  tight  and  w.  yet  ye  have  not  because  ask  not  1  'J'hess.  5.  14.  brethren,  w.  them  that  are  unruly 


IFct.  2.  11.  from  lusts  which  w.  against  the  soul 

WARRED. 
JVum.  31.  7.  and  they  w.  against  the  Midianites 
Josh.  24.  9.  Balak  kingof  Moab  w.  against  Israel 
IKings  14.  19.  Jeroboam,  how  he  w.  and  reigned 
22.45.  acts  of  Jehoshapliat,  how  huw.  are  written 
2Kiugs  6.  8.  the  king  of  Syria  w.  against  Israel 
•iChron.  26.  6.  Uzziah  w.  against  tlie  Philistines 

WARREl'H. 
2  Tim.  2. 4.  no  man  that  w.  eniangleth  himself  with 

WARRING. 
2Ki>tgs  19.  8.  Rabsliakeh  returned  and  found  the 


WARNED. 

IKings  0.  10.  sent  to  the  place  manof  God  Mj.hiiB 
J'sal.  19.  11.  moreover  by  them  is  ihy  servant  10 
J'-zek.  3.  21.  he  shall  surely  live,  because  he  is  jc. 

33.  6.  if  watchman  see  and  the  people  be  not  w. 
Mat.  2.  12.  Joseph  being  w.  of  God  departed,  22. 

3.  7.  O  generation  of  vipers,  who  hath  w.  yuutu 

llee  from  the  wrath  to  como'J  J.uke  3.  7. 

Jicts  10.  22.  Cornelius  w.  from  God  by  an  angel 

JJeb. 11.7.  by  faith  Noah  being  w.  prepared  an  ark 

WARNING. 

Jer.  6.  10.  to  whom  shall  I  speak  and  give  w.? 


king  of  Assyria  w.  against  Libnali,  ha.  37.  8.  Kick.  3.  17.  hear  the  word  and  give  them  w 


Rom.  7.  23.  but  I  see  a  law  in  my  members  w. 

WARRIOR,  ri. 
IKings  12.  21. chosen  men  who  were  w.  2CAr.ll.l. 
Isa.  U.  5.  battle  of  the  w.  is  with  confused  noise 

WARS. 
jVum.  21. 14.  it  is  said  in  book  of  the  70.  of  the  Lord 
Judg.  3.1.  as  had  not  known  all  the  w.  of  Canaan 
2  6'a/n.  8.  10.  Toi  sent  Joram  to  David,  for  Had- 
adezer  had  w.  with  Toi,  IChron.  18.  10. 
ICAron.  22.  8.  hast  made  great  w.  shalt  not  build 
'iChron.  16.  9.  from  henceforth  thou  shalt  havew. 
Psal.  46.  9.  he  maketh  to.  to  cease  to  ends  of  earth 
Mat.  24.  6.  ye  shall  hear  of  ki.  and  rumours  oi  w. 
see  that  ye  be  not  troubled,  J>/arA13.7./,jjA-e  21.9. 
Jam.  4. 1.  from  whence  come  w.  and  lightings? 

WARD. 
Oen.  40.  3.  Pharaoh  put  them  in  w.  4,  7. 

41.  10.  Pharaoh  was  wroth  and  put  me  in  w. 

42.  17.  Joseph  put  his  brethren  in  w.  three  days 
Lev.  24.  12.  they  put  the  blasphemer  in  w. 
.Yum.  15.  34.  they  put  the  gatherer  of  sticks  in  w. 
25am.  20.  3.  David  put  the  ten  concubines  in  w. 
ICkr.  12.  29.  had  kept  the  ic.of  the  house  of  Saul 

25.  8.  they  cast  lots,  w.  against  >c.  small  as  great 

26.  16.  the  lot  came  forth  westward,  by  the  cause- 
way of  the  going  up,  w.  against  w. 

JVcA.  12.  24.  to  give  thanks  w.  over-against  w. 
25.  were  porters  keeping  Ihe  w.  at  the  gates 
45.  kept  w.  of  their  God  and  w.  of  purihcation 
Jsa.  21.  8.  I  am  set  in  my  w.  whole  nights 
.Jer.  31.  13.  Irijah  a  captain  of  the  w.  was  there 
Eiek.  19.  9.  they  put  Zedekiah  in  w.  in  chains 
^^cts  12. 10.  when  they  were  past  first  and  second  w. 

WARDS. 
ICAr.  9.23.  kept  the  house  of  the  tabernacle  by  ic. 
26.  12.  having  w.  one  against  another  to  minister 
JVeh.  13.  30.  1  appointed  the  w.  of  the  priests 

WARDROBE. 

IKings  22.14.  Huldah  the  prophetess,  the  wife  of 

Shallum,  the  keeper  of  the  w.  2  Chron.  34. 22. 

WARE. 

Luke  8.  27.  w.  no  clothes  nor  abode  in  any  house 

WARE 
.Vat.24.50.Ld.  shall  come  in  an  hour  he  is  not  w.of 
jicts  14.  6.  they  were  w.  of  it  and  fled  to  Lystra 
2Tim.  4.  15.  of  the  copper-smith  be  thou  w.  also 

WARE,  Substantive. 

JVeh.  10.  31.  if  people  bring  w.  on  sabbath  to  sell 

13.  16.  men  of  Tyre  brought  all  manner  ofw. 

20.  merchants  and  sellers  ofall  kind  ofw.  lodged 

WARES. 

Jer.  10.  17.  gather  up  thy  w.  out  of  the  land 

Ezek.^'.lG.  by  reason  of  the  multitude  ofw.  18, 33. 

Jonah  1.  5.  the  mariners  cast  forth  w.  into  the  sea 

WARFARE. 
ISam.  28. 1.  the  Philistines  gathered  armies  fortr. 
Job  7.  t  1.  is  there  not  a  w.  to  man  ujion  earth? 
Jsa.  40.  2.  cry  to  her  that  her  ?c.  is  accomplished 
ICor.  9.  7.  goeth  a  w.  any  time  at  Iiisown  charges? 
iCor.  10.  4.  the  weapons  of  our  10.  are  not  carnal 
1  Tim.  1.  18.  that  thou  mightest  war  a  good  w. 

WAR.M. 
'iKings  4.  34.  and  the  flesh  of  the  child  waxed  w. 
Job  6.  17.  what  time  they  wa.t  w.  they  vanish 
37.  17.  how  thy  garments  are  ?o.  when  quitteth 
Kcel.A.ll.ivio  have  heat,  how  can  one  bo  w.  alone? 
Jsa.  44.  15.  he  will  take  therc^of  and  w.  himsek' 
16.  warmeth  himself,  and  saith,  aha,  I  am  w. 
47.  14.  there  shall  not  be  a  coal  to  w.  at  nor  fire 
Hag.  1.  6.  ye  clothe  you,  but  there  is  none  w. 

WARMED. 
.Job  31.  20.  if  were  not  w.  with  fleece  of  mvsheep 
Mark  14.  .'>4.  Peter  w.  himself,  .John  18.  18,  25. 
Jam.  2.  16.  depart  in  peace,  be  you  w.  and  filled 


18.  thou  givost  him  not  w.  nor  speakest,  20. 
33.  4.  taketh  not  w.\\  5.  he  heard  and  took  not  10 
Col.  1.  28.  w.  every  man,  and  teachingevery  man 

WARP. 
/,ec.  13.  48.  plague  in  the  JO.  or  woof,  49,51, 57,59 
52.  burn  w.  \\  56.  rend  w.  \\  58.  wash  the  w. 
WAS. 
Gen.  5.  24.  Enoch  walked  with  God  and  w.  not 
21.  20.  God  w.  with  the  lad,  he  gre\«ftnd  became 
20.  28.  we  saw  certainly  the  Lord  xc.  with  thee 
29.12.Jacob  told  Rachel,  he  w.  her  father's  brother 
31.  40.  thus  I  t<3.intheday,droughtconsumed'me 

37.  29.  and  behold,  Joseph  ?o.  not  in  the  pit 
39.  2.  Lord  m.  with  Josejih,  he  ic.  prosperous,  22. 

Exod.  20.  21.  and  Moses  drew  near  where  God  lo. 

JVum.  27.  3.  he  w.  not  in  the  company  of  Korah 

Josh.  1.  5.  as  I  «).  with  Moses,  sol  will  be  with  thee 

17.  Lord  thy  God  be  with  thee  as  he  w.  with  Mosci 

6. 27. the  Lord  w.  with  Joshua,  and  his  fame  noised 

14.  11.  as  yet  I  am  as  strong  as  I  jo.  for  war 
.Judg.  20.  3.  tell  us,  how  w.  this  wickedness? 
lSa7n.  9.  10.  they  went  where  the  man  of  God  w. 
2.S'a7n.l2.3.the  ewe-lamb  jo.  unto  him  as  a  daughter 

16.  23.  the  counsel  of  Ahithophel  w.  as  if  a  man 

had  iii<]uired  at  the  oracle  of  God,  so  w.  the 

I  Kivgs  3.  26.  woman  spake  whose  living  child  w. 

8.  5'(.  God  be  with  us  as  he  w.  with  our  fathers 

19.  11.  the  Lord  w.  not  in  the  Wind,  the  Lord  w. 
not  in  the  earthquake  ||  12.  w.  not  in  the  fire 

20.41.  king  discerned  him  that  he  ac.of  propheta 
iliings  10.30.  doneto Ahaballthatro.iniiiylKar: 

Esth.  8.  1.  Esther  had  told  what  he  w.  to  her 
.Job  3.  26.  I  w.  not  in  safety,  neither  had  I  rest 

29.  4.  as  I  w.  inthetiaysof  my  youth  when  secret 
Psal.  37.  36.  he  passed  away  and  lo  he  w.  not 

38.  14.  thus  I  w.  as  a  man  that  hearcth  not 
53.  5.  they  were  in  great  fear,  where  no  fear  ». 

Jsa.  9.  1.  the  dimness  shall  not  be  such  as  w.  in  her 

23.  13.  this  people  jr.  not  till  Assyrian  founded  it 

./cr.  48. 27.  tr.  not  Israel  a  derision  unto  thee?  w.h« 

found  among  thieves?  thou  skippcdsl  for  joy 

Jlmus  7. 14.  I  w.  no  proj>het,  neither  JO.  I  a  prophet's 

son,  hut  I  If.  a  her<lman  and  a  gatherer  of  fruit 

.Jonah  4. 2.  I  pray  thee,  Lord,  w.  not  this  my  saying? 

Mai.  1. 2.  w.  not  Esau  Jacob's  brother?  saith  tlie  L. 

Mat.  24.  21.  such  as  !/i.  not  since  thcbeginningof 

the  world,  or  ever  shall  be,  Mark  13. 19. 

Mark  2.  4.  they  uncovered  the  root  where  he  w. 

5.  5.  always  night  and  day  he  ic.  in  the  mountain! 
11.  30.  the  baptism  of  John,  w.  it  from  heaven, 

or  of  men?  answer  me,  J.uke  20.  1. 
.JoJni  1.  I.  the  Word  70.  with  God,  and  Word  !^.  God 
9.  that  ?/■.  the  true  light,  that  lighteth  every  mai 
15.  John  cried,  saying,  he  w.  before  me,  30. 
3.  26.  he  that  w.  with  thee  beyond  Jordan 

6.  62.  Son  of  man  ascend  up  where  he  w.  before 
8.  58.  Jesus  said,  verily  before  .\braham  le.  1  am 
1 1.  15.  I  am  glad  for  your  sakcs  I  w.  not  there 
](i.  4.  these  things  I  said,  because  I  w.  with  you 
17.  5.  I  he  glory  I  had  with  thee  before  the  world  zr. 

20.  24.  Thomas  one  of  the  twelve  ?r.  not  with  them 

21.  11.  full  of  fishes,  yet  w.  not  the  net  broken 
.lets  5.  4.  after  sold,  w.  it  not  in  thy  own  power? 

7.  9.  with  envy  sold  Joseph,but  God  ic.wilh  him 
11.  17.  what  w.  I  that  I  could  withstand  God? 
2 1.33.tho  captain  came  near,  demanded  who  he  te. 

2C»r.  1.  18.  our  word  7/1.  not  yea  and  nay,  19. 

11.  5.  I  w.  not  a  whit  behind  chiefest  apostles 
1  Thess.2. 1.  our  entrance  unto  you  to.  not  in  vain 
3.  our  e.vhortation  w.  not  in  deceit,  nor  in  guil« 
'iTim.  3.9.  follyshall  be  manifest  as  theirs  also  w. 
Heb.  7.  4.  now  consider  how  great  this  man  v 

11.  38.  of  whom  the  world  w.  not  worthy 
Jam.  1.  34.  forgettetli  w  hat  manner  of  man  h«tt. 


WAS 

Hev.  1.  4.  from  h';ra  which  is  and  which  I*.  8.  ]  4. 8. 

17.  S.  Uiu  beasl  thou  sawest  w.  oiid  in  uut,  yet  ui,  1 1. 

iVc  So. 

71  WAS. 

Gen.  41. 13.  came  to  pass  as  he  interpreted,  ao  it  w. 

4i.  G.  ho  it  w.  sold  to  all  the  people  ol'tliu  land 

45.  S.  now  it  w.  not  you  that  sent  nie,  but  Ciod 

Kxod.  10.  15.  manna  lor  lliey  wist  not  what  it  w. 

Jo.«A. 11. -0.it  to.  oftlie  Lord  to  harden  their  hearts 

14.  7.  1  brought  Moses  word  as  U  w.  in  my  heart 

Ju(/4'.G.3.BO  U  ic.when  Isr.  had  sown,  Midiau  cauie 

26uHi.  3.  37.  it  w.  not  of  the  king  to  slay  Abner 

la.  -iH.  Bttw  a  tumult,  but  I  knew  not  wJiat  it  to. 
\  Kings  "i.  15.  is  my  brother's  for  it  ic.  his  from  Lord 
13.  (f.  Jeroboam,  his  hand  became  as  it  to.  belbre 
S".!.  33.  perceived  that  it  tc.  not  the  king  of  Israel 
2Kings  7.  7.  left  the  camp  as  i£  WJ.and  lied  for  life 
jL'«tA?4.5.  Esther  gave  llatach  a  command  to  Mor- 
decai  to  know  what  it  to.  and  why  tt  to. 
Eccl.  12.  7.  then  shall  dust  return  to  earth  as  it  to. 
Cant.  3.4.  it  ir.  but  a  little  that  1  passed  from  them 
Jsa.  U.  lb.  as  it  IC.  to  Israel  in  the  day  he  came  up 
4d.  lb.  from  the  time  that  it  to.  there  am  1 
Kzek.  10. 15.  his  it  ic.  \\  lU.  thus  it  to.  saith  the  Lord 
Jllark  5.  14.  went  to  see  what  it  tc.  that  was  done 
J^uke  '20.  7.  they  could  not  tell  whence  it  tc. 
■2'2.  23.  they  began  to  inquire  which  of  them  it  w. 
John  2.U.the  ruler  tasted  and  knew  not  whence  it  u>. 
5.  13.  he  that  was  healed  wist  not  who  it  tc. 
20.  14.  and  knew  not  that  it  to.  Jesus,  21.  4. 
21. 12.  the  disciples  knowing  that  it  mi.  the  Lord 
Koin.  5. 10.  not  as  it  ic.  by  one  that  snmed,  so  gill 

Bc/told  it  WAS. 
Gen.  1.  31.  God  saw  etiery  thing,  bdiold  it  tc.  good 
0.  12.  God  looked  on  eurlh,  bikold  it  to.  corrupt 
2U.  25.  in  tm;  morning,  behold  it  tc.  Leah 
31.  2.  bclwld  It  tc.  not  toward  Jacob  us  before 
41.7.  Pharaoh  awoke  uixd  biliula  it  w.  a  dream 
42.  27.  for  behold  it  tc.  in  the  sack's  moulli 
Lev.  10.  10.  and  behold  it  to.  burnt,  l.'iain.  30.  3. 
lA'i/io-i  3. 21.  behold  it  tc.  dead,  behold  it  w.  my  son 

There  W.VS. 
Ocn.  1.  3.  let  there  be  light,  and  there  tc.  light 
2.  5.  and  there  to.  not  a  man  to  till  the  ground 

2U.  tlure  to.  not  found  u  help  meet  for  liim 
Ezod-li.  30.  there  to.  a  great  cry  in  Egypt,  for  there 
w.  not  a  house  where  there  w.  not  one  dead 
A'urn.  20.  04.  there  ic.  not  a  man  .Moses  nnmbereil 
Dcut.  2.  30.  there  tc.  not  one  city  loo  strong,  3.4. 
32. 12.  there  tc.  no  strange  god  with  him 
Jo.th.  8.  17.  there  tc.  not  a  man  left  in  Ai  or  Bcth-el 
35.therc  w.  not  a  word  Joshua  read  not  before  Isr. 
11.  11.  there  to.  not  any  left  to  breathe 
Id.there  ic.notacity  that  made  peace  with  Israel 
Jiulg.  4. 10.  host  of  Siseru  fell,  tltere  ic.  not  man  left 
I.Sam.'.  17.  for  there  m.  his  house,  there  he  judged 
2Kin/;s  10.  21.  there  tc.  not  a  man  that  came  not 
11.  10.  laid  hands  on  her,  and  there  tc.  she  slain 
I'sal.  106.  11.  there  to.  not  one  of  them  left 
Kab.  3.  4.  and  there  w.  the  hiding  of  his  power 
2  Cor.  8.  11.  that  as  there  tc.  a  readiness  to  will 
Hce  None. 
Behold  there  WAS. 
F.tod.  9.  7.  and  Pharaoh  sent,  and  behold  there  tc. 
not  one  of  the  cattle  of  the  Israelites  dead 
Judg.  7.  13.  behold  there  tc.  a  man  told  a  dream 
14.  8.  behold  there  w.  a  swarm  of  bees  in  the  lion 
ISain.  It).  16.  behold  there  w.  an  image  in  the  bed 
1  Kings  19. 6.  bihold  there  tc.  a  cake  l.aken  on  coali 
^Kittgn  7.  5.  behold  there  tc.  no  man  there,  10. 
y.eeh.  5.  7.  behold  there  tc.  lill  up  a  talent  of  lead 
Mat.  28.  2.  behold  tki  re  w.  a  great  earthquake 

WASH. 
The  Orientals  tecrevscd  to  wash  the  feet  ofslran 
gcrs  tcho  came  ojf  ajourneij,  becatue  they  com- 
monlij  tr.alked  icilh  thiir  leg.i  naked,  and  their 
feet  oiiltj  defended  tcith  a  sandal.  ThusJibra- 
ham  washed  the  feet  of  the  three  angels,  (ien. 
18.4.  The  fci I  of  Elicicr,Abrahani' s  steward, 
and  those  that  accompattied  him,  were  washed, 
when  they  arrived  at  the  houseof  l.abnn,  Gen. 
S4.32.  And  liketcise  those  of  .hsiph's  brethren 
their  feet  were  washed,  tchrn  they  came  into 
Egypt,  Oen.  43.24.  This  ojjice  teas  commonly 
performed  by  srrvant.i  and  slaves. 
Our  l.ufd  .Irsus,  to  gire  his  .'Ijtostlis  an  riatnple 
of  humility,  washed  their  feet.  Jul)0  13.5,  .Mler 
that,  ho  pouriMl  wnli-r  into  a  bason,  and  began 
to  loa-ih  the  (lisoiiiles'  feet.  Tliis  washing,  as 
it  teas  a  scri'ile  employment,  devoted  our  Sa- 
viour's humility,  ichich  Christians  ought  to 
imttnlehim  in;  and  as  it  teas  stieh  a  particular 
act,  it  denoted  his  wnshiiif;  aieay  their  sim  by 
Ins  blood,  as  he  himself  told  Prlrr  in  verse  8. 
If  r  trash  iheo  not,  thou  hnst  no  part  with  me. 
■Washing,  in  scripture,  is  frrjoi ntlii  taken  in 
this  srn.ie,  as  in  Psnl.  51.  2,  7,  IVash  mo  llio- 
rouphly  from  mine  iniquity  :'tA«t  is,  "  Cleanse 
me  from  the  guilt  and  defilrmrnt  of  sin  by  thy 
rracc,  and  bij  the  virtue  of  the  blood  of  Christ  " 
668 


WAS 


WAS 


uhichtcas  signified  by  the  ceremonial\\ai\\m%t\\Cor.  C.  11.  but  ye  arc  ic.  but  ye  tie  sancti&ed 
under  the  law.     Mnd  our  Havwar  tu  the  foit-\  1  J  im.  5.  10.  if  siie  liavu  tc.  the  taints'  feel 
cited  passage,  Jiiiu  13.  10,  tells  I'lltr,  lie  that   Heb.  10.  22.  having  our  bodies  to.  with  pure  watei 
is  ifu^Viiii,  needetli  not  save  to  wash  his  feet,  2/Vt.2. 22. sow  lliai  was  ui.  to  wallowing  m  tbemirt 
but  IS  clean  sviry  wnit;  that  is,  "  Those  souls  Rev.  1.  5.  that  tc.  us  from  our  sins  in  his  blood 


that  are  washed  with  my  blood,  their  state  is 
}iot  to  be  renewed;  they  need  tiut  be  justijicd  a 
seciiiid  time;  yet  in  regard  of  the  reiiiaiiider  of 
sin  and  lust  that  is  in  them,  and  will  be  so 
tchile  they  are  m  the  tcorld,  and  the  teinptations 
which  coery  where  lie  before  them,  as  snares 
for  their  feet,  they  will  have  need  of  a  daily 
washing,  by  repentance,  and  fresh  applications 
of  their  souls  to  my  blood,  by  the  repeated  exer- 
cises of  faith,  according  to  their  renewed  and 
repeated  acts  of  sin.''  See  also  ICor.  0.  11. 
Tit.  3.  5.  Kev.  1.  5. 

Wash  to  purify,  cleanse,  and  whiten.  There  were 
dicers  sorts  u/ washing,  [1]  jValural,  Gen. 18.4. 
[2]  Ceremontal,  lleb.  9.  lU.  L3J  Jlirac.ulous, 
2  Kings 5. 10, 13.  [4]  JJorul,  Paul.  20. 0.  |  73. 13. 
[5]  fipirituul,  I'sal.  51.2.  Ezek.  10.  9.  [OJ  .'iu- 
perstitious,  Mat.  13.^2.  [7]  iiaeramcntal,Acls 
22.  16.  Put  for,  [1]  Plenty,  Job  29.  0.  [2j 
Pardon  and  saucttjicution,  1  Cor.  0.11.  Kev.  i. 
5.  1  7.  14.  [3]  Repentance,  Isu.  1.  10.  [4]  Rc- 
foriiialion,  Prov.  30. 12.  I'o  wanh  one's  leet  in 
butter,  .lob  29.  6.  To  wash  one's  clotlies  in 
wine,  CSen.  49.  11.  To  wash  one's  feet  in  Ihe 
blood  of  tiie  wicked,  Psal.  58.  10.  These  are 
figurative  and  hypi  rbulicul  expression's,  to  sig- 
nify the  gnat  abundance  oJ  butter,  or  wine^ 
and  the  vengeance  that  the  just  obtain  over  the 
wicked.  'I'o  wash  the  hands  was  a  token  of 
innocence.  Mat.  27.  24. 

Cien.  18.  4.  I  iiray  you  w.  your  feet,  19.  2.  1  24. 32. 

h'.xod.  2.  5.  the  daughter  of  Pharaoh  came  to  w 
29.  4.  Aaron  and  Ins  sons  thou  shall  bring  and  tc. 


7.  14.  Iidve  w  their  robes  and  made  tbem  white 

See  Clothes. 

WASHEST. 

Job  14.  19.  thou  tc.  away  the  things  which  grow 

WASllLNG. 
iSam.  11.  2.  David  saw  a  woman  w.  herself 
Luke  5.  2.  but  the  tisherinen  were  w.  ihcir  nets 

WASHING,  S. 
A(Mj.l3. 56.  the  plague  be  soinew  hat  dark  after  w 
jVtA.  4.  23.  tiiat  every  one  put  thein  olf  for  w. 
Ca)it.4.2.1ike  sheep  which  came  up  from  the  i«.C.6 
Mark  7.  4.  as  the  w.  of  cups,  pots,  and  tables,  8. 
Kpli.  5.  20.  cleanse  it  with  w.  of  water  by  word 
Tit.'i.  5.  he  saved  us  by  the  w.  of  regeneration 
Heb.  9. 10.  which  stood  only  in  meats  and  divers  to 

WASH-POT. 
Psal.  CO.  8.  Moab  is  my  w.  over  Edom  will  I  cas« 
out  my  shoe,  108.  9. 
WAST. 
Dcut.  5.  15.  thou  w.  a  servant  in  land  of  Egypt 
15.  15.  w.  abondman  in  Egypt,  10. 12.  |  24. 18,22. 
23.  7.  because  tliou  w.  a  stranger  in  liis  land 
2*u»i.  5.  2.  thou  w.  he  ihat  leddest  out  Israel 
Jui  38.4. where  jcwhcn  1  laid  foundations  of  earth? 
Jer.  50.  24.  lliou  art  taken  and  w.  not  aware 
Ezek.Va.Q.  I  said  lo  thee,  when  thou  in.  in  thy  blood 
Obad.  11.  even  thou  w.  as  one  of  them 
jliot.  20.  09.  a  damsel  camctoPeler,  saying,  thou 
al.soK.  with  Jesus  of  Galilee,  Mark  14.07. 
.fohn  1.48.  when  thou  (C.  under  fig-lree,  I  saw  thc9 
Rev.  11.  17.  who  art,  and  u:.  and  art  to  come,  16.  5. 

WASTE. 
JcrAO.}^.  have  sworn  lhat  Bozrah  shall  become  lo. 


them  with  water,  3U.  19,  21),  21.  [  4U.  12.  Mat.  20.  8.  to  what  purpose  is  this  w.?  Mark  14.4. 


Lev.  6.  27.  shall  ic.  that  whereon  it  was  sprinkled 

13.  54.  w.  the  thing  wiierein  the  plague  is  I 
58.  whatsoever  thing  of  skin  it  be  thou  shall  w.  it 

14.  8.  shave  and  jc.  himself  in  water,  iJeut.Si.  11. 
9.  w.  his  flesh  in  water,  15. 10.  |  10.  4,  24.  |  22.  0. 

17.  16.  if  he  w.  not,  he  sliall  bear  his  iniquity 
Jjeut.  21.  6.  shall  tc.  their  hands  over  llie  heifer 
Ruth  3.  3.  w.  thyself  therefore  and  anoint  thee 
1  .Sxim.  25. 41.  let  thy  handmaid  be  a  scrv.  lo  w.  feet 
2.SUW.  11.  8.  Daviil  said,  go  down  and  w.  thy  feet 
2A'/H^'-,v5.10.Klishasaid,go(o.inJordan  seven  times 

12.  may  I  not  w.  in  them  and  be  cleani 

13.  when  he  saith  to  thee,  w.  and  be  cleani 
-2Chron.  4.  6.  lavers  lojc.  in,  sea  for  priests  to  «-.  in 
.lob  9. 30.  if  1  w.  myself  with  snow-water  and  make 
P.sal.  SiO.  6.  1  will  w.  my  hands  in  iimocency 

51.  2.  w.  me  thoroughly  from  mine  iniquity 

7.  w.  me  and  I  shall  be  whiter  than  snow 
58.10.  he  shall  Id.  his  feel  in  the  blood  of  the  wicked 

Isa.  1.  16.  w.  ye,  make  you  clean,  jjuI  away  evil 
Jer.  2.  22.  though  thou  w.  thee  with  nitre  and  soap 
4.  14.  O  Jerusalem,  w.  thy  heart  from  wickedness 
Kick.  %\.  40.  for  whom  thou  didst  w.  thyself 
.Mat.  6.  17.  but  when  thou  fastest,  w.  thy  face 

15.  2.  they  w.  not  their  hands  when  they  ent 
Mark  7.  3.  except  they  w.  oft  Ibey  eat  not,  4. 
Luke  7.38.  a  woman  began  to  70.  his  feet  with  tears 
.lohn  9. 7.  Jesus  said,  go  w.  in  the  pool  of  Siloam,  11. 

l.'i.  5.  Jesus  began  to  w.  the  disciples'  feet 
0.  Peter  saith,  liord,  dost  thou  w.  my  feet7 

8.  thou  shall  never  w.  my  feet,  if  1  w.  thee  not 

14.  ye  also  ought  to  tc.  one  another's  feet 
•lets  22. 16.  arise,  be  baptized,  and  w.  aw  ay  thy  sins 

Hec  Clotiiks,  Feet. 
WASHED. 
Orn.  43.  24.  gave  them  water,  they  w.  thoir  feet 
31.  Joseph  IT.  his  face  and  went  out  and  said 
49.  U.  Judahic.  his  garments  in  wine  and  cloihcs 
Ezod.  40.  32.  tc.  as  the  Lord  conmianded  Moses 
J.cv.  13.55.j)riestphall  look  on  plague  utter  it  is  w. 
58.  then  it  shall  be  w.  the  second  lime  and  shall 
be  cleon 
.fudg.  19.21.  the  Levite  nnd  concubine  w.  Ihcir  feet 
2.")a«/.  12.20.  tiicn  David  arose  and.7r.  himself 
1  Kings  22.  ;i8.ono  w.  the  chariot  in  pool  of  Samorin 
Job  29.  6.  when  I  tc.  my  steps  with  butler 
I'sal.  73.  13.  I  have  ic.  my  hands  in  iimoreney 
Prov.  30.  12.  a  generation  not  to.  from  tillhiness 
C«;'f.5.3.I  have  tc.  my  feci,  how  shall  I  defile  lliem? 

12.  his  eyes  are  w.  with  milk  and  filly  sot 
fsa.i.  4.  ir.  away  tho  filth  of  the  daughters  of  Zion 
Ezek.  10.  4.  nor  wnst  w.  in  water  to  snpplo  tlieo 

9.  I  Ihoronghly  ?r.  awny  thy  blood  from  thco 
Mat.  27.  24.  I'ilnto  look  water  and  ir.  his  luuxls 
J.uke  7.  44.  she  hath  w.  my  feet  with  her  tears 

1 1.  38.  the  Pharisee  marvelled  he  had  not  first  jr. 
.fohn  9.  7.  he  went  nnd  te.  nnd  came  seelnc,  11,  15 

13.  10.  is  tr.  needeth  not,  save  lo  wash  Tiis  fi'el 
14.  if  I  vmir  Lord  nnd  Master  linve  tr.  your  feet 
Jlets  9.  :ii.  Dorrns  died,  whom  when  they  had  if 

10.33.  lie  took  tbcm,  w.  their  stripes,  was  baptized 


WASTE. 

Dcut.  32.  10.  he  found  him  in  the  tc.  wilderness 
Job  30.  3.  solitary,  fleeing  into  the  w.  wililerntss 
38.^7.  lo  satisfy  the  desolate  to.  ground  and  causa 
Isa.  24.  1.  behold,  the  Lord  maketh  the  earth  w. 
42.  15.  I  will  make  to.  mountains  and  hills 
49.  17.  they  that  made  the  tc.  shall  go  ibrlh 
•la-.  2.  15.  young  lions  yelled  and  made  his  land  19. 
46.  19.  for  Nopli  shall  be  w.  and  desolate 
F.ick.^.H.  I  w  ill  make  Jerusalem  ic. and  a  reproach 
29.  9.  the  land  of  Egypt  shall  be  w.  10.  |  oO.  li 
38.  8.  the  mountains  which  have  been  always  w. 
JVah.  2.  10.  Nineveh  is  empty, and  void  and  ir. 
Zeph.  '3.  6.  I  have  made  their  streets  w.  thai  none 
pa>selh  by 
Hag.  1.  9.  because  of  mine  house  that  is  tct 
See  CiTiKs,  L.vv,  Laid,  Pl.\ces. 
WASTE. 
IKings  17.  14.  the  barrel  of  meal  shall  not  tr. 
\Chron.  17.  9.  no  children  of  wickedness  w.  them 
Psal.  17.  1 9.  hide  me  from  the  wicked  that  tc.  nio 
80.  13.  the  boar  out  of  the  wood  doth  tc.  it 
Jer.  50.  21.  ic.  inhabitants  of  Pekod  saith  the  Lord 
Mic.  5.  6.  they  shall  lo.  land  of  Assyria  with  sword 

WASl'El). 
jVum.  14.  33.  till  yourcurcasesbe  tc.  in  wildemcsi 
24.  22.  nevertheless  the  Kenile  shall  be  ic.- 
Dctit.  2.  14.  until  all  the  generation  of  Ihe  men  of 
war  were  ic.  out  from  among  Ihe  host 
\  Kings  17.  10.  and  the  barrel  of  meal  w.  not 
IChron.  20.  1.  Joab  w.  the  country  of  Aminon 
Psal.  137.  3.  they  that  tc.  us  re(iuired  of  us  mirth 

t  8.  C)  daughter  of  Unbylon,  who  art  to  bo  w. 
ha.  6. 11.  till  the  cities  be  w.  without  inlKihitunt 
19.  5.  and  the  river  shall  be  w.  nnd  dried  up 
CO.  12.  yea,  those  nations  shall  be  utterly  tc. 
.fer.  44.  0.  are  10.  and  desolate  as  nt  this  day 
.loel  \.  II).  field  is  ic.  corn  is  tc.  new  wine  dried  up 
Luke  15.  13.  the  prodigal  son  w.  lii-n  substance 
10.  1.  was  acrnsed  that  he  had  tc.  his  goods 
(lal.  1.  13.  how  I  persecuted  the  church  and  ic.  it 

WASTK.NESS. 
7.eph.  1.  15.  o  dav  of  tr.  desolation  and  darkncsi 

■  WASTEll. 
Prov.  18.  9.  is  brother  lo  him  that  is  a  great  ir. 
Isa.  54.  10.  I  have  rrented  the  tc.  to  destroy 

W.\STES. 
Isa.  44.  t  26.  I  will  raise  up  the  tc.  thereof 
61.  4.  thev  shall  build  iheold  ic.  and  repair  cities 
./rr.49.13.  ihe  cities  of  Hozrah  shall  he  pirpelual  t« 
Ezek.  33.  24.  they  that  inhabit  those  ic.  of  ImepI 
27.  surely  ihey  in  Ihe  tc.  shall  full  by  Ihe  sword 
.36.  4.  thus  snilh  Ihe  Loid  to  Ihe  di'solato  tc. 
10.  and  Ihe  tc.  shall  be  hnilded,  33. 
WASTE'I'H. 
lob  14. 10.  man  dielh  nnd  in.  away,  giveth  up  phott 
I'snl.  91.  6.  nor  for  drslrtictioii  that  !c.  ntnooli-day 
Vrov   19  20.  ho  that  ic.  falher  nnd  chaseth  motlicr 

WASTING. 
Isa.  50.  7.  tc.  and  deslnirlion  are  in  their  paths 
CO.  18.  not  heard  ir.  nor  destruction  in  thy  borderi 


WAT 

WATCH. 

Exod.U.  24  in  morning  ic ,  L.  looked  to  Egyptians 
Judg.  7.19.  middle  ic  tliey  had  but  newly  set  the  w. 
ISam.  11.  11.  Saul  came  in  the  morning-ic. 
^King's  11.  6.  80  shall  ye  keep  the  to.  of  the  house, 
tliat  it  be  not  broken  do.vn,  7.  2  Ckron.  23.  6. 
JVf  A.  4.  y.  prayed  to  God  and  set  a  w.  against  them 

7.  3.  every  one  in  his  w.  and  every  one  to  be  over 

against  his  house 

Jobl.Vi-  am  I  a  sea.  that  thou  settest  a  ir.  over  me? 

Psal.  yO.  4.  a  tliousand  years  as  a  w.  in  the  night 

141.  3.  set  a  M).  O  Lord,  bcl'ore  my  mouth 

Jer.  51.  1'-.  make  the  ic.  strong,  set  up  watchmen 

Hab.  2.  1.  I  will  stand  upon  my  w.  and  will  watch 

Jl/u£.14.25.  in  the  fourth  lo.  oftlie  night  Jesus  went 

to  them  walking  on  the  sea,  Mark  6.  48. 

24.  43.  had  known  what  m.  the  tliief  would  come 

27.65.  ye  have  a  ic.||  (i().  sealing  stone,  setting  a  w. 

28. 11.  behold,  some  of  the  w.  came  into  the  city 
Luke  2.8.lhe  shepherds  keeping  tc.  over  their  flock 

12.  38.  if  he  shall  come  inWie  second  w.  or  third 

VVATCHEri. 

•VcA.  12.  9.  their  brethren  over-against  them  in  w. 

Ps  63.  6  when  I  meditate  on  thee  in  the  night-zc. 

119.  143  mine  eyes  prevent  the  night-aj. 
ii.ra.2.19  in  beginning  of  the  ir.pour  out  thy  heart 

WATCH,  Verb. 
Gen.  31.  49.  the  I<ord  to.  between  me  and  thee 
ISam.  19. 11.  Saul  sent  to  70.  David  and  slay  him 
Ezra  8.  29.  w.  ye,  keep  vessels  till  ye  weigh  them 
Job  14.  16.  dost  thou  not  w.  over  my  sin? 
Ps.  102.  7.  I  w.  and  am  as  a  sparrow  on  house-top 

130.  6.  more  than  they  that  to.  for  morning,  6. 
ha.  21.  5.  w.  in  the  watch-tower,  eat,  drink 

29.  20.  and  all  that  w.  for  iniquity  are  cut  off 
Jcr.  5.6.  a  leopard  shall  w.  over  their  cities 

31.  28.  so  will  I  w.  over  them  to  build  and  plant 

44.  27.  I  will  w.  over  them  for  evil,  not  for  good 
J^ah.  2.  1.  keep  the  munition,  w.  the  way 
Hab.  2.  1.  I  will  ic.  to  see  what  he  will  say  to  me 
Mat.  24.  42.  ro.  therefore,  ye  know  not  the  hour, 
25.13.  Mark  13.35.  /,«Ae  21.30.  ./?c£»'20.31. 

2G.  33.  Jesus  said,  tarry  ye  here,  and  w.  with  me 

40.  could  ye  not  w.  with  me?  JIark  14.  34,  37. 

41.  M.  and"  pray,  Mark  13.33.  ]  14.  38.  C«Z.4.2. 
Mark  13.  34.  who  commanded  the  porter  to  ?o. 

37.  and  what  I  say  unto  you,  I  say  unto  all,  w. 
ICor.  16.  13.  w.  ye,  stand  fast  in  faith,  be  strong 
1  Thcss.  5.  6.  let  us  ic.  and  be  sober,  IPct.  4.  7. 
iTim.  4.  5.  70.  thou  in  all  tilings,  endure  afflictions 
Heb.  13. 17.  obey  them,  for  they  w.  for  your  souls 

\VATCnED. 
Jer  20. 10.  all  my  familiars  jo.  for  my  halting 
31.  28.  like  as  I  have  w.  over  them  to  pluck  up 
ham.  4.  17.  w.  for  a  nation  that  could  not  save  us 
Dan.  9.  14.  Lord  w.  on  evil,  and  brought  it  on  us 
JIfat.  24.43.  good-man  would  have  w.  Luke  12.  39. 
27.  36.  and  sitting  down  they  w.  him  there 
Mark  3.  2  they  ir.  him  whether  he  would  heal  him 
on  the  sabbath-day,  to  accuse  him,  LukeO.  7. 
114.1. 
hukr  20.  20.  they  w.  Iiim  and  sent  forth  spies 
Jlcts  9.  24.  w.  the  gates  dav  and  night  to  kill  him 

WATCHER,  S. 
.r(>r.4.16.published  that  w.  come  from  a  far  country 
Dan.  4.  13.  a  w.  and  a  holy  one  came  from  heaven 
17.  by  decree  of  the  w.  \\  23.  the  king  saw  a  w. 
VVATCHETH. 
Ps.  37. 32.  the  wicked  10.  the  righteous  and  seekelh 
Kzek.  7.  6.  end  is  come,  it  w.  for  thee,  it  is  come 
Rcv.l6. 15.  blessed  is  he  that  ?r.  and  keepeth  garm. 

WATCHFUL. 
Ken.  3.  2.  be  w.  sirensthcn  the  things  that  remain 

WATCHING. 
\Sam.  4.  13.  Eli  sat  on  a  seat  by  the  way-side  ?i?. 
ProK.8.34. blessed  hearei  h  me,  m.  daily  at  my  gates 
I,am.  4.17.  in  our  w.  we  have  watched  for  a  nation 
.jVat.27.54.the  centurion  ic.  Jesus,  saw  earthquake 
J,uke  12.  37.  whom  Lord  when  he  cometh,  find  w. 
Eph.  6.18.  pravin?  and  ip.  with  all  perseverance 

■  WATCIIFNGS. 

2Cor.  6.  5.  in  turnulis,  in  labours,  in  w.  in  fastings 

11.  27.  in  w.  often,  in  hnnjer,  thirst,  fastings 

WATCHMAN. 
2Sam.  18.  25.  the  to.  cried  and  told  the  king 
26.  the  zc.  saw  another  man  running  alone 
ZKinpn  9.  18.  the  w.  toid,  he  cometh  not  again,  20. 
Psal.  127.  1.  keeps  city,  the  w.  waketb  but  in  vain 
hd.  21.  0.  go  set  a  //I.  1|  11.  w.  what  of  the  night? 
Jcr.  51.  12.  set  up  the  w.  prepare  the  ambushes 
i^;:'-/f.3.17.  son  of  man,  I  have  made  thee  a  w.  33. 7. 
33.  2.  if  the  people  set  him  up  for  their  10. 
Has.  9.  8.  the  w.  of  Ephraim  was  with  my  God 

WATCHMEN. 
Cant.  3.3.  ?/?.  that  go  about  I  ho  city  found  me,  5.  7. 
/.*(!.  .'>2.  8.  thy  w.  shall  lift  up  the  voice,  shall  sing 
56. 10.  his  w.  are  blind,  they  are  all  ignorant 
62.  6.  I  have  set  tc.  on  thy  walls,  O  Jerusalem 
fer.  6. 17.  also  I  set  w.  over  you,  saying,  hearken 
to  the  sound  of  the  trumpet 
609 


WAT 

Jcr.  31.  0.  IC.  on  mount  Ephraim  shall  cry,  arise  ye 

Mic.  7.4.  the  day  of  thy  Ki.and  visitation  cometji 
WATCU-TOWKR. 

^iChron.  20.  24.  when  Judah  came  toward  the  tc. 

Isa.  21.  5.  watch  in  the  w.  eat,  drink,  arise 
8.  1  Bland  continually  on  the  w.  m  day  time 
32.  \  14.  the  w.  shall  be  for  dens  for  ever 
W.^TEll, 

Or  waters,  in  scripture,  is  put,  (1)  For  the  cle- 
ment of  water,  Gen. 1.10.  (2)  For  troubles  and 
afflictions  I'sal.  69. 1,  Save  me,  O  God,  for  the 
waters  are  come  in  unto  my  soul.  ■  Often  in 
the  Psalms  and  elsewhere  it  is  used  in  this 
sense:  Hence  is  the  phrase  in  Mat.  20.  22.  of 
being  baptized  with  Christ's  baptism  ;  that  is, 
"  dipped  and  plunged  in  afflictions,  as  he  was." 
(3)  In  the  language  of  the  prophets,  waters 
often  denote  a  great  multitude  of  people.  Isa. 
8.  7,  The  Lord  bringeth  upon  them  the  waters 
of  the  river  ;  that  is,  the  Mssyrian  army.  Jind 
in  Rev.  17. 15,  The  waters  which  thou  sawest, 
•  where  the  whore  sitteth,  are  peoples,  and  mul- 
titudes, and  nations,  and  tongues.  (4)  It  is 
put  for  children  or  posterity.  Num.  24.  7, 
He  shall  pour  the  icater  out  of  his  buckets. 
./ind  in  Isa.  48.  1,  Which  are  come  forth  out 
of  the  waters  of  Judah.  (5)  For  the  clouds. 
Psal.  104.  3,  Who  layeth  the  beams  of  his 
chambers  in  the  waters.  "  It^ho  founded,  as 
it  were,  the  heavens  upon  the  clouds."  (6) 
Waters  sometimes  stand  for  tears.     ,)cr.  9.  1, 

0  that  my  head  were  waters,  and  mine  eyes  a 
fountain  of  tears.  (7)  For  the  doctrines  of  the 
gospel,  Deut.  32.  2.  1  Cor.  3.  6.  (8)  For  the 
ordinances  of  the  gospel,  where  the  graces  and 
comforts  of  the  Jloly  Hpirit  are  dispensed. 
Isa.  55.  1,  Ho,  every  one  that  thirsteth,  come 
to  the  waters.  Or  by  waters  here  may  be  un- 
derstood the  graces  and  comforts  of  the  Spirit 
thcmselccs,  which  arc  frequently  compared  to 
waters,  as  in  Isa.  12.3.  |  35.6,  7.  JohH7.37,  38, 
(9)  .111  kinds  of  dHnk,  E.vod.  23. 25.  (10)  Un- 
lawful pleasures,  Prov.  9.  17. 

J2s  in  scripture,  bread  is  put  for  all  sorts  of  food, 
or  solid  7iourishment,  so  w'ater  is  used  for  all 
sorts  of  drink.  The  Moabites  and  JJmmon- 
it.es  are  reproached  for  not  meeting  the  Israel- 
ites with  bread  and  water,  that  is,  with  proper 
refreshments,  Deut.  23.  4.  M'abal  says,  in  an 
insulting  manner  to  David's  7nessengcrs,  Shall 

1  theri  take  my  bread  and  my  water,  and  my 
flesh  that  I  have  killed  for  my  shearers,  and 
give  it  unto  men  whom  I  know  not  whence  they 
be?  ISam.  25. 11.  Stolen  waters  denate  unlaw- 
ful pleasures  with  strange  women,  Prov.  9. 17. 

The  Israelites  are  upbraided  for  having  for- 
saken the  fountain  of  living  waters,  and  hcAc- 
ing  out  broken  cisterns;  that  is,  for  having 
quitted  the  tcorship  of  Cod,  for  the  worship  of 
idols  and  false  gods,  .Ter.2. 13.  The  Hebrews 
called  urine,  the  watci-s  of  the  feel,  that  they 
may  drink  their  own  pLss ;  in  Hebrew,  the 
water  of  their  feet,  2  Kings  18.27. 
The  waters  of  Meribah,  so  called  because  of  the 
quarrelling,  the  contention,  and  murmuring, 
of  the  Israelites  against  Moses  and  against 
(lod.  Moses  tells  us,  that  when  the  Israelites 
came  to  Kadcsh,  and  there  happened  to  be  in 
want  of  water,  they  raised  a  sedition  agaiiisl 
him  and  his'brother  Aaron;  this  is  recorded  in 
Num.  20.  1,  2,  3,  &c.  It  was  on  this  occasion 
that  Jtvscs  committed  that  sin,  with  which  God 
was  so  displeased,  thai  he  deprived  him  of  the 
honour  of  introducing  his  people  into  the  land 
of  promise.  The  Psalmist,  in  Ps.  106.  32,  33. 
tells  us,  that  Moses  was  soured,  vered,  or 
troubled  at  these  murmurs  of  the  people,  and 
expressed  some  distrust  by  his  words.  He 
sheiced  so7ne  deubt  in  the  promises  of  the  Lord. 
God  had  ahsolutely  promised  him, that  he  should 
bring  water  out  of  the  rock:  Mosesmade  some 
scruple  to  believe  it;  Must  we  fetch  you  water 
out  of  this  r.';?!;?  He  struck  the  rock  ticice:  and 
God  had  bid  him  only  .ipeak  to  it.  He  jcas 
afraid,  that  upon  this  occasion,  Godheivir  pro 
voked  with  his  people,  should  refuse  to  fulfil  lb( 
promises  he  had  made.  .Moses  and.laron  did 
not  sanctify  the  Lord,  they  did  not  pay  that 
honour  that  was  due  to  him,  hy  a  strict,  punc- 
tual, and  faithful  obedience  to  his  words. 
They  did  npt  sanctify  him  before  the  people : 
They  gave  the  people  occasion  to  conerire  too 
low  an  idea  of  the  power  and  goodness  of  Gad; 
they  did  an  injury  in  some  measure  to  his 
power,  by  shewing  so  little  confidence  in  it. 
Gen.  16. 7.  angel  found  Hagar  by  a  fountain  of  w. 
^?..  4.  let  a  little  tc.  I  pray  you  be  fetched 
21.  14.  Abraham  took  a  bottle  of  wj.  and  gave  it 
unto  Hagar 
24.  32.  Laban  gave  the  man  w.  to  wash  hit  feet  ; 


WAT 

(rcn.24. 43.  give  mo,  I  pray  thee,  a  little  w.  to  drin 
26.  20.  the  w.  is  ours  ||  32.  we  have  found  10. 
43.24. the  steward  of  Joseph's  house  gave  them  Kb 
49.  4.  unstable  as  w.  thou  shall  not  excel 

Kx'od.  12.  9.  eat  it  not  raw,  nor  sodden  with  w, 
17.  6.  and  there  shall  come  w.  out  of  the  rock 
20.  4.  any  likeness  that  is  in  the  w.  under  the  earth 

23.  25.  the  Lord  shall  bless  thy  bread  and  thy  te. 

29.  4.  Aaron  and  his  sons  shall  wash  them  with 

w.  30.  20.  1  40.  12.  J.iv.  8.  6.  |  16.  4,  24. 
32.  20.  bumf  the  calf  and  strawed  it  on  the  u>. 
Lev.  6. 28.  shall  be  scoured  and  rinsed  in  w.  15. 12. 

11.  32.  whatever  vessel,  it  must  be  put  into  ai. 
38.  but  if  any  w.  be  put  upon  the  seed 

JVum.  5.  22.  this  w.  that  causeth  the  curse  shall  go 
8.  7.  sprinkle  w.  of  purification  upon  lliem 

19.  9.  for  a  w.  of  separation,  13,  20,  21.  |  31.  23. 

20.  8.  thou  shalt  bring  forth  to  them  w.  out  of  the 

rock,  10,  11.  J\V/i.  9.  15.  Psal.  114.  8. 
13.  this  is  the  w.  of  Meribah,  24.  \  27.  14. 

21.  5.  there  is  no  bread,  nor  is  there  any  w. 

16.  gather  ye  the  people  and  I  will  give  them  te. 

24.  7.  he  shall  pour  the  w.  out  of  his  buckets 
31.  23.  ye  shall  make  go  through  the  w. 

yjc«t.8.7.Lord  brings  thee  to  a  landof  brooks  of  10. 
11. 11.  the  land  drinketh  w.  of  rain  of  heaven 

12.  16.  shalt  pour  it  on  earth  as  w.  24.  |  15.  23. 
23.  4.  met  you  not  with  w.  in  way,  JVcA.  13.  2. 

Josh.  7.  5.  wherefore  the  hearts  of  people  melted 

and  became  as  u). 

Judg.  5.  25.  he  asked  w.  and  she  gave  him  milk 

7.  4.  bring  them  down  to  the  w.  and  1  will  try,  5. 
15. 19.  IC.  came  out  of  the  jaw  and  Samson  drank 

ISam.  7.  6.  they  gathered  to  Mizpeh  and  drew  w. 

25.  11.  shall  I  then  take  my  bread  and  my  w.7 

26.  11.  take  now  the  cruse  oi  w.  and  let  us  go 

30.  12.  nor  drunk  any  w.  three  days  and  nights 
'iSam.  14.  14.  we  must  die  and  are  as  w.  on  ground 

17.  21.  arise  and  pass  quickly  over  the  w. 

21.  10.  till  10.  dropped  on  them  out  of  heaven 
\Kings  13.  19.  he  did  eat  bread  and  drank  w. 

22.  hast  eaten  bread  and  drunk  w.  in  the  place 
14.  15.  smite  Israel  as  a  reed  is  shaken  in  tlie  w 

17.  10.  fetch  me,  I  pray  thee,  a  little  w. 

18.  4.  Ohadiah  fed  them  with  bread  and  w.  13. 
35.  w.  ran  about  the  altar,  filled  trench  with  w 
38.  the  fire  of  the  Lord  fell  and  ifbked  up  them 

22.  27.  feed  him  with  broad  and  w.  of  affliction 

till  I  return  in  peace,  -Chron.  18.  26. 
2Kings  2. 19.  the  w.  is  nought,  and  ground  barren 
3.  11.  Elisha  who  poured  w.  on  Elijah's  hands 

17.  yet  that  valley  shall  be  filled  with  w. 

22.  and  they  rose  up  early  in  the  morning,  and 
the  sun  shone  upon  the  w. 

6.  5.  was  felling  a  beam,  the  ax-head  fell  into  w. 
22.  set  bread  ar.d  w.  before  them  to  eat  and  drink 

8.  15.  he  di])t  a  thick  cloth  in  7/1.  and  he  died 
20.  20.  made  a  conduit,  brought  ic.  into  the  city 

2('hron.  32.  4.  the  king  of  Assyria  find  much  w. 
JV>A.  4.  t  23.  every  one  went  with  weapon  for  to. 
Job  8.  11.  can  the  flag  grow  without  70.? 

14.  9.  yet  through  the  scent  of  ;r.  it  will  bud 

15.  16.  is  man  who  drinketh  iniquity  like  to. 

22.  7.  thou  hast  not  given  w.  to  the  weary  to  drink       "^ 
34.  7.  who  like  Job,  who  drinketh  scorning  like  to. 

Psal.  22. 14.  I  am  poured  out  like  70.  my  bones  out 
63.  t  10.  they  shall  make  him  run  out  like  to. 

65.  9.  with  the  river  of  God  that  is  full  of  to 

66.  12.  we  went  through  fire  and  through  to. 
79.  3.  thrir  blood  have  they  shed  like  70. 

88. 17.  they  came  round  about  me  daily  like  to. 
109. 18.  so  let  it  come  into  his  bowels  like  w. 
Pror.  17.  14.  strife  is  as  when  one  letteth  out  to. 

20.  5.  counsel  in  the  heart  of  man  is  like  deep  70 
27. 19.  as  in  70.  face  answereih  to  face,  so  heart  of 
30.  16,  the  earth  that  is  not  filled  with  70. 

[sa.  1.22.  silver  isdross,  thy  wine  mi.xed  with  to. 
3.  1.  Lord  doth  take  away  the  whole  stay  of  to. 

21.  14.  the  land  of  Tenia  brought  to.  to  the  thirsty 
30.  14.  not  found  a  sherd  to  take.7r.0ut  of  pit 

20.  tho'Jgh  the  Lord  gave  you  the  70.  of  affliction 
41.  17.  when  the  poor  seek  70.  and  there  is  none        < 
44.  3.  I  will  pour  77'.  on  him  that  is  thirsty 
63.  12.  led  them,  dividing  the  70.  before  them 
.Tcr.  13.  1.  get  a  linen  girdle  and  put  it  not  in  to- 

23.  15.  and  make  them  drink  the  70.  of  gall 

I. am.  1.  Itr  mine  eyes  run  down  with  w.  3.  48. 

2.  19.  pour  out  thy  heart  like  ?o.  before  Lord 

5.  4.  we  have  drunken  our  w.  for  money 
F.zek.  4.  17.  that  they  may  want  bread  and  to. 

7.  17.  all  knees  shall  be  weak  as  w.  21.  7. 

16.  4.  nor  wast  thou  washed  in  to.  to  supple  the* 
9.  then  washed  I  thee  with  70.  and  anointed  hiir 

36.  25.  then  will  I  sprinkle  clean  70.  upon  you 
Hos.'i.  5.  I  willgoafiermy  lovers  that  give  mc»  ^ 

5.  10.  I  will  pour  my  wraih  upon  them  like  tc. 

10.  7.  her  king  is  cut  off  as  foam  upon  w. 
.Imos  8.  II.  not  a  famine  of  bread  nor  thirst  of  |» 
.Xah.  2.  8.  but  Nineveh  is  of  old  like  a  jioo!  of  w 
Hab.  3.  10.  the  overflowing  of  the  w.  passed  bj 


WAT 

Mat-  3.  11. 1  indeed  baptize  you  with  v>.  unto  re-' 


WAT 

WATER-FLOOD. 


pentance,  Mark  1.  b.  J^uke  3. 10.  John  1.  26.  Psal.  69.  15.  lei  not  tlie  w.  overllow  mo,  nor  deep 
16.  Jesus  went  up  out  of  Uie  w.  Mark  1.  10.       I  VVATKR-1'OT,  WATEK-l'UTS. 

10.  42.  wiioso  giveth  a  cup  ofcold  w.  Mark  U.  41.  John  2.  0.  there  were  set  there  six  w.  ol'  stone 
14.  2d.  Peter  said,  bid  rae  come  to  tliee  uii  Uie  w.  \     7.  Jesus  saitti,  lill  the  w.  with  water,  they  iiilcd 
17.  15.  for  he  falletli  oft  into  tlie  fire  and  w.  I  4.28.  the  woman  tnen  leil  her  w.  and  went  to  city 

27.  24.  Pilate  took  w.  and  waslied  liis  hands  WATER-SPOUTS. 

Mark  H.  13.  tliere  siiall  meet  you  a  man  bearing ,  Psai.  42.  7.  deep  calls  to  deep  at  noise  of  thy  w. 

o  pitcher  ol  w.  follow  hun,  J.uke  22.  lU.  WATER-SPRINGS. 

J^vkc  8.23.ship  was  filled  with  w.  were  in  jeopardy  Paal.  107.  33.  he  turnetli  the  ic.  mto  dry  ground 


24.  rebuked  the  w.  |j  2o.  tlie  w.  obeyed  hini 

16.  24.  tint  he  may  dip  the  tip  of  his  linger  in  w 
JvKn  2.  7.  Jesus  saith,  fill  the  water-pots  with  w. 

3.  5.  except  a  man  be  born  of  w.  and  of  the  Spirit 
23. near  toSalim, because  there  was  much  w. there 

4.  10.  given  living  w.  11.  ||  15.  give  me  this  w. 
46.  Jesus  came  again  where  he  made  w.  wine 

5.  3.  halt,  williered,  waiting  for  moving  of  the  tc. 
4.  an  angel  went  down  and  troubled  tlic  ic. 

7.  38.  out  of  his  belly  shall  (low  living  w. 
13.  5.  after  that  he  j>ouretli  w.  into  a  basin. 
19.  34.  forthwith  came  thereout  blood  and  w 

^cls  1.  5.  for  John  truly  baptized  with  w.  11.  16. 

8.  36.  here  is  w.  \\  38.  they  went  down  both  into  w. 
10.  47.  can  any  forbid  w.  these  be  not  baptized  ? 

Kph.  5. 2G.  might  cleanse  it  with  the  washing  of  to. 
Heb.  9.  19.  he  took  the  blood  of  calves  with  to. 

10.  22.  and  our  bodies  washed  with  pi^re  w. 
Jam.  3.  12.  no  fouatain  can  yield  salt  ic.  and  fresh 
l/'et.3.  20.  few,  that  is  eight  souls  were  saved  by  u>. 
iPet  2.  17.  are  wells  without  w.  \\  Jude  12.  clouds 

3.  6.  world  being  overliowed  with  u>.  perished 
\Jokn  5.  6.  this  is  he  that  came  by  w.  and  blood 

5.  8.  three  bear  witness.  Spirit,  w.  and  blood 
/2n>.13.15.and  the  serjicnt  cast  out  of  his  mouth  w. 

16.  12.  the  sixth  on  Euphrates,  and  w.  dried  up 

21.  6.  I  will  give  of  the  fountain  of  the  w.  of  life 

22.  1.  and  he  shewed  me  a  pure  river  of  zo.  of  life 

17.  whosoever  will,  let  liiin  take  (C.  of  life  freely 
Hee  Hathe,  Bitter,  Dkaw,  Dkkw,  Drink, 

Wkll. 

A-o  WATER. 
Gen.  37.  24.  pit  was  empty,  there  was  no  w.  in  it 
Ezod.  15.22.  and  they  went  three  days  in  the  wil- 
derness, and  found  no  w.  17.  1.  JSTuiit.  2U.  2. 
I  33. 14.  JJeul.  8. 15. 
\Kinga  13.22.L.  said,  eat  no  bread  and  drink  now. 
tKings  3.9.  there  was  no  w.  for  the  host  and  cattle 
Psal.  63.  1.  in  a  dry  and  thirsty  land  where  no  w.  is 
Jsa.  1.  30.  yc  shall  be  as  a  garden  that  hatli  no  ic. 
44.  12.  the  smith  drinketh  no  w.  and  is  faint 
50  2.  their  fish  stinketh  because  there  is  no  w. 
Jer  2.  13.  broken  cisterns  that  can  hold  no  w. 
14.  3.  tlicy  came  to  the  pits  and  found  nu  w. 
38.  6.  in  the  dungeon  there  was  nu  w.  but  mire 
ZecA.9.11.  sent  prisoners  out  of  pit  wherein  is  no  w. 
Littke  7.  44.  thou  gavest  me  no  w.  for  my  feet 

WATER. 
Oen.2.10.a  river  wont  out  of  Eden  to  w.  the  garden 
29.  7.  w.  yc  the  sheep  and  go  and  feed  them,  8. 
Psal.  6.  6.  t  w.  my  couch  with  my  tears 
72.  6.  comedown  as  showers  that  w.  the  earth 
Prov.  5.  t  19-  let  her  breasts  w-  thee  at  all  times 
f.ccl.i.G.  I  made  me  pools  of  water  to  ic.  the  wood 
Jsa.  16.  9.  I  will  a.  thee  with  my  tear.<,  O  Ilesliboii 
27.  3.  I  will  w.  it  every  moment,  lest  any  hurt  it 
F.iek.  17.  7.  he  might  w.  it  by  furrows  of  plaiilalion 
32.  6.  I  will  IT.  with  my  blood  the  land  wlnrein 
Joel  3. 18.  a  fountain  shall  ic.  the  valley  of  Sliittiin 

WATERED. 
Gen.  2.  6.  a  mist  that  lo.  the  face  of  the  ground 
13.  10.  the  plain  of  Jordan,  that  it  was  well  w. 
29.  2.  of  that  well  they  iB.  Hocks,  3.  ||  10.  Jacob  w. 
y.zod.  2.  17.  Moses  helped  and  w.  their  flocks,  19. 
Proo.  11.2.).  ho  that  wateretli  shall  bo  w.  himself 
ha.  .'>8.  11.  and  tliuii  slialt  be  tike  a  w.  gdrdcrn 
Jer.  31.  12.  Ihi'ir  soul  shall  be  as  a  w.  garden 
XCor.'i.d.  I  have  [ilanied,  A  polios  to.  but  God  gave 

WATEKi;i)ST. 
y^eut.ll.lO.  w.  it  withiliv  foot  :iK  u  garden  ofhcrbs 

WATEREST. 
Psal.  65.  9.  thou  visilest  the  earth  and  ic.  it 
10.  thou  u>.  the  ridges  Ihcrcif  abundantly 
WATKRETII. 
Psal.  104.  13.  he  u>.  the  hills  from  his  chambers 
Pron   II.  25.  he  that  to.  shall  bo  watered  irniiself 
laa.  55.  10.  ruin  returiieth  not,  but  to.  the  earth 
IC'or.  3.7.  nor  hetlint  plantelh,  nor  w.  any  thing,  8. 

WATERI.NG. 
Gen.  30.  33.  Jacob  laid  roiU  in  the  w.  troughs 
Job  37.  11.  by  w.  he  wearieth  the  thick  cloud 
trov.  .3.  t  8.  it  shall  be  w.  to  thy  hones 
LmKt  1.3.15.dolh  not  each  of  von  lead  his  ass  to  w.? 

W.\TER-llR(t()KS. 
Piai.  42.  1.  at  the  hart  panleili  a  Tier  the  w. 

WATER-CtJL'RSi;. 
^Ckron.  32.  30.  Hc/.ekiah  stopped  the  upper  to. 
J»b  38.  25.  who  hnth  divided  a  w.  for  overflowing 

WATER  COURSKS. 

ir«.  44.  4.  thcr  shall  spring  lu  willows  by  the  to. 

078 


35.  he  turneth  dry  ground  into  w. 
VVATERS. 
Gen.  1.  2.  the  Spirit  of  God  moved  upon  face  of  tr. 
6.  let  the  firmament  divide  the  w.  from  the  w.  7. 

9.  let  the  w.  be  gathered  ||  20.  to.  bring  forth 

6.  17.  I,  even  I,  do  bring  a  flood  of  w.  on  earth 

7.  17.  to.  increased  ||  18.  lo.  prevailed,  19,  20,  24. 
8. 1.  w.  decreased,  3,  5.  ||  13.  w.  were  dried  up 
9.  11.  not  be  cut  off  any  more  by  w.  of  a  flood 

£io(/.7.17.behold,  I  will  smite  the  v:.\\  20.  to.  blood 

8.  6.  Aaron  stretched  out  liis  hand  over  the  w. 

14.  21.  by  a  strong  east- wind  the  to.  were  divided 

22.  to.  were  a  wall,  29.  ||  28.  to.  returned,  15. 19. 

15.  8.  the  to.  were  gatlicred  together,  Hood  stood 

23.  they  could  not  drink  of  the  w.  of  Marah 
27.  come  toElam,  they  encamped  there  by  the  u:. 

JVum.2i.  6.  as  trees  planted,  as  cedar  trees  beside  ic. 

y>eut.l0.7.  journeyed  toJolbath, land  ofriversof  to. 
32. 51.  ye  trespassed  at  the  w.  of  Meribah-kadesli 
33.  8.  with  whom  didststrive  at  the  to.  of  Meribah 

Jush.  3.  16.  the  tc.  which  came  down  rose  up 

4.  7.  the  to.  of  Jordan  were  cut  otf  before  the  ark 
23.  the  Lord  dried  up  the  w.  of  Jordan,  5.  1. 

11.  5.  they  came  and  pitched  at  the  lo.  of  Merorn 
Judir.  5. 19.  the  kings  of  Canaan  by  w.  of  Megiddo 

7.  24.  come  down  and  take  the  to.  before  them 
26'ani.5.  20.  the  Lord  hath  broken  forth  as  a  bread 
of  to.  u|>on  mine  enemies,  ICAroti.  14.  11. 

12.  27.  and  Joab  said,  I  have  taken  the  city  of  to 
iKings  2.  8.  and  Elijah  emote  the  to.  ||  14.  Elisha 

21.  and  he  went  forth  unto  the  spring  of  the  w. 

thus  saith  Lord,  1  have  healed  these  to. 

5.12.are  not  rivers  ofDamasc.  bettor  than  lo.oflsr. 

iChron.  32.  3.  he  took  counsel  to  stop  the  w. 

lob  3.  24.  my  roarings  are  poured  out  like  the  to. 

5.  10.  who  sendeth  to.  upon  the  fields 
H.  16.  remember  thy  misery  as  to.  that  pass  away 
12.  15.  he  withholdeth  the  w.  and  they  dry  up 
14.  U.  as  the  w.  fail  from  the  sea,  and  the  flood 

19.  the  ic.  wear  the  stones,  thou  washest  away 
22.  11.  and  abundance  of  to.  cover  thee,  38.  34. 
24.  18.  he  is  swift  as  the  to.  Ihou  washest  away 

26.  5.  dead  things  are  formed  from  under  the  to. 
8.  he  bindeth  up  the  w.  in  his  thick  clouds 

10.  he  hath  comjiassed  the  w.  with  clouds 

27.  20.  terrors  take  hold  on  him  as  w.  a  tempest 

28.  4.  even  the  w.  forgotten  of  the  foot 
25.  and  he  weighed  the  to.  by  measure 

29.  19.  tiiy  root  was  spread  out  by  the  w. 

30.  14.  came  upon  me  as  a  wide  breaking  in  of  to. 

37.  10.  and  the  breadth  of  the  to.  is  straightened 

38.  30.  the  w.  are  hid  as  with  a  stone 
Psal.  23.  2.  ho  leadeth  me  beside  the  still  w. 

33.  7.  he  gatherc'th  the  w.  of  the  seas  together 
46.  3.  though  the  w.  tliereof  roar  and  be  troubled 
•5S.  7.  let  llicin  melt  away  as  to.  which  run 
69. 1.  for  the  to.  are  (fu\\ic  in  unto  my  soul 
7.3.  10.  ID.  of  a  full  tup  are  wrung  out  lo  them 

77.  16.  the  to.  saw  thee,  O  God,  the  to.  saw  thee 

78.  13.  he  made  the  to.  to  stand  as  a  heap 

16.  and  caused  w.  to  run  down  like  rivers 
20.  ho  smote  the  rock  that  the  w.  gushed  out  and 

streamsoverflowed, 105.41.  |  114.8.  Isa.i9.  21. 
81.  7.  I  proved  thee  at  the  to.  of  Meribah,  106.32. 

104.  fi.  the  w.  stood  above  the  mountains 

105.  29.  ho  turned  their  to.  into  blood  and  slew 

106.  11.  and  the  ij.  covered  their  enemies 
1 19.136.  rivers  of  to.  run  down  mine  eyes  because 
124.  4.  then  the  to.  had  overwhelmed  us 

5.  then  the  |>foud  w.  had  gone  over  our  soul 
136.  6.  him  liiat  stretched  the  earth  above  the  to. 

147.  18.  he  caiiselli  the  wind  to  blow  and  to.  flow 

148.  4.  ye  w.  above  the  heavens,  praise  him 
Pron.  5.  15.  drink  to.  out  of  thine  own  cistern 

16.  let  rivers  of  lo.  be  dispersed  in  the  streets 
8. 29.tlial  the  to.  should  not  pass  his  commandment 
9. 17.  stolon  to.  are  sweet,  and  bread  eaten  insecret 
25.  25.  us  cold  to.  lo  a  thirsty  soul,  so  is  good  news 
;tO.  4.  who  hath  bonnd  the  w.  in  a  garment 
T'.rcl.  11.  1.  cast  thy  bread  upon  to.  lliou  shall  find 
Cant. 4. 15. a  wcllofliving  to.and  streams  from  Leb. 
Isa.  8.  6.  as  this  people  refiisolli  the  lo.  of  fhiloah 
7.  the  Ijord  bringeih  on  lliem  w.  of  Iho  river 
II.  0.  ns  the  w.  cover  Ihi'  sens,  Hnb.1.  14. 
15.  6.  for  the  to.  of  Nimrim  shall  be  desolalo 

9.  fi)r  the  io.  ofDimon  shall  he  full  of  blood 
17.  12.  a  rushing  like  the  rushing  of  mighty  to. 
19.  5.  and  the  to.  shall  fail  from  the  sea 
22.  '•.  and  ye  gathorcil  Iho  to.  of  the  lower  pool 
28.  17.  the  to.  shall  overflow  the  hidlng-placo 


WAV 

Isa.  32.  SX).  blessed  are  ye  that  sow  beside  all  v 
33.  16.  bread  be  given  him,  hi»  to.  Bhall  be  •ai* 
35.  6.  for  in  the  wilderness  shall  to.  break  I6>tji 
40.  12.  who  hath  measured  the  ic.  in  his  hand 
43.  2.  if  thou  pass  through  to.  1  will  be  with  lliM 
16.  and  maketh  a  path  in  the  mighty  to. 

20.  Igive  to.in  the  wilderness  and  rivers  iodeaert 
48.  1.  and  are  come  forth  out  of  the  w.  of  Judaii 

21.  he  caused  the  to.  to  flow  out  of  the  rock 
51.  10.  which  hath  dried  the  to.  of  the  great  deep 
54.  9.  this  is  as  w.  of  IS'oali  unto  me,  to.  not  return 
55.1. ho  every  one  that  thirstelh,  come  ye  to  the  to. 
57.  20.  like  the  sea,  whose  to. cast  upmireanddirt 
58   11.  like  a  Sjiring  of  water,  whose  w.  fail  not 

./er.2.13.1iave  forsaken  me  the  fountain  of  living  to. 

18.W  hat  hast  thou  to  do,  to  drink  the  w.  of  i^ilior? 

6.7.  as  a  fountain  casteth  out  her  to.  so  castcth  out 

8.  14.  God  hath  given  us  w.  of  gall  to  drink 

9.  1.  O  that  my  head  were  w.  and  mine  eyes  teari 

18.  eyes  run  « ith  t-arSj  eye-lids  gush  out  with  la. 

10.  13.  isa  multitud^ol  to.  in  the  heavens,  51.  16. 

14.  3.  their  nobles  sent  little  ones  to  the  to. 

15.  18.  wilt  he  to  me  as  a  liar  and  as  it.  that  fail 

17.  ti.  he  shall  be  as  a  tree  planted  by  the  to. 

13.  have  forsaken  the  Lord,  fountain  of  living  to 

18.  14.  shall  the  cold  flowing  w.  be  Ibrsakeni 

46.  7.  whose  w.  are  moved  as  the  rivers,  8. 

47.  2.  behold,  to.  rise  uji  out  of  the  north 

48.  34.  for  the  to.  of  Nimrim  shall  be  desolate 
5U.  3r^.  a  drought  is  U|ion  her  lo.  and  shall  be  dried 

l.aiii.  3.  54.  to.  flowed  over  mine  head,  1  am  cut  off 
Kieh.  19.  10.  thy  mother  is  like  a  vine  by  the  to. 

31.  4.  to.  made  him  great,  the  deep  set  him  on  high 

14.  that  none  of  the  trees  by  w.  exalt  themselves 

32.  2.  and  troublcst  the  to.  with  thy  feet 
47.  1.  behold,  to.  issued  from  under  lliBthreshoM 

3.brought  me  through  w.  the  to. were  to  ancles,  4. 

5.  for  the  w.  were  risen,  to.  to  swim  in 

8.  these  to.  issue  out  toward  the  east  country,  12. 

19.  even  to  the  to.  of  strife  in  Kadesh,  48.  28, 
Dan.  12.  6.  one  said  to  the  man  upon  the  io.  7. 
Jimiis  5.  8.  callethfor  to.ofsea,andpoureth,9.  6. 

24.  but  let  judgment  run  down  as  to.  and  righL 
■  Jonah  2. 5.  the  to.  comjiassed  me  about  tu  the  soul 
.l/i( .  1.  4.  as  to.  that  are  iioured  down  a  steep  place 
J^ah.  3.  8.  No,  that  had  the  to.  round  about  it 

14.  draw  the  uj.  for  the  siege,  fortify  thy  holds 
7.tch.  14.  8.  living  to.  shall  go  from  Jerusalem 
2Cor.  11.  26.  in  perils  of  to.  in  perils  of  robbers 
Hcv.l.  17.  lead  them  unio  living  fountains  of  ic. 
8.11.  a  third  jiart oftlie  ic.  became  wormw ood, and 
many  died  of  the  to.  because  bitter 

11.  6.  have  power  over  w.  to  turn  them  to  blood 
14.  7.  worship  him  that  made  the  fountain  of  la. 

16.  4.  and  the  third  angel  giuured  his  vialontiie  M. 
5.  I  heard  angel  of  the  to.  say,  thou  art  righteous 

17.  15.  the  to.  where  the  whore  sits,  are  people! 
Hce  Dekh,  Great. 

hi,  or  into  WATERS. 
Eiod.  15.  10.  they  sank  as  lead  in  the  hiighty  IB. 

25.  a  tree  when  cast  into  the  w.  Ihey  were  iweet 
Lev.  11.  9.  these  shall  ye  eat,  of  all  that  are  in  lo. 

what  hath  fins  and  scales  into.  10.46. />n(t.l4.9. 
12.  hath  no  fins  nor  scales  in  the  io.  unclean 
Dfnt.  4.  18.  the  likcnessof  any  fish  tw  the  to.  5.  8 
JokIl.  3.  13.  as  the  feet  of  |)riests  rest  in  the  to. 
M'eh.  9.  11.  thrcwest  a  stone  iti^o  the  mighty  ir. 
Psnt.  74.  13.  breakest  the  heads  of  dragons  in  u 
104.  3.  layeth  the  beams  of  his  chambers  in  te. 
.Mat.  8.  32.  the  swine  ran  and  perished  in  the  to. 
Mark  9.  22.  oft  it  cast  him  into  fire  and  into  jo. 

Jl/anj/ WATERS. 
ATitm.  24.  7.  and  his  seed  shall  be  in  many  to. 
2  '>'(im.  22.  17.  drew  me  out  of  many  to.  I's.  18. 16. 
P.inl.  29.  3.  the  voice  of  the  Lord  is  upon  many  to. 
93.  4.  Lord  mightier  Than  the  noise  u(  many  ic. 
Cant.  S.  7.  many  w.  cannot  quench  love,  nor  Aoodi 
ha.  17.  13.  nations  like  the  rushing  ofmany  to. 
.Jer.  51.  13.  O  thou  that  dwellest  upon  many  lo. 
Kick.  19.  10.  she  was  fruitful  by  reason  of  many  to. 
43.  2.  his  voice  was  like  a  noise  of  many  to.  earth 
shincd  with  his  glory.  Rev.  1.1.5.  |  14.2.  |  19.  6. 
Rev.  17.  1.  the  great  whore  that  sitteth  on  many  to. 

WAVE. 
.Tarn.  1.  6  he  that  wavereth  is  like  a  to.  of  the  tea 

WAVE,  Verb. 

Fio(/.29.24.thoii  shall  to.  thorn  for  a  wavo-oflfTinj 

before  the  Lord,  l.rr.  8. 27. 1 23.  30.A-Hm.6.20 

26.  thou  shult  10.  tlie  breast  ||  27.  v.  the  shoulder, 

/,rr.  7.  30.  |8.29.  |  9.21.  |  10.  15. 

/,rt'.23.11.ho  shall  to.  Ihosheaf  before  llie  Lord, 12 

.Vitm.S.  25.  the  priest  shall  to.  llieje^lousv-oflerinf 

WAVED.         * 
Lev.  14.  21.  then  he  shall  mko  one  Inmb  to  be  w. 
Sec  Breast,  Lhavkc,  Okferi.no. 
WAVERETH. 
Jam.  1.  6.  lit  Ihot  >r.  is  like  a  wave  ofth*  tt%. 

WAVERING. 
/Af/i.in.23.  hold  fast  profession  of  faith  without  W 
Jam.  1.  0.  but  let  him  ask  in  faith,  nothing  te. 


WAY 

WAVES. 
Psal.  t2. 7.  all  thy  w.  are  gone  over  me,  Jonah  2.  3. 

65.  7.  Btilleth  the  noise  of  their  ic.  89. 9.  1 107.  iW. 

88.  7.  thou  hast  afflicted  me  with  all  thy  lo. 

U3.  3.  floods  hit  up  voice,  Hoods  lift  uj)  their  w. 
4.  the  L#)rd  on  high  is  mightier  than  mighiy  w 

107.  25.  the  stormy  wind  which  liUcth  up  llie  w 
!sa.  48.  18.  thy  righteousness  as  the  la.  ot  the  sea 

51.  15.  but  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God  that  divided 

the  sea,  whose  w.  roared,  Jer.  31.  35. 

Jer.  5.  S2.  tho'  thcw.  toss,  yet  can  they  not  prevail 

51.42.Babylon  is  covered  with  the  multitude  ofuj 

55.  Lord  hath  spoiled  Babylon  when  her  w.  roar 

F.iek.  26.  3.  nations  come,  as  the  sea  uauseth  his  w. 

87.  t  28.  IB  shall  shake  at  the  cry  of  thy  pilots 
Zech.  10.  11.  and  shall  smite  the  w.  in  tho  sea 
Mat.  8.  24.  that  the  ship  was  covered  with  the  w. 

14. 24.  but  the  ship  was  tossed  with  id.  MarkA.37. 
iMke  21.  25.  he  signs,  the  sea  and  the  w.  roaring 
£cts  27. 41.  the  hinder  part  was  broken  with  the  w. 
Jude  13.  raging  (C.  of  sea,  foaming  out  their  shame 

w.vx. 

Psal.  22.  14.  ray  heart  is  like  w-  it  is  melted 
63.  2.  as  w.  melteth,  so  the  wicked  perish 
U7.  5.  the  hills  meltedlike  jc.  at  the  presence  of  L. 

Mic.  1.  4.  the  valleys  cleft  as  w.  before  the  fire 
WAX. 

Ezod.  22.  24.  my  wrath  shall  w.  hot,  32.  10. 
32.  11.  Lord,  why  doth  thy  wrath  w.  hot  against 

22.  let  nqftthe  anger  of  my  Lord  w.  hot 
Lev.  25.  47.  if  a  sojourner  ur  a  stranger  to.  rich  by 

thee,  and  thy  brother  by  him  w.  poor 
I.5am.3.  2.  Eli  laid  down,  hiseyes  began  to  w.dini 
Job  6.  17.  what  time  they  w.  warm  they  vanish 

14.  8.  though  the  root  thereof  io.  old  in  the  earth 
Ps.  1(K2.  26.  all  of  them  shall  w.  old  as  a  garment, 
and  be  changed,  Isa.  50.  9.  |  51.  6.  Heb.l.U. 
ha.  17.  4.  the  fatness  of  his  flesh  idiall  w.  loan 

29.  22.  neither  shall  his  face  now  w.  pale 
Jer.  6.  24.  our  hands  w.  feeble,  anguish  hath  taken 
Mat.  24.  12.  the  love  of  many  shall  w.  cold 
Ijuke  12.  33.  provide  bags  which  w.  not  old 

1  Tim.  5.  11.  began  to  w.  wanton  against  Christ 

2  Tim.  3.  13.  seducers  shall  w.  worse  and  worse 

WAXED, 
^cn.  26,J3.  Isaac  JO.  great  II  41.  56.  famines,  sore 
Ezod.  1.  7.  Israel  w.  exceeding  mighty,  20. 

16.  21.  and  when  the  sun  w.  hot,  it  melted 
19.  19.  when  tho  trumpet  w.  louder  and  louder 
32.  19.  Moses'  anger  w.  hot,  and  he  cast  the  tables 

J^um.  11.  23.  is  the  Lord's  hand  w.  shorti 
Deut.  8.  4.  raiment  w.  not  old,  29.  5.  JVeA.  9.  21. 

32.  15.  but  Jeshurun  w.  fat  and  kicked 
./(>sA.  23.  l^that  Joshua  w.  old  and  strickeu  in  age 
ISam.  2. 5.  she  that  hath  many  children  is  m.  feeble 
USam.  3. 1.  but  David  w.  stronger,  i  Citron.  11.  9 

21.15.  and  David  went  down,  fought,  and  w.  faint 
2fCings  4.  34.  and  the  flesh  of  the  child  w.  warm 
2CAr.  13.21.  Abijah  ic.  mighty  and  married  wives 

17.  12.  Jehoshaphat  ||  24.  15.  Jehoiada  w.  old 
Ksth.  9.  4.  Mordecai  w.  greater  and  greater 
Psal.  32.  .3.  when  I  kept  silence  my  bones  w.  old 
Jtr.  49.  24.  Damascus  is  w.  feeble  and  turneth 

50.  43.  the  king  of  Babylon's  hands  vj.  feeble 
Dan.  8.  8.  the  he-goat  w.  great  ||  9.  little  horn,  10. 
^a(.13.15.  this  people's  heart  w.  gross,  ./?c<.5  28.27. 
LukK  1.  80.  the  child  w.  strong  in  spirit,  2.  40. 

13.  19.  a  grain  of  mustard-seed  w.  a  great  tree 
^ct.i  13.  46.  Paul  and  Barnabas  lo.  bold  and  said 
Heb.  11.  34.  w.  valiant  in  fight,  turned  to  flight 
kev.  18.  3.  th.^  merchants  of  the  earth  are  w.  rich 

WAXEN,  WAXED. 
(?i»n.l8. 12.  after  lam  !0.  old  shall  I  have  pleasure? 

19.  13.  bocatise  the  cry  of  Sodom  was  w.  great 
Lev.  25.  2.1.  if  thy  brother  be  w.  poor,  .35,  39. 
Dcut.31.^0.w.  fat,  then  will  they  turn  to  other  gods 
Josh.  17.  13.  the  children  of  Israel  were  w.  strong 
Jer.  5.  27.  therefore  are  become  great  and  w.  rich 

23.  they  are  w.  fat,  they  shine,  they  overpass 
Ezek.  16.  7.  thou  hast  increa.scd  and  w.  great 

WAXETH. 

Psal  6. 7.  mine  eye  w.  old  because  of  mine  enemies 

Heb.  8.  13.  what  ic.  old,  is  ready  to  vanish  away 
WAXING. 

PAj7.1.14.  many  brethren  lo.  confident  by  my  bonds 
WAY, 

Or  path,  IS  taken  in  a  moral  sense,  (1)  For  con- 
duct. /a«.59.  8,  They  have  made  them  crooked 
paths,  f'snl.  1.  6,  The  Lord  knowcth  the  way 
of  the  righteous.  (2)  Ways  are  put  for  the  laics 
of  the  Lord.  Gen.  18.  19,  They  shall  keep  the 
way  of  the  Lord.  /'.«(iM8.21,  I  have  kept  the 
Kays  of  th^  T,ord.  (3)  Way  is  pvt  for  custom, 
manners,  and  way  of  life.  Gen.  6.  12,  All  flesh 
had  corrupted  his  way  upon  the  earth.  Jind  in 
Jer.  10.  2,  Learn  not  the  way  of  the  heathen. 
(4)  The  way  of  the  Lord  expresses  his  conduct 
in  respect  of  us.  Isa.  55.  8,  9,  My  thoughts  are 
not  your  thoughts,  neither  are  your  ways  my 
ways,  saith  the  Lord.  For  an  the  heavcng  are 
671 


WAY 


WAY 


higher  than  tho  earth,  so  are  my  ways  higher  JoJ  3.  23.  light  given  to  a  man  whose  le.  is  hid 
tlian  your  ways,  and  my  thouglits  tlian  your^    12.24.  to  wander  whore  there  is  no  ic.  Pi. 107. 40 
thoughts.     ^Ind  in  Rom.  11.  33,  His  ways  are  i   16.  22.  I  shall  go  the  w.  whence  1  shall  not  return 
past  hnding  out.     (5)  7 'Ac  ways  of  God  ore    22. 15.  Iiast  thou  marked  the  old  w.  which  x.'icked 
put  fur  his  works.    Job  40.  19,  He  is  the  chiol     2.3.  10.  but  he  knowelh  the  w.  that  I  tate 

28. 23.  God  understands  the  It-.  Uiereof  and  knowi 


of  tlie  ways  of  God.  (6)  J)ioinc  Providence, 
I'salm  107.  7.  (7)  Licalh,  Jo=h.  23.  14.  (8) 
The  method  of  salvation,  or  doctrine  of  the 
gospd,  Acts  19.  9. 

To  go  the  way  of  all  the  earth,  is  put  to  signify 
dying  and  the  grave,  Josh.  23.  14.  Ji  hard 
way,  is  put  to  rtprese7tt  the  way  of  sinners,  a 
way  of  impiety.  Judg.  2.  19,  They  ceased  not 
from  their  stubborn  way;  in  Hebrew,  hard  way. 
It  is  so  called  to  si^rmfy,  that  although  it 
seemed  at  first  very  soft,  and  easy,  and  plea- 
sant, yet  they  would  certainly  Jind  that  it  was 
hard  and  dij/icult,  and  truublesuine  to  them,  a.s 
a  hard  way  is  tv  the  traveller.  The  cours 
that  leadeth  to  destruction  is  called  a  broad 
way,  that  is  obvious  to  all,  and  in  which  many 
walk;  on  the  contrary,  that  course  of  life  which 
will  bring  a  man  to  hiaven,  is  numerf  strait 
narrow,  dilficult  to  find  and  to  walk  in :  A 
course  of  holiness  is  unpleasing  to  Jlesh  and 
blood,  it  does  not  at  all  gratify  men's  sensual 
appetites;  it  is  a  narrow  way,  wherein  men 
will  meet  with  many  crosses  and  temptations 
Mat.  7.  13, 14. 

Jesus  Christ  is  called  the  way,  John  14.  6.  be- 
cause it  is  by  him  alone  that  believers  obtain 
eternal  life,  and  an  entrance  into  heaven.  He 
is  the  way  to  heaven,  by  the  doctrine  which  he 
taught;  by  his  death,  by  which  he  purchased 
this  heavenly  inheritance  for  the  elect;  by  his 
holy  life  and  conversation,  setting  us  an  exam- 
ple, that  we  should  follow  his  steps;  and  by  the 
influence  of  his  Spirit,  whereby  btlicvcrs  are 
sanctified,  and  made  meet  to  be  made  partakers 
of  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light.  The 
Psalmist  says,  Thou  wilt  shew  me  the  path  of 
life,  Psal.  16.  11.  that  is,  ^^  thou  wilt  raise  my 
body  from  death  to  life,  and  conduct  me  to  the 
place  and  state  of  everlasting  happiness.^*  In 
Mat.  22.  IC.  the  Pharisees  tetl  our  Saviour  by 
their  disciples.  Master,  we  know  that  thou  art 
true,  and  teachest  the  way  of  God  in  truth ; 
that  is,  the  true  principles  of  religion.  St. 
Peter  says,  that  the  way  of  truth  shall  be  evil 
spoken  of  by  false  teachers,  IPet.  2.  2.  that  is, 
the  doctrine  of  the  gospel,  and  the  Christian 
religion.  7n  Jude  II.  it  is  said,  they  have 
gone  in  the  way  of  Cain;  that  is,  they  have 
followed  his  example,  in  hating  and  persecut' 
ing  their  brethren. 

Gen.  24.  42.  if  thou  prosper  my  w.  which  I  go 
42.  25.  to  give  them  provision  for  the  w.  45.  21. 

Exod.  13. 17.  led  not  thro'  the  lo.of  the  Philistines 
18.  led  the  people  thro'  the  lo.of  the  wilderness 
21.  in  a  pillar  of  cloud  to  lead  them  the  w. 
18.  20.  shew  them  the  w.  JVeh.  9.  19.  Psal.iO'i.4. 

JVum.  21.  4.  and  the  soul  of  the  people  was  much 
discouraged  because  of  the  w. 

22.  26.  there  was  no  w.  to  turn  to  the  right  or  left 
Deut.  1.  22.  by  what  w.  we  must  go,  .lush.  3.  4. 

8.  2.  remember  the  w.  which  the  Lord  led  you 

14.  2'!.  if  the  ic.  be  too  long  for  thee 

17.  16.  shall  henceforth  return  no  more  that  w. 
19.3.  thou  shalt  prepare  thee  a  «j.||6.tlie  id.  is  long 

23.  25.  thou  shalt  go  out  one  w.  against  them 
31.  29.  and  turn  aside  from  the  w.  which  I  have 

commanded  you 
.Tosh.  23.14.  behold  I  am  going  w.  of  all  the  earih 

24.  17.  Lord  preserved  us  in  all  the  w.  we  wont 
Judg.  2. 19.  they  ceased  not  from  their  stubborn  w. 

9.  25.  they  robbed  all  that  came  along  that  w. 

18.  5.  whether  our  w.  we  go  shall  be  prosperous 
6.  before  the  Lord  is  your  w.  wherein  vc  go 

19.  9.  and  to-morrow  get  you  early  on  your  w. 
\Sam.  6.  12.  kine  took  straight  w.  to  Belh-shemesh 

9.  6.  peradventure  he  can  shew  us  our  w.  to  go 
8.  I  will  give  to  the  man  of  God  totellusonr  w. 

12.  23.  I  will  teach  you  the  good  and  the  right  w. 

15.  20.  I  have  gone  the  w.  the  Lord  sent  me 

20.  t  1^.  remain  by  the  stone  that  sheweth  the  ir. 
2.Sam.  19.  36.  servant  will  go  a  little  w.  over  Jordan 
1  h'ings  2.  2.  I  go  the  ic.  of  all  the  earth,  be  strong 

8.  .36.  that  thou  teach  them  the  good  w.  to  walk 
t  44.  pray  to  the  Lord  toward  the  lo.  of  the  city 

13.  9.  nor  turn  again  by  the  same  w.  thou  earnest 
10.  he  went  another  w.  ||  12.  what  w.  went  he? 

18.  6.  Ahab  went  one  w.  Obadiah  a:. other  w. 
22.  24.  he  said,  which  w.  went  the  Spirit  of  Lord 
from  me  to  speak  to  thee?  2CAroii.  18.  23. 
2/iings  3.  8.  and  he  said,  which  w.  shall  we  go? 
the  w.  through  the  wilderness  of  Edom 
5   19   so  he  departed  from  him  a  little  w. 
7.  15.  all  the  w.  full  of  garments  and  vessels 
^Chron.  6.  27.  when  thou  haat  taught  them  good  ic. 
Ezra  8.  21.  to  seek  of  him  a  right  w.  for  lu 


31.  t  32.  but  I  opened  my  doors  to  the  w. 
38.  19.  where  is  the  w.  where  light  dwelleth? 

Psal.  1.  6.  Lord  knoweth  the  w.  of  the  righteous 
2.  12.  kiss  the  Son,  lest  ye  perish  from  the  w. 

36.  4.  he  sctteth  himself  in  a  w.  that  is  not  good 

37.  t  14.  bent  their  bow  to  slay  the  upright  of  w. 
78.  50.  he  made  a  w.  to  his  anger,  ho  spared  not 
101.  2.  I  will  behave  wisely  in  a  perfect  w.  6. 
1  J9.27.make  me  understand  the  w.  of  thy  precepts 

29.  remove  from  mc  the  w.  of  lying  and  grant 

30.  I  have  chosen  the  w.  of  truth 

32.  I  will  run  the  to.  of  thy  commandments 

33.  teacli  me,  OLord,  lo.  of  thy  statutes,  143. 8 
1U4.  therefore  I  hate  every  false  ir.  128. 

13'.).  24.  and  sec  if  there  be  any  wicked  w.  in  me 
146.  9.  the  10.  of  thewickcd  he  turnsupsidodown 
Prill).  2.  8.  he  prescrveth  the  le.  of  his  saints 

IZ.  to  deliver  thee  from  the  lo.  of  the  evil  man 
4.  19.  Ihe  10.  of  the  wicked  is  as  darkness 

6.  23.  are  the  ic.  of  life,  15.  24.  Jer.  21.  8. 

7.  8.  near  her  corner,  he  went  the  lo.  to  her  house 
27. her  house  is  the  lo.to  hell,  going  down  to  death 

12.  15.  the  10.  of  a  fool  is  right  in  his  own  eyes 
26.  the  10.  of  the  wicked  seducelh  them 

13.  15.  but  the  lo.  of  the  transgressors  is  hard 

14.  12.  there  is  a  w.  which  secmeth  right,  16.  25 

15.  9.  the  10.  of  the  wicked  is  an  abomination 
10.  is  grievous  to  him  that  forsakoth  Uie  w. 

19.  the  10.  ofthe  slothful  man  is  a  hedge  of  thorns, 
hut  the  w.  of  the  righteous  is  made  plain 

16.  29.  leadeth  him  into  the  lo.  that  is  not  good 
21.  8.  tho  10.  of  man  is  froward  and  strange 
30. 19.  the  1*.  of  an  eagle,  of  a  serpimt,  of  a  ship 

20.  such  is  the  lo.  of  an  adulterous  woman 
£cfM1.5.knowest  not  what  is  the  to.  of  the  Spirit 
fsa.  3.  12.  they  cause  thee  to  err  and  destroy  the  lo, 

26.  7.  the  10.  of  the  just  is  uprightness 
35.  8.  a  high-way  and  a  w.  cal'ed  lo.  of  holiness 
40.  14.  who  shewed  him  the  lo.  of  understanding! 
43.  16.  Lord  who  maketh  a  lo.  in  tli(5  sen, 51. 10. 
19.  I  will  even  make  a  w.  in  the  w  ilderness 

49.  11.  I  will  make  all  my  mountains  a  lo. 
57.  14.  prepare  a  w.  ||  62.  10.  cast  up  Ihe  high». 
59.  8.  tho  10.  of  peace  they  know  not,  Bu7n.  3.  17. 

Jer.  6.  16.  where  is  the  ^ood  w.  and  walk  therem 
10.  2.  learn  not  the  lo.  ot  heathen,  be  not  dismayed 
23.  I  know  that  the  lo.  of  man  is  not  in  himself 
12.1.  whereforedoth  the  lo.of  the  wicked  prosper? 

18.  15.  to  walk  in  paths,  in  a  lo.  not  cast  up 

32.  .39.  I  will  give  them  one  heart  and  one  w. 
42.  3.  that  the  Lord  thy  God  may  shew  us  the  to. 

50.  5.  they  shall  ask  the  lo.  to  Zion  with  faces 
Ezek.21. 20.  appoint  a  w.  that  the  sword  may  coine 

23.  13.  then  I  saw  that  they  took  both  one  w. 

4.3.  2.  the  glory  of  G.  came  from  the^o.  of  the  east 
.'3mos  2.  7.  and  turn  aside  the  lo.  of  the  meek 
A''ah.  2.  1.  keep  the  munition,  watch  the  w. 
Mai.  3.  1.  he  shall  prepare  the  lo.  before  me 
Jlat.  7. 13.  broad  is  the  lo.  that  leads  to  destruction 
14.  and  narrow  is  the  to.  which  leadeth  unto  life 

8.  28.  so  that  no  man  might  pass  by  that  lo. 
10.  5.  go  not  into  the  lo.  of  the  Gentiles 
22.16.  we  knowlhou  art  true,  and  teachest  the  le. 

of  God  in  truth,  Mark  12.  14.  J,vke  20.  2L 
Lvke  5.  19.  by  what  lo.  they  might  bring  him  in 
10.  31.  there  came  down  a  certain  priest  that  w. 
1.5.  20.  when  he  was  yet  a  great  lo.  ofi",  father  saw 

19.  4.ZaccheuBran  tosee  him,  was  lo  pass  that  jo. 
./(i/ihIO.  1.  but  climboth  upsomeothcrio.is  a  thief 

14.  4.  the  10.  ye  know  ||  6.  I  am  the  lo.  the  truth 
5.Thoftiassaith,  Lord,  how  can  we  know  theio.? 
./ids  16. 17.  which  show  to  us  Ihe  w.  of  salvatioB 
If*.  2G.expoundod  to  him  ic.  of  Goil  more  perfectly 
19.  9.  holievcd  not,  but  spake  evil  of  that  to. 
23.  there  arose  no  small  stir  about  that  to. 
24.  14.  after  the  lo.  which  they  call  heresy 
A'oHi.  14.  13.  or  an  occasion  to  fall  in  brother'.? i» 
ICor.  10.  13.  with  temptation  make  a  IT.  lo  escape 
12.  31.  yet  shew  I  unto  you  a  more  excellent  to. 
1  Thess.  3. 11.  our  Ld.  Jesus  direct  our  lo.  unto  yoB 
Heb.  9.  8.  the  lo.  into  the  holiest  nol  yet  manliest 
10.  20.  by  a  living  w.  which  he  hath  consecrated 
12.  t  17.  for  he  found  no  w.  to  change  his  mind 
Jam.  2.  2.5.  she  had  sent  thom  out  another  to. 
2Prt.  2.  2.  the  to.  of  truth  shall  be  evil  spoken  of 
15.  which  have  forsaken  tho  right  to.  and  are 
gone  astray,  following  the  to.  of  Balaam 
the  son  of  Bosor 
21.  better  not  known  the  w.  of  righteousness 
Rev.  16.12.  that  to. ofkingpofthecastbe  prepared 

Py  the  WAY. 
Oen.  42.  38.  if  mischief  befall  him  by  the  w.  ye  ge 
45.21.Joseph  said,  see  that  ye  fall  nol  out  iy  Me  to 
49.  17.  Dan  shall  be  a  serpent  by  the  w.  an  adde 


WAY 


WAY 


Exod.  4. 524.  hy  the  v>.  in  the  inn  the  LofJ  met  him  JVcA.  9.  19.  departed  not  by  day  to  lead  in  the  w. 
A'um.  14.  SJo.turiiyou,gut  you  into  llie  wilderness,  Job  18.  10.  snare  laid  and  a  traj)  I'ur  him  in  the  tc. 


by  w.  of  the  Red  sea,  21. 4.  J)eut.l.  2, 40. 1 2. 1 
/>£Ut.ti.7.talk  of  them  when  watkest^T/f/ie  u.ll.lU. 
85.  17.  what  Anialek  did  to  thee  by  Uic  w. 

18.  how  he  met  thee  by  the  w.  lHaiii.  15.  2. 

28.  68.  Lord  shall  bring  ihee  by  the  w.  I  spake 

Josh.  5.  4.  even  all  the  men  of  war  died  by  the  w. 

7.  because  tliey  had  not  circum.  i\\\^m  by  the  w. 

IKings  13. 9.  not  turn  again  by  w.  thou  earnest,  17. 

24.  a  lion  met  him  by  the  le.  and  slew  him 
20.  38.  the  prophet  waited  for  the  king  by  the  w. 
iKings  3.20.  there  came  water  by  the  w-  of  Edom 
19.  28.  put  my  bridle  in  lijis,  I  will  turn  thee  back 
by  the  w.  by  wliich  thou  earnest,  /i'u.37. 2i),  34. 
Etra  8.  31.  and  of  such  as  lay  in  wait  by  the  w. 
Job  21.2y.have  ye  not  asked  them  that  goby  the  w.? 
Psal.80.1-2.  ail  tliey  who  pass  by  the  w.  plucked  her 
89.  41.  all  that  pass  by  the  w.  spoil  him 
Eccl.  10.  3.  when  fools  walk  by  the  w.  wisdom  fails 
Isa.  42. 10.  bring  blind  by  the  w.  they  knew  not 
48.  17.  the  Lord  God  that  leadeth  thee  by  the  w 
Jer.  2. 17.  forsaken  God  when  he  led  thee  by  the  w. 
6.25.  walk  nolby  thew.  for  the  sword  of  the  enemy 
L,am.  1. 1 12.  ye  that  pass  by  the  w.  behold  and  see 
Ezek.  43.  4.  glory  of  Lord  came  by  the  w.  of  gate 
44. 3.  prince  shall  enter  by  the  w.  of  porch,  40.  2, 8. 
46.  9.  he  that  entereth  by  the  w.  of  north  gate 
Uos.  13.  7.  as  a  leopard  by  the  w.  will  1  observe 
Mark  8.3.if  I  send  them  fasting,  they  faint  by  the  w. 

z7.  by  the  w.  he  asked  his  (Iiscii)le3,  saying 
9.  33.  what  was  it  ye  disputed  by  the  icI  34. 
I^uke  10.  4.  carry  no  shoes,  salute  no  man  by  the  w. 
24.  32.  heart  burn  while  he  talked  with  us  by  the  w. 
XCor.  16.  7.  for  I  will  not  see  you  now  by  the  w. 

Kvery  WAY. 
Oen.3.  24.  a  flaming  sword  which  WjrnedcDcryio. 
Paal.  119. 101.  refrained  my  feet  from  every  evil  ic. 

104.  therefore  I  hate  every  false  w.  128. 
Prov.  21. 2.  »very  w.  of  man  right  in  his  own  eyes 
Ezek.  10.  31.  bulkiest  eminent  place  in  every  id. 
/{om.3.2.much  ercry  lo. because  to  them  commil  ted 
Pkil.  1.  IS.  every  w.  whether  in  pretence  or  in  truth. 
See  EriL. 
His  WAY. 
Oen.  6.  12.  all  flesh  had  corrujUcd  Ais  w.  on  earth 
2.Sam.22.31.asforGodAi>ic.  is  perfect,  I's.  1H.30. 
\ Kings  8.  32.  condemning  the  wicked,  to  bring  A(a- 
ID.  on  his  own  head,  '■ii'hron.  0.  23. 
Job  8.  19.  behold,  this  is  the  joy  oi his  w. 
17.  9.  the  righteous  also  shall  hold  on  /(/*•  w. 
21.  31.  who  shall  declare  his  w.  to  his  face? 
23.  II.  his  w.  have  I  kept  and  not  declined 
3(3.  23.  who  hath  enjoined  him  his  ic.'f 
Psal.  25.  9.  the  meek  will  he  teach  liis  w. 
37.  7.  bccauscof  liim  who  prospereih  in  his  w. 
23.  stop!;  of  good  man,and  hedelighleth  in  A(,s  w 
31.  wail  on  the  Lord  and  keep  A/i  ra.  and  he  shall 
1 1'.t.O.whrri  with  shall  a  young  man  cleanse  A/'sic. 
Prov.  H.  22.  Ld.  possessed  me  in  beginning  of  A/s  w. 
11.  5.  righteousness  of  the  perfect  direct  his  w. 
14.8.  the  wisdom  of  prudent  is  to  understand  A.  w 
10.9.a  man'sheartdeviseth  A/s  w.  but  Ld.  directs 
17.  he  that  keepeth  his  w.  prcscrvcth  his  sjoul 

19.  3.  the  foolishness  of  man  perverleth  his  w. 

20.  14.  when  he  is  gone  his  w.  then  he  boaslelh 

21.  29.  as  for  the  upright,  he  directeth  his  w. 
Isa.  48.  15.  he  shall  make  his  w.  prosperous 

.55.7.1et  the  wicked  forsake  Ai.'*  jr. and  his  tliouglits 

Jcr.  4.7.  the  destroyer  of  the  Gentiles  is  on  his  w. 

/."ift.  3. 18.  to  warn  the  wicked  from  Af.?  wicked  w. 

19.  and  he  turn  not  from  his  wicked  7/J.33.  8, 9. 

13.  22.  he  should  not  return  from  his  wicked  w. 

J^ah.  1.  3.  the  Lord  hath  Ai>  w.  in  the  whirlwind 

Jam.  1.24.  he  beholdeth  himself  and  goeth  his  w. 

5.  20.wliu  convcrti!th  the  sinner  from  error  of  A.  w. 

See  Wknt. 

In  the  WAY. 

Oen.  2-1.  27.  I  being  in  the  in.  ^le  Lord  led  mo 

48.  blesved  hctheLd.  wholedmeiHfArright  IC. 
3.>.  3.  the  Lord  was  with  me  in  the  tr.  I  went 
19.  Rachel  buried  in  the  w.  to  Kphrath,  4H.  7. 
F.rod.  5.  20.  Moses  and  .Aaron  slooil  in  the  w. 
2;{.20.send  ansel  before  thee  to  keep  thee  in  the  w. 
/^eu(.1.33.  who  went  in  thew.  before  you  to  search 
2:1. 4.  Iipcnusc  lliey  met  vou  not  with  bread  in  t.  w. 
\Kings  II.  29.  Ahijah  foimd  Jeroboam  in  the  w. 
13.  24.  his  carcase  was  cast  in  the  w.  25,  28. 
1.V  26.  ho  walked  in  the  le.of  his  father,  22.  ."iS. 
34.  he  did  evil  in  si-flit  of  iho  Lord,  and  walked 
in  thf  tn.  of  Jeroboam,  10.  2,  19,  20.  |  22.  52. 
18.7.  ns  Ohadiah  was  in  the  w.  Klijah  met  him 
iKings  fl.I8.ho  walked  in  the  w.  of  kinjs  of  Israel, 
u  the  house  of  Ahab,  10.  3.  2CAr.2I.  0,  13. 
27.  he  walked  in  the  w.  of  the  house  of  Almb 
91   22.  and  walked  not  in  their,  of  Ihi-  Lurd 
tCAr.  11. 17.  three  years  walked  in  lA^  in.  of  David 
20.  32.  hn  walked  in  the  w.  of  Asa  his  father 
Ezra  8.  22.  to  help  us  against  the  enemy  in  the  w. 
AcA.  0. 12.  togivt  them  light  in  M«  w.  they  ihall  go 
973 


Psal.  1. 1.  blessed,  nor  standelh  in  the  w.  of  sinners 
25.  8.  therefore  will  he  teach  sinners  in  the  w. 

12.  him  shall  he  teach  in  the  w.  32.  8. 
85. 13.  and  siialt  set  us  in  the  to.  of  his  slops 
ll^2.  23.  no  weakened  my  strength  in  the  w. 
110.  7.  he  shall  drink  of  the  brook  in  the  w. 
119.  1.  Uessed  are  the  undefded  in  the  w. 
14.  I  have  rejoiced  in  the  w.  of  thy  testimonies 
139.24.scarch  me,  and  lead  me  in  the  m. everlasting 
14^.  3.  in  the  w.  have  they  privily  laid  a  snare 

Prov.  1.  15.  walk  not  thou  in  the  to.  with  them 
2. 20.  that  thou  mayest  walk  in  the  w.  of  good  men 

4.  11.  I  have  taught  thee  in  the  w.  of  wisdom 
14.  and  go  not  in  the  w.  of  evil  men 

8.  20.  I  lead  in  the  w.  of  righteousness 

9.  0.  live,  and  go  in  the  w.  of  understanding 
10.17.he  is  in  the  w.  of  life  that  keejieth  instruction 
12.  28.  in  the  w.  of  righteousness  is  lile 
1.3.  0.  right.  keei)eth  him  that  is  upright  in  ^Aeic. 

10.  31.  if  it  bo  found  in  the  w.  of  righteousness 
22.5. thorns  and  snares  are  in  the  w.  of  the  froward 

0.  train  up  a  ciiild  in  the  w.  he  should  go 

23.  19.  bo  wise,  and  guide  thy  heart  in  the  w. 
20.13.theslothful  man  saith  there  is  a  lion  in  the  k. 
29.  27.  ujjright  in  the  w.  is  abomination  to  wicked 

F.cel.  12.  5.  be  afraid,  and  fears  shall  be  in  the  w. 

Isa.H.  11.  should  not  walk  in  iAeic.  of  this  people 
20. 8.  in  the  w.  of  thy  judgments  we  waited  for  thee 
57.  17.  went  on  frowardly  in  the  w.  of  his  heart 

05.  2.  which  walked  in  the  w.  that  was  not  good 
Jer.  2.  18.  what  hast  thou  to  do  in  the  to.  of  Egypt? 

or  what  hast  thou  to  do  in  the  w.  of  Assyria? 
Ezek.^'i.  31.  thou  hast  walked  iii  the  w.  of  thy  sister 
IIos.  0. 9.  so  priests  murder  in  the  w.  by  consent 
Jimos  4.  t  10. 1  sent  pestilence  in  the  w.  of  ICgypt 
Mat.  5.  25.  agree  quickly  whiles  thou  art  in  iAc  w. 
21.  32.  John  came  in  the  w.  of  righteousness 
Mark  11.8.  many  spread  garments  in  the  w.  others 
strewed  branches  in  *Ack).J1/««.21.8./,«A^19.30. 
/-i/Ae  1.  79.  to  guide  our  feet  in  the  w.  of  peace 

12.  58.  as  thou  art  in  the  w.  give  diligence 
J}cts  9.  17.  Jesus  that  appeared  to  thee  in  the  w. 

27.  how  he  had  seen  the  Lord  in  the  w. 
Judc  11.  they  have  gone  in  the  w.  of  Cain 
■See  Lord. 
My  WAY. 
Oen.  24.  50.  seeing  the  Lord  hath  prospered  my  ir. 
25(1771.22.33.  hemaketlunyic.  perfect,  /'s.  18. 32. 
■  fob  19.  8.  fenced  up  7ny  w.  that  I  caimot  pass 
/«a.40.27.why  sayest  thou,  »«i/  w.  is  hid  from  Lord? 
F.iek.  18.  25.  hear,  O  Israel,  is  not  my  w.  equal? 
John  8.21. 1  go  my  io.\\  A'o;n. 15.24. brought  on  my  w. 
-Cor.  1.  10.  to  be  brought  on  wy  w.  to  Jerusalem 

Out  of  the  WAY. 
Kro(/.32.8.thcyhavcturned  aside  quicklyowio/AAr 
w.  I  conmianded  them,  /^r «<.9.I2,10.  ./u(lg.2.\l. 
J^um.  22.  23.  the  ass  turned  aside  oxU  of  the  w. 
Deut.  11.  28.  cursed  if  ye  turn  aside  oh(  of  thew. 
13.5.  thrust  thee  out  of  the  w.  L.  God  commanded 
27.  18.  that  maketh  blind  to  wander  out  of  thew. 
■lob  24.  4.  they  turn  the  needy  out  of  the  w. 

24.  they  are  taken  out  of  the  w.  and  cut  off 
31.  7.  if  my  stej)  hath  turned  out  of  the  w. 

/'roc.  21. 10.  wandero(hou<tt/rAf«7.  of  understand 
Isa.  2fl.  7.  and  thro'  strong  drink  are  out  of  the  w. 

30.11.  get  you  oxit  of  the  w.  turn  aside  out  of  patli 

.')7.14.take  stumbling-block  ontofthew.  of  people 
Miitt'i.  8.  but  ye  are  departed  out  of  the  io. 
Horn.  3. 12.  are  all  gone  nMto/tAcie.none  doth  good 
Col.  2.  14.  he  took  the  hand-writing  out  of  the  w 
27'/(c.«5.  2.  7.  will  let,  till  he  he  taken  out-nf  the  ic. 
/A7;.5. 2.  compassion  on  them  that  are  out  ofthfie 

12.13.1est  that  which  is  la  me  he  turned  out  of  t.  w. 

Own  WAY. 
Prov.  1.  31.  shall  they  eat  the  fruit  oftheir  oicn  w. 

20.  24.  how  can  a  man  understand  his  own  ic? 
fsn.  .'>3.  0.  we  have  turned  every  one  to  his  oirn  w. 

50.  II.  greedy  dogs,  they  all  look  to  their  own  w. 
F.zek.  22.  31.  iheir  own  w.  have  I  recompensed 

30. 17.  they  defiled  fsr.  hy  ihiir  own  w.  and  doings 

WAY  SIDK. 
(7(?n.38.21.whore  is  harlot  that  was  by  the  ir.-.<ri(W 
1  .Sam.  4.  13.  Kli  sat  on  a  sent  by  w.-side  watching 
/'.«.  140.  5.  the  proud  have  spread  a  net  by  w.-side 
J)/at.  13.4. when  hn  sowed,  some  seeds  fell  by  the  ir.- 
side,  fowls  came,  19.  Mark  4.4,15. 7,uA''8.5,12. 

20.  .30.  two  hlin<l  men  silting  by  the  w.-side 
Mark  10.  40.  as  hn  went  out  of  Jericho,  blind  Bnr- 
timcussatby  the  in. -.</(//•  begging,  Luke  18.35. 
TAnir  WAY. 
I  A!'in^,'i2.4.  if  thy  children  lake  heed  totAcirjn.fo 
walk  before  me  in  liuth,  8.  25.  2CAron.  6.  16. 
.fob  0.  18.  the  paths  of  their  in.  are  turned  nsido 

19.  12.  his  troops  raise  np  (Arir  in.  ngninst  mo 

2!).  25.  t  chose  out  their  w.  sat  chief  and  dwelt 
Psal.  35.  0.  let  their  w.  he  dark  and  slippery 

49.  13.  this  tJuir  w.  is  their  folly,  yet  posterity 
Jer.  3.  21.  iJiey  have  perverted  their  v>.  and  forgot 


WAY 

.Tcr.  6. 27.  that  thou  mayest  know  and  try  theiric. 

2;).  12.  their  w.  shall  be  to  them  as  slipjiery  way* 

Ezek.1.27. 1  will  do  to  them  after  their  it. and  judge 

according  to  their  deserts,  9.  10.  |  11.  21 

14.  22.  ye  shall  see  their  w.  and  their  doings 
33.  17.  as  for  them  their  w.  is  not  equal 
30.  17.  their  w.  wai  before  me  as  uncleanncss  of 

lO.according  lo  tAcir  in. and  doings  I  judged  tlteni 
Jlcts  15.  3.  being  brought  on  tAtir  w.  by  the  church 
This  WAY.  [ace  We.nt. 

Gen.  28.20.  if  G.  will  keep  me  in  tAi*  in.  that  I  go 
F.zod.  2.  12.  Moses  looked  this  w.  and  that  way 
./o»A.  8.  20.  had  no  power  to  flee  this  w.  or  that 
HKings  C.19.Elishasaid,«/iis  is  not  the  in  .follow  mo 
Isa.  30.  21.  saying,  this  is  the  w.  walk  ye  in  it 
.'ids  9.  2.  if  he  found  any  ol' this  in.  might  bring 
22.  4.  I  persecuted  this  w.  unto  the  death 

'Ihy  WAY. 
Gen.  24.  40.  the  Lord.^vill  prosper  thy  id. 
F.zod.  33.  13.  therefore,  I  Jiray,  shew  me  thy  to. 
.ATum.  22.  32.  because  thy  w.  is  jierverse  before  ni« 
■losh.  1.  8.  then  thou  shall  make  (Ai/ in.  jirosperou* 
IKings  19.  15.  return  on  thy  w.  to  the  wildernesa 
Psal.  5.  8.  make  thy  w.  straight  before  my  face 

27.  11.  teach  me  thy  w.  O  Lord,  lead  me,  80.  11. 
37.  5.  commit  thy  w.  unto  the  Lord,  trust  in  hiia 
44.18.  neither  have  our  steps  declined  (torn  thy  id, 
07.  2.  that  thy  w.  may  be  known  ui)on  earth 
77.  13.  thy  w.  O  God,  is  in  the  sanctuary 

19.  thy  w.  is  in  the  sea,  thy  path  in  great  wateri 

119.  37.  and  quicken  tiiou  me  in  thy  w. 

Prov.  3.  23.  then  shalt  thou  walk  in  thy  w.  safely 

5.  8.  remove  tliy  w.  far  from  her,  come  not  lygh 

Isa.  57.  10.  art  wearied  in  the  greatness  of  thy  w. 

Jer.  2.  23.  see  thy  in.  in  the  valley,  what  hast  done 

33.  why  trimmest  thou  thy  w.  to  seek  love 

30.  why  gaddest  thou  about  to  change  thy  in.? 

4.  18.  thy  w.  have  procured  these  things  unto  tlico 
Ezek.  10.  43.  1  also  will  recompense  thy  w. 
Hos.  2.  6.  I  will  hedge  up  thy  in.  with  thcrns 

10.  13.  because  thou  didst  trust  in  thy  in. 
Mat.W.W.  behold,  ^scnd  my  messenger,  w  hoshnll 
prepare  thy  w.  belore  thee,  Mark  1.2.  J^ukc'cil. 
WAYS 
Gen.  19.  2.  ye  shall  rise  early  and  go  on  your  in. 
Deut.  5.  33.  walk  in  nil  the  w.  Lord  commanded 
I  A'in^s22.43.ho  walked  in  tlicin.  of  Asa  his  father 
2A'ini's21. 21.  he  walked  in  all  the  in.  of  RIanasseh 
22.2.'he  walked  in  w.  of  David,  2CAr.  17.  3.  |  34. 2. 
2CAr.  21.  12.  walked  not  in  the  in.  of  Jehoshaphat 
22.  3.  he  walked  in  the  w.  of  the  house  of  Ahab 

28.  2.  he  walked  in  the  w.  of  the  kings  of  Israel 
.fob  24.  1.3.  they  know  not  the  in.  of  the  light 

.30.  12.  they  raise  up  the  w.  of  their  destruction 
34.  21.  for  his  eyes  are  upon  the  in.  of  man 
40.  19.  Behemoth  is  the  chief  of  the  in.  of  God 
Psal.  84.  5.  in' whose  heart  are  tho  in.  of  them 
ProD.l.lO.so  arc  the  in.  of  every  one  greedy  of  gain 

2.  13.  to  walk  in  the  in.  of  darkness 

15.  whose  in.  are  crooked,  and  they  frownrd 
S.n.wisdom's  tn.  are  w.  of  pleasantness  niid  paths 

5.  0.  her  in.  are  moveable,  canst  not  know  them 
21.  the  10.  of  man  are  before  the  eyes  of  the  Lord 

6.  6.  go  to  the  nnt,  consider  her  in.  and  be  wise 

7.  25.  let  not  thine  heart  decline  to  her  m. 
14.  12.  thcendthereof  arethe  in.  ofdeath,  16.  25. 
10.  2.  the  w.  of  man  are  clean  in  his  own  eves 

7.  when  man's  in.  please  the  Lord,  he  nuikes 

17.  23.  tnketh  a  gift  tojicrvert  the  in.  of  judgment 
31.  27.  she  looketh  well  to  the  in.  of  her  hoU!.ehold 

KccM  I.9.0  young  man,  walk  in  the  in.  of  thy  heart 
Isa.  49.  0.  they  shall  fec<l  in  the  in.  and  pnslurea 
Jer.  2.  23.  a  swift  dromedary  traversing  her  w. 

3.  2.  in  the  w.  hast  thou  sat  for  them  as  Arnbiao 
0.  16.  stand  in  the  in.  and  sen,  ask  for  old  paths 
7.  3.  amend  your  in.  and  your  doings,  5.  |  20. 13. 

21.  walk  in  all  Iho  in.  I  have  commanded  yon 
12.  10.  if  they  diligently  learn  the  in.  of  m,""  people 

18.  II.  make  your  in.  and  your  doings  pxil 
.32.  19.  thy  eyes  are  open  on  the  w.  ol  Bon«  Jf  men 

I.am.  1.  4.  the  in.  of  Zion  do  mourn,  none  come 

3. 40.  let  us  search  and  try  our  w.  and  turn  to  Lord 

F.zek.  18.  25.  are  nnt  your  tn.  niicqnni?  29. 

20.13.  there  shall  ye  remember  your  in.  and  doings 

44.  not  according  lo  your  wicked  in.  or  doings 

21.  19.  son  of  man  appoint  thee  two  in.  that  sword 

21.  stood  at  head  of  tho  two  tn.  to  use  divinntion 

Hag.  1.  5.  thus  saith  the  T-ord,  Consider  your  tn.  7. 

y.crh.  I.  0.  do  lo  us  according  to  our  in.  and  doings 

I.uke  3.  5.  and  the  ron"h  in.  shall  be  made  smooth 

.^cts  2.  28.  hast  made  known  lo  me  Iho  tn.  of  life 

J}ny  \VA\  S. 

I.rv.  20.  4.  do  any  tn.  hide  Iheir  eyes  from  tho  maa 

A'liin.  .30.  15.  if  ye  shall  any  tn.  make  them  void 

2CAron.  32.  13.  any  in.  able  lo  deliver  their  land* 

Sen  Bv-Ways,  Kvii,,  Hioii. 

His  WAYS. 

Deut.  R.  6.  thou  shall  keepihe  commandments  of 

the  Lord  to  walk  in  his  tn.and  fear  him,  26.17 

|28.9.|30. 16.  lA'i>t/r,2.  3. 


WAY 


WEA 


Oeut.  10  13.  to  walk  in  all  Ai>  w-  to  love  him  and  to '  Prov.  3. 6.  in  all  thy  to.  acknowledge  him,  ho  direct 


serve  the  Lord,  1.1.2:2.  Josh.  itZ.  5. 1  Kings  S.58. 
19.  9.  to  love  the  Lord  and  walk  ever  in  his  w. 
32.  A.  all  his  w.  are  judgment.  Van.  4.  37. 
XSavt.  8.  3.  Samuel's  sons  walked  not  in  his  to. 
18.14.  David  behaved  wisely  in  his  w.  L.  with  him 
XKings  8.  39.  hear  thou  in  liea  vcn,  Ibrgive  and  give 
to  every  man  according  to  his  w.  -C'Ar.  C.  30. 
iChron.  13.  -2.  Abjjah's  .icts  and  his  w.  are  written 
S?7.  0.  Jolham  prepared  kis  w.  belbre  the  Lord 

7.  his  to.  are  written  in  book  of  the  kings,  i!S.  26. 
tub  2b.  14.  tiiese  are  parts  ol'Ai*  w.  hut  liow  little 
34.  11.  cause  every  man  liiid  according  to  his  to. 

27.  and  would  not  consider  any  oi' his  w. 
Psal.  10.  5.  his  w.  are  always  grievous 
103.  7.  he  made  known  his  to.  unto  Moses 
119.  3.  they  do  no  iniquity,  they  walk  in  his  tc. 
128.  1.  blessed  is  every  one  that  walkethln/tuu). 
145.  17.  the  Lord  is  righteous  in  all  his  w. 
Prov.  3.  31.  envy  not  and  choose  none  ol'  his  w. 

10.  9.  he  that  perverteth  his  w.  shall  be  known 
14.  2.he  that  is  perverse  in  his  w.  despiseth  the  Ld. 
19.  16.  he  that  despiseth  his  to.  shall  die 
22.  25.  lest  thou  learn  his  to.  and  get  a  snare 

58.  6.  is  better  than  he  that  is  perverse  in  his  to. 
18.  he  that  is  perverse  in  A2>  io.  shall  tall  at  once 

Isa.  2.  3.  he  will  teach  ua  of  his  to.  Mic.  4.  2. 

4^.  24.  for  they  would  not  walk  in  Ai*  tc. 

45.  13.  I  will  direct  all  his  to.  saith  the  Lord 

57.  18.  I  have  seen  his  a.  and  will  heal  him 
i/er.l7.10.give  every  man  according  to  his  2C.32.19. 
Eiek.  18.  23.  that  he  should  return  from  his  w. 

30.  I  will  judge  Israel  accordingtoA<6  w.33. 20. 
Hos.  9.  8.  is  a  snare  of  a  fowler  in  all  his  ic. 

12.  2.  Lord  will  punish  Jacob  according  to  Ai£w. 
Joel  2.  7.  they  shall  march  on  every  one  in  his  to. 
Uab.  3.  6.  the  hills  did  bow,  Ais  w.  are  everlasting 
Luke  1 .76.  thou  shalt  go  before  L.  to-prepare  his  tc. 
Kom.  11.  33.  and  his  to.  are  past  finding  out 
/am. 1.8. double-minded  man  is  unstable  in  allAij  w 

11.  so  shall  the  rich  man  fade  away  in  his  to. 

See  Lord. 

My  WAYS. 

IBLings  3.  14.  if  thou  wilt  walk  in  tny  to.  as  thy 

father  David  did  walk,  11.  38.  Zech.  3.  7. 

11.33.  worshipped  iVliicom  and  not  walked  in  ?«.  to. 

Job  31.4.  doth  not  he  see  my  10.  and  count  my  steps 

I'sal.liO.  1.  I  will  take  heed  to  my  M.  that  1  sin  not 

81.  13.  O  that  Israel  had  walked  in  my  tc.   . 

95.  10.  they  have  not  known  my  tc.  Hcb.  3.  10. 

119.5.0that  tny  uj.were  direct. to  keep  thy  statutes 

26.  I  have  declared  jHytfl.  and  thou  heardest  me 

59.  1  thought  on  my  to.  and  turned  my  feet  to  thy 
168.  kept  testimonies,  all  my  w.  are  before  tliee 

139.  3.  and  art  acquainted  with  all  my  xc. 
Prov.  8.  32.  blessed  are  thev  that  keep  my  tc. 
23.  26.  my  son,  let  thine  eves  chserve  my  tc. 
Isa.ao.S.  noither  are  your  wr  vs  my  ?o.  saith  theLd. 
9.  so  are  tny  tc.  higher  than  your  ways 
58.  2.  seek  me  daily  and  delight  to  know  my  to. 
Lam.  3.  9.  he  hath  inclosed  my  tc.  with  hewn  stone 
11.  he  turned  aside  my  w.  and  pulled  me  in  pieces 
Eick.  18.  29.  are  not  my  to.  equal,  your  w.  unequal? 
Zech.  3.  7.  if  thou  wilt  walk  in  my  w.  and  keep 
.Val.  2.  9.  according  as  ye  have  not  kept  my  tc^ 
ICcir.  4.17.  bring  you  into  remembrance  of  my  tc. 

Own  WAYS. 
fob  13.  15.  I  will  maintain  my  oton  to.  before  him 
Prop. 14. 14.  the  backslider  be  tilled  with  \\\iowntc. 
l.^a.  58.  13.  honour  him,  not  doing  thine  oion  tc. 
66.  3.  yea,  they  have  chosen  their  own  w. 
Ezfk.  .36.  31.  then  remember  your  own  evil  to. 

32.  be  ashamed  for  your  «?on  w.O  house  of  Israel 
^cts  14.16.he  euiFered  all  nations  to  walk  in  own  w. 
See  Seven. 
Their  WAYS. 
SChron.  7. 14.  pray  and  turn  from  their  wicked  io. 
Job  24.  23.  yet  his  eyes  are  upon  tAeir  to. 
Psal.  125.  5.  for  such  as  turn  to  their  crooked  to. 
/"roB. 9.15. call  passengers  whogo  righton  thcirw. 
hr.  15.  7.  since  thi-y  return  not  from  tAeir  tc. 
16.  17.  for  mine  eyes  are  upon  all  their  w. 
18.  15.  they  caused  them  to  stumble  in  their  lo. 
Ezek.  14.  23.  comfort  you  when  ye  see  their  w. 
16.  47.  ycl  hast  thou  not  walked  after  their  w. 
Hos.  4.  9.  I  will  punish  them  for  tAei'r  w. 
Rom.  3.  16.  destruction  and  misery  are  in  thcirw. 
SPet.  2.  2.  many  shall  follow  tAcir  pernicious  w. 

Thy  WAYS. 
Deut.  28.  29.  thou  shalt  not  prosper  in  thy  to. 
\Sam.  8.  5.  art  old,  thy  sons  walk  not  in  thy  to. 
iC/trnn.  6.  31.  may  fear  thee  to  walk  in  thy  to. 
Job  4.  6.  thy  hope  and  the  uprightness  of  tAy  to. 
21.  14.  we  desire  not  the  knowledge  of  thy  w. 
K.  3.  is  ii  gain  to  him  thou  makesl  tAytc.  perfect? 
28.  and  the  light  shall  shine  upon  tAy  to. 
Psal.  25.  4.  shew  me  tAy  to.  O  Lord,  teach  me 
51.  13.  then  will  I  teach  transgressors  tAy  to. 
01. 11.  charge  his  angels,  to  keep  thee  in  all  tAy  to. 
119.  15. 1  will  bava  respect  unto  (Ay  to. 
673 


4.  26.  and  let  tAy  w.  be  established 

31.  3.  nor  thy  to.  to  thai  which  deslroyeth  kings 
Isa.  63.  17.  why  hast  tliou  made  us  err  trom  thij  w. 

64.  5.  those  that  remember  thee  in  tAy  w. 
Jer.  2.  33.  thou  hast  taught  the  wicked  thy  tc. 

3.  13.  thou  hast  scattered  thy  iv.  to  the  strangers 
Kiek.  7.  3.  judge  thee  according  to  thy  w.  4,  8, 9. 

16.  47.  corrupted  more  than  they  in  all  thy  w 
61.  then  remember  Ihy  w.  and  be  ashamed 

24.  14.  according  lo  thy  w.  shall  they  judge  thee 

28.  15.  thou  wast  perlecl  in  'thy  to.  from  tbo  day 
JJan.  5.  23.  the  God  in  whose  hand  are  all  tAy  to. 
Hev.l^.  3.  just  and  true  are  «Ay  w.  thouK.  of  saints 

WAY-FA  lUiNG. 
Judg.  19.17.  he  saw  a  w.  man  in  the  street  of  city 
2  Sam.  12.  4.  take  his  own  Hock  to  dress  tijr  to.  man 
Isa.  33.  8.  high-ways  lie  waste,  the  to.  man  ceaseth 

35.  8.  w.  men,  though  tijols,  shall  not  err  therein 
Jer.  9.2.  Oh  that  1  had  a  lodging-place  of  to.  men 

14.  8.  why  shouldesl  thou  i)«  as  a  to.  man^ 
WAY-MARKS. 
Jer.  31.  21.  set  thee  up  to.  make  thee  high  heaps 

WE. 
Gen.  46. 34.  been  about  cattle,  w.  and  our  fathers 
J^um.  13.  31.  to.  not  able,  they  are  stronger  than  w. 
Deut.  1.  28.  the  people  is  greater  and  taller  than  w. 
\Sam.  8.  20.  that  to.  may  be  like  all  the  nations 
E'lra  10.  4.  tc.  will  be  with  thee,  be  of  courage 
JVcA.  2.  20.  w.  his  servants  will  arise  and  build 
5.  2.  w.  our  sons  and  our  daughters  are  many 

8.  w.  after  our  ability  have  redeemed  the  Jews 
Job  8.  9.  tc.  are  but  of  yesterday,  know  noth 
Psal.]^.  3.  to.  are  his  people,  sheep  of  his  pasture 
Isa.  14. 10.  art  thou  also  become  weak  as  to.  are? 
63. 19.  w.  are  thine  {|  Mark  5. 9.  for  to.  are  many 
Mark  9.  28.  why  could  not  to.  cast  him  out? 
Luke  1.  74.  that  to.  being  delivered  from  enemies 
John  8. 33.  w.  be  Abraham's  seed,  never  in  bondage 

9.  28.  thou  art  his  disciple,  w.  are  Moses'  discijiles 
40.  are  to.  blind  also?||  17.11.  may  be  one  a.s  to. 22. 

Jlcts  5.  32.  and  to.  are  his  witnesses,  10.  39. 

10.  47.  who  received  the  Holy  Ghost  as  well  as  tc. 

14.  15.  tc.  are  men  of  like  passions  with  you 
23.  15.  to.  or  ever  he  come  are  ready  to  kill  him 

Rom.  12.  5.  to.  being  many  are  one  body  in  Christ 

15.  1.  w.  that  are  strongought  to  bear  inlirmities 
ICor.  3.  9.  tc.  are  labourers  together  with  God 

4.  10.  to.  are  fools,  but  ye  are  wise,  to.  are  weak 
12.being  reviled,  w.  bless,  persecuted,  to.  suffer  it 
8.6.  one  God,  and  to.  in  him,  one  Ld.  and  w.  by  him 
9. 12.  are  not  w.  rather  ||  10.  17.  to.  are  one  bread 
10.  22.  do  w.  provoke  Ld.  are  w.  stronger  than  he? 
2Cor.  1. 14.  that  w.  are  your  rejoicing,  as  ye  ours 

9.  4.  to.  that  w.  say  not  you,  should  he  ashamed 

10.  7.  that  as  he  is  Christ's,  so  are  w.  Christ's 

11.  12.  they  may  be  found  even  as  w. 
(}al.\.8.  though  w.  or  an  angel  from  heaven  preach 

4.  3.  to.  when  w.  were  children,  were  in  bondage 
28.  now  w.  as  Isaac,  are  the  children  of  promise 

Eph.  2. 10.  t<)r  w.  are  his  workmanship  in  C.  Jesus 

1  Thess.  4. 17.  w.  which  are  alive  shall  be  caught  in 
the  clouds,  andsoshall  to.everhs  with  iheLd. 

5.  5.  to.  are  not  of  the  night  nor  of  darkness 
Heb.  3.  6.  whose  house  are  to.  if  to.  hold  fast  confid. 

10.39.  tc.  are  not  of  them  who  draw  back  to  perdit. 
l./oAn4.6.to.are of G. hereby  io.knuwSpiritof  truth 

5.19.  to.  know  that  to.  areof  God  and  world  lieth 

WEAK. 
jVam.  13.  18.  and  see  whether  they  be  strong  or  w. 
.ludg.  16.  7.  then  shall  I  be  to.  as  other  men,  11,17. 

2  Sam.  3.39.  lam  this  day  w.  though  anointed  king 
2  Chron.i5.T.  be  strong,  let  not  your  hands  be  to. 
Job  4.  3.  thou  hast  strengthened  the  tc.  hands 
Psal.  6.  2.  I  am  to.  ||  109.  24.  my  knees  are  w. 
Isa.  14.  10.  art  thou  also  become  w.  as  we? 

.35.  3.  strengthen  ye  the  to.  hands 
Ezek.  7. 17.  all  knees  shall  be  to.  as  water,  21. 7. 

16.  30.  how  w.  is  thy  heart,  saith  the  Lord  God 
Joel  3.  10.  let  the  tc.  say,  I  am  strong 
Mat.  26.  41.  but  the  flesh  is  w.  Murk  14.  38. 
j!cts  20.  35,  so  labouring  ye  ought  to  support  the  to. 
Kom.  4.  lO.lieing  not  lo.  in  faith,  he  considered  not 

8.3.forthe  law  waste,  thro'  the  Hesh,  God  sending 

14.  1.  him  that  is  to.  in  the  faith  receive  ye 
2.  another  who  is  w.  eateth  herbs 
21.  whereby  thy  brother  stumhieth  or  is  made  tc. 

15.  1.  we  ought  to  bear  the  infirmities  of  the  to. 
IC'or.  1.  27.  tc.  things  to  confound  the  mighty 

4. 10.  we  are  to.  ||  8.  7.  conscience  being  to.  10. 
8.12.  wound  their  ?b.  conscience,  sin  against  Christ 
9.  22.  to  the  to.  I  became  as  w.  that  I  might  gain 
the  tc.  I  am  made  all  things  Co  all  men 
11.  30.  for  this  cau.se  many  are  tc.  and  sickly 
20or.  10.  10.  his  bodily  presence  is  to.  and  speech 

11.  21.  I  speak  as  though  we  had  been  tc. 
29.  who  is  to.  and  I  am  not  w.? 

12.  10.  for  when  I  am  to.  then  am  I  strong 

13.  3.  which  io  you-ward  is  not  to.  but  is  mighty 
4.  for  we  are  to.  in  him,  butikall  live  with  him 

43 


WEA 

2Cor.  13.  9.  arcglad  whcnwoareto.  and  ye  stro», 
Gnl.  4.  9.  how  turn  ye  again  to  the  to.  clement* 

1  'J'htss.  5. 14.  support  the  w.  be  patient  toward  au 
WEAK-HANDED. 

25am.  17.  2.  1  will  come  on  him  while  he  is  ta. 

WEAKEN. 
Isa.  14. 12.  how  cut  down,  which  didst  to.  national 

WEAKENED. 
Ezra  4.  4.  then  the  people  of  the  land  w.  Judafc 
JVtA.  6.  9.  their  hands  sliall  be  to.  from  the  wo 
./ob  14.  t  10.  but  man  dieth  and  is  tc. 
Paul.  102.  23.  he  to.  my  strength  in  the  way 

WEAKENETH. 
Job  12.  21.  he  to.  the  strength  of  the  mighty 
Jer.  38.  4.  he  lo.  the  hands  of  the  men  of  war 
WEAKER. 

2  Sam.  3. 1.  David  stronger,  Saul's  house  w.  and  » 
IPct.  3.  7.  give  honour  to  the  wife  as  tiie  w.\et>» 

WEAKNESS. 
Exod.  32.  t  18.  nor  voice  of  them  that  cry  for  % 
ICor.  1.  25.  the  w.  of  God  is  stronger  than  mea 

2.  3.  1  was  with  you  in  w.  and  in  tear 

15.  43.  it  is  sown  in  w.  it  is  raised  in  power 
2  Cor.  12.  9.  my  strength  is  made  perfect  in  to. 

13. 4.  tho'  crucified  thro'  to.  yet  he  livelh  by  power 
Heb.  7.  18.  a  disannulling  going  before  for  the  to. 

11. 34.  out  of  to.  were  made  strong,  waxed  valiant 

WEALTH. 
Geti.  34.  29.  the  sons  of  Jacob  took  all  their  lo. 
IJeut.  8.  17.  my  power  and  my  hand  got  methiito^ 

18.  the  Lord  giveth  thee  power  to  get  to. 
Ruth  2.  1.  Naomi  had  a  kinsman,  a  man  of  lo. 
ISam.  2.  32.  thou  shalt  see  an  enemy  in  all  the  to 
^liings  15.20.  Menah.  e.\acted  money  of  men  of  to. 
•2Chrvn.  1.  11.  thou  hast  not  asked  to.  nor  honour 

12.  I  will  give  thee  riches,  and  tc.  and  honour 
Ezra  9.  12.  nor  seek  their  peace  or  to.  for  ever 
Esth.  10.  3.  Mordecai  seeking  the  to.  of  his  people 
Job  HI .  13.  they  spend  their  days  in  to.  and  go  down 

31.  25.  if  I  rejoiced  because  my  to.  was  great 
Psal.  44.12.  anddostnot  increase  to.  by  their  price 

49.  6.  they  that  trust  in  tc.  and  boast  in  riches 
10.  wise  men  die  and  leave  their  w.  to  others 

112.  3.  w.  and  riches  shall  be  in  his  house 
Prov.  5.  10.  lest  strangers  be  filled  with  thy  tc. 

10.  15.  the  rich  man's  tc.  is  his  strong  city,  18. 11. 
13.  11.  to.  gotten  by  vanity  shall  he  diminished 

22.  the  tc.  of  the  sinner  is  laid  up  for  the  just 
19.  4.  w.  niaketh  many  friends,  the  poor  separated 
Eccl.  5.  19.  to  whom  God  hath  given  tc.  6.  2. 
Isa.  60.  t  5.  w.  of  Gentiles  shall  come  to  thee,  11. 
yCcch.  14.  14.  to.  ofall  the  heathen  shall  be  gathered 
Jlcts  19.  25.  ye  know  that  by  this  craft  we  have  lo. 
ICor.  10.  24.  but  seek  every  man  another's  to. 

CimwoH-WEALTH. 
Eph.  2. 12.  being  aliens  from  theco7«mon-io.of  I»r. 

WEALTHY. 
Psal.  60. 12.  thou  broughtest  us  out  into  a  to.  place 
.Icr.  49.  31.  arise,  get  you  up  unto  the  to.  nation 

WEANED. 
Gen.  21.8.  Isaac  grew  and  was  to.  Abraham  made 
a  great  feast  the  same  day 
ISam.  1.  22.  I  will  not  go  up  till  the  child  be  to. 
1  A'tn^s  11.  20.  whom  Tahp.  to.  in  Pharaoh's  house 
Psal.  131.2.  surely  I  behaved  myselfas  a  child  that 
is  to.  of  his  mother,  my  soul  is  as  a  to.  child 
Asa.ll.8.tlieto.child  put  his  hand  on  cockatrice  den 
28.  9.  them  that  are  tc.  from  the  milk  and  drawn 
/Jos.  1.8.  when  she  70.  Lo-rnliama,  she  conceived 

WEAPON. 
Detit.  23. 13.  thou  shalt  have  a  paddle  upon  thy  to. 
JWA.  4.  17.  and  with  the  other  hand  held  a  to. 
■  fob  20.  24.  he  shall  flee  from  the  iron  to. 
Isa.  54.  17.  note,  formed  against  thee  shall  prosper 
Ezek.  9.  1.  with  his  destroying  w.  in  his  hand,  2. 

WEAPONS. 
Gen.  27. 3.  take,  I  jiray,  thy  w  thy  quiver,  and  bow 
ISam.  21.  8.  neither  my  sword  nor  w.  with  me 
'ih'iiig.i  11.8.  compass  the  king  round  about,  every 
man  with  his  to.  in  his  hand,  11.  2C'Ar.  23.7,10. 
2CAron.  .32.  t  5.  Hezekiah  made  to.  in  abundance 
Isa.  13.  5.  Lord  Cometh  and  the  to.  of  his  indigna- 
tion to  destroy  tho  whole  land,  .Jer.  50.  25 
./(•r.  22.  7.  prepare  destroyers,  every  one  with  his  to 
Ezek.  39.  9.  they  shall  set  on  fire  and  burn  tc.  10 
John  18.  3.  Judas  comoth  with  lanterns  and  to. 
/?om.6.tl3.nor  yield  members  as  tc.  of  unrighteous 
2Cor.  10.  4.  the  tc.  of  our  warfare  are  not  carnal 
See  War. 
WEAR. 
Exod.  18.  18.  wiltsurelytc.  away,  thou. md people 
Deut.  22.  5.  woman  not  w.  what  pertains  to  man 

11.  thou  shalt  not  w.  garment  of  divers  sorts 
l.Snm.  2.  28.  burn  incense  toto.  an  ephod  before  me 

22.  18.  Doeg  slew  85  persons  that  did  to.  an  ephod 
Esth.  6.  8.  the  royal  apparel  the  king  useth  to  to 
Job  14.19.  the  waters  tc.  the  stones,  washest  away 
Isa.  4.  1.  we  eat  our  own  bread  and  to.  our  apparel 

65.  t  22.  mine  elect  shall  to.  out  the  work  of  handj 
Dati.  7. 25.  shall  lo.  out  the  sainfai  of  the  Most  Higb 


WEB 

Zeth.  13.  4.  nor  shall  they  u>.  a  rough  gnrmont 
Mat.  11.8.  lhatui.ijul\ciutiiiiigari' 111  kings'  houKL-s 
y.,-.  k«  y.  ii.  aud  wiieii  llie  day  begun  lo  ic.  uway 

VVEARKTH. 
/am.  2.  3-  yo  renpect  liim  tliat  lo.  the  gay  clutliiiig 

WEAUKVG. 
ISant.  14. 3.  the  Lord's  prieat  in  Shiloh  tc.  an  ephod 
John  19.  5.  Jesus  came  t'orUi  w.  tlie  i)urply  robe 

1  Pet. '3.  3.  whose  adorning,  lent  not  be  w.  of  gold 

WKAKV. 
Oen.  27.  46.  Rebekah  said,  I  am  ic.  of  my  life 
y.>eut.25.18.Ainalek  aiiiote  thee,  when  thou  wastK'. 
Ju<//.4.31.Jttel8inoleSmcra  when I'astasleep  and  w. 

8.  15.  we  should  give  bread  to  thy  men  that  are  w. 

2  -Sam.  16.  14.  the  king  and  all  the  people  came  mi. 
17.  2.  I  will  come  upon  hiin  while  he  is  w. 

23.  10.  he  Biiiote  Philistines  till  Ins  hand  was  w. 

Job  3.  17.  the  wicked  cease,  and  Ihe  to.  beat  rest 
10.1.  my  soul  is  w.  of  my  life,  leave  my  coiniiluinl 
16.  7.  now  he  hath  made  uie  lo.  made  desolate 
K.  7.  thou  hast  not  given  water  to  w.  to  drink 

P*.6.6. 1  am  ic.with  groaning,!  make  my  bed  swim 
63.  t  1.  my  flujh  longeth  for  thee  in  a  w.  land 
68. 9.  thou  didst  contirm  thy  inheritance  when  w. 
69.  3.  I  am  w.  of  my  crying,  my  throat  i.s  dried 

Prov.  3.  11.  my  son,  be  not  w.  of  Lord's  correction 
25.  17.  lest  he  be  ic.  of  thee,  and  so  hale  thee 

Isa.  1.  14.  feaels  are  trouble,  I  am  w-  to  bear  them 

5.  27.  none  shall  be  w.  nor  stumble  among  them 
7.  13.  hear,  O  house  of  David,  is  it  a  small  thing 

for  you  to  lo.  men,  but  will  ye  tc.  my  God  also? 
16.12.whenit  isseenthat  Moab  is  ic.  in  liigh  place 
23.  J2.  wherewith  ye  may  cause  the  w.  to  rest 
3i.  2.  as  the  shadow  of  a  great  rock  in  a  tc.  land 
40.  28.  God,  the  Lord,  fiiinteth  not,  neither  is  te. 

30.  even  the  youths  shall  faint  and  be  tc. 

31.  that  wait  on  the  Lord  shall  run  and  not  be  le. 
43.  22.  but  thou  hast  been  tc.  of  ine,  U  Israel 
46.  1.  they  are  a  burden  to  the  tc.  beast 

50.  4.  to  speak  a  word  in  season  to  him  that  is  to. 
Jrr.  2.  24.  all  that  seek  her  will  not  to.  themselves 

6.  11.  I  am  JO.  with  holding  in,  I  will  pour  it  out 

9.  5.  they  w.  themselves  to  commit  iniquis^,- 
15.  6.  will  destroy  thee,  I  am  tc.  with  repenting 
20.  9.  I  was  10.  with  forbearing,  I  could  nut  slay 
3l.  25.  for  I  have  satiated  the  tc.  soul 

51.  as.  the  folk  shall  labour  in  the  fire  and  be  tc. 
64.  thus  eliall  Babylon  sink  and  they  shall  be  w. 

Hab.  2.  13.  people  shall  tc.  themselves  for  vanity 
J.ukcii^.  5.  lest  by  her  continua-!  coming  she  tc.  me 
Oa/.6.9.1etU3  not  be  w.in  well-doing,  2  V'Ams.  3.13. 

WEAKIKD. 
Gen.  19.  11.  thoy  tc.  themselves  to  find  the  door 
/»a.  43.  23.  nor  have  I  lo.  thee  with  incense 
24.  thou  hast  tc.  me  with  thine  iniiiuiliea 
47. 13.  thou  art  10.  in  the  multitude  of  thy  counsels 
57.  10.  thou  art  tc.  in  the  greatness  of  thy  way 
Jer.  4.  31.  my  soul  is  to.  because  of  murderers 
12.  5.  if  run  with  footmen  and  they  io.  thee,  if  in 
Ihe  land  of  peace  wherein  tjustedst  they  le.  ihec 
F.iek.  24.  12.  she  hath  to.  herself  with  lies 
Mic.  6.  3.  O  my  people,  wherein  have  I  tc.  thee  1 
MiU.2. 17.ye  have  tc.  the  I>ord,  yet  ye  say,  wherein 
have  we  w.  him?  every  one  that do'jth evil 
John  4x0.  Jesus  being  tc.  sat  thus  on  the  well 
Heb.  12.  3.  lest  ye  Iv  w.  and  faint  in  your  minds 

WKARIKTU. 
Jiib  37.  11.  by  watering  he  tc.  the  thick  cloud 
Eccl.  10.  15.  llielabotirof  the  foolish  10.  every  one 

VVKARINKSS. 
Feci.  12.  12.  much  study  is  a  to.  of  the  flesh 
Jrfil  1.  13.  he  said,  what  a  to.  is  it  land  hoBnulTcd 
2  Car.  11.  27.  in  lo.  and  painfnlness,  in  watchings 

WRARIHO.MK. 
Job  7.  3.  and  to.  nights  are  appointed  to  me 

WEA.SEL. 
I,ev.  11.  29.  the  to.  and  ihe  mnuse,  unclean  toyou 

WICATHER. 
Job  37.  20.  fair  ?o.  cometh  out  of  the  north 
ProB.  25. 20.  as  he  that  takcth  a  garment  in  cold  lo. 
.Val.  IC.  2.  it  will  bo  fair  to.  for  the  sky  is  red 
X  in  the  morning  it  will  be  foul  to.  to  day 
WEAVE. 
/»a.  19.  9.  they  that  to.  net-works  be  confounded 
59.5.theyhatchc(irkalri(eegg8andto.«pider'8Web 

WEAVER. 
F.iod.  35.35.  wilhwisdom  to  wiirk  the  work  ofio. 
ISain.17.7.  lUi-  HlafTof  ( Icdiath's  spear  was  like  a  ir. 
Ijcam,  2  Sar,.  21.  19.  1  Ckron.U.  23.  |  20.  5. 
Job  7.  0.  my  days  arc  swifter  than  a  to.  shuttle 
Iia.  38.  12.  I  have  out  oflTlikf  n  w.  my  life 

WEAVEST. 
Jtidn.  16.  13.  if  thou  to.  seven  locks  of  my  head 

WER. 
/tuf^.l'i  in.ifthou  weavest  seven  locks  with  the  to. 
14   and  went  away  with  pinofbeam  ami  the  to. 
Job  8.  14.  and  whoso  t/iiflt  shall  be  a  spider's  w. 
ha..  59.  5.  they  weave  the  spider's  ie. 

WEBS. 
ha.  50.  6.  their  a.  shall  not  bocomo  gnrmeiitj 
074 


WEE 

WEDDING. 

Mat.  22.  3.  to  call  tlicm  that  were  bidden  lo  lo. 
8.  the  10.  is  ready  ||  10.  the  to.  is  furnished 
11.  lie  saw  a  man  that  had  not  a  to.  garment 

Luke  12.  36.  when  he  will  return  from  the  to. 
14.  8.  when  thou  art  bidden  of  any  man  to  a  lo. 
WEDGE. 

Josk.  7.  21.  Achan  saw  a  to.  of  god  of  50  shekels 
24.  Joshua  took  Achan  and  the  w.  of  gold 

Asa.  13. 12.  more  precious  than  golden  lo.of  Ophir 
WEDLOCK. 

Ezek.lG.  38. 1'lljudge  theeas  women  that  break  to. 
WEEDS. 

Job  31.  t  40.  let  10.  grow  instead  of  barley 

..'unalt  2.  5.  the  lo.  were  wrapped  about  my  head 
WEEDY. 

.fcr.  49.  1 21.  the  noise  was  heard  in  the  to.  sea 
WEEK. 

The.  Hebrews  had  three  sorts  of  weeks.  (1) 
Weeks  of  days,  ichich  icere  reckoned  from  one 
iabhath  to  another.  (2)  Weeks  of  years,  loA  if  A 
tooe  reckoned  from  one  sibbatical  year  to 
another,  and  tchich  consisted  of  seven  years. 
(3)  Weeks  of  seven  times  sct^en  years,  or  of 
forty  nine  years,  tchich  are  reckoned  from  one 
jiibihie  to  another. 

The  seventy  weeks,  in  Dan.  9.  24.  It  is  agreed 
that  lhr.<e  arc  weeks  of  years,  and  not  of  days. 
'J'hey  consist  of  seven  lunar  or  Hehreic  years  : 
by  tchich  reckontng  of  seventy  weeks  make  up 
fiiur  hundred  and  ninety  years.  This  tcay  of 
reckoniiitr  years  by  days  is  not  unusual  in  the 
sacred  trriiings,  See  LeiK  25.  8.  F.iek.  4.  4,  5. 
Jiev.  12.  0.  I  13.  5.  There  are  many  different 
hypotheses  concerning  the  be  ginning  and  end  of 
JJaniel's  seventy  weeks,  even  among  Christian 
writers,  u:ho  beliere  this  prophesy  marks  out  the 
time  of  the  birth  and  death  of  our  Saviour  Je- 
sus Christ.  Some  beifin  them  from  the  first 
year  of  Darius  the  Mcde,  which  is  the  epocha 
of  Datiicl's  prophecy,  and  make  them  to  deter- 
mine at  the  profanation  of  the  temple,  tchich 
happened  under  the  persecution  of  .Hntioehvs 
Kpiphanes.  Others  begin  them  from  the  first 
tjear  of  Cyrus  at  Kabylun,  and  place  the 
end  of  them  at  the  destruction  of  the  temple 
by  the  Romans.  Others  fii.  the  beginning  at 
the  first  year  of  Darius  the  Mede,  in  tchich 
this  revelation  tens  made  to  Daniel;  and  put 
the  end  at  the  birth  of  Jesus  Christ.  .Julius 
.Ifriettnus  places  the  first  year  of  the  seventy 
weeks  at  the  ttoentieth  year  of  king  Ar- 
Injcerres  /.,ongimanus,  tcjio  gave aconimission 
or  decree  to  JV'ehemiah,  to  rebtiild  the  tcalls  of 
.hrusalem.  From  thence  to  the  last  week,  in 
tchieh  the  Messiah  teas  put  to  death,  are  reck- 
onedsovetity  weeks  or  four  hundred  and  ninety 
lunaryrars.  This  hypoth  esis  a  r  system  seems  to 
he  the  most  rational  of  any  that  has  been  pro- 
posed by  the  ancients,  and  is  adhered  to,  some 
small  pirticulars  excepted,  by  the  greatest 
part  of  interpreters  and  cbronologers. 

The  greatest  difference  amongchronidogers  in  the 
culculation  of  these  years,  does  not  exceed  nine 
ortenyears.  Petavius,tcho has  treatedofthis 
matter  in  his  ttcelfth  book  De  Doctrina  teinpo- 
riini,rrcr<7tct7c«  all  these  differences  hy  sheiciiig 
that  the  tcords  of  the  prophecy  of  Daniel,  From 
the  going  forth  of  the  commandment  to  restore 
and  to  build  Jerusalem,  ought  to  he  ttndcrstood 
of  Ihe  complete  ezectttinn  of  the  order  to  rebuild 
.Jerusalem, which  teas  not  performed  but  hy  -Ve- 
hemiah.  1/eshews  also,  that  thetwentieth  year 
of  .^rt'txerics,  mentioned  Neb.  2. 1.  ought  to  be 
explained, notof  the  twentieth  year  of  the  reign 
of  -Irtareries  alone,butof  his  ttoentieth  year, 
beginning  from  the  time  that  his  father  asso- 
ciated him  toith  himself  in  the  kingdom,  ten 
years  before  his  death.  These  tent/ears  being 
deduct'ilfrom  the  ntimherof  years  that  elapsed 
front  the  decree  of  .Irtaierxes  in  favour  of.Ve- 
hemlnh,  to  Ihe  death  of  .T-stis  Chrift,  deliver 
the  chronalogers  out  of  their  perplrzities,  and 
dispel  the  difficulties  that  arose  from  the  ten 
siipernttniernry  years,  girm  hy  their  ralcula- 
tion  of  the  four  hundred  and  ninrty  years, con- 
tained in  the  seventy  weeks  of  Dattiel. 

The  modern  Jeios  are  not  agreed  among  them- 
selves, fearing  In  he  convicted,  from  this  pro- 
phecy, that  the  Messiah  is  already  tome,  and 
that  their  expectation  of  him  is  in  vain.  Some 
pronounce  a  eurse  against  them  that  compute 
the  time,  saying,  it  is  in  rein  to  expect  Ihe 
Mi^ssinh,  ichohath  hern  come  a  long  tchile  ago: 
Others  say  he  is  not  yt  cnmr,  hut  that  he 
trould  have  come  a  great  irhile  ago,  if  Ihe  sins 
of  Ihe  .fetes  hadnot  prmentedhim.  Others  place 
thebrginningoflh'Kevn\y\\eeV.*ntthedestriic- 
tion  of  the  first  temple  try  V-htirhadnetzar,  and 
Uu  end  at  the  dcstruclion  of  the  second  tempte\ 


WEE 

by  Titus.  Belveen  these  two  events  they  reekgn 
but  tico  hundred  and  ninety  tjcars,  which  it 
a  proof  of  their  great  ignorance  in  »iaiter«  of 
chronology. 

Gen.  29.  27.  fulfil  her  lo.  ||  28.  and  fulfilled  her  w 

Van.  9.  27.  shall  contirm  the  covenant  with  many 
for  one  lo.  in  the  midst  of  the  to.  sacrifice  ceaM 

Jlfat.  28. 1.  to  dawn  toward  the  first  day  of  the  is 
Mark  16.  2,  9.  Luke  24.  1.  John  20 
1,  19. 

Luke  18.  12.  I  fast  twice  in  the  te.  I  give  tithei 

Acts  20.  7.  the  first  day  of  the  to.  Paul  preached 

1  Cor.  16.  2.  on  the  first  day  of  the  to.  let  every  one 
WEEKS. 

Aei).  12.5.  if  a  maid  child  shall  be  unclean  two  to. 

.^/'um.  28.  26.  bring  a  meat-oftering  after  your  to. 

Jer.  5.  24.  reserveth  the  appoinltd  to.  of  iiarvest 

/)an.  9. 24.3eventy  to.  are  determined  on  thy  people 

25.  know,  after  threescore  and  two  to.  26. 

10.  2.  I  Daniel  was  mourning  three  full  jo. 

3.  nor  anoint  myself  till  three  to.  were  fulfilled 

See  Fe.\st,  Sevkn. 

WEEP. 

The  ancient  Hebrews  wept,  and  made  their  trouble 
to  appear  openly,  in  mourning  and  affliction. 
They  were  not  of  opinion,  that  courage  and 
greatness  of  soul  consisted  ill  seeming  to  be 
insensible  in  adversity,  or  i7i  restraining  their 
tears.  It  was  even  looked  upo7t  as  a  great  dis- 
respect for  any  one  not  to  be  bewailed  at  hit 
funeral.  .Job  says  of  the  tricked  man.  Hit) 
widow  shall  not  weep.  Job  27.  15.  .tnd  tha 
Psalmist,  speaking  of  the  death  of  Hophni  and 
Phinehas,  says,  'I'lieir  priests  foil  by  the  sword, 
and  their  widows  made  uo  Ian  enlation,  Psal. 
78.  64.  God  forbids  Ezekiel  to  weep,  or  to  ex- 
press any  sorrow  for  the  death  of  his  wife,  to 
shew  that  the  Jetrs  should  be  reduced  to  so 
great  calamities,  that  they  should  not  have  the 
liberty  even  to  mourn  or  bewail  themselves, 
Ezek.  24.  16. 

Weeping  men,  an(f  weeping  women.  The  ancient 
Ilebretrs  used  to  hire  men  and  women  to  weep 
at  funerals.  Jer.  9.  17,  18,  Thus  suith  ^he 
Lord  of  hosts.  Consider  ye,  and  call  for  tha 
mourning  women  that  they  may  come,  and 
send  for  cunning  women  that  they  may  come, 
X-c.  .Ind  in  Amos  5.  Ifi,.  Wailing  shall  be 
in 'all  streets,  and  they  shall  say  in  all  the 
highways,  alas!  al.as  !  and  they  shall  call  the 
husbandmen  to  mourning,  and  such  as  are 
skilful  of  lamentation  to  wailing.  .Ill  tht 
weeping  men  and  women  of  L<rael  heretofore 
sung  the  Lamentations  Chat  Jeremiah  com 
posed  for  the  death  of  the  pious  king  .Joaiak 
2  Chron.  35.  25. 

Gen.  23.  2.  .Abraham  came  to  tr.  for  Sarah 
43.;!0.Joseph'HhowelsdiJ  yearn, sought wheretow. 

J^'um.  11. 10.  Moses  heard  the  people  to.  in  familiea 
13.  they  w.  unto  me,  saying,  give  us  lo  eat 

1  Sam.  11.  5.  what  aileih  the  people  that  they  w  ? 
34.  until  they  had  no  more  power  to  to. 

2  .'^ani.  1.  24.  ve  daughters  of  Israel,  if.  over  SaiJ 
12.  21.  thou  (iidst  to.  for  the  cliild  while  alive 

2  Chron.  34. 27.  and  didst  rend  thy  clothes,  and  w. 
Jsfeh.  8.  9.  this  day  is  holy,  mourn  not,  nor  le. 
.hh  27.  15.  and  his  widows  shall  not  to. 

30.  25.  did  not  I  ir.  for  him  that  was  in  trouble? 
31.  and  my  organ  into  the  voice  of  them  that  to 

31.  t  38.  if  the  furrows  likewise  thereof  to. 
Feci.  3.  4.  a  time  to  to.  and  a  time  to  laugh 
Isa.  15.  2.  he  is  gone  to  the  high  places  to  to. 

22.  4.  I  will  to.  bitterly,  labour  not  to  comfort  mo 
30.  19.  thou  shalt  w.  no  more,  he  will  ho  gracioui 
3X  7.  the  ambassadors  of  peace  shall  w.  bitterly 

Jer.  9.  I.  that  1  inisht  to.  day  and  night  for  slain 

13. 17.  but  if  ye  will  not  hear  it,  my  soul  shall  lo.in 
secret  places  foi  your  pride,  my  eye  shall  to. sore 

22. 10.  w.  ye  not  for  the  dead,  nor  bemoan  him,  to. 
sore  for  him  that  goeth  away,  boshallnot  relurti 

48.  32.  O  vine  of  Sibma,  I  will  lo.  for  thco 
l.ani.  I.  16.  for  these  thiii:;sT  to.  my  eye  runneth 
F.iek.  24.  16.  nor  shalt  thou  mourn  nor  lo.  23. 

27.  :il.  shall  to.  for  thee  with  bitterness  of  heart 
.Joel  1.  5.  awake,  yo  drunkards,  jo.  and  h^iwl 

1. 17.  let  the  priests  te.  between  the  porch  and  aliat 
Mic.  1.  10.  declare  it  not  in  Galh,  ro.  not  at  all 
'/eeh.  7.  3.  should  I  to.  in  fiflh  month,  ns  havcdon* 
.Mark  5.  39.  whv  inakoyc  this  ado,  and  to.  ? 

U.  t  72.  when  hethouglil  Ihereon,  If  hi-gantoi» 
I  liked.  21.  blessed  are  yo  that  to.  now,  for  yo«h<lU 
25.  woe  lo  yon  that  laiijh  now,  ve  sh  ill  ot. 

7. 13.  Lord  sti w  h.-r  and  saiil,  to.  noi,S..'>2  Krt).  5. 5. 

23.  28.  10.  not  for  n\e,  but  v.  for  yoiirs'  dvea 
■John  11.  31.  she  goeth  unto  Ihe  grave  to  to.  then 

16.  20.  ye  shall  lo.  but  the  world  shall  rejoice 
.Icts'iX.  13.  what  mean  ye  lo  w.  and  break  myhrart 
Horn.  12.  15.  and  to.  with  them  that  io. 
I  Cor.  7.  30.  thev  thai  te.  ns  though  Ihny  wepJnO 
Jam.  4.  9.  be  aSlictcd,  and  mourn,  and  ». 


WEI 

Jam.  5.  1.  go  to  now,  ye  rich  men,  tc.  and  howl 
Hev.Vi.  11.  merchanU  uf  earth  shall  w.  andniuurn 

WEEPERS. 
Ju,da.  2.  t5.  they  called  the  name  of  that  place,  to 

*  WEEPEST. 

lSa»?i.l.8.Hannah,why  lo.thoul  why  eat.  thou  not? 
JoAn  >0. 13.  angels  said,  woman,  why  ifl.lhou7  15. 

WEEPETH. 
2  Sam.  19.  1.  it  was  told  Joab,  behold  the  king  to. 
'i  Kings  8.  12.  Hazael  said,  why  w.  my  lord? 
Paal.  12G.  6.  he  tliat  goeth  forth  and  w.  bearing 
2.a"i.l.2.sbe  to. sore  in  night  her  tears  on  her  uheeiis 

WEEPING. 
Gen.  35.  t  8.  name  of  it  was  called,  the  oakof  ic. 
45.  \  2.  Josepii  gave  forth  his  voice  in  w. 
J^um.  25.  6.  w.  before  the  door  of  the  tabernacle 
Dent.  34. 8.  so  the  days  o(w.  lor  Moses  were  ended 
2  Sam.  3.  IG.  her  husband  went  along  with  her  w. 
13.  t  3G.  kingandservants  wept  with  a?/!. greatly 

15.  30.  they  went  up,  w.  as  they  went  up 
SKings  20.t3.reiuomber  how  I  have  walked  before 

thee,  Hezekiah  wept  with  a  great  w.  Jsa.  38.  f  3. 
JEira  3.  13.  not  discern  the  noise  of  joy  from  w. 

10.  1.  when  Ezra  had  prayed  and  confessed,  w. 
Kstk.  4.  3.  in  every  province  was  fasting  and  w. 
Job  IG.IO.  my  face  is  foul  with  w.  and  on  my  eyelids 

28.  t  11.  he  bindeth  the  floods  from  w. 
Psal.  G.  3.  the  Ld.  hath  heard  tlie  voice  of  my  w. 

30.  5.  w.  may  endure  for  a  night,  but  joy  cometh 
102.  9.  I  have  mingled  my  drink  with  w. 

Isa.  15.  3.  in  their  streets  howl,  w.  abundantly 

16.  9.  therefore  I  will  bewail  with  the  w-  of  Jazer 

the  vine  o.'  Sibmah,  O  Heshbon,  Jer.  48.  32. 
22.  t  4.  look  away  from  me,  I  will  be  bitter  in  w. 
12.  in  tliat  day  did  the  Lord  of  hosts  call  to  w. 
65.  19.  the  voice  of  w.  shall  be  no  more  heard 
Jer.  3.  21.  the  to.  of  Israel  heard  on  high  places 
9.  10.  for  the  mountains  will  I  take  up  a  7c. 

31.  9.  they  shall  come  with  w.  and  supplications 
15. voice  lieard  in  Ramah,  lamentation  and  bitter 

10.  Rachel  w.  for  her  children.  Mat.  2.  18. 
16.  thus  saith  Lord,  restrain  thy  voice  from  jo. 
41.  G.  Ishmael  went  forth  to  meet  them  ic. 
48. 5.  continual  w.  shall  go  up,  a  cry  ofdestruction 
50.  4.  Judah  going  and  lo.  to  seek  Lord  their  God 
F.zck.  8.  14.  there  sat  women  w.  for  Tammuz 
Joel  2.  12.  turn  ye  ti3  me  with  fasting  and  with  w. 
Mai.  2.  13.  covering  the  altar  of  the  Lord  with  lo. 
Mat.  8.12.  there  shall  be  10.  and  gnashing  of  teeth, 
22.  13.  1  24.  51.  I  25.  30.  Au/te  13.  28. 
/vutf  7.3S.a  woman  stood  at  his  feet  behind  him  id. 
John  11.33.when  Jes.saw  her  uj.  and  the  Jews  also 
10.  which  came  with  her,  he  groaned  in  spirit 
20.  11.  M'ary  stood  without  at  the  sepulchre,  ?o. 
Jlcts  9.  39.  and  all  the  widows  stood  by  him  w. 
Phil.  3.  18.  I  have  told  you  often,  now  tell  you  w. 
Rev.  18.  15.  the  merchant  shall  stand  afar  offjo. 
19.  every  ship-master  and  sailors  cried,  w. 
WEIGH. 
Exod.  22.  t  17.  if  father  refuse  he  shall  w.  money 
IKings  20.  t  30.  thou  shalt  w.  a  talent  of  silver 
lCAron.20.2.  David  found  his  crown  to  jo.alalent 
Ezra  8.  2J.  keep  them  until  ye  w.  them  before  the 
ciiiefof  the  priests  and  the  Levites 
Estk.  3.  t  9.  I  will  w.  10,000  talents  of  silver 
Job  31.  t  G.  let  him  w.  me  in  balances  of  justice 
Pso/.58.2.  you  10.  violence  of  your  handsin  earth 
Jsa.  2G.  7.  thou  dost  w.  the  path  of  the  just 
55. 12.  why  w.  ye  money  for  what  is  not  bread? 

WEIGHED. 
Oen.  23.  16.  Abraham  to.  to  Ephraim  the  silver 

1  Sam.  2.  3.  by  the  Lord  actions  are  w. 

17. 7.  his  spear's  head  w.  COO  shekels,  2  .Sam.  21.1G. 

2  Sam.  14.  26  Absalom  to.  the  hair  of  his  head 
Ezra  8.  25.  priasts  to.  to  them  the  silver  and  gold 

26.  I  tc.  into  their  hands  the  silver  of  vessels,  33. 
Job  6.  2.  Oh  that  my  grief  were  thoroughly  to. 
28.  15.  nor  shall  silver  be  to.  for  the  price  of  it 
31.  6.  let  me  be  to.  in  an  even  balance 
Psal.  78.  t  50.  he  to.  a  path  to  his  anger 
Isa.  40. 12.  who  hath  lo.  the  mountains  in  scales 
Jitr.  32.  9.  Jeremiah  7c.  him  the  money,  17  shekels 
J)an.  5.  27.  Tekcl,  thou  art  w.  in  the  balances 
Zech.  11.  12.  £0  they  w.  for  my  price  thirty  pieces 

WEIGHER. 
/»a.  33. 1 18.  where  is  the  scribe?  where  is  the  to.? 

,      WEIGHETH. 
Job  28.  25.  and  he  w.  the  waters  by  measure 
Prov.  16.  2.  but  tlm  Lord  w.  the  spirits 

WEIGHING. 
»Vu?n.7. 85.  eachcharserw.  ||8G.  golden  spoons  to. 

WEIGHT. 
.^s  thf.  Hebrews  had  nnl  Ihr  use  of  coined  mnnnj, 
which  was  of  a  certain  determined  weight,  they 
weighed  all  the  gold  and  silver  Ihcy  used  in 
trade.  The  general  word  they  used  to  denote  a 
weight  was  a  stone  ;  Dcut.  23.  13,  Thou  shalt 
not  have  in  thy  bag  divers  weights;  the  Hebrew 
rays^  a  stone  and  a  stone.  That  is,  they  were 
forbid  to  keep  two  diiferenl  weights,  one  too 
675 


WEL 

heavy,  to  buy  witJt,  and  another  too  light,  to  sell 
with ;  but  only  one  stone,  or  one  true  weight. 
Jind  in  Prov.  20.  10,  (iod  condemns  fraud  and 
injustice  in  traffic.  Divers  weights,  and  divers 
measures,  both  of  them  are  alike  abomination  to 
the  Lord.  The  shekel,  the  half  shekel,  and  the 
talent,  are  nut  only  denominations  of  money 
of  a  certain  value,  of  gold  and  silver,  but  also 
of  a  certain  weight.  IVhcn  Moses  expressed 
the  drugs  which  were  to  compose  the  perfume  to 
be  burnt  upon  the  golden  altar,  he  says,  that 
they  were-  to  take  the  weight  of  five  hundred 
shekels  of  myrrh,  &.C.  Exod.  30.  23.  JJnd  in 
2Sam.  14.  2G,  it  is  said,  that  Absalom's  hair 
weighed  two  hundred  shekels. 

The  shekel,  or  weight  of  the  sanctuary,  accord- 
ing to  several  interpreters,  was  double  to  the 
common  shekel;  but  others  think  it  was  the 
same  as  the  common  shekel,  and  the  words  of 
the  sanctuary,  are  added,  to  express  a  just  and 
exact  weight,  according  to  the  standards  that 
were  kept  in  the  temple,  or  tabernacle. 

The  weight  of  glory,  of  which  St.  Paul  speaks, 
2Cor.  4.  17,  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal 
weight  of  glory,  t^  opposed  to  the  lightness  of 
the  evils  of  this  life.  The  troubles  and  ajjlic- 
tions  we  endure  arc  of  no  weight  at  all,  if  com- 
pared  to  the  weight  of  that  glory  which  is  to  be 
revealed.  Weight  is  put  for  the  burden  of  sin, 
Hebrews  12.  1. 

Oc7i.43.21. man's  money  in  mouth  of  sack  in  full  to. 

Exod.  30.  34.  of  each  shall  there  be  a  like  w. 

I.ev.  19.  35.  ye  shall  do  no  unrighteousness  in  20. 
26.  26.  they  shall  deliver  you  your  bread  by  w. 

Deut.  25. 15.  thou  shall  have  a  perfect  and  just  w. 

.Judg.  8.  2G.  w.  of  golden  ear-rmgs  1,700  shekels 

2  Sam.  12.  .30.  to.  of  king's  crown  a  talent  of  gold 

1  Kings  7.  47.  and  Solomon  left  aV  the  vessels  un- 

weighed,  neither  was  llie  10  of  the  brass 

found  out,  "Kings  23.  16. 
ICAr.  28. 14.  he  gave  gold  by  to.  for  things  of  gold 

silver  also  by  w.  for  instruments  of  silver 
./ob  28.  25.  to  make  the  w.  for  the  winds 
Prov.  11.  1.  but  a  just  w.  is  his  delight 
16.  11.  a  jnst  w.  and  balance  are  the  Lord's 
Ezek.  4.  10.  thy  meat  shall  be  by  w.  twenty  shekels 

16.  and  they  shall  cat  bread  by  w.  and  with  care 
Zech.  5.  8.  he  cast  the  to.  of  lead  on  the  mouth 
2Cor.  4.  17.  worketh  for  us  a  more  exceeding  w 
Wei. 12.1. let  us  lay  aside  every  to. and  sin  that  besets 
Rev.  16.  21.  every  stone  of  hail  the  w.  of  a  talent 

WEIGHTS. 
r,ev.  19.  36.  just  jo.  shall  ye  have,  I  am  the  Lord 
7>d'««.25.13.lhou  shalt  not  have  in  thy  bag  divers  w. 
Prov.  16.  11.  all  the  w.  of  the  bag  afe  his  work 
20.10.divers  to. and  measures  are  abomination,23, 
Mic.  6.  11.  and  with  the  bag  of  deceitful  w. 

WEIGHTY. 
Prov.  27.  3.  a  stone  is  hetivy  and  the  sand  ia. 
Zech.  5.  t  7.  there  was  lift  up  a  to.  piece  of  lead 

2  Cor.  10.  10.  for  his  letters,  say  they,  are  to. 

WEIGHTIER. 
.Wa£.23. 23.  scribes  have  omitted  w.  matters  of  law 

WELFARE. 
Gen.  43.  27.  he  asked  them  of  their  jc.  and  said 
Exod.  18.  7.  they  asked  each  other  of  their  w. 
1  Chr.  18. 10.  Tou  sent  to  David  lo  inquire  of  his  w. 
JV(;A.2. 10.  was  come  a  man  loseek  the  to.  of  Israel 
./ob  30.  15.  and  my  to.  passeth  away  as  a  cloud 
Pi.  69. 22.  that  which  should  have  been  for  their  w. 
.Jer.  38.4.  this  man  seeketh  not  the  to.  of  his  peojde 

WELL,  Substantioe. 
Gen.  21.  19.  she  saw  a  w.  of  water  and  she  went 
30.  that  they  may  witness  I  have  digged  this  w. 
24.  13.  behold,  I  stand  here  by  to.  of  water,  43. 
49.  22.  Joseph  is  a  fruitful  bough  by  a  w. 
JVu7n.21.16.  that  is  the  to.  whereof  the  Lord  spake 

17.  spring  up,  O  to.  ||  13.  princes  digged  the  w. 
2Sam.  17. 18.  a  man  that  had  a  w.  in  his  own  court 

23.  15.  Oh  that  one  would  give  me  drink  of  the 
water  of  the  w.  Bethlehem,  )  CAron.  11. 17, 18. 
Psal. 8i.G.  who  passing  through  Baca  make  it  a  to. 
Prov.  5.  15.  drink  waters  out  of  thine  own  w. 

10. 11.  the  moulh  of  a  righteous  man  is  to.  of  life 

Cant.  4.  15.  a  w.  of  living  waters  from  Lebanon 

John  4.  6.  now  Jacob's  w.  was  there,  Jesus  being 

wearied  with  his  journey  sat  thus  on  the  10. 

11.  the  w.  is  deep  ||  12.  Jacob  gave  us  the  w. 

14.  shall  be  in  him  a  to.  of  water  spiinging  up 

WELLS. 

Gen.  2fi.  15.  all  to.  Abraham's  servants  had  digged 

18.  and  Isaac  digged  again  the  7b.  of  water 
Exod.  15. 27.  came  to  Elam,  where  were  twelve  w. 
j\'um.  20.  17.  nor  will  we  drink  of  the  water  of  to. 
Deut.  67il.  and  to.  digffod  which  thou diggcdst  not 
"Kings  3.  19.  and  ye  shall  stop  all  to.  of  water 

25.  they  stopped  all  the  w.  of  water,  felled  trees 
'HChron.  26. 10.  Uzziah  built  towers  and  digged  w. 
Asn. 12.3. shall  draw  water  out  of  the  to.  of  salvation 
2 P(;t.2.17.tho»e  are  to. without  watcr,clouds carried 


WEL 

WELL-SPRING. 

Prov.  16.  22.  understanding  is  a  to.-i^'Wn^  of  life 

18. 4.  the  w.-spring  of  wisdom  as  a  flowing  brouk 

WELL,  Adverb. 
Gen.i.T.  if  thou  do.->t  not  to.  sin  lieth  at  the  dool 

12.  13.  that  it  may  be  w.  with  me  for  thy  soke 
IG.  he  entreated  Abram  w.  for  her  sake 

13.  10.  Jordan  was  w.  watered  every  where 

18. 11.  Abrah.  and  Sarah  10.  stricken  in  age,  24. 1. 
20.  6.  Jacob  said,  is  he  w.7  and  they  said,  he  is  w. 
40.  14.  think  of  me,  when  it  shall  be  to.  with  thee 

43.  27.  is  your  father  w.7  is  he  yet  alive? 
Exod. 1. '20.  therefore  God  dealt  to.  with  niidwivcs 

4.  14.  I  know  that  he  can  speak  w. 

jVutH.  11. 18.  for  it  was  to.  with  us  in  Egypt 
1.3.  30.  Calebsaid,we  are  to.  able  lo  overcome  1' 
36  5.  the  tribe  of  the  sons  of  Joseph  hath  said  to. 

Deut.  1.  23.  and  the  saying  |)leased  me  w. 

3.  20.  given  rest  to  your  brethren,  as  to.  as  you 

4.  40.  that  it  may  go  to.  with  thee  and  ihy  chil- 

dren, 5.  16.  I  6.  3,  18.  I  12.  25,  28.  ]  19. 13. 
I  22.  7.  Uuth  3.  1.  Eph.  6.  3. 
5. 14.  thy  maid-servant  may  rest  as  w.  as  thou 
28. 1  heard  words  of  peo.  they  have  to.  said, 18.17. 
29.  that  it  might  be  w.  with  them  and  theirs 
33.  that  it  may  be  to.  with  you,  Jer.  7.  23. 
7.  18.  but  shall  10.  remember  what  the  Lord  did 
15. 16.  wilt  not  go  away  because  he  is  to.  with  thee 
Judg.  9.  IC.  if  thou  hast  dealt  w.  with  Jerubbaal 

14.  3.  get  her  for  me,  for  she  pleaseth  me  10.  7. 
20.  48.  as  w.  the  men  of  every  city  as  the  beast 

Ruth  .3.  13.  w.  let  him  do  the  kinsman's  part 
ISam.  16.  16.  he  shall  play  and  thou  shalt  bo  w. 
20.7.  if  he  say  thus,  it  is  to.  thy  servant  hath  peace 

24.  20.  I  know  to.  thou  shalt  surely  be  kii'^g 
•2Sain.  6. 19.  he  dealt  bread  as  w.  to  women  as  men 

18.  28.  Ahimaaz  called,  and  said  all  is  to. 
IKings  8.  18.  and  the  Lord  said  unto  David  my 
father,  thou  didst  w.  it  was  in  thy  heart  to 
build  a  house,  2  Chron.  6.  8. 
18.  24.  all  the  people  answered,  it  is. to.  spoken 
iKings  4.  26.  is  it  w.  with  thee?  is  it  w.  with  thy 
husband?  is  it  to.  with  the  child?  it  is  to. 

5.  21.  is  all  W.I  9.11.  ||  7.  9.  we  do  not  w. 

25.  24.  dwell  in  the  land,  and  serve  the  king  of 
Babylon,  and  it  shall  be  to.  willi  you,  Psal. 
128.2.  Jer.  40.  9. 

"i  Chron.  12.  12.  also  in  Judah  things  went  w. 
Psfl/.49.]8.mcn  praise  when  thou  dost  w.  to  thyself 
119.05.  thouhastdealttc.  with  thy  servant,  OLd. 
Prov.  11. 10.  when  it  goeth  to.  with  the  righteous 

14.  15.  the  prudent  man  lookelh  w.  to  his  goings 
24.32.  then  I  saw  and  considered  it  le.  looked  on  it 
,10.  29.  there  be  three  things  which  go  to.  yea  four 
31.27.  she  lookcth  w.  tothe  ways  of  her  household 

Eccl.  8.  12.  it  shall  be  to.  with  them  that  fear  God 

13.  but  it  shall  not  be  w.  with  the  wicked 
Tsa.  3.  10.  say  to  righteous  it  shall  be  w.  with  him 
Jer.  1. 12.  the  Lord  said  to  me,  thou  hast  w.  seen 

15.  11.  Lord  said,  it  shall  be  w.  with  thy  remnant 
22.  15.  it  was  to.  with  him,  he  judged  needy,  16. 

39.  12.  take  him,  look  to.  to  him,  do  him  no  harm 

40.  4.  come,  and  I  will  look  to.  to  thee 

42.  6.  that  it  may  be  w.  with  us  when  we  obey 

44.  17.  for  then  we  were  tc.  and  saw  no  evil 
Ezek.  24.  5.  make  it  boil  w.  seethe  bones  therein 

10.  spice  it  to.  \\  44.5.  mark  tc.  behold  and  hear 
33.  32.  of  one  that  can  play  to.  on  an  instrument 
Jonah  4. 4.  the  Lord  said,  dost  thou  to.  to  be  angry? 

9.  I  do  to.  to  be  angry,  even  unto  death 

Mat.  15.  7.  ye  hypocrites,  to.  did  Esaias  prophesy 

of  you,  saying,  Mark  7.  6.  .ficts  28.  25 

25.  21.  tc.  done,  thou  good  and  faithful  servant 

enter  into  tht^joy  of  thy  Lord,  23.  /.Jttc  19.17 

Mark  7. 37.  he  hath  done  all  things  to.  deaf  to  hear 

12.  28.  perceiving  that  he  had  answered  them  v> 
Luke  1.1.  Zacharias  and  Elisabeth  were  now  both 

to.  stricken  in  years 
6.26.  woe  unto  you  when  all  men  speak  to.  of  you 

13.  9.  if  it  bear  fruit,  tc.  if  not,  cut  it  down 
20.  39.  Master,  thou  hast  to.  said,  .John  4. 17. 

.John  8.  48.  say  wc  not  w.  thou  hast  a  devil 
13.  13.  ve  call  me  Lord,  ye  say  ir.  for  so  I  am 
18.  23.  Init  if  to.  why  smitest  thou  me? 
ICur.  7.  37.  he  that  will  keep  his  virgin,  doth  to. 

38.  he  that  giveth  her  in  marriage,  doth  w. 
Gal.  4.  17.  they  zealously  affect  you,  but  not  10. 
5.  7.  ye  did  run  w.  who  did  hinder  you? 
Phil.  4.  14.  ye  have  done  to.  ye  did  communicate 
ITim.  3.  4.  one  thatruleth  to.  his  own  house 
5. 17.  let  the  ciders  that  rule  w.  be  counted  worthy 
Titus  2.  9.  and  to  please  them  to.  in  all  things 
.tain.  2.19.  believestthere  rsone  God,  thou  dost  tc. 
See  As,  Do,  Doino,  FAVofRno,  Pleasep. 
WELL-BELOVED. 
Catt*.  1.13.  a  bundle  of  myrrh  is  my  to.  unto  me 
ft«.5. 1.  now  will  Isingtoto.  asongof  my  holovod 
Mark  12.  6.  he  sent  his  w.  son  also  to  thcfii 
Rotn.ie.  5.  salute  to.  Fpenetu'ifirst-fruitsofAchaim 
3  JyAti  1.  the  elder  to  the  w.  Gaim,  I  love  in  trutij 


WEN 

Very  WELL. 
.?eti SS.lO.done  no  wrong,aB  thou  very  tc.knowest 
2  yim.l.lS.  he  ministered  to  me,  thuu  knowtst  v.w. 

WELL-NIGH. 
Ptai.  73. 2.  as  for  me  my  glepa  had  w.-nigh  slipped 

WEN. 
Lev.  22.  52.  maimed,  or  having  a  w.  or  scurvy 

WENCH. 
S  Sam.  17.  17.  a  w.  told  Jonathan  and  Ahimaaz 

WENT. 
<7fn.  35.  ;j.  the  Lord  was  with  mc  in  the  way  I  w 
*Vu;/i. 10.14.  in  the  first  place  i^>.  standardotjudah 

14.  24.  him  will  I  bri[ig  into  land  whereto  he  w. 
22.22.God's  anger  was  kindled  because  Balaaniio. 

24.  1.  Balaam  jc.  not  to  seek  lor  enchantments 

25.  8.  Phinehae  w.  after  the  man  of  Israel 
Deut.  1.  31.  God  hare  thee  in  all  the  way  ye  w. 
fosh.24.  17. he  preserved  us  in  all  the  way  we  w. 
Judg.  1.  3.  so  Simeon  w.  with  Judah 

17.  and  Judah  w.  with  Simeon  his  brother 

16.  19.  Samson's  strength  w.  from  him 

1  Sam.  10.  14.  Saul's  uncle  said,  whither  w.  ye? 

20.  there  w.  with  Saul  a  band  of  men 

17.  12.  the  man  M.  for  an  old  man  in  days  of  Saul 
15.  but  David  w.  to  feed  his  lather's  sheep 

23.13  Dav.and  his  men  w.  wherever  tliey  could  go 
30.  22.  because  they  vj.  not  with  us,  will  not  give 

2  Sam.  1. 4.  how  w.  the  matter  1   I  pray  thee  tell  me 

8.  3.  as  he  ic.  to  recover  his  border,  1  Cliron.  18.3. 
6.  Syrians  became  servants,  and  Lord  preserved 

David  whithersoever  he  w.  14. 1  Vlir.  18.  6, 13. 

15.  H.  w.  in  their  simplicity  and  knew  nothing 

18.  33.  as  he  w.  thus  he  said, O  my  son  Absalom 
J  Kings  11.6.  Solomon  w.  not  fully  after  the  Lord 

13.  12.  and  their  father  said,  what  waj'  w.  he  1 

14.  he  w.  after  the  man  of  God  and  found  him 

22. 24.  he  said,  which  way  w.  the  Spirit  of  the  Ld. 

from  me,  to  s[>eak  to  thee  1  2  Chron.  18.  23. 

48.  but  they  w.  not||2  Kingsi.  6. they  two  tt>.on 

^  Kings  5.26.  he  said,  w.  not  my  heart  with  thee! 

6.  4.  so  he  JO.  with  them,  and  tlic-y  cut  down  wood 
1  CAro7i.7. 23.  when  he  w.  in  to  his  wife,  she  cone. 

16.  20.  when  they  w.  from  nation  to  nation,  from 
one  kingdom  to  another  people,  Psal.  105.  13. 

Z  Chron.  10.  16.  so  all  Israel  w.  to  their  tents 

12.  J2.  and  also  in  Judah  things  w.  well 

23.  n.all  the  people  ir.  to  house  of  Baal  and  brake 
JVe/j.  2.  16.  the  rulers  knew  not  whither  1  w. 
Esth.'i.  14.  in  evening  she  w.  on  morrow  returned 
Psal.  42.  4.  I  tc.  with  thoin  to  the  house  of  God 
106.  32.  it  w.  ill  with  Moses  for  their  sakes 
Prov.  'i.  8.  a  young  man  ro.  the  way  to  her  house 
/>a.57.17.he  lo.on  frowardly  in  the  way  of  his  heart 
Ezek.  1.  9.  they  w.  every  one  straight  forward 

12.  they  turned  not  when  they  w.  10.  11. 

17.  they  lo.  on  their  four  sides  and  returned  not 

21.  when  those  m. these  w.those  stood, these  stood 

20.  16.  for  their  heart  w.  after  their  idols 
Hos.H.  13.  she  w.  after  her  lovers  and  forgat  the  L. 

.5.  13.  then  w.  Ephraim  to  the  Assyrian  and  sent 

9.  10.  they  w.  to  Baal-peor  and  separated  thems. 
11.  2.  as  they  called  them,  so  they  w.  from  them 

//flA. 3.5. before  him  w.  the  pestilence, burning  coals 
11.  at  the  light  of  thine  arrows,  they  w. 

Mai.  21.  29.  but  afterward  ho  repented  and  to. 
.30.  he  answered  and  said,  I  go,  sir,  but  w.  not 

25.  10.  while  they  w.  to  buy,  the  bridegroom  came 
Mark  1.  20.  they  left  their  father  and  ;o.  after  him 
jAike  2.  3.  all  w.  to  be  taxed,  every  one  to  his  city 

Jfi.  30.  but  if  one  w.  to  them  from  the  dead 

17.  14.  that  as  they  w.  they  were  cleansed 
23..7J.  Josephw.to  Pilate  and  begged  body  of  Jesus 

.T/>hn  4.  45.  the  Galileans  also  ib.  to  the  feast 

7.  ."53.  every  man  w.  to  his  own  house 

9.  11.  I  w.  and  washed  and  I  received  sight 

13.  3.  that  he  was  come  from  (Jod  and  w.  to  God 

18.  6.  they  w.  backward  and  fell  to  the  ground 

21.  23.  then  w.  this  saying  among  the  brethren 
.^c(«  8.  4.  they  m.  every  where  pren(-liiiig  the  word 

9.  1.  Saul  threatening  w.  unto  the  high  priest 
10. 9.  astliey  w.  on  their  journey,  Peter  lo.  to  pray 

14.  1.  they  w.  both  into  synagogue  of  the  Jews 

15.  38.  and  w.  not  with  them  to  iho  work 

16.  16.  ns  wo  u).  to  prayer,  a  damsel  met  ug 

26.  12.  as  I  i/i.  to  Damascus  with  authority 

1  Pet.  3.  19.  which  he  u>.  preach,  to  spirits  in  prison 

.See  Al.oN<J. 

WENT  about. 

.N'lim.  11.  8.  the  people  w.  about  and  gathered  it 

2  Kings  3.  25.  the  glingers  ic.  about  it  and  snvoto  it 
2  Chron.  17.  9.  they  w.  about  and  taught  the  people 
Kr.cl.  2  20.  I  IC.  about  to  cauai!  my  heart  despair 
Oanl.  5.  7.  the  watchaien  that  w.  about  found  me 
^V(if.4.23.Je»u»  Ki.aAounoBching,9.  35.  MarkD.Ct. 
^rr»9.2!l.  they  M.aftovno  slay  him,  21. 31. 126.21. 

10.  38.  Jesiig  u>.  about  doing  good  anil  healing 
13.  11.  ho  IB.  about  seeking  some  to  lead  him 

WF.NT  ttsiiir.        [.svr  Arose. 
/,utc9  10.  Jesus  took  them  and  w.  aside  privately 
dctj  23.  19.  the  chief  caiitain  w.  aside  privately' 
QTtt 


WEN 

WENT  astray. 
Psal.  119.  67.  before  I  was  afflicted  I  w.  astray 
Ezek.  44.  10.  when  Israel  w.  astray  after  idols,  15. 
48.11.itshall  be  for  the  priests  which  w.  nulaslray 
when  Israel  w.  astray  as  Levites  w.  astray 
Jlfa£.18.13.than  of  ninety-nine  which  w.  not  astray 

WENT  away. 
yurf^.16.3. Samson  10.  awuy  with  doors  of  the  gates 
14.  and  w.  away  with  the  pin  of  the  beam 

19.  2.  and  his  concubine  w.  away  from  him 
2  .Sam.  18.9.  the  mule  that  was  under  him  w.  away 
2  Kings  5.11.but  Naaman  was  wroth,  and  w.away 
2  Chron.  9. 12.  queen  of  Sheba  w.  away  to  her  land 
Mat.  19.  22.  he  w.  away  sorrowful,  Mark  10.  22. 

26.  42.  he  w.  away  the  second  time  and  prayed 

44.  he  w.  away  the  third  time,  Mark  14.  39. 
John  12.  11.  by  reason  of  him  many  w.  away 

20.  10.  the  disciples  w.  away  to  their  own  home 
.Sets  10.  23.  on  the  morrow  Peter  w.  away 

WENT  back. 

1  Kings  13.  19.  so  he  w.  back  and  did  eat  and  drink 

2  Kings  8.  29.  king  Joram  to.  back  to  be  healed 
John  6.  66.  from  that  time  many  disciples  w.  back 

WENT  before. 

Exod.  13.  21.  the  Lord  w.  before  them  in  a  cloud 

14. 19.  the  angel  of  God  which  w.  before  the  camp 

J^um.  10.33. the  ark  of  covenant  w.  beforey/osh.'i.d. 

.hsh.  6.9.  the  armed  men  wi  6c/«rc  the  priests,  13. 

1  A'awi. 17.7.one  bearing  a  shield  w.  before  him,  41. 

2  Sam.  6.  4.  and  Ahio  w.  before  the  ark 
10. 16.  and  Shobachio.  beforethem,  1  Chr.  19.  16. 

20.  8.  when  at  Gibeon,  Amasa  w.  before  them 
.fob  18.  20.  as  they  that  w.  before  were  atl'riglited 
Psal.  08.  25.  the  singers  lO.  before,  tl'e  players 
Mat.  2.  9.  the  star  which  they  saw  w.  before  them 

21.  9.  the  multitudes  that  w.  before   them  cried, 
Iliisanna  to  the  son  of  David,  Mark  11.  9. 

l.uke  18.  39.  they  which  w.  before  rebuked  him 

22.  47.  Judas  io.  before  and  drew  near  to  kiss  him 
1  7'im.l.l8.according  to  the  prophecies  which  w.b. 

WENT  behind. 
Exod.  14.  19.  the  angel  removed  and  w.  behind 

WENT  down. 
<Vcn.  12.  10.  Abram  w.doicn  into  Egypt  to  sojourn 
1.5.  17.  when  sun  JO.  (/oizi7i,  a  smoking  furnace  and 
burning  lamp  passed,  Judg.  19. 14.  2  A'a/n. 2.  24. 
42.3.  Joseph's  brethren  w.d.  [|43.15.  Benjaminw.d. 
Exod.  19. 14.  Moses  w.  down  from  the  mount  to  the 
people,  and  sanctified  the  people,  25.  |  32.  15. 
JV«m.  Hi.  33.  w.  down  alive  into  the  pit 
20. 15.  how  our  fathers  (o.rf.  into  Egvi)t,and  dwelt 
a  long  time,  Deut.  10.  22. 1  20.  5.  Josh.  24.  4. 
.Judg.  3.  27.  Israel  w.  down  after  Ehud,  28. 
4.  14.  Barak  w.  down  from  mount  Tabor 

7.  11.  Gideon  w.  down  with  Phurah  his  servant 
14. 1.  Samson  jo.  d.  to  Timnath  and  saw  a  woman 

of  the  (laughters  of  the  Philistines,  5,  7. 
18.  the  men  said  to  him  before  the  sun  w.down 
)9.Samson!o.'/ojcn  to  .^shkelon  and  slew  30  men 
Ruth  3.  6.  Ruth  w.  down  unto  the  floor  to  Boaz 

1  Sam.  13.  20.  the  Israelites  w.  down  to  sharpen 
22.  1.  David's  father's  house  jc.  down  to  him 

2  Sam.  5. 17.  David  heard,  and  w.  down  to  the  hold 
11.0.  hut  Uriah  jo.  not  down  to  his  house,  10, 13. 
17.  18.  a  well  in  his  court,  whither  they  w.  down 
21.  15.  David  jo.  down  against  the  Philistines 
23.13.  three  of  the  thirty  chief  jo.  dojort  and  came 

to  David  to  cave  of  .^dullam,  1  Chron.  11.  15. 

20.  Benaiah  JO.  rf.  and  slew  a  lion  in  time  ofsnow 

21.  Benaiah  in.  d.  to  the  Egyptian,  and  slew  him 
with  his  own  spear,  1  Chron.  11.22,  23. 

2  Kings  1.  15.  Elijah  jo.  down  with  him  to  the  king 
2.  2.  Elijah  and  Klislia  w.  doivn  to  Beth-el 
5. 14.  Naaman  10.  d.  anddi|)ped  himself  in  Jordan 
8.29.  .'Vhaziah  w.d.  to  see  Joram,  2  C/iroH.  22.  6. 
2  Chron.  18.  2.  Jehoshaphat  w.  down  to  see  A  hah 
Psal.  133. 2.  the  ointment  that  w.  down  to  the  skirts 
Cant.  6.  11.  I  10.  down  into  the  garden  of  nuts 
/sa.  52.4.  my  pi  ople  lo.  rfoion  aforetime  into  Egypt 
.At.  18.  3.  thi'n  I  lo.  down  lo  the  potter's  house 
Ezek.M.  15.  in  the  day  when  he  w.  d.  to  the  grave 
31.  17.  they  also  jo.  down  to  hell  with  him 
.fnnah  1.  3.  Jonah  lo.  down  to  Joppa  and  found 
2.  6.  I  m.  down  to  the  bottoms  of  the  mountains 
/.uke  18.  14.  this  man  lo.  down  justified  rather 
.fobn  5.  4.  an  anji'l  w.  down  and  troubled  the  water 
.^els  7. 15.  so  Jacob  w.  down  into  Egypt  and  died 

8.  5.  Philip  10.  rfown  to  Samaria,  preached  Christ 
38.  and  they  both  to.  dotrn  into  the  water 

10.  21.  then  Peter  w.  down  to  the  men,  and  said 

12.  19.  Herod  lo.  down  from  Juilea  to  Cesaren 

20.  10.  Paul  10.  down  and  emhracing  him,  said 

WENT  forth. 

rVrn.R.7.a raven  io./o><A||ll.  "iA.w.  forth  from  llr 
18.  Noah  io./«r(A,  hissons  and  all  out  of  ark,  19. 
10.  11.  out  of  that  land  w.  forth  Ashur 
12.  .5.  they  ir.  forth  to  go  into  land  of  Canaan 

M'um.  11.  31.  there  w.  forth  a  wind  from  the  Lord 
31.  13.  the  piinces  w.  forth  lo  meet  them,  33.  1. 

Judg.'J.S.  treci  lo.  forth  to  anoint  a  king  over  them 


WEN 

2  Sam.  20.  8.  as  he  w.  forth  it  fell  out 

2  Kings  2.  21.  Elisha  w.  forth  into  the  watera 

18.  7.  he  prospered  whithersoever  he  w.  forth 
F.slh.  5.  9.  then  lo.  Haman/wrtA  that  day  joyful 
7o41.12.  Satan  w.  forth  (torn  presence  of  Lord,  2.7 
/sa.37.30.angelofLordTO./()J-tA  and  smote  185,000 

48.  3.  the  lormer  things  w.  forth,  I  shewed  them 
Jer.  22. 11.  Shullupi  who  w.  forth,  out  of  this  place 
/;zcA. 16.14. thyrenownjo./urtA  among  the  heathen 

24.  12.  her  great  scum  w.  nolfoi'.h  out  of  het 
Jimos  5  3.  that  which  w.  forth  by  a  hundred 
Hab.  3.  5  and  burning  coals  w.  forth  at  hie  feet 
Mat.  13.  3.  behold,  a  sower  w.  forth  to  sow 

25.  1.  ten  virgins  w.  forth  to  meet  bridegroom 
Mark  2. 12.  he  arose  and  took  up  bed  and  w.  forth 
'iJohnl.  because  lor  his  name's  sake  they  w.  forth 
Rev.  6.  2.  he  w.  forth  conquering  and  to  conQuer 

WENT  her  way. 
ISnm. 1.18. woman  w.  her  way  and  wasnoTioreMd 
John  4.  28.  the  woman  of  Samaria  jo  /.c<  w 
11.  28.  when  Martha  had  so  said  she  w  nrr  vay 

WENT  his  way. 
Of?i.l8.33.  and  the  Lord  lo.Ai*  way  as  soon  as  had 

24.  61.  the  servant  took  Rebekah  and  lo.  Az*  joay 

25.  34.  Esau  did  eat  and  drink  and  w.  his  way 
Exod.  18.  27.  Jelhro  lo.  his  way  into  his  own  land 
JV-U7H.24.25.  Balak  |J  1  Sam.  24.  7.  Saul  w.  his  way 
1  .Sam.  26.25.  David  jo.  on  Aij  ion?/,  Saul  returned 
1  Kings  1.49.  every  guest  of  Adonijah  w.  his  way 
fr*tA.4.17.BoMordecaiM).Ai5!oaj/,didasE6thercom. 
Jer.  28.  11.  the  prophet  Jeremiah  lo.  his  way 
Mot.  13.  25.  his  enemy  sowed  tares  and  w.  his  way 
Ai/A<'4.30.lie  passing  thro'  midst  of  them,?o.Ai»a;ay 

8. .39.  and  he  w.  his  way  and  published  groat  things 
22. 4. Judas  [o.Aisiofli/ and  communed  with  priests 
John  4.  ,50.  and  the  man  believed,  and  w.  his  way 
Jlcts  8.  39.  the  eunuch  w.  on  his  way  rejoicing 

9.  17.  Ananias  jo.  his  way  and  entered  the  house 

See  Jesus,  Went. 
WENT  171,  or  into. 
Oen.l.l.Noah  w.into  the  ark  and  hissons  with  him 
9.  lo.  iji  two  and  two  H  16.  w.  in  male  and  female 
,39.  11.  Joseph  w.  into  the  house  to  do  business 
Exod.  5. 1.  Moses  and  .\aron  lo.  in  to  Pliaraoh,7.10. 
14.i?2.  Israel  10.  info  midst  oflhesea  on  dry  ground 

23.  the  Egyptians  zo.  in  after  them,  15.  19. 
34.  35.  until  Moses  lo.  in  to^speak  with  him 

/.«).  10.23.  when  Aaron  w.into  the  ho'«y  place 
Josh.  G.  23.  the  young  men  that  were  spies  w.  in 
.Judg.  3.  22.  the  haft  also  jo.  in  after  the  blade 
17.  10.  so  the  Lrvite  jo.  in  and  dwelt  with  Micah 
19.  15.  when  the  Levite  w.  in  to  lodge  in  Gibeah 

1  Sam.  24.  3.  Saul  lo.  in  to  cover  his  feet 

2  Sam.  7.  18.  then  zo.  David  in  before  the  Lord 

1  Kings  1.  15.  Bath-sluba  zo.  in  unto  the  king 
22.  3(1.  king  of  Israel  disguised  w.  into  the  baitic 

2h'ings  4. 33.  Elisha  lo.  in  shutthe  door  and  prayed 
37.  then  she  w.  in,  fell  at  his  feet  and  took  her  son 
5.  4.  and  one  w.  in  and  told  his  lord,  thus  and  thu8 
25.  Gehazi  w.  in  and  stood  before  his  master 

10.  24.  when  they  w.  in  to  offer  sacrifices 

2  Chron. 'iCi.  16.  Uzziah  jo.  into  the  temple  of  Lord 
17.  Azariah  the  priest  lo.  in  after  him 

JVrh.  9.  24.  so  the  children  w.  in  and  possessed 
Eslh.  7.  7.  the  king  jo.  into  the  palace-garden 
Psal.  73.  17.  until  I  lo.  into  the  sanctuary  of  God 
.Jer.  26.  21.  Urijah  fled  and  w.  into  Egypt 
Ezek.  8.  10.  so  I  w.  in  ||  9.  2.  si.x  men  vi.  in 

10.  2.  the  man  clothed  with  linen  w.  in,  3,  6 

25.  3.  when  they  lo.  into  captivity 

39.  23.  Israel  to.  I'n^o  captivity  for  their  iniquity 
Dan.  2.  16.  Daniel  zo.  in  and  desired  of  the  king 

24.  to  Arioclxll  6. 10.  he  ic.  in  to  his  house  to  pray 
Mat.  8.  32.  the  devils  to.  in  to  the  herd  of  swine 

21. 33. there  was  a  certain  householder  w.ivio  a  far 

country,  Mark  12.  1.  jAike  19.  12.  |  20.  9 

25.  10.  they  that  were  ready  w.  in  lo  the  marriage 

27.  ,53. 10.  t'n^o  the  holy  city,  and  appeared  to  many 

Mark  2.  20.  how  David  w.  into  the  house  of  God, 

and  did  ent  the  shew-bread,  I.nke  6.  4 

15.  43.  Joseph  10.  in  boldly  lo  Pilate,  craved  body 

Ijukc  1.  9.  lot  was  to  burn  incense  w4ien  he  w.  in 

39.  Mnry  arose  and  lo.  into  the  hill  country 
24.  29.  and  he  lo.  in  to  tarry  with  them 
.John  18.  15.  that  disciple  w.  in  wilh  Jesus 
20.  5.  ho  saw  linen  clolhes  lying,  yet  w.  not  in 

8.  then  ir.  in  also  that  other  disciple,  and  saw 
^rls  1.  21.  all  the  lime  Iho  Lord  lo.  i»  and  out 

10.  27.  as  Peter  talked  he  lo.  in  and  found  many 
12.  17.  he  departed  and  lo.  into  nnolhrr  place 
13. 14.  tlioy  10.  into  synagogue  on  the  snbbnth-day  , 
17.  2.  Paiil  10.  i7i/»  the  synngogiir,  10.  |  19.  8. 

Rojn.  10.  18.  Iheir  sound  lo.  i«/«  all  the  earth 
WEJVT  in,  as  to  a  woman. 

Orn.Ki.4.  Abram  lo.  in  (o  Hnijar,  she  conceived 

19.  33.  the  first-born  lo.  in  and  lay  with  her  faf.Ser 

29.23.Laban  brought  Leah  lo  jHcob,heio.in  loh(< 

30.  he  10.  Ill  aUounio  Racb.  ||  '.V).  4.  lo.  in  lo  Bilh. 

3**.  2.  Judnh  saw  Rliuah  and  w.  in  to  her 

9.  when  Onan  lo.  in  to  hin  brutlior'n  wife 


WEN 

Juig.  16.  1.  Samson  saw  a  harlot  and  to.  in  to  her 
Hulh  4.  J3.  Boaz  w.  in  to  Rulh,  she  coiicuiveii 
24'a«i. 1:2.^4.  David  coiiil'orteii  Batli-sliebu his  wile, 
and  w.  in  unto  lier,  ^ilc  bare  a  son,  tjolouion 
16.  Stl.  Absalom  w.  in  to  his  lather's  concubines 
17. 25.  Itbra  w.  in  lo  Abigail,  JMahash's  daughter 
iO.  3.  but  David  w.  not  in  to  them 
1  Chron.  2.  il.  Hezron  w.  in  to  daughter  of  Machir 
7.2J.wheni;phraim  w.in  to  his  wile,Klie  conceived 
Etek.  23.  44.  yet  they  w.  in  unto  her  as  a  harlot 
WJONT  over. 
Sam.  2.  15.  there  arose  and  w.  over  by  number 
r.>.  17.  and  they  w.  oocr  Jordan  before  the  king 
31.  Barzillai  w.  oocr  Jordan  with  the  kn\ 
I  Kings  2.  8.  so  they  two  w.  over  on  dry  ground 

14.  Klisha  smote  the  waters  and  w.  over 
IC'Ar.  12.15.  these  io.wuer  Jordan  when  overflown 
2y.  30.  David's  reign,  and  times  that  w.  over  him 
J^'ch.  12.  38.  other  company  w.  ouer  against  them 
7*0.51. 23.  thy  body  as  a  street  to  them  that  w.  over 

WENT  out. 
Oen.  4.  16.  Cain  w.  out  from  presence  of  Lord 
24.  63.  Isaac  w.  out  to  meditate  in  the  held 
34. 1.  Dinah  w.  out  lo  see  the  daugiilers  of  the  land 

43.  31.  Joseph  washed  his  face  and  w.  out 

44.  28.  one  w.  out  from  nie  I  saw  him  not  since 
Exod.  2.  11.  Moses  w.  ovt  to  his  brethren,  13. 

8.  12.  AaroQ  w.  out  from  i'haraoli,  30.  |  9.  ."!3. 

12.  41.  all  the  hosts  of  the  Lord  ^o.  out,  14.  8. 

15.  20.  all  the  women  to.  out  alter  Miriam 

16.  27.  there  w.  out  some  jieople  on  sabbath-day 

18.  7.  Moses  w.  out  to  meet  his  father-in-law 
33.  7.  every  one'u).  out  unto  the  tabernacle 

J.ev.  10.  2.  there  w.  out  lire  from  the  Lord 
jYum.  10. 34.  cloud  was  on  them  when  ihey  w.  out 
11.  26.  two  men  w.  out  into  the  tabernacle 
21.23.  Sihon  w.uut  against  Israel  into  wilderness 
33.  Og,  the  king  of  Bashan,  w.  out  against  them 
22.  32.  behold,  1  w.  out  to  withstand  ihee 
Josh.  6.  1.  none  w.  out,  and  none  came  in 

8.  14.  the  men  of  Ai  w.  out  against  Israel,  17. 
,11.  4.  the  Canaanite  w.  out  and  all  their  hosts 

.Iudg.2.l5.  they  w.  out,  ihe  Lord  was  against  them 
3.  19.  all  tliat  stood  by  him  to.  out  from  him 

19.  23.  the  master  of  the  house  w.  out  unto  them 
Hulk  1.  21.  I  w.  oat  full,  and  came  home  empty 
l.')am.3.3.  ere  the  lamp  oltJod  w.  out  in  the  teinjile 

17.  35.  1  w.  out  after  the  bear,  and  smote  him 
18.5.Uav.  10. 0.  where  Saul  sent  him,  13. 16.  |  19.  8. 

2  i\am.  11. 13.  at  even  he  u:.  out  to  lie  on  Ins  bed 

13.  9.  they  ic.  out  every  man  from  him 
19.  19.  the  day  the  king  w.  out  of  Jerusalem 

1  Kings  20.  16.  they  w.  out  at  noon  ||  17.  w.  out  first 

21.  the  kiug  of  Israel  w.out  and  smote  the  horses 
2Kiiigsi.lti.  the  child  w.out  to  his  father  to  reapers 
37.  she  went  in  and  took  up  her  son,  and  w.  out 
5.  27.  Gehazi  w.  out  from  his  presence  a  leper 

9.  21.  they  w.  out  each  in  hiscliariotand  mei  him 
24.  and  tfift arrow  w.  out  of  Jehorum's  heart 

lChroH.1^2,W!.  David  ib.  out  to  meet  them  and  said 

14.  S.David  heard  of  it,  and  w.  out  against  them 

2  Chron.  15.  2.  Azariah  w.  out  to  meet  Asa 
5.  was  no  peace  to  him  that  w.  out  or  came  in 

19.  2.  Jehu  w.  ovt  to  meet  Jehoshaphat 
20.21. he  appointed  singers  to  praise  as  they  w.  out 
35.  20.  Josiah  w.  out  against  Pharaoh-necho 

y..ith.  7.  8.  as  the  word  w.  out  of  the  king's  mouth 
Job  29.  7.  when  I  w.  out  to  the  gate  thro'  the  cily 
31.  34.  did  fear  terrify  nie  that  I  w.  not  out  at  door 
I'sal.  SI.  a.  when  he  w.  out  thro' the  land  of  EgyjJt 
Jcr.37.4.Jereniiah  caineinand  uj.out  among  peojile 
F.iek.  10.  7.  took  fire  from  the  cherub  and  w.  out 
Jimos  5.  3.  the  city  that  w.  out  by  a  thousand 
'/.cch.  8.  10.  neither  any  i)eace  to  him  that  «;.  out 
Jf/at.  11.7.  Jesus  said,  what  lo.  ye  out  into  the  wil- 
derness to  see  ■?  8,  9.  I.ukc  7.24,  25,  26. 

20.  1.  a  man  who  w.  out  early  to  hire  labourers 
3.  he  70.  out  at  third  hour  |1  5.  sixth  ||  fi.  eleventh 

22.  10.  those  servants  w.  out  into  the  high-ways 
Alark  3.  21.  his  friends  w.  out  to  lay  hold  on  him, 
he  is  beside  himself 
5.  13.  the  unclean  spirits  70.  nut  and  entered  into 
the  swine,  and  ran  down,  />u/ic8.33..^fts  19. 12. 
14.  they  tliat  fed  the  swine  told  it,  they  w.  out  to 
see  whai  it  was  that  was  done,  /.uke  8.  35. 
/  7ike  6.  19  for  there  in.  virtue  out  of  him 
•22.  62.  Peter  w.  out  and  wept  bitterly 
.fuhn  8.  9.  they  which  heard  it,  jc.  out  one  by  one 
.59.  Jesus  hid  himself  and  ic.  out  of  the  temple 
11.  31.  Mary  rose  up  hastily,  and  w.  out 
]'!.  ."iO.  Judas  having  received  Ihe  sop  w.  out 
H.  16.  then  w.  out  that  other  disciple  known  to 
./}(.t.^  1.  21.  all  the  time  the  Lord  w.  in  and  out 

15.  24.  certain  w.  out  from  us  have  troubled  you 
Hrb.  11.8.  Abraham  w.  nut,  not  knowing  whither 
1./oA7j2.  10.  they  to.  nut  from  us,  but  not  of  ue,  they 

w.  out  to  be  mnnifi;.«t  that  they  were  not  all  of  us 
WENT  their  wnij. 
Judg  18.  26.  the  children  of  Dan  ir.  thrir  vtnij 
i6'ani.30.2.AinalekitcBburntZikIa£andw.t/(«i>u^u» 
077  '  " 


WEP 

JVeA.  8.  13.  all  the  people  w.  their  way  to  eat 
Zec/t.  10.2.  therefore  tiiey  w.  their  wuy  as  a  Hock 
jWat.  8.  <i3.  that  kept  swine  Hed  and  w.  their  way 
20.  4.  right  1  will  give  you,  and  they  w.  their  way 
22.  5.  iJiey  made  iighl  of  it  and  w.  tkcir  ways 

22.  they  heard  these  words,  they  w.  their  way 
Mark\.l.4.u).thcir  way  and  lound  coit,y^u/.«  19.32. 
.John  11.  46.  but  some  w.  their  ways  to  I'harisees 
MetsB.  36.  as  they  u).  on  t/it(r  louj/cameto  water 

WENT  through. 
JVeA.  9. 11.  thou  didst  divide  the  sea,  they  w.thro' 
the  midst  of  the  sea  on  dry  land,  J^sal.  66.  6. 
Psal.  66.  12.  we  to.  thro'  tire  and  through  water 
Jsa.  60.  15.  forsaken,  so  that  no  man  w.  thro'  thee 
Jl'/arA2.23.he  w.  through  the  cornfields  on  the  sab- 
bath-day,disciples  began  to  pluck  enta, LukcG.l. 
WENT  ujj. 
Oen.  17.  22.  and  God  w.  up  Irom  Abraham 
35.  13.  God  w.  up  from  Jacob  in  place  he  talked 
49.  4.  to.  up  to  fatlier's  bed,  he  to.  up  lo  my  couch 
£io(i.l7. 10.  Moses, Aaron, Al  liutw.uplo  topofhiil 

19.  3.  Moses  (0.  up  to  God,  and  the  Lord  called 
to  him,  20.  1  24.  13,  15.  |  34.  4.  JJeut.  10.  3. 

JVu(«.13.21.  so  they  w.  up,  and  searched  the  land 
31.  but  the  men  that  w.  up  with  him  said 

20.  27.  they  w.  up  into  mount  Hor,  33.  38. 
Deut.  1. 43.  and  w.  pretumpluously  up  into  the  hill 
.Josh.  6.  20.  so  that  the  people  w.  up  into  the  city 

14.8.  brethren  that  w.  up  with  me  made  hcartmelt 
.ludg.  1.  4.  Judah  to.  up  ami  the  Lord  delivered 

22.  the  house  of  Josejih  also  u>.  up  against  Bethel 
4. 10.  Barak  and  Deborah  w.  up  with  10,000  men 

8.  8.  Gideon  w.  up  thence  to  Penuel,  11. 

1  Sam.  1.  3.  Elkanah  w.  up  out  of  his  city,  7,  21. 
1.  22.  Hannah  w.  not  up,  until  child  bo  weaned 
5.  12.  the  cry  of  the  city  w.  up  to  heaven 

2  Sam.  15.  30.  David  wept  as  he  w.  up  barefoot 
24.  19.  David,  according  to  the  saying  of  Gad,  w. 

up  as  the  Lord  commanded,  1  Chron.  21.  19. 
2A'iH^'-«-2.11. Elijah  w.  up  by  a  whirlwind  lo  heaven 

4.  34.  Elisha  w.  up  and  lay  on  the  child,  35. 
19. 14.  Hezekiah  w.  up  into  the  house  of  the  Lord, 

and  spread  it  before  the  Lord,  I.sa.  37.  14. 
23.2.Josiah(o.i(/)  to  house  of  theLoid,2CAr.34.30. 
lCAron.ll.6.Joiib;o.  up  first  and  was  chief  captain 
£2ra2.1. these  are  the  children  ofthe  province  that 
w.  up  out  ofthe  captivity,  59.  JVVA  7.  6,  61. 
4.23.  they  w.  up  in  haste  to  Jerusalem  to  the  Jews 

7.  6. Ezra  w.u/i  ||  ^V'cA.  12.  1.  the  priestthat  to.  up 

8.  1.  this  is  the  genealogy  of  them  that  w.  up 
£zeA.1.13.itto.u/(anddown  among  living  creatures 

8.  11.  and  thick  cloud  of  incense  w.  up 
10.  4.  the  glory  of  the  Lord  w.  up,  1 1.  23,  24. 
19.  6.  he  to.  up  and  down  among  the  lions 
J>/at.3. 16.  Jesus  to.  u/j  straightway  out  of  the  water 

5.  1.  and  seeing  the  multitude  he  10.  up  into  a 
mounlain,  14.  23.  |  15.  29.  Luke  9.  28. 

Luke  18. 10.  two  men  to.  up  into  the  temple  to  pray 
.lohn  7.  10.  then  w.  he  also  up  unto  the  feast 
.ficts  1.  10.  as  he  w.  up  two  men  stood  by  him 
3.  1.  Peter  and  John  w.  up  into  the  tenjjde 

10.  9.  Peter  w.  up  upon  the  house-top  to  pray 
24.11.  Paul  to.  up  to  Jerusalem, rvai.l.  18.  |  2. 1,2. 

Oal.  1. 17.  neither  w.  I  up  lo  Jerusalem  with  them 
Hev.  20.  9.  they  w.  up  on  the  breadth  ofthe  earth 

WENT  a  whoring. 
.Judg.2.1~.lsi.  w.  a  toAortM^'' after  other  gods, 8. 33 
Psal.  106.  39.  w.  a  whoring  with  their  inventions 

WENTEST. 
Gen.  49.  4.  Reuben,  thou  w.  up  to  thy  fatlier's  bed 
.Judg.  5.  4.  Lord  when  thou  10.  out  of  Seir 
2.S'o7n.  7.  9. 1  was  with  thee  whithersoever  thou  10 
16.  17.  why  w.  thou  nut  with  thy  friend  ^ 
19.  25.  wherefore  w.  thou  not  with  me 
Psal.liH.  7.  OGod,  when  thou  to.  before  thy  people 
/«(7.5T.7.  even  thither  w.  thou  up  toofi'er  sacrifice 

9.  thou  JO.  to  the  king  with  ointment  and  increase 
.Jer.  2.  2.  when  thou  to.  after  me  in  the  wilderness 

31.  21.  set  thine  heart  toward  the  way  thou  w. 
Nab.  3. 13.  thou  w.  forth  for  s:ilvation  of  thy  jieople 
.^cts  11.  3.  thou  w.  fh  to  men  uncircumcised 

WEPT. 
Oen.  21.  16.  Hngar  sat  and  w.  ||  27.  38.  Esau  to. 
29.  11.  Jacob  w.  33.  4.  |  37.  35.  Nos.  12.  4. 
42.  24.  Joseph  turned  from  his  brethren  and  jc. 
43.  30.  I  45.  2,  14,  15.  |  46.  29.  |  50.  1,  17. 
50.  t  3.  the  Egyptians  w.  for  Joseph  seventy  days 
Ki:o(t.2.6.she  saw  the  child, and, behold,  the  babeto. 
JVu7n.ll.4.  and  the  children  of  Israel  also  to.  again, 
18,  20.  I  14.  1.  Deut.  1.  45.  |  34.  8.  Judg. 
2.  4.  I  20.23,26.  |  21.  2. 
.Judg.  14.  16.  Samson's  wife  w.  before  him 
Att(A  1.9.  Naomi  kissed  herdnughlers  and  10. 14. 

1  Sam.  1.  7.  Hannah  w.  and  did  not  eat,  10. 

11.  4.  nil  the  people  w.  2  .S«;/i.  3.  32,  :i4. 
20.  41.  Jonathan  and  David  w.  one  with  another 
24.  16.  Saul  10.  II  ,30.  4.  David  10.  2  Sam.  1.  12. 

2  Sam.  3.  32.  David  w.  at  the  grave  of  Abncr 
12. 22.  while  the  child  was  yet  alive  I  fasted  and  to 
13.  2I&.  the  king  and  servants  w.  cure  for  Amnon 


WER 


25o7?i.  15. 83.  he  and  country  to.  II 30. 10.  ai  he  wont 

18.33.  king  was  much  moved  and  to.  for  Absaloia 
2  Kings  8.  11.  and  the  man  of  God  w. 

13. 14.  Joash  to.  over  Elisha  and  said,  O  my  father 

20.3.remember,Lord,  Hezt  kiah  w.  sore,  Isa.Z'd.Z. 

22.19.because  the  king  ol  J  udah  hath  to. before  ina 
Kit  a  3.  12.  priests  that  had  seen  the  first  house  jo. 

10.  1.  for  the  people  to.  very  sore,  JVcA.  8.  9. 
A'tA.1.4.  when  1  heard  these  words  1  to.  before  God 
Job  2. 12.  Job's  friends  lilted  up  their  voice  and  10, 
Psal.  69.  10.  when  1  to.  and  cliaslened  my  soul 

137.1.bylhe  rivers  of  Babylon  we^atdown  and  to 
Mat.  26.  75.  Peter  w.  Mark  14.  72.  I^uke  22.  62. 
Mark  5.  38.  Jesus  seeth  them  that  to.  J^kc  8.  52 

16.  10.  Mary  told  them  as  they  mourned  and  to. 
l.uke  7.  32.  we  mourned  lo  you  and  ye  have  not  lo. 

19.  41.  he  beheld  the  city  and  w.  over  it 
JiihnW.  35.  Jesus  w.  ||  20. 11.  Mary  w.  at  sepulchre 
Jiets  20.  37.  they  w.  sore  and  fell  on  Paul's  neck 
1  Cor.  7.  30.  they  that  weep,  as  though  they  10.  not 
Rev.  5.4.  I  w.  because  no  man  was  touud  worthy 

WERE. 
Oen.  34. 14.  cannot  do  this,  for  thatto.  a  reproach 
25.  on  the  third  day  when  they  to.  sore 

35.  2.  Jacob  said  to  all  that  to.  will,  him,  put  away 
4.  gave  all  the  strange  gods  that  to.  intiieirhand 
Eiod.  5.  19.  Israel  saw  they  70.  in  evil  case 

10.  6.  since  day  they  to.  on  earth  lo  this  day 
JVu?rt.l2.8.to.ye  not  afraid  to  speak  against  Moses? 

13. 33.  there  we  saw  the  giants,  we  w.  in  our  own 
sight  as  grasshopjiers,  so  we  10.  in  their  sigh* 

14.  3.  w.  it  not  better  for  us  to  return  into  Egypt? 
/Jiut.  5.  29.  O  that  there  uj.such  a  heart  in  them 

10.  19.  for  ye  to.  strangers  in  the  land  of  Egypt 
28.  62.  whereas  ye  to.  as  the  stars  of  heaven 
32.  27.  w.  it  not  that  I  feared  the  wrath  of  enemy 

29.  O  that  they  w.  wise,  that  they  understood 
./"«A.2.4.mehcame  to  me, I  wist  not  whence  theyto. 
.Judg.  9.36.  thouseest  mountains  as  if  they  to.  men 

1  .Sam.  9.  4.  passed  Shalini  and  there  they  to.  not 

2  Sam.  11.  16.  where  he  knew  that  valiant  men  10. 
lA77i^.s3.18.  we  uj.  together,  there  was  no  strange' 

4.  28.  straw  brought  they  where  the  officers  w. 

16.  30.  Ahab  did  evil  above  all  to.  before  hiin,3.3. 
'iKivgs'i.  14.  to.  it  not  that  I  regard  Jehoshaphat 

7.  10.  but  horses  tied,  and  the  tents  as  they  to. 
2  Chron.  29.  31.  as  many  as  w.  of  a  free  heart 
JVpA.  1.9.  though  there  to.  of  you  cast  outto  utmost 

5.  2.  for  there  w.  that  said,  we,  our  sons,  3,  4. 
7.61.  nor  their  seed,  whether  they  to.  of  Israel 

./oi  211. 2.  Oh  that  Ito.  as  in  months  pasl,in  the  days 
Psal.  39.  12.  a  sojourner,  as  all  my  fathers  to. 
/sa.l4.2.takelhem  captives  whose  captives  they  w. 

37.  19.  th(^y  w.  no  gods,  but  work  of  men's  hands 

Jer.  31.  15.  Rachel  weeping,  because  they  w.  not 

Eiek.Xi.H.  though  Noiih,  Daniel,  and  Job  to.  in  it 

should  deliver  but  their  own  souls,  16.  18,  20. 

20.  9.  before  the  heathen  anmng  whom  they  jo. 
Hag.  2.  16.  there  w.  but  ten,  there  10.  but  twenty 
J/nt.5.12.  persecuted  prophe's  which  to. before  you 

12.3.  have  ye  not  read  what  Dav.  did  and  theythat 

70.  with'him?  4.  Mark  2.  25,  26.  Luke  6.'3,  4. 

JAike  3.  1,5.  all  men  mused  whether  he  to.  Christ 

7.  ,S9.  this  man  if  he  to.  a  prophet,  would  known 

17.  17.  70.  not  ten  cleansed,  where  are  the  nine? 
.Johnii.  33.  if  this  man  to.  not  of  G.  could  do  nothing 

11.  57.  that  if  any  man  knew  where  lie  to. 
15.  19.  if  ye  u).  ofthe  world,  world  would  love 

17.  0.  thine  they  7C.  thou  gavest  thoni  me 

18.  30.  they  said,  if  he  w.  not  a  malefactor 
Jicts  20.  12.  and  w.  not  a  little  comforted 

24.  9.  Jews  assented,  saying,  these  things  to.  so 
Horn.  A.  17.  ciillcth  things  that  be  not  as  tho'  theyto. 

9.  25.  I  will  call  them  my  people  that  to.  not 

1  C07-.  12.  17.  if  whole  body  w.  an  eye,  where  w. 
hearini.'?  if  whole  w.  hearing,  where  to.  smelling? 

Oal.  2.  6.  what  theyto.it  makelh  no  matter  to  me 
Fph.'i.Z.  w.  by  nature  children  of  wrath  as  others 

2  Thrss.  3.  10.  from  even  when  we  to.  with  you 
2rt>t.  3.4. all  things  Continue  as  they  to.  from  begin. 
Rev.  6.  11.  till  brethren  kdled  as  they  w.  fulfilled 

JJs  it  WERE, 
/.oti.  14.  .35.  it  seemelh,  there  is  as  it  w.  a  pingua 
Canl.  6.  13.  as  it  w.  the  company  of  two  armies 
Isa.  5.  18.  that  draw  sin  us  it  in.  with  a  cart-rops 

10.  1.5.  as  if  ptafTlifl  u|)  itself  as  it  w.  no  wood 
26.  20.  hide  thyself  n«  it  w.  for  a  little  moment 
53.  3.  and  we  hid  as  it  w.  our  face;--  from  him 

I.vke^i  44.hi6sweat«5it  70.  great  dropsof  blood 
.'0A71  7. 10.  went  up  not  openly,  but  n«7t  70.  in  secret 
Unm.  9.  ,')2.  sought  it  as  it  w.  by  works  ofthe  law 
lC«r.4.9.apostles,  as  it  w.  men  appointed  to  death 
Rev.  10.  1.  and  his  face  was  as  it  70.  the  sun 

13.  3.  I  saw  one  of  his  heads  as  it  to.  wounded 

14.  3.  they  sung  ns  it  w.  a  new  song  before  throno 

15.  2.  I  saw  as  it  w.  a  sea  of  class  with  fire 
//it  WERE. 

./oft  21. 4.  if  it  w.  so,  why  not  my  spirit  he  Iroiibledt 
Mat.^i.li.ifit  70.  possible  to  ('nceive  the  very  elect 
Mark  6.  56vihey  might  touch  if  it  ic.  the  border 


WHA 


WHA 


John  14.  2.  if  it  w.  not  so,  I  would  liavo  told  you  \  Kick.  32.  2.  Pharaoh,  thou  art  as  a  ir.  In  the  seas 
Acts  18.  14.  if  it  w.  a  matter  of  wrong,  O  ye  icwa  Mat.  12.  40.  Jonas  was  tliree  days  in  tlie  w.  belly 


VVEUT 

Oont.8. 1. 0  that  thou  w.  as  my  brother  tliat  sucked 
Rev.  3. 15.  nor  cold  nor  hot,  I  would  thou  ic.  cold  or 

WEST. 
Qen.  28.  14.  tliou  shall  si)read  abroad  to  the  w. 
Deut.  33.  23.  possess  lliou  the  w.  ajid  the  south 
1  Kings  7.  35.  three  oxen  looking  toward  the  w. 
ICArun.  9. 24.  in  lour(|uartcrs  vyere  porters  toward 
the  east,  w.  norih  and  south,  2  Chron.  4.  4. 
12. 15.  they  put  to  flight  tlicin  toward  cast  and  w. 
Psal.  75.  C.  promotion  conielh  not  from  the  w. 
103.  12.  as  tar  as  the  east  is  from  the  w.  so  far 
107.  3.  gathered  them  from  the  east  and  w. 
ha.  11. 14.  shall  fly  on  the  Philistines  to  ward  the  w. 
43.  5.  and  gailier  thee  from  the  id. 
45  6.  that  they  may  know  from  the  jc. 
49.  12.  these  sliall  come  from  the  north  and  w. 
59.  If),  they  shall  fear  the  Lord  from  the  id. 
Ezek.  48.  1    for  these  are  his  sides  cast  and  w. 
Dan.  8.  5.  behold,  a  he-goat  came  from  the  ui. 
Hos  11.  10.  the  children  shall  tremble  from  the  w. 
Z.ech.  8.  7.  I  will  save  my  people  from  the  w. 
14.4. the  mountof  Olives  shall  cleave  toward  theic. 
Jtfat.S.ll.many  shall  come  from  east  and  w.  and  sit 
do  wn  with  Abraham, ls;iao,and  Jacob, /^i(Acl3.29. 
24.27. as  lighln.comelh  from  east  and  shineth  to  io 
J^uke  12.  54.  when  ye  see  a  cloud  rise  out  of  the  w. 
i{e».2l.  IS.onsoutli  three  gates,  and  w.  three  gates 

VVEST-150RDER. 
JVum.34.6.grealseaforborder,lhis  shall  hew.-hurd. 
Josh.  15.  12.  the  w. -border  was  to  the  great  sea 
Ezek.  45-  7.  to  the  w.-lwrder  a  portion  for  prince 

WESTERN. 
JV*ttnt.  34.  6.  as  for  the  w.  border,  the  great  sea 

WEST-aUARTER. 
Jo4A.18.14.atKirjath-baal,tbis  wdslhoio.-guarter 

WEST-SIDE. 

Exod.  27.  12.  on  ic.-side  hanging ."iOcubits,  38.  12. 

J^um.^.  18.  on  the  lo.-sidc  the  standard  of  Ephraim 

35.  5.  measure  on  the  (c.-.sf'ticof  the  Levites cities 

Ezek.  48.  3.  from  the  east-side  even  to  the  w.-sidc 

a  portion  for  Naphtali,  4,  5,  G,  7,  8,  23,  24. 

WE.ST-WARD. 

Gen.  13.14.  Abrain  looked  east-ward  and  w.-ward 

JVum.  3.  23.  pit'li  behind  the  tabernacle  w.-ward 

Deut.^.-il.  liftnp  thiiH'  eyes  ic.-ward,ani\  behold  it 

Er.ek.  48.  18.  the  residue  shall  be  10,000  w.-ward 

Van.  8.  4.  I  saw  l\n:  ram  ])nshing  w.-ward 

WEST-WIXU. 
Exod.lQ.lO.-,!  sitongw.-wind  took  away  the  locusts 

WET. 
J<>324.8.  iheyare  izi.vvith  showers  of  the  mountains 
Dan.  4.  15.  let  it  be  w.  with  the  dew  of  heaven, 
and  his  portion  be  with  the  beasts,  23. 
25,  33.  1  5.  21. 

WHALE 
Is  the  greatest  of  fishes  that  we  know  of.  Pro- 
fane authors  hare  irivcn  cxtravatraiit  ar.coitiils 
of  llie  hiirne.is  of  this  creature ;  some  say,  that 
whales  haoc  been  seen  of  six  hundred  feet  long, 
andthree  hu7idred  and  .sixty  feet  thick.  Others 
write,  that  there  haoc  been  seen  some  of  eight 
hundred  feet  long.  Modern  writers  say  that  in 
J} merica  some  wh-i\i:s  measure  ninety  or  a  hun- 
dred feet  from  head  to  tail,  and  it  is  owned,  that 
the  whales  m  the  north  seas  are  yet  larger  than 
those  that  are  found  upon  the  coast  of  Guinea, 
or  in  the  Mediterranean. 
In  scripture  there  is  mrntion  made  o/t/tc  whale, 
but  the  Hebrew  word  Thannim  is  generally 
used  for  all  lartre  fishes,  whether  of  rioers  or 
of  the  sea.  'I'hc  Leviathan  mentioned  in  Job 
41.  1.  i^  thought  by  a  great  many  interpreters 
to  be  the  whale,  though  others  think  it  is  the 
rrocodile. 
The  whale  brings  forth  her  young  ones  alive,  as 
other  perfect  animals  :  Hut  it  brings  but  one, 
or  two  almost,  and  nourishes  it  by  the  breast, 
with  great  care.  Whales  have  generally  no 
teeth, but  only  beards  or  whiskers  on  the  throat, 
of  about  a  span  in  breadth,  and  fifteen  feet  long, 
which  end  in  firing es,  like  hogs'  bristles  at  the 
end,  which  at  top  arc  set  in  the  palate,  and 
ranged  in  order.  These  beards  serve  to  extend 
or  contract  the  cheeks  of  this  creature.  Whales 
are  maintained  by  a  water  or  froth  which  they 
ruck  from  the  sen  ;  and  by  some  little  fishes,  as 
the  sea-flea,  the  sea-spider,  anchovies,  sea-weed, 
&-e.  Vet  some  of  them  have  teeth,  and  in  their 
bellies  hane  been  found  thirty  or  fortv  cod-fish. 
The  Whale  always  keeps  its  young  (>m«  under 
Its  fins,  and  never  leaves  it  lilt  it  is  weaned. 
It  has  nn  udder,  hut  it  has  nipples  and  teats, 
which  contain  milk  in  surh  abundance,  that 
iometimes  there  have  been  drawn  from  it  to  the 
quantity  of  two  hogsheails. 
Job  7.  12.  am  I  a  sen,  or  a  m.  that  t|)nii  wBlchnut 
41.  t  1  canst  thou  draw  out  a  w.  wiUi  a  hook  7 
078 


WHALES. 

Gen.  1.21.  God  created  great  w.  after  their  kind 
Psal.  74.  t  13.  thou  breakest  the  heads  of  the  w. 

WHAT. 
Gen.  27.  37.  w.  shall  I  do  now  (o  thee,  my  son? 
30.  8.  my  master  wotteth  not  w.  is  with  me 
44. IG.M. shall  we  say  tomy  Lord?w. shall  we  speak 
Exod.  10. 26.  know  not  with  w.  we  must  serve  Lord 
13. 14.  when  son  ask.  w.  is  this?  ||  IG.  7.  w.  are  we  7 
16.  15.  it  is  manna,  for  they  wist  not  w.  it  was 
Ae».  25.  20.  if  ye  shall  say,  w.  sliall  we  eat  1 
JVum. 13.18.  and  see  the  land  w.h  is,  and  the  people 
10.  w.  the  land  is,  and  w.  cities  they  be,  20. 

15.  34.  it  was  not  declared  w.  should  be  done 

16.  ll.r^.is  Aaron7||  23.  17.  «).  hath  Lord  spoken? 
24.  13.  but  u>.  the  Lord  saith,  that  will  I  speak, 

1  Kings  22.  14.  2  Chron.  18.  13. 
Deut.  4.  3.  w.  the  Lord  did  because  of  Baal-peor 

7.  18.  w.  Lord  did  to  Pharaoh  ||  11.  G.  to  Dathan 

10.  12.  w.  doth  Lord  require  of  Israel  ?  Mic.  6. 8. 

20.  5.  a),  man  is  there  ?  G,  7,  8. 
Josh.  7.  8.  O  Lord,  w.  shall  I  say,  when  Lsrael 

15. 18.  and  Caleb  said  to  her,  w.  wouldest  thou  ? 
Judg.  1.  14.  1  Kings  1.  10.  Mat.  20.  21. 

22.  24.  w.  have  you  to  do  wiih  the  Lord  of  Israel? 
.Judg.  7.  1 1.  thou  shall  hear  w.  they  say,  and  after 


a  Her 

yhiTiii 


11.12. re. hastlhou  to  do  witlime  to  fightin  niylatid 
IH.  8.  w.  say  ye  ?  ||  18.  the  priest  said,  w.  dn  ye  ? 
24.  w.  have  I  more?  w.  is  this?  w.  aileth  thee? 

Ruth  3.  4.  Ihou  shall  mark  the  place,  and  he  will 
tell  thee  w.  thou  shall  do,  1  Sam.  10.  8. 

1.9am.  3. 17.?p.is  the  thing  Ld.  hath  said  unto  thee? 
4.  16.  and  he  said,  w.  is  there  done,  my  son  ? 

2  Sam.  16.  10.  w.  have  I  to  do  with  you  ?  10.  22 
17.5.  Absalom  said  let  us  hear  likewise  w.  hesailh 
18.  29.  I  saw  a  tumult  but  I  knew  not  jr.  it  was 

1  Kings  13.  12.  Ihtir  father  said,  w.  way  went  he  ? 
14. 14.  who  cutoff  house  of  Jeroboam  M.  even  now 
17.  IS.  w.  have  I  to  do  with  thee,  O  thou  man  of 

God?2  Kin  gsXU.I  Chron. ^^^.^^.  .Tohn'i.i. 

2  Kings  4.2.  Elisha  said  w.  shall  I  do forlhee  ?  2.  9 
0.  I8.jehusaid,  lo.  hast  thou  to  do  with  peace?  10, 
20.14.(c.sai<l  thesemen,and  fron)whence?/sa.39.3 

15.  7C.  have  tbeyseen  in  thine  house?  /sa. 39.  4, 
2CAron.l9.6.  Jehoshaphat  said,  take  heed  w.  ye  do 
20. 12.  nor  kimw  w.to  do,  hut  our  eyes  are  on  thee 
25.9.  w.  shall  we  do  for  the  hundred  talents  given; 
Ezra  9.  10.  w.  shall  we  say  after  this  ?  ./oh  37.  19 
JWA.2.4.  king  said,  for  w.  dost  thou  make  request  ? 

19.  they  said,  w.  thing  is  this  ye  do  ?  13.  17. 
F.slh.  4.  5.  to  know  ic.  it  was,  and  why  it  was 
5.3.  ?c.  wilt  thou,  queen  Esther?  w.  is  thy  request? 
it  shall  be  g  ven  tbeo,  6.  |  7.  2.  |  9.  12. 
.fob  7.  17.  w.  is  man,  that  thou  shouldest  magnify 
him  ?  15.  14.  Psal  8.  4.  |  144.  3.  Heb.  2.  f>. 
20.7o.shall  Mo  unto  tliee,0  thou  preserver  of  men 
9. 12.  who  will  say  unto  him,  w.  doest  thou?  F.crl. 
8.  4.  Ezek.  12.  9.  J)an.  4.  .35. 
1.3.  13.  let  me  speak,  ami  let  come  on  me  w.  will 
31.  14.  w.  then  shall  I   do?  w.  shall   I  answer 
him?  Luke  10.  25.  |  12.  17.  |  16.  3. 
34.  4.  let  us  know  w.  is  good  ?  Mic.  6.  8. 
35.0.  w.  doest  thou  against  him?  ?/j.  doest  to  him? 
7.  if  Ihou  be  righteous,  in.  givest  Ihou  to  him  ? 
Psal.  25. 12.  jc.man  is  he  fears  Ld.  ?  34.  12.  1 89.  48. 
85.  8.  I  will  hear  w.  God  the  I<ord  will  speak 
120.  3.  M.  shall  be  given  unto  thee  ic.  don  J  to  thee 
Prov.  23.  1.  consider  ddigently  ?«.  is  before  thee 
25.  a.  lest  thou  know  not  w.  to  do  in  tho  end 

30.  4.  w.  is  his  name  ?  w.  is  his  son's  name  ? 

31.  2.  w.  my  son?  and  w.  the  son  of  my  womb  ? 
Eccl.  2.  2.  I  said  of  mirth,  ir.  doeth  it  ? 
fsa.ll.  11.  hecalleth  watchman,  jr.  of  the  night? 

20.iri.H!.hastlhou  here?  and  whom  hastthou  here? 
38.  15.  w.  shall  I  say  ?  .Mm  12.  27. 
.52.  5.  therefore  w.  have  I  here,  saith  the  Lord  ? 
.Ar.4.30.)ij.«  ill  thou  ilo?  Il  13.21.  w.  wilt  thou  say  ? 

8.  6.  w.  have  I  done  ?  48.  19.  and  sny,  tr.  is  ilone? 
f/os  6.  4.  O  Ephraim,  w.  shall  I  do  unto  thee? 

9.  H.  give  them,  O  liord,  w.  wilt  thi)U  give  them? 
14.  8.  It.  have  I  to  do  any  more  with  idols? 

Joel  3.  4.  yea,  and  w.  have  ye  to  do  with  me  ? 
./Imos  4.l3.aiid  di'rlaretb  unto  man  ir.ishisthongbt 
Zeeh.  1.  9.  O  niv  Lord,  w.  are  these?  4.  4.  |  G.  4. 
19.  I  mild  IP.  he  these?  4.  .5,  13.  ||  5.  6.  w.  is  it? 
Mat.  5.  47.  7r.  do  you  more  than  others  ? 
0. 25. 1  say  to  you,  take  no  thought  w.  ye  shall  eat, 
>,r  w.  ye  shall  drink,  31.  f.ulc'r  12.  22,  29. 

8.  29.  w.  have  we  to  do  with  thee,  Jesus  thou  Son 
of  God  ?  Mark  1.  24.  I  5.  7.  >.uke  4.  34.  I  8.  28. 

IJ.  3.  have  ye  not  reail  w.  David  did,  when  he 
was  a  hungered  ?  .Mark  2.  25.  J.vke  6.  '.\. 
19.27.bavcfoniaken  allw.shall  we  have  therefore? 
27.  4.  they  Buid,  j/>.  is  that  to  us?  see  thou  to  that 
Jlf.ir/,l>.30.lold(/i.lhey  hnddonc,nnd  jc. they  taught 

9.  G.  for  hn  wist  not  w.  to  say,  they  were  afraid 
14.  3fi.  this  rup,  n  it  w.  T  will,  but  w.  Ihou  wilt 

/,uA:c3.10.pooplo  B«ked,K>.  shall  wo  do  then?  12. 17. 


WHE 

I.uke  7.  31.  the  Lord  said,  upto  w.  are  llicy  Kket 

'12.  49.  w.  will  I,  if  it  be  already  kindled? 

23.  34.  forgive  tiiem,  they  know  not  w.  ihey  do 

John  1.  21.  w.  then?  ||  9.  26.  w.  did  he  to  theo 
12.  49.  ic.  I  should  say,  and  w.  1  should  speak 
16.  18.  w.  is  this  that  he  saith,  a  little  while? 
21.  22.  w.  is  that  to  thee  ?  follow  thou  me,  23. 

.8cts  2.  37.  brethren,  w.  shall  we  do  ?  4.  16. 
9.  6.  Lord,  w.  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do  ?  22.  10. 
10,4.  in.  is  it,  Lord||ll.  17. ic.  wasl,tliat  willislaud 
16.  30.  w.  must  I  do  ?  ||  21.  22.  re.  is  it  therefore  1 
19.3.  he  said  lo  thcm,lo  ir.then  were  ye  baptizedl 

Rom.  3.  5.  w.  sliall  we  say  ?  4.  1.  1  G.  1.  ]  7.  7. 
y.  w.  then  ?  6.  15.  ]  8.  31.  |  9.  14,  30.    |   11.  7. 
1  Cor.  10.  19.  I  14.  15.  I'hil.  1.  18. 

7.  15.  for  that  which  Idol  allow  not,  to.  I  would 

that  do  I  not,  but  w.  I  hate,  that  do  I 
1  Cor.  4.  21.  w.  will  ye?  shall  I  come  with  a  rod? 
2C»r.H.]2.u).l  do,lhat  I  will  do,  IcutoH'occaatoo 
Phil.  1.  22.  yet  w.  I  shall  choose  1  wot  not 

1  Tim.  1.  7.  understanding  neither  w.  they  say 

2  Tim.i.  7.  consider  w.\  say,the  Lord  give  underst. 
Heb.  11.  32.  w.  shall  I  inoie  say  ?  time  vvould  fail 
Jam.  4. 14.  ye  know  not  j/i.  shall  be  on  the  morrow 

for  w.  is  your  life?  it  is  even  a  vapour 
1  Pet.  1.  11.  searching  w.  or  jr.  manner  of  time 
1  John  3.  2.  it  doth  not  appear  w.  we  shall  be 
Sec  Things. 
WHATSOEVER. 
Gen.  31.  16.  now  w.  God  hath  said  unto  thee,  do 
Lev.  27.  32.  even  of  w.  passelh  under  the  rod 
.Vum.  22. 17.  I  will  do  ir.  thou  snycst  unto  me 
Deut.  2.  37.  nor  w.  the  Lord  our  God  forbad  us 
12.  32.  w.  I  command  you,  observe  to  do  it 
■Judg.  10.  15.  do  thou  to  us  w.  1  Sam.  14.  36. 
1  Kings  8.  37.  to.  plague,  w.  sir  kness  there  be 
38.  w.  supplication  bo  made,  'iChron.  6.  28. 
.Tob  41.  11.  70.  is  under  the  whole  heaven  is  mine 
Psal. 1.  3.  leaf  not  wither, »c.  he  <lolh  shall  prosper 

8.  8.  w.  passeth  through  the  paths  of  the  sea 
115. 3.  but  our  God  is  in  the  heavens,  he  hath  done 

w.  be  pleased,  135.  6.  Keel.  8.  3 
Reel.  3.  14.  w.  God  doeth,  it  shall  be  for  ever 
.fer.  I.  7.  w.  1  command  thee,  thou  shall  speak 
15.  t  7.  I  will  bereave  them  ofw.  is  dear 
44.  17.  we  will  do  ip.goeth  out  of  our  own  mouth 
Mat.  5.  37.  w.  is  more  than  these  Cometh  of  evil 

7.  12.  w.  ye  would  that  men  should  do  to  yoo 

14.  7.  whereupon  Herod  promised  with  an  oath 

to  give  her  IP.  she  would  ask,  Mmk  G.  22. 

17.12.have  done  to  him  !c.  they  listed,  Mark  9. 13. 

20.  4.  and  jc.  Is  right  I  will  give  you,  7. 

21.22.  all  thing<jo.ye  shall  ask  in  prayer,believing, 

vo  shall  receive,  Mark  11.  23,  24.  John 

14.  13. 

23.3.  w.  they  bid  you  observe  that  observe  and  do 

28.  20.  observe  all  things  jr.  I  have  commanded 

./»/(;!  2.  5.  his  mother  sailh,  w.  he  saith  to  you,  doit 

15.  14  ye  ari?my  Iriends,  if  do  jc  I  (BOmmand  you 
IG.  jr.  ye  shall  ask  in  my  name,  1ft  23. 

.'}cts3.  22.  him  hear  in  all  things  ir.  s!  all  say  to  you 

Horn.  14.  23.  for  what  is  not  of  faith  is  sin 

1  Cor.  10.  25.  JO.  is  sold  in  the  shambles,  that  cat 

27.  w.  is  set  before  you,  eat,  asking  no  questions 

31.  or  w.  ye  dn,  do  all  to  the  g'ory  of  God 
Gal.  2.  G.  w.  they  were,  it  maketh  no  matter  to  me 
6.  7.  w.  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap 
Phil.  4.  8.  jr.  things  are  true,  w.  things  are  pure 

II.  I  have  learned  in  w.  slate  I  am  to  be  rontent 
Coi.3.17.  jcye  do  in  word, fee. do  all  in  name  of  Jes. 

23.  w.  ye  do,  do  it  heartily  as  to  the  T^ord 
1  .John  3.  22.  w.  we  ask  we  receive  of  him,  5.  15. 

3  .John  5.  thou  doest  faithfully  w.  thou  doest 

WHEAT. 
Gen. 30.14.  Reuben  found  mandrakesin  w.  harvest 
F.Tod.  9.  32.  but  the  w.  and  rye  were  not  smitten 

34.  22.  the  first-fruits  of  w.  hnrvcsl,  J\''um.  18. 12. 
Drut.  32.  14.  goats,  with  tho  fat  of  kidneys  of  ic. 
Judg.  6.  11.  and  Gideon  threshed  w.  to  hide  it 

15.  l.time  of  ic.  harvest  Samson  visited  his  wif« 
Ruth  2.  23.  lo  glean  unto  the  end  of  ic.  harvest 

1  Sam.  6   13.  they  of  Beth-Bhemesh  reaping  ki. 
12. 17.  is  it  not  rr.  harvest  to-day?  I  will  rail  to  L. 

2  Sam.  4.  6.  as  tho'  they  would  have  fetched  tr. 

1  Kings  5.  II.  Solomon  cave  Hiram  w.  for  food 
irAr()n.21.23.  T  give  thee  if.  for  the  ineat-offcring 
/■;:r(7G.9.give  what  they  have  need  of,  w.  salt,  wino 
7.22.  done  speedily,  to  a  hundred  mtwisurusof  «r. 
Job  31.  40.  let  thistles  grow  instead  of  ;r. 
Ps.  81.  lO.he  should  have  fed  them  with  finosl  of  i«. 
147.  14.  he  fiMeth  thee  wiih  the  finest  of  ir. 
Prov.  27.  22.  bray  a  fool  in  a  mortar  among  ir. 
Cant.  7.  2.  thy  bellv  is  like  a  heap  of  w.  sol  about 
Jer.  12.  13.  they  have  sown  w.  but  reap  thorns 
23.  28.  what  is  the  rhnfl'lo  the  rr.  snith  the  Lord 
31.  12.  flow  tosether  for  jr.  for  wine,  and  for  oil 
F.zrk.  27.  17.  Judnli  traded  in  jr.  of  Minnilh 
./<)d2.  24. the  floors shiill  hefullof  ir.  fatsoverflow 
.Imns  5.  11.  vrtlnke  from  him  burdens  of  m 

8.  5.  tho  labbalh  gone,  that  wo  may  set  forth  te 


WHE 

tf«»«*  8.  6.  may  buy  the  poor,  and  sell  rofuaoof  to. 
Mat.  3.  12.  gather  his  w.  into  garner,  I.uke  3.  17. 
13.  25.  tliti  enemy  sowed  tares  among  the  w. 

29.  lest  ye  root  up  also  the  w.  with  them 

30.  to  burn  them,  but  gather  the  w.  into  my  barn 
Lukel^.  7.  ovvest  thou7  he  said  lOU  measures  of  (c. 

S^.  31.  desired  to  have  you,  that  he  niaysitt  as  w. 
John  12.  24.  except  a  corn  ol"  w.  fall  to  the  ground 
Acts  27.  3d.  and  cast  out  the  u>.  into  the  sea 

1  Ccir.15.37.  it  may  chance  oi'w.  or  some  other  grain 
yi<n>.fi.6.I  heard  a  voice,  a  measure  of  jo.for  a  penny 

U.13  the  merchandise  of  ;c.  is  departed  from  thee 

See  Barley. 

WHEATKN. 

£z9d.29.2.  cakes  and  wafers  shall  make  otw.  flour 

WHEEL. 
Psal.  83.  13.  O  my  God,  make  them  like  a  w. 
Prov.  20.  26.  a  wise  king  bringeth  the  to.  over  them 
Eccl.  12.  6.  or  the  w.  broken  at  the  cistern 
/sa.  28.  28.  nor  break  it  with  the  w.  of  his  cart 
Ezek.  1.  15.  behold,  one  v>.  upon  the  earth 

16.  was  as  it  were  a  w.  in  the  midst  of  a  w.  10. 10. 
10. 13.  was  cried  to  the  wheels  in  my  hearing,  O  lo 

WHEELS. 
Exod.  14.  25.  and  took  otl"  their  chariot  w. 
Judg.  5.  28.  why  tarry  the  w.  of  his  chariots 
Prov.  25.  f  11.  a  word  spoken  upon  his  w.  is  like 
Isa.  5.  28.  and  theii  w.  like  a  whirlwmd 
Jer.  18.  3.  he  wrought  a  work  on  the  w. 
47.  3.  and  at  the  rumbling  of  his  w. 
Ezek.  1.  16.  the  appearance  of  the  w.  their  work 
3.  13.  at  the  noise  of  !o.  over-against  them 
10.  19.  the  w.  also  are  beside  them,  11.  22. 
23.24.  the  Babylonians  come  against  thee  with  w 
5J6.  10.  thy  walls  shake  at  the  noise  of  the  w. 
Z>an.7.9.throne  like  flames,and  his  jc.a  burning  fire 
J^ak.  3.  2.  the  noise  of  the  rattling  of  the  w. 

WHELP,  S. 
2Sa9n.l7. 8.  as  a  bear  rohbed  of  her  w.  in  the  field 
Prov.  17.12.  leta  bear  robbed  of  her  to.  meet  a  man 
Ezek.  19.  2.  she  nourished  her  w.  among  lions 
3.  she  brought  up  one  of  her  w.  a  young  lion 
5.  she  look  another  of  her  w.  and  made  him 
//o5. 13.8.  will  meet  them  as  a  bearbereav.ofher  to. 
JVaA.  2.  12.  the  lion  did  tear  enough  for  his  to. 
See  Lions. 
WHEN. 
/,«).  14.57.  to  teach  w.  it  is  unclean  and  w.  clcp.n 
Z)eut.6.7.talkofthem  to.  thou  sittest,  to.  thou  walk- 
est,  to.  thou  liest  down,  and  to. thou  risest  up,11.19. 
\Sam.  3.  12.  to.  I  begin,  I  will  also  make  an  end 
lA'(n^s8..'iO.  hearin  heav.  to.  thou  hearest,  forgive 
JCch.  2.  6.  the  king  said,  w.  wilt  thou  letuin? 
Psal.  94.  8.  and,  ye  fools,  to.  will  ye  be  wisel 
Eccl.  8.  7.  for  who  can  tell  him  w.  it  shall  bel 
Jer.  13.  27.  Jerusalem  made  clean,  to.  shall  it  be 
ZecA.7.5.to.  ye  fasted  ||  G.io.  ye  did  eat, and  to.drink 
Jlfat.24.3.  tell  us  to.  shall  these  things  be,  what  shall 
besignof  thycoming?  Mark  13.  4.  Luke'il.l. 
Jokni.^.  w.  he  is  come,  he  will  lellall  things, 16.8. 
20.  20.  w.  he  had  so  said,  shewed  them  his  hands 
.^cts  2.  37.  w.  they  lieaid  this,  they  said  to  Peter 
27'AfS«.3.  10.  IT.  we  were  with  you,  this  we conim. 
l./oA7t2.28.to.  he  shall  appear,  we  may  haveconfid. 

WHENCE. 
Oen.  16.  8.  the  angel  said,  Hagar  to.  earnest  thou? 
42.7.  Joseph  said  to  them,  to.  come  ye?  ./<?.?A.9.  8. 
/)5Ut.ll.  10.  is  not  like  Egypt,  from  lo.  ye  came  out 
Josh.  2.  4.  men  came,  but  I  wist  not  w.  they  were 
Ji;(/<T.l 3.6. tasked  himnolio.he  was,nor  told  he  me 
17.9. Mica!)  said,  to. comest  thou?  l'J.17.2A^a(«.l.:i. 
2  Kings  5.  25.  .lob  1.  7.  |  2.  2.  .Jonah  I.  8. 

2  fCivfrs  CO.  14.  Isaiah  said,  what  said  these  men? 

from  tc.  came  these  men  unto  thee?  Isa.  39. 3. 

.Tnb  10.21.  beforelgo  to. Isliall  not  return  16.  22. 

Isa.  47.  11.  thou  shall  not  know  from  to.i  t  risetli 

51.  1.  look  to  the  rock  to.  ye  are  hewn,  and  pit 

JlfaM2.44.l  will  tetnrn  tomy  house,  to.  I  came  out, 

he  findcth  empty,  and  garnished,  I.uke  11.24. 

13.  54.  Tc.  h!ith  this  man  this  wisdom  and  works? 

56.  J",  hath  this  man  allthesothings?  Markti.^. 

Mark  12.37.  calletli  him  Lord,  id.  ishethen  his  son 

/-M*el.43.;o.  is  this  to  me  that  the  mother  of  Lord? 

13.  25.  shall  answer,  1  knowyiiu  not  it),  ye  are,  27. 

John  1.  4^.  Nathanael  said,  to.  knowest  thou  mc? 

7.  28.  ye  both  know  me,  and  ye  know  w.  I  am 

8.  14.  ye  cannot  tell  w.  I  come,  and  whither  I  go 

9.  29.  we  know  not  from  w.  he  is,  30. 

PAi7. 3. 20.  from  w.  wc  look  for  the  Saviour,  L.  Jes. 
Heb.  11.  19.  from  w.  he  received  him  in  a  figure 
Jiim.  4.  1.  from  to.  come  wars  ami  fightings? 
Hn^.  2.  5.  remember  from  to.  thou  art  fallen 
7.1,3.  what  ari'tlicsein  white  robes,  to.  came  they 

WHENSOEVER. 
Mark  14.  7.  to.  yo  will  ve  may  do  them  good 

WHERE. 
Gfn.  3.  9.  to.  art  thou?  ||  .hb  38.4.  to.  wast  thou? 
Exod.  2L  20.  to.  is  he?  2  Sam.  9.  4.  .Tob  14.  10. 
20.24.  in  nil  places  to.  I  record  mv  name  will  come 
29  42.  tf .  I  will  meet  vnr.  to  speak,  30.  G,  36. 
679 


WHI 

Dcut.  32.  37.  he  shall  say,  to.  are  heir  godgl 
Job  y.  24.  if  not,  to.  and  who  is  ho? 

35.10.  none  sailh,  10.  itijlod  my  maker  who  gives 
Psal.  42.  3.  while  they  say  to  me,  w.  is  thy  Uod?  10. 

79. 10.  why  say,  w.  is  their  Godl  115.  2.  Jotl  2. 17. 
ha.  49.  21.  wa^  left  alone,  these,  w.  had  they  been  J 
Jer.  2.  6.  neither  said  chey,  to.  is  the  Lord!  8. 

36.  19.  go  hide  thee,  let  no  man  know  w.  ye  bo 
Hos.l.  10.  w.  it  was  said  to  them  ye  are  not  my  peo. 
ZecA.1.5.  fathers,  w.  are  they?  do  they  live  for  ever? 
l^uke  17.37.  w.  Lord?  ||  Joknl.  11.  w.  is  he?  9. 12. 
John  7.  34.  w.  I  am,  12.  26.  |  14.  3.  I  17.  24. 

WHEREABOUT, 
l^atn.  21.  2.  let  no  man  know  w.  I  scud  thco 

WHEREAS. 
ISatti.  24.  17.  to.  1  reward  thee  evil  for  good 
\Kings8.\ii.  w.  it  was  in  thy  heart  to  bund  a  house 
F.iek.  13.  7.  w.  ye  say,  the  Lord  saith  it 

35. 10.  we  will  possess  it,  to.  the  Lord  was  there 
Jam.  4.  14.  to.  ve  know  not  what  will  bi  jn  morrow 

WHEREBY. 
Jer.  33.  S.  iniquity  to.  they  have  sinned  against  me 
Ezek.l^.  31.  transgressions  w.  ye  have  transgressed 

39.26.  trespasses,  to.  they  have  trespassed,  ag.  me 
huke  1.18.(t\shall  I  know  this?  for  1  am  an  old  man 
Acts  4.  12.  no  other  name  w.  we  must  be  saved 
Rom.  8.  15.  the  Spirit  w.  we  cry,  Abba,  Father 
Eph.\.'i^.  10.  ye  are  sealed  to  the  day  of  redemption 

WHEREFORE. 
2S'atn.l2.23.to.  should  Ifast,  can  1  bring  him  again? 

16. 10.  who  shall  then  say,  to.  hast  thou  done  so? 
Mai.  2. 15.  to.  one?  that  he  might  seek  a  godly  seed 
JHaM4.31.0thouoflittlelaith,  to. didst  thou  doubt? 

26.  50.  Jesus  said,  friend,  w.  art  thou  come? 
Acts  10.  21.  what  is  the  cause  to.  ye  are  come? 

WHERETO. 
Isa.  55. 11.  it  shall  prosper  in  things  w.  I  sent  it 
/•'AiY.3.16.  w.  we  have  already  attained,  let  us  walk 

WHEREWITH. 
.Judg.  6.  15.  O  my  Lord,  to.  shall  I  save  Israel? 
1  Kmgs  22. 22.  the  L.  said  to  him,  to.?  2CAf.  18.  20. 
2CAr.  35.  21.  but  against  the  house  w.  1  have  war 
Psal.  119.  42.  so  sliall  1  have  w.  to  answer  him 
Mic.  6.  6.  w.  shall  I  come  before  the  Lord? 
Mat.^.  13.  thesalt  of  earth,  if  salt  lose  its  savour 
to.  shall  it  be  salted?  Mark  9.  5.  lAikc  14.  34. 
.John  17.  26.  the  love  w.  thou  hast  loved  me 
Kph.  2.  4.  for  his  great  love  w.  he  hath  loved  us 

WHEREWITHAL. 
Jl/n(.  6.31.  what  shall  we  eat?  or  to.  we  be  clothed? 

WHET. 
Dciit.G.  t7.  thou  shall  w.  them  unto  thy  children 

32.  41.  if  I  w.  my  glittering  sword  I  will  reward 
Psal.  7. 12.  if  he  turn  not,  he  will  to.  his  sword 

64.3.  who  to.  their  tongue  like  a  sword  and  bend 
Eccl.  10.10.  if  iron  blunt  and  he  to.  not  the  edge 

WHETHER. 
IKings  20.18.  w.  they  be  for  peace,  or  w.  for  war 
Ezra  2.  59.  w.  they  were  of  Israel,  JVeA.  7.  61. 
Ezek.  2.  5.  to.  they  will  hear  or  forbear,  7.  |  3.  11 
Mat.  21.  31.  to.  of'lheni  did  the  will  of  his  father? 

23. 17.  to.  is  greaier,  the  gold  or  the  temjile? 
.John!.  17.  shall  know  of  the  doctrine,  w.  it  be  of  G. 
Rom.  14.  8.  w.  we  live  or  die,  we  are  the  Lord's 
ICor.  15.  11.  to.  it  were  I  or  they,  so  we  preach 
2Cwr.  12. 2.  w.  in  the  body,  or  w.  out  of  the  body,  3. 
iJuhn  4. 1.  but  trv  the  spiiils  w.  they  are  of  God 

WHICH. 
<7e7i.3. 17.  of  the  tree  to.  I  commanded  thee,  saying 

45.6.  in  w.  there  shall  be  neitherearing  nor  harvest 
jV«t«.,19.  2.  a  heifer  upon  w.  never  came  yoke 
LuLe  21.  6.  in  w.  there  shall  not  be  left  one  stone 
■  lohn  8.  46.  w.  of  you  convincclh  me  of  sin? 

10.  32.  for  IB.  of  those  works  do  ye  stone  me? 
■/lets  20.  16.  in  the  xc.  I  will  appear  unto  ihee 
Ciil.  3.  7.  in  the  w.  ye  also  walked  some  lime 
Ileh.  7. 19.  a  better  hope  by  to.  we  draw  nigh  to  God 

9.  5.  of  to.  we  cannot  now  speak  particularly 

12.  14.  follow  peace  with  all  men,  and  holiness 

without  to.  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord 

.Tarn.  2.  7.  that  worthy  name,  by  xo.  ye  are  called 

\Pct.  3.  19.  by  ID.  lie  jireached  lo  spirits  ill  prison 

WHILE. 
Dcut.  31.  27.  to.  I  am  yet  alive  with  you  this  day 
1  '■'am.  20. 14.  not  only  to.  yet  I  live  shew  kindness 
ISam.  12  18.  w.  the  child'was  yet  alive,  21,  22. 
'iChrnn.  15. 2.  Lord  is  with  you  w.  ye  be  with  him 

34.3. to.  Josiah  was  yet  young,  he  began  loseek  G. 
.Job  "0  23.  God  shall  rain  it  on  him  to.  he  is  eating 
Psal.  7. 2.  tear  my  soul,  70.  there  is  none  "o  deliver 

49.  18.  though  to.  he  lived  he  blessed  his  soul 

63.  4.  thus  will  I  birss  thee  to.  I  live,  146.  2. 

101.33.  will  praise  God  w.  1  have  my  being,  140.2. 
Jsa.  55.  6.  geek  ye  the  Lord  to.  he  niay  be  found 
.Jer.  15.  9.  her  sun  is  gone  down  w.  i'  was  yet  day 

40.  5.  now  to.  he  was  not  yet  gone  bark 
M-it.  5.  25.  agree  to.  thou  art  in  the  way  with  him 

27.  63.  that  deceiver  said,  u;.  he  was  yet  alive 
Mark  2. 19.  can  the  children  of  bride  chaniher  fast 

to.  ths  bridegroom  is  with  them?  Luke  5.  34. 


Win 

Luke  24.  44.  I  spake  w.  I  was  yet  with  you 
John  \).  4.  do  work  of  liiiu  thai  sent  me  to.  it  is  da* 
1 7't/w.5. 6.  that  livelli  in  pleas,  is  dead  w.  shelivetli 
>iei.3.15.io.itissaid,  to-day  ifye  will  hear  his  voice 

.d  WHiLK. 
Gen.  46.  29.  Joseph  wept  on  his  neck  a  good  v>. 
1 4'u>tt.9.:i7.tiumuel  said  to  Saul, stand  thou  still  a  v> 
'iSam.  7.  19.  thou  hast  spoken  for  a  great  to. 
Mat.  13.  21.  hath  not  root,  but  durcin  for  a  to. 
Luke  8.13. which  lor  a  w.  believe,  in  time  fall  away 
18. 4.  he  would  not  for  tt  to.  but  aiterward  he  said 
If  ct.o.lO.after  have  surtered  a  w.  make  you  perfecl 

All  the  WHILE. 
ISam.  22.  4.  all  tlie  w.  David  was  in  the  hold 
25.7.nonc  miss,  alltkew.  they  were  in  Carmcl,16. 
27. 11.  so  will  be  his  manner  all  the  w.  he  dwelleth 
Job  27.  3.  all  the  w.  my  breath  is  in  me  and  Spirit 
See  Little.  [of  God 

Long  WHILE. 
^ct6-20.  11.  had  talked  a /o»^  to.  even  till  break  of 
WHIP.  [day 

Proti.26.3.  a  to.  for  the  horse,  a  rod  for  a  fool's  back 
JVuA.  3.  2.  the  noise  of  a  to.  the  noiscof  the  wheeU 

WHIPS. 

l/i7»irsl2.11.my  father  chastised  you  with  w.  I  will 

chastise  you  with  scorpions,  14.  2CAr. 10.11,14. 

WHlRLETll. 

Eccl.  1.  6.  wind  w.  continually  and  rcturneth  again 

WHIRLWIND. 
2R'ings  2. 1.  Lord  would  lake  up  Elijah  by  a  to.  11. 
.fob  37.  9.  out  of  the  soulh  comethlhe  ic.  and  cold 
38. 1.  the  Lord  answered  Job  out  of  the  to.  40. 6. 
I'sal.  58. 9.  he  shall  lake  them  away  as  in  a  to.  both 
living  and  in  wrath,  Prov.  10.25.  //os.13.  3. 
Proi).  1.27.  when  your  destruction  Cometh  as  a  to. 
/«a.5.28.counled  like  flint  and  their  wheels  like  a  v>. 
17.  13.  chased  like  a  rolling  thing  before  the  la. 

40.  24.  the  to.  shall  take  them  away  as  stubble 

41.  16.  shall  fan  them,  the  w.  shall  scatter  them 
66.15. Lord  come  w  ith  chariots  like  a  re'.  J'or .4. 13. 

.Jer.  23.  19.  a  w.  of  the  Lord  is  gone  forth  in  furj 

25.  32.  a  great  w.  shall  be  raised  up  from  earth 
30.  23.  a  continuing  to.  shall  fall  on  the  wicked 

Ezek.  1.  4.  heboid,  a  w.  came  out  of  the  noith 
/Ian.  11.  40.  king  shall  come  against  him  likeaio 
//os.8.7.they  have  sown  wind, they  shall  reap  theio. 
Amos  1.  14.  devour  palaces  in  the  day  of  the  to. 
JVa/i.  1.  3.  the  Lord  hath  his  way  in  the  to. 
Uab.  3.  14.  they  came  out  as  a  w.  to  scatter  me 
Zcch.  7.  14.  but  I  scattered  them  with  a  w. 

WHIRLWINDS 
fsa.  21.  1.  as  to.  in  the  south  pass  through 
Zec/i.  9. 14.  Lord  shall  go  forth  w  ilh  to.  in  the  eoutb 

WHISPER. 
Psal.  41.  7.  all  that  hate  me  jc.  together  against  me 
Isa.  29.  4.  thy  speech  shall  to.  out  of  the  dust 

WHISPERED. 
2  Sattt.  12. 19.  when  David  saw  that  his  servants  w 

WHISPERER. 
Prov.  16.  28.  e  w.  separatelh  chief  friends 

26.  t  20.  where  there  is  no  to.  strife  ceaseth 

WHISPERERS. 
Rom.  1.  29.  fullof  envy, murder,  debate, deceit, to 

WHISPERINGS. 
2  Cor.  12.  20.  lest  their  be  tc.  swellings,  tumults 

WHIT. 

15(itn.3.18.  Samuel  told  Eli  every  to.  hid  nothing 

./(»Ati  7.  23.  I  have  made  a  man  every  to.  whole 

13. 10.  save  to  wash  his  feel,  but  is  clean  every  a 

2Cor.  11.  5.  I  was  not  a  to.  behind  chiefost  apostlei 

WHITE. 
Oen.  ^0.  37.  Jacob  made  the  to.  appear  in  the  rodg 
49.  12.  and  his  teeth  shall  be  w.  with  milk 
Ezod.  16.  31.  manna  was  like  coriander-seed,  tc. 
Lev.  13.  3.  if  the  hair  be  turned  to.  4,  20,  25. 
4.  if  the  bright  spot  be  m.  in  the  skin,  19,  24. 
10.  if  the  rising  be  to.  in  the  skin,  19.  43. 
21.  but  if  there  bo  no  ic.  hairs  therein,  26. 
.Vum.  12. 10.  Miriam  became  leprous,  lo.  as  snow 
■  hidir.  5.  10.  speak,  ye  that  ride  on  to.  as.^es 
2  Kiniys  5.  27.  Gchazi  wentoul  a  lejier  v>.  as  snow 
2  CAr.  5. 12.  the  Lcviles  being  arrayed  in  to.  linen 
Esth.  8. 15.  Mordecai  went  out  in  to.  apparel 
Job  fi.  6.  is  there  any  taste  in  the  to.  of  an  egg? 
Psal.  68.  14.  it  was  to.  as  snow  in  Salmon 
J>.cl.  9.  8.  let  thy  garments  be  always  w. 
Cant.  5.10.  my  beloved  is  to.  and  ruddy,  the  chiefes 
/sa.l.lR.yoiir  sins  as  scarl.  they  shall  be  to.  as  snow 
Ezek.  27.  18.  Damascus  traded  in  to.  wool 
Dan.  7.  9.  whose  garment  was  w.  as  snow 

11.  35.  some  oflhem  shall  fall  to  make  them  \t 

12.  10.  many  shall  be  jiurlfipd  and  made  to. 
.Tori  1.  7.  the  branches  thereof  are  niadi"  to. 
7.erh.  1.8.  there  were  red  horses,  speckled  and  if 
.^f(tf.5.36.  thou  canst  not  make  one  fiair  to.  or  black 

17.  2.  his  raiment  was  w.  ns  the  light,  T.vke  9. 29 
28.  3.  the  angel's  raiment  was  xr.  Acts  1.  10. 
Mark  16.  5.  a  man  clothed  in  a  long  to.  garmeot 
.^oAtt  4.  35.  the  fields  were  to.  already  lo  harvest 
/Jev.l.  11  his  head  and  his  hairs  wore  10.  like  wool 


WHO 

Rev-  2. 17.  win  give  him  aw.  stone  and  a  new  name 
3. 4.  they  shall  walk  with  me  in  w.  they  are  worthy 
5.  he  thaiovercometh»hall-be  clothed  in  to.  rai- 
ment, 4.  4.  I  7.  9,  13.  I  15.  6.  |  I'J.  8,  14 

18.  buy  w.  raiment,  that  thou  mayest  be  clothed 
6.  2.  and  I  saw,  and  behold  a  w.  horse,  19.  11. 
7.14.  have  made  them  w.  in  the  blood  ol'tlie  Lamb 

14.  14.  a  w.  cloud  ||  ^0.  11.  1  saw  a  w.  tlirone 

WHITE. 
Mark  9.  3.  so  as  no  fuller  on  eartli  can  ?o.  thera 

WHITEU. 
Mat.  23.  27.  the  scribes  were  like  to  to.  sepulchres 
Mcts  23.  3.  God  shall  smile  thee,  thou  w.  wall 

WHITER. 

Psal.  51.  7.  wash  me,  and  I  shall  be  w.  than  snow 
JLam.  4.  7.  her  Nazariles  are  w.  than  milk 

WHITHER. 
Oen.  16.  8.  Hagar,  Sarai's  maid,  w.  wilt  thou  go? 
ISam.  10.14.  Suul's  uncle  said,  to.  went  je? 
iKings  5.  -io.  and  he  said,  thy  servant  went  no  ib 
Cant.  6. 1.  w.  is  thy  beloved  gone?  O  thou  fairest 
Zech.  5.  10.  I  said,  w.  do  these  bear  an  ephah? 
.W«A.11.8.Abra.  obeyed  and  went,  not  knowing u>. 
iiee  Go,  GoKST,  Gokth. 
WHITHERSOEVER. 
S5am.  8.  6.  the  Lord  preserved  David  w.  lie  went, 
14.  2h'ings  18.  7.   IC/iron.  18.  6   13. 
Prop.lT.S.tc.  itlurnethitpro8pereth,agif\precioiiH 
21.  1.  he  lurnelh  the  king's  heart  w.  he  will 
JVa«.8.19.I  will  follow  thee  u). thou  gocst,^«Ac9.57. 
Hcv.  14.  4.  these  follow  the  Lamb  w.  he  goeth 

WHO. 
Oen.  27.  18.  to.  art  thou,  my  son?  32.  Ruth  3. 0, 16. 
Jokn  1.  19,  22.  |  8.  25.  |  21.  12. 
33.  5.  Esau  said,  to.  are  those  with  thee?  48.  8. 
Ezod.  3.  11.  to.  am  I?  ISam.  18.  18.  26am.  7.  18. 
5.  2.  to.  is  the  Lord?  Prov:  30.  9.  John  9.  36. 

15.  11.  to.  is  like  thee,  O  Lord,  among  the  gods? 

Deul.  33.  29.  ISam.  26.  15.  I'sal.  35.  10. 

32.  26.  Mo.seB3toodandsaid,to.isonLord'3side? 
ISam.  25. 10.  to.  is  David?  and  lo.  is  son  of  Jesse? 
iKivgs  9.  32.  Jehu  sf>id,  vy.  is  on  my  side,  to.? 

10.9rbut  to. slew  all  these  ||13.Jehu  said,  to.  are  ye? 

A"cA.6. 11.  to.  would  goinio  temple  to  save  his  life? 

Ksth.  7.  5.  to.  is  he?  and  where  is  he?  .hb  9.  24. 

I  17.  3.  I  42.  3.  .hr.  9.  12.  Mat.  26.  C8. 

Psal.  4.  6.  many  say,  lo.  will  shew  us  any  good? 

59.  7.  they  belch  out,  for  w.  say  they,  doth  bear? 
Prop.'23. 29.  to.  hath  woe?  w.  hath  sorrow?  w.  hath 
contPHtions  and  babbling?  to.  hath  rodn.  of  eyes? 
ha.  6.  8.  7D.  will  go  for  us?  ||  29.  15.  to.  seeth  us? 
Jer.  21.  13.  w.  shall  come  down  against  us? 

49.  4.  saying,  to.  shall  come  unto  me? 

19.  to.  is  like  me?  w.  will  appoint  me  time?  50. 44. 
/,am.  2.  13.  Odaughter  of  Zion,  to.canheal  thee? 

3.  37.  to.  i.5  he  that  saith,  and  it  cometh  to  pass? 
JJ/at.  21.  in.  say.  10.  is  this? /,u*c  5.21. 1  7. 49.1  9.  9. 
Z,nkr.  10.3.  Zarrheus  sought  to  see  Jc.sus  w.  he  was 
Jphn  5. 13.  he  that  was  healed,  wist  not  v:.  it  was 

13.  2.1.  Lord,  to.  is  it?  ||  .^Icls  19.  15.  w.  are  yo 
yict8  9.  5.  he  said,  to.  art  thou,  I^rd?  22. 8.  [  26. 1.5. 

2l.3.3.capt.detnande(l  m.  he  wa3,whathe  had  done 

1  Cor.  3.  5.  to.  then  i^i  Paul?  and  w.  is  A|iollos? 

2  Cor.  2.  16.  and  w.  is  suHicient  for  tlie>c  things? 
11.  29.  w.  i.i  weak?  jp.  i.-) offended  and  I  burn  ijol? 

Jam.  4.  12.  to.  art  thou  that  judgesi  aniitlicr? 
l./oAn  2. 22.  to.  is  a  liar,  but  he  that  denicth  Christ? 
Rrv.  6.  17.  and  to.  shall  be  able  to  stand? 
13. 4.  saying,  to.  is  like  unto  the  beast?  to.  is  able  to 
15. 4.  to.  shall  not  fear  thee,  O  L.  glorify  thy  name? 

WHOLE. 
Kzorf.29.  !«.  shall  burn  to.  ram  on  allar,  /,ct».8.21. 
/,«».  4.  12.  even  the  w.  bullock  shall  he  carry  forth 
10.6.  let  the  to.  house  of  Israel  bewail  the  burning 
Josh.  11.23.  so  .loshua  took  the  to.  land  and  gave  it 
2.Snm.  1.  9.  because  my  life  is  yet  to.  in  mo 
S^Ar.  15.  LI.  .ludah  sought  liitn  with  their  w.  desire 
PKal.  51.19.  shalt  he  pleased  with  to.  burnt-offering 
Prov.  1.  12.  let  us  swallow  llietn  up  alive,  and  to. 

16.  33.  the  to.  disposing  thereof  is  of  the  Lord 
F.ccl.  12.  13.  for  this  is  the  w.  duly  of  man 
/«a.54.5.  thy  Redeemer,  the  II. One,  the  God  of  to. 

earth  slmll  he  l)c  railed,  Mic.  4. 13.  Zech.  4.14. 
Jrr.  19.  II.  .T  vfHic\  that  cannot  be  made  to.  again 

45.  4.  I  will  pliirk  up  even  ibis  w.  land 
F.ick.  1.5.  5.  whi'n  lo.  it  was  meet  for  no  work 
Mai.  3.  9.  ve  have  robbed  me,  even  this  to.  nation 
Mat.  5. 2!).  not  that  tiry  w.  body  be  cast  into  hell,  30. 

8.  32.  the  to.  herd  ofswino  ran  violently  down 

13.  33.  till  the  to.  was  leavened,  Luke  1.3.  21. 

16.26.  what  is  a  man  profiled  if  he  gain  to.  world 

and  lose  his  own  soul?  J»/nrA8.  36.  /,t/)lv9.25. 

/.itAf  2t.  I.  to.  multitude  oflhem  arose  and  led  him 

John  4.  .53.  and  himself  believed,  and  his  to.  house 

II.  50.  is  expedient  that  tbe  to.  nation  perish  not 
.Aetii  13.  44.  came  almost  the  to.  cily  to  hear  word 
iCor.  12. 17.  if  to.  body  were  an  eye,  whf  re  hearing 
iTTiesa.  5.23.  I  pray  God  your  to.  spirit  and  soul 
and  body  he  preserved  blameless 
Jam.  2.  ID.  whosoever  shall  keep  the  to.  law 

oeo 


WHO 

l./oA»i  2.  2.  but  also  for  the  sins  of  the  w.  world 

5.  19.  and  the  lo.  world  licth  in  wickedness 

See  CoNOREGATioN,  Hkakt. 

WHOLE  for  sound. 

Joah.  5.  8.  they  abode  in  the  camp  till  they  were  to. 

Job  5.  18.  he  woundeth,  and  his  hands  make  to. 

Mat.  9.  12.  they  that  he  to.  need  not  a  physician, 

but  they  that  are  sick,  Mark  2. 17.  J,uke  5.  31. 

21.  touch  his  garment,  1  shall  be  to.  Mark  5. 28. 

22.  the  woman  was  made  to.  from  that  hour 
]2.13.hi8hand  was  made  to.  Mark'i.b.  I^uked.lO. 
15.  2rf.  her  daughter  was  made  lo.  from  that  hour 

31. wondered  when  they  saw  the  maimed  lobe  w. 

Mark  5.34.  thy  faith  hath  made  thee  to.  go  in  peace 

and  be  to.  of  thy  plague,  /.ttie  8.  48.  |  17.  19. 

I^ukel.  10.  found  theservant  to.  that  had  been  sick 

.John  5.  6.  Jesus  saith,  wilt  thou  be  made  w.7 

14.  behold,  thou  art  made  to.  sin  no  more 
7.23.  because  I  have  made  a  man  every  whit  w. 
7?c£s4.9.  if  examined  by  what  means  he  is  made  to. 
9.  34.  Eneas,  Jesus  Christ  makcth  thee  lo. 

WHOLLY. 
Lev.  6.  22.  it  is  a  statute,  it  shall  be  w.  burnt,  2;). 
19.  9.  thou  shall  not  w.  reap  cornersof  thy  field 
JVutn.  3. 9.  for  they  are  to.  given  to  him  out  oi*  Israel 
4.  6.  a  cloth  w.  of  blue  ||  8.  16.  are  w.  given  mo 
32.  11.  because  they  have  not  to.  followed  me 
Deut.\.2&.lo  Caleb's  childr.  give  the  land,  because 
he  hath  w.  followed  the  Lord,  .Josh.  14. 8, 9, 14. 
.Judg.  17.  3.  I  had  to.  dedicated  the  silver  to  Lord 
l!^atn.  7.  9.  Samuel  otlcred  a  sucking  lamb  w. 
IChr.  23.  21.  all  the  people  w.  at  thy  commandm. 
Job  21.  23.  one  dieth,  being  w.  at  eaie  and  quiet 
Jsa.  22.  1.  thou  art  to.  gone  up  to  the  house-tops 
.Jer.  2.  21.  yet  I  had  planted  thee  w.  a  right  seed 
6.  6.  she  is  w.  oppression  in  the  midst  of  her 
13.  19.  Judah  shall  he  w.  carried  away  captive 
42  15.  if  ye  to.  set  your  faces  to  enter  Egypt 
4d.  28.  yet  will  I  not  leave  thee  w.  unpunished 
50.  13.  Babylon  not  be  inhabited,  but  tc.  desolate 
Eiek.  11.  15.  all  the  house  of  Israel  w.  are  they 
Jimos  8.  8.  and  it  shall  rise  up  w.  as  a  flood,  9.5. 
Jicts  17.  16.  he  saw  the  city  to.  given  to  idolatry 
1  Thess.  5.  23.  the  God  of  peace  sanctify  you  tc. 
17'im.  4.  15.  meditate,  give  thyself  to.  to  them 

WHOLESOME. 
Prov.  15.  4.  a  to.  tongue  is  a  tree  of  life 
I'J'im.  6.  3.  if  any  man  consent  not  to  to.  words 

WHOM. 

Oen.  22. 2.  take  thy  only  son  Isaac  to.  thou  lovest 
30.  26.  give  me  my  wives,  for  to.  I  served  thee 
43.  27.  the  old  man  of  to.  ye  spake,  is  he  alive?  29. 
Eiorf.33.19.  will  begracious  to  to.  I  will  be  gracious 
Ae».  17.  7.  after  w.  they  have  gone  a  whoring 
JVtttti.  11.  21.  people,  amongst  to.  I  am,  are  600,000 
Deut.  32.  20.  they  are  children  in  w.  is  no  faith 

37. where  their  gods?  their  rock  in  to.  they  trusted 
Jo.ih.  24. 15.  choose  you  this  day  to.  ye  will  serve 
Judg.  7.  4.  that  of  to.  I  say,  this  shall  go  with  thee 
ISatn.  6.  20.  and  to  to.  shall  he  go  up  from  us? 
9.  20.  and  on  to.  is  all  the  desire  of  Israel? 

29.  5.  David,  of  to.  they  sang  one  to  another 
30. 13.  David  said  unto  him,  to  w.  belongest  thou? 

2.S"a7ii.  16.  19.  and  again,  to.  should  I  serve? 

IKings'M.  14.  Ahab  said,  by  to.?  22.  8.  Eira  10. 
44.  Horn.  1.5.  I  5.  2,  11.  Oal.Q.  14. 

•2k'ingK  19.10.  thy  (;.  in  to.  thou  truslest,  Jsa.  37.10. 

P.-ial.  16.  3.  but  to  the  saints,  in  w.  is  all  my  delight 
18.  2.  my  God,  my  strength,  in  in.  I  will  trust 
73.25.10.  have  I  in  heaven  but  thee?  none  on  earth 
146.3.not  trust  in  son  of  man,  in  to.  there  is  ijo  help 

Proo.  3. 12.  asafalher  the-son,  in  to.  ho  delighteth 
27.  withhold  not  good  from  them  to  to.  it  is  due 

30.  31.  a  king  against  to.  there  is  no  rising  up 
F.rcl.  4.  8.  neither  saith  he,  for  to.  do  I  labour? 
Cant.  3.  1.  I  sought  him  to.  my  soul  loveth,  2,  3. 
f.<ia.  6.  8.  I  heard  o  voice  saying,  to.  shall  1  send? 

10. 3. what  in  visitation?  to  ir.  will  ve  flee  for  help? 
22.  16.  what  hast  thou  here?  w.  liast  thou  here? 

31.  6.  lurn  to  him  from  to.  Israel  hath  revolted 
40.  l.S.  lo  w.  then  will  ye  liken  God?  25.  |  46.  5. 
42.  1.  behold  mine  elirct,  in  to.  my  soul  delighteth 
49.  3.  art  my  siTvanI,  O  Isr.inio.I  will  be  glorified 
51.l9.famineandBWord,  by  to.  shall  I  comfort  thee 
57.  4.  against  to.  do  ye  sport  yourselves? 

II.  and  of  to.  hast  thou  bi-en  afraid,  or  feared? 
Jer.  8.  2.  to.  they  have  loved,  to.  they  have  served, 
afler  to.  they  have  walked,  and  to.  they  sought 
Aatn.  I.  14.  from  to.  I  am  not  able  to  rise  up 
4.  20.  of  10.  we  said,  under  his  shadow  wo  live 
F.zek.  31.  2.  Son  of  man  speak  unto  Pharaoh,  Slc. 
to.  art  thou  like  in  thy  grealiinss? 
18.  to  to.  art  thou  like  in  elory  and  greatnn..i8? 
/>an. 5.19.10. ho  would  he  slew,  to.  he  would  he  kept 
alive,  set  up,  and  to.  he  would  ho  pulled  down 
JImns  7.  2.  O  Lord,  by  to.  shall  Jacob  arise?  5. 
J^tih.  3. 19.  on  to.hnth  not  thy  wickedness  passed? 
Mat.  3.  17.  this  is  mv  beloved  Son,  in  to.  I  am  well 
pleased,  17.  .5.  Mark  1.11.  2Pft.  2.  17. 
11.  10.  this  it  he  of  to.  it  is  written,  7oAti  1. 15,30. 


WHO 

Mat.  18.  15.  JcBug  saith  to  them,  but  w.  say  to 
that  1  am?  Mark  10.  29.  Luke  9.  20 
John  5.  21.  to.  he  will  ||  45.  Moses  in  to.  ye  trust 

6.  68.  Lord,  to  to.  shall  we  go?  ||  17. 3.  to.  thou  sout 
.Ids  8.  34.  of  w.  speaketh  the  prophet  this? 

27.  23.  angel  of  God,  whose  I  am,  and  w.  I  serve 
horn.  15.21.  lo  to.  he  was  not  spoken  of,  shallsee 
\Cor.  1.  9.  God  is  faithful,  by  w.  ye  are  called 

3.5.  who  is  Paul  andApollos,bul  ministers  by  to.  ye 

7.  39.  she  is  at  liberty  to  be  married  to  to.  she  will 

8.  6.  one  God,  of  to.  are  all  things,  IJeb.  2.  10 

2  Cor.  1.  10.  in  to.  we  trust  lliat  he  will  deliver  u« 

Eph.  1.  7.  in  to.  we  have  redemption  through  hi« 

blood,  the  forgiveness  of  sins.  Col.  1.  14. 

11.  in  to.  also  we  have  obtained  an  inheritance 

13.  in  to.  ye  also  trusted,  in  to.  ye  were  sealed 

2.  3.  among  to.  also  we  all  had  our  conversatioo 

21.  in  to.  the  building  groweth  to  a  temple 

22.  in  to.  you  also  are  builded  together  for  habit 
3.12.in  to.  ye  have  boldness  and  access  with  cunfid 

Phil.  2. 15.  among  to.  ye  shine  as  lights  in  the  world 

3.  8.  for  w.  I  have  suffered  the  loss  of  all  things 
C«M.28.to.we  preachl|2.11.in  to.ye  arecircumeiscd 

2.  3.  in  to.  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom 
2  Thess.'i.  8.  that  wicked,  w.  the  Ld.  shall  consunae 

1  Tim.  1.  15.  to  save  sinners,  of  to.  I  am  chief 
20.  of  to.  is  Hymeneus  and  Alex.  H'J'im.  2.  17. 

2  7'i7n.  1. 15.  of  to.  are  Phygellus  and  Ilcrmogenea 

4.  15.  the  copper-smith,  of  to.  be  thou  ware  also 
18.  and  will  preserve  ine  unto  his  heavenly  king- 
dom, to  w.  be  glory  for  ever  and  ever,  ameni 
Gal.  1.  5.  IJeb.  13.  21.  IPet.  4.  II. 

ITeb.  3.  17.  with  to.  was  he  grieved  forty  years'? 

18.  to  w.  swarehc  they  should  not  en'.er  interest 
4.  13.  to  the  eyes  of  him  with  w.  we  have  to  do 
7.  2.  to  to.  Abraham  gave  the  tenth-part  of  all 

11.  38.  of  10.  the  world  was  not  worthy 
./atn.l.l7.fatherof  lights,  with  w.  isnovariablenesi 
I  Pe£.1.12.unlo  to.  it  was  revealed,  that  did  minister 

2.  4.  to  10.  coming,  as  unto  a  living  stone 
iPet.  2.  17.  to  w.  darkness  is  reserved,  .Jude  13. 

19.  for  of  10.  a  man  is  overcome,  of  him  brought 
J<ev.  7.  2.  to  to.  it  was  given  to  hurt  the  earth 

17.2.with  IB.  kings  of  earth  committed  fornication 
Sfc  Before. 
WHOMSOEVER. 
<rf7i.  31.  32.  with  10.  thou  findest  thy  gods,  not  live 
.Judg.  11.  24.  ic.  the  Lord  our  God  shall  drive  out 
J)an.  4.  17.  he  givcth  it  to  lo.  he  will,  25, 32. 1 5. 21. 
Mat.  11.  27.  he  to  to.  the  Son  will  reveal  him 
21.  44.  but  on  to.  it  shall  fall,  Luke  20.  18. 
Luke  4.  6.  the  devil  said,  to  to.  I  will  I  give  it 

12.  48.  to  to.  much  is  given,  much  shall  be  required 
.^cts  8.  19.  on  w.  I  lay  hands,  may  receive  H.  Ghost 
ICor.  16.  3.  to.  ye  shall  approve  by  your  lettert 

WHORE. 
J^ev.  19.  29.  do  not  cause  her  to  he  a  to.  lest  the  land 
21.  7.  they  shall  not  take  a  wife  that  is  a  ic. 
9.  if  she  iirofane  herself  by  playing  the  w. 
Deut.  22.  21.  to  play  the  to.  in  her  father's  house 
23. 17.  there  shall  be  no  to.  of  the  daughters  of  Isr. 
18.  thou  shall  not  bring  the  hire  of  a  to.  or  price 
./urf^.l9.2.his  concubine  played  the  w.  againsthim 
Prov.  23.  27.  a  to.  is  a  deep  ditch  and  a  narrowfiit 
Jsa.  57.  3.  the  seed  of  the  adulterer  and  the  to. 
.Jer.  3.  3.  and  thou  hast  a  w.  forehead,  not  a.«hamed 
ioieA.16.28.thou  hast  played  the  w.  also  with  Assy. 
Hev.  17. 1.  will  shew  judgment  of  the  great  to.  19.2. 

15.  the  waters  where  the  to.  sitteth,  are  people* 

16.  tliese  shall  hate  the  to.  and  make  her  desolate 

WHORES. 
KjeA. 16.33. they  give  gifts  to  all  to.  thou  hirest  them 
Hos.  4.  14.  for  themselves  are  separated  with  a. 

WHORF.DOM. 
Oen.  38.  24.  Tamar,  behold,  she  is  with  child  by  to. 
J.ev.  19.  29.  lest  the  land  fall  to  to.  and  be  wicked 
.Jer.  3.  9.  through  the  lightness  of  her  to  she  defiled 

13.  27.  I  have  seen  the  lewdness  of  thy  ib. 
Fzek.  16.  ,33.  they  that  may  come  to  theuforthy  le. 

23.  8.  thev  poured  their  to.  upon  her 

17.  the  Bahyhmians  defiled  her  witfi  their  w 
43.7.  Isr.  shall  not  defile  my  holy  name  by  thoirjo. 

9.  let  them  put  away  their  to.  far  from  me 
JJos.  4.  11.  to.  and  wine  take  away  Ihn  heart 

5.  3.  O  Ephraim,  thou  commillest  to.  Isr.  is  defiled 

6.  10.  there  is  the  to.  of  Kphraim,  Israel  is  defiled 

WHOREDOMS. 
JV*tim.l4.33.your  children  shall  wander  and  boar  to 
2/rino'»9.22.sol(mgaslheio.  oflhyniolhir  Je7ebel 
2f:Arott.  21.  13.  like  to  the  to.  of  the  bouse  of  Ahab 
.Irr.  3.  2.  thou  hast  polluted  the  land  with  thy  w. 
Fzek.  16.  20.  is  this  of  thy  to.  a  small  ninlter? 
2J.in  all  tliv  to.  hast  not  remember,  daysofvoutb 
25.hasl  multiplied  thy  to. II  26.hasl  inrrea<.  thy  » 
.34.  ihe  contrary  from  other  women  in  thy  te. 
23.  .35.  bear  thou  also  thy  lewdness  and  Ihy  to. 
JJos.  I.  2.  go  take  thee  a  wife  and  rhi'dr«»n  of  ML 
2.  2.  let  her  put  awav  her  to.  out  of  her  sieht 

4.  not  have  merry,  for  they  be  Ihe  children  of  i» 
4. 12.  the  spirit  of  lo.  hath  caused  them  to  err,  5. 4 


WIC 

A'cuA  3.4.becaii8e  oftbc  multitude  of...  that  sellctli 

nations  thro'  her  w.  and  ruinilies  thro'  witchcraA 

Sec  Commit. 

WHORKMONGEP,. 

Eph.i.S.aow.  hath  any  inheritance  in  kingd.of  Chr. 

WHOREMONGERS. 
1  Tivi.  1.  10.  tlie  law  made  for  tc.  for  liars 
Heb.  13.  4.  but  w.  and  adulterers  tJod  will  judge 
Rev.  21.  8.  JO.  shall  have  their  part  in  the  lake 
22. 15.  for  witliout  are  w.  and  murderers 
WHORING,  See  Go,  Go.nb,  Went. 
WHORISH. 
Prov.  6.  26.  for  by  means  of  a  w.  woman  a  man  is 
F-iek.  6. 9.  because  I  am  broken  with  their  w.  heart 
16.  30.  the  work  of  an  imperious  w.  woman 

WHOSE. 
Geru  32.  17.  ic.  art  thou  ^  w.  are  these  before  thee? 

1  .Sam.  12.  3.  id.  o.x,  or  w.  ass  have  I  taken  1 

2  Sam.  3.  12.  ic.  is  the  land,  mak^  thy  league 
■/er.44.28.a  remnantshall  know  to. word  shall  stand 

48.  15.  20.  name  is  the  Lord  of  hosts,  51.  57. 
Dan.  5.  23.  the  God  in  w.  hands  are  all  thy  ways 
^mos  5.27.  saith  Lord,?o.  name  is  the  God  of  hosts 
Mit.  22.  20.  he  saith  to  them,  lo.  is  this  image  and 
superscription?  jMark  12.  lb.  Luke  20.  24. 
42.  v>.  son  ia  he  ?  ||  John  19.  24.  w.  it  shall  be 
I^uke  12.  20.  then  w.  shall  those  things  be? 
.'Jc2s27.23.angel  of  God,  'o.  I  am, and  whom  I  serve 
Heb.  3.  6.  Christ  over  his  house,  w.  house  are  we 
See  Heart. 
WHO  ,  WHOSESOEVER. 
1  Kings  13.  ."IS. !o.  would  he  consecrated  him  a  priest 
Mat.  11.  0.  blessed  u>.  shall  not  be  offended  in  me 

13. 12. 10.  hath,  to  him  shall  be  given,  w.  hath  not 
from  him  shall  be  taken  he  hath,  Ltike  8.  18. 
jDkn  20.  23.  20.  sins  ye  remit,  lo.  sins  ye  retain 
Rom.  2  1.  O  man,  w.  thou  art  that  judgest 
1  Cor.  11.  27.  JO.  shall  eat  this  bread  unworthily 
Gal.  5.  10.  shall  bear  his  judgment,  w.  he  be 
Rev.  22.  17.  w.  will,  let  him  take  of  water  of  life 

WHY. 
Oen.  25.22.  Rebekah  said,  if  it  be  so,  jo.  am  I  thus 
Judg.  11. 7.  JO.  are  ye  come  to  me  now  in  distres.s? 

15. 10.  Judah  said,  jc.  are  ye  come  up  against  us  ? 
Rulh  1.  11.  turn  again,  jo.  will  ye  go  with  me  ? 
1  Sim.  2.  23.  Eli  said,  w.  do  ye  such  things? 

21.  1.  JO.  art  thou  alone,  and  no  man  with  thee  ? 
2Sam. 13.26.  kingsaid,io.  should  he  go  with  thee? 
1  Kings  1.  6.  in  saying,  w.  hast  thou  done  so? 
2C/iro«.25.16.forbcar,jo.shoulde3ttliou  be  smitten? 
Estk.  4.  5.  to  know  what  it  was  and  w.  it  was 
/*«.  40. 27.  jo.sayestthou,  OJacob,my  way  is  hid? 
Jer.  8.  14.  jo.  do  ye  sit  still  ?  assemble  yourselves 

27.  13.  w.  will  ye  die?  F.iek.  18.  31.  |  33.  11. 
Mat-  21.  25.  he  will  say  to  us,  jo.  did  ye  not  then 
believe  him?  Mark  11.  31.  J.uke  20.  5. 
^fariS.SO.he  saith,  w.  make  ye  this  ado,and  weep? 
J^uke  2.  48.  jo.  hast  thou  thus  dealt  with  us  ? 
John".  45.  they  said,  lo.  have  ye  not  brought  him  ? 

10.  20.  many  said,  he  is  mad,  jo.  hear  ye  him  ? 
w4c*s9.4.he  fell  to  the  earth  and  heard  a  voice, Saul, 
Saul,  10.  persecutes!  thou  me  ?  22.  7.  [  26.  14. 

14.  15.  sirs,  JO.  do  ye  these  things?  we  are  men 
fiojn.  9.  19.  thou  wilt  say,  JO.  doth  ho  yet  find  fault? 
20.thing  formed  say,jo.  hast  thou  made  me  thus? 
I  Cor,  10.  30  JO.  am  I  evil  spoken  of  for  that  ? 

WICKED. 
0«J1.18.23.  wilt  thou  destroy  righteous  with  jo.?  25. 

38. 7.  Er  was  jo.  |{  Exnd.  9.27.  I  and  my  people  jo. 
Exod.  23.  7.  for  I  will  not  justify  the  lo. 
Lev.  20.  17.  it  is  a  jo.  thing,  they  shall  be  cut  off 
Deut.  15.  9.  there  be  not  a  thought  in  thy  jo.  heart 

17.  5.  who  have  committed  that  io.  thing 

23.  9.  then  keep  thee  from  every  jo.  thing 
25.  1.  and  condemn  the  jo.  1  Kings  8.  32. 

1  Sam.  2.  9.  the  lo.  shall  be  silent  in  darkness 

24.  13.  wickedness  proceedeth  from  the  w. 
iKings  17. 11.  Israel  wrought  lo.  things  to  provoke 
2CAron.6. 23.  judge  thy  servant  by  rc(|uitingthe  Jo. 

7.  14.  if  my  people  humble  themselves  and  turn 
from  their  lo.  ways,  Ezek.  18.  21.  ]  33.  11,  19. 
24.  7.  the  sons  of  Athaliah  that  jo.- woman 
A"eA.9.35.our  kingshave  notserved  thee, nor  turned 
they  from  their  lo.  ways,  Eick.  3.  19.  |  13.  22. 
Esth.  7.  G.  the  adversary  is  this  jo.  Haman 
9.25.  Haman's  jo.  device  shall  return  on  his  head 
Job  3.  17.  there  the  jo.  cease  from  troubling 

9.  22.  he  destroyeth  the  perfect  and  the  lO. 

29.  if  I  be  jo.  why  then  labour  I  in  vain  ?  10.  15. 

10.  7.  thou  knowest  that  I  am  not  lo. 
21.  7.  wherefore  do  the  jo.  live,  become  old  ? 

30.  the  10.  is  reserved  to  the  day  of  destruction 
27. 7.  let  mme  enemy  be  as  the  jo.  and  unrighteous 
34.  18.  is  it  fit  to  say  to  a  king  thou  art  jo.? 
38.  13.  that  the  lo.  might  be  shaken  out  of  it 

15.  from  the  lo.  their  light  is  withholden 
40.  12.  and  tread  down  the  jo.  in  their  place 

Psal.  7.  11.  God  is  angry  with  the  lo.  every  day 
9.  5.  thou  hast  destroyed  the  lo.  for  ever 

16.  tlve  to.  is  inared  in  the  work  of  his  hands 

631 


WIC  » 

P«.9.17.w.  shall  bo  turned  into  hell  and  the  nations 

10.  2.  the  JO.  in  pride  doth  persecute  the  poor 
3.  the  JO.  boasleth  |{  4.  the  lo.  will  not  seek  God 
13.  wherefore  doth  the  lo.  contemn  God  ? 

11.  2.  10.  bend  their  bow,  make  ready  their  arrow 

5.  hut  the  10.  and  violence  his  soul  hateth 

6.  upon  the  lo.  he  shall  rain  snares,  brimstone,  fire 

12.  8.  the  JO.  walk  on  every  side  when  vilest  men 

17.  9.  keep  me  from  the  lo.  that  oppress  me 

13.  O  Lord,  deliver  my  soul  from  the  jo. 

26.  5.  and  I  will  not  sit  with  the  jo. 

27.  2.  when  the  jo.  came  upon  me  to  eat  my  flesh 

28.  3.  draw  me  not  away  with  the  JO. 
3J.17.  let  the  JO.  be  ashamed  and  silent  in  the  grave 
M.  21.  evil  shall  slay  jo.  they  that  hate  righteous 
)7.  7.  the  man  wlio  bringeth  jr.  devices  to  pass 

10.  yet  a  little,  the  jc.  shall  not  be,  Pruv.  10.  25. 

12.  the  JO.  plottuth  ||  20.  the  jo.  shall  perish 

14.  the  JO.  have  drawn  out  the  sword,  they  bent 
16.  is  better  than  the  riches  of  many  lo. 
21.  the  JO.  borrtoweth,  and  payeth  not  again 
32.  the  w.  watcheth  the  righteous  to  slay  him 

34.  when  the  jo.  are  cut  off,  thou  shalt  see  it 

35.  I  have  seen  the  jc.in  great  power,  spreading 
40.  he  shall  deliv.  them  from  the  jo. and  save  them 

39.  1.  keep  my  mouth,  while  the  jo.  is  before  me 

58.  3.  the  w.  are  estranged  from  the  womb 

59.  5.  be  not  merciful  to  any  jo.  tran.<igres3ors 
68.  2.  so  let  the  jo.  perish  at  the  presence  of  God 
75.  8.  the  JO.  of  the  earth  shall  wring  Ihom  out 
92.  7.  when  the  jo.  spring  as  thegras.'^,  and  flourish 
94.  3.  Lord,  how  long  shall  the  jo.  triumph? 

13.  until  the  pit  be  digged  for  the  jo. 
101.  3.  I  will  sot  no  JO.  thing  before  mine  eyes 

4.  I  will  not  know  a  tc.  person 

8.  I  will  early  destroy  all  the  io.  of  the  land 

104.35.sinners  consumed  and  let  the  jo.  be  no  more 

106.  18.  the  flame  burnt  up  the  jc. 

112.  10.  the  JO.  shall  see  it  and  be  grieved 

119.  95.  the  JO.  have  waited  for  me  to  destroy  mc 
110.  the  JO.  laid  a  snare  for  me,  yet  I  erred  not 
119.  thou  puttest  away  all  the  jo.  like  dross 
155.  salvation  is  far  from  the  jo.  they  seek  not  thy 

139.  19.  surely  thou  wilt  slay  the  Jo.  O  God 
24.  and  see  if  there  be  any  jo.  way  in  me 

140.  8.  further  not  his  lo.  device  lest  they  exalt 

141.  4.  to  practise  jo.  works  with  men  that  work 
10.  let  the  JO.  fall  into  their  own  nets 

145.  20.  but  all  the  lo.  will  he  destroy 
147.  6.  ho  casteth  the  jo.  down  to  the  ground 
Prov.  2.  22.  the  jo.  shall  be  cut  off  from  the  earth 
5. 22.  his  own  ini(iuities  shall  take  the  jo.  himself 

6.  18.  a  heart  that  deviseth  jo.  imaginations 

10.  30.  but  the  jo.  shall  not  inhabit  the  earth 

11.  5.  the  JO.  shall  fall  by  his  own  wickedness 
7. when  a  jo.man  dietb,  his  expectation  perisheth 
8.  righteous  delivered,  the  jo.  cometh  in  his  stead 
10.  and  when  the  jo.  perish  there  is  shouting 

18.  the  JO.  worketh  a  deceitful  work 
21.  the  JO.  shall  not  be  unpunished,  31. 

12.  2.  but  a  man  of  jo.  devices  will  he  condemn 
7.  the  JO.  are  overthrown,  and  are  not,  21.  12. 
)2.  the  JO.  desireth  the  net  of  evil  men 
13.  the  JO.  is  snared  by  the  transgression  of  his  lips 
21.  but  the  JO.  shall  be  filled  with  mischief 

13.  17.  a  JO.  messenger  falleth  into  mischief 

14.  17.  and  a  man  of  lo.  devices  is  hated 

19.  the  JO   bow  at  the  gates  of  the  righteous 
32.  the  JO.  is  driven  away  in  his  wickedness 

15.  29.  the  Lord  is  far  from  the  jo. 

16.  4.  yea,  even  the  lo.  for  the  day  of  evil 

17.  4.  a  JO.  doer  giveth  heed  to  false  lips 
IS.helhatjustifieth  lo.  is  an  abomination  to  Lord 

18. 3.  when  the  jo.  cometh,  then  cometh  contempt 

20.  26.  a  wise  king  scattereth  the  jo.  brings  wheel 

21.  18.  the  JO.  shall  be  ransom  for  the  righteous 
27.  when  he  bringeth  it  with  a  jo.  mind 

24.  16.  but  the  jo.  shall  fall  into  mischief 
19.  neither  be  thou  envious  at  the  lo. 

25.  5.  take  away  the  jo.  from  before  the  king 
26.  a  righteous  man  falling  down  before  the  w. 

26.  23.  a  10.  heart  is  like  a  potsherd  covered 
28.  1.  the  (0.  flee  when  no  man  piirsueth 

4.  they  that  forsake  the  law  praise  the  jo. 
12.  when  the  le.  rise,  28.  |;  15.  so  is  a  ic.  ruler 
29. 2.  when  the  to.  beareth  rule,  the  people  mourn 
7.  but  the  10.  regardeth  not  to  know  it 

12.  his  servants  are  w.  \\  16.  theio.  are  multiplied 
Kec'.3.17.  God  shall  judge  the  righteous  and  theio. 

7.  17.  be  not  overmuch  lo.  neither  be  foolish 

8.  10.  I  saw  the  ic.  buried,  they  were  forgotten 

13.  but  it  shall  not  he  well  with  the  lo. 
fsa.  5.  23.  which  justify  the  jo.  for  reward 

11.4. with  the  breath  of  his  lips  shall  he  slay  the  lo. 
13.  11.  I  will  punish  the  jo.  for  their  iniquity 
32.  7.  he  deviseth  jo.  devices  to  destroy  the  poor 
53. 9.  he  made  his  grave  with  the  ic.  and  with  rich 
55.  7.  let  the  lo.  forsake  his  way,  let  him  return 
57. 20.  the  lo.  arc  like  troub.  sea  which  cannot  rest 
Jtr.  2.  33.  thou  hast  taueht  the  tc.  ones  thy  waysl 
4T 


WfC 

.Tcr.  6.  29.  for  the  lo.  aro  not  plucked  away 

17.  9.  the  heart  is  deceitful  and  desperately  w. 
25.  31.  he  will  give  the  jo.  to  the  sword 

Eick.  3.  18.  to  warn  the  lo.  19.  |  33.  8,  9. 
8.  9.  behold  the  w.  abominations  they  do  here 
11.  2.  these  men  give  jo.  counsel  in  this  city 
18.23.  have  I  any  pleasure  that  the  jo.  should  die  1 

20.  44.  not  according  to  your  lo.  ways  nordoingg 

21.  3.  cut  ofl"  from  thee  the  righteous  and  tlie  jo.  4. 
25.j)tofane  jo.prince  of  Israel  whose  day  is  coma 

33.  15.  if  the  w.  restore  the  pledge,  he  shall  live 
Dan.  12.  10.  but  the  jc.  shall  do  wickedly 
Mic.  6.  ll.shctl  Icouni  them  pure  with  jo.  balances? 
JV'n/j.  1.  3.  the  Lord  will  not  at  all  acquit  the  lo. 
11.  there  is  one  come  out  of  thee  a  jo.  counsellor 
1J5.  for  the  ic.  shall  no  more  pass  through  thee 
Hab.  1.  4.  theio.  doth  compass  about  therighteoug 

13.  the  to.  devoureth  the  man  more  righteous 
Zrph.  1.  3.  consume  stumbling  blocks  with  the  jo. 
Mill.  3. 18.  shall  discern  between  righteous  and  jo. 
4.  3.  and  ye  shall  tread  down  the  ic.  as  ashes 
Mat.H.  45.  more  lo.than  himself,even  so  shall  it  be 
also  to  this  jo.  generation,  Lttke  11.  26. 
13.  49.  the  angels  shall  sever  the  w.  from  the  just 

16.  4.  a  JO.  generation  seeketh  after  a  sign 

18.  32.  thou  JO.  servant,  25.  26.  Lnke  19.  22. 
.^i-ts  2.  23.  ynd  by  ?o.  hands  have  ye  slain  hhri 

18.  14.  if  it  were  a  matter  of  «'.  lewdness,<0  Jewj 

1  Cor.  5.  13.  therefore  ])ut  away  thy  w.  person 
Col.  1.  31.  were  enemies  in  your  mind  by  jo.  works 

2  Tkcss.  2.  8.  and  then  shall  that  w.  be  revealed 
See  Man,  Men. 

Of  the  WICKED. 
.fob  8.  22.  the  place  of  the  w.  shall  come  to  nought 

9.  24.  the  earth  is  given  into  the  hand  of  the  w. 
I0.3.andshonldest  shine  upon  the  counsel  ofthcw 
II.  20.  but  the  eyes  of  there,  shall  fail, not  escap« 
16.  11.  God  turned  me  into  the  hands  of  the  w. 
18.  5.  the  light  of  the  ie.  shall  be  put  out 

21.  surely  such  are  the  dwellings  of  the  w. 
20.  5.  the  triumphing  of  the  w.  is  short 

22.  every  hand  of  the  tc.  shall  come  upon  him 

21. 16.  the  counsel  of  the  tc.  is  far  from  me,  22. 18. 
17.how  oft  iscaiidle  of  the  w.  put  out, and  cometh 

destruction  on  them  ?  Prov.  13.  9.  |  24.  20. 
28.  where  are  the  dwelling-places  of  the  ic.  ? 
24.  6.  and  they  gathered  the  vintage  of  the  w. 

29. 17.  and  I  brake  the  jaws  n/  thew.  aijd  plucked 
36  6.  he  prescrveth  not  the  life  of  the  w. 

17.  thou  hast  fulfilled  the  judgment  of  the  vj. 
Psal.  1.  t  1.  walketh  not  in  the  counsel  of  the  ir. 

7.  9.  let  the  wickedness  of  the  in.  come  to  an  end 

10.  15.  break  thou  the  arm  of  the  w.  man 

22.  16.  the  assembly  of  the  w.  have  inclosed  me 
36.1.  the  transgression  of  thcic.  saith  in  my  heart 

II.  let  not  the  hand  of  the  in.  remove  me 

37.  17.  the  arms  of  the  ic.  shall  be  broken 
28.  but  the  seed  of  the  w.  shall  be  rut  off 
38.  the  end  of  the  ic.  shall  be  cut  off 

55.  3.  because  of  the  oppression  of  the  w. 

58. 10.  he  shall  wash  his  feet  in  the  blood  of  the  a. 

64.  2.  hide  me  from  the  counsel  of  the  w. 

71.4.  deliver  me  outnf  hando/rtcio.and  unr%ht- 
eous  cruel  man,  74.  19.  [  82.  4.  |  97.  10 

73.  3.  when  I  saw  the  prosperity  of  the  w. 

75.  10.  all  the  horns  of  the  in.  also  will  I  cut  off 

82.2.howlongwill  ye  accept  the  persons  of  the  to.  J 

91.  8  behold,  and  see  the  reward  of  th^  w. 

92.  II.  mine  ears  shall  hear  my  desire  of  the  to. 
109.  2.  the  mouth  of  the  ic.  is  opened  against  me 
112.  lO.  desire  of  the  ic.  shall  perish,  Prov  10.  28. 
119.  53.  because  of  the  to.  that  forsake  thy  law 

61.  the  hands  of  the  ic.  have  robbed  me 
125.  3.  the  rod  of  the  w.  shall  not  rest  on  the  just 
129.  4.  Lord  hath  cut  asunder  the  cords  of  thew. 
140.  4.  keep  me,  O  Lord,  from  the  hanSsoftke  to. 
8.  grant  not,  O  Lord,  the  desires  of  the  to. 
146.  9.  the  way  nf  the  ic.  he  turns  upside  down 
Prov.  2.  14.  who  delight  in  frowardness  o/fA«  to. 

3.  25.  be  not  afraid  of  the  desolation  of  the  jr. 
33.  the  curse  of  the  Lord  is  in  the  house  of  the  to. 

4.  14.  enter  not  into  the  path  of  the  io. 
in.theway  of  the  ir.  is  as  darkness,  they  know  not 

10.  3.  he  casteth  away  the  substance  of  the  to. 

6.  but  violence  covercth  the  mouth  of  the  to.  IL 

7.  hut  the  name  of  the  to.  shall  rot 
16.  the  fruit  of  the  to.  tendeth  to  sin 
20.  the  heart  of  the  to.  is  little  worth 
24.  the  fear  of  the  w.  it  shall  come  upon  him 
27.  but  the  years  of  the  in.  shall  be  shortened' 
32.  the  mouth  of  the  in.  spcakcth  frowardnes*. 

11.  11.  the  city  is  overthrown  by  mouth  of  the  ut, 

23.  but  the  expectation  of  the  ic.  is  wrath 

12.  5.  but  the  counsels  of  the  ic.  are  deceit 
6.  the  words  o/fAfjo.  are  to  lie  in  waitfor  blood 
10.  but  the  tendermercies  of  the  ic.  are  cruel 
26.  but  the  way  of  the  in.  scdrceth  them 

13.  25.  but  the  belly  of  the  in.  shall  want 

14.  11.  the  house  of  the  in.  shnll  be  overthrown 

15.  6.  but  in  the  revenuoi  nf  the  to.  is  trouble 


WIC 

P»(jo.  13. 8.  sactilice  0/  the  w.  is  an  abomin.  21. 27. 
!(.the  way  of  the  w.  is  an  abominalioii  to  ihe  Loril 
i.'6.  llie  tliuuglils  of  the  id.  are  an  abomination 
iW.  the  mouth  of  the  w.  pouretii  out  evil  things 
J8.  5.  it  ie  not  good  to  accept  tjie  person  of  the  to 

19.  28.  the  moulli  of  the  w.  Uevouretli  inmuity 
-1.  4.  and  the  plowing  of  the  w.  is  sin 

7.  the  robbery  of  the  w.  shall  destroy  them 
10.  the  soul  of  the  w.  desireth  evil 
12.  he  wisely  considereth  the  liouse  of  the  w. 
Jsa.  14.5.  the  i.ord  hath  brolieii  the  stall"  u/ «/ie  w. 
Jer.  5.  28.  they  overpass  the  deeds  of  the  10. 
12.  1.  wherefore  duth  the  way  of  the  w.  prosper? 
15.  21.  I  will  deliver  thee  out  ol  hand  of  the  w. 

23.  19.  whirlwind  tall  on  head  of  the  w.  30.  23. 
Kiek.  13.  22.  have  stronglhened  the  hands  »fthe  w 

18.  20.  the  wickedness  of  the  10.  shall  be  on  him 

21.  29.  lo  bring  thee  upon  the  necks  of  the  to.' 
30.  12.  I  will  sell  the  land  into  the  hand  of  the  to. 
'Si.  11.  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  the  to. 

12.  as  for  the  wickedness  of  the  to. 
Dan.  12.  10.  none  of  the  to.  shall  understand 
-Vic.  tj.  10.  treasures  of  wickedness  in  house  oft.  w 
Uab  3. 13.  woundedst  head  outof  liouse  of  the  w. 
J'.fih.  C.  16.  able  to  quencli  all  the  fiery  darts  of  t.  w. 
2  Pet.  2.  7.  vexed  with  the  conversation  of  the  w. 

3.  17.  lest  ye  be  led  away  with  the  error  of  the  10. 
See  One. 
To  or  utito  the  WICKED. 
.Job  31.  3.  Is  not  destruction  to  the  10.? 
I'sal.  32.  10.  many  Burrows  shall  be  to  the  w. 

50.16.un«()  the  id.  God  saith,  what  hast  thou  to  do? 
yrov.  24.24.he  that  saith  ttnto  the  to.  thou  art  right. 

29.  27.  the  upright  is  an  abomination  to  the  w. 
Keel.  9.  2.  one  event  to  the  righteous  and  to  the  w. 
lia.  3.  11.  woe  unto  the  io.it  shall  be  ill  with  him 

26.10.  let  favour  be  shewed  la  «?.  yet  will  not  learn 

48.  22.  no  peace,  saith  God,  nnlo  the.  w.  57.  21. 
I'.zck.  3.  18.  when  I  say  unto  the  id.  33.  8,  14. 

7.  21.  give  it  to  the  w.  of  the  eartli  for  a  spoil 

WICKEDLY. 
Gen.  19.  7.  Lot  said,  do  not  so  to.  .Tad^.  19.  23. 
J)eut.  9.  18.  your  sins  which  ye  sinned  in  doing  to. 

1  Sam.  12. 25.  but  il'ye  shall  still  Aoic.  be  consumed 

2  Sam.  22. 22. 1  have  kept  the  ways  of  the  Lord  and 

have  not  w.  departed  from  my  God,  Vs.  13.  21. 

24.  17.  lo,  I  have  sinned  and  have  done  to. 

2  Kings '2t.  ll.Manassehdonc  to.  above  Amoritcs 
2  Chr.  6.  37.  we  have  sinned,  we  have  done  amiss, 
dealt  w.  J\rch.  9.  33.  Psal.  106.  6.  Dan.  9. 5, 15. 
2v).  35.  Ahaziah,  king  of  Israel,  did  very  w. 

22.  3.  his  mother  was  his  counsellor  to  do  10. 
Job  13.  7.  will  you  si)eak  to.  for  God  ? 

34.  12.  yea,  surely  God  will  not  do  10. 

P.ial.  7.3.  8.  they  speak  10.  concerning  oppression 
74.  3.  the  enemy  hath  done  to.  in  the  sanctuary 
139.  20.  for  they  speak  against  thoc  to. 

J  Jan.  11.  32.  such  as  do  to.  against  the  covenant 

12.  10.  many  purified,  but  the  wicked  shall  i\oic. 
Mai.  4.  1.  all  that  do  to.  shall  be  as  stubble 

WICKEDNESS. 
Gen.  C.  5.  God  saw  that  the  to.  of  man  was  preaf 
39. 9.  how  can  I  do  this  great  to.  and  sin  ag.  iimU 
J.ev.  18.  17.  it  is  to.  20.  14.  ||  19.  29.  land  full  of  ir. 

20.  14.  that  there  bo  no  to.  among  you_ 
J)eut.O.  4.  for  the  10.  of  these  nations,  5. 

13.  11.  Israel  shall  do  no  more  any  sue!:  w. 
17.  2.  if  there  be  any  that  hath  wrought  to. 
28.  20.  because  of  the  tn.  of  thy  doings 

Judg.OrHC).  thus  God  rendered  the  to.  of  Ahim.-'lech 

20.  3.  Israel  said,  tell  us,  how  was  this  to.  7 
12.  what  10.  is  this  that  is  done  among  you? 

1  .^Trtm.  12.  17.  you  may  see  that  your  w.  is  great 
20.  ye  have  done  all  this  to.  yet  turn  not  aside 

24.  13.  10.  iiroceedeth  from  the  wicked 

25.  39.  returned  the  w.  of  Nabal  on  nis  own  head 

2  Sam.  3. 39.  reward  do?r  ofevil  aci-ording  to  his  tc. 
7.  10.  neither  shnli  the  children  of  lO.  alflict  them 

any  more  as  before-time,  Pnul.  89.  22. 
)  A'in^.9l.52.but  ifio.  bofound  in  him,  hcslialldie 
2. 44.  thou  knowest  all  the  to.  thy  heart  is  privy  lo 
R  47.  rcpniit,  saying,  we  have  committed  ir. 

21.  25.  Ahab  sold  himself  to  work  v. 

0  Kinps  21.  (i.  Manasseh  wrought  much  to. 

1  Ckron.  17.  9.  nor  the  children  of  10.  waste  tliom 
Job  4.  8.  they  that  sow  to.  reajt  the  same 

II.  11.  he  sccth  to.  ||  24.  20.  to.  shall  ho  broken 

14.  let  not  tn.  dwell  in  thy  tahernarlo.i) 
2ft.l2.tho'  w.  be  sweet  in  his  month,  tho'  ho  hide  it 
27. 4.  my  lips  shall  not  speak  tc.  nor  tongue  deceit 
34.  10.  far  be  it  from  God  that  he  should  do  to. 

P^al.  5.  4.  urt  not  a  God  that  hath  pleasure  in  tr. 
9.  theirinward  part  is  very  in.  throat  a  sepulchre 
7.  fl.  let  tho  w.  of  the  wicked  come  to  an  end 
10  IS.  «cnk  out  his  to.  ||  45.  7.  thou  hatcst  to. 
2P.  4.  according  lo  the  tn.  of  their  endeavours 
.W.  7.  he  glrcngthenod  himself  in  his  in. 
56.  <  1   10.  is  in  the  midst  thereof  deceit  and  guile 

15.  43.  is  in  their  dwellings  and  among  them 

58  2.  yea,  in  heart  you  work  if.  weijjh  violence 

tea 


WID 

Psal.  84.  10.  than  to  dwell  in  the  tents  of  10. 

107.31.  he  turns  a  fruitful  land  into  barrenness  for 
the  to.  of  them  Uiat  dwell  therein,  Jer.  12.  4. 
Prov.  4.  17.  for  they  eat  the  bread  of  tc. 

8.  7.  and  to.  is  an  abomination  to  my  lips 

10.  2.  treasures  of  w.  profit  nothnig 

11.  5.  but  the  wicked  shall  fall  by  his  own  to. 

12.  3.  a  man  shall  not  be  established  by  w. 

13.  6.  but  tc.  overlhroweih  the  sinner 

14.  32.  the  wicked  is  driven  away  in  his  w. 
16.  12.  it  is  abomination  to  kings  to  commit  to. 

21.  12.  God  overlhroweththe  wicked  for  their  u; 
26. 26.  Ins  to.  shall  by  shewed  before  congregation 

30.  20.  she  eatcth  and  eaith,  I  have  done  no  ic 
Kcel.'i.lti.  saw  place  of  judgment,  that  tc.  was  there 

7.  15.  a  wicker!  man  prolongoth  his  life  in  tc. 
25.  I  apjilied  my  heart  to  know  the  to.  of  folly 

8.  8.  nor  shall  to.  deliver  those  that  arc  given  to  it 
Isa.  9.  18.  for  to.  burnetii  as  the  fire 

58.  4.  behold,  ye  smite  with  the  fist  of  lO. 

0.  the  last  I  have  chosen,  to  loose  the  bans  of  w 
Jtr.  2.  19.  thine  own  w.  shall  correct  thee 

4.  14.  O  Jerusalem,  wash  thine  heart  from  tc. 

6.  7.  so  she  casieth  out  her  to.  continually 

7.  12.  see  what  1  did  for  the  w.  of  my  people 

8.  6.  no  man  repented  of  his  ir.  what  have  t  done 
14.20.  we  acknowledge,  O  Ld.  our  to.  and  iniquity 
23.  14.  that  none  dolli  return  from  his  to. 

33.  5.  for  whose  tc.  I  hid  my  face  from  this  city 
44.  9.  have  ye  forgot  the  to.  of  your  kings,  their 

wives,  your  own  tc.  and  the  to.  of  your  wiv 
F.zck.2.  19.  if  he  turn  not  from  his  tc.  he  shall  die 

5.  6.  she  hath  changed  my  judgment  into  ic. 
7.  11.  violence  is  risen  up  into  a  lod  of  20. 
18.  20.  the  tc.  of  the  wicked  shall  be  on  him 

27.  turneth  from  the  w.  he  hath  committed 

31.  11.  I  have  driven  him  out  for  hig  id. 

33.  Vi.  in  the  day  he  tuineth  from  his  w.  19. 
Hos.  7.  1.  the  tc.  of  Samaria  was  discovered 

9.  15.  for  the  to.  of  their  doings  I  will  drive  out 

10.  13.  ye  have  plowed  to.  and  reaped  iniquity 
15.S0  shall  Betheldo  toyou  because  of  your  w 

Jo'^i  3.  13.  the  fats  overflow  for  their  w.  is  great 
Mie.  6. 10.  are  treasures  of  tc.  in  house  of  wicked? 
Zcc/i.  5.  8.  and  he  said,  this  is  w.  and  he  cast  it 
J^Ial.  1.  4.  they  shall  call  them  the  border  of  jo. 

3.  15.  yea,  they  that  work  to.  are  set  up 

Mark  7.  22.  out  of  the  heart  proceedeth  to.  deceit 
Luke  11.  39.  but  your  inward  part  is  full  of  jo. 
Acts  25.  5.  and  accuse  this  man,  if  any  io.  in  him 
^lont.  J.  2il.  being  tilled  with  all  to.  envy,  murder 
1  Cor.  5.  8.  nor  with  the  leaven  of  malice  and  w. 
Kpk.  6.  12.  against  spiritual  to  in  high  places 
XJohnS.  19.  we  know  the  who.e  world  lioth  in  w. 

Their  WICKEDNESS. 
Oeut.  9.  27.  look  not  to  their  to.  nor  to  their  sin 
P.'ial.  94. 23.  God  shall  cut  them  off  in  their  own  tc. 
r'7o['.21 .12.God  overthrows  the  wicked  for  their  to. 
Jer.  1.  16.  utter  judgments,  touching  all  their  w. 

14.  16.  for  I  will  pour  their  to.  upon  them 

23.  11.  yea,  in  my  house  have  I  found  their  w. 

44.  3.  they  are  a  desolation,  because  of  their  to. 

5.  inclined  not  their  ear  to  turn  from  their  to. 

Lam.  \.  22.  let  all  their  tc.  come  before  thee 

Hon.  7.  2.  consider  not  that  I  remember  alUAc/rio. 

3.  thoy  make  king  glad  with  their  tc.  and  princes 

0.  15.  all  their  to.  is  in  Gilgal,  there  I  hated  them 
./»«aA  1.2.cry  against  Nineveh, for  th.  id.  is  come  up 
.Mat.  22.  18.  but  Jesus  jicrceived  their  tc.  and  saiil 

r/<y  WICKEDNESS. 
I  A7»,v..-2.44.the  Ld.  shall  return  thy  ro.upon  Ihce 
.7i)i22.5.i8not //(!/  w.great?  thine  iniquities  infinite? 

35.  8.  tliij  w.  may  hurt  a  man  as  thou  art 
Isa.  47.  10.  for  thou  liast  trusted  in  thy  to. 
Jer.  3.  2.  thou  hast  polluted  tho  land  with  thy  id. 

4.  IS.  this  is  thy  to.  for  it  is  bitter  to  thy  heart 

22.  22.  thoti  slialt  bo  confounded  for  all  th)/  10. 
F.zek.  16.  23.  it  came  to  pass  after  all  thtj  to. 

57.  befo^.  thy  to.  was  discovered,  as  at  the  time 
JVah.  3.  19.  upon  whom  hath  not  thy  to.  passed 
.^cts  8.  22.  repent  thereforn  of  this  thy  to.  and  pray 

WIDE. 
Drut.  15.  8.  but  llion  shalt  open  thy  hand  w.  11. 
1  C/(ron.4.40.  the  land  wns  10.  quiet  and  peaceable 
./«A  29.23.  they  opened  llioir  mouth  ic.  as  for  rain 
.30.  14.  came  on  me  as  a  70.  breaking  in  of  waters 
/';(o/.35.21.  they  opened  Ibcir  mouth  to.  against  nx' 
81.  10.  open  thy  iiinulh  ic.  and  I  will  fill  it 
101.  25.  so  is  this  gri^nt  and  to.  sea,  wherein  are 
/'rflt>.13.3.hotliatopenetli  lo.his lips, have destruct. 
21. 9.  it  is  better  to  dwell  in  a  corner,  than  to  dwi  II 
with  a  brawling  woman  in  aw.  bouse,  25.  24. 
Isa.  57.  4.  against  whom  make  vc  a  10.  mouth? 
.frr.  22.  14.  that  saith,  I  will  build  me  a  10.  house 
.VnA.3.13.  thy  gates  he  set  10.  open  to  thine  enemies 
Mat.  7. 13.  to.  is  llieenio  thai  leadoth  to  destruction 

WIDENESa. 
Ezek.  41. 10.  between  cliambers  the  to.  of  20  cubits 

WIDOW 
-Imn-ng  th*  llcircii$,  even  before  the  late  a  wi- 


WID 

dow  loAo  had  no  children  by  her  husband,  teat 
alijtced  to  marry  the  brother  of  her  decea^ia 
ijiousc,  ill  order  to  raise  up  children  who  might 
enjoy  his  in/itritance,  and  perpetuate  his  name 
and  family.  He  Jind  the  practice  of  Uus 
custom  before  the  law,  in  the  person  of  I'amar, 
who  married  sueccasivtly  i'.r  and  Onan,  the 
sons  of  Judah,  and  who  was  liketcise  to  have 
married  Sheluh,  Ihethirdson  of  this  patriarch, 
after  the  tico  former  were  dead  without  issue, 
Gen.  38.  6,  8,  9,  11.  'J'he  law  that  appoints 
these  marriages  is  delivered  in  Duut.  25.  5,  0, 

The  motives  that  prevailed  to  the  enacting  of  this 
law  were,  the  continuation  of  estates  m  tht 
same  family,  and  to  perpetuate  a  inati's  naint 
in  Israel.  11  teas  looked  upon  as  a  great  un- 
happiiiess  for  a  man  to  die  without  an  heir,  and 
to  sec  his  inheritance  pass  into  another  family. 
This  law  was  not  confined  to  brothcrs-m-law 
only,  but  teas  extended  to  more  distant  relations 
of  the  same  line  ;  as  may  be  seen  in  the  exam 
pic  of  Ruth,  tcho  married  Boaz,  after  she  had 
been  refused  by  a  nearer  kinsman.  H  idoiB 
hood,  as  tall  as  barrenness,was  a  kind  of  shame 
and  reproach  in  Israel.  Isa.  54.  4,  Thou 
shalt  forget  the  shame  of  thy  youlli,  passed 
away  in  celibacij  and  barrenness,  and  shall 
not  remember  ihe  reproach  of  thy  widowhood 
any  more.  It  was  presumed,  that  a  woman 
of  merit  and  reputation  might  have  found  a 
husband,  either  in  the  family  of  her  deceased 
husband,  if  he  died  without  children,  or  in 
some  other  family,  if  he  had  left  children. 
The  widows  of  kings  conliiiued  in  their  widow- 
hood. JIdonijah  was  punished  with  death,  for 
asking  in  marriage  .ibishag  the  Shunainitr, 
who  had  been  married  to  David,  though  he  had 
never  consummated  this  marriage,  1  Kings  2. 
13, 14,  &c.  Thnj  shut  up  in  (he  palace  all  the 
concubines  of  king  David,  who  had  been  defilid 
by  Absalom,  l/iere  to  spend  the  remainder  of 
their  days,  2  Sam.  20.  3. 
God  discovers  a  speiial  regard  for  widows,  and 
frequently  ricnmmends  to  his  people  to  beviry 
careful  in  affording  relief  to  the  widow  and 
orphan,  E.xori.  22.  22.  Dent.  10.  18.  St.  Paul 
would  have  vsto  honour  joi'i/otoj  thai  are  widotcs 
indeed,  and  desolate,  that  is,  destitute  of  such 
as  ought  to  help  and  relieve  them,  of  their  hus- 
bands and  children,  1  Tim.  5.  3,  4,  5.  There 
were  widows  in  the  Christian  church,  teko,  be- 
cause of  their  poverty,  were  maintained  at  the 
charge  of  the  faithful,  and  loho  were  to  attend 
vpon  the  poor  and  sick.  St.  Paul  did  not  al- 
low any  to  be  chosen  into  the  number  of  these 
widows,  unless  they  were  threescore  years  old 
at  least;  they  must  be  such  as  had  not  parted 
from  their  husbands  and  married  again  ;  Uiey 
must  produce  ample  testimony  of  their  good 
rcorks  ;  that  they  had  given  good  education  to 
their  children  ;  that  they  had  ezerciscd  hospita- 
lity; that  they  had  washed  the  feet  of  ths 
sainls :  that  they  had  given  sveeotir  lo  the  mi 
serable  and  afflicted,  1  Tim.  5.  9,  10. 
Gen.  38.  11.  remain  a  tc.  in  thy  fatlicr's  house 

14.  she  put  her  w.  garments  ofTfrom  her 
F.xod.  22.  22.  ye  shall  not  afflict  any  10.  or  child 
J.ev.  21.  14.  a  tr.  or  a  harlot  shall  he  not  take 
22.  13.  if  the  priest's  daughter  be  a  10.  she  shall  eal 
..'V"u(«..30.9.evciy  vow  of  a  lo.shall  stand  against  her 
DeutAO.  18.  he  doth  execute  Ihe  judgment  of  a  if. 
14.  29.  the  stranger,  fatherless,  and  to.  shall  come 
and  cat,  and  bo  satisfied,  16.  11,  14. 
I  26.  12. 
24.  17.  nor  take  a  w.  raiment  to  pledge 
19.  the  sheaf  in  the  field  shall  be  for  iho  stransrr, 
for  the  fatherless  and  the  jo.  20,  21.  |  26.13. 
27.  19.  lie  that  pervertcth  tho  judgmenl  of  tlie  ir. 
2$iim.l4.  5.  I  am  a  to.  woman,  mine  bush,  is  dead 
1  A'(nn-*7.14,he  wasaio.  son  of  tribe  of  Naphtali 
1 1.26.Joroboam'3  mother  Zeruali  was  a  to. woman 
17.  9.  I  have  commanded  a  w.  to  suslain  Ihce 
.Jo'i  24.  3.  I  hey  take  the  tc.  ox  for  a  pledge 
21.  and  doelh  not  good  to  the  to. 
2*.!.  13.  I  caused  tho  tc.  Iieart  lo  sing  for  joy 
31.  16.  or  have  caused  the  eyes  of  the  to.  lo  fail 
Psal.  94.  6.  Ihey  slay  Iho  to.  and  the  stranger 
109.  9.  let  his  children  bo  falherless,  bis  wife  aw 
M6.  9.  he  relioveth  tho  futhcrhss  and  the  to. 
Prov.  15.  25.  lie  will  establish  the  border  of  the  to- 
Isa.  1.  17.  judge  tho  fatherless,  plead  for  tho  tc. 
23.  neither  doth  the  cause  of  ir.  come  unto  them 
47.8.l8'hall  not  sit  as  a  to.  nor  know  lossof  cliildren 
.Jer.  7.  6.  if  yc  oppress  not  the  jo.22.3.  7,ceh.  7.  10. 
/,am. 1.1.  how  is  she  become  as  a  to.  thai  was  grei 
F.zck.  22.  7.  in  thcc  have  they  vexed  the  to. 
44.  22.  but  take  a  w.  that  had  a  priest  before 
Mai.  3.  5.  Against  those  Uiat  opprc.is  llio  10. 
Mark  12.  42.  u  certain  poor  if.  tlitew  in  two  miuc 


WIP 

Jlfjrjtl2. 43.  ic.  cast  in  morotlian  at!,  /,uie21. 2, 3. 
Z/UJte2.  37.  Anna  was  a  w.  about  84  years  old 
7.  12.  the  only  son  of  hismotlier,  andahe  was  a  it. 
18.  3.  there  was  a  w.  in  that  city  came  unto  him 
5.  because  this  to.  troubleth  me,  I  will  avenge  her 
1  7'm.  5.  4.  if  any  w.  have  children  or  nephews 
5.  she  that  is  a  w.  indeed  trusteth  in  God 
9.  let  not  a  (o.be'taken  into  the  number  under  60. 
Rev.  18.  7.  she  saith,  I  sit  as  queen,  and  am  no  w. 

WIDOWS. 
F.zod.  22.  24.  and  your  wives  sliall  be  w. 
Job  22.  9.  thou  hast  sent  w.  away  empty 

27.  15.  be  buried  in  death,  and  w.  shall  not  weep 
P/al.  68.  5.  a  judge  of  the  fatherless  and  w.  is  God 

78.  64.  and  their  w.  made  no  lamentation 
laa.  9  1~.  neither  shall  he  have  mercy  on  their  w 

10.  2.  w  may  be  their  prey,  that  they  may  rob 
Jcr.  15.  8.  their  w.  are  increased  above  the  sand 

IS.  21.  let  their  wives  be  70.  and  men  put  to  death 

49.  11.  leave  thy  children,  let  thy  w.  trust  in  rae 
L,am.  5.  3.  we  are  fatherless,  our  mothers  are  as  w 
F.iek.  22.  25.  they  have  made  her  many  w. 
Mat.  23. 14.  woe  unto  you,  ye  devour  w.  houses  for 
pretence  make  long  prayers,  Mark  12.  40, 
Luke  20.  47. 
LukcA.lo.  were  many  jo.  in  Israel  indaysof  Elias 
wf  cts6.1.murmuringbecause  theirio.were  neglected 

9.39.  all  tiiejc.  stood  by  him  weeping  and  shewing 

41.  when  he  had  called  the  saints  and  w. 
ICor.  7.  8.1  said  to  the  ic.  it  is  good  if  they  abide  as  I 

1  Tim.  5.  3.  honour  w.  that  are  w.  indeed 

11.  but  the  younger  w.  refuse,  they  will  marry 
IG.  if  any  have  w.  let  them  relieve  them 
./am.l.27.pure  rehjion  is  to  visitthe  w.  in  affliction 

WIDOWHOOD. 
Gen.  38.  19.  Tamarput  on  the  garments  of  her  w. 
2.SaCT.20.3.David's  concubines  shut  up, living  in  w. 
/sa.  47.  9.  in  one  day  the  loss  of  children,  and  v). 
54.  4.  shall  not  remember  the  reproach  of  thy  w. 

WIFE. 
Oen.  11.29.  the  name  of  Abraham's  ?o.  wasSarai, 
31.  )  12.  17,  20.  I  20.  18.  [  24.  36. 

20.  3.  the  woman  thou  hast  taken  is  a  man's  w. 

21.  21.  Hagar  took  a  ic.  for  Ishmacl  out  of  Egypt 

24.  4.  thou  shall  take  a  w.  to  my  son  Isaac,  38. 
25. 1.  Abraham  took  a  w.  her  name  was  Keturah 
27.46.if  Jacob  take  a  !o.  of  the  daughters  of  Helh, 

whal  good  shall  my  life  do  me  1  23.  1,  6. 

38.  6.  Judah  took  a  ic.  for  Er  his  first-born 

'    8.  go  in  unto  thy  brother's  le.  and  marry  her 

39.  7.  his  master's  w.  cast  her  eyes  upon  Joseph 
Ezod.'iO.M.  thou  shall  not  covet  thy  neiglibour'sj^. 

nor  anything  is  thy  neighbour's,  Dent. 5.  21. 

21.  4.  if  his  master  have  given  him  a  w. 

IXif  he  take  him  another  w.hcr  food,  her  raiment 

and  duty  of  marriage  shall  he  not  diminish 

Z.ei!.18.8.the  nakedness  ofthyfather's  w.shalt  thou 

not  uncover,  20.  11.  Deut.  27.  20. 

13.  of  thy  eon's  w.  \\  16.  thy  brother's  k).20.  21. 

18.  neither  shall  thou  take  a  w.  to  her  sister 

20.  shall  not  lie  with  thy  neighbour's  w.  20.  10. 

20. 14.  if  a  man  take  a  lo.  and  her  mother,  it  is  sin 

20.  if  a  man  lie  with  his  uncle's  w.  he  uncovcreth 

21.  7.  priests  shall  not  lake  a  70.  that  is  a  whore 

13.  the  high  priest  shall  lake  a  ic.  in  her  virginity 
^um.  5.  12.  if  any  man's  jc.  go  aside,  20. 

36.  8.  shall  be  a  70.  to  one  of  the  family  of  the  tribe 
Dent.  13.  6.  or  if  the  w.  of  thy  bosom  entice  thee 
20. 7.  what  man  hath  betrothed  a  in.  not  taken  her 

22.  13.  if  any  man  lake  a  10.  and  hale  her 
24.  because  he  humbleth  his  neighbour's  a. 
30.  a  man  shall  not  lake  his  father's  7a. 

24.1. when  a  man  hath  taken  a  jo.andfind  unclean. 
2.  she  may  go  and  be  another  man's  ic. 

5.  hath  taken  a  new  tc.  he  shall  not  go  out  to  war 

25.  5.  the  77).  of  the  dsad  shall  not  marry  a  stranger 
7.  if  he  like  not  to  take  his  brother's  w. 

9.  then  shall  his  brother's  w.  come  unto  him 
11.  the  70.  of  the  one  draweth  near  to  deliver 

28.  30.  betroth  a  v.  and  another  lie  with  her 
54.  his  eye  he  evil  toward  the  w.  of  his  bosom 

fudg.  4.  4.  Deborah,  w.  of  Lapidoth,  judged  Israel 
17.  Jael  the  w.  of  Heber  the  Kenite,  21.  |  5.  24. 
14.  3.  Ihou  goes!  to  take  a  ic.  of  the  uncircumciscd 
16.  Samson's  w.  wept  before  him,  and  said 
20.  but  his  w.  was  gi»en  to  his  companion 
21.  18.  cursed  be  he  that  giveth  a  7/!.lo  Benjamin 
Umh  4.  5.  buy  it  of  Ruth  the  70.  of  the  dead 

2  Sam.  12.  lO"  thou  hast  taken  the  w.  of  Uriah 

1  .?'(7!^sl4.2.he  not  known  to  he  the  ». of  Jeroboam 

6.  Ahijah  said,  come  in  thou  w.  of  Jeroboam 

2  Kin^s  5.  2.  and  she  waited  on  Naaman's  w. 
•2Chr.  22. 11.  w.of  Jehoiada  hid  him  from  Athaliah 
Prot\  5.  18.  rejoice  with  the  w.  of  tliy  youth 

6.  20.  so  he  that  goelh  in  to  his  neighbour's  w. 

18.  22.  vN'hoso  fmdeth  a  w.  findeth  a  good  thing 

19.  13.  c>)ntentions  ofaw.a  continual  dropping 

14.  and  a  prudent  to.  is  from  the  Lord 

F.crl.  '.).  9.  live  joyfully  with  the  w.  ofihy  youth 

Ija.  54.  1  more  than  children  of  the  married  to. 

683 


WIP 

Isa.  54.6.lho  Lord  hath  called  tlioe  as  a  in.  of  youth 
Jcr.  3.  20.  surely  as  a  w.  treacherously  departeth 

5.  8.  every  one  neighed  after  his  neighbour's  to. 

6.  11.  the  husband  and  the  w.  shall  be  taken 

16.  2.  thou  shall  not  take  thee  a  w.  in  this  place 
£2^4.  16.  32.  as  a  w.  that  cominilleth  adultery 

18.  6.  nor  hath  defiled  his  neighbour's  w.  15. 

11.  and  defiled  his  neighbour's  Tii.  22. 11.  |  33. 26 
Hos.  1.  2.  take  unto  thee  a  77;.  of  whoredoms 

12.  12.  Israel  served  for  a  w.  and  kept  sheep 
Jtfai.2.14.Lord  hath  been  witness  between  thee  and 
the  70.  of  thy  youth,  the  w.  of  thy  covenant 
15.  let  none  deal  treacherously  against  his  w. 
Mat.  1.  6.  of  her  thai  had  been  the  w.  of  Urias 

14.  3.  Herod  bound  John  for  sake  of  Pliilip's  70 
19. 29.  every  one  that  halh  forsaken  ?o.  or  children 

for  my  name's  sake,  Mark  10.  29.  Luki 
18.  29. 
22. 25.  seven  brethren,  the  first,  when  he  had  mar- 
ried a  w.  deceased,  Mark  12.  20.  Lxike  20.  29, 
Litke  14.20. 1  have  married  a  w.  and  cannot  come 

17.  32.  remember  Lot's  70. 

1  Cor.  5.  1.  thai  one  should  have  his  father's  to. 

7.  3.  lei  the  husband  render  to  the  w.  due  benevo 

lence,  and  likewise  also  the  w.  to  the  husband 
4.  the  70.  hath  not  power  over  her  own  body 
10.  let  not  the  to.  depart  from  her  hu.sband 

12.  if  any  brother  hath  a  to.  thai  believeth  not 

14.  unbelieving  to.  is  sanctified  by  tlie  husband 
IG.  what  knowest  thou,  O  to.  if  thou  shall  save 
27.  art  thou  loosed  from  a  10.  seek  not  a  to. 

34.  there  is  difference  between  a  to.  and  a  virgin 

39.  the  70.  is  bound  aslong  as  her  husband  liveth 

F.plt.  5.  23.  for  the  husband  is  the  head  of  the  70. 

33.  let  every  one  love  his  to.  ei'en  as  himself,  and 

the  70.  see  that  she  reverence  her  husband 

1  Tim.  3.  2.  the  Imsband  of  one  70.  12.  Ttt.  1.  6. 

5.  9.  a  widow,  having  been  the  70.  of  one  man 

1  Pet.  3. 7.  giving  honour  to  to.  as  the  weaker  vesst 
Rev.2l.  9. 1  will  shew  thee  the  brido,lhe  Lamb's  70. 

His  WIFE. 

f?C77.2.24.  a  man  shall  leave  father  and  mother,and 
shall  cleave  unto  his  w.  Mat.  19.  5.  Mark 
10.7. 

25.  they  were  both  naked,  the  man  and  his  to. 
12. 12.  they  shall  say,  this  is  kis  w.  and  will  kill  me 

19.  16.  the  men  laid  hold  on  the  hand  of  his  w. 

26.  but  his  w.  looked  back  from  behind  him 

20.  7.  now  therefore,  restore  the  man  his  70. 

24.  67.  and  she  become  his  w.  1  Sam.  25.  42. 

25.  21.  and  Isaac  entreated  the  Lord  for  his  to. 

26.  7.  the  men  of  the  place  asked  him  of  his  w. 
11. he  thai  loucheth  this  manor  his  w.  shall  die 

39.  9.  kept  back  thee,  because  thou  art  his  w. 
Exod.  21.  3.  then  his  to.  shall  go  out  with  him 

22.  16.  he  shall  surely  endow  her  to  be  his  w. 
Lev.  18.  14.  thou  shall  nol  approach  to  his  to. 
JVum.  5.  14.  and  if  he  be  jealous  of  his  w.  30. 

15.  the  man  shall  bring  his  w.  to  the  priest 

30.  16.  the  statutes  between  a  man  and  his  w. 
Deut.  22.  19.  she  shall  be  his  70.  all  his  days,  29 

24.5.  he  shall  cheer  up  his  w.  that  he  hath  taken 
Judg.\2.  11.  Manoah  arose  and  went  after /it's  70 

15.  1.  Samson  visited  his  w.  with  a  kid 
21.21.  come  out,  and  catch  you  every  man  A7S  10. 

\Sam.  30.  22. save  to  every  manAi'^  70.  and  children 

2  Sam.  12.  9.  Ihou  hast  taken  his  to.  to  be  thy  wife 

1  Kings  21.  25.  whom  Jezebel  his  w.  stirred  up 

2  Kings  8.  18.  the  daughter  of  Ahab  was  /17's  to. 
Esth.  5.  10.  Ilaman  called  his  friends  and  his  w. 
Psal.  109.  9.  and  lei  his  w.  be  a  widow 

./er.  3.  1.  if  a   man  put  away  his  w.  Mat.  5.  31, 

32.  1  19.  9.  Mark  10.  11.  Lvke  16.  18. 

Mat.  8.  14.  he  saw  his  to.  mother  sick  of  a  fever 

19. 3.  the  Phariseessaid,  is  it  lawful  for  a  man  to 

put  away  his  w.  for  every  cause  1  Mark  10.  2. 

10.  if  the  case  of  a  man  be  so  with  his  w. 

22.  25.  seven  brethren,  the  firsi  deceased,  and  left 
his  TO.  to  his  brother,  Mark  12. 19.  Luke  20. 28. 
Luke  14.  26.  and  hate  not  his  w.  and  children 
.lets  5.  2.  his  w.  also  being  privy  to  it 
7.  his  70.  nol  knovving  whal  was  done,'  came  in 

18.  2.  Paul  found  Aquila  with  his  in.  Priscilla 
24.  24.  when  Feli.t  came  with  his  w.  Drusilla 

1  Cor.  7.  2.  lei  every  man  have  his  own  to. 

11.  and  let  not  the  husband  put  away  his  w. 
33.  he  carelh  how  he  may  please  his  70. 

Eph.  5.  28.  he  that  lovcth  his  70.  lovcth  himself 

31.  shall  be  joined  to  his  w.  \\  33.  bo  love  his  w. 
Rev.  19.  7.  and  his  w.  halh  made  herself  ready 

My  WIFE. 
<if7i.  20.  11.  they  will  slav  me  for  my  w.  sake 

12.  she  became  my  w.  \\  2C.  7.  alio  is  my  w. 

29.  21.  give  me  my  to.  ||  F.xod.'iX.  5. 1  love  my  w. 
Jiidg.  15.  1.  Samson  said,  I  v.'\\\  go  in  to  my  to. 

2  Sam.  3.  14.  saying,  deliver  me  my  to.  Michal 
II.  11.  shall  I  go  into  my  house  to  lie  withTni/jp.? 

.Job  19.  17.  my  breath  is  strange  to  my  w. 

31.  10  then  let  my  10.  grind  unto  another 
Ezek.  24. 18.  so  I  spake,  and  at  even  my  10.  died 


WIL 

flos.  2.  2.  she  is  not  77iy  to.  nor  am  I  hw  husbaai 
Luka  1.  18.  and  viy  w.  is  well  strickeiTin  )carg 

'J'hy  WIFE. 
Gen.  3.  17.  hast  hearkened  to  the  voice  of  thy  w. 
12.  18.  why  didst  thou  nol  tell  me  she  was  thy  to. 
19.  behold  thy  w.  take  her,  and  go  thy  way 
17.  19.  Sarah,  thy  70.  shall  bear  thee  u  son,  18  10. 
19.  15.  arise,  take  thy  w.  and  thy  two  daughtera 
26.  9.  Abimeleehsaid,  of  a  surety  she  is  thy  10. 

10.  one  might  lightly  have  lien  with  thy  w. 
/Ciorf.18,6.1,  Jdthro,  am  come  unto  ihec, andthyw 
Deut.'il.  11.  thai  thou  wouldest  have  her  lo  thy  10. 
13.  thou  shall  gi>  in  lo  her,  and  she  shall  he  thy  w. 
iSam.  12.  10.  taken  the  wife  of  Uriah  tohcthyw 
Psal.  128.  3.  thy  to.  shall  be  as  a  fruitful  vinii 
JJjnos  7.  17.  thy  w.  shall  be  a  harlot  in  the  city 
1  Cor.  7.  16.  whether  thou  sJialtsave  thy  jc. 

To  WIFE. 
Gen.  12.  19.  I  might  have  taken  her  to  me  to  w. 
34.  4.  Shechem  said,  get  me  this  damsel  lo  to. 
8.  I  pray  you,  give  her  him  to  tc.  12. 
33.  14.  she  was  not  given  to  Shelah  to  tc. 
41.  45.  Pharaoh  gave  Joseph  to  to.  Asenatli 
7-ef .  21.  14.  take  a  virgin  of  his  own  people  to  te. 
Deut.  22.  16. 1  gave  my  daughter  to  this  man  to  to. 
.losh.  15.  16.  Caleb  said,  to  him  will  I  give  Achsah 
my  daughter  to  to.  17.  Judg.  1.  12,  13 
Jiidg.  14.  2.  now  therefore  get  her  for  me  to  to. 
1  Sam.  18.  17.  Merab,  her  will  I  give  thcefo  to. 

1  Kivffs  2.17. give  me  Abishag  the  Shunamitc,?o  70. 

2  Kings  14.  S.  thelhistlesaidlo  the  cedar,  give  thy 

daughter  to  my  son  to  to.  2  Chron.  25.  18. 

2  C/i7-077.21.6.Jehoramliaddaughterof  Ahabto  to. 

.mark  12.23.  the  seven  had  her  to  to.  /.TtAe20,."!3. 

Luke  20.  30.  the  second  took  her  to  tc.  and  died 
WILD. 

Gen.  30.  12.  Ishmael  will  be  a  to.  man 

Rom.  11.  24.  the  olive-tree,  which  Is  to.  by  natura 

See  Ass,  Beast,  Bkasts. 

WILDERNESS, 

Or  Desert,  in  Ilebrcte,  Midbar.  The  Hebrews 
give  this  name  to  all  places  that  are  not  culti- 
r'atcd,  but  tchich  are  chiefly  destined  to  the 
fredingof  cattle,  andot  tchich  trees groto  wild. 
So  tohen  wilderness  is  mentioned  in  scripture, 
tee  are  not  always  lo  imagine  it  to  be  a  place 
forsakev,  abandoned,  void  of  cities  or  inhabi- 
tants ;  as  this  tcord  often  represents  the  soil 
near  a  city  or  village  tchich  teas  appointed  for 
pasture,  and  tchere  the  jilongh  never  came. 
Thus,  in  Scripture,  there  are  f etc  cities  whtck 
had  not  their  wilderness,  that  is,  uncultivated 
places  for  woods  and  pastures. 

The  deserts  of  Jirabia,  wherein  the  Tsraelitei  to- 
joumedforty  years  after  their  departure  out  of 
Egypt,  is  called  wilderness,  by  teav  of  emi- 
nence, Neh.  9.  19,  21.  Psal.  78.  40, "52.  I  107 
4.  Jer.  2.  2. 

The  tcilderness  of  Shur  lies  towards  the  point  of  - 
the  Red-sea.  Hagar  bring  driven  from  Jlbra- 
ham's house, wandcrcdin  tAt's  wilderness,  Geti. 
16.  7.  The  Israelites,  after  their  march 
through  the  Red-sea,  went  into  the  wilderness 
of  Shur,  Exod.  15.  22.  U  is  thought  there  was 
a  city  of  this  name  anciently  in  these  parts. 

The  wilderness  of  Paran  was  in  Jlrabia  Pctrea, 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  city  of  Paran. 
Ishmacl,  the  son  of  Jlbraham,  dwelt  in  ths 
borders  of  this  wilderness.  Gen.  21.  21.  The 
Israelites  having  decamped  from  Sinai,  retired 
into  the  wilderness  of  Paran,  Num.  10.  12. 
It  was  from  hence  that  Mosrs  sent  out  spies,  to 
bring  intelligence  concerning  the  land  of  pro- 
mise, Num.  13.  3.  Moses  seems  to  place  motinf, 
Sinai  in  the  country  of  Paran,  when  he  says, 
that  the  Lord  appeared  to  the  Israelites  up- 
on the  mount  of  Paran,  Deut.  33.  2.  .^nd 
Habakhuk  seems  to  say  the  same  thing,  Ilab. 
3.  3,  The  Holy  One  came  from  mount 
Paran.  , 

The  desert  of  Sin.  There  are  two  deserts  of  this 
name  in  scripture,  the  first  is  written  purely 
Sin,  toith  a  Saninch,  onrfZ/cs  hcttceenT,i\m  and 
novnt  Sinai,  E.xod.  16.  1.  TJte  second  is  writ- 
ten Zin,  or  Tzin  toith  a  Tzade:  it  is  near 
Karleshbnrnpa,  tchere  Miriam  the  sister  of 
Moses  died,  Num.  20.  1. 

The  desert  of  Sinai,  is  that  which  lies  about,  and 
is  adjacent  to,  mount  Sinai.  The  people  en- 
camped there  a  long  time,  and  received  tfit 
greatest  part  of  those  latps  which  arc  written  tn 
the  books  of  jihsesy  Kxod.  19.  2. 

It  is  said  in  Ua..  41.  18,  I  will  make  tho  ?oj7- 
derness  a  pool  of  water  ;  that  is,  "  these  people 
that  arc  like  a  dry  and  barren  wilderness,  ,. 
will  abundantly  toatrr  them  toith  my  blessing, 
and  make  them  fruitful  and  bentitiful."  God. 
asks  his  penjilc  in  Jer.  2.  31,  Have  I  b««n  a 
barren  wilderness  to  Israel  ?  Have  not  I  nr~ 
commodatcd  you  tcitk  all  nectisariet  at  aU 


WIL 

timfsT     JVay,  in  the  wilderness  itself  I  was 

nut  a  wilderness  toyou^but  provided  plentifully 

for  you. 

iCioJ.H.  3.  are  entangled,  their,  hath  shut  them  in 

•Vum.  14.  2.  or  would  God  we  had  died  in  this  to. 

29.  your  carcases  shall  fall  in  this  w.  32.  35. 
Deut.  1.  I'J.  went  through  all  that  terrible  w.  8. 15. 
."{2.  10.  he  found  him  in  the  waste  howling  w. 
J  A'i/i£'«19. 15.  goreturnonthy  way  to  «;.  of  Daiu. 
Job  24.  5  the  ic.yieldeth  food  for  them  and  children 
Fsal.  106.  9.  60  he  led  tlieni  through  the  depths  as 
through  the  w.  136.  16.  Mmos  2.  10. 
107.  35.  he  turneth  tliu  jr.  into  a  standing  water 
Cant.  3.  6.  who  is  this  conieth  out  of  the  w.  7  8. 5. 
Isa  14. 17. is  this  the  tnan  that  made  world  as  a  v>.  ? 
35.  1.  m.  and  solitary  place  shall  be  glad  for  them 

41.  18.  I  will  make  the  ic.  a  pool  of  water 

42.  11.  let  the  w.  and  cities  lift  up  their  voice 

50.  2.  at  my  rebuke  I  make  the  rivers  a  w. 

51.  3.  and  he  will  make  her  to.  like  Eden 
64.  10.  thy  holy  cities  are  w.  Zion  is  a  w. 

Jer.  2.  31.  have  I  been  a  w.  unto  Israel  1 
4.  26.  and  lo,  the  fruitful  place  was  a  w. 
12. 10.  have  made  my  pleasant  portion  adesol.  w. 
22.  C.  yet  surely  I  will  make  thee  a  7C.  Hos.  2.  3. 
i!;;'(;t.6.14.make  the  land  more  desolate  than  the  w. 
Joel  2.  3.  and  behind  them  a  uBsclate  w. 
3.  19.  and  Edom  shall  be  a  desolate  w. 
Zep/i.  2.  13.  he  will  maki;  Nineveh  dry  like  a  id. 

In  the  WILDERNESS. 
J\'am.  14.  22.  my  miracles  which  I  did  in  the  w. 
32. 15.  he  will  yet  again  leave  them  in  the  w.  and 
ye  shall  destroy  all  tliis  people,  Ezck.  29.  5. 
Deut.  8. 2.  thou  shall  remember  the  Lord  led  thee 
forty  yean,  in  the  w.  29.  5.  .Josh.  5.  6.  |  14.  10. 
16.  who  fed  thee  in  the  w.  with  manna 
,V£/i.9.5l.  forty  years  didst  thou  sustain  them  in  w. 
Psal.  95.  8.  as  in  the  day  of  temptation  in  the  w. 
Prov.  21.  19.  bet.'er  dwell  in  the  w.  than  with 
Ua.  32.  16.  then  j.idgment  shall  dwell  in  the  w. 
35.  6.  for  in  the  w.  Jjiall  waters  break  out 
40  3  llie  voice  of  l.im  that  cricth  in  the  w.  Mat. 
3.  3.  Mark  1.  3.  Luke  3.  4.  John  1.  23. 
41. 10. 1  will  plant  in  the  w.  the  cedar  and  oil-tree 

43.  19.  I  will  even  make  a  way  in  the  w. 
Jcr.  2.  2.  when  thou  wtntest  after  me  in  the  w. 

9.  2.  oh  that  I  had  i;i  the  w.  a  lodging-place 
31.  2.  people  that  were  left  found  grace  in  thew. 
48.  C.  flee  and  be  like  the  heath  in  Vie  w. 
J.am.  4. 19.  they  laid  wait  for  us  in  the  w. 
F.zek.  19.  13.  and  now  she  is  planted  in  the  w. 
20.  13.  Israel  rebelled  against  me  in  the  w. 

15.  I  lifted  up  my  hand  to  them  in  the  w.  23. 
34.  25.  and  they  sh^U  dwell  safely  in  the  w. 
Hos.  9.  10.  I  found  Israel  like  grapes  in  the  w. 
13.  5.  I  did  know  thee  in  the  w.  in  the  dry  land 
Mat.2. 1.  John  came  preaching?/!  tftc  w.  of  Judea 
15.  33.  whence  should  we  have  so  much  bread  in 
the  w.  to  fill  so  great  a  multitude  ?  Mark  8.  4. 
J.uke  15.  4.  leave  the  ninety  and  nine  in  the  w. 
.lets  7.  30.  an  angel  appeared  to  him  in  thew.28. 
2  Cor.  11.  26.  I  have  been  in  perils  in  the  w. 

Into  the  WILDERNESS. 
J.ev.  16.  21.  shall  send  hirnby  afit  maniViio  thew. 

22.  and  he  shall  let  go  the  goat  into  the  w. 
Eiek.  20.  10.  and  I  brought  them  into  the  w. 

35.  I  will  bring  you  into  the  w.  of  the  people 
Hos. 2. 14.  will  allure  her,  and  br'mghei  into  thew. 
Mat.  11.  7.  what  went  ye  out  into  the  w.  to  see? 
a  reed  shaken  with  the  wind  1  Luke  7.  24. 
J.uke  8.  29.  he  was  driven  of  the  devil  into  the  w. 
Jicts  21.  38.  which  leddest  into  the  w.  4000  men 
Rev.  12.  6.  and  the  woman  fled  into  the  w.  14. 
17.  3.  so  lie  carried  me  in  the  spirit  into  the  w. 

WILES. 
\'u.m.  25.  18.  for  they  vex  you  with  their  w. 
R'pA.e.  U.  able  toslarid  against  the  w.  of  the  devil 

WILILY. 
/'«fA.9.4.Gibconitcsdid  work  10.  and  took  old  sacks 

WILL, 
t(  that  faculty  of  the  sold  whereby  we  freely 
choose  or  refuse  thinffs.  It.is  of  the  nature 
of  the  will,  to  will  freely  whatsoruer  it  wills, 
for  the  will  cannot  be  eompilled:  but  it  is  unable, 
tillit  be  changed  by  irraceyto  move  itself  toaard 
Crod,and  to  will  anyisood  thinn  pleasing^  to  him. 
Psal.  110.  3.  .Sim ply  to  will  any  thins,  is  of 
nature;  but  to  will  what  is  ffood,  is  of  erace ; 
our  will  being  free  in  respect  of  sinful  acts, 
but  bound  in  respect  of  pood  works  till  it  be 
made  free  by  Chri.it.  John  8.  36,  If  the 
Son  therefore  shall  make  ynii  free,  ve  shall  be 
free  indeed.  Jlnd  in  John  I.").  5,  Without  me 
ye  can  do  nothing.  Jlnd  Phil.  2.  13,  It  is 
God  who  workelh  in  you.  both  to  will  and  to 
do  of  his  pood  pleasure,  .ind  .St.  .Austin  says, 
Voluntas  libera,  quia  libertns ;  libera  ad  pec- 
ratum.ncrvaari  juBtitinm.  That  doctrine thirre- 
fore  which  teaches,  "  thaltthrn graceis offered, 
ve  ma^  Ttfuta  it,  if  u-cviM;  and  if  wc  will 
(S64 


WIL 

we  may  receive  it ;"  is  to  be  looked  upon  as  con- 
trary to  the  scriptures. 
The  will  of  God    ii  taken,  (1)   For  his  absolute 
will,  which  nothing  can  witlistand.     Rom.  9. 
19,  For  who    hath  resisted  his  will  ?  (2)   For 
his  purpose  and   decree.    Eph.   1.   11,   Who 
worketli  all  things  after  the  counsel  of  his  own 
will ;  that  is,  as  he  has  most  tcistty  and  freely 
decreed.     (3)     Fur  his   laws  and  commands. 
Mat.  7.    21,   He  that  doeth    the   will  of  my 
Father  which  is  in  heaven.     So  in  Rom.  12.  2, 
That  ye  may  prove  what  is  that  good  and  ac- 
ceptable, and  perfect  will  of  God.     This  is  his 
rcneuled  will  contained  in  his  word,  which  is 
called  good,  because  it  enjoins  only  what  is  for 
our  benefit:  it  is  acceptable,  is/ uiediVnte  there- 
unto we  shall  be  accepted;  and  it  is  i)erfect, 
the  observance  thereof  will  make  us  perfect, 
2  Tim.  3.  17. 
Deut.  32.  Mj.  for  good  w.  of  him  that  dwelt  in  bush 
Psal.  27.  12.  deliver  me  not  to  w.  of  mine  enemies 
41.  2.  wilt  not  deliver  him  lo  w.  of  his  enemies 
F.zek.  10.  27.  delivered  thee  to  w.  of  tlieni  that  hale 
Mal.'i.  13.  orreceivethil  withgood  w. at  your  hand 
.1/«t.7.21.that  doeth  the  w.  of  my  Failier,  12.  50. 

18.  14.  it  is  not  the  w.  of  your  Father  in  heaven 
21.  31.  whether  of  tliein  did  the  10.  of  his  father? 

Luke  2.  14.  on  earth  peace,  good  w.  toward  men 
23.  25.  but  he  delivered  Jesus  lo  their  w. 
John  1.  13.  were  born,  not  of  the  w.  of  the  flesh 

4.  34.  meat  is  to  do  the  w.  of  him  that  sent  me 

5.  30.  I  seek  the  w.  of  my  Father  which  sent  me 

6.  39.  and  this  is  the  Father's  w.  who  sent  me,  4il/. 
Jlcts  21.  14.  saying,  the  w.  of  the  Lord  be  done 
Kph.  5.  17.  understanding  what  the  w.  of  the  L.  is 

6.  7.  with  good  w.  doing  service,  as  to  tlie  Lord 
Phil.  1.  15.  some  also  preach  Christ  of  good  w. 
Heb.  It).  10.  by  the  which  w.  we  are  sanctified 

1  Pet.i.'.i.  sutfice  to  have  wrought  the  lo.  of  Gentiles 

2  Pet.  1.21.  the  jiropliccy  came  not  by  theic.ofnian 

WILL  of  God. 
Ezra  7.  18.  that  do  aller  the  w.  o/your  God 
J/ar/.-3.35.  who  shall  do  the  w.  of  G.  is  my  brother 
John  1.  13.  born,  not  of  the  w.  of  man,  but  of  G. 
.flets  13.36.  served  his  generation  by  the  w.  of  G. 
Horn.  1.  10.  have  a  jiroaperous  journey  by  w.  of  G. 

8. 27.makes  inlercession  according  to  the  w.of  G. 

12.  2.  prove  that  acceptable  and  perfect  w.  of  G. 

15.  32.  I  come  to  you  with  joy,  by  the  w.  of  G. 
ICur.l.  1.  Paul  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ  by  the  w. 
of  G.  2  Cor.  1. 1.  Eph.  1. 1.  Col.  1. 1.  2  Tim.  1. 1. 
20(r.  8.  5.  gave  themselves  to  us  by  the  w.  of  G. 
Gal.l.  4.  deliver  us  from  evil  world  by  thew.  of  G. 
Eph.  6.  6.  doing  the  w.  of  God  from  the  heart 
Col.  4. 12.  may  stand  complete  in  all  the  w.  of  God 
1  Thcss.  4.  3.  for  this  is  the  w.  of  God,  5.  18. 
Heb.  10.  30.  after  ye  have  done  the  w.  of  God 
1  Pet.  2. 15.  so  is  the  w.  of  G.  that  ye  put  to  silence 

.3.  17.  for  it  is  better  if  the  w.  of  God  be  so 

4.  2.  live,  not  to  the  lusts  of  men,  but  to  w.  of  G. 

19.  them  that  sufier  according  lo  the  w.  of  God 

1  John  2.  17.  he  that  doeth  the  w.  of  God  abideth 

His  WILL. 
Dan.  4.  35.  and  he  doeth  according  to  his  w. 

8.4.  he  did  accord. to /u'.s  w.  \\  11.3.do/(is  w.  16,36. 
Luke  12.  47.  neither  did  according  to  his  w. 
.fohnl.  17.  if  any  man  will  Anhis  w.  he  shall  know 
.lets  22.  14.  that  thou  shouldcst  know  his  w. 
Rom.  2.  18.  knowest  his  w.  \\  9.  19.  resisted  his  w. 

1  Cur.  7.  37.  he  that  hath  power  over  his  own  w. 
10.  12.  his  w.  was  not  at  all  to  come  at  this  time 

F.ph.  1.  5.  according  to  the  good  pleasure  of  AiVtt. 

9.  made  known  lo  us  the  mystery  of /(/.•;  w. 
Col.  1.9.  might  be  filled  with  knowledge  of  Ai4-  w 

2  Tim.  2.  20.  were  taken  cajUivc  by  him  at  his  w. 
Heb.  13. 21.  perfect  in  every  good  work  lo  do  his  w. 
l.Jolin  5.  14.  if  we  ask  according  to  A(.<  ic  he  hears 
llev.  17.  17.  God  put  in  their  hearts  to  fulfil  his  w. 

My  WILL. 
Luke  22.  42.  this  oup,  not  my  w.  but  thine  be  done 
Acts  13.  22.  found  David,  whoshall  fulfil  all  my  w. 
1  Cor.  9.  17.  if  I  do  Ibis  thing  against  my  w. 

Own  WILL. 
Lev.  1.  3.  he  shall  offer  it  of  his  own  voluntary  w. 

19.  5.  ye  shall  olTer  it  as  your  own  w.  22.  19,  29. 
Dan.  11.  16.  he  shall  do  acconling  to  his  oicn  w. 
.lohn  5.  30.  because  I  seek  not  mine  own  w. 

0.  38.  I  came  from  heaven,  nottodomlne  own  w. 

F.ph.X.  11.  who  workelh  after  coun:<el  ofhisoicii  w. 

l/eb.lA.if'iftii  of  HolyGhost, according  lo  hisoicn  w. 

./oni.l.  IS.ofhis  own  w.  begat  ho  us  by  word  oflrulh 

Sec  Ski.k. 

Thy  WILL. 

Psal.  40.  8.  I  delight  to  do  thy  w.  O  my  God 

143.  10.  teach  me  to  do  thy  w.  thou  art  my  God 

Mot.  6.  10.  thy  w.  bo  done  in  earth,  Luke  11.2. 

20.  42.  if  this  cup  may  not  pass,  thy  w.  be  done 
Heb.  10.  7.  lo,  I  come  to  do  thy  w.  O  God,  9. 

WILLS. 
F.ph.  2.  t  3.  fulfilling  the  u.  of  the  flesh  and  mind 


WIL 

WILL. 

Deut.  21.  14.  thou  shall  let  her  go  whither  lUew 

Job  13.  13.  let  me  alone,  let  come  on  me  what  10 

Prov,  21.  1.  as  the  rivers  of  water,  he  turneth  lii« 

king's  heait  whitheisoever  he  <o. 

Dan.  4. 17.  God  ruleth  in  the  kingdom  of  men  and 

givelh  it  to  whomsoever  he  w.  25,  32.  |  5.  21 

Mat.S.X  I  uj.bethou  clean,  Markl.ii.  Lukeb.  13. 

20.15. is  it  not  lawful  lo  do  what  I  if.wilhniy  own? 

32.  what  w.  ye  that  I  shall  do  unto  you? 

26.39.  not  as  lie.  but  as  lliou  wilt,  Jtark  14.  30. 

27. 17.  whom  w.  ye  that  1  release  unto  you,  Barui^ 

has  or  Jesus  ?  21.  Mark  15.  9.  John  18.  39. 

JU'arA'6.25.1ic.tiiaUhou  give  meJuhuUuplist'stiead 

14.  7.  whensoever  ye  w.  ye  may  do  tliem  good 

15.  12.  what  w.  ye  Uien  lliat  I  should  dolo  him? 
Luke  4.  0.  to  whomsoever  I  w.  I  give  it 

12.  49.  and  what  w.  I,  if  it  be  already  kindled  ? 
.lohn 5.  21.evensolhe  Sonquickeneth  whom  he  w. 
9.27.why  hearitagain?  jc.  ye  also  be  his  disciples? 
15.7.ye  shall  ask  what  ye  w.  it  shall  be  lione  toyou 
17.  24.  I  to.  that  they  be  with  me  where  I  am 

21.  22.  if  I  w.  that  he  tarry  till  i  come,  23. 
.ids  18.  21.  I  w.  return  again  to  you,  if  God  will 
rtom.7.18.forto20.i8  presentwith  me,bultu  pcrfornc 

9.16.  therefore  hath  he  mercy  on  wiioni  he  /o.have 

mercy,  and  whom  he  ic.  he  hardeneth 

lCor.4. 19. 1  willcomeloyoushoilly,  iftheLd.  w. 

21.  what  w.  ye,  shall  I  come  to  you  with  a  rod 

7.  36.  let  him  do  what  he  20.  he  sinnelh  not 

39.  she  is  ai  liberty  to  be  married  to  whom  she  ic. 

12.  11.  dividing  lo  every  man  severally  as  he  w. 
2  Cor.  8.  11.  that  as  there  was  a  readiness  to  to. 
Phil.i.  '3.  God  worketh  in  you,  both  to  to. and  to  do 

1  'J'im.'i.ii.  I  w.  that  men  pray  every  where 
5.  14.  I  w.  that  the  younger  women  marry 

7'i(.3.8.tliese  things  I  it.that  thou  allirm  constantly 
Jam.  4.  15.  if  the  l,ord  w.  we  shall  do  this  or  that 
Rev.  11.  6.  to  smile  the  earth  as  often  as  they  10. 
22. 17.  whosoever  M.  let  him  lake  the  water  of  lifa 
WILL  not. 
2Sam.  13.  f  28.  w.  ye  not,  shice  I  have  commanded 
Psal.  80.  18.  so  w.  not  we  go  back  from  thee 
Ezek.  20.  3.  I  w.  not  be  inquired  of  by  you 
Amos  6.t  10.  K.  not  make  mention  of  name  of  Lord 

7.  8.  I  !o.  not  again  pass  by  them  anymore,  8.  2. 
Mat.  21.  29.  he  answered  and  said,  I  w.  nut 

26.  35.  though  I  should  die,  yet  w.  I  not  deny  thee 
Mark  14. 29. tho'  all  shall  be  otlended,  ye\  10.  not  I 
JoA)i5.40.yejc.notconie  tome  that  ye  may  have  life 

WILLETfl. 
/Jom.9.16.so  then  it  is  not  of  him  that  jo.nor  runneth 

WILFULLY. 
//<;A.]0.26.if  we  sin  w. after  we  have  received  truth 

WILLING. 
Gen.  24. 5.  the  woman  will  not  be  10.  to  follow  me 

8.  if  the  woman  will  not  be  w.  to  follow  thee 
Exod.  35.5.  whosoever  is  of  a  ir.  heart,  21, 22, 29 
ICAroji.  28.  9.  my  sun,  serve  God  with  a  w.  mind 
29.  5.  who  is  w.  to  consecrate  his  service  lo  Lord 
Job  39.  9.  will  the  unicorn  be  w.  to  serve  thee 
Psal.  110.  3.  thy  people  shall  be  w.  in  day  of  thy 

power 
Isa.  1.  19.  if  ye  be  io.  ye  shall  cat  good  of  the  land 
Mat.  1.  19.  not  w.  to  make  her  a  public  example 
26.  41.  the  spirit  is  w.  but  the  flesh  is  weak 
Mark  15.  15.  Pilate  w.  to  content  the  i^opls 
Luke  10.  29.  but  he,  w.  10  justify  himself,  said 

22.  42.  if  thou  be  w.  remove  this  cup  from  me 
2:1.  20.  Pilate  therefore  w.  to  release  Jesus 

John  5.  35.  ye  were  w.  for  a  season  to  rejoice 
Acts  24.  27.  Felix  a>.  to  shew  the  Jews  a  pleasure 
25.  9.  but  Festus  w.  to  do  the  Jews  a  pleasure 
27.43.but  the  centurion, !0. to  save  Paul, kept  them 
Rom.  9.  22.  what  if  God  w.  to  shew  his  wrath 

2  Cor.  5.  8.  w.  rather  to  be  absient  from  the  body 
8.3. they  were  lo.ofthemselves  beyond  their  power 

12.  if  there  be  first  a  if.  mind,  it  is  accepted 
1  Thess.  2.  8.  we  were  10.  to  have  imparled  unto  you 
I  'Piin.  6.18.  ready  todistribule,  w.  to  communicate 
Hrb.Ct.  17;  God,  70.  to  shew  lo  tho  heirs  of  promise 

13.  IS.  IC.  to  live  honestly  in  all  things 
2rtt.3.9.not  lo.thiit  any  should  perish,  but  all  come 

WILLINGLY. 
F.iod.Q^.'i.  an  ofl'cring  of  every  man  that  gives  le. 
.hidg.  5.  2.  the  people  10.  oflend  themselves,  9. 

8.  25.  we  will  10.  give  the  ear-rings  of  our  prey 

1  CAr.  29.6.  theprincesof  Israel  and  rulers  ofl"ered 

w.  9,  14,  17.  2  CAr.  35.  8.  Ezra  1.  6. 
I  3.  5. 

2  CAr.  17.  16.  Amasiah  v.  oflcred  himself  to  Cod 
.VfA.11.2.blPsscdthementlrat«.ofl".red  themsi  Ivea 
/'r»B.  31.  13.  she  worketh  w.  with  her  hands 
Lam.  3.  33.  he  doth  not  afllict  w.  nor  grieve 
Has.  5.  II.  Ephraim  10.  walked  after  commandm 
John  6.  21.  they  le.  received  hun  into  the  ship 
rtom.8.20.tliecroiilU'e  made  subject  lo  vanitynotio. 

1  Cvr.  9.  17.  if  I  do  this  thing  w.  I  have  a  rewar4 
Philrm.  14.  not  as  of  necessity,  but  w.  i  Pet  5.2. 

2  Pet.  3.  5.  for  this  Umy  jo.  oie  ignorant  of 


WIN 

VVILI-OWS. 
i.(»u.23  40. yp  eliall  tako  w.  ol'llie  brook  and  rejoice 
Job  4U.  22.  Uie  w.  of  tliu  brook  compass  him  uboul 
Psal.  137.  2.  we  hanged  our  harj>s  upon  llie  w. 
Jsa.  15. 7.  shall  carry  their  riches  to  tlie  brook  of  to 
4'1.4.they  shall  spring  up  as  ic.by  the  water-courses 

WXLLOVV-TKEE. 
f-zek.  17. 5.  by  great  waters,  and  he  set  it  as  a  w.-t. 

VVILL-VVOKSHIP. 
Col.  2.  23.  have  a  shew  of  wisdom  in  w.-worship 

WILT. 
Judg.  1. 14.  Caleb  said  to  her,  what  w.  thou?  Esth. 
5.  3.  jWut.20.  21.  Mark  10.  51.  Luke  18.  41. 

1  Sam.  1.  II.  if  thou  w.  look  on  thine  handmaid 
Psal.  60.  10.  w.  not  thou,  O  God  !  108.  11. 

85.  5.  w.  rhou  be  angry  with  us  for  ever  7 

6.  w.  thou  not  revive  us  again  to  rejoice  in  thee? 
Prov.  5.  20.  why  lo.  thou,  my  son,  be  ravished  1 
Jer,  3.  4.  tu.  thou  not  from  this  time  cry  unto  me  ? 
13.  27.  O  Jerusalem,  w.  thou  not  be  made  clean  ? 
JEze/i:.20.  4.  to.  thou  judge  them  son  of  man  ?  22.2. 
24.  19.  w.  thou  not  tell  us  what  these  things  are 
28.9.  w.  thou  yet  say  before  him  that  slayeth  thee? 
Jtfut.8.2.a  leper  worshii)ped,saying,Lord  if  thou  ic. 
thou  canst  make  me  clean,  jWarA  1.40.Z/uAc5.I2. 
13.2S.ic.thou  then  that  we  go  and  gather  them  up? 
15. 28.  O  woman,  be  it  unto  thee  even  as  thou  w. 
17.  4.  if  thou  w.  let  us  m^ike  three  tabernacles 
26.  17.  the  disciples  said,  where  w.  thou  that  we 
prepare  the  passover?  Mark  14.12.//uA;e22. 9. 
39.  not  as  I  wdl,  but  as  thou  !0.  Mark  14.  36. 
JMor46.22.kingsaid,  ask  of  me  whatsoever  thou  jc. 
JL,uke9.5i.  id.  thou  that  wo  command  tire  to  come? 
John  5.  6.  Jesus  said,  w.  thou  be  made  whole  ? 
Acts  1.  6  !c.  thou  at  this  time  restore  the  kingdom? 

WIMPLES. 

Isa.  3.  22.  the  Lord  will  take  away  mantles  and  w. 

WIN. 

2  Chron.  32.  1.  he  thought  to  w.  them  for  himself 
P/iil.  3.  8.  count  them  dung  that  I  may  to.  Christ 

WINNETH. 

Prov.  11.  30.  and  he  that  lo   souls  is  wise 
WI.VD. 

The  Hebrews  acknowledge  foiirprincipalwinds, 
as  we  do,  Ezek.  42.  16,  17,  18,  He  mea- 
sured the  east-side,  ut  Hehrcu,  the  ea*£-wind, 
<S-e.  Tke  east-vi\nA  is  called  in  Hebrew,  Ka- 
dim ;  tke  7ior(/i-wind,  Tza|)hon ;  the  south- 
wind,  Ddfom  ;  and  tke  ice.'.t-wind,  or  from 
the  Mediterranean  sea,  Rouach-IIajam.  Sulo- 
mon  says,  in  Prov.  25.  23,  Tkat  the  north- 
wind  disperses  the  clouds  and  the  rain; 
but  other  Interpreters  translate  it.  It  pro- 
duces rain.  The  wind  Euroclydon,  see  EU- 
ROCLYDON. 

The  powerful  operations  and  motions  of  Ood^s 
Spirit,  quickening  or  revinlngthe  heart  toward 
Ood,  are  compared  to  tke  blowing  of  tke  wind, 
John  3.  8.  For  as  it  is  with  the  wind,  man 
perceives,  by  the  effects  of  it,  that  there  is 
such  a  thing,  and  that  it  dues  blow,  yet  his 
ytwer  cannot  restrain  it,  neither  can  his  rea- 
ein  reach  to  know  whence  it  rises,  or  from  how 
far  it  cones,  or  how  far  it  reaches  ;  so  is  the 
spiritual  change  wrought  in  the  soul ;  freely, 
where,  in  whom,  when,  and  in  what  measure 
the  Spirit  pleases  ;  and  also  powerfully,  so  as 
to  make  an  evident  sensible  change,  though  tke 
manner  thereof  be  incomprekensible.  f'.lse- 
tohere  themotions  of  the  Spirit  arc  srt  forth  by 
wind,  as  in  Cant.  4.  16.  The  judgments  of 
Ood  are  compared  to  wind,  as  in  Isa.  27.  8, 
He  stayeth  his  roagh-ioind  in  the  day  of  his 
ea.at-wind.  He  assuages  the  fury  of  the  storm, 
and  mitigates  tke  severity  of  tke  judgment. 

It  is  said  in  Isa.  26.  18,  We  have  been  with 
child,  we  have,  as  it  were,  brought  fourth  wind ; 
that  is,  "  fi'e  have  been  in  expectation  of  help, 
and  deliverance  out  of  our  troubles,  but  our 
hopes  have  proved  empty  and  unsuccessful, 
and  we  have  not  been  able  to  do  any  thing 
towards  our  own  deliverance."  So  in  Hos. 
12.  1,  Ephraim  feedeth  on  wind :  "  The  ten 
tribes  flatter  themselves  with  vain  deluding 
hopes  of  hrlp  from  the  Egyptians  and  .Assy- 
rians." In  Mat.  7.  25.  all  sorts  of  tempta- 
g  tions  are  thus  described,  Th^  rain  descended, 
the  floods  came,  the  winds  blew.  Jlnd  in 
■Jer.  4.  11,  12.  the  coming  in  of  an  army 
swiftly  andfiercely,  destroying  all  before  them, 
is  expressed  by  a  dry  wind,  a  full  wind. 

The  .9postle  Paul  compares  vain  and  inconstant 
opinions  and  doctrines  to  wind.  Rph.  4.  14, 
Carried  about  with  every  WiHd  of  doctrine,  .^s 
the  wind  i«  a  subtile  body,  so  these  doctrines 
are  subtile,  but  without  substance  of  truth. 
The  wind  is  uncertain,  now  blowing  from  one 
quarter,  now  from  another,  n4>w  loud,  and  pre- 
sently .lilen. ;  so  false  doctrines  are  uncertain, 
now  making  agreat  nolsc,and iuddenlyvanish- 
035 


WIN 

ing-  The  wind  likewise  carricth  chaff,  stubble. 
and  such  like  things,  along  with  it,  but  houses 
well  founded,  stand  firm  ;  so  the  doctrines  of 
false  teachers  carry  aside  unstable  persons  ; 
but  he  that  is  rooted  in  faith  and  humility, 
knowing  his  misery  by  sin,  and  the  grace  of 
God  in  Christ,  will  not  be  moved  with  them. 

Gen.  3.  f  8.  walking  in  garden  in  the  w.  of  the  day 
8.  1.  God  made  a  w.  to  pass  over  the  earth 

Ezod.  15.  10.  thou  didst  blow  with  thy  w. 

jVum.  11.  31.  the  w.  brought  (piails  from  the  sea 

2  Sam.  22.  11.  he  rode  upon  a  cherub,  he  wasse«n 
upon  the  wings  of  the  w.  I'sal.  18. 10.  |  1114.  3. 

1  Kings  18.  45.  the  heaven  was  black  with  w. 
19.  11.  Lord  passed  by,  a  great  and  strong  w.  rent 

the  mountains,  but  the  Lord  was  not  in 
the  w. 

2  Kings  3. 17.  ye  shall  not  see  w.  nor  shall  see  rain 
.lob  1.  19.  there  came  a  w.  from  the  wilderness 

6.  26.  to  reprove  speeches  which  are  as  w. 

7.  7.  O  remember  that  my  life  is  w. 

8.  2.  the  words  of  thy  mouth  be  like  a  strong  w. 

21.  18.  they  are  as  stubble  before  the  w. 
30.  15.  terrors  pursue  my  soul  as  the  w. 

22.  thou  liftest  me  up  to  the  w. 

37.  21.  men  si'e  not  light  in  the  clouds,  but  the  w. 
passeth  and  cleanselh  them,  Fsal.  103.16. 

Psal.  1.  4.  like  chaff  which  the  w.  drives  away 
78.  39.  w.  that  passeth  away  and  comes  not  again 
135.  7.  be  bringeth  the  w.  out  of  his  treasuries 
147.18.  he  causeth  his  ?c.  to  blov,',  and  waters  How 

Prov.  1 1.  29.  troubleth  his  house,  he  shall  inherit  !C. 

25.  11.  is  like  clouds  and  w.  without  rain 

23.  the  north  w.  driveth  away  rain 
27.  16.  whosoever  hideth  her,  hideth  the  w. 
30.  4.  who  hath  gathered  Ihe  w.  in  his  fists 

Eccl.  1.  6.  w.  goeth  toward  the  south,  and  turneth 
about  to  the  north,  and  the  w.  returneth 
again 
5.  16.  what  profit  hath  he  that  laboured  for  the  w 
II.  4.  he  that  observeth  the  w.  shall  not  sow 
Cant.  4.  16.  awake,  O  north-?o.  come,  thou  south 
Isa.  7.  2.  as  trees  are  moved  with  the  w. 

11.  15.  with  bis  w.  shake  his  hand  over  the  river 

26.  18.  we  have  as  it  were  brought  forth  w. 

27.  8.  he  stayeth  his  rough  w.  in  day  of  his  east-tc 
32.  2.  a  man  shall  be  as  a  hiding-place  from  the  w 
41.  16.  the  w.  shall  carry  them  away,  57.  13. 

29.  their  molten  images  are  w.  and  confusion 

64.  6.  our  iniquiiies,  like  w.  have  taken  us  away 

.Ter.  4.  12.  a  full  w.  from  those  places  shall  come 

5.  13.  prophets  shall  become  lo.  word  not  in  them 

10.  13.  brings  the  w.  out  of  his  treasuries,  51. 16. 

22.  22.  the  w.  shall  eat  up  all  thy  pastures 
Ezek.  5.  2.  a  third  part  thou  shalt  scatter  in  the  w 

12.  14.  I  will  scatter  toward  every  w.  all  that  are 

about  him  to  help  him 
37.  9.  prophesy  to  the  !C.  son  of  man,  say  to  theaj. 
Dan.  2.  35.  and  the  w.  carried  them  away 
Hos.  4.  19.  the  w.  hath  bound  her  up  in  her  win 
8.  7.  they  have  sown  w.  and  shall  reap  whirlwind 

12.  1.  Ephraim  feedeth  on  w.  he  follows  east-ic. 
Jiwos  4.  13.  for  lo,  he  that  createth  the  w. 
Jiinah  1.  4.  Lord  sent  out  a  great  w.  into  the  sea 
Mic.  2.  t  II.  if  a  nian  walk  with  the  w.  and  lie 
Z.ech.  5.  9.  and  the  w.  was  in  their  wings 

Mat.  11.  7.  a  reed  shaken  with  Ihe  w.  Luke  7.  24. 
14.  24.  w.  wascontrarv,  Mark  6.  48.  Jicts  27.  4. 
32.  thej^i.  ceased,  Mark  4.  39.  |  6.  51. 
.Tohn  3.  8.  the  w.  bloweth  where  it  listeth 
.^cts  2.  2.  a  sound  from  heaven,  as  of  a  mighty  w. 
Eph.  4.  14.  carried  about  with  every  w.  of  doctrine 
.fam.l.  6.  like  a  wave  driven  with  the  w.  and  tossed 
Rev.  6.  13.  when  she  is  shaken  of  a  mighty  lo. 

7.  1.  that  the  ic.  should  not  blow  on  the  earth 

WINDS. 
.fob  28.  25.  to  make  the  weight  for  the  w. 
F.iek.  37.  9.  come  from  the  four  w.  O  breath 
.Vo(.  7. 25.  the  lo.  blew,  and  beat  on  that  house,  27. 

8.  26.  he  arose  and  rebuked  the  w.  Luke  8.  24. 
27.  whatmanripr  of  man  is  this  that  even  the  ?c 

and  sea  obey  him  ?  Marki.  41.  Luke 
8.  25. 
.lam.  3.  4.  ships,  tho*  great,  are  driven  of  fierce  7^. 
.Tude  12.  they  are  clouds  carried  about  of  w. 
See  East,  Four,  Scatter,  SxoRMy  ■ 
WINDY. 
Psal.  .55.  8.  I  would  hasten  from  the  w.  storm 

WINDOW. 
Gen.  6.  Ifi.  a  ?/).  shalt  thou  make  to  the  nrk 
P.fi.Noah  oiiened  thejc.  of  the  ark  which  he  made 
26.  8.  the  kins  of  Gerar  looked  out  at  a  w. 
.Tosh.  2.  15.  Rahab  let  the  sfiiesdown  through  ate. 

21.  she  bound  the  scarlet  line  in  the  w. 
.Tudg.  .5.  28.  Sisera's  mother  looked  out  at  a  w. 
1Sam.6.  16.  Michal  looked  throiieh  a  m.eaw  David 
2/irini'.«9.30.  Jezebel  painted, and  looked  out  at  a  w. 

13.  17.  and  he  said,  open  the  w.  enstwar<l 
Prov.  7.  6.  at  the  w.  of  my  house  I  looked  through 
Acts  20.  9.  there  sat  in  a  ui.  a  certain  young  man 


WIN 

2  Cor.  11. 33.  thro' a  w.  was  I  let  down  in  abushe. 
WINDOWS. 

Gen.  7.  II.  and  the  w.  of  heaven  wore  opened 
8.  2.  and  the  w.  of  heaven  were  stopped 

2  Kings  7.  2.  if  the  Lo-d  make  w.  in  heaven,  19. 

/^;ccM2.3.those  that  look  out  uf  the  w.  be  darkened 

C(t/it.  2.  9.  my  beloved  looked  forth  at  the  w. 

Isa.  24.  18.  for  the  id.  from  on  high  are  open 
54.  12. 1  will  make  thy  w.  of  agates 
ti0.8.whoare  these  that  liee  as  tlie  doves  to  their  le. 

Jer.  9.  21?  for  death  is  come  up  into  our  w. 
22.  14.  woe  to  him  that  cutteih  liim  out  w. 

Dan.  6.  10.  his  w.  being  ojicn  in  his  chamber 

.loci  2.  9.  they  shall  enter  in  at  the  w.  like  a  thief 

Zcph.  2.  14.  their  voice  shall  sing  in  the  w. 

Mai.  3.  10.  if  I  will  not  open  you  the  w.  of  heaven 
WINE. 

Several  of  the  ancients  were  uf  opinion,  that  wine 
was  not  in  use  bcj'ore  the  deluge,  and  that  A~oah 
was  ike  first  who  used  thisliquur.  If  wine,  say 
thnj,  had  been  known  before  the  Jiuod,  Jibtl 
would  nut  have  failed  to  bring  an  offering  of  it 
to  the  Lord,  and  jVoah  uuuld  have  been  upon 
his  guard,  so  as  not  to  have  dranJi  of  it  to  ex- 
cess. But,  on  the  other  hand,  ilisviaiutaincd 
by  others,  that  it  is  much  more  probable  that 
the  first  men  were  -not  ignorant  of  the  use  of 
wine,  which  is  a  liquor  so  generally  useful  and 
agreeable,  that  it  could  scarcely  be  unknown 
even  to  Mdam  himself.  ..ind  as  to  JVixiA,  they 
say,  that  tkoughhe  kneic  the  intoxicating  qua- 
lity of  wine,  yet  he  might  be  deceived  in  the 
strength  of  it,  and  think,  tkat  the  quantity  he 
drank  of  it  was  not  capable  of  causing  the 
drunkenness  in  him  that  he  afterwards  J'ound 
it  did. 

There  7cere  many  excellent  vineyards  in  Pales- 
tine;  and  to  shew  how  great  a  number  lliere 
should  be  of  these  in  the  single  inheritance  of 
the  tribe  of  Judah,  the  patriarch  Jacob  says  of 
his  son  Judah,  He  washed  his  garments  in  i 
wine,  and  his  clothes  in  the  blood  of  grapes, 
Gen.  49.  II.  The  use  uf  wine  was  forbidden 
to  tke  priests  during  all  the  time  they  ware  m 
the  tabernacle,  and  employed  in  the  service  of 
the  altar.  Lev.  10.  9.  Drunkenness  is  so 
odious  a  sin  in  itself,  especially  in  a  minister, 
and  most  of  all  in  the  time  of  his  administra- 
tion of  sacred  things,  that  theuse  of  wiae  was 
strictly  forbidden  on  those  occa.^'ions.  This 
liquor  was  also  forbidden  lo  the  J\raiaritcs, 
Num.  6.  .3. 

In  Gen.  27.  28,  37,  Corn  and  wine  denote  all 
sorts  of  temporal  good  thivirs,  which  were 
more  frequently  promised  and  bestowed  under 
the  Old  Testanient,  but  were  types  of  spirit tiai 
blessings.  In  the  style  uf  the  sacred  penmen, 
the  wine,  or  the  cup,  often  represents  the  anger 
of  God.  Psal.  60.  3,  Thou  hast  made  us  to 
drink  the  wiiie  of  astonishment.  Jlytd  in  Jer. 
25.  15,  Take  the  wine-oiip  of  this  fury  at  my 
hand,  and  cause  all  the  nations  to  whom  I 
send  thee  to  drink  it.  They  were  used  to  ad- 
minister wine,  by  way  of  medicine,  to  such  at 
were  in  trouble  and  sorrow.  Prov.  31.  6, 
Give  strong  drink  to  him  that  is  ready  to 
jierish,  and  wine  to  those  that  be  of  heavy 
hearts.  The  Rabbins  say,  that  they  used  to 
givew'me  and  strong  liquors  to  those  that  were 
condemned  to  die,  at  their  execution,  to stupify 
them,  and  take  off  some  part  of  the  fear  and 
sense  of  their  pain :  There  were  certain  chari- 
table iBomcn  at  .Jerusalem,  as  they  tell  us, 
who  used  to  mix  certain  drugs  with  wine,  to 
make  it  stronger,  and  more  capable  of  extin- 
guishing thesinse  of  pain..  Somi^ihink  it  was 
such  a  kind  of  mixture  that  was  offered  to  our 
Saviour  to  drink,  before  he  was  fastened  to  the 
cross.  Mark  15.  23,  And  thov  srave  him  lo 
drink  wine  mingled  with  myrrh,  but  he  received 
it  not. 

The  wine  of  Ilelbon.  Eiekiel  speaks  of  this 
wine  that  was  soldat  the  fairs  of  Tyre,  Kzek. 
27.  IS,  Some  sny  that  this  wine  ira.<i  well 
known  to  tke  ancients;  they  culled  it  Chiii- 
bonium  vinum.  It  was  made  at  Dnmasrus, 
and  the  Persians  hod  plantcdvivrynrds  there, 
on  purpose,  as  Posidonius  nfftrms.  Others 
make  it  a  common  name,  gweet  or  fat  wine; 
for  Helbon  comes  from  a  word  that  signifies 
fat.. 

The  wine  of  Lebanon.  Hosea  speaks  of  this 
wine,  Hos.  14.  7,  The  scent  thereof  shall  be 
as  the  wine  of  Lebanon.  The  wines  of  those 
sides  of  mount  Lebanon  thai  hod  a  good  exposi- 
tion to  the  sun,  were  heretofore  muck  esteemed. 
But  some  think,  tkat  the  Hebrew  text,  wine 
of  Lebanon,  may  signify  a  sweet-scented  wine ; 
wine  (n  which  perfumes  arc  mixed,  or  other 
drugs,  to  make  it  morcpalatable,  and  of  a  better 


WIN 

fiatour.  Odoriferous  wines  were  not  unknown 
to  t/ie  Hebrews.  In  Cant.  B.  -.  iiieiiliuji  io>  mad:. 
of  a  medicated  wine,  Bjiiced  wine,  wine  mizttd 
with  jierfumes.  The  wines o/'  Palestine  being 
headi/,lhe>j  used  to  guatiji/  them  wiUi  water,  that 
tkey  might  be  drunk  without  any  tnconveiiience. 
Piov.  y.  2,  5,  She  hatli  niingiijd  lier  wine: 
Come,  drink  of  the  wiue  which  1  liave  mingled. 

The  wicked  eat  tlie  bread  of  wickedness,  and 
drink  llie  wine  ol"  violence,  Frov.  4.  17.  that  is, 
"  theij  are  maintained  with  illgotten  goods,  or 
they  abuselhegoodthings  that  (jod gives  them; 
they  offend  him  by  the  bad  use  they  make  vf 
the  necessaries  of  life."  In  Amos  \i.  8.  it  is 
said,  They  drink  the  witie  of  the  condonincd 
in  the  house  of  tlieir  gud :  "  'J'hey  drink  the 
wine,  tlicy  make  themselves  merry  at  the  expence 
of  those  they  have  unjustly  condemned."  The 
Septaagint  say,  "  They  drink  w'xnu  earned  by 
their  slanders."  The  Chaldec,  (Ae  wiiieofrapine. 
In  Mat.  y.  It,  n.  our  J.ord  Jesus  Christ  tells 
the  disciples  of  John  the  Baptist,  who  inquired 
the  reason  why  they  and  the  Pharisees  did  fust 
often,  but  his  disciples  did  not  fast,  that  men 
do  not  put  new  wine  into  old  bottles ;  else 
the  bottles  break,  and  the  wine  runneth  out, 
and  the  bottles  perish.  Our  Saviour  hereby 
tells  us,  that  it  was  not  fit  fur  him  to  impose 
upon  his  disciples,  who  were  as  yet  but  weak  in 
grace  and  spiritual  strength,the  severe  exercise 
offreijucnt  and  eitraordinaryfasling,lcst  they 
sItuiUd  be  discouraged  thereby,  and  so  fall  ojf; 
or  lest  it  should  produce  hatred  and  contempt 
instead  of  obedience  :  But,  adds  he,  they  put 
now  wine  into  new  bottles,  and  butli  are  per- 
sorved:  ^^My  disciples  must  befitted  by  degrees, 
and  strengthened  for  such  exercises,  and  then 
they  willperfurm  them  readily  and  acceptably." 
Wme  is  put  for  (rospel  provisions,  Isa.  2j.  G. 
Fur  consitlatwns,  I'rov.  31.  (5.  Jlnd  for  the 
blood  of  Christ,  Mark  14.  25. 

Gen.  y.  24.  Noah  awoke  from  his  w.  and  knew 

14.  18.  Melchizcdek  brought  forth  bread  and  w. 
4y.ll. he  washed  his  garmunis  in  «;.  and  clutlies  m 

12.  his  eyes  were  red  with  w.  hcs  teetli  white 
Eiod.  29.  40.  with  the  fourth  part  of  a  hin  of  70. 
for  a  drink-ortering,  /..ev.  i.i.  13.  JVam.  15.5. 
A'um.  6.  3.  he  shall  separate  himself  from  w. 

15.  JO.  for  adrinkolfering  half  a  hin  of  w.  28.  14. 
23.  7.  shall  cause  the  strong  w.  to  be  poured  out 

JJent.  32.  33.  their  w.  is  the  poison  of  dragons 
Judir.  y.  13.  leave  w.  which  cheereth  God  and  man 
ly.ly.there  is  also  bread  and  lo. forme  and  handm. 

1  Sam.  1.  14.  Eli  said,  put  away  thy  w.  from  thee 
25.  37.  when  the  w.  was  gone  out  of  Nabal 

2  .Sum.  0.  ly.  to  every  one  a  cake  of  bread,  agnod 

piece  of  flesh,  and  a  tlagun  of  w.  1  Chron. 
IC.  3. 
13.  28.  when  .Amnon's  heart  is  merry  with  w. 
If).  2.  the  w.  that  such  as  be  falnl  may  drink 
A'eA.  2.  1.  w.  was  before  him,  I  took  up  the  w, 
5.  15.  the  other  governors  hail  taken  bread  and  w. 
18.  and  once  in  ten  days  store  of  all  sorts  of  ic. 
13.  15.  lading  asses  with  w.  and  grapes  and  tigs 
Eith.  1.  7.  they  gave  them  royal  w.  in  abundance 

10.  the  heart  of  the  king  was  merry  with  w. 
5.  6.  king  said  to  Esther  at  the  bampietof  w.  7.  2. 
7.  7.  the  king  arising  from  the  banquet  of  w. 
Job  1.  13.  drinking  10.  in  eldest  brother's  house,  18. 
32.  19.  behold,  my  belly  is  as  w.  that  hath  no  vent 
Psal.  75.  8.  tiie  w.  is  red,  it  is  full  of  mixture  _ 
78.  05.  mighty  man  that  shouteth  by  rea.son  of  ip. 
104.  15.  IB.  that  maketh  glad  the  heart  of  man 
Prot!.'.).2.  killed  her  beasts,  she  hath  mingled  hertc. 
20.  1.  w.  is  a  mocker,  strong  drink  is  raging 
23. 29,  30.  w'lo  hath  woe  7  who  hath  sorrow  ?  they 
that  tarry  long  at  the  w.  they  that  go  tn 
seek  mixed  w. 
31.  look  not  thou  on  the  w.  when  it  is  red 
31.  f).  give  w.  to  those  that  be  of  heavy  hearts 
Eccl.  2.  3. 1  sought  in  my  heart  to  give  myself  to  w. 
10.  19.  w.  maketh  merry,  but  money  answerelh 
Cant.  1.  2.  for  thy  love  is  better  than  w.  4.  10. 
5.  1.  I  have  drnnk  my  w.  with  my  milk,  eat 
7.  9.  and  the  roof  of  my  mouth  like  the  best  w. 
Isa.  1.  22.  thy  silver  dross,  thy  w.  mixt  witli  water 
5.  II.  that  continue  till  night  till  w.  inllame  them 
K.  pipe  and  w.  nre  in  their  feasts,  but  regard  not 
22.  13.  eating  flesh  and  drinking  w.  let  us  eat 

24.  11.  there  is  a  crying  for  w.  m  the  sireela 

27.  2.  a  vineyard  of  red  w.  \\  .55.  1.  come,  'niy  w. 

28.  1.  valleys  of  them  that  are  overcome  wiili  w. 
7.  Ihev  have  also  erreil  thro'  w.  and  thro'  strong 
drink  out  of  the  way, they  are  swnllowed  up  of  w. 

2':>.  9.  they  are  drunken,  but  not  with  70.  51.  21. 
5ii.  12.  come  ye,  say  they,  I  will  fetch  w. 
ler.  23.  9.  like  a  man  whom  w.  hath  ovcrromo 

25.  15.  Hike  the  w.  cup  of  this  fury  at  my  hand 
35.  5.  pots  full  of  w.  II  40.  12.  Jews  gathered  7*. 
48.  33  1  have  caused  ie.  to  fail  from  wino-prcsies 

mi 


WIN 

./fr.  51.7.  nations  have  drunken  of  her  ic.  are  mad 
Ezek.  27.  lb.  Damascus  traded  in  w.  ol  Helhon 
Van.  1.  5.  thokinggave  of  the  to.  which  he  drank 

8.  but  purposed  not  to  defile  himself  with  the?c. 
5.  1.  Belshazzar  drank  10.  before  the  thousand,  4. 

2.  while  he  tasted  w.  |{  23.  concubines  drunk  w. 
lU.  3.  neither  came  flesli  nor  w.  in  iny  mouth 

Hos.  2.  9.  take  away  my  w.  in  the  season  thereof 
3.  1.  who  look  to  other  gods  and  love  flagons  ot'w. 
14.  7.  the  scent  shall  be  as  the  10.  of  Lebanon 

.loel  1.  5.  weep  and  howl,  all  ye  drinkers  ut'  w. 

JJic.  2.  11.  saying,  1  will  jirophesy  to  thee  of  jr. 

Hab.  2.  5.  yea  also,  because  he  transgresseth  by  w. 

Zech.'^.  15.  drink,  and  make  a  noise,  as  through  w. 
10.  7.  their  heart  shall  rejoice,  as  through  w. 

Lukel.  33.  for  John  came,  neither  drinking  7/5. 

Julia  2.  3.  and  when  they  wanted  w.  the  mother 
of  Jesus  saithunlo  him,  they  have  no  w. 

9.  had  tasted  the  water  that  was  made  w.  4.  4G. 

10.  every  man  at  the  beginning  doth  set  forth 

good  70.  but  thou  hast  kept  good  w.  till  now 
Eph.  5. 18.  be  not  drunk  with  w.  wherein  is  excess 
1  Tim.  3.  3.  not  given  to  w.  8.  Tit.  1.  7.  [  2.  3. 
5.  23.  use  a  little  w.  for  thy  stomach's  sake 
1  Pet.  4.  3.  when  we  walked  in  excess  of  w. 
Rev.  1(5.  19.  give  her  the  cup  of  the  w.  of  wrath 
17.  2.  drunk  with  w.  of  her  fornication,  18.  3. 
See  Bottle,  ConN,  Drink,  New,  OtfLiuNos, 
Oil,  SU'kkt. 
WfNE-BlBBER,  S. 
Proo. 23. 20.  be  nut  with  w.-bibber.f,  eaters  offlesh 
Mat.  11. 19.  behold  a  man  a  w.-bibber,  Lukel.  34. 

WINE  BOTTLES. 

Josh.  9.  4.  Gibooniles  took  w.-bottlcs  old  and  rent 

13.  these  bottles  of  w.  which  we  filled  were  new 

WINE-CELL.\RS. 

1  Chron.  27.  27.  over  the  w.-cellars  was  Zabdi 

WINE-FAT. 
Isa.  63.  2.  like  him  that  ireadeth  in  the  w.-fat 
Mark  12.  1.  he  digged  a  place  for  the  w.-fat 

WINE-PllESS. 

J\rum.  18  27.  as  the  fulness  of  the  iB.-prcss,  30. 

Deut.  15.  14.  shalt  furnish  him  out  of  thy  w.-press 

Judg.6.11.G\<iaon  threshed  wheat  by  the  w.-press 

7.25.  Zeeb  they  slew  at  the  w.-press  of  Zceb 

2/r7n/?-«6.  27.  shall  I  help  thee  out  oi\he  w.-prtss7 

Isa:5.%0i  vineyard, he  also  made  a  w.-press  therein 

63.  3.  I  trodden  the  w.-press  alone,  none  with  me 

Lam.  1.  1.5.  trodden  daughterofJudah  as  inn  w.-p. 

//»s.y.2.  the  floor  and  w.-press  shall  not  feed  them 

Mat.  21.  33.  digged  a  w.-press  in  it,  and  let  it  out 

Rev.  14.19.  the  angel  cast  it  into  the  great  to. -;)rc.«s 

20.  the  w.p.  was  trodden  without  the  city,  blood 

came  out  of  the  lo.  press  to  the  horse- bridles 

19.  15.  he  treadelb  ic.-pres.'!  of  the  wrath  of  God 

WINE-PRESSES. 
J^i'h.  13. 15.  I  saw  simie  treading  70.-;).  on  sabbath. 
Job  24.  11.  tread  their  w.-presses  and  sufler  thirst 
./er.  48.  33.  caused  wine  to  fail  from  the  w.-presses 
Zech.  14.  10.  inhabited  upon  the  king's  w.-presses 

WINES. 
/aa.25.6.  makeafeast  of  70.  on  the  lees  well  refined 

WING. 

By  the  name  wing,  the  Hebrews  understand  not 

only  the  wings  of  birds,  but  also  divers  things 

which  have  same  kind  of  resemblance  to  wings, 

«.•;,  (1)   The  lappet  or  skirt  of  airarmcnt,  Rulh 

3.  9,  Sfiread  thy  skirt  over  thine  handmaid, 
in  Hebrew  thy  wing.  Jlnd  in  Jer.  2.  34, 
In  thy  skirts,  Heb.  wings,  is  found  the  blood 
of  the  Boula  of  the  poor  innocents.  (2)  The 
wings  of  an  army.  Isaiah  speaking  of  the  ar- 
my of  the  king  of  .Assyria,  that  was  coming 
into  the  land  of  ./uilah,  say-f.  The  stretching 
out  of  his  /oiTi^rs  shall  fill  the  breadth  of  thy 
land,  O  Immaniiel,  Isa.  8.  8.  Sec  also  Jer. 
48.  40.  (3)  Wing  is  put  for  the  eitrcniity  or 
utmost  part  of  a  country.  Job  38.  13,  'J'hat 
it  might  take  hold  of  the  ends  of  the  earth,  i;i 
Heb.  the  lOin^s  of  the  earth.  .So  in  Isa.  24- 
16,  From  the  uttermost  part  of  the  earth 
h.'ive  wo  heard  songs:  the  Hebrew  says,  from 
the  wing  of  the  earth.  (4)  //  /.*  put  for  the 
sails  iif  a  ship,  Ua.  18.  I,  Woe  lo  tho  land 
shadowing  with  wings:  meaning  F.gjipt,  which 
abounded  with  ships,  whosesails  are  like  wings, 
that  shadow  the  ship.    (5)  The  name  of  wwi-s 

,  is  given  lo  the  sun-beams.  Mal-  4.  2,  The 
Run  of  righteousness  shall  arise  with  healing 
in  his  wings.  7'Ais  bring  applied  to  Christ, 
denotes  tkat  he  should  appear  in  the  flesh,  and 
by  his  doctrine,  merit,  and  Spirit,  should 
bring  a  remedy  for  all  spiritual  sicknesses 
and  diseases.  Some  have  obsrrned,  that  by 
the  word  wing»,  may  be  insinuated  the  healing 
virtue  that  went  forth  from  Christ  lo  such  as 
by  faith  did  but  touch  the  hem  of  Aw  gar- 
v'tent,  Mat.  9.  20,  21,  22.  (ti)  Wing  is  put 
for  the  balllem-nt  of  a  house.  Mat.  4.  5,  The 
dovil  sot  our  Saviour  on  a  pinnaclo  or  wing 


WIN 

of  the  temple.  (7)  Wings,  in  afi<;-urattoe  and 
metaphorical  sense,  are  put  for  protection  01 
defence.  God  says  in  Exod.  19.  4,  thai  ha 
bare  his  people  on  the  icings  of  eagles;  that  is, 
"  that  he  had  brought  them  safely  out  of  Egypt, 
"  as  an  eagle  carries  its  young  ones  under  its 
"  icings."  Jjavid  begs  of  God  to  hide  liiiu  ua- 
der  his  wings,  to  protect  and  defend  htm,  oi  a 
hen  doth  her  chickens  under  her  wings,  Psal. 
17.  8.  .■3nd  in  Psal.  31).  7.  he  .lays,  that  the 
children  of  men  put  their  trust  under  ihe  sha- 
dow of  his  wings. 
Gen.  7.  f  14.  every  bird  of  every  10.  went  into  aril 

1  Ki7igs6.-2-i.  five  cubits  was  one  (o.of  the  cherub, 

tive  cubits  the  other  iw.  27.  2  Chron.  3. 11, 12. 
Psal.  148.  t  10.  birds  of  tc.  praise  the  Lord 
Isa.  10.  14.  and  tliuro  was  none  that  moved  the  ic. 

24.  t  16.  from  the  w.  of  the  earih  we  heard  songi 
Ezek.  17.  23.  under  it  shall  dwell  fowl  of  every  a. 

3U.  I  17.  speak  to  the  foul  of  every  w. 

WJNGS. 
F.xod.}0.i.yo  have  seen  howl  bare  you  on  eagle' 10 

25.  20.  cheruhims  stretch  forth  their  to.  covering 
tli^mercy-i=eat  with  their  w.  37.  9. 1  Kings  8.  7. 

Aci).  1.  17.  he  shall  cleave  it  with  the  10.  thereof 
Deiit.  22.  t  12.  make  fringes  ujion  the  four  w. 
32.  II,  as  an  eagle  spreadeth  abroad  her  70.  taketh 
her  yuung,  heareth  them  on  her  10. 
Ruth  2.  12.  under  wlio^e  70.  thou  art  come  to  trust 

2  Sam.  22.  11.  he  was  seen  upon  the  10.  of  the  wind 
Job  37.  t  3.  his  lightning  to  the  70.  of  the  earth 

38.  t  13.  it  might  take  hold  of  the  10.  of  the  earlli 

39.  13.  gavest  thou  the  goodly  to.  to  the  peacock? 

or  TO.  and  feathe.-s  lo  the  ostrich  1 
Psal.  17.  8.  hide  me  under  the  shadow  of  thy  ic. 
18.  10.  he  did  fly  on  the  to.  of  the  wind,  104.  3. 
36.  7.  theriforo  men  put  their  trust  under  the 
•1  shadow  of  thy  70.  57.  1.  |  61.  4.  |  91.  4. 

55.3.  I  said.  Oh  that  I  bad  w.  like  a  dovu 
63.  ?.  in  the  shadow  of  thy  10.  will  I  rejoice 
68.  13.  yet  shall  ye  be  as  the  to.  of  a  dove 
139.  9.  if  I  take  the  to.  of  Ihe  morning  and  dwell 
Prov.  23.  5.  riches  make  themselves  70.  they  fly 
Eccl.  10.  20.  that  which  hath  to.  shall  tell  matter 
Isa.  6.  2.  stood  the  seraphims  each  one  had  six  10. 
8.  8.  the  stretching  out  of  his  to.  shall  fill  thy  land 
11.  1 12.  gather  Judah  from  the  to.  of  the  earth 
18.  1    woe  lo  the  land  shadowing  with  w. 

40.  31.  they  shall  mount  up  with  to.  as  eagles 
Jer.  48.  9.  give  70.  to  Moab,  it  may  fly  and  get  away 

40.  behold,  he  shall  spread  his  to.  over  Moab 

49.  22.  behold,  he  shall  spread  his  jo.  over  Bozrah 

Ezek.  1.  6.  every  one  had  four  faces  and  four  to. 

9.  their  w.  were  joined  ||  10.  12.  to.  full  of  eyes 

24.  I  heard  the  noise  of  their  jo.  3.  13.  |  10.  5. 

when  they  stood,  they  let  down  their  10.  25. 

17.  3.  a  great  eagle  with  great  70.  long-wing(  d 

7. there  was  also  another  great  eagle  with  great  10 

Dan.  7.  4.  the  first  was  like  a  lion  and  had  eagles' 

TO.  I  beheld  till  the  to.  thereof  were  plucked 

6.  another  having  on  the  back  four  w.  of  a  fowl 

Hos.  4.  19.  tho  wind  hath  bound  her  uji  in  her  w. 

ZecA.5.9.two  women,  and  the  wind  was  in  their  jo. 

Mal.  4.  2.  sun  of  right,  arise  with  healing  in  his  10. 

Mat.  22.  37.  how  often  would  1  have  gathered  as  a 

hen  gather. her  chickens  under  her70./,t//.«13.34. 

Rev.  9.  9.  the  sound  of  their  70.  as  of  many  horsei 

12.14. to  the  woman  were  given  two  10.  of  an  eagle 

WINGED. 
^(•71.1.21.  God  created  every  to.  fowl  after  his  kind 
Deut.  4.  17.  and  make  the  likeness  of  any  70. fowl 
K:cA.17.3.ngreat  eaglowith  great  wings, long-to.of 
divers  colours,full  olfenthers,caineto  Lebanon 
WINK.  * 

.lob  15.  12.  and  what  do  thine  eyes  ?o.  at  t 
Psal.  35.  19.  neither  let  them  w.  with  the  eye 

WINKED. 
.^cts  17.  30.  and  times  of  this  isnoranco  God  w.  at 

WINKETH. 
Prnv.  fi.  13.  a  wicked  man  70.  with  his  cyog 
10.  10.  he  that  w.  with  ihe  eve,  causclh  sorrow 

WINNOWED. 
fsa.  30.  24.  which  hath  been  ir.  with  the  shovel 

WINNOWEST. 
Psal.  139.  t  -■  tlioii  in.  mv  path  and  lying  down 

WINNOWETH. 
Ruth  3.  2.  behold,  Ron/.  ir.  barley  to  night  in  floor  >• 

WINTER. 
Gen.  8.  22.  summer  and  to.  shall  not  cense 
P.ial.  74.  17.  thou  hast  made  sninmer  and  w. 
rroi>.20.t  4.  sluggard  will  not  plow  by  reaiion  of  «>. 
Cnnt.  2   H.  for  lo,  iho  w.  is  past,  the  rain  is  ovor 
y.eeh.  14.  8.  in  summer  and  in  jr.  shall  it  bo 
Mat.  24  20.  pray  ye  that  your  flight  be  not  !n 
the  70.  nor  on  the  sahhalhday,  Mark  13.  18. 
John  10.  22.  the  feosi  of  dedication  was  in  w 
2  Y't'iti.  4.21.  do  thv  diligenre  lo  come  before  u. 

WINTEU-HOUSE. 
Jrr.  36.  22.  now  the  kins  sat  in  Ihn  w.Aot/.«« 
.<?/7iu*3.15.I  wiiUmilcio.Ai»uifwithBuninior-hotu« 


WIS 

WINTER,  Verb, 
ha.  IB.  6.  thofak^astsot'lhe  earth  shall  w.  on  Iheni 
.oc/.s'27.r2.because  the  haven  was  not  coiiunodious 
to  10.  ill,  the  more  part  advised  to  w.  at  I'liejiice 

1  Cur.  16.  6.  it  may  be  X  will  abide  ajid  w.  witli  you 
'i'it.  3.  12.  lor  I  have  detormined  there  to  w. 

VVINTEREU. 
Acts  33.  U.  ID  a  ship  which  had  w.  in  the  isle 
WirE. 

2  Kings  21.  13.1  will  w.  Jerusalem  as  a  dish 
.Veil.  13.  14.  jc.  not  out  my  good  deeds  I  have  done 
laa.  25.  8.  he  will  swallow   up  death  in  victory, 

Lord  will  w.  away  tears  Ironi  all  faces,  Hcc. 
7.  17.  I  21.  4. 

JL«A'e7.  33.  a  woman  did  jo.  them  with  hairs  of  her 
head  and  kissed  his  feet,  44.  John  11.  2.  1  12.3. 

JV/A/i  13.  5.  he  began  to  w.  them  with  the  towel 
WIPED. 

Prov.  6.  33.  his  reproach  shall  not  be  w.  away 
WIFETH. 

2  icings  21.  13.  as  a  man  to.  a.  dish,  turning  it 

Pruv.  30.  20.  she  eatetli,  and  w.  lie'r  moutli,  and 
suitli,  I  have  done  no  wickedness 
WIPING. 

2  Kings  21.  13.  w.  it.  and  turning  it  upside  down 
WIRES. 

Ezod.  3D.  3.  they  did  beat  the  gold  into  th  in  plates, 
and  cut  it  into  w. 
WISDOM, 

/n  Greeft,  Sophia ;  in  Hebrew,  CJiachemiih.  /£  is 
put,  I.  For  tkat  prudence  and  discretion,  wliic/i 
enables  men  to  perceive  what  is  Jit  to  be  dune, 
according  to  the  circu7nslances  uf  time,  place, 
persons,  manners,  and  end  uf  doing.  Eccl.  2 
13,  14,  1  saw  that  wisdom  excelleih  folly,  for 
the  wise  man's  eyes  are  in  his  head.  "  The 
wise  man  has  the  use  of  his  eyes  and  reason,  he 
sees  his  way,  and  orders  all  his  affairs  ucithdis- 
cretion;  he  foresees, and  so  avoids  manmmn 
gers  a/id mischiefs."  Knowledge directs^fan 
what  is  to  be  done,  and  what  is  not  to  be  done ; 
but  wisdom  directs  himhow  to  do  things  duty, 
conveniently,  and  fitly.  It  was  this  sort  of  wis- 
dom that  Solomon  entreated  of  God  with  so 
much  earnestness,  and  which  God  granted  him 
with  great  liberality,  1  Kings  3.  9,  12,23. 

II.  Wisdom  is  taken  for  quickness  of  invention, 
and  dexterity  in  the  executionuf  several  icurks, 
which  re  quire  not  so  much  strength  of  body,  as 
industry  and  labour  of  the  mind.  Wisdom  I'j? 
the  gift  uf  God,  who  told  Jifosesj  that  he  had 
filled  with  wisdom,  and  understanding,  and 
knowledgt?,  Bcialecl  and  Jlholiah,  to  invent  and 
perform  several  sorts  of  work  for  completing 
the  tabernacle,  Exod.  31.  2,  3. 

in.  Wisdom  ii  used  for  craft,  cunning,  and 
stratagem,  and  that  whether  good  or  evil. 
Exod.  1.  10,  Come  on,  said  Pharaoh,  let  us 
deal  wisely  with  the  Israelites :  "  IjCI  us  fall 
upon  some  stratagem,  whereby  we  may  exhaust 
both  their  wealth  and  their  strength."  It  is 
observedof  .fonadab,  the  friend  of  Jlmvon,  and 
nephew  of  David,  that  he  was  very  wise,  that 
is,  very  subtile  and  crafty,  2  Sam.  1,1.  3.  .lud 
III  Job  5.  13.  it  is  said,  that  God  taketh  the 
wise  in  their  own  oratYiness. 

IV.  Wisdom  js  taken,  for  doctrine,  learning,  and 
experience.  Job  12.  12,  With  the  aiici.'nt  is 
wisdom.  And  in  Acts  7.  22.  it  is  said  of 
Moses,  that  he  was  learned  in  all  the  wisdom 
of  the  Egyptians  ;  "  lie  was  instructed  in  the 
"  knowledge  of  those  arts  and  sciences,  for 
"  which,  in  those  times,  the  Egyptians  were 
'^famous." 

V.  ft  is  taken  for  true  piety,  or  the  fear  of  God, 
which  is  spiritual  wisdom.  Psal.  90.  12,  So 
teach  us  to  number  our  dnys,  that  we  may 
apply  our  hearts  unto  wisdom  ;  "  That  we  may 
"  dcBOte  ourselves  to  the  study  and  practice  of 
"  l.rue  piety."  And  in  Job"  28.  23,  The  fear 
of 'he  Lord,  that  is  wisdom. 

VI.  WW\on\  is  put  for  .Xesus  Christ,  the  eternal, 
essential  Wisdom,  the  word,  the  Son  of  God 
It  was  by  Wisdom  that  God  established  the 
heavens,  and  founded  the  eartti.  Prov.  3.  10, 
It  was  this  Wisdom  that  the  I^ord  possessed 
from  everlasting,  from  the  bnginning,  or  ever 
the  eanh  was,  Prov.  8.  22,  23.  He  was  set  up, 
he  was  anointed  from  everlasting,  before  all 
worlds,  to  be  the  person  by  whom  the  Father  re- 
solved to  do  all  his  works,  first  to  create,  and 
then  to  uphold,  govern,  and  judge,  and  after- 
wards to  redeem  and  save  thcionrld;  all  which 
works  are  in  scripture  particularly  ascribed  to 
the  Son  of  God.  Solomon,  in  Prov.  8.  discour- 
ses largely  and  profoundly  of  this  Wisdom. 

T'te  Psalmi.H  says,  Psal.  37.  30,  The  mouth  of 
tlie  righteous  speaketh  wisdom.  When  the  dis- 
cnurses of  other  men  are  either  wickedor  vain, 
his  artpious  and  pronto  hie,  they  flow  ''rom,  and 

Gsn 


WIS 

arc  so  many  evidences  of  wisdom,  and  have  a 
tendency  to  make  others  spiritually  wise,     hi 
Job  23.  12.  having  mentioned  several  hidden 
things  which  man's  wisdom  has  found  out,  Job 
asks  this  quest,   n.  But  where  shall  wisdom  be 
found  ■?     /^e  means  that  sublime  and  eminent 
wisdom,  which  consists  in  the  exact  knowledge 
of  all  God's  cuu/i.iels  and  ways,  and  of  the  seve- 
ral manners  and  reasons  uf  his  governing  the 
world,  and  dealing  with  good  and  bad  men ; 
this  is  far  above  man's  reach,  a/id.is  the  prero- 
gative uf  Gud  alone.     Job  says  to  his  three 
friends,  chap.  12.  2,  No  doubt  but  ye  arc  tl>e 
people,  and  wisdom  siiall  die  with  you.      Tlds 
is  an  ironical  expression  ;  that  is  to  say,  "  You 
"  are  the  only  people  for  eminency  of  wisdom  ; 
"  you  have  engrossed  nil  the  riasuii  of  man- 
"  kind;  and  you  think  that  all  the  wisdom  and 
"  knowledge  of  divine  things,  which  is  in  the 
"  world,  lives  in  you,  and  will  die  and  be  utterly 
"  lost  when  you  die." 
Wisdom  is  put  fur  natural  instinct  and  sagacity, 
Job  3L*.  17,  The  ostrich  is  hardened  against  her 
young  ones,  because  God  hath  depriv<;il  her  of 
wisdom:  '■'■Because  Gud  hath  not  implanted  in 
"  her  that  natural  instinct,  care,  and  affection, 
"  which  he  hath  put  into  other  birds  and  beasts, 
"  toward  their  young."     Wisdom  is  likewise 
put  for  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel.  1  Cor.  2.  C, 
7,  Howbeit  we  speak  wisdom  among  them  that 
are  perttjct;  yet  not  the  ux'st/om  of  this  world, 
nor  of  the  princes  of  this  world,  that  come  to 
nought:  that  is,     "  The  subject-matter  of  my 
"preaching  is  the  most  wise  contrivance  and 
"  counsel  of  God,  concerning  the  salvation  of 
"man  by   Christ  crucified,  and  so   it  will    be 
"owned  to  be,  though  not  by  learned  philoso- 
' '  phe  rs,  yet  by  humble,  sincere  Christians,  and 
"such  wlio  have  attained  to  some  ripeness  of 
"  understanding  inthc  knowledge  of  the  gospel: 
"But   this  is   not  the  wisdom   of  the  world 
"which  teaches  how  to  manage  our  temporal 
"  affairs,  only  in  order  to  a  comfortable   lifi 
"here;  neither  is  it  the  maxims  of  statc-po- 
"  licy,  which  statesmen  count  the  only  wisdom 
"  icho  yet  by  all  their  plots  and  policies  cannot 
"secure  theiusdves  from  ruin  ;  But  wo  .speak 
"  the  wisdom  of  God  in  a  mystery,  even  hid- 
"dcn  wisdom  ;  it  is  such  as  no  creature  could 
"  make  any  discovery  of,  and  was  hidden  for- 
"  nierly  under  holy  mysteries  and  Jewish  types; 
"it  was  but  darkly  spoken  of  by  the  prophets, 
"  and  altogether  unknown  to  the  Gentilis." 
Christ  .hsus  is  said  to  be  made  of  God  unto  us 
wisdom,  1   Cor.  1.  30.     "  He  reveals  the  will 
"  and  knowledge  of  God  to  us,  and  makes  us 
"wise  unto  salvation."     In  Mat.  11.   V.\,  our 
■  'Saviour  speaking  of  the  bad  treat  men  tthat./ohn 
the  Baptist  and  himself  met  icilhfrom  the  ./ews 
says.  But  IVisdoni  is  justilied  of  her  children. 
Some  take  the  meaning  to  be  th^s  :  "  I  who  am 
"  the  wisdoot  of  God,  am  juslihed  by  you,  who 
"  truly  believe  on  me :  tou  know  I  am  no  glut- 
"  ton,  no  wine-bibber,  no  friend  of  publicans, 
"  and  sinners."      Others  thus,  "  Religion,  in 
"  all  the  branches  and  duties  thereof,  enjoined 
"  by  God,  or  the  various  methods  that  God  uses 
"  to  reclaim  sinners,is  owned,  and  acknowledged 
"  to  be  full  of  wisdom,  holiness,  and  equity, 
"  and  also  vindicat ed  from  the  cavils  and  un- 
"just  imputations  of  all  ungodly  persons,  by 
"  those  who   have  devoted    themselves  to  the 
"study  and  practice  of  religion." 
St.    .fames  speaks  of  tlie  wisdom   that  is  from 
above,  which  cnmcs  from  God,  and  teaches  us 
to  be  humble  and  holy  in  all  our  conversation, 
James  3.  17.   It  is  known  and  expressed  by  se- 
veral properties  :  It  is  jiure,  it  makes  men  care- 
ful to  avoid  any  defilement  by  sin  and  error, 
and  to  adhere  both  to  truth  and  holiness.     It 
is  peaceable,!?  disposethmcn  topeacc,bothas  to 
the  making  and  keeping  it,  so  far  as  is  consist 
cnt  with  purity,  and  may  be  done  withon'.  sin. 
ft  is  gentle,  it  disposes  men  to  bear  with  the 
infirmities  uf  others,  to  forgive  injuries,  to  in- 
terpret all  things  for  the  best,  to  recede  from 
their  own  right,  for  peace  sake.     It  is  easy  to 
be  entioati'cl,  it  mnkesjnrn  yield  to  the  pcrsna- 
sionsof  theword,  to  good  counsel,  stood  reason. 
It  is  full  of  mercy,  it  makes  us  pity  others  that 
are  offlictrd,  or  that  offend.     It  is  full  of  good 
fruits,  of  beneficence,  liberality,  and  all  otfirr 
offices  of  hnmnnity, which  proceed  from  merry. 
It  is  without  jiartiality,  it  does  not  make  a  dif- 
ference between  person  and  person,upon  carnal 
accounts.     It   is   also    witliout   hypocrisy,  or 
counterfoitin;;,  n.t  they  do  that  judge  others, 
being  sruilty  of  the  same  thimrs  thcmsclres  ;  it 
is  unfiignrd  and  sincere.  Wisdom  is  pat /or 
the  hilly  scriptures,  Luko  1!.  49. 


WIS 

Exod.^1.3. 1  have  filled  him  with  tlie  Spirit  of  Cod 
in  w.  and  in  underslandii.g,  G.  [  35.  31,  33 

35.  26.  whose  heart  stirred  them  up  in  w.'SG.  1,  2. 
Lieut.  4.  6.  for  this  is  your  w.  and  understanding 
2  Saoi.  14.  20.  accordmg  to  w.  of  an  angel  of  Gud 

20. 22.  the  woman  went  to  all  the  people  in  her  iv. 
lKiogs'3.  23.  ihey  saw  that  the  w.  of  G.  was  in  hini 

4.  2'J.  God  gave  Solomon  uj. 5.  12.2  C/i/on.l.  12. 
30.  Solomon's  w.  excelled  w.  of  K"¥pt,  34  I  7. 
14.  I  10.  4,  23,  24.  2  Ciirun.  'J.  3,  22,  23 
1  Cliron..  22.12.  only  Lord  give  thee  w.  and  underM. 
'2  Chron.  1.  10.  give  me  w.  ||  11.  but  hast  asked  tr. 
Kzra  7.  25.  thou  Ezra,  after  the  w.  of  thy  God 
Job  \  21.  they  die,  even  without  «-. 

12.  2.  ye  are  the  people,  K).  shall  die  with  you 

13.5.  hold  your  peace  and  it  should  be  your  te. 

15.  3.  and  dost  thou  restrain  w.  to  tUyseU  ! 

20.  3.  hast  thou  counselled  him  that  hath  no  w.  7 

28.  12.  but  w  here  shall  w.  be. found  1 
20.  whence  cometh  k?. and  where  jilace  of  midorsU 

30.  t  22.  and  thou  dissolvest  my  w. 

32.  7.  multitude  of  years  should  teach  w. 

13.  lest  ye  should  say,  we  have  found  out  w. 

33.  33.  hearken  to  me  and  I  shall  teach  thee  w. 

34.  35.  Job's  words  were  without  w. 

30.  5^ behold,  God  is  mighty  in  strength  and  w. 

38.  37.  who  can  number  the  clouds  in  w.  ? 

39.  17.  because  God  hath  deprived  her  of  to. 
P.<!al.  37.  30.  the  mouth  of  the  righteous  speaks  w 

51.  6.  thou  shalt  make  me  to  know  w. 

90.  12.  that  we  may  apply  our  hearts  unto  to 

104.  24.  in  w.  hast  thou  made  all  thy  works 

105.  22.  and  teach  his  senators  w. 
130.  5.  to  him  that  by  w.  made  the  heavens 

P/-OU. 1.2.toknow  ic.p.foolsdesjiise  tc.and  instruct. 
20.  w.  crieth,  8.  1.  ||  2.  2.  incline  thine  car  to  w. 

2.  ti.  the  Lord  giveth  w.  i|  3.  21.  keep  sound  w. 

7.  he  layeth  up  sound  ic.  for  the  righteous 
10.  when  w.  entereth  into  thine  heart 

3.  13.  hajipyis  the  man  that  findetiv  w.  and  the 
man  that  gettelh  uiKkrstandii:g 

19.  the  Lord  hy  lo.  hath  founded  the  earth 

4.  5.  get  le.  7.  ||  5.  1.  my  son  attend  to  my  ?r. 
7.  4.  say  to  w.  thou  art  my  sister,  and  call  uiiderst. 
8  5.  understand  w.  ||  9.  1.  w.  builded  l.or  house 

12.1  w.  dwell  with  prudence,  and  find  knowledge 

14.  Counsel  is  mine,  and  sound  w.  I  am  underbt. 
10.  23.  but  a  man  of  understanding  hath  w. 

31.  the  mouth  of  the  just  bringeth  forth  w. 
12.  8.  a  man  is  commended  according  to  his  w. 

14.  6.  a  scorner  seeketh  w.  and  findeUi  it  not 

8.  the  w.  of  the  jirudeot  is  to  under.>:tand  li:s  way 
33.  w.  resteth  in  heart  of  him  that  halh  nnderst. 

Ifi.  16.  how  much  better  is  it  to  gel  jc.  than  gold 
17.  16.  is  there  a  price  in  hand  of  a  fool  to  get  w, 
18. 1.  thro'  desire  a  man  intermeddleth  with  all  jc. 

19.  8.  he  that  getteth  jc.  loveth  his  own  soul 
21.  30.  there  is  no  re.  against  the  Lord 
23.  4.  labour  not  to  be  rich,  cease  from  thy  ownio 

9.  for  a  fool  will  despise  the  w.  of  thy  words 
23.  buy  w.  II  24.  3.  thro'  w.  is  a  house  built 

29.  3.  whoso  loveth  w.  rejoiceth  his  father 

15.  the  rod  and  reproof  give  w.  but  a  child  left 

30.  3.  I  neither  learned  w.  nor  have  I  knowledge 

31.  26.  she  opeiiclh  her  mouth  with  7b. 
Eecl.  1.  13.  I  gave  my  heart  to  search  out  by  w. 

16.  I  have  gotten  more  w.  than  all  before  me 
)7.  I  gave  tny  heart  to  Know  w.  and  folly 
IS.forinmnch  ic.  is  much  grief.hc  that  increases 

2.  3.  yet  acrjuainting  mine  heart  wiili  w. 
9.  so  I  was  great,  and  my  ip.  remained  with  mo 

12.  I  turned  myself  to  behold  w.  and  madness 
1.3.  w.  excels  tolly  f)  21.  whose  labour  is  in  w. 

^26.  God  giveth  to  a  man  w.  \\  7. 12.  w.  giveth  life 
7. 19.io.8trengfheneth  the  wise  more  than  ton  men 
23.  all  this  have  I  proved  by  jr.  I  will  be  wise 
25. 1  applied  mine  heart  to  know  and  sock  out  to 

8.  1.  a  man's  w.  makelh  his  face  to  shine 
16.  when  I  applied  my  heart  to  know  w. 

9.  10.  there  is  no  jo.  in  the  grave  where  thou  gocst 

13.  this  w.  have  I  seen  also  under  the  sun 

15.  a  poor  man  by  liis  w.  delivered  the  citv 

10.  1.  a  little  folly  him  that  is  in  repulalinn  for  a>. 
3.  his  w.  faileth  him,  and  he  saith  he  is  a  fool 

fsn.W.Wi.  by  my  ?a.I  have  done  it,  for  I  am  prudent 
29.  14.  for  the  ic.  of  their  wise  men  shall  perish 
33.  0.  7r.  shall  be  the  stability  of  thy  timcK 

.fer.  0.  23.  let  not  the  wise  man  glorv  in  his  w 
10.  12.  he  established  the  world  by  his  w.  51.  I.S. 

Dan.  1.  4.  children  who  were  skilful  in  nil  w.  17, 
2.  14.  Daniel  answered  with  counsel  and  w. 

20.  blessed  be  God,  for  w.  and  mi£htare  hig 

21.  he  giveth  w.  to  the  wise,  and  knowledge 
23.  I  thank  thee,  O  God,  who  ha.st  given  mi-  w. 
30.  this  secret  is  not  revealed  for  anv  >r.  1  have 

5.  It.  u.  like  the  m.  of  the  cods  was  found  in  him 
..Mat.  12.  42.  the  queen  of  the  south  came  from  ut- 
most parts  to  hear  the  if.  of  Solomon,  Luke 
11.13. 
13.  54.  whence  hath  this  man  thi^u).  and  works' 


WIS 

Ltikel,  IT.tum  the  disobedient  to  the  w.  of  the  just 

2.  40.  Jesui  tilled  with  w.  \\  52.  incruased  in  w. 
11.49.  therefore  also  said  the  jc.  of  God,  will  send 
21.  15.  lor  I  will  give  you  a  mouth  and  w. 

^cts6. 3.  look  out  seven  men  full  of  to.  and  Uoly  G. 
10.  they  were  not  able  to  resist  the  w.  and  spirit 
7. 10.  God  gave  Joseph  w.  in  the  sight  of  I'haruoh 
•22.  was  learned  in  all  the  w.  of  the  Egyptians 

1  Cor.  1. 17.  to  preach  gospel  not  with  lo.  of  words 
19.  I  will  destroy  the  w.  of  the  wise,  and  bring 
3(J.  God  hath  made  foolish  the  w.  of  this  world 

21.  after  that  in  the  w.  of  God  the  world  by  w. 
knew  not  God,  it  pleased  God  by  preaching 

22.  require  a  sign,  and  Greeks  seek  after  w. 
24.  Christ  the  power  of  God  and  the  w.  of  God 
30.  who  of  G.  is  made  to  us  ic.  and  righteousness 

2-  4.  my  speech  was  not  with  words  of  man's  w. 

5.  your  faith  should  not  stand  in  the  w.  of  men 

6.  we  speak  w.  {{  7.  but  we  speak  the  w.  of  God 
13.  not  in  words  which  man's  w.  teatheth 

3.  19.  the  w.  of  this  world  is  foolishness  with  God 
S  Cor.  1.  12.  with  sincerity,  not  with  fleshly  w. 
Eph.  1.  8.  he  hath  abounded  toward  us  in  all  w. 

3.  10.  might  be  known  the  manifold  w.  of  God 
Col.  1.  9.  that  ye  might  be  filled  with  all  ?o. 
28.  warning  and  teaching  every  man  in  all  w. 

3.  IG.  let  Christ's  words  dwell  in  you  in  all  w. 

4.  .3.  walk  in  w.  toward  them  that  are  without 
Jam.  1.  5.  if  any  lack  w.  let  him  ask  of  God 

3.  15.  this  10.  descendeth  not  from  above 

2  fcf.  3.  15.  according  to  the  w.  given  unto  him 
Hen.  5.  12.  worthy  is  the  Lamb  to  receive  w. 

7.  12.  blessing,  and  glory,  and  w.  be  to  our  God 
17.  9.  and  here  is  the  mind  which  hath  w. 
WISDOM,  joined  with  i>. 
Job  6.  13.  and  is  w.  driven  quite  from  rael 

12.  12.  with  the  ancient  is  w.  13.  16. 

28. 18.  the  price  of  id.  is  above  rubies,  Prov.  8. 11. 
28.  fear  of  the  Lord  that  is  w.  to  depart  from  evil 
Prov.  4.  7.  w.  is  the  principal  thing,  get  w. 
10.13.with  him  that  hath  understandingia.isfound 

II.  2.  but  with  the  lowly  is  id. 

13.  10.  but  with  the  well-advised  is  id. 

14.  8  the  w.  of  jirudent  is  to  understand  his  way 

17.  24.  IC.  is  belore  him  that  hath  understanding 
24.  7.  w.  is  too  high  fur  a  fool,  he  opens  not 

Ecel.  1.  13.  for  in  much  w.  is  much  grief 
7.  11.  JO.  is  good  with  an  inheritance,  and  by  it 
12.  for  w.  is  a  defence,  and  money  is  a  defence 
9. 10.  w.is  better  than  strength  ;  nevertheless,  the 
poor  man's  w.  is  despised,  his  words  not  heard 
18.  w.  is  better  than  weapons  of  war,  but  one 
10.  10.  but  to.  is  profitable  to  direct  ^ 

/(!r.8.9.thcy  rejected  the  word,  what  ?o.  is  in  them? 
49.7.thussaith  the  Lordof  hosts,  j>  w.  no  more  in 
Temanlif  their  w.  vanished? 
Dan.  5.  14.  that  excellent  w.  is  found  in  thee 
Mat.  11.  19.  a  friend  of  publicans  andsinners,  but 
w.  IS  justified  of  her  children,  Luke  7.  35. 
Mark  C.  2  what  w.  is  this  which  is  given  to  him? 
Jam.  3.  17.  the  w.  that  (S  from  above  is  first  pure 
Ho).  13.  18.  here  is  w.  let  him  that  understands 

0/WlSl)U.M. 
J,)h  11. 6.  that  he  would  shew  thee  the  secrets  ofio. 
28.  18.  for  the  price  of  w.  is  above  rubies 
P;)aM9.3.my  mouth  shall  speak  of  ;c.and  meditat. 

III.  10.  tlie  fear  of  the  Lord  isthe  beginning  of  w. 

his  praise  cndureth  for  ever,  Prov.  9.  10. 
Prov.  1.  3.  to  receive  the  instruction  o/ injustice 

4.  11. 1  havf!  taught  thee  in  the  way  of  w.  have  led 

10.  21.  but  fools  die  for  want  of  vs. 

11.  12.  he  that  is  void  of  w.  di'spiscth  his  neighbour 
1.1.  21.  folly  is  joy  to  him  that  is  destitute  of  w. 

33.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  instruction  of  w. 

18.  4.  the  well-spring  of  w.  as  a  flowing  brook 
21.  14.  so  shall  theknosvledgei;/  le.be  to  thy  soul 

F.rrl.  1.  11).  my  heart  had  gri^at  experience  of  w. 
F.fk.  28.  12.  thou  sealest  up  the  sum  full  of  w. 
Dan.  1.20.  in  all  matters  of  to.  ho  found  them  ten 
times  better  than  all  the  magicians 
Mie.  6.  9.  the  man  of  w.  shall  see  thy  name 
Horn.  11.  St.  O  the  depth  of  the  wisdom  of  God  ! 
1  Cor,  2. 1.  not  with  excellency  of  speech  or  of  w. 

12.  8.  to  one  is  given  by  the  Spirit  the  word  of  to. 
Col.  2.  3.  in  whom  arc  hid  all  the  treasures  of  id. 

23.  which  things  have  indeed  a  shew  of  w. 
Jim.  3.  13.  show  his  works  with  mocknuss  of  tc. 

See  Spirit. 
Thy  WISDOM. 

1  Kin^s  9.  6.  do  therefore  according  to  Ihy  w. 
10.  6.  it  was  a  true  report  that  1  heard  o(  thy  w. 

7.  thy  w.  and  prosperity  exceedelh  the  fame 

8.  happy  are  these  thy  servants  that  stand  before 

thee  continually  and  hoar  thy  w.  2  Chr. 
9.  5,  7. 

2  Chron.  9.  0.  the  half  of  thy  w.  was  not  told  me 
Joh  .39.  20.  doth  the  hawk  fly  by  thy  w.  ? 

Isa.  47.  10.  thy  w.  it  hath  iierverloil  tlieo 
Ezi-k.  2><.  4.  with  thy  w.  hnst  gotten  thee  riches,  5. 
17  Uiou  hast  corrupted  thy  w.  by  thy  brightnoiu 
6aH 


WIS 

WISE. 
Gen.  3.  6.  and  a  tree  to  be  desired  to  make  one  w. 

41.  39.  tJiere  is  none  so  discreet  and  w.  as  thou 
Ezod.  23.  8.  the  gift  blindelh  the  w.  JJeut.  10. 19. 
Dcut.  4.  6.  surely  this  great  nation  is  a  w.  people 

32.  29.  O  that  they  were  lo.  that  they  understood 
Judg.  5.  29.  her  w.  ladies  answered  her 
2  Sam.  14.  20.  my  lord  is  w.  according  to  the  wisd. 
1  Kings  3.  12.  1  have  given  thee  a  w.  heart 

5.  7.  blessed  be  the  Lord  that  hath  given  David  a 

w.  son  over  this  great  people,  2  Chron.  2.  12. 

1  Chron.  '26.  14.  fell  for  Zachariah  a  w.  counsellor 

Jul/  5.  13.  he  takelh  the  w.  in  their  own  craftiness 
9.  4.  he  is  w.  in  heart  and  mighty  in  strength 
11.  12.  for  vain  man  would  be  w.  though  burn  like 
a  wild  ass's  colt 
22.  2.  he  that  is  w.  may  be  profitable  to  himself 
32.  9.  great  men  are  not  always  w.  nor  the  aged 
37.  24.  he  respecteth  not  any  that  are  w.  of  heart 

Psal.  2.  10.  be  w.  now,  O  ye  kings,  be  instructed 
19.7. testimony  of  Ld.  is  sure,  making  w.  the  simple 
30.  3.  he  hath  left  off  to  be  w.  and  to  do  good 
94.  8.  and  ye  fools,  when  will  ye  be  w. 
107.  43.  whoso  is  w.  and  will  observe  those  thin; 

Prov.  1.  5.  a  w.  man  shall  attain  to  w.  counsels 
0.  to  understand  the  words  of  the  w.  and  sayings 

3.  7.  be  not  w.  in  thine  own  eyes,  fear  the  Lord 
35.  the  10.  shall  inherit  glory,  but  shame  shall  be 

6.  6.  be  w.  8.  33.  \  23.  19.  |  27.  11. 

9.  12.  if  thou  be  w.  thou  shall  be  w.  for  thyself 

10.  1.  a  w.  son  maketh  a  glad  father,  Ij.SiO. 
5.  he  that  gathereth  in  sununer  is  a  w.  son 

8.  the  w.  in  heart  will  receive  commandments 

19.  but  he  that  refraineth  his  lips  is  w. 

11.  29.  the  fool  shall  be  servantto  the  w.  in  heart 

30.  and  he  that  winneth  souls  is  to. 

12.  15.  but  he  that  hearkeneth  to  counsel  is  w. 
Id.  but  the  tongue  of  the  tD.  is  health 

13.  1.  a  ID.  son  lieareth  his  father's  instruction 
14.  the  law  of  the  id.  is  a  fountain  of  life 

20.  lie  that  walketh  with  id.  men  shall  be  tc. 

14.  3.  but  the  lips  of  the  ic.  shall  preserve  them 
24.  the  crown  of  the  to.  is  their  riches 

35.  the  king's  favour  is  toward  a  jo.  servant 

15.  2.  tongue  of  the  w.  useth  knowledge  aright 
7.  the  lips  of  the  w.  disi)eise  knowledge 

12.  a  scorner  will  not  go  to  tlwi  to. 
24.  the  way  of  life  is  above  to  the  to. 

31.  that  heareth  reproof  abideth  among  the  to. 
10.  21.  the  tD.  in  heart  shall  be  called  prudent 

23.  the  heart  of  the  to.  teacheth  his  mouth 

17.  2.  a  ID.  servant  shall  have  rule  over  a  son 
28.  a  fool  when  he  holdeth  his  peace  is  counted  to. 

18.  15.  the  ear  of  the  tc.  seeketh  knowledge 

19.  20.  that  thou  niayest  be  tc.  in  thy  latter  end 

20.  1.  whosoever  is  deceived  thereby,  is  not  tc. 
2(5.  a  ID.  king  scatteretli  the  wicked,  and  brings 

21.  11.  scorner  punisheu,  simple  is  madeao.  whe|>: 

the  ID.  is  instructed  he  recciveth  knowledf,' 
20.  there  is  oil  in  the  dwelling  of  the  tc. 

22.  17.  bow  thine  ear,  hear  the  words  of  the  tc. 

23.  15.  if  thy  heart  be  id.  my  heart  shall  rejoice 

24.  he  that  begetteth  a  to.  son  shall  have  joy 

24.  6.  for  by  to.  counsel  thou  shall  make  thy  war 
23.  these  things  also  belong  to  the  tc. 

25.  12.  so  is  a  w.  reprover  upon  an  obedient  ear 
20.5.  answer  a  fool  lest  he  be  tc.in  his  own  conceit 

12.  seest  thou  a  man  w.  in  his  own  conceit 
28.  7.  whoso  keepelh  the  law  is  a  tc.  son 
11.  the  rich  man  is  te.  in  his  own  conceit 

30.  24.  there  be  four  things  that  are  exceeding  w. 
Fed.  2.'  15.  I  said  in  my  heart,  why  was  I  more  w. 

10.  for  there  is  no  remembrance  of  the  tc. 

19.  my  labour  wherein  I  have  shewed  myself  lo. 

4.  13.  belter  is  a  to.  child  than  a  foolish  king 
0.  8.  for  what  hath  the  tc.  more  than  the  fool  ? 
7.4.  the  heart  of  the  tc.  is  in  the  house  of  mourning 

5.  it  is  better  to  hear  the  rebuke  of  the  tc. 
Ifi.bo  not  right,  overm.  neither  niakethys.over  tc. 
19.  wisdom  strengtheneth  to.  more  than  ten  men 
23.  I  said,  I  will  be  w.  but  it  was  far  from  mo 
9.  I.  the  tc.  and  their  works  are  in  the  hand  of  God 

11.  I  saw  that  bread  is  not  to  the  tc.  nor  riches 
12.  9.  because  the  preacher  was  to.  he  taught 

II.  the  words  of  the  to.  are  as  goads  and  as  nails 
/jjrt.S.  21.  woe  to  them  that  are  ic.  in  their  own  eyes 
19.  11.  how  say  ye,  I  am  the  son  of  the  tc.7 

31.  2.  yet  ho  also  is  m.  and  will  bring  evil 
Jer.A.  22.  my  people  is  foolish,  they  are  tc.  to  do  evil 

8.8.  how  do  ye  say,  wonre  jo.  law  of  God  with  us 

18.  18.  nor  shall  counsel  perish  from  the  tc. 
Dan.t.'il.  Godgiveth  wisdom  to  to. and  knowledge 

12.  3.  they  that  hi;  lo.  shall  shine  as  the  firmament 
10.  wicked  shall  not,  but  the  lo.  shall  undrrstond 
Has.  14.  9.  the  to.  shall  understand  these  things 
Zech.  9.  2.  though  Tyrus  and  Zidon  be  very  lo. 
Mat.  111.  Ifi.  b:'  yo  thi-reforc  70.  as  serpents 

11.25.  because  thou  hast  hid  these  things  from  to. 
and  prudent,  and  revealiMl  to  babes,  /.ukc  10.21. 


WIS 

Mat.  25.  2.  five  virgins  were  tc.  and  five  fooliab 

4.  the  tc.  took  oil  in  their  vessels  with  their  larni* 
Lukel2.i2.y/ho  then  is  that  faithful  and  zo.stewaiti 
Rom.  1.  14.  1  am  debtor  to  the  tc.  and  unwise 

22.  professing  themselves  tc.  they  became  fools 

11.  25.  lest  you  should  be  to.  in  your  own  conceits 

12.  16.  be  not  tc.  in  your  own  conceits 

10. 19. 1  would  have  you  tc.  to  that  which  is  good 
27.  to  God  only  tc.  i  Tim.  1.  17.  ./ude  25. 

1  Cor.  1.  19.  I  will  destroy  the  wisdom  of  the  to. 
20.  where  is  the  to  ?  ||  27.  lo  confound  the  tc. 

3.  10.  as  a  w.  master-builder,  I  have  laid  the 

foundation,  and  another  buildeth  thereon 

18.  if  any  manseemeth  to  be  to.  in  this  world,  lei 

him  become  a  fool  that  he  may  be  lo, 

19.  he  taketh  the  tc.  in  their  own  craftiness 

20.  the  Lord  knows  the  thoughts  of  the  tc. 

4.  10.  we  are  fools,  but  ye  arc  lo.  in  Christ 

2  Cor.  10.  12.  comparing  themselves,  are  not  le. 
11.  19.  ye  suffer  fools,  seeing  ye  yourselves  are  lo. 

F.ph.  5.  15.  that  ye  walk  not  as  fools,  but  as  to. 
2  Tivt.  3.  lo.the  scriptures  arc  able  to  make  thee  to. 

,fjny  WISE. 
Fxod.  22.  23.  if  thou  afllicl  them  in  any  to. 
J.et).  19.  17.  shall  in  anytc.  rebuke  thy  neighbour 

27.  19.  if  he  will  in  any  to.  redeem  the  field 
Detit.  17. 15.  shall  in  any  w.  set  him  king  over  thee 

21.  23.  thou  shall  in  any  tc.  bury  him  that  day 

22.  7.  thou  shall  in  any  tc.  let  the  dam  go 
■losh.  6.  18.  in  anytc.  keep  from  the  accuwed  thing 

23.  12.  else  if  ye  do  in  any  tc  go  back  and  cleave 
1  Saw,  6.  3,  in  any  tc.  send  a  trespass-offering 

1  Kings  11.22.  howbeit,  let  me  go  in  any  tc. 
Psal.  37.  8.  fret  not  thyself  in  any  tc.  to  do  evil 
Mark  14.  31.  I  will  not  deny  thee  in  any  tc. 

See  Man,  Men. 

WISE-HE.'VRTED. 

Exod.  28.  3.  speak  to  all  that  are  tc.-hearted 

3]J^  I  have  put  wisdom  in  all  that  are  tc.-hearted 

35^P.  every  tc.-heartcd  among  you  shall  make  all 

25.  all  the  women  that  were  to.-Aearte(/ did  spin 

36.  1.  then  wrought  every  tc.-hcarted  man 

i.MosescalledAlioliab  and  every io.-Aeartcdman 

5.  every  tc.-hearted  man  made  ten  curtains 

WISE-MEN. 

Gen  41. 8.  Pharaoh  called  for  all  the  magicians  of 

Egypt,  and  all  the  w.-men,  Exod.  7.  11 

In  no  WISE.  ' 

/,ct).  7. 24.  the  fat  of  beasts  lorn,  in  no  tc.  eat  of  i* 

lA'ino-s3.26.  give  the  child,  and  iiiiio  ic.  slay  it,  27. 

jl/o«.5.18.  one  tittle  shall  in  no  lo.pass  from  the  law 

10.  42.  he  shall  in  no  tc.  lose  his  reward 

Luke\2. 11.  a  woman  could  in  no  tc.  lift  up  herself 

18.  17.  shall  in  no  tc.  enter  therein.  Rev.  21.  27. 

JoAn0.37.he  that  cometh  to  me,  I  will  in  no  tc.  cast 

Jlcts  13. 41.  n  work  which  ye  shall  in  tio  tc.  believe 

Rom.  3.  9.  are  we  better  than  they  ?  no,  in  no  to. 

On  this  WISE. 
JVtim.  6.  23.  on  this  tc.  ye  shall  bless  Israel 
Jl/aM.  18.  the  birth  of  Jesus  Christ  was  on  this  to. 
John  21.  1.  and  on  this  to.  shewed  he  himself 
yicts  7.  6.  God  spake  on  this  to.  that  his  seed 

13.  .34.  he  said  on  this  tc.  I  will  give  sure  mercies 
Rom.  10.  6.  the  righteousness  speaketh  on  this  to, 
Heb.  4.  4.  he  spake  of  (he  seventh  day  on  this  to. 

WISE  tDoman. 

2  Sam.  14. 2.  and  Joab  fetched  thence  a  tc.  tooman 
20. 16.  then  cried  a  to.  teoman  out  of  the  city,  hear 

Prov.  14.  1.  every  tn.  teoman  buildeth  her  house 

WISELY. 
Exod.  1.  10.  come  on,  let  us  deal  to.  with  them 

1  Sam.  18.5.  David  behaved  himself  ir.  14.15,  30 

2  Chron.  U.  23.  Rehoboam  dealt  lo.  he  dispersed 
Psal.  .58.  5.  the  charmers,  charmiii"  never  so  to. 

64.  9.  for  they  shall  lo.  consider  of  his  doing 
101.  2.  I  will  behave  myself  lo.  in  a  perfect  way 
Prov.  16.  20.  he  that  handleth  a  matter  to. 
21.  12.  he  tc.  considcreth  the  honseof  the  wicked 

28.  26.  whoso  walketh  lo.  shall  he  delivered 
Kcc/.7.10.  thou  dost  not  inquire  lo.  concerning  this 
Luke  16.  8.  commended  because  he  had  done  to. 

WISER. 
1  Kings  4.  31.  for  Solomon  was  tn.  than  nil  men 
.fob  35.  11.  makelh  us  lo.  than  the  fowls  of  liraven 
P^nMlO.OS.Ihou  hast  made  meto.than  my  enemies 
Prov.  9.  0.  give  instruction,  and  lie  will  be  yet  to 
20.  16.  the  sluggard  is  lo.  in  his  own  conceit 
Eiek.  28.  3.  behold,  thou  art  lo.  than  Daniel 
Luke  16.  8.  the  children  are  in  their  gonerntion  w. 

1  Cor.  1.  25.  tlie  foolishness  of  God  is  lo.  than  men 

WISH. 
Joh  33.6. 1  am  according  to  thy  to.  in  God's  stcnd 
Psal.  40. 14.  let  them  be  put  to  shame  that  tc.  evil 
73.  7.  they  have  more  tlian  heart  conhl  to. 
Rom.  9.  3.  I  could  to.  myself  accursed  from  Chrjsl 

2  Cor.  13.  9.  this  also  wi'  lo.  even  your  perfrctirtn 

3  John  2. 1  to.  above  all  iliines  thou  mayest  prospei 
WISHED 

Tonah  4.  8.  Jonah  fainted,  and  ir.  himself  to  die 


24.  45.  who  then  is  a  faithful  and  w.  servant  7     i  Acts  27.  29.  they  cast  anchor,  and  tc.  for  the  day 


WIT 

WISHING. 

fob  31 .30  my  mouth  lo  si  ii ,  liy  w.  a  curse  to  his  sou 

vviax. 

KzodAQ.Vj.  it  is  mauiia,l'or  lliey  w.  not  what  it  was 

31.  ^.  Moses  w.  iiol  liial  hist  t'uco  shone 
l.eo.5.  17.  though  ho  20.  not,  yet  is  he  guilty,  18. 
Joih.  'J.  4.  but  1  to.  not  whence  thoy  were 

b.  14.  he  tD.  not  tlial  there  were  liers  in  ambush 
Judg.  1(5.  iO.  lie  w.  not  that  the  Lord  was  deiiurted 
Mark'i.  G.  he  ic.  not  what  to  say,  they  were  ul'raid 
,  14.  40.  neillier  w.  they  wiuit  to  answer  iiim 
AuAe'J.49.ic.ye  not  I  must  be  aboutFather's  husin. 
Jjltn  5.  13.  he  that  was  healed  ic.  not  who  it  was 
Jiots  \'i.  U.  ic.  not  that  it  was  true  wliieh  was  done 

tU.  5.  said  Paul,  1  w.  not  lie  was  the  high-priest 

WITCH. 
F.zod.  22.  18.  thou  shall  not  sulTer  a  w.  to  live 
Jjcut.  Id.  10.  there  shall  not  be  among  you  a  w. 
VVITCHCUAFT. 

1  Sam.  15.23.  for  rebellion  is  as  the  sin  of  w. 

2  Ciir.  1)3.  0.  Manasseh  used  w.  and  enchantments 
tra/.5.2U.  the  works  of  the  flesh  are  idolatry,  w. 

wrrcHciiAFTs. 

2  Kings  9. 22.  so  long  as  .lezebel's  w.  are  so  many 
Mic.b.  12.  I  will  cut  off  it',  out  of  thine  hci)d 
Ji'iih.  'S.  4.  the  mistress  of  w.  that  selleth  nations 
thro'  her  whoredoms,  and  families  thro'  Jier  10. 
WITHAL. 
1  A'/Hn-.slQ.l.wj.howElijah  had  slain  alltheprophets 
/'sai.J41.10.  n  e  wicked  fall  whilst  that  I  m.  escape 
.'IcU  23.  27.  and  noi  w.  to  signify  the  crimes 
WITHDUAW. 

1  .Sam.  14. 19.  Saul  said  to  the  priest,  to.  thine  hand 
Job  U.  13.  if  God  will  not  w.  his  anger,  the  proud 

13.21. M.  thine  hand  far  from  me,  let  not  lliy  dread 
33.  17.  that  he  may  w.  man  from  his  purpose 
Pruii.25.17.20.  thy  foot  from  thy  neighbour's  house 
Eccl.  7.  18.  also  from  this  tc.  not  thme  hand 
Jsa.  00.  20.  neither  shall  thy  moon  lo.  itself       - 
Joel  2.  10.  the  stars  shall  w.  their  shining,  3.  \^- 

2  'J'hcss.  3.  0.  w.  yourselves  from  every  brother 
1  Tim.  C.  5.  from  men  of  corrupt  minds  (o.  thyself 

WITHDRAWN. 
Deut.  13.  13.  have  w.  the  inhabitants  of  their  city' 
Cant. .').  6.  but  my  beloved  had  w.  himself 
L.am.'i.S.  he  hath  not  w.  his  hand  from  destroying 
Ezek.  IS.  8.  that  hath  w.  his  hand  from  iniquity 
Jios.  5.  (5.  the  Lord  hath  uj.iiimself  from  them 
/yaA'i22. 41.  wts  w.  from  them  about  a  stone's  cast 

WITHDRAWEST. 
Psal.  74.  11.  why  tc.  thou  thv  right  hand  1 

WITHDRAWETH. 
Job  36.  7.  he  w.  not  his  eyes  from  the  righteous 

WITHDRAWING. 
J^'ch.  9.  1  29.  and  tliev  gave  a  w.  shoulder 

•    WITHDREW. 
JVch.  9. 29.  they  w.the  shoulder  and  would  not  hear 
Ezek.  20.  22.  nevertheless  I  w.  mine  hand 
Mat.  12.  15.  when  Jesus  knew  it,  he  w.  himself 
JV/arA-3.7.  Jesus  zo.himself  from  thence,  LukeH.  16. 
Gal.  2.  12.  but  when  they  were  come,  he  w. 

WITHER. 
Ps.  1. 3.  hisleaf  also  shall  not  w.  what  he  doth  pros. 
37.  2.  and  they  shall  la.  as  the  green  herb 
/i,a.lO.H.brooks  be  emptied,  reeds  and  flags  shall  w. 

7.  every  thing  sown  by  the  brooks  shall  to. 

40. 24.  he  shall  blow  upon  them,  and  they  shall  w. 

Jer.  12.4.  how  long  shall  the  herbs  of  the  field  w.7 

Ezck.Vl.'i.  shall  he  not  cut  off  the  fruit  thereof  that 

it  w.  it  shall  70.  in  all  the  leaves  of  her  s()ring 

10.  shall  it  not  utterly  10.?  it  shall  ic.  in  furrows 

Amns  1.  2.  and  the  top  of  Carmel  shall  w. 

WITHERED. 
Oen.  41.23.  behold  seven  ears  w.  thin  and  blasted 
I'3.  102.  4.  my  heart  is  smitten  and  w.  \\  11. 1  am  vo. 
Isa.  15.  6.  the  hay  is  m.  away,  the  grass  failcth 
27.  11.  when  boughs  thereof  are  w.  be  broken  off 
Jjam.  4.  8.  the  Nazarite's  skin  is  w.  like  a  stick 
Eiek.  19.12.  her  strong  rods  werejo.  and  consumed 
Joel  1.  12.  the  trees  of  the  field  are  w.  joy  is  w. 

17.  the  hams  are  broken  down,  forthe  corn  is  re. 
JImos  4.  7.  the  piece  whereupon  it  rained  not  w. 
Jonah  4.  7.  and  it  smote  the  gourd  that  it  w. 
Jifat.  12.10.  and  behold  there  was  a  man  which  had 
his  hand  w.  Mark  3.  1,  3.  /^ke  6.  G,  8. 
13.  6. when  the  sun  was  up  they  were  scorched,  be- 
cauxe  having  no  root,  they  ic.away,  .AIa7-44  6. 
21.  19.  presently  the  fig-tree  w.  20.  Jtlark  11.  21. 
I.ukeS.G.itw.  away  because  it  lacked  moisture 
./i>An5.3.of  jc.  folk  waitingfor  moving  of  the  water 
13.  6.  he  is  cast  forth  as  a  branch  and  is  a. 
WITHERETH. 
Job  8.  12.  the  flag  w.  before  any  other  herb 
Psal.  90.  6.  in  the  evening  it  is  cut  down  and  w. 
129.  G.  like  grass  that  v>.  before  it  groweth  up 
/.fa.40.7.gr:i3s  w.  the  flower  fadeth,  8.  1  Pet.  1.  24. 
yam.I.ll.the  sun  no  sooner  risen,  but  \tw.  the  grass 
Jfdel'i.trees  whosefruit  ic. without  fruit, twicedoad 

WITHHELD. 

G'en.20. 6.  fori  ic.  thee  from  sinning  against  mo 

C80 


WIT 


den.^.ifi.  gracing  thou  hast  not  w.  thy  son  from  me 
30.  2.  who  w.  Iiom  tliue  the  fruit  ol  ilie  womb  7 
Kira  U.  1 13.  hast  w.  beneath  our  iniquities 
Jol>'J\.  It),  if  1  have  v>.  the  jioor  from  their  desire 
Keel.  2.  10.  I  10.  not  my  heart  from  any  joy 

WlTllHKLUEtiT. 
JVch.  9.  20.  !0.  not  thy  manna  from  their  mouth 

WITHHOLD. 
(7c».23.6.none  of  us  shall  uj.lrom  thee  his  sepulchre 
2  tiam.  13.  13.  for  lie  will  not  10.  me  from  liiee 
./oil  4.  2.  but  who  can  w.  hnnsell'lrom  siieuking? 
30.  t  10.  they  w.  not  sjiiltlf  from  my  laco 
Psal.  40.  11.  w.  not  thy  teiid.jr  mercies  from  me 
84.11.  no  good  thing  will  he  w.  from  them  that 
Prov.'i.il.w.  not  good  from  them  to  whom  it  in  due 
23.  13.  w.  not  correction  from  the  child 
30.  \1.  two  things  I  required,  w.  not  from  me 
Eccl.  11.6.  in  the  evening  )o.  not  tliy  hand 
Jer.  2.  25.  w.  thy  foot  tVoni  being  unshod  and  throat 
WITHHOLUEN. 

1  Sam.  25.  26.  Lord  hath  w.  thee  from  revenging 
Job  22.  7.  thou  hast  w.  bread  tioin  Ihe  hungry 

38. 15.  from  the  wicked  their  light  is  w. 

42.  2.  that  no  thought  can  be  w.  from  thee 
Psal.  2L  2.  thou  hast  not  w.  the  request  of  his  li{is 
Jer.  3.  3.  therefore  the  showers  have  been  w. 

5.  25.  your  sins  have  w.  good  things  from  you 
Eztk.  18.  16.  hath  not  w.  the  pledge,  nor  spoiled 
Joell.  13.  the  drink-otferiiig  is  w.  from  Gud 
~1iiios  4.  7.  also  1  have  w.  ilie  rain  from  you 

WITHHOLDETH. 
./0JI2. 15.  behold,  he  w.  the  waters,  they  dry  up 
ProK.  11.  24.  there  is  that  w.  more  than  is  meet 

26.  he  that  w.  corn,  the  people  shall  curse  him 

2  7'/icA-.2.6.and  now  ye  know  what  lo.tlmtiie  might 
WITHIN. 

Gen.  39.  11.  none  of  the  men  of  the  house  was  w. 
Lev.  25.  29.  w.  a  full  year  be  may  redeem  it 
JosA.lO.J.  the  inheritance  ofSin;  jon  was  to.  Judah 
Jadg.  11.  2t).  why  not  recover  iheni  w.  that  tii'ne  ! 
1  .Sam. 13.11. thou  earnest  not  w.  the  days  appointed 

1  Kings  6. 23.!0.the  oracle  he  made  two  cherubims 

2  Kings  7.  llttliey  told  it  to  the  king's  house  %d. 
Ezra  10.  8.  whoso  would  not  come  w.  three  days 
Psal.  45. 13.  the  king's  daughter  is  all  glorious  w. 

)U1.  2.  will  walk  w.  my  house  with  a  perfect  heart 
Eccl.  9.  14.  there  was  a  little  city,  few  men  w.  it 
Ezek.  3.24.  spiritsaid,  go  shuttliyself  w.thy  house 
12.  21.  shall  be  no  more  any  vain  vision  w.  Israel 
44.  17.  whiles  they  minister  in  the  gates  and  tc. 
ZfpA.3.3.her  princes  w.  are  roaring  lionS|her  juijges 
Mat.'i.  9.  think  not  to  say  w.  yourselves,  l^uke  3.  8, 
9. 21.  she  said  «>.  herself,  if  I  but  touch  his  garment 
23.  25.  w.  they  are  full  of  extortion  and  e.vce.ss 
20.  cleanse  first  wh.at  is  w.  the  cup  and  platter 

27.  are  iC.  full  of  dead  men's  bones  and  unclean. 

28.  w.  ye  are  full  of  hypocrisy  and  iniquity 
Mark  7.  21.  for  from  w.  proceed  evil  thoughts 

23.  all  these  evil  things  come  from  w.  and  defile 
Luke  11.  17.  he  from  w.  shall  answer  and  say 

12.  17.  he  thought  w.  himself,  16.  3.  |  18.  4. 
John  20.  26.  after  eight  days  his  disciples  were  w. 
.lets  5.  23.  when  we  opened,  we  found  no  man  w. 

1  Cor.  5. 12.  dt^not  ye  judge  them  that  are  w.  ? 

2  Cor.  7.  5.  without  were  fightings,  w.  were  fears 
Rev.  4.  8.  and  they  were  full  of  eyes  w.  rest  not 

'   1.  a  book  written  w.  on  the  back  side  sealed 
See    Gates,    Him,    Me,    Thee,    The.u,    Us, 
Without,  You. 

WITHOUT. 
Gen.  24. 31.  come  in,  wherefore  standest  thou  w.  7 
Deut.  25.  5.  the  wife  of  the  dead  shall  not  marry  w. 
unto  a  stranger 
2  Kings  10.  24.  Jehu  appointed  eighty  men  w. 
II.  15.  and  he  said,  have  her  forth  te.  the  ranges 
18.  25.  am  I  now  come  up  w.  the  Ijord  against 
this  pliiice  lo  destroy  it?  /j>-a.  36.  10. 
2  Chr.  15. 3.  Israel  lialh  been  long  w.  the  true  God 
21.  20.  Jehoram  deptirted  v).  being  desired 
Psal.  31. 11.  they  that  did  see  me  10.  fled  from  me 
Pr«».l.  20.  wisdom  cricth  ic.she  utleielh  her  voice 
7. 12.  now  she  is  w.  \\  22.  13.  there  is  a  lion  w. 
24.  27.  prepare  thy  work  70.  make  it  fit  for  thee 
Isa.  33.  7.  behold,  their  valiant  ones  shall  cry  w. 
52.  3.  and  ye  shall  be  redeemed  w.  money 
55.  1.  buy  wine  and  milk  w.  money  and  vj.  price 
.Ter.  9.21.  to  cut  off  the  children  from  7C. 
33.  10.  JO.  man,  w.  beast,  and  to.  inhabitant,  12. 
//05.3.4.  Israel  to. a  king,  70.  a  prince,  70.  a  sacrifice, 
70.  an  image,  70.  an  cpliod,  and  70.  a  teraphim 
Mat.  10.  29.  a  sparrow  shall  not  fall  70.  your  father 
Mark  4.  11.  to  them  that  are  to.  all  these  are  done 
7.  18.  whatsoever  from  70.  enterelh  into  the  man 
Lukel.  10.  the  whole  multitude  wore  praying  70. 
1  C«r.  5.  12.  what  to  do  lo  judge  Jhem  that  are  70. 

13.  but  them  that  are  7C.  God  judgeth 
K;/A.2.12.having  no  hope,and  TO.God  in  the  world  1 
Col.  4.  5.  walk  in  wisdom  toward  them  that  arc  70. 
1  Thess.  4. 12.  walk  honestly  low.  f  hem  that  are  ?o. 
1  Tim.  3. 7.  have  a  good  report  of  thera  that  are  tc. 

4U     . 


WIT 

Heb.l.  3.  Melchiscd. 70. father, !o.niollicr,io. descent 
13.  12.  wherefore  Jesus  ulsu  suH'ered  w.  tin-  j.'ate 

1  Pet.  3. 1.  that  they  also  may  10.  the  word  be  won 
Uev.  22.  15.  lor  w.  are  dugs  and  sorceieis 

WITHOUT,  joined  with  witlnn. 
Oen. a.  14.  pitch  the  urk  uitliin  and  jo.  wilh  pitch 
Kxod.'ii>.  11.  overlay  ihe  ark  icillun  and  to   37.  2 
J.ev.  13.55.  if  ihe  garment  be  bare  icillun  <  r  to. 
Deut.  32.  25.  the  sword  70.  and  lerror  within 
F.iek.'i.  10.  and  it  was  wiiltcii  williin  tind  w.     - 
7.  15.  ihe  sword  is  70.  and  famine  wil/iin 
Luke  11.  40.  ye  fools,  did  not  he  lliat  made  lliat 
which  IS  70.  iiiiiku  that  which  is  within  nlsoj 

2  Cor.  7.  5.  TO.  weie  fightings,  within  weie  Itars 
Sec    Hlkmlsh,    Cami',     (.'aihe.    City,     Kau,, 

Fear,      Him,     Knowlkdue,     Law,     Alt', 
Stand,  Stood,  U.s,  You. 
WlTHiS. 
,Jvdg.  10.  7.  if  they  bind  me  with  seven  green  jo. 
8.  Ihe  lords  brought  70.  |{  9.  he  biake  ilie  w. 
WITHSTAND. 
J^am.  22.  .12.  the  angel  went  out  to  70.  Balaam 
2  C'/ir.l3.7.Reliol)oani  was  young, could  not  to. them 
8.  now  ye  think  lo  70.  iho  kingdom  of  ihe  Loid 
20.  6.  jiower,  BO  that  none  is  able  to  to.  Ihee 
Eslh.  9.  2.  and  no  man  could  to.  the  Jews 
Keel.  4.  12.  it' one  prevail,  two  shall  70.  him 
Jian.il.  15.  the  arms  of  the  soulh,  nor  his  peojila 
shall  not  TO.  nor  shall  there  be  any 
slreiiytli  to  70. 
.^cf.?  II.  17.  what  w;is  1  thai  I  could  TO.  God  ? 
Kpli.ii.Vi.  ihatyemay  be  able  loTc.  in  the  evil  dav 

WITHSTOOD. 
2  Chron.  26.  IS.  they  to.  U/.ziah  the  king 
/Ja/i. 10. 13.  prince  ol  I'ursia  w.  me  Iwcnly-one  days 
■  lets  13.  8.  but  Elyin.is  the  snrcerer  to.  (hem 
(ral.  2.  11.  at  Antioch  1  to.  Peter  to  the  lace 
2  'J'im.  3.  8.  as  Jaiiiies  and  JaiiibresH-.  .Muses 
4. 15.  beware,  for  he  hath  greatlv  70.  our  words 

WITNESS     ■ 
Is  oar.  that  ginrs  testimony  to  any  thing.     Thus 
it  is  said.  You  are  witness,  a  laithful  tcitHcaa-, 
a  false  tOT/Tie;}.?,  God  t';*  witness,  &.c. 
Witness  t;i  Greek  is  Marlys,  or  Martyr,  and  sig- 
nifies one  that  gives  tcstiuujny  to  the  truth  at 
the  ci/iense  of  his   life.      Jusiis  Clirisl  is    (he 
faithful  witness,  Rev.  1.  5.     >/*  i*  so  called, 
because,  as  the  great  Prophet  of  his  church,  he 
hath  revealed  the  willof  (iodfaithfulhj,jilaiiilij, 
and  fully,  so  for  as  i.>-  necessary  lo  Ihe  suliia- 
tion  of  men  :   This  Isaiah  prophesied  of  him. 
Isa.  .55.  4,  I  have  given  him  for  a  witness  to 
the  people,  to  be  a  Prophet  and  Teacher,  to  de- 
clare the  counsel  and  will  of  God  cvvernivg  the 
duty  and sulcationof  men,  to  bear  witness  unto 
the  truth,  as  Christ  himsilf  affirms  before  Pon- 
tius Pilate,  John   18.   37.       IVhcrcfore    Paul 
saith,  1  Tim.  6.   13,  that  Christ    wiliiessci  a 
good  confession  before  Pontius  Pilale.     He  is 
called  Ihe  faithful  witness,  nnl  only  because  he 
reoealed  all  truth,  and  bare  record  lo  the  truth 
before  Pilate,  but  also   because  he   sealed    it 
loilh  his  blood  :  he  died,  and  was  a  marlyr  of 
the  truth,  lehich  proves  him  to  be  a  faithful, 
constant  witness. 
The  law  appoints,  that  two,  or  //troo  witnesses . 
should  be  sufficient  in  matters  vf  judicature; 
but  one  witness  only  was  not  sufficient,  Deut. 
17.  6.     When  any  one  was  condemned  to  die 
the  witnesses  were  the  first  that  began  the  exe- 
cution.  They  threw  the  first  stone,  for  example^ 
if  Ihe   party  was  to  be   stoned,  Deut.  17.  7. 
The  law  condemned  a  false  ^'Wae^s  to  undergo 
the  same  punishment  that  he  would  have  sub- 
jected his  neighbour  to,  Deut.  19.  IG,  17,   18, 
19.     IHien  God  is  said  to  be  a  witness  to  sin, 
as  in  Jer.  29.  23.  1/  signifies,  that  he  not  only 
knows  it,  but  he  will  also  punish  it :     He  is 
both  judge  and  witness,  he  does  not  stay  for  any 
one  to  accuse  the  leicked  to  him,  he  has  no  nerd 
of  the  testimony  or  accusation  of  men,  to  know 
the  demerits  ojf  the  guilty.     He  accuses  them, 
himself,  he  punishes  them,  he  condemns  them, 
he  knows  all  their  transgressions,  by  his  wis- 
dom, his  justice,  his  infinite  penetration. 
In  Mai.  3.  5.  God  threatens  perjured  persons, 
adulterers,  and  other  wicked  men,  with  ven- 
geance, I  will  be  a  swift  witness  against  false 
swearers,  iH-c.     This  is   spoken  of  Christ  the 
Messiah,  to  whom  the  Father  hath  committed 
all  judgment,  John  5.  22.     The  prophets  and 
Old   Testament  believers,  by  thctr  doing  and 
suffering  for  God,  have  given  testimony  to  the 
truth  of  our  holy  religion.     The  apostle  call* 
them  a  cloud  of  witnesses,  Hcb.  12.  1.     The 
apostles  also  are  still  more  witnesses,  of  the 
coming,  the  mission,  the  Joetrine,  the  resurrec- 
tion of  Christ.     1  Cor.  15.  14,  15,  If  Cliri.it  bo 
not  risen,  then  we  are  found  false  witnesses  of 
God.  And  SI.  Peter  says,  VfQatewitncsttt*/ 


WIT 


all  things  which  he  did  in  Judea  and  Jerusa 
Icin,  .-Ids  lU.  '.fJ,  He  chose  a  email  nutiiOn 
ofpersuns  tube  wilneuiius  to  him,  and  whttt  Ihcij 
took  ujiun  them  to  put  another  apostle  in  the 
place  uf  Judas,  they  thought  fit  to  appoint  one 
who  had  been  a  witness  0/ (Ac  resurrection  along 
with  them,  Acts  1.  SW. 
The  apostle  Paul,  in  Horn.  8.  16.  says,  thai  the 
Spirit  itself  heareth  witness  wilh  our  spirit, 
that  we  uro  the  children  ol'  God.  'J'he  ISpirit 
of  Ood  by  an  inward  and  secret  suggestion, 
speaks  the  same  things,giocs  the  same  evidence, 
concerning  the  truth  of  grace,  and  our  sonship, 
and  so  ratifies  what  our  enlightened  and  renew- 
ed consciences  say.  In  Heb.  11.  4.  it  is  said, 
that  Abel  obtained  witness  that  he  was  rigii- 
teous,  God  tf.stit)ing  of  his  gifts.  The  Spirit 
of  (/od  testified  to  his  spirit  that  he  wasjiusti 
fied  by  the  righteousness  of  Christ ;  and  Ood 
witnessed  from  heaven  to  the  truth  of  his  stat 
by  accepting  of  his  person  and  sacrifice,  and  by 
giving  a  visible  sign  of  it,  so  as  that  Cain 
could  observe  it :  It  is  thought  that  Ood  sent 
fire  from  heaven  andconsuined  .ibel's  sacrifice 
as  he  did  others  aftericards.  ' 

Job  says,  Tiiou  rciiewcst  thy  witnesses  against 
ine.  Job  10.  17.  Thou  hringcsl  fresh  plagues 
and  judgments  upon  me,  u:hich  arc  the  wit- 
nesses and  evidences  both  of  my  sins,  and  of 
thy  displeasure  against  me.  In  Psal.  8'J.  3'/. 
it  i.1  said  that  the  house  and  kingdom  of  David 
shall  be  established  for  ever  as  the  moon,  and 
as  a  failhful  witness  in  heaven.  By  faithful 
wiliiess,  some  understand  the  moon,  which  is 
called  a,  witness  of  God's  covenant  of  the  night, 
Jer.  33.  "20.  so  the  meaning  is.  .Ind  though  the 
jnoonbe  subject  to  eclipses  and  m  anifoldchangcs, 
yet  it  still  abides  in  heaven,  as  a  witiiees  of  my 
covenant  of  the  night,  so  shall  the  house  and 
kingdom  of  iJaviM,  who  was  a  type  of  the  Mes- 
Biali,  continue  for  ever,  notwithstanding  the 
changes  and  calamities  that  befall  it.  Others 
understand  by  this  the  rainbow,  which  is  God's 
faithful  and  perpetual  witness,  Gen.  9.  12,  16. 
Witness  IS  put  for  the  miracles  of  Christ,  which 
gave  testimony  to  his  Deity  and  .Mediatorship, 
John  5.  36.  I  lU.  iJ. 

Ottt.  21.  :i0.tlie)'  may  be  ;i  w.  tliat  I  digged  this  well 
31.  44.  let  this  covenant  be  a  w.  between  us 
iS.  this  lieaji  is  a  w.  this  pillar  is  w.  5i. 
50.  God  is  w.  biiween  me  and  thee,  1  Thess.i.5. 

Kfod.  a.  13.  if  It  be  turn,  let  him  bring  it  for  a  w. 
•Xi.  1.  put  not  ihine  hand  to  be  an  unrighteous  w. 

J.ev.  5.  1.  if  a  soul  sin,  and  is  a  w.  of  swearing 

yum.  5.  13.  if  there  he  no  w.  against  her 
35.30.  one  to.  shall  not  testify  against  any  person 
to  cause  him  to  die,  Deut.  17.  6.  |  10. 15. 

Deut.  31.  19.  this  nong  may  be  a  70. '21.  iW. 

./o.?A.  22.  27.  the  altar  is  a  w.  between  us,  28.  34. 
24.  27.  behold  this  stone  shall  be  a  w.  10  us 

Jadg.  II.  10.  Lord  be  10.  between  us,  .ler.  42.  5. 

1  Ham.  12.  5.  the  Lord  is  w.  against  you  this  day 

Job  16.  8.  my  wrinkles  which  is  a  w.  against  me 
lO.hehold,  my  w.  is  in  heaven,  my  record  on  high 
29.  11.  when  the  eye  saw  me,  it  g«»e  w.  to  me 

/'«a/.  80. 37.  esiablishcd  as  a  faithful  w.  in  heaven 

Prov.  14.5.  a  faithful  to.  will  not  lie,  hut  a  false  w 

25.  a  true  w.  delivereth  souls,  hut  a  deceitful  w 
19.  28.  an  ungodly  lo.  scornelh  judgment 
24.  28.  be  not  w.  aga.nst  thy  neighbour  without 

cause 
I»a.  19.  20.  it  shall  be  for  a  w.  to  the  Lord  of  hosts 

55.  4.  I  have  giveh  him  fur  a  w.  to  the  people 
Jer.  20.  23.  I  know,  and  am  a  w.  Kiiith  the  Lord 

42.5.  Lord  be  a  true  and  faithful  10.  between  us 
Mie.  1.  2.  let  the  Lord  (>od  he  w.  against  you 
JUal.  2.  14.  Lord  be  la.  between  thee  and  wife 

3.  5. 1  Will  he  a  swift  w.  against  the  sorcerers 
^at.  24. 14.  he  preachnd  fiir  a  w.  to  all  nations 
Mark  14. .'>5.  the  council  sought  for  w. against  Jesus 

56.  but  their  le.  agreed  not  together,  50. 
7<ttJlii!22. 71.  they  said,  what  need  we  further  tr.  ? 
John  1.  7.  the  same  camo  for  a  tc.  to  bear  to. 
3.1  l.wc  spe.ik  that  we  know, ye  receive  not  our  w. 

26.  tu  whom  thiiU  bearest  10.  the  same  bapti/.eth 
5.31.  if!  hear  w.  of  myself,  my  to.  is  not  truo 

32.  I  know  the  to.  he  wilnesseth  of  mn  is  true 

36.  hut  I  have  greater  w.  than  that  of  John 

37.  Father  who  iwuit  me  hath  home  10.  of  me 
Jlcts  1.  22.  must  one  ho  ordained  to  he  w.  with  us 

4.  3!t.  gave  10.  of  the  n-mirrection  of  iho  Lord 
10.  4.1.  to  him  give  all  prophets  10.  whoso  holievoth 
14.  17.  he  left  not  himself  without  to.  ho  did  good 
22.  I.'i.  for  thou  sliallbe  his  w.  to  all  men  of  what 
26.  16.  to  make  thee  a  minister  and  a  to.  of  Ihesic 

Kom.  1.  9.  Rod  is  my  JO.  whom  I  serve  in  the  gospel 
2.  I.'i.  their  eonsci'nce  also  bearing  10.  0.  I. 
Tit.  I.  13.  this  w.  is  true,  rebuke  them  sharply 
Hrb.  2.  4.  God  also  Iwaring  them  to.  with  signs 
10.  15.  whcruofthe  Holy  Gbosl  is  a  to.  to  ua 
SM 


WIV 

//iej.11.4.  by  which  Abel  obtained  to. was  righteous 
Jam.  5.  3.  the  rust  of  them  shall  be  w.  against  you 
1  Pet.  5.  1.  Peter  a  to.  of  the  suHerings  of  Christ 
1  JoAn5.9.  if  we  receive  the  w.  of  men,  the  10.  of 
God  is  greater,  for  this  is  the  10.  of  God 

10.  he  that  believeth  hath  the  w.  in  himself 
3  John  6.  which  have  borne  to.  of  thy  charity 
Rev.  1.  5.  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  the  faithful  to. 

3.  14.  write  these  things,  saitli  the  true  to. 
20.  4.  that  were  beheaded  for  the  w.  of  Jesus 

See  Bauk,  Bkak,  Bkakktii,  Falsk,  Taber- 
nacle. 

WITNESSES. 
J^Tum.  35.  30.  murderer  put  to  death  by  mouth  of  to. 
Deut.  17.  6.  at  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  to.  shall 
he  be  put  lo  death,  19.  15.  2  Cor.  13. 1. 
7.  the  hands  of  the  to.  shall  be  first  ugion  him 
./osA.24.22.  Joshua  said, ye  arew. against  yourselves 
that  ye  have  chosen  Lord,  they  said  we  are  10. 
Ruth  4.  9.  ye  are  to.  that  1  have  bought,  10. 

11.  the  people  and  the  elders  said,  we  are  w. 
Job  10.  17.  thou  rencwest  thy  10.  against  me 
Isa.  8.  2.  I  took  to  rne  faithful  to.  to  record 

43.  9.  let  all  the  nations  bring  ILrth  their  w. 
10.  ye  are  my  w.  sailh  the  Lord,  12.  |  44.  8. 

44.9.  they  are  their  own  w.  they  bee  not,  nor  know 
.fer.  32.  10.  I  sealed  the  evidence  and  took  10.  12, 

25.  buy  the  field  for  money,  and  take  w.  44. 
^Mat.  18.  16.  in  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  10. 

23.  31.  wherefore  ye  he  to.  lo  yourselves  that  ye 

2G.  65.  what  further  need  of  to.  ?  Mark  14.  63. 
I^uke  24.  48.  and  ye  are  10.  of  these  things 
.'Jets  1.  8.  ye  shall  be  to.  to  me  in  Jerusalem 

2.32.Je«us  God  raised  up,  whereof  we  are  10. 3.15. 

5.  32.  we  are  his  to.  of  these  things,  10.  39. 
7.  58.  w.  laid  down  their  clothes  at  Saul's  feet 
10.  41.  but  unto  to.  chosen  before  of  God,  to  us 
13.  31.  who  are  his  w.  unto  the  people 

1  'Iliess.  2. 10.  ye  are  to.  and  God  also,  how  we 

1  77t/i.5.19.receive  no  accuEation  but  before  two  10. 

6.  12.  professed  a  good  profession  before  many  w. 

2  7'ttn.2.  2.  things  heard  of  me  among  many  to. 
//eA.10.28.died without  mercyundertwoor  threeto. 

12.  l.arecompassedabout  with  80  great  cloud  of  to. 
Reo.  11.  3.  I  will  give  power  to  my  two  10. 
See  Falsk. 
WITNESS,  Verb. 
Z>eut.4.26.I  call  heaven  and  earth  to  to. against  you 
1  Sam.  12.  3.  behold,  here  I  am,  w.  against  me 
Asa.  3. 9.  their  countenance  doth  to.  against  them 
Lam.2. 13.  what  thing  shall  I  take  to  to.  for  thee  7 
Mat.  26.  02.  answerest  thou  nothing?  what  is  it 
that  these  w.  against  thee?  Mark  14.  60. 
27.  13.  Pilate  saith  to  him,  bearest  thou  not  how 
many  things  they  w.  against  thee,  Mark  15.4. 
WITNESSED. 
1  Kings'il.  13.thc  menof  Belial  to.  against  Naboth 
Rom.  3.  21.  being  to.  by  the  law  and  the  prophets 
I  7'(«i.6. 13.  who  before  Pilate  to. a  good  confession 
Heb.  7.  8.  of  whom  it  is  to.  that  he  liveth 

WITNESSETH. 
./ohn  5.  32.  the  witness  that  he  w.  of  me  is  true 
Wc£5  20. 23.  save  that  Holy  Ghost  to.  in  every  city 

WITNESSING. 
Jlcts  26.  22.  to.  both  to  small  and  great,  saying 
WITS.         s       >     J    » 

Psal.  107.27.  they  stagger  and  arc  at  their  to.  end 

WITTY. 
Proti.8. 12.  I  find  out  knowledge  of  to.  inventions 

WITTINGLY. 
O'en.48. 14.  Isr.  guided  his  hands  w.  forManassch 

WIVES. 
Oen.  4.  19.  Lnmech  took  unto  him  two  10. 

6.  2.  they  took  them  w.  of  all  which  they  chose 

30.  2().  give  nie  my  to.  and  children  and  let  nie  go 

31.  50.  if  thou  take  other  w.  besides  my  daughters 
jVuiH.14.3.that  ourto.and  children  slionld  be  a  prey 
Deut.  17.  17.  nor  shall  he  multiply  to.  to  himself 

21.  15.  if  a  man  have  two  to- one  beloved,  another 

.Tudg.  8.  30.  Gideon  had  threescore  and  ten  sons, 

he  had  many  to. 

21.  7.  how  shall  wo  do  for  to.  for  them  ?  16. 

18.  wo  may  not  give  them  to.  of  our  daughters 
I  .S"atn.l.2.Klkan.hnd  two  ir. Hannah  andPeninnah 

2.5.  43.  they  wore  also  both  of  thoni  David's  w. 
'2  Sam.^1.  13.  David  took  more  to.  out  of  Jerusalem 

12.8.  I  gave  thee  thy  master's  to.  into  thy  bosom 
1  Kings  11.  3.  Solomon  had  700  w.  princesses 

4.  his  10.  turned  away  his  heart  when  he  was  old 
20.  7.  ho  sent  unto  mo  for  my  to.  and  children 

1  Chron.  4.5.  Ashur  had  two  to.  Hclah  and  \aarah 

7.  4.  the  sons  of  IJzzi  had  mnnv  w.  and  sons 

8.  8.  Shaharaim  had  two  to.  Ilushim  and  llaara 
2CAr.ll.21.Hehob.  loved  Maachah  above  all  his  to. 

23.  ho  gavo  them  victual ;  he  desired  many  to. 
2^1.  3.  Jehoiadn  took  for  him  two  to.  he  begatsons 
29.  9.  and  our  10.  arc  in  captivity  for  this 

f'.zra  10.  3.  a  covenant  to  put  away  all  the  jn.  44. 

^V*cA.  12.  43.  tho  to.  also  and  children  rejoiced 
13.  23.  I  taw  Jews  that  had  married  10.  of  Ashdod 


WOE 

Esth.  1.  20.  the  10.  ehall  give  to  hnsbandi  honoor 
Jer.  29. 6.  take  ye  to.  and  lake  10.  for  your  sons 
35.  8.  to  drink  no  wine,  we,  nor  our  w.  nor  sona 
Dan.  5.  2.  his  to.  and  concubines  drink  therein,  3 
Duke  17.  27.  tliey  eat,  drank,  they  married  to. 
JlctsH.  5.  they  brought  us  on  our  way  with  10. 
1  Cor.  7.  29.  that  have  w.  be  as  tho'  they  bad  none 
Kph.5.':i'i.w.  submit  yourselves  to  your  own  hus- 
bands as  unto  the  Lord,  Col.  3. 18.  1  Pet.  3.  1 
24.  BO  let  the  to.  be  lo  their  own  husbands 
1  y'itrt.  4.  7.  refuse  profane  and  old  w.  fables 

1  Pel.  3. 1.  may  be  won  by  the  conversation  of  ».' 
iSee  Stkance. 
Their  WIVES. 

Gejt.34.29.all  their  wealth,  all  their  little  ones,  ar.^ 

their  w.  took  they  captive,  1  Sam.  30.  3. 

Judg.  3. 6.  they  took  their  daughters  to  be  their  u 

2  Chron.  20.  13.  all  Judah  witn  their  10.  stood 
Kzra  10.  19.  that  they  would  put  away  their  w. 
JVeh.  5. 1.  a  great  cry  of  the  peojile  and  of  their  a. 

10.28.  their  w.  and  daughters  entered  into  an  oath 
/£a.l3.16.their  houses  spoiled, and  their  to. ravished 
Jer.  6.  12.  their  w.  shall  be  turned  lo  others,  8.  10 

14.  16.  they  shall  have  none  lo  bury  their  to. 
Id.  21.  let  their  to.  be  bereaved  of  their  children 
44.  9.  have  ye  forgotten  tlie  wickedness  ol'Uieir  to.' 

15.  men  who  knew  their  w.  hud  burnt  incente 
Eiek.  44.  22.  nor  take  for  their  to.  a  widow 
I  J  an.  6.  24.  cast  them  and  their  w.  into  den  oflioDt 
Zech.  12.  12.  their  to.  shall  mourn  apart,  13,  14. 
Eph.  5.  28.  lo  love  their  to.  as  their  own  bodies 

1  Tim.  3. 11.  even  so  must  their  w.  be  grave,  sober 
Thy  WIVES. 

2  Sam.  12.  11. 1  will  take  thy  w.  before  thine  eyes, 
and  he  shall  lie  with  thy  w.  in  sight  of  the  sua 

19.  5.  who  saved  this  day  the  lives  of  thy  to. 

1  Kings  20.  3.  thy  silver  and  gold  is  mine  and  thy  w. 
5.  thou  shall  deliver  me,  thy  to.  and  children 

2  Chr.  21. 14.  Lord  will  smite  thy  people  and  thy  10 
.Jer.  38.  23.  so  they  shall  bring  thy  to.  and  childrt'D 
Dan.5.2'i.thy  to.  and  concubines  have  drunk  wine 

I'our  WIVES. 
Gen.  45.  19.  take  waggons  for  your  to.  and  come 
Erod.  19.  15.  said  to  people,  come  not  at  yout  w 
22.24. yai^r  to.  shall  be  widows,  children  fatherless 
32.  2.  break  off  the  golden  ear-rings  of  your  to. 
Deut.  3.  19.  your  w.  and  your  fitlle  ones  and  your 
callle  shall  remain  in  your  cities,  Jv^/i.  1. 14 
29.  11.  your  w.  shall  enter  into  covenant  wilhL 
jVtA.  4.  14.  fight  for  yottr  w.  and  your  houses 
Jer.  44  9.  have  ye  forgotten  wickedness  oi your  10 
25.Lord  saying, ye  and  your  to. have  both  spoken 
Mat.  19.  S.Mosessutl'ered  you  tojuit  away  your  io 
Eph.  5.  25.  husbands,  love  your  w.  Col.  3.  19. 

WIZARD. 
Lev.  20.  27.  a  w.  shall  surely  be  put  to  deafh 
Z^euM8.11. there  shall  not  be  found  among  you  ato. 

WIZAKDS. 
Lev.  19.  31.  nor  seek  after  w.  to  be  defiled  by  them 

20.  6.  the  soul  that  turns  after  to.  I  will  cut  off 

1  Sam.  28.  3.  Saul  had  put  to.  out  of  the  land,  9. 

2  Kings  21.  6.  Mnnaesch  dealt  with  to.  2  Chr.  33.  6 
23.  24.  Joslah  put  the  w.  and  idols  out  of  the  land 

/su.8.19.when  say,  seek  unto  to.  that  peep  and  inut. 
19.  3.  and  they  shall  seek  to  idols  and  ic. 
WOE. 
jVttrtt.  21.  29.  to.  to  tliee,  Moah,  .Jer.  48. 4C. 
1  Sam.4.  7.  w.  unto  us,  for  there  hath  not  been  such 
a  thing  heretofore,  8.  Jer.  4.  13.  |  6.  4 
J^am.  5.  16. 
Prop.  23.  29.  who  hath  to.?  who  hath  sorrow  ? 
Eccl.  4. 10.  to.  to  him  that  is  alone  when  he  falls 
10.16.(0.  lo  thee,  O  land,  when  thy  king  is  a  child 
Isa.  3.  9.  w.  to  tiieir  soul,  for  they  rewardeil  evil 
11.  w.  to  the  wicked,  it  shall  be  ill  wilh  him 

17.  12.  to.  to  the  multitudo  of  many  people 

18.  1.  10.  to  the  land  shadowing  with  wings 
28.  1.  ID.  to  Ibe  crown  of  pride,  to  Iho  drunkards  ' 
2!1.  1.  to.  to  Ariel  ||  33.  1.  to.  to  thee  thai  spoilest 

30.1.  to.  lo  the  rebellious  children,  saith  the  Lord 
45.  9.  to.  to  him  that  strivelh  wilh  his  maker 

10.  lo.lo  him  that  saith  lo  fath.whal  bcgettest  Ihoo 
Jer.  13.  27.  w.  unto  thee,  O  Jerusalem,  will  tliou 

22.  13.  to.  to  him  that  builds  by  unrighteousness 

23.  1.  to.  to  Iho  pastors  that  destroy  the  sheep 
48.  1.  w.  to  Nebo  ||  Eick.  16.  23.  w.  to.  lo  thee 

Ezck.  2.  10.  there  was  written,  mourning  and  ie. 
13.  3.  to.  to  fuylish  prophets,  that  follow  their  spirit 
18.10.  to  women  that  sew  pillows  to  all  arinholes 

24.  6.  to.  to  the  bloody  city,  9.  ^ah.  3.  1. 
30.  2.  thus  saith  the  Lord,' howl,  w.  worth  the  day 

34.2.  w.  be  lo  the  shepherds  that  feed  themselves 
y/mo,*  5.18.10. to  you  that  desire  the  day  of  iho  Lord 
Hab.  2.  6.  to.  to  him  that  increnseth  that  is  not  his 

9.  to.  to  him  that  covetelh  on  evil  covetousnesi 
12.  w.  lo  him  that  buildelh  a  town  with  blood 

15.  to.  to  him  that  giveth  his  neighbour  drink 

19.  to.  to  him  that  soilh  to  the  wooil,  awoke 
7.rph.  2.  5.  to.  lo  the  inhabitants  of  the  si'O  cossta 

3.  1.  10.  to  her  that  is  filthy  and  polluted,  lo  citT 


WOL 

Zeck.  11.  17.  Iff.  to  the  idol  shepliorrl  tlint  leavrlh 
.WaM1.21.tr.fotheeChorttzin,M.totliee,Betlisairia, 
for  it'tlie  works  liad  been  done,  huke  10. 13. 
8.7.JO.  to  tlie  world  because  of  offences, ?c.to  thai 
man  by  whom  the  offence  cometh,  I.vkcV!.  1. 
23.  13.  tn.  unto  you  scribes  and  Pharisees,  hy- 
pocrites, 14,  15,  23,  25,  27,  29.  Luke  11.  44. 
1().  w.  unto  you,  ye  blind  guides,  which  say 
SIC.  24.  but  w.  unto  that  man  by  whom  the  Son  of 
man  is  betrayed,  Mark  14.  21.  Luke  22.  22. 
Z,?iie6.24.but  w.unto  you  that  are  rich,  for  ye  have 
2,5.  w.  to  you  that  are  full,  lo.  to  you  that  laugh 
26.  70.  to  you  when  all  men  speak  well  of  you 
11.  42.  but  XB.  unto  you  Pharisees,  43. 
46.  he  said,  w.  to  you  also,  ye  lawyers,  47.  52. 
lico-8. 13. 1  heard  an  angel  flying,  saying,  70.  w.  in. 
to  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  12.  12. 
D.  12.  one  w.  is  past  ||  11.  14.  the  second  to.  is  past 

WOE  is  me. 
Psal.  120.  5.  m.  is  me,  that  1  sojourn  in  Mcshech 
fsa.B.a.w.is  me,  I  am  undone,  1  am  of  unclean  lips 
,.Vr.  4.  31.  2c.  is  me  now,  for  my  soul  is  wearied 
10.19.fC.!>  mcformy  hurt||  15.10. 7C.7'«  rncmy  moth. 
45.3.  w.  is  me,  for  the  Lord  halh  added  grief 
Mic.1. 1.  v>.  is  meA  am  as  when  they  gathered  fruit 

WOE  7/7ito  me. 
Job\0.  15.  if  I  be  wicked,  tc.  unto  me,  if  righteous 
Isa.  24.  10.  hut  I  said,  my  leanness,  w.  unto  me 
I  Cor.  9.  16.  w.  untn  me  if  I  preach  not  the  gospel 

WOE  to  them. 
Isa.  5.  8.  w.  to  them  that  join  house  to  house 
11.  w.  to  them  that  rise  up  early  in  the  morning 
18.  IB.  to  them  that  draw  iniquity  with  cords 

20.  75.  to  them  that  call  evil  good  and  good  evil 

21.  to.  to  them  that  are  wise  in  their  own  eyes 
^2.  to.  to  them  that  are  mighty  to  drink  wine 

30. 1.  w.  to  them  that  decree  unrighteous  decrees 
29.  15.  70.  to  them  that  seek  deep  to  hide  counsel 
31. 1. 70.  to  them  that  go  down  into  Egypt  for  help 

.Ter.  50.  27.  70.  to  thr.m  for  their  day  is  come 

Hos.  7.  13.  70.  to  them,  for  they  have  fled  from  me 
9.  12.  ID.  to  them  when  I  depart  from  them 

..Amos  6.  1.  to.  to  them  that  are  at  ease  in  Zion 

Mic.  2.  1.  70.  to  them  that  devise  iniquity 

Mat. 24.  J9.w.totheiit  which  are  with  child  and  to 
them  that  give  suck,  J»rar4  13.17./.u/ire21.23. 

Jude  11.  w.to  tliem,thpy  have  gone  in  way  of  Cain 
WOES. 

Ret).9.12.behold,  there  come  two  to.more  hereafter 
WOEFUL. 

Ter.  17.  16.  neither  have  I  desired  the  to.  day 
WOLF, 

fn  Greek  Lycos  ;  Tn  Hebrew  Zeeb  ;  it  is  a  wild 
creature  very  leell  known.  The  scripture  takes 
notice  of  these  remarkable  things  of  the  wolf: 
That  it  lilies  upon  rapine  :  That  il  is  violent, 
cruel,  and  bloody;  That  it  is  voracious  and 
greedy  ."  That  it  goes  abroad  by  night  to  seek 
its  prey  :  That  it  is  the  great  enemy  of  flocks 
of  sheep  :  That  Benjamin  shall  ravin  as  a 
wolf :  That  false  teachers  arewolves7"7i  sheep^s 
clothing  :  That  the  persecutors  of  the  thurch, 
and  false  pastors,  are  also  ravening  wolves. 

The  prophets  Jeremiah,  Hahakkuk,  and  Zepha- 
niah,  speak  of  the  wolves  of  the  evening.  It 
hath  been  observed  that  towards  evening  wolves 
are  most  dangerous,  as  being  then  mare  hun- 
gry. Instead  of  the  wolves  of  the  evening, 
the  Septnagint  translate  it.  The  wolves  of 
Arabia;  because  the  Hebrew  word  Arab  sig- 
vifies  both,  the  evening  and  Arabia.  Wolves 
are  common  in  .Arabia,  but  they  have  nothing 
peculiar  in  that  country;  so  that  there 
can  be  no  reason  to  have  recourse  to  that 
translation. 

^s  to  what  is  said  in  Gen.  49.  27,  that  Benja- 
min shall  ravin  as  a  wolf;  this  denotes  the 
warlike  and  fierce  disposition  and  carriage  of 
this  tribe.  The  Chaldee  interpreters  explain 
it  of  the  altar  of  burnt-offerings,  which  was 
at  .Terusalrm  in  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,  and 
•upon  which  they  burnt  the  morning  and  even- 
ing sacrifices  to  the  Lord.  Others  refer  it  to 
that  violent  seizure  which  was  made  by  the 
children  of  Benjamin,  of  the  young  women 
that  came  to  the  tabernacle  at  Shilnh,  .ludg. 
21.  21,  23.  Others  again  refer  it  to  Mordccni, 
or  to  .Saul,  or  to  Paul,  who  were  of  the  tribe 
of  Benjamin, 
saiah  describing  the  tranquillity  of  thereign  of 
the  Messiah,  says.  The  100//  shall  dwell  with 
the  lamb,  and  the  leopard  shall  lie  down  with 
the  kid,  cj-c.  Isa.  11.  6.  This  is  to  he  under- 
stood spiritually,  and  metaphorically  ;  that  is 
tn  say,  "  Men  of  fierce,  cruel,  and  ungnrcrnahlr 
dispositions,  shall  be  fo  transformed  by  the 
preaching  of  the  gospel,  and  by  the  grace  nf 
Christ,  that  they  shall  become  most  humble, 
gentle,  and  tractable,  and  shall  no  more  vex 
and  pcrscctLte.  but  shall  live  and  converse  in 
991 


WOM 

the  same  church  with  other  poor  Christians 
quietly  and  harmlessly.^'  Persecutors  are 
elsewhere  compared  to  wolves.  Mat.  10.  16. 
Behold,  I  send  you  forth  as  sheep  in  the  midst 
of  wolves.  Both  .Jews  and  Pagans  were  at 
first  like  ravenous  and  voracious  wolves,  let 
loose  against  the  faithful.  They  persecuted 
and  put  to  a  violent  death  almost  all  the  Jlpos- 
tles  and  disciples  of  our  Saviour.  But  at  last 
some  of  these  wolves  themselves  became  con- 
verts, and  grew  to  be  lambs  ;  St.  Paul,  one  of 
the  most  eager  persecutors  of  the  church,  was 
afterwards  one  of  its  most  zealous  defenders. 

The  wolf,  as  it  is  said,  is  a  fierce  creature,  abid- 
ing in  forests,  an  enemy  to  cattle,  ravenous, 
greedy,  crafty,  of  an  exquisite  quickne.is  of 
smell,  having  a  head  something  square,  and 
his  hair  inclined  to  gray.  It  is  commonly  said, 
tAat  what  makes  him  so  voracious  is,  that  he 
has  but  one  very  large,  short  gut,  in  which  his 
food  stays  but  a  little  time:  But  this  is  a  po- 
pular mistake  :  His  guts  are  as  long  as  any 
other  animal's,  or  as  a  dog's,  being  himself  a 
kind  of  wild  dog. 

In  times  of  great  famine,  when  they  can  get  no 
preij,  wolves  arc  said  to  destroy  one  another; 
for  rohen  they  meet  together,  bemoaning  them- 
selves one  to  another,  as  it  were  by  consent, 
they  run  round  in  a  circle,  and  the  first  which, 
through  giddiness,  falleth  to  the  ground,  is, 
forthwith  devoured  by  the  rest.  They  are 
frightened  at  thethrowing  of  stones,  at  fire,  at 
the  sound  of  bells,  and  at  the  singing  of  men  or 
women.  IVhen  they  set  upon  sheep,  they  make 
choice  of  a  dark,  cloudy  day,  that  they  may 
escape  the  more  safely  ;  and  they  go  against 
the  wind,  to  prevent  the  dogs  smelling  them. 
It  it  said  also,  that  the  female  bringeth  forth 
one  the  first  year,  twothe  second,  and  soon  till 
the  ninth  year.  If  the  young  one  lap  as  a  dog, 
she  rejectcth  it ;  if  it  suck  the  tcater  as  a  swine, 
or  bite  as  a  bear,  she  nourishes  it.  Many 
other  things  are  said  of  this  animal. 

It  is  recorded  that  one  Gelon  of  Syracusa,  then  a 
scholar  at  school,  was  thus  preserved :  A  wolf 
entering  the  school,  seiied  on  Oelon's  writing 
table  and  hasted  to  be  gone  ;  Oelon  pursued 
after  his  table :  in  the  mean  time  the  school- 
house  fell  doion,  whereby  both  masters  and 
scholars  were  all  killed,  Gelon  alone  being  pre- 
served. Many  other  things  are  reported  of  them. 

Gen.  49.  27.  Benjamin  shall  ravin  as  a  to. 

Isa.  11.  6.  the  w.  shall  dwell  with  the  lamb 
65.  25.  the  to.  and  the  lamb  shall  feed  together 

Jer.  5.  6.  a  7b.  of  the  evenings  shall  spoil  them 

JohnW.H.  but  he  that  is  hireling  seeth  the  w.  com- 
ing, the  70.  catcheth  and  scattereth  the  sheep 
WOLVES. 

Eiek.  22.  27.  her  princes  are  like  w.  ravening 

Hab.  1.  8.  their  horses  fiercer  than  evening  70. 

Zeph.  3.3.  her  princes  lions,  her  judges  evening  to. 

Mat.  7.  15.  but  inwardly  they  are  ravening  w. 
10.  16. 1  send  you  forth  as  sheep  in  the  midst  of  to. 

Luke  10.  3.  I  send  you  forth  as  lambs  among  70. 

Acts  20.  29.  grievous  w.  shall  enter  in  among  you 
WOMAN. 

God  having  created  all  the  animals  in  pairs, 
male  and  female,  and.  having  brought  Ihem  to 
Adam,  that  he  might  give  them  names;  in  this 
review  that  .fid am  made  of  all  living  creatures, 
he  could  not  observe  that  any  one  of  them  was 
like  himself,  or  created  for  him.  Gen.  2.  19,20. 
But  God  was  pleased  to g've  hima  companion 
and  assistant,  as  he  haa.  done  to  all  the  other 
creatures-  He  therefore  cast  Adam  into  a  pro- 
found sleep,  and  when  he  was  fast  asleep,  God 
took  a  rib  out  nf  his  side,  of  lehich  he  formed 
the  woman.  When  .^Idam  aicoke,  he  perceived 
it,  and  cried  out.  This  is  bone  of  my  bones, 
and  flesfi  of  my  flesh  ;  she  shall  be  called  by  a 
nhme  derived  from  that  of  man,  because  she  is 
taken  out  of  man.  Wherefore  a  man  shall 
forsake  father  and  mother,  and  shall  cleave  to 
his  wife,  and  they  two  shall  be  one  flesh  ;  or, 
"  they  shall  be  but  one  in  two  different  bodies, 
becauseoftheproductionof  children,  which  are 
the  blond  of  both."     Gen.  2.  21,  22,  S,-c. 

Somewri  ter  shave  thought,thatAdam  was  created 
of.  both  sexes ;  because  it  is  said  in  Gen.  1. 2t). 
27,  Let  us  make  man  in  our  image,  after  our 
likeness,  and  let  them  have  dominion  over  the 
fish  of  the  sea:  So  God  created  man  in  his 
own  image,  in  the  image  of  God  created  he 
him ;  male  and  female  created  bo  them.  He 
.<!peaks  of  the  work  of  the  sixth  day.  And  in 
the  following  chapter  he  relates  the  formation 
of  /.Ac  woman  tn  the  manner  before  mentioned. 
It  is  therefore  affirmed,  that  man  was  already 
f armed  male  and  f  em  ale,bef  ore  Eve  was  created. 
Others  think,  that  the  bodies  ef  Adam  and  Eve 


WOM 

loore  created  even  from  the  sixth  day,  hutjoinea 
and  fastened  sidcwise  to  each  other  ;  and  that 
afterwards  God  sent  a  deep  sleep  on  Adam, and 
then  separated  the  woman  from  him  :  And  thus 
they  explain  those  words,  Gen.  2.  21,  He  took 
one  of  his  ribs,  and  closed  up  the  flesh  instead 
thereof:  they  translate  the  Hebrew  thus.  He 
took  one  (woman)  out  of  his  side,  and  put  fliish 
in  its  place.  The  opinion  that  generally  pre- 
vails is,  that  theman  and  woman  70f»-c  created 
on  the  sixth  day,  according  to  Gen.  1.  27.  and 
that  what  is  related,  chap.  2.  20,  (S-c.  is  only  a 
recapitulation,  or  a  supplement,  tu  what  had 
been  before  mentioned  in  a  concise  manner. 

Woman  toas  created  to  be  a  companion  and  as- 
sistant to  man  :  She  was  equal  to  him  in  that 
authority  and  jurisdiction  that  God  gave  them 
over  all  other  animals:  But  after  the  fall, 
God  made  her  .subject  to  the  government  of 
man.  Gen.  3.  16,  Thy  desire  shall  be  to  thy 
husband,  and  he  shall  rule  over  thee.  Beside* 
the  duties  prescribed  by  the  law,  common  to 
men  and  women,  there  were  certain  regulations 
peculiar  to  this  sex ;  as  were  those  legal  un- 
eleannesses  which  they  contracted  during  the 
times  of  their  ordinary  infirmities,ljev.  15. 1'J. 
and  those  that  attended  their  lying-in.  Lev.  10. 
2.  and  those  which  proceeded  from  certain 
fluxes  of  humours,  at  those  seasons  appointed 
by  nature.  Lev.  15.  25.  ,  The  law  also  made 
them  liable  to  the  trial  of  the  waters  of  jea- 
lousy, if  their  husbands  had  entertained  any 
well-grounded  suspicions  of  their  fidelity, 
Num.  5.  14,  S-c.  and  when  the  tokens  of  vir- 
ginity could  not  be  found  in  them,  they  were 
stoned  to  death,  Deut.  22.  20,  21. 

ff  a  married  woman  made  a  vow,  of  whatever 
nature  it  was,  she  could  not  be  obliged  to  keep 
it,  if  her  husband  was  against  it,  and  contra- 
dicted it  the  same  day.  But  if  he  staid  till 
the  next  day  before  he  contradicted  it,  or  Anoic- 
ing  the  thing,  if  he  held  his  peace,  he  was  then 
supposed  to  consent  to  it,  and  the  woman  toaj 
obliged  to  perform  her  vow,  Num.  30.  6,  7,  8. 
See  the  epistles  of  St.  Paul,  for  the  duties  of 
women  towards  their  husbands,  1  Cor.  7.  3,  4, 
&c.  Eph.  5.  22,  S-c.  See  also  Tit.  2.  4,  5. 
and  1  Pet.  3.  1,  2,  3.  where  modesty  is  recom- 
mended to  them,  and  a  great  care  in  avoiding 
all  superfluous  ornaments,  and  unnecessary 
finery  of  dress. 

The  propfut  Isaiah  says.  As  for  my  people,  wo- 
men rule  over  them  ;  that  is,  iccak  and  effemi- 
nate men,  Isa.  3.  12  And  in  chap.  19.  16, 
In  that  day  shall  Egypt  be  like  unto  woman; 
that  is,  feeble  andfearftil.  The  prophet  Eze- 
kiel  represents  the  kingdoms  of  Israel  and 
Judah,  who  both  sprung  from  the  same  stock  fy 
two  Toor/icji,  the  daughters  of  one  mother,  Ezek 
23.2,44.  And  in  Rev.  12.  J,  the  church  is 
represented  by  a  woman  clothed  with  the  sun 
and  the  moon  under  her  feet.  The  church  is 
compared  to  a  woman,  ai  she  is  the  spouse  of 
Christ  ;  and  as  the  woman  is  the  weaker  sex, 
so  the  church  halh  always  been  the  weakest 
part  of  the  world.  The  Antichristian  church 
is  always  represented  as  a  woman  sittin"  on  a 
scarlet  coloured  beast,  full  of  names  of  blas- 
phemy. Rev.  17.  3. 

Gen.  2.  22.  and  the  rib  of  the  man  made  he  a  w. 
23.she  shall  be  called  70. shewas  taken  out  of  man 
3.  15.  I  will  put  enmity  between  thee  and  the  to 

24.  5.  peradventure  the  w.  will  not  come,  39. 
44. let  the  same  be  the  to.theLord  halh  appointed 

Exod.'iX.  22.  ifmen strive  and  hurtato.  with  child 
Lev.  18.  23.  nor  shall  a  w.  stand  before  a  beast 
20.  13.  if  a  man  lie  with  mankind  as  with  a  w. 
J\'um.  5.  18.  he  shall  set  the  70.  before  the  Lord,  33. 
27.  the  70.  shall  be  a  curse  among  her  people 

25.  6.  brought  a  Midinnilish  10.  in  sight  of  Mose» 
8.  Phinehas  thrust  the  70.  through  her  belly 

30.  3.  if  a  to.  vow  a  vow  to  Lord  and  bind  herseli 

31.  17.  now  kill  every  w.  that  hath  known  man 
Deut.  22.  14.  I  took  this  w.  and  when  I  came  to 

her,  I  found  her  not  a  maid 
.fn.sh.  2.  4.  the  to.  took  the  two  men  and  hid  them 
6.  22.  go,  and  brin"  out  thence  the  w.  Rahab 
.Tiidg.4.  0.  Lord  shall  sell  Sisera  into  the  hand  of  to. 
9. 5.3.  a  certain  w.  cast  a  piece  of  a  millstone  upon 
Abimelech's  head,  and  all  to  break  his  scull, 
2  Sam.  11.21. 
54.  that  men  say  not  of  me,  a  w.  slew  him 

13.  11.  art  thou  the  man  that  spakest  to  the  to.? 

14.  3.  is  there  ntver  a  70.  among  all  my  people? 
16.  4.  Snm.'on  loved  a  10.  in  tliv  valley  of  Sorek 
19.2fi.  then  came  the  jr.  in  the  dawning  of  the  day 

Pulh  1.  .5.  the  to.  was  left  of  her  sons  and  husband 
3.  II.  for  my  people  know  thou  art  a  virtuous  to. 
4.11.  the  Lord  make  the  to.  like  Rachel  and  Leah 

lSo«.1.15.Haimahsarfl,T  am  to. of  sorrowful  spirit 


WOM 

ISnm.l.QC.  Tsrn  icthatstofadliy  ihce  here,  praying 
2.  20.  Lord  give  thee  seed  ofiliis  w.  for  ttic  loau 
2d.  7.  seek  ine  a  w.  that  hath  a  familiar  spirit 

2  Hani.  3.  8.  ihou  chargust  nie  coiicerni[ig  this  w. 
1  l.'i.from  tlie  roof  Uavid  saw  au?. washing  licrsell 
i;t.  17.  put  now  this  IT.  out  fromnie  and  bolt  door 
17.  19.  the  w.  spread  a  covering  over  the  well 
20. 22.  then  w.  went  unto  all  people  in  her  wisdom 
Kings  3.  17.  I  and  this  w.  dwell  in  one  house 
J4.  5.  she  shall  feign  hersi-lf  to  he  another  w. 
17.  17.  the  son  of  the  m.  fell  sick  and  died 

iliinirsA.  S.weiit  to  Shuneni,  w  here  was  a  great  w. 
G.2ii.  there  cried  a  io.s;iyiiig,  help,  my  lord,  O  kinj 

8.  5.  this  is  the  w.  ||  ii.itt.  see  this  cursed  w. 

2  Chron.  21.  7.  the  sons  of  .\lhali:ih  that  wicked  w. 

Job  31.  y.  if  my  heart  liave  lieen  deceived  hy  a.ic 

l'6al.  4B.  6.  puin  as  of  a  lo.  in  travail,  Isa.  13.  8. 
21.  3.  I  CO.  17.  .At.  4.  31.  |  6.  21.  |  13 
21.  I  22.  23.  I  30.  6.  I  31.  6.  |  48.  41. 
4!).  22,  24.  I  50.  43. 

Pror.  6.  21.  to  keep  Ihee  from  the  evil  w. 

7.  lU.  behold  there  met  him  a  w.  suhtile  of  heart 

9.  13.  a  foolish  w.  is  clamorous,  she  is  simtde 
12. 4. a  virtuous  w.is  a  ci  own  to  her  husband, 31. 10. 
''4.  1.  every  wise  w.  buildeth  her  house  but  foolish 

21.  y.  than  with  a  brawling  w.  in  a  wide  house,  19. 
31.  10.  who  can  find  a  virtuous  w.?  price  rubies 

30.  a  K.  that  fears  the  Lord  shall  he  jjraised 
Ecrl.  7.  21).  the  w.  whose  heart  is  snares  and  nets 

28.  hut  a  ic.  among  all  lliose  have  I  not  found 
Isa.  42.  14.  now  will  I  cry  like  a  travailing  a>. 

45.  10.  or  to  the  w.  what  hast  thou  brought  forth  1 

49.  15.  can  a  in.  forget  her  sucknig  child  '! 

54.  ().  the  Lord  hath  called  thee  ag  a  w.  forsaken 
Jcr.  6.  2.  likened  daughter  of  Ziontoa  delicate  w. 

31.  22.  created  a  new  thing,  a  tc.  compass  a  man 
A.am.  1.  17.  Jerns.isa  menstruous  w.  among  them 
Kic/c.  Ki.  30.  the  work  of  an  imperious  whorishic. 

23.  44.  they  went  in  unto  her,  as  (hey  go  in  to  a  ic. 

'i6. 17.theirwayas  the  unclcannessofa  removed  ic. 
f/iis.  3.  1.  go  yet,  love  a  w.  beloved  of  her  friend 

13.  13.  the  sorrows  of  a  travailing  w.  shall  come 
upon  him,  he  is  an  unwise  son,  JMic.  4.  9,  10. 
Zrch.  5.  7.  this  is  a  w.  that  sits  in  the  cphah 
Mat.  a.  28.  whoso  lookeih  on  a  w.  to  lust  after  her 

U.  20.  a  w.  which  was  diseased  with  an  issue  of 
bloo<l  twelve  years,  MarU  5.  25.  I.uUc  8.  43. 

13.  33.  leaven,  which  a  jc.  took  and  hid  in  meni 

15.  Z^.  i)  w.  great  is  thy  faith,  be  it  to  thee  as  thon 

22.  27.  unto  the  seventh,  and  last  of  all  tlie  w. 

died  also,  Mark  12.  22.  Luke  20.  32. 
Sf).  10.  JcBus  said,  why  trouble  ye  the  7a.  ? 

13.  this  that  this  w.  hath  done  shall  be  toM 

Mark  10.  12.  if  a  w.  shall  put  away  her  husband 

Luke  7.  39.  who  and  what  manner  of  m.  this  is? 

44.  Jesus  said  unto  Simon,  scest  thou  this  w.  7 

13.16.oughtnot  thisic.  being  a  daughter  of  .\brah. 

Juhn  2.  4.  w.  what  have  I  to  do  with  thee  ? 

4.9.  askest  drink  of  me  who  am  a  w.  of  Samaria? 

39.  many  believed  on  him  for  the  sayingof  thezc. 

8.  3.  brought  to  him  a  m.  taken  in  adultery,  4. 
10.  when  .lesus  saw  none  hut  the  w.  he  said 

19.20.  he  saith  to  his  mother,  v>.  heludd  thy  son 
8cls  9.  30.  Dorcas,  this  w.  was  full  of  good  works 
17.  34.  and  a  w.  namid  Dtimaris  believed 

lioin.  1.  27.  men  leaving  the  natural  use  of  the  tc. 
7.  2.  the  w.  (hat  hath  a  husb.jnd  is  bound 

1  Car.  7.  1.  it  is  good  for  a  man  not  to  touch  a  ic. 
2.  let  every  w.  have  her  own  husband 

11.  5.ibut  every  ic.  that  prayelli  uncovered 

6.  if  the  tc.  he  not  covered,  let  her  he  shorn 

7.  but  the  w.  is  the  glory  of  the  man 

8.  man  is  not  of  the  w.  hut  the  in.  of  the  man 

9.  man  not  for  the  to.  but  the  ic.  for  the  man 

10.  the  w.  ought  to  have  power  on  her  head 

11.  neverthel'ss,  neither  is  tlio  man  without  the 

w.  nor  the  w.  without  the  man  in  the  Lord 

12.  as  the  m.  is  ofthe  inan,  so  is  the  man  by  the  m. 
]3.is  it  comely  for  a  jr. to  pray  loGod  uncovered? 
l."!.  if  n  IT.  have  long  hair,  il  is  a  glory  to  her 

Onl.  4.  4.  flod  sent  forth  his  Son  made  of  a  w. 
I  7Tkr«.<.5  3. then  desiruc.  Cometh  as  travail  on  a  w. 
1  Tim.  2.  12.  I  sufTer  not  a  w.  to  teach  or  usurp 

14. the  7n.bi.'ing  deceived, was  in  the  transgression 
Rf.o.  2.  20.  thou  siifTerest  thatw.  .Iez<-bcl  lo  teach 

12.  1.  there  nppnnri'd  w.  clothed  with  the  Him 
fi.  the  IT.  fled  II  Ifi.  the  earth  helped  the  )0. 
17.  and  the  dragon  was  wroth  with  iho  m. 

17.  3.  I  snw  a  w.  Hit  on  a  scarlet-coloured  bpB.il 

6.  a  v>.  drunken  ||  7. 1  will  tell  mystery  of  the  ic. 

ice    BoKN,    M\N,    STRiNUK. 

Youni:  WOMAN. 
Ttuthi.  12.  lot  ihy  house  ho  like  that  of  Pharez,  of 
thegeed  which  Ld. shall  ffive  thr.e  oftliis  youii"  to. 

W.OM.\NKINI). 
Ln.  18.  22.  shall  fioi  lie  with  inuiikind  an  with  lo. 

WOMB. 
Oen.  2.').  23.  Lord  a:iid,  two  nations  are  in  thy  ir. 

24.  behold,  there  were  twinn  in  her  in.  38.  27. 
t9.31.Lurd  opened  Loah'i  u>.  Ij  :UJK.  nachel'ii  w. 

on 


WOM 

den.  49.2.1.  bless  with  blessings  ofbreastSjand  of  ic. 
Kxud.  13.  2.  whatsoever  openeth  the  tc.  is  mine 
jVuin.  8.  16.  the  Levitcs  are  given  me,  instead  of 
such  as  open  every  w.  even  ofthe  lirst-born 
Jiidg.  13.  5.  he  shall  be  a  Nazarite  from  the  xc.  7. 
Ruth  1.  11.  are  there  yet  any  more  sons  in  my  w.  ? 
1  .Sum.  1.  5.  but  the  Lord  had  shut  up  her  tc.  0. 
.lob  3.  11.  why  died  I  not  from  the  w.  ? 

10.  18.  why  hast  thou  brought  me  forth  of  thcio.  ? 

24. 20.  the  w.  shall  forget  him,  he  shall  be  no  more 

31.  15.  did  not  he  thai  made  thee  iiua.  make  him? 
.38.  8.  brake  forth  as  if  it  had  issued  out  ofthe  w. 

29.  out  of  whose  w.  came  the  ice  ? 
Pia/.22.9.but  thou  art  he  wholookmeout  of  tlicic. 
10.  1  was  cast  upon  thee  from  the  w.  art  iny  God 

.'58.  3.  the  wicked  are  estranged  from  the  w. 

71.  0.  by  thee  have  I  been  holdcfi  up  from  the  w. 

110.  3.  thy  people  willing,  from  w.  ofthe  morning 
Prov.  30.  10.  the  barren  w.  says  not,  it  is  enough 

31.2.  what,  my  son?  and  what,  the  son  of  my  w.  7 
F.cel.  11.5.  thou  knowest  nolhow  bonesgrow  \nw. 
ha.  44.  2.  Lord  formed  thee  from  the  w.  24.  |  49. 5. 

4li.  3.  O  Israel  which  are  carried  from  the  w. 

48.  8.  wast  called  a  transgressor  from  the  20. 

49.  1.  the  Lord  hath  called  me  from  the  w. 

15.  she  not  havecomiiassionon  thesonof  her  zr. 
60.9.shall  I  cause  to  bring  forth,  and  shut  thejc. .? 
Jrr,  I.  5.  before  thou  earnest  forth  out  of  the  w. 

20.  17.  because  he  slew  me  not  from  the  w.  or  my 

mother's  10.  to  be  always  great  with  me 
18.  why  came  I  forth  of  the  id.  lo  si;e  labour  ? 
F:t*.20.2fl.pass  thro'the  fire  all  that  openeth  iliew. 
//(/.f.9.  II. their  glory  shall  flee  from  the  birth  and  w. 
14.  give  them  a  miscarrying  w.  and  dry  breasts 
12.  3.  he  took  his  brother  by  the  heel  in  the  w. 
Luke  1.  31.  beh<dd,  thou  shall  conceive  in  thy  ic. 
41.  the  babe  leaped  in  her  w.  for  joy,  44. 
2.21. namejcsus, before  he  was  conceived  in  thejc. 
23.  every  mule  that  openeth  the  w.  shall  be  holy 
Ste  Fruit,  Mother. 
WOMBS. 
Gen.  20. 18.  the  Lord  had  fast  closed  up  all  the  xc. 
Luke  23.  29.  blessed  are  the  w.  thai  never  bare 

WOMEN. 
Crrn.  24.  11.  the  time  that?/;,  go  out  to  draw  water 
Eiod.  15.  20.  all  the  w.  went  out  after  Miriam 
35.  25.  all  the  w.  that  were  wise-hearled  did  syi\n 
20.  all  the  w.  whose  heart  stirred  them  up 
/-f  i).20.2C.len  (c.shall  hake  your  bread  in  one  oven 
JVK7n.3l.l5.  Moses  said,  haveye  saved  all  w. alive? 
Deut.  20. 14.  the  w.  and  little  ones  take  captives 
./ly.s'A.  8.  35.  Joshua  read  the  law  before  the  w. 
./m(/;;i-.5.24. blessed  abnveKi.shallJaelwife  of  Heh.be 
21. 14.  they  saved  alive  of  the  7/;.  of  Jabesh-gilead 

1  Sam.  2.  22.  Eli  hoard  how  they  lay  with  the  w. 
15..33.as  thy  sword  hath  made  ja.childlcFS,so  shall 

18.  0.  the  w.  came  out  ofthe  cities  of  Lsrael 

7.  the  TC.  answered  one  another  ns  they  played 

21.  4.  if  the  young  men  kept  themselves  from  10. 
5. of  a  truth  ic. have  been  kept  from  us  three  days 

30.  2.  the  Amalekiles  had  taken  the  jc.  captives 

2  Sam.  1.  20.  ihy  love  lo  me  passing  the  love  of  jc. 
15.  10.  the  king  left  ten  w.  to  keep  the  house 

1  Kings  3. 10.  llicn  caino  two  w.  that  were  harlots 

2  h'iiig.tB.  12.and  rip  uptheirTf.  wiihcliild,  15.  10. 
23.  7.  where  the  w.  wove  hangings  for  the  grove 

JV(7i.l3. 2fi.cven  him  did  outlandish  ir.  cause  to  sin 
F..<ilh.l.  9.  Vashti  the  queen  made  a  feast  for  the  ia. 

2.  17.  .Miasuerns  loved  Esther  above  all  the  w. 

3.  13.  to  slay  all  Jews,  little  children  and  ic.  8.  11. 
./oft  42.  15.  no  w.  found  so  fair  as  Job's  daughters 
Psal.  45.  9.  king's  daughters  among  thy  lion.  w. 
Prov.  31.  3.  eive  not  thy  strength  lo  w. 

Cant.  1.  8.  O  thou  lairest  among  w.  5.  9.  |  0.  1. 
f.'a.  3.  12.  as  for  my  people,  tc.  lulo  over  them 
4. 1,  in  that  day  seven  !c. shall  lake  hold  of  one  man 

19.  10.  in  that  day  Egypt  shall  be  like  to  ic. 
27.  11.  the  y>.  come,  and  set  them  on  fire 

32.  9.  rise  up  ye  ie.  that  are  at  ease,  hear  my 
10.  cari'less  w.  ||  11.  tremble,  ye  10.  be  troubled 

.Tcr.  7.  18.  the  ir.  knead  theii  dough  10  make  cakes 
9.  17.  call  for  ibo  mourning  and  cunning  ?c. 
20.  vol  hi^ar  the  word  of  the  Lord,  O  ye  10. 
38.  22.  all  the  ir.  left,  shall  b,'  brought  to  the  kins 

.  44.  24.  Jeremiah  said  to  all  the  w.  hear  the  word 

50.  37.  they  Hhnll  become  id.  and  shall  be  r<d<bed 

51.  30.  the  miglily  men  of  Rabylon  became  as  w. 
/,nm.2. 20.  shall  the  ir.  eat  children  ofa  span  long? 

4.  10.  the  iiitiful  IT.  have  sodden  their  childri-n 
5.11.  they  ravished  ir.in  Zion,  and  mniils  in  Judah 

E:rk.  B.  14.  thorn  sal  tc.  weeping  for  Tamniuz 

9.  0.  slay  utterly  maidj,  little  children,  and  w. 
J3.  18.  woe  to  IC.  lliat  sew  pillows  to  all  armholes 

10.  34.  the  contrary  is  in  thee  from  other  ir. 

33.  1  will  judge  thee  aa  ic.  that  break  wedlock 
23.  2.  there  were  two  w.  dausbtersof  one  mother 
45.  julgc!  after  Ihe  manner  of  w.  that  shed  blood 
48.w.tiiavb'^  tnughl  not  todo  after  vour  lewdiies.'i 
Dnii.  II.  l'7.  hp  »hnllpive  hiintbo  liaughter  of  ir 
37.nor  shall  ho  regard  the  dovira  of  ic.nur  any  god 


WON 

Hos.  13.  16.  Uieir  tc.  witn  child  shall  be  vippi.d  op 
yy;H0il.l3.becauselliey  have  ripped  up(C.wit:>  child 
Alic.  2.  9.  the  w.  of  my  people  have  ye  cast  out 
j\'"aA.  3.  13.  thy  people  in  the  midst  of  tliee  are  tc. 
Zeck.  5.  9.  there  came  out  two  to.  and  had  wings 

8.  4.  old  w.  shall  dwell  in  the  streets  of  Jerusalem 

14.  2.  the  houses  rifled,  the  w.  shall  be  ravished 

J\Iut.  11.  11.  among  them  that  are  born  of  ic.  not 

risen  a  greater  than  John  Baptist,  Lukc'.'iS. 

14.  21.  Jesus  fed  5000  men,  besides  w.  15.  38. 

24.  41.  two  tc.  grinding  at  Iho  mill,  Luke  17.  35. 

27.  55.  and  many  w.  were  then  beholding  afar  oil" 
Luke  1.  28.  blessed  art  ihou  among  jc.  42. 

24.  22.  certain  ic.  also  made  us  astonished 
24.  and  found  it  even  so  as  the  w.  had  said 

.^cts  1. 14.  these  all  continued  in  prayer  with  the  u> 

13.  50.  but  the  Jews  stirred  up  the  devout  ic. 
10.  13.  we  speak  to  the  tc.  which  resorted  thilhei 
17.  4.  ofthe  chief  tc.  not  a  few  believed,  12. 

Rom.  1.  20.  their  ic.  did  change  the  natural  use 
ICur.14.34.  let  your  ic.  keep  silence  in  ibe  churciieg 
35.  it  is  a  shame  for  w.  to  speak  in  the  church 
Pkil.  4.  3.  help  those  ic.  which  laboured  with  me 

1  Tim.  2. 9.  tc.  adorn  themselves  in  modest  apparel 

10.  which  becometh  tc.  professing  godliness 

11.  let  the  w.  learn  in  silence  with  all  subjcctior. 
5.  2.  entreat  the  elder  ic.  as  moliiets,  youni;cr  aa 

14.  I  will  therefore  that  the  younger  tc.  marry 

2  Tim.  '4.  6.  lead  captive  silly  7C.  laden  witiisina 
Tit.  2.  3.  the  aged  ic.  behave  as  becometh  holinega 

4.  they  may  teach  the  younger  tc.  to  be  sober 
//<:i.ll.35.  ic.  received  their  dead  raised  lo  lifeii<r. 
1  PlI.  3.  5.  after  this  manner  the  holy  ic.  adorned 
Rrv.^.8.  they  had  hair  as  hair  of  tc.  their  teeth  ag 

14.  4.  these  arc  they  that  are  not  defiled  with  w. 
See  Ckildricn,  Mkn,  Hingi.no,  Stra.ngi;. 

WOMEN-SEKVANTS. 
(Vcji. 20.14. Abimelech  gave !C.-seroaHti  lo  Abrah. 
32.  5.  Jacob  had  men-=ervants  and  w.-scrcanls 

WON. 
1  Chron.  20.  27.  out  ofthe  spoils  tc.  in  battles 
Prov.  18.  19.  u  brother  otVended  is  harder  to  be  ir. 

1  Pet.  3. 1.  may  be  w.  bv  the  conversation  of  wiveg 

WONDEir. 
Deut.  13.  1.  if  a  prophet  give  thee  a  sign  or  a  id. 
2.  and  the  sign  or  the  to.  come  lo  pass 

28.  40.  tliry  shall  be  upon  thee  for  a  sign  and  n  ic 

2  Chron.  32.31.  wliosentto  him  to  inquire  the  ic 
Psal. 'I.  "i.  I  am  as  a  w.  unto  many,  but  ihou  art 

my  strong  refuge 
Isa.  20.  3.  like  as  Isaiah  walked  barefoot  for  a  jc. 

29.  14.  I  will  do  a  marvellous  work  and  a  tc. 
.ficts  3. 10.  they  were  filled  with  w.  and  amazement 
Rev.  12.  1.  there  appeared  a  great  tc.  in  heaven,  3, 

WONDER,  rerb. 
fsa.  13.  t  8.  they  shall  ic.  one  at  another 

29.  9.  stay  yourselves  ami  ic.  cry  ye  out  and  crj 
.hr.  4.  9.  the  priest  and  the  prophets  shall  10 
Ilah.  1.  5.  behold  ye,  regard  and  to.  marvellously 
.'Ids  13.  41.  heludd,  ye  il(  spisers,  ic.  and  perish 
Rco.  17.  8.  they  that  dwell  on  the  earth  shall  10. 

WONDERFUL. 
Deut.  28.  59.  ibe  Lord  will  make  thy  plagues,  ic. 
2  Sam.  1.  20.  thy  love  to  me  was  ic.  passing  love  of 
2  Chron.  2.  9.  house  lam  lo  build  shall  he  ic. great 
.lob  42.  3.  1  have  uttered  things  too  tc.  for  me 
P4«M19.129.tliy  leslimoiiies  ic.  my  soul  keep  them 

131.  1 1.  nor  do  I  exercise  myself  in  things  loo  ic. 

139.  0.  siioh  knowleilgeis  loo  jc.  for  me 
froi'.  30.  18.  there  be  three  things  that  are  tooic. 
Isa.  9.  0.  his  name  shall  be  called  If.  Counsellor 

2"i.l.O  Lord,  I  will  praise  theOjhast  doncic.things 

25.  29.  from  the  Lord  of  hosLs  who  is  if.  ii)  counsel 
./( r.  5.  30.  a  tc.  thing  is  comniitlcd  in  the  land 
/>an.?.  t  13.  a  saint  said  lo  the  ir.  niimberer 
.Mat.  21.  15.  when  they  saw  the  ic.  things  he  did 

Sre  WoUKS. 
WONDERFULLY. 
1  .'^am.  0.  0.  when  bo  had  wrwighlic.  among  them 
Psal.  139.  11.  I  will  praise  thee  for  I  am  ic.  iiiado 
/yfliH.  1.  9.  therefore  Jerusalem  came  down  ic. 
PJiui-  8.  24.  he  shall  deslrov  w.  and  shall  jiro.sper 

WONDERS. 

Eiod.  3.  20.  I  will  slrelrb  out  my  hand  and  smite 

Egypt  with  all  my  ic.  7.  3.  [  1 1. 9.  Deut.  0.  22. 

I  7.  19.  [20.  8.  134.  11 

4.  21.  see  thou  do  thoso  ic.  jj  II.  10.  did  those  if 

15.  11.  the  I,ord  is  fearful  in  prai-ses  doing  ic. 
ryrijf. 4.34. bath  God  ns«ayed  lo  lake  a  nation  by  u) 
./o.^A. 3.5. to-morrow  the  Lord  will  dorr. among  you 
I  Chron-  10.  12.  rcmeinhor  Sis  w.  Psal.  105.  5. 
jYrh.  9.  10.  thou  shewedsl  ic.  upon  PImraoh 

17.  nor  were  mindful  oflhy  in.  Psal.  78.  11,  43 
.Job  9.  10.  Rod  iloth  ic.  without  iiumh'T 
Psal. 'I.  11.  surely  I  will  remember  thy  ic.  dfolj 

14.  ihou  art  the  Rod  thai  doest  ic. 

88.  10.  wilt'lhou  show  ir.  lo  the  dead  ? 

12.  shall  thy  w.  be  known  in  the  dirk  ? 

89.  5.  the  lii-nvens  •■U:\']  praise  thy  o.  O  Lord 

90.  3.  declare  his  ic.  among  all  psojila 


woo 

Ps   105.  i!7.  tliey  shewed  liis  w.  in  the  land  of  Ilani 

106.  7.  our  tUllieiB  uiideistooil  not  thy  w.  in  Esfyjjt 

107.  iM.  these  see  liis  works  ajid  his  w.  in  the  deep 
13.1.  9.  who  cent  w.  in  the  midst  of  Egypt 

136.  4.  to  him  who  alone  doeth  great  w. 
Isa.  8.  19.  i.  and  the  ciiildren  are  lor  w.  in  Israel 
ycr.3ij.20.who  hath  set  signs  andw.in  land  ot'Egypt 

21   and  hast  brought  I'ortli  tiiy  people  with  w. 

/Jan.  4.  2.  I  thought  good  losliew  the  signsand  w. 

3.  how  great  are  his  signs!  Iiow  mighty  his  to. I 

6.  27   he  workeih  w.  in  heaven  and  ni  earth 

12.6  how  long  shah  it  he  to  the  end  ol  these  to.? 

Joel  2.  30.  I  will  shew  io.  in  heaven,  ^-Icts  2.  I'J. 

Jl7(i£. 24. 24.  there  shall  arise  false  Christs  and  false 

prophets,  and  shall  sliew  great  w.  Mark  13.22. 

Jokn  4.  48.  Jesus  said,  e.xcept  ye  see  signs  and  tc. 

jgcls  2.  22.  Jeeus,  a  man  approved  of  God  by  ic. 

43.  fear  came  on  every  soul,  many  signs  and  w. 

were  done  by  the  apostles,  S.li.  1 14.3.  |  15.12. 

4.  30.  that  tc.  m try  he  done  by  the  name  of  Jesus 

6.  8.  Stephen  did  great  w.  among  the  people 

7. 30.  after  he  had  shewed  w.  in  the  land  of  Egypt 

Rom.  15. 19.  to  make  Gentiles  obedient  through  w 

2  Cor.  12. 12.  the  signs  of  an  apostle  wrought  in  ic. 

2 /'Ac.'!«.2.y.whoseioming  is  wiih  signs  and  ly ingjo 

//t6.2.4.God  also  bearing  witness  with  signs  undio 

Hco.  13.  13.  he  doelh  great  ic.  in  the  sight  of  men 

VVO.NDEREU. 
Isa.  53.  16.  he  w.  there  was  no  intercessor 
63.  5.  and  I  w.  that  there  was  none  to  uphold 
Zfc/i.  3.  8.  hear  now,  for  they  are  men  !0.  at 
J.Hke  2.  18.  all  they  that  heard  it  lo.  at  things  told 
4.  22.  they  all  w.  at  the  gracious  words 
'24.  41.  while  they  believed  not  for  joy,  and  w. 
.^cts  7.  31.  Moses  w.  ||  8.  13.  Simon  Magus  w. 
Kev.  13.  3.  all  the  world  w.  after  the  beast 
17.6.  when  I  saw  her,]  w.  with  great  admiration 

WOA'DERING. 
Gen.  24.  21.  the  man  w.  at  her,  held  his  peace 
/^uA<24.12.Peter«).atthat  which  was  Come  to  pass 
dels  3.  11.  all  the  people  ran  together  gieaily  w. 

WONDEROUcJ. 
1  Citron.  16.  9.  sing  psalms,  talk  you  of  all  hism. 
works,  I'sal.W.'.  |  iOo.  2.  |  110.27. 
1  145.  5. 
Job  37.  14.  consider  the  ?c.  works  of  God 

16.  dost  thou  know  the  w.  works  of  him? 
Psai.  71.  17.  hitherto  have  I  declared  thy  w.  works 
72.  18.  the  God  who  only  doth  w.  things,  86.  10. 
75.  1.  that  thy  name  is  near,  ihy  <c.  works  declare 
78.  32.  tl)oy  believed  not  for  his  w.  works 
]06.22.whohad  done  ic. works  in  the  land  of  Ham 
119.  18.  that  I  may  beludd  w. things  out  of  thy  law 
Jer.  21.  2.  he  will  deal  according  lo  his  tc.  works 

WONDEROUSLY. 
Judg.  13.  19.  the  angid  did  w.  Manoah  looked  on 
Jod  2.  26.  the  Lord  halh  dealt  w.  with  yuu 

WONT. 

j;zorf.21.29.if  the  ox  were  ic.to  push  with  his  horns 
Kum.  22.  30.  was  I  ever  w.  lo  do  so  to  thee? 
■"fcam.SO.  31.  where  David  and  his  men  jo.to  haunt 
8  Sam.  20.  18.  they  were  w.  to  speak  in  old  time 
Dan.  3.  19.  seven  times  more  than  w.  to  be  heated 
^lat.  27.  15.  the  governor  was  w.  to  release 
Mark  10.  1.  as  he  was  v>.  he  taught  them  again 
I^like  22.  39.  he  went  as  he  was  w.  to  the  mount 
Acts  16. 13.  went  where  prayer  was  w.\.q  be  made 

WOOD. 
Ccn.  22.  6.  Abraham  took  w.  and  put  it  on  Isaac 

7.  Isaac  paid,  behold  the  fire  and  the  w. 
JVuOT.  13.  20.  whether  there  be  w.  therein  or  not 

31.  20.  purify  all  things  that  are  made  of  ic. 
Jjeut.  10.  1.  come  up,  and  make  thee  an  ark  of  aj. 
19.  5.^  when  a  man  gocth  into  the  w.  to  hew  w. 

29.  11.  from  the  hewerof  thy  zo.  unto  the  drawer 

of  thy  water,  Jusk.  9.  21,  23,  27. 
.Ter.  4(i.  22. 
Josh.  17.  18.  the  mountain  is  a  w.  cut  it  down 
]  .Sam.  6.  14.  and  they  clave  the  w.  of  the  cart 

14.  2.5.  ail  they  of  the  land  came  lo  a  w, 

2:t.  16.  Jonathan  went  to  David  into  the  le. 
CSd/n.  18. 8.  the  ic.  devoured  more  people  that  day 
1  A'ii!<?-sl8.23.1iiyihe  bullock  onio.antl  no  fire  under 
2Ar»nn-52.24.thern  came  two  she-bears  out  of  thew. 
1  Clirun.  29.  2. 1  have  prepared  w.  for  Ihings  of  w. 
Psal.  80.  13.  the  boar  out  of  the  w.  doth  waste  it 

132.6.  we  found  it  in  the  fields  of  the  w. 

14L  7.  as  when  one  cleavcth  w.  upon  the  earth 
PrrtD.26.20.  where  no  w.  is,  there  the  firegoeth  out 
21.  as  w.  to  fire,  so  is  a  content,  man  to  kin:  strife 
Eccl.  10.  9.  he  that  cleavcth  w.  shall  be  in  danger 
/sa.lO.lo.stairshould  lift  up  itself  as  if  it  were  now. 

30.  33.  the  pile  thereof  is  fire  and  much  w. 
4.5.  20.  they  that  set  up  the  w.  of  their  image 
60.  17.  for  iron  I  will  bring  silver,  for  w.  brass 

Jvr.  T>.  14.  I  will  make  my  words  fire,  this  people  w. 

7. 18.  the  children  gather  w.  the  fathers  kindle  fire 

•  23.  13.  thou  hast  brid<en  the  yokes  of  uj.  but  shall 

Ei('A.15.3.6halliC.be  taken  thereof  to  do  any  work? 

24.  10.  heap  on  w.  \\  39.  10.  no  jr.  out  of  the  field 

093 


WOR 

Mic.  1.  14.  the  flock  which  dwell  solitary  in  the  w . 
Hab.  2.  19.  woo  to  him  that  saith  to  the  w.  awake 
Hug.  1.  8.  go  up,  bring  w.  and  build  the  house 
Ztck.  12.  6.  like  a  hearth  of  fire  among  the  w. 
ICar.  3.  12.  if  any  build  on  this  foundation,  lo.  hay 
2  'I'hn.  2.20.  but  also  vessels  of  1.0.  and  earth 
See  Offkrino,  Stonk. 
WOODS. 
Ezek.  34.  25.  they  shall  sleep  safely  in  tha  w. 

WOOF. 
I.CV.  13.  43.  if  the  plague  be  in  the  warp  or  a. 

51.  if  the  plague  be  spread  in  the  warp  or  the  w. 

52.  burn  that  garment,  whether  warp  or  to. 

53.  if  the  plague  be  not  sjiread,  wash  the  lo.  58. 
56.  then  he  shall  rend  it  out  of  the  warp  or  u). 
59.  this  is  the  law  of  Icprusy  in  the  waru  or  jc. 

WOOL. 
.Tudg.  0.  37.  I  will  put  a  fleece  of  lo.  in  the  floor 
2  Kings  3.4.  Mesha  rendered  100,000  rams  with  «j. 
Psal.  147.  16.  the  Lord  giveth  snow  like  w. 
Pron.'H.  13.  she  seeketh  w.  and  flax,  and  worketh 
lsii.\.  18.  tho' your  sins  like  crimson,  shall  be  as  id. 
51.  8.  the  worm  shall  eat  them  like  w.  but  my 
righteousness  shall  be  for  ever 
Ezek.  27.  18.  Damascus  was  thy  merchant  in  w. 
34.  3.  ye  eat  the  fat,  je  clothe  you  with  the  w. 
44.  17.  and  no  w.  shall  come  upon  thcni 
/Jan.  7.  9.  the  hair  of  his  head  like  jo.  liev.  1.  14. 
//oA. 2.5. will  go  after  iny  lovers  that  give  ine,iny  w. 
9.1  will  recover  my  ?o.and  my  fla.x  given  to  cover 
WOOLLEN. 
I^ev.  13.  47.  the  garment,  whether  w.  or  linen, .50. 
48.  the  leprosy  be  in  the  warp  or  woof  of  !c.  52. 
19.19.  nor  shall  a  garment  mingled  of  linen  andu;. 
come  npon  thee,  Ueut.  22.  11. 
WORD, 
fa  Hebrew,  Dabar;  m  Greek,  Rhcma,  or  Logos. 
Itsignifies,  I.   The  eternal  Son  of  God,  the  un- 
created IVisdom,  the  second  Person  of  the  most 
holy   Triiuly  equal  and  consiihstantial  with 
the  Father.     The  Evangelist  .John,  chap.  1. 1. 
more  exjircsslij  than  any  other  has  opened  the 
viy.'slcry  of  this  WORD,  ichen  he  tt  Us  u.s.  In  the 
beginning  was  the   JVord,  and  the   Word  was 
with  God,  and  the  Word  was  God.    The  same 
was  in  the  beginning  with  God.  All  things  were 
made  by  him,  and  without  him  was  nut  any 
thing  made  that  was  made.     Christ  Jesus  is 
callid  the  WORD,  (1)  In  respect  of  his  person, 
he  being  the  express  image  of  the  Father,  as 
zee  are  tuld,  Heb.  1.  3.   as  our  words   are  of 
our  thoughts.     (2)  In  respect  of  his  office,  be- 
cause the  Father  made  known  his  tcill  to  the 
church  in  all  ages  by  him,  as  we  drcla're  our 
minds  one  to  another  by  our  words,  John  3.34. 
(3)  Because  the  Messiah  was  called  The  Word 
of  God    by    the    Jeics.      The    Chaldee  I'ara- 
phrasts,  the  most  ancient  .Icwish  writers  cz- 
tant,  generally  make  use  of  the  word  M  EM  liJ) , 
which  signifies  the  Word,  in  those  places  where 
Moses  puts  the  name  Jehovah.  ..Ind  it  is  gene- 
rally thought,  that  under  this  term  the  Para- 
phrasts  would  intimate  the  Son  of  God,  tjie  se- 
cond Person  of  the  Trinity. JVow  their  testimony 
is  so  much  the  more  considerable,  as  having 
lived  beforeChrist,or  at  the  time  of  Christ,  thiy 
arcirrefragable  witnesses  if  the  sentiments  of 
their  nation  concerning  this  article,  since  their 
Targum,  or  Explication,  has  always  been,  and 
still  is,  in  universal  esteem  among  the  Jews. 
Jind  as  they  ascribe  to  Memra  all  the  attributes 
of  the  Deity,  it  is  concluded  from  thence,  that 
they  believed  the  divinity  of  the  WORD. 
They    say,    that    it     was    MEMIi.l,    or   the 
WORD,    which    created    the    world;    which 
appeared  to  Moses  on  mount  Sinai;  whichgave 
him  the  law  ;  which  spoke  to  him  face  to  face; 
which  brought  Israel    out  of  Egypt ;    whii.h 
marched  before  the  people ;  which  wrought  all 
those  miracles  which  are  recorded  i/i  the  book 
of  Eiodus.     It   was  the  same    WORD  that 
ajipeared  to  Jlbraham  in  the  plain  of  Mamrc; 
that  was  seen  of  Jacob  at   Beth-el,  to  whom 
.Tncob  madchis  vow,  and acknowledgedas  God, 
Gen.  23.  20,  If  God  will  be  with  nie,  and  will 
keep  me  in  this  way  that  I  go,  iVc.  then  shall 
the  liord  be  my  God. 
II.   The  word  is  taken  for  what  is  written  in  the 
sacred  books  of  the  Old  and  JVew  Testament, 
Luke  11.  28,  15k*sed  are  they  that  hear   the 
word  of  God  and  keep   it.     .Tarn.  1.  22,  Ho  ye 
doers  of  the  2/;or<Z.      This  is  the  inspired  and 
created -worA.     III.     For  the  divine  laze,  which 
teaehe.i  and  commands  good  things,  andforbids 
evil.    Psal.  119.  101,  I  have  refrained  my  feet 
fr<mi  every  evil  way,  thai  I  might  keep  thy  7cord. 
This  is  the  word  of  precept  or  commandment. 
IV.  For  every  promise  of  God,  tnuchinir  any 
good  things,  lohelhcr  temporal  or  eternal.  Psal. 
119.   25,  Quicken  thuu  me   acconliiig   to   thy 


WOR 

word.  So  in  verses  38,  49,  StaWish  thy 
word  un:o  thy  servant,  who  is  devilled  to  tliy 
fear.  Remember  the  word  unto  thy  serva.:i, 
upon  which  thou  hast  caused  me  to  hope. 
'J'his  is  the  word  of  promise.  V.  For  prophecy^ 
or  vision.  Isa.  2.  1,  The  word  that  Isaiali 
saw.  VI.  Word  also  signifies  the  command 
of  God.  Psal.  147.  18,  He  sendeth  out  hni 
word  and  mellelh  them  ;  speakin"  <:/  the  ice 
One  word  shall  dissoluc  them.  S^  in  Luke  5. 
5,  Nevertheless  at  thy  word  I  will  letdown  llio 
net.  It  was  thus  the  good  Centurion  said  to 
Christ,  Wherelbre  neither  thought  I  nivseif 
worthy  to  come  unto  thee  ;  but  say  in  a  word, 
and  my  servant  shall  be  healed,  J.alic  7.  7. 
77ii4-  is  a  woril  of  authority,  ordering  things 
to  be  done  effectually. 

In  Mat.  4. 3,  4.  the  devil  putting  our  Sariour  upon 
an  unnecessary  proof  of  his  dioinity,  and  a 
distrust  of  God's  providc'ice,  by  de.^i.rtiig  h(„t 
lo  turn  the  stones  into  bread  ;  our  Suvioiit 
answers  him,  that  man  does  not  live  by  bread 
alone,  but  by  eveiy  2i«/-(/that proceedetli  outrf 
the  mouth  of  God  ;  that  is,  by  uhatsorrer  rVe 
providence  of  God  shall  afford,  and  bless  for 
our  support ;  yea,  a  mitn  may  lice  by  his  power 
and  will  only  without  cnymcans  at  all,ifGod  so 
please;  or  be  fed  by  roJens,  as  F.lijah  was,  ana 
therefore  no  man  should  absolutely  rest  upon 
the  means,  and,  without  warrant,  run  to  an  ex- 
traordinary course  f'lr  supply,  but  should  trust 
in  God,and  wait  o  ii  I.  ioi  to  p  rocidc  as  he  pleases 

Gen.  37.  14.  go  anil  b:  iiig  me  w.  again,  Mat.  2. 8. 
44. 18.  O  my  lord,  let  me  speak  a  ic.  2  Sam.  14. 12. 

Exoit.  8. 13.  Lord  did  iccording  to  the'jc.  ofMoscs 
12.35.  L^rael  did  acr.ording  to  the  w.  of  Moses 
32.  28.  Levi  did  accirdiiig  to  the  w.  I.er,.  10.  7. 

Xum.  13.  26.  they  brought  back  w.  unto  them 

22.  8.  lodge  here,  I  vilfbring  you  w.  Dent.  1.  22 

20.  yet  the  w.  1  shdll  say  lo  thee,  that  do 

35.  the  w.  I  shall  speak  ||  38.  the  w.  God  pntteth 

23.  5.  the  Lord  put  a  w.  in  Balaam's  mouth 
Deut.  1.  2.').  ihey  brought  us  w.  again,  and  said 

4.  2.  ye  shall  not  add  unto  the  lo. I  command  you 
8.  3.  but  by  every  w.  that  proceedetli  out  of  the 
mouth  of  God  doth  man  live.  Mat.  4.  4. 
15.  t9-  beware  tliere  be  not  a  w.  in  thy  heart 

18.  20.  the  prophets  that  presuipe  to  sjir-ak  a  w. 

21.  how  shall  we  know  the  w.  ?  Jer.  28.  9. 

21.  5.  by  their  w.  shall  every  controversy  be  tried 
30.  14.  the  w.  is  nigh  thee,  'liom.  10.  8. 
.losh.  1.  13.  remember  the  w.  Mosrs  commandeij 
8.  35.  there  was  not  a  w.  which  Joshua  read  nu. 

14.  7. 1  brought  him  w.  \\  22.  32.  brought  tliPiii  w 

1  .Saw   4.  I.  the  17.  of  Samuel  caine  to  all  Isnie; 

17.  t30.  ho  turnid,  and  siiake  after  the  same  w 

2  Sum.  3.  11.  he  could  not  answer  Abner  a  w. 

7.  7.  in  all  places  spake  I  a  10.  1  Chron.  17.  6. 
25.  the  w.  thou  hast  s))okcn  concerning  thy  serv. 

15.  28.  till  there  come  w.  from  you  to  ceriily  me 

19.  10.  speak  ye  not  a  w.  of  hriniiiiig  the  king 

24.  4.  Ilio  king's  ic.  prevailed,  1  Chrtni.  21.  4. 

1  Kings  2.  30.  lienaiah  brought  the  kins  w.  again, 

2  Kings  22.  9,  20.  2  C7(7-on."34, 16,  28. 
42.  the  w.  that  I  have  heard  is  good 

8.  56.  hath  not  failed  one  w.  of  all  his  promise 
18  21.  the  people  answered  not  a  jr.  Isa.  36.21 

t24.  all  the  people  answered,  the  w.  is  good 

2  A7«.!?-5  6.18.ho  smote  according  lo  the  jr.  of  Elishu 

18.  28.  hear  the  w.  of  the  great  king  of  A.ssyria 

1  Chron.  10.  15.  niin^lfiil  ofjhe  w.  which  he  com- 
manded to  a  ihiiusaiid  generations,  Psal.  105. 8. 
21.  12.  advise  what  w.  I  shall  bring  to  him 
jV(A.  1.  8.  remcinhor  7/1.  thou  commandedsl  Moses 
F.sth.  1.  21.  he  did  according  to  w.  of  Memiican 

7.  8.  lis  the  w.  went  out  of  the  king's  mouth 

■  Tob  2.  13.  they  sat  down,  none  spake  a  w.  lo  Job 
Psal.  17.  4.  by  w.  of  thy  lips,  I  have  kent  me 
Ct?.  11.  the  Lord  gave  ilie  w.  many  published  it 
119.  49.  remember  the  w.  to  thy  servant  on  which 
123.  mine  eyes  fail  for  the  jf.of  ihy  righteousncsa 
139.  4.  there  is  not  a  w.  in  my  tongue,  but  ihnu 
Prnv.  12.  25.  a  good  jr.  makelh  the  heart  glad 

13.  13.  who.10  despiscth  the  w.  shall  be  destroyed 

14.  15.  simple  believe  every  v.  hut  the  prudent 

15.  23.  w.  sjinken  in  due  season  how  good  is  it! 
18.  1 13.  he  that  returneth  a  id.  before  he  hear  it 
25.  11.  a  JO.  filly  spoken  is  like  apples  of  gold  in 

pictures  of  .«i!ver 
Feci  5.  t  2.  be  not  hasty  to  utter  any  je. before  God 

8.  4.  where  the  w.  of  a  kini:  is,  there  is  power 
7«a.5.24.  they  despised  jr. of  the  Holy  One  of  Isra« 

8.  10.  speak  jc.  and  it  shall  not  stand,  God  with  us 
OS.  the  Ld.  sent  a  w.  to  Jacob,  it  liirhted  on  Israel 

29.  21.  that  make  a  man  an  offender  for  a  to. 

30.  21.  thine  ears  shall  hear  a  w.  behind  thee 
41.28.  there  v^'as  no  counsellor  could  answer  a  w 

44.  2''.  that  confirmeth  ihe  jc.  of  his  servant 

45.  23.  the  w.  is  pone  out  of  my  month 

50.  4.  I  should  know  how  to  rjicuk  a  w.  insetaoa 


WOR 

Jfr.  5.  13.  become  wind,  and  tlip  w.  is  not  in  them 
9.  20.  let  your  cur  receive  w.  of  liia  mouth,  10.  1. 
18.  IK  nor  shall  ihe  w.  periali  IVom  the  projjliet 
Jfl.  30.  for  every  man's  tc.  shall  be  his  burden 
2(>.  2.  speak  unto  them,  diminish  not  a  70. 
34.  5.  for  I  li;ive  pronounced  the  w.  saith  the  Lord 
37.  17.  kin?  said,  is  there  any  to.  from  the  Lord 
44.  1(5.  a.s  for  theic.  thou  hast  spoken  unto  us 

Ezek.  3.  17.  therefore  hear  w.  at  my  mouth,  33.  7. 

12.  25.  the  w.  that  I  shall  speak  shall  cornc  to  pass 
28.  the  w.  that  I  have  spoken  shall  be  done 

13.  6.  that  they  would  confirm  the  w. 
33.  30.  hear  what  is  w.  that  cometh  from  the  Lord 

Dan.  3.  28.  who  have  changed  the  king's  w. 

4.  17.  the  demand  is  by  the  ic.  of  the  holy  ones 
31.  while  the  w.  was  in  the  king's  mouth 

Jonali  3.  6.  for  w.  came  lo  the  king  of  Nineveh 
//a^'.2.5.accnrdirig  to  their. I  covenanted  with  you 
M(S.  8.  8.  s|)eak  tin;  w.  only,  he  shall  be  healed 

12.  32.  whoso  speakelh  a  w.  against  the  Son  of 

man,  it  shall  be  forgiven  him,  Luke  12.  10. 
3(i.  of  every  idle  ?r.  men  shall  give  account 
13.l9.when  anyone  liearcth  ihoic.of  the  kingdom, 
20,  22,  23.  Mark  4.  IC,  18,  20.  /.vkt  8.  l.i. 

21.  for  when  tribulation  or  persecution  ariseth, 
because  of  the  w.  he  is  offended,  Mark  4. 17. 

15.23. Jesus  answercdSyrophenic. woman  not  a  v>. 
18.16.that  every  w.mny  be  established  ,2ror.l3. 1. 

22.  46.  no  man  was  able  to  answer  him  a  w. 

27.  14.  .lesus  answered  him  to  never  a  w. 

23.  8.  they  did  run  to  bring  his  disciples  w. 
Mark  4.  14.  tne  sower  sowelh  the  w. 

14.  72.  Peter  called  tomind  the  vj.  that  Jesussaid 
Ifi.  20.  the  Lord  confirming  the  ic.  with  signs 

/,H*r4.36.were  all  amazed, saying  what  air. is  this! 
7.  7.  say  in  a  ic.  and  my  servant  shall  be  healed 

24.  19.  Jesus,  a  prophet  mighty  in  w.  and  deed 
Juhn  1.  1.  in  the  beginning  was  the    IV.  and  the 

;r.  was  with  God,  and  the  W.  was  God 

14.  the  IK.  was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us 

2.  2J.  they  believed  Ihe  w.  that  Jesus  said,  4.  50. 

]2.48,(c.  I  have  spoken  shall  judge  him  in  last  day 

14  24.  the  w.  which  you  hear  is  not  mine 

15.  3.  ye  are  clean  through  the  w.  I  spake  to  you 
20.  remember  the  w.  that  [  said  unto  you 

25.  that  JO.  might  be  fulfilled,  written  in  their  law 
17.  20.  who  shall  believe  on  me  through  their  w. 

fifts  10.  36.  the  w.  which  God  sent  to  Israel 

13.  !.■).  if  ye  have  any  w.  of  exhortation,  say  on 

26.  to  you  is  the  w.  of  this  salvation  sent 

15.  7.  that  Gentiles,  by  my  mouth,  should  hear  w. 
17.  11.  they  received  the  to.  with  all  readiness 
90.  32.  I  commend  you  to  the  w.  of  bis  grace 

28.  25.  after  that  Paul  had  spoken  one  w. 
linm.  10.  8.  that  is  the  w.  of  faith  which  we  f  reach 

1.5.  18.  to  make  Gentiles  obedient  by  w.  and  deed 
:Cor.  4.  20.  kingdom  of  G.  is  not  in  jc.but  in  power 

12.  8.  to.  of  wisdom,  to  another  zo.  of  knowledge 
2Cor.  1. 18.our!r.  toward  you  was  not  yea  and  nay 

5.19.God  committed  to  us  the  w.  of  reconciliation 

10. 11.  such  as  we  are  in  70.  bv  letters  when  absent 
Oal.  5.  14.  all  the  law  is  fulfilled  in  one  lo. 

6.  6.  let  him  that  is  taught  in  the  lo.  communicate 
F.ph.  5. 26.clean.so  with  washing  of  water  by  Ihew. 
Phil.  1.  14.  are  bold  to  speak  the  w.  without  fear 

2.  16.  holding  forth  the  to.  of  life  to  rejoice  in  day 
Cnl.  1.  5.  heard  in  the  ;o.  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel 

3.  16.  let  the  w.  of  Christ  dwell  in  you  richly 
17.  whatsoever  ye  do  in  w.  or  deed,  do  in  name 

iThes.i.  1.5.  our  gospel  came  not  to  you  in  jc.  only 

fi.  having  received  the  w.  in  much  affliction 

2.13.  ye  receive  it  not  as  uj.  of  men,  but  as  it  is  in 

truth  word  ofGod  working  effoctually  in  you 

2  7'Ac,.-.<..2.2.or  be  troid)led,  not  by  Spirit,  nor  by  w. 

15. have  been  taught, whether  bym.or  our  epistle 

17.G.  comfort  and  estabiinh  you  in  every  goodjc. 

3.  14.  if  unv  man  obey  not  our  70.  by  this  epistle 

1  Tim.  4.  12.  be  thou  an  example  of  believers  in  w. 

5.  17.  they  who  labour  in  the  w.  and  doctrine 

2  Tim.  2.  17.  their  w.  will  oat  as  doth  a  canker 

4.  2.  preach  jo.  he  instant  in  season,  out  of  season 
Tit.  1.  9.  holding  fast  the  faithful  lo.  as  taught 
WcA.1.3.uplioldingall  things  by  the  rr.  of  his  power 

2.  2.  if  the  ir.  spoken  by  angels  was  stedfast 
4.  2.  but  the  w.  preached  did  not  profit  them 
R.  13.  is  unskilful  in  the  Jo.  of  righteousness 
7.2^.buttheM).ofthe  oath, which  was  since  thelaw 
12.  lO.intrcated  10.  should  not  be  spoken  anymore 
13.22.  brelhren,  stifTer  the  w.  of  exhortation 

Xam.  1.  21.  receive  with  meekness  the  ingrafted  w. 

22.  he  ye  doors  of  the  w.  and  not  hearers  only 

23.  if  any  ho  a  hearer  of  the  w.  and  not  a  doer 

3.  2.  if  any  man  olTend  not  in  w.  U  a  perfect  man 
I  r<'(.2. 2.  as  babes  desire  the  sincere  milk  ofthoKi. 

8.  even  to  them  who  stumble  at  the  10.  being 
3.  1.  if  anv  obey  not  the  v>.  may  without  the  u>. 

3  Pel.  1.  19  we  have  a  more  suro  le.  of  prophecy 
3.  7.  the  heavens  by  the  same  w.  are  kept  in  store 

I  ./,ihn  1.  1.  our  hands  have  handled  the  w.  of  life 

I.  IS.  W<  us  not  lova  in  m.  but  in  doud  and  truth 

CM 


WOR 


WOR 


l./bAnS.  7.  the  Father,  the  IK.and  Ihe  H.  G.  are  one  IJokn  8.37.  kill  mebeOTjy  10.  hath  no  place  hi  yoa 


lifv.'i.lO.  because  thou  hastkeptuj.  of  my  patience 

12. 11.  tbcy  overcame  by  the  to.  of  their  testimony 

WORD  of  Ood. 

1  Sam.  9.  27.  that  I  may  shew  thee  the  w.  of  God 

I  Kings  12.  22.  the  w.  of  ^orfcametoShemaiah 

1  Chrov.  17.  3.  the  70.  of  Clod  came  to  Nathan 

Prow  30.  5.  every  to.  uf  Ood  is  pure,  he  is  a  shield 

Isa.  40.  8.  the  w.  of  our  God  shall  stand  for  ever 

Mark  7.  13.  making  the  to.  of  God  of  none  effect 

/.i/A63.2.their.  uf  God  came  unto  John  in  wildern. 

4.  4.  not  by  bread  alone,  but  by  every  to.  of  God 

S.l.l.hs  psoplepressed  on  him  to  hear  ihew'.of  God 

8.  II.  purable  is  this,  the  seed  is  the  10.  of  God 

21.  my  brethren  are  these  that  hear  the  to.  of  G 

11.  28.  blessed  are  they  that  hoar  the  jo.  of  God 

./oAjil0.35.if  hecallcd  them  gods  Uiwhomw.of  God 

.^t?s4.  31.  they  spake  the  to.  0/  God  with  boldness 

6.2.not  reason  that  we  should  leave  the  w.nf  God 

7.  the  to.  of  God  increased  in  Jerusalem,  12.  24 

8.  14.  that  Samaria  had  received  the  lo.  of  God 

11.1.  the  Gerrtiles  had  received  the  10.  of  God 

13.7.SergiusPaulu3  desired  to  hear  the  70.0/  God 

44.  the  whole  city  came  to  hear  the  to.  of  God 

ifi.w.of  Oorfshould  have  been  first  spoken  to  you 

19.20.SO  mightily  grew  ihato.of  Godam\  prevailed 

/J«m.9.6.not  as  tlio' to.  of  fi.hath  taken  noneeflect 

10.  17.  failh  by  hearing,  hearing  by  the  70.  of  God 

1  Cor.  14. 36.  came  the  w.  of  God  out  from  you  ? 

2  C[;»-.2.  17.  as  many  which  corrupt  the  to.  uf  God 
4.  2.  not  handling  the  10.  of  God  deceitfully 

Epfi.  6.  17.  take  the  helmet  of  salvation,  and  the 

sword  of  the  Spirit,  which  is  the  70.  of  God 

Col.  1. 25.  which  is  given  me  to  fulfil  the  to.  of  Ood 

1  Thess.  2.  13.  when  ye  received  the  10.  of  God 

1  y/m.  4.5.  it  is  sanctified  by  to.  o/Oo(i  and  prayer 

2  Tim.  2.  9.  but  the  to.  of  Gad  is  not  bound 
Tit.  2.  5.  that  the  to.  of  God  be  not  blasphemed 
Hrb.  4.  12.  the  70.  of  God  is  quick  and  powerful 

6.  5.  and  have  tasted  the  good  to.  of  God 

11.  3.  the  worlds  were  framed  by  the  tb.  of  God 
13.  7.  who  have  s|ioken  to  you  the  to.  of  God 

1  Pel.  1.  23.  being  born  again  by  the  to.  of  God 
2Pf^3.5.  by  the  to.  of  Godxhe  heavens  were  of  old 
\.lohn  2.14. are  strong,  theto.o/  f»'o(iabidetbinyou 
Heii.  1.  2.  who  bare  record  of  the  to.  of  God 

9.  I  was  in  the  isle  of  Patmos,  for  the  v:.  of  God 
6.9.lhe  souls  of  them  that  were  slain  for  zc.uf  God 

19.  13.  his  name  is  called  the  to.  of  fiod 

20.  4.  them  that  were  beheaded  for  the  to.  of  Ood 
See  Hkard. 
His  WORD. 

JtTum.  27  21.  at  kis  70.  shall  they  go  out,  and  at  his 

w.  they  shall  come  in,  both  he  and  Lsraol 

30.2.if  a  man  vow  a  vow,  he  shall  not  break  Aisto. 

1  Sam.  1.  23.  only  the  Lord  stablish  hi.'!  to. 

2  Sam.  23.  2.  and  his  70.  was  in  my  tongue 

1  Kijifrs  2.  4.  that  the  Lord  may  continue  his  to. 
8.20.Lord  hath  performed  A/s  70. that  he  spake, am 

risen  up  in  room  ofmy  father,  2  Chr.  6. 10. 

2  Kivgs  l.lfi.  no  God  in  Israel,  to  inquire  of  At*  to. 
2  Chr.  10.  15.  that  the  Lord  might  perform  Ai* 
/'.9«/..56.4.in  God  will  I  praise  kisw.'m  him  trust, 10. 

103.  20.  hearkening  unto  the  voice  oi his  to. 

105.  19.  until  the  time  that  his  7c.  came 

28.  and  they  rebelled  not  against  his  70. 

106.  24.  they  believed  not  his  10.  but  murmured 

107.  20.  he  sent  his  to.  and  healed  them 
130.  5.  I  wait  for  the  Lord  and  in  his  w.  do  I  ho|)C 
147.  15.  A!.«  TU.  runneth  very  swiftly 

18.  he  sendeth  out  his  to.  and  melteth  them 

19.  ho  sheweth  his  70.  unto  Jacob,  bin  statutes 
148.8.  snow,  vapour,  stormy  wind  fulfilling  his  to. 

F.<ta.  66.  5.  bear,  ye  that  tremble  at  his  10. 
,/cr.  20.  9.  but  Ai*  10.  was  in  my  heart  as  a  fire 

r,am.  2.  17.  he  hath  fulfilled  Ai.t  to.  ho  commanded 
.foel  2.  II.  he  is  strong  that  e.xccuteth  his  to- 
Mat.  8.  16.  he  cast  out  the  spirits  with  his  70. 
/.Tike  4.  32.  astonished,  for  Ai.?  to.  was  with  |)owor 
.fohn  4.  41.  many  believed  hocaiiso  of  hix  own  jo. 

5.  38.  ye  have  not  his  to.  abiding  in  you 
.^ets  2.  41.  they  that  gladly  received  his  tf . 
Til.  1.  3.  but  bath  in  due  times  manifested  his  to. 
1  ./oAn2. 5.  whoso  keopetb  his  to.  in  him  is  the  love 
Sec  Lonn. 
My  WORD. 
A'lim.  II.  23.  whether  iny  to.  .shall  come  to  pass 

20.  24.  because  ye  rehellerl  against  tny  tc. 
1  fOtiffsn.  12.  then  will  I  perform  m7/  w.  with  thee 

17.  1.  nor  dew  nor  rain,  lint  according  lo  my  to. 
A?a.55.]l. so  shall  mtj  70.be  that  go'-th  out  of  month 

66.  2.  I  will  look  to  him  that  tremhleth  at  7tty  to. 
.Jer.  1.  12.  /  will  hasten  rr,ij  to.  to  perform  it 

23.  28.  ho  that  bath  my  to.  let  him  speak  my  tn. 

29.  is  not  7mj  to.  like  as  a'  fire,  saith  the  Lord  ? 

30.  I  am  against  the  prophets  that  steal  mtj  to. 
29.  10.  I  will  perforin  tny  good  10.  toward  you 

Mat.  24.  ^.  but  my  to.  shall  not  pass  away 
.^oAti  5.  24.  he  that  hoarclh  tny  to.  and  believeth 
8.31.  continue  in  my  to.  yo  are  my  disciplea  indeed 


43.  even  because  ye  cannot  hear  my  to. 
i2et'.3.  8.  thou  hast  kept  tny  70. not  denied  my  name 

7  At.*  WORD. 
Ezod.  14.  12.  isnotrAt*  the  to.  that  we  did  tell  the» 
■losh.  14. 10.  since  Ihe  Lord  spake  this  to.  to  Mo8e« 
2  Sam.  19.  14.  they  sent  «Ai.9  to.  to  the  king 
l/ri7!^s2.23.haat  not  spoken  this  to.  against  bis  life 
2  Ktngs  19.  21.  this  is  the  to.  that  the  Lord  hath 
spoken  of  him,  Isa.  16.  13.  |  24.  3.  |  37.22. 
F.zra  0.  11.  that  whosoever  sliaii  alter  this  to. 

10.5.swear  that  Iheyshould  do  according  tothisn 
Isa.  8.  20.  if  they  speak  not  according  to  this  70. 

30.12.becauseyedesp|pefAi4to.and  trust  inoppres 
./or.  5.  14.  because  ye  speak  this  to.  23.38. 

7.  2.  proclaim  there  this  tc.  and  say,  hear  word 

13.  12.  thou  shall  8|)Hak  unto  them  thts  to. 

14.  17.  tlierefore  sbalt  thou  say  this  tc.  to  them 
22.  1.  Lord  said,  go  down,  and  speak  tliere  this  to 
2(5.1.  in  tlie  reign  of  Jehoiakim  this  tc.  came  from 

the  Lord,  saying,  27.  1.  |  34.  8.  |  36.  1 
28.  7.  hear  now  tAts  to.  .ivuis  3.  1.  |  4.  1.  ]  5.  1. 
I  Jan.  10.  11.  when  he  had  spoken  this  to.  lo  me 
Zf  tA.  4.  6.  this  is  the  to.  of  Ihe  Lord  to  Zerubbabel 
Jicts  22.  22.  they  gave  him  audience  to  this  to. 
Woin. 9.9.for  this  is  to.  of  promise,  Sarah  have  a  sou 
Heb.  12.  27.  this  w.  yet  once  more  signifielh 
1  Pet.  1. 25.  this  is  the  to.  which  is  preached  to  you 

7'At/  WORD. 
G071.3O.  34. 1  would  It  migiil  be  according  to  thy  to. 
4I.40.according  to  thy  to.shall  my  people  be  ruled 
Ezod.  8.  10.  he  said,  be  it  according  to  thy  tc. 
JVum.  14.  20. 1  have  pardoned,  according  to  thy  to. 
/)oi;«.33.9.have  observed  thy  to.  and  kept  covenant 
1  h'ivirs  3.  12  I  have  done  according  to  thyw. 
8.26.  lot  thy  to.  I  pray  thee,  be  verified 
18.  36.  I  have  done  all  these  things  at  thy  to. 
22.  13.  let  thy  10. 1  pray  thee,  be  like  the  word  of 
oneoflhcm  and  speak  what  is  good,  2CAr.l8.12 
Psal.  119.  9.  by  taking  heed  according  to  thy  to. 
11.  thy  to.  have  I  hid  in  mine  heart,  not  to  sin 
16.will  delight  in  statutes,  I  will  not  forget  thy  to. 
17.  (hat  I  may  live,  and  keep  thy  to.  101. 
25.  quicken  me  according  to  thy  tc.  107.  154. 
28.  strengthen  thou  mo  according  to  thy  tc.  116. 
38.  stablish  thy  to.  ||  42.  I  trust  in  thy  to. 
41.  even  thy  salvation  according  to  thy  to. 
.50.  comfort  in  affliction,  for  thy  70.  quickened  mo 
58.  be  merciful  to  nio  according  to  thy  to.  65, 76. 
67.  I  went  astray,  but  now  have  I  kept  thy  w. 
74.  because  I  have  hoped  in  thy  te.  147. 
81.  I  hope  in  thy  tc.  114.  ||  140.  Vnj  to.  is  pure 
82.mine  ryes  fail  for  (A?/ to. ||105.rAy  to.  is  a  lamp 
89.  for  ever,  O  Lord,  thy  tc.  is  settled  in  heaven 
133.  order  my  slops  in  thy  10.  let  nol  iniquity 
I48.night- watches,iliat  I  might  mcdituto  mlkyv. 
1.58.  I  was  grieved,  hccanse  they  kept  not  f  Ay  to. 

160.  ^Ay  TO.  is  true  ||  162.  I  rejoice  at  IhTj  to. 

161.  but  my  heart  standeth  in  awe  of  thy  to. 

169.  giive  me  understanding  according  to  My  to. 

170.  supplication,  deliver  me  according  to  thy  to. 
172.my  tongue  shall  speak  of  thy  tc.  for  thy  com. 

138.  2.  ihou  hast  magnified  thy  lo. above  thy  name 
■Jer.  15. 16.  rAy  to.  was  to  mc  the  joy  ofmy  heart 
Et^A-.20.46.drop  th\  to. toward  Ihe  south,  prophesy 

21.2.  drop  tAyjo.  toward  Ihe  holy  jilaces,  prophegy 
.'itnosl.  16.  drop  not  thy  to.  against  house  of  Isaac 
Hah.  3.  9.  thy  bow  was  made  naked,  even  thy  v. 
Luke  1.  3^.  be  it  unto  me  according  lo  thy  w. 

2.  29.  servant  depart  in  peace,  acconling  to  Ihyw. 

5.5.  neverlholcss  at  Ihtj  tr.  I  will  let  do«  n  the  net 
./«A«17.0.thine  they  were,and  they  have  keptfAyio. 

14.  I  have  given  ihcm  (Ay  to.  ||  17.  thtj  10.  is  truth 
..Ictsi.iiO.  with  all  holrlniss  ihev  may  speak  tAyto. 

Se  Tri  TH.' 

WORDS. 
Oen.  II.  1 1.  the  whole  earth  was  of  one  »p. 
F,xod.4.  tlO.  and  Moses  said,  I  am  not  n  monofur. 

15.  and  tbnii  shalt  put  to.  in  bis  moulh 
5.  9.  more  work,  and  lot  them  not  regard  vnin  10. 
19.  8.  Moses  returned  the  ir.  nf  the  people 
23.  8.gift  perverteih  ir.  of  righteous,  Detit.  16.  19. 
34.  1    the  10.  which  were  in  Ihe  first  tables 

28.Moso9wroletho7/'.ofthocovcnant,  ncM<.10.2. 
Deut.  2  26.  I  sent  to  Sihon  with  to.  of  pence 

28.  14.  thiiii  shall  not  go  aside  from  any  of  the  to. 
29.9.kcep  (he  to. of  this  covenant  and  dolhem.lhat 

ve  may  prosp.>r.2A'ini'.9  2:1.3,24.2  Chr„r,.  :t4.  31. 

32. 1.  give  ear,  O  heavens,  hoar,  O  earth,  the  ir. of 

niv  month,  Psal.  51.  2.  |  78,  ).  Prov.  7.  24. 

1  .">nm.2fl.2fl.Saul  was  afraid  of  the  to.  of  Samuel 

2  Sam.  19.  43.  the  to.  of  men  of  Jiidah  wore  fiercer 

1  h'inrrs  22.  13.  bolmtd,  the  tr.  of  prophet' dtjclara 
good  to  the  kin?  with  ono  mouth,  2  rAro»t".l8.12 

2  h'iviT.i  6.  12.  Rlisbn  telleth  the  tr.  tlioii  spnakost 
18.  26.  but  they  arc  but  vain  in.  ha.  36.  5. 

2rAr,9.t2!).Solomon'sarls  ivri'ton  in  tr  of  Nathan 
12.  t  15.  in  10.  ofShomniah!|20.  t34.in  v.otJchu 

29.  30.  to  sing  praises  with  the  to.  of  Davd 
32.  8.  tlis  people  rested  on  the  to.  of  Hezekiah 


WOR 

ExtA.O.SO.  he  sent  letters  with  w.  of  peace  and  truth 
fob  6. '26.  do  ye  imagine  to  reprove  w.  and  speeches 
8.2.shall  theio.oftliy  mouth  be  like  a  strong  wind? 
V2.  11.  doth  not  the  ear  try  w.f  34.  3. 
1.5.  13.  thou  lettest  such  to.  go  out  of  thy  mouth 

16.3.  shall  vain  to. have  an  end,or  what  emboldens 
4. 1  could  heap  up  to.  against  you  and  shake  my 

18  2.  how  long  will  it  be  ere  ye  make  an  end  of  to..' 

19.2.  how  long  will  ye  break  mc  in  pieces  with  to.? 

23.  5.  I  would  know  the  to.  he  would  answer  me 
12.  I  have  esteemed  tbe  lo.  of  his  mouth  more 

35.  16.  he  niukiplieth  to.  without  knowledge 

30.  t2.  shew  thee,  that  there  are  yet  ro.  for  God 
38.  2.  who  is  this  that  darkoneth  "counsel  by  to.? 

Psal.  19. 14.  let  the  to.  of  my  mouth  be  acceptable 
22.  1.  why  so  far  from  the  to.  of  my  roaring? 

36.  3.  the  to.  of  his  mouth  are  iniquity  and  deceit 
52.4.tliou  lovest  all  devouringw.Odeceitful  tongue 
T>h.  21.  ic.  of  his  mouth  were  smoother  than  butter 
59.  12.  for  to.  of  their  lips,  let  them  be  taken 
65.  t3.  10.  of  iniquities  prevail  against  me 

137.  13.  they  required  of  us  the  w.  of  a  song 
Trov.  1.  6.  to  understand  the  w.  of  the  wise 
4.  5.  decline  not  from  the  w.  of  my  mouth,  5.  7. 

6.  2.  ihou  art  snared  with  the  w.  of  thy  mouth 
10. 19.  in  multitude  of  to.  there  wanteth  not  sin 
12.  6.  to.  of  the  wicked  are  to  lie  in  wait  for  blood 
1.5.  26.  the  10.  of  the  pure  are  pleasant  to. 

18. 4.  the  to.  of  a  man's  mouth  are  as  deep  waters 
R  the  w.  of  a  tale-bearer  are  as  wounds,  26.  22. 

19.  7.  he  pursueth  them  with  to.  they  are  wanting 
27.  hecauseth  thee  to  err  from  to.  of  knowledge 

22.  12.  he  overthrows  the  w.  of  the  transgressor 
17.  bow  down  thine  ear,  hear  the  to.  of  the  wise 
21.  make  thee  know,  certainty  of  the  to.  of  truth 

that  thou  niiglitest  answer  the  to.  of  truth 

23.  8.  and  thou  shalt  lose  thy  sweet  w. 

29.  19.  a  servant  will  not  be  corrected  by  vj. 

EctZ.J.S.fool'svoice  knownbvmultitnde  of  to.10.14. 

10. 12.  the  (0.  of  a  wise  man's  mouth  are  gracious 

12. 10.  the  preacher  sought  to  find  out  acceptable 

to.  wh:it  was  written,  even  the  w.  of  truth 

11.  the  10.  of  the  wise  are  as  goads  and  as  nails 

Jsa.  29.  11.  is  become  as  Ihe  to.  of  a  book  sealed 
37. 4.  it  may  be  God  will  hear  the  to.  of  Rabshakeh 
.59.  13.  uttering  from  the  heart  to.  of  falsehood 

Jcr.  11.  2.  hear  ye  the  to.  of  this  covenant,  6. 
23.  9.  because  of  the  Lord  and  w.  of  his  holiness 
35.14.ir.of  Jonadabsdn  of  Rechab  are  performed 
44.  28.  renmant  shall  know  whose  to.  shall  stand 

Ezck.  3.  6.  whose  w.  thou  canst  not  understand 

Dan.  7. 2.5.  shall  speak  great  ic.  against  most  High 
12.  4.  shut  up  the  w.  ||  9.  the  to.  are  closed  up 

ffos.  6. .5. 1  have  slain  them  by  the  to.  of  my  mouth 

14.  2.  take  with  you  to.  and  turn  to  the  Lord 
Z.rrh.  1.13.ans wored  with  gond  and  comfortable  w. 

7.  7.  should  ye  not  hear  the  to.  the  Lord  hath  cried 
Mat.  26.  44.  saying  the  same  w.  Mark  14.  39. 
/,utc4.22.nllwondere(Iatgraciousto.whichproceed. 
fohn  6.  63.  the  le.  T  speak  (o  you  they  are  life 

68.  to  whom  we  go?  thou  hast  the  w.  of  eternal  life 
17.8.1  have  given  to  them  the  to.  thou  gavestme 
Act.?  2.  40.  with  many  other  w.  did  he  testify 
7.  ^.  Moses  was  mighty  in  to.  and  in  deeds 

10.  22.  Cornelius  was  warned  to  hear  w.  of  thee 

11.  14.  send  fur  Peter,  who  shall  tell  thre  to. 

15.  15.  to  this  agree  the  to.  of  the  prophets 

24.  that  certain  have  troubled  vou  with  w. 
18.  15.  but  if  it  be  a  question  of  to.  and  names 

20.  35.  to  remember  the  to.  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
3.S.  sorrowing  most  of  all  for  the  ic.  he  spake 

20. 25.  hut  T  speak  forth  to.  of  truth  and  soberness 
Jiom.ia.  l".  hv  good  ir.  deceive  hearts  of  the  simple 
1  Cnr.  1.  17.  not  with  wisdom  of  to.  2.  4,  13. 

14.  9.  excppt  ye  utter  w.  easy  to  be  understood 

19. 1  had  rather  speak  five  w.  with  understanding 
Kpk.  5.  6.  let  no  man  deceive  vou  with  vain  w. 

1  Tim.  A.  6.  noutislipd  npinto.  of  faith  and  doctrine 

2  Tim.1. 14.  that  they  strive  not  uhout  to.  to  no  profit 
4.  15.  for  he  hnth  greatly  withstood  our  to. 

2  Pet.  3. 2.  he  mindful  of  the  to.  spoken  by  prophets 
hrr.  1.  3.  hear  the  7n.  of  this  prophecy,  22.  18. 
22.  19.  take  awav  from  the  w.  of  tliia  prophecy 

.'111  /Ar  WORDS. 
Oen.  45.  27.  they  told  .Taroh  all  the  to.  of  Joseph 
F.iod.  4.  28.  Moses  told  Aaron  nit  the  to.  of  the  Lord 

24. 3.  Moses  lold  the  people  all  the  w.  J\!'um.  1 1. 24. 
4.  Moses  wrote  all  the  w.  of  Ihe  Lord  and  rose 

Tieut.  9.  10  jn  the  tables  were  written  all  the  w. 
17.  19.  keep  all  the  w.  ||  29. 29.  may  do  all  the  to. 

27.  3.  write  on  stones  all  the  to.  of  this  law,  8. 
26.  cursed  is  he  that  confirmeth  not  all  the  w, 

28.  .58.  if  thou  wilt  not  observe  lo  do  all  the  to. 

31.  12.  and  observe  to  do  all  the  to.  of  this  law 

32.  44.  Moses  spake  all  the  w.  of  this  song  in  ears 
46.  set  your  hearts  to  all  the  to.  1  leslify 

Joi^h.  8.  34.  he  rend  all  Ihe  w.  of  the  law,  blessings 
1  s:am.  8.  10.  Samuel  told  nil  the  to.  of  the  Lord 
^Kirle■1^9.^.  it  maybetheLord  will  hear  a/Z  theie. 
of  Rabshakeh  sent  by  king  of  Assyria,  tsi.  37.17. 


WOR 

2  Kings  23. 2.  Josiah  read  all  the  lo.of  the  covenant 
found  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  2  Chron.  34.  30. 
Prov.  8.8.  alt  the  w.  of  my  mouth  are  righteousness 
£ccZ.  7.21.  also  take  no  heed  unto  all  the  to. spoken 
Jer.  11.8.  bring  on  them  all  the  to.  of  this  covenant 
26.  2.  speak  all  the  w.  that  1  command  thee 
20.  according  to  all  the  w.  of  Jeremiah 
30.  2.  write  all  the  w.  I  have  spoken,  36.  2. 

36.  4.  Baruch  wrote  all  the  to.  of  the  Lord,  32. 
43.  1.  when  Jeremiah  had  ended  alt  the  w.  of  Lord 

Jicts  5.  20.  speak  to  the  people  all  the  w.  of  tliis  life 

WORDS  of  God. 

JVi/7tt.24.4.hath  said,  which  heard  the  w.of  God,16. 

1  Chr.  25.  S.Heman  the  king's  seer  in  the  w.of  (lod 

JEzra9.4.  every  one  that  trcnibluth  at  the  w.  of  God 

Psal.  107.  11.  they  rebelled  against  the  to.  of  God 

John  3.  34.  he  whom  God  sent,  spcakelh  to.  of  God 

8.  47.  he  that  is  of  God,  heareth  the  v).  of  God 

Reo.  17.  17.  until  the  w.  of  God  be  fulfilled 

See  He-ird. 

ms  WORDS. 

Gen.  37. 8.  they  hated  him  yet  the  more  for  his  to. 

Deut.  4.  36.  thou  heardest  his  w.  out  of  the  fire 

Jiid^.11.11.  Jephthah  uttered  allAi*  (o.beforeLord 

1  Sam.  3. 19.  he  let  none  of  his  to.  full  to  the  ground 

2  Chr.  36. 16.  but  they  despised  his  w.  and  misused 
fob  22.  22.  and  lay  up  his  to.  in  thine  heart 

32. 14.  now  ho  hath  not  directed  his  w.  against  me 
34.  35.  and  his  w.  were  without  wisdom 

37.  for  he  multiplieth  his  to.  against  God 
Ps<iZ.55.21.Ais  lo.softer  than  oil,  yetdrawn  swords 

106. 12.  then  believed  they  his  w.  sang  his  praise 
Prov.  17.27.  he  that  hath  knowledge  spareth  his  in. 

29.  20.  seest  thou  a  man  that  is  hasty  in  his  w.'i 

30.  6.  add  thou  not  unto  his  w.  lest  he  reprove  thee 
Isa.  31.  2.  the  Lord  will  not  call  back  his  to. 
Jer.  18.  18.  let  us  not  give  heed  to  any  of  Ats  w. 
Dan.  9.  12.  he  hath  confirmed  his  to.  he  spake 
Amos  7.  10.  the  land  is  not  able  to  bear  all  his  w. 
MarkiO.24.  the  disciples  were  astonished  a.t  his  w. 

12.  13.  to  catch  him  in  his  w.  Luke  20.  20. 
Luke  20.26.  they  could  not  take  hold  of  his  w. 

24.  8.  they  remembered  his  w.  and  returned 

See  Lord. 
My  WORDS. 
J^um.  12.  6.  he  said,  hear  now  iny  te.  Job  34.  2. 
Deut.  4.  10.  I  will  make  them  hear  my  w. 
11.  18.  therefore  lay  up  my  w.  in  your  heart 

18.  18.  and  I  will  put  my  w.  in  his  mouth 

19.  whosoever  will  not  hearken  to  viy  w.  T  will 

require  it  of  him,  Jer.  29. 19.  |  35.  13. 
JVeh.  6.  19.  and  they  uttered  my  w.  to  him 
Job  6.  3.  therefore  my  w.  are  swallowed  up 

19.  23.  Oh !  that  my  to.  were  now  written 
29.  22.  after  my  w.  they  spake  not  again 

33.  1.  hearken  lo  all  my  to.  34.  16.  Aets  2.  14. 
3.  my  w.  shall  be  of  uprightness  of  my  heart,  36. 4. 

Psal.  5.  1.  give  ear  to  my  w.  O  Lord,  consider 
50.  17.  seeing  thou  easiest  my  w.  behind  thee 
56.  5.  every  day  they  wrest  my  w.  thoughts  for  evil 
141.  6.  they  shall  hear  my  w.  for  they  are  sweet 

Prov.  1.  23.  I  will  make  known  my  w.  unto  you 
2.  1.  my  son,  if  ihou  wilt  receive  my  w. 
4.  4.  let  thine  heart  retain  my  w.  and  live 

20.  attend  to  my  w.  \\  7.  1.  keep  my  w. 

Isa.  51. 16. 1  have  put  my  to.  in  thy  mouth,  and  say 
to  Zion,  thou  art  my  people,  Jer.  1.  9. 

59.  21.  my  v>.  which  I  have  put  in  thy  mouth 
Jer.  5.  14.  I  will  make  my  w.  in  thy  mouth  fire 

6.  19.  they  have  not  hearkened  to  my  to.  nor  law 

11.  10.  which  refused  to  hear  my  to.  13.  10. 
18.  2.  there  I  will  cause  thee  to  hear  my  w. 

19. 15.  that  they  might  not  hear  my  w. 

23.  22.  if  they  caused  my  people  lo  hear  my  w. 

25.  8.  because  ye  have  not  heard  my  w. 
13.  I  will  bring  upon  that  land  all  my  w. 

39.  16.  I  will  bring  my  w.  on  this  city  for  evil 
44.  29.  you  may  know  my  w.  shall  surely  stand 
Eiek.  2.  7.  thou  shalt  speak  myw.  to  them,  3.  4, 10. 

12.  28.  there  shall  none  of  ?h;/  to.  be  prolonged 
.Sfi<;.2.7.  donottny  to.dogood  to  him  that  walkeih? 
ZecA.  1.6.  my  to.  did  they  not  take  hold  of  your  fath.? 
^ttr<r8.38.  whosoever  shall  be  ashamed  of  me  and 

myw.  of  him  Son  of  man  be  ashamed, /,u/.'c9. 26. 

13.  31.  butmi/io.  shall  not  pass  away,  Luke-"l.'.V.^. 
Luke  1. 20.  because  thou  believest  not  tny  to. which 

shall  be  fulfilled  in  their  season 
John  5.  47.  how  shall  ye  believe  my  w.? 
12.  47.  if  any  man  hear  my  to.  and  believe  not 
48.  he  that  receiveth  not  viy  w.  one  judgeih  him 
14. 23.  will  keep  my  to.  ||  15. 7.  my  w.  abide  in  you 

TActV  WORDS. 
Gen.  34. 18.  their  to.  pleased  Hnmor  and  Shechem 
2  Chron.  9.  6.  I  believed  not  their  ir.  until  I  came 
Psal.  19. 4.  their  line  is  gone  out  lliro'  all  the  earlh, 
their  to.  to  the  end  of  Ihe  world,  Rom.  10. 18. 
Kiek.  2.  6.  Son  of  man,  be  not  afraid  of  their  id. 
Luke  24. 11.  tkeir  w.  seemed  to  them  as  idle  tales 

These  WORDS. 
Gen.  39. 17.  she  spake  to  him  according  to  these  w. 


WOR  ' 

(7<;n.43.7.we  told  according  to  the  tencr  oC these  to 
Kzod.  19.  6.  these  are  thejo.  thou  shalt  speak,  7 

20.  1.  God  spake  all  these  to.  I^eut.  5.  22. 

34.  27.  Lord  said,  write  thou  these  w.  Jer.  36. 17. 

35. 1.  these  are  the  w.  which  the  Lord  hath  com- 
manded you  to  do  them,  Deut.  6.  6.  |  29.  1. 
JVutn.  16. 31.  as  he  had  maile  an  end  of  S|)euking  all 

these  to.  ground  clave,  Vcut.  32.  45. 1  Sam.  24. 16 
Deut.  12.  28.  observe,  hear  ui\  these  w.  Zeeh.S.  9. 

1  Sam.il.  12  David  laid  up  tliesc  ic.  in  his  heait 
24.  7.  David  stayed  his  servants  with  these  io 

2  6'am.7.17.according  to  all  these  ic.  and  ihis  vision 
so  did  Nathan  speak  to  David,  1  Chron.  17.  15. 

"Kings  18.27.  hath  my  master  sent  njnto  thv  mas 
ter  and  to  thee  to  speak  these  ic?  Isa.  36. 12 
23.  16.  the  man  of  God  proclaimed  these  w. 

Jer.  3. 12.  go  proclaim  these  w.  toward  the  north 
7.  27.  speak  all  these  w.  unto  them,  26.  15. 
16.  10.  these  to.  \\  25.  30.  prophesy  all  these  w. 
22.  5.  but  if  ye  will  not  hear  Oiese  to.  I  swear 
3?!.  24.  Zedekiah  said,  let  no  man  know  of  these  v> 
45.  1.  when  he  had  written  these  w.  51.  60. 
51.  61.  when  thou  shalt  read  all  these  io. 

Luke  24.  44.  these  are  the  w.  I  spake  unto  you 

JoAti  9.  22.  these  w.  spake  his  parents,  feared  Jewg 
10.21.  these  are  not  w.  of  him  that  hath  a  devil 

J}ets  2. 22.  ye  men  of  Israel,  hear  these  w.  Jesus 
10. 44.  while  Peter  yet  spake  these  w.  Holy  Gho't 
]3^2.besouglit  these  to. might  be  preached  to  them 
28.  29.  when  he  had  said  these  w.  Jews  departed 

1  Thess.  4.  18.  comfort  one  another  with  these  le 

Rev.  21.  5.  for  these  w.  are  true  and  faithful 
Thy  WORDS. 

Deut.  33.  3.  every  one  shall  receive  of  thy  w. 

Josh.  1. 18.  whosoever  will  not  hearken  to  thy  m. 

Judg.  11.  10.  if  we  do  not  according  to  thy  ic. 
13. 12.  Manoah  said,  now  let  thy  w.  come  lo  pau 

1  ■'Sam.  15.  24i  I  have  transgressed  thy  ic. 
28.  21.  behold  I  have  hearkened  to  thy  to. 

2Sam.7.21.  thy  w.  sake  hastthou  done  these  thingi 
28.  thou  art  that  God,  and  thy  ic.  be  true 

1  Kings  1. 14. 1  will  come  in  and  confirm  tAjr  to, 

JiTeh.  9.  8.  for  thou  hast  performed  thy  ir. 

Job  4.  4.  thy  w.  upheld  him  that  was  falline 

Psal.  119.  57.  I  said  that  I  would  keep  thyw. 
103.  how  sweet  are  thy  w.  to  my  taste! 
130.  the  entrance  of  thy  w.  giveth  light 
1,39.  mine  enemies  have  forgotten  thy  w. 

Prov.  23.  8.  thou  shalt  lose  thy  sweet  ic. 
9.  he  will  despise  the  wisdom  of  thy  ic. 

Keel.  5. 2.  be  not  rash,  therefore  let  thy  ic.  be  few 

,/er.  15.  16.  thy  w.  were  found,  and  I  did  eat  them 

Ezek.  33.  31.  hear  thy  to.  but  do  them  not,  32. 

Dan.  10.  12.  fear  not,  Daniel,  from  the  first  day 
thy  w.  were  heard,  and  I  am  come  for  thy  to 

Mat.  12.  37.  for  by  thy  w.  thou  shalt  be  justilied, 
and  by  thy  to.  thou  shalt  be  condemned 
r«ttr  WORDS. 

Gen.  42. 16.  kept  in  prison,  that  your  ic.  be  proved 
20.  bring  Benjamin,  so  shall  your  w.  be  verified 
44.  10.  lei  it  be  according  lo  your  ic.  Josh.  2.  21. 

/^cut. 1.34. the  Lord  heard  the  voice  of  your  to.5.28. 

./«A32. 11.  behold,  I  wailed  for  your  w.  I  gave  ear 

Isa.  41.  20.  there  is  none  that  heareth  your  ic. 

Jer.  42.  4. 1  will  pray  to  God  according  to  your  to. 

F.iek.  35. 13.  ye  have  multiplied  your  ic.  against  ine 

Mai.  2. 17.  ye  have  wearied  the  Lord  with  your  io. 
3.13.1/nitr  to. have  been  sloul  against  me,  saith  Ld. 

Mat.  10. 14.  shall  not  receive  you  nor  heart/our  w. 
WORK 

Is  taken,  (1)  For  such  business  as  i.t  proper  to 
every  man's  calling,  which  may  be  done  in  six 
days.  Exod.  20.  9^  Six  days  shall  thou  labour 
and  do  all  thy  work.  (2)  Far  any  thoueht, 
word,  or  outward  action,  whether  good  or  eeil. 
Eccl.  12.  14,  God  shall  bring  every  loorA-  info 
judgment.  (3)  Work  !>  put  fur  wages.  Lev. 
19.  13,  The  wages,  in  Hebrew,  Ihe  work  of 
him  that  is  hired,  shidl  not  abide  with  thee  art 
night.  So  in  Job  7.  2,  As  a  hireling  lookeili 
for  the  reward  of  his  work,  Neb.  for  his  work. 
(4)  Work  is  put  for  vengeance  or  jvdrrment. 
Isa.  5.  19,  Let  him  make  speed  and  husien  hi.s 
work:  '■'•  Let  him  begin  to  execute  vengtnvce 
as  soon  as  he  pleases."  And  in  Isa.  28.  21, 
That  he  may  do  his  work,  his  strange  work: 
"  Tlial  he  may  cTeevte  his  extraordinary  and 
unusual  judgment  against  Israel ;  a  judg- 
ment contrary  to  the  benignity  of  God's  na- 
ture, and  tn  his  usual  way  of  dealing  with 
his  people."  (5)  Work  is  put  for  miracle, 
John  7.  21,  I  have  done  one  work,  and  ye  all 
marvel :  The  miracle  onr  Saviour  speaks  of, 
is  his  healing  the  man  who  lay  at  the  pool  of 
Bethesda. 

The  works  of  God,  denote,  (1)  His  work  of  crea- 
tion. Gen.  2.  2,  On  Ihe  seventh  day  God 
ended  his  loorA-.  (2)  His  works  of  providence 
in  preserving  and  goveminir  the  world.  .Tnhn 
5.  17,  My  Falher  worketh  hitherto.     '3^   7'4« 


WOR 

work  ofrcdcmpiion  is  called  God's  wjrk.  ./u.Vn 
9.  4,  1  inii:<t  work  tlic  icorks  of  liini  tliHt  sent 
me.  Jlnd  parlicnlarly  the  faith  of  true  be- 
liever.-!  is  called  the  work  nl'  God.  John  G. 
:I!l,  This  is  the  icork  of  Goil,tliat  ye  bcliove  oii 
iiim  whom  he  haih  sent.  '/Tie  work  nf  redemp- 
tion is  attributed  to  the  Three  Persons  of  the 
Trinity,  and  titf.ir  acts  herein  are  of  the  same 
extent :  The  Father  loves  those  that  are  gioen 
to  Christ  in  thk  covenant  of  redemption,  and 
Christ  is  l/ie  Saviour  of  those  that  are  loved  by 
the  Father;  and  the  Spiritsanctijies  those  that 
are  justified  t'lruugh  the  merits  of  Christ's 
hloo'd.  Thus  there  is  a.  chain  in  salvation,  the 
ben-inning  is  from  the  Father,  the  dispensation 
lliroutrh  the  Hon,  and  the  application  by  the 
Spirit :  So  in  looking  after  the  comfort  of  elec- 
tion, believers  must  first  look  inioard  to  the 
work  ()/  the  Spirit  on  their  hearts,  then  out- 
ward  to  tlie  work  of  CItrist  on  the  cross,  then 
upward  to  the  everlasting  love  of  tlie  Father  in 
keavcn,  1  Pet.  1.  2. 
li"  good  works  are  to  be  understood  all  manner  of 
duties  inmard  and  outward,  as  mill  thoughts, as 
words  and  actions,  toward  Clod  or  man,  which 
lire  commavded  in  the  law  of  (!od,  and  proceed 
frotn  a  pure  heart  and  a  faith  unfeigned,  and 
are  referred  unto  C/od's  glory ;  for  it  is  neccs- 
s  try  that  ^ooii  works  proceed  from  right  princi- 
ples, and  have  right  motircs  mid  ends,  vamely, 
a  principle  of  love  to  God,  the  motive  of  obedi- 
ence to  (rod's  law,  and  the  glory  of  God  as  the 
chirf  end.  1  (Jor.  10.  31,  Whether  therolore 
ye  eat  or  drink,  or  whatsoever  ye  do,  do  all  to 
the  ql'iry  nf  God.  F.ph.  2.  ID,  Fur  we  are  his 
workmanship,  created  in  Christ  Jesus  unio 
good  works. 
tt  is  said,  James  2.  24,  You  see  that  by  works 
a  man  is  jnstillcd.  The  Jlpostle  does  not  there 
treat  of  our  juslifienlion  in  the  sioht  of  God, 
hot  of  the  jnstifriiJion  of  our  faith  in  the 
tight  of  man,  and  Ikerifore  asserts  thatjtisli- 
f.cntion  is  by  works,  Ver.  18.  I  will  shew 
thee  my  faith  by  my  works,  for  works  justify 
our  faith,  and  derlnre  us  to  be  justified  be- 
fore men,  who  cannot  see  vor  know  our  faith 
but  by  our  works.  St.  Paul,  in  his  Kpisllcs  to 
the  liomans  and  Gahitians,  asserts,  by  many 
argunienls,  our  just  if  cation  by  faith,  that  re- 
ceives and  relies  iipon  the  righteousness  of 
Christ,  that  ts,  Ids  olwdieneo  iind  finfferings, 
Horn.  :».  24,  38.  Jlnd  surely  Ike  apostles,  being 
inspired  by  the  same  Spirit,  cannot  be  sup- 
posed to  contradict  one  another. 
M'tn,  because  he  is  depraned  and  weakened  -with 
original  sin,  is  not  able  to  fulfil  the  law,  and 
cannot  be  justified  or  accepted  before  God,  on 
iicronnt  of  his  works,  for  In/  the  works  of 
the  law  shall  no  fl"sh  be  justified,  Horn.  3.  20. 
Gnl.  2. 10.  The  righteousness  of  Christ  is  the 
sole  meritorious  ravse  of  our  justification;  but 
tho!;e  that  are  justified,  are  also  sanctified,  and 
will  be  enreful  to  maintain  good  work?",  for 
^vilhoiit  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord, 
Heh.  12.  14.  C/trist's  righteousness,  received 
by  faith,  and  imputed  to  true  belirvers,  is  the 
cause  of  the, r  justification,  and  gives  them  a 
prnrious  title  to  heaven,  and  sniictifieatiou 
makes  them  meet  for  it :  Bvrunrd  snys.  Bona 
iipmi  sunt  via  nd  re^num,  non  e.iusa  re;- 
nandi;  '■'■Good  works  are  the  way  to  the 
/.■inirilnm,  not  the  cause  nf  entering  the  king- 
iJom," 
Fiod.  5.  n.  let  tliere  more  »/>.  be  laid  on  the  men 

12.  IG.  no  manner  of  w.  sliall  be  done  in  tliein,  20. 
10.  f,ev.  le.  2(1.  I  2n.  :i,  2><,  si.  JVi/m.  ii'X  7. 

1^.  20.  kIiow  llieiii  the  w.  that  lln'y  must  do 

31.  H.  whosodoctli  aiiv  w.  therein  shall  be;  cut  off 
from  nmonjsl  the  people,  1.5.  /,ev.  23.  3U. 

^.I.  2.  six  dnys  shnll  m.  be  done,  »t).  9. 

3f>.  7.  «iiirieie.ni  for  all  the  w.  and  too  much 

J^ee.  23.  7.  in   first  day  a   holy  convocaiion,  ve 

shall  do  no  servile  iff.  therein,  8,  21,  2.'>, 

3.-1, 3(i.  .Vom.  28.  IH.  25,  2«.  |  20.  I,  12, :». 

Deut.  4.  '2f.  111.'  ir.  of  Mien's  hands,  27.  i:>.  2  h'ings 

in.  IH.  2  Chr.  32.  I'J.  Psal.  Il.'i.  4.  |  13).  15. 

5. 14.  the  sabbath  of  the  Lord  ihy  God,  In  it  thou 
shall  nol  do  any  w.  1(5.  8.  ./er.  17.  22,  24. 

14.  on.  that  ihc  L.  niavblc«s  thee  in  all  rr.of  lliv 
hnnd  which  llioii  <lo.si,  24.  10.  |  2S.  12  |  30.  9. 

Mi.  10.  do  no  m.  with  the  fiisllinj  of  thy  bullock 

31.20.  to  provoke  biiii  lo  an^ir  ilirimphlhe  »/>.  of 
your  hands,  1  Finns  Ifi.  7.  ./er.  32.  ."JO. 

33. 1 1.  bless  Iho  T.d.  and  arcepl  the  w.  of  his  hands 

1  A'/iiVirLUirhierof  J^oloinon's  idlirers  which  wen- 

"over  the  w.  0.  23.  1  Chr.  Sit.  0.  2  Chr.  2.  18. 
7.  P.  his  hoiise  had  another  eoiirt  nf  the  like  w. 

2  Finos  12.  11.  into  hands  that  did  the  ir.22.  5,  0. 
1  f'hr.'v.  0.  33.  employed  in  that  w.  day  and  niijlit 

10.  '.i'l.  to  minister  as' every  day's  w.  ro((ciired 
GlHi 


WOR 

1  Clirort.  2D.  1.  Solomon  is  yet  young  and  tender, 

and  the  w.  is  great,  .VVA.  4.  10. 

2  Chron.  31.  21.  in  every  w.  that  he  began,  he  did  it 
34.  12.  the  men  did  the  w.  faithfully 

Ezrn4.24.  then  ceased  the  w.  of  the  house  of  God 
5.8.  this  w.  goeth  fast  on,  prospcrith  in  their  hands 
G.  7.  let  the  w.  of  this  house  of  God  alone 

22.  to  strengthen  their  hands  in  the  ?c.  of  house 
10.  13.  neither  is  it,  a  w.  of  one  day  or  two 

jYeh.  3.  5.  but  their  nobles  put  not  their  necks  to  w. 

4.  11.  slay  them,  and  cause  the  w.  to  cease 

6.  3.  why  should  the  to.  cease  whilst  I  leave  it? 
10.  they  perceived  this  w.  was  wrought  of  God 

7.  70.  the  chief  of  the  fathers  gave  to  the  w. 
Job  1.  10.  thou  hast  blessed  the  w.  of  his  bands 

10.  3.  thou  shouldest  despise  the  w.  of  thine  hands 
14.  15.  thou  wilt  have  a  desire  to  w.  of  ihy  hands 
24.  5.  as  wild  asses  go  they  forth  to  their  w. 
34.  11.  for  the  m.  of  a  man  shall  ho  render  to  him 
cause  to  find  according  to  his  ways,  1  Pet.  1. 17. 
19.  for  they  are  all  the  w.  of  his  hands 
36.  9.  he  sheweth  them  their  w.  and  transgression 

P«a/.8.  3.  when  I  consider  Ihe  w.  of  thy  lingers,!). 
9.  Ifi.  the  wicked  is  snared  in  the  w.  of  liis  hands 
19.  1.  the  firmament  shcweth  his  handy  in. 
28.  4.  give  them  after  the  w.  of  iheir  hands 
44.  1.  we  heard  what  io.  thou  didst  in  iheir  days 
90. 17.  establish  thou  the  w.  of  our  hands  upon  us 
95.  9. when  your  fathers  proved  nie  and  saw  my  w. 
101.  .3.  I  halo  the  -lO.  of  them  that  turn  aside 
102  25.  the  heavens  are  the  w.  of  thy  hands 
143.  5.  I  muse  on  the  w.  of  thy  bands 

Prov.  11-  18.  the  wicked  workelh  a  deceitful  in. 

Feel.  3. 17.  there  is  a  time  there  for  every  w. 

5.  f).  why  should  God  destroy  the  w.  of  thine  hands 

8.  9.  I  applied  my  heart  to  every  w.  under  Ihe  sim 
14.  to  whom  it  hapjienelh  according  to  ir.  of  the 

wicked,  according  to  the  w.  of  ihe  righteous 

9.  10.  th"re  is  no  w.  in  grave  whilher  thou  goest 

12.  14.  God  will  bring  every  w.  into  judgment 
Cunt.  7.  1.  V).  of  the  hands  of  a  eimning  workman 
Isa.  2.  8.  Ihev  worship  the  w.  of  their  own  hands, 

37.'  19.  .lev.  1.  10.  I  10.  3,  9,  15.  |  .51.  18. 
17.  8.  ho  shall  not  look  lo  the  -w.  of  his  hands 
19.  15.  neither  shall  there  be  any  w.  for  Kgypt 
25.  blessed  be  Assyria  the  w.  of  my  hands 

28.  21.  that  he  may  do  his  in.  bis  siranse  w. 

29.  1(>.  shall  the  w.  say  of  him  that  made  it 

23.  he  seetli  his  children,  and  the  w.of  my  hands 
32.  17.  the  w.  of  righteousness  shall  be  peace 
45.11.ciincerninglhe?c.ofiny  hands  command  me 
49.  4.  yet  surely  my  te.  is  with  my  God 

(iO.  21.  they  shall  inherit  the  ■w.  of  my  hands 
fil.  8.  and  I  will  direct  their  ?/>.  in  tiuih 
04.  8.  and  we  all  are  the  id.  of  ihy  hands 
65.22.  mine  elect  shall  long  enjoy  w.  of  their  bands 

.7rr.  32.  19.  great  in  counsel  and  mighty  in  w. 
50.29.  recompense  her  according  to  iv.  J, am.  3.*54. 

F.iek.  15.  3.  shall  wood  be  taken  to  do  anv  ic.  1 
4.  is  ii  meet  for  any  w.?  ||  .5.  it  was  meet  lor  no  in. 
16.  30.  the  75.  of  an  imperious  whorish  woman 

lUis.  1.3.  2.  all  of  it  the  w.  of  the  craftsman 
14.  3.  we  will  say  no  more  to  the  ic.of  our  hands 

J\Uc.  5. 13.  Shalt  no  more  worship  w.  of  thine  hand.-; 

Uab.  1.  5.  for  I  will  work  a  m.  in  your  days 

Hag.  2.  14.  and  so  is  every  V).  of  their  bands 

Marh  fi.  5.  lie  could  there  do  no  mighty  iv. 

John  7.  21.  I  have  done  one  m.  and  ye  marvel 
17.4.  T  have  fini.shed  the  w.  thou  gavest  me  to  do 

Jlrts  5.38.if  Ibis  to.  be  of  men  it  will  come  to  nouvlit 

13.  2.  for  ihe  ?c.  whercunto  I  have  called  ihein 
41.behold,yedespisers,  and  wonder,  for  I  work  ii 

w.  in  your  days,  a  w.  which  ye  will  not  believe 

14.  20.  for  the  w.  which  thev  fulfilled 

1.5.  38.  who  went  not  with  ihcm  to  the  ir. 
Horn.".  1.5.  which  shew  the  ic.  of  the  law  written 
9.28.  nshortiiu.  will  the  Lord  make  upon  tbeearih 
1 1.0.  no  more  grace,  otherwise  w.  is  no  more  w 

1  r^r.  3. 13.  every  man's  j/i.  shnll  be  nnuliMnaniffSl 

14.  ifnny  man's  le.  abide  ||  15.  \f  w.  Uc  burnt 
9.  1.  are  not  ye  my  w.  in  the  Lord? 
F.ph.  4.  12.  he  gave  some  for  the  w.  of  the  ministry 
/'////.  2.  30.  for  Ihc  w.  of  Christ  he  \vas  nigh  death 

2  Thrss.  1.  11.  that  God  may  fulfil  the  w.  offaith 
2.  17.  «lalili..*li  you  in  overy  good  word  end  to. 

2  Tim.  4.  5.  do  the  w.  of  nu  evangelist,  make  full 
.Aim.  1.  4.  lei  patience  have  her  perfect  in. 
25.  but  a  doer  of  the  ?/>.  shall  bu  blessed 
.S><-  Kvn,. 
WORK  of  God,  WORKS  of  God. 
F.rod. :«.  10.  the  lab'es  were  the  w.  of  God 
.fidi  37.  14.  consider  the  wondrous  w.  of  God 
Psnl.  04.  9.  all  men  shall  declare  the  w.  of  God 
GO.  5.  come  and  sec  the  w.  of  God  be  is  terrible 
78.  7.  thai  they  ifdjht  not  forget  the  w.  of  God 
Keel.  7.  13.  rnnsider  the  tr.  of  God  who  can  make 
H.  17.  then  I  bcbel.l  all  Ihe  w.  nf  God 
II..').  even  so  thou  knnwesl  nol  the  ip.  of  God 
John  fi.  2«.  that  wc  mishi  work  the  ir.  of  God 
29.  this  id  the  ye.  of  God  thai  ye  believe  on  me 


WOR 

1  -Tolm  9.3.  that  w.  c/^«(f  should  be  made  mnnif* 
Jlets  2.  11.  we  hear  them  speak  the  ic.  of  God 
Hom.  14.  20.  for  meat  destroy  not  the  w.  of  God 
See  Goon.  Grk.\.t. 
His  WORK. 
f?''77.  2. 2.  God  ended  his  w.  \\  3.  rested  from  A/9  v) 
Fxod.  30.  4.  they  came  every  man  from  his  ic. 
Jieut.  32.  4.  he  is  the  rock,  bis  w.  Is  perfect 
Judg.  19. 16.  an  old  man  came  from  his  w.  at  even 
1  .Sam.  8.  10.  be  will  take  assi  s  and  put  lo  his  w 
I  Kings!.  14.  Hiram  came  and  wrought  all /1/5  a 

1  Chron.  4. 23.  they  dwelt  with  the  king  for  Am  w. 
'ii  C'hr.  8. 9.  of  Israel  he  madb  no  servants  for  his  u>. 

10.5.  Daasha  let  his  a),  cease,  he  left  ofTbuilding 
JVeh.  4.  15.  that  we  returned  every  man  to  his  m. 
Job!.  2.  a  hireling  looketh  for  the  reward  of  hisio. 

30.  24.  remember  that  thou  magnify  his  10. 

37.  7.  that  all  men  may  know  his  -w. 
Paal.  G2.  12.  lo  thee  mercy,  for  thou  renderrst  to 
every  ftian  according  to  his  id.  Prov.H.  29. 

104.  23.  man  goclb  forth  to  his  to.  and  labour 

111.  3.  his  w.  is  honourable  and  glorious 
Prov.  16.  11.  nil  the  wei^hiH  of  the  hag  are  his  ia 

20.  II.  whether  bis  w.  be  pure  or  whether  right 

21.  8.  but  as  for  the  pure  his  w.  is  right 

fsa.  5. 19.  let  him  hasten  his  w.  that  we  may  see  ii 

10.  12.  the  Lord  hath  performed  his  whole  to. 
28.  21.  that  he  may  do  his  w.  his  siranje  lo. 
40.  10.  heboid,  his  w.  \>  before  liini,  02.  IL 

54. 10.  thatbringelli  fnrih  an  instrument  fothistt 

Jer.  22.  13.  that  givelli  him  not  for  his  w. 

Hah.  2.  18.  the  maker  of  his  w.  Irustelh  thereia 

jlfiirk  13.  34.  who  gave  to  every  man  his  ic. 

.lohn  4.  .34.  my  meat  is  to  finish  h>s  ir. 

Gal.  0.  4   let  every  man  prove  his  own  w. 

licv.  22.  12.  to  live  I'verv  man  ns  his  w.  shall  b« 

Sre  LOUD,  Nkkdle. 

Our  WORK. 

fjfn.5. 20.  this  shnll  com  fori  ns  concerning  our  to. 
V^wWOUK. 

F.jod.  20.9.  s'x  days  do  all  thy  w.'Zi.  12.  Dcut.S.ld. 

Ruth  3.  12.  the  I,ord  recompense  thy  v. 

Psal.  Ti.  12.  r  will  meditate  al.-o  of  "all  thy  w. 
90.  10.  let  tUy  ir.  appear  unto  thy  servanis 
fl2.  4.  thnn,  Lord,  hast  made  me  glad  thro'  thy  -,n, 

Prov  '^i.'H'i.  prepare  ^Aj' m.  wilhout  and  mnkeii  lit 

fsa.  45.  9.  or  !-hall  thy  ir.  say  he  hnth  no  hands? 

./rr.31.1fi.  for  Ibyw.  shall  be  rewarde.l,  saith  li.e  L 

//ab.  3.  2.  revive  thii  w.  in  the  midst  of  Ihe  yen,' 
Your  WORK. 

Fjnrf.S.n.  not  oujbt  ofHnHnr.shallhediminis.it^  ^ 

2  Chron.  15.  7.  for  your  w.  .shall  be  reworded 
fsn.  41.21.  ve  are  of  nothing,  yovriv.  is  of  ni'ug-^ 
1  7'Ar.«.s-.1.3.remomberins/»iimr.failh,lab.iuMif  »v 
Hcb.6. 10.  God  is  nol  11  nriirhtroii.! to  forget wmr  ^ 

WORK-FLLI.OW. 
Rom.  16.  21.  Timo'hv  my  w.-fiHoto  saliil'Vn 

Wl>RK,  Firb. 
Exod.  5.  18.  go  and  w.  ||  34.  21.  si.x  daVii    nri». 

sbl  t  IA 

35  2.  whoso  doef  h  ir.  therein  .«bnll  be  put  in  di-afi 
Josh.  9.  4  thev  did  w.  wilily  and  went  and  m.ul 
I  Sam.  14.  0.  it'mav  be  tbnt  ihe  Lord  will  ir  for  t 
1  A7n;r,, 21.20.  thou  bast  sold  thy.<«dftO70.  e«il.'3 
JVcA.  4.  0.  for  the  people  had  a  mind  to  ia 
.Job  23.  9.  on  the  left  hnnd  where  be  doth  ■• 
Psnl.  .5H.  2.  yea,  in  heart  you  m.  wickedncsi 

119.  120.  it  is  lime  for  thee.  Lord,  t«i  w. 
Prov.  11.  l!^.  the  wicked  w.  a  deceitful  work 
Isa.  19.  9.  thev  that  w.  in  fln.v,  shall  be  confounded 

43.  13.  I  will  IC.  and  who  shall  let  it 
F.zek.  3:).  21).  ye  w.  Hhominalion  ami  ve  defile 
/><i7i.  11.  2:1.  and  he  shall  w.  deceilfiiily 
.1//>.2.  1.  woe  tothem  tlial  ir.  evil  upon  their  berli 
//«4. 1.5.1  will  ir.n  work  in  yourdays,which  ye  will 
not  believe,  thoush  it  be  told  you,  .firls'\X4\ 
Jfarr.  2.  4.  Iff.  for  I  am  with  ynii,  saiih  Ihe  Lord 
.VnjI.  3.  15.  ihey  that  w.  wickedness  arc  set  up 
Mill  21.  2'*.  son,  so,  iff.  to-dav  in  my  vineyard 
l.iikr  13.  14.  six  days  in  which  men  ought  lo  w. 
.lohn  5.  17.  my  Father  workelh  biiherto,  and  I  te. 

0.  28.  that  wc  mijlit  w.  the  works  of  God 
30  they  said  nnio  bim,  what  dosi  thou  iff,  ? 

9.4.1  musi  IP.  the  works  of  him  that  sent  nic  while 

it  is  day,  the  night  com'ih  when  no  man  can  iff. 

Hom.  7.  5.  sin  by  the  law  did  iff.  in  our  member." 

H. '28.  we  know  that  all  things  ir.  together  for  good  / 

F.ph.  4.  19.  10  Iff.  all  uncleanness  with  greediriess 
Phil.  2.  12.  Iff.  out  vour  own  snlvaiion  with  fear 

1  Th'ess.  4.  1 1.  study  lo  iff.  with  vour  own  hands 

2  Thess.  2.  7.  the  mystery  of  inlipiity  dolh  a. 

3.  10.  if  anv  woiilil  nol  iff.  neither  should  ho  eat 
12.  wc  exhort  that  wiih  quietness  Ihey  ia.  * 

S't  IviofiT*'. 
WORKKR. 

1  TCingsl.  14.  Ilirai'Mif  Naiiliiali  was  a  w.  in  brass 

WORK  MRS. 
2/rin/T.«23.  24.  Iff.  with  familiar  spirits  and  wizards  | 

2  Cor.  0.  I.  we  then  i>»  iff.  'ogeiber  with  him 

11.  \'i.  for  !>uch  arc  false  ajiuiilles  deceitful  le 


WOR 

pat.  3.  2.  bew&re  of  dogs,  beware  of  evfl  lo. 
Sec  Iniquitv. 
WORKS. 
Exod.  5.  13.  fulfil  your  w.  and  your  daily  tasks 
Jt'um.  16. 26.  the  Ld.  hath  sent  me  to  do  all  these  m 
/;fiu£.2.7.  IheLd.  blessed  theeinnll  the  ifl.  ]6.  l.'i, 
Judg.  2.  10.  a  generation  which  knew  not  the  ic 
l.Sam.8. 8.  according  to  nil  the  !c.  they  have  done 
1  Kings  13. 1 1 .  told  him  nil  the  to.  th©  man  of  Q.  did 
iKings  22. 17.  because  they  have  forsaken  nie  and 
provoked  me  to  anger  with  all  the  w.  of 
their  hands,  2  Citron.  3-1.  2.5. 
JV'fA.  9.  35.  nor  turned  they  from  their  wicked  w. 
Psal.  14.  I.  corrupt,  ihey  have  done  abominable  7c. 
17. 4.  concerning  the  w.  of  men  by  word  of  thy  lips 
92.  4.  I  will  triumph  in  the  w.  of  thy  hands 
111.  2.  the  10.  of  the  Lord  are  great,  sought  out 
7.  the  w.  of  his  hands  are  verity  and  judgment 
1.13.  8.  forsake  not  the  to.  of  thine  own  hands 
141.  4.  to  practise  wicked  lo.  with  men  that 
Prov.  31.  31.  let  her  own  ic.  praise  her  in  the  gates 
Keel.  1.  14.  I  have  seen  tliezc.  that  are  done,  2.  11 
I.ia.  26.  12.  thou  hast  wrought  all  our  w.  in  us 
■/t.  7.  13.  because  ye  have  done  all  these  to. 
25.0.  provoke  me  not  to  anger  withtlie  vj.  of  your 
hands  to  your  own  hurl,  7.  |  44.  8. 
14.  recompense  them  acrording  to  their  deeds 
and  the  w.  of  their  hands,  JUv.  2.  23. 
Piek.  6.  6.  that  your  w.  may  bo  abolished 
Jirni.  4.  .37.  honour  him  whose  w.  are  truth 
Mic.  6.  16.  the  w.  of  the  house  of  Ahab  are  kept 
Jifat.  11.  2.  John  heard  in  prison  the  in.  of  Christ 
^3in  5.  20.  he  will  shew  him  greater  w.  than  these 

36.  the  ID.  which  the  Father  hath  given  me,  the 

same  w.  that  I  do  bear  witness  of  me 

7.  3.  thy  disciples  inay  see  the  w.  that  thou  does! 
7.  because  I  testify  that  the  lo.  thereof  are  evil 

8.  39.  if  children,  yo  would  do  the  ?c.  of  Abraham 
S.  4.  I  must  work  the  w.  of  him  that  sent  me 

10.  25.  the  JO.  that  I  do  in  my  Father's  name 
32.  for  which  of  these  w.  do  ve  stone  me? 

37.  if  r  do  not  the  w.  |t  38.  helicvo  the  to. 

14.  10.  lie  doeth  the  w.  ||  11.  believe  for  the  id. 
12.  the  w.  that  I  do,  shall  he  do,  ami  greater  ?c. 

15.  24.  if  I  had  not  done  among  them  the  jo. 
i^cts  7.  41.  they  rejoiced  in  the  ?3.  of  their  hands 
^;.  20.  Gentiles  should  do  ir.  meet  for  repentance 

Bom.  3.  27.  by  svhat  lawl  ofic?  nay,  but  of  faith 

4.  2.  for  if  Abraham  were  justified  l)y  to. 
6.  God  imputeth  righteousness  without  w. 

9.  11.  not  of  10.  but  of  him  that  calleth 

32.  not  by  faith,  hut  ns  it  were  by  the  to.  of  tlie  law 

11.  6.  if  by  grace,  then  it  is  no  more  of  tr.  but  if 

it  be  of  ?c.  it  is  no  more  of  grace 

13. 12.  let  us  therefore  cast  off  the  w.  of  darkness 

Oal.  2. 16.  knowing  a  man  is  not  justified  by  the  lo. 

of  thelaw,  for  by  the  7/3.of  law  no  flesh  isjuslificd 

3.  2.  received  ye  the  Spirit  by  the  to.  of  the  law? 

5.  doeth  he  it  by  the  to.  of  the  law,  or  by  failh? 

10.  as  many  as  are  of  io.  of  the  law,  under  curse 

.5.  19.  the  TO.  of  the  Hesh  are  manifest,  adultery 

Fph.  2.  9.  not  of  TO.  le.^t  any  man  should  boast 

5.  11.  with  the  unfruitful  to.  of  darkness 

Col.  1.  ^1.  and  enemies  in  your  mind  by  wicked  to. 

1  Thess.  5.  13.  to  esteem  in  love  for  their  tc.  sake 

2  7"ijn.l.9.saved  tis,  not  according  to  our  to.  Tit.3.5. 
Tit.  1.  16.  but  in  w.  they  deny  God,  abominable 
Jffb.  1.  10.  the  heavens  are  the  to.  of  thy  hands 

2.  7.  thou  didst  set  him  over  the  to.  of  thy  hands 
3  0.  your  fathers  saw  my  to.  forty  years  in  wildern. 
4.3.although  the  to.  were  finished  from  foundation 
C.  1.  the  foundation  of  repentance  from  dead  to. 
0. 14.  purge  conscience  from  dead  to.  to  serve  God 
Jam.  2.  14.  if  he  have  not  to.  can  faith  save  him? 

17.  faith  without  to.  is  dead,  being  alone,  20.  20. 

18.  I  have  w).  shew  me  thy  faith  without  thy  io. 

21.  was  not  Abraham  justifi'^d  by  w.? 

22.  and  by  ic.  was  faith  made  perfect 

21.  ye  see  then  that  by  to.  a  man  is  justified 
25.  was  not  Rahab  the  harlot  justified  by  to.? 
C  Per.  3. 10.  the  earth  and  the  to.  therein  burnt  up 
1  ..hfm  3.  8.  that  he  might  destroy  the  ?p.  of  devil 
Rri'.  2.  26.  he  that  keepnth  my  lo.  to  the  end 
9.  20.  yet  repented  not  of  the  to.  of  their"hands 
13.  G.  dniible  to  her  double,  according  to  her  to. 
See  Evil,  Goon,  Work  of  God. 
His  WOKKS. 
1  Sam.  19.  4.  his  to.  Iiavc  been  lo  thee  very  good 
I  Chrnv.  32.  30.  Hezckinh  pro.^pered  in  all  his  w. 
P.inl.  3.1.  4.  and  all  his  m.  were  done  in  truth 
78.  11.  forgat  his  to.  and  his  wonders,  106.  13. 

103.  22.  hless  tlie  Lord,  nil  his  to.  in  all  places 

104.  31.  the  Lord  shall  rejoice  in  his  to. 

107.  2?.  let  them  declare  his  to.  with  rejoicing 
111.  6.  he  shewed  his  people  the  power  of  his  to. 
145.  9.  his  tender  mercies  are  over  all  his  to. 
17.  the  Lord  is  holy  in  all  his  to. 
prov.  8.  22.  the  Lord  possessed  me  before  his  to. 
24.  12.  shall  not  he  render  to  every  man  accord- 
ing to  its  to.?  .Mat.  16  27.  2Tim.  i.  14. 
097 


WOR 

Eccl.  3.  22.  a  man  should  rejoice  in  his  own  v>. 
Dan.  9.  14.  God  is  righteous  in  all  A/s  w. 
.lets  15.  18.  known  to  God  are  all  his  ic. 
Ileh.  4.  4.  rested  the  seventh  day  from  all  his  to. 

I'J.  he  also  hnlh  ceased  from  his  own  to.? 
.1am.  2.  22.  eeest  how  faith  wrought  with  his  to.? 
3.  13.  shew  out  of  a  good  conversation  his  to. 
See  LOKD,  Marvellous,  Miqhty. 
Their  WORKS. 
Eiod.  5.  4.  why  do  ye  let  the  people  from  lli/:ir  lo. 
23.  24.  thou  fhalt  not  do  after  thtir  w. 
.\''eh.  6.  14.  accoiding  to  these  their  ic. 
./lib  34.  25.  therefore  he  knovveth  their  to. 
Psal.  33.  15.  be  considereth  all  their  w. 

106.  35.  and  they  learned  their  to. 

39.  thus  were  they  defiled  with  their  own  w. 
Eccl.  9.  1.  and  their  to.  are  in  the  hand  of  God 
ha.  29.  15.  their  to.  are  in  the  dark,  they  say 

41.  29.  they  are  vanity,  their  lo.  are  noticing 

59.  6.  nor  shall  Ihey  cover  themselves  with  their 
to.  their  to.  are  works  of  iniquity,  and  the 
act  of  violence  is  in  their  bands 

66.  18-  I  know  their  to.  and  their  thoughts 
Jivios  8.  7.  I  will  never  forget  any  of  their  to. 
Jonah  3.  10.  God  saw  their  tr.  that  they  turned 
jMat.  23.  3.  but  do  not  ye  after  their  to. 

5.  all  their  to.  they  do  to  be  seen  of  men 
2  Cor.  11.  15.  whose  end  be  according  to  their  to. 
Rrv.  14.  13.  and  Ihcir  to.  do  follow  them 

20.  12.  the  dead  judged  according  to  their  to.  13. 

r/ry  WORKS. 
DcTit.  3.  24.  who  can  do  according  to  thy  ic? 

15.  10.  the  Lord  shall  bless  thee  in  nil  tjnj  to. 
2  Chriin.  20.  \VI.  the  Lord  hath  bioken  thy  lo. 
Psal.  26.  7.  tell  of  all  thy  wondrous  w.  145.  4. 

66.  3.  say  to  God,  how  terrible  art  thou  in  thy  to. 

73.  28.  trust  in  Lord,  that  I  may  declare  all  Ifiy  to. 

86.  8.  nor  are  there  any  works  like  unto  ttiy  to. 

92.  5.  O  Lord,  how  great  arc  thy  to. 

104.  13.  earth  is  satisfied  with  fruit  of  thy  to. 
24.  O  Lord,  how  manifold  are  thy  ic.? 

143.  5.  I  remember,  I  meditate  on  all  thy  ir;. 

Ho.  Jv.  all  thy  to.  shall  praise  thee,  O  Lord 
Pro:.  Iv).  3.  commit  thtj  lo.  unto  the  L'ird 
F.ce.l.  3.  7.  for  now  God  acceptuth  thy  to. 
I'.vn.  57.  10.  I  will  declare  thy  to.  shall  not  profit 
.hr.  48.  7.  because  thou  hast  trusted  in  th>)  w. 
.lam.  2.  18.  shew  me  thy  faith  without  thy  ir. 
Rev.  2.  2.  I  ktiow  thy  io.  9,  13,  19.  |  3.  1,  8,  15. 

3.  2.  i  have  not  found  thv  w.  perfect  before  God 

M'onderful  WORKS. 
Psal.  40.  5.  many,  O  Lord,  are  thy  ironderftd  to. 
78.  4.  shewing  his  wovderfiil  to.  be  hath  done 

107.  8.  would  praise  the  Loid  for  his  toniidcrfvl 

to.  to  the  children  of  men,  15,  21,  31. 

111.  4.  made  his  tconderful  to.  to  be  remembered 

Mat.  7.  22.  in  thy  name  have  done  trnnderfnl  to. 

..^cts  2.  11.  Crctes  and  Arabians,  we  do  hoar  ihein 

speak  in  our  tonjucs  the  toonderful  ic.  of  God 

See  WoNDRors. 

WORK  n:TH. 

.Tab  33.  29.  lo,  all  these  thjtigs  tn.  Gnd  for  man 
Psal.  15.  2.   he   that  walketli  uprightly,  and  in. 
righteousn.^ss  shall  dwell 

101.7.  liethatM.  deceit  shall  not  dwell  in  my  house 
Ptov.  11.  18.  the  wicked  tc.  a  deceitful  work 

2l>.  28.  a  flattering  mouth  to.  ruin 

31.  13.  she  70.  willingly  with  her  bands 
F.ccl.  3.  9.  what  profit  hath  he  that  lo.? 
Isa.  44. 12.  the  smith  with  his  tongs  tc.  in  the  coals, 
and  iie  to.  it  with  the  strength  of  his  arms 

64.  5.  tb  m  meetest  him  that  to.  righteousness 
Dan.  6.  27.  he  lo.  signs  and  wonders  in  heaven 
.Tuhn  5.  17  my  Father  to.  hitherto,  and  I  work 
..lets  10.  .15.  he  that  to.  righteousness  is  accepted 
/?ni7i.2.10.g1ory  and  peace  to  every  one  lhat70.gor)d 

4.  4.  to  him  that  to.  is  the  reward  not  of  grace 
5.  to  him  that  to.  not,  but  bclieveth  on  him 

15.  because  the  law  70.  wrath,  for  where  no  law 

5.  3.  knowing  that  tribulation  ?o.  patience 

13.  10'.  love  10.  no  ill  to  his  neighbour,  therefore 
love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law 

1  Car.  12.  6.  it  is  the  same  God  that  w.  all  in  all 

II.  all  these  to.  that  one  and  the  same  Spirit 
16. 10.  for  he  10.  the  work  of  the  Lord,  as  I  also  do 

2  Cor.  4. 12.  so  then  death  to.  in  us,  but  life  in  you 
17.  10.  for  us  a  more  exceeding  weight  of  glory 

7. 10.  for  godly  sorrow  to.  repentance  to  salvation, 

but  the  sorrow  of  the  svorld  tn.  death 

Oal.  3.5.  hethercfore  that  7«. miracles  among  you 

5.  6.  but  faith,  which  to.  by  lovo 
F.ph.  1.11.  who  10.  all  things  after  the  counsel 

2.  2.  the  spirit  that  now  to.  in  the  disobedient 

3.  20.  according  to  the  power  that  to.  in  us 
Phil.  2. 13.  for  it  is  G.  that  to.  in  you  to  will  and  do 
Col.  1.  29.  his  working,  which  ir.  in  me  mightily 

1  Thess.  2.  13.  efTectually  to.  in  you  that  believe 
./am.  1.  3.  that  the  trying  of  your  faith  tc.  patience 
20  the  wra'h  of  man  to.  not  righteousness  of  God 
Hcv.  21.  27.  nor  whatsoever  if.  abominritioa 
4  X 


WOR 

■\J^OrvKIXG,  Participle. 
Psal.  Z2.    .  like  a  sharp  razor,  to.  Ueccitfully 

74.  12.  vc.  Bulvulion  in  the  midst  of  the  earth 
F.zek.V).\.  the  gate  shall  he  shut  llie  six  to.  days 
Mark  16.  'JO.  the  Lord  to.  with  them,  with  signs 
Hom.l.a.  men  with  men  to.  that  which  is  unscendy 

7.  13.  sin  to.  death  in  me  by  that  whicii  is  good 
1  Cor.  4.  12.  and  labour,  to.  with  our  own  hands 
F.jih.  4.  28.  to.  wilhhishaudsthe  thing  that  is  good 
'2'J'hess.  3.  11.  to.  not  at  all,  but  are  busy-b'>dies 
Ifeb.  13.  21.  lo.  in  you  that  which  is  well  pleasing 
/lev.  16.14.  they  are  thespirits  of  devils  jo.  niiraclct 

WORKING,  .Sub.nantive. 
/sa.  28.  29.  from  the  Lord  who  is  excellent  in  ». 

1  Cor.  9.  6.  have  not  we  power  to  forbear  to.7 
12.  10.  to  another  the  ir.  of  miracles 

F.jih.  1. 19.  according  to  tlie7o.  of  liis  mighty  power 

3.  7.  given  inc  by  tlie  cflectual  to.  of  his  jiower 

4.  10.  according  to  the  effectual  to.  in  the  measure 
Phil.  3.  21.  according  to  the  to.  wlnreby  he  is  able 
Ce)l.  1.  29.  his  10.  which  worketh  in  me  mightily 

2  'J'hess.  2. 9.  wliose  cominc  is  after  the  tc.  of  Satan 

WORKMAN. 
Exod.  26.  f  1.  cherubims,  the  work  of  a  cunning  to. 
35.35.r!izalecl  and  Aholiab  with  wisdom  to  work 
all  mannerof  workof  the  cunning  to.  38.  23. 
Cant.  7.  1.  like  jewels,  the  work  of  a  cunning  to. 
Isa.  40.  19.  the  70.  nielteih  a  graven  image 

20.  he  steketh  to  bini  a  cuiuiing  to.  to  prepare 
./ir.  10.  3.  the  work  of  the  to.  with  the  axe 
f/iis.  8.6.  the  IO.  made  it,  therefore  it  is  not  God 
jtfat.  10.  10.  the  to.  is  worthy  of  his  meat 
iTim.  2.  15.  a  to.  that  recdeth  not  be  ashamed 

WOUKMANSIIir. 
Find.  31.  3.  and  in  all  manner  of  jo.  5.  |  35.  31. 
2  /Cinffs  16.  10.  according  to  all  the  to.  thereof 
Fzeli.  28.  i:t.  the  to.of  tahrets  was  prepared  in  thee 
I'ph.  2. 10.  for  we  are  his  ic.  created  in  Christ  Jesus 

WORKMEN. 
■2ICiugs  12.14.but  they  gave  that  to  the  to.  to  repair 
thehniiHeortl('e'Lord,I5.  2  CAron.  34. 10,17. 
1  CAr.  22.  15.  there  are  in.  with  thee  in  abundance 
25.  1.  number  of  70.  II  2  Chrov.'.i.  13.  70.  wrought 
Ezra  3.9.  to  set  forward  the  to.  in  the  house  of  God 
fsa.  44.  11.  behold,  the  7.1.  they  are  of  men 
^'Jcts  19.  25.  called  with  the  ?o.  of  like  occupation 

WOKLD, 
fn  Greek,  Cosrmos ;  7/1  H.-breio,  Tbcbal.  It  it 
taken  fur  the  whole  tininerse  ;  comprehending 
the  heavens,  earth,  sea,  the  element.'!,  the  angcU, 
men,  animals,  in  a  toind,  all  created  beings, 
John  1.  10,  The  toorld  was  made  by  him. 
Jt  is  also  put  for  the  race  of  mankind  ;  some- 
times in  an  extensive  sense,  for  all  the  pos- 
terity of  Adam.  Rom.  5.  12,  By  one  man 
sin  entered  into  the  teorld.  "  Sin  came  tn  bt 
among  mankind ;"  it  is  a  mctovt/my,  the  thing 
containing,  being  put  fur  the  inhabitants  con- 
tained. Sometimes  it  is  taken  in  a  more  re- 
stricted sense,  us  in  John  15.  18.  it  is  pvt  fur 
the  icicked  in  the  world,  for  iinregimcraled 
iLnrencwcd  persons.  If  the  tnorld  bale  you, 
ye  know  that  it  hated  me  before  it  haled  you. 
The  toicked  are  called  the  world,  because  they 
relish  and  savour  nothing  bvt  worldly  things, 
and  pursue  nothing  but  vot\i\y  designs,  /t  is 
put  likeicise  for  (iod's  chosen  people,  tohetker 
Jeios  or  Gentiles.  2  Cor.  5.  19,  God  was  ^U 
Christ,  reconfiling  the  toorld  lo  himseH'.  And 
in  John  3.  16,  God  so  loved  the  world,  that  ho 
gave  his  only  hegotten  Son  to  diein  their  stead, 
and  give  satisfaction  for  them  to  his  justice. 
Believers  arc  called  the  world,  both  because 
they  arc  taken  from  among  .fetes  and  Gentiles, 
and  do  participate  in  the  corruption  of  the 
world.  World  is  put  for  the  Gentiles  only. 
Rnm.  11.  12,  If  the  fall  of  them  be  the  riches 
of  the  vorld.  The  Jeios  rejecting  the  gospel, 
and  so  fulling  fmm  being  God's  people,  teas 
the  occasion  of  God's  manifesting  hts  abun- 
dant grace  in  the  conversion  of  the  Gentiles. 
/I  is  put  for  sensual  lusts  and  pleasures,  for 
the  tiejte.s,  honours,  and  dignities  of  the  world. 
1  .hhn  2.  15,  Love  not  the  icorld,  neither  the 
tilings  that  are  in  the  Toorld.  /t  also  stands  for 
the  good  things  of  this  world.  1  Cor.  7.  31, 
They  that  use  this  toorld,  as  not  abusing  it. 
The  children  of  this  world,  arc  such  as  live  in  tht 
world,  Tchelher  the.y  be  good,  or  bad,  Luke  20.34. 
The  devil  is  called  the  prince  of  this  toorld, 
John  12.  31.  and  the  God  of  this  toorW,  2  Cor 
4.  4.  I/c  boasted  to  oyr  Saviour  that  he  tea* 
so,  Mat.  4.  9.  and  he  actelh  in  this  world  likt 
a  piHnce,  powerfttlh/  working  in  the  children 
of  disobedience,  Ejih.  2.  2.  /«  Heb.  2.  iS.  the 
apostle  calls  the  gospel-slate  of  the  church  I'm 
toorld  to  come.  It  is  put  for  the  Roman  em- 
pire, Luke  2. 1. 
Concerning  the  creation  of  the  world,  it  it  ns}-l4 
if  the  icholc  mass  of  matter  teas  created  all  at 


WOR 

tncel  and  if  all  corporal  things  toere  ranged 
in  order  at  the  same  lime;  or  only  in  the  space 
«//  seven  days,  ds  Moses  describes  in  the  be- 
ginning of  Genesis}  Some  inttrprtters  are 
of  opinion,  that  God  created  all  the  matter  of 
the  universe  out  of  nothing  in  an  instant,  by 
one  simple  act  uf  his  almighty  will;  but  they 
are  not  agreed  about  the  other  guestiori.  Some 
viaintain  that  sensible  beings  were  not  brought 
to  their  full  perfection,  till  after  the  space  of 
scctn  days  was  completed.  TIUs  opinion  is 
founded  upon  Moses'  narration,  who  expresses 
tt  very  distinctly.  Hesides,  it  cannot  be  easily 
conceived,  that  the  chaos  should  settle  into  any 
regular  order,  till  after  an  infinite  variety  of 
different  motion.t,  by  ichich  the  parts  of  matter 
separated  from  one  another^  which  were  of 
different  and  incompatible  qualities;  and  till 
there  should  be  a  union  and  coalescence  of 
those  which  were  of  the  same  form  and  nature; 
and  that  all  those  motions  could  not  be  per- 
formed till  after  a  sufficient  space  of  time. 

Others,  fearing  that  consequences  contrary  to 
the  immutability  and  omnipotence  of  the  Cre- 
ator might  be  drawn  from  the  opinion  of  a 
successive  creation,  have  thought,  that  nothing 
should  be  inferred  from  Moses'  description, 
but  a  mental  succession  of  order,  and  that  he 
only  represents  the  creation  as  performed  in 
succession  of  time,  to  accommodate  himself  to 
the  apprehensions  uf  the  vulgar,  and  to  give  a 
■more  intelligible  account  of  it.  Matter,  al- 
ways obedient  to  the  commands  of  the  Al mighty , 
had  no  need  uf  preparation.  Hut  the  first 
opinion  has  the  greatest  number  of  followers. 

It  is  also  inquired,  at  what  season  of  the  year 
the  world  was  created  ?  The  generality  of  the 
fathers  think  it  was  created  in  the  Spring. 
Jiut  a  great  number  of  others,  among  whom 
are  the  most  learned  jL'hronologists,  contend 
that  the  world  was  created  in  Jlutumn.  They 
urge,  1.  That  the  Hebrews,  the  Egyptians,  and 
THost  uf  the  Orientals,  began  their  year  at 
.liitumn;  which  custom  they  had  received  from 
thiir  ancestors,  and  they  from  the  first  men, 
who  would  naturally  commence  thiir  year  from 
the  time  when  the  world  began.  2.  H'hcn  God 
created  JIdam  and  Eve,  and  all  other  animals, 
ke  was  to  provide  them  withnecessary  nourish- 
iiient.  3.  Th^re  was  fruit  upon  the  trees  in 
the  garden  of  Eden,  Gen.  3.  2,  3.  It  was 
therefore  .lutumn,  say  they,  in  whatever  place 
we  suppose  Jidam  to  have  been  created. 

1  .Sam.  2.  8.  he  hutti  set  the  w.  upon  ihem 

2  Sam.  22. 16.  the  channels  of  ihe  sea  appeared,  thf 
foundnlionsof  the  w.  were  discovered,  fs. 18.15. 

1  Ckron.  10.  30.  the  to.  aJBo  sliall  not  he  moved 
Job  18.  18.  he  shall  be  clin.sed  out  of  the  w. 

34.  13.  or  who  hath  disposed  the  whole  w.? 

37.  12.  that  they  may  do  on  the  face  of  the  w. 
fsal.  9.  8.  he  shall  judge  the  w.  in  righteousness, 
minister  judgment  to  the  people,  96. 13. 198.9. 

17.  14.  deliver  my  soul  from  the  men  of  the  w. 
JO.  4.  their  words  to  end  of  the  w.  Rom.  10.  18. 
22.  27.  all  the  ends  of  the  w.  shall  remiMnber 

24.  1.  the  earth  and  the  w.  is  the  Ltjrd's,  and  they 
that  dwell  therein,  98.  7.  J\'a/i.  1.  .5 

33.  8.  let  the  inhabitants  of  the  w.  stand  in  awe 

49.  1.  give  car,  all  ye  inhabitants  of  the  w. 

50.  12.  for  the  w.  is  mine 

77.  18.  the  lightning."  lightened  the  w.  97.  4. 
89.  11.  thou  hast  founded  the  to.  and  its  fulness 
yO.  2.  hadst  formed  the  earth  and  the  to. 
93. 1.  Iher/).  also  is  cslablishcd,  it  cannot  he  moved 
96.  10.  to.  also  shall  be  established,  not  be  moved 
Prov.  8.  26.  while  he  had  not  made  dust  of  the  to. 
Keel.  3.  11.  also  he  hath  set  the  to.  in  their  heart 
Isa.  13.  II.  I  will  punish  the  w.  for  their  evil 
14.  17.  is  this  he  that  m.-idc  the  to.  as  a  wilderness? 
21.  nor  fdl  the  face  of  the  lo.  with  cities 
24.  4.  Iho  to.  lan^uishekh  and  fudelli  away 
27.  0.  Faracl  shall  fdl  the  fiice  of  the  w.  with  fruit 

34.  I.  let  the  to.  hear,  and  all  that  come  forth 
45. 17.  ye  shall  not  be  confounded,  to.  without  end 

Mat.  4.  8.  the  devil  hhewclh  him  nil  the  kinidoins 

of  the  to.  and  ibe  glory  of  them,  I.uke  4.  5 

5.  14.  yo  are  the  light  of  this  in.  n  cily  on  a  hill 

13.  38.  the  field  is  the  ?o.  good  seed  are  children 

40.  so  shall  il  be  iti  th<'  end  of  this  tr..49. 

16. 26.  what  proHled,  if  he  shall  giilu  the  whole  to 

and  lose  his  own  BouH  ^/arA  8. 36.  Luke0.i5 

18.  7.  woo  lo  the  in.  berauic  of  ofTciirPS 

24.  H.this  gospel  of  the  kingdom  shall  be  preached 
in  nil  the  to.  for  a  witness  to  all,  Mark  14.  9 
7^tiA<-1.7(l.who  have  been  since  to.begnn,  y]cts^.'2\ 
2.  1.  a  decree  that  all  the  lo.  should  he  taxed 
20.  3.S.  they  that  are  worthy  lo  obtain  that  to. 
'John  1    10.  he  was  in  the  to.  the  lo.  was  made  by 
him,  and  the  lo.  knew  him  not,  JJcl^  17.  24 
to.  Uwi  Lamb  ufG.  (hut  takes  away  the  sin  uf  to 
6M 


WOR 

John  3.16.  God  so  loved  the  to.  that  he  gave  his  Son 

17.  that  the  lo.  through  him  might  bo  saved 
4.  42.  Christ,  the  Saviour  of  the  to.  1  John  4.  14. 
6.33.bread  of  God  is  he  that  giveth  life  unto  the  to. 

51.  my  flesh,  which  I  give  for  the  life  of  the  w. 
7.4.  if  thou  do  these  things,  shew  thyself  to  the  to. 

7.  the  w.  cannot  hate  you,  but  mc  it  hatelh 
8.  12.  Jesus  said,  1  am  the  light  of  the  w.  9.  5. 
12.  19.  behold,  the  to.  is  gone  after  bim 

47  I  came  not  to  judge,  but  to  save  the  to. 

14.  17.  the  Spirit,  whom  the  to.  cannot  receive 
19.  a  little  while  and  the  to.  seoth  ine  no  more 
22.  Lord,  how  is  it  that  thou  wilt  manifest  thy- 
self unto  us  and  not  unto  the  w.7 

27.  my  peace  I  give,  not  as  the  to.  giveth,  give  I 
31.  that  the  w.  may  know  I  love  Father 

15.  18.  if  Ihe  to.  hate  yuu,  I  John  3.  13. 

19.  if  ye  were  of  the  to.  the  to.  would  love  his  own 

16.  20.  but  the  to.  shall  rejoice 

28.  I  leave  tlie  to.  and  go  to  the  Father 

33.  be  of  good  cheer,  1  have  overcome  the  to. 

17.  5.  the  glory  t  bad  with  thee  before  the  to.  was 
6.  thy  name  to  men  Ihou  gavest  me  out  of  the  ic. 
9.  I  pray  not  for  w.  but  for  them  bast  given  my 

14.  w.  hated  them,  because  they  are  not  of  the  to. 

15.  thou  sbouldest  not  take  them  out  of  the  w. 

16.  they  are  not  of  the  to.  even  as  I  am  not  of  w. 
21.  that  the  w.  may  believe  thou  hast  sent  me, 23. 
25.  O  Father,  the  w.  hath  not  known  thee 

18.  20.  Jesus  answered,  I  spake  openly  lo  the  w. 
21.  25.  I  suppose  to.  could  not  contain  the  books 

.^cts  17.  6.  these  that  turi.cd  the  w.  ujiside  down 

19.  27.  Diana,  whom  Asia  and  the  to.  worsbippcth 
24.  5.  a  mover  of  sedition  thro' the  to.  a  ringleader 

/Jotn.l.  8.  your  faith  is  spoken  of  thro'  the  whole  to. 
3.  0.  for  then  how  shall  God  judge  the  w. 

19.  that  all  the  w.  may  become  guilty  before  God 
4. 13.  tho  pronii.se  that  he  should  beheir  of  the  w. 
11.  12.  if  the  fall  of  them  be  the  riches  of  the  to. 

15.  if  casting  away  of  them  be  reconciling  of  to. 

1  Cor.  1.  21.  the  to.  by  wisdom  knew  not  God 
2.7.thc  wisdom  which  God  ordained  before  the  to. 

12.  now  we  have  received  not  the  spirit  of  the  to. 

3.  22.  or  the  to.  or  life,  or  death,  all  are  yoxrs 

4.  9.  for  we  are  made  a  spectacle  to  w.  to  angels 

13.  we  are  made  as  the  filth  of  to.  and  offscouriiig 

5.  10.  for  then  must  ye  needs  go  out  of  the  w. 

6. 2.do  ye  not  know  that  saints  shall  judge  the  to.? 

7.  33.  carcth  for  the  things  that  are  in  the  to.  34. 

8.  13.  I  vsill  eat  no  flesh  while  the  w.  standelh 
11.  32.  that  we  should  not  be  condemned  with  to. 

2  Cur.  5. 19.  God  inChrist  reconciling  to.  to  himself 
Oal.  6.  14.  God  forbid  that  I  should  glory,  save  in 

the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  whom 
the  to.  is  crucified  unto  me,  and  I  unto  the  to. 

2rim.  1.9.  in  Christ  before  the  (T.  began,  7'iM.2. 

Heb.  2.  5.  he  put  not  in  subjection  the  w.  to  come 

6.  5.  have  tasted  the  powers  of  the  w.  to  come 

11.  38.  of  whom  the  w.  was  not  worthy 

Jam.  1.  27.  to  keep  himself  unspotted  from  the  lo 

3.  0.  the  tongue  is  a  fire,  a  w.  of  iniquity 

4.  4.  the  friendship  of  the  to.  is  enmity  with  God, 

a  friend  of  the  to.  is  the  enemy  of  God 

2  Pet.  2.  5.  God  spared  not  the  old  to.  bringing  in 

the  flood  on  the  to.  of  the  ungodly 

3.  6.  whereby  the  w.  that  then  was,  perished 

I  John  2.  2.  he  is  the  propitiation  for  the  sins  of  w. 

15.  love  not  tho  to.  ||  16.  but  is  of  the  to. 

17.  tho  w.  passcth  away,  and  the  lusts  thereof 
3.1. Ihe  te.knowoth  us  nol.because  it  knew  him  not 

4.  .5.  they  are  of  the  to.  therefore  speak  of  ihe  to 

5.  4.  what  is  horn  of  God,  overcometh  the  w.  5. 
19.  we  are  of  God,  whole  to.  licth  in  wickedness 

Rev.  3.  10.  hour  of  temptation  shall  come  on  all  w. 

12.  9.  cnlled  Satan,  who  deceivcth  the  whole  to. 

13.  3.  and  all  the  to.  wondered  after  the  beast 

See  FoUNDATios. 
Tn,  or  into  the  WORLD. 
Psal.  73. 12.  Iho  ungodly  who  prosper  in  the  to. 
^»A</«.26. 13.  this  gospel  be  preached  in  (Ac  whole  to. 
Mark  10.  30.  he  shall  receive  a  hundred-fold, and 
in  thf!  IP.  to  come  eternal  life,  I.uke  18.  30. 
.Tuhn  1.9.  lig'htelh  every  mnn  that  comes  into  tAe  to. 
10.  he  was  in  the  to.  and  Ihe  w.  was  made  by  him 
3.17.  God  sent  not  his  Son  into  (.  lo.lo  condemn  to. 
19.  light  is  come  infofAe  to.  men  loved  darkness 

6.  14.  priiphet  that  should  come  into  the  in.  11.27 

9.  .5.  as  long  ns  I  am  in  M<"  lo.  I  am  the  light  of  to. 
12.  46.  I  am  come  a  light  in(o  (Ac  to.  whobelieveth 

16.  33.  in  w.  yo  shall  have  tribulation,  in  me  peace 

17.  11.  I  am  no  more  in  the  to.  theso  arc  in  tht  to. 

12,  while  I  was  with  Ihem  in  (Ac  to.  I  kept  them 

18.  37.  and  for  this  cnuso  came  I  in(o  the  w. 
Horn.  5.  12.  ns  by  one  mnn  sin  entered  in(o  thew. 

13.  for  until  the  law,  sin  was  in  the  w. 

1  Cor.  8.  4.  wc  know  an  idol  is  nothing  in  Ihe  to. 
F.ph.  2.  12.  having  no  hope,  without  God  in  (A«  to 
C/>1. 1.  6.  gosprl  is  come  to  you  as  il  is  in  all  (Ae  lO. 

I I  Tim.l.lS.Chr.  Jesus  came  into  ic.  to  nave  sinners 
I  3.  16.  seen  of  angels  and  behoved  on  in  the  v. 


WOR 

Heb.  10.  5.  when  he  comelh  into  the  to.  he  ."nitb 
1  t'tt.  5.  9.  the  same  afilictions  that  arc  in  the  to 

1  ^oAn  2.  15.  love  not  the  things  that  are  in  the  w. 
4. 1.  many  false  prophets  are  gone  out  in(o  thew. 

3.  antichrist,  even  now  already  is  it  in  the  to. 

4.  because  he  is  greater  than  be  that  iainthev 
9.  God  sent  his  Son  into  the  to.  that  we  inightliv* 

2  John  7.  many  deceivers  are  entered  into  the  so. 
This  WORLD. 

jVa(.  12.  32.  it  shall  not  be  forgiven  him  in  tAt>  le. 

13.  22.  cares  of  (/a>  w.  choked  word,  .l/ari  4.10. 
Luke  16.8.  for  the  children  of  (Ais  to.  are  wiser  than 

20.  34.  Jesus  said,  the  children  uf  this  w.  marry 

.John  8.  23.  ye  are  of  this  lo.  I  am  not  o(  this  lo. 

9.  39.  for  judgment  I  am  come  into  (Ais  to. 

12.  25.  he  that  hateth  life  in  (Ais  to.  shall  keep  it 

31.  Jesus  said,  now  is  Ihe  judgment  uf(Aiji  w.  now 

sliall  the  prince  of  this  to.  be  cast  out 

13. 1.  he  should  depart  out  of  (Aii  w.  lo  tbeFatlier 

14.  30.  for  prince  of  this  w.  comelh,  nothing  in  ma 
16.  11.  because  the  prince  of  this  to.  is  judged 

18.  36.  Jesus  answered,  my  kingdom  is  not  ofthii 

w.  if  my  kingdom  were  of  (Ai«  to. 

Rom.  12.  2.  be  not  conformed  lo  this  w.  but  Iransf. 

1  Cor.  1.20.  where  is  the  dispulerof  (Aii  w.l  hath 

not  God  made  foolish  the  wisdom  of  this  u.7 

2.  6.  yet  we  speak  not  the  wisdom  of  (Aii  to. 

3.  18.  if  any  man  seemeth  to  be  wise  tn  this  to. 
19.  the  w  isdom  of  this  to.  is  foolishness  with  God 

5.  10.  yet  not  with  Ihe  fornicators  of  this  w. 

7.  31.  lliey  that  use  this  w.  as  not  abusing  it 
2Cor.  4.  4.  the  god  of  this  w.  halh  blinded  the  mindi 
Gal.].4.he  might  deliver  us  fromtAisjiresent  evil  ic. 
Eph.  1.  21.  not  only  in  (Ai.v  w.  but  in  that  to  come 

2.  2.  ye  walked  according  lo  Ihe  course  of  this  xc. 

6. 12.  against  the  rulers  of  the  darkness  of  Ihi*  u. 
1  7'im.  6.  7.  for  we  brought  nothing  into  this  to. 

17.  charge  Ihem  that  are  rich  in  (Ais  to. 
•iTim.  4.  10.  Deinas  having  loved  (Ais  present  to. 
Tit.  2.  12.  we  should  live  godly  in  this  present  to. 
.fam  2.  5.  God  hath  chosen  the  poor  of  this  v>. 
1  John  3. 17.  but  w  hoso  hath  (Ais  w.  good  and  scclb 

4.  17.  because  as  hi-  is,  to  are  we  in  (Ais  to. 

WORLDLY. 
7'i(.  2.  12.  denying  ungodliness  and  to.  lusts 
Heb.  9.  1.  the  first  covenant  had  a  w.  sanctuary 

WORLDS. 
//e4.1.2.  by  his  Son,  by  whom  also  he  made  the  iff 
11.  3.  the  to.  were  framed  by  the  word  of  God 

WORM. 
Jf'Tien  the  scripture  would  represent  to  us  a  per 
su7i  that  is  weak,  mean,  and  demised  in  tht  / 
world,  it  compares  him  to  a  worm  of  the  earth, 
because  nothing  is  found  lo  be  more  contempt  f 
hie  than  this  creature.    Job  25.  6,  How  much 
less  man  that  is  a  worml     Jind  the  Psahnitt 
say.'!,  I  am  a  leorm,  and  no  man,  Psal.  22.6.    Tht 
Worm  o/  (Ac  damned  dies  not,  and  their  fire  shall 
never  be  quenched,  /.«a.6fi.24.   ^' They  will  feel 
a  worm  of  conscience  that  shall  never  die,  and 
the  fiery  wrath  of  God  upon  their  souls  and 
bodies  that  shall  never  go  out." 
Eiod.  16.  24.  neither  was  there  any  w.  therein 
Job  17.  14.  I  said  to  the  w.  thou  art  my  mother 

24.  20.  the  to.  shall  feed  sweetly  on  him 

25.  6.  much  less  man  that  is  a  to.  and  son  of  man 
Psal.  22.  0.  but  I  am  a  w.  and  no  man,  a  reproach 
Isa.M.  11.  tho  w.  is  spread  under  thee,  and  worms 

41. 14.  fear  not,  thou  to.  Jacob,  and  ye  tnen  of  Isr. 
51.  8.  and  the  to.  shall  eat  them  like  wool 
66.  24.  for  their  w.  shall  not  die,  nor  their  fire  be 
quenched,  Mark  9.  44,  46,  4!=. 
.Jonah  4.  7.  God  prepared  a  w.  il  smole  the  gourd 

WORMS. 
Eiod.  16.  20.  their  manna  bred  to.  and  stank 
Dent.  2P.  39.  grapes,  for  Ihe  to.  shall  eat  them 
.Ml  7.  5.  my  flesh  is  clothed  with  le.  and  dust 

19.  20.  though  w.  destroy  this  body,  yet  in  my 

flesh  shall  I  see  God 
21.26.  Ihey  shall  lie  down,  and  to.  shall  cover  ihem 
ha.  14.  II.  worm  under  thee,  and  the  to.  cover  lln;e 
Mie.  7.  17.  they  move  out  of  their  hob-s  like  to. 
.4c(s  12.2.'I.Herod  wnsontenof  to.nndgave  upghost 

WORMWOOD. 
Dent.  29.  IS.  lest  there  be  a  root  that  bearelh  to. 
Prnv.  .">.  4.  her  end  is  bitter  as  to.  shnrp  as  n  sword 
.Ur.  9.  15.  I  will  feed  them  with  if.  23.  15. 
I.am.  3.  1.5.  he  hnlh  made  me  drunken  with  to. 

19.  remembering  my  misery,  the  lo.  and  the  gall 
JImos  5.  7.  vo  who  turn  judgment  to  to. 
Rev.  8.  11.  the  name  of  Ihe  star  is  cnjled  to.  and 
the  third  pnrl  of  the  waters  become  to. 
WORSE. 
Gen.  19.  9.  wp  will  deal  to.  with  Ihec  than  them 
ISnm.  19.7.  Ibatwill  bo  to.  than  all  that  bi'fell  thee 

1  Kings  16.  25.  Oinri  did  to.  than  all  before  him 

2  Kiiigs  14  12.  Judah  was'  put  to  the  w.  before  !•■ 

rael,  and  floil  lo  their  lenls,  2CAron.  25.  22 

1  Chmn.  10.  16.  the  Syrians  were  put  to  tho  lo.  19 

2  Chron.  0.  24  if  thy  people  be  put  lo  the  i( 


WOR 

L  Ch:  on.  33. 9.  Manasseh  made  Jerusalem  do  w. 
Isa.  41.  t24.  w.  than  nothing,  w.  than  a  viper 
Jer.  7.  26.  they  did  w.  than  their  fathera,  16.  12. 
Dan.  1. 10.  why  should  ho  sec  your  faces  w.  liking? 
Mat.  9.  IG.  the  rent  is  made  re.  Mark  2.  21. 
12.45.  wicked  spirits  dwell  there,  the  last  state  of 
that  man  is  w.  than  the  first,  Lrike  11.26. 

27.  04.  Ihe  last  error  shall  be  w.  than  the  first 
^/ari- .5. 26.  she  was  nothing  bettered,  but  grew  w. 
Johnl.  10.  men  have  drunk,  then  that  which  is  v!. 

5.  14.  sin  no  more,  lest  a  lo.  thing  come  unto  thee 
1  Cor.  8.  8.  neither  if  we  cat  not,  are  we  the  w. 
11. 17.  you  come  not  for  the  better,  but  for  the  w. 

1  Tim.  5.  8.  denied  the  faith,  he  is  to.  than  an  infidel 

2  Tim.  3.  13.  but  seducers  shall  wa.x  w.  and  w. 

2  Pet.  2.  20.  the  latter  end  is  w.  with  them 

WORSHIP. 
Qcn.  22.  5.  I  and  the  lad  will  go  yonder  and  io. 
Ezod.  24. 1.  come  up  to  the  Lord,  and  w.  ye  afar  off 
34. 14.  for  thou  shaltto.no  other  god,  Lordjealous 
Dcut.A.  19.  lest'houshouldest  be  driven  to  a>.  them 
8.  19.  if  thou  ID.  other  gods,  11.  IC.  |  30.  17. 
26. 10.  shalt  set  first-fruits  before  Lord,  and  w.  be- 
fore the  Lord  thy  God,  Psal.  22. 27, 29.  ]  86. 9. 
1 1  Sam.  1.  3.  this  man  went  up  early  to  w. 
15.  25.  turn  again,  that  I  may  tc.  the  Lord,  30. 
1  Kings  12.30.  the  people  went  lo  ic.  before  the  one 

3  Kings  5.  18.  to  w.  in  the  house  of  Rimmon 

17.  36.  the  Lord  shall  ye  fear,  and  him  shall  ye  w. 

18.  22.  hath  said  to  Judah,  ye  shall  w.  before  this 

altar  in  Jerusalem,  'J  Chron.  32. 12.  Isa.  36.  7, 

1  Chron.  16.  29. 7C.  Lord  in  the  beauty  of  holiness, 
Psal.  29. 2. 1  66. 4. !  96. 9.  Mat.  4. 10.  Luke  4. 8. 

Psal.  5.  7.  I  will  w.  toward  thy  temple,  138.  2. 
45.  11.  he  is  thy  Lord,  and  w.  thou  him 
81.  9.  neither  shalt  thou  w.  any  strange  god 
93.  6.  O  come  let  us  w.  and  bow  down  and  kneel 
97.  J^jc.  him,  all  ye  gods;  Sion  heard,  was  glad 
99.  \'iD.  at  his  footstool,  for  he  is  holy,  132.  7. 
9.  exalt  the  Lord,  and  w.  at  his  holy  hill 

Isa.  2.  8.  they  JO  the  work  of  their  hands,  20.  |  46.6. 
27. 13.  shall  to.  the  L.  in  holy  mount  at  Jerusalem 
49.  7.  princes  also  shall  w.  because  of  the  Lord 
66.  23.  all  flosh  shall  come  to  w.  before  me 

Jer.  7.  2.  that  enter  in  at  these  gates  to  w.  26.  2. 
13.  10.  they  that  !o.  other  gods,  be  as  this  girdle 
25.  6.  go  not  after  other  gods  to  ?o.  them 
44.  19.  did  we  w.  her  without  our  men 7 

£ict.  46. 2.  he  shall  w.  at  the  threshold  of  the  gate 
3.  the  people  of  the  land  shall  w.  at  the  door 

V9.  he  that  eiitereth  to  to.  by  the  north  gate 
an.  3.5.  ye  fall  down,  (O.the  golden  image,  10, 15. 
'12.  nor  w.  the  image,  18.  23.  |]  15.  if  y^to. 
14.  do  not  ye  w.  the  golden  image  I  havTi  set  up? 
Mic.  5.  13.  no  more  w.  the  work  of  thine  hands 
Z.epli.  1.  5.  them  that  w.  the  host  of  heaven 
2. 11.  men  shall  w.  him,  every  one  from  his  place 
ZfcA.  14.  16.  to  w.  the  King  the  Lord  of  hosts,  17. 
Mat.^.  2.  we  have  seen  his  star,  and  come  to  to.  him 

8.  that  I  may  come  and  w.  him  also 

4.9.  if  thou  wilt  fall  down  and  w.  me,  Luke  4.7. 
J5.9.but  in  vain  they  do  !o.me,teaching  the  comm 
fohn  4.  20.  ye  say  that  in  Jerusalem  is  the  place 

where  mfen  ought  to  w.-Mark  7.  7. 

22.  ye  w.  ye  know  not  what,  we  know  what  we 

w.  for  salvation  is  of  the  Jews 

23.  they  shall  w.  the  Father  in  spirit,  24. 

12.  20.  certain  Greeks  came  to  w.  at  the  feast 
lids  7.  42.  God  gave  them  np  to  w.  the  host,  43. 

8.  27.  an  eunuch  came  to  Jerusalem  to  to. 

17.  23.  whom  ye  ignorantly  w.  him  declare  I 

18.  13.  persuaded  men  to  lo.God  contrary  to  law 
24.  11.  Paul  cime  up  to  Jerusalem  lo  to.  God 

14.  they  call  heresy,  so  w.  I  the  God  of  my  fathers 
1  Cor.  14.  25.  so  falling  down,  he  will  w.  God 
Phil.  3.  3.  which  to.  God  in  spirit,  rejoice  in  Christ 
Heb.  1.  6.  let  all  the  angels  of  God  w.  him 
fiew.  3. 9.  make  them  come  and  w.  before  thy  feet 

4. 10.  and  w.  him  that  liveth  for  ever  and  evi*r 

9.  20.  that  lliey  should  not  w.  devils  nor  idols 
11. 1.  measure  temple  of  God,  and  them  to.  therein 

13.  8.  all  on  the  earth  shall  w.  the  beast,  12. 

15.  they  that  would  not  w.  the  image  of  the  beast 

14.  7.  ?o.  him  that  made  heaven,  earth,  and  sea 

9.  if  any  man  to.  the  beast  and  his  image 
11.  who  10.  the  beast,  have  no  rest  day  and  night 

15.  4.  all  nations  shall  come  and  lo.  before  thee 

19.  10. 1  fell  at  his  feet  to  jo.  22. 8.  |1 22.9.  lo.  God 

WORSHIPPED. 
001.24.  26.  Abraham  bowed  and  to.  the  Lord,  48. 
52.  Abraham's  servant  w.  Lord,  bowing  to  earth 
Exod.  4.  31.  Israel  bowed  and  w.  12.  27.  |  33.  10. 
^2.  8.  they  made  a  calf,  and  to.  it,  Psal.  106.  19. 
34.  8.  M.)seB  w.  \\  Judg.  7.  15.  Gideon  to. 
Deul.  17.  3.  hath   gone  and  served  other  gods, 
and  m.  29.  20.  1  Kings  9.  9.  2  Kings  21.  21. 
2  Chron.  7.  22.   Jer.  1.  16.  |  8.  2.  |  16.  11.  | 
22.  9. 
I  Slim.  1.  19.  KIkanah  and  Hannah  jo.  before  Lord 

28.  Samu«l  ic.  ||  15.  .31.  Saul  w.  the  Lord 

699 


WOR 

0  Sam.  12.  20.  then  David  arose  and  to.  15.  32, 

1  A'ln^s  11.33.  have  forsaken  me,  and  w.  Ashtaroth 
16.  31.  Ahab  served  Baal  and  w.  him,  22.  53, 

2  Kings  17. 16.  they  w.  all  the  host  of  heaven  and 
served  Baal,  21.  3.  2  Chron.  33.  3. 

1  Chron.  29.  20.  all  the  congregation  bowed  down 
and  JO.  the  Lord,  2  Chron.  7.  3.  ]  29.  28, 29, 30. 

M'eh.  8.  6.  all  the  people  w.  the  Lord,  9.  .3. 
.Job  1.  20.  Job  w.  II  Ezek.  8.  16.  w.  the  sun 
Dan.2.  46.  king  to.  Daniel  ||  3.  7.  to.  golden  image 
Mat.  2.  11.  the  wise  men  fell  down  and  w.  Christ 

8.  2.  a  leper  came  and  jo.  him  ||  9.  18.  a  ruler  to. 

14.  33.  they  that  were  in  the  ship  jo.  him 

15.  25.  the  woman  of  Canaan  came  and  jo.  him 

18.  26.  the  servant  fell  down  and  jo.  his  lord 
28.  9.  they  held  him  by  the  feet  and  lo.  him 

17.  hia  disciples  to.  hira,  Luke  24.  52. 
Mark  5.  a.  ihe  man  ran  out  of  the  tombs  and  jo.him 

15.  19.  they  spit  upou  him,  and  bowing,  jo.  him 
.lohn  4.  20.  our  fathers  m.  in  this  mountain 

9.  38.  the  blind  man  believed,  and  JO.  him 
Jicts  10.  25.  Cornelius  fell  down  and  lo.  Peter 

16.  14.  Lydia  to.  God  ||  18.  7.  Justus  jo.  God 

17.  25.  neither  is  w.  with  men's  hands,  gives  lif 
Rom.  1.  25.  JO.  the  creature  more  than  the  Creator 

2  Thess.  2.  4.  exalteth  himself  above  all  that  is  jo. 
Hcb.  11.21.  Jacob  to.  ||  Rev.  7.  11.  the  angels  w.  G 
Rev.  5.  14.  the  twenty-four  elders  lo.  11.  16.  ]  19.  4 

13.  4.  they  w.  the  dragon,  they  lo.  the  beast 
16.  2.  a  sore  fell  on  them  which  jo.  his  image 

19.  20.  he  deceived  them  that  jo.  his  imago 

20.  4. 1  saw  the  souls  that  had  not  w.  the  boast 
WORSHIPPER. 

./oA7!9.31.if  any  man  be  a  7o.orGod,him  he  heareth 
j?c(s  19.  35.  the  city  of  Ephesus  is  a  to.  of  Diana 

WORSHIPPERS. 

2  Kings  10. 19.  Jehu  might  destroy  the  to.  of  Baal 

21.  all  the  ic.  of  Baal  came,  none  was  left 

23.  that  there  be  none  but  the  w.  of  Baal  only 

John  4.  23.  when  the  true  lo.  shall  worship  in  spirit 

Heb.  10.  2.  because  that  the  jo.  once  purged 

WORSHIPPETH. 
J^eh.  9.  6.  and  the  host  of  heaven  to.  thee 
Isa.  44.  15.  yea,  he  maketh  a  god,  and  lo.  it,  17. 
Dan.  3.  6.  and  whoso  falleth  not  down  and  w.  11 
.^cts  19.  27.  whom  all  Asia  and  the  world  jo. 

WORSHIPPING. 
2  Kings  19.  37.  as  he  was  w.  in  the  house  of  Nis- 
roch  his  god,  his  sons  smote  him,  Isa.  37.  38. 
2  Chron.  20.  18.  all  Judah  fell  down,  w.  the  Lord 
Mat.  20.  20.  mother  of  Zebedee's  children  came  w 
Col.  2.  18.  let  no  man  beguile  you  in  to.  of  angels 

WORST. 
Ezek.  7.  24. 1  will  bring  the  lo.  of  the  heathen 

WORTH. 
Oen.  23. 9.  for  as  much  money  as  it  ia  to.  give  it  me 
15.  the  land  is  lo.  four  hundred  shekels  of  silver 
/,ey.  27.  23.  priest  shall  reckon  the  jo.  of  estimation 
Deut.  15. 18.  hath  been  w.  a  double  hired  servant 
2S'a?ji.  18.  3.  but  thou  art  lo.  ten  thousand  of  us 
1  Kings'il.2.  give  the  to.  of  thy  vineyard  in  money 
Job  24.  25.  who  will  make  thy  speech  nothing  to. 
Prov.  10.  20.  the  heart  of  the  wicked  is  little  jo 
£zeA.  30. 2.  prophesy  and  say,  howl  ye,  woe  to.  day 

WORTHY. 
Gen.  32. 10. 1  am  not  jo.  of  the  least  of  thy  mercies 
WejiJ.  25.  2.  if  the  wicked  man  be  lo.  to  be  beaten 

1  Sam.  1.  5.  but  to  Hannah  he  gave  a  to.  portion 
26.  16.  as  the  Lord  liveth,  ye  are  w.  to  die 

2  Sam.  22.  4.  who  is  lo.  to  be  praised,  Psal.  18.  3. 
1  Kings  1.  52.  if  he  will  shew  himself  a  jo.  man 
.hr.  26. 11.  this  man  is  lo.  to  die  |1  16.  he  is  not  jo. 
Mat.  3.  11.  whose  shoes  I  am  not  w.  to  bear 

8. 8.  the  centurion  said.  Lord,  I  am  not  jo.  that  thou 
shouldest  come  under  my  roo(i  Luke  7.  6. 

10.  10.  for  the  workman  is  v>.  of  his  meat 
11.  inquire  who  in  it  is  to.  and  there  abide 
13.  and  if  the  house  be  to.  but  if  it  be  not  jo. 
37.  loveth  more  than  me,  he  is  not  jo.  of  me,  38. 

22.  8.  but  they  which  were  bidden  were  not  to. 
Mark  1.7.who8e  shoes  I  am  not  lo.  to  unloose,  Luke 
3.  16.  .lohn  1. 27.  .^cts  13.  25. 
Luke  3.  8.  bring  forth  fruits  jo.  of  repentance 
7.  4.  that  he  was  lo.  for  whom  he  should  do  this 
7.  nor  thought  I  myself  ic.  to  come  to  thee 

10.  7.  for  the  labourer  Is  w.  of  his  hire 
12.  48.  he  that  did  commit  things  jo.  of  stripes 
15.  19.  I  am  no  more  to.  to  be  called  thy  son,  21. 
20. 35.  shall  be  accounted  lo.  to  obtain  that  world 

21.  36.  be  accounted  to.  to  escape  these  things 
.^cts  24.  2.  very  to.  deeds  are  done  to  this  nation 
ftom.8. 13.  are  not  lo.  to  be  compared  with  the  glory 
F.ph.  4.  1.  that  ye  walk  jo.  of  the  vocation 
Col.  1.  10.  that  ye  might  walk  w.  of  the  Lord 
1  Thess.  2.  12.  that  ye  would  walk  lo.  of  God 
1  Tim.  1.  13.  »  saying  to.  of  all  acceptation,  4.  9. 

5.  18.  the  labourer  is  to.  of  his  reward 
/fei. 10.29.  of  how  much  sorer  punishment,  suppose 
ye,  shall  he  be  thought  7e.  who  hath  trodden 

11.  38.  of  whom  the  world  was  not  to. 


woi; 

.lam.  2.  7.  do  not  llicy  blaspheme  that  lo.  namel 

Ileo.  3.  4.  Ihey  shall  walk  in  while,  for  they  are  to 

4. 11.  thou  art  to.  to  receive  ^lory,  and  power,  5. 12 

5.2.  who  is  10.  to  open  the  book,  and  loose  tlie  seah 

4.  because  no  man  was  found  lo.  to  open  the  book 

9.  thou  art  !o.  to  take  the  hook  and  open  the  seal* 

16.  6.  give  them  blood  to  drink,  for  they  are  w. 

See  Count,  Counted,  De.vtu. 

WORTII1E.S. 

JVaA.2.5.heshall  recount  his  ti.  they  shall  stumble 

WORTHILY. 
liutM.  11.  do  thou  JO.  in  Ephratah,  and  be  famous 

WOT/TETH. 
Oen.  21.  26.  I  jo.  not  who  hath  done  this  thing 
39.  8.  my  master  w.  not  what  is  with  me  in  liiiu»-» 
44. 15.  w.  ye  not  that  such  a  man  as  I  can  divincT 
Ezod.  32.  1.  as  for  this  Moses,  we  jo.  not  «h;it  iii 
become  of  liim,  23.  ^cts  7.  40. 
.Aru7n.22.  6.  I  lo.  he  whom  thou  blessed  is  blesstd 
.fifsh.  2.  5.  whither  the  men  went  I  jo.  not 
.^cts  3.  17.  I  10.  that  through  ignorance  ye  did  it 
Rom.  11.  2.  JO.  ye  not  what  the  scripture  saith  ? 
Phil.  1.  22.  yet  what  I  shall  choose  I  w.  not 

WOVE. 
2  Kings  23. 7.  the  women  to.  hangings  for  the  grove 

WOVEN. 
Eznd.i3. 32.  ephod  have  binding  of  jo.  work,  39.  22. 
.39.  27.  maile  coats  of  fine  linen  jo.  work  for  Aaron 
John  19.  23.  the  coat  was  without  seam,  to. 

WOULD. 
Oen.  30.  34. 1  jo.  it  might  be  according  to  thy  word 
JVujn.  22.  29. 1  jo.  there  were  a  sword  in  mine  hand 
1  Kings  13.  33.  whosoever  jo.  he  consecrated  him 
JVfA.  9.  24.  they  might  do  with  them  as  they  to. 
iC«(A.  9. 5.  Jews  did  what  they  to.  lo  their  enemies 
Psal.  81.  11.  not  hearken,  and  Israel  to.  none  of  me 
Prov.  1.  25.  but  ye  lo.  none  of  my  reproof 

30.  they  w.  none  ofmy  counsel,  despised  reproof 
Dan. 5. 19.  whom  heir,  he  slew, and  whom  he  io.  he 
kept  alive,  and  whom  he  lo.  he  set  up,  and  jo. 
Jl/aC.?.  12.  whatsoever  ye  to.  that  men  should  do  to 
you,  do  ye  even  so  to  them,  Ante  6.  31. 
27.  15.  the  governor  was  wont  to  release  a  pri- 
soner whom  they  lo. 
Mark3. 13.  and  he  calleth  to  him  whom  he  lo.  and 
they  came  unto  him 
10.  35.  JO.  thou  shouldest  do  for  us  what  we  desire 
36.  what  to.  ye  that  I  should  do  for  you  ? 
.7oA7i6.  U.he  distributed  fishes  as  much  as  they  jo. 
Jlcts  18.  14.  reason  to.  that  I  should  bear  with  you 
Rom.  7. 15.  what  I  JO.  that  I  donor,  but  what  I  hate 
19.  for  the  good  that  I  ic.  I  do  not,  but  the  evil 

1  Cor.  7.  7. 1  w.  that  all  men  were  even  as  I  mysel. 
14.  5.  I  JO.  that  ye  all  spake  with  tongues 

2  Cor.  12.  20.  I  shall  not  find  you  such  as  I  lo. 
Oal.  2.  10.  they  lo.  that.we  remember  the  poor 

5.  12.  I  JO.  they  were  cut  off  which  trouble  you 
17.  so  that  ye  cannot  do  the  things  that  ye  jo. 
Col.  2.  1.  I  10.  yc  knew  what  great  conflict  I  have 
3./»Aji]0.  forbiddeth  them  that  jo.casteth  them  out 
Rev.  3. 15. 1  know  thy  works,  I  lo.  wert  cold  or  hot 

WOULD  God. 
Ezod.  16.  3.  ie.  Ood  we  had  died  in  Eeypt,  when 
we  sat  by  the  flesh  pots,  J\'"u77i.  14.  2. 
JVum.l  1 .29. (0.  frorf  all  Lord's  people  were  prophota 

20. 3.  JO.  Ood  we  had  died  when  our  brethren  died 
Z)eu«.28.67.  JO.  <?.  it  were  even,  lo.  <V.  it  were  morn. 
.Josh.  7.  7.  JO.  O.  we  had  dwelt  on  other  side  Jordan 
.Tudg.  9.  29.  JO.  O.  this  people  were  under  my  hand 
2  .9n;n.l8.33.  jo.  Ood  I  had  died  for  thee,  O  Absalom 
2  Kings  5. 3.  jo.  Ood  my  lord  were  with  Ihe  prophet 
-Sets  26.  29.  JO.  Ood  that  all  were  such  as  fam 

1  Cor.  4.  8.  and  I  lo.  to  Ood  ye  did  reign 

2  Cor.  11.  1.  JO.  to  Ood  \e  could  bear  with  me 

WOULD  not. 

1  Sam.  20.  9.  if  I  knew,  then  to.  not  I  tell  theet 
31.  4.  his  armour-bearer  to.  not,  1  Chron.  10.  4. 

2  Sam.  12. 17.  he  jo.  not,  nor  did  he  eat  with  them 

13.  16.  but  Amnon  jo.  not  hearken  unto  her 
25.  howbeit  David  to.  not  go,  but  blessed  him 

14.  29.  but  Jonb  jo.  not  come  lo  .Absalom 

1  Kings  22.  49.  but  Jehoshaphat  lo.  Jioe 

2  Kings  24.  4.  which  the  Lord  lo.  not  pardon 
A''<'A.9.30.  yet  lo.  they  ?iot  give  ear,  therefore  gnvest 
Job  9.  16.  yet  to.  I  not  believe  he  had  hearkened 
Isa.  30. 15.  and  ye  to.  not,  Mat.  23.  37.  Luke  13. 34. 
Mat.  18.30.besoughthim  lo  have  patience,  he  w.not 

i2.  3.  they  that  were  bidden  ic.  vnt  come 
2.3.  30.  we  to.  not  have  been  partakers  with  them 
24.  43.  JO.  not  have  suffered  his  house  to  be  broken 
27.  34.  when  he  had  tasted,  he  jo.  not  drink 
Mark  9. 30.  he  w.  not  that  any  man  .should  know  it 
Luke  15.  28.  and  he  was  anijrv,  and  jo.  not  go  in 

18.  4.  he  10.  jiot  for  a  while,  but  aftrrwnrds  .sairt 
13.  he  te.not  lift  up  so  much  as  his  eyes  to  heaven 

19.  27.  who  IB.  not  that  I  should  reign  over  them 
.Tehn  7.  1.  for  he  jo.  not  walk  in  Jewry 

.^cts  9.  38.  ihal  he  jo.  not  delay  to  come  to  them 
21. 14.  and  when  he  jo.jioMie  prrennded  wPcoaic% 
Rum.  7.  10.  if  then  I  do  that  which  I  to.  n^t 


WRA 


WRA 


Rnm.  7.  19.  but  t!ie  evil  thtit  I  w.  nut,  tlial  I  do     '1  Kings  1!).  13.  Elijivh  w.  his  face  in  hie  mantle 
11.25.1  io.  jMy£,  l/rethrcn,  tliut  yc  ulioulil  be  i(;no-i.'A'i«^s2.d.Eiijah  look  his  mantle  and  ir.il  togulher 
rant  of  tliis  mystery,  1  Cvr.  10.  l.\Job  8.  17.  liis  roots  arc  w.  about  tlie  heap 
1  Cot.  10.  20.  I  w.  ntt  ye  aliould  have  fellowship  I   40.  17.  the  sinews  of  his  stones  are  w.  tirgcthcr 
'2  Cur.  VJ.20.gliall  be  found  to  you,  such  as  ye  w.7iut\  Ezek.  21.  15.  the  sword  is  w.  up  for  slaughter 
I  '/'Afss.2.1).bcciiuse  wc  ic.  not  be  cliargrable  to  you  Jonah  2.  5.  the  weeds  were  w.  about  my  head 
Jlel/.  4.  8.  then  lo.  he  7iut  afterwards  liave  spoken  Mat.  27.  00.  Joseph  u).  the  body  in  a  clean  linen 


WOULDEST. 

Jo.t/i.l.i.lS.Calebsaid,  what  7P.  thou?  lA'i'o^s  1.16. 
Julin  21.  la.  thou  walkedsl  whither  Il'ou  w. 

WOULDEST  not. 
John  21.  18.  shall  carry  thee  whiihcr  thou  w.  not 
JJcl).  10.  5.  sacritice  and  offering  thou  w.  no',  8. 

VVUUiND. 
F.znd.  21.  25.  give  w.  for  w.  stripe  for  siripe 

1  Ktni;s  22.  3.j.  and  the  blood  ran  out  of  the  7b. 
Jub  U4.  C.  my  m.  is  incurable  without  transgression 
I'sal.  04.  17.  suddenly  their  w.  shall  he 

Prov.  6.  35.  a  ic.  and  dishonour  shall  he  got 

20.30.  the  bluencss  of  a  to.  cleanseth  away  evil 
Jsa.  30.  2i;.  he  healeth  the  stroke  of  their  w. 
Jer.  10.  VJ.  woe  i.i  me,  for  my  w.  is  grievous 

J5.  18.  and  why  is  my  w.  incurable? 

30.  12.  and  thy  w.  is  grievous,  JVah.  3.  19. 
14.  I  wounded  tbee  with  ic.  of  an  enemy 
J/os.  5.13.  Judah  saw  his  w.  could  not  cure  your  »c. 

Obad.  7.  they  that  eat  have  laid  a  ic.  under  thee 

Mic.  1.  y.  her  w.  is  incurable,  it  is  come  to  Judah 

Jiev.  13.  3.  and  Iiis  deadlv  ir.  was  healed,  12,  14. 

WOUNDS. 

2  R'ings  8.  29.  king  Jornm  went  to  be  healed  of  the 

■w.  the  Syrians  had  given  him,  9. 15. 2  Chr.  22. 6. 
Job  9.  17.  he  mulliplied  my  w.  without  cause 
Psnl.^8  5.  my  w.  stink,  are  corrupt  because  of  folly 

147.  3.  he  healeth  and  bindetb  up  their  jr. 
I'ror.  18. 8.  words  of  a  tale-bearer  are  as  w.  2G.  22. 

2;t.29.  who  hath  woe7  who  hath  in.  without  cause? 

27. 1).  faithful  are  w.  of  friend,  but  kisses  of  enemy 
/.<a.  1.  0.  there  is  no  soundness  in  it,  but  to.  bruises 
Jcr.  6.  7.  before  me  continually  is  grief  and  w. 

30.  17.  I  will  heal  thee  of  thy  w.  saith  the  Lord 
y.erh.  13.  0.  what  are  these  !r.  in  thy  hands  ^ 
J.uke  10.  34.  the  Samaritan  bound  up  bis  w. 

WOUND. 
Drut.  32.  30.  1  kill,  I  make  alive;  I  w.  and  I  heal 
J'.inl.  6H.  21.  God  shall  w.  the  head  of  his  enemies 
)  10.  fi.  he  shall  w.  th(^  heads  over  many  countriod 
Jinios  9.  1 1.  and  w.  them  in  the  head  all  of  them 
1  Cur.  8.  12.  when  ye  "'•  their  weak  conscience 

WOUND. 
John  19.40.  they  w.  body  of  Jesus  in  linen  clothes 
.Acts  5.  (5.  young  men  v).  up  Ananias,  buried  him 

WOUNDED. 
Deut.  23.  1.  he  that  is  tc.  in  the  stonps,  not  enter 
JudjT.  2fl.  t3I.  to  smite  of  the  people  w-  t39. 

1  .Sam.  17.  52.  the  w.  of  the  Philistines  fell  down 

31.  3.  Saul  was  w.  of  the  archers,  1  Chron.  10.  3. 

2  .Sa?rt.  22.39. 1  have  w.  mine  enemies,  Psal.  18.  38. 

1  Kinjs  20.  37.  so  that  in  smiting  he  w.  hiin 

22.  34.  carry  me  out,  for  I  am  w.  2  Chron.  18.  33. 

2  Kings  8.  TO.  and  the  Syrians  w.  Jorain 

2  Chron.  35.  23j  have  me  away,  for  I  am  sore  w. 
.fob  24.  12.  and  the  soul  of  the  in.  crieth  out 
P.ial.  fi4.7.  shoot  at  them,  suddenly  shall  they  be  w. 

C9.  2'").  to  the  grief  of  those  whom  thou  hast  w. 

100.  22.  I  am  poor,  and  my  heart  is  w.  within  me 
Prov.  7.  26.  for  she  bath  cast  down  many  w. 

18.  14.  but  a  w.  spirit  who  can  bear? 
('ant.  5.  7.  the  watchmen  found  me,  they  te.  me 
ha.  51.  9.  art  thou  not  it  that  w.  the  dragon? 

53.  5.  belt  ho  was  w.  for  our  tranfgrossiona 
Jcr.m.  14.1  w.  thee  with  the  wound  of  an  enemy 

'.n.  10.  there  remained  but  w.  men  among  them 

51.  .V-'.  through  all  the  land  the  w.  shall  groan 
J.am.'i.  12.  when  they  ssvooned  iisif.  in  tho  streeLii 
F.ielt.lfS.  15.  when  the  w.  cry,  khall  not  if  hs  shake? 

28.  23.  the  w.  shall  be  judged  in  the  midst  of  her 

30.  24.  with  the  groanings  of  a  deadly  w.  man 
J(Kj2..'*.when  they  full  on  theswordjshall  not  be  k>. 
y.rrJi.  13.  H.  I  Was  w.  in  tho  house  of  my  friends 
Mark  12.1. he  sent  anothi;r  servant,  ihey  east  stones 
and  Ihey  in.  him  in  tho  head,  j.nkc  20.  12. 
J.ukr  10.  30.  be  f  II  amonist  thieves,  which  w.  him 
Jlcl.i  19.10.  they  fliicl  out  of  that  house  naked  and  10. 
Ken.  13.3.  I  ^aw  <i'ie  of  his  head.i,  as  it  were  w. 

WorNDEDST. 
//aj.3. 13.  thou  ir.ih.l».:i(li,iii.d"liouso  of  wicked 

WDINDETH. 
Job  5.  18.  ho  w.  and  lin  li.inds  mako  whole 
F.'.r.k.  28.  \9.  no  Cud,  ui  the  hand  of  him  that  ic. 

WOlTNniNO. 
f:cn.  4.  23.  for  1  hnve  sin  in  a  man  to  my  v>. 

WR.\N(;LIN(!. 

Jam.  3.  1 17.  the  wisdom  from  above  is  without  w. 

WR.AP. 

/>(j.2S.20.nnrrower  than  that  he  ran  id. himself  in  it 

J\fic.7.'i.  jiidg''  asketh  for  a  reward;  so  they  la  it  up 

WR.MM'KD. 

<7(!n.3S  li.Tamnr  w.  herself  and  sat  in  open  place 

1  Siun.  Ql.  0.  Uollatlj's  'word  ii  lo.  in  a  cluth 
700 


cloth,  Mark  15.  4t).  I^iike  23.  53. 
l.iike  2.  7.  Mary  lo.  liim  in  swaddling  clothes 

12.  ye  shall  find  the  babe  lO.  in  swaddling  clothes 
John  20.  7.  napkin  w.  together  in  a  place  by  itself 

WRATH. 
Gen.  49.  7.  cursed  be  their  w.  for  it  was  cruel 
/yCu-  10.  fi.  lest  w.  come  upon  all  the.  people 
J^um.  1.53.  that  now.  bo  on  the  congregation,  18.5. 

Iti.  4G.  for  there  is  w.  gone  out  from  the  J..ord 
Dent.  9.  7.  hew  thou  provokedst  the  Lord  to  u>.  22. 

29. 23.  tho  Lord  rooted  them  out  in  anger  and  w. 

32.  27.  were  it  not  I  feared  the  w.  of  the  enemy 
.Jush.  9.  20.  let  them  live,  lest  w.  be  upon  us 

22.  20.  and  w.  fell  on  all  the  congregation 
2  Sam.  11.  20.  if  so  be  that  the  king's  w.  arise 
2  A'/ti^.s- 23. 2G.  the  Lord  turned  not  from  great  m). 

1  Chr.  ^11.  24.  he  finished  not,  because  there  fell  w. 

2  Chr.  19.  2.  therefore  is  w.  upon  thee  from  Lc-d 
10.  they  trespat-s  not,  and  so  w.  come  upon  you 

21.  18.  w.  came  upon  Judah  for  this  trespass 

28.  13.  and  there  is  fierce  w.  against  Israel 

29.  10.  that  his  fierce  w.  may  turn  away  from  us 
32.  2.5.  therefore  there  was  w.  upon  him 

Kira  5.  12.  our  fathers  had  provoked  God  to  w. 
7.  2:).  why  should  there  be  w.  against  the  realm? 
J^ch.  13.  18.  yet  ye  bring  more  w.  upon  Israel 
F.sth.  1.  18.  thus  there  shall  arise  too  umcli  w. 

2.  I.  when  the  w.  of  the  king  was  appeased 

3.  5.  Mordecai  bowed  not,  then  Hainan  full  of  to. 

7.  10.  then  was  the  king's  w.  pacified 

Job  5.  2.  for  w.  killeth  foolish  man,  and  envy  slays 
19.29.  for  w.  brings  the  punishments  of  the  sword 
21.  20.  he  tliall  drink  of  the  w.  of  the  Almighty 
3r>.  13.  but  the  hypocrites  in  heart  heap  up  jo. 

18.  because  there  is  w.  beware  lest  he  take  thee 
Psal.  37.8.  forsake  w.  \\  55.  3.  in  w.  they  hate  me 

70.  10.  surely  the  w.  of  man  shall  praise  thee,  ihe 
remainder  of  jc.  shalt  thou  restrain 
138.7.  shalt  stretch  thy  hand  against  w.  of  enemies 
Prov.  11.  2.3.  the  expectation  of  the  wicked  is  w. 
12.1(i.a  fool's  ^.presently  known,  but  prudent  men 
14.29.  that  is  slow  to  w.  is  of  great  unilerslanding 
15.  1.  a  soft  answer  tiirneth  away  w.  but  words 
16. 14.  iho  70.  of  a  king  is  as  messengers  of  death 
19.  12.  the  king's  w.  is  as  the  roaring  of  a  lion 

19.  a  man  of  great  w.  shall  suffer  punishment 
21.  14.  a  reward  in  the  bosom  pacifieth  strong  w. 

24.  scorner  is  bis  name,  who  dealeth  in  proud  w. 
27.  3.  hut  a  fool's  w.  is  heavier  than  them  both 

4.  w.  is  cruel,  and  anger  is  outrageous,  but  who 

is  able  to  stand  before  envy? 
29.8.a  city  into  a  snare, hut  wise  men  turn  away  w. 

30.  33.  the  forcing  of  mj.  briiigeth  forth  strife 
Kcd.  5.  17.  he  halh  much  w.  with  his  sickness 
Isa.  13.  9.  the  day  of  the  Lord  cometh  with  w. 

14.6.  ho  who  smote  the  people  in  w.  with  a  stroke 

54.  8.  in  a  little  ir.  I  hid  my  face  from  thee 
■  kr.  21.  5.  I  myself  will  flglit  against  you  in  w. 

32.  37.  whither  I  have  driven  them  in  great  w. 

44.  8.  in  that  ye  [irovoke  me  to  w.  with  idols 
F.ic.k.  7.  12.  w.  is  on  all  the  multitude  thereof 
JVuA.  1.  2.  and  he  rescrvcth  w.  for  his  enemies 
Hub.  3.  2.  O  Lord,  in  w.  remember  mercy 
Zeph.  1.  18.  gold  shall  not  deliver  in  the  day  of  ic. 
ZrrA.  7. 12.  therefore  en  me  a  gieatir.  from  tho  Loid 

8.  14.  when  your  fathers  provoked  me  to  w. 
Mat.  3.  7.  to  flee  from  w.  to  come,  Luke  3.  7. 
l.ukr  4.  28.  they  were  filled  with  w.  .lets  19.  28. 

21.  23.  for  there  shall  be  w.  on  this  people 
Rnm.  2.5.  but  treasures!  upio.  against  the  day  of  lo. 
8.  hut  to  them  that  obey  unrighteousness,  jn. 

4.  15.  because  Ihe  law  worketh  w.  where  no  law  is 

5.  9.  we  shall  bo  saved  from  w.  through  him 
9.22.  endured  the  vessels  of  lo.  fitted  to  destruction 

12.  19.  avenge  not,  but  rather  give  place  to  v). 

13.  4.  for  he  is'tho  minister  of  God  to  execute  lo. 

5.  yo  must  needs  he  subject,  nr)t  only  for  w. 
Onl'  a.  20.  Ihe  works  of  the  llcsh  are  w.  strife 
E/ih.  2.  3.  we  were  by  nature  tho  children  of  to. 

4.  26.  let  not  the  sun  go  down  upon  your  w. 
31.  let  all  IC.  anger,  and  clamour  be  put  away 

6.  4.  fathers,  provoke  not  your  children  to  ic. 
Cnl.  3.  8.  put  off  all  these,  in.  mnlice,  blasphemy 

1  Thrss.  1.  lO.wlio  delivered  us  from  the  w.to  coino 
2.  10.  for  w.  is  come  on  them  to  the  uttermost 

5.  9.  for  God  hath  not  appointed  us  lo  tp. 

1  Tim.  2.  8.  lifting  up  holy  hands,  without  w. 
Ilrh.  11.  27.  Moses  not  fearing  the  w.  of  the  king 
./am. 1.19. let  every  man  be  slow  lo  speak, slow  loio. 

20.  ?r.  of  man  worketh  not  righteousneis  of  God 
Hrv.  6.  16.  and  hide  us  from  the  in.  of  the  Lamb 

12.  12.  Ihe  ilcvil  is  como  down,  having  great  ir. 
i   14. 8.  she  made  all  rations  drink  wine  of  w.  18. 3. 


WRE 

Day  of  WRATH. 
Jiib  20.  28  his  goods  flow  away  in  tho  ilay  oj  his  \t 
21.  30.  the  wicked  brought  forth  to  the  day  of  w 
Pial.  110.5.  Lord  strike  thro'  kings  iiit/aj^o/his  w 
Prov.  11.  4.  riches  profit  not  in  the  day  of  w. 
Ztph.  1.  15.  that  day  is  a  day  of  w.  and  trouble 
ftom.2.5.  but  treasuresi  upic.  against  the  t/ayo/w 
Hco.  0.  17.  for  the  great  day  of  his  m.  is  come 

WKATII  of  Ood. 
2  Chron.  28.  11.  the  fierce  w.  of  Cod  is  upon  you 
F./.Ta  10.  14.  till  the  w.  of  God  be  lurin.d  from  us 
Psal.  78.  31.  Ihe  w.  of  God  came  upon  them 
./ohn  3.  30.  but  the  w.  of  God  abidelh  on  him 
Rom.  1 .  18.  the  ic.  of  God  is  revealed  from  licaveD  ^ 
A"j://j.5.G.becau3eof  iliese  thines,  ?r.  o/  f/orf  cometh  "• 

on  the  children  of  disobedience,  Col.  3.  6. 
Iin\  14. 10.  shall  drink  of  the  wine  of  the  w.  of  God 
19.  and  cast  it  into  wine-priss  of  thi;  w.  of  Gua 
15.  I.  for  in  them  is  fiilid  up  the  w.  of  God 
7.  seven  golden  vials  lull  of  the  w.  of  God 
10.  1.  pour  the  vials  of  the  w.  of  God  on  earth 

19.  15.  hettcadelhlhe  wlne-pn-ssof  the  tc.of  God 

His  WRATH. 
Deut.  29.  23.  which  ihe  Lord  overthrew  in  his  w 

1  .Snr;i.28  13.  nor  executeilst  his  w.  upon  Anialek 

2  Kings  23.  20.  Ihe  Loid  turned  not  from  his  tc. 
2  Chron.  29.  10.  hi.<  fierce  w.  may  turn  away,  30. 8. 
F.ira  8.  22.  his  a.  is  against  them  that  Ibrsake  him 
K,»<.'t.  7.  7.  king  arising  from  the  baii'iuet  in  his  w. 
./nb  16.  9.  he  teareth  me  in  his  w.  who  hatelh  me 

20.  23.  God  shall  cast  the  fury  of  Ai.«  to.  on  him 
Psal.  2.  5.  llien  shall  he  speak  to  them  in  Aij>-  ic, 

21.  9.  the  Lord  shall  swallow  them  uji  in  his  to, 
58.  9.  he!  shall  lake  them  away  in  his  v>. 
78.38.  turned  away  anger,  did  not  stir  upall  AiS]0. 

49.  he  cast  on  them  the  fierceness  of  his  w. 

106. 23.  had  not  Moses  stood  lo  turn  axviiy  his  in. 
Prov.  14. 3.5.  his  ir.  against  him  that  causelh  shaiiie 

24.  18.  lest  the  Lord  turn  away  his  w.  frotf  him 
fsa.  Ui.  6.  we  heard  of  Moab's  prfde  and  his  lo. 
.hr.  7.  29.  Lord  hath  forsaken  generation  ut'his  id. 

10.  10.  at  his  IB.  the  earth  shall  tremble 

48.  30.  I  know  his  w.  saiih  Lord,  shall  not  be  so 
/,am.  2.  2.  haih  thrown  down  in  Aw  jo.  the  holds 

3.  I.I  have  seen  allliction  by  the  nid  of  Ai's  ic. 
.^mos  1.  11.  because  he  kept  his  w.  for  evpr 
linm.  9.  22.  what  if  God  willing  lo  shew  his  to. 
Rev.  10.  19.  the  cup  of  wine  of  fierceness  of  Ai's  to. 

Six  KiNTii.KD  ;     Wrath  oElhe 

LORD.  ^ 

Jffj/ WKATFL 
F.znd.  22.  24.  v\y  w.  shall  wax  hot,  I  will  kill  you 
32.  10.  let  me  alone,  that  my  w.  m;iy  wax  hot 
J^'um.  2.5.  11.  Phinehas  halh  turned  my  tr.  away 
2  Clirun.  12.  7.  my  in.  shall  not  be  poured  out  on 
Jerusalem  by  Ihe  hand  of  Shishak 
Psal.  95.  11.  unto  whom  I  sware  in  my  w. 
/sa.  10.  0.  send  him  against  the  pepple  of  my  to. 
(jO.  10.  for  in  my  w.  I  smote  lliee,  but  had  mercy 
Fzck.  7.  14.  for  in;/  ir.  is  on  all  the  niullitude 
13.  15.  thus  will  I  accomplish  viy  v.  on  the  wnli 

21.  31.  blow  against  thee  in  fire  o(my  w.  22.  21. 

22.  31.  I  consumed  them  with  the  fire  of  niy  w. 
38.  19.  for  ill  the  fire  of  my  w.  have  I  spoken 

//(I.W.5.  10. 1  will  pour  out  my  in.  on  them  like  water 
13.11. 1  gave  a  king,  and  I  look  him  away  in  my  to. 
H'h.  3. 1  i.  so  I  sware  in  my  w.  they  shall  not  enter 

4.  3.  as  I  have  swum  in  my  in.  if  they  shall  enter 

Thy  VVR.\Tn. 
f7rn(/.15.7.lhousr'nlest/Ay  lo.whichconsumedfhem 
3i.ll.\vliy  doth  rAy  jo.wax  hoi  against  thy  people? 
12.  turn  from  thy  fierce  JO.  and  repent  of  this 
.M)  14.  13.  kiM!p  mo  secret  until  thy  in.  be  past 
40.  II.  cast  abroad  iherageof /Ay  JO.  behold  ptoud 
Psal.  38.  1.  O  Lord,  rebuke  me  not  in  thy  v>. 
79.  6.  pour  out  (Ay  in.  on  tho  heathen 
85.  3.  thou  bust  taken  away  all  thy  in. 
88.  7.  thy  10.  lieih  hard  on  I'ne,  thou  hast  afHicted 
88.  10.  thy  fierce  in.  goelh  over  me,  thy  lernirg 
811.  46.  hnw  long  shall  thy  in.  bum  like  fire? 
90.  7.  and  by  thy  in.  are  we  troubled 
9.  for  nil  oiir  dnys  arc  passeil  away  in  thy  ic. 
11.  even  according  lo  thy  fear,  so  is  thy  in. 
102.  10.  hrrausc  of  thy  indignation  artd  thy  in. 
Jer.  lt*.20.  T  stood  lo  turn  away  thy  in.  from  theni 
Uab.  3.8.  was  cAy  in.  against  the  sea,  timl  didst  rido 
R~>>.  11.  18.  thy  in.  is  come,  and  lime  of  the  dead 

WRATHFUL. 
Psal.  09.  24.  lot  thy  w.  ang>r  lake  hold  of  them 
Prov.  15.  18.  a  to.  "m'n  siirreth  up  sliifo 

WRATHS. 
2  Cor.  12. 20. 1  foar  lest  ther.'  hr-  envvings,  to.  strlfet 

WREATH. 
2  Chr.  4. 13.  two  rows  nf  prinie:;ranato5  on  each  19. 

WREATHED. 
Lam.  1. 14.  my trMnofresaion"  are  to.  and  como  up 

WREATH  EN. 
F.zod.  28.  14.  two  chains  at  the  m.ls,  of  in.  work 
sh:ilt  mnki-  them,  22,  24,  25    |  39   \\  17,  18 
2  Kings  25. 17.  pillars  of  to.  work  ho  carried  awaj 


WRI 

WREATHS. 

1  Kings  7.  17.  to.  cf  cliain-work  for  the  chapiters 
S  Citron.  4.  12.  two  tc.  to  cover  tliu  two  poinnieU 

13.  lour  liuiidred  poinejjraiiales  on  tlie  two  tc. 

VVKKsr. 

Eiorf.  23.2.  not  decline  after  many,  lo;r.  jtidgmcnl 

6.  tliou  shalt  not  w.  the  jmlginuiit  ol'tliy  jjoor 
Deal.  It).  19.  iliou  slialt  not  w.  jiidgin.  nor  takeyift 
fi'.'ili.S.every  d:iy  tliuy  ic. u\y  words,  llieir  lliouglits 

2  Pet.  3.  l(j.  winch  they  tlial  are  unstable  jc. 

WRESVEU. 
Hab   1.  t  4.  there'rire  w.  jndeinent  proceedeth 

WltESTIiVG. 
Ezek.  9.  t  9.  the  city  is  lull  of  ic.  of  judgment 

WRESTLE. 
Epii.  6.  12.  for  we  tc.  not  against  flesh  and  blood 

WRESTLEU. 

Gen.SO.S.  with  great  wreillingshave  I  jo. with  sister 

32.  24.  Jacob  was  alone,  there  w  a  man  with  him 

25.  Jacob's  thigh  wa,<  out  of  j(>int  as  he  w. 

WRESTLING. 

C/en.  30.  f  8.  and  Rachel  callcid  his  name  w. 

WRESTLINGS. 
OeH.30. 8.  with  great  w.  have  I  wrestled  with  sister 

\V'RETCHED. 
Koni.7.24.0  M.maii  that  I  am,  who  shall  deliver  me 
Kcv.  3.  17.  and  kiiowi'St  not  tliaC  thou  art  w. 

WRETCHEDNfc;SS. 
J\'iiTii.  11.  15.  kill  me  and  let  me  not  see  my  w. 

WRING. 
I^ev.  1.  15.  the  priest  shall  w.  off  his  head,  5.  8. 
Psal.  75.  8.  all  the  wicked  shall  v>.  them  out 

WRINGED. 
Jiiiir.  6.  38.  Gideon  ir.  the  dew  out  of  the  fleece 

WRINGER. 
Isa.  16.  t  •!■  for  th*-  ?c.  is  at  an  end,  spoiler ceaseth 

WRINGLVG. 
Trov.  30. 33.  the  w.  of  the  nose  bringolh  forth  blood 

WRLN'KLE. 
F.ph.  5.  27.  a  glorious  church  not  having  spot  or  w. 

WRINKLES. 
Joh  l(i.  8.  and  thou  li.isl  filled  me  with  w. 

WRINKLING. 
JVaA.  3.  t  19.  there  is  no  w.  of  thy  bruise 

WRITE. 
F.ioil.  34. 1. 1  will  w.  on  these  tables,  nnit.  10.  2. 

27.  the  Lord  said  to  .Moses,  to.  thou  these  words 
f^um.  17.  2.  tc.  thou  every  man's  name  on  his  rod 
3.  ihou  slialt  IC.  Aaron's  name  on  the  rod  of  Levi 
Drtit.  (i.  9.  w.  them  on  posts  of  thy  house,  11.  20. 
24.  \.  then  let  him  tc.  her  a  bill  of  divorct^ment, 
and  send  her  out  of  his  house,  3.  Mark  10.4. 
27.  3.  in.  on  the  stones  the  words  of  this  law,  8. 
3l.  19  DOW  thereliire  w.  ve  this  song  for  you 
2  Chrnn.  2G.  22.  the  acts  of  Uzziah  did  Isaiah  to. 
Ezra  .'>.  10.  that  we  might  tc.  the  names  of  the  men 
JV>A.  9.  38.  we  make  a  sure  covenant  and  to.  it 
Estk.  8.  8.  tc.  ye  also  for  the  Jews  as  itiikeih  you 
Prov.  3.  3.  te.  them  on  the  table  of  thy  heart,  7.  3. 
I.irt.  8.  1.  ic.  in  the  great  roll  with  a  man's  pen 
10.  1.  that  to.  grievousness  which  they  prescribed 
19.  trees  shall  be  few,  that  a  child  may  w.  them 
3l>.  8.  Sow  go  tc.  il  before  them  in  a  table 
Jcr.  22.  30.  saith  the  Lord  tc.  ve  this  man  childless 

30.  2.  JT.  the  words  I  have  spoken,  36.  2, 17,  28. 

31.  33.  I  will  IB.  it  in  their  hearts,  Hcb.  8.  10. 
F.-.rh.  24.  2.  son  of  man,  w.  the  name  of  the  day 

37.  I'i.  tc.  upon  the  sticks  for  Judali  and  Isrnei 

43.  II.  M.  it  in  their  sight,  that  they  may  keep  form 
Hub.  2.  2.  to.  the  vision,  m«ke  it  plain  on  tables 
/,u4<;1.3.it  seemed  good  to  me  \otn.  to  thee  in  order 

16.  6.  take  thy  billand  w.  fii'ty  ||  7.  tu.  fourscore 
Jakit  1.  45.  of  whom  Moses  anil  the  prophets  did  to. 

19.  21.  tc.  not,  king  of  the  Jnws,  but  that  he  said 
^f  r'!l5.20.that  we  rc.io  them  that  they  abstain  from 

2.'5.  26.  of  whom  I  have  no  certain  thing  to  tc.  to 
my  lord,  tlini  I  might  have  somewhat  to  to. 

1  Cor.  4.  14.  I  »(?.  not  these  things  to  shame  you 
14.37.  things  1 10.  arc  the  comniandmenta  of  Lord 

2  Cnr.  1.  13.  for  we  w.  none  other  things  to  you 
2.  9.  to  Mrs  end  also  did  I  tc.  that  I  might  know 
9.  1.  it  is  superfluous  for  me  to  tc.  to  you 

13.  2.  1  to-  to  them  which  heretofore  have  sinned 

10.  therefore  I  w.  these  things  being  absent 
(rnl.  1.  20.  now  the  things  \  id.  unto  you,  I  lie  not 
Phil.  3.  1    to  to.  the  same  things,  for  you  it  is  safe 
1  Thrnn.  4.  9.  ye  need  not  that  I  tc.  to  you,  5.  1. 
2rA«.?.«.  3.17.  so  I  tc.  II  1  Tim.  3.14.  these  things  I  tc. 
lirh.  10.  16.  and  in  llieir  minds  will  I  to.  them 
5  P/"!.  3.  1.  C  now  in.  unto  you,  1  .fuhn  2.  1. 
?  .Tohti  1.4.  these  things  w.  we  to  you  that  your  joy 

2.  7.  brethren,  [  78.  no  new  commnndinenl  to  you 
P.  Egnin,  a  new  coinmandnvnf  f  lo.  unto  you 

12.  r  to.  to  you,  little  children,  13. 

13.  I  JO.  to  you,  fathers,  1  to.  to  yoij,  young  men 
0  .Tnhn  12.  having  manv  things  to  tc.  unto  you 
S./n^n  13.  I  will  not  with  ink  and  pen  to.  to  you 
Jude  3.  when  I  gave  all  diligence  to  to.  of  common 

salvation,  it  was  needful  for  ine  to  to.  to  you 
Rev.  I.  11.  what  thou  seest  it.  in  a  book,  19. 
701 


WRI 

/?rf.2. 1.  totlienngelof  thechurchof  Ephesiis,  to. 

8.  in  Smyrna  ||  12.  in  Pergamns  ||  18.  Tliyatira 

3.  1.  in  Sardis  1|  7.  Philadelphia  ||  14.  Laodicea 

12. 1  will  to.  on  him  the  name  of  my  God  and  city 

of  my  God,  1  will  iv.  on  him  my  new  name 

10.  4.  as  I  was  about  to  tc.  a  voice  suid,  tc.  not 

14.  13.  10.  blessed  are  the  dead  that  die  in  the  Lord 
19.9.10. blessed  are  they  which  are  called  tosupjier 
21.  5.  to.  for  these  words  are  tiue  and  faillil'ul 

fiie  Rook. 

WRITER. 
.Jiidff.  5.  14.  they  that  handle  the  pen  of  the  tc. 
P.iul.  45.  1.  my  tongue  is  the  pen  of  a  ready  tc. 
Eiek.  'J.  2.  a  man  with  a  to.  inkhorn  by  his  side,  3. 

Writest. 

./oJ  13.  26.  for  thou  tc.  bitter  things  against  me 

Kzek.  37.  20.  the  .sticks  whereon  thou  to.  shall  be 
WRITETH. 

Psal.  87.  6.  the  Lord  shall  count  when  he  tc.  up 
WRITING. 

Exod.  32.  16.  and  the  tc.  was  the  tc.  of  God 
.39.  30.  and  wrote  on  plate  of  the  holy  crown  a  to. 

Drut.  10.  4.  he  wrote  according  to  the  first  tc. 
31.24.  when  Moses  had  made  an  end  of  to.  the  law 

1  Chr.  28.  19.  the  Lord  made  me  understand  in  'c. 

•i  Chr.  2.  11.  Iluram  king  of  Tyre  answered  in  lo. 
21.  12.  there  came  a  to.  from  Jehoram  to  Elijah 
35.  4.  prepare  according  to  the  tc.  of  David  king 
36.22.  Cyrus  putthe  proclamation  in  to.  Ezra  1. 1. 

Ezra  4.  7.  the  to.  of  letter  was  in  the  Syrian  tongue 

Esth.  1.  22.  for  he  sent  letters  unto  all  provinces 
according  to  the  tc.  thereof,  3.  12.  |  8.  9.  |  9.  27. 

3.  14.  the  copy  of  the  w.  was  published  to  all 

4.  8.  Mordecai  gave  to  Hataeh  a  copy  of  the  tc. 
8.  8.  the  10.  in  the  king's  name  may  no  man  reverse 

/sri.38.9.  the  to.  of  llezekiah  when  he  had  been  sick 

Ezrk.  13.  9.  not  written  in  the  to.  of  house  iif  Israel 

Dan.  5.  7.  the  king  said,  whoso  shall  read  this  tc. 

8.  could  not  read  the  to.  ||  15.  shonid  read  this  to. 

16.  thou  canst  reail  the  to.  thou  shalt  be  clothed 

17.  yet  I  will  road  the  to.  to  the  king  and  make 
24.  this  is  the  ic.  that  was  written,  25. 

C.  8.  sign  the  to.  ||  9.  king  Darius  signed  the  to. 
10.  when  Daniel  knew  that  the  tc.  was  signed 
.Milt.  5.  31.  give  her  a  to.  of  divorcement,  19.  7. 
./ohii  19.  19.  the  to.  was,  Jesus  of  Nazareth  king 

7/an(i-WRrriNG. 
Col.  2.  14.  blotting  out  the  kand-.v.  of  ordinances 

WRiriNG-TAlfLE. 
Euke  1.  03.  Zacharias  asked  for  a  to.-tahle 

WRITINGS. 
.Tohn  5.  47.  if  ye  believe  not  his  tc.  how  believe? 

WRITTEN. 
F.znd.  31. 18.  tc.  with  the  finger  of  God,  /Jn;7.9.10. 
1  Kings  21. 11.  elders  did  as  it  was  tc.  in  the  letters 

1  Giron.  4.  41.  these  tc.  by  name  smote  their  tents 

2  C/iron.30.5.had  not  kept  the  passover  as  it  was  to. 
Ezra  5.  7.  they  sent  a  letter,  whi;rein  was  tc.  thus 

6.  2.  and  therein  was  a  record  thus  tc. 

8.  34.  the  weight  of  the  vessels  was  to.  at  that  time 
JVtA.  6.  6.  sent  an  open  letter,  wherein  was  tc. 

8.  14.  found  tc.  in  the  law  to  dwell  in  booths 

13.1.  was  to.  Ammonite  not  come  into  congregation 
K.«Z/i.l.l9.  let  it  be  tc.  among  the  laws  of  the  Modes 

3.  9.  let  it  be  to.  that  they  may  be  destroyed 
12.  in  the  name  of  king  Ahasuerna  was  it  tc. 

6.  2.  found  tc.  that  Mordecai  told  of  Bigthana 
8.  5.  hit  it  he  tc.  to  reverse  Hainan's  letters 

P.<!al.  69.  28.  let  them  not  be  tc.  with  the  righteous 
102. 18.  this  shall  be  to.  for  the  generation  lo  come 
149.  9.  lo  execute  on  them  the  judgment  to. 

Prov.  22.  20.  have  not  1  tc.  to  thee  excellent  things? 

Eccl.  12.  10.  that  which  wa.s  tc.  was  upright 

.7rr.  17. 13.  that  dejiart  from  me  shall  be  to.  '>n  earth 
36.29.  why  hast  to.  the  king  of  Babylon  shall  come 

Kzf/.-.  2.  10.  the  roll  was  tc.  within  and  without 
13.  9.  nor  to.  in  the  writing  of  house  of  Judah 

T)nti.  5.  24.  this  is  the  writing  that  was  to.  25. 

Mat.  27.  37.  they  sot  up  his  accusation  w. 

.Mark  11.  17.  is  it  not  w.  my  house  shall  be  called 

15.  26.  the  sunerscription  of  his  accusation  was  tc. 
the  king  of  the  Jews,  I.ukc<iX  38.  .Jolin  10.  20. 

TAikr.  4.  17.  he  found  the  place  where  it  was  tc. 
10.  20.  rejoice  that  your  names  are  tc.  in  heaven 
18.  31.  nil  things  to. shall  be  accomplished,  21.  22. 

.John  2.  17.  the  disciples  remembered  that  it  was  to. 
10.  34.  is  it  not  to.  in  your  \p.vi,  I  said,  ye  are  gods 

20.  31.  hut  Iheflo  are  tc.  that  ye  might  believe     * 

21.  23.  if  they  should  be  to.  every  one,  the  world 
could  not  contain  the  books  that  should  be  to. 

.Ictx  13.  29.  they  had  fulfilled  all  that  was  to. 
21.  25.  as  touching  the  Gentiles,  we  havo  tc. 
Ram.  2.  15.  which  shew  the  work  of  the  law  ttt. 

4.  23.  now  it  was  not  tc.  for  his  sake  alone 

1  Cor.  10.  11.  they  are  to.  for  our  admonition 

2  Cor.  3.  2.  ye  are  our  epistle  tn.  in  our  heart!! 
3.  to.  not  with  ink,  but  with  the  Spirit  of  God 
7.  if  the  ministration  of  death  to.  in  slonoa 

Philrtn.  19.  I  Paul  have  w.  with  mine  own  hand 
Tiff  J. 12.23.the  church  of  the  first-born  te.  in  heaven 


VVRO 

Pev.  1.  3.  keep  those  things  which  arc  to.  therein 
2.  17.  and  in  the  stone  a  new  name  to. 
13.  6.  whose  names  are  not  tc.  in  the  book  of  life 
ll.l.having  his  Father's  name  lo.in  their  forehead* 

17.  5.  upon  her  head  was  a  name  tc.  Mystery 

19.  12.  he  had  a  name  tc.  on  his  thigh,  16. 

21.  12.  names  of  the  twelve  tribes  to.  on  the  gatci 

h  WRITTEN. 
.JoKh.  1.  8.  observe  to  do  all  that  is  tc.  therein 
2  ICinirs  22.  13.  that,  which  is  tc.  concerning  U8 
Estli.!^.)^.(iiT  writing  which  is  tc.  in  the  king's  nanjt 
/>u.  4.  3.  every  one  that  is  tc.  among  the  living 
.fir.  17.  I.  sin  of  Judali  i.«  tc.  with  a  pen  of  iron 
/.'ail.  9.  II.  the  curse  and  oath  that  is  to.  in  il.e  law 
/y«Ae  10.  26.  what  is  tc.  in  the  law?  how  teadest? 

20.  17.  he  said,  what  is  this  then  that  ii  tc.7 

22.  37.  this  that  is  ic.  must  he  accmnplished 
Julin  15.  25.  the  word  might  he  fulfilled  that  is  to, 
1  Cvr.  4.  6.  to  think  of  men  above  that  which  IS  if, 

9.  10.  for  our  sakes,  no  doubt,  this  is  tc. 

15.  54.  he  brought  to  pass  the  saying  that  is  13. 

It  is  WRITTEN. 

■losh.  8.  31.  as  it  is  tc.  in  the  law  of  Moses,  1  Kinrs 

2.  3.  2  Citron.  23.  18.  |  25.  4.  1  31.  3.  |  35.  12. 

Ezra  3.  2,  4.  1  6.  18.  Kch.  6. 15.  I  1U.34,  iC. 

Dan.  9.  13. 

Psal.  -lO.  7.  in  the  volume  t7  is  tc.  of  me,  T{eb.  10.7. 

Isa.  65.  6.  il  is  to.  before  me,  I  will  recompcns'e 

Mat.  2.  5.  thus  il  is  w.  hv  the  prophet,  l.ukc  24.  46. 

11.  10.  this  is  he  of  whom  it  t.s-  ic.  Liikr  7.  27. 
2:i.  24.  as  it  is  to.  of  him,  Mark  9.  13.  ]  14.  21. 

31.  il  is  to.  .Mark  14.  27.  J.tikc  4.  8.  .IcLi  23.  5. 

Mark  9.  12.  and  how  it  is  to.  of  the  Son  of  man 

Luke  2.  23.  as  it  is  to.  in  the  law  of  the  Lord 

Rom.  11.  8.  according  as  it  is  tc.  1  Cor.  1.  31. 

2  Cor.  4.  13. 

12.  19.  for  It  is  to.  14.  11.  Cnl.  3.  10. 

15.  3.  Christ  pleased  not  hinirtt-lf,  but  as  il  is  tc. 
1  Cor.  15.  45.  so  it  is  to.  the  first  man  Adam 
1  Pet.  1. 16.  because  it  is  to.  be  \<\  hidv,  T  am  holy 

Iliiive,  or  /trtt.o  /  WRITTEN. 
7^xo(/.24.12.willgivctheeeoriiinan(ln)rni,/A.it7cio. 
//«.?.  8.  12.  /  haci:  to.  to  him  great  things  oi"  my  la  «r 
■  lohn  19.  22.  Pilate  said,  what  /  have  w.  I  have  te. 
1  .lohn  2. 14.  /  have  tc.  to  you  fathers,  young  mca 
26.  these  thing's  kar^e  f  m.  unto  you,  5.  13. 
Wire  WRITTEN. 
A^um.  11.  26.  an.l  they  were  of  them  that  toerc  te. 
.hib  19.  23.  Oh  that  my  words  wi-rc  \w\v  to. 
/tt/fe24.  44.  all  things  he  fulfilled  which  tccre  te. 
.Jiihn  12.  16.  that  those  things  were  to.  of  him 
fio/H. 15.4. whatsoev.  things  tcere  to.  aforetime  tofT# 
w.  for  our  learning  that  we  might  Imvo  liopa 
See  Book,  Chronicle. 
WRONG. 
Oen.  16.  5.  Sarai  said,  my  tc.  be  upon  thee 
Eiod.  2.  13.  Mo.scB  said  to  him  that  did  the  tc. 
Dcut.  19.  16.  to  testify  again.st  him  what  is  to. 
.Judg.  11.  27.  thou  dost  me  to.  to  war  against  mo 
1  Citron.  12.  17.  seeing  there  is  no  to.  in  my  hands 
16.21.  he  siifi'ircd  no  man  to  do  them  to.  In-  re- 
proved kings  for  their  sakes,  Psal.  105.  14. 
E.ilh.l.  16.  Vashti  had  not  done  to.  tothe  kiiii'only 
.Job  19.7.  behold,  I  cry  outof  to.  but  am  not  heard 
Jrr.  22.  3.  do  no  tc.  do  no  violence  lo  the  sirangtr 
13.  woe  lo  him  that  buildeth  liiscliatobtMS  by  tc. 
/.«(« .3.59.0  Lord,  thou  hastseen  my  to.  judge  thou 
Hah.  1.  4.  therefore  to.  judgment  proceedeih 
Mat.  20.  13.  he  answered,  friend,  I  do  theo  no  to. 
Jlr.ts  7.  24.  and  seeing  one  of  them  suffer  to. 

26.  ye  are  brethren,  why  do  ye  to.  one  to  another? 

27.  helh.atdid  his  nci:;iibour  tc.  thrust  him  away 

18.  14.  if  it  were  a  matter  of  to.  or  lewdness 

25.  10.  Paul  said,  to  the  Jews  have  I  done  uo  te. 

1  Cnr.  6.  7.  why  do  ye  not  raither  take  to.? 

8.  nnv,  ve  do  to.  and  defraud  vour  brethren 

2  Cor.  7. 12.  I  ilid  it  not  for  his  cau^e  that  had  ilone 

the  tc.  nor  for  his  cause  that  sufT.'ied  to. 
12.  13.  I  was  not  burdensome,  fojpive  mo  this  lo 
Col.  3.  2.5.  he  tliat  doth  tc.  shall  receive  for  the  to. 

WRONGED. 
2  Cor.  7.  2.  receive  us,  we  have  to.  no  man 
PItilctii.  18.  if  he  hntli  m.  thee,  or  owoth  ought 

WRONG  RTH. 
Prov.  8.  30.  he  that  sinneth  ag.  me  tc.  his  own  seal 

WRONGFULLY. 
.fob  21.  27.  the  devices  ye  to.  imagine  ajrainst  me 
Psal.  35.  19.  let  not  mine  enenties  to.  rejoice 
3'^.  19.  they  that  hate  me  to.  are  multiplied 
69.  4.  would  destroy  me,  being  mine  enemies  re 
119.  86.  they  persecute  me  tc.  help  thou  nic 
Ezck.  22.  29.  they  have  oppre.ssed  the  stranger  tc. 
1  Pet.  2.  13.  if  a  man  endure  grief,  sulTerine  lo. 

WROTE. 
Eiod.24.4.  Moses  to.  all  the  words  of  the  Lord,  nnj 
rose  early  in  the  morning,  Dcut  31.  9 
34.28.  Lord  to.  upon  the  tables  words  of  covenant 
ten  commands,  Dcut.  4.  13.  |  5.  22.  |  10.  4 
.\'«fm.  33.  2.  and  Moses  tc.  their  goings  out 
DeuL  31.  22.  Moses  ic.  tliid  song  the  samv  day 


WRO 

Jash.  8.  32.  Joshua  v>.  upon  the  stonea  the  law 
16'am.lO.'J5.Sanuicl!C.  the  manner  of  tliu  kiiiydom 
2  Sam.  11.  14.  David  u>.  a  letter  to  Joab,  J5. 
IKings  21.8.  Jezebel  lo.  letters  in  Ahnb's  name,  9. 
2h'tngs  lO.l.Jehuio.  6.  ||  1  CAr. 24.  ti.Sliemaiah  a?. 
S  Chro/i.  30.  1.  Hezckiah  w.  letters  to  E|)liruiiii 
32. 17.  Sennacherib  tc.  to  rail  on  the  Ooil  of  Israel 
Ezra  4.  G.  they  to.  an  accusation  against  Judah 

8.  Rehum  UJ.9.  ||  Est/i.S.  5.  letters ol" Hainan  w. 
Kith.  8.  10.  Mordecai  u>.  letters,  9.  20,  29. 

J;r.  3(3.  4.  Baruch  io.  from  Jeremiah,  18,  27,  32. 

51.  60.  so  Jeremiah  le.  in  a  book  all  the  evil 
Dan.  5.  5.  fingers  of  a  man's  hand  w.  on  the  wall 

C.  25.  then  king  Darius  tc.  unto  all  people 

7.  1.  Daniel  had  a  dream,  anil  he  w.  the  dream 
Atnrk  10..5. for  your  hardn.  Mos.  w.  you  this  precept 

12.  19.  Master,  Moses  w.  to  us,  /.uie20.2d. 
•  l.uke  1. 1;3.  Zaeharias  w.  saying,  his  name  is  John 
John  5.  4G.  have  believed  me,  lor  Moses  w.  of  me 

8.  6.  Jesus  with  his  finger  u>.  on  the  ground,  8. 
19.  19.  Pilate  w.  a  title  and  put  it  on  the  cross 

21.  24.  John  ic.  and  testified  of  these  things 
^cts  15.  2;i.  the  apostles  w.  letters  by  them 

18.  27.  the  brethren  w.  e.\horiing  the  disciples 
23.  25.  Lysias  u>.  a  letter  after  this  manner 
Rum.  16.  22.  I  Terlius,  who  w.  this  epistle,  salute 
XCor.  5.  9.  Paul  w.  in  an  epistle,  2  Cur.  2.  3,  4. 
I  7.  12.  Epk.  3.  3.  PkiUm.  21. 
7.  1.  concerning  the  things  whereof  ye  w.  to  me 

2  ./oAn  5.  Hol  as  though  I  w.  a  new  commandment 

3  John  9.  I  10.  totherhurch,  Diotr.  receives  us  not 

WROTH. 
Oen.  4.  5.  Cain  was  very  w.  ||  6.  why  art  thou  lo.? 
31.36.  Jacob  was  w.  \\  lU.  7.  Jacob's  sons  were  w. 

40.  2.  Pharaoh  was  to.  with  two  offii;er«,  41.  10. 
Erod.  16.  20.  Moses  was  to.  jVam.  16.  15.  |  31. 14. 
J^um.  16.22.  wilt  thou  be  ic.  with  all  congregation'? 
Veut.  1.  34  the  Lord  heard  your  words  and  was  ;o. 

3.  26.  I  9.  19.  2  Sam.  22.  8.  2  Chron.  28.  9. 
Psal.  18.  7- 1  78.  21,  59,  62. 

1  Sam.  IS.  8.  and  Saul  was  very  w.  20.  7. 

29.  4.  ihe  princes  of  PhilisTines  were  to.  with  him 

2  .Sum.  3.  8.  Abiier  was  to.  1|  13.  21.  David  was  to. 
5  Kinss  5.  ll.bulNaaman  was  w.  and  wen-t  away 
'l3.  19.  and  Ihe  man  of  God  was  to.  with  him 

2  CAron. 16. 10.  Asa  was  lo.  ||  26.  19.  Uzziah  was  to. 

JVf/i.4.  ].Sanb:illal,7.||  K.f(A.  1.12.  .\hasuorus  to. 

FMh.  2.  21.  Higlhan  and  Teresh  were  to. 

Psal.  89.  3.9.  thou  hast  been  w.  with  ihine  anointed 

/si.  28.  21.  he  shall  be  to.  as  in  Ihe  valley  ofOibcon 
47.  6.  I  was  JO.  with  my  people,  I  have  polluted 
54.  9.  I  have  sworn  T  would  not  be  to.  with  theo 
57.  16.  I  will  not  contend,  nor  will  I  be  always  w. 

17.  for  the  iniquity  of  his  covetousness  was  I  to. 

and  smote  him,  I  hid  me,  and  was  w. 
64.  .■;.  heboid  thou  art  w.  fur  we  have  sinned 

9.  be  not  to.  very  sore,  O  Lord ;  we  are  thy  people 
y(T.37.15.princc3  were  (o.||.l/al.2.16.  Herod  was  w. 
I, am.  5.22.  rejected  us,  thou  art  very  t«.  against  us 
JtJat.  18.  34.  his  Lord  was  to.  and  delivered  him 

22.  7.  king  was  to.  11  Uev.  12. 17.  dragon  was  w. 

WROUfiHT. 
Ora.  34.  7.  Phechcm  had  to.  folly  in  Israel 
ETod.  10.  2.  what  things  I  have  to.  in  Egypt 
36. 1.  then  to.Bezaleel  and  Aholinb,  Ld.  put  wisd. 

4.  all  the  wi.ic  men  lo.  the  woik,  8.  |  39.  6. 

J.n.  20.  12.  put  to  death,  they  have  to.  confusion 

JV*i«7t.  23.  23.  ii  shall  be  said,  what  hath  God  to.? 

/)'-wM7.2.  mnnor  woman  that  hath  to.  wickedness 

22. 21 .  to.  folly  in  Israel,  .h,sh.  7. 15.  .1ml<:.  20.  10 

31,  18,  for  the  evils  which  they  shall  have  to. 
/?u(A2.19.shewed  with  whomshe  had  w.  the  man's 

name  with  whom  I  to.  lo-dny,  is  Boaz 

1  .SdTti.  6.  6.  Lord  hiid  tp.  wonilerfully  among  them 
11.  13,  Lord  hath  to.  salvation  in  Israel,  19.  5. 
14.  45  for  Jonathan  hath  to.  with  God  this  day 

2  -Sam.  1^.  13.  otherwise  I  should  have  to.  falsehood 

23.  10.  Ihe  Lord  to.  n  great  victory  that  day,  12. 
lATinp-oS.lO.wtb  ruled  over  the  people  thai  to, 9.23, 

Jfi.  20.  th"-  nets  ofZimri,  and  the  treason  he  to. 
2.'>.  but  Oinri  to.  evil  in  the  eyes  of  Ihe  Lord 
S  Ki-ns'  3.  2   Jehoram  to.  evil,  2  Chrnn.  21.  6. 
17  11.  Israel  to.  wickeil  things,  .Vch.  9.  18. 
21  6.  M.innwqch  to.  much  wickedness,  2CAr.  .33.6. 

1  Chrnn.  4,  21.  the  families  that  to.  fine  linen 

2  Chrnn.  3.  14.  and  he  to.  cheruhinis  thereon 

24.  12.  they  hircMl  such  as  to.  iron  and  brass 
13.  so  Ihe  workman  to.  the  work,  34.  10,  13. 

32.  t  24,  the  Lord  lo.  a  miniclc  for  Ilezekiah 
/t'rh.  4.  16.  Iinlfof my  servants  in.  in  the  work 

IT.evrry  one  with  one  of  liis  hands  to. in  the  work 

J,>h  12.  0.  the  hand  of  Ihe  Lord  hath  to.  Ibis 
36.  23.  or  who  can  say,  thou  hast  v>.  iniipiityt 

I'ltal.  31.  19.  hast  to.  for  them  that  trust  in  tlieo 
68.  28.  strent'lhf  n  that  which  thou  hast  to.  for  us 
78.  43.  how  he  had  lo.  his  signs  in  Egypt 

Ecell.  11.  I  looked  on  all  works  my  hands  had  lo. 

Ua.  26.  12.  for  thou  hast  to.  all  our  works  in  us 

18.  we  have  not  to.  any  ilelivernnro  in  th"  earth 

41.  4.  who  bath  to.  and  done  it?  I  the  Lord,  I  am 

703 


YEA 

Jer.  11. 15.  seeing  she  hath  tc.  lewdness  with  many 

18.  3.  and  behold,  he  to.  a  work  on  the  wheels 
Ezek.  20.  9.  I  to.  for  my  name's  sake,  14,  22,  44. 

29.  20.  given  him  Egypt,  because  lliey  w.  for  me 
/Jan.4.2.  the  wonders  that  God  hath  w.  toward  mu 
.funah  1.  11.  the  sea  to.  and  was  tempestuous,  1.1. 
Zf/)A.2. 3.  meek  ofearih  who  have  lo. Ids  judgment 
Mat.  20.  12.  these  last  have  to.  but  one  hour 

26.10.  she  hath  w.  a  good  work  on  me,  Jilark  14.6. 
Jicts  15.  12.  what  wonders  God  hath  to.  21.  19. 

I8.3.Pau4ofsame  tradc,abode  with  .Xquiluand  u> 

19.  11.  God  10.  special  miracles  by  hands  of  Paul 
Rom.  7.  8.  10.  in  me  all  manner  ot  concupiscence 

15.  18.  things  which  Christ  hath  not  to.  by  me 
2  Cor.  5.  5.  he  that  hath  w.  usibrsanic  thing,  is  God 

7.  11.  what  carefulness  it  w.  in  you? 
Gal.  2.  8.  for  he  that  to.  effectually  in  Peter 
Kph.  1.  20.  which  he  lo.  in  Christ,  when  he  raised 
IThess.  3.  8.  but  we  w.  with  labour  and  travail 
Hcb.  11.  33.  who,  through  faiih,  to.  righteousness 
./flm.2. 22.  Bcest  thou  how  faith  to.  with  his  works? 

1  Pet.  4.  3.  to  have  w.  the  will  of  Ihe  Gentiles 

2  John  8.  lose  not  those  things  which  we  have  to. 
Reij.  19.  20.  the  false  prophet  that  lo.  miracles 

WROUGHT,  Passivdy. 
.Vuni.  31.  51.  Moses  took  of  them  all  w.  jewels 
Dent.  13.  14.  that  such  abomination  is  w.  17.  4. 

21.  3.  take  a  heifer  which  hath  not  been  to. 

1  Kings  7.  26.  the  brim  of  the  sea  was  w.  like 

1  Chrun.  22.  2.  be  set  masons  to  hew  tc.  stonea 
A'eA.  6.  Hi.  this  work  was  to.  of  our  God 
Psal.  45.  13.  her  clothing  was  of  to.  gold 

139.  15.  when  I  was  made  in  secret,  curiously  w. 

F.ccl.  2   17.  Ihe  work  to.  under  the  sun  is  grievous 

Mat.  14.  t  2.  John  the  Baptist  is  risen,  therefore 

mighty  works  are  w.  by  him,  Mark  6.  2. 

John  3.  21.  made  manifest  that  they  are  to.  of  God 

19.  t  23.  coat  was  without  seam,  w.  from  the  top 
.Ict.i  5.  12.  wonders  were  to.  among  the  people 

2  Cor.  1.  t  6.  which  is  to.  in  enduring  sulTi^rings 
12.  12.  the  signs  of  nn  apostle  were  m.  among  you 

WROUGHTEST. 
Ruth  2.  19.  Naomi  said  to  her,  where  to.  thoul 

WRU.\G. 
Lev.  1.  15.  the  blood  shall  be  w.  out,  5.  9. 
Psal.  73.  10.  waters  of  a  full  cup  are  w.  to  them 
/so.  51. 17.  thou  hast  lo.out  of  the  dregs  of  the  cup 

Y. 

YARN. 

I  Kings  W. '28.  Solomon  had  linen  ij.  out  of  Egypt, 
the  king's  meichants  received  y.  2  C/tr.  1.  lli. 
YCE,  or  rather  ICE. 
Job  6.  16,  which  are  blackish  by  reason  of  y. 
38.  29.  out  of  whose  womb  came  the  y.  and  frost 
Psal.  147.  17.  he  casteth  forth  his  y.  like  morsels 

YE. 
Oen.^.a.yc  shall  be  as  gods,  knowing  "ood  and  evil 
T.ukc  16.  15.  ye  are  they  which  justify  yourselves 

1  Cor.  6. 11.  but  i/c  are  washed,  yf  are  sanctified,  ye 

are  justiAeu  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
20.  ye  are  bought  with  a  price,  glorify  G.  in  body 

2  Cor.  3.  2.  ye  are  our  epistle  written  in  our  hearts 
6.  12.  ye  are  not  straitened  in  us  but  in  your  own 

(}al.  4.  12.  brethren,  be  as  I  am,  for  I  am  as  ye  are 
6,  1.  ye  which  are  spiritual,  restore  such  a  one 
Fph.  2.  13.  j/e  who  sometimes  were  far  off  are  nigh 

1  Thes.1.  2.  19.  what  is  our  joy,  are  not  even  ye? 
20.  ye  are  our  glory  ||  3. 8.  if  yc  stand  fast  in  Lord 

5.  4.  but  ye,  brethren,  are  not  in  darkness 
5.  ye  are  all  children  of*  light  and  of  the  day 

2  Thr.is.  3.  13.  but  ye,  brethren,  be  not  weary 

1  Pet.  2.  9.  but  ye  are  a  chosen  generation 

YEA. 
Orn.  3.  1.  T/.  hath  God  said,  ye  shall  not  eat 
Mat.  5.  37.  let  your  conversation  be  y.  y.  ./uni.5.12. 
9.  2H.  they  said  unto  him,  y.  Lord,  l5,  51. 
Jlcts  5.  8.  Sapphira  said,  y.  for  so  much 

22.  27.  tell  me,  art  thou  a  Romnnl  he  said,  y. 

2  Cur.  1.  17.  there  should  be  y.  y.  and  nay,  nay 
18.  our  word  toward  you  was  not  y.  and  nay 
10.  for  the  Son  of  God  was  not  y.  and  nay 
2fl.nll  the  promi.<es  of  God  in  him  are  y.and  amen 

Phil.  1.  18.  I  do  rejoice,  ;/.  and  will  rejoice 
3.8,  y.and  I  count  all  things  hut  loss  fori!,tcellency 

2Tim.3.12.  y.  mid  all  that  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus 

Philcm.  20.  y.  brother,  let  me  have  joy  of  llico 
YEAR. 

Conr.rming  Ihe  .Teirish  year.  See  Month,  ft 
i.i  .laid  in  Gen.  15.  13.  ati</  in  Acts  7.  6,  that 
they  should  entreat  them  evil  four  bundled 
y^,ir.«  .  Rut  in  Exnd.  12.  40.  it  is  said.  The 
sojourning  of  the  children  of  Isra<d  who  dwelt 
in  Egypt,  was  four  hundred  and  thirty  years. 
This  difference  is  reconciled  by  distingiiishin/f 
Ihe  beirinnii\g  of  the  accnunt,  irhirh,  if  taken 
fmm  Jthraham's  leaving  of  f'haldra,  and  re- 
ceiving the  first  promise  of  Canaan,  tchen  his 


YEA 

sojourning  did  begin;  then  from  that  time  t$ 
the  giving  of  the  law,  there  will  Oe  four  hun- 
dred  and  thirty  yi  ars,   as  it  is  in  Exodus, 
liul  if  it  be  taken  from  Abraham's  seed,  that 
is,  from  the  birth  of  Isaac,  which  teas  in  the 
hundredth  year  of  Abraham's  age,  and  so  thirty 
years  after  his  departure  from  (Jhaldea,  then 
it  must  consequently  be  thirty  years  /es.-  from 
thence  to  the  giving  of  the  luic;  and  so  that 
will  agree  exactly  icith  tlie  four  hundred  years 
mentioned  in  (icnisis  and  in  the  Acts,  which 
are  assigned   to  his    seed's   sojourning  in  <t 
strange  land;  by  the  strange  laud  buth  Canaan, 
and   Egypt  being  to  be    undcrstuud ;  for  tht 
Chaldee  Paraphrast,  and  the  generality  of  tlit 
Jews,  determine  the   space    wherein    ihry  so- 
journed in  Egypt,  to  be  but  two  hundred  anil 
ten  years ;  only  Josephus  calls  them  two  hun 
deed  and  fifteen. 
Oen.  17.  21.  whom  Sarah  shall  bear  Ihc  next  y. 
26.  12.  I^auc  received  the  sume  y.  a  hundrud-luld 
47.  17.  Joseph  fed  them  with  bread  that  y. 
Exod.  12.  2.  it  shall  he  the  first  month  of  the  y. 
23.  14.  keep  a  feaat  to  me  in  the  y.  Lev.  23.  41. 
17.  three  times  in  they,  all  thv  males  shall  appear 
before  the  Lord  God,  34.  23,  24.  Deut.  16.  16. 
29.  1  will  not  ilrive  them  out  from  thee  in  one  y. 
Lev.  16.  34.  to  make  an  atonement  once  a  y. 

25.  5.  it  is  a  y.  of  rest  ||  29.  redeem  it  witliiu  a  y. 
J^'um.  9.  22.  if  it  were  a  y.  that  the  cloud  lurried 

14.  34.  each  day  foi  a  y.  shall  ye  bear  iniquitie* 
Deut.  15.  9.  saying,  the  y.  of  release  is  at  hand 

26.  12.  Ihe  third  y.  which  is  the  y.  of  tilhing 
Josh.  5.  12.  they  did  eat  the  fruit  of  Canaan  iliat  ». 
Jvdg.  10.  8.  that  y.  the  Ammonites  vexed  Israel 

1 1.  40.  they  went  to  l.imeiit  four  days  in  a  y. 

17.  10.  1  will  give  thee  ten  shekels  by  the  y. 
1  Sam.  27.  7.  David  dwelt  a  y.  and  four  niunthi 
^2  Sam.  II.  1.  that  aftrr  the  y.  u'as  expired 

14.  26.  it  was  at  every  y.  end  that  he  polled  it 

1  h'inirs  9.  2.'>.  three  times  in  a  y.iliil  Solomon  offer 
10.  14.  now  the  weight  of  the  gold  that  came  to 

Solouion  in  one  y.  2  Chron.  9.  13. 

2  Kings  19.  29.  ye  shall  eat  this  y.  such  ihings  aa 

grow  of  themselves  in  second  and  third  y. 

Is  a.  37.  30. 
2  Chron.  •i'i.  5.  .\minon  gave  him  the  same  y. 
F.slh.  9.  27.  they  would  keep  two  days  every  u. 
I's.  65.  11.  thou  crownest  Ihe  y.  with  thy  goodnos* 
Isa.  6.  1.  in  the  y.  that  kIngU/.ziah  died 

14.  28.  in  the  y.  king  Ahai.  died  was  this  burden 
21.  16.  in  a  y.  all  iIh-  glory  of  Kedar  shall  fail 
61.2.10  iiroclaim  the  acceptable  y.  of  the  Lord,  and 

the  day  of  vengeance  of  our  God,  Luke  4.19. 
63.  4.  and  thi'  y.  of  my  redeemed  is  come 
Jer.  11.23.  bring  evil  on  the  men  of  Anal  lioih,  even 
the  y.  of  their  visitation,  23.  12.  |  48.  44. 

17.  8.  shall  not  be  careful  in  the  y.  of  drought 
28.  16.  thus  saith  Ihe  Lord,  this  y.  thou  shalt  dis 

17.  so  Hanaiiiah  the  prophet  died  the  same  y. 

51.  46.  a  rumour  shall  both  come  in  one  y. 
Ezek.  4.  6.  I  have  appointed  each  day  fof  a  y. 

46.  17.  It  shall  be  his  to  the  y.  of  hherty 
Mic.  6.  6.  shall  I  come  with  calves  of  a  y.  old? 
/,uAf  2. 41.  his  parents  went  to  Jerusalem  every  y. 

1.3.  8.  he  said.  Lord,  let  it  alone  this  y.  also 
.John  11,  49.  Caiaph  isheing  high-priest  thai  y.  aaij 
one  man  should  die  for  the  people,  51.  |  18. 13. 
Act.i  11.26.  a  whole  y  they  dssenibled  theiiiselvea 

18.  II.  Paul  conlinui'il  a  y.  at  Corinth,  leaching 
2  Oir.  8.  10.  but  also  lo  ho  forward  a  y.  ago 

9.  2.  that  .Acliaia  wis  ready  a  y.  ago,  your  zeal 
IJrb.  9.  7.  the  liigb-priest  went  in  once  a  y.  25. 

10.3.  there  isa  remembrance  made  of  sins  every  y 
.fatn.  4.  13.  wo  will  continue  there  a  y,  and  buy 
Rev.  9. 15.  who  were  prepared  for  a  month  and  a  y 

YEAR  after  YEAR. 
2  Sant.21.1. there  was  a  famine  three  years  y.  aft.  y. 

YEAR  by  YEAR. 
Deut.  14.  22.  thou  shall  tithe  the  increase  of  ihy 
seed  that  the  field  bringeih  forth  y.  hy  y. 

15.  20.  thou  shalt  cat  it  before  the  Lord  y.  hy  y. 
1  Sam.  1.7.  nshodid  so  y.by  y.  so  she  provoked  hot 

1  Kings  a.  II.  thus  Solomon  gave  lo  Hiram  y.hyy. 

10.  25.  they  brought  a  rate  y.  byy-  2  CAron  9.  24. 

2  Kings  17.  4.  no  present  as  he  had  done  y.  by  y. 
jWA.  10.  :J4.  to  bring  the  wood  offering  y.  by  y. 

3.').  bring  the  first -fi nils  of  all  trees  y.  by  y. 
//cA. 10.1. those  sacrifices  which  they  offered  y.byy. 

YEAR  lo  YEAR. 
Eiod.  13.  10.  keep  thia  ordinance  from  y.  lo  y. 

1  Sam.  2.  19.  brought  a  coat  to  him  from  y.  to  y. 
7.16.Samuol  went  from  y.fo  y.  ill  circuit  lo  Reifiel 

2  CAr.  24.  5.  repair  house  of  your  (Jod  fromy.  toy 
Isa.  29.  I.  adil  ye  y.  to  y.  let  them  kill  sacrifices 
;^rcA.I4.I6.  shnllgo  up  from  y.  Iny.  to  worship  Ld 
.Sec  FmsT,  Skconp.  Tiiiiin,  Fimi,  Skventh. 

YEARLY. 
Lev.  2.'>.  53.  n«  a  y.  hired  servant  sliall  he  he 
Jadg.  11.40.  dnughtois  of  Israel  wont  y.  to  lameot 


YES 

Arf^-21.19.  there  U  a  feast  of  llie  Lord  In  Shiloh  y. 
ISam.  i.  'A.  Elkaiiah  went  up  y.  to  worsliip 
-1.  went  up  to  oli'er  the  y.  sacrifice,  2.  19. 
20.  6.  there  is  a  y.  sacrifice  tliuru  for  all  tiie  family 
E»th.  9.:!1.  tliat  they  should  keep  the  14tli  day  o'f 
the  month  .A.dar,  and  lit"teemh  of  tlie  same  y- 
YEARS. 
Oen.  1.  14.  lot  tlicm  be  for  seasons,  days,  and  y. 
'ia.  7.  these  are  the  days  of  the  y.  of  .Xbrafaam 
b.  Abralian;  died  an  old  man  and  full  of  y. 
17.  Ishinael  was  a  hundred  thirty  seven  y. 
47.  9.  few  and  evil  liave  the  y.  of  my  life  been 
Kzod.  34.  22.  the  feast  of  in-gathering  at  they,  end 
l.tv.  25.  15.  according  to  number  of  y.  lt),50,  52. 
27. 18.  the  money  according  to  the  y.  that  remain 
Ijeul.  32.  7.  consider  the  y.  of  nuuiy  generations 
Josh.  I'i-  1.  Joshua  was  old  and  stricken  in  y. 
1£am.29. 3.  David  who  hath  been  with  me  these  y. 
IKings  1.  1.  David  was  old  and  stricken  in  y. 
17.  1.  there  shall  not  be  dew  nor  rain  these  y. 
ICAr.H.ti.land  had  rest,  Asa  had  no  war  in  those  y. 

18-  2.  after  certain  y.  he  went  down  to  Ahab 
JuAJO.S.are  thy  y.as  man's  days,  that  scarchest  sin 
15.  20.  the  number  of  J.  is  hidden  to  the  oppressor 
11).  22.  when  a  few  y.  are  come,  1  shall  go  the  way 
32.  7.  and  multitude  of  y.  should  teach  wisdom 
36.  11.  they  shall  spend  their  y.  in  pleasures 

2(5.  nor  can  number  of  his  y.  be  searched  out 
Psal.  31.  10.  and  my  y.  are  spent  with  sighing 
61.  6.  wilt  prolong  his  y.  as  many  generations 
77.  5.  I  considered  the  y.  of  ancient  times 

10.  1  will  remember  the  y.  of  the  riglit-hand 
7¥.  33.  their  y.  did  he  consume  in  trouble 
90.  4.  for  a  tliousand  y.  in  thy  sight  are  but  as 
yesterday  when  it  is  past,  2Pet.  3.  8. 

9.  we  spend  our  y.  as  a  tale  that  is  told 

10.  the  days  of  our  y.  arc  threescore  y.  and  ten 
15.  according  to  the  y.  wherein  we  have  seen  evil 

102.  24.  thy  y.  are  throughout  all  generations 
27.  thou  art  the  same,  thy  y.  shall  have  no  end 
VruB.  4. 10.  the  y.  of  thy  life  shall  be  many,  9. 11. 
5.  9.  lest  thou  give  thy  y.  unto  the  cruel 

10.  27.  the  y.  of  the  wicked  shall  be  shortened 
Kcc/.12.1.wliile  evil  days  come  nol,nor»/.draw  nigh 
Isa.  21.  16.  according  to  the  y.  of  a  hireling 

3i^.  10.  I  am  deprived  of  the  residue  of  my  y. 
15.  1  shall  go  softly  all  my  y.  in  the  bitterness 
of  my  soul 
I'.zek.i.o.  I  have  laid  on  thee  the  y.  oftheir  iniquity 
sra  4.  and  thou  art  come  even  unto  thy  y. 
'M.  8.  in  latter  y.  thou  slialt  come  into  the  land 
DuH.Q.  2.  I  understand  by  books  the  number  of !/. 

11.  6.  in  the  end  ofy.  they  shall  join  together 
8.  continue  more  y.  than  the  king  of  the  north 
13.  the  king  of  north  shall  come  after  certain  y. 

Jorl  2.  2.  even  to  the  y.  of  many  generations 

25.  I  will  restore  the  y.  the  locusts  hath  eaten 
Hab.  3.  2.  revive  thy  work  in  the  midst  of  the  y. 
Mai.  3.  4.  the  olTerings  pleasant  as  in  the  former  y. 
Luke  1.  7.  both  were  well  stricken  in  y.  18. 
Oal.  4.  10.  ye  observe  days  and  months,  and  y. 
Hcb.  1.  12.  thou  art  the  same,  thy  y.  shall  not  fail 
11.  24.  by  faith  Moses  when  come  to  y.  refused 
Rev.  20.  2.  an  angel  bound  Satan  a  thousand  y. 

3.  till  the  thousand  y.  should  be  fulfilled 

4.  they  lived  and  reigned  with  Christ  athous.  y. 
7.  when  the  thousand  y.  are  cxjiircd,  Satan  shall 

SceJ^umeral  voords  intheir places.,  as  HuNORKO, 
MiNy,  Two,  Thrke,  Six,  Old. 
YELL. 
Jcr.  51.38.  like  lions,  they  shall  y.  as  lions'  whelps 

YELLED. 
Jcr.  2.  15.  the  young  lions  roared  and  y.  on  him 

YELLOW. 
J.cr.  13.  30.  behold,  if  there  be  in  it  a  y.  thin  hair 
32.  behold,  if  there  be  in  it  no  y.  hair 
36.  priesta  shall  not  seek  for  y.  hair,  is  unclean 
Psal.  68.  13.  her  leathers  covered  with  y.  gold 

YEARN. 
Ocn.  43.  30.  for  his  bowels  did  y.  on  his  brother 

YEARNED. 
IKings  3.  20.  for  her  bowels  y.  upon  her  son 

YESTERDAY. 
Clcn.  31.  t  2.  not  toward  him  as  y.  and  day  before 
F.iod.  4. 1 10.  not  elociuent  since  y.  nor  third  day 
5.  14.  why  have  ye  not  fulfilled  your  task  y.7 
J)cut.  10.  T4.  hattd  not  from  ;/.  the  third  day,  G. 
Jask.  3. 1 4.  ye  have  not  pa.ssed  this  way  «ince  y.7 
ISam.  19.  t".  David  was  ill  Saul's  presence  as  ?/. 
20.  27.  why  came  not  the  sonof  Jesse  to  meaty.? 
Z-Sam.  15.  20.  whereas  thou  earnest  but  y. 
ZKings  9.26.  I  have  seen  ?/.  the  blood  of  Naboth 
1  Chr.ll.  1 2.  y.  and  third  day,  when  Saul  was  king 
Jab  8.  9.  we  are  but  of  y.  and  know  nothing 
Ps.  00. 4  a  thousand  years  in  thy  sight  are  but  as  y. 
Isa.  30  t  3.'<.  Tophet  is  ordained  from  y. 
Mic.  2.  t  ft.  y.  my  people  is  risen  up  as  an  enemy 
Johv  4.  52.  y.  at  the  seventh  hour  the  fever  left  him 
Jlr.1.1  7.  28.  kill  me  as  thou  didst  the  Egyptian  y.J 
Hcb.  13.  8.  Jesus  Christ,  the  sainc  y.  and  for  ever 
703 


^  YET 

YESTERNIGHT. 
Gen.  19.  34.  behold,  1  lay  y.  with  my  father 
31.  29.  the  God  of  your  lathers  spake  to  me  y. 

42.  God  hath  seen  allliction,  and  rebuked  thee  y. 

YET. 
■Ben.  40. 23.  y.  did  not  the  butler  remember  Joseph 
Ifxud.  9.17.  us  y.  exaltesl  thyself  against  my  jieopie 
10.7.  knowest  thou  not  y.  that  Egypt  is  destroyed .' 
Lev.  26. 18.  if  ye  will  not  y.  hearken  unto  me 
44.  y.  for  all  that  when  they  be  in  the  land 
Deut.  1.  32.  y.  in  this  thing  ye  did  not  believe 

9.  29.  y.  they  are  thy  people  and  inheritance 

12.  9.  ye  are  not  as  y.  coine  to  the  inheritance 

29.  4.  y.  the  Lord  hath  not  given  you  eyes  to  see 
.losh.  14.11.  as  y.  lam  as  stronir  Ihisday  asl  Uas 
Judg.  7.  4.  Lord  said,  the  people  are  y.  too  many 

10.  13.  y.  yo  have  forsaken  me  and  served  gods 
lisam.  15.  30.  y.  honour  me  now  before  the  elders 
iHam.  23.  5.  y.  made  with  me  everlasting  covenant 
lA'i«n-4-14.  8.  y.  hast  not  been  as  my  Servant  Daviil 

19.  18.  y.  1  have  lell  me  seven  thousand  in  Israel 

22.  8.  there  is  y.  one  by  whom  we  may  inquire 

43.  as  y.  the  people  did  sacrifice,  IKings  14.  4. 
i  flings  8. 19.  y.  the  Lord  would  not  destroy  Judah 

13.  23.  nor  cast  he  them  from  his  presence  as  y. 
iChroii.  20.  33.  as  y.  the  peoi)le  had  not  prepared 

27.  2.  and  the  people  did  y.  corruptly 

30.  18.  not  cleansed,  y.  did  they  eat  the  passover 
Ezra  3. 6.  the  foundation  of  temple  was  not  y.  laid 

9.9.  y.  our  God  hath  not  forsaken  us,  jVe/i.  9.  19. 
JVtA.  5. 18.  y.  required  not  I  bread  of  the  governor 

13.  18.  y.  ye  bring  more  wrath  upon  Israel 
Esth.5.1'3.  y.  all  tliisavaileth  me  nothing  so  long  as 
■fob  1.  16.  while  he  was  y.  speaking,  17,  18. 

6.  10.  then  should  I  y.  have  comfort 

13.  15.  though  he  slay  me  y.  will  1  trust  in  him 

20.  7.  y.  he  shall  perish  for  ever,  like  his  dung 

29.  5.  when  the  Almighty Was  y.  with  me 

35.  15.  y.  he  knoweth  it  not  in  great  c.\trcmity 
Psal.  2.  0.  y.  have  I  set  my  king  on  my  holy  hill 

37.  25.  y.  have  1  not  seen  the  righteous  forsaken 
42.  5.  I  shall  y.  praise  him,  11.  [43.  5.  |  71.  14. 
44.  17.  this  is  come,  y.  have  we  not  forgotten 
119.51.  y.  have  I  not  declined  from  thy  law, 157. 
83.  y.  do  I  not  forget  thy  statutes,  109,  141. 
Proo.  27. 22.  y.  will  not  his  foolishness  depart  from 

30.  12.  y.  is  not  washed  from  their  filthiness 
Eccl.  4.  3.  better  is  he  which  hatii  not  y.  been 
Cant.   8.  1.  kiss  thee,  y.  1  should  not  be  despised 
Isa.  10.  22.  y.  aicmnantof  them  shall  return 

14. 1.  for  the  Lmwill  y.  choose  Israel  and  see  them 
17.  6.  y.  gleaning  grajies  shall  be  left  in  it 

28.  4.  while  it  is  y.  in  his  hand,  he  eateth  it  up 
12.  this  is  the  rest,  y.  they  would  not  hear 

31.  2.  y.  he  also  is  wise,  and  will  bring  evil 

49.  5.  though  Israel  be  not  gathered,  y.  shall  I  be 

15.  they  may  forget,  y.  will  I  not  forget  thee 
53.7.lie  was  oppressed,  y.  he  opened  not  his  moutl 
Jer.  2.  9.  I  will  y.  plead  with  you  saith  the  Lord 

3.  1.  y.  return  to  me  ||  5.  28.  y.  they  prosjier 

15.  1.  y.  my  mind  could  not  be  toward  this  peoph 

23.  21.  prophets  y.  they  ran,  y.  they  prophesied 

36.  24.  y.  they  were  not  afraitl,  nor  rent  garments 
Ezek.  8. 18.  tho'  they  cry,  y.  will  I  not  hear  them 

11.  16.  y.  will  I  be  to  them  as  a  little  sanctuary 
28.2.said,  lam  agod.y.  thou  art  a  man  and  not  G. 
36.  37.  I  will  y.  lor  tiiis  be  inquired  of  by  Israel 

/>n7i.  9. 13.  y.  made  we  not  our  prayer  before  God 

11.  35.  because  it  is  y.  for  a  time  appointed 

45.y.he  shall  come  to  his  end, none  shall  help  him 

Has.  7.  9.  grey  hairs  are  on  him,  y.  he  knoweth  not 

13.  4.  y.  I  am  the  L.  tlry  God  iVoin  land  of  Egypt 

.^mos  4. 6.  I  have  given  you  want  of  bread,  y.  have 

ye  not  returned  to  me,  8,9,  10, 11.  Hag.~.i'. 

6.  10.  he  shall  say,  is  there  y.  any  with  thee 
Jonali  2.  4.  y.  I  will  look  toward  thy  lioly  temple 

3.4.w.forty  days  and  Nineveh  shall  be  overthrown 

4.  2"  was  my  saying,  when  I  was  y.  in  my  country 
Mic.  6. 10.  are  there  y.  the  treasures  of  wickedness 
JVaA.  3.  10.  y.  was  she  carried  away  into  captivity 
Hall.  3. 18.  y.  I  will  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  I  will  joy 
J\Ial.  2.  14.  y.  is  she  thy  companion,  and  the  wife 
J/aM5.17.do  ye  not  y.understand  that  whatsoever 

entereth  in  at  tho  mouth,  16.  9.  Mark  8.  17. 
in.  20.  these  things  have  I  ke|)t,  what  lack  I  y.f 

24.  6.  but  the  end  is  not  y.  Mark  13.  7. 
Mark  11.  13.  for  tho  time  of  ligs  was  not  y. 
Lvke  24.44.  the  words  I  spake  while  y.  with  you 
JoIlu  2.  4.  Jesus  saith  unto  her  my  hour  is  not  ;/. 

come,  7.  6,  30.  ]  8.  20. 

7.  39.  for  the  Holy  Ghost  was  not  y.  given 
II.  25.  though  ho  were  dead,  y.  shall  he  live 
20.  9.  for  as  y.  they  knew  not  the  scripture 

.fcts  S.IG.as  ir.H.Ghost  was  fallen  on  none  of  them 
Horn.  4.  II.  he  had  y.  being  uncircuniciHcd,  12. 

5.  6.  wc  were  y.  without  strength  ||  8.  y.  sinners 

8.  24.  what  a  man  seeth,  why  doth  lie  y.  hope  for? 

9.  19.  thou  wilt  say,  why  doth  he  y.  find  fault? 
10>r.  3.  3.  ye  are  y.  cnrnalt  ||  15.  y.  so  as  by  fire 

7.  10.  to  tlic  married  I  comm.  y.  not  I,  but  the  Ld 


YOK 

ICor.  14.  21.  y.  for  all  that  will  they  not  hear  me 

15.  10.  y.  not  I,  but  the  grace  ot  God  with  nie 

17.  your  faith  is  vain,  ye  are  y.  in  your  iiiiu 

2C«r.  1.  10.  we  trust  that  he  will  y.  deliver 

23.  to  sjmre  you  1  came  not  as  y.  to  Corinth 

6.  8.  as  deceivers,  y.  true,  us  unknown,  y.  knuwm 
(ial.  2.  20.  y.  not  1,  but  Christ  livetli  in  mo 

3.  4.  have  ye  suffered  in  vain?  if  it  be  y.  in  vain 
5.  11.  I,  brethren,  if  I  y.  preach  circuiiicision 

i'f'hess.  2.  5.  when  I  was  y.  with  you,  1  told  yon 
•i'J'iin.  2.  5.  y.  is  he  not  crowned,  except  he  strira 
Hcb.  2.  8.  we  see  not  y.  all  things  put  under  him 

4.  15.  was  tempted  like  as  we  are,  y.  without  isu) 

7.  10.  for  he  was  y.  in  the  loins  of  his  father 
11.  4.  and  by  it  he  being  dead,  y.  speaketh 

7.  Noah,  being  warned  of  things  not  seen  as  v. 
./am.2.10.ki'ei>tlie  whole  law,  y.olfend  in  one  pou.t 

11.  y.  if  thou  kill  ||  4.  2.  y.  ye  have  not 
l./o/iw  3.2.  itdotli  not  y.  apjiear  what  we  shall  bo 
tier. 17.  8.  the  beast  that  was,  and  is  not,  and  y.  iH 
10.  and  one  is,  and  the  other  is  not  y.  come 
12.ten  kings  who  have  received  no  kingdom  as  y. 
Hee  A  LIVE. 
YIELD 
Gen.  4. 12.  the  earth  not  henceforth  y.  hor  strength 
49.  20.  Asher's  bread  be  tat,  shall  y.  royal  dainties 
J.iv.  19.  25.  that  it  may  y.  to  you  the  incr<:ase 
26.  4.  the  land  shall  y.  her  increase,  trees  y.  fruit' 
20.  for  your  land  shall  not  y.  her  increase 
•iCfiron.  .'iO.  8.  but  y.  yourselves  to  the  Lord 
Psal.  1)7.  6.  the  land  shall  y.  her  increase,  85.15. 
107.  37.  plant  vineyards  may  y.  fruits  of  increase 
/Voi'.7.21.with  much  fairspeucli  she  caused  himy. 
Isa.  5. 10.  ten  acres  of  vineyard  shall  y.  one  bath, 
and  the  seed  of  a  homer  shall  y.  an  ephah 
Has.  8.  7.  have  sow  n  the  wind,  the  bud  shall  y.  no 
meal,  if  so  be  it  y.thcstrangor  shall  swallow'it  up 
.foel  2.  22.  the  fig-tree  and  vine  y.  their  streneth 
Hnb.  3.17.  altho'  fields  shall  y.  no  meal,  joy  in  Gcd 
.fids  23.  21.  but  do  not  thou  y.  unto  them 
Kom.  6. 13.  nor  y.  ye  your  members  asinstrumentB 
of  unrighteousness  to  sin,  y.  yourselves  to  God 
16.  that  to  whom  ye  y.  yourselves  servants 
19.  y.  your  members  servants  to  righti'ousnesg 
Javi.  3.  12.  no  fountain  y.  salt  water  and  fresh   1^ 
YIELDED.  • 

<?f7i.40.33.Jacob  after  commanding  his  sons,  y.  up 
JVuin.  17.  8.  behold  the  rod  of  Aaron  y.  almonds 
f)an.  3.28.  y .  their  bodies  that  they  might  not  fi^rve 
Mat.  27.  50.  Jesus  cried  again,  and  y.  up  the  ghost 
.fcts  5.  10.  then  Sappliira  y.  up  the  ghost 
J<om.  6.  19.  as  ye  have  y.  vour  members  servanta 

YIELDETH 
JVch.  9.  37.  it  y.  much  increase  to  the  kings 
.lob  24.  5.  the  wilderness  y.  food  for  them 
Hcb.  12. 11.  y.  the  peaceable  fruit  of  righteousnes* 

YIELDING. 
Gen.\.  11.  bring  forth  herb  y.  seed,  tree  y.  fruit,  12. 

29.  I  have  given  you  every  tree  y.  seed 
Eccl.  10.  4.  for  y.  pacifietli  great  ofl'ences 

Hcc  FRt;iT. 
YOKE. 
Besides  the  common  acceptation  of  tliis  term,  for 
an  instrument  put  alwvt  Hie  necks  of  tattle,  to 
couple  tliem  for  drawing;  ike  scripture  makes 
mention  (1)  Of  Ike  yoke  af  bondiigr,  or  slavery. 
Jjcv.  26.  13,  I  have  broken  the  uands  of  your 
yoke.  Ucut.^9.  48,  He  shall  put  a  yoke  of  iron 
ujion  thy  neck.  (2)  Of  the  yoke  of  afflictions 
and  crosses^  I.,am.  3.  27,  It  is  good  for  a  man 
that  he  bear  the  yoke  in  his  youth.  "/<  is  a 
man's  duty,  it  is  prof  table  to  him,  patiently  to 
bear  what  afflictions  God  uill  please  to  lay 
upon  him,  and  to  restrain  his  wanton  .'pirits 
ic/ien  they  are  most  prone  to  be  too  brisk  and 
lascivious."  (3)  Of  the  yoke  of  punish/nait 
for  sin,  whicic  the  prophet  .fcremiah  eipressrs 
thus,  Tlie  yo/.f  of  my  transgressions  is  hound  by 
his  hand,  J, am.  1.  14.  "'/'*«  piiftislmient  and 
bondage  I  uvderiro  fir  my  sins  is  bound  fo 
fast  that  I  cannot  shake  it  off."  (4)  Of  l!>e 
yoke  of  God's  comwandnients.     Mat.  11.  29, 

30,  Take  my  yoke  upon  you :  for  my  yoke  is 
easy.  Thcservirc  of  God  to  flesh  and  hluodis 
a  yoke,  because  it  grates  vpon  the  sen.'itivc  ap- 
petites, and  restrains  our  natural  motions  and 
inclinations;  yet  it  is  easy,  in  comparison  of 
the  service  of  sin,  tfte  covenant  of  works,  and 
the  ceremonial  law;  it  is  easy  to  them  that  love 
God,  and  are  regenerated,  because  the  lair  is 
written  in  their  hearts,  Psal.  37.  31.  They  are 
endued  witfi  faith,  Mark  9.  23.  ./)nd  thrv  are 
strengthened  tiy  Christ,  Phil.4. 13  (5)  'jhfre 
!<  the  yoke  of  legal  ceremonies,  .Xcis  15.  10 
Gal.  5.  1  'Phey  are  called  a  yoke  in  resp/dt 
of  Ihrir  variety,  and  the  difficulty  in  perform 
ing  them;  in  respect  of  their  chargeablcneit, 
and  inefficaey,  being  nnly  shadows  of  gooo 
thin?9  to  come,  Heh.  10.  1. 

Gen.  27.  40.  that  thou  shall  break  his  y.  .Tir.  30.8. 


YOU 

tmt.  K.  13.  I  linvc  broken  the  bai)ds  of  your  y. 

and  mniio  you  go  upright,  Kick.  'M.  i!7. 

A'ttm.  19. 2.  bring  n  lud  huit'er  without  blemiiih,  on 

which  never  ciinio  y.  Deut.  21.  3.  I.Sam,  ti.  7. 

Deut.  2ci.  48  he  nh.ill  put  a  y.  of  iron  upon  thy 

neck,  until  he  have  th^stroyod  thee,  Jer.  28.14. 

15o7n.ll.7.  Saul  took  a.y.  ofo.xennnd  hewed  tlieni 

14.14.  a  half  acre,  which  a  y.  of  oxen  might  plow 

\lvings  12.4.thy  father  made  our  i/.gricvous,  make 

his  heavy  y.  lighter,  10,  11,  14.  •2Chron.  10.  4. 

13.  19.  Elisha  jilowing  with  twelve  y.  of  o.xen 

21.  he  took  a  y.  of  oxen,  and  slew  them 
Job  1.  3.  Job  had  five  hundred  y.  of  oxen 

42.  12.  he  had  a  thousand  y.  of  oxen 
lid.  "J.  4.  thou  hast  broken  the  y.  of  bin  burden,  and 
the  statfof  his  shoulder,  10.  27.  |  14.  25. 

47.  f).  on  ancient  thoulmat  very  heavily  laid  thy  j/. 

58. 6.opi)re9sed  go  free,  and  that  ye  break  every  y. 
Jer.  2.  20.  for  of  old  time  1  liavo  broken  thy  y. 

5  5.  but  those  have  altogether  broken  thy  y. 

27.  8.  that  will  not  put  their  neck  under  tliu  y. 

11.  that  bring  their  nock  under  the  y.  12. 

28.  2.  broken  the  y.  of  the  king  of  Uabylon,  4,11. 

12.  Ilanuniuh  had  broken  the  y.  from  Jeremiah 
31.  18.  as  a  bullock  unaccustomed  to  the  y. 

51.  2.1.  will  I  break  the  liusbanilman  and  his  jr. 
J.iin.  1.  14.  the  y.  of  my  transgression  is  bound 
^■5.27.it  is  good  for  a  man  to  bear  the  y.  in  his  youth 
JIt;.  11.  4.  I  was  as  they  that  take  otf  the  y. 
J\'ii.'i.  1.  13.  now  will  I  break  his  y.  from  otVthec 
.Milt.  11.  20.  take  my  y.  on  you  ||  30.  my  y.  isoasy 
/,u'iO  14.  19.  I  liave  bought  live  y,  of  oxen 
W.f  9  LI.  10.  to  put  a  y.  on  the  di.-iciples'  neck 
fial.  5.  1.  be  not  entangled  with  the  y.  of  bondage 
1  Tun.  6. 1.  let  as  many  servants  as  are  under  the  y. 

YOKES, 
y-r.  27.  2.  make  thee  bonds  and  y.  28. 13. 

28.  13.  hast  broken  the  y.  ol  wood,  make  y.  iron 
Ezek.  30.  18.  when  I  shall  break  the  y.  of  Egypt 

YOKED. 
2Cor.  6. 14.  be  not  uneijiiallv  y.  with  unbelievers 

YOKK-l'ELLOW. 
Phil.  4.  3.  I  intreat  thee  also,  true  y.-fdloto 

YONDER, 
ficn.  22.  5.  I  and  the  lud  will  go  y.  and  worship 
jTum.  16.  37.  and  scaitor  thou  the  fire  y. 

23.  15.  eland  here,  while  I  meet  the  Lord  y. 
iKings  4.  25.  behold,  y.  is  that  Sliunamito 
Mat.  17.  20.  ye  shall  siiy,  remove  hence  to  y.  place 

26.36.  Jesus  saith,  sit  here,  while  I  go  and  pray  y. 
YOU. 
Jiysh.'i.  4.  there  shall  be  a  space  between  y.  and  ark 
A>A.  2.  20.  but  y.  have  no  portion  in  Jerusalem 
.fob  16.  4.  I  could  shako  my  head  at  y. 
Jsa.  59.  2.  your  iniiiuitics  separate  betw.  y.  and  G. 
.KifA-.l  1.19.  will  put  a  new  spirit  with  in  y.  36.26,27. 

36.7.tlio  heathen  tliiit  are  about  y.  bear  shame,  36. 
.tmos  2.  13.  behold,  I  am  pressr-d  under  y. 

3.  2.  y.  only  have  I  known  of  all  families  of  earth 

L'ukelO.  16.  hethathoarethy.  heareth  me,  he  that 

despiseth  y.  di;spiseth  me  and  him  that  sent  me 

13.28. and  y.  yourselves  thrust  out  of  the  kingdom 
/f//m.2.24.  the  name  ofGod  is  blasphemed  thro'  y. 
iCor.  1.  II.  y.  also  helping  by  prayer  for  us 

(?.  13.  tht'  other  men  bo  eased  and  y.  burdened 

!^.  4.  le.st  fiv,  i^nt  wo  say  not  y.  be  ashamed 

n.l6.to  [ireath  tliChTispel  in  the  rc^gions  beyond  y. 

12.  14.  for  1  seek  not  yours  but  y. 
t.pn.  'X.  1.  y.  hath  he  quickened  who  were  dead 

22.  in  whom  y.  also  arc  builded  together 
C'l'.  1.  21.  y.  that  were  some  time  alienated 

2.  13.  y.  being  dead  in  sins  liiith  he  quickened 

.nfUr  YOU. 
^•/i.O.O.establi.di  covenant  with  you, and  seed  a.y. 
J.av.  2.3.  46.  yo  shall  take  them  as  an  inheritance 
for  your  children  nftiyr  y.  1  Chron.  28.  8. 
2'>.  3:i.  nnil  1  will  draw  out  a  sword  after  y. 
/'  iiM  1.4. In  overflow  them,  as  they  pursued  af.  y. 
2".).  22.  the  generation  (hat  shall  rise  up  after  y. 
\  Sam.  2.'i.  19.  sro  on  before,  bi'liold,  I  come  aftr.r  y. 
Jt.  42.  16.  the  famine  shnll  follow  close  after  y. 
2C..r.  9.  14.  which  long  nflrr  y.  Phil.  1.  8. 
Phil.  2.  26.  Epaphroditns  lonirr..]  after  y.  all 

Jiirniust  YOU. 
F.r.nil.  10.  16.  he  said,  I  have  sinned  against  y. 
J.rr.  26.  17.  I  will  sot  my  face  nfr.  y.  .Jer.  44.  11. 
JVum.  17.5.  whereby  they  murmur  against  y. 
Iti-r.t.  1.  44.  the  Amorites  came  out  against  y. 
4.26. 1  call  heaven  and  earth  to  witness  against  y. 
this  day  yo  shall  soon  utterly  Jierish,  30.  19. 
fi  19.  I  testify  ag.  y.  that  yc  shall  surely  perish 
9.  19. 1  was  afraid  of  the  anger  wherewith  the  lid. 
was  wroth  against  y.  11.  17.  ./o.<!A.23.  16 
J.)sh.  04.  11.  the  men  of  Jericho  fought  against  y. 
iSam.  12.  5.  the  Lord  is  witness  ag.  y.  J\fic..  1.  2. 
12.  Nahash  kin?  of  the  Ammoniti-a  came  (!/?■.  y 
15.  the  liaml  of  the  Lf>rd  shall  be  against  y. 
t.^awi.  17.  21.  thus  Ahithophel  counselled  ag.  y. 
tCAroTt.  I'.l.  12.  to  cry  alarm  against  y.  O  Israel 
J<ti  16.  4  I  could  henp  up  words  araintt  y. 
704 


YOU 


£0V 


Jer.  18.  11.  behoH  I  devise  a  device  against  y.    'iCoT.  10. 15.  'a^  that  we  shall  be  enlarged  by  y 
21.  5.  and  1  inynolf  will  tight  agaiii.it  y.  in  anger  Concerning  VOU. 

26.  13.  Lord  willrcpent  ot  evil  pronounced  a^r.y.  JVh/h.  9. 8. what  Lord  will  comniund  concerning  y 
37.10.urmyof  the  Chaldeans  that  fight  «^<-ai;i«£  y.  Josh.  23.  14.  which  the  Lord  spiike  concerning  y. 

19.  the  king  of  Uubylon  shall  not  come  ag.  y.   .  ^cr.  "i'l.  19  the  l^ord  hath  said  concerning  y. 
38.  5.  the  king  cannot  do  any  thing  against  y.  ftWicss.  5.  18.  this  is  the  willofGodcuHCcrrt;;!^'  y 
44.  29.  that  my  words  shall  stand  against  y.       ^  For  YOU. 


49.  30.  Neb.  had  conceived  a  purjiose  against  y. 
Blzek.  13.  8.  1  am  ag.  y.  \\  36. 2.  enemy  said  ag.  y. 
jlmos  3. 1.  Lord  had  spoken  ag.  y.  5. 1.  '/.eph.  2. 5. 

6.  14.  behold,  I  will  raise  up  against  y.a  nation 
Mic.  2.  4.  one  shall  take  up  a  jiurable  against  y. 
Mat.  5.  11.  shall  say  all  manner  of  evil  a^rain.it  y. 

21.  2.  go  into  the  village  over  against  y.  and  yo 
shall  find  an  ass  tied,  Mark  11. 2.  J^uke  19.  30. 

/y«Ae  10.11.  the  dust  of  your  city  wo  wipe  otfa^.y. 
•lam.  5.  3.  the  rust  shall  be  a  witness  against  y. 
ypct.  2.  12.  whereas  they  speak  ag.  y.  as  evil  doers 

Jimong  or  amongst  YOU. 

Gen.  35.  2.  put  away  the  strange  gods  that  arc; 

am.  y.  and  be  clean,  ,Iosh.  24.2;).  16'am.7.3. 

Lev.  26.  11.  1  will  set  my  tabernacle  amongst  y. 

12.  1  will  walk  among  y.  and  will  bo  your  God 

22.  I  will  send  wild  boasts  am.  y.  |{  25.  pestilence 

.Xum.  11.  20.  yo  have  despised  the  Lord  who  is 

am.  y.  14.42.  JJcnt.  6.  15.  |  7.21.  ./«.s-A.  3.  10. 

'iChron.  36.  23.  who  is  there  among  y.  Kzra  1.  3. 

Isa.  42.  23.  who  among  y.  will  give  ear  to  this7 

50.  10.  who  is  among  y.  that  fearcth  the  Lord? 
Fzek.  20.  38.  purge  out  from  among  y.  the  rebels 
/Iag.2. 3.who  is  loll  among  y.  that  saw  this  house? 
Mai.  1.  10.  who  is  there  uirtuii^  y.  that  Would  shut 
^/fft.20. 26.  it  sha  II  not  be  so  owori^'y.  Mark  10.43. 

27.  (Sii  whosoL'veT  will  be  ch\(;( among  y.  let  him 

Lt  »our  servant,  23.  11.  J.ukc  22.  26. 

/.;(Ae9.  <8.  no  cnat  is  Jbiuil  aa^ng  y  shall  begrsut 

22.  27.  hut  1  am  among  y.  as  ho  that  servclh 
John  1.  2li.  but  there  standeth  one  among  y. 

8.  7.  ho  that  ia  without  sin  among  y.  let  him  cast 

./icti6.3.brethren,  look  ye  out  a7H0H,i,''y. seven  men 

13.  26.  and  whosoever  among  y.  fenreth  God 

25.  5.  let  them  who  among  y.  are  able,  go  down 
Horn.  1.  13.  that  I  might  have  some  fruit  among  y. 

12.  3.  I  say  to  every  man  that  is  among  y. 
ICor.  1.  10.  that  there  be  no  divisions  among  y. 

11.  there  are  contentions  among  y.  11.  18. 
2.2.  Ideturminednot  to  know  any  thing  anionic y. 

3.  3.  whereas  there  is  among  y.  envying,  strife 
18.  if  any  man  among  y.  seemeth  to  bo  wise 

5.  1.  is  reported  that  there  is  Ibrniijgtion  among  y. 
2.  that  he  might  bo  taken  away  from  among  y. 
15. 12.  how  say  some  among  y.  is  no  resurrection 
20)r.  1.  19.  Christ  who  was  preached  among  y. 

10.  1.  I  I'aul,  who  in  i)rRsenco  am  base  among  y. 
12.  21.  lest  my  God  will  humble  mo  among  y. 

F.ph.  5.  3.  let  it  not  be  once  named  among  y. 
1  Thess.  1.  5.  what  manner  of  men  we  were  am.  y. 
.Jain.  1.  26.  if  any  man  among  y.  sei^m  religious 
5. 1.3.  is  any  among  y.  aftlictod?  ||  14.  is  any  sick? 
1  Pet.  5.  2.  feed  the  tloek  of  God  which  is  among  y. 
'iPet.  2.  1.  there  shall  be  false  teachers  among  y. 
Rev.  2.  13.  Antipas,  who  was  slain  among  y. 

Hce  SOJOUTINETH. 

JSrfore  YOU. 
Gen.  34.  10.  and  the  land  shall  be  before  y.  dwell 
4.5. 5.  God  did  send  me  before  y.  to  jireserve  life,  7. 
F.xod.  10.  10.  look  to  it,  for  evil  is  befnre  y. 
/iCD. 18.24.  in  all  these  the  nations  are  defiled  which 
I  cast  out  before  y.  20.  23.  Ktim.  33.  ,52, 55. 
Deut.  11.  23.  Josh.  3.  10.  |  9.  24.  |  23.  5,  9. 
I  24.  8,  12.  .Judg.  0.  9. 
27.  men  of  land  done  which  were  before  y.28, 30. 

26.  7.  your  enemies  shall  fall  before  y.  8. 
JViim.  14.  43.  the  Canaanites  are  there  before  y. 

32.  29.  and  the  land  shall  be  subdued  before  y. 
Deut.  1.  8.  behold,  I  have  set  the  land  before  y. 
30.  Lord  who  goeth  before  y.  shall  fight  for  you 

4.  8.  which  I  set  before  y.  this  day,  11.  32. 

11.  26.  I  sot  bef.  y.  a  blessing  and  a  curse,  30.19. 
.Josh.  4.  2.1.  (he  Lord  dried  up  Jordan  before  y. 

24.  12.  I  sent  the  hornet  before  y.  which  drave 
I.Sam.  9.  12.  behold,  it  is  before  y.  make  haste 

12.  2.  and  now  behold  the  king  wnlketh  before  y. 
2Chron.7.  19.  if  ye  forsake  my  statutes  which  I 

have  set  before  y.  Jer.  26.  4.  |  44.  10. 
Isa.  52.  12.  for  the  Lord  will  go  before  y. 
.Jer.  21.  8.  behold,  I  set  before  y.  the  way  of  life 
Mat.  5. 12.  BO  persecuted  prophets  that  were  bef.  y. 
21.  31.  go  into  the  kingdom  of  God  before  y. 
26.  32.  but  after  I  am  risen  again,  I  will  go  be- 
fore y.  into  Galilee,  28.  7.  Mark 
14.  28.  I  16.  7. 
I.uke  10. 8.  Into  whatsoever  ci(y  yo  enter,  eat  such 
things  as  are  set  before  y.  ICor.  10.  27. 
.Ocls  4. 10.  this  man  stands  here  before  y.  whole 

}<y  YOtr. 
F.ze.k.  20.  3.  I  will  not' bo  inquired  of  Ay  y.  31. 
Rom.  15.  24.  I  (rust  to  bo  brought  on  my  way  by  y 
I  Tor,  6.  2.  if  the  world  shall  he  judged  by  y. 
2G»r.  7.  13.  his  spirit  was  refreshed  by  y.  all 


Gen.  44.  17.  as /or  y.  50.  20.  JViim.  14.  32.  Dcvt. 
1.  40.  Josh.  23.  9.  .)nb  17.  16. 
J^um.  15.  15.  one  ordinance  shall  bo  for  y.  16. 
JJcut.l.'M.  all  that  he  did /or  y.  4. 34.  l.ium.12.24. 
Fzek.  20.  39.  as /or  y.  O  house  of  Israel,  34.  17. 

36.  9.  behold  I  am /or  y.  and  I  will  turn  to  you 
IJan.  2.  9.  there  is  but  one  decree /or  y. 

/Imos  a.18.  thedny  of  Lord,  to  wha'lend  is  it/or  y. 
Mic.  3.  1.  is  it  not /or  y.  to  know  judgment? 
Hag.  1.4.  is  it  time/or  y.  to  dwell  in  ceiled  houscsl 
Mdl.  2.  1.  O  priests,  this  comninndment  is  for  y 
Mat.  11.22.  1  say  lo  you,  it  shall  be  more  tolurabl* 
for  Tyro  and  Sidon,  than  for  y.  Jyuke  JO.  14 
.  34.  come,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared /or  y 
Mark  10. 36.  what  would  yo  that  I  should  Aofor  y 
J.uke  22.  19.  this  is  my  body  which  is  given  for  y 
30.  my  blood  which  is  shed /or  y.  iLor.  11.  24. 
John  14.  2.  1  go  to  prejiare  a  place /or  y.  3. 

16.  26.  I  say,  that  1  will  pray  the  Father /or  y. 
Jlrts  1.  7.  is  not /or  y.  to  know  the  times  orsea.sons 
28.  20.  for  this  cause  therefore  have  I  called  fur  y. 
/Tom.  I.  8.  I  thankniy  God  through  Christ /or  y.  all. 
It  0^1.13.  ist.'hr.  divided?  was  I'aul  crucified/,  y. 
'JCor.  7.  12.  that  our  care /or  y.  appear,  8.  16. 
9.  14.  by  their  prayer /or  y.  which  long  after  vou, 
J'hil.  1.  4.  Col.  1.  3,  9.  I  4.  12.  iiThcss.  i'.  Jl. 

12.  15.  I  will  gladly  spend  end  bo  spent /or  y. 
Fuh.  1.  16.  wherefore  I  cease  not  to  give  thanks 

fpr  y.  1  Thcss.  1. 2. 1 3. 9.  2  Thess.  1. 3. 1 2. 13. 

3.  13.  at  my  tribulations /or  y.  Col.  1.  24. 
/'/£i7.  3.  1.  is  not  grievous,  but  for  y.  it  is  safe 
Col.  1.  5.  for  the  hope  which  is  laid  up /or  y. 

25.  the  dispensation  which  i.s  given  to  nic  for  y. 

2.  1.  yo  know  what  great  conliict  I  have /or  y. 

4. 13.  that  he  hath  a  groat  zeal  fory.  and  for  thom 
Uch.  13.  17.  for  that  is  unprofitable /or  y. 
\Pet.\.i.  to  an  inheritance  reserved  in  heaven/,  y. 

5.  7.  cast  your  cure  on  him,  for  ho  careth  fur  y 

From  YOU. 
Gcn.Z6.  27.  seeing  ye  have  sent  me  away /rom  y 
./osh.  9.  22.  saying  we  are  very  (ar  from  y. 
1  .Sa»rt.  6.  3.  why  his  hand  is  not  removed  from  v 
^iSam.  15.  28.  until  there  come  word /rom  y. 
'iChron.  30.  8.  his  wrath  may  turn  away /rom  y, 

9.  the  Lord  will  not  turn  away  his  face/rowi  y 
Isa.  1.  15.  I  will  hide  mine  eyes  from  y. 

.59.  2.  but  your  sins  have  hid  his  face /rom  y 
.Jer.  5.  25.  have  wilhholden  good  things /rom  y. 

34.  21.  king's  army  which  are  gone  up /rom  y. 

42.  4.  I  will  keep  nothing  back /rom  y. 
Fzek.W.  31.  cast  away  from  y.  your  transgressioni) 
.loel  2.  20.  remove  far/ro7n  y.  the  northern  army 
Amos  4.  7.  I  have  withholden  the  rain/ro7n  y. 
Jlf««.21. 43.  kingdom  of  God  shnll  be  taken  from  y. 
./0A71I6.  iH.  and  your  joy  no  man  taketh /rom  y. 
Acts  1.  11.  who  is  taken  np /rom  y.  into  heaven 

13.  46.  but  seeing  you  jiut  \l  from  y.  lo  we  turu 
1  Cor.  14.  36.  camo  tho  word  of  God  out /rom  y. 
2C'or.  3.  1.  or  letters  of  commendation /rom  y. 
F/ih.  4.  31.  let  evil-speaking  be  jiut  away /rom  y. 
1  Thess.  1.  8.  for /rom  y.  sounded  out  the  word 

2.  17.  but  we  being  taken  from  y.  a  short  time 
.Jam.  4.7.  resist  the  devil,  and  he  will  flee /rom  y 

In  YOU. 
Oen.  41.  16.  whether  there  be  any  truth  771  y. 
.Judg.  9.  19.  and  let  him  also  rejoice  in  y. 
Fzek.  20.  41.  I  will  be  sanctified  in  y.  36.  23. 

37.  6.  and  I  will  jmt  breath  in  y.  14. 

Mnl.  1.  10.  I  have  no  pleasure  ;n  ?/.  saith  the  Lord 
Mat.  10.  20.  but  the  Spirit  which  speakoth  in  y. 

11.  21.  if  the  mighty  works  which  were  done  in  y, 
.John  5.  38.  yo  have  not  bis  word  abiding  in  y. 

42.  that  ye  have  not  the  love  of  God  in  y. 

6.  53.  except  ye  cat  (he  flesh,  ve  have  no  life  in  y 

14.  17.  he  shall  be  in  y.  ||  20. 'and  I  in  y.  15.  4. 

15.  7.  if  my  words  abide  in  y.  I  .John  '.I.  14,  24. 
liom.  8.  9.  the  Spirit  dwcllcth  in  y.  1  .rohn  2.  27. 

10.  and  if  Christ  bo  in  y.  tho  body  is  dead 

12.  18.  as  niuoh  as  lieth  in  y.  live  peacenhlv 
lCor.1.6.  the  testimony  of  Christ  is  confirmed  in  y. 

6.  19.  tho  templeoflho  Holy  Ghost  wliich  is  in  y. 
14.  25.  will  report  that  (Jod  is  in  y.  of  a  .ruth 
2C<)r.  2.  3.  1  wrote  (his  (o  you,  haviii<;  coiifideneo 
in  y.  nil,  7.  16.  |  8.  22.  Gal.  5. 10 

4.  12.  hut  lifo  in  y.  ||  7.7.  he  was  comforted  in  y 

8.  6.  he  would  fiiiish  in  y.  (he  same  grace  also 

9.  14.  for  (ho  exceeding  grace  of  God  in  y. 

13.  3.  which  (o  you  is  no(  weak,  hu(  mighty  111  y 
5.  kr>ow  ve  not  how  that  Jckus  Christ  is  in  y. 

Gal.  4.  19.  I  travail,  (ill  Christ  be  formed  in  y 
F.ph.  4.  6  one  God,  who  is  above  nil,  and  in  7.  all 
7'Ai7. 2. 5.  let  (his  mind  he  in  y.  which  was  iiirtriaJ 
13.  it  i*  God  which  work«th  in  y.  to  will  Kod  d« 


YOU 

Ccl.  1.  6.  which  bringelh  fruit,  as  it  doth  also  in  y. 
27.  which  is  Christ  in  y.  tlie  liope  ol' glory 

3.  16.  let  the  word  of  Christ  dwell  in  y.  richly 
1  Thess.  2.  13.  which  eli'uctually  worketii  in  y. 
^T/iess.  1.  4.  so  that  we  glory  ui  y.in  the  churches 

12.  the  name  of  Christ  lu.iy  be  glorified  in  y. 
P/iilem.  (i.  acknowledging  every  good  thing  iji  y. 
Heb.  13.  21.  working  in  y.  what  is  well-jileasing 
1  Pel.  3.  15.  a  reason  of  the  hope  that  is  in  y. 
iPel.  1.  8.  if  these  things  be  in  y.  and  abound 
IJolin  2.  8.  which  thing  is  true  in  hiin  and  in  y. 
i.  4.  greater  is  he  that  is  in  y.  than  in  the  world 

Of  YOU. 
Gen.  27.  45.  why  should  1  be  deprived  of  y.  both? 
Ezod.  12.  IG.  that  only  may  be  done  of  y. 
Deut.  1.  22.  ye  came  near  unto  me  every  one  of  y. 
Josh.  2.  9.  the  inhabitants  faint  because  of  y. 

23.  3.  hath  done  to  these  nations  because  of  y, 

]  6aHi.22.8.that  all  of  y.  have  conspired  against  me 
iKings  22.  28.  hearken,  O  people,  every  one  of  y. 
Ezra  7.  21.  what  Ezra  requires  of  y.  it  be  done 
JVcA.l.y.though  there  were  of  y.  cast  out  to  heaven 
Ps.  (52.  3.  ye  shall  be  slain  all  of  y.  a  bowing  wall 
Kzeli.  6.  9.  they  that  escape  of  y.  shall  remember 
Mic.  1.  II.  he  shall  receive  of  y.  his  standing 
Mat.  6.  27.  which  o/?/.  by  taking  thought  can  add 
one  cubit  to  his  stature?  Ijuke  12.  25. 
Luke  13.  15.  doth  not  each  one  ofy.  lead  his  o.\ 
Jokn  8.  4t).  which  of  y.  convinceth  me  of  sin? 

13.  18.  I  speak  nolo/ y.  all,  I  know  whom  I  chose 
.^cts  2.  22.  which  God  did  by  him  in  the  midst  o/?^. 

3. 2G.  in  turning  every  one  ofy.  from  his  iniquities 

4.  11.  which  was  set  at  nought  of  y.  builders 
Rom.  1.  12.  by  the  mutual  faith  both  of  y.  and  me 
ICor.  1.  11.  It  hath  been  declared  to  me  of  y. 

6.  11.  such  were  some  of  y.  but  ye  are  washed 
12.  21.  the  head  to  the  feet,  I  have  no  need  of  y. 

14.  26.  every  one  of  y.  hath  a  psalm,  a  doctrine 
It).  2.  let  every  one  of  y.  lay  by  him  in  store 

iCor.  1.  7.  and  our  hope  of  y.  is  sledfast 

7.  14.  if  [  have  boasted  any  thing  to  him  of  y. 

11.  20.  for  ye  suffer,  if  a  man  take  of  y. 

12.  17.  did  Imake  a  gain  «/ ?/..?  ||  18.  or  did  Titus? 
Gal.  3.  2.  this  only  would  1  learn  of  y.  received  ye 

27.  for  as  many  of  y.  as  have  been  baptized  into 
4.20.to  change  my  voice,  for  1  stand  in  doubt  o/y. 
Col.  4.  9.  a  beloved  brother,  who  is  one  of  y.  12. 
1  Thess.  2.  6.  neither  of  y.  sought  we  glory 

4.  4.  every  one  of  y.  should  know  how  to  possess 
Til.  2.  8.  having  no  evil  thing  to  say  of  y. 
Jam.  5. 4.  the  hire  which  is  of  y.  kept  back  by  fraud 
\Pet.  3.  IG.  whereas  they  speak  evil  ofy.  4.  4. 

Over  YOU. 
Lev.  26.  IG.  I  will  even  appoint  over  y.  terror 

17.  they  that  hate  you  shall  reign  over  y. 

Dent.  28. 63.  as  the  Lord  rejoiced  oocr  y.  to  do  you 

good,  he  will  rejoice  over  y.  to  destroy  you 

Jndg.  8. 23.  Gideon  said,  I  will  not  rule  over  y.  nor 

my  son  rule  ooery.  Lord  shall  rule  over  y. 

9.  2.  is  it  better  that  seventy  reign  ot;cr  y.  or  one? 

15.  if  in  truth  ye  anoint  me  king  over  y. 
I  Sam.  8. 11.  manner  of  king  that  shall  reign  ovcry. 
12.  1.  behold,  I  have  made  a  king  over  y. 
13.  behold,  the  Lord  hath  set  a  king  over  y. 
2.S'a/n.3. 17.  ye  sought  David  to  be  king  over  y. 
'2Chron.  19.  11.  Amariah  the  chief-priest  is  over  y. 
fer.  6.  17.  also  I  set  the  watchmen  over  y.  saying 
Eict.  20.33.  with  fury  poured  out  will  I  xnW.overy. 
Hag.  1. 10.  the  heaven  over  y.  is  stayed  from  dew 
Iiuki  12. 14.  man,  who  made  me  a  divider  oucr  y.1 
Rom.  6. 14.  sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  y. 
I  Cor.  9.  12.  be  partakers  of  this  power  over  y. 
2Cor.  11.  2.  I  am  jealous  over  y.  with  godly  zeal 
1  T'/ifss.3.7.we  were  comforted  over  y.  in  affliction 

5.  12.  know  them  which  are  over  y.  in  the  Lord 
Heb.  13.  7.  remember  them  that  have  rule  over  y. 

17.  obey  them  that  have  the  rule  over  y. 

24.  salute  them  that  have  the  rule  over  y. 

See  Tell. 
To  or  unto  YOU. 
Gen.  1.  29.  every  herb  to  y.  it  shall  be  for  meat 
34.  9.  and  take  our  daughters  unto  y. 
F.zod.6.~.l  will  take  you  to  me, and  will  be  to  y.&G. 
12.  26.  when  your  children  shall  say  unto  y. 
20.  23.  ye  shall  not  make  unto  y.  gi>ds  of  gold 
30.  36.  iit  shall  be  unto  y.  most  holy 
/y("o.26.16.  I  will  also  do  this  unto  y.  appoint  terror 
./V«m.  10. 8.  they  shall  be  to  y.  for  an  ordinance 
10.  be  to  y.  a  memorial  ||I.'>.39.Kn(o  ij.  for  a  fringe 
33.  .56.  I  shall  do  unto  j^.as  I  thought  to  do  to  them 
.Tosh.  23.  12.  if  ye  go  in  to  them,  and  they  to  y. 
iSam.  4.  9.  be  not  servants,  as  they  have  been  toy. 
Prov.  8.  4.  unto  y.  O  men,  I  call,  and  my  voice  is 
Isa.  30. 13.  this  iniquity  shall  be  to  y.  as  a  breach 
Dan.  3.  4.  to  y.  it  is  commanded,  O  people 
j\lal.  4.  2.  but  unto  y.  tliat  fear  my  name  shall  sun 
Mat.  7.  12.  that  men  should  do  to  y.  Luke  6.  31. 
9.  29.  according  to  your  faith  be  it  unto  y. 
13  11.  beca'ise  it  is  given  untoy.  to  know  the  mys- 
teries of  the  kingdom,  Mark  4. 11  Lukt  8.10. 
705 


YOU 

Mark  4. 24.  unto  y.  that  hear  shall  more  be  given 
Luke  2.  11.  unto  y.  is  born  this  day  a  Saviour 

6.33.  if  ye  do  good  to  them  which  do  good  to  y. 

22.29.and  1  appoint  unto  y.a.  kingdom  as  my  Fatli. 
jicts  2.39.  for  the  promise  is  unto  y.  andcliildren 
'  3. 26.ttnto  y.  first,  God  having  raised  up  his  Son 

10.2y.theretore  came  1  unto  ?/.withuut  gainsaying 

13.  2G.  to  y.  is  the  word  of  this  salvation  sent 
ICor.  9.  2.  if  not  to  others,  doubtless  I  am  to  y. 

14.  36.  or  came  the  word  of  God  unto  y.  only? 
2Cor.  10.  13.  a  measure  to  reach  even  auto  y. 

14.  we  are  come  as  far  as  to  y.  in  iireaching 
Phil.  1.  28.  but  is  toy.  a  token  of  salvation 
29.  unto  y.  it  is  given  not  only  to  believe 
1  Thess.  1.  5.  our  gospel  came  not  unto  y.  in  word 
•iThess.  1.  7.  to  y.  who  are  troubled,  rest  with  us 
IPet.  2.  7.  unto  y.  that  believe,  ho  is  precious 
Reo.  2.  24.  but  unto  y.  1  say,  anti  to  the  rest 
See  CSay,  Told. 
Toward  YOU. 
Jer.  29. 10.  I  will  pertbrm  my  good  word  toward  y. 

11.  1  know  the  thoughts  1  think  toward  y. 
Hos.  5.  1.  give  ear,  for  judgment  is  toward  y. 
2Cor.  1.  18.  our  word  toward  y.  was  not  yea 
7. 15. inward  affection  is  more  abundant  towardy. 

9.  8.  able  to  make  all  grace  abound  toward  y. 

10.  1.  but  being  absent  am  bold  toward  y. 

13. 4.  we  shall  live  by  the  power  of  God  toward  y. 
1  Thess.  3. 12.  abound  in  love,  as  we  do  toward  y. 

To  YOU-WARD. 
2Cur.  13.  3.  which  to  y.-ward  is  not  weak 
Lpli.  3.  2.  the  grace  of  God  given  me  to  y.-ward 

On,  or  upon  YOU. 
Ezod.  12.  13.  the  plague  shall  not  be  upon  y. 

32.  29.  that  ho  may  Destow  upon  y.  a  blessing 
Lev.  10.  7.  the  anointing  oil  of  the  Lord  is  upon  y. 
JiTam.  16.  3.  they  said,  ye  take  too  much  upon  y.  7. 
Deut.  7.  7.  the  Lord  did  not  set  his  love  upon  y. 
Josh.  23.  15.  as  all  good  things  are  come  upon  y. 
J\reh.  4.  12.  from  all  places  they  will  be  upon  y. 
Psal.  129.  8.  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  be  upon  y. 
Isa.  29.  lO.Lord  hath  poured  upon  y.  spirit  of  sleep 

30.  18.  he  may  have  mercy  upon  y.  Jer.  42.  12. 
ycr.  23. 2. 1  will  visit  u/7o?i^.  the  evil  of  your  doings 

40.  3.  therefore  this  thing  is  come  upon  y. 
Ezek.  22.21. 1  will  blow  u.  y.  in  the  fire  of  my  wrath 
Jimos  4.  2.  that  lo,  the  days  shall  come  upon  y. 
Zeph.'i.  2.before  day  of  Lord's  anger  come  upon  y. 
Mat.  23.  35.  upon «/.  may  come  the  righteous  blood 
J,uke  11.  20.  the  kingdom  of  God  is  come  upon  y. 

21.  34.  and  so  that  day  come  upon  y.  unawares 

24.  49.  1  send  the  promise  of  my  Father  tipon  y. 
John  12.  35.  walk,  lest  darkness  come  upon  y. 
.lets  1.  8.  after  the  Holy  Ghost  is  come  upo7i  y. 
ICor.  7.  35.  not  that  I  may  cast  a  snare  upon  y. 
Gal.  4. 11.  lest  I  bestowed  upon  y.  labour  in  vain 
./am.  5. 1.  howl  for  miseries  that  shall  come  on  y. 
I  Pet.  4.  14,  the  Spirit  of  God  resteth  upon  y. 
Rev.  2.  24.  I  will  put  upon  y.  none  other  burden 

Hith  YOU. 
Gc7i.34.16.then  we  will  dweW  with  y.  be  one  people 

48.  21.  behold,  I  die,  but  God  shall  be  toith  y. 
Exod. 13.13.  shall  carry  up  my  bones  hence  with  y. 

20.  22.  ye  have  seen  that  I  have  talked  witii  y. 

24.  14.  tarry  ye  here,  Aaron  and  Ilur  are  with  y. 
JVum.  1.  4.  with  y.  shall  be  a  man  of  every  tribe 

17.  4.  the  testimony,  where  I  will  meet  with  y. 
Deut.  5.  33.  and  that  it  may  be  well  with  y. 

12. 12.  no  part  with  y.  \\  20.  4.  God  gooth  with  y. 

29.  14.  nor  with  y.  only  do  I  make  this  covenant 
.Josh.  7.  12.  neither  will  I  be  with  y.  any  more 
Ruth  2.  4.  and  Boaz  said,  the  Lord  be  with  y. 
\Sam.  22.  3.  let  my  father  and  mother  be  with  y. 

23.  23.  come  again  to  me,  and  I  will  go  with  y. 
'iSam.  16.  10.  what  have  I  to  do  imth  y.?  19.  22. 

18.  2. 1  will  surely  go  forth  with  y.  myself 
^Kings  10.  2.  seeing  your  master's  sons  are  with  y. 

23.  see  there  he  withy,  none  of  servants  of  Lord 
25  24.  and  it  shall  be  well  with  y.  Jer.  40.  9. 

1  Chron.  22.  18.  is  not  the  Lord  your  God  with  y."! 

2Chron.  13.  8.  there  are  with  y.  golden  calves 
15.  2.  the  Lord  is  with  y.  while  ye  be  with  him 

19.  6.  for  the  Lord  who  is  with  y.  in  the  judgment 

20.  17.  fear  not,  for  the  Lord  will  be  with  y. 
28.  10.  are  there  not  with  y.  even  with  y.  sins 

Ezra  4.2.  let  us  build  withy,  we  seek  your  God 
Job  42.  8.  lest  I  deal  with  y.  after  your  folly 
.Ter.  18.  6.  cannot  I  do  with  y.  as  this  potter? 
42.  11.  for  I  am  with  y.  Hag.  1.  13.  |  2.  4. 
Ezrk.  20.  35.  there  will  I  plead  with  y.  36. 

44.  know  I  am  Ld.  when  I  have  wrought  with  y. 
.Imos  5.  14.  the  God  of  hosts  shall  be  with  y. 
7.cch.  8.  23.  we  will  go  with  y.  for  God  is  with  y. 
Mat.  17. 17.  O  faithless  perverse  generat.  how  long 
shall  I  be  with  y.?  Mark  9. 19.  Lukc9.4l. 
26.  11.  for  ye  have  the  poor  always  with  y.  but 
me  ye  have  not  always,  .Tohn  12.  8. 
29. when  I  drink  it  new  w.  y.  in  myFather'e  king. 
2-f.  20.  I  am  with  y.  always  to  the  end  of  the  world 
Luke  24.  44. 1  snake  to  yon  while  I  was  tcith  y. 
4  Y 


YOU 

John  7.  33.  yet  a  little  while  am  I  with  y.  then  I 
go  to  him  that  sent  me,  12.  35.  |  13.  33 

14.  9.  Jesus  said,  have  I  been  so  long  with  y.l 
16.  Coiiilbrter,  that  he  may  abide  with  y  tor  ever 
17. he  dwelleth  withy. \\  25.  being  present  withy 
27.  peace  1  leave  with  y.  ||  16. 4.  1  was  with  y. 

jJcts  18.  14.  reason  would  1  should  bear  witli  y. 
20.  18.  I  have  been  with  y.  at  all  seasons 
Rom.  1.  12.  I  may  be  comlorted  together  with  y. 

15.  32.  that  I  may  with  y.  be  refreshed 

33.  now  the  God  of  peace  be  with  y.  all.     Amen, 
2  Cur.  13.  IL  PUil.  4.  9. 

16.  20.  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  bo 

with  y.  24.  ICor.  16.  23.  FhU.  4.  23.  Col  4. 
18.  I'J/iess.  5.  28.  'iThess.  3.  18.  2  7'm.  4. 
15.  Tit.  3.  15.  Heb.  13.  25.  2  John  3.  Rev. 
22.  21. 
ICor.  2.  3.  I  -wiiswith  y.  in  weakness  and  in  fear 
4.  8.  that  we  also  might  reign  with  y. 
16.  10.  see  that  he  may  be  with  y.  without  feai 
24.  my  love  be  with  y.  all  in  Christ  Jesus 
2Cur.  1.  21.  he  that  establisheth  us  with  y.  is  God 
4.  14.  shall  raise  us  up  and  present  us  with  y. 

7.  3.  ye  are  in  our  hearts  to  die  and  live  with  y. 
11.  9.  when  I  was  present  with  y.  Gal.  4.  18,  20. 

Phil.  2.  17.  I  joy  and  rejoice  with  y.  all 
Col.  2.  5.  yet  am  I  with  y.  in  the  spirit,  joying 
2  Thess.  3. 1.  word  may  be  glorified,  as  it  is  with  y. 
16.  Lord  of  peace  give  peace,  the  L.  be  w.  y.  all 
Heb.  12.  7.  God  dealeth  with  y.  as  with  sons 
l/'c«.  5. 14.  peace  be  ic!«Ay.  all  that  are  in  Christ 
'iPet.  2.  13.  spots  and  blemishes,  while  they  feast 
YOURS.  [with  y. 

Gen.  45.  20.  the  good  of  the  land  of  Egypt  is  y. 
iJeut.  11. 24.  the  soles  of  your  feet  tread  shall  be  y. 
Josh.  2.  14.  tlie  men  answered  our  life  for  y. 
•2Chron.  20.  15.  the  battle  is  not  y.  but  God's 
./cr.  5.19.  shall  serve  strangers  in  land  that  is  not  y. 
J.uke  G.  20.  for  y.  is  the  kingdom  of  God 
./«/t»15.20.if  kept  my  saying,  they  will  keep  y.  alto 
lCor.3.21.  not  glory  in  men,  for  all  things  are  7^.  22. 

8.  9.  lest  this  liberty  ofy.  become  a  stumbling 
16.  18.  for  they  have  retVeshed  my  spirit  and  y. 

2  Cor.  12.  14.  for  I  seek  not  y.  but  you 

YOUiN'G. 
Gen.  31.38.  thy  she-goats  have  not  cast  their  y. 
33.  13.  the  flocks  and  herds  with  y.  are  with  rao 
Exod.  23.  26.  there  shall  nothing  cast  their  y. 
/>f  i,'.22.28.shall  not  kill  it  and  her  j/.both  in  one  day 
Dfut.  22.  6.  thou  shalt  not  take  the  dam  with  the  y 
7.  let  the  dam  go  and  take  the  y.  to  thee 
28.  50.  which  will  not  shew  favour  to  the  y. 
32.  11.  as  the  eagle  fluttereth  over  her  y. 
2Sam.  9.  12.  Mephibosheth  had  a  y.  son  Micha 
IChron.  22.  5.  Solomon  my  son  is  y.  29. 1. 
^Chrov.  13.  7.  when  Rehoboani  was  y.  and  tendef 
34.3.  Josiah,  while  he  wa.'*  yet  y.  began  to  seek  G 
Psal.  78.  71.  from  following  ewes  great  with  y. 
84.  3.  swallow  a  nest,  where  she  may  lay  her  y. 
Isa.  40. 11.  shall  gently  lead  those  that  are  with  y 
Jer.  31.12.  shall  flow  together  for  they,  of  the  fiock 
Ezek.  17.  4.  cropped  oft  the  toj)  of  his  y.  twigs,  22L 
Mark  7. 25. whose  y. daughter  had  an  unclean  spirit 
Jokn  21.  18.  when  y.  thou  girdedst  thyself 
See  Old. 
YOUNG  ass,  or  asses. 
Isa.  3fl.  6.  carry  riches  on  the  shoulders  of  y.  asset 

24.  the  y.  asses  shall  eat  clean  provender 

Jokn  12.  14.  when  he  found  a  y.  ass  sat  thereon 

See  BuLLorK. 

Y'OUNG  bullocks. 

.ATum.  28.  11.  shall  offer  two  y.  bullocks,  19,  27. 

Ezra  6.  9.  give  what  they  need,  both  y.  bullookt 

YOUK'G  calf. 
Lev.  9.  2.  take  thee  a  y.  calf  for  a  sin  offering 
See  Child,  Children. 
YOUNG  cow. 
Isa.  7.21.  that  a  man  shall  nourish  a  y.  cow 

YOUNG  dromedaries. 
Esth.8.10.  he  sent  letters  by  riders  on  y.  dromedar. 

Y'OUNG  eagles. 
Prov.  30.  17.  and  the  y.  eagles  shall  eat  it 

YOUNG  hart. 

Cant.  2.  9.  my  beloved  is  like  a  y.  hart,'i7.  |  8. 14. 

See  Lion,  Lions,  Man,  Men. 

YOUNG  one. 

7?CH^28. 57.  her  eye  shall  be  evil  toward  hery.  one 

Zech.  IL  16.  neither  shall  seek  they,  owe,  nor  heal 

YOUNG  ones. 
Deut.  22.  6.  whether  they  be  y.  ones  or  eggs 
.Job  38.41.when  his  y.  ones  cry  to  God  they  wander 
39.  3.  they  bow,  they  bring  forth  their  y.  ones 
4.  their  y.  ones  are  in  good  liking,  they  grow  up 
16.  the  ostrich  is  hardened  against  her  y.  onca 
30.  the  eagles'  y.  ones  also  suck  up  blood 
Tsa.  11.  7.  their  y.  ones  shall  lie  down  together 
/.,a;«.4.3.thc  sea  monsters  give  suck  to  their  y.onM 

YOUxXG  pigeon. 
Gen.  15.  9.  take  me  a  turtle-dove,  and  a  y.  pigeon 
Lev.  12.  6.  bring  a  y. pigeon  for  a  Bin-offering 


YOU 

YOUNG  pigeons. 

IjH,.  1. 14.  he  shall  bring  his  oftoriiig  ofy.  pigeons 

y  7.  if  not  able  to  bring  a  lamb  iiu  sliall  bring 

two  y.  pigeons,  12. 8.  I J4.  22, 30.  |  15.  H,  2y. 

^um.  B.  10.  J.uke  2.  24. 

11.  if  ho  be  not  able  to  bring  two  y.  pigeons 

YOUNG  ravens. 

Ptal.  147. 9.  he  givctli  food  to  y.  ravens  which  cry 

YOUNG  rues. 
Cant.  4.  5.  thy  breasts  are  like  two  y.  rocs,  7.  3. 

YOUNG  virgin. 
\Kinga  1.  2.  let  there  be  sought  lor  my  lord  a  y.  v. 

YOUNG  7nrgins. 

Judg.  21.  12.  there  were  found  4U0  y.  virgins 

Esth.  2.  2.  let  fair  y.  virgins  bo  sought  for  the  king 

3.  tiiey  may  galher  together  all  the  y.  virgins 

VOUNU  unicorn. 

Psal.  29.  C.  Lebanon  and  Siriun  like  a  y.  unicorn 

YOUNG  woman. 
Ruth  i.  12.  Lord  shall  give  thee  of  this  y.  woman- 

YOUNG  women. 
Tit.  2.  4.  tliey  may  teach  y.  women  to  be  sober 

YOUNGER. 
Oen.  9.24.  Noah  knew  what  his  y.  son  had  done 
19.  31.  and  the  first  born  said  to  the  y.  34. 
38.  and  the  ij.  she  also  bare  a  son  Bcn-ammi 
25.  23.  the  elder  shall  serve  the  y.  Horn.  9.  12. 
27.  15.  Rebekah  put  them  on  Jacob  her  y.  son 
42.  she  sent  and  called  Jacob  her  y.  son 
29.  It),  the  name  of  the  y.  daughter  was  Rachel 

18.  I  will  serve  thee  seven  years  for  the  y. 
26.  it  must  not  be  so  done,  to  give  the  y.  first 

43.  29.  is  this  your  y.  brother  of  whom  ye  sjiake 
48-  14.  Israel  laid  his  right  hand  on  the  y. 

19.  his  y.  brolhcr  shai;  be  gretiter  than  ho 
Jndg.  1.  13.  Caleb's  y.  brother  took  it,  3.  9. 

15.  2.  is  not  her  y.  sister  fairer  than  she"! 
l.Sam.  14.  49.  Saul's  y.  daughter  was  Michal 
\Chr.  24.  31 .  cast  lots  over-against  their  y.  brethren 
Job  30.  1.  that  are  y.  than  I,  have  mo  in  derision 
Eiek.  IG.  40.  and  thy  y.  sister  is  Sudom 

61.  shall  receive  thy  sisters,  thine  elder  and  y. 
Luke  15.  12.  the  y.  said,  falher,give  me  the  portion 

13.  the  y.  gathered  all,  and  took  his  journey 
22.  2G.  he  that  is  greatest,  let  him  be  as  the  y. 

1  Tim.  5.  1.  intreat  the  y.  men  as  brethren 
2.  the  y.  woman  as  sisters,  with  all  purity 

11.  the  y.  widows  refuse,  for  when  they  begin 

14.  I  will  therefore  that  the  y.  women  marry 
XPet.  5.  3.  like>vise,  ye  y.  submit  to  the  elder 

YOUNGEST. 
Gen.  42.  13.  the  y.  is  this  day  with  our  father,  32. 

15.  except  your  y.  brother  come,  20, 34. 1 44.23,26. 

43.  33.  they  sat,  the  y.  according  to  his  youth 

44.  2.  put  silver  cup  in  the  sack's  mouth  of  the  y. 

12.  he  began  at  the  eldest,  and  left  otf  at  the  y. 
Ji?sA.6. 20.  inhis  »/.  son  set  up  gates,  l/ri«jDrs  16. 34. 
Judg.  9.  5.  yet  Jotham  the  y.  son  was  left 
\Sam.  IC.  11.  he  said,  there  remains  yet  the  y. 

17.  14.  David  was  y.  the  eldest  followed  Saul 
iCkron.  21. 17.  none  left  save  Jehoahaz  the  y. 
23. 1.  made  Ahaziah  his  y.  son  k.n?  in  his  stead 

YOUtH. 
Cm  8.  SI.  th«  imuination  is  evil  from  hia  y. 
706 


YOU 

Cen.  43. 33.  and  the  youngest  according  to  bis  y. 

46.  34.  about  cattle,  from  our  y.  even  till  now 
I^ev.  22.  13.  in  her  father's  house,  as  in  her  y. 
JV*i/m.30.  3.  being  in  her  father's  house,  in  her  (^.  16. 
Jud^.8.20.  the  y.  drew  not  a  sword,  because  yet  a  y. 
lHarn.  17.  33.  thou  butu^.  he  a  man  of  war  rVom^. 
42.  furhe  was  but  a  y.  |{  55.  whose  son  is  this  ^.7 
2.So7n.  19.  7.  the  evil  that  befell  thee  from  thy  y. 
I  Kings  18.  12.  but  I  fear  the  Lord  from  my  y. 
Job  IJ.  26.  to  possess  the  iniquities  of  my  y. 

20.  11.  his  bones  are  full  of  the  sin  of  his  y. 

29.  4.  asl  wasindaysofmy  1/.  whensecretof  God 

30.  12.  on  my  right  hand  riso  the  y.  Ihey  push  away 

31.  18.  from  my  y.  he  was  brought  up  with  me 
33.  25.  he  shall  return  to  the  days  of  his  y. 

36. 14.  hypocrites  die  in  y.  and  their  life  is  unclean 
Psat.  25.  7.  remember  not  the  sins  of  my  y. 
71.  5.  O  Lord,  thou  art  my  trust  from  my  y. 
17.  O  God,  thou  hast  taught  me  from  my  y. 
83,  15.  I  am  afllicted,  and  ready  to  die  from  my  y. 
83.  45.  the  days  of  his  y.  hast  thou  shortened 
103.  5.  so  that  thy  y.  is  renewed  like  the  eagle's 
110.  3.  from  morning,  thou  hast  the  dew  of  thy  y. 
127.  4.  as  arrows,  so  are  the  chilrlren  of  thy  y. 
129.  1.  they  have  alllicted  me  from  my  y. 
144.  12.  thaloursonsbe  as  plants  grown  up  in  y. 
Prov.  2.  17.  which  forsaketh  the  guide  of  her  y. 
5.  18.  and  rejoice  with  the  wife  of  thy  y. 
Keel.  11.  9.  rejoice,  O  young  man,  in  thy  y. 
10.  for  childhood  and  y.  are  vanity 
12.  1.  remember  thy  Creatorin  thedaysof  thy  y. 
Isa.  47. 12.  wherein  thou  hast  laboured  from  thy  y. 

15.  thy  merchants  from  thy  y.  shall  wander 
54.  4.  thou  shall  forget  the  shame  of  thy  y. 

0.  for  the  Lord  halh  called  thee  as  a  wife  of  y. 
Jer.  2.  2.  I  remember  the  kindness  of  thy  y. 
3.  4.  my  Father,  thou  art  the  guide  of  my  y. 
Sl.dovoured  the  labour  of  our  fathers  from  our  y. 
25.  we  and  our  fathers  from  our  y.  have  sinned 

22.  21.  this  hath  'oeen  thy  manner  from  thy  y. 

31.  19.  I  did  bear  the  reproach  of  my  y. 

32.  30.  have  only  done  evil  before  me  from  their  y. 
48.  11.  Moab  hath  been  at  ease  from  his  y. 

f.am.  3. 27.  it  is  good  that  he  bear  the  yoke  in  his  y. 

F.zek.  4.  14.  my  eoul  not  been  polluted  from  my  y. 

16. 22.  thou  hast  not  remembered  days  of  thy  y.  43. 

60.  I  will  remember  my  covenant  in  days  of  lliyy. 

23.  3.  they  committed  whoredoms  in  their  y. 
8.  for  in  her  y.  they  lay  with  her  and  bruised 
19.  call  to  remembrance  the  days  of  her  y.  21. 

//os.2.15.she  shall  sing  there  as  in  the  days  of  her  y. 
.loel  1.  8.  lament  as  virgin  for  the  husband  of  her  y. 
Zcch.  13.  5.  I  am  a  husbandman,  for  man  taught 
nie  to  keep  cattle  from  my  y. 
Mai.  2. 14.  between  thee  and  the  wife  of  thy  y. 

15.  let  none  deal  treacherously  ag.  wife  of  his  y. 

Mat.  19.  20.  all  these  have  I  kept  from  my  y.  what 

lack  I  yet?  Mark  10.  20.  J.n'ke  18.  21. 

Jlcts  06.  4.  my  manner  of  life  from  my  y.  know  all 

1  Tim.  4. 12.  let  no  man  despise  thy  y.  be  an  cxamii. 

YOUTHS. 
Prov.1.1. 1  discerned  among  the  y.  a  young  man 
void  of  understanding 
laa.  40.  30.  eren  the  y.  shall  faint  and  be  weary 


ZEA 

YOUTHFUL. 
■2Tim.  2.  22.  flee  also  y.  lusts  but  fjUow  faita 


z. 


ZEAL 

Is  a  mixed  passion,  composed  rf  grief  and  anger 
firvent  love  and  desire;  fur  what  a  man  lovea 
cameslly,  he  is  careful  to  sec  it  honuurtd,  and 
grieved  when  it  is  dishonoured.  Phinehas  u 
comniendrd  for  having  expressed  much  zeal 
against  Ihuae  wicked  persons  that  violated  the 
law  of  the  J.ord,  Num.  25.  II,  13.  JJnd  in 
l*6al.69.9,  the  Psalmist  says,  'i'lie  zra/of  tjiine 
house  liaih  eaten  me  up:  "■My  earnest  desire 
to  have  all  things  duly  ordered  about  thy  wor- 
ship, and  my  just  displeasure  and  indigna- 
tion at  all  abuses  theriin,  have  overcome  me, 
have  wasted  my  natural  7/lui^fure  and  vital 
spirits." 

Zeal  is  taken  either  in  good  or  ill  part.  There 
may  be  an  eagerness  in  pursuing  g  ood  things, 
when  neither  the  end  nor  manni  r  of  doing  it  is 
guild.  Such  was  t/ic  zeal  of  Jihu,  2  Kings  10.16. 
He  was  eager  in  executing  the  cuinviauds  of 
(iod,  but  he  did  it  to  be  seen  of  men:  Come, 
sec  my  zeal  lor  the  Lord.  Such  also  was  the 
zeal  of  thuse  .lews  whom  Ht.  Paul  speaks  of. 
Horn.  10.  2,  They  have  a  zeal  of  God,  but  not 
according  to  knowledge.  "  They  have  an  ear- 
nest desire  to  maintain  the  law  and  worship  of 
Ood  instituted  by  Mosis,  thinking  thereby  to 
promote  the  glory  of  (iod,  but  though  this  be  a 
warm,  yet  it  is  a  blind  zeal :  Thry  know  not  the 
will  of  Ood,  or  what  that  righteousness  ii 
whereby  a  person  is  juslijied  bifore  Ood." 

•iSam.  21.  2.  Saul  sought  to  slay  them  in  his  z. 

iKinirs  10.  16.  come  and  see  my  :.  for  tlie  Lord 
19.  31.  the  z.of  the  Lord  shall  do  this,  iia.  37.  32. 

Psal.  69.0.  the  z.  of  thy  house  hath  eaten  me  up 

and  reproaches  are  fallen  on  me,  .lohn  2.  17. 

1 19.139.my  z.  hath  consumed  me,  because  en>'niie( 

Isa.  9.  7.  the  :.  of  the  Lord  will  perform  this 
59.  17.  and  he  was  clad  with  z.  as  a  cloak 
63.  15.  where  is  thy  z.  and  thy  strength? 

F.zrk.  5. 13.  that  I  the  Lord  have  spoken  it  in  my  z. 

Pom.  10.  2.  I  bear  record,  that  they  have  z.  of  God 

2Cor.  7.  11.  yea  what  z.?  |{  9.  2.  and  your  z.  hath 
provoked  very  many 

Phil.  3.  6.  concerning  z.  persecuting  the  church 

Col.  4.  13.  that  he  hath  a  great  z.  for  you 
ZEALOUS. 

J\"wm.  25.  11.  while  he  was  z.  for  my  sake 

13.  he  was  z.  for  his  God  and  made  atonement 

.rins  21.  20.  and  they  are  all  z.  of  the  law  • 

22.  3.  Paul  was  z.  toward  God,  Oul.  1.  14. 

\Cor.  14.  12.  as  ye  are  i.  of  spiritual  gifu 

'/'/(.2.14. purity  a  peculiar  people,  z.  of  good  works 

Hcv.  3. 19.  as  many  as  I  love,  I  rebuke  and  chasten  : 
be  z.  therefore,  and  repeal 
ZEALOUSLY. 

Gal.  4.  17.  they  z.  affect  you,  but  not  well 
18  it  is  good  to  be  z.  affected  in  <i  good  thing 


AN    ALPHABETICAL 

TABLE    OF    THE    PROPER    NAMES 

IN    THE 

OLD    AND    BTEW    TESTAIVEEIXTTS ; 

TOGETHER    WITH   THE 

SHcanCnij  ot  cStfiitification  oC  tlje  WLoxtiH  in  t^tiv  (DilfiCnal  aaiifluafics. 


J^otc,— There  are  some  Proper  Names  in  this  TABLE,  which  are  not  in  the  following  Part  of  the  CONCORDANCE,  being  seldom  menlioncd 
in  Scripture.     To  these,  a  reference  to  the  Place  in  which  they  are  found,  is  here  annexeu. 


AARON,  signifies  lofty,  or  mountainous;  or, 
mountain  of  strength  ;  or,  a  teaclier,  or  teach- 
ing. The  first  high  priest  of  the  Jeics,  the  son 
of  Jimram,  brother  to  jMoscs.  He,  at  the  desire 
of  the  people,  made  a  calf,  which  lliey  worship- 
ped, and  thereby  committed  a  great  sin.  He 
was,  with  his  suns,  anointed  and  consecrated 
to  the  priest's  office,  Lev.  8. 

AARONITES. 

ABADDON,  the  destroyer.  Rev.  9.  11. 

AB.\GTHA,  father  of  the  wine-press. 

ABAN.A,  made  of  stone,  or  a  building. 

ABARIM,  passages,  or  passengers. 

ABDA,  a  servant,  or  servitude. 

ABDt,  he  is  my  servant. 

ABDIEL,  the  servant  of  God ;  or,  cloud  of  the 
abundance  of  God. 

ABDON,  a  .servant,  or  cloud  of  judgment. 

ABED-NEGO,  servant  ofligbt,  Dan.  3.  23. 

ABEL,  .Adam's  second  son,  signifies  vanity,  or 
breath,  or  vapour.  Gen.  4.  4. 

ABEL,  a  city,  siiniifirs  mourning. 

ABEL-BETH-MAACHAH,  mourning  to  the 
house  of  Maachah. 

ABEL-MAI.M,  the  mourning  of  the  waters;  or, 
the  valley  of  waters. 

ABEL-MEHOLAH,  sorrow  or  mourning  of 
vi'pakni'ss,  or  of  sickness. 

ABEL-MIZRAIM,  the  mourning  of  the  Egypti- 
ans, Gen.  .W.  11. 

ABEL-SHITTIM,  mourning  of  the  thorns.  It 
was  a  city  near  therioer  Jordan  in  the  wilder- 
ness, Num.  33.  49. 

ABEZ,  an  egg,  or  muddy.  .^  city  in  the  tribe 
nf  Issachar,  Josh.  10.  20. 

ABI,  my  father.  Tlie  mother  of  Hnekiah, 
2  Kin  ITS  IS.  2. 

ABIAH,  the  Lord  is  my  father,  or  the  father  of 
the  I/ord. 

ABI-.ALBON,  most  intelligent  father,  or  the  fa- 
ther over  the  building  ;  or,  father  of  injury. 

ABIATHAR,  excellent  father,  or  father  of  him 
that  survived,  1  Sam.  22.  20. 

ABIB,  jreen  fruits,  or  ears  of  corn. 

ABIDAH,  the  father  of  knowledge,  or  the  know- 
ledge of  the  father.  One  of  the  sons  of  Midian, 
Gen.  2.1.  4. 

ABID.AN,  father  of  judgment,  or  my  father  is 
judse. 

ABIEL,  God  mv  father,  or  my  God  the  father. 
He  icns  the  father  of  Kish,  1  Pam.  9.  1. 

ABIEZER,  father  of  help,  or  help  of  the  father, 
or  mv  father  is  my  help. 

ABf-EZRITE. 

ABIGAIL,  father  of  joy,  or  the  joy  of  the  fa- 
ther, 1  Sam.  2.'>.  3. 

ABIHAIL,  the  father  of  strength,  or  father  of 
trouble. 

ABIIIIT,  he  is  my  father,  or  his  father. 

ABU  AH,  the  will  of  tha  Lord,  or  the  Lord  is 
mv  father. 

ABI.TAM,  father  of  the  sen. 

ABILENE,  the  father  of  the  apartment,  or  of 
mourning.  .4  prninise  between  IJbanus  and 
.^ntilibanus,  whereof  Lysanias  was  tctrarch, 
Luke  3.  1. 

ABIMAEL,  a  falher  sent  fron^i  God,  or  my  father 
707 


ACH 

comes  from  God.  He  was  the  son  of  Joktan, 
Gen.  10.  28. 

ABIMELECH,  father  of  the  king,  or  my  father 
the  king. 

ABINADAB,  father  of  willingness;  or,  my  fa- 
ther is  a  prince. 

ABINOAM,  father  of  beauty,  or  comeliness; 
or,  my  father  is  beautiful. 

ABIRAiM,  a  high  father,  or  father  of  fraud. 

ABISHAG,  ignorance  of  the  father. 

ABISHAI,  the  present  of  my  father,  or  the  fa- 
ther of  the  present ;  otherwise,  tde  father  of 
the  sacrifice,  or  the  sacrifice  of  my  father. 

ABISHALOM,  the  father  of  peace,  or  the  peace 
of  the  father  ;  or,  the  recompense  of  the  father, 
1  Kinrrs  15.  2. 

ABISHtJA,  father  of  salvation,  or  of  magnifi- 
cence, or  the  salvation  of  my  father,  1  Chr.  G.  4. 

ABISHUR,  the  father  of  the  wall,  or  of  up- 
rightness ;  or,  my  father  is  upright.  1  Chron. 
2.28. 

ABITAIL,  the  father  of  the  dew;  or,  the  father 
of  the  shadow,  according  to  the  Syriac.  One 
of  David's  wives,  2  Sam.  3.4. 

ABITUB,  father  of  goodness,  or  my  father  is 
good.     1  Chron.  8.  11. 

ABIHTJD,  father  of  praise,  or  glovy  of  my  father. 

ABNER,  falher  of  light,  or  the  lamp  of  the  fa- 
ther, or  the  son  of  the  father. 

.ABRAM,  a  high  father;  the  father  of  elevation. 

.ABRAHAM,  the  father  of  a  great  multitude. 
./?J  the  command  of  Ood  Abraham  went  out  of 
Ur  of  the  Chaldees,  his  native  country,  into 
Canaan,  where  the  J^ord  promisedto  give  that 
land  to  his  seed.  The  Messiah  was  promised 
to  be  of  his  family,  for  in  his  seed  all  the 
families  of  the  earth  were  to  be  blessed.  Gen. 
12.  3.  Acts  3.  25.  Gal.  3.  8.  He  was  circum- 
cised with  all  his  household,  and  taught  his 
family  to  keep  the  commands  of  God.  His 
faith  was  tried  in  being  cummanded  to  offer  up 
his  son  Isaac ;  but  the  angel  of  the  Dord  stayed 
him,  and  Isaac  was  exchanged  with  a  ram. 
Isaac  in  this  matter  was  an  eminent  type  and 
figure  of  Christ,  who,  in  the  time  appointed  by 
God,  was  to  be  offered  up  a  sacrifice  for  the  sins 
of  those  that  believe  in  him.  The  spiritual 
children  of  faithful  Abraham,  are  those  that 
believe  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  do  the  works  of 
Abraham,  .Tohn  8.  39.  Rom.  4.  10.  and  9.  7. 
Gal.  .3.  7,  29. 

ABSALOM,  father  of  peace,  or  the  peace  of  the 
father. 

ACCAD,  a  vessel,  a  pitcher;  or,  a  sparkle. 
The  city  where  J^Timrod  reigned,  Gen.  10.  10. 

ACCHO,  close,  inclosed,  pressed  together. 

ACELDAMA,  the  field  of  blood,  .acts  1.  19. 

ACHAIA,  erief,  or  trouble. 

ACHAICUS,  a  native  of  Achaia. 

ACHAN,  or  ACHAR,  he  that  troubles  and 
bruises. 

ACHBOR,  a  rat;  o/Aeriri>f,  bruising  or  inclosing 
the  well.  He  was  father  of  Baal-hanan,  the 
srvFvth  king  of  Edam,  Gen.  36.  38. 

ACIUIVI.  preparing,  confirming,  or  revenging. 

.\rHISFI,  thus  it  is  ;  or  how  is  this  T 

ACnMETHA,aci«y. 


ADR 

ACHOR,  trouble. 

ACH8AH,  adorned;  or,  bursting  of  the  veil. 

ACHSHAPH,    poison,     tricks;    or,    one     that 

breaks;  or,  the  lip  or  brim  of  any  thing. 
ACHZIB,   liar,  lying;   or,  that  runs;   or,   that 

delays. 
ADADAH,   the   witness  or    testimony   of   the 

assembly.     The  name  of  a  city ,  Josh.  15.  22. 
ADAH,  an  assembly.     The   wife   of   Lamech, 

Gen.  4.  19.     Also    the   wife   of  Esau,  Gen. 

36.2. 
ADAl.AH,  the  witness  of  the  Lord.     The  father 

of  Jeiiidah,  mother  of  Josiah,  2  Kings  22.  1. 
ADALIAH,  one  that  draws  water;  or,  poverty, 

or  cloud,    vapour,  death.     One  of   Hanian'l 

sons,  Eslh.  9.8. 
ADAM,  earthy,  taken  out  of  red    earth.     The 

name  of  the  first  man,  who  was  made  after  the 

imaire  of  God,  in  a  holy  and  happy  estate, but 

by  his  fall  and  disobedience  broke  covenant 

with   Ood,  and  thereby  brought  kimsdf  and 

all  his  posterity  into  an  estate  of  sin  and 

misery,  Rom.  5.    12.     But  our  J.ord  Jesus 

Christ,  the  second  Adam,  is  the  Saviour  and 

Redeemer  of    all  that   truly  believe  in  him, 

Mark  16.  16.  Acts  4.  12.  and  16.  31. 
ADAMAH,  red  earth.     A  city.  Josh.  19.36. 
AD  A  MI,  mv  man,  red,  earthy,  human.     A  city, 

Josh.  19.  33. 
ADAR,  high,  or  eminent. 
ADBEEL,  a  vapour,  a  cloud  of  God  ;  otherwise, 

a  vexer  of  God.     One  of  Ishmael's  suns,  Gen. 

25.  13. 
ADDI,  my  witness,  adorned,  passage,  prey. 
ADDON,    basis,     foundation,   the    Lord.      The 

name  of  a  place,  Neh.  7.  61. 
ADIEL,   the    witness   of  the   Lord.    1  CAroit. 

4.  36. 
ADIN,  adorned,  or  voluptuous,  dainty.     Ezra 

8.  fi. 
ADITHAIM,  assemblies,  or  testimonies.    Josh. 

15.  3«. 
ADL.AI,  my  witness,  my  ornament.     1  Chron. 

27.  29. 
A  DM  AH,  earthy,  red  earth. 
ADMATH.A,  a'cloud  of  death,  a  mortal  vapour. 

Esth.  1.  14. 
ADN.AH,  rest,  or  testimony  eternal.     1  Chron. 

12.  20.      ^ 
ADONI-BEZEK,  the  lightning  of  the  Lord,  or 

the  Lord  of  lightning  ;  or,  the  Loid  of  Bezek ; 

for  he  v^as  king  of  this  city. 
ADONIJAH,  the  Lord  is  my  master. 
ADONIKAM,  the  Lord  is  raised,  or  iny  Lord 

hath  r.nised  me. 
ADONIRAM,  my  Lord  is   most   high,  or   tho 

Lord  of  miirlit  and  elevation.     1  Kings  i.  6. 
ADONt-ZEDEK,  justice    of  the  Lord,  or  the 

Lord  of  justice.     He  was  king  of  Jerusalem, 

Josh.  10.  1. 
ADORAM,  their  beauty,  their  power,  or  their 

praise.     He    was    David's   tribute-gatherer, 

2  Sam.  20.  24. 
ADORAI.M,    strength   or   power    of    the    tea 

2  Chron.  11.  0. 
ADRAMMELECH,  the  clokc,  glory,  grander, 

or  power  of  the  king. 


AMM- 


ADRAAIMYTTIUM,  the  court  of  death,  Uie 

mansion  of  death. 
ADRIA,  the  name  of  a  city,  which  gives  name 

to  the  .Idriatic  sea,  now  the  gulf  of  Venice, 
ADULIiAM,    their   testimony,    their    prey,  or 

their  ornament. 
AGABUS,  a  locust,  or  the  feajt  of  the  father. 
AGAG,  roof,  floor. 
AGAGITE,  of  the  race  of  Agag. 
AGAR,  see  HAGAR. 
AGRIPPA,  this  word  is  Latin,  andsignifes  one 

who  at  his  birlh  causes  great  puin,  who  is  born 

with  his  leet  foremost,  if gcr  partus. 
AGUR,  a  stranger,  or  gathering,  or  gatliered  to- 
gether 
AHAIJ,  the  brother  of  the  father,  uncle  or  father 

of  the  brother. 
AHASUKRUS,  prince,  head,  or  chief. 
AHAV.A,  csserjce,  or  generation. 
AHAZ,  one  that  takes  and  possesses. 
AHAZt.MI,  seizure,  possession,  or  vision  of  the 

Lord. 
AHIAH,  brother  of  the  Lord. 
AHIEZKR,  brother  of  assistance,     j?  prince  of 

the  tribe  of  Dan,  Num.  1.  12. 
AHIJAH,  the  same  with  AHIAH. 
AHIK.\>i,  a  brother  that  raises  up. 
AHILUD,  a  brother  born.     He  was  secretary  to 

David,  2  Sam.  8;  16. 
AHIMAAZ,    brother    of  the    council,    or   my 

brother  is  counsellor. 
AHIM.AN,  a  brother  prepared,  or  brother  of  the 

right  hand. 
AHlMELECH,  my  brother  is  a  king,  or  the 

brother  of  my  king. 
AHIMOTH,  brother  of  death,  or  my  brother  is 

dead.     1  Ckron.  6.  25. 
AHINOAM,  the  beauty  and  comeliness  of  the 

brother,  or  brother  of  motion. 
AHIO,  his  brotiier,  his  brethren. 
AHIRA,  brother  of  iniquity  ;  otherwise,  brother 

or  companion  of  the  shepherd.     He  was  chief 

of  the  tribe  of  .Vaphtali,  Num.  1.  15. 
AHIS.ViM.VCH,  brother  of  strength  or  support, 

or  my  brother  supports  me. 
AHISHAR,  brother  of  a  prince,  or  brother  of  a 

gong.  He  was  steward  of  Sviomo7t's  household, 

1  Kings  4.  0. 
AHITIK  »PHEL,  brother  of  ruin  or  folly. 
AHITUB,  brother  of  goodness,  or  my  brother  ia 

good. 
AHIHUD,  brother  of  praise.     The  prince  of  the 

tribe  of  Jishfr,  Num.  34.  27. 
AHLAB,  which  is  of  milk,  or  which  is  fat;  other- 
wise, brother  of  the  heart.   The  name  of  a  city, 

Judg.  1.  31. 
AHOL.MI,  his  'abernacle,  his  tent. 
AHOMAn,  the  tent,  or  tabernacle  of  the  father- 
AHOI.UiAII,  my  tent  and  my  tabernacle  in  her 
AHOLIB.V.MAH,  my  tabernacle  is  exalted. 
A\,  or  HAI,  mass  or  heap. 
AIOTH,  the  same  as  hi. 
AJALON,  a   chain  ;   otherwise,  strength,  or  a 

stag. 
ALA.MMELECH,  God  is  king.     A  city.  Josh. 

19.  26. 
ALEXANDER,  is  a  Greek  word,  and  signifies 

one  that  assisU  men,  or  one  that  helps  stoutly  ; 

or,  one  that  turns  away  evil. 
■ALEXANDRIA,  a  citj^  in  F.g^t. 
ALLELUI.\,  praise  the  Lord,  or  praise  to  the 

Lord. 
ALLO.V,  an  o:ik,  or  strong.  1  Chron.  4.  3' 
ALLON-B.ACflUTH,  the  oak  of  weeping.    The 

place  where  Ucbckah's  nurse  was  buried.  Gen 

15.8. 
ALMODAD,  measure  of  God.     Gen.  10.  26. 
ALPFI.A,  lite  first  letter  of  the  Greek  alphabet, 

marked  A. 
ALPHEIJ.S,  a  thousand  ;  otherwise,  learned,  or 

chief. 
AM.^LEK,  a  people  that  licks  up,  or  that  takes 

Hway  all ;  otherwise,  a  people  that  strikes,  or 

that  uv.  ill. 
AM.A  I.KK  IT  I!.",  people  descended  from  Amalek. 
AMANA,  integrity  and  truth. 
AMARIAII,  \\v  Lord  nays,  or  the  excellency  of 

the  Lord.     y.tph.^.X. 
AMAf.A,  a  furgivinj  people,  or  sparing  the  peo- 
ple ;  otherwise,  the  biinhn  of  the  people. 
AMAZIAII,  the  strength  of  the  Lord. 
AMM  All,  my  people. 
AM  MI,  /he  same  with  AMMAII. 
AMMI-.NADin,  my  people  in  liberal,  or  prince 

of  the  pp<i()lc,  or  a  people  that  vuwt. 
AMMIIlUn,  people  of  praise,  or  praise  is  with 

me,  .Viim.  I.  10. 
AMMISIIADDAI,  the  people  of  the  Almighty, 

or  the  Almighty  is  with  me.     A'um.  1.  12. 
AMMON,  a  people,  or  the  »on  ofmr  people. 
T08 


ARN 

AMMONITES,  A  people  that  descended  of  Ben 
ammi,  son  of  Lot  by  his  youngest  daughter . 

AMNON,  faithful  and  true;  otherwise,  foster- 
father,  or  tutor ;  or,  son  of  the  mother. 

AMON,  faithful,  true. 

AMORITE,  hitler,  a  rebel ;  otherwise,  a  babbler 
or  prater. 

AMOS,  loading,  weighty. 

AMOZ,  strong,  robust. 

AMPHIPOLIS,  a  city  encompassed  by  the 
sea. 

AMPLIAS,  large,  extensive.    A  Latin  word. 

AMR.AiM,  an  exalted  people;  or,  their  sheaves, 
or  handfuls  of  corn. 

AMR.APHEL,  one  that  speaks  of  hidden  things; 
or,  one  that  speaks  of  judgment,  or  of  ruin 

.ANAH,  one  who  answers,  or  who  sings  ;  other- 
wise, poor  or  afflicted. 

ANAK,  a  collar,  or  ornament. 

ANAKl.MS. 

-ANAMMELECH,  answer,  or  song  of  the  king 
and  council. 

.AN.ANI.AS,  the  cloud  of  the  Lord. 

.ANATHOTII,  answer,  song;  or,  afflictionc po- 
verty. 

ANDREW,  a  stout  and  strong  man.  A  Greek 
word. 

ANDRONICUS,  a  man  excelling  others,  a  vic- 
torious man.     Greek. 

ANER,  answer,  song,  affliction,  of  light. 

ANNA,  gracious,  merciful. 

ANNAS,  one  that  answers,  that  afflicts  and 
liumbles,  or  gracious,  merciful.  A  high  priest 
who  sent  Christ  bound  to  Caiaphas  his  father- 
in-law. 

ANTICHRIST,  an  adversary  to  Christ. 

ANTIOCII,  for,  or  instead  ol  a  chariot;  or,  equal 
in  speed  with  a  chariot. 

ANTIPAS,  for  all,  or  against  all.  One  of  the 
martyrs  slain  by  the  people  of  Fergamus,  Rev 
2.  13. 

ANTIPATRIS,  for,  or  against  the  father. 

APELLESjfl  Greekword  from  the  verb  x!rtKKw, 
I  exclude,  I  separate. 

APHEK,  a  stream,  a  rapid  torrent ;  or,  strength, 
vigour. 

.APOLLONIA,  perdition,  destruction. 

APOLLOS,  one  that  destroys  and  lays  waste. 

.APOLLYON,  one  that  exterminates  or  destroys 

.\PPHI.A,  that  produces,  or  is  fruitful.  Philem.'i. 

APPII-FORUM,  a  town  so  called  from  Appius 
Claudius,  whose  statue  was  erected  there. 

AOUIL.A,  an  eagle.    Latin. 

AR,  awaking,  watching,  evacuation,  uncovering. 

ARABIA,  evening,  or  a  place  wild  and  desert ; 
or,  hostages,  ravens  ;  and  also,  mixtures  ;  be- 
cause this  country  was  inhabited  by  different 
kinds  of  people. 

ARABIAN. 

ARAM,  highness,  magnificence;  otherwise,  one 
that  deceives,  or  their  curse.  ARAM  signifies 
Syria  in  Gen.  22.  21.  and  elsewhere. 

ARARAT,  the  curse  of  trembling. 

ARAUNAII,  ark,  song,  joyful  cry,  curse. 

.ARB.A,  the  city  of  the  four. 

.ARCH  EL  A  US,  the  prince  of  the  people.  Greek. 

ARCHIPPUS,  a  governor  of  horses,  or  master 
of  the  horse.     Greek. 

ARCTURUS,  a  gathering  together. 

ARD,  one  that  commands,  or  ho  that  descends. 
A  son  of  Benjamin,  Gen.  46.  21. 

ARELI,  the  light  or  vision  of  God.    Gen.  46.  16. 

AREOPAGITE,  belonging  to  the  council  called 
Areopagus. 

AREOPAGUS,  the  hill  of  Mars  ;  a  place  where 
the  magistrates  of  Athens  held  their  supreme 
council:  from  aftnf.  Mars;  and  Tixyof 
a  hill. 

ARETAS,  one  that  is  agreeable,  that  pleases 
that  is  virtuous. 

ARGOB,  a  turf  of  earth,  or  fat  land,  or  curse 
of  the  well. 

ARIEL,  the  altar,  light,  or  linn  of  God. 

ARIMATHEA,a  lion  dead  to  the  Lord  ;  or,  the 
light  of  the  death  of  tho  Lord  ;  or  simply, 
Ramath,  or  Ramah,  a  city  where  Samuel  dwelt, 
1  Sam.  1.  19. 

ARIOCII,  long,  great,  tall;   or,  your  drunken- 
ness ;  or,  your  lion. 
ARISTARCIIUS,  a  good  prince,  tho  best  prince. 

Greek. 
ARI.STOBULUS,  a  good  counsellor,  good  ad- 
vice.    Greek. 
ARMAGEDDON,  tho  mountain  ot  Megiddo,or 
the  mountain  of  the  gospel ;    otherwise,   the 
mountain  of  fruits,  or  of  apples. 
ARMENIA,  a  province  which  is  supposed  to 

take  its  name  from  Aram. 
ARNON,  rejoicing,  or  leaping  for  joy  ;  <w,  their 
chest,  or  ark. 


BAB    [P»op«B  Namct. 

AROER,  heath,  tamarisk;  or,  the  nakedness  of 

the  skin  ;  or^  nakedness  of  the  watch,  or  of  the 

enemy. 
ARPAD,  the  light  of  redemption ;  or,  that  liei 

down,  that  makes  his  bed. 
.ARPHAXAD,  one  that  heals;  or,  one  that  re- 
leases. 
ARTAXERXES,  in  Hebrew,  Artachsasta,  Uke 

silence  of  light,  or  light  that  imposes  silence  ; 

oMer«!i«c,  joy  that  is  in  haste.  A  Persian  name. 
ARTEMAS,  whole,  sound,  or  without  fault. 
AS.A,  physician,  or  cure. 
ASAHEL,  the  work,  or  creature  of  God. 
AS.AI.AH,  the  Lord  hath  wrought;  or, a  creature 

of  the  Lord. 
.ASAPH, one thatassembles together;  or,one  that 

finishes  and  completes. 
ASENATH,  peril,  or  misfortune. 
ASHDOD,  inclination,  leaning;  or,  a  wild  open 

place  ;  or,  pillage,  theft. 
ASHER,  blessedness,  or  happiness. 
ASHIMA,  crime  ;  or,  position  ;  or,  fire  of  the  sea. 

The  name  of  an  idol,  2  Kings  17.  30. 
ASHKEN.AZ,  a  fire  that  distils  or  spreads.  One 

of  the  Sons  of  Gomer,  Gen.  10.  3. 
ASIITAROTH,  flocks,  the  sheep,  ot  riches. 
ASIIUR,  one  that  is  happy,  that  walks  on  pro» 

perously. 
ASI  \,  muddy,  boggy. 
ASKELON,  weight,  or  balance  ;  or,  fire  of  in 

fnmy. 
ASNAPPER,    unhappiness,   misfortune   of  the 

bull  or  calf;  or,  fruilfulness,  or  increase  of 

danger. 
ASSIR,  prisoner,  fettered,  1  Chron.  3.  17. 
ASSOS,  approaching,  coming  near  to.  Acts^.\3. 
ASSYRIA. 
ASSYRIAN. 

ASYNCRITUS,  incomparable. 
.ATAD,  a  thorn. 

ATH.ALIAH,  the  lime  of  the  Lord. 
ATHENIANS,  inhabitants  of  Athens. 
ATHENS,  so  called  from  Athene,  or  Athcnaia, 

Minerva. 
ATTALIAH,  that  increases  or  sends. 
AVEN,  iniquity,  force,  riches. 
AUGUSTUS,  increased,  augmented  ;  or,  royal, 

majpstic. 
AZARIAH,  assistance,  or  help  of  the  Lord;  or, 

he  that  hears  the  Lord,  or  whom  the  Lord  hears. 
AZEK  AH,  strength  of  walls. 
.AZGAD,  a  strong  army,  or  the   strength  of  a 

troop  ;  otherwise,  a  gang  of  robbers,  or  a  troop 

of  solilii'rs.     F.zra'2.1'2. 
AZNOTH-TABOR,  the  ears  of  T-iAor;  or,the 

ears  of  choice,  purity,  contrition,     .fosh.  19.34. 
AZOTUS,  the  same  as  ASHDOU,  pillage,  theft 

Acts  8.  40. 
AZUR,  he  that  assists,  or  he  that  is  assisted.  Jer 

23.1. 


B. 


BAAL,  he  that  rules  and  subdues;  or,  master, 
lord,  iir  husband. 
BAALAH,  her  idol;  or,  she  that  is  governed  or 

subdued,  n  spouse.     A  city.  Josh.  15.  9. 
BAAL-BERITH,  idol  of  the  covenant;  or,  ho 

that  possesses,  or  subdues  the  covenant. 
BAAL-G.AD,  the  idol  of  the  Iroop,  of  the  army, 

or  of  felicity  ;  otherwise,  the  Lord  is  master  of 

the  troop.     Josh.  11.  17. 
BAAL  H.AMON,  one  that  possesses  or  rules  a 

mullitnile;  a  populous  place 
BA.AL-IIERMO.V,  the  possessor  of  destruction  ; 

or,  of  a  thing  cursed,  devoted,  or  consecrated  to 

God.     Jl  is  a  mountain.     Judg.  3.  3. 
BA.ALI,  my  idol,  master,  or  lord  over  me. 
BAALI.M,  idoU,  masters,  false  gods. 
B.AALIS,  a  rejoicing,  or  pr<md  lord. 
BAAL-MEOSi,  tho  idol,  the  master  ofthc  house. 
BA.AL-PEOR,  master  of  the  opening. 
BA.AL-PER.AZIM,  master,  or  god  of  divisions, 

or  he  that  possesses  and  enjoys  divisions  and 

dissipations. 
BAAL  SII.ALISIIA,  tho    third    idol,  tho   third 

husband  ;  or. that  govcrnsorpresidesover  three. 
B.A.AL  TAM  AR,  master  ofthc  palm-tree. 
l!AAL-/KnUH,  the  master  of  flies. 
B.AAL-ZEPIIO.V,  the  idol,  or  possession  of  th« 

north  ;  nr,  hidden,  secret. 
BAAN.AII,  in  the  answer,  in  affliction. 
B.AASIIAH,  in  the   work,  or  in   tho    compres- 
sion ;  or,  he  that  seeks  and  demands,  or  wh« 

lavs  waste. 
B.ABEL,  confusion,  or  mixture. 
BABYLON,  the  sami  with  BADEL. 
BABYLOMAN.S. 
BABYLONISH. 


BitOPKR  NaMKS.]         bet 

BACA,  mulberry-tree. 

BAHURIM,  choice,  warlike,  valiant. 

BAJITH,  a  house. 

BALAAM,  the  oM  age  or  ancient  of  llie  pooi)le 

or  their  destruction  ;  or,  without  the  people. 
BALAK,  who  lays  waste  and  destroys;  or,  who 

licks  and  laps. 
BAMAH,  an  eminence,  or  high  place. 
BAR.^BBAS,  son  of  the  father,  or  of  the  master, 

or  the  son  of  confusion  «nd  sliamu. 
BARACHEL,  who  blesses  God,  who  bends  the 
knee  before  God.  The  father  of  Elihu,  Job  3'2.'2. 
BAR.\CmAS,  the  same  with  1J.\RACHEL. 
BARAK,  thunder,  or  in  vain. 
B.AR-JESIJS,  son  of  Jesus,  or  Joshua. 
B.^R-JONA,  the  son  ofJona,  or  of  u  dove. 
BARNABAS,  the  son  of  the  prophet,  or  of  con- 
solation. 
BARSABAS,  son  of  return,  or  of  conversion  ;  or 

son  of  rest,  or  son  of  swearing. 
BARTHOLOMEW,  a   son   that  suspends   the 

waters. 
BARTIMEUS,  the  son  of  Timeus,  or  of  the  per- 
fect and  honourable. 
BARUOH,  who  is  blessed,  who  bends  the  knee. 
BARZILL.M,  made  of  iron;  or,  the  son  of  con- 
tempt. 
B.^SUAN,  in  the  tooth,  or  in  the  ivory;  other- 
wise, in  the  change,  or  the  sleep. 
BASHEMATH,    port'umed ;    or,    confusion   of 

death  ;  otherwise,  in  desolation. 
3ATH-SHEB.^,  the   seventh   daughtei,  or  the 

daughter  of  an  oath. 
iJED.-\D,  alone,  solitary;   or,   in   friendship,  in 
the  bosom,  or  the  nii>ple.     He  was  father  of 
Hadad,  Gen.  36.  35. 
BEDAN,  only  ;  or,  in  tlie  judgment;  or,  accord- 
ing to  judgment. 
BEEL-ZEBUB,  the  same  with'RAA'LZEBUB. 
BEER,  a    well.      The   name  of  a   city,   Num. 

2L  16. 
BEER-LAHAI-ROI,  the  well  of  him  that  liveth 

and  seeth  me.     Oen.  16.  14. 
BEER-SHEBA,the  well,  or  fountain  of  an  oath; 
otherwise,  the   seventh   well,  or  the    well   of 
satiety. 
K'EViKn,  half  a  shekel. 

BEL,  ancient;  or,  nothing,  vain,  or  what  is  sub- 
ject to  change.     The  name  of  an  idol. 
BELI.'XL,  wicked,  or  the  devil. 
BEL^H.'VZZAR,  master  of  the  treasure,  or  who 

lays  up  treasures  in  secret. 
BELTESHAZZAR,  who  lays   up   treasures  in 
secret ;  or,  he  tliat  secretly  endures  pain  and 
pressure. 
BENA[.\H,  son   of  the   Lord  ;   or,  the   under- 
standing of  the  Lord;  or,  the  Lord's  building. 
BEN-A.M.MI,  the  son  of  my  penple. 
BEN-IIAD.AD,  the  son  of  Hadad,  or  of  noise, 

clamour,  cry. 
BENJAMIN,  the  son  of  the  right  hand. 

benjamite. 

BENONI,  son  of  my  grief,  pain,  sorrow. 
BEOR,  burning;  otherwise,  foolish,  mad,  beast. 
BERACHAH,  blessing,  or  bending  of  the  knee. 
BEREA,  heavy,  weighty ; /rom  pafo?,  weight. 
BERITH,  covenant. 
BERNICE,  one  that  brings  victory. 
BESOR,  glad  news,  or  incarnation. 
BETAH,  confidence.     j9  city,i  Sam.  8.  8. 
BETHABARA,  the  house  of  passage,  or  house 

of  anger. 
BETHANY,  the  house  of  song,  or  of  affliction; 

otherwise,  the  hou.se  of  obedience,  or  the  house 

of  the  grace  of  the  Lord. 
BETH-.WEN,  the  house  of  vanity,  of  iniquity, 

of  trouble,  of  sirengih. 
BETH  BIREI,  the    house  of  my  Creator;    or, 

the  temple  of  my  Creator.     1  CAr.  4.  31. 
BETn-C.\R,  the    house   of  the  lamb;    or,  the 

house  of  knowledge.     ^  city,  1  Sam.  7.  II. 
BETH-D.\GO.V,  the  house  of  corn;  or,  the  ha 

bitation  of  the  fish  ;  or,  the  tecnplo  of  the  god 

Ditsron.    Josh.  19.  27. 
BETH  DIBLATHAIM,  the  house  of  dry  figs. 
BETH-EI-,  the  house  of  God. 
BETH  ELITE. 
BETHER,  division;  otherwise,  in  the  turtle,  or 

in  the  trial,  or  perquisition. 
BETHESDA,  the    house   of   effusion;    or,  the 

house  of  pity,  or  mercy. 
BETH-EZEL,  a  neighbour's  house. 
BETil-G.\MUL,  the  housoof  recompcnce,  or  of 

the  weaned  ;  or,  the  house  of  the  camel. 
BETH  HACCEREM,   the   house  of  the   vine- 
yard. 
BETH  HORON,  the  house  of  wrath;   or,  the 

house  of  the  hole,  or  of  the  cave,  or  of  liberty. 
BETHLEHEM,   the  house   of  bread,   or  the 

house  of  war. 

7W 


CAR 

BETHLEHEM-EPHRALM. 
BETH  LEHE.M-JUDAH. 
IJETH-LEHE.MITE. 

BETH-PEOR,  the  house  of  gaping  er  ojiening. 
BETHPHAGE,  the  house  of  the  moutli,  or  the 
drain  of  the  valleys;  or,  the  house  of  early  figs. 
BETHSAIDA,  the  house  of  fruits,  or  of  food,"or 

of  hunters,  or  of  snares. 
BETH-SHAN,  the   house  of  the   tooth,  or   of 
ivory  ;  or,  the  house  of  change;  or,  the  dwel- 
ling of  sleep. 
BETH-SHEMESH,  the  house  of  the  sun ;   or, 

the  house  of  service,  or  of  ministry. 
BETHUEL,  filiation  of  God. 
BEULAH,  married. 
BEZALEEL,  in  the  shadow  of  God. 
BEZEK,  lightning;  or,  in  the  chains  or  fetters. 
BICHRI,  first-born,  or  first-fruits  ;  otherwise,  in 

the  ram,  or  the  sheep. 
BIDKAR,  in  compunction,  or  in  sharp  pain,  in 

the  wound. 
BIGTH.\N,  giving   meat,   Esth.  2.  21.   called 

also  Bigthana,  chap.  6.  2. 
BILD.\D,  old  friendship,  or  old  love. 
BILHAH,  who  is  old,  troubled,  or  confused  ;  or, 

which  spreads  itself. 
BIRSHA,  in  evil ;  or  son   that  beholds.     Gen- 
ii. H. 
BITHIAH,    daughter   of  the    Lord.     1  CAro7j. 

4.  18. 
BITHRON,  division;  or,  in  his  examination  ;  or 
daughter  of  the  song;  or,  the  habitation  of  th' 
song,  or  of  anger,  or  of  liberty. 
BITHYNI.A,   violent    precipitation;    fro7n    the 
Greek  work  &tx,  violence,  and  the  verb  iuvui, 
I  make  haste. 
BLASTUS,  one  that  sprouts  and  brings  forth. 
BOANERGES,  the  sons  of  thunder,  James  and 

John  the  sons  of  Zebedee. 
BO.\Z,  or  BOOZ,  in  strength,  or  in  the  goat. 
BOCHIM,  the  place  of  weeping,  or  of  mourners, 

or  of  mulberry  trees. 
60ZEZ,  mud,  bog ;  or,  in  him  the  flower.     The 

name  of  a  rock,  1  Sam.  14.  4. 
BOZRAH,  in  tribulation  or  distress. 
BUL, changeable,  perishing.  Thename  of  a  month 
BUZ,  despised,  or  plundered. 
BUZI,  my  contempt. 
BUZITE,  a  descendant  from  Buz. 


c. 

CABUL,  displeasing,  or  dirty. 
CAIAPH.'\S,   a  searcher;  or,  he  that  seeks 
with  diligence. 

CAIN,  possession,  or  possessed. 

CAINAN,  possessor  or  purchaser ;  or,  one  that 
laments  ;  or,  the  builder  of  a  nest. 

CALAH,  favourable,  opportunity;  or  as  the 
verdure,  or  green  fruit.     Ji  city.  Gen.  10.  12. 

CALEB,  a  dog,  or  crow,  or  a  basket;  or,  as  the 
heart. 

CALEB  EPHRATAH,  a  place  so  called  by  a 
conjunction  of  the  names  Caleb  and  his  wife 
Ephratnh.     See  EPHRATAH. 

CALNEH,  our  consummation,  or  all  we;  or,  as 
murmuring. 

CA  LNO,  our  consummation;  .-Jccordj?)^  to  others, 
altogether  himself. 

CALVARY,  the  place  of  a  scull. 

CAMON,  his  resurrection. 

CANA,  zeal,  or  emulation  ;  otherwise,  possession, 
lamentation,  the  nest,  cane  or  staff. 

CANAAN,  a  merchant,  a  trader.  He  was  the 
son  of  Ham,  and  gave  name  to  the  land  of 
Canaan.  The  Canaanites  icerc  a  wicked  peo- 
ple, for  they  descended  from  a  wicked  father, 
Gen.  13.  7. 

CAIVAANITE. 

CANDACE,  who  possesses  contrition  ;  or,  pure 
possession. 

CAPERNAUM,  the  field  of  repentance,  or  city 
of  comfort ;  otherwise,  the  propitiation  of  the 
penitent;  or,  the  town  of  pleasure,  the  hand 
some  city. 

CAPHTOR,  a  sphere,  a  buckle,  a  hand,  a  palm, 
doves,  or  those  that  seek  and  inquire. 

CAPPADOCLA,  171  Hebrew,  CAPHTOR,  which 
see. 

CARCAS,  the  covering  of  a  lamb  ;  or,  the  lamb 
of  the  throne,  Esth.  1.  10. 

CARCHEMISH,  a  lamb,  as  taken  away,  with- 
dr.Twn,  or  carried  off, 

CARMEL,  a  circumcised  lamb  ;  otherwise,  har- 
vest, full  ears  of  corn,  vineyard  of  God, 
excellent  vineyard. 

CARMELITE. 

C.ARMI,  my  vineyard;  or,  the  knowledge  of 
tb«  waters;  or,  the  lamb  of  the  waters. 


DAM 

CARPfS,  fruit,  or  fruitful.     Greek. 

C.'^SII'III.A,  monev,  or  covetouaneM. 

CEDRON,  black,  or  sad. 

CENCHREA,  mdlet,  small  pulse. 

CEPH.AS,  a  rock  or  stone. 

CESAR,  a  Latin  name,  from  the  word  cisdo,  I 
cut,  because  he  was  cut  out  of  his  mother's 
womb  ;  or  from  the  ward  Cajsaries,  a  head  of 
hair,  irhich  he  was  said  to  be  born  with. 

CKSAREA,  a  bush  of  ha:v. 

CH.\LCOL,  who  nourishes,  consumes,  and  sus- 
tains the  whole. 

CH.\LI)E.\,  as  demons, or  as  robbers,  orbreastj, 
or  fields. 

CHALDEAN. 

CHALDEHS. 

CH.\RR.\N,  a  singing,  or  calling  out,  or  the 
h(^at  of  wrath. 

CHEB.-\R,  strength  or  power.     Eiek.  10.  15.20 

CIIEDORLAO.MER,  iis  a  generation  of  servi- 
tude ;  otherwise,  the  roundness  of  the  sheaf. 
Gen.  14.  4. 

CHEMARIMS,  the  name  of  BanVs priests. 

CHE.MOSH,  as  handling  or  stroking,  or  as  with- 
drawing or  takijig  away. 

CHENANIA,  preparation,  or  disposition  or 
strenglli  or  rectitude  of  the  Lord. 

CHERETHIMS,  who  cuts,  who  tears  away  and 
exterminates. 

CHRRETIllTES,  See  CHERETHIMS. 

CHERITH,  cutting,  piercing,  slaying. 

CHESED,  MS  a  devil,  or  as  a  destroyer,  or  as  a 
brea.st  ot  nipple,  Gen.  22.  22. 

CHILE.\B,  totality  of  the  father,  or  the  perfec- 
tion of  the  father,  2  Sam.  3.  3. 

CHILTON,  finished,  complete,  perfect. 

CHILM.AD,  as  teaching  or  learning. 

CHIMH.\M,  as  they,  or  like  to  them. 

CHIOS,  open,  or  opening. 

CHISLEU,  rashness,  confidence,  the  flanks. 

CHITTIM,  those  that  bruise  ;  or,  gold  ;  or,  stain 
ing  or  dying. 

CHIUN,  an  Egyptian  god,  whom  some  think  to 
be  Saturn. 

CHLOE,  ?rrcn  herb. 

CHOR,\ZIN,  the  secret,  or  here  is  a  mystery. 

CMUSHAN-RISHATHAIM,  Ethiopian ;  er, 
blackness  of  iniquities. 

CHUZ.A,  the  seer,  or  prophet;  Oi  Ethiopian. 
The  husband  of  Joanna. 

CILICI.'\,  which  rolls  or  overturns. 

CL.'\UD.'\,  a  broken  voice,  a  lamentable  voice. 
ft  is  an  inland.     Acts  27.  16. 

CLAUDIA,  lame,  2  Tim.  4.  21. 

CLEMENT,  mild,  good,  modest,  merciful.  Phil 
4.3. 

CLEOPHAS,  the  whole  glory;  or,  glory  alto- 
gether. 

COLOSSE,  punishment,  coircction;  from  ths 
word  ■/.■>Kx^x,,  I  punish. 

CONIAH,  the  strength,  or  stability  of  the  Lord. 

CORINTH,  which  is  satisfied,  or  ornament,  or 
beanlv. 

CORINTHIANS. 

CORNELIUS,  ui^  horn.  Or  xrp>)>..of,  as  if 
it  were  yipx;  xou  y.Ktx,  the  beam  of  the  sun. 
Having  a  vision,  he  sent  for  Peter,  who  first 
preached  the  gospel  to  the  Gentiles,  Act*  10. 

COZBI,  a  linr;  or,  as  sliding  away. 

CRESCENS,  growing,  increasing. 

CRETE,  carnal,  fleshly. 

CRETES. 

CRETIANS. 

CRISPUS,  curled. 

CUSH,  Ethioi.ians,  or  black. 

CUSHAN,  Ethiopia,  black,  blackness,  heat, 

CUSHT,  the  same. 

CYPRUS,  fair,  or  fairness. 

CYRENE,  a  wall,  or  coldness,  or  meeting,  or  a 

floor. 
CYRENIANS,  people  of  Cyrene. 
CYRENIUS,  who  governs. 
CYRUS,  as  miserable,  or  as  heir;  or,  the  belljr. 


D. 

D  A  BBASHETII,  flowing  with  honey;  or,  caug. 
ing  infamy. 

DABERATH,  word,  thing;  or,  a  bee ;  or,  sub- 
missive and  obedient. 

DAGON,  corn;  or,  a  fish. 

D,\LMANUTHA,   a   bucket;  or,   exhauttioD, 
leanness,  branch.     ./?  country,  Mark  8.  10. 

D.\LM.ATIA, deceitful  la.iips,  or  vain  brightnaM 

D.AMARIS,  a  little  woman. 

DAMASCUS,  a  sack  full  of  blood  ;  or,  similitud 
of  burning,  or  of  the  kiss,  or  of  the  pot 


EDO 

DAN,  Judgment,  or  he  that  judges. 

DAM  EI,,  juilgiiieiii  of  liod  ;  or,  God  U  my 
judge.  Jl  prophet  descended  from  the  royal 
family  of  Daoid,  who  wan  curried  captive  to 
Babylon  ichen  he  was  very  young.  He  inter- 
preted JsTcbuchadnciiar's  dreams,  was  cast  into 
the  lions'  den  and  saoed,  but  his  adversaries 
ucre  divoured.  lie  was  favoured  with  the 
vision  of  the  four  beasts,  and  of  the  ram  and 
hc-goat;  (Jabriel  infunuelh  him  of  the  suvoiily 
weuk«,  which  is  a  famous  prophecy  of  the  time 
of  the  coming  of  the  great  MrHsuih. 

DARA,  genurulioi),  or  ImUHn  of  tlio  Bliophord,  or 
of  tliL'  CDiiipiuinjii  ;  or,  ritcu  of  wickcdiious, 
1  CAroFi.  '2.  b. 

DARIUS,  lie  Ihiit  iiifiiiires  and  informs  himsjlf 
The  king  of  the  Medes,  J)an.  5.  31. 

DATHAN,  luwB,  or  rilus. 

DAVID,  l)ol(ivc-d,  dciir.  The  son  of  Jesse,  the 
king  uf.ludak  and  Israel,  who  was  a  great  type 
of  tlie  Mi'ssiali  the  king  and  spiritual  head  of 
his  church.  It  is  taken  for  Christ  himself, 
who  was  descended  of  the  family  of  JJaoid,  Jcr. 
30.  it.  Ezik.  34.  •£}.  and  M.  '24,  i!5. 

DKBORAIl,  a  word,  or  a  beo. 

DKCAIHJMS,  a  Creek  word  compounded  of  two 
others,  of  Jixx,  Ion,  and  woXif,  ii  city,  because 
this  country  contained  ten  cities. 

DEI) AN,  tliuir  breiiHls,  or  tlieir  fricndsliip,  or 
thiMf  luiclc  ;  or,  II  judge. 

DEUANIM,  the  descendants  of  Dednn. 

DEUL-MI,  I'oor,  biuuII,  or  liotid  of  liuir;  or, 
bucket. 

DEMAS,  pomilnr. 

DEMETRIUS,  belonging  to  CeroB,  or  to  corn. 

UERBE,  11  sliiig.   'J'he  name  of  a  city,  AcIb  14. 0. 

DEUEL,  the  knowledge,  or  Bcitiice  of  God, 
J^um.  1.  14. 

DIANA,  (Ac  I.ntin  word  may  signify\uminous. 
The  Greek  word  afri/x't  signifies  perfect. 

DIBON,  uiiderBlniidiiig,  abundance  of  knowledge, 
or  of  building. 

DIBON-G.AU,  fibundanco  of  sons  linp|iy  nnd 
powerful ;  or,  liappy,  ur  great  uiidersliiiiding,  or 
edifice. 

DIDYMUS,  ntwin. 

DIMON,  wbero  it  IB  red. 

DINAH,  judgment,  or  wlio  judges. 

DlNlIAltAII,  bis  jiirlgnienl  in  I.er,  or  she  gives 
judgment;    or,    wlio    gives    judgment.     (Jen 

3G.  ;t-2. 

DIONYSIUS,  divinely  touched,  from  S">(,  di 
vine,  and  ruo-rui,  I  Blrike. 

DIOTREl'IIES,  nourished  by  Jupiter,  or,  Jii- 
jiiler^B  fosler-cliild  ;  from  J'6(,  ol  Jujiiter,  and 
Tfifsf,  u  foster  cliihi. 

DOE(!,  who  tcts  with  uneasiness;  or,  a  fisher- 
man. 

DOR,  gnr^iration,  or  habitation. 

DORCAS,  the  female  of  a  rue-buck.     Oreek. 

DOTIIAN,  the  law,  or  oustmii. 

DKUSUjIiA,  watered  by  the  dew,  from.  S(Ovt(, 
the  dew. 

Dl'M.MI,  nilcncc,  or  rcBemblanco. 

DI.'UAIl,  generation,  or  habflatmn. 


E. 


t FASTER,  tho  pnnsovcr,  a  feast  of  the  ./cws 
i  This  word  isnat  prnprrhj  lriinslaltd,forin 
the  original.  Acts  12.  4.  it  is  to  nxerx 
icAi'c/i  si/inifiea  the  piisa  over;  which  teas  a 
yearly  feast  among  the  Jews,  cstablishid  in 
commrmuration  of  the  coming  forth  out  of 
KgypL,  and  of  the  angit's  passing  bij  and 
tparin:;  the  houses  of  the  Isnirlites  sprinkled 
xcith  blood,  when  the  first-born  of  the  Kgyptiana 
were  slam.  Eanler  was  a  goddess  of  the  Sax- 
ons ill  honour  of  which,  sacrifices  were  offered 
about  th'it  time  of  the  year.  The  word  Ea^ter 
teems  nut  to  have  been  properly  used  in  the 
F.nglish  llihlr  or  English  Liturgy. 

EIIAI.,  n  heap,  or  collcclinn  of  old  age;  or,  a 
maxB  that  tuns  away  nnd  dinporsis. 

KREI),  n  Berviint,  or  libiimer. 

nilED-MEM'.CII,  ihe  king's uorvant. 

i;nF.N-E'/,ER,  the  stone  of  help. 

KBER,  one  that  pasBus,  or  a  puhcago  ;  or,  anger, 
wralh. 

ElilASAI'II,  a  falhor  that  gather*  together,  oi 
Rddm  or,  my  fnther  who  bus  added.  1  CAron 
6.  2H. 

El),  wilni'Kii. 

EDKN,  phusurr,  or  drllirht. 

EDO.M.  n'l,  bloodv,  criby,  ur  red  eartK 

CnOMlTE. 

7;o 


ENE 

KDREI,  a  very  groal  mast;  or,  cloud,  death  of 

the  wicked.     The  city  of  Og,  DouL  1.  4. 
VMXjAW,  heifer,  chariot,  round. 
EGLAIM,  drops  of  the  sea. 
K(;i.()N,  the  same  as  EGLAH. 
EGYI'T,   in  Hebrew,   Mizraim ;  that  binds,  or 

ttiilti'iis;  ur,  that  troubles,  or  oppresses. 
EGYPTIAN. 
KlIUI),  he  that  praises. 
ICKRON,  barrenness,  tore  away. 
EKRONITES. 

EIjAII,  an  oak,  a  curse,  oath,  imprecation. 
I'll. AM,  u  young  man,  a  virgin;  or,  Bocrel,  or  an 

age. 
El/AMITES. 

EliATII,  a  hind,  or  strength,  or  an  oak. 
EI.  UEl'IIEL,  tho  God  of  Beth-el. 
EI.DAD,  loved  of  God,  or  favoured  of  God. 
ELEAIjEH,  ascension  of  God,  or  huriil-otfering 

of  God. 
ELEA/AR,  tho  liclp  of  God,  or  court  ot  God. 
EL-EEOUE,  Israel,  God  the  God  of  Israel. 
EEll  ANAN,  grace,  gill  or  morcy  of  God. 
EI, I,  ELI,  my  God,  my  God. 
IM,I,  Iho  oll'ering,  or  lilting  up. 
i;i,I.M$,  God  my  father,  or  my  God  father. 
EMADA,  the  knowledge  of  God. 
ELI.AKIM,  the  reisurrectiim  of  God;  or,  tho  God 

of  the  resurrection  or  of  strength  ;  or,  God  the 

revenger. 
ELlA\f,  the  people  of  God,  or  llic  God  of  the 

p.'ople. 
ELI  AS,  See  ELIJAH. 
ELI  ASM  IB,  the  God  of  conversion ;  or,  my  God 

will  bring  back. 
ELIATIIAU,    tliou    art  my  God;  or,  my  God 

comes.     'J'he  son  of  Jleinan.     1  CAroii.  25.  4. 
RLIEZER,  help,  or  court  of  my  God. 
ELIIIOREl'll,  the  God  of  winter;  or,  tho  God 

of  youth. 
ELIIIU,  he  is  my  God  himself. 
ELIJAH,  God    the  Lord;   or  the  strong  I,ord. 

Jl  famous  prophet,who  foretold  a  great  famine, 

and  was  fed  by  the  ravens,  \  Kin^s  17.  G.    He 

was  raised  up  by  (iod  to  oppose  idolatry,  and 

particularly  the  worship  of  ISaal,  introduced 

into  Israel  by  Jeiebcl  and  Jlhab,  1  Kings  ]8. 

He  was  taken  vp  into  heaven  in  a  whirlieind. 

Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  interprets  the  lOhjah 

promised  in  Rial.  4.  5.  to  be  John  the  BiiptisI, 

Mat.  11.  10,  14.    who  came  in  the  .ipirit  and 

power  of  Elijah. 
ELIKA,  pelican  of  God.    2  Sam.  23.  25. 
ELIM,  the  ruins;   or,  the  strong,  or   the  sings, 

or  the  Viillevs. 
ELIMELECH,  my  God  is  king. 
ELIOEN.M,  towards  him  are  my  eyes  ;  or,  to- 
wards biin  are  my  fountains;  or,  towards  him 

are  my    poverty   and    my    misery.     1   Chron. 

3.  23. 
ELIPIIALET,  tho  God  of  deliverance  ;  or,  my 

God  who  puts  to  flight. 
EI,1I'*IA'/,,  the  endiavour  of  God. 
ELISABI'.TII,  God   hath    sworn,  tho   oath    of 

(.'od,  or  the  lulness  of  God. 
ELISIIA,  salvation  of  God,  or  God  that  saves. 

The  name  of  a  prophet  tchom  Elijah  anointed 

in  his  room,  1  Kings  111.  IC. 
ELISIIAII,  son  of  Javan,  Gen.  10.  4.     Or  the 

isles  of  Elishiih,  Etck.  27.  7.     It  is  God ;  or, 

Iho  lamb  of  God  ;  otherwise,  God  that  gives 

help. 
ELISIIAMAIF,  God  hearing. 
KLISIIEBA,  Sec  ELiSABETH. 
I'LISIIUA,  God  is  my  salvation. 
ELIHUI),  God  is  my  piaisc,  or  tho  praise  of  my 

Cod. 
EI.r/UR,  God   is   my    strength,  my    rock;   or, 

stone,  or  rork  of  God.     J^um.  1.  5. 
ELll.ANAN,  God  the  zealous;   or,  the  posses- 
sion, or  the  reed  ofGod. 
ELMODAM,  the  God  of  measure;  or,  tho  God 

of  the  yarmenl. 
ELNATILVN,  God   has  given,  or  tho   gift  of 

(;od. 
KLON,  oak,  or  grove,  or  Btrong. 
I'.LUL,  cry,  ouicry.     The  sixth   month  of  the 

Hebrew  year. 
I'LI'/AI,  (iod  is  my  strength.     1  CAron.  12.  5. 
ELYMAS,  tAi»  name  in  Arabic  signifies  a  ina- 

girinn. 
EMIMS,    fears   of  terrors ;    or,    formidable,   or 

people. 
I'.M  MAI'S,  people  dcspiBcd,  or  ohseuro. 
I'MMOK,  an  ass. 
EN  ItoR,  fountain;   or,  oyo  of  generation,  or 

hMhiliitinn. 
ENEAS,  laudable,  from  the  Greek  vrrb  »in  e, 

I  (iraiao. 


EZR        [P»0?«»  NlVKt, 

EN-EGLAIM,  the  fountain,  or  the  eye  of  tlie 
calves,  or  of  the  chariots,  or  of  roimdiiess. 

EN-GEL)I,  lounlum,  or  eye  of  the  goat,  or  of 
happiness. 

EN-MISIU'AT,  fountain  of  judgment.  Otn. 
14.7. 

ENOtJII,  iledieatcd,  or  disciplined,  and  well 
regulated.  The  son  of  Jured  and  father  of 
Methuselah.  Enoch  and  Elijah  were  translated 
to  heaven  without  siting  death.  It  is  said,  that 
Enoch  walked  with  God,  and  ho  was  not:  for 
God  took  him.  "  He  lived  in  comfortable 
communion  with  God;  God  manifesting  him- 
self to  him,  and  he  having  a  lively  sense  of 
God's  presence  always  vpon  his  spirit,  and 
seeking  to  approve  himself  to  God  in  all 
things."     Gen.  5.  24.  Heb.  11.  5. 

ENUN,  cloud  or  mass  of  daikiics6;  or,  his  foun- 
tain ;  or,  his  eye. 

ENOS,  fallen  man,  subject  to  all  kind  of  evil 
in  Boul  and  body. 

EN  R0(;EL,  the  fuller's  fountain. 

EN-SIIEMESIl,  fountain,  or  oyo  of  the  sun. 
./o.sA.  18.  17. 

El'AI'llRAS,  covered  with  foam.     Oreek. 

EI'ArilRODlTUS,  agreeable,  handsome.  One 
uhiim  I'aul  sent  to  the  I'hilippians. 

EPENETUS,  laudable,  worthy  of  praise.  One 
that  first  embraced  the  gospel  in  Asia. 

EPIIAH,  weary,  tired;  or,  to  lly  in  tho  air  as  a 
hiril.      The  son  of  Midian. 

EPIIES-DAMMIN,  the  portion  or  effusion  of 
blood,  or  drop  of  blood. 

EPII  ESI  A  NH,  the  piople  of  F.phesvs. 

EPIII'.SIIS,  desirable,  chief  city  of  Asia  Minor. 

FI'IIPIIATIIA,  be  opened. 

I'.l'llltAIM,  that  brings  fruit,  or  that  grows. 

EPllKAIMITE. 

El'llRA'l'.Ml,  abundance,  or  bearing  fruits  or 
increasing.  It  is  beliered  that  the  city  Ephra- 
Uii\, olhirwise  called  Beth-lehem,  (ooA  Us  naaLs 
from  Ephriilab,  Caleb's  wife. 

EPIIRATIl,  .Sir  EPIIRATAII. 

El'IlllATIIlTE,  an  inhabitant  of  Ephralah,  or 
a  diseendant  from  Eiibralm. 

EI'llR()N,duKt. 

EPICUREANS,  who  give  assistance;  from  tk* 
Greek  word  irnxvpitu,  1  help,  I  assist.  A  stet 
of  Heathen  philosophers. 

EU,  watch,  or  enemy. 

ERASTUS,  lovely,  or  amiable. 

Eltl'.(;il,  length,  or  which  lengthens;  othcririse, 
health,  physic.     A  city.  Gen.  10.  10. 

ESAIAS,  See  ISAIAH. 

ESAR-IIADDON,  that  binchi  joy,  or  that  cloeee 
the  J)'. int. 

ESAIJ,  he  that  does,  or  acts,  or  finlBlies. 

E/.EK,  contention. 

ESII-BAAL,  Ihefireoftheidol.     1  CAro7i.8.33. 

ESIICOL,  a  himch  of  grajics. 

ESHTAOL,  stout,  strong  woman.     .Tosh.  15.  33. 

ESHTEMO.\,  which  is  heard  ;  or,  tho  bosom  of 
a  woiinin.     A  city,  1  Sam.  30.  2M. 

rSLI,  near  me;  otherwise,  he  that  separates. 

ESROM,  the  dart  of  joy;  or,  division  of  the 
song. 

ESTHER,  serrct  or  hidden. 

ETA M,  lluir  bird  ;  or,  their  roveriwj.  1  CAron. 
4.  3. 

ETH.AM,  their  strenith,  their  sign. 

ETHAN,  strong  ;  or,  the  gill  ol  iho  island. 

ETIIANIM,  strong,  or  valiant.  The  seventh 
month  of  the  ecclesiastical  year  of  the  //»• 
brews. 

ETHBAAL,  towards  the  idol,  or  with  Baal ;  or, 
he  thai  rules  and  possesses.     1  Kings  l(i.  31. 

ETHIOPIA,  in  Hebrew,  Cush,  blaekness :  in 
Greek  it  signifies  heal,  burning  ;  from  mtim, 
I  hum,  and  onju,  face. 

ETHIOPIAN,  ETHIOPIANS. 

EUBULUS,  a  prudent,  a  good  counsellor.     Or, 

EVE,  living,  or  enlivening. 

EVIL  MERODACH,  the  fool  of  Meiodnch,  •r 
d(spi.><ing  tho  bitterness  of  the  fool ;  or,  otAer- 
wise,  Iho  fool  grinds  bitterly. 

EUNICE,  good  virtory. 

I'UIODIAS,  Bweel  scent,  or  ihal  imelle  well. 

EUPHRATES,  Ihnt  makes  fruitful,  or  grows. 

EUTYCHUS,  happy,  fortunate;  from  iv,  good, 
and  Tur.i,  fortune. 

E/EKIEL,  the  strength  of  God,  or  supported  of 
G<id,  or  (Jod  is  my  strength. 

E7.EL,  goins  abroad,  walk  ;  or,  distillation. 

E7.I()N-{;EBER,  Ihe  wood  of  Ihe  man,  or  of  Ihe 
strong;  or,  counsel  of  the  man.  A  city  I 
Kings  9.  2«. 

EZR.A,  a  helper,  /n  his  hook  we  have  the  history 
of  his  return  from  Hnhyhin  to  .lerusnlem,nfter 
ihcscoentyytars'coptirity.Zcrubbabtlra  umid 


PaoriE  Nambi.]    GIL 

the  temple  ;  Ezrn  the  Korship  of  Ood ;  JVehe- 
miah  the  city  of  Jerusalem. 


FELIX,  hnppy,  or  prospoiniia. 
FESTUS,  Icetivul,  or  joyful. 
FORTUNATUS,  haiipy,  or  prosperous. 


G. 


GAAL,  contempt,  or  abomination. 
UAASII,  tempest,    coindiotioii,  tumult,  or 
overthrow.    Ji  mountain,  Josh.  24.  'M. 
GABBATHA,    hij,'h,    or   elevated.      Jn    Greek 
lithostrotos,  paveil  with  stones;  from    XiSof, 
n  stone,  and  o-xpiuTOf,  imvod. 
GABRIEL,  God    \a   my  alrcngth,   or,   man    of 

God,  or  strength  of  (jod,  or  my  strong  God. 
GAD,  11  hand,  or  happy,  or  armed  and  prepared. 
GADARENES,  surrounded,  walled. 
G.\  1)1)1,  my    haiipiness.    my   army,    my   troop; 
ot/ierwigc,  a  kid.    The  son  vf  Susi,  Num.  13.  12. 
G.'VDDIKL,  goat  of  God;    or,  the  Lord  is  my 

Imppini'ss,  or  my  army.     JVum.  I'i.  JO. 
GADITES. 

GAIUS,  Lord;  or  nn  oartliy  man. 
GALA'I'IA,  white,  of  the  colour  of  milk. 
GALATIANS. 

G.ALB.ANUM,  a  sort  of  gum,  or  sweet  spice. 
GALEKI),  the  heap  of  witness. 
GALILEH,  wheel,  revolution,  or  heap  ;  or,  revo- 
lution of  the  wheel. 
GALILRANS. 

G.\LLIiVI,  who  heap  up,  who  cover,  who  roll. 
GALLKJ,  he  that  sucks,  or  lives  upon  milk. 
GAMALIKL,  rccompencu  of  God,  or  camel  of 

God,  or  weannd  of  Goil. 
GAMMADIMri,  soldiers  placed  in  the  towers  of 
Tyrus.   The  word  in  Hebrew  sifrnifies  a  cubit, 
whence  some    call  them    pigmies,  or    dwarfs. 
Others  think  that  the  word  is  Syrian,  and  signi- 
fies bold  anil  courageous  men.     Others  say, 
they   mere  men  who  came  from  Gummade,  a 
town  of  I'henicia. 
G.'VTAM,  their  lowing;  or,  their  touch  ;  or,  the 
lowing  of  the  jierlect.     Grandson  of   Esau, 
Gen.  :«).  II. 
GATM,  n  press. 
CATH-RIMiMON,  the  pre.ifl  of  the  granate;  or, 

exulted  press.    Josh.  2L  25. 
GAZA,  strung,  or  a  goat. 
liKHA,  a  hill,  or  cup. 
GEBAF,,  hound,  or  limit. 
GKBIM;  grasshoppers;  or,  height. 
GEUALIAII,  God  is  my  greatness;  or,  fringe  of 

the  Ijonl. 
GIOHA'/,I,  valley  of  sight,  or  vale  of  the  breast 
GE.VIAIU  All,  completion,  or  accornplishmont  of 

the  Lord. 
GENNKSARKT,    the    garden    of   the    prince; 
otherwise,  protection  of  the  prince,  or  of  him 
that  governs. 
GENlJUATIIj    theft,    robbery;    or,   garden,   or 

protection  ol  the  daughter.     1  Kings  W.  20. 
GERA,  pilgrimage  ;  or,  combat,  dispute. 
GERAIl,  the  twentieth  part  of  a  shekel. 
GEKAR,  .Sc'-GF-RA. 

GERGKSKNH!^,  those  who  come  from    pilgri- 
mage?, or  IVojn  fight.    Jl  people  beyond  Galilee. 
GEIM/IM,  cullers. 
GERSno.Vl,  a  stranger  there;  or,  a  traveller  of 

repniation. 
GKRSIION,  his  banishment;  or,  the  change  of 

pilgrimage. 
GKSIHIR,  the  sight  of  the  valley;  the  vale  of 

the  ox  ;  or,  the  vale  of  the  wall. 
GESmiRITES. 

GETHKR,  the  vale  of  trial,  or  of  searching;  or, 
the  press  of  infiiiiry,  or  of  contemplation.     The 
son  of  ./I ram,  (Jen.  10.  21). 
GETHSKMANE,  a    very    fat   valley;    or,    the 

valley  of  oil. 
GIAII,  to  guide,  draw  out,  produce;  or,  a  sigh 

or  groan. 
GIRRAU,  a  hill. 

GIBEON,  hill,  or  cup;  ofA/'rioior,  that  which  is 
without,  or  that  which  ia  lifted  up;   or,  the 
elfvalion  of  iniquity. 
GIRKONMTKS,  people  of  Gibeon. 
GIDEON,  he  that  bruises  and  breaks;  or, cutting 

olTiniquity. 
GIDKO.M,  .Vf«  GIDEON. 

GIIIO.N,   valley   of   grace;   or,  breast,   or    im- 
petuous. 
OIIjBOA,  revolution  of  inquiry;    or   collection 
of  swelling  and  inflammation. 
711 


HAZ 

GTLEAD,  the  heap  or  mass  of  testimony. 

GILEADITES. 

GILG  AL,  wheel,  revolution,  heap ;  otherwise,  re- 
volution of  Ihe  wh(;el,  or  heap  of  hcip. 

GILOII,  he  that  rejoices,  that  overturns,  tha. 
passes,  that  reveals,  or  discovers.  A  citii, 
.losh.  15.  51. 

niLONITE. 

CIRG.XSIIITE,  who  arrives  from  pilgrimage. 

(ilTTITE,  a  winc-presB. 

(JOB,  cistern,  or  grasshopper,  or  eminence. 

GO(i,  roof,  covering. 

GOLAN,  passage,  or  revolution. 

GOLGOTHA,  a  heap  of  sculls. 

GOLIATH,  passage,  revolution,  discovery,  heaj). 
Jl  giant  slain  by  David. 

GOMER,  to  finish,  complete,  accomplish  ;  other- 
wise, consuming,  «  consumer. 

GOMORRAH,  a  rebellious  people;  or,  the  peo- 
ple that  fear. 

GOHHEN,  approaching,  drawing  near. 

GOZAN,  fleece,  or  pasture;  or,  who  nourishes 
the  body. 

GRF.tMA,  Ihe  country  of  the  Greeks. 

GRECIANa. 

gree(;e. 

GREEK. 
GREEKS. 

GUR,  the  young  of  a  beast;  otAermisc,  dwelling, 
asscnibly,  or  fear. 

H. 

HABAKKUK,    ho    thai    embraces;    or,    o 
wrestler,  Ilah.  I.  1. 
HAOHALIAII,   who   waits  for   the   Lord;   or, 

the  hook  of  the  Lord,  JVcA.  10.  1. 
FIAUHILAII,  my  hopj  is  in  her;   or,  hook  in 

her. 
HADAD,  joy,  noise,  clamour,  cry  of  mariners. 

Gen.  ^^^<.  X>.  1  Chron.  1.  30. 
HADADEZER,  the  beauty  of  assistance. 
HADADRIMMON,  the  voice  of  height.     Rim- 

inon  was  a  god  of  the  Syrians  ;  the  invocation 

of  the  god  itimmon. 
HADASSAH,  a  myrtle,  or  joy. 
HADORAM,    their    beauty,  their    power,  their 

cloke  ;  or,  praise,  or  a  cry  lifted  up. 
HADRACli,   point,  or  joy  of  tenderness;   or, 

your  chand)er. 
HAGAR,  a  stranger,  or  that  fears. 
H  AGAR  ENES,  of  the  family  of  Ilngar. 
HACJARITE.S,  the  same. 
H.\G(;.\I,  feast,  solemnity,  turning  round. 
HAGGITH.  rejoicing. 
HALLELUIAH,  jiraiso  the  Lord,  or  iiraise  to 

the  Lord. 
HAM,  hot,  heat,  or  brown. 
HAMAN,  noise,  tumult;  or,  ho  that  prepares. 
HAMATII,  anc(!r,  heat,  or  a  wall. 
HAMMEDATHA,  ho  that  troubles  the  law  ;  or, 

measure. 
HAMON-GOG,  the  multitude  of  Gog. 
HAMOR,  an  ass,  or  clay,  or  wine. 
HAMUTAL,  the   shadow  of  his  heat;  or,  the 

heat  of  the  dew.     2  Kings  23.  31. 
HANAMEEL,  the  grace  that  comes  from  God  ; 

or,  pity,  or  gift  ot  God. 
IIANANEEL,  grace,  mercy,  gift  of  God. 
HANANI,  my   grace,    my   mercy;    or,  ho    has 

shewed  me  mercy. 
HANANIAH,  grace,  mercy;  gift  of  the  Lord. 
HANNAH,  gracious,  merciful  ;  or,  taking  rests. 
The  wife  of  F.lkanah,  and  mother  of  Samuel. 
HA NOCll,  dedicated. 

HANUM,  gracious,  merciful;  or,  ho  that  rests. 
HARAN,  mountain,  or  mountainous    country; 

or,  which  is  inclosed.     The  son  of  Terah. 
WAV. AN,  a  place.     .Sm  CHARRAN. 
H.ARBONAH,  his  destrm-.tion,  or  his  sword,  or 

his  dryness  ;  or,  the  anger  of  hiiu  that  builds, 

or  that  understands. 
HAROn,  astonishment,  fear. 
HAROSHETH,    agriculture,  silence,   deafnrss ; 

or,  vessel  of  earth;  or,  forest. 
HASIliMONAH,  diligence,  or  enumeration;  or, 

oinbassy,  or  present.    JVum.  33.  29. 
HATACH,  ho  that  strikes.     Esth.  4.  .'). 
HAVILAH,  that  Buffers  pain  ;  that  brings  forth  ; 

or,  that  speaks,  or  declares  to  her.   Gen.  10.  7. 
HAVOTH-JAIR,  the  villages  that  enlighten,  or 

that  shew  forth  light.     JVum.  32.  41. 
HAZ  A  EL,  that  sees  God. 
HAZARMAVETH,  court,  or  entry,  or  dwelling 

of  death.      The  son  of  Joktan.     Gen.  10.  20. 
HAZELELPONI,  shade,  and  sorrow  of  coun- 
tenance ;  or,  submersion  of  the  face. 
II AZEROTII,  villages,  hamlet*  :  court,  or  porch. 
HAZOR,  court,  or  hay. 


JAB 

IIERER,  one  that  passes,  or  a  passage;  otfieritut, 

angir,  wrath. 
III',IIRi;VV.S,  descenihd  from  Ileber. 
IIEKRON,  society,  friendship,  enchantment. 
HEGAI,    or   III'XJE,  meditation,  word,  t'.kinj 

away,  separation,  groaning. 
HELAM,    their    army,   or   their   trouble,    thoir 

strengib;  or,  expeeialion  ;  or,  dream. 
HELHON,  milk,  or  fatness. 
MELDAI,  the  world. 
IlElil,  anr<niling,  «r  climbing  up. 
IIELKATII-IIAZZURI.M,  the    field   of  strong 

inrn,  or  of  rocks. 
IIEMAN,  \\u-\x  trouble,  their  tunmlt.     The  son 

of  I.„tan,  Gen.  3(5.  22. 
IIEMAN,  murh,  nr  in  great  number;  otherwisi, 

tntnult.     1   Kings  4.  31. 
H1;N,  irrare;  or,  (|uiel,  or  rest. 
llEI'ir/l  BAH,  my  pleasure,  or  delight  in  her. 

The  mother  of  Manasseh,  2  King921.  1.      Tht 

true  chnnh  f/ins  called,  Isa.  62.  4. 
HERMES,  Menury,  or  grain,  or  refuge.  Greek 
IIi:HM()(.'ENES,  begotten  of  Mercury,  or  gene- 
ral Ion  of  lucre.     Greek. 
FIi;ini()N,  anathema,  destruction. 
IIERMONITEH. 
IIERDD,    the   glory    of   the    skin,   from    nfte 

favour,  glory,  and  Siaxf,  the  skin  ;  or,  son  ol 

the  her..: 
HERODIANS.     .S«  Appellatives. 
HEIU miAS   t/ie  wife  of  Herod. 
IlKltODlON,  songof  j'uno;/rom  "Hp«,  ,Iuno, 

nnil    "\>,aBnng;  or,  the  conqueror   ofheroc*. 
HESIlliO.^J,  invention,  industry, or  thought;  or 

\w  thai  hastens  to  understand,  or  to  build. 
IlETH,  trembling,  or  fear. 
HETIILON,  fearful  dwelling;  or,  his  covering 

The  name  of  a  city,  Ezek.  47.  1.5. 
IIl'.ZIIKI All,  stroeg  in  the  Lord;  or,  taken  and 

snppDitcd  by  the  Lord. 
IIEZRON,  the  dart   of  joy  ;  or,  division  of  the 

song. 
IIIDDEKEIj,  a  sharp  voice,  or  sound. 
HIEL,  (iod  lives,  or  the  life  of  God. 
HIERArOLlS,    holy    city;   from    <i(>o»,    holy, 

and  rrekii:,  n  city.     Col.  4.  13. 
HK30AION,  nieditiition,  considerati(m. 
HILKIAH,  God    is    my  portion;   according   t» 

others,  thi!  Lord's  gentleness. 
HILLEL,  he  that  praises;  or,  ftdly  ;  or,  Lucifer 

77//  father  of  JIbdon,  .ludg.  12.  13. 
IHXNOM,  there  they  are  ;  ar,  their  riches. 
HIR/\M,  ixnliation  of  life;  or,  lln'ir  whiteness, 

nr,  their  liberty;  or,  he  tlial  destroys,  or  ana- 
thematizes. 
HITTITER,  who  is  broken,  or  fears.     Deseevd 
nnis  of  Helh  Ihe  son  of  Cannon,  Gen.  10.  15. 
IHVITES,  wicked,  bad,  or  wickedness. 
IIOMAH,  favoured  and  beloved. 
HOB/\H,    love,    friendship,    or   secrecy.     OcH. 

14.    l."!. 

IIO(;i,An,  his  festival,  or  his  dance. 

IIOPHNI,  be  that  covers;  or, my  fist. 

IIOR,  who  conceives,  or  shews. 

IIOKI'I'.,  desert,  solitude,  destruction,  dryness. 

HOR  IIAGIDGAD,  the  hill  of  felicity. 

HORMAII,  ilevoted  or  consecrated  to  God  ;  uttef 

destruction. 
HORON.AIM,  anger,  or  raging. 
HORONITE,  nng.'r,  fuiy,  or  liberty. 
HOHE.\  and  HOSIIE.A,  saviour,  or  salvation. 
HUL,  pain,  infirmity, bringing  forth  children, sand, 

or  expectation.      The  sun  of  Jlram,  Gen.  10.  23. 
IMILDAH,  the   world.     Jl  prophetess,  2  Kingi 

Hlllf,  bbnrty,  whiteness,  hole,  cavern. 
IIIISHAI,  their    haste,   or   their   sensuality,  or 

Ihi'ir  silence. 
IIUZZAR,  molten. 
HYMENEUS,  nuptial,  tr  marriago. 


J. 


TA  ALAM,  who  Is  hiilden  ;  or,  yoimg  man  ;  »r 
their  kids.     .Son  nf  F.sau,  Gen.  3(1.  .5. 
JAAZANIA,  whom  the  Lor/i  will  hear,  or  who 

is  attentive  to  the  I^ord  ;  or,  the  balances,  tha 

arms,  the  nonrisbment  of  the  Lord. 
.IAB.\L,  which  glides  oway;  or,  that  brings,  or 

that  proiluccs. 
.I.ABBOK,  evacuation,  or  dissipation. 
.lABF'SH,  dryness,  confusion,  shame. 
.lABESH-GILEAI). 
.lABEZ,  sorrow,  or  trouble. 
.lARFN,  he  that  understands,  ho  that  builds. 
JABNERL,  building  of  (Jod  ;  or,  understoiklmg 

of  God.     A  city,  Josh.  19.  33. 


JER 

JACHIN,  he  that  streiigtheM  and  makes  stcd 
fast. 

JACOB,  lie  that  supplants  or  unOermines;  or,  tlie 
heel.  T/ie  son  of  Isaac,  and  the  father  of  the 
twelve  patriarc/is;  lie  prevailed  in  prayer  with 
Ood,  and  was  called  Israel ;  he  iccnt  inlhc  time 
of  the  famine  with  all  his  family  into  F.gypt, 
and  his  son  Joseph  gave  them  habitation  and 
maintenance.  Jaco\>  blessed  his  children  be- 
fore his  death,  and  ordered  them  to  bury  him 
in  Canaan. 

JAEL,  he  thai  ascend.s,  or  a  kid. 

i.\H,  the  everlasting  God. 

JAHAZ,  quarrel,  dispute;  or,  the  going  out  of 
the  Lord. 

J.\HAZA,  the  same. 

J  AIR,  my  light;  or,  who  diffuses  light;  or,  is  en- 
lightened. 

JAIRUS,  the  same. 

JAMBRES,  the  sea  with  poverty. 

JAMES,  the  same  as  JACOB. 

JANN.A,wlio  speaks,  or  who  answers;  otherwise, 
affliction,  misery,  or  impoverished. 

JANNES,  the  same. 

JAI'IIETH,  ho  that  persuades,  or  extends,  or 
handsome. 

JAPHIA,  which  enlightens,  appears,  or  shews; 
or,  which  groans.  The  son  of  David,  2  Sam. 
5.  1.5. 

JAREB,  a  revenger. 

JARED,  he  that  descends;  or,  he  that  rules  or 
commands. 

JASIIER,  righteous. 

JASON,  he  that  cures,  or  that  gives  medicines; 
from  'ixo-i;,  health,  or  cure. 

JAVAN,  he  that  deceives,  or  makes  sorrowful ; 
otherwise,  clay,  dirt. 

J.\ZER,  assistance,  or  he  that  helps. 

IBHAR,  elecliim,  or  he  that  is  chosen.  ' 

ICHABOP,  where  is  the  glory  %  or,  woe  to  the 
glory. 

ICON lUM,  a  ci7y,/rom ''itw,  I  come. 

IDDO,  his  hand,  his  power,  his  praise,  his  wit- 
ness, Ills  .irnament. 

IDUMEA,  red,  earthy. 

JEBUS,  which  treads  under  foot,  or  contemns. 
J)  city,  the  same  as  Jerusalem,  ./udg.  lU.  10. 

JEBUSITES,  inhabitants  vf  Jebus. 

JECONIAH,  preparation  of  the  Lord,  or  sted- 
faatness  of  the  Lord. 

JE1)ID.\H,  well  beloved,  or  amiable.  Themother 
of  .hsiah,  2  Kiii^s  22.  1. 

JEDIDIAH,  beloved  of  the  Lord. 

JEDUTIIU.V,  his  law  ;  or,  who  gives  praise. 

JEGAR-SAHAUUTIIA,  the  heap  of  witness. 

JEHO.MIAZ,  the  prize,  or  possession  of  the 
Lord  ;  or,  the  Lord    hat  sees. 

JEMOASII,  the  fire  of  the  Lord;  or,  the  victim 
of  the  Lord. 

JEHOIAC'ULV,  preparation,  or  strength  of  the 
Lord. 

JEIIOIAPA,  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord. 

JEIIOL'VKIM,  the  resurrection,  or  confirmation 
of  the  Lord. 

JEIIO.VADAB,  .Sm  JONADAB. 

JEIIORAM,  exaltation  of  the  Lord  ;  or,  rejected 
of  the  Lord. 

JEIIOSIIAPHAT,  Cod  judges,  or  the  judgment 
of  the  Lord. 

JEIK)VAII,  the  incommunicable  name  of  Ood. 
Sell-existing. 

JEHOVAH  JIREH,  the  Lord  will  see  or  pro 
vide;  the  Lord  will  be  manifested  or  seen. 

JEHOVAH-NISSI,  IIm;  Lord  my  banner. 

JEHOVAH  SHALOM,  the  Lord  send  peace. 

JEHOVAH  SUA  MM  AH,  the  Lord  is  there. 

JEHOVAH-TSIDKENU,    The     Loud     our 

RlriiriKOr.'iNESS. 

JEHH,  he  Hint  is,  or  who  cxisls. 

JEIIIJDI.IAII,  the  praise  of  the  Lord.  The  wife 
of  F.zra.     1  rhron.  4.  1^. 

JEMIMA,  hanrUoine  as  the  day.  One  of  Job's 
daushlrrs,  Jrd)  12.  14. 

JEPHTH  All,  hi:  that  opens,  or  ho  will  open. 

JEPHtlNNEH,  he  that  beholds. 

JERAH,  the  moon,  or  nionih;  otherwise,  Vo  scent 
or  smell.     .Son  of  ./.iktan,  Gen.  10.  20. 

JERAMEEL,  merry  of  God;  or,  the  lovo  of 
God. 

JER E.MI.MI,  exaltation  or  grniidcur  of  iholioril ; 
or,  ""ho  exnlls,  or  ijives  irlory  lo  the  liOrd. 
/{r  was  called  lo  the  ritraiirdinary  office  of 
a  Prnphrt  in  his  yannger  years,  and  cnilinued 
in  that  nfjiee  fnr'nt  least  forty  years  tngrlhrr. 
In  his  lime  iniquity  did  rirrrdinirly  abound  in 
the  laiidi.f.hidah.  fleenrnrslly  and  frequently 
calls  the  people  la  rrpr.nlanre,  both  by  his  re- 
proof.i  and  thrratenxngs  for  their  sins.  He  de- 
nounced the  captivity  nf  the  people  by  the 
Babylonians,  for  which  he  was  put  in  prison  ; 
712 


IND 

he  lived  to  set  his  prophesy  fulfilled.  But  for 
the  comfort  and  support  of  the  faithful,  he 
foretells  their  return  after  seventy  years,  and 
the  enlargement  of  the  church  by  Christ.  His 
style  is  generally  the  most  plain  of  any  of  the 
prophets. 

JERICHO,  his  moon,  or  month;  or,  his  sweet 
smell. 

JERIMOTH,  eminences;  or,  he  that  fears,  that 
sees,  that  rejects  death.     1  Chron.  7.  7. 

JEROBOAM,  fighting  against,  or  increasing  the 
people. 

JERUBBAAL.  ho  that  disputes  about  Baal ;  or, 
that  revenges  tho  idol ;  or,  let  Baal  defend  his 
cause. 

JERUBBESIIETH,  let  tho  idol  of  confusion  de- 
fend itself. 

JERUSALEM,  the  vision,  or  possession  of  peace. 
It  was  the  chief  city  of  .fudea,  and  was  first 
called  Salem,  where  Mclchiicdck  was  king. 
Gen.  14. 18.  /(  was  also  called  inhws,  and  was 
possessed  by  the  Jebusites,  who  held  therein  the 
fort  of  Sion,  till  it  was  taken  from  them  by 
David,  Judg.  10.  6.  1  Chron.  11.  4,  5,  7. 
Here  also  was  mount  Moriah,  near  mount  Sion, 
whereon  Solomon  built  the  temple,  and  where 
Jibraham  was  commanded  to  offer  hisson  Isaac; 
.Abraham  named  the  place  Juhovah-jireh,  be- 
cause the  providence  of  Ood  was  there  emi- 
nently seen,  2  Chron.  3.  1.  Gen.  22.  2,  14. 
7Dhich  word  ]\igU  being  put  to  the  former  name 
Salem,  maketh  it  Jerusalem,  where  peace  is 
seen.  It  is  called  Salem,  by  the  first  name, 
Psal.  70.  2.  It  is  put  for  the  church  militant, 
Isa.  02.  1.  and  the  church  triumphant  is  called 
the  new  Jerusalem,  Rev.  3.  12. 

JERUSHA,  he  that  possesses  the  inheritance;  or, 
exiled,  banished,  rejected.    2  Kings  15.  33. 

JESIIIMOX,  solituile,  des-iation.  The  name  of 
a  desert,  1  Sam.  23.  24. 

JESHIIA,  a  saviour. 

JESIUJRUN,  upright  or  righteous.  Israel  is  so 
called. 

JESSE,  to  be,  or  who  is;  or,  my  present. 

JKSUI,  who  is  equal,  jiroper,  placed  ;  or,  flat 
country.  TAc  so7io/./3s^cr,  Gen.  46.  17.  Num. 
20.  44. 

JESnUITES,  the  posterity  of  3eBa\. 

JESUS,  the  holy  name  Jesus;  Saviour;  who 
saveth  his  poojde  from  their  sins.  Mat.  1.2). 
The  eternal  Son  of  Ood,  of  one  substance  and 
equal  with  the  Father,  the  mediator  of  thccovc- 
nant  of  grace,  who  in  the  fulness  of  time  be- 
came man,  and  so  was  and  continues  to  be  Ood 
and  man  in  two  distinct  natures  and  one  per- 
son for  ever.  The  word  Jesus  is  taken  for  the 
doctrine  of  Jesus,  Jlctf  S.  35.  and  for  Joshua, 
who  brought  Ood's  people  into  the  land  of  Ca- 
naan, and  was  therein  an  eminent  type  of  our 
Lord  Jesus,  Heb.  4.  8. 

JETHER,  he  that  excels,  or  remains;  or,  that 
examines,  searches;  or,  a  line  or  string,  Judg. 
8  20. 

JETHRO,  his  excellence,  his  remains,  his  pos- 
terity. 

JETHUR,  ho  that  keeps;  otherraisc,  order,  suc- 
cession ;  or,  mountainoOs.  Son  of  Ishmael, 
Gen.  2,5.  15. 

JEUSFI,  he  that  is  devoured,  gnawed  by  the 
moih ;  otherwise,  assembled.  Son  of  Ilchoboam, 
2  Chron.  11.  I'J. 

JEW,  JEWS,  so  called  from  Judah.  See  315- 
It.MI. 

IE  W  ESS. 

JEWISH. 

jnvvHV. 

JEZEIlEf,,  island  of  the  habitation;  or,  woe  to 

the  Iribilnlion  ;  or,  islo  of  tho  dunghill,  or  woe 

lo  lb.'  dunghill. 
JEZRAHIAH,  the  Ltml  is  the  east;  or,  the  Lord 

arises;   or,  brightness  of  tho  Lord.     Chief  of 

the  singers,  Neh.  12.  42. 
JEZRT.EL,  seed  of  God  ;  or,  God  who  spreads 

the   evil;   or,  dropping  of  the   friendship   of 

God. 
JEZREELITE,  an  inhabitant  of  the  city  Jezr^i-]. 
IGD.ALI.A,  the   greatness  of  the  Lord;  or,  the 

Lord  shall  exalt  me,  or  make  mo  great.     .4 

man  of  Ood,  Jer.  3.5.  4. 
JIDLAPH,  ho  that  distils,  or  drops  water;  or 

hands  joined.      Son  of  JVaAor  and   Milcah. 

Gen.  22.  22. 
MON,  look,  eye,  fountain.  .7  city,  I  Kings  15. 20. 
IM-VRICIIM,  joy,  rejoicing. 
IMIiAH,  plenitude,  or  repletion;  or,  circumci- 
sion. 
IMMANUEL,  aname  given  to  our  Lord  Jesus 

Christ,  /so.  7.  14.   It  .lignifics,  God  with  lis. 
INDI.A,  praise,  law.     ./}  considerable  country  in 

the  east,  Esth.  1.  1. 


ISA      [PaorKR  NAMti. 

JOAB,  paternity,  or  who  has  a  father;  or,  toIud- 
tary. 

JOAH,  fraternity,  or  who  has  a  brother;  or,  bro 
ther  of  the  Lord. 

JOANNA,  tho  grace,  the  gift,  or  the  mercy  of 
the  Lord. 

JOASH,  who  despairs;  or,  he  that  burns,  who  is 
on  fire. 

JOB,  ho  that  weeps,  that  cries ;  or,  that  speaks 
out  of  a  hollow  place.  He  dwelt  in  the  land 
of  Ui,  and  was  an  upright  anil  jast  man,  fear- 
ing Ood.  Satan  was  permitted  to  bereave  him 
of  his  children  and  substance,  and  to  smite  him 
with  sore  boils.  He  was  visited  by  his  friends 
in  his  affliction;  Goil  blessed  his  hitler  end 
anil  gave  him  twice  as  much  as  he  had  before. 
.lob's  patimce  is  recommended  as  an  example 
to  the  godly  in  all  ages.  Jam.  5.  11. 

JOCIIEBEI),  glorious,  honourable,  a  person  of 
merit;  or,  (he  glory  of  the  Lord.  The  motluT 
of  Moses,  Exod.  0.  20. 

.JOEL,  he  that  wills,  commands,  or  swears. 

JOEZER,  he  that  aids  and  assists.  1  Chron. 
12.  6. 

Jf)IIA,  who  enlivens  and  gives  life.  1  Chron. 
8.  16. 

JOIIANAN,  who  is  liberal,  merciful,  pious,  and 
grants  favour;  otherwise,  the  grace  of  the 
Lord. 

JOHN,  the  grace,  gift,  or  mercy  of  the  Lord. 

JOKSn.\N,  liard,  difficult,  scandalous.  Oen. 
25.  2. 

JOKTAN,  small;  or,  disgust,  weariness;  or, 
dispute,  contenlion.  The  son  of  Heber,  Gen. 
10.  25. 

JONADAR,  who  acts  in  good  earnest,  gives 
and  ofltts  freely,  liberally  ;  or,  who  acts  cs  a 
prince. 

JONAH,  or  JONAS,  a  dove;  or,  ho  that  op- 
presses. , 

JONATHAN,  given  of  God,  or  the  gift  of  the 
Lord. 

JOl'PA,  beauty,  comeliness. 

JORAM,  to  cast;  elevated. 

JORD.AN,  the  river  of  judgment;  or,  he  that 
shews,  or  rejects  judgment,  or  descent. 

JORIM,  he  that  exalts  the  Lord,  or  the  exaltation 
of  I  he  Lord. 

JOSE,  raised,  or  who  exists;  or,  who  pardons,  or 
saviour. 

JO.'^EPIF,  increase,  addition.  The  eleventh  son 
of  Jacob,  beloved  by  his  fathi  r,  hut  hated  by  his 
brethren.  His  two  dreams  foretold  his  advance- 
ment: He  was  cost  into  a  pit  by  his  brithnn, 
and  sold  to  the  Ishmaclites.  He  inlerprtted 
I'haraoh's  dreams,  and  was  made  ruler  of 
F.gypt.  His  brethren  in  the  seven  year.s'  fa- 
mine are  sent  to  Egypt  by  Jacob  for  com;  and 
afterioards  Jacob  with  his  family  come  to  Jo- 
seph in  Egijpt,  who  receives  them  kindly,  and 
settles  them  in  the  land  of  Ooshen.  In  the  his- 
tory of  Joseph  there  are  many  wonderful  steps 
of  divine  Providence  relating  to  his  nfflicltd 
and  exalted  state,  which  arc  recorded  in  the 
bookof  Oenesis.  (2)  Jo.>-eph  was  also  thcname 
of  a  disciple  of  Christ,  a  rich  man  of  Jirima- 
thea,  who  buried  the  body  of  our  Lord  Jesua 
in  a  tomb  prepared  far  himself,  Mat.  27.  57. 
and  was  likewise  the  name  of  several  others, 
Luke  3  24,  20,  :(0.     Acts  1.23. 

JOSES.  See  JOSE. 

JOSHUA,  the  T,ord,the  Saviour. 

JOSIAH,  the  Lord  burns,  or  tho  firo  of  the 
Lord. 

JOTHAM,  p.rficlion  of  the  Lord. 

IPHEnEI/MI,  the  redemption  of  the  Lord, 
1  CAron.  8.  25. 

IRA,  city,  watch,  spoil;  or,  effusion,  or  heap 
of  vision.  One  of  David's  rulers,  2  Sam.  20 
20. 

IR.'\n,  wild  ass;  or,  heap  of  descents,  or  of  em- 
(lire.      The  .<:on  of  F.noeh,  Goii.  4.  18. 

IRIJ.AH,  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  or  vision  of  the 
Lord ;  or  protection  of  iho  Lord,  Jcr.  37 
13. 

ISA. AC,  laughter.  The  son  nf  .Ibrakam  and 
Sarah,  being  the  seed  promised  to  thim  by  God. 
.Abraham,  for  the  trial  of  his  faith,  was  com' 
mantled  to  offer  vp  his  son  Isaac,  nnd  went  to 
the  place  appointed,  mount  Moriah,  where  af 
terwards  the  temple  was  built;  and  binding 
Isaac,  and  taking  the  knife  to  kill  him  as  a 
sacrifice,  he  was  stayed  by  the  angel  of  the 
J.oril,  and  Isaac  was  exchanged  fi>r  a  ram 
caught  in  a  thicket.  Isaac  takcth  Rebrkah  to 
wife,  by  irhom  he  had  two  sons,  Fsau  and 
.liirob:  llr  sends  his  eldest  son  Fsau  for  veni- 
son, but  Rebekah  instructs  Jacob  the  younger 
lo  obtain  the  blessing. 

ISAIAH,   tho   solvation    of  the    Lord.     .It  tkt 


Froper  Names.]       KEM 

priesis  mid  I.rvitr.s  wrre  the  ordinary  teachers 
of  Ike  leiciak  chimhjuo  (Jod  sumetimes  raised 
up  and  sent  rxtraiirdinaryjnessensrers,  theyro- 
phets.  .H.noKg  these  l»aia.h  is  j untCy  accounted 
Ike  most  emiiiint,  both  for  the  7iiajesty  of  his 
style  and  the  e/cellency  uf  his  matter,  wherein 
he  so  fully  and  eharly  describes  the  person, 
offices,  the  sufferinirs  and  kingdom  of  Christ, 
that  he  is  commonly  called  the  Evungclitul 
Prophet. 

IhiCAfI,  lio  tliai  anoints;  or,  that  covers,  or 
protects.  The  daughter  of  Haran,  Gen.  11. 
29. 

ISCARIOT,  f.«  thought  to  signify  a  native  of 
the  town  of  Iscariolh.  A  man  of  murder; 
from  [Hcb.]  ish,  a  man,  and  [Ucb.]  careth, 
he  that  culs  otT",  or  exterminiiles.  Others 
7naintain,  that  the  surname  given  to  Judas, 
signifies  that  he  was  of  the  tribe  of  Issacliar,  a 
word  signifying  n^conipcnCR,  restii  ution.  This 
traitor  vcriftrd  his  nativity,  by  receiving  the 
price  of  the  blood  of  his  Master  Jesus  Christ; 
from  t/tc  word  [  Hcb.]  sachar,  to  receive  a  re- 
coni|>«rice. 

ISHBAK,  who  is  empty  or  exhausted  ;  or,  who  is 
forsaken  or  abandoned.  One  of  Jlbraham's 
Suns,  GiMi.  '25.  2. 

ISIIBI-BENOn,  he  that  sits  in  the  prophecy,  or 
in  the  word,  ar  in  the  production;  otherwise, 
conversion,  or  blowin»,  or  respiration  in  pro- 
phecy.    .1  giant,  2  Sam.  21.  Hi. 

ISU-Bi)Stir;Tll,  a  man  of  shame;  or,  the  re- 
tarding of  the  in!\n. 

ISHMAEUGod  wholiears. 

FSHM  A  ELITES,  the  posterity  of  Fshmael. 

IriRAEIi,  a  prince  with  God,  or  prevailing  with 
God ;  or,  one  that  wrestleth  with  God ;  as  if  it 
had  been  written  Isli-rael.  The  name  given  by 
Ood  to  Jacob,  G(!n.  :}2.  28.  and  3!).  10.  Israel 
i>  often  in  scripture  taken  for  the  people  of 
God,  Exod.  r..  G,  7. 

ISRAELITES,  the  posterity  of  Israel. 

fSSACHAR,  price,  reward,  or  recompence. 

ITALIAN,  hi  longing  to  Italy. 

ITALY,  a  l^otin.  ward,  that  has  its  original 
from  vituhis,  or  vitula,  because  this  country 
abounded  in.  calves  and  heifers.  Jlceording  to 
others,  it  is  t'ikenfrom  a  king  called  Italus. 

ITIIAMAR,  iskind  of  the  piilm-tree;  or,  of 
puhos;  or,  changing  of  the  isle;  or,  woe  to  the 
palm,  or  to  the  change. 

ITfUEL,  God  with  me;  or,  sign,  coming  of  God. 

ITHREAM,  excellence  of  the  people.    2  Sam. 

n.  r>. 

ITUREA,  which  Is  guarded;  or,  a  country  of 
mountains. 

IV AH,  ini(|uily. 

JL BAL,  he  that  runs,  or  he  that  produces ;  or,  a 
trunip<1. 

'UBILEE,  a  feast  of  the  Jews,  every  fiftieth 
year;  in  Hebrew,  Job(d,  which,  according  to 
some,  signifies  a  ram's  horn,  or  a  trumpet, 
by  which  the  .luhilee  year  inis  proclaimed. 
Othrrs  dr.rine  the  etymology  of  io\n-\  from  the 
Hebrew  Jiihal,  which  fnrmerly  signified,  as 
they  say,  to  play  upon  instrunv^nts;  and  this 
year  was  celebrated  with  music  and  all  cr,- 
pressions  of  joy.  Others  are  of  opinion,  that 
it  comes  from  the  oerh  Ilobil,  to  bring  or  call 
back ;  because  then  every  thing  was  restored 
to  its  first  possessor. 

JUDAli,  the  praise  of  tlu-  Lord. 

JUDAS,  the  same  as  JUDAH. 

•UIDEA,  a  ountry. 

JULIA,  downy;  from  m\o;,  down,  soft,  and 
tender  hair.     Ji  friend  of  St.  Paul's.  Rom.  16. 

JULIUS, /rom  the  same.  Acts  27.  1. 

JUiVIA,  from  Juno,  or  from  Juventua,   youth. 

J}  kinsman  of  St.  Paul's,  Rom.  Hi.  7. 
rUPlTER,  as  if  it  were  juvans  pater,  the  father 

that  hplneth. 
JUSTUS,  just,  upright. 

K. 

KABZEEL,  the  congregation  of  God,  .Tosh.  15. 
2L 
KADESri,  holv,  or  holinesn. 
KADESH  BAU\1''A,  holiness  of  nn  inconstant 

pon  ;  or,  lioliiicss  of  the  corn,  or  of  purity. 
KEDAR,  l>\;ifknrss,  nr  sorrow. 
KEDEMAIl.  oriental;  from  Kcdcm,  the  East, 

Oen.  2.->.  1.V 
KEDEMOTM,  nntiqnity,  old-age;  or,  orientals. 

The  nnme  nf  a  wilderness,  Deut.  2.  20. 
KKU,  Ml,  sire  that  dividfs  or  cuts. 
KEMUEL,  God  is  risen  ;  or,  God  has  raised  him. 
The  son  of  A'ahor,  Gen.  22.  21. 
T13 


LYS 

KEN.\7,,  this  nest;  or,  this  lamentation,  this 
possessiiin,  this  purchase.  The  father  of  0th- 
nicl.  Josh.  15.  17. 

KENITES,  possession,  or  purchase,  or  lamenta- 
tion, or  nest. 

KEREN-HAPPUCH,  the  hoi-n,  or  child  of  beau- 
ty,   .fob's  third  daughter,  Job  42. 14. 

KERIOTII,  the  cities,  the  callings. 

KP^TURAH,  he  that  burns,  or  makes  the  in- 
cense to  fume ;  otherwise,  perfumed,  or  odori- 
ferous. 

KEZI A,  superficies,  or  angle;  or,  cassia.  The 
daughter  of  Job,  Job  42.  14. 

KEZIZ,  end,  e.Mrcmity.  ^  valley.  Josh.  18. 
21. 

KIBROTIMIATTAAVAH,  the  graves  of  lust, 
JVnm.  11.34. 

KIDRON,  obscurity,  obscure.    2  Sam.  15.  23. 

KIR,  a  city,  a  wall,  or  meeting. 

KIR-HARESETH,  the  city  of  the  sun;  the 
city  with  walls  of  burnt  brick. 

KIR-JATII,  city,  vocation,  lesson,  reading,  or 
meeting.     JI  city,  Josh.  18.  28. 

KIRIATHAIM,  the  two  cities,  the  callings,  the 
meetings. 

KIRJATH-AUBA,  the  city  of  four. 

KIRJATH-ARIM,  city  of  cities;  or,  the  city  of 
those  that  watch.     Ezra  2.  25. 

KIRJATH-BAAL,  the  city  of  Baal,  or  of 
those  that  command,  or  that  possess.  Josh. 
15.  GO. 

KIRJATII-JEARIM,  the  city  of  woods  or  fo- 
rests. 

KIRJATII-SANNAH,  the  city  of  the  bush;  or, 
the  city  of  enmity.     Josh.  15.  49. 

KIRJAtll-SEPHER,  the  city  of  letters,  or  of 
the  book.    Josh.  15.  15. 

KISII,  liard,  difficult;  otherwise,  straw,  or  fo- 
rage. 

KITTIM,  they  that  bruise;  or,  gold,  or  colour- 
ing. 

KOHATH,  congregation,  wrinkle, obedience;  or, 
to  make  l)lunt. 

KOIIATIIITES,  the  posterity  of  Kohatb. 

KORAII,  bald,  frozen,  icy. 


L. 


T   ABAN,  white,  shining,  gentle. 

LACIIISH,  she  walks,  she  goes;  or,  who  ex- 
ists of  himself. 

LAIIMI,  my  bread,  or  my  war.  The  brother  of 
Goliath,  1  Chron.  20.  5. 

LAISH,  a  lion. 

LAMEt^H,  poor,  made  low;  or,  who  is  struck. 

LAODICEA,  just  people;  from  Xocof,  people, 
and  ^inaio?,  just. 

LAODICEANS,  inhabitants  of  L.aodicea. 

LAPIDOTH,  enlightened,  or  lamps.  The  hus- 
band of  Deborah,  Judg.  4.  4. 

LAZARUS,  the  help  of  God. 

LEA  15,  weary,  tired. 

LEBANON,  white,  or  incense. 

LEBBEUS,  a  man  of  heart 

LEGION. 

LEIIABIM,  flames,  or  which  are  Inflamed;  or, 
the  points  of  a  sword,  Gen.  10.  13. 

LEHI,  jaw-bone.     The  name  of  a  place,  Judg. 

LEMUEL,  God  with  them. 

LEVI,  who  is  held  and  associated. 

LEVITES,  of  the  posterity  of  Levi. 

LTBNAH,  white,  whiteness. 

LIBNI,  t/ie  same.  The  son  of  Oershon,  E.vod. 
(i.  17. 

LIBYA,  in  Hebrew,  Lubim,fhelieart  of  the  sea; 
or,  a  nation  that  has  a  heart. 

LIBYANS,  the  people  of  Libya. 

LINUS,  nets.  A  friend  of  St.  Paul's,  2  Tim.  4. 
21. 

LO-AMMI,  not  my  people. 

LOIS,  belter ;  from  the  Greek  word  \<uiicv,  bet- 
ter. 

LO-RUIIAMAH,  not  having  obtained  mercy; 
rot  ))itied. 

LOT,  wrapt  up,  hidden,  covered ;  otherwise, 
myrrh,  rosin. 

LUCAS,  luminous. 

LUCIEER,  bringing  light. 

LUCIUS,  Sec  LUCAS. 

LUKE,  See  LUCAS. 

LUZ,  Fcpnration,  departure. 

LYf'AONIA,  she-wolf.     Jl province. 

I/YDDA,  the  name  nf  a  city. 

LYSANI.AP,  that  destroys  or  drives  away  sor- 
row; from  Kuiri;,  solution,  and  aviot,  sorrow. 

TiYSTRA,  that  dissolves,   or  disperses;  frovi 

4  Z 


MEP 

M. 


IV/IAACHAII,  to  squeeze. 

^'^^  MAASElAli,  the  work  of  the  ..ord. 

MACEDONIA,  adoratior,  prostration,  accC  ding 
to  the  JJcbrew  ;  but,  elevitled,  eminent,  accora- 
ing  to  the  Greek ;  from  f^xxiSvaf. 

MACHIR,  he  that  sells,  or  iliat  knows. 

MACHPELA,  double. 

MAGDALA,  tower,  or  greatness. 

MAGDALENE,  l<iwer;  otherwise,  grand,  ele- 
vated, magnificent.     jMat.  27.  OG. 

MAGOG,  luof,  or  that  covers,  or  that  dissolve* 

MAGOR-MISSABIB,  fear  round  about.  Jcr. 
20.  3. 

MAIIALALEEL,  he  that  praises  God;  or,  illu- 
mination of  Goil.  The  son  of  Cainan,  Gen. 
5.  12. 

MAHALATII,  melodious  song;  otherwise,  infir- 
mity. The  wife  of  Hchuboam,  2  Cliron.  IL 
18. 

M-MIANAIM,  the  two  fiilds,  nr  two  armies. 

MAHAR-SHALAL-HASIIBAZ,  making  speed 
to  the  spoil,  he  haslcneth  the  prev.     Marg. 

MAHLAll,  the  same  with  MAHALATU.  One 
of  the  daughters  of  Zclophehad.   Num.  20.  33. 

MAIILON,  song,  or  infirmity. 

MAKKEDAM,  adoration,  or  prostration,  accord- 
ing to  the  Hebrew  ;  or,  raised,  eminent;  from 
the  Greek  word  fixxiSvoq.  A  city.  Josh.  10. 
10. 

MALCIIAM,  their  king. 

MALClllSUUA,  my  king  is  a  saviour;  or^ 
magnificent  king.  The  son  of  Saul,  1  Sam. 
14.  4!). 

MALCIIUS,  king,  or  kingdom. 

MAMMON,  riches. 

MAMRE,  rebellions;  or,  bitter;  or,  that  changes, 
that  barters  ;  or,  fat,  ur  elevated. 

MANAEN,  a  comforter;  or,  he  that  conduct* 
them;  nr,  preparation  of  heat. 

MANASSEII,  forgetfulnoss,  or  he  that  is  forgot- 
ten. 

MANEII,  a.  species  of  money. 

MANOAH,  rest,  or  a  present. 

MAON,  house,  or  habitation;  otherwise,  crime; 
or,  by  sin.     A  city.  Josh.  15.  55. 

MARA,  bitter,  or  biuerness. 

MARA II,  the  same. 

MARCUS,  polite,  shining. 

MARK,  the  same. 

MARS-IIILL,  the  place  where  the  celebratea 
judifes  of  Athens  held  their  supreme  council. 

MARTHA,  who  becomes  bitter. 

MARY,  exalted,  or  bitterness  of  the  sea,  or 
myrrh  of  the  sea ;  or,  lady  or  mistress  of  the 
sea. 

M.'VSREKAII,  whistling,  or  hissing;  or,  who 
touches  vanity.     A  city,  Gen.  3G.  30. 

MASSAII,  temptation.  The  name  of  a  place, 
Exod.  17.  7. 

MATRI,  rain,  or  prison.  Oiie  of  the  ancestors 
of  Saul.  ISam.  10.  21. 

MATTAN,  gift,  or  the  reins;  or,  the  death  of 
them. 

MATTATHIAP,  the  gift  of  the  Lord. 

MATTIIAT,  gift,  or  he  that  gives.     JmUc  3.  24 

MATTHEW,  given,  or  a  reward. 

MATTHIAS,  See  MATTATIHAS. 

MAZZAROTH,  the  twelve  signs.     Marg. 

MED  AD,  ho  that  measures;  or,  the  water  of 
love,  or  of  paps. 

M EDA N,  judgment,  process;  or,  measure,  habit, 
covering.     Son  of  Abraham,  Gen.  25.  2. 

MEDES,  a  people  of  the  province  nf  Jledia. 

MEDIA,  measure,  habit,  covering,  or  abun- 
dance. 

MEGIDDO,  that  declares;  or,  his  precious  fruit; 
or,  thnt  s|)oiIs. 

MEGIDDON,  the  same. 

MEIIETABEL,  how  sood  is  God?  or,  has 
d(me  good  to  us.  The  wife  of  Hadar,  Gen. 
nr..  30. 

MEHUJAEL,  who  proclaims  God  ;  or,  God  thai 
blots  out,  or,  according  fii  the  Syriac  and  Ho- 
brew,  who  is  Rniillcn  of  God.     Gen.  4.  18. 

MELCHI,  mv  king,  or  my  counsel 

MELCinZEDEK,  king  of  righteousness. 

MELTTA,  afforrling  honfy,  from  whence  honey 
distils;  frnm  f>^',  honey.  An  island  note 
colled  Malta,  Acts  28.  1. 

MEMPHIS,  bv  the  mouth. 

MEMUCAN,  impnverislu  rl ;  or,  to  prepare;  or 
certain,  true.     Fsth.  1.  10. 

MENAHEM,  comforter;  or,  who  conducts  them' 
or,  prepnriition  of  heat. 

MFNE,  who  reckons,  or  who  is  counted. 

MEPHIBOSHETII,  out  of  my  mouth  proceeds 
reproach. 


MOS 

MERAB,  he  that  fights,  or  disputes  ;  or,  that 
multiiilies. 

MERARl,  bitter ;  or,  to  provoke. 

MERCURIUS,  afaUe  god,  from  the  Latin  word 
inercari,  to  buy  oi  sell,  because  this  god  pre- 
sided ottT  merchandise.  In  Greek,  Hermes, 
which  si^rnijics  orator,  or  interpreter. 

MERIBAli,  ilispute,  quarrel. 

MERIB-B.-V.^L,  rebellion;  or,  he  that  resista 
Baal,  and  strives  against  the  idol.  1  Chron. 
8.34. 

MERODACH,  bitter  contrition;  or,  bruised 
myrrh.  According  to  the  Sijriac,  it  signifies 
the  little  lord.  This  is  the  name  of  one  of  the 
Chaldran  deities. 

MEROUAClI-BALAnAN,  who  creates  contri- 
tion ;  or,  the  son  of  death,  or  of  thy  vapour. 

MEROM,  eminences,  elevations. 

MEROZ,  secret,  or  leanness. 

MESH.\CH,  that  draws  with  force ;  or,  that  sur- 
rounds the  waters. 

MESHECH,  who  is  drawn  by  force;  or,  included, 
shut  up,  surrounded. 

MESHELEMIAH,  peace,  or  perfection,  or  retri- 
bution of  the  Lord  ;  or,  the  Lord  is  my  reconi- 
pencc,  or  my  hapjiiness.  The  father  of  Zecha- 
riah,  1  Chron.  9.  2L 

MESOPOTAMIA,  in  Hebrew,  Aramnaharaim, 
that  is,  Syria  of  the  two  rivers.  The  Greek  word 
Mesopotamia, n/sy  6i>«'^es between  tworivers; 
from  /i'-'^';,  middle,  aiid  ^ro-rxfin;,  river. 

MESSL\H,  anointed. 

METHEG-AMMAH,  the  bridle  of  bondage. 

METHUS.-V EL,  who  demands hisdeath;  or,  death 
is  his  hell  or  grave. 

METHUSELAH,  he  has  sent  his  death;  or,  the 
arms  of  his  death;  or,  spoil  of  liis  death. 

M1C.'\H,  poor,  humble ;  or,  who  strikes,  or  is 
struck  ;  or,  who  is  there,  or  the  waters  here. 

MICALAH,  who  is  like  to  God  7 

MICH  ALA  H,  the  same. 

MICHAEL,  the  same. 

MICH.AL,  who  is  it  that  has  all  1  or,  who  is  per- 
fect, or  complete?  or,  the  whole  is  water. 

MICHMASH,  he  that  strikes;  or,  poor  who 
is  taken  away.  The  name  of  a  town,  1  Sam. 
13.  2. 

MIULAN,  judgment;  or,  measure,  habit,  co- 
vering. 

MiniANlTES. 

MIDIANITISH. 

MIGROX,  fear;  or,  a  farm,  or  throat,  Isa.  \0. 
28. 

MILCAH,  queen. 

Ml  LOOM,  their  king. 

MILETUM,  red,  or  scarlet; /rom  the  Greek  word 
/ui>.To;,  vermiliim,  red. 

MILLO,  fulness,  plenitude,  repletion. 

MINNI,  diajjosed,  reckoned,  prepared.  Jer.  51.. 
27. 

MI.VXITH,  counted,  prepared.  Ji  city,  Judg. 
11. :«. 

MIRIAM,  c.xnlted;  or,  bitterness  of  the  sea; 
or,  myrrh  of  the  sea ;  or,  lady  or  mistress  of 
the  sea. 

M1SH.\EL,  who  is  asked  for,  or  lent;  or,  God 
takes  away,  or  retires. 

MI.-^REPHOTH-MAIM,  the  burnings  of  the 
waters;  or  furnaces  where  metals  are  melted. 
.^  place  where  there  were  salt  pits,  ,losh.  II.  8. 

MITVLENE,  a  Greek  word, signifying  ymrhy, 
cleansing,  or  press. 

Ml'/ AR,  little.     Marg. 

Mi/.I'.VH,  a  sentinel,  speculation,  or  that  waits 
for. 

MIZI'EII,  thesatne. 

MISll.M.M,  trilMilalions;  or,  who  is  straitened, 
or  blocked  up.      The  son  of  Ham,  Gen.  10,  6. 

MNASO.N,  a  diligent  seeker,  or  betrothing,  or 
remembering,  or  an  exhortor. 

MOAB,  ofihe  father. 

MOA  BITES,  the  posterity  of  MOAB. 

MOL.\I).MI,  birth,  generation.  A  city,  Josh. 
1.').  26. 

MOLECII,  king. 

MOLOCH,  the  same. 

MORI)EC.\I,  contrition,  or  bitter  bruising;  or, 
nivrrh  hrnised  ;  or,  who  teaches  to  bruise. 

MORLMI,  bitterness  of  the  Lord;  or,  doctrine, 
or  fear  of  the  Lord. 

MOSEROTH,  erudiiion,  discipline,  bond.  JVum. 
Xi.  :tn, 

MOSES,  taken  out  of  the  water.  He  wa.i  of 
the  house  of  Levi,  horn  in  F-nypt,  and  mi- 
raculously prcserred.  God  appi-ared  to  him 
in  a  burning  bush,  and  sent  him  to  drliocr 
the  Israelites  out  of  Egypt.  He  was  ap- 
pointed by  God  to  lead  the  hrarlilrs  through 
the  wildernr.fs  to  the  land  of  Canaan.  lieing 
a'jout  to  die,  he  bUss'th  nil  the  tribes  of  U 
714 


NIG 

raet :  He  views  the  land  of  Canaan,  dies,  is 
buried  by  Ood,  and  Joshuamade  his  successor: 
He  was  a  very  great  man,  and  highly  honour- 
ed by  God  in  many  respects.  'J'lie  law  was 
given  by  Moses,  but  grace  and  truth  came  by 
Jesus  Christ,  John  1.  17. 

MUSHI,  he  that  touches,  that  withdraws  him- 
self, that  takes  away.  Son  of  Merari,  E.\od. 
6.  19. 

MYRA,  is  derived  from  the  Greek  word  fvf^-, 
I  flow,  pour  out,  weep. 

MYSIA,  criminal,  or  abo.ninable;/rom  the  Greek 
word  /•"«■»«,  crime. 


N. 


TV'AAMAN,  beautiful,  agreeable  ;  or,  that  pre- 
pares himself  to  motion. 
NAAMATHITE,  who  is  of  Naamath. 
NAASHON,  that  foretels,  that  conjectures ;  or, 

serpent;  or,  their  auguries. 
NABAL,  a  fool  or  senseless. 
NABOTH,  words,  or  prophecies,  or  fruits. 
NADAB,  free  and  voluntary  gift;  or,  prince. 
NAGGE,  brightness. 
NAHARI,    my    nostrils,   my  nose;    or,  hoarse, 

dry,  hot,  angry.     One  of  David's  valiant  cap 

tains,  2  Sam.  23.  37. 
NAHASH,  snake,  or  serpent,  or  that  foretels,  oi 

brass. 
NAHOR,  hoarse,  dry,  hot,  angry. 
NAHUM,  comforter,  penitent;  or,  their  guide 

The  name  of  a  prophet,  Nah.  1.  1. 
NAIN,  beauty,  pleasantness. 
NAIOTH,  beauties;  or,  habitations,  abodes. 
.\'.\OMI,  beautiful,  agreeable. 
NAPHISH,  the   soul;  or,  he   that  rests  or  re 

freshes  himself,  that  respires;  or,  according  to 

the  Syriac,  that  multiplies.     The  son  of  Ish 

marl,  Gen.  25.  15. 
NAPHTALI,    comparison,    likeness;    or,    that 

struggles,  or  fights. 
NARCISSUS,  astonishment,  stupidity,  surprise  ; 

from  the  Greek  word  vapxiirif.     Rom.  16.  11 
NATHAN,  who  gives,  or  is  given. 
NATHAN  A  EL,  the  gift  of  God. 
NATHAN-MELECH,  the  gift  of  the  king.    2 

Kings  23.  11. 
NAUM,  See  NAHUM. 
NAZARENE,  kept,  or  flower.   A  native  o/ Na- 
zareth. 
N.AZARETH,  separated,  sanctified. 
NEAP0LI3,new  city, /rom  v£»,new,  fresh,  and 

TToKif,  a  city. 
NEBAIOTH,  words,  or  prophecies,  or  fruits. 
NEB  AT,  that  beholds. 
NEBO,  that  speaks,  prophesies,  or  fructifies. 
NEBUCHADNEZZAR,    tears   and   groans    of 

judgment ;  or,  trouble,  or  sorrow  of  judgment. 
NEBUZAR-ADAN,    fruits    or    prophecies    of 

judgment;  or,  winnoweil,  or  spread. 
NECHO,  lame,  or  who  was  beaten.     The  name 

of  a  king  of  Egi/pt,  2  Kings  23.  29. 
NEHELAMITE,  "dreamer,  or  dream;  or,  val 

or  brook,  or  inheritance  of  the  waters. 
NEHEMIAH,  consolation,  or  repentance  of  the 

Lord  ;  or,  rest  of  the  Lord ;  or,  conduct  of  the 

Lord . 
NEHUSHTA,  snake,   soothsayer,   or  of  brass. 

Mnthrr  nf  .lehoiakim,  2  Kings  24.  8. 
NEHUSHT.AN,  which  is  of  brass  or  copper; 

by  derision,  a  trifle  of  brass. 
NER,  lump,  hrii.'lilnees;  or,  land  new  tilled. 
NEREUS,  .SVeNER. 
NERI,  my  lighu     The  father  of  Salathiel,  Luke 

3.27. 
NERI  AH,  light,  and  lamp  of  the  Lord;  or,  the 

Lord  is  mv  light. 
NETIIANKEL,  Sec  NATHANAEL. 
NETIIANI  A,  the  gift  of  the  L(,rd. 
NETII  INI  MS,  given,  or  offered.     The  Gibeon- 

ites,  or  those   who   succeeded  them   in    their 

service. 
NIBIIAZ,  that  fructifies,  or  that  produces  vi- 
sion; or,  to  prophesy,  to  foretel,  or  to  speak. 

.In  idol  of  the  Aeites,  2  Kings  17.  31. 
NlCAN'tR,  a  conqueror,  or  victorious;   from 

the  Greek  word  n«»a>,  1  conquer. 
NKyODP^MUS,  innocent  blood:  or,  according  to 

the  Greek,  the  victory  of  the   people ;   from 

nx»tt>,     I    conquer,     and     itifOi,    the     peo- 
ple. 
N1COLAITAN9,  victory  of  the  people; /rnm 

»•»«»,  I  overcome,  and  >.«»«,  iho  people.     Tie 

followers  of  Nicolas. 
NI(;OLAS,  from  the  $ame.      A  deacon,  Acts 

6.5. 


PAR     [Proper  Names. 

NICOPOLIS,  the  city  of  victory,  or  victotioui 

city;  from   nxxa.,   I    conquer,  and   3ro>.<;,  a 

citv. 
NIGER,  black. 
NI.MRI.Nl,  leopard,  bitterness,  rebellion,  or  change. 

The  name  of  a  place,  Isa.  15.  6. 
NI.MROD,  rebellious,  or  steep  of  descent,  or  of 

him  that  rules. 
NIMSHI,  rescued  from  danger;  or,  that  touch- 

NINEVEH,  handsome,  agreeable;  or,  dwell- 
ing. 

NINEVITES,  the  people  o/ Nineveh. 

NIS.AN,  flight,  or  standard ;  or,  proof  and  temp- 
tnlion. 

NISROCH,  flight,  or  standard,  or  proof  and 
temptation  ;  tender,  or  delicate. 

NO,  stirring  up,  or  a  forbidding. 

NOADIAH,  witness;  or,  assembly,  or  ornament 
of  the  Lord. 

NO.AH,  re|)ose,  or  rest,  or  consolation. 

NO.AH,  that  quavers,  or  totters.  Daughter  of 
Zelophehad,  Num.  26.  33. 

NOB,  discourse,  prophecy. 

NOB.AII,  that  barks  or  yelps.  .5  city.  Num.  32. 
42. 

NOD,  vagabond.     .1  country.  Gen.  4. 16. 

NOPH,  honey-comb,  a  sieve,  or  that  drops. 

NUN,  Sim,  posterity,  durable  and  eternal. 

NYMPHAS,  spouse,  or  bridegroom. 

o. 

QBADIAH,  servant  of  the  Lord. 

OBAL,  inconvenience  of  old  age  ;  or,  of  the 

flu.x.     The  son  of  Jvktan,  Gen.  10.  28. 
OBED,  a  servant. 
OBED-EDOM,  the   servant   of    F.dom,   or   lh» 

Idumeun;  or,  labourer  of  the  man,  of  red,  or 

earthy. 
OBIL,  that  weeps,  or  deserves  to  ho  bewailed; 

or  ancient ;  or,  who  is  brought.     One  that  had 

the  care  of  David's  camels,  1  Chron.  27.  30. 
OCRAN,  disturber,  or  that  disorders. 
ODED,  to  sustiiin,  to  hold,  to  lift  up. 
OG,  a  cake,  bread  baked  in  the  ashes. 
OHEL,  tent,  tabernacle;  or,  brightness,  1  Chron. 

3.  21). 
OLYMPAS,  heavenly. 
O.MAR,   he   that  speaks;  or,  bitter.     Gen.  36l 

11. 
OMEGA,  the  lost  Utter  of  the  Greek  alphabet. 
OMRT,  a  sheaf,  or  bundle  of  corn;  or,  rebellion, 

or  bitter. 
ON,  pain,  force,  iniquity. 
ON.AN,  pain,  strength,  power,  iniquity. 
ONESIMUS,    profitable,    useful;  from   0f,9-.^ 

usefulness. 
ONESIPIIORUS,  who  brings  profit;  from  thx 

Greek  word  ovi-o-i,',  usefiiliiess,  and  f'ff,  h« 

that  brings. 
OPMEL,  tower,  or  elevated  place  ;  or,  obscurity. 
OPHIR,  ashes. 
OPHRAH,  dust,  fawn,  lead.     .?  city,  Josh,  la 

23. 
OREB,  a  raven,  sweet,  caution,  or  mi.tture,  »»• 

evening. 
ORION,  a  constellation. 
ORNA.V,  thai  njoices;  their  bow  or  ark;   or 

Irght  of  the  sun. 
ORPAH,  the  neck,  or  the  skull,  nakedncM  oftlM 

month  or  fare. 
OTHNI,  my  lime,  mv  hour.     The  son  of  Sk^ 

maiah,  1  Chron.  26.'7. 
OTHMEL,  the  lime  or  the  hour  of  God. 
07EM,  that  fasts;  or,  their  eagerness. 
OZLAS,  strength  from  the  Lord. 


P.\ARAI,  opening. 
PADAN-ARAM,    Padan   n(  the  field,  «nrf 

Aram  Syria;    a   city  of   Syria  where  Laban 

dirrll.  Gi-n.  25.  20. 
PAGIEF-,  prercntion  of  God,  or  prayer  ofGod. 
PALESTINA,  which  is  covered,  watered,  or  hi 

hrinu  or  cause  ruin. 
PA  LTI,  deliverance,  or  flight.     Son  of  Kapha, 

Num.  13.  9. 
PAMPHYLIA,  a  nation  madt  up  of  every  tribe, 

from  rrxf,  all,  and  ?uXit,  a  tribe. 
PAPIIOS,    which   boils,   or  which   is  very  hoi; 

from  jixiKx^i'v,  to  boil,  or  to  be  very  hot. 
PARAN,  beauty,  glory,  ornament. 
PARBAR,  agate,  or  building  belonging  to  the 

■temple. 
PARMEVAS,  that  abides   and   is   pTmaneut 

from  the  Grtck  word  -%fxyiv^,  I  dbide. 


Proper  Names.]     PHY 

PAROSH,  a   flea;    or,  the   fruit  of  tho  moth. 

Ezra  2.  3. 
PARSIIANDATHA,   revelation    of    corporeal 

impurities,  or  of  his  trouble;  or,  dung  of  impu 

rity.     Tht  son  of  Hainan,  Esth.  9.  7. 
PARTHIANS,  horsemen. 
I'ARUAH,   Hourishing;    or,   according    to   the 

Syriac,  that  flies  away.  Father  ofJehoshaphat, 

1  Kings  4.  17. 
PASHUR,  that  extends,  or  multiplies   the  hole, 

oi-  whiteness  ;  or,  that  multiplies  ur  extends  the 

liberty  or  the  principality. 
PATARA,  whicli  is  irod  under  foot ;  from  the 

Greek  icordTmrtJt,  I  iread  under  foot. 
PATHROS,  mouthful  of  dew;    or,  persuasion, 

or  dilaiation  of  ruin. 
PATiMOS,  motVji.\;  from'rxTxftxi, I  am  squeezed 

to  pieces. 
PATROBAS,  paternal,  or  that  pursues  the  steps 

of   his    father ;   from    Trxruf,   a    father,   and 

/3».v«,,  Igo.     Hum.lQ.M. 

AU,  that  cries  aloud  ;  or,  that  appears.  A  city, 

Gen.  3().  39. 
PAUL,  a  worker.  His  former  name  was  Saul,  a 

sepulchre,  a  destroyer. 
PAULUS. 
PEDAHZUR,  saviour,  strong  and  powerful ;  or, 

stone  of  reiicmption  ;  or,  the  redemption  of  that 

which  is  placed  or  set  up.     J^Tiim.  1.  10. 
PEDAI.Ml,  redemption  of  the  Lord.    2  Kings 

i>3.  35. 
PElvAII,  he  that  opens  ;  or,  that  opens  the  eye, 

or  that  is  at  liberty. 
PEKAHI.'VH,  it  is  the  Lord  that  opens. 
PELATIAH,  let  the  Lord  deliver;  or,  deliver- 
ance, or  Highl  of  the  Lord. 
PEL  EG,    division.     The    son    of    Eber,   Gen. 

10.  '-'.5. 
PELETHITES,  judges,  or    destroyers.     These 

were  troops  or  "tiards  of  king  David,  2  Sam. 

8.  18. 
PENIEL,  face,  or  vision  of  God;  or,  that  sees 

God. 
PENINNAH,  pear],  precious  stone  ;  or,  his  face. 

The  wife  of  F.lkanah,  1  Sam.  1.  2. 
PENUEL,  See  PENIEL. 
PEOR,  hole,  or  ojiening. 
PERGA,    very    earthy ;  from    the  preposition 

sirpi,  very,  and  yyt,  the  earth. 
PERGAMOS,  height,  elevation. 
PERIZZITES,  the  name  of  a  people,  who  dwell 

in  villages,  or  places  not  inclosed  with  walls. 
PERSIA,  that  cuts  or  divides;  or,  nail,  gryphon, 

horseman. 
PERSIS,  the  same. 
PETER,  a  rock,  or  stone. 
PETHUEL,  month  of  God ;  or,  dilaiation,  or, 

persuasion  of  God.     Father  of  Joel,  Joel  1.  1. 
PHALEC,  SeePELEG. 
PHALLU,  admirable,  or  hidden.     The  son  of 

Reuben,  Gen.  46.  9. 
PIIALTl,  deliverance,  or  flight.     The  son  of 

Laish.     1  Sam.  25.  44. 
PHANUEL,  face,  or  vision  of  God.  Lxike  2.  36. 
PHARAOH,  that  disperses,  that  spoils,  that  dis- 
covers; or,  according   to  the   Syriac,  the  re- 
venger, the  destroyer,  the  king,  the  crocodile. 
PHAREZ,  division,  rupture  ;  or,  that  breaks  forth 

violently. 
PHARPAR,  that  produces  fruits;  or,  the  fall  of 

the  hull. 
PHEBE,  shining,  pure  ;  from  (f  oiSof . 
PHENICE,    rod,    or  purple;  from   the    Greek 

word  <fciiviy.i(  ;  or,  palm-tree;  from  ifoivij. 
PHICOL,  the  mouth  of  all,  or  every  tongue  ;  or, 

perfection,  or  completing  of  the  mouth.     Gen. 

21.  22. 
PHILADELPHIA,   the   love  of  a  brother,  or 

of  fraternity;    from    <f'f.'s,     a    friend,    and 

xSikO"!,  a  brother. 
PHILEMON,  that  kisses,  or  is  afl^ectionate  ;  from 

O'Ki^lux,  a  kiss. 
PHILETLTS,  amiable,  or  who  is  beloved;  /ro7n 

CiXi)TO;. 

PHILIP,  warlike,  or  a  lover  of  horses. 
PHlLiPPl,  the  same. 

PHlLISTfA,  the  country  of  the  Philistinea. 
PHILISTINES,  those  that  dwell  in  villages. 
PHILOLOGUS,  a  lover  of  learning,  or  of  the 

word ; /ro;n  ^iKof,  a   lover,  and  ».oyof,  the 

word. 
PHINE.AS.  a  bold  countenance,  or  face  of  trust, 

or  protcclion. 
PHLEfiO.V,  zealous,  burning;  from  ^Xiyajn. 
PHRVGIA,  dry,  barren  ;  from  Cpwy'f. 
PHURAII,  that  hears  fruit,  or  that  grows. 
PH YG  ELLUS,  fugitive.     One  loho  forsook  St. 

Paul. 
PI-HAHIROTH,  the  mouth,  the  pass  of  Iliroth, 

»r  the  opening  of  liberty  ;  or,  mouth  engraved. 
"Ma 


RAM 

PILATE,  who  is  armed  with  a  dart. 

PINON,  pearl,  or  gem  ;  or,  that  beholds.     One 

of  the  heads  of  Esau's  posterity,  Gen.  36.  41. 
PIRATHON,  his   dissipation,   his   deprivation ; 

his  rupture;  or,  according  to  the  Syriac,  Im 

vengeance.     ./I   city,   Judg.  12.   15.     Whence 

Piriithonite,  Judg.  12.  13. 
PISGAH,  hill,  eminence,  fortress. 
PISIDIA,  pilch,  or  pitchy  ;  from  n-io-riujiit. 
PISON,  changing,  or  doubling,  or  extension  of  the 

mouth  ;  or,  extended,  or  multitude.  One  of  the 

rivers  of  Paradise,  Gen.  2.  11. 
PITHOM,  their  mouthful,  or  bit ;  or  consumma- 
tion, or  dilatation  of  the  mouth,     ji  city,  Exod. 

1.11. 
PITHON,  his  mouth,  or  his  persuasion,  or  gift 

of  the  mouth.     Son  of  Micah,  1  Clircm.  8.  35. 
PONTIUS,  marine,  or  belonging  to  the  sea. 
PONTUS,  the  sea  ;  from  the  Greek  word  jtovto;. 
PORATHA,  fruitful.   The  Son  of  Hainan,  Esth. 

9.8.  J  . 

PORCIUS. 

POTIPHAR,  the  bull  of  Africa;  or,  a  fat  bull. 
POTI-PHERA,  that  scatters,  or  demolishes  the 

fat. 
PRISCA,    a    Latin   word  signifying    ancient. 

2  Tim.  4.  19.  -^    JH    ^ 

PRISCILLA,  from  the  same. 
PROCHORUS,     he     that     presides    over    the 

choirs;  from  n-po,  before,  and  xofOf,  a  com- 
pany of  singers.    Jicts  6.  5. 
PUBLIUS,  common. 
PIJDENS,  shamefaced. 
PUL,  bean,  or  destruction. 
PUNON,  precious  stone,  or  that  beholds.     One 

of  the  stations  of  the  Israelites,  Num.  33.  42. 
PUR,  lot.     See  Appellatives. 
PUTEOLI,  (I  city  in  Campania.- 
PUTIEL,  God  is  my  fatness.   The  father-in-law 

of  Elcazar,  Exod.  6.  25. 


Q. 


Q 


UARTUS,  the  fourth.    Rom.  16.  !a 

R. 


T)AAMAH,  greatness,  thunder;  or,  some  sort 
of  evil,  or  bruising,  or  company,  Ge7i.  10.  7. 

R  ABB  AH,  great,  powerful,  contentious,  or  dispu- 
tative. 

RAB-MAG,  who  overthrows  or  destroys  a  multi- 
tude ;  or,  chief,  or  prince  of  dissolution  ;  or, 
chief  of  the  magicians.    Jer.39.3. 

RAB-SARIS,  grand  master  of  the  eunuchs. 
2  Kings  18.  17. 

RAB-SHAKEH,  cup-bearer  of  the  prince,  or 
chamberlain. 

RACHAL,  injurious;  or, perfumer, or trafiicking. 
Ji  city,  1  Sam.  30.  29. 

RACHEL,  a  sheep. 

RAGAU,  a  friend,  a  neighbour. 

RAGUEL,  shepherd  of  God,  or  friend  of  God  ; 
or,  rupture  of  God.  The  father  of  Hobal, 
Num.  10.  29. 

RAHAB,  proud,  strong,  quarrelsome.  Egypt, 
as  most  think,  is  called  by  this  name,  Psal 
87.  4.]  89.  10. 

RAHAB,  which  is  large  and  extended,  or  public 
place.     The  name  of  a  woman. 

RAKKATH,  empty,  or  spittle,  or  temple  of  the 
head      JI  city,  Josh.  19.  35. 

R.\KKON,  vain,  void  ;  or,  mountain  of  lamen- 
tations and  tears ;  or,  mountain  of  enjoyment. 
.9  city.  Josh.  19.  46. 

RAM,  elevated,  sublime  ;  or,  who  rejects,  or  is 
rejected. 

RAMAH,  from  the  same. 

RAMATH,  raised,  loflv.    Jl  city.  Josh.  19.  8. 

RAMATHAIM-ZOPHIM,  a  cif?/,  1  Sam.  1.  1. 
The  same  as  Ramah.  Literally,  Ramathaim, 
signifies  the  two  Ramalhas,  proAa4/j/  because 
the  city  was  divided  into  two  parts.  The  city 
of  Ramah,  Samuel's  birth-place,  was  also  call- 
ed Zophim,  which  sigJiifies  watch-tower,  or 
watchmen,  Jecause  the  prophets,  who  arc  called 
watchmen,  had  a  ichool,  or  college  there. 

RAMATH-LEHI,  elevation  of  the  jaw-bone. 
The  name  of  a  place,  Judg.  15.  17. 

RAMESES,  thunder;  or,  reproach  of  the  mouth; 
or  he  that  destroys  or  dissolves  evil.  Ocn.  47. 
11.  F.jcnd.  1.  II. 

R.MVIOTH,  eminences,  high  places.  .-9  city  of 
this  name  was  situate  in  Gilead,  and  called 
Ramoth-gilead,  1  Kings  4.  13. 


SAL 

RAPHA,  relaxation,  or  physic. 

RAPHU,  cured,  comforted. 

REBA,  tho  fourth,  or  a  square  ;  or,  that  stoop* 

or  lies  down.    M  king  of  Midian,  Num.  31.  8. 
REBEKAH,  fat,  fattened  ;  or,  quarrel  appeaseo 

or  removed. 
RECHAB,  square,  or  chariot,  or  team  of  horses, 

or  a  rider. 
RECHABITES,  the  posterity  oUiechab. 
REGEM,  that  stones,  or  is  stoned,  or  purple. 

The  son  of  Jaddai,  1  Chron.  2.  47. 
REGEM-MELECH,  he   that  stones   the  king; 

or  the  purple  of  the  king,  or  of  the   council. 

Zech.  7.  2. 
REHABIAH,  breadth,  or  extent,  or  place  of  the 

Lord  ;  nr,  God  is  my  extent,  he  hatk  set  me 

at   liberty.     The  son    of    Eliezer,  1  Chrou. 

23.  17. 
REHOB,    breadth,   space,   or  extent.    A   city, 

Josh.  19.28. 
REHOBOAM,  who  sets   the  people  at  liberty; 

or,  space  of  the  people  ;  or,  that  lets  the  people 

breathe,  or  blow. 
REFIOBOTH,  spaces,  or  pbices. 
REHUM,  merciful,  compassionate,  or  friendly 
REI,  my  shepherd,  my  companion,  my  friend ; 

or,    my    evil,    or    my    breaking.      1     Kings 

REMALIAH,  the  exaltation  of  the  Lord;   or, 

who  is  rejected  of  the  Lord. 
REMMON,  greatness,  elevation  ;  or,  a  pomegra 

nate-tree.     A  city,  Josh.  19.  7. 
REMPHAN,  the  name  of  an  idol,  which  some 

think  to  be  Saturn.     See  STAR,  in  Appella- 
tives. 
REPHAEL,  the  physic,  or   medicine   of  God. 

The  son  of  Skemaiah,  1  Chron.  26.  7. 
REPHAIM,  giant,  physician,  or  relaxed,  or  that 

relax,  that  weaken. 
REPHAIMS,  from  the  same. 
REPHIDIM,  beds,  or  places  of  rest. 
RESIN,  a  bridle,  or  bit.     A  city.  Gen.  10.  12. 
REU,    his   friend,  his   shepherd.     The   son   of 

Feleg,  Gen.  11.  18. 
REUBEN,  who  sees  the  son,  or  vision  of  the 

son.     Jacob's  eldest  so7i  by  Leah ;  he  endea- 
voured to  deliver  Joseph  from  his  brethren. 
REUBENITES,  the  posterity  of  Reuben. 
REUL,  shepherd,  or  friend  of  God.     The  son  of 

Esau,  Gen.  3(3.  4. 
REUMAH,  lofty,  sublime.     J^ahor's  concubine. 

Gen.  22.  24. 
REZIN,  voluntary,  or  good-will  ;  or,  runner. 
REZON,  lean,  or   small,  or   secret,  or   prince. 

The  son  of  Eliadah,  1  Kings  11.  23. 
RHEGIUM,    rupture,    or    fracture;   from    ih* 

Greek  word  pj-i). 
RHESA,  will,  or  course. 
RHODA,  a  rose. 
RHODES,  a  rose  ;  from  poJif. 
RIBLAH,   quarrel,   or   greatness   to    him;    or, 

quarrel  that  increases,  or  that  spreads.  iKing$ 

23.  33. 
RIMMON,  exalted,  pomegranate. 
RIPHATH,  remedy,  or  medicine,  or  release,  of 

pardon.     The  son  of  Gomer,  Gen.  10.  3. 
RISSAH,  watering,  distillation,  or  dew.   One  of 

the  stations  of  the  Israelites  in  the  wilderness 

Num.  33.  2!. 
RIZPAH,  bed,  or   extension,  or  coal,  or  fire 

stone. 
ROMAMTI-EZER,  exaltation  of  help.     Son 

Heman,  1  Chron.  25.  4. 
ROMAN,  strong,  powerful ;  from  the  Greek  wor 

puj^i),  strength. 
ROMANS. 

ROME,  strength,  power  ;  from  f«iM<f. 
ROSH,  the  head,  or  the  top,  or  the  beglnninj 

The  son  of  Benjamin,  Gen.  46.  21. 
RUFUS,  red. 

RUHAMAH,  having  obtained  mercy.     Marg. 
RUMAH,  exalted,  sublime,  or  rejected.    A  citw 

2  Kings  23.  36. 
RUTH,  filled,  satisfied. 


s. 


OABEANS,  captivitj  ;  or,  conversion,  rest,  » 

age. 
SABTECHA,  that  surrounds,  or  causes  wounc 

ing.     The  son  of  Cash,  Gen.  10.  7. 
SA  DOC,  just,  or,  justified.  The  Father  of  AchiTT. 

Mat.  1.  14. 
S.ALAH,  mission,  sending  ;  or,  branches,  or  dar' 

or,  according  to  the  Syriac,  that  spoils,  or 

spoiled.     The  son  of  Arphaxad,  Gen.  10.  24. 
SAL.AMIS,  shaken,  tost,  beaten  ;  from  the  Gret 

word    <r-A\tux'f  I   beat,  I   toss.    An    islan- 

Acts  13.  5. 


SUA 

BALATIIIEL,  I  have  asktd  of  GoJ ;  of,  loan  of 

God. 
SALF.M,  com|ileH»,  p»-rf.>cl,or  penrc. 
SALIAI,  .lohn  3.  03.     Set  SHALI.M. 
SALMON,  peaceable,  perfect,  or  that  rewards. 
SALMO.NE.    Acitxj. 
SALOMK,  set  SALMON. 
SAM.ARIA,  his  lees,  \\\i  prison,   liis  guanl,  Ins 

thron«,  or  his  iliainimd.     In  Hch.  Slionieruo. 
SAMARITANS,  people  «/-Sanmrii. 
S\MLAH,   raiment;    or,  his  h^ft  hand;  or,  his 
name,  hin  astonishineul,  or  what  has  been  put 
to  him.    Jl  kirn;  of  EUom,  Gen.  36.  36. 
SAMOS,    full   of   gravel;   J'toih   Afi/xoi,    sand. 

Jin  island,  Ac\s  20.  1.5. 
SAMOTIIRACIA,  an  i.-lmid,  sn  ealled  because 
it  wiii  peopled  by  Sainians  and  Tlirucians,  Acts 
16.  11. 
SAMSON,  his  sun  ;  or,  aecordivjT  to  the  Syrine, 
his  service,  or  his  ministry ;  or,  here  the  second 
time. 
SAMUEL,  heard  of  God,  or  asked  of  God. 
S.^NRALL.^T,  bush  in  secret;  or,  the  enemy  in 

secreL  ' 
S.APH,  ruslics,  or  sea-moss,  end,  consummation  ; 
or-  vessel,  flat,  threshold.     ^  giant,  2  Sam. 
•21.  la 
SAPHIR,  a  city. 
SAPPHIRA,    that    relates    or    tcll.i;     or,    that 

writes  or  composes  books;  «r,  liandsome. 
S.AR.^II,  lady,  or  princess;  or,  llie  princess  of 

the  multitude. 
S.^R.AI,  my  lady,  my  princess. 
SARDIS,  prince  of  joy,  </r  song  of  jny;  or,  thnt 

which  remains.     Syr.  a  pot,  a  ketile. 
SAREPT.\,  a  goldsmith's   shop,  where  metals 

vsfd  to  be  viclted  and  tried. 
S.ARGON,  who  takes  away  protection;  or,  that 
takes  away  the   garden :  or,  according  to  the 
.Vyrirtc,  nets,  snares.     ^  king  of  .Assyria,  Isa. 
20.1. 
SARON,sffe  SHARON. 
SARSECniM,  master  of  the  wardrobe ;  or,  of 

the  perfumes.     Jer.  30.  3. 
S.MU'CH,  branch,  layer;  or,  twining. 
S.\TAN,  contrary,  adversary,  a  party  in  a  pro- 
cess, an  enemy,  an  accuser. 
S.AUL,  demanded,  or  lent,  ditch,  sepulchre,  death, 

or  hell. 
8CEVA,    disposed,    prepared;    from   <rxeua^<u, 

I  dispose,  I  prepare. 
PCYTIIIAN,  tanner,  or  leather-dresser. 
SEBA,  drunkard;  or,  that  turns,  or  surrounds; 

or,  oM  man,  according  to  the  Syriac. 
?E1!AT,  twifr,  sceptre,  tribe,  ZccA.  1.  7. 
SRGUH,  fortified,  or  raised.     1  Kings  16.  34. 
SEIR,  hairv,  goat,  demon,  tempest,  or  barley, 
SELEUCIA,  sliaken  or  beaten  by  the  waves,  or 

thnt  runs  as  a  river. 
SEMEI,  hearing,  or  obeyin?. 
SENEH,  bush.     Ji  rock,  1  Sam.  14.  4. 
SENNACHERin,  bush  of  the  destruction  of  the 

sword,  of  solitude,  of  drounht. 

SEPHARV.MM,   the  two   books,   or   the  two 

scribes.  I 

SERAH,  lady  of  scent;   or,  the   song:   or,  the 

morning,  the  morning  star.     The  daughter  of 

Jlnher,  Gen.  46.  17. 

BERAIAH,  prince  of  the  Lord,  or  the  Lord  is  my 

prince  ;  or,  song  of  the  Lord. 
SERGIUS  PAULUS. 
SERt'G,  branch,  layer;  or,  twining.     The  father 

0/ JVuAor,  Gen.  11.22. 
SETH,  put,  or  who  puis. 
8HAALBI.M,  that  beholds  the  heart  ;_or,  fist,  or 

hand,  or  dix  of  the  sea.     ./vdg.  1.  3.5. 
BHAAR.MM,    gates,    valuation,    hmrs,   barley, 
tempests,   goats,    demons.    ./I  city,    1   Chron. 
4.21. 
SIIAASIIGA7,  he  that   presses  the  fleece;  or, 
he  thnt    performs  the   shearing  of  the  sheep. 
Kn'.h  -2.  14. 
SHADRACir,  tender   nipple;   or,  field  soft  and 

fender.     J>nn.  1.  7. 
SHALIM,  fox,  or  fist,  or  path. 
8HALISHA,  three,  or  the  third;  or,  prince,  or 

captain. 
RHALLITM,  perfect,  or  peaceable. 
SH  A  LM  A  N ,  peaceable,  perfect ;  or,  that  rewards. 

Hos.  10.  14. 
SHALMANEZFR,    peace   tied   or  chained,  or 
pcrfi'clion    and    retribution,    or    peace    taken 
nwRV. 
SIIAMGAR,  named  a  stranger;  or,  ho  is  here  a 
Btranzer;    or,    surprise,    nulonishmenl    of    the 
straneer. 
PHAMiniTII,  desolation,  destruction,  a«loni«h 
Mient;  or,  desolation  nfiniquily.    One  of  David', 
aptnins,  1  Chron.  27.  8. 
716 


SHI 

SH.AMIR,  prison,  bush,  lees';  thorn     Josh.  15. 

43. 
SH.AMM.\H,  loss,  desolation,  astonishment. 
SH.\MMU.\H,  he  that  is  heard,  or  obeyed. 
SHAPHAN,  a  rabbit,  or  wild  rat;  or  their  brink, 

their  lip,  their  breaking. 
SHAPHAT,  a  judge,  or  judging. 
SIIARAI,  my  lord,  my  prince,  or  my  song.     -9 

man's  name,  Ezra  10.  40. 
SHAREZER,   overseer   of  the   treasury,  or  of 

the  store-house ;  or,  the  treasures  of  hira  that 

sings ;  or,  tliat  sees  the  ambushes. 
SHARON,  his  plain,  field,  his  song. 
SHASH.*\K,  a  bag  of  linen;  or,  the  sixth  bag. 

1  CAron.  8.  14. 
SH.WEH,    the   plain;   or  that   put?,  or  makes 

equality.     Gen.  14.  5. 
SIIEALTIEL,  I  have  asked  of  God. 
SHEARIAH,  gate  of  the  Lord;  or,  tem post  of 

the  Lord.     The  son  of  Mel,  1  Chron.  8.  38. 
SHEAR  J.\SHUB,    the   remnant   shall   return. 

Marg. 
SHEBA,  captivity,  or  compassing  about,  repose, 

old  age. 
SHERAMAH,  the  Lord  that  converts,  or  that 

recalls  from  captivity,  or  that   captivates;  or, 

that  understands,  that  builds.     JVcA.  0.  4. 
SHEBNA,  who  rests  himself,   or  who  is  now 

captive. 
SHECHEM,  part,  portion,  the  back,  shoulders, 

early  in  the  morning. 
SHEDEUR,  field,  pap,  all-mighty;  or,  destroyer 

of  fire,  or  of  light.     J^um.  1.  5. 
SHELAH,   that  breaks,   that    unties,   that  un 

Iresses. 
SHFLEMLAH,  God  is  my  perfection,  my  happi 

ness,  my  peace ;  or,  the  peace  or  perfection  of 

the  Lord 
SHELEPH,  who  draws  out.    The  son  nfjuktan, 

Gen.  10.  26 
SHELOiMITH,  my  peace,  my  happiness,  my  re- 
compense.    Daughter  of  Zerubbabel,  1  Chron. 

3.  19. 
SHELUMIEL,  peace  of  God,  or  God  is  my  hap- 
piness;   or,  retribution  or   perfection    of  God. 
The  son  of  Zurishaddai,  Num.  1.  6. 
SHEM,  name,  renown  ;  or,  he  that  puts  or  places, 

or  who  is  put  or  placed.     The  son  of  JSToah, 

from  irhovi  the  Messiah  loas  descended. 
SHEMAIAH,  that  hears,    or,    that    obeys   the 

Lord. 
SHEMARIAH,  God  is  my  guard,  or  the  guard 

of  the  Lord  ;  or,  diamond,  dregs,  thorn,  or  bush 

ofthoLord.     1  C/iron.  12.  5. 
SHEMEBER,   name  of  force,  or  fame,  of  the 

strong,  or  of  the  wing.     King  ofLeboim,  Gen. 

14.2. 
SHEMER,  gunrflian,  thorn.     1  King3\f>.  24. 
SHE.MIDA,  name   of  knowledge,   or  that   puts 

knowledge;  or,  the  knowledge  of  desolation,  or 

of  astonishment;  or,  the  science  of  the  heavens 
.<fon  of  Gilead,  Num.  26.  32. 
SHEMINITM,  tl.eeiL'hth. 
SHEMIRAMOTH,  the  height  of  the  heavens; 

or,  the  elevation  of  the  name.     1  Chron.  15.  18 
SHEN,  tooth,  ivory,  or  change;  or,  he  that  sleeps 

The  name  of  a  place,  1  Sam.  7. 12. 
SHENIR,  lantern,   or   light  that  sleeps;  or,  re- 

ng  ofthe  lamp,  or  he  that  shews. 
SHEPHATIAH,  the  Lord  that  judges;  the  judg- 
ment ofthe  Lord  ;  or,  God  is  my  judge. 
SHESHACH,  bag  of  flax,  or  linen;  or,  the  sixth 

bag.  ^ 

SHESHRAZZ,\R,  jov  in  tribulation;  or,  produc- 
tion, or  defiance  of  joy;  or,  joy  of  the  vintajre 


SHETHER-BOZNAI,  that  makes  to  rot  and 
corrupt ;  or,  that  seeks  and  examines  those  who 
despise  me.     Kzra  5.  3. 

SHEVA,  vanity,  elevation,  fame,  or  tumult.  One 
of  Darid'.t  .«rriAM,2  Sam.  20.  2.5. 

SHIBIIOLETII,  burden,  ear  of  corn,  or  current 
f  water. 

SHICRON,  drtuikenness;  or,  his  gift,  or  his 
'ages.     Ji  city,  Jonh.ia.  1\. 

SHIGG.MON,  a  song  of  trouble  or  comfort 
P.irl.  7.      Title. 

SlULOAII,  .sfcSILOAH. 

SmT,OH,sent.     See  Appellatives. 

HMILOH,  peace,  or  abundance.     ./?  city. 

SniLONlTE,  of  the  city  of  Shiloh.  1  King! 
11.20. 

SIMMKAH,  that  hears,  that  obeys. 

SMIMEl,  that  hears  or  obeys;  or,  name  of  the 
liiap  ;  or,  that  destroys  the  heap;  or,  my  repu- 
tation, my  fame. 

SHIMSHAI,  my  son. 

SrilNAR,  the  watching  of  him  that  sleeps;  or, 
spoil  of  tho  tooth;  or,  rhanje  of  Ih-'  city. 

SIflPHRAH,  handsome,   or,  trumpet;    or,  that 


SUR       [Pbop«R  Vj^-YBS. 

does    good.    .On    Fgyptian   midwift,    Eiod. 
1.  IS. 
SHISIIAK,   rresent  of  the  bag,  of  the  pot,  of 

the  thigh. 
SHITTIM,  that  turn  away,  or  divert;  otherwise 

scourge,  rods,  or  thorns. 
SIIOB.\B,  returned,  turned  back.     The  son  of 

/>(iiwi/,  2Sani.  5.  14. 
SH0B.\CH,  your  bunds,  your  chains,  your 
nets,  your  gins;  or,  his  captivity;  or,  your 
Conversion,  your  return;  or,  a  dove  house,  ac- 
cording to  the  Syriac.  General  of  Hadareicr't 
army.  2  Sam.  10.  16. 
SIIUAH,   pit,  or  that  swims;   or,  humiliation, 

meditation,  or  word. 
SIlKAIi,  fox,  hand,  fist;  or,  traces,  way. 
SHUllITE. 
SHUr,,AMlTE,  peaceable,  perfect,  that  recora- 

pfMses. 
SIltfNAMITE,  a  native  of. 
SnUNEM,  their    change,  their  repeating,  their 

second,  or  their  shep.     1  Sam.  28.  4. 
SIIUR,  »  all,  ox,  or  that  beholds.     ^  wilderness, 

Gen.  16.  7. 
?ni'.'«IIAN,lilv,  rose,  or  joy. 
SnUTHELAli,   plant,   or    verdure;    or,   moist 
pot,  or  drinking  pot.      'J'hc  Sun  of  F.phraim, 
Num.  26.  3.5. 
SIBM.AH,  conversion,  return,  captivity,  old  age, 

rest. 
SIDON,  hunting,  fishing,  venison. 
SIGIONOTH,   according   to   variable  son^,  or 

tones.     Marg. 
SIHON,  rooting  out ;  or,  conclusion. 
SlIIOR,  black,  trouble;  or,  early  in  the  moroing. 

The  river  J\rHus  in  Egypt,  Isa.  23.  3. 
SILAP,three,  or  the  third. 
SILOAS,  or  SILO.VM,  sent,  or  who  sends;  or 

dart,  branch,  or  whatever  is  sent. 
SILOE,  the  same. 
SILVANUS,  who  loves  the  woods,  or  forest?, 

from  the  f.alin  word  silva,  a  wood. 
SIMEON,  that  hears,  that  obeys,  or  is  heard. 
SIMON,  that  hears,  or  obeys. 
SIN,  bnj>h. 

SIN. A  I,  hush.     .According  to  the  ffjjriae,  enmity 

SION,  noise,  tumult.     .1  vwvnlain  ofthe  country 

of  the  Amvrites,  the  same  as  Hermon,  Deut 

4.48. 

SIKION,   a  breast-plate;   or,   deliverance,  or  a 

sons  ofthe  dove. 
SISERA,  that  sees  a  horse,  or  a  swallow. 
SIVAN,  bush,  or  thorn.      This  is  the  /Sabyhmian 
name  of  the  third  month  ofthe   Hebrew  year, 
which  answers  in  part  to  our  Jtay  unti  June, 
F.sHi.  8.  <). 
SMYRNA,  myrrh. 
SO,  a  measure  for  grain,   or  dry   matters.    Jin 

Fsrtrptian  word. 
SOCOH,    tents,   or  tabernacles.    J)   city.  Josh. 

1.5.  48. 
SOni,  my   secret.     Father   of   Gaddiel,   Num. 

13.  10. 
SOnOM,  their  secret,  their  line,  their  cement. 
SOnO^IlTES. 

fJOI.OMO.N  peaceable,  perfect,  nr  who  recom- 
piMises.  He  was  the  son  of  David  king  of 
Israel:  He  prayed  to  God  fur  wisdom,  and 
obtained  wisdom,  rirhes  and  honovr.  He  built 
the  temple  at  .TerusaUm,  where  the  sacrifices 
were  to  be  offered  to  God.  Jfe  married  Pha- 
raoh's dauijhier,  and  built  for  her  a  house. 
He  loved  many  stranise  women,  who  turned 
air  ay  his  heart  after  their  gods,  ft  is  thought 
that  Ike  three  bni'ks  he  wrote,  namely.  Proverbs, 
Fcrlesiiistes,  and  the  Canticles,  ure  an  evidence 
of  his  repentance. 
SOPATER,  who  (hfends  'he  father,  or  the  health 
of  the  fiither;  from  (t.^l",  T  save,  and  xmrnf, 
father.  .1  di.^ciple  of  St.  Paul's,  AcU 
20  4. 
SORKK,    vine,    hissing,    a    colour    inclining   to 

VC'lh.W. 

SOS  1 1' A  TER.. tec  SOPATER. 

SO.'^TIIENES,    saviour,    siron?   and    poiverful, 

from    <r«i^e,    I    save,     and     *••■»»,    strength, 

force. 
SP  \IN,  in  Greek,  rare,  or  precious. 
STACIIYS,  spike  ;/rnm  irraxv(. 
STEPHAN.AS,    a    cro»vn,    or  crowned;   /rjit 

(TTi  r  »vi5,  a  cr(»wr.. 
STEPHEN,  the  same. 
SITCOTH,  tonis.  inh-rnactes. 
SirCCOTH  BENOTH,  the  Inhernacles  ofvounff 

woMii'n,  or  the  tents  of  prostitutes.    2  Kings 

17.  30. 
sni,  that  withdraws,  or  deparlo.     The  name  of 

one  nf  the  gates  of  .'^olamun's  temple,  2Kin(t 

11.6. 


Propkr  Namks.]     THA 

ST'SANNA,  a  lily,  or  a  rose,  or  joy. 

SUSl,  liorso,  or  swallow,  ur  nioUi.  The  father 
uf  Gaddi,Num.  lU.  11. 

SYOH.\R,  acitij,  Joliii  4.  5. 

SYEMK,  bush;  or,  enmity,  according  to  the  Sij- 
riac,  Ezik.  Sia  10. 

SYiNTYCHE,  that  speaks  or  discourses,  from 
the  Greek  icurrf  <ri'Tuy;<;»vi»,  to  converse.  Phil. 

■  4.2. 

SYRACUSE,  that  draws  violently 

SYRIA,  in  Hebrew,  Aram,  sublime,  or  that  de- 
ceives. 

SYRI.\C. 

SYRIAN,  who  is  of  Syria. 

SYRIANS. 

SYROl'HENICIAN,  red,  or  purple,  drawn  to; 
from  <rup:o,  1  draw,  and  foinj,  red,  palm-tree, 
or  of  purple. 


T. 


'T'AAN.ACH,  who  humbles  thee,  or  answers 
-'■  thee,  or  alllicu  thee.  A  city,  1  Kings  4. 
I'i. 

TABBATH,  good,  or  goodness.  A  place,  Judg. 
7.  ii. 

TABEAL,  good  God. 

TABEEL,  the  same.     Ezra  4.  7. 

TABERAH,  burning. 

TABITUA,  is  a  Syriac  word,  signifying  clear- 
siglited.  She  is  also  called  Dorcas,  that  is, 
wild  goat,  or  kid. 

TABOR,  choice,  or  purity,  Syr.  bruising,  con- 
trition. 

TABRIMON,  good  pomegranate;  or,  goodness 
raised;  or,  the  navel,  or  middle,  prepared, 
reckoned,  given.  The  father  of  Ben-hadad, 
1  Kings  15.  18. 

TADMOR,  ihe  palm,  or  palm-tree;  or,  bitter- 
ness, or  change. 

TAHAPANES,  secret  temptation,  hidden  flight, 
covered  standard. 

TAPHENES,  standard,  flight,  temptation,  se- 
cret. 

TALITHA-CUMI,  young  woman,  arise.  A  Sy- 
riac and  Hebrew  expression.     Murk  5.  41. 

TALMAI,  my  furrow  ;  or,  that  suspends  the 
waters  ;  or,  heap  of  waters.  The  Son  of  Anak, 
Josh.  15.  14. 

TARIAR,  a  palm,  or  palm-tree. 

TAMMUZ,  abstruse,  concealed. 

T.'ilS'HUMETH,  consolation,  or  repentance;  or, 
bollle,  or  wall  that  is  given,  or  of  a  gift.  The 
father  of  Seraiah,  2  Kings  25.  23. 

TAPIIATH,  little girl;/ro»n  the  Hcbrew,'Va\A\a.h, 
or  Tapli,  to  take  short  steps,  like  children; 
otherwise,  distillation,  drop.  The  daughter  of 
Solomon,  1  Kings  4.  H. 

TARPELITES,  ravishers,  or  wearied  ;  or,  suc- 
cession or  order  of  miracles,  or  ruinous  order, 
or  rank.     The  name  of  a  people,  Ezra  4.  9. 

TAR3HI9H,  contemplation,  or  examination,  of 
the  marble,  or  of  the  joy ;  or,  precious  stone, 
the  colour  of  marble. 

TARSUS,  winged,  feathered. 

TARTAK,  chained,  bound,  shut  up. 

TARTAN,  that  searclies  and  examines  the  gift 
of  the  turtle ;  or,  their  law.    2  Kings  18.  17. 

TATNAI,  that  gives,  or  the  overseer  of  the  gifts, 
of  the  presents,  of  the  tributes.     Ezra  5.  3. 

TEBAH,  murder,  butchery,  or  guarding  of  the 
body,  a  cook.  Son  of  jVahor,  and  Reumah, 
Gen.  22.  24. 

TEBETH,  the  Babylonish  name  of  the  tenth 
month  of  the  Hebrews,  that  answers  partly  to 
December,  and  partly  to  January. 

TEKEL,  weight. 

TEKOA,  trumpet,  or  sound  of  the  trumpet;  or, 
that  is  confirmed. 

TEL-HARSA,  heap,  or  suspension  of  the  plough, 
or  of  deafness,  of  silence;  or,  suspension  of  the 
head.     A  place,  Ezra  2.  50. 

TEL-MELAH,  heap  of  gall,  or  of  mariners  ;  or, 
suspension  of  the  salt,  or  of  the  mariner.   Ezra 

2.  .59. 

TEMA,  admiration,  or  perfection,  consummation; 

or,  the  south. 
TEM.AN,  the  south,  or  Aftica;  or,  perfect 
TEMANITE,  an  inhabitant  of  Temaa 
TERAH,  to  breathe,  to  scent,  to  blow 
TERAPHIM,  an  image,  an  idol. 
TERTIUS,  the  third.     I.atin. 
TERTULLUS,  a  liar,  an  impostor;  from  ripa- 

To>.3To;,a  teller  of  stories,  or  monstrous  things. 
TETRARCn,  governor  of  a  fourth  part  of  a 

kingdoin. 
THA  DDEUS,  that  praises  and  confesses.    Mark 

3.  18. 

717 


UNN 

THAHASH,  that  makes  haste,  or  that  keeps 
silence ;  or,  of  the  colour  of  hyacinth.  The 
son  of  J^ahor,  Gen.  22.  24. 

TIlAAIAli,  that  blots  out,  or  suppresses.     Ezra 

THEBEZ,  muddy;  or,  eggs;  or,  fine  linen,  or 
silk. 

TIIELAZAR,  that  unbinds  and  grants  the  sus- 
pension, or  the  heap.  A  part  of  Syria,  2  Kings 
19.  12. 

THEOPIJILUS,  a  friend,  or  a  lover  of  God; 
from  ©15;,  God,  and  i?">-o?,  a  friend. 

TiII^S?ALONJ€A,  victory  against  the  Thessa- 
lians. 

THEUDAS,  a  fa.'se  teachir. 

THOMAS,  a  twin. 

THYATIRA,  a  sweet  savour  of  labour,  orsacri- 
fice  of  contrition ;  from  5-ox,  scent,  perfume, 
and  Ttip^,  I  bruise,'!  disturb. 

TIBERI.AS,  good  vision,  or  the  navel,  or  a 
breaking  asunder. 

TIBERIUS,  son  of  Tiber.    Luke  3.  1. 

TIBNI,  straw,  or  hay  ;  otherwise,  understanding. 

TIDAL,  that  breaks  the  yoke  ;  or,  the  knowledge 
of  elevation.     King  of  nations.  Gen.  14.  1. 

TIGLATH-PILKSER,  that  binds  or  takes  away 
captivity,  miraculous,  or  ruinous;  or,  that 
hinders  or  binds,  and  withholds  the  snow  that 
falls. 

TIMEUS,  in  Greek  may  signify,  perfect,  honour- 
able ;  in  Hebrew,  admirable. 

TIMNATH,  image,  or  figure,  or  enumeration. 

TliMON,  honourable  ;  from  ti^,),  Acts  6.  5. 

TIMOTHEUS,  honour  of  God,  or  valued  of 
God  ;  from  T'fi,  honour,  and  6)jo;,  God. 

TIPHSAH,  passage,  leap,  or  step;  or,  the  pass- 
over.     1  Kings  4.  24. 

TIRHAKAH,  inrjuirer,  examiner  or  dull  obser- 
ver; or,  law  made  dull.  King  of  Ethiopia, 
2  Kings  19.  9. 

TIRSHATHA,  that  overturns  the  foundation  ; 
or,  that  beholds  the  time,  or,  the  year  according 
to  the  Syriac. 

TIRZAH,  benevolent,  pleasant,  well-pleasing, or 
that  runs. 

TISHBITE,  that  makes  captives;  or,  that  turns 
back  or  recalls,  that  dwells.  1  Kings  17.  1. 

TITUS,  honourable,  from  thu,  I  honour. 

TOB,  good,  or  goodness.  The  name  of  a  country, 
Judg.  11.5. 

TOB-ADONIJAH,  my  good  God  ;  or,  the  good 
ness  of  the  foundation  of  the  Lord,  2  Chron. 
17.8. 

TOBIAH,  the  Lord  is  good,  or  Ihe  goodness  of 
the  Lord. 

TOGARMAH,  which  is  all  bone,  or  strong;  or 
breaking  or  gnawing  of  the  bones. 

TOHU,  that  lives,  or  that  declares.     1  Sam.  1. 1. 

TGI,  who  wanders,  Kingof  Hamath,  2  Sam.  8.  9 

TOLA,  worm,  or  grub,  or  scarlet. 

TOPHEL,  ruin,  folly,  without  understanding,  in- 
sipid.    A  desert  place.     Deut.  1.  1. 

TOPHET,  a  drum,  or  betraying.  See  Appella- 
tives. 

TRO.\S,  penetrated;  from  Ttrfuxrxaj,  I  pene 
trale. 

TROGYLLIUM,  a  city  in  the  isle  of  Samos. 

TROPHIMUS,  well  educated,  or  brought  up 
from  Tfi^io,  to  bring  up,  or  educate.  Acts 
20.4. 

TRYPHENA,  delicious,  delicate;  /rom  tjis? 

TRYPHOSA,  thrice  shining. 

TUBAL,  the  earth,  Ihe  world ;  or,  that  is  carried, 
or  led  ;  or,  confusion. 

TUBAL-CAIN,  worldly  possession,  or  possessor 
of  the  world ;  or,  who  Is  jealous  of  confusion 
The  son  of  Lamech.     Gen.  4.  23. 

TYCHICUS,  casual,  happening;  from  rvxn, 
fortune. 

TYRANNUS,  a  prince,  or  that  reigns. 

TYRE,  in  Hebrew,  Sor,  or  Tzur;  strength,  rock, 
sharp. 

TYRUS,  the  lame. 


u. 


TTCAL,  power,  or  prevalcncy. 

^     ULAI,   strength;   or  fool,  senselcsi.     Tht 

name  of  a  river,  Dan.  8.  2. 
ULAM,  the  porch,  the  court;  or,  their  strcngih, 

or  their  folly.     1  Chron.  7.  16. 
ULLA,  elevation,  or  holocaust,  or  leaf,  or  youn 

child.     1  Chron.  7.  39. 
UNNf,  poor,  or  afflicted,  or  that  answers.     The 

name  of  a  porter  or  singer,  1  Chron.  15.  18. 
UPHAZ,  gold  of   Phasis,  or  Piaou    ihp  fuirrt 

gold. 


ZER 

UR,  fire,  or  light. 

UUI,  my  light,  or  fire. 

URIAH',  or  URIJAH,  Ihe  Lord  is  my  light,  >r 

fire;  the  light  of  Ihe  Lord. 
URIEL,  G(.d  is  my  light  or  fire;  or  the  light  of 

God.     1  CAru7i.  1.5.  5. 
URIM  OHrfTHUMMIN,  lights  and  perfection. 
UZ,  counsel,  or  wood;  or,  according  to  the  Syriac, 

to  fix,  to  fasten  to. 
UZZAII,  strength,  or  a  goat. 
UZZEN-SHERAIl,  ear  of  Ihe  flesh,  or  of  th« 

parent ;  or  the  ear  of  him  that  remains.  A  city, 

1  Chron.  7.  24. 
UZZI,  my  strength,  or  my  kid.     Son  of  Bukki, 

1  Chron.  G.  5. 
UZZI  All,  the  strength  of  the  Lord;  or,  the  kid 

of  thi'  Lord. 
UZZIKL,  the  strength  of  God  ;  or,  kid  of  God. 

1  Chron.  7.  7. 
UZZIELITES,  the  posterity  of  Uzziel.    AVa 

V. 

VTASHNT,  the  second.      The  son  of  Samuel, 
^     1  Chron.  15.28. 

VASIITl,  that  drinks;  or,  thread,  or  woof. 
VOPSHI,  fragment,  or  diniiuulion.     Father  of 
J^'ahbi,  Num.  13.  14. 


z. 

^ABDT,  portion,  dowry.    The  father  of  Carmi, 

ZACCHEUS,  pure,  clean  ;  just,  or  justified. 

ZACH.ARIAH,  memory  of  the  Lord,  or  man  of 
the  Lord. 

ZADOK,just,  or  justified. 

ZAHAM,  crime,  filihiness,  impurity.  The  son 
of  Rrhoboam,  2  Chron.  11.  19. 

ZAIR,  little;  or  afflicted,  in  tribulation.  A  city, 
2  Kings  8.  21. 

ZALMON,  his  shade,  his  obscurity,  his  image, 
A  mountain,  Judg.  9.  48. 

ZALMONAH,  the  shades,  or  sound  of  the  num- 
ber; or,  your  imngc,  o'^  picture.  One  of  the 
stations  of  the  Israelites  in  the  wilderness 
Num.  3.3.41. 

ZALMUNNA,  shadow,  image,  or  idol  forbid- 
<len  ;  or,  ndise  of  trouble. 

ZAMZUMMINS,  thinking  wickedness,  or  wick- 
edness of  wicked  men.     Giants,  Deut.  2.  20. 

ZANOAh,  forgelfulness  or  desertion;  or,  this 
rest,  this  consolation.     A  city.  Josh.  15.  34. 

ZAPNATH-PAANEAH,  one  that  discovera 
hidden  things;  in  the  Fgyptian  tongue,  a  Sa- 
viour of  the  world.  The  name  that  Pharaoh 
gave  to  .To.^eph,  Gen.  41.  4.5. 

ZARAH,  east,  brightness. 

ZAREPHATH,  ambush  of  the  mouth  ;  or,  cru- 
cible, in  which  metals  are  melted, 

ZEBADIAH,  iiortion  of  the  Lord,  or  the  Lord  k 
my  portion.     1  Chron.  8.  15. 

ZEBAH,  victim,  sacrifice,  immolation. 

ZEBEDEE,  abundant  portion. 

ZEBOIM,  deer,  goats. 

ZEBUL,  a  habitation. 

ZEBULUN,  dwcllins,  hnhitation. 

ZECHARIAH,  See  ZACHARIAH. 

ZEDEKIAH,  the  Lord  is  my  justice,  or  tn« 
justice  of  the  Lord. 

ZEEB,  wolf     .Tudg.  7.  2.5. 

ZELEK,  the  shadow,  or  noise  of  him  that  licks, 
that  laps,  or  strikes.  One  of  David's  thirty 
vnlinnt  coptains,  2  Sam.  23.  37. 

ZELOPIIEHAD,  Ihe  shade,  or  tingling  of  fear; 
or,  till'  fiar  of  submersion,  or  of  being  burnt. 

ZELOTKS,  jealous,  or  full  of  zeal;  froin  <>i>.»f, 
zeal,  jealousy.  The  sirname  of  Simon,  Luke 
(i.  l.i. 

ZELZAH,  noontide. 

ZENAS,  living;  from  ix„,  I  live. 

ZEPHANIAH,  the  Lord  is  my  sorrel ;  or,  Ihe 
secret  of  the  I.ord  ;  or,  the  north  of  tlie  Ijord. 

ZEPH  ATH,  which  beholds,  that  attends,  that  co- 
vers.    J?  c?7y,  Judg.  1.  17. 

ZEPHO,  that  sees  and  observes:  or,  that  expects, 
or  covets.     Son  of  F.liphaz,  Gen.  30.  IJ. 

ZERAH,  .See  ZARAH. 

ZEREDAH,  ambush,  change  of  dominion,  or  de- 
scent ;  or,  plan  of  power.  The  country  of  Je- 
rnbonm,\  Kings  11.  26. 

ZERESH,  misery,  stranger,  strange  or  dispersed 
inheritance;  otherwise,  crown  of  inheritance, 
or  of  ihisery. 

ZEROR,  -oot,  or  that  straitens,  that  binds,  that 
>s  li^ht ;  or  a  stone.    1  Sam.  9.  I. 


ZIL 

ZEP.UAH,  leprous,  or   wnsp,  or  hornet.     TTte 

mother  of  Jeroboam,  1  Kings  11.  26. 
ZF.RU15I5AI5EL,    banished,   or   a   stranger   at 

Babylon;  or,  diepersion  of  confusion. 
ZEUUIAli,  pain,  or  tribulation,  chains  of  the 

Lord. 
ZETUAR,  ho   thai  examines  or  beholds;    or, 

olive  of  vision,  or  olive  of  the  turtle.     Esth. 

1.  10. 
ZIBA,  nrmy,  fight,  strength,  slag. 
ZIBEON,  iniquity  that  dwells;  or,  elevation,  or 

swelling  ;  or,  oath,  or  fulness,  or  the  seventh. 
ZIBIAH,  deer,  or  goat,  or  h.mourablo  and  fine  ; 

or,  ide  Lord  dwells;  or,  vuluntary,  according- 

to  the  Hyriac.     The  mother  of  Joash,  2  Kings 

12.  1. 
ZICHRl,  that   remembers,  or   that  is   a    male, 

F.zod.  C.  21. 
ZIDON,  huntins,  fishing,  venison. 
ZIDO.NIANS,  the  in/iaOitants  of  Zidon. 
ZIF,  this,  or  that;  or,  accordinir  to  the  .^yriac, 
■brightness.     The  second  Hebrew  month,  which 

answers  jiartlij  to  April  and  May. 
ZIKL.AG,  inensure  pressed  down. 
ZILLAll,  shadow:  which  is  roasted;  the  ting- 
'     718 


ZOA 

ling  of  the  ear.     The  wife  of  Lamcch,  Geo. 

4.  19. 
ZILP.MI,     distillation;     or,  contempt    of    the 

mouth. 
ZliMllAN,  song,  singer,  or  vine.     The  son  of 

Abraham,  Gen.  25.  2. 
ZIMRl,  my  field,  or  my  vine,  my  branch. 
ZI.V,  buckler,  coldness. 
ZION,  a  monument  raised  up,  heap  of  stones  set 

up,  sepulchre,  turret,  dryness. 
ZIUR,  ship  of  him  that  watches,  or  is  awake,  or 

of  him  that  is  robbed,  or  of  the  enemy.   A  city. 

Josh.  16.  5-t. 
ZIPH,  this ii]outh,ormouthful.  J? ci7y.  Josh. 1.5.24. 
ZIPPOR,  bird,  or  sparrow  ;  or  crown,  or  desert; 

or,  according  tc  Vie  Syriac,  early  in  the  morning, 

or  goat.     The  Father  of  Balak,  Num.  22.  2. 
ZIPPORAH,  beauty,  trumpet. 
ZITHRf,   to   hide;    or^   demolished,   or   over- 
turned ;  or,  my  refuge.     Son  of  Uzziel,  Exod. 

6.  22. 
ZIZ,  flower,  branch,  a  lock  of  hair;  or,  according 

to  the  Syriac,  wing,  feather.     The  side  of  a 

mountain  or  hill,  2  Chron.  20.  16. 
ZOAN,  motion. 


ZUZ     [Proper  NiMM 

ZOAR,  little,  small. 

ZOB.\H,  an  army,  or  warring,  or  a  command 
inent  in  tliat,  or  a  swelling. 

ZOHAR,  white,shi[iing,  or  dryness.  The  FatJier 
of  F.j/hron,  Gen.  2.3.8. 

ZOHELETH,  that  creeps,  slides,  or  draws,  jj 
roeky  1  Kings  1.  9. 

ZOPH.AR,  rising  early,  or  crown;  or,  sparrow 
/jr  lillle  bird,  or  goat.     Syr. 

ZORAH,  leprosy,  or  scab. 

ZOROBABRL,  See  ZERUBBABEL. 

ZUAR,  small. 

ZUPII,  that  beholds,  or  observes,  or  watches 
or,  roof,  covering ;  or,  honey-comb,  or  tba 
floats.     Thefatlur  of  Tohu,  1  Sam.  1.  1. 

ZUR,  sto^e,  rock,  that  besieges, or  preaches;  or 
plan,  form. 

ZURH^HADDAT,  the  Almighty  is  my  rock,  my 
strength  ;  otherwise,  splendour,  beauty  ;  or,  ac- 
cording to  the  Syriac,  revolters.  The  father  of 
Shelutnicl,  Num.  1.  6. 

ZUZI.MS,  the  posts  of  a  door;  or,  splendour, 
beauty.  These  were  giants  who  dwelt  beyond 
Jordan,  and  who  were  conquered  by  Chedorlao- 
mer  and  his  allies,  Gen.  14.  15 


CONCORDANCE  TO  THE  PROPER  NAMES 


OLD  AlKTD  7JSW  TESTAMENTS. 


ABI 

Dan.  2.  49.  the  king  set  A.  over  the  affairs,  3.30. 
3.  23.  A.  fell  down  bound  into  the  liery  furnace 

AUYjIj, person,  place. 
Oen.  4.4.  Lord  liad  respect  to  A.  and  his  offering 
\Sam.  6. 18.  stone  of  A.  whereon  they  set  tlie  ark 
2Sam.  20.  18.  they  shall  surely  ask  counsel  at  A. 
Mat.  23.  35.  from  the  blood  of  A.  Luke  11.  51. 
Heb.  11.  4.  by  faith  A.  offered  unto  God  a  more 
excellent  sacrifice  than  Cain 
12.  24.  speaks  belter  things  than  the  blood  of  A. 

ABEL-BETH-MAACHAH. 
livings  15.  20.  Ben-hadad's  captains  smote  A. 
2Kings  15.  29.  Tiglath-piluser  came  and  took  A. 

ABEL-MAIM. 
2  Chron.  16.  4.  they  smote  lion,  and  Dan,  and  A. 

ABEL-MEHOLAH. 
Judg.  7.  22.  the  host  fled  to  the  border  of  A. 
IKings  19.  16.  Elisha  the  son  of  Shaphat  of  A. 

ABEL-MIZRAIM. 
Gen.  50.  11.  mourning,  name  of  it  was  called  A. 

ABIAH. 
l.Sam.8.2.thename  of  Samuel's  second  son  was  A. 
lCAr.2.24.A.Hezron'3  wife  ||  7. 8.  son  of  Becher  A. 
3.  10.  the  son  of  Rehoboam  was  A.  Mat.  1.  7. 
ABIALBON. 
'iSam.  23.  31.  A.  was  one  of  David's  mighty  men 
ABIATHAR. 

1  Sam.  22.  20.  A.  escaped  and  fled  to  David 
23.  6.  when  A.  son  of  Ahimelech  fltd  to  David 

9.  David  said  lo  A.  bring  hither  the  ejihod,  30.  7 

2  Sam.  8.  17.  Zadok  and  A.  were  the  prii.'sis,  and 
Seraiah  was  the  scribe,  20.  25.  IKings  4.  4. 

33.  39.  A.  was  120  years  old  when  he  died  in  Hor  l^ni^s  2.  22.  ask  the  kingdom  for  him  and  A. 

Deut.  9.  20.  the  Lord  was  vary  angry  with  A.  27.  so  Solomon  thrust  out  A.  from  being  prieei 

yosA.24.5.  Isent  Moses  and  A.  and  I  plagued  Egypt  7l/ur/i  2.26.how  went  into  house  of  G.  in  days  of  A 

and  brought  you  out,  1  Sam.  12.  8.  Mic.  G.  4.  |  ABIB. 

I.Sam.  12.  6.  the  Lord  that  advanced  Moses  and  .\.  <  Exod.  13.  4.  ye  came  out  in  the  month  A.  34.  18 
JCAron.  6.3.  sonsofAmiam,  A.  and  Moses,  23.13.  j  23.15.  thou  shall  keep  the  feast  of  unleavened 
f*.  77.  20.  thouleddestthy  peoplebyMose.sand  A.  bread  in  the  month  A.  34.  IS.  Dcut.  16.  1. 

99.6.  Moses  and  A.  among  his  priests,  and  Samuel '  ABIDAN. 


AARON. 

JpXOD.  4.  14.  is  not  A.  the  Levite  thy  brother'? 
'-'  5.20.  they  met  Moses  and  A.  who  stood  in  way 
6.23.  A.  took  Elisheba,  sisterof  Naashon,to  wife 

7.  1.  and  A.  thy  brother  shall  be  thy  prophet 
12, but  A.  rod  swallowed  up  their  rods 

16.34. A. laid  up  the  pot  of  manna  before  testimony 
17.  12.  and  A.  and  Hur  stayed  up  his  hands 
19.  24.  thou  shalt  come  up,  thou  and  A.  with  thee 
24.  14.  and  behold  A.  and  Hur  are  with  you 
28.  12.  and  A.  shall  bear* their  names,  2y.  30. 
30.  7.  A.  shall  buili  sweet  incense  every  morning 

8.  when  A.  lighteth  the  lamps  at  even 

-     10.  A.  shall  make  an  atonement  once  in  a  year 

32.  35.  because  they  made  calf,  which  A.  made 

40.  31.  Moses  and  A.  and  his  sons,  washed  thereat 

Lev.B.m.  he  poured  oil  on  A.  head  to  sanclify  him 

30.  he  sprinkled  blood  on  A.  and  his  sons 
9.  22.  A.  blessed  them  ||  10.  3.  A.  held  his  peace 
16.  3.  thus  shall  A.  come  into  the  holy  pl.iCe 

8.  A.  shall  cast  lots  ||  24.  3.  A.  shall  order  it 

21.  A.  shall  lay  his  hands  on  the  head  of  the  goat 
ffum.  1.  3.  A.  shall  number  them  by  their  armies 

8.  11.  A.  shall  offer  the  Levitcs  before  the  Lord 

16.  11.  what  is  A.  that  yc  murmur  against  him  ? 
16.  come  thou,  they,  and  A.  to-morrow  before  L. 
43.  Moses  and  A.  came  before  the  tabernacle 

17.  3.  shall  write  A.  name  upon  the  rod  of  Levi 
10.  bring  A.  rod  again  before  the  testimony 

20.  8.  thou  and  A.  thy  brother  speak  to  the  rock' 
28.  A.  died  there  in  the  top  of  the  mount ;  Moses 
and  Eleazar  came  down,  33.  38.  Devt.yX.5M. 


106.  10.  they  envied  A.  the  saint  of  the  Lord 
115.  10.  O  house  of  A.  trust  in  the  Lord 
12.  the  Lord  will  bless  the  house  of  .\. 


J^um.  1. 11.  of  Benjamin,  A.sonof  Gidconi,  2.22 

7.  60.  on  the  ninth  day  A.  of  Benjamin  offered,  65 

ABIEZER. 


1 18.  3.  let  house  of  A.  say,  his  mercy  end.  for  ever  Josh.  17.  2.  there  was  a  lot  for  the  children  of  A. 

133.  2.  ointment  that  ran  down  upon  A.  board      .Judg.  6.  34.  and  A.  was  gathered  after  him 

135.  19.  bless  the  Lord,  O  house  of  A.  8.  2.  is  it  not  better  than  the  vintage  of  A.  ? 

I^ukc  1.  5.  his  wife  was  of  the  daughters  of  A.        2  Sam.  23. 27.  A.  was  one  of  David's  mighty  men 
./?(;(*  7.40.saying  lo  A.make  us  gods  to  go  before  us '  ABI-EZRITE. 

Heb.  5.  4.  but  he  that  is  called  of  God,  as  was  A.  Judg.  6.  11.  an  oak  that  pertained  to  Joash  the  A. 

7.  11.  and  not  be  called  after  the  order  of  A.        !  ABIGAIL. 

9.  4.  A.  rod  Ihnt  biiddi'd,  and  tables  of  covenant     1  Sam.  25.  3.  the  name  of  Nabal's  wife  was  A. 
Sons  of  A.VROiV,  See  Abihi;  and  N.\dab.       1   27.  3.  David  dwelt  at  Gath  with  his  two  wives, 
AAROXITES.  Ahinoam  and  A.  30.  5.  2  Sam.  2.  2. 

1  Chron.  12.  27.  Jeholada  was  leader  of  the  A.     ,  1  Chron.  2. 16.  w  hose  sisters  were  Zeruiah  and  A. 


27.  17.  Zadok  was  the  ruler  of  the  A. 

ABADDO.V. 
Rev.  9.  11.  the  angel  of  the  bottomless  pit  is  A. 

ABAGTHA. 
Eslh.  1.  10.  A.  was  chamberlain  to  Ahasucrua 

ABANA. 
ifCinr^s  5.  12.  arc  not  rivers  A.  and  Pharpar  belter 
ABARIM,  See  Movnt. 
ABBA,  ."fee  Father. 
ABDA. 
ilCingni.G.  Adoniram  son  of  A.  was  over  tribute 'l  Kings  14.  1.  A.  the  son  of  Jeroboam  fell  sick 
A't/j.  11.  17.  A.  was  for  thanksgiving  in  prayer  31.  A.  the  son  of  Rehoboam  reigned,  15.  1,  7. 

ABDI.  1 1  Chron.  24.  10.  the  eighth  lot  came  forth  to  A. 

2  CAr.  29.  12.  of  sons  of  Merari,  Ki»h  thesonof  A.J2  Chrun.  29. 1.  Hczekiah's  mother's  name  was  A. 
Ezra  10.20.  A.  of  them  that  married  strange  wives  J\TrA.  10.  7.  those  that  sealed  were  A.  Mijnmin 


ABIHAIL 
2CAr.lI.  18. Rehoboam  took  A.  daughter  of  Eliab 
Esth.  2. 15.  turn  of  Esther  the  daughter  of  A.  9.  29. 

ABIHU. 
Exod.  6.  23.  Aaron's  sons  Nadaband  A.  Eleazar 
and  Ithamar,  28.  1.  Lev.  10.  1.  JV«m.  3. 
2.  I  26.  60.  1  Chron.  6.  3.  |  24.  1. 
24.  1.  come  up,  .\.  ||  9.  then  A.  went  up 
J\''um.  3.  4.  A.  died  before  the  Lord,  26.  61. 
ABIJAH,  ABUAM. 


ABDIEL. 
1  CAron.  5.  15.  Ahi  son  of  A.  chief  of  the  house 

ABDON. 
Judg.  12.  13.  A.  judged  Israel  ||  IS.  A.  died 
9CAr.34. 20.  commanded  A.  to  inquire  of  the  Lord 

ABED-NEGO. 
Dan.  1  7.  be  gave  to  Azariah  the  name  of  A. 
719 


12.4.  went  up  with  Zerub.  A.  ||  17.  of  A.  Zichri 

ABIMELECH. 
Gen.  20.  2.  A.  kingof  Gerar  sent  and  took  Sarah 

21.22.  A.  and  Pichol  spake  to  Abraham, paying 

26. 1.  Isaac  went  to  A.  ||  16.  A.  said,  go  from  us 
Judg.  8.  31.  Gideon's  concubine  bare  him  A. 

9.  1.  A.  the  son  of  Jerubbaal  went  to  Sbechem 


ABR 

2  Sam.  11.  21.  who  smote  A.  »on  of  Jorubbeshcth 
1  Chron.  18.  10.  Zadok  and  A.  were  the  priests 

ABINADAB. 
1  Sam.  7.  1.  brought  the  ark  into  the  house  of  A. 
16.8.  Jesse  called  A.  made  him  pass  before  Samuel 

17.  13.  A.  followed  Saul  to  the  battle 

31.  2.  PhilihtinesslewA.sonofSanl,  ICAr.  10,2. 
25am.6.3.they  set  the  ark  on  new  carl,  and  brought 

it  out  of  the  house  of  A.  1  Chron.  13.  7. 

IKings  4. 11.  A.  had  Solomon's  daughter  to  wife 

ABLNOAM,  See  Barak. 

ABIRAM. 

JVam.  16.  l.Dathanand  A.  the  sons  of  Eliab,  26. 9. 

12.  and  Moses  sent  to  call  Dathan  and  A. 
Dcut.  11.  6.  and  what  he  did  to  Dathan  and  A. 
1  Kings  Ki.  34.  he  laid  the  foundation  in  A. 
Psul.  106. 17.  the  earthcovered  the  company  of  A 

ABISHAG. 
IKings  1.  15.  and  A.  ministered  to  king  David 
2.  22.  and  why  dost  thou  ask  A.  for  Adonijah 
ABISHAI. 

1  Sam.  26.  6.  A.  said,  I  will  go  down  with  thee 

2  Sam.  2.  18.  and  there  were  three  sons  of  Zeruiah 

there,  Joab,  A.  and  Asahel,  1  Ckrvn.  2.  16. 
10.  14.  the  Ammonites  fled  also  before  A. 

18.  12.  the  king  charged  thee,  and  A.  and  Ittai 
2).  17.  A.  succoured  liim  and  smote  the  Philistine 
23.  18.  and  .\.  the  brother  of  Joab,  the  son  of 

Zeruiuh,  was  chief  among  three,  1  CAr.ll.2(l. 

1  CAron.  IS.  12.  A.  slew  of  the  Edomiies  16,060 

ABIUD. 
Jl/aM.lS.ZorobabcI  begat  A. and  A. begat  Eliakim 

ABNER. 
I.Sam.  14.  51.  Ner  father  of  .\.  was  son  of  .Abiel 
17.  .55.  Saul  saiil  to  A.  whose  son  is  this  youth.' 

26.  7.  but  A.  and  the  people  lay  round  abouthim 
14.  David  cried,  answerest  thou  not.  A.? 

2  Sam.  2. 14.  A.  said,  let  young  men  play  before  U3 
3. 25.  Jacob  said,  thou  fcnowest  A.  the  son  of  Ner 

.30.  so  Joab  and  Abishai  his  brother  slew  A. 

32.  they  buried  A.  in  Hebron,  king  wept  atgrave 
3.3.  the  king  said,  died  A.  as  a  fool  dieth  7 

37.  that  it  was  not  of  the  king  to  slay  A. 
4.  1.  when  Saul's  son  heard  that  A.  was  dead 

12.and  buried  Ish-bosheth'shend  in  A.  sepulchre 
1  Kings  2.  5.  thou  knowist  what  Joab  did  to  A. 
1  Chrov.  26.  2S.  all  that  A.  had  dolicated 

27.  21.  Jaasii  1  son  of  A.  ruler  of  Benjamin  » 

ABR  AM,  ABRAHAM. 

Gen.  12.1.  Lord  said  lo  A.  git  out  of  thy  country 

10.  A.  woiit  down  into  Egypt  to  sojourn  there 

13.  1.  .\.  went  up  out  of  E?ypl,  he  and  his  wife 
12.  A.  dwelt  in  land  of  Oan.ian,and  Lot  in  cities 
18.  .A.  came  and  dwelt  in  the  plain  of  Mamre 

14.  14.  .\.  armed  his  traineil  servants,  318. 

15.  1.  fear  not,  A.  I  am  thy  shield,  and  thy  ex 

cecding  great  reward 
18.  that  day  the  Lord  made  a  covenant  with  A 
17.5.  Ihynaniesh.allbc  A.  ICAr.  1.27.  JVVA.9.7 
IP.  6.  A.  hnslened  into  the  tent  unto  S.irah 
17.  shall  I  hide  from  A.  that  thing  which  1  do? 
22.  but  A.  stood  yr-l  before  the  j.ord 

20.  2.  .\.  B:iid  of  Sarah  his  wife,  she  is  my  siiter 

21.  33.  and  A.  planted  a  grove  in  Beer-shcba 

22.  1.  God  did  tempt  A.  and  said,  lake  thy  son 
U.ihc  angel  called  out  of  heaven,  and  saiil,  A.  A 

23.  2.  Sarah  died,  and  A.  came  to  mourn  for  h»r 
17.  A.  bought  the  field  of  Ephron,  40.  30.  |  .50.  13. 

24.  1.  the  Lord  had  blessed  A.  in  all  things 
2.  A.  said,  put  thy  hand  under  my  thigh 
34.  Eliezer  s.iid,  I  am  A.  servant: 

42. 0  Lord  Godofmv  master  A.  prosper  my  way 
59.  they  sent  away  Rebekah  and  A.  servant       ' 

25.  5.  and  A.  gave  all  that  he  had  unto  Isaac 
7.  these  are  the  davs  of  the  years  of  A.  lifb 
I2.l3hmael,  whom  Hagar  iha  Egypt  baro  to  A. 


ACa 

Oeit. 0*1.1. beside*  fuin;iie  that  was  in  llie  Jnys  ovi.. 
S  beciuise  A.  obeyed  my  voic>;,  lieiit  my  cimrge 
2^.  i  will  inuliiiily  iliy  si;C<l  tor  A.  siiliy 
28.  4.  and  God  give  iheo  the  blessing  of  A. 

31.  li  r.vcupt  the  Gud  ol"  A.  had  beon  willi  me 
50.  -^4.  hrin''  to  land  which  he  sivare  to  A.  Ezoil. 

:«.  I.  .Viim.  3-.».  1 1.  JJeul.  1. 8.  |  0.  10.  |  ;*0.  20. 
Exod.^.a.  I  am  the  God  ot'A.  15,  IG.  [  4.5.  Miit.-i-i. 
32.  Mark  Vi.iG.  Lulic  -I'd.  37.  .ids  :t.  13.  |  7.  Wl. 
32.l3.ruinc0iiber  A.Uauc,  and  Israel,  /)(•«£. 9.  27. 
Psal.  47.  U.  even  the  peojile  of  the  God  of  A. 
105.  St.  which  covrnaiil  he  made  with  A. 
42.ho  ruinenibcrtMl  his  promi  u,riiid  .■^  his  ."sc^rvant 
Isa.  2;t.  2'J.  thus  -aith  tin;  Lord,  who  redeL"in.-d  A. 
63.  l^i.  art  our  lather,  though  A.  be  ignorant  of  us 
Kzck.'.V.^.iX.  -A.  wasoiie,  ami  he  inheriied  the  land 
Mic.  7.  20.  ily)U  wilt  perform  the  mercy  to  A. 
Mat.  1.  1.  Chrrst  the  .■ion  of  »avid,  the  son  of  \. 
3.9.G.  alile  to  raisie  U|i  i-liil.ln^n  unto  A.  Luke  3. 8. 

8.  U.shallsitdown  wiih  .\.  in  kingdom  of  heaven 
Lukt  3.  :H.  which  was  tiie  son  of  A.  son  of  Thara 
•13.28.  whi-n  veshnllisee  .\.\n  the  kingdom  of  God 

16.  2.3.  he  lili  up  hi*  eyes,  and  seeth  .\.  afar  oli" 
19.  9.  forasmuch  as  he  also  is  the  son  of  A. 
Jekn  8.  40.  this  did  not  A.  ||  52.  A.  is  dead 

57.  ha.si  thou  seen  A.'i  |i  53.  before  A.  was,  I  am 

j5c<*13.2I).  children  of  the  s'ock  of  A.  word  is  sent 

Rom.  4.  2.  for  if  .■V.  were  justified  by  works,  he  hath 

3.  A.  believed  God,  and  it  was  counted  .lo  him 

for  righteousne.ss,  9.  G.il.  3.  6.  .Jam.  2.  23. 

Gal.  3.  7.  who  are  of  fiitli  are  the  children  of  A. 

8.  preached  before  the  gospel  to  A.  in  ihee  shall 

9.  they  of  faith  are  ble-sed  with  faithful  A. 

18.  God  gave  the  inheritance  to  A.  by  promise 
4.  22.  A.  had  two  sons,  the  one  by  a  bond-maid 
Jlrb.  fi.  13.  for  when  God  made  promise  to  A. 
7.  1.  who  met  A.  returning  from  the  slaughter 
9.  as  I  miy  so  say,  Levi  payed  tillies  in  .\. 
11.  8.  A.  obi-ved  ||  17.  by  failliA.  offered  up  Isaac 

ABRAHAM  with  father. 
Gen.  26. 3. 1  will  perform  the  oath  to  .\.  \\n- father 
24.  I  am  the  (Jod  of  A.  Hi y  father,  28.  13. 

32.  9.  OGod  oftny  father  A.  and  Gud  of  Isaac 
Josh.ii.i.f  look  your  futlier  .\.  from  the  oilier  side 
I.ia.  51.  2.  look  I'o  .\.  yimr  fathrr  and  to  Sarah 
Mat.  3.  0.  we  have  .\.  to  oar  father,  /.uke  3.  8. 
J.uke  1.73.theoath  which  he  sware  lo  our/u(/(C7-A. 

16.  24.  he  said,  father  A.  have  mercy  on  me 
30.  nay,/tttAcr  A.  but  if  one  went  from  the  dead 
Juhn  8.  :fi).  they  said  to  him,  A.  is  om  father 
53.  art  thou  greater  than  our  father  A.l 
SG.vour/atAcrA.rejoiced  to  see  my  day, was  glad 
yicts  7. 2.  the  G.  of  glory  appeared  to  omjfathcr  A. 
lion.  4  1.  what  say  that  A.  our  father  hath  found? 
12.  in  the  steps  of  that  faith  of  our  father  A. 
16.  the  faith  of  A.  who  is  \he  father  of  us  all 
.ram.2.21.was  not  A.our/a^Acr  jiisiified  by  works'? 

ABRAHAM  joined  with  seed. 
2C/ir»n.20.  7.andgavest  it  lo^ertZof  A.  thy  friend 
Psal.  105.  6.  O  ve  seed  of  A.  his  servant 
/.la.  41.  R.  thou  Israel,  the  seed  of  A.  my  friend 
Jer.  33.  26.  to  be  rulers  over  the  seed  of  A.  Isaac 
f.uke  1.  55.  as  he  spake  to  A.  and  his  seed  forever 
Juhn  8.33. we  he  A.secd  and  were  never  in  bondage 
37.  I  know  ye  are  A.  seed  but  ye  seek  lo  kill  nie 
Rnm.  4.  13.  the  promise  was  not  to  A.  or  to  his  seed 

9.  7.  neither  because  they  are  the  seed  of  A. 
11. 1.  I  also  am  of  the  seed  of  A.  2  Cor.  11.  22. 

fJa/.3.16.loA.and  his  seed  were  the  promises  made 

29.  if  ye  be  Christ's,  then  are  ye  A.  sf^'-rfand  heirs 
Heb.  2.  16.  he  took  on  liiin  the  seed  of  A. 

ABSALOM. 
2  Sam.  3.3.  A.  the  son  of -Maachah,  lC/iron.3.2. 
13.  22.  A.  spake  to  Amnon  neither  good  nor  bad 
23.  A.  had  sheep-shearers  in  Baal-hazor 

30.  saying,  A.  hath  slfb  all  the  king's  sons 

39.  the  soul  of  king  Dai .  longed  to  go  forth  lo  A. 
14. 23.  »o  Joab  arose  and  brought  A.  to  Jerusalem 
25.  there  was  none  to  be  so  much  praised  as  A. 

15.  4.  A.  said,  O  that  I  were  made  a  judge  in  land 
6.  80  A.  ttole  the  hearts  of  the  men  of  Israel 
31.Ahilhophcl  is  among  the  conspirators  with  A. 

16.  22.  A.  went  in  unto  his  father's  concubines 

17.  4.  Ahithophel's  counsel  phased  A.  well 
14.  that  the  Lord  might  bring  evil  upon  A. 
20.  and  when  A.  servants  came  to  the  woman 
24.A.  passed  over  Jordan  [',  26.  pilchcd  in  Gilead 

18.  5.  saying,  deal  gently  for  my  sake  with  A. 
10.  behold,  I  saw  A.  hanged  in  an  oak 

14,  ho  thrust  three  dnrls  through  the  heart  of  A. 

18.  and  it  is  called  unto  this  day  A.  place 

29.  is  young  man  A  safe?  32.  1|  33.  O  my  son  A. 

19.  6.  if  A.  had  lived  and  all  we  hail  died  this  day 
IKins-.i  2.  7.  when  I  fled  b«cause  of  A.  thy  brother 

28.  he  turned  after  Ailonijnh,  though  nut  afli^r  A. 
2  Chron.  II.  20.  he  took  Maachah  daughter  of  A. 

ACCIIO. 
Juiif.  1.31. nor  diJ.A  sherd  rive  out  iiihnb.lantsof  A. 

a<:haia. 

JlcU  11.  J2.  w>en  ^allio  was  the  deputy  of  A. 
•'20 


AGA 

j:;a  lO.  27.  Apollos  was  disposed  to  pass  Into  .\. 
Rom.  15.26.  it  pleased  tlicmof  .X.to  innkeconlrib. 

16.  5.  salute  Epent-tns,  the  first-fruits  of  A. 
1  Cor.  115. 15.  house  of  Stephanas,  first-fruits  of  A. 
iCor.  9.  2.  that  A.  was  ready  a  year  ago 

11. 10.  no  man  shall  slop  me  in  the  regions  of  A. 
1  Thess.  1.  7.  ye  were  ensauiples  to  all  in  A. 

8.  from  you  the  word  sounded  not  only  in  A. 

ACHAICUS. 
1  Cor.  16.  17.  I  am  glad  of  the  coming  of  A. 

ACIIAN,  cr  ACHAR. 
.Tosh.  7.  18.  A.  of  the  tribe  of  Jmlah  was  taken 
22. 20.  did  not  A.  son  of  Zerah  commit  a  trespass 
IChr.  2. 7.  A.  the  troubler  of  Isr.  who  transgressed 

ACHLM. 
Mat.  1. 14.  Sadoc  begut  A.  and  A.  begat  Elihud 

ACHISH. 
1  Sam.  21.  10.  David  lied  and  went  to  A.  27.  2. 

12.  was  afraid  of  A.  ||  27.  6.  A.  gave  him  Ziklag 
29.  2.  David  passed  on  in  the  rereward  with  A. 

9.  A.  said,  I  know  thou  art  good  in  my  sight 
1  Kinirs  2.  40.  and  Shimei  went  to  Gath  to  A. 

ACHMKTHA. 
Ezra  6.  2.  there  was  found  at  A.  a  roll 

ACHOR. 
.fo.ih.  7.26.  was  calledihe  valley  of  A.  tothisday 
fsa.  65.  10.  the  valley  of  .\.  a  place  for  herds 
Hos.  2. 15.  give  the  valley  of  .A.  for  a  door  of  hope 

ACHSHAH. 
./osA.15.16.to  him  I  will  give  A.  to  wife,Ju(/o-.1.12. 

ACHSHAPH. 
.Tosh.  11.  1.  king  Jabin  sent  to  the  king  of  A. 
12.  20.  king  of  A.  one  1|  19.  25.  their  border  A. 

ACHZIB. 
.Tosh.  19.  29.  Asher's  lot  from  the  coast  to  A. 
Mie.  1. 14.  the  houses  of  A.  shall  be  a  lie  to  Israel 

ADAM. 
^i"7T.  2  T 15. God  took  A.  and  put  him  in  the  garden 

20.  A.  gave  names  to  all  cattle  and  fowl  of  the  air 
5.  2.  he^lessed  them,  and  called  their  name  A. 

Deut.  32.  8.  when  he  separated  the  sons  of  A. 
.Tub  31.  33.  if  I  covered  my  transgressions  as  A. 
Rom.  5.  14.  death  reigned  from  A.  to  Moses 
1  Cor.  15.  22.  for  as  in  A.  all  die,  even  so  shall 
45.  first  mail  A.  the  last  A.  a  quickening  spirit 

1  Tim.  2.  13.  for  A.  was  first  formed,  then  Eve 

14.  and  A.  was  not  deceived,  but  the  woman 
Jude  14.  Enoch  the  seventh  from  A.  prophesied 

ADAM. 
.Tosh.  3. 16.  the  city  A.  that  is  beside  Zaretan 

ADAR. 
Ktra6.15.this  house  was  finished  on  third  day  of  A. 
Esth.  3.  7.  they  cast  lot  till  the  twelfth  month  A 

13.  killonl3thday  of  month  A.  8.  12.  ]  9.  1,  17. 
9.  15.  the  Jews  gathered  on  the  14tli  day  of  A. 

19.  Jews  made  14lh  day  of  A.  a  day  of  gladness 

21.  to  keep  the  14th  and  ]5ih  days  of  A.  yearly 

ADDI. 
/,uJte3.28.  which  was  the  son  of  A.  sonof  Cosam 

ADMAH. 
Gen.  14.  2.thesemade  war  with  Shinab  kingof  A 
T)eut.  29. 23.  like  the  overthrow  of  A.  and  Zeboim 
Hos.  11.  8.  how  shall  I  make  thee  as  A.? 

ADONI  BEZEK. 

■Tudg.  ].  5.  and  they  found  A.  in  Bezekand  fought 

ADONIJAH. 

2  Sam.  3. 4.  A.  the  son  of  Haggith,  1  Chron.  3.  2. 

1  Kings  1.  5.  then  A.  exalted  himself,  saying 

11.  hast  thpu  not  heard  that  A.  doth  reign? 
2.5.  God  save  king  A.  ||  50.  A.  feared,  51. 
2.  21.  she  said,  let  Abishag  be  given  to  A.  to  wife 

24.  A.  shall  be  put  to  death  this  day 
28.Jo:ib  had  turned  after  A.  tho'  not  after  .Absnl 

2  Chr.  17. 8   sent  Levites  to  teach,  .\.  and  Tobijah 
JVcA.10.16.cliief  of  the  people  sealed,  -V.and  Adim 

ADOMKAM. 
Ezra  2.  13.  the  children  of  A.  666,  .V,  A.  7.  18. 

ADRAMMELECH. 

2  Kings  17.  31.  Sepharviles  burnt  children  to  A. 

19.  37.  A.  and  Sliarezer  smote  him,  Isa.  37.  38. 

ADRAMYTTIUM. 
Jlcts  27. 2.  entering  into  a  ship  of  A.  we  launched 

ADRIA. 
Jlcts  27.  27.  as  we  were  driven  up  and  down  in  A. 

ADULLAM. 

i  Sam.  22.1.  David  therefore  departed  thcnro,and 

escaped  lo  the  cave  A.  1  Chrnn.  II.  15. 

2  .9am.  23.13.  three  of  the  thirty  came  to  Dav.  to  .1. 

Mic.  1. 15.  he  shall  come  to  A.  theglory  of  Israel 

AGABUS. 
JJrlr  11.28.  there  stood  up  one  of  them,  named  A. 
21.  10.  there  came  down  a  prophet  named  A. 

AGAG. 

JVum.  04.  7.  his  king  shall  he  higher  than  A. 

1  ftam.  15.  9.  but  Saul  and  the  people  spared  A. 

33.  Samuel  hewed  A.  in  pirres  before  the  Lord 

AGAGITR.     See  IIaman. 

AGAR. 

Gnl.  4.  24.  one  gcndcreth  lo  bondng'>,  which  if  A. 

25.  foi  Ihia  A.  ia  mtunt  Sioti  in  Arabia 


AHI     [Pkopbr  Namu 

AGRI1»P.\. 
Jlcts  25.  13.  A.  and  Bernice  came  to  Ccsarea 
22.  A.  said,  I  would  also  hear  the  man  inysell 

26.  and  specially  before  thee,  O  king  A. 

20.  7.  for  which  hope's  sake,  king  A.  1  am  accused 

27.  king  A.  believest  thou  the  prophet*? 

28.  A.uaid,  almost  thou  persuadesline  to  beClir 

AGUR. 
Prov.  30.  1.  the  words  of  A.  the  son  of  Jakeh 
AHAB. 

1  Kings  16.  30.  A.  did  evil  above  all  before  him 
33.  A.  did  more  to  provoke  Lord  than  ali  kings 

18.  1.  Lord  said  to  Elijah,  go  shi.-w  thyself  to  A. 
6.  A.  went  one  way,  and  Obadiahwc-nt  another 
9.  deliver  me  into  the  hand  of  .A.  to  slay  me 
42.  so  A.  went  up  to  eat  and  to  drink 
46.Elijah  ran  before  A. to  the  entrance  of  Jezreel 

20.  13.  behold  there  came  a  projihet  to  A. 

21.  4.  A.  came  to  his  house  heavy  and  displeased 

21.  I  will  cut  off  from  .\.  him  that  pissylli 

25.  there  was  none  like  A.  w  ho  did  sell  himseir 
2'.t.  seest  tliou  how  A.  humbleth  himself  bef.  me 

22.  20.  who  shall  persuade  A.  that  he  may  go  up 

and  fall  at  Ramoth-Gilead?  2  Chron.  18.19. 

40.  so  A.  slept  with  his  fathers,  Ahaziah  reigned 

i  Kings  I.  1.  ftloab  rebelled  after  death  of  A.  3.  5. 

8.  18.  Jehoram  walked  as  did  the  house  of  A.  for 

the  daughter  of  A.  was  his  wife,  27. 

9.  7.  thou  shall  smite  the  house  of  .A.  thy  master 
8.  for  the  whole  house  of  A.  shall  perish 

25.  when  1  and  thou  rode  after  A.  his  father 
lO.ll.Jehu  slew  all  that  remained  of  A.  in  Jezreel 

21.  3.  Manasseh  did  as  A.  king  of  Israel 

13.  I  will  stretch  the  plummet  of  house  of  ,A. 

2  CAr.21.13.  like  thewhoredoms  of  thehouse  of  A. 
Jcr.  29.  21.  saith  the  Lord  of  .V.  son  of  Kolaiah 

22.  a  curse,  saying,  the  Lord  make  thee  like  A. 
Mic.  6.  16.  the  works  of  the  house  of  A.  are  kepi 

AHASUERUS.  9 

Ezra  4.  6.  in  the  reign  of  A.  wrote  they  to  him 
Esth.  1.  1.  this  is  A.  which  reigned  from  India  to 

2.  16.  so  Esther  was  taken  unto  king  A. 

21.  and  sought  to  lay  hand  on  the  king  A.  6.  2. 

3.  12.  in  the  name  of  A.  was  it  written,  8.  10. 
8.  1.  A.  gave  to  Esther  the  house  of  Haman 

10.  3.  Mordecai  the  Jew  was  next  to  king  A. 
Dan.  9.  1.  in  the  first  year  of  Darius  son  of  A. 

AHAVAH. 
£2ra8.15.  gathered  lo  the  river  that  runneth  to  A. 

21.  a  fast  at  A.  ||  31.  then  we  departed  from  A. 

AHAZ. 

2ff'i7i^^l6.2.A.wastwenty  years  old  when  he  began 

to  reign,  did  not  what  was  right,  2  Chr.  28. 1. 

11.  Urijali  made  the  altar  against  A.  came 

20. 11.  had  gone  down  in  the  dial  of. -V.  /.5n.38. 8. 

23.  12.  the  altars  of  A.  did  Josiah  beat  down 
ICAr.  8.  3.";.  the  sons  of  Micah,  Pithon,  A.  9.  41. 
2CAr.  28.19.  Ld.  brought  Judah  low,  because  of  A. 

22.  this  isthat  king  A.  ||  24.  A.  gathered  vessels 
Isa.  1. 1.  the  vision  in  days  of  A.  Nos.\.l.  Mic.J.l 

7.3.  go  forth  to  meet  A.  ||  10.  the  Lord  spake  to  A. 

AHAZIAH. 
IKings^.iO.  A.  reigned  in  hisslend,  2A'!n5'»-8.24. 
2Kings  1.  2.  A.  fell  through  a  lattice  and  was  sick 

8.  29.  A.  kingof  Judah  went  down  lo  see  Joram 

9.  23.  Joram  said  to  A.  there  is  treachery,  O  A 
27.  A.  fled,  and  Jehu  followed  after  him 

10. 13.  they  answered,  we  are  the  brethren  of  A 
2Ckron.  20.  35.  Jehoshaphat  did  join  with  A. 

22.  7.  the  destruction  of  A.  was  of  God 
9.house  of  A.  had  no  power  to  keep  the  kingdom 

AHIAH. 
1  Sam.  14.  3.  .A.  son  of  .Ahiliib,  the  Lord's  priest 

18.  Saul  said  In  A.  bring  hither  the  ark  of  God 
I  Kijigs  4.  3.  Elihoreph  and  .\.  were  scribes 

AH  UAH. 
1  Kings  11.  29.  the  prophet  A.  found  Jeroboam 
12.  15.  that  he  might  perform  his  saying,  which 
the  Lord  spake  by  A.  i  Chron.  10.  15. 

14.  2.  there  is  A.  that  told  me  I  should  be  king 
4.  Jeroboam's  wife  came  to  the  house  of  A. 

6.  it  was  so.  when  A.  heard  the  sound  of  her  feet 

15.  27.  Baaslia  son  of  A.  conspired  apainsl  him 

1  Chron.  2.  25.  the  sons  of  Jerahmeel,  Uvzmn,  A. 

11.  36.  David's  valiant  men,  A.  tho  Prionite 
2ii.20.  over  treasury  of  Levites,  .\.  over  treasures 

2rAr.  9.  29.  the  arts  of  Solomon  in  prophecy  of  A. 

.VcA. 10.26. the  Levites  thai  sealed  the  covenant,  .\. 

AHIKAM. 

2  Kings  22.  12.  Josiah  commnr.dcd  A.  the  son  of 

Shaphan  lo  inquire  of  the  Lord,  2  Chr.  34.  20. 
25.22.  he  made  Gedaliah  the  son  of  A.  ruler 
Jcr.  26.  24.  tho  hand  of  A.  was  with  Jeremiah 
40.  6.  Jeremiah  went  to  Gedaliah  the  sim  of  A. 
Se'  OitiAl.tAll. 
AHIMAAZ. 

1  .tarn.  14.  .10.  Saul's  wife  wn-  the  dangblerof  .A. 

2  Sam.  17. 17.  Jonathan  and  A.  st.iiH  by  En  rogel 
l.S.  27.  is  like  tho  riinnin;  of  A.  son  of  Zadok 

IKings  4.15.  .\.  was  in  Naphtali,  hu  took  UutmBlL 


PaorER  Names.]     AMA 

I  Chron.  6.  8.  Ahitub  begat  Zadok,  and  Zadok  A 

AHIMAN. 
A*«m.  13.  22.  A.  was  of  tlie  chllJren  of  Anak 
TudF.l.lO.  Judah  slew  A.  ||  1  Chr.  9. 17.  porters,  A 
AHIMELECH. 

1  5am.  21  I.  A.  was  afraid  at  the  meeting  of  David 
S^.  9.  I  saw  the  son  of  Jesse  coming  to  A. 

16.  the  king  said,  thou  shall  surely  die,  A 
26.  6.  David  said  to  A.  who  will  go  down  with  me? 

2  Sam.  8.  17.  Zadok  and  A.  priests,  1  Chron.  18.lt). 
1  Chron.  24.  3.  A.  of  the  sonsof  Ithaiiiar  according 

6.  Shemaiah  the  scribe  wrote  them  before  A 
31.these  cast  lots  in  the  presence  of  David  and  A. 
AHINOAM. 
1  Sam.  14.  50.  the  name  of  Saul's  wife  wat  A. 
25.  43.  David  also  took  A.  of  Jezreel  ids  wife 
See  Abigail. 
AHIO. 
25am.  6. 3.  Uzzah  and  A.  drave  the  cart,  1  CAr.13.7 

AHISAMACH. 
£rod.  35.  34.  both  he  and  the  son  of  A.  may  teacl 

AHITHOPHEL. 
25am.  15.  12.'Absalom  sent  for  A.  theGilonile 
31.  Lord,  turn  the  counsel  of  A.  into  foidishness 
34.  then  mayest  thou  defeat  the  counsel  olA. 

16.  1.).  Absalom  came  to  Jerusiil.  and  A.  with  him 
23.  the  counsel  of  A.  was  as  if  a  man  inquired 

17.  7.  the  counsel  of  A.  is  not  good  at  this  liinc 
15.  thus  and  thus  did  A.  counsel  Absalom 
23.  A.  saw  that  his  counsel  was  nol  followed 

1  Chron.  27.  33.  A.  was  the  king's  counsellor 

AHITUB. 
1  Sam.  22. 12.  Saul  said,  hear  now,  thou  son  of  A. 
S  Sam.  8. 17.  Zadok  the  son  of  A.  1  Chron.  18.  16. 

AHOLAH,  AHOLlfJAH. 
Eiek.  23.  4.  Samaria  is  A.  Jerusalem  Aholibah 
36.£onof  man,  wilt  thou  judge  A.  and  Aholibah? 
AHOLI.AB. 
Ezod.  30.  1.  then  wrought  Bezaleel  and  A. 

AHOLIBAMAH. 
Gen. 36. 2.  Esau  took  to  wife  A.  ||5.  .A.  bareJeush 

Al,  orHAI. 
Gen.  13.  3.  -Abram  dwelt  between  Betb-el  and  A. 
Josh.  7.  4.  and  they  Hed  before  the  men  of  A. 
8. 1.  go  up  to  A.  II  10.2.  Gibeon  was  greater  than  A. 
Eira  2.  28.  the  men  of  Beth-el  and  A.  JVeA.  7.  32. 
Jer.  49.  3.  howl,  O  Heshbon,  for  A.  is  spoiled 

AIATH. 
Isa.  10. 28.  he  is  come  to  A.  be  is  passed  to  Migron 

'  AJALON. 

Josh.  10.  12.  stand,  thou  moon,  in  the  valley  of  A 

ALEXANDER. 
Mark  15.  21.  Simon  the  father  of  A.  and  Rufus 
J3ct3  4.  6.  Annas,  Caiaphas,  A.  were  gathered 
19.  33.  they  drew  A.  out  of  the  multitude 

1  Tim.  1.  20.  of  whom  is  Hyrneneus  and  A. 

2  Tim.  4.  14.  A.  the  copper-smith  did  me  much  evil 

ALEXANDRIA,  ANS. 

Jlcts  6.  9.  the  syniigogue  of  the  Libertines  and  A. 

18.24.  a  certain  Jew  named  Apollos,  born  at  A. 

27.6.  centurion  found  ashipof  A.saiiJng  into  Italy 

ALPHEUS. 
JUat.  10.3.  the  names  of  the  apostles,  James  the  son 
of  A.  Mark  3.  18.  Luke  6.  15.  Jlcts  1.  13. 
Mark  2.  14.  he  saw  Levi  the  son  of  A.  sitting  at 

AMALEK. 

Gen.  36.  12.  Timna  bare  to  Eliphas  Esau's  son  A. 

Ezod.  17.  8.  then  came  A.  and  fought  with  Israid 

14. 1  will  utterly  put  out  the  remembrance  of  A. 

16.  Lord  hath  sworn  he  will  have  war  with  A. 

JVam.  24.  20.  when  he  looked  on  A.  he  took  up  his 

parable  and  said,  A.  was  the  first  of  the  nations 

Deut.  25.  17.  remember  what  A.  did,  1  Sinn.  15.  2. 

19.  thou  shall  blot  out  the  remembrance  of  A. 
Judg.  5.  14.  out  of  Ephraim  was  a  root  against  A. 
1  Sam.  15.  3.  smite  A.  ||  5.  Saul  came  to  a  city  of  A. 

28.  18.  thou  didst  not  execute  his  wrath  on  A. 
fsal.  83.  7.  Gebnl,  .Ammnn,  A.  are  confederate 

AMALEKITE,  S. 
J^um.  14.  45.  the  A.  came  down  and  smote  Israel 
^urf^.6.3.wben  Israel  had  sown  the  .A. came  against 

7.  12.  Midianites  and  A.  lay  like  grasshoppers 

10. 12.  the  A.  did  oppress  you,  and  ye  cried  to  me 
1  Sam.  14.  48.  Saul  smote  the  A.  15.  7. 

IS.  6.  Saul  paid  loKenites,  get  you  from  among  A. 

20.  yea,  I  have  utterly  destroyed  the  A. 
27.  8.  David  and  bis  men  ipvaded  the  A. 
30.  1.  the  A.  had  invaded  the  south  and  Zlklag 

2.'>am.  1.  I.David  returned  from  the  slaughter  of  A. 

fl.  and  I  answered  him,  I  am  an  A.  13. 
ICAron-  4.  43.  they  smote  the  rest  of  the  A. 

AMANA. 
Cant.  4.  8.  look  from  the  top  of  A.  from  Shcnir 

AMASA. 
8  5am.  17. 26.  Absalom  made  A.  captain  of  the  host, 
which  .\.  was  the  eon  of  Ithra  an  Israelite 
20.  9.  Joab  took  A.  by  the  beard  to  kiss  him 

12.  A.  wallowed  in  blood  in  the  highway 
I  Kings'i.5.  thou  knowestwbat  Joab  did  to  A.  32. 
1  C%roii.2.17. Abigail  bare  A.  the  father  was  Jetber 
721 


ANA 

2CAr.28.12.  A.son  of  Hadlai  stood  upaeainst  them 

AMAZIAH. 
2  Kings  12.  21.  A.  his  son  reigned,  2  Chron.  24. 27. 

13.  12.  wherewith  he  fought  against  A.  14.  15. 

14.  11.  but  A.  would  not  hear,  llierefore  Jehoasb 

15.  3.  as  his  father  A.  had  done,  2  Chron.  26.  4. 

1  Citron.  6.  45.  of  Merari,  A.  the  sou  of  Hilkiah 

2  CAroT!.25. 27.  after  A.  did  turn  from  the  Lord 
.imos  7.  10.  A.  priest  of  Bcth-el  sent  to  Jeroboam 

AMMAH. 
2  Sam.  2.  24.  when  they  were  come  to  the  bill  A. 

AMMI. 
Hos.2.  1.  say  ye  unto  your  brethren,  A.  and  sisters 

AMMINADAB. 
Ezod.  6.  23.  Aaron  took  Elisheba  daughter  of  A. 
Rulh  4.  20.  and  A.  begat  Nahshon,  Mat.  1.  4. 

AMMI-NADIB. 
Cant.6.12.my  soul  made  me  like  the  chariots  of  A. 

AMMON. 
Gen.  19.  38.  Ben-ammi,  father  of  children  of  A. 
Judg.  10.  11.  did  not  I  deliver  you  from  A.? 
11.  4.  the  children  of  A.  made  war  against  Israel 
15.  Israel  took  not  the  land  of  the  children  of  A. 
33.  thus  the  children  of  A.  were  subdued 
2  Sam.  10.  11.  if  the  childrec  of  A.  be  too.  strong 
for  thee,  I  will  help  thee,  1  Chron.  19.  12. 
14.  children  of  A.  saw  that  the  Syrians  fled 
12.9.  hast  slain  Uriah  \vith  sword  of  children  of  A. 
31.  thus  did  he  to  all  children  of  A.  1  Chr.  20.  3. 
1  Kings  11.  7.  built  a  high  place  for  Molech  the 
abomination  of  the  children  of  A.  'i  Kings  23.13. 
33.  Milcom  the  god  of  the  children  of  A. 
JVeh.  13.  23.  Jews  that  had  married  wives  of  A. 
Pial.  83. 7.  Gebal  and  A.  confederate  against  thee 
Isa.  11.  14.  the  children  of  A.  shall  obey  them 
.Ter.  9.  26.  I  will  punish  the  children  of  A. 
25.  21.  I  made  children  of  A.  to  drink  of  the  cujt 
49.  6.  I  will  bring  again  the  captivity  of  A. 
Dan.  11.  41.  these  shall  e^cape,  the  chief  of  A. 
Zeph.  2.  9.  children  of  A.  shall  be  as  Gomorrah 

AMMONITE,  S. 
Z)cut.23.3.  A.not  enter  into  congregation,JVf  A.13.1. 
1  Sam.  11.  II.  slew  the  A.  till  the  heat  of  the  day 

1  Kings  11. 1,  king  Solomon  loved  women  of  the  A. 

2  Chron.  26.  8.  and  the  A.  gave  gifts  to  Uzziah 
Ezra  9.  1.  do  according  to  the  abomination  of  A. 
./er.  27.3.  make  yokes  and  send  to  the  king  of  A. 

49.2.  an  alarm  of  war  to  be  heard  in  Rubbah  of  A. 
Ezek.  25.  .5.  make  A.  a  couching-place  for  flocks 
10.  that  the  A.  may  not  be  remembered 
AMNON. 
2  Sam.  3.  2.  David's  first-born  was  A.  1  Chr.  3.  1. 
13.  2.  A.  vexed,  fell  sick  for  his  sister  Taniar 
20.  I  pray  thee,  let  my  brother  A.  go  with  us 
28.  when  I  say,  smite  A.  then  kill  him,  fear  not 
1  Chron.  4.  20.  the  sons  of  Shimon,  A.  ilinnah 
AMON. 

1  Kings  22. 20.  carry  him  back  to  A.  2  Chr.  18. 25. 

2  Kings  21.18.  A. reigned  ||23.  his  servants  slew  A. 
2  Chron.  33.  22.  A.  sacrificed  to  carved  images 
JVf/i.  7.  59.  came  out  of  captivity  children  of  A. 
Mat.  1. 10.  Manasses  beg;U  A.  and  A.  begat  Josias 

AMORITE,  S. 
Gen.  15.  16.  the  iniquity  of  the  A.  is  not  yet  full 
48.  22.  which  1  took  from  A.  with  my  sword 
Deut.  20.  17.  thou  shall  utterly  destroy  the  A. 
Josh.  3.  10.  God  will  without  fail  drive  out  the  A 

10.  12.  in  the  day  when  the  Lord  delivered  up  A. 
2^.  15.  or  gods  of  A.  in  whose  land  ve  dwell 

.Judg.  6.  10.  I  sriid,  fear  not  the  gods  of  the  A. 

11.  23.  the  Lord  God  hath  dispossessed  the  A. 

1  Sam.  7. 14.  was  peace  between  Israel  and  the  A. 

2  Sam.  21.  2.  the  Gibeonites  were  of  the  A. 

1  Kings2\.  20.  Ahab  did  abominably  as  did  the  A. 

2  Kings  21.  11.  Manasseh  did  above  all  the  A.  did 
Ezek.  16.3.  thy  father  an  A.  mother  a  Hiltile,45. 
Amos  2.  9.  yet  destroyed  I  the  A.  before  them 

AMOS,  or  AMOZ. 

2  Kings  19.  2.  Isaiah  the  son  of  A.  20.  |  20.  1. 

2  Chron.  26.  22. )  32.  20,  32.  Isa.  1.  1. 

12.  1. 11.3.1  120.2. 1  37.  2,  21. 1  38.  1. 

Amos  7.  14.  then  A.  said,.!  was  no  prophet 

Luke  3.  25.  Mattathias,  which  was  the  son  of  A. 

AMPHIPOLIS. 
Acts  17. 1.  now  when  thev  had  passed  through  A. 

AMPLIAS. 
Rom.  16.  8.  greet  A.  my  beloved  in  the  Lord 

AMRAM. 
Exnd.  6.  18.  the  sons  of  Kohath,  A.  JVum.  3.  19. 
1  Chron.  1.  41.  the  sons  of  Dishon,  A.  and  Eshban 
6.  3.  the  children  of  A.  Aaron,  Moses  and  Miriam 
Eira  10.  34.  ef  the  sons  of  Bani,  Maadi,  A. 

ANAH. 
Oen.  36.  24.  this  was  that  A.  that  found  mules 

ANAK. 

.A/um.  13.28.  the  cities  are  great,  and  moreover  we 

saw  the  children  of  A.  there,  33.  Dctit.  1.  28. 

Deut.^l.  who  can  stand  before  ihe  children  of  A.? 

Josh.  15. 14.  Caleb  drove  thonce  Ihe  three  sons  of 

A.  Sheshai  Ahiman  and  Talmai,  Judg.  1. 20. 


ARa 

ANAKIMS. 

Deut.  2. 10.  the  people  gieat  and  tall  as  the  A.  9.  J. 

Josh.  11.  22.  none  of  the  A.  were  left  but  in  Gaza 

14.15.  which  Alba,  was  a  great  man  among  the  A. 

AWAMWELECH. 

2A7«^sl7.31.Adramnielecb,A.god8ofSepharvaim 

ANAMAS. 
Acts  5.  5.  .Aj|fcariiig  iiiese  words  fell  down 
9.  12.  he  baWseen  in  a  vision  A.  coining,  22.  12. 

23.  2.  the  liigh-priesi  A.  commanded  lo  smite 

24.  1.  A.  the  jirieot  descended  with  the  elders 
ANATHOTH. 

Josh.'iX.  18.  out  of  Benjamin,  A.  with  her  suburbs, 
Almon  with  bur  suburbs,  I  Chrun-  li.  60. 
1  Kings  2.  26.  get  thee  to  A.  to  thine  own  liildg 
1  CAron.  7.  8.  the  sons  of  Becher;  A.  and  Al.imeth 
J^eh.  10.  19.  A.  and  Nebai  sealed  the  covenant 
fsa.  10.  30.  lilt  up  tliy  voice,  O  poor  .A. 
Jcr.  11.  23.  I  will  bring  evil  on  the  men  of  A. 
29.27.  why  liasl  thou  not  lepioved  Jeremiah  of  A. 
32.  7.  saying,  buy  my  tit^ld  that  is  iu  A.  8. 

ANDREW. 
Mark  1.  29.  they  entered  into  the  house  of  A. 

13.  3.  James,  John,  and  A.  asked  him  privately 
John  1.  40.  one  of  the  two  vvbicti  heard  was  A. 
44.  Pbiliji  was  of  Bethsaida  the  city  of  A. 

12.  22.  Philip  telleih  A   and  A.  told  Jeeus 
Actsl.i3.  where  abode  Peter,  John,  James, and  A 

ANDRONICUS. 
Rom.  IG.  7.  salute  A.  and  Junia  my  kinsmen 

AN1|R. 
Gen.  14.  24.  A.  Eshcol,  lei  them  take  their  portion 
1  Chron.  6.  70.  out  of  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh  A. 

ANNA. 
Z,uAt  2.36.  was  A. a  prophetess  daughter  of  Phanuel 

ANNAS. 
Luke  3.  2.  A.  and  Caiaphas  being  high-priests 
./ohn  18.  13.  A.  was  father-in-law  lo  C'aiaphua 
24.  A.  had  sent  Jesus  bound  to  Caiaphas 
ANTICHRIST,  S. 

1  .John  2. 18.  A.  will  come,  now  there  are  many  A. 
22.  be  is  A.  that  denitlli  the  Father  and  Son 

4.  3.  this  is  that  spirit  of  A.  whereof  ye  heard 

2  John  7.  this  is  a  deceiver  and  an  A. 
ANTIOCH. 

Acts  11.  19.  they  travelled  as  far  as  A.  22. 
20.  some  when  come  to  A.  spake  to  the  Grecians 
20.  the  disciples  were  called  Christians  first  in  A- 

13.  14.  Ihey  came  lo  A.  in  Pisidia  and  taught 

14.  20.  anil  from  Attalia  they  sailed  to  A. 

15.  22.  to  send  men  of  their  own  company  to  A. 
3.5.  Paul  al.so  and  Barnabas  coniinued  in  A. 

Gal.  2.  11.  when  Peter  was  come  to  A.  1  withstood 

2  Tim. 3. 11.  persecutions  which  came  lo  me  at  A. 

ANTIPAS,  See  Martyr. 

ANTIPATBIS. 

.4ct.s  23. 31.  the  soldiers  brriughi  Paul  by  night  to  A. 

APELLES. 
Rom.  10.  10.  salute  A.  approved  in  Christ 

APHEK. 
1  Sam.  4.  1.  Ihe  Philistines  pitched  in  A.  29.  1. 

1  Kings  20.  30.  the  rest  fled  to  A.  there  a  wall  feU 

2  Kings  13.  17.  thou  shah  smite  the  Syrians  in  A. 
APOLI,ONIA. 

Acts  17. 1.  more  when  they  had  passed  through  A. 

APOLLOS. 
Acts  18.24.  certain  Jew  mimed  A.  came  loEphesu* 
1  Cor.  1.  12.  1  am  of  A.  3.  4.  ||  3.  5.  who  is  A.? 
3.6.1  have  planted,  A.waterid,God  gave  increase 
4.  6.  I  have  in  a  figure  transferred  to  A. 
Tit.  3.  13.  bring  Zenas  nnd  A.  on  their  journey 

APOLLYON. 
Rev.  9.  31.  in  the  Greek  tongue  bis  name  is  A. 

APPII-FORUM. 
Acts  28.  15.  they  came  lo  meet  us  as  far  as  A. 

AQUILA. 
Acts  18.  2.  Paul  fiiund  a  certain  Jew  named  A. 

26.  when  A.  and  PrisciMa  heard  Apollos 
Rom.  16.  .3.  greet  A.  and  Pri.^cilla,  2  Tim.  4. 19. 
1  C»r.l6. 19.  A.  and  Priscilla  salute  you  in  the  Lord 

AR. 

JVum.  21  28.  the  fire  hath  consumed  A.  of  Moab 

Deut.  2.  9.  I  have  given  A.  lo  the  children  of  Lot 

[sa.  15.  1.  in  the  night  .A.  of  Moab  is  laid  waste 

ARABIA. 

1  Kings  10. 15.  besides  what  Solomon  had  of  mer- 
chant-men and  of  kiiig.s  of  A.  2  Chrun.  9.  14. 

fsa.  21.  13.  the  burden  upon  A.  shall  lodge  in  A. 
./rr.  2.5. 24.  give  the  cup  to  nil  the  kings  of  A. 
Gal.i.  17. 1  went  into  A. and  returned  to  Damasciu 
4.  25.  for  this  .Agar  is  mount  Sinai  in  A. 
ARABIAN,  S. 

2  Chron.  17. 11.  the  A.  brought  Jehoshsphat  flocki 
26.  7.  God  helped  Uzziah  against  the  A. 

Tsa.  13.  20.  nor  shall  the  A.  pitch  lent  there 
Jer.  3.2.  thou  sattest  for  them  as  A.  in  wildernesg 
Acts  2. 11.  Cretes  and  A.  we  do  hear  them  speak 

ARAM. 
n'en.l0.22.thesonsofShem,Lud,  A.lC/iron.1.17 
JVum.23.7.Balak  king  of  Moab  brought  me  from  A 


ASA 

Jtfat.  1.3.  Estom  bejat  A.  ||  4.  A.  bogat  AminaHub 
l^uke  3.  33.  AminHilab  wlucli  was  the  sou  of  A. 
Hre  Papan. 
ARARAT. 
Gen.  8.  4.  the  ark  rested  on  the  moiinmiiis  of  A. 
JcT.  51.  27.  call  against  hur  thu  kingiluiiis  uf  A. 

AKAUiVAH.       . 

2  Sam.'ii.  10.  angel  hub  by  the  ihresjj^g-iilnccofA. 

'•Mi.  ull  thcBO  did  A.  aji  a  king  give  to  Uavid 

ARIiA. 

JosA.14.15..\.wasagri>ai  man  among  IheAnakiins 

A  KB  A. 
Josh.  21. 11.  gave  thoin  .\.  which  city  18  Hebron 

AKCIIKLAUS. 
Mat.  2. 22.  when  JoM|>h  h<;;iril  that  A.  did  reign 

AKCIIirPUS. 
Col.  4.  17.  say  to  .\.  take  heed  to  the  ministry 
/'At/em. 2.  Paul  to  A.  lcll(iw-.<oldierand  the  church 

ARCTURUS. 
Job  9.  9,  which  mukctli  .\.  Orion  and  Pleiades 
3d.  32.  or  canst  thou  guide  A.  with  his  sons  1 
AREOPA<;iTE. 
Jlcts  17.  34.  among  wliicli  was  Dionysius  the  A. 

ARF.OPAGUS. 
^cts  17. 19.  they  took  Paul  and  brought  him  to  A. 

ARiri'AS. 
2  Cor.  11.  32.  the  governor  under  A.  the  king 

ARGOI3. 
Dtut.2.i.  all  the  region  i,f  .\.  13, 14.  1  Kings  4. 13. 

AltlKL. 
Ezra^,.  10.  I  sent  for  lOJiezer  and  A.  chief  men 
Isa.  2".).  1.  woe  to  A.  tlie  city  where  Uavid  dwelt 
2.  I  will  distress  A.  it  shall  be  to  me  an  A. 
7.  multitude  of  the  nations  ihat  fight  agiiinst  A. 
J,        ARIMATHKA. 
Mat.  27.  57.  Josepli  of  A.  who  was  Jesus'  disciple, 
Mark  15.  43.  I.nke  23.  51.  .hlin  19.  38. 
ARIOCH. 
Gen.  14.  I.  in  the  days  of  A.  king  of  Ellasar 
/;a/i.2.  25.  then  A.  brought  in  Daniel  before  king 

ARISTARCIIUS. 
Jlcts  19.  29.  and  having  caught  Gaiue  and  A. 
20.  4.  A.  accompanied  Paul  into  Asia 
27.  2.  ono  A.  a  Macedonian  being  with  ua 
Cb/.4.10.  A.  fellow-prisoner  sahiteth  you,  VkiU.  24. 

ARlrfTORULUS. 
/2ont.  16. 10.  salute  them  that  areof  A.  household 

ARMAGEDDON. 
Ren.  16.  16.  he  gathered  them  together  to  A. 

ARMENIA. 
2jrinffsl9.37.lhey  escaped  info  landof  A./ia.37.38. 

ARXON. 
JVum.  21.  14.  what  he  did  in  the  brookp  of  A. 
22.  Wa.  I?al;ik  met  I'alaani  in  the  border  of  A. 
Deut.  2.  24.  rise  up,  and  pass  over  the  river  A. 
Jadg.  11.26.  while  Israel  dwelt  by  I  he  coasts  of  A. 
Isa.  16  2.daughiersof  Moabhhall  be  at  foidsof  A. 
Jer.  48.  20.  tell  ye  it  in  A.  that  Moab  is  spoiled 

AROER. 
Xiim.  32.  34.  the  children  of  Gad  built  A. 

1  Savi.  30.  28.  David  sent  a  present  to  them  in  A. 

2  ffiim.  24.  5.  passed  over  .Jordan  and  pitched  in  i\. 

1  Ckron.  5. 8.  Rela,  who  dwelt  in  .\.  even  to  Nebo 
/.««.  1".  2  the  cities  of  A.  are  forsaken 

.Jer.  id.  19.  O  inhabitant  of  A.  stand  by  the  way 
ARPAD,  ARPHAD. 

2  A'lTf^*  18.  34.  where  are  the  gods  of  A.?  /:<n.36.19. 
19.  13.  where  is  the  king  of  A?  Isa.  37.  13. 

Isa.  10.  9.  for  he  saiih,  is  not  Hnmath  as  A. 7 
Jer.  49.  23.  Hainath  is  conlounded,  and  A. 

ARPHAXAD. 
G'n.  in.  22.  the  son  ofShem,  .\.  II.  10. 1  Chr.  1.17. 
J^uke  3.  ;iC.  Cainan,  who  was  the  son  of  A. 

ARTAXERXES. 
Kzra  4.7.  in  the  days  of  .\.  wrote  Risblam 

6.  14.  according  to  the  commandment  of  A. 

7.  1.  in  the  reign  of  A.  Ezra  went  up,  8.  I. 

11.  the  copy  of  the  letter  that  A.  gave  to  Ezra 

21.  I,  even  I,  A.  the  kinj,  ibi  make  a  decree 

JVVA.  2.  1.  ill  20th  year  of  A.  wine  was  before  him 

5.  14.  WHS  governor  from  20lh  to  32d  year  of  A. 

ARTEMAS. 
Til.  3. 12.  when  I  shall  send  A.  to  thee  or  Tychicus 

ASA. 

1  A'ln^J  M.  II.  A.  did  what  was  richi,  2  Chr.  14. 2. 

14.  .K.  hit  heart  was  perfect,  2C/iron.  15.  17. 

18.  A.  look  tb-  silv.'r  and  gold,  2  Cliron.  16.  2. 

1  Chrnn.  9.  16.  Bi-neliiali  ihi  son  of  A.  a  I.evite 

2  Chron.  14.  II.  A.  cried  lo  the  Lord  his  God 
15.  2.  Azariah  went  out  to  me>-t  .\.  and  said 

19.  there  was  no  war  to  the  35;h  vear  of  A. 

in.  10.  A.  was  wroth  with  the  B'^it,  and  |iut  him 
in  prison,  A.  oppre«9i-d  some  of  the  people 
Jrr.  41.  9.  the  pit  was  it  whirh  A.  had  made 
Mat.  1.  7.  Abia  bopat  .\.  ||  8.  A.  begat  Jueaphal 

ASA  HE!,. 

2  .«nm.2.18.  sonsofZ-ruiah,  Joab,  A.  I  CAr.2. 16. 

21.  .\.  would  notiiirna-iidefr.imfollowiog  Abnnr 

32.  they  took  up  A  and  buried  him  in  P-'th-lehem 

3.27.  Abaoc  died  for  thp  blood  of  A.  hit  brother 

722 


ASl 

2.9<jm.23.24.  A.  was  one  of  the  thirty,  1  Chr.  11.  26. 
■Hjltrun.  17.  8.  he  sent  Levites,  Zchadiah,  A. 
31.  13.  Jehiel,  Nahalh  and  A.  were  overseers 
Lira  10.  15.  son  of  A.  was  employed  about  this 
ASAIAH. 

1  Chron.  4.  30.  Jeshohaiah  and  A.  were  princes 

6.  .'to.  the  sons  of  Merari,  Haggish,  .\. 

9.  5.  of  the  Shilonites,  A    the  tirst-born 

2  Chron.  34.  20.  king  Josiah  gent  A.  to  Huldah 

ASAPH. 
2  Kings  18. 18.  Shcbna  the  scribe  and  Joah  the  son 
of  A.  the  recorder,  37.  l.ia.  36.  3,  22. 
1  Chr.  6.  39.  A.  son  of  Berechiuh,  9.  15.  ]  15.  17. 
It).  7.  Uavid  delivered  first  this  psalm  to  A. 
25.  1.  of  the  eons  of  A.  2.  |  26.  1.  2  Chron.  5.  12. 
I  20.  14. 1  29.  13.  1  35.  15.  Ezra  2.  41.  |  3.  10. 
jVeA.7.  44. 1  U.  17,22.112.35. 
9.  the  first  lot  came  forth  for  A.  to  Joseph 
2CAr.  29.  30.  the  Levites  to  sing  with  words  of  A. 

15.  15.  according  to  the  commandment  of  A. 
JiTi-.h.  2.  8.  a  letter  to  A.  keeper  of  the  forest 

12.  46.  in  the  days  of  A.  were  songs  of  praise 

ASEiVATH. 

Gen.  41. 45.  A.  daughter  of  Poti-pherah,  50. 146.20. 

ASHDOU. 

1  Sam.  5.  1.  the  Philistines  brought  the  ark  to  A. 
6.  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  heavy  on  them  of  .X. 

2  CAr.  26.  6.  Uzziah  warred  against  Philistines  and 
brake  down  w-allof  A.  and  built  cities  about  A. 

JVfA.  13.  23.  Jews  that  had  mftrrii;d  wives  of  .\. 

24.  their  children  spake  half  in  the  speech  of  A. 
ha.  20.  I.  Tartan  came  and  fought  against  A. 
Icr.  2.5. 20.  I  made  remnant  of  A.  drink  of  the  cup 
Amos  1.  8.  I  will  cut  oti'the  inhabitant  from  A. 

3.  9.  publish  in  the  palaces  at  A.  and  of  Egypt 
Zeph.  2.  4.  they  shall  drive  out  A.  at  noon-day 
Zech.  9.  6.  and  a  bastard  shall  dwell  in  A. 

ASHER. 
Oen.  30.  13.  and  Leah  called  his  name  A. 

35.  26.  the  sons  of  Zilpah,  Leah's  maid,  Gad,  A. 

46.  17.  the  children  of  A.  J^urn.  1.  40.  |  26.  44. 
1  Chron.  7.  30,  40.  |  12.  36. 

49.  20.  out  of  A.  hie  bread  shall  be  fat,  and  yield 
.V«ra.  1.  13.  prince  of  A.  was  Pagiel,  2.  27.  |  7.72. 

2t).  46.  tlio  name  of  the  daughter  of  A.  w.ts  Sarah 
Deut.  27.  13.  these  on  Ebul  to  curse  ;  Gad  and  A. 

33.2 1,  of  A.  be  said,  let  A.  be  blessed  with  children 
fudir.S.n.  A.continued  on  the  sea-shore  and  abode 

0.35.  Gideon  sent  messengers  lo  A.  and  Zebulun 

7.  23.  men  out  of  A.  pursued  the  Midianites 
1  ICini'si.  16.  Baanah  the  son  of  Ilushai  was  in  A. 

1  Chron.  12.  36.  of  A.  expert  in  war  40,000 

2  Chron.  30.  11.  divers  of  A.  bumbled  themselves 
Ezek.  48.  2.  a  jiortion  for  A.  ||  34.  one  gate  of  A. 

Tribe  of  .\SUKll. 
J^um.  1.  41,  numbered  of  the  tribe  of  .\.  41,500 
2.  27.  the  tribe  of  A.  shall  encaiii|i  by  U:in 

10.  26.  over  the  host  of  tribe  of  A.  was  Pagiel 

13.  13.  of  the  tribe  of  A.  to  s|)y  the  land,  Shetur 
31.27.  jirince  of  the  tribe  of  .\.  to  divide,  Ahihud 

.Josh.  19.  24.  the  fifth  lot  for  the  tribe  of  A. 

31.  this  is  the  inheritance  of  the  tribe  of  .\. 
21.  6.  the  children  of  Gershon  had  cities  out  of 
the  tribe  of  A.  30.  1  Chron.  6.  02,  74. 
/.ii/ir('2.36..\nna  daughter  of  Phanuei  of  tri4eo/.\. 
liev.  7.  0.  of  the  tribe  of  A.  were  sealed  12,000 

ASHTAROTH. 

Dctit.  1.  4.  Og,  who  dwelt  at  A.  .fosh.  9.  10.  1 12.  4. 

./«(/"■. 2.  13.  ifu  children  of  Israel  served  A.  10.  6. 

1  Satn.  7.  3.  put  away  the  strange  gods  and  .\.  4. 

12.10.  wehavesinneil,  because  we  have  served  A. 

31.  10.  they  put  Saul's  armour  in  the  bouse  of  A. 
1  Kinirs  I1.33.have  worshippcdA.goddessof  Zidon 
I  CAr.O.  71.  to  children  of  Gershnm  was  given  A. 

ASHUR,  or  ASSUR. 
Grn.  10.  II.  A.  went  foith  and  built  Nineveh 

22.  children  of  Shorn,  Elani  and  A.  1  Chr.  I.  17. 
.Vi/m.24.  22.  till  A.  shall  carry  thee  aw.iy  ciptive 

24.  ships  shall  come  from  Chitliin  and  afflict  A. 
1  Chron.  2.  24.  Hezron's  wife  bare  liiin  .\. 

4.  5.  A.  had  two  wives,  Helah  and  Nanrah 
Kz»a4.2.  Esar-haddon  king'of  A.which  broughtup 
Psal.  83.  8.  A.  also  is  joined  with  them 
Ezi-k.'T!.^.  A.  and  Chilmad  were  thy  merchants 

32.  22.  A.  is  there,  and  all  her  company 

Uos.  14.  3.  A.  shall  not  save  us,  we  will  not  rido 

ASIA. 
..lets  6.  0.  them  of  A.  disputing  with  Stejihen 
10.0.  they  wore  forbidden  to  preach  Iho  word  in  .\. 

19.  10.  all  they  that  dwelt  in  A.  heard  tlie  word 
27.  whom  all  A.  and  the  world  wnrshipixith 
31.  rcrtain  of  the  chief  of  A.  sent  unto  him 

20.  16.  because  he  would  not  spend  time  in  A. 
IH.  ye  know  from  the  first  day  that  I  came  into  A. 

27.  2.  we  launched,  meaning  to  -ail  by  roastsof  .A. 

1  Cor.  16.  10.  the  churches  of  A.  salute  you 

2  Cor.  1.  8.  our  trouble  which  came  to  us  in  A. 

2  Tim.  1. 15.  they  that  are  in  .\.  are  turned  nwny 
1  fet.  1.  1.  to  the  strangers  sciiliered  in  A 
Se*  Ciii'ucHES. 


AZA       (PROKR  Namh 

ASKELON,  or  ASHKELOX. 

Judg.  1.  18.  Judali  took  Gaza  and  A.  and  Ekron 

14.I9.Sanison  wentdownto  A.and  slew  thirty  men 

1  Saw.  6. 17.  for  A. one,  for  Gath  one,  for  Ekron  ona 

2  Sam.  1.  20.  publish  it  not  in  the  streets  of  A. 
.kr.  25.  20.  I  made  A.  and  Azzah  to  drink  of  cup 

47.  5.  A.  is  cut  off  with  remnant  of  their  valley 

7.  the  Lord  bath  given  it  a  charge  against  A. 

Amos  1.8.  cut  off  him  that  liolds  sceptre  from  A. 

Zeph.  2.  4.  Gaza  shall  be  forsaken,  A.  a  desolatioa 

7.  in  the  houses  of  A.  shall  they  lie  down 
ZccA.9.5.  A.  Eball  see  it,  and  fear ;  king  shall  jierisli 
from  Gaza,  and  A.  shall  not  be  inhabited 
A.SNAPPAR. 
Ezra  4.  10.  whom  the  noblH  A.  brought  over 

ASSYRIA. 
Gen.  2. 14.  Hiddekel  goeih  toward  the  east  of  .A. 
25.  18.  Isbmael's  sons  dwelt  as  thou  goest  to  A. 
2  A'(7i»-s  15.  29.  carried  cajitive  to  A.  17.  6.  |  18. 1 1. 
Isa.  7. 18.  hiss  tor  the  boc  that  is  in  the  land  of  A. 
11. 11.  to  recover  remnant  of  his  people  from  A. 

16.  a  highway  for  his  people  left  from  A. 
19.  23.  shall  be  a  highway  out  of  Egypt  to  .\. 
24.  Israel  shall  be  the  third  with  Egypt  and  A. 
2.5.  blessed  be  A.  the  work  of  my  hands 
27.  13.  shall  come  who  were  ready  to  perish  in  A 
Jer.  2.  18.  what  hast  thou  to  do  in  the  way  of  A.I 

!10.  ashamed  of  Egypt,  as  wast  ashamed  of  A. 
f'lcA.  23.  7.  committed  whoredom  with  men  of  A. 
W»».7.11.  they  go  to  .A.  ||  8.9.  they  are  gone  up  to  A. 

9.  3.  they  shall  cat  unclean  things  in  A. 

10.  6.  it  shall  he  carried  to  A.  for  a  present 

11.  11.  shall  tremble  as  a  dove  out  uf  land  of  A. 
Mic.  5.  0.  anil  th»jy  shall  waste  the  land  of  A. 

7.  12.  in  that  day  he  shall  come  to  thee  from  A. 
Z.eph.  2.  13.  and  he  will  destroy  A.  and  Nineveh 
Zeeh.  10.  10.  1  will  gather  them  out  of  .\. 
11.  the  pride  of  A.  shall  be  brought  down 
See  Kino,  Kings. 
ASSYRIAN. 
Isa.  10.  5.  O  A.  thu  rod  of  mine  anger,  and  staff 
24.  O  my  people,  be  not  afraid  of  the  A. 
14.  25.  that  1  will  break  the  A.  in  my  land 
2.3.  13.  this  people  was  not  till  the  A.  founded 
30.  31.  the  A.  shall  be  beaten  down  which  smot« 
31.8.  then  shall  the  A.  fall  with  the  sword 
52.  4.  the  A.  oppressed  them  without  cause 
F.zek.  31. 3.  beholil,  the  .A.  was  a  cedar  in  Lebanon 
Hos.  5.  13.  then  went  Ejiliraim  lo  the  A.  and  synt 
11.  5.  but  the  .\.  shall  be  his  king,  ihey  refused 
Mie.n.a.  this  man  shall  be  the  jieace  when  A.  coma 
6.thu8  shall  he  deliver  us  from  the  A. when  comei 
ASSYRIANS. 
2  Kings  19.  35.  the  angel  of  the  Lord  smote  in  iha 
camp  of  A.  1f5,O0O  men,  Isa.  37.  M. 
f,am.  .'>.  0.  we  have  given  the  band  to  tht(  .\. 
Ezek.^d.  28.  thou  hast  played  the  whore  with  i  he  A. 
23.  5.  she  doled  on  the  A.  her  neighbours,  12. 

9.  I  have  delivered  her  into  the  hand  uf  the  A. 
23.  I  will  briii^  all  the  ,A.  against  tlieo 

Hos.  12.  1.  they  make  a  covenant  with  the  .\. 

ASYNCRITUS. 
Rom.  16. 14.  salute  .\.  Phiesou,  Uermas,  PalrobOi 

ATAU. 

Gen.  50. 10.  they  came  to  the  threshing-floor  of  A. 

11.  when  inhabitants  saw  mourning  in  floor  of  A. 

ATHALIAH. 

2  A'(nff«8.26.  Ahaz.ah's  mother  was  A.2  CAr.22.a. 

II.  I.  A.  destroyed  the  seed  royal,  2  CAion.  22.  Itt 

2.  Jehosbeba  hid  Joash  from  A.  2  Chron.  22.  II, 

20.lhey«h'w  A.  with  Ihesword,  2  CAro».2;i.  21.     ■ 

1  Chron.  8.  20.  of  Benjamin,  Slnhariah  and  A. 

2  Chron.  24.  7.  the  sons  of  A.  that  wicked  woman 
Ezra  8.  7.  Jeshaiah  son  of  .-V  with  him  70  male* 

ATHENIANS. 
.'lets  17.21.  .\.  spent  their  time  in  telling  or  hearing 

ATHENS. 
Acts  17. 15.  they  conducted  and  brouglit  Paul  to  A. 

10.  now  while  Paul  waited  for  them  at  A. 

22.  ye  men  of  A.  I  perceive  ye  are  superetitiou* 
18. 1.  Paul  departed  from  .\.  and  came  lo  Corinth 
I  7'A<;is.3.I.wo  thousht  it  good  to  bo  left  at  A.  alono 

.\IU.\IAA. 
Acts  14.  25.  from  Perpa  thev  went  down  into  A 

AVE. v. 
Ezrk  30.17.theyoungmenof  A.  shall  fall  by  sword 
Hos.  10.  8.  the  high  places  of  A.  the  sin  of  Israel 
Amos  1.  5.  I  will  cut  off  the  inh.ibitanl  from  A. 

AU(;i;sTu.s. 

/,«*«  2. 1.  there  went  out  a  decree  from  Cesar  A. 
.'/r/.s-  25.  21.  when  Paul  had  appealed  to  A.  25. 
27.  1.  to  one  Julius,  a  centurion  of  .\.  band 
AZARIAH. 

1  Kin^Ts  4.  2.  .\.  was  one  of  Solomon's  prince« 
5.  .\.  the  son  onVathan  was  over  the  officer* 

2  Kini'S  14.21.  t1ie  people  of  Jmlah  made  A.  kinj 
1  CArin.  2.  8.  A.  son  of  Ethan  ||  38.  Jehu  begat  A 

3.  12.  .Amaziah  his  son,  .\.  his  son 
0.  9.  Ahimnaz  becat  A.  ||  HI.  Johanan  begat  A 
13.  Hilkiah  begat  A.  ||  36.  Zephaniah  begat  A 


Proper  Nam«.]     BAA 

SCAron. 15. 1.  Spirit  of  God  came  on  A. son  of  Oded 
21.  2.  A.  son  uf  Jehoshapliat  ||  ^-i.  b.  of  Jehorain 
23.  1.  A.  son  of  Jehoram,  and  A.  son  of  Obed 
2t).  17.  A.  llie  priest  went  in  after  him,  20. 

Ezra  7   1.  the  son  of  A.  tlie  son  of  Hilkiah,  3. 

JWj.  3.  23.  A.  the  son  of  Maaseiah  repaired 
7.  7.  Nehemiah,  A.  came  up  with  Zerubbabe! 
b.  7.  A.  caused  the  people  to  understand  the  law 
10.  2.  those  that  sealed  were  A.  Jeremiah 

Jcr.4'i.  2.  A.  and  all  the  proud  men  spake,  saying 

Dan.  l.O.of  the  children  of  Judah  was  Daniel,  A. 

7.  he  gave  to  A.  the  name  of  Abed-nego 
2.  17  Uien  Daniel  made  the  thing  known  to  A. 
AZEKAH. 

Josh.  10. 11.  Lord  cast  down  stones  on  them  to  A. 

Jer.  34.  7  the  king  of  liabylon  fought  against  A. 

B. 


BAAL. 

JV'u/«.22. 41.  brought  Balaam  to  high  places  of  B 
Jaig.  2.  13.  Israel  served  B.  and  Ashtaroth 
6.  ~5.  the  Lord  said,  throw  down  the  altar  of  B. 
31.  will  ye  plead  for  B.l  will  ye  save  him? 

1  Kings  16.31. .\hab  served  B.  and  worshipped  him 

18.  21.  but  if  B.  be  Gud,  then  follow  him 

2tj.  called  on  name  of  B.  saying,  O  B.  hear  us 
40.  take  the  prophets  of  B.  let  none  escape 

19.  18.  yet  1  have  left  seven  thousand  in  Israel, 
knees  which  have  not  bowed  to  B.  Rom.  11.4. 

2  Kings  10. 19. 1  have  a  great  sacrifice  to  do  to  B. 
20.  Jehu  said,  proclaim  a  solemn  assembly  forB. 
2d.  thus  Jehu  destroyed  B.  out  of  Israel 

11.  18.  the  people  brake  down  the  house  of  B. 
17.  It),  they  worshi|)ped  hostof  heaven,  served  B. 
21.3.Man:isseh  reared  up  aliars  for  B.  made  grove 
23.  4.  to  bring  forth  all  the  vessels  made  for  B. 

5.  he  put  down  them  tlial  burnt  incense  to  B. 
Jer.  2.  8.  and  the  prophets  prophesied  by  B. 
7. 9.  will  ye  burn  incense  to  B.?  11.  13, 17.  |  32.29. 

12.  16.  as  they  taught  my  people  to  swear  by  B. 
I'J.  5.  they  have  built  tlie  high  places  of  B.  to  burn 

their  sons  with  fire  for  burnt-oflTerings  to  B. 

23.  13.  they  prophesied  in  B.  and  caused  Israel  en 
27.as  Uieir  fathers  have  forgotten  my  name  for  B. 

//ui. 2.8. silver  and  gold  which  they  prepared  for  B. 

13.  1.  but  when  Ephraim  ollended  in  B.  he  died 
Znph.  1.  4.  and  I  will  cut  otFlhe  remnant  of  B. 

BAAL-BEKITH. 
Judir.  6. 33.  the  children  of  Israel  made  B.  their  god 

BAAL-HAMON. 
Cant.  3.  11.  Solomon  had  a  vineyard  at  B. 

BAALI. 
Has.  2.  16.  and  thou  shalt  call  me  no  more  B. 

BAALIM. 
Judg.  2.  11.  Israel  served  B.  3.  7.  ]  10.  6,  10. 
8.33. 1  he  children  of  Israel  wenta  whoring  after  B. 
1  Sam.  7.  4.  the  children  of  Israel  put  away  B. 

1  Kings  18.  18.  and  thou  hast  folowed  B. 

2  Chrun.  17.  3.  Jehushaphal  sought  nut  to  B. 

24.  7.  all  the  dedicate  things  did  thuy  bestow  on  B. 
28.  2.  Ahaz  made  also  molten  images  for  B. 

33.  3.  Manasseh  reared  up  altars  for  B. 

34.  4.  and  they  brake  down  the  altars  of  B. 
Jer.  2.  23.  how  canst  say,  I  have  not  gone  after  B. 

9. 14.  have  walked  after  B.  which  fathers  taught 
Hos.  2.  13.  I  will  visit  on  her  the  days  of  B. 
17.  for  I  will  take  awav  the  names  of  B. 
BAALIS. 
J(T.40.14.  B.  king  of  .Ammonites  hath  sent  Ishmael 

BAAL-.MEON. 
Ezek.  2.5.  9.  tlie  glory  of  Beth-jeshimoth,  B. 

BAAL-fEOR. 
JVup/i.2.}.3.  Israel  joined  himselftoB.  and  theanger 
of  ihe  Lord  was  kindled,  KsaMOG.  28.  Hos. 9.10. 

5.  siny  the  men  that  were  joined  unto  B. 
Deut.  4. 3.  have  seen  what  Lord  ilid  because  of  B. 

BAAL-PERAZIM. 
2  Sam.5.20.  David  called  Ihe  place  B.  1  Chr.  14. 11. 

BAAb-SHALlSHA. 
2  Kiws  4.  42.  and  there  came  a  man  from  B. 

BAAL-TAM.AR. 
Juda-.  20.  33.  Israel  put  thom.solves  in  array  at  B. 

BAAL-ZEBUB. 
2  Kini's  1.  2.  inquire  of  B.  the  God  of  Ekron,  16. 

BAAL-ZEPHOX. 
Exoi.\i.~.  and  encam() over  against  B.JVum.33.7. 

BAANAU. 
2  Sam.  4.  6.  Rechab  and  B.  his  brother  escaped 
23.29.  Helel)  the  son  of  B.  one  of  the  mighty  men 
1  Kings  4.  16.  B.  the  son  of  Hushai  was  in  Asher 
Ezra  2.  2.  B.  came  to  Jerus-.ilem,  JVeA.  7.  7. 
JWA.10.27.Malluth,  Harim,  B.  sealed  the  covenant 

BAASIIA. 
lA'/nj-^-l.T.lG.there  was  war  between  AeaandB.32. 
)9.  come,  break  thy  league  with  B.  2  Chrun.  16. 3. 
27.  B.  son  of  Ahijah  conspired  ajainit  him 
]6. 1 .  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  Jehu  against  B. 

6.  B.  ilept  with  hi*  faihsrs  and  was  buried 

723 


BAB 

1  Kin^s  16. 11.  Zimri  slew  all  the  house  of  B.  12. 

21.  22.  1  will  make  Ahab's  house  like  the  house 

of  B.  the  son  of  Ahijah,  2  Kings  "J.  9. 

./er.  41.  9.  the  pit  which  Asa  made  for  i'uat  of  B. 

BABEL. 
Oen.  10.  10.  the  beginning  of  his  kingdom  was  B. 

11.  9.  therefore  is  the  name  of  it  called  B. 
£zeA.23.tl7.the  children  of  B.  came  to  iier  into  bed 

BABYLON. 
Gfn.  10. 1 10.  the  beginning  of  his  kingdom  was  B. 
■2Kinffsii.30.  the  men  of  B.  made  Succoth-benoth 

25.  28.  above  kings  that  were  in  B.  Jer.  5^32. 
2CAr.  32.  31.  the  ambassadors  of  the  princes  of  B. 

36.  7.  he  put  the  vessels  in  his  temple  at  B. 
Ezra  5. 14.  those  did  Cyrus  take  out  of  temple  of  B. 

6.  1.  where  the  treasures  were  laid  up  in  B. 
Psal.  87.  4. 1  will  make  mention  of  Rahab  and  B. 

137.  1.  by  the  rivers  of  B.  there  we  sat  down 
Isa.  13.  1.  the  burden  of  B.  which  Isaiah  did  see 

19.  B.  shall  be  as  when  God  overthrew  Sodom 
21.  9.  B.  is  fallen,  Jer.  51.  8.  Rev.  14.  8.  |  18.  2. 
48.  14.  the  Lord  will  do  his  pleasure  on  B. 

20.  go  ye  forth  of  B.  flee  from  the  Chaldeans 
Jer.  20.  4.  he  shall  carry  them  captive  into  B. 

28.  4.  the  captives  of  Judah  that  went  into  B. 

29.  10.  after  70  years  be  accomplished  at  B. 
15.  the  Lord  hath  raised  us  up  prophets  in  B. 

40.  4.  if  it  seem  good  to  come  with  me  into  B. 

50.  1.  the  word  that  the  Lord  spake  against  B. 
8.  remove  out  of  the  midst  of  B.  and  go  forth 
13.  every  one  that  goeth  by  B.  shall  hiss 

23. how  is  B.  become  a  desolation  among  nations? 
29.  call  together  the  archers  against  B. 

34.  that  he  may  disquiet  the  inhabitants  of  B. 
45.  hear  the  counsel  of  the  Lord  agaftist  B. 

51.  6.  flee  out  of  the  midst  of  B.  and  deliver 

35.  the  violence  done  to  me  be  upon  B. 

42.  the  sea  is  corae  up  upon  B.  ght  is  covered 

48.  the  heaven  and  earth  shall  sing  for  B. 

49.  at  B.  shall  fall  the  slain  of  all  the  earth 
53.  though  B.  should  mount  up  to  heaven 
55.  because  the  Lord  hath  spoiled  B. 

58.  the  bro.id  walls  of  B.  shall  be  utterly  broken 
60.  wrote  all  the  evil  that  shall  come  on  B. 
64.  thus  shall  B.  sink,  and  shall  not  rise  from  evil 
£zeA.17. 16.  withhim  in  the  midst  of  B.  he  shall  die 
Dan.  4.  30.  is  not  this  great  B.  that  I  have  built  1 
Mat.  1.  17.  from  David  till  the  carrying  into  B. 
jicts  7.  43.  I  will  carry  you  away  beyond  B. 

1  Pet.  5.  13.  the  church  at  B.  saluteth  you 

Wfu.  16.19.  great  B.  came  in  remembrance  before  G. 

17.  5.  B.  the  great,  the  mother  of  harlots 

18.  10.  saying,  alas,  alas,  that  great  city  B. 

21.  thus  shall  that  great  city  B.  be  thrown  down 
Sec  Daughter,  Province,  fVise  Men. 

From  BABYLON. 
2.K7Bn's20.14.from  a  fai  country /rom  B.  Isa.  39. 3. 
Ezra  7.  9.  on  first  day  began  he  to  go  u\>  from  B. 
6.  1.  of  them  that  went  up  with  mc  from  B. 
Isa.  14.  Si.  I  will  cut  off  from  B.  the  name 
Jer.  50.  16.  cut  off  the  sower /rom  B.  and  him  that 
51.  54.  a  sound  of  a  cry  Cometh  from  B. 
Zech.  6.  10.  take  of  them  which  are  come  from  B. 
iTiHO'o/ BABYLON. 

2  irinn-525.24.  serve  the  tin  oro/B.  Jer.  27.17.|40.9. 
Ezra  5. 12.  he  gave  them  into  the  hand  of  the  Icing 

of  B.  the  Chaldean,  Jer.  21.  7. 

I  22.  25. 

fsa.  14. 4.  take  up  this  proverb  against  king  of  B. 

Jer.2l.i.  wherewith  ye  fight  against  the  king  of  B. 

25.  11.  nations  shall  serve  the  king  of  B.  70  years 

12.  after  that  I  will  punish  the  king  of  B. 
27.8.  kingdoms  which -vill  notserve/tiniTo/B.13. 
28. 11.  so  will  I  breaK  the  yoke  of  the  king  of  B. 
29.  22.  whom  the  king  of  B.  roasted  in  the  fire 
34. 3.  thine  eyes  shall  behold  the  eyes  ofking  ofB. 

36.29.  king  ofB.  shall  certainly  come  and  destroy 
39.11.  Aj'no-  of  B. gave  charge  concerning  Jeremiah 

42.  11.  be  not  afraid  of  the  king  of  B. 

49.30.  king  of  B.  hath  taken  counsel  against  you 
.50.  17.  the  king  o/B.  hath  broken  his  bones 

Kzci.21.19.  that  sword  of  the  king  of  B.  may  come 
29.  18.  the  king  o/B.  caused  his  army  to  serve 

19.  I  will  give  Egypt  unto  the  king  o/B. 
30.24. 1  will  strengthen  the  arms  of  Aino- o/B.  25. 
32. 11.  sword  of  the  king  of  B.  shall  come  on  thee 

To  or  unto  BABYLON. 
2  Kings  20. 17.  shall  be  carried  to  B.  24.  15.  |  25. 
7,  13.  1  Chron.  9.  1.  2  CAron.  36.  6,  7, 
20.  Ezra  5.  12.  Isa.  39.  6.  .Jer.  27.  20. 
I  28.  3.  I  29.  1,  4.  I  40.  1,7. 
2  Chr.  33. 11.  took  Manaaseh  and  carried  him  to  B. 
36.  18.  the  treasures,  all  these  he  brought  to  B. 
Isa.  43.  14.  for  your  sake  I  have  sent  tn  B. 
.fer.  20.  6.  Pashur,  thou  shalt  come  to  B. 
34.  3.  Zedekiah,  thou  shalt  go  to  B. 
51.24. 1  will  render  U7i<«B.  II 61. when  comest^oB. 
E2eA.17.20.Iwill  bring  him  tu  B.  and  plead  with  him 
Mic.  4.  10.  the  daughter  of  Zion  shall  go  to  B. 
Mat.  1. 11.  about  ths  time  thoy  were  carried  to  B. 


BAR 

BABYLONIANS. 
Ezck.  23.  15.  after  the  manner  of  the  B.  of  Chaldo* 

17.  the  B  came  to  her  into  the  bed  of  love 

BABYLONISH. 
Josh.  7.  21  Achan  saw  a  goodly  B.  garment 

BACA. 
Psal. 8i.G.  who  passing  through  the  valley  of  B. 

UAIIURIM. 

2  Sam.  3. 16.  went  along  weei)ing  behind  licr  to  B 

16.5.  when  David  came  to  B.  Shiniei  came  out 

17.  18.  and  they  came  to  a  man's  house  in  B. 

19.  16.  Shirmei  a  Benjamite  of  B.  1  Kings  2.  8. 

BAJITH. 
Isa.  15. 2.  he  is  gone  up  to  B.  and  to  Dibon  to  ween 

BALAAM. 
jV«m.22.5.Balak  sent  messengers  toB.  son  ofBeor 
9.  God  came  to  B.  and  said,  what  men  are  these? 
14.  they  said,  B.  refuseth  to  come  with  us 
25.  the  ass  crushed  B.  foot  against  the  wall 
31.  then  the  Lord  opened  the  eyes  of  B. 
35.  so  U.  went  with  the  jirinces  of  Balak 

23.  4.  God  met  B.  and  said  unto  him,  11!. 
30.Biilak  did  as  B. had  said,  and  offered  a  bullock 

24.  2.  B.  lilt  up  his  eyes  and  saw  Itrael 
3.  B.  the  son  of  Beor  hath  said,  15. 

25.  B.  rose  up  and  returned  to  his  place 
31.  8.  B.  the  son  of  B.jor  thoy  slew.  Josh.  13.  22. 
16.  through  the  counsel  of  B.  to  commit  trcspaa* 
Deut.  23.  4.  hecau?c  they  hired  B.  JYcA.  13.  2. 

5.  the  Lord  thy  God  would  not  hearken  to  B. 
,Ios/i.  24.  9.  Balak  sent  and  called  B.  to  curse  you 
jVic.  6.  5.  remember  what  B.  answered  him 

2  Pe«.2.15.  following  the  way  uf  B.  the  sonofBosor 
Jude  11.  thoy  ran  greedily  after  the  error  of  B. 
Rev.  2.  14.  them  that  hold  the  doctrine  of  B. 

BALAK. 
JVi;7ri.22.4.  B.  was  king  of  the  Bloabites  at  that  time 
16.  thus  saith  B.  let  nothing  hinder  thee 

23.  2.  and  B.  did  as  Balaam  had  spoken,  30. 

7.  B.  king  of  Moab  hath  brought  m-e  from  Ar.Tin 

18.  rise  up,  B.  and  hear  ||  24. 10.  B.  anger  kindled 

24.  13.  if  I!,  would  give  mo  his  house  full  of  gold 
Josh.  24.  9.  then  B.  arose  and  warred  against  Israel 
Judg.  11.  25.  art  thou  any  thing  better  than  B.? 
jWic.6.5.reinember  wliatli.  king  ofMoab  consulted 
Rec.  2. 14.  who  taught  B.  to  cast  a  stumbling  block 

BAMAU. 
Ezek.  20.  29.  the  name  thereof  is  called  B. 

BARAl'.BAS. 

>/a«.27. 17. release B. 21.  Murklo.U.  Luke'23.lS. 

John  18.  40.  then  cried  tiiey  all  again,  saying,  not 

this  man  but  B.  now  B.  was  a  robber 

BARACHIAS. 

Mat.  23.  35.  to  the  blood  of  Zacharias,  son  of  B. 

BARAK. 
Judg.  4.  6.  Deborah  called  B.  ihe  son  of  Abinoam 
9.  Deborah  went  with  B.  ||  16.  B.  pursu'd  after 
5.  1.  then  sang  Deborah  and  B.  son  of  Abinoanj 

12.  arise  B.  and  lead  thy  captivity  captive 
IJcb.  11.  32.  the  time  would  fail  me  to  tell  of  B. 

BAR-JESUS. 
Acts  13.6.they  found  a  sorcerer  whose  name  was  B. 

BAR-JONA. 
Mat.  16. 17.  Jesus  .said,  blessed  art  thou,  Simon  B. 

BARNABAS. 
./?cJs4.36.  Joses  who  by  Aposlles  wassirnamed  B. 

11.  22.  that  B.  should  go  as  far  as  Antioch 

25.  then  departed  B.  to  Tarsus  tn  seek  Saul 
30.  they  sent  it  by  the  hands  of  B.  and  Saul 

12.  25.  B.  and  Saul  returned  from  Jerusalem 

13.  1.  at  Antioch  were  teachers,  as  B.  and  Saul 
2.  the  Holy  Ghost  said,  separate  me  B.  and  Saul 
.50.  Jews  raised  persicution,  against  Paul  and  B. 

14.  12.  they  called  B.  Jupiter;  Paul,  Mercurius 

15.  2.  Paul  and  B.  had  no  small  dissension 

12.  the  multitude  gave  nudience  to  B.  and  Pau. 
37.  B.  determined  to  take  with  them  John 

1  Cor.  9.  li.  or  I  only  and  B.  have  not  we  power 
Gal.  2.  1.  I  went  up  again  to  Jirusaletn  with  B. 

9.  gave  tn  me  and  B.  I  ho  right  hands  of  fellowshif 

13.  B.  carried  away  wiih  their  dissimulation 
Col.  4. 10.  Marcus,  sister's  son  to  B.  saluteth  you 

See  Saul,  Paul. 
BARSABAS. 
Acts  1.  23.  Joseph  called  R.  ||  15.  22.  Judas  B. 

BARTHOLOMEW. 
Mat.  10.  3.  ^1/arA  3.  1.''.  I.7,ke  6.  14.  Acts  J.  13. 

BARTIMEUS. 
Mark  10.  46.  blind  B.  sat  bv  the  way-side  beggmg 

BARUCH. 
.VfA.  3.  20.  B.  son  of  Zahbai  earnestly  repaired 

10.  6.  Ginncthon,  B.  scaled  ti.e  covenant 

11.  5.  Maaseiah  son  of  B.  dwelt  at  Jerusalem 
Jer.  32.  12.  I  gave  the  evidence  to  B.  16. 

36.  4.  then  Jeremiah  railed  B.  and  B.  wrote 

10.  then  read  B.  in  the  hook  in  the  house  of  Lord 

14.  B.  took  the  roll  in  his  hand  and  came 

26.  the  king  commanded  to  lake  B.  the  scribe 
43.  3.  but  B.  seltcth  thee  on  neainst  us 

6.  Johanan  took  Joremiah  and  B.  into  Egypt 


BEN 

Jer.  45.  1.  the  word  that  Jeremiah  spake  to  B. 
BARZILLAI. 

2  Sam.  17.27.  B.  of  Rogclim  brought  lieds  to  David 
19.  3-2.  B.  was  a  very  ag^.'d  man,  oven  fO  years  old 
39.  the  king  kissed  B.  and  blessed  him 
21.  8.  whom  she  brou^'ht  up  tor  Adritl  son  of  B. 
1  Kings  2.  7.  but  shew  kindness  to  the  sons  of  B. 
Ezra  2.  61.  the  children  of  B.  which  took  a  wife  of 
the  daughters  of  B.  llie  Gileariite,  jVt/i.  7.  63. 
BASHAN. 
^um.21.33.they  went  up  by  the  wayof  B.i)«it'.3.1. 
32.  33.  Og  king  of  B.  Dciit.  1.  4.  |  3.  1,  3,  11. 
I  4.  47.  I  2'.».  7.  Josh.  9.  10.  |  12.  4. 
13.30.  1  Kings  4.  19.  JVcA.9.-22. 
Psal.  13.5.  U.l  136.20. 
Deut.  3. 4.  kingd.  of  O?  in  B.  10.  Josh.  13. 12,30,31. 
4.  43.  and  Golan  in  B.  Jush.  20.  8.  |  21.  27. 

32.  14.  with  rams  of  the  breed  of  B.  and  goats 

33.  2-^.  of  Dan  he  .^aid,  Dan  shall  leap  from  B. 
Josh.  17.  1.  therefore  he  had  Gilead  and  B. 
i  Kings  10.  33.  even  Gilead  and  B.  Hazael  smote 

1  CAro;i.  6.  71.  to  the  sons  of  Gershon,  Golan  in  B. 
Psal.^2. 12.  strong  bulls  of  B.  have  beset  me  round 

68.  1.5.  the  hill  of  God  is  as  the  hill  of  B.  a  high 
hill,  as  the  hill  of  B.  why  leap  ye,  ye  high  hills'? 
22.  the  Lord  said  I  will  bring  again  from  B. 
Isa.  33.  9.  B.  and  Carmel  shake  oHf  their  fruits 
.Ter.  2i.  20.  cry,  lift  up  thy  voice  in  B.  and  cry 
50. 19.  Israel  shall  feed  on  Carmel  and  B. 
F.zek.30.  18.  all  oftlictn  fatlings  i.fB. 
Amos  4.  1.  hear  this  word,  ye  kine  of  B. 
Mic.7.  14.  lei  them  feed  in  B.  as  in  the  days  of  old 
J^ak.  1.  4.  B.  languished,  Oarinel  and  Lebanon 
See  Oaks. 
BASHEMATH. 
Gen.  2f).  34.  Esau  took  to  wife  B.  the  Hiltite 
36.  3.  B.  Ishmael's  daughter,  sister  of  Nebajoth 
BATH  SHRBA. 

2  Sam.  11.  3.  is  not  this  B.  daughter  of  Eliam? 
12.  24   and  David  comforted  B.  his  wife 

1  Kings  1. 1.5.  B.  went  to  the  king  into  the  chamber 

28.  then  the  king  said,  call  nie  B.  \\  31.  B.  bowed 

2.13.  Adonijah  came  to  B.  the  mother  of  Solomon 

1  Clron.3. 15.  Solomon,  of  B.  daughter  of  Ammiel 

BEDAN. 
]  Sum.  12.  II.  the  liord  sent  B.  and  delivered  you 
1  Chron.  7.  17.  and  the  snn^  of  Ulara,  B. 

BEELZEBUB. 
Mat.  10.  25.  if  they  have  called  the  master  B. 
12. 24.  this  fellow  doth  not  ca.stout  devils,  but  by 
B.  prince  of  devils,  .Mark  3.  22.  f.uhe  11.  15. 
27.  if  I  by  B.  cast  nut  devils,  f.ulce  11.  18,  19. 
BEER  SHEBA. 
Gen.  21.  14.  Hagar  wandered  in  wilderness  of  B". 
33.  and  Abraham  planted  a  grove  in  B. 
22. 19.  they  went  to  B.  Abraham  dwelt  at  E. 
26.  33.  therefore  the  name  of  the  city  is  B. 
28.  10.  Jacob  went  out  from  B.  toward  Haran 
46.  1.  Israel  took  his  journey  and  came  to  B. 
./osh.  19.  2.  Simeon  had  in  their  inheritance  B. 

1  Kings\9  3.FjVij«h  went  for  his  life  and  came  to  B. 
.Imo.f  5.  5.  seek  not  to  Beth-el,  and  pass  not  to  B. 

6.  14.  they  that  say,  the  manner  of  B.  liveth 
See  Dan. 
BEKAH. 
Ezod.  38.  26.  a  B.  for  each,  that  is  half  a  shekel 

BEL. 
/.5a.  46.  1.  B.  howeth  down,  Nebo  stoopeth 
.Ter.  .50.  2.  Babylon  i.s  taken,  B.  is  confounded 
51.  44.  and  I  will  punish  B.  in  Babylon,  will  bring 

BELIAL. 
Deut.  13.  13.  certair  children  of  R.  are  gone  out 
./iidg.  19.  22.  certain  sons  of  B.  besot  the  house 
20.  13.  deliver  i:«  the  men,  the  children  of  B. 
1. Sam. l.io.posni  not  thyhandmaid  a  daughter  of  B. 
2.  12.  now  the  sons  of  Eli  WQte  sons  of  B. 
10.27.ch'ldr.or  B.said,  howshall  this  man  save  us? 
25.17.  i.4«uchasnn  ofB.  man  cannot  speak  to  him 
25.  let  not  my  lord  regard  this  man  of  B. 
30  22.  then  an><\vered  the  men  of  B.  and  said 

2  .Sam.  16.  7.  come  out,  como  out,  thou  man  of  B 
20.1. there  happened  to  be  there  a  man  of  Fl.  Sheba 
23.6.  the  sons  of  B.  shall  be  as  thorns  thrust  away 

1  Kings  2l.l0.3et  two  sons  of  B.  before  Nalioth,13 
20kroii.  13. 7. gatli(!red  to.Ieroboam  children  of  B 

2  Cor.  6.  15.  what  concord  hath  ClKist  with  B.? 

BELSIIAZZAR. 
Dan.  5.  22.  thou,  O  B.  hast  not  hiimlilnd  thy  heart 
7. 1.  in  Uic  first  var  ofB.  ||  «.  1.  in  third  year  of  D. 

BELTESHAZZ.AR. 
Dan.  1.  7.  for  he  gavo  tn  Daniel  the  name  of  B. 
2.  20.  name  was  B.  4.  **,  9,  19.  I  5.  12.  I  10.  1. 

BRNAIAM. 
2.9<im.23.  22.  those  ihinL'*  did  B.  1  Chrnn.  11.  24 
1  Kings  1.  32.  tho  kin?  said,  call  me  Zadok  and  B. 
2.  35.  tho  king  put  B.  in  Joib's  room 
4.  4.  B.  the  son  of  Jehoiada  was  over  tlie  host 
'  Chron.  4.  3(5.  .lesimiel  nnJ  B.  sons  ofSimeon 
II.  31.  B.  the  Pir  ithonile,  a  mighty  man 
15.  18.  brethren  of  toconl  degro»,  B.  20.  ]  16.  5, 0. 
724 


BEN 

1  Chr.  27.  5.  the  third  captaia  for  third  month,  B. 

14.  the  captain  for  llie  eleventh  month,  B. 

2  Chron.  31.  13.  Mahath  and  B.  were  overseers 
Ezra  I0.25.B.sonolParo9h  ||  30.  ofPahalh-moab 

35.  B.  the  son  of  Bani  ||  43.  B.  son  of  Nebo 

Ezck.  11. 1.  among  whom  I  saw  Pelatiah  sun  of  B. 

13.  when  1  prophesied,  the  son  of  B.  died 

BEN-AMMI. 

Oen.  19.  38.  the  younger  called  his  name  B. 

IJEN-HADAD. 

1  Kings  15. 18.  Asa  sent  them  to  B.  2  Chron.  16. 2. 
20.  '.L  thus  eaith  B.  thy  silver  and  gold  is  mine 

Hi. n. was  drinking  himself  drunk  in  the  pavilions 

20.  B.  escaped  on  a  horse,  with  the  horsemen 
32.  thy  servant  B.  saith,  I  pray  thee,  let  iiic  live 

2  Kings  6.  24.  B.  went  up  and  besieged  Samaria 

8.  7.  B.  was  sick  |{  9.  thy  son  B.  hath  sent  ine 
13.  3.  he  delivered  Israel  into  the  hand  of  B. 

25.  Jehoash  took  again  out  of  the  hand  ofB. 

.Jer.  49.  27. 1  will  kindle  afire  in  the  wall  of  Damas- 
cus, it  shall  consume  the  palaces  of  B.  jJ;nu«  1.4. 
BENJAMIN. 

Gen.  35.  18.  but  his  father  called  him  B. 

24.  the  sons  of  Rachel,  Joseph  and  B.  46.  19. 

42.  3().  Joseph  is  not,  and  ye  will  take  B.  also 

43.  14.  he  may  send  away  your  brother  and  B. 
16.  and  when  Joseph  saw  B.  with  them,  29. 

34.  B.  mess  was  five  times  so  much  as  theirs 

44.  12.  and  the  cup  was  found  in  B.  sack 

45.  14.  he  fell  on  his  brother  B.  neck  and  wept 
40.  21.  the  sons  of  B.  JSTum.  26.  38,  41.  1  Chion. 

7.  6.  1  8.  1,  40.  I  9.  7.  JVc/j.  11.  7. 
49.  27.  B.  shall  ravin  as  a  wolf,  devour  tho  prey 
.ATiim.  1.  11.  the  prince  ofB.  was  .\bidan 
Deut.  27.  teJ.  these  shall  stand  to  ble.ss,  Joseph,  B. 

33.  12.  of  B.  Moses  said,  the  beloved  of  the  Lord 
./udg.  5.  14.  after  thee,  B.  among  thy  people 

19.  14.  they  were  by  Gibeah,  which  belongs  to  B. 

20.  20.  men  of  Israel  went  out  to  battle  against  B. 

35.  the  Lord  emote  B.  before  Israel 
46.  all  that  fell  that  day  ofB.  were  25,000  men 

21.1.  not  any  of  us  give  his  daughter  to  B.  18. 
16.  seeing  the  women  are  destroyed  out  ofB. 

1  Sam.  4.  12.  there  ran  a  man  of  B.  out  of  the  army 

9.  1.  there  was  a  man  ofB.  whose  name  was  Kisli 

10.  2.  by  Rachel's  sepulchre,  in  the  border  of  B. 

13.2.  in  Gibeah  ofB.  15,  10.  |  14.  16. 

2  Sam.  2.  15.  there  arose  by  number  twelve  ofB. 
3.  19.  and  Abner  also  spake  in  the  ears  of  B. 
19.  17.  there  were  a  thousand  men  of  B.  with  him 

21.  14.  the  bones  of  Saul  buried  they  in  B. 
I  Kings  4.  18.  Shimei  son  of  Elah,  ofBcer  in  B. 
1  Chron.  7.  10.  the  sons  of  Bilbao,  Jeush  and  B. 

21.  6.  Levi  and  B.  counted  he  not  among  them 
27.  21.  over  B.  was  Jaasiel  the  son  of  Abner 
2CAron.l7.17.ofB.  Eliada  a  mighty  man  of  valour 

34.  32.  caused  all  in  Jerusalem  and  B   to  stand 
JVcA.  3.  23.  after  him  repaired  B.  and  Hashub 
Psal.  68.  27.  there  is  little  B.  with  their  ruler 

80.2.  before  B.  and  Manasseh,  stir  up  thy  strength 
Jer.  37.  13.  when  Jeremiah  was  in  the  gate  ofB. 

.38.  7.  the  king  then  sitting  in  the  gate  ofB. 
F.zek.  48.  23.  B.  have  a  portion  ||  32.  one  gate  ofB. 
f/os.  5.  8.  cry  aloud  at  Beth-aven,  afler  thoe,  O  B. 
Obiid.  19.  possess  Ephraim,  B.  shall  possess  Gilead 
ZetA.  14.  10.  it  shall  bo  inhabited  from  B.  gate 
See  Children. 
BENJ.\MIi\'  with  Judah. 

Jtidg.  10. 9.  Atninon  passed  to  fight  .tudah  and  B. 
1  Kings  12.23.  sji.to  house  oUudah,  B.  2  Ch  r.  1 1 .3. 

1  Chr.  12. 16.  there  came  of  B.  and  Judah  to  David 

2  Chr.  II.  12.  Rohoboam  having  Judah  and  B. 

15.  2.  hear  ye  me,  Asa,  and  all  .Judah  and  B. 
8.  put  away  the  idols  out  ai .Judah  and  B. 

25.  5.  Amaziah  made  captains  thro'  .fndah  and  R. 

31.  1.  threw  down  the  altars  outof  ./iniaA  and  H. 
34.  9.  money  that  was  gathered  of  .Judah  and  B. 

F.zra  1.  5.  rose  up  chief  fathers  of  .Judah  and  B. 

4. 1.  when  the  adversaries  of  .Judah  and  B.  heard 
JWA.  11.  4.  at  Jerusalem  dwelt  of  J udnh  and  B. 

12.  34.  after  them  went  Judah,  B.  and  Jeremiah 
Ezck.  48.  '22.  between  the  border  of  .Judah  and  B. 

J.and  of  BEN ^  AMIS. 
./u(/^.21.21  .take  his  wife  and  go  into  ihv  land  of  1i. 

1  .Sam. 9. 16.  simd  thee  a  man  oulof  the  land  o/B. 

2  Chron.  15. 8.  put  away  idols  out  of  the  land  of  B. 
.Jer.  17.26.  como  from  land  of  K.  bringing  ofP'rings 

32.  44.  shall  take  witnesses  in  the  land  of  B. 

33.  13.  in  the  land  o/B.  shall  flocks  pass  neain 
37.  12.  Jeremiah  went  to  gci  inui  tho  land  o/B. 

rriAeo/ BENJAMIN. 
.Vi/m.l.37.ofthc«nAco/B.  wercMiumbered  35,400 
2.  22.  captain  of  tho  tribe  of  B.  Abidan,  10.  24. 
1.3.  9.  of  tho  tribe  of  B.  to  spy  the  land,  Palti 

34.  21.  of  th«  tribe  ofH.  to  divide,  Elidad 
Jonh.  18.  11.  the  lot  of  »he  tribe  of  B.  came  up 

21.  the  cities  of  the  tribe  of  B.  were  Jericho 

21.  4.  cities  to  the  Levitesontof  the  trihoof  Judah 
and  the  tribe  of  B.  17.  1  Chron.  0.  60, 05. 

Judg.ia.  12.  Iiraol  sent  ineo  thro"  all  th«  tribe  o/B. 


BET  [PkOPKR  NAJIB8 

1  Sam.  9. 21.1am  leastof  families  of  the  <riJc  o/B 
10.  20.  tribes  come  near,  the  tribe  ofB.  was  taken 
Jlcts  13.  21.  Siul  a  man  of  the  tribe  of  B. 
Horn.  II.  1.  I  am  of  the  tribe  ofB.  Phil.  3.  5. 
liev.  7.  8.  of  the  tribe  of  B.  were  sealed  12,000 

BENJAMITE. 
.Judg.  3. 15.  Ehud  a  B.  II  1  Sam.  9.  1  .Kish  a  B. 

1  .Sum.9.21.  Saul  answered  and  said,  am  notlaB.t 

2  .Sam.  16.  11.  Shimei  a  B.  19.  16.  1  Kings  2.  8. 
20.  1.  Sheba  a  B.  ||  E.Hh.  2.  5.  Mordecai  a  B. 

BENJAMITES. 
.Judg.  19.  10.  the  men  of  the  place  were  B. 
20.  35.  Israel  destroyed  of  the  B.  25,100. 

43.  thus  they  inclosed  the  B.  round  about 
1  Sam.  22.  7.  then  said  Saul,  hear  now.  ye  B. 
1  Chron.  27. 12.  the  ninth  captain  was  Abiezer  ofB 

BENONI. 
Gen.  35.  18.  departine  she  called  his  name  B. 

BEOR. 

Gen.  36. 32.  Bela  the  son  ofB.  reigned,  1  Chr.  1.  43 

J^um.  22.  5.  Balaam  the  son  of  B.  24.  3,  15.  |  31. 8 

Deut.  23.  4.  .Josh.  13.  22.  |  24.  9.  Mic.  6.  5 

BERACHAH. 

1  Chron.  12.  3.  B.  came  to  David  to  Ziklag 

2  Chron.  20.  26.  therefore  called  the  valley  ofB. 

BEREA. 
Mcts  17.10.  breth.  sent  Paul  and  Silas  by  night  to  B 

13.  the  Jews  heard  that  Paul  preached  at  B. 

20.  4.  Sopater  ofB.  accompanied  Paul  to  Asia 

BKRITH. 

Judg.  9.  40.  a  hold  of  the  house  of  their  God  B. 

BERNICE. 
^?f<,? 25.13.  Agrippa  and  B.  came  unto  Ce8area,23. 
26.  30.  the  king  rose  up,  the  governor  and  B. 

BESOR. 
1  Sam.30. 9.  sixhundred  men  came  to  the  brook  B 

BETHABARA. 
.Tohn  1.  28.  these  things  done  in  B.  beyond  Jordan 

BETHANY. 
Jirat.21. 17.  Jesus  went  into  B.  26.  6.  Mark  11.  1, 
11.  1  14.  3.  f.uke  19.  29.  .hhn  12.  1 
Mark  11.  12.  when  como  from  B.  he  was  hungry 
l.uke  24.  50.  he  led  them  out  as  far  as  to  B. 
.John  11.  1.  a  man  was  sick,  named  Laaarus  ofB 

BETH-AVEN. 
.Josh.  7.  2.  -sent  men  to  Ai,  which  is  beside  B. 
1  Sam.  14.  23.  and  the  battle  passed  over  to  B. 
Hus.  4. 15.  come  yenot  toGilgal,norgoye  up  toB 
5.  8.  cry  aloud  at  B.  after  thee,  O  Benjamin 
10.  5.  shall  fear,  because  of  the  calves  ofB. 
BETH-DIBLATHAIM. 
Jer.  48.  22.  judgment  is  come  upon  B. 

BETH-EL. 

Gen.  28.  19.  Jacoli  called  the  pl.ice  B.  3.5.  15. 

31. 13. 1  am  God  of  B.  where  tliou  vowedst  a  vow 

35.  1.  go  up  to  B.  3.  II  0.  so  Jacob  came  to  B. 

./(/.'A.  16.  2.  the  lotof  Jose|)h  goeth  from  B.  to  Lu« 

rjuda.  1.22.  the  house  of  Joseph  went  up  against  B. 

4.  5.  Deborah  dwelt  between  Rainah  and  B. 
21. 19.  in  a  place  which  is  on  the  north  side  ofB. 

1  .Sam.  7.  16.  ho  went  from  year  to  year  to  B. 
10. 3.  shall  meet  three  men  going  up  to  God  to  B. 
13.  2.  two  thousand  were  vi'ith  Saul  in  mount  B 
30.  27.  a  present  to  them  which  were  in  B. 
1  Kings  12.  29.  ho  set  the  one  calf  in  B.  33. 
13.  1.  behold,  there  came  a  man  of  God  to  B. 
4.  which  had  cried  against  the  altar  in  B.  32. 
11.  now  there  dwelt  an  old  prophet  in  B. 
2 .A'/n  D-.s- 2. 2.  tarry  here,  the  Lord  hath  sent  me  to  B 

23.  and  he  went  up  from  thence  unto  B. 
*  10.  29.  Jehu  departed  not  from  the  calves  in  B. 
17.  28.  one  of  the  priests  came  and  dwelt  in  B. 
23.  4.  he  burnt  them  and  carried  the  ashes  to  B 
15.  the  altar  at  B.  Josiah  brake  down 
17.  who  proclaimed  against  the  altar  ofB. 
19.  according  to  all  that  ho  had  done  in  R. 
F.zra  2.28.  the  men  ofB.  and  Ai  223,  JVVA.C  32. 
./rr.48.13.  as  the  house  of  Israel  was  ashamed  ofB. 
//ni. 10.15. so shallB.do  to  you  because  of  wickedn. 
12.  4.  he  found  him  in  B.  there  he  spake  with  lit 
Jimas  3.  14.  I  will  also  visit  the  altars  of  R. 
4.4.  come  to  B.  and  transgress,  multiply  iransgrei. 

5.  5.  seek  not  B.  for  B.  shall  come  to  nought 
6.  lest  there  be  none  to  quench  it  in  B. 

7.  13.  but  prophesy  not  acain  any  more  at  B. 

BETH-rLlTE. 
1  Kings  16.  34.  Hicl  the  R.  did  build  Jericho 

B  ETHER. 
Cant.  2.  17.  like  a  hnrt  on  the  mounlains  ofB. 

BETHESDA. 
John  5.  2.  there  is  a  imol  called  in  Hebrew  B. 

BETII-KZEL. 
Mie.  1.  II.  came  not  forth  In  the  mourning  ofB. 

BETH-RAMUL. 
Jer.  48.  23.  judgment  is  come  upon  B. 

BETH-HACCEREM. 
Jer.  6.  1.  O  Benjamin,  set  np  a  sign  of  fire  in  B. 

BETH-IIORON. 

.Josh.  10.  II.  going  down  to  B.  the  Lord  cast  stoned 

21.  K.  Ephraim  gave  Lcvile»  B.  1  ChroK.  6  6i. 


Propicr  Nambs.]     bit 

1  Sam.  i;t.  1^.  another  comoanv  turned  to  B. 

1  Kinffs  y.  17.  and  Solomon  liuill  B.  2  ChroH.8.5. 

1  CAroK.  7.  24.  his  daughter  Sherah  built  B. 

BETHLEHEM. 
Oe7i.  35.  19.  Rachel  died  in  the  way  lo  B.  48.  7. 
Josh.  19.  15.  Idalah  and  B.  cities  ol  Zehulun 
Judg.  12.  8.  after  him  Ibzan  of  B.  judged  Israel 
But/i  1.  19.  they  two  went  till  they  came  lo  B. 
2.4.  Boaz  came  from  B.  ||  4.  11.  be  famous  in  B. 

1  .Sam.  It).  4.  Samuel  camo  to  B.  ciders  trembled 
20.  6.  David  asked  leave  of  me  to  run  to  B.  28. 

2  5aw.  23.15.David  said,  O  that  one  woulit,give  me 

drink  of  water  of  tlio  well  of  B.  1  C/ir.  11. 17. 

1  Chron.  2.  51.  Salma  the  father  of  B.  54. 

4.  4.  the  first  born  of  Ephratah,  the  father  of  B 

2  Chron.  II.  6.  Kchoboam  built  B.  and  Etani 
Ezra  2.  21.  the  children  of  B.  JV,;A.  7.  26. 

Jer.  41.  17.  dwelt  in  habitation  of  Cliimhnm  by  B. 

Mot.  2. 1.  when  Jesus  was  born  in  B.  of  Judah,  5. 

6.  thou  B.  in  the  land  of  Judah,  art  not  the  least 

16.  Herod  slew  all  the  children  that  were  in  B. 

Luke  2.  4.  Joseph  went  up  from  Galilee  to  B. 

15.  let  us  now  go  to  B.  and  see  this  thing 
John  7.  42.  Christ  cometh  out  of  the  town  of  B. 

BETH-LEHEM-EPHRATAH. 
Mic.  5.  2.  thou  B.-Ephratah,  tliough  thou  be  little 

BETH-LEHEM-JUDAH. 

Judg-.  17.  7.  a  Levite  of  B.  went  to  sojourn,  8,  9. 

9.  1.  a  Levite  took  him  a  concubine  out  of  B. 

18.  we  are  passing  from  B.  and  I  went  to  B. 

Ruth  1.  I.  Elimelech  of  B.  went  to  sojourn 

1  Sam.  17.  12.  Davidson  of  an  Ephrathile  of  B. 

BETH-LEIIEMITE. 
1  Sam.  16.  1.  Jesse  the  B.  18.  |  17.  58. 
2Sam.21.19.Elhanan  the  B.slew  Goliath's  brother 

BETH-PEOR. 
Dcut.  3. 20.  we  abode  in  the  valley  over-against  B. 
4.  46.  the  statuies  Moses  spake  over-against  B. 
34.6.  he  buried  Moses  in  a  valley  over-against  B. 

BETH-PHAGE. 
J»/a£.21.1.whencoinp  to  B.  Mark  W.l.Luke  19.29. 

BETHSAinA. 
Mat.  11.  21.  woe  unio  thee  B.  r.uke  10.  13. 
Mark  6.  45.  he  constrained  his  disciples  togoto  B. 
8.  22.  cometh  to  B.  they  bring  a  blind  man  to  him 
I.uke  9.  10.  he  went  into  a  desert  bKlongiiig  to  B 
John  1.  44.  now  Philip  wns  of  B.  12.  21. 

BETH-SIl.AN. 
l.?am.31.I0.fiistenedSHurBb..dvtothewaIlof  B. 

BETH-SHEMESH. 
Jdsh.  15.  10.  the  border  of  Judah  went  down  to  B. 
19.  22.  Issachar's  coast  reachelh  to  B. 
38.  Beth-anath  and  B.  cities  of  Naphtali 
21. 16.  Judah  gave  to  Leviies  B.  with  her  suburbs 
Judg.  1.  33.  did  not  drive  out  the  inhabitants  of  B. 
•  1  .Sam.  6.  9.  if  it  goelh  up  by  the  way  of  B. 
12.  the  kine  took  the  str:iiglit  way  to  B. 
19.  he  smote  the  men  of  B.  because  they  looked 

1  Kings  4.  9.  the  son  of  Dekar  was  in  B.  an  officer 

2  Kings  14.  11.  kings  of  Judah  and  Israel  Inoked 

one  another  in  the  face  at  B.  2  Chron.  25.  21. 
2  Chron.  28.  18.  the  Philistines  had  taken  B. 
Jer.  43.  13.  he  shall  break  the  images  of  B. 

BETHUEL. 
Opv.  22.  22.  behold,  Milcah  bare  to  Nahor,  B. 

23.  B.  bpjat  Rebeknh,  24.  15.  |  25.  20. 
24.  24.  she  said,  I  am  the  daughter  of  B.  47. 
23.  2.  go  to  the  house  of  B.  thy  molher'.s  father 

BEIJLAH. 
Zs-o.  62. 4.  call  thy  land  B.  for  Ld.  delighteth  in  thee 

"BEZALEEL. 

Etod.  31.  2.  I  have  called  by  name  B.son  of  llri 

of  thetribeof  JndMh,3.5.30.  1  Chron. '2.  20. 

36.  1.  then  wrought  B.  ||  37.  1.  B.  made  the  ark 

38.  22.  B.  made  all  the  liord  commanded  Moses 

5  Chron.  1.  5.  the  brazen  altar  that  B.   had  made 

Ezra  10.  30.  the  sons  of  Pahath-moab,  B.  Biiinui 

BEZEK. 
.^(/(iir.  1.4.  they  slew  of  ihem  in  B.  10,000  men,  5. 

1  Sam.  11.  8.  Saul  numbered  Israel  in  B.  300,006 

BICHRI. 

2  .<fam.  20.  1.  Sheba  the  son  of  B.  a  Benjamito 
2.  so  every  man  followed  Sheba  tire  son  of  B. 
6.  now  shall  the  son  of  B.  dn  us  more  harm 
22.  Ihev  cut  off  the  hond  of  Sheba  the  son  of  B. 

BIDKAR. 

2A'(n5'.«  9. 25.  Jehu  sh id  to  B.  his  captain,  take  up 

BIGTHAN.  I 

J^«fA.2.21.  B.  sought  to  lav  hnml  on  kine  Abasuerus 

6.  2.  that  Mordecai  hadtnld  of  B.  and  Teresh 

BILDAD. 

yo'.2.  11.  B.theShnhite,  8.  1.|  18.  l.|25. 1.  142.9. 

BILHAH. 
^'71 .29.29. Lahan  gave  to  Rachel  B.lo  be  her  maid 
30.  3.  behold  mv  mnid  B.  so  in  unto  her,  4. 

fi  B.  conceived,  7.  ||  3.5.  22.  Reuben  lay  with  B. 
3.^.  05.  the  sons  of  B.  37.  2.  |  46.  25.  1  Chr.  7.  13. 
1  Chron.  4.  29.  Shimei.  his  sons  dwelt  at  B. 

BITHY>fI,A. 
Jiett  16.  7.  they  assaye'l  to  go  into  B.  but  Spirit 
723 


CAN 

1  Pet.  1. 1.  to  strangers  scattered  thro'  Aeia  and  B 

BLASTUS. 
.^cts  12.  20.  and  having  made  B.  their  friend 

BOANERGES. 
Mark  3. 17.  surnamed  them  B.  the  sons  of  thunder 

BOAZ. 
l.S'tH^s7.21.  the  left  pillar  called  B.  2  CAr.  3. 17. 

BOAZ. 

Ruth  2.  1. 'Naomi  had  a  kinsman,  his  name  wasB. 

19.  the  man's  name  with  whom  1  wrought,  is  B. 

3.2.  is  not  B.  of  our  kindred  |17.whcn  B.had  eaten 

4.  1.  then  went  B.  up  to  the  gate,  and  sat  down 

13.  80  B.  took  Ruth,  and  she  was  his  wife 

21.  B.  begat  Obed,  1  Chr.  2.  11, 12.  Mat.  1. 5. 
f^uke  3.  32.  Obed,  which  was  the  son  of  B. 

BOCniM. 
Judg.  2.  1.  an  angel  came  up  from  Gilgal  to  B. 
5.  and  they  called  the  name  of  that  place  B, 
BOSOR,  See  Balaam. 
BOZRAH. 
Gen.  36.  33.  Jobab  of  B.  reigned  in  his  stead 
Jsa.  34.  6.  for  the  Lord  hath  a  sacrifice  in  B. 
63.  1.  that  cometh  with  dyed  garments  from  B. 
Jer.  48.  24.  and  judgment  is  come  upon  B. 
49. 13.  have  sworn  that  B.  shall  become  desolation 

22.  and  he  shall  spread  his  wings  over  B. 
Jimos  1. 12.  which  siiall  devour  the  palaces  of  B. 

Mic.  2.  12.  put  them  together  .as  the  sheep  of  B. 

BUL. 
1  Kings  6.  38.  in  month  B.  the  house  was  finished 

BUZ. 
Oen.  22.  21.  Milcah  bare  to  Nahor  B.  and  Kemuel 
1  Chr.  5. 14   Jeshishai,  son  of  Jahdo,  the  son  of  B. 
Jer.  25.  23.  I  made  Dedan  and  B.  to  drink  the  cup 

BUZL 
Ezei-.l  .3.  word  came  to  Eze  k  iel  the  priest,  son  of  B. 

BUZITE. 
Job  32.  2.  Elihu  the  son  of  Barachel  the  B.  6. 


CAR 

Gen.  as.  1.  not  take  a  wife  of  the  daughters  of  C  & 

CANAAN. 
Exud.  15.  15.  the  inhabitants  ofC.  shall  melt 
Judg.  3.1.  as  had  not  known  all  the  wars  of  C. 

4.  2.  the  Lord  sold  them  lo  Jabin  king  of  C. 
23.  and  God  subdued  Jabin  the  king  of  C.  24. 

5.  19.  Ihcn  fought  the  kings  of  C.  in  Taanach 
I'^id.  100.  ."is.  tliey  sacrificed  to  'he  idols  of  C. 

135.  11.  who  siiiotc  all  the  kingdoms  of  C. 
/sa.19.18.  fiveciiiesin  Egypt  speak  language  of  C 
Zi'ph.  2.  5.  O  C.  I  will  even  destroy  thee 
Mat.  15.  22.  a  woman  of  C.  cried  to  Jesus,  sayin" 
Z-ando/ CANAAN.  " 

Gen.  1^  5.  went  forth  to  go  into  the  land  of  C. 

16.  3.  Abram  dwell  ten  years  in  the  land  of  C. 

17.  8.  I  will  give  thee  tho land  nf  C.  Lev.  25.  38. 

jVum.  34.  2.  Deut.  32.  49.  1  Chron. 
16.  18.  Psal.  105.  11. 
37.  1.  and  Jacob  dwelt  in  the  land  ofC. 
42.  5.  for  the  famine  was  in  the  land  of  C. 
7.  whence  come  ye?  they  said,  from  land  of  C. 
13.tliy  servantsarcsonsof  one  man  in  land  of  C. 
45.  17.  and  go,  gel  ye  up  unio  the  land  of  C. 
50.  13.  his  sons  carried  him  into  the  land  of  C. 
Lev.  14.  34.  when  yc  be  come  into  the  land  of  C 
which  I  gave  for  a  possession,  J^um.  34.  2. 

18.  3.  do  not  after  the  doings  of  the  land  of  C. 
^'■■—  13  ]7.  Moses  sent  them  to  spy  the  landofC 


CABUL. 

1  Kings  9. 13.  Hiram  called  them  the  land  of  C. 

CAIAPHAS. 
Mat.  26.  3.  the  high-priest  who  was  called  C. 

57.  they  led  Jesus  away  to  C.  the  high-priest 

John  11.49.  C.  said,  ye  know  nothing  at  all 

18.  14.  C.  was  he  that  gave  counsel  lo  the  Jews 

28.  led  Jesus  from  C.  to  the  hall  of  judgment 

See  Annas. 

CAIN. 

■Tosh.  15.  .57.  C.  and  Gibeah,  cities  of  Judah 

CAIN. 
Gen.  4.  2.  but  C.  was  a  tiller  of  the  ground 
5.  to  O.  and  his  offering  he  had  not  respect 
15. the  L..set  a  mark  on  C.lest  anyshould  kill  him 
25.  another  seed  instead  of  Abel  whom  C.  slew 
Heb.  11.4.  a  more  excellent  sacrifice  than  C. 
1  .fohn  3. 12.  not  as  C.  who  was  of  that  wicked  one 
Jude  11.  they  have  gone  in  the  way  of  C. 

CAINAN. 
Luke  3.  36.  which  was  the  son  of  C.  37. 
CALDEA,  See  Chaldea. 
CALEB. 
JVi(TO.13. 0.ofthe  tribe  of  Judah,  C  to  spy  the  land 
30.  and  C.  stilled  the  people  before  Moses 
14. 24. but  my  servant  Chaving  another  spii  it,  will 
I  bring  into  the  land,  30.  1  32. 12.  Deut.  I.  36. 
38.  but  Joshua  and  C.  lived  still,  26.  65. 
34.  19.  ofthetribeof  Judah,  C.todivide  the  land 
./o.<;A.  14. 13.  Joshua  gaveC.  Hebron  for  inheritanc 
15.  14.  C.  drove  thence  the  three  sons  of  Anak 
16.  C.  said,  he  that  smiteth  Kiijalh-sepher 
.Tudg.  1.  15.  and  C.  gave  her  the  upper  springs 
1  Sam.  25.  3.  Nabal  was  of  the  house  of  C. 
1  Chr.  2. 18.  and  C.  begat  children,  42.  50.  1 4. 15. 

CALEB. 
1  Sam.  30.  14.  on  the  south  of  C.  we  burnt  Zikla; 

CALEB-EPHRATAH. 
1  Chron.  2.  24.  after  that  Hrzron  was  dead  in  C. 

CALNEH. 
Gen.W.  10.  Babel  and  C.  in  the  land  of  Shinar 
.fimos  6.  2.  pass  ye  unto  C  from  thence  to  HematI 

CALNO. 
Asa.lO.O.not  C.  as  Carchemish  ?  Hamath  as  Arpad? 

CALVARY, 
Luke  23.  33.  when  come  to  the  place  called  C. 

CAMON. 
.Judg.  10.  5.  Jair  died,  and  was  buried  in  C. 

CANA. 

John  2   1.  there  was  a  marriage  in  C.  of  Galilee 

11.  this  beginning  of  miracles  did  Jesus  in  C. 

4.  46.  so  Jesus  came  again  into  C.  of  Galilee 

21.  2.  there  were  Thomas  and  Nathanael  of  C. 

CANAAN. 

Gen.  9.  18.  and  Ham  is  the  father  of  C. 

22.  Ham  the  father  of  C.  saw  the  nakedness 

25.  cursed  be  C.  I|  26.  C.  shall  be  his  servant,  27. 

10. 15.  C.  begat  Sidon  hie  first-born,  1  Chr.  1. 13. 


32.  32.  we  will  pass  over  armed  into  the  land  ofC. 
./ash.  5.  12.  they  did  eat  the  fruitof  the  iund  of  C. 
22.  11.  have  builtanaltar  over-against  Zand  o/C. 
24.  3.  I  led  him  through  all  tho  land  of  C. 
Ezek.je.  3.  thy  nativity  is  of  the  l,ntd  ofC. 
Jjcls  7.11.there  came  dearth  overall  ihe  landofC 
13.  19.  had  destroyed  seven  nations  in  land  of  C. 

CANAANITE,  .S. 
Gen.  12.  6.  and  the  C.  was  then  in  the  land,  13.  7. 
15.21.  the  Amcirites,  C.  Girgashiles  and  Jebusiles, 
F.xod.  3.8,  17.  I  23.23.  /Jeiit.7.  1.  |  20.  17. 
.fosh.  3. 10.  I  12.  8.  Judg.  3.  5.  Xeh.  9.  8. 
24.  3.  thou  shall  not  take  a  wife  of  the  C. 
34.  .'10.  to  make  me  lo  slink  amongst  the  C. 
38.  2.  Judah  saw  the  daughter  of  a  certain  C. 
Fiod.  23.  28.  I  will  drive  out  the  C.  33.  2.  |  34.  11. 
JV«7r<.21.3.  the  Lord  delivered  up  the  C.  JVeh.  9. 24. 
./ush.  17. 12.  butC.woiild  dwell  in  land,  .ludg.  1.27. 
18.  shall  drive  out  the  C.tho'  have  iron  chariots 
■7udg.  1.  1.  who  shall  go  U|i  again.'l  the  C.  first? 
9.  Judah  went  down  to  fight  against  the  C.  10. 
29.iieiiher  did  Ephraim  drive  out  theC.  inGezer 
33.  but  Naphtali  dwelt  among  the  C.  of  the  land 
1  Kings  9.  16.  Pharaoh  had  slain  Ihe  C.  in  Gezer 
/^zra  9.1. diing  according  to  the  abominations  of  C. 
0*0^7.20. captiv.  of  this  host  shall  possess  that  of  C. 
Z.ocA.  14.  21.  no  more  C.  in  the  hou-o  of  the  Lord 
Mat.  10.  4.  Simon  the  C.  Mark  3.  18. 

CANAAN  ITESS. 
1  CAron.2.  3.  werebnrntoJuiIahofShua  the  C. 

CANDACE. 
yicts  8.  27.  a  eunuch  of  rieat  niiihority  under  C. 

CAPERNAUM. 
Mat.  4. 13.  Jesus  leaving  Nazurclh,  dwelt  in  C. 
8.  5.  when  Jesus  was  entered  into  C.  there  came 
11.  23.  thou  O.  «hich  art  e.xalted,  Luke  10.  15. 
17.  24.  when  they  were  come  to  C.  they  that 
Mark  1.  21.  and  they  went  into  C.  he  taught,  2. 1. 
/Aike  4.  23.  whatsoever  we  have  hoard  done  in  C 
John  2.  12.  they  continued  not  many  daVs  in  C. 
4.  46.  was  a  nobleman  whose  son  was  sick  at  C. 

6.  17.  the  disciples  went  over  Ihe  sea  toward  C. 
24.  the  people  came  to  C.  seeking  for  JesuB 
59.  these  things  said  he,  as  he  taught  in  C. 

CAPHTOR. 
.Tf-r. 47. 4. v/W]  spoil  the  remnant  of  tlie  country  of  C 
.^mos  9.  7.  I  brought  the  Philistines  from  C. 

CAPPADOCIA. 
.Sets  2.  9.  the  dwellers  in  C.  we  hear  Ihom  speak 

1  Pet.  1. 1.  to  the  strangers  sCHilcred  ihro'  C.  Aeia 
CARCHEMISH. 

2  rAron.35.20.  Nechocameiip  to  fight  arninst  C 
/.?a.  in.  9.  is  notCalnoasC?  Hamtilh  as  Arpad? 
.rer.  46. 2.  which  was  by  the  river  Euiihratos  in  C. 

CARMEL.       • 
.Ush.lS.^^.C.  and  Ziph  in  theinhnrilnnce  of  Judsh 
1  .Sflm.  15.  12.  it  was  told  Samuel,  Paul  came  to  C. 
25.2.  Nabal's  possessions  were  in  C.  the  man  great 

7.  nothing  missing  all  ihe  while  they  were  inC. 
40.  David's  servants  were  come  to  .Abigail  to  C. 

1  Kings  18.  19.  gather  to  me  all  Israel  to  mount  C. 
42.  and  Elijah  went  up  to  the  top  of  C. 

2  Kings'i.  25.  Elisha  went  from  thence  to  mount  C.    < 
4.  25.  the  woman  of  Shunom  came  to  mount  C. 
19.  2;).  I  will  enter  into  the  lodgings  of  his  borders, 

and  into  the  forest  of  his  C.  fsa.  37.  24. 
2  Chron.  26.  10.  Uzziah  bad  vinp-dre«sers  in  C. 
C(tnJ. 7,5. thine  head  upon  thee  is  like  Chair  purpto 
Isa.  35.  2.  the  excellency  of  C.  and  Sharon 
.fer.  46.  13.  and  ns  C.  by  the  se:;,  sosh  ill  hecomn 
Imns  1.  2.  and  the  top  of  C.  shall  wither 
9. 3.  though  thoy  hide  themselves  in  the  top  of  C 


CHA 

Jtfic.7.14.  wliiclidwellsolitary inthe  midst ofC 

See   Rasiias. 

CARMELITE. 

lSam.30.5.Abi-.  wifeof  Nabal  C.  25am.  2.2.  |  3.3. 

2  Sam.  23.  3j.  Hezrai  C.  one  of  Duvid'ii  v.oriliius 

C.ARMI. 
Oen.  4G.  9.  the  sons  of  Reuben  ;  Ilczron,  and  C 
Josh.  7.  ).  Aclian  the  son  of  C.  18.  1  Ckrun.  2.  7, 
1  Chr.i.  1.  thesonsof  Jud.tli;  Pharez,  Uezron,  C. 

CARPUS. 
iTim.  4.  13.  the  cloke  that  I  left  witb  C.  bring 

CASIPHIA. 
JSzro  8.  17.  to  Iddo  the  cliief  at  the  place  C. 

CEDRO.V. 
Jokn  18. 1.  he  went  witb  di8ci|ilc3  over  the  biook  C. 

CE.\"CI1RKA. 
^cls  IP.  18.  Paul  having  shorn  his  head  in  C. 
Rum.  16. 1.  sisicr  Phebe  a  servanlof  church  at  C. 

CEPHAS. 
John  1.  42.  thou  ahalt  be  called  C.  a  stone 
1  Cor.  1.  12.  every  (jno  of  you  sailli,  I  am  of  C. 
3.  22.  whether  Paul,  or  Apullos,  or  C.  or  life 
9.  5.  and  nss  tlio  brethren  of  the  Lord,  and  C. 
15.  5.  that  he  was  seen  of  C.  iben  ol'the  twelve 
Gal.  2.  !).  James,  C.  and  John,  who  seemed  pillars 

CESAR. 
Mat.  22.  17.  tell  us,  is  it  lawful  to  give  tribute  to 
C.  or  not?  Mark  12.  14.  LuU  20.  22. 
21.  render  to  C.  the  things  that  arc  Cesar's,  and  to 
God  the  things  that  are  God's,  JUark  12. 17. 
iuAc  2.1. there  went  out  a  decree  from  C.Aumistus 
3.  1.  now  in  the  fifteenth  year  of  Tiberius  C. 
23.  2.  and  forbidding  to  give  tribute  to  C  saying 
Juhn  19.  12.  tlieJews  cried  out,  saying,  if  thou  let 
this  man  go,  thou  art  not  Cesar's  friend  : 
speakeih  against  C. 
J5.  the  priests  answered,  wc  have  no  king  but  C. 
Jints  11.  23.  came  to  pass  in  days  of  Claudius  C 

17.  7.  theiie  all  do  contrary  to  the  decrees  of  C. 
2.5.  8.  nor  against  C.  have  I  ofTended  any  thing 

11.  I  appeal  unto  C.  ||  21.  till  I  send  hi>n  to  C. 

26.  32.  set  at  l.berty,  if  he  had  not  appealed  to  C. 

27.  24.  fear  not,  thou  must  be  brought  before  C 
Z-t.  19.  1  w  as  constr.iined  to  appeal  to  C. 

Phil.  4.  22.  chiefly  I liev  that  lire  of  C.liousehold 

CESARRA. 
Mat.  16.  13.  Jesus  came  into  the  coasts  of  C. 
Mark  8.  27.  Jesus  went  out  into  the  towns  of  C. 
^ct.i  8.  40.  Philip  preached,  till  he  came  to  C. 

9.  30.  the  brethren  brought  Paul  down  to  C. 

10.  24.  ihe  morrow  after  Ihey  entered  into  C. 

11.  II.  Cornelius  sent  three  men  from  C.  to  mo 

12.  19.  Herod  went  down  from  Judea  to  C. 

18.  22.  w  li^.'n  ho  had  landed  at  C.  and  saluted 
21.  16.  there  went  with  us  of  the  disciples  of  C. 
23.  23.  make  ready  200  soldier.?  to  go  to  C. 

25.  1.  after  3  days  he  ascended  from  C.  to  Jeru.?. 

4.  Festus  answered,  Paul  should  be  kejit  at  C. 

CHALCOL. 
I  Kwirs  4.  31.  Solomon  was  wiser  thnn  C. 
1  Chr.  2.  G.  the  sons  of  Zerah  ;  Henian,  C.  and  Dara 

CHALDEA. 

Jer.  50.  10.  C.  shall  be  a  spoil,  saith  the  Lord 

51.  24.  1  will  render  loinbabiiantsof  C.  theirevil 

35.  mv  blooil  be  upon  the  inhabitants  of  C. 

F.i'k.  16.  20.  ha.st  multiplied  thy  fornication  to  C. 

23.  16.  she  sent  m'ssciisirH  to  them  into  C. 

CIIALDE.AN. 
F.tra  5. 12.  gave  them  intohnndof  Xcbuch.  the  C. 
Dan.  2.  JO.  that  asked  such  ihingn  at  any  C. 

CHALDEANS. 
Jnh  1.  17.  C.  made  out  three  bands,  fell  on  camel.i 
/.»(!.  23.  13.  the  land  of  C.  the  As-iyrinn  founded 
43.  1  I.  I  hruc  brought  down  all  the  C. 

47.  1.  there  is  no  throne,  O  daughter  of  the  C 

5.  eet  thee  into  darkness,  O  daughter  of  the  C. 

48.  14.  and  Ills  arm  shall  he  on  Ihe  C. 

20.  2<>  \i-  fiirth  of  Babylon,  flee  yo  from  the  C. 
Jer.  21.  4.  wherewith  ye  fight  against  the  C. 

9.  he  Ihn'.  fallelh  to  the  C.  he  shall  live,  38.  2. 
25.  12,  I  « ill  punish  the  land  of  O.  .50.  1,4.5. 

32.  5.  tho'  y^fisht  with  the  C  ye  shall  not  prosper 
24.  the  riiy  i<i  given  into  Ihe  hand  of  tho  C.  4.3. 
2fl.  the  C.  simil  come  and  set  fire  on  this  oily 

33.  5.  come  to  fisht  with  the  C.  but  to  fill  thein 
37.8.  tlirC.  shall  come  again  and  fight  ng.  the  city 

0.  nayiog,  the  C.  nhnll  surely  depart  from  us 

10.  tho'  ye  hiid  uniillen  the  whole  army  of  the  C 
H.  tlien  said  Jeremiah,  I  fall  not  away  to  ihe  C. 

38.  10.  am  afrnid  of  Jews  that  are  fallen  to  Ihe  C. 
23.  Ihev  shnll  brine  out  Ihy  rbildren  to  Ihe  C. 
'J9.  8.  C  biirni  king's  house,  and  houses  of  people 

40.  9.  Grdaliah  said,  fear  not  to  s.-rve  Ihe  C. 
10.  r  will  dwell  ut  Mizpnh,  lo  serve  Ibc  1^. 

41.  3.  Isbmael  slew  Ihe  C.  Ihni  were  nl  Mizpnh 
43.  3.  Biiriich  settcth  thee  obIo  deliver  lis  lo  C. 
30.  35.  a  sword  is  upon  the  C.  snilh  Ihe  Lord 

45.  Ihe  Lord  halh  piirpoxed  aeninsl  Ihe  V.. 
51.4.  thus  Hip  slain  shnll  fall  in  the  land  of  the  C. 
51  B.  but  \\v:  army  of  Iho  C.  pursued  Zodekiah 
7at 


COR 

F.zfk.  12.13.  I  will  bring  him  to  the  land  of  the  C. 
23.  14.  she  saw  the  imagesof  Ihe  C  jiourtrayed 
Dan.  1.  4.  they  might  teach  the  tongue  of  the  C. 

2.  2.  then  the  king  commanded  to  call  the  C. 

3.  8.  at  that  tiiue  certain  C.  accused  the  Jews 

4.  7.  then  came  in  the  C.  and  the  soothsayers 

5.  7.  Ihe  king  cried  aloud  to  bring  in  the  C. 

11.  whom  thy  father  made  master  of  the  C. 

9.  1.  Darius  made  king  over  the  realm  of  the  C. 
Hab.  1.  6.  lo,  I  raiso  up  the  C.  that  hasty  nation 
Acts  7.  4.  Abrahamcamcoutof  thelandof  theC. 

CHALDEES. 

2  Kings  24.2.Lor(l  sent  against  him  band.s  of  the  C. 

25.  4.  the  C.  were  against  the  city  round  about 

10.  the  army  of  the  C.  brake  down  the  walls 

26.  came  to  Egypt,  for  they  were  afraid  of  the  C. 

2  Chr.  36.  17.  he  brought  on  them  the  king  of  the  C. 

ha.  13.  19.  Babylon  the  beauty  of  C.  excellency 

See  Ur. 

CHARRAN. 

y?c(«7.2.Cod  appeared  bef.  .Abraham  dwelt  in  C.4. 

CHEBAR. 
Ezek.  1.  1.  by  river  of  C.  3. 1 3.  15,  23. 1  10.  15, 20. 

CHEMARIMS. 
Zeph.  1.  4.  I  will  cut  oir  lb<*iuime  of  the  C. 

CHEMOSH. 
J\''um.  21.  29.  thou  art  undone,  O  people  of  C. 
■Juilg.  11.  24.  wilt  not  thou  possess  what  C.  givelh? 
lAVn^sll.  7.  Solomon  built  a  high  plaee  for  C.  33. 
Jer.  48.  7.  and  C.  shall  go  forth  into  captivity 
13.  and  Moab  shall  be  ashamed  of  C.  as  Israel 
46.  woe  to  thee,  O  Moali,  people  of  C.  perisheth 
CHENANIAH. 
lCAr.l5.22.C.chief  of  the  Lcvitcs,  was  for6ong,27. 

CHEKETHIMS. 

Eiek.  25.  16.  behold,  I  will  cutoff  C.  and  destroy 

CHERETHITES. 

1  .5a>n.  30. 14.  made  an  invasion  on  the  south  of  C. 

2  Sam.  8.18.  Benaiah  the  son  of  Jehoiada  was  over 

theC.  and  Peletliites,20.23.  1  Ckron.  18.  17. 
Zeph.  2.5.  woe  unto  Ihe  nation  of  the  CO  Canaan 
CHERITII. 

1  Kinirs  17.  3.  and  hide  thyself  bv  the  brook  C. 

CHILIO.\,  5Vc  Maulo.n. 

CHILMAD. 

F.iek.  27.  23.  Ashur  and  C.  were  thy  merchants 

CHIMHAM. 

2  .'?nm.  19.  37.  Iliy  servant  C.  let  him  go  over,  38, 40. 
Jer.  41. J7.  they  dwelt  in  the  habitation  of  C. 

CHIOS. 
.Ids  20.  15.  we  came  next  day  over-against  C. 

CHISLEIJ. 
A"eA.l.l.in  the  month  C.  ||  Zcf/(.7.1.ninlh  month  C. 

CHITTIM. 
.Vi/Tn.  24. 24.  the  ships  shall  como  from  consis  of  C 
Isa.  23. 1.  from  the  land  of  C.  il  is  revealed  to  them 

12.  pass  over  lo  C.  there  shall  thou  have  no  rest 
.Jer.  2.  10.  for  pass  over  the  isles  of  C.  and  sec 
F.zek.  27. 6.  benches  of  ivory  brought  out  of  isle.^  C 
Van.  11.  30.  the  ships  of  C.  shall  come  against  him 

CHltJN. 
Amos  5.  26.  have  born  Moloch  and  (.^.  your  images 

CHLOE. 
1  Cor.  1.  11.  by  them  which  are  of  the  house  of  C. 

CHORAZIN. 
Mat.  11.  21. -woe  unio  thee  C.  I.vkr  10.  13. 

CHUSHAN-R4SHATHA1M. 
.Judg.  3.  8.  Lord  sold  Israel  into  the  hand  of  C. 

CHUZA. 
iMke  8.  3.  Joanna  wife  of  C.  ministered  unto  him 

CILICIA. 
Art.'!  6.  9.  they  of  C.  diapuiod  with  Stephen 
15.23.  the  brethren  whii-h  areoflhefientiles  in  C 
41.  he  went  through  C.  confirming  the  churches 
21. 39.  a  man  of  Tarsus,  a  ciiy  in  C.  22.  .3.  |  23.  34. 
27.  5.  when  we  had  sailed  over  the  sea  of  C. 
Gal.  1.  21.  I  came  into  the  regions  of  C. 

CLEOPAS. 
T.ukelA.  18.  one  of  ihem,  whose  name  was  C.  said 
.John  19.25.  Mary  Ihe  wife  of  C.  stood  by  the  cross 

COLOSSE. 
Col.  1.  2.  Paul  to  the  sninlH  and  brethren  at  C. 

COMAH. 
Jer.  22.21.  though  C.  M'erc  Ihe  signet  on  my  hand 
28.  is  this  man  C  a  despised,  broken  idol  7 
37.  1.  king  Zedckiah  reigned  instead  of  C. 

CORINTH. 
.tctf  18.  1.  afler  those  things,  Paul  came  to  C. 
19. 1.  it  came  to  pass  that  while  .A  polios  was  nt  C 

1  Cor.  1.2.  unto  Ihe  church  of  God  which  is  nlC  lo 

them  sanctified  inf'hrisi  Jesus,  2  Cnr.  1.1. 

2  Ccr.  1.  23.  lo  spare  voti  I  cnmenot  as  vet  lo  C 
2  Tim.  4.  2(1.  Ern^liis  aho.le  m  C.  Trophimus  nl 

CORINTHIAN.'^.  [Milelum 

.Orfu  18.  P.  many  of  the  C.  henrinff,  believed 
2  Cor.  6.  11.  O  ye  C  our  moiitl.  Is  open  unto  vou 

CORNELII'S. 
Arl.i  10.  1.  there  was  a  man  in  reBaren.rnllod  C. 
7.  Ihe  angel  which  spake  lo  C.  wns  dppnrled 
23.  C.  met  Polor,  and  foil  down  ot  hia  febt 


DAM      [Proper  Namis. 

Acts  10.  31.  the  angel  said,  C.  thy  prayer  is  heard 

COZBI. 
JVu  m.25.15.name  of  the  Midianitish  woman  was  C 
18.  they  have  beguiled  vou  in  the  matterof  C. 
CRE.-^CENS. 
2  Tim.  4.  10.  C.  is  departed  lo  Galatia,  Titu»  to 
CRETE.  [Dalmatia 

Acts '21.  7.  we  sailed  under  ('.  ||  13.  close  by  C, 
12.  attain  to  Phcnice,  which  is  a  haven  of  C. 
21. hearkened  lome,and  not  have  loi^sed  from  C. 
Tif. 1.5. for  this  cause  left  I  ihee  inC.  to  set  in  order 

CRETES. 
Acts  2.  11.  C.  we  hear  ihem  speak  in  our  tongue* 

CRETIANS. 
Tit.  1.12.  tlic  C.  are  always  liars,  evil  beasts 

CRISPL'S. 
Acts  18.8.  C.  chief  ruler  of  the  synagogue  believed 

1  Cor.  1.  14.  that  I  baptized  none  of  you  but  C. 

CUSH. 
Gen.  10.  6.  sons  of  Ham;  C.  Mizraim,  1  Chr.  1.  8. 
7.  the  sons  of  C.  Seba,  and  Havilali,  1  Chr.  1.  9. 
ha.  II.  11.  to  recover  the  remnant  left  from  C. 

CUSHAN. 
Hab.  3.  7.  I  saw  the  tenis  of  C.  in  aflliction 

CUSHI. 

iSnm.  18.  21.  C.tell  the  king  what  thou  hast  seen 

23.  Ahimaaz  ran  by  the  plain,  and  overran  C. 

./er.  30.  14.  all  princes  sent  the  son  of  C.  toBaru'-h 

Zeph.  1.1.  Ihe  word  come  to  Zephaniah  son  of  C. 

CYFRCS. 
Acts  4.  36.  Joscs  was  of  the  country  of  C. 
11.  19.  travelled  as  far  as  Phcnice  and  C. 
20.  some  of  them  were  men  of  C.  and  Cyreno 
13.  4.  and  from  SeleucJa  lliey  sniled  to  C. 
15.  39.  Barnabiis  took  Mark  and  sailed  lo  C. 
21.  3.  when  we  had  discovered  C  we  left  it 

16.  they  brought  with  him  one  Miiason  of  C. 
27.  4.  when  we  launched,  we  sailed  under  C. 

CYRENE. 
Mat.  27.  32.  found  a  mnn  of  C.  Simon  by  name 
Acts  2.  10.  and  in  the  parts  of  Libya  about  C. 
II.  20.  some  of  lliem-wcre  inenofCyprus  and  O 
13.  1.  Lucius  of  C.  was  in  the  church  at  Antiocb 

CVRENIAN. 
J1/aril5. 21.  compel  Simon  a  C.  lobear  hiscrosi 

CYRENIANS. 
Acts  6.  9.  is  called  the  svniigogue  of  the  C. 

CYRENIUS. 

/,u/i:c2.2.was  ma<le  when  C  was  governor  of  Syria 

CYRITS. 

2  CAron.  36.  22.  in  the  first  year  of  C.  kin?  of  Persia 

the  Lord  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  C.  F.zra  1.  I. 
23.  thus  snitli  C.  kine  of  Persia,  Ezra  1.  2. 
F.zra  1.  7.  C.  brought  forth  the  vessels,  8.  |  5. 14. 

3.  7.  according  to  the  guant  they  had  of  C. 

4.  3.  will  build  asC.  the  king  hath  commanded  u^ 
■5.  13.  C.  made  a  decree  lo  build  this  house,  17. 

Isn.  44.  28.  that  sailh  of  C.  he  is  my  shepherd 
45.  1.  thus  sailh  the  Lord  lo  his  anointed,  to  C. 

Dan.  1.21.  Daniel  continued  lo  the  first  year  of  C 
6.  2*.  Daniel  prospered  in  Ihe  reign  of  C. 
10. 1.  in  the  third  year  of  C.  a  thing  was  revealed 


D. 


PABBASHETH. 
Josh.  19. 11.  their  bonier  toward  sea  reached  to  D. 
,  DABERATH. 

.Tosh  19.  12.  and  then  goethouttoD.  nptojnphia 
1  Chron.  6.  72.  oul  of  Issichnr,  D.  with  hersuburbi 

DAG ON. 

.Judg.  16.  23.  10  offer  a  sacrifice  lo  D.  their  god 

1  Sam.  5.  2.  brought  the  ark  into  Ihe  house  of  D. 

,3.  D.  was  fallen  ||  4.  Iho  head  of  D.  was  cut  off 

7.  his  hand  is  sore  on  us,  and  on  D.  our  gi>d 

1  Chr.  10.  10.  fastened  Saul's  head  in  temple  of  O. 

DALMATIA. 

2  7'im.  4. 10.  Tiiusisdeimrted  to  D.  only  Luke  it 

DAMARIS. 
Acts  17.34.  and  a  woninii  nnmcd  T).  believed 

DAMASCUS. 
(?r».l5.2.  Ihe  steward  of  my  house  is  Eliezer  of  !>. 
2  Sam.  8.0.  David  put  garrisons  in  Syria  of  O.  and 
Syrians  became  servants  lo  David,  ICAr.  18.6. 
1  h'iii'irs  1 1 .  24.  Re/on  went  lo  I),  and  reiened  in  D. 
19.  1.5.  reliirn  on  Ihy  way  lo  tho  wilderness  of  D. 
'20.  31.  Ihoii  Khali  innke  sireo's  for  Ihee  in  D. 
2AVnir.«5.  l2.Hienot  Ahnnn.Pbarpnr,  rivers  of  D.? 
H.T.  Elisha  camelo  D.|il4.  28.  Jerob.  recovered  D. 
16.  9.  the  king  of  .Assyria  went  up  niraiiist  D. 
1(1.  king  .Ahiiz  saw  an  altar  thai  was  nt  D. 
ICAr.  IH.  5.  SvrinnsofD.  came  111  help  lladarezci 
2rAr.24.23.  se'nilliespoilofllieintolhekinpof  O 
2^.  .5.  carried  a  crenl  multlliiile  of  enplive*  toD 

23.  for  Alinz  sacrificed  to  Ihe  gods  of  D. 
Catil.  7.  4.  Lebanon,  whirh  lootelh  toward  D. 
/."«.  7.  8.  llm  bend  of  Svnn  is  D.  hen.l  of  D.  Rezin 
8.  4.  Ihe  riches  of  D.  ilmll  he  taken  nwny 
.10.  9.  for  ho  laith,  is  not  Samaria  as  D.^ 


PaoPER  Names.]     DAR 

ha.  17.  L  the  burden  of  D.  is  tnkei\  Jer  49.  23 
3.  and  the  kiiigduiii  shall  cease  from  O- 

Jer.  4'J.  ^4.  D.  is  waxed  feeble  and  turneth  to  flee 
27.  1  will  kindle  a  fire  in  the  wall  of  D 

Ezek.  27.  18.  D.  thy  merch.Tnt  in  wine  and  wool 

Amos  1.3.for  three  traiisgressions  of  1). and  for  four 
5.  I  will  break  also  the  bar  of  D.  and  cut  oti" 

3.  1'2.  and  that  dwell  in  D.  in  a  couch 
5.i7.will cause  you  logo  into  captivity  beyond  D. 

2.ech.  y.  1.  and  U.  shall  be  the  rest  thereof 
Acts  9.  2.  Saul  desired  of  high  priest  letters  lo  D. 
10.  there  was  a  disciple  at  D.  nnineil  Ananias 
I'J.  then  was  Saul  with  the  disciples  at  U. 

22.  Saul  confounded  the  Jews  who  dwelt  at  D. 
27.  declared  how  he  had  preached  boldly  at  D. 

22. 6.  as  I  was  come  nigh  to  D.  about  noon,  26.  12. 
10.  the  Lord  said  to  me,  arise,  and  go  into  D. 
Cor. 1 1. U2. in  D. governor  desirous  to  apprehend  me 
Qal.  1.  17.  but  1  returned  again  unto  1>. 

D.\N,  a  person, 
fren.  30.  6.  therefore  called  she  his  name  D. 
35.2.5.  snnofl5ilhah,D.||4().23.ofD.JV;um.26.42. 
4y.lb.U. shall  judge  his  people,  as  one  of  the  tribes 
17.  I),  shall  be  a  serpent  by  the  way,  an  adder 
A'H7n.l.l2.of  n.  Ahiezer  the  son  of  Amnii-shiuldai 
2.  25.  The  stiindafd  of  the  camp  of  D.  onnorthside 
31.  all  numbere*!  in  the  camp  of  D.  were  157,600 
7?eu<.33.  22.  of  D.  he  said,  D.  is  a  lion's  whelp 
.hsk.  19.  47.  after  the  name  of  D.  Jitdg.  16.  29. 
Judgr.  5.  17.  and  why  did  D.  remain  in  ships'! 
'3.  25.  the  Spirit  moved  him  in  the  camp  of  11. 
fr.ek.  48. 1.  a  portion  for  D.  ||  32.  one  gate  of  D. 
See  Children. 
Tribe  of  DAN. 
JEzod.31.6.  Aholiab  of  the  tribe  of  D.  .35.34.  \  38.23. 
Lei'.  24.  11.  daughter  of  Dibri,  of  the  tribe  of  1). 
A''um.  1.  .39.  numbered  of  the  tribe  of  D.  GJ,700 
13.  12.  of  tribe  o/D.  to  spy  the  lan<l,  Ainmiel 
?4.  22.  oi' tribe  of\).  to  divide  the  land,  Bakki 
Josh.  19.  40.  lot  came  out  for  the  tribe  of  D.  48. 
21.  5.  out  of  the  tribe  of  D.  lo  the  Leviles,  23. 
Ji«/^.18.30.were  priests  to  tribe  of  D.  till  captivity 

D.\N,  a  place. 
Ocn.  14.  14.  Abram  pursued  them  unto  D. 
Deut.3i.  1.  Lord  shewed  Moses  all  Gilead  untoD. 
Josh.  19.47.  tliey  called  Leshem,  D.  Judg.  18.29. 
Jadg.  20.  1.  from  D.  to  Beer-sheba,  1  Sam.  3.  20. 
2  Som.  3.  10.  I  17.  11.  |  24.  2,  15.  1  Kings 
4.  25.  1  Chron.  21.  2.  2  Cliron.  30.  5. 
1  Kin?s  12.29.other  calf  put  he  in  D.  2Kings  10.29. 
15.  20.  the  kingof  Syria  smoteD.  2  Cliron.  IG.  4. 
Jrr.  4.  15.  for  a  voice  declarcth  from  D. 
8.  10.  the  snoriing  of  horses  was  heard  from  D. 
Ezek.  27.  19.  D.  and  Javan  occupied  in  thy  fairs 
Amos  8.  14.  they  that  sav,  thy  God,  O  D.  liveth 

DANiEI,. 
J  Chr.  3.1.  David  had  D.  of  Abigail  the  Carmelitess 
Ezra  8.  2.  of  Ithamar,  D.  ||  JVek.  10.  6.  D.  sealed 
Ezek.  14.  14.  tho'  Xoab,  D.  and  Job  were  in  it,  20. 
2?.  3.  behold,  thou  art  wiser  than  D.  no  secret 
Dan.  I.  b.  D.of  Judah  ||  19.  none  was  found  like  D. 
7.  he  gave  to  D.  the  name  of  Beltei^hazzar 
17.DThad  understanding  in  all  visions  and  dreams 
£.  13.  sought  D.  to  be  slain  ||  16.  then  D.  went  in 
19.  the  secret  was  revealed  to  D.  in  a  vision 
46.  King  Nebuchadnezzar  worshipped  D. 

48.  then  the  king  made  D.  a  great  man 

49.  D.  sat  in  the  gate  ||  4.  8.  at  last  D.  came  in 

4.  19.  then  D.  was  astonished  for  one  hour 

5.  12.  dissolving  of  doubts  was  found  in  D. 
29.  and  lliey  clothed  D.  with  scarlet  and  put 

6.  2.  D.  was  first  ||  14.  king  set  his  heart  on  D. 
5.  wp  shall  not  find  occasion  against  this  D. 
XI.  these  men  found  D.  praying  before  his  God 
13.  n.  regardeth  notihoe,  O  king,  northe  decree 

23.  that  they  should  take  up  D.  out  of  the  den 
2i.  that  men  tremble  before  the  God  of  D. 

27.  who  hath  delivered  D.  from  power  of  the  lions 

28.  so  this  D.  prospered  in  the  rei?n  of  Darius 

7.  1.  D.  had  a  dream,  and  visions  of  his  head 
28.  as  for  me  D.  ||  10.  12.  he  said,  fear  not,  D. 

6.  1.  a  vision  appeared  to  me,  even  unto  me  D. 
12.  9.  he  said,  go  thy  way  D.  the  words  are  closed 
Mat.'H.  15.  whi'n  shall  see  abomination  of  desola- 
tion, spoken  of  bv  D.  the  prophet,  Mark  13.14. 
/  DANIEL. 
Dnn.l.  15.  /  D.  was  grieved  ||  8.  27.  /D.  fainted 

8.  15.  when  /,  even  I  D.  had  seen  the  vi.«ion 
9.2.  ID.  understood  by  hooks  the  number  of  years 
10.  2.  I  D.  was  mourning  throe  full  weeks 

7.  /  D.  alone  saw  the  vision  II  12.  5.  /  D.  looked 
O  DANIEL. 
Dai.  6.  W.  0  D.  servant  of  the  living  God 

9.  22.  O  D.  I  am  now  come  to  give  thee  skill 

10.  11.  he  said  tome,  O  D.  a  man  greatly  beloved 
12.  4.  O  D.  shut  up  the  words  and  seal  the  book 

DARIUS. 
Ezra  4.  5.  to  frustrate,  till  the  reign  of  D.  24. 

5.  5.  not  to  cease,  till  the  matter  came  to  D. 

6.  I.  tlien  D.  the  king  made  a  decree,  13. 

7Q7 


DAV 

F.zra  G.lS.tliis  house  was  finished  in  sixlli  year  of  D. 
.VcA.  12.  22.  also  the  priests  lo  the  reign  of  D. 
/)av.  5.  31.  D.  the  Midian  took  Ihe  kingdom 
0.  9.  wherefore  king  D.  signed  the  wrilmg 
25.  king  D.  wrote  to  all  people  and  nations 
9.  1.  ift  the  first  year  of  D.  the  Mede,  11.  1. 
Hag.  1.  1.  in  second  year  of  I).  15.  |  2.  10.  '/.(ch.X.I. 
Zec/i  7.  1.  in  fourth  year  of  D.  the  word  came 
DATHAN,  See  AniRAM. 
DAVID. 
Ruth  4.  22.  Jesse  beo;at  D.  Mat.  1.  6.  Luke  3.  31. 

1  Sam.  16. 13.  tho  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  D. 

1!'.  send  me  D.  thy  son  ||  21.  D.  came  to  Saul 

23.  D.  played  with  his  hand,  18.  10.  |  19.  9. 

17.  14.  D.  was  youngest  ||  15.  returned  from  Saul 

33.  and  D.  heard  the  words  of  Goliath 
28.  Eliab's  anger  was  kindled  against  D. 

38.  Saul  armed  D.  ||  42.  when  Goliath  saw  D. 
43.  the  Philistine  cursed  D.  by  his  gods 
50.  D.  prevailed  over  the  Philistine  with  a  sling 
57.a6D. returned  from  theslaughter  of  Philistines 

18.  1.  the  soul  of  Jonathan  was  knit  to  D. 
3.  then  Jonathan  and  D.  made  a  covenant 
5.  D.  went  out  whithersoever  Saul  sent  liiru 
7.  D.  hath  slain  his  ten  thousands,  29.  5. 

9.  Saul  eyed  D.  from  that  day  and  forward 
14.  D.  behaved  himself  wisely  in  all  his  ways 

16.  but  all  Israel  and  Judah  loved  D. 

24.  the  servants  said,  on  this  manner  spake  D. 

28.  Saul  saw  and  knew  that  the Ld.  was  with  D. 

29.  and  Saul  became  D's.  enemy  conlinually 

19.  1.  Saul  spake  to  bis  servants  to  kill  D. 

5.  wilt  thou  sin  against  innocent  blood  to  slay  D.? 

10.  Saul  sought  to  smite  D.  but  D.  escaped,  18. 
19.  D.is  at  Naioth  ||  22.where  are  Samuel  and  D.? 

20.6.D. asked  leave  of  me  to  run  to  Belh-lehem,28. 

17.  and  Jonathan  caused  D.  to  swear  again 
24.  D.  hid  hftnself  ||  25.  D.  place  was  emjuv,  27. 

34.  Jonathan  cat  not,  for  he  was  grieved  tor  D. 
41.  wept  one  with  another  till  D.  exceeded 

21.1.  Ahimelechwas  afraid  at  the  meeting  of  D. 

10.  D.  arose,  and  fled  to  Achisli  for  fear  of  Saul 

1 1.  is  not  this  D.  the  king  of  the  Ijyid?  29.  3. 
22.1. D. departed  and  escaped  to  the  cave  .Adullam 

3.  and  D.  went  thence  to  Mizpeh  of  Monb 
5.D.  departed  and  came  into  the  forest  of  Ilarelh 

14.  who  is  so  faithful  among  thy  servants  as  D.7 
17.  because  their  hand  also  is  with  D. 

23.  2.  therefore  D.  inquired  of  the  Lord,  4.  |  30.  8. 

2  Saw.  2.  1.  I  3.  19,22.  |  21.  1. 
5.  so  D.  and  his  men  went  to  Keilah  and  sought 

9.  D.  knew  that  Saul  practised  mischief 

15.  D.  was  in  the  wilderness  of  Ziph  in  a  wood 
24.  D.  and  his  men  were  in  wilderness  of  Maon 
28.Saul  returned  from  pursuing  after  D.and  went 

24.  1.  D.  is  in  the  wilderness  of  En-gedi 

5.  D.  heart  smote  him  ||  7.  D.  stayed  his  servants 

16.  Saul  said,  is  this  thy  voice,  my  son  D.7  26.  17. 
22.  D.  sware  unto  Saul  ||  25. 1.  D.  went  to  Paran 

25.  5.  D.  sent  out  ten  young  men  to  go  to  Nabal 
22.  so  and  more  al.^o  do  God  to  the  enemies  of  1). 

20.  1.  doth  not  D.  hide  himself  in  hill,Hachiiah7 
5.  and  D.  beheld  Ihe  place  where  Saul  lay 

'   12.  D.  took  the  spear  and  Ihe  cruse  of  water 

17.  Saul  knew  D.  voice  ||  21.  return,  my  son  D. 

27.  1.  D.  said,  I  shall  perish  by  the  hand  of  Saul 

4.  D.  was  fled  to  Gath  ||  8.  D.  invaded  Geshuritcs 

11.  saying,  so  did  D.  and  so  will  be  his  manner 

28.  17.  Lord  given  it  lo  thy  neiehbonr,  even  lo  D. 

29.  3.  is  not  this  D.?  ||  6.  then  Achish  called  D. 

30.  1.  when  D.  and  his  men  were  come  to  Ziklag 

5.  and  D.  two  wives  were  taken  captives 

10.  D.  pursued  {|  17.  smote  them  from  twilight 

18.  D.  recovered  all,  19.  1|  20.  D.  took  the  flocks 

2  Sam.  1.  11.  D.  took  hold  on  his  clothes  and  rent 

15.  D.  called  one  of  the  young  men,  and  said 
17.  D.  lamented  over  Saul  and  over  Jonathan 

2.  5.  D.  sent  messengers  to  men  of  Jabeshgilead 
10.  hut  the  house  of  Judah  followed  D. 

3.  1.  but  house  of  D.  waxed  stronger  and  stronger 
2.  unto  D.  were  sons  born  in  Hebron 

9.  except  as  Ld.  hath  sworn  to  D.  so  I  do  to  him 
17.  ye  sought  for  D.  in  times  past  to  he  king 
28.  D.  said,  I  and  my  kingdom  are  guiltless 

5.  1.  then  came  all  the  Iribes  of  Israel  to  D. 

6.  thinking,  D.  cannot  come  in  hither 

7.  nevertheless,  D.  took  the  strong-hold  of  Zion 

10.  D.  grew  great  ||  21.  D.  burnt  their  images 

12.  D.  perceived  the  Lord  had  established  him 
17.  D.  heard  of  it,  and  went  down  to  the  hold 

6.  2.  D.  went  to  bring  up  the  ark  of  God 

5.  D.  all  Israel  played  before  tho  Lord  .ind  said 
9.  and  D.  was  afraid  of  the  Lord  that  day 

14.  D.  danced  ||  15.  bo  D.  brought  up  the  ark 

7.  20.  what  can  D.  sav  more  totheel  ICAr.  17. 18. 

8.  1.  D.  smote  the  Philistines  H  3.  Iladadezer 

6.  Lord  preserved  D.  whithersoever  he  weni,  14. 

7.  D.  took  the  shields  of  gold,  1  Chron.  18.  7. 
13. D.  gat  him  a  name  1  1.1  D.  reign.,  ir;Ar.l8.14. 

15.  D.  reigned,  e.xecuud  judgment  to  his  people 


DAV 

2.SiTw.l0.  2.  D.  sent  to  comfort  Ilaniin,  lC/ir.l9.  3, 

3.  thinktst  thou  thai  D.dolh  honour  ihy  father,  in 

sending  comforters  to  thee'!  1  Citron.  19.  3 

18.  D.  slew  men  of /UO  chariots  of  the  Syrian* 

11.  3.  D.  Bci ;  and  inquired  after  the  woman 

6.  D.  sent  for  Uriah  ||  14.1).  wrote  a  letter  to  Joab 
27.  Ihe  thing  D.  hail  done  displeased  the  Lord 

12.  5.  D.  anger  was  kindled  against  the  man 
13.  D.  said,  I  have  sinned  against  the  Lord 
16.  1).  besought  God  for  the  child,  D.  fasted 

19.  1).  perceived  that  the  child  was  dead 
24.  and  D.  comforted  Batb-sheba  his  wife 

29.  1).  fought  against  Kabbah  and  took  it 

30.  their  king's  crown  was  set  on  D.  head 

13.  7.  I),  sent  to  Tamar  ||  30.  tidings  came  lo  D. 

15.  30.  D.  went  up  by  the  ascent  of  mount  Olivet 

16.  6.  Shimei  cast  stones  at  D.  ||  10.  curse  D. 

17.  1.  I  will  arise  and  pursue  after  D.  this  night 

16.  send  quickly  and  tell  1).  ||  22.  ilun  D.  aroso 
27.  I),  was  comelo  Mahanaim  ||  29.  honey  forD. 

18. 1.  D.  numbered  the  people  that  were  with  him 

24.  I),  sat  between  the  two  gales,  the  watchman 

19.  43.  we  have  also  more  right  in  D.  than  ye 

20.  1.  Slu'ba  said,  we  have  no  part  in  D. 

3.  and  D.  came  to  his  house  at  Jerusalem 

11'.  he  that  is  tor  D.  let  him  go  after  Joab 

91.  16.  Ish  benob  thought  to  have  slain  D. 

22.  51.  he  sheweth  mercy  unto  D.  Fsal.  IS.  50. 

23.  1.  the  last  words  of  D.  ||  15.  D.  longed  and  said 
8.  theniighty  men  whom  D.  had,  1  Chron.  11. 10. 

24. 10.  D.  heart  smote  him,  afrer  he  had  numbered 

25.  U.  built  there  an  altar  unio  ihe  Lord 

1  Kings  1.  11.  and  D.  our  Lord  knoweth  it  not 
2.  10.  D.  slept  with  his  fathers  ami  w.is  buried 
32.  slew  them,  my  father  D.  not  knowing  thereof 

44.  thou  knowest  whatthou  didst  to  D.my  father 
3. 14.  if  thou  wilt  walk  as  thy  faihur  D.  did  walk 
5.7.  who  hath  eiven  D.  a  wise  son  o\er  this  people 

8.  16.  I  chose  D.  to  be  over  my  people  Israel 

20.  I  am  risen  up  in  the  room  of  D.  mv  father 

9.  5.  as  I  promised  to  D.  |1  11.  38.  us  I  built  forD. 

11.  39.  I  will  for  this  ;:fHici  the  seed  of  D. 

12.  16.  what  portion  have  we  in  D.?  now  see  to 

thine  own  house  D.  2  Cliriin.  10.  16. 

1  Chron.  10. 14.  ihe  Lord  turned  the  kingdom  to  D 

11.  3.  D.  made  a  covenant  with  them  in  Ilebroo 

12.  18.  thine  are  we,  D.  then  D.  received  ihem 

21.  they  helped  D.  against  the  band,  of  rovera 

14.  17.  the  fame  of  D.  went  out  inio  all  lands 

15.  27.  D.  was  clothed  with  a  robe  of  fine  linen 

16.  1.  thf'ysetilieark  iiiihe  teiitD.  had  pitched 
43.  and  D.  returned  to  bless  his  house 

21.  21.  Oman  saw  D.  and  bowed  himself  to  D. 
23.  1.  so  when  D.  was  old  and  full  of  days 
29.10.  D.  blessed  Ihe  Lord  before  tho  congregation 

'iC/iron.  1.8.  thou  hast  shewed  great  mercy  unto  D 

34.  3.  he  began  to  seek  after  the  God  ot'D. 
F.zra  8.  2.  of  the  sons  of  D  Hattush  was  Ihe  chief 
.V(A.3.16.  to  the  place  over  against  sepulchres  of  D. 

12.36.  with  musical  in.struments  of  D.  man  of  God 
P.f«/.72.20.  prayers  of  D.  the  son  of  Jesse  are  ended 

80  .35.  I  will  iiot  lie  unto  D.  ||  49.  swarest  to  D. 

132. 1.  Lord, 'remember  D.  II  11.  hath  sworn  to  D 

17.  Ihere  will  I  make  the  horn  of  D.  to  bud 
Cant.  4.  4.  thy  neck  is  like  the  lower  of  D. 

fsa.  9.  7.  on  the  throne  of  D.  and  on  his  kingdonj 
29.  I.  woe  to  Ariel,  the  city  wljerc  D.  dwelt 
55.  3.  even  the  sure  mercies  of  D.  .lets  1.3.  34. 
■7er.  17.  25.  kings  and  princes  sitting  on  throne  ofD. 
23.  5.  I  will  raise  to  D.  a  righteous  branch 
33.  15.  I  will  cau.se  the  branch  to  grow  up  unto  D. 
17.  D.  shall  never  want  a  man  to  sit  on  the  thron« 
36.  30.  he  shall  have  none  to  sit  on  throne  of  D. 
.Imos  0.  5.  invent  instrumenls  of  music  like  D. 
9.11.  in  that  d;iv  will  (raise  up  the  tabernacle  of  D. 
that  is  fallen,  and  will  build  it.  Acts  1.5. 10. 
Zech.  12.  8.  the  feeble  shall  be  as  D.  and  D.  as  God 
Mat.  9.  27.  thou  son  of  D.  have  mercy,  1.5.2-2.  1 20. 
30,  31.  Mark  10.  47,  48.  Luke.  18.  .38,  39. 
12.3.  have  ye  not  road  what  D.dld  when  he  was  a 
hungered?  Mark  2.  25.  Lvke  6.  3. 
23.  the  people  said,  is  not  this  the  son  of  D.! 

21.  9.  saving,  Hosanna  to  the  son  of  I).  15. 

22.  42.  Christ  is  the  son  of  D.  Mark  12.  3.5. 

45.  if  D.  then  call  him  Lord,  how  is  he  his  soni 

Mark  12.  37.  Luke  20.  41,  44. 
Mark  ll.lO.blessed  bethekinidom  ol'oiir  fatherD. 
.John  7.  42.  that  Christ  cometh  of  the  seed  of  D. 
Acts  2.  29.  let  me  freely  speak  of  the  p.ilriirrh  D. 
34.  for  D.  is  not  ascended  into  the  heaveng 

13.  22.  he  raised  up  to  them  D.  to  he  their  king 
36.  for  n.  fell  on  sleep,  and  saw  rorruption 

Rom.1.3.  Christ,  made  of  the  seed  of  D.  2  7'im.2.8. 
4.  6.  even  .is  D.  also  describnth  tho  blessednegs 
Heb.  4.  7.  he  limiteth  a  certain  dav,  sayinj,  in  O. 
11.  32.  the  time  would  fail  me  to'iell  of  D. 
Rev.  3.  7.  hath  the  kev  of  D.  ||  5  5.  root  of  D.  23.1& 
See  City,  F.kthfr. 
DaysofV).KV\T). 

2  Sam.  21. 1.  there  was  a  famine  in  UiedayttJ  D 


DEL 

^Klngs'2^.days  o/D.drew  nigh  that  he  should  die 
ICAr.  7.  2.  whose  number  waa  in  the  days  of  D. 
A'eA.  12.  46.  in  tlie  days  ofD.  were  chicl'smgera 
jlcts  7.  45.  God  druve  out  unto  the  days  of  I). 
Hand  of  DAVID. 

1  Sam.  20. 16.  let  Lord  require  it  at  A.  o/D.  enemies 

2  Sam.3.  S.  have  not  delivered  thee  into  /tand  of  D. 
18.  by  hand  of  my  aervant  D.  I  will  save  Israel 

21.  22.  lell  by  the  hand  of  D.  1  Chron.  20.  8. 

House  of  DAVID. 

l$a7n.20.16.Jonathan  made  covenant  with  h.  of  D. 

2Sonj.3.1.war  between  the  Aouaec/ Saul  and  D.  6. 

7.  2G.  let  house  of  thy  Bi-rvant  D.  be  established 

1  Kings  12.  19.  so  Israel  rebelled  against  the /iou«« 

of  D.  unto  this  day,  2  Chrun.  10.  19. 

20.  none  followed  ihe  huune  of  D.  biit  Judah 

26.  shall  the  kingdom  return  to  the  house  of  D. 

13.  2.  a  child  be  born  to  Ihe  house  of  D.  Josiah 
14.8.  rent  kin;^doin  from  A. o/D.  2  ifin^a  17.21. 

iChr.  21.7.  Lord  would  not  destroy  the  house  ofD. 
Psal.  122.  5.  Ihe  thrones  of  the  house  of  D. 
Isa.T.".  it  was  told  the  Aouse  of  D.  saying,  Syria 

13.  hear  ye  now,  O  house  of  D.  Jer.  21.  12. 
22.22.key  ofA«usco/D.  I  will  lay  on  his  shoulders 
Zech.12.7.  that  glory  of  Aoi/se  o/D.  do  not  magnify 
S.feeble  as  D.  and  the  house  ofD.  shall  be  as  God 

10.  I  will  pour  on  Aouic  o/ D.  the  spirit  of  grace 
12.  family  of  the  house  ofD.  shall  mourn  apart 

13. 1.  shall  be  a  fountain  opened  to  the  Aouseo/D. 

Z,ukg  1.27. whose  name  was  Joseph,  of  the  A.  o/D. 

69.  raised  up  a  horn  of  salvation  in  house  of  D. 

14.  because  he  wasof  the  Aouseand  lineage  o/D. 

D.WID  joined  with  king. 
1  Sam.  21.  11.  is  not  this  D.  the  king  of  the  land? 
!2  Sam.2.  4.  there  they  anointed  D.  king  over  Judah 

11.  time  that  D.  was  king  in  Hebron  over  Judah 
3.  31.  and  king  D.  himself  followed  Ihe  bier 

5.  3.  king  D.  made  a  league  with  them,  and  ihey 

anointed  D.A.  over  Israel,  lCAr.ll.3.|12.:n,:i8. 

'S.  11.  which  kingD.  did  dedicate  to  the  Lord  with 

the  silver  and  gold,  1  Chron.  26.  26. 

20.21.  lifted  up  his  hand  against  the  Aino-,  even  D. 

IKings  1.37.greater  than  throne  of  my  lord  kingD. 

47.the  king's  servants  came  to  bless  our  lord  A.D. 

ICArun.  29.  9.  D.  the  king  rejoiced  with  great  joy 

2Cftr.2. 12.  who  hath  given  toD.  the  king  a  wise  son 

29.  27.  ordained  by  D.  Ai«^  of  Israel,  F.zra3.  10. 

Jer.  30.  9.  shall  serve  the  Lord  and  D.  their  king 

Has.  3.  5.  shall  seek  the  Lord  and  D.  their  king 

.Vat.  1.  6.  Jesse  begat  D.  the  king,  and  D.  the  king 

J^clt  13.  22.  he  raised  up  D.  to  be  their  king 

Scrvani  DAVID. 
2.Sam.3.18.hv  the  hand  of  my  scrnant  D.  I  will  save 
7.  .5.  go  and  tell  my  servant  D.  thus  aailh  Lord,  &. 

26.  Lord  is  God  of  Israel,  let  the  hou.se  of  thy 

scrvani  D.  be  established  before  thee, 
1  CAron.  17.  24. 
IKings  3.6.hast  shewed  \\\y servant  D.great  mercy 
8.24. kept  wilh  thy  servant  D.that  tlum  proiiiisedsl 

25.  keep  with  thy  servant  D.  26.  2  Chron.  6.  16. 
66.  for  all  the  goodness  he  had  done  for  D.  his  s. 

11.  1.3.  for  D.  my  servant's  sake  and  for  Jerusa- 
lem's sake,  32,  34.  Psal.  132.  fO.  fsa.  37. 35. 
36.  that  D.  my  servant  may  have  a  light 
38.IO  keep  my  statutes,a8  my  scrDunt  I). did, 14.8. 
2CAr.6.42.  remember  the  mercies  of  D.  thy  servant 
P».78.70.  he  chose  D.  also  his  servant  ami  took  him 
89.  3.  I  have  sworn  unto  D.  my  servant 
20.  I  have  found  D.  my  servant,  I  anointed  him 
144.  10.  who  delivered  D.  servant  from  sword 
/rr.33.21.my  covenant  broken  with  D.  my  .lervant 
22.  I  will  multiply  the  seed  ofD.  my  servant 

26.  then  will  I  cast  away  the  seed  of  D.  my  s. 
F.iek.  34.  23.  even  my  servant  D.  shall  feed  them 

24.  my  servant  D.  shall  be  a  prince  among  them 
37.  24.  D.  my  servant  shall  he  king  over  them 

25.  my  servant  D.  shall  be  ihcir  prince  for  ever 
J.uke  1.  fiO.  horn  of  salvation  in  housi:  of  his  s.  D. 
JttU  4.  2.5.  who  by  the  mouth  of  thy  servant  D. 

DRBOR.MI. 
(7«i. 35.8.  hut  D.  Rrbfkah's  nurse  died,  was  buried 
Judg.  4.  4.  and  I),  a  prophcte.ns  judged  Israel 
5.  >.  until  iliiii  I  I),  arose  a  mother  in  Israel 

12.  awttkc  D.  II  I.'),  the  princes  were  with  D. 

DKCAPOLIS. 
Mat.  4.  25.  great  mollitudes  followed  him  from  D. 
Mark  5.  20.  and  he  bi-gan  lo  publish  in  D. 

7.  31.  through  the  inidBlof  the  coast  ofD. 

DKD.\N. 
Oen.lO.  7.  snns  of  Raamnh,  Sheha,  D.  I  CAron.1.9. 
1  Chrnn.  1.32.  the  Konsof  Jokshan;  flheba,  and  D. 
Jer.  2.5.  2:1.  (  made  I).  andTema,and  Buz  todrink 

40.  8.  flee  yo,  dwell  deep,  O  inhiibit.inis  of  D. 
E-.ck.  25.  13.  they  ofD.  shall  fall  by  the  sword 

27.  20.  D.  was  thy  merchant  in  precious  clothes 

DlCnANIM. 
ha.  21.  13.  O  yo  trnvclling  companies  ofD. 

DKLILAH. 
Judf.  16.  4.  a  woman  in  the  valley  of  .=<orek,  D. 

13.  D.  ihorefuio  look  new  ropoa  and  bound  Sami. 

738 


EDO 

DEMAS. 
Col.  4.  14.  Luke  and  D.  greet  you,  Philem.  24. 

2  Tim.  4.  10.  D.  hath  forsaken  me,  having  loved 

DEMETRIUS. 
Acts  19.  24.  D.  a  silversmith,  who  made  shrines 

38.  if  D.  have  a  mutter  against  iiiiy  man 
3JoAnl2.D.bath  good  report  of  all  men  and  of  truth 

DIANA. 
.^cts  19.  24.  which  made  silver  shrines  for  D. 

27.  the  temple  of  the  great  goddess  D. 

28.  they  cried,  great  is  D.  of  the  Ephesians,  34. 
35.  EphcBUs  is  a  worshipper  of  the  goddess  D. 

DIliON. 
JVum.  21.  30.  Ileshbon  is  perished  even  to  D. 
32.  34.  the  children  of  Gad  built  D.  and  Aroer 
yo.s'A.lS.lT.Moses  gave  D.to  the  children  of  Keubeii 
JVeA.  11.  25.  the  children  of  Judah  dwelt  at  D. 
Isa.  15.  2.  he  is  gone  up  to  D.  the  high  place 
Jer.  4S.  18.  thou  daughter  that  dost  inhabit  D. 
22.  judgment  is  come  upon  D.  and  Nebo 
DIBON-GAD. 
A'um.  33.  45.  pitched  in  D.  ||  46.  removed  from  D. 

DIDYMUS. 
yoAnll.l6.Thoraas,  who  is  called  D.  20. 24. 121.2. 

DIMON. 

Fsa.15.9.  for  the  waters  of  D.  shall  be  full  of  blood, 

for  I  will  bring  more  upon  D.  lions  upon  him 

DINAH. 

frcn.30.  2] .  Leah  bare  a  daughter,  called  her  name 

34.  5.  Jacob  heard  that  he  had  defiled  D.        [D. 

DIONYSIUS. 

Jlcts  17.  34.  among  which  was  D.  the  Areopagite 

DIOTREPHES. 

3  John  9.  D.  who  loveth  to  have  the  pre-eminence 

DOEG. 
1  .Sam.  21.  7.  and  his  name  was  D.  an  Edomite 
,  22. 18.  D.  turned  and  slew  the  priests,  85  persons 
22.  I  knew  it  that  day  when  D.  was  there 
DOR. 
,/i<rf^.l.27.didJIana8suh  drive  out  inhabitants  ofD. 
IKings  4. 11.  son  of  Abinadab  in  the  region  ofD. 

DORCAS. 
.^cts  9.  36.  named  Tabilha,  by  interpretation  Is  D. 

39.  shewin?  coats  and  garments  which  D.  made 

DOTHAN. 
Oen.  .37.  17.  let  us  go  to  D.  he  found  them  in  D. 
^Kinrrs  6.  13.  saying,  heholrl  Elisha  is  in  D. 

DRUSILLA. 
.^cts  24.  24.  when  Felix  came  with  his  wife  D. 

DUMAH. 
rjcn. 25.  H.sonsof  Ishmael;  D.  Massa,  lCAr.l.'30. 

DUMAH. 
.Tosh.  15.  52.  D.  was  in  Judnh's  inheritance 
Isa.  21.  11.  the  burden  of  D.  he  culled  to  me 

DURA. 
Dan.  3.  1.  he  set  the  image  up  in  the  plain  ofD. 


E. 


EASTER. 
Acts  12.  4.  intending  afler  E.  to  bring  him  forth 

EBAL. 

/)(?uM1.29.  thou  shalt  putthe  curse  upon  mount  E. 

27.  4.  ye  shall  set  up  these  stones  in  mount  E. 

13.  these  shall  stand  upon  mount  E.  to  curse 

.Tosh.  8.  30.  Joshua  built  an  altar  in  mount  E. 

33.  half  of  them  stood  over-against  ipount  E. 

EBEI). 

./ud;o-.9.30.Zebul  heard  the  words  of  Gnal  son  of  E. 

Ezra  8.  6.  E.  the  son  of  Jonathan  with  50  males 

EBED-MELECH. 
.Ter.  38.  8.  E.  spake  lo  the  king  for  Jeremiah 
39.  16.  go  and  speak  to  E.  ihe  Ethiopian 

EBEN-EZER., 
1  Sam.  4.  1.  Israel  went  out  and  pitched  beside  E. 
5.  1.  the  Philislines  brought  the  ark  from  E. 
7.  12.  Samuel  called  the  name  of  the  stone  E. 

EBER. 
Gen.  10.21.  Shcm  tho  father  of  the  children  of  E. 
2.5.  unto  E.  were  horn  two  sons,  1  Chron.  1.  19. 
N'um.  24.  24.  ships  from  Chittim  shall  afflict  E. 

ED. 
Josh.  22.  34.  children  of  Gad  called  the  altar  E. 

EDEN. 
Gen.  2.  15.  God  put  tho  man  into  the  garden  of  E. 
3.  23.  God  sent  him  forth  from  the  garden  of  E. 
/.<a.51.  3.  make  her  wilderness  like  E.  Kiek.  36. 35. 
KzcA.  28.13.  thou  hast  been  in  E.  the  garden  of  God 
31.  9.  so  that  all  iho  trees  of  E.  envied  him 
16.  all  the  trees  of  E.  shall  be  comforted 
18.  thou  shall  bo  bro't  down  with  tho  trees  of  E. 
.fori  2.3.llie  land  is  as  the  garden  of  E.  before  them 
Amos  l.S.andcutoffhim  that  holds  sceptre  from  E. 

EDOM. 

Grn.  25.  30.  therefore  was  his  nimc  called  E. 

36. 1.  E-au  is  E.||  f:T<)d.l5.15.dukes  of  E.  amazed 

JVum.  20.  14.  Moses  sent  messengers  from  Kcdesh 

to  the  king  of  E.  .ludg.  11.  17. 

21. E. refused  lo  give  Iir.  passage  thro'  bit  border 


EGY    [PmpkrNamm 

^Vum.24. 18.  E. shall  be  a  possession  for  his  enemies 
Judg.  5.  4.  thou  marchedst  out  of  the  field  of  E. 

1  Sam.  14.  47.  Saul  fought  against  Moab  and  E. 

2  Sam.  8.  14.  David  put  garrisons  in  E.  lCAr.18.13 

1  Kings  11. 14.  Hadud  was  of  the  king's  seed  inE. 

16.  Joab  rem.  till  he  bad  cutotfevery  male  inE. 

22.  47.  there  was  then  no  king  in  E. 

2  Kings  3.  20.  there  came  water  by  the  way  of  E 

8.  2U.  in  his  days  £.  revolted  from  under  Judah 
14.  10.  thou  hast  indeed  smitten  E.  iilory  of  thit 

2  CAron.  25.  20.  they  sought  after  the' gods  of  E. 

Psal.  60. 8.  over  E.'will  I  cast  out  my  i>hoe,108. 9 

9.  who  will  lead  me  into  E.?  108.  10. 
83.  6.  the  tabernacles  of  E.  are  confederate 
137.  7.  remember,  O  Lord,  the  children  of  E. 

Isa.  11.  14.  they  shall  lay  their  hand  on  E. 
63.  1.  who  is  this  Ihal  comelh  from  E.l 

.Jer.  9.  26.  Judah  and  E.  I  will  punish,  25.  21. 

27.  3.  send  bonds  and  yokes  to  ihe  king  of  E. 
49.  7.  concerning  E.  saith  ihe  Lord,  Ubad.  1. 

17.  E.  shall  be  a  desolation,  every  one  astonishea 
20.  the  counsel  he  hath  taken  against  E. 

Ezek.  25. 12.  because  E.  hath  dealt  against  Judah 
14.  and  I  will  lay  my  vengeance  upon  E. 

32.  29.  there  is  E.  hei  kings  and  all  her  princei 
Dan.  11.  41.  E.  shall  escape  out  of  his  hand 
.Jotl  3.  19.  E.  shall  be  a  desolate  wilderness 
Amos  1.  6.  captivity  to  deliver  them  up  to  E.  9. 

2.  1.  he  burnt  the  bones  of  the  king  of  E. 

9.  12.  Ihal  they  may  possess  Ihe  remnant  of  E. 
Oliad.  8.  I  will  destroy  the  wise  men  out  of  E. 
Mai.  1.  4.  whereas  E. saith,  we  are  impoverished 

See  Daughter. 

EDOMITE,  S. 
Gen.  36.  9.  Esau  father  of  the  E.  in  mount  Scir,  43. 
Deut.  23.  7.  shall  not  abhor  an  E.  he  is  ihy  brother 

1  Kings  11.  14.  the  Lord  stirred  up  Hadad  the  E. 

2  Kings  8  21.  Joram  smote  the  E.  2  CAron.  21. 9. 

1  Chron.  18.  13.  the  E.  became  David's  servants 

2  Chron.  21.  10.  the  E.  revolted  from  under  Judah 

2.5.  19.  thou  sayest,  lo,  thou  hast  smitten  the  E. 

28.  17.  the  E.  had  come  and  smitten  Judah 

See  D.iEG. 

EGLAH. 

2  5arn.3.  5.  the  sixth, Ilhream,  by  E.  David's  wife 

EGLAIM. 
fsa.  15.  8.  the  howling  thereof  is  gone  unto  E. 

EGLON. 
.Judtr.  3.  14.  Israel  served  E.  the  king  of  Moab 
17. brought  preseiitR  to  E.and  E.was  very  fat  man 
EGYPT. 
Gen.  15.  13.  from  the  river  of  E.  to  Euphrates 
45.9.  God  hath  made  me  lord  of  all  E.  come  down 
Kzod.  3.  20.  I  will  smite  E.  .Jer.  9.  26.  j  46.  25. 
7.  4.  not  hearken,  that  I  may  lay  my  hand  on  E. 

8.6.  Aaron  stretched  his  hand  over  the  waters  of  E. 

9.  4.  sever  between  the  cattle  of  Israel  and  of  E. 

10.  7.  knowest  thou  not  that  E.  is  destroyed 

23.  15.  for  in  it  thou  earnest  out  of  E.  34.  18. 
J^um.M.  19.  thou  hast  forgiven  this  people  from  E. 

22.  5.  behold,  there  is  a  people  come  out  of  E. 
Deut.  0.  22.  the  Lord  shewed  great  s-igns  upon  E. 

7.  15.  will  put  none  of  the  diseases  of  E.  onthee 

11.  4.  and  wh.it  he  did  unto  the  army  of  E. 

28.  27.  Lord  will  smile  thee  with  the  botch  of  E. 

60.  he  will  bring  on  thee  all  Ihe  di.ieases  of  E. 

Josh.  5.  9.  I  have  rolled  away  the  reproach  of  E. 

24.  5.  I  sent  Moses  and  Aaron,  and  I  plagued  E. 
1  .Sam.  30.  13.  he  said,  I  am  a  young  man  of  E. 

1  A'ino'.f  4. 30.  Solomon's  wisd.  excelled  wisd.of  E. 

2  Kings  18.  21  tlii.u  IruKtesI  on  E.  24.  Isa.  36. 6,  9 
Psal.  105.  38.  E.  was  phid  when  they  departed 

135.  8.  who  smote  the  first-born  of  E.  of  man  and 
9.  who  sent  wonders  into  the  midst  of  thee,  O  E. 

136.  10.  to  him  that  smote  E.  in  their  first-born 
Prov.  7.  10.  decked  my  bed  with  fine  linen  of  E. 
I.ia.  10.  24.  after  the  niannor  of  E.  Amos  4.  16. 

,11.  11.  to  recover  the  remnant  of  people  from  E 

19.  1.  burden  of  E.  the  idols  of  E.  shall  be  moved 
3.  the  spirit  of  E.  shall  fail  in  midst  thereof 

16.  in  thill  day  shall  E.  be  like  unto  women 
24.  in  that  diiy  shall  Isriiel  be  the  third  wilh  E. 
25.ahall  bless,  saving,  blessed  bo  ve  E.my  people 

20.  5.  they  shall  be  ashamed  of  If.  their  glory 

23.  5.  as  at  tho  report  concerning  E.  so  of  1'yw 
27.  12.  Lord  shall  heat  off  from  the  stream  of  E. 
30.  3.  the  trust  in  the  shadow  of  E.  your  confusion 
43.  3.  I  g.ive  E.  for  thy  ransom,  Scba  for  thee 
45.  14.  the  lnhour  of  E.  shall  come  over  to  then 

Jer.  2.  18.  what  liast  ihou  to  do  in  ihe  wiiy  of  E.? 

36.  Ihou  shall  be  iishamed  of  E.  as  of  .\ss\Ti« 
46.2.  the  word  of  the  Lord  which  came  against  E 

20.  R.  is  like  a  fair  heifer,  but  di'SlruclH.n  comr« 
K:rA.20.7.dofile  not  yourselves  with  the  idoU  of  E 
23,  8.  nor  left  she  her  idols  brought  from  E. 

27.  thou  shall  not  remember  E.  any  more 
27.  7.  fine  linen  with  brolilcred  work  from  K. 
29  2.  prophesy  ngiinst  him  and  against  all  B 

14.  I  will  bring  again  ihe  cniitivitv  of  E. 
30.  0.  they  also  (hat  uphold  R  shall  fall 


PaoPBR  N^MKS.]        EGY 

EzakM.  9.  pain  shall  come  on  them,  as  in  day  of  E. 
15. 1  will  pour  my  fury  on  S.u  llie  slrcni-lli  of  E. 
as.  12.  tlity  shall  spoil  the  poinp  of  E.  anj  all 
16.  they  shall  lament  ior  her,  oven  for  E. 

18.  son  of  man,  wail  for  the  multitude  of  E. 
Dan.  11. 43.  have  power  over  precious  tilings  of  E. 
/ios.  9.  ti.  they  are  gone,  E.  shall  gulher  them  up 
Joel  .1. 19.  E.  shall  he  a  desolation, ami  Edom  wilder. 
yjmos  8.  8.  be  diowned,  as  by  the  Hood  of  E.  9.  5. 
JVah.  3.  9.  Ethiopia  and  E.  were  her  strength 
Zech.  10.  U.  the  sceptre  of  E.  sliall  depart  away 

14.  18.  if  family  of  E.  go  not  up  and  come  not 
,1cts7.  10.  he  made  him  governor  over  E.  and  hia 
Heb.  11.  27.  by  faith  he  lorsook  E.  not  fearing 
hev.li.S.  which  spiritually  is  called  Sodom  and  E. 
See  Dauoiitkr. 
In  EGYPT. 
Gen.  45.  13.  tell  my  father  of  all  my  glory  in  E. 
47. 29.  Jacob  said,  bury  me  not,  I  pray  thee,  in  E. 
Exod.  3. 7. 1  have  seen  affliction  of  my  people  in  E. 
16.  I  have  seen  that  which  is  done  to  you  in  E. 

9.  18.  grievous  hail,  such  as  hath  not  been  in  E. 

10.  2.  what  things  I  wrought  in  E.  Josh.  24.  7. 
12.  30.  u  great  cry  in  E.  ||  14.  11.  no  graves  in  E. 

Aum.  11.  18.  for  it  was  well  with  us  in  E. 

20.  15.  and  we  have  dwelt  in  E.  a  long  time 
Deut.  1.  30.  all  that  he  did  for  you  in  E.  4.  34. 
Josh.  9.  9.  we  have  heard  all  that  he  did  in  E. 
Psal.  78.  43.  how  he  had  wrought  his  signs  in  E. 

51.  he  smote  all  the  first-born  in  E. 
106.  7.  iJiey  understood  not  thy  wonders  in  E. 
21.  forgat  God,  who  had  done  great  things  in  E. 
Jer.42.  Ifi.  famine  shall  follow  close  afleryou  in  E. 
46. 14.  declare  ye  in  E.  and  publish  it  in  Migdol 
Ezek.  23.  3.  they  committed  whoredoms  in  E. 
30. 8.  shall  know,  when  I  have  set  a  fire  in  E.  16. 

19.  thus  will  I  execute  judgment.^;  in  E. 
Mat.  2.  19.  an  angel  appeared  to  Joseph  in  E. 
Jlcts  2. 10  the  dwellers  J7i  E.  we  do  hear  them  speak 
J{eb.  11. 20.  greater  riches  than  the  treasures  in  E. 

Into  EGYPT. 
Octi.  41.57.  all  countries  came  into  E.  to  buy  corn 
46.  4.  I  will  go  down  with  thee  into  E. 

26.  all  the  souls  that  came  witli  Jacob  into  E. 
A"u7n.  14.  3.  better  for  us  to  return  into  E.  4. 
ha.  19.  1.  behold,  the  Lord  shall  come  into  E. 
30.  2.  that  walk  to  go  down  into  E.  to  strengthen 
Jrr.  26.  21.  Urijah  afraid,  fled  and  went  into  E. 

41.  17.  if  ye  set  your  faces  to  go  into  E.  42.  15. 

42.  19.  the  Lord  said,  go  ye  not  into  E.  43.  2. 
Ezek.  17.  1.5.  sending  his  ambassadors  into  E. 
Dan.  11.  8.  he  shall  also  carry  captives  into  E. 
Nus.  12. 1.  with  Assyrians,  and  oil  iscnrried  into  E. 
Mat.  2.  13.  flee  into  E.  ||  14.  he  departed  into  E. 
.lets  7.  9.  the  patriarchs  sold  Joseph  ijito  E. 

34.  and  now  come,  I  will  send  thee  into  E. 
39.  in  tlieir  hearts  turned  back  again  into  E. 
See  King. 
Land  of  EGYPT. 
Gm.  13.  10.  Sodom  was  like  the  la7id  of  E. 

21.  21.  Ishmael's  wife  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
41. 19.euch  as  I  never  saw  in  all  the  land  nfE. 

29.  seven  years  plenty  thro'  all  Imid  of  E.  30,  53. 

41.  set  thee  over  all  the  land  of  E.  45.  8,  26. 

54.  but  in  all  the  land  of  E.  there  was  bread 
45.18. 1  will  give  you  the  good  of  the  land  of  E.20. 
47. 6.  the  l.tnd  of  E.  is  before  thee,  in  best  of  land 

15.  when  money  failed  in  the  la7id  of  E. 

20.  Joseph  bought  all  the  land  of  E.  lor  Pharaoh 
26.  Joseph  made  it  a  law  over  the  land  of  E. 

50.  7.  all  the  elders  of  the  land  of  E.  went  up 
Arzod.7.I9.  that  there  may  be  blood  in  siW  land  of  E 
8.6.  frogs  covered  lUelandofE.  ||  10.  lice  |i  24. flies 
9. 9.  blains  ||  22.  hail  1|  10. 14.  locuiils  in  land  of  E. 

10.  21.miiy  bedurkne.ss  over  all  the  ^iwrf  o/ E.  22. 

11.  3.  Moses  was  very  great  in  the  land  of  E. 

12.  20.  Lord  pmote  first-born  in  land  of  E.  13.  15, 
10.3.  would  God  we  had  died  in  /.  ofE.  A^um.U.i 

6.  brought  you  out  o(  land  of  E.  20.  2.  |  29.  46. 

22. 21.  for  ye  were  strangers  in  the /and  o/E.  23.9 

J.ev.  19.  34.  JJeut.  10.  19.  ^ct«  13.  17 

32.  4.  these  be  thy  gods  which  brought  thee  out 

of  the  land  n/E.  1  Kin^s  12.  28.  JVfA.  9.  18. 

Kev.  18. 3.  after  doings  of  land  of  E.  shall  ye  not  do 

19.  36.  I  am  the  Lord  thv  God.  who  brought  you 

out  of  the  ;a)»/o/E.  26. 1.3.  ./Vum.  15.41. /^e«« 

5.  6. 1 13. 5, 10.  I  20. 1.  .Tudff.  2. 12.  1  Sam.  12.6 

Deut. 'J.i.  from  ihe  day  that  thou  didst  depart  out 

of  the  land  of  E.  Judg.  19.  30.  (sa.  11.  16. 

Jer.  7.  22.  |  II.  7.  |  34.  13.  Mic.i.  15. 

11.10.  the  land  whither  thou  goest  is  not  land  of  E 

16.  3.  thou  earnest  out  of  the  land  of  E.  in  ha.sie 

P«.78.12.  marvellous  things  did  he  in  the  land  of  E. 

81.  5.  when  he  went  out  through  the  land  of  E. 

fed.  19.  IS.shall  in /.o/E.  speak  language  of  Canaan 

19.  altar  to  Lord  for  a  witness  in  land  of  E.  20. 

27.  13.  the  outcasts  in  the  land  of  E.  bIihII  come 

Jer.  42.  14.  no,  but  we  will  go  into  the  land  of  E. 

16.  thesword  shall  overtake  you  in  the  land  ofE 

43.  7.  80  they  came  into  the  land  of  E. 

729 


EGY 

.fcr.  43. 12.  he  ahall  array  himself  with  the  /.  of  E. 

44.  28.  shall  return  out  of  the  I.  of  E.  into  Judah 
Kiek.  20.  5.  myself  known  to  them  in  land  of  E. 

23. 19.  she  had  playi:d  the  harlot  in  the  land  of  E. 
27.  thy  whoredom  brought  from  the  land  of  E. 

29.9.1  he /aniZu/E.  desolate,  12.  ||  10.utli;rly  waste 

20.  have  given  him  the  lundvf  E.  for  his  labour 
30. 13.  shall  be  no  more  a  prince  of  the  land  of  E. 

Dan.  11.  42.  and  the  land  ofE.  shall  not  escape 
Hos.  7. 16.  this  shall  be  their  derision  in  land  of  E. 

12. 9.  the  Lord  thy  God  from  the  land  of  E.  13.  4. 
Zeeh.  10. 10. 1  will  bring  them  out  of  the /an(Z«/E. 
Heb.  8.  9.  to  lead  them  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
./udcS.having  saved  the  people  out  of  lheZa«(i  ofE. 

Out  uf  EGYPT. 
G'en.l3.].Abrahamo.y/E.||47.30. carry  me  o.o/E. 
Ezod.  3.  11.  that  I  should  bring  Israel  out  of  E. 

12.  39.  because  they  were  thrust  out  of  E. 

13.9.  it  shall  be  for  a  sign,  for  with  a  strong  hand 

hath  the  Loid  brought  thee  out  of  E.  Hi. 

J^um.  1 1.  20.  saying,  why  came  we  forth  out  of  E.7 

22.  11.  behold,  there  is  a  |)eople»«ome  out  of  E. 
32.  11.  none  of  the  men  that  came  out  of  E. 

Deut.  16.  6.  at  season  thou  camest  forth  -utofE. 
Josh.  2. 10.  dried  up  Ked  sea,  when  came  out  of  E. 
5.  6.  till  all  that  came  out  of  E.  were  consumed 
.Judg.  2.  1.  I  made  you  go  out  of  E.  1  Sam.  10.  18. 
16'awi.l5.6.  shewed  kindn.  when  Isr.  came  outofE, 

1  Chr.  17.21.  whom  thou  hast  redeemed  out  of  E. 

2  CAr.l2.3.the  people  that  came  with  him  outofE. 
Psal.  68.  31.  princes  shall  come  out  of  E.  Ethiopia 

80.  8.  thou  hast  brought  a  vine  out  of  E. 

114.  1.  when  Israel  went  out  of  E.  house  of  Jacob 
Isa.  19.  23.  there  shall  be  a  highway  out  of  E. 
Jer.  26.  23.  they  fetched  forth  Urijah  out  ofE. 

37.  5.  then  Pharaoh's  army  was  come  out  of  E. 
Hos.  11.  1.  I  called  my  sou  out  of  E.  Mat.i.  15. 

11.  they  shall  tremble  as  a  bird  out  of  E. 

12. 13.  by  a  prophet  Lord  brought  Israel  out  of  E. 
Hag.'i.  5.  I  covenanted,  when  ye  came  out  ofE. 
Heb.  3.  16.  howbeit  not  all  that  came  out  of  E. 

To  EGYPT. 
IKings'W'.  IS.Hadad  and  the  Edomites came (o  E. 
2  Kings  23.  34.  Jehoahaz  came  to  E.  2  Citr.  3l).  4. 
Isa.Vi.  17.  the  land  of  Judah  shall  be  a  terror  tuE. 

21.  and  the  Lord  shall  be  known  to  E. 

31.  1.  woe  to  them  that  go  down  to  E.  for  help 
Hos.  7.  11.  they  call  to  E.  they  go  to  Assyria 

See  Return. 
EGYPTIAN. 
Gen.  16.  1.  Sarai  had  a  handmaid  an  E.  3.  |  21.9. 
39.  1.  an  E.  bought  Joseph  of  the  Ishniaelites 

5.  Lord  blessed  the  E.  house  for  Joseph's  sake 
Ezod.  1. 19.  the  Hebrews  are  not  as  the  E.  women 
2.  11.  Moses  spied  an  E.  smiting  a  Htbrew 

12.  he  slew  the  E.  and  hid  him,  ..lets  7.  24. 
19.  an  E.  deJi'.--r-kd  '•«  from  the  shepherds 

Lev.  24.  10.  W-0S3  icier  was  an  E.  went  out 
Deut.  2';.  7.  thou  ih*    njt  abhor  an  E.  because 

1  Sam.  30.  11.  they  founl  an  E.  in  t^ie  field 

2  Sam.23. 21.  Benaiah  slew  an  E.  a  goodly  man,  and 

the  E.  had  a  spear  in  his  hand,  1  Chron.  11.23 
I  Chron.  2.  34.  Sheshan  had  a  servant  an  £.  Jarha 
Isa.  11.  15.  Lord  shall  destroy  the  tongueof  E.  sea 

19.  9-3.  and  the  E.  shall  come  into  Assyria 
./^cts  21.38.  art  not  thou  that  E.whomadest  uproar? 

EGYPTIANS. 
Gen.  41.  55.  Pharaoh  said  to  the  E.  go  to  Josejih 
43.  32.  that  is  abomination  to  the  E.  46.  34. 
50.  3.  the  E.  mourned  for  Jacob  seventy  days 
Exod.  3.  22.  and  ye  shall  spoil  the  E.  12.  36. 
8.  26.  shall  we  sacrifice  the  abomination  ofE.? 
11.7.  Lord  put  a  diflTerence  between  E.  and  Israel 
12.  35.  they  borrowed  of  the  E.  jewels  of  gold 
14.  9.  but  the  E.  pursued  after  tliem,  10. 
]3.theE.  whom  ye  have  seen  to-day,  see  no  more 
25.  the  E.  said,  let  us  flee  from  the  face  of  Israel, 
for  Ihe  Lord  Rghteth  for  them  against  the  E. 
27.  the  Lord  overthrew  E.  in  the  midst  of  the  sea 
19.4.  ye  have  seen  what  I  did  to  the  E.  and  how 

32.  12.  wherefore  should  the  E.  6po:ik  and  say? 
J^um.  14.  13.  Moses  said,  then  ihe  E.  shall  hear  it 

20.  15.  and  E.  vexed  us  and  our  fathfrs 

Devi.  26.  6.  the  E.  evil  enireated  and  afflided  ut 
./«.vA.  24.7.  he  put  darkness  between  you  and  thoE 
Judg.  10.  11.  did  not  I  deliver  you  from  the  E.? 
1  Sam.  4.  8.  these  are  the  gods  that  smote  the  E. 
6.6.  why  do  you  harden  your  hearts,  as  the  E.did? 
KzraO.  1.  according  to  the  abominations  of  the  E 
Isa.  19.  2.  I  will  set  the  E.  against  the  E. 
4.  the  E.  will  I  give  into  Ihe  hand  of  a  cruel  lord 
21.  the  E.  shall  know  the  Lord  in  that  day 
23.  the  E.  shall  serve  with  the  -Assyrians 
20. 4.  king  of  Assyria  shall  lead  away  E.  prisoners 
30.  7.  the  E.  shall  help  in  vain  and  to  no  purpose 
31.3.  now  E.  are  men  and  not  God,  their  horses 
./cr.43. 13.  houses  of  the  gods  ofthe  E.  shall  he  burn 
I.am.  5.  6.  we  have  given  the  hand  to  the  E. 
i^ic*.16.26.ha3t  committed  fornication  with  the  E 

23.  21.  in  bruising  thy  teats  by  E.  for  the  papi 

SB 


ELI 

Eiek.  29. 12.  and  I  will  scatter  !'•«>  E.  30.  23,  20 

13.  I  will  gather  the  E.  from  t-^e  people 
yictsT.'H.  MosKS  was  learned  in  the  wisdom  of  G. 
Heb.ll.  29.  which  E.  assaying  t-  do,  were  drowned 

Eli  VI}. 
./u(ii/-.3. 15. raised  up  E.ihe  sonofGeraa  Benjamite 
16.  E.  made  .  --i  a  dagger  ||  23.  E.  wt^nt  Ibrth 
•26.  and  E.  esf  Tped  whilu  they  tarried  and  passed 
4.  1.  Israel  again  did  evil,  wliun  E.  was  dead 
I  C/tron.7.10.sinaofBilham,  E.||  8.6.  the  son*  of  B. 
EKHON. 

1  Sam.  5. 10.  '.t  came  to  pass,  as  the  ark  came  to  B 
7.  14.  the  ..ities  were  restored  to  Israel  from  E. 

2  Kings  1.  2.  Baal-zebub  the  god  of  E.  3.  (i,  16. 
jitnos  1.  6.  I  will  turn  mine  hand  against  E. 
Zeph.  2.  4.  and  E.  shall  he  rooted  uj> 

Ztch.  9.  5.  E.  verv  sorrowful  II  7.  E.  a  Jebusite 

EKRONITES. 

.fosk.  13.  3.  the  land  ofthe  E.  not  yet  conquered 

1  Sam.  5. 10.  when  ark  ca«ne  to  Ekron,  E.  cried  ou: 

ELAH. 
«en.36.41.dukeE.  ||lA'(n4'»4.18.ShimeisonofE. 

1  Kings  16.  6.  E.  son  of  Baasha  began  to  reign 

2  Kin^a  15.30.  Hoshea  the  son  ofE.  17. 1.  ]  18.  1,9. 
1  Chron.4.  15.  the  son  of  Caleb,  E.  the  song  ofE. 

9.  8.  E.  the  son  of  Uzzi,  the  son  of  Micliri 

ELAH. 
1  Sam.  17.  2.  Israel  pitched  bv  the  valley  ofE. 
21.  9.  David  slew  Goliath  in' the  valley  ofE. 

ELAM. 
Gen.  10.  22.  the  children  of  Sliein  ;  E.  and  A«bur 
14.  I.  in  Ihe  days  of  Chedorlaor.;3r  king  ofE. 

1  Chron.  8.  24.  Hananiah  and  E-  of  Benjamin 

26.  3.  E.  the  fiflh  son  of  Meshelemiah 
A-zra2.7.thpr,hildren  of  E.  31.18.7.  JVe/i.7.12,34 

10.  2.  one  ofthe  sons  ofE.  answered  to  Ezra 
.VcA.  10.  14.  the  chief  oC  the  penple,  E.  Zatlh-a 

12.  42.  Jehohanaii  and  E.  and  Ezer,  priests 
Isa.  11.  11.  to  recover  his  people  from  E. 
21. 2.  go  up,  O  E.  II  22.  6.  and  E.  bare  the  onivet 
./«■>-.  25.  25.  I  made  all  the  kings  ofE.  to  dimk 
49.34.  Ihe  word  ofthe  Lord  ihat  came  against  E. 
36.  upon  E.  will  I  bring  the  four  winds 
39.1  will  bring  again  the  captivity  ofE.saith  Lord 
Ezek.  32.  24.  there  is  E.  and  all  her  multitude 
Dan.  6.  2.  Shushan  which  is  in  the  province  of  K 

ELAMITES. 
Ezra  4.  9.  the  E.  wrole  a  letier  to  Artaxerxea 
Jlcts  2.  9.  Parthians,  E.  we  hear  them  speak 
ELATH. 

2  Kings  14.  22.  Azariah  built  E.  and  restored  it 
10.  6.  at  that  time  Rexin  recovered  E.  to  Syria 

EL-BETHEL. 
Gen,  35.  7.  Jacob  buili  an  altar,  and  called  it  B 

ELDAD. 
J^um.  n.  26.  Ihe  name  ofthe  one  wa.f  E. 

27.  E.  and  Aledad  do  prophesy  in  the  camp 

ELEALEII. 
jVion.  32.  .37.  the  chiMien  of  Reuben  built  E. 
Isa.  15.  4.  and  Heshbcm  shall  cry,  and  E.  iheir  voio* 

16.  9.  I  will  water  thee  with  my  tears,  O  E. 
Jer.  48.  34.  from  the  cry  of  Heshbon  even  to  E 

ELEAZAR. 
Exod.  6.  25.  Aaron's  son  E.  28.  1.  .Vnm.  3.  2.  |  26. 
60.  1  Chron.  6.  3.  j  24.  I.  Ezra  8.  33. 
Lev.  10. 16.  Moses  was  an"ry  w  illi  E  and  Ithamar 
J^um.  3.  4.  E.  ministered  in  the  priest's  office 
32.  E.sonofAaronshallbechiefoverthe  Levites 
4.  16.  til  the  office  of  E.  pertaineth  ihe  oil 
16.  .39.  E.  the  priest  took  the  brascn  censers 
20.  26.  and  jiut  his  garments  upon  E.  his  BoD 

28.  Moses  and  E.  came  down  from  the  mount 
20.  (53.  that  were  numbered  by  Mo^es  and  E. 

27.  '-"2.  he  set  Joshua  before  E.  the  priest 

31.  12.  they  brought  llie  spoil  to  Moses  and  E. 

26.  take  the  sum  of  prey  thou  and  E.  the  priest 
41.  nnd  Moses  save  iribiite  unto  E. 

34.  17.  E.  and  Joshua  shall  divide  the  land 
Josh.  17.  4.  came  near  before  E.  ||  24.  33.  E.  died 

1  .Sam.  7.  1.  thov  sanctified  E.  to  keep  the  ark 

2  .Snni.23.9.afterhim  E.  son  ofDodo,  I  CAr.  11.12. 
1  Chron.  9.  20.  the  son  of  E.  was  ruler  over  them 

23.  21.  the  sons  of  Mahli ;  E.  nnd  Kish,  24.  28. 
22.  E.  died,  and  had  no  sons,  but  daughters 

24.  4.  more  chief  men  of  sons  uf  E.  than  llhamar 
5.  the  governors  were  of  Ihe  sons  of  K. 

JVeh.  12.  42.  Slieinaiah  nnd  E.  were  priesU 
Mat.  1.  15.  Eliml  lieg:it  E.  nnd  E.  begat  Matthafl 

EL-ELoHE-ISRAEI.. 
Gen.  33.  20.  Jacob  called  the  altar  E.-Israel 

ELIIANAN. 
2. Sam.Jl. 19.  E.  slew  brother  of  Oolinlh,  1  CAr.2f>.5. 
23.  34.  E.  the  son  of  Dodo,  I  CAron.  11.  26. 

ELL 
1  Sam.  1.  25.  they  brought  the  child  to  E. 

2.  1 1.  Ihe  child  did  minister  t«  the  L.  before  E.  3, 1. 
12.  now  the  sons  of  E.  were  sons  of  Belial 

27.  there  came  a  man  of  God  to  E.  and  Raid 

3.  5.  Samuel  ran  to  E.  and  said,  here  am  I,  6.  ? 
12.  in  that  day  I  will  perform  a^ainat  E.  all  oiiagi 


ELI 

I  Sam.3. 14.  iniquity  ol'E.  houaealiall  not  be  purged 
4.  14.  the  'nun  cuine  in  hatstily  iind  luld  E. 
1  JCtiigts  ~-  ii".  "  I'lcli  liB  sjiuke  ccincuniing  E. 

EH,  ELI,  lavia  sabtchlhuni. 
Jtfot.27.46.Jcsu»crieil,E.  E./amusa4.Mark  15.34. 

ELIAK. 
JVuni.  I.  9.  of  the  trihe  of  Zebulun,  E.  the  Hon  of 
Helon,  'J.  7.  I  7.  24, '.«).  |  10.  Iti. 
16.  1.  Dathaii  and  Aliiruin  suns  of  E.  1'2.  |  '.'li.  <J. 

26.  S.  Bons  of  I'allu,  E.  ||  1  Ham.  IG.  fi.  lookt;.!  on  E. 
iJeul.  11.  0.  what  he  did  to  the  Bona  of  E. 
1  Sam.  17.  'iti.  E.  heard,  and  his  unger  waa  kindled 

1  Chron.  i!.  IX  and  Jeate  begat  his  firsl-horii  E. 
(i.  in.  E.  the  .son  of  Nahalli,  tlie  son  of  Zophai 
)2.  9.  E.  cu|it  tin  of  the  Gadues  came  to  David 
l.i.  IS.  E.  pocler,  20.  ||  10.  5.  E.  with  a  psaltery 

i  Citron.  11.  18.  Kuhohoain  look  the  daughter  of  E. 
E1-I.M)A. 

2  Sam.  5.  16.  E.  a  pon  of  David,  1  Cliron.  3.  8. 
2  Cliron.  17.  17.  of  Bi'iijamin,  E.  a  mighty  man 

ELIAKIM. 
Z  Kings  IH  IP.  there  came  out  to  Rab-shakeliE. the 
Hon  ofHiikiali  and  Sliebna  the  scribe,  Isa.'id.'i, 
1«.  2.  Hezekiah  aent  E.  lo  Isaiah,  Isa.  37.  2. 
2o  "M.  made  E.  sun  of  Jnsiah  king,  2  Chrun.  36. 4. 
.WA.  12.  41.  E.  and  Maaseiah  the  priests 
Ua  22.  20.  that  1  will  call  my  servant  E. 
JSlal-  1-  13.  Abiud  begat  E.  and  E.  begat  Azor 
hake  3.  30.  Jonan,  which  was  the  son  of  E. 

ELIAM. 
;•  .<?am.  11.  3.  nath-sheba  the  daughler  of  E. 

23.  34.  E.  the  son  of  Ahithoptiel  ihe  Gilonite 

ELIAS,  Ste  ELIJAH. 
ELIASHIll. 
I  Chriin.  3.  24.  E.  and  Pelaiah  sons  of  Elioonai 

24.  12.  ihe  eleventh  lot  came  forth  to  E. 
Ezra  10.  6.  Jolianan  the  son  of  E.  A'cA.  12.  23- 

34.  E.  a  singer  ||  27.  E.  the  son  of  Zattu 
:«).  E.  e.iii  of  Hani  ||  J^ck.  3. 1.  E.  the  high-priest 
.VVA.  12. 10.  Joiakim  begat  E.  and  E.  begai  .loiada 
13.  4.  E.  was  allied  to  Tobiah  ||  7.  the  evil  E.  did 
28.  one  of  the  sons  of  Joiada,  the  son  of  E. 
ELIEZER. 
Cien.  15.  2.  the  steward  <if  my  house  is  this  E. 
Kiod.XS.i.  name  of  Moses'  son  was  E.  1  CAr.23. 15. 

1  Chron.'. 8.  the  sons  of  Bechcr;  E.  and  Elionai 
15.  24.  nenaiah  and  E.  the  pries's  did  blow 
2:1.  17.  the  son  of  E.  was  Rchahiah  the  chief 

27.  I6»  the  ruler  of  the  Reuhenites  was  E. 

2  CAron-20. 37.  E.  prophesied  against  Jehoshaphat 
A'lruH.  16.  ilieii  sent  I  for  E.  and  Ariel,  chief  men 

10.  18.  E.  hail  taken  strange  wives,  23,  31. 
/.uA'e  3.  29.  Juse,  which  was  the  son  of  E. 

EMHOREPH. 
1  Kiifs^.  3.  E.  and  Ahiah,  sonsof  Sliisha,  scribes 

ELIHU. 
I  Sam.  1.  1.  Elkanah.  son  of  Jeroham,  son  of  E. 
I  Cliron.  12.  20.  E.  fell  to  David  out  of  Manasseh 

26.  7.  E.  and  Shemaehiah  were  strong  men 
27. 18.  of  Judah,  E.  one  of  the  brethren  of  David 

Job  32.  2.  wraih  of  E.  the  Buzite  was  kindled 
4.  E.  had  waited  ||  6.  answered,  34.  1.  |  35.  1. 
ELIJAH,  or  ELIAS. 

1  h'iugs  17.  1.  E.  thi^  Tishbite  said  to  Ahab 
IS.she  went  and  ilid  according  to  the  saying  of  E. 

22.  and  the  Lord  heard  the  voice  of  E. 

23.  E.  took  Ihe  child,  and  brought  him  down 

18.  2.  E.  went  to  shew  himself  unto  Ahab 
7.  art  thou  that  my  lord  R.?  ||  H.  E.  is  here 

10.  Ahab  went  to  meet  E.  ||  27.  E.  mocked  them 
40.  E.  slew  all  the  nropheis  of  Baal 
46.  and  the  band  of  the  Lord  wa.<  on  E. 

19.  1.  Ahab  lold  Jezebel  all  that  E.  had  done 

9.  the  I..ord  said,  what  docst  thou  here  E.I  13. 
20.  Elisha  left  the  oxen  and  ran  after  E.  21. 

21.  20.  Ahab  sairl  to  E.  ha.st  ihon  found  me? 
C  Kingg  1    S.  Aha/.iah  said,  it  is  E.  ihe  Tishbite 

13.  the  third  captain  fell  on  his  knees  before  E. 
17.  he  died,  according  !o  the  word  E.  had  spoken 

2.  1.  when  th"  Lord  would  lake  up  E.  into  heaven 
fl,  E.  look  his  mantle,  and  wrapt  it  together 

11.  R  Weill  op  bv  a  whirlwind  into  heaven 

14.  Eli«ha  said,  where  is  the  Lord  God  of  E.T 

15.  the  »j)irit  of  V..  dolh  rest  on  Rlisha 

3.  11.  which  [mured  water  on  the  hands  of  R. 
9.  3«!.  done  that  which  he  spake  by  E.  10.  10,  17. 

CCAron.  21.  12.  there  came  n  writing  from  R. 
Kira  10.  21.  Maaseiah  and  E.  the  sons  of  llariin 
Mat.  4.  5.  behold,  I  will  iend  you  R.  the  prophet 
.Mai.  II.  H.  this  is  WirM  which  was  lo  come 

16.  M.somesav,  Fliii.i.  .1/nr/.-6.  15.  /,u/.r  9.  8,10. 

17.  3.  there  appeared  F.lin.^,  .^fnrk  <l.4.  /,Mfrr9.30. 
4.  three  laberiiaclei',  one  for  Ihne,  one  for  Moses, 

one  for  Flia.i,  .\fark  9.  5.  r.ukf.  9.  33. 

10.  that  Fhnu  must  first  come,  Mark  9.  11. 
ll.WiiMihallromej,regtoro  nil  thines,w1/(irA 9.12. 
12  I  s»y  lo  veil,  f/ff-'iscomn  nIrendv,.V/ir<9.13. 

27.  47.  tills  man  calle'h  lor  riiaf,  Mark  I.V  :'5. 
<V).let  in  «re  whether /•7i(l,«  will  come,. War*  IS.VG. 

Lvkf}.!'.  shall  go  before  him  in  the  power  of /'.7«u 
730 


EMM 

Luke  4.25.  many  widows  were  in  the  days  of  Eliat 

9. 54.  command  tire  to  consume  them  as  £/iaj>'did 

Ji,liu  1.  21.  art  thou  Kltas  ?  art  ihou  that  prophet  7 

25.  if  Ihou  be  not  F.lian,  why  baptizest  Ihuul 
Hum.  11.  2.  what  the  scripture  saith  of  Elias 
.Jam.5.i~.Elias  was  a  man  subject  to  like  passions 

ELIM. 
Ezod.  15.  27.  they  came  lo  E.  JVum.  33.  9. 
16. 1.  they  took  their  journey  from  E.  jVum.  33.19. 

ELIMELECH. 
Ruth  1.2.  the  name  of  the  man  was  E.  ||  3.  E.dicd 

2.  1.  Boaz  was  a  kinsman  of  the  family  of  E. 
4. 9.  that  I  have  bought  all  that  was  E.  of  Naomi 

ELIl'HALET. 
2  Sam.5. 16.  Eliada  and  E.  David's  son,  1  CAr.3.6,8. 

ELU'HAZ. 
Gen.  36.  4.  Adah  bare  to  Esau,  E.  10.  1  Chr.  1.  35. 

11.  the  sons  of  E.  12,  15.  ijt.Aron.  1.  36. 
Job  2.  11.  E.  came  from  his  place  lo  mourn 

4.  1.  E.  the  Teiiianite  answered,  15.  1.  |  22.  1. 
42.  9.  E.  did  as  the  Lord  commanded  him 

ELISABETH. 

/yiiA«  1.  5.  Zacliarias'a  wife  E.  {|  7.  E.  was  barren 

24.  E.  conceived,  36.  ||  4}.  Mary  saluted  E. 

57.  E.  full  time  came  that  she  should  be  delivered 

ELISHA,  ELISEUS. 

1  Kings  19.  16.  thou  shall  anoint  E.  to  be  prophet 
17.  thai  escaped  from  Jehu,  shall  E.  slay 

19.  Elijah  departed,  and  found  E.  plowing 

2  Kings  2.  5.  the  projihets  at  Jericho  came  to  E. 

12.  E.  saw  it,  and  cried,  my  father,  my  father 

15.  the  spirit  of  Elijah  doth  rest  on  E. 

3.  U.  one  said,  here  is  E.  the  sonrof  Shaphat 

4.  1.  now  there  cried  a  certain  woman  unto  E. 
H.E. passed  to  Shunem, where  was  a  great  woman 

17.  bare  a  son  at  that  sea.son  that  E.  had  said 
32.  when  E.  was  come,  behold  the  child  was  dead 

5. 9.  so  Naaman  came  and  stood  at  the  door  of  E. 
6.  12.  E.  telleth  the  words  that  thou  speakest 

18.  E.  prayed  to  the  Lord,  and  the  Lord  smote 
them  with  blindness  according  to  the 
word  of  E. 

20.  E.  said.  Lord,  open  Ihe  eyes  of  these  men 
31.  if  the  head  of  E.  stand  on  him  this  day 

8.  4.  lell  me  the  great  things  that  E.  hath  done 
5.  the  woman  whose  son  E.  restored  to  life 
14.  Ben-hadad  said,  what  said  E.  to  thee  7 

13.  14.  E.  was  fallen  sick  ||  17.  E.  said,  shoot 

16.  and  E.  put  his  hands  upon  the  king's  hands 

21.  they  cast  the  man  into  the  sepulohre  of  E. 
A,aie4.27.  many  lepers  in  Israel  indaysof  £Ziieui' 

ELISHAH. 
Ezci-.27. 7.  blue  and  purple  from  isles  of  E.  covered 

ELISHAMA. 
A*i/W.  1.  10.  E.  the  son  of  Animihud,  2. 18.  |  7.  48, 
53.  I  10.  22.  1  Cliron.  7.  26. 
2  Sam.  5.  16.  E.  David's  son,  1  Ckr.  3.  6,  8.  |  14.  7. 

1  Citron.  2.  41.  and  Jekamiah  begat  E. 

2  Chron.  17.  8.  he  sent  with  them  E.  priest 
.rcr.  36.  12.  E.  scribe  ||  41.  1.  E.  of  the  seed-royal 

ELISHRBA. 
Exod.  6.  23.  Auron  look  him  E.  to  wife 

ELISHUA. 
2  Sam.  5. 15.  Ibhar  and  E.  David'* sons,  1  Chr.  14.5. 

ELIUD. 
Mat.  1. 14.  Achim  begat  R.  ||  15.  E.  begat  Eleazar 

ELKANAH. 
F.xod.  6.  24.  the  sons  of  Korah;  Assir,  and  E. 
1  Sam.  1.  1.  his  name  was  E.  the  son  of  Jeroham 

21.  E.  went  up  to  offer  the  yearly  sacrifice 
2.  11.  E.  went  lo  his  house  ||  20.  Eli  blessed  E. 

1  Chrnn.  6.  23.  the  son  of  R.  27,  .34,  35.  I  9.  16. 
25.  the  sons  of  E.  26.  ||  12.  fi.  E.  the  Korhito 

15.  23.  E.  was  door-keeper  for  the  ark 

2  Chron.  28.  7.  E.  that  was  next  to  the  king 
ELMODAM. 

Luke  3.  28.  Cosam,  which  was  the  son  of  E. 

ELNATHAN. 
•2  Kings  24.  8.  Nehuehia  the  daughter  of  E. 
Ezra  8.  16.  I  sent  for  E.  and  Jiirib,  chief  men 
.fir.  26.  22.  Jeboinkim  sent  E.  into  Egypt 
36.  12.  R.  the  son  of  Achbor  sat  there 
2.5.  E.  had  made  intercession  to  the  king 
ELON. 
nm.  26.  34.  EsBU  took  Bashemnlh  daughter  of  E. 
3fi.  2.  Esau  took  Adah  llio  daughter  of  R. 
40.  14.  the  Hons  of  Zebiiliin;  Sered  and  E. 
.fadg.  12.  11.  E.  judged  Urael  ||  12.  R.  died 

JVeA.6.15.  wall  finished  tlie25th  dav  ofthe  month  E. 

ELYMAS. 
.^ct.f  13.  8.  but  E.  the  sorcerer  withstood  tlicm 

EM  I  MS. 

fJen.  14.  5.  Chndorlnomer  came  and  smole  the  E. 

Deut.  2.  10.  Ihe  R.  dwell  there  in  times  past 

EMMANUEL.     9vp  Jlppcltatives. 

EMMAI'S. 

/.tiA<:24. 13.  twoof  iheiM  Willi  that  same  day  to  E. 

EMMOR 


EPH      [PKona  Naxm 


EN-DOR. 

Josh.  17.  11.  Blanasseh  had  E.  and  her  towns 
1  6'am.28. 7.  a  woman  at  E.  hath  a  familiar  sjiirit 
Hsat.  83.  10.  as  to  Jabin,  which  perished  at  E. 

ENEAS.     . 
^?ct«  9.  34.  E.  Jesus  Christ  makcth  tliee  whole 

ENEGLAIM. 
Eiek.  47. 10.  fishers  shall  stand  from  Eo-gedi  toE. 

EN-GEDl. 
.Tosh.  15.  62.  in  the  wilderness  of  Judah,  E. 

1  .^uw.  23. 29.  David  dwelt  in  the  holds  at  E.  24. 1. 

2  CAr.20.  2.  couieth  against  Jehoshaphat  are  inE. 
Cant.  1.  14.  as  cum|ihire  in  the  vineyards  of  E. 
Ezek.  47.  10.  the  fishers  shall  stand  from  E. 

ENOCH. 
<7e«.4.17.Cain's  wife  bare  E.||5. 18.  Jared  begat  E. 
5.  22.  E.  walked  with  God,  and  God  look  him,  24. 
Luke  3.  37.  Matbusalu,  which  was  Ihe  son  of  E. 
Wifr.  1 1.  5.  by  faith  E.  was  translated,  and  was  not 
Judc  14.  E.  also  prophesied  of  these,  sayins 

ENON. 
^oAn  3. 23.  John  was  baptizing  in  E.  near  toSalim 

ENOS. 
den.  4.  26.  Seth  called  his  son's  name  E. 
AuAe  3.  38.  Cainan,  which  waa  the  son  of  E. 

EN-ROGEL. 
2. Sam.  17. 17.  Jonathan  and  Ahimaaz  stayed  byE 
1  Kings  1.  9.  Adonijah  slew  sheep  and  oxen  by  E 

EPAPHRAS. 
Cut.  1.  7.  as  ye  learned  of  E.  our  fellow  servant 
4.  12.  E.  a  serv.  of  Clirisl  salutelh  you,  fhilem.  23 

EPAPllRODITUS. 
Phil.  2. 25.  to  send  to  you  E.  1|  4.  18.  received  of  E 

EPENETUS. 
Rom.  IC.  5.  salute  my  well-beloved  E.  firat-fru  » 

EPHAH. 

Gen.  25.  4.  E.  the  son  of  Midian,  1  Chron.  1.  33 

1  Chron.  2.  46.  E.  Caleb's  concubine  bare  Harac 

47.  the  sons  of  Jahdai;  Pelet,  E.  and  Shaaph 

tsa.  60.  6.  the  dromedaries  of  R.  shall  cover  Ihee 

EPHES-DAMMIM. 
1  Sam.  17.  1.  tlie  Philistines  pitched  in  E. 

EPH  ESI  A NS. 

Jlcls  19.28.tliey  cried  out.great isDiana  ofthe E.  3* 

35.  the  city  ofthe  E.  is  a  worshipjier  of  Diana 

EPHESUS. 

Jlcts  18.  19.  Paul  came  to  E.  ||  21.  sailed  from  E 

24.  a  certain  Jew  named  Apollos  came  to  E. 

19.  17.  Ibis  was  known  to  Jews  and  Greeks  at  E 
26.  ye  see,  that  not  alone  at  E.  but  Ihro'  all  Asie 
35.  ye  men  of  E.  ||  1  Cor.  16. 8.  I  will  tarry  at  E 

20.  16.  for  Paul  had  determined  lo  sail  by  E. 
1  Cor.  15.  32.  I  have  fought  with  boasts  at  E. 

1  Tim.  1.  3.  as  I  besought  thee  lo  abide  still  at  E. 

2  Tim.  1.  18.  Onesipliorue  ministered  !o  me  at  E 

4.  12.  and  Tycliicus  have  I  sent  lo  E. 
Rev.  1.  11.  send  it  to  E.  ||  2.  1.  lo  the  angel  at  E. 

EPHPHATHA. 
Mark  7.  34.  he  saith  to  him,  E.  that  is,  be  openea 

EPHRAIM,ay/ac<;. 
2  .9(im. 13.23. Absalom  had  sheep-shearers  beside  E. 
2  Chron.  13.  19.  Abijah  look  E.  and  towns  thereo 
John  11.  54.  Jesus  went  into  a  city  called  E. 

Mount  RPHKAIM. 
Tosh.  17.  1.5.  if  mount  R.  be  too  narrow  for  theo 
20.7.  Shechem  in  mount  R.  a  city  of  refuge,  21.21. 
fiidg.'2.9.  Ihey  burieil  Joshua  in  the  mount  of  E. 
7.24.  Gideon  fent  me-sengers  through  mount  E. 
17.1.  Micah  of  mourrt  E.  ||  8.  Lcvite  came  tow. E 

18.  13.  the  Danites  passed  unto  mount  E. 

19.  1.  n  Levite  sojourning  on  the  side  of  mount  E 

1  .Vnm.  1. 1.  Elkanah  ofw.  E.  ||  2  Sam.20.21.  Shcb 
9.  4.  Saul  pas-seil  throngh  m.  E.  and  passed 

2  Kings  5.  22.  two  men  be  come  to  me  from  m.  E. 
ler.  4.  15.  piiblisheth  afHiclion  from  mount  E. 
31.  6.  the  watchman  upon  me«?i(  E.  shall  cry 
50.  19.  Israel  shall  be  satisfied  on  mount  E. 

EPHR.AIM,  a  prr.<ton,  or  provle. 
f7en.4l.52.  ilie  name  of  Joseph's  second  son  wisE 
48.  14.  Israel  laid  his  right  hand  on  E.  head 
20.  in  thee  shall  Israel  bless,  saying,  God  msfca 
thee  as  E.  and  he  set  E.  before  Mnnasseh 
Mum.  1.  10.  the  prince  of  E.  was  Elishama,  7.48 
2. 18.  on  the  west  side  shall  be  the  standard  of  E. 
10. 22.  the  standard  of  the  camp  of  E.  set  forwar 
26.  35.  these  are  the  sons  of  E.  1  Chron.  7.  20. 
7)ri/(.  33.  17.  they  are  the  ten  ihousnmlii  of  E. 
Josh.  16.  9  the  -ties  for  the  children  of  E.  17.  9 
Judg.  1.  2*?  ii.ir  did  E.  drive  out  the  Canannitcs 

5.  14.  nulfof  R  was  there  n  root  against  A  male* 

8.  2.  is  not  Ihe  L'lennin"  of  Ihe  grapes  of  R.hetlir 
12.  4.  Ih-n  Jephlhah  loiight  with  E  smote  E. 

2  Sam.  2.  9.  .Abner  made  Ish-bosheth  king  over  R 
I  C/iron. 7. 22    R.  their  father  mourned  manydayi 

9.  3.  in  Jerusalem  dwelt  ofthe  children  of  R. 
|2  CArnn.  15.9.  the  stranger*  out  of  R.  fell  lo  Asa 
I    17.  2.  Jehoshaphat  set  garrisons  in  ihe  ciib-s  of  R. 

2"i.  10.  Aiiiiizinh  separated  the  nriiiy  out  of  R. 
i   2><  7.  Z.ichri  u  iiiightv  man  of  R.  slew  Maa«eink 


.Icti  7.  16.  Abraham  bought  of  the  loni  of  E.        I   30.  18.  many  of  E.  had  not  clo:ni»od  tlionnclvci 


Pkopkr  Nakks.]     ESA 

2CAr .31.1. all  Isr.  brako  imagesinE.  and  Manasseli 
Psal.  78.  '.*.  llie  cliildreiiol'E. being  aimed,  turned 
80.  2.  before  E.  siir  up  thy  strength  and  save  us 
laa.  7.  2.  saying,  Syria  is  conlederate  with  E. 
5.  E.  halh  taken  evil  counsel  against  thee 

8.  within  sixty-five  years  shall  E.  he  broken 
9.thehead  ol'E.  is  Samaria, and  head  of  Samaria 
17.  from  the  day  that  E.  de])arted  from  Judah 

9.9.  E.  that  say  in  thejiride  and  stoutness  of  heart 
21.  Manasseh  shall  eat  E.  and  E.  Manasseh 

11.  13.  the  envy  also  of  E.  shall  depart;  E.  shall 
not  envy  Judah,  and  Judah  shall  not  vex  E. 

17.  8.  the  fottress  also  shall  cease  from  E. 

28.  1.  woe  to  the  drunkards  of  E.  whose  beauty 

3  drunkards  of  E.  shall  be  trodden  under  feet 

Jer.7.\5.  as  1  have  cast  out  the  whole  seed  of  E. 

31. 18.  I  have  heard  E.  bemoaning  himself  thus 

Ezek.  37.  l(i.  theslick  of  E.  ||  48.  5.  a  portion  for  E. 

19.  I  will  take  stick  of  Joseph  in  the  hand  of  E. 

Hos.  5. 3. 1  know  E.  O  E.  thou  conimittest  whored. 

5.  I.sracI  and  E.  shall  fall  in  their  iijiquity 

9.  E.  shall  he  desolate  ||  12.  be  to  E.  as  a  moth 
IS.when  E.  saw  his  sickness,  E.went  to  Assyrian 
14. E.  as  a  lion  ||  G.4.  O  E.what  shall  I  do  to  thee? 

6. 10.  there  is  the  whoredom  of  E.  Israel  is  defiled 

7.  1.  then  the  iniquity  of  E.  was  discovered 
8.  E.  bath  mixed  himself  among  the  people 

8.  9.  E.  hired  lovers  {|  11.  E.  rnade  altars  to  sin 

9.  3.  but  E.  shall  eat  unclean  things  in  Assyria 

8.  llie  watchmen  of  E.  was  with  my  God 

11.  aa  for  E.  their  glory  shall  fly  away 

13.  E.  shall  bring  forth  children  to  the  murderer 

10.  6.  E.  shall  receive  shame,  Israel  be  ashamed 
11.1  will  make  E.  lo  ride ;  Judah  shall  plow 
1). 3.1  taught  E.togo||8. bow  shall  I  give  Ihee  up  E. 

9.  I  will  not  return  to  destroy  E.  for  I  am  God 

12.  E.  compasseth  me  about  with  lies 

12.  1.  E.  fecdeth  on  wind  ||  8.  E.  said,  I  am  rich 

14.  E.  provoked  him  to  anger  most  bitterly 

13.  l.when  E.  spake  trembling,  he  exalted  himself 

12.  the  iniquity  of  E.  is  bound  up,  his  sin  is  bid 

14.  8.  E.  shall  say,  what  have  I  to  do  with  idols? 
Obad.  19.  Ibey  shall  possess  the  fields  of  E. 
Zeck.  9.  10.  I  will  cutotTthe  chariot  from  E. 

13.  when  I  have  filled  the  bow  with  E.  and  raised 
lU.  7.  they  of  E.  shall  be  like  a  mighty  man 

See  Gate. 

EPHRAIM  is. 

Psal.  CO.  7.  E.  is  the  strength  of  my  bend,  103.  8. 

/er.  31.  9. -and  a  father  to  Israel,  E.  i.?  ray  first-born 

20.  is  E.  my  dear  son?  is  he  a  pleasant  child  ? 

Hos.  4.  17.  E.  ?s  joined  to  idola,  let  him  alone 

5.11.  E.  ('^  ofipressed  ||  7.8.  E.is  a  cake  not  turned 
7.  11.  E.  is  like  a  silly  dove  ||  9. 16.  E.  is  smitten 
10.  11.  E.  js  as  a  heifer  that  is  taught  and  loveth 

EPHRAIM  Willi  tribe. 
A* im.  1.33. were  numberedof  the  trjieof  E.  40, .500 
13.  8.  of  the  tribe  ofE.  to  spy  ihe  land,  Osbea 
34.  24.  nf  tribe  of  E.  to  divide  the  land,  Kemuel 
Josh.  16.  8.  the  inheritance  of  the  tribe  of  E. 
21.  5.  the  KohathitiB  had  cities  out  of  the  t7-ibe 
of  E.  Dan  and  Manasseb,  20.  1  Chr.  6.  66. 
Psal.  78.  67.  and  he  chose  not  the  tribe  of  E. 

EPHRAIMITE,  S. 
Judg.12.5.  themenof  Gilead  said,  art  thou  an  E.l 

6.  there  fell  at  thnt  time  of  the  E.  42,000 

EPIIRATAH. 
Ruth  4.  11.  do  thou  worthily  in  E.  and  be  famous 
1  Chrov.  2.  50.  Hur,  the  first-born  of  E.  4.  4. 
Psal.  132.  6.  lo,  we  heard  of  it  at  E.  we  found  it 
Mic.  5.  2.  but  thou,  Bcth-khera  E.  though  little 

EPHRATH. 

Gen.  35. 16.  there  was  a  little  way  to  come  to  E. 

19.  Rachel  was  buried  in  the  way  to  E.  48.  7. 

1  Cltron.2. 19.  Caleb  took  to  him  E.  who  bare  Hur 

EPHR.VPHITE,  S. 
J?«*/i].2.Mablon,Chilion,E.ofBeihlehem-Judab 
1  Sam.  1.  1.  Elkanah  wasan  E.  ||  17. 12.  Jesse  anE. 
1  Kings  11.  26.  Jeroboam  an  E.  of  Zereda 

EPHRON. 
Gen.  23.  8.  entreat  for  me  to  E.  the  son  of  Zoar 
16.  Ahrah.  hearkened  lo  E  weighed  silver  toE. 
25.  9.  Abraham  was  buried  in  the  field  of  E. 
49.30.  Abraham bonuht  with  the  field  of  E.  50. 13. 

EPICUREANS. 
Jlcts  17.  18.  certain  of  the  E.  encountered  Paul 

ER. 
Gen.  38. 3.  called  his  name  E.l|  6.took  a  wife  for  E. 

7.  E.  Judah's  first-born  was  wicked,  lCAr.2.3. 

1  Chron.  4.  21.  E.  the  father  of  Lecah 

L,u!iK  3.  28.  Elinodam,  which  was  the  son  of  E. 

ERASTUS. 

^<;<sl9.22.Paul  sent Timoihens and  E. into  Maced. 

2rjm.4.20.  E.  abode  Corinth,  Tropbimus  Miletum 

ESA  I  AS,  See  Is.viah. 

ESAR  HAnnON. 

2  K^in^Ts  19.  37.  E.  reigned  in  his  siend,  Isa.  37.  38. 
Kzra  4.  2.  since  the  days  of  E.  king  of  Assur 

ESAU. 
Om.  23.  25.  and  th^v  called  his  name  E. 
731 


EVE 

Oen.^.7!.  E.  was  ahunter  1|  20.  E.  came  from  field 
34.  thus  E.  despised  bis  birthright 

27.  11.  behold,  E.  my  brother  is  a  hairy  man 

21.  whether  thou  be  my  very  son  E.  or  not,  24. 

41.  E.  haled  Jacob  because  of  the  blessing 

42.  these  words  of  E.  were  told  to  Rebekah 

28.  9.  then  went  E.  to  Ishmael,  and  took  Mahalath 

32.  3.  Jacob  sent  messengers  before  him  to  E. 

11.  deliver  me, I  pray  thee,  from  the  hand  of  E. 
18.  it  is  a  present  sent  unto  my  lord  E. 

33.  4.  £.  ran  to  meet  him,  and  embraced  him 

9.  and  E.  said,  I  have  enough,  my  brother 

35.  1.  when  thou  lleddest  from  E.  thy  brother 

36.  1.  now  these  are  the  generations  of  E. 

43.  ho  is  E.  the  father  of  the  Edomites 
£'eiit.2.5.havegiven  mount  SeirtoE.12. yo«A.24.4. 

22.  as  he  did  lo  the  children  of  E.  in  Seir 
Josh. 24.4.  unto  Isaac,  Jacob,  and  E.  lCAru?i.l.34. 
Jcr.  49.  8.  I  will  bring  the  calamity  of  E.  on  bini 

10.  I  have  made  E.  bare,  I  have  uncovered 
Obad.  0.  how  are  the  things  of  E.  searched  out! 

18.  the  house  of  E.  shall  be  for  stubble 

21.  saviours  shall  come  to  judge  the  mount  of  E. 
Jl/ai.l.2.was  not  E.Jacob's  brother,  sailh  the  Lord? 

3.  I  loved  Jacob,  and  I  hated  E.  lioin.  9.  13. 
Heb.  11.  20.  by  faith  Isaac  blessed  Jacob  and  E. 
12.  16.  lesl  there  be  any  profane  person,  as  E. 

ESEK. 
Ocn.  26.  20.  Isaac  called  the  name  of  the  well  E. 

ESHCOL. 

Gen.  14.  13.  Mamre  the  Amorite,  brother  of  E. 

24.  Aner,  E.  Mamri,  let  them  take  their  portion 

A''um.  13.  24.  the  place  was  called  the  brook  E. 

32.  9.  when  they  went  up  uiilo  thu  valley  of  E. 

ESLl. 
Luke  3.  25.  Naum,  which  was  the  son  of  E. 

ESROM. 
Mat.  1.  3.  and  E.  begat  Aram,  Luke  3.  33. 

ESTHER. 
Esth.  2.  7.  he  brought  up  Hadassah,  that  is  E. 
17.  the  king  loved  E.  ||  18.  the  king  made  E.  feast 

22.  told  it  to  E.  II  5.  3.  what  wilt  thou,  queen  E.? 

4.  4.  E.  maids  came,  she  sent  raim.  to  clothe  Mord. 

12.  and  they  told  to  Mordecai  E.  words 

17.  Mordecai  did  all  that  E.  had  commanded 

5.  2.  the  king  held  out  to  E.  the  golden  sceptre,  8.  4. 
12.  E.let  nomancoine  with.the  king  but  myself 

7.  2.  the  king  said,  what  is  thy  petition,  queen  E.? 
7.  Hainan  stood  up  to  make  request  for  life  to  E. 

8.  3.  and  E.  spake  yet  again  before  the  king 

7.  behold  I  have  given  E.  the  house  of  Hainan 

9.  92.  E.  the  queen  wrote  with  all  aulboriiy 
32.decree  of  E.  confirmed  these  mailers  of  Purini 

ETAM. 
Judg.  15.  8.  Samson  dwelt  in  top  of  the  rock  E. 

11.  then  3000  men  went  to  top  of  the  rock  E. 

ETHAM. 
Exod.  13.  20.  they  encamped  in  E.  JVujh.  33.  6.    ; 
JVum.33.8.went  three  days'jouru.  in  wildern.of  E. 

ETHAX. 
1  Kings  4.  31.  for  Solomon  was  wiser  than  E. 
1  Chron.  2.  6.  the  sons  of  Zerah,  Zimri,  and  E. 
ETHANIM. 

1  Kings  8.  2.  all  Israel  assembled  in  the  month  E. 

ETHIOPIA. 

^Kings  19.  9.  when  he  heard  say  of  Tirbakah  king 

ofE.  behold,  he  is  come  out  lo  fight,  Isa.  37.9. 

Esth.  1, 1.  Abasuerus  reigned  from  India  to  E.8.  9. 

.fob  28.  19.  the  topaz  ofE.  shall  not  equal  it 

Psal.  68.  31.  E.  shall  stretchout  her  hands  to  God 

87.  4.  behold  Philisiia  and  Tyre  with  E.nian  born 

/^a.lSl. which  is  beyond  theriversofE.Z<;;>A.3.10. 

20.3.  Isaiah  halh  walked  bare-foot  for  a  sign  on  E. 

5.  they  shall  be  ashamed  of  E.  their  expectation 

43.  3.  I  gave  Egypt  for  thy  ransom,  E.  for  thee 

45.  14.  the  merchandize  ofE.  shall  come  to  thee 

Ezek.30.  4.  great  pain  in  E.  |1  5.  E.  shall  fall, 38.  5. 

JVah.  3.  9.  E.  and  Egypt  were  ihe  strength  of  No 

./?cf«8.27.behold,a  man  of  E.a  eunuch  of  authority 

ETHIOPIAN. 
JV?(m.  12.  1.  because  of  the  E.  woman  he  married 

2  Chron.  14. 9.  Zerah  the  E.  came  out  against  Asa 
fer.  13.  23.  can  the  E.  change  his  skin  or  leopard 
38.  7.  Ebed-melech  the  E.  10,  12.  |  39.  16. 

ETHIOPIANS. 
2  Chrnn.  14.  12.  the  Lord  smote  the  E.  the  E.  fled 

16.  8.  were  not  the  E.  and  Lubims  a  huge  host? 

21.  16.  the  Ld.  stirred  Arabians  that  were  near  E. 
Tsa.  20.  4.  he  shall  lead  the  E.  captives 
Jer.  46.  9.  the  E.  that  handle  the  shield 
Eiek.  .30.  9.  to  make  the  careless  E.  afraid 
/.^an.i  1. 43.  the  Libyans  and  E.  shall  be  at  bis  steps 
J}mos9.7.  are  ye  not  as  the  children  ofE.  unto  me? 
Zeph.  2.  12.  ye  E.  shall  be  slain  by  the  sword 
.^cts  8.  27.  a  eunuch  under  Canduce  queen  of  E. 

EUBULUS. 
2  7Vm.  4.  21.  E.  gieeteth  thee,  Pudens  and  Linus 

EVE. 
Gen.  3.  20.  Adam  called  his  wife's  name  E. 

4. 1.  Aflarn  knew  E.  his  wife,  and  she  conceived 


GAD 

2Cor.ll.3.  lest  aa  serpent  beguiled  E.  thro*  subtlety 

1  'Jim.  2.  13.  f(.r  Adam  wastirsl  formed,  then  E. 

EVIL-MEKODACn. 

2  Kings  25.  27.  E.  king  of  liabyion  did  lift  up  the 

bead  of  Jehoiaehin  out  of  prison,  Jer.  Si.  31 
EUNICE. 
27'i/n.l.  5.  faith  which  dwelt  in  Lois  and  mother  E 

EUOUIAS. 
Phil.  4.  2.  I  beseech  E.  and  beseech  Syntyche 

EUPHRATES. 
Gen.  2.  14.  and  the  fourth  river  is  E. 
15.  18.  unto  the  great  river,  the  river  E. 
iJeul.  1.  7.  go  to  the  great  river  E.  Josh.  1.  4. 
11.24.  shall  be  yours  fioin  the  river  E.  to  the  sea 
2  Sam.  8.  3.  David  smote  Iladade/er  as  he  went  to 
recover  bis  border  at  the  river  E.  lCAro>i.l8.3. 
2  Kings  23.  2!l.  Neclio  went  up  lo  E.  2  Chr.  35.  20. 
24.  7.  the  king  of  Babylon  took  from  Egypt  to  E. 
1  Chron.  5.  9.  Reuben  inhabited  from  ihe  river  E. 
Jer.  13.  4.  arise,  go  lo  E.  ||  5.  so  I  hid  it  by  E. 
7.  I  went  to  E.  ||  46. 10.  hath  a  sacrifice  by  E.- 
46.  2.  the  word  came  ag.iinst  Pliaraob  by  E. 

6.  they  shall  stumble  and  fall  Uy  the  river  E. 

51.  63.  ihou  shall  cast  it  into  the  mid»t  ofE. 

Hev.  9.  14.  angels  that  are  bound  in  the  river  E. 

It).  12.  sixth  angel  poured  out  his  vial  on  E. 

EUTYCHUS. 

^cts  20.  9.  there  sat  a  young  man  named  E.  I'allen 

EZEKIKL. 
Ezek.  24.  24.  thus  E.  is  unto  you  a  sign 

EZEL. 
1  Sam.  20. 19.  thou  shall  remain  by  the  stone  E. 

EZRA. 
1  Chron.  4. 17.  the  sons  ofE.  Jether  and  Mered 
Ezra  7.  12.  Arlaxerxes  king  to  E.  the  priest 
2.5.  Ihou,  E.  after  the  wisdom  of  thy  God,  set 
10. 1.  when  E.  had  prayed  and  confessed,  weeping 
JVtA.  8.2.  E.  brought  the  law  before  congregation 
6.  and  E.  blessed  the  Loril  the  j^reat  God 
12.  I.  these  are  the  priests,  Seraiali,  Jeremiah,  E. 
13.  of  E.  Meshuilam  was  priest 
20.  these  were  in  days  of  E.  ihe  priest,  the  scribe 
36.  and  £.  the  scribe  before  Ibein 


F. 


FELIX. 
.^cts  23. 24.  that  they  may  bring  Paul  safe  toF. 
26.  L)sius  to  llie  most  excellent  governor  P. 

24.  3.  we  accept  it  always,  most  noble  F. 

24.  when  F.  came  with  his  wife  Drusilla 

25.  as  Paul  reasoned  ol'juilgmeiil,  F.  trembled 
25. 14.  there  is  a  certain  iciaii  lelt  in  bonds  by  F. 

FESTUS. 
.^ets  24.  27.  Porcius  F.  came  into  Felix'  room 

25.  9.  F.  willing  to  do  the  Jews  b  pleasure 

1.3.  king  Agrippa  cametoCesarealosaluteF. 

14.  F.  declared  Paul's  cause  unto  the  king 

23.  at  F.  commandment  Paul  was  brought  forth 

26.  25.  Paul  said,  I  am  not  mad,  iiiosl  noble  F. 

FORTUNATUS. 
1  Cor.  16.  17.  I  am  glad  of  the  coming  of  F. 


G. 


GAAL. 

Judg.  9.  41.  Zebiil  thrust  out  G.  and  his  brethren 

GABBATHA. 
,Tohn  19. 13.  called  the  jiaveinent,  in  Hebrew,  G. 

GABRIEL. 
Dan.  8.16.  G.  make  ibis  man  understand  the  vision 
9.21.  while  I  was  praying,  the  man  G.  touched  me 
Luke  1. 19.  I  am  G.  that  stand  in  presence  of  God 
26.  the  angel  G.  was  sent  from  God  to  Mary 
GAD. 
^«r,.30. 11.  a  troop  comes,  she  called  his  name  6 
35.  26.  the  sims  ofZilpah  ;  G.  and  Asber 
46.16.  soiisG.  jV«m.  1.24.  |26. 13,18.  lCAr.12.14. 
49.  19.  G.  a  Iroop  shall  overcome  bim 
.Vuni.  1.14.  the  prince  of  G.  Eliasaph,  2. 14.  |  7.  42. 
32.  1.  children  of  G.  had  a  nuiltilnde  of  cattle 
2.  the  children  of  G.  came  and  spake  to  Moses 
29.  if  the  children  of  G.  will  pass  over  Jordan 
.33.  Moses  gave  to  G.  Ihe  kingdom  of  Sihon 
34.14.  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  G.  have  received 
their  inheritance,  .fosh.  13.  28.  |  18.  7. 
Dent.  27. 13.  on  mount  Ebal  to  ciir.«e  G.  and  .Asbei 
.33.  20.  and  of  G.  blessed  be  he  that  ci.largelh  G. 
.^sh.  4.  12.  the  children  of  G.  passed  over  armed 
22.  9.  the  children  of  G.  rcinrned  out  of  Shiloh 

1  Sam.  13.  7.  some  Hebrews  went  lo  the  land  of  G 

2  S«w.24. 5.  that  lieth  in  the  mid-t  ofthe  river  of  G 
11.  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  the  prophet  G 

David's  seer,  saying,  1  Chron.  21.9,  13 
14.  David  said  unto  G.  I  am  in  a  great  sirait 
19.  David  did  accnrrling  to  llie  saying  of  G. 

1  CAr.  29.  29.  acts  nf  David  are  in  the  book  of  G. 

Sdr.Si).  25.Lovitc>  according  to  command  oiG. 


GAT 

Jtr.  40.  1.  why  tlinn  doth  their  king  inherit  G.? 
E:tk.  4d.  27.  a  iiorlioii  lorG.  ||  34.  ociegatu  ofG. 

Tribe  of  GAD. 
Jifum.  1.25.  that  were  nunibered  oft.  of  G.  45,050 
2.  14.  then  the  tribe  ofG.  shall  set  forward,  the 
captain  of  G.  shall  be  Eliasa|.li,  10.  20. 
13.  15.  of  the  tribe  ofG.  to  spy  the  land,Geuel 
34.14.  the  trtieu/ihechi  dreiiofG.  have  received 
their  inheritance.  Josh.  13.  24. 
Josh.  20.  8.  out  of  Ihe  tribe  o/G.  assigned  Rainoth- 
GikadlotheLevile«,21.7,3«.  JC/ir.ti.ti:),  80. 
Rtv.  7.  5.  of  the  tribe  ofG.  were  sealed  12,000 

GAUARENES. 
JlfarJfcS.  1.  they  cuiiie  over  lo  ihe  other  side  of  the 
sea  into  the  country  of  the  G.  JmIcc  8.  20. 
Luke  8.  37.  country  olG.  bi'sought  him  to  depart 

GADITE,  3. 
Deut.  3.  12.  this  land  gave  I  unto  the  G.  16. 
Jogh.  22.  1.  Joshua  called  the  Kenbenites  and  G. 
2.Sa»i.  211.  3(i.  llaniG.  one  of  David's  mighty  men 
2Kinirs  10.33.1Ijzacl  sn)ote  the  G.  anil  Reubrnites 
1  CAron.  12.  6.  of  the  G.  there  separated  to  David 
2C.  32.  whom  David  made  rulers  over  the  G. 
GAUJS. 
^ft»  19.29.liavingcaughtG.a  man  of  Macedonia 

20.  4.  G.  of  Di'rbe  accompanied  Paul  in  Asia 
liuiit.  Ifi.  2.'t.  G.  mine  host  saluteth  you 

1  Car.  1.14.  I  hiipiized  none  but  Crispus  and  G. 
3Julin  1.  the  elder  unto  the  well-beloved  G. 

GALATIA. 
Jici.t  le.O.had  gone  through  the  region  of  G.  18. 23. 
1  Cor.  IC.  1.  have  given  order  to  the  churches  of  G. 
CTim.  4.  10.  Crescens  is  departed  to  G. 
IPU.l.  1. 10  the  saints  scattered  through  Pontu.s,  G. 

GAI.ATIANS. 
Gal.  3.  1.  O  foolish  G.  who  hath  bewitched  youl 

GALKANUM. 
F.iod.  30.  31.  take  sweet  spices,  onycha,  and  G. 

GALEED. 
Gen.  31.  47.  bat  .lacob  called  the  heap  G. 
48.  therefore  w  is  the  name  of  it  called  G. 

GAMLEE. 
Josh.  00.  7.  Kedesh  in  G.  lor  a  city  of  refuge 

21.  32.  KedesliinG.  tothe  Eevites,  \Chron.  0.76. 

1  Kinirs  !'.  II.  Scdomon  gave  Hiram  20  cities  in  G. 

2  Kiii^'i  15.  20.  Tiglath-pileser  to>k  Jjon  and  G. 
Ua.  9.  1.  ilid  more  grievously  afflict  her  in  G. 
M'lt.  2.  22.  Joseph  turned  into  the  parts  ofG. 

3.l3.thcncoini'ili  JesusfnmiG.  to  John,j!/arA  1.9. 
4.  15.  G.  of  the  Gentiles  ||  21.  II.  Jesus  ofG. 

18.  Jesus  walking  by  the  sea  ofG.  Mark  1.  Ifi. 

25.  there  followed  multitudes  from  G.  Mark  3. 7. 
IV  2.'.  Jesus  euine  nigh  unto  the  sea  ofG. 
2.i.  32.  I  will  go  before  you  into  G.  Mark  14.28. 

27.  .55.  many  women  beholding  afaroffwhich  fol- 
lowed Jesus  from  G.  Mark  15.41. /.uAf  23.40,5.5. 

28.  7.  he  gueth  before  you  into  G.  Mark  IG.  7. 
Mark  I.  3'.).  he  iireache'd  throughout  all  G. 
Z,iiA-«4.14.Je8us  returned  in  power  of  Spirit  into  G. 

44.  he  preached  in  synagogues  ofG. 
i53.  .5.  b'-ginning  from  G.  to  this  place 

O.when  Pilate  hearilofG-he  asked  whether  Gal.? 
24.  6.  how  he  spake  to  y  'U  when  he  was  in  G. 
John  7.  41.  some  saiil,  shall  Christ  come  out  ofG.? 

52.  art  thou  ofG.?  nut  ofG.  ariseth  no  |)rophet 

12.  21.  Philip  who  WHS  of  Bethsiida  in  G. 
Jtclx  1.  II.  ye  men  ofG.  ||  5. 37.  Judas  of  (J.  rosenp 

0.  31.  then  had  the  churches  rust  through  all  G. 
10.  37.  the  word  you  know  which  began  from  G. 

13.  31.  he  was  seen  of  them  that  came  from  G. 

Sf.  C.^NA. 

GALILEAN,  S. 
Mark  14.  70.  for  thou  art  a  0.  I.ukr.  22.  50. 
Luke  13.  I.  there  wore  some  told  him  of  the  O. 

2  suppose  yi'  these  G.  were  sinners  above  all  G.? 
23.  6.  Pilate  asked  whether  the  man  were  a  G.? 
John  4.  4.5.  when  he  was  come,  the  G.  reci;ivcd  him 
jleta  2.  7.  are  not  all  these  that  speak,  G.I 

GALEIM. 
I  Sam.  15.  44.  Hiiul  gave  Michal  lo  Phaiti  ofG. 
/»<!.  10.  .')0.  lift  up  thv  voice,  O  daughter  ofG. 

GAEEIO. 
Artt  18.  12.  wh'm  G.  was  the  deputy  of  Achala 
17.  and  G.  cared  for  none  of  those  things 
G  A. MALI  EL. 
A'um.  1.  10.  of  Manasseh,  G.  »im  of  Pedahzur,  2. 
20.  I  7.  54,  50.  I  10.  23. 
Jirtii  5.  34.  then  stood  op  a  I'liarisee  nnnn'd  G. 
K.  3.  yet  I  was  broujht  nii  at  the  feet  of  G. 

GA.MMADIMS. 
F.itk.  27.  11.  and  the  G.  were  in  thy  towers 

GATH. 
I  Sam.  5.  8.  let  the  ark  be  carried  about  to  G. 
d.  17.  those  are  Hi"  golden  emcrmls,  for  G.  one 
27.  4.  it  WHS  told  .-"aul,  thai  David  was  lied  toG. 
2Som.1.20.tell  it  n-^  in  fJ. publish  it  not  in  .Vsdkclon 
21.  22.  those  four  «err'  born  lo  the  giant  in  G.  nnd 
fell  by  Ihe  hand  of  David  and  serv.  1  CAr.20.  8. 
1  /Tin/T*  2.  30.  two  fcrvantu  of  Shimei  ran  lo  G. 
40.  Sbioioi  went  to  G.  In  leak  his  MrvanU 
7» 


GIB 

5  Kings  12.  17.  Ila/.ael  went  and  fought  ngaintl  G. 

1  CAr.  8.  13.  ISeraiali  drove  away  inhabitants  of  G. 
18.  1.  David  took  G.  fiom  the  Philistines 

2  L'hron.  26.  6.  Uzziah  brake  down  the  wall  ofG. 
Ainus  6.  2.  then  go  down  to  G.  of  the  Philistines 
Mic.  1.  10.  declare  ye  it  not  at  G.  weep  not  at  all 

GAZA. 
.Tudg.  16.  1.  Samson  went  to  G.  and  saw  a  harlot 
21.  the  Philistines  brought  Samson  down  to  G. 
Jcr.  47.  1.  before  that  Pharaoh  smote  G. 

5.  baldness  is  come  upon  G.  Asbkclon  is  cutolf 
.Hinox  1.6.  for  three  transgressions  of  G. and  for  four 

7.  but  I  will  send  a  fire  on  the  wall  ofG. 
Z(7)/i.2.4.G.sball  be  forsaken  and  Ashkelonadcsol. 
Zech.  9.  5.  G.  shall  see  it,  king  shall  perish  from  G. 
Acts  8.26.  the  way  that  goelh  from  Jerusalem  to  G. 

GEBA. 
Josh.  21.  17.  given  out  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin  to 
the  priests,  G.  with  her  suburbs,  ICVir.  6.  60. 
\  Kings  15.  '22.  king  Asa  budt  G.  2  Chron.  16.  6. 
2AriH»-s2;i.8.  Josiah  defiled  the  high  places  from  G. 
[sa.  10.  20.  they  have  taken  up  lodging  at  G. 
Zech.  14.  10.  the  land  shall  be  as  a  plain  from  G. 

GEUAL. 
Psal.  83.  7.  G.  and  Amnion  arc  confederate 
Eiek.  27.  9.  the  ancients  ofG.  were  thy  calkers 

GEIUM. 
Isa.  10.  31.  the' inhabitants  ofG.  gather  to  flee 

G  EDA  LI  AH. 
2  Kings  25.  24.  and  G.  sware  to  them,  .Jer.  40.  9. 

1  Chron.  25.  3.  the  sons  of  Jedulhun,  G.  and  Zeri 
9.  now  Ihe  second  lot  came  forth  to  G. 

Ezra  10.  18.  Jarib  and  G.  had  taken  strange  wives 
.Irr.  38.  1.  G.  the  son  of  Pasliur  heard  Jeremiah 
40.  14.  but  G.  son  of  Ahikam  believed  them  not 
41.2.  Ishmael  smote  G.  with  Ihe  sword 
43.  6.  Johanan  took  all  that  were  left  with  G. 
Zfph.  1. 1.  Zephaniah  the  son  of  Cushi,  son  ofG. 
Hee  AiiiKAM. 
GEHAZI. 
2Kings  4. 12.  Elisha  said  to  G.  call  Shunamite,  36. 
27.  but  G.  came  near  to  Ibrusl  her  away 
5.2 1. so  G.  followed  after  Naniaan,  said,  is  all  well 
25.  Elisha  said  to  him,  whence  comesi  thou  G.? 
8.  4.  the  king  talked  with  G.  servant  of  Elisha 

GEMARtAH. 
Jer.  29.  3.  the  words  thai  Jeremiah  seiil  by  G. 
36.  25.  G.  made  intercession  not  to  burn  the  roll 

GE.NNESARET,  ETH. 
Mat.\4.  34.  thoy  came  to  the  land  of  G.  MiirkG.5X 
/^uAcS.l. people  pressed,  Jesus  stood  by  lake  ofG. 

GERA. 
Judir.  3. 15.  the  Lord  raised  up  Ehud  the  eon  of  G. 
2.S-ttm.l6. 5.  Shimei  son  ofG.  19.16,18.  lifino-s  2.  8. 

GERAHS. 

Exod.  30.  13.  a  shekel  is  twenty  G.  Lev.  27.  25. 

JVum.  3.  47.  I  18.  16.  Ezek.  45.  12. 

GERAR. 

Oen.  20. 1.  Abraham  sojourned  in  G.  ||  26.6.  Isaac 

2.  .^bimelech  kingof  G.  ||  20.  the  her^man  of  G. 

GERGESENES. 

Mat.  8. 23.  he  was  come  into  the  country  of  the  G. 

GERIZIM. 
Deut.  1 1.29.thou  shall  put  ihe  blessing  on  mount  G. 
27.  12.  these  shall  stand  on  mount  G.  to  bless 
Josh.  8.  33.  half  of  them  over-againsl  mount  G. 
Judg.  9.  7.  Jotham  stood  on  the  top  of  mount  G. 

GERSHOM,  GERSHON. 
Gcn.46.1 1.the  sons  of  Levi;  G.  Kohalh  and  Merari 
Ezod.  6. 16.  Xum.  3.  17.  \Ckr.  6. 1, 16.  |  23. 6. 
Ezod.  2.  22.  Ihe  name  of  Moses'  son  was  G. 
fi.  17.  Ihe  sons  ofG.  Libni,  Shimei,  J^um.  3.  18. 
JVuTi.  3.  21.  ofG.  was  the  family  of  the  Libnilos 
25.  charge  of  the  sons  ofG.  ||  4. 22.  their  sum,  38. 
4.  28.  this  is  the  service  of  the  sons  ofG. 
7.  7.  two  wagons  and  four  o.xen  gave  losonsof  G. 
10.  17.  the  sons  ofG.  bearing  the  tabernacle 
./<).«A.  21.6.  cities  the  chiUlren  ofG.  had,  27. 
Judg.  IH.  30.  Jonathan  the  eon  ofG    was  priest 
F.ira  8.  2.  of  Ihe  sons  of  Phinehas,  G.  went  up 
GESHIIR. 

2  Sam.  13.  .37.  Absalom  fled  and  wont  to  G.  38. 

14.  23.  Joab  went  lo  G.  ||  32.  why  1  come  from  G. 

15.  8.  thy  servant  vowed  a  vow  at  G.  in  Syria 

1  C'Arore.-.  21.  Jair  took  G.  and  .\ram  from  them 

GESIHTRITES. 
.fosh.  13.  13.  the  G.  dwell  among  the  Israeliten 

1  Sam.  27.  8.  David  and  his  men  invaded  the  G. 

GETHSEMANE. 

J»fa£.26.30.comoth  to  a  plare  called  G.Mark  14.32. 

GIAH. 

2  Sam.  2.  24.  the  hill  Ammah  that  lietli  before  G. 

GIBEAII. 
Judn-.  10. 14.  sun  went  down  when  they  were  by  O. 
16.anold  manof  mount  Ephraim  sojourne^l  inG. 
20.  0.  this  shall  bo  the  thing  we  will  do  lo  G. 
13.  deliver  us  the  children  of  Belial  in  G. 
30.  they  put  Ihr-inselvei  in  array  against  O. 
1  .Sam.  10.  26.  Saul  also  went  homo  to  G.  15.34. 
14.  2.  Saul  tarried  in  (liu  uttermost  part  ofG. 


GIR        L^  HOPBB  KaXBS 

25am  21 .6.  let  seven  men  of  bis  sons  be  delivered  lo 
us,  ue  Will  hang  them  up  to  the  Lord  in  G 
Isa.  10.  29.  Ui.mah  is  afraid,  G.  of  Saul  is  fled 
Hos.  5.  8.  blow  ye  the  cornel  m  G.  cry  aloud 
9.'.l.bav»;  corrupted  themselves  as  in  the  days  ofG. 

10.  9.  O  Israel,  thou  hast  sinned  from  the  days  of 

G.  the  battle  in  G.  did  not  overtake  them 
GlBEOiX. 
Josh.  10.  2.  feared,  because  G.  was  a  great  city 

4.  come  up  and  help  me,  that  we  may  smile  G. 

12.  Joshua  said,  sun,  stand  thou  still  upon  G. 
2  Sam.  2.  13.  they  met  together  by  the  pool  of  G. 

3.  30.  because  he  had  slainAsaliel  aiG.  in  baltla 

20.  8.  when  they  wete  at  the  greal  stone  in  G. 
\Kings3.5.  inG.  the  L.  appeared  lo  Soluiinin,9.2. 
IChron.  8.  29.  at  G.  dwell  the  father  of  G.  9.  35. 

21.  29.  the  aliar  of  burnt-otfering  was  at  G. 
/.>o.  28. 21.  he  sliall  be  wroth  as  in  the  valley  of  G. 
Jer.  28.  I.  Hananiali  the  son  of  .Azur  in  G. 

41. 12.  they  found  Ishmael  bvthe  waters  io  G. 

GIBEOiNITES. 

2  Sam.  21.  1.  a  famine,  because  Saul  slew  the  G. 

9.  he  delivered  them  into  the  hands  of  the  G. 

GIDEON. 

Judg.  6.  11.  G.  threshed  wheat  by  the  wine-prcM 

24.  (i.  built  an  altar  there  unto  the  Lord 

34.  but  the  Spirit  of  fhe  Lord  came  upon  G. 

7.  1.  then  Jerubbaal,  who  is  G.  rose  up  early 
14.  there  is  nmhing  else,  save  the  sword  ol  G. 
18.  the  sword  of  the  Lord  and  ofG.  20. 

8.  21.  G.  slew  Zeba  ||  27.  G.niade  an  ephod  ihercof 
30.  G.  had  70son8|i32.  G.  died  in  a  good  old  age 

35.  nor  shewed  they  kindness  to  the  house  of  G. 
Heb   11.  32.  the  lime  would  fail  me  to  tell  ofG. 

GIDEONI. 
J^um.l.  II.  the  prince  ofBenjamin  was  Abidan  the 
sonofG.  2.  22.  1  7.  60,  65. 
GIHON. 
Oen.  2. 13.  the  name  of  the  second  river  is  G. 
1  Kings  I.  33.  and  bring  Solomon  diiwn  to  G.  38. 
45.  they  have  anointeil  him  king  in  G. 
GILBOA. 
I  Sam.  28.  4.  Saul  and  all  Israel  pitrhed  in  G. 
31.  1.  Israel  and  Saul  fell  down  slain  in  mount  G. 
8.  2  Sam.  21.  12.  1  Chron.  )0.  1,  8. 
2.S"nm.  1.6.  as  I  happened  by  chance  on  mount  G. 
21.  ye  mountains  ofG.  let  there  be  no  dew 
GILEAD. 
JViim.  32.1.  saw  the  land  ofG. was  a  place  forcattla 

40.  Moses  gave  G.  to  Machir,  Deut.  3.  )5. 
Deut.  34.  1.  the  Lord  shewed  him  the  lind  ofG. 
Josh.  17.  1.  Machir,  being  a  man  of  war,  had  G 

22.  13.  Israel  sent  Phinehas  into  the  land  of  G 
■Judg.  10.  18.  be  head  over  the  inhabitants  of  G. 

11.  11.  then  Jephthah  went  with  the  elders  ofG. 
2. Sam. 2.  9.  Abner  made  Ishboshelh  king  over  G 

17.  26.  Israel  and  Absalom  pitched  in  land  ofG. 
I  Kings  17.  1.  Elijah  the  Tishbiie,  who  was  ofG. 
I'sal.  60.  7.  G.  is  mine,  Manasseh  is  mine,  108.  8. 
Cant.  4.  1.  thy  hair  as  a  flock  of  goats  from  G.6.  5. 
./cr.8.22.  is  there  no  balm  inG.?  no  physician  there? 

22.  0.  thou  art  G.  to  me  ||  46.  II.  go  up  into  G. 

50.  19.  bis  soul  shall  be  saiisfled  on  mount  G. 
Hus.  6.  8.  G.is  the  city  of  them  that  work  iniquily 

12.  11.  is  there  iniquity  in  G.?  they  are  vanity 
Jlmos\.3.  they  have  threshed  G.  with  instrumenti 

13.  they  have  ripped  up  wimien  with  child  ofG. 
Obiid.  19.  and  Ueiijaniiii  shall  possess  G. 

Mie.  7.  14.  let  them  feed  in  Bashan  and  G. 
Zech.  10.10.  I  will  bring  them  into  the  laud  ofG. 
See  R.4.MOTH. 
GILEADITE,  S. 
./w(/^.10..3.  Jairn  G. judged  Israel  ||  11.  1.  Jephthah 
12.  4.  ye  G.  are  fugitives  of  Ephraim 

5.  and  tht?  G.  took  the  passages  of  Jordan 
iSam.  17.  27.  Barzillai  the  (}.  brought  beds 

See  B.vRZtLL.M. 

GILGAL. 

.lofh.  4.19.  the  people  came  up  and  encamped  in  G 

9.  6.  ihcy  went  to  Joshua  unto  the  camp  at  G. 

10.6.  the  men  of  Giboon sent  lo  the  camp  toG. 
.Judg.  2. 1.  an  ungel  came  up  from  G.  lo  Uochim 

1  Sam.  7.  16.  S.imnel  went  in  circuit  to  G. 

10.  8.  and  thou  shall  go  down  before  ine  lo  G. 

11.  14.  lot  us  go  to  G.  and  renew  the  kingdom 

13. 7.  Saul  was  in  G.  ||  8.  Samuel  came  not  to  G 
15.  33.  Samuel  hewed  Agiig  in  pieces  in  G. 

Hos.i.  15.  come  not  ye  to  G.  nor  go  in  Belh-.ivcn 
9.  15.  their  wickedness  is  in  G.  there  I  haled  them 

12.  II.  they  sacrifice  bullocks  in  G.  their  altars 
.Imvs  4.  4.  at  G.  multiply  tran»ere«»ioii  and  bring 

5.  .'>.  enter  not  into  G.  for  G.  shall  go  into  eaiitivitj 

J/ic.  6. 5.  Balaam  answered  him  from  Sbittim  toG. 

GILONITE. 

2  Sam.  15.  12.  Ahithophel  the  G.  23.  34. 

(JIRGASHITE,  S. 
Oen.  10.  16.  faoaan  b.>gal  the  G.  1  Chron.  I.  14 
15.  21.  to  thy  seed  have  I  v'iveii  this  land  lo  Eu- 
phrates and  the  land  .if  the  G.  .Vch.  0.  8 
Deut.  7.  I.  when  the  Lord  hulh  cast  out  the  G. 


PaoPKR  Najiks.]    had 

Jotk.  3.  10.  ho  will  without  fail  drive  out  the  G. 

GITTITE. 

2  Sam.  6.  10.  tho  house  of  Obed-cdom  the  G.  11. 

1.5.  19.  Iltai  the  G.  -H.  \  18.  2.  H  21. 1'J.  Goliath 

GOB.  , 

S  Sam.  21.  18.  a  battle  with  the  Philistines  at  G. 

GOG. 
1  Chron.5. 4.  sons  of  Joel;  G.  his  son,  Shimei  his  son 
£zek.  38.  3.  son  of  man,  set  thy  fuce  against  G. 
3.  say,  behold,  I  am  against  thoe,  O  G.  39.  1. 
IB.  when  I  shall  he  sanctified  in  thee,  O  G. 
18.  when  G.  shall  cunie  against  the  land  of  Israel 
39. 11.  I  will  give  to  G.  a  place  of  graves  in  Israel 
Rev.  20.  8.  G.  and  Magog,  to  gather  them  together 
GOL.AN,  See  Bashjin. 
GOLGOTHA. 
^at.27.33.  were  come  to  a  place  called  G.  that  is  to 
say,  a  place  of  a  skull,  Mark  15.22.  John  19.17. 
GOLIATH. 

1  Sam.  17.  4.  G.  of  Galh  a  champion  went  out,  23. 
21.  9.  the  sword  of  G.  the  Phili.stine  is  here 
22. 10.  hegnve  him  tho  sword  of  G.  the  Philistine 

2  Sam.  21. 19.  slew  the  brother  of  G.  1  air.  20.  5. 

GOMER. 
G«n.lO.  2.  sonsof  Japheth;  G.  Magog,  \Chr.\.5. 
3.  the  sonsot'G.  Aslikenaz,  Riphalh,  \Clir.  1.6. 
JEzeA.38.6.G.andall  his  bands,  house  of  Togarmah 
Uos.  1.  3.  he  took  G.  the  daughter  of  Diblaim 

GOMORRAH. 
Gffn.13.10.  before  the  Ld.  destroyed  Sodom  and  G. 

14.  11.  they  took  all  the  goods  of  Sodom  and  G. 

18.  20.  because  the  cry  of  Sodom  and  G.  is  great 

19.  24.  the  Lord  rained  on  G.  fire  from  heaven 
28.  Abraham  looked  toward  Sodom  and  G. 

X'euf.29.  23.  like  the  overthrow  of  Sixiom  and  G 
ha.  1.  9. 1 13.  19.  Jer.  23. 14.  |  49.  18.  |  50. 40. 
Mmos  4. 11.  Rom.  9.  29.  2  Pet.  2.  6.  Jude  7. 
32.  32.  for  their  vine  is  of  the  fields  of  G. 
Isa.  1.  10.  give  ear  to  the  law,  ye  people  of  G. 
Zeph.  2.  9.  the  children  of  Ammun  shall  be  as  G. 
Mat.  10.  15.  be  more  tolerable  forG.  Mark  6.  11. 

GOSHEN. 
Gen.  45.  10.  dwell  in  G.  46.  34.  |  47.  4,  6,  27. 
Ezod.  8.  22.  I  will  sever  that  day  the  land  of  G. 

9.  20.  only  in  the  land  of  G.  was  there  no  hail 
Jo^h.  10.  41.  Jo.shua  smote  the  country  of  G. 

11. 16  so  Joshua  took  all  the  land  of  G. 

15.  51.  the  inheritance  of  Judah,  G.  Holon 

GOZ.\N. 
Kinrrs  17.  6.  the  king  of  Assyria  placed  Israel  by 
the  rivet  of  G.  18.  11.  1  Chron.  5.  26. 
19.12.my  fathers  have  destroyed,  as  G.  Isa.  37.12. 

GRECIA. 
Dan.  8.  21.  the  rough  goat  is  the  king  ofG. 

10.  20.  when  lam  gone  the  king  of  G.  shall  come 

11.  2.  he  shall  stir  up  all  against  the  realm  of  G. 

GRECIANS. 
Joel  3.6.  the  childr.  of  Judah  have  ye  sold  to  the  G. 
.dots  6.  1.  there  arose  a  murmuring  of  the  G. 

9.  29.  Paul  spake  boldly  and  dis|mted  ag.  the  G. 

11.  20.  who  spoke  to  the  G.  preaching  theL.  Jesus 

GREECE. 
.ZfcA.9.13.  thy  sons,  O  Zion,  again.^t  thy  sons,  O  G. 
Jicts  20.  2.  Paul  came  to  G.  and  there  abode 

GREEK. 
Mark  7.  26.  the  woman  was  a  G.  a  Syrophenician 
^^cts  16.  1.  the  father  of  Timotheus  was  a  G.  3. 
Rom.  l.lfi.te  Jew  first,  and  also  to  G.  2.  t  9, 1 10. 

10.  12.  for  there  is  no  difference  between  the  Jew 
and  the  G.  the  same  Lord,  Gal.3.W.  Col.3.\] 

Gal.2.  3.  nor  Titus  who  was  with  nic,  being  a  G. 

•See  ArPELL.vTivES. 

GREEKS. 

John  7.  t  3.").  will  he  go  to  dispersed  among  the  G.? 

12.  20.  certain  G.  came  to  worship  at  the  feast 
.dcts  14.  1.  a  muhilude  of  G.  believed,  17.  4,  12. 

18.  4.  he  persuaded  the  Jews  and  the  G. 

17.  then  the  G.  took  Sosthenes  and  beat  him 
lO.lO.the  Jews  and  G.  heard  the  word  of  the  Lord 

17.  this  was  known  to  all  the  G.  at  Ephesus 

20.  21.  testifying  to  the  Jews  and  G.  repentance 

21.  28.  he  brought  the  G.  also  into  the  tfmple 
Rom.  1. 14.  t  am  dibtor  both  to  G.  and  Barbarians 
1  Cor.  1.  22.  and  tlie  G.  seek  after  wisdom 

23.  we  preach  Christ  crucified,  to  theG.  fooliehn. 

24.  to  called,  Jews  and  G.  Christ  the  iiower  of  G. 

GUR. 
t  Kings  9. 27.  smote  Ahaziah  at  the  going  up  to  G. 


HAN 


H. 


HACHILAH. 

1  Sam.  23.  19.  David  hid  in  the  hill  of  H.  26  1. 
26.  3.  and  Saul  pitched  in  the  hill  of  H. 

HADADEZER,  HADAREZER. 

2  Sam.  8. 3.  David  smote  H.  9,  10.  ICAron.  18.  3. 
5.  when  the  Syrians  came  to  succour  H. 

7.  took  shields  on  servants  of  H.  ||  8.  cities  of  H. 
10.  II.  had  wars  with  Toi  ||  12.  the  spoil  of  H. 
733 


2  Sam.  10.  IG.  H.  sent  and  brought  out  the  Syrians 
IKings  11. 23.  Rczon  Hed  from  lord  H.  kingof  Zob. 

HADADRIMMON. 
Zech.  12.  11.  as  the  mourning  of  H.  in  the  valley 

HAUASSAH. 
Esth.  2.  7.  he  brought  up  H.  his  uncle's  daughter 

HADORAM. 
Oen.  10.  27.  and  Joktan  begat  H.  1  Cliron.  1.  21. 

1  Chron.  18. 10.  Tou  sent  H.  his  son  to  king  David 

2  Chr.  10. 18.  Rehoboam  sent  H.  Israel  stoned  him 
HADRACH. 

Zech.  9. 1.  the  burden  of  the  Lord  in  the  land  of  H. 

HAGAR. 
Oen.  16. 1.  II.  an  Egyptian  was  Sarai's  maid,  3,8. 

15.  H.  bare  Abram  a  son,  16.  |  25.  12. 
21.  9.  Sarah  saw  son  of  H.  the  Egyptian  mocking 
14.  Abraham  gave  H.  bread,  and  sent  her  away 
17.  angel  of  God  called  to  H.  what  aileth  thee,  H  .1 
See  Agar. 
HAGARENES. 
Psal.  83.  6.  the  11.  are  confederate  against  thee 
HAGARITES. 

1  Chron.  5.  10.  they  made  war  with  the  H.  19. 
20.  the  H.  were  delivered  into  theit  hand 

HAGGAL 
Gen.  46. 16.  the  sons  of  Gad  ;  II.  Shuni  and  Ezbon 
Ezra  5.  1.  H.  the  prophet  prophesied  to  the  Jews 
6.14.prospered  thro'  prophesying  of  H. the  prophet 
Hag.  1.  1.  word  of  the  Lord  by  H.  3.  1  2. 1, 10,20 
HAGGITH. 

2  Sam.  3.  4.  and  the  fourth,  Adonijah  the  son  of 
H.  1  Kings  1.  5, 11. 1  2. 13.  1  Chron.  3.  2. 

HALLELUIAH. 

Psal.  106.  t  1.  I  111- 1  1-  I  113.  t  1.  1  146.  t  1.  I 

148.  1 1.  I  149.  1 1.  I  150.  t  i. 

See  Allelui.^h,  in  ..Appellatives. 

HAM. 

Gen.  5.  32.  Noah  begat  Shem,  H.  and  Japheth, 

6.  10.  I  9.  18.  I  10.  1.  1  Chro7i.  1.  4. 

7.  13.  the  self-same  day  H.  entered  into  the  ark 

9.  18.  and  H.  is  the  father  of  Canaan 

10.  6.  sons  of  H.  Cush,  Mizraim,  20.  1  Chr.  1.  8. 
14.  5.  Chedorlaomer  smote  the  Zuzims  in  H. 

1  Chron.  4.  iQ.  they  of  H.  had  dwelt  there  of  old 
Psal.  78.  51.  he  smote  in  the  tabernacles  of  H. 

105.  23.  Jacob  sojourned  in  the  land  of  H. 
27.they  shewed  wonders  in  the  land  of  H. 106.22. 
HAMAN. 
Estk.  3.  1.  king  promoted  H.  ||  5.  H.  full  of  wrath 
2.all  the  king's  servants  bowed  and  reverenced  H. 
6.  wherefore  H.  sought  to  destroy  all  the  Jews 
7.cast  the  lot  before  H.  ||  4.  7.  H.  promised  to  pay 
15.  and  the  king  and  H.  sat  down  to  drink 
5.4.  the  king  and  H.came  to  the  banquet,  5.8.  |  7.1. 

9.  then  went  H.  fortK  that  day  joyful  and  glad 

11.  H.  told  them  of  the  glory  of  his  riches 

14.  the  thing  pleased  H.  (f  6.  5.  II.  stands  in  court 
6.  6.  H.  thought  II  11.  then  H.  took  the  apparel 

12.  but  H.  hasted  to  his  house  mourning 

13.  H.  told  Zeresh  his  wife  ||  7. 6.  this  wicked  H. 
7. 7.  H.  made  request  ||  8.  H.  was  fallen  on  the  bed 

10.  hanged  H.  |f  8. 1.  gave  Esther  the  house  of  H. 
9.  10.  slew  the  sons  of  H.  ||  14.  they  hanged  them 

HAMATH. 
JViim.  13.  21.  Zin  to  Rehob,  as  men  come  to  H. 
34.  8.  from  mount  Hot  to  the  entrance  of  H.  Josh. 

13.  5.  .rudg.  3.  3.  1  Kings  8.  65.  2  Kings 

14.  25.  2  Chron.  7.  8. 

2  Sam.  8.  9.  Toi  kingof  H.  1  Chron.  18.  9. 
2  Kings  14.  28.  now  Jeroboam  recovered  H. 

17.  24.  the  king  of  Assyria  brought  men  from  H. 
30.  the  men  of  H.  made  Ashima  their  god 

18.  34.  where  arc  the  gods  of  H.l  Isa.  36.  10. 

19.  13.  where  is  the  king  of  H.?  Isrr.  37.  13. 
23.33.  put  him  in  bands  in  the  land  of  H.  25.  21. 

1  Chron.  18.  3.  David  smote  Hadarezer  to  H. 

2  Chron.  8.  4.  Solomon  built  store-cities  in  H. 
/5a. 10.9. is  not  H. as  A  rjiad?  Samaria  as  Damascus'? 

11.  11.  Lord  shall  recover  his  people  from  H. 
Jer.  39.  5.  to  H.  where  he  gave  judgment,  52.  9. 

49. 23. about  Damascus,  H.is  confounded, &.\rpad 
Ezek.  47.  16.  fhe  border  on  the  north,  H.  17. 

90.  from  border  till  a  man  come  over  against  11. 
ZccA.9.2.  II.  also  shall  border  thereby.  Tyre,  Sidon 

HAMMEDATHA. 
Esth.  8.  5.  Haman  the  son  of  H.  9.  10,  24. 

HAMON-GOG. 
Ezek.  39.  11.  they  shall  call  it  the  valley  of  H. 

15.  the  buriers  have  burled  it  in  the  valley  of  H. 

HAMOR. 

Oen.  33.  19.  Jacob  bought  a  fiild  of  the  children 

of  H.  Shechem's  father,  .fosh.  24.  32. 

34.  6.  H.  went  out  to  commnr.e  with  Jacob,  8. 

24.  to  H.  and  Shechem  hearkened  all  the  citizens 

26.  they  slew  H.  and  Shechem,  and  took  Dinah 

Judg.O.iS.  serve  the  men  of  H.  father  of  Shechem 

HANAMEEL. 
./er.  32.  7.  H.  thine  uncle's  son  shall  come,  8. 
9.  I  bought  tho  field  of  H.  my  uncle's  son 

12.  I  gave  Uie  evidence  to  Baruch  in  sight  of  H,   I 


HEB 

HANANEEL. 
JVeA.3.1.  tower  of  H.  12. 39.  Jer.dl.38.  Zech.U  16 

HANANL 
1  Kings  10. 1.  to  Jehu  son  of  H.  the  word  came,  7. 

1  C/ir.25.  4.  H.  son  of  Himan  ||  25.  18th  lotto  H. 

2  CAr.  16.  7.  at  that  time  H.  the  seer  came  to  Asa 

19.  2.  Jehu  son  of  U.  went  to  meet  Jehoshaphat 

20.  34.  his  acts  in  the  book  of  Jehu  son  of  H. 
Ezra  10.  20.  of  the  sons  of  Immer,  H.  Zebadiah 
JVeA.  1.  2.  that  H.  one  of  my  brethren  came 

7.  2.  I  gave  my  brother  H.  charge  over  Jerusalem 
12.  36.  H.  with  the  musical  instruments  of  David 

HANANIAH. 
ICAr.  3.19.  the  sons  of  Zerubbnbcl ;  Meshullara,  H. 

21.  the  sons  of  H.  ||  8.  24.  H.  Benjamite 
25.  4.  H.  son  of  Heman  ||  23.  sixteenth  lot  to  H. 

2  Chron.  20.  11.  Uzziah  had  a  host  under  H. 
Ezra  10.  28.  H.  Zabbai  had  taken  strange  wives 
JVcA.  3.  8.  H.  the  son  of  an  apothecary  repaired 
7. 2. 1  gave  H.  ruler  of  palace  charge  over  Jerus. 

10.  2:1.  H.  sealed  ||  12.  12.  H.  with  trumpeU,  41. 
Jer.  28.  1.  H.  son  of  Azur  a  false  prophet 

11.  H.  spake  in  the  presence  of  all  the  people 

12.  after  that  H.  had  broken  Jeremiah's  yoke 
17.  H.  died  that  year  in  the  seventh  month 

36. 12.  Zedekidh  son  of  H.  sat  in  scribe's  chamber 
37.  13.  Irijah  the  son  of  H.  took  Jeremiah 
Dan.  1.  6.  of  the  children  of  Judah,  Daniel,  H. 

7.  he  gave  to  H.  the  name  of  Shadrach 
11.  Melzar  was  set  over  Daniel,  H.  Mjshael 
19.  among  all  was  found  none  like  Daniel,  H. 

2.  17.  then  Daniel  made  the  tiling  known  to  H. 
HANNAH. 

1  Sam.  1.  2.  Elkanah's  wife  H.  had  no  children 

8.  H.  why  weepest  thoul  ||  9.  so  H.  rose  up 

13.  H.  spake  in  her  heart,  only  her  lips  moved 
19.  Elkanah  knew  H.  ||  20.  alter  H.  conceived 

22.  but  H.  went  not  up  II  2.1.  H.  prayed,  and  said 
2.  21.  the  Lord  visited  H.  so  that  she  conceived 

HANOCH. 

Gen.25.  4.son3ofMidian;Ephah^tl.  ICAr.  1.33. 

46.  9.  H.  son  of  Reuben,  M'um.  26.  5.  ICAr.  5.  3. 

HANUN. 

2  Sam.  10.  I.  H.  his  sou  reigned  in  his  stead 
2.  I  will  shew  kindness  unto  H.  1  Chron.  19.  2. 

4.  H.  took  David's  servants,  and  shaved  off  ths 
one  half  of  their  beards,  ICAron.  19.  4. 

jV'fA.  3.  13.  H.  repaired  the  valley  gate 

30.  H.  si.\th  son  of  Zalaph  repaired  another  pieco 
HARAN,  a  man. 

Gen.  11.  26.  Terah  begat  H.  27.  ||  28.  H.  died 
29.  Nahor's  wife  was  Milcah  daughter  ef  H. 

31.  Terah  took  Lot  the  son  ofH.  his  son's  son 
1  Chron.2.  46.  Ephah,  Caleb's  concubine, bare  H. 

and  Moza,  and  II.  begat  Gazez 
23.  9.  the  sons  of  Shimei;  H.  Shelomith,  Haziel 

HAR.'VN,  a  place. 
Gen.l  1.31.Terah  came  to  H.  ||  32. Terah  died  in  H. 
12.  4.  Abram  at  75  years  departed  out  of  H. 

5.  he  took  tho  souls  *hat  they  had  gotten  in  H. 

27.  43.  flee  to  H.  ||  29.  4.  they  said,  of  H.  arc  we 

28.  10.  Jacob  went  from  Beer-sheba  toward  H. 
'iKings  19. 12.  my  fathers  destroyed  H.  Isa.  37. 12 

HARBONAH. 
Esth.  1. 10.  H.  was  one  of  the  chamberlains,  7.  9. 

HAROD. 

Jiidg.  7.  1.  Gideon  pitched  beside  the  well  of  H. 

HAROSHETH,  Srr  Gentiles. 

HAZAEL. 

1  Kings  19.  15.  anoint  H.  to  be  king  over  Syria 

17.  thatescapeth  the  swordofH.  shall  Jehu  slay 
IKings  8.9.  H.  went  to  meet  Elisha,  took  a  presenX 

15.  Ben-hadad  died,  and  H.  reigned  in  his  stead 
28.  Ahaziah  went  with  Joram  against  H. 

9.  14.  Joram  kept  Ramothgilead  because  of  H. 

10.  32.  H.  smote  them  in  all  the  coasts  of  Israel 

12.  17.  H.  set  his  face  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem 

18.  .Telroash  sent  the  hallowed  things  to  H. 

13.  3.  Lord  delivered  Israel  into  the  hand  of  H. 
22.  but  H.  oppressed  Israel  ||  24.  so  H.  died 
25.  recovered  from  Ben-hadad  son  of  H.  cities 

Jimos  1.  4.  I  will  send  fire  into  the  house  of  H. 

HAZELELPONI. 
1  Chron.  4.3.  tht  nime  of  their  sister  was  H. 

HAZEROTH. 
M'lim.  11.  35.  the  pcoiile  abode  at  H.  33.  17. 
12.  16.  the  people  removed  from  H.  33.  18. 
HAZOR. 
.7b,»A.n.lO., Joshua  took  H.  hesdof  these  kingdom* 

11.  and  he  burnt  H.  with  fire,  13. 
1.5.  23.  Kedesh  and  H.  cities  of  Judah,  25. 
19.  36.  Ramah  and  H.  cities  of  Naphlali 

■Tudg.  4.  2.  sold  them  to  Jabin  who  reigned  in  H 
I  Kings  9.  15. Solomon  raised  alevvtobuild  H. 
iKinirs  15.  29.  the  king  of  Syria  took  H. 
Jer.  49.  28.  concerning  the  kingdoms  of  H. 

.30.  flee,  dwell  deep,  O  ye  inhabitants  of  H. 

33.  and  H.  shall  be  a  dwelling  for  dragons 
HEBER. 
Oen.  46. 17.  the  gone  of  Beriah,  H.  1  Ciron.  7. 31 


HER 

rudg.  4  11.  H.  the  Kenite,  17.  |  5.  24. 
Luke  3  35.  Phuluc,  winch  was  the  aoii  of  H. 

HF.liKKVV. 
Oen.  14.  13.  one  came  and  told  Abraham  the  II. 

30.  14.  Bee  he  hath  brought  in  a  U.  tu  mock  ux 

41.  12.  there  wua  there  with  ua  a  young  man,  a  H. 
Exod.  2.  11.  he  spied  an  Egyptian  smiting  u  il. 
Jer.  34.  9.  should  let  a  il.  or  Hebrewess  go  tree 
Jonah  1.  9.  he  said  unto  thi.'ni,  I  am  a  II. 

HEBKEWS. 
Oen.  40.  15.  I  was  stolen  out  of  the  land  of  the  II. 

43.  32.  the  Egyptians  might  not  eat  with  the  11. 

Exod.  2.  6.  she  said,  this  is  one  of  the  H.  children 

13.  behold,  two  men  of  the  II.  strove  together 

3. 18.  God  of  the  11.  5. 3.  1 7.  16.  ]  9.  1,  13.  |  10.  3. 

1  Sam.  4. 6.  this  great  shout  in  tiie  camp  of  the  H. 
9.  be  strong,  tliat  ye  be  not  servants  to  the  II. 

13. 3.  let  the  H.  hear  ||  19.  lest  the  H.  make  swords 
14.  11.  behold  the  H.  come  forth  out  of  holes 
21.  the  II.  that  were  with  the  Philistines 
29.  3.  the  princes  said,  what  do  these  il.  here? 
Jiels  6.  1.  a  murmuring  of  Grecians  against  the  II. 

2  Cor.  11.  -22.  are  they  11.  or  Israelites?  so  am  I 
Phil.  3.  5.  I  am  of  Benjamin,  a  Hebrew  of  the  H. 

HEBREW. 
Luke  23.  38.  written  over  him  in  H.  .Tohn  19.  20. 
John  ."i.  2.  a  pool  called  in  the  H.  tongue,  Bethesda 
19.  13.  called  in  H.  Gabbatha  ||  17.  Golgotha 
Jicts  21.  40.  Paul  spake  lo  thoin  in  II.  22.  2. 
26. 14.  a  voice  saying  in  the  H.  tongue,  Saul,  Saul 
Hev.^.  11.  ill  H.  Abaddon  ||  J6.  Iti.  Armageddon 

HEBREW  man. 
Deut.  15.  12.  if  thy  brother,  a  H.  man,  be  sold 

HEliREW  servant. 
Oen.  39.  17.  the  H.  servant  came  in  to  mock  me 
Exod.  21.  2.  if  thou  buy  a  H.  servant 
HEBREW  woman,  women. 
Exod.  1.16.  dotheothce  of  a  midwife  to  H.  women 
19.  II.  women  are  not  as  the  Egyptian  women 
2.  7.  shall  I  ofjjl  to  thee  a  nurse  of  the  li.  women? 
Deut.  15.  12.  if  any  H.  woman  be  sold  unto  thee 

HEBREWESS. 
Jer.  34.  9.  every  man  should  let  a  11.  go  free 

"HEBRON,  place. 
Oen.  23.  2.  Sarah  died  in  Kirjalh-arba,  the  same  is 
H.  35.  27.  Josh.  14. 15.  |  20.  7.  Ju>l-r.  1.  10. 
37.  14.  Jacob  sent  Joseph  out  of  the  vale  of  H. 
AVrn.  13.22.  H.  was  built  seven  years  before  Zoan 
Josh.  10.  39.  as  he  did  to  H.  so  he  did  to  Debir 

14.  13.  Joshua  gave  to  Caleb  H.  14.  .Judg.  1.  20, 
I  .Sow.  30. 31.  a  present  to  them  which  were  in  H. 
S  .Sam.  2.  1.  whither  shall  I  go  up?  he  said  unto  II. 

2.  11.  the  time  David  was  kins  in  II.  was  seven 

years, 5. 5.  1  Kincrs  2.  II.  1  CArtfn.211.27. 

32  Joiib  and  his  men  came  to  H.  at  break  of  day 

3. 2.  to  David  were  sons  born  in  H.  5.  1  Chr.  3. 1, 4. 
32.  they  buried  Abner  in  II.  and  the  king  wept 

t.  12.  ihcy  buried  the  head  of  Ish-boslieth  in  II. 

5.3.  the  elders  oflsrael  came  to  II.  and  Dav.  made 

a  league  with  them  in  H.  1  Chron.  11.  3. 
13.  took  more  wives  after  he  was  come  from  H. 

15.  7.  which  I  have  vowed  to  the  Lrfrd  in  H. 
10.  then  ye  shall  say,  Absalom  reigncth  in  H. 

1  Chron.  6.  57.  cities  of  Judah  H.  a  city  of  refuge 

12.  38.  all  these  came  with  a  perfect  heart  to  H 

aCAron.ll.lO.RehoboambuiltZorah,  H.  in  Judah 

HEBRON,  person. 

Exod.  6.  18.  the  sons  of  Kohath;  Amram,II.  and 

Uzzicl,  JVum.  3.  19.  ICArnjj.  6.  2,  18.  |  23. 12. 

1  Chron.  2.  42.  sons  of  Mareshah  the  father  of  II. 
43.  the  sons  of  11.  J.5.  9.  |  23.  19.  |  24.  23. 

HEGE. 

Esth.  2.  3.  unto  the  custody  of  H.  the  chamberlain 
HELAM. 

2  5ani.  10. 16.  Syrians  bevond  the  river  came  lo  H 

IlELRON. 
Eiek.  27.  18.  was  thv  merchant  in  the  wine  of  II 

liEI-DAI. 
ZccA.  6.10.  lake  of  them  of  the  captivity  even  of  II 

IIELI. 
Luke  3.  23.  Joseph,  which  wni  the  son  of  II. 

(1EEKATII-HA7./URIM. 
35am.  2.  16.  wherefore  that  place  was  called  H. 

II  EM  AN. 
1  Kings  4.  31.  Solomon  was  wiser  than  Kthan,  TI. 

1  Chron.  2.  6.  ihc  sons  of  Zorah;  II.  and  CalrnI 
6.  33.  soil!!  of  KoliHlhites,  II.  a  singer,  son  of  Joe), 

the  Bonof  Shemiiel,  15.  17,  19.  |  16.  42 

25.  1.  David  appointed  of  the  sons  of  .\saph  and 

of  II.  4,  5.  2  Chrnn. .'..  12. 1 29.  14.  |  35.  1.5. 

3.  alltheso  wcreanniior  II   God  gavoH.  14  sons 

HEN. 

Z<M.  6. 14. crown  shall  be  fnrll.  sonof  Zephnninh 
IIEPIIZI-BAM. 

2  Kines  21.  1.  Mann-seh's  mollinr's  nnmo  was  H 
Isa.  62.  4.  ihou  shall  be  railed  II.  and  land  Beiilal 

HERMAS,  HERMES. 
Knm.  16.  14.  sahitp  flrrmns,  Pntrobas,  Ifermrs 

HERMOr;ENFj4 

2  Tim.l.lJ.from  mc,  of  whom  are  PhvKol'i"  «n<l  H 

734 


HET 

HERMON. 

Deut.  4. 48.  from  Aroer  to  mount  Sion,  which  b  H. 
.fosh.  13.  11.  all  mount  11.  Reuben  and  Gad  had 
fsu/.  89. 12.  Tabor  and  H.  shall  rejoice  in  thy  name 
133.  3.  it  is  the  dew  of  H.  that  descended  on  Zioii 
Cant.  4.  8.  look  from  the  top  ofSheiiir  and  II. 

HERMONITES. 
Ps.42. 6. 1  will  remember  thee  from  tlie  land  of  H. 

HEROU. 
JVat.  2.12.  warned,  that  they  should  not  return  to  H. 

15.  Joseph  was  there  till  the  death  of  H. 

16.  H.  slew  all  the  children  in  Beth-lehem 

14.  3.  for  H.  had  laid  hold  on  John,  Mark  0.  17. 

6.  but  when  H.  birth-day  was  kept,  Mark  6.  21. 

Markd.  20.  H.  feared  John,  knowing  he  was  a  just 

8.  15.  take  heed,  beware  of  the  leaven  of  II. 
Luke  3.  1.  and  11.  being  telrarch  of  Galileo 

19.  for  all  the  evils  which  H.  had  done 

9.  7.  H.  heard  of  all  that  was  done  by  Jesus 
13.  31.  depart  hence,  for  H.  will  kill  thee 

23.  7.  Pilate  sent  Jesus  lo  II.  ||  8.  H.  was  glad 

11.  H.  with  his  men  of  war  set  him  at  nought 

12.  Pilate  and  H.  were  made  friends  together 
15.  I  found  no  fault  in  this  man,  no,  nor  yet  II. 

.^cts  4.27.both  II.  and  Pontius  Pilate  against  Jesus 
12.  1.  II.  ve.\ed  the  church,  and  killed  James 
6.  when  H.  would  have  brought  forth  Peter 

11.  hath  delivered  me  out  of  the  hand  of  H. 

21.  on  a  set  day  H.  made  an  oration  to  tli'^m 
13.1. which  had  been  brought  up  vviih  II.  and  .Saul 
23.35.  command,  him  lo  be  kept  in  11.  judgni.-liall 

HERODIANS,  See  .Appellatives. 

HEUODIAS. 

Mat.  14.  3.  John  in  prison  for  H.  sake,  Mark  6.  17. 

6.  the  daughter  of  H.  danced,  Mark  6.  22. 
Mark  6.  19.  H.  had  a  quarrel  against  John 
Luke  3.  19.  Herod  being  reproved  by  John  for  II. 

herOdion. 

Rom.  16.  11.  salute  H.  my  kinsman,  greet  them 

HESIIBON. 
JVum.  21.  25.  Israel  dwelt  in  H.  and  its  villages 
26.  H.  was  the  city  of  Sihon  ||  27.  come  into  H. 
28.  a  fire  gone  out  of  H.  ||  30.  il.  is  perished 
32.  37.  children  of  Reuben  built  11.  and  Elealeh 
Deut.  2.  24.  I  have  given  thee  Sihon  king  of  H. 
Judg.  II.  26.  while  Israel  dwelt  in  II.  and  Aroer 
JVVA.  9. 22.  they  possessed  the  land  of  the  king  of  H. 
Cant.  7.  4.  thine  eyes  like  the  fish-pools  of  H. 
Isa.  15.  4.  H.  shall  cry  ||  ./er.  40.  3.  howl,  O  H. 
16.  8.  for  field  of  H.  binguish,  and  vine  of  Sibniah 
O.will  water  thee  with  my  tears,  OH. and  Elealeh 
.Ter.  48.  2.  in  H.  they  have  devised  evil  against  it 
34.  from  cry  of  H.  even  to  Elealeh  and  Jahrtz 
45. that  fled  stood  under  the  shadow  of  H.becan.^e 
of  the  force,  but  a  fTre  shall  come  out  of  II. 
See  SiHOfi. 
HETH. 
Oen.W.  15. Canaan  begat  Sidon  and  H.  IChr  1.13. 
23.  7.  Abraham  bowed  before  the  children  of  H. 
25.10.Ahraham  purchAscd  of  the  sons  of  H.  49. 32, 
27.46.  am  weary  of  life  because  of  daughters  of  II, 

HEZEklAH,  called  EZEKIAS. 

2  Kings  16.20.  H.  Ahaz's  son  reigned  in  h's  stead 

18.  14.  11.  sent  to  the  king  of  .Assyria  to  Lachish 

15.  H.  gave  him  all  the  silver  in  house  of  the  Lord 

22.  whose  altars  H.  hath  taken  away,  Isa.  36.  7. 
29.tliusBailh  the  king,  let  not  H.  deceive  you,  not 

able  to  deliver  you,  2CAr.  32.  15.  Isa.  36. 14 
31.  hearken  not  to  H.  .32.  Isa.  36.  16. 

19.1. king  H.  heard  it,  he  rent  his  clothes,  Isa.^'.\. 
15.  H.  prayed,  2  CAron.  30.  18.  Isa.  37.  15. 

20. 1.  II.  was  sick  lo  death,  2CAr.:K.  24.  /*-«.38.1 
3.  H.  wept  sore,  Isa.  38.  3.  ||  5.  turn  again,  tell  II. 

12.  Berodach  sent  a  present  to  II.  Isa.  .39.  1. 

13.  nothing  that  H.  shewed  them  not,  Isa.  39.  2. 
19.H.6iiid,  good  is  the  word  of  the  Eord,/.«rt.39.8. 

21.  H.  slept  with  his  fathers,  2  Chron.  32.  .33. 
21 .  3.  built  what  H.  had  destroyed,  2  Chrnn.  3.3. 3. 

iChr.  3.  23.  the  sons  of  Neariah;  II.  and  Azrikam 

4.  41.  came  in  days  of  H.  and  smote  Iheir  tenis 

2CAr.29.27.  H.  commanded  to  offer  biirnl-offerinps 

36.  and  H.  rejoiced,  and  nil  the  people  that  God 

30.  20.  the  Eord  hearkened  loH.  and  healed  lliem 

22.  Fl.  spake  comfortably  to  nil  the  Eeviles 
24.  H.  gave  the  congregation  IIXX)  bullocks 

31.  2.  H.  appointed  the  eonrsos  of  the  priests 
11.  then  H.  commanded  to  prepare  chambers 

32.  6.  the  iwoplo  rested  on  the  words  of  H. 

17.  so  shall  not  the  God  of  II.  deliver  his  people 
22.  Ihiifl  tho  Lord  saved  H.  from  Sennaelietib 
2.'i.H.  rendered  not  again  according  to  tho  benefit 
26.  wrath  canio  not  on  Ihom  in  the  days  of  11. 
30.  and  H.  prospered  in  all  his  works 

Ezra  2.  16.  tho  children  of  Atcr  of  H.  JVcA.  7.  21. 
I'roiK  25.  1.  which  the  men  of  II.  copied  out 
Jer.  15.  4.  berauso  of  Mannsseh  the  son  of  JI. 
26.  IH.  Micnh  prophesied  in  days  of  II.  Mic.  1.  1. 

19.  did  II.  and  all  Judah  put  Micah  to  death 
Hos.  I  1  I  he  word  that  came  to  llosea  in  days  of  11 
Mai.  1.9.  Achaz begat  H.  ||  10.  H.  bugat  Manasscs 


HOR      IPKOriR  TfjLMEt 

HEZRON. 
(?C7i.  46. 9.  sons  of  Reuben;  il.  Carmi,  £zod.  6.14 
12.  sonofPharez,  H.yi'H<A4.18.  1  CAr.  2. 5. 1 4.1 
liuth  4.19.  H.  begat  Ram,  Ram  begat  Amniinadab 
1  Chr.  2.  9.  the  sons  of  H.  ||  If*.  Caleb  the  son  of  H. 
21.  11.  begat  Segub  ||  24.  after  that  II.  was  dead 
25.  the  sons  of  Jerahmeel  the  first  born  of  II. 
HIDDEKEL. 
Oen.  2.  14.  the  name  of  the  third  river  is  H. 
Van.  10.  4.  as  I  was  by  the  side  of  the  river  H. 

HIEL. 
1  Kings  16.  34.  H.  the  Beth-elite  built  Jericho 

IIIGGAION. 
P«o/.9.16.the  wicked  Miared  in  his  works,  II.  Sclab 

HILKIAH. 
i  Kings  18. 1^.  there  came  out  Eliakim  son  of  H. 
37.  then  came  Eliakim  the  son  of  II.  to  Ilczekiah 
with  his  clothes  rent  and  told  him,  Isa.36.  22. 

22.  4.  saying,  go  up  to  H.  the  high-priest 

8.  II.  gave  the  book  to  Shaphan,  10.  2CAr.  34. 15 
12.  the  king  commanded  H.  to  inquire  of  the 
Lord  for  him,  2  Chron.  34.  20, 
14.  so  H.  went  to  Iluldah,  2  Chrun.  34.  2-2. 

23.  4.  commaiideil  II.  to  bring  forth  the  vessels 

1  C//r.6.13.  Shallum  begat  H.  and  H.  begat  Azariah 

45.II.son  of  Amaziah  ||  9.11. H. son  of  Meshullam 
26.  11.  II.  the  second  son  of  Hosuh,  Tabaliah 
F.zra  7.  1.  H.  the  son  of  Slialluin,  son  of  Zudok 
jVfA.  8.  4.  II.  stood  on  Ezra's  right  hand 

11.  11.  Seraiah  tho  son  of  H.  dwelt  at  Jerusalem 

12.  7.  II.  the  priest  went  up  with  Zerubbabel 

21.  of  H.  Ilashabiah  was  a  priest,  of  Jeduiah 
Isa.  22.20. 1  will  call  my  servant  Eliakim  son  of  II. 
.ler.  1.  1.  the  words  of  Jeremiah  the  son  of  H. 

29.  3.  Gemariah  son  of  II.  was  sent  to  Babylon 

HINNOM. 
,Tosh.^5.  8.  the  border  went  up  bv  the  valley  of  H. 

2  Kings  23.10.  Topliet,  which  is  iii  the  valley  of  H. 
2  Chron.  28.  3.  he  burnt  incense  in  the  valley  of  H. 

33.  6.  he  caused  his  children  lo  pass  thro'  fire  in  H. 
./cr.  19.  2.  go  forth  lo  the  valley  of  the  son  of  H. 

32.  35.  they  built  high  places  in  the  valley  of  H. 

HIRAM. 

2.Sam.5.11.  TI.  king  ofTyre  sent  messengers  to  Da- 
vid and  cedar  trees  and  masons,  ICAr.  14.  I. 

1  Kings  5.  1.  H.  king  of  Tyre  sent  his  servants  to 
Solomon,  for  II.  was  ever  a  lover  of  David,  8. 

10.  H.  gave  Solomon  cedar-trees  and  fir-trees 

11.  Solomon  gave  H.  20,000  measures  of  wheat 

12.  there  was  peace  between  II.  and  Solomon 
7.  13.  Solomon  sent  and  fetched  H.  out  of  Tyre 

40.  H.  madellie  layers, H.  made  an  end  of  doing 
9. 12.  II.  came  lo  see  the  cities  Solomon  had  given 

27.  II.  sent  in  the  navy  his  servants,  shipnien 
10.  11.  the  navy  of  II.  brought  in  alinug  trees 

22.  king  had  at  sea  a  navy,  with  the  ni-vy  of  II. 

UITTITE. 
CTni.'i5  0.  buried  hlin  in  the  field  of  Epli/oii  the  H. 

26.  31.daiigliierof  Reri  the  H.  Elon  the  H.  36.2. 

49.  30.  Abraham  bonghtof  Ephron  the  II.  .50.  1,3. 
F.jod.  23.28.  I  will  drive  nut  the  H.  . •13.2. 1 34. 11. 
.Jvsk.  9.  I.  the  H.  and  Ainorile  gathered,  II.  3. 

1  ■'^am.  26.  6.  David  said  to  .Abimclecli  the  H. 

2  Sam.  n.  6.  DnvliI  .said,  send  mc  Uriah  the  IT. 
21.  thy  servant  Uriah  the  H.  is  dead  also,  24. 

12.  0.  I'hou  bast  killed  I'riah  Ihe  II.  with  sword 
10.  taken  the  wife  of  Uriah  the  H.  Jo  be  thy  wifo 
23.  39.  Uriah  the  H.  thitly-seven  w'orthies  in  all 
1  Kings  1.5.  5.  save  only  in  mutter  of  Uriah  the  H. 
Ezck:  16.  3.  and  thv  mother  a  H.  45. 

HITTITES. 

firn.  15. 20.  seed  ha  ve  I  given  land  of  H.  .Tosh.  T.  4. 

Fxod.  3.  8.  Canaanhes  H.  Amoriles,  17.  I  13.  .5. 1 

23.23.  /),  i<r.  7.  I.  I  CO.  17.  .Insh.  .3. 10.  |  12.8.  ( 

24. 11.  .r„dg.  3. 5.  1  Kings  9. 20.  A'<h.  9.  8. 

.hiilg.  1.  26.  the  man  went  into  the  land  of  the  H. 

3.  5.  Ihe  ehllilren  oflsrael  dwelt  among  Ihe  H. 

1  AVinr.*lI.  I.  but  Solomon  hived  wom<>n  of  the  H. 

2  Kinir.^  7.  6.  L.'rael  h  red  the  king-"  of  the  H. 

2  Chron.  S.  7.  of  II  lel1  Solomoninnde  pay  Irihiilo 
F.ira'J.  1.  done  after  the  nlmniinalinn^  of  Ihe  H. 
HIVITE,  miieh  in  Hittiie. 
HOB  An. 
wViim.  10. 29.  Moses  said  loll,  cnmn  Ihon  wi'h  na 
.fuiiir.  4.  II.  lleher  vvas  of  the  children  of  H. 

IIOPFINI. 
I  fSnjti.  1.3.  t\vo  sons  of  Eli,  II.  and  Plilnehas,  4.  4. 
2.  31.  II.  and  Phinehns  shall  both  die  in  one  day 

4.  11.  Eli's  son':  n.  and  PhinelniB  were  slain,  17 

HOR.  S,-r  MoiNT. 
IIOREH. 
Exoit.  3.  1.  Moses  led  the  flock   and  raine  to  lh« 
mountain  of  Go.I,  even  lo  II.  1  /w-t^.v  19.  8. 

17.  6.  I  will  stand  hifoie  thee  on  the  rock  in  H. 

33.  6.  Tsriiel  stripped  of  ornaments  bv  niniinl  H. 
neiif.  1.  6.  Ihe  Lord  spake  lo  iiR  in  II.  4.  15. 

•t.  in.  when  Ihon  sloodesi  before  llie  I.ord  in  H. 
5  o  Ihe  T.d.  made  a  covenant  will,  us  in  H.29.  1 
9.  W.  iilso  in  II.  vo  provoked  'he  l.onl  tn  wrath 

18.  16.  all  Ihou'dcairodst  of  the  Lord  in  II 


Proper  Nasm.]      JAB 

1  Kiv^f,  8.  0.  nolliinsr  in  iIip  ark  save  the  two  fables 

which  Mioses  pill  ill  liie  ark  at  H.  2  C/iron.  5. 10. 

f  .inMOG.lS.thoymadeacalfin  II.  and  worshijiped 

Mai.  4.  4.  whirh  I  cmnninnded  iinto  Moses  in  H. 

HOR-irAGinnAi). 

A"am.  33.  32.  eiRain|>pd  at  H.  ||  33.  went  from  11. 

IIORMAH. 
JVum  14. 45.the  Canaauites discomfited  them  to  H. 

21.  3.  and  he  called  the  name  of  the  place  H. 
J)iut.l.i4.  and  destroyed  you  in  Seir  even  to  H. 
Jiish.  l.'i.  30.  the  cities  of  .ludah,  Eltolad,  H. 

19.  4.  Simeon  had  out  of  Judah,  Bethul,  H. 
J'ldg.  1.  17.  the  name  of  the  city  was  called  H. 
1  Sam.  30.  30.  a  present  to  thcin  that  were  in  H. 

1  Chron.  4.  30.  Shimei's  sons  dwelt  at  H.  in  Ziklag 

HORONAIM. 
I.ta.  15.  5.  in  the  way  of  H.  they  shall  raise  a  cry 
Jer.  48.  3.  a  voice  of  cryin?  shall  be  from  H. 

5.  in  going  down  of  H.  the  enemies  heard  a  cry 
34.  from  Znar  to  H.  they  uttered  their  voice 

HORONITE,  See  S.vnballat. 

riOSHEA. 

Deut.  32. 44.  ho  and  H.  son  of  Nun  spake  to  people 

2  Kings  15.30.H.made  a  conspiracy  against  Pekah 
17.  1.  H.  son  of  Elah  began  to  ruigu  in  Samaria 

3.  H.  became  the  king  of  Assyria's  servant 

6.  in  the  ninth  year  of  H.  Siimaria  taken,  18. 10. 
1  Cliron.  27.  20.  the  ruler  of  Ephraim  was  H. 
JV'cA.  10.  23.  H.  and  Hananiah  sealed  the  covenant 

HUR. 
£rorf.l7.10.Moses,  Aaron,  H.went  up  totopofhill 

12.  and  Aaron  and  H.  stayed  up  his  hands 

24.  14.  behold,  Aaron  and  H.  are  with  you 

31.  2.  Lord  hath  called  Brzaleel,  the  son  of  Uri, 

son  of  H.  of  the  tribe  of  Jiidah,  35.  30.  |  38. 22. 

JVum.  31.  8.  they  slew  Evi,  Rekem,  Zur,  H.  and 

Reba,  five  king.?  of  Midian,  .Tnsh.  13.21. 

1  Kings  4.  8.  the  son  of  H.  in  mount  Ephraim 
iChron.  2. 19.  Cileb  took  Ephratah,  which  hareH. 

20.  H.  begat  Uri  |1  4. 1.  sons  of  Judah,  H.  Shobal 
50.  these  were  the  sons  of  Calrb  the  son  of  H. 

4.  4.  these  are  the  .'ions  of  H.  Ephratah,  Ashur 

A'cA.  3.9.  Reiihaiah  son  of  H.  repaired  next  to  them 

KTTSHAI. 

2  Sam.  15. 32.  H.  the  .Archite  came  to  meet  David 
37.  so  H.  David's  friend  came  into  the  city 

16.  IG.  H.ciime  to  Absalom  and  said,  G.  save  kin 
17.  said  to  H.  is  this  thy  kindness  to  thy  friend? 
I7.5.call  H.ll  8.ror,Bald  It.  ibou  kno  west  thy  father 

14.  the  counsel  offl.  is  better  tli^in  of  Ahithophel 

15.  then  said  11.  to  Zadok  and  lo  Abiathar 
I  Kivg.f  4.  Ifi.  B;ianah  the  son  of  H.  was  in  Ashur 
I  Olron.  27.  33.  and  H.  was  the  king's  companion 

HIIZZAB. 

JVa/t.2.7.H.  shall  be  led  awavcaplive,be  brougbtup 
HYMENEUS. 

1  Tim.  1.  20.  of  wh')ni  is  H.  and  Alexander 

2  Tim.  2. 17.  of  whom  is  II.  and  Philetus 


JAAZANTAII. 

2  KimTn  25.  23.  .1.  came  to  Gedaliah,  to  Mizpeh 
Jer.  35.  3.  J.  of  the  house  of  the  Rediabites 
F.ir.k.  8.  11.  .1.  stood  with  his  censer  in  his  hand 
11.  1.  J.  and  Pelatlah  princes  of  the  people 

.lABAL. 
Gen.4.20.J.  was  the  father  o'such  as  dwell  in  tents 

JABllOK. 
<?en.  32.  22.  and  Jacob  passed  over  the  ford  J. 
/)e«t.2.  37.  thou  earnest  nottoanv  place  of  river  J. 
3.  16.  I  gave  Rtubin  and  Gad  the  border  to  J. 
Josh.  12. 2.  Sihon  ruled  from  Gilead  to  the  river  J. 
JARESH. 

1  .'Jam.  11. 5.  they  lolil  Saul  the  tidings  of  men  ofj. 

9.  shewed  to  the  men  of  J.  and  they  were  glad 
31. 12.  came  to  J.  and  burned  the  body  of  Sanl 

13.  thf-y  buried  their  bones  at  J.  1  Chron.  10.  12. 
S  Kings  1.5.  10.  Shallum  the  son  of  J.  conspired 

13.  Phalliim  tlie  son  of  J.  beg:in  to  reign 

14.  Menaheni  smnie  SUalUini  the  son  of  J. 

JABESH-GlLEAn. 
Judg.  21.  8.  there  came  none  to  the  camp  from  J. 

10.  enyin",  go  and  smite  the  inhabitants  of  J. 
12.  they  found  400  young  vii  g-ns  ofJ.  not  known 
14.  gave  Beiij.unites  wives  of  women  of  J. 

I>S<zrn.Il.l.  Nahash  came  and  encamped  against  J. 

31.  11.  the  inhibUants  of  J.  h'ard  what  the  Phi- 

fstines  had  done  to  Saul,  1  Chron.  10.  12. 

2  Sam.  2.  4.  men  of  J.  were  Ihpy  that  buried  Sniil 
21. 12.  David  took  bones  of  Saul  from  men  of  J. 

J  A  BEL. 
I  Ch.r.%  55.  the  families  of  scribes  who  dwelt  at  J. 

JABEZ. 
1  Cftron.  4. 9.  J.  was  more  honourable  than  his  bre- 
thren, and  his  mother  called  his  name  J. 
10.  J.  called  on  God  of  Israel,  siiying,  O  bless  me 
JABIN. 
Af  A.n.l.  whcji  J.  king  of  Hazor  heard  these  things 
135 


JAC 

Judg.  4.  2.  the  Lord  sold  them  into  tbe  Iiand  of  J. 
17.  was  peace  between  J. and  the  house  of  Heber 

23.  God  subdued  that  day,  J.  king  of  Canaan 

24.  the  hand  of  Israel  prevailed  against  J. 
Psal.  83.  9.  do  to  them  as  unto  J.  at  brook  Kison 

JACHIN. 

1  Kings  7. 21.  he  set  up  pillars  in  temple,  he  called 

the  pillar  on  the  right  hand  J.  2  Chron.  3.  17. 

JACOB. 

G'cn.25.26.he  was  called  J.  tl  27.J.  was  a  plain  man 

29.  J.  sod  pottage  ||  34.  J.  gave  Esau  pottage 
27. 22.  the  voice  is  J.  ||  30.  J.  was  scarce  gone  out 

36.  Esau  said,  is  not  he  rightly  named  J. 

41.  Esau  hated  J.  ||46.  if  J.  take  a  wifeof  Ileth 

28.  5.  Isaac  sent  away  J.  ||  7.  J.  obeyed  his  father 

16.  J.  awaked  out  of  sleep  {|  20.  J.  vowed  avow 

29.  10.  J.  saw  Rachel  the  daughter  of  Laban 
20.  and  J.  served  seven  years  for  Rachel 
28.  and  J.  did  so,  and  fulfilled  her  week 

30.  IG.  J.  came  out  of  the  field  in  the  evenin; 

37.  and  J.  took  him  rods  of  green  poplar 

42.  the  feeble  were  Laban's,  the  stronger  J. 

31.  1.  J.  hath  taken  all  that  was  our  father's 
20.  J.  stole  away  unawares  to  Laban  the  Syrian 
53.  J.  sware  by  the  fear  of  his  father  Isaac 

32.  3.  J.  sent  messengers  before  him  to  Esau 
4.  J.  saith  thus  ||  7.  then  J.  was  greatly  afraid 

18.  then  thou  sbalt  say,  they  be  thy  servant  J 
24.  J.  was  left  alone,  and  there  wrestled  a  man 
28  thy  name  shall  be  no  more  J.  but  lsrael,35.10. 
.30.  J.  called  the  name  of  the  place  Peniel 

33.  ].  J.  looked,  and  behold,  Esau  came 

17.  J.  journeyed  to  Succoth  ||  18.  to  Shalem 

34.  5.  J.  held  his  peace  until  they  were  come 
7.8ons  of  J.  13. 25.  |  35.26. 1 49. 1, 2.  IKings  18.31. 

35.6.  J.  came  to  Luz  ||  15.  J. called  the  place  Beth-el 
37.  2.  these  are  the  generations  of  J. 
34.  J.  rent  his  clothes,  put  sackcloth  on  his  loins 

45.  26.  J.  heart  fainted,  for  he  believed  not 

46.  6.  J.  and  all  his  seed  came  into  Egypt 

26.  all  the  souls  that  came  with  J.  were  sixty-six 

47. 10.  J.  blessed  Pharaoh  ||  28.  the  whole  age  of  J. 

49.24.  by  hinds  of  the  mighty  God  of  J.  Erorf.3.6, 

15,  16.  1  4.  5.  2  Sam.  23.  1.  Psal.  20.  1. 

Kzod.2.24.rememl).hi8  covenant  with  J.  /^eB.26.42. 

JVum.  23.  7.  come,  curse  me  J.  and  defy  Israel 

10.  who  can  countdustof  J.  and  number  of  Israel 

23.  there  is  no  enchantment  against  J.  it  shall  be 

said  of  J.  and  Israel,  what  hath  God  wrought? 

24.17.  there  shall  come  astarout  of  J.  and  sceptre 

19.  out  of  J.  came  he  that  shall  have  dominion 
Deut.  32.  9.  J.  is  the  lot  of  his  inheritance 

33.10.  they  shall  teach  J.  thy  judgments  and  Israel 

28.  fountain  of  J.  shall  be  on  land  of  corn,  wine 

1  Chron.  16.  Vi.  O  ye  seed  of  Israel  his  servant, 

ye  children  of  J.  his  chosen,  P.<!al.  105.  C. 

Psal.  14.  7.  J.  shall  rejoice,  Isr.  shall  be  glad,  53. 6. 

20.  1.  the  name  of  the  God  of  J.  defend  thee 

22.  23.  all  ye  seed  of  J.  glorify  him  and  fear  him 

44. 4. my  king,0  God, command  deliverances  for.l. 

46.  7.  the  God  of  J.  11.  |  75.  9.  |  70.  6.  I  81.  1,  4. 

I  84.  8.  I  94.  7.  I  114.  7.  |  132.  2,  5.  1  146.  5. 

47.4.the  excellency  ofJ.  whom  he  loved, JV'aA.2.2. 

78.  21.  afire  was  kindled  ag.  J.  angor  against  Isra. 
71.  he  brought  him  to  feed  J.  his  people 

79.  7.  for  they  have  devoured  J.  and  laid  waste 
8.1.  1.  thou  hast  brought  back  the  captivity  of  J. 
87.2. gates  of  Zion  more  than  all  the  dwellings  of  J, 
10.5.  23.  and  J.  sojourned  in  the  lan<l  of  Ham 
135.  4.  the  Lord  hath  chosen  J.  unto  himself 

ha.  2.  3.  the  God  of  J.  41. 21.  Mic.  4. 2.  Mat.  22. 

32.  Mark  12.  26.  Luke  20.  37.  .^cts  3.  13. 

I  7.  32,  46. 
10.  21.  the  remnant  of  J.  shall  return  to  God 
14.  1.  for  the  Lord  will  have  mercy  on  J. 
17.  4.  in  that  day  the  glory  of  J.  shall  be  made  thin 
27.  6.  shall  cause  them  that  come  of  J.  to  lake  root 

9.  bv  this  shall  the  iniquity  of  J.  be  purged 
20.  23.  they  shall  sanctify  the  holy  One  of  J. 
41.8.J.  whom  I  have  chosen,  the  seed  of  Abraham 

14.  fear  not,  thou  worm  J.  and  ye  men  of  Israel 

42.  24.  who  gave  J.  for  a  spoil?  did  not  the  Lord? 

43.  28.  therefore  I  have  given  J.  to  the  curse 

44.  5.  another  shall  call  himself  by  the  name  of  J. 
23.  for  the  Lord  hath  redeemed  J.  .Ter.  31.  11. 

45.  4.  for  J.  my  servant's  sake,  I  called  thee 
43.  20.  the  Lord  hath  redeemed  his  servant  .1. 
49.  5.  that  formed  me  to  bring  J.  again  to  him 

6.  be  my  servant  to  raise  up  the  tribes  of  J. 

26.  thv  Redeemer,  the  mighty  One  of  J.  60.  16. 
,'')«.  14.  I  will  feed  thee  with  the  heritage  of  J. 
65. 0. 1  will  bring  forth  a  seed  out  of  J.  and  Jndnli 
rn:  10.  16.  the  portion  of  J.  not  like  them,  51. 19. 

25.  for  they  have  eaten  up  J.  and  devoured  him 

30.  7.  it  is  even  the  time  of  J.  trouble,  be  saved 

10.  therefore  fear  thou  not,  O  my  servant  J. 

15.  I  will  bring  again  the  captivity  of  J.  tents 

31.  7.  saith  the  Lonl,  sing  with  gladness  for  J. 
.33.  26.  then  will  I  ca.st  away  the  seed  of  J. 

46.  27.  J.  shall  return  to  be  in  rest  and  ease 


JAM 

Tjam.  1.  17.  Lord  hath  commanded  conceinlng  J 

2.  3.  ho  burned  against  J.  like  a  flaming  fire 
//ws.lO.ll.Judah  shall  plow,  J.shall  break  his  cods 

12.  2.  I  will  punisli  J.  ||  12.  J.  fled  into  Syria 
j?Hio«  6.  8.  I  abhor  the  excellency  of  J.  and  hate 

7.  2.  by  whom  shall  J.  arise,  for  he  is  small?  5. 

8.7.  the  Lord  hath  sworn  by  the  excellency  of  J 
Mic.  1.  5.  for  the  transgression  of  J.  is  all  this 

3.  1.  and  I  said,  hear,  I  pray  you,  O  heads  of  J. 
5.  8.  remnant  of  J.  shall  be  among  the  Gentiles 

MaL  1.  2.  was  not  Esau  J.  brother?  yet  I  loved  J. 

3.6.  therefore,  ye  sous  of  J.  are  not  consumed 
Mat.  1.  2.  Isaac  begat  J.  ||  1.5.  Matthan  begat  J. 

8. 11.  shall  sit  down  with  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  J. 
Lake  13. 28.  when  ye  pec  J.  in  the  kingdom  of  GoJ 
.fohn  4.6.now  J.well  was  there,  Jesua sat  on  the  well 
.^Jcts  7.  14.  Joseph  called  his  father  J.  to  him 
Rom.  9. 13.  J.  have  I  loved,  but  Esau  have  I  hated 

11.  2l5.  and  shall  turn  away  ungodltncss  from  J. 
Hell.  11.9.  Abraham  dwelling  in  tabernacles  with  J 

20.  by  faith  Isaac  blessed  J.  {|  21.  J.  blessed  sons 
See  House. 
In  JACOB. 

Gen.  49. 7. 1  will  divide  them  in  J.  and  scatter  ihcm 
JVum.  23.  21.  he  hath  not  beheld  iniquity  in  J. 
Psal.  59.  13.  let  thein  know  that  God  ruleth  in  3. 
78.5.for  he  established  a  testimony  in  J.  and  a  law 
99.  4.  thou  executest  judgment  and  righteous.in  J 
/sa.59.20.to  them  that  turn  from  transgression  in  J. 

O  JACOB. 
JVum.  24.  5.  how  goodly  are  thy  tents,  O  J. ! 
Psai  24.  6.  the  generation  that  seek  thy  face,  O  J. 
fsa.  40.27.  why  saycst  thou,  0  J.  my  way  is  hidi 
43.  1.  saith  the  Lord  that  created  thee,  O  J. 
22.  but  thou  hast  not  called  upon  me,  O  J. 
44. 1.  yet  hear  O  J.  ||  48. 12.  hearken  unto  me,  O  J. 
2.  fear  not,  O  J.  my  servant,  Jer.  46.  27,  28. 

21.  remember  these,  O  J.for  thou  art  my  servant 
Mic.  2. 12.  I  will  surely  assemble,  O  J.  a'l  of  thea 

To  or  unto  JACOB. 
Cfen.  31.24.  speak  not  to  J,  either  good  or  bad,  29. 
35.  9.  God  appeared  unto  J.  and  blessed  him 
50.24.  the  land  which  he  swnie  to  give  to  J.  Exod. 
6.  8.  I  33.  1.  JV«TO.  32.  11.  Deut.  6.  10.  I  2'J. 
13.  1  30.  20.  I  34.  4.  F.iek.  37.  25. 
1  Chr.  16.  17.  and  hath  confirmed  the  same  to  3.  for 
a  hi  w,  and  to  Israel  for  a  covenant,  Ps.  105. 10. 
P.<!al.\il.\d.hc  shewed  his  word  unto  J. his  statutes 
Isa.  9.  8.  the  Lord  sent  a  word  unto  J.  it  lighted  on 
Jl/ie.3.8.to  declare  7i7((o  J.his  transgression  and  Isr. 
7.  20.  wilt  perform  truth  to  J.  and  mercy  to  Abr. 

JAEL. 
.Judg.  4.  17.  Siscra  fled  away  to  the  tent  of  J. 

21.  J.  took  a  nail  of  the  tent  and  a  hammer 

22.  J.  came  out  to  meet  Barak,  and  said 
5.  6.  in  days  of  J.  the  high-ways  were  unoccupied 

24. blessed  above  women  shall  J.  wife  of  Heber  be 
JAH. 
Psal.  68.  4.  extol  him  bv  his  name  J.  and  rejoice 

JAHAZ. 
J\'Vm.  21.  23.  Sihon  gathered  his  people  and  came 
and  fought  at  J.  Deut.  2.  32.  .ludg.  11.  20. 
ha.  15.  4.  their  voice  shall  be  heard  even  to  J. 
,lcr.  48.  34.  to  J.  have  thev  uttered  their  voice 

JAHAZAH. 
.Josh.  21.  .36.  out  of  Reuben  J.  given  lo  the  Leviles 
.Ter.  48.  21.  judgment  is  come  upon  Holon  and  J. 

J  AIR. 
JVum.  32. 41.  J.  took  the  small  towns,  Deut.  3. 14. 
Judg.  10.  3.  J.  the  Gileadile  judged  Israel  22  years 

5.  J.  died  |)  1  Chrvn.  2.  22.  Seguh  begat  J. 
1  Chron.  20.  .5.  Ellianan  the  son  of  J.  slew  Lahmi 


Esth.  2.  5.  Mordecai  the  son  of  J.  a  Benjamito 

JAIRUS. 

Jl/ar/i5.22.  J.  a  ruler  of  the  synagogue.  /.uA'e8. 41. 

JAKEH,  .''re  AotiR. 

JAMBRES. 

2  Tim.  3.  8.  as  Jannes  and  J.  withstood  Moses 

JAMES. 
Mat.i.^X.a^w  two  brethren  J.and  3ohn,Mark  1.19. 
10.  2.  J.  the  son  of  Zobedce,  Mark  3.  17. 
3.  J.  the  son  of  Alpheus,  Mark  3.  18.  .^cts  1.  iX 
13.  55.  and  his  brethren  J.  and  Joses,  Mark  6  3. 
17.  1.  after  six  days  Jesus  taketh  Peter,  J.  and 
John,  Mark  5.  37.  !  9.  2.  I  14.  33.  Luke 
8.  51. 
27.  56.  Mary  Masdalenc  and  Mary  mother  of  3. 
and  Joses,  Mark  15.  40.  I  10.  1.  Luke  24.  iO. 
Mark  10.  41.  began  to  be  miicli  displeased  with  J. 
13.  3.  Peter,  J.  and  .lohn  asked  him  |irivately 
Luke  5.  10.  J.  was  astonished  at  draught  of  fi'Jhea 
.irts  I.  13.  where  abode  both  Peter,  J.  and  John 
12  2.  Herod  killed  J.  brother  of  John  with  sword 
17. Peter  said,  shew  these  things  to  J.and  brethren 
15.  1.3.  .1.  answered,  saying,  hearken  unto  me 
21.  18.  Paul  went  in  with  ub  unto  J.  and  elders 
1  Or.I5.7.aller  that  was  seen  of  J. then  of  apostles 
Cral.  1. 19. 1  saw  none,  save  J.  the  Lord's  biother 
2.  9.  when  J.  perceived  the  grace  liven  to  me 
12.bofure  certain  came  from  J.did  eat  with  Gent. 


JEH 

JANNA. 

Luke  '.i.'-ii.  Melchi  who  was  aon  of  J.  who  was 

JANNEf!,  .S>«.I\MBRIC3. 

JAPHETH. 

Oen.  5. 32.  Shem,  Ham,  J.  the  sons  of  Noah,  6. 10 

1  7.  13.  J  9. 18.  1  Chron.  1.  4, 

9.  23.  Shem  and  J.  took  a  garment  and  covered 
37.  Gud  shall  enlarge  J.  hu  simll  dwell  in  tents 

10.  1.  unto  J.  were  sons  born,  1  Chron.  1.  5. 
•21.  Shem  father  ol'Eber,  brother  of  J.  the  elder 

JAKKU. 
Has.  5. 13.  then  Ephraicn  saw,  and  sent  to  king  J. 
10.  C.  shall  be  carried  for  a  present  to  king  J. 

JAUED. 
Om.  5.  15.  Maha'ce!  b.gut  J.  Luke  3.  37. 

JASHER. 
Josh.  10. 13.  written  in  the  book  of  J.  2  Sam.  1. 18, 

JASON, 
jfcte  17.  5.  the  Jews  assaulted  the  house  of  J. 
6.  they  drew  J.  ||  7.  whom  J.  hath  received 
9.  and  when  they  had  taken  security  of  J. 
Rom.  16.  21.  Lucius,  J.  and  Sosipater  salute  you 

JAVAN. 
<Vm.l0.2.  sonsof  Japheth;  J.  Tubal,  1  Chron.  1.5. 
ha.  66.  19.  (  will  send  those  that  escape  to  J. 
Eiek.  27.  13.  J.  and  Tubal  were  thy  merchants,  19. 

JAZER. 

JV*««n.  32.  1.  they  saw  J.  was  a  land  for  cattle,  3. 

/ja.l6.8.lheyare  come  even  unto  J.  they  wandered 

9.1  will  bewail  with  weeping  of  J. vine  of  Sibmah 

IBHAR. 

2Som.  5.  15.  David's  son  I.  1  Chron.  3.  6.  I  14.  5. 

JCHABOD. 

1  Sam.i.  21. she  named  the  child  I.  glory  departed 
14.  3.  Ahiah  the  son  of -Ahitiib,  I.  brother 

ICONIU.M. 
yiets  13.  51.  Paul  and  Barnabas  came  unto  I. 
14.  1.  in  I.  they  went  both  into  the  synagogue 
19.  there  came  thither  certain  Jews  from  I. 
16.  2,  well  reported  of  by  the  brethren  at  I. 

2  Tim.  3.  11.  afflictions  which  came  to  me  at  I. 

IDDO. 
1  Kin^s  4.  14.  Ahinadab  son  of  I.  had  Mahanaim 

1  Chron.  6.21.  ofGershom,  Joash  his  son,  I.  his  son 
27.21.  of  the  half  trilm  of  Manasseh  I.  was  ruler 

2  Chr.  9.  2'.».  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Solomon  written 

in  the  visions  of  F.  the  seer,  12.  1.5.  |  13. 22. 

Ezra  5. 1.  Ze.^h.  son  of  I.  prophesied,  Zech.  1.1,7. 

6.  14.  through  prophesying  of  Zechnriah  son  of  1. 

8.  17.  I  sent  them  to  I.  the  chief,  and  lolil  them 

what  they  shoidd  say  to  I.  and  his  brethren 

AVA.12.4.  i.  with  priests  went  up  with  Zerubbabel 

IDU.MEA. 
ha.  34.  5.  my  sword  shall  come  down  on  I.  6. 
F.iek.  3.5.  1.5.  and  all  1.  shall  be  desolate 
36.  5.  in  jealousy  have  I  spoken  against  all  I. 
Mark  3.  8.  a  multitude  followed  him  from  I. 

JEBUSITE. 
On.  10.  16.  Canaan  begat  the  J.  1  Chron.  1.  14. 
F.zod.  33.  2.  I  will  drive  out  the  J.  34.  11. 
2  .Sam.  24. 16.  angel  of  Lord  was  by  the  threshing- 
place  of  Araunah  the  J.  18.  1  Chron.  21.  15. 
Z«cA.  9.7.  a  governor  in  Judiih,  and  Ekron  as  a  J. 

JEBi;SlTE3. 

JVam.  13.  29.  the  J.  dwell  in  the  mountains 

.hsh.  15.63.  the  J.  dwell  with  the  children  of  Judah 

JudjT.  1.  21.  drive  the  J.  thiit  inhabited  Jerusalem 

19.  11.  let  us  turn  into  this  city  of  the  J.  and  dwell 

S  Sam.  5.  8.  whoso  getteth  up  and  smiteth  the  J. 

Ser  HiTTiTKS. 

JECONIAH. 

1  CAron.  3. 16.  the  sons  of  Ji'holnkim;  J.Zedekiah 

17.  the  Hiins  of  J.  Assir  and  Salathiel 
Jrr.  24.  I.  had  carried  away  captive  J.  27.  20. 
28.  4. 1  will  bring  again  to  this  place  J.  the  son  of 

jRDinrAn. 

2  Sam.  12.  25.  the  I.nrd  called  Solomon  J. 

jRD(;rnnN. 

1  Chron.  16.41.  Ileman  and  J.  to  give  thanks  to  L. 
,  42.  the  son-i  of  J.  25.  3.  2  Chron.  2<l.  14. 
^.(f.accordine  tn  the  kind's  nrdiT  to  J. and  ficman 

jKCAR-sAiiAurrniA. 

r?en.31.47.  l-nban  railed  the  heap  J.  bnl  Jacob 
JKHOMIAZ,  riirril  AriAZlAH. 

2  Kinn'  10  35.  J.SMO  of  Jehu  reigned  in  his  stead 
13.  1.  J.  son  of  Jehu  bogiin  to  reign  over  Israel 
23.  30.  the  people  of  the  land  took  J.  the  son  of 

Josiah,  and  anuinied  him,  2  Cfirnn.  36.  J. 
34.  Pharaoh-npcholook  J.  nwny,  2  CAron.  36.  4. 
2  Chron.'il.  17.  led  Jehoram  never  n  son  auvo  J. 

JEHOAail,  »r  JOASH. 

Zh'in^.f  11.2I.J.sevon  ypn.oM  vrhe.i  beean  to  reign 

12.2  J.  did  what  was  ri:;lit  in  sijlit  of  the  Lord 

1H.  J.  sent  all  the  hallowcrl  thins»i  to  UnrmA 

20.  his  Bnrvaiil  slew  J.  in  the  hoijue  of  Millo 

13.  10.  J.  the  son  of  Ji'hoahnr  began  to  reign 

14.  8.  then  .Aniar.iah  si'nt  mesRenjers  to  J. 
10.  J.  slept  with  hi-i  fithers  and  was  btiriod 

JRMOIAnHIN. 

?  Kings  24.  8.  J.  was  13  v"ar»  old  when  lie  b'-gnn 

736 


JEH 

2  Kims  24. 12.  J.  k.  of  Judah  went  to  k.  of  Babylon 

i").  27.  did  lift  up  the  head  of  J.  ./tr.  52;  31. 
2  Chr.  36.  9.  J.  was  eight  years  old  when  he  began 

JEUOIADA. 
2Sam.8. 13.  Beiiaiah  thesonof  J.  20.  23.  J  23.  20, 

22.  1  Chron.  11.  22,24.  [  18.  17. 

1  Kings  1.  44.  sent  with  Solomon  Benaiah  sou  of  J. 
4.  4.  Benaiah  the  son  of  J.  was  over  the  host 

2  Kings  11.  17.  J.  made  a  covenant,  2  Chr.  23. 10. 
12.  2.  wherein  J.  the  priest  instructed  him 

1  Chron.  12.  27.  J.  was  leader  of  the  Aaronites 
27.  34.  after  Ahilhophel  was  J.  a  counsellor 

2  Chron.  24.  2.  Joash  did  right  tA\  the  days  of  J. 
17.after  the  death  of  J. came  the  princes  of  Judah 

22.  Joash  remember,  not  the  kindness  J.  had  duiu 
25.  for  the  blood  of  the  sons  of  J.  the  priest 

JWA.  3.  6.  the  old  gate  repaired  J.  soti  of  Paseah 
Jer.  29,  26.  hath  made  thee  priest  instead  of  J. 

JEHOIAKIM. 
2  Kings  23.  ,34.  turned  his  name  to  J.  2  Chr.  36.  4 
35.  j.  gave  the  silver  and  gold  to  Pharaoh 
24.  1.  J.  became  his  servant  three  years 
Jer.  22.  18.  thus  saith  the  Lord  concerning  J. 
26.  22.  J.  sent  men  after  Urij:ih  into  Egypt 
36.  28.  the  roll  which  J.  the  king  hath  burnt 
30.  thus  saith  the  Lord  of  J.  king  of  Judah 
52.  2.  Zedekiah  did  what  was  evil  as  J.  had  done 
Van.  1.  2.  and  the  Lord  gave  J.  into  his  hand 

JEIIONADAB. 
2  Kings  10. 15.  lie  lighted  on  J.  the  son  of  Rechab 

23.  Jehu  and  J.  went  into  the  h'luse  of  Baal 
JEHORAM. 

1  Kings  22.50.J.3on  of  Jehoshaphat,  2  Kings  8. 16. 
'i  Kings  1.17.J.  the  son  of  Ahab  reigned  over  Israel 

2  Chron.  17.  8.  he  sent  Elishama  and  J.  priests 

21.  9.  J.  went  forth  and  smote  the  Edomites 
16.  the  Lord  stirred  up  against  J.  the  Philistines 

22.  5.  he  went  with  J.  to  war  against  Hazael 
7.  Ahaziah  went  out  with  J.  against  Jehu 

JBHOSIIAPHAT. 
2  Sam.  8. 16.  J.  the  son  of  Ahilud  was  recorder,  20. 
24.  1  Kings  4.  3.  1  Chrvn.  18.  15. 
1  Kings  4. 17.  J.  son  of  Pharaoh  was  in  Issachar 
1.5.  24.  J.  the  son  of  Asa  reigned,  2  Chron.  17.  1. 
22.  2.  J.  came  down  to  Ahab  king  of  Israel 
10..Ahaband  J.sateachon  his  throne,  2  C/ir.  18.0. 
29.  J.  went  up  to  Ramolh-G ilead,  2  Chron.  18.28. 
.32.  J.  cried  out  ||  50.  J.  slept  with  his  fathers 
49.  let  my  servants  go,  but  J.  would  not 
2/irin^s3.14.  were  it  not  that  I  regard  presence  of  J. 

9.  2.  look  out  there  Jehu  the  son  of  J.. and  go  in 
1  Chron.  15.24.  J.  blew  with  the  trumpet  before  ark 
2CAron.l7. 3.  Lord  was  with  J.  because  he  walked 

10.  so  that  they  made  no  war  against  J. 

12.  J.  waxed  great  exceedingly  and  built  castles 

18.  1.  J.  had  riches  and  honour  in  abundance 

20.  3.  J.  feared  and  sot  himself  to  seek  Ine  Lord 
27.  they  returned,  and  J.  in  the  fore  front  of  them 
.35.  after  this  did  J.  join  with  Ahaziah  king  of  I»r. 
.37.  then  Eliezor  prophfsied  against  J.  because 

21.  12.  thou  hast  not  walked  in  the  ways  of  J. 

22.  9.  because,  said  they,  he  is  the  son  of  J. 
Tool  3.  2.  bring  them  down  to  the  valh.'y  of  J. 

12.  let  the  heathen  come  up  to  the  valley  of  J. 

jehoshOa. 

JV«m.  13.  16.  Moses  called  Oshea,  son  of  Nun,  J. 
1  Chron.  7.  27-Non  his  son,  J.  his  eon 

JEHOVAH. 
Kiorf.6.  3.  by  my  name  J.  was  I  not  known  to  them 
Psal.  rt;i.  18.  that  thou  whose  name  alone  is  J. 
ha.  12.  2.  the  Lord  J.  is  my  strength  and  song 
26.  4.  for  in  the  Lord  J.  is  evetlaiting  strength 

JEHOVAH-JIRKH. 
Wfjt.22.14.Abraham  culled  the  nameoftheplace-J. 

JEHOVAH-NIPSI. 
Ezod.  17. 15.  Moses  calh'd  the  name  of  the  altar  J. 

JEHOVAH  SHALOM. 
Judg.  6.  24.  Gideon  built  and  called  the  altar  J. 

JEHOVAH  9HA.MMAH. 
Eiek.  48.  t  3.5.  the  name  of  the  i-iiv  shall  be  J. 

JKHOVAH-TSlDKENir. 
.Jer.  23.  \  0.  this  is  his  name,  J.  33.  t  16. 
JEHtr. 

1  Kings  16.1.  word  came  to  J.  son  of  Hanani,7, 12. 

19.  10.  J.  son  of  Nimshi  shsit  thou  anoint  king 
17.  shall  J.  slay;  that  cscapeth  the  sword  of  J. 

2  Kings  0.  2.  look  out  there  J.  ||  13.  J.  is  king 
14.  J.  son  of  Nimshi  corxpired  against  Jorani 

17.  a  watchman  spied  company  of  J  as  he  came 
20.  th"  driving  is  like  the  driving  of  J.  son  of 
24.  J.  drew  a  bow  with  his  full  strength,  sinoto 

10.  11.  J.  slew  II II  that  rnmaineilof  lioiHeof  Ahab 

18.  Ahab  sorved  Baal,  J.  shall  serve  Baal  much 
29.  J.  di'partod  not  from  the  sins  of  Jeroboam 
31.  J.  took  no  heod  lo  walk  in  the  kiw  of  God 

15.  12.  tliis  was  the  word  which  he  sjiake  lo  .1. 

1  Chrnn.  2.  38.  Obed  begat  J.  and  J.  bi-gal  Az.'triah 
4  35.J.sonorjosibiah||  12.  3.  J.  son  ofAr.mavpth 

2  Chron.  19.  2.  J.  went  out  to  meet  Jehoshaphat 
20.34.  written  in  the  book  of  J.  son  of  Hanani 


JER       [PaOPER  Namm 

2  CJr.22.  8.  J.  was  executing  judgment  on  Ahab 
fJus.  1.4.  I  will  avenge  the  blood  of  Jezrcel  on  J 

JEPHTHAH. 
Judg.  Il.l.now  J.  the  Gileadite  wasa  mighty  tnaa 
of  valour,  arnl  Gilead  begat  J 
3.  J.  fled  from  his  brethren,  and  dwelt  in  Tob 
11.  J.  uttered  all  bis  words  before  the  Lord 

28.  the  king  hearkened  not  to  words  ofj. 

29.  the  Spirit  came  on  i.  \\  30.  J.  vowed  a  vow 
40.  went  yearly  lo  lament  the  daughter  of  J. 

12.  7.  J.  judged  Israel  six  years,  tlun  ilied  J. 
1  Sam.  12.  11.  the  Lord  sent  J.  and  delivered  yoD 
Heb.  11. 32.  for  the  time  would  fail  me  to  tell  of  J 

JEPHL'NNEH. 

.ATuTji  13.6.  oft  he  tribe  of  Judah,  Caleb  the  son  of  J 

1  Chron."!.  38.  the  8on.->  of  Jeihcr;  J.  and  Pispah 

See  CaLbu. 

JERAH.MEEL. 

1  C/trtm.  2.  9.  the  sons  of  Ilezroii ;  J.  and  Ram 

33.  the  sons  of  J.  II  24.  29.  J.  the  son  of  Kisli 
./er.  30.  2fi.  the  kingconmianded  J.  to  takeBaruch 

JEREMIAH. 

2  Kings  23.31. his  mother's  name  was  namotal,th* 
daughter  of  J.  of  Libnah,2l.  18.  ./er.  .52. 1. 

1  Chron.  5.  24.  J.  a  mighty  man,  12.  4, 10, 13. 

2  Chron.  35.  25.  and  J.  lamented  for  Josiuh 

36.  12.  Zedekiah  biiiiibled  not  hinwelf  before  J. 
21.  to  fulfil  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  the  mouth  of 

J.  till  land  enjoyed  her  sabbaths, 22.  Ezra  1. 1. 
Jfeh.  10.  2.  Azariiih,  J.  sealed  the  covenant 

12.  1.  Serarah,  J.  went  up  with  Zerubbabel 
12.in  daysof  Joiakiin,  of  J.  Hananiah  was  priest 

34.  J.  and  Sliemaiah  went  after  them 
.Ter.  I.  1.  the  words  of  J.  the  son  of  Hilkiah 

7. 1.  the  word  that  caine  to  J.  11. 1.  [  14.  1.  [  18. 1 
18.  18.  come,  let  us  devise  devices  against  J. 
20.  2.  Pashur  smote  J.  and  put  him  in  the  slock* 
24.  3.  then  said  the  I><jrd,  what  seest  thou,  J.  1 
26.  9.  all  the  people  were  gathered  against  J. 

24.  the  ha  d  of  Ahikam  was  with  J.  not  to  put 
28.  10.  took  the  yoke  from  the  prophet  J.  neck 
29.27  why  hast  thou  not  reproved  J.  of  Anallioth? 
32.  2.  .1.  was  shut  up  in  the  court  of  the  prisuu 
34.  6.  J.  spake  all  tlie.se  words  of  Zedekiah 
35  3.  then  I  took  Jaazaniah  the  son  of  J. 
36. 19.  the  princes  said, go  hide  thee,  thou  and  J. 

20. Lord  hid  Baruch  the  scribe  and  J.  the  prophet 

37.  4.  J.  came  in  and  went  out  among  the  peuplo 

14.  so  Irijiih  took  J.  and  brought  him  tu  prince* 

15.  wherefore  the  princes  were  wroth  with  J. 

16.  when  J.  was  entend  into  the  dungeon 
21.  to  commit  J.  into  the  court  of  llie  prison 

.38.  6.  then  they  cai^l  J.  into  the  dungeon 
13.  drew  up  J.  with  cords  out  of  the  dungeon 
16.  Zedekiah  the  king  sware  secretly  to  J. 
39.11.  Nebuchadrezzar  save  charge  concerning  J. 
40.  6.  then  went  3.  to  Gcdaliah  son  of  Ahikam 
51.60.  so  J.  wrote  in  a  book  allthe  evil  on  Babylua 

04.  thus  far  are  the  words  of  J. 
Mat.  2.  17.  fulfilled  that  was  spoken  by  J.  27.  9. 
16.  14.  others  say  thou  art  J.  or  one  of  propheu 

JERICHO. 
Josh.  2. 1.  go  view  J.  j[  6. 1.  J.  was  straitly  shut  up 
3.  16.  the  people  passed  over  right  agair^sl  J. 

6. 2.  Lord  snid,  see  I  havegiven  into  ibiiie  hand  J 
26.  cursed  be  the  man  that  hiiildelh  the  city  i. 

7.  2.  Joshua  sent  men  from  J.  lo  view  Ai 

24.  11.  ye  came  to  J.  and  the  men  of  J.  fought 
2  Sam.  10.  5.  king  snid,  tarry  at  J.  till  your  beards 

be  grown,  and  then  return,  1  Chron.  19.  5. 

1  Kings  16.  34.  in  his  days  diil  Hicl  build  J. 

2  Kings  2.  4.  for  the  Ijord  hath  sent  me  lo  J. 

25.  5.  the  army  of ('haldccs  pursued  and  overtook 
him  in  the  plains  of  J.  ./er.  .39.  5.  |  52.  H. 

2  Chron.  2,8.  1.5.  they  brought  the  captives  lo  J. 
f.nhe  IO.;tO,  a  certain  man  went  down  lo  J.  and  fell 
Heb.  11.  30.  by  faith  the  walls  of  J.  fell  down 

JRROBOA.M. 
1  Kines  11.3?.  .1.  was  a  mighty  man  of  valour 
40.  Solomon  sought  lo  kill  J.'nud  J.  fled 
12  2.  J.  dwelt  in  Egypt  |I  20.  was  como  again 
25.  J.  built  Shecheiii  %u\  dwell  therein 

32.  J.  ordaiird  a  feast  in  the  eighth  month 
13.  1.  J.  stood  by  the. altar  lo  burn  incense 

33.  after  this  J.  returrred  not  from  his  evil  wajr 

34.  lliis  thing  became  sin  to  the  house  of  J. 
II.  1.  at  that  lime  Abijah  the  son  of  J.  fell  sick 

6,  Ahijah  said,  cntne  in,  thou  wife  of  J. 

10.  bohidd,  I  will  bring  evil  upon  the  liouso  of  J 

11.  him  that  dielh  of  J.  shall  the  dngs  oat 

13.  for  ho  only  of  J.  shall  come  to  Iho  grars 
16.  because  of  the  sins  of  J.  15.  .30. 
30,  there  wns  war  biitwern  Rehobonin  and  J. 

l5.  29.  Bansha  lefk  not  lo  J.  any  lliat  breathed 

34.  Baisha  did  evil  and  walked  in  the  way  of  J, 

2  fi'mr.»  10.  31.  I  13.  6.  I  14.  24.  f  17.  22 

2  Kingrs  13.  13.  J.  son  of  Jnnsh  sal  on  his  throne 

14   27.  the  Lord  saved  Israel  by  the  hand  of  J. 

17.  21.  J    ilrave  Israel  from  fcdiowing  the  Lord 

ICAren  5.17.  reckoned  by  genealogies  indayiorj 


Propsr  Nakbs.]     JER 

S  Chron.  11.  14.  J.  had  cast  off  the  Levkes  from 
13.  8.  golilun  calves  which  J.  made  for  your  god 
15.  God  smote  J.  and  all  Israel  hefure  Abijah 
20.  neither  did  J.  recover  strength  again  in  days 
Has.  1.  1.  prophesied  in  the  days  of  J.  Jiiiws  1.  1. 
Jlmos  7.  9.  rise  against  house  ol' J.  witli  the  sword 
11.  thus  Amos  saith,  J.  shall  die  by  the  sword 
JEROBO.^M  joined  with  M'Kbat. 
1  Kings  11.  26.  J.  son  of  Kchat  lifted  up  his  hand 
12. 15.  which  the  Lord  spake  by  Ahijah  the  Shilo- 
nile  to  J.  the  son  o<  jVebat,  2  Chron.  10.  15. 
16.  3.  I  will  make  thy  house  like  the  house  of  J. 
the  son  of  JVcAa«,  21.  22.  |  2  Kings  9.  9. 
26.  for  he  walked  in  all  the  way  of  J.  the  son  of 
J^ebat  and  his  sin,  31.  |  22.  52.  2  Kings  3.  3. 
iKings  10.'J9.Jehu  departed  not  from  the  sins  of  J. 
son  ofJVebal,  13. 2, 11.  |  U.  24.  j  15. 9, 18, 24.28. 
JERUBBAAL. 
Judg.  6.  32.  on  that  day  he  called  him  J.  saying 

7.  1.  then  J.  (who  is  Gideon)  rose  up  early 

8.  29.  and  J.  went  and  dwelt  in  hi.s  own  house 
35.  nor  shewed  they  kindness  to  the  house  of  J. 

9.  2.  either  that  all  sons  of  J.  reign,  or  one  reign 

5.  Abimeli'ch  slew  his  brethren  the  sons  of  J. 
le.ifye  dealt  well  with  J.H  19.  if  sincerely  with  J. 

28.  who  is  Abiinelech?  is  not  he  the  son  of  J. 7 

1  Sam.  12.  11.  the  Lord  sent  J.  and  delivered  you 

JERUBBESflETH. 

2  Sam.  11.  21.  who  smote  Abimelech  the  son  of  J. 

JERUSALEM,  or  H1ERU6.\LEM. 
Josh.  18.  28.  Jebiisi,  which  is  J.  .fiidg.  19.  10. 

1  Sam.  17.  54.  David  brought  Goliath's  head  to  J. 

2  Sam.  5.  6.  king  David  and  his  men  went  to  J. 
8.  7.  David  brought  the  shields  of  gold  to  J. 

12.  31.  so  David  and  all  Ihe  people  relumed  to  J. 
15.  8.  if  the  Lord  shall  bring  me  again  to  J.  then 

29.  they  carried  the  ark  of  God  again  to  J. 

19.  19.  the  day  that  my  lord  went  out  of  J. 

24.  8.  they  came  to  J.  at  the  end  of  nine  months 

16.  when  the  angel  stretched  out  his  hand  on  J. 

to  destroy  it.  Lord  repented,  1  Chron.  21.  15. 

1  Kings'3. 1.  made  an  end  of  building  the  wall  of  J. 

10.  2.  she  came  to  J.  with  a  very  great  train 
11.13.  for  J.  sake  which  I  have  chosen,  2  CA?-.  6.  6. 
15.4.  to  set  up  his  eon  after  him  and  to  establish  J. 

2  Kings  18.  35.  delivered  their  country,  that  Lord 

should  deliver  J.  out  of  mine  hand,  /sa.36.2U. 

19. 31.  out  of  J.  shall  go  forih  a  remnant,  and  they 

that  escape  out  of  Mount  Zion,  Isa.  37.  32. 

21.  12.  behold,  I  will  bring  such  evil  upon  J. 

13. 1  will  wipe  J.  as  a  man  wipeth  a  dish,  wiping 
16.  shed  innocent  blood  till  he  had  filled  J.  24.  4. 

23.  27.  I  will  cast  off  J.  which  I  have  chosen 

24.  14.  he  carried  away  all  J.  and  the  princes 

25.  9.  Nebuzar-adan  burnt  all  the  houses  of  J. 

3  Chron.  12.  7.  my  wrath  tliall  not  be  poured  on  J. 

20.  28.  they  came  to  J.  with  psalteries,  harps 
24.  18.  wrath  was  upon  J.  29.  8.  1  32.  25. 

28.  24.  Ahaz  made  altars  in  every  corner  of  J. 

32.  19.  they  spake  against  the  God  of  J. 

34.  3.  Josiah  began  to  purge  J.  from  high  places 
Ezra  7.  14.  thou  art  sent  to  inquire  concerning  J. 

19.  those  deliver  thou  before  the  God  of  J. 
JV"eA.  2.  11.  so  I  came  to  J.  7.  6.  |  13.  7. 

13.20.  merchants  lodged  without  J.  once  or  twice 
P.5.51.18.  do  good  to  Zion  build  thou  the  walls  of  J. 
79.  1.  the  heathens  have  laid  J.  on  heaps 

3.  their  blood  have  they  shed  round  about  J. 
122.  3.  J.  is  bnilded  as  a  city  compact  together 

6.  pray  for  the  peace  of  J.  they  shall  prosper 
125.  2.  as  the  mountains  are  round  about  J. 
128.  5.  thou  sliali  see  the  good  of  J.  all  thy  life 
137.  6.  if  I  prefer  not  J.  above  my  chief  joy 

7.  remember  cliildren  of  Edom  in  the  day  of  J. 
147.  2.  the  Lord  doth  build  up  J.  he'gatheieth 

Cnnt.  6.  4.  thou  art  comely,  O  my  love,  as  J. 
fsa.  1.  1.  the  vision  he  saw  concerning  J.  2.  1. 
3.8.  for  J.  is  ruined  |I  10.  11.  so  will  1  do  to  J. 

4.  4.  the  Lord  shall  have  purged  the  blood  of  J. 

10.  12.  Lord  hath  performed  his  whole  work  on  J. 

22.  10.  and  Me  have  numbered  the  houses  of  J. 
31.  5.  Fo  will  the  Lord  of  hosts  defend  J. 

33.  20.  thine  eyes  see  J.  a  quiet  habitation 

40.  2.  speak  ye  comfortably  to  J.  and  cry  to  her 
41. 2"^  give  to  J.  one  that  bringeth  good  tidings 
44.  2G.  tliat  <.aiih  to  J.  thou  shalt  be  inhabited 
5-i.  9.  sing  together,  ye  waste  placesof  J.  forLord 
hath  comforted  his  people,  he  hath  redeemed  J. 
62.  1.  for  J.  sake  I  will  not  rest  till  righteousness 
7.  give  him  no  rest  till  he  make  J.  a  praise 

64.  10.  Zion  is  a  wildprncs.a,  J.  a  desolation 

65.  18.  for  behold,  1  create  J.  a  rejoicing 

66.  10.  rejoice  ye  with  J.  and  be  glad  with  her 
Jer.  2.  2.  go,  and  cry  in  the  ears  of  J.  saying 

3.  17.  they  shall  call  J.  the  throne  of  the  Lord 

5.  1.  run  yc  to  and  fro  through  the  streets  of  J. 

6.  1.  gather  you  to  flee  out  of  the  midst  of  J. 

8.  5.  why  then  is  this  people  of  J.  slidden  back 

9.  11. 1  will  make  J.  heaps,  and  a  den  of  dragons 

11.  6.  proclaim  these  words  in  the  streets  of  J. 

737 


JER 

./cr.  13. 9. 1  will  mar  the  great  pride  of  Judah  and  J 

14.  2.  Judah  mourneih,  the  cry  of  J.  is  gone  up 
17.  26.  they  shall  come  from  the  places  about  J. 
19.  7.  1  will  make  void  the  counsel  of  J. 

13.  the  houses  of  J.  shall  be  defiled  as  Tophet 
23. 14.  have  seen  in  prophets  of  J.  a  horrible  thing 
21).  18.  J.  shall  become  heaps,  Mic.  3.  12. 
33.  13.  in  the  places  about  J.  shall  flocks  pass 

16.  in  those  days  J.  shall  dwell  safely,  this  is 

35.  11.  let  us  go  to  J.  for  fear  of  the  Chaldeans 
38.28.  till  day  that  J.  was  taken,  there  when  taken 
39.  8.  the  Chaldeans  brake  down  the  walls  of  J. 
44.  2.  ye  have  seen  the  evil  I  have  brought  on  J. 

6.  mine  anger  was  kindled  in  the  streets  of  J. 
51.. 50.  let  J.  come  into  your  mind  remember  Lord 
/,awi.l.8. J.hath  grievously  sinned,  theref.  removed 

17.  J.  is  as  a  menstruous  woman  among  them 
Ezek.5.5.  this  is  J.  ||  9. 4.  go  through  the  midst  of  J. 

16.2. son  of  man  cause  J.to  know  her  abominations 
17.  12.  th«  king  of  Babylon  is  come  to  J. 
21  20.  that  the  sword  may  come  to  Judah  in  J. 
22.  at  his  right  hand  the  divination  for  J. 
22.  19.  I  will  gather  you  into  the  midst  of  J. 
33. 21.  one  that  had  escaped  out  of  J.  came  to  me 

36.  38.  as  the  flock  of  J.  in  her  solemn  feasts 
Dan.  6.  10.  his  windows  being  open  toward  J. 

9.  12.  not  been  done,  as  hath  been  done  upon  J. 
25. from  going  forth  ofthecommandm.  to  build  J. 
Joel  3.  1.  when  I  bring  again  the  captivity  ofJ. 

17.  then  shall  J.  be  holy  ||  20.  J.  shall  dsvell 

Obad.  11.  foreigners  entered  and  cast  lots  upon  J. 

jV/(C.1.5.are  they  not  J.?  ||  Zech.  1. 14.  jealous  for  J. 

3.  10.  build  up  Zion  with  blood,  J.  with  iniquity 

Zepk.l.12.1  will  search  J.  with  candles  and  punish 

ZccA.1.12.ho  w  long  wilt  thou  not  have  mercy  onJ.? 

17.  L.  shall  yet  comfort  Zion,  and  choose  J.  2.12. 

19.  these  are  the  horns  which  have  scattered  J. 

2.  2.  whither  goest  thoul  I  go  to  measure  J. 

4.  J.  shall  be  inhabited  as  towns  without  walls 

8.  3.  I  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  J.  and  I  shall 

15.  so  again  have  I  thought  to  do  well  to  J. 

12.  2.  behold,  I  will  make  J.  a  cup  of  trembling 
3.  that  day  I  will  make  J.  a  burdensome  stone 

14.  11.  but  J.  shall  be  safely  inhabited 
Mill.  3.  4.  the  ofTering  of  J.  shall  be  pleasant 
Mai.  3.  5.  then  went  out  to  him  J.  Mark  1.  5. 

5.  35.  neither  swear  by  J.  |[  21.  10.  come  into  J. 
16.  21.  Jesus  began  to  shew  how  he  must  go  to  J. 

Lvkc  2.  22.  his  parents  brought  him  to  J. 
4.5.  they  turned  hack  again  to  J.  seeking  him 

6.  17.'^a  great  multitude  out  of  J.  came  to  hear 

9.  53.  his  face  was  as  though  ho  would  go  to  J. 

13.  33.  it  cannot  be  that  a  prophet  perish  out  of  J. 
19. 11.  spake  a  parable,  because  he  was  nigh  to  J. 
21.20.  when  ye  shall  see  J.  compassed  with  armies 

24.  J.  shall  be  trodden  down  of  the  Gentiles 

24.  49.  tarry  ye  in  J.  till  ye  he  endued  with  power 
52.  and  they  returned  to  J.  with  great  joy 

Jii  Ah  12.12.  when  heard  that  Jesus  was  coining  to  J. 
Jlcts  5.  23.  ye  have  filled  J.  with  your  doctrine 
9.  2.  that  he  might  bring  them  bound  unto  J. 

20.  22.  behold,  I  go  bound  in  the  Spirit  to  J. 

21.  31.  tidings  came  that  all  J.  was  in  an  uproar 

22.  18.  make  haste,  get  thee  quickly  out  of  J. 

25.  20.  1  asked  him  whether  he  would  go  to  J.? 
Rom.i5.  31.  that  my  service  for  J.  may  he  accepted 
1  Cor.16.  3.  will  send  to  bring  your  liberality  unto  J. 
Gal.  4.  25.  Agar  answereth  to  J.  which  now  is 

26.  but  J.  which  is  above  is  free,  mother  of  us  all 

Rev.  3.  12.  the  new  J.  21.  2.  ||  21.  10.  the  holy  J. 

See  Dwell. 

.^gainst  JERUSALEM. 

./u'i.o'.l.S.  Judah  had  fought  against  J.  and  taken  it 

1  Kings  14.25.Shi6hakcame  against  .1 .2  Chr.\2.9. 

2  Kings  18.17.  Sennacherib  against  J.  2  CAr.32.2. 
24. 10.  the  kingof  Babvlon  came  against  J.  25. 1. 

./«»•.  34.  1,  7.  j'39.  1.  I  .52.  4.  Ezck.  24.  2. 
F.zra  4.  8.  Rehum,  Shimshai,  wrote  against  J. 
A'ch.  4.  8.  they  conspired  to  come  and  fight  ag.  J. 
.At.  4.  16.  publish  ag.J.  ||  6.  6.  cast  a  mount  ag.  J. 
EzeA.26.2.  because  that  Tyrus  hath  said  against  J. 
Zcch.  12.9.  destroy  nations  that  cnmea£-.  J.  14.12. 

.^t  JERUSALEM. 

.rosh.  15.  63.  the  Jebusites  dwelt  with  Judah  at  J. 

2  .$am.  20.  3.  David  came  to  his  house  at  J.  | 

1  Kings  12.27.  go  up  to  do  sacrifice  in  the  house  of 

the  Lord  at  J.  2  Chron.  9.  25.  fsa.  27.  13.  j 

1  Chron.9.  34.  these  chief  fathers  dwelt  at  J.  38.   | 

2  Chron.  3.  1.  Solomon  began  to  build  the  house  of  i 
Lord  at  J.  in  mount  Moriah,  Ezra  1.  2.  ]  5.  2.  i 

JVsA.l  1.2.  willinglyofTered  themselves  to  dwell  at  J. 

13.  fi.  but  in  all  this  lime  was  not  I  at  J.  | 

P.'!.08.29. because  of  thy  tenipie  at  J.  bring  presents 

135.  21.  blessed  be  the  Lord  who  dwelleth  at  J. 
Isa.  30.  19.  the  people  shall  dwell  in  Zion  at  J. 
./t.  35.  II.  let  us  go  into  J.  so  we  dwell  at  J. 
Zcch.  14.  14.  and  Judah  also  shall  fight  at  J. 
/,«A<'9.3l.deceasewhicli  he  should  accomplisliafJ. 

23.  7.  Herod  himself  wa.<  also  at  3.  at  that  time 
24.47.  preached  among  all  nations,  beginning  jt  J. 

5C 


JER 

JoAn4.21.n.  ryetshall  ye  a<  J.  worship  the  Fatlier 

45.  having  seen  all  things  that  ho  did  at  J. 
.^cts  1.  19.  It  was  known  to  all  the  dwellers  at  J. 
8. 1.  a  great  persecution  against  the  church  at  J 

9.  13.  what  evil  he  hath  done  to  thy  saints  at  J 
1.3.  27.  they  that  dwell  at  J.  have  fulfilled  them 

20.  16.  he  hasted  to  be  at  J.  the  day  of  Pentecost 

21.  H.  so  shall  the  Jews  at  J.  bind  the  man 
13.  but  aljo  to  die  at  J.  for  the  name  of  Jesus 

26.  20.  but  shewed  first  to  them  of  Damascus  at  J. 

Rom.  15.  26.  contribution  for  the  poor  saints  at  J 

See  Daughter's. 

i^«m  JERUSALEM. 

1  Kings  2.  41.  told  that  Shimei  had  gone  from  J. 

2  Kings  12.  18.  Ilazael  went  aw.ay/roni  J. 

24. 15.  carried  into  captivity /rom  J.  to  Babylon, 

K.Uh.  2.  6.  .Jcr.  24. 1 .  j  27.  20.  |  29. 1.  |  hi.  29. 

Isa.  2.  3.  the  word  of  the  Lord /rom  J.  Mid.  2. 

3.  1.  the  Lord  doth  take  away  from  J.  the  stay 
./«d3.16.  the  Liinl  utter  his  voice/rom  J../97«osl.2 
Zech.  9.  lU.  I  will  cut  olT  the  horse /rom  J. 

14.  3.  that  living  waters  .shall  go  oul  from  J. 
Mat.  4.  25.  multitudes  fullowed  him /rem  J. 
Lulic  10.  30.  a  certain  man  went  down  from  J. 

24.  13.  which  was  from  J.  about  sixty  furlongs 
Jlcts  I.  4.  that  they  should  not  depart /rom  J. 

8.  26^  the  way  that  goeili  down /row  J.  to  Gaza 
11.  27.  there  came  projihets /;om  J.  to  Antioch 

Rom.  15.  K.  from  J.  to  Illyricnm  I  have  preached 

In  JERUSALEM. 
.Turlg.  1.  21.  Jebusites  dwell  with  Benjamin  in  J. 
2  Sam.  19.  33.  I  will  feed  thee  with  me  in  J. 
1  Kings  2.  36.  build  thee  a  house  in  J.  and  dwell 
1 1. 36.  may  have  a  light  al  way  before  me  in  J.  15. 4 
2A7n^j- 18.22.  ye  shall  worship  befoie  this  altar  in  J 

21.  4.  the  Lord  said,  in  J.  will  I  put  my  name 

22.  14.  now  Huldah  dwelt  in  J.  in  the  college 

1  CAron.  8.  28.  these  dwelt  in  J.  32.  |  9.  3. 

23.  25.  that  they  may  dwell  in  J.  for  ever 

2  Chron.  9.  27.  the  king  made  silver  in  J.  as  stones 

30.  14.  ihey  look  away  the  altars  that  were  in  J. 
26.  there  was  great  joy  in  J.  not  the  like  in  J. 

Ezra  1.  3.  the  house  of  the  Lord  which  is  in  J. 

7.  15.  God  of  I.srael,  whose  habitation  is  in  J. 

9.  9.  and  to  give  us  a  wall  in  Judah  and  in  3. 
JVeA.  2.  20.  ye  have  no  right  nor  memorial  in  J. 

4.  22.  I  said,  let  every  one  lodge  in  J. 

11.  1.  cast  lots,  to  bring  one  often  to  dwell  in  3. 
Ps.  102.21. do  declare  in  Zion  and  his  praise  in  3. 
Keel.  1. 16.  that  have  been  before  me  in  J.  2.  7, 9. 
fsa.  4.  3.  that  rojnaineth  i}i  J.  be  called  holy 

24.  23.  when  the  Lord  of  hosts  shall  reign  in  3. 
2ft.  14.  hear,  ye  scornful  men  that  rule  in  J. 

31.  9.  whose  fire  is  in  Zion,  his  furnace  in  3. 

65.  19.  I  will  rejoice  in  3.  and  joy  in  my  people 

66.  13.  and  ye  shall  be  comforted  in  3 

Jer.  4.  5.  publish  in  J.  and  say,  blow  the  trumpet 

15.  4.  for  that  which  Manasseh  did  in  3. 
Ezek.  4.  16.  I  will  break  the  staffof  bread  in  3. 

/of i  2.32.  in  mount  Zion  and  J.  shall  be  deliverance 
Zrch.  12.  6.  J.  be  inhabited  in  her  place,  even  in  3. 

14.  21.  every  pot  in  J.  shall  be  Holiness  to  Lord 
Mai.  2.  11.  an  abomination  is  committed  in  3. 
Luke  2.  25.  a  man  in  3.  whose  name  was  Simeon 
38.  spake  to  all  that  looked  for  redemption  in  J. 
43.  the  cliild  Jesus  tarried  behind  in  3. 
13.  4.  they  were  sinners  above  all  that  dwelt  in  3. 
24.  13.  one  said,  art  thou  only  a  stranger  in  3.1 
John  4.  20.  in  3.  is  the  place  where  to  worship 
JScts  1.  8.  shall  be  witnesses  to  me  in  3.  10.  39. 

6.  7.  the  number  of  the  disciples  multiplied  in  J. 
23.  11.  for  as  thou  hast  teslifiid  of  me  in  3. 

26.  10.  which  thing  I  also  did  in  3.  many  saints 

Inhabitants  o/ JERUSALEM. 

2  CArnrj.20.  15.  ye  inhabitants  of  3.  be  not  afraid 

32.  22.  thus  the  Lord  saved  the  inhabitants  of  3. 
33.  inhabitants  nf3.  did  him  honour  at  his  death 

34. 32.  inhabit,  of  3.  did  according  to  the  Covenant 
/.'Ja.5.3.  O  inhab.  o/J.  judge  betwixt  me  and  viney. 

8.  14.  for  a  gin  and  snare  to  the  inhabitants  of  3. 
22.21.  he  shall  he  a  father  to  the  inhabitants  of  3. 

Jer.  17.25.  inhabitants  of  3.  shall  remain  for  ever 
35. 13.  go  and  tell  JuJah  andthe  inhabitants  of  3 

Eirk.  11. 15.  to  whom  inhabitants  of  3.  have  said 
15. 6.  so  will  I  give  Ihe  inhabitants  of  3.  for  fuel 

Zej-h.  12.  5.  the  inhabit,  of  3.  shall  be  my  strength 

7.  the  glory  of  the  inhabit,  of  3.  do  not  magnify 

8.  the  Lord  shall  defend  the  inhabitants  of  3. 

10.  pour.upon  inhabit,  of  3.  the  Spirit  of  grace 
13.  1.  a  fountain  opened  to  Ihg  inhabitants  of  J. 

0  JERUSALEM. 
Ps.  116.19.1  will  pay  my  vows  in  midslofthee,0  J. 

122.2.  our  fort  shall  stand  within  thy  gates,  O  J. 

137.  5.  if  I  forget,  O  J.  ||  147. 12.  praise  Lord,  O  J. 
Isa.  40.  9.  O  J.  that  hrinjest  good  tidings,  lift  up 

51. 17.  stand  np,OJ.  ||  52.2.ari6e,andaitdown,OJ 

52.  1.  put  on  thy  beautiful  garments,  0  3. 
Jer.  4.  14.  O  3.  wash  thy  heart  from  wickedness 

6.8.  be  thou  instructed,©  J.  lest  I  depart  from  the* 

7.  29.  cut  off  thioe  hair,  O  3.  aod  cast  it  awsy 


TES 

/fr-13. 27.  vroe  toth^e,  OJ.wilt  not  be  made  clean 

15.  5.  I'or  wlio  shall  have  pity  uiion  thee,  0  J.? 
Jdat.  23.  37.  O  J.  J.  thou  that  killest  ihe  prophets 

and  stonest  them  sent  to  thee,  Luke  13.  34. 
Up  to  JEKUSALtiM. 
2Sam.  19.34.  that  I  should  go  u^  with  the  king  toi. 

1  Kings  li.  ia.  it  is  too  much  tor  you  to  go  u;/  to  J. 

2  Kings  12. 17.  Hazar  set  hin  face  to  go  up  to  J. 

16.  5.  Rezin  and  I'ekah  came  up  to  J.  to  war 
Ezra  1.  3.  and  let  him  go  vp  to  J.  7.  13. 

Mat.  20. 16.  behold,  we  go  up  to  J.  Son  of  man  shall 
be  betrayed,  Mark  10.  33.  Luke  18.  31. 
Mark  10.  32.  they  were  in  the  way  going  up  to  J. 
Luke  19.  2d  he  went  before,  ascending  up  to  J. 
Acts  11.  2.  and  when  Peter  was  come  up  to  J. 
15.  2.  they  should  go  up  to  J.  to  the  apostles 

21.4.  who  said,  that  he.ihould  not  go  up  to  J.  12. 
25.  9.  wilt  thou  go  up  to  J.  and  there  be  judgedl 

Oal.  1. 17.  neither  went  1  up  to  J.  to  them  apostles 

18.1  went  up  £«  J. to  see  Peter  and  abode  with  him 

S.  1.  I  went  up  to  J.  with  Barnabas,  took  Titus 

JESIiUA. 
Ezra  2.  5.  those  that  came  with  Zerubbabel,  J. 

3.  2.  then  stood  up  J-  son  of  Jc)zadak,and  brethren 

JESHURUN. 
J)eut.  32.  15.  but  J.  waxed  fat  and  kicked 

33. 5.  he  was  king  in  J.  when  Israel  was  gathered 
26.  there  is  none  like  to  the  God  of  J. 

Isa.  44.  2.  fear  not,  thou  J.  whom  1  have  chosen 

JESSE. 
Ruthi-  17.  Obed,  he  is  the  father  of  J.  Mat.  1.  5. 

22.  Obed  begat  J.  and  J.  begat  David,  Mat.  1. 6. 
1  Sam.  IB.  1. 1  will  send  Ihee  to  J.  the  Belh-leliemite 

9.  he  s:inctitied  J.  and  his  sons  and  called  them 

18.  I  have  seen  a  son  of  J.  that  is  cunning 

19.  wherefore  Saul  sent  messengers  unto  J. 

17.  58.  David  said,  I  am  the  son  of  thy  servant  J. 
20.  30.  I  know  thou  hast  chosen  the  son  of  J. 

31.  as  long  as  the  sun  of  J.  liveth  on  tlie  ground 
22.7.  will  the  son  of  J.  give  every  one  of  you  tield.-il 

8.  my  son  hath  made  a  league  with  Ihe  son  of  J. 

9.  Doeg  said,  I  saw  the  son  of  J.  coming  to  Nob 

25.  10.  who  is  David  7  and  who  is  the  son  of  J.I 
25am.  20. 1.  neither  have  we  inheritance  in  the  son 

of  J.  1  Kings  12.  16.  2  Chron.  10.  Ifi. 
1  CAr.lO.  14.  turned  kingdom  to  David  the  son  of  J. 

12.  18.  on  thy  side  are  we,  thou  son  of  J.  peace 
Isa.  11.1.  there  shall  come  a  rod  out  of  thestein  of  J. 

10.  there  shall  be  a  root  of  J.  Rom.  15.  12. 
Jlcts  13.  22.  I  have  found  David  the  son  of  J. 

JESUITES. 
A'um.  26.  44.  of  Jesui,  the  family  of  the  J. 

JESUS. 
Mat.  1. 21.  shalt  call  his  name  J.  for  he  shall  save 
his  people  from  I  heir  sins,  25.  Au/ic  1.  31.  |2. 21. 

4.  1.  J.  was  led  up  of  the  Spirit  into  wilderness 

17.  from  that  time  J.  began  to  preach  and  say 

8.  3.  J.  put  forth  his  hand  and  touched  him 
10.  when  J.  heard  it,  he  marvelled,  and  said 
29.  what  have  we  to  do  with  thee,  J.  thou  Son 

of  God?  Mark  1.  24.  |  5.  7.  Luke  8.  28. 
34.  behold,  the  whfde  city  came  out  to  meet  J. 

9.  2.  J.  seeing  their  faith  ||  10.  as  J.  sat  at  meat 
K.J.  turned  him  about  ||  27.  J.  departed  thence 

'    12.  25.  J   knew  their  thouglits,  and  said  to  them 

13.  34.  these  things  »pake  J.  to  the  multitude 

14.  1.  at  that  time  Herod  heard  of  the  fame  of  J. 

29.  Peter  walked  on  the  water  to  go  to  J. 

17.  8.  they  saw  no  man  save  J.  only,  Mark  9.  8, 

18.  J.  rebuked  the  devil  and  he  departed 

25.  when  come  into  the  house,  J.  prevented  him 

18.  2.  J.  called  a  little  child  to  him,  and  set  him 
20.  30.  two  blind  men  heard  that  J.  pa-sed  by 

34.  J.  had  compa-.'sion  on  them,  touched  their  eyes 
21. 11.  this  is  J.  the  prophet  of  Nazareth  of  Galilee 
22. 18.  but  J.  perceived  their  wickedness  and  said 

26.  4.  they  might  take  J.  by  snbtilly  and  kill  him 

19.  the  disciples  ilid  as  J.  had  appoinUid  them 

26.  J.  lo.ik  bread  and  blessed  it,  Mark  14.  22. 
69.  thou  also  wast  with  J.  71.  Mark  M.  67. 
75.  and  Pc-tcr  remembered  the  words  of  J. 

27.  37.  written,  this  is  J.  the  king  of  the  Jews 
46.  J.  crieil  with  a  loud  voice,  Mark  15.  .37. 
57.  Joseph,  who  .ilso  himself  was  J.  disciple 

28.  .5.  fear  not  ye,  I  know  ye  seek  J.  Mark  16.  G. 
9.  J.  met  them  ||  18.  J.  came  and  spake  to  them 

Mark  1.  4.'>.  J.  could  no  more  enter  into  the  city 
3.  7.  J.  withdrew  him<elf  with  his  di8ci[dcs 
5. 13.  J.  g  ive  them  leave  1|  10.  J.  suffered  him  imt 

30.  J.  knowine  that  virtue  had  gone  out  of  him 

9.  4.  Eliaa  and  Mo!<e<i  were  talking  with  J. 

10.  21.  th.n  J.  beh.dding  him,  loved  him 

12.  34.  when  J.  saw  that  he  answered  discreetly 

15.  1.  they  bmmd  J.  and  carried  him  away 
Luke  5.  19.  lei  him  down  in  the  nrdst  before  J. 

6.  11.  they  communeil  what  ihey  might  do  to  J. 
10.  30.  wiio  sat  at  J.  feet  and  heanl  hi'*  word 
19.  3.  ZaccheuB  «'>ught  to  sec  J.  who  ho  was 

23.  26.  'hat  he  mijht  hi'nr  the  crow  after  J. 

M  l.S.  J.  hunsjlf  drew  near  and  •»unl  with  tlicm 
MA 


JET 

John  6.  42.  they  said,  is  not  this  J.  son  of  Joseph? 
9.  11.  a  man,  that  is  called  J.  made  clay,  anointed 

11.  13.  J.  spake  of  his  death  ||  35.  J.  wept 

12.  21.  sir,  we  would  see  J.  ||  13.  23.  leaning  on  J. 

13.  1.  when  J.  knew  that  his  hour  was  come 

18.  7.  whom  seek  ye?  they  said,  J.  of  Nazareth 
22.  one  of  the  officers  that  stood  by  struck  J. 

19. 5.  then  came  J.  forth,  -vearing  crown  of  thorns 
25.  now  there  stood  by  the  cross  of  J.  his  mother 
28.  J.  knowing  that  all  things  were  accomplished 
40.  took  the  body  of  J.  ||  42.  there  laid  Ihey  J. 

20.  14.  and  she  knew  not  that  it  was  J.  21.  4. 

Jlcts  1.  1.  of  all  that  J.  began  to  do  and  teach 

11.  this  same  J.  which  is  taken  up  from  you 

16.  Judas,  who  was  guide  to  them  who  took  J. 

2.  32.  this  J.  hath  God  raised  up,  3.  26.  |  5.  30. 

3.  13.  God  of  Abraham  hath  glorified  his  son  J. 
4. 2.  preaching  thro'  J.  resurrection  from  the  dead 

]3.theytook  knowledge  that  theyhad  been  wiihJ. 
IS.they  commanded  not  to  teach  in  the  name  of  J. 
27.  for  of  a  truth  against  thy  holy  child  J. 
30.  signs  done  by  the  name  of  thy  holy  child  J. 

5.  40.  they  should  not  speak  in  the  name  of  J. 

6.  14.  this  J.  shall  destroy  this  place  and  change 

7.  5.).  he  saw  J.  standing  on  the  right  hand  of  God 

8.  35.  then  Philip  preached  unto  him  J. 

9.  5. 1  am  J.  whom  thou  persecutest,  22. 8.  1 26. 15. 

17.  even  J.  that  appeared  to  thee  in  the  way 
27.  had  preached  at  Damascus  in  the  name  of  J. 

10.  ;{8.  how  God  anointed  J.  with  the  Holy  Ghost 
13.  23.  God  hath  raised  lo  Israel  a  Saviour  J. 
17.  7.  saying,  that  there  is  another  king,  one  J. 

18.  because  he  preached  J.  and  the  resurrection 

19.  13.  we  adjure  you  by  J.  whom  Paul  preacheth 
15.  J.  I  know,  and  Paul  I  know,  but  who  are  ye? 

25.  19.  had  rjuestions  of  one  J.  who  was  dead 
28.  23.  persuading  concerning  J.  law  and  prophets 

Rom.  3.  26.  the  justifier  of  him  that  believes  in  J. 
8.  11.  Ihe  Spirit  of  him  that  raised  up  J.  from  dead 

1  Cor.  12.  3.  no  man  speaking  by  Spirit  calleth  J. 

2C9r.  4.5.  and  ourselves  your  servants  for  J.  sake 

10.  that  the  life  of  J.  might  be  made  manifest 

11.  we  are  delivered  to  death  for  J.  sake 

14. thai  he  who  raised  J. shall  raise  up  us  also  by  J. 

11.  4.  for  if  he  that  cometh,  preach  another  J. 
F.pk.  4.  21.  been  taught  by  him  as  the  truth  is  in  J. 
P/iil.  2.10.  at  the  name  of  J.  every  knee  should  bow 
1  T/iess.  1. 10.  even  J.  who  delivered  us  from  wrath 

4.  14.  so  them  that  sleep  in  J.  will  God  bring 
//ci.2.9.  we  see  J.  who  was  made  lower  than  angels 

4. 14.  we  have  a  great  high- priest,  J.  son  of  G.  6. 20. 
7. 22.  by  so  much  was  J.  made  surety  of  better  test. 

10.  19.  lo  enter  into  the  holiest  by  the  blood  of  J. 

12.  2.  looking  unto  J.  the  author  of  our  faith 
24.  to  J.  the  Mediator  of  the  new  covenant 

13.  12.  wherefore  J.  suffered  without  the  gate 

1  John.  4. 15.  whoso  shall  confess  J.  is  Son  of  God 

5.  5.  that  believetli  that  J.  is  the  Son  of  God 
Ren.  14.  12.  here  are  they  that  keep  the  faith  of  J. 

17.  6.  woman  drunken  with  blood  of  martyrs  of  J. 

20.  4.  that  were  beheaded  for  the  witness  of  J. 
22.  16.  I  J.  have  sent  mine  angel  to  testify  to  you 

See  Christ. 

JESUS  joined  with  Lord. 

Jlcts  1. 21.  all  the  lime  the  Lord  3.  went  in  and  out 

2.36.  God  made  that  same  J.  both  Lord  and  Christ 

7.  59.  Stephen  saying,  Lord  J.  receive  my  spirit 

8.  16.  were  baptized  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  J. 

9.  2'.l.  he  spake  boldly  in  the  name  of  the  Lordi. 

11.  20.  spake  to  Grecians,  preaching  the  Lord.). 
16.  31.  believe  on  the  Lord  J.  Christ  and  be  saved 

10.  10.  all  in  Asia  heard  the  word  of  the  Lord  J. 
17.  and  the  name  of  the  Lord  J.  was  mar/nified 

20.  35.  and  to  remember  the  words  of  the  Lord  J. 

1  Cor.  11.23.  Lord  J.  same  night  ho  was  betrayed 

12.  3.  that  no  man  can  say  that  J.  is  the  Lord 

2  Cor.  1. 14.  as  ye  are  ours  in  the  day  of  the  Lordi. 
4.  10.  always  hearing  about  the  dying  of  Lordi. 

rial.  6. 17. 1  b(!ar  in  my  body  the  marks  of  I^ord  J. 

1  7'AM.f.2. 15.  who  both  killed  Lord  J.  and  prophets 
4.  1.  we  beseech  and  exhort  you  by  the  Lord  3. 

2.  what  commandments  we  gave  you  by  Lordi. 

2  Tlie.ts.  1.  7.  when  Ihe  /,ord  i.  shall  be  reveah^d 
Ifel}.  13. 'JO.  brought  again  from  dead  our  Lordi. 
2  Pet.  1.2.  through  the  knowledge  of  J.  our  J^ord 
Rev.2i.  20.  I  come  quickly, even  so,  come  Lord  3. 

See  Grack,  Name. 

JESUS  said. 

Mark  14. 72.  Peter  called  to  mind  the  word  J.  said 

.John  2.  22.  the  disciples  believed  the  word  J.  said 

4.  .')3.  it  was  at  the  same  hour  in  whieh  J.  said 

13.  21.  when  J.  had  thus  said,  he  was  troubled 

21.  23.  yet  J.  said  not  to  him,  he  shall  not  die 

JESUS,  for  .Joshua. 
./7rM7.4.5.brouslitin  with  J. into  possession  of  Gent 
Wcft.4.8.  forif  J.hadgiven  Ihom  rest  then  would  not 

JESUS. 
Col.  4. 11.  J.  who  is  calli'd  Justus  of  circumcision 

J RTIIRO,  called  Reuel. 
EzoJ.  3.  1.  Moaos  kept  tlie  flock  of  J.  his  father 


JEW       [PROPBR  PTamm 

Ezod.  4. 18.  Moses  returned  to  J.  his  father-in-law 
18.  1.  when  J.  heard  of  all  that  God  had  done 
5.  J.  camo  with  his  suns  and  his  wife  to  Mosei 
6  1  thy  father-in-law  J.  am  come  unto  thee 
9.  J.  rejoiced  lor  the  goodness  done  to  Israel,  10. 
12.  J. took  a  burnt-ollering  and  sacrifices  for  God 
JEW. 
Eslh.  2. 5.  a  certain  J.  whose  name  was  Motdecai 
3.  4.  for  he  told  them  that  he  was  a  J. 
6.  10.  make  haste,  do  even  so  to  JMordecai  the  J. 
.Jcr.  :{4.  9.  himselfofthem,  to  wit,  ufaJ.  his  brother 
Zech.  8.23.  ten  men  shall  take  hold  of  skirt  of  a  J. 
John  4. 9.  how  is  it  that  thou  being  a  J.  askest  drink 
18.35.  Pilate  answ.am  I  a  J.?  wlial  hast  thou  done 
Acts  10.  28.  ii  is  unlawful  for  a  man  that  is  a  J. 
13.  6.  they  found  a  sorcerer,  a  J.  named  Barjt,eua 
18.2. Paul  found  a  certain  J. named  .\quila,bornin 
24.  a  J.  named  Apollos  |1  19.14.  sons  of  Sceva  a  J 
19. 33.  Alexander  a  J.  ||  21.  39.  Paul  a  J.  22.  3. 
Rom.  1.  16.  to  the  J.  first,  also  to  Gentile,  2. 9, 10. 

2.  17.  behold,  thou  called  a  J.  and  resleth  in  law 
28.hei8not  a  J.  ||  29.  he  is  a  J.who  is  one  inwardly 

3.  1.  what  advantage  then  hath  the  J.?  or  what 
10.  12.  for  tliere  is  no  difference  between  the  J. 

and  the  Greek,  Gal.  3.  28.  Col.  3. 11. 

1  Cor.  9.  20.  to  the  J.  I  became  as  a  J.  to  gain  Jew» 
Gal.  2.  14.  if  thou  being  a  J.  livest  as  the  Gentilei 

JEWS. 

2  Kings  16.  6.  king  Rezin  dravo  the  J.  from  Elath 
Eira  4.  12.  the  J.  are  come  up  to  Jerusalem 
JVVA.  I.  2.  I  asked  conctTUing  the  J.  that  escaped 

4.  2.  Sanballat  said,  what  do  these  feeble  J.? 

5. 17.  there  wore  at  my  table  one  hundred  and  fifty  J 
6.  H.  that  thou  and  the  J.  think  lo  rebel 
13.  23.  I  saw  J.  that  married  wives  of  Ashdod 
Esth.  4.  3.  there  was  great  mourning  among  the  J. 

14.  then  shall  deliverance  arise  unto  Ihe  J. 

6. 13.  they  said,if  Morducai  be  of  the  seed  of  the  J 

8.  7.  because  Haman  laid  his  hand  upon  the  J. 
8.  write  ye  in  king's  for  the  J.  aa  it  iiketh  you 

16.  the  J.  had  light,  and  gladness,  and  joy,  17 

17.  for  the  fear  of  the  J.  fell  upon  them 

9.  .3.  the  officers  of  the  king  heljicd  the  J. 

28.  days  of  Puriin  should  not  fail  from  among  J 

10.  3.  for  Mordecai  was  great  among  the  J. 
Jer.  38.  19.  Zedekiah  said,  I  am  afraid  of  the  J. 

52.  28.  carried  away  captive  3023  of  the  J.  30. 
7)071.3.8.  Chaldeans  came  near  and  accused  llieJ. 
Milt.  28.  15.  this  saying  is  reported  among  the  J. 
Jo/i/i3.25.a  question  betweenJohn's  disciples  andJ. 

4.  9.  the  J.  have  no  dealings  with  the  Samarilani 
22.  salvation  is  of  the  J.  ||  5.  1.  feast  of  Ihe  J. 

5.  16.  and  therefore  did  the  J.  persecute  Jesus 

18.  therefore  the  J.  sought  Ihe  niorelo  kill  bin) 

6.  .52.  Ihe  J.  therefore  strove  among  themselves 

7.  13.  no  man  spake  ojienly  of  him,  for  fear  of  J. 

9.  18.  the  J.  did  not  believe  that  he  had  been  blind 

10.  31.  the  J.  took  up  stones  agiin  to  stone  him 
11.8.  .master,  Ihe  J.  of  late  sought  to  stone  thee 

33.  when  Jesus  saw  her  and  the  J.  also  weeping 
12.11. many  of  J. went  away  and  believed  on  Jesus 
18.20. 1  taught  in  temple,  whither  J.  always  resort 

3fi.  that  I  sh.oild  not  b;  delivered  to  the  J. 
].'.  40.  body  of  Jesus  as  the  manner  of  J.  is  to  bury 
Jlcts  11.  19.  preaching  to  none,  but  the  J.  only 
12.  3.  because  Herod  saw  it  pleased  the  J. 
Hi.  3.  because  of  the  J.  that  were  in  those  parts 

20.  these  men  beine  J.  do  trouble  our  city 

19.  10.  J.  and  Greeks  heard  the  wonl  of  the  Lord 
13.  then  certain  of  the  vagab(md  J.  exorcists 

20.  3.  and  when  the  J.  laid  wail  for  him,  19. 

21.  11.  so  shall  the  J.  at  Jerusalem  bind  the  man 
23. 12.  certain  of  the  J.  banded  louelher  and  bound 

27.  this  man  was  taken  of  the  J.  had  been  killed 
24.  18.  certain  J.  from  Asia  found  me  purified 
S.").  10.  to  the  J.  have  done  no  wr-^ng,  thou  knowcst 
«,;m.3.29.is  he  God  of  J.onlv?  is  I.e  not  of  Gentiles? 

1  Cnr.  1.  23.  Christ,  to  the  J.  a  stumbling-block 
9.20.  to  J.  f  became  as  a  Jew  that  I  might  gain  J. 

2  Cor.  1 1. 24.  of  J.  five  times  received  forty  ttiincs 
Gnl.  2.  14.  as  the  Gentiles,  and  not  as  do  Ihe  J. 

15.  we  who  are  J.  by  nature,  and  not  sinners 

1  7'/if.«<.2.  14.  even  as'lhey  have  surtered  of  Ihe  J. 

Rev.  2.  9.  which  say  lliev  are  J.  and  arc  not,  3.  9. 

.W  IlieiV.W'S.  [See  Gkntiles. 

Esth.  3.  6.  Haman  sought  lo  desiroy  all  the  3.  13. 

4.  13.  more  than  all  the  3.  \\  16.  go,  gather  all  the 3. 
Jcr.  40.  II.  when  nil  the  3.  in  Moah  hear-!  that 
12.  even  all  the  3.  returned  out  of  all  places 

41.  3.  IshmanI  slew  all  the  3.  that  were  with  hinn 

44.  1.  Ihe  word  concerning  all  the  3.  in  Egypt 
Mjrk  7. 3.  all  the  3.  except  they  wash,  they  eat  not 
./?cfsl8.2.commnnded  a//MeJ.todepartfromRom« 

19.  17.  this  was  known  lo  all  the  3.  at  Ephesus 

21.  21.  Ihou  IcaehesI  all  the  J.  to  forsake  Mosns 

22.  12.  Ananias  had  a  good  report  of  alt  the  3. 
24.  5.  and  a  mover  ofseditiMi,  among  all  the  3 
2i)  4.  my  manner  of  life  at  J.  rns.  know  all  the  3. 

King  o/f/if  JEWS. 
Mit.  2.2.  where  is  ho  llial  is  born  King  of  ihe  3  J 


PRdPiK  Names.]      JOA 

Jtfo'..27.11.thegovcrnora9ketlJe3U9,art  thou  King 
jftheJ.1  Mark  15.2.  Luke'i3.3.Ju/in\8.'SS. 

29.  hail,  King  of  the  J.  Mark  15.  18.  Jo/m  19.  3. 
37.  set  up  his  accusation, this  is  the  King  of  the  i. 

Mark  15.  26.  Luke  23.  38.  John  19.  19. 

Mark\5.^.  but  Pilate  answered  them,  will  ye  that 

I  release  to  you  1\k  KingoftAei.'i  John  18.39. 

12.  do  unto  him  whom  you  call  the  King  of  the  3. 
/,ute23.37.if  thou  be  the  Kingofthcl.sa.ve  thyself 
/oAnl9.21.thechierpriest8  said, write  nottheA'infi- 

of  the  J.  but  that  he  said,  1  am  Kingof  thci. 
JEWESS. 
Sets  16.1.Timothcus  was  son  of  a  J.  who  believed 
34.24.  Feli.x'  wife  Drusilla  was  a  J.  gent  for  Paul 

JEWISH. 
Tit.  1. 14.  not  giving  heed  to  J.  fables  and  comni. 

JEWRY. 
Dan.  5.  13.  whom  my  father  brought  out  of  J. 

JEZEBEL. 
IKings  16.31.  Ahab  took  to  wife  J.and served  Baal 

18.  4.  when  J.  cut  off  the  prophets  of  the  Lord 

13.  what  I  did  when  J.  slew  the  prophets  of  Lord 
19.  the  prophets  of  Baal  which  eat  at  J.  table 

19.  1.  Ahab  told  J.  all  that  Elijah  had  done 
21.  11.  the  elders  did  us  J.  had  sent  unto  them 

15.  when  J.  heard  Naboth  was  stoned  and  dead 

23.  dogsshall  eat  J.  by  the  wall,  2  A'?7i^i-9.10,36. 

2.5.  none  like  Ahab,  whom  J.  his  wife  stirred  up 

2  Kings  9.  7.  that  I  may  avenge  at  the  hand  of  J. 

22.  80  long  as  the  whoredoms  of  thy  mother  J. 
37.  carcase  of  J. shall  be  as  dung  upon  the  face  of 

the  field,  so  that  they  shall  not  say,  this  is  J. 
Rev.  2.  20.  because  thou  sufferest  that  woman  J. 

JEZREEL,  name  of  place  and  person. 
Judg.  6.  33.  Anialek  pitched  in  the  valley  of  J. 

1  Sam.  25.  43.  David  also  took  Ahinoam  of  J. 
29.  1.  Israel  pitched  by  a  fountain  which  is  in  J. 

2  Sam.  2.9.  Abner  made  Ish-bosheth  king  over  J. 
I  Kings  18.  45.  and  Ahab  rode  and  went  to  J. 

40.  Elijah  ran  before  Ahab  to  entrance  of  J. 
21.  1.  Nabolli  had  a  vinevard  which  was  in  J. 

23.  dogs  eat  Jpzeliel  by  wall  of  J.  2  Kings  9.10,36. 
8  Kings  8. 29.  Jurain  went  back  to  J.  2  Chr.  22. 6. 

9.  16.  so  Jehu  rode  in  a  chariot  and  went  to  J. 

10.  6.  come  to  me  to  J.  by  to-morrow  this  time 
7.  they  sent  the  liends  of  the  king's  sons  to  J. 

1  Chron.^.  3.  these  were  of  the  father  of  Elam,  J. 

Hos.  1.  4.  Lord  s.nid  to  him,  call  his  name  J.  for  I 

will  avenge  the  blood  of  J.  on  the  house  of  Jehu 

5. 1  will  break  the  bow  of  Israel  in  valley  of  J. 

11.  one  head,  for  great  shall  be  the  day  of  J. 

2.  22.  the  corn,  wine  and  oil  shall  hear  J. 

JEZREELITE,  See.  Naboth. 

ILLYRICUM. 

Rom.  15. 19.  round  about  unto  I.  I  have  preached 

IMLAH,  .9cc  MicAiAH. 

JOAB. 

5am.  2.  18.  three  sons  of  Zeruiah,  J.  Abishai 

22.  how  should  I  hold  upmy  face  toJ.thy  brother 

24.  J.  also  and  Abishai  pursued  after  Abner 

3.  29.  let  the  blood  of  Abner  rest  on  the  head  of  J. 

30.  so  J.  and  Abishai  his  brother  slew  Abner 
8.  16.  J.  the  son  of  Zeruiah  was  over  the  host, 

.20.  23.    1  Chron.  11.  6.  |  18.  15.  |  27.  34. 

11.  7.  David  demanded  of  Uriah  how  J.  did 

11.  Isr.  and  Judah  abide  in  tents,  and  my  lord  J. 

14.  in  the  morning  David  wrote  a  letter  to  J. 

12.  26.  J.  fought  against  Rabbah  of  Ammon 
14.  3.  so  J.  put  the  words  in  the  widow's  mouth 

19.  is  not  the  hand  of  J.  with  thee  in  all  this  7 
29.  Absalom  sent  for  J.  |1  30.  J.  field  is  near 

20.9.  J.  killed  .\niasa  ||  17. woman  said,  art  thou  J. 
24.  4.  notwithstanding  the  king's  word  prevailed 

against  J.  and  captains  of  the  host,  1  Chr.  21.4. 
IKings  l.7..Adonijah  confer,  with  J. son  of  Zeruiah 
2.  .5.  moreover  tho".  knowest  what  J.  did  to  me 
28.  J.  fled  to  tabernacle  of  Lord  and  caught  horns 

11. 10.  six  months  J   remain,  every  male  inEdom 
1  CAr.4.14.Seraiah  begat  J.  1|  20.  1.  J.  led  the  army 

21.  6.  for  the  kmg'a  word  was  abominable  to  J. 
26.  28.  all  that  Abner  and  J.  had  dedicated 
JCzra  2.  6.  of  children  of  Jeshua  and  J.  JVeh.  7. 1 1. 
8.  9.  of  the  sons  of  J.  Obadiah  went  with  Ezra 
JOAH. 
2Kingg  18.  18.  J.  son  of  .Asaph  recorder,  /«a.36.3. 
1  CA7-.6.21.  J.  son  of  Zimmah  |1  26.4.  ofObed-edom 

JOANNA. 
I.uke  3.  27.  Juda,  which  was  the  son  of  J. 
8.  3.  J.  the  wife  of  Cliura,  Herod's  steward 

JOASH. 
Judg.  6.  11.  that  per'ainelh  to  J.  the  Abi-ezrite 
7.  14.  save  the  sword  of  Gideon  the  son  of  J. 
I  ATiJt "■« 22. 26.  king oflBraelsaid,carryhim back  to 
Amon  and  J.  the  king's  son,  2  Chron.  18.  25. 
Kings  11.  2.  Jehoshfba  stole  J.  2  Chron.  22.  II. 

13.  9.  J.  the  son  of  Jehoahaz  reigned  in  his  stead 
14.  J.  the  king  of  Israel  wept  over  Elisha 

25.  J.  beat  Ben-hadad  three  times,  and  recovered 

14.  27.  by  the  hand  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  J. 
Chron.  7  8.  the  tons  of  Bechor;  Zemira.and  J. 

739 


JOH 

1  Cftr.  19. 3.  J.  the  son  of  Shemaiah  theGibeathite 
27.  28.  and  over  the  cellars  of  oil  was  J. 

2  Chr.  24.  22.  thus  J.  remembered  not  the  kindness 
24.  so  they  executed  judgment  against  J. 

JOB. 

Gen.  46.  13.  the  sons  of  Issachar  ;  J.  and  Shimron 
Job  1.1. a  man  in  the  land  of  Uz  whose  name  was  J 

8.  hast  thou  considered  my  servant  J.?  2.  3. 

9.  Satan  said,  doth  J.  fear  God  for  nought  ? 
22.  in  all  this  J.  sinned  not  with  his  lips,  2.  10. 

2.  7.  Satan  went  and  smote  J.  with  sore  boils 

32.  1.  so  these  three  men  ceased  to  answer  J. 

2.  against  J.  was  Elibu's  wrath  kindled 

3.  because  they  found  no  answer  and  condemn.  J 
12.  there  was  none  of  you  that  convinced  J. 

33.  31.  mark  well,  O  J.  hearken  unto  me 

34.  7.  what  man  is  like  J.  who  drinketh  scorning? 

35.  J.  bath  spoken  without  knowledge 

36.  my  desire  is  that  J.  may  be  tried  to  the  end 

35.  16.  therefore  doth  J.  open  his  mouth  in  vain 

42.  7.  ye  have  not  spoken  as  my  servant  J.  hath,  8. 

8.  take  seven  bullocks  and  go  to  my  servant  J. 
9.did  as  Lord  commanded, the  L.also  accepted  J. 

10.  the  Lord  gave  J.  twice  as  much  as  he  had 
12.  so  the  Lord  blessed  the  latter  end  of  J. 
15.no  women  found  so  fair  as  the  daughtersof  J. 

16.  after  this  J.  lived  140  years  and  saw  his  sons 

17.  so  J.  died,  being  old  and  full  of  days 
iCzeAr.l4.14.tho'  Noah, Daniel  and  J.  were  in  it,  20. 
Jam.  5.  11.  ye  have  heard  of  the  patience  of  J. 

JOEL. 
1  Sam.  8.  2.  name  of  Samuel's  first-born  was  J. 

1  Chr.  4.  35.  of  the  family  of  Simeon,  J.  and  Jehu 

5.  4.  of  the  Reubenites,  the  sons  of  J.  8. 

12.  of  the  Gadiles,  J.  the  chief,  and  Shapham 

6.  3.3.  Heman,  a  singer,  son  of  J.  son  of  Shemuel 
36.  Elkanah  the  son  of  J.  a  Kohathite 

7.  3.  tiiesonsof  Izrahiab;  Michael, Obadiah  and  J. 

11.  38.  J.  and  Mibhar  were  valiant  men 
15.  7.  of  the  sons  of  Gershom,  J.  the  chief 

11.  David  called  for  liaiah  and  J.  the  Levite 
23.  8.  the  sons  of  Laadan,  the  chief  was  J. 
26.  22.  the  sons  of  Jehuii ;  ZetbaA  and  J. 

27. 20.  of  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh,J.  was  captain 
Kzral0.43.J.and  Benaiah  had  taken  strange  wives 
JVeA.  11.  9.  J.  son  of  Zichri  was  their  overseer 
Joel  1.  1.  the  word  came  to  J.  the  son  of  Pethuel 
.lets  2.  16.  which  was  spoken  by  the  prophet  J. 
JOHANAN. 

2  Kings  25.  23.  J.  came  to  Gedaliah,  Jer.  40. 8, 13. 
1  CAron.3. 15.  the  sons  of  Josiah,  the  first-born  J. 
Ezra  10.  6.  Ezra  went  into  the  chamber  of  J. 
.Jer.  41.  11.  but  when  J.  heard  of  all  the  evil 

43.  4.  so  J.  obeyed  not  the  voice  of  the  Lord 

JOHN  son  of  Zacharias. 
^at.3.4.  J.  had  raiment  of  camel's  hair,  Mark  1. 6. 
14.  Jesus  came  to  be  baptized,  but  J.  forbad  him 
4.  12.  that  J.  was  cast  into  prison,  Mark  1.  14. 
9. 14.  then  came  to  him  the  disciples  of  J.  Mark 
2.  18.  Luke  5.  33.  |  7.  18.  |  11.  1.  John  3.  25. 
11.2.  J.  had  heard  the  works  of  Christ,  Lukel.  19. 

4.  go  and  shew  J.  these  things,  Luke  7.  22. 

7.  Jesus  began  to  say  concerning  J.  Luke  7.24. 

13.  the  law  prophesied  till  J.  Luke  16.  16. 

14.  10.  Herod  beheaded  J.  Mark  6. 16.  Luke  9.9. 

21.26.all  hold  J.  a  prophet,  Jl/ari  11.32. /^mAc 20.6. 

32.  J.  came  in  the  way  of  righteousness 
JWarA  6.20. Herod  feared J.knowinghewas  just  man 
Luke  1.13.beara6on,  thou  shall  call  his  name  J.  60. 

3.  15.  all  men  mused  in  their  hearts  of  J. 

9.  7.  it  was  said,  that  J.  was  risen  from  the  dead 
Johni.fi.  a  man  sent  from  God,  whose  name  was  J. 

19.  and  this  is  the  record  of  J.  32. 
29.  next  day  J.  seelh  Jesus  coming  unto  him 
3. 23.  J.  also  was  baptizing  in  Enon  near  to  Salim 

24.  for  J.  was  not  yet  cast  into  prison 

4.  1.  that  Jesus  made  more  disciples  than  J. 

5.  33.  ye  sent  to  J.  and  he  bare  witness  to  the  truth 
36.  but  I  have  greater  witness  than  that  of  J. 

10.  41.  J.  did  no  miracle;  but  all  that  J.  spake 
Jicts  1.5.  for  J.  truly  baptized  with  water,  11.  16. 

13.24.  when  J.  had  first  preached  before  his  coming 

25.  and  as  J.  fulfilled  his  course,  he  said,  whom 

See  Baptism,  Baptist. 

JOHN  the  apostle. 

Mat.  4.  21.  James  and  J.  the  sons  of  Zebedee,  he 

called  them,  10.2.  Mark  1.  19.  |  3.  17. 

7-uAe22.8  Jesus  sentPeter  andJ. to  prepare  passover 

Jicts  3.  1.  Peter  and  J.  went  up  into  the  temple 

11.  and  as  the  lame  man  held  Peter  and  J. 
4. 13.  when  they  saw  the  boldness  of  Peter  and  J. 

8.  14.  the  apostles  sent  to  Samaria  Peter  and  J. 

12.  2.  Herod  killed  James  the  brother  of  J. 
Rev.  1. 1.  signified  it  by  his  angel  to  his  servant  J. 

4.  J.  to  the  seven  churches  which  are  in  Asia 

9.  T  J.  who  also  am  your  brother  and  companion 
21. 2. 1  J.  saw  the  holy  city  new  Jerusalem  coming 

See  James. 
JOHN. 
Act!  4.  C.  J.  and  Alexander  gathered  togethsr 


JOR 

JOHN,  Eurnamed  Mark. 
Acts  12. 12. 1'eler  came  to  house  of  J.  surn  imed  H 

25.  look  with  them  J.  whose  surname  was  Mark 

13.  5.  and  they  had  also  J.  to  their  minister 

13.  J.deparling  from  them, returned  to  Jerusalem 
15.37.  Barnabas  determined  to  take  with  them  J 
JONADAB,  called  JEHONADAB. 
2  Sam.  13.3.  J.  was  Amnon's  friend,  a  subtle  man 
2  Kings  10.15.  J.  son  ofRechab  came  to  meet  Jehu 
Jer.  35.  6.  J.  our  father  commanded  us,  saying 
8.  thus  have  we  obeyed  the  vuice  of  J.  18. 

19.  J.  shall  not  want  a  man  to  stand  before  me 

JONAH,  or  JONAS. 
2  Kings  14.25.  the  word  he  spake  by  his  servant  J. 
Jonah  1 . 3.  J.  rose  up  to  flee  to  Tarsbish  from  Lord 
7.  so  they  cast  lots,  and  the  lot  fell  upon  J. 

15.  they  cast  J.  into  the  sea,  the  sea  ceased  raging 
17.  J. was  in  the  belly  ofthefish  3  days  and  nighti 

2.  1.  J.  prayed  ||  10.  the  fish  vomited  out  J. 

3.  3.  J.  went  to  Nineveh  ||  4.  1.  displeased  J. 

4. 6.  tlie  Lord  made  the  gourd  to  come  up  over  J. 

Mat.  12.  39.  no  sign  be  given  to  it,  but  the  sign  of 

the  prophet  J.  16.  4.  Luke  11.  29,  3a 

40.  as  J.  was  three  days  in  the  whale's  belly 

41.  they  repented  at  the  preaching  of  J. 
John2l.  15.  Simon  son  of  J.  lovest  thou  me'?  16, 17. 

JONATHAN. 

■Judg.  18.  30.  J.  and  his  sons  were  priests  to  Dan 

l.Sam.13.2.  a  thousand  men  were  with  J.  in  Gibeah 

22.  but  with  Saul  and  J.  were  swords  found 

14.  3.  the  people  knew  not  that  J.  was  gone 
13.  J.  climbed  up  upon  his  hands  and  his  tfet 

27.  J.  heard  not  when  his  father  charged  people 

39.  though  it  be  in  J.  my  son,  he  shall  surely  die 

40.  I  and  J.  my  son  will  be  on  the  other  side 

42.  J.  was  taken  1|  44.  thou  sbalt  surely  die,  J. 
45.  so  the  people  rescued  J.  that  he  died  not 

18. 1.  the  soul  of  J.  was  knit  with  the  soul  of  David 

19.  2.  but  J.  Saul's  son  delighted  much  in  David 
4.  J.  spake  good  of  David  to  Saul  his  father 

20.  3.  let  not  J.  know  this  lest  be  be  grieved 
13.  the  Lord  do  bo,  and  much  more  to  J. 

16.  J.  made  a  covenant  with  the  house  of  David 
30.  then  Saul's  anger  was  kindled  against  J. 
33.  J.  knew  it  was  determined  to  slay  David 
37.  J.  cried  after  the  lad  ||  39.  J.  and  David  knew 

23. 16.  J.  rose  and  w  ent  to  David  into  the  wood 
31.  2.  the  Philistines  slew  J.  1  Chron.  10.  2. 
2  Sam.  1.  4.  Saul  and  J.  his  son  are  dead  also 

22.  the  bow  of  J.  turned  not  back,  sword  of  Saul 

23.  Saul  and  J.  were  lovely  in  their  lives 

26.  I  am  distressed  for  thee,  my  brother  J. 

4.  4.  J.  had  a  son  that  was  lame  of  his  feet,  9.  3. 

9.  7.  for  I  will  shew  thee  kindness  for  J.  sake 
15. 27.  J.  the  son  of  A  biathar,  36. 1  Kings  1. 42, 43. 
17.  17.  now  J.  and  Ahimaaz  stayed  by  Eu-rogel 

21.7.  the  king  spared  Mephiboslieth  the  sun  of  J. 
12.  David  took  the  bones  of  Saul  and  J. 

21.  J.  the  son  of  Shlmea  slew  him,  1  Chron.  20.7.' 
23.  32.  of  the  sons  of  Jashen,  J.  a  valiant  man 

1  Chron.  2.  32.  the  sons  of  Juda ;  Jether  and  J. 
11.34.  the  sons  of  Hashem;  J.  Abiam,and  Eliphal 
27.  32.  also  J.  David's  uncle  was  a  counsellor 

Ezra  8.  6.  Ebed  the  son  of  J.  went  up  with  Ezra 

10.  15.  only  J.  and  Jehaziah  were  employed 
JVfA.  12.  11.  Joiada  bi-gat  J.  ||  14.  of  Meiicu,  J. 

35.  Zechariah  the  son  of  J.  with  a  trumpet 
./cr.  37. 15.  put  Jeremiah  in  prison  in  the  house  of  J. 

20.  not  to  return  to  the  house  of  J.  38.  26. 

40. 8.  Johananand  J.  came  to  Gedaliah  to  Mizpch 

See  David,  Saul. 
JOPPA. 

2  Chr.  2. 16.  bring  it  by  sea  in  floats  to  J.  Ezra  3.  7. 
.Jonah  1.3.  Jonah  went  down  to  J.  and  found  a  ship 
Acts  9.  36.  was  at  J.  a  disciple  named  Tabitha 

42.it  wasknown  throughoutall  J.  many  believed 

43.  Peter  tarried  many  days  in  J.  with  Simon 

10.  5.  send  men  to  J.  and  call  for  one  Simon,  32. 

23.  certain  brethren  from  J.  accompanied  him 
11.5.  I  was  in  the  city  of  J.  praying,  saw  a  vision 

JORAM,  called  JEHORAM. 
2  Sam.  8.  10.  Toi  sent  J.  his  son  to  king  David 
2  Kings  8.  16.  J.  of  Ahab  ;  J.  son  of  Jehoshaphat 

28.  Syrians  wounded  J.  ||  20.  J.  went  to  Jezreel 
9.14.Jehuson  of  Jehoshaphat  conspired  against  J. 

24.  drew  a  bow  and  smote  J.  between  his  arras 

11.  2.  Jehosheba  the  daughter  of  J.  took  Joash 
1  Chron.  26.  25.  of  the  Levitcs,  J.  over  treasure! 
2CAr.  22. 7.  destruction  of  Ahaziah  by  coming  toi 
Mat.  1.  8.  Josaphat  beeat  J.  and  J.  begat  Ozias 

JORDAN. 
Oen.  13.  11.  Lot  chose  him  all  the  plain  of  J. 
J^Tum.  34.  12.  the  border  shall  go  down  to  J.  and 
goings  out  at  the  salt  sea,  .Josh.  13. 27.  1 18. 12. 
Josh.  3.  6.  when  ye  are  come  to  J.  stand  still  in  J 
11.  the  ark  passelh  over  before  you  into  J. 
15.  J.  overflowoth  all  his  banks  in  harvest 
4.  3.  take  twelve  stones  out  of  the  midst  of  J. 

17.  commanded  the  pricntj,  come  ye  up  out  of  J 
23.  the  Lord  your  God  dried  up  the  %vaters  of  J 


JOS 

Ja<A.S2.  S5.  Lord  hath  made  J.  a  border  bfitween  as 
Judg.3.  28.  they  took  the  lords  of  J.  7.  -^4.  |  12.  5. 

Vi.  6.  then  they  slew  him  at  the  passaguB  of  J. 
i  Sam.  19.  15.  the  king  returned  and  came  to  J. 
i  Kings  2.  8.  Shimci  came  down  to  meet  me  at  J. 
7. 4(>.  in  plain  of  J.  did  the  king  cant  them  in  clay 
ground  betw.Siiccoth  and  Zarthan,2  C'Ar.4.17. 
17.  3.  Elijah  by  the  brook  Chenth  before  J.  5. 
S  Kings  2.  G.  tarry  here,  the  Lord  hatli  sent  me  to  J. 
7.  they  two  stood  by  J.  ||  13.  Klmlia  stood  by  J. 
S.  10.  saying,  go  and  wash  in  J.  seven  times 

14.  Naaman  dipped  himself  seven  times  in  J. 
6. 2.  let  us  go,  we  pray  thee,  to  J.  and  take  a  beam 
7.  15.  and  they  went  alter  the  Syrians  to  J. 
Job  40.  2;l.  he  trustelh  that  ho  can  draw  up  J. 
i'sai.  42.6.1  will  remember  iheo  from  the  land  of  J. 

114.  3.  the  sea  fled,  J.  was  driven  back,  5. 
Jer.  12.  5.  how  wilt  thou  do  in  the  swelling  of  J. 7 
49.  la.  like  a  lion  from  the  swelling  of  J.  50.  44. 
Zech.  11.  3.  for  the  pride  of  J.  is  spoiled 
Mat.  3.  6.  were  baptized  of  him  in  J.  Jilarkl.  5, 9. 
13.  then  Cometh  Jesus  from  Galilee  to  J. to  be  bap. 
Jieyond  JORDAN. 
Oen.  50.  10.  the  Hoor  of  Atad  which  is  bexjond  J. 

11.  called  Abel-mizraim,  which  is  beyond  J. 

Deut.  3.  25.  see  the  good  land  that  is  beyond  J. 

Josh.  9.  10.  did  10  the  kings  of  Amoritea  biyond  J. 

13.8.  inheritance  Moses  gave  iham  beyond  i.  18.  7. 

Judg.  5.  17.  Gilead  abode  beyond  i.  Uan  in  ships 

Isa.  9.  1.  the  land  of  Zubulun  and  land  of  Naphtuli 

beyond  J.  in  Galilee  of  the  nations.  Mat.  4.  15. 

JoAjil.28.  these  things  done  in  Delhabara  beyond  i. 

3.  2tj.  he  that  was  with  tliee  beyond  J.  baptizeth 

On  the  other  side  JOKD.VN. 

Z>eu£.11.30.Gerizim,Ebal,arethey  noton  others.]. 

Josh.  7.  7.  been  content  and  dwelt  on  other  side  ]. 

12. 1.  Reuben,  Gad,  and  half  the  tribe  on  the  other 

side  J.  13.  27,  32.  |  14.  3.  |  17.  5.  J  22.  4. 

20.8.onotAcr«i(/eJ.Bezer,Ramuth,citie3ol  refuge 

24.  8.  Amoritcs  who  dwelt  on  the  other  side  J. 

.7u<i^.7.25.brought  heads  of  Oreb,Zeeb  on  other  s.]. 

lO.B.lsrael  on  other  s.  J.oppressed  by  the  Amoritea 

ISam.  31. 7.  they  on  other  side  J.  forsook  their  cities 

lCAr.G.78.  to  children  of  Merari  cities  on  ofAcrs.  J. 

12.  37.  on  the  other  side  J.  were  120,000  men 

On  this  side  JOl{.D.\N. 

iMVm.32. 19.  our  inheritance  is  fallen  on  this  side  J. 

eastward,  32.  |  34. 15.  ./osh.  1. 14,  15.  |  22.  7. 

35.  14.  give  three  cities  on  this  side  i.  Deut.  4.41. 

Z)eut  1.5.on  t.  s.  J.  Moses  began  to  declare  this  law 

3.  8.  we  took  the  land  on  this  side  J.  from  Arnon 

Jush.  9.  1.  kings  on  this  side  J.  gathered  ag.  Joshua 

1  CAr.  20.30.  of  Hebronites  1700  officers  on  tAi'a  S.J. 

Over  JORDAN. 
Oen.  32.  10.  with  my  staff  I  passed  over  this  J. 
^nm.  32.5.  give  us  this  land,  bring  us  not  over  3. 
21.  if  ye  will  go  all  of  you  armed  over  3. 
32.  we  will  pass  over  J.  armed  before  the  Lord 
33.  51.  when  ye  are  passed  over  3.  into  the  land 
of  Canaan,  3.5.  10.  Dcut.  12.  10.  |  27.  4,  12. 
D«u«.  3.27.  Ihou  shalt  not  go  oner  J.  4.21.  |31.2. 
4.2^2. 1  must  die  in  this  land,  I  must  not  go  ««cr  J. 
9.  1.  thou  art  to  pass  ooer  3.  this  day,  II.  31. 
Josh.  1.  2.  go  over  this  J.  thou  and  all  this  i)eople 
11.  within  three  days  ye  shall  pass  over  3. 

3.  17.  the  people  were  passed  clean  over  3.  4.  1. 

4.  22.  Israel  came  over  this  J.  on  dry  land 

7.  7.  brought  this  people  over  3.  to  deliver  us 
24.  11.  ye  went  aver  3.  and  came  unto  Jericho 
Judg.  10.  9.  Ammon  passed  over  3.  to  fight 

1  Sam.  13.  7.  some  of  the  Hebrews  went  over  3. 

2  .Sam.  2.  29.  Abner  and  his  men  passed  over  3. 
17.  22.  David  and  the  people  passed  over  3. 

24.  .Xbsalorn  and  all  Israel  passed  over  3. 
19. 15.  Judah  came  to  conduct  the  king  over  J. 31. 
1  CAron.  12.  15.  these  are  they  that  passed  over  3. 
19.  17.  David  passed  over  3.  against  the  Syrians 

JORIM,  JOSE. 
Z.uA:e 3.29.  .M.icthesonof  Eliezer,  theson  otJorim 
J09EDKCH.  .S«  Joshua. 
JOSEPH. 
Oen.  30.  24.  she  called  his  name  J.  and  said 
33.  2.  Jacob  pot  Rachel  and  J.  hindermnst 
35.  24.  son*  of  Jacob  twelve,  the  sons  of  Rachel, 
J.  and  Benjamin,  40.  19.  1  Chron.  %  2. 
37.  2.  J.  brought  to  his  father  their  evil  report 
3.  Israel  loved  J.  ||  2H.  his  brethren  sold  J. 
5.  J.  dreamo<l  a  dream  ||  '<3.  J.  in  rent  In  |iicccs 

39.  2.  but  the  Lord  was  with  J.  21. 

5.  Lord  blessed  the  Egyptian's  houso  for  J.  sake 
7.  Ilia  master's  wife  cast  hir  eyes  upon  J. 
20.  J.  master  Dok  him  and  |iut  him  in  prison 

40.  9   the  chief  butler  told  his  dream  to  .1. 
23.  yet  did  not  the  chief  butler  remember  J. 

41.  14.  they  brought  J.  out  of  the  dungeon 

42.  Pharaoh  put  his  ring  on  J.  hand,  nrraved  him 

4G.J.:iOyenisold  when  ho i I  before  Pharaoh 

49.  J.  gathered  corn  as  the  sand  of  the  ten 
41.  M.  go  to  J.  II  42.  H.  J.  knew  Ins  brelhrun 
49.  36.  J.  ii  not  ||  43.  17.  the  man  did  M  J.  bado 
740 


JOS 

Oen.  43. 30.  J.  made  haste,  for  his  bowels  did  yearn 
45.  3.  I  am  J.  4.  ||  9,  say,  thus  saith  thy  son  J. 

2C.  they  told  him,  saying,  J.  is  yet  alive,  28. 
4G.  4.  J.  shall  put  his  hand  upon  thine  eyes 

29.  J.  went  up  to  meet  Israel  his  father 

47.  12.  J.  nourished  his  father  and  his  brethren 
IS.  money  failed,  all  the  Egyptians  came  to  J. 
29.  Israel  must  die,  and  he  called  his  son  J. 

48.  2.  one  told  Jacob,  thy  eon  J.  Cometh  to  thee 

12.  J.  brought  them  from  between  his  knees 
15.  Jacob  blessed  J.  and  said,  God  bless  the  lads 

49. 22.  J.  is  a  fruitl'ul  bough  even  a  bough  by  a  well 
26.  blessings  shall  be  on  head  of  J.  and  on  him 
50.  7.  and  J.  went  up  to  bury  his  father 

15.  J.  will  peradvcnture  hate  us  and  requite  us 

16.  and  they  sent  a  messenger  to  J.  saying 

17.  J.  wept  when  they  spake  unto  him 

25.  J.  took  an  oath  of  the  children  of  Israel 

Ezod.  1. 8.  now  king  which  knew  not  J.  Mcts  7. 18. 

13.  19.  Moses  took  the  bones  of  J.  with  him 

^iim.  26.  28.  sons  of  J.  Manasseh,  Ephraim,  37. 

Deut.  27.  12.  these  on  Gerizim  to  bless,  Judah,  J. 

33.  13.  of  J.  he  said,  blessed  of  the  Lord  bo  his  land 
16.  let  the  blessing  come  upon  the  head  of  J. 

1  CAr.5. 2.  the  chief  ruler,  but  the  birth-right  was  J 
Psal.ll.  15.  hast  redeemed  the  sons  of  Jacob  and  J 
78.  67.  moreover  he  refused  the  tabernacle  of  J. 

80.  1.  giv^ear,  thou  that  leadest  J.  like  a  flock 

81.  5.  this  he  ordained  in  J.  for  a  testimony 
105.  17.  even  J.  who  was  sold  for  a  servant 

Eiek.  37. 16.  write  for  J.  the  stick  of  Ephraim,  19, 
47. 13.  tribes  of  Israel,  J.  shall  have  two  portions 
48.  32.  one  gale  of  J.  one  gate  of  Benjamin 

Amos  5. 15.  L.  will  be  gracious  to  the  remnant  of  J. 
6.6.  but  they  are  not  grieved  for  the  aflliction  of  J. 

John  4.  5.  near  thi;  ground  that  Jacob  gave  to  J. 

.>iets  7.  9.  the  patriarchs  sold  J.  into  Egypt 

13.  at  the  second  time  J.  was  made  known 

14.  then  J.  called  his  father  Jacob  to  him 
Heb.  11.  21.  by  faith  Jacob  blessed  the  sons  of  J. 

22.  J.  made  mention  of  Israel's  departing 
See  House. 
JOSEPH  with  tribe  and  children. 
JVam.  1.  10.  of  the  children  of  J.  of  E|>hraim,  32. 

13.  II.  of  the  (r/6eof  J.  namely  of  Manasseh 

34.  23.  the  princes  of  the  children  of  J.  Hanniel 
36.  5.  the  tribe  of  the  sons  of  J.  halli  said  well 

,/osh.  14.  4.  the  children  of  J.  two  tribes,  16.  4. 

16.  1.  the  lot  o(  children  of  J.  fell  from  Jordan 

17.  14.  the  children  of  J.  spake  to  Joshua,  16. 
1  Chron.  7.  29.  in  these  dwell  the  children  of  J. 
Hev.  7.  8.  of  the  tribe  of  J.  were  sealed  12,000 

JOSEPH,  husband  of  Jlfarj/. 
Mat.  1.  16.  Jacob  begat  J.  the  husband  of  Mary 

18.  when  as  his  mother  Mary  was  espoused  to  J. 

19.  J.  her  husband  being  a  just  man  was  minded 
24.  J.  did  as  angel  of  the  Lord  had  bidden  him 

2.  13.  the  angel  of  the  Lord  a|ipeared  to  J.  19. 
Luke  1.27.  his  name  was  J.  of  the  house  of  David 

2.  4.  J.  also  went  up  from  Galilee  to  be  taxed 
16.  the  shepherds  found  Mary,  J.  and  the  babe 
43.  and  J.  and  his  Mother  knew  not  of  it 

3.  23.  being,  as  was  suppnsed,  the  son  of  J. 

4.  22.  is  not  this  J.  son?  ./ohn  1.  45.  )  6.  42. 

JOSEPH,  the  name  of  divers  men. 
JVum.  13. 7.  of  the  tribe  of  Issachar,  Igal  son  of  J. 
1  Chron.  25.  2.  of  the  sons  of  Asaph  ;  Zaccur,  J.  9. 
Ezra  10.  42.  Shalltim,  J.  had  taken  strange  wives 
JVeA.  12.  14.  of  Shebaniah,  J.  was  a  priest 
Mat.  27.  57.  Jesus'  disciple,  J.  of  Arimalhea,  .59. 
Mark  1.5.  43,  45.  /.nke  23.  50.  John  19.  :18. 
An4c  3.  24.  who  was  the  son  of  J.  26,  30. 
.^cts  1. 23.  they  ajipointed  two,  J.  called  Barsabas 

J  OSES. 
Mat.  13.  .55.  his  brethren  James  and  J.  Murk  fi.  3. 
27.  .56.  Mary  the  mother  of  J.  Mark  15.  40,  47. 
.^(;t.s-4.36.  J.  by  apostles  was  surnajned  llanmbas 
JOSHUA,  called  JEHOSHUA,  and  OSHEA. 
A'iod. 17.13.  J. discomfited  Amalek  with  the  sword 

14.  write  this,  and  rehearse  it  in  the  cars  of  J. 
24.  13.  and  Moses  rose  up  and  his  minister  J. 

32.  17.  when  J.  heard  the  noise  of  the  people 

33.  11.  J.  departed  not  out  of  the  tabernacle 
JVum.  13.  8.  of  tribe  of  Ephraim,  Oshrantn  of  Nun 

16.  Moses  called  Oshea  the  son  of  Nun,  Jehoshua 

14.  .30.  save  Caleb  an.l  J.  38.  I  26.  G5.  |  32.  12. 
27.  18.  take  thee  J.  ||  22.  he  sot  J.  before  Eleazar 

34.  17.  Eleazar  and  J.  shall  divide  the  land 
Deut.  1.  38.  but  J.  shall  go  in  thither,  31.  3. 

3.  28.  charge  J.  and  cncourngo  him,  31.  23. 
34.  9.  J.  was  full  of  the  spirit  of  wisdom 
.hixh.  I.  10.  then  J.  commanded  the  officers 

2.  I.  J.  sent  two  men  to  spy  socntly  the  land 

3.  7.  Ld.  said  to  J.  5.  9.  |  0.  2. 1  7.  10. 1 8. 18.  |  10.  8. 
4. 8.  the  children  of  Israel  did  so  ns  J.  commanded 

14.  on  that  day  the  Lord  magnified  J.  in  sight 

5.  7.  their  children,  them  J.  circumcised 

14.  J.  fell  on  his  fuco  to  tho earth  anil  did  worshiji 

15.  and  J.  did  so  ||  6.27.  so  Ihe  Lord  was  wiUi  .1. 
T.  6.  J.  rent  his  cluthet  ||  S.  IG.  puriu«d  arioi  J. 


ISA       [PropurNutm 

Josh.  8.  30.  then  J.  built  an  altar  to  the  Lord 
35.  which  J.  read  not  before  all  the  cungregatioa 

10.  12.  then  spake  J.  and  said,  sun,  stand  still 
42.  and  their  land  did  J.  take  at  one  lime 

11.  9.  J.  did  unto  them  as  the  Lord  bade  him 

13.  1.  now  J.  was  old  and  stricken  in  years,  23.  ■» 

14.  13.  80  J.  blessed  Caleb  and  gave  him  Hebron 

18.  10.  J.  cast  lots  for  them  before  the  Lord 

19.  49.  Israel  gave  an  iijl>critonce  to  J. 

22.  6.  J.  blessed  ihe  Reubcnitcs  and  Gadites 
24,1.  J.  gathered  the  tribes  of  Isiael  toShecheir 

25.  so  J.  made  a  covenant  with  the  people 

29.  J.  the  servant  of  the  Lord  died,  Judg.  2.  8. 

31.  Israel  served  the  Lord  all  the  davs  of  J.  and 

of  the  elders  that  overlived  3.'jud'r.  2.  7. 

I  Sam.  6. 14.  the  cart  came  into  the  field  ot'j.  18. 

1  Kings  16.  34.  which  he  spake  by  J.  the  son  of  Nun 

2  Kings  23.  8.  in  the  entering  in  of  the  gate  of  J. 
Hag.  1.  1.  J.  son  of  Josedech,  12,  14.  j  2.  2,  4. 
Zech.  3.  1.  and  he  shewed  me  J.  the  high-priest 

3.  now  J.  was  clothed  with  filthy  garments 
9.  behold,  the  stone  that  I  have  laid  before  J. 

6.  11.  make  crowns,  sellliem  upon  the  head  of  J. 
JOSIAH. 

1  Kings  13.  2.  a  child  shall  be  born,  J.  by  name 

2  A'i»(»-«21.24.  the  people  made  J. king,  2CVir.33.25. 

22.1.  J.  was  eight  years  old  when  he  began  to  reign 

23.  19.  did  J,  lake  away,  24.  2  Chron.  34.  33. 
29.  J.  went  against  Pharaoh,  2  Chron.  35.22. 

1  CAr.3.15.  the  sonsof  J.  were  Johanan,  Jehoiakim 

2  CAr.  3.5.  1.  J.  kept  a  passovcr  unto  the  Lord 

18.  nordid  kings  keep  such  a  passovcr  as  J.  keol 

19.  in  the  18ih  year  of  J.  was  ihis  passover 

23.  archers  shot  at  king  J.  and  wounded  him 

24.  all  Judah  and  Jerusalem  mourned  for  J. 

25.  Jeremiah  lamented  for  J.  men  spake  of  J. 
Jer.  1.2.  word  of  Ihe  Lord  came  in  days  of  J.  3.  6 
Zeph.  1.  1.  word  came  to  Zcphaniah  in  days  of  J 
Zech.  6. 10.  go  in  to  the  house  of  J. son  of  Zephaniah 
Mat.  1. 10.  Anion  begai  J.  ||  11.  J.  begat  Jecbonias 

JOTHAM. 
Judg.'J.5.  J. youngest  son  of  Jerubliaal  escaped,  21. 
57.  on  them  came  the  curse  of  J.  son  of  Jerubbaal 
2  Kings  15. 5.  J.  judged  the  people,  2  CAron. 26.  21. 

1  Chron.  2.  47.  the  sons  of  Jahdai,  Regem  and  J. 
3.  12.  Amaziab  his  son,  Azariiih  his  son,  J.  his  son 
5.  17.  were  reckoned  by  genealogies  in  days  of  J. 

2  CAron. 27. 6.  J.  became  mighly.  because  prepared 
Isa.  1.  1.  in  thedaysof  J.  .Xhaz,  Hos.  1. 1.  Mic.  1.1. 
Mat.  1.  9.  Ozias  beg^it  J.  and  J.  begat  Achaz 

"ISAAC. 
Cien.  17.  19.  thou  shall  call  his  name  I.  21.  3. 
21.  but  my  covenant  will  I  establish  wilh  L 
21.  10.  shall  not  be  heir  wilh  my  son,  even  I. 

12.  God  said,  hearken  lo  Sarah's  voice,  for  in  1. 
shall  thy  seed  be  called,  Horn. 9.1.  Heb. \\.  18 

22.2.  take  ihine  only  son  1. 1|  it.  .Abraham  bound  \. 

24.  4.  take  a  wife  for  I.  ||  14.  appointed  for  I. 
63.  I.  went  oiii  to  meditate  in  Ihe  field 

67.  I.  was  comforted  after  his  mother's  death 

25.  5.  Abraham  gave  all  that  he  ha<l  unto  I. 
9.  his  sons  I.  and  Ishniaol  buried  .Abraham 

11.  God  blessed  I.  ||  28.  F.  loved  Esau 

20.  I.  was  forty  years  old  when  he  look  Rebckah 

21.  and  I.  entreated  the  Lord  for  his  wife 

26.  I.  was  sixty  years  old  when  .she  bare  Esau 
26. 1.  I.  went  to  Abimelech  kingof  the  Philislinea 

8.  I.  was  sporting  wilh  Ribi^kah  his  wife 

12.  I.  sowed  and  received  a  hundred-fold 

19.  I.  servants  digge<l  in  valley  and  found  a  well 
35.  which  wire  a  grief  of  mind  to  I.  and  Rebekah 
27.  30.  as  I.  had  made  an  end  of  blessing  Jacob 
2.S.I.  I.  called  J;\col),blessed  him, and  charged  him 
5.  I.  sent  Jacob  away,  he  went  lo  Padnn-aram 
31.  42.  except  Ihe  (bar  of  I.  had  been  wilh  me 
35.27.  Jacob  came  to  I.  ||  29.  I.  g:ive  up  Iheghoft 
40.  1.  ofl'.-red  sacrifices  to  ihe  God  of  his  fiillier  I. 

48.  15.  God,  before  whom  my  father  1.  did  walk 
16.  let  Ihe  name  of  inv  failicr  I.  be  on  lliem 

49.  31 .  there  they  buried  I.  ||  50.  24.  lie  swarc  to  L 
/'rzorf.2.24.G. heard  their  groaning  and  remeinbeted 

his  covenant  wilh  Abraham, wilh  I.  l.rv.  26.42. 

3.  G.  the  God  of  I.  15, 16. 1 4. 5.  Hen.  :12.  9.  1  Kingi 

18.  36.  1  CAroK.  29.  18.  2  CAron.  30.  6.  Mat. 

22.  32.  Mark  12.  26.   Juke  20.  37.  Jicts  X 

13.  I  7.  32. 

./o.sA.  24.  3.  I  miilliplied  his  seed  and  gave  him  I. 

4.  I  gave  unio  I.  Jacob  and  Ea«u,  and  to  Etau 
1  Chron.  16.  16.  his  oHih  unto  I.  Psal  105.  9. 
Jrr.  33.  26.  his  seed  to  be  rulers  over  the  seed  of  I 
./9mo.»7.9.  and  the  high  places  of  I.  shall  bedesolata 

16.  drop  not  thy  word  against  the  house  of  I. 
Mat.  1.  2.  Abraham  begat  I.  and  I.  begal  Jacob, 

J.ukr  X  34.  .'lets  7.  8. 
8. 11.  manyshall  »it.doan  with  I.  in  the  kingdom 
l.ukr  13. 28.  when  vc  shall  sec  I.  in  kingdom  of  God 
W.mi.  9.10.  Itebekiih  had  conceived  by  our  father  I. 
finlA.'i-'*.  we,l)relhron,a'<  I.  was,  nreoftbopromisa 
//(,'i. 11. 9. dwelling  in  labermrlen  with  I.  aiirl  Jacob 

17.  b;  failh  Abraham  olVcroil  up  I.  Jam.  2.  21. 


Proper  Nahbs.J       ISR 

Heb.ll.W.bv  failh  I.blessed  Jac.  Esau  ubout  tliingi 

■  ISAIAH,  or  KSAIAS. 
2  ATi.-.^s  19.  2.  Hezekiali  sunt  Eliakiiii  lo  I.  the 
prophet,  tlie  son  of  Ainuz,  /so.  'SI.  'i. 
20. 1.  He/.ekiah  wassick,  I.caine  lolmii,  Isa.'MA. 

11.  and  I.  cried  unto  the  Lord,  2  Clirun.  32.  20. 
2  C/iTon.  26.  22.  his  acts  did  1.  write,  ;)2.  .■12. 
Jsd.  2U.  3.  as  my  servant  1.  halli  walked  naked 
Mat.  3.  3.  spoken  by  tlie  j)roiihet  E.  4.  14.  |  H.  17. 

1  12.  17.  I  13.  14.  Lu/ce  3.  4.  .Mm  1.  23.  |  12.  38. 
15.  7.  well  did  E.  projiliesy  ol'yuu,  Mark  7.  0. 
J./u/ce4.17.was  deUvered  to  him  book  otjiropliet  E. 
John  12.  311.  because  that  E.  said  again,  lie  blinded 
41   these  things  said  E.  when  he  saw  his  glory 
^cta  S.  2y.  the  eunuch  read  E.  the  prophet,  30. 
28. 2o. well  spake  the  Holy  Ghost  by  E.  the  prophet 
Horn.  0.  27.  E.  also  ciieth  concerning  Israel 
2'J.  as  E.  said  bet'ore,  except  the  Lord  of  Saba- 
oth  had  lel\  us  u  seed 
10. 16.  E.  saith,  L.  who  hath  believed  our  report'! 

20.  E.  is  very  bold,  and  sailli,  I  was  (i)und 

15.12.  again  E.  saiih,  there  shall  be  a  root  ol' Jesse 

ISCARIOT,  seeJvDAS. 

ISH-UOSUETH. 

6  5am.  2.  8.  Ahncr  took  I.  and  set  him  over  Gilead 

3.  8.  Abner  was  very  wroth  lor  the  words  of  I. 

14.  David  sent  messengers  to  I.  Saul's  son 

4.  8.  they  brought  the  head  oft.  unto  David 

12.  but  they  took  the  head  of  I.  and  buried  it 

ISHMAEL. 
Ocn.  16. 11.  thou  shalt  call  his  name  I.  15. 

16.  Abram  was  86  years  old  when  Hagar  bare  I. 
17. 18.  said  to  God,  O  that  [.  might  live  before  thee 

20.  as  for  1. 1  have  heard  thee,  I  have  blessed  him 
25.  I.  was  13  years  oM  when  he  was  circumcised 
25.  9.  his  sons  Isaac  and  1.  buried  Abraham 
12.  the  generations  of  1.  13,  16.  1  Clir.  1.  29,  31. 

17.  these  are  the  years  of  the  life  of  I.  137 
28.9.  then  went  Esau  unto  I.  and  took  Mahalath 

2  Kings  25.  23.  I.  came  to  Gedaliah,  Jer.  40.  8. 
25.  I.  came  and  ten  men  with  him,  Jer.  41.  1. 
1  C/iron.  1.  28.  the  sons  of  Abraham  ;  Isaac  and  I. 

8.  38.  Bocheru  and  I.  were  sons  of  Azel,  9.44. 
^C/iron.  19.  11.  Zebadiah  son  of  I.  the  ruler 

23.  1.  Jehoiada  took  I.  into  covenant  with  him 
Ezra  10.  22.  I.  Elasah,  had  taken  strange  wives 
Jer.  40.  14.  king  of  the  Ammonites  hath  sent  I. 

15.  I  will  slay  I.  II  41.  2.  I.  smote  Gedaliah 

16.  not  do  this  thing, for  thou  speakest  falsely  of  I. 
41.  6.  I.  went  forth  to  meet  them,  weeping 

10.  then  [.carried  away  captive  residue  of  people 

12.  then  Johanan  went  to  tight  with  I. 
15.  but  I.  escaped  from  Johanan  with  eight  men 

ISHMAELITES. 
Gen.  37.  27.  come,  let  us  sell  him  to  the  I. 
39.  1.  Potiphar  bought  him  of  the  hands  of  the  I 
Judn-.  8.  21.  had  ear-rings,  because  Ihey  were  I. 
Psal.S^.a.  Edoinites  and  I.  confederate  against  thee 

ISRAEL. 
Oen.  32.  28.  thy  name  shall  be  no  more  Jacob  but  I. 
35.  10.  but  I.  shall  be  thv  name,  1  A'inifS  18.  31. 
47.  27.  I.  drtcit  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  in  Goshen 
31.  and  I.  bowed  himself  upon  the  bed's  head 
48.20.  in  thee  shall  I.  bless,  saying,  Gud  make  thee 
49.  24.  from  thence  is  the  shepherd,  the  stone  of  I. 
Ezod.  4.  22.  I.  is  my  son  ||  17.  11.  I.  prevailed 
5.  2.  that  I  should  obey  his  voice  to  let  I.  gol 
14.  5.  thai  we  have  let  I.  go  from  serving  us 
25.  let  us  flee  from  I.  for  Lord  fighteth  for  them 
30.  the  Lord  saved  I.  that  day  fioni  Egyptians 
32. 13.  remember  Abraham,  Isaac,  audi,  thy  serv. 
//CO.  24.  10.  her  son  aod  a  man  of  I.  strove  together 
A'um.  10.  29.  Lord  bath  spoken  good  concerning  I. 
36.  return,  O  Lord,  to  the  many  thousands  of  I. 

20.  14.  thus  saith  thy  brother  I.  let  us  pass 

21.  2.  I.  vowed  a  vow  uuto  tlie  Lord,  and  said 
17.  then  I.  sing  this  song,  spring  up,  O  well 

23.  7.  defy  I.  ||  24.  17.  a  sceptre  rise  out  of  I. 
23.  shall' be  said  of  I.  v\liat  hath  God  wrought! 
24.18.  Edema  possession, and  I. shall  do  valiantly 
25.8.  Pliinehagwentafter  the  man  of  I.  and  thrust 
Deut.  25.  6.  that  his  name  be  not  put  out  of  I. 
33.  10.  shall  leach  I.  ihy  law,  Jacob  thyjudg.  and 
28.  I.  then  shall  dwell  in  safety  alone,  fountain 
Josh.7.9.  when  I.  turned  their  backs  hnfore  enemies 
11.  L  hath  sinned  ||  22.  22.  and  I.  he  shall  kn 

11.  16.  so  Joshua  took  the  mountain  of  I. 

21.  31.  I.  served  the  Lord  all  the  days  of  Joshua 
Judir.  1.  28.  It  came  to  pass  when  I.  was  strong 
2.  22.  that  through  them  I  may  prove  I.  3.  1,  4. 

5.  9.  my  heart  is  toward  the  governors  of  I. 

6.  fi.  I.  was  greatly  impoverished  by  Midianites 
14.  save  1. 15,36,37.  ||  7.2.  lest  I.  vaunt  themselves 

10.  9.  so  that  I.  was  sore  distressed 

16.  his  soul  was  grieved  for  the  misery  of  I. 
1 1 .13. because  I.took  away  my  land  even  toJalibok 
20.  35.  the  Lord  smote  Benjamin  before  I. 
1  Ham.  4.  2.  I.  wa^!  smitten,  lit.  ||  17.  I.  is  fled 
9.  20.  on  whom  is  the  denireof  I.  is  it  not  on  thee  7 

13.  4.  heard  that  I.  also  was  had  in  aboniinaliun 

741 


ISR 

1  Sam.  15.  29.  a  so  the  strength  of  I.  will  not  lie 

17.  45.  in  tlie  nameof  the  Gud  of  the  armies  of  I. 

2  .Sam.  1. 19.  (he  beauty  of  1.  is  slain  on  high  places 
7.  23.  what  one  nation  is  like  thy  peup  e  I..' 
II.  II.  the  ark,  and  1.  and  Judali  abide  in  tents 
19.  8.  for  I.  had  lied  every  man  lo  his  tent 

1  yt'in^fs4. 20.  Judah  and  I.  were  many  as  the  sand 
25.  Judali  and  I.  dwelt  safely,  Jer.  23.  0. 

9.  7.  I.  shall  he  a  proverb  among  all  people 
11.  25.  he  abhorred  I.  1|  12.  19.  so  I.  rebelled 
14.  15.  Lord  shall  smile  I.  as  a  reed  is  shaken 

18.  17.  Ahab  said,  art  thou  he  that  troubletli  1.1 

2  Kings  10.  32.  the  Lord  began  to  cut  I.  short 
14.  12.  Judah  was  put  lo  the  worse  before  1. 

27.  not  that  he  would  blot  out  the  name  of  [. 
17.  6.  carried  I.  away  into  Assyria,  23.  1  23.  27. 
34.  the  children  of  Jacob,  whom  he  named  I. 

1  Cliron.  11. 10.  the  word  of  the  Lord  concerning  I. 
21.  5.  all  they  of  I.  were  a  thousand  ihousand 
29.  18.  the  God  of  I.  1  Kings  18.  36.  2  Chron.  6. 

16.  I  30.  6.  Jer.  31.  1. 

2  Chron.  9.  8.  because  thy  God  loved  I.  to  establish 
Ezra  2.  59.  whether  they  were  of  I.  JVeA.  7.  61. 

3.  11.  his  mercy  endureth  for  ever  toward  I. 

10.  10.  strange  wives  to  increase  the  trespass  of  I. 
Ps.  14.7.  Jacob  shall  rejoice,  I.  shall  be  glad,  53.6. 

22. 23.  glorify  him,  and  fear  him,  all  ye  seed  of  I. 
25.  22.  redeem  I.  O  God,  out  of  all  his  troubles 
68.  26.  bless  ye  the  Lord  from  the  fountain  of  I. 
78.  59.  when  God  heard  this,  he  abhorred  I. 
81.  11.  would  not  hearken,  I.  would  none  of  me 

13.  O  that  my  people  I.  had  walked  in  my  ways 
83.  4.  that  nameof  I.  may  be  no  more  in  remenibr, 
114.  2.  Judut)  was  his  sanctuary,  I.  his  dominioii 
121.  4.  he  that  keepelh  I.  shall  neither  slumber 
125.  5.  but  peace  shall  be  upon  I.  128.  C. 
130.  7.  lest  I.  hope  in  the  Lord,  131.  3. 
135.4.  Lord  haih  chosen  I.  lor  his  peculiar  treasure 
147.  2.  he  gathereth  together  the  outcasts  of  I. 
14!^  2.  let  I.  rejoice  in  him  that  made  him 

Isa.  1.  3.  but  I.  doth  not  know  nor  consider 

19.  25.  blessed  he  I.  mine  inheritance 
27.6.  I.  shall  blossom  and  bud,  and  lill  the  world 
41.8.  but  thou  I.  art  my  servant,  seed  of  Abraham 

42.  24.  who  gave  I.  to  robbers?  did  not  the  Lord  1 

43.  28.  and  I  have  given  I.  to  reproaches 

44.  5.  shall  surname  himself  by  the  name  of  I. 

45.  4.  for  I.  mine  elect's  sake,  I  have  called  thee 
17. 1,  shall  he  saved  in  Lord  with  everlasting  salv. 
25.  in  the  Lord  shall  the  seed  of  I.  be  justified 

48.  1.  which  are  called  by  the  name  of  1. 
49. 5.  though  I.  be  nut  gathered,  I  shall  be  glorious 
6.  be  my  servant  to  restore  the  preserved  of  I. 
.56. 8.  the  Lord  which  gathereth  the  outcasts  of  I. 
ti.l.  16.  and  though  I.  acknowledge  us  not 
.fcr.  2.  3.  I.  was  holiness  to  ihe  Lord  and  first-fruits 

14.  is  I.  a  servant?  ||  3.  23.  the  salvation  of  I. 

10.  16.  I.  is  the  rod  of  his  inheritance,  51.  19. 
14.  8.  O  Lord,  hope  of  I.  Saviour  in  trouble,  17.13. 

48.  27.  for  was  not  I.  a  derision  unto  thee? 

49.  1.  hath  I.  no  sons?  hath  he  no  heir? 
2.  I.  shall  be  heir  lo  them  that  were  his  heirs 

50.  17.  I.  is  a  scattered  sheep,  lions  have  driven 

19.  I  will  bring  I.  again  to  his  habitation 

20.  iniquity  of  I.  be  sought  for  and  shall  he  none 

51.  5.  I.  hath  not  been  forsaken  of  his  God 
I^am.  2.  5.  the  Lord  bath  swallowed  up  I. 
F.zek.  11.  10.  I  will  judge  you  in  the  border  of  I. 

13.  ah  Lord  God,  will  thou  make  a  full  end  of  I.? 
37.  28.  shall  know  that  I  the  Lord  do  sanctify  I 
44.  10.  are  gone  from  me,  when  I.  went  astray 

Hiis.i.  15.  though  thou  I.  play  harlot,  let  not  Juda 

16.   I.  slideth  back  as  a  backsliding  heifer 
5.  3.  I.  is  not  hid  from  me,  I.  is  defiled,  6.  10. 

5.  I.  shall  fall  II  8.  2.  I.  shiill  cry  to  me.  My  God 

8.  3.  I.  hath  cast  off  thp  thing  that  is  good 
8.  I.  is  swallowed  up  ||  9.  7.  I.  shall  know  it 

14.  I.  hath  forgotten  his  M.iker,  and  builik-th 

9.  10.  I  found  I.'like  gra|ics  in  the  wilderness 
10.1.  Lis  an  empty  vine||H.the  sin  of  I.  bedeslroyed 

6.  I.  shall  be  ashamed  of  his  own  counsel 

11.  I.  when  I.  was  a  child,  then  I  loved  him 
8.  how  shall  I  deliver  thee,  f.I  my  heart  is  turned 

12.  12.  I.  served  and  kept  sheep  for  a  wife 
Joel  3.  2.  will  plead  with  them  for  my  heritage  I. 
Jimos  7.  II.  I.  shall  surely  be  led  captive,  17. 
Mie.  1.  15.  shall  come  to  Adullam  the  glory  of  I. 

5.  1.  they  shall  smite  the  judge  of  I.  with  a  rod 
I.ukc  I.  54.  he  hath  holpen  his  servant  I.  in  mercy 
John  3.10.  art  thou  a  master  of  I.  and  knowest  not" 
Jicts  28.  20.  that  for  the  hope  of  I.  f  am  hound 
Ram.  9.  6.  for  they  are  not  all  I.  which  are  of  I. 

27.  Esaias  crieth  concerning  I.  tho'  nuiiiher  of  I. 

31.  I.  which  folliTwed  tho  law  of  righteousness 

10.  19.  hut  I  say,  did  not  I.  know?  Moses  sailh 

11.  7.  I.  hath  not  obtained  what  he  seoketh  for 
1  Car.  10.  18.  behold  I.  after  the  flesh 
Gal.  6.  16.  peace  be  on  them,  and  mercy,  and 

upon  iho  I.  of  God 
Phil.'i.  5.  of  the  slock  of  L  of  tho  tribe  of  Bunjamin 


ISR 

.^gainst  ISRAEL 
.V«w.21.1.  .\rad  fought  ag.  I.||23.  Sihon  aeaintt  L 
23.  23.  is  there  any  divination  against  l.'i 

25. 3.  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  against  L 
32.  13.  Judg.  2.  14,  20.  |  3.  8.  |  10.  7.  iSam, 
24. 1 .  2  Kings  1 3.  3.  1  Chron.  27. 34.  2  Chron. 
28.  13.  I'sal.  78.  21. 

Josh.  8.  14.  the  kings  of  Canaan  against  I.  II.  5. 
21.  9.  Balak  king  of  Moah  warred  against  I. 
Judg.'.i.l-i.  Eglona^a(rtstI.||6.2.  Midian  against  \ 

11.4.  cliildr. of  Amnion  nmdn  v,  at  a  gdinst  1.5,20 
25.  Balak,  did  he  ever  strive  against.  1.1 

1  Sam.  4.  2.  the  Philistines  (lut  themselves  in  array 
against  1.  7.  7,  10.  |  31.  1.  1  Citron.  10.  1 

1  Kings-2i).'i6.  Ben-hadad  agcfiiist  I.  2  Kings 6.  d 

2  Kings  1.  1.  then  Moab  rebelled  against  I. 
3.  27.  there  was  great  indignation  against  I. 

17.  13.  yet  the  Lord  testified  against  1.  and  Judak 

1  Chron.  21.  1.  and  Satan  stood  up  against  I. 

2  Chron.  11.  1.  Rchoboain  went  out  against  I. 
./cr.36.  2.  write  the  words  I  have  spoken  against  I 
-Inios  7.  16.  thou  saycst,  prophesy  nol  ugainsi.  \. 
Rom.  11.  2.  he  maketh  interce.ssion  against  I. 

.^11  ISRAEL. 
F.iod.  18.  25.  Moses  chose  able  men  out  of  all  I. 
jVum.m.M.all  I.round  aboulfli.d  at  the  cry  of  thera 
/Mat.  13.  11.  all  1.  sh.ill  bear  and  fear,  21.  21. 
./k.s/i.  7.  25.  all  I.  stoned  Aclian  with  stones 
■  hidg.  8.  27.  all  I.  went  a  whoring  after  the  ephod 

1  Sam.  2. 22.  Eli  heard  all  that  his  sons  did  to  all  I. 
3.  20.  all  I.  knew  that  Samuel  was  a  prophet 
4   1.  word  of  Samuel  came  to  all  I.  now  I  went 

11.  2.  that  I  may  lay  it  for  a  reproach  on  all  I. 

18.  16.  hut  all  I.  and  Judah  loved  Davi.l 

28.  3.  all  I.  bad  lamented  Samuel,  and  buried  him 

2  Sam.  3.  12.  lo  bring  about  all  I.  unto  ihce 
37.  all  I. understood  that  it  wasnotof  king  David 

12.  12.  but  I  will  do  this  thing  before  all  I. 
14.  25.  in  all  I.  none  so  much  praised  as  Absalom 
10.  21.  all  I.  shall  hear  that  thou  art  abhorred 

17.  10.  all  I.  know  thy  father  is  a  mighty  man 

18.  17.  and  all  I.  tied  every  one  to  his  tent 

19.  11.  seeing  the  speech  n\  all  I.  is  come  to  mo 
1  Kings  1.  20.  the  eyes  of  all  I.  are  upon  thee 

2.15.  ihou  know  est  thai  all  I.  sot  their  faces  on  me 
3.  28.  all  I.  heard  of  the  judgment  of  Solomon 
8. 62.  the  king  and  all  I.  offered  sacrifice  before  L. 
12.18.a/Z  I.stoned.Vdoram  with  stones  that  he  died 

14.  13.  all  I.  shall  mou/n  for  him,  and  bury  him 
18.  19.  gather  to  me  all  1.  unto  mount  Carmel 
22.  17.  I  saw  all  I.  scattered,  2  Chron.  18.  16. 

1  Chron.  11.4.  David  and  all  I.  went  to  Jerusalem 
13. S.David  and  all  I. played  beforeGod  with  might 

15.  28.  a'l  I.  brought  u^i  the  ark  of  the  covenant 
17.  0.  wheresoever  I  have  walked  with  all  I. 

29.  23.  all  I.  and  the  princes  obeyed  Solomon 
iChron.  12.  1.  all  I.  forsook  iho  law  of  the  Lord 

13.  4.  Ahijah  said,  hear  me,  Jeroboam  and  all  I. 
15.  Goil  smote  Jeroboam  and  all  I.  before  Judah 

28.  23.  they  were  the  ruin  of  him  tind  of  all  I. 
29. 24.  lo  make  an  atonement  for  nil  I.  £iro6. 17 
31.  1.  all  I.  went  out  and  brake  the  images 
F.zra  2.  70.  all  I.  dwelt  in  their  cities,  JVcA.  7.  73 

10.  5.  he  made  all  I.  swear  to  do  this  thing 
JVch.  12.47.  all  I.  gave  the  portions  of  the  singeri 
/.>a?i.9.7.confiision  of  faces  belongeth  to  us,to  all  I 

11.  yea,  all  I.  have  transgre.ssed  thy  law 
.Mai.  4.  4.  remember  ye  the  law  of  Jloses  for  all  I 
Rom.  9.  6.  fur  Ihey  are  not  all  I.  which  are  of  I. 

11.  26.  so  all  I.  shall  he  saved,  as  it  is  written 
See  CHiLnREN. 

Camp  of  ISRAEL. 
E/o(/.14.19.angel  which  went  before  the  camp  of  I. 

20.  aclond  between  Egyptians  and  ihe  camp  nf  I. 
.Josh.  6.  18.  lest  ye  make  the  camp  of  I.  a  cnrso 

23.  they  left  them  without  the  camp  of  I. 

2  Sam.  1.  3.  out  of  the  cainp  of  I.  am  I  escaped 
2  Kings  3.  24.  when  thoy  came  to  the  camp  of  I 

See  CoNRKKQATioN,  Elders. 

For  ISRAEL. 

F.znd.  18.  1.  all  thatG.d  had  dime  for  X.  8.  .fosh. 

24.  31.  .fudg.  2.  7,  10.  1  Kings  8.  66. 

.fosh.  10.  14.  for  the  Lord  fought /or  I.  42. 

.hidg.a.  4.  the  Miili.inites  left  no  sustenance /or  I. 

1  Sam.  7.  9.  Samuel  cried  unto  the  Lord/tir  I. 

30.  2.').  that  David  mide  it  an  ordinance /or  I. 

2  Kings  14.  26.  there  was  not  any  helper /or  I. 
1  Chron.  6.  49.  lo  make  an  atonement  for  \.  n» 

Moses  had  commamlcd,  22.  1.  -WA.  10.  33. 
Psal.BX.A.  this  was  statute /nr  I.  law  of  G.  of  Jacob 
I.ia.  46. 13  place  ?alvation  in  Zioii  for  I.  mv  s'<"y 
ZfcA.12.1.  the  burden  oftho  word  of  the  Lord/or  I 
Worn. 10.1.  my  prayer  loGorl /"or  Lis,  they  be  saved 

From  ISRAEL. 
F.rod.  12.  15.  shall  be  cutofT/rom  T.  JN'im.  19. 13 
jV«i«.25.4.  that  wrath  may  be  liirned  aw.iy/rom  I 
Dnil.  17.  12.  put  evil  /rom  I.  22.  22.  .Tndg.  20. 13 

Tudg.  21.  fi.  there  is  ono  tribe  cut  off  from  I. 
1  .Sam.  4.  21.  iho  glory  is  departed /rorn  I.  22. 

7  14.  tho  cities  taken  from  I.  were  restotud 


ISR 

I5am.l7. 20.  that  tnkclhuway  the  roproach/rom  I. 

ifiam.i-i.'-iS.  unci  the  plague  was  slayvti  from  1. 

JVeh.  13.3.  stparuteii/row  1.  the  mixud  multitude 

isa.  9.  14.  LiOid  will  cut  offj'ruiii  1.  hi;ad  uiid  liiil 

Hos.ti.H.l'ijt J ramLwaa ila\fO,li\f  workiiiau  iiiiideit 

See  GDI),  Holy  One  if  Israel,  HousB. 

In  ISRAKL. 

Oen.34.7.  becaunehf  had  wrought  loll v  in  I.  Devt. 

2-2.  21.  Josh.  T.  15.  .ludg.  20.  6,  10. 

49.  7.  divide  them  in  Jacob,  scaitpr  them  in  I, 

/,«».  20. 2.  strangers  sojourn  IK  1.22.  iH.  F.iek.  14.7. 

A'k/h.  I.  :<•  able  to  go  lortli  to  war  in  1.  4.i.  |  2(5.  2. 

16.  these  were  heads  ollljousatid.-i  in  1.  10.  4. 

3.  13.  I  hallowed  lo  me  all  the  lirst-horn  i«  I. 
18.  14.  every  tiling  devoied  in  1.  shall  he  thine 

21.  given  all  the  IbuiIi  in  I.  lor  an  inheritance 

23.21.  nor  hath  he  seen  jierverscness  t»i  1.' 
Z}eut.  17.  4.  aboniiiialion  is  wrought  in  I.  22.  21. 

35.  7.  to  raise  up  unto  his  hrolhr^r  a  uaine  in  I. 

10.  his  name  he  called  in  I.  the  house  olhini  that 
34  10.  arose  not  a  projihct  since  IH  1.  like  Moses 

Josh.  6.  2J.  Halihb  dwelleth  in  1.  because  liiil  spies 

Juiig.  5.  7.  they  ceased  in  1.  till  that  I  Deborah 

arose,  that  I  arose  a  niuther  in  I. 

8.  was  there  a  spear  seen  among  40,000  in  1.7 

11. 3it.  custom  in  1.  lo  lament  Jephthah'sdaughter 

17.  6.  was  no  king  in  1.  18.  1.  |  I'J.  1.  |  21.  2.'>. 

18.  19.  or  that  thou  be  jiriest  to  a  family  in  I. 
21.  3.  come  to  pass  in  I.  one  tribe  lacking  in  I. 

/i«tA4.7.  ibis  was  the  inaiinerin  Ibrnier  ti:iiesiji  I. 
concerning  redeeming,  this  wasatestiinony  in  I. 
14.  that  bis  name  may  be  ranious  in  (. 

1  Sam.  3.  II.  behold,  I  will  do  a  thing  in  I. 

9.  9.  belbrelinie  in  I.  when  a  man  went  to  inquire 
11. 13.  Lord  hath  wrought  eaLvalion  in  I.  14.  45. 

17.  25.  will  make  his  father's  house  free  in  I. 
46.  the  earth  may  know  that  there  is  a  God  in  I. 

18.  18.  or  what  is  my  father's  family  in  I. 
26.15.David  said  lo  Ahner,who  is  like  lo  thee?n  I.? 

2  .Sam.  3.  :<H.  there  is  a  great  man  i'allen  in  I. 
5.  2.  thou  broughiest  in  I.  1  Chrun.  11.  2. 
13.  12.  no  such  thing  ought  to  be  done  in  I. 

13.  thou  shalt  be  as  one  of  the  fools  in  I. 

19.22.  shall  any  be  put  to  dealh  this  day  in  I.? 
20. 19.  1  am  one  that  is  faithful  and  peaceable  iv 

I.  Ihou  seekest  to  destroy  a  mother  in  I. 
21.  4.  nor  lor  us  sh^ilt  thou  kill  any  nnin  in  I. 
1  Kinirs  14.  10.  behold,  I   will  cot  off  him  that  is 
shut  up  and  left  in  1.  21.  21.  2  Kings  9.  8. 
13.  3(i.  lei  it  be  known,  that  ibou  art  God  in  I. 

19.  IS.  yet  I  have  left  me  seven  thousand  in  I. 

S  Kings  1.  3.  bwause  there  is  not  a  God  in  I.  0,  Ki. 

5.  8.  he  shall  know  that  there  is  a  prophet  in  I. 
1.5.  there  is  no  God  in  all  the  earth  but  in  I. 

fi.  12.  the  prophet  in  I.  lelleili  the  king  of  Israel 
1  C/inm.  12  40.  for  there  was  joy  in  I. 
S  Citron.'.  18. not  fail  thee  a  nian  to  be  ruler  in  I. 

24. 16.  burii'd  him,  because  he  had  done  good  in  1. 

34.  21.  in<piire  for  them  that  are  left  in  I. 

33.  Josiaii  made  all  pre.sent  in  I.  to  serve  the  Lord 

35.  18.  was  no  jiassover  like  to  that  kej)'.  in  I. 
25.  singing-men  made  them  an  ordinance  in  I. 

I^zra  10.2.  yet  there  is  hope  in  I.  concerning  this 
Paal.'iC).  1.  known  in  Judah,  hisnamcisgreat  in  1. 

78.5.te8iiniony  in  Jacob,a!id  hi;  appointed  law  in  I. 
Jta.  8.  18.  are  for  signs  ami  for  wonders  in  I. 

44.  2;).  the  Lord  halh  glorified  himself  in  I. 
Jcr.  2V(.  23.  they  have  committed  villany  in  F. 

32.  20.  which  hast  eel  signs  and  wonders  in  I. 
Kzek.  12.  23.  no  more  use  it  as  a  proverb  in  I.  18.  3. 

39.7.  shall  know  that  I  am  the  lioly  One  in  I. 

11.  will  give  to  Gog  a  ))laco  of  graves  in  I. 
44.28.  ye  shall  give  them  no  ]>usseEsion  in  \. 

29.  every  dedicated  thing  in  I.  shall  be  theirs 
43.  8.  in  the  land  shall  be  his  possesaion  in  L 
Ifi.  shall  give  this  oblation  for  the  prince  in  I. 
Ho.<i.  13.  1.  I'.pliraim  spake,  he  exalieil  himselfirt  I. 
Mic,  5. 2.  come  out  of  thee,  thai  is  lo  be  ruler  in  L 
Mai.  2.  II.  afi  abominalion  is  committed  in  I. 
Mat.  8.  10  i-o  great  faith,  no,  not  in  I.  l.uJiC  7.  9. 
9.33.  marvelhd,  saying,  It  was  never  so  seen  in  F. 
L,uke^.  34.  for  Ihi'  fall  and  rising  of  many  in  I. 

4.  25.  many  willows  were  in  F.  ||  27.  lepers  in  F. 

.See  King,  Kings. 
Land  of  l.'JKAKL. 

1  Sam.  13.  19   no  smith  fi.iind  in  all  the  land  of\. 

2  Kin f  Kb.  2.  brought  a  little  maid  out  ndnnil  of  F. 
6.23.  bands  of  Syria  cnine  no  more  into  land  of  \. 

1  Citron.  13.  2.  send  lo  brethren  lefl  in  liind  of  I. 

22.2.  to  galher  together  ihe  sirangers  that  witc  in 

Ihe  land  of  I.  2  diron.  2.  17.  |  30.  25. 

S  Okron.  34. 7.  cut  down  idols  Ihrongh  ihe  land  of  I. 

F.zck.  7.2.  thus  saith  the  Lord  to  the  land  of  I. 

11.  17.  anil  1  will  (five  you  the  land  of  1. 

12.  19.  thus  saith  the  Lord  of  the  land  of  1. 

13.  0.  nor  shall  I  hey  enter  into  land  of  1.  20.  38. 
80.  42.  bring  you  into  the  land  of  I.  37.  12. 

21.  2.  and  prophesy  against  Ihe  land  of  1. 
2.'!.  3.  thou  saiilst,  Aha,  against  the  land  of  J. 
6.  rejoiccdst  wilh  dcsniie  ai'aiiiRt  the  land  nf  I, 
742 


ISR 

Ezek.  27. 17.  Judah  and  landof  I.  were  thy  merch. 

38. 18.  when  Gog  shall  come  against  l\Klandof  \. 
lU.  r-hall  be  a  great  shaking  in  the  land  of  I. 

40. 2.  in  visioiis  he  brought  me  into  the  land  uf  1. 
jWu«.2.  20.  go  into  t\:i!  land  vfi.  for  they  are  dead 

21.  took  the  child  and  came  into  the  land  of  I. 

Made  ISRAEL  sin. 

1  Kings  14.  16.  Jeroboam  made  1.  to  sin,  15.  20, 

30.  34. 1  10.  19,  2t>.  I  22.  52. 

16.  2.  Baasha  murfc  my  jieojde  1.  to  sin,  13. 

21. 22.  .Ahab  jirovoked  Ihe  Lord, and  vtadi  1.  to  sin 

2  Kings  3.  3.  Jeroboam  son  of  Nebat,  who  viadi 

I.  to  sin,  10.  29,  31. 1 13.  2,  6,  11. 1  14.  24. 
I  15.  9,  18,  24,  28. 1  2;j.  15. 
Men  of  ISRAEL. 
.Josh.  10.  24.  Joshua  called  for  all  the  jncn  nf  I. 
.ludg.  20.  11.  men  of  I.  gathered  against  the  cily 
20.  men  o/I.w  ent  out||22.  encouraged  themselves 
30.  the  men  of  I.  gave  place  to  the  Benjamites 

1  .Sam.  14.24.  the  t/k  no/  1.  were  distressed  that  day 
31.  1.  the  j«cn  of  I.  Hed  from  the  Philistines 

2  ■'Sam.  2.  17.  Abner  was  beaten  and  the  men  of  I. 
15.  13.  hearts  of  the  men  of  1.  are  after  Absalom 
If).  18.  whom  the  me7i  of  I.  choose,  his  will  1  be 
19. 43.  words  of  Judah  fiercer  than  of  the  Jncn  of  I. 
23.  9.  and  the  jnen  of],  were  gone  away 

Psal.  78.  31.  smote  down  the  chosen  men  of  I. 
Isa.4l.  14.  fear  not,  ye  men  of  I.  1  will  help  you 
.lets  2.  22.  ye  meyt  of  F.  hear  these  words 

3.  12.  ye  mm  of  I.  wliy  marvel  ye  at  this? 

5.  35.  ye  men  of  I.  take  heed  lo  yourselves 

13.  16.  Paul  said,  ye  men  ofl.  give  audience 
21.  28.  Jews  of  Asia  crying  out,  7ncn  of  I.  help 

0  ISRAEL. 
F.Tod.  32.  4.  ihey  said,  these  be  thy  gods,  0  I. 
JVum.  24.  .5.  how  goodly  are  thy  tabernacles,  0  L 
J  lent.  4.  1.  hearken,  O  I.  27.  9.  Isa.  48.  12. 
5.  1.  hear,  O  I.  6.  3,  4.  |  9.  1.  |  20.  3.  I'sal.  50.  7.  | 
81.  8.  Isa.  44. 1.  Mark  12.  29. 
33. 29.  liappy  art  thou,  O  I.  who  is  like  to  tlite  ? 
./()sA.7.13.an  accursed  thing  in  the  nridslof  llHe,0  F. 
'2  Sam.  20.  1.  he  said,  every  man  !o  his  tents,  O  F. 
1  Kings  12.  Ifi.  2  Chron.  10.  Ui. 
1  A'in^.s  12.28.  behold  thy  gods,  O  1.  which  brought 
I'sal.  115.  9.  O  I.  trust  thou  in  the  Lord,  their  help 
Isa.  40.  27.  why  speakest  thou,  O  I.  my  way  is  hid 

43.  1.  O  F.  fear  not,  Jer.  30.  10.  ^40.  27. 

22.  but  thou  hast  been  weary  ot  me,  O  I. 

44.  21.  remember  ibese,  0  I.  for  thou  art  my  ser- 

vant, O  l.thou  sjialt  not  be  forgotten,  49. 3. 

.ler.  4.  1.  if  thou  wilt  return,  O  1.  Nos.  14.  1. 

Kzek.  13.  4.  U  I.  thy  prophets  are  like  the  foxes 

llos.S).  1.  rejoice  not,  O  I.  for  joy,  as  other  people 
10.9.  O  F.  thou  hast  sinned  from  the  days  of  Gibeali 
I3.i).  O  l.thou  hast  desiroyed  thyself,but  in  me  help 

.Omos  4.  12.  prepare  lo  meet  thy  God,  O  F. 

Zr^/A. 3. 14.  shout,  OF.  be  glad  and  rejoice  with  heart 
Over  FSKAEL. 

.Tudg.  9.  22.  Abimi'lech  reigned  three  years  over  I. 

14.  4.  the  Philistines  had  dominion  oiur  1. 

1  Satn.  8.  1.  Samuel  made  his  sons  judges  over  F. 
13.  1.  when  Saul  bad  reigned  two  years  over  1. 
15.20.Ld.halh  rejected  thee  from  being  kingourrl. 

2  .Sum.  2. 10.  Fsh-boshelli  Saul's  son  reigned  ortr  F. 
S.lO.David  over  F.  5.2, 3, 12, 17. 1  6.21.  ICAr.  11.3. 
7.  26.  the  Lord  of  hosts  is  the  God  over  F. 

1  Kings  1.  :14.  Solomon  over  1. 1|  11.  37.  Jeroboam 
M.  14.  the  I.,ord  shall  raise  up  a  king  ox^er  I. 
V\  2.5.  Nadab  over  I.  1|  10.  8.  Elah  |1  16.  Oniri 
in.  29.  Ahab  1|  22.  51.  Abaziah  reigned  over  \. 

2A'in^.s-3.1.JehoramorcrF.||9.3.J(hu,fi,12.|I0.3G. 
13.  I.  Jchoahaz  ||  10.  Jehoash  ||  15.8.  7echaiiah 
1.5.  17.  Ml  nahcm  ||  23.  Pekahiah  ||  17. 1.  Floshea 

1  f  A  r.2f).2'.I.Chcnaiiiali  for  out  ward  business  uD<r  I. 
29.  30.  times  that  went  over  I.  are  written 

/'.s«/.(iH..'14.slrengtli  to  God, his  excellency  is  over  I. 

F.cel.  1.  12.  F  the  preacher  was  king  over  I. 
FSRARL  joined  with  pruvle. 

J^iTam.  21.  6.  much  pioplc  of  I.  died  by  serpents 

Devt.  21.  8.  be  merciful,  O  Lord,  lo  thy  ;)i-n///c  F. 
20.  15.  look  down  and  bhss  thy  peojile  F. 

.Tosh.  8.  33.  that  they  should  bless  \\w  people  ofF. 

.ludg.  II.  23.  drave  Amorites  before  h\» people  I. 

1  Sam.  2. 29.  fat  with  the  offerings  of  1.  my  people 
9.  16.  shall  anoint  Saul  captain  over  my  people  I. 
27. 12.  hath  rnadu  V\»people  I.  utterly  to  abhor  him 

2  Sam.  3.  18.  Ijy  David  F  will  save  my  people  I. 
5.  2.  to  feed  my  people  F.  7.  7.   1  Chron.  II.  2. 

12.  exalted  his  kingilorii  for  his  people  1.  sake 
7.  10.  I  will  appoint  a  place  for  my  people  F.  that 
Ihcy  mav  dwell  and  move  no  more,  1  Chr.  17.9. 
24.  thou  hast  confirmed  to  thyself  thy  pioplc  I. 
1  Kings  6.  13.  1  will  not  forsake  my  people  I. 
8.33.  when  \\\y  people  F.  he  smitten,  2  Chr.  6.24. 
38.  what  prayer  shall  he  made  by  thy  people  I. 
43.  all  people  may  fear  thee,  as  do  Xhy  people  \. 
.50.  the  F.ord  halh  given  rest  to  his  people  I. 
I  TAr.  14.2.  was  lifted  up,  bi-cn use  of  his  pco/-?f  1. 

17.  7.  be  ruler  over  my  people  1.  2  Chron.  6.  5. 
21   what  one  nation  in  the  earth  is  like  thy  ;)fo.  F. 


ISR      [PRoriR  Namm 

1  CAr.l7. 22.  thy  people  F.  didst  thou  make  thine  own 

2  (  hr.  7. 10.  goodness  of  Lord  shewed  1.  his  "copla 
31.  8.  Ihey  blessed  tlie  Lord  and  his  peop.     1. 
35.3.  serve  now  llieLd.  your  God  and  his  people  1. 

A'l/u 7. 13.all  Ihey oltlie^(o;)if  of  1. minded  logo  lip 
9. 1,  itia people  of  I.  have  not  separated  iheniselvci 

Fsal.  13.).  12.  gave  for  a  heritage  to  1.  Wi»  people 

/«-u.l0.22.llio'  lUy  people  1.  he  as  i  lie  sand,  a  lemntnt 

.he.  7.  12.  for  the  wickedness  of  my  people  I. 
12.  14.  winch  I  caused  my  people  1.  lo  inherit 
23.  13.  they  have  caused  my  people.  I.  to  err 
30.3.  the  days  come  that  1  « ill  taring  again  lliecay)- 
tiviiyoi  my  people  I.  atu\  iudnii,. imos  9.  14. 

Ezek.  25. 14.  lay  vengeance  on  Edom  by  my  peo.  L 
36.  8.  ye  shall  yield  your  fruit  to  my  people  I. 

12.  F  will  CAUse  my  pioplc  1.  to  •••u'k  upon  you 
38.  14.  when  my  people  1.  dwelleth  safely 
10.  ihou  shall  come  up  against  my  people  L 

'Jan.  9.  20.  was  confessing  the  sin  ol  my  people  I. 

//H/()i7.15.Loid  said,go,propliesy  unlomyptu^icl. 

8.  2.  the  end  is  come  upon  my  people  1. 

Mat.  2.0.  a  Governor,  that  shall  rule  my  people  1. 
Like  2.  32.  and  the  glory  of  thy  people  I. 
/ii.t.1 4. ^Si.  people  ofl.  were  gathered  against  Jesui 
13  M.  («od  of  thispeo/^ie  i.  chose  our  fathers 
»4.  John  preached  repentance  to  uU  people  of  L 
Princes  of  ISRAEL. 
JVio"*.  1.  44.  Ihe  princes  of  I.  being  twelve  men 
7.2.1  ho  princes  of  I. heads  and  priJiees  of  the  tribes 
»-lf..'red  at  the  setting  up  of  the  taberuade,  «4. 

1  CAr.2'J.17.  David  coniiiranded^j-incfi  of  I.  to  help 

23.  2.  David  assembled  the  princes  of  I.  28.  1. 

2  CAron.lS.  6.  the;; rincf5«/l.  humbled  themselves 
21.  4.  Jthorani  slew  divers  of  ihi;  princes  of  I. 

f.r(A-.19.1.  tfikeuplainenlnlion  for  lhe;yrincti(  ofl. 
21.  12.  a  swo.'d  ?hall  be  upon  all  liic  princes  of  1. 

22. 6.  Ihe  princes  of  1.  were  in  thee  to  shed  hlooil 
45.9.  Lordsai'h,  let  it  sutliee  vou,  O  princes  of  I. 

To  1.1  tivto  K-^UAEL. 
Geji.  46.  2.  God  spaksn?iio  F.  in  the  visions  of  night 
4'.l.  2.  hear  and  hearken  unto  I.  your  faiher 
fr3-erf.H.9.  goodness  wliich  Ihe  Lord  halh  done  to  L 
./o«A.l  1.23. Joshua  gave  it  for  inheritance  (<il.2l.43. 

23. 1.  Lord  had  given  rest  i.n<«  I.  from  all  enemies 
.fiidg.  8.  35.  the  goodness  he  had  shewed  unto  1. 

1  Sam.  15.  2.  remember  what  Anialek  did  to  I. 

2  *«7«.  3. 19.  Abner  spake  all  that  seemed  good  to  I. 
1  Kings  11.  25.  Rezon  was  an  adversary  to  1. 

1  Chron.  16. 17.  confirmed  the  same  for  a  law,  and 

to  1.  for  an  everlasiing  covenant,  Psal.  10.5.10. 

21.  3.  why  will  he  be  a  cause  of  trespass  to  1.7 

22.  9.  I  will  give  quietness  to  1.  in  his  days 

2  Chron.  2.  4.  this  is  an  ordinance  for  ever  lo  I. 
Kir«7.11.i:zrathe  priest,a  scribe  of  his  statutes  tu\ 
A'VA.8. 1.  Ltw,  which  the  Lord  had  Commanded  lo  L 
Psal.  73.  1.  truly  God  is  good  to  I  even  to  such 

13.5.  12.  even  a  heritage  unto  1.  130.  22. 

147.  19.  the  Lord  shcweth  his  jiidginonls  to  I. 
Isa.  11.  10.  lis  it  wa6^/  F.iii  the  day  that  he  came 
.ler.  2.  31.  have  1  been  a  wilderness  unto  1.7 

31.9.  1  am  a  faiher  to  I.  Ephraim  is  my  first-horn 
Hiis.  14.5. 1  will  he  as  the  dew  to  I.  lie  shall' grow 
./l/ic.3. 8.  I  am  full  of  power  lo  declare  to  I.  his  sin 
Mill- 1.1.  the  burden  of  the  word  of  the  Lord  to  1. 
J.nke  1.  80.  till  the  day  of  his  shewing  unto  I. 
.lohn  1.  31.  that  he  sbuuM  be  n.ade  manifest  to  I. 
.lets  1.  6.  wilt  thou  restore  the  kingdom  to  F.7 

5.31.  him  hath  (Jod  exalted  to  give  repentance  ro  \. 

13.23.  God  hath  raisi  d  unto  F.  a  Saviour,  Jesus 
lloin.W.  21.  to  I.  he  sailh,  all  day  long  stretched  out 

11.  25.  that  blindness  in  part  is  happened  to  1. 

Tribes  of  ISRAEL. 
<7»'n.49. 16.  Dan  shall  judge  as  one  oT  tribes  of  1, 

28.  all  these  are  the  twelve  tribes  of  I. 
7'>(»(Z.24.4. twelve  pillars  according  to  K  tribes  nf  I, 
.\''h)/i.3I.4.  Ihousand  IhrouL'hall  irihes  ofl.  to  war 

36.  3.  if  married  to  any  oflhe  other  tribes  of  F. 

9.  every  one  of  tribes  nf  I.  shall  keep  to  his  own 
r>eut.  29. 21.  sepiraifi  him  lo  evil  out  of  ^riJci  ofl. 

33.  ,5.  when  Ihe  tribes  ofl.  were  gathered  together 
.hish.  3.  12.  lake  twelve  men  out  oflhe  tribes  of  I. 
4.5.  stones  according  to  number  of  rri/«?«  ofl.  8. 
7.  10.  so  Joshua  brought  I.  by  their  tribes 

12.7.  the  land  which  Joshua  gave  to  the  tribes  of  I. 
li'.51. which  heads  offalhersOf/n'Ae.i  ofl.  divided 
22. 14.  princes  ihronph  tribes  nf  I.  frnt  to  Reuben 

24.  1.  Joshua  gathered  nntrihes  ofl.  lo  fyiechcm 
./m</^'.18.1  inherilanccof  Dan  nol  among  tri/<Mo/F. 

20.2.  thcchiefof/riir-.^n/F.  presented  before  Goil 

10.  take  leu  men  of  a  bund,  oulofall  tribes  ofl. 
21.5.  who  among  Ihe  tribes  of  I.  came  nol  up,  8. 

15.  Lord  halh  made  a  breach  in  the  tribes  of  I. 

1  .Snm.  2. 28.  did  I  choose  him  out  of  nil  tribts  of  1.1 

9.  21.  I  am  oflhe  smallest  of  ibe  tribes  ofl. 

10.  20.  Samin-l  caused  all  Ihe  tribes  of  I.  lo  comn 
15. 17.  wast  ihou  not  made  head  of  the  tribes  of  1.1 

2  .Snjn.  5. 1.  then  came  all  Ihe  tribes  of  I.  to  David 
7.  7.  spake  F  a  word  wilh  any  of  Ihe  tribes  nfl.1 
15.  2.  ibv  servant  is  of  one  of  the  trihrs  ofl. 

10.  Absalom  tent  sjiios  through  all  the  tribes  of  I 


IllO?Bll  Nams*.]      ITH 

Bft'am.ig.O.peoptc  were  at  strife  thro' lhefrtfte«o/I 

'-'4.  2.  go  lliioiigh  nil  the  tribes  of  I.  aud  number 

1  Kings  8.  J6.  f  chose  no  city  out  of  all  ihe  tribes 

of  I.  to  build  a  liouse  in,  2  Cliron.  6.  5. 

11.  32.  have  chosen  .lerusalem  out  of  all  the  tribes 
of  I.  14.  21.  2  Kiii<fs  21. 7.  2  Chr.  12. 13.  |  33 
i  C/ir.  11.  1(1.  after  them  out  of  all  the  tribes  of  I. 
KzraG.  17.  oftercd  12  goats  according  to  tribes  of  I 
Psal.  78. 55.  made  tribes  of  I.  to  dwell  in  their  tents 
£zek.  37. 19. 1  will  take  tribes  of  I.  put  with  Judah 

47. 13.  according  to  the  twelve  tribes  of  I.  21,  22 

48.  19.  eerve  the  city  out  of  all  the  tribes  of  I. 

31.  gates  be  after  the  names  of  the  tribes  of  I. 
Hos.  5.9.  among  tribes  of  I.  have  I  made  known 
Zech.  9. 1.  the  eyes  of  all  tribes  of  I.  be  toward  Ld. 
Mat.  19. 28.  judging  the  12  tribes  of  I.  /.?U-e22.30. 
/few.  21. 12.  gates  with  names  of  twelve  tribes  of  I. 

li'ith  ISRAEL. 
F.xod.  17.  8.  Amalek  fought  with  I.  in  Rephidim 

34.  27.  I  have  made  a  covenant  with  thee  and  I. 
/)eu£.18.1.Leviies  shall  have  no  inheritance  Mfytl. 

33.  21.  Gad  e.vecuted  his  judgments  with  1. 
Josh.  9,  2.  the  kings  of  Canaan  fought  with  I. 

10.1.  the  inhabitants  of  Giheon  made  peace  with\. 

1  Sam.  13.  5.  the  Philistines  gathered  themselves 

together  to  fight  with  I.  28.  1.  2  Sam. 
21.  1.5. 
S  Sam.  10.  19.  the  Syrians  made  peace  with  I. 

2  Kinss  17.  18.  the  Lord  was  very  angry  with  I. 
2  Chf.  25.  7.  for  Lord  is  not  toith  \.  with  Ephraim 
^/ic.6.2.for  the  Lord  will  plead  with  I.  O  my  people 

ISRAELITE. 
JV'um.25.14.  the  name  of  the  I.  that  was  slain, Zimri 
2  Sam.  17.  25.  Amasa  was  the  son  of  Ithra  an  I. 
John  1.47.  behold  an  I.  indeed,  in  whom  is  no  guile 
Rom.  11. 1.  I  also  am  an  \.  of  the  seed  of  Abraham 

ISRAELITES. 
F.xod.  9.7.  was  not  one  of  the  cattle  of  the  I.  dead 
J.ev.  23.42.  all  that  arc  I.  born  shall  dwell  in  booths 
Josh.  3.  17.  all  the  I.  passed  over  on  dry  ground 

13. 6.  only  divide  it  by  lot  to  the  I.  for  inheritance 
Judg.  20.  21.  the  Bonjamites  destroyed  of  the  I. 

1  Sam.  2.  14.  so  the  priests'  servants  did  to  all  I. 
13.20. 1,  went  to  the  Philistines  to  sharpen  his  a.xe 

14.  21.  the  Hebrews  turned  to  be  with  Ihe  I. 

S-'i.  1.  all  the  I.  lamented  Samuel  and  buried  him 
29.  1.  the  I.  pitched  by  a  fountain  in  Jezree! 

2  Sam.  4.  1.  the  I.  were  troubled  at  Abner's  death 
2  Kins's  3.  24.  the  I.  rose  and  smote  the  Moabites 

7.  13.  they  are  as  all  the  multitude  of  the  I. 

1  Chron.  9.  2.  the  first  inhabitants  were  the  I 
Rom.  9. 4.  who  are  I.  to  whom  pertaineth  adoption 

2  Cttr.11.22.  are  tliev  Hcbiews7  are  they  I.?  so  am  I 

ISRAELITISH. 
Z.fP.24.  10.  the  son  of  an  I.  woman  strove  in  camp 
11. 1,  woman's  son  blasphemed  the  name  of  Lord 
rSSACHAR. 
Oen.  30.  18.  and  Leah  called  his  name  I. 
3.5.23.  Leah's  son  I.  II  46.  13.  sons  of  I.  1  CAr.  7.1 
49.  14.  I.  is  a  strong  ass,  couching  down  between 
F.xod.  1.3.  Israel's  eons,  T.  Zehulun,  ]  Chrov.^.l 
J^um.  1.  8.  the  princesof  I.  Nethaneel,  2.5.  |  7. 18. 
Deut.  27.  12.  I.  and  Joseph  shall  stand  to  bless 
33.  18.  rejnice,  Zebnlun  and  I.  in  thy  tents 
Jo.<h.  17.  10.  they  met  together  in  I.  on  the  east 

11.  Mana!!seh  had  in  I.  and  Asher,  Beth-shean 
Judg.  5.  ]5.  the  princes  of  I.  were  with  Deborah 
even  Land  ,t1so  Barak, he  was  sent  into  the  valley 
10.  1.  Tola  a  ma'i  of  I.  arose  to  defend  I.«rael 
1  Kings  4.  17.  Jehoshaphat  was  an  officer  in  I. 

15.  27.  Baasha  son  of  Abijah  of  the  house  of  I 

1  CAr.l2. 40.  ihry  that  were  nigh  to  T.  brought  bread 
2.'5.  5.  I.  the  seventh  son  of  Obed-edom 
27.  )8.  captain  of  I.  Oniri  the  son  of  M'chael 
2CAr.30.18.  many  ofl.had  not  cleansed  thcmselve 
Ezek.  48. 25.  by  the  border  of  Simeon,  I.  a  portion 
2fi.  by  the  border  of  I.  Zihulun  a  portion 
33.  south  side,  one  gale  of  I.  one  gate  of  Zehulun 
Tribe  of  TSSACIIAR. 
JVj/m.  1.  29.  that  were  numbered  of  the  tribe  of  I. 
2.  5.  thai  pitch  next  Jndih  shall  be  the  tribeofl. 
10.  15.  ovcT  the  tribe  of  I.  was  Nethaneel 
13.  7.  of  the  trife  of  I.  to  spy  the  land,Igal  the  son 
34.20.  prince  of  the  f?-i7ico/'I.Piillielsonof  Azzan 
Josk.  19.23.  the  inheritance  of  the  tribe  of  I. 
21. 6.  OcrshoTi  had  hv  lot  out  of  the  familiis  ofthe 
Irihe  of  I.  and  Asher,  28.  1  Chron.  6.  62,  72. 
Rev.  7.  7.  oi'the  trl'ie  of  I.  were  sealed  12,000 

IT.M.TAN. 
Acts  10.  1.  Corncliu-  a  ci  nitirion  of  the  I.  band 

ITALY. 
•^r^.T  18.  2.  found  a  ccrtain.Iewlately  come  from  1. 
27. 1.  it  was  determined  that  we  should  sail  into  I. 
Jieb.  13.24.  salute  the  saints,  they  of  I.  salute  you 

ITHAMAR. 
.Frorf. 6. 23.  Aaron's  sons,  Abihu,  and  1. 1  Chr.6.3. 
2%  21.  as  it  was  counted  by  the  hand  of  I. 
JVvm.  4.  28.  (heir  charge  under  the  hand  of  I. 
I  Chron.  24.  3.  and  Ahiinelech  of  t'le  eons  off. 
4.  were  eight  chief  men  among  the  Bona  of  I. 
T43 


JUD 

Ezra  8.  2.  ofthe  song  of  I.  Daniel  went  up 

See  Eleazau. 

ITIllEL. 

JVcA.  II.  7.  I.  son  of  Jesaiah  dwelt  at  Jerusalem 

rrotj.30.1.  the  man  spake  to  I.  even  to  Land  Ucal 

ITUREA. 
Luke  3.  1.  and  his  brother  Philip  tetrarch  of  I. 

IVAH. 
2  Kings  18. 34.  where  are  the  gods  of  Hena  and  1.7 
19.  13.  where  is  the  king  of  1.7  Isa.  37.  13. 

JUBILEE. 
iLei'.  25.  9.  cause  the  trumpet  of  the  J.  to  sound 

10.  it  shall  be  a  J.  it  shall  be  holy  to  you,  12. 

11.  a  J.  shall  that  fiftieth  year  be  to  you 

13.  in  the  year  of  J.  ye  shall  return  to  possession 
2.S.  a  field  shall  go  out  in  the  year  of  J.  27. 21, 24. 

30.  then  the  house  shall  not  go  out  in  the  J. 

31.  they  shall  go  out  in  the  year  of  J.  33,  54. 
27.  17.  if  ye  sanctify  his  field  from  year  of  J.  18. 

JVum.  36. 4.  when  J.  then  their  inheritance  be  put 
JUDAH. 

Om.  29.  35.  therefore  she  called  his  name  J. 
35.  23.  the  sons  of  Leah  ;  J.  Issachar,  Zehulun 
38.  15.  J.  thought  Tamar  to  be  a  harlot 

26.  J.  acknowledged  the  signet  and  bracelets 
46.  12.  sons  of  J.  JSTuni.  26.  19.  1  Chr.  2.  3.  [  4.  1. 

28.  Jacob  sent  J.  before  him  to  Joseph 
49. 8.  J.  thou  art  he  whom  thy  brethren  shall  praise 

9.  J.  is  a  lion's  whelp,  he  couched  as  a  lion 

10.  sceptre  shall  not  depart  J.  till  Sliiloh  come 
Kiud.  1.2.  the  sons  of  Israel ;  Levi,  J.  1  Chr.  2.  1. 
JV"!/7n.l.7.J.Nahshonson  olAmminadab  was  prince 

"1.  3.  the  camp  of  J.  shall  pitch  on  the  east  side 

9.  all  that  were  numbered  in  the  camp  of  J. 

Dent.  2'.  12.  Simeon,  Levi,  J.  shall  stand  to  bless 

33.  7.  this  is  the  blessing  of  J.  the  voice  of  J. 
Josh.  7.  17.  Joshua  brought  the  family  of  J. 

18.  5.  J.  shall  abide  in  their  coast  on  the  south 
Judg.  1.  2.  the  Lord  said,  J.  shall  go  up  first 

19.  the  Lord  was  with  J.  ||  10.  9.  fight  against  J. 
Rvth  4.  12.  like  Pharez,  whom  Tamar  bare  to  J. 

1  Sam.  23.  23.  .search  him  thro'  all  thousands  of  J. 

2  Sam.  3.  8.  which  against  J.  do  shew  kindness 

5.  5.  David  reigned  over  J.  seven  years,  six  months 
11.  11.  the  ark,  Israel,  and  J.  abide  in  tents 

19.  15.  J.  came  to  Gilgal  to  meet  the  king 
24.  1.  David  said,  go  number  Israel  and  J. 

l/iTfH^s  2.32.  Joab  slew  Amasacaptainof  host  of  J. 

4.  20.  J.  and  Israel  were  many  as  the  sand  by  sea 

25.  J.  and  Israel  dwelt  safely  under  Solomon 

13.  1.  there  came  a  man  nf  God  out  of  J.  by  the 
word  ofthe  Lord,  to  Beth-el,  2  Kings  23.  17. 

14.  22.  J.  did  evil  in  the  sight  ofthe  Lord 

15.  1.  Abijam  reigned  over  J.  ||  9.  Asa  over  J. 
17.  Baasha  went  up  against  J.  2  Chron.  10.  1. 

22.  41.  Jehoshaphat  begnn  to  reign  over  J. 
2  Kings  H.  19.  vet  the  Lord  would  not  destroy  J. 

20.  Edom  revolted  from  J.  22.  2  Chron.  21.  8,"  10. 

9.  29.  Ahaziah  began  to  reisn  over  J. 

14. 10.  to  fall,  thou  and  J.  with  thee,  2  CAro».25.19. 

12.  J.  was  put  to  the  worse,  2  Chron.  25.  22. 

22.  Azariah  restored  Elath  to  J.  2  Chron.  2().  2. 
15.  37.  the  Lord  began  to  send  against  J.  Rczin 
17. 13.  yet  the  Loid  testified  against  Israel  and  J. 

19.  J.  kept  not  the  commandments  ofthe  Lord 
2!.ll.Manas6ehmadeJ.  tosin,  16.  2  CAron.  33.9. 

12.  behold,  I  am  bringing  such  evil  upon  J. 

2:1. 26.  his  anger  kindled  against  J.  2  Chron.  25. 10. 

27.  I  will  remove  J.  also  out  of  my  sight 

24.  2.  the  Lord  sent  bands  of  Chaldees  against  J 
3.  at  the  command  of  the  Lord  came  this  on  J. 

25.  21.  so  J.  was  carried  away,  1  Chron.  6.  15. 

1  Chron.  5.  2.  J.  prevailed  above  his  breihren 

27. 18.  J.  Elihu  oneof  David's  brethren  was  capt. 
28.  4.  for  he  hath  chosen  J.  to  be  the  ruler 

2  CAron.  13.  13.  so  Ihey  were  before  J.  and  behind 

16.  the  children  of  Israel  fled  before  J. 
14.  4.  Asa  commanded  J.  to  seek  the  Lord 
17.  6.  Jehoshaphat  took  the  groves  out  of  J. 
21.1I.Jehoram  compelled  J.  to  commit  fornication 

13.  hast  made  J.  and  Jerusalem  20  a  whorine 
24.  18.  wrath  came  upon  J.  28.  9.  |  29.  8.  ]  32.  25. 
28.  19.  the  Lord  brought  J.  low,  made  J.  naked 
2fi.  21.  seven  lambs  for  a  sin-otTering  for  J. 

30.  25.  all  the  congregation  of  J.  rejoiced 

.33. 16.  Manasseh  commanded  J.toserveihe  Lord 

34.  3.  in  12th  year  of  Josiah  began  to  purge  J.  5. 
F.zra  3.  9.  sons  of  J.  to  set  forward  the  workmen 

7.  14.  thou  art  sent  to  inquire  concerning  J. 

10.  23.  J.  and  Eliezer  had  taken  strange  wives 
J^ch.  2.  5.  that  thou  wouldest  send  me  to  J. 

7.  that  thoy  may  convey  me  till  I  come  into  J. 

6.  17.  tJie  nobles  of  J.  sent  letters  to  Tobiah 

1 1.  9.  J.  son  of  Senuah  was  second  over  the  city 

12.  44.  for  J.  rejoiced  for  the  priests  that  waited 
Ps.  60.  7.  Gilead  is  mine,  J.  is  my  lawgiver,  108.  8. 

111.  2.  J.  was  his  sanctuary,  Israel  his  dominion 
I.tn.  1  1.  vision  which  he  saw  concrrnin?  J.  2.  1. 
3. 1.  Lord  doth  take  from  J.  slay  and  siafTof  bread 

8.  J.  ig  fallen  1|  7.  6.  let  us  go  up  against  J. 


JUD 

Jsa.  1. 17.  from  day  that  Ephraim  deptrrted  from  3 

8.  8.  shall  pass  thmiigh  J.  shall  overllow,  go  )ver 

9.  21.  and  they  together  shall  be  against  J. 

11. 12.  he  shall  gather  together  Ihe  dii^persed  of  J. 
13.  the  adversaries  of  J.siiall  be  cutoff;  Ephraim 

shall  not  envy  J.  and  J.  not  ve.v  Ejihraim 
22.  8.  he  discovered 'the  covering  of  ,1. 
48.  1.  and  are  come  lorih  out  of  the  waters  of  J 
65.  9.  and  out  of  J.  an  inlieritor  of  my  niounlaina 
Jcr.  2.  28.  as  number  of  cities  are  thy  gods,  O  J. 
3.  7.  her  sister  J.  saw  it,  and  feared  nut,  8. 

9.  26.  Egypt,  and  J.  and  Edom  aie  uncircumcieed 

13.  9.  alter  this  manner  will  I  mar  the  pride  ot  J. 
19.  J.  shall  be  carried  away  captive  :ill  of  it 

14.  2.  J.  mourneth  ||  23.  6.  J.  shall  be  saved 
19.hasl  thou  utterly  rejected  J. and  loathed  Zion? 

17.  1,  the  sin  of  J.  is  written  with  a  pen  of  iron 
19.7. 1  will  void  the  counsel  of  J.  and  Jerusalem 

32.  35.  they  should  do  this  to  cause  J.  to  sin 

33.  7.  F  will  cause  Ihe  captivity  of  J.  to  vcturn 

36.  2.  the  words  that  I  have  spoken  iigainst  J. 
42. 1,5.  hear  the  word  ofthe  Lord, ye  remnant  of  J. 
44.  26.  not  named  in  mouth  of  any  man  of  J. 

50.  20.  the  sins  of  J.  shall  not  be  found 

51.  5.  J.  hath  not  been  forsaken  of  his  God 

52.  27.  J.  was  carried  away  captive,  /.am.  1.  3. 
Kzek.^\  .20.tliat  the  sword  may  come  to  J.  in  Jerus. 

27.  17.  J.  and  Israel  were  thy  inerchants 

37.  16.  write  upon  it  for  J.  and  for  Israel 

48.  7.  by  the  border  of  Reuben,  a  portion  for  3, 
31.  one  gale  of  Reuben,  one  gate  ol' J.onc  of  Levi 
A/«,?.4. 15. tho' Israel  pliiy  havlol,  yet  lei  iiolJ.ofiend 
5.  5.  J.  shall  fall  ||  13.  when  J.  saw  his  wound 
6.4.  O  J.  what  shall  I  do  unio  thee7  for  your  good 

10.  11.  J.  shall  plow,  Jacob  shall  break  his  clods 

11.  12.  but  J.  ruleth  yet  with  God,  and  is  faithful 

12.  2.  the  Lord  hath  also  a  controversy  with  J. 
.Joel  3.20.  hut  J. shall  dwell  forever,  tinil  Jerusalem 
v^w/os  2.4.  for  three  transgressions  of  J.  and  fur  four 

5.  but  I  will  send  a  fire  on  J.  it  shall  devour 

jyjic.  1.9.  her  wound  is  incurable,  it  is  come  to  J. 
5.2.  tho'  thou  be  little  among  thelhoiisnndsof  J. 

7.i.ph.  1.  4.  I  will  stretch  out  mine  hand  upon  J. 

Zerk.  1. 19.  the  hoins  whic  h  have  scattered  J.  21. 
2. 12.  Lord  shall  inherit  J.  his  portion  in  holy  land 
9.  13.  when  I  have  bent  J.  for  me,  filled  the  bow 
12.  7.  the  Lord  sImII  save  the  tents  of  J.  first 
14.  14.  J.  also  shall  fight  at  Jeriisulem 

.W«i.2.  ll.J.  Iialhdeait  treacherously;  J.  hath  pro- 
faned the  holine.ss  ofthe  Lord  which  he  loved 
3.  4.  then  shall  the  otferiiiff  of  J.  be  pleasant 

Mat.  1.  2.  Jacob  begat  J.  ||  3.  J.  begat  Phares 

f.uhe  3.  33.  Phares,  which  was  the  son  of  J. 

Heb.l.W.fot  it  is  evident  that  our  Lord  sprang  of  J 
.^,7  JUDAH. 

1  Sam.  18.  16.  but  all  Israel  and  all  3.  loved  David 

2  Sam.  5.  5.  David  leigiif  d  33  years  over  all  3. 
2  Chron.  15.  15.  nil  J.  rejoictd  at  the  oath 

20.13.  u?/ J.slooil  before  tin-  Lord  with  their  wives 
.32.33.  all  3.  did  honour  Hez.kiah  at  his  death 
35.  24.  all  3.  and  Jernsali  m  mnnrncd  for  Josiah 

^Vf  A.  1.3. 12.  then  «/M.  Iirouirht  the  lilhe  ofthe  corn 
.hr.  20.  4.  t  will  give  all  J.  u.  the  king  of  Babylon 
44.  11.  I  will  set  my  face  to  cut  oK  all  J. 
."^fcBBNJAMIN,  HeTII  LEIIE>t,CHILtlRKN,ClTIK3, 

Daughter.  DAt'r.iiTERs,  Housk. 
in  JUDAH. 
I  Slim.  2,3.  3.  behold,  we  le  afraid  here  in  3. 

1  Kings  10.  32.  like  unto  the  feast  that  is  in  3. 

2  Kings  24.  20.  fi.r  through  tho  anger  of  the  Lord 

it  came  to  pass  ('«  Jerusalem  and  J.  .Iir.  52.  3. 
2  Chron.  2.  7.  cunning  men  that  are  with  mem  J 
12.  12.  nnri  also  in  3.  Ihings  went  well 
17, 9.  thev  taught  in  J. and  had  hook  of  law  of  Lord 

28.  6.  Pekah  slew  in  J.  120,000  in  one  day 

30.  12.  in  3,  hand  of  God  was  to  give  one  heart 

34.  21.  in(|uire  for  th:'ni  that  are  left  in  3. 
Ezra  5.  1.  prophesied  to  thc^Jews  that  were  in  3 

9.9.  but  hath  extended  mevcvtngive  us  a  wall  in  J 
„VcA.  6.  7.  to  preach,  saying,  there  is  a  king  in  3. 

13. 15.  I  saw  in  3.  some  treading  wine-presses 
Psal.  76.  I.  in  3.  is  God  known,  his  name  is  great 
.Jrr.i.  5.  declare  yeVii  J.pul/li.sh  in  Jerusalem,  5. 20. 

22.  30.  none  shall  prosper,  ruling  any  more  in  }. 
7,rrh.  9.  7.  he  shall  be  ns  a  governor  in  3. 

14.  21.  every  pot  in  3.  be  holi'ness  to  the  Lord 

See  Kino,  Kincjs. 

J.andof3VX)i\K. 

Pent.  34.  2.  Lord  shewed  him  all  the  land  of  3. 

Piil/i  1.  7.  thus  went  to  return  unIo  the  lavdof  3 

1  Sam.  22.  5.  depart,  gel  thee  into  the  land  of  3. 

2  Kings '2.'>.^2.  people  ihal  remained  \n  land  of  3 
2  Chr.  17. 2.  Jetioshaiihat  set  jrarrisnns  in  laml  of  3. 
ha.  19.  17.  the/unrfo/ J.shall  be  a  terror  to  Egypt 

26.  1.  this  song  shall  be  sung  in  the  land  nf  3. 
Trr.  31.  23.  use  this  speech  in  the  land  of  3. 
39. 10.  the  poor,  who  had  nothing  in  the  land  nf  3 
44.  9.  they  have  committed  in  the  land  of  3. 

14.  that  they  should  return  into  the  land  of  3. 
.dmos  7.  li  fleo,  thou  eocr.  into  the  land  of  3 


KED 

Eech.  1.  21.  lift  up  tlieir  horn  over  the  land  of  3. 
Mat.  2.  6.  tliou,  Bellilehem,  in  the  land  of  J. 

Men  of  JVDAll. 
Judg.l5.\0.mcn  of},  said,  why  are  yccomoag.  us? 
i.fam.  2.  4.  the  men  of  J.  anointed  David  king 

19.  14.  he  bowed  tliu  heart  of  all  the  mm  of  i 
43.  the  words  of  the  men  of  i.  were  fiercer 

20.  2.  but  the  men  of  i.  clave  to  their  king 
4.  awemble  tlie  men  of  3.  within  three  days 

24.  9.  the  men  of  3.  were  five  hundred  tlnuiaand 
2  Chron.  111.  15.  then  tlie  mm  of  3.  gave  a  shout 
£:>o  10.  9.  all  the  men  of  3.  gathered  together 
Isa.  5.  7.  the  men  of  3.  are  his  pleasant  plant 
Jer.  4.  4.  circumcise  your  hearts,  ye  vicn  of  3. 

11.9.  a  conspiracy  is  Ibund  among  the  men  of  3. 

■Hi.  31.  bring  ujioii  the  men  of  3.  all  the  evil 

43.  9.  hide  thern  in  the  sight  of  the  men  of  3. 

44.  27.  nil  the  mai  of  3.  shall  be  consumed 
Van.  9.  7.  but  confusion  belongeth  to  thejHfno/J. 

See  Princks. 

n-ibe  of  3VUAH. 

F.zod.n.%  Bezaleel  of  the  tribe  of  3.  35.30.  (  38.22. 

A'um.  1.27.  that  were  numbered  of  the  tribe  of  3. 

7.  12.  Nahshon,  the  prince  of  the  tribe  of  3. 

13.  6.  of  the  tribe  of  3.  Caleb  to  spy,  34.  19. 
JoiA.7.1.Achan  of  ^i-iTice/J. took  of  accursed  thing 

16.  and  the  tribe  of  3.  was  taken,  18. 
15.  1.  this  was  the  lot  of  the  tribe  of  3.  20. 
21.4.  Levites  ouXuflho  tribe  o/.I.9.  1  C/ir.  6.65. 

1  Kings  I'i.'iO.  the  Jriico/ J.  only  followed  David 

2  Kings  17.  18.  none  left  but  the  tribe  of  3.  only 
Psal.  78. 68.  but  he  chose  the  tribe  of  3.  mount  Sion 
Hev-  5.  5.  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  3.  hath  prevailed 

7.  5.  of  the  tribe  of  3.  were  sealed  12,000 
JUDAS. 
Mat.  13.  55.  his  brethren  Joscs,  Simon,  and  J. 
26.47.  J.  one  of  the  twelve  came,  and  a  great  mul- 
titude, Mark  14.  43.  J.ulce  22.  47.  John  18.  3, 5. 
27.3.lhen  .1. repented  himselfand  brought  30  pieces 
John  13.  29.  some  thought  because  J.  had  the  bag 

14.  22.  J.  eaitb  unto  him,  not  Iscariot,  how  is  it 
Jicts  1.  16.  David  spake  before  concerning  J. 

25.  from  which  J.  by  transgression,  fell 
5.  37.  after  this  man  rose  up  J.  of  Galilee 
9.  11.  inquire  in  ihe  house  of  J.  for  one  Saul 

15.  22.  Ihcy  sent  J.  surnamed  Barsabas,  27. 
32.  J.  and  Sdas  exhorted  the  brethren 

JUDAS  Iscariot. 
Mat.  10.  4.  J.  Iscariot,  who  betrayed  him,  Mark 
3.  19.  /,t/Ae6.  16.  .Mm  6.  71.  |  13.2. 
26. 14. 3.1scrtr.  went  to  chief  priests,  Mark  14. 10. 
J.uke  22.  3.  then  entered  Satan  into  J.  Iscariot 
John  13.  26.  he  gave  the  sop  to  J.  Iscariot 

JUDRA. 
F.ira  5.  P.  that  we  went  into  the  province  of  J. 
Mat. 24.  16.  then  let  them  which  be  in  J.  flee  into 
the  mountains,  Mark  13.  14.  I.ukc  21.  21. 
John  4.  3.  he  left  J.  and  d(  parted  to  Galileo 
7.  3.  d''parl  hence  and  go  into  J.  again,  11.  7. 
^cta  1.  8.  in  all  J.  ye  shall  be  wilne^ses  to  me 
2.  14.  ye  men  of  J.  be  this  known  unto  you 
9.  31.  the  churches  had  rest  throughout  J. 
10. 37.  that  word  which  was  published  through  J. 
J2.  19.  he  went  down  from  J.  to  Cesarea 
28.  21.  we  neither  received  letters  out  of  J. 
Pom.  15.  31.  from  them  that  do  not  believe  in  3. 
2  Cor.  1.  16.  to  be  brought  on  my  way  toward  J. 
1  Thess.^.  14.  churches  wliich  in  J.  are  in  Christ  Jes. 

JUPITER. 
.Acts  14.  12.  and  they  called  Barn^ibas,  J. 
13.  then  the  priests  of  J.  brought  garlands 
19.  ;i5.  of  the  imago  which  fell  down  from  J. 

^USTUS. 
4cfj»l. 23.  JoFPph,who  was  surnamed  J. and  Matthias 
Irt.  7.eii'eri(linto  a  certain  man's  house,  named  J. 
Col  4.  11.  Jesus,  who  is  called  J.  saluteth  you 


K. 


KADESIl. 
fVm.  14.  7.  they  came  to  K.imishpnt  which  is  K. 
JVum.n  26.  liieycnme  lo  wilderness  of  Pii ran  to  K. 
20.  16.  b(;!ir)ld,  we  are  in  K.  a  city  in  thy  border 
27. 14.  ye  rehi'lled  iigninKi  moat  water  of  Mcribah 
in  K.  />iut.  32.  51.  F.zek.  47.  19.  |  48.  28 
33.  36.  pitched  in  wihh'rness  of  7,in,  which  is  K. 
Deul.  1.  46.  no  vp  abode  in  K.  mnnv  days 
/»»o/.  29.8.tbe  t.ord  shakelh  ihc  wildernesB  of  K. 

KADF.PII  HARNKA. 

JWm.  32.  8.  wlicn  I  oent  them  fcom  K.  to  sec  the 

lan<l,  Dnil.  9.  23.  .lo.Hh.  14.  7. 

Jofh.  10.  41.  Joshua  smote  them  from  K.  toOa/a 

•  14.6.  what  I,d.«nid,  concerning  nie  and  thee  in  K. 

KARKAir,  .SVr  Joiiana:*. 

KKDAU. 

r?Mi.  2.'').  13.  thesonof  Ishm-iel,  K.  1  rAron.1.29. 

/'»oZ.120.5.  woe  is  mo  that  I  dwell  in  the  ten's  of  K. 

Cant  1   5. 1  am  black  but  comely  as  the  tents  of  K. 

/*o.21. 16.  in  a  year  all  th<-  glory  of  K .  shall  fail,  17. 

744 


LAB 

Isa.  42.  11.  thn  villages  that  K.  dotli  inhabit 
tiO.  7.  the  flocks  ofK.  shall  be  gathered  to  thee 

Jer.  2.  JO.  see  and  send  to  K.  and  consider  diligently 
49.  28.  concerning  K.  thus  saith  the  L.  go  up  to  K. 

£:cA.27.21.  all  the  princes  of  K.occupied  with  thee 
KEILAH. 

■losh.  15.  44.  K.  and  Achzib,  cities  of  Judah 

1  Ham.  23.  1.  the  Philistines  fight  against  K. 

4.  arise,  go  down  to  K.  ||  5.  David  saved  K. 
6.  when  Abialhar  son  of  Ahinielecli  fled  to  K. 
11.  will  the  men  of  K.  deliver  me  lo  Saul?  12. 
JVcA.  3.  17.  the  rulerof  half  part  of  K.  repaired,  18. 
KENAZ,  .See  Othnikl. 
KENITES. 
Gen.  15.  19.  unto  thy  seed  have  I  given  the  K. 
JVum.  24.  21.  Balaam  looked  on  the  K.  and  said 
l*'am.l5.6.  Saul  said  to  the  IC.  depart  lest  I  destroy 
27. 10. 1  made  a  road  against  the  south  of  the  K. 
KERIOTH. 
7i!r.48.24.  judgment  is  come  on  K.  ||  41.  K.  is  taken 
J3mos  2.  2.  a  liie  shall  devour  the  palaces  of  K. 

KETURAH. 

Gen.  25. 1.  Abraham  took  a  wife,  her  name  was  K. 

4.  all  these  were  children  of  K.  1  Ckr.  1.  32,33. 

KIDRON,  .S^e  Brook. 

KIR. 

2  Kings  16.  9.  he  carried  the  people  captive  lo  K. 
Isa.  15.  1.  in  the  night  K.  of  Moab  is  laid  waste 

22.  6.  Elam  bare  the  quiver,  K.  uncovered  shield 
yimos  1.  5.  the  Syrians  shall  go  into  captivity  to  K. 

9.  7.  have  I  not  brought  the  Assyrians  from  K.? 

KIR-HARASETH. 
2  Kings  3.  25.  only  in  K.  left  they  the  stones 
Isa.  l(j.  7.  for  the  foundations  of  K.  shall  ye  mourn 
11.  mine  inward  parts  shall  sound  f<>/  K. 
KIRIATIIAIM. 
<7f?i.l4.5.Chednrlaom.  smote  Emims  in  Shavah  K. 
./cr.48. 1. thus  saith  Ld.  K.  is  confounded  and  taken 
23.  judgment  is  come  upon  K.  and  Beth-gamul 
KIRJATII-ARBA. 
Gen.  23.  2.  Sarah  died  in  K.  the  same  is  Hebron 
in  Canaan,  .losli.  14.  15.  |  20.  7.  Judg.  1.  10. 
KIRJATH-JEARIM. 
Josh.  9.  17.  K.  a  city  of  the  Hiviles  made  peace 
15.  9.  the  border  was  to  Bnalah,  which  is  K.  60. 
18. 14.  which  is  K.  a  city  of  Judah,  ICAron.  13. 6. 
1  Sam.  7. 1.  the  men  of  K.  came  and  fetched  the  ark 

1  Chron.  13.  5.  to  bring  the  ark  of  God  from  K. 

2  Chron.  1.  4.  David  had  brought  the  ark  from  K. 

KISH. 
l.Sam.9. 1.  a  man  of  Benjamin  whose  name  was  K. 

3.  the  usses  of  K.  Saul's  father  were  lost,  14. 51. 

10.  II.  what  is  this  that  is  come  to  the  son  of  K.7 
21.  and  Saul  the  son  of  K.  was  taken 

2  Sam.  21.  14.  they  buried  Saul  in  sepulchre  of  K. 
1  CAr.8. 30.  K.  the  son  of  Gibeon  1|  33.  Ner  begat  K. 
23. 21.  K.  son  of  Mahli  ||  2  Chr.  29. 12.  son  of  Ahdi 
7CsfA.2.5.Mordecai,sonof  Jair,of  Shiniei,son  ofK. 
j3ci5  13.  21.  God  gave  them  Saul  the  son  of  K. 

KITTIM. 
Gen.  10.  4.  sons  of  Javnn  ;  Taishish,  K.  ICAr.  1.  7. 
See  CiUTTiM. 
KOHATH. 
Gen.  46.  11.  the  sons  of  Levi;  Gershon,  K.  and 
Merari,  F.iod.  6.  16.  JVwm.  3.  17. 
Exod.  6.  18.  the  sons  of  K.  JVum.  3.  19, 27,  29, 30. 
I  16.  1.  1  Chron.  6.  2,  22,  61. 
the  years  of  the  life  of  K.  were  133  years 
JVum.  4. 2.  take  the  sum  of  Ihe  sons  ofK.  of  Levi 

4.  this  be  the  service  of  the  sons  ofK.  15.  [7.  9. 

1  Chron.  15.  5.  of  the  sons  ofK.  Uriel  the  chief 

K0HATH1TK3. 

J^Tiim.  4.  18.  cut  ye  not  ofl"  the  family  of  the  K. 

34  Moses  and  Aaron  numbered  Ihe  sons  ofK.  37. 

10.  21.  the  K.  set  forward  bearing  the  sancliinry 

rosh.2\.  4.  the  lot  came  out  for  K.  1  Chmn.  6.  54. 

2  Chron.  29. 12.  the  sons  of  K. sanctified  themselves 
34.  12.  the  sons  of  the  K.  to  set  the  work  forward 

KORAII. 

rjen.  36.  5.  Aholibnmab  bare  K.  H  16.  duke  K.  18. 

Kj-nrf.  6.  21.9on8ofl7.har ;  K.Nepheg,  JV't/m.  16.1. 

JSTum.  16.  6.  take  censers,  K.  niid  all  bis  company 
19.  K.  gathered  all  the  congregation  against  them 
04.  get  you  up  from  about  ihe  tabernacle  ofK. 
40.  that  he  be  not  as  K.  and  as  his  company 

26.  9.  Datban  who  strove  in  the  company  ofK. 
II.  nntwithi'tanding  the  children  ofK.  died  not 

27.  3.  our  father  was  not  in  the  company  of  K. 

1  Chron.  1.  35.  the  sons  of  Esau  ;  Joalam  and  K. 
2.  43.  SOB  of  Il.bron,  K.  ||  0.  2-2.  of  Ainminadab 
9.  19.  son  ofK.  and  his  brethren  over  iho  work 

Jude  11.  tlicy  perished  in  the  gainsaying  of  K. 


L. 


LABAN. 

r7rn.24.29.Rehekah  had  nbrolhor,his  name  wag  L. 
27.  43.  flee  thou  lo  L.  mv  brotlier,  lo  Ilaran 
2.3.  2.  take  theo  a  wife  of  Uio  duughtcrB  of  L. 


LEfi    [PHOFcn  Name* 

I  Ren.29.5.  know  ye  L.  ||  29.  L.  gave  Rachel,  Bilhab 
30.  36.  and  Jacob  fed  ihe  rest  of  L.  flocks 
42.  so  the  feebler  were  L.  the  stronger  Jacob's 

1  31.  2.  Jacob  beheld  the  countenance  of  L. 

12.  for  I  have  seen  all  thai  L.  doth  to  thee 

20.  Jacob  stole  away  unawares  toL.  the  Syrian 

24.  God  came  to  L.  in  a  dream  by  night 

34.  L.  searched  all  the  lent,  but  found  them  not 
3b.  Jacob  chude  with  L.  ||  5.5.  L.  kissed  his  sons 
32.4.1  havesojourned  with  L. and  stayed  until  now 

LABAN. 
/>euM.l.wordsMoses  spake  betweenParan  and  L. 

LACHISH. 
Josh.  10.  32.  the  Lord  delivered  L.  to  Israel 
12.  11.  the  king  of  L.  one  ||  15.  39.  Judah  had  L. 

2  Kings  14. 19.  Amaziah  fled  to  L.  2  Chron.  25. 27. 

18.  14.  Hezekiah  sent  to  king  of  Assyria  lo  L. 
17.  the  king  of  Assyria  sent  Rabshakeli  from  L. 

with  a  great  liost  to  Jerusalem,  Isa.  36.  2, 
2  Chron.  11.  9.  Rehoboam  built  L.  and  Azekah 
Jer.  34.  7.  IIm;  king  of  Babylon  fought  against  L 
Mic.  1.  13.  U  iiihubiiant  of  L.  bind  the  chariot 

LAlSll. 
Judg.  18.  14.  that  went  to  spy  the  country  of  L 

29.  the  name  of  the  city  was  L.  at  the  first 
/su.l0.30.cause  thy  voice  be  heard  toL.O  Aoatholb 
LAISII. 

1  Sam.  25.  44.  Michal  given  to  Phalli  son  of  L. 

2  SaHi.3.15.  Ish-bosheth  look  her  from  the  son  of  L 

LAMECIl. 
<7cn.4.]8,Mpthusael  begat  L.||19.L.took  two  wive« 
5.  25.  Methuselah  begat  L.  1  Chron.  1.  3. 
Luke  'i.  36  Noe,  which  was  the  son  of  L. 

LAODICEA. 
CdI  2  1.  what  great  conflict  I  have  forthem  alL. 
4.  13.  he  hath  a  zeal  for  them  that  are  in  L. 
15.  salute  brethren  which  are  in  L.  and  Nymphaa 
•  10.  that  ye  likewise  read  the  epistle  from  L. 

LAODICEANS. 
Col.  4.  16.  that  it  be  read  in  the  church  of  the  L. 
Rev.  3.  14.  to  the  angel  of  the  church  of  tlie  L. 

LAZARUS. 
Luke  16.  20.  there  was  a  certain  beggar  named  L 
23.  he  seeth  L.  in  Abraham's  bosom  ||  24.  send  L. 

25.  and  likewise  L.  received  evil  things,  but  now 
John  11.2.  Mary  whose  brother  L.  was  sick 

5.  Jesus  loved  L.  ||  II.  our  friend  L.  sleepeth 

14.  L.  is  dead  ||  43.  he  cried,  L.  come  forth 
12.  2.  L.  was  one  of  them  that  sat  at  the  table 

i!.  much  people  came  that  they  might  see  L. 
17.  when  lie  called  L.oul  ofgrave  and  raised  him 
LEAH. 
Gen.  29.  16.  the  name  of  the  cider  daughter  wasTj. 
17.  L.  was  tender-eyed, but  Rachel  was  beautiful 
25.  in  the  morning,  behold  it  was  L. 

31.  when  the  Lord  saw  that  L.  was  hated 

32.  L.  conceived  and  bare  a  son,  30.  19. 

30.  16.  Jacob  came  out  of  the  field,  L.  met  him 

31.  4.  Jacob  called  Rachel  and  L.  to  his  flock 
33.  2.  Jacob  put  L.  and  her  children  after 

.34.  1.  Dinah  the  daughter  of  L.  went  out  to  see 
35.  2.3.  the  sons  of  L.  Reuben,  Simeon,  46.  l.V 
49.  31.  they  buried  Abraham,  there  I  buried  L. 

Ruth  4.  11.  the  Lord  make  this  woman  like  L. 
LEBANON. 

Deut.^.  25.  let  me  see  that  goodly  mountain  and  L. 

Judg.  3.  3.  Ihe  Hivites  that  dwelt  in  mount  L. 

1  Kings  5. 14.  he  sent  ten  thousand  a  month  to  L. 
7.  2.  the  house  of  the  forest  of  L.  10.  17,  21. 

2  Arin^.il4.9.  the  thistle  iIikI  was  in  L.  sent  to  the 

cedar  that  was  in  L.  saying,  give  thy  daugh 
ter  to  my  son,  2  Chmn.  25.  18. 

19.  23. 1  am  come  up  to  ihe  sides  of  L.  Tsa.  37. 24. 
2CAr.  2.  8.  thy  servnnls  can  skill  locut  limber  in  L. 
Psal.  29.  6.  L.  and  Sirion  like  a  voung  unicorn 

72.  16.  the  fruit  thereof  shall  shake  like  L. 
92.  12.  he  shall  grow  like  a  cedar  in  L. 
Can  t.3.9.Soloinon  made  a  chariot  of  the  woodoflj. 
4.  8.  come  with  me  from  L.  my  spouse,  from  L. 
11.  smell  of  t'hy  garments  is  like  the  smell  of  li. 

15.  a  well  of  living  waters,  and  strBams  from  L. 
5. 15.  his  countenance  is  ns  I<.  e.vcellent  as  cedars 
7.  4.  thy  nose  is  as  tower  of  Ij.  toward  Damascus 

Isn.  10.'34.  L.  shall  fall  ||  33.  9.  L.  is  ashamed 
29.  17.  L.  shall  be  turnrd  into  a  ftuiiful  field 
.35.  '».  Ihc  glory  of  L.  shall  be  given  unto  it 
40. 16.  I>.isnotsutVicienttohurn  forbnrnt-nflrcring 
60.  13.  the  glory  of  L.  shall  come  lo  thee 

.frr.  18.  14.  will  a  man  leave  the  snow  of  L.7 
22.  6.  thou  art  Gi'cad  and  the  head  of  L.  to  mp 
20.  go  up  to  L.andcry,lift  op  thy  voice  inBaalina 

F.trk.  17.  3.  a  great  easle,  long-winged,  crime  lo  L. 
31.  15.  and  I  caused  L.  to  mourn  for  him 

JIns.  14.  5.  he  shall  cast  forth  hi-j  roots  ns  L.         > 

6.  his  smell  ns  L.  ||  7.  the  scent  ns  the  wine  ofL. 
JVaA.  1.4.  Bashan  and  the  flmver  ofL.languisheU- 
Hab.  2.  17.  the  vinliMKO  of  L.  shall  cover  thee 
7,fcA.  10.  10.  I  will  bring  them  into  the  lanil  of  L 

11.  1.  open  thy  doors,  O  L.  that  firo  may  devoui 
See  Cedirs. 


Promr  Namks.]     LYD 

.LEBBEUS. 
Mat.  10.  3.  L.  whose  surname  was  Thaddoua 

LEGION. 
Varic  5.9.iny  name  is  L.  for  we  arc  many,  Z.Ji.8.30. 

LEGIONS. 
Ma£.26.  53.  ho  shall  give  me  more  than  twelve  I. 

LEMUEL. 
Prov.  3L  1.  the  words  of  king  L.  the  prophecy 
4.  it  is  not  for  kings,  O  L.  to  drink  wine 
LEVL 
Oen.  29.  34.  therefore  was  his  name  called  L. 
46.  n.  the  sons  of  L.  Eznd.  6.  Ifi.  JVum.  3.  17. 
49.5.Simcon,  L.  are  hretlir.  instrnmcntsof  cruelty 
.Eiod.6.16.  the  years  of  ihe  life  of  L.  were  137  years 
JV*K7n.  16.  7.  take  too  much  upon  yon,  ye  sons  of  L. 
2G.  59.  Amrain's  wife  Jochebed,  daughter  of  L. 
Dcut.  10.  9.  L.  hath  no  part  with  his  brethren 
21.  5.  the  priests  the  sons  of  Ij.  shall  come  near 
33.8.  of  L.  he  said,  let  thy  Thummiui  and  Urim 
I  Kings  12.31.  made  priests  which  were  not  of  L. 
1  CAr.  21.6.  but  L.  and  Benjamin  counted  he  not 
Ezra  8.  15.  I  found  there  none  of  Ihe  sons  of  L. 
Psal.  135.  iO.  bless  the  Lord,  O  house  of  L. 
f;ieA.40.46.the  sons  of  Zadok  among  the  sons  ofL. 
48.  31.  one  gate  of  Judah,  one  gate  of  L. 
7.fch.  12.  13.  the  family  of  the  house  of  L.  apart 
Mai.  2.  4.  that  my  covenant  might  be  with  L. 

8.  ye  have  corrupted  the  covenant  of  L. 
3.  3.  and  he  shall  purify  the  sons  of  L. 
Mark  2. 14.  he  saw  L.  the  son  of  Alpheus  sitting 
Lvke  3.  24.  Matthat,  which  was  the  son  of  L.  29 
5.  27.  he  saw  a  |iublican  named  L.  sitting  at 
29.  L.  made  him  a  great  feast  in  his  own  house 
Hcb.l.^.h.who  received  tithes, payed  tithes  in  Abr, 

Tribe  of  LEVL 

^um.  1. 49.  thou  shalt  not  number  the  tribe  of  L. 

3.  6.  bring  the  tribe  of  L.  near  and  present  them 

18.2.  tr.  o/L.  bring,  that  they  may  minister  to  thee 

lieut.  10.  8.  the  Lord  separated  the  tribe  of  L 

18.  1.  all  the  tribe  of  L.  shall  have  no  part  nor 

inheritance  with  Israel,  .Tosh.  13.  14,  33, 
lCAr.23. 14.  Moses'  sons  were  named  of  the  tr.nfh 
Rev.  7.  7.  of  the  tribe  ofl^.  were  sealed  12,000. 
LEVITE,  S.     See  ./Appellatives. 
LIBNAH. 
A'um.  33.  20.  pitched  m  L.  ||  21.  removed  from  L. 
Josh.  10. 29.  passed  to  L.  ||  21.13.  gave  l.io  Levites 
2  Kings  8.  22.  then  L.  revolted,  2  Chron.  21.  10. 

19.  8.  Rab-sbakch  returned,  and  found  the  king 

of  Assyria  warring  against  L.  Tsa.  37.  8. 
23.  31.  Jehoahn?,  mother's  name  was  Hamulal, 
daughter  of  Jeremiah  of  L.  24.18.  Jer.  52.  1. 
LIBYA. 
F.zek.  30.  5.  L.  shall  fall  with  them  by  the  sword 
.^cts  2.  10.  in  the  parts  of  L.  about  Cyrene 

LIBYANS. 
Jer.  46.  9.  and  the  L.  that  handled  Ihe  shield 
Dan.  11.  43.  the  L.  and  Ethiopians  shalTbe  at  his 
LO-AMMF.  [steps 

Ifos.  1. 9.  call  his  name  L.  for  ye  are  not  my  people 

LOIS. 
2  Tim.  1.  5.  which  dwelt  in  thy  grandmother  L. 

LO-BUHAMAH. 
Ifoi.  1.  6.  Ood  said  unto  him,  call  her  name  L. 
8.  when  she  had  weaned  L.  she  conceived  and 
Lf)T.  [hare 

Oen.  11.  27.  Haran  begat  L.  ||  31.  Terah  took  L. 

12.4.  Abram  departed,  L.  went  with  him,  13.  1. 

13. 5.  L.  had  flocks  !|  14.12.  they  took  L.  prisoner 
7.  was  a  strife  between  herdmen  of  Abram  andL. 
11.  then  L.  chose  him  all  the  plain  of  Jordan 

J9. 1.  L.  sat  in  the  gate  of  Sodom  ;  L.  seeing  them 

lO.puUcd  L.into  housell  IS.the  anjelshastened  L. 

29.  God  sent  L.  out  of  the  midst  of  the  overthrow 

36.  both  Ihe  daughters  of  Ij.  were  with  child 

Dent.  2.  9.1  have  given  Ar  to  the  children  of  Tj.  19. 

Psal.  83.  8.  ihey  have  holpen  the  children  of  T,. 

Luke  17.  28.  likewise  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  L. 

32.  remember  L.  wife 
2Pef.2.7.  deliv.  just  L.  vexed  with  filthy  conversat. 

LUCAS. 
PAi7em.24. Marcus,  Pemns,  L.  my  fellow-labourers 

LUCIFER. 
Isa.  14. 12. how  art  thou  fallen  from  heaven,  O  L. 

LUCIUS. 
Jlcts  13.  l.L-  of  Cyrene  was  a  teacher  at  Antioch 
Rom.  16.  21.  L.  Jason  and  Sosipatcr  salute  you 

LUKE. 
0)f.  4. 14. 1,.  the  beloved  physician  greefeth  you 
8Tim.4.11.onIy  L.is  with  me,  bring  Mark  with  thee 

LUZ. 
<7fn.28  19.lhe  city  was  called  L. at  first,  .Tndg.\.^. 
35.  fi.  Jacob  came  to  L.  in  the  land  of  Canaan 
48.3.G.  Almighty  appeared  to  me  at  L.  in  Canaan 

LYCAONIA. 
Jicls  14.6.thevfled  toLystrannd  Perbe,citie8  of  L. 
ll.lift  up  thcirvoices,  saying  in  the  speech  of  L. 
LYDDA. 
/lets  9.  32.  Peter  came  down  to  Iho  saints  at  L. 
35.  all  that  dwelt  at  L.  turned  to  the  Lord 
T45 


MAN 

Acts  9.  38.  forasmuch  as  L.  was  nigh  to  Joppa 

LYUIA. 
Ezek.  30.  5.  L.  shall  full  with  them  by  the  sword 

LYDIA. 

Jlcts  16. 14.L.  worshipped  god,  heart  Lord  opened 

40. they  went  out  and  entered  into  the  liousoof  L. 

LYSANIAS. 

/-«A:(;3.1.in  reign  ofTibi'riu3,L.tctrarch  of  Abilene 

LYSIAS. 
Jlcts  23.  26.  L.  unto  the  most  excellent  Felix 

LYSTRA. 

JlctsXi.^.  they  were  ware  of  it,  and  fled  unto  L. 

8.  a  certain  man  at  L.  impotent  in  his  feet 

16. 1.  Paul  came  to  L.  {{  2.  by  the  brethren  at  L. 

2  Tim.  'i.  11.  afflictions  which  came  unto  me  at  L. 


M. 


MAACHAH. 

Oen.  22.  24.  Reumah  Nahor's  concubine  bare  M. 

2  Sam.  3.  3.  M.  mother  of  Absalom,  1  Chron.  3.  2. 

1  Kings  15.  2.  M.  the  mother  of   Abijam,  the 

daughter  of  Abishalom,  10.  iCkron.  11.  22. 

1  Chron.  2.  48.  M.  Caleb's  concubine  bare  Sheber 
7.  16.  M.  the  wife  of  Machir  bare  Percsh 

11.  43.  Hanan  the  son  of  M.  was  a  valiant  man 
MAASEIAH. 

2  Chron.  28.  7.  Zichri  slew  M.  the  king's  son 
JVcA.  10.  25.  Rehum  and  M.  sealed  the  covenant 
.7-'r.21.1.Zephaniah  Ihe  son  of  M.  29. 25.  |  .37.  3. 

29.  21.  saith  the  Lord  of  Zedekiah  son  olM. 
32. 12.  to  Baruch  sonofNeraiah  eonof  M.51.59. 
35.  4.  above  the  chamber  of  M.  son  of  Shallum 

MAATH. 
Luke  3.  26.  Nagge,  which  was  the  son  of  M. 

MACEDONIA. 
Acts  16.  9.  saying,  come  over  into  M.  and  help  us 

18.  5.  Silas  and  Timotheus  were  come  from  M. 

19.  21.  Paul  purposed,  when  passed  through  M. 
Rom.  15.  26.  for  it  hath  pleased  them  of  M. 

2  Cor.  7.  5.  when  we  were  come  into  M. 
8.1.  grace  of  God  bestowed  on  the  churches  of  M. 
9.  2.  for  which  I  boast  of  you  to  them  of  M. 

4.  lest  if  they  of  M.  find  you  unprepared 
11.  9.  brethren  which  came  from  M.  supplied 

IThess.  1.7.  ensamples  to  all  that  believe  in  M. 

8.  from  you  sounded  out  the  word,  notonly  in  M. 
4.  10.  toward  all  the  brethren  that  are  in  M. 

MACHIR. 
Oen.  50. 23.  M.  the  son  of  Manasseh,  JVum.  32. 39. 
JVum.  26.  29.  M.  begat  Gilead,  27.  1.  |  36.  1. 
Jo.^h.  17.  1. 
32.  40.  Moses  gave  Gilead  unto  M.  Dent.  3.  15. 
.Tvdg.  5.  14.  out  of  M.  came  down  governors 
2  Sam.  9.  4.  M.  the  son  of  Ammiel,  5. 1 17.  27. 

MACHPELAH. 
Oen.  23.  9.  that  he  may  give  me  the  cave  of  M.17. 

19.  Abraham  buried  Sarah  in  the  cave  of  M. 
25.9.buried  Abraham  in  M.  ||  49. 30.  Jacob,  50. 13. 

MAGDALA. 
Mat.  15.  39.  Jesue  came  into  the  coasts  of  M. 

MAGOG. 
Oen.  10.  2.  the  son  of  Japheth,  M.  1  Chron.  1.  5. 
F.zek.  38.  2.  set  thy  face  against  the  land  of  M. 
39.  6  I  will  send  a  fire  on  M.  and  in  the  isles 
Eev.  20.  8.  to  gather  Gog  and  M.  to  battle 

MAHANAIM. 
Oen .  32. 2.  Ja  cob  called  the  name  of  the  place  M. 
.Tosh.  21.  38.  out  of  Gad  to  Levites,  M.  1  Chr  6. 80. 
2  Sam.  2.  8.  Abner  brought  Ish-bosheth  to  M.. 

17.  24.  then  David  came  to  M.  27. 

19.  32.  Barzillai  provided  sustenance  at  M. 
1  Kivg.^  2.  8.  Shimei  cursed  me  when  I  went  to  M. 
'  4.  14.  Ahinadab  the  son  of  Iddo  had  M. 

MAHER-SHALAL-HASH-BAZ. 
Fsa.  8.  1.  write  in  the  roll  concerning  M. 
3.  then  said  Ihe  Lord  to  me  call  his  name  M. 
MAHLON. 
Rvth  1.  2.  Elimelech's  sons,  M.  and  Chilion 

5.  M.  and  Chilion  died  also  both  of  them 
4.  9.  that  I  have  bought  all  that  was  M. 

10.  Ruth  the  wife  of  M.  have  I  purchased 

MALCHAM. 
Ze])h.  1.  5.  that  swear  bv  the  Lord  and  by  M. 

MALCHUS. 
.Tohn  18.  10.  the  servant's  name  was  M. 

MAMMON. 
Mat.  6.  24.  no  man  can   serve  two  masters,  ye 
cannot  serve  God  and  M.  Lvke  16.  13. 
Lvke  16.  9.  make  friendsofM.  of  unrighteousness 

11.  if  not  faithful  in  the  unrighteous  M.  who  will 

MAMRE. 
<7c7i.  13. 18.  Abram  dwelt  in  the  plain  of  M.  14. 13. 
14.  24.  Eshcol,  M.  let  them  take  their  portion 

18.  1.  the  Lord  appeared  to  Abraham  in  M. 
23.  17.  Marbpelah  before  M.  19. 1  49. 30.  i  .50. 13. 
35.  27.  Jacob  came  to  Isaac  bia  father  to  M. 

MANAEN. 
Acti  13.  1.  M.  who  had  been  brought  up  with  H. 


MAN 

MANASSEir. 
Oen.  41.  51.  Josejih  called  the  first  born  M. 
48.  5.  thy  two  sons  M.  and  Ephraim  are  rains 
20.  in  thee  shall  Israel  bless,  God  make  thee  Si 
Ephraim  and  M.  and  he  set  Ejihraim  before  M. 
JVum.  1.  10.  of  M.  Gamaliel  was  prince 
7.  54.  Gamaliel  i)rince  of  M.odered  on  eighth  day 
26.  34.  these  are  the  families  of  M.  27.  1. 
36.  12.  they  were  married  into  the  family  of  M 
Deut.  33.  17.  they  are  the  thousands  of  M. 
Josh.  14. 4.  of  Joseph  were  two  tribes,  M.  Ephraim 
17.  2.  these  were  the  male  children  of  M. 
3.Zelophehad  son  of  M. had  no  sons  but  daughter! 

5.  there  fell  ten  portions  to  M.  beside  Gilead 

6.  the  daughters  of  M.  had  an  inheritance 

11.  M.  had  in  Issacbar,  lieih-sbean  and  Ibleam 

12.  children  of  M.  could  not  drive  out  inhabilauti 
.Tudg.  6.  15.  behold,  my  family  is  poor  in  M. 

18. 30.  Jonathan  son  of  Gershom,  son  of  M.  priest 
2  Kings  20.  21.  M.  his  son  reigned,  2  Chron.  32. 33. 

21.  9.  and  M.  seduced  them  lo  do  more  evil 
IG.M.shed  innocent  blood,  till  he  filled  Jerusalem 

23.  12.  the  altars  M.  made  did  Josiah  beat  down 
26.provocations  thalM.had  provoked  him  withal 

24.  3.  for  the  sins  of  M.  this  came  upon  Judah 
ICAj-.  9.  3.  in  Jerusalem  dwelt  of  Ihe  children  ofM. 

12.  19.  and  there  fell  some  of  M.  to  David 

2  Chron.  15.  9.  Ihe  strangers  out  of  M.  fell  to  Asa 

30.  1.  Hezekiah  wrote  letters  to  Ephraim  andM. 
11.  yet  divers  of  M.  humbled  themselves 

31.  1.  all  Israel  cut  down  the  groves  in  M. 
33.  9.  M.  made  Judah  and  Jerusalem  to  err 

10.  Ihe  L.  spake  to  M.  he  would  not  hearken 

11.  the  captains  took  M.  among  ihe  thorns 

13.  then  M.  knew  that  Ihe  Lord  he  was  God 
23.  Amon  humbled  not  himself,  a^  M.  had  dona 

34.6.  so  did  Jneiah  in  thecities  of  M.  and  Ephraim 
Ezra  10.  30.  M.  had  taken  strange  wives,  33. 
Psal.  fJO.  7.  Gilead  is  mine,  M.  is  mine,  108.  8. 

80.2.  before  M.  stir  up  thy  strength,  and  save  uf 
Isa.  9.  21.  M.  shall  eat  Ephraim,  Ephraim  M. 
Jer.'i5.4.  cause  them  to  be  removed,  because  of  M. 
F.zek.  43.  4.  to  the  west  side  a  portion  for  M. 
Mat.l.  10.  Ezekias  begat  M.  and  M.  begat  Amon 

Tribe  of  MANASSEH. 
JVum.  1.  3.5.  numbered  of  the  tribe  o/ M.  32,200 

2.  20.  by  Ephraim  shall  be  the  tribe  o/M.  and  the 
captain  of  ihe  children  of  M.Gamaliel,  10.  23. 

13.11.  of  lhe«riA«fl/M.Gaddi  ||  34.23.  Hannicl 

32.  33.  to  ha.\r  tribe  o/M.  the  kingdom  of  Og 
34. 14.  hn\f  tribe  of  M.  have  received  inheritance 

J(>.-A.4.  12.lhe  hn]i' tribe  of  M.  passed  over  armed 

13.  7.  divide  lo  nine  tribes  and  ha]f  tribe  of  M. 
29.Moses  gave  inheritance  to  half  ^r/Ar o/M.thii 

was  possession  o(  bM  tribe  o/M.12.6.  118.7. 

17.  1.  there  was  also  a  lot  for  the  tribe  of  M. 
20.  8.  gave  Golan  out  of  the  tribe  ofU.  21.27. 

22.  10.  Ihe  h»\f  tribe  o/M.  built  there  an  nliar 
lCAr.5.18.Reuben,Gari, and  half  tr7fcro/M.valiant 

6.  70.  out  of  half  trrfte  n/M.  to  the  Levites,  71. 
12.31.half<r!Aco/M.18,000lomake  David  king 
26.  32.  rulers  over  Gad  half  ^Wfte  o/M.  27.20,21. 
Rev.  7.  6.  of  the  tribe  of  M.  were  sealed  12,000 

MANEH. 
Ezek.  48.  12.  fifteen  shekels  shall  be  your  M. 

MANOAH. 
.Tudg.  13.  8.  then  M.  entreated  the  Lord,  and  said 
9.  and  God  hearkened  to  the  voice  of  M. 
11.  M.  arose  and  went  after  his  wife  and  came 
16.  M.  knew  not  that  he  was  angel  of  Ihe  Lord 

19.  M.  took  a  kid,  and  oflfered  it  upon  a  rock 

20.  M.  and  his  wife  looked  on  it,  and  fell  down 

21.  M.  knew  that  he  was  an  angel  of  the  Lord 
16.31.  buried  Samson  in  the  burying-place  of  M. 

MARA. 
Ruth  1.20.Ruth  said,  call  me  not  Naomi,call  me  M. 

MARAH. 
F.Tod.  15. 23.  they  could  not  drink  of  waters  of  M. 
JVuvi.  33.  8.  went  three  days,  and  pitched  in  M. 
9.  they  removed  from  M.  and  came  unto  Elim 
MARCUS. 
Col.  A.  10.  M.  sister's  son  to  Barnabas,  saluteth  you 
Philem.  24.  M.  saluteth  vou,  1  Pet.  5.  13. 

MARK. 
Acts  12.12.  Mary  mother  of  John,  surnamcd  M. 
25. took  with  ihem,  John  whose  surname  was  M. 
15.  39.  Barnabas  took  M.  and  sailed  lo  Cvprus 
2  Tim.  4.  11.  take  M.  and  bring  him  with  thee 

MARS-HILL. 
Acts  17.  22.  Paul  stood  in  the  midst  of  M. 

MARTHA. 
Luke  10.  38.  a  woman  named  M.  received  him 

40.M.was  cumbered  II 41.  M.  M.ihou  art  careful 
John  11.1.  the  town  of  Mary  and  her  sister  M. 
5.  now  Jesus  loved  M.  Mary,  and  Lazarus 
30.  Jestis  was  in  that  place  where  M.  met  him 
12.  2.  they  made  him  a  supper,  and  M.  scrvod 

MARY. 
Mat.  1.  16.  Jacob  begat  Joseph  the  husband  of  M. 

18.  when  bis  mother  M.  waa  espoused  to  Jose|<b 


MEP 


MID 


Mai.  \.  20.  fear  not  to  tnke  unto  thee  M.  thy  wife  [2.^am.l9.25^wherer.  wentes^lhou  not  with  me  M.? 
2.11.  Iht-y  saw  the  young  child  with  -M.  hia  niotli«r 
13.  55.  is  not  liis  mother  called  M.I  Alark  6.  'i. 
27. .%.  among  them  was  M.  the  mother  of  James 
and  Joscs,  Mark  15.40,47.  |  !«.  1. 
Z,i(tel.27.hoiist- of  David  the  virgin'8  name  was  M. 
30.  fear  not,  M.  ||  56.  M.  abode  three  months 
41.  when  Elisabeth  heard  the  salutation  of  M. 
2.  5.  Josejih  went  to  be  taxed  with  M.  his  wife 
16.  the  shci)herd8  found  M.  and  the  babe  lying 
19.  but  M.  kept  all  these  things  in  her  heart 
10.  39.  she  had  asister  called  M.  which  also  eat 
42. M.  hath  chosen  that  good  part  not  to  be  taken 
John  11.  1.  the  town  of  AI.  1|  20.  but  M.  sat  still 
2.  it  was  that  M.  that  anomlcd  the  Lord 
28.  she  called  M.  her  sister  secretly,  saying 
12.  3.  M.  took  a  pound  of  ointment  and  anointed 
19.25.  M.  the  wife  of  Cleophas  stood  by  the  cross 

20.11.  M.  stood  without  at  the  sepulchre,  weeping 
16.  Jesus  saith  to  lier,  M.  she  turned  herself 

Acts  l.U.lhe  apostles  continued  in  prayer  withM. 

12. 12.  Peter  came  to  house  of  M.  mother  of  John 
Rom.  16.  6.  gre«'t  M.  who  bestowed  much  labour 

M.\RY  Magdalene. 

Jiro£.27.5C.  many  women  were  there,  among  whom 

was  M.  Magdalene^  Mark  15.  40.  John  19.25. 

61.  M.  MagdaUnf  sitting  ovor-against  sepulchre 

as.l.came  >I.  Magd.  to  see  sepulchre,  .lohniO.  1. 


Mark  JC.  1.  M.  Magdalene  and  Mary  the  mother 
of  James  bought  sweet  spices,  Luke  24.  10. 

9.  he  appeared  first  to  M.  Magd.  out  of  whom 
Juhn  20.  18.  M.  Magdalene  told  the  disciple* 

MASSAH. 

F.zod.  17.7.  he  called  the  name  of  the  place  M. 

i^fKt.e.lG.  nottemptl..  as  tempted  him  in  M.  9. 22. 

33.8.  thy  holy  one,  whom  thou  didst  prove  at  M. 

MATTAN. 

8  Kine»  11.18.  slew  M.  priest  of  Baal,  2CAr.  23.17. 

MATTATHIAS. 
Luke  3.  25.  Joseph  which  was  the  son  of  M. 

MATTHEW. 
Jlfat.9.9.8aw  a  man  named  M.  and  saith,  follow  me 
10. 3. Philip,  Thomas  and  M.  the  publican,  Mark 
3.  18.  Luke  6. 15.  Mis  1. 13. 
MATTHIAS. 
Jtcts  1.  23.  Joseph  called  Darsabas,  and  M. 
iie.  tJie  lot  fell  on  M.  and  he  was  numbered 
MAZZAIKJTH. 
Job  33.  32.  canst  thou  bring  forth  M.  in  season  1 

MKDAD. 
A'unt.ll.2f).lheSpiritcamc  on  M.hc  prophesicd,27. 

MEDE,  S. 

SA'in^s  17.  fi.  placed  them  in  cities  of  the  M.  18. 11. 

Ezra  6.2.was  found  in  the  province  of  the  M.  a  roll 

Esth.  1. 19.  let  it  be  written  among  the  laws  of  M. 

/*a.l3.17.I  will  stir  up  M.  against  them,  ./cr.ol.  11. 

J'er.25.25.  Imadeall  the  kings  of  the  M.  to  drink 

r)an.  5.28.  Pkres,  thy  kingdom  is  given  to  the  M. 

6.  e.  according  to  the  law'of  the  M.  12, 15. 

9.1.  Darius  son  of  A  hasuerus  of  the  seed  of  the  M. 

11.  1.  in  the  first  year  of  Darius  the  M. 

MEDIA. 
Esth.  1.  3.  all  the  power  of  Persia  and  M. 
14.  seven  princes  of  Persia  and  M.  saw  the  king 
18.  the  ladies  of  M.  shall  say  this  day  to  princes 

10.  2.  written  in  the  book  of  the  kings  of  M. 
Isa.  21.  2.  besi'gp,  O  M.  all  the  sighing  ceaseth 
A>an.8.20.the  two  horns  are  kings  of  M.  and  Persia 

MEGIDDO. 
Judg.  1.27.  the  Cnnannites  would  dwell  in  M. 
5.1§. kings  of  Canaan  fought  by  the  waters  of  M 
1  Kingn  4.12.  to  Haana  pertained  Taa;iach  and  M 

9.  15.  Soliimnn  raised  a  levy  to  build  M. 
I  Kings  9.27.  Ahnziah  fled  to  M.  and  died  there 
23.29.  Josiah  wa«  slain  at  M.  30.  2  Chr.  35.  22. 

MEGIDDON. 
Zech.  12.  11.  as  the  monrnin-;  in  the  valley  of  M. 

mi;l(;hi. 

Luke  3.  24.  Levi,  whirh  wna  ihe  son  of  M. 

MKLCHIZEDEK. 
Oen.U.  IH.  king  M.  broueht  forth  bread  and  wine 
Psal.  110.  4.  thou   art  a  priest  for  ever  after  the 
order  of  M.  ffnh.  5.  6,  10.  |  6.  20.  |  7.  17, 21. 
Jlrb.  7.  1.  this  M.  king  of  falem,  priest  of  God 

10.  in  the  loins  of  his  father  when  M.  met  him 

11.  a  priest  should  arise  after  Ihe  order  of  M. 

15.  after  the  limdiinde  of  M.  ariseth  a  priest 

MEMPHIS. 
llos  9  6.  Egypt  shnll  gather  them,  M.  shall  Imry 

MEN'AHEM. 
S  Kings  l.'>.  14.  M.  sniole  flhalimn  in  Pamnria 

16.  M.  smolo  Tiphsah  ||  20.  M.  exacted  money 

MRNE. 
Z)(n»  5  25.M.M.  God  hath  numbered  thy  kingd.  26. 
MEPHIHOSIIETH. 
Sam.  4.4.  Jonathan  had  a  son,  his  name  was  M 
9.  10.  but  M.  shall  eat  bread  at  my  table,  11. 
12.  M.  had  a  young  son  Micha;  all  thit  dwelt 
in  the  house  of  Ziba  were  servants  to  M 
It  4.  behold,  thine  ore  all  that  portaimd  tinto  .M 
T40 


'21,  7.  but  the  king  spared  M.  the  son  of  Jonathan 

Ci.  king  took  two  sons  of  Uizpah,  Annoni  and  M. 

MEUAB. 

1  Snm.  14.  49.  Saul's  eldest  daughter  M.  18.  17. 

18. 1'J.  when  M.  should  have  been  given  to  David 

MERARI. 
Gen.  4t>.  11.  the  sons  of  Levi,  Gershon,  Kohath,  M. 
Ezod.  6. 16.  JVuni.  3. 17.  1  Chr.  ti.  1, 10.  1 23.  6. 
Ezod.  6.  19.  the  sons  of  M.  Mahali,  Mushi,  jVum. 
3.  20.  1  Chr.  6.  19,  29. 1 2:).  21.  |  24.  'JO. 
jYam.  3.  36.  under  t)ie  charge  of  the  sons  of  M. 
4.42. were  numbered  of  M.||  10.17.  M.sel  forward 
7.  8.  waggons  and  o.\en  given  to  the  sons  of  M. 
Jush.'il.  7.  cities  given  to  M.  40.  1  CAr.  6. 63, 77. 

MERCURIUS. 
.^cts  14.13.  Paul  calleilM. because  thechiefspcaker 

MERiBAH. 
Exod.  17.  7.  he  called  the  name  of  the  place  M. 
.Yum.  20.  13.  this  is  the  water  of  M.  27.  14. 

24.  rebelled  at  water  of  M.  Deul.  32.  51.  ]  33.8. 
Psal.  81.7.  I  proved  thee  at  tlie  waters  of  M. 

MERODACH. 
Jer.  50.2.  Babylon  taken,  M.  is  broken  in  pieces 

MERODACH-UALADAN. 
/sa.39.1.M.  sent  letters  and  a  present  to  Hczekiah 

MEROM. 
Josh.  11.  5.  they  pitched  at  the  waters  of  M.  7. 

MEROZ. 

Judg.  5.  23.  curse  ye  M.  said  the  angel  of  the  Ld. 

MESHACH,  Sfc  Abkd-neoo. 

MESHECH. 

Oen.  10.  2.  M.  the  son  of  Japheth,  1  Chron.  1.  5. 

1  Chron.  1. 17.  the  sons  of  Shein,  Gether,  and  M. 

Psal.  I'-O.  5.  woe  is  me,  that  I  sojourn  in  M. 

B:zek.  27. 13.  Tubal  and  M.  were  thy  merchants 

32. 26.  there  is  M.  |  38. 2.  chief  prince  of  M.  3. 

39.1. 1  am  against  the  chief  prince  ofM.  and  Tubal 

MESOPOTAMIA. 
Gen  24.10.Eliezer  went  to  M.  to  the  city  of  Nahor 
J)eut.  23.  4.  they  hired  Balaam  of  M.  to  curse  thee 
Judg.  3.  8.  Cushan-rishathaim  king  of  M. 
10.  Lord  delivered  the  king  of  M.  to  Israel 

1  CAr.19.6.  Amnion  sent  to  hire  chariots  out  of  M. 
Jicls  2.  9.  the  dwellers  in  M.  we  hear  in  out  tongue 

7.  2.  the  God  of  glory  appeared  to  Abraham  in  M. 
MESSIAH,  See  jippellatives. 

METHEG-AMMAH. 

2  Sam.  8.  1.  David  took  M.  from  the  Philistines 
METHUSELAH. 

Oen.  5.21.  Enoch  begat  M.  ||  25.M.  hegatLamech 
27.  all  the  days  of  M.  were  969  years 

1  Chron.  J.  3.  Henoch,  M.  Lamech 
Luke  3.  37.  Lamech,  which  was  the  son  of  M. 

MICAH. 

.Tudg.  17. 1.  a  man  of  mount  Ephraim  called  M. 

5.  the  man  M.  had  a  house  of  gods 

12.  M.  consecrated  the  Levite  for  his  priest 

18. 4.  thus  dealeth  M.  ||  31.  they  set  up  M.  image 

IChr.  5.5.  M.  his  son,  Reaia  his  son,  Baal  his  son 

8.  34.  Merih-baal  of  Benjamin  begat  M.  9.  40. 
35.  the  sons  of  M.  Pithoii,  and  Melech,  9.  41. 

9.  15.  Mnttaniah  the  son  of  M.  son  of  Zicliri 

2  Chron.  34.  20.  Josiah  sent  Abdon  the  son  of  M 
JVt7i.  10.  11.  M.  Rehob  sealed  the  covenant 
,/er.2G.18.M.  theMorashite  prophesied  in  thedays 

of  He/.ekiuh,  Zion  shall  be  plowed,  Mic.  1. 1. 
MICA  I  AH. 

1  Kings  22.  8.  M.  the  son  of  Iraluh,  9.  2  Chr.  18. 8. 
24.  Zedekiah  smote  M.  on  the  cheek 

20.  take  M.  carry  him  to  Amon,  2  Chr.  18.23,25. 
MICH  AI  AH. 

2  Chron.  13.2.  Ahijah's  mother  was  M.  of  Uriel 
17.7.  Jehoshaphat  sent  M.  to  teach  cities  of  Judah 

ncK.  12.  .35.  son  of  M.  to  give  thanks,  41. 

Jer.  36. 11.  M.  heard  what  Baruch  had  read,  13. 

MICHAEL. 
Dan.  10.  13.  M.  one  of  the  chief  princes  came 

21.  none  holdeth  with  mc  but  M.  your  prince 
12.  1.  at  that  time  shall  M.  stand  up  for  the  people 

.lade  9.  yet  M.the  archangel,  contending  with  devil 

Kcv.  12.7.  M.  and  anffels  foiiqhi  against  thedragon 

MICHA  L. 

1  Sam.  14.  40.  Saul's  younger  daughter  M. 
IH.  20.  M.  Saul's  daughter  loved  David,  28. 
19. 12.  so  M.  lei  David  down  through  a  window 

13.  M.  took  an  imago  and  laid  it  in  Ihe  bed 
2.').  44.  Saul  had  given  M.  David's  wife  to  Phaiti 

2  Sam.  3.  13.  except  Ihou  first  bring  M. 

14.  ilelivi'r  mc  my  wife  M.  whom  I  espoused 
6.1f>.M.Saiil'«dau2luer  looked  ibroiijh  a  window, 

and  ssw  king  David  dancing,  1  CAren.  15.29. 
23.  therefore  M.  had  no  rhilil  to  her  death 
21  .B.king  look  fivir  sons  of  M. brought  up  forAdriel 

MIDIAN. 
F.jnd.  2.  l.S.  but  Moses  dwelt  in  Ihe  land  of  M. 
IH.l.  Jethro  priest  of  M.  heard  nil  God  hail  ilonc 
A'um.  22.  4.  Moab  said  to  the  elders  of  M. 
25. 15.  Cozbi  the  dau^hlcr  of  Zur,  and  of  a  ehio'" 
house  in  M. 


MOA     [P«ori»  Namm. 

JVTum.  31.3.  let  them  go  and  avenge  the  Lord  ofM 

8.  they  slew  the  kings  ofM.  beside  the  rest 

9.  Israel  took  all  the  women  ofM.  cHptives 
Judg.  6.  1.  the  Lord  delivered  them  to  M.3. 

7.  14.  for  into  his  hand  hath  God  del'terea  M. 

8.  iW.  thou  hast  delivered  us  from  M.  9.  17. 
2f<.  thus  was  M.  subdued  before  Israel 

1  Kings  II.  18.  some  Edomites  arose  out  ofM. 
Isa.  9. 4.  thou  hast  broken  the  yoke  as  in  day  ofM 

10.  2t).  according  to  the  slaughter  of  M.  at  Oreb 
60.  6.  the  dromedaries  of  M.  shall  cover  thee 
Hab.  3.7.  the  curtains  of  the  land  of  M.  did  tremblt 

MIDIAJVITES. 
Gen.  37.  28.  there  passed  by  M.  merchant-men 

36.  Ihe  M.  sold  liiin  into  Egvpt  to  I'oiiphar 
jVum.25.17.vex  lbeM.||31.2.aveiige  Isiuel  of  the  M. 
Judg.  6.7.  Israel  cried  to  the  Lord  because  ofM. 

16.  and  thou  shall  smite  the  M.  as  one  man 

7.  2^1.  the  men  of  Israel  pursued  after  the  M. 

25.  they  took  two  princes  of  the  M.  Oreb,  Zeeb 

8.  1.  when  thou  wentest  to  fight  w  ith  the  M. 
Psal.  83.  9.  do  to  them  as  to  the  M.  as  to  Sisera 

MIDIANITISH. 
J^um.  25.  6.  behold,  Ziinri  brought  a  M.  woman 
15.  the  name  of  the  M.  woman  u  as  Cozbi 
MILCAH. 
Gen.  11.29.  M.  daughter  of  Haran,  Nahor'swife 
22.  20.  M.  also  bare  children  to  Nahor,  23. 
24.  15.  Bethuel  son  ofM.  the  wife  of  Nahor 
.Vum.'J6.33.  Zekiplichad'sdaughter'sname  was  M. 

MILCOM. 
l/iTinffjll. S.Solomon  vieiit  after  M.god  of  Ammon 

33.  they  have  worshipped  M.  god  of  Ammon 

2  Kings  23. 13.  which  Solomon  had  budded  for  M. 
MILETUM. 

2rim.4.20.Trophimu8  have  I  left  at  M.  sick 

MILETUS. 
.^cts  '20. 15.  and  Ihe  next  day  we  came  to  M. 

17.  from  M.  he  sent  to  Ephesus  to  the  eldera 
MILLO. 

Judg.  9.  6.  all  the  house  ofM.  gathered  togcthei 

20.  but  if  not,  let  fire  devour  the  house  ot  M. 
2  Sam.  5.  9.  David  built  round  about  from  M. 

1  Kings  9.  15.  the  reason  of  the  levy  to  build  M. 
24.  then  did  Solomon  build  M.  11.  27. 

2  Kings  12.20.  they  slew  Joash  in  the  house  of  M. 
MIRIAM. 

Exod.  15.20.  M.  took  a  timbrel  in  her  hand 
JSTum.  12. 1.  M.  and  Aaron  spake  against  Moses 
10.  behold,  M.  became  leprous  white  as  snow 
15.M.was  shut  out  seven  days||20.1.]\I.died  Iher* 

26.  59.  to  .'Vmram  were  born  Aaron,  Mose»,  M. 
Dcul.  24.9.  remember  what  G.  did  to  M.by  the  way 
^/ic.6.  4. 1  sent  before  ihee  Moses,  Aaron,  and  M. 

MISHAEL. 

Exod.  6.22.  and  the  sons  of  Uz7iel,  M.  Elzaphaa 

and  Zithri,  Lev.  10.  4. 

A/*eA.8.4.on  Ezra's  left  hand  stood  M.  and  Hashum 

iion.l.e.  of  the  children  of  Judah,  M.and  Azariah 

MIZAR. 
fsai.  42.6.1  will  remember  thee  fiom  the  hill  ofM. 

MIZPAH. 
Gen.  31.  49.  the  name  of  the  heap  was  called  M. 
1  Kings  15.  22.  king  Asa  built  wiih  those  slonet 
Geha  of  Benjamin  and  M.  2  Chron.  16.  6. 
i  Kings  25.  23.  Ishmael  the  son  of  Ncthaniah 
came  to  Gedaliah  to  M.  .frr  41.  1. 
JVpA.  .3.  7.  the  men  of  Gibeon  and  M.  repaired 

15.  Shallum  ruler  of  M.  ||  19.  Ezer  ruler  of  M. 
Jcr.  40.  fi.  then  J(  reminh  went  to  Gedabah  lo  M. 

10.  as  for  me,  behold,  I  will  dwell  at  M. 
41.3.  Ishmael  slew  all  the  Jews  that  were  at  M. 
14.  Ishmael  had  carried  away  captive  from  M. 
Hos.  5.  1.  because  ye  have  been  a  snare  on  M. 

MIZPEH. 
.Tnsh.  15.  38.  Dilean  and  M.  cities  of  Judah 

18.  26.  M.  Chepbirah  cities  of  Benjainm 
.fudg.  10.  17.  Israel  assembled  and  encnm|>ed  in  M. 

11.  II.  Jephtlinh  uttered  all  his  words  in  M. 

20.  1.  Israel  was  gathered  lo  the  Lord  in  M. 

21.  .I.  that  came  not  up  lo  the  Lit.  to  M.  shall  die 
1  Sam.  7.  5.  Samuel  said,  gather  all  Israel  lo  M. 

6.  and  Samuel  judged  Israel  in  M.  16. 
10. 17.  Samuel  called  the  people  to  Ihe  Lord  loM. 

22.  3.  David  went  thence  lo  M.  of  Moab 
MNASO.V. 

Jlcts  21.  16.  they  bronchi  M.  an  old  disriple 
MOAB. 

Gen.  19.  37.  Lot's  eldest  dnughier's  son  was  M. 
3fi.  Xi.  smote  Midian  in  field  of  M.  1  Chron.  1.  46. 

Frnr/.I.'i.l.'i  trenil.ling shall  tnkehold  on  tuenof  M. 

JiTl/m.  21.  29.  wor  lo  ihee,  M.  .'t.  48.  4fi.  / 

'.'2.  3.  M.  was  sore  nOnid,  and  M.  »  as  disireMed 
24.  17.  a  sceptre  shall  smile  the  corners  ofM 
25. 1. people  pommUwhnredom  wi'h  dniisbl.  ofM 

Prut. 2.  IP.  Ihou  art  to  pass  Ihro'  the  rossl  ofM. 

34.  .">.  so  Moses  died  there  in  the  l.iiul  ofM. 
.tiidiT.  3.  29.  they  slew  ofM.  alio. it  10.0(10  moo 

30.PoM.  wassuh.l.ied  under  'he  band  nlUrtft 
10.  6.  Israel  served  tli«  gods  of  Syria  and  M. 


Proper  Nambs.]     MOS 

Judg.  11. 15.  Israel  took  not  away  the  land  of  M. 
Huth  1.  2.  Klimelech  came  into  lliecounlry  oI'M. 

4.  bis  sons  took  them  wives  of  the  women  of  M. 
1  Sam.  14.  47.  Saul  fought  against  M.  and  Amnion 
9Aom.  8.  2.  David  smoie  M.  and  measured  them 

23.  20.  lienaiah  slew  two  lion-like  men  of  M. 

1  Kings  11.7.  for  Chemosh  the  abomination  of  M. 
S  Kings  1.  1.  then  M.  rebelled  against  Israel 
3.  7.  wilt  thou  go  with  me  against  M.  to  battle? 

23.  the  kings  are  slain,  ihcret'ore  M.  to  the  spoil 

1  ClironA.'i.'i.  Saraph,  who  had  ilie  dominion  inM. 
18.  II.  the  silver  and  gold  he  brought  from  M. 

2  Cliron.  20.  1.  M.  came  against  Jehoshaphat 

10.  behold,  how  the  children  of  M.  reward  us 
AeA.  13.  23.  Jews  that  had  married  wives  of  M. 
Psal.  60.  8.  RI.  is  my  wash-pot,  108.  9. 

83.  6.  M.  is  confederate  against  thee 
ha.  11.  14.  they  shall  lay  their  hand  upon  M. 

15.  1.  the  burden  of  M.  Ar  of  M.  laid  waste,  16. 

13.  Jer.  48.  1.  Kiek.  25.  8.  Amos  2.  2. 

5.  my  heart  shall  cry  out  for  M.  his  fugitives 

16.  6.  we  have  heard  the  pride  of  M.  .Jer.  48.29. 

11.  my  bowels  shall  .sound  like  a  harp  for  M. 

14.  and  the  glory  of  M.  shall  be  contemned 
25.  10.  M.  shall  be  trodden  down  under  him 

Jer.  9.  20.  I  will  punish  Egypt,  Judah,  and  M. 
25.  21.  I  made  Edom  and  M.  to  drink  of  the  cup 
40.  11.  all  the  Jews  returned  from  M. 
48.  2.  there  shall  be  no  more  praise  of  M. 
9.  give  wings  to  M.that  it  may  flee  and  getaway 
11.  M.  hath  been  at  ease  from  his  youth 
90.  tell  ye  it  in  Arnon,  that  M.  is  sjioiled 

26.  M.  shall  wallow  in  his  vomit,  be  in  derision 
33.  joy  and  gladness  is  taken  from  the  land  of  M. 
39.  how  hath  M.  turned  the  back  with  shame! 
47.  yet  will  I  bring  again  the  captivity  of  M. 

Jimosi.  2.  but  I  will  send  afire  upoiiM.  and  devour 
ZepA.2.9.saith  the  Lord,surely  M.shall  be  as  Sodom 
See  Kino. 
MOABITE. 
Dent.  23.  3.  a  M.  shall  not  enter  into  tie  congre- 
gation to  tenth  generation,  jveA.  13.  1. 

1  Chron.  11.  4(>.  Ithmah  the  M.  a  valiant  man 

MOA  BITES. 
Ocn.  19.  37.  the  same  is  the  father  of  the  M. 
Deut.  2.  9.  the  Lord  said,  distress  not  the  M. 
Jndg.  3. 28.  the  Lord  hath  delivered  the  M.  to  you 

2  Sam.  8.  2.  so  the  M.  became  David's  servants 

and  brought  gifts,  1  Ckron.  18.  2. 
\  Kings  11.  1.  Solomon  loved  women  of  the  M. 

33.  they  worshipped  Chemosh  god  of  the  M. 
i  Kings  i.  18.  he  will  deliver  the  M.  into  your  hand 

24.  the  Israelites  rose  up  and  smote  the  M. 
13.  20.  the  bands  of  the  M.  invaded  the  land 

24.  2.  the  Lord  sent  against  him  bands  of  the  M. 
£ira9.  1.  according  to  the  abominations  of  the  M. 

MOABITESS,  See  Ruth. 

MOLECH. 

Lev.  18. 21 .  shalt  not  let  thy  seed  pass  thro'  fire  to  M. 

20.2.  whosoever  he  be  that  giveth  of  his  seed  loM. 

shall  surely  be  put  to  death,  3,  4.  Jer.  32.  35. 

1  Kings  11.  7.  Solomon  built  a  high  ])lace  for  M. 

2  Kings  23.10.no  man  make  his  son  pass  thro'  loM. 

MOLOCH. 
jJmos5.26.haveborne  the  tabernacleof  M.j9c/s7.43. 

MORDECAI. 
Ezra  2.  2.  M.  came  up  with  Zerubbabel,  JSTch.  7. 7. 
Esth.  2.  5.  there  was  a  Jew,  whose  name  was  M. 
19.  then  M.  sat  in  the  king's  gate,  21. 
22.  the  thing  was  known  to  M.  who  told  it 

3.  5.  when  Haman  saw  that  M.  bowed  not 

6.  for  they  had  shewed  him  the  people  of  M. 

4.  1.  M.  rent  his  clothes,  and  put  on  sackcloth 

9.  Hatacli  came  and  told  Esther  the  words  of  M. 

15.  Esther  bade  them  return  M  this  answer 
5.13.  so  long  as  I  see  M.  the  Jew  at  the  king's  gate 

H.gallowsmade,  thalM.  may  be  hanged  thereon 

6.  3.  what  honour  hath  been  done  to  M.  for  this? 

10.  make  haste,  and  do  even  so  to  M.  the  Jew 

7.  9.  the  gallows  which  Haman  had  made  for  M. 

8.  2.  the  king  took  off  his  ring  and  gave  it  to  M. 

Esther  set  M.  over  the  house  of  Haman 
15.  M.  went  out  from  the  king  in  royal  apparel 

9.  3.  because  the  fear  of  M.  fell  upon  them 

10.  3.  M.  the  Jew  was  next  to  king  Ahasueruj 

MORIAH. 

Gen.  22.  2.  and  get  thee  into  the  land  of  M. 

Ckr.  3.  1.  Solomon  built  the  house  of  Lord  in  M. 

MOSES. 

J';Tod.2.10.  Pharaoh'sdaughtercalledhis  name  M. 

14.  M.  feared,  and  said,  this  thing  is  known 

15.  Pharaoh  sought  to  slay  M.  but  M.  fled 

3.  4.  the  Lord  called  to  him  and  said,  M.  M. 

6.  M.  hid  his  face,  he  was  afraid  to  look  on  God 

4.  14.  the  Lord's  anger  was  kindled  against  M. 

27.  go  to  meet  M.  I|  11.  3.  M.  was  very  great 

5.  22.  M.  returned  unto  the  Lord  and  said 

8.  13.  accord,  to  word  of  M.  31. 1 9.  12,  35.  1 12. 35. 

10.  22.  M.  stretched  forth  his  hand  toward  heaven 

14.31.  people  believed  the  Lord  and  hii  servant  M. 

747 


MOS 

Eznd.  15.  24.  the  people  murmured  ag.  M.  17.  3. 
IC.  20.  notwithstanding  they  hearkened  not  to  M. 
17.4.M.cried  to  the  Lord  ||  b.M.did  so,JVum.l7.1). 

12.  M.  hands  were  heavy  ||  15.  M.  built  an  altar 
18.13.  M.  sat  to  judge  ||  19.  3.  M.weiit  upunio  God 
19. 8.  M.  returned  the  words  of  the  people  to  Lord 

20.  the  Lord  called  M.  up  to  mount  Sniai 
20.  21.  M.  drew  near  unto  the  thick  darkness 
24.  2.  M.  alone  shall  come  near  the  Lord 

4.  M.  wrote  all  the  words  of  the  Lord 

18.  and  M.  went  into  the  midst  of  the  cloud 

32.1.  as  for  M.  we  wot  not  what  become  of  him,  23. 
11. M. besought  the  Lord  ||19.M.anger  waxed  hot 

33.  9.  the  Lord  talked  with  M.  ||  34.  4.  M.  went  up 

34.  35.  M.  put  the  vail  upon  his  face  again 

39.  43.  M.  did  look  on  all  work  ;  M.  blesiied  them 

40.  35.  M.  was  not  able  to  enter  into  the  tent 
]^ev.  10. 16.  M.  sought  the  goat  of  the  sin-offering 

24.  11.  they  brought  the  blasphemer  to  M. 
J^um.  5.  4.  as  the  Lord  sjiake  lo  M.  so  did  Israel 

11.2.  the  people  cried  to  M.  and  M.  prayed  to  Lord 
10.  M.  heard  people  weep  through  iheir  families 

12.  2.  hath  the  Lord  indeed  spoken  only  by  M.  ? 
3.M.  was  very  meek  above  all  men  upon  the  earth 

7.  M.  is  not  so,  who  is  faithful  in  all  my  house 
14.  44.  ark  and  M.  departed  not  out  of  the  camp 

16.  4.  when  M.  heard  it,  he  fell  upon  his  face 

17.  7.  M.  laid  up  the  rods  before  the  Lord 

20.  3.  the  people  chode  wiih  M.  and  spake,  saying 

21.  5.  people  spake  against  God  and  against  M. 

9.  M.  made  a  serpent  of  brass  and  put  it  on  a  pole 

25. 6.  brought  a  Midianitish  woman  in  si^ht  of  M. 
31.  6.  M.  sent  them  to  the  war,  them  and  Phinehas 

14.  M.  was  wroth  with  the  ollicers  of  the  host 
33. 2.  M.  wrote  their  goings  out  by  command  Lord 
Deut.  27. 11.  M.  charged  the  people  the  same  day 
31.  9.  M.  wrote  this  law  and  delivered  it 

22.  M.  wrote  this  song,  and  taught  it  Israel 

33. 1. wherewith  M.  the  man  of  God  blessed  Israel 
34.  5.  M.  the  servant  of  the  Lord  died  there 

10.  not  a  prophet  since  in  Israel  like  to  M. 
Jush.\.i.a.a  I  was  with  M.so  I  will  be  with  thee,3.7. 

17.  as  we  hearkened  to  M.  so  will  we  to  thee 

4. 14.  the  people  feared  Joshua,  as  they  feared  M. 

14. 10.  ever  since  the  Lord  spake  this  word  to  M. 

11. 1  am  as  strong  as  I  was  in  the  day  M.  sent  me 

1  Kings  2.  3.  to  keep  his  commandments,  as  it  is 

written  in  the  law  of  M.  2  Kings  23.  25. 

2  Chron.  23. 18.  Eira'i.  2.  Dan.  9. 11, 13. 

Luke  24.  44.  1  Cur.  9.  9. 

8.  9.  save  the  two  tables  which  M.  put  there 

1  Chr.  23. 14.  now  concerning  M.  the  man  of  God 
26.  24.  the  son  of  M.  was  ruler  of  the  treasures 
Psal.  103.  7.  he  made  known  his  ways  unto  M. 

105.  26.  he  sent  M.  his  servant,  and  Aaron 

106.  10.  they  envied  M.  also  in  the  camp 

23.  had  not  M.  stood  before  him  in  the  breach 
32.  so  that  it  went  ill  with  M.  for  their  sakes 

/so.  63.  12.  that  led  them  by  the  right  hand  of  M. 
./er.  1.5. 1.  though  M.  and  Samuel  stood  before  me 
Mai.  4.  4.  remember  the  law  of  M.  my  servant 
Mat.  17.  3.  behold,  there  appeared  M.  and  Elias 
talking  with  him,  Mark  9.  4.  Luke  9.  30. 

4.  let  ue  make  one  tabernacle  for  M.  Mark  9.  5. 

19.7.  why  did  M.  then  command  to  give  a  writing? 

8.  M.  Buffered  you  to  put  away  your  wives,  but 

23.  2.  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  sit  in  M.  seat 
Mark  10.  3.  he  said,  what  did  M.  command  you? 

]2.19.M.wrote,if  a  man's  brother  die,  />MAe20.28. 
Luke  16.  29.  they  have  M.  and  the  prophets 

31.  if  they  hear  not  M.  and  the  prophets 

20. 37.  that  dead  are  raised  M.  shewed  at  the  bush 

24.  27.  beginning  at  M.  and  all  the  prophets 
John  l.n.law  was  given  by  M.  grace  by  Jes.  Christ 

45.  we  have  found  him  of  whom  M.  did  write 
3. 14.  as  M.  lifted  up  the  serpent  in  the  wilderness 
5.  45.  one  accuseth  you,  even  M.  in  whom  ye  trust 

40.  had  ye  believed  M.  ye  had  believed  me 
fi.  .32.  M.  gave  you  not  that  bread  from  heaven 
7. 19.  did  not  M.  give  you  the  law?  none  keepeth  it 

22.  not  because  it  is  of  M.  but  of  the  fathers 

23.  that  the  law  of  M.  should  not  be  broken 

9.  28.  thou  art  his  disciple,  we  are  M.  disciples 
29.  we  know  that  God  spake  unto  M. 

J]cl.s  3.  22.  for  M.  truly  said  unto  the  fathers 
6.11.  heard  him  speak  blasphem. words  agninstM. 
14.  change  the  customs  which  M.  delivered  us 
7.  20.  in  which  time  M.  was  born,  and  was  fair 

32.  then  M.  trembled  and  durst  not  behold 
3.5.  this  M.  whom  they  refused  did  God  send 
37.  this  is  that  M.  that  said  unto  Israel 

13.  39.  ye  could  not  be  justified  by  the  law  of  M. 
15. 1.  except  ye  be  circumcised  after  manner  of  M. 

5.  to  command  them  to  keep  the  law  of  M. 
21.  M   hath  io  every  city  them  that  preach  him 

21.  21.  thou  teachest  the  Jews  to  forsake  M. 
26.  22.  things  which  M.  did  say  should  come 
28.  23.  out  of  the  law  of  M.  and  the  prophets 
Rom.  5.  14.  death  reigned  from  Adam  lo  M. 

10.  5.  M.  describeth  the  righteousness  of  tha  law 


NAP 

1  Cor.  10.  2.  were  all  baptized  to  M.  in  the  cloud  . 

2  Cor.  3. 7.  Israel  could  not  behold  the  face  of  M. 
13.  not  as  M.  who  put  a  veil  over  his  face 

15.  when  M.  is  read,  the  veil  is  on  their  heart 

2  Tim.  3.  8.  as  Jannes  and  Janibres  withstood  M. 
Heb.'i.  2.  M.  was  faithful  in  all  his  house,  5. 
3.  was  counted  woiihy  of  moie  glory  than  M. 

16.  howbeit  not  all  that  came  out  of  Egypt  by  M. 
7.  14.  which  tribe  M.  spake  nothing  of  priesthood 
9.  19.  for  when  M.  had  spoken  every  precept 
10. 28.  that  despised  M.  law,  died  without  mercy 

under  two  or  three  witneiMsa 

11.  23.  by  faith  M.  was  hid  three  nionlhs 

24.  M.  refused  be  called  son  of  Pharaoh's  daugh. 

12.  21.  M.  said,  I  e.xceedingly  fear  and  quako 
Jtide  9.  he  disputed  about  the  boily  of  M. 

iiev.  1.5.  3.  they  sing  the  song  of  M.  and  the  Lamb 
See  Aakon,  Book,  Commanded,  Law. 
MYRA. 
Jlcts  27.  5.  we  came  to  M.  a  city  of  Lycia 

MYSIA. 
Jlcls  16.  7.  come  to  M.  ||  8.  they  passing  by  M. 

N. 

NAAMAN. 

Qen.  46.  21.  the  sons  of  Benjamin  ;  N.  and  RoM 

Jfum.  26.  40.  the  son  of  Bela,  N.  1  Chron.  8.  4. 

2  Kings  5.  1.  N.  captain  of  Syria  was  a  leper 
11.  but  N.  was  wroth  and  went  away,  and  said 
20.  my  master  hath  spared  N.  the  Syrian 
27.  the  leprosy  of  N.  shall  cleave  lo  thee 

Luke  4.  27.  and  none  was  clcan>cd,  saving  N. 
NAAMATHITE,  See  Zophar. 
NAASHON,  or  NASHON. 

Ezod.  6.  23.  Aaron  took  Elislieba  tiie  sister  of  N. 

JVum.  1.  7.  of  Judah,  prince  was  N.  2.  3.  )  10.  14. 

7.  12.  he  that  offered  the  first  day  was  N. 

17.  this  was  the  offering  of  N. son  of  Amminadab 
Ruth  4.  20.  Amminadab  begat  N.  and  N.  begat 

Salmon,  1  Chron.  2.  10,  11.  Mat.  1.  4. 
Luke  3.  32.  Salmon,  which  was  the  son  of  N. 

NABAL. 
1  Sam.  25.  3.  now  the  name  of  the  man  was  N. 
4.N.did  shear  his  sheep  1|  5.golo  N.and  greet  him 

25.  N.  is  his  name,  and  folly  is  with  him 

38.  that  the  Lord  smote  N.  that  he  died 

39.  Lord  hath  returned  the  wickedness  of  N. 
27.  3.  Abigail  N.  wife  30.  5.  2  Sam.  2.  2.  I  3.  3. 

N  A  BOTH. 

1  Kings  21.  1.  N.  the  Jezreelite  had  a  vineyard 
7.  1  will  give  thee  vineyard  of  N.  the  Jezreelite 
9.  set  N.  on  high,  12.  ||  14.  heard  N.  was  stoned 

16.  when  Ahab  heard  IhatN.  was  dead 

18.  behold,  Ahab  is  in  the  vineyard  of  N. 

19. in  the  place  where  dogs  licked  the  blood  of  N. 

2  Kings  9.  21.  they  met  him  in  ihe  portion  of  N. 

25.  cast  him  in  the  portion  of  the  field  of  N. 

26.  surely  I  have  seen  yeslenlay  the  blood  of  N. 

NADAB. 
£iorf.6.23.  the  sons  of  Aaron;  N.  Abihu,/-«».  10. 1. 
24.  1.  come  up,  N.  and  Abiliu,  seventy  elders,  9. 
^um.  3.  4.  N.  and  Abibu  died  before  Lord,  26.  61. 
1  Kings  14. 20.  N.  son  of  Jeroboam  reigned,  15.25. 
1  CAr.2.28.  N.sonofShammai  ||  30.  the  sons  of  N. 

8.  30.  Baal  and  N.  Ihe  sons  of  Gibeon,  9.  36. 

NAGGE. 
Luke  3.  25.  Esli,  which  was  the  son  of  N. 
NAHASH. 

1  Sam.  11.  1.  N.  came  up  against  Jabesh,  12.  12. 

2  Sam.  10.  2.  then  said  David,  I  will  shew  kindness 

to  Hanun  the  son  of  N.  1  Chron.  19.  2. 
17.  2.5.  went  in  to  Abigail  the  daughter  of  N. 

27.  Shobi  son  of  N.  brought  beds  and  basons 

NAHOR. 

Oen.  11.  22.  Serug  begat  N.  ||  29.  N.  wife  Milcnh 

24.  N.  lived  29  years,  begat  Terah,  1  CAr.  1.26. 

26.  Terah  begat  Abraham,  N.  and  Haran,  27. 

22.  20.  behold  Milcah,  she  hath  bnrn  children  to 

thy  brother  N.  23.  |  24.  15,  24. 

24. 10.  Abraham's  servant  went  lo  the  city  of  N. 

31.  53.  God  of  Abraham  and  N.  judge  betwixt  ua 

NAIN. 
Luke  7.  11.  Jesus  went  into  a  city  called  N. 

NAIOTH. 

1  Sam.19.18.  Samuel  and  David  dwelt  at  N.  19.  22, 

23.  Saul  went  lo  N.  ||  20.  1.  David  fled  from  N. 

NAO.MI. 

Ruth  1.  2.  the  name  of  Elimelech's  wife  was  N. 

19.  is  this  N.?  II  20.  call  me  not  N.  call  me  Mara 
2.  1.  N.  had  a  kinsman  of  her  husband's  Boaz 
4.  5.  what  day  thou  buyesi  the  field  of  land  of  N 

9.  that  I  have  bought  all  at  Ihe  hand  of  N. 

17.  the  women  said,  there  is  a  son  born  to  N. 

NAPHTALI. 
Oen.  30.  8.  and  Rachel  called  his  name  N. 
35.2.5.  sons  ofBilhnh  Rachel's  handmaid,  Dan,  N. 
4fi.  24.  sons  of  N.  JVhw.  1. 42. 1  26. 48.  1  CAr.  7. 13. 
40.21.  N.  is  a  hind  lat  loose,  he  gives  goodly  woidt 


NEB 

Kt»d.  1. 4.  the  sons  of  Israel ;  N.  Gad,  and  Asher 
JVttia-  !•  15.  of  N.  Aliira  wua  (irince,  'i.  tiU.  |  7.  7d. 
/)«u(.  27.  13.  un  mount  Ebiil  to  curgu;  Uan,  N. 

33.  23.  of  N.  lie  said,  O  N.  salUtivd  wiili  luvuur 
Josk.  10.  32.  tliu  sixtli  lot  came  uut  to  N. 

2(1.  7.  appuinlod  Kedesh  in  Galilee,  in  mdunl  N. 
Jad^.  1.  33.  nor  did  N.  drive  uut  the  inliiibiluntd 

4.  10.  Hatak  railed  Zebulun  and  N.  lo  Kudesh 

5.  18.  Zebuinn  and  N.  jeoparded  llieir  lives 
C.35.  Gideon  sent  messengers  lo  N.  and  tliey  came 
7.23.  Israelgatliercdtlienisejves together oulofN. 

1  Kings  4.  15.  Ahimaaz  was  ollicer  in  N. 

■  15.  20.  Ben-hadad  smote  N.  2  CArun.  ItJ.  4. 

2  Kings  \:>.  29.  curried  N.  captivo  to  Assyria 

1  C4r</n.  12.40.  N.  brouglit  bread  on  asses  and  mules 
27. 19.lhe  captain  ofN.  was  Joriinoth  son  of  Azriel 
SCAron.  34.  0.  Josiali  in  N.  brake  down  the  altars 
Psal.  6i.  27.  there  the  princes  otZebulun  and  N. 
Jsa.  9.  1.  ho  lightly  afflicted  the  land  ol'N. 
Ezek.  48.  3.  a  portion  lor  N.  ||  34.  one  gate  of  N. 
Mat.  4.  13.  he  dwelt  in  the  borders  ofN. 
15.  the  land  ofN.  by  the  way  of  the  sea 
Tribe  u/ti  Al'liTAU. 
•^um.  1.  43.  numbered  of  the  tribt  of  N.  53,400 

10.  27.  over  the  host  of  the  tribe  of  N.  Ahira 
13.  14.  of  the  tribe  of  N.  Nabbi  |1  34.  iW.  Tedahecl 

Josh.  19.  3'.t.  this  the  inheritance  of  the  tribe  of  N. 
21.  32.  cities  out  of  tribe  of  N.  1  Chrun.  ti.  62,  76. 

1  Kings  7.  14.  Iliram  a  widow's  son  ui  tribe  of  N. 
Rev.  7.  6.  of  Iho  tribe  of  N.  were  sealed  12,0110 

NATHAN. 

2  .Tarn.  5. 14.  son  ofDavid,  N.  ||  7.  2.  N.  the  prophet 
7. 17.go  di<l  N.  speak  ||  12.  l.the  Lord  sent  N.  25. 
23.  3ti.  Igal  son  ofN.  one  of  David's  worthies 

1  Kings  1.  10.  but  N.  the  prophet  he  called  not 
22.  while  the  talked  with  David,  N.  came  in 
34.  let  Zadok  and  N.  anoint  him  king  over  Urael 

4.  5.  Azariali  son  ofN.  was  over  the  officers 

1  Citron.  2. 36.  Artai  begat  N.  and  N.  begat  Zabad 

11.  38.  Joel  the  brother  ofN.  a  valiant  man 
29.  29.  David's  acts  written  in  the  book  ofN. 

8  Chron.  9. 29.  acts  of  Solomon  in  the  book  ofN. 
Ezra  8.  16.  I  sent  from  Abava  for  N.  and  Ariel 
10.  39.  Slieliiniah,  N.  had  taken  si.an^e  wives 
Zech.  12.  12.  the  family  of  the  house  ofN.  apart 
L,itkc  3.  31.  Mattaiha,  which  was  the  son  ofN. 

NATIIANAEL. 
John  1.  45.  Philip  findeth  N.  ||  21.2.  N.  of  Cana 

NAUM. 
Luke  3.  25.  Amos,  which  was  the  son  ofN. 

NAZARENE. 
Mat.Q.  23.  by  the  prophet,  he  shall  be  called  a  N. 

NAZARENES. 
JlcU  24.  5.  a  ring-leader  of  the  sect  of  the  N. 

NAZARETH. 
Mat.  2.  23.  Joseph  dwelt  in  a  city  called  N. 
21.  11.  this  is  Jesus  of  N.  Mark  1.  24.  I  10.  47. 
Luke  4.  34.  |  18.  37.  \  24.  19. 
Mark  14.  67.  thou  wast  also  with  Jesus  of  N. 
16.  6.  be  not  afTrighled,  ye  seek  Jesus  ofN. 
J^uke  1.  20.  the  angel  Gabriel  was  sent  to  N. 
2.  51.  Jesus  came  to  N.  and  was  subject,  4.  16. 
John  1.  45.  Jesus  of  N.  18.  5,  7.  1  19.  19.  Jlcts  2. 
22.  I  4.  10.  1  6.  14.  I  22.  8. 
46.  can  there  any  good  thing  come  out  of^.? 
Jets  3.  6.  in  the  name  of  Jesus  ofN.  rise  up 
10. 38.  how  God  anointed  Jesus  of  N.  with  power 
26.  9.  things  contrary  to  the  name  of  Jesus  ofN. 

NEAPOEIS. 
JlcLs  10.  11.  and  the  next  day  we  came  to  N. 

NEBAIOTH. 

Oen.  25. 13.  the  son  of  Ishmael,  N.  1  Chron.  1.  29. 

Jsa.  CO.  7.  the  rums  ofN.  shall  minister  to  thee 

NEBAT,  .<fee  Jeruooam. 

NEBO. 

JWm.  32.  3.  EInalah  and  N.  is  a  land  for  cattle 

38.  the  children  of  Reuben  built  N. 
Deut.  32.  49.  L'et  thee  up  unto  mount  N.  34.  1. 
1  Chron.  5.  H.  Bcla  dwelt  in  Aroer,  even  unto  N. 
Ezra  2.  29.  the  children  ofN.  10.  43. 
JVeA.  7.  33.  the  men  of  the  other  N.  fifiy-lwo 
Jta.  15-  2.  Monb  shall  howl  over  N.  and  Medoba 
46.  ].  N.  sinopi'ih  II  .hr.  48.  1.  woe  unto  N. 
Jer.  48.  22.  juilfmirii  in  conic  upon  Dibon  and  N. 
NEBL'CIIA1).M//.ZAK,  NEBUCHAD- 
REZZAR. 
S  Kings  "iA.  1.  inhisdnys  N.  iiiine  iipagninst  .loru- 
salnni,  25. 1.2  Chron.  36. 6.  .hr.  39.  1. 1  52.  4. 

05.  22.  ns  for  the  people  whom  N.  had  loft 

1  Chron.fi.  15.  when  the  I.onl  carried  away  Jndnh 

by  N.  .frr.  24.  1.  |  29.  I.  j  52.  28. 

Etra  1.  7.  Cyrin  brought  forth  the  vessels  which 

N.  had  tiiken  out  of  Ji.'riisah'm,  .5.  14.  |  6.  5. 

Jrr.  21.  8.  the  kinsdom  which  will  not  serve  N. 

28.  Uneven  so  will  I  break  the  yoke  ofN. 
14.  that  they  mny  serve  N.  kinir  ofniibylon 

29.  21.  I  will  deliver  thoni  into  the  hand  ofN. 
32.  4"'.  I  will  givo  this  city  into  the  hand  ofN. 
39.  11.  N.  gave  chnree  concerning  Jeremiah 

43.  10.  beliold,  I  will  taku  N.  my  ssoant  and  sot 
7i8 


NO 

Jer.  49.  28.  N.  king  of  Babylon  shall  smite  Kedar 
5U.  17.  and  last  this  N.  hath  broken  his  bones 
51.  34.  N.  huth  devoured  me,  he  hath  crushed  me 

Ezek.26.1.l  will  bring  onTyrus  N.  a  king  of  kings 
29.  19.  I  will  give  the  land  of  Egypt  lo  N.30.  10. 

Dan.  "2. 1.  N.  dreamed  ||  4.37. 1  N.  praise  and  extol 

3.  1.  N.  the  king  made  an  image  of  gold 

19.  N.  was  full  of  fury  ||  24.  N.  was  astonished 

4.  28.  all  this  came  upon  the  king  N.  33. 

34.  atendof  days  IN.  lift  upmineeyes  to  heaven 

5.  18.  the  most  high  God  gave  N.  a  kingdom 

NEBUZAR-ADAN. 
2A'i;in-s25.8.N.captainofguaidcametoJerusalcm 
Jer.  39.  10.  N.  left  of  the  poor  of  the  people 
NEHELAMITE,  See  SutMAi.\ii. 
NEHEMIAH. 
Ezra  2.  2.  N.  came  with  Zcruhbabel,  JVcA.  7.  7. 
jVch.  1.  1.  the  words  of  N.  the  son  of  llachallah 
3.  16.  N.  son  of  Azbuk  repaired  after  Shallum 
8.  9.  N.  which  is  the  Tirshatha,  10.  1. 
12.  47.  Israel  in  the  days  ofN.  gave  portions 
NEHUSIITAN. 
2  Kings  18.  4.  he  called  the  brasen  scriicnt  N. 
NER. 

1  Chron.  8.  33.  and  N.  begat  Kish,  9.  36,  30. 

See  Abnkr. 
NEREUS. 
Rom.  16.  15.  salute  Julia,  N.  and  his  sister 
NERGAL. 

2  Kings  17.30.  thcmenof  Cuth  made  N.  their  god 

NERAIAH,  .^ec  Baruch 
NETHANEEL. 
J^um.  1. 8.  N.  the  son  of  Zuar  was  prince  of  Issa- 
char,  2.  5.  |  7.  18,  2;i.  |  10.  15. 

1  Chron.  2.  14.  N.  the  fourth  son  of  Jesse 
15.  24.  N.  and  Ainaeai  blew  with  trumpets 

24.  6.  the  son  ofN.  the  scribe,  one  of  the  Levites 
26.  4.  the  sons  of  Obed-edom,  Joah  and  N. 

2  Chron.  17.  7.  Jehoshaphat  sent  N.  to  teach 
35.9.  N-  gave  to  the  Levites  for  passover-ollcrings 

Ezra  10.  22.  Ishniael,  N.  had  taken  strange  wives 

JVfA.  12.  21.  in  days  of  Joiakim  N.  was  priest 

36.  Maai  and  N.  with  the  musical  instruments 

NETIIANIAH. 

2/rinn-s 25.23.  Ishmael  son  of  N.2.3.  Jcr.H).8.  \  41. 1. 

1  Chrun.  25.  2.  the  sons  of  Asaph,  Joseph  and  N. 
12.  fifth  lot  came  forth  to  N.  he,  his  sons  twelve 

2  Chron.  17.  8.  he  sent  Levites  to  teach,  even  N. 
./cr.  .36.  14.  princes  sent  the  son  ofN.  lo  Baruch 

41.  2.  Ishmael  the  son  of  N.  slew  Gedaliah 
15.  but  Ishmael  son  of  N.  escaped  from  Johanan 
NETHINIMS. 

1  Chron.  9.  2.  the  first  inhabitants  were  the  N. 
Ezra  2.  43.  the  N.  went  up  with  Zerubbabel 

58.  all  the  N.  and  the  children  of  Solomon's  ser- 
vants were  392,  J^ek.  7.  60. 

7.  7.  some  of  the  N.  went  to  Jerusalem 

24.  it  shall  not  be  lawful  to  impose  toll  on  the  N. 

8.  17.  what  to  say  to  Iddo  and  brethren  the  N. 

20.  the  N.  whom  David  appointed  for  service 
J\VA.  .3.  26.  the  N.  dwelt  in  Ophel,  11.  21. 

10.  28.  the  N.  had  separated  from  the  people 

11.  21.  Ziha  and  Gispa  were  over  the  N. 

NIUANOR. 
.^cts  6.  5.  tliey  chose  Stephen,  Philip  and  N. 

NICODEMUS. 
./■«/(«  3.  1.  N.  a  ruler  of  the  Jews  came  to  Jesus 
7.  50.  N.  came  to  Jesus  by  night,  19.  39. 

NICOLAITANS. 
Rev.  2.  6.  that  thou  halest  the  deeds  of  the  N. 
15.  hast  them  that  hold  the  doctrine  of  the  N. 
NICAPOLIS. 
7Vt.  3.  12.  be  diligent  to  come  unto  me  to  N. 

NIGER. 
.^cts  13.  1.  at  Antioch,  Simeon  who  was  called  N. 

NIMROI). 
Gen.  10.  8.  Cush  begat  N.  1  Chron.  1.  10. 

9.  as  N.  the  miglily  hunter  before  the  Lord 

Mic.  5. 6.  they  shall  waste  lainl  of  .Assyria  and  N. 

Nl.MSHI,  .<?/(•  Jtiiu. 

NINEVEH. 

r/rn.  10.  11.  Ashur  went  and  buildcd  N. 

2  A'lru'.'i  19.:i6.  Sennacherib  dwelt  at  N.  [sa.  37. 37. 
.foniih  1 .2.gn  to  N.3.2.  ||  4.1 1.  should  not  I  spare  N.? 

3.  3.  now  N.  was  an  exreeiling  great  city  ^ 

.VoA.  1.  1.  Iho  burden  ofN.  ||  2.  8.  .\.  is  like  a  pool 
3.  7.  N.  is  laid  waste,  who  will  bemoan  her? 
Zrph.  2.  13.  he  will  make  N.  a  desolation,  and  dry 
Mat.  12.  41. the  men  ofN.  shall  rise  upinjudgmeiil 
and  condemn  this  generation,  Luke  11.32. 
NINEVITES. 
Luke  11.  30.  OS  Jonas  was  a  sign  unto  the  N. 

NISAN. 
J\r,h.1.\.  in  the  month  N.  ||  f:w/(.3.7.  first  month  N. 

NI9R<1CII. 

2  Kings  10.37.a»  ho  was  worshipping  in  Iho  house  of 

N.liisgod,  was  smote  with  the  sword,  /ia.  37.38. 

NO. 

.Jrr.  46.2.';.  I  will  punish  N.  F.zck.  30.  14,  1.1,  16. 

A'uA.  3.  8.  art  thou  better  than  pupuluui  N.l 


OMR     IPRorcKNAJin 

NOADIAH. 

Ezra  8.  33.  N.  the  son  of  Binnui,  a  Lcvile 
jVeh.  6.  14.  my  God,  think  on  the  pro|:hele8s  N 

NOAH.NOE. 

Gen.  5.  29.  N.  saying,  this  same  shall  comfort  iw 

30.  Lainech  begat  N.  ||  6.  8.  N.  found  grace 

6.  9.  these  arc  the  generations  of  N.  10.  1,32 

1  Ckr.  1.  4. 

7.  2:1.  N.  only  remained  alive,  and  thev  in  the  ark 

8.  1.  God  remembered  N.  and  every  fiving  thing 
6.  N.  o|>ened  the  window  of  the  ark  he  had  made 
20.  JV.  budded  an  altar  to  the  Lord,  and  oflTcred 

!).  24.  N.  awoke  from  his  u  ine  ||  29.  the  days  ofN. 
Isa.  54.  9.  this  is  as  the  waters  ofN.  unto  me 
/;:eA.14.14.  though  these  three,  N.  Daniel,  Job,  20. 
.^tal.  24. 37.  as  it  was  in  ihe  days  of  .\.  Luke  17.  26. 
J.uke  3.  36.  Sliem,  which  was  the  son  of  N. 
Hrb.  11.  7.  by  faith  N.  being  warned  of  God 

1  Pit,  3.  20   when  God  wailed  in  the  days  ofN. 

2  Ptt.  2.  5.  God  spared  not  old  world,  but  saved  N 

NOAH. 
JVum.2C.33.lhe  names  of  the  daughters  of  Zelophe- 
had  were  N.  Tirzah,  27.  1.  j  36.  IL 
Josh.  17.  3. 
NOB. 
1  Sam.  21.  1.  David  came  to  N.  to  Ahlmclech 
22.9.I)oeg  said,  1  saw  Ihe  son  of  Jesse  coming  to  N 
11.  the  king  sent  to  call  the  priests  in  N. 
in.  Doeg  smote  N.  the  city  of  the  priests 
A*cA.  1 1.  .32.  the  children  of  Benjamin  dwelt  at  N. 
Isa.  10.  32.  as  yet  shall  he  remain  at  N.  that  day 

NOPH. 

Isa.  19.  13.  the  princes  ofN.  arc  deceived 

.Jer.  2. 16.  the  children  ofN.  have  broken  the  crown 

46.  14.  publish  in  N.  jj  19.  for  N.  shall  be  waste 

Ezek.  30. 13.  will  cause  their  images  to  cease  out  N 

16.  and  N.  shall  have  dislressLS  daily 

NUN,  See  JosnfA. 

NYMPHAS. 

Col.  4.  15.  salute  N.  and  the  church  in  his  houM 

o. 


OBADIAH. 

1  Kings  18. 3.  A  hab  called  O.  no w  O.  feared  the  Ld. 
4.  O.  took  a  hundred  prophets  and  hid  them 
7.  as  O.  was  in  the  way,  heboid  Elijah  met  him 
16.  so  O.  went  to  meet  .\hab,  and  told  him 

1  Chr.  3.  21.  sons  of  O.  ||  27. 19.  Ishmaiah  son  of  O. 
7.  3.  son  of  Izraiah,  O.  ||S.  38.  son  of  Azel,  9.  44. 
9.  16.  O.  the  son  of  Shemaiah,  the  son  of  Galai 

12.  9.  of  Gadites  men  of  might,  O.  the  second 

2  Chr.  17.  7.  he  sent  to  his  princes,  to  O.  to  teach 
.34.  12.  the  overseers  were  Jabath  and  O. 

Ezra  8.  9.  O.  son  of  Jehiel  went  up  with  Ezra 
JVch.  10.  5.  C).  sealed  ||  12.  25.  O.  was  a  porter 
Obad.  1.  the  vision  of  O.  thus  sailli  Ihe  Lord 

OBED. 
[iuih  4.  17.  and  they  called  his  name  O. 
21.  Boaz  begat  O.  1  Chron.  2.  12.  Mat.  I.  5. 

1  CAron.  2.  .37.  Ephlal  begat  O.  ||  26.  7.  Shemaiah 
II.  47.  O.  one  of  David's  valiant  men 

2  C'AroH.23.1.  look  Azariahson  of  O.  into  covenant 
jMkc  3.  32.  Jesse,  which  wns  the  son  of  O. 

OBEDEDOM. 

2  Sam. 6. 10.  David  carried  the  ark  into  the  house 

of  O.  11.  1  Chrun.  13.  1.3,  14. 

ll.thcL.blesscdthehou.seofO.  12.  ICAr.  13. 14. 

12.  David  brought  the  ark  from  house  of  O.  into 

Ihe  cilv  ofDavid  with  gladness,  1  Chr.  15.25. 

1  CAron.  15  18.  O.  a  porter,  24.  ||  21.  O.  with  harp 
16.  5.  O.  and  Jciel  with  psalteries  and  harps 

38.  O.  with  their  brethren,  O.  also  son  of  Jcdu- 
thiin,  and  Ilosah,  to  be  porters 

26.  4.  sons  of  O.  8.  ||  «.  sons  of  O.  fit  for  scrvic* 
15.  the  lot  southward  fell  lo  O.  and  his  sons 

2  CAroH.25.24.Joashlo(di  the  vessels  found  with  O. 

OCRAN,  See  Paoiel. 

ODED. 

2CAr. 15.1.  Spirit  of  God  came  on  .Aznriah  son  of  O. 

28.  9.  a  prophet  of  the  Lord  was  there,  called  O. 

OG. 
Drut  31 .4.  the  Lord  shall  ilo  lo  them  as  he  did  to  O. 
./n«A.2.  10.  for  we  hove  heaid  what  yon  did  lo  O. 

13.  31.  the  cities  of  O.  porlnining  lo  Mnchir 

1  Kings  4.  19.  Gcbor  was  in  Ihe  country  of  O. 

See  BasiiaN. 

OLYMPAS. 

/2om.l6.15.sn1utn  Julia,  O.and  all  s-iinis  with  them 

O.MEGA,  See  .Ai-rii*,  in  .ippcltativit. 

O.MR  I. 

1  Kings  16.  16,  wherefore  all  Israel  made  O.  kinf 
21.  half  followed  O.  ||  2.'5.  bin  O.  wrought  evil 
30.  Ahahson  of  O.  did  evil  in  the  sicht  of  the  Ld. 

2  A-in^r;,8.26.  AlhaIi«hdaughleror0.2rAr.22.2. 
I  Chr.  7.  8.  O.  son  of  Beelwr  ||  9.  4.  O.  son  of  Iinr' 

27.  18.  O.  son  of Michoel,  ruler  of Issa.lmr 
jVit.6. 16.  forlhcititnteiiofO.nrckept,  and  nil  Iha 

wwiLs  ttf  tlio  house  of  Ahab 


rswBR  nauis.    Pat 

ON. 

Oen.  41.  45.  Poti-pliciali  priest  of  O.  50.  \  46.  20. 
JVum.  16.  1.  O.  the  son  ot  Telulh  took  men 

ON.\N. 
Oen.  38.  4.  she  bare  a  son  and  called  liis  name  O. 

9.  O.  knew  that  the  seed  should  not  be  his 
46.Ii8oii8of  Judah,  Er,O..Vu7n.'26.19.  iair.-2:S. 
£r  andO.diedin  the  land  ul'Canuan,A*uni.^.lU. 
ONESIMU.;. 
Col.  4.  9.  O.  a  faitlilul  and  beloved  brother 
Pfiilem.  10.  1  beseech  thee  lor  my  son  O. 

ONK^SIPHOKUS. 
2  Tim.  1. 16.  Lord  give  mercy  to  the  liousc  of  O. 
4.  19.  salute  Aquila  and  the  household  of  O. 
Ol'HEL. 
2CAr.  27.  3.  Jotham  built  much  on  the  wall  of  O 
33.14.Manasseh  compassed  about  U.  and  raised  it 
JVcA.  3.  26.  the  Netbinims  dwelt  in  O.  11.  21. 
27.  the  Tekoiies  repaired  to  the  wall  of  O. 
Ol'llIR. 
Gm.  10.  29.  Joktan  begat  O.  1  Ckroti.  1.  23. 
IKinffs  9.2S.tliey  came  to  O.and  fetch.from  thence 
gold,  and  brought  to  Solomon,  2CAr.8.18.  j  9.10. 
lU.lI. brought  from  O.  great  plenty  of  almug-trees 
22.48.Jehoshaphat  made  ships  logo  toO.  for  gold 
1  Chron.  29.  4.  given  3000  talents  of  gold  of  O. 
^oA22. 24.  ihnu  shall  lay  up  the  gold  ofO.  asstones 
28.  16.  wisdom  not  valued  with  the  gold  of  O. 
Psal.  45.  9.  did  stand  the  queen  in  gold  of  O. 
Jsa.  13.12.  a  man  more  jirecious  than  wedge  of  O 

OREB. 
Jurfu-.7.25.they  slew  princes  of  Midian,Zeeb,0.8.3. 
Psal.  83.  Jl.  make  their  nobles  like  O.  and  Zeeb 
Jga.  10.  26.  slaughter  of  Midian  at  Ihe  rock  of  O, 

OE10i\. 
Job  9.  9.  who  niaketh  O.  and  Pleiades,  ^mo«  5.  8. 
38.  31.  or  canst  ibou  loose  the  hands  of  O.I 
OKNAN. 
1  Chron.  21.  15.  the  threshing-floor  of  0.18.  28. 
20.  and  O.  turned  back,  and  saw  the  angel 
25.  David  gave  to  O.  for  the  place  600  shekels 
ORPAH. 
Ruth  1,  4.  the  name  of  the  one  was  O.  other  Ruth 

14.  O.  kissed  iS'aomi,  but  Ruih  clave  to  her 
_  OSHEA,  5ee  Joshua. 

OTHNIEL. 
Josh.  15.  17.  O.  son  of  Kenaz  took  it,  Judg.  1. 13. 
Judg.  3. 0.  Lord  raised  a  deliverer,  O.  I]  11.  O.  died 
1  Chr.  4. 13.  sons  of  Kenaz,  O.  Seraiab,6onsof  O. 
27. 15,  the  twelfth  captain  was  Heldai  of  O. 

OZEM. 
i  Chron.  2.  15.  O.  was  the  si.xth  son  of  Jesse 

OZIAS. 
JWat.  1.  8.  Joram  begat  O.  ||  9.  O.  begat  Joatham 


P. 


PAARAL 

2  Sam.  23.  35.  P.  the  Arbite,  a  mighty  man 

PADAN-ARAM. 

Gen.  25.  20.  Rebekah  daughter  of  Bethuel  of  P. 

28.  6.  Isaac  sent  Jacob  away  to  P.  to  take  a  wife 

7.  Jacob  obeyed  nis  father,  and  was  gone  to  P. 

31. 18.  he  carried  away  what  be  had  gotten  in  P. 

35. 9.  G.  appeared  to  Jacob  when  he  came  from  P. 

26.  sons  which  were  born  to  him  in  P.  46.  15. 

PAGIEL. 

J^um.  1. 13.  P.  son  of  Ocran,  prince  of  Asher,  7.  72. 

PALESTINA. 
iSjorf.  15. 14.  sorrow  shall  take  hold  on  men  of  P. 
Jsa.  14.  29.  rejoice  not,  thou  whole  P.  because 
31.  cry,  O  city,  ihoii  whole  P.  art  dissolved 
PAMPHYLIA. 
•^cis  13. 13.  Paul  came  from  Paphoe  to  Perga  in  P. 
15.  38.  John  departed  from  them  from  P. 
27.  5.  when  he  bad  saileil  over  the  sea  of  P. 

PAPHCS. 
.^cts  13.  6.  when  they  had  gone  thro'  the  isle  to  P. 

PARAN. 

Gen.  21.  21.  Ishmael  dwelt  in  the  wilderness  of  P. 

JViim.  10.  12.  1 12. 16.  1 13. 3, 26.  1  .Sam.  25.  1. 

Deut.  33.  2.  the  T^ord  shined  forth  from  mount  P. 

Hab.2.2.  fromTeman,  the  billy  One  came  from  P. 

PARBAR. 
1  CAr.  26.  18.  porters,  fi.nr  at  the  causey,  two  at  P. 

PA  RM  EN  AS. 
.Octs  6.  5.  they  chose  Timon,  P.  and  Nicolas 

PARTHIANS. 
Acts  2.9.  P.  wc  hear  Ihcm  speak  in  our  tongues 

PASIIUR. 
1  Ckron.  9. 12.  P.  the  son  of  Malchiiah,  Jfth.  11. 12. 
Ezra  2.  38.  tho  children  of  P.  10.  22.  jV<7t.  7.  41. 
AVA.10.3.  P.  sealed  ||  ./<^.20. 6.  P.  go  into  captivity 
Jcr.  20. 1.  P.  the  son  of  Imnier  smote  Jeremiah, 2. 

3.Ld. called  not  thy  name  P.  but  Magor-missabih 
21.  1.  when  king  Zedekiab  sent  unto  him  P. 
38.1 .  Gedaliah  the  eon  of  P.  and  P.  the  son  of  Mal- 
chiah  heard  the  words  Jeremiah  had  spoken 
PATRA. 
Acts  21. 1.  and  from  Rhodes  we  came  uoto  P. 
749 


PER 

PATHROS. 
As/1.11.11,  to  recover  remnant  of  his  people  from  P. 
Ezek.  29.  14.  cause  them  return  into  the  land  of  P 
30.14.will  make  P.  desolate,  I  will  set  6re  in  Zoaii 

PATMOS. 
Ret.  1.  9.  I  was  in  the  isle  thai  is  called  P. 

PAUL. 

Acts  13.9.then  Saul, called  P.filled  with  IIolyGhost 
43.  many  Jews  and  relig.  proselytes  followed  P 
40.  P.  waxed  bold  |{  14.  9.  the  same  heard  P. 
50.  Jews  raised  persecution  ag.  P.  and  Barnabas 

14.  12.  called  P.  Mercurius,  he  was  chief  speaker 
19.  having  stone.l  P.  drew  him  out  of  the  ciiy 

15.  38.  P.  thought  not  good  to  take  him  with  them 
40.P.choseSila8||17.10.bretbren8ent  P.away,14. 

16.  3.  hira  would  P.  have  to  go  forth  with  ban 
9.  and  a  vision  appeared  to  P.  in  the  night 

14.  Lydia  attended  to  the  things  spoken  of  P. 

17.  followed  P.  II  18.  but  P.  being  grieved 

25.  P.  and  Silas  |irayed,  and  sang  prai.~es  to  God 

28.  but  P.  cried,  saying,  do  thyself  no  harm 

17.  2.  P.  as  his  manner  was,  went  in  unto  them 
4.  some  believed  and  consorted  with  P.  and  Silas 

16.  now  while  P.  waited  for  them  at  Athens 
18.5.  P.  was  pressed  in  spirit,  and  testified  to  Jews 

9.  the  Lord  spake  to  P.  in  the  night  by  a  vision 

19.  11.  God  wrought  miracles  by  the  hands  of  P. 

15.  P.  I  know  II  23.  11.  be  of  good  cheer,  P. 
21.  P.  purposed  in  spirit  to  go  to  Jerusalem 

26.  this  P.  hath  persuaded  and  turned  away 

20.  7.  P.  preached  unto  them,  ready  to  depart 

10.  P.  went  down,  and  embracing  him,  said 
37.  they  all  wept  sore,  and  fell  on  P.  neck 

21.  4.  who  said  to  P.  through  the  Spirit,  not  go  up 

11.  Agabus  took  P.  girdle  and  bound  his  hands 

18.  the  day  following  P.  went  in  unto  James 

30.  they  took  P.  and  drew  him  out  of  the  temple 

32.  when  they  saw  soldiers,  they  left  beating  P. 
40.  P.  stood  on  the  stairs  ||  23.  1.  P.  beholding 

23.  10.  fearing  lest  P.  should  have  been  pulled 

12.  they  would  not  eat  till  they  had  killed  P.  14. 
18.  P.  prayed  me  to  bring  this  young  man  to  thee 

31.  the  soldiers  brought  P.  to  Antipatris 

24.  1.  who  informed  the  governor  against  P. 

26.  that  money  should  have  been  given  him  of  P. 

27.  Felix  left  P.  bound  i|  2T.24.saying,  fear  not,  P. 

25.  19.  one  Jesus,  whom  P.  affirmed  to  be  alive 

26.  24.  Festus  said,  P.  thou  art  beside  thyself 

27.  3.  and  Julius  courteously  entreated  P. 

33.  P.  besought  them  all  to  take  meat,  saying 
43.  the  centurion,  willing  to  save  P.  kept  them 

28. 16.  but  P.  was  sutfered  to  dwell  by  himself 
1  Cor.  1.12.  I  am  of  P.  3. 4.  II  ,^5.  whothenisP.I 

13.  is  Christ  divided?  was  P.  crucified  for  you? 

3.  22.  whether  P.  or  Apollos,  or  Cephas,  or  world 
16.  21.  the  salutation  of  me  P.  with  mine  own 

hand.  Col.  4.  18.  2  Thess.  3.  17. 

1  TAes»-.2.18.we  would  have  come  to  you,  even  I  P. 
Philem.  9.  being  such  a  one  as  P.  the  aged 

2  Pet.  3.  15.  as  our  beloved  brother  P.  wrote 

PAULUS. 
./?cfil3.7.a  JewBarjesue  with  thedeputySergiusP. 

PEKAH. 
^  Kings  15.  25.  P.  conspired  against  Pekahiah 

29.  HI  the  days  of  P.  came  Tiglath-pilcser 

30.  Hoshea  made  a  conspiracy  against  P. 
.37.against  Judah  came  P.  son  of  Remaliah,16.5. 

2  Chron.  28. 6.  P.  slew  in  Judah  120,000  in  one  day 
Isa.  7.  1.  Rezin  and  P.  went  toward  Jerusalem 

PEKAHIAH. 
IKings  15. 22.  P.  the  son  of  Menahem  reigned,  23. 

PELATIAH. 
1  CAroTi.  3.  21.  the  son  ofHananiali,  P.  of  Judah 

4.  42.  of  Simeon,  hnving  for  their  captain  P. 
.N'eh.  10.  22.  P.  and  Hanan  sealed  the  covenant 
Eiek.  11.  13.  that  P.  the  sonof  Benaiah  died 

PENIEL. 
Gen.  32.  30.  Jacob  called  the  name  of  the  place  P. 

PENUEL. 
Gen.  32.  31.  as  Jacob  passed  over  P.  he  halted 
.Judg.  8. 8.  Gideon  went  up  thence  to  P.  and  spake 

17.  he  beat  down  the  tower  of  P.  and  slew  men 
1  Kings  12.  25.  then  Jeroboam  went  and  built  P. 
1  Chron.  4.  4.  P.  Ihe  father  of  Gcdor,  and  Ezcr 

8.  25.  Iphcdeiah  and  P.  the  sons  of  Shashak 

PEOR. 
^Tum.  23.  28.  Balak  brought  Balaam  to  top  of  P. 
25.  18.  beguiled  you  in  the  matter  of  P.  31.  16. 
.Josh.  22. 17.  is  the  iniquitv  of  P.  too  little  for  us? 

PERGA. 
.Sets  1.3.  13.  Paul  and  his  company  camp  to  P. 
14.  25.  when  they  had  preached  the  word  in  P. 

PERGAMOS. 
Rrv.  1.  11.  send  it  to  P.  andThyatira,  and  Sardis 
2.  12.  to  the  angel  of  the  churcii  in  P.  write 

PERIZZITE. 
Gtn.  13.  7.  the  P.  dwellt^d  then  in  the  land 
Ezod.  .33.  2.  and  I  will  drive  out  the  P.  34.  II. 
.Josh.  9.  1.  when  the  P.  and  Ilivite  heard  thereof 
11.  3.  Jabin  sent  to  the  P.  and  the  Jcbusite 


PHA 

PERIZZITES. 
Gen.  15. 20. 1  have  given  to  thy  seed  tho  lant"  of  th« 
P.  Lord  made  a  covenant,  f.'iwrf.S.  8,17.  |  23.23L 
34.  30.  to  make  me  to  stink  among  the  P. 
Jcu.A.17.15.  cut  down  the  wood  in  the  land  of  the  P. 
Judg.  1.  4.  the  Lord  delivered  the  P.  to  Judah,  5 

3.  5.  the  children  of  Israel  dwelt  among  the  P. 

2  Chron.  8.  7.  Solomon  made  tho  P.  to  pay  tribute 

Ezra  9.  1.  doing  according  to  abominalions  of  P. 
PERSIA. 

1  Chron.  36.  20.  till  the  reign  of  the  kingdom  of  P. 

J.slk.  1.  3.  a  feast  to  the  power  of  P.  and  Mediu 
14.  the  seven  princes  of  P.  which  saw  the  king 
18.  the  ladies  of  P.  shall  ^ly  to  the  princes 

Ezek.^.  10.  they  of  P.  and  Lud  were  in  thy  army 
38.5.P.Ethiopia,and  Libya  with  them,  with  shield 

Dan.  8.  'iO.  two  liorns  are  kings  of  -Media  and  P. 

10.  13.  but  the  prince  of  P.  withstood  me  twenty- 
one  days ;  and  I  remained  with  the  kings  of  P 

20.  1  will  return  to  fight  with  the  printe  of  P. 

11.  2.  there  shall  stand  up  yet  three  kings  in  P. 

See  Kino. 

PERSIANS,  .SeeMKDES. 

PERSIS. 

Jiom.  10. 12.  salute  P.  which  laboured  much  in  L<L 

PETER. 
J/«£.14.29.when  P.  was  comedown  out  of  the  ship 
16.  18.  I  say  also  to  thee  that  thou  art  P. 

23.  he  said  to  P.  get  thee  behind  me,  MarkB.  33. 
17. 1.  he  taketh  P.  James  and  John,  26. 37.  Mark 

5.  37.  1  9.  2.  1  14.  33.  J.vkc  8.  51.  |  9.  2a 

24.  they  that  received  tribute-money  came  to  P 
26.  58.  P.  followed  him  to  the  high  priest's  palace 

75.  P.  remembered  words  of  Jesus,  Mark  14.72. 

Mark  16.  7.  go  your  way,  tell  his  disciples  and  P. 

Luke  22.  01.  the  Lord  turned  and  looked  upon  P. 

John  1.  44.  Bethsiiida,  the  city  of  Andrew  and  P. 
18.  26.  being  his  kinsmun,  whose  ear  P.  cut  off 
21.  17.  P.  was  grieved  because  he  said  unto  him 

.^cts  1. 15.  in  those  days  P.  stood  up  in  the  midst 
3.3.  seeing  P.  and  John  about  to  go  into  the  temple 

4.  8.  P.  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  said  to  lliem 
13.  vsben  they  saw  Ihe  boldness  ofP.  and  John 

5.  15.  at  least  the  shadowof  P.might  overshado^* 

8.  14.  the  apostles  sent  unto  tliem  P.  and  John 

9.  38.  the  disciples  had  heard  that  P.  was  there 
40.  P.  put  them  all  forth,  and  kneeled  down 

10.13.  there  came  a  voice,  rise,  P. kill  and  eat, 11.7. 

44.  while  P.  spake  ihese  words,  Holy  Ghost  fell 

45.  were  astonished,  as  many  as  came  with  P. 

12.  3.  he  proceeded  further  to  lake  P.  also 

6.  P.wassleepin"  between  two  soldiers  incliaini 

7.  the  angel  of  the  Lord  smote  P.  on  the  side 

13.  as  P.  knocked  at  the  door  of  the  gate 
18.theie  was  nosmallslir  what  was  become  of  P 

Gal.  1.  18.  then  I  went  up  to  Jerusalem  to  see  P. 
2.7.t  he  gospel  ofcircumcision  was  coinmil  ted  toP. 

8.  for  he  that  wrought  effectually  in  P.  to  the  ap. 

14.  I  said  unto  P.  before  them  all,  if  thou  a  Jew 

Simon  PETER. 
Mat.  4.  18.  Je.sus  walking,  saw  Simon  called  P. 
10.2.the  first  Simon,  who  is  called  P.  and  Andrew 
^/arA:3.16.to  cast  out  devils, .Simon  hesurnamed  P, 
/.hAc  5.  8.  Simon  P.  fell  down  at  Jesus'  kheeg 
6. 14.  be  chose  Simoji,  whom  he  also  named  P. 
John  13.  6.  then  cometh  he  to  Simon  P.  he  saith 
20.  2.  then  she  runneth  and  comeih  to  Simon  P. 
21.15.  Jesus  saith  to  Simon  P.  Simon  son  of  Jonas 
Acts  10.  5.  send  men  to  Joppa,  and  call  for  one 
Simon,  whose  surname  is  P.  32. 1  11.  13. 
PHALEG. 
I.uke  3.  35.  Ragau,  which  was  the  son  of  P. 

PHARAOH. 
Gen.  12.  15.  princes  commended  Sarai  before  P. 
17.  the  Lord  plagued  V.  and  his  house 

39.  1.  Potiphar  an  officer  of  P.  brought  Joseph 

40.  2.  P.  was  wroth  against  two  of  his  officers 

13.  P.  shall  lift  up  thine  head  and  restore  thee, 19 

14.  make  mention  of  me  to  P.  and  bring  me  out 

41.  1.  P.  dreamed  ||  4.  so  P.  awoke,  7. 
lO.Josepli  said, God  shall  give  P. answer  of  peace 
34  let  P.  do  this  ||  44.  I  am  P.  and  without  thee 
55.  peoplecried  to  P.  ||  42.15.  by  the  life  ofP.  16. 

44.18.tliouartasP.  1|  4.'i.  8.  made  me  a  father  to  P. 

46.  31.  Joseph  said,  I  will  go  up  and  shew  P. 

47.  10.  Jacob  blessed  P.  and  went  out  from  P. 

25.  let  us  find  grace,  and  we  will  be  P.  servant* 

26.  only  the  land  of  the  priests  became  not  P. 
.50.  4.  speak,  I  pray  you,  in  the  ears  of  P.  saying 

Kxorf.2,15.whenP.  heard,  hcsouglit  to  slay  Moseg 

3.  10.  come  now,  and  I  will  send  thee  to  P. 

4.  21.  see  thou  do  all  those  wonders  before  P 
5.2.  P.  said,  who  is  the  L.that  I  should  obey  h'.tn'' 

1.5.  then  the  officers  came  and  cried  unto  P. 

23.  since  I  came  to  P.  to  speak  in  thy  name 
0.  1.  now  shall  thou  see  what  I  will  do  lo  P. 

12.  Moses  spake,  how  then  shall  P.  hear  me?  ."lO 
7.  1.  Lord  said,  see,  I  have  made  thee  a  eod  lo  P. 

3.  I  will  harden  P.  henri,  13.  M,  22.  |  8  19.  |  9.12 
8.20.stand  before  P.  9.13.  ||  9.27.  P.  sent  for  M<Mef 


PHI 

ftrorf.ll.l.yetwill  I  bring  one  plague  more  upon  P. 
lO.Moeea'a'iJ  AHrjn  did  all  tlifse  wou.lera  bel".  I'. 
]'2.  20.  iVom  the  firsl-born  of  P.  on  ihe  throne 
13.17.  when  P.  hail  1ft  people  50  God  led  ihtm  not 
14.  4.  and  I  will  be  honoured  upon  P.  17. 

29.  the  waters  covered  all  the  host  of  P. 

1  Kingx  :<.  1.  Solomon  made  iitlinity  wilh  P. 

7.  8.  Solomon  made  a  house  for  P.  daughter 

11.  10.  Hadad  found  favour  in  the  Bight  of  P. 
8/rin^*17.7.Lord,whobrou!,'ht  them  from  under  P. 

18.  21.  so  i8  p.  to  nil  thai  (rust  in  him,  Isa.  'Mi.  6. 

2S.  35.  according  to  the  cimiiuandnien!  of  P. 
jWA.  9.  10.  thou  t-liewedst  siiius  and  wonders  on  P 
I'iol.  135.  y.  who  sent  tokens  and  wonders  on  P 

136.  1.5.  hut  overthrew  P.  and  his  host  in  Red  sea 
Cant.  1.  9.  to  a  company  of  horses  in  P.  chariots 
y.'o.  19.  11.  how  say  ye  to  P.  I  am  the  son  of  wise 

30.  2.  to  strengthen  themselves  in  strength  of  P. 
3.  the  srenglh  of  P.  shall  be  your  shame 
Jer.  25.  19.  I  made  P.  and  his  servants  to  drink 

37.  II.  army  was  broken  up,  for  fear  of  P.  army 

46.  17.  did  cry,  P.  king  of  Egypt  is  but  a  noi.^o 

47.  1.  word  that  came,  before  that  P.  smote  Gaza 
Eirk.  17.  17.  P.  with  his  army  not  make  for  liim 

2!>.  2.  set  thy  face  against  P.  king  of  Kgypt 
3.  I  am  against  thee,  P.  king  of  Kgvpt,  30.  22. 

30.  21.  I  have  broken  the  arm  of  P.  24,  25. 

31.  IS.  this  is  P.  andhismultilude,  saith  the  Lord 

32.  2.  son  of  man  take  up  a  lamentation  for  P. 
Jicis  7.  13.  Joseph's  kindred  made  known  to  P. 

21.  P.  daughter  look  him  up  and  nourished  him 
Rom.  9. 17.  forsciipluresiiith  to  P.  1  raised  thee  up 
Iffb.  11.  24.  to  be  called  the  scm  of  P.  daughter 

PHARAOM-HOPHR.V. 
.7irr.44  3fI.willgiveP.-Hciphra  into  hand  of  enemies 

PHARAOH  i\ ECHO 
3  Kings  23.  29.  P.  Necho  went  against  Assyria 

33.  P.  Necho  put  .lehoahaz  in  bands  at  Rihiah 

34.  P.  Necho  made  Eliakim  son  of  Josiali  king 
3p.  he  taxed  the  land  to  give  money  to  P.  Necho 

.7<;r.46. 2. word  came  to  .leremiah  against  P.  Necho 

PHAREZ. 
Gen.  38.  29.  therefore  his  name  was  called  P. 
46. 12.  Ihesonsof  Judali,  P.  and  Zerah,  1  Chron. 
2.  4.  Mat.  1.3.  LukrX  33. 
and  thn  sons  of  P.  were  He/.rin  and  Hamcl, 
JVum.2fi.  20,21 .  ««rA  4.18. 1  CAr.2.5.  [  9.4. 
Ruth  4.  12.  let  thv  house  be  like  the  house  of  P. 
PHARPAR,  See  Ab.\.na. 
PHEBE. 
Ram.  16.  1.  I  commend  unto  you  P.  our  sister 

PHENICE. 

^rts  11.  19.  thoy  travelled  as  far  as  P.  and  Cyprus 

JS. 3. Paul  and  Birnabas  passed  thro' P. &  Samaria 

21.2.  find itig  ship  sailing  over  to  P.  we  wont  aboard 

27.  12.  if  by  anv  means  thev  might  attain  to  P. 

PHII^AnELPHIA. 
iJeB.l. 11. write  and  send  itunto  P..HcunloIiaodicea 
3.  7.  to  the  angel  of  the  church  in  P.  write 
PHILETUS,  <<re  Hy.menkus. 
PHILIP. 
Mat.W.X  P.  and  Bartholomew,  Thomas  and  Mat- 
thew, Mark  3.  18.  I.uke  6.  14.  .Ids  1.  13. 
14.  3.  put  John  in  prison  for  Herodias'  sake  his 
brother  P.  wife,  Mark  6.  17.  r.uke  3.  19. 
I.uke  3.  1.  his  brother  P.  tetrarch  of  Ilcirea 
John  1.  43.  Jesus  findeth  P.  and  snilh,  follow  me 

44.  now  P.  was  of  Bcthsaida,  thecity  of  Andrew 

45.  P.  findeth  Nathanael,  and  saith  to  him 
12.  21.  the  same  came  to  P.  and  desired  him 

22.  P.  Icllelh  Andrew,  .Andrew  and  P.  told  Jesus 
14.  9.  and  vet  hast  thou  not  known  me,  P.? 

.IfU  0.5.  P.'ihe  deacon  ||  8.  29.  the  Spirit  said  to  P. 

8.5.P.went  down  to  Samaria, and  preached  Christ 

fi.peop.  gave  heed  to  those  things  which  P.  spake 

12.  hut  when  they  believed  P.  preaching  things 

13.  Simon  continued  with  P.  and  wondered 

30.  P.  ran  to  him,  heard  the  eunuch  read  Esaias 
39.  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  caufht  away  P. 

SlJi'.wcentered  into  the  linoseof  P.  the  evangelist 

PHILIPPI. 
flctt  lfi.l2fromNeapoliswecametoP.orMaced. 
20.  fi.  we  saili'd  away  from  P.  and  cameloTroas 
ITheat.  2.2.  we  were  sham'Tully  entreated  at  P. 

PIIILISTIA. 
Paul.  fiO.  fl.  P.  tri'imph  tiuiM  becftUB<«  of  me 
87.  4.  behold  P.  and  Tyre,  this  man  was  hnrii  there 
108.  9.  Moab  mv  wnsKpoi,  over  P.  will  I  trinmi>h 

■PHILIHTI.M. 
f?«l.  10.14.  oiltofwhomcin.eP.  1  Chrnn.  1.  12. 

PHII,I.<I'INE. 
ISim.l7.)».  nm  not  I  a  P  7  |l  43.  the  P.  cursed  David 
32.  Da  v. »aid,  thy  servant  will  go  fight  wilh  this  P. 
49.  Daviil  smiite  the  P.  in  his  fonhead 
21.9.  sword  of  Goliath  the  P.  thou  slewost  is  here 
2"i.  10.  he  lave  him  the  sword  of  (inlialh  the  P, 
iSam.  21.  17.  Abishai  snccoured  him  ami  Bmolc  P. 

PHILISTINES. 
Om.  21.  .34.  .\hraliarn  sojourned  in  the  P.  land 
08   14.  Isaac  had  floek«,  and  thu  P.  nnviod  him 
750 


PIL 

Oen.  30.15.  P.  stopped  the  welli  Abrah.  digged,  18. 
t'.xod.  13.  17.  God  led  them  not  thro'  the  land  of  P. 
Josh.  13.  2.  the  borders  of  P.  not  yet  eonijuered 

3.  from  Sihor  to  Ekron,  five  lords  of  P.  Judg.3.2. 
Juilg.  3.  31.  Shamgar  slew  of  the  P.  IMMJ  men 

10.  6.  and  Israel  served  the  gods  of  the  P. 

7.  he  sold  tliem  into  the  hands  of  the  P.  13.  1. 
11.  did  not  I  deliver  you  from  Egyptians  and  P. 

14.  4.  i^amson  sought  an  occasion  against  the  P. 

15.  3.  now  shall  I  bo  more  blameless  than  the  P. 
6.  the  P.  came  up  and  burnt  her  and  her  father 
ll.knuwest  thou  not  that  theP.urcrulersover  us? 

20.  Samson  judged  Israel  in  the  days  of  the  P. 
Iti.  9.  the  P.  be  ujion  thee,  Samson,  12,  14,  20. 

21.  the  P.  took  Samson  and  put  out  his  eyes 
28.  that  I  may  be  at  once  avenged  of  iho  P. 
3U.Sains.  said,  let  medio  with  the  P.bowed  hims. 

1  ^am.  4.  1.  now  Israel  went  out  against  the  P. 

3.  why  hath  the  Lord  smitten  us  before  the  P.? 

9.  be  strong,  quit  yourselves  like  men,  O  ye  P.! 

5.  1.  the  P.  took  the  ark  of  God  and  brought  it 
C.  1.  Ihe  ark  was  in  the  land  of  P.  seven  months 

21.  P.  have  brought  again  the  ark  of  the  Lord 
7.  8.  he  will  save  us  out  of  the  hand  of  the  P. 

10.  the  P.  drew  near  to  battle  against  Israel 
13.  so  the  P.  were  subdued,  and  came  no  more 

13.  12.  the  P.  will  come  down  upon  metoGilgal 
20.  Israelites  went  down  to  the  P.  to  sharpen 

14.  1.  come,  and  let  us  go  over  to  the  P.  garrison 
19.  noise  that  was  in  the  host  of  the  P.  went  on 
.52.  was  sore  war  ag.  the  P.  all  the  ilays  of  Saul 

17.  51.  the  P.  saw  their  champion  was  dead 
53.  Israel  returned  from  chasing  afler  the  P. 

18.  17.  hut  let  the  band  of  the  P.  be  on  him,  21. 
30.  then  the  princes  of  the  P.  went  forth 

19. 8.  David  fought  with  the  P.  23.  .5.  2.5am.  21.15. 

24.  1.  Saul  returned  from  following  the  P. 

27.  I.  than  that  I  should  escape  into  land  of  the  P. 
28. 15.  for  the  P.  make  war  ag.  me,  God  de|>artcd 
20.  7.  that  thou  displease  not  the  lords  of  the  P. 
31.  2.  P.  followed  hard  upon  Saul,  1  CArun.  10.  2. 
9.sent  into  land  of  Iho  P.  round  about  to  publish  it 

2  .Sum.  5.  17.  all  tlie  P.  came  up  to  seek  David 

19.  shall  I  go  up  to  the  P.?  wilt  thou  deliver 
2.).David  smote  the  P.  8.1. ||  8.12.gold  got  from  P. 
23. lO.EIeazar  smote  theP.||  12.  Shammah  slew  P. 
16.  mi"hty  men  brake  through  the  host  of  the  P. 
2A'ino',9  8. 2.  the  woman  sojourned  in  land  of  the  P. 
2CAr.  21. 16.  stirred  up  ag.  Jehoram  the  spirit  of  P. 
26.7.  God  helped  U/.ziah  ag.  the  P.  and  Arabians 
28.18.P.  had  invaded  the  cities  of  the  low-eountry 
Psal.  83.7.  the  P.  with  the  inhabitants  of  Tyre 
Isa.  2.  6.  they  are  soothsayers  like  the  P. 
y.  12.  the  Syrians  before,  and  the  P.  behind 

11.  14.  they  shall  fly  on  the  shoulders  of  the  P. 
■Jer.  25.  20.  ihe  kings  of  the  P.  shall  drink  the  cup 

47.  1.  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  against  the  P. 

4.  for  the  Lord  will  spoil  the  P.  the  remnant 
F.zek.  16.  27.  delivered  thee  to  the  daughters  of  P. 

25.  15.  because  the  P.  have  dealt  by  revenge 
16.  I  will  stretch  out  mine  hand  upon  the  P. 

Jimns  1.  8.  the  remnant  of  the  P.  shall  perish 

6.  2.  then  go  down  to  Gath  of  the  P. 

9.  7.  have  not  I  brought  the  P.  from  Caphtor? 
Obad.  19.  they  of  the  plain  shall  possess  the  P. 
7.eph.  2.  5.  O  land  of  the  P.  I  will  destroy  thee 
ZccA.  9.  6.  I  will  cut  ofTtho  pride  of  tlie  P. 
See  Dauohtbrs. 
PHILOLOGUS. 
ftom. 16.15. salute  P.  Julia, and  Ncreus  and  hisslslcr 

PHINEHAS. 
F.zod.  6.  25.  Eloazar's  wife  bare  him  P. 
JV«m.25.  11.  P.  hath  turned  my  wrath  from  Israel 
31.  6.  Moses  sent  them  and  P.  to  the  war 
Jo.ih.  22.  13.  Israel  sent  P.  to  the  Reubenilos 
24.  33.  they  buried  in  a  hill  that  pertained  to  P. 
.Twig.  20.  2-^.  P.  stood  before  the  ark  in  those  days 
I  .Sam.  1.  3.  Hophni  and  P.  the  priests  were  there 
2.  34.  Iloplmi  and  P.  shall  both  ilie  in  one  day 
4.  17.  thy  Iwo  ions  Hophni  and  P.  nrn  dead 
19.  P.  wife  was  wilh  child,  roar  to  be  delivered 
14.  3.  the  son  of  P.  the  I^ord's  priest  in  Shiloh 
I  Chr.  0.  4.  Elear.ar  begat  P.  ||  50.  P.  begat  Ahishua 
9.  20.  P.  son  of  Eleazar  was  ruler  over  them 
Ezra  7.  5.  Ahishua  son  of  P.  iho  son  of  Eleazar 
8. 2.  of  the  sons  of  P.  Gershoni  wont  up  from  Bab. 

33.  with  Meremoth  was  Eleazar  the  son  of  P. 
r».106.30.  then  stood  up  P.  and  executed  judgment 

PHLEGON. 
Rom.IO.H.salutc  Asvnrriius,  P.  Hermas and  bretli. 

PHRYGI.\. 
Jlcls  16.  6.  when  they  had  gone  Ihroughnnt  P. 
18.  23.  Paul  wont  over  all  the  country  of  P. 
PIHUIAH. 
.Tiidir.  7.  11.  he  went  down  with  P.  his  servant 
PHYGELLIIS,  Ser  HkrM(mii.:nks. 
PIHAHIROTH,  .Srr  B  vAL  /iPiioM. 
PILATE. 
.lfi(.27.2.wheti  they  had  hound  him,  they  delivered 
him  to  Pontius  P.  the  governor,  Mark  15.  I. 


RAM    [Prome  Na^bs 

Mat.  27.  34.  P.  aaw  that  he  could  prevail  nothiiw 
Mark  15.  5.  so  that  P.  marvelled,  44. 

15.  so  P.  willing  to  content  the  people  released 
I.uke  3.  1.  Pontius  P.  being  governor  of  Judea 
13.  1.  whose  blood  P.  ha<l  mingled  with  sacrifice* 
23.  12.  same  day  P.  and  Herod  were  made  friend* 
52.  this  man  went  to  P.  and  begged  the  body 
.John  18.  2!).  P.  then  went  out  to  iliem  and  said 
3.3.  then  P.  entered  into  thu  judgment-hall 
19.  8.  when  P.  heard  that,  he  was  the  more  afraid 
12.  from  thenceforth  P.  sought  to  release  him 
19.  P.  wrote  a  tille,  and  put  it  im  the  cross 
38.  Joseph  besought  P.  and  P.  gave  him  leave 
.Ir.ls  3.  13.  ye  denied  him  in  the  presence  of  P 
4.  27.  against  Jesus  Herod  and  P.  were  gathered 

13.  28.  yet  desired  they  P.  that  he  should  bo  slain 

1  Tim.  6.  13.  who  before  P.  witnessed  a  good  conf. 

PISGAH. 
.'Vum.23.14.  Balak  brought  Balaam  to  the  top  of  P 
f)eut.  3.  27.  get  thee  up  into  the  top  of  P.  34.  1. 
4.  49.  sea  of  the  plain,  under  the  springs  of  P. 
PISIDIA. 
.■Ids  13.  14.  they  came  to  .Antioch  in  P. 

14.  24.  after  ihev  had  passed  throughout  P. 

PONTIUS,  See  PiLATK. 
PONTUS,  .^cts  2.  9.  I  18.  2.  1  Pet.  1. 1. 
PORCIUS. 
.lets  24.  27.  P.  Festus  came  into  Felix  room 

POTIPHAR. 
Oen.  37. 36.  the  Mi.lianites  sold  Jr>3eph  to  P.  39  1. 

POTI-PIIERAH. 

Gen.  41.  45.  Asenalh  the  daughter  of  P.  50. 

PRISCILLA,  .Sv-c  Aquila. 

PUBLIIJS. 

.^cts  28.  8.  the  father  of  P.  lay  sick  of  a  fever 

PUD  ENS. 

2  Tim.  4.  21.  Eubidus  greetcth  thee  and  P. 
PUL. 

2  Kings  15. 19.  P.  king  of  Assyria  came  against  Is- 
rael;  MenahemgaveP.  1000  lalents  of  silver 
1  Chron.  5.  26.  God  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  P. 
/*o.  60.  19.  I  will  si'nd  those  that  escape  to  P. 
PURPURI.M,  See  .ippellatittes 
PUTEOLI. 
.lets  28.  13.  and  we  came  the  next  day  to  P      », 


Q. 


aUARTUS. 
Rom.  IG.  23.  and  Q..  a  brother  saluteth  yoa 


R. 


RA71BAH,  or  RABBATH. 
Ocuf.3.11.  is  it  not  in  R.of  ihe  children  of  Ainmont 
iSam.  11.  1.  Joah  and  all  Israel  besieged  R. 
12.  26.  Jonb  fought  against  R.  and  trxik  the  city 
17.  27.  Shobi  of  R.  brought  beds  for  David 
1  Chron.  20.  1.  Joab  smote  R.  and  ileslroyed  it 
JcT.  49. 2. 1  will  cause  an  alarm  lobe  heard  in  R. 
3.  cry,  ye  ilaughlers  of  R.  gird  wilh  sackcloth 
Fiek.  21.  20.  that  the  sword  may  come  to  R. 
25.  5.  I  will  make  R.  a  stable  for  camels 
.^mos  1.  14.  I  will  kinille  a  fire  in  the  wall  of  R. 

^{AI!  SI1.\KEH. 
•'iKhgi!\H.  17.  lb.'  kin-olAssyria  sent  R./;s-n.3fi.2. 
37.  Ihoy  told  him  the  wonls  of  R.  fsa.  36.  22. 
19.  4.  God  will  hear  the  words  of  R.  /«a.  37.  4. 
RACHEL. 
rtm.29.12.  Jacob  told  R.  thai  lio  was  Rebehah'ssoa 
16.  the  name  of  the  younger  was  R. 
IT.  R.  wa<  he:ititi''ui  and  well  favoured 
18.  Jacob  loved  R.  .30.  ||  31.  R.  was  barren 
20.  Jacob  served  seven  years  for  R.  25. 
28.  Lahan  gave  him  R.  his  dnoghier  to  wife 
.TO.l.R.hriio  no  children,  R.  envied  her  sister  Leah 
2.  Jacob's  anger  was  kindled  against  R.  he  said 
22.  God  remembered  R.  and  opened  her  woiub 
31.  19.  R.  had  stolen  her  father's  images,  34. 

33.  then  Lalinn  went  into  R.  lent 
33.  2.  Jacob  put  K.  and  Joseph  hindermost 
3.5.  19.  U.  died,  48.  7.  ||  3.>.  2 1. sons  of  R. 46. 19,22. 
Iliith  4.  11.  the  Lord  make  the  woman  like  R. 
l.'iam.lO  2.  ihou  shall  find  two  men  hv  R.scpiilclir* 
Jrr.  31. 1.5.  R.  weepins  for  her  chihiren,  Mi2t.2. 13. 

RAGAU. 
/,u4c  3.  35.  Sanieh,  which  was  the  son  of  R. 

RAH.AB,  prr.<iipn,  plnrr. 
Josh.  2.  1.  Ihn  (ipies  entered  inUi  the  house  of  R. 
6.  17.  only  R.  shall  live  ||  2.').  Joshua  s.wed  R. 
Pnal.  87.  4.  I  will  nnke  mention  of  ft.  and  Babylon 
Wl.  10.  Ihou  hast  broken%.  in  pieces  as  one  slain 
Inn.  51.  9.  nrl  Itiou  not  it  that  haili  cut  R.? 
.Vol.  1.  5   Salmon  brcnl  Bonz  ofR. 
}lfh.  11.  31.  by  faith  llie  Imrlot  R.  perished  not 
Jam.  2.  2.5.  was  not  R.  nl-o  justified  by  workst 

RAM." 
Rvth  4.  19.  Pharez  begat  Hczrm,  Ifezron  begat  R 
and  U.  begat  Ammiiiadab,  1  Ckrsn.  2.  9,  10   u* 


PkOTKK  NAt»8.]      REP 

?  Ckron.  0.  25.  tho  sons  of  .lernlimcpl,  R.  Buneh 

27.  the  sons  of  R.  tlic  first-born  of  .loriihmoel 
fob  32.  2.  Klihii  tilt-  Buzitu  of  the  kindred  of  R. 

R.^MAH,  R.AMA. 
Josh.  18.  2.1.  R.  a  city  of  the  trihe  of  Renjnmin 
Judg.  4.  5.  Dohornh  dwelt  between  K.  anil  Belh-cl 
1  .Sam.  1. 19.  Klkiinahcanic  to  his  house  inR.2.  11. 

7.  17.  Samuel's  return  was  toR.  15.34.  |  16.  13. 

8.  4.  all  the  elders  came  to  Samuel  unto  R. 

19.  IH.  so  David  fled,  and  catne  to  Samuel  to  R. 
22.Saulwent  to  R.  2.3.  ||  2-2.  6.  Saul  abode  in  K. 
25.  I.  Samuel  was  bnried  in  his  house  at  R.  28. 3. 
1  Kings  15.  17.  Baaslia  built  R.  2  Chron.  16.  1. 

21.  fiaoslm  left  otf  building  of  R.  2  Chron.  16.  5. 
?  JSTin^'S  8.  2!).  Joram   went  to   be  healed  of  the 
wounds  which  the  Syrians  had  given  him 
at  R.  2  Chron.  22.  6. 
Rtra  2.  26.  the  children  of  R.  and  Geba  six  hun- 
dred and  twenty-one,  J^eh.  7.  30. 
JVeA.  11.33.  the  children  of  Benjamin  dwelt  at  R. 
Isa.  10.  29.  R.  is  afraid,  Gibeah  of  Saul  is  (led 
Jer.  31.  15.  a  voice  was  heard  in  R.  Mat.  2. 18. 
F.iek.  27.  22.  the  merchants  of  R.  were  in  Tyre 
Hos.  5.  8.  blow  ve  the  trumpet  in  R.  cry  aloud 

R.\MOTH-GlLEAn. 
Deut.A.  43.  R.  in  (!ilead  of  the  Gadites,  a  city  of 
refii«ro,  Bczer  and  Golan,  Jo.'jA.  20.  8.  |  21. 38. 
1  Khigf  4.  13.  the  son  of  Geber  was  olficer  in  R. 
22.  3.  know  ye  that  R.  is  ours,  and  we  be  still 
4.  Ahai)  said  to  Jchoshaphat,  wilt  thou  go  with 
me  to  battle  to  R.?  2  Ckron.  18.  3. 
6.  shall  I  go  against  R.l  15.  2  Chron.  18.  14. 
12.  saying,  go  up  to  R.  and  prosper,  2  Chr.  18.11. 
SiTtnn'sS.  25.  Joram  went  against  Hazael  in  R.and 
the  Syrians  wounded  Joram,  2  Chron.  22.  5. 
9. 1.  Elisha  said,  take  this  box  of  oil,  and  go  toR. 
14.  now  Joram  harl  kept  R.  because  of  Hazael 
1  CAr.6.80.outof  the  tribe  of  Gad  to  the  Levites.R. 

RAPHA,  and  RAPHU. 
JVum. 13. 9.  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,  Palli  son  ofR. 

1  CAr.8.37.  R.  Eleasa,  Azel,  were  the  sons  of  Binea 

REBEKAH. 
<?fn.  22.  23.  Bethuel  begat  R.  ||  24. 15.  R.  came  out 
24.  51.  R.  is  before  thee  ||  67.  Isaac  took  R.  25.20. 

50.  they  sent  away  R.  {|  60.  thev  blessed  R. 
25.28.  R.  loved  Jacob  ||  26.35.  agfief  of  mind  to  R. 

26.  7.  lest  men  of  the  place  should  kill  me  for  R. 

27.  42.  those  words  of  Esau  were  told  to  R. 

29.  12.  that  he  was  R.  son  1|  35.  8.  R.  nurse  died 

49.  31.  there  they  buried  Isaac  and  R.  his  wife 

Rom.  9.  10.  but  when  R.  had  conceived  by  Isaac 

RECHAB. 

2  Sam.4. 2.  R.  theson  ofRimmon,  5.  ||  6.  R.  escaped 
iKings  10.15.  Jehu  lighted  on  Jehonadab  son  of  R. 

23.  the  Fon  of  R.  went  into  the  house  of  Baal 
1  Chron.  2.  .SS.  Hemalh,  father  of  the  house  of  R. 
At'A.  3. 14.  Malchiali  son  of  R.  repaired  dung-gate 
Jer.  35.  6.  Joiiadab  the  son  of  R.  commanded  us 
Sre  JoN.MiAB. 
RECHABITES. 
Jer.  35.  2.  go  to  the  house  of  the  R.  and  speak 

REHOBOAM. 
I  Kings  11.  43.  Solomon  slept  with  his  fathers,  R. 
the  son  ofSolomon  reigned,  14. 21 .  2  C/ir.0.31. 

12.  6.  R.  consulted  with  the  old  men,  2  Chr.  10.  6. 
17.  R.  reigned  over  them,  2  Chron.  10.  17. 

21.  to  bring  the  kingdom  agiiiii  to  R.  2  Chr.  11.1. 
27.  then  tlieir  heart  shall  turn  again  to  R. 
14.  .30.  there  was  war  between  R.  and  Jeroli.  15.6. 

1  Chron.  .3.  10.  R.  was  Solomon's  son.  Mat.  1.  7. 
S  Chron.  11.  17.  tlicy  madi;  R.  strong  three  years 

21.  R.  loved  Maachah  daughter  of  Absalom 

22.  R.  made  Abijah  the  son  of  Maaehah  the  chief 

13.  7.  Jeroboam  strengthened  himself  against  R. 

when  R.  was  voun?  and  lender-hearted 
REIldnOTH. 
Grn.  10. 11.  Asliiir  went,  bnilded  Nineveh  and  R. 
26.  22.  Isaac  called  the  name  of  the  well  R. 
36  37.  Samlah  died,  Saul  i.f  R.reigned,  1  CAr.1.48. 

REHUM. 
Ezra  2.  2.  R.  came  with  Zerubbnbel,  J^ck.  12.  3. 
4.  8.  R.  the  chancellor  wrote  against  Jerusalem 
17.  the  king  sent  an  answer  to  R.  and  Shimshai 

23.  now  when  the  letter  was  read  before  R. 
JVcA.3. 17.  R.  the  son  of  Dani  repaired  after  him 

10.35.  R.  of  chiefofihe  people  sealed  the  covenant 

RRMAUAH. 
/y/7.7.4.  fear  not,  for  the  fierce  anger  of  son  of  R. 
.S.  the  son  of  R.  hnth  taken  evil  counsel 

9.  and  the  b'-ad  of  Samaria  is  R.  son 

8.  6.  this  people  reioic.e  in  Regin  and  R.  son 

REMPHAN. 
.Acts  7.  43.  ye  took  up  the  star  of  your  god  R. 
RRPHATM. 

2  Sam.  5.  18.  the  Philistines  spread  themselves  In 

vallev..fR.22.  |23.13.  1  Chr.  11.  15.114.9. 
Jsa.  17.  5.  that  ga'ber'lh  enr^  in  ihc  valley  of  R. 

REPHAIMS. 

Gen.  14.  5.  smote  the  R.  in  A:-hferoth  Karnaim 

13  20.  to  iby  seed  have  I  given  the  land  of  R. 

T51 


RUT 

REPHIDIM. 
Eiod.  17.  1.  Israel  pitched  in  R.  ^Tum.  33.  4. 
8.  Amuiek  came  and  fought  with  Uracl  in  R. 
19.  2.  they  were  departed  from  R.  JVuwi.  33.  15. 

REUBEN. 
Ocn.  29. 32.  she  bare  aeon,  and  called  his  name  R 
30.  14.  R.  went  in  the  days  of  wheat-harvest 
35.  22.  that  R.  went  and  lay  with  Billiah 
23.  the  sons  of  Leah,  R.  Jacob's  first-born,  40 
8.  I  49.  3.  JVum.  26.  5.  1  Chron.  5. 1 
37.  22.  R.  said  unto  them,  shed  no  blood 
29.  R.  returned  to  the  pit,  Joseph  was  not  in  it 
46. 9.  the  sons  of  R.  Ezod.  6. 14.  J^'um.  16.1. 1 32.1, 
37.  Deut.  11.  6.  Josh.  4.  12.  1  Chron.  5.  3, 18. 
48.  5.  as  R.  and  Simeon,  they  shall  be  mine 
JVum.2. 10.  the  standard  of  the  camp  of  R.  10.  18. 

10.  all  that  were  numbered  of  the  camp  of  R. 
7. 30.  Elizur  prince  of  tho  children  of  R.  did  offer 
32.33.  Moses  gave  to  children  of  R.  Jush.  13.23. 
Dcul.  27.  13.  these  on  mount  Ebal  to  curse,  R. 

33.  6.  let  R.  live,  and  let  not  his  men  bo  few 
Josh.l^.a.  to  the  stoneof  Bohan  the  son  of  R.  18.17. 

22. 13.  Israel  sent  to  the  children  of  R.  and  Gad 
./wrf^.5. 15.for  the  divisions  of  R.  great  thoughts.  Hi. 
Eiek.  48.  6.  a  portion  for  R.  {|  31.  one  gale  of  R. 

Tribe  of  REUBEN. 

J^um.  1.  5.  of  the  tribe  of  R.  Elizur  was  prince 

21.  of  the  tribe  of  R.  were  numbered  40,500 

13.  4.  of  the  tribe  of  R.  Shammua  to  spy  land 

34.  14.  the  tribe  of  R.  have  received  inheritance 
.Josh.  20.  8.  oulof  Ihe  tribe  of  R.  Gad  and  Manas- 

seh  the  Levites  iKid  cities,  .36.  1  Chr.  6. 63, 78. 
Rev.  7.  5.  of  Ihe  tribe  of  R.  were  sealed  12,000 

REUBENITES. 
JVum.  26.  7.  these  are  the  families  of  the  R. 
Deut.  3.  12.  these  cities  gave  I  to  the  R.  and  to  the 
Gadites,  16.  |  29.  8.  Jo.^h.  12.  6.  |  13.  8. 
.Tosh.  1.  12.  Josnua  spake  to  the  R.  22.  1. 
2  Kings  ]0.33.nazael  smote  the  R.  and  Manassites 

1  Chron.  5.  6.  Beerali  was  the  prince  of  the  R. 
26.  Tilgath-pilneser  carried  away  R.  and  Gadites 

11.  42.  Adina  a  captain  of  the  R.  thirty  with  him 

26.  32.  Hashabah  and  his  brethren  over  tht  R. 

27.  16.  Eliezer  son  of  Zichri  was  rulei*of  Ihe  R. 

REZIN. 
2A'V?io'sl5.37.the  Lord  began  to  send  aeainst  Judah 
R.  the  king  of  Syria,  16.~5.  fsa.  7.  1. 
16.  6.  at  that  time  R.  recovered  Elath  to  Syria 

9.  the  kingof  Assyria  took  Damascus  and  slewR. 
£rra2.48.the  children  of  R. children  of  Nckoda  and 

Gazzam  came  with  Zerubbabcl,  JWA.  7.  50. 
Fsa.  7.  4.  fear  not  the  fierce  anger  of  R. 
8.  and  the  head  of  Damascus  is  R. 

8.  6.  forasmuch  as  the  people  rejoice  in  R. 

9.  11.  Lord  shall  set  up  the  adversaries  of  R. 

RHEGIUM. 
.dots  28.  13.  we  set  a  compass  and  came  to  R. 

RHESA. 
/yuA-e3.27.the  son  of  Joanna,who  was  the  son  of  R. 

RHODA. 
-dcts  12. 13.  a  damsel  came  to  hearken,  named  R. 

RHODES. 
./lets  21.  1.  the  day  following  we  came  unto  R. 

RIMMON. 
Tosh.  15.  32.  Shilhim,  Ain  and  R.  cities  of  Judah 
ludff.  20.  45.  theBeiijamites  fled  toward  the  wil- 
derness, to  the  rock  R.  47.  |  21.  13. 

2  .Sam.  4.  2.  Baanah  and  Rechab  sons  of  R.  5,  9. 
2  Kings  5. 18.  my  master  gocth  into  the  house  ofR. 

1  Chron.  4.  32.  the  villages  of  Simeon  were  Ain,  R. 
6.  77.  out  of  Zebulun  was  given  to  Merari,  R. 

ZccA.  14.10.  the  land  sh'ill  beturncd  asaplain  toR. 

RIZPAH. 
2 .9am. 3.7.SauI  had  concubine,  whoso  name  was  R. 
21.8.  David  delivered  two  sons  ofR.  to  Gibeonites 

10.  R.  spread  sackcloth  for  her  on  the  rock 

ROMAN. 

./Jc/s  22.  2.5.  is  a  R.  26.  II  27.  tell  me,  art  thou  a  R.  7 
29.  after  he  knew  that  he  was  a  R.  23.  27 
ROMANS. 

Jo/m  II.  48.  the  R.  shall  come  and  take  our  place 

JJcts  16.  21.  not  lawful  for  ns  to  observe,  being  R. 

.37.  beaten  us,  being  R.  ||  38.  heard  they  were  R. 

2S.  17.  delivered  prii^oner  into  the  hands  of  the  R. 

ROME. 

j?cts2. 10.  strangers  of  R.  we  do  hear  them  speak 

18.2.  had  commanded  all  Jews  to  depart  from  R. 

19.  21.  I  must  see  R.  ||  23.  11.  bear  wilne.'^s  at  R. 

28. 10.  when  we  came  to  R.  Paul  dwelt  by  himself 

Rom.  1.  7.  to  all  that  be  in  R.  beloved  of  God 

15.  to  preach  the  gospel  to  you  that  are  at  R. 

2  7'im.  1.  17.  when  he  was  in  R.  he  sought  me  out 
RUFUS. 

Mark  15.21.  Simon,  father  of  Alexander  and  R. 
Rum.l6.I3.8a]ute  R.chosen  in  tho  Lord,and  mother 

RUIIAMAH. 
ffus.  2. 1.  say  to  your  "isiers,  R.  plead  with  mother 

RUTH. 
Ruth  1.  4.  the  name  of  the  other  was  R. 
14.  R.  clave  to  her  ||  3. 9.  who  art  thou  ?  I  am  R. 


SAM 

Ruth  4. 5.  thou  must  Duy  It  also  ofR.  the  Moahitew 

10.  moreover,  R.  have  I  purchased  to  be  my  wife 

Mat.  1.  3.  Bouz  begul  Obed  of  R.  Obed  Segat  Jusfe 

s. 


SABEANS. 
Job  1. 15.  the  S.  fell  on  the  oxon  and  asses  of  Job 
/.?a.45.I4.  merchandise  of  the  S.  shall  come  to  thee  A 

Ki(k.'2'.i.  42.  with  mmi  of  the  common  sort  wereS 
.iod  .3.  8.  and  they  shall  sell  them  to  the  S. 

SALATHIEL. 
1  CArfl?i.3. 17.  S.  thcionof  Jechoniah,  Mai.  1. 12 
l,uhc  3.  27.  Zorobabel,  which  was  the  sun  of  S. 

SALEM. 
Gen.  14.  18.  Melchizedek  king  of  S.  brought  wine 
I'sal.  76.  2.  in  S.  also  is  his  tabernacle,  and  in  Zion 
Wci.7.1. Melchizedek  king  of  S.  who  blessed  A  brah. 
2.  being  king  of  S.  which  is  king  of  peace 
SALMON. 
Ruth  4.  20.  Nuhshon  begat  S.  ||  21.  S.  besat  Bonz, 
1  CAron.  2.  11.  Mat.  L  4,  5. 
Psal.  G8.  14.  it  was  white  as  snow  in  S. 
I.ukc  3.  32.  Buaz,  which  was  the  son  of  S. 

SALMONE. 

.dcts  27.  7.  we  sailed  imder  Crete,  over-against  S 

SALOME,  Murk  15.  40.  |  16.  1. 

SAMARIA. 

1  Kings  13. 32.  against  liigli-places  which  are  in  S 

16.  24.  Oinri  bought  the  hill  S.  of  Shemer 
20.  1.  Bcn-badad  besieged  S.  2  Kings  6.  24. 

10.  if  the  dust  of  S.  shall  suffice  for  handfuls 
17.  told,  saying,  there  are  men  come  out  of  S. 

22.  10.  Ahab  and  Jehoshaphat  sat  (ych  on  Iiii. 

throne  in  the  entrance  of  the  gale  of  S. 
2  CAron.  18.  9. 
38.  one  washed  the  chariot  in  the  pool  of  S. 

2  Kings  6.  20.  behold  they  were  in  the  midst  of  S. 

7.  1.  barley  for  a  shekel  in  the  gate  of  S.  18. 

17.  6.  the  king  of  Assyria  took  S.  18.  10. 

18.  34.  have  they  delivered  .S.  out  of  mine  hand'! 

where  are  the  gods  of  Hamulh  and  ArpadJ 
Isa.  30.  19. 
21. 13.  I  will  stretch  over  Jerusalem  the  line  of  S. 
23. 18.  the  bones  of  the  prophet  that  came  out  of  S. 
2  Chron.  25.  13.  soldiers  fell  on  the  cities  from  S. 
Ezra  4.10.  the  noble  Asnapper  set  in  the  cities  ofS. 
JVi:h.  4.  2.  Sanballat  spake  before  Ihe  army  of  S. 
Isa.  7.  9.  the  head  of  Ephraini  is  S.  and  the  head 
ofS.  is  Reujaliah's  son,  if  ye  will  not  be- 
lieve, surely  ye  shall  not  be  established 

8.  4.  and  the  spoil  of  S.  shall  be  taken  away 

9.  9.  Epiiraim  and  inhabitants  of  S.  shall  know 
10. 9.  is  not  Hamath  as  .\rpail  ?  S.  as  Damascus  ? 

.Jer.  23.  13.  I  have  seen  folly  in  the  prophets  of  8. 

31.5.  shall  yol  plant  vines  on  the  mountains  of  S. 

41.  5.  there  came  certain  from  Sliechein  and  S. 
Er(?A:.lG.46.tliine  elder  sister  is  S.slie  and  daughtert 
51.  nor  hath  S.  committed  half  of  thy  sins 

23.  4_.  S.  is  Aholah.  and  Jerusalem  -Aholibah 
Hos.l.  1.  then  the  wickedness  of  S.  was  discovered 

8.  5.  thy  calf,  O  S.hat  h  cast  thee  ofl',  anger  kindled 

6.  but  the  calf  of  S.  shnll  be  broken  in  pieces 
10.5.  the  inhabiinnts  of  S.  shall  fe;ir  for  the  calveB 

7.  as  for  S.  h(!r  king  is  cut  off  as  foam  on  water 
13. 16.  S.  shall  l)f come  desolate,  i-he  hath  rebelled 

Jlmits  3. 9.  assemble  yourselves  on  mountains  of  S. 
4.  1.  hear,  ye  kine  of  Bashan,  in  mi)Untain  of  S 
G.  1.  woe  to  llieni  that  trust  in  the  mountain  of  S. 

8.  14.  they  that  swear  by  the  sin  of  S.  and  say 
Obad.  19.  they  shall  possess  Ihe  fields  of  S. 
Mic.  1.  1.  the  woril  which  he  s;iw  concerning  S. 

6.  I  will  make  S.  ns  a  heap  of  the  field 
jMke  17.  11.  he  passed  through  the  midst  of  S 
.John  4.  4.  and  he  must  needs  I'o  through  S. 

9.  how  askest  drink  of'me,who  am  a  woman  of  9. 
.drts  8.  1.  were  scattered  through  the  regions  of  S. 

5.  Philip  preached  Christ  to  them  of  S. 

14.  the  apostles  heard  that  S.  received  Ihe  word 
In  SAMARIA. 

1  Kings  16.  28.  Omri  buried  in  S.  ||  02.  37.  Ahab 
29.  Ahab  reigned  in  S.  ||  22.  51.  Ahaziali  in  S. 

IS.  2.  and  there  was  a  sore  famine  in  S. 
20.34.streetsin  Damascus, as  my  father  rnadet>i9. 
21. 18.  to  meet  Ahab  kingof  Israel  which  is  in  S. 

2  Kings  3.  1.  now  Jehoram  began  to  reign  iv  S. 
5. 3. would  God  my  lord  were  wiih  the  prophet  ijiS. 
6.  25.  iind  there  was  n  great  famine  iv  S. 

10.  17.  Jehu  slew  all  that  remained  to  Ahab  ?nS 

13.  1.  Jehoahnz  reigned  in  S.  ||  10.  .Tehoash 
fi.  and  there  remained  the  erove  also  in  S. 
9.  Jehoahaz  buried  in  S.  ||  13.  Joash,  14.  16. 

14.  23.  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Joash  reigneil  in  3 

15.  8.  Zechariah  reigi>ed  over  Israel  in  S.  13. 

17.  Menahem  |I  27.  Pekah  |I  17.  1.  Ifo^hea  in  S      ' 
2  Chron.  22.  9.  for  Ahazlali  was  hid  in  S. 
JlmosX  12.  f-o  Israel  betaken  out  that  dwell  in  9 
.9rt.^  1.  8.  be  « itnesses  to  me  in  Jiidea  and  ta  9 

9.  31.  then  had  ihc  churches  rest  in  S. 


SAR 

To  or  vnto  SAMARIA. 

1  Kines  20.43.  Almli  bfiiig  ilisiileu.^ed  came  to  S. 

22,  37.  so  iKft  king  died,  Knd  was  brought  <o  S. 
i  Kings  2.  05.  Klisha  returned  from  Ciirmel  to  S. 

(i.  11).  Elisha  led  tlicm  <o  S.  open  eyes  of  those  men 

10.  1.  Jehu  sent  letters  to  S.  ||  12.  came  to  S.  17. 

14. 14.  Jehoiish  took  all  vessels  in  hoii.sp  of  Lord, 

and  toi^k  hostages,  returned  tu  S.  2  Chr.  2.5,24 

^  15.  14.  Menahem  cumc  to  S.  and  smote  Shulluni 

^  17.  5.  the  king  of  As^iyria  went  up  tu  S. 

2  Chron.  18.  2.  Jeho»li;i|)hat  went  down  to  S. 
28.  8.  Israel  bronght  the  spoil  of  Judiih  to  9. 

Isa.  10.  II.  a«  I  have  done  unto  S.  and  her  idols 

SAMARITAN,  S. 
Mat.  10.  5.  into  any  ciiy  of  the  S.  enter  ye  not 
I^uke  9.  52.  they  entered  into  a  village  of  the  S. 
10.  3X  but  a  certain  S.  cnnie  where  he  was 
17. 16.  one  of  them  gave  thanks,  and  he  was  a  S. 
John  4.  9.  the  Jews  have  no  dealings  with  the  S. 

39.  and  Tiuiny  of  the  S.  believed  on  him 
8.  48.  that  ihuu  art  a  S.  and  hast  a  devil 

SAMSON. 
Juilg.  13.  24.  the  woman  called  his  name  S. 

14.  L^.  went  to  Tininatli  H  7.  ."he  pleased  S.  wel! 
10.  S.  made  there  a  fe:ist  {{  IG.  S.  wife  wept 

1.5.  4.  S.  caught  fo.xes  ||  ]l).  to  bind  S.  are  we  come 
J6.2.  S.  Is  come  hither  ||  3.  S.  lav  till  midnight 
9.  tho  Philistines  be  upon  thee,  S.  12,  14,  20. 

23.  our  God  hath  delivered  ».  into  our  hand 
2.5.  call  S.  II  30.  S.  said,  let  me  die  with  Philistines 
28.  S.  called  unto  the  Lord  ||  29.  S.  took  hold 

Ueb.  11.  32.  the  time  would  fad  me  to  tell  of  S. 
SAMUEL. 

1  fiam.  1.  20.  Hannah  bare  a  son,  and  called  him  S. 
2.18.  S.  i#inistere.l  before  the  Lord  ||  21.  S.  grew 

3.  4.  the  Lord  ealled  S.  he  answered,  fi,  8,  10. 
15.  and  S.  feared  to  shew  Eli  the  vision 

21.  the  Lord  revealed  himself  to  3.  in  Shiloh 
'  4.  1.  and  the  word  of  S.  came  to  all  Israel 

7.  6.  S.  judged  the  children  of  Israel,  15. 

9.  S.  cried  to  the  Lord  for  Israel,  the  Lord  heard 

13.  Lord  was  against  Philistines  all  the  daysof  9. 

8.  6.  displeased  S.  when  they  said,  give  us  a  king 

10.  the  people  refused  to  obey  the  voice  of  S. 

21.  and  S.  heard  all  the  words  of  the  people 
D.  15.  Lord  told  S.  in  his  ear  before  Saul  came 

24.  so  Saul  did  eat  with  S.  that  day 

26.  S.  called  Saul  to  the  top  of  the  hon^.• 
10.  1.  S.  took  a  vial  of  oil  and  anointed  San! 

14.  we  came  to  S.  ||  12.  II.  the  Lord  sent  S. 

15.  tell  me,  I  pray  thee,  what  S.  said  to  you 
2.5.  then  S.  told  the  manner  of  the  kingdom 

11. 7.  whosoever  Cometh  not  forth  after  Saul  and  S. 
12.18.  all  the  people  greatly  feared  the  Lord  andS. 

13. 8.  he  tarried  the  set  lime  that  S.  had  appointed 

15.  ll.il  grieved  S  ||  33.  S.  hewed  Agag  in  piece? 

27.  as  S.  turned  about  to  go  away,  S.  mantle  rent 
35.  nevertheless,  S.  mourned  for  Saul 

10.  10.  Jesse  made  seven  of  his  sons  pass  before  S. 
13.  S.  took  the  horn  of  oil  and  anointed  David 

19.  IH.  David  fled  and  came  to  S.  to  Ramah 

22.  he  said, where  a  re  S. and  David?  ||  25.1.  S. died 
28. 11.  Saul  said  to  the  woman,  bring  me  up  S. 

14. Saul  perceived  that  it  was  S.  and  bowed  hims. 
lCAr.6,2fl.sonsofS.l|2«.28.all  tbntS.had  dedicated 

9.  22.  whom  David  and  3.  the  seer  did  ordain 

11.  3.  according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  S. 

2  Chron.  35. 18.  was  no  passover  like  that  from  S. 
P.in/.  99. 6.  S.  among  them  that  call  on  his  name 
.Irr.  15.  1.  though  Mo.ies  and  S.  stood  before  me 
.ffrt.i  3.  24.  the  praphets  from  S.  have  foretold 

13.  20.  gave  them  juilges  4.50  years  till  S.  prophet 
Heb.  II.  32.  the  time  would  fail  me  to  tell  of  S. 

SANBALLAT. 
JVfA.  2. 10.  when  S.  heard  of  it,  it  grieved  him,  19. 

4.  1.  when  S.  heard  we  bnildid  he  was  wroth, 7. 
f).2,  S.  Si-nt  to  me,  5.  ||  14.  mv  Ood,  think  upon  S. 

12.  r.ir  Toh  nh  and  S.  had  hired  him 
13.  28.  the  Bon  of  Joiadsi  was  son-in-law  to  S. 

SAPMIR. 
Mir„  1.  11.  pass  ye  awav,  thou  inhabitant  of  S. 

■  SAPPIIIRA. 
./Jets 5.1.  Ananias, with  S.  hi<  wife  .sold  a  posseneion 

SARAH. 

Om.  17.  1.5.  not  Sarni,  but  S.  shall  her  name  be 

19.  S.  thy  wife  shall  bear  thee  a  son,  18.  14. 

18.9.  where  i«a.?||2ll.  14.  Abimolerh  restored  S. 

11.  it  ceased  to  he  withS.aOer  manner  of  women 

12.  S.  laughed  ||  13.  wherefore  did  S.  laugh  7 

20.  2.  Abraham  said  of  S.  she  is  mv  sister 

18.  because ofS.  1123.  l.venrsnf  the  life ofS.  127 

21.  1.  the  Lord  did  unto  S.  ns  he  had  spoken 
7.  that  a.  »h(Mdd  have  given  rhildron  suck 
12.  in  nil  that  S.  said  to  thee,  hi'nrken  In  her 

23,  2,  S.  died  ||  19,  Abraham  buried  S.  bis  wife 

24,  r>7,  I-aac  brought  her  in'o  his  mother  S.  lent 

25,  10,  there  w,-\s  Abraham  buried  nm!  S,  49,31, 
JVi<m.  26. 4r>.  name  oflhe  daughter  iifAsh.r  was  fl 
Ii>ii  51.2.  look  to  Abraham  and  to  S,  that  bare  you 
K^m.  4.  19   nor  yot  the  deadness  of  S.  womb 

752 


SAU 

/Jum.n.O.at  this  time  I  will  come,  S.  shall  have  a  son 
Heb- 1 1, 1 1. thro'  faith  S.receiv.  strength  to  conceive 
1  Pet.  3.  6.  as  S.  obeyed  Abraham,  calling  him  lord 

SARAI. 

Gen.  11.  29.  the  name  of  Abraham's  wife  was  9. 

.30.  but  S.  was  barren,  she  had  no  child,  16.  1. 

12.  17.  the  Lord  plagued  Pharaoh  because  of  S. 
16.6.  when  S.  dealt  hardly  with  Hagar,  she  fled 

8.  she  said,  I  flee  from  the  face  of  my  mistress  S. 

17.  15.  thou  ahalt  not  call  her  name  S,  but  Saiali 

SARDIS. 
/Ini.1.11.  write  and  send  it  to  S.  and  to  Philadelphia 
3.  1.  to  tho  angel  of  the  church  in  S.  write 

4.  a  few  names  in  S.  which  have  not  defiled 

SAREPTA. 
I.uks  4.  26.  save  to  S,  a  city  of  Sidon,  1  Kings  17.9. 

SARON. 
Jlcts  9.  35.  and  all  that  dwelt  at  S.  saw  him 

SARUCH. 
Luke  3.  35.  Nnchor,  which  was  the  son  of  S. 
SATAN,  See  Jlppellatives. 
SAUL,  callrd  SHAUL,  1  Chron.  1.  48. 
Gen.  .36.  37.  S,  of  Rehohoth  reigned  ||  38,  S,  died 
lSom.9.2.Kish  had  a  son, whose  name  was  S, 1 4, 51. 
15.  the  Lord  told  Samuel  a  day  before  S.  came 
17.  when  Samuel  saw  S.||  18.  S.drew  near  to  Sam. 
24,  set  it  before  S.  so  S.  did  eat  with  Samuel 
10. 11. is S.  also  among  the  prophets?  12,  1 19.  24. 
21. S.  was  taken  ||  11.  12.  shall  S.  reign  over  us? 
11,6.  the  Spirit  ofGod  came  upon  S,  anger  kindled 
7.  whosoev.  cometh  not  forth  after  S,  and  Samuel 
15, people  went  to  Gilgal,  there  they  made  S.  king 

13.  3.  S,  blew  the  trumpet  through  all  the  land 
7.  as  for  S.  he  was  yet  in  Gilgal, and  all  the  people 
10,S.  went  out  to  meet  Samuel  ||  15.  S, numbered 

14.  24.  for  S.  had  adjured  the  people,  saying 

35,  S.  built  an  altar  ||  37.  S.  asked  counsel  ofGod 
4B,  S.  went  up  from  following  the  Phili3tin(a 
.52.  when  S.  saw  any  strong  man,  he  took  him 

15  II.  it  repenteth  me  that  I  have  set  up  S. 

31.  Samuel  turned  again  after  S.  S.  worshipped 
35,  p.m\  Samuel  came  no  more  to  see  9. 
16.  1,  Iiord  said,  how  longwilt  thou  mourn  for  S,7 
2,  if  S.  hear  it  ||  18.  6.  came  out  to  meet  king  S. 

14.  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  departed  from  S. 

23.  the  evil  Spirit  from  G.  was  on  S.  18. 10. 1 19,9, 

17.S.  am  not  I  a  Philistine,  and  you  servants  to  S.? 

12.  Jesse  went  for  an  old  man  in  the  days  of  S. 

19.  S.  and  all  Israel  were  in  the  valley  of  Elah 
33.  and  S,  armed  David  with  his  aimour 

18,  9.  S,  eyed  David  from  that  day  and  forward 
12,  S.  afraid  of  David;  Lord  departed  from  S, 

15,  when  S,  saw  that  he  behaved  very  wisely,  30. 
29,  S,  became  David's  enemy  continually 

19.4,  Jonathan  spake  good  of  David  to  S  his  father 
7. Jon,  brought  David  loS.he  wasas  in  times  past 
11,  S,  sent  messengers  to  take  David,  14,  15,20 

20,  25,  Abner  sat  by  S.  side  ||  33.  S.  cast  a  javelin 
21.10.  David  arose  and  fled  that  day  for  fear  of  S 

11.  saying,  S.  hath  slain  his  thousands,  29.  5. 

22,  22,  I  knew  that  he  would  surely  tell  S. 

23,  11.  wills,  come  down  as  thy  serv,  hath  heard  ? 
17.  shall  be  king,  and  that  9.  my  father  knoweth 
28.  S.  returned  from  pursuing  after  David 

24,  4,  David  cut  ofTtlie  skirt  of  S,  robe  privily 

7,  David  suffered  them  not  to  rise  against  9. 

8.  David  cried  after  S.  ||  22.  David  aware  to  9. 
26.4.  David  understood  S.  was  come  in  very  deed 

5,  and  David  beheld  the  place  where  S.  lay 
7.  beholil,  S.  lay  sleeping  within  the  trench 
17.  S.  knew  David's  voice  1|  25.  S,  returned 

27,  1,  I  shall  perish  one  day  by  the  hand  of  9. 

28,  9.  behold,  thou  knowes't  what  S.  hath  done 

10,  S,  swiire  to  her  by  Lord  ||  12.  for  thou  art  S. 

20.  S.  fill  straightway  all  along  on  the  earth 

29,  3.  is  not  this  David  servant  of  S,  king  of  Nra"l  7 
31.  2,  the  Philistines  followed  hard  upon  9,  and 

his  sons,  and  slew  Jonathan,  1  Chron.  10,  2, 
7,  that  S,  and  his  sons  were  dead,  I  Chron.  10. 7. 

11.  when  inhiibil.  of  Jahesh-gil.-ad  heard  what 
the  Philistines  had  done  to  S.  I  Chron.  10.  11. 

2 Sam.  1.6,  leaned  on  his  spear  ||  21,  the  shield  of  9. 
2».  ve  daughters  of  Israel,  weep  over  9. 

2.  7.  be  vo  valiant,  for  your  master  9.  is  dead 

3.  1.  the  house  of  S,  waxed  weaker  and  weaker 
10.  to  Iranslaie  the  kingdom  from  hnu^eofS  and 

to  set  up  the  throne  of  David,  1  Chron.  12,  23, 

4.  10.  one  brought  tidings,  sayin",  9,  is  dead 
5.2,  in  time  pnst,  when  9,  was  king,  1  rAr»n.ll.2. 
7,  15,  mercy  shall  not  depart,  as  I  took  it  from  S. 
9.  1,  is  there  vet  any  left  of  the  hoii"e  of  9,7  3. 

7,  (  will  restore  thee  all  the  land  of  9,  thv  father 
12.  7.  di'livered  thee  nut  of  th-  hand  olS.  22.  1. 

16  8,  on  thee  nil  the  blood  of  the  house  of  S. 

21,  I.  it  is  for  9,  and  for  hie  hloodv  house 

4.  will  have  nn  silver  nor  gold  of  S,  nor  his  house 
12, David  took  the  hones  of  S, from  men  of  Jiibesh 
1  Chron.  5.  10,  in  the  days  of  S.  they  made  war 
10  i:i.  "oS.died  for  his  itansgre9<ion  ng,  the  Lord 
12.  1.  David  kepi  bim»elf  close  boQause  of  9. 


SHA      tPBOMR^AKO• 

'  1  Chr.  l.T  3.  we  inr]uired  not  at  it  in  the  days  of  9 
26.  28.  all  that  Samuel  and  8.  had  dedicated 
fsa.  10.  29.  Ramah  is  afraid,  Cibeah  of  S.  is  fled 
Jlcts  7.58.at  a  young  man's  feet  whouc  name  was  9. 
8.  1.  and  S.  was  consenting  unto  his  death 
3.  as  for  9.  he  made  havoc  of  the  church 
9. 4, 9,  S,  why  iwrsccntest  thou  me  7  22.  7. 1 26. 14, 

11.  and  inquire  for  one  called  S.  of  Tarsus 
17.  brother  9.  the  Lord  hath  sent  me,  22. 13. 
22.  but  S.  increased  more  in  strength 

24.  but  their  laying  wait  was  known  ofS. 

26.  when  9.  was  come  to  Jerusalem,  he  assayefl 

11.  25.  Barnabas  went  to  Tarsug  to  seek  9. 

30.  sent  relief  by  the  hands  of  Barnabas  and  3. 

13.  1.  at  Antioch  prophets  brought  up  with  9. 

2.  Holy  Ghost  said,  separate  me  Barnabas  and  S 
7.  Sergius  Paulus  called  for  Barnabas  and  S. 
9.  9.  set  his  eyes  on  him,  and  said,  ()  full  of  all 

21.  God  gave  unto  them  3.  the  son  of  Cii 

Sec  Jonathan. 

SCEVA. 

.^cts  19. 14.  there  were  seven  sons  of  one  S.  a  Jew 

SCYTHIAN. 
Col.  3.  II.  where  there  is  neither  barbarian,  9. 

9EBA. 
Grn.  10.  7.  the  sons  of  Ciish,  9.  and  Havilah 
P5a/.72.10.thekingsofShebaandS,sh.iIIofltrgiftj 
fsa.  43.  3.  I  gave  Ethiopia  and  S,  for  thee 

SEIR. 
Gen.  32.  3.  to  the  land  of  S.  the  country  of  Edora 
33.  14.  lead  eofllv,  till  I  come  to  my  lord  to  S. 
36.20,  these  arc  the  sons  of  9.  21.  1  Chron.  1.38 
JVnm.  24.  18.  9.  shall  be  a  possession  for  enemiea 
Dent.  1.  44,  the  Amorites  destroyed  you  in  9. 
33.2.the  Lord  came  from  Sinai  androseupfromS. 
.Tuilg.  5.* 4    Lord,  when  thou  wentest  out  of  S. 
2  C/iron.'iO.  23.  ma<le  nnend  of  the  inhabitants  of  9, 
25,  II.  Amaziah  smote  of  children  of  9.  10,000 

14.  he  brought  the  gods  of  the  children  of  S. 
fsa.  21.  II.  he  callelh  to  me  out  of  S.  watchman 
Ezek.  25.  8.  because  that  Moab  and  S.  do  say 

J»nvnl  SEIR. 
Gen.  14.  6.  and  the  Horites  in  their  moant  9. 
36.  8.  thus  i^welt  E^au  in  mount  9.  9. 
Deut.  2.  1,  we  compassed  mount  S.  many  days 
5.  I  have  given  mount  S.  to  Esaii,  .fosh.  24.  4. 

1  CAr.4.42,  ofsonsofSimeon  .500  went  to  mount  S 

2  C^r. 20, 10.  mount  9.  whom  woiiW.-t  not  let  invada 

22.  the  Lord  set  ambtisbments  against  mount  S 

23.  Ammon  and  Moibstood  up  against  mountS 
Ezek.  35.  2.  set  thy  face  against  mount  S. 

3,  say  to  it,  behold,  O mounts.  lam  against  the* 
7.  thus  will  I  m:ike  mnmtt  S.  mo.st  desolate,  15, 

9ELEIICIA. 
.^cts  13.  4.  being  sent  forth,  they  departed  unto  9 

SKMEI. 
T.uke  3.  26.  Matlnthias  which  was  the  son  of  9. 

9ENNACHI".RIB. 

2  Kimrs  13,13,  9.  cnme  up  ag:iin>t  Jndah,  ^-0,36,1 

19,  16.  see,  anil  hear  the  words  ofS.  A«a,  37,  17. 

20,  thou  hast  prayed  to  me  against  9.  tsa.  Xt.  21, 

36.  S,  departed  aiiil  dwelt  at  Nineveh,  A-n.  37.37. 

2 CTiron. 32.  22.  the  Lord  saved  Hezekiah  from  8. 

SEPHARVAIM. 
^Kings  17,24.kinpof  .Assvria  brought  menfrnmS. 

18.  34,  where  are  the  ?oiJs  ofS.?   ha.  36   19. 

19.  13.  where  is  the  king  of  S,7  ha.  37.  13. 

SERAIAH. 
2 .9/iTn.8. 17, 7adok  the  priest,  and  S.  was  the  seribs 
2  Kings  25.  18.  the  captain  of  the  guard  took  9, 
the  chief  priest,  and  TIephaniah,  .Tt.  ,52.  24. 
23.  there  enme  to  Gedaliah,  S.  ./t.  40.  8. 
I  CAron.4,  14,  S.  begat  Joah  ||  35  Josihiab  son  of9, 
6.  14.  Azariah  begat  9,  and  9.  h'^gal  Jeho/adak 
Fzrn  7.1.  Ezra  the  son  of  S.  ||  .WA,  10,2,  9.  sealed 
-V./1.  11.  II.  S.  was  ruler  of  the  house  of  God 

12.  1.  S.  the  priest  went  up  with  Zernbhnbel 

12.  the  chief  of  the  fathers  ofS    Meraiah 

Jer.  36,  2  \  thi-  kingeommnnd"d  S.  to  lake  Rariich 

51.59.  the  word  whirh  Jeremiah  commanded  8. 

the  sou  of  Nerinh.  ihi«  9,  was  a  quiet  prncs 

61.  Jeremiah  snid  lo9,  when  comest  to  Babylon 

SERlHUS  PAULUS. 

Jirts  13.  17.  S,  Paulus  a  prudent  man,  the  deputy 

SETH. 

G-n.  5.  3,  a  son  a'^er  his  image,  and  called  him  9. 

6.  S.  Ivgnt  Enos.  1  Chron.  1.  1.  I  vl;e  3.  38. 

SHADRACII.  s;re  Ab«:t>-neoo. 

SI1A1.1M,  J 

I  .Sam.  9.  4.  S.  then  ihev  pas..ed  thro'  the  land  ofS,  1 

SIIAI.I9HA. 

1  Sam.  9.  4.  ho  pas-ed  thronrh  the  land  of  9. 

SHALI.UM. 

2  Kinps  15, 10,  S,  «on  of  Jnhe«h  killrd  /arhnriah 

14,  Menahem  stew  9.  son  of  Jabevh  in  Samaria 
22. 14.  Hilkiah  the  pries'  went  to  Hiddnh  the  pro- 
phetess, the  wit"'  of  S.  2  ChrnTi.  31.  22. 

1  Cfcron.  2  40.  of  Jndah,  S  ||  4.  25.  of  Simeon.  S 
R  12  of  Levi,  S.  II  7.  13,  S,  the  son  of  NniditftU 
9  17.  9,  B  porter,  19.  |1  31,  S.  the  KorahiW 


PROf  XR  NxHBa.]     SHE 

Chren.  28.  12.  Jehizkiah  the  son  of  S.  stood  up 

Eira  2.  42.  the  children  oftlie  porters,  the  childrpii 

of  S.  10.  24.  JVe/i.  7.  45.  ./er.  35.  4. 

7.  2.»S.  the  son  of  Zadok,  the  son  of  Ahitub 
10.  42.  S.  and  Amariah  hud  taken  strange  wives 

JVeA.  3.  12.  next  unto  him  repaired  S.  15. 

yer.22.11.  thussaithLord  touching  S.son  ofJosiuh 

32.7.Hananicel  the  son  ofiS.thinc  uncle  shall  come 

SHALMANEZER. 

2  Kings  17.  3.  S.  came  up  against  Sjimaria,  18.9. 

SHAMGAR. 
Judg.  3.  31.  after  him  was  S.  the  son  of  Anath 
5.  t).  the  days  of  S.  high-ways  were  unoccupied 

SHAMMAH. 
Om.  36.  13.  the  son  of  Reuel,  S.  17.  1  Chr.  1.  37. 
liam.  16. 9.  S.  tlie  son  of  Jesse,  17. 13.  1  Chr.  2.  13. 
2  Sam.  23.  II.  after  him  was  b.  the  Ilararitc,  33. 
25.S.lhe  Haroilite  ||  ICAr.  7.37.son  of  Zophah,S. 
SHAMMUAH. 
JVum.l3.4.ofReuben  to  spytheland,S.8on  ofZaccur 
2  Sam.  5.  14.  S.  the  son  of  David,  1  Chron.  14.4. 
JVeA.  11.  17.  Abda  son  of  S.  dwelt  at  Jerusalem 

SHAPHAN. 
2  Kings  22.  3.  king  Josiah  sent  S.  the  scribe  to  re- 
pair the  house  of  the  Lord,  2  Chron.  34.  8. 

8.  Hilkiah  gave  the  hook  to  S.  2  Chron.  34. 15. 
12.  the  king  commanded  Ahikam  the  son  of  S. 

and  S.  the  scribe  to  inquire  of  the  Lord 
25.  22.  Ahikam  the  son  of  S.  ./er.  39. 14.  |  40.11. 
/er  .26.24. the  hand  of  son  of  S.  was  with  Jeremiah 
29.3.  the  words  Jeremiah  sent  by  Elasah  son  of  S. 
36. 10.  read  in  the  chamber  of  Gemariah  son  of  S. 
Kiek.  8. 11.  in  the  midst  stood  Jaazaniah  son  of  S. 

SHAPHAT. 
A"Km.l3.5.ofthe  tribe  ofSimeon,S.tospy  theland 
IKings  19. 16. anoint  Elisha  son  ofS.  to  be  prophet 
2  Kings  6.  31.  if  the  head  of  Elisha  the  son  of  S. 

1  Chron.  3.  22.  the  sons  of  Shemaiah,  Noariah,S. 
5.  12.  of  the  Gadkes,  S.  in  Bashan  chief 
27.29.over  the  herds  in  valleys  was  S.son  of  Adiai 

SHAREZER. 

2  Kings  19.  37.  S.  his  son  smote  him,  Isa.  37. 38. 

SHARON. 
1  Chron.  5.  16.  they  dwelt  in  all  the  suburbs  of  S, 

27.  29.  over  the  herds  that  fed  inS.  was  Shilrai 
Cant.  2. 1.  lam  the  rose  of  S.  thelily  of  the  valleys 
/«a..'<3.9.S.  is  like  a  wilderness, Bashan  and  Carmel 

35.  2.  the  e.xcellency  of  Carmel  and  S.  given  thee 

65. 10.  S.  shall  be  a  fold  of  flocks  and  val.  of  Achor 

SHEALTIEL,  See  Zerubbabel. 

SHEAR-JASHUB. 

ha.  7.  3.  go  forth  to  meet  Ahaz,  thou  and  S. 

SHEBA,  SHEBAH. 
Oen.  10.7.  son  ofRaamah  S.  {|  28.  S.  sonof  Joktan 

25.  3.  Jokshan  begat  S.  and  Dedan,  1  Chr.  1.32. 

26.  33.  Isaac  called  the  well  S.  city  Beer-sheba 
Josh.  19.  2.  Simeon  had  in  their  inheritance  S. 
1  Kings  10. 1.  ivhen  queen  of  S.  heard  of  the  fame 

of  Solomon  she  came  to  prove  him,2  Chron.  9.1. 

1  Chron.  1.  9.  the  son  ofRaamah  S.  ||  22.  of  Joktan 
5.  13.  of  the  children  of  Gad,  S.  and  Jorai 

Job  6.  19.  the  companies  of  S.  vvaited  for  them 
Psal.  72. 10.  kings  of  S.  and  Seba  shall  offer  gifts 
15.  to  him  shall  be  given  of  gold  of  S.  fsa.  &).  6. 
/er.  6.  20.  to  what  purpose  is  incense  from  S.  ? 
E:ei.27.22.the  merchants  of  S. thy  merchants,  23. 
38. 13.  S.  shall  say,  artthou  come  to  take  a  spoil? 
See  BiCHRi. 
SHEBNA. 

2  Kings  18. 18.  when  had  called  to  the  king  there 

came  to  Rnb-shakeh  S.  the  scribe,  37.  Isa.  36.  3. 

19.  2.  Hezekiah  sent  S.  to  Isaiah,  Isa.  37.  2. 
fsa.  22.  15.  go,  get  thee  to  this  treasurer,  S. 

SHECHEM. 
Oen.  33.  18.  Jacob  came  to  Salem  a  city  of  S. 

19.  he  bought  at  the  hand  of  Hamor  S.  father 

34.  2.  S.  lay  with  Dinah  |l  26.  they  slew  S. 

35.  4.  Jacob  hid  them  under  an  oak  that  was  by  S. 
37.  12.  went  to  feed  their  father's  flock  in  S. 

14.  Joseph  came  from  the  vale  of  Hebron  to  S. 
JVum.  26.  31.  of  S.  the  family  of  the  Shechcmifes 
Josk.  17.  2.  there  was  a  lot  for  the  children  of  S. 

20.  7.  S.  in  mount  Ephraim  a  city  of  refuge,  and 

Hebron  in  Judah,21. 21.1  CAron.6.67. 
24. 1.  Joshua  gathered  all  the  tribes  of  Israel  to  S. 

32.  and  the  bones  of  Joseph  buried  they  in  S. 
Tudg.  8.  31.  Gideon's  concubine  in  S.  bare  a  son 
9.  1.  Abimelech  the  sun  of  Jeruhbaal  went  to  S. 

7.  Jotham  cried,  hearken  to  me,  ye  men  of  S. 

20.  let  fire  come  out  from  the  men  of  S. 

28.  whoisS.t  II  31.  Gaal  and  brethren  come  to  .S. 
41.  thrust  out,  that  they  should  not  dwell  in  S. 
57.  the  evil  of^the  men  of  S.  did  God  render 

t  Kings  1^.  1.  Rehoboam  went  to  S.  2  Chron.  10. 1. 

25.  Jeroboam  built  S.  in  mount  Ephraim 
I  Chron.  7.  79.  the  sons  of  Shemida,Ahian  and  S. 
Psal.  60.  6.  I  will  rejoice,  I  will  divide  S.  108.  7. 
Jer.  41.  5.  that  there  came  certain  from  S. 

SHELAH. 

Gen.  38.  5.  Judah'i  son  S.  li  11.  till  3.  be  growa 

753 


SH 


fi'cn.33.2G.becau3e  that  I  gave  her  not  to  S. my  son 

46.  12.  the  sonsof  Judah,  Er,  Onan  and  S.J\rum. 

26.  20.  1  Ckron.2.3.  |  4.21. 

1  Chron.  1. 18.  Arphaxad  begat  S.  and  S.  £ber,24. 

SHELEMIAH. 
1  Chron.  26.  14.  the  lot  eastward  fell  to  S. 
Ezra  10.39.S.and  Nathan  had  taken  strange  wives 
JVeh.  13.  13.  I  made  S.  the  priest  treasurer 
Jer.  36.  14.  S.son  of  Chushi  |{  26. S.sonof  Abdeel 

SHELUMIEL. 

JVum.  1.  6.  the  prince  of  Simeon,  S.  the  son  of 

Zurishaddai,  2.  12.  |  7.  36.  |  10.  19. 

SHEM. 

Oen.  5.  32.  Noah  begat  S.  6. 10.  |  10. 1. 1  Chr.  1.  4. 

9.  23.  S.  took  a  garment  and  went  backward 

26.  Noah  said,  blessed  be  the  Lord  God  of  S. 

27.  and  he  shall  dwell  in  the  tents  of  S. 
10.21.thechildren  of  S.22.31.  1 11.  10. 1  Chr.  1. 17 

Luke  3.  36.  Arphaxad,  which  was  the  son  of  S. 

SHEMAIAH. 
1  Kings  12.  22.  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  S. 
the  man  of  God,  2  Chron.  11.  2.  |  12.  7. 
1  Chron.  4.  37.  of  Simeon,  Shimri  the  son  of  S. 

5.  4.  of  Reuben,  S.  the  son  of  Joel 

9.  14.  of  the  Levites,  S.  16.  |  15.  8,  11.  |  24.  6, 
I  26.  4,  6,  7. 2  Chron.  17.  8.  1  29.  14.  |  31.  15. 
I  35.  9.  Ezra  8.  16.1  10.  21,  31. 

Ezra  8.  13.  S.  the  son  of^Adonikam  went  up 
JVeh.  3.  29.  S.  keeper  of  the  east-gate,  repaired 

6.  10. 1  came  to  the  house  of  S.  son  of  Delaiah 

10.  8.  S.  a  priest  sealed  ||  12.  34.  S.  priest,  42. 

11.  15.  of  the  Levites,  S.  12.  6,  18,  35,  36. 
./er.  26.  20.  Urijah  the  son  of  S.  who  prophesied 

29.  24.  say  to  S.  the  Nehelamite,  31,  32. 
36.  12.  and  Delaiah  the  son  of  S.  a  prince 

SHEMINITH. 
1  Chron.  15.  21.  with  har|)s  on  the  S.  to  excel 

SHENIR. 
Deut.  3.  9.  which  Hermon  the  Amorites  call  S. 
Cant.  4.  8.  look  from  the  top  of  S.  and  Hermon 

SHEPHATIAH. 
2Sam.  3. 4.  S.  the  fifth  son  of  David,  1  Chron.  3.  3. 
1  CAro«.9. 8.  Meshullnm  son  of  S. dwelt  in  Jerus. 

12.  5.  S.  the  Harufihite  came  to  David  to  Zikia 
27.  16.  the  ruler  of  the  Simeoniles  was  S. 

Ezra  2.  4.  the  children  of  S.  372,  JVih.l.  9. 

./er.  38.  l.S.  heard  the  words  of  Jeremiah  to  people 

SHESHACH. 
Jer.  25.  26.  the  king  of  S.  shall  drink  after  them 
51.  41.  how  is  S.  taken  I  how  is  Babylon  become 

SHESHBAZZAR. 
Ezra  1.8.  he  numbered  them  to  S.  prince  of  Judah 
11. all  these  did  S. bring  up  from  Biibylon  toJerus 
5. 14.  delivered  to  S.  whom  he  had  made  governor 
16.  S.  laid  the  foundation  of  the  house  of  God 
SHIBBOLETH. 
.hidiT.  12.  6.  say  now  S.  and  he  said  Sibholeth 
SHILOH  for  MESSIAH,  See  Jlppcllatives. 
SHILOH. 
./osh.  18.  1.  all  Israel  assembled  together  at  S. 
8.  that  i  may  here  cast  lots  for  you  in  S.  10. 

22.  9.  Reuben  departed  from  Israel  out  of  S. 
Judg.  18. 31.  the  time  that  house  of  God  was  in  S. 

21.  12.  they  brought  the  young  virgins  to  S. 
19.  there  is  a  feast  of  the  Lord  in  S.  yearly 
21.  if  the  daughters  of  S.  come  out  to  dance 
1  Sam.  1.  3.  Elkanah  went  up  to  worship  in  S. 
24.she  brought  Samuel  to  house  of  the  Lord  in  S. 
2.  14.  so  did  the  priests  in  S.  to  all  the  Israelites 
3.21. the  Lord  appeared  again  in  S.  Lord  revealed 
4.  3.  let  us  fetch  the  ark  of  the  Lord  out  of  S. 

12.  a  man  came  to  S.  with  his  clothes  rent 
14.  3.  Ahiah  son  of  Ahitub  the  Lord's  priest  in  S. 

1  Kings  2.27.the  word  against  the  house  of  Eli  in  S. 
14.  2.  get  thee  to  S.  to  Ahijah  the  prophet 
4.  Jeroboam's  wife  arose  and  went  to  S. 
Psal.  78.  60.  he  forsook  the  tabernacle  of  S. 
./er.  7.  12.  but  go  ye  to  my  place  which  was  in  S. 
14.  I  will  do  to  this  house  as  I  have  done  to  S. 
26.  6.  then  will  I  make  this  house  like  S.  9. 
41.  5.  there  came  certain  from  S.  and  Samaria 

SIHLOAH. 

fsa.  8.  6.  this  people  refuselh  the  waters  of  S. 

SHILONITE,  .See  Ahijah. 

SHIMEAH. 

2.5am. 13  3.  Ammon  had  a  friend,  Jonadab  son  ofS 

David's  brother,  32.  |  21.  21.  1  Chron.  20.  7. 

1  Chron.  3.  5.  S.  was  born  to  David  in  Jerusalem 
6.  39.  Asaph  son  of  Berachiah,  the  son  of  S. 

SHIMEI. 

2  Sam.  16.  5.  S.  son  of  Gera  of  Bahurim,  19.  16. 

13.  S.  went  along  on  the  hill's  side  and  rurped 
1  /ri?i^«2. 8.  thou  hast  with  thee  S.  who  cursed  me 

39.  that  two  of  the  servants  of  S.  ran  away 
4.  18.  8.  the  son  of  Elah,  officer  in  Benjamin 
1  CAr.3. 19.  S.son  of  Pedaiah  ||  5.4.  S.  sAnof  Joel 
4.  26.  the  sons  of  Mishma  ;  Hamnel,  Zaccur,  S. 

27.  S.  had  sixteen  sons  and  six  dausrhters 
6.17.  S.son  of  Ger8hom,42.  |  23.7.  ||  29.  of  Merari 

23.  9.  wns  of  S.  10.  ||  25.  17.  the  tenth  lot  to  S. 
5G 


SIL 

1  CAron.  27. 27.  over  vineyards  was  S.  Ramatbit« 

2  Chron.  2'J.  14.  the  sons  of  Heman,  JehielandS, 
31.  12.  over  the  dedicated  things  was  S  13. 

Ezra  10.  2:i.  S.  had  taken  a  strange  wife,  33,  33. 
Esth.  2.  5.  Mordecai  son  of  Jair,  the  son  of  8. 
Zech.  12.  13.  the  family  of  S.  shall  mourn  apart 

SHIAISHAL 
Eira  4.  8.  S.  the  scribe  wrote  a  letter,  9. 
17.  the  king  sent  un  answei  to  S.  the  scribe 
SHINAK. 
Oen.  10.  10.  Accad  and  Calneh  in  the  land  of  8. 
11.  2.  that  tiiey  found  a  plain  in  the  land  of  S 
14.  1.  in  the  days  of  Amraphel  king  of  S. 
/«a. 11. 11. recover  the  remnant  IromS. and  Hamath 
/Jan.  1.  2.  w  hich  he  carried  into  the  land  of  S. 
Zcc/i.  5.  11.  to  build  it  a  house  in  the  land  of  S. 
SIllSHAK. 

1  Kings  14.25. in  fifUi  year  of  Rehoboam,  S.king  of 
Egypt  came  up  against  Jerusalem,  2  Chr.  12.  i. 

2  Chr.  12. 5.  to  princes  that  were  gathered  together 
because  of  S.  I  left  you  in  the  hand  of  B. 

7.  wrath  shall  not  be  poured  out  on  Jerus.  by  S. 

9.S.took  awaythe  treasures  of  the  house  of  Lord 

SHITTIM. 

JVum.25. 1. Israel  abodeinS.peoplebegan  to  commit 

./osh.  2.  I .  sent  out  of  S.  two  men  to  spy  the  land 

3.  1.  they  removed  from  S.  and  came  to  Jordan 

Jorl  3.  18.  and  shall  water  the  valley  of  S. 

Mic.  6. 5.  Balaam  answered  him  from  S.  to  Gilgal 

SHUAH. 

f?e».2o.  2.  Kelurah  bare  Ishbak,  S.  1  Chron.  1.32. 

38. 2.  Judah  married  the  daughter  of  a  Canaanite 

named  S.  12.  1  CAron.  2.  3. 

SHUAL. 

1  Sam.  13.  17.  the  spoilers  turned  to  the  land  of  S. 

SHUHITE,  Sec  Bii.njiD. 

SHULAMITE. 

Cant.  6.  13.  return  O  S.  what  wiilyesecin  theS.t 

SHUNAMITE. 

1  Kings  \.  3.  and  found  a  fair  damsel  Abishag  a 3 

2.  17.  that  he  give  me  Abishag  the  S.  to  wife 
22.why  dost  thou  nskAbishag  theS.for  Adonijah 

2  Kings  4. 12.  call  this  S.  36.||25.  yonder  is  that  8. 
SHUSHAN. 

.ATfA.  1.  1.  it  came  to  pass  as  I  was  in  S.  the  palace 
Eslh.  2.  8.  many  maidens  were  gathered  to  S. 

3.  15.  hut  the  city  S.  was  perplexed 

4.  16.  gather  all  ihe  Jews  in  S.  and  fast  for  ma 

8.  15.  the  city  of  S.  rejoiced  and  was  glad 

9.  H.  number  slain  in  S.  was  brought  to  the  king 
15.  the  Jews  slow  in  S.  three  hundred  men 

Sec  Palace. 
SIBMAII,  Sec  Vine. 
SIDON,  called  ZIDON,  1  Chron.  1   13. 
Oen.  10.  15.  Canaan  begat  S.  his  first-born 

19.  tlie  border  of  the  Canaanites  was  from  S. 
Judg.  18.  28.  because  Laish  was  far  from  S. 
Mat.  11.21.  if  works  had  been  done  in  Tyre  and  S. 
22.it  shall  be  more  tolerable  for  S.Luke  10.13,14. 
15.21.  Jesusdeparted  into  the  coasts  of  Tyre  andS. 
behold,  a  woman  of  Canaan  came,  Markl.'i^ 
Mark  3.8.they  about  Tyre  and  S.came,/,uA:c  6. 17 
7.  31.  departing  from  the  coasts  of  Tyre  and  S. 
/,KAe4.26.io  none  sent,  save  to  Sare(>ta  a  city  of  8 
J/cts  12.  20.  Herod  was  displeased  with  them  of  8* 
27.  3.  and  the  next  day  we  touched  at  S. 

SIGIONOTH. 
Hab.  3. 1.  aprayerof  Ilaliakkuk  the  prophet  on  3. 

SIHON. 

JVwm.21.23.S.  would  not  suffer  Isr.to  pass  thro'  hii 

border,  but  went  out  against  \&T:\c\y/udg.  1 1.  20. 

27.  let  the  city  of  S.  be  built  and  prepared 

28.  a  flame  is  gone  out  from  the  city  of  S. 
34.  do  to  him  as  thou  didst  to  S.  Deut.  3.  2,  6. 

/)fiit.2.30.S.king  of  Heshbon  would  not  let  us  pass 

31.  behold,  I  have  begun  to  give  S.  and  his  land 

32.  S.  came  out  against  us,  29.  7.  ./udg.  11.20. 
31.  4.  the  Lord  shall  do  to  them  as  he  did  to  S. 

.Tosh.  9.  10.  all  that  he  did  to  S.  king  of  Heshbon 
Judg.  II.  21.  God  delivered  S.  into  hand  of  Israel 
.VcA.  9.  22.  so  they  po.snessed  the  land  of  S. 
Jer.  48. 45.  a  fl  ime  .«ha!l  come  from  the  midst  of  S. 

SIHON  king  of  the  .f/moritcs. 

JVum.  21. 21.  and  Israel  sent  messengers  to  S.  king 

of  the  .Imoritcs,  Deut.  2.  26.  Judg.  II.  19. 

26.Hoshlic.n  was  a  city  ofS.king  of.^../nsh.n.i. 

29.his  daughters  into  captivity  toS.  king  of  .^m. 

34.ns  thou  didst  toS.king  ofy/morilcs,r)eur.3.2. 

/?cut.1. 4. after  he  had  slain  B.king  nf  theJ/  moriles, 

and  king  of  Bashan,  Psal.  135.  II.  |  136. 19. 

.ro.?A.13.I0.citipsofS.A(n^o/.4m.  ||  2I.kingd.ofS 

lA'!ng's4.19.Gebar  officer  in  countryofS.Ai'n^ojW. 

SIHOR. 
.Josh.  13.  3.  from  S.  which  is  before  EgypttoEkroo 
.Tcr.  2.18.in  way  ofEgvpt  to  drink  the  waters  of  8 

SILAS. 

Jlcts  15.  22.  sent  S.  ch^efamong'the brethren,  27. 

34.  it  pleased  S.  to  abide  there  still 

40.  Paul  cho»e  S.  H  16.  19.  caught  Paul  and  9 

16.  25.  at  midnight  Paul  and  S.  prayed  aadtoaf 


SIV 

Stfi  16. 29.  the  gaoler  fell  down  before  Paul  and  S. 
17.  4.  some  of  them  consoried  with  Puul  and  S. 
10.  Beutaway  S.by  nij,'lit||18.5.  when  S.wascoine 

15.  receiving  a  comiiiundinent  to  S.  to  come 

SlLO.\H,SlLO.\M. 
AVA.  3. 15.  Shallum  repaired  the  wall  of  pool  of  S. 
John^.  7.  Jesus  said,  go  wash  in  the  pool  of  S.  11. 

SILOE. 
Lvike  13.  4.  upon  whom  the  lower  in  S.  fell 

SII.VANUS. 
2Cor.  1. 19.  was  preached  among  you  by  me  and  S. 
1  Thcss.  1. 1.  Paul,  S.  and  Timollieus  to  the  church 
of  Thessalonians,  grace  be  toyou,2  77iMs.l.l. 

1  Pet.  5. 12.  by  S.  a  faithful  brother,  I  have  written 

SIMEON. 
Oe7i.29.33.  Leah  bare  a  son  and  called  his  name  S. 
34.  25.  S.  and  Levi  took  each  man  his  sword 
35. 23.  S.  son  of  Leah  II  Kiod.  1. 2.  9.  son  of  Israel 

42.  24.  Joseph  took  from  them  S.  ||  3G.  S.  is  not 

43.  23.  and  he  brought  S.  out  unto  them 

46.  10.  the  sons  of  S.  Eioil.  6.  15.  JVu7n.  1.  22.  J 
20.  12.  1  ChTon.  4.  24,  42.  |  12.  2j. 

48.  5.  ns  Reuben  and  S.  they  shall  be  mine 

49.  5.  S.  and  Levi  are  brethren,  they  slew  a  man 
Ji'iLitt.  1.6.  prince  of  S.  wasSheluniiel,2. 12.  |  7.36. 
Devil.  27.  12.  S.  Levi  and  Judah  stand  to  bless 
Josh.  19. 1.  the  second  lot  came  forth  to  S. 

9.  S.  had  their  inheritance  within  Judah 
Jriig.  1.  3.  S.  went  with  Judah  ||  17.  Judah  with  S. 

2  Chron.  15.  9.  the  strangers  out  of  S.  fell  to  Asa 
34.  6.  so  did  Josiali  in  the  cities  of  S.  to  Naphtali 

Ezek.  48. 21.  S.  have  a  portion  ||  33.  one  gate  of  S. 
L,itke  2.25.  a  man  in  Jerusalem, whose  name  was  S. 
34.  S.  blessed  Joseph  and  Mary, and  said  to  Mary 
3.  30.  Levi,  which  was  the  sou  of  S. 
^cU  13.  1.  at  Antioch,  S.  that  was  called  Niger 
15.14.  S.  hath  dei  hired  how  God  did  visit  Gentiles 
Tribe  of  SIMKON. 
yum.  1.  23.  of  the  tribe  of  S.  numbered  .50,300 
2.  12.  the  tribe  ofS.  shall  pitch  by  Reuben 
10. 19.  over  the  host  of  the  tribe  of  S.  Shelumiel 
13.  5.  of  the  tribe  o/S.  Shaphat  to  spy  the  land 
34.  20.  o{  tribe  of  S.  Sheniuel  to  divide  the  land 
Josh.  19. 1.  second  lot  came  out  for  the  tribe  of  i^. 
8.  this  is  the  inheritance  of  the  tribe  of  S. 
21.  4.  Levitcs  had  out  of  tribe  of  S.Q.I  Chr.  6. 55. 
Rev.  7.  7.  of  the  tribe  uf  S.  were  sealed  12,000 

SIMON. 
^fat.  10.  4.  S.  the  Canaanitc,  Mark  3.  18. 

13.  55.  his  brethren,  Jameis,  Joses,  S.  Mark  G.  3. 

16.  17.  Jesus  said,  blessed  art  thou,  S.  Bar-jona 

17.  25.  what  Ihinkest  thou  S.  of  whom  do  the 

kings  of  the  earth  take  custom? 

26.  6.  in  (he  house  of  S.  the  leper,  Mark  14.  3. 

27.  32.  they  found  a  man  of  Cyreno,  S.  by  name, 
to  bear  the  cross,  Mark  15.  21.  Luke  23.  2G. 

JtfarJt  1.29.  they  entered  into  house  ofS.Au4c4.38. 

14.  37.  S.  slecpost  thou  1  couldsl  not  thou  watch 
Luke  5.  3.  into  one  of  the  ships,  which  was  3. 

4.  he  said  unto  S.  launch  out  into  the  deep 

10.  James  and  John  who  were  partners  with  S. 

6.  15.  and  S.  called  Zelotes,  Jicti  1.  13. 

7.  40.  S.  I  have  somewhat  to  say  unto  thee 
5K.  31.  S.  S.  Satan  hath  desired  to  have  you 

24.  34.  the  Lord  i.i  risen,  and  haih  appeared  toS. 
John  1.  41.  he  first  findeth  his  own  brother  S. 
42.  Jesus  said,  thou  art  S.  the  son  of  Jona 
6.71.JudaBlscariot  thoBonofS.  12.  4.  |  13.2,26. 
21.  15.  S.  son  of  Jonas,  lovest  thou  me?  16,  17. 
^cts 8.9.  a  man,  S.  who  beforetimc  used  sorcery 
13.  thi^n  S.  himself  believed  also,  when  baptized 
9.43.  it  came  to  pass  thatPelcr  tarried  many  days 
at  Joppa  with  one  S.  a  tanner,  10.  6,  17,  32. 
Hcc  Pbtkr. 
SIN. 
F.rod.  16.  1.  they  came  unto  the  wilderness  of  S. 

17.  1.  Urnel  journeyed  from  S.  JVum.  33.  12. 
Etek.  30.  15.  and  I  will  pour  my  fury  upon  S. 

16.  8.  shall  have  great  pain,  No  shall  be  rent 

SINAI. 
Deut.  33.  2.  the  I..ord  came  from  S.  unto  them 
Judg.  5.  5.  the  mountains  melted,  even  that  S. 
PkU.  68.  8.  P.  was  moved  at  the  presence  of  God 

17.  the  Lord  is  among  them  aa  in  S.  in  holy  place 

S.v  MorsT. 

SIKKIN. 

r)eut.  3.  9.  whirb  Ilirmun  the  Sidoninns  call  S. 

r»al.  29.  6.  Lebanon  nnd  S.  like  a  young  unicorn 

SISr.UA. 
.Judg.  4.  2.  the  captain  of  Jabin  s  host  was  3. 
17.  S.  fled  away  on  bis  feet  |1  22.  8.  lay  dead 

5.  20.  the  9lar«  in  their  courfes  fought  against  8. 
26.  and  with  the  hammer  she  unioloS. 

28.  the  mother  of  9.  looked  out  at  a  window 
1  Sam.  12.  9.  ho  Hold  them  into  the  brnd  of  S. 
Ezra  2.  53.  the  chililrim  of  9.  Neihinims  went  u| 
with  Zerubhnbel,  JVrh.  7.  55 
Psal.  83.  9.  do  unto  thr-ni,  as  to  3.  aa  to  Jabin 

8IVAN. 

Kslk.  8.  9.  the  third  monih,  that  ii  tho  month  S. 

754 


SOL 

SMYRNA. 

Rev.  1.  11.  write  and  send  to  the  church  in  S. 

2.  P.  to  the  angel  of  the  church  in  S.  write 

SO. 
2/rin"S  17.4.  he  sent  messengers  to  S.king  of  Egypt 

SODOM. 
Gen.13.10.  before  Lord  destroyed  S.  andGomorrah 
13.  the  men  of  S.  were  wicked  exceedingly 

14. 11.  they  took  all  the  goods  of  9.  and  Gomorrah 

12.  they  took  Lot  who  dwelt  in  S.  and  his  goods 
17.  the  king  of  S.  went  out  to  meet  Abram 

18.  20.  Lord  said,  because  the  cry  of  S.  is  great 
26.  if  I  find  in  S.  fifty  righteous,  1  will  spare 
19.24.  Lord  rained  upon  S.  fire  out  of  heaven 
Oeut.  29. 23.  like  the  overthrow  of  9.  and  Gomor- 
rah, Isa.  13. 19.  Jer.  49.  18.  |  50.  40. 
32.32.  their  vine  isof  the  vineof  3.  and  Gomorrah 
Isa.  1. 9.  we  should  have  been  as  9.  like  Gomorrah 
10.  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord  ye  rulers  of  S. 

3.  9.  and  they  shall  declare  their  sin  as  S. 
Jcr.  23.  14.  they  are  all  of  them  unto  me  as  S. 
Lam.  4. 6.  greater  than  the  punishment  of  sin  of  S. 
F.zek.  16.  46.  thy  younger  sister  is  3.  48,  49,  55. 

53.  when  I  bring  again  the  captivity  of  9. 
Jimosi.  11.  overthrown  you,  as  God  overthrew  S. 
Zeph.  2.  9.  as  I  live,  surely  Moab  sbnll  be  us  S. 
Mat.  10. 15.  it  shall  be  more  tolerable  for  the  land 
of  3.  11.  24.  Mark  6.  11.  Luke  10.  12. 
Luke  17.  29.  the  same  day  that  Lot  went  out  of  S. 
Rom.  9.  29.  hud  left  us  a  seed,  we  had  been  as  S. 
2  />(■«.  2. 6.  turning  cities  of  9.  and  Gom.  into  ashes 
.Turie  7.  even  as  S.  and  Gom.  nnd  cities  about  them 
Rev.  11. 8.  great  city  spiritually  call.d  S.  and  Egypt 

SODOMITE. 

Deut.iXXI.  there  shall  be  no  9.  of  the  sons  of  Israel 

SODOMITES. 

1  Kings  14.  24.  there  were  also  3.  in  the  land 

15. 12.  Asa  took  away  the  9.  ||  22.46.  Jehoshaphat 
2A'/;i'ri23.7.Josiali  brake  down  the  houses  of  theS. 

90LOMON. 

2  .Sam.  5. 14.  there  was  born  to  David  in  Jerusalem, 

S.  1  Chron.  .3.  5.  |  14.  4. 
12.  24.  he  called  his  name  S.  and  God  loved  him 
1  Kings  1.  10.  9.  his  brother  he  called  not,  19.  26. 

13.  S.  thy  son  shall  reign  after  me,  17,  30. 

21.  1,  anil  my  son  9.  shall  be  counted  offenders 
34.  God  save  king  S.  30.  ||  43.  hath  made  9.  king 
37.  L.  hath  been  with  David  even  so  be  he  with  9 
47.  God  make  the  name  of  9.  better  than  thine 
51.  let  S.  swear  to  me  that  he  will  not  slay  me 

2. 1.  David  charged  9.  his  son  ||  23.  king  9.  sware 
46.  the  kingdom  was  established  in  the  hand  of  S. 

3.  I.  3.  made  allinity  with  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt 
3.  3.  loved  the  Lord  ||  10.  S.  had  asked  this  thing 
5  the  Lord  appeared  to  S.  9.2.  2  CAj.  1.7.  |7.I2. 

4.  22.  9,  provision  forone  day  was  tliirly  measures 
2!l.  God  gave  3.  wisdom  exceeding  much,  5. 12. 
34.  came  to  hear  the  wisdom  of  3.  from  all  kings 

of  the  earth,  Mat.  12.  42.  Luke  11.  31. 

5.  1.  Hiram  king  of  Tyre  sent  his  servants  to  S. 
13.  king  3.  raised  a  levy  out  of  all  Israel 

6.  14.  so  S.  built  tho  house  and  finished  it,  2  Chr. 

7.  11.  .'/t(A-7.  47. 

7.  51.  BO  was  ended  all  the  work  that  9.  made 

8.  1.  S.  assembled  the  elilers  of  Israel,  2  Chr.  5.  2. 

22.  9.  spread  forth  his  hands  to  heaven 

54.  when  3.  made  an  end  of  praying,  2  Chr.  7.  1. 
65. 8.  held  a  feast  l|  9. 26.  3.  made  aiiavy  of  ships 

10.  1.  whon  the  queen  of  Sheba  heard  of  the  fame 

of  3.  she  came  to  prove  him,  2  Chron.  9.  1. 
24.  all  the  earth  sought  to  S.  2  Chron.  9.  2.3. 

11.  1.  but  king  3.  loved  many  strange  women 

2.  3.  clave  to  these  in  love  ||  4.  when  3.  was  old 

5.  3.  went  after  Ashtoreth  and  after  Milrnm 

6.  S.did  evil  ||  7.  built  for  Chemnsh  and  Molech 
9.  the  Lord  was  angry  with  S.  ||  27.  9.  built  Millo 

.  14.  Hadad  tho  Edomite,  an  adversary  to  3. 
28.  S.  madeJeroboamrulerover  house  of  Joseph 
40.  3.  sought  therefore  lo  kill  Jerolmam 
43.  8.  slept  with  his  fathers,  and  was  buried 

12.  2.  Jeroboam  fled  from  the  presonci^  of  S. 

14  26.  shields  of  gold  which  8.  made,  2  Chr.  12.  9. 

2/i'4n/f»21.7.<if  which  the  Lord  said  to  David  and 

to  3. 1  will  put  my  name  for  ever,  2  Chr.  33. 7. 

1  Chron.  22.  5.  8.  my  son  is  young  and  tender 
9.  for  his  name  shall  bo  S.  ||  17.  to  help  S. 

28.  6.  3.  I  by  son,  ho  shall  biiihl  my  house 

9.  thou  8.  my  ?on,  know  the<io<l  of  Ihy  fathers 
11.  David  gave  to  8.  the  pattern  of  the  house 

29.  1.  S.  mv  son,  whom  God  alone  haih  chosen 
19.  give  to  9.  my  son  a  perfect  heart  to  keep 

23.  3.  sal  on  the  throne  of  the  Lorrl  as  kin)f 
2.'i.  the  I^ord  mngnifieil  9.  exceedingly  before  Isr. 

2  Chr.  2. 17.  8.  numbered  all  ihe  strangers  in  Israel 

3.  3.  are  tho- things  wherein  9.  was  instructed 

30.  26  sinro  lime  of  8.  not  such  joy  in  Jerusalem 
F.zra  2.  55.  the  children  of  8.  Hcrvinilj',  58.  JVeh. 

7.  .57,  f.0.  1  II.  3. 
.^eh  12.  45.  nccnrding  to  tho  commandment  of  S. 
13.  20.  did  not  king  3.  sin  by  these  thingi  ? 


SYR      (rRorea  Namm 

Prov.  1.  1.  the  proverbs  of  S.  10.  1.  |  25.  1. 
Cant.  I.  1.  the  song  of  songs  which  Is  S. 

5.  I  am  black,  hut  comely,  as  the  curtains  of  S. 
3. 7.  behold,  his  bed  which  is  S.  sixty  men  ^bout  it 

11. behold  kingS.  ||  8.12.  9. must  have  a  thousand 
8.11.  S.  had  a  vineyard  at  Ilaul-hainon 
Jer.  52.  20.  the  sea  3.  made  was  carried  away 
Mat.  1.  6.  David  begat  9.  ||  7.  9.  begat  Roboam 

6.  29.  S.  in  all  his  glory  not  arrayed,  Luke  12. 27. 
12.  42.  a  greater  than  9.  is  here,  Luke  11.  31. 

John  10.  23.  and  Jesus  walked  in  9.  porch 
jfcts  3.  11.  the  people  ran  to  tlium  to  S.  porch 
5.  12.  they  were  all  with  one  accord  in  S.  porch 

SOREK. 
Judg.  16.  4.  Samson  loved  «  woman  in  valley  of  S 

S09IPATER. 
Rom.  16.21.  Jason  and  9.  my  kinsmen  salute  you 

S0STI1ENE9. 
~^cts  18.  17.  the  Greeks  took  S.  and  beat  him 
1  Cor.  1.  1.  Paul  and  9.  to  the  church  at  Corinth 

9PAIN. 
Rom.  15. 24.  whensoever  1  lake  my  journey  into  & 
28.  I  will  come  bv  you  into  S. 
STACHY9. 
Rom.  16.  9.  salute  Urbane,  and  9.  my  beloved 

STEPHANAS. 
1  Cur.  1.  16.  I  baptized  also  the  household  of  S. 
16.  15.  the  house  of  9.  the  firsf-fruiis  of  Achaia 

17.  1  am  glad  of  the  coming  of  9.  and  Fortunutua 

STEPHEN. 
Mcts  6.  5.  they  chose  S.  a  man  full  of  faith,  8. 

7.  59.  they  stoned  S.  calling  on  Gi^d,  and  Baying 

8.  2.  devout  men  carried  S.  to  h.s  burial 

11. 19. scattered  abroad  on  the  persecution  aboutS. 
22. 20.  when  the  blood  of  ihv  martyr  S.  was  shed 

9UCCOTH. 

Gen.33.l7.  Jacob  journeyed  to  9.  and  madebnolhs 

for  his  cattle,  therefore  it  is  called  8. 

Ezod.  12.  37.  Israel  journeyed  from  Ramesea  to  S. 

13.20.  they  took  their  journey  from  S.  A*um.33.5,6 

.fosh.  13.  27.  Gad  had  in  the  valley,  3.  and  Zaphoo 

Judg.  8.  5.  Gideon  said  to  the  men  of  S.  give  bread 

8.  the  men  of  Penuel  answered  as  the  men  of  8. 

16.  with  them  he  taught  the  men  of  3. 

1  Kings  7.  46.  the  king  cast  them  in  the  clay-ground 

between  9.  and  Zarthan,  2  Chron.  4.  17. 
Psal.  60. 6.  I  will  mete  out  the  valh-y  of  9.  108. 7.   % 
9UCCOTH-BENOTn. 

2  Kings  17.  30.  men  of  Babylon  made  8.  their  fcn 

8U9ANNA. 
Luke  8.  3.  Joanna  and  S.  ministered  to  Christ 

SYRIA. 

Judg.  10.  6.  Israel  served  Ihe  gods  of  9.  and  Zldon 

2  Sam.  8.  6.  David  put  garrisons  In  8.  I  Chr.  18. 6 

15.  8.  vowed  a  vow  while  I  abode  at  Geshur  in  8 

1  Kings  10.  29.  for  ihe  kings  of  9.  did  they  brine 
11.25.  Rezon  abhorred  Israel  and  reigned  overs. 
19.15.  anoint  Hazael  lo  be  kini  nfS.  2  Kings  13.3. 
22.1.  continued  without  war  hfiween  8. and  Israel 

2  Kings  5. 1.  by  Naaman  deliverance  given  lo  8. 

6.  23.  the  bands  of  S.  came  no  more  into  the  land 

7.  5.  behold,  there  was  no  man  in  the  camp  of  8. 

8.  13.  Ld.  shewed  me  that  thou  shall  be  king  of  S 
13.  7.  for  the  king  of  9.  had  ilestroycd  them 

17.  he  said,  Ihe  arrow  of  deliverance  from  8. 
19.  but  now  thou  shalt  smile  S.  but  thrice 

Hi.  f>.  Rezin  king  of  9.  recovered  Elath  lo  8. 
2  Chron.  18.  10.  with  these  thou  shall  push  S. 

24.  23.  the  host  of  S.  came  up  against  Joash 

28.  23.  because  the  gods  of  kings  of  9.  help  thciB 
Isa.  7.  2.  saying,  S.  is  confederate  with  Ephraim 
8.  tor  head  of  9.  is  Damascus, and  Rezin  of  Dam 
F.!rk.  16.  ,57.  reproach  of  the  dnughters  of  8. 

27.  1(1.  3.  was  thy  merchant  for  Ihy  wares 
Hiis.  12.  12.  Jacob  fled  fnto  the  cmiiilry  of  8. 
.flmos  1.  5.  the  people  of  3.  shall  go  into  cnptivity 
Mai.  4.  24.  his  fame  went  throughout  all  8. 
Luke  2.  2.  when  Cyrcnius  was  governor  of  S. 
.^rts  15.  23.  send  grceiing  to  the  biolhren  in  S. 
41.  he  went  through  3.  and  Cilicia,  confirming 

18.  18.  sailed  thence  inlo  9.  21.  3.  Oal.  I.  21. 

firr  Kino. 

SYRIAO. 

Dan.%  4.  the  (.'ha.deans  spake  to  tho  king  in  3. 

SYRIAN. 
Citn.  25.  20.  Rebekah  daughter  of  Beihiiel  Ihe  9 
Lal.an  the  S.  28.  .5.  |  31   20,  24 
Drvt.  26.  5.  a  3.  ready  to  perish  was  my  f  ilher 
2  Kinira  5.  20.  my  mn'sler  spared  Naamnn  this  S. 
1.^.  26.  speak  in  the  9.  hmgunse,  Isa.  30.  11. 
Kira  4.  7.  the  writing  of  the  lelliT  was  written  ia 
the  9.  tongue,  nnd  interpreled  in  Ihe  S.  tonguo 
t.uke  4.  27.  nono  clesoBed,  saving  Nnnman  the  8. 

SYRIANS. 
2  $am.  8. 5.  when  'he  S  of  Dam;isrufl  came  to  tmo- 
com  fladade/er,  David  nI -w  of  3.  2-2,0fl0meil 
6.  Ihe  3.  became  Dnviil's  servants,  1  Chr.  18.5.6 
13.  when  ho  returned  from  smiling  of  the  8. 
)0.  6.  Ihe  Ammimiics  seni  nnd  hirwl  the  3. 
1 1.  if  the  8.  be  too  strong  for  mo,  1  Chr.  19.  H 


Propcr  Nambb]    TEK 

S  Sam.  19. 19.  so  the  S.  feared  to  help  the  childron 

of  Ammon  any  more,  1  Chron.  19.  19. 

1  /Tino'sSO.  20.  the  S.  fled  and  Israel  pursued  them 

27.  Israel's  little  flocks,  but  S.  filled  the  country 

29.  Israel  slew  of  the  S.  100,000  in  one  day 

22.11.  Lord  Baith,with  these  ehalt  thou  push  the  S 

S  Kings  5.  2.  the  S.  had  taken  a  maid  captive 

6.  9.  beware,  for  thither  the  S.  are  come  down 

7.  4.  come,  let  us  fall  unto  the  host  of  the  S. 
6.theLord  made  the  host  oftheS.  to  hear  a  noise 
10.  we  came  to  camp  of  the  S.  no  man  was  there 

6.28.  S.  wounded  Joram,  29.  |  9. 15.  2  Chr.  22.  5. 
13.5.  Israel  went  out  from  under  the  hand  of  S. 
^7.  for  thou  shalt  smite  the  S.  in  Aphek 
16.  6.  the  S.  came  to  Elaih  and  dwelt  there 
Jsa.  9. 12.  the  S.  before,  and  the  Philistines  behind 
Jirr.  35. 11.  to  Jerusalem  for  fear  of  the  army  of  S. 
Jimos  9.  7.  have  not  I  brought  the  S.  from  Kir  1 

SYROPHENICIAN. 
Jlfar&7.26.  the  woman  was  a  Greek,  a  S.  by  nation 


T. 


TABEAL. 
/sa.  7.  6.  a  king  in  midst  of  it,  even  the  son  of  T. 

TABERAH. 
JVam.  U.  3.  he  called  the  name  of  the  place  T. 
Z)eu«.9. 22.  at  T.  he  provoked  the  Lord  to  wrath 

TABITHA. 
Acts  9.  36.  was  at  Joppa  a  disciple  named  T. 
40.  Peter  turning  to  the  body,  said,  T.  arise 
TABOR. 
J^Brfn-.4.6.Iiord?aid,go,and  draw  toward  niountT 
12.  shewed  that  Barak  was  gone  up  to  mount  T. 
8.  18.  what  men  were  they  whom  ye  slew  at  T.7 

1  Savi.  10.  3.  thou  ehalt  come  to  the  plain  of  T. 
Ps.  89. 12.  T^nd  Hermon  shall  rejoice  in  thy  name 
Jer.  46.  18.  Mrely,  as  T.  is  among  the  mountains 
.Hos.5.1. because  ye  have  been  a  net  spread  uponT. 

TADMOR. 

2  Chrnn.  8.  4.  Solomon  built  T.  in  the  wilderness 

TAHAPANES;  or  TEHAPHNEHES 
Jer.  2.  16.  the  children  of  T. have  broken  the  crown 
43. 7.  came  to  Egypt,  thus  came  they  even  to  T. 
46.  14.  publish  in  Noph,  and  T.  say,  stand  fist 
Eiek.  30.  18.  atT.  also  the  day  shall  be  darkened 
TAHPENES. 

1  ^irtffs  11. 19.  gave  him  the  sister  of  T.  the  queen 

TALITHA-CUMI. 
Mark  5.  41.  he  said  unto  her,  T.  damsel,  arise 

TAMAR. 
G'en.33.6.Jud.took  wife  for  Er, whose  name  wasT. 

24.  was  told  Judah,  T.  hath  played  the  harlot 
Ruth  4.  12.  thy  house  like  house  of  Pharez,  whom 

T.  bnre  to  .Tiidah,  1  Chron.  2.  4.  Mat.  1.  3. 

2  Sam.  13. 1.  Absalom  had  a  fair  sister,  named  T. 
2.  Ammon  fell  sick  for  T.  ||  22.  he  forced  T.  32. 

14. 27.  Absalom  a  daughter,  whose  name  was  T. 
Eiek.  47.  19.  the  south  side  southward  from  T. 

TAMMUZ. 
Ezck.  8.  14.  there  sat  women  weeping  for  T. 

TARSHISH. 
(7<'?i.l0.4.the sons  of  Javan,Elishah,T.  1  Chr.  1.7. 

1  Kings  10.  22.  for  the  king  had  at  sea  a  navy  of 

-  T.  with  a  navy  of  Hiram,  2  Chron.  9.  21. 

2  Chron.  20.  36.  joined  to  make  ships  to  go  to  T. 
37.the  ships  were  broken  and  not  able  logo  to  T. 

P.ial.iri.7.th«u  breakest  ships  ofT.  with  east-wind 
72.  10.  the  kings  of  T.  shall  bring  presents 

/»a.2. 16.  the  day  of  the  Lord  on  all  the  ships  ofT 
23.  1.  bowl,  ye  ships  off.  it  is  laid  waste,  14. 
6.  pass  over  to  T.  howl,  ye  inhabitants  of  the  isle 
10.  pass  through  thy  land,  O  daughter  ofT. 
60.  9.  the  ships  of  T.  shall  wait  for  me 
66.  19.  I  will  send  those  that  escape  to  T. 

./er.lO.O.silver  spread  into  plates  is  brought  from  T 

Ez'k.  27.  12.  T.  was  thy  merchant,  with  iron 

25.  the  ships  ofT.  did  sins:  of  thee  in  thy  market 
38.  13.  the  merchants  of  T.  shall  say  to  thee 

Jonah  1.  3.  .lonah  ro«e  np  to  flee  unio  T. 
4.  2.  therefore  I  fled  before  unto  T.  for  I  knew 
TARSTIS. 
Jlcts  9.  11.  inquire  for  one  Saul  ofT.  he  prayelh 
30.  the  brethren  .sent  him  forth  to  T. 
11.  25.  Barnnbas  departed  to  T.  to  seek  Paul 
21.  39.  I  am  a  man  who  am  a  Jew  ofT.  22.  3. 

T.^RTAK. 
i  Kings  17.  31.  the  A  vites  made  T.  their  god 

TEBETH. 
F.ith.  2.  16.  in  the  tenth  month,  which  isT. 

TEKEL. 
Van.  5.25.  was  written,  mene,  mene,  T.  upharsin 
27.  T.  thon  art  weiehed  in  the  balances 
TEKOAH,  nr  TEKOA.    • 
2  ^am.  14.2.  Jonb  sent  toT.to  fetch  a  wise  woman 
4.  when  the  woman  of  T.  spake  to  the  king,  9. 

1  CAron.2.  24.  Abiali  bare  .^shur  the  father  ofT. 
4.  5.  Ashur  the  father  of  T.  had  two  wives 

2  Chron.  11.  (J.  Rehoboam  built  Etam  and  T. 

755 


TIT 

2  CAr.  20.  20.  army  went  into  the  wilderness  ofT. 
Jer.  6.  1.  O  Benjamin,  blow  the  trumpet  in  T. 
./imosl.  I.Amos,  who  was  among  herdmen  ofT, 

TEMA. 
Gen.  2.5.1.5.sons  of  Ishmael,  Hadar,  T.  1  Chr.  1 .30. 
Job  6.  19.  the  troops  of  T.  looked  for  them 
fsa.  21.  14.  the  inhabitants  of  T.  brought  water 
Jer.  25.  23. 1  made  Dedan  and  T.  to  drink  the  cup 

TEMAN. 

Gen.  36.  11.  the  sons  of  Eliphaz  were  T.  Omar 

15.  duke  T.  duke  Kenaz,  42.  1  Chron.  1.  53. 

Ji!r.49.7.is  wisdom  no  more  in  T.T  counsel  perished 

20.  that  the  Lord  hath  purposed  against  T. 
Ezek.  25.  13.  I  will  make  it  desolate  from  T. 
.^mos  1.  12.  but  I  will  send  a  fire  upon  T, 
Obad.  9.  thy  mighty  men,  O  T.  shall  be  dismayed 
Hab.  3.  3.  God  came  from  T.  holy  One  from  Paran 
TEMANITE,  See  Eliphaz. 
TERAH. 
Gen.  1 1.  24.  Nahor  begat  T.  1  Chron.  1.  26. 
26.  T.  begat  Abram,  27.  Josh.  24.  2. 
31.  T.  took  Abram  his  son,  and  Lot.and  went  out 
TERAPHIM. 
.Tudg.  17.  5.  the  man  Micah  made  an  Ephod  and  T. 
18.  14.  in  these  houses  is  T.  ||  20.  took  the  T. 
Hos.  3.4.  Israel  shall  abide  many  days  without  T. 

TERTIUS. 
Rom.  16. 22. 1 T.  who  wrote  this  epistle  salute  you 

TERTULLUS. 

Acts  24.  1.  with  a  certain  orator,  named  T. 

2.  T.  began  to  accuse  Paul,  saving 

TETRARCH,  See  Herod. 

THEBEZ. 

Jiido-.9.50.  then  went  Abimelech  toT.  and  tookT. 

2  Sam.  11.  21.  smote  Abimelech  that  he  died  in  T. 

THEOPHILUS. 
Luke  J.  3.  to  write  to  thee,  most  excellent  T. 
Acts  1.  1.  the  former  treatise  have  I  made,  O  T. 

THESSALONICA. 
Jlcts  17.  1.  at  T.  was  a  synagogue  of  the  Jews 

11.  these  were  more  noble  than  those  ofT. 
27.  2.  one  Aristarchus  ofT.  being  with'us 
Phil.  4.  16.  even  in  T.  ye  sent  once  and  again 
2  Tim.  4.  10.  for  Demas  is  departed  unto  T. 

THEUDAS. 
Jicts  5.  36.  before  these  days  rose  up  T.  boasting 

THOMAS. 

Mat.  10.  3.  T.  and  Matthew  the  publican,  apos 

ties,  Mark  3.  18.  Luke  6.  15.  Acts  1.  13 

.John  11.  16.  T.  said,  let  us  go  and  die  with  him 

20.  24.  T.  was  not  with  them  when  Jesus  came 

26.  T.  was  with  them  ||  21. 2.  Simon  Peter  and  T. 

27.  he  sailb  to  T.  reach  hither  thy  finger 
THUMMIM,  See  Appellatives. 

THYATIRA. 
.flcts  16.  14.  Lydia,  of  city  ofT.  worshipped  Ood 
/ieu.1.11. send  ittoT.||2.24.to  you  and  to  rest  in  T. 
2.  18.  to  the  angel  in  the  church  in  T.  write 

TIBERIAS. 

John  6.  1.  sea  of  Galilee,  which  is  the  sea  ofT. 

23.  howbeit  there  came  other  boats  from  T. 

TIBNI. 

1  Kings  16.  21.  half  of  the  people  followed  T. 
22.0mri  prevailed  against  those  that  folio  wed  T. 

TIGLATH-PILESER. 

2  Kings  15. 29.  T.  came  and  took  Ijori  and  Kedesh 
16.  7.  Ahaz  sent  messengers  to  T.  king  of  Assyria 

1  Chron.  5.  6.  T.  carried  Beerah  away  captive 
26.  God  of  Israel  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  T. 

2  Chron.  28.  20.  T.  came  and  distressed  Ahaz 
TIMNATH. 

Gen.  38.  12.  Judah  went  to  his  shearers  in  T. 
Judg.  14.1.  Samson  went  down  to  T.  saw  a  woman 

TIMOTHEUS. 
Acts  16.  1.  a  certain  disciple  there,  named  T. 
Rnm.  16.  21.  T.  my  workfrllow  saluteth  you 
\Cor.  16. 10.  if T.  come  ||  2  Cor.  1. 1. T.  our  brother 
2  Cor.  1. 19.  who  was  preached  even  by  me  and  T. 
Phil.  2.  19.  I  trust  in  the  Lord  to  send  T.  to  you 
1 7'Aes«.3.2.we  sent  T.to  establish  and  comfort  you 
1  Tim.  1.  2.  to  T.  my  own  son,  18.  2  Tim.  1.2. 
Heb.  13.  23.  our  brother  T.  is  set  at  liberty 

TIRSHATHA. 
EzraZ.  63.  T.  said,  they  should  not  eat,  JW/j.  7.  65. 
JVeA.  7.  70.  the  T.  gave  gold  to  the  treasure 
10. 1.  those  that  sealed  were  Nehemiah  the  T. 
TIRZAH. 
J^Tum.  26.  3.3.  Hoglah,  Milcah,  and  T.  daughters 
of  Zelophehad,27.  1.  |  36.  11.  .JoKh.Vl.  3. 
Jo.ih.  12.  24.  Joshua  smote  the  king  of  T. 

1  Kings  14.  17.  Jeroboam's  wife  came  to  T. 

15.  21.  Baasha  dwelt  and  reigned  in  T.  33. 

16.  8.  Elah  reigned  in  T.  H  1.5.  Zimri  reigned  in  T. 
17.  Omri  besiesed  T.  ||  23.  Omri  reigned  in  T. 

2  Kings  15.  16.  Menabcm  smote  coasts  from  T. 
Cant.  6.  4.  thou  art  beautiful,  O  my  love,  as  T. 

TISHBITE.  See  Elijah. 

TITUS. 

2  Cor.  2. 13. 1  had  no  rest,  because  T  found  not  T. 

7.  0.  God  comforted  us  by  the  coming  of  T.         I 


URI 

2  Cor.  7. 13.  yea,  the  more  joyed  we  for  ioy  ofT. 

14.  even  .so  our  boasting  wlucb  I  made  before  T. 

8. 6.  we  desired  T.  ||  Gal.  2. 1. 1  took  T.  with  me 

16.  the  same  earnest  cure  into  the  heart  ofT. 

23.  whether  any  inquire  of  T.  he  is  my  partner 

12.  18.  I  desired  T.  did  T.  make  a  gain  of  you7 
Gal.  2.3.  nor  was  T.  compelled  to  be  circumcised 
2  Tim.  4.  10.  T.  is  depnrted  to  Dalmatia 

TOBIAH. 

Ezra  2.  60.  children  of  T.  not  shew  father's  house 

JVeA.  2.  10.  Sanballat  and  T.  heard,  19.  |  4.7.  I  6. 1.  " 

6. 12.  T.  had  hired  him  ||  14.  my  God,  think  ofT. 

19.  and  T.  sent  letters  to  put  me  in  fear 

13.  4.  Eliashib  the  priest  was  allied  to  T. 
8.  I  cast  forth  all  the  honsehold-stutf  of  T. 

TOGA  RM  AH. 
Gen.W.  3. sons  of  Gomer,  Riphath,  T.  1  CAron.1.6. 
Ezck.  27.  14.  they  of  the  house  ofT.  traded 

TOLA. 

Gen.  AG.  13.  T.  the  son  ofIssachar,l  Chron.l.X. 

Judg.  10.  l.T.  son  of  Puah  arose  to  defend  Israel 

TOPIIET,  See  .flppellalives. 

TROAS. 

Acts  16.  8.  passing  by  Mysia  they  came  to  T. 

11.  loosing  from  T.  ||  20.  5.  tarried  for  us  at  T. 
2  Cor.  2. 12.  when  I  came  to  T.  to  preach  Christ 
2  Tim. 4. 13.  the  cloke  I  let!  at  T.  bring  with  thee 
TRYPHENA,  TRYPHOSA,  Rom.  16.  12. 
TUBAL. 
<?e7i.  10.  2.  sons  of  Japhetli,  Javan,T.  1  CAron. 1.5. 
Isa.  66.  19.  I  will  send  those  that  escape  to  T. 
Ezck.  27. 13.  Javan,  T.  they  were  thy  merchants 
32.  26.  there  is  Meshech,  T.  and  her  multitude 

38. 2.  the  chief  prince  of  Meshech  and  T.  3.    39. 1. 
TYCHICUS. 

Acts  20.  4.  T.  of  Asia  accomjianied  Paul 
Eph.Ci.  21.  T.  shall  make  known  to  you  all  tbingf 
Cnl.  4.  7.  all  my  state  shall  T.  declare  unto  you 
2  Tim.  4.  12.  and  T.  have  I  sent  to  Ephesus 
Tit.  3.  12.  when  1  shall  send  T.  unto  thee 

TYRANNUS. 
Acts  19.  9.  disputing  in  the  school  of  one  T. 

TYRE. 
.Tosh.  19.  29.  coast  tnrneth  to  the  strong  city  T. 
2  Sam.  24.  7.  they  came  to  the  strong  hold  of  T. 
I  Kings!.  13.  king  Solomon  set  Hiram  out  of  T. 

14.  his  father  was  a  man  ofT.  2  Chron.  2.  14. 
9.  12.  Hiram  came  out  from  T.  to  see  the  cities 

Ezra  3. 7.  they  gave  meatand  drink  to  them  ofT. 
J^ch.  13.  16.  there  dwelt  men  of  T.  also  thereiu 
Psal.  45   12.  the  daughter  ofT.  shall  be  there 

83.  7.  Philistines,  with  the  inhabitants  ofT. 

87.  4.  Philistia  and  T.||/srt.  23.  1.  the  burden  ofT. 
Isa.  23.  5.  they  shall  be  pained  at  the  report  ofT 
8.  who  hath  taken  this  counsel  against  T.I 

15.  T.  shall  be  forgotten  !|  17.  Lord  will  visit  T. 
.Ti7cl  3.  4.  vea,  what  have  ye  tb  do  with  me,  O  T.I 
Mat.  1 1.21. works  had  been  done  in  T.  Luke  10. 13. 
Acts  12.20.  Herod  was  displeased  with  them  of  T. 

See  Kino,  Sidon. 
TYRUS. 
.Ter.  25.  22.  I  made  all  the  kings  ofT.  to  drink 

27.3.  send  the  yokes  to  the  kings  of  T.  and  Zidon 
47.  4.  to  cut  off  from  T.  and  Zidon  every  helper 

Ezck.  20.2.  because  T.  said  ai'ainst  Jerusalem,  aha 
3.  behold,  I  am  against  thee,  O  T. 

27.  2.  son  of  man,  take  up  a  lamentation  for  T. 
32.what  city  like  T.like  the  destroyed  in  the  seat 

28.  2.  son  of  man,  say  to  the  prince  of  T. 
12.  take  up  a  lamentation  on  the  king  ofT. 

29.  18.  to  serve  a  great  service  against  T. 
Hos.  9.  13.  Ephraim,  as  I  saw  T.  is  planted 
Amos  1.9.  for  three  transgressions  ofT.  and  four 

10.  I  will  send  a  fire  on  the  wall  ofT. 
Zech.  9.  2.  T.  ami  Zidon  though  it  be  very  wise 
3.T.  build  herself  a  strong  hold,  heaped  up  silver 

u. 

UCAL. 
Prov.  30.  1.  the  man  spoke  to  Ithiel  and  U. 

UPHARSIN. 
Dan.  5.  25.  was  written,  mene,  mene,  tekel,  V. 

UPHAZ. 
.Ter.  10.  9.  and  gold  is  brought  from  V. 
Dan.  10.  5.  his  loins  were  girded  with  gold  of  U 

UR. 
Gen.  11.  28.  Hnran  died  before  bis  father  in  U. 
15.7.broughl  thee  out  of  U.  ofChalHecs,  JVeh.  9. 7. 
1  Oiron.  11.  35.  Eliphal  the  son  of  U.a  mighty  maa 

URI. 
Exod.  31.  2.  I  called  Bezaleel  the  son  of  U.  35. 
30.  I  38.  22.  1  Chron.  2.  20.  2  Chron.  1.  5. 
1  Kings  4.  19  Geher  the  son  of  U.  was  in  Giload 
Ezra  10.  24.  Shalliim,  Telem,  and  U.  [loriers 

URIAH,  rallrd  URIJAH,  .VeA.  3.  21.  |  8.  4. 

2.Snm.ll.3.  isnnt  this  Bnih-sheba  the  wife  ofU. 

6.  send  me  U.  |I  14.  sent  it  by  U.  21.  U.  is  dead 

12.  9.  thoii  hast  killed  U.  the  Hittite  with  sword 

23.39.  U.one  of  David's  worthies,  1  Chr.  11.41 


ZAD 

1  Kings  15.  5.  save  only  in  the  matter  of  U. 
A'zra 8.33.  vessels  weighed  by  Meremolli  son  of  U. 
JVeh.  3.  4.  ne.xt  repaired  Mercmoth  the  eon  of  U. 
Isa.  8.  2.  I  toolt  faithful  witnesses,  U.  the  priest 
Mat.  1.  ti.  David  begat  Solomon  of  the  wife  of  U. 

URIJAH. 

2  Kings  16.10.  Ahaz  sent  U.  the  fashion  of  the  altar 

16.  thus  did  U.  as  king  Ahaz  conimai]d(;d 

Jer.  26. 20.  U.  prophesied  ||  21.  U.  tied  into  Egypt 

URIM,  See  AppeUaiioes, 

UZ. 

Oen.  10.  23.  the  children  of  Aram;  U.  Hul,  Gether 

36.28.  children  of  Dishan  ;  U.  Aran,  1  Ckr.  1.42. 

1  Chr.  1.  17.  Ihesopsof  Shcm  ;  Lud,  Aram,  and  U. 
yoi  1.1. there  was  a  man  in  the  land  of  U.named  Job 
Jer.  25. 20. 1  made  the  king  of  U.  to  drink  the  cup 
L,am.  4.  21.  rejoice,  O  daughter  of  Edom,  in  U, 

UZZA,  UZZAH. 

2  5am.  6.  3.  U.  and  Ahio  drave  the  cart,  1  C%r.l3.7. 
6.  U.  put  forth  his  hand  lo  the  ark,  1  Chr.  13.  9. 
8.  because  the  Lord  had  made  a  breach  upon  U. 

2  Kings  21. 18.  Manasseh  buried  in  garden  of  TJ. 
26.  Amon  ||  1  Chr.  6. 29.  sons  of  Merari;  Malili,  U. 

1  Chron.  8.  7.  he  removed  them,  and  begat  U. 
Ezra  2.  49.  the  children  of  U.  JWA.  7.  51. 

UZZIAH,  called  AZARIAH,  OZIAS. 

2  Kings  15.  13.  .Shalliim  to  reign  in  39th  year  of  U. 
.34.  Jotham  did  as  his  father  U.  had  done 

1  Chron.  6.  24.  a  son  of  Kohath,  U.  and  Shaul 
11.  44.  U.  the  Aslilerilhite,  a  valiant  man 
27.  25.  over  the  storehouses  was  the  son  of  U. 

2  Chron.  26.  1.  all  the  people  made  U.  king 
8.  the  Ammonites  gave  gifts  to  U.  and  his  name 
18.  it  pertaineth  not  to  thee,  U.  to  burn  incense 

21.  U.  the  king  was  a  leper  to  the  day  of  his  death 
/?zral0.21.U.son  of  Ilarim  had  taken  strange  wife 
A'eA.  11.  4.  at  Jerusalem  dwelt  Athaiah  son  of  U. 
Isa.  1.  1.  saw  in  days  of  U.  Has.  1. 1.  ./9mos  1. 1. 

6.  1.  in  the  year  king  U.  died,  I  saw  the  I^ord 
Zech.  14.5.  before  the  earthquake  in  the  days  of  U. 
Jl/oM.ti.Joram  begat  0:!(2.?||  9.0:ia.s  begat  Joath. 

UZZIEL. 
Ezod.G.  18.  the  sons  of  Kohalh;  Amram,  r7.har,U. 
JViun.  3.  19.  1  Chron.  6.  2,  18.  ]  23.  12. 

22.  the  sons  of  TJ.  Uv.  10.  4.     JVum.  3.  30. 

1  Chron.  15.  10.  |  23.  20.  |  24.  24. 
IChron.  4.  42.  of  Simeon  had  U.  for  their  captain 

7.  7.  U.  son  of  Bela  ||  25.  4.  U.  the  sion  of  Heman 
2  Chron.  29.  14.  sons  of  Jeduthnn;  She.iiaiah,  U. 
Jif(h.  3.  8.  U.  of  the  goldsmiths  repaired  next 


ZEN 


V. 


VASIITI. 

Esth.  1.  9.  V.  the  queen  made  a  feast  for  women 

12.  queen  V.  refused  to  come  at  king's  command 

19.  that  V.  come  no  more  before  king  Ah.isuerus 

2.  17.  the  king  made  Esther  queen  instead  of  V. 


ZACCHEUS. 

Luke  19.  a.  7,.  make  haste  and  come  down 

ZACHARIAII,  ZKCriARIAII. 
2Arin^»14.29.Z.  son  of  Jeroboam  reigned, 15,8,11. 
18.  2.  Ahi  the  daughter  of  Z.  2  Chron.  29.  1. 

1  Chron.  5.  7.  chief  of  the  Reubeniles;  Jeiel,  Z. 
9.  21.  Z.  of  Lnvitcs'  porter,  15.  18,  20,  24.  |  2G.  2. 

37.  Geder,  Ahio,  Z.  and  Mickloth 
Ifi.  ,5.  next  to  Asaph,  Z.  ||  24.  2.->.  of  Isshiah,  Z. 

26.  11.  Z.  the  fourth  son  of  Ilosah 

14.  Z.  the  son  of  Slutlemiah,  a  wiso  counsellor 

27.  21.  rulHr  in  Gilead  was  Iddo  the  son  of  Z. 

2  Chron.  1.7.  7.  Jehoshaphut  sent  to  Z.  to  teach 

20.  14.  on  Jahaziel  son  of  Z.  came  the  Spirit 

21.  2.  Jehiel  and  Z.  the  sons  of  Jehoshaphat 
24.  20.  the  Spirit  of  God  came  upon  Z. 

SJTi.  5.  Uzriali  sought  God  in  the  ilays  of  Z. 
29. 13.  of  Uie  sons  of  Asaph,  Z.  sanctified  himself 

34.  12.  Z.  of  the  Koliathites  was  overseer 

35.  8.  Hilkiah,  Z.  rulers  of  the  house  of  God 
Kvra  5.  1.  Z.  the  son  of  Mdo  prophesied  to  the 

Jews  in  Judah,  6.  14.     JVcA.  12.  Ifi. 
8.3.  nflhesonsof  Ph.iro«h,Z.  II  11.  of  Bebai,  Z. 
;0.2fi.  Klam,  Z.  ||  N'rh.  11.4.  Z.  son  of  Amariah 
JV/'A.  8.  4.  and  on  Ezra's  leO  I,:,,,,)  gtood  Z. 

11.  r>.  Z.  the  son  of  Shiloni  ||  12.  Z.  son  of  Pashur 

12.  3.5.  Z.  son  of  Jomilhan  ||  41.  Z.  with  trumpet". 
ha.S/i.  Z.  the  son  orjeliereehinh  anil  Uriah  priest 
Ztch.  1.1.  Z.  the  son  of  Barae.hiah,  thosonof  Iddo 

the  prophet,  7.  1.  Mat.  23.  35.  /.uke  11.  51. 
lyuke  1.  5.  Z.  n  priesr  of  the  course  of  Ahia 
13.  fear  not,  Z.  ||  .50.  and  they  called  him  Z. 

z.xnoK. 

2  f^am.  8.  17.  Z.  and  Ahimelech  were  the  priestJi 

l.V  20.  Z.  and  Abialhnr  cnrrind  the  ark  of  G.i,| 

3.1.  halt  Ihou  not  with  thee  Z.  and  Abiathar7 

SO.  33.  Z.  and  Abiathar  were  priciti,  1  Kings  4. 4. 

756 


1  Kinffs  1.  8.  but  Z.  was  not  with  Adonijah,  i26. 
45.  Z.  and  Nathan  have  anointed  him  king 

2.  3.5.  and  Z.  the  priest  did  the  king  put  in  the 
room  of  Abiathar,  1  Chron.  29.  22. 
4.  2.  Azariah  the  son  of  Z.  the  priest 

2  Kings  15.  33.  Jerusha  the  daughter  of  Z.  was 
Jotham'g  mother,  2  Chron.  27.  1. 

1  C7iro7i.  6.8.  Ahilub  begat  Z.  12,53.  |y.ll.  |  18.16. 

12.  28.  Z.  a  young  man,  mighty  man  uf  valour 
24.3.botli  Z. of  the  sons  of  Eleazar,and  Ahimelech 
27.  17.  of  the  Aaronites,  Z.  was  captain 

2  Chron.  31.  10.  the  chief  priest  of  the  house  of  Z. 
Ezra  7.  2.  the  son  of  Shallum,  the  son  of  Z. 
JV(A.  3.  4.  Z.  repaired,  29.  ||  10.  21.  Z.  sealed 

11.  11.  of  the  priests,  the  son  of  Z.  Meshullam 

13.  13.    I    made    Z.  the    scribe    treasurer    of 
treasuries 

F.zek.  40.  46.  these  the  sons  of  Z.  43.  19.  |  44.  1.5. 
48. 11.  it  shall  be  for  priests  sanctified  of  sons  of  Z. 

ZALMUNNA. 

Judg.  8.  5.  I  am  pursuing  after  Zeba  ami  Z. 

6.  the  hands  of  Zeba  and  Z.  in  thy  hand,  1.5. 

21.  and  Gideon  arose  and  slew  Zeha  and  Z. 

Psal.  83. 11.  make  all  their  princes  as  Zeba  and  Z. 

ZARAH,  See  also  ZERAII. 
Oen.  38.  30.  Judah's  son  was  called  Z.  46.  12. 
1  Chrnn.'i.  4.  Tamar  bare  Pharez  and  Z.  Jl/at.1.3. 
6.  the  sons  of  Z.  Ziniri,  and  Ethan,  and  Heman 
ZAREPHATH. 
1  Kings  17.  9.  get  thee  to  Z.  ||  10.  he  went  to  Z. 
Obad.  20.  the  raptivity  of  Israel  shall  possess  to  Z. 
ZEBAH,  See  Zalmunna. 
ZEBEDEE. 
Mat.i.Sll.  in  a  ship  with  Z.  their  father,  mending 
10.  2.  now  the  names  of  the  apostles,  James  and 
John  the  sons  of  Z.  26.  37.  Mark  1.  19.  I  3. 
17.  I  10.  35.  Luke  5.  10.  John  21.  2. 
20.  20.  came  to  him  the  mother  of  Z.  childr.  27.  .56 
Mark  1.  20.  they  left  their  father  Z.  in  the  ship 

ZEBOIM. 
f?fn.]4.2.kingofZ.  II  />ej((.29.  23.  overthrow  of  Z. 
1  Sam.  Xt.  18.  the  valley  of  Z.  to  the  wilderness 
J^eh.  11.  34.  the  children  of  Benjamin  dwelt  at  Z. 
Hos.  11.  8.  Israel,  how  shall  I  set  thee  as  Z.? 

ZEBUL. 
.Tudg.  9.23.the  son  of  Jerubbaal,  and  Z.  his  officer 
41.  Z.  thrust  out  Gaal  and  his  brethren 
ZEBULUN. 
Oen.  30.  20.  Leah  called  his  name  Z. 
35.23.the  sons  of  Leah;  Reuhen,Simeon,Judah,Z. 
46.  14.  the  sons  of  Z.  Xum.  1.  30.  ]  26.  26. 
49.  13.  Z.  shall  dwell  at  the  haven  of  the  sea 
JVum.  1.9.  ofZ.  Eliabcaptain,2.  7.  |7.  24. 1  10.  16. 
/)«uf.  27.13.  mount  Ebalto  curse;  Reuben,  Gad, Z. 
.33.  IS.  ofZ.  he  said,  rejoice  Z.  in  thy  going  out 
■Tosh.  19.  10.  the  third  lot  came  up  for  Z. 
Judg.  1.  30.  nor  did  Z.  diive  out  the  inhabitants 

4.  10.  Barak  called  Z.  and  Naphtali  lo  Kedcsh 

5.  14.  and  out  of  Z.  they  that  handle  the  pen 
18.Z.and  Naphtali  a  peo[ile  jeoparded  theJr  lives 

6.  35.  he  sent  messengers  to  Z.  and  they  came 

12.  12.  Elon  was  buried  in  the  country  of  Z. 

1  Chron.  27.  19.  of  Z.  Ishmaiah  was  the  ruler 

2  Chron.  30.  11.  divers  of  Z.  humbled  themselves 
Psal.  68.  27.  the  princes  of  Z.  and  Naphtali 
/.9a.  9.  1.  at  first  he  lighllv  afflicted  the  land  of  Z. 
Kzek.  48.  26.  Z.  a  portion  ||  .33.  one  cate  of  Z. 
Mat.  4.  13.  in  the  borders  of  Z.  and  Nephthalim 

IS.the  land  of  Z. and  Nephtlmlim  beyond  Jordan 
Trihe  of  ZKBULUN. 
JVum.  1.  31.  numbered  the  trihe  of  Z.  57,400 
2.  7.  then  the  tribe  of  Z.  Eliab  captain,  10.  16. 

13.  10.  of  the  trihe  of  Z.  Gaddicl  to  spy  the  land 
34.25.  princeof  the  tribeof  7..  to  divide  the  land 

Josh.  21.7.  out  of  the  trihe  o/Z.  twelve  cities  werf 
given  to  the  Leviles,  34.  1  Chron.  6.  63,  77. 
Rev.  7.  8.  of  the  tribe  of  Z.  were  sealed  12,000 

ZEDKKIAH. 

1  /rin;S'«20.11.Z.  made  horns  of  iron,  2  CAr.ia.lO. 

24.  Z.  smote  Micaiah  on  cheek,  2  Chron.  18.  23. 

2K'im'.i24.17.king  of  Babyl. changed  his  name  to  Z. 

25.  7.  they  slew  the  sons  of  Z.  and  put  out  the 

eyes  of  2.  .Tcr.  39.  6,  7.  |  Tyi.  in,  11. 

1  Chron.  3.  15.  son  of  Josiah,  Z.  ||  Ifi.  Jehoiakini 

2  Chron.  36.  10.  ho  made  Z.  his  brother  king 
Jer.  21.  7.  I  will  deliver  Z.  and  his  people 

29.  22.  the  Lord  make  thee  like  Z.  and  A  hah 
32.  4.  Z.  shall  not  escape  from  the  Chalde-ins 

5.  he  shall  lead  Z.  to  tSaliylon,  there  shall  he  he 

39.  5.  the  armv  overtook  Z.  in  the  |)lain«,  52  8. 

ZERB,  Sre  OnEn. 

ZELOPIIEHAD. 

JVKm.26..33.Z.had  noson«,buldaiiglilers,.7(>.9A.]7.3. 

27. 7.  the  daughters  of  Z.  speak  right,  siirclygive 

30.  11.  the  dauchters  of  Z.  were  married 

ZELOTES.  Ste  Simon. 

ZELZAH. 

1  Sam.  10.  2.  two  men  hv  Rachel'i  sepulchre  atZ. 

ZENAS. 
Tit.  3.  13.  bring  Z.  the  lawyer  on  his  journey 


t  ZIN     [Propee  Najii# 

ZEPHANIAH. 
2  Kings  25. 18.  took  Z.  second  priest,  .Ter.  52.  24. 
1  Chron.  6.  36  Z.  of  the  sons  of  the  Kohatliiteg 
Jer.  21.  1.  when  Zedekiah  sent  Z.  to  Jeremiah 
29.  25.  thou  hast  sent  letters  in  thy  name  to  Z. 
29.  Z.  read  this  letter  in  the  ears  of  Jeremiah 
37.  3.  Z.  the  son  of  Maaseiah  the  priest 
Zeph.  1.  1.  the  word  came  to  Z.  the  son  of  CubI« 
Zech.  6.  10.  go  into  the  hou.'ie  of  Josiah  son  of  S 
14.  the  crowns  shall  be  to  Hen  the  son  of  Z. 
ZERAH,  .Sec  also  ZARAH. 
Gen.  .36. 13.  the  son  of  Reuel  Z.  17.  1  Chron.  1. 37. 
33.  Jobab  the  son  of  Z.  reigned,  1  Chron.  1.  44. 
j\"Hm.  26.  13.of  Z.  the  family  of  the  Zarhites,  20. 
Josh.  7.  1.  the  son  of  Zabdi,  the  son  of  Z. 
22.20.  dill  not  Achan  son  of  Z.  commit  a  trespass 

1  Chron.  4.24.  sons  of  Simeoji  were  Z.  and  Shaul 
6.  21.  Z.  son  of  Iddo  ||  41.  Ethiii  the  son  of  Z. 
9.  6.  of  the  sons  of  Z.  Jeuel  dwelt  in  Jerusalem 

2  Chron.  14.  9.  Z.  the  Ethiopian  came  against  Asa 
jVeA.  11.  24.  Pethahiah  of  the  children  of  Z. 

ZERESH. 
Esth.  5.  10.  Haman  called  for  Z.  his  wife 

ZERUBBABEL. 
1  Chron.  3.  19.  the  son  of  Pedaiah,  Z.  sons  of  Z. 
F.zra  2.  2.  which  came  up  with  Z.  JVcA.  12.  1. 
3.  2.  Z.  the  son  of  Shealtiel,  8.  |  .5.  2. 
J^'eh.  12.  47.  Israel  in  the  days  of  Z.  gave  portions 
Hag.  1.  1.  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  Haggai  to  Z. 
12.  then  Z.  obeyed  the  voice  of  the  Lord 
14.  the  Lord  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  Z. 

2.  4.  yet  now  be  strong,  O  Z.  ||  21.  speak  to  Z. 
Zech.  4.  6.  this  is  the  w  ord  of  the  Lord  unto  Z. 

7.  before  Z.  thou  shalt  become  a  plain 
9.  the  hands  of  Z.  have  laid  the  foundation* 
ZERUIAH. 
2  Sam.  2.  18.  there  were  three  sons  of  Z.  there 

3.  39.  the  sons  of  Z.  be  too  ha'rd  for  me 
8.16. Joab  son  of  Z.  over  the  host,  \Mhro7i.  18. 15 
16. 10.  and  the  king  said,  what  hav^  to  do  with 

you,  ye  sons  of  Z.?  19.  22, 

1  Chron.  2. 16.  whose  sisters  were  Z.  and  Abigail 
ZIBA. 

2  Sam.  9.  2.  art  thou  Z.  ?  |1  10.  Z.  had  fifteen  son! 
16.4.  the  kingsaid  lo  Z.  ihine  are  all  that  pertain 
19.  29.  I  said,  thou  and  Z.  divide  the  land 

ZIBEOX. 
f?<'n.36.2.  Anah  the  daughter  of  Z.  the  Hivitp,14. 
24.  these  are  the  chililien  of  Z.  1  Chr.  1.  40.  as 
he  fed  the  asses  of  Z.  his  father  |1  29.  duke  Z, 
ZIDON. 
Oen.  49.  13.  Zebnlun's  border  shall  be  to  Z. 
Josh.  II.  8.  Israel  chased  them  to  great  Z. 

19.  28.  Hammon  and  Kanah,(ven  unto  great  Z. 
Judg.  10.6.  Israel  did  evil  and  served  thegodsof  Z. 
18. 28.  no  deliverer,  because  it  was  far  from  Z. 
1  Kings  17.  9.  Zarephath,  which  belongeth  to  Z. 
Ezra  3.  7.  they  gave  drink  unto  them  of  Z. 
Jsa.  23.  2.  whom  the  merchants  of  Z.  replenished 

4.  be  thoti  ashamed,  O  Z.  the  sea  hath  spoken 
12.  O  thou  oppressed  virgin,  daughter  of  Z. 

Jer.  25.  22.  all  the  kings  of  Z.  shall  drink 

27.  3.  send  bond*  and  vokes  to  the  king  of  Z. 
47.  4.  to  cut  off  from  Tyre  ami  Z.  every  helper 

F.zek.  27.  8.  the  inhabitants  of  Z.  thy  mariners 

28.  21.  set  thy  face  against  Z.  and  projihesyaga.  it 
22.  and  say,  behold,  I  am  asainsl  thee,  O  Z. 

./of/3.4.what  have  ye  to  do  with  me,OTyreand  Z. 
Z'-cA.  9.  2.  Tyrus  and  Z.  thoii2h  it  be  very  wise 

ZIDONIANP. 

./iidg.  lQ.12.lhc  Z.  and  Amalrkilesdid  oppress yoa 

18.7.  they  dwelt  careless,  after  manner  of  the  Z. 

1  Kings  11.1.  but  king  Solomon  loved  women  ofZ. 

33.  they  worshipped  Ashtorelh,  goddess  of  Z. 
Ezek.  32.  30.  Z.  that  are  gone  down  with  the  slain 

ZIP. 
1  Kings  6.  1.  the  month  Z.  which  is  the  second 
37.  the  foundation  was  laid  in  the  month  Z. 
ZIKLAG. 

1  .<?am.  27.  6.  Achish  javo  Z.  to  David 
30.  i4.  we  biirni  Z   ||  2  Sam. 4  1.0.  t  slew  them  in  Z. 

2  Sam.  1.  1.  David  had  abode  two  days  in  Z. 
I  Chron.  4.  30.  they  dwell  at  Z.  .VrA.'  11.28. 

12.  1.  they  that  came  to  Pavid  to  Z.  20. 

ZILPAII. 
<7' 71.29.2  (.Lnban  gave  lo  Leah,  Z.  for  a  handmaid 
30.  0.  Leah  gave  Z.  her  maid  lo  Jacob  to  wifo 

10.  Z.  Leah's  mniil  bare  Jacob  a  son,  12. 
3.-).  26.  the  sons  of  Z.  Gad  and  Aslier,  46.  18. 
37.  2.  the  lad  w  as  with  the  sons  of  Z. 

ZIMRL 
JVum.  25.  14.  the  Israelite  that  was  slain  was  Z. 
AVn.r.s-  Ifi.  9.  7.  conspired  against  F.lah,  16. 
15.  Z.  reigned  seven  days  in  Tirznh 
2  A7n<r.9  9.  31.  had  Z.  pence,  who  slew  his  master? 
I  Chrnn.  2'.  0.  the  sons  of  Zerah,  Z.  and  Ethan 
a.  36.  Z.  the  son  of.Iehoadnh  ||  9.  42.  of  Jarah 
Jer.  25.  25.  I  made  all  the  kings  of  Z.  to  drink 

ZIN. 
.Yum.  13.21.  they  searched  from  wildernMs  of  Z. 


fROrER  Namls.]       ZIO 

J^um.  20.1.  congreg.  came  to  the  desert  of  Z.  33. 36 
27. 14.  ye  rebelled  in  the  desert  of  Z.  JJeut.  32.  51 
ZION. 
SSam.S.  7.  nevertheless,  David  took  strong  hold  of 
Z.  the  same  is  the  city  ol'David,  1  Chron.  11.5. 
1  .K"in^s  8.1. the  city  of  Dav.  which  is  Z.  2  Chr.  5.2. 
Psal.  2.  6.  I  set  my  king  on  my  holy  hill  of  Z. 
48.  12.  walk  about  Z.  and  go  round  about  her 
ul.  18.  do  good  in  thy  good  pleasure  unto  Z. 
09.35. forGod  will  save  Z.and  buihl  cities  of  Judah 
87  2.  the  Lord  loveth  the  gates  of  Z.  more  than 
5.  he  said  of  Z.  this  and  that  man  was  born  there 
97.  8.  Z.  heard  and  was  glad,  Judah  rejoiced 
102.  13.  thou  shalt  arise  and  have  i^rcy  on  Z. 
16.  when  the  Lord  shall  build  up  Z. 
126.  1.  when  the  Lord  turned  the  captivity  of  Z. 
129.  5.  let  them  be  turned  back  that  hate  Z. 

132.  13.  the  Lord  hath  chosen  Z.  he  desired  it 

133.  3.  as  the  dew  on  the  mountains  of  Z. 
137.  1.  yea,  we  wept,  when  we  remembered  Z. 

3.  saying,  sing  us  one  of  the  songs  of  Z. 
146. 10.  the  Lord  shall  reign,  even  thy  God,  O  Z. 
147.  12.  praise  the  L.  O  Jerus.  praise  thy  G.  O  Z. 
149. 2.  let  the  children  of  Z.  bejoyful  in  their  Kim 
/sa.  1.  27.  Z.  shall  be  redeemed  with  judgment 
12.  6.  cry  out  and  shout,  thou  inhabitant  of  Z. 
14.  32.  that  the  Lord  hath  founded  Z.  and  poor 

33.  5.  the  Lord  hath  filled  Z.  with  judgment 
20.  look  on  Z.  ||  35.  10.  come  to  Z.  with  songs 

34.  8.  year  of  recompences  for  controversy  of  Z 

40.  9.  O  Z.  that  bringest  good  tidings,  get  up 

41.  27.  the  first  shall  say  to  Z.  behold  them 
40.  14.  but  Z.  said,  the  Lord  hath  forsaken  me 

51.  3.  for  the  Lord  shall  comfort  Z.  will  comfort 

11.  the  redeemed  shall  come  with  singing  to  Z. 
16.  and  say  unto  Z.  thou  art  my  people 

52.  1.  awake,  awake,  put  on  thy  strength,  O  Z. 

7.  that  saith  unto  Z.  thy  God  reignelh 

8.  when  the  Lord  shall  bring  again  Z. 

59.  20.  and  the  Redeemer  shall  come  to  Z. 

60.  14.  call  thee  the  Z.  of  the  holy  One  of  Israel 
62.  1.  for  Z.  sake  will  I  not  hold  my  peace 
64.  10.  Z.  is  a  wilderness,  Jerusalem  a  dessolation 
66.  8.  as  soon  as  Z.  travailed,  she  brought  forth 

Jer.  3.  14.  turn,  and  I  will  bring  you  to  Z. 
4.  6.  set  up  the  standard  toward  Z.  stay  not 
14. 19.  hast  thou  reject.  Jud.?  ihv  soul  loathed  Z. 
26. 18.  Z.  shall  be  plowed  like  a  field,  Mic.  3. 12. 

30.  17.  this  is  Z.  whom  no  man  seeketh  after 

31.  6.  arise  ye,  and  let  us  go  up  to  Z.  to  the  Lord 

12.  they  shall  come  and  sing  in  the  height  of  Z. 
50.  5.  they  shall  ask  the  way  to  Z.  saying,  come 
51.35.  shall  the  inhabitant  of  Z.  say,  and  my  blood 

Lam.  1.  4.  the  ways  of  Z.  do  mourn,  because 


ZIO 

Z,ain.4.2.the  precious  sons  of  Z.comparable  to  gold 
3.  18.  because  the  mountain  of  Z.  is  desolate 

Joel  2.  23.  be  glad,  ye  children  of  Z.  and  rejoice 

./Imos  1.  2.  he  said,  the  Lord  will  roar  from  Z. 

J>//c.3.]0.they  build  up  Z.  with  blood, and  Jerusalem 

4. 2.  for  law  shall  go  forth  of  Z.  word  from  Jerusa. 

11.  nations  that  say,  let  our  eye  look  upon  Z. 

Zech.  1. 14. 1  am  jealous  for  Z.  with  great  jealousy 

17.  cry,  saying,  the  Lord  shall  vet  comfort  Z. 
2.  7.  deliver  thyself,  O  Z.  ||  8.  2.'jealous  for  Z 

8.  3.  thus  sailh  the  Lord,  I  am  returned  to  Z. 

9.  13.  when  I  have  raised  up  thy  sons,  O  Z. 
See  D.iUGHTKR,  Daughters. 

In  ZION. 
Psal.9. 11.  sing  praises  to  the  Lord,  who  dwelleth 
in  Z.  76.  2.  Juel  3.  21 
65.  1.  praise  waiteth  for  thee,  O  God,  in  Z. 
84.  7.  every  one  in  Z.  appeareth  before  God 
99.2.Lord  is  great  in  Z.  he  is  high  above  all  people 
102.  21.  to  declare  the  name  of  the  Lord  in  Z. 
Tsa.  4.  3.  that  is  left  in  Z.  shall  be  called  holy 

10.  24.  O  my  people  that  dwellest  in  Z. 
28. 16.  behold,  I  lay  in  Z.  for  a  foundation  stone,  a 

tried  stone,  a  precious  corner-stone,  1  Pet.  2.  fi. 
30.19.forthe  people  shall  dwell  i?i  Z.  at  Jerusalem 
31.  9.  saith  the  Lord,  whose  fire  is  in  Z. 
33.14.  the  sinners  iJi  Z.  are  afraid,  fearfulness  hath 
46.  13.  I  will  place  salvation  in  Z.  for  Israel 
61.  3.  to  appoint  unto  ihem  that  mourn  in  Z. 

Jer.  8. 19.  is  not  Lord  in  Z.l  is  not  her  king  in  her? 
50. 28.  to  declare.jn  Z.  the  vengeance  of  the  Lord 
51. 10.  let  us  declare  in  Z.  the  work  of  the  Lord 
24.  all  their  evil  that  they  have  done  ire  Z. 

Lam. '■2.6.  Lord  caused  sabbaths  be  forgotten  t»  Z. 

4.  11.  the  Lord  hath  kindled  a  fire  in  Z. 

5.  11.  they  ravished  the  women  in  Z.  and  maids 
Joel  2. 1.  blow  ye  the  trumpet  in  Z.  and  sound,  15, 

3.  17.  I  am  the  Lord  your  God  dwelling  iji  Z. 
Amos  6.  1.  woe  to  them  that  are  at  ease  in  Z. 
Rom.  9.  33.  behold,  I  lay  in  Z.  a  stumbling  stone 

Mount  ZION.  1 

1  Kings  19.31.out  of  Jerusalem  shall  go  a  remnant, 

they  that  escape  out  oUnount  Z.  Isa.  37.  32. 

P«aZ.  48.  2.  the  joy  of  the  whole  earth  is  mount  Z. 

1  Met  mouref  Z.  rejoice  ||  78.68.  mount  Z.  he  loved 

74.  2.  this  mount  Z.  wherein  thou  hast  dwelt 

125.  1.  as  mount  Z.  which  cannot  be  removed 
/sa.4.5.on  every  dwelling-place  of  mount  Z.a  cloud 

8.  18.  Lord  which  dwelleth  in  mount  Z.  18.  7. 

10.  12.  Lord  performed  his  work  upon  mount  Z. 

24.  23.  when  tha  Lord  shall  reign  in  mount  Z. 

29.  8.  fight  ag.  mount  Z.  ||  31. 4.  fight  for  mount  Z. 


zuz 


Joel  2.  32.  m  mount  Z.  be  deliverance,  Obad.  17. 
Ohad.  21.  saviours  shall  come  up  on  mount  Z. 
17.  Z.  spreads  forth  her  hands,  none  to  comfortl^ic.  4  7.  Lord  shall  reign  over  them  in  mount  Z. 
757 


Heb.  12.  22.  but  ye  are  come  unto  mount  Z. 
Rev.  14.  1.  lo,  a  Lamb  stood  on  the  mount  Z. 

'  Out  of  ZION. 

Psal.  14.  7.  salvation  were  come  out  ofZ.  53.  6. 
20.2.  the  Lord  strengthen  thee  out  ofZ.  110.  2. 
128.  5.  the  Lord  shall  bles^  thee  out  ofZ.  134. 3L 
135. 21.  blessed  be  the  Lord  out  of  Z.  who  dwells 
/sa.  2.  3.  for  out  of  7,.  shall  go  forth  the  law 
Jer.  9.  19.  a  voice  of  wailing  is  heard  out  of  Z. 
.hel  3.  16.  the  Lord  also  shall  roar  out  of  Z.  . 

Worn. 11. 26.  there  shall  come  oh<o/Z.  the  deliverer 
ZIPPOR,  .See  1?alak. 
ZIPPORAH. 
Ezod.  2.  21.  Jcthro  gave  Moses  Z.  his  daughter 
4.  25.  Z.  took  a  sharp  stone  ||  18.  2.  Jethro  took  Z  * 
ZOAN. 
JV«;n. 13.22.  Hebron  was  built  seven  years  before  Z. 
Psal.  78.  12.  marvellous  things  did  he  in  Z.  43. 
Isa.  19.  11.  surely  the  princes  of  Z.  are  fools,  1.3. 
30.  4.  for  his  princes  were  at  Z.  and  his  ambass. 
i2zei-.30. 14. 1  willsetfirein  Z.  and  e.xecute  iudera. 

ZOAR.  •"     ^ 

Gen.  14.  2.  the  king  of  Bela,  which  is  Z.  8. 
19.  22.  the  name  of  the  city  was  called  Z. 
i)eHt.  34.3.  shewed  him  the  city  of  palm-trees  to  Z. 
Isa.  15.  5.  his  fugitives  shall  flee  unto  Z. 
■fer.  48.  34.  they  uttered  iheir  voice  from  Z. 
ZOBAH. 

1  .5am.  14.  47.  Saul  fought  against  the  kings  of  Z. 

2  Sam.  8.  3.  David  smote  Hadadezer  the  king  of  Z. 
1  Kings  U.  24.  1  Chron.  18.  3,  9. 

23.  36.  Igal  son  of  Nathan  of  Z.  David's  worthy 
1  Kings  11.  23.  Rezon  fled  from  the  king  of  Z. 

ZOPHAR. 
.ToVi.W.Z.  the  Naamnthite,  11.1.  120.  1.142.9 

ZORAH. 
■Josh.  19.  41.  coast  of  inheritance  of  Dan,  was  Z. 
Judg.  13.  2.  a  certain  man  of  Z.  called  Manoah 
25.S[)irit  moved  Samson  between  Z.and  Kshtao 
16.   31.   they  buried   Samson   between   Z.   and 
Eshtaol  in  the  burying  place  of  Manoah 
18.  2.  the  Danites  sent  from  Z.  to  spy  the  land 
8.  they  came  unto  their  brethren  to  Z. 
?  Chron.  11.  10.  Rehoboain  built  Z.  and  Ajalon 

ZOROBABEL. 
Mat.  1.12.  Salathicl  bog:at  Z.  ||  13.  Z,  begat  AUhud 
Luke  3.  27.  Rhesa,  which  was  the  son  of  Z. 
ZUAR,  See  Nathanael. 
ZUR. 
JVum.  25.  15.  Cozbi  the  daughter  of  Z.  was  alain 
31.  8.  Z.  a  prince  of  Midian  sJain,  Josh.  13.  21. 
1  Chron.  8.  30.  Z.  the  sou  of  Gideon,  9.  36. 
ZURISHADDAI,  .Sz-e  Sheldmiel. 
ZUZIMS. 
Oen.  14.  5.  the  kings  smote  the  Z.  in  H»ra 


CONCORDANCE 


TO 


THE  BOOKS  CALLED  AFOCRYPHA. 


AARON. 
l^SD.  1. 13.  for  their  brethren  thesons  of  A.  14. 
■*-'  5. 5.  priests  the  sons  of  Phinees,  the  son  of  A. 
2  KKd.  1.  3.  Kleazar  son  of  A.  of  the  tribe  of  Levi 
13  I  gave  Moses  for  a  leader,  and  A.  for  a  priest 
Tob.  1.  l>.  I  gave  to  the  priests  the  children  of  A. 
EccL36.  17.  Iiear,  according  to  the  blessing  of  A. 
45.  6.  he  exalted  A.  a  holy  man  like  unto  him 
20.  but  he  made  A.  more  honourable,  gave  him 
25.  the  inheriumce  of  A.  should  be  to  his  seed 
50.  13.  so  were  all  the  sons  of  A.  in  their  glory 
16.  then  shouted  the  sons  of  A.  and  sounded 
1  Mac.  7.  14.  a  priest  of  the  seed  of  A.  is  come 

ABACUC. 
8  Esd.  1.  40.  I  will  give  for  leaders,  Nahum,  A. 

ABASEMENT. 
Eecl.  20.  11.  there  is  an  a.  because  of  glory 

ABASHED. 
Tob.  2.  14.  I  did  not  believe,  and  I  was  a.  at  her 
Eccl.i-i5.  but  be  a.  of  the  error  of  thy  ignorance 

ABATETH. 
fVisd.  16.  24.  and  a.  his  strength  for  the  benefit 
ilccl.  25.  23.  a  wicked  woman  a.  the  courage 
ABATED. 

1  Mac.  5.  3.  he  a.  their  courage,  and  took. spoils 
11.  49.  so  when  Ihey  saw,  their  courage  was  a. 

ABDIAS. 

2  Ead.  1.39. 1  will  give  for  leaders,  Joel,  A.  Jonas 

ABHOR. 
Eith.  14.  15.  I  a.  the  bed  of  the  uncircumcised 

It),  and  that  I  a.  it  as  a  menstruous  rag 
Eccl.  11.  2.  nor  a.  a  man  for  outward  appearance 

13.  20.  have  huiiiiliiy,  so  doth  the  rich  a.  the  poor 
3d.  4.  he  that  is  wise  will  not  a.  medicines 

ABHORRED. 
Jud.  9.  4.  which  a.  the  pollution  of  their  blood 
Eccl.  10.  8.  but  he  a.  ihem  for  their  i)ride 
20.  8.  he  that  useth  many  words  shall  he  a. 

ABHORREST. 
ffisd.  11.24.  thou  a.  nothing  which  thou  hast  made 

ABHORRETH. 
Eccl.  50.25.  there  be  two  nations  which  my  heart  a. 

ABIDE. 
Siw.  57.  she  would  not  a.  your  wickedness 

ABIDE. 
2  Ead.  7.  42.  the  end  where  much  glory  dotli  a. 
Jud.  15.  2.  so  that  there  was  no  man  that  durst  a. 
lVisd.\.5.  will  n<it  a.  when  unrighteousness  comes 

3.  9.  such  as  be  faithful  in  love  shall  a.  with  him 
Eccl.'Z.lO.iM  any  a.  in  his  fear,  and  was  forsaken? 

6.  8.  he  will  not  a.  in  the  day  of  thy  trouble 

11.  21.  «ru«t  in  the  Lord,  and  a.  in  thy  labour 

12.  1.').  lor  a  while,  he  wdl  a.  with  thee 

22.  23.  a.  Btodfisl  to  him  in  the  time  of  trouble 

24.  7.  and  in  whose  inheritance  shall  I  a.7 

28.  6.  reminilier  death,  a.  in  the  commandments 

43.  3.  H>id  who  can  a.  the  burning  heat  thereof? 
1  Mac.  7.  2d.  hi:  was  not  able  to  a.  their  force 

10.  73.  thou  shall  not  be  able  to  a.  the  horsemen 
S  Mac.  7. 17.  but  u.  a  while,  and  behold  his  power 
9.  12.  when  ho  could  not  a.  his  own  smell 

ABIDETH. 

Eccl.  43.  20.  it  a-  upon  cverv  gathering  of  water 

ABILITY. 

1  Kjrf.5.44.  tosi:tup  the  house,  according  to  their  a. 
H'isd.  13.  19.  for  good  success  nsketh  a.  to  do 
Eccl.  11.  12.  wanting  a.  and  full  of  poverty 

14.  11.  my  son,  according  to  thy  n.  do  good 
13.  according  to  thy  a.  give  lo  ihv  friiMid 

44.  6.  rich  men  furnished  with  a.  living  peactably 

ABIRON. 

Eccl.  45.  18.  that  were  on  Dalhan's  and  A.  side 

ABLE. 

2  Ksd.  2.  28.  but  they  shall  be  a.  to  do  nothing 

4.  6.  then  I  said,  what  man  is  a.  to  do  that? 

11.  how  should  thy  vessel  be  a.  to  comiirehend  ? 
758 


ABO 

2  Esd.7. 4,5.  no  man  a.  save  him  that  is  destroyed 

8.  47.  be  a.  lo  love  my  creature  more  than  I 

9.  7.  shall  be  a.  to  escape  by  his  works  and  faith 

10.  32.  1  have  seen  that  I  am  not  a.  to  e-xjiress 
55.  as  much  as  thine  eyes  be  a.  to  see 

15.  17.  desire  to  go  into  a  city,  and  shall  not  he  a. 
Jud.G.i.  footsteps  shall  not  be  a.  to  siand  before  us 

7.  4.  the  hills  are  not  a.  to  bear  their  weight 
Ksth.  10.  3.  but  not  being  a.  to  bear  abundance 
IVisd.  12.14.  tyrant  not  a.  to  set  his  face  against  thee 

13.  9.  for  if  they  were  a.  to  know  so  much 
10.20.  send  bread  a.  to  content  every  man's  delight 

Eccl.  7.  0.  being  not  a.  to  take  away  iniquity 

16.  20.  and  who  is  a.  to  conceive  his  ways? 
41.  1.  yea,  to  him  that  is  yet  a.  to  receive  meat 
43.  28.  how  shall  we  a.  to  magnify  him? 

Bar.  6.  34.  they  are  not  a.  to  recompense  it 
41.  may  speak,  as  tho'  he  were  a.  to  understand 
04.  seeing  they  are  nor  a.  to  judge  causes 

1  Mac.  3.  17.  how  shall  we  be  a.  being  few  to  fight? 

30.  not  be  a.  to  hear  the  charges  any  longer 

5.  40.  we  shall  not  be  a.  to  withstand  him 

6.  .3.  he  sought  to  lake  the  city,  but  was  not  a. 
27.  neither  shall  thou  be  a.  to  rule  them 

7.  25.  that  he  was  not  a.  to  abide  their  force 

10.  72.  thy  foot  is  not  a.  to  stand  before  our  face 
73.  shall  not  be  a.  to  abide  the  horsemen 

2  Mac.  15.  17.  words  a.  to  slir  them  up  to  valour 

ABODE. 
2  Esd.  3.  22.  the  good  departed,  the  evil  a.  still 
.Ivd.  10.  2.  in  which  she  a.  on  the  sabbath-days 

12.  7.  thus  she  a.  in  the  camp  three  days 

2  Mac.  12.  27.  a  strong  city  vvherein  Lysias  a. 

14.  23.  Nicanor  a.  in  Jerusalem  and  did  no  hurt 

ABOLISH. 
Ksth.  14.9.  they  will  a.  the  thing  thou  hast  ordained 
KcfZ.47. 22.  he  will  not  a.  the  posterity  of  his  elect 
1  JI/ac.3.42.  given  commandment  utterly  to  a.  them 

ABOLISHED. 
Eccl.  45.  26.  that  their  good  things  be  not  a. 

ABO.MINABLE. 
Eccl.  41.  5.  the  chiklren  of  sinners  are  a.  children 

1  Mac.  1.  48.  they  should  make  their  souls  a. 

2  Mac.  6. 25.  get  a  slain  to  old  age,  and  make  it  a. 

ABOMINATION. 
IVisd.  14.  11.  because  they  are  become  an  a. 
Eccl.  1.  25.  but  godliness  is  an  a.  to  a  sinner 
10   13.  he  that  hath  pride  shall  pour  out  a. 

17.  20.  and  hate  Ihou  a.  vehemenily 

19.  23.  there  is  a  wickedness,  and  the  same  an  a. 

1  Mac.  1.  .')4.  they  set  up  the  a.  of  desolation 
0.7.  they  pulled  down  the  a.  which  he  had  setup 

2  Mac.  .5.  H.  being  had  in  a.  as  an  open  enemy 
6.  19.  than  to  live  slained  wilh  sucii  an  a. 

ABOMIiNaTIONS. 

1  End.  7.13  had  scpaniti  d  I'roni  the  a.  ofthe  people 

2  Esd.  1 1.44.  they  are  imied,  and  his  a.  are  fulfilled 
fVisd.  12.  23.  tormented  them  with  their  own  a. 
Eccl.  27.  30.  malice  and  wrath,  even  these  are  a. 

49.  2.  he  took  away  the  a.  of  iniijuity 

ABOVE. 
2  E.<>d.  8.  20.  O  Lord,  who  bcholdest  from  a. 
IVi.id.  9.  17.  and  send  thy  Hidy  Spirit  from  a. 
Eccl.  10.  17.  shall  any  remember  me  from  a.7 

ABOVE. 

1  Esd.  1.  24.  that  did  wickedly  a.  all  people 

3.  12.  but  a.  all  things  truth  brnreth  the  victory 

2  Esd.  4.  34.  do    not    Ihou    hasten    a.  the  most 

llighn.'it,  for  thy  haste  is  in  vain  to  be  a.  him 
10.  !il.  fur  llioii  art  blessed  a.  many  other 
Eccl.  3.21.  nor  search  ihings  Ibat  are  a.  thy  strength 

13.  2.  burden  not  ihyself  n.  thy  [lower 
25.  10.  none  a.  him  thai  feareth  the  Lord 

1;>.  there  is  no  head  a.  the  bend  of  a  serpent 
30. 10.  theie  is  no  riches  a.  a  SMiind  body,  and  no 
joy  a.  the  joy  of  tho  heart 


ACC 

4 

EccZ.40.18.he  that  findeth  a  treasuie  is  a.  them  botk 

20.  but  the  love  of  wisdom  is  a.  them  both 

21.  but  a.  pleasant  tongue  is  a.  them  both 
23.  but  a.  bolh  is  a  wife  with  her  husband 
20.  but  the  fear  ofthe  Lord  is  a.  them  both 

43.  28.  for  he  is  great  a.  all  his  works 
Prayer  of  Manass.  a.  the  number  of  the  sands 

ABOUND. 
Kcc2. 21. 13.  knowledge  of  a  Wiseman  a. like  a  flood 

23.  3.  lest  my  sins  a.  to  my  destruction 

24.  26.  the  understanding  to  a.  like  Euphrates 

ABOUNDED. 

1  Mac.  3.  30.  he  a.  above  the  kings  before  hira 

2  Mac.  3.  19.  the  women  a.  in  the  streets 

ABOUNDETU. 
Eccl.  10.  27.  that  labourelh  and  a.  in  all  things 

ABRAHAM. 
2  Esd.  1. 39. 1  will  give  for  leaders,  A.  Isaac,  Jacob 
3. 13.  whose  name  was  A.  ||  6.  8.  from  .\.  to  Isaac 
7.  36.  A.  prayed  first  for  the  Sodomites 
Tob.  4. 12.  we  are  children  ofthe  jirophets,  Noc,  A. 
./ud.  8.  26.  remember  what  things  he  did  to  A. 
Ksth.  14. 18.  no  joy,  but  in  thee,  O  Lord  God  of  A. 
Keel.  44.19.  A.  was  a  great  father  of  many  people 
liar.  2  34.  which  I  promised  to  their  father  A. 
7Jan.  3.  12.  not  depart  for  thy  beloved  A.  sake 
U/'uc.2.52.was  not  A. found  faithful  in  lemptationT 
21.  21.  found  that  they  are  ofthe  slock  of  A. 
2  Mac.  1.  2.  his  covenant  that  he  made  with  A. 

ABRIDGE. 
2  Mac.  2.  23.  we  will  essay  lo  a.  in  one  volume 

ABRIDGING. 
2  Mac.  2.  26.  have  taken  this  painful  labour  of  a 

ABRIDGMENT. 

2  Mac.%  31.  granted  to  him  that  will  make  an  a 

ABSALO.M. 

1  Mac.  11.  70.  except  Mattaihias  son  of  A. 

13.  1 1.  he  sent  Jonathan  the  son  of  A.  to  Joppe 

2  Mac.  11.  17.  John  and  A.  were  sent  from  you 

ABSENT. 
ffisd.  11.  11.  whether  they  were  a.  or  present 

14.  17.  that  they  might  llaller  him  that,  was  a. 

ABSTAIN. 
Kcc/.  28. 8.  a.  from  slrif>,  Ihou  shall  diminish  sins 

ABSTAIN  ETH. 
JVisd.  2. 10.  he  a.  from  our  ways  as  from  filthiness 

ABSTINENCE. 
2  Esd.  7.  55.  the  faces  of  them  which  have  used  a. 

ABUBUS. 
1  jVae.l6.11.Plolemous  thesonof  A.madc  captaio 
15.  the  son  of  A.  receiving  them  deceitfully 
ABUNDANCE. 

1  Esd.  8.  20.  they  shall  give  other  things  in  a. 

2  E.id.  2.  27.  but  thou  shall  be  merry  and  have  a. 
0.  50.  the  a.  of  ihem  to  a  drop  that  falleth 

15.  41.  may  be  full  with  the  a.  of  great  waters 
7'oi.  2.2.  when  I  saw  a.  of  meat,  I  said  to  my  son 

4.  10.  and  according  to  thine  a.  give  alms 
fVisd.  11.  7.  thou  gavest  unto  them  a.  of  water 
Eccl.  27.  1.  he  that  seeks  for  a.  will  turn  his  eves 

1  Mac.  16.  11.  and  ho  had  a.  of  silver  and  gold 

ABUNDANTLY. 
Eccl.  24.  31.  I  will  water  a.  my  garden-bed 

ABUSE. 
Eccl.  20. 10.  keep  her  in  slraitly,  lest  she  a.  herself 
liar.  0.  23.  the  priests  a.  things  sacrificed 
ABUSED. 

2  K.id.  9.  9.  which  now  have  a.  my  ways 

1  Mac.  7.  34.  but  be  a.  them  shamefully 

2  Mac.  14.  42.  choosing  rnlhcr  to  die  than  to  be  a. 

ACCARON. 
J  Mac.  10.  89.  ho  also  gnv.-  him  A.  in  possession 

ACCEPT. 
Tab.  13.  0.  turn,  who  can  lell  if  bo  will  a.  youl 
Krrl.  4.  22.  a.  no  person,  27.  |  35.  13.  |  42.  1. 
1  Mac.  8. 1.  such  as  would  a.  all  that  joined  theia 


ArOCRYPHA.]  ACH 

ACCEPTABLE. 
Wisd.  3.  14.  an  inheritance  more  a.  to  liis  mind 
9.  9.  and  knew  wimt  was  a.  in  Ihy  sigiit 
12.  so  shall  my  works  be  o.  then  simll  I  judge 
Eccl.  2.  5.  a.  men  tried  in  furnace  of  adversity 
15.  15.  if  thou  wilt,  to  keep  the  commandments, 
and  to  perform  o.  faitlifulness 
35.  7.  the  sacrifice  of  a  just  man  is  a. 

41.  2.  O  death,  a.  is  thy  sentence  to  the  needy 

ACCEPTED. 
Wisd.  18.  7.  80  of  thy  people  was  a.  the  salvation 
£ccM9.18.  the  fear  of  the  L.  is  the  first  step  to  be  a. 

34.  18.  the  gifts  of  unjust  men  are  not  a. 

35.  16-.  he  that  serveth  the  Lord  shall  be  a. 
Dan.  3.  16.  in  an  humble  spirit  let  us  be  a. 

1  Mac.  6.  60.  to  make  peace,  and  they  a.  thereof 

9.  71.  which  thing  he  a.  and  sware  unto  him 
14.  47.  then  Simon  a.  hereof,  and  was  pleased 

S  Mac.  12.  4.  who  a.  of  it  according  to  tlie  decree 

13. 24.  a.  well  of  Maccabeus,  made  him  governor 

ACCEPTING. 

1  Elsd.  4.  39.  with  her  there  is  no  a.  of  persons 
Eccl.  20.  22.  by  a.  persons,  overthroweili  himself 

ACCESS. 

2  Mac.  14.  3.  nor  have  any  more  a.  to  the  altar 

ACCLAMATIONS. 

1  Mac.  5.  64.  the  people  assembled  with  joyful  a. 

ACCOMPANY. 

Jud.  10. 17.  a  hundred  men,  to  a.  her  and  her  maid 

ACCOMPLISH. 

2  Esd.  12.  25.  for  these  shall  a.  his  wickedness 
Jud.  2.  13.  but  a.  ihem  fully,  as  I  commanded 

10.  8.  the  God  of  our  fathers  a.  thy  enterprises 

9.  that  I  may  go  forth  to  a.  things  you  spake 

S  Mac.  14. 29.  he  watched  his  time  to  a.  this  thing 

ACCOMPLISHED. 
1  Esd.  1.  17.  the  things  belonging  to  sacrifices  a. 
2.  1.  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  might  be  a. 
1  Mac.  3.  49.  Nazaritcs,  who  had  a.  their  days 

ACCORD. 

1  Esd.  5.  58.  all  Levites  with  one  a.  labouring 

9.  38.  the  multitude  came  together  with  one  a. 

Jud.  15.  9.  they  blessed  her  with  one  a.  and  said 

n^isd.  10.  20.  magnified  with  one  a.  thine  hand 

ACCOUNT. 
f^isd.  5.  1.  such  aa  made  no  a.  of  his  labours 
1  Mac.  6.  9.  and  he  made  a.  that  he  should  die 
S  Mac.  15.  18.  was  in  least  a.  with  them 

ACCOUNTED. 
tVisd.  5.  4.  we  fools  a.  his  life  madness 
Bar.  3.  35.  none  be  a.  of  in  comparison  of  him 

ACCOUNTS. 
Toll.  1.  21.  who  appointed  over  his  father's  a. 

22.  Achiacharus  was  overseer  of  the  a. 
ff'isd.  4.  20.  when  they  cast  up  the  a.  of  their  sins 

1  Mac.  10.  40.  I  give  silver  out  of  the  king's  a. 

42.  which  they  look  out  of  the  a.  year  by  year 
44.  expenses  shall  be  given  of  the  king's  a. 

ACCUSATION. 
Eccl.  26.  5.  my  heart  feareth  a  false  a. 
51.6.byana.to  the  king  from  an  unrighteous  tongue 

2  Mac.  4.  43.  an  a.  was  laid  against  Menelaus 

ACCUSATIONS. 
2  Mac.  14.  27.  with  the  o.  of  the  wicked  man 

ACCUSE. 
2  Esd.  16.  .50.  and  shall  a.  her  to  her  face 
ff'isd.  12.  12.  who  shall  a.  thee  for  the  nations 
Eccl.  id.  19.  taken  no  goods,  and  no  man  did  a.  him 
1  Mac.  10.  61.  assembled  themselves  to  a.  him 

ACCUSED. 
Tfisd.  10.  14.  as  for  them  that  had  a.  him 

1  Mac.  7.  f).  and  they  a.  the  people  to  the  king 

2  Mac.  5.  8.  being  a.  before  Aretas  the  king 
10.13.  being  (i.of  the  king's  friends  before  Eupator 

21.  a.  those  men. that  they  had  sold  their  brethren 
14.  38  formerly  Rizis  had  been  o.  of  Judaism 

ACCUSER. 
2  Mac.  4.  5.  not  to  be  an  a.  of  his  countrymen 

ACCUSERS. 
2  Esrf.  Ifi.  65.  your  own  sins  shall  be  your  a. 
1  Mac.  10.  64.  when  his  a.  saw  he  was  honoured 

ACCUSTO.M. 
Eccl.  23.  9.  a.  not  thv  mnulli  tn  swearing 

ACCUSTOMED. 
Eccl.  20.  25.  a  thief  is  better  than  a  man  a.  to  lie 
23.  15.  the  man  that  is  a.  to  opprobrious  words 

ACHAN. 
8  Esd.  7.  37.  praved  for  Israel  in  tl.3  time  of  A. 

ACHIACHARUS. 
Tob.  1.  21.  A.  my  brother  Anael's  son,  over  afl[airs 

22.  A.  entreating  for  me,  1  reiurned  to  Nineve 
2.  10.  A.  did  nourish  me  till  I  went  to  Elymais 

11.  18.  A.  and  Nasbiis  his  brother's  son  came 
14.  10.  remember,  how  .A man  handled  A. 

ACHIOR. 
Jud.  5.  .5.  then  said  A.  the  captain  of  Ammon 
22.  when  A.  had  finished  these  sayings 
6.2.  who  art  thou,  A. Ill  5.  A.  a  hireling  of  Ammon 

10.  then  Olofernes  commanded  to  take  A. 

13.  they  bound  A.  cast  him  down,  and  led  him 
759 


ADM 

Jud.S.lG.  they  set  A.  in  the  midst  of  all  tlieir  people 

11.  9.  concerning  the  matter  which  A.  did  speak 

14.  10.  when  A.  had  seen  all  that  God  had  done 

ACHiTOB. 

2  Esd.  1. 1.  Sadaniias,  son  of  Sadoc,  the  son  of  A. 

ACKNOWLEDGE. 
2  Esd.  1.  30.  yet  they  shall  a.  their  sins 

10.  16.  if  thou  Shalt  a.  the  determination  of  God 
Jud.  9.  14.  a.  that  thou  art  the  God  of  all  power 
fVisd.  13.  1.  nor  did  they  a.  the  work-master 
Eccl.  23.  11.  if  h«  a.  not  his  sin,  a  double  olience 
Prayer  of  Manass.  I  a.  mine  iniquities 

ACKNOWLEDGED. 
Pf'isd.  12.  27.  they  a.  him  to  be  the  true  God 
18.  13.  they  a.  this  people  to  be  the  sons  of  God 
Eccl.  44.  23.  he  a.  him  in  his  blussing,  and  gave 
Sus.  14.  they  asked  the  cause,  they  a.  their  lust 
2  Mac.  3.  28.  manifestly  they  a.  the  power  of  God 

ACaUAINTANCE. 
Eccl.  30.  2.  shall  rejoice  of  his  sou  among  his  a. 
2  Mac.  6.  21.  the  old  a.  they  had  with  the  man 

ACaUlT. 
fVisd.  1.  6.  will  not  a.  a  blasphemer  of  his  words 

ACT. 
Jud.  8.  34.  but  inquire  not  you  of  mine  a. 

ACTION. 
Eccl.  37. 16.  let  counsel  go  before  every  a. 

ACTIONS. 
2  Esd.  15. 16.  their  a.  shall  stand  in  their  power 

ACTIVE. 
Wisd.  15.  11.  that  inspired  into  him  an  a.  soul 
ACTS. 

1  Esd.  1.  25.  now  after  all  these  a.  of  Josias 
33.  the  a.  that  Josias  did  are  reported 

Eccl.  17. 9.  gave  them  to  glory  in  his  marvellous  a. 
18.  4.  and  who  shall  find  out  his  noble  a.? 
51.  8.  then  thought  I  upon  thy  a.  of  old 
ljtfac.2.51.call  tg  remembrance  what  a.  our  fathers 
did  in  their  time  to  receive  great  honour 
3.4.  in  his  a.  he  was  like  a  lion  roaring  for  his  prey 
7.  he  made  Jacob  glad  with  his  a. 
5. 56.  heard  of  valiant  a.  and  deeds  they  had  done 

8.  2.  it  was  told  him  of  their  wars  and  noble  a. 

9.  22.  his  wars,  and  the  noble  a.  which  he  did 
14.  35.  the  people  seeing  the  a.  of  Simon 

2  Mac.  2.  13.  gathered  together  the  a.  of  king 

10.  10.  now  will  we  declare  the  a.  of  Antiochue 

ADAM. 
2  Esd.  3.  5.  thou  gavest  a  body  to  A.  without  soul 
10.  as  death  was  to  A.  so  was  the  flood  to  these 
21  .the  first  A. bearing  a  wicked  heart  transgressed 
26.  in  all  things  did  even  as  A.  had  done 

4.  30.  evil  seed  hath  been  sown  in  the  heart  of  A 

6.  54.  A.  whom  thou  madest  lord  of  thy  creatures 

7.  II.  when  A.  transgressed  my  statutes 

46.  been  belter  not  to  have  given  the  earth  to  A 
48.  O  thou  A.  what  hast  thou  done  ? 
Tob.  8.  6.  thou  madest  A.  and  gavest  him  Eve 
Eccl.  33.  10.  and  A.  was  created  of  the  eartli 
40.  1.  and  a  heavy  yoke  is  upon  the  sons  of  A. 
49. 16.  80  was  H.  above  every  living  thing  in  crea. 

ADAMANT. 
Eccl.  16. 16.  his  light  from  the  darkness  with  an  a. 

ADAR. 
lEsri.  7.5.  holy  house  was  finished  in  the  month  A. 
Esth.  J3.  6.  of  the  twelfth  month  A.  16.  20. 

1  Mac.  7.  43.  the  thirteenth  day  of  the  month  A. 

2  Mac.  15.  36.  in  the  Syrian  tongue  is  called  A. 

A DAS A. 

1  JIfac.  7.  40.  Judas  pitched  in  A.  with  3000  men 

45.  then  pursued  after  them  from  A.  to  Gazera 

ADD. 

Tob.  5.  15.  I  will  a.  something  to  the  wages 

18.  be  not  greedy  to  a.  money  to  money 
Eccl.  4.  3.  a.  not  more  trouble  to  a  heart  vexed 

5.  5.  be  not  without  fear  to  a.  sin  to  sin 
21.  15.  he  will  commend  it,  and  a.  unto  it 

I  Mac.  8.  30.  shall  think  meet  to  a.  or  diminish  any 
thing;  and  whatsoever  thev  shall  a.or  take  away 
ADDED. 
1  Esd.  7.  6.  that  were  a.  to  them  did  according  to 
Eccl.'^.M.  instead  of  sins  shall  be  a. to  build  thee  up 
42.  21.  to  him  may  nothing  be  a.  nor  diminished 

1  Mac.  10.  30.  governments  which  are  a.  thereto 
38.  the  three  that  are  a.  to  Judea,  11.  34. 

14.  .30.  after  that  Jonathan  was  a.  to  his  people 
ADDING. 

2  Mac.  2.  32.  only  a.  this  much  to  what  is  said 

ADDO. 
1  .Esd.  6.  1.  Zacharias  the  son  of  A.  prophesied 

ADHERENTS. 
1  Mac.  9.  60.  he  sent  letters  to  his  a.  in  Judea 

ADIDA. 
1  Mae.  12.  38.  Simon  also  set  up  A.  in  Sephela 
13.  13.  but  Simon  pitched  his  tents  at  A. 
ADJOINING. 

1  Mac■^1. 33.  Simon  passed  thro'  the  holds  there  a. 

2  Mac.  12.  16.  a  lake  ncir  a.  thereto,  being  filled 

ADMIRABLE. 
1  Esd.  4. 29.  Apame,  daughter  of  the  a-  Bartacus 


AFF 

ADMIRATION. 

^ccZ  22.23.nor  the  ricli  that  is  foolish  to  be  had  in  a 
38.  3.  in  the  sight  of  great  men  lie  shall  be  in  a. 

ADMIRE. 
Eccl.  27.  23.  he  will  speak  sweetly  and  a.  thy  words 

AUM1R4ID. 
Jud.  10.  19.  wondered  at  her  beauty,  and  a.  Israel 
fVisd.8. 11.  I  shall  be  a.  in  the  sigiii  of  great  men 
11. 14.  when  they  saw  what  came  to  pass,  thev  a. 
ADMONISH.  ^ 

Jud.  8.  27.  that  come  near  to  him  to  a.  them 
lyisd.  11.  10.  for  these  thou  didst  a.  as  a  father 
Eccl.  19.  13.  a.  a  friend,  may  be  not  done  it,  14, 15 
17.  a.  thy  neighbour  before  thou  threaten  him 
ADMONISHED. 
fVisd.  16.  6.  were  troubled,  that  they  might  be  a. 

ADORE. 
Bei4.  theking  worshiiipedil  and  wentdailytoo.it 

ADORNED. 
Esth.  15.  2.  being  gloriously  a.  she  took  maids 

ADORNING. 
2  Mac.  2.  29.  must  seek  fit  things  for  a.  thereof 

ADVANTAGE. 
2  Mac.  8.  7.  but  specially  took  he  a.  of  the  night 

ADVENTURE. 
Wisd. 2. 2.  for  we  are  born  at  all  a.  be  as  not  beec 

ADVERSARY. 
Eccl.  36.  7.  lake  away  the  a.  destroy  the  enemy 
1  Mac.  1.  36.  it  was  an  evil  a,  to  Israel 

ADVERSARIES. 
1  Esd.  8.  51.  conduct  for  saleguard  against  our  « 
Wi.-id.  11.  3.  they  were  avenged  olliieir  a. 

8.  declaring  how  thou  hadst  puiii>lied  their  a. 
18.  8.  for  wherewith  thou  didst  punish  our  a. 

£c(;Z.23.3.lcst  my  sins  abound  and  I  I'all  bef.minei 
47.  7.  he  brought  to  nought  the  Philistines  his  a. 
51.  2.  thou  hast  been  my  helper  against  mine  a. 

1  Mac.  9.  29.  against  them  that  are  a.  to  us 

ADVERSITY. 
Eccl.  2.  5.  acceptable  men  in  the  furnace  of  a. 
11.14.  prosperity  and  a.  life  and  death  come  of  God 
12.  8.  and  an  enemy  cannot  be  hidden  in  a. 

9.  but  in  his  a.  even  a  friend  will  depart 

17.  if  a.  come  upon  thee,tlioushalt  find  him  there 
2.,lfac.6.16.though  he  punish  with  a.  yet  nol  forsake 

12.  30.  entreated  them  kindly  in  time  of  their  a. 

ADVERSITIES. 

2  Esd.  10.  20.  for  how  manv  are  the  a.  of  Sion ! 
2  Mac.  5.  20.  partaker  of  the  a.  that  happened 

ADVICE. 
Eccl.  32. 19.  do  nothing  without  a.  done  repent  not 

ADULTERER. 
Eccl.  25.  2.  my  soul  hateth  an  old  a.  that  dotetb 

ADULTERERS. 
Wisd.2.\&.  cliildr.  of  a.  shall  notcometo  perfection 

ADULTERY. 
Wisd.  14.  24.  slew  another,  or  grieved  him  by  a. 
Eccl.  23.  23.  she  hath  played  the  whore  in  a. 

AFARoJ. 
1  Esd.  5.  65.  sounded,  so  that  it  was  heard  a.  off 
Eccl.  16.  22.  for  his  covenant  is  a.  off,  Irial  in  end 

AFFAIRS. 
1  Esd.  8. 12.  that  they  may  look  to  the  a.  of  Judea 
7'oA.1.21.  over  father's  accounts,  and  overall  hieo. 
Esth.  13.  7.  cause  our  a.  to  he  well  settled 
16.  5.  put  in  trust  to  manage  their  friend's  a. 

1  Mac.  3.  32.  Lysins  to  over.'see  the  a.  of  the  king 

6.  .56.  sought  to  take  to  him  the  ruling  of  the  a. 
57.  and  the  a.  of  the  kingdom  lie  upon  us 

10.  37.  some  set  over  the  a.  of  the  kingdom 

2  Mac.  4.  21.  not  to  be  well  afiected  to  big  a. 

7.  24.  that  he  would  trust  him  with  his  a. 

8.  8.  wrote  to  yield  more  aid  to  the  king's  a. 

9.  20.  and  if  your  a.  be  to  your  contentment 

11.  1.  Lysias,  who  managed  a.  took  displeasure 
23.  that  every  one  may  attend  upon  his  own  a. 
20.  I  hey  may  go  cheerfully  about  tifeir  own  a. 

13.  2.  Lysias,  his  protector  and  ruler  of  his  a. 
23.  who  was  left  over  the  a.  in  Antioch 

AFFECT. 
Eccl.  13.  II.  a.  not  to  be  made  equal  to  him  in  tall 

AFFECTED. 
Esth.  13.  5.  this  people  is  evil  a.  to  our  state 
16.  23.  be  safety  to  us,  and  the  well  a.  Persians 
2  Mac.  4.  21.  understanding  him  not  to  be  well  a 

13.  26.  Lysias  pacified,  and  made  them  well  a. 
14.5.  being  called  and  asked  howthejewsstooda 

26.  Nicanor  was  not  well  a.  toward  the  state 

AFFECTIO.V. 

Wisd.  6.  11.  therefore  set  your  a.  on  my  wordl 

AFFLICT. 

F.cr.l.  30.  21.  a.  not  thyself  in  thine  own  counsel 

49.  7.  that  he  mijlit  root  out,  and  a.  and  (lestroy 

AFFLICTED. 

2  Esd.  11.42.  for  thou  hast  a.  meek,  hurl  peaceable 

Jud.  9.  11.  for  thou  art  a  God  of  the  a.  a  helper 

16.11.  my  a.  shouted  for  joy,  my  weak  ones  cried 

Wisd.  5.  1.  before  the  face  of  such  as  have  a.  him 

14.  15.  a  father  a.  with  untimely  mourning 

18.  19.  they  should  not  know  why  they  were  A 


AGE 

tt^sd.  19.  16.  bul  these  very  grievously  o.  them 
Eccl.  4.  4.  reject  not  the  Bupplication  of  the  a. 
30.  14.  than  a  rich  man  that  is  a.  in  his  body 
Sar.  4.  31.  misurable  are  they  that  a.  thee 

1  Mac.  9.  68.  and  they  a.  Bacchides  sore 

10.  46.  for  he  had  a4i^em  very  sore 

AFFLICTING. 

Jud.  3.2.  and  concluded  the  a.  of  the  whole  earth 

AFFLICTION. 

2  Esd.  6.  19.  when  the  o.  of  Sion  shall  be  fulfilled 
Jud.  13.  20.  not  spared  for  ihe  a.  of  our  nation 
Estk.  11.  8.  a  day  of  anguish,  a.  and  great  uproar 

14.  12.  make  thyself  known  in  time  of  our  a. 
16. 20.  who  in  time  of  their  a.  shall  set  upon  them 

Eccl.  2.  11.  for  the  Lord  saveth  in  time  of  a. 

3.  15.  in  the  day  of  a.  it  shall  be  remembered 
6.  10.  will  not  continue  in  the  day  of  thine  a. 
11.25.  in  prosperity  there  is  a  forgetfolness  of  a. 

and  in  the  day  of  a.  there  is  no  remembrance 
S7.  a.  of  an  hour  makes  a  man  forget  pleasure 
25.  14.  any  a.  but  the  a.  from  them  that  hate  me 
W.  12.  and  it  shall  deliver  thee  from  all  a. 
35.20.  mercy  is  seasonable  in  the  time  of  a. 
38. 19.  in  a.  also  sorrow  rcmaineth,  life  of  the  poor 
Bar.  5.  1.  the  garment  of  thy  mourning  and  a. 
1  Jdac.  9.  27.  so  was  there  a  great  a.  in  Israel 

AFFLICTIONS. 
i  Esd. 8.9:7. of  ihoii;  that  keep  thy  testimonies  in  a. 
Jud.i.  13.  so  God  heard  and  looked  upon  their  a. 
Eccl.  51.3.  and  from  the  manifold  a.  which  I  had 
1  Mac.  2.  30.  because  a.  increased  sore  on  them 

AFFRIGHTED. 
S  Esd.  10.  55  fear  not,  let  not  thy  heart  be  a. 

12.  5.  great  fear  wherewith  I  was  a.  this  night 

AFORE. 
1  Esd.  6.  32.  make  light  of  any  thing  o.  spoken 

AFOREHAND. 
Jud.  7. 1.  to  take  a.  the  ascents  of  the  hill-country 

AFORETIME. 
Sus.  52.  sins  committed  a.  are  come  lo  light 
1  Mac.  3.  46.  was  the  place  where  they  prayed  a. 

9.  72.  the  prisoners  taken  a.  out  of  land  of  Judea 

11.  34.  the  king  received  of  them  yearly  a. 

AFRAID. 
S  Esd.  6.  15.  therefore  when  it  speaks,  be- not  o. 
23.  when  they  hear  shall  be  suddenly  a. 
10. 25. 1  was  a.  of  her,  and  mused  wh;it  it  might  be 
27.  then  was  1  a.  and  cried  with  a  loud  voice 
38.  I  shall  tell  thee  wherefore  thou  art  a. 

13.  3.  ihey  were  sore  a.  and  yet  durst  fight 

11.  dust  and  smoke,  when  I  saw  this,  I  was  a. 

15.  18.  bonses  be  destroyed,  and  men  shall  be  a. 
37.  and  they  that  see  the  wrath  shall  he  a. 

43.  they  shall  go  to  Babylon,  and  make  her  a. 
16. 10.  he  shall  thunder,  and  who  shall  not  be  a.? 
Tab.  2.  8.  this  man  is  not  yet  a.  to  be  put  to  death 

4.  8.  be  not  a.  lo  give  according  to  that  little 

6.  14.  and  I  am  a.  lest  if  I  go  in  unto  her,  I  die 
Jud.  1.  II.  for  they  were  not  a.  of  liim 

4.  2.  therefore  they  were  exeedingly  o.  of  him 

5.  23.  we  will  not  be  a.  of  the  face  of  Israel 

10.  16.  when  before  him  be  not  a.  in  thy  heart 

16.  25.  there  was  none  made  Israel  any  more  a. 
Wisd.  8. 15.  horrible  tyrants  be  a.  when  hear  of  me 

18.  25.  the  destroyer  gave  place  and  was  a. 
Eccl.  26.  5.  and  for  the  fourth  I  was  sore  a. 

30.  9.  cocker  thy  child  he  shall  make  thee  a. 

34.  14.  whoso  feareth  the  Lord,  shall  not  be  a. 
Bar.  6.  5.  neither  be  ye  a.  when  ye  see  multitude 
1  Mac.  1.  18.  but  Ptolemce  was  a.  of  him  and  fled 

3.  22.  and  a^  for  you,  be  ye  not  a.  of  them 

4.  8.  fear  not,  neither  be  ye  a.  of  their  assault 
21.  perceived  these  things,  they  were  sore  a. 

5.41.  but  if  he  be  a.  and  camp  beyond  the  river 
8.  12.  all  that  heard  of  their  name  were  a. 

12.  40.  he  was  a.  Jonathan  would  not  suffer  him 

52.  they  .bewailed  Jonathan,  and  were  sore  a. 
16.  8.  he  saw  thai  the  peojdft  were  a.  to  go  over 

^Mac.  3.  24.  all  that  came  with  him  were  sore  a. 

AFTERWARD. 
Eccl.  19.  21.  say,  I  will  not  do  it,  though  a.  he  do  it 

AGAGITE. 
£«(A.12. 6.  howbeit,  ,Aman  tho  .^.sought  to  molest 

AO.ARENE.S. 
Bar.  3.  23.  the  A.  that  seek  wisdom  upon  earth 

AGE. 
S  Ksd.  3.  Ifi.  thou  troiihlest  the  men  of  that  a. 

5.  50.  for  our  mother  draweth  now  nigh  to  a. 

53.  and  tluy  that  are  born  in  the  time  of  a. 
Tob.  1.  9.  when  I  was  come  to  the  a.  of  a  man 

3.  10.  shall  bring  old  a.  with  sorrow  to  the  grave 

14.  5.  till  the  time  of  that  a.  be  fulfilled 

Jud.  8.  18.  there  arose  none  in  our  a.  that  worship 
Wwd.  3.  17.  their  last  a.  shall  be  without  honour 

4.  8.  honourable  n.  is  not  in  length  of  time 
9.  and  an  unspotted  life  is  old  a. 

18.  the  many  years  and  old  a.  of  the  unrighteous 
Eccl.  3.  12.  my  rton,  hf,l|i  thy  father  in  his  a. 

6.  18.  so  shalt  thou  find  wisdom  till  thy  old  a. 
8.  6.  dishonour  not  a  man  in  hia  old  a. 

760 


ALE 

Eccl.  26.  17.  80  Is  the  beauty  of  the  face  In  ripe  o. 

19.  my  son,  keep  the  flower  of  thine  a.  sound 
30.  24.  carefulness  brings  a.  before  the  time 

41.  2.  that  is  now  in  the  last  a.  and  is  vexed 

42.  9.  lest  she  pass  away  the  flower  of  her  a. 
46.  9.  which  remained  with  him  till  his  old  a. 

1  Mac.  16.  3.  I  am  old,  and  ye  are  of  sutKcient  a. 

2  Mac  0. 24.  for  it  becometh  not  our  a. to  dissemble 
25.  1  get  a  stain  to  my  old  a.  and  abominable 
27.  shew  myself  such  a  one  as  my  a.  requireth 

7.  27.  nourished  and  brought  thee  up  to  this  a. 

AGED. 

2  Esd.  5.  49.  the  things  that  belong  to  the  a. 
Tub.  8.  7.  that  we  may  become  a.  together 
14.  3.  for  behold,  I  am  a.  and  ready  to  depart 
IVisd.  2.  10.  the  ancient  gray  hairs  of  the  a. 

£cci.  25. 20.  as  climbing  a  sandy  way  is  to  feet  of  a. 
42.  3.  be  not  ashamed  to  inform  the  extreme  a. 

9,  Mac.  6.  18.  Eleazar  the  scribe,  an  a.  man 

8.  30.  made  the  a.  equal  in  spoils  with  themselves 

AGES. 
1  Esd.  4.  40.  she  is  the  strength  and  majesty  of  all  a. 
fi^isd.  7.  27.  and  into  all  a.  entering  into  holy  souls 

14.  6.  and  left  to  all  a.  a  seed  of  generation 
Eccl.  24.  33.  I  will  leave  it  to  all  a.  for  ever 

1  Mac.  2.  61.  thus  consider  throughout  all  a. 

AGGEUS. 
lEsrf.  6.1.  A.  and  Zacharias  prophesied  to  the  Jews 
7. 3.  the  holy  works  prospered  when  A.  prophesied 

2  Esd.  1.  40.  A.  Zachary  and  Malachi  for  leaders 

AGO. 

1  Esd.  6. 14.  this  house  was  builded  many  years  a 

AGONY. 

2  Mac.  3. 14.  there  was  no  small  a.  thro'  the  city 
21.  the  fear  of  the  high-priest  being  in  such  an  a. 

AGREE. 
Tob.  7.  11.  I  will  eat  nothing  here  till  we  a. 
Eccl.  13.  2.  how  a.  kettle  and  earthen  pot  together 
25.  1.  a  man  and  a  wife  that  a.  together 
2Mac.  11. 14.  he  persuaded  them  to  a.  to  conditions 

AGREEABLE. 
fVisd.  12.  15.  thinking  it  not  a.  to  condemn  him 

AGREEABLY. 
1  Esd.  8. 12.  a.  to  that  which  is  in  law  of  the  Lord 

AGREEING. 
iVisd.lG.iQ.  didst  send  them  bread  a.  to  every  taste 

AGREEMENT. 
Eccl.  13.  IS.  what  a.  between  the  hyena  and  a  dog? 
iMac.  12.  25.  restore  them  according  to  the  a. 

AID. 
Tob.  8.  6.  let  us  make  to  him  an  a.  like  himself 
Jud.  9.  4.  thy  children  called  upon  thee  for  a. 
Esth.  16.  20.  ye  shall  a.  them,  thai  they  be  avenged 
Mf'isd.  13. 18.  for  a.  he  beseecheth  what  hath  least 

1  Mac.  7.  7.  punish  them,  with  all  that  a.  them 
8.  26.  nor  shall  they  a.  them  with  victuals 
10.24.  promise  them  gifts,  that  I  may  have  their  a. 

15.  19.  nor  yet  a.  their  enemies  against  them 

16.  18.  that  he  should  send  him  a  host  to  a.  him 

2  Mac.  4.  11.  who  went  to  Rome  for  amity  and  a. 

8.  8.  to  yield  more  a.  to  the  king's  affairs 

15.  8.  expect  victory  and  a.  from  the  Almighty 
AILETH. 
2  Esd.Q.  42.  I  said  to  her,  what  a.  thcet  tell  me 
10. 31.  what  a.  thee?  and  why  art  thou  disquieted? 

AIM. 
IVisd.  13. 9.  to  know  that  they  could  a.  at  the  world 

AIR. 
2  Esd.  fi.  4.  or  ever  the  heights  of  the  a.  were  lifted 
II.  2.  all  Ihe  winds  of  the  a.  blew  on  her 
Jud.  11.7.  the  fowls  of  the  a.  shall  live  by  thy  power 
IVisd.  2.  3.  our  spirits  shall  vanish  as  the  soft  a. 
5.  11.  as  when  a  bird  hath  flown  through  the  a. 
but  the  light  a.  being  beaten  with  her  wings 
12.  an  arrow  is  shot  at  a  mark,  it  parteth  the  a. 
7.  3.  when  I  was  born  T  drew  in  the  common  a. 

17.  10.  they  died,  denying  that  they  saw  tho  a. 
Dar.  .3.  17.  had  pastime  with  the  fowls  of  the  a. 
nan.  3. 58.  O  all  ye  fowls  of  the  a.  bless  the  Lord 
2  Mac.  4.  46.  taking  aside,  as  it  were  to  take  the  a. 

5.  2.  there  were  seen  horsemen  running  in  the  a. 

ALARM. 
lJl/ac.7.45.BOunding  an  a.  after  them  with  trumpets 

ALCIMU3. 

\Mac.'i.5.  having  A.  who  was  desirous  to  be  priest 
9.  and  him  he  sent  with  that  wicked  A. 

12.  did  there  assemble  lo  A.  a  company  of  scribes 

lo  require  justice,  20,  23,  25.  I 
9.1,. 57. 
21.  but  A.  contended  for  Ihe  high  priesthood 

9.  .54.  A.  commanded  that  tho  wall  he  pulled  down 
.55.cvennt  that  time  was  A.plagiird  and  hindered 
.W.  A.  died  at  that  time  with  great  torment 

IMac.  14.  3.  one  A.  who  had  been  high-priest 

13.  to  make  A.  high-priost  of  the  great  lemple 
2fi.  A.  perceiving  the  love  that  was  betwixt  tliem 

ALEXANDKR 
1  Mac.  1. 1.  A.  son  of  Philip  the  Macedonian,  6.  2. 
7.  A.  reigned  twelve  years,  and  then  died 

10.  1.  A.  the  ton  of  Antiochui  took  Ptolemaia 


ALO 


[AroCRTFHA. 


1  Mac.\Q.  A.  let  us  first  makepeace  with  him,  befor* 
he  join  with  A.  15.  18,  47,  49,  59,  68,  88. 

23.  what  have  we  done  that  A.  prevented  us? 
51.  A. sent  ambassadors  toPtolemce  king  of  Egypt 

ALIENS. 

1  ^fac.  3. 45.  sanctuary  trodden,  a.  kept  strong  bold 

ALIKE. 
IVisd.  6. 7.  made  small  and  great,  he  careth  for  all  a. 

11.  11.  absent  or  present,  they  were  vexed  a. 
14.  9.  are  both  a.  hateful  unto  God 

ALIVE. 

2  Esd.  12.  33.  set  them  before  him  a.  in  judgment 
7Vii.3.15.  nor  any  son  of  his  a.  to  whom  1  may  keep 

7.  5.  they  said,  he  is  both  a.  and  in  good  health 

8.  12.  send  and  let  her  see  whether  he  be  a. 
14.  came  forth,  and  told  them  that  he  was  a. 

\Mac.  1.  6.  and  parted  his  kingdom  while  he  was  a. 
8.  7.  how  they  took  him  a.  and  covenanted 

14.  2.  he  sent  one  of  his  princes  to  take  him  a. 

2  Mac.  6. 26.  not  escape  the  Almighty  a.  nor  dead 

7.  5.  commanded  him,  being  yet  a.  to  be  brought 

24.  whilst  the  youngest  was  yet  a.  did  exhort  him 

12.  35.  he  would  have  taken  that  cursed  man  n. 

ALLEDGING. 
IVisd.  18.  22.  a.  the  oaths  made  with  the  fathers 

ALLIED. 
IVisd.  8.  17.  to  be  a.  to  wisdom  is  immortality 
ALLOWANCE. 

1  Esd.  1.7.  these  things  were  given  of  the  king's  a. 

2  Mac.  4.  14.  to  be  partakers  of  the  unlawful  a. 

ALLOWED. 
2  Esd.  8.  52.  to  you  rest  is  a.  yea,  perfect  wisdom 

ALLURE. 
Jud.  10.  4.  to  a.  the  eyes  of  all  that  should  see  her 

ALLURED. 

Wisd.  14.  20.  multitude  a.  by  the  grace  of  the  work 

ALMIGHTY. 

1  Esd.  9.  46.  Esdras  blessed  the  God  of  hosts  A. 

2  Esd.  1.  15.  thus  saith  the  a.  Lord,  22,  28,  33.  I 

2.  9,  31.  Jud.  4. 13. 1  If).  6, 17. 
9-  45.  and  we  gave  great  honour  unto  the  A. 
Jud.  8. 13  try  the  Lord  A.  but  you  shall  never  know 

15.  10.  blessed  bo  thou  of  the  a.  Lord  for  ever 
Esth.  13.  9.  saying,  O  Lord,  Lord,  the  King  a. 

16.  21.  a-  God  hath  turned  to  joy  unto  them 
IVisd.  7.  25.  flowing  from  the  glory  of  the  A. 

11.  17.  thy  a.  hand  that  made  the  world 
18.  15.  thine  a.  word  leaped  down  from  hcavea 
Eccl.  24.  24.  for  the  Lord  a.  is  God  alone 
42. 17.  works  which  the  a.  Lord  firmly  settled 
50.  14.  the  oflforing  of  the  most  high  A. 

17.  worship  their  Lord  God  a.  the  Most  High 
Bar.  3.  4  O  Lord  a.  thou  God  of  Israel,  hear  now 
Prayer  nf  Manass.  O  Lord,  n.  God  of  our  fathera 
2  Mac.  1.  25.  Ihe  only  Just,  A.  and  Everlasting 

3.  22.  Ihey  then  called  upon  the  a.  Lord 

30.  when  the  a.  Lord  appeared,  filled  with  joy 

5.  20.  it  was  forsaken  in  wrath  of  the  A.  7.  38. 

6.  26.  I  should  not  escape  Ihe  hand  of  the  A. 
7.35  thou  hast  not  escaped  the  judgnientofaXIod 

8.  1 1,  that  was  to  follow  upon  him  from  the  a.  God 

18.  but  our  confidence  is  in  the  a.  God 

24.  by  the  help  of  the  A.  the.y  slew  above  9000 

9.  ,5.  Lord  a. smote  him  with  an  incurable  plague 
11.  13.  because  the  a.  God  helped  them,  he  sent 
12.28.  Judas  and  his  company  called  onihe  a.  God 
15.  8.  which  should  come  to  them  from  the  A. 

29.  praising  the  A.  in  their  own  language 
32.  stretched  against  ihe  holy  temple  of  the  A. 
ALMOST. 
2  Eld.  10.  10.  they  walk  n.  into  destruction 
22.  the  name  that  is  named  on  us  is  a.  profaned 
ALMS. 
Tob.  1.  3.  I  did  many  a.-deeds  to  my  brethren 

16.  I  gave  many  a.  lo  my  brethren,  I  gave  bread 
2.  14.  where  are  thijM!  a.  and  righteous  deeds  ? 

4.  7.  give  a)  of  thy  sulwtance,  and  when  thou 

givest  a.  let  not  thine  eye  be  envjous,  tti, 
8.  if  thou  hast  abundance,  give  a.  accordingly 

10.  because  a.  doth  deliver  from  death,  12.  9. 

11.  for  a.  is  a  good  gift  lo  all  that  give  it 

12.8.  prayer  is  good  with  fasting,  a.  and  righteous- 
ness, it  is  better  to  give  a.  than  to  lay  up  gold 

14. 2.  he  gave  a.  and  increased  in  the  fear  of  God 

10.  Manassc*  gave  a.  and  escaped  Ihe  snarei 

11.  wherefore,  my  son,  consider  what  a.  doeth 
Eccl.  3.  30.  and  a.  inakelh  an  atonement  for  sins 

7.  10.  not  faint-hearted,  and  neglect  not  lo  give  a. 

12.3.  no  good  can  come  to  him  that  giveth  no  a. 

17.  22.  the  a.  of  a  man  is  as  a  signet  with  him 
29.  12.  shut  up  a.  in  thy  store-lmuses 

31.  11.  tho  congregnlion  shall  declare  his  a. 

3.5.  2.  he  that  givelh  a.  sBCrificulh  praise 

ALOFT. 
1  FM.  8. 92.  married  strange  worn,  now  is  all  In.  a 
1  Afac.  13.  27.  Simon  raised  it  a.  to  the  sight 

ALONE. 
I  Fsd.  5.  71.  wo  ourselves  a.  will  build  to  the  Tjord 
'HE.iJ.  3.  4.  didst  plant  tho  earti),  and  that  thyself  a 

6. 6.  they  all  were  made  thro'  me  a.  and  ao  other 


ApocaypHA.] 


AMA 


ANG 


2  Kad'. 48. 0  Adam,  thou  ait  not  fallen  abut  we  all 
0.  41.  Sir,  let  me  a.  tlial  I  may  buwail  injscjf 

To'i.  1.  6.  I  (I.  went  often  to  Jerusaiem  at  feasts 
8  6.  it  is  not  good  that  man  shoulil  be  a. 

Esth.  13. 5.  that  this  people  o.  is  in  opposition  to  all 

H'isd.  10.  1.  father  of  the  world  that  was  created  a. 

Eccl.  li.  2.  torn  in  pieces,  as  a  bull  straying  a. 

Bar.  4.  IG.  these  have  left  her  that  was  a. 

Sus.  H.  a  time,  when  they  might  find  her  a. 
36.  the  elders  said,  as  we  walked  in  the  garden  a. 

1  Mac.  10.  70.  thou  a.  liftcst  up  thyself  against  us 

12.  .16.  to  separate  it  that  so  it  might  be  a. 

13.  4.  my  brethren  are  slain  and  1  am  left  a. 
~  Mac.  15.  3y.  hurtful  to  drink  wine  or  water  a. 

ALRE.\DY. 

1  Esd.  6.  9.  and  the  timber  a.  laid  upon  the  walls 

2  Esd.  'i.  13.  the  kingdom  is  a.  prepared  tor  you 
'fob.  3.  8.  thou  hast  had  a.  seven  husbamls 

15.  my  seven  husbands  a.  dead,  why  should  Hive 
Wisd.  ly.  4.  forget  the  things  that  had  a.  happened 

16.  were  a.  made  partakers  of  the  same  laws 

Al.TAR. 
I  Esd.  1. 18.  offer  sacrifices  upon  the  a.  of  the  Lord 

4.  5'2.  to  maintain  burnt-otferings  upon  the  a. 

5.  48.  make  ready  the  a.  of  the  God  of  Israel 
50.  they  erected  the  a.  upon  his  own  place 

8.  15.  (jiay  offer  sacrifices  on  the  a.  of  the  Lord 
t  Esd.  10.  il.  thou  seest  that  our  a.  is  broken  down 
Tob.  1.  6.  them  1  gave  at  the  o.  to  the  priests 
Jud.  4.  3.  the  vessels  and  the  a.  were  sanctified 

11.  also  they  put  sackcloth  about  the  a. 
9.8.  to  cast  down  with  the  sword  the  horn  of  thy  a. 

Ksth.  14.  9.  quench  the  glory  of  thy  house  and  a. 
JVisd.  9.  8.  an  a.  in  the  city  wherein  thou  dwellest 
Eccl.  35.  6.  offering  of  righteous  maketh  the  a.  fat 
50.  11.  when  he  went  up  to  the  holy  a.  he  made 

12.  he  himself  stood  by  the  hearth  of  the  a. 

14.  and  finishing  the  service  at  the  o. 

15.  he  poured  nut  at  the  foot  of  the  a.  a  savour 
Bar.  1.  10.  offer  upon  the  a.  of  the  Lord  our  God 

1  Mac.  1.  21.  Anliochus  took  away  the  golden  a. 
54.  the  abomination  of  desolation  on  the  a. 
59.  did  sacrifice,  which  was  upon  the  a.  of  God 

2.  23.  sacrifice  upon  the  a.  which  was  at  Modin 

24.  wherefore  he  ran  and  slew  him  upon  the  a. 

25.  he  killed,  and  the  a.  he  pulled  down 
4.  38.  they  saw  the  a.  profaned,  the  gates  burnt 

44.  what  to  do  with  the  a.  of  burnt  offerings 
47,  they  took  whole  stones,  and  built  a  new  a. 
50.  and  upon  the  a.  they  burnt  incense 
56.80  they  kept  the  dedication  of  the  a.  eight  days 
6. 7.  the  abomination  which  he  had  set  upon  the  a. 

2  Mac.  1.  19.  the  priests  that  were  then  devout, 

took  the  fire  of  the  a.  privily 

32.  consumed  by  the  light  that  shined  from  the  a. 
2.  5.  where  he  laid  the  ark  and  the  a.  of  incense 
4. 14.  the  priests  had  no  courage  to  serve  at  ihe  a. 
10.  3.  they  made  another  a.  and  offered  sacrifice 

14.  3.  nor  have  any  more  access  to  the  holy  a. 

33.  I  will  break  down  the  a.  an<l  erect  a  temple 

15.  31.  when  he  had  set  the  priests  before  the  a. 

ALTARS. 

1  Mac.  1.  47.  set  up  a.  and  groves,  and  chapels 
54.  they  builded  idol-a.  through  the  cities  of  Juda 

2  Mac.  10.  2.  the  a.  which  the  heathen  had  built 

ALTERATIONS. 
Wisd.  7.  18.  the  a.  of  the  turning  of  the  sun 

ALTER. 
Wi4i.4.11.1est  wickedn.should  a.his  understanding 

ALTERED. 
Jud.  10.  7.  they  saw  that  her  countenance  was  a. 
fVisd.  16.25.  even  then  was  it  a.  into  all  fashions 
Eccl.  33.  8.  and  he  a.  seasons  and  feasts 

ALTOGETHER. 
2  F.sd.  6. 20.  books  be  opened,  and  they  shall  see  a. 
Jvd.  15.  2.  rushing  out  o.  they  fled  to  the  plain 
Wisd.  18.  12.  so  they  a.  bad  innumerable  dead 
Eccl.  41.  16.  nor  is  it  a.  approved  in  every  thing 

ALWAY. 
2  Esd.  1.5.  47.  have  a.  desired  to  commit  whoredom 

16.  20.  they  shall  not  be  n.  mindful  of  scourges 

AMADATHA. 
Esth.  16. 10.  Aman  a  Macedonian  the  son  of  A.  17. 

AMADATHUS. 
Esth.  12.  6.  Aman  the  son  of  A.  the  Agagite 

AMAN. 
TVt.M.lO.remcmber  how  A. handled  Achiacharus, 
but  A.  fell  into  the  snare  and  perished 
Esth.  10.  7.  and  the  two  dragons  are  I  a'hd  A. 

12.  6.  howbeit  A.  was  in  great  honour  with  king 

13.  6.  are  signified  in  writing  to  you  by  A. 

14.  17.  thy  handmaid  hnth  not  eaten  at  A.  table 
16.10.  for  A.  a  Macedonian  had  obtained  favour 

17  not  execute  the  letters  sent  to  you  by  A. 

AMALN. 

i  Mat.  12  22.  the  enemies  being  smitten,  fled  a. 

AMATHIS. 
1  Mae.  12.23.  Jonathan  met  them  in  the  land  of  A. 

AMAZED. 

Wisd.5J2.  eball  be  a.  at  strangeness  of  his  salvation 

761 


AMBASSADOR. 

1  Mac.  12.  8.  Onias  entreated  the  a.  that  was  sent 

2  Mad.  11.  who  wkii  a.  to  Rome  for  amity  and  aid 
AMBASSADORS. 

.Tud.  3.  1.  so  they  sent  o.  to  him  to  treat  of  peace 

1  Mac.  9.  70.  he  sent  a.  to  him,  to  make  peace 

11.  9.  Ptolemee  sent  a.  to  king  Demetrius 

13.  23.  we  do  command  our  a.  to  make  report 

14.  21.  the  a.  that  were  sent  to  our  people 
40.  that  they  had  entertained  the  a.  of  Simon 

15.  17.  the  Jews  a.  our  friends  came  unto  us 

2  Mac.  11.  34.  a.  of  the  Romans,  send  greeting 
AMBASSAGE. 

I  Mac.  14.  23.  put  the  copy  of  their  a.  in  records 

AMBUSH. 
1  Mac.  9.  40.  from  the  place  where  they  lay  in  a. 

10.  79.  had  left  a  thousand  horsemen  in  a. 

11.  68.  having  laid  men  in  a.  in  the  mountains 
69.  when  they  that  lay  in  a.  arose  out  of  places 

AMBUSHMENT. 

1  Mac.  10. 60.  Jonathan  knew  that  there  was  an  a. 

AMEN. 

1  Esd.  9.  47.  and  all  the  people  answered  a. 
Tob.  8.8.  she  said  with  him,  a.  they  slept  that  night 
Eccl.  50.  29.  blessed  be  the  Lord  for  ever,  a.  a. 

AMEND. 

fVisd.  11.23.  at  sins  of  men,  because  they  should  a. 

AMENDMENT. 

2  Esd.  16. 19.  and  anguish  .ive  sent  as  scourges  for  a. 
AMIABLE. 

Ebth.  15.  5.  her  countenance  was  cheerful  and  a. 

AMISS. 
2  Esd.  8.  35.  there  is  none  which  hath  not  done  a. 
Eccl.7.3G.  remember  the  end,  thou  shalt  never  do  a. 
24.  22.  they  that  work  by  me,  shall  not  do  a. 
40.  23.  a  friend  and  companion  never  meet  a. 
AMITY. 

1  Mac.  8.  1.  such  as  would  make  a  league  of  a. 

12.  with  such  as  relied  on  them  they  kept  a. 
17.  sent  them  to  Rome  to  make  a  league  of  a. 

10.  23.  in  making  a.  with  the  Jews  to  strengthen 
54.  now  therefore  let  us  make  a  league  of  a. 

12.  16.  to  renew  the  a.  that  we  had  with  them 
iMac.  4.  11.  who  went  to  Rome  for  a.  and  aid 

AMMON. 

.Tnd.  5.  2.  was  angry,  hecalled  all  the  captains  of  A. 

6.5.  thou  Achior,  ahirelingof  A.  who  hastspoken 

7.  17.  the  camp  of  the  children  of  A.  departed 

AMMONITES. 

2  Mac.  4.  26.  to  flee  into  the  country  of  the  A. 
AMORITES. 

2  Esd.  1. 22.  when  you  were  in  the  river  of  the  A. 
Jud.  5.  15.  so  they  dwelt  in  the  land  of  the  A. 

AMOS. 
2  Esd.  1.  39. 1  will  give  for  leaders,  A.  and  Michens 
ToA.2.6.rememberin2  that  prophecy  of  A.as  hesaid 

ANANIAS. 
Tob.  5.  12.  I  am  Azarias,  the  son  of  A.  the  great 
Dan.3.66.  O  A.  Aziirias,  and  Misael,  1  Mac.2.o^. 

ANCESTORS. 
Jud.  5.  8.  for  they  left  the  way  of  their  a. 
Eccl.  8.  4.  jest  not,  lest  thy  a.  be  disgraced 

1  Mac.  7.  2.  he  entered  into  the  palace  of  his  a. 

2  Mac.  14.  7.  I  being  deprived  of  mine  a.  honour 
ANCIENT. 

Esth.  16. 7.  not  so  much  by  a.  histories,  as  ye  may 
Wisd.2.i0.  nor  reverence  a. gray  hairsof  the  aged 

13.  10.  or  a  stone,  the  work  of  an  a.  hand 
Eccl.  25.  4.  and  for  a.  men  to  know  counsel 

32.9.when  a.  men  are  in  place,  use  not  many  words 
39.  1.  be  will  seek  out  of  the  wisdom  of  the  a. 

1  Mac.  14.  9.  the  a.  men  sat  all  in  the  streets 

2  Mac.  6.  6.  nor  was  it  lawful  to  keep  a.  feasts 
23.  as  became  the  excebency  of  his  a.  years 

ANCIENTS. 

1  Esd.  5.  63.  the  a.  who  had  seen  the  former  house 

7.  2.  assisting  the  a.  of  the  Jews  and  governors 
./ud.6. 16.  they  called  together  all  the  a.  of  tliecity 

8.  10.  Chabris,  and  Charmis,  a.  of  the  city,  10.  6. 
15.  8.  the  a.  of  the  children  of  Israel  came 

S««.  5.  two  of  the  a.  of  the  people  to  be  judges 
ANDRONICUS. 

2  Mac.  4.  31.  leaving  A.  a  man  in  authority 
34.  taking  A.  apart,  prayed  him  to  get  Onias 
38.  forthwith  he  took  away  A.  his  purple  and  rent 

5.  23.  at  Gerizirii  he  left  A.  governor 
ANEW. 

1  Esd.  2.  24.  if  the  walls  thereof  be  set  up  a. 
Wisd.  19.  6.  the  creature  was  fashioned  again  a. 

ANGEL. 

2  F.sd.  1.  40.  who  is  called  also  an  a.  of  the  Lord 
2. 44.  I  asked  the  a.  and  said,  sir,  what  are  these  1 

4.  1.  the  a.  that  was  sent  to  me  gave  an  answer 

5.  15.  the  a.  that  was  come  to  talk  with  me 
20.  I  fasted,  as  Uriel  the  a.  commanded  mo 
31.  the  a.  that  came  to  me  the  niglit  afore' 

7.  1.  there  was  sent  to  me  the  a.  that  had  been  sent 
12.  51.  but  I  remained,  as  the  a.  commanded  me 
Tob.  5.  4.  he  found  Raphael  that  was  an  a. 

16.  and  the  a.  of  God  keep  you  company 
5F 


ANS 

Tob.  5. 21.  for  the  good  a.  will  keep  hitn  compan/ 

6.  5.  the  young  man  did  as  the  a.  commanded  him 
8.  3.  the  evil  spirit  fled  and  the  a.  bound  him 
12.  5.  so  he  called  the  a.  and  said  unto  him 

22.  how  the  a.of  the  Lord  had  appeared  tolhein 
Esth.  15.  13.  I  saw  thee,  my  lord,  as  an  a.  of  God 
Eccl.  48. 21.  smote  the  host,  his  a.  destroyed  them 
Bar.  6.  7.  my  a.  is  with  you,  and  I  caring  your  soul* 
Dan.  3.  26.  but  the  a.  of  the  Lord  came  down 
Sus.  55.  Ihe  a.  of  God  hath  received  the  sentence 

59.  the  a.  of  God  waiteth  to  cut  thee  in  two 
Bel  34.  but  the  a.  of  the  Lord  said  to  Habbacuo 
30.  the  a.  of  the  Lord  took  him  by  the  crown 
.39.  the  a.  of  Ihe  Lord  set  Habbacuc  in  his  placa 

1  Mac.  7.  41.  thine  a.  went  out,  and  smote  185,000 

2  Mac.  11.  6.  would  send  a  good  a.  to  deliver  Israel 
15.  22.  thou  did.-it  send  thy  a.  in  lime  of  Ezekias 

23.  send  a  good  a.  before  us  for  a  dread  to  (hem 
ANGELS. 

2  Esd.  1. 19. 1  gave  you  manna,  ye  did  eat  a.  bread 
6.  3.  before  the  a.  were  gathered  together 

8.  21.  before  whom  the  bosis  of  a.  stand  trembling 
16. 66.  how  hide  your  sins  before  God  and  his  a.? 

Tob.  8. 15.  let  all  thy  a.  and  thine  elect  praise  theo 

11.  14.  and  blessed  are  all  thine  holy  a. 

12.  15.  I  am  Raphael  one  of  the  seven  holy  a. 
Wisd.  16.20.  thou  feddest  thy  people  with  a.  food 
Dan.  3.  37.  O  ye  a.  of  the  Lord,  bless  ye  the  Lord 

ANGER. 
"Esd.  10.  5.  then  I  spake  to  her  in  a.  saying 
.Jud.  8.  14.  provoke  not  the  Lord  our  God  to  a. 
11.  11.  they  will  provoke  their  God  to  a. 
Wisd.  10.  3.  unrighteous  went  away  from  her  in  a. 
Eccl.8.  11.  rise  not  up  in  a.  at  the  presence  of  ao 

10.  18.  nor  furious  a.  for  them  that  are  born 

25.  22.  a  woman  is  full  of  a.  and  much  reproacb 

26.  8.  a  drunken  woman  causeth  great  a. 
28.  10.  according  to  his  riches,  his  a.  risetli 
40.  5.  trouble,  fear  of  death,  and  a.  and  strife 

l.Wac.  2.  24.  nor  could  he  forbear  to  shew  his  a. 

44.  they  smote  sinful  men  in  their  a. 
2  Mac.  4.  38.  and  being  kindled  with  a.  he  took 

9.  4.  then  swelling  with  a.  he  thought  to  avenge 
ANGERETH. 

Eccl.  3. 16.  he  that  a.  his  mother  is  cursed  of  God 

19.  21.-  a  servant  a.  him  that  nourisbetli  him 
ANGRY. 

1  Esd.  8.  88.  mightest  not  thou  be  a.  with  ust 

2  Esd.  16.  48.  the  more  will  I  be  a.  with  them 
Jud.  1. 12.  Nabuchodonosor  a.  with  all  this  country 

5. 2.  he  was  very  a.  and  called  the  princes  of  Moab 
Eccl.  8.  16.  strive  not  with  an  a.  man,  go  not  with 

20.  2.  it  is  better  to  reprove  than  be  a.  secretly 
26.  23.  two  things  grieve,  and  the  third  maketh  a. 

Btl  20.  I  see  footsteps,  and  then  the  king  was  a. 
Prayer  of  Manass.  be  not  a.  with  me  for  ever 

1  Mac.  6.  23.  when  he  heard  this  he  was  a.  11.  22. 
'2Mac.  5.17.  he  considered  not  that  the  Lord  was  a. 

7.  33.  though  the  living  Lord  be  o.  a  little  while 
ANGUISH. 

2  Esd.  10. 19.  tribulation  and  a-  sent  for  amendment 
Esth.  11.  8.  and  lo,  a  day  of  tribulation  and  o. 

14.  2.  put  on  garments  of  a.  and  mourning 

15.  5.  but  her  heart  was  in  a.  for  fear 
Wisd.  5. 3.  they  groaning  for  a.  of  spirit,  shall  say 
Eccl.  27.  29.  a.  shall  consume  them  before  they  die 
Bar.  2.  1.  the  soul  in  a.  the  troubled  spirit  crieth 

ANNA. 
Tt>h.  1.  9.  I  married  A.  of  mine  own  kindred 

20.  not  any  thing  left  me,  besides  my  wife  A. 
2.  1.  my  wife  .A.  was  restored  to  me  with  my  son 

11.  my  wife  A.  did  take  women's  work  to  do 
5.  17.  A.  his  mother  wept,  and  said  to  Tobit 
11.  5.  novf  A.  sat  looking  about  for  her  son 

9.  A.  ran  forth,  and  fell  on  the  neck  of  her  son 

14. 12.  when  A.  his  mother  was  dead,  he  buried 

ANNOYANCE. 

1  Esd.  2.  29.  proceed  no  further  lo  the  a.  of  kings 
ANNOYED. 

2^ac.  8.  32.  who  hail  a.  the  Jews  many  ways 

ANOINT. 
Tob.  6. 8.  it  is  good  to  a.  a  man  that  hath  whiteness 
11.  8.  therefore  a.  thou  his  eves  with  the  gall 
ANOINTED. 

2  Esd.  12.  32.  Ibis  is  the  a.  which  the  Highest  kept 
,fud.  10.3.  washed, a.  herself  with  precious  ointmenc 

16.  8.  and  she  a.  her  face  with  ointment 
Eccl.  45.  15.  Moses  a.  him  with  holy  oil 

46.  19.  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  and  his  a. 

48.  8.  who  a.  kings  to  take  revenge  and  prophet! 
2  Mac.  1.  10.  who  was  of  the  stock  of  the  a.  priests 

ANSWER. 
IEsd.6.6.8ignification  was  given,  and  an  a. received 

13.  they  gave  us  this  a.  we  are  the  servants 
'2  Esd.  4.  1.  the  angel  Uriel  gave  roe  an  a. 

9.  yet  canst  thou  give  me  no  a.  of  them 
Wi.id.  6. 10.  that  have  learned,  shall  find  what  to  a. 
Eccl.  4.  8  gave  him  a  friendly  a.  with  meekness 
5.  11.  be  swift  to  bear,  and  with  patience  givo  a. 

12.  if  thou  bast  understanding,  a.  ihy  neighbour 


APO 

S€cl.  BJ3.  of  tho  ciders  thou  ehalt  learn  understanil- 
iiig,  uiid  lo  give  a.  as  neetl  retjuirelii 
11.  8.  a.  not  In  lore  Ihuu  hast  heard  the  cause 
i!0.  U.  liolJs  his  luiigue,  because  he  huth  nulto  a. 
Si.  4.  bjiid  up  instructiui),  and  then  make  a. 

ANSWERED. 
1  Esd.  'J.  -IT.  and  ail  the  |ieo|ile  a.  amen 
Jud.  )4.  15.  but  because  none  a.  he  opened  it 
ias.  5i.  who  a.  under  a  mnstick-trce 

5ri.  who  a.  under  a  holm-tree 
1  JIac.ii.'M.lhx:)-  a.  them  iioi,  nor  cast  they  a  stone 

ANSVVEKI.N'G. 
SjUoc.  1.23.  tho  rest  a.  thereunto  as  Neemiasdid 

ANTILIBANUS. 

Jud.  1. 7.  sent  to  all  that  dwelt  in  Libanus  and  A. 

ANTIOCH. 

1  Mac.  3.  37.  he  departed  from  A.  his  royal  city 
JO.  08.  king  .Alexander  returned  into  A. 

11. 13.  then  I'tolumee  entered  into  A.  where  he  set 
44.  Jonathan  sent  three  thousand  men  into  A. 

2  Mac.  8. 35.  he  came  like  n  fugitive  servant  to  A. 
11.  30.  for  we  are  now  going  to  A. 

13.  '23.  who  was  left  over  the  alfairs  in  .\. 
20.  made  them  well  affected,  returned  to  A. 
ANTIOCUIA. 

1  Mac.  4. 35.  he  went  lo  A.  and  gathered  strangers 

2  Alac.  5.  «1.  lie  departed  in  all  liaste  into  A. 

ANTlOCniANS. 
2  Mac.  4.9.  to  write  them  by  the  name  of  A. 
ID.  sent  messengers  from  Jerusalem  who  were  A. 
ANTIOCHIS. 
2  Mac.i.  30.  the  king's  concubine  called  A. 

ANTIOCHUS. 
IMac.  1.10.  A.siinamed  Epiplianes,  son  of  A.the 
king,  who  had  been  a  hostage  at  Rome 
16.  the  kingdom  was  established  before  A. 

20.  after  A.  had  smitten  Egypt,  ho  returned  again 
41.  king  A.  wrote  to  his  whole  kingdom 

3.  27.  when  A.  heard,  he  was  full  of  indignation 
33.  he  left  Lysias  to  bring  up  his  son  A. 

6. 1.  A. heard  6ay,that  Elymij^s  was  city  renowned 

15.  to  the  end  he  should  bring  up  hie  son  .\. 

16.  so  king  A.  died  tliere  in  the  149th  year 

55.  whom  A.  had  appointed  to  bring  upliissonA. 

7.  2.  BO  it  was,  that  his  forces  had  taken  A. 

8.  6.  A.  the  great  king  of  Asia  came  in  battle 

11.  39.  that  bioughtU|)  A.  young  sonof  Ale.xander 
40.  lay  eore  on  him  to  deliver  him  this  young  A. 
57.  at  that  time  young  .\.  wrote  lo  Jonathan 

12.  16.  we  chose  Numenius  the  son  of  A.  14.  22. 
39.  Tryphon  went  about  to  kill  A.  the  king 

13.  31.  dealt  deceitfully  with  the  young  king  .\. 
15.  1.  A.  son  of  Demetrius  the  king,  sent  letters 

2.  king  A.  to  Simon  the  high-priest,  greeting 

10.  A.  went  into  the  land  of  his  fathers 

11.  being  pursued  by  king  A.  he  fled  to  Dora 
13.  then  camped  A.  against  Dora,  25. 

ZMac.  1.  14.  A.  as  though  he  would  marry  her 
15.  they  shut  the  temple  as  soon  as  A.  was  come 

4.  7.  A.  called  Epiphanes  took  the  kingdom 

21.  A.  unders'anding  him  not  to  be  well  affected 
37   A.  was  heartily  sorry  and  moved  to  pity 

5.  1.  A.  prepared  his  second  voyage  into  Egypt 
5.  gone  forth  a  fulse  rumour,  as  if  A.  been  dead 

17.  haughty  was  .\.  in  mind,  he  considered  not 
21.  so  when  A.  had  carried  out  of  the  temple 

9. 1.  A.  came  with  dishonour  out  ol  Persia 
19.  A.  king  and  governor  lo  the  good  Jews 
2.5. 1  have  appointed  my  son  A.  king 
29.  who  fearing  the  soii  of  A.  went  into  Egypt 

10.  9.  this  was  the  end  of  .\.  called  Epiphanes 
10.  we  will  declare  the  acts  of  .\.  Eu|)ator 

11.  22.  king  A.  unto  his  brother  Lysias  sendelh 
27.  king  A.  sendelh  greeting  to  the  council 

J3.  1.  A.  Rupator  was  coming  with  great  power 
S.MonelauH  with  groat  dissimulat.encouraged  A. 
4.  but  the  King  of  kings  moved  A.  mind 
14.2.  had  killed  A.  and  Lysias  his  protector 
See  EPIPIIA.NKS. 
ANVIL. 
Eeel.  38.  28.  the  smith  also  sitting  by  the  a.  the 
noise  of  the  hammer  and  a.  is  ever  in  his  ears 
ATA  MR. 
1  E$d.  4.  29.  I  did  see  .\.  the  king's  concubine 

APART. 
1   F.td.  4.  44.  all  the  vessels  which  Syrus  set  a.  57. 
Tob.  12.  0.  then  betook  Ihi-m  both  a.  and  said 
ZMac.  13.  13.  JmU«  hrin?  a.  with  the  elders 

APIIERRMA. 
I  Mae.  11.34.  governmnnti  of  .A.  Lydda,  Ramatli 

APOLLONMIia. 
1  Mac.  X  10,  A.  g:ithor.d  the  (Jcn'iles  Ingplher 
12.  Judas  look  Iheir  spoils,  and  A.  sword  also 
10. 69.  nemetriim  made  A.  governor  of  Celopyria 
74.whi;n  Joiiaihan  heiird  these  words  of  A. 
75.  because  .\.  had  a  garrison  there 
77.  A.  took  'tOnO  horsemen  with  a  great  host 
79.  A.  ha<l  hft  a  Ihoimnnd  horsemen  in  nmhush 
iMac.  3.  5.  be.'ial  liitnto  .\.lhe»on  of  Thras- as 
7.  whea  A.  came  to  the  king,  and  bad  ahewed 

7et 


APP 

2  Mac.  4.  4.  that  A.  aa  being  tho  governor,  did  rage 

21.  A.  son  of  Menestheus  was  sent  lo  Egypt 
.5.  24.  he  sent  that  detestable  ringleader  A. 
1-2.  2.  A.  son  of  Genneus  would  not  suffer  them 

APOTHECARY. 

Eccl.  38.  8.  of  such  doth  the  a.  make  a  confection 

49.  1.  the  composition  made  by  Uie  art  of  the  a. 

APPAREL. 

./«(/.  8.5.  she  put  on  sackcloth,  and  wore  widows' a. 

10.  7.  when  her  a.  was  changed,  they  wondered 
12.  IT),  she  arose,  and  decked  herself  with  her  a. 

Est/i.  14.  2.  Esther  laid  away  her  glorious  a. 

1  Alac.  14.  9.  the  young  men  put  on  warlike  a. 
'iMac.  3.  20.  two  other  young  men  comely  in  a. 

APPARITION. 

2  Mac.  5.  4.  prayed  that  that  a.  might  turn  to  good 

APPARITIONS. 
H'i.id.  17.3.  being  troubled  with  strange  a. 
15.  were  partly  ve.^ed  with  monstrous  a. 
APPEAR. 
2  E.<id.  6.  40.  a  fair  light,  that  thy  work  might  o. 
7.  20.  the  bride  shall  a.  and  she  shall  be  seen 
3:i.the  Most  High  shall  a.  on  the  seat  of  judgment 

11.  10.  before  thou  beginnest  to  a.  no  more 
45.  and  therefore  a.  no  more,  thou  eaglo 

Tub.  12.  19.  all  these  days  I  did  a.  unto  you 
/ud.  14.  2.  so  soon  as  the  morning  shall  a. 
Eccl.  19.23.  thatturneth  aside  to  make  judgment  a. 
24.  27.  he  maketh  the  doctrine  of  knowledge  a. 
3.5.  4.  thou  shall  not  a.  empty  before  ihe  Lord 
37.  18.  four  manner  of  things  a.  good,  evil,  life 
39.  4.  and  he  shall  a.  before  princes 
Dar.  6.  51.  it  shall  mauifestly  a.  to  all  nations 
2  Mac.  2.  8.  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  u. 

APPEARANCE. 
2  Esd.  15.  28.  and  the  a.  thereof  from  the  east 
Eccl.  11.  2.  abhor  not  a  man  for  his  outward  a. 
2  Mac.  4.  24.  for  the  glorious  a.  of  his  power 
15.  27.  for  by  the  a.  of  God  they  were  cheered 
APPEARED 
2  Esd.  10.  27.  behold,  the  woman  a.  to  me  no  more 
42.  but  there  n.unlo  thee  a  city  budded 
1 1.  13.  and  the  place  thereof  a.  no  more 
14.  so  that  it  o.  no  more,   18,  19,  20,  26,  33. 
I  12.3,  26.  2Jl/<ic.  3.34. 
Tab.  12.  22.  how  the  angel  of  the  L.  had  a.  to  them 
/I'(.srf.l7.4.  visionsa.to  them  with  sad  countenances 
6.  there  a.  to  them  a  fire  kindled  of  itself 
19.  7.  where  water  stood  before,  dry  land  a. 

1  Mm.  4.  19.  there  a.  part  of  them  looking  out 

2  Mac.  1.  33.  where  fire  was  hid,  there  a.  water 

3.  2.5.  there  a.  to  them  a  horse,  with  a  rider 

20.  two  other  young  men  a.  notable  in  strength 
30.  whim  the  Almighty  Lord  a.  temple  was  filled 
33.  the  same  young  men,  in  tho  same  clothing,  a. 
11.  8.  there  a.  before  them  on  horseback  one  white 

14.  20.  i!  a.  that  they  were  all  of  one  mind 

15.  13.  this  done,  there  a.  a  man  with  grey  hairs 

APPEARETH. 
Eccl.  43. 2.  the  sun  when  it  a.  declaring  at  his  risinj 
Bar. 2. 6. to  us  and  father's  shame,  as  a.  this  day, 11 

APPEARING. 
2  Mac.  12.  22.  the  a.  of  him  that  seeth  all  things 

APPEASE. 
Ecrt.  39.  28.  a.  the  wrath  of  him  that  made  them 
2  Mac.  4.  31.  the  king  came  in  all  haste  to  a.  matters 

APPEASED. 
Eccl.  46.  7.  they  o.  the  wicked  murmuring 
1  Mac.  13.  47.  ao  Simon  was  a.  toward  them 

APPEASETH. 
Eccl.  43.  23.  by  his  counsel  he  a.  the  deep 

APPERTAIN. 

1  End.  8.  95.  for  to  thee  doth  this  matter  a. 
Toh.  0.  II.  for  to  thee  doth  the  right  of  hor  a. 

12.  the  right  of  inheritance  <lolh  rather  a.  to  thee 
APPERTAINED. 

2  Mac.  4.  28.  to  him  a.  tho  g.ilhering  ofcuatoms 

APPERTAINETII. 
I  Esd.  1.12.  they  roasted  tho  passover  with  fire,aaa, 
Rar.  2.  0.  to  ihe  Lord  our  God  a.  righleousnesg 
I  Mac.  10.  30.  that  which  a.  to  me  lo  receive 

APPETITE,  S. 
fVi.id.  16.  2.  prepareat  even  quails  to  stir  up  their  a. 
19.  II.  being  led  with  their  o.  asked  meau 
Eccl.  18.  30.  but  refrain  Ihvself  from  thine  o. 

APPLE. 
Eccl.  17.  22.  keep  good  deeds  aa  the  a.  ofthe  eye 

APPLY. 
Eccl.  6.  32.  my  son,  if  thou  will  a.  thy  mind 

APPLIRTH. 
Eccl.  38.  30.  he  a.  himself  lo  lead  it  over 

APPOINTED. 
1  Fjd.  3.  9.  lo  him  tho  victory  bo  given,  as  was  a. 

4.  42.  aak  more  than  ia  a.  in  the  writing 

5.  .IS.  they  a.  the  Levltes  from  twenty  yenra  old 

6.  27.'  which  were  a.  rulera  in  Hyria  and  Phenico 
9.  12.  lot  nil  of  Ihem  come  al  tho  time  a. 

Ti'h.  1.  21.  who  a.  over  his  father's  accounts 
22.  and  i^archedoniis  a.  him  ne.Tl  unto  him 
6.  17.  for  ibo  ia  a.  ualu  Uioe  from  the  beginning 


ARI 


[ApocRTra 


Jud.  7.  16.  he  a.  to  do  as  they  had  spoken 
Esth.  13. 9. 0  Lord,  if  thou  hast  a.  to  save  Israel 
Keel.  36.  20.  who  will  trust  a  thief  well  a. 

45.  15.  was  a.  to  him  by  an  everlasting  covenant 
Bar.  1.  20.  the  curse  which  the  Lord,  a.  by  Moaea 

5.  7.  God  hath  a.  that  every  high  hill  be  cast  down 
Sus.  5.  the  same  year  were  a.  two  ofthe  ancients 
Prayer  of  Manass.  hast  not  a.  repentance  lo  th« 
just,  but  hast  a.  repentance  to  me  a  sinner 
l.Afar.  1.  51.  he  a.  overseers  over  all  the  people 

4.  41.  then  Judas  a.  certain  men  to  fight 

5.  27.  had  a.  to  bring  their  host  asainst  forts 

6.  5.5.  whom  Antiochus  had  a.  to  bring  up  bis  son 
8.  25.  Jews  shall  helj)  them,  as  time  shall  he  a. 
12.  26.  a.  to  come  upon  them  in  the  night  season 

2^/ac.  3.  14.  at  the  day  which  he  a.  he  entered 
4.  20.  this  money  was  a.  to  Hercules'  sacrifice 

8.  23.  also  he  a.  Eleazar  to  read  the  holy  book 

9.  23.  considering  that  my  father  a.  a  successor 
25.  I  have  a.  my  son  Antiochus  king 

14.  21.  a  day  to  meet  together  bv  themselves 

APPOINTED.St. 
2  Esd.  3.  7.  immediatelv  thou  a.  death  in  him 

APPOINTMENT. 
1  Esd.  1.  15.  singers  according  to  the  a.  of  David 
6.  4.  said,  by  whose  a.  do  ye  build  this  house  ? 

APPREHENDED. 

1  Esd.  1.  38.  but  Znrnces  his  brother  he  a. 

APPROACH. 

2  Esd.  12.  21.  be  kept  until  their  end  begin  to  a. 

APPROACHED. 
Jud.  13.  7.  a.  to  his  bed,  and  took  hold  ofthe  hair 

APPROACHING. 

2  Esd.  12.21.  the  middle  time  a.  four  shall  be  kepi 

2.^ac.  12.31  .came  to  Jerus.the  feasts  ofthe  weekio. 

APPROVED. 
2  Esd.  5.  27.  thou  gavest  a  law  that  is  a.  of  all 
Eccl.  3.  17.  shall  be  beloved  of  him  that  is  a. 
39.  34.  for  in  time  they  shall  all  be  well  a. 

41.  16.  nor  is  it  altogether  a.  in  every  thing 

42.  8.  thus  shall  thou  be  a.  of  all  men  living 

APT. 
tVisd.  19.  21.  meat  that  was  of  nature  a.  to  melt 

ARABIA. 
2  Esd.  15.  29.  where  the  dragons  of  A.  shall  come 
IMac.  11.10.  Alexander  fled  into  A.  to  be  defended 
2  Mac.  12.  11.  Ihe  Noinades  of  A.  besought  Juda* 

ARABIAN. 
IJlfac.  11.17.  Zabdiel  A.  took  off  Alexander's  head 
39.  one  Tryphon  went  to  Simalcue  the  A. 
ARABIANS. 
1  Mac.  12.  31.  Jonathan  turned  to  the  A. 
2.1/(ic.5.8.being  accused  beforeAretaskingoflheA. 
12.  10.  horsemen  ofthe  A.  set  upon  him 

ARADUS. 
1  Mac.  15.  23.  the  same  thing  wrote  he  to  A. 

ARBATTIS. 

1  JIfae.  5.  23.  those  thai  were  in  A.  look  he  awaj 

ARBELA. 

1  Mac.  9.  2.  before  Massaloth,  which  is  in  A. 

ARBONAL 

./lid.  2.  24.  he  destroved  the  cities  on  the  river  A. 

ARCHANGEL. 

2  Esd.  4.  35.  Uriel  the  a.  save  them  answer 

ARCHER,  S. 
2  Esd.  16.  7.  arrow  that  is  shot  of  a  strong  a.  16. 
Jud.  2.  15.  ho  mustered  12,000  a.  on  horseback 

1  Mac.  9.  11.  their  slingers  and  a.  going  before 

ARDATH. 

2  Esd.  9.  26.  in  the  field  which  is  called  A. 

ARETAS,  See  Arabians. 
ARIGHT. 
2  Esd.  8.  37.  some  things  hast  thou  spoken  a. 
fVisd.  2.  1.  reasoning  with  themselves,  but  not  a 
0.  4.  you  have  not  judged  a.  nor  kept  the  law 
9.  16.  and  hardly  do  we  guess  a.  al  things 
Eccl.  2.  2.  set  thy  heart  a.  and  cimslanlly  endure 
6.  17.    who   feareth  L.  shall  direct   his  friend- 
ship •. 
20.  17.  for  ho  knowelh  not  a.  what  it  is  to  have 
38.  10.  order  ihy  bond:;  n.  and  cleanse  thy  heart 

ARIO(MI. 
.lud.  1.6.  came  all  that  dwelt  in  the  plajn  of  A. 

ARISE. 
2  K.'.d.  2.  .18.  a.  up  and  stand,  behold  the  number 

15.  39.  Btrong  wind.<  shall  a.  from  the  east 
Eccl.  31.  21.  hnst  been  forced  lo  eal,  a.  vomit 
Ihir.  5.  5.  a.  OJerusiilcm,  and  ."land  on  high 

1  Mac.  14.  41.  Ihere  should  a.  a  faithful  prophe* 

AUISETH 
Eccl.  211.  16.  Ihe  sun  when  it  n.  in  high  heaven 
AUISTOHCLKH. 

2  Mac.  1.  10.  sent  greeting  and  health  unto  A. 

ARK 

1  Esd.  1.3. to  set  the  holy  a  of  llin  Lord  in  the  hooir 

4.  shall  no  more  bear  Ihe  a.  on  your  shonlden 
54.  they  look  the  veiweU  ofthe  a.  of  Goil 

2  Esd.  10.  2'J.  the  a.  of  our  covenant  is  spoiled 
2  Mae.  2.  1.  commanded  the  a.  l.i  go  with  hiia 

5.  where  laid  the  a.  and  altar  in  iDcania 


Apocktpha.1 


ARP 


ARM. 

2  Esd.  15.  11.  bring  them  with  a  stretched  out  a. 
JVind.  5.  U>.  with  his  a.  shall  he  protect  them 

11.  21.  who  may  withstaml  the  power  of  thy  a.? 
It).  It),  were  scourged  by  the  strenglh  of  thy  a. 

Reel.  21.  21.  as  B  bracelet  upon  his  riglit  a. 
36.  G.  glorify  thy  hand  and  thy  right  a. 

38.  30.  he  liishionoth  the  clay  with  his  a. 

Bar.  2. 11.  hast  brought  thy  i)eopleout  with  high  a. 
2  Mac.  13.  24.  through  the  might  of  thine  a. 

ARMS. 
Estk.  15.  8.  the  kjng  took  her  in  his  a. 
Eccl.  9.  0.  nor  sit  down  with  her  in  thine  a. 

ARM. 

1  Mac.  3.  58.  a.  yoursolvns,  and  be  valiant  men 

ARMED. 

1  Mac.  6.  35.  a  thousand  men  a.  with  coats  of  mail 
43.  one  of  the  beasts  a.  with  royal  harness 

14.  32.  Simon  a.  the  valiant  tnen  of  his  nation 

2  Mac.  4.  4(1.  Lysimachus  a.  about  3000  men 
5.  2.  a.  with  lances  like  a  banil  of  soldiers 
14.22.  Judas  placed  a.  men  in  convenient  places 

15.  1 1.  thus  he  a.  every  one  of  them 

ARMS. 
iVisd  18.  22.  not  with  strength,  nor  force  of  a. 

1  Mar.  12.  27.  he  commanded  his  men  to  be  in  a 

2  Mat   5.  11.  he  took  the  city  by  forre  of  a. 

15.  5  I  command  to  take  a.  and  do  king's  business 

ARMY. 
Jud.  1.  16.  there  he  banqueted,  both  he  and  his  a. 

2.  7. 1  will  cover  the  earth  with  the  feet  of  my  a. 

14.  Olofernes  called  the  officers  of  the  a.  of  Assur 
16.  ranged  them,  as  a  great  a.  is  ordered  for  war 
18.  plenty  of  victual  for  every  man  of  the  a. 

22.  then  he  took  all  his  a.  footmen,  horsemen 

3.  10.  might  gather  all  the  carriages  of  his  a. 

5.  1.  captain  of  the  a.  of  Assur,  10.  13.  |  13.  15. 
24.  be  a  prey  to  be  devoured  of  all  thine  a. 

7.  1.  next  day  Olofernes  commanded  all  his  a. 
2.  a.  of  the  men  of  war  was  ]T0,000  footmen 
9.  that  there  be  not  an  overthrow  in  thine  a. 

12.  remain  in  camp,  keep  all  the  men  of  thy  a. 
18.  and  the  rest  of  the  a.  camped  in  the  plain 
26-  and  deliver  the  whole  city  for  a  spoil  to  his  a. 

11.  18.  thou  shalt  go  forth  with  all  thine  a. 

16.  4.  Assur  came  with  ten  thousands  of  his  a. 
1  Mac.  3.  13.  Seron  a  prince  of  the  a.  of  Syria 

27.  he  gathered  together  a  very  strong  a. 
35.  that  he  should  send  an  a.  against  them 

4.  3.  thai  he  might  smite  the  king's  a. 

9.  when  Pharaoh  pursued  them  with  an  a. 
'M.  when  he  saw  that  mighty  a.  he  prayed 
31.  shut  u[i  this  a.  in  the  hand  of  thy  people  Israel 
35.  when  Lysias  saw  his  a.  put  to  flight 

6.  28.  he  gathered  together  the  cnptains  of  his  a. 
30.  the  number  of  his  a.  was  100,000  footmen 

40.  part  of  the  a.  being  spread  on  high  mountains 

41.  for  the  a.  was  very  great  and  mighty 

42.  there  were  slain  of  the  king's  a.  600  men 

7.  14.  one  that  is  a  priest  is  come  with  this  a. 

8.  6.  having  a  very  great  a.  was  discouifited 

3  Mac.  1.13.  the  a.  with  him  that  seemed  invincible 

5.  24.  he  sent  Apollonius  with  an  a.  of  22,000 

8.  12.  imparted  to  him  that  the  a.  was  at  hand 

9.  9.  his  smell  was  noisome  to  all  his  a. 

23.  what  time  he  led  an  a.  into  the  countries 

12.  20.  Maccabeus  ranged  his  a.  by  bands 

15.  20.  and  the  a.  was  .set  in  array,  and  the  beasts 
ARMIES. 
1  Esd.  4.  10.  all  his  people  and  his  a.  obey  him 
Jud.  1.  4.  for  the  going  forth  of  his  mighty  a. 
Eccl.  43.  6.  being  an  instrument  of  the  a.  above    ' 

ARMOUR.. 
Jud.  14.  3.  then  they  shall  take  their  a.  and  go 
1.5.  13.  the  men  of  Israel  followed  in  their  a. 

1  Mac.  1.  35.  they  stored  with  a.  and  victuals 
4.  6.  had  neither  a.  nor  swords  to  their  minds 

6.  6.  that  they  were  made  strong  by  the  a. 

10.  21.  gathered  forces  and  provided  much  a.    ' 

14.  3.3.  where  the  a.  of  the  enemies  had  been 
42.  to  set  them  over  the  a.  and  fortresses 

15.  7.  let  all  the  a.  thou  hast  made  remain 

2  JVfac.  8.  27.  so  when  they  had  gathered  their  a. 

11.  8.  one  in  while,  shaking  his  a.  of  gold 
15.  21.  seeing  the  divers  preparations  of  a. 

ARMOUR-BEARER. 
1  JIfac.  4.30.  Jonathan  the  son  of  Saul,  and  his  a. 

AROSE. 
1  Esd.  9.  7.  so  Esdras  a.  up  and  said  unto  them 
Tob.  8.  4.  Tobias  a.  out  of  the  bed,  and  said,  arise 
Jud.8.  18.  a.  none  in  our  age  which  worship  gods 

12.  5.  she  a.  when  it  was  towal^l  morning-watch 

15.  she  a.  and  decked  herself  with  her  apparel 
14.  H.  as  soon  as  the  morning  a.  they  hanged 

Bel  16  beiime  the  king  a.  and  Daniel  with  him 

39.  so  Daniel  a-  and  did  eat,  angel  set  Habbacuc 

ARPHAXAD. 

Juii.  l.lin  days  of  .\.  which  reigned  over  Medes 

5.  Nabuchodonosor  made  war  with  king  A.  13. 

15.  he  took  also  A.  in  the  mountains  of  Ragau 

763 


ASI 

ARRAY. 

.Tud.  1.  4.  for  the  setting  in  a.  his  footmen 
2  Mac.  5.  3.  were  seen  troops  of  horsemen  in  a. 
15.  20.  now  when  the  army  was  set  in  a. 
ARRAYED. 

1  Esd.  1.2.  being  a.  in  long  garments  in  the  temple 

7.  9.  the  Levites  stood  a.  in  their  vestments 

ARROW. 

2  Esd.  16. 7.  may  one  turn  again  the  a.  that  is  shot 

16.  like  as  an  a.  which  is  shot  of  a  mighty  aicher 
fVisd.5.Vi.  or  like  as  when  an  a.  is  shot  at  a  mark 
Eccl.  19.  12.  as  an  a.  thai  slicketh  in  the  thigh 

26.  12.  she  will  open  her  quiver  against  every  a. 
ARROWS. 
2  Esd.  16.  13.  his  a.  that  he  shooteth  arc  sharp 

ARSACES. 
1  JIfac.  14.  2.  A.  king  of  Persia,  3.  I  15.  22. 

ART. 

JVisd.  14.  4.  though  a  man  went  to  sea  without  a. 

17.7.  as  for  the  illusions  of  a.  magic,  were  putdown 

Eccl.  49. 1.  that  is  made  by  the  a.  ol  the  apothecary 

ARTAXERXES. 

1  Esd.  2.  16.  ill  time  of  A.  king  of  the  Persians 

17.  to  king  A.  our  lord  ||  7.  4.  with  consent  of  A. 

8.  1.  when  A.  the  king  reigned,  6,  28. 

8.  the  commission  which  was  written  from  A. 

9.  king  A.  unto  Esdras  the  priest,  greeting 
19.  I  king  A.  have  commanded  the  keepers 

2  Esd.  1.  3.  A.  king  of  the  Persians,  Esili.  11.  2. 
Est/i.  12.  2.  they  were  about  to  lay  hands  on  A. 

16. 1.  greet  king  A.  unto  the  princes  and  governors 
ARTICLES. 

1  Mac.  8.  29.  according  to  these  a.  did  the  Roinans 

2  Jl/ac.  14. 28.  should  make  void  the  a.  agreed  on 

ARTIFICER. 
JVisd.  14.  18.  the  diligence  of  the  a.  did  help 
Eccl.  9. 17.  for  hand  of  a.  the  work  be  commended 

ARTILLERY. 
1  Mac.  6.  51.  and  he  set  there  a.  with  engines 

ASADIAS. 
Bar.  1.  1.  Sedecias,  son  of  A.  son  of  Chelciaa 

ASAEL. 
Tob.  1.1.  of  the  seed  of  A.  of  tribe  of  Naphtali 

ASANIAS. 
1  Esd.8.54.  separated  Esabrias,  and  A. and  ten  men 

ASAPH. 

1  Esd.  1. 15.  also  the  sons  of  A.  were  in  their  order, 

to  wit,  A.  Zacharias,  and  Jeduthun 

ASBAZARETH. 

lEs(i.5.69.fromdaysof  A.thekingof  the  Assyrians 

ASCALON. 
.Tud.  2.  28.  that  dwelt  in  A.  feared  him  greatly 
1  Mac.  10.  86.  Jonathan  camped  against  A. 

11.  60.  he  came  to  A.  they  of  the  city  met  him 

12.  33.  Simon  passed  through  the  country  to  A. 

ASER 

Tob.  1.  2.  called  Naphtali  in  Galilee  above  A. 

ASHAMED. 

1  Esd  8.  51.  for  I  was  a.  to  ask  the  king's  footmen 
74.  I  said,  O  Lord,  I  am  a.  before  thy  face 

fVisd.  13. 17.  is  not  a.  to  speak  to  what  hath  no  life 
Keel.  4.  26.  be  not  a.  to  confess  thy  sins 

21.  22.  but  a  man  of  experience  is  a.  of  him 

22.  25. 1  will  not  be  a.  to  defend  a  friend 
41.17.  be  a.  of  whoredom  before  father  and  mother 
42.  1.  of  these  things  be  not  thou  a. 

8.  be  not  a.  to  inform  the  unwise  and  foolish 
11.  lest  she  make  thee  a.  before  the  multitude 

Bar.  6.  27.  they  also  that  serve  them  are  a. 

Dan.  3.  20.  let  all  that  do  thy  servants  hurt,  be  a. 

Siis.  11.  for  they  were  a.  to  declare  their  lust 
27.when  elders  declared,  servants  were  greatly  a. 
ASHES. 

2  Esd.  2.  9.  in  clods  of  pitch  and  heaps  of  a. 

9.  38.  and  she  had  a.  upon  her  head 
Toh.  6.  16.  thou  shalt  take  thee  a.  of  perfume 
Jud.  4.  11.  they  cast  a.  upon  their  heads 

15.  had  a.  on  their  mitres,  and  cried  to  the  Lord 

9. 1.  put  a.  on  her  head,  and  uncovered  sackcloth 
Esth.  14. 2.  she  covered  her  head  with  a.  and  dung 
fVisd.  2.  3.  our  body  shall  be  turned  into  a. 

15. 10.  his  heart  is  a.  his  hope  more  vile  than  earth 
Eccl.  10.  9.  why  is  earth  and  a.  proud  1 

17.  32.  and  all  men  are  but  earth  and  a. 

40.  3.  to  him  that  is  humbled  in  earth  and  a. 
Bel  14.  Daniel  commanded  his  servants  to  bring  a. 

1  Mac.  3.  47.  then  they  cast  a.  upon  their  heads 

2  Mac.  13.  5.  now  there  was  a  tower  of  fifty  cubits 

high  full  of  a.  instrument  hanged  down  into  a. 
S.committed  many  sins  about  the  altar,  whose  fire 
and  a.  were  holy,  he  received  his  death  in  a. 
ASIA. 
2  Esd.  15.  46.  thou  A.  that  art  partaker  of  hope 
16.  1.  woo  be  unto  thee  Babylon  and  A. 

1  Mae.  8.  6.  Antiochus  the  great  king  of  A. 

12.  39.  Tryphon  went  pbout  to  get  kingilom  of  A. 

13.  32.  and  he  crowned  himself  king  of  A. 

2  Mac.  3. 3.  Seloucus  kin?  nf  A.  bare  all  the  costs 
ASIDE. 

Sus.  51.  put  those  two  a.  one  far  from  another 


ASS 

Au«.  56.  lohe  put  him  a.  and  commandecl  to  brfnc 
ASK. 

1  Esd.  4.  42.  then  said  the  king  a.  what  thou  wilt 

2  Esd.  4. 6.  that  tluiu  shouldest  a.  such  things  of  mi» 
7.  if  [should  a.  how  great  dwellings  are  in  the  sea 
35.  a.  question  of  these  things  in  their  chambers 

5.  11.  one  land  also  shall  a.  another,  and  say 
46.  he  said  unto  me,  a.  the  womb  of  a  woman 
51.  a.  a  woman  that  bearelh  children 
10.  9.  a.  the  earth,  and  she  shall  tell  thee 
Tvb.i  W.a.  counsel  of  all  that  are  wise,  despise  not 
Eccl.  20.  15.  and  to-morrow  will  he  a.  it  again 
21.  1.  but  a.  pardon  for  thy  former  sins 
28.  4.  and  doth  he  a.  forgiveness  of  his  own  sins? 

1  Mac.  10.  72.  a.  and  learn  whom  I  am,  and  the  rest 

2  Mac.  7.  2.  what  wouldcst  thou  a.  or  learn  of  us? 
ASKED. 

2  E.S(/.  2. 44. 1  a.  the  angel,  and  said,  what  are  these? 
4. 11.  now  have  I  a.  thee  but  of  the  fir"*  and  wind 
25.  of  these  things  have  I  a.  then  answered  he  me 

5.  50.  I  a.  and  said,  seeing  thou  hast  given  me 
Tob.  7.  3.  Raguel  a.  them,  from  whence  are  you 
.Jud.  0.  16.  Ozias  a.  him  of  that  wliich  was  done 

10.  12.  they  a.  her  of  what  people  art  thou 
Eslh.  13.  3.  when  I  a.  counsellors  how  this  might  be 
IVisd.  19.11.  led  by  appetite,  they  a.  delicate  meat* 
Eccl  32.  7.  scarcely  when  thou  art  twice  a. 
^5?<.s.  14.  after  they  a.  one  another  the  cause 

40.  we  a.  who  the  man  was,  she  would  not  tell 
2  Mac.  14.  5.  being  a.  how  the  Jews  stood  affected 

ASKEST. 
2  Esd.  4.  28.  the  things  thou  a.  me,  I  will  tell,  52. 

8.  2.  as  when  thou  a.  the  earth,  it  shall  say 
ASKETH. 

fVisd.  13.  IS.  he  a.  of  that  which  cannot  set  a  foot 
19.  for  gaining  and  getting,  a.  ability  to  do 
ASLEEP. 
2  Esd.  7.  32.  earth  restore  those  that  are  a.  in  her 
Tob.  8.  13.  so  the  maid  found  them  both  a. 

ASMODEUS. 
Tob.  3.  8.  whom  A.  the  evil  spirit,  had  killed,  17 

ASPHAR. 
1  Mac.  9. 33.  pitched  their  tents  by  the  pool  A. 

ASPHARASUS. 
1  Esd.  5.  8.  Beelsarus,  A.  I'eelius returned  to  Jerus. 

ASS.     • 
Erel.  13.  19.  as  the  wild  n.  is  the  lion's  prey 
33.  24.  fodder,  a.  wand  and  burdens  are  for  the  a. 
ASSABIAS. 
1  Esd.  1.  9.  A.  and  Ochicl  gave  to  the  Levites 
ASSAULT. 

1  Mac.  4.8.  neither  be  ye  afraid  of  their  a. 

2  Man.  5.  5.  .Icison  made  an  a.  upon  the  city 
12.  15.  Judas  give  a  fierce  a.  against  the  walls 

ASSAULTED. 
\Mac.  5.16.  were  in  ironble,and  a.of  them, 30,35,50. 

6.  31.  Belhsura,  which  thev  a.  many  days 
ASSAUL-flNG. 

1  Mar.  11.  .50.  let  the  Jews  cease  from  a.  us 
15.  25.  the  second  dny  a.  it  continually 

2  Mac.  10.  17.  a. them  strongly,  they  won  the  holds 
ASSAY. 

2  Mac.  2.  23.  we  will  a  to  abridge  in  one  voluma 

ASSEMBLED. 
1  Esd.  8.  72.  all  that  were  then  moved  a.  unto  me 

9.  55.  the  words  for  which  they  had  been  a. 
Jud.  1.  6.  many  nations  a.  themselvrs  to  battle 

7.  23.  then  all  the  people  a.  to  Ozias 
Sus.  28.  when  the  people  were  a.  to  her  husband 

Joachim,  1  Mae.  3.  52,  58.  |  4.  37.  I  5.  9, 
1.5,  16. 

1  Mac.  10.  61.  pestilent  fellows  a.  themselves 

2  Mac.  8.  1.  they  a.  aboul  six  thousand  men 
ASSEMBLY. 

Jud.  6. 16.  and  the  women  ran  to  the  a. 

21.  Ozias  took  him  out  of  the  a.  to  his  house 
7.  29.  then  there  was  great  weeping  in  the  a. 
14.  6.  in  the  a.  of  the  people  he  fell  down 
.Sus.  60.  all  the  a.  cried  out  with  a  loud  voice 
1  Mae.  14.  44.  or  to  gather  an  a.  in  the  country 
ASSIDEANS. 

1  Mac.  2.  42.  there  came  to  him  a  company  of  A. 
7.  13.  the  A.  were  the  first  that  sought  peace 

2  Mac.  14.  6.  these  of  the  Jews  that  he  called  A. 
ASSIGN.  ^ 

2Jl/ae.  4.  9.  he  promised  to  a.  a  hundred  and  fifty 

ASSIST. 

Wisd.  19. 22.  didst  a.  them  in  every  time  and  place 

ASSISTING. 

1  £s(i.  7.2.  a.  the  ancients  of  the  Jews  and  governors 
ASSUAGE. 

Eccl.  18.  16.  shall  not  the  dew  a.  the  heat? 

ASSUERUS. 
Tob.  14.  15.  Nineve,  which  was  taken  by  A. 
ASSUR. 

2  Esd.  2.  8.  woe  be  to  thee,  A.  thou  that  liidcst 
Jud.  2. 14.  Olofernes  called  the  officers  of  the  army 

of  A.  5.  l.|6.  l.|  13.  15.  I  14.3. 

6.  17.  spoken  in  the  midst  of  the  princes  of  .^. 

7.  2U.  the  company  of  .^.  remained  about  them 


<ft 


AVE 

/«(il.l5.6.rc«iciueof  Bethuliafellon  the  camp  of  A.  I 
10  4   A.  came  out  ol'tlie  mountains  from  tlio  north 

ASSURANCE. 
Ifjs(i.6.18.giviiig  heed  to  laws  is  a-ofincorruptioa 

ASSURED. 
Eccl.  49.  10.  they  delivered  them  hy  a.  hope 
2  Mac.  7.  a.  hut  also  a.  him  wiih  oiiths 
1-2.  -io.  when  he  had  a.  Ihem  with  many  words 

ASSUREDLY. 
Jf'isd.  18.  6.  a.  knowing  in  what  oaths  they  had 

ASSYRIA. 
1  Esd.  7.15.  he  had  lurn.-d  counsel  of  the  king  of  A. 

ASSYRIANS. 

Tab.  1.  2.  in  time  of  Eiiemessar,  king  of  the  A. 

3.  who  came  with  me  into  the  land  of  the  A. 

Jud  1.  7.  Na'juchodonosor  king  of  the  A.  2.  1,  4. 

7.  17.  with  them  live  tliousaniT  of  A.  departed 

9.  7.  hehold,  the  A.  are  multii>hed  in  their  power 

10.  11.  the  first  watcii  of  the  A.  met  her 

12.  1:J.  he  made  as  one  of  the  daughters  of  the  A. 
14.  2.  as  iho' ye  would  go  toward  the  watch  of  A. 

12.  when  A.  saw  them,  they  sent  to  leaders 
19.  when  the  ca|itains  of  the  A.  army  heard 

Keel.  48.  21.  he  smote  the  host  of  the  A. 

1  Mac.  7.  41.  were  sent  from  the  king  of  the  A. 

ASTONISHED. 
Jud.  11.  10.  whereat  all  the  earth  shall  be  a. 

1.3.  17.  all  the  people  were  wonderfully  a. 

]4.  7.  which  liearing  thy  name  shall  be  a. 

1.5.  1.  they  were  a.  at  the  thing  that  was  done 
JVisd.  \'i.  4.  but  if  lliey  were  a.  and  their  power 

17.3.1)eing  horribly  a.  and  troubled  by  apparitions 
Eccl.  43.  18.  the  heart  is  a.  at  the  raining  of  it 

1  Mae.  0.  8.  the  king  was  n.  and  sore  moved 
16.  22.  hereof  when  he  heard,  he  was  sore  a. 

S  Mac.  3.  24.  all  were  a.  at  the  power  of  God 
ASTONISHMENT. 

2  Esd.  4. 24.  and  our  life  is  a.  and  fear,  not  worthy 

ASTRAY. 
ff'isd.  12.  24.  they  went  a.  in  the  ways  of  error 
Bar.  4. 28.  as  it  was  your  inind  to  go  a.  from  God 

AStYAGES. 
Bel  1.  king  A.  was  gathered  to  his  fathers 

ATARGATIS. 
2  Mac.  12.  2G.  marched  forth  to  the  temple  of  A. 

ATE. 
Jud.  12.  19.  then  she  a.  and  drank  before  him 
ATIlENOniUS. 

1  Ma.c.  15.  28.  ho  sent  to  him  A.  one  of  his  friends 

ATHENS. 
2.Vii<:.0.1.kingBcnt  an  old  man  of  A.to  compel  .Tews 
9.  15.  make  them  equuls  to  the  citizens  of  A. 

ATONEMENT. 
Ecel.  3.  3.  honnurclh  father,  makes  a.  for  his  sins 
30.  an  alms  maketh  an  a.  for  sins 

2  Mac.  3.  33.  as  the  hl^'li  priest  was  making  a. 

ATTAIN. 
Eccl.  15.  7.  but  f.iolish  men  shall  not  a.  to  her 
2  Mac.  15.  38.  it  is  that  which  I  could  o.  unto 
ATTAIAIS. 

1  Mac.  15.  22.  wrote  to  Demetrius  the  king  and  A. 

ATTEMPT. 

2  Mac.  4.  41.  thev  seeing  the  a.  of  Lysimachui 

ATTEMPTS. 
Eccl.  9.  4.  lest  thou  be  In  ken  with  her  a. 
ATPEMPTED. 

1  Mac.  12. 10.  have  m^verlheless  a.  to  send  to  you 

ATTE.VD. 

2  Mac.  11.  23.  cverv  one  may  a.  on  his  own  affairs 

ATTENDANCE. 
I  Mac.  15.  32.  when  Athenobius  saw  his  great  a. 

ATTENDED. 
Wisd.lO.'J.  delivered  from  pain  those  that  a.  on  her 

ATTENDETH. 
Eccl.  4.  15.  he  that  a,  to  her  shall  dwell  securely 

ATTENTION. 
Prol.  of  Jesus  Sirach.ttt  rend  it  with  favour  and  a. 

ATTENTIVE. 
Eccl.  3.  29.  nn  a.  ear  is  the  desire  of  a  wise  man 

ATTIRE. 
Jud.  12.  15.  decked  herself  with  her  woman's  a. 
Eccl.  19.  30.  a  man's  a.  and  excessive  laughter 

AVAILETH. 
Eccl.  34.  2.5.  if  he  touch  it,  what  a.  his  washing 

AVENGE. 
C  F.nd.  15.  9.  saith  the  Lord,  I  will  surely  a.  ihem 
Jud.  2.  1.  ho  slinuld  a.  himself  on  all  the  earth 

1  Mac.  2.  (17.  and  a.  ye  the;  wrong  of  your  people 
fi.  22.  how  long  ere  thou  a.  our  brethren  7 

13.  (i.  ilouhtless  I  will  a.  my  nation  and  our  wives 

2  Mac.  9.  4.  ho  thought  to  a.  upon  the  Jews  th 

disgrace 
AVENGED. 
Jud.  1.  12.  would  surely  ho  a.  on  nit  those  coasts 
F.xOi.  10.  20.  that  they  may  be  a.  on  them 
Wind.  II.  3.  thev  were  a.  of  their  adversaries 
I  Mae.  3.  15.  t.-!'ho  c.  of  the  children  of  Israel 
7.  38.  be  a.  of  this  n.an  and  his  host 
».  42.  had  a.  fully  the  blood  of  their  brother 
IS.  A.  1  may  bu  a.  of  them  that  deflroyod  it 
764 


BAB 

AVENGER. 
Eccl.  30.  6.  he  left  behind  hira  an  a. 
AVENGERS. 

^Mac.i.  16.  hohad  them  to  be  their  enemies  and  a. 

AUGME.NTATION. 
2  Jfac.  5.16.  were  dedicated  by  other  kings  to  the  a. 

AVOID. 
2  Esd.  7.  21.  they  should  observe  to  a.  punishment 
Toh.  13.  2.  neither  is  there  any  can  a.  his  hand 
/fisd.  16.  4.  penury  which  they  could  not  a.  16. 
2  Mae.  2.  31.  to  a.  much  labouring  of  the  work 

AVOIDED. 
iVisd.  17.  10.  which  could  of  no  side  be  a. 

AURANUS. 
2  Mac.  4.  40.  began  first  to  offer  violence  to  one  A. 

AUTHOR. 

fVisd.  13. 3.  for  first  a.  of  beauty  hath  created  them 

2  Mac.  2.  28.  leaving  to  the  a.  the  exact  handling 

30.  belongeth  to  the  first  a.  of  the  story 

7.  31.  thou  that  hast  been  the  a.  of  all  mischief 

AUTHORS. 
Bar.  3.  2.3.  the  a.  of  fables  and  searchers  out  of 
1  Mac.  9.  61.  that  were  a.  of  that  mischief 

AUTHORITY. 
1  Esd.  8.  22.  no  man  have  a.  to  impose  any  thing 
Eath.  13.  2.  lifted  up  with  presumption  of  my  o. 
10.  5.  caused  many  that  are  in  a.  to  be  partakers 
7.  of  them  that  are  unworthily  placed  in  a. 
TVisd.  14.  19.  for  he  willing  to  please  one  in  a. 
Keel.  3.2.  Lord  hath  ccmfirmed  the  a.  of  the  mother 
10. 3.  through  the  prudence  of  them  that  are  in  a. 
21.  the  fear  of  Ijordgoeth  before  the  obtaining  a. 
20.  8.  he  that  taketh  to  himself  a.  therein 
45.  17.  gave  him  a.  in  the  statutes  of  judgments 

1  Mae.  1.  58.  thus  did  they  by  their  a.  10.  6. 

10.  32.  as  for  the  tower,  I  yield  up  my  a.  over  it 
35.  no  man  shall  have  a.  to  meddle  with  them 

2  ..Wac.  4.  50.  Menelaus  remained  still  in  a. 

AWE. 
n'isd.  6.  7.  nor  stand  in  a.  of  any  man's  greatness 

AWAKE. 
Estk.  11.  12.  when  Mardocheus  was  a.  he  bare 
Ecci.l3.13.when  hoare«t  these  things  a.in  thy  sleep 

AWAKED. 

1  Esd.  .3.  3.  Darius  slept,  and  soon  after  a. 

2  K«d.5.14. 1  a.  and  fearfulness  went  thro'  my  body 

11.  29.  a.  one  of  the  heads  that  were  at  rest 

12.  3.  then  a.  I  out  of  the  trouble  of  my  mind 
13. 13.  then  was  I  sick  through  great  fear,  and  I  a. 

Eccl.  33. 16. 1  a.  up  last  of  all,  as  one  that  gathers 

AWAKETH. 
2  Esd.  1.  31.  the  world  that  yet  a.  not  be  raised 
Eccl.  40.  7.  when  all  is  safe,  he  a.  and  marvelleth 

AWARE. 
Eccl.  19.  27.  do  thee  a  mischief  ere  thou  be  a. 

AX. 
Bar.  6. 15.  he  hath  in  his  hand  a  dagger  and  an  a. 

AXLE-TREE. 
Eccl.  33.  5.  his  thoughts  are  like  a  rolling  a. 

AZARIAS. 
2  Esd.  1.  1.  the  son  of  A.  the  son  of  Helchias 
Tab.  5.  12.  he  said,  I  am  A.  the  son  of  Ananias 

6.  6.  brother  A,  to  what  use  is  the  heart  I 

13.  A.  this  maid  hath  been  given  to  seven  men 

7.  8.  Tobias  said,  brother  A.  speak  of  those  things 
9.  2.  brother  A.  take  with  thee  a  servant 

Dun.  3.2.  then  A.  stood  up  and  prayed  thus 
20.  angel  came  into  the  oven  together  with  A. 
60.  O  Ananias,  A.  and  Misael,  bless  ye  the  Lord 
1  Mae.  2.  59.  A.  by  believing  was  saved  out  of  fire 
5.  18.  so  he  loft  A.  captain  of  the  people 

AZOTUS. 
.rud.  2.  28.  fear  fell  on  them  that  dwelt  in  A. 
1  Mae.  4. 15.  to  the  [ilains  of  Idumea  and  A. 
5. 68.  Judas  turned  to  A.in  the  land  of  Philistines 

9.  l.^.  who  pursued  them  to  the  mount  of  A. 

10.  77.  be  went  to  A.  as  one  that  journeyed 
83.  the  horsemen  being  scattered  fled  to  A. 

11.4.  when  ho  came  near  to  A.  they  shewed  him 
the  temple  of  Dagon  that  was  burnt,  and  A. 
14.  34.  ho  fiirlified  Ga/ara  that  bordereth  upon  A. 
16. 10.  they  fled  to  the  towers  in  the  fields  of  A. 


BAT 


[Apocrypha 


B. 


nAAT. 

Tab.  1.  5.  Naphtali  sacrificed  to  the  heifer  B. 

BAHES. 
2  E.<>d.  1.23.  T  prayed  you  as  a  nurse  her  young  4. 
IVisd.  15.  14.  arc  more  misernble  than  very  4. 

HABULER. 
Eccl.  20.  7.  a  ft.  and  a  fool  will  regard  no  time 

nARHLING. 
Eccl.  19.  6.  ho  that  haleth  ft.  chall  have  lets  evil 
20.  5.  another  by  much  ft.  Incometh  hateful 
BABYLON. 

1  Esd.  1.40.  and  carried  him  into  I^  .M,  .56. 
41.  he  set  Ihom  in  bia  own  temple  ni  B. 

2  E>d.  3. 1. 1  was  in  B.  ond  lay  troubled  on  my  bed 


2  F.sd.  3.  28.  are  their  deeds  better  that  inhabit  B.l 
31.  are  they  of  B.  better  than  they  of  Sion  ? 

15.  46.  that  ait  partaker  of  the  hope  of  B. 

10.1.  woe  be  to  tliee,  B.  and  .*\sia,  woe  be  to  Egyp* 
Bar.  1.  1.  the  words  which  Baruch  wrote  in  B. 
."ius.  1.  there  dwelt  a  man  in  B.  called  Joaciin 
Bel  34.  carry  the  dinner  that  thou  hast  to  B. 

35.  Lord,  I  never  saw  B.  nor  do  I  know  the  den 

36.  then  the  angel  set  him  in  B.  over  the  deu 

BABYLONIANS. 
Bel  3.  now  the  B.  had  an  idol  called  Bel 

BACCHUS. 
2  Mac.  6.  7.  when  the  feast  of  B.  %vas  kept,  the 
Jews  were  compiilled  to  go  in  procession  to  B. 
BACCHIDES. 

1  Mie.  7. 8.  the  king  chose  B.  a  friend  of  the  king 
9.  26.  and  they  brought  Judas  friends  to  B. 

2  Mac.  8.  30.  that  were  with  Timotheus  and  B. 

BACKBITING. 
IVisd.  1.  11.  and  refrain  your  tongue  from  ft. 
Keel.  23.  14.  a  ft.  tongue  hath  disquieted  many 
15.  a  ft.  tongue  hath  cast  out  virtuous  womea 
BACKWARD. 
2  Esd.  16. 16.  like  as  an  arrow  returneth  not  6. 
Eccl.  48.  23.  in  his  time  the  sun  went  b. 

BAG. 
Jud.  10.  5.  Judith  filled  a  ft.  with  parched  corn 

13.  10.  she  put  his  head  in  her  ft.  of  meat 
15.  so  she  took  the  head  out  of  the  ft. 

BAGS. 
Tob.  9.  5.  who  brought  forth  ft.  sealed  up 

BAGGAGE. 
.Tud.  7.  2.  beside  the  4.  and  other  men  afoot 
2  Mac.  12.  21.  he  sent  the  other  ft.  unto  a  fortress 

BAGOAS. 

./Md.l2.Il.  then  said  he  to  B.  the  eunuch,  13.  |  13.  3. 

15.  soft  skins,  which  she  had  received  of  B. 

14.  14.  then  went  B.  and  knocked  at  the  door 

BALANCE. 

2  Esd.  3.  34.  weigh  thou  our  wickedness  in  the  b 

Jf'isd.  11.22.  the  world  is  as  a  little  grain  of  the  b. 

Eccl.  21.  25.  their  words  are  weighed  in  the  ft. 

28.25.  weigh  thy  words  in  a  ft.  and  make  a  door 

BALTHAZAR. 
Bar.  1.  12.  we  shall  live  under  the  shadow  of  B. 

BAND. 
2  Mac.  5.  2.  with  lances  like  a  b.  of  soldiers 
8.  22.  leaders  of  each  ft.  to  wit,  Simon,  Josef  b 

BANDS. 
Jiid.  14. 11.  they  went  forth  by  ft.  to  the  strait* 
Eccl.  0.  30.  an    her  6.  are  purple  lace 
28.  19.  nor  hath  been  bound  in  her  ft. 
20.  and  the  ft.  thereof  are  ft.  of  brass 
BANQUET. 
.Tud.  12.  10.  called  none  of  the  officers  to  the  6. 
Eeel.  32.  .5.  a  concert  of  music  in  a  ft.  of  wine 
49.  1.  it  is  as  honey  and  music  at  a  J.  of  wine 

1  Mac.  16. 15.  son  of  Abubus  made  them  a  great  b. 

2  Mac.  2.  27.  no  ease  to  him  that  prepareth  a  b. 

BANQUETED. 
Jud.  1.  16.  and  there  he  took  his  ease  and  ft. 

BANQUETING. 
KccM8.33.be  not  made  abeggar  by  ft. on  borrowing 

1  Mac.  16.  16.  came  on  Simon  into  the  ft.  place 

BAR. 
Eccl.  28.  25.  make  a  door  and  ft.  for  thy  mouth 

BARS. 

(f'isd.  17.  16.  shut  up  in  prison,  without  iron  ft. 

BARBAROUS. 

2  Mac.  2.  21.  so  that  a  few  chased  ft.  multitudes 
5.  22.  for  lianners,  more  ft.  than  he  that  set  hira 

BARBAROUSLY. 
2  Mae.  15.  2.  O  destroy  not  so  cruelly  and  J. 

•BARE. 
Eccl.  13.  5.  ho  will  make  thee  ft.  and  not  be  sorry 

BARE. 
2  Mac.  7.  27.  have  pitv  on  mo  that  ft.  theo 

BARK. 
fV.isd.  13.  11.  and  taken  off  all  the  ft.  skilfully 

BARREN. 
2  Fsd.  0.  43.  she  said,  T  thv  servant  have  been  b. 
IVisd.  3.  13.  blessed  is  theft,  that  is  undetilcd 
K:cc^42.I0.whe^sheismarried,lc8t8heshouldbe4 

BARTACUS. 
1  Esd.  4.  29.  the  danjliter  of  the  admirable  B. 

BARUCH. 

Bar.  1.  1.  the  words  of  the  book  which  B.  wrot« 

3.  B.  did  read  the  words  of  ibis  book 

BASENESS. 

Feel.  22.  9.  they  shall  rover  the  ft.  of  their  parents 

BASHKULNESS. 
Fed.  20.23.  there  iji  that  for  A.  proniisolh  his  frientl 

B.VSTARa 
IVisd.  A.  3.  nor  lake  deep  rooting  from  A.  slips 

BATS. 
Bur.  6. 22.  on  their  bodies  and  heads  sit  ft.  and  bird! 

BATTERED. 
1  .Vac.  13.  43.  Simon  A.  a  certain  tower  and  took  il 

BATTLE. 
1  Esd.  1.  29.  but  joined  ft.  with  him  in  the  plain 


AFOCR^lfHA.] 


BEA 


1  Esd.  1.  oO.  carry  me  away  out  of  h.  for  T  am  very 

weak,  his  servants  took  him  away  out  of  the  fr. 

2  Esd-  7.  57.  this  is  tlie  condition  of  the  4. 
Jud.  1.  C.  many  assembled  themselves  to  h. 

13.  then  he  marched  in  4.  array  with  his  power 

5.  '23.  they  have  no  power  for  a  strong  b. 
7.  11.  my  lord,  fight  not  against  them  in  4. 
14.13.havebeen  bold  tocomedown  against  us  to4. 

ICith.  11.  7.  all  nations  were  prepared  to  4. 
fVisd.  M.  9.  under  the  hand  of  the  righteous  in  4. 
Eccl.  46.  6.  he  made  the  4.  to  fall  on  the  nations 
1  Mac.  2.  35.  they  gave  them  the  4.  with  speed 
41.  wliosoever  shall  come  to  make  4.  with  us 
4.  14.  so  they  joined  the  4.  and  the  heathen  fled 

6.  30.  thirty-two  elephants  exercised  in  4. 
S  Mac.  10  4b.  making  their  rage  leader  of  their  4. 

Hee  Join. 
B.\TTLES. 
Jud.  5.18.  they  were  destroyed  in  many  4.  very  sore 
9.  7.  thou  art  the  Lord  that  breakest  the  4. 

16.  3.  God  breaketh  the  4.  for  he  delivered  me 
1  Mac.  3.  26.  all  nations  talked  of  the  4.  of  Judas 

13.  9.  they  answered,  saying,  fight  thou  our  4. 

B.\TTLEMEi\TS. 
Eccl.  9.  13.  thou  walkest  on  the  4.  of  the  city 
BE.AR. 

1  Esd.  1.  4.  Josias  said,  ye  shall  no  more  4.  the  ark 
4. 15.  all  the  people  that  4.  rule  by  sea  and  land 

Eccl.  1.  23.  a  patient  man  will  4.  tor  a  time 

6.  25.  bow  down  ihy  shoulder  and  4.  her 
5i2.  15.  a  mass  of  iron  is  easier  to  4.  than  a  man 

BEARETH. 

2  Esd.  5.51.  he  said,  ask  a  woman  that  4.  children 

BEARDS. 
Bar.  6. 31.  priests  sit,  and  their  heads  and  b.  shaven 

BEARS. 
Wisd.  11  17.  to  send  a  multitude  of  4.  or  fierce  lions 
Eccl.  47.  3.  he  played  with  4.  as  with  lambs 

BEAST. 
Wisd.  13.  14.  or  made  it  like  some  vile  4. 
£;i:ci.l3.15.every4.1ovethhi3like|every  manloveth 

1  Mac.  6.  36.  wheresoever  the  4.  was,  they  went 

BEASTS. 

2  Esd.  8.  29.  them  which  have  lived  like  b. 
30.  at  them  which  are  deemed  worse  than  4. 

Wisd.  II.  15.  worshipped  wild  4.  thou  didst  send  a 
multitude  of  unreasonable  4.  for  vengeance 

12.  9.  or  to  destroy  thein  at  once  with  cruel  4. 
15.  18.  they  worshipped  those  4.  most  hateful 
lU.  1.  by  the  multitude  of  4.  were  tormented 

3.  for  the  ugly  sight  of  the  6.  sent  among  them 
5.  the  horrible  fierceness  of  4.  came  on  these 

17.  9.  yet  being  scared  with  4.  that  passed  by 
19.  a  terrible  sound  or  a  running  of  skipping  4.  or 

a  roaring  voice  of  most  savage  wild  4. 

1  Mac.  6.  37.  on  the  4.  were  there  strong  towers 

2  Mac.  X5.  21.  seeins  the  fierceness  of  the  4. 

'BEAT. 
Eccl.  30.  12.  4.  him  on  the  sides  while  he  is  a  child 

BE.ATEN. 
Eccl.  23.  10.  as  a  servant  that  is  continually  4. 
2  Mac.  6.  30.  I  endure  pains  in  body  by  being  b. 

BEAUTY. 

1  Ksd.4.18.  do  they  not  love  a  woman  comely  in  4.? 

2  £«<i.lO..'50  he  shewed  thee  the  comelinessofher4. 
55.  see  the  4.  and  greatness  of  the  building 

15.  63.  and  they  shall  mar  the  b.  of  thy  face 
Jud.  10.  7.  they  wondered  greatly  at  her  4.  14. 

II.  21.  both  for  4.  of  face  and  wisdom  of  words 

16.7.  weakened  him  with  the  6.  of  her  countenance 
9.  her  4.  ravished,  took  his  mind  [irisoner 
Estk.  15.  5.  ruddy  through  the  perfection  of  her  4. 
Wisd.  7.  10.  I  loved  her  above  health  and  4. 

6.2.  to  wake  my  spouse,  and  I  was  a  lover  of  her  4. 

13.  3.  with  whose  4.  they  being  delighted ;  for  the 

first  author  of  4.  hath  created  them 

5.  by  the  greatness  and  4.  of  the  creatures 

Eccl.  9. 8.' look  not  on  another's  4.  many  have  been 

deceived  by  the  4.  of  a  woman,  love  kindled 

11.2.  commend  not  a  man  for  his  4.  nor  abhor  him 

26.16.  so  is  4.  ofa  good  wife  in  ordering  her  house 

17.  BO  is  the  4.  of  the  face  in  ripe  age 
36.22.the  4.  ofa  woman  cheereth  the  countenance 
40.  22.  thine  eye  desireth  favour  and  4. 

42.  12.  behold  not  every  body's  4.  and  sit  not 

43.  1.  pride  of  height,  the  4.  of  heaven,  9,  18. 
Sus.  32.  that  they  might  be  filled  with  her  4. 
1  Mac.  1.  26.  so  that  the  4.  of  women  was  changed 

BEAtTTIFIEn. 

Eccl.  25.  1.  in  three  things  I  was  4.  and  stood  up 

45.  7.  he  6.  him  with  comely  ornaments 

47.  10.  he  4.  their  feasts  and  set  in  order  the  time 

1  Mac.  14. 15.  he  4.  the  sanctuary,  and  multiplied 

BEAUTIFUL. 
Jud.  11.  23.  4.  in  countenance  and  witty  in  words 
Wisd.  5.  16.  a  4.  crown  from  the  Lord's  hands 

7.  29.  for  she  is  more  4.  than  the  sun 
13.  7.  because  the  things  are  but  ft.  that  are  seen 
15.  19.  nor  are  they  4.  so  much  as  to  be  desired 

Eccl.  9.  8.  turn  away  thine  eye  from  a  4.  woman 
763 


#     BEH 

Eccl.  25. 1.  Istood  up  4.  both  bafore  God  and  men 
43.  11.  very  4.  it  is  in  the  brightness  thereof 
45.  12.  the  desires  of  the  eyes,  goodly  and  4. 
Bar.  6.  24.  the  gold  about  thejii  to  make  them  4. 

BEAUTEOUS. 
.Skj.  31.  was  a  delicate  woman  and  4.  to  behold 

BECOMETH. 
2  Esd.  8.  49.  thou  hast  humbled  thyself,  as  it  4.  thee 

BECTILETH. 
Jud.  2.  21.  they  went  forth  of  Nineve  toward  the 
plain  of  B.  and  pitched  from  B.  near  mountain 
BEU. 
2  Esd.  12.  26.  that  one  of  them  shall  die  on  his  4. 
Tob.  8.  4.  Tobias  rose  out  of  the  4.  and  said 
14.  11.  he  gave  up  the  ghost  in  4.  158  years  old 
Jud.  9.  3.  so  that  they  dyed  their  ft.  in  blood 
10.21.  Olofernes  rested  on  his  ft.  under  a  canopy 

13.  2.  and  Olofernes  lying  along  on  bis  4. 

4.  Judith  standing  by  his  ft.  said  in  her  heart 

6.  then  she  came  to  the  pillar  of  the  4. 

7.  approached  his  4.  and  took  the  hair  of  his  head 
9.  she  tumbled  his  body  down  from  the  4. 

Wisd.  3.  13.  which  hath  not  known  the  sinful  ft. 
Eccl.  24.  31.  and  I  will  water  my  garden  4. 
31. 19.  he  fetcheth  not  his  wind  short  on  his  ft. 
41.  22.  and  come  not  near  his  maid's  ft. 
48.  6.  broughtest  honourable  men  from  their  J. 
BEDCHAMBER. 
Jud.  13.  3.  her  maid  to  stand  without  her  4. 
4.  so  all  went  forth,  none  was  left  in  the  ft. 

14.  15.  he  went  into  the  4.  and  found  him  dead 
16. 19.  the  canopy  which  he  had  taken  ouiof  his  4. 

BEDS. 
Jud.  13.  1.  they  went  to  their  ft.  they  were  weary 
Wisd.  4.  6.  for  children  begotten  of  unlawful  ft. 

BEG. 
Eccl.  40.  28.  for  better  it  is  to  die  than  to  ft. 

BEGAN. 
2  Esd.  3. 12.  they  that  dwelt  on  earth  4.  to  multiply 

BEGAT. 
Eccl.  22.  3.  is  the  dishonour  of  his  father  that  4.  him 

BEGET. 
2^/ac.l4.25.prayed  him  totakea  wifeand4.childr. 

BEGGAR,  S. 
Eccl.  18.  33.  be  not  made  a  4.  by  banqueting 
40.  28.  lead  not  a  4.  life,  for  better  to  die  than  beg 

BEGGING. 
Eccl.  40.  30.  ft.  is  sweet  in  mouth  of  the  shameless 

BEGIN. 
2  Mac.  2.  32.  here  then  will  we  ft.  the  story 

BEGINNETH. 
Eccl.  18.  7.  when  a  man  hath  done  then  he  ft. 
36.  24.  he  that  getteth  a  wife,  4.  a  possession 
BEGINNING. 
2  Esd.  1.  1.3.  in  the  4.  I  gave  you  a  safe  passage 
3.4.0Lord,who  bearest  rule,  thou  spakest  at  the  4. 
4.  30.  sown  in  the  heart  of  Adam  from  the  4. 
9. 5.  as  all  made  in  the  world  hath  a  4.  and  an  end 
16. 18.  the  4.  of  sorrows  and  great  mournings,  the 
4.  of  famine  and  great  dearth,  the  ft.  of  wars, 
the  4.  of  evils,  what  shall  I  do? 
Tob.  4.  12.  that  our  fathers  from  the  4.  married 

6.  17.  for  she  is  appointed  to  thee  from  the  4. 
,/«rf.8.29.from  the  4. people  knew  thyunderstandin, 
Estk.  13.  15.  that  hath  been  thine  from  the  4. 
Wisd.  6.  22.  I  will  seek  her  out  from  the  4. 

7.  5.  no  king  that  had  any  other  4.  of  birth 
18.  the  ft.  ending,  and  midst  of  the  times 

9.  8.  which  thou  hast  prepared  from  the  4. 
12.  16.  for  thy  power  is  the  4.  of  righteousness 

14.  12.  devising  of  idols  was  the  4.  of  fornication 
13.  for  neither  were  they  from  the  4. 
27.  for  the  worshipping  of  idols  is  the  ft.  of  evil 

Eccl.  1. 14.  to  fear  the  L.  is  the  ft.  of  wisdom,  25. 12. 

10.  12.  the  ft.  of  pride  is  when  one  departeth 

11. 16.  error  and  darkness  had  their  A.  with  sinners 

15.  14.  he  himself  made  man  from  the  4. 

24.  9.  he  created  me  from  the  4.  before  the  world 
25. 12.  faith  is  the  4.  of  cleaving  unto  him 
36.  11.  and  inherit  thou  them  as  from  the  4. 
30.  25.  good  things  are  created  from  the  4. 

Bar.  3.26.  there  were  the  giants  famous  from  the  4. 

2  Mac.  1.  23.  Jonathan  4.  and  the  rest  answering 

7.  23.  who  found  out  the  4.  of  all  things 

8.  27.  which  was  the  ft.  of  mercy  upon  them 

BEGOT. 
Eccl.  7.  28.  remember  that  thou  wast  J.  of  them 

BEGOTTEN. 
Tob.  8.  17.  of  two  that  were  the  only  ft.  children 
Wisd.  4.6.  childr.  ft.  ofunlawful  beds  are  witnesses 

BEGUILE. 
Wisd.  4.  11.  lest  that  wickedness  should  ft.  his  soul 

BEGUILING. 
E«f/t.l5.6.4.with  falsehood  of  their  lewd  disposition 

BEHAVED. 
'Eccl  49.2.  he  4.  himself  uprightly  in  the  conversion 
2  Mac.  2.  21.  those  that  4.  themselves  manfully 

BEHAVIOUR. 
Estk.  16.  7.  done  through  the  pestilent  ft.  of  them 
Witd.  19. 13.  they  used  a  more  hard  and  hateful  6. 


BET 

BEHIND. 
Wisd.  8.  13.  leave  4.  me  an  everlasting  memorial 
Eccl.  11.11.  that  labonrelh,  and  is  so  much  more  ft. 

BEHOLDER. 
Esih.  15.2.  G.who  is  the  ft.  and  saviour  of  all  things 
Wisd.  1.  6.  for  God  is  a  true  4.  of  Ilia  heart 

BEHOLDETH. 
Eccl.  15.  18.  mighty  in  power,  and  ft.  all  things 

BEL. 
Bar.  6.  41.  they  entreat  B.  that  he  may  speak 
Bel  3.  the  Babylonians  had  an  idol  called  B. 
4.  the  king  said,  why  dost  not  thou  worship  B 
18.  great  art  thou,  O  B.  with  thee  is  no  deceit 
22.  the  king  delivered  B.  into  Daniel's  power 
BELIEVE. 
2  Esd.  1.  37.  yet  in  spirit  they  ft.  the  thing  I  say 
16.  36.  ft.  not  the  gods  of  whom  the  Lord  spake 
7'o4.2.14.  howbeit,  I  did  not  ft.  her,  bade  her  render 
14.  4.  for  I  surely  ft.  those  things  Jonas  spake 
Wisd.\i.2.\eav\ng  wickedness,  they  may  ft.  on  theo 
18.  13.  and  whereas  they  would  not  ft.  any  thing 
Eccl.  2.  6.  ft.  in  him,  and  he  will  help  thee 
13.  11.  affect  not  to  be  equal,  ft  not  his  words 
36.  20.  eo  who  will  ft.  a  man  that  hath  no  house? 
BELIEVED. 
2  E,9rf,3.32.  or  what  generation  hath  so  4.  as  Jacob? 
5.  29.  they  which  4.  not  thy  covenants,  7.  60. 
2  Esd.  9.  7.  and  by  faith,  whereby  ye  have  ft. 
.lud.  14.  10.  he  4.  in  God  greatly,  and  was  joined 
Eccl.  31.  23.  his  good  hou.se-keeping  will  be  ft. 
Sus.  41.  then  the  assembly  ft.  them  as  elder* 
1  Mac.  7.  16.  whereupon  they  4.  him 

BELIEVETH. 
Eccl.  2.  13.  woe  to  the  faint  hearted,  for  he  4.  not 
32.  24.  he  that  4.  in  the  Lord  taketh  heed 
BELIEVING. 

1  Mac.  12.  46.  so  Jonathan  ft.  him,  did  as  he  bade 

BELLS. 
Eccl.  45.  9.  he  compassed  him  with  golden  ft. 

BELLY. 
Eccl.  23. 6.  let  not  the  greediness  of  theft.  takehoW 
31.  20.  pangs  of  4.  are  with  an  unsatiable  man 

36.  18.  the  4.  devoureth  all  meat^,  yet  one  meat 

37.  5.  which  helpeth  his  friend  for  the  4. 
40.  30.  but  in  his  4.  there  shall  burn  a  fire 

51.  5.  delivered  from  the  depth  of  the  4.  of  hell 

BELONGETH. 
Tob.  3.  17.  because  she  ft.  to  Tobias  by  right 
BELOVED 

2  Esd.  16.  74.  hear,  O  ye  my  ft.  saith  the  Lord 
Wisd.  4.  10.  he  pleased  God,  and  was  ft.  of  him 
Eccl.  7.  35.  that  shall  make  thee  to  be  ft.  20.  13. 

24.  11.  likewise  in  the  4.  city  he  gave  mo  rest 

45.  1.  he  brought  out  Moses  4.  ot  God  and  men 

46.  13.  Samuel  the  prophet  of  Lord,  4.  of  his  Lord 

47.  16.  and  for  thy  peace  thou  wast  4. 

1  Mac.  6.  11.  I  was  bountiful,  and  ft.  in  my  powei 

BENDED. 

Eccl.  43. 12.  the  hands  of  the  Most  High  have  4.  it 

BENDETH. 

2  Esd.  16.  13.  his  richt  hand  that  4.  the  bow 

BENEFIT. 
Wisd.  16.  24.  for  the  ft.  of  such  as  trust  in  thee 
2  Mac.  2.  27.  and  that  seeketh  the  ft.  of  other* 

BENEFITS. 
2  Esd.  9.  10.  who  in  their  life  have  received  ft. 
Eccl.  12.  1.  so  shalt  thou  be  thanked  for  thy  ft. 

1  Mac. M.  53.  according  to  theft,  which  he  received 

2  Mac.  9.  26.  I  request  you  to  remember  the  ft. 

BENEFITED. 
Wisd.  11.  5.  by  the  same  they  in  their  need  weret. 
13.  when  they  heard  the  other  to  be  ft. 
BERYL. 
Tob.  13.  17.  the  streets  shall  be'paved  with  ft 

BESEECHETH. 
Wisd.  13.  18.  he  humbly  4.  that  which  hath  leait 

BESIEGE. 

1  Mac.  6. 19.  called  the  people  together  to  4.  thera 

24.  for  which  they  of  our  nation  4.  the  tower 

BESIEGED. 

1  Mac.  6.  20.  so  they  came  together  and  ft.  them 

21.howbeit,  certain  of  them  that  were  ft.  got  forth 

BESIEGING. 

Eccl.  50.  4.  he  fortified  the  citv  against  ft. 

BESOUGHT. 

./((rf.  12.  8.  she  ft.  Lord  God  of  Isr.  to  direct  her  way 

Wied.  8.  21.  I  i)raycd  to  the  Lord  and  4.  him 

18.  2.  they  thanked  them,  and  ft.  them  pardon 

BESTOW. 

Bar.  6.  10.  the  priests  4.  it  upon  themselves 

BESTOWED. 
2.Vac.l.3.5.the  king  took  manvgilis  and  4.  on  thoM 

BETHORON. 
■  fud.  4.  4.  sent  to  B.  and  Belmen,  and  Jericho 
1  Mac.  7.  39.  Nicanor  pitched  his  tents  in  B. 

BETHSHAN. 

1  J)far.5..'')2.  they  went  into  the  great  plain  before  U. 

12.  40.  so  he  removed  and  came  to  B. 

BETHSURA. 

1  Mac.  4. 29.  they  pitched  their  tent*  at  B.  6.  T,  31 


BIR 

t  Mae.  13.  19.  the  king  inarched  toward  B. 
22.  the  Kiiigcreatird  wlih  ihein  ill  li.  second  time 
BETHULIA. 
Jud.  4.  6.  Joacim  wroie  to  tliem  that  dwelt  in  B. 

6.  14.  tlie  laraehtes  brought  him  into  It.  ID,  11. 
8.3.  Maiia^ausdied  in  the  city  ot'B.they  buried  him 

10.  6.  but  they  went  forth  lo  the  gate  ot"B. 

11.  9.  for  the  men  of  B.  saved  Achior 

BETEMES. 
Ecd.  G.  36.  get  b.  lo  him,  and  let  thy  foot  wear 
51.  30.  work  your  work  b.  he  will  give  reward 
1  Mac.  4.  5->.  ihey  rose  up  b.  in  the  inoiuing 
*>e  Morning. 
BETKAVl.NG. 
H'isd.  17.  12.  for  fiar  is  noihing  else  but  a  b. 

BlCTKUTllEU. 
1  Mac.  3.  56.  but  u.s  for  such  aa  had  b.  wives 

BETTER. 
3  Esd.  1.  16.  it  had  been  b.  for  us  lo  have  served 
3.  31.  are  ihey  of  Babylon  b.  ih.in  Ihey  of  Sion  ? 
5.33.  lovesl  ih'ou  |)eoiile  b.  than  lie  that  made  ihem 

7.  46.  it  had  been  b.  not  lo  have  given  llie  earth 

12.  44.  how  much  b.  had  it  been  for  u^ 
Tob.\i.6.a  little  with  righteousness  is  b.  than  much 

with  unright.  it  is  A.  to  give  aims  than  to  lay  up 

tyisd.i.l.b.it  IS  to  have  no  children  and  have  virtue 

15. 17.  he  hiiiiself  is  b.  than  things  he  worshipped 

Eccl.  10.  27.  4.  is  lie  that  labourelh  and  aboundeth 

16.  3.  one  that  is  just  is  b.  than  a  thousand 

18. 16.  assuage  the  heat?  so  is  a  word  b.  than  a  gift 

17.  lo,  is  not  a  word  b.  than  a  gift"? 

19. 24.  he  that  fearelh  God  is  b.  than  one  that  hath 
20.  2.  it  is  much  b.  to  reprove  than  to  be  angry 

18.  it  is  b.  than  to  slip  with  the  tongue 

2.').  a  thief  is  b.  than  a  man  accustomed  to  lie 
31.  4.  is  he  that  hidelh  folly  than  wisdom 
32.nece8sary  patience  in  seeking  the  Ld.is6.than 
2rt.  21.  an  evil  death,  the  grave  were  b.  than  it 

29.  13.  b.  than  a  mighty  shield  and  strong  spear 
22.  b.  is  the  life  of  a  poor  man  in  a  cottage 

30.  14.  b.  is  the  poor  being  sound  and  strong 
17.  death  is  b.  than  a  bitter  life  or  sickness 

36. 13.  all  meats,  yet  is  one  meat  b.  than  another 
22.  and  a  man  lovcth  nothing  b. 

40.  28.  for  b.  it  is  to  die  than  to  beg 

41.  15.  is  b.  than  a  man  that  hidelh  his  wisdom 

42.  14.  b.  is  l!ie  churlishness  of  a  man  than 
liar.  6.  59.  b.  be  a  king  that  shevveth  his  power 

1  Mac.  3.  59.  for  it  is  b.  for  us  to  die  in  battle 

13.  5.  for  I  am  no  b.  than  my  brethren 

BEWAIL. 

2  Esd.  10.  2.  b.  your  children  and  be  sorry 
Tob.  10.  4.  and  she  began  to  b.  him  and  said 

7.  she  ceased  not  whole  nights  to  b.  her  son 
Bel  iO.on  seventh  dav  the  king  went  to  4.  Daniel 

BEWAILED. 
IVisd.  18.  10.  a  noise  for  children  that  were  4. 
Keel.  51.  19.  I  b.  my  ignorances  of  her 

1  Mac.  12.  .'>2.  and  there  they  4.  Jonathan 
13.  26  and  all  Israel  4.  him  many  days 

BEWARE. 
Tob.  4.  12.  4.  of  all  whoredom,  my  son 
Ifisd.  1. 11.  4.  of  murmuring  which  is  unprofitable 
Eccl.  4.  20.  4.  of  evil,  and  be  not  ashamed  when 
12.  11.  though  he  humble  himself,  yet  4.  of  him 
I'l.S.i.tliat  tliou  be  not  deceived  and  brouglit  down 

17.  14.  he  said  4.  of  all  unrighteousness 

18.  27.  in  the  day  of  sinning  he  will  4.  of  ofTenco 
22.  13.  4.  of  him,  Inst  thou  have  trouble 

20.  every  one  that  heareth  it,  will  4.  of  him 
29.  20.  4.  thou  thyself  fall  not  into  the  same 
32.  22.  and  4.  of  thine  own  children 
37.  8.  4.  of  a  counsellor,  know  what  need  ho  hath 
40.  29.  but  a  wise  man  well  nurtured  will  4. 

BEWITCIIING. 
IVisd.  4.  12.  the  4.  of  naughtiness  doth  obscure 
BEWRAYER. 

2  Mac.  4.  1.  bavins  been  a  4.  of  the  money 

BliWRAYETII. 
Keel.  27.  21.  he  that  h.  secrets,  is  without  hope 

HIDDEN. 
Tob.  7.  17.  when  she  had  done  as  ho  liad  b.  her 

BILL. 
Keel.  S.").  20.  give  her  a  4.  of  divorce,  let  her  go 

BIND, 
./iirf.  8.  10.  do  not  A.  thi!  connieU  of  the  Lord 
F.eel.  7.  H.  4.  not  oiip  Kin  upon  another,  for  in  one 
28.  24.  and  4.  uji  thy  silvc:r  and  gold 
30.7. 4.  up  his  wouiidti,  and  his  bowels  bolrouhlud 

BIKl). 
JVind.a.M.nranwhonab.  has  flown  Ihniiighlheair 
Eccl.  27.  19.  as  ono  that  lets  a  A.  go  out  of  hand 

BIRDS. 
Wind.  17.IR.  molodioiis  noise  of  A.  among  branches 
Keel.  27.  9.  the  A.  will  ro.sorl  tn  their  like 

43.  17.  as  4.  flying  he  srailerelh  the  snow 

BIRTH. 
2  F.nd.  A.  10.  her  womb  may  keep  the  h.  any  longer 
10.  :tn.  within  two  or  three  hours  of  her  4. 
WUd.  7.  S.  that  had  any  other  beginning  of  4. 
700 


.* 7. 


BOA 


[ArooBTroA 


S  Mae.  6. 7.  in  the  day  of  the  king's  b.  were  brought 

BITINGS. 
Jf isi.16. 9.  them  4.  of  grasshoppers  and  flies  killed 

BITTEN. 
Eccl.  12.  13.  who  will  pity  a  charmer  that  is  4.? 

BITTER. 
Esth.  14. 8.  satisficth  not  that  we  are  in  4.  captivity 
Keel.  29.  25.  moreover,  thou  shall  hear  6.  words 

30.  17.  death  is  better  than  a  A.  life  or  sickness 
41.  I.  O  death,  how  4.  is  the  remembrance  of  thee 

2  Mac.  6.  7.  they  were  brought  by  4.  constraint 

BITTERLY. 
Eccl.  25.  18.  when  husband  heareth  it,  shall  sigh  4. 

38.  17.  weep  4.  and  make  great  moan 

BITTERNESS. 
IVisd.  8.  IC.  for  her  conversation  hath  no  4. 
Eccl.  4.  6.  if  he  curse  thee  in  the  4.  of  his  soul 
7.  11.  laugh  no  man  to  scorn  in  the  b.  of  his  soul 
21.  12.  there  is  a  wisdom  which  multiplielh  4. 

31.  29.  wine  with  excess  makelh  4.  of  the  mind 

BLACKER. 
2  Esd.  7.  55.  our  faces  shall  be  4.  than  darkness 

BLAME. 

£ccMI.7.A.notbefore  thou  hast  examined  Ihe  truth 

31.  in  things  worthy  jiraisc,  will  lay  A.  on  thee 

BLAMED. 

H'isd.  13.  G.  for  this  they  are  the  less  to  be  b. 

2  Alac.  2.  7.  when  Jeremy  perceived,  be  4.  them 

BLAMELESS. 

If/'isd.  2.  22.  nor  discerned  a  reward  for  4.  souls 

10.  5.  she  preserved  him  A.  to  God,  and  kept  him 

15. she  delivered  the  righteous  people  and  4.  seed 

18.  21.  for  then  the  4.  man  made  haste  to  defend 

BLASPHEME. 

2  Mac.  15.  24.  come  against  thy  holy  peoide  to  4. 

BLASPHEMED. 

1  Mac.T.  41.  they  thai  were  sent  from  Assyrians  4. 

2  Mac.  10. 34.  they  that  were  within  A.  exceedingly 

BLASPHEMER. 
JVisd.  1.6.  wisdom  will  not  acquit  a  4.  of  his  words 
Eccl.  3.  16.  that  forsaketh  his  father,  is  as  a  4. 
2  Mae.  9.  28.  the  4.  died  a  miserable  death 
15.  32.  he  shewed  them  the  hand  of  that  A. 
BLASPHEMIES. 
2  Esd.  1.  23.  I  gave  you  not  fire  for  your  4. 

1  jT/<ic.2.6.when  he  saw  the  A.  that  were  committed 

7.  38.  remember  their  4.  and  sutfer  them  not 

2  Mac.  8.  4.  the  4.  committed  against  his  name 

BLASPHEMING. 
2  Mac,  12.  14.  Ihey  behaved  themselves  rudely,  4. 

BLASPHEMOUS. 
2  Mac.  10.  4.  might  not  be  delivered  to  Ihe  4.  nations 
13.  11.  to  bo  in  subjection  to  the  4.  nations 
BLASPHEMOUSLY. 

1  ^1/00.7.42. the  rest  may  knov/  that  he  hath  spoken  4. 

BLAST. 

2  Esd.  4.  5.  or  measure  me  the  A.  of  the  wind 
13.  27.  out  of  his  mouth  came  as  a  4.  of  wind 

IVisd.  11.  20.  they  have  fallen  down  with  one  A. 

BLASTING. 
iEsd.  15. 13.  for  their  seeds  shall  fail  through  the  A. 

BLEED. 
£cci.  42.  5.  and  to  make  side  of  an  evil  servant  to  6. 

BLEMISH. 
Eccl.  13.  15.  my  son,  A.  not  thy  good  deeds 

31.  8.  blessed  is  tlie  rich  that  is  found  without  4. 

BLESS. 
Tub.  4. 19.  A.  the  Lord  thy  God  alway,  and  desire 

8.  5.  let  the  heaven  A.  thee,  and  all  creatures 
13.  J3.  they  shall  A.  the  Lord  of  tho  just 

15.  let  my  soul  A.  God  tho  great  King 
Eccl.  4.  13.  where  she  enters,  the  Lord  will  4. 

32.  13.  for  these  things  4.  him  that  made  tlieo 

39.  14.  sing  praise,  4.  the  Lord  in  all  his  works 
45.  15.  they  should  4.  the  people  in  his  name 
50.22.4.  ye  God  of  all  who  doth  wondrous  things 

Dan.  3.  35.  A.  ye  tho  Lord,  36,  37,  38,  39,  40,  ^-c. 
BLESSED. 

1  Esd.  A.  40.  A.  be  tho  God  of  truth 

CO.  A.  art  thou  who  hast  given  me  wisdom 

9.  46.  so  E-dras  A.  Ihe  Lord  God  most  high 

2  Esil.  13.  24.  are  more  A.  than  they  that  be  dead 
Tob.  3.  II.  4.  art  thou,  O  Lord  my  God,  thy  holy 

and  glorious  name  is  A.  anil  honourable 
for  ever,  8.  5.  \  II.  14.  .hid.  13.  17. 
4.  12.  our  fathers  were  A.  in  their  children 
7.  7.  Raguel  A.  him,  and  said  unto  him,  thou  art 

13.  behold,  take  her  and  load  her,  and  he  A.  them 

10.  11.  ho  A.  them,  and  sent  them  away,  II.  17. 
13.1. Tohit  wrote  prayer  ofrejoicing  and  said,  A.  he 

God  that  livetli  for  ever,  and  4.  he  his  kingdom 
12.  A',  shall  all  ho  which  love  thee  for  over 

14.  A.  are  Ihey  who  love  thee,  4.  are  they  who 

have  been  sorrowful  for  all  Ihv  scourges 
18.  4.  be  (Jod  which  hath  extolled  it  i'or  ever 
.hid.  14.  7.  4.  art  thou  in  the  taliernacle  of  Juda 
15.  9.  they  A.  her  with  one  nci'iird,  and  said 

10.  4.  he  thou  of  the  aliiiighly  Lord  fur  ever 
IVisd.  2.  16.  he  pronoiincetli  the  just  to  be  4. 
3.  13.  b.  is  thu  barren  that  ii  undutiled 


^t>d.I4.7.&.iathewood  whereby  righteousn. coins* 
Eccl.  11.  28.  judge  none  4.  before  his  death 
14. 1.  A.  is  the  man  that  hath  not  slipped  with  mouth 
2.  A.  is  he  whose  conscience  hatli  not  condemned 
20.  A.  is  the  man  that  doth  meditate  good  things 
26.  I.  4.  is  the  man  that  hath  a  virtuous  wife 
31.  8.  4.  is  Ihe  rich  that  is  found  without  blemish 
9.  who  is  hel  and  we  will  call  him  4. 

33.  12.  some  of  them  hath  he  A.  and  exalted 

34.  15.  4.  is  the  soul  of  him  that  fearelh  the  Lord 
45. 1.  Moses  beloved,  whose  memorial  is  4.  49.  JO. 

46.  11.  the  judges,  let  their  memory  be  4. 

48. 11.  4.  are  tJiey  that  saw  thee,  and  slepl  in  lova 
50.  28.  A.  is  he  shall  be  exercised  in  these  things 
29.  A.  be  Ihe  Lord  for  ever,  amen,  anion 
2  Mac.  1.  17.  A.  be  our  God  in  all  things 
15.  34.  A.  be  he  that  hath  kept  his  own  place 
BLESSETII. 

1  Esd.  4. 36.  calleth  upon  truth,  and  the  heaven  4.  it 

BLESSING. 

fVisd.  15. 19.  without  the  praise  of  God  and  his  (. 

Eccl.  3.  8.  that  a  4.  may  come  on  thee  from  them 

9.  for  4.of  father  eslablishelb  houses  of  children 

11.  22.  4.  of  the  Lord  is  the  reward  of  the  godly 

33.  16.  by  Ihe  A.  of  the  Lord  I  profiled  and  filled 

34.  17.  he  giveth  health,  life,  and  A. 

.36.  17.  according  lo  4.  of  .\aron  over  ihy  people 
37.  24.  a  wise  man  shall  be  filled  with  A. 
39.  22.  his  A.  covered  the  dry  land  as  a  river 
44.22.  with  Isaac  did  he  establish  the  4.  of  all  men 
23.  he  acknowledged  him  in  his  A.  and  gave  him 
50.  20.  to  give  the  A.  of  ihc  Lord  with  his  lips 
21.they  bowed  down,  that  they  might  receive  a  b. 
BLESSINGS. 
Eccl.  16.29.  the  Lord  filled  the  earth  wilh  his  A. 

47.  6.  the  people  lira  i.-iod  him  in  the  A.  of  the  Lord 

BLIND. 
Eccl.'iO.  29.  presents  and  git'is  A.lhe  eyes  of  the  wis* 
Bar.  6.  37.  they  cannot  restore  a  4.  man  to  sight 

BLINDED. 
Wisd.  2.  21.  iheir  own  wickedness  hath  b.  them 

BLINDNESS. 
Wisd.  19.  17.  even  wilh  A.  were  these  stricken 

2  .Mac.  10.  30.  so  tliat  being  confounded  with  b. 

BLOOD. 

2  Esd.  1.26.  for  ye  have  defiled  your  hands  with  4 

32.  whose  4. 1  will  reiiuireof  yourhan<ls,saith  L 

5.  5.  and  A.  shall  drop  out  of  the  wood,  and  stone 

15.  8.  behold,  the  innocent  and  righteous  A.  crielh 

unto  me,  9.  22.  E.?tA.  16.  5.  2  Mac.  1.  8. 

.Tud.6.  4.  mountains  shall  be  drunken  wilh  their  A. 

9.3.SO  Ihat  they  dyed  their  bed  in  A. being  deceived 

4.  which  abhorred  the  pollution  of  Iheir  4. 
E.-^th.  16.  10.  a  stranger  from  the  Persian  4. 
IVisd.l.  2.  being  compacted  in  4.  of  the  seed  of  men 

11.  6.  a  running  river,  troubled  with  foul  4. 

12.  5.  devourers  of  man's  flesh,  and  the  feasts  of  A, 
14.  25.  so  that  there  reigned  in  all  men,  A.  theft 

Eccl.  8.  16.  for  A.  is  as  nothing  in  his  siglit 

11.  32.  and  a  sinful  man  layeth  wait  for  A. 

12.  16.  he  will  not  be  satisfied  with  A. 
28.  11.  and  a  liasiy  fighting  sbeddelh  A. 

34.  21.  he  that  delVandeth  hlin,  is  a  man  ofi. 
39.  26.  the  A.  of  the  grape  is  for  iiiie  of  man's  llfA 

1  Mac.  6.  34.  they  shewed  them  tho  A.  of  grape* 
7.  17.  their  A.  have  they  shed  about  Jerusalem 

10.  H9.  is  to  be  given  to  such  as  are  of  the  king's  i. 

2  Mae.  8.  3.  and  hear  the  4.  that  cried  uiiio  him 
12.  16.  a  lake  being  filled  was  seen  running  with  ft. 
14.  45.  though  his  A.  pushed  out  like  spouts 

46.  when  as  his  4.  was  now  (|uite  gone 
See  Innotknt. 
BLOOD-SHEDDER. 
Eecl.^i.  22.  ho  that  detVamlrtli  the  labourer  is  a  A. 

BLOOD-SHEDDING. 
Eccl.  27.  15.  the  strife  of  the  proud  is  4. 

BLOT. 
Eccl.  II.  33.  lest  ho  bring  upon  thee  n  perpetual  b 
20.  24.  a  he  is  a  foul  4.  in  a  man 
46.  20.  lo  A.  out  Ihc  wickeilness  of  thu  people 

BLOTTED. 
Ecel.  23.  26.  her  reproneh  shall  not  be  4.  out 
39.9.  soiling  as  world  endureth,  shall  nol  be  A.  out 
41.  II.  but  an  ill  name  of  sinners  shall  be  A.  out 
44.  13.  and  their  glory  ►h-ill  nol  bo  4.  out 

BLOW. 
JVi.i'l.  5  23.  and  like  a  siorm  slinll  A.  thorn  away 
Eccl.  28.  12.  if  thou  4.  iIm-  «pnrk  it  shall  burn 

BLOWN. 
IVi.-id.  5. 1 1,  like  diisi  th  it  is  h.  nway  with  Ihe  wind 

Bi.OWETH. 
Eccl.  43.  16.  and  at  h's  will  the  Bonlh-wind  6. 

BLUE. 
Eccl.  23.  10.  shall  n<>l  be  without  a  4.  mark 

BOA  US. 
2  Esd  15.  30.  shall  go  Ibilh  ns  wild  A.  of  the  wood 

BOAST. 
IVi.iil.  2. 16.  he  inakrth  his  A.  that  God  is  his  fathtr 
Eccl.  7.  5.  4.  not  of  Ihy  wisdom  before  Ihe  king 

11.  4.  b.  nol  of  Ihy  clothing  and  raiiuoiit 


ArOCRTPRA.] 


BOR 


BOASTED. 
Eccl.  48. 13.  Sermacherili  carno  ag.  Sion  b.  proudly 

BOASTETH. 
Heel.  10.  27.  that  b.  himself,  mid  wanteth  bread 

BOASTING. 
Eccl.  47.  4.  when  he  beat  down  the  b>  of  Goliath 

BOATS. 
S  Mac.  12.3.  go  with  their  wives  and  children  into  i. 

6.  Judas  set  the  6. on  fire  and  slew  those  thatfled 

BODY. 

1  Esd.  3.  4.  the  guard  that  kept  the  king's  b. 

S  Esd.  3.  5.  thou  gavest  a  b.  to  Adam  without  soul 

5.  14.  e.\trenie  fearfulnesa  went  through  all  my  b. 
K  10.  coniinandcd  milk  out  of  the  parts  of  the  b. 

11.  45.  appear  not,  thou  eagle,  nor  thy  vain  b. 

12.  3.  the  whole  b.  of  the  eagle  was  burnt 
16.  fil.  he  i)ut  his  heart  in  the  midst  of  the  b. 

Jud.  10.  3.  she  washed  her  b.  all  over  with  water 
H^isd.  2.  3.  our  b.  shall  be  turned  into  ashes 
9.  15.  the  corruptible  b.  pres.seth  down  the  soul 

Eccl.  7.  24.  hast  daughters'?  h.ive  care  of  their  b. 
23. 16.  a  fornicator  in  the  b.  of  his  flesh  notecase 

18.  the  walls  cover  me,  and  no  6.  seeth  me 
30.  15.  health  and  good  state  of  ft.  are  above  gold 
34.  25.  washeth  after  the  touching  of  a  dead  b. 
38.  16.  then  cover  his  b.  according  to  the  custom 

47.  19.  by  thy  b.  was  brought  into  subjection 

48.  13.  and  .ifter  his  death  his  b.  prophesied 
51.  2.  and  hast  preserved  my  i.  from  destruction 

2  Mac.  7.  4.  to  cut  off  the  utmost  parts  of  his  b. 

7.  be  punished,  through  every  member  of  thy  b. 
9.  7.  the  members  of  his  b.  were  much  pained 

9.  so  that  the  worms  rose  up  out  of  the  b. 
BODIES. 
Jud.  6.  4.  fields  shall  be  filled  with  their  dead  b. 
Eccl.  41. 11.  the  mourning  of  men  is  about  theiri. 
Bar.  2.  17.  whose  souls  are  taken  from  their  b. 

6.  22.  on  their  b.  and  hends  sit  bats  and  birds 

BODILY. 
2  Esd.  1.  37.  they  have  not  seen  me  with  6.  eyes 

BOLD. 
Jvd.  14. 13.  the  slaves  have  been  b.  to  comedown 
Eccl.  6.  11.  he  will  be  b.  over  thy  servants 
8.  15.  travel  not  by  the  way  with  a  b.  fellow 
19.  3.  and  a  b.  man  shall  be  taken  away 
•  22.  5.  she  th.-it  is  A.  dishonoureth  her  father 
2  Mac.  4.  2.  thua  was  he  b.  to  call  him  a  traitor 
BOLDLY. 

1  Mac.  4.  18.  after  this  you  may  b.  take  the  spoils 

2  ^fac. 14.43.he  ran  h.  up  the  w;ill,  and  cast  himself 

BOLDNESS. 
Jvd.  16.  10.  the  Persians  quaked  at  her  ft. 
fVisd.  5.  1.  the  righleousshall  stand  in  great  ft. 
12.  17.  thou  makest  their  ft.  manifest 

1  Jtfac.  4.  32.  cause  tlie  b.  of  their  strength  to  fall 

2  Mac.  8.  18.  thev  trust  in  their  weapons  and  ft. 

BONDAGE. 

1  &d.8.80.when  we  were  in  ft.we  were  not  forsaken 

2  E.id.  1.  7.  I  brought  them  from  the  house  of  ft 
J-ud.  8.  22.  wheresoever  we  shall  be  in  ft. 
IVisd.  19.  14.  but  thesf  broiigbl  friends  into  ft. 

BOND-MAN. 
1  Esd,  3.  19.  mind  of  the  ft.  and  freeman  to  be  one 

BOND-SLAVE. 
I  Mac.  2.  11.  of  a  free-woman  she  is  become  a  ft. 

BONDS. 
Wisd.  10.  14.  and  she  left  him  not  in  ft. 
17.2.  fettered  wiih  the  ft. of  a  long  night,  lay  exiled 
Eccl.  0.  25.  and  be  not  srrieved  with  her  ft. 

BONES. 

Eccl.  28. 17.  the  stroke  of  the  tongue  brenks  theft 

46.  12.  lettheirft.  flourish  out  of  place,  49.  10. 

Bar.  2. 2-1.  that  the  ft.  of  our  kings,  and  the  ft.  of  our 

fathers  should  be  taken  out  of  their  places 

BOOK. 

1  Ksd.  7.  6.  things  written  in  the  6.  of  Moses,  9. 

2  Fsd.  12.  37.  write  these  things  in  a  ft.  Toh.  12. 20. 
Tab.  1.1.  the  ft.  of  the  words  of  Tobit,  Hiir.  1.  1. 
£cc/.  24.  23.  these  things  are  the  ft.  of  the  covenant 

50.  27.  hath  written  in  this  ft.  the  instruction 
Bar.i.\.  this  is  the  ft.  of  the  commandments  ofGod 

1  Mac.  I.  ■'»7.  w;is  found  the  ft.  of  the  testament 

2  Mac.  6.  12.  I  beseech  those  that  read  this  ft. 

BOOKS. 

1  Esd.  2.  21.  sousht  out  in  the  ft.  of  thy  fathers 

2  Ksd.  6.  20.  4.  shall  be  opened  before  firmament 

1  Mac.  \.  56.  hiid  rent  in  pieces  the  ft.  of  the  law 

2  Mac.  2.  23.  being  declared  by  Jason  in  five  ft. 

BOOTY. 
2  ^fac.  8.  20.  and  so  ihpv  recpived  a  great  ft. 

BORDERERS. 

2  Mac.  9.  25.  princes  that  are  ft.  to  my  kingdom 

BORN. 

1  K.<rf„  4.15.  women  have*,  the  king  and  all  people 

2  Esd.  3.  21.  so  be  all  thev  that  are  A.  of  him 
14.  20.  but  thi'v  that  shall  be  A.  afterward 

Jvd.\'i.  20.  he  had  drunk  in  one  day  since  he  was  ft. 
H'vid.  2.  2.  for  we  are  ft.  at  all  ;idvfiniure 
5.  13.  as  soon  as  ft.  we  began  to  draw  to  our  end 

7.  3.  when  I  wag^.  I  drew  ia  the  common  air 

767 


^    BRA 

Eccl.  10. 18.  for  them  that  are  6.  of  a  woman 
14.  18.  one  comelh  to  an  end  and  another  is  ft. 
23.  14.  and  wish  that  thou  hadst  not  been  ft. 
41.9.  and  ifyoubeft.you  shall  be  6.  to  a  curse 
44.  9.  perished,  as  though  they  had  never  been  ft. 
49.  15.  nor  was  there  a  man  ft.  like  unto  Joseph 

1  Mac.  2.  7.  wherefore  was  I  ft.  to  see  this  misery 

BORNE. 
Bar.  6.4.  ye  shall  see  gods  of  gold  J.  upon  shoulders 
26.  they  are  ft.  on  shoulders  having  no  feet 
BORROWED. 
Wisd.  15. 16.  and  he  that  ft.  his  own  spirit 

BORROWING. 

Eccl.  18.  33.  not  made  a  beggar  by  banqueting  or  ft. 

BOSOM. 

2  Esd.  15.  21.  I  will  recompense  in  their  ft. 

BOTTLE. 
Jud.  10.  5.  then  she  gave  her  maid  aft.  of  wine 

BOTTOM. 
Wisd.  10.  19.  cast  them  out  of  the  ft.  of  the  deep 
Eccl.  24.  5.  and  I  walked  in  the  A.  of  the  deep 

BOTTOMS. 
Wisd.  17.  14.  came  out  of  the  ft.  of  inevitable  hell 

BOUGHS. 
2  Mac.  10.  7.  they  bear  fair  ft.  and  palms  also 
14.  4.  presenting  unto  him  a  crown  also  of  the  ft. 

BOUGHT. 
.hid.  4.  10.  and  their  servant-  A.  with  money 
Eccl.  33. 30.  because  thou  hast  ft.  him  with  a  price 
BOUND. 

1  Esd.  1.  40.  and  A.  him  with  a  chain  of  brass 

2  Esd.  13.  13.  some  sorry,  some  of  them  were  A. 
16.  77.  woe  to  them  that  are  ft.  with  their  sins 

Tob.  8.  3.  fled  into  Egypt,  and  the  angel  A.  him 
Jud.  6.  13.  they  ft.  Actiior  and  cast  him  down 
Wisd.  17.  17.  all  ft.  with  one  chain  of  darkness 
Eccl.  27.  21.  as  for  a  wound,  it  may  be  ft.  up 
28.  19.  nor  hath  been  ft.  in  her  baiids 
BOUNDS. 

1  Mac.  14.  6.  and  enlarged  the  ft.  of  his  nation 

BOUNTY. 

Estk.  16.2.are  honoured  with  the  great  ft.of  princes 

BOUNTIFUL. 

2  Esd.  7.  65.  that  he  is  ft.  for  he  is  ready  to  give 

1  Mac.  6.  11.  I  was  ft.  and  beloved  in  my  power 

BOW. 

2  Esd.  16.  13.  his  right  hand  that  bendeth  the  ft. 
Jud.  9.  7.  they  trust  in  shield,  and  spear  and  ft. 
Wisd.  5.  21.  as  from  a  well  drawn  A.  shall  they  fly 

BOW. 
Esth,  13.  12.  that  I  did  not  ft.  to  proud  Aman 
Eccl.  4.  7.  and  ft.  thy  head  to  a  great  man 
8.  let  it  not  grieve  thee  to  A.  thine  ear  to  poor 

6.  25.  ft.  down  thy  shoulder  and  bear  her 
33.  if  thou  ft.  thine  ear,  thou  shall  be  wise 

7.  23.  ft.  down  their  neck  from  their  youth,  30.  12. 
33.  26.  a  yoke  and  a  collar  do  ft.  the  neck 

47.  19.  thou  didst  ft.  thy  loins  unto  women 

BOWED. 
Eccl.  50.  21.  they  ft.  themselves  down  to  worship 
51.  16.  I  ft.  down  mine  ear,  and  received  her 
Bar.6.27.nor  if  thev  be  ft.  down,  can  make  straight 

BOWETH. 
Eccl.  38.  30.  he  A.  down  his  strength  before  his  feet 

BOWING. 
2  Mac.  7.  27.  but  she  A.  herself  toward  him 

BOWELS. 

Eccl.  10.  9.  while  he  lives,  he  casteth  away  bis  ft. 
30.  7.  his  A.  will  be  troubled  at  every  cry 
2  Mac.  9. 5.  a  pain  of  the  A.  that  was  remediless 
6.  for  he  had  tormented  other  men's  ft. 
BOWL. 
Bc/.33.Habbacuc  a  prophet  had  brokenbread  in  aft. 

BOX  TREES. 
'HEsd.  14.24.  but  look  thou  prepare  thee  many  ft. 

BRACELET. 
Eccl.  21.  21.  is  like  a  A.  upon  his  right  hand 

BRACELETS. 
Jud.  10.  4.  she  put  about  hor  her  ft.  and  chains 

BRAGGED. 
■Tud.  16.  5.  heft,  thnt  he  would  burn  my  border 

BRAGGING. 
2  Mac.  9.  7.  he  nothing  at  all  ceased  from  his  ft. 

BRAIDED. 
.T%id.  10.  3.  and  ft.  the  hair  of  her  head 

BRAN. 
Bar.  6.  43.  the  women  al^•o  burn  ft.  for  perfume 

BRANCHES. 
Wisd.  4.  4.  though  they  fl()uri>h  in  A.  for  a  lime 

5.  the  imperfect  ft.  shall  be  broken  off 
F.crl.  I.  2(1.  and  theft,  thereof  are  lone  life 
II.  26.  under  lier  shelter,  and  lodee  und(  r  her  ft. 
23.  2.').  and  her  ft.  shall  bring  forth  no  fruit 
24. 16.  as  the  turpentine  tree  I  stretched  out  my  A. 
and  my  ft.  are  the  b.  of  honour  and  grace 
2  Mac.  10.  7.  therefore  thev  bare  A.  and  boughs 

BRASS. 
1  Ksd.\.  40.  came  and  hound  him  with  achainofft. 
Wisd.  15.  9.  to  do  the  like  workers  in  ft. 
Eccl.  28.20.  the  banda  thereof  are  bands  of  ft. 


BRE 

1  Mac.  8.  22.  wrote  in  tables  of  J.  14.  18,  27. 

BRAVELY. 
Jud.  10.  4.  she  decked  herself  A.  to  allure  the  cvti 

BRAWLING. 
£cc2.  31.29.  makelh  bitterness  of  the  mind  with  ft. 

BRAWLS. 
Eccl.  27.  14.  their  A.  make  one  atop  his  ears 

BREAD. 
1  Esd.  1.  19.  held  the  feast  of  sweet  A.  seven  daya 
iKsd.  1.19.  gave  you  manna,  .so  ye  did  eatangels'  ft. 
Tob.  1.  16.  1  gave  my  A.  to  the  hungiy,  4.  itj. 

4.  17.  pour  out  thy  A.  on  the  burial  of  the  just 
Jud.  10.  5.  then  she  filled  a  bag  with  fine  A. 
Eccl.  10.  27.  then  he  that  boasteth  and  wanteth  ft 

12.  5.  hold  back  thy  6.  nnd  give  it  not  unto  .him 

14.  10.  a  wicked  eye  envieth  his  A. 

15.  3.  with  the  ft.  of  uijderstanding  shall  he  feed 
20.  16.  they  that  eat  my  ft.  speak  evil  of  me 

23.  17.  all  A.  is  sweet  to  a  wiioremonger 
29.  21.  the  chief  thing  for  life  is  water  and  A. 

33.  24.  ft.  correction  and  work  for  a  servant 

34.  21.  the  6.  of  the  needy  is  their  lile 
45.  20.  he  prepared  him  ft.  in  abundance 

Bel.  33.  Habbacuc  had  broken  A.  in  a  bowl 

BREADTH. 
Eccl.  1.  3.  who  can  find  out  the  ft.  of  the  earth  ? 

BREAK. 
1  Esd.  4.  4.  A.  down  mountains,  walls,  and  towers 
.Jud.  9.  10.  6.  down  their  stateliness  by  a  woman 

BREAKEST. 
Jud.  9.  7.  thou  art  the  Lord  that  J.  the  battles 

BREAKETH. 
Jud.  16.  3.  for  God  ft.  the  battles,  he  delivered 
Eccl.  23.  18.  a  man  that  ft.  wedlock,  saying,  thua 

BREAST. 
2E6-(/.  14. 40.  when  I  drunk  it, wisdom  grew  in  my  6. 

BKEAST-PLATE.  ' 
Wisd.  .5. 18.  he  shall  put  on  righteousness  as  a  ft. 
Eccl.  43.  20.  it  clotlieth  the  water  as  with  a  A. 
45.  10.  he  compassed  him  with  a  ft.  of  judgment 

1  Mac.  3.  3.  he  put  on  a  ft.  as  a  giant 

BREASTS. 

2  Esd.  8. 10.  for  thou  hast  commanded  out  of  the  6. 

milk  to  be  given,  which  is  the  fruit  of  the  A. 

2  Mac.  6.  10.  the  babes  banging  at  their  ft. 
BREATH. 

2  Esd.  3.  5.  did  breathe  into  him  the  A.  of  life 

Wisd.  2.  2.  the  A.  in  our  nostrils  is  as  smoke 
7.  25.  for  she  is  the  ft.  of  the  power  of  God 
15.  5.  they  desire  a  dead  image  that  hath  no  6. 

Keel.  .33.  20.  as  long  as  thou  livest  and  hast  ft. 

Bar.  6.  25.  the  things  wherein  there  is  no  ft. 

2  Miic.'i.  22.  for  I'neither  gave  you  ft.  nor  life 

23.  the  Creator  will  give  you  life  and  6.  again 
14.  45.  while  there  was  vet  A.  within  him 

BREATHED. 
Wisd.  15.  11.  and  that  A.  in  him  a  living  spirit 

BREATHING. 
Wisd.  11.  18.  ft.  out  a  fiery  vapour  or  smoke 
2  Mac.  9.  7.  ft.  out  fire  in  his  rage  against  the  Jews 

BRED. 
Wisd.  12.  10.  that  Iheir  malice  was  ft.  in  them 

BREECHES. 
Eccl.  45.  8.  with  ft.  with  a  long  robe,  and  ephod 

BRETHREN. 
1  Esd.  3.  22.  forgot  their  love  to  friends  and  A. 
4.61.  BO  became  to  Babylon  and  told  itto  all  hisft. 

5.  3.  all  their  A.  played,  and  he  made  them  go  up 
Tob.  1.  3.  and  I  did  many  alms-deeds  to  my  ft. 

2.  2.  what  poor  man  ihoushalt  find  out  of  our  ft. 

4.  13.  my  son,  love  thy  A.  and  despise  not  thy  A. 

5.  12.  then  he  said,  I  am  Azarias,  of  thy  A. 
13.  were  not  sedurpd  with  the  error  of  our  A. 

7.  3.  Raguel  asked  them, from  whence  are  you.  A.? 

11.  17.  there  was  joy  anicng  all  his  A.  at  Nineve 

14.  4.  our  ft.  shall  be  scattered  in  the  earth 
7.  shall  rejoice,  shewing  mercy  to  our  ft. 

.Tud.  7.  30.  A.  be  of  good  courage,  let  us  endure 

8.  14.  A.  provoke  cot  the  Lord  our  God  to  anger 

24.  O  ft.  let  us  show  an  example  to  our  A. 
Eccl.  10. 20.  among  A.  he  that  is  chief  is  Iwnourable 

2'!.  1.  the  unity  of  A.  the  love  of  neighbours 
40.  24.  A.  and  help  are  against  time  of  trouble 

1  Mac.  3.  2.  and  all  his  ft.  helped  him 

5.  32.  he  said,  fight  this  day  for  your  ft. 

12.  11.  ns  it  becometh  us  to  think  on  our  A. 

13.  4.  all  my  ft.  are  slain,  for  Israel's  sake 
5.  for  I  am  no  bctier  than  my  ft. 

2  Mac.  1.  1.  the  ft.  the  Jews  that  be  at  .leruoalein 

wish  to  the  ft.  the  Jews  in  Egypt  health 
7.  1.  seven  ft.  with  their  mother  were  taken 

29.  being  worthy  of  thy  A.  take  thy  death,  that  I 

may  receive  tliee  in  mercy  again  with 
thy  A. 

30.  our  A.  who  have  sufTerpd  a  short  pain 
37.  but  I,  as  my  ft.  ofl^tr  up  my  body  and  life 

10.  21.  that  they  had  sold  their  A.  foj  money 

15.  14.  this  is  a  lover  of  the  A.  who  prayeth 

BREVITY. 
2  Mac.  2.  31.  but  to  use  ft.  and  avoid  labouring 


BUI 

BRIBERY". 

Eeel-  40. 13  all  b.  anil  injustice  shall  be  blotted  out 

BRiCKLE. 
fFitd.  15.  13.  of  earthly  matter  raukcth  b.  vesseU 

BRIDE. 
2  Fsd.  7.  26.  and  the  4.  shall  appear  and  be  seen 
Bar.  2.  !i3.  the  voice  of  bridegruoni,  and  voice  of*. 

1  Mac.  'J.  37.  were  bringing  the  b.  I'rom  Nadabatha 

BRIDEGROOM,  S. 

2  Esd.  If).  33.  virgins  shall  niuurn,  having  no  b. 
34.  in  the  wars  6hall  their  b.  be  destroyed 

1  Mac.  1.  27.  every  b.  took  up  lamentation 

9.  3y.  b.  came  forth,  and  bis  IVieiids  to  meet  them 
BKIDUE. 

2  Mac.  12.  13.  he  went  also  about  to  make  a  ft. 

BRIDLES. 

1  Esd.  3.  6.  and  a  chariot  with  ft.  of  gold 

2  Mae.  JO.  29.  live  men  on  horses  with  ft.  of  gold 

BRIGHT,  Sve  Flames. 
BRIGHTER. 
Keel.  17.  31.  what  is  ft.  than  the  sun  7  yet  light  fails 
M.  19.  are  ten  thousand  limes  ft.  than  the  sun 

BRIGHTNESS. 
2  Esd.  10.  50.  he  shewed  thee  the  ft.  of  her  glory 
Wisd.  7. 26.  for  she  is  the  6.  of  the  everlasting  light 
Eecl.  43.  11.  very  beautiful  it  is  in  the  ft.  thereof 
Bar.  5.  3.  God  will  shew  thy  A.  to  every  country 

BRING. 

1  Ksd.  4.  5.  get  the  victory,  they  ft.  all  to  the  king 

22.  da  ye  not  give,  and  ft.  all  to  the  woman'? 

BRINGEST. 

Wiad.  16. 13.  leads  to  gales  of  hell,  and  ft.  up  again 

BRINGETH. 
1  Esd.A.'ii.  when  he  hath  robbed,  he  ft.  it  to  his  love 

BROKEN. 
ffisd.  4.  5.  the  imperfect  branches  shall  be  b.  off 
Eecl.  )3.2.  if  one  smitten  against  other,  it  shall  be  A. 
1  Mac.  7.18.  for  they  have  ft.  the  covenant  and  oath 

BROOK. 
Eecl.  24.  30.  I  also  came  out  as  a  A.  from  a  river 
31.  and  lo,  my  ft.  became  a  river,  my  river  a  sea 
39.  13.  as  a  rose  growing  by  the  ft.  of  the  field 

1  Mac.  5. 39.  have  pitched  their  tents  beyond  the  A. 

BROOKS. 

Jud.  2.  8.  their  slain  shall  fill  their  valleys  and  6. 

BROTHER. 

2  Esd.  12.  11.  seen  in  the  vision  of  thy  ft.  Daniel 
Tub.  5.  6.  I  have  loilged  with  our  A.  10.  11,  13. 
Jud.  8.26.  the  sheep  of  Laban  his  mother's  ft. 
Ksl/t.  15.  9.  I  am  thy  A.  be  ofgood  cheer 

ffisd.  10.  3.  in  fury  wherewith  he  murdered hisft. 

10.  when  the  righteous  fled  from  his  A.  wrath 
Eecl.  7. 12.  devise  not  a  lie  against  thy  h. ' 

18.  change  not  a  faithtui  ft.  for  the  gold  of  Ophir 
29.  10.  lose  thy  money  for  thy  A.  and  friend 
27.  give  place,  my  A.  eomolh  to  be  lodged 
33.  19.  give  not  thy  wife  and  A.  power  over  thee 
31.  if  thou  have  a  servant,  cnlreat  him  as  a  ft. 
1  jyiac.  2.  65.  your  ft.  Simon  is  a  man  of  counsel 

BROTHERHOOD. 
I  Mac.  12.  17.  conciTning  the  renewing  of  our  A. 

BUCKLE, 
i  Mac.  10.  89.  king  .Alexander  sent  him  a  A.  of  gold 
H.  58.  he  gave  him  leave  to  wear  a  golden  ft. 

BUCKLER. 
Eecl.  37.  5.  and  laketli  up  the  A.  against  the  enemy 

BUD. 
Eecl.  39. 13.  ft.  forth  as  a  rose  growing  by  the  brook 

BUDS. 
Wisd.  2.  8.  let  us  crown  ourselves  with  rose-6. 

BUILD. 
1  fl'd.  2.  4.  Ijord  commanded  me  to  ft.  him  n  house 

5.  let  him  go  up,  and  ft.  the  house;  of  the  Lord 
18.  that  the  Jews  do  ft.  the  market-places 

4.  8.  If  he  command  to  ft.  they  A. 
6.  2.  Zorobabel  and  Jesus  began  toft,  the  house 
4.  by  whose  appointment  do  ye  ft.  this  house? 
Tob.  14.  5.  where  they  shall  A.  a  temple;  afieriheir 
captivity  shall  A.  up  Jerusalem 
gloriously 
J?cr/.3.14.in3lpad  of  sins  it  shall  beadd'^dft.  theeup 
47.  13.  that  he  might  ft.  n  house  in  his  name 
1  Mae.  15.  39.  he  conimnmb'd  him  to  ft.  up  Cedron 

BUILDKD. 
1  K.id.  6.  14.  this  honxe  was  h.  many  years  ago 

3  End  8.  .52  lo  you  a  <itv  in  A.  and  rest  allowed 
Tob.  13.  10.  that  hit  iMlierna.-le  may  bo  ft.  with  joy 

BUILUKKS. 
1  Btd.  2.  30.  Rathumus  hig.n  to  hinder  the  ft 

BUiLDirrn. 

S  End.  16.  42.  he  that  A.  ns  h.-  that  shall  not  dwell 
Kcr.l.  21.  H.  A.  his  house  with  other  men's  money 

34.  23.  when  one  A.  and  iinotlicr  pulleth  down 

BUILDING. 
I  End.  4.  51.  twenty  talents  lo  the  h.  of  the  temple 

563.cametolho  A.ofthifl  wilh  weeping  and  crying 

6.  9.  A.  B  house  to  the  Lord  of  costly  stones 

S  Esd.  10.  54.  there  can  no  man's  6.  be  able  to  stand 

ToA.14.5  houseofG.shiill  be  built  with  n  glorious  6. 

1  Mat.  16.  23.  lliK  ft.  of  the  walls  which  he  made 

7G8 


CAL  ^ 

BUILT. 

1  Ksd.  2.  34.  that  if  this  city  be  ft.  again  and  walls 
4.  51.  twenty  talents  till  the  time  that  it  were  A. 
Tob.  13.  16.  Jerusalem  shall  be  A.  with  sapphires 
14.  5.  the  house  of  God  shall  be  ft.  in  it  for  ever 

BULL. 

Eecl.  6. 2.  that  thy  soul  be  not  torn  in  pieces  as  a  ft. 

BULLOCKS. 

1  £srf.6.29.  for  sacrifices,  for  A.  and  rams  and  lambs 
8.  14.  silver  and  gold  may  be  collected  tor  A.  rams 

Eecl.  38.  25.  in  labours,  and  whose  talk  is  of  ft. 

BURDEN. 
Eecl.  13.  2.  A.  not  thyself  a'bove  thy  power 

BURDENS. 
Eecl.  33.  24.  a  wand  and  ft.  are  for  the  ass 

BURI.AL. 
Tob.  2.  9.  the  same  night  t  returned  from  the  A. 
4.  17.  pour  out  thy  bread  on  the  A.  of  the  just 
JCcc^21.8.thatgalhereth  stonesforthe  tomb  ofhisA. 
38. 16.  then  cover  his  body  and  neglect  not  his  A. 

2  Mac.  13.7.  not  having  so  much  as  A.  in  the  earth 

BURIED. 
Tob.  14.  11.  he  A.  him  honourably,  1.  17,  18.  |2.7. 
.Eecl.  44. 14. their  bodies  areft  in  peace,name  liveth 
2JlJ(ic.9.15.he  judged  not  worthyto  be  so  much  as  A. 

BURIETH. 
Tob.  2.  8.  and  vet  lo,  he  ft.  the  dead  again 

BURN. 
Jud.  16.  5.  he  br.iggeil  lie  would  ft.  up  my  borders 
IVisd.  16.  18.  that  it  might  not  ft.  up  the  beasts 
Eecl.  28.  12.  if  thou  blow  the  spark,  it  shall  A. 
23.  it  shall  A.  in  them,  and  not  be  quenched 
40.  30.  but  in  his  belly  there  shall  A.  a  fire 

BURNED. 
Tob.  14.  4.  and  the  house  of  God  in  it  shall  be  A. 

BURNETH. 
Wi.'id.  16.  19.  at  another  time  it  A.  even  in  water 
Eecl.  28.  10.  as  the  matter  of  fire  is,  so  it  ft. 

BURNING. 

IVi-fd.  16.  22.  might  know  that  fire  ft.  in  the  hail 

18.  3.  thou  gavest  them  a  A.  pillar  of  fire 

EccZ.  23. 16.hot  mind  as  a  ft. fire,  not  to  be  quenched 

BURNT. 

1  F.sd.B.  16.  who  pulled  down  the  house  and  A.  it 

2  Esd.  13.  4.  all  they  ft.  that  heard  his  voice 
11.  the  blast  of  fire  ft.  them  up  every  one 

BURST. 
Eecl.  19.  10.  and  be  bold,  it  will  not  6.  thee 

BURY. 
2  Esd.  2.  23.  where  thou  findest  the  dead,  A.  them 
Tob.  4.  3.  he  said,  my  son,  when  I  am  dead,  A.  me 
4.  when  she  is  dead,  A.  her  by  me  in  one  grave 
6   14.  for  they  have  no  other  son  to  A.  them 
12. 12.  when  thou  didst  ft.  thedead,  I  was  with  thee 
14.  6.  all  nations  shall  turn  and  A.  their  idols 
10.  ft.  me  decently,  and  thy  mother  with  me 
BURYING. 
2  Mac.  9.  4.  would  make  it  a  common  A.  place,  14. 

BUSH. 

2  Esd.  14. 1.  there  came  a  voice  oulof  a  ft.  and  said 

3.  in  the  A.  did  manifcsllv  reveal  myself  to  Moses 

BUSHES. 

2  Esd.  16.  77.  like  as  a  field  covered  over  with  A. 

BUSINESS. 
I  E.'d.  4.  11.  neither  may  any  one  do  his  own  A. 
5.58.  Levites  with  one  accord  setters  forward  of  A. 
Tob.  7.  8.  and  let  this  ft.  be  dispatched 
Eecl.  3.  17.  my  son,  go  on  with  thy  A.  in  meekness 
10.  26.  be  not  over-wise  in  doing  thy  A.  boast  not 
29.  19.  ho  that  followeth  other  men's  A.  for  gain 

37.  11.  nor  consult  with  an  idle  servant  of  much  ft. 

38.  24.  ho  that  hath  little  ft.  shall  become  wise 

BUY. 
Fed.  51.  25.  ft.  her  for  yourselves  without  money 

1  Mae.  3.  41.  came  to  the  camp  to  ft.  children  of  Isr. 
12.  36.  that  men  might  neither  sell  nor  A.  in  it 
13. 49.  could  not  go  into  thecountrv,  nor  A.  nor  sell 

2  Mae.  8.  34.  brought  KHlOmerchants  to  A.  the  Jens 

BUYER. 
Eecl.  37.  11.  nor  consult  with  a  ft.  of  selling 

BUYETH. 
Eecl.  20.  12.  there  is  that  A.  much  for  a  little 

BUYING. 
Ecc/.27.2.  BO  dolh  sin  stick  close  bclw.A.and  »elling 


CAR 


rAroCRTFBA' 


C. 


CADES. 

1  Mac.  11.  63.  Demetrius  princes  were  come  to  C 

73.  with  him  pursued  them  to  C.  to  their  tents 

C.AL.AMITY. 

1  Mac.  13.  32.  ho  brought  a  great  c.  on  the  land 

2  Mae.  4.  16.  by  n'nson  whereof  e.  came  on  them 

C.AL.AMITIES. 

Feci.  2.3.  II.  but  his  house  shall  be  fidl  ofc. 
40.  9.  strife,  swnrd,  c.  famine,  and  tribulation 

2  Mac.  a.  12.  be  not  disconragod  for  these  c. 
10.  10.  gathering  briefly  the  e.  of  the  war» 
14  14  thinking  the  c  of  Jews  to  bo  tboir  welfare 


CALDRONS. 

2. Vic.  7.  3.  the  king  commanded  c.  to  be  make-hot 

CALEB. 
Feel.  46.  9.  the  Lord  gave  strengih  also  to  C. 
1  Mac.  2.  56.  C.  received  the  hi-ritage  of  the  laad 

CALISTHE.M'.S. 
2Jlfac.  8.33.  they  burnt  C.  that  had  set  fire  on  gates 

CALL. 
1  Esd.  1. 50.  sent  by  his  messengers  to  c.  them  back 
Eecl.  13.  14.  and  c.  ujiun  him  lor  thy  salvation 
CALLED. 

1  Esd.  3.  7.  he  shall  be  c.  Darius  his  cousin 

4.  42.  thou  shalt  sit  ne.\t  me  and  be  c.  my  cousin 

2  Esd.  4.  25.  unto  his  name  whereby  we  are  c. 
Wisd.  1.  16.  but  ungodly  men  c.  it  to  tliein 

7.  7.  I  e.  on  God,  and  the  Spirit  of  wisdom  came 

11.  25.  or  been  preserved,  if  not  e.  by  thee 
Kcf/.  46.  5.  hec.on  the  most  high  Lord,  16.  |  47.5 
Har.  2.  15.  because  Israel  is  c.  by  thy  name 

6.  30.  for'how  can  they  be  e.  godsl 

1  Mac.  6.  10.  w  herefore  he  c.  ior  all  his  friends 

14.  then  c.  he  lot  Philip  one  o(  his  friends 

7.  37.  didst  choose  this  house  lo  be  c.  by  thy  name 
10.  20.  we  ordain  thee  to  be  c.  the  king's  friend 
14.  40.  the  Romans  c.  the  Jews  their  friends 

2  Mac.  3.  15.  the  priests  c.  unto  heaven  upon  him 
4.  28.  they  were  both  c.  before  the  king 

7.  25.  the  king  c.  his  mother,  and  exhorted  her 

8.  1.  Judas  and  they  e.  their  kinsfolks  together 
2.  and  they  c.  upon  the  Lord,  12.  36. 

15. for  his  holy  name's  sake, by  w  hich  they  were  f. 

10.  13.  being  accused  and  c.  traitor  at  every  word 
14.  37.  who  for  bis  kindness  was  e.  a  father 

CALLETH. 
1  Esd.  4.  36.  all  the  earth  c.  on  the  truth 
lyisd.  2.  13.  he  c.  himself  the  child  of  the  Lord 

13.  18.  for  health,  he  c.  on  that  which  is  weak 

14.  1.  one  preparing  to  sail,c.  on  a  piece  of  wood 
Bar. 3.  33.  thatc.  it  again,  and  it  obeyeth  him 

34.  when  he  e.  them,  they  say,  here  we  bo 
CALLING. 

1  Mac.  12.  35.  c.  the  elders  of  the  people  together 

2  Mar.  12.  6.  and  c.  on  God  the  righteous  Judge 

15.  Judas  c.  upon  the  great  Lord  of  the  world 
14.46.  and  c.  upon  the  Lor<l  of  life  and  spirit 

CAMP. 

1  Mac.  3.  41.  Ihey  came  into  the  c.  to  buy  Israel 
,57. so  thee.  removeil,anil  piteheil  nearEmmall 

12.  28.  and  they  kindled  fires  in  their  c. 

2  Mac.  W.  15.  he  slew  in  ihe  c.  about  4000 men 

15.  17.  liot  to  pitch  e.  bui  courageously  to  set  oa 

CAMI'HI). 

1  Mae.  10.  86.  Jonathan  r.  against  .Ascalon 

11.  73.  even  to  their  own  tens,  and  there  they  e 

13.  43.  in  those  days  Simon  r.  against  Gazt 

2  Mae.  13.  14.  to  fight  manfully,  Judas  e.  by  Modis 

CANAAN. 
.fud.  6.  3.  he  said,  tell  ine  now,  ye  sons  of  C. 

SfcCHAKAKK. 

CANDLES. 
Bar.  6.  19.  thev  light  th>'m  r.  more  than  for  them* 

CANDLESTICK. 
1  Mac.  1.  21.  Antiochus  took  away  the  c.  of  light 
4.  49.  brought  the  e.  and  the  altar  into  the  temple 

CANOPY. 
.Tud.  10.  21.  Olofernis  rested  on  his  bed  under  ae. 
13.  9.  she  pulled  down  the  r.  from  the  pillars 
16.19.  gave  the  e.  whlrh  sh.'  had  taken  to  Ihe  Lord 

CAPMENATHA. 

1  Mac.  12.  37.  tepaind  that  which  was  called  C. 

CAPTAIN. 

1  Mae. '2.  66.  let  him  be  your  c.  and  fight  ihe  battle 

7.  5.  there  came,  having  Alcimus  for  their  c. 

11.  .59.  his  brother  Simon  also  ho  made  r. 

12.  .53.  they  have  no  e.  nor  any  to  help  them 

13.  53.  Simon  made  his  son  e.  of  all  the  host 

2  Mac.  I.  16   and  Ihey  stiuck  down  the  e. 

8.  9.  wilh  him  he  joined  also  Gorgias  a  c. 

CAPTIVE. 

2  Mar.  8.  II).  make  so  much  money  of  the  r.  Jew* 

II.  he  sent,  prorlaimiiic  a  sale  of  the  c.  Jews 

CAPTIVES. 

Itar.  6.  2.  ye  shall  be  led  away  c.  unto  Babylon 

I  Mac.  14.  7.  and  gathered  a  great  number  ofc. 

CAPTIVITY. 
1  Esd.  5.  7.  these  are  they  that  came  up  from  e. 
6.  5.  becaniiB  the  Lord  h'alh  visited  the  c. 

8.  the  anci'-nls  of  the  Jews  that  were  of  the  e. 
Bar.  3.  7.  that  we  should  praise  Ihi-e  in  our  e. 
8.  behold,  we  are  yet  this  dav  in  our  e. 
CAftBUNCLl-:. 
Tob.  13.  17,  Jems. shall  bo  paved  with  fx^ryl  and  6 
Eecl.  :12.  5.  is  as  a  signet  of  r.  set  in  gold 

CARCASES. 
Bel  32.  they  had  given  Ihem  every  day  two  t. 

CARE. 
H'isd.  3.  9.  and  he  haih  c  fiir  his  elect 

6.  17.  and  the  c.  of  discipline  is  love 

7.  23.  kind  to  man,  sledfnsl,  sure,  free  from  «. 
Eecl.  8. 13.  If  thou  be  surely,  take  e.  to  pmjr  it 


AroCRfPHA.] 


CAU 


Eccl-  30.  25.  a  good  heart  will  hare  £.  of  his  meal 
31.  2.  watching  c.  will  not  let  a  man  slumber 
50.  4.  he  took  c.oflhe  temple,  that  itshould  not  fall 

1  Mac.  6.  10.  and  my  heart  fuileth  lor  very  c. 
9.  58.  are  at  ease,  and  dwell  without  c. 
16.  14.  taking  c.  tor  the  good  ordering  of  them 

2  Mac.  2.  29.  must  e.  for  the  whole  building 

9.  21.  to  c.  for  the  common  safety  of  all 

14.  8.  for  the  unfeigned  c.  I  have  of  things 

15.  18.  the  c.  they  took  for  their  wives 
19.  they  in  the  city  took  not  the  least  c. 

CARED. 
1  Esd.  1.  47.  lie  c.  not  for  the  words  spoken 
CAREFUL. 

3  Mae.  2.  25.  we  have  been  c.  thai  they  that  read 
11.  15.  consented,  being  c.  of  the  common  good 

14.  9.  be  c.  for  tlie  country  and  our  nation 

CAREFULLY. 

1  Esd.  7.  2.  did  very  c.  oversee  the  holy  works 
Wisfd.  12.  22.  we  should  c.  think  of  thy  goodness 
Eccl.  38.  29.  who  is  always  c.  set  at  his  work 

2  ^ac.  8. 31.  laid  Ihem  upallc.in  convenient  places 

CAREFULNESS. 
Eccl.  30.  24.  c.  brjngetli  age  before  the  time 

CARES. 
tVisd.  7.  4.  I  was  nursed,  and  that  with  e. 
8,  9.  she  would  be  a  comfort  in  c.  and  grief 

CARETH. 

fVisd.  12. 13.  nor  is  anv  God  but  thou  that  c.  for  all 

CARNAIM. 

1  Mac.  5.  43.  fled  unto  the  temple  that  was  at  0. 
44.  thus  was  C.  subdued,  nor  could  they  stand 

CARNION. 

2  JW(k;.12.21.  sent  the  baggage  to  a  fortress  called  C. 

26.  then  Maccabeus  marched  forth  to  C. 
CARPENTER. 
fVisd.  13.  11.  now  a  c.  that  felleth  timber 
Eccl.  38. 27.  60  every  c.  that  labours  night  and  day 

CARPENTERS. 
1  Esd.  5.  54.  gave  unto  the  masons  and  c.  money 
Bar.  6.  45.  they  are  made  of  c.  and  goldsmiths 
CARS. 

1  Esd  5.  55.  unto  them  of  Sidon  they  gave  c. 

CARRY. 
Bel  34.  go  e.  the  dinner  that  thou  hast  into  Babylon 

2  Mac.  9.  10.  no  man  could  endure  to  c.  for  stink 

CARRIED. 
2  Mae.  9.  8.  was  now  c.  in  a  horse  litter 
29.  and  Philip  c.  away  his  body 
CARRIETH. 
Tfisd.  14. 1.  more  rotten  ihan  the  vessel  thatc.  him 

CARRYING. 
2  Mac.  6. 7.  go  in  procession  to  Bacchus,  e.  ivy 

CARTS. 
Jud.  15. 11.  she  made  readv  her  e.  and  laid  them 

CART-WHEEL. 
Eecl.  33. 5.  the  heart  of  the  foolish  is  like  a  e. 

CARVED. 

Wi.jd.13.13.  a  carpenter  hath  c.  the  wood  diligently 

1  Mac.  5.  68.  Judas  burnt  their  c.  images  with  fire 

CASLEU. 

1  Mac.  4.  59.  from  the  25th  day  of  the  monih  C. 

with  mirth  and  gladness,  2  Mac.  1.  18.  1|  10.  .5. 

2  Mac.  1.  9.  keep  the  feast  in  the  month  C. 

CASPIS. 
2  Mac.  12.  13.  and  the  name  of  it  was  C. 
CAST. 

1  Mac.  4.  33.  c.  them  down  with  the  sword 

6.  51.  he  set  artillery  with  instruments  to  c.  fire 

and  stones,  and  pieces  to  c.  darts  and  slings 

7.  17.  the  flesh  of  thy  saints  have  they  e.  out 
19.  Bacchides  c.  them  into  the  gre.it  pit 
44.  thcyc.  away  their  weapons  and  fled,  11.  51. 

10.  80.  for  they  had  c.  dans  at  the  people 

2  Mac.  5.  8.  as  an  enemy,  he  was  e.  out  into  Egypt 

10.  he  that  had  c.  out  many  unburied 

9.  8.  and  thus  he  was  now  c.  on  the  ground 

15.  but  to  be  c.  out  with  their  children 
14.  15.  they  c.  earih  upon  their  heads 

43.  he  c.  himself  down  manfully  among  them 
46.  bee. his  bowels  upon  the  throng,  he  thus  died 
CASTING. 

1  Mac.  13. 11.  who  c.  out  tliom  that  were  therein 

2  Mac.  5.  3.  drawing  of  swords  and  c.  of  darts 

CASTING. 
2  Mac.  11. 13.  c.  Willi  himself  what  loss  he  had  had 

CASTLE. 
2  .Afac.  4.27.  though  the  ruler  of  the  c.  required 
5.  5.  the  city  taken,  Menelaus  find  into  the  e. 

10.  20.  certain  of  tho»e  that  were  in  the  e. 

CA.STLES. 

2  Mac.  10.  18.  who  fled  into  two  very  strong  e. 

22.  so  he  immediately  took  the  two  c. 

CATALOGUE. 

1  Esd.  8.  49.  the  c.  of  whose  names  were  shewed 

C.\TTLE. 

1  Mac.  12.  23.  that  your  c.  and  goods  are  ours 
S  Mac.  12. 11.  to  give  him  r..  and  to  pleasure  him 

CAUGHT. 

2  Mae.  4. 41.  tome  of  them  c.  stones,  some  clubs 

769 


CHA    . 

CAUSE. 

1  Mae.  6. 13.  to  destroy  the  inhabitants  without  e. 
13.  1  perceive  that  Ibr  this  c.  these  are  come 

2  Mae.  4. 44.  three  men  pleaded  the  c.  before  him 
47.  who  was  c.  of  all  the  mischief;  who  if  they 

had  told  their  c.  before  the  Scythians 
7.  18.  who  said,  be  not  deceived  without  c. 
34.  O  godless  man,  be  not  lifted  up  without  a  c. 
13.  4.  that  this  man  was  the  c.  of  all  mischief 

CEASE. 
Eccl.  16.  27.  nor  do  they  c.  from  their  works 
28.  6.  remember  thy  end,  and  let  enmity  c. 

1  Mac.  11.  30.  let  the  Jews  c.  from  assaulting  us 

2  Mac.T.38.  that  the  wrath  of  the  Almighty  may  c. 
9.  18.  but  for  all  this  his  pains  would  not  c. 

CEASED. 
1  Esd.  1.  56.  as  for  her  glorious  things,  they  never  c. 
Dan.  3.23.  c.  not  to  make  the  oven  hoi  with  rosin 
1  Mac.  9.  73.  thus  the  sword  c.  from  Israel 

CEASING. 

1  Mac.  12. 11.  at  all  times  without  c.  we  remember 

2  JI/ac.9. 4.  his  chariot  man  to  drive  without  c. 
CEDAR. 

Eccl.  24.  13. 1  was  exalted  like  a  c.  in  Libanus 
50.  12.  he  stood  as  a  young  c.  in  Libanus 
CEDRON. 

1  Mac.  15.  39.  also  he  commanded  him  to  build  C. 
41.  when  he  had  built  C.  he  set  horsemen  there 

16.  9.  John  still  followed,  until  he  came  to  C. 

CELEBRATE. 
Tob.  6. 12.  when  we  return,  we  will  c.  the  marriage 

2  Jtfnc.2. 16.  we  are  about  to  c.  the  purification 

15.  36.  to  c.  the  13th  day  of  the  12th  month 
CELEBRATING. 

2  Mac.  5.  26.  were  gone  to  the  c.  of  the  sabbath 
CELOSYRIA. 

1  Esd.2.  17.  the  judges  in  C.  and  Phenice 

6.  29.  out  of  the  tribute  of  C.  a  portion  given 

7.  1.  the  governor  of  C.  did  oversee  the  works 

2  Mac.  3. 8.  visiting  the  cities  of  C.  and  Phenice 
4. 4.  being  the  governor  of  C.  and  Phenice,  10. 11. 

CENDEBEUS. 
1  Mac.  15.  38.  then  the  king  made  C.  cnptain 
40.  C.  came  to  Jamnia  {|  16.  1.  what  C.  had  done 

16.  4.  with  horsemen,  who  went  out  against  C 

8.  whereupon  C.  and  his  host  were  put  to  flight 

9.  till  he  came  to  Cedron  which  C.  had  built 
CENSERS. 

1  Esd.  2. 13  c.  of  silver  twenty-nine,  vials  of  gold 

1  Mac.  1.  22.  Antiochus  took  away  the  c.  of  gold 
CEREMONIES. 

Wisd.  14.  15.  delivered  to  those  under  him,  c. 
23.  fof  whilst  they  used  secret  c.  or  revellings 
CERTIFY. 
Bel  9.  if  ye  can  c.  me  that  Bel  devoureth  fhem 

2  Mac.  1.  18.  we  thought  it  necessary  to  c.  you 
CERTIFIED. 

1  Mac.  14.  21.  the  ambassadors  c.  us  of  your  glory 

2  Mac.  11.  26.  that  when  they  are  c.  of  our  mind 
CHAIN. 

1  Esd.  1.  40.  and  bound  him  with  a  c.  of  brass 
3.  6.  Darius  shall  give  him  a  c.  about  his  neck 
Wisd.  17.  17.  were  bound  with  one  c.  of  darkness 
Eccl.  6.  24.  and  put  thy  neck  into  her  c. 

CHAINS. 
.Tud.  10.  4.  put  about  her  her  bracelets  and  her  c. 
Eccl.  6.  !29.  her  c.  shall  be  a  robe  of  glory 
CHAMBER. 

1  Esd.  9.  1.  Esdras  went  to  the  e.  of  Joanan 

2  Esd.  5.  9.  withdraw  itself  into  his  secret  e. 
CHAMBERS. 

2  Esd.i.AX.  the  c.  of  souls  are  like  a  woman's  womb 
1  Mac.  A.  38.  they  saw  the  priests'  c.  pulled  down 

CHANAAN. 
Sus.  56.  O  thou  6ee"d  of  C.  and  not  of  Judah 
1  Mac.  9.  37.  of  one  of  the  great  princes  of  C. 
See  Canaan. 
CHANGE. 
Wisd.  7.  18.  given  me  to  know  the  c.  of  seasons 
19.  18.  in  a  psaltery  notes  c.  the  name  of  the  tune 
Eccl.  7. 18.  c.  not  a  friend  for  any  good  by  no  means 
40.  5.  anger,  night-sleep  do  c.  his  knowledge 

1  Mac.  1.  49.  they  might  c.  all  the  ordinances 
CHANGED. 

2  Esd.  6.26.  the  heart  of  inhabitants  shall  be  c. 
Ksth.  15.  8.  then  God  c.  the  spirit  of  the  king 
Wisd.  19. 18.  the  elements  were  c.  in  themselves 
Eccl.  2.  4.  when  thou  art  c.  to  a  low  estate 

18. 26.  from  the  morning  till  the  evening  time  is  c. 

1  Mac.  1.  26.  the  beauty  of  womfn  was  e. 
CHANGETH. 

Eccl.  13. 25.  the  heart  of  a  man  c.  his  countenance 
25.  17.  the  wickedness  of  a  woman  e.  her  face 
27.  11.  but  a  fool  c.  as  me  mnon 
CHANGING. 

Eccl.  37.  17.  the  countenance  is  a  sign  of  e. 
43.  8.  increasing  wonderfully  in  her  e. 

2  Mac.  3. 16.  the  c.  of  his  colour  declared  agony     j 
6.27.  manfully  e.  this  life,  I  will  shew  myself 


CHr 

CHAPELS. 

1  Mac.  1.  47.  set  up  altars,  groves,  and  e  .«/  idsb 

2  Mac.  10.  i.  also  the  c.  they  pulled  down 

11.  3.  as  of^ie  other  c.  of  the  heathen 
•      .  CHARGE. 

2  Esd.  2.  33.  Esdras  received  a  c.  of  the  Lord 
6.46.  thou  gavest  them  a  c.  to  do  service  to  man 

1  .Wac.  5. 19.  saying,  t.ike  ye  the  c.  of  this  people 
58.  when  they  had  given  c.  unto  the  garrison 

12.  45.  for  I  will  give  it  to  all  that  have  any  c. 
14.  42.  that  he  should  take  c.  of  the  sanctuary 

2  Mac.  15. 10.  he  gave  them  their  c.  shewing  them 
CHARGE. 

2  Mac.  11.  11.  and  giving  a  c.  on  their  enemies 
CHARGED. 

1  Esd.  4. 57.  the  same  c.  he  also  to  be  done 

2  Mac.  2.  2.  e.  them  not  to  forget  the  commands 
CHARGES. 

1  Esd.  4.  55.  likewise  for  the  c.  of  the  Levitcs 

1  Mac.  3.  30.  he  should  not  be  able  to  bear  the  c 

2  Mac.  4.  19.  but  to  be  reserved  for  other  c. 
9.  16.  defray  the  c.  boUmging  to  sacrifices        'i 

CHARIOT. 

1  Ksrf.  1.2S.  Josiasdid  notturnbackhisc.frorabim 
31.  then  gat  he  up  upon  his  second  c. 

3.  6.  a  c.  with  bridles  of  gold  and  a  chain  about  her 
Eccl.  48.  9.  was  taken  up  in  a  c.  of  fiery  horses 
49.  8.  shewed  him  upon  the  c.  of  the  chcrubims 

2  Mac.  9. 7.  he  fell  down  from  his  c.  carried  violently 
CHARIOTS. 

1  Mac.  1.  17.  he  entered  into  Egypt  with  c. 

2  Mac.  13.  2.  three  hundred  c.  armed  with  hooka 
CHARIOT-MAN. 

2  Mac.  9.  4.  he  commanded  his  c.  to  driv 

CHARMER. 

Eccl.  12. 13.  who  will  pity  a  c.  bitten  with  aserpentl 

CHASED. 

1  Mac.  14.  26.  c.  awav  their  enemies  from  them 
CHASTEN. 

ff!.'rf.l2.22.vvhereas  thou  dost  c.  us,  thou  scnurgest 

2  Mac.  10.  4.  that  he  would  c.  them  with  mercy 
CHASTEN  EST. 

Wisd.  12.  2.  thou  c.  them  by  little  and  little 

CHASTENING. 
2  Mac.  6.  12.  but  for  a  c.  of  our  nation 
7.  33.  angry  with  us  for  our  c.  and  correction 

CHASTISE. 
Eccl.  30.  13.  c.  thy  son,  and  hold  him  to  labour 

CHASTISED. 
2  Esd.  15.  51.be  weakened,  as  one  c.  withwoundi 
Wisd.  3.  5.  having  been  c.  they  shall  be  rewarded 
11. 9.  when  they  were  tried,  albsit  but  in  mercy  e. 

CHASTISETH. 
Eccl.  30.  2.  he  that  c.  his  son  shall  have  joy 

CHASTITY. 
2  Esd.  6.  32.  the  miglitv  hath  seen  also  thy  e. 

CHEEKS. 

Eccl.  35. 15.  doth  not  tears  run  down  widows'  e.t 

CHEER. 

1  Esd.  9.  54.  then  they  went  to  make  great  e. 
Eccl.  18.  32.  take  not  pleasure  in  much  good  c 

CHEERED. 

2  Mae.  15. 27.  through  the  appearance  they  were  e. 
CHEERETH. 

Eccl.  36. 22.  beauty  of  a  woman  c.  the  countenance 

CHEERFUL. 
Eccl.  7.  24.  shew  not  thyself  c.  toward  them 
13.  25.  a  merry  heart  maketh  a  c.  countenance 
26.  a  c.  countenance  is  a  token  of  prosperity 
26.  4.  he  shall  rejoice  with  a  c.  countenance 
30.  25.  a  c.  heart  will  have  a  care  of  his  meat 
35.  10.  as  thou  hast  gotten  give  with  a  c.  eye 
2  Mac.  15.  9.  Maccabeus  made  them  more  e. 

CHEERFULLY. 
Reel.  2.  4.  what  is  brought  upon  thee,  take  e. 
2  Mac.  11. 26.  ever  go  c.  about  their  own  affairs 

CHEERFULNESS. 
Bar.  3.  34.  so  with  c.  they  shewed  light  to  him 

CHEREAS. 

2  Afae.  10.  32.  strong-hold,  where  C.  wa.i  governo' 

'.tl.  they  killed  Timotheus  and  C.  his  brother 

CHERUBIMS. 

Eccl.  49.8.  was  shewed  him  on  the  chariot  of  the  e. 

CHETTIM. 
1  Mac.  1. 1.  Alexander  came  out  of  the  land  of  C. 

CHICKENS. 
2£8(2.1.30.as  a  hen  gathereth  her  e.  under  her  winge 

CHIEFLY. 

Tob.  4. 12.  c.  take  a  wife  of  the  seed  of  thy  fathers 

CHILD. 

1  Esd.  1.  53.  who  spared  neither  old  men  nor  e. 

2  F.-'d.  4.  40.  go  thy  way  to  a  woman  with  c. 
5. 49.  like  as  a  yoiing  c.  may  not  bring  forth  things 

Wisd.  2  13.  he  calleth  himself  the  c.  of  the  Lord 
8. 19.  for  I  was  a  witty  c.  and  had  a  good  npirit 
14.  15.  when  he  hath  made  an  image  of  his  c. 

Eccl.  30.  8.  a  c.  left  to  himself  will  be  wilful 
9.  cocker  thy  e.  and  he  shall  make  thee  afraid 
12.  and  beat  him  on  the  sides  while  he  is  a  e. 


20.  c.  the  good  will  they  bare  him  a  little  before  1 2  Mae.  15.  12.  exercised  from  a  e.  m  all  nttve 


CIS 

CHILDREN. 
E^th.  16.  16.  that  they  be  c.  of  the  Most  High 
iyisd.3.  1'2.  wives  are  fonlish  and  ttieir  c.  wicked 
16.  aa  for  c.  of  adulterers  they  sbptll  not  come 

4.  1.  better  it  is  to  have  no  c.  aim  to  have  virtue 
6.  fore,  begotten  of  unlawful  beds  are  witnesxes 

5.  5.  how  is  he  numbered  amuiig  the  c.  of  Gud  ? 
9.  4.  and  reject  me  not  from  among  thy  c. 

£ccJ.7.23.baBt  thou  c' instruct  them  and  bow  down 
11.  iS.  fur  a  man  shall  be  known  in  his  c. 
16.  1.  desire  not  a  mulliiude  of  unprofitable  c. 

3.  better  it  is  to  die  without  c.  than  have  ungodly 
22.  9.  if  c.  live  honestly  and  have  wherewithal 

10.  bate,  being  haughty  through  disdain  do  stain 
2.'i.  23.  she  hath  brought  c.  by  another  man 

24.  18.  I  therefore  am  given  to  all  my  c. 

25.  7.  a  man  that  huth  joy  of  his  c. 

32.  22.  and  beware  of  ihine  own  c. 

33.  21.  better  it  is  that  lliy  c.  should  seek  to  thee 
.39.  13.  hearken  to  me,  ye  holy  c.  and  bud  forth 

40.  15.  the  c.  of  the  ungodly  shall  not  bring  forth 
19.  c.  and  building  a  cily  coniinue  a  man's  name 

41.  5.  the  c.  of  sinners  are  abominable  c. 

6.  the  inheritance  of  sinners'  c.  shall  perish 

7.  the  c  will  complain  of  an  ungodly  father 
45.  13.  before  him  none,  nor  did  a  stranger  put 

them  on,  but  his  c.  and  his  children's  c. 
perpetually 
Bel^O.  I  see  the  footsteps  of  men,  women,  and  c. 

CHILD-BED. 
Bar.  6.  29.  women  in  c.  eat  their  sacrifices 

CHIMNEYS. 
2  Esd.  6.  4.  or  ever  the  c.  in  Zion  were  hot 
CHOICE. 

1  Mac.  4. 28.  Lysias  gatheied  60,000  c.  men  of  foot 

2  Mac.  13.  15.  with  the  valiant  and  c.  young  men 

CHOLER. 
Ecel.  37.  30.  and  surfeiting  will  turn  into  c. 

CHOOSE. 

2  Esd.  3. 13.  thou  didst  c.  thee  a  man  among  them 

16.  thou  didst  c.  him  to  tliee,  and  put  by  EsaiJ 

Bar.  3.  27.  those  did  not  the  Lord  c.  nor  gave  be 

l.Woc.5.  17.  c.  thee  out  men  and  deliver  brethren 

7. 37.  thou,  O  Lord,  didst  c.  this  house  to  bo  called 

10.32.  may  set  in  it  such  men  as  he  shall  c.to  keep  it 

iMac.  1.  2.5.  didst  c.  the  fathers  and  sanctify  them 

5. 19.  God  did  not  c.  the  people  for  the  place's  sake 

CHOOSING. 
1  Mae.  10.  74.  c.  10,000  men,  he  went  out  of  Jerus. 
2. Vac.  10.  12.  c.  rather  to  do  justice  to  the  Jews 
14.  42.  e.  rather  to  die  manfully  than  to  come 
CHOSE. 
1  Esd.  9.  16.  Esdras  c.  to  him  the  principal  men 
Eccl.  45.  16.  he  c.  him  out  of  all  men  living 

1  Mac.  4. 42.  he  c.  priests  of  blameless  conversation 
9.  25.  then  Bacchides  c.  the  wicked  men 

16.  4.  so  he  c.  out  of  the  country  20,000  men 

2  Mac.  3.  7.  the  king  e.  Heliodorus  his  treasurer 

CHOSEN. 
1  Esd.  5.  1.  after  this  were  the  principal  men  e. 
fVisd.  4.  1.").  that  ho  halh  respect  unio  his  c. 
9.  7.  thou  hast  c.  me  to  be  a  king  of  thy  people 
/o«/.  47.2.  so  was  David  c.  out  of  children  of  Israel 
49.  6.  they  burnt  the  c.  city  of  the  sanctuary 
1  Mac.  12.  41.  went  with  men  c.  for  the  battle 

CHRIST. 
8  .Esd.  7.  29.  after  these  yeiir.^  shall  my  son  C.  die 

CHRONICLES. 
1  Esd.  9. 22.  Ihou  sh.'ilt  find  in  ihec.  what  is  written 

1  Mac.  16.  24.  behold,  these  are  wrilton  in  the  e. 

CHURCH-ROBBER. 

2  Mac.  4.  42.  as  for  the  c.  him.self,  him  they  killed 

CHURLISH. 
8. Vac.  14.  30.  Nicanor  began  to  be  c.  unto  him 

CHURLISHLY. 
Eccl.  18.  18.  a  fool  will  iipliraiil  c.  and  a  gift  of 

CHURLISHNESS. 
Ee«J.42.H.betteristhef,ofa  man  than  a  courteous 

CILICI.A. 
Jvd.  2.  21.  which  is  at  the  left  hand  of  upper  C. 
S  Mac-  4.  36.  was  come  from  the  places  about  0. 

CINNAMON. 
Eecl.Z4.\5.  gave  sweet  smell  like  c.  and  aspalalhua 

CIRCLE. 
tfUd.  13.  2.  deemed  it  either  tho  c.  of  the  star* 

CIRCUIT. 
Ercl.  24.  5.  I  ninnn  compassed  the  c.  of  heaven 
2Jlfac. 6.  4.  within  the  ,-.  ofilip  holy  places 

<;iRcnM('isr,D. 

Jh4.  14.  10.  Achlor  c  lh<:  foreskin  of  his  flesli 

1  Mae.l.  60.  women  that  caus.id  their  childr.  to  be  e. 

61.  they  slew  Ihem  lh:il  harl  r.  them 
CIKCU.MCISHt.NS. 

2  Etd.  1.  31.  for  your  e.  have  I  forsaken 

CIRCI'MSIM'.CT. 
Tub.  4    14.  be  c.  mv  ^'«t,  in  mII  thm^q  thou  dost 

CIRCn.MSPKI'TION. 
Wifd.  12.21.  with  howereatc  didst judgothysons'? 

CISTKRN. 

Eec{.  SO.  3.  thee,  wag  cnvpred  with  platan  of  brass 

770 


CLO 

CISTERNS. 
,/ud.  7.21.  the  c.  were  emptied,  they  had  no  water 

CITHERNS. 
1  Mac.  4.  54.  it  was  dedicated  with  songs  and  c. 

CITY. 
1  Esd.  2.  23.  even  this  c.  was  made  desolate 
26.  that  that  c.  was  practising  against  kings 
5.  b.  they  returned  every  man  to  his  own  c. 
Keel.  26.  5.  1  was  afraid  of  the  «lander  of  a  c. 
38.  32.  without  these  cannot  a  c.  be  inhabited 
40.  19.  the  building  of  a  c.  continues  a  man's  name 
4'J.  6.  they  burnt  the  chosen  c.  of  the  sanctuary 
50.  4.  and  he  fortified  the  c.  against  besieging 

1  Mac.  1.  oi.  cities  of  Juda  to  sacrifice,  c.  by  c. 

5.  50.  the  soldiers  assaulted  the  c.  all  that  day, 

and  all  that  night 

6.  3.  he  sought  to  take  the  c.  and  to  spoil  it 
63.  he  found  Philip  to  be  master  of  the  c.  so  he 

fought  against  him  and  took  the  c.  by  force 

7.  1.  Demetrius  came  unto  a  c.  of  the  sea-coast 
10.  75.  but  they  of  Joppe  shut  him  out  of  the  c. 

12.  36.  raising  a  great  mount  between  the  tower 

and  the  c.  and  to  separate  it  from  the  c 

13.  47.  fought  no  more,  but  put  them  out  of  the  c 

2  Mac.  8.  17.  and  the  cruel  handling  of  the  c. 
15.  19.  they  that  were  in  the  c.  took  no  care 

CITIES. 
Eccl.  46.  2.  stretch  out  his  sword  against  the  c. 

1  Mac.  5.  ()8.  when  he  spoiled  their  c.  he  returned 
10.  71.  for  with  me  is  tlie  power  of  the  c. 

2  Mac.  8.  11.  he  sent  to  the  c.  on  the  sea-coast 

CITIZENS. 
2  Mac.  4.50.  Menelaus  being  a  great  traitor  to  thee 

5.  fi.  but  Jason  slew  his  own  c.  without  mercy 
9. 15.  would  make  them  all  equals  toe.  of  Athens 

19,  to  the  good  Jews  his  c.  wisheth  much  joy 
CLAY. 
JVisd.  7. 9.  silver  shall  be  counted  as  c.  before  her 
15.  7.  yea,  of  the  same  c.  he  maketh  both  vessels 
8.  he  maketh  a  vain  god  of  the  same  c. 
Eccl.  33.  13.  as  the  e.  is  in  the  potter's  hand 
US.  30.  he  fashioneth  the  c.  with  his  arm 
Bel  7.  for  tliis  is  but  c.  within  and  brass  without 

CLEAN. 
Eccl.  38.  30.  is  diligent  to  make  c.  the  furnaco 

CLEANSE. 
Eccl.  38.  10.  c.  thy  heart  from  all  wickedness 
1  Mac.  4.  36.  let  us  go  up  to  c.  and  dedicate 
CLEANSED. 

1  Mac.  4.  41.  until  he  had  c.  the  sanctuary 

43.  who  c.  the  sanctuary  and  bare  out  the  stones 
13.  47.  c.  the  houses  wherein  the  idols  were 
50.  Simon  c.  tho  tower  from  pollutions 
2Mac.  10.  5. on  the  very  same  day  it  was  c.  again 
14.36.keep  this  house  undefiled  which  lately  wasc. 
CLEANSING. 

2  Mac.  1.  36.  which  is  as  much  aa  to  say  a  e. 
CLEAR. 

Sus.  46.  I  am  e.  from  the  blood  of  this  woman 

CLEAVE. 
Er.cl.  2.  3.  c.  unto  him,  and  depart  not  away 

6.  34.  and  c.  unio  him  that  is  wise 

24.  24.  that  he  may  confirm  you,  c.  unto  him 
Bar.  3.  4.  for  which  cause  these  plagues  c.  to  us 

CLEAVED. 
Bar.  1.  20.  the  evils  c.  unto  us  and  the  curse 
CLEAVETH. 

1  E.'!d.4.20.man  leaveth  his  country, and  c.to  hiswife 
Eccl.  19.  2.  that  c.  to  harlots  will  become  impudent 

CLEAVING. 
Eccl.  25.  12.  faith  is  the  beginning  of  e.  to  him 
CLEMENCY. 

2  Mac.  14.  9.  according  to  the  c.  thou  thewcst 

CLEOPATRA. 
Kslh.  II.  1.  in  the  reign  of  Ptolemeus  and  C.       / 

1  JV/oc.  10.  57.  wont  out  with  his  daughter  C. 

CLIMB. 

2  Esd.  4.  8.  neither  did  I  ever  c.  up  into  heaven 
CLIMBED. 

2  Mac.  2.  4.  the  mountain  where  Moses  c.  up 

CLIMBING. 
Eccl.  i'i.  20.  as  the  c.  up  a  sandy  way  is  to  the  feet 

CLOSE. 

Tob- 12. 11. 1  will  keep  e.  nothing  from  you;  I  said 

it  was  good  to  keep  c.  the  secrets  of  a  king 

Feci.  27. 2.  doth  sin  stick  c.bet  w.  buying  and  selling 

1  Mac.  12.  50.  wont  c.  together  prepared  to  fight 

CLOSED. 

1  Mac.  7.  46.  c.  them  so  that  ihcy  were  all  slain 

CLOTH. 

2  Mac.  5.  2.  men  running  in  tho  air  in  c.  of  gold 
CLOTHE. 

2  Esd.  2.  20.  give  to  the  poor,  c.  the  naked 

CLOTHED. 
1  E,«d.  3. 6.  as  to  bo  c.  in  purple,  to  drink  in  gold 
Ecrl  .'iO.  11.  and  wasc.  with  the  perfection  of  glory 
1  Mac.  11.  58.  to  bo  c.  in  purple,  14.  43. 

CLOTHES. 
Har.  6.  20.  eat  them  and  their  c.  they  fuel  it  not 
1  Mac.  11.71.  then  Jonathan  rent  his  e.  and  prayed 


COM 


[AfOCKTPBA 


CLOTHETH. 
Ecc  .43.20.  and  c.  the  water  as  with  a  breast-plate 

CLOTHING. 
Eccl.  29.  21.  chief  thing  for  life  is  bread  and  e. 
39.  26.  the  blood  of  the  grape,  and  oil,  and  e. 
2  Mac.  3.  33.  the  same  young  men  in  the  same  e. 
11. 8.  one  in  white  c.  shaking  his  armour  of  gold 
CLOUD. 
2  F.sd.  15.  39.  the  c.  which  he  raised  up  in  wrath 
IVisd.  2.  4.  our  life  pass  away  as  the  traee  of  a  e 
Krcl.  24.  3.  and  I  covered  the  earth  as  a  c. 
50.  6.  he  was  as  the  morning  star  in  midst  of  a  e 
CLOUDS. 
2  F.sd.  15.  40.  great  and  mighty  e.  shall  be  lifted  up 
IVisd.  5.  21.  from  the  c.  as  from  a  well-drawn  bow 
Eccl.  13.  23.  what  he  saith,  they  extol  it  to  the  e. 
35.  16.  his  prayer  shall  reach  unto  the  c. 
17.  the  prayer  of  the  humble  pierceth  the  e. 
20.  seasonable,  as  e.  of  rain  in  time  of  drought 
43.  14.  the  treasures  opened,  c.  fly  forth  as  fowls 

15.  by  his  great  power  he  maketh  the  c.  firm 
50.7.  as  the  rainbow,  giving  light  in  the  bright  c. 

Dan.  3.  51.  O  ye  lightnings  and  c.  bless  the  Lord 

CLOUDY. 
Eccl.  24.  4.  and  my  throne  is  in  a  c.  pillar 

CLUBS. 
2^/ac.  4.41.  some  of  them  caught  stonee,  aomcc. 

CLUSTER,  S. 

2  Esd.  9.  21.  and  I  have  kept  me  a  grape  of  the  e. 

16.  30.  there  are  left  some  c.  of  them  that  seek 

CNIDUS. 

1  Mac.  15.  23.  the  same  thing  wrote  he  to  C. 

COALS. 
F.ccl.8.  10.  kindle  not  thee,  of  a  sinner,  lest  be  bumi 

11.  32.  of  a  spark  of  fire  a  heap  of  c.  ia  kindled 

COAT. 

2  Mac.\2. 35.  taking  hold  of  his  c.  drew  him  by  force 

COATS. 
2  Mac.  12.  40.  under  the  e.  of  every  one  elain 

COCKER. 
£ecj. 30. 9.  c.  thy  child,  he  shall  make  thee  afraid 

COGITATIONS. 
Eccl.  17.  5.  an  interpreter  of  the  e.  thereof 

COLLECTION. 
Bar.  1.  6..  they  made  also  a  c.  of  money 

COLLAR. 
Eccl.  33.  26.  a  yoke  and  a  c.  do  bow  the  neck 
COLLECTOR. 

1  Mac.  1.  29.  the  king  sent  his  chief  c.  to  Juda 

COLONY. 

fVisd.  12.  7.  receive  a  worfhyc.  of  God's  children 

COLOUR. 

2  Mac.  3.  8.  under  a  c.  of  visiting  the  citie§ 

16.  the  changing  of  his  c.  declared  his  agony 

COLOURING. 
fVisd.  13.  14.  c.  it  red,  and  covering  every  spot 

COLOURS. 
fVisd.  15.  4.  any  image  spotted  with  divers  e. 
COME. 

1  Mac.  6.  13.  that  these  troubles  are  c.  upon  mo 

2  Mac.  6.  15.  lest  being  c.  to  the  height  of  sin 

9.  18.  tho  just  judgment  of  God  was  c.  uj)on  him 

COM  EST,  ETH. 
Eccl.  21.  2.  for  if  thou  c.  too  near  it,  it  will  bite 
5.  and  his  judgment  c.  speedily 
COMING. 

1  Mac.  II.  44.  the  king  was  very  glad  of  their  e. 

12.  45.  for  this  is  the  cause  of  my  c. 

14.  21.  wherefore  we  were  glad  of  their  e. 

2  Mac.  6.  3.  the  c.  in  of  this  mischief  was  sore 

COMELY. 

1  F.sd.  4.  18.  love  a  woman,  which  ia  c.  in  favour 
Eccl.  14.  3.  riches  are  not  e.  for  a  niggard 

20.  1.  there  is  a  reproof  that  is  not  e. 
25.  4.  O  how  c.  a  thing  is  judgment  for  grey  hairs ! 
5.  O  how  e.  is  the  wisdom  of  old  men ! 

2  Mac.  3.  26.  excellent  in  beauty,  c.  in  npparel 

10.  29.  there  appeared  five  e.  men  upon  horses 

COMFORT. 
2  Esd.  6. 33.  and  to  say,  be  of  good  c.  and  fear  not 

14.  e.  such  of  them  as  be  in  trouble 
H'isd.  3.  18.  nor  have  they  e.  in  the  day  of  trial 
8.  0.  that  we  should  be  a  c.  in  cares  and  grief 
Eccl.  3.  6.  he  shall  be  a  c.  lo  his  mother 
4.  18.  she  will  c.  him,  and  shew  him  her  sccre 
25.  23.  a  woman  that  will  not  c.  her  husband 
30.  23.  love  thine  own  soul,  and  e.  thy  heart 
31).  2:i.  if  there  be  meekness  and  c.  in  her  lowgue 
:it*.  17.  and  then  c.  thyself  for  thy  heaviness 
Bar.  4.  27.  be  of  good  c.  O  my  children,  cry  to  God 
30.  he  that  gave  thoo  that  name  will  e.  thee 

1  Mac.  12.  9.  tho  holy  bonks  of  script  iiro  lo  c.  tis 
.1/ac.  7.  6.  the  Lonl  God  in  truth  lialh  c.  in  ua 
11.32.  I  have  sent  Menelniii  that  he  may  e.  yon 

CO.M  PORTED 

2  F.sd.  5. 15.  the  angel  c.  me,  anil  set  nio  on  mv  feet 
f,',*/*.  15.  8.  tho  kins  c.  her  wiih  loving  words 

10.  and  all  tho  king's  s^'rvanis  c.  her 
Eccl.  17.  24.  ho  c.  those  thni  fail  in  paticnc« 
35.  17.  till  it  come  mgh,  he  will  not  bo  c. 


AroCRTPHA.] 


COM 


Eccl.  38.23.  bo  c.  for  hira,  when  spirit  is  departed 

48.  24.  he  c.  them  ihat.mourned  in  Sion 

49.  10.  for  they  c.  Jacob,  and  delivered  them 
2  Mac.  7.  6.  and  he  shall  be  c.  in  his  servants 

15.  17.  thus  being  well  c.  by  the  words  of  Judas 
COMFORTING. 

2  Jtfoc.  15.9.  so  c.  them  out  of  the  law  and  prophets 

COMMAND. 

3  Mae.  9.  8.  he  that  thought  he  nnight  c.  the  waves 

COMMANDED. 
Eccl.  15.  20.  he  hath  c.  no  man  to  do  wickedly 
i.Wac.7.3.kingc.  pans  and  caldrons  to  be  made  hot 
I  4.  he  c.  to  cut  out  the  tongue  of  him  that  spake 

5.  he  c.  him,  being  yet  alive,  to  be  brought 
15.  33.  he  c.  that  they  should  give  it  by  pieces 
COMMANDEDST. 
iEsd.6. 45.  upon  the  fourth  day  thou  c.  sun  to  shine 

COMMANDMENT,  S.  m 

2  Esrf.  6.  48.  brought  forth  things  at  thee,  of  God 
53.  on  the  sixth  day  thou  gavest  c.  to  the  earth 
Eccl.  1.  26.  if  thou  desire  wisdom,  keep  the  c. 
2  Mac.  7. 30.  I  will  not  obey  the  king's  c.  but  I  will 
obey  the  c.  of  the  law  that  was  given  by 
Moses 

COMMENDABLE. 
Eccl.  37.  22.  understanding  is  c.  in  his  mouth 
COMMENDED. 

1  Mac.  12.  43.  but  c.  him  to  all  his  friends 

2  Mac.  9.  25.  whom  I  c.  unto  many  of  you  often 

COMMENTARIES. 

2  Mac.  2.  13.  were  reported  in  the  c.  of  Neemias 

COMMISSIONER. 

1  Mac.  2.  25.  the  king's  c.  who  compelled  men 

COMMIT. 

2  Mac.  2.  25.  that  are  desirous  to  c.  to  memory 

COMMITTED. 
2  Esd.  4.  42.  to  deliver  those  things  c.  to  them 
5.  17.  knowest  thou  not  that  Israel  is  c.  to  thee  7 

7.  32.  shall  deliver  souls  that  were  c.  to  them 

1  Mac.  7.  20.  then  c.  he  the  country  to  Alcimus 
13.  39.  as  for  any  oversight  or  fault  c.  to  this  day 

2  Mac.  3.  12.  had  c.  it  to  the  holiness  of  the  place 
22.  to  keep  the  things  c.  of  trust  safe  and  sure 

9.  25.  whom  I  often  c.  and  commended  to  you 
13.  0.  or  had  c-  any  other  grievous  crime 
8.  as  he  had  c.  many  sins  about  the  altar 
14.  he  had  c.  all  to  the  Creator  of  the  world 
COMMODIOUS. 
2  Mac.  10.  15.  having  gotten  the  most  c.  holds 

COMMON. 
IVisd.  7.  3.  when  I  was  born,  I  drew  in  thee,  air 
2  Mac.  4.  40.  whereupon  the  c.  people  rising 

8.  29.  when  they  had  maile  a  c.  supplication* 

9.  4.  make  it  a  c.  burying  place  of  the  Jews,  14. 
21.  necessary  to  take  care  for  thee,  safety  of  all 

10.  8.  they  ordained  by  a  e.  statute  and  decree 

11.  15.  consented,  being  careful  of  the  c.  good 

12.  4.  according  to  the  c.  decree  of  the  city 

13.  14.  fight  for  the  country  and  the  c.-wealth 

COMMOTIONS. 

1  Esd.  5.  73.  by  persuasions  and  e.  they  hindered 

COMMUNE. 

1  Mac.  15.  28.  he  sent  Athenobius  to  c.  with  him 

2  Mac.  11.  20.  I  have  given  order  to  e.  with  you 

COMMUNICATE. 
TVisd.  7.  13.  I  do  c.  her  liberally,  I  do  not  hide 
2  Mac.  5.  20.  e.  in  the  benefits  sent  from  the  Lord 

COMMUNICATETH. 
Eccl.  26.  6.  scourge  of  tongue  which  c.  with  all 

COMMUNICATION. 
Eccl.  9.  15.  all  thy  e.  in  the  law  of  the  Most  High 
13.  11.  for  with  much  c.  will  he  tempt  thee 

COMPACTED. 
JVisd.  7.  Cqbeing  c.  in  blood  of  the  seed  of  man 

COMPANY. 
Eccl.  9.  4.  use  not  much  the  c.  of  a  woman 

1  Mac.  4.  35.  he  gathered  a  c.  of  strangers 
ti.  41.  all  that  heard  the  marching  of  the  c. 

7.  12.  assemble  a  c.  of  scribes  to  require  justice 
9.  44.  Jonathan  said  to  his  e.  let  us  go  and  fight 

58.  behold,  Jonathan  and  hi.s  c.  are  at  ease 
12.29.  hcivvbeit,  Jonathan  and  his  c.  knew  it  not 

49.  sent  a  host  to  destroy  all  Jonathan's  c. 
13.  52.  th(  re  he  dwt-lt  himself,  with  his  c. 

2  Mac.  5.  27.  his  e.  fed  on  herbs  continually 

COMPANIED. 
Sus.  57.  and  they  for  fear  e.  with  you 

COMPANIES. 
1  Mac.  5.  33.  went  fiirth  behind  them  in  three  c. 

CO.MPANYING. 
5a.«.  54.  under  what  tree  sawest  thou  them  e.? 
58.  under  what  tree  didst  thou  take  them  c.  ? 
COMPANION. 
Eccl.  6.  10.  some  friend  is  a  c.  at  the  table 
37.  4.  there  is  a  c.  who  rejoiceth,  5. 
40.  23.  a  friend  and  c.  never  meet  amiss 

COMPANIONS. 
1  Esi.  6.  3.  Sathrabiizanes  and  his  c.  7,27 

COMPARABLE. 
Eccl.  0.  10.  for  the  new  friend  ia  not  c.  to  him 
771 


•    CON 

COMPARED. 

H'isd.  7.  9.  nor  c.  I  unto  her  any  precious  stone 

15.  18.  for  being  c.  together,  some  are  worse 

Eccl.  22.  l.a  slothful  man  is  e.  to  a.'ilthystone,  2. 

COMPASS. 

1  Mac.  14.  48.  within  the  c.  of  the  sanctuary 

2  Mac.  1.15.  was  entered  into  thee,  of  the  temple 

COMPASSED. 
lf'i.<!d.  19.  17.  being  c.  with  horrible  darkness 
Eccl.  23.  18.  who  seeth  me  ?  I  am  e.  with  darkness 
24.  5.  I  alone  e.  the  circuit  of  heaven 
45.9.  and  he  e.  him  with  pomegranates  and  bells 
1  Mac.  4.  7.  that  it  was  c.  about  with  horsemen 
10.  80.  for  they  had  e.  in  his  host  and  cast  darts 
15.  14.  when  he  had  e.  the  city  round  about 
'UMac.S.  17.  the  man  was  so  c.  with  fear  and  horror 
27.  HeHodorus  was  e.  with  great  darkness 
COMPASSETH. 

1  Esd.  4.  34.  the  sun  e.  the  heavens  round  about 
Eccl.  43.  12.  it  e.  the  heaven  with  a  glorious  circle 

COMPASSION. 
EecM7.29.how  great  is  hisc.to  such  as  turn  to  him? 
18.  12.  therefore  he  multiplied  his  e. 
Prayer  of  Manass.  of  great  e.  long-suffering 

2  Mac.  8.  3.  that  he  would  have  e.  on  the  city 

COMPEL. 

1  Esd.  4.  6.  they  c.  one  another  to  pay  tribute 

2  Mac.  6.  1.  to  c.  the  Jews  to  depart  from  the  laws 

COMPELLED. 

1  Mac.  2.  15.  such  as  c.  the  people  lo  revolt 
25.  the  commissioner,  who  e.  men  to  sacrifice 

2  Mac.  4.  26.  Jason  v/as  c.  to  flee  into  the  country 

6.  7.  the  Jews  were  c.  to  go  in  procession 

7.  1.  were  e.  by  the  king  to  taste  swine's  flesh 
15.  2.  the  Jews  that  were  c.  to  go  with  him 

COMPLAIN. 
Eccl.  29.  5.  he  will  return  words  and  e.  of  the  time 
41.  7.  the  children  will  e.  of  an  ungodly  father 

1  Mac.  8. 32.  if  therefore  they  e.  any  more  ag.  thee 

COMPLAINED. 

2  Mac,  4.  36.  the  Jews  e.  because  Onias  was  slain 

COMPLAINT,  S. 
Eccl.  35.  14.  when  the  widow  pourelh  out  her  e. 

1  Mac.  11.  25.  some  men  had  made  e.  against  him 

COiMPLETE. 
PTisd.  5.  17.  take  to  him  jealousy  for  c.  armour 

2  Mac.  3.  25.  that  he  had  e.  harness  of  gold 

COMPREHEND. 

2  Esd.  4.  2.  thinkest  thou  to  e.  the  way  of  God  ? 

11. how  thy  vessel  be  able  to  e.the  way  of  Highest 

5.  34.  while  I  labour  to  e.  way  of  the  Most  High 

COMPREHENDED. 

2  Esd.  8.  21.  whose  glory  may  not  be  e. 

COMPREHENDING. 
£ce;.32.8.thy  speech  beshorf,c.much  in  few  words 

CONCEIT. 
Wisd.8. 11. 1  shall  befoundof  aquicke.  injudgm. 
£cci.27.6.  so  is  the  utterance  of  a  c.  in  heart  of  man 

CONCERT. 
Eccl.  32.  5.  a  c.  of  music  in  a  banquet  of  wine 
CONCUBINE. 

1  Esd.  4.  29.  yet  did  I  see  Apame  the  king's  e. 

2  Mac.  4.  30.  they  were  given  to  the  king's  c. 

CONCUPISCENCE. 
JVisd.  4. 12.  the  wandering  of  c.  doth  undermine 
Eccl.  23.  5.  turn  away  from  me  vain  hopes  and  e. 

CONDEMN. 
2  Esd.  4. 18.  if  wert  judge,  whom  wouldst  thou  e.? 
IVisd.  2.  20.  let  us  e.  him  with  a  shameful  death 
4.16.  the  righteous  that  isdead  shall  c. the  ungodly 
Prayer  of  Manass.  nor  c.  me  into  the  lower  parts 

CONDEMNED. 
Eccl.  14.  2.  whose  conscience  hath  note,  him 
Sus.  41.  the  assembly  e.  Susanna  to  death 
48.  without  knowledge  have  c.  daughter  of  Israel 
53.  thou  hast  c.  the  innncent,  and  guilty  go  free 
2  Mac.  4. 47.  those  poor  men,  them  he  c.  to  death 
13. 6.  whosoever  was  c.  of  sacrilege  or  committed 
CONDITION. 
2  Esd.  7.  57.  he  said,  this  is  the  c.  of  the  battle 
2  Mac.  9l  8.  so  proud  was  he  beyond  the  c.  of  man 
15.  12.  OniaB  gentle  in  c.  well  spoken  of 
CONDITIONS. 
2  J/ac.ll.l4.perBiinded  to  agree  to  all  reasonable  e. 
13.23.  submitted  himself  and  sware  to  all  equal  e. 
CONDUCT. 

1  Ksd.S.Sl.was  ashamed  to  ask  kinge. for  safeguard 
./urf.lO.lS.come  to  hie  tent  and  some  ofuswillc.lhee 

2  Mac.  11.  30.  that  will  depart  shall  have  safe  e. 

CONFECTION. 
Eccl.  38.  8.  of  such  the  apothecary  makcth  a  c. 

CONFEDERATE. 
1  Mac.  10.  16.  we  will  make  him  our  friend  and  c. 

CONFEDERATES. 

1  Mac.  8.  24.  if  there  come  war  on  any  of  their  c. 

31.  yoke  heavy  on  our  friends  and  c.  the  Jews 

14.  40.  the  Romans  had  called  the  Jews  c. 

15.  17.  the  Jews  ambassndora  our  friends  and  c. 

CONFEDERACY. 
1  Mae  8. 17.  lent  them  to  Rome  to  make  a  e.20. 


CON 

CONFERENCE. 

fVisd.S.  18.in  the  exercise  of  e.  with  her  prudctict 
2  Mac.  14.  22.  so  they  made  a  peaceable  c. 

CONFESS. 
Tab.  13.  6.  therefore  c.  hirn  with  your  whole  mouth 
14.  7.  his  people  shall  C.God,  and  Lord  shall  e.ialt 
fVisd.  16.  8.  in  this  thou  madest  thine  enemies  c. 
Eccl.  4.  26.  be  not  ashamed  to  e.  thy  sins 
2  Mac.  7.  37.  thou  mayest  c.  thai  he  alone  is  God 

CONFESSED. 
Tob.  12.  22.  they  c.  the  wonderful  works  of  God 

CONFESSETH. 
Eccl.  20. 2.  that  c.  his  fault  be  preserved  from  hurt 

CONFESSING. 
1  Esd.  9.  8.  now  bv  e.  give  glory  unto  the  Lord 

CONFESSION. 

1  Esd.  8.  91.  in  his  prayer  he  made  his  c.  weeping 
Bar.  1.  14.  to  make  e.  in  the  house  of  the  Lord 

CONFIDENCE. 

2  Esd.  8.  36.  <vhifh  have  not  the  c.  of  good  works 
./ud.  13.  19.  for  this  thy  c.  shall  not  depart 
Eccl.  26.  21.  having  e.  of  their  good  descent 

2  Mac.  a.  18.  but  our  e.  is  in  the  Almighty  God 
15.7.butMaccabeushad  ever  sure  c.of  Lord's  help 

CONFIDENT. 
Eec^  32.  21.  be  not  e.  in  a  plain  way 

CONFIRM. 
Eccl.  24.  24.  be  strong  in  theL.  that  he  may  c. you 
50.  24.  that  he  would  e.  his  mercy  with  us 

1  Mac.  11.  57.  I  c.  thee  in  the  high-prieslhood 

12.  1.  to  c.  and  renew  the  friendship  with  them 

13.  37.  to  e.  the  immunities  we  have  granted 

14.  24.  sent  Nuinenius  to  e.  the  league  with  them 

CONFIRMED. 
lJIfac.ll.27.e.  him  in  the  high-priesthood  and  hon. 

14.  26.  he  and  his  brethren  e.  their  liberty 
38.  Demetrius  e.  him  in  the  high-priesthood 

CONFLICT. 
Wisd.  10.  12.  in  a  sore  e.  she  gave  him  the  victory 

2  Mac.  5.  14.  forty  thousand  were  slain  in  the  c. 

15.  17.  and  manfully  to  ti^  the  matter  by  c. 

19.  took  not  the  least  care,  being  troubled  for  c. 

CONFORM. 
2  Mac.  6.  9.  and  whoso  would  not  c.  themselves 

CONFOUNDED. 
Eccl.  2. 10.  did  ever  any  trust  in  the  L.and  was  «.? 
24.  22.  he  that  obeyeth  me  shall  never  be  e. 
har.  6.  39.  they  that  worship  them  shall  be  c. 
Dan.  3.  17.  they  shall  not  be  c.  that  trust  in  thee 
21.  let  them  be  c.  in  all  their  power  and  might 

1  Mac.  4.  27.  Lysias  was  e.  and  discouraged 
31.  let  them  be  c.  in  their  power  and  horsemen 

2  Mac.  10.  30.  so  that  being  r.  with  blindness,  and 

full  of  trouble,  they  were  killed 

13.  2.3.  heard  that  Philip  was  desperately  c. 

14.  28.  Nicanor  was  much  c.  in  himself 

CONFUSION. 
2  Esd.  2.  6.  that  thou  bring  them  toe. 
.5.  8.  there  shall  be  a  c.  also  in  many  places 
Bar.  1.  15.  but  to  us  belongeth  the  c.  of  faces 
\Mac.  1.  28.  all  house  of  Jacob  was  covered  withe. 

CONGEALED. 
£ecZ.43.19.beingc.itlieth  on  the  top  of  sharp  stakes 

CONGREGATION. 
Eccl.  1.  30.  cast  thee  down  in  midst  of  the  e. 
4.7.  get  thyself  the  love  of  thee,  and  bow  thy  head 
21.  9.  the  c.  of  the  wicked  is  like  tow  wrapped 
24.  2.  in  the  c.  of  the  Most  High  shall  she  open 
23.  the  law  for  a  heritage  unto  the  c.  of  Jacob 
31.  11.  and  the  e.  shall  declare  his  altos 
33.  18.  hearken  unto  me,  ye  rulers  of  the  e. 
38.  3.3.  they  shall  not  sit  high  in  the  c. 
45.  18.  the  e.  of  Core  with  fury  and  wrath 
50.  13.  oblations  in  their  hands  before  all  the  e. 

20.  he  lifted  up  his  hands  over  the  whole  e. 
1  Mac.  2.  56.  for  bearing  witness  before  the  e. 

14.  19.  which  writings  were  read  before  the  c. 

28.  at  Saramel  in  the  great  e.  of  the  priests 

CONJECTURETH. 

Wisd.  8.  8.  she  c.  aright  what  is  to  come 

CONQUERED. 

1  Mac.  8.  2.  it  was  told  him  how  they  had  c.  them 
4.  by  their  policv  tliev  had  c.  all  that  place 

CONSCIENCE. 
Wisd.17.  ll.being  pressed  withe,  alw.iys  forecast. 
Eccl.  14.  2.  whose  c.  hath  not  condemned  him 

2  Mac.  6.  11.  they  made  a  c.  to  ht-lp  themselves 

CONSECRATED. 

Tob.  1.  4.  the  temple  was  e.  and  built  for  all  ages 

Eccl.  45.  15.  Moses  c.  and  anointed  him  with  oil 

2  Mac.  12.  40.  they  found  things  e.  to  the  idols 

CONSENT. 

1  Esd.  5.  47.  they  came  altogether  with  one  e. 
6.22.have  been  done  with  the  e.  of  king  Cyru8.7.4. 

.Tud.  7.  29.  there  was  great  weeping  with  one  c. 

2  Mae.  4.  39.  committed  with  the  c.  of  Menelaus 
11.  24.  that  the  Jews  would  not  c.  to  our  fathe, 

CONSENTED. 
1  Jtfae.  1.  57.  if  any  e.  to  the  law,  put  himtodcath 
11. 20.  so  the  king  c.and  wrote  letters  to  Jonathao 


CON 

S^Vatlll5-Ma<y5abeus€.toallthat  Lysiss  desired 

14  iiO.  all  of  one  mind  they  c.  to  tlio  covenants 

COiNSlUERATION. 

1  Mac.  8.  17.  in  c.  of  these  things  Judas  chose 

CONSIDERATE. 
Eccl.  32.  18.  a  man  of  council  will  be  e. 

CONSIDER. 
Bar.  2.  16.  O  Lord,  c.  us,  bow  down  thine  ear 
JH  Mac.  7.  28.  and  c.  that  God  made  them  of  tilings 
'  CONSIDERED. 

2  Esd.  7.  16.  why  hast  thou  not  c.  in  thy  mind  1 
56.  we  c.  not  that  we  should  begin  to  suffer 

9.  iiO.  so  I  c.  the  world,  behold,  there  was  peril 
fVisd.  8.  17.  when  I  c.  these  things  in  myself 
2  Mae.  5.  17.  he  c.  not  that  the  Lord  was  angry 

CONSIDERING. 
2  Mae.  5.  6.  not  c.  that  to  get  the  day  of  them 
11.4.  not  at  all  c.  the  power  of  God,  but  puffed  up 
13.  c.  that  the  Hebrews  could  not  be  overcome 
CONSIST.        * 
Eccl.  43.  26.  and  hv  his  word  all  things  c. 
CONSOliT,  6>e  CONCERT. 
CONSORTETH. 
Eccl.  13.  16.  all  flesh  c.  according  to  kind 
CONSPICUOUS. 

1  Mac.  11.  37.  let  it  be  set  in  a  c.  place,  14.  48. 

CONSPIRED. 
Eccl.  45.  18.  strangers  c.  together  against  liim 
Bel  28.  they  e.  against  the  king,  saying 

CONSTRAINED. 
Bel.  30.  being  c.  he  delivered  Daniel  to  thera 

2  Mac.  6.  18.  Elea/.ar  was  c.  to  open  his  mouth 

CONSTRAINT. 
2  Mac.  6.  7.  tiiey  w^re  brought  by  bitter  c.  to  eat 

CONSUL. 
IMac.  15. 16.Lucius  c.  of  the  Romans  to  Ptolemee 

CONSULT. 
Ecel.B.n.  c.  not  with  a  fool  ||  9.14.  c.  with  the  wise 
37.  10.  c.  not  with  one  that  suspccteth  thee 
1  Mac.  5.  16.  assembled  to  c.  what  they  should  do 

CONSULTED. 
1  Mac.  4.  44.  they  c.  \*hat  to  do  with  tho  altar 
12.  35.  c.  with  them  about  building  strong  holds 
16.  13.  Ptolemeus  c.  deceitfully  against  Simon 

CONSULTING. 
1  Mac.  8. 15.  c.  alway  for  tho  people  to  be  ordered 

CONSUiME. 
Eccl.  27.  2^.  anguish  shall  c.  them  before  death 
45. 19.  did  wonders  toe.  them  with  the  fiery  flume 

1  Mac.  5.  15.  arc  assembled  against  us  to  c.  ua 

CONSUMED. 

2  Esd.  A.  16.  for  the  fire  came  and  e.  the  wood 
IVisd.  5.  13.  but  were  c.  in  our  own  wickedness 
Eccl.  4.5.  14.  their  sacrifices  shall  be  wholly  c. 

19.  in  his  wrathful  indignation  were  they  c. 
2  Mac.  1.  31.  now  when  the  sacrifice  was  c. 
.■J2.  it  was  c.  by  light  that  shined  from  the  altar 
2.  10.  c.  tho  sacrifices,  c.  the  burnt-offerings 
11.  sin-offering  was  not  to  be  eaten,  it  was  c. 

consump:th. 

Eecl.  14.  19.  every  work  rotteth  and  c.  away 
18.  18.  a  gift  of  the  envious  c.  the  eyes 
31.  i.  watching  for  riches  c.  the  flesh 
43.  21.  the  cold  north-wind  c.  tho  grass  as  fire 

CONSUMING. 
irisd.  6.  23.  neither  will  I  go  with  c.  envy 
2  Mac.  1.  23.  priests  prayed,  whilst  sacrifice  was  c. 

CONTAINETH. 
ITife.  1.7. that  which  r.  all  things  hathknowledge 

CONTEMNED. 

Eccl.  22.  23.  a  mean  estate  is  not  alway  to  be  e. 

CONTEMNER. 

1  Mae.  14.  14.  every  c.  of  the  law  he  look  away 

CONTEMNETII. 
Eccl.\9. 1.  he  that  c.  small  things  shall  fall  bv  littl 
26. 24.  a  dishonest  woman  c.  shame,  but  an  honest 

CONTEMPT. 
Eith.  13.  12.  that  it  was  neither  in  e.  nor  pride 

2  Mac.  3.  18.  tbo  place  \v;vi  like  to  come  into  c 

CONTRND. 
£ce{.  28.  10.  the  stronger  they  are  which  c. 

CONTENT. 
F.tlh.  13.  13.  T  could  hiive  been  c.  to  kiss  the  soles 
Tnb.  11.  9.  from  henceforth  I  am  c.  to  die 
1  Mac.  6.  60.  the  king  and  the  princes  were  c 
S  .Vac.  5. 15.  he  was  not  e.  wiih  this,  but  presumed 
6. 30.  but  in  soul  am  well  r.  to  suiter  these  things 

CO.NTENTEI). 
Eccl.  29.  23.  bo  il  litib-  or  much,  hold  thee  c. 

CONTENTION. 
Eccl.  23.  IL  »  hasiy  c.  kindl.ih  a  fire 
S  Mae.  4.  4.  Onias  seeing  the  (t-uijer  of  this  c. 

contentmi:n'i\ 

Wi'.M.  19.  12.  quails  came  from  the  sea  for  their  r. 
S  Mac.  9.20.  if^your  affairs  be  to  your  c.  i  thank  G. 

CONTRNT.S. 
I  Mac.  15.  2.  the  c  wherefore  were  these 
'2  Mac.  '.I.  17.  for  perforinnnce  of  tho  c.  thereof 

CON'^INENT. 
EeeL  2(*  IS.  and  her  c  mind  cannot  be  valued 
-7X 


COS 

CONTINUALLY. 
Feci.  11.  19.  and  now  I  will  eat  c.  of  my  goods 
1  Mac.  15.  25.  against  Dora,  assaulting  it  c. 
2j1/>ic.3.26.  who  stood  by  him,  and  scourged  him  c. 
5.  27.  fed  on  herbs,  c.  lest  they  should  be  polluted 

CONTINUE. 
Eccl.6.\0.  some  friend  will  not  c.in  day  of  aflliction 

40.  19.  children  and  building  c.  a  man's  name 

41.  12.  for  that  shall  c.  with  thee  above  gold 

1  Mac.  10.  27.  c.  ye  still  to  be  faithful  unto  us 

2  Mac.  4.  6.  that  the  state  should  c.  quiet 
10.  12.  Ptolemeus  endeavoured  to  c.  peace 

CONTINUED. 

1  Mac.  6.  9.  and  there  he  c.  many  days 

9.  13.  the  battle  c.  from  morning  till  night 

10.  26.  whereas  you  have  c.  in  our  friendship 
50.  he  c.  the  battle  until  the  sun  went  down 

2  Mac.  8.  1.  took  such  as  e.  in  the  Jews'  religion 
CONTRACTS. 

1  Mac.  13.  42.  write  in  their  instruments  and  e. 

CONTRARY. 
Wiad.  2.  12.  because  he  is  clean  c.  to  our  doings 

CONTRITE. 
Dan.  3. 16.  in  a  c.  heart  let  us  be  accepted 

CONTROL. 
Eccl.  5.  3.  say  not,  who  shall  c.  me  for  my  works? 

CONVEYED. 

1  Mac.  9.  6.  many  c.  themselves  out  of  the  host 

2  Mac.  8.  13.  they  fled  and  c.  themselves  away 
CONVENIENT. 

Eccl.  10.  23.  nor  is  it  c.  to  magnify  a  sinful  man 
39.  17.  at  time  c.  they  shall  all  be  sought  out 
1  Mac.  4.  46.  and  laid  up  the  stones  in  a  c.  place 

12.  II.  both  in  our  feasts  and  other  c.  days 
14.  34.  he  furnished  tliera  with  all  things  e. 

2.Vac.  4.19.  because  it  was  not  c.but  to  be  reserved 
32.  Menelaus  supposing  he  bad  gotten  a  c.  time 
8.  31.  they  laid  them  up  carefully  in  c.  places 

10.  18.  having  all  things  c.  to  sustain  the  siege 

11.  36.  that  we  may  declare  as  it  is  c.  for  you 
14.  22.  Judas  placed  armed  men  ready  in  c.  places 

CONVERSANT. 
JVisd.  8  3.  in  that  she  is  c.  with  God  she  magnifies 

13.  7.  for  being  c.  in  his  works,  they  search  him 
F.ccl.  11.  20.  in  thy  covenant,  and  be  c.  therein* 

39.  3.  and  he  will  be  c.  in  dark  parables 
41.5.  they  that  are  c.in  the  dwelling  of  the  ungodly 
CONVERSATION. 

Tob.  4. 14.  be  circumspect  and  be  wise  in  all  thy  e. 

IVisd.  8.  16.  for  her  c.  hath  no  bitterness 

1  Mac.  4.  42.  so  he  chose  priests  of  blameless  c. 

2  Mac.  15.  12.  Onias  reverend  in  c.  prayed  for  Jews 
CONVERSED. 

Bar.  3.  37.  shew  himself  on  earth,  and  c.  with  men 

CONVERSION. 
£cci.49.2.  behaved  uprigliilv  in  the  c.  (flfthe  people 

CONVICPED. 
2  Mac.  4.  45.  Menelaus  being  now  c.  promised 

CONVINCE. 
IVisd.  4.  20.  their  own  iniipiities  shall  c.  them 

COPY. 
E.<th.  13.  1.  the  c.  of  the  letters  was  this 
11).  19.  ye  shall  publish  the  c.  of  this  letter 
Bar.  6.  1.  a  c.  of  an  epistle  which  Jeremy  sent 
1  Mac.  8.  22.  this  is  the  c.  of  the  epistle 

11.  31.  we  sent  you  here  a  c.  of  the  letter 
37.  see  that  thou  make  a  c.  of  these  things 

12.  5.  this  is  the  c.  of  the  letters,  19.  ]  14.  20. 

14.  23.  and  to  put  the  c.  of  their  ambassage 
COPIES. 

1  Mac.  14.  49.  that  the  c.  ihereofshould  belaid  up 

CORE. 

Eccl.  45.  18.  tho  congregation  of  C.  maligned  him 

CORES. 

1  Esd.  8.  20.  likewise  of  wheat,  to  a  hundred  c. 
CORRECTION. 

fVisd.  12.  2R.  that  would  not  be  reformed  by  thai  c. 

F.ccl.  16.  12.  as  his  mercy  is  great,  so  is  his  c.  also 
22.  6.  but  stripes  and  c   are  never  out  of  time 
42.  5.  of  much  c.  of  children  be  nnt  iiNhamed 

2  Mac.  7.  33.  bo  angry  n  little  while  for  our  c. 
CORRUPTED. 

2  Esd.  4.  11.  the  work)  being  now  outwardly  c. 

CORRUPTIBLE. 
2  Esd.  7.  15.  seeing  thou  art  but  a  c.  man 
fVisd.O.  15.  the  c.  body  presseth  down  the  soul 
14.  8.  because  being  c.  it  was  called  god 
19.  21.  wasted  not  the  flesli  of  the  c.  living  things 
2  Mac.  7.  16.  thou  art  c.  thou  dost  what  thou  wilt 

CORRUPTION. 
2  Esd.  7.  41.  even  so  now  seeing  e.  is  grown  up 

43.  beginning  of  immortality,  wherein  e.  is  past 
Eccl.  28.  6.  romoraber  thy  end,  c.  and  death 

COS. 
1  Mac.  15.  23.  tho  same  thing  wroto  ho  to  C. 

COSTLY. 
I   Fsd.  n.  9.  building  a  house  of  hewn  and  e.  stone 
H'isd.  2.  7.  let  us  fill  ourselves  with  c.  wino 

COSTS. 
2.Vac.3.3.3<jIcucai  bare  all  e.bolonBinj  to  sacrifice 


cou 


[APOCRTPBiC 


COTTAGE. 
Eccl.  29.  22.  i>etter  is  a  poor  man  in  a  mean  e. 

COVENANT. 
2i?S(/.2.5.thegechildren,whichwould  not  keepmye. 

7.  be  scattered,  for  they  have  despised  my  c. 

3.  15.  thou  madest  an  everlasting  c.  with  him 
Wisd.  1.  16.  and  they  made  a  c.  with  it 
Eccl.  11.  20.  be  stedfust  in  thy  c.  and  conversan. 

17.  12.  he  made  an  everlasting  c.  with  them 
45.  24.  there  was  a  c.  of  peace  made  with  hira 
47.  11.  he  gave  him  a  c.  of  kings,  and  a  throne 
1  Mac.  1.  15.  they  forsook  the  holy  c.  and  joined 
63.  that  they  might  not  profane  the  holy  c. 

4.  10.  and  remember  the  c.  of  our  fathers 
7.  18.  for  they  have  broken  the  c.  and  oath 

23/ac.l.  2.  remember  his  c.he  made  with  Abraham 
7.  36.  for  our  brethren  are  dead  under  God's  e. 
*  COVENANTS. 

1  Mac.  1.5.  27.  but  brake  all  the  e.  he  had  made 

2  Mac.  12.  1.  when  these  c.  v^■ere  made,  Lysias 

13.  2.5.  the  people  were  grieved  for  the  c.  for  they 
stormed  because  they  would  make  iheirc.  void 

14.  20.  all  of  one  mind,  they  consented  to  the  c. 
27.  that  he  was  murh  displeased  with  the  c. 

COVER. 
IVisd.  5.  16.  with  his  right  hand  shall  he  e.  them 
10.  17.  she  was  to  them  for  a  c.  by  day 
Rcci.22.9.they  shall  c.  the  basenessof  their  parents 

23.  18.  the  walls  c.  me,  and  nobody  sceth  me 
26.  8.  and  she  will  not  c.  her  own  shame 
38.  16.  then  c.  his  body  according  to  the  custom 

COVERED. 
EccM6.30.with  living  things  he  haihe. face  thereof 

24.  3.  and  I  c.  the  earth  as  a  cloud 
47.  15.  thy  soul  c.  the  whole  earth 

■Su-t.  32.  to  uncover  her  face,  for  she  was  c. 

2  Mac.  10.  30.  c.  him  on  every  side  with  weapons 

COVERETH. 
Eccl.  40.  27.  and  c.  him  above  all  glory 

COVERING. 
2  Mac.  3.  25.  a  rider  adorned  with  a  very  fair  e. 

COVETOUS. 
Reel.  10.  9.  not  a  more  wicked  thing  than  a  c.  man 
14.9.ac.  man's  eye  is  not  satisfied  with  his  portion 

COVETOUSNESS. 
2  Mac.  4.  50.  tlie  c.  of  them  that  were  in  power 
10.  20.  thev  with  Simon,  being  led  with  c. 
COULD. 
2  Mac.  15.  38.  it  is  that  which  I  e.  attain  unto 

COUNCIL. 
I  Esd.  2.  17.  the  rest  of  their  c.  and  the  judges 

8.  .'is.  vessels  which  the  king  and  c.  had  given 
1  Mic.  9.  58.  then  all  the  ungodly  men  held  a  c. 

14.22.  register  things  I  hey  spake  in  c.  of  the  people 
COUNSEL. 

1  Esd.l.  15.  had  turneil  the  c.  of  the  king  of  .Assyria 

2  Fsd.  4.  13.  I  went  into  a  plain,  the  trees  took  c. 
15. 1  he  floods  of  the  sea  also  took  c.and  said, coma 

7'o4.4.18.ask  c.  of  allthat  are  wise,  and  despise  not 
any  c.  that  is  profitable 
19.  for  every  nation  hath  not  c.  but  Lord  himself 
IVisd.  A.  17.  what  God  in  his  c.  decreed  of  him 

6.  4.  you  have  not  walked  after  the  c.  of  God 
9.13.  what  man  is  he  that  can  know  thee,  of  God? 

17.  thy  c.  who  hath  known,  except  give  wisdom 
F.ccl.  8.  17.  consult  not  a  fool,  he  cannot  keep  c. 
15.  14.  he  left  him  in  the  hand  of  his  e. 
17.6.C.  a  tongue  and  eyes  and  heart  gave  he  them 
21.  13.  his  c.  is  like  a  pure  fountain  of  life 
25.  4.  and  for  ancient  men  to  know  c. 

5.  oh  how  comely  is  c.  to  men  of  honour! 
30.  21.  and-afllict  not  thyself  in  thine  own  e. 
32.  18.  a  man  ofc.  will  be  considerate,  l^t  a  proud 
37.  8.  for  he  will  e.  for  himself 

1  Mac.  2.  (u.  I  know  that  Simon  is  a  man  ofc. 

7.  31.  when  he  saw  that  his  c.  was  discovered 

9.  60.  because  their  c.  was  known  to  them 

2  .V<jc.  7.  25.  she  would  c.  the  young  man 
26.  that  she  would  r.  her  son  io  save  his  life 

COUNSrOLLOR.  .     • 

IVifd.  8.  9.  that  she  would  be  a  e.  of  good  thing! 
Kec?.6.6.havc  but  oner. of  a  thousand,  ncvcrtheleia 
37.  7.  every  e.  o.ttollelh  counsel,  but  thero  is 
8.  beware  of  a  e.  and  know  what  need  be  hath 
42.  21.  and  he  hath  no  need  of  any  c. 
COUNSELLERS. 

1  F.'id.  8.  11.  to  me  and  inv  seven  friends  the  c. 
COUNSELLETH. 

Eecl.  37.  7.  but  there  is  some  that  c.  for  himself 
COUNSELS. 

2  F.sd.  1.  7.  hut  they  have  dcsjiised  my  c.  2. 1. 
Tub.  4.  19.  that  all  thy  paths  and  c.  may  prosper 
rt'i.s-rf.1.9.  for  inmiisitioii  shall  boniiiduinlo  thee. 

of  the  unsodly,  and  sound  of  her  woi'dscoma 
6.  3.  from  Highest,  who  shall  senich  out  your  c. 
F.ccl.  23.  1.  O  Lord  loavo  nio  not  to  their  t. 
24.  29.  her  c.  iirofounder  than  the  great  deep 

COUNTENANCE. 
.Jtid.  13.  Ifi.  myc  halli  deceived  him  to  doatructJOH 
Eslh.  IS.  14.  Bud  thy  c.  is  full  uf  grace 


ArOGKTPHA.] 


CRE 


Eccl.V2.19.  he  will  whisper  much  and  change  his  c. 

13.  25   the  beat!  of  a  man  changulh  inn  c.  and  a 

merry  heart  niakelh  a  cheerful  c. 

26.a  cheerful  c.  is  a  token  of  a  heart  in  prosperity 

19.  29.  one  that  hath  understanding  by  his  c. 
25.17.the  wickedness  of  a  woman  darkenelh  here. 

23.  a  wicked  woman  niakeih  a  heavy  c. 
37.  17.  tlie  c.  is  a  sign  of  changing  of  tlie  heart 
H  Mac.  3.  IG.  his  c.  declared  the  inward  agony 
6.  18.  an  aged  man,  and  of  a  well-favoured  c. 

COUNTERFEIT,  S. 
trisd.  2.  Ifi.  we  are  esteemed  of  him  aa  c. 
15.  9.  andcounteth  it  his  glory  to  makec.  things 
COUNTERVAIL. 
Eicl.  6.  15.  nothing  doth  c.  a  faithful  friend 

COUNTRY. 
S  Ksd.  4. 15.  that  there  we  may  make  us  another  c. 
i  JUac.  8.  8  and  the  c.  of  India,  Media  and  Lydia 
16.  to  one  man,  who  ruled  over  all  their  c. 

9.  25.  Bacchides  made  them  lords  of  the  c. 

12.  25.  he  gave  them  no  respite  to  enter  his  c. 
14. 6.  Simon  enlarged  bounds  and  recovered  the  c. 

36.  so  that  the  heathen  were  taken  out  of  their  c. 

37.  he  fortified  i|  for  the  safety  of  the  c. 
2.Vac.5. 8.  as  open  enemy  of  his  c.  and  countrymen 

13.  14.  to  fight  for  the  temple,  the  city,  and  c. 

COUNTRY-MEN. 
2  Mac.  4.5.  he  went,  not  to  bo. an  accuser  of  his  c. 
5.  6.  thinking  them  his  enenjies  and  not  his  c. 
8.  as  an  open  enemy  of  his  country  and  c. 
23.  having  a  malicious  mind  against  his  c. 

12.  S.when  Jud.  heard  of  this  cruelty  done  to  his  c. 

14.  37.  Razis  a  lover  of  his  c.  was  accused 

15.  30.  who  continued  his  love  toward  his  c. 

COUNTRIES. 
Keel.  10. 16.  the  Lord  ov«tlirew  c.  of  the  heathen 
39.  4.  he  will  travel  through  strange  c.  for  he  tried 
47.  17.  the  c.  marvelled  at  thee  for  thy  songs 
Mac.  1.  4.  Alexander  ruled  over  c.  and  nations 
9.8.  and  of  the  goodliest  c.  which  they  took  of  him 

COURAGE. 
Eccl.  45.  23.  Phinees  stood  up  with  good  c.  of  heart 
.  Mac.  4.  32.  make  them  lo  he  of  no  c.  and  cause 

5.  .3.  he  abated  their  t.  and  took  their  spoils 
11.49.  Jews  had  got  me  city,  their  c»was  abated 

ZAfac.  1.  3.  and  to  do  his  will  with  a  good  c. 
4.  14.  the  priests  had  no  c.  to  serve  at  the  altar 

6.  31.  his  death  for  an  example  of  a  noble  c. 

7.  12.  the  king  marvelled  at  the  young  man's  c. 

20.  she  bare  it  wiih  a  good  c.  because  of  hope 

COURAGEOUS. 

ZMac.  7.  21.  ihe  molher  filled  with  e.  spirits  said 

COURAGEOUSLY. 

1  Mac.&.  45.  wheref.  he  ran  upon  him  c.  thro'  battle 

2  Mac.  6.  23.  an  example  to  die  willingly  and  c. 
7.  11.  he  said  c.  these  I  had  from  heaven 

10.  33.  Ihcy  laid  siege  against  the  fortress  c. 
15. 17.  but  c.  to  set  u|)on  them  and  try  the  matter 

COURAGEOUSNESS. 
2  Mac.  14.  18.  and  of  tli'?  <:.  they  had  to  fight 

COURSE. 

1  Esd.  4.  34.  gwifl  is  the  sun  in  his  c.  he  fetclieth 

his  e.  again  to  his  own  place  in  one  day 

COURT. 

1  K.5(i.  9. 1.  Esdras  ri.sing  from  the  c.  of  tho  temple 

1  .Mac.  9.  54.  the  wall  of  inner  c.  to  be  pulled  down 

11.  46.  wherefore  Ihe  king  fled  into  the  c. 

13.  40.  who  are  meet  among  y-ou  to  be  in  our  c. 

COURTS. 
1  Mac.  4.  38.  they  saw  shrubs  growing  in  the  c. 

COURTEOUS. 
Eccl.  42.  14.  than  a  c.  woman  thnt  brings  shame 

COURTEOUSLY. 
iMac.  3.  9.  when  he  had  been  c.  'p.ceived 

COURTESY. 

Eccl.  33. 21.  that  thou  sbonldest  stand  to  their  e. 

COUSIN. 

1  E.<rrf.  3.  7.  he  shall  be  called  Darius  his  e. 
4.  42.  thou  shalt  sit  next  me  and  be  called  my  r. 

Tab.  6.10.  we  shall  lodge  wiih  Raguel  wfto  is  thy  c. 

2  Mac.  11. 1.  Lysia.'s  the  kini.''s  protector  and  c.  35. 

CRAFT. 
2  Mac.  12.  24.  whom  ho  besought  with  much  c. 

CRAFTY. 
Eccl.  42.  18.  he  considerelh  their  c.  devices 

CRATES. 
2  Mae.  4.29.  Sostratns  left  C.  who  was  governor 

CREATED. 
ZF.fd.  5.  44.  hold  them  that  shall  bee.  therein 
45.  hast  given  life  to  the  creature  thou  hast  c. 
49.  BO  have  I  disposed  the  world  which  I  e. 

9.  13.  but  inquire  for  whom  the  world  was  c. 
ffisd.  1.  14.  hec.  all  thinc-i  that  they  might  have 

10.  I   the  first  formed  father  that  was  c.  alone 
Ercl.  1.  4.  Wisdom  hnth  her-n  e.  before  all  things 

14.  it  was  c.  with  the  faithful  in  the  womb 
17.  1.  the  Lord  c.  man  of  Ihe  earth,  and  turned 
l**.  1.  he  that  livelh  for  ever  c.  all  things 
23.  20.  he  knew  all  tliinss  ere  they  were  c. 
U-i.  9.  he  c.  me  from  the  beginning  before  world 
773 


CUB 

Eccl.  31.  13.  what  is  c.  more  wicked  than  an  eye? 
33.  1.  for  the  Lord  hath  c.  the  physician,  12. 
4.  the  Lord  hath  c.  medicines  out  of  the  earth 
39.25.  for  the  good  are  good  things  c.  from  bcginn 
28.  there  be  spirits  that  are  c.  for  vengeance 
CREATION. 
2  Esd.  6. 38.  thou  speakest  from  beginning  of  the  c. 
Eccl.  49.  16.  above  every  living  thing  in  the  c 

CREATOR. 
./lid.  9.  12.  C.  of  the  waters,  hear  thou  my  prayer 
Ecc^24.  8.  so  the  C.of  all  things  gave  commandm. 
2jlf(ic.l.24.  O  Lord,  C.of  all  things,  who  art  fearful 

7.  23.  doubtless  the  C.  of  the  world  will  give 
13.  14.  had  committed  all  to  the  C.  of  the  world 

CREATURE. 
2  Esd.  5.  44.  the  c.  may  not  haste  above  the  maker 
56.  shew  thy  servant  by  whom  ihou  visitest  thy  c. 

8.  8.  thy  c.  is  preserved  in  fire  and  water 
13.  thou  shalt  mortify  it  as  thy  c.  and  quicken  it 
45.  for  thou  art  merciful  unto  thy  c. 

Jud.9.  12.  King  of  every  c.  hear  thou  my  prayer 
IVisd.  5.  17.  he  shall  make  the  c.  his  weapon 
Eccl.  16.  16.  his  mercy  is  manifest  to  every  c. 

CREATURES. 
2  Esd.  5.  55.  as  the  c.  which  now  begin  to  be  old 

6.  47.  that  it  should  bring  forth  living  c. 
49.  then  didst  thou  ordain  two  living  c. 
54.  whom  thou  niadest  lord  of  all  thy  c. 

Jud.lG.14. let  c.  serve  thee,  Ihou  sjieakest,  they  were 
IVisd.  2.  G.  let  us  use  the  c.  like  as  in  youth 

7.  20.  to  know  the  natures  of  living  c. 

9.  2.  that  he  should  have  dominion  over  the  c. 
CREDIT. 

Feci.  6.  7.  prove  him,  and  be  not  hasty  to  c.  him 
19.  4.  ^e  that  is  liasty  to  c.  is  light  minded 
1  Mac.  10.  46.  they  gave  no  c.  unto  thein 

CREPT. 
1  Mae.  6.  46.  he  c.  under  the  elephant,  and  thrust 

CROOKED. 
JVisd.l^.  13.  being  a  c.  piece  of  wood,  full  of  knots 
Eccl.  4.  17.  he  will  walk  with  him  by  c.  ways 

CROUCHING. 
Eccl.  12. 11.  though  he  go  c.  yet  take  good  heed 

CROWN. 
Bel  30.  the  angel  of  Ihe  Lord  took  him  by  the  c. 

CROWN. 
H'lsd.  2.  8.  let  us  c.  ourselves  with  rose-buds 
4.  2.  it  weareth  a  c.  and  triumphelh  for  ever 

5. 16.  they  shall  receive  a  beautiful  c.  from  the  Ld. 
Eccl.  1.  11.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  a  c.  of  rejoicing 

18.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  a  c.  of  wisdom 
32.  2.  receive  a  c.  for  well-ordering  the  feast 
45.  12.  he  set  a  c.  of  gold  upon  the  mitre 
47.  6.  in  that  he  gave  him  a  c.  of  glory 

1  Afac.  6.  15.  he  gave  him  the  c.  and  his  robe 

8.  14.  yet  for  all  this,  none  of  them  wore  a  c. 

10.  20.  nent  him  a  purple  robe  and  a  c.  of  gold 
29.  release  from  customs  of  salt  and  c.  taxes 

11.  3.5.  the  c.  taxes,  we  discharge  them  of  them 

12.  39.  that  he  might  set  the  c.  on  his  own  head 

13.  37.  the  golden  c.  and  scarlet  robe  ye  sent 
39.  we  forgive  the  e.  tax  also  which  ye  owe 

2  Mac.  10. 11.  when  Antiochus  was  come  to  the  c. 

14.  4.  came,  presenting  to  him  a  c.  of  gold 
CROWNS. 

1  Mac.  1.  9.  they  all  put  c.  upon  themselves 
4.  57.  they  decked  the  temple  with  c.  of  gold 

CROWNETH. 
Eccl.  19.5.  but  he  that  resisteth  pleasures  c.  his  life 

CROWS. 
Bar.  6. 54.  they  are  as  c.  befween  heaven  and  earth 

CRUEL. 
'2  Mac.  4.  2.5.  but  having  the  fury  of  a  c.  tyrant 
7.  27.  she  laughing  the  c.  tyrant  to  scorn,  spake 

8. 17.  and  c.  handling  of  the  city 
11.9.  not  only  to  fight  with  men,  but  with  c.  beasts 

CRUELLY. 
Eccl.  13.  12.  but  c.  he  will  lay  up  thy  words 

2  Mac.  15.  2.  O  destroy  not  so  c.  and  barbarously 
CRUELTY. 

2  J/ac.]2.5.heard  of  this  c.  done  lo  his  country-men 

CRY. 
1  Mac.  4. 10.  now  therefore  let  us  c.  unto  heaven 

CRIED. 
1  Esd.  9.  10.  then  c.  the  whole  multitude  and  said 
S««.  24.  with  that  Susanna  c.  with  a  loud  voice,  and 
the  two  elders  c.  out  against  her 
Brl  37.  Habbacuc  c.  saying,  O  Daniel,  Daniel 
1  Mac.  3.  .50.  then  c.  they  with  a  loud  voice,  .54. 
11.  49.  they  made  supplication  to  the  king  and  c. 
13.  50.  then  c.  they  to  Simon,  beseeching  him 
"Mac.  8.  3.  and  hear  ihe  blood  that  c.  unto  him 

CRIER. 
Eccl.  20.  15.  he  openeih  his  mouth  like  a  c. 
CRYING. 

1  Esd.  5.  63.  came  with  weeping  and  great  c. 
ffisd.  7.  3.  the  first  voice  which  I  ottered  was  c. 
JETcci. 26.27. aloud  c.  woman  and  a  scold  be  sought 

CUBITS. 

2  Mac  13.  5.  there  was  a  tower  of  fifty  c. 


DAI 

CUCUMBERS. 
Bar.  6.  70.  as  a  scare  crow  in  a  garden  of  e. 

CULTURE. 
2  Esd.  8.  6.  give  us  c.  to  our  understanding 

CUNNING. 
IVisd.  8. 6.  who  is  a  more  c.  workman  than  ihet 
Eccl.  45.  11.  the  work  of  the  c.  workman 
1  Mac.  13.  29.  in  these  he  made  c.  device* 

CUP-BEARER. 
Tab.  1.  22.  now  Achiacharus  was  c.  and  keeper 

CUP-BOARD. 

1  Mac.  15.32.  saw  the  c.of  gold  and  silver  plato 

CUPS. 

1  Esd.  2.  13.  a  thousand  golden  ;.  vials  of  gold 
3.22.when  they  are  in  Iheirc.  they  forget  their  Iot* 

CURIOUS. 

2  Esd.  4.  23.  for  it  was  not  my  mind  to  be  c. 

9. 13.  be  not  chow  the  ungodly  shall  be  punished 
Eccl.  3.  23.  be  not  c.  in  unnecessary  matters 
2  Mac.  2.  30.  to  be  e.  in  particulars  belonging 

CURSE. 
Eccl.  4.  5.  givB  him  none  occasion  toe.  thee 
().  if  he  c.  thee  in  the  bitterness  of  his  soul 
23.  14.  and  so  thou  c.  the  day  of  thy  nativity 
28.  13.  c.  the  whisperer  and  double-tongnea 
3S.  19.  the  life  of  the  poor  is  the  c.  of  the  heart 
41.  9.  if  you  be  born,  ye  shall  be  born  lo  a  c.  and 
if  you  die,  a  c.  shall  be  your  jiortion 
lO.sothe  ungodly  shall  go  from  a  c. to  destruction 
Bar.  ].  20.  and  the  c.  which  the  Lord  appointed 
3.  8.  wa  aie  yet  this  day  in  our  captivity  for  a 
*>  reproach  and  a  c. 

CURSED. 
I1'isd.2.\3.  theifoffsiiring  isc.  blessed  is  the  barren 
12.  11.  it  was  a  c.  seed  from  the  bpginning 
14.  8.  but  that  which  is  made  with  hands  is  c. 
Eccl.  23.  26.  she  shall  leave  her  memory  to  be  c. 
2  Mac.  4.  38.  there  slew  he  that  c.  murderer 
12.  35.  when  he  would  hive  taken  that  c.  man 

CURSETH. 
Eccl.  21.  27.  when  the  ungodly  c.  Satan,  he  c.  his 
own  soul,  a  whispeier  dtfileth  his  own  soul 
CUSTOM. 
Il'isd.  14.  16.  in  time  an  ungodly  c.  grown  strong 
Eccl.  7.  13.  for  Ihe  c.  thereof  is  not  good 
23.  14.  and  so  thou  by  thy  c.  become  a  fool 
2  Mac.  4.  16.  whose  c.  Ihey  followed  so  earnestly 

11.  24.  to  be  brought  to  the  c.  of  the  Gentiles 

12.  38.  they  purified  themselves  as  the  c.  wa» 

CUSTOMS. 

1  Mac.  10.  29.  now  I  do  free  you  from  thee,  of  salt 
11.  35.  of  the  tithes  and  c.  pertaining  to  us 

2  Mac.  4.  28.  appertained  the  giilhering  of  the  e. 

11.  25.  after  the  c.  of  their  forefathers 

CUT. 

1  F.sd.i.  9.  if  he  command  to  c.  down,  they  c.  down 
Eccl.  25.  20.  c.  her  oflf  from  thy  flesh  and  let  her  go 

2  J\fac.  7.  4.  he  commamled  to  c.  out  Ihe  tongue  ef 

him  that  spake,  and  lo  c.  off  the  utmost  pattj 

CUTTING. 
AK(i.l3.18.hathdirecled  thee  lo  the  c.  ofTof  the  hesd 

CYMBALS. 
1  Esd.  5.  59.  the  Leviles  the  sons  of  Asaph  had  c. 
Jud.  16.  2.  Judith  said,  sing  to  my  Lord  with  c. 

1  Mac.  4.  54.  it  was  dedicated  with  harps  and  c 

CYPRESS. 
Eccl.  24. 13.  and  as  a  c.  tree  on  the  mountains 
50.  10.  as  a  c.  tree  which  groweih  to  the  clouda 
CYPRIANS. 

2  Mae.  4.  29.  Crates,  who  was  governor  of  the  C 
CYPRUS. 

2Mac.  10. 13.  called  Jraitor  because  he  had  lefk  C 

12.  2.  Nicanor  governor  of  C.  would  not  suffer 

CYRENE. 

1  Mac.  15.23.  the  same  wrote  he  to  Cyprus  and  C. 

2  Mac.  2.  23.  declared  by  Jason  of  C.  in  five  books 

CYRUS. 

1  Esd.  2.  3.  thus  saith  C.  king  of  the  Persians 

4.44. which  C.  set  apart  when  he  vowed  to  destroy 

.57.  C.  had  set  apart  and  all  Hint  C.  had  given 

5.  71.  we  will  build,  ns  C.  hath  commanded  us 

73.  they  hindered  all  the  tijie  that  kingC.  lived 
6. 17.  in  the  first  year  that  Inflg  C.  reiirned  in  Ba- 
bylon, C.  the  king  wrote  to  build  this  houM 
21.  search  be  made  among  the  records  of  king  C. 


D. 


DADDEUS. 
1  Esd.  8.  46.  that  they  should  speak  unto  D. 

DAGGER. 
Bar.  6.  15.  he  hath  also  in  his  right  hand  a  d. 

DAGON. 

U/oc.l0.84.took  their  spoils  and  thotempleof  D. 

11.  4.  they  showed  him  the  temple  of  D.  burned 

DAINTY. 
Eccl.  37.  29.  bo  not  unsntiable  in  any  d.  thing 

DAINTIES. 
Eccl.  14. 16.  there  is  no  seeking  of  d.  in  the  grave 


DAU 

DALLIED. 
Ifisd.  12.  26.  correction  wherein  ho  d.  with  them 

DAMASCUS. 
Jud.  15.  5.  chapcd  them  until  Ihey  woropnsscci  D. 

1  Mac.  11.  62.  passed  through  the  country  unto  U. 

12.  32.  and  removing  thence  he  came  to  I). 

DAMNATION. 
tVisd.  12.  27.  therefore  came  extreme  d.  on  them 

DANCE. 

Jud.  15.  12.  women  made  a  d.  among  them  for  her 

13.  she  went  before  the  peopio  in  the  d. 

DANCES. 

Jud.  3.7.  they  received  them  with  garlands  and  d. 

DANGER. 
Ksth.  14.  4.  for  my  d.  is  in  my  hand 
ICccl.  3.  26.  he  that  lovetli  d.  shall  porish  therein 
29.  17.  will  leave  him  in  d.  that  delivered  him 
34.  12.  I  was  oftliines  in  d.  of  death,  yet  delivered 
43.  24.  they  thai  sail  on  the  sea,  tell  of  the  d. 

2  Mac.  15.  1.  resolved  without  any  (/.  to  set  on  them 

DAKGEKUUS. 
Eccl.  9.  18.  a  man  of  an  ill  tongue  is  d.  in  his  city 

DANGERS. 
7'tf6.4.4.  remember  that  she  saw  many  d.  for  thee 

DANIEL. 
Sui.  45.  a  young  youth  whose  name  was  D. 
61.  for  D.  had  convicted  them  of  false  witness 
64.  from  that  day  was  I),  in  great  n^pulution 
Bfl  4.  but  D.  worshipped  his  own  God 
10.  the  king  wint  with  D.  into  the  temple  of  Bel 
17.  D.  are  the  seals  whole'?  and  he  sayL^yea 
37.  O  I).  D.  take  the  dinner  God  halh  sent  thee 

1  Mac.  2.  60.  D.  for  his  innocency  was  delivered 

DAPHNE. 

2  Mac.  4.  33.  he  withdrew  into  a  sanctuary  at  D. 

DAREST. 
Eccl.  29.  24.  thou  d.  not  open  thy  mouth 

DARIUS. 
I  Esd.  2.  30.  second  yea.  of  the  reign  of  D.  fi.  1. 
3.  1.  now  when  D.  reigned,  he  made  a  great  feast 
5.  to  him  shall  the  king  D.  give  great  gifts 

7.  he  shall  sit  next  to  D.  becauseof  his  wisdom 

8.  sealed  ii,  and  laid  it  under  D.  his  pillow 
6.  7.  wrote  and  sent  to  D.  to  king  D.  greeting 

34.  I  D.  the  king  have  ordained  that  it  be  done 
1  Mac.  12.  7.  there  were  letters  sent  from  D. 

DARK. 
fi'i.<id.  8   8.  Wisdom  can  expound  d.  sentences 
17.  3.  they  were  under  a  d.  vail  of  forgetfulness 
Eccl.  45.  5.  he  brought  hijn  into  the  d.  cloud 
DARKNESS. 

1  F..^d.  4.  24.  lonkclh  on  a  lion  and  goeth  in  d. 

2  n^d.  14   20.  thus  the  world  is  set  in  d. 
Tub.  4.  10.  alms  suffereth  not  to  come  into  d. 

14. 10.  how  out  of  light  he  brought  him  into  d.  and 
rewarded  him  again,  for  he  went  down  intod. 
F..ith.  11.  8.  and  lo,  a  day  ct( d.  and  obscurity 
Wisd.  1**.  4.  were  worthy  to  he  imprisoned  in  d. 
h'.tcl.  11.  16.  error  and  d.  had  their  beginning 
16.  10.  he  hath  separated  his  light  from  d. 

DARKENETII. 
F.ccl.  25.  17.  her  wickedness  d.  her  countenance 

DARTS. 
Jud.  1.  15.  he  smote  him  through  with  his  d. 

DASH. 
Jud.  10.  5.  that  he  wouhl  d.  the  sucking  children 

DATHAN. 
Eccl.  45.  18.  the  nion  that  were  of  D.'s  side 

DAUGHTER. 
Tnh.  3.  10.  I  am  the  only  d.  of  my  father,  15. 
6.  10.  he  halh  nliso  one  only  d.  named  Sara 
7. 11.  I  have  given  myrf.  in  marriage  lo  seven  men 

13.  then  he  called  his  d.  Sara,  and  she  came 

10.  12.  I  commit  my  d.  to  thee  of  special  trust 

11.  17.  hl(:ss<il  her,  saying,  thou  art  welcome,  d. 
F.ccl.  7.  25.  rnarrv  thy  d.  and  so  shalt  thou  have 

22.  3.  and  a  foolish  d.  is  born  lo  his  loss 
4.  a  wise  d.  shall  bring  an  inheritance 
36.  10.  if  thy  d.  be  shameless,  keep  her  in 
36.  21.  yet  is  one  d.  better  than  another 
42.9.  falhcr  wakeih  for  ilie  d.  when  no  man  knows 
!<U8.  if.  ve  have  (•<iiHlemni'd  a  d.  of  I.srafl 
1  Mnc.  9. 37.  na  being  the  d.  of  a  prince  of  Chanaan 

10.  .Vi.  for  I  will  marry  my  d.  to  Ihee 

11.  12.  wherefore  be  look  his  (/.  from  him 

DAITGHTERS. 

1  F.itd.  8.  84.  ye  shall  not  join  your  d.  to  their  sons 

2  F.sd.  I.  28.  1  have  prayed  yimas  a  mother  herd 
IVis'l.  9.  7.  to  be  a  judge  of  thy  sons  and  d. 
F.ccl.l.  24.  hast  thou  d?  have  u  care  of  their  body 

DAVID. 
1  F.nd.  1.  3.  that  Solomon  the  son  of  D.  had  built 
F.rcl.  V-i.  25.  to  the  covenant  made  with  D. 
47. 1.  Nathan  rose  up  to  prophesy  in  'lie  time  of  D. 
2.  so  was  D.  chosen  out  of  the  chililir.'n  of  Israel 
22.  and  he  gave;  out  of  him  n  root  iiiilo  D. 

48.  15.  there  remained  a  ruler  in  the  hoiijn  of  D. 

49.  4.  all  except  D.  and  Ezokias  were  dofoclivo 

DAUNTED. 

Jv4.  16.  10.  the  Medes  were  d.  at  her  hardiness 

T74 


DEA 

Eccl.  32.  18.  a  proud  man  is  not  i.  with  fear 
DAY. 

1  K.»(i.8.89.thou  art  true,  for  we  arelefla  root  this  d. 
I).  11.  and  this  is  not  a  work  of  a  d.  or  two 

53.  this  d.  is  holy  to  the  Lord,  be  not  sorrowful 

2  Ksd.  1.  16.  but  ever  to  this  d.  do  ye  yet  murmur 
7.  43.  d.  of  doom  shall  be  the  end  of  this  time 

Tob.  4.  9.  thou  layest  up  against  the  d.  of  necessity 
5.14.wilt  thou  a  drachm  ad.  and  things  necessary? 

10.  1.  now  Tobit  his  father  counted  every  d. 

7.  she  went  out  every  d.  into  the  way  which  they 

went,  and  did  eat  no  meat  on  the  d.  time 

lVisd.3.  18.  nor  have  they  comfort  in  the  d.  of  trial 

Eccl.  10. 10.  he  that  is  a  king  to  d.  to-morrow  dies 

11.  25.  in  d.  of  prosperity,  in  the  d.  of  alHiition 
26.  it  is  easy  in  the  d.  of  death  to  reward  a  man 

20.  15.  lo  d.  he  lendeth,  to-morrow  will  he  ask  it 
33.  7.  why  doth  one  d.  excel  another,  when  as  all 

the  light  of  every  d.  in  the  year  is  of  the  sun? 
38.  22.  yesterday  for  me,  and  to  d.  for  thee 
40.  1.  from  the  d.  they  go  out  of  their  mother's 

womb,  till  the  d.  they  return  lo  mother  of  all 
46.  4.  sun  go  back,  was  not  one  d.  as  long  as  two? 
Sns.  12.  they  watched  from  d.  to  d.  to  see  her 

1  Mac.  9.  44.  it  stands  not  with  us  to  d.  as  before 

2  Mac.  7.  20.  seven  slain  within  ihc  space  of  one  d. 

DAYS. 
Tob.  4-  3.  but  honour  her  all  the  d.  of  thy  life 
5.  My  son,  be  mindful  of  the  Lord  all  thy  d. 

9.  4.  but  my  father  counteth  the  d.  if  I  tarry  long 

10.  1.  when  the  d.  of  the  journey  were  ex|iired 
.fud.  12.  18.  more  than  all  the  d.  since  I  was  burn 
F.ccl.  17.  2.  he  gave  them  few  d.  and  a  short  tinje 

22.  12.  seven  d.  do  men  mourn  for  the  dead 

33.  9.  some  of  them  hath  he  made  high'd.  and 

some  of  them  hath  he  made  ordinary  d. 

41.13.  a  good  life  hath  few  d.  a  good  name  endures 

50.  3.  in  his  d.  the  cistern  to  receive  water 

Har.  1.  11.  pray  for  the  life  of  father  and  son,  that 

their  d.  may  be  upon  earth  as  thed.  of  heaven 

'     DAILY. 

1  Ksd.1.2.  having  set  priests  according  to  d.  courses 

5.  51.  they  offered  sacrifices  d.  as  was  meet 

6.  30.  as  priests  shall  signify  to  be  d.  spent 
Eccl.  47.  9.  might  d.  sing  praises  in  their  songs 

DAY-SPRING. 

fVisd.  16.  28.  that  at  the  d.  we  may  pray  to  thee 

DEAD. 

2  /^.«d.  2.  16.  those  that  be  d.  will  I  raise  again 
23.  wherever  thou  findest  the  d.  bury  them 

7.  30.  prayed  for  the  d.  that  he  might  live 
10.  30.  and  lo,  I  lay  as  one  that  had  been  d. 
16  23.  the  d.  shall  be  cast  out  as  dung 

Tub.  3.  15.  my  seven  husbands  are  already  d. 
4.  3.  he  said,  my  son,  when  I  am  d.  bury  me 

8.  21.  have  the  rest  when  I  and  my  witie  be  d. 

12.  12.  when  thou  didst  bury  the  d.  I  was  with  thee 
13.  leave  thy  dinner  to  go  and  cover  the  d. 

fVisd.  4.  IG.  the  righteous  that  is  d.  shall  condenm 

18.  be  a  reproach  among  the  d.  for  evermore 
Eccl.  7.  33.  and  for  the  d.  detain  it  not 
8.  7.  rejoice  not  over  Ihy  greatest  enemy  being  d. 
17.  28.  thanksgiving  perisheth  from  the  d. 
22.  11.  weep  for  the  d.  for  he  hath  lost  the  light, 
make  liitle  weeping  for  the  d.  he  is  at  rest 
30.  4.  yet  he  is  as  though  he  were  not  d. 

34.  25.  he  that  washeth  afier  touching  of  ad.  body 
38.  16.  my  son,  let  tears  fall  down  over  the  d. 

23.  when  the  d.  is  at  rest,  be  comforted  for  him 

43.  5.  who  didst  raise  up  a  d.  man  from  death,  and 

his  soul  from  the  place  of  the  d.  by  the  word 

2  Mac.  7.  36.  are  d.  under  God's  covenant  of  life 

12.  44.  it  had  been  vain  to  pray  for  the  d. 
45.  ho  made  a  rei-oncilialion  for  the  d. 

DEADLY. 
1  Mac.  7.  20.  a  man  that  bare  d.  hate  to  Israel 

DEAL. 
Tob.  3.  0.  d.  with  me  ns  seemclh  best  to  then 
4.  6.  if  thou  d.  truly,  thy  doing*  shall  succeed 

13.  6.  if  you  d.  uprightly  before  him 

Dan  3.  19.  d.  with  us  after  thy  loving-kindness 
1  Mac.  n.  16.  d.  not  with  us  according  to  our  sin 

DEALETH. 
Eccl.  50.  22.  d.  with  us  aceording  to  his  mercy 

DEALING. 
ffi.id.  5.  2b.  ill  d.  shall  overthrow  the  mighty 
16.  2.  d.  graciously  with  thine  own  people 
F.rcl.  29.  7.  refused  to  lend  for  other  men's  ill  d. 

40.  12.  but  true  d.  shall  endure  for  ever 

41.  18.  ashamed  of  unjust  d.  before  thy  partner 

DEALT. 

2K«d.8.35.  but  he  hath  d.  wickedly,  and  among  Ihc 

faithful  there  is  none  which  hath  not  d.  amiss 

Tub.S.  10.  hnstd.  with  us  according  lo  thy  mercy 

DEATH 


DED 


[ArocBTraA 


2  F.-id.  3.  7.  and  thou  apnointedst  d.  in  him 
10.  thai  ns  d.  was  to  Adam,  so  was  the  flood 

7.  47.  after  d.  lo  look  for  punishmunl 
49.  we  have  done  the  works  that  bring  d. 

0.  13.  the  lamo  roust  know  it  after  d.  by  pain 


Tob.  4.  2.  I  have  wished  for  d.  why  do  1  not  call 
10.  because  that  alms  duth  deliver  from  d. 

14.  10.  gave  alms  and  escaped  the  snares  of  d. 

.Jud.  12.14.  it  shall  be  my  joy  to  the  day  of  my  d. 

H  isd.  1.  12.  seek  not  d.  in  the  error  of  your  life 

13.  for  God  made  not  d.  nor  halh  he  pleasure 

2.  1.  in  the  d.  of  a  man  there  is  no  remedy 
24.  thro'  envy  of  the  devil  camed.  into  the  worM 

4.  7.  though  the  righteous  be  prevented  with  d. 
Eccl.  4.  28.  strive  for  the  truth  unto  d. 

14.  12.  remember  d.  will  not  be  long  in  coraing 

18.  22.  defer  not  till  d.  to  be  justified 

22.  11.  the  life  of  the  fool  is  worse  ihan  d. 

28.  21.  the  d.  thereof  is  an  evil  d. 

,33.  11.  good  is  set  against  evil,  and  life  against  d. 

.37.  2.  it  is  not  a  grief  unto  d.  when  a  friend 

38.  18.  for  of  heaviness  conielh  d. 

41.  1.  Od.  how  bitter  is  the  remeiYibrance  of  thee! 

2.  ()  d.  acceptable  is  Ihy  sentence  to  ihe  needy 

3.  fiar  not  the  sentence  of  d.  remember  theru 
46.  20.  after  his  d.  he  prophesied,  and  shewed 
48.  14.  at  his  d.  were  his  works  marvellous 

Bar.  t).  14.  cannot  put  lo  d.  one  Ihat  offeiideth  him 
36.they  can  save  no  man  fromd.  nor  deliver  weak 
2  Mac.  0.  30.  I  might  have  been  delivered  from  d. 
31.  leaving  his  d.  for  an  example  of  courage 
7.  14.  being  put  lo  d.  by  men  to  look  for  hope 
9.28.  so  died  he  a  miserable  d.  in  Ihe  mountains 

13.  8.  committed  sins,  he  received  his  d.  in  ashes 

DEBT. 
I  Esd.  3.  20.  a  man  remembereth  not  sorrow  nor  d. 

■      DECAY. 
Tob.i.  13.  in  lewdness  is  d.  and  great  want 

DECEIT. 
Jud.  9.]3.make  my  speech  ai>d  d.  to  be  their  wound 
Wisd. 1.5.  forthe  Holy  SJkirit  of  discipline  will  flyrf. 

14.  30.  they  unjustly  swore  in  d.  despising  holinea* 
Eccl.  1.  30.  but  Ihy  heart  is  full  of  d. 

10.  8.  becauseof  riches  got  by  d.  the  kingdom 
Bel  18.  O  Bel,  with  thee  is  no  d.  at  all 
I  Mac.  11.  1.  went  about  bvd.  to  get  the  kingdom 

DECEITFUL. 
F.ccl.  11.  29.  for  the  d.  man  hath  many  trains 
27.  25.  and  a  d.  stroke  shall  make  wounds 
•  DECEITFULLY. 

1  Mac.  7.  27.  sent  unto  Judas  and  his  brethren  (i. 

DECEIVABLE. 
F.ccl.  10.  19.  they  that  tran^yress,  are  a  d.  seed 

DECEIVE. 
./«d.  12.  16.  for  ho  wailed  a  lime  lo  d.  her 
liisd.  14.  21.  this  was  an  occasion  lo  d.  the  world 
1.5.  4.  neither  did  Ihe  invention  of  men  d.  ug 
Eccl.  13.  6.  if  he  have  need  of  thee,  he  will  d.  thee 

DPX'EIVED. 
.fud.  13.  16.  my  countenance  hath  d.  him 
Eccl.  3.  24.  many  are  d.  by  Iheir  own  opinion 
34.  7.  dreams  have  d.  many,  and  lliey  have  failed 

2  Mac.  6.  25.  and  so  they  should  be  d.  by  roe 
7.  18.  who  said,  be  not  d.  without  cause 

DECKED. 
.fud.  12.  Mi.  shed,  herself  with  her  apparel 
IMac.  4.  57.  they  d.  the  forefront  of  the  templA 

DECLARATION. 
Eccl.  43. 6.  for  a  d.  of  times,  and  a  sign  of  the  world 

DECLARE.  • 

2  F.sd.  4.  4.  whereof  if  thou  canst  d.  me  one 
Tub  Kl.6.d.his  might  and  majesty  to  n  sinful  natioa 
./i/d.  8.  34.  for  I  will  not  d.  it  unto  you 
10.  13.  I  am  coming  to  d.  words  of  truth 
11.5.  I  will  d.  no  lie  In  my  lord  this  night 
F.rcl.  14.  7.  at  Ihe  last  he  will  d.  his  wickedness 
16.  22.  who  can  d.  Ihe  works  of  his  juslicel' 
25.  and  I  will  d.  his  knowledge  exactly 
n.O.thutthey  might  d.  his  works  with  understand. 
34.  9.  he  that  hath  ex))erience  will  d.  wisdom 
39.  10.  Ihc  congregation  shall  d.  his  praise 
•S'u.*.  11.  Ihey  were  ashamed  to  d.  their  lust 
i'Mac.  3.  .34.  d.  to  all  men  the  mighty  power  of  God 

DECLARED. 
2  F..id.  8.  36.  in  this  thy  goodness  shall  be  d. 
fViad.  16.  21.  thy  sustenance  d.  thy  sweetness 
Sus.  27.  but  when  the  elders  had  d.  their  matter 

DECLARETH. 
F.ccl.  27.  6.  the  fruit  d.  if  the  tree  have  been  droaaod 
4-2.19.ho  d.  the  things  lhat  are  pastand  for  to  coma 

DECLARING. 
F.ccl.  43.  2.  the  sund.  nt  his  rising  a  marvellous 
44.  3.  men  giving  counsel  and  ri.  prophecies 
2  JVfar.6. 17.  we  will  ccmielo  the  d.  of  the  matter 

DF.CRKASK.TH. 
F.ccl.  43.  7.  a  light  that  d.  in  bur  perfection 

DIXREE. 
2  Mac.  6. 8.  went  out  a  d.  to  the  neighbouring  citiei 

DECREED. 
1  r.«d.8.94.  put  away  our  wives,  like  ns  Ihou  hast  d. 
H'i.id.A.  17.  what  God  in  his  counsel  bath  d.  of  bim 
'IMac.  3.  23.  ho  executed  thai  which  was  d. 

DEDK^ATF,. 
F.rrl.  35.  9.  and  d.  Ihy  lilhes  with  eladn<>si 
1  Mac.  4.  3G.  lot  ui  go  up  to  d.  the  sanctuary 


APOMLIPRA.] 


DEL 


DEDICATED. 
Jud.  16.  19.  Judith  d.  all  the  stuff  of  Oloferne* 
1  -tfac.  4.  54.  in  that  day  was  it  d.  with  songs 
HJUac.  5.  l(j.  pulled  down  the  things  that  were  d. 

DEDICATION. 
lEsd.  7.  7.  to  the  d.  of  the  teujplo  of  the  Lord 

1  Mac.  4.  56.  bo  they  kept  the  d.  of  llie  altar 
59.  that  the  days  of  the  d.  should  be  kept 

2  Mac.  2.  9.  he  offered  the  sacrifice  of  d. 

DEEDS. 
2  Esd.  3.  28.  are  their  d.  then  any  better? 

7.  23.  deceived  themselves  by  their  wicked  d. 
35.  the  reward  shall  bo  shewed,  the  good  d.  shall 

be  of  force,  and  the  wicked  d.  shall  bear  no  rule 

8.  33.  shall  out  of  their  own  d.  receive  reward 
Tab.  2.  14.  where  are  thy  alms  and  righteous  d.7 
JVisd.  1.9.  for  manifestation  of  his  wicked  d. 
Eccl.  4.  29.  and  in  thy  d.  slack  and  remiss 

17.  20.  none  of  their  unrighteous  d.  are  hid 
22.he  will  keep  the  good  rf.as  the  apple  of  the  eye 
48.  4.  how  wast  thou  honoured  in  wondrous  d.l 

DEEMED. 
fFisd.  13.2.  but  d.  it  either  fire,  or  wind,  or  air 

DEEP. 
S  Esd.  4.  8.  I  never  went  down  into  the  d. 
7.  3.  is  set  in  a  wide  place  that  it  might  be  d. 
Wisd.  4.  3.  nor  take  d.  rooting  from  bastard  slips 
10.  19.  cast  them  up  out  of  the  bottom  of  the  d. 
Eccl.  1.  3.  who  can  find  out  the  d.  and  wisdom? 
16.  18.  the  d.  shall  be  moved  when  he  shall  visit 
24.  29.  her  counsels  profounder  than  the  great  d. 

42.  18  lie  seeketh  out  the  d.  and  the  heart 

43.  23.  by  his  counsel  he  appeoseth  the  d. 

DEFECTIVE. 
Eccl.  49.  4.  all,  except  David  and  Josias,  were  d. 

DEFENCE. 
JEc<;I.34.1'6.he  is  ad.from  heat,  a  cover  from  the  sun 

1  Mac.  4.  fil.  that  the  people  might  have  a  d. 
Z  Mac.  15.  11.  not  so  much  with  d.  of  shields 

DEFEND. 

2  Esd.  2.  20.  d.  the  orphan,  clothe  the  naked 
7.  52.  to  d.  them  which  have  led  a  wary  life 

Jud.  5.  21.  pass  by,  lesi  their  Lord  d.  them 

6.  2.  not  war,  because  their  God  will  d.  them 

DEFENDED. 
Wisd.  10.  12.  she  d.  him  from  his  enemies 
19.  8.  the  people  that  were  d.  with  thy  hand 
Eccl.  2.  13.  therefore  shall  he  not  be  d. 
28.  19.  well  is  he  that  is  d.  from  the  tongue 

DEFENDER. 
Eccl.  51.  2.  for  thou  art  my  d.  and  helper 
iMac.  6.  2.  temple  of  Jupiter  thed.  of  strangers 

DEFENDETH. 
ZMae.  3.  39.  hath  his  eve  on  that  place,  and  (2.  it 

DEFER. 
^u(f.2.1.3. 1  have  commanded  thee,d.nottodo  them 
Ecd.  4.  3.  d.  not  to  give  to  him  that  is  in  need 
18.  22.  d.  not  till  death  to  be  justified 
DEFILE. 
Jtid.  13.  16.  he  hath  not  committed  sin  to  d.  me 
DEFILED. 
»   1  Ksd.  1.49.  the  governors  rf.  the  temple  of  the  Ld. 
2  Esd.  8.  60.  d.  the  name  of  him  that  made  them 
Eccl.  13.  1.  he  that  touchelh  pitch  shall  be  d. 
22.  13.  thou  shalt  never  be  d.  with  his  fooleries 
42.  10.  in  her  virginity,  lest  she  should  be  d. 
Bar.  3.  10.  that  thou  art  d.  with  the  dead 

1  Mac.  1. 37.  they  shed  blood,  and  d.  the  sanctuary 
4. 45.  to  pull  it  down  because  the  heathen  had  d.  it 

DEFILETH. 
Eccl.  21.  28.  a  whisperer  d.  his  own  sou! 

DEFILING. 
Wisd.  14.  26.  there  rcisned  in  all  men  d.  of  souls 

DEFLOWER. 
Eccl.  20.  4.  as  the  lust  of  a  eunuch  to  d.  a  virgin 

DEFRAUD. 
Eccl  4.  1.  my  son,  d.  not  the  poor  of  his  living 

7.  21.  d.  not  a  gooil  servant  of  liberty 
14.  14.  d.  not  thvsr'lfnf  the  eood  day 

DEFRAUDED. 
Eccl.  29.  7.  manv  refused  to  lend,  fearing  to  bod. 

DEFRAUDING. 

Eccl.  14.  4.  he  that  gathRreih  by  d.  his  own  soul 

DEFRAY. 

2  Mac.  8.  10.  so  much  as  should  d.  the  tribute 
9.  16.  out  of  his  own  revenue  d.  the  charges 

DEGREE. 
Etel.W.  l.lifteth  up  hra.l  of  them  that  is  of  low  d. 

DELAY. 
Tob.  12.  13.  when  thou  didnt  not  d.  to  rise  up 
Eccl.  29.  8.  and  d.  not  (o  shew  him  mercy 

DKMBRRATION. 
Wiai.  12  20.  if  thon  didst  punish  with  such  d. 

DELICATE. 
Wisd.  19.  11.  when  they  asked  d.  meats 
Eccl.  29.  22.  th;in  d.  fare  in  another  man's  house 
Sus.  31.  Susanna  was  a  very  d.  woman 

DEDICATES. 
Ercl.  30.  18.  d.  poured  upon  a  mouth  shut  up 
?1.  3  the  rich  is  filled  with  his  d. 
775 


DEP 

DELIGHT. 

Jud.  12.  20.  Olofernes  took  great  d.  in  her 
Wisd.  6.  21.  if  your  d.  be  then  in  thrones 

16.  20.  bread  able  to  content  every  man's  d. 
Eccl.  1.  27.  and  faith  and  meekness  are  his  d. 

9.  12.  d.  not  in  the  things  the  ungodly  have 

16.  1.  neither  d.  in  ungddly  sons 

DELIGHTED. 
Wisd.  13.  3.  if  they  being  d.  took  them  to  be  go<ls 
Eccl.  51.15.  from  the  Ho  wer  my  heart  hath  d.  in  her 

DELIGIITETH. 

Eccl.  26.  13.  the  grace  of  a  wife  d.  her  Inisband 

2  Mac.  15.  39.  mingled  wine  is  pleasant  and  d.  the 

taste,  so  speech  finely  framed  d.  the  ears 

DELIVER. 

1  Esd.  8.59.  till  ye  d.  them  to  the  chief  of  the  priests 

2  Esd.  7.  32.  the  secret  places  shall  d.  souls 
T'o*.  4.10.  because  almsdothd.  from  death,  12. 9. 

14.  11.  consider  how  righteousness  doth  d. 
Jud.  8.  9.  had  sworn  to  d.  the  city  to  the  Assyrians 
11.  ye  have  promised  tod.  the  city  to  our  enemies 
Est^.  14. 19.  d.  us  out  of  the  hands  of  mischievous 
Eccl.  4. 9.  d.  him  that  sufforeth  wrong  from  oppres. 
29.  12.  it  shall  d.  thee  from  all  aflliction 
33.  1.  in  temptation  even  again  he  will  d.  him 
42.  7.  d.  all  tilings  in  number  and  weight 
50.  24.  that  be  would  d.  us  at  this  time 
Bar.  6.  15.  but  cannot  d.  himself  from  war 

36.  nor  can  they  d.  the  weak  from  the  mighty 
Daji.  3. 11.  d.  us  not  up  wholly  for  thy  name's  sake 
Bel  29.  d.  us,  Daniel,  else  we  will  destroy  thee 
1  Mac.  5.  12.  come,  and  d.  us  from  their  hands 

DELIVERANCE. 
Eccl.  51.  9.  I  prayed  for  d.  from  death 
1  Mac.  4.  25.  thus  Israel  had  a  great  d.  that  day 
56.  they  sacrificed  the  sacrifice  of  d.  and  praise 
DELIVERED. 
1  Esd.  1.  53.  for  he  d.  all  into  their  hands 

3.  13.  they  d.  their  writings  unto  him 
8.  56.  I  d.  unto  them  650  talents  of  silver 

62.  the  gold  and  silver  was  d.  into  house  of  our  L. 
Tab.  3.  4.  wherefore  thou  hast  d.  us  for  spoil 
Wisd.  10.  6.  she  d.  the  righteous  man  who  fled 
9.Wisdomd.from  pain  those  that  attended  on  her 
13.  she  forsook  him  not,  but  d.  him  from  sin 
Eccl.  29.  17.  will  leave  him  in  danger  that  d.  him 
48.  20.  Lord  d.  them  by  the  ministry  of  Esay 
2Mac.  6. 26. 1  should  be  d.  from  punishment  of  men 
30.  whereas  I  might  have  been  d.  from  death 
12.  45.  tliat  they  might  be  d.  from  sia 

DELIVEREDST. 
Eccl.  51. 12.  thou  d.  me  from  the  evil  time 

DELIVEREST. 
Eccl.  51.  8.  how  thou  d.  such  as  wait  for  thee 

DELIVERETH. 
1  Mae.  4.  11.  that  there  is  One  who  d.  Israel 
DEMANDED. 

1  Esd.  6.  12.  we  d.  who  were  the  chief  doers 
Wisd.  15.  8.  life  that  was  lent  him  shall  be  d. 

2  Mac.  15.  3.  he  d.  if  there  were  a  mighty  one 

DEMETRIUS. 
IMac.T.l.  D.  son  of  Seleucus departed  from  Rome 
8.  31.  the  evils  that  D.  doth  to  the  Jews 

10.  52.  I  have  overthrown  D.  ||  67.  D.  son  of  D. 

11.  12.  he  took  his  daughter  and  gave  her  to  D. 
39.  seeing  all  the  host  murmured  against  D. 

14.  3.  who  went  and  smote  the  host  of  D. 

2  Mac.  1.  7.  what  time  as  D.  reigned  in  169th  year 

14.  1.  informed  that  D.  had  taken  the  country 

4.  came  to  king  D.  |{  II.  did  more  incense  D. 

DEN. 

Bel  35.  neither  do  I  know  where  the  d.  is 

36.  the  angel  set  him  in  Babylon  over  the  d. 

DENS. 

2  Mac.  10.  6.  they  wandered  in  mountains  and  d. 

DENIED. 
Wisd.  12.  27.  whom  bclore  they  d.  to  know 
DEPART. 

1  Esd.  1. 27.  d.  from  me,  and  be  not  against  the  Ld. 

4.  11.  these  keep  watch,  neither  may  any  one  d. 

2  E.?d.4.l4.make  war  against  the  sea,  that  it  may  d. 
Tob.  4.  21.  if  thou  fear  God  and  d.  from  all  sin 

14.  3.  I  am  aged  and  am  ready  to  d.  out  of  this  life 
.Tud.  13.  1.  his  servants  made  haste  to  d. 

19.  for  this  thy  confidence  shall  not  d.  from  men 
Eccl.l.'i.d.  from  unjust,  and  iniquity  shall  turn  aw. 
82.  13.  d.  from  him,  and  thou  shalt  find  rest 
22.  for  these  things  every  fiiend  will  d. 
23.  II.  the  plague  shall  never  d.  from  his  house 
27.  22.  he  that  knoweth  him,  will  d.  from  him 
35.  3.  to  d.  from  wickedness,  pleases  the  Lord 

17.  and  will  not  d.  till  the  Most  High  behold 
J)au.  3.  12.  cause  not  thy  mercy  to  d.  fiom  us 
2  Mac.  2.  3.  the  law  should  not  d.  from  their  hearts 

11.  30.  they  that  will  d.  shall  have  safe  conduct 
DEPARTED. 

1  Esd.  8.  CI.  from  the  river  Theras  we  d. 

2  Esd.  3.  22.  the  good  d.  away,  the  evil  nbode  still 
Eccl.  33.  23.  when  his  spirit  i'f  d.  from  him 

46.  11.  whose  heart  d.  nut  from  the  Lord 


DES 

Eccl.  48.  15.  neither  d.  they  from  their  gini 
Bar.  3.  8.  which  d.  from  the  Lord  our  God 
Sus.  7.  now  when  the  people  d.  away  at  r)ooo 

DEPARTURE. 
Wisd.  3.  2.  and  their  d.  is  taken  for  misery 

DEPEND. 
Jud.  8.  24.  because  their  hearts  d.  upon  ua 

DEPENDETH. 
Eccl.  40.  29.  the  life  of  him  that  d.  on  another 
DEPOSED. 

1  Esd.  1.  35.  then  the  kinff  of  Egypt  d.  him 
DEPRIVE. 

Esth.  16. 12.  went  about  to  d.  us  of  our  kingdom 

DEPRIVED. 
Wisd.  18.  4.  they  were  worthy  to  be  d.  of  light 
Eccl.  28.  15.  hath  d.  them  of  their  labours 
29.  6.  he  hath  d.  him  of  his  money 
37.  21.  because  he  is  d.  of  all  wisdom 
'iMac.  14.7.  I  being  d.  of  my  ancestor's  honour 
DEPTH,  S. 

2  Esd.  3.  18.  and  thou  madcst  the  d.  to  tremble 
8. 23.whoselookdrieth  up  the  d.  mountains  melt 

DERISION. 
1  Esd.  1.  51.  but  they  had  his  messengers  in  d. 
Wisd.  5.  3.  this  was  he  whom  we  had  somet.  in  d. 

DESCENDED. 
.Tud.  5.  6.  this  people  are  d.  of  the  Chaldeans 
6.  14.  but  the  Israelites  d.  from  their  city 
DESCRIPTION. 

1  £sd.5. 39.  when  the  d.  of  the  kindred  wasaoueht 
DESERTS. 

Wisd.ft.l.vif.  have  gone  thro'  d.  where  was  no  way 

DESERTS. 
Esth.  16.  18.  rendering  him  according  to  his  d. 

DESERVED. 
Wisd.  19.  14.  friends  that  had  well  d.  of  them 

2  Mac.  4.  2.  that  had  d.  well  of  the  city 
38.  rewarded  him  his  punishment  as  he  had  d. 

DESIRE.  , 

1  Esd.  4.  46.  and  now  this  is  what  I  d.  of  thee,  I 
d.  therefore  that  thou  make  good  the  vow 

2  Esd.  1.  25.  when  ye  d.  me  to  be  gracious  to  you 
8.  27.  the  d.  of  those  that  keep  thy  testimonies 

32.  if  thou  hast  a  d.  to  have  mercy  upon  us 
Tob.  4.  19.  d.  that  thy  ways  may  be  directed 
IVisd.  4.  2.  and  when  it  is  gone,  they  d.  it 
6.  11.  d.  my  words,  and  ye  shall  be  instructed 
13.  she  preventeth  them  that  d.  her 
17.  the  beginning  of  her  is  the  d.  of  discipline 
20.  the  d.  of  wisdom  bringeth  to  a  kingdom 
8.8.  if  a  man  d.  much  experience,  she  knoweth 

14.  2.  for  verily  d.  of  gain  devised  that 

15.  5.  so  they  d.  the  form  of  a  dead  image 
6.  they  that  d.  them  are  lovers  of  evil  things 

16.  25.  according  to  d.  of  them  that  had  need 
KccM.26.  if  thou  d.  wisdom,  keep  commandments 

3.  29.  an  attentive  ear  is  the  d.  of  a  wise  man 
14. 14.  let  not  the  part  of  a  good  d.  overpass  thee 
16.  1.  d.  not  a  irtultitude  of  unprofitable  children 
25.  21.  and  d.  her  not  for  pleasure 
2  Mac.  6.  25.  through  my  d  to  live  a  little  time 
11.  2S.  if  ye  fare  well,  we  have  our  d. 
29.  declared  that  your  d.  wa<  to  return  home 
DESIRABLE. 
Eccl.  1.  17.  she  filletli  all  her  house  with  things  d. 
42.  22.  O  how  d.  are  all  his  works  ! 

DESIRED. 
./«d.  12.  16.  Olofernes  d.  greatly  her  company 
16.  22.  many  d.  her  but  none  knew  her 
Wisd.  8.  2.  I  d.  to  make  her  my  spouse 
15.  19.  aie  not  beautiful  so  much  as  to  be  d. 
Svs.  11.  that  they  d.  to  have  to  do  with  her 
2 Mac.  15.  38.  done  well,  it  is  that  which  I  d. 

DESIRES. 
KcrM8.31.if  thou  givcst  thy  soul  d.  that  please  her 
2  Mac.  9.  27.  will  araciouslv  vield  to  your  d. 

DESIREST. 

2  Esd.  4.  4.  show  thee^ie  way  that  thou  d.  to  see 

43.  from  beginninz  look  what  thou  d.  to  see 

DESIROUS. 

Estk.  11.  12.  he  by  all  means  was  d.  to  know  it 

rri.'!d.l3.6.they  err,  seeking  God,  and  d.'.o  find  him 

Eccl.  23.  5.  that  is  d.  always  to  serve  then 

24.  19.  come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  hd  d.  of  me 

Sus.  15.  she  was  d.  to  wash  herself  in  the  garden 

I  Mac.  5.67.  certain  priests  d.  to  shew  their  valour 

DESOLATE. 

1  K.<d.  4.  45.  when  Judea  was  made  d.  by  Clmldces 
8.  HI.  and  they  raised  up  the  d.  Sinn 

2  Esd.  1.  33.  your  house  is  d.  I  will  cast  you  out 
Tob.  14. 4.  Jerusalem  shaii  'ue  d.  the  house  of  God 

in  it  shall  be  burned,  shall  be  d.  for  a  lime 

Eslh.li.XO  my  Lord,  help  mod. woman  who  have 

14.  help  me  that  am  d.  have  no  helper  but  thee 

Ecc^21.4.  the  house  of  proud  men  shall  be  made  d. 

DESOLATION. 
I  F.sd.  1.  58.  the  whole  lime  of  her  d.  shall  she  rest 
2Esd.3.2.for  Isaw  d.  of  Sion  and  wealth  at  Baby). 

DESPAIR. 
Eccl.  22. 21.  yet  d.  not,  there  may  be  a  returninj; 


DEV 

DESPAIHETH. 
Ecel.  41.  2.  to  him  that  d.  and  huth  loit  patience 

DESPAIRING. 
iMae.  9.  18.  tliereCore  d.  of  his  health,  he  wrote 

DESPERATE. 
2  Mac.639.  the  spiieches  proceeded  from  a  d.  mind 

DESPERATELY. 
ZMac.  13.  23.  heard  that  Philip  was  d.  bent 

DESPISE. 
2  Esd.  7.  20.  because  they  d.  the  law  ofGod 
To*.  4.  3.  bury  me,  and  d.  not  thy  mother 
13.  my  son  d.  not  in  thy  heart  Ihy  brethren 
18.  d.  not  any  counsel  that  is  profitable 
Jud.  8.  20.  we  trust  that  he  will  not  d.  us 

10.  19.  every  one  said,  who  would  d.  this  people? 
Esth.  13.  16.  d.  not  the  jjorlion  thou  hast  delivered 
fFisd.  4.  18.  they  thiill  see  him  and  d.  him 
Eccl.  3.  13.  d.  him  not  when  thou  art  in  strength 
10.  23.  it  is  not  m.eet  to  d.  the  poor  man 
31.  22.  my  son,  hear  me,  and  d.  me  not 
31.  and  d.  not  ihy  ntighbour  in  his  mirth 
35.  14.  ho  will  not  </.  the  supplication  of  fatherless 

DESPISED. 
iEsd.  1.  7.  but  they  have  d.  my  counsels 

34.  for  they  havifd.  mycommanument,  done  evil 

2.  33.  they  d.  the  commandment  of  the  Lord 

7.  24.  his  law  have  they  d.  and  denied  his  covenant 

8.  56.  d.  the  Most  High,  and  forsook  his  wkys 
Jud.  14.  5.  know  him  tliat  d.  the  house  of  Israel 
Esth.  13.  4.  that  d.  the  commandments  of  kings 

fVisd.  12.  24.  among  Ihe  beasts  of  enemies  weied. 
2  Mac.  7.  24.  Aniiochus  thinking  himself  d. 

DESPISETH. 
Ecel.  14. 8.  env.  man  hath  a  wicked  eye  and  d.  men 

DESPISING. 
Wisd.  14.  30.  they  swore  in  deceit,  d.  holiness 

DESPITEFUL. 
Bccl.  31.  31.  give  no  d.  words,  press  not  on  him 

•despitefulness. 

Wisd.  2. 19.  let  us  examine  him  with  d.  and  torture 

DESTINY. 
Wisd.  19.  4.  the  d.  whereof  they  were  worthy 

DESTITUTE. 
Wisd.  12.  6.  the  parents  that  killed  souls  d.  of  helj 
Eccl.  37.  20.  and  is  hated,  he  shall  be  d.  of  all  food 

DESTROY. 

1  Es(/.8.88.mightcst  not  thou  be  angry  with  us  to  d.7 

Esth.  10. 8.  were  assembled  to  d.  the  name  of  Jews 

Wisd.U.  19.  but  the  terrible  sight  utterly  d.  them 

12.8.di<l6t  send  wasps  to  d.  them  by  little  and  little 

1  Mac.  5.  2,  ihey  thought  to  d.  the  generation  of 

Jacob,  they  began  to  slay  and  d. 

the  people 

DESTROYED. 

S  Fsd.  1.  10.  many  kings  have  I  d.  for  their  sakcs 

11.  all  the  nations  have  I  d.  before  them 
Jud.  5.  18.  they  were  d.  in  many  battles 
13.  14.  but  hath  d.  our  enemies  by  mine  hands 
Esth.  16. 24.  every  city  shall  be  d.  without  mercy 
Wisd.  16.  27.  that  A'hich  was  not  d.  of  the  fire 
F^cl.  8.  2.  for  gold  hath  d.  maiiv,  and  perverted 
DESTROYEDST. 

2  F.sd.  3.  9.  thou  broughlest  the  flood  and  d.  them 
Wisd.  18.  5.  d.  them  altngethcr  in  a  mighty  water 

DESTROYER. 

Wi'sd.  18.  22.  he  overcame  thed.  not  with  strength 

25.  to  these  the  d.  gave  [ilace,  and  was  afraid 

DE.STROYETII. 

Eccl.  20.  22.  there  is  that  d.  his  own  soul 

DESTRUCTION. 
SKjd.1.16.triumphcd  not  for  the  d.  of  your  enemies 
Tub.  4.  13.  for  in  pride  is  d.  and  much  trouble 
Jud.  13.  5.  exec,  myenlcrprizi's  tod.  of  Ihe  enemies 

16.  my  countenance  hath  deceived  him  to  his  d. 
F^tk.  16. 13.  this  wretch  hath  delivered  to  utter  d. 

2.3.  that  there  may  be  a  memorial  of  d. 
Wisd.  1.  12.  and  pull  not  upon  yourselves  d. 

3.  3.  and  their  going  froifl  us  to  bo  utter  d. 
5.  7.  we  wearied  ourselves  in  the  way  of  d. 

2  Mac.  6.  12.  those  puniahmcnls  not  to  be  for  d. 

DETAINED. 
7'o4.I0.2.Tobit  said,  arc  they  d.  or  is  Gabael  dead? 

..      DETKRMI.VED. 
1  Esd.  8.  10.  having  d.  to  deal  graciously 
./ud.5.4.  whv  have  ihey  d.  not  to  come  and  meet  me? 
7?;.»<A.11.12.Miirdoch.Mis  had  seen  what  God  had  d. 

Wisd.  18.  5.  d..to  slay  the  babes  of  the  saints 
^  Mac.  11.  2.'>.  wn  have  d.  to  restore  their  temple 

13.  0.  Nicanor  d.  to  set  up  a  public  moruimcnt 

17.  d.  not  to  pitch  cnmp,  but  to  set  upon  them 

DETEr!TAI5LE. 
2. Vac.  5.  24.  he  sent  aNo  that  d.  ringleader 

DEVICE. 
Esth.  14.  11.  but  turn  ihrir  d.  upon  Ihemiielves 
1  Mac.  1.  12.  so  this  d.  rileascd  tliem  well 

DEVICES. 
Wisd.  9.  14.  and  our  d.  arc  but  uncertain 
Eccl.  3.'i.  19.  the  works  of  men  according  to  their  d. 
42.  18.  he  considered  their  crafty  d. 
1  Mac.  6.  37.  were  girt  fmt  unto  them  with  d 
776 


DEVIL. 

Tob.  6.  7.  if  a  d.  or  an  evil  spirit  trij«n)Ie  any 

17.  and  the  d.  shall  smell  it,  and  flee  away 
fVisd.  2.  24.  through  envy  of  the  d.  came  death 

DEVILS. 
Bar.  4.  7.  by  sacrificing  to  d.  and  not  to  God 
35.  she  shall  be  inhabited  of  d.  a  great  time 
DEVISE. 
Eccl.  7.  12.  d.  not  a  lie  against  thy  brother 

DEVISED. 
2  Esd.  4.  19.  it  is  foofish  that  they  both  have  d. 
Wisd.  14.  2.  for  verily  desire  of  gain  d.  that 

DEVOUR. 
2Esd.8.4. swallow  down,  O  my  soul,  and  d.  wisdom 
Eccl.  28.  23.  it  shall  d.  them  as  a  leopard 
31.  16.  and  d.  not,  lest  thou  be  hated 
Bel  32.  to  tlie  intent  they  might  d.  Daniel 

DEVOURED. 
2  Esd.  6.  52.  kept  him  to  be  d.  of  whom  thou  wilt 
Tob.  6.  2.  a  fish  leaped  out  and  would  have  d.  him 
,fud.  5.  24.  they  shall  be  a  prey  to  be  d.  of  all 
F.sth.  11.  11.  lowly  exalted,  and  d.  the  glorious 
Bel  42.  were  d.  in  a  moment  before  his  face 

DEVOURERS. 
Wisd.  12.  5.  those  murderers,  and  d.  of  man's  flesh 

DEVOURETH. 
F.ccl.  36. 18.  belly  d.  all  meats,  yet  one  meat  better 
Bel  8.  who  is  this  that  d.  these  expenses  ? 
9.  but  if  ye  can  certify  me  that  Bel  d.  them 
DEW. 
Wisd.  11.-22.  the  world  is  as  a  drop  of  morning  d. 
Eccl.  18.  16.  shall  not  the  d.  assuage  the  heat? 

DIADE.M. 
Wisd.  18.  24.  thy  majesty  upon  the  d.  of  his  head 
Bar.  5.  2.  and  set  a  d.  on  thy  head  of  the  glory 

DIE. 
2  Fsd.  1.  18.  better  than  to  d.  in  this  wilderness 

7.  29.  after  these  years  shall  my  son  Christ  d. 
31.  and  that  shall  d.  that  is  corrupt 

8.  .58.  yea,  and  that  knowing  they  must  d. 
Tob.  3.  15.  if  it  please  not  thee  that  I  should  d. 

10.  12.  that  I  may  see  thy  children  before  I  d. 

11.9.  from  henceforth  I  am  content  to  d. 
Wisd.  3.  2.  in  sight  of  unwise  they  seemed  to  d. 

18.  or  if  they  d.  quickly,  they  have  no  hope 
F.ccl.  8.  7.  but  remember  that  we  d.  all 

14.  13.  do  good  to  thy  friend  before  thou  d. 

17.  the  covenant  is.  Thou  shall  d.  the  death 

19. 10.  if  thou  hast  heard  a  word,  let  it  d.  with  thee 
25.  24.  and  through  the  woman  we  all  d. 
30.  4.  though  bis  father  d.  yet  he  is  as  tho'  he  were 

39.  11.  ifhed.  he  shall  leave  a  greater  name 

40.  28.  for  better  it  is  to  d.  than  to  beg 

41.9.  and  if  you  d.  a  curse  shall  be  yuur  portion 
Bar.  4.  1.  hut  such  as  leave  the  law  shall  d. 

1  Mac.  1.  5.  and  he  perceived  that  he  should  d. 
2.  37.  but  said,  let  us  d.  all  in  our  innocency 

2  Mac.  7.  2.  are  ready  to  d.  rather  than  transgress 

5.  they  exhorted  one  another  to  d.  manfully 
14.  80  when  he  was  ready  to  d.  he  said  thus 

18.  who  being  ready  to  d.  said,  be  not  deceived 
14.42.choo8ing  rather  to  d.  manfully,  than  to  come 

DIED. 

JVisd.  17. 10.  they  d.  for  fear,  denying  they  saw  air 
1  Macl"!.  .Alexander  reigned  12  years,  and  then  d. 
'2  Mac.  6.  31.  thus  this  man  d.  leaving  an  example 

7.  40.  so  this  man  d.  undefiled,  and  put  his  trust 
41.  Inst  of  all,  after  the  sons,  the  mother  d. 

9.  28.  so  d.  ho  a  miserable  death  in  the  mountains 

12.  45.  favour  laid  up  for  those  that  d.  godly 
14.  46.  calling  on  the  Lord  of  life,  he  thus  d. 

,      DIET. 
EccJ.  30.  25.  a  good  heart  will  have  a  care  of  his  d. 

DIGGED. 
Ecel.  48.  17.  he  d.  the  hard  rock  with  iron 

DIGGETH. 
Eccl.  27.  26.  whoso  d.  n  pit  shall  fall  therein 

DIGNITY. 
Esth.  16.  12.  but  he  not  bearing  his  great  d. 
1  Mac.  10.  54.  give  gifts  according  to  thy  d. 

DIGNITIES. 
1  Esd.  1.  11.  accoriling  to  the  several  d.  8.  28. 
DILIGENCE. 

1  Fsd.  6.  10.  and  with  all  glory  and  d.  is  it  made 

2  Fsd.  3.  19.  give  d.  to  the  generation  of  Israel 
Wisd.  14.  18.  the  singular  d  of  the  artificer 

DILIGENT. 
1  K*d.  2. 26.  I  commanded  to  makorf.  learch 
Feci.  32.  1,  take  d.  care  for  them,  and  so  sit  down 
38.  26.  he  is  d.  to  give  the  kinc  fodder 
27.  they  are  d.  to  make  great  variety 
30.  he  18  d.  to  muke  rlcnn  tho  furnace 
DILIGENTLY. 

1  Esd.  0. 28.  that  they  look  d.  to  help  thoee  that  be 

8.  24.  whoso  transgresaeth,  shall  be  punished  d. 

2  Fsd.  9  1.  measure  thou  tho  time  d.  in  itself 

16.  ;W.  chuler*  that  d.  seek  through  thn  vineyard 
Wisd.  7.  13.  I  learned  d.  and  do  communicBte  hor 

13.  7.  they  search  him  d.  and  believe  their  light 
13.  hatb  carved  it  d.  when  ho  had  nothinj  to  do 


DIS 


[APOCBtPBAt 


Eccl.  IS.  14.  that  d.  seek  after  his  judsuieota 
Sus.  12.  yet  they  watched  d.  from  day  today 

DIMINISH. 
Eccl.  28.  8.  and  thou  shah  d.  thy  sins 
35.  8.  and  d.  not  the  first  fruiis  of  thy  hands 

DIMINISHED. 
Bar.  2.  34.  increase  them,  they  shall  not  be  d 

DIMINISHETH. 
£cc2.31. 30.  drunkenn.  d.  streugth,  maketh  wouotia 

DIMMETH. 
Eccl.  43.  4.  aendelh  bright  beams,  it  d.  tlie  eyes 

DINNER. 
Tob.  12.  13.  not  delay  to  rise  up  and  leave  thy  d. 
Sus.  13.  let  us  now  go  home,  for  it  is  d.  lime 
Bel  34.  carry  the  d.  that  thou  hast  into  Babylon 
37.  take  the  d.  which  God  hath  sent  thee 
DIRECT, 
./ud.  12. 8.  she  besought  God  of  Isr.  dod.  bcrway 
Eccl.  6.  17.  shall  d.  his  friendship  aright 
37.  15.  pray  that  he  will  d.  thy  way  in  truth 
39.  7.  he  shall  d.  his  counsel  and  knowledge 

DIRECTED. 
Tob.  A.  19.  desire  of  him,  that  thy  ways  may  be  <L 
Jud.  13.  18.  which  hath  d.  thee  to  the  cutting  off 
Feci.  49.  9.  he  d.  them  that  went  right 
51.  20.  I  d.  my  soul  unto  her  and  found  her 

DIRECTETH. 
Wisd.  7. 1.5.  he  leads  to  wisdom  and  d.  the  wise 

DISANNUL. 
Dan.  3.  11.  neither  d.  thou  ihy  covenant 

DISAPPOINTED. 
Jud.  16.  6.  but  the  almighty  Lord  hath  d.  them 

DISCERNED. 
Wisd.  2.  22.  nor  d.  a  reward  for  blameless  souIb 

DISCIPLINE. 
Wisd.  1.  5.  the  holy  Spirit  of  d.  will  flee  deceit 
6.  17.  for  the  very  true  beginning  of  her,  is  tbs 
desire  of  d.  and  the  care  of  d.  is  love 
Eccl.  4.  17.  she  will  torment  him  with  her  d. 

17.  18.  being  first-born,  he  nourished  with  d. 

18.  14.  he  hath  mercy  on  them  that  receive  d. 
2;!.  2.  will  set  the  d  of  wisdom  over  my  heart 

7.  hear,  O  ye  children,  the  d.  of  the  mouth 
32. 14.  whoso  feareih  the  Lord,  will  receive  hisd. 
41.  14.  my  children  keep  d.  in  peace 
Bar.  4.  13.  nor  trod  they  in  the  paths  of  d. 

DISCLOSING. 
Eccl.  22.  22.  except  for  pride  or  d.  of  secrets 

DISCOMFITED. 
1  Mac.  4. 14.  the  heathen  being  d.  fled  into  the  plaia 
36.  Judah  said,  behold,  our  enemies  are  d. 
DISCOURAGED. 

1  Mac.  4.  27.  he  was  confounded  and  d. 

2  Mac.  6.  12.  that  thev  be  not  d.  for  calamitiee 

DISCOURSE. 
Eccl.  6.  35.  be  willing  to  hear  every  godly  d. 
8.  9.  miss  not  the  d.  of  the  ciders,  they  learned 
27.  11.  the  d.  of  a  godly  man  is  with  wisdom 
13.  the  d.  of  fools  is  irksome,  and  their  sport 
DISCOVER. 
Eccl.  1.  30.  so  God  d.  thy  secrets  and  cast  down 

DISCOVERED. 
.Tud.  9.  2.  and  who  d.  the  thigh  to  her  shame 
Feci.  11.  27.  in  his  end  his  deeds  shall  be  d. 

1  Mac.  7. 31.  when  he  saw  that  his  counsel  was  d. 

DISCOVERETH. 
Eccl.  27.  16.  whoso  d.  secrets  loseth  his  credit 

DISDAIN. 
EccA  22. 10.  but  children  b^ing  haughty  throaghd. 

DISEASE. 
Feel.  10.  10.  the  physician  cutteth  off  a  long  d. 
31.  2.  as  a  sore  d.  breakelh  sleep 
DISEASES. 

2  Esd.  8.  31.  our  fathers  do  languish  of  such  d. 

DISGRACE. 
Wisd.  17.  7.  their  vaunting  was  reproved  with  d. 
F.ccl.  21.24.  hut  a  wise  man  will  be  grieved  with  a. 
22.  1.  every  one  will  hiss  him  out  to  his  d. 
29.  6.  and  for  honour  he  will  pay  him  d. 
2  Mac.  9.  4.  thought  to  avenge  on  the  Jews  the  d. 

DISGRACED. 
Feel.  8.  4.  jest  not  lest  thy  ancestors  bo  d. 
11.  6.  many  mighty  men  have  been  greatly  d. 

DISHONEST. 
Eccl.  26.  24.  a  rf.  woman  rontemneth  shame 

DISHONE.'^TLY. 
Ecc/.22.  4.  she  that  lives  rf.  i<  her  father's  heavlnest 

DISHO.NOUR. 
Feci.  1.  30.  thou  fall  and  bring  d  on  thy  soul 
3.  10.  glory  not  in  Ihe  d.  of  thy  father 
11.  a  nioihcr  in  rf.  is  a  reproach  to  the  children 

8.  fi.  d.  not  a  man  in  hi.t  old  age,  fur  wn  wax  old 
2-2.  3.  an  ill-nurlnred  son  U  the  d.  of  his  father 

Bar.  6.  40.  Ihe  Chalileans  thomBclves  d.  thom 

1  Mac.  1.  40.  as  glory,  so  was  her  d.  increaied 

2  .Mae.  8.  35.  he  came,  having  very  great  d. 

9.  1.  at  that  lime  cam"  AntioehiH  with  d. 

DI.=lHONOURAIU,E. 

Frrl.  10.  10.  Ihey  ihni  regard  not  law,  are  a  d.  feed 

31.  be  that  isd.  in  riches,  much  more  io  poTorty 


i     OCRVP^A.) 


my 


£cc?.20. 26.  the  disposition  of  liar  is  d.  and  shame 

DISIIONOUUETH. 
Ecel.  '2-2.  5.  she  that  is  bold  d.  her  father 
26.  26.  but  she  that  d.  him  in  her  pride 

DISMISSED. 
Jud.  13.  1.  he  d.  the  waiters  trmn  the  presence 

DISOBEDIENT. 
Bar.  1.  19.  we  have  been  d.  to  the  Lord  our  God 

DISOBEY. 

Ecd.  2.  15.  they  that  fear  the  Lord  will  not  d. 

6.  23.  and  they  shall  never  d.  his  word 

DISOBEYED. 

/i^ccf.  2,3. 23.  first  she  hath  d.  the  law  of  the  Lord 

Bnr.  1.18.  we  have;/,  him,  and  have  not  hearkened 

DISORDER. 
JVisd.  14.  26.  there  rei!;niHl  d.  in  marriages 

Dlt^l'.ATCH. 
JVisd.  11.  19.  the  h.arm  might  d.  them  at  once 
2  JV/ac.9.  4.  he  commanded  him  to  d.  the  journey 

DISPATCHED. 
Tob.  1.  8.  and  let  Ihi.s  busine:*s  be  d. 

DISI'ERSED. 
Tob.  3  4.  to  all  nations  among  whom  we  are  d. 
Jud.  7.  32.  he  d.  the  peoplcevery  one  to  his  charge 
IVisd.'i.A,  our  life  shill  bed.  as  a  mist  driven  away 
5.  14.  as  the  smoke  which  is  d.  here  and  there 

DISPL.\CE. 
I  Mac.  8. 13.  and  whom  again  they  would,  they  d. 

DISPLEASED. 
Ecd.  4.'>.  19.  this  the  Lord  saw,  and  it  d.  him 
1  Mac.  5. 1.  the  nnlions  saw,  it  d.  them  very  much 
DISPLEASURE. 

1  Ksd.  4.  31.  but  if  she  took  any  d.  at  him 

2  £srf.  8.  34,  that  thou  shouldest  take  d.  at  him 

DISPOSED. 
2  Esd.  5.  49.  even  so  have  I  d.  the  world 
Eccl.  It).  26.  he  d.  the  parts  thereof 

DISPOSEST. 
i  Esd.  8.  11.  till  tbnu  d.  it  to  thy  mercy 

DISPOSITION. 
2  F^tf.  8.  38.  I  will  not  think  on  the  d.  of  them 
39.  I  will  rejoice  over  the  d.  of  the  righteous 
Jud.  8.  29.  because  the  d.  of  thy  heart  is  good 
Esth.  Ifi.  fi.  with  the  deceit  of  their  lewd  d. 
Eccl.  20.  26.  the  d.  of  a  liar  is  dishonourable 

DISQUIETED. 
2  End.  10.  31.  what  aileth  thee "!  why  art  thou  d.  ? 
Eccl.  22.  13.  and  never  be  d.  with  his  madness 
2d.  14.  a  backbiting  tongue  hath  d.  many 

DISaUIETETH. 
Eccl.  28.  9.  a  sinful  man  d.  friends 
DISaUIETING. 
fFisd.  14.  26.  there  reiiined,  d.  of  good  men 
DISSEMBLED. 

1  Mac.  11.  53.  he  d.  in  all  that  ever  he  spake 

DISSIMUL.ATION. 
fVisd.  14.  25.  there  reigned  in  all  men  d, 

2  Mac  13.  3.  with  great  d.  encouraged  Antiochus 

DISSOLVED. 
Tob.  3.  6.  that  I  mav  be  d.  and  become  earth 

DISSOLUTELY. 
ffisd.  12.  23.  whereas  men  have  lived  d. 

DISTANCE. 
2  Esd.  5.47.  she  cannot;  but  must  do  it  by  d.  of  time 

DISTINGUISHED. 
Eccl.  33.  8.  by  knowledge  of  Lord  they  were  d. 

DISTRESS 
2  Es,l.  fi.  37.  my  soul  was  in  d.  and  I  said 
Tob.  3. 6.  command  theref.  that  I  may  be  delivered 
out  of  this  d.  and  go  into  the  everlasting  place 
Eccl.  4.  2.  neither  provoke  a  man  in  his  d. 
10.  26.  boast  not  thyself  in  the  time  of  thy  d. 
2.5.  23.  that  will  not  comfort  her  husband  in  d. 
Bar.  (5.  37.  they  cannot  help  any  man  in  his  d. 

1  JIfac.  2.53.  Jo.se|ih  in  his  d.  k>>pl  commandment 

DISTRIBUTE. 
Jvi.  16.  24.  she  did  d.  her  goods  to  her  kindred 
Ecd.  33.  2:j.  when  finish  life,  d.  thine  inheritance 

DISTRUST. 
Wisi.  1.2.  shews  himself  to  such  as  do  not  d.  him 
Ecd.  1.  28.  d.  not  the  fear  of  the  Lord  when  poor 
.     DISTRUSTING. 

2  Mac.  9.  22.  not  d.  niv  health,  but  having  hope 

DIVERS. 
!J  Esd.  6.  44.  many  and  d.  pleasures  for  the  taste 
ffisd.  15.  4.  any  image  spotted  with  d.  colours 
Fxd.  33.  11.  the  Lord  hath  male  their  ways  d. 

DIVERSITIES. 
JVisd. 1.  20.  the  d.  of  plants,  and  virtues  of  roots 

DIVIDED. 
Ecd.  14.  15.  leave  thy  labours  to  be  d.  by  lot 
33.  U.  in  much  knowlpflge  the  Lord  hath  d.  them 
44.23.  give  him  a  heritage,  and  d.  his  portions 
47.21.  so  the  kingdom  wasd.  and  out  of  Ephraim 

DIVIDI.NG. 
Eecl.  18.3.  d.  holv  thinjs  am»ne  them  from  profane 

DIVINATIONS. 
Ecd.  34  5.  d.  soothsavings,  and  dreams  are  vain 

DIVISION. 

2  £»d.  S.  41   and  to  make  a  d.  bolwiit  the  waters 

T77 


DOW 

Eccl.  17.  17.  in  the  d.  of  the  nations  of  the  earth 

DIVORCE. 
Eccl.  25.  26.  give  her  a  bill  of  d.  and  let  her  go 
DO. 

1  Esd.  9.  9.  d.  his  will,  and  separate  yourselves 
10.  like  as  thou  hast  spoken,  so  will  we  d. 

2  K.id.  1. 24.  what  shall  I  d.  unto  thee,  O  Jacob  ? 
30.  but  now  what  shall  I  d.  unto  you  7 

Tob.  4.  15.  d.  that  to  no  man  which  thou  hatcst 
5.1. father,I  will  d.all  thingsthou  hast  commanded 

.>ud.  2.  12.  whatever  I  have  spoken,  that  will  I  d. 

fVisd.  13.  19.  for  gaining  and  getting  askelh  ability 
to  d.  of  him  that  is  most  unable  to  d.  anything 

Eccl.  14.  11.  according  to  thy  ability  d.  good 
21.  1.  my  son,  hast  thou  sinned  1  d.  so  no  more 
DOCTRINE. 

Eccl.  16.  25.  I  will  shew  forth  d.  in  weight 
24.  27.  he  maketh  the  d.  of  knowledge  appear 

32.  I  will  yet  make  tl.  to  shine  as  the  morning 

33.  I  will  yet  pour  out  d.  asprophocv,  and  leave 

DOERS. 

1  Esd.  6.  12.  demanded  of  Ihom  who  were  chief  d. 

2  Esd.  3.  30.  how  thou  hast  spared  wicked  d. 
Esth.  16.  15.  we  find  that  the  Jews  are  no  evil  d. 

DOEST. 
2  Mac.  7. 16.  thou  d.  what  thou  wilt,  yet  ihiisk  not 

DOG. 
Tob.  5.  16.  and  the  young  man's  d.  with  them 

11.  4.  so  they  went,  and  the  d.  went  after  them 
Eccl.  13. 18.  what  agreement  betw.  hyena  and  ad.? 

26.25.  a  shameless  woman  shall  be  counted  as  a  d. 

DOINGS. 
Tob.  4.  6.  thy  d.  shall  prosperously  succeed 
JVisd.  2.  12.  and  he  is  clean  contrary  to  our  d. 
9. 11.  she  shall  lead  me  soberly  in  my  d. 
Eecl.5l.  19.  my  soul  wrestled,  in  my  d.  I  was  exact 
DOMINION. 

1  Esd.  4.  3.  but  yet  the  king  hath  d.  over  them 
22.  you  must  know  that  women  have  d.  over  you 

2  F.sd.  3.  28.  they  should  have  the  d.  over  Sion 

12.  23.  they  shall  have  the  d.  of  the  earth 
Esth.  13.  2.  I  had  d.  over  the  whole  world 
JVisd.  3.  8.  they  shall  have  d.  over  the  people 

9.  2.  that  he  should  have  d.  over  the  creatures 

Eccl.  17.  4.  the  Lord  gave  him  d.  over  beasts 
1  Mac.  1.  16.  he  might  have  the  d.  of  two  realms 
DONE. 

1  Esd.  8.  86.  all  is  d.  to  us  for  our  wicked  works 
Esth.  10.  4.  he  said,  God  hath  d.  these  things 
Eccl.  16.  26.  works  of  Lord  are  d.  in  judgment 

18.  7.  when  a  man  hath  d.  then  he  beginnelh 
Bar.  2.  12.  O  Lord  our  God,  we  have  d.  ungodly 

2  Mac.  7.  18.  marvellous  things  are  d.  unto  us 
15.  5.  he  obtained  not  to  have  his  wicked  will  d. 

DOOM. 
2  Esd.  7. 43.  the  day  of  d.  shall  be  the  end  of  time 

DOOR. 
Tob.  8.  13.  so  the  maid  opened  the  d.  and  went  in 
11.  10.  Tobit  also  went  forth  toward  the  d. 
Eccl.  21.  24.  it  is  rudeness  to  hearken  at  the  d. 
28.  25.  and  make  a  d.  and  bar  for  thy  mouth 
Bar.  6.  59.  or  be  a  d.  in  a  house  to  keep  safe 
Sus.  26.  the  servants  rushed  in  at  the  privy  d. 
2  Mac.  2. 5.  he  laid  the  ark,  and  so  stopped  the  d. 

DOORS. 
JVisd.  6.  14.  he  shall  find  her  sitting  at  his  d. 
F.cd.  14.  23.  he  shall  also  hearken  at  her  d. 
Bar.  6.  18.  as  the  d.  are  made  sure  on  every  side 
Sus.  20.  the  garden  d.  are  shut,  no  man  can  see  us 
Bel  21.  shewed  the  privy  d.  where  they  came  in 
1  Mac.  4.57.  and  they  hanged  d.  upon  them 
DORA. 

1  Mac.  15. 13.  then  camped  Antiochus  against  D. 

DOSITHEUS. 
Esth-  11. 1.  D.  who  said  he  was  a  priest  and  Levite 

2  Mac.  12.  35.  D.  one  of  Bacenor's  company 

DOTETH. 
Eccl.  25.  2.  I  hate  an  old  adulterer  that  d. 

DOTH. -VIM. 
.hid.  4.  6.  toward  the  open  country  near  to  T). 
7.  3.  they  spread  themselves  in  breadth  over  D. 

DOUBLE. 
Ecd.  5.  9.  the  sinner  that  hath  a  d.  tongue 

14  an  evil  condemnation  on  the  d.  tongue 
6.  1.  BO  shall  the  sinner  that  hath  a  d.  tongue 
2n.  10.  there  is  a  fifi  whose  recompence  is  d. 
2fi.l5.shamefaced  and  faithful  woman  is  a  d.  grace 
28.  13.  curse  the  whisperer  and  d.  ton^jued 
42.  24.  all  things  are  d.  one  against  another 
SO.  2.  and  by  liim  was  built  the  d.  height 

DOUBT. 
Eccl.  9.  13.  so  shalt  thou  not  d.  the  fear  of  death 

DOUBTED. 
Eccl.  31.  34.  the  testimonies  flhall  not  be  d.  of 

DOUBTFUL. 
Eccl.  18.  7.  when  he  lenveth  offy  he  shall  be  d. 

DOUBTLESS. 
2  Mac.  7.  23.  but  d.  the  Creator  will  give  you  life 

DOWRY. 

2  Mac.  1. 14.  to  receive  money  id  name  of  a  d., 
3H 


DRU 

DR.ICHM. 
Tci.5.14.wilt  thou  a  d.  a  day  and  things  necessarr 

DRACHMS. 
2  AJac.  4  19.  to  carry  three  hundred  d.  of  silver 
12.  43.  to  the  sum  of  two  thousand  d.  of  silvur 

DRAGON. 
Eccl.  25.  16.  I  bad  rather  dwell  with  a  d. 
Bel  '£.i.  in  the  same  place  was  a  great  d. 

DRAGONS. 
2  F.sd.  15.  29.  where  the  d.  of  Arabia  shall  come 

31.  then  shall  the  d.  have  the  upper  hand 
F.'itU.  10.  7.  and  the  two  d.  are  I  and  Aman 
116.  two  great  d.  came  Ibrth  ready  to  fight 
DRANK. 
.Tud.  12. 20.  d.  much  more  whio  than  he  had  drunk 

DRAW. 
Jfisd.  5.  1 3.  e vi;n  so  we  bi  'gan  to  d.  to  o\ir  end 
15.  1.5.  idols  that  have  not  noses  lo  d.  breath 
Eccl.  51.  23.  d.  near  unto  me,  ye  unlearned 

DRAWN. 
Eccl.  13.  7.  until  he  have  d.  thee  dry  twice 

DREAD. 
2  Mac.  15.  23.  send  a  good  angel  before  us  for  a  d. 

DREADFUL. 

Fstk.  15.  C.  all  glittering,  and  he  was  very  d. 

IVisd.  10.  16.  she  withstuod  d.  kings  in  womicrs 

17.6.there  appeared  a  fire  kindled  ofitself,  very  d. 

DREAM. 

2  Fsd.  10.  36.  id  sense  deceived,  or  my  soul  in  a  d. 

Esth.  10  5.  for  I  remember  a  d.  which  I  saw 

11.  4.  Mardocheus  who  was  a  Jew,  this  wiis  his  d. 

12.  now  when  Mardocheus,  wholiad  seen  thisd. 

was  awake,  he  bare  this  d.  in  mind 
2  Mac.  15.  11.  he  told  a  d.  worthy  to  be  believed 

DREAMS. 
Jfisd.  18.  19.  the  d.  that  troubled  them  foreshew 
Eccl.  34.  1.  hopes  are  vain,  and  d.  lift  up  fools 

2.  whoso  regardeth  d.  is  like  him  thatcatchelhat 

3.  the  vision  ofd.  is  the  resenjblance  of  one  thing 
5.  divinations,  soothsayings  and  d.  are  vain 

7.  for  d.  have  deceived  many,  they  have  failed 

DRESSED. 

Ecc/.27.6.the  fruit  declareth  if  the  treehave  been  d. 

DRINK. 
1  Esd.  3.  6.  to  d.  on  gold,  and  to  sleep  on  gold 

18.  wine  causeth  all  men  to  err  that  d.  it 
9.  54.  then  went  they  their  way  to  eat  and  d. 
Tob.  4.  15.  d.  not  wine  to  make  thee  drunken 
7.  9.  Raguel  said,  eat  and  d.  and  make  merry 
.Jud.  12.  1.  that  she  should  d.  of  bis  own  wine 
11.  that  she  come  unto  us  and  eat  and  d.  with  u« 

13.  fear  not  to  d.  wine  and  he  merry  with  us 
18.  Judith  said,  I  will  d.  now,  my  lord,  because 

Eccl.  9.  10.  thou  shalt  d.  it  with  pleasure 
15. 3.  shall  she  give  him  the  water  of  wisdom  to  d. 
24.  21.  they  that  d.  me  shall  yet  be  thirsty 
26.  12.  and  d.  of  every  water  near  her 
31.  31.  press  not  on  him  with  urging  him  to  d. 

1  Mac.  11.  58.  he  gave  him  leave  to  d.  in  gold 

2  Mac.  15.  39.  for  as  it  is  hurtful  to  d.  wine 

DRIVE. 
Jud.  11.19.  shall  d. them  as  sheep  have  no  shepherd 
Eccl.  38. 20.  take  no  heaviness  to  heart,  d.  it  away 
Bar.  2.  35, 1  will  no  more  d.  Israel  out  of  the  land 

DRIVEN. 
Eccl.  29.  18.  mighty  men  hath  it  d.  from  houses 
47.  24.  that  they  were  d.  out  of  the  land 

DRIVETH. 
Eccl.  1.  21.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  d.  away  sins 
31.  1.  the  care  thereof  d  awav  sleep 

DROP. 
2  Esd.  6.  56.  to  a  d.  that  falleth  from  a  vessel 
9.  16.  like  as  a  wave  is  greater  than  a  d. 
fVisd.  II.  22.  the  world  is  as  a  d.  of  morning  dew 
Eccl.  18.  10.  as  a  d.  of  water  unto  the  sea 

DROPS. 
2  Fsd.  4.  49.  the  rain  w  as  past,  the  d.  remained  stiil 
50.  as  the  rain  is  more  than  the  d.  and  fire  grealw 
than  smoke,  but  the  d.  and  the  smoke  remajti 
5.  36.  gather  me  the  d.  that  are  scattered 
Eccl.  1.  2.  whii  can  nuinlier  the  d.  of  rain  ? 

DROUGHT. 
Eccl.  35.  20.  as  clouds  of  rain  in  time  of  d. 

DROWN. 
JVisd.  5.  22.  and  the  floods  shall  cruelly  d.  thoja 

DROWNED. 
JVisd.  10.  4.  the  earth  being  d.  with  the  flood 
10.  but  she  d.  their  enemies,  and  cast  them  up 
DRUNK. 
Esth.  14.  17.  nor  d.  wine  ol  the  drink-oflTorings 
Eccl.  31.  27.  wine  is  good,  if  it  be  J.  moderately 
28.winc  measurably  d.  bringeth  gladness  of  heart 
DRUNKEN. 
Tob.  4.  15.  drink  not  wine  lo  make  thee  d. 
Jud.  6.  4.  mountains  shall  be  d.  with  their  blood 
Ecd.  26.  8.  a  d.  woman  causeth  great  anger 
31.  29.  wine  d.  with  excels  maketh  bitlerne«B 

DRUNKENNESS. 
Tob.  4.  15.  nor  lei  d.  go  with  thee  in  thy  jouro«y 
Jud.  13. 15.  the  canopy  wherein  be  did  lie  in  his  d 


EAR 

Ecct.  19.  1.  a  man  given  to  d.  shall  not  be  rich 
31.26.  wine  proves  the  b^rts  of  the  proud  by  d. 
30.  d~  iiicreaseth  the  ra^  of  a  fool  till  he  otiend 
DRV. 
tfisd.  19.7.  where  water  stood  d.  land  appeared 
Eccl.  6.  3.  thou  shalt  leave  thyself  as  a  d.  tree 

13.  7.  till  he  have  drawn  the  d.  twice  or  tlirice 
39.  22.  bis  blessing  covered  the  d.  laud 

DRIED. 
S  Esd.  6.  51.  which  was  d.  up  the  third  day 
15.  50.  the  glory  of  ihv  power  shall  be  d.  up 
DR'IETH. 
2  Esd.  8.  03.  whose  look  d.  up  the  depths 
EccL  14. 9.  the  iniquity  of  the  wicked  d  up  his  soul 

DUE. 
Eecl.  14.  11.  give  the  Lord  his  d.  offering 

18.22.  letnolhinghindt'rtopay  thy  vow  in  </.  time 
29.  2.  pay  thy  neighbour  again  in  d.  season 

38.  1.  honour  him  with  the  honour  d.  to  him 

39.  33.  he  will  give  every  tiling  in  d.  season 

DUMB. 
Wisd.  10.21.  Wisdom  openeth  the  mouth  of  the  d. 
Bar.  0.41.  who  if  they  shall  see  one  d.  cannot  speak 

DUNG. 
1  Mac.  2.  C2.  for  bis  glory  shall  be  d.  and  worms 

DUNGHILL. 
Ecct.  22. 2.  a  slothful  man  is  compared  to  filth  of  d. 

DURdT. 
Sus.  10.  yet  d.  not  one  shew  another  his  grief 

1  JWac. 12.42.  he  d.  not  stretch  his  hand  against  him 

bUST. 
2Esd.7.32.  so  shall  the  d.those  that  dwell  in  silence 
Eccl.  44.  21.  he  would  multiply  him  as  the  d. 
DWELL. 

2  Esd.  6.  51.  that  he  should  d.  in  the  same 

7.  32.  BO  shall  the  dust  those  that  d.  in  silence 
9.  18.  even  for  them  to  d.  in  that  now  live 
fVisd.  1. 4.  nor  d.  in  the  body  that  is  subject  to  sin 
Eccl.  4.  15.  attendeth  to  her  shall  d.  securely 

14.  27.  and  in  lief  glory  shall  he  d. 

25.  16.  I  had  rather  d.  with  a  lion  and  a  dragon 
3rt.  32.  they  shall  not  d.  where  they  will 

51.23.  draw  near,  and  d.  in  the  house  of  learning 

DWELLEST. 

2  Esd.  8.20.  O  Lord,  thou  that  d.  in  cveilastingness 

)Visd.  9.  8.  an  altar  in  the  city  wherein  thou  d. 

DWELLETH. 

1  Esd.  2.  5.  he  is  the  Lord  that  d.  in  Jerusalem 
Tob.  5.  16.  God  which  d.  in  heaven  prosper  you 
Jud.  5.  3.  this  people  that  d.  in  the  hill-country 
tVisd.  7.  2rf.  none  but  him  that  d.  with  Wisdom 
Eccl.  21.  28.  and  is  hated  wheresoever  he  d. 

25.8.well  is  him  that  d.  with  awife  of  understanding 

2  jUat.  3.  39.  he  that  (/.  in  heaven,  bath  his  eye  on 

DWELLING. 

1  Esd.  1.  21.  that  were  found  d.  at  Jerusalem 

2  Esd.  5.  38.  but  he  that  hath  not  his  d.  with  men 

DWELLINGS. 
2  Esd.  4. 7.  howgreat  d.  arein  themidstofthesea! 

7.  51.  are  laid  up  for  us  d.  of  health  and  safety 

DWELT. 
Eccl.  47.  12.  and  for  his  sake  he  d.  at  large 
Sus.  1.  there  d.  a  man  in  Babylon,  called  Joacim 

E. 

EACH. 

2  Esd.  8. 6.  how  shall  e.  man  live  that  is  corrupt  1 

EAGLE. 
2  Esd.  11.  1.  there  came  up  from  the  sen  an  e. 

12.  1.  while  the  lion  spake  these  words  to  the  e. 

EAR. 
Wisd.  1.  10.  the  e.  of  jealousy  heareth  all  things 

8.  12.  when  I  speak,  they  shall  give  good  e. 
EccL^.W.  an  attentive c.  is  the  desire  ofa  wise  man 

4. 8.  grieve  thoe  to  bow  down  thine  e.  to  the  poor 

15.  whoso  gives  e.  to  her  shall  judge  nations 
6.  2.3.  give  c.  mv  sim,  receive  my  advice 
33.  and  if  ihon  bow  thine  e.  thou  shalt  be  wise 
16.5.  mine  e.  hiilh  beard  greater  things  than  these 
27.  15.  their  fvilings  are  grievous  to  the  e. 
51.  16.  I  bowed  down  mine  e.  and  received  her 
Bar.  3.  9.  civc  e.  to  understand  wisdom 

1  Mac.  2.  65.  he  is  a  man  of  counsel,  give  e.  to  him 

2  Mac.  5.  11.  now  when  Ibis  came  to  the  king's  c. 

EARS. 

2  Esd.  10.  ."Jfi.  ns  much  as  thine  e.  may  comprehend 

Wisd.  15.  15.  which  neither  have  the  use  of  eyes 

to  sen,  nor  e.  to  henr 

Eccl.  17.  6.  a  tongno  and  ryes,  and  «.  gave  he  them 

13.  nrd  their  t-  heard  his  glorious  voice 
21.  5.  a  prayer  ronrlieth  to  the  c.  of  God 

25.9.  that  spnnkeih  in  the*,  of  him  thnt  w.u  hear 
27.  14.  their  brawln  make  one  slop  hii  n. 
33.  18.  and  hearken  with  your  e.  ye  rulers 
38.  2H.  the  nnise  ofibe  anvil  is  ever  in  his  e. 
43.  24.  when  we  heir  it  with  our  e.  we  innrvel 
Bor.  2.  31.  I  will  live  them  a  heart  and  r..  to  lienr 
S  Mae.  15.  39.  dclightvth  the  e.  of  Ibwin  that  read 
T78 


EAS 

EAR-RINGS 

Jud.  10.  4.  put  on  her  c.  and  all  her  ornaments 

EARLY. 
Tob.  9.  6.  e.  in  the  morning  they  went  forth 
IVisd.  6.  14.  whoso  seekelh  her  e.  shall  find  her 
Eccl.  4.  12.  they  that  seek  her  e.  shall  be  filled 

31.  20.  he  riseth  e.  and  his  wits  are  with  him 

32.  14.  they  that  seek  him  e.  shall  find  favour 

39.  5.  will  give  his  heart  to  resort  e.  to  the  Lord 

1  Mac.  6.  33.  the  king  rising  very  e.  marched 

EARNEST. 

2  Jlfac.  12.23.  Judas  was  very  e,.  in  pursuing  them 

EARNESTLY. 
Jud.  4.  12.  all  cried  to  God  with  one  consent  e. 
tlslh.  13.  18.  all  Israel  cried  most  e.  to  the  Lord 
Eccl.  51.  18.  and  e.  I  followed  that  which  is  good 
1  Mac.  4.  16.  whose  custom  they  followed  so  e. 
EARTH. 

1  Esd.  4.  36.  all  the  e.  calleth  on  the  truth 

6.  13.  the  Lord  which  made  heaven  and  e. 

2  i?sd.2.14.take  heaven  and  e.  to  witness,  y«d.7.28. 
3.  6.  before  ever  the  e.  came  forward 

18.  bowing  heavens,  thou  didst  set  fast  the  e. 

7.  32.  the  «.  shall  restore  those  that  are  asleep 
4i5.  been  belter  not  to  have  given  the  e.  to  Adam 

S.'^.  as  when  thou  askeat  the  e.  it  shall  say 
15.  22.  that  shed  innocent  blood  upon  the  e. 
Tob.  3.  6.  that  I  may  be  dissolved  and  become  e. 
13.  Uike  me  out  of  e.  that  I  may  hear  no  more 
7.  18.  the  Lord  of  heaven  and  e.  give  thee  joy 
Jud.  2. 1.  that  he  should  avenge  himself  of  all  the  <. 

7.  that  they  prepare  for  me  e.  and  water;  I  w  il 
cover  the  face  of  the  c.  with  feet  of  mine  a-  *>y 

20.  a  great  multitude  like  the  sand  of  the  < 
7.  4.  these  men  will  lick  up  the  face  of  the  e. 

10.  19.  being  let  go,  might  deceive  the  whole  e. 

11.  1.  Nahuchodonosor  king  of  all  the  e.  7. 

8.  it  is  reported  in  all  the  e.  thou  art  mighty 

16.  whereat  all  the  e.  shall  be  astonished 

21.  not  such  a  woman  from  one  end  ofe.  to  other 
13. 18.  blessed  art  thou  above  all  women  on  the  e. 

E.itk.  11.  8.  lo,  a  day  of  great  uproar  on  the  e. 
IVisd.  1.  1.  ye  that  be  judges  of  the  e.  6.  1. 

5.  23.  thus  iniquity  shall  lay  waste  the  whole  e. 
7.  1.  offspring  of  him  that  was  first  made  of  the  e. 

3.  when  I  was  horn,  I  fell  upon  the  e. 
9. 16.  hardly  guess  aright  at  things  that  are  on  e. 
10.  4.  the  e.  being  drowned  with  the  flood 

15.  8.  he  which  a  little  before  was  made  of  «. 

18.  16.  touched  the  heaven,  but  it  stood  on  the  e. 
Eccl.  1. 3.  who  can  find  out  the  breadth  of  the  e.f 

10. 4.  the  power  of  the  «.  is  in  the  hand  of  the  Lord 
9.whyis  e.and  ashes  proud?  not  morewicked  than 

17.  he  made  their  memorial  to  cease  from  the  e. 

16.  18.  the  e.  and  all  therein  shall  be  moved 
29.  after  this  the  Lord  looked  on  the  e. 

17.  32.  and  all  men  are  but  e.  and  ashes 
33.10.all  men  from  ground, Adam  was  created  ofe. 
38.  4.  Lord  hath  created  medicines  out  of  the  e. 

8.  and  from  him  is  peace  over  all  the  e. 

40.  3.  to  him  that  is  humbled  in  e.  and  ashes 

11.  all  things  that  are  of  thee,  shall  turn  to  the  c. 

again,  and  waters  return  to  the  sea 

49.  14.  but  upon  the  e.  was  no  man  created  like 

Enoch,  for  he  was  taken  from  the  e. 

Bar.  1.11. that  their  days  be  on  e.  as  days  of  heaven 

2.  15.  all  the  e.  may  know  that  thou  art  God 

3.  23.  the  Agarcncs  that  seek  wisdom  upon  e. 

6.  54.  for  they  are  crows  between  heaven  and  e. 
Dan.  3.  54.  all  ye  things  that  grow  on  e.  bless  Lord 
Brl  .5.  who  hath  created  the  heaven  and  the  e. 
Prayer  of  Manass.  who  bast  made  heaven  and  e. 

1  Mac.  1.3.  went  through  to  the  ends  of  the  p.  and 

took  spoils,  so  that  the  e.  was  quiet  before  him 
2.  37.  let  us  die,  heaven  and  e..  shall  testify  for  us 

40.  they  will  quickly  root  us  out  of  the  e. 
3.9.  was  renowned  to  the  utmost  parts  ofe.  8.  4. 

9.  13.  the  e.  shook  at  the  noise  of  the  armies 
11.71.  Jonathan  cast  e.  on  his  head,  and  prayed 
14.  8.  did  till  in  peace,  and  the  f.gavi^  her  increase 

2  Mac.  7.  28.  my  son,  look  on  the  heaven  and  e. 

10.  2.').  prayed  and  sprinkled  e.  upon  their  heads 

13.  7.  not  having  so  much  as  burial  in  the  e. 

14.  15.  they  cast  c.  on  their  heads,  and  prayed 

15.  5.  the  other  said,  I  also  nm  mighty  on  e. 

EARTHEN. 
2  K.»d.fl.2.  much  mould  whereof/?,  vessels  are  made 
f."ccM3.2.  how  agree  the  knitle  and  e.  pot  together? 

EARTHLY. 
Ifisd.  9. 15.  (he  c.  tabernacle  weiffhoth  down  mind 
15.  13.  that  ofe.  matter  mnke<  brittle  vessel* 

19.  19.  for  e.  thlnei  were  iiimod  into  watery 

EARTHan.AKK.s. 
2  F.id.  9.  3.  when  there  shall  he  ki-imi  r.  and  uproars 
E.ith.  11.  5.  aniiiseof  a  tumult  with  thunder  aiulc. 

EASE. 
Jud.  1.  16.  there  he  took  his  r.  and  banqueted 
f'rrl.  38.  14.  for  r.  and  remedy  to  prohmg  life 
I  .Var.  9.  .18.  Jonnihnn  and  hU  cnmpnny  are  at  t. 
i  Mac.  S.  25.  to  commit  to  memory,  might  have  <. 


EDO 


[Afocbtpb*. 


2  ^oc.2.27.  even  as  it  is  no  e.  to  him  that  prepaietb 

EASED. 

2  Esd.  7.68.  who  committed  inicuities,  might  be  « 
EAST. 

1  Esd.  9.  38.  place  of  the  holy  porch  toward  the  e 

2  Esd.  1.  38.  the  people  that  cometh  from  the  «. 
IS.  20.  from  the  south,  from  the  e.  and  Libanui 

34.  behold,  clouds  from  the  e.  and  north  to  south 
39.strong  windsshall  arise  from  thee.and  open  it 
liar.  4. 36.  O  Jerusalem,  look  toward  the  c.  5.  S. 

EASY. 
2  F^d.  8.  14.  it  is  an  e.  thing  to  be  ordained 
.Jud.  4.  7.  it  was  e.  lo  stop  them  that  would  come 

7.  10.  because  it  is  not  e.  to  come  up  lo  the  top* 
Eccl.  11.  21.  an  e.  thfng  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 
har.  6. 61.  lightning  breaking  forth  is  e.  to  be  seen 
2  Mac.  2.  26.  it  was  not  e.  but  a  matter  of  sweat 

EASIER. 
2  Esd.  13.  20.  it  is  e.  for  him  that  is  in  danger 
Eccl.  22. 15.  salt  and  a  mass  of  iron  is  c.  to  bear 

EASILY. 
Wisd.  6.  12.  she  is  e.  seen  of  them  that  love  her 
2  Mac.  8. 30.  they  very  e.  gothigh  and  strong  holds 

■EAT. 
1  Esd.  7.  13.  that  came  out  of  the  captivity  did  e. 

8.  85.  that  ye  may  e.  the  good  things  of  the  land 

9.  2.  Esdras  did  e.  no  meat,  nor  drmk  water 
51.  go  then  and  e.  the  fat  and  drink  the  sweet 
54.  then  went  every  one  to  e.  and  drink 

2£«d.  1.19.  had  (lity  on  your  mournings,  I  gave  you 
manna  to  f.  so  ye  did  e.  angels'  bread 

5.  18.  up  then,  e.  bread,  and  forsake  us  not 

9. 24.  e.  only  the  Howers  of  the  field,  taste  no  flesh, 
drink  no  wine,  but  c.  flowers  only 
26. 1  did  e.  of  the  herbs  of  the  field 
12.  51.  I  uiu  6.  only  in  those  days  of  floweri 
Tub.  1.  10.  did  e.  of  the  bread  of  the  Gentiles 
2. 1.  a  good  dinner,  in  the  which  I  sat  down  to  t. 
13.  it  is  not  lawful  to  e.  any  thing  stolen 

6.  5.  when  they  had  roasted  the  flesh  they  did  e. 
7. 9.  Raguelsaid,  e.  and  drink,  and  make  merry 

11. 1  will  e.  nothing  here  till  we  agree  and  sweat 

10.  7.  she  did  e.  no  meat  on  the  day-time 
12.  19.  but  I  did  neither  e.  nor  drink 

Jud.  12.  2. 1  will  not  e.  thereof,  lest  there  be  offene* 
15.  that  she  might  sit  and  e.  upon  them 

Eccl.  6.  3.  shalt  e.  up  thy  leaves  and  lose  thy  fruit 
19.  but  thou  shalt  e.  of  her  fruits  right  soon 

9.  16.  let  just  men  e.  and  drink  with  thee 

11.  19.  now  will  I  e.  continually  of  my  goods 
20.  16.  they  that  e.  my  bread  speak  evil  of  me 
24.  21.  they  that  «.  me  shall  yet  be  hungry 

.30.  19.  for  neither  can  it  e.  nor  smell 
31.  16.  e.  as  it  becometh  a  man,  and  devour  not 
21.  if  thou  hast  been  forced  to  e.  arise,  go  fotth 
45.  21.  they  e.  of  the  sacrifices  of  the  Lord 
Bar.  2.  3.  a  man  should  e.  the  flesh  of  his  own  son 

6.  29.  women  in  child-bed  e.  their  sacrifices 
Bel  7.  this  did  never  e.  or  drink  any  thing 

15.  the  priests  and  wives  did  e.  and  drink  up  all 

1  .Af(jc.l.62.  many  resolved  not  c.  any  unclean  thing 

2  Mac.  6. 18.  to  open  his  mouth  and  e.  swine's  flesh 
21.  and  make  as  if  he  did  e.  of  the  flesh 

7.  7.  wilt  thou  e.  before  thou  be  punished  1 

EATEN. 
1  FM.  3.  3.  when  they  had  e.  and  drunken 
Esth.  14.  17.  thy  handmaid  not  e.  at  .A man's  tabls 
Bar.  6.  72.  they  themselves  afterward  shall  be  «. 
Bfl  12.  if  thou'findest  not  that  Bel  hath  e.  up  all 

1  Mac.  6.  53.  had  e.  up  the  residue  of  the  store 

2  Mac.  2. 11.  the  sin-offering  was  not  to  be  e. 

EATETH. 

1  Esd.  4.  10.  he  e.  and  drinketh  and  lakelh  resk 
Bel  24.  lo,  ho  liveth,  he  c.  and  drinketh 

ECANU3. 

2  Esd.  14. 24.  E.  and  Asiel  ready  to  write  swiftly 

ECBATANA. 

1  FM.  6.  23.  to  seik  among  the  records  at  E. 
Tob.  6. 5.  they  went  on  till  they  drew  near  to  E. 
7.  1.  and  when  thev  were  come  to  E. 

14. 14.  he  died  at  E.'in  Media,  being  127  years  oh] 
.fud.  1.  1.  which  reigned  over  the  M^dcs  in  E. 
2.  built  in  R.  walls  round  about,  14. 

2  Jtfae.  9.  3.  whcnheenmeto  E.  news  was  brough. 

ECHO. 
tVisd.  17. 19.  a  reboundinff  e.  from  the  mountains 

EDGE. 
.hid.  2.27.Bmote  voung  men  with  the  c  of  the  sword 
Eecl.  28.  18.  mariy  have  fallen  by  then,  of  tbesword 
31.  26.  the  furnace  proveth  the  e.  by  dipping 
1  Mac.  5. 2fl.  slew  all  the  ninles  with  the  «.  of  sword 

EDGED. 
Eccl.  21.  3.  all  iniqiiilv  is  ns  a  two  c.  sword 

EDNA. 
Tob.  7.  2.  then  said  Ragiinl  to  E.  his  wife  how  Ilk* 
is  this  young  man  lo  Tobit?  8,  14,  16.  | 
11.1. 

10.  12.  E.  said  to  Tohia«,  the  Lord  restore  tliee 

RDOMITF.S. 
1  Esd.  8.69.  have  not  put  away  pollutions  of  the  B 


Afocsyfba.] 


ELE 


EDUCATION. 

fViidM.  12.  objecteth  the  transgressions  of  our  e. 
8  Mac.  C.  23.  and  his  most  honest  e.  from  a  child 
7.27. nourished  thee  and  endured  the  troubles  of  e. 
EFFECT. 
S  Esd.  4.  23.  written  covenants  come  to  none  e. 
Jud.  1.  11.  without  e.  and  without  disgrace 
I  Mac.  10.  25.  he  sent  unto  them  to  this  «. 

EFFECTS. 
S  Esd.  9.  6.  they  have  endings  in  e.  and  signs 

EFFKCTUALLV. 
Tab.  6  17.  and  his  heart  was  e.  joined  to  her 
EGYPT. 

1  Esd.  1.  26.  the  Uftig  of  E.  sent  to  him,  saying 
38.  Zarace*  his  brother  brouglit  he  out  of  E. 

2  Esd.  1.  7. 1  brought  them  out  of  the  land  of  E. 
3.  17  when  thou  leddest  his  seed  out  of  E.  14.4. 
9.  29.  to  our  fathers  when  thry  came  out  of  E. 
14.3.talked  with  tiim,when  my  people  served  in  E. 

29.  our  fathers  were  strangers  in  E.  from  whence 
15.  11.  I  will  smite  E.  with  plagues  as  before 
12.E  shall  mourn, and  the  foundation  ofit  smitten 
Tob.  8.  3.  he  lied  into  the  outmost  parts  of  E. 
Jud.  1. 9.  sent  unto  all  that  were  at  the  river  of  E 
6.  5.  vengeance  of  this  nation  that  came  out  of  E. 
Esth.y.i.  16.  which  thou  hast  delivered  out  of  E. 

1  Mac.  1.  16.  he  thought  to  reign  over  E. 
17.wherefore  he  entered  into  E.with  a  multitudi 
20.  after  that  ,\ntiochus  had  smitten  E. 

3.  32.  from  the  river  Euphrates  unto  borders  of  E. 
11.  1.  the  king  of  E.  gathered  a  great  host 

13.  he  set  the  crown  of  E.  upon  his  head 

2  Mac.  1.  1.  to  the  Jews  that  are  throughout  E. 
10.  sent  greeting  to  the  Jews  that  were  in  E. 

4.  21.  when  Apollonius  was  sent  into  E. 

5.1.  Anliochus  prepared  his  second  voyage  into  E 
8.  as  an  open  enemy  he  was  cast  out  into  E. 

9.  29.  went  into  E.  to  Ptolemeus  Philometor 

EGYPTIANS. 
2Esd.  1. 18.  been  better  for  us  to  have  served  theE. 
Jud.  5. 12.  the  E.  cast  them  out  of  their  sight 

EIGHT. 
2  Esd.  6.  36.  in  the  e.  night  was  my  heart  vexed 

11.  11.  and  behold,  there  were  e.  of  them 

12.  20.  that  in  him  there  shall  arise  e.  kings 
Tob.  14.  2.  which  was  restored  to  him  after  e.  years 

1  Jl/ac.4..'56.  they  kept  dedication  of  the  altar  e.  days 

59.  kept  from  year  to  year  by  space  of  c.  days 

2  Mac.  2.  12.  so  Solomon  kept  those  e.  days 

10.  6.  they  kept  e.  days  with  gladness  as  in  feast 

EIGHT  and  ffty. 
Tob.  14.2.  was  e.  and  fifty  vears  old  when  lostsight 

EIGHTEEN. 
1  Esd.  1.  43.  he  was  made  king  being  e.  years  old 
8.  47.  his  sons  and  his  brethren  who  were  e. 

EIGHTEENTH, 
1  Esd.  1.22.  in  the  e.  year  of  the  reign  of  Josias 
Jud.  2.  1.  in  e.  year,  the  22nd  day  of  first  month 

1  Mac.  14.  27.  the  e.  dav  of  the  month  Elul 

EIGHTY. 

2  Mac.  4.  8.  and  of  another  revenue  e.  talents 

ELBOW. 
Eccl.  41.  19.  to  lean  with  thine  e.  on  the  meat 

ELDER,  ELDER. 
2  Esd.  7.  13.  for  the  entrances  of  the  e.  world 
£ccJ.32.3.speak  thou  that  a rt  the  e. it  becometh  thee 

ELDERS. 
1  Esd.  6.  5.  the  c.  of  the  Jews  obtained  favour 

11. then  asked  we  those  e.saying,by  whose  comm. 
Jud.  6.  21.  Ozias  made  a  feast  to  the  e. 

13.  12.  and  they  called  the  e.  of  the  city 

yvisd.  8.  10. 1  shall  have  honour  with  e.  tho'  young 
Eccl.  6.  34.  stand  in  the  multitude  of  e. 

7.  14.  use  not  many  words  in  a  multitude  of  «. 

8.  9.  mi.ss  not  the  discourse  of  the  e. 

i'u«.  8.  the  two  e.  saw  her  going  in  every  day  and 
walking,  18,  19,  34,  41,  50. 
61.  and  they  arose  against  the  two  e. 
I  Mac.  1.  26.  so  that  the  princes  and  c.  mourned 

7.  33.  there  came  out  certain  e.  of  the  people 

11.  23.  he  chose  certain  of  the  e.  of  Isra^ 
r2.35.Jonathan  calling  the  c.ofthe  people  together 

ELDEST. 
1  Mac.  16.  2.  Simon  called  his  two  e.  sons 

ELEASA. 
1  Mac.  9.  5.  Judas  had  pitched  his  tents  at  E. 

ELEAZAR. 
lE.'!(i.8.43.  then  sent  I  toE.  and  Iduel  and  Masman 
63.  with  him  was  E.  the  son  of  Phinees 

1  Mac.  2.  5.  E.  called  Avaran  and  Jonathan 
6.  43.  E.  also  surnamed  Savaran,  perceiving 

8.  17.  Jason  the  son  of  E.  was  sent  to  Rome 

2  Mac.  6.  18.  E.  one  of  the  principal  scribes 
24.  E.  being  fourscore  years  old  and  ten 

8.  23.  he  appointed  E.  to  read  the  holy  book 

ELECT. 
7^*.8.15.1et  thine  angels  and  e.praise  thee  for  ever 
Eccl.  17   10.  the  e.  shall  praise  his  holy  nn.me 
'46.  1.  waB  made  great  for  saving  the  e.  of  God 
47.  22.  no:  will  he  abolish  the  posterity  of  his  e. 
779  ^ 


END 

ELEMENTS. 
Wiad.  7.  17.  to  know  the  operation  of  the  e. 
19.  18.  for  the  e.  were  changed  in  themselves 
ELEPHANT. 
1  Mae.G.  35.  for  every  e.  they  appointed  1000  men 
46.  which  done,  he  crept  under  the  c.  and  the 
e.  fell  down  upon  him,  and  there  he  died 
ELEPHANTS. 

1  Mac.  1. 17.  he  entered  Egypt  with  chariots  and  e. 
3. 34.  delivered  to  him  halt  of  his  forces  and  the  e. 
6.  34.  that  they  might  provoke  the  e.  to  fight 

8.  6.  Anliochus  king  of  Asia  came,  having  a  120  e. 

11.  56.  Tryphon  took  the  e.  and  won  Anlioch 

2  Mac.  11.  4.  but  pufted  up  with  his  fourscore  e. 
13.  2.  having  either  of  them  two  and  twenty  e. 

15.  he  slew  in  the  camp  the  chiefest  of  the  e. 
ELEVEN. 
2  Mac.  11.  11.  they  slew  c.  thousand  footmen 

ELEVENTH. 
1  Mac.  16.  14.  in  the  e.  month  called  Sabat 

ELEUTHERUS. 
1  Mac.ll.l.  when  he  had  gone  to  the  river  called  E. 

12.  30.  for  they  were  gone  over  the  river  E. 

ELIAS. 
Eccl.  48.  1.  then  stood  up  E.  the  prophet  as  fire 

4.  O  E.  how  wast  thou  honoured  in  thy  deeds  ? 
1  Jlfac.2.58.E.  being  zealous  and  fervent  for  the  law 

ELIZEUS. 
Eccl.  48. 12.  and  E.  was  filled  with  his  spirit 

ELOQUENT. 
Esth.  14. 13.  give  e.  speech  in  my  mouth  before  him 
IVisd.  10. 21.  tongues  of  them  that  cannot  speak  e. 
Eccl.  21.  7.  an  e.  man  is  known  far  and  near 
44.  4.  men  wise  and  e.  in  their  instructions 
ELUL. 

1  Mac.  14.  27.  the  eighteenth  day  of  the  month  E. 

ELYMAIS. 
7*06.  2. 10.  did  nourish  me  until  I  went  into  E. 
lJl/ac.6.1.  heard  say  E.was  a  city  greatly  renowned 

EMBRACE. 

2  Esd.  2. 15.  mother  e.  thy  children,  bring  them  up 

EMBRACED. 
Esth.  15.  12.  he  e.  her,  and  said,  speak  unto  me 

EMBRACETH. 
EccZ.30.20:  as  a  eunuch  that  e.  a  virgin  and  sigheth 

EMBROIDERER. 
Eccl.  45.  10.  silk  and  purple,  the  work  of  the  e. 

EMERALD. 
Eccl.  32. 6.  as  a  signet  of  an  e.  set  in  a  work  of  gold 

EMERALDS. 
Tob.  13.  16.  Jerusalem  shall  be  built  wilh  e. 
Jud.  10.  21.  Olofernes'  bed  was  woven  with  e. 

EMINENT. 

2  Esd,  15.40.  pour  out  over  every  high  and  e.  place 

EMMAUS. 

1  Mac.  3.  40.  they  pitched  by  E.  in  the  plain 
57.  the  camp  pitched  on  the  south  side  of  E. 

4.  3.  might  smite  the  king's  army  which  was  at  E. 

9.  50.  Ke  repaired  the  fort  in  Jericho  and  E. 

EMPLOYED. 

2  Mac.  4.  20.  it  was  e.  to  the  making  of  gallies 

EMPLOYING. 
Wisd.  15.  8.  e.  his  labours  lewdly,  he  makes  a  god 

EMPTY. 
2Esd.6.22.thefull  store-houses  suddenlybe  found  £ 
7.  25.  therefore  Esdras  for  the  e.  are  e.  things 
£cc/.  35.  4.  thou  shall  not  appear  e.  before  the  Lord 

EMPTIED. 
Jud.  7.  21.  the  cisterns  were  e.  they  had  no  water 

EMULATION. 

1  Jl/ac.8.16.  was  neither  envy  nor  e.  amongst  them 

ENCAMPED. 

1  Mac.  5.  5.  but  shut  them  up  and  e.  against  them 
37.  and  e.  against  Rajihon  beyond  the  brook 

11. 65.  then  Sim'on  e.  against  Bothsura  and  fought 

ENCOURAGED. 
IMac.  12.  50.  they  e.  one  another,  and  went  close 

2  Mac.  13. 3.  Menelaus  joined  and  also  e.  Anliochus 
ENCOURAGEMENT. 

1  Mac. 'lO.  24.  I  write  to  them  words  of  e. 
ENCOUNTERED. 

2  Jl/(ic.l5.26.Judas  and  his  company  e.  the  enemies 

END. 

1  Esd.  9.  17.  their  cause  was  brought  to  an  e. 

2  FM.  2.  34.  that  shall  come  in  the  e.  of  the  world 
3.23.  times  passed  the  years  were  brought  to  an  e. 

5.  40.  or  in  the  e.  the  love  that  I  have  promised 

41.  nigh  to  them  that  no  reserved  till  the  c. 

6.  9.  for  Esau  is  ihe  e.  of  the  world,  and  Jacob  is 

15.  Ihe  word  is  of  tho  e.  ||  25.  the  e.  of  your  world 

16.  the  c.  of  these  things  must  be  changed 

7.  33.  the  long-suffering  shall  have  an  e. 

42.  he  said,  Ihis  present  life  is  not  the  e, 

43.  but  the  day  of  d<iom  shall  be  the  e.  of  lime 

44.  intemperance  is  at  an  c.  infidelity  is  cut  off 

8.  .54.  in  e.  is  shewed  tho  treasure  of  inimort;ility 
9.5.  for  like  as  all  that  is  made  in  tho  world  hath 

a  beginning  and  an  i».  and  the  e.  is  manifest 
10.22.our  song  is  put  to  silence, rejoicing  is  at  an  e. 
28.  e.  is  turned  into  corruption,  prayer  to  rebuke 


ENE 

2  Esa.  12.  6.  that  he  will  comfort  me  to  the  «. 
fVisd.  2.  5.  after  our  e.  there  is  no  returning 
16.he  pronounceih  the  e.  of  the  just  to  he  bleased 

4.  17.  for  they  shall  see  tho  e.  of  Ihe  wise 

5.  4.  we  accounted  his  e.  to  be  without  honour 
13.  soon  as  wo  were  born,  began  to  draw  to  our  fc 

8.  1.  wisdom  reacheth  from  one  c.  to  another 
14. 14.  they  shall  come  shortly  to  an  c. 

27.  the  beginning,  the  cause,  and  the  e.  of  ail  evL 

18.  21.  and  so  brought  the  calamity  to  an  e. 

19.  1.  came  uj)on  them  without  mercy  to  the  «. 
4.  fir  the  destiny  drew  them  to  this  e. 

7otc^7.36.remember  Ihe  c.thou  shall  never  do  amigi 
0.  11.  for  thou  knovvest  not  what  shall  be  his  e. 
11.  27.  in  his  e.  his  deeds  shall  be  discovered 

14.  18.  one  Cometh  to  an  e.  and  another  is  born 
16.  22.  the  trial  of  all  things  is  in  the  e. 

18.  12.  he  saw  and  perceived  their  c.to  be  evil 
24.  think  upon  the  wrath  that  shall  be  at  the  e. 

21.  9.  tlie  e.  of  them  is  a  flame  of  fire  to  destroy 
10.  but  the  e.  thereof  is  the  pit  of  hell 

28.  6.  remember  thy  e.  and  let  enmity  cease 

30.  1.  that  he  may  have  joy  of  him  in  the  e. 
10.  lest  th,ou  gnash  thy  teeth  in  the  e. 

33.  23.  at  tlie  lime  when  thou  shall  e.  thy  days 

38.  8.  and  of  his  works  there  is  no  e. 

43.  26.  hy  him  the  e.  hath  )>rosperou3  success 

46.  20.  he  prophesied  and  shewed  the  king  his  A 

47.  10.  he  set  in  order  the  solemn  times  till  the  (. 
51.  14.  I  will  seek  her  out  even  to  Ihe  c. 

Bar.  3.  25.  great  is  the  house,  and  halh  no  e. 

1  Mac.  2.  13.  to  what  c.  shall  we  live  any  longer? 
14. 10.  his  name  was  renowned  to  e.  of  the  world 

2  Mac.  5.  8.  in  the  e.  he  had  an  unhappy  return 

10.  9.  this  was  the  e.  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes 
15.37.  I  will  make  an  e.  ||  .39.  hero  shall  be  an  e. 

ENDED. 

1  E5(/.  6. 20.  the  house  of  ihe  Lord  is  not  yet  fv"y  «. 

2  Esd.  6.6.  by  me  ihey  shall  be  e.  and  by  none  other 

11.  44.  Ihe  proud  limes,  behold,  they  are  e, 

14.  9.  thou  shall  remain,  until  the  times  be  e. 
.7vd.  2.  4.  and  when  he  had  c.  his  counsel 

Esth.  15. 1.  on  third  day  when  she  had  «.  her  prayer 
Eccl.  50.  19.  till  Ihe  solemnity  of  the  Lord  was  e. 
2  Mac.  15.24.  be  stricken  wiih  terror,  and  hee.  thus 

ENDING. 
Wisd.l.  18.  the  beginninff,  e.  and  midst  of  times 

ENDINGS. 
2  Esd.  9.  6.  the  times  have  e.  in  effects  and  signj 

ENDS. 

2  Esd.  16. 13.  begin  to  be  shot  into  Ihe  e.  of  world 

Wisd.  6.  1.  ye  that  he  judges  of  Ihe  c.  of  the  earth 

I  Mac.  1.3.  Alexander  went  thro'  to  e.  of  the  earth 

ENDAMAGE. 

1  Esd.Q.  33.  to  hinder  or  c.  the  house  of  the  Lord 

ENDEAVOUR. 
Esth.  16.  3.  />.  to  hurl,  not  our  subjects  only 

2  Mac.  11. 19. 1  will  e.  to  be  a  means  of  your  good 

ENDUED. 
Eccl.  17. 3.  he  e.  them  wiih  strength  by  theniselvei 

ENDURE.  \ 

Eccl.  2.  2.  set  thy  heart  aright,  and  constantly  e. 
16.  22.  the  works  of  his  justice,  who  can  e.  them? 
40.  12.  but  true  dealing  shall  e.  for  ever 
45.  26.  and  that  their  glory  may  e.  for  ever 
2..Vac.6.30.  Inowe.sore  pains  in  body  being  beatea 

9.  10.  no  mah  could  r..  to  carry  for  liis  stink 

ENDURED. 
Wisd.  11.25.  could  any  thing  haves,  if  not  thy  will? 
16.  5.  they  perished,  thy  wrath  e.  not  for  ever 
17. 17.  e.  that  necessity  that  could  not  be  avoided 
18.  20.  but  the  wrath  e.  not  long 

1  Mac.  10.  15.  told  of  the  pains  that  they  had  e. 

2  Mac.  7.  27.  that  e.  the  troubles  of  education 

ENDUREST. 
Bar.2.  3.  thou  e.  for  ever  and  we  perish  utterly 

ENEME3SAR. 
Tnh.  1.13.  the  Most  High  gave  me  favour  before  E. 

15.  now  when  E.  was  dead,  Scrjnacherib  reigned 

16.  in  the  time  of  E.  I  gave  many  alms 

ENEMY. 
Eccl.  6.  1.  instead  of  a  friend  become  not  an  e. 
8.  7.  rejoice  not  over  thy  greniest  e.  being  dead 

12.  8.  and  an  e.  cannot  be  hidden  in  adversity 
10.  never  trust  thine  e.  for  as  iron  rusteth  so  is 
16.  an  c.  speaketh  sweetly  with  lips,  hut  in  heart 

20.  23.  that  makelh  him  his  e.  for  nulhing 

23.  3.  lest  mine  c.  rejoice  over  me 

25.  7.  and  he  that  liveth  to  see  the  fall  of  his  «. 

15.  there  is  no  wrath  above  the  wrath  of  an  •. 
27.  13.  for  as  man  hath  destroyed  his  f. 

29  6.  he  hath  gotten  him  an  c.  without  causa 

30  3.  he  that  t.(,'achelh  his  son,  grieveth  the  t. 
36. 7.  take  away  the  adversary  and  de.-itroy  the  a. 
37.2.  when  a  companion  and  friend  is  turn,  toane 

5.  who  taketh  up  Ihe  hnckler  against  the  e. 
1  Mac.  2.  7.  was  drlivered  into  the  hand  of  the  e. 
9.  her  young  men  sliiin  with  the  sword  of  the  «. 
8.  23.  the  sword  and  Ihe  r.  be  far  from  them 

13.  51.  there  was  destroyed  a  great  e.  out  oflsiaoi 


ENO 

S  .Ifnc.  3  38.  if  thou  hast  nny  a.  ortrnitor,!iend  him 
5.  8.  as  an  open  e.  of  his  country  and  country-men 
8.  Ifi.  not  to  be  stricken  with  terror  of  the  e. 
10.  26  hosought  him  to  he  an  e.  to  their  enemies 
ENEMIES. 
]  F.sd.  4.  4.  if  he  send  them  out  neainst  the  e. 
S  K.id.  1.  11.  and  I  have  slain  nil  iheir  e. 
3  27.  Ihougavest  into  hands  of  thine  c.  F.sth.  14.6. 
3(t.  I  have  seen  how  thou  hast  preserved  thy  e. 
6  24.  t'riends  shall  fight  one  against  another  like  e. 
Tob.  12.  10.  they  th.it  sin  are  e.  to  their  own  life 
Jtid  8.  I.'),  hath  power  to  destroy  us  before  our  e. 
.9.  our  fathers  had  a  great  full  before  our  e. 
^tS.Lord  be  beforo  thee  to  take  vengean.  on  our  e. 
13.  5.  to  the  destruction  of  the  e.  that  are  risen 
14.  hath  destroycrl  our  p.  by  my  bands,  17. 
LS.to  the  cutting  off  the  head  of  the  cliiefofourc. 
15.  5.  what  things  were  done  in  camp  of  their  e. 
FMk.  13.  G.  he  destroyed  by  the  sword  of  their  e. 
Wisd.  2.  18.  deliver  him  from  the  hand  of  his  e. 
5.  17.  his  weapon  for  the  revenge  of  his  p.. 
10. 12.  she  defended  him  from  his  e.  and  kept  him 
19.  but  she  drowned  Iheir  e.  and  cast  Ihcm  up 
J  1.3.  they  st<)od  against  their  e.  and  were  avenged 
.'5.  for  bv  what  thinirs  their  c  were  punished 
12.  20.  if  thou  didst  punish  the  e.  of  thy  children 
22.  thou  Fcourgfsl  our  e.  a  thousand  limes  more 

21.  among  the  beasts  of  their  e.  were  disposed 
15.  14.  all  the  e.  of  thy  people  are  most  foolish 
lO.  4.  only  be  showed  how  their  e.  were  tormented 

8.  and  in  this  thou  madest  thine  e.  confess 

22.  that  fire  did  destroy  the  fruits  of  the  e. 
18.  2.  they  thanked  them,  and  besoueht  them 

pardon,  for  that  they  had  been  e. 
EfW.  fi.  4.  be  laughed  to  scorn  of  his  e.  18.  31. 
'     13.  separate  thyself  from  e.  take  heed  of  friends 
12.  '.).  in  prosperity  of  a  man,  e.  will  be  erieved 
25.  14.  and  any  revenge,  but  the  revenge  of  «. 
2'>.  27.  ascolil  shall  he  sought  to  drive  away  thee. 
29.  13.  it  shall  fight  for  thee  asain'^l  thine  e. 
42.  II.  make  thee  a  laughing-stock  to  thine  e, 

46.  1.  taking  vengeance  of  the  e.  thai  roi^e  up 
.5.  when  tlie>e.  pressed  on  him  on  every  side 

47.  7.  for  he  deslroycd  the  e.  on  every  side 
51.8.  and  savest  them  out  of  the  haods  of  the  e. 

Bit.  3.  10.  Israel,  llint  thou  art  in  thine  e.  land 
•    4.26.  were  taken  as  a  (lock  causht  of  the  e, 

5.  6.  for  they  were  led  away  of  their  e. 
6.56.  they  cannot  withstand  any  king  or  e. 

Dun.  3.  0.  didst  deliver  us  into  hands  of  lawless  c. 

1  Mac.  4.  18.  but. stand  ye  now  against  your  e. 
36.  behold,  our  e.  are  discomfited,  let  us  go  up 

7.  29.  the  e.  were  prei)ared  to  take  away  Judas 
10.  06.  nor  joining  yourselves  with  our  e. 
ril.  stood  still,  and  so  the  e.  horses  were  tired 
15.  19.  nor  vet  aid  their  r.  against  them 

2  .^f^lc.  10.26.  besought  to  be  an  enemy  to  their  e. 

29.  there  appeared  to  the  r.  from  heaven 

30.  but  they  shot  arrows  and  lishtnings  aga.thee. 
ll.Jl.  giving  a  charge  on  their  e.  like  lions 
12.^2.  the  r..  being  smitten  with  fear,  fled  amain 

28.  who  breakcth  the  streneth  of  his  e. 
13.21.  Rhodo'us  disclosed  the  secrets  to  the  e. 
14.  17.  through  the  sudden  silence  of  his  c. 
22.  treachery  should  he  suddenly  practised  by  e. 
1.5.  26.  Judas  and  companv  encountered  the  «. 

ENFORCKTH. 
1  Esd.  3.  24.  is  not  winestronff"st,thate.  todo  thus? 

ENGAnni. 

Kcd.  24.  14.  I  was  exalted  like  a  palm-tree  in  E. 

ENGINE. 
1  Mae.  13.  43.  Simon  made  also  nn  «.  of  war 
44.  they  that  w«re  in  the  r.  leaped  into  the  city 
ENGINES. 
1  .Vffc.  5.  30.  hearing  ladder.^  and  other  e.  of  war 

6.  .31.  making  p.  for  war.  9.  64.  |  II.  20.  |  1,5.  2.5. 
.51.  and  he  set  there  artillery  with  c.  and  inslrnm. 
.52.  they  also  made  e.aga.  their  (?.  and  held  them 

9fl7.Simon  and  his  company  burnt  uptho  c.ofwar 

iMar.  12.  15.  without  any  e.  of  war  did  cast  down 

27.  wherein  was  in  at  provision  off.  and  dirts 

R.VGRAVED. 

Eetl.  4.5.  11.  with  a  writing  r.  for  a  memorial 

12.  a  crown  of  gidd,  wherein  was  c.  holiness 

ENJOY. 

^i«<f.2.6.  let  U9«.  the  pond  things  that  are  present 

EN.IOYF.n. 
1  Rid.  1.  .58.  until  the  land  had  p..  her  sabbaths 

ENI-ARGEn. 
1  Mnc.  14.  6.  Simon  c.  llw  bounds  of  his  nation 

ENMITY. 
1  End.  5.  .50.  the  nations  were  nt  p.  with  them 
F.prl.  6.  9.  there  is  a  friend,  who  being  turned  to  p. 
28. 6.  re-nemher  thy  end,  and  It  e.  cease,  r"menib. 

1  Mac.  1 1 .  40.  his  men  of  war  wore  at  c.  with  him 

ENOCIT. 

2  F.nd.  6.  40.  one  thou  callodst  R  other  T>i'vinlhan 
.51.  to  K.  thou  invest  one  part,  which  was  dried 

Frrl.  44.  16  E.  plenscd  T.ord,  and  wns  Irnrislaied 

40. 14.  on  the  eutth  wa-'  no  man  u kSUxl  like  E. 

7B0 


'       EPH 

ENOUGH. 

IVisd.  14.  22.  moreover,  this  was  not  e.  for  tliem 
18.  25.  it  was  e.  that  they  only  tasted  of  wrath 

Eccl.  .5.  1.  and  say  not,  I  have  e.  for  my  life 
11.  24.  say  not,  I  have  e.  and  possess  many  things 
18.  25.  when  hast  e.  remember  the  time  of  hunger 
31.  5.  he  that  followclh  corruption  shall  havee.  of 
35.  1.  that  keeps  the  law  bringeth  offerings  e 


LSD 


[ArocR\'PHA 


£i;cI.47.23.Jerohoam,wli« shewed  E.llie  wav  ofsii 

EPHRON. 
I  Mac.  5.  46.  now  when  they  came  to  E. 
"Mac.  12  27.  Judas  removed  the  host  toward  & 

EPIl'HANES. 
1  Mac.  1.  10.  came  a  wicked  root,  Anliochus  stir 
named  E.  10.  1.  2  Mac.  2.  20.  I  4.  7.  I  10.  9 
EPISTLE,  S. 


43.  30.  be  not  wearv,  for  ye  can  never  go  tar  e.    j  F.^lh.  11.  1.  they  brought  this  e.  of  Phurini 


2  Mac.  7.  42.  let  this  be  e.  now  to  Iiave  spoken 
10.  19.  left  tliem,  who  were  e.  to  besiege  them 
ENUUIRE. 
2  Esd.  9.  13.  e.  how  the  righteous  shall  be  saved 
Jud.  8.  34.  but  c.  not  you  of  mine  act,  not  declare 
Eccl.  21.  17.  they  e.  at  the  mouth  of  the  wise  man 

ENQUIRED. 
Tob.  5. 13.  I  have  e.  to  know  thy  tribe  and  family- 

ENaUIRY. 
1  Mac.  9.  26.  they  made  c.  for  Judas'  friends 

ENRICHED. 


Eccl.  35. 10.  give,  according  as  he  hath  e.  thee 

ENROLLED. 

1  Mac.  10.36.  there  be  p.  amongst  the  king's  forces 

ENTER. 

1  E.id.  8.  83.  the  land  which  ye  e.  into  to  possess 

2  Esd.  7. 14.  labour  not  to  c.  strait  and  vnin  things 
fVisd.X.i.  into  amalicious  soul  wisdom  shall  not  c. 

ENTERPRISE. 
Krc?.37.16.Iet  reason  go  before  every  e.and  counsel 
2  Mac.  14. 5.  opportunity  to  further  his  foolish  e. 

ENTERPRISES. 
Jud.  10.  8.  God  accomplish  thine?,  toglory  oflsra. 
13.5. to  execute  my  e.  todestruclion  of  the  enemies 
1  Mac.  9.  55.  was  plagued,  and  his  e.  hindered 

ENTERTAIN. 
Wisd.  18.  3.  a  harmless  sun  to  c.  them  honourably 
Eccl.  29.  25.  thou  shalt  e.  and  have  no  thanks 

1  Mac.  14.  2;}.  it  pleased  the  people  to  e.  the  men 

ENTERTAINED. 
Tob.  7.  8.  moreover,  they  c.  them  cheerfully 

ENTICETH. 
Wisd.  15.  5.  the  sight  of  which  e.  fools  to  lust 
ENTRANCE. 

2  Esd.  7.  4.  but  put  the  case,  the  c.  were  narrow 
7.  the  c.  thereof  is  narrow  and  is  set  to  fall 

.f'id.  4.  7.  by  them  there  was  an  e.  into  Judca 

Wisil.  7.  6.  for  all  men  have  one  e.  into  life 

Bil  13.  imder  the  table  they  had  made  a  privy  c. 

1  Mac.  14.  5.  he  made  an  c  to  the  isles  of  the  sea 

ENTRANCES. 

2  Esd.l.Vi.  then  were  e.  of  this  world  made  narrow 

ENTRAP. 
Er.cl.S.  11.  lest  he  lie  in  wait  to  e.  thee  in  thy  words 

ENTREAT. 
Toh.  10.  12.  wherefore  do  not  e.  her  evil 
.fiid.  10. 16.  shew  unto  him,  and  he  will  e.  thee  well 
Kcc/.7.20.tby  servant  workelh  truly,  e,  him  not  evil 

ENTREATED. 
Eccl.  49.  7.  for  they  e.  bim  evil,  who  was  a  prophet 

1  Mac.  11.  20.  the  king  e.  him  as  bis  predecessors 
12.  8.  Onias  e.  the  ambassador  honourably 

2  .Ufac.  9.  28.  as  he  e.  others,  so  died  he  miserably 

12.  30.  e.  them  kindiv  in  the  time  of  adversity 

ENTERED. 
2  Esd.^0.l.  it  came  to  pass  when  my  son  wasc.  into 
his  wedding  chamber,  be  fell  down  and  died 

13.  43.  they  e.  Euphrates  by  narrow  passages 
Toh.  3.  17.  the  same  time  came  Tohit  home  and  e. 
.hid.  16. 18.  as  soon  as  they  e.  into  Jertisalem 
Wi.'id.  10.  16.  she  f .  into  the  soul  of  the  servant 

14.  14.  by  vain-glory  they  p.  into  the  world 
lirl  1.3.  entrance  whereby  they  e.  in  continually 

1  .Mac.  12.  3.  they  c.  into  the  senate  and  said 
13.  47.  so  p.  into  it  with  songs  and  thnnksgiving 

51.  be  p.  info  it  the  23d  day  of  the  second  month 

2  Mac.  14.  1.  having  p.  by  liie  haven  of  Tripolis 

ENVY. 
2  K.«rf.  2. 28.  heathen  shall  e.  thee  but  not  be  able 
Wisd.  2.  24.  throuch  p.  of  the  devil  came  death 
Fret.  '.).  11.  c.  not  the  clory  of  a  sinner 
30.  24.  p.  and  wrath  shorten  the  life 
37.  10.  hide  thy  counsel  from  such  as  e.  thee 
40.  5.  wrath  and  e.  do  change  his  knowledge 

1  Mac.  8.  16.  there  was  neither  e.  nor  emulation 

ENVIETH. 

2  Esd.  16.  49.  as  a  whore  p.  an  honest  woman 
Eccl.  14.  6.  none  worse  than  he  that  e.  himself 

10.  a  wicked  eye  p.  his  bread,  he  is  a  niggard 

ENViors. 

Toh.  4. 16.  let  not  thine  eye  be  e.  when  thou  givest 
Eccl.  14.  3.  what  should  an  p.  man  do  with  monoy'! 
8. the  f.mnn  hnlh  a  wicked  eye,  he  despisoth  men 
18.  18.  a^ifl  of  the  e.  connumeth  the  eyes 
20.  14.  nor  yet  of  the  e.  for,  his  necessity 
37.  11.  nor  with  an  p.  mnn  of  tliankfulnosg 

EPHOD. 
Eccl.  4.5.  8.  with  breecbe",  a  long  robe,  and  the  p. 

EPIIRAIM. 
■  hid.  6.  2.  thou  Acliior,  and  the  hirelings  of  E. 
Eccl.  47.  21.  out  of  E.  ruled  a  rebullluus  kinplom 


liar.  6.  1.  a  copy  of  an  e.  which  Jeremy  tent 

1  Mac.  8. 22.  this  is  the  cojiy  of  the  c.  senate  wrote 

2  Mac.  2.  13.  tlie  e.  of  the  kings  about  holy  gift* 
EQUAL. 

Eccl.  13.  11.  affect  not  to  be  made  e.  to  him 
.32.  9.  great  men  make  not  thyself  £.  with  them 
2  Mac.  8.  30.  they  made  the  aged  e.  in  spoils 

13.  23.  submitted  and  swaro  to  all  e.  condiliuos 
EQUALS. 

2  Mac.  9.  15.  make  them  all  e.  to  the  citizens 

EQUITY. 

Esth.  13.  2.  but  carrying  myself  alway  with  e. 
Wisd.  9.  3.  according  to  e.  and  righteousness 
12.  18.  thou  jiidgest  with  e.  and  ordereet  us 
ERECT. 
2  Mac.  14.33. 1  will  e.  a  notable  temple  to  Bacchui 

ERECTED. 

1  Esd.  5.  50.  they  e.  the  altar  on  his  own  i.lace 

ERR. 

1  Esd.  3. 18.  it  causeth  all  men  to  c.  that  drink  it 
JVisd.  13.  6.  they  peradventnre  c.  seeking  God 
Eccl.  15.  12.  say  not  thou  he  hath  caused  ine  to  «. 

2  .HJac.  2.  2.  that  they  should  not  e.  in  their  minds 

ERRED. 
1  Esd.  4.  27.  many  have  c.  and  sinned  for  womcu 
Jf'isd.  5.  6.  we  have  e.  from  the  way  of  truth 

14.  22.  that  they  e.  in  the  knowledge  of  God 
17.  1.  therefore  unnurtured  souls  have  e. 

ERROR. 
Tob.  5. 13.  not  seduced  with  the  e.  of  brethren 
.fud  5.  20.  if  there  be  any  e.  in  this  people 
Wisd.  1.  12.  seek  not  death  in  the  e.  of  your  life 
12. 24.  they  went  astray  very  far  in  the  ways  of  e. 
Eccl.  4.,  25.  be  abashed  of  the  e.  of  thy  ignorance 
11.  16.  c.  and  darkness  bad  their  beginning 
ERRORS. 

1  Esd.  9.  20.  to  make  reconcilement  for  their  e. 

ESAU. 

2  Esd.3. 16.  thou  didst  choose  Jacob,  and  put  by  E. 
0.  8.  he  said  to  me,  when  Jacob  and  E.  were 

born  of  him,  Jacob's  hand  held  fast  the 
heel  of  E. 
9.  E.  is  the  end  of  world,  Jacob  the  beginning 
.hid.  7.  8.  all  the  chief  of  the  cjiildren  of  E. 

1  .<l/ac.  5. 3.  Judas  fought  agaii\st  children  of  E.  65. 

E3AY. 

2  Esd.  2. 18. 1  will  send  my  servants  E.  and  Jeremy 
Eccl.  48.  20.  delivered  them  by  the  ministry  of  E. 

22.  as  E.  the  prophet  had  commanded  him 

ESCAPE. 

2  Esd.  6.  25.  wboRO  shall  e.  and  see  my  salvation 

9.  7.  that  shall  be  able  to  c.  by  his  works 

16.  22.  and  the  other  that  e.  llie  hunger 
./h(/.7.19.  there  was  no  way  to  e.  from  among  them 
Esth.  16.  4.  they  think  to  e.  the  justice  of  God 
If'isd.  16.  1.5.  it  is  not  possible  to  e.  thine  hand 
JCft^6.35.  let  not  parables  of  understanding  £.  thee 

1!.  10.  neither  slialt  thou  e.  hy  fleein? 

16.  11.  it  is  marvel  if  he  e.  unpunished 
13.  the  sinner  shall  not  e.  with  iiis  spoils 

20.  3.  shew  repenlaiico,  so  shalt  e.  wilful  sin 
I!ar.  6.  57.  able  to  c.  from  thieves  or  robbers 
.s'k.s-.  22.  if  I  do  it  not,  I  cannot  e.  your  hands 
2  .Vac.  3.  38.  him  well  scourged,  if  he  e.  with  life 

6.26.  yet  should  I  note,  the  hand  of  the  Almighty 

7.  19.  iliiiik  not  that  thou  shall  c.  unpunished 

9.  22.  having  great  hope  to  f.  this  sickness 

10.  20.  they  took  money  and  let  some  of  them  e. 

ESCAPED. 
Wisd.  14.  6.  hope  of  the  world  p.  in  a  weak  vessel 
F.rcl.  27.  20.  he  is  as  n  roo  e.  out  of  the  snare 
40.  6.  tumbled,  as  if  he  were  c.  out  of  a  battle 

1  Mac.  4. 26.  now  all  the  strangers  that  had  e.  came 

2  JVfcr.  7.  35.  Ihon  hast  not  yet  c.  judgment  of  God 
11.12.many  of  them  also  being  wounded,  cnaked, 

and  Lysias  fled  awav  shamefully  and  so  t. 
ESCAPETH. 
F.rcl.  36.  9.  let  him  that  e.  be  consumed  hy  firfi 
42. 20.  no  thought  c.  him  iinr  is  any  word  hidden 
ESDRAS. 

1  r.irf.  8.  1.  ader  this  came  E.  the  son  ofSeraia* 
3.  this  E.  went  up  fiomllabylon  as  a  pciibo 
7.  for  E.  had  very  great  skill  |)  25.  then  said  E. 

9.  1.  R.  rising  from  the  court  of  the  temp'o 
16.  E.  the  priest  chose  Ihcypriiicipal  men 
40.  so  E.  the  ibief  priest  liroiight  the  law 
45.  then  look  E.  the  book  of  the  law 

2  I'.sd.  I.  1.  the  second  book  ofllie  prophet  E 
2.  33.  1  E.  received  a  cli-irge  of  Ihe  Lord 

6.  10.  other  (|iieslion,  R.  n.^k  lln-ii  not 

7. 2.  up  E.  and  hear  the  wurds,  8.  2, 19.  |  14.  1. 


ArOCRTPHil.] 


EVE 


ESDR^LON. 
Jud.  1. 8.  tliat  were  of  tlie  great  plain  of  E. 
3.  9.  he  came  over  against  E.  4.  6.  I  7.  3. 

ESPV. 
1  Mac.  5.  38.  bo  Judas  spiil  men  to  e.  the  host 

ESPIED. 
Tob.  11.  C.  when  she  e.  him  coming,  she  said 

ESTABLISH. 
Eccl.  6.  37.  he  shall  e.  thy  heart  and  give  wisdom 

ESTABLlSHEn. 
E((l.  24.  10.  and  so  was  I  e.  in  Sion 
31   11.  his  goods  shall  be  e,  congregation  declare 
4i  17.  whatsoever  is,  might  be  c.  I'or  his  glory 
44.  20.  he  e.  ihe  covenant  in  his  Hush 
49. 3.  in  timeof ungodly  Joeiiis  e.  the  worship  ofG 
1  Mac.  1.  1(3.  now  when  the  kingdom  was  e. 

14.  2(>.  lor  he  and  his  brethren  have  c.  Israel 
S  Mac.  14.  15.  to  him  that  had  e.  his  people 

E65TABL1SHETH. 
Eccl.  3.9.  blessing  of  father  e.  the  houses  of  children 
42.  2a.  one  thing  e.  the  good  of  another 

ESTATE. 

Toi. 1.15.  whose*,  was  troubled  that  I  could  not  go 
Jud.  6.  19,  O  Lord,  pity  the  low  e.  of  our  nation 
Eccl.  '2.  4.  when  thuu  art  clianged  to  a  low  e. 

11.  12.  yet  the  Lord  set  him  up  from  his  low  e. 
20.  11.  tliat  liflelh  up  his  head  from  a  low  e. 
22.  23.  a  mean  e.  is  not  always  to  be  contemned 
29.  8.  yet  have  patience  wiih  a  man  in  poor  e. 

16.  a  sinner  will  overthrow  good  e.  of  his  surety 
18.  surety.ship  hath  undone  many  of  good  e. 
31.  4.  the  poor  laboureth  in  his  poor  e. 
1  Mac.  3.  43.  let  us  restore  decayud  e.  of  our  peopl 

15.  3.  that  [  may  restore  it  to  the  old  e. 

ESTEEMED. 
E.sth.  14.  17. 1  have  not  greatly  e.  the  king's  feast 
IVisd.  2.  16.  we  are  c.  of  him  as  counterfeits 

7.  8.  I  e.  riches  nothing  in  comparison  of  her 
Eccl.  40.  25.  but  connsiil  is  e.  above  them  both 

ESTEEMEDST. 
Ifisd.  12.  7.  the  land  thou  e.  above  all  other 

ESTHER. 
Esth.  10.  6.  this  river  is  E.  whom  the  king  married 

15.  9.  E.  what  is  the  matter?  I  am  thy  brother 

16.  13.  the  destruction  also  of  blameless  E. 

ESTIMATION. 
Wisd.  8.  10.  for  her  sake  I  shall  have  e. 

ESTRANGED. 
1  Mac.  11.  53.  and  he  e.  himself  from  Jonathan 

ETERNAL. 
JVisd.  17. 2.  lay  there  exiled  from  the  e.  Providence 
Eccl.  24.  Id.  I  being  e.  am  given  to  my  children 
3C.  17.  know  that  tliou  art  the  Lord,  the  e,  God 

ETERNITY. 
Wisd.  2.  2,3.  made  hirn  to  be  an  image  of  his  own  e 
Eccl.  1.  2.  who  can  number  the  days  of  e.? 
18. 10.  so  are  a  thousand  ye:irs  to  the  days  of  c. 
ETHIOPIA. 
1  Ksd.  3.  2.  from  India  to  E.  Esth.  13.  1.  |  16.  1. 
Jud.  1.  10.  until  you  come  to  the  borders  of  E. 

EVE. 
Toft.  8.  6.  thougavest  hiniE.  his  wife  for  a  helper 

EVEN. 
.Bar.  5.7.  to  make  e.  the  ground  that  Israel  may  go 

EVENING. 
1  Ksd.  8.  72.  I  sat  still  until  the  e.  sacrifice 
Tob.  6.  1.  they  came  in  the  r..  to  the  river  Tigris 
Jud.  9.  1.  the  incense  of  that  e.  was  offered 

12.  9.  she  remained  till  she  did  eat  her  meat  at  e. 
13. 1,  when  the  e.  was  come,  servants  made  haste 

Eccl.  13.  20.  from  morning  until  e.  1  Mac.  10.  80. 

EVENT. 
ZMiic.  9.  25.  prince.^  expert  what  shall  be  the  e. 

EVENTS. 
IVisd.  8.  8.  foreseelh  the  e.  of  seasons  and  times 
'  EVER. 

1  Esd.  5.  61.  his  mercy  is  for  e.  in  all  Israel 

2  Esd.  7.  53.  a  paradise,  whose  fruit  endureth  for  e. 
9.  31.  ye  shall  he  honoured  in  it  for  c. 

16.  C7.  to  meddle  no  more  with  them  for  e. 
Tub.  3.  2.  thou  jndgcst  truly  and  justly  for  c.    . 

11.  thy  holy  and  glorious  name  is  blessed  and  no- 
nourable  for  e.  let  all  thy  works  praise  thee  for  e. 

8.  .5.  Tobias  said,  blessed  is  thy  holy  name  for  e. 
15.  and  let  thine  elect  prai.se  thee  for  e. 

II.  14.  and  blessed  is  thy  name  for  c. 

12.18.  by  will  of  God  came,  wherefore  praise  for  e. 

13.  1.  blei>sed  he  God  that  liveth  for  e. 

10.  love  in  thee  for  c.  those  that  are  miserable 

12.  blessed  shall  all  be  that  love  thee  for  e. 
14.have  seen  all  thy  glory,  and  shall  be  glad  for  e. 
18.  blessed  be  God  who  hath  extolled  it  for  e. 

14.  5.  the  house  of  God  shall  be  built  in  it  for  e. 
Tad.  13.  19.  remember  the  power  of  God  for  «. 

16.  17.  thnv  iihall  feel  them  and  weep  for  c. 
E^th.  14.  10.  to  magnify  a  flnshly  king  for  e. 

16.  24.  Iritcful  to  wild  beasts  and  fowls  for  c. 
IVisd.  .3.  8.  and  their  Lord  shall  reign  fur  e. 

14.  13.  for  neither  shall  they  hf.  for  e. 

16.  5.  thy  wrath  endured  not  for  e. 
781 


EVI 

Eccl.  1.  1.  all  wisdom  is  with  the  Lord  for  c. 

16.  27.  he  garnished  his  works  for  e. 

17.  9.  to  glory  in  his  marvellous  acts  for  e. 
15.  their  ways  are  e.  before  him  and  not  hid 

18.  1.  he  that  liveth  for  c.  created  all  things 
24.  33.  and  I  will  leave  it  lo  all  ages  for  e. 
38.  28.  the  noise  of  the  anvil  is  e.  m  his  ears 
40.  17.  and  mercifulness  endureth  I'or  e. 

42.  2.3.  all  these  things  live  and  remain  for  e. 

44.  13.  their  seed  shall  remain  for  c.  and  glory 

45.  24.  the  dignity  of  the  priesthood  for  e. 
20.  and  that  their  glory  may  endure  for  e. 

47.  11.  the  Lord  exalted  his  horn  for  e.. 

13.  that  he  might  prepare  his  sanctuary  for  e. 

48.  25.  he  shewed  «vhat  should  come  to  pass  for 

e.  and  secret  things  or  e.  they  came 
50.  23.  that  peace  may  be  in  Israel  for  e. 

29.  blessed  be  the  Lord  for  e.  amen,  amen 
Bar.  3.  3.  for  thou  endurest  for  c.  and  we  perish 
13.  thou  shouldest  have  dwelt  in  peace  for  e. 

4.  1.  this  is  the  law  that  endureth  for  e. 

23.  give  you  to  me  with  joy  and  gl.idness  for  e. 

5.  1.  the  glory  that  Cometh  from  God  fur  e. 
Dan.  3. 20.  blessed  art  thou,  O  Lord  God,  and  to  bo 

praised  and  exalted  above  all  for  e.  30,31,32. 

33.  to  be  praised  and  glorified  above  all  for  e. 

Jindso  to  the  end  of  the  chapter. 

Prayer  of  Manass.  I  will  praise  thee  for  e.  all  tlie 

days  of  my  life,  thine  is  the  glory  for  e.  andc. 

1  Mac.  3.  7.  his  memorial  is  blessed  for  e. 

4.  24.  because  his  mercy  endureth  for  e. 
8.23.good  success  be  to  Jews  by  sea  and  land  for  e. 
11.  36.  be  revoked  from  this  time  forth  for  e. 

16.  2.  we  have  e.  fought  against  the  enemies 

2  Mac.  8.  29.  reconciled  with  his  servants  for  e. 
11.  26.  they  may  e.  go  cheerfully  about  affairs 

14.  15.  that  had  established  his  people  for  e. 

EVERLASTING. 
2  Esd.  2.  11.  I  will  gire  these  the  e.  tabernacles 

34.  he  shall  give  you  c.  rest,  for  he  is  nigh 

35.  for  the  e.  light  shall  shine  upon  you 

3.  15.  thou  madest  an  e.  covenant  with  him 

7.  50.  that  there  is  prOmi.sed  us  an  e.  hope 
Tob.  1.  0.  as  it  was  ordained  by  an  e.  decree 

3.  6.  may  be  delivered,  and  go  into  the  e.  place 

13.  6.  praise  the  Lord,  and  extol  the  c.  King 
10.  and  praise  the  e.  King,  for  he  is  good 

Pf'isd.  7.  26.  she  is  the  brightness  of  the  c.  light 

8.  13.  I  shall  leave  behind  me  an  e.  memorial 
Eccl.  1.  4.  Uie  understanding  of  prudence  from  e. 

5.  and  her  ways  are  e.  commandments 
1.5.  she  hath  built  an  e.  foundation  with  men 
2.  9.  hope  for  good,  and  for  c.  joy  and  mercy 

15.  6.  she  shall  cause  Itim  to  inherit  an  c.  name 

17.  12.  he  made  an  e.  covenant  with  them 
39.2().he  seeth  from  e.toe.||42.  21.  he  is  from  e.  to  c. 

44.  18.  an  e.  covenant  was  made  with  him 

45.  7.  an  e.  covenant  he  made  with  him 

15.  this  was  appointed  to  him  by  an  c.  covenant 

49.  12.  holy  temple,  which  was  prepared  for  e. 
Bar.  4.  10.  which  the  E.  brought  upon  them,  14. 

20.  I  will  cry  to  the  E.  in  my  days 

22.  my  hope  is  in  E.  that  ho  will  save  you,  mercy 
shall  come  to  you  from  the  E.  our  Saviour 
24.  with  great  glory  and  brightness  of  the  E. 
29.  shall  bring  you  e.  joy  again  with  salvation 

35.  for  fire  shall  come  on  her  from  the  E. 

5.  2.  set  a  diadem  of  the  glory  of  the  E. 
5ii5.  42.  O  e.  God,  that  knowest  the  secrets 

1  Mac.  2.  51.  so  shall  ye  receive  an  e.  name 
54.  obtained  the  covenant  of  an  e.  priesthood 
57.  David  possessed  the  throne  of  an  e.  kingdom 

2  Mac.  1.  25.  the  only  Just,  Almighty,  and  E. 
7.  9.  the  King  shall  r.iise  us  up  unto  e.  life 

36.  are  dead  under  God's  covenant  of  e.  life 

EVERLASTINGNESS. 
2  Esd.  8.  20.  O  Lord,  thou  that  dwellest  in  c. 
EVERMORE. 

1  Esd.  8.  8.5.  leave  the  land  to  your  children  for  c. 

2  E.id.  2.  35.  light  shall  sjiine  upon  you  for  e. 
.Tad.  15.  10.  blessed  he  thou  of  the  Lord  for  e. 
IVisd.  4.  18.  be  a  reproach  among  the  dead  for  e 

5.  15.  but  the  righteous  love  for  c.  their  reward  is 

6.  21.  honour  wisdom,  that  ye  may  reign  for  c. 
Eccl.  44.  14.  but  their  name  liveth  for  e. 

Bar.  3.  32.  he  that  prepared  the  earth  for  e. 
Dan.  3.  3.  thy  name  is  worthy  to  be  praised  for  e. 

1  Mac.  111.  30.  from  this  day  forth  for  e.  15.  8. 

14.  4.  as  that  e.  his  authority  pleased  them 

EVIDENT. 

2  Er'd.  4.  11.  tlie  corruption  Jhat  is  e.  in  my  .sight 
Esth.  16.  9.  always  judging  things  that  are  e. 

2  Mac.  15, 35.  and  e.  sisn  of  the  help  of  the  Lord 
EVIL. 

1  Fsd.  1.  44.  and  Joacim  did  e.  before  the  Lord 
47.  he  did  e.  also  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 

2  Fsd.  2.  3.  have  done  that  which  is  c.  before  him 
14.1  have  broken  thec.in  pieces  and  created  good 

3.  22.  the  good  departed,  and  the  e.  abode  Flill 
29.  then  my  euul  law  many  e.  doers  in  30tli  year 


EXA 

2/c5(L4.28.the£.ie  sown,  but  destruction  U  not  com* 

29.  if  place  where  the  e.  is  sown  pas.i  not  away 

30.  for  Ihe  grain  of«.  seed  hath  been  sown 

31.  the  grain  of  c.  seed  hath  brought  forth 
o3.  wherefore  are  our  years  few  and  e.  ? 

6.  27.  for  e.  shall  be  put  out  and  deceit  quenched 
8.  53.  the  root  of  c.  is  sealed  up  from  you 
13.  38.  shall  lay  before  them  their  e.  thoughts 
Tob.  3.  8.  whom  Asmodeus  the  e.  spirit  killed 
17.  and  to  bind  Asmodeus  the  e.  spirit 

6.  7.  if  a  devil  or  an  c.  spirit  trouble  any 

15.  make  thou  no  reckoning  of  the  e.  spirit 

8.  3.  which  smell,  when  the  e.  spirit  had  smelted 

10.  12.  wherefore  do  not  entreat  her  e. 

12.  7.  do  what  is  good  and  no  e.  shall  touch  thee 
Jud.  7.  15.  thou  shalt  render  them  an  e.  reward 

8.  9.  when  she  heard  the  c.  words  of  Ihe  people 
Esth.  13.  5.  this  people  is  e.  affected  to  our  state 
16.  4.  that  seeth  all  tilings,  and  haleth  c. 
IS.Jewsarc  no  f.  doers, but  live  by  most  just  lawi 
fVisd.  14.  27.  idols  the  cause  and  the  end  of  all  e. 

15.  6.  but  they  are  lovers  of  e.  things 

12.  we  must  be  getting,  though  it  be  by  e.  means 

16.  8.  that  it  is  thou  who  deliverest  from  all  e. 
18.  9.  saints  be  partakers  of  the  same  good  and  «. 

Ecc/.3.24.aoc.suspicion  hath  overthrownjudgment 

26.  a  stubborn  heart  shall  fare  e.  at  Ihe  last 

4.  20.  observe  the  opportunity,  beware  of  e. 

5.  14.  an  e.  condemnation  on  the  double  tongue 

7.  1.  do  none  e.  so  shall  no  harm  come  to  theo 
20.  thy  servant  worketh  truly,  entreat  him  not  «. 

9.  1.  teach  her  not  an  c.  lesson  against  thyself 

11.  16.  and  e.  shall  wax  old  with  them  that  glory 
24.  and  what  e.  can  coine  to  me  hereafter? 

31.  he  lieth  in  wait,  smd  turneth  good  into  8. 

18.  8.  what  is  his  good  7  and  what  is  his  e.  ? 

12.  he  saw  and  perceived  their  end  to  bee. 

19.  6.  he  that  hateth  babbling  shall  have  less  «. 
28.  when  he  findeth  opportunity  he  will  do  e. 

20.  9.  that  hatli  good  success  in  e.  things 

16.  they  that  eat  my  bread  speak  e.  of  me 
22.  26.  if  any  e.  happen  unto  me  by  him 

26.  7.  an  e.  wife  is  a  yoke  shaken  to  and  fro 

27.  22.  he  that  winketh  with  the  eyes  worketh  «. 

28.  21.  the  death  thereof  is  an  e.  death,  grave  better 
31.  10.  might  have  done  e.  and  hath  not  done  it 

13.  remember  that  a  wicked  eye  is  an  e.  thing 
33.26.so  are  tortures  and  torments  for  an  c.  servant 

27.  send  to  labour,  for  idleness  leachethmuch  e. 
31.  if  thou  entreat  iiim  e.  and  he  run  from  thee 

37.  18.  four  manner  of  things  appear,  good  and  e. 
27.  prove  thy  soul,  and  see  what  is  e.  for  it 

38.  17.  weep  bitterly,  lest  thou  he  e.  spoken  of 

39.  4.  for  he  haih  tried  the  good  and  the  e. 

42.  5.  lo  make  the  side  of  an  e.  servant  to  bleed 

6.  sine  keeping  is  good,  where  an  e.  wife  is 
51.  12.  thou  delivcredst  me  from  the  e.  tiroo 
Prayer  of  Manass.  be  not  angry  with  me  for  ever 
by  reserving  c.  for  me,  nor  condemn  me 
EVILS. 
2  Ksd.  7.  27.  whoso  is  delivered  from  the  foresaid  «. 

12.  43.  are  not  e.  which  are  come  to  us  sufficient 
14^16.  yet  greater  e.  shall  be  done  hereafter 

17.  so  much  the  more  shall  e.  increase  on  them 
16. 18.  the  powers  stand  in  fear,  the  beginning  of 

c.  what  shall  I  do  when  these  e.  shall  come? 
21. even  then  shall  e. grow  on  earth, sword, famine 
40.  in  those  c.  he  even  as  pilgrims  upon  earth 
Esth.  10.  9.  Lord  hath  delivered  us  from  all  thos"  <. 
11.9.  nation  was  troubled,  fearing  their  own  t. 
Bar.  1.  20.  wherefore  the  c.  cleaved  unto  us 
1  jMuc.  1.  9.  and  e.  were  multiplied  in  Ihe  earth 

6.  12.  now  I  remember  the  e.  I  did  at  Jerusalem 
8.31.  as  touching  the  e.  that  Demetrius  doth 

10.  a.  he  will  remember  nil  the  c.  we  have  done 

EUMENES. 
lJ\tac.  8.8.wliich  thev  took  of  him  and  gave  king  E. 

EUNUCH. 
■Tud.  12.  II.  then  said  he  to  Bngoas  tlie  e. 
ff'/>'?.3.U.blessod  is  the  f.wlio  wroujrht  no  iniquity 
Feel.  20.4.  as  is  the  lust  of  an  c.  to  deflower  a  virgin 
30.20.  as  an  c.  that  emhrnccth  a  virgin  and  slgheth 

KUNUCIIS. 

Estfi.  12.  1.  with  Ihe  two  e.  of  the  king,  6. 

3.  king  examined  the  two  c.  they  were  strangled 

EUPATOR. 

I  Mac.  6.  17.  to  reign,  and  his  name  he  called  E 

EUPHRATES. 

1  Fsd.  1.  25.  lo  raise  war  at  Carchamig  upon  E. 
27.  not  sent  against  thee,  for  my  war  is  upon  E 

2  Fsd.  13.  43.  they  entered  K.  by  narrow  passages 
.Tud.  1.  6.  all  that  dwell  by  E.  came  unto  him 

2.24. ho  went  over  E.  and  Went  thro'  Mesopotamia 
Fccl.^i.  26.  m.Tkc  under-standing  to  abound  likeE 
1  .Vac.  3.  32.  froin  the  river  E.  to  borders  of  Egypt 
37.  and  having  pa«9"d  the  river  E.  he  went  thro 
EXACT. 
EcclSl.lO.  wrestled  with  her,and  my  doings  was* 

EXACTED. 
l£^<2.3.27.migiity  kings  who  reigned  and  <>.  tribute! 


EXC 


EXP 


EZE 


[AroCRTTBA 


EXACTLY. 
tF.sd  Ifi.W.  Ltl.halh  ^.soarchBd  out  all  your  works 
Eccl.  16.  25.  1  will  declare  his  knowledge  e. 

EXACTNESS. 
Eccl.  42.  4.  of  e.  of  weight  be  not  thou  aghamed 

EXALT. 
Tob.  12. 6.  It  is  Rood  to  praise  God  and  e.  his  name 
'ud.  16.  2.  e,  him,  and  rail  upon  lli^<  name 
Keel.  1.  30.  e.  not  thysi-lf,  IcRt  thou  fall 
II.  4.  and  e.  not  thyself,  in  the  day  of  honour 
13.  5.  she  shall  e.  him  above  his  nei^libours 

43.  30.  e.  him  ns  much  ns  you  can,  for  he  will  far 
exceed,  wheii  you  e.  him  put  forth  your  strength 

44.  21.  that  he  would  e.  hi.s  seed  as  the  stars 
Dan.3.35-  praise  and  e.  him  above  all  for  ever,  36, 

37,  38,  .W,  40,  41,  42,  43,  44,  45,  46,  47, 
4S,  49,  .10,  r,\,  .52,  53,  54,  55,56,  57,  5a, 
59,  60,  61,  62,  63.  64,  65,  66. 
1  <Vae. 14.35. he  sought  bv  aH  means  toe.  his  people 

EXALTATION. 
Jud.  10.  8.  thine  enterprises  to  the  e.  of  Jorusalem 
13.  4.  the  works  of  my  hands  for  the  e.  of  Jerus. 
15. 9.  they  said,  thou  art  the  e.  of . Jerusalem 
16.  afore,  of  those  that  were  oppressed  in  Israel 
EXALTED. 
S  Esd.  2.  43.  A  youn;;  man,  and  upon  every  one  of 
their  heads  he  set  crown.o  and  was  more  e. 
Jud.  9.  7.  behold,  they  are  e.  with  horse  and  man 
Ffth.  11.11.  the  sun  rose,  and  the  lowly  were  e. 
Eecl.  24.  13,  I  was  e.  like  a  cedar  in  Libanus 

14.  I  was  e.  like  a  palm-tree  inEngaddi 
33.  12.  some  of  them  hath  he  blessed  and  e. 

45.  6.  he  e.  Aaron  a  holy  man  like  unto  him 
47.  11.  Lord  took  away  his  sins,  and  e.  his  horn 

Bar.  2.  5.  thus  we  were  cast  down  and  not  e. 
5.6.  God  bringeth  (hem  unto  the  e.  with  glory 
Dan.  3.  29.  to  be  praised  and  c.  above  all,  30,  32 
1  Jifae.  1.  3.  he  was  e.  and  his  heart  was  lifted  uj 
8.  13.  finally,  that  they  were  greatly  e. 
11.  16.  Ale.\aniler  fled,  but  king  Ptolemee  was  e. 
EXALTETH. 
EcclA.  19.  wisdom  e.  them  to  honour  that  hold  her 
4.  11.  wi^■dom  e.  her  children  and  layeth  hold 
7.  11.  for  there  is  one  which  humhleth  and  e. 
50.  22.  which  e.  our  days  t'rom  the  womb 
EXALTING, 
t  Esd.  15.  53.  e.  the  stroke  of  thine  hands 
EXAMINE. 

1  Fsd.  9.  16.  they  sat  together  to  e.  the  matter 
Wisd.  2.  19.  let  us  e.  him  with  despitefidncss 
Eecl.  18.  20.  before  judgment  e.  thyself 

Sus.  51.  put  these  two  aside,  and  I  will  e.  them 

EXAMINATION. 
J-ad.  8.27.  hath  tried  them,  for  thee,  of  their  hearts 
-Sjts.  48.  tliat  without  e.  ye  have  condemned  her 

EXAMINED. 
Eith.  12.  3.  then  the  king  e.  the  two  eunuchs 
Eccl.  11.  7.  blame  not  before  thou  hast  e.  truth 

EXAMPLE. 
Jud.  8.24.  let  us  shew  an  e.  to  our  brethren 
E.itk.  14.  11.  make  him  an  a.  that  hath  begun  this 
Wisd.  4.  2.  when  it  is  present,  men  take  e.  at  it 
Eerl.  44.  16.  being  an  c.  of  repentance  to  all 

2  Mac.  G.  28.  leave  a  notable  c.  to  such  as  be  young 
31.  leaving  his  death  for  an  e.  of  a  noble  courage 

EXCEED. 
2Ksd.4.50.so  the  qu;intitv  which  is  past  did  more  e. 

EXCEEDED. 
2  Ks(i.  4.34.  haste  is  In  vain,  for  thou  hast  much  e. 

EXCEEDING. 
1  F.i^d.  3.  18.  O  yo  men,  how  e.  strong  is  wino 
Ercl.  39.  16.  the  works  of  the  Lord  are  e.  good 

1  Mar.  3.  25.  then  an  e.  great  dread  began  to  fall 
10.  2.  king  Demetrius  gathered  an  c.  great  host 
15.  36.  whereupon  the  king  was  e.  wroth 

2  Jilac.8. 27.  yielding  e.  prai.se  and  thanks  to  Lord 
1.5.  6.  soNicanoT  in  c  pride  determined  to  set  up 

13.  a  man  with  grny  hairs,  and  e.  glorious 
EXCEEDINGLY. 

1  Esd.  V  24.  and  how  they  grieved  him  e.        * 
S  Esd.  10.25.  her  fice  on  a  sudden  sbined  r. 

15.  6.  wirkndiiess  hath  e.  polluted  thi'  earth 
Jud.  4.  2.  therefore  they  were  e.  afraid  of  him 
F.eel.  47.  24.  their  sins  were  multiplied  c. 

2  Mac.  10.  34.  und  thev  within  blasphemed  e. 

EXCEL. 
I  Emt.  4.  2.  O  yo  men,  do  not  men  f.  in  stretigth  ? 
Wind.  15.  9.  but  hi'  slriveth  to  e.  goldsmiths 
Etcl.'^.l.  why  doth  one  day  e.  another? 

EXCELLED. 
Eslh.  13.  3.  Amnn  that  r.  in  windom  among  ui 

EXCELLETM. 
1  Esd.  4.  14.  O  ye  men,  neithnr  is  it  wine  that  «. 

EXCELLENCY. 
Eccl.  6.  15.  H  faithful  friend's  e.  is  invaluable 
I  Mnr.  1.  40.  hiT  r.  was  turned  into  mouriiini; 
iMuc.  6.  23.  as  become  the  e.  of  his  ancient  yonrs 

EXt.'ELLENT. 
Jud.  11.  8.  it  is  rejiiirted  that  thou  only  art  e. 
Esth.  IG.  10.  ordered  the  kingd.  In  moit  t.  maanor 
783 


Eecl.  42.  21.  he  hath  garnished  the  e.  works 
48.  24.  he  saw  by  an  e.  spirit  what  should  come 
2  Mac.  3.  26.  e.  in  beauty,  and  comely  in  apparel 
15.  13.  who  was  of  a  wonderful  and  e.  majesty 

EXCEPTION. 
IVisd.  14.  25.  there  reigned  in  all  men,  without  e. 

EXCESS. 
Eccl.  31.  29.  wine  drunk  with  e.  maketh  bitterness 
37.  30.  for  e.  of  meats  bringeth  sickness 

EXCESSIVE. 
Feel.  19.  30.  a  man's  attire  and  e.  laughter  shew 
33.29.  bo  not  e.toward  any,  and  without  discretioif 

EXCHANGE. 
F.eel.  37.  11.  nor  with  a  merchant  concerning  e. 

44.  17.  Noah  was  taken  in  e.  for  the  world 
EXCUSE. 

.Ecc2.  32.  17.  but  findelh  an  e.  according  to  his  will 

EXECUTE. 
1  Esd.8.46.  send  such  men  as  might  e.  priest's  office 
Jud.  13.  5.  toe.  my  enterprises  to  the  destruction 
lyisd.  9.  3.  and  e.  judgment  with  an  upright  heart 
Feci.  35.  17.  judge  righteously  and  e.  judgment 

45.  15.  should  f.  the  office  of  tJie  priesthood 

1  jUac.6.22.how  long  will  it  be  ere  thoue.judgment? 
EXECUTED. 

Dav.  3.  5.  in  all  things  thou  hast  e.  truejudgment 

2  Mac.  3.  23.  Heliodorus  e.  that  which  was  decreed 
EXECUTETII. 

Feci.  20.  4.  he  that  e.  judgment  with  violence 

EXECUTING. 
1  Fsd.  5.  39.  from  e.  the  office  of  the  priesthood 
Wisd.  12.  10.  but  e.  thy  judgments  upon  them 

EXECUTION. 

1  K.?d.8.95. arise, put  in  e.  totheedoth  thisappertain 
Esth.  16.  17.  do  well  not  to  put  in  e.  tlie  letters 

EXERCISE. 

2  Fsd.  15.  8.  in  which  they  wickedly  e.  themselves 
Tob.  12.  9.  those  that  e.  alms  and  righteousness 
If'isd.  8.  18.  in  the  e.  of  conference  with  her 

1  Mac.  1.  14.  they  built  a  place  of  e.  at  Jerusalem 

EXERCISED. 
Feel.  50.  28.  blessed  is  he  that  shall  be  e.  in  these 

1  Mac.  0.  30.  thirty-two  elephants  e.  in  battle 

2  Mac.  15.  12.  e.  from  a  child  in  points  of  virtue 
EXERCISING. 

/rw<i.l6.4.on  them,^.  tyranny,  should  come  penury 

EXHORT. 
2Mae.7.  24.  Antiochus  did  not  only  e.  by  words 

EXHORTATION. 
1  Mac.  13.  3.  Simon  gave  them  e.  saying 
EXHORTED. 

1  Mae.  5.  53.  Judas  e.  the  people  all  the  way 

2  Mac.  2.  3.  with  other  such  speeches  e.  he  them 

7.  5.  they  e.  one  another  to  die  manfully 
21.  yea,  she  e.  every  one  of  them  in  her  language 

25.  e.  her  that  she  would  counsel  the  young  man 

26.  and  when  he  had  e.  her  with  many  words 

8.  16.  he  e.  them  not  to  be  stricken  with  terror 
12.  42.  besides  Judas  e.  the  people,  13.  12. 
15.  8.  wherefore  he  e.  his  people  not  to  fear 

EXHORTING. 
2  Mac.  11.7.  e.  the  other  that  they  would  jeopard 

EXILED. 
JVisd.  17.  2.  lay  e.  from  the  eternal  Providence 

EXPECT. 
2  Mac.  9.  25.  princes  e.  what  shall  be  the  event 
15.8.now  to  e.tbe  victory  an'd  aid  that  should  come 

EXPECTATION. 
IVisd.  17.  13.  the  e.  from  within  being  less 

EXPECTING. 
2.flfac.  8.11. note,  the  vengeance  that  was  to  follow 

EXPENCE. 
Feel.  18.  32.  neither  be  tied  to  the  e.  thereof 

EXPENCES. 
I  Fsd.  6.  25.  the  e.  thereof  to  bo  given  by  Cyrus 
Bel  8.  tell  me  who  this  is  that  devourcth  these  c.? 
1  Mae.  10.  39.  for  the  necessary  c.  of  the  sniictuury 
44.  e.  bo  given  of  the  king's  accounts,  45. 
EXPERIENCE. 
IVisd.  8.  8.  if  a  man  desire  much  c.  she  knoweth 
Eccl.  1.7.  who  bath  understood  her  great  e.  ? 
21.  22.  but  a  man  of  e.  is  ashamed  of  him 
25.  6.  much  f.  is  the  crown  of  old  men 
34.  9.  he  that  hath  much  e.  will  declare  wisdom 
36.  20.  but  a  man  of  e.  will  recompense  him 

EXPERT. 
Par.  3.20.  of  so  great  stature,  and  so  c.  in  war 
1  Mac.  4.  7.  with  homeinen,  these  were  e.  in  war 

EXPIRED. 
Toll.  10.  I.  when  the  days  of  the  journey  woro  e. 

1  Mac.  1.  29.  after  two  years  ftdly  e.  the  king  sent 
EXPOUND. 

2  r.sd.  4.  47.  I  shall  c.  the  similitude  unto  you 
IVisd.  8.  8.  and  she  can  r.  dark  sentences 

EXPtWNDED. 
2E£(2.12.I2.butit  was  not  e.iinio  him,now  I  declare 

EXPRESS. 
2  F.rd.  10.  32.  and  yo  see  that  I  am  not  able  to  c. 
IVisd.  14.  17.  they  made  an  r.  image  of  a  king 
Eccl.'Ji.  11.  and  lundorstandmoto  than  lean  «. 


1  EXPRjISSED. 

fTiW.n.l.greatare  thy  Judgments  and  cannotbeo. 

EXQUISITE. 
Feel.  18.  29.  they  poured  forth  e.  parables 
19.25.  there  is  an  e.  suhtiliiv,  the  same  unjust 

EXTINGUISHED. 
fVisd.'i.S.  which  being  e.imr  body  shall  be  turned 

EXTOL. 
Tob.  13.  4.  and  e.  him  before  a1I  the  living 
6.  praise  the  Lord,  e.  the  everlasting  King 
7. 1  will  e.  my  God,  my  soul  shall  praise  the  Kinj 
Feel.  6.  2.  c.  not  thyself  in  thine  own  heart 

13.  23.  they  e.  what  a  rich  man  saith  to  clouds 

EXTOLLED. 
Tob.  13. 18.  blessed  be  God  who  hath  e.  it  for  CTer 

EXTOLLETH. 
f;cc^37.7.evcry  coiiriscllnr  r.  counsel,  but  there  ona 

EXTREME. 
2Es(/.5.  14.anc.fearfuliiess  went  through  my  body 
Wisd.  12.  27.  therefore  camee.  damnation  on  them 
Feci.  42.  8.  be  not  ashamed  to  inform  the  e.  aged 

2  Mae.  7.  42.  to  have  spoken  of  the  e.  tortures 

EXTREMITY. 
2  Mac.  1.  7.  wo  wrote  to  you  in  the  e.  of  trouble 

EYE. 
Toh.  4.  10.  let  not  thine  e.  be  envious  when.givest 
.Jud.  2.  II.  that  rebel,  let  not  thine  e.  spare  them 
Feci.  4.  5.  turn  not  away  thine  e.  from  the  needy 
7.22.  hast  thou  cattle?  have  an  e.  to  them 

9.  8.  turn  away  thine  e.  fro»n  a  beautiful  woman 

11.12.  yet  the  e.  of  the  Lord  looked  upon  him 

14.  8.  the  envious  man  hath  a  wicked  e.        • 
9.a  covetous  man'sc.not  satisfied  with  his  portion 
10.  a  wicked  e.  envieth  bread,  he  is  a  niggard 

17.  8.  he  set  his  e.  upon  their  hearts  to  shew  them 
22.  will  keep  the  deeds  of  man  as  apple  of  thee. 

22.  19.  he  that  pricketh  the  e.  will  make  tears 

26.  11.  watch  over  an  impudent  e.  nmrvel  not 

31. 13.  remember  that  a  wicked  r.  is  »n  evil  thing, 

and  what  is  more  wicked  than  an  «.  t 
35.  8.  give  the  Lord  his  honour  with  a  good  e, 
10.  give  to  the  Most  High  with  a  cheerful  e. 
40.  22.  thine  e.  desireth  favour  and  beauty 
43.  18.  the  e.  manelleth  at  the  beauty  of  it 
2  Mae.  5.  17.  and  his  e.  was  nut  upon  the  place 

EYE-LIDS. 
Eccl.  26.  9.  whoredom  may  be  known  in  her  e. 
EYES. 

1  Fsd.  4.  10.  they  gape  and  fix  their  e.  fast  on  her 

2  K*d. 9. 38. Hooked  back  with  mye.and  saw  womaa 

10.  .55.  as  much  as  thine  e.  be  able  to  see 
T'«A.2.10.ihe  sparrows  muted  warm  dimg  into  niy«. 

3.  12.  I  set  mine  e.  and  my  face  .oward  thee 
17.  scale  away  the  whiteness  jf  Tobit's  e.  6.  8. 

5.  20.  he  shall  return,  thine  c  shall  see  him 
10.5.  since  I  have  let  thee  go,  ihe  light  of  mine  «. 

11.  7.  I  know  that  thy  father  will  open  his  e. 
8.  therefore  anoint  his  e.  with  the  gall,  II. 

12.  when  his  c.  began  to  smart,  be  rubbed  them 

13.  whiteness  pilled  away  from  corners  of  his  «. 
Jud.  7.  27.  the  death  of  our  infants  before  our  e. 

\    IC.  4.  decked  herself  to  allure  the  e.  ot  all  men 
16.  9.  her  sandals  ravished  his  r.  her  beauty  took 
K.-'th.  13.  18.  because  death  was  be'bre  their  e. 
Wisd.  11.18.  shooting  horrible  sparks  nut  of  I  heir  «. 

15.  1.5.  which  neither  have  the  use  ofe.  to  see 
Feel.  3.  25.  without  e.  thou  sinit  want  light 

4.  1.  my  son,  make  not  the  needy  c.  to  wait  long 

12.  10.  an  enemy  will  weep  with  his  e.  but  if  find 

15.  19.  his  e.  are  upon  them  that  fear  him 

16.  5.  many  sueh  things  have  I  seen  with  mine«, 

17.  0.  a  tongue,  and  c.  and  ears  gave  he  them 
13.  and  theirs,  saw  the  majesty  of  his  glory 
15.  their  wny.<  shall  not  be  hid  from  bis  e. 

19.  and  bis  c.  are  continually  on  thoir  ways 

18.  18.  a  gift  of  the  envious  consumeth  the  e. 

23.  19.  only  feareih  the  e.  of  m.'^n,  and  knoweth 

not  that  the  e.  of  the  Lord  are  brighter 
than  the  sun 

27.  1.  that  seeks  abunilanco  will  turn  his  f.  away 
22.  he  that  winkelh  with  the  r.  worketh  evil 

30.  20.  he  seelh  with  his  e.  and  groanelh 
34.  16.  thee,  of  tb^' Lord  are  on  them  that  love  him 
17.  ho  raiseth  up  the  soul,  and  lighteneth  the  e. 

20.  that  killeth  the  son  before  his  father's  f. 

38.  28.  and  his  f.  look  still  upon  the  pattern 

39.  19.  and  nothing  can  he  hid  from  his  e. 
43.  4.  seniling  bright  beams  it  dimmeth  the  t. 
45.  12.  a  cosily  work,  the  desires  of  the  i". 
51.27.  behold  with  your  r.  how  I  had  little  lahouf 

Har.  1.  12.  will  give  us  strength  and  liglnen  our  a. 

2.  18.  llw  r.  tliat  full  will  give  thee  praise 

3.  14.  whi're  is  the  light  of  Ihe  r   anil  peace 

6.  17.  when  they  be  set  up,  their  *•.  be  fullofduit 
.S'm.9.  9.  thev  perverted  and  turned  nwny  their  e. 

1  .Vric.  4.  12.  then  the  ulraiigers  lift  up  their  e. 
6.  10.  sleep  Is  pone  tVom  mine  r.  my  heart  fails 

2  Mac.  3f  36.  which  he  bad  seen  with  his  e. 

F.7EKIEL. 
Eccl.  49.  8>  it  was  E.  who  saw  the  glorious  rluoa 


Apocrtfba.] 


FAI 


EZECHIAS,  or  EZEKIAS. 

2  F.sd.T.  40.  and  E.  for  the  pcoiile  in  the  time  of 

EccZ.  48.17.  E.  fortified  Ills  city,  and  brought  water 

2-2.  E.  Imd  done  the  thing  that  pleased  the  Lord 

49.  4.  all,  except  David  and  E.  were  defective 

t  Mac.  15.  22.  didst  send  thy  angel  in  time  of  E. 


F. 


FABLES. 

Bar.  3  23.  merchanl.i  of  Theman,  authors  of/. 

FACE,  FACE. 

1  Ksd.  8.  74.  O  Lord,  I  am  ashamed  before  thy/. 

2  Esd.  I.  30.  I  will  cast  you  out  from  my /• 

31.  when  you  offer,  I  will  turn  my/,  from  you 
10.  25.  Iier/.  on  a  sudden  shincd  exceedingly 
12.7.  if  my  prayer  indeed  be  come  before  thy/. 
15.63.  they  shall  mar  the  beauty  of  thy/. 
Tob.  2.  9.  t  slept,  and  my/,  was  uncovered 

3.  6.  turn  not  thy/,  away  from  me 

12.  O  Lord,  I  set  mine  eyes  and  /.  toward  thee 

4.  7.  nor  turn  thy/,  from  any  poor,  and  tlie/.  of 

God  shall  not  he  turned  away  from  thee 

13.  6.  and  he  will  not  hide  his/,  from  you 
Jud.  2.  7.  cover  the  whole/,  of  the  earth,  19. 

4.  11.  spread  sackcloth  before  the/,  of  the  Lord 

6.  5.  and  thou  .^chior  shall  see  my/,  no  more 

19.  look  on  the  /.  of  those  that  are  sanctified 

7.  4.  these  men  will  lick  up  the  /.  of  the  earth 

9.  1.  then  Jndilh  fell  upon  her/.  10.  23. 

11!  13.  that  serve  in  Jerus.  before  the/,  of  our  G. 
21.  there  is  not  such  a  woman  for  beauty  of/. 

14.  3.  and  they  shall  flee  before  your/. 

6.  he  fell  down  on  his/,  and  his  spirit  failed 
ifi>rf.4.20.iniquities  shall  convince  them  to  their/. 

5.  1.  before  the/,  of  such  as  have  afflicted  him 

12.  14.  nor  king  or  tyrant  be  able  to  set  his/. 
F.ccl.  fi.  12.  he  will  hide  himself  from  thy/. 

17.  25.  return,  make  thy  prayer  before  hie/. 

18.  24.  when  he  shall  turn  away  his/. 
21.2.  flee  from  sin  as  from  the/,  of  a  serpent 
25.17.  the  wickedness  ofa  woman  changeth  her/. 
26.  17.  so  is  the  beauty  of  the/,  in  ripe  age 

34.  3.  even  as  the  likeness  ofa/.  to  a/. 

41.  21.  to  turn  away  thy/,  from  thy  kinsman 
Dan.  3.  18.  now  we  fear  thee,  and  seek  thy/. 
Siis.  32.  thebe  men  commanded  to  uncover  her  /. 
Be!  42.  were  devoured  in  a  moment  before  bis/. 

1  Mac.  3.  22.  overthrew  them  before  our/.  4.  10. 
7,  30.  and  he  would  see  his/,  no  more 

10.  72.  Ihy  foot  is  not  able  to  stand  before  our  /. 

2  Mac.  3. 16.  whoso  had  looked  high-priest  in  the/. 

FACES. 
2  Ksd.  7.  .55.  whereas  our/  shall  be  blacker  than 
Tob.  12. 16.  they  were  troubled,  and  fell  on  their/. 
Eccl.  50.  17.  fell  down  to  the  earth  on  their/. 
Bar.  1.  15.  but  to  us  heloiigeth  confusion  of/. 

6.  13.  they  wipe  their/,  because  of  dustof  temple 
21. their/,  are  blacked  thro'  the  smoke  of  temple 

1  Mac.  4.  55.  then  all  the  people  fell  on  iheir/. 

7.  3.  he  said,  let  me  not  see  their/. 

2  Mac.  7.  6.  which  witnessed  to  their/,  declared 

FACT. 
2.,Wac.4.36.G  reeks  that  abhorred  the/,  complained 

FACTION. 
2  .1/ae.4.3.  by  one  of  Simon's/murders  committed 

FAIL. 
2  Esd.  15.  13.  their  seeds  shall/,  through  blasting 
Jud.  11.  6.  my  lord  shall  not/,  of  his  purposes 
12.  for  iheir  victuals/,  them,  and  their  water 
12.3  ifthv  provision  should /.how  should  we  givel 
Eccl.  2.  8.  believe  him,  your  reward  shall  not/. 
3.  13.  if  his  undtTftanding/.  have  patience 
7.  34.  /.  not  to  be  with  them  that  weep 
24.  9.  he  crep.ted  me,  and  I  shall  never/. 
37.  23.  the  fruits  of  bis  understanding/,  not 
£ar.2.18.tbc  eyes  that  f.  will  give  thee  praise,  O  L. 

FAILED. 
2  F-trf.  3. 29.  saw  evil-doers  so  that  my  heart /.me 
yud.7.19.Israel  cried  to  Lord, because  their  heart/. 

20.  so  that  all  ibeir  vessels  of  water/.  Belhulia 
14.0.  Arhior  fell  down  on  bis  face,  and  hisspirit/. 

Esth.  10.  5.  and  nothing  thereof  hath/. 

Eccl.  17. 24.  he  comforted  those  that/,  in  patience 
34.7.  they  have/,  that  put  their  trust  in  them 
49.  4.  forsook  the  law,  even  the  kings  of  .ludah/. 

1  Mac.  3.  20.  that  the  monev  ofhis  treasures/. 

2  Mac.  13. 19.  he  was  put  to  flight,/,  lost  ofhis  men 

FAILETH. 
2  F.sd.  5.  53.  born  when  the  womb  /.  are  otherwise 

13.  4.  as  the  e.Trlh/.  when  it  feeleth  the  fire 
JVi.id.l  14.  for  wisdom  is  a  treasure  that  never/. 
F.ccl.  17. 31.  than  the  sun,  yet  the  light  thereof/. 

41.  2.  acceptable  to  him  whose  strength/. 
1  Mac.  6.  10.  and  mv  heart  f.  for  very  care 

FAILING. 
Wisd.  17.  15.  partly  faimeJ,  their  heart/,  them 

FAIN. 

1  Mac.  6.  54.  they  were  f.  to  disperse  thenuelves 

T83 


PAL 

FAIKT. 

.Tud.  8.  31.  send  us  rain,  and  wc  shall/,  no  more 
Eccl.  2.  12.  woe  be  to  fearful  hearts  and/,  hands 

4.  9.  be  not /.-hearted  when  thou  sittestin  judgm. 

7.  10.  be  not /.-hearted  when  niakest  thy  prayer 
24.24./.  not  to  be  strong  in  Lord,  to  confirm  you 

43.  10.  they  will  never/,  in  their  watches 

1  Mac.  3.  17.  we  are  ready  to/,  with  fasting 

FAINTED. 
Jud.  7.  22.  women  and  young  men/,  for  thirst 

8.  9.  when  she  heard  that  they  /.  for  lack  of  water 
Estli.  15.  7.  the  queen  fell  down,  was  pale  and/. 
JVisd.  17.  15.  vexed  with  apparitions,  and  partly/. 

2Jl/ac.3. 24.  astonished  at  the  power  of  God, and/. 

FAINTNESS. 
Esth.  15. 15.  she  was  speaking,  she  fell  down  for/. 

FAIR,  FAIR. 
Tob.  6.  12.  the  maid  is/,  and  wise,  now  hear  me 
Jud.  12.  13.  let  not  this/,  damsel  fear  to  come 
Esth.  16.  5.  the/,  speech  of  those  that  are  in  trust 
Eccl.  3.  15.  as  the  ice  in  the/,  warm  weather 
6.  5.  a/,  tongue  will  increase  kind  greetings 
13,6. will  speak  thee/and  say, what  wantest  thou? 
22.  17.  as/,  plastering  on  the  wall  ofa  gallery 

24.  14.  as  a/,  olive-tree  in  a  pleasant  field 

18.  I  am  the  mother  of/.  love,  fear  and  hope 

26.  18.  so  are  the/,  feet  with  a  constant  heart 
50.  10,  as  a/,  olive-tree  budding  forth  fruit 

Sus.^.a.  very/ woman,  and  one  that  feared  the  Ld. 

4.  Joacim  had  a/,  garden  joining  to  his  house 

2.Afac.3,25,  a  horse  adorned  with  a  very/,  covering 

FAITH. 

2  F.sd.  5,  1.  and  the  land  shall  be  barren  of/. 

6.  5.  that  have  gathered  /.  for  a  treasure 
28.for/.  it  shall  flourish,  corruption  be  overcome 

7.  34.  truth  shall  stand,  and  /.  shall  wax  strong 

13.  23.  such  as  have/,  toward  the  Almighty 
Wisd.  3. 14.  to  him  shall  be  given  special  gift  of/. 
Eccl.  1.  27./,  and  meekness  are  bis  delight 

25.  12,/,  is  the  beginning  of  cleaving  to  him 

1  Mac.  14.  35.  for  the  justice  and/,  that  he  kept 

FAITHFUL. 

2  F.-id.  7. 24.  in  his  statutes  have  they  not  been  /. 

8.  35.  among  /.  there  is  none  hath  not  done  amiss 
15.  2.  cause  them  to  be  written,  for  they  are  /. 

Estk.  16.  1.  the  king  to  all  our/,  subjects,  greeting 
ff  tsrf.  3.9.  such  as  be/,  in  love  shall  abide  with  him 
Eccl.  1,  14,  it  was  created  with  the/,  in  the  womb 
6. 14.  a/  friend  is  a  strong  defence  and  a  treasure 

15.  nothing  doth  countervail  a/,  friend 

16,  a/,  friend  is  the  medicine  of  life 

7,  18,  nor  a/,  brother  for  the  gold  of  Ophir 
22.  23.  be  /.  to  thy  neighbour  in  his  poverty 
26.15.shamefaced  and/,  woman  is  a  double  grace 

27.  17.  love  thy  friend,  and  be/  to  him 

33.  3.  the  law  is  /.  to  him  as  an  oracle 

34.  8.  wisdom  is  perfection  to  a/,  mouth 

36.  It),  and  let  thy  prophets  be  found/. 

37.  13.  for  there  is  no  man  more  /.  to  thee  than  it 

44.  20.  when  he  was  proved,  he  was  found/. 
40. 1.5.  by  his  word  he  was  known  to  be  /.  in  vision 
48.  22.  as  Esay  who  was  great  and  /.  m  vision 

\Mac.  2.  52.  was  not  Abraham  found/,  in  tempta,? 
3.  13.  Judas  had  gathered  a  company  of  the/. 
7,8.  Bacchides  was  a  great  man  and/,  to  the  king 
10.27.  now  continue  you  stil!  to  be/,  unto  us 

14.  41.  till  there  should  arise  a  /.  prophet 

2  Mac.  1.  2.  Isaac  and  Jacob  his/,  servants 

9.  26.  that  every  man  will  be  still/,  to  me 

FAITHFULLY. 
Eccl.  29.  3.  keep  ihv  word  and  deal/,  with  him 

FAITHFULNESS. 
Eccl.  15.  15.  and  to  perform  acceptable/. 

45.  4.  he  sanctified  him  in  his/,  and  meekness 

46.  15,  by  his/,  he  was  found  a  true  prophet 

FALL, 
2  Esd.t.l.  entrance  is  set  in  a  dangerous  place  to/. 

10.  9,  that  ouejit  to  mourn  for  the/,  of  so  many 
48.  my  son  happened  to  have  a/,  and  died 

12,  18,  it  shall  not  then  /,  but  be  restored 

28,  but  at  the  last  shall  he  /,  through  the  sword 

13.  .58.  and  such  things  as/,  in  their  seasons        , 

15.  57.  and  thou  shall/,  through  the  sword 
Tub.  11,8.  he  shall  rub,  the  whiteness  shall  /.  away 
Jud.  6.  fi,  and  thou  shalt/amnng  their  slain 

9,  let  not  thy  countenance/,  I  have  spoken 

8,  19,  they  had  a  great/,  before  our  enemies 

16.  7.  the  mighty  one  did  not/,  by  young  men 
Esth.  14,  11.  O  Lord,  let  them  not  laugh  at  our/, 
WUd.  3,  1.5,  the  root  of  wisdom  shall  never/, 

6,  9.  that  ye  may  learn  wisdom,  and  not  /,  away 

7,  25,  therefore  can  no  defiled  thing/,  into  her 
10.  1.  and  she  brought  him  out  ofhis/. 

13.  16.  he  provided  for  it,  that  it  might  not/. 

17.  18.  or  a  pleasing/,  of  water  running  violently 
Eccl.  1,  30.  exalt  not  thyself  lest  thou/. 

2.  7.  wait  for  mercy  and  go  not  aside  lest  ye/. 
\%.  we  will/,  into  the  hnnds  of  the  Lord 

5.  13.  and  the  tongue  of  man  is  his/. 

8,  1.  strive  not  with  a  mighty  man  lent  Ihou/. 


FAM 

F.ccl.^.y  meet  not  harlot  lest  thou  /.into  her  enaret 
9.  so  through  thy  deeire  thou/,  into  destruction 

12.  15.  if  thou  begin  to/,  he  will  not  tarry 

13.  21.  a  rich  man  beginning  to/,  is  held  up 

14. 18.  as  of  the  green  leaves,  some/,  some  grow 
19. 1.  small  things,  he  shall/,  by  little  and  liltio 

2.  wine  and  women  will  make  men  to/,  away 
20,  18.  the/,  of  the  wicked  sluill  come  speedily 

22.  19.  that  pricketh  the  eye  will  make  tears/. 
27,  on  my  lips,  that  I/,  not  suddenly  by  Ihom 

23,  1,  leave  me  not,  and  let  me  not/,  by  them 

3.  lest  I/,  before  mine  adversariesand  my  enemy 
8.  the  evil  speaker  and  proud  shall/,  thereby 

25,  7,  he  that  livelh  to  see  the/,  ofhis  enemy 
19  let  the  portion  ofa  sinner/,  upon  her 

27.  26.  whoso  diggeth  a  pit  shall/,  therein 

27,  he  that  worketh  mischief  it  shall/,  on  him 
29.  they  that  rejoice  at  the/,  of  the  righteouii 

28.  2.3.  such  as  forsake  the  Lord  shall/,  into  it 
26.  lest  ihou/.  before  him  that  lietli  in  wait 

29.  19.  a  wicked  man  transgressing  the  command, 
of  L.  shall/,  into  sureiy.ship  ;  shall/,  into  snares 

20.  beware  that  thou  thyself/,  not  into  the  same 
32.  20,  go  not  in  a  way  wherein  thou  mayest/, 
35,  15,  her  cry  against  him  that  causeth  them  to/. 
38,  15.  let  him/,  into  the  hand  of  the  physician 

16,  my  son,  let  tears/,  down  over  the  dead 
43,  13.  by  hiscommandm.  he  maketh  snow  to/. 
46.  6.  he  made  thebattle  to/,  on  the  nations 
.50.4,  he  took  care  of  temple  that  it  should  not/. 
Bar,  4,31,  miserable  are  they  that  rejoiced  at  thy/. 

33,  for  as  she  rejoiced  and  was  glad  at  thy/. 

6,  27.  for  if  they/,  to  the  ground  at  any  time 
.Sm.s.  2;I.  it  is  better  for  me  to_/.  into  your  hands 

1  Mac.  2.  19.  /.  away  every  one  from  the  religion 
3. 25. an  exceeding  great  drt^ad  to/,  on  the  nations 

4.  32.  cause  boldness  of  their  strength  to/,  away 

7,  38,  be  avenged,  and  let  them/,  by  the  sword 

2  Jl/ac,9. 7.  Antiochus  fell,  so  that  having  a  sore/. 

FALLEN. 
2  F,5(l,7,48,0  Adam,  thou  art  not/.alone,but  wc  all 
13.23.thal  be/into  danger  are  such  as  have  works 
37.  for  their  wicked  life  are/,  into  the  tempest 
Jud.  10.  2.  Judith  rose  where  she  had/.  dowi> 
11. 11. even  death  is  now/,  upon  them  and  their  sin 
/f7.?f/.  11.  20.  they  have/,  down  with  one  blast 
18.  23.  when  the  dead  were  now/,  down  by  heaps 
F.ccl.  13. 22.  when  a  rich  man  is/,  he  hath  helpers 
28.  18.  many  have/,  by  the  edge  ofthe  sword,  hut 
not  so  many  as  have  /.  by  the  tongue 
49.13.  who  raised  up  \'ot  us  the  walls  that  were/.? 
1.4f<ic.9.21.how  is  the  valiant  man/,  that  delivered 
12,  37.  the  wall  on  the  east-side  was/,  down 
FALLETH. 
2K5d.6.56.hast  likened  to  a  drop  that/,  from  vessel 
IVisd.  11.22.  as  a  drop  of  dew  that/,  on  the  earth 
Eccl.  3.  31.  when  he/,  he  shall  find  a  slay 
Bar.  6.  55,  when  fire/,  on  house  of  gods  of  wood 

FALLING, 
'iF.sd.  12,18,  great  strivings,  shall<sfand  in  peril  of/, 
Wisd.  16,  11,  tiiatnot/,  into  deep  forgelfulness 
17,  4.  noises  as  of  waters/,  sounded  about  them 
Ecc^,34.16.  from  stumbling,  and  he  is  a  help  from/. 
43. 17./.  down  thereof  as  lighting  of  grasshoppers 
2  Mac.  3.  21.  to  see  the/,  down  ofthe  multitude 

FALLS, 
2  Esd.  8,  17. 1  see/  of  us  that  dwell  in  the  land 

FALSE. 
Eccl.  34.  1.  the  hopes  ofa  man  are  vain  and  /. 

4.  from  that  which  is/,  what  truth  can  cornel 
3G.19.so  doth  a  heart  ofunderstanding/.  speechet 

Bar.  6.  8.  yet  arc  they  but/,  and  cannot  speak 
44.  whatsoever  is  done  among  them  is/. 
59.  it  is  better  to  be  a  king  than  snqd/.  gods 
Su,«.43.knowesl  they  have  borne/,  witness  agn.  me 
49.  for  they  have  borne/,  witness  against  her 
61.  for  Daniel  had  ronvirted  them  off.  witnest 
FALSEHOOD. 
E.tfA, 16,6. beguilinsw it h/,nnd  deceit  ofdisposition 
2  J\tac.  15, 10,  shewing  them  the/,  ofthe  tieathen 

FALSELY. 
If'isd.  14, 29.  though  (hey  swifre/.yet  they  look  not 
Bel  12,  or  else  Daniel  th.it  speakeih  /,  against  IM 

FAME, 
1  Mac.  3,  26.  insomuch  as  his/,  came  to  the  King 
41,  the  merchants  henrin£  ilie  /,  of  them 
FAMILY, 
Tob.  5.  10,  show  me  of  what  tribe  and/,  thou  art 
11.  dost  thou  seek  a  tribe  or/,  ofa  hired  manY 
13,  I  inquired  to  know  lliy  tribe  and  thy/. 
.tud.  8. 18,  no/,  who  worshipgods  made  with  handa 
E.'it.h.  14,  5,  I  have  heard  in  the  tribe  of  my/. 
16,  18,  hanged  at  sriile-  i>f  Sii^a,  with  all  his/. 

FAMILIKS, 
1  F.sd.  1.  4.  prepare  vou  aOer  your/,  and  kindredi 
.5.  the  dignity  ofthe/.  of  vou  the  Levites 
2.  8.  then  the  chief  of  the  /^  of  Judea  stood  up 

5,  1,  the  prinei;ial  men  ot'the/.  were  chosen 
4.  the  names  of  the  men  according  to  their/ 
63.  and  ofthe  cliicf  of  their/,  tlic  ancsenU 


FAS 

1  &ii.  5.  68.  BO  they  went  to  chief  of  tli? /.  .iml  snid 
a.  28.  the  chief  according  to  their/,  and  dignitits 

59.  to  the  principal  men  of  the/,  of  larael 
9.  IC.  Esdras  chose  the  principal  men  of  tJiiir/. 
FAMINE. 

2  Esd.  15.5.  I  will  bring/,  death,  and  dofltruction 
40.  1  will  send  poverty,/,  sword,  and  pe^tllence 

Hi.  18.  the  beginning  ol/.  and  great  dearth 
I'J.  behold/,  and  plague  are  sent  a.s  scourges 
21.  gworil,/,  and  great  confusinn  shall  grow 
4C. for  in  cujitivity  and/,  shall  they  got  cliildren 
Tab.  4.  13.  for  lewdness  is  the  niuthcr  of/. 
Jaii.  5.  10.  a/,  covered  all  the  land  of  Ch.maan 
7.  14.  they  and  chddren  ^ihall  be  consumed  with  /. 
F.ccl.  39.  29./.  and  death  created  for  vengeance 
40.  9.  calamities,  /.  were  created  for  the  wicked 
43.  2.  he  brought  a  sore/,  upon  them 
iiar.2. 25.  they  died  by/,  sword,  and  by  pestilence 
1  Mac.  G.  54.  the/,  did  so  prevail  against  them 
9.  21.  in  those  days  there  was  a  very  great  /. 
IX  49.  a  great  number  of  them  perished  thiough/. 

FAMOUS. 
Kcd.  44.  1.  let  us  now  praise/,  men  and  fathers 
Itar.  3.  2tJ.  the  giants,/,  from  the  beginning 

FANCIEl'H. 

Keel.  34.5.  heart/. as  a  woman's  heart  in  travail 

FAR. 

1  F.sd.  9.  11.  our  sin  in  these. things  is  spread/. 

2  Esd.  4.2.  thy  heart  haih gone  too/,  in  this  worM 
Tub.  13.  11.  many  nations  shall  come  from/ 
li'isd.  12.  24.  they  went  astray  very/,  in  error 

14.  17.  because  they  dealt  /.  off;  liiey  took  the 

counterfeit  of  his  visago  from  /. 
Eccl.  9. 13.  keep/  from  the  man  that  hath  power 

15.  8.  for  she  is/,  from  pride,  men  that  are  liars 
21.  7.  an  eloquent  man  is  known/,  and  near 
23.  3.  v;ho3e  hope  is/,  from  thy  mercy 

12.  all  such  things  shall  be/,  from  the  godly 
27.  20.  he  is  too/,  otf,  he  is  as  a  roi;  escaped 
43.  30.  exalt  Lord,  for  even  yet  will  he/.  e.\ceed 
47.  II).  thy  name  went/,  unto  the  islands 

har.  3.  21.  their  children  were/,  from  that  way 

4.  15.  he  hath  brought  a  nation  on  them  from  /. 
6.  73.  for  the  just  man  shall  he/,  from  reproach 

Sits.  51.  put  the.-e  two  aside  one/,  from  another 

1  -Vac. 8. 12.  had  coiifiuered  kingdoms/,  and  nigh 
23.  the  sword  also  and  en  ,'my  he/,  from  them 

13.  5.  be  it/,  from  me  Ihat  I  should  spare 

2  Mar..  4.  40.  a  man  /.  gone  in  years,  no  less  in  fully 
8.25.  they  took  their  money  and  pursued  them/. 

FARE. 
Krcl.  3.  2G.  a  stubborn  hea't  shall/,  evil  at  last 
32.24.  that  trusleth  shall/,  never  the  worse 
FAKE  well. 
2  Mac.  9.  20.  ifve  and  vour  children/,  well 
II.  21./.  ye  jae»,  33,  :J8. 

28.ifyc/.  w.  we  have  onrdesirc,  we  are  in  health 
FASHION. 
S  R3d.  4.  35.  how  long  shall  I  hope  on  this/.  ? 
5.53.tl)at  be  born  in  strength  of  yo-.ith,  are  of  one/. 
Wii(/.2.l5.noilikcothers,hi3  ways  are  ofanothor/. 
J4.  19.  to  make  the  resemblmco  of  the  best/. 
FASHIONED. 

2  Esd.  8.  8.  for  when  the  body  is/,  in  the  womb 
11.  that  the  thing  which  is  /.  may  be  nourished 
14.  him  who  with  so  great  labour  was/. 

fVisd.7.2. 1  was/,  to  be  flesh  in  lime  often  months 
13. 13.  formed  it  and/,  it  to  the  imago  of  a  man 
15.  10.  he  that  borrowed  his  own  spirit/,  them 
19.  C.  the  whole  creature  was  f.  again  anew 
FASHlONF/ni. 

JVisd.  15.7.  potter/,  every  vos^<cI  with  much  labour 

/^/.38.304ie /.the  clay  with  his  arm, bowcth  down 
FASHIONS. 

Ifi.id.  10.  S.'J.  even  then  was  it  altered  into  all/. 

8  Mae.  4.  9.  training  up  in  the/,  of  the  heathen 

13.  now  such  was  the  height  of  Greek  /. 

5.  8.  that  the  Jews  ahoillil  observe  the  same/. 

FAST. 
t  End.  3.  18.  thou  didsi  set/,  the  earth 
Ifiid.  2.  5.  it  is/,  sealed,  no  man  nometh  again 
4.  4.  yet  standing  not/,  they  shall  be  shaken 
13.  l.>.  set  it  in  n  wall,  and  innde  it  f.  with  iron 
Feel.  4.  1.1.  he  lh.it  hold^  her/,  shall  inherit  glory 
44.  12.  their  secil  stands /.children  for  their  sakes 
fiar.  0.  18.  BO  the  prie-li  make/,  their  temples 
Belli. »\ial  the  door  f.  an  I  mn]  it  with  thy  signet 

fA.S'li;N. 
Eccl.  14  24,  he  shall  also  r.  n  pin  in  her  walls 

FAST. 
1  R.«<i.P..'i0.and  there  I  vowed  a  f.  to  the  voting  men 

73.  rising  up  from  the/,  with  my  rlolln-fi  rent 
t  K.?'/.  rt.  31.  if  thou  wilt  f.  seven  ilnvs  again 
9.23.  Beven  days,  but  thon  shall  not/,  in  Ihom 
10.  4.  but  I  purpo.s"  to  niniirn  and/,  till  I  die 
FASTED. 

3  F.sd  5.20.  if.  seven  riavs, mourning  and  weeping 

6.  3.").  I  wept  and/,  seven  diiyn  in  like  mnnnor 
Jud.  4.  13.  the  people/,  innny  days  in  all  Judoa 

P.  G.  she/,  all  the  day"  "f  her  wiclov.hood 
764 


FAT 

Bar.  1.  5.  they  wept,/,  and  prayed  before  the  Lord 
1  Mac.  3.  47.  they/,  that  day,  and  put  on  sackcloth 

FASTING. 
T(ii.l2.8.prayerisgood  with/,  alms  and  righteous. 

1  Mac.  3.  17.  ready  to  faint  with/,  all  this  day 

2  Mac.  13.12.  they  besought  L.  with  weeping  and/. 
FAT. 

1  Fsd.  1.  14.  the  priests  offered  the/,  until  night 

9.  51.  go  then,  eat  the/,  and  drink  the  sweet 
./ud.  10. 16.  and  all  the/,  is  not  suflicienl 
Eccl.  20.  13.  and  her  discretion  will/,  his  bones 

35.  fi.  the  offering  of  righteous  makes  the  altar/. 
38.  11.  and  make  a/,  offering,  as  not  being 
47.  2.  as  the/,  taken  from  the  peace-offering 
Dan.  3.  16.  like  as  in  ten  thousands  of/,  lambs 
.Be/ 27.  Daniel  took  pitch,/,  hair,  and  made  lumps 
FATHER. 

1  Esd.  1.  34.  made  him  king  instead  of  Josias  his/. 
4. 20.  a  man  leaveth  his/,  and  cleaveth  to  his  wile 

21.  remembereth  neither/,  mother,  nor  country 
25.  man  lovelh  his  wife  better  than/,  and  mother 

2  Esd.  1 .  28.  have  not  I  prayed  you  as  a  /.  his  sons 
29.  that  ye  should  be  my  children,  and  I  your/. 

2.  5,  as  for  me,  0/  I  call  on  thee  for  a  wi:nes3 
Tob.  3.7.  Sara  was  also  reproached  by  her/,  maids 
5.  1./.  I  will  do  all  that  thou  hast  commanded 
C.  12.  now  hear  nie,  and  I  will  speak  to  her/. 

15.  the  precepts  which  thy/,  gave  thee  to  marry 
0.  4.  but  my  /.  counteth  the  days  if  I  tarry  long 

10.  1.  now  Tobit  his/,  counted  every  drfy 
12.  honour  thy  /.  and  mother-in-law,  thy  parents 

11.  2.  thou  knowest  how  thou  didst  leave  thy/. 
14.  1.3.  he  buried  his/,  and  mother  honourably 

Jud.^.'i.O  L.  God  of  my/Simeon,  to  whom  gavest 

12.  I  pray  thee,  I  pray  thee,  O  God  of  my/. 
K.ith.  16. 11.  as  he  was  called  our/,  and  honoured 
/('i.sti.lO.l. preserved  the  first  formed /.of  the  world 
11.  10.  these  thou  didst  admonish  and  try  as  a/. 
14.  3.  but  thy  providence,  O  F.  governeth  it 
15.  for  a/  afllicted  with  untimely  mourning 
Eccl.  3.  1.  hear  me,  your/.  O  chihiren,  and  do 

3.  whoso  hoiioureth  his/,  maketh  an  atonement 

8.  honour  thy/,  and  i.iotlier  in  woni  and  deed 

9.  for  the  blessing  of  the/,  establisheth  children 

10.  glory  not  in  the  dishonour  of  thy/. 

11.  for  theglory  of  a.man  is  from  honour  of  his/. 

12.  my  son,  help  thy/,  in  his  age,  grieve  him  not 
4. 10.  be  a/  to  fatherless,  and  husband  to  moiher 
7.  27.  honour  thy/,  with  thy  whole  heart 

22.  3.  an  ill-nurtured  son  is  the  dishonour  of  his/. 

4.  she  that  lives  dishonestly  is  her/,  heaviness 
5. she  that  is  bold  dishonouieth  her/.an(f  husband 

23.  1.  O  Lord,/,  and  governor  of  all  my  life 

4.  O  Lord,/,  and  God  of  my  life,  give  me  not 
14.  remember  Ihy/.  and  thy  mother 

30.4. though  his/,  die,  yet  he  is  as  though  not  dead 
34.  20.  as  oni  that  killeth  the  son  before  his/,  eyes 
41.  17.  he  ashamed  of  whoredom  before/,  anil  mo. 
42.0.the/.  waketh  for  theduughter,  none  know  eth 
lO.lest  she  should  bo  got  with  child  in  her/house 
44.  19.  Abraham  was  a  great/,  of  many  people 
51.  10.  I  called  xin  the  Lord,  the/,  of  my  Lord 
Sus.  30.  so  she  came  with  her/,  and  mother 

1  Mac.  2.  54.  Phinees  our/,  obtained  covenant 
65.  give  ear  to  him,  he  shall  be  a/,  unto  you 

3.  2.  so  did  all  they  that  held  with  "his/. 
6.  23.  we  have  been  willing  to  servo  thy/. 
11.2.  so  to  do  because  he  was  his /.-in-law 
40.  that  ho  might  reign  in  his/,  stead 

13.  3.  what  my/,  house  have  done  for  the  laws 

27.  a  monument  upon  the  sepulchre  of  his/. 

28.  he  set  up  pyramids  for  his/,  and  mother 

2  Mar.  9.  23.  my/,  at  what  time  he  led  an  army 
11.  23.  since  our/,  is  translated  to  the  goia 

14.  37.  who  was  called  a/,  of  the  Jews 
FATHERLKS3. 

1  F.sd.  3. 19.  mind  of  king  and/,  child  tobeallone 

2  Esd.  2.  20.  judg-3  for  the/,  give  to  the  poor 
Ecrl.4.  10.  be  as  a  father  to  the/,  and  a  hu.shand 

.3.5. 14.  he  will  not  despise  the  supplication  of  the/. 
Bar.  G.  38.  nor  ran  they  do  rood  to  the/. 
2  Mac.  3.  10.  for  tho  relief  of  widows  and/. 

FATHERS. 
1  F.sd.  1. 11.  accord  ng  to  the  several  dignities  of/ 
3I..IoBiaj<  died  and  was  buried  in  his/.  B0)>ulchie 
2.21.  it  may  be  sought  out  in  the  bonks  of  thy/. 
6,  15.  but  wlien  our/,  provoked  God  to  wrath 
Tub.  3.  3.  punish  mo  not  for  the  sins  of  my/. 

5.  deal  with  me  according  to  my  sins  and  my/. 
4.12.  tfikci  a  wife  of  seed  of  thy/,  not  a  strange  wo- 
man who  is  not  of  ihv  /.  tribe;  our/,  married 

8.  5.  blessed  art  thon,  O  God  of  our/. 
fiid.  5.  7.  they  would  not  follow  the  gods  of  their/ 
7.2''<.  taVe  to  witness  our  Goil  nnd  Loid  of  our/. 
8.  25.  who  trioth  uAoven  as  lie  did  our/. 
10.  8.  the  Goil.  the  God  of  our  f.  give  tlu-e  favour 
H'^isd.  9.  I.  O  God  of  my/,  and  Lord  of  mercy 
12.21.  to  whose/,  hast  sworn  and  made  covenaDl 
H.  6.  of  that  niL'ht  wore  our/,  certified  afore 
9.  the/  now  s'nginj  out  tlic  songs  of  pra'se 


FEA 


(ApocKTpaa 


VTi^J.  18.24.  in  stones  was  the  glory  of/,  graven 
Keel.  8.  9.  for  they  also  learned  of  iheir/. 

44/  J.  let  us  now  praise  our/,  that  begat  uj 
liar.  2.  C.  but  to  us  and  to  our/,  open  shams 
21.  the  land  that  I  gave  unto  your/. 

3.8.  according  to  all  the  initpiities  of  our/. 
/Jan.3. 3.  blessed  art  thou,  O  Lord  God  of  our/. 
Hcl  1.  king  Astyages  was  gathered  to  his/. 
Prayer  of  Muuass.  O  Lord,  almigfity  God  of  our/ 

1  Mae.  2. 19.  fall  away  fioni  the  leligion  of  their/ 
20.  we  will  wall;  in  the  covenant  of  our/. 

50.  give  your  lives  for  the  covenant  of  vour/. 

51.  remember  what  acts  our/,  did  in  tlieir  time 
69.  he  blessed  them,  and  was  gathered  to  his/. 

4.  9.  remember  how  our/,  were  delivered 

2  Mac.  1.  25.  thou  that  didst  choose  the/. 

5.  10.  nor  had  he  sepulchre  with  his/. 
G.  ).  the  Jews  to  depart  from  the  laws  of  their  ' 

7.  2.  rather  than  transgress  the  laws  of  our/. 
24.  if  ho  would  turn  from  the  laws  of  his/.     ' 
30.  the  law  that  was  given  to  our/,  by  Moses 
37.  I  offer  my  body  and  life  for  laws  of  our/. 

12  39.  to  bury  them  in  their/,  graves 

13.  9.  worse  than  had  been  done  in  his/,  time 

FAUCHION. 
■Jud.  13.  6.  she  look  down  his/,  from  thence 
16.  9.  nnd  the/,  passed  through  his  neck 

FAULr. 
Eccl.  9.  13.  make  no/,  h.s!  he  take  awUy  thy  life 

1  Mac.  13.  39.  as  for  any/,  committed  to  this  day 

2  Mac.  14.  28.  articles  agreed  on,  man  being  in/io/. 
FAULTLESS. 

Eccl.  23.  10.  he  that  stvi-areth  shall  not  be/. 
FAVOUR. 

1  F.sd.  6.  5  the  elder&of  the  .lews  obtained/. 

2  F.sd.  5.  56.  if  I  have  found/,  in  Ihy  sight,  6.  11 
Tub.  1. 13.gave  me  grace  and  /.  before  Encmessar 

12.18.  not  of  any /.  of  mine,  but  by  the  will  of  G. 
./iirf.  8.  23.  our  servitude  shall  not  be  directed  to/. 

10.  8.  the  God  of  onr  fathers  give  Ihee/. 
F.sth.  10.  11.  bad  so  far  obtained  the/,  we  show 
JVisd.  12.  18.  thon  ordeiest  us  with  great/. 
F.cel.  1.  1.3.  he  shall  find/,  in  the  day  of  death 

3.  IR.  thou  shall  find/,  before  the  Lord 
22.  21.  for  there  may  ho  a  returning  .to/. 
32.  10.  before  a  .shamefaced  man  goeth/. 

14.  thnv  that  seek  him  early  th  ill  find/. 

40.  22.  thine  eve  desirelh/.  and  beauty 

41.  21.  so  shall  thou  find/,  before  all  men 
45.  1.  which  found/,  in  the  sight  of  all  flesh 

y.'ar.  I.  12.  we  shall  find/,  in  their  sight 
2. 14.  give  us/,  in  sight  of  them  that  led  uscaptlvo 

1  .Mar.  10.  00.  where  he  found/,  in  their  sight 
1 1.21.  to  the  king,  where  he  found/,  in  his  sight 

2,1/(7c.2.22.  Lord  being  gracious  to  them  with  all/. 

4.  11.  privileges  granted  of  special/,  lo  the  Jews 
6.  22.  and  for  the  (dil  fiiendship  might  find  /.' 
12.  45.  there  was  great  f.  laid  up  for  those  godly 

F.WOURABLE. 
I/?;A-i.8.53.wcb(sniight  Loid  nml  foond  him/.toiia 

FAVOURABLY. 
IVisd.  6. 16  sheweth  herself/,  to  them  in  the  ways 

2  Mae.  9.  27.  ho  will  /.  vield  to  your  desires 
FAVOURED. 

2  Mac.  6.  IS.  he  was  of  a  well/,  countenance 

FEAR. 
9  F.sd.  3.  3.  I  beg.in  to  speak  words  full  of/. 
Tob.  1.  19.  I  withdrew  tnvself  ("or/. 

14.  2.  he  inereased  in  the/,  of  the  Lord  God 
Jud.  2.  28.  the/,  and  dread  of  him  fell  upon  all 

14.3.  then/,  shall  fill  upon  them,  they  shall  tleo 

15.  2./  nnd  trembling  fell  upon  them 
r,?fA.14.1.E-!ther  in/,  ofdeath  resorted  to  theLord 

19.  O  thou  mighty  God, deliver  me  out  of  my/ 
15.  5.  hut  her  heart  was  in  anguish  for/. 

8.  the  king,  who  in  a/,  l.-aped  from  his  throne 

13.  my  heart  was  troubled  for/,  of  thy  majesty 
^f''^'.■f^4.20.  thev shall  come  with/.  iniquitii;s  con- 
5  2.  they  shall  be  t'oiibled  with  terrible/,     [vince 
6.  7.  he  who  is  Lord  shall/,  no  nmn's  person 
12.  11.  nor  didst  Ihoil  for/,  give  them  pardon 
17.  4.  nor  misht  the  corner  keep  them  from/. 

10.  they  died  for/,  denying  they  saw  tho  nir 
12.  /.  is  nothing  but  a  betraying  of  succours 
1.5. for  a  sudden/not  looked  for  canio  upun  Ihc.ii 
10.  these  thing.^  mide  them  lo  swoon  for/. 
r.ccl.  1.  11.  I  he/,  of  the  Lo'd  is  honour  ard  glory 
12,  the/,  of  the  I,ord  maketh  a  merry  heirt 

14.  to/,  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom 
16.  to/,  the  l.iord  is  fulness  of  wisdom 
18.  the/,  of  the  Lord  is  n  crown  of  wisdom 

20.  the  root  of  wisdom  is  to/,  lb*  Lord 

21.  the/,  of  the  Lord  drivelh  nway  sins 

27.  the/,  of  the  Lord  is  wisilom  nnrl  instruction 

28.  dis'rnstnottho/.ofLord  when  thou  art  poor 
30.  thou  rnmesi  not  in  truth  lo  the/,  of  the  Lord 

2.  7.  ye  that  /.  the  Lord  w  ail  fur  his  mercy 
P.  ve  that  f.  the  Lord,  believe  him 

9.  ye  that/,  the  Lord,  hop"  for  good  find  joy 

10.  that/  the  Lord  will  seek  whnl  i.s  pluasing 


AfOCKTrBi^] 


FEA 


Ecel.  4.  17.  she  will  bring/,  and  dreeiJ  upon  him 
i.  5.  be  not  wilhout/.  lo  add  sin  unto  sin 
6.  16.  auJ  they  that/,  the  Lord  shall  find  him 

9.  16.  let  thy  glorying  bo  in  the/,  of  the  Lord 

10.  19.  they  that^'.  the  Lord  are  a  sure  seed 

21.  the/,  of  the  Lord  goeth  before  autlionty 

22.  thoir  glory  is  the/,  of  the  Lord 
1.5.  13.  and  they  that/.  God  love  it  not 

16.  2.  except  the/,  ol  the  Lord  be  wi'h  thorn 

18.  27.  a  wise  man  will/,  in  every  tli.ng 
19.18.  the/,  of  Lord  is  the  lirst  step  to  bu  accepted 

22.  18.  a  fearful  heart  cannot  stand  against  any /. 

23.  27.  nothing  better  than  the/,  of  the  Lord 

24.  13.  I  am  the  mother  of  fair  love  and/. 

25.  G.  the/,  of  God  is  tlie  glory  of  old  men 
12.  the/,  of  the  Lord  is  beginning  of  his  love 

27.  3.  hold  himself  ddigenlly  in  the  /.  of  the  Lord 
32.  16.  they  that/,  the  Lord  shall  find  judgment 
36.  2.  send  thy  /.  on  al!  nations  that  seek  not 
40.2.  and  cause/,  of  heart  ||  5./.  of  death 

7.  he  marvelleth  that  the/,  was  nothing 

26.  but  the  /.  of  the  Lord  is  above  them  both  ; 

there  is  no  want  in  the  /.  of  the  Lord 

27.  the/,  of  the  Lord  is  a  fruitful  garden 
41.  3./.  not  the  sentence  of  death,  temeinber 
45.  23.  Phinees  had  a  zeal  in  the/,  of  the  Lord 

Bar.  3.  7.  thou  hast  put  thy/,  in  our  hearts 

33.  calleth  it  ?gain,  and  it  obeyeth  him  with/. 
Sus.  57.  and  they  for/,  companied  with  you 

1  .Woe.  2.  62. /.  not  then  the  words  of  a  sinful  man 

3.  6.  wherclore  the  wicked  shrunk  for/,  of  him 
25.  then  begun  the/,  of  Judas  to  fallonnations 

4.  8./.  ye  not  their  multitude,  nor  be  afraid 

10.  76.  they  of  the  city  let  him  in  for/. 

2  Mac.  3.  17.  the  man  was  so  compassed  with/. 
21.  the/,  of  the  high  priest  being  in  an  agony 
30.  the  temple  was  full  of/,  and  trouble 

6.  30.  I  suffer  these  things,  because  If.  him 

7.  2l». /.  not  this  tormentor,  but  take  thy  death 

12.  22.  the  enemies  being  smitten  with/,  fled 

13.  16.  they  filled  the  camp  with/,  and  tumult 
15.  18.  but  the  principal/,  was  for  the  temple 

23. send  a  good  angel  for  a/,  and  dread  to  them 
FEAKED. 
2  Esd.  12.  13.  it  shall  be/,  above  all  kingdoms 
Tob.  12.  16.  they  fell  on  their  faces,  for  they/. 
Jud.  8. 8.  none  gave  her  an  ill  word,  for  she  /.  God 
Eccl.  1.  8.  there  is  one  wise  and  greatly  to  be/. 
Sus.  2.  a  fair  woman  and  one  that/,  the  Lord 
IJUac  3. 30./.  he  should  not  be  able  to  bear  charges 
12.  28.  they/,  and  trembled  in  their  hearts 
FE.\RETU. 
Jud.  16.  16.  but  he  that/,  the  Lord  is  great 
£ccl.].l3.  whoso/,  the  L.  it  shall  go  well  with  him 

6.  17.  whoso/,  the  Lord  shall  direct  friendship 
10  24.  none  greater  than  he  that/,  the  Lord 
15  1.  he  that/,  the  Lord,  will  do  good 

19.  24.  that  hath  small  understanding  and/.  God 

21.  6.  he  that/,  the  L.  will  repent  fiom  his  heart 
23.  19.  such  a  man  only/,  the  eyes  of  men 

25.  10.  there  is  none  above  him  that/,  the  Lord 

26.  5.  there  be  three  things  which  my  heart/. 
i3.but  a  godly  woman  given  to  him  that/.  Lord 

32.  14.  whoso/,  the  L.  will  receive  his  discipline 

33. 1.  no  evil  shall  happen  lo  him  that  /.  the  Lord 

34.  14.  whoso/,  the  L.  shall  not  fear  or  be  afraid 

15.  blessed  is  the  soul  of  him  thai/,  the  Lord 

FKAUFUL. 

2  F.sd.  8.  22.  word  true,  and  whose  ordinance  is/. 

12.8.  shew  mc  the  plain  ditforence  of  this/,  vision 

15.  13.  their  seeds  shall  fail  with  a/,  constellation 

Kcd.  2.  12.  woe  be  to/,  heart;!  and  faint  hands 

22.  18.  so  a/,  heart  cannot  stand  against  fear 

1  Mac.  3.  56.  .«uch  as  were  /.  commanded  to  return 

2  Mac.  1.  24.  O  Lord  God,  who  art  /.  and  strong 

8.  13.  they  that  were /.and  distrusteiL  fled 

FEARFULNESS.       ' 
2  E.id.  5.  14.  an  extreme/,  went  through  my  body 

11.  4(1.  had  power  over  the  world  with  great/. 
15.  37.  there  shall  be  great/,  and  trembling 

FEARING. 
F.sth.  11.9.  nation  was  troubled,/. their  own  evils 
F.ccl.  29.  7.  refused  to  lend,/,  to  be  defrauded 
2  Mac.  9.  29.  who  also/,  the  sun  of  Antiochus 
FEAST. 

1  F.sd.  L  1.  .losias  held  the/,  of  the  pas.sover 
19.  Israel  held  the/,  of  sweet  bread  seven  days 

3  I.  Darius  made  a  great/,  to  all  his  subjects 

5.  51.  also  they  held  the/,  of  labcrnaclcs 

7.  14.  they  ke|it  the/,  of  unleavened  bread 

2  Esd.  1.31.  your  sclemn/.  days  have  I  forsaken 
2  38.  those  that  be  sealed  in  the/,  of  the  Lord 
9  47.  the  time  he  should  have  a  wife,!  made  a  /. 

Tcb.  2.  1.  when  I  was  come  home  in  the/,  of  pen- 
tecoRt,  which  is  the  holy  /.  of  the  seven  weeks 

8.  19.  he  kept  the  wedding/,  fourteen  days 
!nLd  6.  21   Oziiis  made  a/,  to  the  elders 

10.  2.  in  the  fabbalh-days,  and  in  her /.-days 

12.  10.  Olofernes  made  a/,  to  his  .servants  only 
U  1.  were  wcuiy  because  the/,  had  been  long 

785 


FEI 

£stA.14.17.Ihave  not  greatly  esteemed  Die  king's/. 
£cc^29.25.shalt  cnteriainand/.uudhave  no  thanks 
32.  1.  if  thou  be  made  the  master  of  the/. 

2.  receive  a  crown  for  well-ordering  the/. 
Bar.  6.  32.  as  men  do  at  the/,  when  one  is  dead 

1  .Mac.  10.  34.  and  the  three  days  after  the/. 

2  Mac.  1.  9.  see  that  ye  keep  the/,  of  tabernacles 
6.  7.  and  when  the/,  of  Bacchus  was  kept 

21.  they  that  had  the  charge  of  thai  wicked/. 

8.  33.  as  they  kept  the/,  for  the  victory 
10.  6.  with  gladness,  as  in/,  of  tabernacles 
12.31.  came  to  Jerua.  the/,  of  weeks  apjiroaching 
.  32.  after  the./,  called  penlecost  went  lotth 

FEASTED. 
1  Esd.  4.  63.  they/,  with  in»trumtnts  of  music 

FEASTLNG. 
.Tud.  16.  20.  the  people  continued/,  in  Jerusalem 
Esl/i.  16.  22.  shall  keep  it  a  high  day  with  all/. 

FEASTLNGS. 
fVisd.  19.  16.  whom  they  had  received  wilji/. 

FEASTS. 
Tob.  1.  6.  I  went  often  to  Jerusalem  at  the/. 
2.  6. your/,  shall  be  turned  into  mourning 
Jud.  8.  6.  she  fasted,  save  the/,  and  solemn  days 
EstA.  16.22.  among  your  solemn /.ye  shall  keep  it 
Eccl.  33.  8.  and  he  altered  seasons  and  /. 
43.  7.  from  the  moon  is  the  sign  of/,  a  light 
47.  10.  he  beautified  their/,  and  set  in  order 
Bar.  1.  14.  read  this  on  the/,  and  solemn  days 

1  Mac.  J.  39.  her/,  were  turned  into  mouruing 
10.  34.  I  will  that  all  tile/,  and  sabbaths 

12.  11.  ia  our/,  and  other  convenient  days 

2  Mac.  6.  6.  to  keep  sabbath  and  ancient/. 

".  42.  have  spoken  concerning  the  idolatrous/. 
FEATHER. 
2  Esd.  11.  12.  there  arose  one/,  and  reigned 

FEATHERS. 
2  Esd.  11.3.  out  of  her/,  there  grew  other  contrary 
/.  and  they  became  little/,  and  small 
.5.  lo,  the  eagle  liew  with  her  /.  and  reigned 
7.  the  eagle  rose  and  spake  to  her/. saying 
11.  I  numbered  her  contrary/,  there  were  eight 
20.  the  /.  that  followed  stood  up  on  the  right  side 

22.  after  this  I  looked  and  behold,  the  twelve/. 

appeared  no  more,  nor  the  two  little/. 

24.  that  two  little/,  divided  themselves 

25.  the/,  that  were  under  the  wing  thought 
31.  the  head  eat  up  the  two  /.  under  the  wing 
45.appear  no  more,  thou  eagle,nor  thy  wicked  /. 

12.  19.  sa west  the  eight  small  under/,  sticking 

29.  whereas  thou  sa  west  two/,  under  the  wings 

FEATHERED. 
2  Esd.  11.  1.  an  eagle  which  had  twelve/,  wings 

FEATS. 
Jud.  11.  8.  that  thou  art  wonderful  in/,  of  war 

FED. 
2  Mac.  5.  27.  Judas  who/,  on  herbs  continually 

FEDDEST. 
fVisd.  16.  20.  thou/,  thv  people  with  angels'  food 

FEEBLE. 
JVisd.  2.  11.  that  which  is/,  is  found  nothing 

9.  5.  for  I  thy  servant  am  a/,  person 

Eccl.  25.  23.  maketh  weak  hands  and/,  knee.9 
Bar.  2.  18.  which  goelh  stooping  and/,  eyes  fail 
1  Mac.  1.  26.  virgins  and  young  men  were  made/. 
FEED. 

1  Esd.  16.  68./.  you  being  idle  with  things  offered 

FEEL. 
Jad.  16.  17.  they  shall/,  them,  and  weep  forever 
Eccl.  30.  1.  causeth  him  oft  to/,  the  rod 
Bar.  6.  20.  when  they  eat  them,  clothes/,  it  not 

24.  nor  when  they  were  molten  did  thev/.  it 

FEELETH. 

2  Esd.  13.  4.  as  the  earth  faileth  when  it/,  the  fire 

FEELING. 
tVisd.  11,  13.  they  had  some/,  of  the  Lord 

FEET. 
2  Ksd.  1.  26.  are  swift  to  comrsit  inan-slaughter 
2.  15.  make  their/,  as  fast  as  a  pillar 

25.  O  thou  good  nurse,  establish  their/. 

5.  15.  so  the  cngel  set  me  up  upon  my/. 

6.  13.  stand  up  upon  thy/,  and  hear  a  voice 

10.  .10.  he  set  me  upon  my/,  and  said  unto  me 
14.  2. 1  said,  here  am  I,  Lord,  and  stood  on  my  /. 

■Tud.  2.  7.  cover  the  earth  with  the/,  of  my  army 
10.  4.  and  she  took  sandals  upon  lier/. 

14.  7.  he  fill  at  Judith's/,  and  reverenced  her 
Esth.  13. 13.  been  content  to  ki?s  the  soles  of  his/. 
IVisd.  14. 11.  a  snare  to  the/,  ofthe  unwise 

15.  15.  as  for  their/,  they  are  slow  to  go 
Reel.  6.  24.  and  put  thy/,  into  her  fetters 

21.  19.  doctrine  to  fools  is  as  fetters  on  the/. 

25.  20.  as  a  sandy  way  is  to  the/,  ofthe  aged 

26.  IS.  so  are  fair/,  with  a  constant  heart 
.38.  20.  turning  the  wheel  about  with  his/. 

30.  he  boweth  down  his  strength  before  his/. 
Bar.  6.  17.  through  the/,  of  them  that  come  in 

26.  they  are  borne  on  shoulders,  having  no/. 

FEIGNEDLY. 
2  Esd.  8.  28,  think  not  on  thoao  that  walk/. 
BI 


FEW 

FELL. 

1  Esd.  9. 47.  they  /.  to  the  ground  and  worshipped 

2  Esd.  10.  1.  in  Ills  wedding-chamber  he/,  down 

13.  11.  and/,  with  violence  on  the  multitude 
Tub.  1.  4.  Kaphtah/.  from  the  house  of  Jerusalem 

11.  13.  when  he  saw  his  son  he/,  on  his  neck 

14.  10.  but  Ainaii/.  inio  the  snare,  and  perished 
Jud.  4.  11./.  before  the  temple  and  cast,  ashes 

6.1H.lhen  the  people/.doiviiiind  worshipped  God 

7.  22.  young  men/,  down  in  the  slreetaof  the  city 

8.  3.  he/,  on  his  bed,  and  died  in  Bethulia 

9.  1.  then  Judith/,  on  her  face,  and  put  ashes 

10.  23.  she  /.  down  on  her  face,  and  did  reveren(6 

14.  6.  he/,  down  on  his  face,  his  spirit  failed 
7.  he/,  at  Judith's  feet,  aud  reverenced  her 

15.  2.  fear  and  trembling/,  upon  them 

5.  ili»y  all/,  upon  them  with  one  consent 
Est/j.I  j.7.llie  quetn/.down,  wus  pale, aud  fainted 

1.5.asshe  wasspeakiiig,  she/,  down  iorfaintnesa 
H'isd.  10.  6.  fire  that  /.  down  on  the  five  cities 
17.  16.  so  whosoever  there/,  down  was  kept 
Eccl.  15.  fl.  say  not,  it  is  thio'  the  Lord  If.  away 

16.  7.  the  old  giants  who/,  away  in  foohshnesa 
50.  17.  the  people/,  to  the  earth  on  their  faces 

■Sus.  15.  it/,  out  as  they  watched  a  fit  time 

1  Mac.  1.  5.  and  alter  iliese  things  he/,  sict 

3.  11.  many  also/,  down  slain,  the  rest  fled 

4.  40./.  down  flat  to  the  ground  on  their  faces 

6.  8.  laid  hiin  on  his  bed,  and/,  sick  for  grief 
46.  vvheeupon  ihe  elephant/,  down  on  him 

7.  18.  the  dread  of  them/,  on  all  tiie  people 

9.  40.  many/,  down  dead,  and  the  remnant  fled 

13.  22.  but  there/,  a  very  great  snow 

2  Mac.  3.  27.  Heliudorus  /.  suddenly-lo  the  ground 
40.  and  ihe  tlii,iigs/.  out  of  this  sort 

9.  7.  it  came  to  pass  he/,  down  from  his  chariot 
9.  his  flesh/,  away,  and  his  smell  was  noisome 
24.  if  any  thing/,  out  contrary  to  expectation 

10.  4.  they/,  flat  down,  and  besought  the  Lord 
17.  they  slew  all  that/,  into  their  hands 

26.  they  /.  down  at  the  feet  of  the  altar 

12.  2^1.  Timotheus/.  into  the  hands  of  Dositheua 

14.  41.  being  ready  to  be  taken,/,  on  his  sword 

FELLOW. 
Eccl.  8.  15.  travel  not  by  the  way  with  a  bold/. 

13.  23.  if  poor  speak,  tliey  say,  what/,  is  this  1 
Bar.  6. 43  she  reproacheth  her  /.  that  she  was  not 

FELLOWS. 
Dan.  3.  26.  Angel  came  with  Azarias  and  hi»/. 

1  Mac.  4.  5.  for,  said  he,  these/,  flee  from  us 
10.  61.  certain  pestdent/.  of  Israel  assembled 

FELLOWSHIP. 
Wisd.  6.  23.  such  shall  have  no/,  with  wisdom 
Eccl.  13.  1.  he  that  hath/,  with  a  proud  man 
2.haveno/.with  one  that  is  mightier  than  tliyielf 

17.  what/,  hath  the  wolf  with  the  lamb 

FENCED. 

2  Mac.  12.  13.  which  was  /.  about  with  walli 

FERVENCY.  , 

.Jud.  4.  9.  every  man  cried  to  God  with  great /. 

FERVENT. 
2  fl>.d.  6.  58.  ihy  only  begotten  and  thy/,  lover 
1  Mac.  2.  54.  PhineeB,  in  being  zealous  and/. 
53.  Elias,  for  being  zealous  and  /.  for  the  law 
FESTIVAL. 

1  Mac.  I.  45.  profane  the  sabbaths  and/,  dayi 

FETCH. 

2  ^ae.  2.  15.  seud  some  to/,  them  to  you 

FETCH ETH. 

1  Esd.  4.  34.  sun  /.  his  course  to  his  own  place 
Eccl.  31.  19.  he/,  not  his  wind  short  on  bis  bed 

FETTERED. 
Wisd.  17.  2.  /.  with  the  bonds  of  a  long  night 

FETTERS. 
Eccl.  6.  24.  put  thy  feet  into  her/,  neck  into  ch.'iin 
29.  then  shall  her/,  be  a  strong  defence  to  the* 
21.  19.  doctrine  to  fools  is  as/,  on  the  feot 
FEW. 

2  Esd.  4.  33.  wherefore  are  our  years/,  and  evil? 
7.  12.  they  are  but/,  and  evil,  full  of  perils 

7.  70.  there  should  be  very/,  left  in  a  muliilnde 

8.  1.  but  ho  hath  made  the  world  lo  come  for/. 
3.  there  be  many  created,  but  /.  shall  be  saved 
62.  but  I  have  shewed  to  thee  and  a/,  like  thee 

10.  57.  called  with  the  Highest,  and  so  are  but/. 
Eccl.  17.  2.  he  irave  ihem/.  days,  and  a  short  lime 
41.13.  nsood  life  hath  but/.days,bui  a  good  natne 
43.  32.  fof  we  have  seen  hut  a/,  of  his  works 
Bar.  2.  13.  we  are  hut  a/,  among  the  healhen 
L»/<ic..3.I7.how  shall  we  be  able  being  so/.to  fightl 

18.  for  many  lo  be  shut  up  in  the  hands  of  a/. 

6.  54.  there  were  but  a  /.  left  in  the  sanctuary 

7.  1.  Demetrius  came  up  with  a/,  men  to  a  city 
2.S.  I  will  come  with  a/,  men,  that  I  may  see  you 

9.  9.  lei  us  now  save  our  lives,  for  we  are  but/. 
12.'  45.  and  choose  a  /.  men  to  wait  on  thee 
15.  10.  Bo  that/,  were  left  with  Tryphon 

2  Mac.  2.  21.  iothnt  beingbut  a  /.  they  overcani>« 
6.  17.  come  to  declaring  of  Ihe  matter  in/,  word* 
12.  34.  in  figiiting,  a/,  ofthe  Jews  weto  slain 


FiG 

iMac.  14. 30. gathered  together  nola/.  of  hiimen 

KEWEK. 
S  Mac.  5.  14.  am]  iio  /.  were  sold  than  elaip 

10.  17.  they  killed  no  /.  than  twenty  thousand 
12. 10.  no  /.  than  5000  men  on  loot,  50O  horsemen 

FIDELITY. 
Esth.  13.  3.  Aman  was  approved  tor  his  stcdfast/. 

FIELD. 
iEsd.  7. 6.  a  city  is  budded  and  set  upon  a  broad  /. 

9.  17.  like  as  the/,  is,  so  is  bUo  the  seed 

24.  go  into  a/,  of  flowers  where  no  house  is 
526.  there  did  I  eat  of  the  herbs  of  the/. 

10.  3.  then  I  came  into  this/,  as  thou  seest 
32.  and  I  went  into  the/,  and  lo,  I  have  seen 
51.  therefore  I  bade  thee  remain  in  the/. 

12.  51. 1  remained  slill  in  Iho/.  seven  days  and  did 

eat  only  in  thoso  days  of  the  flowers  of  the  /. 

13.  57.  then  went  I  forth  into  the  /.  giving 

16.  28.  two  of  the/,  which  shall  hide  themselves 
77.  like  as  a/,  is  covered  over  with  bushes 
Wisd.  17.  17.  whether  he  wore  a  lab  surer  in  the/. 

19.  7.  and  out  of  the  violent  stream  a  green/. 
F.crl.  24.  14.  as  an  olive-tree  in  a  pleasant/. 
Bel  33.  and  who  was  going  into  the  /.  to  bring  it 

1  Mac.  10.  71.  come  down  to  us  into  the  plain/. 

14.  8.  the  trees  of  the/,  gave  their  fruit 

FIELDS. 

2  F.sd.  15.  4L  that  all/,  may  be  full  and  all  rivers 
16.  32.  and/  thereof  shall  wa.xold,  and  her  ways 

Jv4.  2.  27.  he  burnt  up  all  their/,  and  destroyed 

3.  3.  all  OUT  f.  of  wheat  lie  before  thy  face 

4.  5.  for  their/,  were  of  late  reaped 

6.  4.  their/,  shall  be  filled  with  dead  bodies 
1  ^ae.  IG.  M».  they  fled  to  the  towers  in  the/. 

FIERCE. 

I  F.td.  2.  27.  mighty  kings  and/,  were  in  Jerusalem 

Wisd.  11.  17.  u  multitude  of  bears  or/  lions 

18.  15.  as  a/,  man  of  war  into  the  midst  of  a  land 

iMac.  10.  35.  with  a/,  courage  killed  all  tbey  met 

12.  15.  who  gave  a/,  assault  against  the  walla 

FIERCELY. 
Fjtth.  15.  7.  the  king  looked  very  /•  upon  lier 
1  Mac.  6.  33.  the  king  marched/,  with  his  host 

FIERCENESS. 
Sj>/ae.l5.21.  Maccabeus  seeing  the  /.  of  the  beasts 

FIERY. 
H'isd.  11.  18.  breathing  out  eitlier  a/,  vapour 
Eccl.  43.  4.  breathing  out/,  vapours  and  scndin, 
45.  19.  to  consume  them  with  the/,  flame 
48.  9.  who  was  taken  np  in  a  chariot  of/,  horses 
FIFTH.  , 
2/?;.<(i.6.47.on  the  /.  day  thou  saidst  to  seventh  part 

3  Mac.  7.  15.  afterward  thov  brought  the  /.  also 

FIFTEENTH. 
Eilh.  10.  13.  the  14th  and  /.  day  of  the  month 
1  Mac.  1.  54.  now  the/,  dav  of  the  month  Casleu 

FIFTY. 
Jud.  1.  2.  the  breadth  of  the  wall/,  cubits 

1  Mac.  9.  61.  took  about/,  persons  and  slew  them 

2  Mac.  13.  5.  there  was  a  tower  of/,  cubits  high 

FIFTIES. 
1  Mac.  3.  55.  Judas  ordained  captains  over  /. 

FIGS. 
Jud.  10.  5.  Judith  filled  a  hag  with  lumps  of/. 

FIG-TREE. 
\Mae.  14.  12.  every  man  sat  under  his  vine  and/. 

FIGHT. 
1  F.sd.  1.28.  but  undertook  to/,  with  him 
JC.«(i.6.24  at  that  time  shall  friends/ like  enemies 

13.  8.  all  were  sore  afraid,  and  yet  durst/. 

11.  the  multitude  which  was  prepared  lo/. 
31.  one  shall  undertake  to/,  against  another 

15.  15.  shall  stand  up  to/,  one  against  another 
Jud.  7. 1 1.  /.  not  against  them  in  battle-array 
FMk.  11.  6.  two  great  dragons  came  ready  to/. 

7.  thai  they  might/,  against  the  righteous 
H'isd.  .5.  '."0.  and  the  worhl  shall/,  with  him 
JSc(;/.4.28.  strive  for  truth,  the  Lord  shall  /.for  thee 
5K>.  13.  it  shall/,  foi'  thee  against  thy  enemies 
1  Mae.  2.  40.  if  we/,  not  for  our  lives  and  laws 

41.  wc  will/,  against  him,  nor  will  we  die  all 

66.  let  him  /.  the  battle  of  the  people 

3.  21.  but  »!•/.  (or  our  lives  and  our  laws 

43.  Ill  us/,  lor  onr  people  and  the  sanctuary 
58.  that  ye  may/,  with  these  nations  assembled 

4.  21.  the  hos^of  Judas  in  the  plain,  ready  to/. 

5.  32.  he  said,  /.  thii  day  for  your  brethren       ' 
57.  let  us  go  an<l  /.  agaiuBl  the  heathen 

67.  fur  that  thry  went  out  to/,  unadvisedly 

6.  34.  they  might  provoke  the  elephants  to/. 
8.  'JH.  wo  will/,  with  thee  by  sea  and  by  land 
9.8.  pcradvenlurc  wnmay  be  ahleto/.  with  them 

30.  rliosi'n  thee,  that  thou  maycsl  /.  our  battles 

44.  let  UH  go  up  now  and  /  for  our  lives 

12.  .'50.  tliev  went  close  together  prepared  to/. 
13  9/  our  battles,  which  commanrlrKl.wi,.  will  do 

14.  13.  nor  was  there  any  loft  to/,  aeamstthcm 
2r).baver.hn»ed  awayin/.thuir  eiirnih  »l'iornlliem 

16.  3.  be  iniitead  of  me,  go  and  /.  for  our  nation 
t  Mac.  8.  16.  not  to  fear,  hut  to/,  raaufully 


FIN 

2  Mae.  8.  36.  told  that  Jews  had  G.  to  /.  for  them 

11.  9.  they  were  ready,  not  only  to/,  with  men 

14.  18.  that  they  bad  to/,  for  tiieir  country 

FIGHTETH. 
Esth.  14. 13.  his  heart  to  hale  him  that /.against  us 
fVisd.  16.  17.  for  the  world/,  for  the  righteous 
Eccl.  38.28.  he/,  with  the  heat  of  the  furnace 

FIGHTING. 
2  Esd.  13.  34.  and  to  overcome  him  by  /. 
Eccl.  28.  11.  and  a  hasty/,  sheddeth  blood 

1  Mac.  8.  10.  /.  with  them  slew  many  of  them 

i  Mac.  12.  34.  it  happened  that  in  their/,  together 

15.  27./.  with  their  hands,  and  praying  to  God 

FIGURE. 

Eecl.  49.  9.  made  mention  under  the  /.  of  the  rain 

FILL. 

2  Esd.  1.  20.  and  waters  flowed  out  to  your/. 
4.  32.  how  great  a  floor  shall  they/. 

Tob.  8.  18.  Raguel  bade  his  servants/,  the  grave 
Jad.  2.  8.  their  slain  shall/,  their  valleys 

7.  21.  they  had  no  water  to  drink  their/. 

8.  31.  the  Lord  will  send  rain  to/,  our  cisterns 
'  tVisd.  2.  7.  let  us/,  ourselves  with  costly  wine 

Eccl.  24.  19.  and/,  yourselves  with  ray  fruits 

36.  14./.  Sion  with  thy  unspeakable  oracles 

FILLED. 
2  Esd.  4.  36.  when  the  number  of  seeds  is/,  in  you 

5.25.  of  all  depths  of  sea  thou  hast /.thee  one  river 
Tub.  12.  9.  that  e.xerciso  alms  shall  be/,  with  life 
Jud,  6.  4.  their  fields  shall  be  /.  with  dead  bodies 

10.  5.  she/,  a  bag  with  parched  corn  and  figf 

13.2.01oferne8  lying  along,  for  he  was£.witli  wine 
fVisd.  13.  12.  refuse  to  dress liis  meat,/,  himself 

18.  16.  thy  almighty  word/,  all  things  with  death 
Eccl.  2.  16.  that  love  him  shall  be/,  with  the  law 

4.  12.  that  seek  her  early  shall  be/,  with  joy 

16.  29.  the  Lord  /.  it  with  his  blessings 

17.  7.  withal,  be/  them  with  understanding 

23.  II.  swearer  shall  be/,  with  iniquity 

31.  3.  when  he  restcth,  he  is/,  with  his  delicates 

32.  15.  he  that  seeketh  the  law,  be/,  therewith 

33.  16. 1/,  my  wine-press  like  a  gatherer  ofgrapes 

37.  24.  a  wise  man  shall  be/,  \vith  bifssingg 
39.6.he  shall  be/,  with  the  spirit  of  underatandin; 

12.  for  I  am/,  as  the  moon  at  the  full 
42.  25.  who  shall  be/,  with  beholding  his  glory 

47.  14.  and  as  a  flood  /.  with  understanding 

48.  12.  and  Elizeas  was/,  with  his  spirit 
Bar.  3.  32.  he  hath/,  it  with  four-footed  beasts 

5.  7.  God  hath  appointed  that  valleys  be/,  up 
Sus.  32.  that  they  might  be/,  with  her  beauty 
2Jt/ac.3.30.the  temple  was/,  with  joy  and  gladness 

4.  40.  the  common  people  being/,  with  rage 

6.  4.  the  temple  was/,  with  rioting  and  revelling 
5.  the  altar  was/,  with  profane  things 

7.  21.  she  exhorted,/,  with  courageous  spirits 

9.  7.  but  still  was/,  with  pride,  breathing  out 

12.  16.  »  lake,  being/,  full,  was  seen  running 

13.  16.  at  last  thev/.  the  camp  with  fear 

FILLEDST. 
Eccl.  47.  15.  ai.d  thou  /.  it  with  dark  parables 

FILLETH. 
fVisd.  1.7.  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord/,  the  world 
Eccl.  I.  16.  to  fear  the  Lord,/,  men  with  her  fruits 

24.  25.  he/,  all  things  with  his  wisdom 

FILTH. 
Eecl.  22.  2.  is  compared  to  the/,  of  a  dunghill 
27.  4.  so  the/,  of  a  man  in  his  talk  remainetli 

FILTHY. 
fVisd.  11.  18.  or/,  scents  of  scattered  smoke 
Eccl.  22. 1  .a  slothful  man  is  compared  to  a  /.  stone 

FILTHINESS. 

H'isd.  2.  Ifi.  he  abslaineth  from  our  ways  as/. 

2  Mac.  9.  9.  and  the/,  of  his  smell  was  noisome 

FIND. 

1  EsA  2.  22.  thou  shall/,  in  the  chronicles 

2  Esd.X  36.  shall/  that  Israel  kept  ihy  precepts 
Tob.  2.  2.  what  pgor  man  soever  thou  shall /. 
Jud.  P.  14.  you  cannot/,  the  depth  of  the  heart 

14.  3.  run  to  the  tent  of  Olofernus,  but  not/,  bim 
Eslli.  10.  15.  we/,  that  the  Jews  are  no  evil-doors 
IVisd.  2.  24.  they  that  do  hold  of  his  side,  do/,  il 

6.  10.  that  have  learned  shall/  what  lo  answer 
14.  for  he  shall/,  her  sitting  at  his  doors 

9.  16.  with  labour  do  wo/,  the  things  before  us 

13.  6.  Becking  God  and  desirous  to/,  him 
O.bow  did  they  not  sooner/,  out  ihe  Ld. thereof? 
Feci  1.  13.  he  shall/,  favour  in  the  day  of  death 

3.  18.  thou  shall/,  favour  hifore  the  Lord 
31.  and  when  he  falleth,  he  shall/  a  stay 

6.  16.  they  thai  feaj  the  Lord  shall/,  him 
18.  so  shall  thou/  wisdom  till  ihiiie  olil  age 
28.  for  at  the  last  thou  shall  /  her  rest 

I.").  6.  he  shall/,  joy  and  a  ciown  of  gladness 

l(i.  14.  every  man  shall/,  according  to  his  workf. 

18.  4.  and  w  ho  shall  /.  out  his  noble  acts  1 

24.  28.  no  more  shall  the  lost  /.  her  out 

25.  3.  how  canst  ihou/.  any  thing  in  thine  ago? 

27.  111.  a-iil  shall  never/,  friend  to  his  mind 

28.  1.  ho  that  leveDj^eth,  kball  /.  vengeance 


FIR 


•  APOCRTraA 


Kr:cZ.29.3.  thou  (halt/,  the  thing  that  is  necesamry 

31.  22.  at  the  last  thou  shall/,  as  I  told  ihe« 

32.  14.  ihey  that  seek  him  early  shall/,  favour 

33.  25.  if  set  thy  servant  to  labour  thou  shall/,  rei* 
41.  24.  ihou  shall/,  favour  before  all  men 

51.  26.  instruction  is  hard  at  hand  to/. 
Bar.  1.  12.  we  shall/,  favour  in  their  sight 
Dan.  3.  15.  no  place  to  sacrifice  and/,  mercy 
*!/«.  14.  when  Ihcy  might/.  Susannah  alone 
iMac.  10.  16.  he  said,shall  we/,  such  another  m&pT 
2  Mac.  2.  6.  mark  the  way  but  they  could  not/,  it 
24.  the  ditficully  they/  which  desire  lo  look 
5.9.and  thinking  there  lo/.succour  fur  his  kindred 
6.  22.  the  old  friendship  with  ihem  might/,  favour 
FliNDEST. 
2  Esd.  2.  23.  wherever  thou  /.  the  dead  bury  ihera 
Bel  12.  if  thou/,  not  that  Bel  hath  eaten  all 

FINDETH.      . 
Eccl.  19.  28.  when  he/,  opportunity,  he  will  do 
25.  10.  oh  how  great  is  he  that/,  wisdom! 
32.  17.  but/,  an  excuse  according  lo  his  will 
40.  18.  he  that/,  a  treasure  is  above  them  both 

FINDING. 

Esth.  16.  14.  he  thought,  /.  us  desititute  of  friends 

Eccl.  13.  26.  the/,  out  ol  a  parable  is  wearisome 

FINE. 

1  Esd. 3.  6.  bridles  of  gold  and  a  head-tire  of/,  lineo 
Jud.  10.  5.  she  filled  a  bag  with  figs  and/,  bread 
Eccl.  35.  2.  he  that  reputeth  good,  otVeri/.  flour 

38.  11.  a  sweet  savour  and  a  memorial  of/,  flour 
Bel  3.  were  spent  twelve  great  measures  of/,  flour 

2  Mac.  1.8.  we  oflered  sacrifices  and/,  flour 

FINELY. 
2.Vac.l5. 39.80  speech/framed  delighteth  the  earl 

FINGERS. 
H'isd.  15.  15.  idols  nor  have/,  of  hands  to  handle 

FINISH. 

Tob.  8. 17.  grant  mercy,  O  Ld.  /.  their  life  in  health 

Eccl.  38.  27.  they  that  watch  to/  a  work 

28.hesetteth  his  mind  to/his  work  and  walchetb 

FINISHED. 

1  Esd.  4.  55.  till  the  day  that  the  house  was/. 

6.  14.  it  wnsbuildfd  many  years  ago,  and  was/ 
28.  help  them,  till  the  house  of  the  Lord  be/. 

7.  4.  they/,  these  by  the  commandment  of  the  Ld. 

5.  thus  was  the  holy  house/,  in  the  month  Adar 

2  Esd.  6.  20.  and  when  the  world  shall  be/. 
Toi. 8. 20. for  before  the  days  of  the  marriage  were/ 
Jud.  5.  22.  when  Achior  had/  these  sayings 

8.  34.  not  declare  it  till  the  things  be/,  that  I  d« 
Eccl.50.  lO.besought  Ld.  till  they  had/,  hisserviot 
1  Mae.  4.  51.  they/,  all  the  worksthey  began  to  do 

FINISHING. 

1  Esd.  5.  73.  they  hindered  the/,  of  the  building 
Eccl.  37.  II.  with  a  hireling  for  a  year  of/,  work 

50.  14.  /.  the  service  at  the  altar  to  adorn  otTcring 

2  Mac.  2.  9.  the  sacrifice  of  the/,  of  ihe  temple 
FIRE. 

1  Esd.  1.  12.  they  roasted  the  passover  with/. 
55.  ihey  broke  walls  and  set/  upon  her  lowers 

6.  24.  where  they  do  sacrifice  with  continual/. 

2  Esd.  1.23.  f  gave  you  not/,  for  your  blasphemiei 

3.  19.  thy  glory  went  through  four  gates  of/. 

4.  5.  go  thy  way,  weigh  mo  the  weight  of  ihe/. 

9.  I  have  asked  Ihee  but  only  of  the/,  and  wind 
16.  for  the/,  came  and  consumed  it 

50.  as  the/,  is  greater  than  the  smoke 
G.  37.  rnyspirit  was  greatly  set  oii/.and  in  distress 

7.  8.  one  only  path  between  the/,  and  the  walei 

8.  8.  thy  creature  is  preserved  in/,  and  water 
22.  whose  service  is  conversant  in  wind  and/. 

13.  4.  the  earth  failelh  when  it  feelelh  the/. 

10.  only  I  saw  as  it  had  been  a  blast  of/. 

11.  the  blasl  of/,  fell  upon  the  multitude 

27. there  cnme  as  a  blasl  of  wind,and/.and  slorm 
38.  destroy  ihcrn  by  Ihe  law,  which  is  like  to/. 

14.  39.  bnt  the  colour  of  the  water  was  like/. 

15.  23.  the/  is  gone  forth  from  his  wrath 
41./  hail,  and  flying  swords,  and  many  waters 
61.  thou  lys  stubble,  Ihey  shall  he  unto  thee  as/. 

16.  4.  a/,  is  sent  among  you,  who  may  quench  it? 

6.  or  may  anv  one  quench  the/,  in  the  stubble  ? 
9./.  shall  go  from  his  wrath,  who  may  quench  ill 
15.  the/,  is  kindled,  and  shall  not  bo  put  out 
53.  for  God  shall  burn  coals  of/,  upon  his  head 
73.  they  shall  be  tried  as  the  gold  in  the/. 
78.it  is  cast  into  the  /to  be  consumcil  lln'rcwilh 

hid.  8.  27.  for  he  hath  not  tried  us  in  the/. 
13.  13.  they  inailoa/.  for  a  light,  and  stoorl  rouo«J 
It").  17.  in  putting/,  and  worms  in  their  flesh 
Esth.  16.  24.  shall  bedeelroyod  with/,  and  sword 
It'isd.  10.  0   who  fled  from  the/,  which  fell  dowa 
13.2.  bui  dnemed  it  cither/,  or  wiml,  or  swift  air 

16.  16.  and  through/,  were  they  consumed 

17. the/had  morn  force  in  the  water  that  quench 
19.  il  burnetii  in  water  above  the  power  of/. 
22.but8nowand  ico endured  ihe/.anil  nielud  no! 
27.  lh.it  which  was  not  drstroyid  of  llio/. 

17.  5.  no  power  of  ihe/.  might  give  Ihem  light 
0.  only  there  appeared  a/,  kindled  of  itself 


ArOCKTPHA.] 


FIR 


ff^isd.  18. 3.  thou  gavest  them  a  burning  pillar  of/. 

19.  20.  the/,  had  power  in  the  water,  forgotling 
Eccl.'i.  5.  for  gold  is  tried  in  the/,  men  in  adversity 

3.  30.  water  will  quench  a  flaming/. 

7.  n.for  the  vengeancoof  ungodly  is/,  and  worms 

8.  3.  and  heap  not  wood  upon  his/. 

10.  lest  thou  be  burnt  with  the  tiame  of  his/. 

9.  8.  for  herewith  love  is  kindled  as  a/. 

11.  32.  of  a  spark  off.  a  heap  of  coals  is  kindled 
15.  IG.  he  hath  set/,  and  water  before  theo 

10.  6.  among  the  ungodly  shall  a/,  be  kindled 
21.9.  the  end  is  a  llame  of/,  to  destroy  thom 
22.24  as  the  vapour  and  smoke  goeth  before  the/. 
23    1<).  a  hot  mind  is  a  burning  /.  will  not  be 

quenched,  never  cease  till  he  hath  kindled  a/. 
28.  10  as  the  matter  of  the/,  is,  so  it  burneth 

11.  a  hasty  contention  kindleth  a/. 

36.  9.  let  him  be  consumed  by  the  rage  of  the/. 

38.  28.  the  vapour  of  the  /.  wasteth  his  flesh 

39.  2t;.  water  and/,  are  for  the  use  of  man's  life 
29.  /  and  death  were  created  for  vengeance 

4U.  30.  but  in  his  belly  there  shall  burn  a/. 
43.  21.  it  burneth  and  consumeth  the  grass  as/, 
48.  1.  then  stood  up  Elias  the  prophet  as/. 
3.  he  also  three  times  brought  down/. 

9.  who  was  taken  up  in  a  whirlwind  of/. 

50.9.  as/,  and  incense  in  the  censer,  and  as  vessel 
51.  4.  from  the  choking  of/,  on  every  side;  and 

from  the  midst  of  the/,  which  I  kindled  not 

Bar  A.  35./.  shall  come  on  hur  from  the  Everlasting 

6.55.  when/,  fallethon  the  house  ofgodsof  wood 

Dan.  3.  1.  and  they  walked  in  the  midst  of  the/. 

2.  opening  his  mouth  in  the  midst  of  the/,  said 

26.  the  angel  smote  theflameof  the/.outof  oven 

44.  O  ye  /.  and  heat,  bless  ye  the  Lord 
IJHac.l.  31.  when  taken  spoils  of  city,  ho  set  it  on/. 

56.  when  rent  books  they  burnt  them  with/. 

5.  28.  took  all  their  spoils,  and  burnt  city  with/. 
35.  received  s|>oils  thereof,  and  burnt  it  with/. 
68.  Judas  burnt  their  carved  images  with/. 

6.  39.  the  mountains  shined  like  lamps  of/. 
51.  set  their  instruments  to  cast/,  and  stones 

10.  84.  the  temple  of  Dagon  he  burnt  with/. 

16.10.  wherefore  he  burnt  towers  in  Azotus  with/. 
2  JMac.  1.  18.  keep  it  as  the/,  which  was  given  us 

19.  the  priests  look  the/,  of  the  altar  privily 

20.  did  send  of  those  priests  that  had  hid  it  to  the 
/.  they  told  us  they  found  no/,  but  thick  water 

22.  this  done,  there  was  a  great/,  kindled 
33.  where  the  priests  had  hid  /.  water  appeared 
2.  1   to  take  the/,  as  it  hatii  been  signified 

10.  the/,  came  down  from  heaven  and  consumed 

7.  5.  to  be  brought  to  the/,  and  fried  in  the  pan 

8.  33.  Callisthenes  that  had  set/,  on  the  holy  gates 

9.  7.  breathing  out/,  in  his  rage  against  the  Jews 

10.  3.  striking  stones,  they  took/,  out  of  them 

12.  6.  burnt  the  haven,  and  set  the  boats  on/. 

9.  set/,  on  the  haven  and  navy,  so  that  the  fight 
of  the/,  was  seen  at  Jerusalem  240  furlongs  oft' 

13.  8.  the  allar  whose/  and  ashes  v\'ere  holy 

14.  41.  bade  that/,  should  be  brought  to  burn  it 

FIRES. 
Jud.  7.  5.  when  they  kindled/,  on  their  towers 

1  Mac.  12.  38.  they  kindled/,  in  their  camp 
iJilac.  10. 36.  and  kindling/,  burnt  the  blasphemers 

FIRM. 
£cc/. 43. 15.  by  his  great  power  he  maketb  clouds/. 

FIRMLY.       - 
EsW.  13. 5.  that  our  kingd.  may  not  be/.established 
Eccl.  42.  17.  which  the  Almighty  Lord/,  settled 
FIRMAMENT. 

2  Esd.  4.  7.  how  many  springs  are  above  the/. 
6.  4.  before  the  measures  of  the/,  were  named 

20  the  books  shall  be  opened  before  the/. 

41.  on  second  day  thou  madest  the  spirit  of  the/ 
Eccl.  43.  1.  the  clear/,  the  beauty  of  heaven 
Dan.  3.  34.  blessed  art  thou  in  the/,  of  heaven 

FIRST. 
1  Esd.  1.  1.  the  fourteenth  day  of  the/,  month 

2.  1.  in  the/,  year  of  Cyrus  king  of  the  Persians 

3.  10.  the/,  wrote,  wine  is  the  strongest 

17.  then  began  ihe/.  who  had  spoken  of  wine 

5.  53.  from  the/,  day  of  ihe  seventh  month 

57.  in  the/,  day  of  the  second  month 

6.  17.  in  the/,  year  that  king  Cyrus  reigned 

7. 1(1  Israel  held  the  passovcr  14lh  day  of/,  month 
9.  lb.  in  the/,  day  of  the  tenth  month  they  sat 
17.  was  brought  to  an  end  the/,  day  of/,  month 
40.  hear  the  law  in  the/,  ttny  of  seventh  month 

45.  for  he  sat  honourably  in  the/,  place  in  sight 
Esd.  3.  12.  they  began  to  be  more  ungodly  than/. 

5.  42.  even  so  there  is  no  swiftneiis  of  the/. 

G.  7.  or  when  shall  be  the  end  of  Ihe  /.? 
8.  Jacob's  hand  held/,  the  heel  of  Esau 
38. 0  Lord,thouspakest  the/,  day  and  saidsl thus 

58.  v»hom  thou  hast  called  thy /.-born 

10. 10.  for  out  of  her  came  all  at  the/,  others  come 

14.  45.  the/,  that  thou  hast  written  publish  openly 

Tob,  1.  6.  with  that  which  was/,  shorn 

7.  the/,  tenth  of  all  increase  I  gave  to  Aaron 

787 


FLA 

Tab.  5.  13.  we  offered  the /.-born  and  the  tenths 
14.  5.  they  shall  build  a  temple,  but  not  liku  the/. 

yu(/.  2.1.  the  two  and  twentieth  day  of  the/,  month 
8.  29.  this  is  not  the/,  day  wherein  thy  wisdom 

Eslh.  11.  2.  in  the/,  day  of  the  month  Nisan 

fVisd.  6.  13.  in  making  herself/,  known  to  them 
7.  l.oflspringof  him  that  was/,  madeof  the  earth 

3.  the/,  voice  which  I  uttered  was  crying 

10. 1.  preserved  the/,  formed  father  of  the  world 
13.  3.  the/,  author  of  beauty  hath  created  them 

18.  13.  upon  the  destruction  of  the /.-born 
Eccl.  4.  17.  at  the/,  she  will  walk  with  him 

6.  7.  if  thou  wouldst  get  a  friend,  prove  him/. 
11.  7.  blame  not,  understand/,  and  then  rebuke 
12. 17.  thou  shalt  find  him  there  /.  tlio'  he  pretend 
17.  18.  whom,  being  his /.-born,  he  nourisheth 

19.  18.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the/,  step 

23. 23./.  she  hath  disobeyed  the  law  of  the  Lord 
31.17.  leave  off/for  manners'  sake,  not  unsatiable 

18.  reach  not  out  thine  hand/,  of  all 
36.  12.  Israel,  whom  thou  hast  named  thy /.-born 

1  Mac.  1.  1.  he  reigned  in  his  stead,/,  over  Greece 

2.  18.  come  thou/.and  fulfil  king's  commandment 
5.  40.  if  he  pass  over  /.  to  us,  we  shall  not  be  able 

43.  he  went/,  over  to  them,  and  people  after  him 

7.  13.  the  Assideans  were  the  /.that  sought  peace 
43.  Nicanor  himself  was/,  slain  in  the  battle 

8.  24.  if  there  come/,  any  war  on  the  Romans 
27.  if  war  come/,  on  the  nation  of  the  Jews 

10. 47.  he  was  the/,  that  entreated  of  true  peace 
16.  6.  he  went/,  over  himself,  and  then  the  men 

2  Mac.  2. 30.  belonging  to  the  /.  author  of  the  story 
4.40.  began/.to  offer  violence,  one  A  uranus  leader 

7.  2.  but  one  of  them  that  spake/,  said  thus 

4.  to  cut  out  the  tongue  of  him  that  spake/. 

7.  when  the/,  was  dead,  they  brought  the  second 
8.23.  himself  leading  the/,  band,  he  joined  battle 

FIRST-FRUITS. 
Tab.  1.  6.  having  the/,  and  tenths  of  increase 
.Jud.  11.  13.  are  resolved  to  spend  the/,  of  the  corn 
Eccl.  7.  31.  give  priests  the/,  and  trespass-ofl'ering 
35.  8.  and  diminish  not  the/,  of  thy  hands 
45.  20.  he  divided  to  him  the/,  of  the  increase 

1  Mac.  3.  49.  they  brought  the/,  and  the  tithes 

FISH. 

2  Esd.  5.  7.  the  Sodomitish  sea  shall  cast  out/. 
7oi.6.2.to  wash  himself,  a/,  leaped  out  of  the  river 

3.  the  angel  said  to  him  take  the  /.  and  the  young 

man  laid- hold  of  the/,  and  drew  it  to  land 

4.  open  the/,  and  take  the  heart  and  the  liver 

5.  when  they  had  roasted  the/,  they  did  eat  it 

6.  to  what  use  is  the  heart,  liver  and  gall  of  the/..' 
16.  lay  on  them  some  of  the  heart  &  liver  of  the/. 

8.  2.  put  the  heart  and  the  liver  of  the/,  thereon 
11.  4.  take  in  thine  hand  the  gall  of  the/. 

FISHES. 

2  Ksd.  6. 47.  that  it  should  bring  forth  fowls  and  /. 

16. 12.  the/,  thereof  are  troubled  before  the  Lord 

fVisd.19.10.  how  the  river  cast  up  frogs  instead  off. 

FIT. 
IVisd.  13. 11.  a  vessel/,  for  the  service  of  man's  life 
Eccl.'  33.  28.  set  him  to  work  as  is/,  for  him 
Sus.  15.  it  fell  out  as  they  watched  a/,  time 
2  JHac.2.29.  must  seek/,  things  for  adorning  thereof 

3.  37.  who  might  be  a/,  man  to  be  sent  again 

4.  19.  thought/,  not  to  bestow  on  the  sacrifice 

FITTING. 
2  Mae.  15.  38.  if  done  well,  and  as  is/,  the  story 

FIVE. 
.Ttid.  7.  30.  Ozias  said,  let  us  yet  endure/,  days 
8.  9.  had  sworn  to  deliver  the  city  after/,  days 
Eccl.  17.  5.  the  use  of  the/,  operations  of  the  Lord 
2  Mac.  2.  23.  bring  declared  by  Jason  in  /.  books 
10.  29./.  comely  men  upon  horses  appeared 
FLAME. 
2  Esd.  4.  48.  when  the/,  was  gone  by,  I  looked 
Wisd.  16.  18.  sometimes  the/,  was  mitigated 
Keel.  8.  10.  lest  thou  be  burnt  with  the  /.  of  his  fire 
21.  9.  the  end  of  them  is  a/,  of  fire  to  destroy 
28.  22.  nor  shall  they  be  burnt  with  the/,  thereof 
45.  19.  to  consume  them  with  the  fiery/. 
/3an.  3. 24.  so  that/,  streamed  forth  above  furnace 
26.  the  angel  smote  the/,  of  fire  out  of  the  oven 
66.  out  of  midst  of  the  burning  /.  delivered  us 

1  Mac.  2.  59.  by  believing  were  saved  out  of  the/. 

2  Mac.  1.^2.  this  done,  there  was  kindled  a/. 

FLAMES. 
Wisd.  17.  5.  nor  could  the  bright/,  of  the  stars 
19. 21.  on  the  other  side,  the/,  wasted  not  the  flesh 
FLAMING. 
2  Esd.  13.  10.  out  of  his  lips  he  sent  a/,  breath 

11.  the/. breath  fell  with  violence  on  multitude 
Eccl.  3.  30.  water  will  quench  a/,  fire 

FLAT. 
1  Esd.  8. 91.  lying/,  on  the  ground  before  the  temple 
1  Mac.  4.  40.  they  fell  down/,  to  the  ground 
2 .Vac  10.  4.  they  fell/,  and  besought  the  Lord 
13.  12.  lying/,  on  the  ground  three  days  long 

FLATTER. 
1  Ead.  4. 31.  the  king  was  fain  to/,  to  be  reconciled 


FJ£ 

Wisd.  14.  17.  they  might/,  him  that  was  absent 

FLED. 
2  Kssf.  8.  .'53.  corruption  is/,  into  hell  to  be  forgotten 

10.  3.  I  rose  up  by  uiglit  and/,  and  came  hither 

14.  18.  truth  is/,  far  away,  leasing  is  at  hand 
Tob.  1.  18.  when  he  was  come,  and/,  from  Judea 

21.  they/,  into  the  mountains  of  Araralh 
2.  8.  this  man  is  not  yet  afraid  who/,  away 

8.  3.  he/,  into  the  ulinosl  jiarts  of  Egypt 

.Jud.  5.8.  they/,  into  Meso|ioiamia,  and  sojourned 
10. 12.  I  am  of  the  HubrevvB,  and  am/,  from  theui 

11.  3.  but  tell  me  why  art  thou/,  from  them? 
16.  knowing  this  I  am/,  from  their  presence 

15.  2.  they/,  into  every  way  of  the  plain 
Wisd.  10.  6.  who/.  ft»m  fire,  which  fell  on  citiet 

10.  when  righteous/,  from  his  brother's  wrath 

1  Mac.  2.  28.  he  and  his  sons/,  to  the  mountaini 

43.  also  all  they  that/,  for  persecution  joined 

4.  14.  heathen  being  discomfited/,  into  the  plain 

5.  9.  but  tliey/.  to  the  fortress  ot  Dathema 

7.  32.  and  the  rest/,  into  the  city  of  David 

44.  tiny  cast  away  their  weapons  and/. 

9.  18.  Judas  was  killed,  and  the  remnant/. 
33.  they/,  into  the  wilderness  of  Thecoo 

10.  49.  Demetrius'  host/.  Alexander  followed 
64.  when  his  accusers  saw,  they/,  all  away 

83.  the  horsemen  being  scattered/,  to  Azotus 

84.  them  that  were/,  into  it  he  bu#it  with/. 
11.16.Alexander/.  to  Arabia, there  to  bedefendcd 

46.  wherelbre  the  king/,  into  the  court 
55.  against  Demetrius, who  turned  his  back  and/ 
69.  all  that  were  of  Jonathan's  side/. 
15.  11.  he/,  to  Dora,  which  lielh  by  the  sea  side 
21.  fellows  that  have/,  from  their  country  to  you 
37.  in  the  meantime/.  Tryphon  to  Orthosiag 

10.  10.  so  they/,  to  the  towers  in  the  field 

2  Mac-  5.5.  city  taken,  Menelaus/.  into  the  castle 
7./.  again  into  the  country  of  the  Ammonites 

8.  13.  they  that  were  fearful/,  away 

33.  Callisthenes,  who  was/,  into  a  little  house 
10.18.  were/,  together  into  two  very  strong  castlet 
32.  as  for  Timotheus,  he/,  into  a  strong  hold 

11.  12.  Lysias/.  away  shamefully,  and  escaped 

12.  6.  and  those  that/,  thither,  he  slew 

.  22.  the  enemies/,  amain,  one  running  this  way 
35.  smote  his  shoulder, so  thatGorgias/to  Maris* 
14.  14.  the  heathen  that  had/,  out  of  Judea 
FLEE. 
2  Esd.  2.  36./.  the  shadow  of  this  world 
14.  1.5.  and  haste  thee  to/,  from  these  times 
Tob.  6.  17.  the  devil  shall  smell  it  and/,  away 
Jud.  14.  3.  they  shall  /.  before  your  face 
Wisd.  1.  5.  for  holy  spiritof  discipline  will/deceit 
Eccl.  21.  2.  /.  from  sin  as  from  the  face  of  a 

serpent 
Bar.  6.  55.  their  priests  will/,  away  and  escape 
1  Mac.  1.  53.  wherever  they  could  /.  for  succour 
4.  5.  for,  said  he,  these  fellows/,  from  us 

9.  10.  God  forbid  that  I  sllViuld  /.  from  them 

10.  43.  that/,  to  the  temple  at  Jerusalem 
73.  where  there  is  not  a  place  to/,  unto 

2Jl/a(;.4.26.Jason  was  compelled  to_;'.toAmmonitei 
42.  and  all  of  them  they  forced  to/. 

9.4.  disgrace  done  to  him  by  those  that  made  him/. 

FLESH. 

Jud.  2.  3.  then  they  decreed  to  destroy  all  /. 
14.  10.  he  circumcised  the/,  of  his  foreskin 
10.  17.  in  putting  fire  and  worms  in  their/. 

Wisd.  7. 2.  I  was  fashioned  to  be  /.  in  ten  months 

12.  5.  and  those  devourers  of  man's/. 

19. 21.  flames  wasted  not  the/,  of  the  living  thing* 
Eccl.  1.  10.  she  is  with  all  /.  according  to  his  gift 

13.  15.  all/,  consorteth  according  to  kind 

14.  17.  all/,  waxeth  old  as  a  garment 
18.  so  is  the  generation  of/,  and  blood 

17.  4.  he  put  the  fear  of  man  upon  all/. 
31.  and/,  and  blnod  will  imagine  evil 

18.  13.  but  the  mercy  of  the  Lord  is  upon  all/. 
23.  6.  let  not  the  lust  of  the/,  take  hold  of  me 

16.  a  fornicator  in  the  body  of  his  /. 

25.  26.  cut  her  ofi"  from  thy/  and  give  her  a  bill 

28.  5.  if  he  that  is  /.  nourish  hatred,  who  will 

entreat  t 

17.  the  stroke  of  the  whip  maketh  marks  in  the/. 
31.  1.  watching  for  riches  consumeth  the/. 

38.  28.  the  vapour  of  the  fire  wasteth  his/. 

39.  19.  the  works  of  all/,  are  before  him 

40.8.  such  things  happen  to  all/,  man  and  beast 
41.  3.  the  sentence  of  the  Lord  over  all/. 
44. 18.  that  all/,  should  perish  no  more  by  the  flood 
20.  be  eslablished  the  covenant  in  his/. 

4.5.  1.  who  found  favour  in  the  sight  of  all/. 
Bar.  2.  3.  that  a  man  should  eat  the/,  of  his  son 
Bel  5.  living  God  who  hath  soveieignty  over  all/ 
1  Mac.  7.  17./.  of  thy  saints  have  they  cast  out 

i  Mac.  6.  21.  besought  him  to  bring/,  of  his  own 
provision,  and  make  as  if  he  did  cat 
the/. 
7. 1.  compelled  against  the  law,  to  taste  swinei'  / 
9.  9.  while  he  lived  in  pain,  his/,  fell  away 


FLO 

FLESHLY. 
Ettk.  14.  10.  and  to  inagnily  a/,  king  for  ever 

I'LESIIY. 
Eccl.  17. 16.Dor  could  ihey  make/,  hearts  for  slonj 

FLKW. 
2  Esd.  11.  5.  lo,  the  eagle/,  with  her  feathers 
J3.  tj.  he  hud  graved  a  iiiouniuiii,  and/,  up  upon  it 

FLIES. 
JVisd.  Ifi.  0.  for  them  the  bilings  of/,  killed 
19.  10.  how  llie  ground  brought  forth/. 
FLIGHT. 
2  Esd.  5.  6.  thp  fowls  shall  lake  their/,  away 
1  .Mac.  4.  20.  ihat  the  Jews  had  put  their  host  to/. 
35.  now  when  Lysias  saw  his  army  put  to/. 

5.  <J0.  that  Joseph  and  Azurias  were  put  to/. 

6.  5.  that  the  armies  against  Judea  were  put  to/. 

10.  72.  thy  fathers  have  been  twice  put  to/. 

11.  15.  king  I'toluniee  met  him  and  put  him  to/. 
72.  he  put  them  to/,  and  so  they  ran  away 

10.  8.  CendebuB  and  his  host  were  put  to/. 
i.Mac.  8.  C.  put  to/,  no  small  number  of  enemies 

SM.  by  helj)  uf  the  Almighty  they  put  all  to/. 
9.2.Antiochus  being  put  to/,  returned  with  shame 

11.  11.  and  they  put  all  the  other  to/. 

12.  27.  after  he  had  put  to/,  and  destroyed  them 
37.  rushing  unawares  he  put  them  to/. 

FLINT. 

1  jVac.  10.73.  where  is  neither  stone  nor/,  nor  place 

FLINTY. 

H'isd.  11.  4.  water  was  given  themoutof/.  rock 

FLOCK. 

2  Esd.  5.  18.  leavelh  his  /.  in  the  hands  of  wolves 

15.  10.  my  people  is  led  as  a/,  to  the  slaughter 
Tub.  7.  8.  after  they  had  killed  a  ram  of  the/, 
ifar  .4.26.wetelaken  away  as  a/.caught  of  enemies 

FLOCKS. 
Jud.  2.27.  he  destroyed  their/,  and  herds 
3.  3.  our/,  and  herds  lie  before  thy  face 
2  Mac.  14. 14.  the  heathen  ciinie  to  Nicanor  by/. 

FLOCKING. 

i  Mac.  3.  IS.  others  ran/,  out  of  their  houses 

14.  23.  seot  away  people  thai  came  /.  to  him 

FLOOD. 

2/;j(i.3  O.thouliroughicst  the/,  onthose  that  dwelt 

10.  as  death  was  to  Adam,  so  the/,  to  these 

13.  44.  held  still  the/,  till  they  were  passed  over 
Eslh.  11.  10.  from  a  little  fountain  a  great/. 
IVisd.  JO.  4.  the  earth  being  drowned  with  the/. 
Eccl.  21.  13.  knowledge  shall  al)oundlike  a/. 

3(1.  22.  his  blessing  watered  the  dry  land  as  a/. 

40.  JO.  arid  for  their  sakcs  came  the/. 

44.  17.  therefore  was  he  left  when  the/. came 

18.  that  all  flesh  should  perish  no  more  by  the/. 
47.  14.  and  as  a/,  filled  with  understanding 

\Mac.fi.  11.  how  great  a/,  of  misery  wherein  I  am? 
7.  8.  Bacchides,  who  ruled  beyond  the/. 
FLOODS. 
2  Ksd.  4.  15.  the/,  of  the  sea  also  took  counsel 
17.tlie  thought  of  ihe/.of  the  sea  came  to  nought 

19.  the  sea  also  hath  his  place  to  bear  his/. 
21.  like  as  the  sra  is  given  lo  his/,  even  so 

16.  60.  that  the/,  might  pour  down  from  rocks 
IVUd.  5.  22.  and  the/,  shall  cruelly  drown  them 

FLOOR,  S. 
2  E.id.  4.  32.  how  great  a/,  shall  thev  fill 

35.  when  comcih  the  fruit  of  the/,  of  our  reward? 
39.  that  the/,  of  the  righteous  are  not  filled 
Jud.  14.  15.  he  found  him  cast  upon  the/,  dead 
FLOTES. 

1  ^irf.5.55.6hould  be  brought  by/.to  haven  of  Joppe 

FLOUR. 
Etcl.  3.5.2.  that  requites  good,  offereth  fine/. 

38.  11.  give  Bweetsavour  a  memorial  of  fine/. 

39.  2l'i.  /.  of  whi.'at  for  the  use  of  man's  life 
JielW.  spent  on  him  twelve  great  Inea.^u^e8of  fine/. 

2  Mac.  1.  8.  we  offered  B;icrifi<-es  and  fine/. 

FLOURISH. 
2E*(i.6.28.a»for  faith,  it  shall/,  corrupt,  overcome 
Wi>d.  4.4.  Ihou^'h  they/,  in  branches  for  a  time 
Eccl.  1.  18.  makmg  peace  and  perfect  health  to/. 
II.  22.  suddenly  he  makeih  his  blessing  to/. 
39.   14.  /.   as  a  lily  ||  40.   12.  let  their   bones 
/.  49.  10. 
FLOW. 
2  Esd.  3.  33.  and  I  pi.-  that  they/,  in  wealth 

FLOWED,  ETH. 
2  Esd,  I.  20.  anil  waters/,  out  to  vour  fill 
.E(;cZ.46.8.lhat/.  with  mdk  nod  honey,  Bar.  1.20. 

FLOWING. 
2  F^d.  2.  19.  as  many  fMuiHains/.  with  milk 
Wisd.  7.  25.  Q  pure  influpnce/.  from  the  glory 

FLOWN. 
Wisd  5.  II.  Of  when  a  bird  linih/.  through  the  air 

FLOWER. 
2  F.id.  15.  .in.  the  glory  shall  be  dried  up  nn  a/. 
IVisd.  2.  7.  Ii-i  no/,  of  the  spring  |i!iks  by  us 
Keel.  26.  19.  keep  the  /.  of  thine  ace  sound 
42.  9.  lest  she  pacs  nway  the/,  of  her  age 
50.  8.  as  the/,  of  roses  in  the  spring  of  the  year 
51   15.  even  from  the/,  till  I'.ia  gtapc  wan  ii|>e 
788 


POO 

FLOWERS. 

2  Esd.  5.  24.  and  of  all  the/,  thereof,  one  lily 

3U.  make  me  the  withered/,  green  again 
C.  3.  he  said  to  mo,  before  the  lair  /.  were  seen 

44.  there  were/,  of  unchangeable  colour 
9.  17.  as  the/,  be,  such  are  the  colours  also 
24.  but  go  into  a  field  of/,  eat  only  /.  of  field, 
taste  no  llesh,  drink  no  wine,  but  eat/,  only 

26.  and  there  I  sat  among  the/,  and  did  eat 
12.  51.  1  did  eat  only  in  those  days  of  ihe  /. 

FLUTES. 

1  Esd.  5.  2.  musical  instruments,  tabrets  and/. 
FLY. 

Wisd.  5.  21.  as  from  a  bow  shall  they/,  to  the  mark 
Eccl.  11.  3.  the  bee  is  little  among  such  as/. 
43.  14.  through  this  the  clouds/,  forth  as  fowls 

FLYING. 
Eccl.  II.  10.  neither  shall  thou  escape  by/. 

FODDER. 
Eccl.  33.  24.  /.  a  wand,  and  burdens  are  for  the  ass 
38.  20.  and  he  is  diligent  to  give  the  kine/. 

FOLDED. 
Jud.  10.  5.  80  she/,  all  these  things  together 
FOLLOW. 

2  Esd.  7.  35.  work  shall/,  and  reward  be  shewed 
Tob.  4.  5./.  not  the  ways  of  unrighteousness 
Jud.  11.6.  if  thou/,  the  words  of  thy  handmaid 
Eccl.  5.2.  /.  not  thine  own  mind  and  thy  slrenglh 

11.  10.  if  rtiou/.  after,  thou  shaltnot  obtain 
23.  28.  it  is  great  glory  to  /.  the  L.  to  be  received 
27.17. if bewrayest  secrets, /.no  more  afterhim,20. 

46.  10.  Israel  might  see  that  it  is  good  to  /.  the  L. 
Dan.  3. 18.  and  now  we/,  thee  with  all  our  heart 

1  Jlfuc.  2.  27.  is  zealous  of  the  law,  let  him/,  me 

2  Jl/ac.  2.  28.  to/,  the  rules  of  an  abridgment 
8.  11.  the  vengeance  that  was  to/,  on  him 
11.29.  to  return  homo  and  to/,  youi  own  business 

FOLLOWED. 
Jtid.  15.  13.  the  men  of  Israel/,  in  their  armour 
E.Hh.  15.  4.  the  other/,  bearing  up  her  train 
Eccl.  46.  6.  because  he/,  the  mighty  One 
51.  18.  and  earnestly  I/,  that  which  is  good 
2  Mac.  4.  16.  whose  custom  they/,  so  earnestly 

8.  30.  because  they/,  the  laws  he  gave  them 
FOLLOWEST. 

Eccl.  27. 8.  if  thou/,  righteousness,  shall  obtain  her 

FOLLOWETH. 
2  Esd.  6.  7.  and  the  beginning  of  it  that/.  9. 
Ecd.  29. 19.  and/,  other  men's  business  for  gain 
31.  5.  he  that/,  corruption,  shall  have  enough 
34.  2.  is  like  him  that/,  after  the  wind 
2  Mac.  9.  25.  to  whom  I  have  written  as/. 
FOLLOWING. 

1  Esd.  2.  16.  wrote  to  him  these  letters/. 
7.  I./,  the  commandments  of  king  Darius 

2  Esd.  11.  13.  so  Ihe  ne.vt/.  stood  up  and  reigned 
2  Mac.  4.  17.  the  time/,  shall  declare  these  things 

9.  4.  the  judgment  of  God  now/,  him 

12.  39.  on  the  day/,  as  the  use  had  been 
FOLLY. 

Eccl.  8.  15.  thou  shall  perish  with  him  through/. 
20.  31.  better  is  he  that  hidelh  his/,  than  a  man 

47.  20.  and  thou  wast  grieved  for  thy/. 
2  Mac.  4.  6.  that  Simon  should  leave  his/ 

40.  a  man  far  gone  in  vears,  and  no  less  in/. 
FOLLIES. 
Eccl.  16.  23.  a  foolish  man  erring,  imagineth/. 
30. 11.  give  him  no  liberty,  and  winknotathis/. 
||  FOOD. 

1  Esd.8.  79.  to  give  us/,  in  the  timcof  servitude 
80.  he  made  us  gracious  so  that  Ihey  gave  us  /. 
H'isd.  10.  3.  to  the  end  that  they  desiring/. 

20.  thou  feddest  thy  own  people  with  angels'/. 
Eccl.  37.  20.  he  shall  be  destitute  of  all/. 

FOOL. 

Eccl.BM.  consult  not  with  n/.cannot  keep  counsel 

18.  27.  but  a/,  will  not  observe  time 

19. 11.  a/  travailelh  with  a  word,  as  a  woman 

12.  as  an  arrow,  so  is  a  word  within  a  /.  belly 

20.  7.  a  babbler  ami  a/,  will  regard  no  time 
14.  the  gift  ofa/.  shall  do  thee  no  good 
16.  the  /.  faith,  I  have  no  friends,  no  Ihank  for 
20.  rejected,  when  it  comelh  out  ofa/.  mouth 

21.  14.  the  inner  parts  of  a/,  are  like  a  broken 

vessel 

10.  talking  ofa/.  is  like  a  burden  in  llie  way 
18.  as  a  house  destroyed,  so  is  w  isdoni  lo  a  /. 
2;<.  a/,  will  peep  in  at  the  door  into  the  house 

22.  7.  whoso  teacheth  a  /.  is  as  one  tfiat  glueth 
8.  he  that  tellelh  a  lale  10  a/,  spr akelh  to  one 

11.  weep  for  the/,  he  wants  understanding,  bnt 
the  life  oflho/.  is  worse  than  death 

12.  hut  for  a/,  and  an  ungodly  man,  nil  his  life 

13.  talk  not  nnich  with  a/,  and  so  not  to  him 

14.  and  what  is  Iho  name  thereof  but  a /.  7 
1«.  a  fearful  heart  in  the  imagination  ofa/. 

23.  14.  so  Ihou  bv  thy  custom  become  a/. 

27.  II.  but  a  f.  chnneelh  as  the  moon 
31.  7.  and  every/,  shall  he  taken  therewith 

30.  drunkcnneii  increascth  tho  ru{u  ofa/. 


FOR 


[ArocmTTHA 


FOOLERIES. 
Eccl.  22.  13.  thou  shalt  never  be  defiled  with  kii/ 

FOOLISH. 
2  Esd.  4.  19.  it  is  a/,  thought  they  have  deviaed 

10.6.  thou/woman  above  all  other seest  thou  not? 
H'isd.  3.12.  their  wives  are/,  their  children  wicked 

II.  15.  for/,  devices  of  their  wickedness 

J5.  14.  the  enemies  of  thy  people  are  most/. 

19.  3.  thr-y  added  another/,  device,  jjursued  them 
Erct  4.  2i.  be  not  an  underling  to  a/,  man 

15.  7.  but/,  men  shall  not  attain  umu  her 

16.  23.  a/,  man  erring,  imagineth  follies 

21.  22.  a/,  man's  foot  is  soon  in  neighbour's  house 

22.  3.  and  a/,  daughter  is  born  to  his  loss 

23.  nor  rich  lhat  is/,  to  be  had  in  adiniratioa 

33.  5.  the  heart  of  the/,  is  like  a  cart  wheel 
50.  20.  and  that/,  people  that  dwell  in  Sichem 

2  Alac.  2.  32.  it  is  /.  to  make  a  long  prologue 
14.  5.  opportunity  to  further  his/,  enterprise 

FOOLISHNESS. 
Jfisd.  10.  8.  left  behind  them  a  memorial  of  their/ 
Eccl.  16.  7.  who  fell  in  Ihe  strength  of  their/. 

23.  8.  the  sinner  shall  be  left  in  his/. 

41.  15.  a  man  that  hidelh  his/,  is  better  than 

47.  23.  Roboam,  even  the/  of  the  people 
liar.  2.  28.  but  they  perished  by  their  own/. 

FOOLS. 
IVisd.  5.  4.  we/,  accounted  his  life  madness 

I.').  5.  the  sight  enticeth  /.  to  lust  after  it 
Eccl.  20. 13.  the  gract!s  of/,  shall  be  poured  out 

21.  19.  doctrine  lo  /.  is  as  fetters  on  the  feet 

26.  the  heart  off.  is  in  their  month 

27.  13.  the  discourse  off.  is  irksome,  their  sport 

34.  1.  hopes  vain  and  false,  and  dreams  lift  up/. 
Sus.  48.  are  ye  such/,  ve  sons  of  Israel  ? 

<  FOOT. 

2  Esd.  16.  69.  consent  to  them,  be  trodden  under/ 
Jud.  6.  4.  for  we  will  tread  them  under/. 

13.  they  left  him  at  the/,  of  the  hill 
H'i.'id.  13.  18.  which  cannot  set  a/,  forward 
Eccl.  6.  36.  let  thy  /  wear  the  steps  of  his  door 

9.  2.  lo  a  woman,  to  set  her/,  upon  thy  substance 
2l.22.a  foolish  man's/,  is  soon  in  his  neighb.houK 
40.  25.  gold  and  silver  make  the/,  stand  sure 
46.  8.  of  si.'k  hundred  thousand  people  on/. 

50.  15.- he  poured  out  ^t  the/,  of  the  altar 

51.  15.  my  /.  went  the  right  way  from  my  youth. 
har.  5.  6.  for  they  departed  from  thee  on/. 

1  .Mac.  4.  28.  threescore  thousand  men  of/. 

5.  48.  none  do  hurt,  we  will  only  pass  through  on/ 

10.  72.  that  thy/,  is  notable  to  stand  befoio  ua 

2  Mac.  5.  21.  lo  make  the  sea  pa.'sable  by /. 
10.26.  and  fell  down  at  the/,  of  the  altar 

FOOTMEN. 
\Esd.  8.  51.  I  was  ashamed  to  ask  the  king's/. 
Jud.  1.  4.  and  for  the  setting  in  array  of  his/. 
2.  5.  off.  a  hundred  and  twenty  thousand 

19.  to  cover  Ihe  face  of  the  earth  with  chosen/ 
22.  he  took  all  his  army,  his  horsemen,  and/. 

7.  20.  both  their/,  chariots,  and  horsemen 

9.  7.  they  glory  in  the  strength  of  their/. 

1  Mac.  9.  i.  they  went  to  Berea  with  20,000/. 

10.  82.  Simon  set  his  host  again.st  the/. 

12.  49.  then  sent  Tryphon  ahost  of /.  to  Galile« 
10.  5.  a  mighty  great  host  of/,  and  horsemen 

2  Mac.  11.4.  puffed  up  with  his  ten  thousand/. 

13.  2.  having  a  Grecian  power  of/.  110,  0(10 

•  FOOTSTEPS.         ■     . 
Jud.  6.  4.  their/,  shall  not  he  able  to  stand 
ISrl  19.  and  mark  well  wlmse/.  are  these 

20.  I  see  the/,  of  men,  women,  and  children 

FORBEAR. 
2^:.«rf.l.9  how  long  sliiill/.lhem  to  whom  done  good 

1  Mac.  2.  24.  nor  could  he/,  to  shew  his  anger 
2j1;uc.5.  25.  did  f.  till  the  bolv  day  of  sabbath 

FORBEARETH. 

2  Mac.  6.  14.  nations  whom  tho  Lord  patiently/ 

FORBID. 

1  Jlfnc.2.21.God/.  that  wp  should  forsake  ih^  law 
9.  10.  God/,  lhat  I  should  do  Ibis  thing 

FORBIDDEN. 
Jud.  11.  12.  things  lhat  God  bath/,  them  to  eat 

2  Mac.  12.  40.  which  is/,  the  Jews  by  the  law 

FORBIDDETH. 
2  Mac.  6.  5.  with  profane  things  which  the  law/ 

FORCE. 
2  Esd.  7.  S.").  and  the  good  iloed  shall  be  of/. 

9.  37.  Iho  law  perishelh  not  but  remainelh  in  \vitf 
./uH.  9.  8.  and  hrinir  down  iheir.f.  in  thy  wrath 
/rf.svf.  4.  4.  through /.  of  wind  shall  be  rooted  o« 
16.  17.  Ihe  fire  had  more/,  in  the  water 

18.  22.  not  with  sircnslh  of  body  nor/,  of  arms 

19.  13.  with  former  sicns  by  the'/,  o!' thunders 
Erel.  4.  26.  and  /.  not  Ihe  course  of  the  river 

39.  2fl.  in  dcBtrurlion  thev  pour  out  their/. 

1  .^far.  6.  6.3.  he  fousht,  and  look  the  cily  by/. 
7.  25.  that  he  was  not  able  to  abide  thrir  /. 

27.  Nicanor  rnme  to  JeriisfthMl  will,  errttf 
12.  42.  that  Jonathan  rnnio  wlh  vt,  r'iKt  i./ 

2  Mac.  5.  11.  ho  look  thn  city  fc*  f  of  a'i«t 


Apocryvha.J 


FOR 


S  «Wac. 10.24.tho'  he  would  take  Jewry  by /.of  arms 
1"2.  35   liikiiig  hold  of  hi»  coat,  drew  him  by/. 

FORCED. 
Wisd.  14.  19./.  hi8  skill  to  miike  tho  resemblance 
Keel.  31.  21.  if  thou  hast  been  /.  to  eat,  arise 
iMac.  4.42.  and  all  of  them  they/,  to  flea 
FORCKS. 

1  Jifac.'2-\i.  so  they  joined/  and  smote  sinful  men 

3.  27.  he  gathered  all  the/,  of  his  realm 
34.  he  delivered  lo  him  tho  halt  of  his/. 
37  the  king  took  half  the/,  that  remained 

42.  saw  that  the/,  did  encamp  themselves 

4.  4.  while  the/,  were  dispersed  from  the  camp 
7.2.  that  his/,  had  taken  Antiochus  and  Lysias 
fi.  52.  he  put/  in  them  and  provision  of  victuals 

67.  when  he  began  to  smite,  and  came  up  with/ 

10.  3().   enrolled    anmngst   the    king's  /.    about 
30,000of  Jewsasbeloiigeth  to  all  the  king's/ 

48.  then  gathered  king  Alexander  great/. 

11.  38.  ho  sent  away  all  his  /.  every  one  to  his 

own  place,  wherefore  the/,  of  his  father 
haled  hini 

43.  to  help  me,  for  all  my  /.  are  gone  from  me 
60.  all  the/  of  Syria  gathered  themselves  to  him 

12.  45.  will  give  the  rest  of  the  strong  holds  and/ 
14.  1.  kiiig  bemelrius  gathered  his  /  together 
15. 10.  at  which  time  all  the/  came  together 

12.  he  saw  that  his/,  hud  forsaken  him 

2  Mae.  10.  24.  a  great  multitude  of  foreign/ 

FORCIBLY. 

1  Esd.  4.  49.  should/  enter  into  their  doors 
Tob.  1.  20.  then  all  my  goods  were/,  taken  away 

FORECASTETH. 

Wisd.  17.11.  wickedness  always  /■.grievous  things 

FOREFATHERS. 

2  Esd.  A.  23.  why  law  of/,  is  brought  to 'nought? 
Bar.  1. 19.  brought  our/,  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt 

3.  5.  remember  not  the  iniquities  of  our/. 
7.  the  iniqiiiiy  of  our/,  that  sinned  before  thee 

3  Mac.  8.  19.  what  helps  their/  had  found 

FOREFEET. 
2  Mae.  3.  25.  he  smote  at  Heliodorus  with  his/. 

FOREFRONT. 
1  Mac.  4.  57.  they  rieckrd  also  the/,  of  tlie  temple 

FOREIGN. 
1  Mac.  15.  3.  have  gathered  multitude  of/,  soldiers 
'2  Mac.  10.-4.  had  saihereil  multitude  of/  forces 

FOREKNOWLEDGE. 
Jud.  9.  6.  and  thy  judgments  are  in  thy/. 
11.  19.  these  "ere  told  me  aceording  lo  my/. 

FORERUNNERS. 
Wisd.  12.  8.  didst  send  wasps,  /'.  of  thine  host 

FORESEETH. 
JVisd.  8-  8.  she/,  signs  and  wonders,  and  events 

FORESHEW. 
Wisd.  18.  19.  dreams  that  trouble  them  did/,  this 

FORE-SKIN. 
/ud.  14.  10.  Achior  circumcised  the/  of  his  flesh 

FOREST. 
2&J.  4. 13.1  went  into  a/  the  trees  took  counsel 
1  Mac.  4.38.  shrubs  srrowing  in  the  courts  as  in  a/ 

FORE-WARD. 
Ufac.9.11.  they  that  marrbed  in  the/  mighty  men 

FORGAT. 
Wisd.l9.20.  the  water/  his  own  quenching  nature 

FORGE. 
Eccl.  51.  2.  and  from  the  lips  that/  lies 
FORGET. 

1  K.W.  3.22.  Ihey/  their  love  to  friends  and  brethren 

2  F.sd.  10.  07.  leave  otTsins,  and  /.  your  iniquities 
fVisd.  If).  23.  this  did  even/  his  owti  strength 

19.  4.  ninde  ihem/  thingis  that  had  happened 
Keel.  7.  27.  and  /.  not  the  sorrows  of  thy  mother 
11.27.  affliction  of  an  hour  make  man/  pleiisure 
29.  15./  not  the  friendship  of  thy  surety 
37.  6./.  not  thy  friend  in  thy  mind,  in  thy  riches 
3i!.  21./  it  not,  for  there  is  no  turning  again 

1  Mac.  1.  49.  to  the  end  they  might/,  the  law 

2  jV/ac.  2.2.  charged  them  not  to/ theconimandm. 

FORGETFUL. 
Eccl.  23.  14.  be  not  /.  bcfin  e  tln'm,  and  so  become 

FORGETFULNESS. 
Wisd.  14.  2fi. /.  of -jood  turns  reigned  in  all 

16.  11.  thai  not  fallir.g  deep  into/  be  mindful 

17.  3.  were  scattered  under  a  dark  vail  of/. 
Eccl.  II.  25.  in  prosperitv  there  is  a/  of  affliction 

FORGETTING. 
Jf'isd.  19. 20.  the  fire  /  his  own  virtue  had  power 

FORGIVE. 
2  Esd.  7.  69.  being  judge,  if  he  should  not/,  them 
FccZ.IO.il. he  is  mijhty  to/.  &  pour  out  displeasure 
28.  2./  thy  neighbour  the  hurt  he  hath  done 
Prayer  nf  Manass.  /  nie,  O  Lord,/  me 
1  Mac.  13.  39.  as  f.ir'anv  ov.-f^ight,  we/,  it 

FORGIVEN. 
Eccl.  28.2. 60  shall  thy  sins  be/  when  thou  prayest 
1  Mac.  15.  8.  let  it  he/  th'e  from  this  tiine 

FORGIVENESS. 

Keel.  2*'.  4.  and  doth  he  ask  /  of  his  own  gins'? 

Prayer  vf  Manasa.f.  to  them  that  have  sinned 

789 


FOR 

FOREGO. 

iEccZ.7.19./.nota  wise  and  good  worn,  is  above  gold 

FORGOTTEN.  "^ 

2  Esd.  1.  fi.  for  they  have/  me,  and  have  offered 
14.  yet  have  you/,  me,  sailh  the  Lord 
8.  53.  and  corruption  is  fled  into  hell  to  be/. 

12.  47.  the  Mighty  hath  not/  you  in  temptation 
Wisd.  2.  4.  and  our  name  shall  be/,  in  time 
Eccl.  13.  10.  stand  not  far  off,  lest  thou  bo/. 

35.  7.  the  memorial  thereof  shall  never  be/. 
44. 10.  whose  righteousness  hath  not  been/. 
Bar.  4.  8.  ye  ha\^  f  the  everlasting  God 

FORLORN. 
Jud.  9.  11.  for  thou  art  a  protector  of  the/. 
Esth.  14. 19.  O  mighty  G.  hear  the 'voice  of  the/ 

FORM. 

Wisd.  11. 17.  m.tde  the  world  of  matter  without/ 

15..  5.  so  they  desire  the  /.  of  a  dead  image 

FORMED. 

2  Esd.  6. 39.  the  sound  of  man's  voice  was  not  yet/. 

Wisd.  10. 1.  she  preserved  first/,  father  of  world 

13.  13.  and/,  it  by  the  skill  of  his  understanding 
2  Mac.  7.  22.  nor  was  it  I  that/  the  members 

23.  the  Creator,  who  f.  the  generation  of  man 
FORMER. 
1  Esd.  1;  24.  tfiey  were  written  in/,  times 
/f7«rf.l9.13.punishments  came  not  without/  signs 
Eccl.  21.  1.  but  ask  pardon  for  thy/,  sins 

1  Mae.  4.  47.  built  a  new  altar  according  to  the/ 
10.  41.  the  officers  payed  not  in,  as  in/  time 
12.  3.  ye  should  renew  the  league  as  in/,  time 

16.  to  renew  the  amity  and  the/  league 

2  Mae.  7. 8.  he  received  the  ne.xt  torment  as  /  did 

14.  38.  in  the/  times  when  they  mingled  not 

15.  8.  help  which  in/  times  they  had  received 

FORMERLY. 
2  Mac.  5.  18.  had  been/,  wrapped  in  many  sins 

FORNICATION. 
Wisd.  14.  12.  was  the  beginning  of  spiritual/. 

FORNICATOR. 
Ecc^  23.16.  a/  in  the  body  of  his  flesh,  never  cease 

FORSAKE. 
2  Esd.  1.  25.  ye  have  forsaken  me,  I  will/ you  also 

3.  15.  that  thou  wouldest  never  /  his  seed 
5.  18.  /  us  not  as  the  shepherd  that  leaveth  flock 
10.34. only/me  not,  lest  I  die  frustrate  of  my  hope 

12.  44.  if  thou/ us,  how  much  better  to  be  burnt 
Jud.  7.  30.  for  he  will  not/,  us  utterly 
Eccl.  4.  19.  but  if  lie  go  wrongs  he  will  /  hiin 

7.  26.  hast  thou  a  wife  after  thy  mind?/  her  not 

30.  love  him  made  ihee,  and/,  not  his  ministers 
9.10./.not  an  old  friend, the  new  is  not  comparable 

13.  4.  if  thou  have  nothing,  he  will/,  thee 
7.  he  will/,  thee,  and  shake  his  head  at  thee 

17. 18.  giving  him  the  light  of  love  doth  not/  him 
25.  return  to  the  Lord,  and  f.  thy  sins 

28.  23.  such  as/  the  Lord  shall  fall  into  it 

29.  14.  but  he  that  is  impudent  will/  him 
35.  3.  to/  unrighteousness,  is  a  propitiation 

1  Mac.  2.  21.  God  forbid  we  should  /.  the  law 

2  Mae.  1.  5.  God  never/  you  in  time  of  trouble 
6. 16.  tho'  he  punish,  yet  doth  he  never/ his  people 

FORSAKEN. 

1  Esd. B. SO.  in  bondage,  we  were  not/ of  our  Lord. 
2K«rf.l.25.seeingyou  have/,  me, I  will  forsake  you 

27.  ye  have  not/,  me,  but  your  own  selves 

31.  your  new  moons  and  circumcisions  have  1/ 
2.  2.  I  ain  a  widow  and/  go  your  way,  4. 
Wisd.  3.  10.  the  ungodly  punished,  have  /  the 

Lord 
Erel.  2. 10.  or  did  nny  abide  in  his  fear,  and  was/..' 
41.8.  woe  to  you  ungodly  men  who  have/",  the  law 
51.20.  found  inpureness,  thereforeslmll  I  not  bo/. 
Bar.  3.  V}.  thou  hast/,  the  fountain  of  wisdom 

4.  10.  let  none  rejoice  over  me  a  widow,  and  /  of 
Bil  38.  nor  hast  thou/,  them  that  seek  thee 
IMac.  7. 19.  he  took  many  of  them  that  had/,  him 

10. 14. certain  of  those  that  had/the  law  remained 
15.  12.  for  he  saw  that  his  forces  had  /.  him 

2  Mac.  5.  20.  as  it  was  /  in  wrath  of  the  Almighty 

7.  16.  think  not  that  our  nation  is/,  of  God 

FORSAKER,  S. 
Dnn.  3. 9.  lawless  enemies,  most  hateful  /.  of  God 
2  Mac.  5.  8.  pursued,  hated  as  a/  of  the  laws 

FORSAKEST. 
2  Esd.  12.41.  what  have  we  done?  that  thou/.  UB 

FORSAKETH. 
Eeel.3. 16.  he  that  f.  his  father,  is  as  a  blasphemer 

FORSOOK. 
2  Esd.  3.  25.  they  that  inhabited  the  city/  thee 

8.  56.  thought  scorn  of  his  law,  and  /  his  ways 
M7.«d.l0.13.when  righteous  was  sold, she/  him  not 


FOU 

FORTIFICATION. 
1  Mac.  10. 11.  to  buiid  with  square  stones  for/. 

FORTIFY. 
I  Jlfac.15.39.  commanded  to  f.  the  gates  and  to  wui 

FOK'J'lFlED. 
./ud.  4.  5.  they/,  the  villages  that  were  in  them 
5.  1.  Israel  had/  all  the  tops  of  the  high  hills 
Eccl.  48.  17.  Ezekias/  his  city  and  brought  in 
50.  1.  and  in  his  days/,  the  temple 
4.  look  care  of  temple  and/city  against  besieging 
1  Mac.  1.  34.  they/,  themselves  therein 

4.  61.  they/.  Bethsura  to  preserve  it 

5.  46.  Ephron  was  a  great  city,  very  well/. 

6.  26.  the  sanctuary  and  Bethsura  have  Ihey/ 
9.52.  he/  also  the  city  of  Bethsura  and  Gazara 

13.  10.  he/  Jerusalem  round  about 

14.  33./  the  cities  of  Judea  ||  34.  he/.  Joppa 
37.  he/,  it  for  the  safety  of  the  country 

FORTIFYING. 
1  Mac.  10.45.  and  for  the/  thereof  round  about 

FORTITUDE. 
Wisd.  8. 7.  she  teacheth  prudence,  justice,  and/. 

FORTRESS. 
Eccl.  50.  2.  by  him  was  biult  the  high/  of  the  wall 

1  Mad. il.  to  tight  against  those  tliut  were  in  the/. 
5.  9.  but  they  fled  to  the/  of  Dalhema 

11.  they  are  preparing  to  come  and  take  the/. 
29.  and  he  went  till  he  came  lo  the/. 

2  Mac.  10.  33.  but  they  laid  siege  against  the/. 
12. 19.  had  left  in  the/  above  10,000  men 

21.  he  sent  baggage  to  a/  calltd  Carnion 
FORTRESSES. 
IMac.  10.12.  the  strangers  that  were  in/,  fled  away 
11.  41.  those  of  the  tower,  and  those  in  the/. 

14.  42.  to  set  them  over  the  armour  and  the/. 

15.  7./  that  thou  host  built,  let  lliem  remam 

FORWARD. 

1  Esd.  1.  27.  the  Lord  is  with  me,  hasting  me/ 

2  E.^d.  3.  6.  before  ever  the  earth  came  /. 

Esl/i.  13.  4.  so  as  thennit.  ofkingdoms  cannot  go/ 
IVisd.  13.  18.  of  that  which  cannot  set  a  foot/. 
14. 18.  the  artificer  did  help  lo  set/  the  ig.noiant 

1  Mac.  1.  13.  the  people  were  so/,  herein 

2  Mac.  11.  10.  thus  they  marched/,  in  armour 

15.  25.  then  Nicanor  came/,  with  trumpets 

FORWARDNESS. 
Wisd.  14.  17.  by  their  /".  they  might  flatter  him 

FOUGHT. 
Wisd.  10.  20.  magnified  thy  hand  that/,  for  them 
Eccl. 4G.6.  because  he/,  in  the  siglitof  the  Lord 
1  Mac.  3.  2.  they/,  with  cheerfulness  the  battle 

12.  and  therewith  he/,  all  his  life  long 

5.  3.  Judas/  against  the  children  of  Esau,  65. 
7.  so  he/.  ma.«y  battles  with  them 

21.  where  he/  many  bailies  with  the  heathen 

11.  41.  cast  tliem  out,  for  they  /.  against  Israel 
55.  the  men  of  war/,  against  Demetrius 

12.  13.  the  kings  round  about  have  /.  against  us 

13.  47.  so  Simon/,  no  more  against  them 

14.  .'10.  Simon  rose  up,  and/  for  his  nation 

16.  2.  we  have/  again=t  the  enemies  of  Israel 
2Mac.  1.12.  he  cast  Ihem  out  that/within  holy  city 

JO.  17.  they  kept  off  all  that/,  on  the  wall 

12.  36.  when  they  had/.  long,  were  weary 

13.  22.  the  king/,  with  Judas,  was  overconM 

FOUL. 

1  Esd.  9.  6.  because  of  the  present/,  weather 
11.  it  is/,  weather,  so  that  we  cannot  stand 

Wisd.  11.  0.  a  fountain  troubled  with  /  blood 
Eccl.  5.  14.  for  a/  shame  is  upon  the  thief 
20.  24.  a  lie  is  a/  blot  in  a  man 
FOWLS. 

2  Esd.  .5.  6.  the/,  shall  lake  their  flight  away 

6.  47.  that  it  should  bring  forth/  and  fishes 
Jud.  11.  7./  of  the  air  shall  live  by  thy  power 
Estft.  16.  24.  hateful  to  wild  beasts  and  /  for  ever 
Wisd.  lO.'ll.  they  saw  a  new  generation  of/. 
Eccl.  17.4. and  gave  him  dominion  over  beasts  and/. 

43. 14.  treasures  openi^d,  and  clouds  fly  forth  as/. 
Bar.  3.  17.  they  have  had  their  pastime  with/. 
Dan.  3.  58.  O  all  ye/,  of  the  air,  bless  the  Lord 
2  .1/uc.  9.  15.  to  be  devoured  df/.  and  wild  beastJ 

15.  33.  they  should  give  it  by  pieces  to  the/. 

FOUND. 
1  E.'id.  1.  7.  and  to  the  people  that  was/,  there 
21.  with  Israel  that  wore^vvelling  at  Jerusalem 

4.  42.  we  will  give  it,  becrose  thoii  .irt  /  wisest 

5.  39.  was  sought  in  the  register,  and  was  not  /. 

6.  22.  if  it  be/,  that  the  building  was  done 
8.  4.  he/  grace  in  hi?  sight  in  all  requesti 

42.  when  I  had  /  there  none  of  the  priests 
.53.  and  we/,  him  favourable  unto  us 


Eccl.  17.  21.  neither  left,  nor/  them,  but  spared   i^  Esd.  3. 34.  thy  name  no  where  be/,  but  in  Israel 

49.  4.  for  they/,  the  law  of  the  Most  High  4.  44.  if  I  have/  favour  in  thy  sight,  and  if  it  b« 
1  Mae.  1.  15.  and  Ihey/  the  holy  covenant           j      possible,  and  if  I  be  meet  therefore,  5.  .56.  ]  6.  II 

11.12.and/.Alexander,so  I  heir  hatred  was  known  5.  10.  shall  be  sought  of  many,  and  vet  not  be/. 

FORSWEAR.  6.22.  full  store  houses  shall  suddenly  be/  empty 

Wisd.  14.  28.  or  else  lightlv  f.  themselves  8.  42.  I  said,  if  I  have/  grace  let  me  speak 

FORSWORE.  12.  7.  I,ord,  if  I  have/,  grace  before  thy  tight 

1  E»d.  1.48.  be/,  himself  and  rebelled,  hardening,  14.  22.  but  I  have/,  grace  before  thee 


POU 

TVS. 1.19.  he  hilled  many,  but  the  borJies  were  not/. 
5.  4.  he/.  Raphael  that  was  an  angel 
8.  13.  the  maid  went  in  and  /.  them  holh  asleep 
fud.  14.  15./.  Olofernes  cast  on  the  floor  dead 
Wisd.  1.2.  he  will  be/  of  them  thiit  tempt  him  not 
2.  11.  what  ia  feeble  is/,  to  be  nothing  worth 
3.5.G.proved  them  and/them  worthy  for  himself 

5.  10.  as  a  »hip,  the  trace  thereof  cannot  be/. 

11.  when  a  bird  hath  flown  no  token  of  her  way 

to  be  /.  no  sign  where  she  went  is  to  be  /. 

6.  12.  wisdom  is  glorious,/,  of  such  as  seek  her 

7.  29.  compared  wilh  the  li?ht,  she  is/,  before  it 

8.  11.  I  shall  be/,  of  quick  conceit  in  judgment 
15.  I  shall  be/,  good  amoiij  the  multitude 

10.  5.  she/,  out  the  righteous  and  preserved  him 
16.  9.  nor  was  there/,  any  remedy  for  their  life 

Keel.  6.  14.  a  faithful  friend  is  a  strong  defence,  he 
that  hath/,  such  a  one  hath/,  a  treasure 

11.  19.  whereas  he  saith,  I  have/,  rest 

18.6.  neither  can  the  ground  of  them  be/,  out 
28.  he  will  give  praise  of  him  that/  her 

21.  16.  grace  shall  he  /.  in  the  lips  of  the  wise 
23.  12.  God  grant  that  it  be  not/  in  Jacob 
25.-9.  well  is  him  that  hath/,  prudence 
89.  4.  a  thing  lent  them,  reckoned  it  to  be/. 

6.  and  he  will  count  as  if  he  had/,  it 

3).  8.  blessed  is  the  rich  that  is  /.  without  blemish 

10.  who  hath  been  tried  thereby  and  /.  perfect 
34.  8.  the  law  shall  be/,  perfect  without  lies 
36.  16.  and  let  thy  prophets  be/,  faithful 
38.33.  shall  not  he/,  ^v^lere  parables  are  spoken 
44.5.  such  as/  out  musical  tunes,  and  recited 
20.  when  he  was  proved,  he  was/,  faithful 

45.  1.  who/,  favour  in  the  sight  of  all  flesh 

46.  15.  hy  faithfulness  he  was/,  a  true  prophet 
51. 20. 1  directed  my  soul  to  her,  /  her  in  pureness 

Bar.  3.  15.  who  hath/,  out  her  place  ? 

30.  who  hath  gone  over  the  sea  and/,  her? 

32.  he  hatli/.  her  out  with  his  understanding? 

3*).  he  hath/,  out  all  the  way  of  knowledge 
.9iw.  63.  there  was  no  dishonesty/,  in  her 

1  Jl/(ic.!.23.  he  took  the  hidden  treasures  which  he/. 

56.  they  rent  the  books  of  the  law  which  they/. 

57.  where  was/  with  any  the  book  of  testament 
2.  46.  what  children  soever  they/,  in  Israel 

52.  was  not  Abraham/,  faithful  in  temptation 
63.  and  to-morrow  he  shall  not  be/. 

4.  5.  when  he/,  no  man  there,  he  sought  him 

5.  6.  where  he/  a  mighty  power  with  Timotheus 

6.  63.  where  he/  Philip  to  he  master  of  the  city 
10.  60.  and  he/,  favour  in  their  sight 

11.24.  where  he/,  favour  in  his  sight  went  to  king 

12.  21.  it  is/,  in  writing  that  the  Lacedemonians 

2  Mac.  1.  20.  when  they  told  us  they/,  no  fire 
2.  1.  it  is  also/,  in  the  reconis  that  Jeremy 

7.  23.  who/  out  the  beginning  of  all  things 

8   19.  what  helps  their  forefathers  had  /  \ 

10.  22.  so  he  slew  those  that  were/,  traitors 
12.  18.  but  as  for  Timotheus  they/,  him  not 
40.they/.  things  consecrated  to  idols  of  Jamnites 
FOUND.\TinX. 

1  Esd.  2.  13  the  Jews  do  lay  the  /  of  the  templo 
5.  57.  they  laid  the/,  of  the  house  of  God 

2  Ksd.  6.  15.  the/,  of  the  earth  is  understood 
10.  .53.  where  no/  of  any  building  was 

15.  12.  the/,  of  it  shall  be  smitten  with  plague 

16.  15.  till  it  consume  the/,  of  the  earth 

Jad.  1.  3.  the  breadth  thereof  in  the/.  60  cubits 
fViad.  4.  3.  brood  of  ungodly  shall  not  lay  fast/. 

19.  and  he  shall  shake  them  frotn  the/. 
F.rcl.  1.  I.'),  she  hath  built  an  everlasting/. 

50.  2.  by  him  was  built  from  the/,  the  height 
FOIT.VDATIONS. 

1  Esd.  6.  11.  and  lay  the/  of  these  works 

20.  laid  the  f.  of  the  house  of  the  Lord 

2  K.id.  6.  2.  or  ever  the/,  of  Paradi.so  were  laid 
10   27.  a  large  place  shewed  itself  from  the/. 

15.  23.  fire  hath  consumed  the/,  of  the  earth 
Jud.  16. 15.  mountains  shrill  be  moved  from  their/. 
Eccl.  10.  16.  destroyed  them  to  the/,  of  the  earth 

16.  19.  the/,  of  tiie  earth  sh:ill  be  shaken 

FOL'.NDI.NG. 
2  Mac.  2. 13.  how  he  f.  a  library  gathered  the  acts 

lOITNTAI.N. 
Jud.  7.  3.  they  camped  in  the  valley  by  the/. 

7.  he  came  tot  ho/JBrthnir  waters  and  took  them 

12.  lot  ihy  servants  get  the/,  of  water 

12.7.  she  washed  her.'clfin  a/,  of  water  by  camp 
F.slh.  lO.fl.  a  little/,  became  a  river,  there  was  light 

1.  10.  as  it  were  from  a  little/,  was  a  flood 
IVi.id.  11.  6.  instead  ofa/.  of  a  running  river 
Keel.  1.  5.  the  word  of  God  is  the/,  of  wisdom 
21.  13.  his  counsel  is  like  a  pure/  of  life 
26.  12.  as  a  traveller,  when  he  hath  found  n/. 
Bar.  3.  12.  thou  hast  forsaken  the/,  of  wisdom 

FOUNTAINS. 
2K.'i'i.2.19.  as  many/,  flowing  with  milk  and  honey 

6.  24.  the  springs  of  the/,  shall  stand  still 
'  14.  47.  for  in  them  is  the/,  of  wisdom 
Jud.  6.  11   they  camo  to  the/,  under  Bolhulia 
790 


PRI 

■  Tud.  7.  17.  and  they  took  the/,  of  the  waters 
Dan.3.55.  Oyef.  praise  ye  the  Ld.  praise  forever 

FOUR. 

2  Esd.  3. 19.  thy  glory  went  through/,  gales  of  fire 

6.21.  untimely  children  of  three  or/,  months  old 

11.39.  art  thou  not  it  that  remainestof  the/,  beasts 

12.  2.  and  the/,  wings  appeared  no  more 

21. /.shall  be  kept  till  their  end  begin  to  approach 

13.  5.  from  the/,  winds  of  the  heaven  to  subdue 
16.  29.  there  are  left  three  or/,  olives,  31. 

IVisd.  18.24.  in  the/  rows  of  the  stones  was  glory 

1  Mac.  11.  .57.  thee  ruler  over  the/,  governments 
13.  28.  for  his  mother,  and  his/,  brethren 

2  Mac.  8.  21.  he  divided  his  army  into/,  parts 

FOURTEEN. 
Thb.  8.  19.  he  kept  thy  wedding-feast/,  days 

20.  till  the/,  days  of  the  marriage  expired 

10.  7.  till  the/,  days  of  the  wedding  were  expired 

FOURTEENTH. 
\E.id.  1.  1.  the/,  day  of  the  first  month,  7.  10. 
Esth.  10. 13.  the/,  and  fifteenlhday  of  same  month 

13.  6.  the/,  day  of  the  twelfth  month  Adar 

FOURTH. 
Jud.  12. 10.  In  the/,  day  Olofernes  made  a  feast 
Esth.  11. 1.  in  the?,  year  of  the  rei^nof  Ptolomeus 
Eccl.  26.  5.  and  Iot  the/  I  was  sore  afraiil 
2  Mac.  7.  13.  they  mangled  the/,  in  like  manner 

FORTY. 

2  Esd.  14.  23.  that  they  seek  thee  not  for/,  days 
36.  let  no  man  seek  after  me  these/,  days 
42.  they  sat/  days,  and  they  wrote  in  the  day 
2  Esd.  14.  44.  in/  days  they  wrote  204  books 

45.  when  the/,  days  were  fullilled 
Bel  3.  were  spent  on  him  every  day/,  sheep 

FRAMED. 
2  Jlfae.  15.  39.  so  speech  finely  f.  delighleth 

FRANKINCENSE. 
Eccl.  24. 15.  as  the  fume  of/,  in  the  tabernacle 
.39.  14.  and  give  ye  a  sweet  savoar  as  /. 
50.  8.  as  the  branches  of  the  /.  tree  in  summer 

FRANTIC. 
Eccl.  4.  30.  be  not  f.  among  thy  servants 

FRAYETH. 
Eccl.  22. 20.  casteth  a  stone  at  birds,  /.  them  away 

FREE. 
1  Esd.  2.  9.  with  many  /.  gifts  of  a  great  number 
4.  .53.  nil  that  went  should  have/,  liberty 
.lud.  4. 14.  with  vows  and/,  gifts  of  the  people 
16.  18.  they  offered  their/,  oflferings  and  eifts 
23.  she  waxed  old,  and  made  her  maids/, 
fff'sd. 7.23. kind  toman,  stead  fast,  sure,/,  from  care 
Eccl.  10.  25.  they  that  are/  shall  do  service 
.^i/.t.  53.  and  thou  hast  let  the  guilty  go/. 

1  Mac.  10.  29. 1  /.  you,  and  for  your  sakes  I  release 

31.  'ot  Jerusalem  also  be  holy  and  /. 
39.  1  give  it  as  a/,  gift  to  the  saneiuary 

11.  28.  that  he  would  make  Juilea/  from  tribute 
15.  7.  let  them  be/  and  all  the  armour  remain 

FREED. 
Eccl.  26.  29.  a  huckster  shall  not  be/  from  sin 

2  Mac.  2.  22.  they  f.  the  city  and  upheld  the  laws 

"FREELY. 
Esth.  16.  19.  publish  that  the  Jews  may/,  live 
1  Mac.  10.  33.  I  /.  set  at  liberty  every  one 

FREEDOM. 
1  E.id.  4.  49.  he  wrote  concerning  their/. 

62.  because  he  had  given  them/,  and  liberty 
1  Mac.  10.  34./.  for  all  the  Jews  in  my  realm 
FREE-MAN. 

1  Esd.  3. 19.  mind  of  bond-man  and/,  man  all  one 

FREE- WOMAN. 

lJlfac.2.11.  oCaf-icomnn  she  is  become  bond-slave 

FRIED. 

2  Mac.  7.  5.  he  comm.Tndeil  him  to  he/,  in  the  pan 

FRIEND. 
ffisd.  1.  16.  they  thought  to  have  it  their  /. 
Eccl.  6.  1.  instead  ofa/  become  not  an  enemy 

7.  if  thou  wouldst  get  a  /.  prove  him  first 

8.  for  soriW!  man  is  n  /.  for  his  own  occasion 

9.  there  is  a  /.  who  being  turned  to  enmity 

10  again,  some/,  is  a  companion  at  the  table 
14.  a  luilhful  /.  is  a  strong  defi-nco 
16.  a  faithful  /.  is  the  medicine  of  life 

7.  12.  devise  not  a  lie,  nor  do  the  like  to  thy/. 
18.  change  not  a/,  for  nnv  good  by  no  means 

9. 10.  forsake  not  an  old  /.  for  the  new  is  not  com- 
parable, a  new  /  is  as  new  wine 

12.  8.  n  f.  ennnot  be  known  in  prosperity 

9.  hilt  in  his  adversity  even  a  /.  will  depart 

14.  13.  do  good  unto  Ihy/  before  thou  die 
19.  8.  whether  to/,  or  foe,  talk  not  of  lives 

13.  admonish  a/  it  may  be  he  hath  not  done  it 

14.  admonish  thy/,  it  may  be  he  bath  not  said  it 

15.  admonish  a  /.  for  miinv  tinifs  it  is  a  slander 
20  23.  thefi'  is  that  promisi'th  to  his  /. 

22.20.  he  that  uphratdolh  his/,  breaks  friendship 

21.  thoiijh  thou  drewest  a  sword  at  Ihv/. 

22.  if  thou  hnst  opimed  thy  mouth  against  thy  / 

for  these  things  every/  will  depart 
25.  I  will  not  bo  ashamed  to  defend  a/. 


FRO 


[Apocrtfb^ 


Eccl.  27.  16.  and  shall  never  find  a  /.  to  hia  miiul 

IT.  love  thy  /.  and  be  faithful  unto  luin 
2'J.  10.  lose  money  for  thy  brother  and  thy  /. 
37.  1.  every  /.  saith,  I  am  his  /.  also,  biit  there 
is  a  /.  who  is  only  a  /  hi  name 

2.  when  a  companion  and/,  is  turned  an  eoeiuy 

4.  which  rejuicelhin  the  prosjierity  ofa  /. 

5.  a  companion  who  helpeth  jils  /.  for  tl  e  belly 

6.  forget  not  thy  /.  in  thy  mind  when  in  tichw 

40.  2)1.  a  /.  and  companion  never  meet  amiss 

41.  W.  be  ashamed  before  thy  partner  and  /. 

1  Mac.  7.  8.  chose  Hacchides  a/,  of  the-  king 

10.  16.  we  will  make  him  our  /.  and  conlifiderata 

19.  A  man  of  great  power,  and  meet  to  bo  our/. 

20.  we  ordain  thee  to  be  called  the  king's  /. 
13.36.  to  Simon,  hi;,'h-priest  and  /.  of  kings 
15.32.  Athenobiusllie  king's/,  came  to  Jerusalem 

2  Mac.  7.  24.  that  he  would  take  him  for  his/. 

11.  14.  that  he  must  needs  be  a/,  to  them 

FRIENDS. 

1  Esd.  3.  22.  they  forget  their  love  to  /. 

8.  13.  the  gifts  which  I  and  my/,  have  vowed 

26.  honoured  me  in  sight  of  all  his/,  and  noblea 

2  Esd.  5.9.  and  all/,  shall  destroy  one  another 
6. 24.  at  that  time/,  shall  fight  one  against  another 

Esth.  16.  5.  put  in  trust  to  manage  their/,  afl'dirs 

14.  he  thought,  finding  us  destitute  of/. 
IVisd.  7. 14.  which  they  that  use,  become  /.  of  God 

27.  she  maketh  them/,  of  God  and  prophcta 
19.  14.  but  these  brought/,  into  bondage 

Keel.  6.  5.  sweet  language  will  multiply/. 

13.  separate  from  enemies,  take  heed  of  thy  f, 

13.  21.  a  ric;h  man  falling,  is  held  up  of  his/. 
20. 16.  the  fool  saith,  I  have  no  /.  I  have  no  thank 
2-^.  9.a^inful  man  disquicleih/and  makes  debate 
30.  3.  and  before  his/,  he  shall  rejoice  of  him 

6.  and  one  that  shall  requite  kindness  to  his/. 
41.  22.  be  ashamed  of  upbraiding  speeches  be- 
fore /. 
42.3. be  not  ashamed  of  the  gift  of  the  heritage  of/ 
Sus.  3.3.  therefore  her/,  and  all  that  saw  her  wept 
Bel  2.  Daniel  was  honoured  above  all  his  /. 

1  .Mac.  2.  18.  thou  shalt  be  in  number  of  king's/. 
39.  Mattathias  and  his/,  understood  thereof 
45.  Mattathias  and  his/,  went  round  about 

3.38.Nicanor,Gorgias,mighly  men  of  thekiiig'8/'. 

6.  10.  wherefore  he  called  for  all  his  /. 

14.  then  called  he  for  Philip  one  of  his/. 

28.  the  king  gathered  together  all  his  /. 

.53.  now  tlierefiire  let  us  be  /.  with  these  men 

7.  6.  Judas  and  his  brethren  have  slain  all  thy/. 

15.  we  will  udl  procure  harm  of  you  nor  your/. 

8.  12.  with  their  /.  and  such  as  relied  on  them 
20.  we  be  registered  your  confederates  and  /. 
31. why  hast  thou  made  thy  yoke  heavyiui  our/. 

9. 26.  they  made  inquiry  and  search  for  Judas'/. 
2rl.  for  this  cause  all.ludas'  /.  came  together 
.35.  had  smt  to  pray  his/,  ilie  Nuhbathitcs 

39.  the  bridegroom  caine  forth  and  his  /. 

10.  60  who  gave  them  and  their/,  silver 

lj.5.  SI)  the  king  wrote  him  among  his  chief/. 

11.  26.  primioted  him  in  the  sight  of  all  his/. 

27.  gave  him  pre-eminence  among  his  chief/". 
33.  to  do  good  to  the  Jews,  who  are  our  /. 
.57.  appoint  thee  to  be  one  of  ihe  king's/. 

12.  14.  our  confederates  and/  in  tliiwe  wars 
43.  Tryiihon  commemli'd  him  to  all  his/. 

14.  39.  Demetrius  made  him  one  of  his  /. 

40.  the  Romans  had  calleil  the  Jews  X\\e\%f. 

15.  17.  the  Jews'  ninhnssador8,our/.  came  to  us 

28.  he  sent  to  him  Aihenobius  one  of  his/. 

2  Mac.  1.  14.  came  and  his/,  that  were  wilh  him 
3.  31.  certain  of  Ileliodorus'/  prayed  Onias 

8.  9.  choosing  Nicanor  one  of  his  special/. 
10.  13.  whereupon  being  accused  of  the  king's/ 
14.11.  others  of  the  kioc's  /'.  Ix-ing  maliciuusTy  set 
FRIENDLY. 

/f7.^■(i.  19.  15.  because  they  used  strangers  not  /. 

Ecrl.\.  8.  and  give  him  a  /.  answer  with  meekness 

1  Mac.  7.  27.  he  sent  deceitfully  with/,  words 

2  Mac.  12.  31.  desiring  them  to  be/,  still  to  them 

FRIENDSHIP. 
IVisd.  8.  18.  great  pleasure  it  is  to  have  her  /. 
f>r/.6.17.  whoso  fcnrelh  L.shall  direct  hia/.aright 

22.  20.  he  that  upbraids  his  friend,  breaks  /. 

29   15.  forjut  not  the/,  of  thy  surety 

1  Mac.  10.20.  to  lake  our  part,  and  keep/,  with  US 
26.  whereas  ymi  have  continued  in  our  /. 

12.  1   to  confirm  ami  renew  the  /.  with  them 

3.  sent  us  to  the  end  you  should  renew  the/. 
8.  declaration  was  made  of  the  league  and/. 
10.    to  send  for  rrnnwing  of  brotherhood  sod/ 

14.  18.  they  wrote  in  tables  of  brass  lo  renew/ 
22.  Jews  cnme  to  renew/,  thi-y  hiid  with  us 
1.%.  17.  Ihe  Jews  came  to  us  lo  riiiew  the  old/. 

2  Mac.  6.  22.  for  the  old  f.  with  them  find  faroui 

FlltiCK. 
Eccl.  40.  4.  lo  him  that  is  clothed  with  a  linen/ 

FRO(;S. 
Wisd.  19.  10.  a  multitude  of/,  instead  of  fishM 


AtOiBTrO*.] 


FUI 


GAB 


FRONTIERS. 
Jud.  3. 8.  vet  he  did  cast  down  tlieir/.  and  groves 

FROST. 
Iftsd.  16.29.  shall  melt  away  as  the  winter's  hoar/. 
Bar.  2.  25.  they  are  cast  out  to  ihe/.  of  the  night 
Uan.  3.  50.  O  ye/,  and  snow,  bless  ye  the  Lord 

FROTH. 
Wisd.  5.  14  like  a  thin  /.  that  is  driven  away 

FROWARD. 
Wisd.  1.  3.  for/,  thoughts  separate  from  God 
Eccl.  3(i.  20.  a/,  heart  causeth  heaviness 

FRUIT. 
S  Esd.  'i.  20.  thy  law  might  bring  forth/,  in  them 
33.  reward  appeareth  not,  labour  hath  no/. 
4.  31.  ponder  now  how  great/,  of  wickedness 

35.  when  cometh  the/,  of  the  floor  of  our  reward 
6  44.  there  was  great  and  innumerable/. 

8.  6.  give  us  seed,  that  there  may  come/,  of  it 
10.  milk  to  be  given,  which  is  the/,  of  (he  breasts 

9.  31.  I  sow  my  law  in  you,  it  shall  bring  forth/. 
32.  though  ihii/.  of  thy  law  did  not  perish 

10.  12.  because  1  have  lost  the/,  of  my  womb 

14.  even  so  the  earth  also  hath  given  her/. 

11.  42.  the  dwellings  ofthem  that  brought  forth/. 
16  25. trees  shall  give/and  who  shall  gather  them? 

Wwd.3.13.she  shall  have/,  in  the  visitation  of  souls 

15.  for  glorious  is  th'e/.  of  good  labours 
4.5.  their/,  unprofitable,  not  ripe  to  eat 
10.7.  plants  bearing/,  that  never  come  to  ripeness 

Keel.  6.  3.  lo.se  thy/,  and  leave  thyself  a  dry  tree 

11.  3.  but  her/,  is  the  chief  of  sweet  things 
19.  19.  shall  receive/,  of  the  tree  of  immortality 

23.  25.  her  branches  shall  bring  forth  no/. 

24.  17.  my  flowers  are  the/,  of  honour  and  riches 
27. 6.  the/,  declares  if  the  tree  have  been  dressed 
50.  10.  as  a  fair  olive-tree  budding  forth/. 

1  Mac.  10.  30.  the  half  of  the/,  of  the  trees 
14.  8.  and  the  trees  of  the  field  gave  their/. 

FRUITS. 

2  Esd.  2.  18.  twelve  trees,  laden  with  divers/. 
16.  46.  strangers  shall  reap  their/,  and  spoil  goods 

Tob.  5.  13.  we  ofl^ered  the  tenths  of  the  /. 

tfisd.  16. 19.  it  might  destroy/,  of  an  unjust  land 
22.  fire  did  destroy  the/,  of  the  enemies 
26.  the  growing  of/,  that  nourisheth  man 

EceU  6.  19.  come  to  her  and  wait  for  her  good  /. 
for  thou  Shalt  eat  of  her  /.  right  soon 

24.  19.  come  and  fill  yourselves  with  my/. 
25.  and  as  Tigris  in  the  time  of  the  new/. 

37.23.  and  the/,  of  his  understanding  fail  not 

1  Mac.  11.34.  king  received  out  of  the/,  of  the  earth 

FRUITFUL. 
ZEsd.  1.  34.  and  your  children  shall  not  be/. 
15.62.  thy/,  trees  shall  they  burn  up  with  fire 
Eeel.  26.  2(1.  thou  hast  gotten  a/,  possession 
40.  27.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  a/,  garden 

FRUITLESS. 

Wisd.  15.  4.  nor  an  image  the  painter's/,  labour 

FRUSTRATE. 

2  Esd.  10.  34.  forsake  me  not,  lest  I  die/,  of  hope 
Jud.  11.  11.  not  defeated,  and  /.  of  his  purpose 

FUGITIVE. 

2  Mac.  8. 35.  he  came  like  a/,  servant  to  Antioch 

FUGITIVES. 
Jud.  16. 12.  and  have  wounded  them  as  /.  children 
Wisd.  19.  3.  and  they  pursued  them  as/. 

FULL. 
1  Kad.  1.  23.  with  a  heart  /.  of  godliness 
.58.  until  the/,  term  of  seventy  years 

3  E.id.  3.  3.  I  began  to  speak  words  /.  of  fear 
4.  27.  for  this  world  is/,  of  unrighteousness 

38.  I  said,  even  we  all  are/,  of  impiety 

6.  22./  store-houses  suddenly  be  found  empty 

7.  6.  a  city  is  set  on  a  field,/  of  all  good  things 

12.  entrances  of  this  world  were/,  of  sorrow 


^7.  and  for  the/,  are  the/  things 

10.  7.  how  that  Sion  ourmother  is/,  of  heaviness 
12.  2.  their  kingdom  was  small  and/,  of  uproar 

14.  39.  and  behold,  he  reached  mca/.  cup 

15.  34.  the  clouds  are/,  of  wralh  and  storm 

40.  the  clouds  shall  be  lifted  up/,  of  wrath 

41.  and  many  waters,  that  all  fields  may  be/. 

16.  ."iS.  all  her  paths  shall  grow/,  of  thorns 
Ksth.  15.  14.  and  Ihy  countenance  is/,  of  grace 
Wisd.  5.  22.  hailstones/,  of  wrath  shall  be  cast 

11.  18.  or  unknown  wild  beasts/,  of  rage 

12.  17.  not  believe  that  thou  art  of  a/,  power 

13.  13.  a  crooked  piece  of  wood,  and/,  of  knots 
Ecel.  1.  30.  but  thy  heart  is/,  of  deceit 

2.  11.  the  Lord  is/,  of  compassion  and  mercy 

3.  13.  when  thou  art  in  thy/,  strength 

8.  3.  strive  not  with  a  man  that  is/,  of  tonguo 
19.  26.  but  inwardly  he  is/,  of  deceit 
23.  Jl.  but  his  house  shall  be/,  ofcalamities 
2.5.  20.  BO  is  a  wife/,  of  words  to  a  quiet  man 
34. 10.  but  he  that  hath  travelled,  is  /.  of  prudence 
39.  12.  I  am  filled  as  the  moon  at  the/.  50.  6. 
42.  16.  the  work  is/,  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord 
Bar.  6. 17.  when  set  up,  their  eyes  be/,  of  dust 
1  Mac.  3.  27.  Antiochus  was/,  of  indignation 
791 


'^Mac.  3.  6.  was/,  of  infinite  sums  of  money 
30.  the  temple  wliich  alore  was/,  of  fear 
12.  16.  a  lake  filled/,  seen  running  with  blood 
FULFIL. 

1  Esd.  1. 57.  to/,  the  word  of  the  Ld.  spoken  by  Jer. 

2  Esd.  C.  35.  that  I  might/,  the  three  weeks 
IVisd.  19.  4.  that  they  might/,  the  p^ninhment 
Eccl.  26.  2.  he  shall  /.  the  years  of  his  life 

1  JMac.2. 18.  come  and/,  the  king's  commandment 
'iJdac.  3.  8.  but  indeed  to/,  the  king's  purpose 

FULFILLED. 

2  Esd.  2.  40.  which  have  /.  the  law  of  the  Lord 
41.  the  number  of  thy  children  is/. 

4.  37.  doth  not  move  till  the  said  measure  be  /. 
40.  ask  her  when  she  hath/,  her  nine  months 

6.  19.  when  the  affliction  of  Sion  shall  be/. 

11.  44.  and  his  abominations  are/. 

14.  45.  when  the  forty  days  were/. 

15.  6.  and  their  hurtful  works  are/. 
Tob.  14.  5.  until  the  time  of  that  age  be/. 
IVisd.  4.  13  he  being  made  perfect  /.  a  long  time 

FULFILLING. 
l.Vac.2.55.  Jesus,  for/,  the  word, was  made  a  judge 

FULLY. 
1  Esd.  6.  20.  the  house  of  Lord  is  not  yet/,  ended 
.Jud.  2. 13.  but  accomplish  the  commandments/. 

1  Mac.  1.  29.  after  two  years/,  expired 
62.  many  in  Israel  were/,  resolved  not  to  eat 

2.  68.  recompense/,  the  heathen,  and  take  heed 
9.  42.  80  when  they  had  avenged/,  the  blood 

FULNESS. 
Eccl.  1.  16.  to  fear  the  Lord  is  /.  of  wisdom 

2  Mac.  6.  14.  till  come  to  the/,  of  their  sins 
FUME. 

Eecl.ii.  15.  as  the/,  of  frankincense  in  tabernacles 

FUNERALS. 
2  Mac.  5. 10.  had  none  to  mourn,  nor  any  solemn/. 

FURLONGS. 
2  Mae.  11.  5.  distant  from  Jerusalem  about  five/. 

12.  9.  was  seen  two  hundred  and  forty/,  off 

16.  a  lake  two/,  broad  being  filled  full 

17.  then  departed  they  from  thence  750/ 

29.  Scythopolis  lieth  600/  from  Jerusalem 
FURNACE. 

TVisd.  3.  6.  as  gold  in  the/,  hath  he  tried  them 
Eccl.  2.  5.  acceptable  men  in  the  /.  of  adversity 
22.  24.  as  the  vapour  of  a  /.  goeth  before  fire 
27.  5.  the/,  proveth  the  potter's  vessel 
31.  26.  the/,  proveth  the  edge  by  dipping 
38.  28.  he  fightelh  with  the  heat  of  the/. 

30.  he  is  diligent  to  make  clean  the/ 
43.  4.  a  man  blowing  a/,  is  in  works  of  heat 

Dan.  3.24.  the  flame  streameth  forth  above  the/. 
25.  it  burnt  Chaldeans  it  found  about  the/. 

27.  made  the  midst  of  the/,  as  a  moist  wind 

28.  then  the  three  blessed  God  in  the/ 
66.  he  hath  delivered  us  out  of  midst  of  the/. 

FURNISH. 
Ecrf.  29. 26. /.  a  table  and  feed  me  of  that  ready 

FURNISHED. 
Eccl.  44.  6.  rich  men  /.  with  ability,  living 
1  Mac.  14.  34.  and  he/,  them  with  all  things 

FURROWS. 
Eccl.  1. 3.  BOW  not  on  the/,  of  unrighteousness 
38.  26.  he  giveth  his  mind  to  make/. 
FURTHER. 

1  Esd.  2.  29.  those  wicked  workers  proceed  no/. 

6.  .30  and  that  every  year  without/,  question 

2  Esd.  13.  41.  would  go  forth  into  a/,  country 
FURTHERMORE. 

1  Esd.4.  10./.  he  lieth  down,  he  eateth,  drinketh 

1  Mac.  9.1./.  when  Demetrius  heard  that  Nicanor 
FURY. 

Wisd.  10.  3.  he  perished  in  the  /.  wherewith 
Eccl.  1.  22.  the  sway  of  his/,  be  his  destruction 
45. 18.  the  congregation  of  Core  with/,  and  wrath 
48.  10.  wrath,  before  it  break  fiirlh  into/. 
Bar.  1.13.  to  this  day  the/,  of  Lord  is  not  turned 

2  Mac.  4.  25,  having  the/,  of  a  cruel  tyrant 

7.  9.  thou  like  a/,  takest  us  out  of  this  life 

FURIES. 
Wisd.  7.  20.  to  know  the  f.  of  wild  beasts 

FURIOUS. 
Eccl.  1.  22.  a/,  man  cannot  be  justified 
10. 18.  or/,  anger  for  them  that  are  born  of  wom. 
28.  8.  for  a/,  man  will  kindle  strife 
2  Mac.  5.  11.  removing  out  of  Egypt  in  a  /.  mind 

G. 

GABAEL. 

Tob.  1.  1.  Aduel  son  of  G.  of  the  seed  of  Asael 

14.  I  left  in  trust  with  G.  ten  talents  of  silver 

4.  1.  the  money  which  he  had  committed  to  G. 
20.  I  signify  that  I  committed  ten  talents  to  G. 

5.  G.  for  I  have  lodged  wilh  our  brother  G. 

9.  2.  go  to  Rages  of  Sled  ia,  to  G.  and  bring  money 

5.  so  RnpliacI  went  out  and  lodged  with  G. 

10.  2.  are  they  detained?  or  is  G.  deadt 


GAR 

GABATHA. 
Esth.  12.  1.  took  his  rest  in  the  court  with  G. 

GAURIAS. 
Tob.  1.  14.  I  left  wilh  Ga])ael  the  brother  of  G. 
4.  20.  committed  trii  talents  to  Gabael  son  of  G 

GAD. 
Eccl.  25.25.  nor  a  wicked  worn,  liberty  to^.  abroad 

GADDER. 
Eccl.  26.  8.  and  a  g.  abroad  causeth  great  anger 

GAIN. 

Wisd.  14.  2  for  verily  de-^^ire  of  ^.  deviseth  that 

15.  12.  they  counted  our  time  here  a  market  for  ^. 

Eccl.  20.  9.  theie  is  a  o-.  that  turiiuth  to  loss 

29.  19.  that  followeth  other  men's  business  for^. 

2  Mac.  11.  3.  thinking  t<p  make  a  g.  of  the  temple 

GAINING. 
Wisd.  13. 19.  for^.  and  getting  asketh  ability  to  do 

GAINSAY. 
2  Esd.  5.  29.  they  who  did  g.  thy  promises 
./ud.  8.  28.  there  is  none  that  may  g.  thy  words 

12.  14.  who  am  I  that  I  should  g.  my  lord  1 
Eslli.  13.  9.  there  is  no  man  that  can  g.  thee 
1  Mac.  14.  44.  to  break,  or  to  g.  his  words 

GAIT. 
Eccl.  19. 30.  man's  laughter  and  g.  shew  what  he  it 

GALAAD. 
■  Tad.  1.  8.  to  those  that  were  of  Carmel  and  G. 
15.  5.  they  inG.  and  Galilee  chased  them 
1  Alac.  5.  9.  the  heathen  that  were  at  G.  assembled 
17.  I  and  Jonathan  will  go  to  the  country  of  G 
25.  that  had  happened  to  their  brethren  in  G, 
27.  shut  up  in  cities  of  the  country  ofG.  36. 
45.  Israelites  that  were  in  the  couirtry  of  G. 
55.  Judas  and  Jonathan  were  in  the  land  of  G 

13.  22.  became  into  the  country  of  G. 
GALBANUM. 

Eccl.  24.  15.  I  yielded  a  pleasant  odour  as  G. 

GALLERY. 
Eccl.  22.  17.  as  plaislering  on  the  wall  ofa^. 
GALATIANS. 

1  Mac.  8. 2.  which  they  had  done  amongst  the  G. 

2  Mac.  b.  20.  battle  they  had  in  Babylon  witli  G. 
GALILEE. 

Tob.  1.  2.  which  is  called  properly  Nephthali  in  G 
Jud  1.  8.  those  of  higher  G.  and  the  great  plain 
15.  5.  they  that  were  in  Galaad  and  in  G. 

1  Mac.  5.  14.  there  came  other  messengers  from  G. 
15.  and  all  G.  of  the  Gentiles  are  assembled 

17.  go,  and  deliver  thy  brethren  that  are  in  G. 

20.  were  given  three  thousand  men  to  go  into  Q 

21.  then  went  Simon  jnto  G.  where  he  fought 
23.  and  those  that  were  in  G.  look  he  away 
55.  and  Simon  his  brother  was  in  G. 

10.  30.  out  of  the  country  of  Samaria  and  G. 

11.  63.  his  princes  were  come  to  Cades  in  G. 

12.  47.  of  whom  he  sent  two  thousand  into  G. 
49.  Tryphon  sent  a  host  of  footmen  into  G. 

GALL. 
Tob.  6.  4.  lake  the  heart,  the  liver,  and  the^.  6 
8.  as  for  the^.  it  is  good  to  onoint  a  man 
11.  4.  take  in  thine  hand  the  g.  of  the  fish 
8.  therefore  anoint  thou  his  eyes  with  the  g. 
11.  he  strake  off  the  g.  on  his  father's  eyes 
GALLIES. 
2 Mac.  4.  20.  it  was  employed  to  the  making  of^. 
GAME. 

2  .Vac.  4.14.  after  the  ^.  of  Discus  called  them  forth 

18.  now  when  the^.  thai  was  used  was  kept 
GAPE. 

1  Esd.  4.  19.  do  they  not  ir.  and  with  open  mouth  } 

GAPED. 
1  Esd.  4.  31.  the  king  g.  ami  gazed  upon  her 

GARDEN. 
Eccl  24.  .30.  I  came  out  as  a  conduit  into  a.g. 
31 .  I  said,  I  will  water  my  best  g.  and  will  water 
abundantly  my  g.  bed,  my  brook  became  a  river 
40.  17.  bountil'ulness  is  as  a  most  fruitful  g. 
27.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  a  fruitful  g. 
Bar,  6.  70.  as  a  scare-crow  in  a  g.  of  cucumbers 
Sr/s.  4.  Joaciin  had  a  fair  g.  joining  to  his  house 
7.  Susanna  went  into  her  husband's  g.  to  walk 
15.  she  was  desirous  to  wash  herself  in  the  g. 

17.  and  shut  the  g.  doors  that  I  may  wash  ine 

18.  and  they  shut  Ibe  g.  doors  and  went  out 

25.  then  ran  the  one  and  opened  the  g.  door 

26.  when  ihe  servants  heard  the  cry  in  the^. 
36.  elders  said,  as  we  walked  in  the^.  alone,  this 

woman  shut  the^.  doors,  and  sent  maids  away 
38. we  thatstood  in  a  corner  of  the^.  ran  to  them 
GARRISOiV. 

1  Mac.  4.  61.  they  set  there  a  g.  to  keep  it 

5.  .58.  when  they  had  given  cTiarsc  to  the  g, 

6.  50.  Ihe  king  set  a  g.  there  to  keep  it 

9.  .51.  in  them  he  set  a  g.  that  they  might  work 

10.  75.  because  Apollonius  had  a  g.  there 

11.  .3^.  he  set  inevery  oneofthema^.  of  soluierB 
66.  he  look  the  city  and  set  a  g.  in  it 

12.  34.  wherefore  beset  a  g.  there  to  keep  it 
14.  33.  but  he  set  a  g.  of  the  Jews  there 

2  Mdc.  12. 18.  having  left  a  strong  g.  in  the  hold 


GAT 

GARRISONS. 
Jud.  3.  6.  Olofernus  set^.  in  the  high  cilies 

7.  7.  Olofernea  set  g.  of  men  of  war  over  them 

1  Mac.  5.  50.  captams  of  the  r.  heard  of  Uie  acts 

GARIZIAI. 

2  Mac.  5.  23.  and  at  G.  lie  !eft  Andronicus 

6-2.  that  in  G.  of  Jupiter  the  defender  of  strangers 

GARLAND. 
Jvd.  15.  13.  they  put  a^.  of  olive  upon  her 

G.'VRLANUS. 
Jv,d.  3.  7.  they  received  them  with  g.  and  dances 
15.  13.  men  followed  in  Ihtir  armour  with  g. 
GARMENT. 
1  fUd.  8. 71. 1  rent  my  clothes  and  the  holy  g.  73. 
Ju4. 16. 8.  for  she  put  otf  the  g.  of  her  widowhood, 
and  look  a  linen  g.  to  deceive  him 
Wiad.  18.  24.  in  the  long  g.  was  the  whole  world 
Eccl.  14.  17.  all  flesh  wiixeth  old  as  a^. 
45.  10.  he  compassed  him  with  a  holy  g. 

50.  11.  he  made  the  g.  of  holiness  honourahle 
Bar.5. 1.  putoif,  O  Jerusalem,  the  g'.  of  mourning 

2.  cast  about  tliee  a  double  g.  of  righteousness 
GARMENTS. 

1  Esd.  1.  2.  the  priests  being  arrayed  in  long  g. 
4.  17.  these  make  g.  fur  men,  these  bring  glory 

2  Esd.  2. 39.  have  received  glorious  g.  of  the  Lord 
Tab.  4.  10.  give  of  thy  g.  to  them  that  are  naked 

.  Jud.  10.  3.  she  put  oil"  the  g.  of  her  widowhood, 
washed  her  body,  and  put  on  her  g.  of  gladness 
Estk.  14.2.  put  oh  the  g.  of  anguish  and  mourning 
15. 1.  the  third  day  she  laid  away  her  mourning  d-. 
Eccl  42.  13.  for  from  g.  cometh  a  moth 
45.  d.  he  strengtheneth  him  with  rich^. 
Bar.  6.  11.  they  will  deck  them  as  men  with  g. 
33.  the  priests  also  take  otf  their  g.  and  clothe 
53.  whose  g.  they  that  are  strong  do  take  away 
1  Mac.  3.  49.  they  brought  also  the  priests  g. 

10.  62.  the  king  commanded  to  take  off  his  ff. 

GARNERS. 
Eccl.  1.  17.  she  filled  the  g.  with  her  increase 

GARNISH. 
5  Mac.  9.  16.  he  would  g.  with  goodly  gifls 

GARNISHED. 
Eccl.  16.  27.  he  g.  his  works  for  ever 
42. 21.  he  hath  g.  the  excellent  works  of  wisdom 
GASP. 
8  Mac.  7. 9.  when  he  was  at  the  last  g.  he  said 

GAT. 
1  E^d.  1.  31.  then  g.  he  up  on  his  second  chariot 
IVisd.  10.  8.  they  g.  not  only  this  hurt 
Feci.  40. 2.  how  great  glory  0-.  he  when  he  did  lift  up 

51.  10.  I  received  her  and  g.  much  learning 
1  Mac.  3.  3.  so  he  g.  his  people  great  honour 

9.  32.  when  IJacchides^.  knowledge  thereof 

11.  67.  they  g.  them  to  the  plain  of  Nasor 

GATE. 

1  Fsd.  1.  16.  the  porters  were  at  every  g.  7.  9. 
Toh.  Jl.  16.  went  to  meet  his  daughter  at  the^. 
Jud\  S.  33.  you  shall  stand  this  night  in  the  g. 

10.  6.  thus  they  went  forth  to  the  g.  of  the  city 
13. 1 1.  then  said  Judith  to  the  watchmen  at  the  g. 

open,  open  now  the  g.  our  God  is  with  us 

12.  they  made  haste  to  go  dow  n  to  the  g. 

13.  90  lliey  opened  the  g.  and  received  them 
^ac.5. 22.  he  pursued  lliemto  the  "•.  of  Ptolemais 

GATES. 

2  F^d.  3.  19.  thy  glory  went  thro'  four^.  of  firo 
Jtid.  1.4.  he  made  the  ^'.thereof;  oven  ^.  that  were 

raised  to  the  height  of  seventy  cubits 
7.22.  young  men  fell  by  the  passages  of  the  "-. 
10.  n.  command  the  g.  of  the  city  to  be  opened 
f>fA.  IR.  18.  he  is  hanged  at  the  g.  of  Susa 
Feci.  4^.  13.  who  set  U()  the^.  and  the  bars 

1  .Mo'^.  4.  33.  they  saw  altar  profaned  and  g.  burned 
57.  the  g.  and  the  chambers  they  renewed 

.*>.  47.  they  slopped  up  the  g.  with  stones 

9.  50.  thi'se  did  lie  strengthen  with  g.  and  bars 

12.  3H.  Simon  made  ii  strong  with  g.  and  bars 
48,  they  of  Ptolemais  shut  the  g.  and  took  him 

13.  Xi.  Simon  fenced  them  with  great  walls  and  ^. 

15.  39.  to  build  Crdron,  and  to  fortify  the  g. 

2  Mae.  3.  19.  the  virgins  ran,  some  to  the  g. 

10.  38.  others  broke  open  tire*',  nnd  took  city 

GATHER. 

2  F.sd.  14.  23.  go  thy  way,  g.  the  people  together 

16.  25.  trees  give  fruit,  and  who  shall  g.  them  ? 
Tub.  13.  5.  he  will  /r.  im  out  of  all  nations 
Fj'cI.  6.  18.  g.  instruction  from  thy  youth  up 

36.  M.  g.  all  the  tribes  of  Jni-ob  together 
47.  18.  thou  didst  g.  gold  ns  tin,  and  multiply 
I  Mae.  3  31.  determined  there  to  g.  much  money 

9.  7   that  he  had  no  tiiDe  to  g.  them  tueether 

10.  K  hud  given  authority  to  g.  together  n  host 

14.  44.  or  to  g.  an  assembly  in  the  country 

3  Mae.  I.  27.  g.  those  together  that  are  scaiterod 
f.  7.  till  the  lime  that  God  g.  his  people  ntrain 

18.  God  will  g.  us  tojpther  out  of  every  land 
GATMERKD. 
1  E»d.  4.  18.  have  g.  tngfiher  (fold  nnd  Bilv.>r 

8.  41.  these  I  g.  to  the  river  called  Theraa 

T03 


GAV 

1  Esd.  8.  91.  there  g.  to  him  a  very  great  multitude 

9.  3.  they  should  be  g.  together  at  Jerusalem 

5.  they  of  Judah  and  Benjamin  were  g.  together 

2  Eid.  I.  30.  1  g.  you  together  as  a  hen  gatherelh 
16.  30.  when  a  vineyard  is  g.  there  are  left 

Jud.  16.  22.  after  Manasses  was  g.  to  his  people 
Feci.  25,  3.  if  thou  hast^.  nothing  in  thy  youth 
Bet  1.  Astyages  was^.  to  his  fathers,  1  Mac.  2.  69. 

1  Mae.  1.  4.  lie^.  a  mighty  strong  host 

15.  3.  I  have  g.  a  multitude  of  foreign  soldiers 

2  Mac.  2.  13.  he,  founding  a  library,  g.  the  acts 
8.  27.  they  had  g.  their  armour  together,  31. 

10.  24.  hud  g.  a  multitude  of  foreign  forces 

12.  38.  so  Judas  g.  his  host  and  came  to  Odollam 

GATHERETH. 

Eccl.  14.  4.  he  that  g.  by  defrauding  his  own  soul, 

g.  for  others  that  shall  spend  his  goods  riotously 

21.  8.  that^.  stones  for  the  tomb  of  his  burial 

Eccl.  33.  16.  as  one  that  g.  after  grape-gatherers 

GATHERING. 
Feci.  26.  5.  the  g.  together  of  an  unruly  multitude 
31.  3.  the  rich  hath  great  labour  in  g.  riches 
43.  20.  it  abideth  on  every  g,  together  of  water 
2  Mae.  4.  28.  appertained  tJie  g.  of  the  customs 
10.  10.  g.  briefly  the  calamities  of  the  wars 
]2.43.when  hehadmadeav-.thiough  the  company 
GAVE. 

1  Esd.6.13.so  they  g.  us  this  answer,we  are  servants 

15.  ho^.  them  over  into  the  power  of  Nabuchod 

8.  80.  made  us  gracious,  so  that  they  g.  us  food 

9.  20.  they  g.  their  hands  to  put  away  their  wives 
41.  and  all  the  multitude  g.  heed  to  the  law 

2  Esd.  1.  13.  I  g.  you  a  large  and  safe  passage 
24.1  g.  you  light  in  a  pillar  of  fire  and  wonders 

19.  then  I  had  pity,  and  g.  you  manna  to  cat 
23.  I  g.  you  not  fire  for  your  blasphemies 

2.  l.I  ff.  them  my  commandments  by  the  prophets 
16.61.  he^.  him  breath,  life,  and  understanding 
Tab.  1.  6.  them  I  g.  at  the  altar  to  the  priests 

7.  the  first  tenth  part  I  g.  to  the  sons  of  Aaron 

8.  the  third  I  g.  to  them  to  whom  it  was  meet 
13.  the  Most  High  g.  me  grace  and  favour 

16.  in  time  of  Enemessar,  I  g.  many  alms  to  my 

brethren,  and  g.  my  Lread  to  the  hungry 

2.  12.  they  g.  her  also  oesides  a  kid 
7.  13.  and  he  g.  her  to  be  wife  to  Tobias 

10.  10.  then  Raguel  g.  him  Sara  his  wife 

14.  2.  he^.  alm^,  and  increased  in  the  fear  of  Lord 
ll.have^.up  the  ghost  in  the  bed, being  158 years 

./ud.  8.  8.  there  was  none  that  g.  her  an  ill  word 
10.  5.  then  she^.  her  maid  a  bottle  of  wine 

15.  11.  they  g.  to  Judith  Olofernes  his  tent 
12.  she  g.  branches  to  the  women  with  her 

16.19.  ^. the  canopy  she  had  taken  for  gift  to  Lord 
H%id.  10.  2.  she  g.  him  power  to  rule  all  things 

10.  she  ^.  him  knowledge  of  holy  things 
14.she  shewed  them  liars  &^.him  perpetual  glory 

18.25. unto  these  the  destroyer^,  place,  was  wiraid 
Eccl.  17.  6.  a  heart  he  g.  them  to  understana 

9.  lie  g.  them  to  glory  in  his  marvellous  acta 

11.  besides  this  he  ^.  them  knowledge 

24.  8.  BO  the  C'eator  g.  me  a  commandment 
IS.l^.a sweet smellliKe cinnamon  and  aspalathus 

45.  3.  ho  g.  him  a  commandment  for  his  people 
7.  he  g.  him  the  priesthood  among  the  people 

17.  he  g.  unto  him  his  commandments 

20.  he  made  Aaron  honourable  and  g.  him  herita. 

21.  sacrifices,  which  he  g  to  him  and  his  seed 

46.  9.  the  Lord  g.  strength  also  to  Caleb 

47.  5.  he  g.  him  strength  in  his  right  hand  to  slay 

6.  in  that  he  g.  him  a  crown  of  glory 

11.  he  gave  him  a  covenant  of  kings,  and  a  throne 

22.  wherefore  he  g.  a  remnant  to  Jacob 
49.  5.  therefore  he  g.  their  power  to  others 

Bar.  1. 18.  in  commandments  that  he  g.  us  openly 

3.  27.  nor  g.  he  the  way  of  knowledge  to  them 
4. 30.  he  that^.  thee  that  name,  will  comfiirt  thee 

1  Mac.  1. 13.  who  ^.  them  license  to  do  after  ordin. 
3.  28.  he  g.  his  soldiers  pay  for  a  year 

5.  3.  he  g.  them  a  great  overthrow  and  abated 
7.  11.  but  they  g.  no  heed  to  their  words 
8.8.  which  they  took  of  hirn  and  ^.to  king  Eumencs 
10.  46.  these  words,  thi"y  g.  no  credit  to  them 
58.  he  g.  to  him  his  daughter  Cleopatra 
60.  he  g.  them  and  their  friends  silver  and  gold 
89.  ho  g.  him  Accarrm  with  the  borders  thereof 
H.  10.  I  repent  that  I  g.  my  daughter  to  him 
12.43.  ho  g.  him  gifts,  nnd  commanded  his  men 
13.3.  Simon /f.  them  exhortation,  saying 

14.  8.  the  earth  g.  her  increase,  trees  their  fruit 
32.  Simon  armed  valiant  men  an<\g.  them  wages 

2  Mac.  2.  17.  hope  that;?,  them  nil  a  heritage 

7.  22.  for  I  neither  g.  you  brtalh  nor  life 

8.  36.  they  fidlowed  the  laws  that  he  g.  them 
12.  15.  Judas  g.  a  fierce  assault  against  the  walls 

15.  15.  Jeremias  j^.  to  Judin  a  sword  of  gold 

GAVEST. 

1  End.H.PH.  which  thou  g.  by  thy  servants  the  proph. 

2  Fad.  3.5.  thou  g.  a  body  to  Adam  without  soul 
16  to  him  thou  g.  Isaac,  to  Isaac  thou  g.  Jacob 


GET 


LAfocrtfha 


2  Esd.  3.  27.  thou  g.  the  city  into  hands  of  enemief 
5.  27.  thou  g.  a  law  that  is  approved  of  all 
0.  40.  thou  g.  them  charge  to  do  service  to  man 

51.  to  Enoch  thou  g.  one  part,  which  was  dried 

52.  unto  Leviathan  thou  g.  the  seventh  part 

53.  on  the  sixth  day  thou  g.  cumniandment 
Tub.  8.  6.  thou  inadcst  Adam  and  g.  him  Eve 
Jud.i).i.lo  whom  thou^.asword  to  take  vengeance 

3.  wherefore  thou  g.  their  rulers  to  be  slain 
IVisd.  11.  7.  thou  g.  to  them  abundance  of  wutei 

12.  10.  thou  g.  them  place  of  repentance 
]H.  3.  thou  g.  them  a  burning  pillar  of  fire 

1  Mac.  4.  30.  and  thou  g.  the  host  of  etrungera 

GAY. 
Bar.  6.  9.  as  it  were  for  a  virgin  that  loves  to  go  g. 

GAZA. 

\Mac.  11.61.  went  to  G.but  they  of  G.  shut  him  out 

62.when  theyofG.madesuppiicalion  to  Jonathan 

13.  43.  in  those  days  Simon  encamped  against  G.' 

GAZARA. 
1  Mae.  4.  15.  for  they  pursued  them  unto  G. 
7.45.  pursued  a  day's  journey  from  Adasa  to  G. 

13.  53.  captain  of  all  the  hosts,  and  dwelt  at  G. 

14.  7.  he  had  the  dominion  of  G.  and  Bethsura 

34.  he  fortified  G.  that  bordereth  on  Azotus 

15. 28.  you  withhold  JoppeaiidG.  with  the  tower 

35.  and  whereas  thou  dcmandest  Joppe  and  G. 
16. 1.  then  came  up  John  from  G.  and  told  Simoa 

19.  he  sent  others  also  to  G.  to  kill  John 
21.  one  had  run  afore  unto  G.  and  told  John 
GAZE. 
Keel.  9.  5.  g.  not  on  a  maid  that  thou  fall  not 
41.  21.  or  to^.  upon  another  man's  wife 
GAZED. 

1  E^d.  4.  31.  yet  the  king  gaped  and  g.  on  her 

GABA. 
Jud.  3. 10.  he  pitched  between  G.  and  Scytbopolis 

GEDEON. 
.Jud.  8.  I.  the  son  of  G.  the  son  of  Raphaim 

GENERAL. 
2K5<i.  8.  15.  touching  man  in ^.  thou  knowest  best 
Fsth.^S.W.  tho'ourcominandmenlbeH-. come  near 
iCccMS.l.be  tliatliveth  for  evei  created  all  things. 

2  Mae.  3.  18.  others  run  to  the  g.  supplication 

GENERATION. 
2  Esd.  3.  19.  give  diligence  to  the  g.  of  Israel 
32. or  what  g.  hath  so  believed  thy  covenants* 
8.  34.  or  what  is  a  corruptible  e'.  to  be  so  bitter  ? 
n'!*(/.3.19.hoirible  is  the  end  ofthe  unrighteous^. 
12. 10.  not  ignorant  that  they  were  a  naughty  g. 
14.  6.  and  left  to  all  ages  a  seed  of^. 
19.  11.  afterwards  they  saw  a  new  g.  of  fowla 
Feci.  4.  16.  his  g.  shall  hold  her  in  possession 
14.  18.  so  is  the^.  of  flesh  and  blood 
39.  9.  and  his  name  shall  live  from  g.  tog. 

1  Mac.  5.  2.  they  thought  to  destroy  iheg.  of  Jacob 

2  jUac.  7. 23.  the  Creator  who  formed  the  g.  of  mao 
8.  9.  to  root  out  the  whole  g.  ofthe  Jews 

GENERATIONS. 
2  Fsd.  3.  7.  appointedst  death  in  him  and  his  g. 
26.  they  did  as  Adam  and  all  his  g.  had  done 
Tab.  13.  11.  all  g.  shall  praise  thee  with  joy 
,fud.  8.  32.  which  shall  go  throughout  nil  g. 
Fstk.  10.  13.  according  lo  the  g.  lor  ever 
Af'isd.  1.  14.  the^.  ofthe  world  were  healthful 
Feel.  2.  10.  look  at  the  f.  of  old  and  see 
10.  27.  in  his  hand  are  the  chief  of  them  to  all  g. 
44.  7.  all  these  were  honoured  in  their  g. 

16.  being  an  example  of  repentance  lo  all  ^. 
Bar.  6. 3.  ye  shall  remain  at  Babylon  seven  r. 

GENTILES. 
1  Fsd.  P.  69.  not  put  away  the  pollutions  ofthe  G. 
Tob.  13.  3.  confess  him  before  the  G.  ye  children 
./ud.  8.  22.  will  he  turn  on  our  heads  among  the  G. 
Ks</i  10.9.  which  have  not  been  done  among  tbeG. 

10.  ho  hath  made  .■mother  lot  for  all  the  G. 
fVUd.  14.  11.  a  visitation  upon  the  idols  of  the  G, 

1  ..Vac. 2.12.  our  sanctuary,  iheG.  h.iveprofined  il 

48.  recovered  the  law  out  ofthe  hand  ofthe  G. 

3.  10.  then  Apollonius  gathered  the  G.  together 

4.  60.  lest  the  G.  should  or)me  and  tread  it  donm 

5.  1.5.  and  nil  Galilee  ofthe  G.  arc  assembled 

6.  .'>3.  they  that  were  delivcrrd  from  the  G. 

2  Mae.  6.  4.  temple  was  filled  with  revelling  by  G. 
9.  would  not  conform  to  ihe  miinmrs  of  iho  G, 

11   2.  to  make  the  city  a  habit-ilion  ofthe  G. 
24.  to  ho  brought  unto  the  riistom  of  G. 
14.  3.  the  times  of  mincling  with  tlie  G. 
GENTLE. 
2  Mac.  15.  12.  g.  in  condition,  well  spoken  also 

GEON. 
Feci.  24.  27.  nnd  ns  G.  in  the  lime  ofvintA^ 

GERGESHITES. 
Jud.5. 16.  they  cast  forth  before  thorn  tlie  G. 

GESEM. 
Jud.  1.  9.  the  king  sent  unio  all  the  land  of  O. 
GET. 

1  F.»(/.  4.5.  if  they  g.  the  victory  thoy  bring  all 

2  Fad.  7.  58.  if  ho  g.  the  victory  he  shall  rucotre 
16.  44.  as  thoy  that  shall  g.  no  children 


ArOCKVPHA.] 


GIV 


lE*<i.l6.46.in  captivity  and  famine  shall  ^. children 
Eccl.  4.  7.  g.  thyself  the  love  of  the  congregation 
13  11.  smiling  on  thee,  he  will  g.  thy  secrets 
27.  19.  and  thuu  shall  not^.  him  again 
51.28.^.  learning  with  a  great  sum  of  money,  and 
g.  much  gold  by  her,  rejuico  in  his  mercy 

1  Mac.  3.  14.  I  will  g.  me  a  name  in  the  kingdom 

6.  44.  that  he  mighty,  hiin  a  perpetual  name 

2  Mac.  5.  6.  that  to^.  the  day  of  his  own  nation 

GETTKTH. 
Eccl.  21.  11.  g.  the  understanding  thereof 
3ti.  l!4.  he  that  g.  a  wife,  beginneth  a  possession 

UETTING. 
ff'isd.  13. 19.  for  gaining  and  g.  and  good  success 

15.  12.  for  say  they,  we  must  be  g.  every  way 
jEccZ.42.4.  be  not  lliou  ashamed  of^.  much  or  little 
Bar.  3.  17.  thev  that  made  no  end  of  Iheir  g. 

GHOST. 
2  Esd.  14.  22.  sent  the  Holy  G.  into  me 
Tnb.  14. 11.  lie  gave  up  the  g.  in  the  bed,  158  years 
2  Mac.  3.  31.  who  lay  ready  to  give  up  the  g. 

GIANT. 
Eccl.i'.i.  slew  he  not  a  ^.  when  he  was  yet  young'? 

1  Mac.  3.  3.  he  put  on  a  breast  plate  as  a  g. 

GIANTS. 
Jud.  16.  7.  nor  did  the  high  g.  set  upon  him 
fVisd.  14. 6.  in  old  lime  when  the  proud  g.  perished 
Keel.  Id.  7.  he  was  not  pacified  toward  the  old  g. 
£or.  3.2G. there  werea'.  famous  from  the  beginning 
GIFT. 

2  Esd.  2.  37.  O  receive  the  g.  that  is  given  you 
Tob.  2.  14.  it  wa^  given  for  a  g.  more  than  wages 

4.  1 1.  for  alms  is  a  good  g.  to  all  that  give  it 
Jud.  16.  IS),  she  gave  the  canopy  for  a^.  to  the  L. 
IVisd.  3.  14.  shall  be  given  the  special  g.  of  faith 
8.21.  a  point  of  wisdom  to  know  whose  x,'. she  was 
Eccl.  1. 10.  she  is  with  all  flesh  according  to  his  «-. 

7.  31.  give  him  the  g.  of  the  shoulders 

33.  a  g.  hath  grace  in  the  sight  of  every  man 
11.17.  the  ^.oflhe  Lord  remaineth  with  the  godly 
18.  16.  so  is  a  word  better  than  a  g. 

17.  lo,  is  not  a  word  better  than  a  g.? 

18.  a.  g.  of  the  envious  consumeth  the  eyes 

20. 10.  there  is  a  g.  that  shall  not  profit  thee,  and 
there  is  a  g.  whose  recompense  is  double 
14.  the  g.  of  .1  fool  shall  do  thee  no  good 
26. 14.  a  silent  and  loving  woman  is  a  g.  of  the  L. 

41.  21.  or  to  take  away  a  portion  or  a  g. 

42.  3.  or  of  the  g.  of  the  heritage  of  friends 

1  Mac.  10. 39. 1  give  it  as  a  free  g.  to  the  s^inctuary 

2  Mac.  15. 16.  lake  this  holy  sword,  a  g.  from  God 

GIFTS. 

1  Esd.  2.  7.  help  him  with  g.  horses,  and  cattle 
9.  ihey  helped  them  with  very  many  free  g. 

3.  .5.  to  him  shall  king  Darius  give  great  g. 

8.  13.  carry  the  g.  to  the  Lord  of  Israel  lo  Jerus. 
Tob.  13.  11.  many  nations  shall  come  with  g,  in 

their  hands,  even  g.  to  the  King  of  heaven 
Jud.  4.  14.  with  vows  and  free  ^.  of  the  people 

16.  18.  otFered  their  free  offerings  and  their  g. 
IVisd.  7.  14.  for  the  g.  that  come  from  learning 
Eccl.  1.  18.  both  which  are  the  g.  of  God 

20.  29.  presents  and  g.  blind  the  eyes  of  the  wise 

34.  18.  the  "•.  of  unjust  men  are  not  accepted 

35.  9.  in  all  thy  g.  shew  a  cheerful  countenance 
12.  do  not  think  to  corrupt  with  g. 

Bar.  6. 27.  they  set  g.  before  iheni  as  to  dead  men 
\Mac.  3.30.  nor  to  have  such  g.  to  give  so  liberally 
>10.  24.  I  will  promise  them  dignities  and  g. 

12. 43.  received  him  honourably,  and  gave  him  g. 

15.  5.  and  whatever  g.  besides  they  granted 

2  Mac.  1.  35.  the  king  took  many  ^.  and  bestowed 
2.  13.  the  epistles  of  kings  concerning  the  holy  g. 
3.2.kingsdid  magnify  the  temple  with  their  best  w-. 
9.16.  holy  temple  he  would  garnish  with  goodly /t. 

GILDED. 
Bar.  6.  8.  they  themselves  are  g.  and  laid  over 

GIRD. 
2  Esd.  16.2.  "•.  up  yourselves  with  clothes  of  sack 

GIRDED. 
2  Mac.  10.  25.  and  g.  their  loins  with  sackcloth 

GIRDLE. 
Jud.d.2.  who  loosened  the^.  of  a  maid  to  defile  her 

GIRT. 
Jud.  4. 14.  priesU  had  their  loins  g.  with  sackcloth 
Ecr.l.  22.  16.  as  timber  g.  and  bound  together 

1  Mnc.  3.  3.  lie  g.  his  warlike  harness  about  him 
6.  37.  and  were  g.  fast  unto  them  with  devices 

2  Mac.  3.  19.  the  women  tr.  with  sackclolh  under 

GIVE. 

1  Eid.  2. 19.  they  will  not  only  refuse  to  g.  tribute 
4.60.  for  tolhee  I  g.  thanks,  O  Lord  of  our  fathers 

8.  19.  Ihey  shoulil  g.  it  him  with  speed 

79.  and  to  g.  us  food  in  the  lime  of  servitude 

9.  8.  by  confVssing  g.  glory  to  the  Lord  God 
54.  and  lo  g.  part  to  them  that  had  nothing 

2  Esd.  2.  20.  g.  to  the  poor,  defend  the  orphan 

34.  he  shall  g.  you  everlasting  rest,  he  is  nigh 
3.19.  thou  mightcst  ^z-.  the  law  to  the  seed  of  Jacob 
5.5.  Cne  stone  shall  g.  bia  voice,  people  be  troubled 

N  *    793 


GIV 

2  Esd.  6.  23.  and  the  trumpet  shall  g.  a  sound 
45.  commandedst  that  moon  should  g.  her  light 

7.  65.  for  he  is  ready  to  g.  where  il  needolh 

8.  6.  and  culture  if  thou  g.  us  seed  to  our  heart 

24.  g.  ear  to  the  petition  of  thy  creature 
Tob.'S.n.tog.SatSifar  a  wife  to  Tobias  son  of  Tobit 

4.  7.  g.  alms  of  thy  substance,  thy  eye  not  envious 
8.  if  thou  hast  abundance,  g.  alms  accordingly ; 
if  little,  be  not  afraid  to  ^.  according  to  that 
11.  for  alms  is  a  good  gift  to  all  that  g.  it 
14.wages  not  tarry  with  thee, but  "-.  itoiit  of  hand 
16.^.  of  thy  bread  lo  the  hungry,  and  of  garments 

17.  hut^.  nothing  to  the  wicked 

5.3. man  may  go  with  lhee,and  I  will  ff.  him  wages 
14.  bill  tell  me,  what  wages  shall  I  g.  thee  ■? 

7.  12.  the  merciful  God  g.  you  good  success 

18.  the  Lord  ^.  thee  joy  for  this  thy  sorrow 
10.  11.  God  g.  you  a  prosperous  journty 

12.  1.  have  his  wages,  and  ihou  must  g.  him  more 
2.  O  Father,  it  is  no  harm  to  me  to  g.  him  half 
8.  it  is  heller  to^.  alms  than  lo  lay  up  gold  * 

20.  nor  therefore  g.  God  thanks 

13.  10.  g.  praise  to  ihe  Lord,  for  he  is  good 
Jud.  4.  12.  would  not  g.  their  children  for  a  prey 
Estk.  14.  12.  g.  me  boldness,  O  King  of  nations 

13.  g.  me  eloquent  speech  in  my  mouth 
If^isd.  6.  2.  g.  ear,  ye  that  rule  the  people 
8. 12.  when  I  speuk,  they  shall  g.  good  ear  to  me 

9.  4.  g.  me  wisdom  that  sittest  by  thy  throne 

17.  except  thou  g.  wisdom,  and  send  thy  Spirit 

16.  28.  we  must  prevent  the  sun  to  g.  thee  thanks 
Eccl.  1.  26.  the  Lord  shall  g.  her  unto  thee 

4.  3.  and  defer  not  to  g.  lo  him  that  is  in  need 

5.  and  g.  him  none  occasion  to  curse  thee 
8.  g.  him  a  friendly  answer  with  meekness 

19.  she  will  forsake  him,  and  g.  him  over  to  ruin 

5.  11.  be  swift  to  hear,  wiih  patience  g.  answer 
6.23.^.  ear,  my  son,  receive  my  advice,  refuse  not 

37.  he  shall  g.  thee  wisdom  at  thine  own  desire 
7. 10.  be  not  faint-hearted,  neglect  not  lo  g.  alms 

25.  but^.  her  to  a  man  of  understanding 

26.  but  g.  not  thyself  over  to  a  light  woman 
31.  g.  him  his  portion  as  it  is  commanded  thee 

8.  9.  learn  lo  g.  answer  as  need  reqiiireth 

9.  2.  g.  not  thy  soul  to  a  woman,  to  set  her  fool 

6.  g.  not  thy  soul  unto  harlots,  that  thou  lose 
10.2S.o'.il  honour  according  to  the  dignity  thereof 
12.  4.  g.  to  the  godly  man,  and  help  not  a  sinner 

5.  but  g.  not  to  the  ungodly,  g.  it  not  to  him 

7.  g.  unto  the  good,  ami  help  not  the  sinner 

14.  II.  my  son,  g.  the  Lord  his  due  offering 

13.  stretch  out  thy  hand,  and  g.  to  him 

16.  g.  and  take,  and  sanctify  thy  soul 

15.3.  she  shall  g.  him  the  walerof  wisdom  lo  drink 

17.  22.  g.  repentance  to  his  sons  and  daugliters 

27.  instead  of  them  which  live  and  g.  thanks 

18.  23.  and  will  g.  praise  lo  him  that  found  her 
23.  4.  O  God  of  my  life,  g.  me  not  a  proud  look 

6.  and  g.  not  over  me  into  an  impudent  mind 
25.  13.  g.  me  any  plague  but  the  plague  of  heart 

25. ir.  the  water  no  passage,  nor  a  wicked  woman 
26.^.  her  a  bill  of  divorce,  and  let  her  go 
29.  27.^.  place,  stranger,  to  an  honourable  man 
30. 11.  g.  him  no  liberty  in  his  youth,  wink  not 

21.  g.  not  over  thy  mind  to  heaviness 
33.19.n'.nol  thy  son.wife,  brother  and  friend  power 

over  thee,  g.  not  ihy  goods  to  another 

20.  while  thou  livesl,  g.  not  thyself  over  to  any 
33.  8.  g.  the  Lord  his  honour  with  a  good  eye 

10.  g.  to  the  Most  High  according  as  he  hath 

enriched  thee,  g.  with  a  cheerful  eye 

11.  the  Lord  will  g.  thee  seven  times  as  much 

36.  15.  g.  testimony  lo  those  thou  h.Tst  possessed 

37.  27.  what  is  evil  for  it,  g.  not  that  unto  it 

38.  11.  g.  a  sweet  savour  and  memorial  of  flour 

14.  that  he  would  prosper,  that  which  Ihey  g. 
39.5.  he  will  ^.his  heart  early  to  resort  to  the  Lord 

6.  he  shall  g.  thanks  to  the  Lord  in  his  prayer 
14.  g.  ye  a  sweet  savour  as  frankincense 

;{3.  he  will  g.  every  thing  needful  in  season 
41.  19.  and  of  scorning  to  «•.  and  take 
45.  26.  God  g.  you  wisdom  in  your  heart 
.50.20.  to  g.  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  with  his  lips 
51.  30.  in  his  time  he  will^.  you  your  rewiird 
Bar.  1.  20.  to  g.  us  a  land  that  flows  with  milk 
2.  14.  g.  us  favour  in  sight  of  them  that  led  us 

17.  they  will  g.  to  the  Lord  neither  praise  nor 

18.  but  the  hungry  soul  shall  g.  thee  praise 
31.  for  I  g.  them  a  heart,  and  ears  lo  hear 

4.  3-.  g.  not  thine  honour  to  another,  nor  things 

6.  28.  but  to  the  poor  Ihey  g.  nothing  of  it 
35.  they  can  neither  g.  riches  nor  money 

53.  neither  can  they  set  up  a  king,  nor  g.  rain 
67.  nor  shine  as  the  sun,  nor  g.  light  as  the  moon 
Dan.  3.  20.  deliver  us,  and  rr.  glory  to  thy  name 
1  Mae.  2.  50.  and  g.  your  lives  for  the  covenant 

8.  4.  the  rest  did  g.  them  tribute  every  year 

7.  should  pay  a  great  tribute,  and  "•.  hostages 

9.  55.  he  could  not  g.  order  concerning  his  house 

10.  28.  be  faithful  to  us,  we  will  g.  you  reward! 

5K 


GLA 

1  Mac.  10.  54.  and  g.  me  now  thy  daughte  jto  wife 
II.  9.  make  a  league,  I  will  g.  thee  my  daughter 
15.  6.  I  g.  thee  leave  also  to  coin  money 
ijyiac.  1.  3.  God  g.  you  all  a  heart  to  serve  him 
7.23.  will  of  his  mercy  S-.  you  breath  and  life  again 
9.  20.  if  ye  fare  well,  \  g.  great  thanks  lo  God 
15.  33.  they  should  g.  it  hv  pieces  to  the  fowia 
GIVEN. 
1  Esd.  1.  6.  the  commandm.  which  was^-.  to  Moses 
7.  these  things  were  g.  of  the  king's  allowance 
32.  and  this  was  g.  out  fur  an  ordinance 
2.  27.  the  men  therein  were  g.  to  rebellion 
4.  liO.  bles-scd  art  Ihou  who  hasl^.  ine  wisdom 
62.  because  he  had  g.  them  freedom  and  liberty 
6. 25.  expenses  g.  out  of  Ihe  house  of  king  Cyrua 
2£;«(i.  7.46.  better  iiol  to  have  ^i-.the  earth  to  Adam, 
or  else  when  il  was  g.  to  have  restrained  him 

8.  10.  Commanded  out  ol  the  breasts  milk  to  be  g. 
Tob.  5.  19.  which  Ihe  Lord  hath  g.  us  to  live  with 
6.  10.  that  she  may  he  g.  thee  for  a  wife 

13.  that  this  maid  hatli  been  g.  lo  seven  men 
15.   O  my  brother,  she  shall  be  g.  thee  to  wife, 
for  this  night  she  shall  be^.  Ihee  in  marriage 
7. 11. 1  have^.  my  daughter  in  marriage  to  7  men 

11.  1.  thai  he  had  g.  him  a  prosperous  journey 
.Tiid.  8.  19.  our  fathers  were  g.  to  ihe  sword 

9.  4.  Ihoii  hast  g.  their  wivfs  for  a  prey 

10.  12.  for  they  shall  be  g.  you  lo  be  consumed 
F.i'lh.  14.  6.  hast  n-.  us  into  ihe  hands^f  our  enemicj 
IVisd.  7.7.  I  prayeil,  and  understanding  was  g.  ma 

15.  lo  conceive  for  llie  things  that  are  g. 
17.  he  hath  g.  ine  certain  knowledge  of  things 
11.4.  water  was  «•.  thnm  out  of  the  flinty  rock 

18.  4.  the  law  was  lo  he  g.  to  the  world 

6.  knowing  to  what  oattis  ihey  had  "■   credence 
KccZ.15.17.  and  whi-lher  him  likelh,  shall  be  "-.  him 
2U.  neither  hath  he  g.  any  man  licence  lo  sin 
17.  10.  every  man  from  his  youih  is  g.  to  evil 

19.  1.  labouring  man  that  is  g.  to  drunkenness 
24.  18.  I  am  g.  to  all  my  children  named  of  him 
26.  3.  which  shall  be^.  in  the  portion  of  them 

23.  a  wicked  woman  is  g.  to  a  wicked  man,  but 
a  godly  woman  is  ir.  to  him  that  feareth  Lord 
29.  15.  for'  he  hath  g.  his  life  for  thee 

37.  21.  for  grace  is  not  g.  him  from  ihe  Lord 

38. 6.  hath  g.  men  skill  that  he  might  be  honoured 

41.  22.  and  after  ihoii  hast  g.  u|ibraid  not 

42.  17.  the  Lord  hath  not  g.  power  lo  the  aaintg 

43.  33.  and  to  the  godly  hath  he  g.  wisdom 

51.  2-2.  Lord  hath  g.  me  a  tongue  for  my  reward 

.s'u,«.  50.  God  hath  g.  thee  the  honour  of  an  elder 

llel  32.  they  had  g.  lhe;n  every  day  two  carcases, 

which  then  were  not  o'.  them  to  devour  Daniel 

1  Mac.  4.  55.  who  had  g.  them  good  success 
10.  8.  they  heard  the  king  had  g.  him  authority 

45.exp(^nies  shall  be  jtr.out  of  the  king's  accounts 
89.  sent  a  buckle  of  gold,  as  the  use  is  to  be  g. 

2  Mac.  1.  18.  of  the  fire  which  was  g.  us 

8.23.  and  when  he  had  g.  them  this  watch-word 
28.  they  had  g.  part  of  the  spoils  lo  the  maimed 
10.  38.  prai.sed  God,  who  had  4/.  them  the  victory 
13.  15.  and  having  g  the  watch-word  lo  them  . 
GIVEST. 
2  Esd.  5.  45.  that  Ihou  which  g.  life  to  all 
Tob.  4.  7.  when  ihou  "-.  alms,  let  not  thine  eye,  16. 
Jf^isd.  12.  19.  that  thou  g.  repentance  for  sins 
Eccl.  18. 15.  nor  use  words  when  thou  g.  any  thing 
31.  iflhou  g.  thy  soul  the  desires  that  please  her 

42.7.  writing  all  tliatthon  cr.  out  or  receivest  in 

GIVETH. 
2  Esd.  2.  46.  thai  g.  them  palms  in  their  hands 

a.  2.  it  shall  say  lo  thee,  ihil  it  g.  much  mould 
Tob.  4.  19.  the  Lord  himself  5-.  all  good  things 
Eccl.  1.  12.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  g.  gladness 

4   1.5.  whoso  g.  ear  lo  her  shall  judge  nations 

12.  3.  no  good  can  come  to  him  that  g.  no  alms 

20.  15.  he  g.  little,  and  upbraideth  much 

34.  17.  he  g.  life,  health,  ami  blessing 

35.  2.  and  tie  that  g.  alms  sacrificcth  praise 

38.  26.  he  g.  his  mind  lo  make  furrows 

."19.  1.  he  that  g.  his  mind  to  the  law  of  the  Lord 

42.  16.  the  sun  that  n-.  light,  looks  on  all  things 

50.  29.  leadeth  liim,  who  g.  wisdom  lo  the  godly 

51.  17.  ascribe  glory  to  him  that  ^.  me  wisdom 
2  Mac.  15.  21.  he  g.  it  to  such  as  are  worthy 

GIVING. 
2  Esd.  2.  37.  g.  thanks  to  him  that  ha«li  called  you 

13.  .57.  g.  praise  and  Ihanks  to  the  Most  High 
ffisd.  6. 18.  g.  heed  to  her  law  is  the  assurance  of 
Eccl.  17.  18.  and  g.  him  the  light  of  his  love 

43.  9.  an  ornament  g.  light  in  highest  places 

44.  3.  men  g.  counsel  by  Iheir  umleraiaiiding 
50.  7.  the  rainbow^,  light  in  the  bright  clouds 

1  Mac.  6.  38.  horsemen  g.  them  signs  what  to  do 

2  Mac.  8.  22.  g.  each  one  fifteen  hundred  men 
11. 11.  ^.  a  charge  on  their  enemies  like  lions 
15. 15.  gave  him  a  sword,  and  in  g.  it,  spake  thu« 

GLAD. 
2  Esd.  2.  .37.  receive  gift  that  is  given,  and  be  g. 
Tob.  13.13.  rejoice  and  be^-.  for  the  children  of  juil 


GLO 

Tab.  13. 14.  have  seen  ihy  glory,  shall  be^.foreTor 
Keel.  :tl.  '27.  wine  was  made  to  inuke  iiitn  g. 
Bar.  4.  J3.  lor  us  shu  was  g.  al  lliy  fall 

1  .Mac.  3.  7.  he  made  Jacob  g:  with  his  acts 
)0.  20.  we  have  heard  liereof  and  are  g. 

11.  44.  the  king  was  very  g.  o(  iheir  coming 

12.  12.  and  we  are  right /r.  of  your  honour 

14.  21.  wherclore  we  were  g.  of  their  coming 

GLAULY. 

2  Mac.  2.  27.'we  undertake  g.  this  groat  pains 

4.  12.  for  he  built  ^.  a  place  of  exercise 

GL.\D.\K6S. 

1  Esd.  4.  63.  they  feasted  with  g.  seven  days 

2  F.sd.  1.  37.  whose  litlie  ones  rejoice  in  g. 

2.  3. 1  brought  you  up  with  g.  with  sorrow  I  lost 
Id.  embrace  c'liildrtii,  bring  them  up  with  g. 
Jud.  10.  3.  elii!  put  on  her  garments  of  g. 
Eslh.  10. 13.  those  days  shall  be  with  g.  before  G. 
Eccl.  1.  11.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  glory  and  "■. 

12.  it  givelh  joy,  g.  and  a  long  life 

15.  6.  he  shall  tind  joy  and  a  crown  of  ^. 

•  30.  22.  the  g.  of  the  heart  is  the  life  of  man 
31.  28.  wine  measurably  drunk  bringeth  "-. 
35.  y.  and  dedicate  thy  tithes  with  g. 

Bar  4.2,3.  God  will  give  you  to  me  again  with  g. 

1  Mac.  4.  5fi.  they  otlered  burnt-olierings  w  ith  g. 

53.  thus  was  there  very  great  i'.  among  people 
59.  the  dedication  kept  with  mirth  and  g. 

5.  54.  so  they  went  up  to  mount  Sion  with  g. 
7.  48.  they  kept  that  day  a  day  of  great  g. 
10.  G().  Jonathan  ieturni:d  with  peace  and  g. 

13.  52.  that  that  day  should  be  kept  with  g. 

2  >fac.3.30.  for  the  temple  was  filled  with  joy  and  ^. 
10.  6.  and  they  kept  eight  days  with  g. 

GLASS. 
Ecel.  12.  11.  if  thou  hadst  wifieda  looking  ,f. 

GLISTERED. 
2  Esd.  10.  25.  on  a  sudden  her  countenance  g. 
1  Mac.  6.  3'J.  tlie  mountains  "■•  therewith 

GLISTERLNG. 

1  Ksd.  8.  57.  even  of  fine  brass  g.  like  gold 
Esth.  15.  t).  all  g.  with  gold  and  precious  stones 

2  Mae.  5.  3.  horsemen  with  o'.  of  goldenornameiits 

GLORY. 

1  Esd.  1.  33.  Ills  g.  and  understanding  in  the  law 

4.  17.  make  garments  for  men,  bring  g.  to  men 
59.  thine  is  the  g.  and  I  am  thy  servant 

5.  CI.  bis  mcrc-y  and  g.  is  for  ever  in  all  Israel 
9.  8.  and  by  confessing  give  g.  to  the  Lord 

2  Esd.  8. 21.  whose  g.  may  not  be  comprehended 
Tob.  13.  14.  when  they  have  seen  all  thy  g. 
Jud.  9.  7.  they  "-.  in  strength  of  their  footmen 

10.8.  accomplish  thy  enterpri^e5  to  the  "•.oflsrael 
15.  9.  they  said  to  her,  Ibou  art  the  g.  of  Israel 

Esth.  13.  12.  it  was  not  for  any  desire  of  »•. 

14.  1  did  this,  that  I  might  not  prefer  the  n-.  of 
man  above  the  ^r.  of  God,  nor  worship  any  but 

14.  9.  they  will  quench  the  g.  of  ihine  house 

15.  that  I  hate  the  g.  of  the  unrighteous 
Wisd.  t>.  2.  and  g.  in  the  multitude  of  nations 

7.  25.  flowing  from  the  g.  of  the  Almigliiy 

9.  10.  O  send  her  from  the  throne  of  thy  g. 

10.  14.  and  she  gave  him  perpetual  g. 
14.14.by  vain  g.  of  men  they  entered  into  tlie  world 

15. 9.  counted  it  bis  g.  to  make  counterfeit  things 
18.  24.  in  rows  was  the  g.  of  the  fathers  graven 

Eccl.  3.  10.  g.  not  in  the  dishonour  of  thy  father, 
for  Ihy  father's  dishonour  is  no  g.  to  Ihcc 
11.  g.  of  a  man  is  from  the  honour  of  his  father 
4.  21.  there  is  a  shame  which  is  g.  and  grace 
C.  29.  and  her  chains  shall  be  a  robe  of  g. 

9.  11.  envy  not"',  of  asiniier,  knowost  not  his  end 

10.  22.  their  g.  is  tlie  fiar  of  the  Lord 

11. 1*5.  shall  wax  old  with  tlieni  that  5-.  therein 

14.  27.  and  in  her  g.  shall  he  dwell 

17.  9.  he  gave  them  to  g.  in  his  marvellous  acts 

13.  their  eyes  saw  the  innjcsty  of  his  g. 
20.  11.  lliTi''  is  an  aba.^cment  because  of^. 

23.  28.  it  is  great  g.  to  follow  the  Lord 

24.  I.  wisdowi  jshall  g.  in  mid^t  of  her  people 

25.  6.  and  the  lear  of  God  is  their  p. 

31.  10.  been  found  perfect,  thon  let  him  g. 

3fi.  14.  iin.l  fill  thy  people  with  Ihy  g. 

37.26.a  wise  man  shall  inherit  ;rr.amoiig  his  people 

30.  8.  he  shall  g.  in  the  hiw  of  his  rovenunt 

40.  3.  from  him  that  silteth  on  a  throne  it( g. 

27.  the  fear  of  the  Lonl  covere'h  him  above  all  g. 
42.16.  the  work  thereof  is  full  oflhe  "-.  of  the  Lord 

17.  wha'soevcr  is,  mijhl  be  established  for  his^. 

25.  who  -^hall  bo  filled  with  beholding  his  g. 

43.  9.  g.  oflhe  starn,  nn  ornament  giving  light 

44.  2.  the  Lord  hath  wrought  jrcal  g.  by  them 

7.  all  these  were  the  g.  of  their  times 
13.  and  their  g.  shall  not  be  blotted  out 
19.  in  g.  was  there  none  like  unto  him 

43.  3.  and  he  shewed  him  part  of  his  a. 
1.  and  he  clothed  him  with  a  robe  of /r. 

8.  he  put  npoM  'lim  perfect  g.  ami  sirenirthened 
23.  ihr  tlvrd  in  g.  is  Phinees  son  of  Eleiizar 
9R.  and  that  their  g.  may  cnduro  for  ever 

794 


GO 

^ccZ.  4G.  2.  how  great  ^.  gat  he  whenlifi  his  hands? 

47.  6.  in  that  he  gave  him  a  crown  of  ^. 

8.  he  praiseil  the  Most  High  with  words  of  ^. 

11.  he  gave  him  a  throne  of  g.  in  Israel 

48.  4.  and  who  may  g.  like  unto  thee  ! 

49.  5.  he  gave  their  g.  to  a  strange  nation 

12.  which  was  prepared  for  everlasting  g. 

50.  II.  and  was  clothed  with  the  perfection  of^. 

13.  so  were  all  the  sons  of  Aaron  in  their  g. 

51.  17. 1  ascribe  the  g.  to  him  that  giveth  wisdom 
Bar.  4.  24.  which  shall  come  on  you  with  great  g. 

37.  thy  sons  come,  rejoicing  in  the  g.  of  God 
5.  1.  the  g.  Cometh  from  God  for  ever 

2.  set  a  diadem  on  thy  head  the^.  of  Everlasting 
4. thy  name  shall  be  called  the^.of  God's  worship 

6.  God  bringeth  them  to  thee  exalted  with  g. 

7.  that  Israel  may  go  safely  in  the  ^.*)f  God 

9.  shall  lead  Israel  with  joy  in  the  light  of  his  ^. 
Dan.  3.  20.  deliver  ue,  and  give  g.  to  thy  name 

31.  blessed  art  thou  in  the  temple  of  thy  holy  g. 

Prayer  of  Manass.  the  majesty  of  thy  g.  cannot  be 

borne,  thine  is  the  g.  for  ever  and  ever 

1  Mac.  1.  40.  as  had  been  her  g.  so  her  dishonour 
2.  8.  her  temple  is  become  aa  a  man  without  "■. 

12.  even  our  beauty  and  oui  g.  is  laid  waste 
G2.  for  his  g.  shall  be  dung  and  worms 
64.  for  by  the  law  shall  you  obtain  g. 
10.  .W.  celebrated  her  marriage  with  great  j^. 

14.  21.  they  certified  us  of  your  ^.  and  honour 

15.  32.  and  when  he  saw  the  g.  of  Simon 
3').  made  report  to  him  of  the  ^.  of  Simon 

2  Afac.  2. 8.  and  the  g.  of  the  Lord  shall  appear 
5.1().  were  dedicated  to^.  and  honour  of  the  place 

20.  so  again  it  was  set  up  with  all  g. 
GLORIETH. 
Eccl.  38.  25.  that  g.  in  the  goad,  that  driveth  oxen 
GLORIFY. 

1  Esd.  8.  05.  to  g.  his  liou^e  that  is  in  Jerusalem 
fVi.sd.  18.  8.  by  the  same  thou  didst  g.  us 

19.  22.  didst  niagnify  thy  people  and  g.  them 
Eccl.  10.  28.  my  son,  g.  thyself  in  meekness 
36.  6.  shew  signs,  g.  thy  hand  and  thy  right  arm 
43.  30.  when  you  g.  the  Lord,  exalt  him  as  much 
GLORIFIED. 

2  Esd.  8.  49.  not  judged  thyself  worthy  to  he  g. 
Dan.  3.28.  the  three  praised  g.  and  blessed  God 

SO.blessed  is  thy  glorious  holy  name,  to  be  praised 

and  g.  above  all  for  ever,  31,  32,  33,  34. 

GLORIOUS. 

1  Esd.  1.5R.  as  for  her  g.  things,  thoy  never  ceased 

2  fi.S(/.  2.  39.  have  received  "■.garments  of  the  Ld 
Tol).  3.  11.  and  thy  holy  and  "-.  mime  is  blessed 
8.  5.  blessed  is  thy  holy  and  g.  name  for  ever 
14.5.hou8eofGod  shall  be  built  with  a  ^.building 

Jud.  0.  8.  tabernacle,  where  thy  g.  name  restelh 

16.  13.  O  Lord,  thou  art  gie.Ht,  g.  and  wondcrCu 
Ka-(A.  11.11.  the  lowly  exalted,  and  devoured  the ^. 

14.  2.  and  she  laid  away  her  g.  apparel 

15.  1.  on  the  thinl  day  she  put  on  her  g.  apparel 

16.  4.  but  also  lifted  up  with  the  g.  words 
fVifd.  3.  15.  for^rr.  is  the  fruit  of  good  labours 

5.  16.  they  shall  receive  a  g.  kingdom 

6.  12.  wisdom  is  g.  and  never  fadeth  away 
Ei-.cl.  17.  13.  and  their  ears  heard  his  g.  voice 

27.  8.  thou  shalt  put  her  on  as  a  g.  long  robe 
43.  1.  the  beauty  of  heaven,  with  his^.  shew 
12.  it  compasseth  the  heaven  with  a  g.  circle 
45.  2.  he  made  him  like  to  the  g.  saints 

3.  he  made  him  g.  in  the  sight  of  kings 

49  8.  it  was  Ezekiel  who  saw  the  g.  vision 
Dan.  3.  20.  that  thou  art  g.  over  the  whole  world 
Prayer  nf  Manass.  by  thy  terrible  and  g.  name 

1  Mac.  0.  9.  her  g.  vessels  aie  carried  away 

14.  9.  and  th<'  young  men  put  on  g.  apparel 

2  Mac.  4.  24.  for  the  g.  appearance  of  his  power 
8.  .35.  flatting  ofT^.  npparel,  he  came  to  Antioch 

15.  13.  there  appeared  a  man  exceeding  a*-. 

34.  so  every  man  praised  the  g.  Lord,  saying 

GLORIOUSLY. 

Tnh.  14.  5.  return  and  huihl  up  Jerusalem  "■■ 

Eslh.  15.2.  being  ;f.  adorned,  she  took  two  maids 

'iMac.  6.  19.  rather  to  die  g.  than  to  live  stained 

GLORYING. 
Eccl.  9.  16.  let  thv  e-  be  in  Ibe  fear  of  the  Lord 

■  GLUF.TH. 
Eccl.  22.  7.  as  one  that  g.  n  potsherd  together 

GNASH. 
Eccl.  30.  10.  and  I.st  tho.i  g.  thy  teeth  in  the  end 

GNAWRI). 
Bar.  0. 20.  their  hearts  mpg.nn  by  things  creeping 

GO. 
I  Esd.  1.  16.  it  was  not  lawful  to  g.  from  servirn 

2.  5.  let  him  g.  up  to  Jerusalem  that  is  in  Jiidea 
4.4.  if  he  send  th"m  against  the  enemies,  tliey  g. 

8.  10.  the  .lews  should  n--  with  thee  to  Ji^rusalem 
27.  I  gathered  men  oflsrnel  to  g.  up  with  me 
45.  that  they  should  ir.  to  Siiddeu"  the  captain 

Tnh.  1.  15.  that  I  could  not  g.  into  Media 

3.  fi.  that  I  may  g.  into  the  everbLstin;  place 

4.  15.  neither  let  drunkenness  g.  with  thea 


GOI 


I  ArO(  RYPBA 


Tab.  5.  IG.  his  father  Eaid,|f.  thou  with  this  man 
10.  7.  let  me  "•.  for  my  father  and  mother  look  no 

8.  they  shall  declaie  how  things  "-.  with  thee 

9.  Tobias  said,  no,  but  let  me  g.  to  my  father 
12.  17.  fear  not,  for  it  shall  g.  well  with  you 
14.  4.  g.  into  Media,  my  eon,  for  I  believe 

9.  keep  the  law,  that  it  may  g.  well  with  tht>« 
Jud.  8.  3.5.  g.  in  peace,  the  Lord  g.  before  thee 

10.  9.  that  I  may  g.  to  accomplish  the  thmgs 

13.  whereby  he  snail  g.  and  win  the  hill  coiiDtrj 

11.  17.  and  thy  servant  will  g.  out  by  night 
18.  then  thou  shall  g.  forth  with  thine  army 

12.  6.  that  thine  handinaid  may  g.  io  prayer 

11.  g.  now  and  persuade  this  Hebrew  woman 

12.  will  be  a  shame  if  wo  let  such  a  woman  g 

13.  12.  they  made  baste  to  g.  down  to  the  gate 

14.  2.  g.  forth  every  valiant  man  out  of  the  city 
Eath.  13.  7.  may  with  violence  g.  into  the  grave 
IVisd.  1. 11.  word  so  secret  shall  g.  for  nought 

2.  9.  let  none  of  us  g.  without  his  part 

6.  23.  neither  will  I  g.  with  consuming  envy 

15.  15.  as  for  their  feet  they  are  slow  to  g. 
Eccl.  1.  13.  it  shall  g.  well  with  him  at  the  last 

2.7.  ye  Ihat  fear  the  Lord,  g.  not  aside  lest  you  fal 
3. 17.  my  son,  g.  on  with  thy  business  in  meekness 

5.  4.  the  Lord  will  in  no  wise  let  thee  g. 

0.  g.  not  into  every  way,  for  so  doth  the  sinner 

6.  27.  when  thou  liiist  got  hold,  let  her  not  g. 

8. 14.  "•.  not  to  law  with  the  judge,  they  will  judge 

16.  g.  not  with  bim  into  a  solitary  place 
9.  12.  remember  they  shall  not^.  unpunished 
12. 1 1.  though  he^.  crouching,  yet  take  good  heed 

14.  22.  g.  after  her  as  one  that  traceth 

].«.  30.  g.  not  after  thy  lusts,  but  refrain  thyself 
2^2.  13.  g.  not  to  bim  that  hath  no  understanding 
25.  26.  if  she  "■.  not  as  thou  wouldest  have  her 
27.  19.  as  one  thatletteth  a  bird  g.  out  of  his  hand 
29.  24.  a  miserable  life  to  g.  from  house  to  house 

31.  21.  if  thou  hast  been  forced  to  eat,  g.  vomit 

32.  10.  before  a  shamefaced  man  shall  g.  favour 

20.  "•.  not  in  a  wav  wherein  thou  mnyest  fall 
33   25.  but  if  thou  l-^t  him  g.  idle,  he  shall  seek 

31.  which  way  wilt  thou  g.  to  seek  him  ? 

3H.  12.  let  him  not  g.  tor  thoii  hast  need  of  him 

32.  not  dwell  where  they  will,  nor  ^.  up  and  down 
40. 1.  from  the  day  that  they  5'.  out  of  the  womb 
43.  30.  not  weary,  for  you  can  never  g.  far  enough 

i?ar.  3.  11.  with  them  ihat  ^.  down  into  the  grave 

4.  19.  g.  your  way,  O  my  children,  g.  vour  way 

5.  7.  Israel  may  g.  safely  in  the  glory  ot  God 
6. 9.  as  it  were  for  a  virgin  that  loves  to  g.  gay 

58.  they  that  are  strong  do  take  and  g.  away 
Bel  11.  so  Haal's  priests  said,  Io,  we  g.  out 
34.  g.  carry  the  dinner  thou  hast  to  Babylon 

1  Mnc.  1.  11.  let  us  g.  and  make  a  covenant 
2.22.  to  the  king's  words  to  g.  from  our  religion 

3.  13.  a  multitude  tn  g.  out  with  bim  to  war 
14.1  will  get  a  name,  for  I  « ill  ^.  fight  withJudai 

5.  57.  let  us  "■.  figlit  against  the  heathen 
9.  8.  let  us  arise  and  g.  up  against  our  encmiee 
13.  16.  send  hostages  and  we  will  let  bim  g. 
10.  neither  would  he  let  Jonathan^. 

15.  14.  neither  suffered  he  any  to  g.  out  or  in 
2.5.  Trvphon  could  neither  x'.  out  nor  in 

2  Mac.  2.  30.  and  to  g.  over  things  at  large 

5.  1.5.  but  presumed  to  g.  into  the  holy  temple 

6.  7.  the  Jews  were  compelled  to  g.  in  procession 

11.  26.  ever  g.  cheerfully  about  their  own  affaire 

12.  24.  he  besought  to  let  him  g.  with  his  life 
2.5.  let  him  g.  for  saving  of  their  brethren 

15.  2.  the  Jews  thai  were  compelled  lo^.  with  him 

GOEST. 
.^ud.  10.  12.  whence  comest  Ibou?  whither  g.  thon? 
Feci.  9.  13.  that  thou  g.  in  the  midst  of  snares 

GOETH. 
1  Fsd.  4.  23.  a  mnn  g.  his  way  to  rob  and  steal 

21.  a  man  looketb  on  a  lion,  and  g.  in  darkncM 

6.  )0.  the  work  g.  on  prosperously  in  their  handi 
>ri.«rf.6.16.she  g.  seeking  such  as  are  worthy  of  her 

7.  10.  licht  that  Cometh  from  her  never  g.  out 
12.  I  rejoiced,  became  wisdom  g.  before  them 
24.  she  jiassetb  .md  g.  throiisb  all  things 

/■>(•;.  2.  12.  woe  to  the  sinner  that  g.  two  ways 
111.  21.  the  fear  ofthe  Lord  g.  betore  nuthority 
12. 14.  so  one  that  g.  to  a  sinner,  and  is  defiled 
22.  24.  as  the  smoke  of  a  furnnre  g.  before  the  fire 
32.  10.  before  the  thunder  g.  lislilning 
Par.  2.  18.  the  soul  whirh  g.  stooping  and  feeble 
3.  33.  he  that  sendeih  for'h  light,  and  it  g. 

GOING. 
Ti'b.  2.  4.  until  the  g.  down  ofthe  sim 
7.  after  the  g.  down  oflhe  sun  I  made  a  grave 
5.  17.  astaffof  our  hand  ing.  in  niid  oiil  before  na 
./ad.  1.  4.  for  the  ;'.  forth  of  bi«  imshty  armiei 
IVisd.  3.  3.  their  g.  from  n«  to  be  utter  deatruclioo 
7.  6.  hiivn  an  entranrn  to  life  and  the  like  g.  onl 
23.  nnil  g.  ihrniicb  all  iinderstnnding,  pure  spirit! 
Sus.  S.  the  two  elders  saw  her  ."■.  in  every  day 
Bel  33.  who  was  g.  into  the  tielil  to  the  reapers 
1  Mac  3.  16.  came  near  to  the  g.  up  to  BethoroD 


Apocrypha.] 


GOD 


1  Mac.  3. 04.  pursued  from  the  "'.down  of  Betlioron 
S  JV/ac.S.SiJ.they  upheld  the  laws  that  wero^.  down 
9.  14  the  city,  to  the  which  he  was  g.  in  haste 
11.  36.  for  we  are  now  g.  to  Antioch 

GOAD. 
Eccl  38.  25.  that  glorieth  in  g.  that  driveth  oxen 

GOATS. 

Jud.^.  17.  sheep,  and  oxen,  and  ^.without number 

GOD. 

1  Eld.  4.  62.  they  praised  the  G.  of  their  fathers 

5.  53.  all  they  tiiat  had  made  any  vow  to  G. 
6.31.  offerings  may  be  made  to  the  most  high  G. 
P.  16.  that  do  according  to  the  will  of  thy  G. 

17.  thou  shalt  set  before  thy  G.  in  Jerusalem 
19.  the  reader  of  the  law  of  the  most  high  G. 

23.  according  to  the  wisdom  of  G.  ordain  judges 

24.  whosoever  shall  transgress  the  law  of  thy  G. 

9.  46.  the  Lord  G.  most  high,  the  G.  of  hosts 

2  Esd.  1. 29.  ye  my  people,  and  I  should  be  your  G. 

6.  42.  some  being  planted  of  G.  and  tilled 

7.  19.  he  said  to  me,  there  is  no  judge  above  G. 

8.  58.  said  in  their  heart,  that  there  is  no  G. 
16.  67.80  shall  G.  lead  you  forth  and  deliver  you 

75.  fear  nut,  neither  doubt,  for  G.  is  your  guide 
Tob-  1.  12.  I  remembered  G.  with  all  my  heart 

3.  16.  heard  bffore  the  majesty  of  the  great  G. 

4.  7.  the  face  of  G.  shall  hot  be  turned  away 

14.  for  if  thou  serve  G.  he  will  repay  thee 
21.  if  thou  fear  G.  and  depart  from  all  sin 

5.  16.  G.  send  you  a  good  journey,  and  G.  who 

dwelleth  in  heaven  prosper  your  journey, 
and  the  angel  of  G.  keep  you  company 

6.  17.  rise  up  and  pray  to  G.  who  is  merciful 

7.  12.  G.  give  you  good  success  in  all  things 

8.  5.  blessed  art  thou,  O  G.  of  our  fathers 

15.  then  Raguel  praised  G.  and  said,  O  G.  thou 
art  worthy  to  be  praised  with  all  holy  praise 

10.  11.  G.  give  you  a  prosperous  journey 

11.  14.  he  wept  and  said,  blessed  art  thou,  O  G 

16.  Tobit  went  out,  rejoicing  and  praising  G. 

17.  gave  thanks,  because  G.  had  mercy  on  him; 

G.  be  blessed  who  hath  brought  thee  to  us 

12.  6.  bless  G.  praise  and  mngnify  him;  it  is  good 

to  praise  and  shew  forth  the  works  of  G. 
7.  it  is  honourable  to  reveal  the  works  of^. 

11.  ii  was  honourable  to  reveal  the  workFof  G. 

14.  now  G.  hath  sent  me  to  heal  ihee  and  Sara 

17.  it  shall  go  well  with  you,  praise  G.  therefore 

16.  but  by  the  will  of  our  G.  I  came,  praise  him 
20.  now  therefore  give  G.  thanks  for  I  go  up 

13.  4.  and  he  is  the  G.  our  Father  for  ever 

15.  let  my  soul  bless  G.  the  great  King 

18.  blessed  be  G.  who  hath  extolled  it  for  ever 

14.  5.  again  G.  will  have  mercy  on  them,  and  the 

house  of  G.  shall  be  built  in  it  for  ever 

7.  his  peojile  shall  confess  6.  who  love  G.  in  truth 
Jiid.  3.  8.  all  tribes  shall  call  upon  him  as  G. 

4.  13.  so  G.  heard  their  prayers,  and  looked  on 
5-  8.  they  left  way  of  ancestors  and  worshipped 
the  G.  of  heaven,  the  G.  whom  they  knew 

12.  then  they  cried  to  their  G.  he  s.niote  Egypt 

13.  and  G.  dried  up  the  Red  sea  before  them 

17.  whilst  they  sinned  not  before  their  G.  because 

the  G.  that  hateth  iniquity  was  with  them 

19.  but  tiow  are  they  returned  to  their  G. 

20.  and  if  they  sin  against  their  G.  let  us  consider 
21.lestG.be  for  them,  and  we  become  a  reproach 

6.  2.  ami  who  is  G.  but  Nabuchodonosor  1 
3.  and  their  G.  shall  not  deliver  them 

18.  then  the  people  fell  down  and  worshipped  G. 

and  cried  unto  G.  saying 

19.  O  Lord  G.  of  heaven,  behold  their  pride 

21.  they  called  on  the  G.  of  Israel  all  night 

7.  24.  G.  be  a  judge  between  us  and  you 
25.  but  G.  hath  sold  us  into  their  hands 

8.  8.  none  gave  her  an  ill  word,  for  she  feared  G. 
12.  who  are  you  that  have  tomjited  G.  this  day, 

and  stand  instead  of  G.  amongst  children 

14.  can  you  search  out  G.  who  made  all  things! 

16.  do  not  bind  the  counsels  of  the  Lord  our  G. 
forG.  is  notas  man,  that  he  may  be  threatened 

00.  we  know  none  other  G.  therefore  we  trust 

9.  4.  O  G.  O  my  G.  hear  me  also  a  widow 

11.  for  thou  art  a  G.  of  the  alHicted,  a  helper 

12.  I  pray  thee,  OG.  of  my  father,  and  G.  of  the 

inheritance  of  Israel,  Lord  of  heavens 
1 4.acknowledge  that  thou  art  the  G.  of  all  power 

10.  1.  she  had  ceased  to  cry  to  the  G.  of  Israel 

8.  the  G.  the  G.  of  our  fathers  give  thoe  favour 
ll.lOnor  sword  prevail,pxcept  they  sin  agaiiist  G. 

12.  consume  all  those  things  G.  hath  forbidden 

13.  for  the  priests  that  serve  before  face  of  our  G. 

16.  G.  hath  sent  me  to  work  things  with  thee 

17.  thy  servant  serveth  the  G.  of  heaven  day 

and  night,  I  will  pray  to  G.  and  he 
will  tell  me 
23.  thy  G.  shall  be  my  G.  and  thou  slinlt  dwell 
13.  11.  G.  even  our  G.  is  with  us  to  shew  power 

14.  then  f  aid  she  to  them,  praise  G.  praise  G. 
10.  which  remember  tht-  power  of  G.  for  ever 

795 


GOD 

Jud.  14.10.  when  Achior  had  seen  all  that  the  G.of 

Israel  had  done,  he  believod  in  G.  greatly 

16.  2.  Judith  salth,  begin  to  my  G.  with  timbrels 

3.  G.  breaketh  the  battles,  fur  ho  delivered  inu 
Estk.  10.  4.  said,  G.  hath  done  these  things 

9.  my  nation  is  Israel, which  cried  to  G.  and  were 

saved,  G.  hath  wrought  signs  and  wonders 

10.  ho  made  two  lots,  one  for  the  people  of  G. 

11.  lots  came  at  the  day  of  judgment  before  G. 

12.  so  G.  remembered  his  people  and  juslilied 
11.  10.  then  they  cried  to  G.  and  on  their  cry 

12.  and  what  G.  had  determined  to  do 

13.  14.  might  not  prefer  glory  of  man  above  glory 

of  G.  nor  will  I  worship  any  but  thee,  O  G. 

15. 2.  after  she  had  called  upon  G.  who  beholds 

8.  then  G.  changed  the  spirit  of  the  king 

13.  I  saw  thee,  my  lord,  as  an  angel  of  G. 
16.  4.  they  think  to  escape  the  justice  of  G. 

16.  that  they  be  children  of  the  most  high  G. 
18.  G.  who  ruleth  all  things, rendering  vengeance 
IVisd.  1.  6.  for  G.  is  witness  of  his  reins 

13.  for  G.  made  not  death,  nor  hath  pleasure 

2.  13.  he  professeth  to  have  the  knowledge  of  G. 

16.  he  maketh  his  boast  that  G.  is  his  father 

•  18.  if  the  just  man  be  sou  of  G.  he  will  help  him 
23.  for  G.  created  man  to  be  immortal 
3. 1.  the  souls  of  righteous  are  in  the  hand  of  G. 

5.  for  G.  proved  them,  and  found  them  worthy 

14.  nor  imagined  wicked  things  against  G. 

4.  1.  because  it  is  known  with  G.  and  with  men 
10.  he  pleased  G.  and  was  beloved  of  him 

17.  they  shall  not  understand  what  G.  decreed 

18.  but  G.  shall  laugh  them  to  scorn 

6.  4.  nor  have  walked  after  the  counsel  of  G. 

19.  incorruption  maketh  us  near  unto  G. 
7.14. which  they  that  use,  become  the  friends  ofG. 

15.  G.  hath  granted  me  to  speak  as  I  would 

25.  for  she  is  the  breath  of  the  power  of  G. 

26.  the  unspotted  mirror  of  the  power  of  G. 

27.  she  maketh  them  friends  of  G.  and  prophets 
28.G.loves  none  but  him  that  dwells  with  wisdom 

8.  3.  she  is  conversant  with  G.  she  magnifieth 

4.  for  she  is  privy  to  the  mysteries  of  G. 

21.  I  could  not  obtain  her,  except  G.  gave 

9.  1.  O  G.  of  my  fathers,  and  Lord  of  mercy 

13.  what  man  that  can  know  the  counsel  of  G.? 

10.  5.  she  preserved  him  blameless  unto  G. 

10.  she  shewed  him  the  kingdom  of  G. 

12. 7.  might  receive  a  worthy  colony  of  G.  childr. 
13.  nor  is  there  any  G.  but  thou,  that  careth 
26.  they  shall  feel  a  judgment  worthy  of  G. 

13.  1.  vain  are  all  men,  who  are  ignorant  of  G. 

6.  for  they  pcradventure  err,  seeking  G. 

14.8.  because  being  corruptible,  it  was  called  G. 

9.  they  are  both  alike  hateful  unto  G. 

11.  in  the  creature  of  G.  they  are  an  abomination 

20.  the  multitude  allured,  took  him  for  a  g. 

22.  that  they  erred  in  the  knowledge  of  G. 
.30.  both  because  they  thought  not  well  of  G. 

15  1.  but  thou,  O  G.  art  gracious  and  true 
8.  he  maketh  a  vain  g.  of  the  same  clay 

16.  but  no  man  can  make  a  g.  like  to  himself 
19.  but  they  went  without  the  praise  of  G. 

16.  18.  were  persecuted  with  the  judgment  of  G. 
18. 13.  acknowledged  this  people  to  be  sons  of  G. 
Eccl.  1.  18.  both  which  are  the  gifts  of  G. 
30.  so  G.  discover  thy  secrets  and  cast  thee  down 

3.  16.  that  angereth  his  mother  is  cursed  of  G. 

7.  9.  say  not,  G.  will  look  on  my  oblations,  when 

I  offer  to  the  most  high  G.  he  will  accept  it 
10.  5.  in  tho  hand  of  G.  is  the  prosperity  of  man 

7.  pride  is  hateful  before  G.  and  man 

12.  pride  is,  when  one  departeth  from  G. 
15.  13.  and  they  that  fear  G.  love  it  not 
18.  11.  therefore  is  G.  patient  with  them 

19. 24.  that  hath  small  understanding  and  fears  G. 

20.  15.  such  a  one  is  to  be  hated  of  G.  and  man 

21.  5.  prayer  of  a  poor  man  reacheth  to  ears  of  G. 
23.  4.  O  G.  of  my  life,  give  me  not  a  proud  look 

10.  he  that  swears  and  names  G.  continually 
12.  G.  grant  that  it  be  not  found  in  Jacob 

24.23.the  book  of  the  covenant  of  the  most  high  G. 
25.1.1  stood  beautiful,  both  before  G.  and  men 

6.  and  the  fear*of  G.  is  their  glory 
36.  5.  that  there  is  no  G.  but  only  thou,  O  G. 

17.  that  thou  art  the  Lord,  the  eternal  G. 

41.  8.  have  forsaken  the  law  of  the  most  high  G. 

19.  in  regard  of  the  truth  of  G.  ami  his  covenant 
45.  1.  even  Moses  beloved  of  G.  and  men 

26.  G.  give  you  wisdom  in  your  heart  to  judge 
40.  1.  was  made  great  for  saving  the  elect  of  G. 

47.  13.  for  G.  made  all  quiet  round  about  him 

48.  16.  some  did  that  which  was  pleasing  to  G. 

49.  3.  he  established  the  worship  of  G. 

50.  22.  now  therefore  bless  ye  the  6.  of  all 

51.  1.  I  will  praise  thee,  O  G.  my  Saviour 
Bar.3.35.  this  is  our  G.  {|  4. 6.  ye  moved  G.  to  wrath 

4.  7.  by  sacrificing  to  devils  and  not  to  G. 

8.  ye  have  forgotten  the  everlasting  G. 
37.  they  come,  rejoicing  in  tho  glory  of  G. 


GOD 

Bar.  5.  1.  the  glory  that  cometh  from  G.  for  em 

2.  the  righteousness  which  cometh  from  G. 

3.  G.  will  shew  thy  brightness  to  evuiy  couatry 

4.  shall  be  called,  the  glory  of  G.  worship 

5.  rejoicing  in  the  remembrance  of  G. 

6.  G.  bringelh  them  to  thee  exalted  with  glory 

7.  G.  hath  appointed  every  liigh  hill  be  cast  down 

8.  overshadow  IsrUol  by  thecorninandmenlof  G. 

9.  for  G.  shall  lead  Israel  with  joy 

6.  51.  and  that  there  is  no  work  of  G.  in  them 
Dan.  3.  1.  they  walked  in  the  lire,  praising  G. 

22.  let  them  know  thou  art  Lord,  the  only  G. 
Sus.  42.  G.  everlasting  G.  that  knowest  the  secret* 

50.  G.  hath  given  thee  tho  honour  of  an  elder 
55.  Daniel  said,  even  now  ihe  angel  of  G.  hath 
received  the  sentence  of  G.  to  cut  thee  in  two 
.W.  the  angel  of  G.  waiteth  with  the  sword 
60.  praised  G.  whosaveth  them  that  trust  in  him  , 
63.  they  praised  G.  for  their  daughter  Susanna 
Bel  4.  but  Daniel  worshipped  his  own  G. 
5.  the  living  G.  who  created  heaven  and  earth 

37.  take  the  dinner  which  G.  hath  sent  thee 

38.  Daniel  sai<l,  thou  hast  remembered  ine,  OG. 
Prayer  of  Maytass.  thou  art  the  G.  of  the  just,  for 

thou  art  G.  even  the  G.  of  them  that  repent 

1  Mac.  2.  21.  G.  forbid  we  should  forsake  the  law 
3.  18.  with  the  G.  of  heaven  it  is  all  one  to  deliver 

53.  able  to  stand,  except  thou  O  G.  help 
60.  as  the  will  of  G.  is  in  heaven,  so  let  him  do 
4.55.  worshipping  and  praising  the  G.  of  heaven 
9.  10.  G.  forbid  that  1  should  do  this  thing 

2  Mac.  1. 2.  G.  be  gracious  unto  you  and  remember 

27.  let  the  heathen  know  that  thou  art  G. 

2.  4.  that  the  [irophet  being  warned  of  G. 

7.  till  the  time  that  G.  gather  his  people  together 

17.  we  hope  that  the  G.  that  delivered  his  people 

3.  24.  all  were  astonished  at  the  power  of  G. 

28.  they  acknowledged  the  power  of  G. 

29.  for  he  by  the  hand  of  G.  was  cast  down 
34.  declare  to  all  men  the  mighty  power  of  G. 
36.  the  works  of  the  great  G.  which  lie  had  seen 
38.  no  doubt  there  is  an  f.spo.;ial  power  of  G, 

4.  17.  to  do  wickedly  against  the  laws  of  G. 

5. 19.  G.  did  not  choose  people  for  the  places' aako 
6. 1.  and  not  to  live  after  tlie  laws  of  G. 

23.  the  holy  law  made  and  given  by  G. 

7.  14.  to  look  for  hope  from  G.  to  be  raised  up 

16.  think  not  our  nation  is  forsaken  of  G, 

18.  we  suffer,  having  sinned  against  our  G. 

19.  thou  that  takest  in  hand  to  strive  against  O 
28.  G.  made  them  of  things  that  were  not 

31.  thou  shalt  not  escape  the  hands  of  G. 

36.  our  brethren  are  dead  under  G.  covenant 

37.  that  th'ou  mayest  confess  that  he  alone  is  G 

8.  23.glven  them  this  watcli-word,  the  help  ofG. 

30.  that  the  Jews  had  G.  to  fight  for  them 

9.  4.  the  judgment  ofG.  now  following  him 
5.  the  G.  of  Israel  smote  liiin  with  a  plague 

8.  shewing  forth  the  manifest  power  of  G. 
ll.acknowledgeof  himself  by  the  scourge  ofG. 

12.  it  is  meet  to  be  subject  to  G.  a  mortal  man 
should  not  think  of  himself  as  if  he  were  G. 

17.  that  he  would  declare  the  power  ofG. 

18.  the  just  judgment  ofG.  was  come  on  him 

20.  if  ye  fare  well,  I  give  great  thanks  to  G. 

10.  16.  besought  G.  that  he  would  be  their  helper 
25.  they  turned  themselves  to  pray  to  G. 

11.  4.  not  at  all  considering  the  power  of  G. 

9.  then  they  praised  the  merciful  G.  together 

13.  because  the  Almighty  G.  helped  them 

12.  6.  calling  on  G.  the  righteous  Judge 

11.  but  Judas'  side  by  the  help  ofG.  got  victory 
IS.  Judas  took' the  city  by  the  will  ofG. 

13.  15.  given  the  watch-word,  victory  is  ofG. 

15.  14.  to  wit,  Jerernins  the  prophet  of  G. 

27.  praying  to  G.  with  their  hearts,  for  through 
the  appearance  ofG.  they  were  cheered 
GODLY. 
.7i(d.8.31.  pray  for  us,  because  thou  art  a^.  woman 
Eccl.  6.  3.5.  be  willing  to  hear  every  g,  discourse 
II.  17.  tho  gift  of  the  Lord  remaineth  with  the  "■. 
22.  the  blessing  of  Lord  is  in  the  reward  of  the;?. 
12.2.  do  good  to  thy  g.  man,  and  thou  shalt  find 
4.  give  to  the  g.  man,  and  help  not  a  sinner 
13.  17.  what  fellowship  hath  the  sinner  with  g.? 

16.  13.  the  patience  of"',  shall  not  be  frustrated 
23.  12.  all  such  things  shall  be  far  from  the  g. 
06.23.  a  g.  woman  is  given  him  that  feareth  Ld. 
27.11. ihediscourseorihen-.is  alwayswith  wisdom 
33.  14.  life  against  death,  so  is  the  g.  set  against 

the  sinner,  and  Ihe  sinner  against  the  o'. 
37.  12.  but  he  continually  with  a  g.  mim 
39.  27.  nil  these  things  are  for  good  to  the  ff. 
43.  33.  and  to  tho  ^.  hath  he  given  wisdom 
50.  29.  who  giveth  wisdom  to  the  g. 
2  Mac  12.  45.  favour  laid  up  for  those  that  died  g. 

GODLESS. 
2  J>/ac. 7.34.  but  thou,  O^r.  man  and  mostwicksd 

GODLINES?!. 
1  E»d.  1.  23.  upright,  with  a  heart  full  of  g 


GOL 

tfisd.  10.  12.  might  know  ^.  is  stronger  tlian  all 
Keel.  1.  25.  but  ff.  is  an  abomination  to  a  sinner 
2  Mac.  3.  1.  because  of  the  ^.  ofOnias  the  priest 

GODS. 
2  Esd.  1.  0.  they  have  offered  to  strange  g. 

16.  36.  believe  nol^.  of  whom  the  Lunl  spake 
Jud.3.8.  decreed  to  destroy  all  the^n-.  of  the  land 
5.7.  they  would  not  follow  the  ff.  of  their  fathers 
8.  they  cast  them  out  from  the  face  of  their  ^. 
8.  18.  which  worship  g.  made  with  hands 
Eatk.  14.  7.  because  we  worship|i«d  Iheir  ^. 
}Visd.  yi.  27.  them  whom  they  thought  to  be^. 
13.  2.  to  be  the^'.  which  govern  the  world 
3.  if  they  being  delighted,  took  them  to  be  ff. 
10.  called  them  ^.  which  are  the  works  of  men 
15.  15.  counted  the  idols  of  the  heathen  to  be  «•. 
Bar.  6.  4.  ye  shall  see  in  Babylon  g.  of  silver 
•    9.  they  make  crowns  for  the  heads  of  their  ^. 

10.  the  priests  convey  from  their^.  gold  and  silv. 

11.  being  ^.  of  silver,  and  ^.  of  gold  ami  wood 

12.  yet  cannot  these  "-.  save  themselves  from  rust 

16.  whereby  they  are  known  not  to  be  g. 

17.  even  so  it  is  with  their  g.  when  they  be  set  up 
IS.  lest  their  "-.  be  spoiled  with  robbers 

23.  by  this  ye  may  know  they  ore  no  g.  29. 
30.  how  can  they  be  called  g.?  set  meat  before 
32.  they  roar  and  cry  before  their  g.  as  men  do 

39.  their  g.  of  wood,  and  which  are  overlaid 

40.  how  shall  a  man  think  and  say,  they  are  g.? 
44.  how  may  it  be  thought  or  said  they  are  g.? 
46.  how  should  the  things  that  are  made  be  g.? 
49.  how  cannot  men  perceive  that  they  be  nog.? 

51.  that  they  are  no  g.  but  works  of  men's  hands 

52.  who  then  may  not  know  that  they  be  no  g.? 
55.  when  fire  fallelh  on  the  house  of^.  of  wood 
5»5.  how  can  it  be  thought  or  said, that  they  be^.? 
57.  nor  are  those  g.  of  wood  able  to  escape 

Bel  27.  Daniel  said,  lo,  these  are  g.  you  worship 
GOLD. 

1  Esd.  1.  3G.  a  tax  on  the  land  of  ono  talent  of  g. 
2.  6.  his  neighbours  help  him  with  g.  and  silver 

13.  vialsof^'.  30,  of  silver  2410,  ami  other  vessel; 
3. 6.  to  drink  in  g.  to  sleep  on  ^.and  a  chariot  with 

bridles  of  g.  and  a  head  tire  of  fine  linen 

2  K.^d.  8.  2.  but  little  dust  that  g.  conieth  of 
10.  73.  they  shall  be  tried  as  g.  in  the  fire 

Tab.  12.  8.  better  lo  give  alms,  than  lay  up  g. 
13.  10.  and  thy  battlements  with  pure  g. 

Jud.  2.  18.  very  much  g.  out  of  the  king's  house 
5.  9.  they  were  increased  with  g.  and  silver 
8.  7.  Manasses  had  left  her  "■.  and  silver 
10.  21.  which  was  woven  with  purple  and  g. 

F.stK.  1.5.  6.  before  the  king  all  glittering  with  g. 

IVisd.  3.  6.  as^.  in  furnace  hath  he  tried  them 
7.  9.  all  g.  in  respect  of  her  is  as  little  sand 
13. 10.  gods  that  are  g.  and  silver,  lo  shew  art  in 

F.ccl  2.  5.  for  J",  is  tried  in  the  fire,  men  in  adversity 

7.  18.  nor  a  faithful  brother  for^.  of  Opliir 

19. forego  not  a  goodwoman,her  grace  is  above^ 

8.  2.  for  g.  hath  destroyed  many,  and  perverletl 
21.  21.  learning  to  a  man  is  as  an  ornament  of  ^. 

28.  24.  look  that  thou  hind  up  thy  silver  and  g. 

29.  11.  it  shall  bring  thee  more  profit  than  g. 

30. 15.  health  and  a  good  state  of  body  is  ahove  ff. 

31.  5.  he  that  loveth  g.  shall  not  be  justified 
fi.nf.  hnlh  been  ruin  of  many  and  their  destruction 

8.  blessed  is  the  rich  that  halh  not  gone  after  g. 

32.  .5.  is  as  a  signet  of  carbuncle  set  in  g 

6.  as  a  signet  of  an  emerald  set  in  a  work  o( g. 

40.  25.  g.  and  silver  make  the  foot  stand  sure 

41.  12.  above  a  thousand  great  treasures  o( g. 
4.').  11.  and  set  in  g.  the  work  of  the  jeweller 

12.  he  set  a  crown  of  ^.  upon  the  mitro 
47.  18.  thou  didst  gather  g.  as  tin  and  multiply 

50.  9.  as  a  vessel  of  beaten  g.  set  with  stones 

51.  28.  get  learning,  and  get  much  "•.  by  her 
Bar.  3.  17.  they  that  hoarded  up  silver  and  g. 

30.  who  found  her,  and  will  bring  her  for  pure  g. 
6. 4.  shall  ye  sec  in  Babylon  pods  of  silver  and  g. 

9.  and  laiciri!;  g.  as  it  were  for  a  virgin  to  go  gay 
30.  sit  meat  br'fore  cods  of  silver,  a.  and  wood 

I  Mar..  1.22.  cpnseis  of  g.  and  the  vail  and  crowns 
23.  he  took  alxo  the  silver  and  the  g.  and  vessels 

2. 18.  children  shall  be  honoured  wiih  silver  and  g. 

3. 41.  the  merchants  took  silver  and  g.  very  much 

4.23.  where  they  got  much  fi-.  and  silver  and  silk 
.'57.  Ihey  decked  the  lem(ilo  with  crowns  of  «-. 

6. 1.  was  a  city  renowned  for  riches,  silver,  and  g. 
2.  a  temple,  wherein  were  coverings  of  g. 
12.  that  r  took  all  the  vesseU  of  g.  and  silver 
39.  when  the  sun  shone  on  thr-  sliii-Ids  of  g. 

P.  3.  winning  the  mines  of  Ihe  silver  and  g. 

10.  60.  who  gave  them  and  fricml  sliver  and  g. 
89.  ho  sent  him  a  buckle  of  g.  as  the  use  is 

14.24.  Simon  sent  lo  Home  with  a  great  shield  ofg. 

43.  should  be  clothed  in  purple,  wenr  g. 

44.  clothed  in  purple,  or  wear  a  huckli'  of  g. 
15.  18.  Ihey  brought  a  shield  of  j(r.  of  1000  pnnnd 

ifi.  sent  him  "liver,  and  g.  and  much  ariiiour 
32.  faw  the  glory  of  Hi'"on,  and  cupboard  of^. 


GOO 

1  Mac.  IG.  11.  he  had  abundance  of  silver  and  g. 
19.  might  give  them  silver  and  g.  and  rewards 

2  Mac.1.  2.  when  they  see  images  of  silver  and  g. 

3.  25.  itseemed  that  he  had  complete  harnes-sof^. 

4.  32.  stole  certain  vessels  of  "•.  out  of  the  temple 

5.  2.  horsemen  running  in  the  air  in  cloth  of^. 

10.  29.  appeared  five  rhen  with  bridles  of  g. 

11.  8.  one  in  wliite,  shaking  his  armour  of^. 

15.  15.  Jeremias  gave  to  Judas  a  sword  ot  g. 

GOLDEN. 
1  F.sd.  8.  57.  twenty^,  vessels,  twelve  of  brass 
E.Hh.  15.  11.  so  he  held  up  his  g.  sceptre 
F.ccl.  6.  30.  there  is  a  g.  ornament  upon  her 
26.  18.  as  g.  pillars  are  on  sockets  of  silver 
45.  9.  with  many  g.  bells  round  about 

1  Mac.  1.  21.  and  took  away  the  g.  altar 

22.  and  the  g.  ornaments  before  the  temple 
11.  58.  on  this  he  sent  him  g.  vessels  to  be  served 
in  and  gave  him  leave  to  wear  a  g.  buckle 

13.  37.  the  g.  crown  and  scarlet  robe  ye  sent 

2  Mac.  5.  3.  and  glittering  of  ^'.  ornaments 

GOLDSMITHS. 
fVisd.  15. 9.  he  striveth  to  e.xcel  g.  arid  silversmiths 
Bar.  6.  45.  they  are  made  of  carpenters  ands-. 

GOLIATH. 
Ecel.  47.  4.  he  beat  down  the  boasting  of  G. 

GOMORRAH. 
2  F.sd.  2.  8.  remember  what  I  did  to  Sodom  and  G. 

GONE. 
2  Esd.  10.  22.  our  Levites  are  o-.  into  captivity 

14.  II.  the  ten  parts  of  it  are^'.  already 
Jud.  10. 10.  till  she  was^.  down  the  mountain 
Wisd.  4.  2.  and  when  it  is  g.  they  desire  it 

5.  10.  when  g.  by  the  trace  cannot  be  found 

16.  14.  the  spirit  when  it  is^.  forth  returneth  not 
19.  3.  whom  they  had  entreated  to  be  g. 

F.ccl.  31.  8.  Ihe  rich  that  hath  not  g.  al'ter  gold 
Bar.  3.  19.  they  are  ^.  down  to  the  grave 

30.  who  hath  g.  over  the  sea  and  tuund  her? 
4.  26.  my  delicate  ones  have  g.  rough  ways 
.'fas.  19.  now  when  the  maids  were  g.  forth 
Bel  14.  when  g.  forth,  king  set  meats  before  Bel 

1  Mac.  6.  10.  the  sleep  is  g.  from  mine  eyes 

11.  43.  for  all  my  forces  are  g.  from  me 

12.  30.  they  were  g.  over  the  river  Eleutherus 

2  Mac.  4.  40.  a  man  far  »•.  in  years,  no  less  in  folly 

6.  24.  were  now^.  to  another  religion 

12.  4.  when  they  were  g.  forth  into  the  deep 

10.  when  they  were  g.  from  thence  nine 

GOOD. 

1  Esd.  4.  46.  I  desire  that  thou  make^.  the  vow 
6.  21.  if  it  seem  g.  to  the  king  let  search  be  made 
8.  11.  as  it  hath  seemed  g.  to  me  and  my  friends 

85.  that  ye  may  eat  the  g.  things  of  the  land 

2  F.sd.  1.  9.  to  whom  I  have  done  so  much  g. 

2.  14.  I  have  broken  the  evil,  and  created  the  ^. 
25.  nourish  thy  children,  O  thou  ^.  nurse 

3.  22.  the  g.  departed  away,  the  evil  abode  still 

6.  33.  sent  nie  to  say,  be  of  g.  comfort,  fear  not 

7.  6.  a  city  is  builded  and  full  of  all  g.  things 
3.'i.  and  the  g.  deeds  shall  be  of  force 

16.  21.  victuals  shall  be  so  g.  cheap  on  earth 
Tab.  2.  1.  there  was  a  g.  dinner  prepared  me 

4.  9.  thou  layest  up  a  g.  treasure  for  thyself 

11.  for  alms  is  a  g.  gift  to  all  that  give  it 
19.  the  Lord  himself  givelh  all  g.  things 

5. 13.  for  thou  art  my  brother  of  an  honest  and  g. 
stock;  my  brother,  thou  art  of  a^.  stock 
21.  for  the^.  angel  will  keep  him  company 

7.  4.  then  said  he,  is  he  in  g.  health  7 
5.  he  is  both  alive,  and  in  g.  health 

12.  God  give  you  g.  success  in  all  things 
IS.  be  of  g.  comfort,  my  daughter 

8.  6.  it  is  not  g.  that  man  should  be  alono 

10.  12.  that  I  may  hear  g.  report  of  thee 

11.  II.  saying,  he  of  g.  hope,  my  father 

12.  6.  it  is  ^.  to  praise  God  and  e.xalt  his  name 

7.  it  is  "•.  to  keep  close  the  secret  of  a  king,  II. 

do  what  is  "-.  and  no  evil  shall  touch  you 

8.  prayer  is  g.  with  fasting  and  alms 

13.  thy  g.  deed  was  not  hid  from  mo 

13.  10.  give  praise  lo  the  Lord,  for  he  is  g. 
Jud.  3.  2.  use  us  as  shall  be  g.  in  thy  sight 

4.  anil  deal  with  them  as  seemefh  g.  to  thro 

7.  30.  Ozias  said,  brethren,  be  of  ^.'courage 

8.  28.  thou  hast  spoken  all  with  a  g.  heart 
29.  because  the  disposition  of  thy  heart  is  g. 

10.  19.  it  is  not  g.  that  one  man  of  ihem  he  left 
1 1 .1  .wom.be  ofg.  comfort,  fear  not  in  thy  heart,  3. 
13.  20.  for  a  praise,  to  visit  thee  in  g.  things 

15.  8.  g.  things  that  God  hath  shewed  to  Israel 
10.  thou  hast  done  much  j?.  lo  Israel 

Eslh.  13.  3.  was  approved  fVir  his  constant^,  will 

13.  for  I  could  have  been  conti^nt  with  g.  will 
15.  9.  Kslher,  1  am  thy  brother,  ho  ofg.  cheer 
10.  3.  to  practise  against  those  that  do  them  ^. 
4.  words  of  lewd  persons  that  wore  never  g. 
13.  who  continually  procured  nnr  g. 
H'istl.  2  6.  lot  us  cnjov  the  g.  ihincs  present 
3.  15.  fur  glorious  is  the  fruit  off.  labours 


GOO 


[AporRTPtfA 


Wisd.  5.8.  whatg".  hath  riches  with  vaunting  bro't? 

6.  25.  receive  instruction,  it  shall  do  you  g. 

7.  11.  all  g.  things  together  came  to  me  with  her 
22.  clear,  undefilcd,  plain,  loving  the  thing  tba» 

is  g.  that  cannot  ho  letted,  ready  to  do  g 

8.  9.  she  would  be  a  counsellor  of  ^.  things 

12.  when  I  speak,  they  shall  give  g.  ear  unto  me 
15.  I  shall  be  found  g.  among  the  multitude 
18.  and  in  talking  with  her  is  a  g.  report 

20.  being  ^.  I  came  into  a  body  undefiled 

10.  8.  they  knew  not  the  things  which  were  g. 

12.  19.  hast  made  thy  children  to  be  of  a  g.  Iiopt 

21.  thou  hast  made  covenants  of  ^r.  promises 

13.  1.  could  not,  out  of  the  g.  things  that  are  seen 
10.  to  shew  art  in  a  stone  g.  for  nothing 

14.26. disquietingof^. men,  torgetfuln.  (ifg.  turns 
defiling  souls,  disorder  in  marriages,  adultery 
18.  6.  they  might  afterwards  be  of  ^.  cheer 
9.  the  children  of  ^.  men  did  saciifice  secretly 
should  be  like  partakers  of  the  same  ^.and  ev? 
F.ccl.  1.  29.  take  "-.  hevd  what  thou  speakest 
2.  9.  ye  that  fear  the  Lord,  liope  lor  g. 

6.  19.  come  to  her,  and  wait  for  her^.  fruits 

7.  13.  for  the  custom  thereof  is  not  ^. 

18.  change  not  a  friend  for  any  g.  by  no  mean* 

21.  love  a  g.  servant,  defraud  him  not  of  libcrtj 

11.  12.  the  eye  Of  the  Lord  looked  on  him  for  g 

15.  love,  and  the  way  of  ^.  work.-^,  are  from  hi« 
2:1.  what  g.  things  shall  I  liave  hereafter  1 

31.  he  lieih  in  wait,  and  turned  g.  into  evil 

12.  1.  when  Ihou  wilt  do  g.  know  to  whom  dost  il 

2.  do  o'.  lo  the  godly  man,  and  thou  shall  find 

3.  there  can  no  g.  come  to  one  occupied  in  evij 
5.  shall  receive  twice  as  much  evil  for  all  Ihe  ^. 
7.  give  to  the  g.  and  help  not  Ihe  sinner 

13.  24.  riches  are  g.  lo  him  that  hath  no  sia 
25.  his  countenance,  whether  w.  be  g.  or  evil 

14.  5.  is  evil  lo  himself,  lo  whom  will  he  be  ^.7 

7.  and  if  he  doth  g.  he  doth  it  unwillingly 

1  l.my  son,  according  to  thy  ability  do^'.to  thyself 

13.  do  g.  to  thy  friend  before  thou  die 

14.  defraud  not  thyself  of  the  "■.  day,  and  let  not 

the  part  of  a  g.  desire  overpass  thee 

20.  the  man  that  dolh  meditate^,  things 
25.  lodge  in  a  lodging  where  ^.  things  are 

15.  l.%e  that  fearelh  the  Lord,  will  do  g. 
17.  7.  withal,  he  shewed  them  g.  and  evil 

22.  he  will  keep  Ihe  g.  deeds  of  man  as  the  apple 
18.8. what  is  man?  what  is  his  g.?  what  is  his  evilT 

I't.  my  son,  blemish  not  thy  g-  deeds 

32.  take  not  pleiisure  in  much  g.  cheer  ' 
20.3.how  n-.is  it  when  reproved  to  shew  repentance 

9.  there  is  a  sinner  that  haih  g.  success  in  evil 
14.  Ihe  gift  of  a  fool  shall  do  thee  no  g. 

10.  I  have  no  thank  for  all  my  g.  deeds 
26.  4.  if  he  have  a  g.  heart  toward  the  Lord 

16.  fo  is  the  beauty  of  a  g.  wife  in  her  house 

21.  having  the  confidence  of  their  ^.  descent 
20. 16.  will  overthrow  the  g.  estate  of  his  surety 

18.  Riiretvship  halh  undone  many  of^.  estate 

30.  15.  Iioiilth  and  g.  stale  of  body  arc  above  gold 

19.  what^.  doth  the  offering  to  an  idol? 
25.  a  g.  heart  will  have  a  care  of  his  meat 

31.  2.3.  the  report  of  his  g.  house-keeping 
27.winedr'jnk  nioderalely  i^s  as  n-.as  life  to  a  man 

32.  13.  and  halh  n-phnished  thee  with  5-.  Ihings 

23.  in  every  g.  work  tiust  thine  own  soul 

33.  14.  g.  is  set  against  evil,  life  against  dealh 
35.  2.  he  that  requilelh  g.  oflTerelh  fine  flour 

8.  give  the  Lord  his  honour  with  a  w.  eye 
•37.  9.  he  will  say  unto  thee,  thy  way  is  g. 

18.  four  things  appear,  ^.  and  evil,  life  and  death 
38.  13.  when  in  their  hands  there  is  g.  success 

21.  thou  slinlt  not  do  him  g.  but  hurt  thyself 
30  4.  for  he  halh  tried  Ihe  g.  and  evil  ani<  ng  men 

16.  all  Ihe  works  of  the  Lord  are  exceeding^. 

25. for  then-,  aro^'.  things  created  from  beginning 

27.  all  Iheso  things  nro  for  g.  to  the  godly 

33.  all  Ihe  works  of  the  Lord  are  ^. 
41.1.3.a|f.lifehatli  but  few  day3,a/r. name  endures 

16.  it  is  not  g.  to  retain  all  shainofacedmss 
42.  6.  sure  keeping  is  g.  where  an  evil  wife  il 

25.  one  thing  estahlisheth  llie/r.  of  another 

45.  2:1.  he  stood  up  with  g.  coiiriigc  of  heart 

26.  that  iheir  g.  things  ho  not  aholishod 

46.  10.  might  see  that  It  is;rr.  to  follow  the  Lord 
51.  18.  earnestly  I  followed  thai  which  Is^. 

21.  therefore  have  I  gotten  a  g.  possession 
Rnr.  2.  I.  the  Lord  halh  made  ;rr.  his  word 
4.  5.  he  ofg.  cheer,  inv  people,  memorial  of  Israe. 

30.  take  a  g.  heart,  O  Jerusalem,  he  will  comfort 
6.  34.  whether  evil  or  g.  they  cannot  reconipeote 

3S.  nor  can  they  do  g-  '<•  "'O  falherless 

64.  seeing  th'V  are  not  able  to  do  g.  lo  men 
I  .^fac.  4.  24.  Ihe'v  praised  the  Lord,  because  it  itg, 

5.";.  [iraising  God,  who  had  eiven  them  g.  success 
8.  23.  g.  success  be  to  the  Romans  and  Jews 
11.  33.  iletfrmined  to  do  <r.  to  people  of  the  Jews 
our  friends,  because  of  iheir  g.  will  toward  ui 
14.  4.  ho  Bought  thef.  ofhi:!  nation  in  such  wi*« 


ArocRVPVi  J 


GOV 


1  Jl/ac. 14.9  tlicy sat  comniuiiiDgtogotherof^.tliings 

16.  14.  lakiiig  care  t'ur  l\iO  g.  ordering  ol  Uieiii 
17.  great  treachery,  he  reooiiipciiseil  evil  lor^. 

2  Mac.  1.  3.  to  do  his  will  wilh  a  g.  courage 

4.  5  not  to  be  accuser  but  seeking  tlio  g.  of  M 

5.  4.  tliat  that  apparition  might  turn  to  g. 

6.  29.  changing  lUa g.  will  they  hare  him  before 

7.  5.  the  vajKjur  was  lor  a  g.  space  dispersed 

14.  it  is  g.  being  put  to  dealh  by  men,  to  look 

8.  30.  to  make  g.  to  the  Romans  their  tribute 

9.  19.  Antiochus,  to  the  ^.  Jews  his  citizens 
21.  would  have  remembered  kindly  your  g.  will 

K).  23.  having  g.  success  with  his  weapons 
li.  G.  would  send  a  g.  angel  to  deliver  Israel 

15.  consenled,  l)«ing  carelul  of  the  common  g. 
19.  I  will  endeavour  lo  be  a  means  of  your  g. 
21).  when  certified  that  they  may  bi,  of  n-.  comfort 
28.  we  have  our  desire,  we  are  also  in^.  health 

12.  45.  it  was  a  holy  and  g.  thought 

13.  16.  at  last  they  departeil  with  g.  success 

14.  8.  I  intend  the  i'.  of  mine  own  countrymen 
30.  that  such  sour  behaviour  came  not  of  ^. 
37.  Razis  a  man  of  very  g.  report  was  accused 

15.  12.  Oiiias,  a  virtuous  and  g.  man,  prayed 

17.  by  the  words  of  Judas,  which  were  vary  g. 
23.  O  Lord  of  heaven,  send  a  g.  angel  before  us 

GOODLY. 

1  Esd.  4.  18.  gold,  silver,  or  any  other  g.  thing 
Jud.  8.  7.  she  was  also  of  a  ^.  countenance 

2  Mac.  9.  16.  he  would  garnish  with  g.  gifts 

GOODLIEST. 

1  JUac.  8.  8.  of  the  g.  countries  which  they  took 

GOODNESS. 

2  Esd.  7.  68.  he  pardons,  if  he  did  not  so  of  his  g. 
8.  52.  rest  allowed,  yea,  perfect  g.  and  wisdom 

JEsth.  16.  6.  the  innocency  and  g.  of  princes 

10.  and  far  dUlant  from  our  g.  and  as  a  stranger 
tVisd.l.  26.  and  she  is  the  image  of  bis  ^. 

12.  22.  we  should  carefully  think  of  tliy^. 

16. 11.  they  might  be  continually  mindful  of  thy  g. 
Eccl.  26.  20.  tiiisting  in  the  g.  of  thy  stock 
Jiar.  2.  27.  thou  hast  dealt  wilh  us  after  all  thy  g. 
Prayer uf  Manass.'m  tlieethou  wiltshew  all  thy^. 
2  Mac.  6.  13.  for  it  is  a  token  of  his  great  ^. 
GOODS. 

1  Esd.  6.  32.  and  all  his  g.  seized  for  the  li'"" 

2  Esd.  15.  19.  destroy  their  house,  and  spoil  iheir^. 
Tob.  1.  20.  all  my  g.  were  forcibly  taken  away 

8.  21.  then  he  should  take  the  half  of  bis  g. 

10.  10.  gave  him  Sara  his  wife,  and  half  his  g. 
Jud.  16.  24.  she  did  distribute  her  g.  to  them 
IVisd.  13.  17.  then  maketh  he  prayer  for  his  g. 
Eccl.  5.  1.  set  not  thy  heart  upon  thy  g. 

11.  19.  '.low  I  will  eat  continually  of  thy  g. 
14.  4.  others  that  shall  spend  his  g.  riotously 

5.  he  shall  not  take  pleasure  in  his  g. 
31.  11.  \i\s  g.  shall  be  eslablished,  congregation 

33.  19.  give  not  thy  g.  to  another,  lest  it  repent 

34.  20.  brings  an  offering  of  the  ^.  of  the  poor 
40.  13.  the  g.  of  the  unjust  shall  he  dried  up 
46. 19. 1  have  not  taken  any  man's  g.  not  a  shoe 

1  Mac.  12.  23.  that  your  cattle  and  g.  are  ours 
GORGL'VS. 

1  Mac.  3.  38.  chose  Nicanor  and  G.  mighty  men 

4.  1.  then  took  G.  five  thousand  footmen 
5.  in  the  mean  season  came  G.  by  niglit 

18.  G.  and  his  host  are  here  in  the  mountain 

5.  59.  then  came  G.  and  his  men  out  of  the  city 

2  Mac.  8.  9.  and  with  him  he  joined  G.  a  captain 

10.  14.  but  when  G.  was  governor  of  the  holds 

12.  32.  they  went  forth  against  G.  the  governor 
35.  was  still  upon  G.  so  that  G.  fled  inloMarisa 
3G.  when  they  that  were  with  G.  had  fought  long 
37.  rushing  unawares  on  G.  men,  be  put  to  flight 

GOT. 
Eccl.  6. 27.  when  hast  g.  hold  of  her,  let  her  not  go 
24.  6.  and  in  every  nation  I  g.  possession 

1  Mac.  4.  23.  where  they  g.  much  gold  and  silver 

11.  49.  the  Jews  had  g.  the  city  as  they  would 

2  Mac.  4.  24.  he  g.  the  priesthood  to  himself 
27.  so  Mcnelaus^.  the  principality 

GOTTEN. 
2  Ksd.3. 12.  when  they  had^.  them  many  children 
M'lsd.  4.  2.  having  g.  victory,  striving  for  rewards 
Eccl.  5.  8.  set  not  thy  heart  on  poods  unjustly  g. 
26.  20.  when  thou  hast  g.  a  fruitful  possession 
29.  6.  he  hath  g.  him  an  enemy  without  cause 
34. 18.  he  that  sacrificelh  of  a  thing  wrongfully^. 
3.5.  10.  as  thou  hast  g.  give  with  a  cheerful  eye 
42.10.le8t  should  ^j-.wilh  child  in  her  father's  house 
51.  21.  therefore  have  I  ^.  a  good  possession 

27.  and  I  have  g.  unto  me  much  rest 
Bar.  2.  11.  O  Lord,  thou  hast  o-.  thyself  a  name 
1  Mac.  2.  10.  what  nation  hath  not  g.  her  spoils 

49.  now  halh  pride  and  rebuke  g.  strength 
'2  J>/ac.  13.2 1 .  they  had  "■.  him,  they  put  him  in  prison 

GOVERN. 
fVisd.  13.  2.  to  be  the  gods  which  g.  the  world 
Sus.  5.  to  be  judges,  who  seemed  lo  g.  the  people 
I  Mac.  9.  73.  Jonathan  began  to  g.  the  people 
797 


GRA 

GOVERNANCE. 

2  Esd.  n.  32.  and  it  hiRl  the  ^.  of  the  world 

1  Mac.  9.  31.  Jonathan  took  the  "■.  upon  him 

GOVERNED. 

IViid.  14.  C.  the  hope  of  the  world  g.  by  the  hand 

GOVEKNETH. 

2  Esd.  13.  58.  and  because  he  g.  the  same 
IVisd.  14.  3.  but  thy  providence,  O  Father,  g.  it 
Eccl.  18. 3.  who  g.  the  world  wilh  palm  of  ins  band 

GOVERNMENT. 
Jud.  8.  10.  that  had  thog.  of  all  things  she  had 
Eccl.  10.  1.  the  g.  of  u   prudent   man   is  well 

ordered 

1  Mac.  8.  16.  they  committed  their  ^.  to  one  man 

2  Mac.  8.  17.  taking  away  the  g.  of  forefathers 

GOVERNMENTS. 

1  Mac.  10.  30.  nor  of  the  three  g.  that  are  added 
38.  concerning  the  three  ^r.  that  are  added 

11.  28.  as  also  the  three  g.  with  Samaria 
34.  the  borders  of  Judea,  with  the  three  ^. 
57.  1  appoint  thee  ruler  over  the  four  g. 

2  J)/ac.4.11.  putting  down  the />•.  which  were  by  law 

GOVERNOR. 

1  Esd.  2.  12.  to  Saiiabassar  the  g.  of  Judea 

3.  21.  a  man  remembereth  neither  king  nor  g. 

6.  3.  Sisinnes  g.  of  Syria  and  Phenice,  7,  27. 
29.  a  portion  to  be  given  to  Zorob:  bel  the  g. 

7.  1.  Sisinnes  the  g.  of  Celosyria  did  oversee 
Jud.  5.  20.  my  lord  and  g.  if  there  be  any  error 

8.  9.  the  words  of  the  people  against  the  g. 

11.  10.  O  Lord  and  g.  reject  not  his  word 
Eccl.  23.  1.  O  Lord,  Father  and  g.  of  all  my  life 

49.  15.  a^.  of  his  brethren,  a  stay  of  the  people 
1^/ac.  13.  42.  Simon  l  be  ^f.  and  leader  of  the  Jews 

14.  35.  people  made  him  their  ^.  and  chief  piicst 
41.  were  well  pleased  that  Simon  should  he  ^. 
47.  Simon  was  well  pleased  to  be  g.  of  the  Jews 

2  Mac.  3.  4.  Simon  Was  made  g.  of  the  temple 

4.  29.  left  Crates  who  was^.  of  the  Cyprians 

9.  19.  Antiochus  king  and  o-.  to  the  good  Jews 

10.  14.  but  when  Gorgias  was  g.  of  the  holds 

32.  he  fled  to  Gazara,  where  Chereas  was  g. 
12  2.  Nicanor  o-.  of  Cyprus  would  not  suffer  them 

32.  they  went  against  Gorgias^'.  of  Idumea 

13.  3.  because  he  tbougiit  to  have  been  made  g. 
24.  made  him  princijial  g.  from  Ptolemais 

14.12.  making  him  g.  over  Judea,he  sent  him  forth 
GOVERNORS. 
1  Esd.  1.  8.  "■.  of  the  temple  gave  to  the  priests 
49.  the  ^.  also  of  the  people  and  the  priests 

3.  2.  and  to  all  the  g.  and  captains,  14. 

4.  47.  Darius  wrote  letters  to  captains  and  g. 

7.  2.  assisting  the  ancients  and  g.  of  the  temple 
./ud.  2.  14.  Oloferncs  called  all  the  g.  and  captains 

5.  2.  he  called  all  the  g.  of  the  sea  coast 

6.  14.  they  presented  him  to  the  g.  of  the  city 

7.  8.  and  all  ihe^.  of  the  people  of  Moab 

8. 11.  hear  me,  O  ye  £'.  of  inhabitants  of  Bethulia 
Esth.  13.  1.  the  princes  and  gj  that  are  under  him 
16.  1.  unto  the  princes  and  g.  of  127  provinces 

1  jifac. 10. 37. their  overseers  and  g'. be  of  themselves 

12.  4.  Romans  gave  letters  lo  g.  of  every  place 

2  Mac.  5.  22.  he  left  g.  to  ve.x  the  nation 
10.21.  he  called  the  ^.  of  the  people  together 
12.  2.  but  the^.  of  several  places 

GRACE. 

1  F.sd.  8.  4.  he  found  g.  in  his  sight  in  his  requests 

2  Esd.  1.  37. 1  take  to  witness  the  ^.  of  the  ■•eople 
2.  32.  my  wells  run  over,  and  my  g.  shall  not  fail 

8.  42.  I  said,  if  I  have  found  g.  let  me  speak 
12.  7.  if  I  have  found  g.  bet^ire  thy  sight 

14.  22.  but  if  I  have  found  g.  before  thee 

Toll.  1.  13.  Iho  Most  High  gave  me  ^.  and  favour 
Est/i,  15.  14.  and  thy  countenance  is  full  of  ^. 
IVisd.  3.  9.  g.  and  mercy  is  lo  his  saints,  4.  15. 

14.  20.  the  multiliide  allured  by  the  ^z.  of  the  work 
16.  25.  it  was  obedient  to  thy  g.  that  nourishelh 

Eccl.  4.  21.  there  is  a  shame  which  is  glory  and  g. 
7. 19.  a  wise  and  good  woman  her^r.  is  above  gold 

33.  a  gift  hath  g.  in  the  sight  of  every  man 

21. 16.  but  "■.shall  be  found  in  the  lips  of  the  wise 
24.  lf>.  my  branches  are  branches  of  honour  and^r. 
26.  13.  the  ^.  of  a  wife  delighteth  her  husband 

15.  a  shamefaced  woman  is  a  double  5' 

37.  21.  for  g.  is  not  given  him  from  the  Lord 
PrayerofManass.l  bow  knpe,beseechingthecof^. 

GRACES. 

Eccl.  20.  13.  the  g.  of  fools  shall  be  poured  out 

GRACIOUS. 

1  Esd.  8.  80.  he  made  us  "-.  before  the  kings 

2  Esd.  1.  25.  when  ye  desire  me  to  be  g.  nnio  you 
Est/i.  16.  2.  wilh  the  groat  bounty  of  the  g.  princes 
IVisd.  12.  16.  it  maketh  thee  to  be  g.  to  all 

15.  1.  but  thou,  O  God,  art^.  and  true 

Eccl.  17.  21.  the  Lord  being  g.  forsook  them  not 

18.  17.  but  both  are  with  n  g.  man 
/)o7i.3.67.give  thanks  to  the  Lord,  because  he  is^. 
2  JIfar.  1.  2.  God  be  g.  unto  you,  and  remember 
24.  O  Lord  God,  who  art  the  only  and  g.  king 

2.  22.  the  Lord  being  g.  unto  them  with  favour 


GRE 

GRACIOUSLY. 

IVisd.  16.  2.  dealing  g.  wilh  ibine  own  peop.e 
2  j\Jac.  9.  27.  he  will  g.  yield  to  your  desiret 

GRAIN. 
2  Esd.  4.  30.  the  g.  of  evil  sued  halh  been  sown 

31.  the  0-.  of  evil  seed  hath  brought  forth 
JVisd.  11.  22.  is  as  a  little  g.  of  the  balance 

GRANT. 
2  Esd.  5.  4.  but  if  the  Most  High  g.  tdlb  to  live 
Tob.  10.  12.  Lord  g.  that  I  may  see  iTiy  children 
Keel.  23.  12.  God  g.  that  it  be  not  found  in  Jacoa 
50.  23.  he^.  us  joyfulness  of  heart  and  peaca  ' 

1  Mac.  11.50.  g.  us  peace,  and  let  the  Jews  ceasa 
13.  45.  beseeching  Simon  to  g.  them  peace 

2  Jl/ac.  3. 31.  call  on  the  Most  High,  to  4'.  him  his  life 

11.  26.  to  send  unto  them,  and /r.  them  peace 

GRANTED. 
IVisd.  7. 15.  God  hath  g.  me  to  speak  as  I  wonld 
Ecil.  17.  24.  to  them  that  repent  he^.  return 

1  Muc.  II.  66.  to  have  peace  with  him,  which  he  g 
13.  37.  confirm  the  immunities  which  we  have  g 

50.  to  be  at  one  with  them,  which  thing  he  g. 
15.  5.  I  confirm  nil  the  oblations  the  kinjs  before 
me^.  thee,  and  whatsoever  gifts  besides  they  ^. 

2  Mac.  2.  31.  ^r.  to  him  that  will  make  abridgment 

3.  33.  Lord^r.  thee  life  1|  4.  lO.when  the  king  had  ^. 

4.  II.  and  the  royal  privileges  g.  lo  the  Jews 
U.  15.  whatever  Maccabeus  wrote,  the  king  g. 

18.  and  he  hath  g.  as  much  as  might  be 

35.  whatsoever  Lysias  the  king's  cousin  g. 

12.  12.  g.  them  peace,  whereon  they  shook  hands 

GRAPE. 
2  Esd.  9.  21.  I  have  kept  me  a  g.  of  the  cluster 
Eccl.  33.  16.  that  gathererh  after  the  g.  gatherers 
39.  26.  honey,  milk,  and  the  blood  of  the  ^. 

50.  15.  be  poured  of  the  blood  of  the  g, 

51.  15.  fioin  the  flower,  till  the  g.  was  ripe 

GRAPES. 
2  /r.5fZ.16.26.the^.shall  ripei),whoshall  tread  themi 

43.  as  he  that  shall  not  gather  the  G. 
Eccl.  33.  16.  my  wine-press,  like  a  gatherer  of  ^. 

1  Mac.  6.  34.  they  shewed  tliem  the  blood  of  g. 

GRASS. 
2 Esd.  9.  27.  after  seven  days  I  sat  on  the  »■. 
15.  42.  shall  bieak  down  the  or.  of  the  meadowa 
Eccl.  40.  16.  shall  be  pulled  up  before  all  g. 
43.  21.  and  it  coiisumeih  the  g.  as  fire 
GRASSHOPPERS. 

2  Esd.  4.  24.  we  jiass  away  out  of  the  world  as  g. 
IVisd.  16.9.  for  them  thebilingsof^.  and  flies  killed 
Eccl.  43.  17.  falling  of  snow  is  as  the  lighting  of  ^•. 

GRATIFY. 
2  Mac.  1.  35.  bestowed  on  those  whom  he  would  g. 

GRAVE. 
Ecci.39.3.be  will  seek  out  the  secrets  ofs'.sentences 

GRAVE. 
2  Esd.4. 41.111  the^.  the  chambers  of  souls  are  like 
Tob.  2.7. 1  went  and  made  a  g.  and  buried  him,  8. 9. 
3. 10. 1  shall  bring  his  old  age  with  sorrow  to  the  ^. 
4.  4.  when  she  is  dead  bury  her  by  me  in  one  g. 
6.  14.  bring  my  father's  and  mother's  life  to  llie^. 
Esth.  13.7.  may  in  one  day  with  violence  go  inlo^. 
Eccl.O.  12.  they  shall  not  go  unpunished  to  their  cr. 
14. 12.  the  covenant  of  the  "■.  is  not  shewed  to  thee 
16.  there  is  no  seeking  of  dainties  in  the  g. 

17.  27.  who  shall  praise  the  Most  High  in  the  g. 
28.  21.  an  evil  death,  llie  g.  Were  better  than  it 
30.  18.  delicales  are  as  messes  of  meat  set  on  a  ff, 
41.  4.  there  is  no  inquisition  in  the  ^. 

Bur.  3.  11.  with  them  that  go  down  into  the  g. 
2  Mac.  6.  23.  and  willed  them  to  send  him  to  the  g. 

GRAVES. 
/fOsrf.W.S.making  lamentation  at  thoir.of  the  dead 
2  Mac.  12.  39.  to  burv  them  in  their  father's  5'. 

GRAVE. 
Eccl.  38.  27.  and  thiv  that  cut  and  g.  seals 

GRAVED. 
'2E.<:d.  13.6.  lo,  he  bad  n-.  himself  a  great  mountain 

GRAVEL. 
Eccl.  18. 10.  and  a  g.  stonp  in  comparison  of  sand 

GRAVEN. 
2K.''f/.13.7.havesoen  the  place  whereout  hill  was ^. 

36.  as  thou  sanest  the  hill  »•.  without  hands 
JVisd.  14.  16.  and  g.  images  were  worshipped 

15.  13.  maketh  brickie  vessels  and  g.  images 

18.  24.  in  rows  was  the  ir'ory  of  the  fathers  g. 

GR.\Y. 
JVisd.  2.  10.  nor  reverence  the  ancient's  g.  hairs 
4.  9.  but  wisdom  is  thp  g.  hair  unto  men 
Ecc^  25.  4.  how  comely  is  judgment  for  ^.  hairs 
2  Mac.  6.  23.  as  became  the  honour  of  his  g.  head 
15.  13.  there  appeared  a  man  with  g.  hairs 
GREAT. 
1  E<:d.  3.  5.  to  him  shall  kins  Darius  ffive  g-  gifts 
4. 14.  Oyo  men,  it  is  not  tho^.  king  that  excelleth 

34.  O  ye  tnen,g.  is  the  earth,  high  is  the  heaven 

35.  is  he  not  g.  that  maketh  tbe.<e  things?  there- 

fore g.  is  the  truth,  stronger  than  all  things 
41.  g.  is  truth,  and  mishty  above  all  tilings 
8.  70.  wo  have  been  and  are  in  g.  sin  to  Ihiy  daj 


GRE 

1  Esd.  8  86.  done  to  us  for  wicked  works  and  /r.  sina 

2  £i<f.  7.ti(i.  and  Iliat  he  is  of  »■.  mercy  lie  niulli|)Ii<.s 
8.  50.  many  g.  miseries  shall  he  done  lo  them  in 

latter  lirne,  because  they  have  walked  in^'.  pride 
Tob.  3.  16.  before  the  majesty  of  the  ff.  God 

4.  13.  and  in  lewdness  his  decay  and  g.  want 

5.  1'2.  I  am  Azarins  the  son  of  Ananias  ihe^. 
13.  Anaauis  and  Jonathas  Bon.s  of  »'.  Samaias 

8. 16.  haslBcalt  with  us  according  to  thy^'.  mercy 
13. 15.  let  my  soul  bliss  God  the  g.  King 
Jud.  1.  1.  who  reigned  in  Nineve  ilie  «■.  city 
5  made  war  with  king  Arjihaxml  in  the  g.  |)laii! 

8.  nations  that  were  of  the  ^'.  plain  of  Esdrelon 
2.  3.  thus  saith  tlie^.  king,  lord  of  the  earth 
3.2.  the  servants  of  Nabuchodonosor  the  «■.  king 

9.  he  came  over-against  the  «■.  strait  of  Judea 
8.  19.  they  hud  a  ".  fall  before  our  enemies 
15.9.  thou  art  the^.\a!tatioii  of  Jerus.  the^r.  glory 

of  Israel,  thou  ail  the^.  rejoicing  of  ournation 
16.  13]  O  Lonl,  thou  nrt  g.  and  glorious 

16.  he  that  leareth  the  Lord  is  ^r.  at  all  times 
Enth.  11.  6.  and  behold,  two  g.  dragons  came  forth 

ready  to  fight  and  their  cry  was  g. 

10.  a  little  fountain  was  made  a  g.  flood 
12.6.  Aman,  who  was  in^'.  honour  with  the  king 

16.  1.  the  g.  king  Artaxer.xes  to  the  princes 
12.  but  he  not  bearing  his  g.  dignity,  went 

fFjsrf.6. M.whososeeketh  carlyshall  have  no  o'.tra. 
8.  II.  I  shall  be  admired  in  the  sight  of  »■.  men 
11.21.  thou  canst  shew  thy  g.  strength  at  all  times 
12.  18.  and  thou  ordertst  us  with  g.  favour 
H.  ^s^iey  lived  in  the  g.  war  of  ignorance 
IT.l.y.are  thyjudgnients,and  cannot  be  expressed 
18. 1.  nevertheless  thy  saints  had  a  very  g.  light 
Keel.  I.  7.  who  hath  understood  her  g.  experieneel 
3.20  for  the  power  of  the  Lord  is^.  he  is  honoured 

4.  7.  and  bow  thy  head  lo  &  g.  man 

5.  6.  say  not,  his  mercy  is  g.  he  will  be  pacified 

8.  8.  shall  learn  how  to  serve  g.  men  with  ease 

10.  '^4.  g.  men  &nd  judges  shall  be  honoured 

11.  1.  wisdom  maketh  him  to  sit  among  ^.  men 

15.  18.  for  the  wisdom  of  the  Lord  is  o-. 

Ifi.  \-i.  as  his  mercy  is  g-  so  is  his  correction  also 

17.  2'.t.  how  g.  is  the  loving  kindness  of  the  Lord 
20.  28.  he  that  pleaseth  g.  men  shall  get  pardon 

24.  29.  her  counsels  profounder  than  the  g.  deep 

25.  10.  oh  how  g.  is  he  that  findelh  wisdom! 
28.  14.  hath  overthrown  the  houses  of  «•.  men 
'Si-  9.  if  thou  be  among  o'.  men  make  not  thyself 
33.  H.  hear  ye,  O  ye  g.  men  of  the  people 

3-<  10.  as  if  lliou  liadst  suffered  g.  harm  thyself 

17.  weep  bitterly,  and  make  g.  moan,  and  use 

lamentation,  ns  lie  is  worthy 
27.  they  are  diligent  to  make^r.  variety 

39.  4.  he  shall  serve  among  g.  men  and  appear 
().  when  the  "■.  Lord  will,  he  shall  be  filled 

40.  1.  g.  travel  is  created  for  every  man 

43.  3.  g.  is  the  Lord  that  made  it 

15.  by  his  ^.  power  he  makeih  thi;  clouds  firm 
M.  magnily  him,  for  ho  is  g.  above  all  his  works 
29.  Lord  is  terrible,  and  very  g.  and  marvellous 

44.  2.  the  Lord  hath  wrought  g.  glory  by  them 

through  his  g.  power  from  the  beginning 
19.  Abraham  was  a  ^.  father  of  many  people 
46.  1.  who  according  to  his  name  was  made  g. 
2  how  g.  glory  g.it  he,  when  he  lift  up  his  hands 
5  he  called  on  Lord,  and  the  g.  Lord  heard  him 

48.  22.  who  was^.  and  faithful  In  his  vision 

49.  13.  Neemias  wlio^e  renown  is  g.  raised  up 

16.  Sein  anri  Seth  were  in  g.  honour  among  men 
50  16.  sons  of  Aaron  made  a  g.  noise  to  be  heard 
51.  28.  get  learning  with  a  g.  sum  of  money 

Bar.  3.  24.  O  Israel,  how  g.  is  the  house  of  God 
25.^.  and  haih  no  end,  high  and  unmeaBiirahl" 

Bel  18.  g.  art  thou,  O  Rel,  with  thee  is  no  deceit 
41.  saying,  g.  art  thou,  O  Lord  God  of  Daniel 

1  Mat.  1. 17.  he  entered  into  Egypt  with  a  g.  navy 

33.  they  buildcd  the  city  of  David  with  a  g.  wall 
64.  and  there  was  very  g.  wrath  on  Israel 
7.  19.  when  slain,  he  cast  them  into  the  »-.  ditch 
GREATER. 

2  Rsd.  5.  13.  thou  shall  hear  yd  g.  things 

6.  31.  if  thou  piav,  I  shall  tell  thee  g.  things 

9.  16.  like  as  a  wave  is  g.  than  a  drop 

14.  16.  for  yet  g.  evils  slmll  be  done  hereafter 
Fed.  3.18.  the  g.  thou  art,  the  more  humble  thyself 

10.  24.  none  g.  than  he  that  fenrcth  the  Lord 

16.  5.  mine  ear  hath  heard  g.  things  than  these 
39.  11.  if  he  die,  he  shall  leave  a  g.  name  than 
43.  32.  thfre  are  yet  hid  g.  things  than  these 

1  JV/ae.  6.  27.  they  will  do  ;rr.  ihinea  than  these 
12.24.  to  fight  aga.  him  with  ng.  host  than  before 
GRE.\TEST. 
Keel.  8. 7.  rejoice  not  over  tliy  g.  enemy  being  dead 

<;rratly. 

fVifd  3.5.a  little  chastised  thoyshall  ho  ^.rewarded 
Fr.rl.  1.  R.  there  is  one  wise,  and  g.  to  be  feared 

7.  17.  humble  thy  soul  g.  for  the  vengeance  is  fire 
11.6.  many  mijbly  men  have  been  g.  disgraced 
25.  2.  and  I  am  g.  offended  at  their  lifu 

798 


GRl 

1  .Vac.  3.  31.  being  ^.  perplexed  in  his  mind 

5.  »i3.  Judas  and  his  brethren  were  g.  renowned 

6.  1.  Elyinas  was  a  city  ^.  renowned  for  riches 
11.  42.  1  will  fi-.  honour  thee  and  thy  nation 

GREATNESS. 

2  Esd.  10.  55.  the  beauty  and^.  of  the  building 
Tub.  13.  4.  there  declare  his  g.  and  extol  him 
IVisd.  6.  7.  nor  shall  he  stand  in  awe  of  a  man's  g. 

13.5.  for  by  the  g.  and  beauty  of  the  creatures 
Eccl.  17.  8.  might  shew  them  the  g.  of  his  works 
51.3.  delivered  me  according  to  the^.  of  thy  name 

1  Mac.  9.22.  the  noble  acts  he  did  and  his  g. 

GRECIAN. 

2  Mac.  13.  2.  having  either  of  them  a  G.  power 

GRECIANS. 

1  Mac.  0.  2.  who  reigned  first  among  the  G. 
8.  9.  how  the  G.  had  determined  lo  destroy  them 

2  Mac.  4.  15.  but  liking  iliii  glory  of  the  G.'best 

GREECE. 
1  Mac.  1. 1.  he  reigned  in  his  stead  the  first  over  G. 

GREEDY. 
Tob.  5.  18.  be  not  g.  to  add  money  to  money 
Eccl.  37.  29.  nor  be  too  g.  upon  meals 
1  Mac.  4.  17.  Judas  saiil  be  not  g.  of  the  spoila 

GREEDINESS. 

£cc2.23.6.1et  not  the  g.  of  the  belly  take  hold  on  me 

GREEK,  S. 

1  Miic.l.lO.  the  137th  year  of  the  kingdom  of  the  G. 

2  Mac.  4.  13.  such  was  the  height  of  G.  fashions 
3t).  certain  G.  which  abhorred  the  fact  also 

GREEKISH. 
2  J/ac.4. 10.  brought  his  own  nation  to  G.  fashions 

GREEN. 
IVisd.  19.  7.  out  of  the  violent  stream,  a  g.  field 
Eccl.  14.  18.  as  of  «-.  leaves  on  a  thick  tree 
40.  22.  but  more  than  both,  corn  while  it  is  g. 

GREETING. 
1  Esd.  6.  7.  the  copy  of  letters  to  king  Darius  g. 

8.  9.  king  Artaxerxes  to  Esdras  sendeth  g. 
E.'itli.  16.  1.  to  all  our  faithful  suldects,  g. 

1  Mac.  10.  18.  Alexander  to  Jonatlian  sendeth  g. 
25.  Demetrius  unto  the  Jews  sendeth  g.  11.  30. 

11.  32.  Demetrius  unto  Lasthenes,  sendelh  g. 

12.  20.  Areus  king,  to  Oiiias  the  liigh-priesl,  g. 

13.  36.  king  Demetrius  unto  Simon  sendeth  g. 

14.  20.  rulers  of  Lacedemonians  to  Simon,  send^. 
1.5.  2.  Antiochus  to  the  people  of  the  Jews,  g. 

16   Lucius  consul  to  king  Ptolemee,  g. 
^Mac.  l.IO.  Judaseent  W-.  and  health  to  Aristobulus 
11.  16.  Lysias  to  the  pco[ilt'ofthe  Jews,  sendeth  g. 
22.  Antiochus  to  his  brother  Lysias  sends  g. 
27.  king  Antiochus  sends  g.  lo  the  council 
34.  ambassadors  of  Roinnns  send^^.  lo  ihe  Jews 
GREETINGS. 
Eccl.  6.  5.  a  fair  tongue  will  increase  kind  g. 
GREW. 

2  E.s-'i.  8.  9.  delivereth  up  the  things  that  g.  in  it 

9.  47.  so  when  he  g.  up,  and  came  to  the  time 
11.  3.  out  of  her  feathers  g.  oih>T  feathers 
14.  40.  when  I  had  drunk,  wisdom  ^o-.  in  my  breast 

GRIEF. 
IVisd.  8. 9.  she  would  be  a  cimifort  in  cares  and  g. 
11.  12.  for  a  double  "■.  came  upon  them 
Eccl.  20. 6.  but  a  g.  of  heart  and  sorrow  is  a  woman 
that  is  jealous  over  another  woiiian 
29.  5.  hut  when  he  should  repay,  he  will  return 
words  of^.  and  complain  of  the  time 
37.  2.  is  it  not  a  g.  when  a  companion  is  turned 
Sus.  10.  yet  durst  not  one  shew  another  his  g. 
IMac.a.H  the  king  laid  him  down  and  fellsick  for^. 
9.  for  his  g.  was  ever  more  and  more 
13.  I  perish  through  «reat  g.  in  a  strange  land 
GRIEVE. 
Tob.  4.  3.  which  shall  please  her  and  g.  her  not 
Eccl.  3.  12.  g.  him  not  as  long  as  he  liveth 
4.  8.  let  it  not  "■.  thee  to  bow  down  thine  ear 
GRIEVED. 

1  E.id.  1.  24.  and  how  they  g.  him  exceedingly 

2  Esd.  9.  38.  and  she  was  much  g.  in  heart 
40.  I  said,  why  art  thou  ho  g.  in  thy  mind  ? 

10.  8.  we  all  mourn,  art  thou  g.  for  one  son  ? 
.50.  God  seetli  that  thou  arl  g.  imreigneilly 

Tnb.  3.  1.  then  I  hiring  g.  did  wiu'p  and  prayed 
fVi.id.  14.  21.  slew  him,  or  ^.  him  by  adultery 
Ercl  6.25.  bear  her,  and  be  not  g.  with  her  bonds 
12  9.in  Ihe  prosperity  of  a  man,  enemies  will  hug. 
21.  24.  a  wise  man  will  be  g.  with  the  disgrace 
47.  20.  and  thou  wast  g.  for  thy  folly 
Bar.  4.  R.  yo  have  g.  Jerusalem  that  nursed  you 
33.  so  shall  she  bo  g.  fiir  her  own  desolation 

1  Mar.  3.7.  hog.  many  kings  and  made  Jarobgliid 

2  Afar.  4.  35.  were  much  g.  for  the  unjust  murder 
13.  25.  the  peoph'.  there  were  p.  for  the  covenants 

GRIEVETH. 
Eccl.  30.  3.  ho  that  leacbelh  his  son,  g.  the  enemy 

GRIEVOUS. 
2  Esd.  a.  21.  the  thouglils  of  my  heart  wore  g. 
H'ind.  2.  15.  ho  is  g.  lo  us  even  lo  heboid 
17.  11.  wickedness  always  forecasteth  g.  things 
21.  were  to  thenuelves  mure  g.  than  darknesi 


GUS 


[ApOCXTrBA 


Eccl.  S.  15.  travel  not,  lest  he  become  g.  to  tnee 

27.  15.  and  their  reviliiigs  are^.  to  the  ears 
29.  28.  these  things  are  g.  to  a  man  of  under- 
standing 

2  Mac.  6.  3.  this  mischief  was  ^.  lo  the  people 
9.  21.  and  being  talren  with  a  g.  disease  though* 
24.  if  any  tidings  were  brought  that  were^. 

13.  6.  or  had  comiriitted  any  other  j'.  crime 

14.  45.  and  though  his  wounds  were  /'.  yet  he  ran 
GRIEVOUSLY. 

IVisd.  19.  16.  but  these  vary  g.  afflicted  thcin 
2  Mac.  7.  39.  and  look  it  g.  that  he  was  mocked 
9.  i'S.  the  murderer  having  sutTored  most  ». 

14.  28.  took  it^.  thai  he  should  make  void  arliclet 
GROANi:;). 

2  Mac.  6.  30.  when  re.ulv  to  die  with  stripes  he  g 

GKOANETU. 
Eccl.  30.  20.  he  g.  as  an  eiinurh  that  embraccth 

GROANING. 

IVisd.  5.  3.  n-.  for  anguish  ofspirij,  they  shall  say 

11.  12.  a  g.  for  the  remeinbrance  of  things  past 

GROVKS. 

2  Esd.  16.  28.  who  shall  hide  themselves  in  thick  g 

Jud.  3.  8.  yet  he  did  cut  down  their  frontiers  and^, 

ljl/ac.1.47.  set  up  altars,  and  ('.and  chapels  of  idolt 

GROUND. 

1  Esd.  8.91.  lying  flat  on  the  g.  before  the  temple 
9.  47.  they  fell  to  the  5-.  and  worshipped  the  Lord 

2  Esd.  4.  19.  for  the  g.  is  given  to  the  wood 
21.  for  like  as  the^.  is  given  to  the  wood 

8.  41.  ns  husbandman  sowelli  much  seed  on  Ihe^; 

9.  34.  it  is  a  custom  when  the  g.  hath  received 
seed,  or  the  sea  a  ship 

10.22.  psaltery  is  laid  on  the  "•.  our  song  tosileuco 

15.  13.  they  that  till  the  g.  shall  mourn 
■/tid.  12.  15.  her  maid  laid  solt  skins  on  ihe^. 

14.  18.  Olofernes  lielh  on  Ihe  g.  without  a  head 
Hi.  5.  (lash  Ihe  suckling  children  ajainst  the  g. 

IVisd.  19.  10.  how  the  g.  brought  forth  flies 
19.  things  that  before  swam,  now  wenton  Ihe^. 

Ercl.  II.  5.  many  kings  have  sal  down  on  Ihe  g. 
18.  6.  neither  can  Ihe  g.  of  them  he  found  out 
33. 10.  all  men  from  the^.  .Adam  of  the  earth 

Rar.  5.  7.  lo  make  even  the  g.  that  Israel  may  go 

6.  27.  for  if  they  fall  lo  the  g.  at  any  time 

1  ATuc.  14.  8.  then  did  they  till  llieir  g.  in  peace 

2  Mi'c.  3.  27.  Helioilorus  fell  suddenly  lo  the  ^. 
4.  42.  and  some  they  struck  to  the  g. 
8.3. defaced  and  ready  to  he  made  even  with  Ihe^. 

9.  8.  he  was  now  cast  on  the  g.  and  carried 
14. was  going  to  lay  the  holy  city  even  with  the  ^. 

14.  33.  lay  this  temple  of  God  even  with  the^. 
GROW. 
2  Esd.  2.  19.  whereon  there  g.  ro.'ps  and  lilies 

10.  9.  for  the  fall  ofso  many  that  g.  upon  her 
Ifi.  21.  even  then  shall  evils  f.  upon  earth, sword 

32.  and  nil  her^iaths  shall  g.  full  of  thorns 
Eccl.  14.  18.  green  leaves,  some  fall  and  some  g. 
/Jnn. 3. 54.  Oall  ve  things  that  <r.bless  ye  the  Lord 

GROWKTII. 
Eccl.  50.  10.  a  cypress  which  g.  up  to  the  clouds 

■  GROWING. 
IVisd.  10.  2G.  that  it  is  not  the  gK  offr'iits 
Eccl.  .^9.  13.  and  bud  forth  as  a  rose^.  by  the  brook 
40.  16.  Ihe  weed  g.  on  every  water  and  bank 

1  Mac.  4.  38.  they  saw  shrubs  g.  in  the  courts 
GROWN. 

2  Esd.  4.  10.  and  such  as  are  g.  up  with  thee 

7.  41.  even  so  now  seeing  corruption  is  "•.  up 
IVisd.  14.  16.  an  unijodly  eustom  c  strong 

GRUDGE. 
Eccl.  10.  25.  he  will  not  g.  when  he  is  reformed 

GRUDGED. 

Wisd.  12.  27.  what  ihinss  they  g.  when  punished 

GUARD. 

1  Esd.  3.  4.  three  young  men  that  were  of  the  g, 
./lid.  12.  7.  'hen  Oloferni'S  commanded  his  g. 

2  .1/rtr-.  3.  24.  he  was  present  himself  with  his^. 

28.  lately  came  with  all  his  g.  into  the  treasury 
GUESS. 

IVisd.  9.  16.  hardly  do  we  g.  aright  at  things 
Eccl.  9.  14.  as  near  as  thou  canst  "-.atthy  iie-glibour 

GUEST. 
Wisd.  5. 14.  remembrance  ofa^.  lanieth  but  a  day 

GUIDE. 
2  F^id.  16.  75.  neitlier  doubt,  for  God  is  your  4'. 

76.  the  g.  of  them  who  keep  my  comniandmenti 
fVi.sd.  18.  3.  to  be  a  g.  of  the  unknown  journey 
F.ccl.  20.  :J2.  that  leadeth  his  life  without  a  g. 
i  Mac.  5.  15.  Menelaus  thai  irailor  being  his  g. 

GUIDED. 

/*'i".«(/.  10. 10.  she  ^T.  him  in  right  paths,  shewed  him 

17.  she  g.  them  in  a  iiinrvellous  way,  and  wat 

GUIDING. 

'iJ^tac.  10. 1.  the  Lord  <r.  iliiini,  recovered  the  tompla 

GUILTY. 
Tob.  6.  12.  hut  he  shall  he  g.  of  death  hecaiue 
.S'i(4.  53.  and  thou  hnsi  let  the  g.  go  free 

GUSHED. 
2  .Vac.  14.  45.  though  hii  blooil  ff.  out  liko  ipoutt 


Apocktpoi.] 


HAN 

H. 


HABBACUC. 
Htl  33.  there  was  in  Jewry  a  prophet  called  (1. 

34.  but  the  hiigel  of  the  Lord  said  unio  H. 

35.  and  H.  said,  Lord,  I  never  saw  llabylon 
37.  and  H.  cried,  saying,  O  Daniel,  Daniel 
39.  the  angel  uf  the  Lord  set  PI.  in  his  own  place 

HABITATION. 
Tob.  1.  4.  the  temple  of  the  A.  of  the  Most  High 
S  Mac.  IL  ".  to  make  the  city  a  h.  of  Gentiles 
14.  35.  the  temple  of  thy  h.  should  he  among  us 
HABITATIONS. 
1  Esd.  9.  12.  and  let  all  them  of  our  h.  come 
£ccl.  44.  6.  rich  men  living  peaceably  in  their  A. 

HAIL. 
9Esd.l5.  13.  Bceds  shall  fail  through  blasting  and  A. 

41.  fire  and  A.  and  Hying  swords,  and  waters 
Wisd.  16.  'i.i.  tiro  burning  in  the  A.  did  destroy 
Eccl.  39.  29.  fire  and  A.  created  for  vengeance 

HAILS. 
Wisd.  16. 16.  with  strange  A.  were  they  persecuted 

HAILSTONES. 

Wisd.  5.  22.  and  A.  full  of  wrath  shall  be  cast 

Eccl.  43.  15.  by  his  power  the  A.  are  broken  small 

46.  G.  with  A-  of  mighty  power  he  made  the  battle 

HAIR. 

1  Esd.  8.  71.  I  pulled  the  It.  from  off  my  head 

2  F.sd.  1.  8.  pull  thou  olfthe  A.  of  thy  head 
16.2.  gird  yourselves  willi  clothes  of  sack  and  A. 

Jud.  10.  3.  she  braided  the  A.  of  her  head 
13.  7.  she  took  hold  of  the  A.  of  his  head 
10.  8.  she  bound  her  A.  in  a  lire  and  took 

Esth.  14. 2.  the  places  of  joy  she  lilled  with  torn  A. 

Eccl.  27.  14.  niaketh  the  A.  stand  upright 

Bel  27.  then  Daniel  look  pitch,  fat,  and  A. 

36.  the  angel  bare  him  by  the  A.  of  his  he.id 
a  Mac.  7.  7.  ihey  piillL-il  off  the  skin  with  the  A. 

Gray  HAIRS.     See  Gray. 

HALF. 

2  Esd.  11. 17.  none  after  thee,  attain  to  A.  thy  time 

13.  4.5.  a  great  way  to  go,  of  a  year  and  a  A. 

14.  11.  ten  parts  are  gone,  and  A.  of  a  tenth  part 
12.  that  which  is  after  the  A.  of  a  tenth  part 

Tob.  8.  21.  then  he  should  take  the  A.  of  his  goods' 

12.  2.  it  is  n<i  harm  to  me  to  give  hiin  A.  of  those 
5.  take  A.  of  all  that  ye  have  brought  and  go 

Wisd.  18.  lr<.  and  another  thrown  there  A.  dead 
£c(;/.  29. 6.  if  prevail,  he  shall  hardly  receive  the  A. 

1  Mac.  3.  .T7.  the  king  took  the  A.  of  the  forces 
10.  30.  and  the  A.  of  the  fruit  of  the  trees 

HALLELUIA. 
Tob.  13.  18.  and  all  her  etreets  shall  say  A. 

HALLOW. 
XEsd.l.Z.  the  Levites  should  A.  themselves  to  Lord 

HALLOWED. 

2  Esd.  2.  41.  that  thy  people  may  be  A. 

5.  25.  of  all  cities  tlK)a  hast  A.  Sion  to  thyself 
Jud.  9.  13.  against  thy  covenant  and  ihy  A.  house 
Eccl.  33.  0.  he  hath  made  high  days  and  h.  them 

1  Mad.  48.  made  up  the  sanctuary,  A.  the  courts 

HAM.MER. 
£ccl.  38. 28.  the  noise  of  A.  and  anvil  is  in  his  ears 

HAND. 

\Ksd.  fi.  33.  that  stretchcth  out  his  A.  to  endamage 
ZF.sd.  3.  6.  wliich  thy  right  A.  had  planted 

6.  H.  Jacob's  A.  held  first  the  heel  of  Esau 
10.  the  A.  of  man  is  betwi.vt  the  heel  and  the  A. 

Toll.  4.  14.  but  give  him  his  wages  out  of  A. 
5.17.ishe  not  theslaffofourA.  in  going  in  and  out? 

7.  13.  he  look  her  by  the  A.  and  gave  her  to  Tobias 
11.4.  take  in  thine  A.  the  gall  of  the  fish 

13.  2.  nor  is  there  any  that  can  avoid  his  A. 
Jud.  2.  12.  that  will  I  do  by  mine  A. 

8.  33.  the  Lord  will  visit  Israel  by  mine  A. 

9.  9.  give  it  into  mine  A.  who  am  a  widow 

10.  break  their  stateliness  by  the  A.  of  a  woman 

12.  4.  before  the  Lord  work  by  mine  A. 

13.  1,5.  Ld.  hath  smitten  bim  by  the  A.  of  a  woman 

15.  10.  hath  (^ne  all  these  things  by  Ihino  A. 
16.6.halh  disappointed  them  by  the  A.  of  a  woman 

Estli:  14.  4.  for  my  danger  is  in  mine  A. 
14.  but  deliver  us  from  thine  A.  and  help  mo 

Wisd.  2.  18.  deliver  him  from  the  h.  of  his  enemies 
3.  l.the  souls  of  the  righteous  areinflie  A.of  God 
7.  16.  for  in  his  h.  are  both  we  and  our  words 

10.  20.  magnifi.'d  thine  A.  that  fought  for  them 

11.  1.  she  prospered  in  the  h.  of  the  holy  prophet 
17.  thy  almiglity  A.  that  made  the  world 

13.  10.  a  stone,  the  work  of  an  ancient  h. 

14.  6.  the  hope  of  the  world  governed  by  thy  k. 

16.  !5.  it  is  not  |)Ossible  to  escape  thine  A. 
19.8.  all  the  people  that  weredciended  with  thy  A. 

F.cel.  4.  9.  deliver  him  from  the  A.  of  the  oppressor 
5.  12.  if  not,  lay  thy  A.  upon  thy  mouth 
7.  32.  and  stretch  thy  A.  unto  the  poor 

36.  whatever  tlioutakfst  in  A.  remember  the  end 
fi.n.forA.ofartificer  the  »*>ork  shall  he  commended 
10.  4.  the  power  of  the  earth  is  in  the  A-  of  Lord 
799 


HAN 

BccZ.10.5.  In  the  h.  of  God  is  the  prosperity  of  man 

12.  12.  neither  let  him  sit  at  thy  right  A. 

14.  13.  stretch  out  thine  A.  and  givu  to  him 

15.  14.  and  left  him  in  the  A.  uf  liis  counsel 

16.  stretch  forth  thy  A.  unto  whither  Ihuu  wilt 

16.  27.  and  in  his  A.  are  the  chief  of  them 

18.  3.  governs  the  world  with  the  palm  of  his  A. 

21.  19.  and  like  manacles  on  the  right  A. 

22.  2.  every  man  that  lakes  it  up,  will  shake  his  A. 
27.  19.  as  one  that  letteih  a  bird  go  out  of  his  A. 
29.1. be  thai  strenglhenelh  hi8A.keepclh<;oinmand 

5.  till  he  bath  received,  he  will  kiss  a  man's  A. 
31.  14.  stretch  out  thine  A.  whiiher  it  lookcth 

18.  reach  not  thy  A.  out  first  of  all 
33.  13.  as  clay  is  in  the  potter's  A.  to  fashion  it 
36.  3.  lift  up  thy  A.  against  strange  nations 

6.  shew  signs,  glorify  thy  A.  and  thy  right  arm 
38.  15.  let  him  tall  into  the  A.  of  the  physician 
40.  14.  while  he  openeth  his  A.  he  shall  rejoice 

47.  4.  when  he  lilted  up  his  A.  with  the  stone 

5.  he  gave  him  strength  in  his  right  A.  to  slay 

48.  18.  Sennacherib  lift  up  his  A.  against  Sion 

49.  11.  even  he  was  as  a  signet  on  the  right  A. 

50.  15.  he  stretched  out  his  A.  to  the  cup 

51.  26.  receive  instruction,  she  is  hard  at  A.  to  find 
Bar.  6.  15.  he  hath  also  in  his  right  A.  a  dagger 
Dan.  3.  66.  he  hath  saved  us  from  the  A.  of  death 
2  Mac.  3.  29.  he  by  the  A.  of  God  was  cast  down 

5.  23.  Menelaus  bare  a  heavy  A.  over  the  citizens 

6.  26.  I  should  not  escape  the  A.  of  the  .'\lmighly 

7.  19.  that  takest  in  h.  to  strive  against  God 

34.  lifting  up  Ihy  A.  against  the  servants  of  God 

13.  22.  gave  his  A.  took  theirs,  departed,  tought 
15.  15.  Jeremias  holding  forth  right  A.  gave  Judas 

30.  command,  to  strike  off  Nicanur's  head  and  A. 
32.  he  shewed  them  the  A.  of  that  blasphemer 
HANDFULS. 
2  Mac.  4.  41.  others  taking  A.  of  dust,  cast  them 

HANDLE. 
iVisd.  15.  15.  nor  have  fingers  of  hands  to  A. 

HANDLED. 
2Mac.  7.  39.  the  king  A.  him  worse  than  all  the  rest 

HANDLING. 
2  Mac.  2.  28.  the  exact  A.  of  every  particular 
8. 17.  injury  to  holy  place,  the  cruel  A.  of  the  city 

HANDMAID. 
2  Esd.  9.  45.  afterthirty  years  God  heard  me  thy  A. 
Jtid.  11.  5.  suffer  thy  A.  to  speak  in  thy  presence 

6.  if  thou  wilt  follow  the  words  of  thine  A. 

16.  I  thine  A.  knowing  all  this,  am  Hed 
12.  4.  thine  A.  shall  not  spend  these  things 

6.  command  that  thine  A.  may  go  forth  to  prayer 
Eslh.  14.  17.  thy  A.  hath  not  eaten  at  Aman's  table 

18.  nor  hath  thine  A.  any  joy  since  the  day 
Wisd.  9.  5.  I  thy  servant  and  son  of  thine  A. 
HANDS. 

1  Esd.  1.  53.  for  he  delivered  all  into  their  A. 

7.  15.  to  strengthen  their  A.  in  the  works  of  Lord 

8.  73.  stretching  forth  my  A.  unto  the  Lord 

9.  20.  they  gave  their  A.  to  put  away  their  wives 
47.  lifting  up  their  A.  they  fell  to  the  ground 

2  Esd.  1.  20.  ye  have  defiled  your  A.  with  blood 
32.  whose  blood  I  will  require  of  your  A. 

3.  5.  which  was  the  workmanship  of  thine  A. 

5.  30.  yet  ghouldst  punish  them  with  thine  own  A. 

8.7.  we  are  all  one  workmanship  of  thine  A. 
./ltd.  7.  25.  but  God  hath  sold  us  into  their  A.  I 

Esth.  12.  2.  were  about  to  lay  A.  upon  Arlaxerxes 
Wisd.  1.  12.  destruction  with  the  works  of  your  A 

3.  14.  who  with  his  A.  hath  wrought  no  iniquity 

8.  12.  they  shall  lay  their  A.  on  their  mouth 

18.  in  the  works  of  her  A.  are  infinite  riches 

12.  3.  thy  will  to  destroy  by  the  A.  of  our  lathers 
6.  the  parents  that  killed  with  their  own  A. 

13.  10.  gods  which  are  the  works  of  men's  A. 

19.  forgood  success  of  his  A.  asketh  ability  to  f?o 

14.  8.  but  that  which  is  made  with  A.  ia  cursid 

15.  15.  .which  have  not  fingers  of  A.  to  handle 

17.  he  worketh  a  dead  thing  with  wicked  A. 
Eccl.  2. 12.  woe  be  to  the  fearful  hearts  and  faint  A. 

18.  saying,  we  will  fall  into  the  A.  of  the  Lord 
8.1.  strive  not  with  a  mighty  man,  lest  fall  in  hi«  A. 
11.6.  the  honourable  delivered  into  other  men's  A. 
12.  18.  he  will  shake  his  head  and  clap  his  A. 
25.  23.  she  maketh  weak  A.  and  feebli;  knees 

35.  8.  diminish  not  the  first  fruits  of  thy  A. 
38.  10.  leave  off  sin,  and  order  thy  A.  aright 
13.  a  time  when  in  their  A.  there  is  good  eucces.i 
31.  all  these  trust  to  their  A.  every  one  is  wise 
42.  6.  and  shut  up  where  many  A.  are 
46.  2.  when  he  did  lift  up  his  A.  against  cities 
48.  19.  then  trembled  their  hearts  and  A. 

20.  they  stretched  out  their  A.  toward  him 

50.  12.  when  he  took  the  portions  out  of  priest's  A. 
13.  the  oblations  of  the  Lord  in  their  A. 

20.  he  lifted  up  his  A.  over  the  congregation 

51.  3.  out  of  the  A.  of  such  as  sought  my  life 

8.  thou  savest  them  out  of  the  A.  of  the  enemies 

19.  I  stretched  forth  my  A.  to  the  heavens  above 
Bar.  6.  51.  no  gods  but  the  works  of  men's  A. 


HAR 

Dan.  3.  9.  deliver  us  into  A.  ofiawless  encmici 
Hus.  22.  if  1  do  it  not,  1  cannot  escape  your  A. 

23.  it  is  belter  fur  me  to  fall  into  your  A. 

34.  the  two  elders  laid  their  A.  upon  her  head 
Bel  5.  I  may  not  worship  idols  made  with  A. 

1  Mac.  3.  18.  to  be  sliul  up  in  the  A.  of  a  few 

12.  9.  we  have  holy  books  of  scrijHure  in  our  A. 
14.  31.  that  they  might  lay  A.  on  Ihe  sanctuary 

2  Mac.  2.  25.  that  all  into  whose  A.  it  cuineB 

3.  20.  all  holding  their  A.  toward  heaven 

5.  16.  taking  Ihe  holy  vessels  with  polluted  A.  and 
with  profane  A.  pulling  down  things  dedicattJ 
7.  10.  holding  forth  his  A.  nianfully 

31.  thou  shall  not  escajic  the  A.  of  God 

12.  12.  whereupon  they  shook  A.  and  departed 

14.  34.  then  the  priests  lift  up  their  A.  loheavca 
46.  and  taking  his  bowels  in  both  his  A. 

15.  12.  holding  up  his  A.  piavcd  for  the  Jewa 

HANDSO.MELY. 
Wisd.  13.  11.  the  carpenier  hath  wrought  it  A. 

HAND- WRITING. 
Tob.  5.  3.  then  he  gave  him  Ihe  A.' and  said 

9.  5.  Raphael  wiiu  out  and  gave  Gabael  Ihe  A. 

HANG. 
.fud.  14.  1.  take  his  head,  ami  A.  it  on  your  walls 
"iMac.  15.  33.  A.  up  the  reward  of  his  niadncss 
HANGED. 

1  Esd.  0.  32.  a  tree  taken,  and  he  thereon  be  A. 

2  Esd.  10.  58.  he  halh  A.  tlio  earth  on  the  waters 
.lud.  14.  11.  they  A.  the  head  of  Olofernes 
/•.'.s(A.  16.  18.  the  Worker  of  these  tilings  is  A. 

1  Mac.  1.  61.  they  A.  infants  about  their  necks 
4.57. chambers  they  renewed  and  A.  doors  on  iheia 
7.  47.  they  A.  them  up  toward  Jerusalem 

2  Mac.  13.  5.  on  every  side  A.  down  into  the  ashoj 
15.  35.  he  A.  also  Nicanur's  head  on  the  tower 

HANGETH,  ING. 
Eccl.  19.  26.  a  wicked  man  that  A.  down  hit  head 
iMac.  6.  10.  the  babes  A.  at  thei'r  breasts 

HAPPEN. 
2  Esd.  4.  51.  or  what  shall  A.  in  those  dayg 

13.  18.  which  shall  A.  to  ilicm  and  to  those  lefl 
20.  pass  away,  and  nut  to  see  the  things  that  A. 

32.  Ihe  signs  shall  A.  which  I  shewed  thee 

14.  16.  than  those  which  thou  hast  seen  A. 
Il'isd.  2. 17.  let  us  prove  w  hat  sliali  A.  in  the  end 
Keel.  22.  20.  and  if  any  evW'A.  to  me  by  him 

33.  1.  no  evil  shall  A.  to  him  ihatfeareth  the  Lord 
40.  8.  such  things  A.  to  all  flesh,  man  and  beast 

HAPPENED. 
2  F.sd.  P.  35.  but  with  us  it  hath  not  A.  so 

10.  48.  that  my  son  A.  to  have  a  fall  and  died 
Tob.  11.  15.  things  that  had  A.  lo  him  in  Media 
.lud.  8.  20.  and  what  A.  to  Jacob  in  Mesopola.iii* 
fVi.9d.  19.  4.  the  things  that  bad  already  A. 
Eccl.  5   4.  and  what  harm  halh  A.  unto  me? 
Bar.  2.  2.  bring  great  plagues,  such  as  never  A. 

1  Mac.  I.  1.  it  A.  aflerlhat»Ale.\aiider  had  smillon 

4.  26.  th? strangers  told  I.ysias  what  had  A. 

5.  25.  Nabalhites  told  tlicm  every  thing  that  A. 

2  Mac.  9. 3.  what  had  A.  to  Nicunor  and  Tii»otI:eut 
13.  7.  such  a  death  it  A.  that  wicked  man  to  die 

HAPPENETIl. 
2  Esd.  10.  6.  seest  Ihuu  not  what  A.  unto  us? 
i?ttr.  3.10.  how  A.  illhou  an  in  thine  enemies'  laDd? 

HAPPY. 
Wisd.  18.  1.  had  not  suffered,  they  counted  Ihem  k. 
F.rcl.  25.  7.  nine  things  which  I  judged  to  be  A. 
.37.  24.  all  they  that  see  him  shall  count  him  A. 
B ar. 4.4.0  Israel,  A.  are  we,  things  aie  made  known 

1  Mac.  10.  .55.  A.  day  wherein  thou  didst  return 

2  j>/ac.7.24.would  make  him  both  a  rich  and  A.man 

HARD. 
Wisd.  11.4.thirst  wa,s  quenched  out  of  the  A.  stono 
19.  13.  Ihey  used  a  more  A.  and  hateful  behaviour 
Feel.  3.  21.  the  things  that  are  leo  fy.  for  Ihee 

40.  15.  lire  as  unclean  roots  u|U)n  a  A.  rock 
48.  17.  he  digged  the  A.  rock  with  iron 

1  Miic.J.lH.  it  is  no  A.  matter  for  many  to  be  shut  np 

2  Mac.  12.  21.  for  the  town  was  A.  lo  besiege 

HARDENED. 
Eccl.  10.  15.  Lord  A.  Pharaoh  that  he  should  not 

HARDENING. 
1  Esd.  1.  48.  A.  his  lienri,  lii>  tmn-gressed  the  law* 

HARDINESS. 
.Tud.  16.  10.  the  Medes  were  druinted  at  her  A. 

H.ARDLY. 
Wisd.  0.  16.  and  A.  du  we  guess  aright  at  thinn 
Frel.  26.  29.  a  merehanL  shall  A.  keep  himseir 
29.6.  if  he  prevail,  he  stmll  A.  receive  the  half 

HARDNFS.S. 
Eccl.  16. 10.  were  gathered  in  the  A.  of  their  bearta 

HARDY. 
1  Mac.  9.  14.  ho  took  with  him  all  the  A.  men 

HARLOT. 
Ecrl.  9.  3.  meet  not  with  a  A.  lest  thou  fafl 
26.  22.  a  A.  shall  be  accounted  as  spittle 

41.  20.  b»  ashamed  to  look  upon  a  A. 

HARLQTS. 
EccL  9.  6.  give  not  thy  soul  unto  *. 


HAT 

£ccM9.2.that  clesveth  to  k.  will  become  impudent 
Bat.  ti.  11.  they  will  give  thereof  to  cominuii  A. 
2  Mac.  6.  4.  the  Uentiles  who  dullied  with  h. 

HARM. 
7'oft.l2.2.  O  father  it  is  no  A.  to  me  to  give  him  half 
fVisd.  11.  I'J.  the  A.  n)ightdis|iHtcli  tht-in  ut  once 
£ccl.  5. 4.  say  not  1  sinned,  whut  A.  hath  hai)|>ened 
7.  1.  do  no  evil,  so  shall  no  A.  come  unto  thee 
38.  16.  thou  hadat  sutFercd  great  A.  thyself 

1  Mad.  15.  we|vill  procure  the  A.  neither  of  you 
9.  71.  he  8w;ate  that  he  would  never  do  thcni  A. 

15.  19.  to  write  that  they  should  do  them  no  A. 
31.  give  me  for  the  A.  that  you  have  done 
35.  albeit  they  did  great  A.  to  the  people 

2  Mac.  14. 14.  the  A.  ul  the  Jews  to  be  their  welfare 

H.\K.MLESS. 
Wisd.  18.  3.  thou  gavest  a  A.  sun  to  entertain  them 
2  Mae.  8.  4.  the  wicked  slaughter  of  A.  infants 

HAUMONY. 
ITwd.  19. 18.  the  elements  changed  by  a  kind  of  A. 

HAKNEHS. 
1  Mac.  3  3.  he  girt  his  warlike  A.  about  biin' 
6.  41.  all  that  heard  the  rattling  of  A.  were  moved 
43.  one  of  the  beasts  armed  with  royal  A. 
S  Mac.  3.  25.  that  he  had  complete  h.  of  gold 
5.  3.  wore  seen  ornaments  and  A.  of  all  sorts 
15.28.  they  knew  that  Nicanor  lay  dead  inhisA. 
HAKNESSKD. 
1  Mac.  4. 7.  they  saw  that  it  was  strong  and  well  A. 
(i.  38.  and  being  A.  all  over  amidst  the  ranks 

HAUP. 
1  .Afac.3. 45.  joy  taken  the  pipe  with  the  h.  cetrsed 

HARPS. 
F.ccl.  39.  15.  and  shew  forth  his  praise  with  A. 
1  Mac.  4.  .54.  it  was  dedicated  with  A.  and  cymbals 

13.  51.  he  entered  into  it  with  A.  and  cvnibals 

HARVEST. 
Ecd.  24.  26.  to  abound  as  Jordan  in  time  of  A. 
HASTE. 

1  Ksd.  2.  30.  removing  in  A.  toward  Jerusalem 

2  F.sd.  4.  34.  thy  A.  is  in  vain  to  be  above  him 
42.  a  woman  maketh  A.  to  escape  the  necessity 

5.  44.  the  creature  may  not  A.  above  the  Maker 

14.  15.  and  h.  thee  to  flee  from  these  times 
Tob.  11.  3.  let  us  A.  before  thy  wife  and  prepare 
Jud.  13.  1.  his  servants  made  h.  to  depart 

12.  they  made  A.  to  go  down  to  the  gate 
Wisi,  IH.  21.  then  the  blameless  man  made  A. 
Eccl.  2.  2.  and  make  not  A.  in  time  of  trouble 
Sus.  50.  all  the  people  turned  again  in  A. 

1  Mac.  6.  57.  he  went  in  all  A.  and  said  to  the  king 
63.  afterward  departed  he  in  all  A.  and  returned 

II.  22.  hut  come  and  speak  with  him  in  great  A. 

13.  10.  he  mndoA.  to  finish  the  walls  of  Jerusalem 

2  Mac.  4.  31.  the  king  came  in  all  A.  to  appease 
5.  21.  he  departed  in  all  A.  into  Aniiochia 

9.  7.  and  commanding  to  A.  the  journey 

14.  the  holy  city,  to  which  he  was  going  in  A.  to 
lay  even  with  grmuid  and  make  a  burying 

14.  43.  hut  missing  his  stmke  through  h. 
•  HASTED. 

Jud.Xn.  15.  in  that  thou  hast  A.  to  come  to  our  lord 
Wisd.  4.  1 1.  therefore  A.  he  to  take  him  away 

5.  9.  those  things  passed  away  as  a  post  that  h.  by 
Eccl.  50.  17.  then  all  the  people  A.  and  fell  down 

HASTEN. 
2  F.fdA.  34.  do  not  thou  A.  above  the  Most  Highest 
G.  34.  A.  not  with  the  times  that  are  past 

1  Mac.  13.21.  that  he  should  A.  his  coming  lo  them 

HASTETH. 

2  F.sd.  4.  26.  for  the  world  A.  fast  to  pass  away 
14.  18.  now  A.  vision  to  come  which  thmisawest 

HASTENED. 
2Jtfoc.4.14A.to  be  partakers  of  unlawful  allowance 

HASTY. 
F^cl.  4.  29*be  not  A.  in  thy  tongue,  in  deeds  slack 

6.  7.  provr'  him  first,  and  he  not  A.  to  credit  him 

III.  4.  he  that  U  A.  to  give  credit,  is  light-minded 
28.  11.  a  A.  contention  kindleth  a  fire,  and  a  A. 

fighting  sheddeth  blood 
HASTILY. 
tVitd.  19.  2.  and  having  sent  them  A.  away 
F^cl.  43.  5.  at  his  commandment  it  runneth  A. 

HAT. 
2  Jl/ac.4.  12.  njadethe  chiefyoung  men  wear  a  A. 

HATE. 
2  F.»d.  5.  30.  if  Ihnu  clidst  so  much  A.  thy  people 

10.  23.  delivered  into  the  hands  of  Ihem  thalA.  us 

16.  50.  so  shall  righteousness  A.  Iniquity 
Tob.  13.  12.  cursed  ore  all  they  which  A.  thee 
E»l.h.  14.  13.  turn  his  honrl  to  A.  him  that  fights 

15.thf)u  knowesi  I  A.  the  glory  of  the  unrighteous 
Feci.  7.  15.  h.  not  laborious  work  nor  husbiindry 
13.  20.  as  proud  A.  humility  so  doth  rich  the  poor 
19.  9.  and  when  lime  comolh  ho  will  A.  then 
25.  14.  hut  the  aflliction  from  them  that  A.  me 
1  Mac.  7.  26.  a  man  that  bare  deadly  A  to  Israel 
ZMac.  14.  39.  willing  lo  declare  the  k.  he  hare 

HATED. 

S  Eld.  13  48.  k.  in  oil  her  works  and  inventions 

800 


HEA 

'  TVisd.  11.  21.  made  any  thing,  if  thou  hodst  A.  it 
Eccl.  9.  18.  he  that  is  rash  in  iiis  talk  shall  be  A. 
SO.  8.  that  taketh  to  himself  authority  shall  be  A. 

IS.  such  a  one  is  to  be  A.  of  God  and  man 
21.  28.  a  whisperer  is  A.  wheresoevur  hedwelleth 
37.  24.  I  have  A.  many  things,  nothing  like  hiiu 
31. 16.  eat  as  becomes,  devour  not  lest  thou  he  A. 

37.  2U.  one  sheweth  wisdom  in  words,  and  is  A. 
42.  9.  and  being  married,  lest  she  should  be  A. 

1  Mac.  11.  21.  ungodly  persons  A.  their  own  people 
'S6.  wherefore  all  the  forces  of  his  father  A.  him 
"Mac.  5.  8.  A.  as  a  forsaker  of  the  laws 

HATEFUL. 
Wisd.  14. 9.  ungodly  and  ungodliness  are  A.  to  God 
15.  13.  those  beasts  also  that  are  most  A. 

19.  13.  they  used  a  more  hard  and  A.  behaviour 
Reel.  10.  7.  pride  is  A.  before  God  and  man 

20.  5.  another  by  much  babbling  becoinelh  A. 
Van.  3.9.  lawless  enemies,  most  A.  forsakers  of  G. 

HATEST. 
Tob.  4.  15.  do  that  to  no  man  which  thou  A. 
TVisd.  12.4.  whom  thou  A.  fordoing  odious  works 

HATETH. 
.Tud.  5.  17.  God  that  A.  iniqinty  was  with  them 
E.Hh.  16.  4.  God  that  seeth  all  things,  and  A.  evil 
F.ccl.  12.  6.  for  the  Most  High  A.  sinners 

15.  11.  thou  oughtest  nut  to  do  the  things  that  he  A. 
13.  the  Lord  A.  all  abomination 

10.  6.  he  that  A.  babbling,  shall  have  less  evil 
21.6.  he  that  A.  to  be  reproved,  isin  way  of  sinners 
25.2.three  sorts  of  men  my  soul  A.  and  amuflfended 
33.  2.  a  wise  man  A.  not  the  law 

HATRED. 
Eccl.  10.  6.  bear  not  A.  to  thy  neighbour 
28.  3.  one  man  beareth  A.  against  another 

5.  if  he  that  is  but  flesh  nourish  A. 

1  Mac.  11.  12.  so  that  their  A.  was  openly  known 

13.  17.  he  should  i)rocure  to  himself  great  A. 

2  Mac.  3.  1.  because  of  his  A.  of  wickedness 
4.  3.  but  when  their  A.  went  so  far 

49.  moved  with  A.  of  that  wicked  deed 
6.  29.  changing  the  good-will  they  bare  into  A. 
HAVEN. 

1  Ksd.  5.  55.  brought  by  floats  to  the  A.  of  Joppe 

2  Esd.l'i.  42.  as  a  A.  or  ship  preserved  from  tempest 

1  Mac.  14.  5.  in  this,  that  he  took  Joppe  for  a  A. 

2  Mac.  12.  6.  and  he  burnt  the  A.  by  night 
9.  he  set  fire  on  the  A.  and  the  navy 

14.  1.  having  entered  by  A.  of  Tripolis 

HAUGHTY. 

Eccl.  22.  10.  but  children  being  A.  through  disdain 

23.  4.  but  turn  away  from  thy  servant  a  A.  mind 

20.  9.  the  whoredom  may  be  known  in  her  A.  looks 

2  Mac.  5.  17.  so  A.  was  Antiochus  in  mind 

13.  9.  the  king  came  with  a  barbarous  and  A.  mind 

HAUGHTINESS. 

2  Mac.  5.  21.  such  was  the  A.  of  his  mind 

15.6.Nicanor  in  exceeding  pride  and  A.  determined 

HAVOCK. 

1  Mac.  7.  7.  see  what  A.  he  hath  made  amongst  us 

HEAD. 

1  £«d.4.30.  taking  the  crown  from  the  king's  A.  and 

setting  it  on  her  own  A.  she  struck  the  king 

8.  71.  I  pulled  the  hair  from  off  my  A. 

2  Esd.  1.  8.  pull  thou  ofli'then  the  hair  of  thy  A. 

9.  38.  clothes  were  rent,  she  had  ashes  on  her  A. 

16.  .53.  God  shall  burn  coals  of  fire  on  his  A. 
Jud.  8.  3.  as  he  stood,  the  heat  came  upon  his  A. 

9.  1.  Judilhfellonher  fHce,and  put  ashesonher  A. 

13.  8.  and  she  look  away  his  A.  from  him 
9.  she  gave  Olofernes  his  A.  to  her  maid 

15.  she  took  the  A.  out  of  the  bag  and  shewed  it 
18.  hath  directed  thee  to  the  cutting  off  the  h. 

14.  I.  take  this  A.  and  hang  it  on  your  walls 

6.  he  saw  the  A.  of  Olofernes  in  a  man's  hand 
II.  they  hanged  the  A.  of  Olofernes  on  the  wall 
15.  and  his  A.  was  taken  from  him 

18.  Olofernes  lielh  on  the  ground  without  a  A. 
F.sth.  14.  2.  she  covered  her  A.  with  ashes 

Ki.abhorsignof  my  high  estate  which  is  on  my  A. 
fVisd.  18.  24.  thy  majesty  on  the  diadem  of  his  A. 
F.ccl.  4.  7.  and  how  tiiy  A.  lo  a  great  man 

11.  1.  wisilom  lifted  up  the  A.  of  him  that  is  low 
13.  the  Lord  lifleth  up  his  A.  from  misery 

12.  18.  he  will  shake  his  A.  and  elap  his  hands 
19.  26.  a  wicked  man  that  hnngeth  down  his  A. 
20  11.  that  lifteili  up  his  A.  from  a  low  estate 
25.  15.  there  is  no  A.  above  the  A.  of  a 

27.  25.  castelh  a  sKme,  caslelh  it  on  his  own  A.   . 

38.  3.  the  skill  of  the  physician  shall  lift  up  his  A. 
44  23.  and  made  it  rest  on  A.  of  Jacob 

Itar.  5.  2.  and  set  a  diadem  on  tjiy  A.  of  glory 
Suit.  34.  the  elders  laid  their  hands  on  her  A. 
55.  thou  hast  lied  against  thine  own  h.  59. 
Hrl  36.  the  angel  bar^im  by  the  hair  of  his  A. 
Vraycr  nf  .Manass.  tnat  I  rnimol  lift  up  mine  A- 

1  Mac.  7.  47.  they  smote  off  Nicanor's  A. 

II.  13.  where  he  set  two  crowns  upon  his  A. 
71.  Jonathan  cast  earth  on  his  A.  and  prayed 

2  Jl/ac.  7.  7.  they  hod  pulled  off  the  skin  of  his  A. 


HEA 


[ArOCBYFIU 


2  .Vuc.15.30.  commanded  to  strike  off  Nicanor's  4. 

32.  and  he  shewed  Ihem  vile  Nicanor's  A. 

35.  he  hanged  also  Nicanor's  A.  on  the  lower 

HEADLONG. 

JVifd.  4.  19.  for  he  siiall  cast  them  down  A. 

2  Mac.  6. 10.  they  cast  them  down  A.  from  the  wall 

HEADS. 

1  Esd.  8.  75.  our  sins  are  multiplied  above  our  A. 

2  A"*(/.2.43'.upon  every  one  of  their  A.  he  set  crowui 
.fud.  4.  11.  they  cast  ashes  upon  their  A, 

8.  22.  the  desolation  wdl  he  turn  on  our  A. 

9.  'J.  and  send  thy  wrath  upon  their  A. 

Eccl.  17.  23.  render  their  reconipence  on  their  A. 
36.  10.  smite  in  sunder  the  A.  of  the  rulers 
Bar.  6. 9.  they  make  crowns  for  the  A.  of  tlieir  godg 
22.  upon  their  bodies  and  A.  sit  bats,  birds 

31.  priests  sit  in  their  temples,  their  clothes  rent, 
their  A.  and  beards  shaven,  nothing  on  their  A. 

1  Mac.  3.  47.  they  cast  ashes  on  their  A.  4.  39. 
6.  35.  with  helmets  of  brass  on  their  A. 
0.  23.  the  wicked  began  to  put  forth  their  A. 
2J/uc.l.I6.tliey  smote  off  their  A.  and  cast  them  out 
lU.  25.  and  they  sprinkled  earth  on  their  A. 
14.  ISi  they  cast  earth  on  their  h.  and  prayed 

HEAD  STRONG. 
Eccl.  30.  8.  a  horse  nol  bioken  becometh  A. 
HEAD-TIRE. 

1  Esd.  3.  6.  and  a  A.  of  fine  linen,  and  a  chain 

HEAL. 

2  F.sd.  2.  21.  A.  the  broken  and  the  weak 
Tub.  3.  17.  Raphael  was  sent  to  A.  tbtro  both 

12.  14.  now  God  hath  sent  me  to  A.  thee 
Eccl.  33.  7.  with  such  doth  ho  A.  men 

HEALED. 
TuA.O.S.it  is  good  lo  anoint  a  man, and  he  shall  be  A. 

12.  3.  he  brought  me  money,  and  likewise  A.  thec 
/>7«rf.l6.10.lliy  mercy  was  ever  by  them  and  A.thetn 
F.ccl.  21.  3.  the  wounds  whereof  cannot  be  A. 

HEALETH. 
ff'isd.  16. 12.  thy  word,  O  Lord,  which  h.  all  tliingt 

HEALING. 
Eccl.  38.  2.  for  of  the  Most  High  cometh  A. 

HEALTH. 
2  E*d.7.51.1aid  up  for  us  dwellings  of  A.  and  safety 
Tub.  1.  4.  then  said  he,  is  he  in  good  A.? 
5.  they  said,  he  is  both  alive  and  in  good  A. 

8.  17.  finish  their  life  in  A.  with  joy  and  mercy 
Wisd.  7.  10.  I  loved  her  above  A.  and  beauty 

13.  18.  for  A.  he  callclh  on  that  which  is  weak 
16.12.  no  herb  nor  plaisler  that  restored  them  to  A. 

Eccl.  1. 18.  making  peace  and  perfect  A.  lo  flourish 

17.  26.  will  lead  out  of  darkness  into  the  light  of  A. 

.30. 15.  h.  and  good  slate  of  body  are  above  all  gold 

34.  17.  he  giveth  A.  life,  and  blessing 
2  Mac.  1.  10.  sent  greeting  and  A.  to  Aristobulua 

3.  32.  ofleicd  a  sacrifice  for  the  A.  of  the  man 

9.  18.  therefore  despairing  of  bis  A.  he  wrote 
lO.wisheth  much  joy,  A.  and  prosper,  to  the  Jews 
22.  not  distrusting  my  A.  but  having  hope 

11.  28.  if  ye  fare  well,  we  arc  also  in  good  h. 

HEALTHFUL. 
Wisd.  1.  14.  the  generations  of  the  world  were  h. 

HEAP 

Feci.  3.  27.  the  wicked  man  shall  A.  sin  upon  sin 

20.  28.  that  tilleth  bis  land  shall  increase  his  A, 

39.  17.  at  his  command  ihe  waters  stood  as  a  A. 

HEAPS. 

2  F.sd.  2.  9.  lielh  in  clods  of  pitch  anl  A.  ofashe* 

Wisd.  IS.  23.  the  dead  were  fallen  down  by  A. 

1  Mac.  11.  4.  they  had  made  A.  of  Ihein  by  the  way 

HEAR. 

1  Ksd.  9.  40.  to  A.  the  law  the  first  day  of  the  month 

2  F.sil.  1.  26.  when  you  call  on  me,  T  will  not  A.  you 
2.  I.  by  Ihe  prophets,  whom  they  would  not  k. 

9.  even  so  will  I  do  lo  ihem  that  A.  me  not 
Tub.  3.  13.  that  I  may  A.  no  more  repioach,  15. 
6.  15.  wherefore  A.  me,  O  my  brother 

10.  12.  that  I  may  A.  good  report  of  ihee 
.fud.  8.  17.  he  will  A.  our  voice,  if  it  plcnse  him 

32.  A.  me,  and  I  will  do  a  thing  which  shall  go 
9.  4.  O  God,  O  my  God,  A.  me  al«o  a  widow 

12.  Ld.ofthe  he'avens.earth,  A.  thou  myprayor 

14.  I.  A.  me  now,  my  brethren,  ami  hang  it  up 
Fjith.  13. 17.  A.  inv  prayer,  turn  our  sorrow  into  joy 

14.  19.  O  mighty  God,  A.  the  voice  of  the  f.irlom 
Wi..id.  6.1. .A.  therefore,  O  ye  kings,  and  understand 

8.  \U.  shall  be  afraid  when  they  do  but  A.  of  mo 

15.  15.  nor  noses  to  draw  breath,  nor  ears  to  A. 
F.ccl.  3.  I.  A.  me  your  fiilher,  O  children,  and  do 

5.  II.  be  swift  lo  A.  and  let  thy  life  be  simere 
6. 33.  if  thou  love  lo  A.  shall  receive  understanding 
35.  be  willing  to  A.  every  godly  discourse 
2I.1.'>.  ifa  skill',  man  A.  a  wise  word  will  commend 
23.  7.  A.  O  ye  children,  the  discipline  of  Ihe  month 
2.'>.  9   that  speaketh  in  the  ears  of  him  that  will*. 
29.  25.  moreover,  thou  shall  A.  hitler  words 
31.  22.  my  son,  A.  me,  and  despise  me  not 

33.  18.  A.  me,  O  ye  great  men  of  the  people 

34.  24   whose  voice<»ill  the  Lord  A.? 

26.  that  doth  the  same,  who  will  A.  his  prayorl 


ArocKvPBA.] 


HEA 


HEARD. 

1  Esd.  5.  65.  that  the  truinpota  might  not  be  A.  yet 
the  mulliiude  sounded  ao  that  it  was  A.  afar  ud' 
9.  50.  fur  they  all  wept  when  they  A.  the  law 
Tab.  3.  111.  the  prayers  of  them  both  were  A. 
Jud.  4.  13.  8o  God  A.  their  prayers,  and  looked 
Esth.  12  'i-  he  A.  their  devices,  and  searched  out 
£eci.3. 5  when  he  miiketh  his  i)rayer,he  ehull  be  A. 
4.  6.  his  prayer  shall  be  A.  of  him  that  made  him 
11.8.  answer  not  before  thou  hast  A.  the  cause 
IG.  5.  mine  ear  hath  A.  greater  things  than  these 
17.  13.  and  their  ears  A.  Iiis  glorious  voice 
19  9.  he  A.  and  observed  thee,  and  will  hate  thee 
10.  if  thou  hiist  A.  a  word,  let  it  die  with  thee 
27.  down  his  countenance,  making  as  if  lie  A.  not 
33. 4.  prepare  what  to  say,  and  so  Ihou  shalt  bo  A, 
41.  23.  or  speaking  again  what  thou  hast  A. 

45.  9.  a  noise  that  might  be  A.  in  the  teni|ile 

46.  5.  he  called,  and  the  groat  Lord  A.  him 
48.  20.  anci  immediately  the  holy  One  A.  them 

50.  16.  sons  of  Aaron  made  a  great  noise  to  be  A. 

51.  11.  I  will  praise,  and  so  my  prayer  was  A. 

HEARDEST. 
Eccl.  48.  7.  who  A.  the  rebuke  of  the  Lord  in  Sinai 

HEARER. 
fPisd.l.  6.  for  God  is  witness  and  a  A.  of  his  tongue 

HEAREST. 
Eccl.  13.  13.  when  thou  A.  these  things,  awake 

27.  7.  praise  no  man  before  thou  A.  hiin  speak 

HEARETH. 
fVisd.  1.  10.  for  the  ear  of  jealousy  A.  all  things 

Eecl'.  21.  15.  when  one  of  no  understanding  A.  it 
22.  26.  every  one  that  A.  it  will  beware  of  him 
25.  Itt.  and  when  he  A.  it,  shall  sigh  bitteily 
HEARING. 

JVisd.  18.  1.  whose  voice  they  h.  and  not  seeing 

Bar.  1.  4.  in  the  A.  of  nobles,  in  the  A.  of  elders 
HEARKEN. 

Eccl.  14.  23.  he  shall  also  A.  at  her  doors 
16.  24.  ray  son,  h.  to  me,  and  learn  knowledge 
21.24.  it  is  the  rudeness  of  a  man  to  A.  at  the  door 
33. 18.  A.  with  your  ears,  ye  rulers  of  congregation 
37.  11.  A.  not  to  these  in  any  matter  of  counsel 
39.  13.  A.  to  me,  ye  holy  children,  and  bud  forth 

Bar.  2.  24.  but  we  would  not  A.  to  thy  voice 

1  Mac.  2.  22.  wo  will  not  A.  to  the  king's  words 

2  Mac.  7.  25.  the  young  man  would  in  no  case  A. 

HEARKENED. 
Bar.  3.  4.  have  not  A.  to  the  voice  of  thee  their  God 

HEART. 
1  Esd.  1.  23.  with  a  A.  full  of  godliness 
48.  hardening  his  A.  he  transgressed  the  laws 

3.  21.  and  it  maketh  every  A.  rich,  so  that  a  man 
8  25.  who  hath  put  these  things  into  A.  of  the  king 

8  Esd.  3.  21.  the  first  Adam  bearing  a  wicked  A. 

26.  did  even  as  Adam,  they  also  had  a  wicked  A. 

4.  30.  evil  seed  hath  been  sown  in  theA.  of  Adam 
8.  53.  and  said  in  their  A.  that  there  is  no  God 

Tob.  1. 12.  because  I  remember  God  with  all  my  A. 

4.  13.  my  son,  despise  not  in  thy  A.  thy  brethren 
6.  4.  and  take  the  A.  and  the  liver  and  the  gall 

6.  brother,  to  what  use  is  the  A.  and  the  liver  ? 

7.  he  said  to  Iiim,  touching  the  A.  and  the  liver 
•17.  and  his  A.  was  effectually  joined  to  her 

8.  2.  put  the  A.  and  liver  of  the  fish  thereon 
Jud.  8.  14.  you  cannot  find  the  depth  of  the  A. 
Esth.  14.  13.  turn  his  A.  to  hate  him  that  fightelh 

15.  5.  but  her  A.  was  in  anguish  for  fear 
Wisd.  1.  6.  fur  God  is  a  true  beholder  of  his  A. 
2.  2.  as  a  little  spark  in  the  moving  of  our  k. 
8.  17.  when  I  pondered  these  things  in  my  A. 

21.  besought  him,  and  with  rny  w  hole  A.  I  said 
15.10.  his  A.  is  ashes,  his  hope  more  vile  than  earth 
Ecel.  1.  12.  the  fearof  the  Lord  maketh  a  merry  A. 

28.  and  come  ntft  to  him  with  a  double  A. 
30.  camest  not  in  truth,  hut  thy  A.  is  full  of  deceit 

2.  2.  Bct  thy  A.  aright,  and  constantly  endure 

3.  26.  a  stubborn  A.  shall  fare  evil  at  the  last 

27.  nil  obstinate  A.  shall  be  laden  with  sorrows 

29.  the  A.  of  the  prudent  will  understand 

5.  1.  set  not  thy  A.  on  thy  goods,  and  say  not 
2.  thy  strength,  to  walk  in  the  ways  of  thy  A. 

6.  26.  come  unto  hrr  with  thy  whole  A.  ami  keep 
37.  he  shall  establish  thy  A.  and  give  wisdom 

7.  27.  honour  thy  father  with  thy  whole  A. 

8.  19.  open  not  thine  A.  to  every  man,  lest  he 

9.  9.  lest  thy  A.  incline  unto  her,  and  thou  fall 

10.  12.  his  A.  is  turned  away  from  his  Maker 

11.  30.  kept  in  a  cage,  so  is  the  A.  of  the  proud 

13.  25.  the  A.  of  a  man  changeth  his  countenance, 

a  merry  A.  maketh  a  cheerful  countenance 
2fi.  is  a  token  of  a  A.  that  is  in  prosperity 

14.  21.  he  that  considereth  her  ways  in  his  A. 

16.  20.  no  h.  can  think  on  these  things  worthily 
21.  my  son,  mark  my  words  with  thy  A. 

17.  6.  and  a  A.  gave  he  them  to  understand 
28.the  living  and  sound  in  A. shall  pra:sa  the  Lord 

19.  16.  that  slippeth  in  speech,  but  not  from  his  A. 
81.  6.  that  fears  the  Lord,  will  repent  from  hisA. 
17.  they  shall  ponder  his  Words  in  their  A. 
801 


IIEA 

Eccl.  21.  25.  the  A.  of  fools  is  in  their  mouth 

22.  16.  the  A. that  is  established  by  advised  counsel 

17.  a  A.  settled  on  a  thought  of  uiidersianding 

18.  so  a  fearful  A.  in  the  imagination  of  a  loo 

19.  ho  that  pricketh  the  A.  maketh  it  to  shew 

23.  2.  set  the  discipline  of  wisdom  over  my  A. 
18.  saying  thus  in  his  A.  who  seeth  me  7 

25.  7.  which  I  have  judged  in  my  A.  to  be  happy 
13.  give  me  any  plague,  but  the  plague  of  the  A. 

20.  4.  if  he  have  a  good  A.  toward  the  Lord 
5.  there  be  three  Ihiiigs  that  my  A.  feareth 
18.  so  are  the  fair  feet  with  a  constant  A. 
28.  there  be  two  things  that  grieve  my  A. 

27.  6.  so  is  the  utterance  of  a  conceit  in  the  A. 

30.  16.  there  is  no  joy  above  the  joy  of  the  A. 
23.  love  thine  own  soul,  and  coinlbrt  thine  A. 
25.  a  good  A.  will  have  a  care  ofhis  meat  and  diet 

31.  28.  wine  in  season  brings  gladness  of  the  A. 
33.  5.  the  A.  of  the  foolish  is  like  a  cart-wheel 
3).  5.  the  h.  fancieth  as  a  woman's  A.  in  travail 
36.  20.  a  froward  A.  causeth  heaviness 
37.17.  the  countenance  is  a  sign  of  changing  theA. 
38.  10.  and  cleanse  thy  A.  from  all  wickedness 

18.  the  heaviness  of  the  A.  breaketh  strength 
20.  take  no  heaviness  to  A.  drive  it  away 
40. 20.  wine  and  music  rejoice  the  A.  but  wisdom 

42.  13.  he  seeketh  out  the  deep  and  the  A. 

43.  18.  theA.  is  astonished  at  the  raining  of  it 

45.  26.  God  give  you  wisdom  in  your  A.  to  judge 

46.  11.  every  one,  whose  A.  went  not  a  whoring 

49.  3.  he  directed  his  A.  unto  the  Lord 

50.  23.  he  grant  usjnyfulness  of  A.  and  that  peace 
25.  two  manner  of  nations  my  A.  abhorreth 

27.  who  out  ofhis  A.  poured  forth  wisdom 

28.  he  that  layeth  them  up  in  his  A.  shall  be  wise 
Bar.  2.  8.  from  the  imaginations  ofhis  wicked  A. 
Dan.  3.  16.  in  a  contrite  A.  let  us  be  accepted 

65.  O  ye  holy  and  humble  men  of  A.  bless  Lord 
Sua.  35.  for  her  A.  trusted  in  the  Lord 
Prayer  of  Manass.  now  I  bow  the  knee  of  my  A. 

1  Mac.  6. 10.  sleep  gone,  my  A.  faileth  for  very  care 

2  Mac.  3.  17.  what  sorrow  he  had  now  in  his  A. 
HEARTH. 

Eccl.  50.  12.  he  stood  by  the  A.  of  the  altar 

HEARTILY. 
2  Mac.  4.  37.  therefore  .\ntiochus  was  A.  sorry 

HEARTS. 
2  Esd.  14.  34.  if  so  be  ye  will  reform  your  A. 
16.  54.  the  Lord  knoweth  their  thoughts  and  A. 
63.  he  knoweth  what  you  think  in  your  A. 
Jud.  8.  24.  because  their  A.  depend  upon  us 
Eccl.  2.  12.  woe  be  to  fearful  A.  and  faint  hands 

17.  that  fear  the  Lord  will  prepare  their  A. 
S.  2.  for  gold  hath  perverted  the  A.  of  kings 
16.  10.  were  gathered  in  the  hardness  of  their  A. 
IV  8.  he  set  his  eyes  upon  their  A.  to  shew  them 
16.coul(i  not  make  to  thcmsel.fleshly  A.  Ibrstony 
31.  26.  so  doth  wine  prove  the  A.  of  the  proud 
48.  79.  then  trembled  iheir  A.  and  hands 
Bar  2.  T.  :hoa  hast  put  thy  fear  in  our  A. 
0.  6.  say  ye  in  your  A.  O  Lord,  we  must  wofship 
20.  their  A.  are  gnawed  upon  by  things  cree|)ing 

1  Mac.  12.  28.  they  feared  and  trembled  in  their  A. 

2  Mac.  1. 4.  open  your  A.  in  his  law  and  commands 
2.  3.  the  law  should  not  depart  from  their  A. 
15. 17.  able  to  encourage  the  A.  of  the  young  men 

27.  fighting  with  hands,  praying  with  their  A. 
HEAT. 
2  Esd.  1.  20.  for  the  A.  I  covered  you  with  leaves 
.fud.8. 3.  A.  came  on  his  head,  and  he  fell  on  his  bed 
fVisd.  2.  4.  that  is  overcome  with  the  A.  thereof 
Eccl.  14.  27.  by  her  he  shall  be  covered  from  A. 
18. 10. shall  not  the  dew  assuage  theA.?soisa  word 
34.  16.  a  defence  from  A.  a  cover  from  the  sun 
38.  28.  he  fighteth  with  the  A.  of  the  furnace 
43.  3.  who  can  abide  the  burning  A.  thereof? 
22.  a  dew  coming  after  A.  refiesheth 
Bar.  2.  25.  they  are  cast  out  to  the  A.  of  the  day 
Dan.  3.  44.  O  ye  fire  and  A.  bless  ye  the  Lord 

HEATED. 
2  Mac.  7.  4.  the  caldrons  forthwith  being  A. 
HEATHEN. 

1  F.sil.  5.  72.  the  A.  of  the  land  lying  heavy 

8.  93.  wives  which  we  have  taken  of  the  A. 

9.  9.  and  separate  yourselves  from  the  A. 

2  F^d.  3.  36.  Israel  kept  thy  precefits,  not  the  A. 
EHh.  14.  15.  I  abh.ir  the  bed  of  all  the  A. 
fVisd.\^.  15.  they  counted  idols  of  the  A.  to  be  gods 
Eccl.  35. -18.  and  repayed  vengeance  to  the  A. 

36.  10.  smite  in  sunder  the  heads  of  the  A. 

3!l.  23.  so  shall  the  A.  inherit  his  wrath 
Bar.  2.  13.  for  we  are  but  a  few  left  among  the  A. 
1  Mac.  1.  11.  let  us  make  a  covenant  with  the  A. 

13.  give  licence  to  do  after  the  ordinances  of  A. 

14.  according  to  the  customs  of  the  A. 
15. they  joined  themselves  to  the  A. and  were  sold 
42.  so  all  the  •%.  agreed  to  command  of  the  king 

2.  18.  like  as  all  the  A.  and  Judea  have  done 
6-".  recompense  fully  the  A.  and  take  heed 
4.  II.  that  lo  all  the  A.  may  know  there  is  Ono 
5L 


HEA 

1  .Wae.  4. 4S.  pull  it  down,  because  A.  had  defiled  it 
54.  look  at  wliat  day  the  A.  had  profaned  it 
,58.  that  the  reproach  of  the  A.  was  put  away 

5.  .57.  let  us  go  fight  against  the  A.  round  us 
13.  41.  thus  the  yoke  of  the  A.  was  taken  away 

2  Mac.  1.  27.  deliver  them  that  serve  among  theA. 
look  on  them,  let  the  A.  know  that  thou  artOo-l 

4.  9.  tra;.iing  up  of  youth  in  the  fushionsof  the  A. 

6.  8.  a  decree  to  the  neighbour  cities  of  the  A. 

10.  2.  bu:  the  altars  which  the  A.  had  built 

11.  3.  as  of  the  oiher  chapels  of  the  A.  and  toset 

15.  10.  shewing  them  the  falsehood  of  the  A 
HEATHENISH. 

2  Mac.  4.  13.  such  was  the  increase  of  A.  manner* 
HEAVEN. 

1  Ead.i.  36.thc  earth  calleth  on  truth  the  A.  blesseth 
46.  thou  hast  vowed  to  the  King  of  A. 
58.  he  lifted  up  his  face  to  A.  praised  King  of  A. 

6.  13.  servants  of  the  Lord  who  made  A.  and  earth 
8.  75.  our  ignorances  have  reached  uji  unto  A. 

2  Esd.  2.  14.  lake  A.  and  earth  to  witness 

4.  8.  neither  ^kl  I  ever  climb  up  into  A. 

6.  38.  thou  sMst,  let  A.  and  earth  be  made 
8.  20.  who  beholdest  things  in  the  A.  and  in  the  air 
13.  3.  waxed  strong  with  the  thousands  of  A. 

.5.  was  gathered  from  the  four  winds  of  the  A. 

16.  55.  let  the  A.  be  made,  and  it  was  created 
Tob.  5.  16.  God  which  dwclleth  in  A.  prosper  you 

7.  18.  the  Lord  of  A.  and  earth  give  thee  joy 
10.  11.  God  of  A.  give  you  a  prosperous  journey 

12.  the  Lord  of  A.  restore  thee,  dear  brother 
13.  II.  many  nations  come  with  gifts  to  king  of  A. 

Jud.  5.  8.  they  worshipped  the  God  of  A. 
11.17.  thy  ,-ervant  eerveth  God  of  A.  day  and  night 

Esth.  13.  10.  for  thou  hast  made  A.  and  earth 

IVisd.  9.  16.  things  in  A.  who  hath  searched  oull 
13.  2.  they  deemed  the  lights  of  A.  to  be  the  godi 
16.  20.  thou  didst  send  them  from  A.  bread 
18.  15.  thine  almighty  word  leaped  down  from  A 
16.  and  it  touched  A.  hut  stood  on  the  earth 

Eccl.  1.  3.  who  can  find  out  the  height  of  A..' 

16.  18.  behold,  the  A.  and  the  A.  of  heavens 

17.  32.  he  vieweth  the  power  of  the  height  of  A. 
24.  5.  I  alone  compassed  the  circuit  of  A. 
26.  16.  the  sun  when  it  ariseth  it:  the  high  A. 
43.  1.  the  beauty  of  A.  with  his  rlorious  shew 

8.  shining  in  the  firmament  of  ^. 

12.  it  compasseth  the  A.  about  with  a  circle 
46.  17.  and  the  Lord  thundered  from  A. 
48.  3.  by  the  word  of  the  Lord  he  shut  up  the  A. 

20.  and  the  holy  One  heard  them  out  of  A.  ' 
51.  19.  I  stretched  forth  my  hands  lo  A.  above 
Bar.  1.  II.  days  may  be  on  earth  as thedaysofft. 

2.  2.  such  as  never  happened  under  the  whole  k. 

3.  29.  who  hath  gone  up  into  A.  and  taken  her 

5.  3.  will  shew  it  unto  every  country  under  A. 

6.  54.  they  are  as  crows  between  A.  and  earth 
Sus.  9.  that  they  might  not  look  unto  A. 

35.  and  she  weeping,  looked  up  toward  A. 
Bel  5.  who  hath  created  the  A.  and  the  earth 
Player  of  Manass.  who  hast  made  A.  and  earth  I 
am  not  worthy  to  behold  and  see  the  height  of  A. 
1  Mac  2.  37.  A.  and  earth  shall  testify  for  us 

58.  Elias,  for  his  ze.il,  was  taken  uji  into  A. 

3.  18.  with  the  God  of  A.  it  is  all  one  to  deliver 
19.  but  strength  Cometh  from  A. 
60.  as  the  will  of  God  is  in  A.  so  let  him  do 

4.  10.  no\v  therefore  let  us  cry  unto  A. 
24.  sung  a  song,  and  praised  the  Lord  in  A. 
40.  cried  toward  A.  ||  55.  praising  the  God  of  A, 

.5.  31.  the  cry  of  the  city  went  up  to  A. 
9.  46.  wherefore  cry  ye  now  toA.  tohcdelivered  1 
12.  15.  we  have  help  from  A.  that  succoiireth  ua 
16.  3.  ye  fight,  and  the  help  from  A.  be  with  you 
2. Uac. 2.10.  fire  came  down  from  A.  and  consumed 

21.  the  manifest  si^ns  that  came  from  A.  to  those 
3.15. the  priestscalled  loA.on  himthatmado  a  lavir 

20.all  holding  their  hands  toward  A  mndesuppli. 

34.  seeing  Ihou  hast  been  scourged  from  A. 

39.  for  he  that  dwclleth  in  A.  halh  his  eye 

7.  II.  these  I  had  from  A.  and  for  his  laws 
28.  my  son,  look  upon  the  A.  and  the  earth 

8.  20.  bocause  of  the  help  that  they  had  from  A. 

9.  in.  that  thought  hecoiild  reach  to  ihestarsof  A. 
21).  I  give  thanks  lo  God,  having  my  hope  in  A. 

10.  99.  there  appeared  to  the  enemies  from  A. 

11.  10.  they  marched,  having  a  helper  from  A. 

14.  34.  the  priests  lift  up  their  hand:*  toward  A. 

15.  3.  demanded  if  there  were  a  mighty  Ono  in  il. 

8.  the  help  which  they  had  received  from  A. 
34.  so  every  man  praised  toward  the  A. 

HEAVRNLY. 
2  Esd.  2.  37.  hath  called  you  to  the  A.  kingdom 
fVisd.  19.  21.  nor  mdled  the  icy  kind  of  A.  meat 

HE. WENS. 
1  Esd.  4.  34.  he  compasseth  the  A.  round  about 
2f;.«d.3.18.bowin2llie;i.lhnn  didst  set  fast  the  eartfc 
4.21.helhat  dwclleth  above  thfAmay  understand 
the  things  that  are  above  the  height  of  ik 

16.  59.  he  spreadoth  out  the  A.  lika  a  vault 


HEL 

Tab.  8.  5.  let  h.  bless  ihee  and  all  thy  creatures 
Jud.  y.  12.  LorJol'A.  and  earili,  hear  cny  prayer 
ffisd.  9.  10.  O  send  her  out  of  thy  holy  h. 
Eccl.  16.  Itj.  the  heaven  ol  A.  shall  be  moved 

45.  lo.  to  his  seed  so  long  as  the  A.  should  remain 
Bar.  6.  C7.  nor  can  they  shew  signs  in  the  A. 

HE.WY. 
lEsiZ.  5.72.  the  heatheiilyiiig  A.  on  the  inhabitants 
2  Esd.  5.  It),  and  why  is  ihy  countenance  so  It.  ? 

J'i.  46.  and  be  not  A.  thou  house  ol  Jacob 
fyisd.l'.i.  appeared  to  them  with  A.  countenances 
£cc/.'J5.'23.a  wicked  woman  makes  4. countenance 

33.  "id.  ilnot  obedient,  put  on  more  A.  I'elteis 
40.  1.  a  A.  yoke  is  upon  the  sons  of  Adam 

1  jVac.  8.  31.  why  hast  thou  made  thy  yoke  A.  ? 
S  Mac.  5.  23.  bate  a  A.  hand  over  the  citizens 

ilE.WIEU. 
£cci.22.14.  what  is  A. than  lead  ■?  the  name  is  a  fool 

HE.WINESS. 
S  Esd.  10.  7.  Sion  is  full  of  A.  ||  8.  we  are  all  in  A. 

24.  iherel'ure  shake  off  thy  great  A.  put  away 
Tab.  2.  5.  1  washed  myself  and  ^^my  meat  in  A. 
Eccl.2i.  4.  tliat  iivclh  dislionestlj^her  father's  A. 

30.  9.  play  with  him,  and  he  vmII  bring  thee  to  A. 
21.  give  not  over  thy  mind  lo  A.  afllict  nut  thyself 
30.  20.  a  froward  heart  causeth  A.  but  a  man 
38.  17.  then  comfort  thyself  for  thy  A. 
18.  for  of  A.  Cometh  death,  and  the  A.  of  the  heart 
breakelh  strength,  in  aflfilction  sorrow  remains 
20.  take  no  A.  to  heart,  drive  it  away,  remember 
IJilac.  1.  27.  she  in  the  marriuge-chamber  was  in  A. 
3.  51.  thy  priests  are  in  A.  and  brought  low 
C.  4.  he  fled,  and  departed  thence  with  great  A. 
HEBREW. 
Jud.  12. 11.  persuade  this  H.  woman  to  come  to  U3 

HEBREWS. 
Jud.  10.  12.  and  she  said,  I  am  a  woman  of  the  H. 

14.  18.  one  woman  of  the  H.hath  bruughtslmme 

2  Mac.  7.  31.  autlior  of  all  mischief  against  the  H. 
11.  13.  considering  the  H.  could  not  he  overcome 

15.  37.  the  H.  had  the  city  in  their  power 

HEBRON. 
IJIac.  5.  65.  where  he  smote  H.  and  towns  thereof 

HEDGE. 
£cci.  26.  12.  by  every  A.  will  she  sit  down 
28.  24.  look  that  thou  A.  thy  possession  about 
36.  25.  where  no  A.  is,  the  possession  is  spoiled 

HEIFER. 
Tob.  1.  5.  the  tribes  sacritired  unto  the  A.  Baal 
HEIGJIT. 

1  Esd.  6.  25.  whose  A.  shall  be  sixty  cubits 
Jud.  1.  2.  the  A.  of  the  wall  seventy  cubits 

7.  10.  but  they  trust  in  the  A.  of  the  mountains 
Eccl.  1.  3.  who  can  find  out  the  A.  of  heaven  ? 
43.  1.  the  pride  of  the  A.  the  clear  firmament 
50.  *i.  and  by  him  was  built  the  double  A. 
Prayer  of  Manass.  to  behold  the  A.  of  heaven 

2  Mac.  4.  13.  such  was  the  A.  of  Greek  fashions 
6.  15.  lest  that  being  come  to  the  A.  of  sin 

HEIR. 
Tob.  3.  15.  nor  hath  he  any  child  to  be  his  A. 
Eccl.  22.  23.  that  thou  maycst  be  A.  with  him 
23.  22.  that  bringeth  in  an  A.  by  another 

IlELU. 
lK«(i.l.2I. kings  of  Israel  A.notsuch  pas.s.  as  Josias 

3.  24.  when  he  had  so  spoken,  he  A.  his  peace 

4.  12.  he  A.  his  tongue  ||  41.  he  A.  his  peace 
50.  the  villages  of  the  Jews  which  they  A. 

5.  51.  also  they  A.  the  feast  of  tabernacles 

2  Esd.  5.  15.  so  the  angel  A.  me,  comforted  me 

6.  8.  Jacob's  hand  A.  first  the  heel  of  Esau 

13.  9.  nor  A.  sword  nor  any  instrument  of  war 
28.  he  A.  neither  sword  nor  any  instrument 
44.  A.  still  lh(!  flood,  till  they  were  passed  over 

Eslk.  15.  11.  and  so  ho  A.  up  his  golden  sceptre 
H'lsd.  12.  24.  A.  them  for  gods,  being  deceived 

17.  4.  nor  might  the  corner  that  A.  them  keep 
Eccl.  13.  21.  a  rich  man  is  A.  up  of  friends 

2fi.  7.  hath  holdof  her,  as  though  he  A.  a  scorpion 
Bel\9.  Daniel  A.  the  king  that  he  should  not  go  in 
I  Mac.  3.  2.  BO  did  all  they  that  A.  with  his  father 

6.  52.  they  A.  them  battle  a  long  season 

11.  5.  might  blame  him,  but  the  king  A.  his  peace 
SMac.  10.  6  they  had  A.  the  feast  of  tabernacles 

14.  4.  and  so  that  day  he  A.  his  peace 

IIEEIODORUS. 
iMac.  3.  7.  the  king  chose  out  H.  his  treasurer 
8.  BO  furlhwilh  li.  look  his  journey 

25.  ho  ran  and  srnotc  at  M.  with  his  foro-feet 
27.  and  H.  fell  suddenly  to  the  ground 

31.  then  certain  of  II.  friends  prayed  OniaB 

32.  treachery  had  been  done  lo  II.  by  the  Jews 

33.  Iho  sanin  young  men  stood  by  H.  saying 
35.  II.  after  ho  had  offered  sacrifice,  returned 
37.  when  the  king  asked  II.  who  might  be  fit 
40.  the  things  cimrerning  II.  fill  out  thus 

4.  I.  i.ondcred  OniO'i,  an  if  ho  had  terrified  H. 

HELL. 
t  Etd.  2.  20.  that  thy  children  ahall  not  loc  A. 
8.  never  weiil  -nlo  the  deep,  nor  na  yet  into  A. 
8^2 


HEL 

iEsd.S.  53.  corruption  is  fled  into  A.  to  be  forgotten 
'fob.  13.  2.  he  leadeth  down  to  A.  and  bringeth  up 
h'isd.  17.  14.  out  of  the  bottoms  of  inevitable  A. 
Eccl.  21.  10.  at  the  end  thereof  is  the  pit  of  A. 
51.  5.  from  the  depth  of  tlie  belly  of  A. 
U.  my  life  was  near  to  the  A.  beneath 
Dan.  3.  66.  fur  he  hath  didivered  us  from  A. 

HELMET. 
frisd.  5.  18.  and  true  judgment  instead  of  a  A. 

HELMETS. 
1  Mac.  6.  35.  with  A.  of  brass  on  their  heads 

HELP. 
1  Esd.  2.  6.  dwells  in  places  about,  let  them  A.  him 
6.  28.  to  A.  those  that  be  of  the  captivity  of  Jews 
8.  27.  I  was  encouraged  by  the  A.  of  the  Lord 
Jud.  6.  21.  Ihey  called  all  that  night  for  A. 
7.31.  ifthese  days  pass,  and  there  come  no  A.  to  us 
8.  11.  unless  in  these  days  the  Lord  A.  you 
15.  if  he  will  not  A.  us  within  these  five  days 

17.  therefore  let  us  call  upon  him  to  A.  us 
13.  5.  now  is  the  time  to  A.  thine  inheritance 

EstA.  14.  3.  O  my  Lord,  A.  me  desolate  woman 

14.  deliver  us,  and  A.  me  that  am  desolate 
H'i.^d.  2.  18.  he  will  A.  him  and  deliver  him 

12.  G.  the  parents  killed  souls  destitute  of  A. 

13.  16.  knowing  that  it  vnus  unable  to  A.  itself,  for 

it  is  an  image,  and  hath  need  of  A. 

18.  that  which  hath  least  means  to  A. 

14.  18.  did  A.  to  set  forward  the  ignorant 
Eccl.  2.  0.  believe  in  him,  and  he  will  A.  thee 

3.  12.  my  son,  A.  thy  lather  in  his  age 

8.  10.  where  there  is  no  A.  he  will  overtlirow 

11.  12.  another  that  is  slow  and  halh  need  of  A. 

12.  4.  give  to  the  godly  man,  and  A.  not  a  sinner 

7.  give  to  the  good,  and  A.  not  the  sinner 

17.  and  though  he  pretend  to  A.  thee,  yet  shall  he 

13.  23.  stumble,  they  will  A.  to  overthrow  him 
23.  9.  A.  the  poor  for  the  commandment's  sake 

20.  A.  thy  neighbour  according  to  thy  power 
34.  16.  and  he  is  a  h.  from  falling 
31).  24.  a  A.  like  himself,  and  a  pillar  of  rest 
40.  24.  brethren  and  A.  are  against  trouble 

'2i'\  the  fear  of  the  Lord  needeth  not  to  seek  A. 
ol.  7.  they  cc;:::p?.ssed  me,  there  was  no  man  to  A. 

10.  in  time  of  the  proud,  when  there  was  no  A. 
Bar.  4.  17.  but  what  can  I  A.  you  1 
6.  37.  nor  can  they  A.  any  man  in  his  distress 

58.  neither  are  they  able  to  A.  themselves 

68. they  can  get  under  a  covert  and  A.  themselves 
1  Mac.  3.  15.  a  mighty  host  of  ungodly  to  A.  him 

53.  able  to  stand,  except  thou,  O  God,  be  our  A. 

5.  39.  he  hath  hired  the  Arabians  to  A.  them 
8.  13.  also  whom  they  would  A.  to  a  kingdom 

25.  the  people  of  the  Jews  shall  A.  them 

27.  the  Romans  shall  A.  with  all  their  heart 
10.  74.  Simon  his  brother  met  him  to  A.  him 
11.43.  shalt  do  well  if  thou  send  me  men  to  A.  me 

60.  the  forces  gathered  unto  him  for  to  A.  him 
12.  15.  we  have  A.  from  heaven  that  succoureth 

53.  they  have  no  captain,  nor  any  to  A.  them 

14.  1.  to  get  him  A.  to  fight  against  Tryphon 
16. '3.  and  the  A.  from  heaven  be  with  you 

2jt/ac.3.28.being  unable  to  A.himself  with  weapons 

6.  11.  they  made  conscience  to  A.  themselves 
8.  20.  because  of  the  A.  they  had  from  heaven 

23.  had  given  them  this  watch-word,  The  A.of  G. 

24.  by  the  A.  of  the  Almighty  they  slew  9000 
35.  he  was  through  the  A.  of  the  L.  brought  down 

10.  19.  unto  places  which  more  needed  his  A. 

11.  7.  jeopard  themselves  to  A.  their  brethren 

12.  11.  Judah's  side,  by  the  A.  of  God,  got  victory 

13.  10.  if  at  any  other  time,  he  would  now  A.  them 
13.  try  the  matter  in  fight,  by  the  A.  of  the  Lord 
17.  the  protection  of  the  Lord  did  A.  them 

l.!.  7.  confidence  that  the  Lord  would  A.  him 

8.  to  remember  the  A.  received  in  former  times 
35.  a  manifest  sign  to  all  of  the  A.  of  the  Lord 

HELPED. 
}Esd.  2.  9.  A.  them  in  all  things  with  silver  and  gold 
Tob.  2.  10.  I  went  to  physicians,  but  they  A.  me  not 
Eccl.  29.4.  and  put  them  to  trouble  that  A.  them 

1  Mac.  3.  2.  all  his  brethren  A.  Mai-rabciis 

2  Mac.  11.  13.  because  the  almighty  God  A.  them 

HELPER. 

Tob.  8.  6.  thou  gavesl  him  Eve  his  wife  for  a  A. 

./u(<.  7. 25.  now  we  have  no  A.  but  God  hath  sold  us 

E.itfi.  14.  3.  help  me,  who  have  no  A.  but  thee,  14. 

Eccl.  51.  2.  for  thou  art  my  defender  and   A.  and 

hnst  been  my  A.  ngaiiist  mine  adversaries 

iMac.  10.  16.  besought  G.  that  he  would  be  their  A. 

II.  10.  Ihey  marched,  having  a  A.  from  heaven 

12  36.  that  he  woiihl  shew  himself  to  be  their  A. 

HELPERS. 

2  Esd.  10.  33.  daughters  shall  mourn  having  no  A. 

Eccl.  13.  22.  a  rich  man  is  fallen,  he  halh  many  A. 

HELPETIl. 
Eccl  37.  5.  a  companion  which  A.  his  friend 
2  Mac.  14.  15.  and  who  always  A.  his  portion 

HELPING. 
1  Eld.  0.  3.  prophets  being  with  them,  and  A.  them 


HIG 


[ArOCRTTBA 


HELPS. 
2  Mac.  8.  19.  what  A.  iheir  forefathers  found 

HEN. 
2££(2.1.30.as  a  A.gathereth  her  chickens  under  bet 

HERB. 
H'isd.  16.  12.  it  was  neither  A.  that  restored  tbem 

HERBS. 
2  Esd.  9.  26.  and  I  did  eat  of  the  A.  of  the  field 

12.  51.  and  I  had  my  n>eat  of  the  A. 
2j/ac.5.27.  his  company  who  fed  on  A.  continuallY 

HERCULES. 

2  Mac.  4.  19.  to  cany  silver  lo  the  sacrifice  of  U 

20.  this  money  was  appointed  to  H.  sacrifice 

HERDS. 

Jud.  2.  27.  he  destroyed  their  flocks  and  a, 

3.  3.  our  flocks  and  A.  lie  before  thy  face 

HERITAGE. 
1  Esd.  8. 83.  the  land  ye  enter  into  lo  possess  as  a  A. 
Eccl.  17.  11.  he  gave  them  the  law  of  lifefor  a  k. 

19.  3.  moths  and  worms  shall  have  him  to  A. 
20.25.  but  both  shall  have  destruction  to  A. 
22.  23.  thou  mayesi  be  heir  with  him  in  bis  A. 
44.  23.  and  he  gave  him  a  A.  45.  20. 

46.  8.  were  preserved  to  bring  them  into  the  A. 

9.  and  his  seed  obtained  it  lur  a  h. 

1  Mac.  2.  56.  Caleb  received  the  A.  of  the  land 
2.1/ttc.2.4.Moscs  climbed  up, and  saw  the  A.  of  God 

17.  God  delivered  his  peojile,  and  gave  them  a  A. 

HERMON. 
Eccl.  24.  13.  as  a  cypress  on  the  mountains  of  H. 

HEWED. 
2.fl^ac.l.l6.  A.  them  in  pieces,  smote  ofi"  their  heads 

HEWN. 
.fud.  1.  2.  and  built  walls  round  about  of  stones  A 
Bar.  6.  39.  like  stones  A.  oulof  the  mountain 

1  Mac.  13.  27.  built  a  monument  with  A.  stone 

HID. 

2  Esd.  8.  53.  weaknessand  the  moth  is  A.  from  yon 
Tvb.  1.  19.  that  I  buried  them  and  A.  myself 

12.  13.  thy  good  deed  was  not  A.  from  me 
ff  i5(^.1.8.speaketh  unrighteous  things  cannot  be  A. 

10.  the  noise  of  murmurings  is  nut  A. 
10.  8.  they  could  not  so  much  as  be  A. 

17.  3.  they  supposed  to  lie  A.  in  their  secret  sins 
Eccl.  16.  21.  the  most  part  of  his  works  are  A. 
17.  15.  their  ways  shall  not  be  A.  from  his  eyM 
20.  none  of  their  unrighteous  deeds  are  A. 

20.  30.  wisdom  that  is  A.  and  treasure,  41.  14. 
39.  19.  and  nothing  can  be  A.  from  his  eyes 
43.  32.  there  are  A.  greater  things  than  these 

Sus.  16.  Ihe  two  elders  that  had  h.  theniselves 

18.  saw  not  the  elders,  because  Ihey  were  A. 
37.  a  young  man  who  was  there  A.  came  to  hei 

1  J/ac.2. 36.  nor  stopped  places  where  ihey  lay  A. 

9.  ;i8.  they  A.  themselves  under  the  covert 

2  Mac.  1.  19.  they  A.  it  a  hollow  place  of  a  pit 
20.  the  posterity  of  those  priests  that  A.  it 
22.the  sun  shone,  which  afore  was  A. in  the  cloud 
3:{.  the  priests  that  were  led  away  had  A.  iho  fiie 

10.  37.  killed  Timolheus,  that  was  A.  in  a  pit 
12.  41.  who  had  opened  the  things  that  were  A. 

HIDDEN. 
2  Esd.  5.  1.  and  Ihe  way  of  truth  shall  be  A. 
16.  62.  the  Spirit  searcheth  out  all  A.  things 
Eccl.  11.  4.  and  his  works  among  men  are  A. 
12.  8.  and  an  enoiDy  cannot  be  A.  in  advorsitj 
42.  19.  he  revealed  the  steps  of  A.  things 
20.  neither  any  word  is  A.  from  him 
/)ar.6.48.  consult  where  they  may  be  A.  with  them 
1  Mac.  J* 23.  also  he  took  the  A.  treasures  he  found 

HIDE. 
2E.f<i.5. 9.  then  shall  wit  A.  itself  and  understanding 
12.  37.  write  all  these  things  ond  A.  them 
14.  6.  these  ileclare,  and  these  shalt  thou  A. 
16.  63.  even  them  that  sin,  and  would  A.  their  sin 
66.  or  how  will  you  A.  your  sins  before  God? 
Tab.  13.  6.  ho  will  not  A.  his  face  from  you 
H'isd.  6.  22.  I  will  not  A.  mysteries  from  you 
7.  13.  I  do  coinmunicatc,  I  do  not  A.  her  riches 
Eccl.  1.  24.  he  will  A.  his  words  for  a  time 

4.  2;j.  and  A.  not  thy  wisdom  in  her  beauty 
6.  12.  and  he  will  A.  himself  from  thy  face 

16. 17.  say  not  ihou,  I  will  A.  myself  from  the  Lord 
22.  25.  neither  will  I  A.  my  face  fioin  him 
37.  10.  A.  thy  counsel  from  such  as  envy  thee 

HIDETII. 

Eccl.  20.  31.  wisdom  saiih  better  is  he  that  k.  his 

fully,  than  a  man  that  A.  his  wisdom,  41. 15. 

HIGH. 

1  Esd.  2.  3.  the  most  A.  Lord  liBlh  made  me  king 

4. 34. A.  is  the  heaven,  swill  is  iho  sun  in  his  course 

5.  40.  till  thi're  arose  up  a  A.  priest  clothed 

6.  31.  their  ofl"erings  may  ho  made  toinost  A.  God 
9.  46.  Esdrns  blessed  the  Lord  (Joil  most  A. 

'/'o''.1.4.the  temple  of  thehabitalion  of  iheMostH 

13.  the  Must  II.  gave  me  grace  and  favoor 
4.  II.  that  give  it  in  Ihe  sight  of  the  Most  U. 
.fud.  3.  6.  he  set  garrisons  in  the  A.  cities 
4.H.Joarim  the  A.  priest  wrote  lo  them  hi  Bethulil, 
8.  did  as  Joacim  the  A.  piiost  had  comtnandod 


Apocrtpha..] 


HIG 


J»d.  4.  14.  JoBcim  the  A.  priest  anJ  all  the  priests 

13.  18.  blessed  art  thou  of  the  most  h.  God 

15.  8.  thi'ii  Jouciin  the  A.  priest  came  to  beliold 

16.  7.  nor  did  A.  giants  set  ui)on  liim 

EsUi.  14.  IB.  I  abhor  the  sign  of  my  h.  estate 

16.  22.  shall  keep  it  a  A.  day  wiili  all  feasting 
lVisd.5.  15.  the  carenf  thoin  is  with  the  Most  H. 

6.  5.  judgment  be  to  them  that  be  in  A.  places 
Keel.  1.5.  Ihe  word  of  God  most  A.  is  the  fountain 

3.  19.  many  are  in  A.  place  and  of  renown 

4.  10.  so  shalt  thou  be  as  the  son  of  the  Most  H. 
7.9.  when  I  offer  to  the  most  A.  God,  he  will  accept 

15.  husbandry,  which  the  Most  H.  hath  ordaijR'd 
9.15.thy  communication  in  the  law  oftho  Mo.<t  H. 
12.  2.  and  if  not  from  him,  yet  from  the  Most  H. 

6.  for  the  Most  H.liateth  sinners,  and  will  repay 

17.  25.  turn  to  the  Most  H.  turn  from  iniquity 
27.  who  shall  praise  the  Most  II.  in  the  gravel 

19.  17.  give  place  to  the  law  of  the  Most  H. 

24.  and  trunsgrcsseth  the  law  of  the  Most  H. 
22.  18.  pales  set  on  a  A.  place  will  never  stand 
5!3.  13.  the  Most  H.  will  not  remember  my  sins 

23.  she  hath  dioobcyed  the  law  of  the  Most  A. 
S6. 16.  the  sun  when  It  ariseth  in  the  A.  heaven 
33.  9.  some  of  them  hath  he  made  A.  days 

15.  so  look  on  all  the  works  of  the  Most  H. 
"ii.  6.  if  they  be  not  se[it  from  the  Most  H. 

19.  the  Most  H.  is  not  pleased  with  the  offerings 
35.  6.  the  savour  thereof  is  before  the  Most  H. 

10.  give  to  Ihe  Most  H.  according  as  he  enriched 

17.  till  the  Most  H.  shall  behold  to  judge 
37.  14.  watchmen  that  sit  above  in  a  A.  tower 

15.  and  above  all  this  pray  to  the  Most  H. 
38.2.  for  of  the  Most  H.  cometh  healing 

33.  not  sought  for,  nor  sii  A.  in  the  congregation 
39.  1.  giveth  his  mind  to  the  law  of  the  Most  H. 

5.  and  he  will  pray  before  the  Most  H. 

4l.  4.  why  against  Ihe  pleasure  of  the  Most  H.? 

8.  who  have  forsaken  the  law  of  the  most  A.  God 
42.2.  be  not  ashamed  of  the  law  of  the  Most  H. 
43. 2.  Ihe  sun  declaring  the  work  of  the  Most  H. 

12.  the  hands  oftho  Most  H.  have  bended  it 
44.  20.  Abraham  kept  the  law  of  the  Most  H. 

46.  5.  he  called  upon  the  most  A.  Lord,  47.  5. 

9.  he  entered  upon  the  A.  places  of  the  land 

47.  8.  in  all  he  praised  the  holy  One  Most  H. 
48.5.  didst  raise  a  dead  man  by  word  of  Most  H. 

49.  4.  for  they  forsook  the  law  of  the  Most  H. 

50.  1.  Simon  the  A.  priest  repaired  the  house 
2.  the  A.  fortress  of  the  wall  about  the  temple 

7.  sun  shining  U|)on  the  temple  of  the  Most  H. 

14.  adorn  the  offering  of  the  most  k.  Almighty 

15.  a  savour  to  the  most  A.  King  of  all 

IB.  for  a  remembrance  before  the  Most  H. 
17.  their  Lord  God  Almighty  the  Most  H. 

19.  besought  the  Lord  the  Most  H.  by  prayer 
21.  might  receive  a  blessing  from  the  Most  H. 

Bar.  1. 7.  they  sent  collection  to  .Toachim  A.  priest 

2.  11.  brought  with  a  mighty  hand  and  A.  arm 

3.  25.  and  hath  no  end,  A.  and  unmeasurable 
6.  25.  things  are  bought  for  a  most  A.  price 

Prayer  of  Jlanass.  tiiou  art  the  most  A.  Lord 

1  Mac.  4  60.  builded  mount  Sion  with  A.  walls 
6. 7.  compassed  about  the  sanctuary  with  A.  walls 
7.5.  Alcimus  who  was  desirous  to  be  A.  priest 

9.  the  wicked  Alcimus,  whom  he  made  A.  priest 
21.  Alcimus  contended  for  the  A.  priesthood 
10.20.  we  ordain  thee  to  be  A.  priest  of  thy  nation 
32.  as  for  the  tower,  I  give  it  to  the  A.  priest 
38.  to  obey  oilier  authority  than  A.  priest's 
69.  sent  unto  Jonathan  the  A.  priest,  saying 

11.  27.  confirmed  him  in  the  A.  priesthood,  14.  38. 
57.  I  confirm  thee  in  the  A.  priesthood 

12.  3.  Jonathan  the  A.  priest  sent  us  unto  you 

6.  Jonathan  Ihe  A.  priest  to  the  Lacedemonians 

7.  there  were  letters  sent  to  Onias  the  A.  priest 

20.  Arens  to  Onias  the  A.  priest,  greeting 

13.  36.  king  Demetrius  to  Simon  the  A.  priest 
42.  in  the  first  year  of  Simon  the  A.  priest 

14.  17.  his  brother  Simon  was  made  A.  priest 

20.  Ihe  Lacedemonians,  to  Simon  the  A.  priest 

23.  written  a  copy  thereof  to  Simon  the  A.  priest 
27.  the  third  year  of  Simon  the  A.  priest 

41.  should  be  governor  and  A.  priest  for  ever 
47.  Simon  was  well  pleased  to  he  A.  priest 

15.  17.  being  sent  from  Simon  the  A.  priest 

21.  deliver  them  to  Simon  the  A.  priest 

24.  the  copy  ihey  wrote  to  Simon  the  A.  priest 

16.  12.  for  he  was  the  A.  priest's  son-in-law 

2  Mac.  3.  1.  the  godliness  of  Onias  the  A.  priest 
4.  but  one  Simon  fell  out  with  the  A.  priest 

9.  had  been  courteously  received  of  the  A.  priest 

10.  then  the  A  priest  told  him  there  was  money 

16.  whoBo  had  looked  the  A.  priest  in  the  face 
21.  the  fear  oftho  A.  priest  being  in  an  agony 

31.  prayed  that  ho  would  call  upon  the  Most  H. 

32.  the  A.  priest  suspecting  lest  the  king 

33.  as  Ihe  A.  priest  was  making  an  atonement 

4.  7.  Jason  laboured  under-hand  to  be  A.  prieat 

13.  Jacon  that  ungodiv  wretch  and  not  A.  priest 

803  ^ 


HOL 

^Mae.  4. 25.  bringing  nothing  worthy  h.  priegthood 

8.  30.  they  very  easily  got  A.  and  strong  holds 

9.  8.  and  weigh  the  A.  mountains  in  a  balance 
2.3.  when  he  led  an  army  into  the  A.  countries 
25.  when  I  went  up  into  A.  provinces 

11.  3.  and  to  set  the  A.  priesthood  to  sale 
14.  3.  one  Alcimus,  who  had  been  A.  priest 

7.  ancestor's  honour,  I  moan  the  A.  priesthood 

15. 12.  Onias  who  had  been  A.  priest,  a  good  man 

HIGHEST. 

2  Rsd.  4. 11.  able  to  comprehend  the  way  oftho  H. 

34  do  not  thou  hasten  above  the  Most  II. 
.Tiifl.  14.  1.  hang  it  on  the  A.  place  of  your  walls 
IVisd.  6.  3.  power  and  sovereignty  from  the  H. 
Reel.  23.  7.  remember  the  covenant  of  the  II. 
43.  9.  an  ornament  giving  light  in  the  A.  places 
Bar.  1.  4.  the  people  from  the  lowest  to  the  A. 

HIGHLY. 
2  Mac.  1.  11.  God  hath  delivered,  we  thank  him  A. 

HILL. 
2  Ksd.  13.  7.  the  place,  whereout  the  A.  was  graven 

36.  thou  sawest  the  A.  graven  without  hands 
.hid.  1.  6.  all  they  that  dwelt  in  the  A  country 

2.  22.  he  went  from  thence  into  the  A.  country 
4.7.charging  them  to  keep  the  passages  of  A. count. 

5.  1.  had  shut  up  the  passages  of  the  A.  country 

6.  7.  shall  bring  thee  back  into  Ihe  A.  country 

11.  they  went  from  the  plain  into  the  A.  country 

12.  they  went  out  of  the  city  to  the  lop  of  the  A. 

13.  having  gotten  privily  under  the  A. 

\Mae.  13.52.  the  A.  of  the  temple  he  madestronger 

HILLS, 
t  Ksd.  6.51.in  same  part  wherein  are  a  thousand  A. 
Jud.  5.  1.  had  fortified  the  tops  oftho  high  A. 

7.  4.  nor  are  the  A.  able  to  bear  their  weight 
16.  4.  and  their  horsemen  have  covered  the  A. 

Bar.  6.  6.3.  fire  sent  from  above  to  consume  the  A. 
Dan.  3. 53. 0  ye  mountains  and  little  A.bless  the  L. 

HIMSELF. 
Keel. 37. 7.  but  there  is  some  that  counselleth  for  A. 

HINDER. 
1  Ksd.  2.  28.  I  have  commanded  to  A.  those  men 
from  building  the  city 
30.  they  began  to  A.  the  builders  of  the  temple 
6.  .33.  that  siretchelh  out  his  hand  to  A.  that  house 
Keel.  18.  22.  let  nothing  A.  thee  to  pay  thy  vow 
32.  3.  speak  with  sound  judgment,  A.  not  music 
39.  18.  and  none  can  A.  when  ho  will  save 

HINDMOST. 
1  Mac.  4. 15.  howbeit,  all  Ihe  A.  of  them  were  slain 

HINDERED. 
1  Kid.  5.  72.  but  the  heathen  A.  their  building 
73.  they  A.  the  finishing  of  the  building,  so  they 
were  A.  from  building  till  the  reign  of  Darius 
6.  6.  they  were  not  A.  from  building  until  such  lime 
Wisd.  17.  20.  and  none  were  A.  in  their  labour 
EetM9.28.if  for  wantofpowerhebeA.from  sinning 
20.  21.  there  is  that  is  A.  from  sinning  for  want 

1  Mac.  9.  55.  was  plagued,  and  his  enterprises  A. 

HINDERETH. 

Keel.  16.  28.  none  of  i hem  A.  another,  not  disobey 

HIRCANUS. 

2  JIfae.  3.11.  someof  it  belonged  to  H.  son  Tobias 

HIRE. 
CceZ.  34. 22.  that  defrnudeth  the  labourer  of  his  A. 

HIRED. 
ToA.5.11.to  whom  he  said,do8t  thou  seek  for  a  tribe 
or  family,  or  a  A.  man  to  go  with  thy  son  7 

1  Mac.  5.  39.  ho  hath  A.  the  Arabians  to  help  them 
6.  29.  there  came  to  him  bands  of  A.  soldiers 

2  Mac.  10.  14.  he  A.  soldiers,  and  nourished  war 

HIRELING. 
.Jud.  4.  10.  every  stranger  and  A.  put  on  sackcloth 
6.5. thou  Achior,a  h.  of  Ammon,  shalt  soo  my  face 

HIRELINGS. 
Jud.  6.2.  who  art  thou  Achior,  and  A.  of  Ephraim? 

HISS. 
Keel.  22.  1.  every  one  will  A.  him  to  his  disgrace 

HISSING. 
Wiad.  17. 9.  scared  with  beasts  and  A.  ofaerpents 

HISTORIES. 

EstA.16.7.have  declared, notso  much  by  ancient  A. 

See  STORY. 

HITTITES. 

1  Ksd.  8.  69.  tho  pollutions  of  the  Canaanites,  H. 

HOAR. 
TVisd.  16.  29.  shall  melt  away  ns  winter's  A.  frost 
Keel.  43. 19.  the  A.  frost  as  salt  he  poureth  on  earth 

HOARDED. 
Keel.  20.  30.  treasure  that  is  A.  up,  what  profit? 
Bar.  3.  17.  they  that  A.  up  silver  and  gold 
HOLD. 

1  Mac.  1.  33.  and  made  it  a  strong  k.  for  them 

3.  45.  and  aliens  kept  the  strong  A. 

6.  61.  whereupon  they  went  out  oftho  strong  h. 

12.  34.  he  heard  that  they  would  deliver  the  A. 
16.  8.  tho  remnant  got  them  to  the  strong  A. 

15.  receiving  them  into  a  little  A.  called  Docus 

2  Mac.  10.  32.  he  fled  into  a  very  strong  A. 
13. 19.  which  was  a  strong  A.  of  the  Jews 


HOL 

HOLDS. 

l^/(ic.l.2.mademanywars,and  won  many  strong  ik, 
8. 10.  and  pulled  down  their  strong  A.  and  brought 

10.  37.  some  shall  be  placed  in  the  king's  strong  A. 

11.  18.  they  that  were  in  the  strong  A.  were  slain 
12.35.  consulted  about  building  stiojig  A.  in  Judea 
13.  33.  Simon  built  up  the  strung  /«.  in  Judea 

38.  the  strong  A.  which  yo  liuvi:  huil.led 
2  Jlfdc.S.  30.  and  very  easilygot  lii^'h  :;n,l  strong 4, 

10.  15.  having  gotten  the  most  ccjininodious  h. 
10.  they  ran  on  Ihe  strong  A.  of  the  Idumeaiw 
17.  they  won  the  A.  and  kept  oil' all  tluit  fought 
23.  he  slew  in  the  two  A.  more  than  i!0|OIX) 

11.  6.  when  they  heard  that  ho  besieged  tho  A. 
13.  18.  he  went  about  to  take  the  A.  by  policy 

HOLD. 

1  Ksd.  1.  17.  that  they  might  A.  the  passover 

Tab.  10.  6.  A.  thy  peace,  take  no  care,  he  is  safo 

7.  she  said,  A.  thy  peace,  and  deceive  me  not 

U.  1 1,  took  A.  of  his  father,  and  strake  tho  gall 

lVi.<d.  2.  24.  they  that  A.  of  his  side  do  find  it 

3.  la.whcu  I  Oiiy  tongue  they  shall  bide  my  leisuro 
15.  14.  the  enemies  that  A.  them  in  subjection 

Keel.  1. 19.  exaltelh  them  to  honour  thai  A.  her  fa«t 

4.  11.  wisdom  layeili  A.  of  them  that  seek  her 

6.  27.  when  thou  hast  got  A.  of  her,  let  her  not  go 

12.  5.  A.  back  thy  bread,  and  give  it  not  to  him 

20.  7.  a  wise  man  will  A.  his  tongue  till  he  see 

21.  14.  he  will  A.  no  knowledge  while  he  livoth 
23.  5.  thou  shalt  A.  him  up  that  is  desirous  to  serve 

6.  let  not  the  lust  of  the  flesh  take  A.  of  me 
26. 7.  he  that  hath  A.  of  her,  is  as  though  he  held 
27.3.  unless  a  man  A. himself  diligently  in  fear  of  L. 

29.  23.  be  it  little  or  much,  A.  thee  contented 

30.  13.  chastise  thy  son,  and  A.  him  to  labour 
Bar.  3.  21.  nor  understood  jiaths,  nor  laid  A.  of  it 
Sus.  3i  the  man  we  could  not  A.  he  was  stronger 

1  Mac.  15.34.  we  A.  the  inheritance  of  our  father! 

2  Mac.  12.  35.  and  taking  A.  of  his  coat,  drew  him 

HOLDETH. 

Eerl.  4.  13.  he  that  A.  her  fast  shall  inherit  glory 
13.23.when  rich  speaketh,evcry  man  A.  his  tongue 
20.  1.  some  man  A.  his  tongue,  and  he  is  wise,  6. 
25.  11.  he  that  A.  it,  whereto  shall  ho  be  likened? 
32.  8.  as  one  that  knoweth,  and  yet  A.  his  longua 
38. 25.  how  can  he  get  wisdom  that  A.  the  plough? 

iJar.  6. 14.  A.  a  sceptre,  as  (hough  he  were  a  judge 
HOLDING. 

2  Mne.  3.  20.  all  A.  their  hands  toward  heaven 

7.  10.  the  third  A.  forth  his  hands  nmnfully 
15.  12.  A.  up  his  hands,  prayed  for  the  Jews 

15.  Jeremias  A.  forth  bis  rijht  hand, gave  Judll 

HOLM-TREE. 

Sms.58.  under  what  tree?  who  answered,  uqderaA. 

HOLOFERNES,  See  Olofernes. 

HOLY. 

1  Ksd.  1.3.  Levitcs,  the  ministers  ofTsrael,  should 

hallow  themselves  to  set  Ihe  A.  ark  of  the  Lord 
15.  the  A.  singers  also  the  sons  of  Asaph 
45.  brought  with  the  A.  vessels  of  the  Lord 
53.  within  the  compass  of  their  A.  temple 

2.  10.  king  Cyrus  brought  forth  the  A.  vessels 

5.  45.  to  give  into  the  A.  treasury  1000  pounds 
52.  of  the  new  moons,  and  of  all  A.  feasts 

fi.  18.  A.  vessels  of  gold  and  silver  carried  away 

7.  2.  did  very  carefully  oversee  the  A.  works 

3.  and  so  the  A.  works  prospered  when  Aggeui 
5.  and  thus  was  the  A.  house  finished  in  ."idar 

8.  5.  went  up  oftho  Leviles,  of  the  A.  singers 
58.  you  are  A.  to  the  Lord,  ami  the  vessels  are  A. 

70.  the  A.  seed  is  mi.xed  with  tho  strange  people 

71.  I  rent  my  clothes  and  Ihe  A.  garments 
73.  with  my  clothes  and  iTie  A.  garment  rent 

9.  ;t8.  came  into  Ihe  broad  place  oftho  A.  porch 
41.  he  read  in  Ihe  broad  court  before  Ihe  A.  porch 
."iO.  this  day  is  A.  to  tho  Lord,  .')2,  53. 

2  Ksd.  10,  22.  our  A.  things  are  defiled,  and  wives 
14. 22.  if  I  found  grace,  send  the  A.  Ghost  into  mo 

Tob.1. 1.  which  is  the  A.  feast  of  the  seven  weeks 

3.  11.  thy  A.  and  glorious  name  is  blessed 

8.  5.  blessed  Is  thy  A.  and  glorious  name  for  ever 
15.  to  be  praiseiteivith  all  pure  and  A.  praise 

11.  14.  and  bles.sed  are  all  thine  A.  angels 

12.  12.  bring  your  prayers  ber(ue  the  A.  One 
15.1  am  Raphael,  one  of  the  seven  A.  angels,  who 

go  in  and  out  before  the  glory  of  the  A.  One 

13.  9.  O  Jerusalem,  the  A.  city,  he  will  scourgo 
Wisd.  1.  5.  the  A.  spirit  of  discipline  will  flee 

6.  10.  they  thai  keep  holiness,  shall  he  judged  h. 
7. 22.  in  her  is  an  understanding  spirit,  A.  lively 

27.  and  in  all  ages  entering  into  h.  souls 
9. 8.  to  build  a  temple  on  thy  A.  mount,  an  altar  in 
the  city,  a  resemblance  of  the  A.  tabernacle 
10.  Osend  her  out  of  thy  A.  heavens,  from  lhron« 
17.  except  thou  send  thy  A.  Spirit  from  above 

10.  10.  she  gave  him  knowledge  of  A.  things 
20.  the  righteous  praised  thy  A.  name,  O  Lord 

11.  1.  she  prospered  in  the  hand  of  the  A.  prophet 

12.  3.  both  those  old  inhabilnnU  of  thy  A.  land 
17.  2.  men  thought  to  oppress  the  A.  nation 


HON 

fFlsi.  18.  0.  and  \vi;h  one  consont  made  a  A.  law 
Eccl.  4.  IJ.  and  lliey  sliiill  minister  to  llie  A.  One 

7.  .'U.  give  him  llie  tifsl-tVuits  of  the  A.  ihinga 

14.  2U.  the  inu'n  thai  rensoiielh  of  A.  things 
17.  lU.  the  elect  siiall  praise  his  A.  name 

15.  3.  oy  power  dividing  A.  things  among  them 

23.  9.  nur  use  thyself  to  naming  of  the  A.  One 

24.  10.  in  the  A.  tabernacle  I  served  before  him 
18.  am  niotherof  fear,andknowle(lge,and  A.hope 

28.  17.  aa  clear  light  is  on  the  A.  candlestick 
36.  13.  be  merciful  to  Jerusalem  thy  A.  city 
39.  13.  hearken  to  mo  ye  It.  children,  and  bud 

'ii.  as  his  ways  are  cli  an  and  plain  unto  the  A. 
43.  10.  at  the  coramandnicnl  of  the  A.  One 
45.  10.  with  a  A.  garmiMit,  with  gold  and  blue 

15.  Moses  anointed  him  with  A.  oil 

47.  8.  m  all  Ins  works  he  praised  the  A.  One 

49.  1-2.  we  set  up  a  A.  temple  to  the  Lord 

50.  11.  when  he  went  up  lo  the  A.  altar 

Bar.  'J.  16.  O  Lord,  look  down  from  thy  A.  house 

4.  22.  and  joy  is  come  unto  me  from  the  A.  One 

37.  by  the  word  of  the  A.  One,  5.  5. 

Dan.  3.  5.  hast  brought  on  the  A.  city  ofour  fathers 

12.  mercy  not  depart,  for  thy  A.  Israel's  sake 

65.  O  ye  A.  and  humble  men  of  heart,  bless  Lord 

Sus.  45.  Lord  raised  the  A.  sjjirit  of  a  young  youth 

IMac.l.iO.  and  pollute  the  sanctuary  and  A.  people 

63.. they  might  not  profane  the  A.  covenant 
2.  7.  the  misery  of  my  people  and  of  the  A.  city 
4.  M).  they  made  also  new  A.  vessels 

10.  21.  at  the  least  Jonathan  put  on  the  A.  robe 
31.  let  Jerusalem  also  be  A.  and  free 

11.  37.  let  it  be  set  upon  the  A.  mount 

12.  9.  that  we  have  the  A.  books  of  scripture 
H.  36.  and  did  much  hurt  in  the  A.  place 

16.  8.  then  sounded  they  with  the  A.  trumpets 
2JiIac.  1.7.  his  company  revolted  from  the  A.  land 

12.  he  cast  them  out  that  fought  within  the  A.  city 

29.  plant  thy  people  again  in  thy  A.  place 
34.  the  king  inclosing  the  place,  made  it  A. 

2.  13.  the  epistles  concerning  the  A.  gifts 
18.  God  will  gather  us  iido  the  A.  place 

3.  1.  when  the  A.  city  was  inhabited  with  peace 

4.  48.  that  followed  the  matter  for  the  A.  vessels 

5.  15.  but  presumed  lo  go  into  the  most  A.  temple 

16.  taking  the  A.  vessels  with  polluted  hands 
25.  did  forbear  till  the  A.  day  of  the  sabbath 

6.  4.  within  the  circuit  of  the  A.  places 

2;i.  or  ratlier  the  A.  law  made  and  given  by  God 

28.  to  die  for  the  honourable  and  A.  laws 

30.  to  the  Lord,  that  hath  the  A.  knowledge 

8.  15.  for  ills  A.  and  glorious  name's  sake 

17.  the  injury  unjustly  done  to  the  A.  place 
23.  he  appointed  Eleazar  to  read  the  A.  book 
33.  Calhsthenes  that  set  fire  upon  the  A.  gates 

9.  14.  that  the  A.  city  he  would  set  at  libeity 

16.  A.  temple,  wbicli  before  he  had  spoiled,  he 
wouM  garnish  with  gifts  and  restore  A. 
vessels 

12.  4.5.  it  was  a  A.  and  good  thought 

13.  8.  the  altar,  whose  lire  and  ashes  were  A. 
10.  at  the  point  to  he  put  from  the  A.  temple 

11.  3.  nor  have  any  more  access  to  the  A.  altar 

31.  the  other  came  into  the  great  and  A.  temple 
36.  O  A.  Lord  of  all  holiness,  keep  this  house 

15.  16.  take  this  A.  sword,  a  gift  from  God 

IIOLILY. 
IVisd.  6. 10.  for  tliev  that  ki>e|i  holiness  A.  be  holy 

liOLl.NESS. 
Ifisd.  5. 19.  take  A.  for  an  invincible  shield 

6.  10.  they  that  kee|)  A.  holily,  shall  be  judged  holy 

14.  30.  they  swore  in  deceit,  despising  A. 
Eccl.  17.  29.  to  such  as'turn  to  him  in  A. 

4.5.  12.  a  crown,  wherein  was  engraved  A. 
50.  11.  he  made  the  garment  of  A.  honourable 
2  Mac.  3.  12.  had  committed  it  to  the  A.  of  the  place 

14.  36.  O  holy  Lord  of  all  A.  keep  this  house 

15.  2.  that  which  he  hath  honoured  with  A. 

HOLLOW. 
IVigd.  17.  19.  an  echo  from  the  A.  mountains 
2  Afac.  1.  19.  and  hid  it  in  a  A.  place  of  a  pit 
2.5.  Jeremy  found  a  A.  cave,  where  he  laid  the  ark 
HOME. 

1  F.sd.  3.  3.  and  being  satisfied,  were  gone  A. 

2  Esd.  12.  49.  now  go  your  way  A.  every  man 
Tab.  3.  17.  the  sclf-sacne  time  came  Tobit  A. 
Eccl.  32.  11.  but  gel  thee  A.  without  ilelay 
Su-t.  13.  one  said  to  the  other,  let  us  now  go  A. 

1  Mac.  4.  24.  after  this  they  went  A.  and  sung 

12.  35.  aflcr  this  came  Jonathan  A.  again 

45.  therefore  send  them  now  A.  again  and  choose 

2  Mae.  11.  29.  that  your  de«irc  was  lo  rolurii  A. 

HONEST. 

2  F..id.  10.  49.  as  a  wlioni  envielh  an  h.  woman 
7'iib.  5.  13.  thou  art  of  an  A.  and  ijood  Hiock 

7.  7.  thou  art  the  son  of  an  A.  and  good  man 
fVLid.  4.  12.  doth  obscure  things  that  are  A. 
Ecc/.  26.  24.  but  an  A. woman  wdl  reverenn.  Inisba. 

29.  14.  an  A.  man  is  surety  for  his  neighbour 

3  Mae.  C.  23.  bi«  most  A.  education  fruni  a  child 

8U4 


HON 

HONESTLY. 
Feci.  22.  9.  if  children  live  A.  have  wherewithal' 
2  Mac.  12.  43.  doing  therein  very  well  and  A. 
HONOUR. 

1  F.sd.  8.  4.  the  king  ilid  him  A.  for  he  found  grace 

9.  52.  for  the  Lord  will  bring  yoii  to  A. 

2  F.fd.  9.  45.  we  give  great  A.  to  the  Almighty 

10.  23.  the  seal  of  Sion  hath  now  lost  her  A. 
Tob.  4.  3.  but  A.  her  all  the  days  of  thy  life 

10.  12.  A.  thy  father  and  mother-in-law 
14.  13.  where  he  became  old  with  A. 

Jud.  16.  23.  she  increaseth  more  and  more  in  A. 

F.sth.  12.  6.  Anian  was  in  great  A.  with  the  king 
13.3.had  the  A.  of  the  second  place  in  the  kingdom 

IVisd.  3.  17.  their  last  age  shall  be  without  A. 

5.  4.  we  accounted  his  end  to  be  without  A. 

6.  21.  O  ye  kings  of  the  people,  A.  wisdom 

8.  10. 1  shall  have  A.  with  the  elders,  tho'  young 
14.  17.  whom  men  could  not  A.  in  presence 

Eccl.  1.  11.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  A.  and  glory 

19.  wisdom  exalteth  them  to  A.  that  hold  her 
3.  2.  given  the  father  A.  over  tho  childien 

7.  he  that  feareth  the  Lord,  will  A.  his  father 
S.A.thy  father  and  mother  both  in  word  and  deed 
11.  the  glory  of  a  man  is  from  the  A.  of  his  father 

5.  13.  A.  and  shame  is  in  talk,  the  tongue  is  his  fall 

6.  31.  thou  shalt  put  her  on  as  a  robe  of  A. 

7.  4.  nor  seek  of  the  king  the  seat  of  A. 

27.  A.  thy  father  with  ihy  whole  heart 
31.  fear  the  Lord  and  A.  tho  priest 

8. 14.  they  will  judge  for  him  according  to  his  A. 

10.  5.  on  the  person  of  the  scribe  shall  he  lay  liis  A. 

28.  give  it  A.  according  to  the  dignity  thereof 

29.  who  will  A.  him  that  dishonoureth  his  life 
11.4.  e.xalt  not  thyself  in  the  day  of  A. 

24.  16.  my  branches  are  the  branches  of  A. 
17.  my  flowers  are  the  fruit  of  A.  and  riches 

25.  5.  how  comely  is  counsel  lo  inen  of  A..' 
29.  6.  for  A.  he  will  pay  him  disgrace 

33.  22.  leave  not  a  stain  in  thine  A. 
35.  8.  give  the  Lord  his  A.  with  a  good  cyo 
38.  I.  A.  a  physician  with  the  A.  due  lo  him 
2.  and  he  shall  receive  A.  of  the  king 
45.  12.  holiness  an  ornament  of  A.  a  costly  work 

47.  20.  thou  didst  stain  thy  A.  and  pollute  lliy  seed 
49. 16.  Sem  and  Sclh  were  in  great  A.  among  men 
.50.  11.  when  he  put  on  the  robe  of  A.  was  clothed 

/iar.  4. 3.  give  not  thine  A.  to  another  nor  the  things 
.Sus.  50.  God  hath  given  thee  the  A.  of  an  elder 

1  Afac.  1.  39.  her  A.  was  turned  into  contempt 

2.  51.  so  shall  ye  receive  great  A.  and  a  name 

3.  3.  he  gat  his  people  great  A.  put  on  breast-plate 
14.  I  will  get  me  a  name  and  A.  in  the  kingdom 

9.  10.  let  us  die,  and  lei  us  not  stain  our  A. 

11.  42.  but  I  will  greatly  A.  thee  and  thy  nation 

12.  12.  and  we  are  right  glad  of  your  A. 

14.  4.  his  authority  and  A.  pleased  them  well 
21.  the  ambassadors  certified  us  of  your  A. 

20.  they  did  their  nation  great  A. 

39.  Demetrius  honoured  him  with  great  A. 

15.  9.  we  will  A.  thee  and  thy  nation  and  temple 

with  great  A.  so  that  your  A.  shall  he  known 

2  Jl/ac.  2. 21.  those  behaved  lo  their  A.  fiir  Judaism 
3.  2.  the  kings  themselves  did  A.  tho  place 

5.  10.  dedicated  lo  the  glory  and  A.  of  the  place 

6.  II.  to  help  for  the  A.  of  the  most  sacred  day 
23.  as  became  the  A.  of  his  gray  head 

9.  21.  I  would  have  remembered  kindly  your  A. 

14.  7.  I  being  deprived  of  my  ancestors'  A. 

15.  2.  give  A.  to  that  day  which  ho  hath  honoured 

HONOURARLK.  . 
Tub.  3.  11.  thy  glorious  name  is  A.  for  ever 

12.  7.  it  is  A.  to  reveal  the  works  of  (Jod,  II. 

.fud.  16.  21.  was  in  her  lime  A.  in  tho  coimiry 

IVisd.  4.  8.  for  A.  ago  is  not  in  length  of  time 

Eccl.  10.  19.  that  love  the  Lord,  are  an  A.  plant 

20.  among  brethren  he  that  is  chief  is  A. 

11.  6.  the  A.  delivered  into  other  men's  hands 

24.  12.  I  took  root  in  an  A.  people 

29.  27.  give  place,  thou  stranger,  lo  an  A.  man 

45.  20.  but  he  made  Aaron  more  A. 

48.  6.  who  broughlest  A.  men  from  their  bed 
50.  II.  he  made  the  garment  of  holiness  A. 

.Sus.  4.  because  he  was  more  A.  than  all  others 
1  Mac.  1.  6.  lie  called  his  servants  such  as  weto  A. 
2.  17.  thou  art  an  A.  and  great  man  in  this  city 

7.  20.  the  king  sent  Nicanor  one  of  his  A.  princes 
14.  5.  as  ho  was  A.  in  all  his  acts,  so  in  this 

10.  so  that  his  A.  name  was  renowned 

3  Mac.  6.  28.  to  die  for  the  A.  and  holy  laws 
7.  20.  the  mother  was  worthy  of  A.  memory 

10.  13.  seeing  that  he  was  in  no  A.  place 

HONOUR  AH  LV. 
1   F.sd.  9.  45.  for  he  sat  A.  in  the  first  place 
Tub.  12.  6.  A.  to  show  forth  the  works  of  God 
14. 11.  ho  gave  up  the  ghost,  and  he  buried  him  A. 

13.  ho  buried  his  father  and  m(it;.er-in-law  A. 
F.sth.  13.  4.  so  as  tho  uniting  ofour  kingdoms  A. 
H'isd.  18.  3.  a  harmless  sun  to  entertain  them  A. 
1  Mac.  10.00.  wcnlA.  lo  I'tolomais,  whcie  ho  mot 


HOP 


[Apocbvph* 


1  Mae.  ll.f)0.  at  Ascalon,  they  of  city  met  him  A 

12.  8.  Onias  e  ilreated  the  ambassador  A. 

43.  but  received  him  A.  and  commended  him 
14.23.  it  pleased  the  people  to  entertain  the  men  A 
40.  that  they  had  entertained  the  amba>sadors  A 

2  Mac.  2.  8.  that  the  place  might  be  A.  sanctified 

4.  22.  where  he  was  A.  received  of  Jason 

49.  they  of  Tyrus  caused  them  lo  be  A.  buried 
HONOURED. 

1  F.sd.  8.  26.  hath  A.  mo  in  the  sight  of  the  king 
67.  and  ihey  A.  ihe  people  and  the  temple  of  God 
81.  yea,  and  they  A.  the  temple  ofour  Lord 

2  Esd.  9.  31.  and  ye  shall  be  A.  in  it  for  ever 
Jud.  12.  13.  lu  be  A.  in  his  presence,  and  drink  wine 
EsUt.  10.  2.  the  more  often  they  are  A.  with  bounty 

II.  that  be  was  continually  A.  of  all  men 
H'isd.  14. 15.  now  A.  him  as  a  god,  then  a  dead  niao 

17.  an  express  image  of  a  king  whom  they  A. 
20.  which  a  little  before  was  but  A.  as  a  man 

Eccl.  3. 20.  power  great,  and  Lord  is  A.  of  the  lowly 
10.  24.  judges  and  potentates  shall  be  A. 

30.  the  poor  man  is  A.  for  his  skill,  and  the  rich 

man  is  A.  for  his  richea 

31.  he  that  is  A.  in  poverty,  is  much  moreinrichc* 

38.  6.  he  might  be  A.  in  his  marvellous  works 
44.  7.  all  these  were  A.  in  their  generations 
40.  12.  let  the  name  of  them  that  were  A. 

47.  6.  so  the  people  A.  him  with  ten  thousands 
I3.Solom. reigned  in  a  peaceable  time, and  was  h, 

48.  4  O  Elias,  how  wast  thou  A.  in  ihy  deeds! 
50.  5.  how  was  ho  A.  in  tho  midst  of  the  people! 

Bel  2.  Daniel  was  A.  above  all  his  friends 

1  Jfac.  2.  18.  lliy  children  shall  be  A.  with  silver 
10.  64.  when  bis  accusers  saw  that  he  was  A. 

65.  so  the  king  A.  him,  and  made  him  a  duke 
88.  king  ."Vlexander  A.  Jonathan  yet  more 
11.51.  Ihe  Jews  were  A.  in  Ihe  sight  of  the  kii^ 

14.  39.  Demetrius  A.  him  with  great  honour 

2  Mac.  3.  12.  Ihe'temple  A.  over  all  the  world 
30.  that  had  miraculously  A.  his  own  place 

13.  23.  A.  the  temple,  and  dealt  kindly  with  place 

15.  2.1ialh  A.  with  holiness  above  other  days 

HOKOURETH. 
Eccl.  3.  3.  who  A.  hisTather,  maketh  an  atonement 

4.  A.  his  mother  is  as  one  that  layeth  up  treasure 

5.  who.HO  A.  his  father,  shall  have  joy  of  children 

6.  he  that  A.  father  shall  have  long  life 
2G.26.a  woman  that  A.hir  husband  be  judged  wise 

HONOURS. 

1  Mac.  11.  27.  in  all  the  A.  that  he  had  before 

2  Mac.  4.  15.  not  setting  by  Ihe  A.  of  their  fatheri 

HONEY. 
2&(/.2.19.many  fountains  flowing  with  milk  and  A. 
Feci.  24.  20.  my  memorial  is  sweeter  than  A. 

39.  26.  A.  and  milk  are  for  the  use  of  man's  life 

40.  8.  land  that  flowcth  with  milk  and  A.  Bur.  1.20. 

49.  1.  it  is  sweet  as  A.  in  all  mouths,  and  as  muiic 

HOOKS. 
'2  Mac.  13. 2.  three  hundred  chariots  armed  with  A. 

HOPE. 
2  Fsd.  4.  35.  how  long  shall  !  A.  on  this  fashion  1 

5.  12.  at  the  same  time  shall  men  A.  but  not  obtain 
7.  .50.  there  is  promised  us  an  everlasting  A. 

10.  34.  forsake  me  not,  lest  I  die  frustrate  of  A. 

11.  46.  that  she  may  A.  for  the  judgment  of  him 
15.  40.  that  art  partaker  of  the  A.  of  Babylon 

Tub.  11.  11.  saying,  being  of  good  A.  my  father 
./ud.  9. 11.  a  Saviour  of  them  that  are  without  A. 
irjVf/.  3.  4.  yet  is  their  A.  full  of  immorlalily 
11.  he  is  miserable,  and  their  A.  is  vain 

18.  they  have  no  A.  nor  comfort  in  the  day  of  trial 
5.  I  i.  the  A.  of  the  ungoilly  is  like  dust 

10.  19.  Imst  made  thy  children  to  be  of  good  A. 

13.  10.  and  in  dead  things  is  there  A. 

14.  0.  the  A.  of  the  world  governed  by  thy  hand 

15.  10.  his  A.  is  more  vilo  than  earth 

10.  20.  the  A.  of  the  unfaithful  shall  melt  away 
Eccl.  2.  9.  ye  that  fear  the  Lord,  A.  for  good 

13.  0.  he  w'ill  smile  on  thee,  and  put  thee  in  A. 

14.  9.  who  is  not  fallen  from  his  A.  in  tho  Lord 

23.  3.  whoso  A.  is  far  from  Ihy  mercy 

24.  18.  I  am  Iho  mother  of  fair  love,  and  holy  A. 
27.  21.  but  ho  thai  bewravolh  secrets  is  without  A. 
34.  13.  for  their  A.  is  in  him  that  saveth  them 

14.  not  fear,  nor  bo  afraid,  for  he  is  his  A. 
49.  10.  they  delivered  them  by  assured  A. 
riar.  4.  22.  for  my  A.  is  in  the  Evcrlastine 
2  Jfac.  2.  17.  we  A.  also  that  tho  God  that  dehvcioi 
3.  29.  he  lay  speechless,  without  all  A.  of  life 
7.  II.  from  him  I  A.  to  receive  them  asrain 
14.  il  is  good  to  look  for  A.  from  God 
20.  bocaiiBo  of  the  A.  that  she  had  in  the  Lord 
9.20.  I  give  thanks  lo  God  having  A   in  heaven 
22.  having  great  A.  to  'scnpe  this  sickness 
HOPED. 
If 7.<K/.2.22.iicilher  A.  they  for  wages  of  richlnousr 
11.7.gnve8t  them  water,  by  mcain  they  A.  not  fol 
2  .Wik:.  12.  44.  if  he  had  not  A.  they  should  rise 

HOPES. 
Eccl.  23.  5.  turn  away  from  m»  "ain  A. 


Afocrtpha., 


HOU 


JSccl-  34.  1.  the  A.  of  a  man  void  ofunderBtanding 
S  Mac.  7.  34.  noi  iiull'ud  up  wiili  uncurtain  A 

HOREB. 
Eccl.  48.  7.  and  io  H.  llie  judgment  of  vengeance 

HORN. 
Jud.Q.8.  to  cast  down  with  sword  the  h.  of  thy  altar 
Eccl.  47.  5.  and  set  up  the  A.  of  his  people 
7.  he  brake  llieir  A.  in  sunder  to  this  day 
11.  the  Lord  e.xalted  his  A.  fur  ever 
HOUKIBLE. 
S  Ead.  11.  45.  appear  no  more,  nor  thy  A.  wings 
J5.  28.  behold,  a  A.  vision  from  the  east 
34.  they  are  very  A.  Io  look  on,  full  of  wrath 
IVisd.  3.  19.  A.  is  the  end  of  the  unrighteous 

8.  15.  A,  tyrants  shall  bo  afraid  when  they  hear 
11.  18.  shooting  A.  sparkles  out  of  their  eyes 

16.  5.  when  the  A.  fierceness  of  beasts  came 

17.  5.  nor  stars  endure  to  lighten  that  A.  night 

18.  17.  visions  of  A.  dreams  troubled  them  sore 

19.  17.  being  compassed  with  A.  great  darkness 

HORRIBLY. 
Wisi.  6.  5.  A.  and  speedily  shall  he  come  on  you 

HORROR. 
2  J\Iac.  3.  17.  the  man  was  so  compassed  with  A. 

HORSE. 
Jud.  9.  7.  they  are  exalted  with  A.  and  man 
Eccl.  30.  8.  a  A.  not  broken  becomes  headstrong 
33.  6.  a  stallion  A.  is  as  a  mocking  friend 
1  Mac.  6.  28.  those  (hat  had  charge  of  the  A. 
m  Mac.3.~5.  there  appeared  to  them  a  A.with  a  terri- 
ble rider,  and  it  seemed  that  he  ttiatsaton  theA. 
HORSES. 
1  Esd.  2.  Y.  with  gifts,  with  A.  and  with  cattle 

9.  they  helped  them  with  A.  and  cattle 
Jud.  2.  5.  A.  with  their  riders  twelve  thousand 

6.  3.  not  able  to  sustain  the  power  of  our  A. 
IVisd.  19.  1).  for  they  went  at  large  like  A. 
Eccl.  48.  9.  wast  taken  up  in  a  cliariot  of  fiery  A. 

1  Mac.  10.  81.  and  su  the  enemies'  A.  were  tired 

2  Mac.lO.  29.  there  appeared  five  comely  men  on  A 

HORSEBACK. 
Jud.  2.  15.  and  twelve  thousand  archers  on  A. 
2 Mac.  11.  6.  there  appeared  before  them  on  A. 

12.  35.  Dosilheus  who  was  on  A.  and  a  strong  man 

HORSE-LITTER. 
2  Mac.  9.  8.  he  was  now  carried  in  a  A. 

HORSEM.\N. 
2  Mac.  12.  35.  a  A.  of  Thracia  coming  on  him 

HORSEMEN. 

1  Esd.  5.  2.  Darius  sent  with  them  a  thousand  A. 

8.  51.  for  I  was  ashamed  to  ask  of  the  king  A. 
Jud.  1.  13.  he  overthrew  all  his  A.  and  chariots 

2.  19.  to  cover  the  earth  with  chariots  and  A. 

7.  6.  Olofernes  brought  forth  all  his  A. 
IMac.  1.  17.  he  entered  Egypt  with  chariots  and  A. 

4.  1.  Gorgias  took  a  thousand  of  the  best  A. 
7.  the  camp  compassed  round  about  with  A. 

HOST. 

2  Esd.  15.  33.  in  their  A.  shall  be  fear  and  dread 
ff'isd.  12.6.  didst  send  waspsforerunnersof  thy  A. 
Eccl.  48.  21.  he  smote  the  A.  of  the  Assyrians 

1  Mac.  I.  4.  he  gathered  a  mighty  strong  A. 

2.  31.  the  A-  that  was  at  Jerusalem  in  the  c'ty 

3.  3.  protecting  the  A.  with  his  sword 
4-  10.  destroy  this  A.  before  our  face  this  day 

5.  11.  Timotlieus  being  captain  of  their  A. 

HOSTS. 

2  Esd.  8.  21.  before  whom  the  A.  of  angels  stand 
1  Mac.  7.  43.  the  13th  day  the  A.  joined  battle 

13.53.  he  niadehim  captainof  all  theA.  anddwell 
HOSTAGE. 
1  Mac.  1.  10.  Antiochus,  who  had  been  a  A. 
HOSTAGES. 

1  Mac.  8.  7.  should  [lay  a  great  tribute,  and  give  A 

9.  .53.  he  t(^)k  the  chief  men's  son's  for  A.  11.  t)2. 

10.  6.  that  the  A.  in  tower  should  be  delivered  him 

9.  they  of  the  lowerdelivered  their  A.to  Jonathan 

13.  16.  wherefore  send  two  of  his  sons  for  A. 

HOT. 

2  Esd.  4.  48.  behold,  a  A.  burning  oven  passed  by 

6.  4.  or  ever  ihi>  chimnies  in  Sion  were  A. 
Dan.  3.  23.  to  make  the  oven  A.  with  rosin 
2  Jlfa<:.7.3.command.pans  &  caldrons  to  bo  made  A. 

HOUGH. 
2  Esd.  15.  36.  dung  of  men  unto  the  camels'  A. 
HOUR. 

1  E.id.  S.  M.  the  weight  was  written  up  the  same  h. 

2  Esd.  5.  34.  for  my  reins  pain  me  every  A. 
9.  44.  every  A.  I  ilid  nothing  else  but  pray 
14  26.  lo-morrow  this  A.  shall  thou  begin 

Jud.  14.  8.  until  that  A.  she  spake  to  them 
JXA.  10.11.  these  two  lots  came  at  theA.  and  time 
Eccl.  11.  27.  the  affliction  of  an  A.  makes  a  man 

HOURS. 
8  Esd.  16.  38  within  Iwn  or  three  A.  of  her  birth 

HOUSE. 
I  Esd.  ).  3.  in  the  A.  th.it  king  Solomon  built 

55.  as  for  the  A.  of  the  Lnril   they  burnt  it 
2.  4.conimaii(!cd  me  to  build  him  a  A.  at  Jerusalem 
i.  and  build  the  A.  of  the  Lord  of  Israel 
805 


HOU 

1  Esd.  2.  8.  to  build  a  A.  for  the  Lord  at  Jerusalem 

5.  57.  they  laid  the  foundation  of  the  A.  of  God 

6.  32.  out  of  his  own  A.  should  a  tree  be  taken 

8.  25.  to  glorify  his  A.  that  is  in  Jerusalem 

2  Esd.  1.  7.  brought  them  from  the  A.  of  bondage 
33.  your  A.  is  desolate,  I  will  cast  you  out 

9.  24.  a  field,  where  no  A.  is  huilded,  10.  51. 
12.  46.  and  be  not  heavy,  thou  A.  of  Jacob 
14   13.  now  therefore  set  thine  A.  in  order 

Tab.  2.  13.  when  it  was  in  my  A.  and  began  to  cry 

3.  17.  Tobit  came  home,  and  eutcied  into  his  A. 

7.  1.  they  came  to  the  A.  of  Raguel,  and  Sara 

8.  11.  but  when  Raguel  was  come  into  his  A. 
14.  4.  the  A.  of  God  in  it  shall  be  burned 

5.  the  A.  of  God  shall  be  built  in  it  for  ever 
yarf.2.]. there  was  talk  in  thcA.  of  Nabuchodonosor 

18.  much  gold  and  silver  out  of  the  king's  A. 

4.  3.  the  altar  and  A.  were  sanctified 
15.  look  on  all  the  A.  of  Israel  graciously 

6.  17.  had  spoken  proudly  against  the  A.  of  Israel 
8.  5-  she  made  her  a  tent  on  the  top  of  her  A. 

6.  save  the  solemn  days  of  the  A.  of  Israel 
9. 13.  have  purposed  evil  against  thy  hallowed  A. 
13. 14.  nor  taken  his  mercy  from  the  A.  of  Israel 
14.  5.  know  him  that  despised  the  A.  of  Israel 

10.  Achior  was  joined  unto  the  A.  of  Israel 
Esth.  14.  9.  they  will  quench  the  glory  of  thy  A. 
IVisd.  8.  16.  after  I  am  come  into  my  A. 
Eccl.  1.  17.  she  fills  her  A.  with  things  desirable 
4.  30.  be  not  as  a  lion  in  thy  A.  nor  frantic 
11.  34.  receive  a  stranger  into  thy  A.  will  disturb 
14.  24.  he  that  doth  lodge  near  her  A.  shall  fasten 
21.  4.  thus  the  A.  of  proud  men  shall  be  desolate 
8.  he  that  buildeth  his  A.  with  other  men's  money 
18.  as  is  a  A.  that  is  destroyed,  so  is  wisdom 

22.  foolish  man's  fool  issoon  in  his  neighbour's  A. 

23.  a  fool  will  peep  in  at  the  door  into  the  A. 
23.  11.  the  plague  shall  never  depart  from  his  A.  if 

,        he  swear  in  vain,  his  A.  shall  be  full  of  calamity 

25.  16.  than  to  keep  A.  with  a  wicked  woman 

26.  16.  so  is  a  good  wife  in  ordering  of  her  A. 

27.  3.  his  A.  shall  be  soon  overthrown 
29.  21.  water,  bread,  and  a  A.  to  cover  shame 

22.  than  delicate  fare  in  another  man's  A. 

23.  that  thou  hear  not  the  reproach  of  thy  A. 

24.  it  is  a  miserable  life  to  go  from  A.  to  A. 
27.  my  brother  comes,  and  I  have  need  of  my  A. 

36.  26.  who  will  believe  a  man  who  hath  no  A.? 
42.  10.  and  gotten  with  child  in  her  father's  A. 

47.  13.  that  he  might  build  a  A.  in  his  name 

48.  15.  there  remained  a  ruler  in  the  A.  of  David 

49.  12.  who  in  their  time  budded  theA.  and  set  up 

50.  1.  who  in  his  life  repaired  the  A.  again 

51.  23.  and  dwelt  in  the  A.  of  learning 
Bar.  1. 14.  to  make  confession  in  the  A.  of  the  Lord 

2.  16.  O  Lord,  look  down  from  thy  holy  A 
26.  the  A.  which  is  called  by  Ihy  name 

3.  24.  O  Israel,  how  great  is  the  A.  of  God 

6.  55.  when  fire  falleth  on  the  A.  of  gods  of  wood 
59.  it  is  better  to  be  a  profitable  vessel  in  a  A 

than  such  false  gods,  or  to  be  a  door  in  a  A. 
5((s.  4.  Joacim  had  a  fair  garden  joining  to  his  A 

6.  these  kept  much  at  Joacim's  A. 
Bel  29.  else  we  will  destroy  thee  and  thy  A. 
ljlfac.1.28.  A.  of  Jacob  was  covered  with  confusion 

2.  18.  so  shall  thou  and  thy  A.  be  in  the  number 

3.  .56.  should  return  every  man  to  his  own  A. 

7.  35.  if  I  come  again,  I  will  burn  this  A. 
37.  thou,  O  Lord,  didst  choose  this  A.  to  be  call 

ed  by  thy  name,  and  a  A.  of  prayer 
for  thy  people 
9.  55.  he  could  not  give  order  concerning  his  A. 

13.  3.  great  things  my  father's  A.  have  done 

1  Mac.  14.  26.  the  A.  of  his  father  established  Israel 
16.  2.  I  and  my  brethren,  and  my  father's  A. 

2  Mac.  2.  29.  as  the  master-builder  of  a  now  A. 

8.  33.  Callisthenes,  who  was  fled  into  a  little  A. 

14.  36.  O  Lord,  keep  this  A.  ever  undefiled 
HOUSEHOLD. 

1  Esd.  3.  1.  Darius  made  a  great  feast  to  his  h. 

2  Esd.  3.  11.  one  thou  leftest  Noah  with  his  A. 
HOUSE-KEEPING. 

Eccl.  31.  23.  report  of  his  good  A.  will  be  believed 

HOUSE-ROOM. 
Eccl.  29.  28.  the  upbraiding  of  A.  is  grievous 

HOUSES. 
2  Esd.  1  35.  your  A.  will  I  give  to  a  people 

15.  18.  for  pride,  the  A.  shall  be  destroyed 
49.  to  waste  thy  A.  with  destruction  and  death 

16.31.  by  them  that  search  their  A.  with  the  sword 
72.  that  shall  cast  them  out  of  their  A. 
fVisd.  17.  2.  they  being  shut  up  in  their  A. 
Ercl.  3.  9.  cstab'lishelh  the  A.  of  children 

28.  14.  it  hath  overthrown  the  A.  of  great  men 

29.  18.  mighty  men  hath  suretiship  driven  from  A. 

1  Mac-  1.  31.  he  pulled  down  the  A.  and  walla 
61.  they  hanged  infants  and  rifled  their  h. 

13.  47.  cleansed  the  A.  wherein  the  idols  were 

2  Mac.  3.  18.  others  ran  flocking  out  of  their  A. 
5  13,  to  slay  euch  aa  went  up  upon  the  k. 


HUS       • 

HUCKSTER. 
Eccl.  26.  29.  a  A.  shall  not  be  freed  fiom  lin 

HUMBLE. 
Jud.  4.  9.  with  vehemency  did  they  A.  their  souls 
Eccl.  2.  17.  they  will  A.  their  souls  in  his  sight 
7.  17.  A.  thy  soul  greatly,  for  vengeance  ia  tire 

12.  11.  though  he  A.  himself,  and  go  crouching 
18.  21.  A.  thyself  before  thou  be  sick 
35.  17.  the  prayer  of  the  A.  piercetli  the  clouds 

HUMBLED. 
iEsd.8.49.  in  that  thou  hast  A.  thyself  as  becomelb 

10.  7.  Sion  is  much  A.  mourning  very  sore 
Esth.  14.  2.  Esther  A.  her  body  greatly 
Eccl.  40.  3.  to  him  that  is  A.  in  earth  and  ashes 

HU.MBLETH. 
Tob.  4.  19.  the  Lord  A.  whom  he  will 
Eccl.  7.  11.  there  is  one  which  A.  and  exalteth 

HUMBLING. 
Eccl.  34.  26.  or  what  doth  his  A.  profit  himl 

HUMBLY. 
IVisd.  13. 18.  A.  beseecheth  that  which  hath  least 
Prayer  of  Maitass.  wherefore  I  A.  beseech  thee 

HUMILITY. 
Eccl.  13.  20.  as  proud  hate  A.  so  doth  the  rich 

HUNDRED. 
1  Esd.  1.  36.  he  set  a  lax  on  land  of  a  A.  talents 

7.  7.  they  offered  a  A.  bullocks,  two  A.  rams 

8.  20.  the  sumof  a  A.  talents  of  silver,  of  wheat  to 
a  A.  cors,  a  A.  pieces  of  wine  iind  other  things 

Jud.  1.  3.  set  the  towers  on  gates  a  A.  cubits  high 

Eccl.  18.  9.  man's  days  at  the  most  are  a  A.  years 

41.  4.  whether  thou  hast  lived  ten  or  a  A.  years 

1  Mac.  15.  35.  we  will  give  a  A.  talents  for  them 

HUNDREDS. 

1  Mac.  3.  55.  ordained  captains  over  thous.  and  A. 
HUNGER. 

2  Esd.  15.  57.  thy  children  shall  die  of  A. 
58.  they  in  the  mounlain  shall  die  of  A. 

16.22.  the  other  that  escape  the  A.  sword  destroy 
Eccl.  18. 25.  when  enough,  remember  the  time  of  A. 

HUNGRY. 

2Esrf.].17.  when  you  were  A.  and  thirsty  in  wildera. 

16.  6.  may  anydriveaway  a  A.  lion  in  the  woodl 

Tub.  1.  16.  and  I  gave  my  bread  to  the  A. 

4. 16.  give  of  thy  bread  to  the  A.  and  garments 

HURT. 

2  Esd.  6.  19.  what  lliey  be  that  have  A.  unjustly 

11.  42.  thou  hast  A.  the  j)eaceiible,  loved  liars 
IVisd.  10.  8.  they  gat  not  only  this  A. 

14.  29.  swear  falsely,  yet  they  look  not  to  be  A. 

18.  2.  but  for  that  they  did  not  A.  them  now 

19.  6.  thy  children  might  be  kept  without  A. 
Eccl.  13.  12.  and  he  will  not  spare  to  do  thee  A. 

28.  2.  forgive  thy  neighbour  the  A.  he  hath  done 
38.  21.  thou  shall  not  do  him  good  but  A.  thyself 
Dan.  3.  27.  the  fire  neither  A.  nor  troubled  them 

1  Mac.  5. 48.  let  us  pass  thro'  none  shall  do  you  A 

6.  18.  they  in  tower  sought  always  their  A. 

7.  22.  Juda  in  their  power  did  much  A.  in  Israel 

14.  36.  and  did  much  A.  in  the  holy  places 

15.  29.  ye  have  done  great  A.  in  the  land 

2  Mac.  3.  39.  he  destroyeth  them  that  come  to  A.  it 

8.  36.  and  therefore  they  could  not  be  A. 

12.  3.  as  though  they  had  meant  them  no  h. 

22.  that  they  were  oflen  A.  of  their  own  men 

25.  that  he  would  restore  them  without  A. 
HURTFUL. 

2  Esd.  11.  45.  apjtcar  no  more,  nor  thy  A.  claws 

15.  6.  and  their  A.  works  are  fulfilled 
HUSBAND. 

2  Esd.  9.  43.  barren,  though  I  had  a  A.  thirty  yean 
10.  17.  go  thy  way  then  into  the  city  to  thy  A. 

Jud.  8.  2.  Manasses  was  her  It.  of  her  kindred 
7.  her  A.  Manasses  had  left  her  gold  and  silver 
10.  3.  was  clad  during  the  life  of  Manasses  her  h. 

16.  22.  but  none  knew  her  after  her  A.  was  dead 
24.  were  nearest  of  kindred  to  Manasses  her  A. 

Eccl.  4.  10.  be  instead  of  a  A.  to  their  mother 

22.  4.  shall  bring  an  inheritance  to  her  A. 
5.  dishonoureth  both  her  father  and  her  A. 

23.  22.  thus  with  the  wife  that  leaveth  her  k. 

23.  she  hath  trespassed  against  her  own  A. 

25.  18.  her  A.  shall  sit  among  his  neighbours 
22.a  woman,  if  she  maintain  her  A.  is  fullof  ange" 

23.  a  woman  that  will  not  comf.  her  A.  indistren 

26.  2.  a  virtuous  woman  rejoiceth  her  A. 

13.  the  grace  of  a  wife  delighteth  her  A. 
22.  is  a  tower  ngainst  death  to  her  A. 

24.  but  nn  honest  woman  will  reverence  her  A 

26.  a  woman  that  honouretli  her  A.  judged  wise 
36.  23.  then  is  not  her  A.  like  other  men 
40.  23.  but  above  both  is  a  wife  with  her  A. 
42.  10.  having  a  A.  lest  she  should  misbehave 

Su.s.  28.  people  were  assembled  to  her  A.  Joacim 
63.  Susanna  with  her  A.  praised  God 
HUSBANDS. 
2  E.<'d.  16.  33.  women  shall  mourn,  having  no  k. 

34.  and  their  li.  shall  perish  of  famine 
Toi.3.8.dosl  thou  not  know  that  thou  hast  strangled 
Iby  A.?  thou  hast  had  already  seven  k 


IDU 

Tab.  3.15.  mv  suvon  It.  are  dead,  why  sJ-ould  I  live? 

HVU.ASPKS. 
Jud  1.  ti.  there  came  tu  him  all  thut  dwelt  l>y  H. 

HYENA. 
jRccM3. 18.  what  agreement  bulueen  A.  and  a  dog? 

HYMNS. 
IMac.  13.51.  entered  with  viiil.«,  and  A.  andaongs 

HYPOCRISY. 
2  JIfac.  G.  25.  they  thro'  mv  A.  should  be  deceived 

HYI'OCRITK. 
F.ccl.  1.  29.  be  not  a  A.  in  ihe  sight  of  men 
3-i.  15.  but  tlie  A.  will  be  otiVnded  thereat 
33. 2.  he  that  is  a  A.  therein,  is  us  a  ship  in  a  storm 


J. 


JACOB. 

2  E.^d.  1.  24.  wliat  shall  I  do  to  thee,  O  J.? 
3. 10.  thou  gavest  Isaac,  to  Isaac  also  thou  gaveat 
J.  and  Esau,  so  J.  became  a  great  nmllitude 
19.  mightest  give  the  law  unto  the  seed  of  J. 

5.  35.  I'mighl  not  have  seen  the  travel  of  J. 

6.  8.  J.  hand  held  first  the  heel  of  Esau 

9.  J.  is  the  begiiMiing  of  it  that  followeth 

9.  30.  thou  saidst,  mark  my  words  thou  seed  of  J. 
12.  40.  and  be  not  heavy,  thou  house  of  J. 

Jud.8.  20.  what  happened  to  J.  in  Mesopotamia 
Eccl.  23.  12.  be  not  found  in  the  heritage  of  J. 

24.  8.  Creator  said,  let  thy  dwelling  be  in  J. 

36.  11.  gaiher  all  ihe  tribes  of  J.  together 

44.  23.  he  made  it  rest  upon  the  head  of  J. 

45.  5.  that  he  might  teach  J.  his  covenant 

46.  14.  and  the  Lord  had  respect  unto  J. 

47.  22.  wherefore  he  gave  a  remnant  to  J. 

48.  10.  and  to  restore  the  tribes  of  J. 

49.  10.  for  they  comforted  J.  and  delivered  them 
Bar.  3.  30.  and  hath  given  it  to  J.  his  servant 

4.  2.  turn  thee,  O  J.  and  take  hold  of  it 

1  Mac.l."8.  house  of  J.  was  covered  wilh  confusion 
3.  7.  and  he  made  J.  glad  with  bis  acts 
45.  joy  was  taken  frnm  J.  the  pipe  ceased 

5.  2.  tli.ev  thought  to  destroy  the  generation  of  J. 

JAMBRf. 

I  Mac.  9.  :?6.  but  the  children  of  J.  came  out 

37.  the  children  of  J.  made  a  great  marriage 

JAMNIA. 

]  Afac.  4.  15.  they  pursued  them  to  the  plains  of  J. 

5.  58.  they  had  givincharge,  they  went  toward  J. 

10.  O9.who  gathered  a  great  ho.'<t  and  camped  in  J. 
15.40.Ccndebcu3  rnme  to  .1.  and  began  to  provoke 

JAMNITES. 

2JV/ae.l2.8.the  J.  were  minded  to  do  in  like  manner 

9.  he  came  upon  the  J.  by  night,  and  set  fire 

40.  found  tilings  cim-ecrated  to  theidolsof  the  J 

JAPHETH. 

Jud.  2.  25.  and  he  came  to  the  borders  of  J. 

JAZAR. 

1  Mac.  5. 8.  when  he  had  taken  J.  with  the  towns 

ICE. 
jyjsd.  16.  22.  but  snow  and  j.  endured  the  fire 
F.ccl.  3.  l.'i.  thy  sins  shall  melt  away  as  the  ;. 
43.  20.  and  the  water  is  cnngetled  into  i. 
Dan.  3.  49.  O  ye  i.  and  cold,  bless  the  Lord 

ICY. 

^j»d.l9.01.nor  melted  the  i.kind  of  heavenly  meat 

IDLE. 

2  F.s(t.  15.  60.  they  shall  rush  on  the  i.  city 
16.  68.  Ilify  shall  take  and  feed  you  being  i. 

Wisd.  14.  5.  the  works  of  thy  wisdom  should  be  i. 

Keel.  37.  11.  nor  with  an  ?'.  servant  of  business 
IDOL. 

Feci.  30.  19.  whnt  good  doth  theoflering  loan  i. 

Bel  3.  the  Babyloninns  had  an  i.  called  licl 
IDOLS. 

1  F.sd.  2.  10.  Nabuch.  had  set  up  in  his  temple  of  ('. 

Tub.  M.  6.  nil  nations  shall  turn  and  bury  their  i. 

F.^lll.  1 1.  10.  to  set  forth  the  praises  of  the  i. 

IVi^d.  II.  II.  on  the  i.  of  Gentiles  be  a  visitation 
12.thedevi8in!rof(.  was  beginning  of  fornication 
27.  the  worshipping  of  j.  not  to  be  named 

29.  aa  iheir  trust  is  in  i.  which  have  no  life 

30.  giving  heed  to  i.  and  also  unjustly  swoio 
1S.15.thev  counted  the  i.  of  the  heathen  to  be  nods 

Jtar.  fi.  73.  better  is  the  just  man  that  hath  no  j. 
B'l  a.  who  said,  because  I  may  not  worship  j. 
1  Mac.  I.  43.  many  Israolilos  sacrificed  to  i. 
47.  set  up  altiirs,  grovi-j,  and  chapels  of «. 

10.  Kl.  went  to  Hethdai:«n  Iheir  i.  temple 
13.47.  and  rb'nnsed  the  houses  wherein  the  i.  wore 

2 Mac.  12.40.  things  consiernled  to  >'.  of  Jamnili's 

IDOL-ALTAR. 
I  Mae.  1.  .lO.  thev  did  sacrifii-(!  on  the  i.-altar 

IDOL-ALTARS. 
1  Jir-Jcl.  54.  thev  hiiilded  i.-nlt.  thro'  cities  of  Juda 

IDOLATROUS. 
IVind.  12.0.  out  of  Ihe  midst  of  their  ».  crrw 
8  Mae.  7.  42.  have  p|inken  cnncorning  the  i.  feast 

IDIJMKA. 

I  Mae.  4. 15.  they  pnrsu™!  Ihoni  to  the  plains  of  I. 

800 


JES 

IMac.i.  29.  80  they  came  into  I.  pitched  their  tent* 

61.  tliu  people  might  have  a  defence  against  1. 

5.3. Judas  fought  against  the  children  of  Esau  in  I. 

0.  31.  Iheiie  went  Ihro'  I.  and  pitched  ag.  Bclhsura 

2  Mac.  12.  32.  against  Goigias  the  governor  of  I. 

IDUMEANS. 
2  Mac.  10.  15.  the  I.  have  gotten  into  their  hands 

JEALOUS. 
Eccl.  9.  1.  be  not  7.  over  the  wife  of  thy  bosom 
20   6.  a  woman  ihat  taj.  over  another  woman 
37. 11.  not  Consult,  touching  her  of  whoniBheisj. 
JEALOUSY. 
2  Esii.  15.  52.  would  I  wilh  _;'.  have  so  proceeded 
iVisd.  1.  10.  the  ear  o(  j.  heareth  all  things 
5.  17.  he  shall  take  to  him  his  j.  for  armour 

JEBUSITE. 
Jud.  5.  16.  they  cast  forth  before  them  the  J. 
JEDUTHUN. 

1  Esd.  1.  15.  Zachai'ias  and  J.  of  the  king's  retinue 

JEOPARD. 

2  J)/oc.  11.  7.  that  they  wouldj.  themselves  to  help 

JEOPARDY. 

1  Jl/ac.C.  44.  put  himself  in  j.  to  deliver  his  peojile 

JEPIIUNNEH,  See  Caleb. 

JEREMIAS;  JEREMY. 

1  F.sd.\.'iS.  not  regarding  the  words  of  prophet  J. 
32.  yea  J.  the  prophet  lamented  for  Josias 

47.  the  words  spoken  to  him  by  the  prophet  J. 
57.  lo  fulfil  the  words  spoken  by  the  mouth  of  J. 
2.  1.  that  he  had  promised  by  the  mouth  of  J. 

2  Esd.  2.  18.  I  will  send  my  servants  Esay  and  J. 
F.ccl.  49.  0.  according  to  the  prophesy  of  J. 
ISar.  0.  1.  a  co|:y  of  an  epistle  which  J.  sent 

2. Vac.  2.  1.  that  J.  the  prophet  commanded  therti 
5.  when  J.  came  there,  he  found  a  hollow  cave 
7.  which  when  J.  perceived,  he  blamed  them 

15.  15.  J.  holding  forth  his  right  hand 

JERICHO. 
Eccl.  24.  14.  I  was  exalted  as  a  rose-plant  in  J. 
1  JVfac.  9. 50.  repaired  the  fort  in  J.  and  Emmaus 

16.  11.  in  the  plain  of  J.  was  Plolemeus 

14.  he  came  down  himself  to  J.  with  his  sons 
2Jl/ac. 12.15.  did  cast  down  J.  in  the  time  of  Joshua 

JEROBOAM. 
Eccl.  47.  23.  there  was  also  J.  the  son  of  Nebat 

JERUSALEM. 
1  Esd.  1.  21.  Israel  that  were  found  dwelling  at  J. 
49.  the  temple  wliich  was  sanctified  in  J. 
55.  they  brake  down  the  walls  of  J. 
2.  4.  to  build  him  a  house  at  J.  in  Jewry 
5.  if  there  be  any  of  his  people,  let  him  go  up  to  J 

4.  43.  thy  vow  which  thou  liast  vowed  lo  build  J 
Tub.  1.  6.  I  alone  went  often  to  J.  at  the  feasts 

7.  another  tenth  part  I  spent  every  year  at  J. 

13.  9.  O  J.  the  holy  city,  he  will  scourge  thee 

16.  for  J.  shall  be  built  up  wilh  sapphiics 

17.  the  streets  of  J.  shall  be  paved  with  b"ryl 
14."  4.  J.  shall  be  desolate,  and  house  of  God  burnt 

5.  they  shall  return  and  build  up  J.  gloriously 
.Tud.  4.  2.  ihey  were  troubled  for  J.  and  the  temple 
Eccl.  24.  1 1.  gave  me  rest,  and  in  J.  was  my  power 
30.  13.  O  be  merciful  to  J.  thy  holy  city 
,50.  27.  Jesus  the  son  of  Sirach  of  J.  wrote 
Bar.  4.  8.  ye  have  grieved  J.  that  nursed  you 
30.  take  a  good  heart,  O  J.  he  will  comfort  Ihcc 

5.  1.  put  off,  O  J.  the  garment  of  Ihy  mourning 
5.  arise,  O  J.  and  stand  on  high,  and  look  about 

1  Mac.  6.  12.  I  remember  the  evils  I  did  at  J. 
7.  17.  tlii'ir  blood  have  they  shed  about  J 

39.  so  Nicanor  went  out  of  J.  and  i>ilched  tents 

9.  53.  put  Ihein  in  the  tower  at  J.  to  be  kept 

10.  31.  let  J.  also  be  holy  and  free,  with  borders 

11.  41.  would  cast  those  of  the  tower  out  of  J. 

14.  30.  that  were  in  the  city  of  David  in  J. 

2  JV/ac.  1.  1.  the  brethren  the  Jews  lhat  bo  at  J. 

9.  4.  spoken  proudly,  that  ho  would  come  to  J. 

10.  15.  those  that  wore  banished  from  J. 

11.  .5.  but  distant  from  J.  about  five  furlonjs 

12.  9.  that  the  light  of  Ihn  fire  was  seen  at  J. 
29.  Rcylhopolis  linth  600  furlongs  from  J. 

15.  30.  to  bring  Nicanor's  head  and  hand  to  J. 

JESSE. 
Ecc?.4.5.25.tho  covenant  mndo  wilh  David  son  of  J. 

JEST. 
Feci.  8.  4.  >'.  not  with  a  rudo  man,  lest  ancestors 

JESU. 

1  F.sd.  P.  63.  wilh  them  was  Josabad  son  of  J. 

JESUS. 
\F.sd.  5.  5.  J.  the  son  of  Josodcc,  son  of  Strains 
H.  with  J.  Noliemias,  and  Znchnrias  their  ffiiides 
4H.  thru  Blood  up  J.  tho  son  of  Josodec,  ."ifi. 
.IH.  then  flDod  up  J.  and  his  sons  and  brethren 
70.  Zorohuhel  and  J.  chief  of  ihn  families 
6. 2.  J.  tlirsrin  of  Josodec  began  to  build  Ihn  house 

2  F.sd.  7.  2H.  fur  my  son  J.  shall  be  revealed 

H7.  J.  after  him  for  Israel  in  Iho  tiino  of  .Arlinn 
F.rrl.  46.  1.  J.  thesonof  Navn  was  valiant  in  wars 
•19    12.  so  was  J.  the  son  of  Jnsedec,  whobuildod 

50.  <J7.  J.  the  son  of  Scrach  of  Jerusalem 

51.  1.  a  prayer  of  J.  the  gon  of  Siraoli 


ILL 


lApocarFHA 


"{Mac.  2. 55.  J.  fur  fulfilling  wora  was  made  a  judge 

JEW. 
E.»tA.11.3.who  was  J.  and  dwelt  in  the  city  of  Su»a 
2  Mac.  0.  6.  or  profess  himself  at  all  tu  be  a  J. 
9.  17.  lhat  also  lie  would  become  a  J.  himself 

JEWELLER. 
Eccl.  45.  11.  like  seals  set  in  gold,  work  of  tlie  ;'. 

JEWRY. 
1  Esd.  1.  32.  in  all  J.  they  mourned  for  Josias 

4.  49.  the  Jews  that  went  out  of  Ins  realm  up  to  J 

5.  8.  they  returned  to  the  other  parts  of  J. 

57.  in  the  second  year  after  they  were  come  to  J 

6.  1.  the  projiliuts  prophesied  to  Ihe  Jews  in  J 

8.  81.  they  have  given  us  a  sure  abiding  in  J. 

9.  3.  there  wasa  proclamation  in  all  J.  and  Jems. 
Ucl  33.  there  was  in  J.  the  prophet  Habbacuc 
2Jl/cc.l0.24.came  us  though  would  take  J.  by  forca 

JEVVS. 
1  Esd.  1.  21.  and  the  J.  held  with  all  Israel 
2.  18.  that  the  J.  do  build  the  market-places 
2;).  and  that  the  J.  were  rebellious,  and  raised 
4.  49.  he  wrote  for  all  the  J.  that  went  out 
50.  Edomites  should  give  over  villages  of  the  J 

6.  1.  Ihe  prophets  prophesied  lo  the  J.  in  Jewry 
8.  the  ancients  of  the  J.  thfit  were  of  the  captivity 
27.  the  eldersof  the  J.  to  build  ibe  house  of  Lord 

7.  2.  assisting  the  ancientsof  the  J.  and  governors 

8.  10.  I  liave  given  orilers  that  such  of  the  J. 
fXA.lO.  8.  assembled  to  destroy  the  name  of  the  J. 

16.  15.  we  find  that  the  J.  are  no  evil-doers 

19.  the  J.  may  freely  live  after  iheir  own  laws 
Su.f.  4.  to  him  resorted  Ihe  J.  because  he  was  mora 
1  Mac.  2.  23.  came  one  of  the  J.  in  sight  of  all 

4.  2.  thai  he  might  rush  in  on  the  camp  of  the  J. 

6.  6.  that  Lysias  svas  driven  away  of  Ihe  J. 

8.  31.  on  our  friends  and  confederates  the  J. 

10.  23.  prevented  us,  in  making  amity  withtneJ. 
29.  now  I  release  all  the  J.  from  tributes 

11.  30.  and  to  the  iiaiion  of  the  J.  13.  36. 

33.  determined  to  do  good  to  the  people  of  the  J. 
47.  then  the  king  called  to  the  J.  for  help 

14.  22.  the  J.  ambassadors  came  to  us,  15.  17. 
3.3.  but  he  set  a  garrison  of  J.  there 

34.  but  he  placed  J.  there,  and  furnished  them 

15.  1.  to  Simon  Ihe  priest  and  prince  of  Ihe  J, 

17.  being  sent  from  Simon  and  people  of  the  J. 
2.1/uc.  1. 1.  Ihe  brethren  the  J.  that  be  at  Jeiusalem 

7.  we  the  J.  wrote  unio  vou  in  trouble 
li.  32.  had  been  done  to  Heliodorus  by  the  J 

4.  11.  the  royal  privileges  granted  to  the  J. 

5.  23.  a  mind  against  his  countrymen  the  J. 
25.  when  taking  the  J.  keeping  holy-day 

6.  1.  to  compel  Ihe  J.  to  depart  from  the  laws 

8.  1.  took  such  as  continued  in  the  J.  religion 
10.  to  m.ike  so  much  money  of  the  captive  J. 

9.  4.  he  tlioughl  to  avenge  on  Ihe  J.  thoilisgracc, 

make  it  a  common  burying-|)laC9 

of  ihe  J. 
7.  breathing  out  fire  in  his  raje  against  the  J. 
19.  Antiochus  to  the  good  J.  his  citizens 

10.  29.  five  men,  and  two  of  ihem  led  ihe  J. 

11.  10.  there  were  letters  written  to  Ihe  J. 

12.  1.  the  J.  were  about  their  husbandry 

13.  9.  to  do  far  worse  10  the  J.  than  had  been  done 

18.  had  taken  a  taste  of  Iho  manliness  of  ihe  J. 

19.  Bclh-sur.i,  which  was  a  strong-hold  of  the  J. 

14.  5.  being  asked  how  the  J.  stood  afteclcd 
6.  those  of  the  J.  thai  be  called  Assideans 

14.  thinking  Ihe  harm  of  the  J.  to  be  their  welfare 
37.  who  for  kindne.s^  was  called  a  father  of  the  J. 
3H.  did  jeopard  his  lite  f<^r  Ihe  religion  of  the  J. 

39.  lo  declare  the  hate  llial  he  bare  to  the  J. 

40.  by  lakin:;  him.  In  do  the  J.  much  hurt 

15.  2.  the  J.  that  \ve;-e  compelled  lo  go  with  him 
12.  Onias  prayed  for  the  whole  body  of  the  J 

IGNORANCE. 
fVI$d.  14.  22.  they  lived  in  Ihe  great  war  oft. 

17.  13.  roiinlelli  the  »'.  more  than  Ihe  cause 
Feci.  4.25.1)111  be  abashed  of  Ihe  error  of  thine  1. 

28.  7.  remember  the  covenant,  and  wink  at  i. 
IGNORANCES. 

1  Esd.H.  75.  our  1.  have  reached  up  lo  heaven 
Toh.  3.  3.  punish  mo  not  for  my  sin«  and  t. 
Eccl.  23.  2.  lhat  they  spare  me  not  for  mine  1. 

3.  h'-t  mine  1.  increnso  ami  mv  sins  abound 
51.  19.  and  I  bewail.'d  mv  1.  of  hor 

IGNORANT. 

IVi.'id.  13.  1.  vain  are  all  men,  who  are  i.  of  God 

14.  18.  sot  forward  ih.-  1.  lo  more  supcrslilion 

Eccl.  5. 15.  be  not  I.  of  nnvihinj:  in  a  groat  manner 

IGNOUANTLY. 

2  Mac.  11.31.  shall  bo  molested  for  things  1.  done 

ILL. 
.hid.  8.  8.  thorn  was  none  lhat  gave  hor  an  »'.  word 
If'isd.  .'S  23.  i  dealing  shall  overthrow  the  Ihronoi 
Frrl.  9.  IH.  a  man  of  an  1.  lonjoe  is  diingon.uii 
29  7. many  linve  refused  lo  lend  lor  oihers  1  d»nling 
41.  11.  an  ».  nnme  of  sinner-  shnll  be  blotted  out 

ill-accoud:ng. 

(VUd.  18.  iP.  sounder  aiu.-arcord.etv  of  enomiiM 


APOCRYPHA.] 


IMP 


ILLUMINATED.        • 
Bar.  4.  2.  walk  iii  light  Ifiul  lliou  mnycst  be  t. 

ILLUMINATION. 
£cc/.  25.n.  love  of  the  Lord  pusseth  all  things  for  i. 

ILLUSIONS. 
h'isd.  17.  7.  as  for  the  i.  of  inagic,  were  put  down 

IMAGE. 
C  Esd.  5.  .37.  shew  me  the  i.  of  a  voice,  and  declare 
8.  44.  eo  pcrislielh  man,  who  is  calloil  thine  own  i. 
IVisd.  '2.  iy.  made  him  to  be  an  i.  of  his  eternity 

7.  2ti.  and  she  is  the  i.  of  liis  goodness 
13.  13.  and  fashlunud  it  to  the  2.  of  a  man 

16.  for  it  is  an  i.  and  halh  need  of  help 

J4.  15.  when  he  halh  made  an  i.  of  his  child 

17.  they  made  an  e.\|>iess  i.  of  a  king 

15.  4.  nor  any  i.  spotted  with  divers  colours 
5.  and  so  they  desire  the  form  of  a  dead  i. 

■  17.  21.  an  i.  of  that  darknnss  spread  over  them 

IMAGERY. 
EccL  38.  27.  and  give  themselves  to  counterfeit  i 

IMA(JES. 
IVisd.  15. 13.  makelh  brickie  vessels  and  graven  i. 

1  Mac.  3.  48.  sought  to  paint  the  likeness  of  their  i. 
5.  68.  when  he  burnt  their  carved  ('.  with  fire 

2  Mac.  2.  2.  wlien  thev  see  j.  of  silver  and  gold 

IMAGINATION. 
Eccl.  22. 18.  a  fearful  heart  in  the  i.  of  a  fool 
37.  3.  O  wicked  (.  whence  earnest  thou  in  to  cover 
40.  2.  their  i.  of  things  to  some  causeth  fear 
Bar.  1.  22.  the  i.  of  his  own  wicked  heart 

IMAGINATIONS. 
2  F.sd.  15.  3.  fear  not  the  i.  against  thee 

16.  54.  behold  the  Lord  knoweth  their  i. 
Wisd.'i.W.  sUiW  be  punished  accord,  to  their  own  t. 
Bar.  2.  8.  turn  from  the  i.  of  his  wicked  heart 
Sus.  28.  full  of  mischievous  2.  against  Susanna 

IMAGINE. 
Eccl.  17.  31.  flesh  and  blood  will  i.  evil 

1  ^l/ac.  3. 52.  what  tiny  i.  against  u.^,  thou  kno  west 

IMAGINED. 

2  Esd.  7.  22.  spake  against  him,  and  i.  vain  things 
fVisd.  3.  14.  nor  i.  wicked  things  against  God 

1  Mac.  11.  8.  t.  wicked  counsels  against  Alexander 

IMAGINETH. 
Eccl.  12.  16.  in  his  heart  he  i.  how  to  throw  thee 
IC.  23.  and  a  foolish  man  erring  ;'.  follies 
IMMORTAL. 

2  Esd.  7.  13.  for  the  entrances  brought  i.  fruit 
49.  if  there  be  promised  us  an  *'.  time 

TVisd.  1.  15.  for  righteousness  is  i. 

2.  23.  for  God  created  man  to  be  i.  and  made  him 

4.  1.  for  the  memorial  thereof  is  i. 
Eccl.  17.  30.  because  the  son  of  man  is  not  i. 

I.MMOUTALITY. 
2  Esd.  7.  43.  the  beginning  of  the  i.  for  to  come 

8.  54.  in  the  end  is  shewed  the  treasure  oft. 
Wisd.  3.  4.  yet  is  their  hope  full  oft. 

8.  13.  by  the  means  of  her  I  shall  obtain  i. 

17.  how  that  lo  he  allied  unto  wisdom  is  i. 
15.  3.  yea,  to  know  thy  power,  is  the  root  oft. 
Eccl.  19.  19.  receive  the  fruit  of  the  tree  oft. 

IMMUNITY. 
\Mac.  10. 34.  shall  be  all  the  days  of  t.  and  freedom 
13.  34.  to  the  end  he  shall  pive  the  land  an  i. 
IMMUNITIES. 

1  .Vac.  10.  28.  we  will  grant  you  many  t.  and  give 
13.  37.  lo  confirm  the  i.  which  we  have  granted 

IMPARTED. 
Eccl.  17.  5.  in  sivtli  place  he  t.  them  understanding 

2  Mac.  8.  12.  he  had  i.  lo  those  that  were  with  him 

IMPEDIMENT. 
tVisd.  19.  7.  out  of  the  Red  sea,  a  way  without  t. 

IMPEDIMENTS. 

Jud.5.  I.  and  had  laid  i.  in  the  champain  countries 

IMPIETY. 

1  Esd.  1.  42.  recorded  of  his  uncloanness  and  t. 

2  E.id.  4.  38.  O  Lord,  even  we  all  are  full  of  i. 

2  .Mac.  4.  38.  the  place  where  he  had  committed  t. 

IMPIETIES. 
2  Esd.  3.  29.  when  I  had  seen  i.  without  number 

IMPORTABLE. 
Praijcrof  Manass.  thrcateningtoward  sinners  is  t. 

IMPOSITION. 

1  Esd.  8.  22.  nor  any  olhcr  t.  of  any  of  the  priests 

LMPOSSIRLE. 

2  Mac.  3. 12.  that  it  was  altogether  i.  such  wrongs 
4.  6.  he  saw  it  i.  that  the  stale  should  continue 

IMPOTENT. 
Bar.  6.  23.  but  lo  poor  and  t.  thev  give  nothing 

IMPRISONED.' 
fVisd.  18. 4.  thev  were  wnrlliy  to  be  i.  in  darkness 

IMPRISONMENT. 
1  Esd.  8.  24.  by  penalty  of  money,  or  by  i. 

IMPUDENCE. 
Eccl.  25.  22.  ie  full  oft.  and  much  reproach 

IMPUDENT. 
Eccl.  19.2.  he  that  cleavcth  to  harlots  will  become  i. 
23. 6.  give  not  over  mo  thy  servant  into  an  t.  mind 
26.  11.  watch  over  an  i.  eye,  and  marvel  not 
29. 14.  but  he  that  is  i.  will  forsake  htm 

ao7 


INF 

IMPUTED. 

1  Mac.  2.  52.  it  was  j.  to  him  foi  righteousness 

INCOMMUNICABLE. 
IVisd.  14.  21.  did  ascribe  to  stocks  the  t.  name 
INCENSE. 

2  Esd.  3.  24.  to  oflTer  i.  and  oblations  lo  thee 
.fad.  9. 1.  about  time  t.  of  that  evening  was  offered 
fVisd.  18.  21.  bringing  the  propitiation  oft. 
Eccl.  45. 16.  i.  and  a  sweet  savour  for  a  memorial 

50.  9.  as  fire  and  i.  in  the  censer,  and  a  vessel 
I^ar.  1.  10.  sent  money  to  buy  sin-ofterings  and  : 
Dan.  3.  15.  nor  is  their  oblation,  or  t.  or  place 

1  Mac.  1.55.  and  burnt  t.  at  the  doors  oflhiir  houses 

4.  49.  they  brought  the  altar  oft.  and  the  table 
50.  and  upon  the  altar  they  burnt  t. 

INCHANTMENTS. 

fVisd.  18. 13.  not  believe  anv  thing  by  reason  oft 

INCLOSING. 

2  Mac.  1.  34.  the  king  t.  the  place,  made  it  holy 

INCONTINENCY. 
2  Esd.  5.  10.  i.  shall  bo  miiliiplied  upon  earth 

INCORRUPTIBLE. 

Wisd.  12.  1.  for  thine  i.  spirit  is  in  all  things 

18.  t  4.  by  whom  the  i.  light  was  to  be  given 

INCORRUPTION. 

2  Esd.  4.  1 11.  to  understand  the  t.  that  is  evident 

fVisd.  6.  18.  keeping  laws  is  the  assurance  oft. 

INCREASE. 
1  Esd.  9.  7.  thereby  to  t.  the  sins  of  Israel 
Tub.  1.  7.  the  first  tenth  part  of  all  :.  I  gave 
Eccl.  6.  5.  a  fair  tongue  will  i.  kind  greetings 
20.  28.  that  tilleth  his  lands,  shall  t.  his  heap 
23.  3.  lest  my  ignorances  i.and  sins  abound 
39.  11.  and  if  he  live  he  shall  i.  it 
45.  20.  divided  to  him  the  first  fruits  of  the  t. 
Bar.2.34.I  will  i.  them,  they  shall  not  be  diminished 

1  Mac.  14.  8.  the  earth  gave  her  i.  the  trees  fruit 

2  Mac.  4.  4.  did  rage,  and  i.  Simon's  malice 
13.  such  was  the  t.  of  heathenish  manners 

INCREASED. 
2  Esd.  1.  6.  the  sins  of  their  fathers  are  i. 

5.  2.  iniquity  shall  be  i.  above  that  thou  seest 
7.  41.  even  so  now  seeing  wickedness  is  t. 

Tub.  14.  2.  he  i.  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord 
Jud.  5.  9.  they  were  t.  with  gold  and  silver 
16.  23.  but  she  t.  more  and  more  in  honour 
Keel.  2.  3.  that  thou  mayest  be  i.  at  thy  last  end 
lj1/nc.l.40.  as  had  her  glory,  so  was  her  dishonours. 

2.  30.  because  afflictions  i.  sore  upon  them 

2  Mac.  8.  8.  so  when  Philip  saw  that  this  man  t. 

INCREASETH. 
IVisd.  16.24.  i.  his  strength  against  the  unrighteous 
Eccl.  31.  30.  drunkenness  t.  the  rage  of  a  foot 

INCREASING. 
Eccl.  43.  8.  t.  wonderfully  in  her  changing 
2  Mac.  4.  50.  i.  in  malice,  and  being  a  traitor 

INCREDULITY. 
2  Esd.  15.  3.  let  not  the  i.  of  them  trouble  thee 

INCURABLE. 
.hid.  5.  12.  he  smote  all  Egypt  with  i.  plagues 

INDEBTED. 
1  Mac.  10.  43.  flee  to  temple,  being  i.  to  the  king 

INDIA. 
Ksth.  13.  1.  lo  the  princes  from  I.  to  Ethiopia 
1  J/ac.8. 8.  thecountry  of  I.and  Media,  and  Lydia 
INDIAN. 

1  Mac.  G.  37.  besides  the  I.  that  ruled  him 

INDIFFERENT. 
Eccl.  42.  5.  and  of  merchants  i.  selling 
INDIGNATION. 

2  F.sd.  8.  30.  lake  thou  no  i.  at  them  which  are 
Eccl.  5.  6.  and  his  t.  resleth  upon  sinners 

36.  7.  raise  up  t.  and  pour  out  wrath 

45.  19.  in  his  wrathful  t.  were  they  consumed 

Bar.  2.  20.  thou  hast  sent  out  thy  wrath  and  i. 

BcJ38.they  took  great  i.and  conspired  against  king 

1  Mac.  2.  49.  pride  got  strength,  and  the  wrath  of  i. 

3.  27.  king  Antiochus  was  full  oft. 

2  Mac.  4.  35.  many  other  nations  took  great  i. 
INESTIMABLE. 

2  Esd.  8.  21.  whose  throne  is  i.  whose  glory 

INEVITABLE. 
Wisd.  17.  14.  came  out  of  the  bottoms  oft.  hell 

INFAMY. 
Wisd."!.  12.  he  objecteth  to  our  i.  the  Iransgressings 

INFANTS. 
/■wf/.7.27.  not  see  (he  death  of  our  t.  before  our  eyes 
16.  5   make  my  i.  as  a  prey,  my  virgins  a  spoil 
Wisd.  11.  7.  commandment  whereby  t^were  slain 

1  Mac.  2.  9.  her  t.  are  slain  in  the  streets 

2  Mac.  5.  13.  there  was  slaying  of  virsins  and  i. 
8.4.  remoinber  the  wicked  slaughter  of  harmless  i. 

INFIDELITY. 
2  Esd.  7.  44.  J.  is  cut  off,  righteousness  is  grown 

INFINITE. 
Wisd.  8.  18.  in  works  of  her  hands  ore  «.  rich-js 
Eccl.  16.  17.  such  an  j.  number  of  creatures 
30.  1.5.  and  a  strong  body  above  t.  wealth 
Prflyero/.Vanrtss.  of  thy  t.  mercies  hast  appointed 
2  Mac.  2.  24.  for  considering  the  t.  number 


INI 

2  Mac.  3. 6.  trcasurv  was  full  of  i.  sums  of  moan 

INFIRMITY. 
2  Esd.  3.  22.  thus  i.  was  made  permanent 

INFIRMITIES. 
2  Esd.  4.27.  this  world  is  full  of  unrighteousn.  naii. 

INFLAMED. 
Eccl.  28.  10.  the  more  they  will  be  t. 
Sus.  8.  so  that  their  lust  was  i.  toward  her 

1  Mac.  2.  24.  Mailathias  was  t.  with  zeal 

INFLUENCE. 
IVi.'d  7.  25.  a  pure  /.  from  the  glory  of  Almighty 

INFORMED. 
iMac.  13.  4.  Lysias  t.  king  that  this  man  wascauto 
14.  1.  Judas  was  t.  that  Demetrius  had  taken 
INHABIT. 

2  Esd.  3.28.  are  their  deeds  belter  that  t.  Babylon  1 
Jud.  5.  3.  what  arc  the  cities  that  they  i.  ? 

14.  4.  you  and  all  that  t.  the  coast  of  Israel 
INHABITANTS. 
2  F.sd.  6.  26.  the  heart  of  the  ;.  shall  be  changed 
.fud.  1.  10.  till  you  come  to  all  the  t.  of  Egypt 

11.  the  i.  of  the  land  made  light  of  the  command 

12.  he  would  slay  all  the  i.  of  thu  land  of  Muab 
2.  28.  fear  fell  on  all  the  t.  of  the  sea-coasts 

4.  11.  the  t.  of  Jerusalem  fell  before  the  temple 

5.  4.  more  than  all  the  t.  of  the  west 

7. 13.  the  t.  of  Betliulia  have  their  water  thence 
20.  vessels  of  water  failed  all  the  i.  of  Bethulia 

8.  11.  O  ye  governors  of  the  t.  of  Belliulia 
Wisd.  12.  3.  to  destroy  I  hose  old  i.  of  thy  holy  land 
Bar.  1.  15.  lo  Juda  and  to  the  t.  of  Jerusalem 

1  Mac.  1.  28.  the  land  also  was  moved  for  the  t. 
38.  the  t.  of  Jerusalem  fled  because  of  them 

6.  12.  that  I  sent  lo  iestroy  the  i.  of  Judea  ^^ 

2  Mac.  9.  2.  that  being  put  to  flight  of  the  t.  V| 

INHABITED. 
2  Esd.  3.  25.  they  ihat  i.  the  city  forsook  thee 
Wisd.  11.2.  through  the  wilderness  that  was  not  i 
Feci.  10.  3.  through  prudence  the  city  shall  be  ». 

38.  32.  without  these  cannot  a  city  be  t. 
Bar.  4.  35.  she  shall  be  i.  of  devils  for  a  time 

2  Mac.  3.  1.  when  the  holy  city  was  t.  with  peace 

9.  17.  would  go  through  all  the  world  that  was  j. 

12.  13.  city  was  i.  by  people  of  divers  eountriee 

INHERIT. 
2  F.sd.  7.  17.  the  righteous  should  i.  these  things 

67.  the  world  nol  continue  with  them  that  i. 
Toh.  4.  12.  and  their  seed  shall  i.  the  land 
Eccl.  4.  13.  he  that  holdeth  her  fast,  shall  i.  glory 

16.  he  shall  i.  her,  and  his  generation  shall  hold 

6.  1.  for  thereby  thou  shall  i.  an  ill  name 

10.  11.  he  shall  t.  creeping  things,  beasts,  worm* 
1.5. 6.  she  shall  cause  him  tot.  an  everlasting  name 

39.  23.  so  shall  the  heathen  t.  his  wrath 

44.  21.  would  cause  iliem  lo  i.  from  sea  to  sea 

INHERITANCE. 
1  F.sd.  8.  85.  that  ye  may  leave  the  t.  of  the  land  t 
2Ksf/.6.59.why  do  we  not  pos.ses.s  an  i.  with  world? 

7.  9.  were  given  for  t.  how  slrall  we  receive  this  t. 

8.  45.  and  have  mercy  on  thine  own  t. 

Tab.  3.  17.  she  belongeth  to  Tobias  by  right  of » 
6. 12.  because  the  right  oft.  doth  appertain  to  thee 
Jnd.  9.  12.  I  pray  thee,  O  God  of  the  i.  of  Israel 

13.  5.  for  now  is  the  time  to  help  thine  t. 
16.  21.  every  one  returned  to  his  own  t. 

Esth.  10. 12.  so  God  remembered  and  justified  hie*. 

13.  15.  yea,  they  desire  lo  destroy  the  t. 

17.  hear  my  prayer,  and  be  merciful  to  thine  «.         * 

14.  5.  thou  tookest  Israel  for  a  perpetual  i. 
Wisd.  3.  14.  an  i.  in  the  temple  of  the  Lord 
F.ccl.  9.  6.  not  lo  harlots  that  thou  lose  nol  thine  i. 

24.  7. 1  sought  rest,  and  in  whose  t.  shall  I  abide! 
12.  I  look  root  in  the  portion  of  the  Lord's  t. 

20.  and  mine  i.  is  sweeter  than  the  honey-comb 

45.  22.  howbeit  in  the  land  of  the  people  he  had 

no  i.  for  the  Lord  himself  is  his  portion  and  i. 

25.that  the  t.  of  the  king  be  to  his  posterity  alone, 

so  the  t.  of  Aaron  should  also  be  to  his  seed 

46.  1.  that  he  might  set  I.^racl  in  their  i. 

1  Mac.  6.  24.  they  slew,  and  spoiled  our  t. 
^cr  F\T!iKns. 
INHERITED. 
7'oft.l4.13.hei.their  siibslaBce  and  his  fathctTobit's 

INIQUITY. 
I  K«(f.  8. 70.  ?reat  men  have  been  parlakersofthisi. 
72.  assembled  to  me,  whilst  I  mourned  for  the  I. 
2K.?rf.5.2.i.  shallbe  increased  above  that  thou  seest 
7.  56.  for  while  we  lived  and  comniilled  t. 

16.  .52.  t.  shall  be  taken  away  out  of  the  earth 
.lad.  5.  17.  the  God  Ihat  lialeth  t.  was  with  thetn 

21.  but  if  there  bo  no  i.  in  their  nation 

fi.  5.  hasi  B|)f)ken  these  \\  ords  in  the  day  oflhino  i. 
Wisd.  5.  23.  thus  i.  shall  lay  waste  the  earth 
F.ccl.  7.  2.  and  i.  shall  turn  "awav  from  thee 

6.  seek  not  to  be  jiirl?e,  not  able  lo  take  away  i. 
10.  7.  and  by  bolh  dolh  one  commit  t. 

17.  26.  turn  io  Most  High,  and  turn  away  from  t. 
20.  28.  that  pleaseth  great  men,  got  pardon  for  t. 
21.3.allt.is  as  a  Iwo-edgcd  sword,  wounds  wheroof 
23.  U.  that  useth  swearing,  shall  be  filled  wilK  i. 


INT 

fee/.27.10.Iion  for  prey,Bo  sin  for  them  that  work  i. 

41.  18.  oil.  bd'ore  a  congregation  and  people 

49.  2.  he  took  away  the  aboinuiutiun  ofi. 
Bar.  3.  7.  lor  we  have  called  lo  mind  all  the  »'. 
JJan.  3.  (i.  for  we  have  sinned  and  coniniitted  i. 
frayer  of  J\fanass.  lor  the  multitude  of  mine  »'. 
1  Mac.  3.  t).  all  the  workers  of  i.  were  troubled 

'M.  they  come  against  us  in  much  pride  and  i. 

y.  'il.  and  ihere  arose  all  such  as  wrought  i. 
INIUUlTiKS. 

1  Esd.  8.  90.  now  are  we  bt-fure  thee  in  our  i. 

9.  '2.  mourning  for  the  great  /.  of  the  multitude 

2  F.sd.  7.  fa.  that  they  which  have  committed  i. 
1().  t)7.  leave  off  your  sins,  and  forget  your  i. 

76.  and  let  not  your  i.  lift  up  themselves 

77.  woe  lo  them  that  are  covered  with  their  i. 
Prayer  of  Manase.  I  have  sinned,  I  acknow.  mine 

t.  forifive  me  aud  destroy  me  not  with  mine  i. 
INJURY. 
9MaeA.  17.  set  before  their  eyes  the  i.they  had  done 

INJURIES. 
Eecl.  10.  8.  because  of  j.  and  riches  got  by  deceit 

INJURIOUS. 
£ccJ.8.11.risc  not  up  in  anger  at  prcs.  of  an  j.person 

INJUSTICE. 
E£cl.  40. 1-.  all  bribery  and  i.  shall  be  blotted  out 

INNER. 
Red.  21. 14.  I.  parts  of  a  fool  like  a  broken  vessel 

1  Mac.  9.  54.  the  wall  of  i.  court  of  the  sanctuary 

2  Mac.  9.  5.  and  sore  torments  of  the  i.  parts 

INNOCENCy. 
Rstk.  16.  6.  the  i.  and  goodness  of  princes 

1  Mac.  -■  37.  but  said,  let  us  die  all  in  our  i. 
60.  Daniel  for  his  (.  was  delivered  from  lions 

INNOCENT. 

2  Esd.  15.  8.  the  i.  and  righteous  blood  crielh 

9. 1  will  receive  the  «'.  blood  from  among  them 
22.my  hand  shall  not  spare  them  that  shed /.blood 
Eslh.  16. 5.  caused  many  to  be  partakers  of  i.  blood 
.EccMl.lO.ifthou  meddle  much, thou  shall  not  be  i. 
23.  11.  if  he  swear  in  vain,  he  shall  not  be  i. 
£u«.S3.for  thou  hast  condemned  the  i.  albeit  the  L. 
saith,  the  i.  and  righteous  shalt  thou 
not  slay 
62.  thus  the  i.  blood  was  saved  the  same  day 

1  Mac.  1. 37.  thus  they  .«hed  i.  blood  on  every  side 

2  Mac.  4.  47.  thev  should  have  been  judged  i. 

1NNUMER.'\BLE. 
S  Esd.  6.  3.  before  the  *.  multiludo  of  angels 

44.  immediately  there  was  great  and  i.  fruit 
Wj>d.7.11.  all  good  thingsand  i.riches  in  her  hands 
18.l2.8o  they  altogether  had  i.dead  withone death 
F.ccl.  37.  25.  hut  the  days  of  Israel  are  i. 
2  Mac.  3.  6.  the  multitude  of  their  riches  was  j. 

mauisiTioN. 

2  Esd.  6.  10.  and  I  will  begin  (o  make  i.  of  them 
Eccl.  23.  24.  and  i.  shall  be  made  of  her  children 
41.  4.  there  is  no  i.  in  the  grave 

INSPIRED. 
VTisd.  15.  11.  him  that  i.  into  him  an  active  soul 

INSTRUCT. 
2  Esd.  5.  32.  angel  said,  hear  me,  and  I  will  i.  thee 
i';ccZ.7.2.3.hastthou  children?  i.lhem,and  bowdowii 

10.  1.  a  wise  judpc  will  ?.  his  people 

INSTRUCTED. 
Wisd.  6.  11.  desire  my  word,  and  ye  shall  be  i. 
Eccl.  26. 14.  nothing  so  mucli  worth  as  a  mind  well  i. 

INSTRUCTETIl. 
Eccl.  37.  23.  a  wise  man  i.  his  people  and  fruits 

INSTRUCTION. 
F.ccl.  1.  27.  the  feiir  of  the  I^ord  is  wisdom  and  i. 
6.  18.  my  son,  gather  i.  from  thy  youth  up 
8  8.  for  of  them  thou  shall  learn  i.  and  to  serve 
33.  4.  and  bind  up  i.  and  then  make  answer 
SI.  26.  lei  your  seul  receive  i.  she  is  at  hand 

INSTRUCTIONS. 
Eccl.  44.  4.  wise  and  eloquent  in  their  /. 

INSTRUMENT. 
2  Esd.  13.  9.  nor  held  sword,  nor  any  i.  of  war,  28. 
Tob.  7.  14.  and  did  write  an  j.  of  covenants 
Fxcl.  43.  2.  declaring  at  his  rising  a  marvellous  i. 

8.  being  an  t.  of  the  armies  above,  shining  in 
%Mac.  13.  5.  it  had  n  rnutid  t.  which  hanged  down 

INSTRUMENTS. 
1  Esd.  4.  63.  they  f<:asled  with  i.  of  music 
5.  2.  and  with  musical  i.  and  lahrets,  59., 

1  Mac.  6.  51.  engines  and  i.  lo  cast  fire  and  stones 
9.39.  with  drums  and  i.  of  mii-ic,  and  weapons 
13.  42.  the  i)Oople  began  to  write  in  their  i. 

INSURRECTION. 

2  FJfd.  16. 70.  a  great  i.  on  those  timt  fear  the  Lord 
2  Mac.  4.  30.  thev  nf  Thnr^us  and  Mallos  made  i. 

INTELMCENCE. 

2  Jlfae.3.9.  he  tolrl  him  what  i.  wn«  given  of  money 

INTEMI'ER.ANCE. 

1  Esd.!.  44.  I.  is  at  an  enil,  infnlelity  is  cut  oflT 

INTEMPERATE. 
Keel.  23.  13.  use  not  Ihv  mouth  to  «.  swoarmg 
INTEND. 

2  Mae.  14.  8. 1  i.  the  good  of  my  own  countrymen 

8oa 


JOH 

INTENDED. 

Eslh- 13. 4.  the  uniting  of  kingdoms  honourably  i. 
Sus.  62.  they  did  in  such  sort  as  they  maliciously  i. 
2  Mac.  14.  5.  Jews  stood  affected,  and  what  they  i. 

INTENT. 
TVisd.  12.  22.  to  the  t.  that  when  we  judge 
Bel  32.  to  ihe  i.  they  might  devour  Daniel 

INTERPRETATION. 
2  Esd.  12.  8.  show  me  thy  servant  the  i.  of  vision 

10.  he  said  to  mc,  this  is  the  t.  of  the  vision 

17.  this  is  the  i.  19,  22.  |  13.  22,  28. 

13.  15.  shew  mo  now  yet  the  i.  of  this  dream 
21.  the  I.  of  the  vision  shall  I  shew  thee 

53.  this  is  the  i.  of  the  dream  thou  sawest 
INTERPRETATIONS. 
2  F^d.  12.  3.5.  this  is  the  dream,  and  these  are  the  i. 
Eccl.  47.  17.  they  marvelled  at  thee  for  thy  t. 

INTERPRETED. 
FMIi.  11. 1.  the  same,  and  that  Lysimachus  had  i.  it 

INTERPRETER. 
Eccl.  17.  5.  speech,  an  i.  of  the  cogitations  thereof 

INTERRUPT. 
F.ccl.  11.  8.  nor  i.  men  in  the  midst  of  their  talk 

INTOLERABLE. 
tVisd.  17. 14.  sleeping  the  same  sleep,  which  was  i. 
2  Mac.  9.  10.  no  man  could  carry  for  his  i.  stink 

INTREAT. 
Eccl.  13. 3.  the  poor  is  wronged,  and  he  must  i.  also 
28.  5.  who  will  I.  for  pardon  of  his  sins? 
Bar.  6.  41.  they  i.  Rel  that  he  may  speak 

1  Mac.  8.  18.  toi.  them  they  would  take  the  yoke 

INTREATED. 
tVisd.  10.  3.  whom  ihey  had  i.  to  be  gone 

2  Mac.  13.  23.  i.  the  Jews  submitting  himsell 

INTREATINC. 
Tob.  1.  22.  .Acliiacharus  i.  for  me,  I  returned 
INVADE. 

1  Mac.  13.  12.  removed  to  i.  the  land  of  Judea 
20.  after  this  came  Tryphon  to  i.  the  land 

14.  31.  their  enemies  purposed  to  i.  their  country 

15.  40.  to  provoke  the  people,  and  to  i.  Judea 

INVADING. 

2  E«d.l j.T6.sedition  among  men, and  i.  one  another 

INVENTED. 
Su5.43.as  these  men  have  maliciously  i.  against  mc 

INVENTION. 
fVisd.  14. 12.  and  i.  of  thera  the  corruption  of  life 
15.  4.  nor  did  the  mischievous  i.  of  men  deceive 
INVENTIONS. 
2  Esd.  6.  5.  or  ever  Ihe  i.  of  them  that  now  sin 
8.27.  regard  not  the  wicked  ;'.  of  Ihe  heathen 
13.  37.  rebuke  the  wicked  i.  of  those  nations 

15.  48.  hnst  followed  her  that  is  hated  in  all  her  (. 

16.  63.  he  knoweih  your  i.  and  what  you  think 

INVINCIBLE. 
.htd.  16.  13.  thou  art  wonderful  in  strength  and  i. 
il'isd.  5.  19.  he  shall  take  holiness  for  an  i.  shield 
2  Mac.  1.  13.  the  army  wilh  him  that  seemed  i. 

INVIOLABLE. 
2  Mac.  3.  12.  and  Ihe  i.  sanctity  of  the  temple 

INVISIBLE. 
2  Jlfac.  9.5.  the  Lord  smote  him  with  an  i.  plague 

INVITE. 
Eccl.  13.  9.  so  much  the  more  will  bo  i.  thee 

INVITED. 
f^ccM3.9.if  thou  he  j.with  a  mighty  mai),  withdraw 

INVOCATION. 
2jVac.l5.2C.encountered  enemies  wilh  i.and  prayer 

INWARD. 
2  Mac.  3.  16.  declared  iKe  J.  agony  of  his  mind 

INVV^ARDLY. 
Eccl.  19.  2G.  but  i.  he  is  full  of  deceit 
JOACIM. 

1  K.srf.1.37.  the  king  made  J.  his  brother  king  of  Jud. 

.T8.  and  he  bound  J.  and  the  nobles,  but  Zaraces 
39.  five  and  twenty  years  old  was  J.  when  king 
43.  and  J.  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 
5.5.  and  J.  the  son  of  Zorobabel,  a  priest  went  up 
Jvd.  4.  6.  also  J.  the  high-priest  in  jlcriisalem 

8.  did  as  J.  the  high  priest  had  commamled 

14.  J. had  his  loins  girl  with  sackcloih,  and  offered 
15.  8.  then  J.  the  high-priest  came  to  behold 
■Sus.  1.  there  dwelt  a  man  in  Babyhm  ciilled  J. 
4.  J.  was  a  great  rich  man  and  had  a  fair  garden 
28.when  people  were  nssemkled  tolur  hushind  J. 
29.  Susanna,  daughter  of  Chelcliins,  J.  wife 
6.3.  Susanna,  wilh  J.  her  husband,  praised  God 
JOEL 

2  Esd.  1.  WJ.  I  will  give  fnr  leaders,  Amos,  J. 

JOHN. 
1  Mnc.  2.  1.  then  aroiio  Mattathias,  llin  son  of  J. 
a.  17.  Ju  Ins  chose  Eiipolomus  llie  son  of  J. 
0.  35.  now  Jiinathan  had  sent  his  brother  J. 
3K.  the  children  of  Jambri  came  and  look  J. 
38.thny  remembered  J.  thoirbtother  ami  went  up 
l."*.  53.  when  Simon  saw  thai  J.  was  a  vahant  man 
16  l.thoncamoupJ.  from Gazara  and  told  Simon 
2.  called  his  two  eldest  sons  Jiidns  and  J. 

9.  but  J.  still  followed  after  them  to  Odron 
19.  be  scot  othori  also  to  Gazara  to  kill  J. 


JOS 


LAfocbtfha 


1  Mac- 10.  21.  one  had  run  afore  to  Gazara,  told  J 
23.  as  concerning  Ihe  rest  of  llie  acts  of  J. 

2  jttac.  4.  IJ.  by  J.  the  father  of  Eupolemus 

11.  17.  J.  and  Absalom  who  were  sent  from  vol 
JOIN. 

1  Esd.  8.  84.  ye  shall  not  j.  your  daughters  to  soW' 

2  Esd.  15.  30.  with  great  power  ccxne  and  J.  batlla 
1  Mac.  10.4.  Ircfore  Tiej.  with  Ale.vamler  agKinst  ua 

11.  I.  to  get  his  kingdom,  and_;.  it  lo  his  own 
13. 14.  that  Simon  meant  Utj.  battle  with  him 
JOINED. 
1  E»rf.  1.  29.  butj.  battle  with  him  in  the  plaia 
Tob.  6.  17.  his  heart  was  effectually  j.  lo  lier 
./ud.  14.  10.  Achior  wusj.  lo  Ihe  house  of  Israel 
Eccl.  51.  20.  I  have  had  my  heart  j.  wilh  her 

1  Mac.  1.  15.  Iheyj'.  ihems<dves  lo  Ihe  heathen 

4.  14.  so  Iheyj.  battle,  and  the  heathen  fled,  :14. 

17.  43.  1  9.  47.  I  10.  49,  53,  78.  \  11.  69. 

2  Mac.  8.  23. 
6.  21.  lo  whom  some  ungodly  mcnj.  Ihemselvet 

8.  1.  accept  all  thalj.  themselves  to  them 

15.  14.  when  he  had^'.  ships  close  to  the  town 

2  JT/ac.8. 22  and  j.  with  him.^elf  his  own  brethrea 

JOINING. 
Sus.  4.  Joacim  had  a  fair  garden  j.  lo  his  house 
1  Mac.  10.  26.  not  j.  yourselves  with  our  enemiet 

JOININGS. 
Eccl.  27.  2.  as  a  nail  sticketh  fast  between  thej. 

JOLLITY. 

1  Esd.  3.  20.  it  lurnelh  every  thought  inloj. 
Eccl.  13.  8.  thou  be  not  brought  down  in  thy  J. 

JONAS. 

2  Esd.  1.  39.  I  will  give  for  leaders,  AWias  and  J. 
Tob.  14.4.  lh<»e  things  ivhich  J.  spake  ofNinevo 

8.  those  things  which  the  prophet  J.  spake 
JONATHAN. 
1  Mac.  2.  5.  called  J.  whose  surname  was  ApphtM 

4.  30,  into  the  hands  of  J.  the  son  of  Saul 

5.  17.  I  and  J.  my  brother  will  go  into  Galaad 

9.  19.  J.  and  Simon  took  Judas  their  brother 
31.  upon  this  J.  took  the  governance  upon  him 

33,  then  J.  and  Simon  fled  into  Ihe  viilderness 
35.  J.  had  sent  his  brother  John  to  pray  hi.<  friendi 
37.  after  this  came  word  to  J.  and  Simon 

44.  then  said  J.  to  his  company,  let  os  go  up 
48.  then  J.  and  they  that  were  with  him  leapcii 
58.  behold,  J.  and  his  company  are  at  case 

10.  3.  moreover  Demetrius  sent  letters  to  J. 

21.  J.  put  on  tlie  holy  robe  and  gathered  force* 

11.  6.  J.  met  the  king  wilh  great  pomp  at  Joppn 
20.  J.  gathered  together  them  that  were  in  Juilah 

41.  in  the  mean  time  J.  sent  lo  king  Demetrius 
44.  on  this  J.  soul  him  three  Ihonsand  strung  njen 
C7.  as  for  J.  and  his  host  thev  pitched  at  Genesar 
69.  men  in  ambush,  all  that  were  of  J.  side  fled 

12.  1.  now  when  J.  saw  that  the  time  served  him 
3.  J.  the  high-priest  and  the  people  sent  us 

H'2.  there  Ihey  bewailed  J,  and  ihem  with  hir.T 

13.  II.  also  he  sent  J.  the  son  of  .Absalom 

19.  Tryphon  dissembled,  nor  would  he  let  J.  go 
23.  at  fenscamn  he  slew  j.  who  was  buried  thera 
2.5.  Simon  took  the  bones  of  J.  his  brother 

14.  16.  when  it  was  heard  that  J.  was  dead 
18.  they  made  with  Judas  and  J.  his  brethren 
:10.  after  that  J.  having  gathered  his  nation 

^Mdc.  1.  23.  J.  beginning,  and  Ihe  rest  nnswcrinj 

8.  22.  he  joined  Simon,  and  Joseph,  and  J. 

JOPPA,  JOPPE. 
1  K.s-rf.5.55.  bring  cedar-trees  liy  floats  to  haven  of  J 

1  Mac.  10.  75.  nhil  he  pilrhed  his  tenia  against  J 

but  they  of  J.  shut  him  out  of  tho  city 
76.  Ihoy  let  him  in,  and  bo  Jonathan  won  J. 
11.6.  Jonathan  met  Ihe  king  wilh  great  (Ximp  at  J. 

12.  33.  whence  ho  turned  aside  lo  J.  ami  won  it 

13.  11.  he  sent  Jonathan  wilh  a  great  power  to». 

14.  5.  BO  in  Ibis  that  he  look  J.  for  a  hnven 

34.  moreover,  he  fortified  J.  and  Gazara 

15.  2^.  you  withhold  J.  and  Gazara,  and  Ihe  tower 
3.5.  whereas  thou  deinandest  J.  and  Ga/.nra 

2  .Ifiic  1.21.hecnmeloJ.  from  thence  lo  Jerusalem 
12.  3.  men  of  J.  also  ilid  such  an  ungodly  deed 

7.  root  out  all  Iheoi  of  Ihe  city  of  J. 
JORAM. 
I  F.sd.  1.  9.  .Assabias,  and  Ochiel,  and  J.  captains 

JORDAN. 

.fad.  5.  15.  and  passing  over  J.  they  possessed  all 

Eccl.  24.  26.  abininil  as  J.  in  the  litno  of  harvest 

1  Mnc.  5.  24.  Judas  and  Jonathan  went  over  J, 

.52.  aTier  this  went  ihey  over  J.  into  ihe  plain 

9.  34.  he  caino  near  to  'J,  with  all  his  host 

42.  Ihey  turned  nsidu  lo  the  mnrish  of  J. 

43.  ho  came  lu  the  banks  of  J.  wilh  a  greal  power 
4.5.  the  waler  of  J.  on  this  side  and  that  side 
48.  they  le:ipl  into  J.  andsw  am  over  lo  Ihc  furlhor 

bank,  the  other  passed  not  over  J.  unto  Ihem 
JOSABAD. 
I  Esd.  8. 63.  wilh  them  were  J.  and  Moeth,  Loviic* 

JOSEDEC:. 

1  Etd.  5, 5.  Jesus  the  son  of  J.  son  of  Saraiaa,  48 

Ste  Jksum. 


ArOCRYFBA.] 


IRO 


JOSEPH. 
£ccl.  49.  15.  nor  was  tiiere  a  man  born  like  to  J. 
X  Mac.  2.  53.  J.  in  time  urdistress  kept  com mandin 
-  5.  18.  80  he  left  J.  son  of  Zucliarias,  atid  Azariua 
56.  J.  son  of  Zacliarias,  and  Azariati,  captains 
60.  it  was,  that  J.  and  Azarias  were  put  to  flight 
3  Mac.  H.  3'i.  to  wit,  Siniun,  and  J.  and  Jonathan 
10.10. Maccabeus  left  Sinmn,  and  J. and  Zaccbeus 
JOSHUA. 
2  Mac  13.  15.  did  cast  down  Jericho  in  time  ofJ. 

JOSIAS. 
1  End.  1.  1.  J.  held  the  least  of  the  passover 
7.  J.  gave  thirty  thousand  lambs,  and  kids 
25.  Pharaoh  came,  and  J.  went  out  against  him 
Sd.  howbeit,  J.  did  not  turn  back  bis  chariot 

32.  Jeremy  the  prophet  liniented  for  J. 

33.  and  every  one  of  the  acts  that  J.  did 

34.  tiiu  people  made  Joachax  the  son  of  J.  king 
Eccl.  49. 1.  the  remembrance  of  J.  is  like  pi-rfuine 

4.all  except  David, Ezekias  and  J. were  defective 
JOURNEY. 
1  Esd.  8.  50.  to  desire  of  him  a  prosperous/. 
7'ofr.  4.  15.  nor  let  drunkenness  go  wilh  thee  in_7. 

5.  16.  (Jod  send  you  a  goodj.  God  prosper  yourj. 
31.  his  J.  shall  be  prosperous,  he  sliall  return 

6.  1.  as  tbey  went  on  their;',  they  came  to  Tigris 

10.  1.  and  when  tlie  days  of  the_/.  were  exjiiied 
11.  the  God  of  heaven  give  you  a  pros|)efous_;. 

11.  1.  that  he  had  given  him  a  prosperous  J. 
'Visd.  13.  18.  and  for  a  good,;',  he  asketh  of  that 

18-  3.  to  be  a  guide  of  the  unknown  7.  and  a  sun 
1  Mac.  7.  45.  they  pursued  after  them  a  day's _;. 

11.  2.  whereupon  he  took  bis,;,  into  Syria 

3  Mac.  9.  4.  bis  chariot-man  to  dispatch  the 7. 
7.  filled  with  pride,  commanding  to  hasle  ihe^'. 

12.  10.  were  gone  in  their^'.  toward  Tnnotheus 

JOURNEYED. 

1  Mac.  10.  77.  he  went  to  .\zotus  as  one  that 7. 

JOY. 

2  Esd.  2.  19.  I  will  fill  thy  children  with 7. 

7.  01.  as  shall  be  7.  over  ihern  that  are  persuaded 
Tob.  7.  18.  Lord  give  Iheej.  for  tliis  thy  sorrow 

8.  17.  finish  their  life  in  health  wilh  ;'.  and  mercy 

11.  17.  iHere  wusj.  amongst  all  his  brethren 

13.  10.  his  tabernacle  built  in  thee  again  with 7. 
11.  all  generations  shall  praise  thee  with  great  j. 

Tud.  12.  H.itehallbemy  7.  to  the  day  of  my  death 
16. 11.  then  my  afflicted  shouted  I'or^'. 
Esth.  10.  13.  with  an  assembly,  and  7.  and  gladness 

13.  17.  turn  our  sorrow  mlitj.  that  we  may  live 
14.2.  all  places  of  herj.  she  filled  with  her  torn  hair 

18.  nor  bad  thine  handrniiid  anyj.  since  the  day 
16.  21.G(id  hath  turned  the  day  to  7.  unto  them 
Wisd.  8.  16.  haih  no  sorrow,  but  mirth  andj. 
Eccl.  1.  12.  givethj.  and  gladness,  and  a  long  life 

23.  and  afterwards^,  shall  spring  u|i  to  him 
2.9.  that  fear  Ld.  hope  for  everlasting^',  and  mercy 
3.  5.  he  shall  have.;,  of  his  own  children 
4. 12.  that  seek  to  her  early  shall  be  filled  wilh^'. 
6.  28.  and  that  shall  be  turned  to  thy  7. 

31.  shall  put  her  about  thee  as  a  crown  of 7. 
15.  6.  he  shall  find  7.  and  a  crown  of  gladness 
25.  7.  a  man  that  hath  7.  of  his  children 
30.  1.  that  he  may  have7.  of  him  in  the  end 

2.  that  chastisetb  his  son,  shall  have 7.  in  him 

16.  there  is  no  7.  above  the7.  of  the  heart 
Bar.  2.23.  the  voice  of  mirth  and  the  voice  of  7. 
4.ll.wilh7.did  I  nourish  thfm,bul  sent  them  away 

22.  and  7.  is  come  to  me  from  the  holy  One 

23.  but  God  will  give  you  to  me  again  with7'. 
29.  he  shall  bring  you  everlasting7'.  again 

36.  behold  thej.  that  comcth  to  thee  from  God 
5.  9.  God  shall  leail  Israel  with 7.  in  light  ofglory 
I  Mac.  3.  45. 7  was  taken  from  Jacob,  pipe  ceased 
5.  23.  he  brought  them  to  Judea  with  great7". 
54.  so  they  went  up  to  mount  Sion  with7'. 

14.  11.  and  Israel  rejoiced  with  great 7. 

1  Mac.  3.  30.  for  the  temple  was  filled  wilh7. 

9.  19.  wisheth  much7.  health,  and  prosperity 

15.  28.  returning  again  withi.  they  knew 

JOYFUL. 
B  Ksd.  2.  30.  bej.  O  thou  mother  of  children 

12.  34.  he  shall  make  them 7.  till  the  coming 
Tob.  8.  16.  to  be  praised,  for  thou  hast  made  me7'. 

13.  10.  let  him  tnake7'.  those  that  are  captives 
Jud.  14.  9.  the  people  made  a  j.  noise  in  their  city 

JOYFULNESS. 

2  Ksd.  2.  3R.  receive  thej.  of  your  glory 
IVisd.'i  O.lct  us  leave  tokens  ofonr7'.  in  every  place 
Eccl.'iQ.  22.  the 7.  of  a  man  prolongcth  his  days 

IRKSOME. 

EccI.27.I3.  the  discourse  of  fools  is  i.  and  their  part 
IRON. 

Eccl.  12. 10.  like  as  t.  rustelh,  so  is  his  wickedness 
29.  1.5.  sand  and  a  mass  of  i.  is  easier  to  bear 
28.20.  for  the  yoke  thereof  is  a  yoke  of  i.  and  made 
38.28.  the  smith  considering  the  t.  work 
39.  26.  fire,  t.  and  salt  for  the  use  of  man's  life 
48.  17.  he  digged  the  hard  rock  with  i. 

Prayer  of  Manass.l  am  bowed  down  with  t.  bands 

eoo 


JUD 

2^fac.  11.9.  were  ready  to  pierce  thro'  walls  of  i. 

ISAAC. 
3  Esd.  3. 16.  and  unto  him  thou  gavest  I.  and  unto 
I.  also  thou  guvest  Jacob  and  Esau 
,fud.  8.  26.  and  how  he  tried  I.  and  what  happened 
Keel.  44.  22.  wilh  I.  did  he  establish  rlie  blcksing 
Van.  3.12.mercy  not  depart,  for  thy  servant  I.  sake 

ISLANDS. 
Eccl.  43.  23.  by  counsel  he  planteth  j.  therein 
47. 16.  thy  name  went  far  unto  the  1.  for  thy  peace 

ISLES. 
1  JV/oc.  6.  29.  came  to  him  from  i.  of  the  sea,  bands 

11.  39.  whom  ho  gathered  from  i.  of  the  heallien 

14.  5.  he  made  an  entrance  to  the  1.  of  the  seti 

15.  1.  Antiochus  sent  letters  from  /.  of  the  sea 

ISMAEL. 
,fud.  2.  23.  they  spoiled  all  the  children  of  I. 
ISRAEL. 

1  Egd.  1.3.  the  Leviies,  the  holy  ministers  of  I. 
4.  serve  the  Lord,  and  minister  unto  his  people  I 

2. 3.  Lord  of  I.  the  most  high  Lord  made  me  king 
5.  61.  because  his  glory  is  for  efer  in  all  I. 

7.  8.  they  ort'ered  twelve  goats  for  the  sin  of  all  I. 

8.  7.  but  taught  I.  the  ordinances  and  judgment! 
27.  I  gathered  together  men  of  I.  to  go  with  nu 

9. 7.  in  marrying,  thereby  to  increase  the  sins  of  I 

2  Esd.2.  16.  for  1  have  kno.vn  my  name  in  I. 
3.  36.  that  I.  by  name  hath  kept  thy  precepts 
4i  23.  wherefore  I.  is  given  up  a  reproacli 
5.  35.  that  I  might  not  have  seen  the  toil  of  I. 

9.  30.  hear  me,  O  I.  and  mark  my  words,  11.  28 

12.  46.  be  of  good  comfort,  O  I.  be  not  heavy 
,/ud.  8.  33.  the  Lord  will  visit  I.  by  mine  band 

10.  1.  after  she  censed  to  cry  to  the  God  of  I. 
16. 1.  Judas  began  to  sing  this  thanksgiving  in  all  I. 

Esth.  10. 9.  rny  nation  is  this  I.  which  cried  to  God 

13.  9.  if  thou  iiast  appointed  to  save  I. 
14.5.thi)uO  Lord,tookest  I. from  among  all  people 

Eccl.  17    17.  but  I.  is  the  Lord's  portion 
24.  8.  and  let  thine  inheritance  be  in  I. 

36.  12.  on  I.  whom  thou  hast  named  thy  first-born 

37.  ?5.  but  the  days  of  I.  are  innumerable 

45.  5.  that  he  might  teach  I.  his  judgments 
11.  after  the  number  of  the  tribes  of  I. 
17.  that  should  inform  I.  in  his  laws 

46.  1.  that  be  might  set  I.  in  their  inheritance 

47.  11.  be  gave  him  a  throne  ofglory  in  I. 
50.  13.  before  all  the  congregation  ofl. 

Bar  .2.1. pronounced  agst.  our  judges  that  judged  I. 

3.  1.  O  God  of  I.  the  soul  in  anguish  crieth 
36.  and  he  hath  given  it  to  I.  bis  beloved 

4.4.  O  I.  happy  ate  we,  for  things  are  made  known 
5.  be  of  cheer,  my  people,  the  memorial  ofl. 

5.  7.  that  I.  may  go  safely  in  the  glory  of  God 
Dan.  3. 12.  mercy  not  depart  for  thy  holy  I.  sake 
Sus.  48.  are  ye  such  fools,  yesons  ofl.  ye  that  with 
out  knowledge  have  condemned  a  daughter  of  1.1 
1  Mac.  3.2.they  fought  with  cheerfulness  battle  ofl 

4.  11.  there  is  One  who  deliverelb  and  saveth  I. 
5. 3.  ag.  Esau  in  luumea,  because  they  besieged  I 

7. 5.  all  the  wicked  and  ungodly  men  of  I. 
22.  Judah  into  their  power,  did  much  hurt  in  I. 
26.  sent  Nicanor  that  bare  deadly  hate  unto  I. 

8.  18.  the  Grecians  did  oppress  I.  with  servitude 

9.  21.  the  valiant  man  fallen  that  delivered  I. 
51.  that  they  might  work  malice  upon  I. 

10.46.  remembered  the  great  evil  he  had  done  in  I. 

11.  23.  he  chose  certain  of  the  elders  ofl. 

12.  52.  wherefore  all  I.  made  great  lamentation 

13.  4.  all  my  brethren  are  slain  for  I.  sake 
41.  thus  the  yoke  was  taken  away  from  I. 

14.11.  he  made  peaceand  I. rejoiced  wilh  greatjoy 

16.  2.  that  we  have  delivered  I.  oftentimes 
2Mac.  1.  25.  thou  thai  dclivcresll.  from  trouble 

26.  receive  the  sacrifice  for  thy  whole  people  I. 
9.  5.  but  the  God  of  I.  smote  them  with  a  phgue 
10.38.  Lord  who  had  done  such  great  things  fijr  I. 
11.  6.  he  would  send  a  good  nngel  to  deliver  I. 
ISRAELITES. 
.Tud.  6.  14.  the  I.  descended  from  their  city 
Bar.  3.  4.  hear  now  the  prayers  of  the  dead  I. 
1  Mac.  1.  43.  many  I.  consented  to  his  religion 
.53.  and  drove  the  I.  into  secret  places 
58.  thus  did  they  to  the  I.  every  mrmth 
3.  46.  the  I.  assembled  themselves  together 
6.18.  they  shut  up  the  I. round  about  the  sanctuary 
7. 23.  the  mischief  Alcimua  had  done  among  the  I. 
ISSUED. 

1  Mac.  14.  36.  made  a  tower  out  of  which  they  i. 

ITERATING. 
Eccl.  41.  23.  or  of  i.  and  speaking  agrfinsl  that 
JUDA. 

2  K.'d.  1.24.  thou  J.  woublst  not  obey  me 
.fud.  14.7.  blessed  art  thou  in  the  tabernacle  of  J. 
F.ccl.  49.  4.  even  the  kings  of  J.  fail"d 
Su.<i.  50.  O  thou  seed  of  Chanaan,  and  not  of  J. 

57.  but  the  daughter  of  J.  would  not  abide 
1  Mac.  2.  fi.  blasphemies  that  were  committed  in  J. 
7.  22.  had  gotten  the  land  of  J.  into  their  power 
50.  the  land  of  J.  was  in  rest  a  little  while 
5M 


JUZ) 

JUDAISM. 
2  Mac.  2.  21   that  behaved  to  their  honour  for  J 

JUDAS. 
1  Mac.  3. 12.  J.  took  Ihcir  spoils,  Apollonius'swcrd 
25.  the  fear  of  J.  began  to  fall  on  nations  round 
42.  when  J.  saw  that  miseril-s  were  multiplied 

4.  5.  Gorgins  came  by  night  into  the  camp  of  J. 
16.  J.  returned  willi  his  host  from  pursuing 
21.  the  host  of  J.  in  the  plain  ready  to  fight 
23.  then  J.  returnea  to  sj  )il  the  tents 

41.  J.  appointed  men  to  i.^'lit  against  those 

5.  28.  J.  turned  by  the  way  of  the  wildcrnes* 
38.  J.  sent  men  to  espy  'j  39.  J.  went  to  mee' 
44.  nor  could  they  stand  any  longer  before  J 
48.  J.  sent  unto  them  in  peaceable  manner 
61.  because  they  were  not  obedient  unto  J. 
65.  afterward  went  J.  forth  with  his  brethren 

6.  1!).  J.  purjiosing  to  destroy  them,  called  people 

42.  then  J.  and  his  host  entered  into  battle 

7.  6.  J.  and  his  brethren  have  slain  thy  fi  lends 
10.  thny  sent  messeng'rslo  J.  and  bis  lirulhreD 
23.  J.  went  out  into  all  the  coasts  of  Judea 
40.  but  J.  pitched  in  Adasa  with  3000  men 

8.  I.  J.  bad  heard  of  the  fame  of  the  Romans 

9.  7.  J.  therefi)re  saw  that  his  host  slipped  away 
13.  tbey  of  J.  side  sounded  their  trumpets  also 
18.  J.  also  was  killed,  and  the  remnant  fled 
28.  for  this  cause  J.  friends  came  together 
31.  Jonathan  rose  up  instead  of  his  brother  J 

11.  70.  J.  the  son  of  Calphi,  a  captain  was  left 

2  Mac.  12.  .5.  when  J.  heard  of  his  cruelly  done 

28.  when  J.  had  called  upon  Almighty  God 

39.  J.  came  to  lake  up  the  bodies  of  the  slain 
42.  J.  exhorted  the  people  to  keep  from  ein 

13.  1.  it  was  told  J.  that  Antiochus  was  coming 
12.  J.  commanded  they  should  be  in  readiness 
20.  J.  conveyed  sur  h  things  as  were  necessary 
22.  the  king  fought  wilh  J.  and  was  overcome 

14.  1.  J.  was  informed  ||  10.  as  long  as  J.  liveth 
22.  J.  placed  armed  men  in  convenient  places 

15.26.  but  J.  encnuuiercd  the  enemies  wilh  prayer 
Sec  Maccabeijs. 
JUDEA. 
I  E.^d.  1.  26.  what  to  do  wilh  thee.  O  kin-  of  J. 
4.  45.  when  J.  was  made  desolate  by  the  Chaldees 
Tob.  1.  18.  when  he  fled  from  J.  I  buried  them 
./ud.  3.  9.  over-againsl  Esdraelon,  near  unto  J. 
4.  7.  by  them  there  was  an  entrance  into  J. 

8.  21.  if  we  he  taken  so,  all  J.  shall  lie  waste 
II.  19.  I  will  lead  thee  through  ibe  midst  of  J. 

1  Mac.  6.  5.  that  went  against  the  hind  of  J.  48. 

9.  1.  sent  them  into  thebind  of  J.  Ihesecond  lime 

10.  30.  they  shall  not  be  taken  of  the  land  of  J. 

11.  28.  that  he  would  make  J.  free  from  tribute 
12.35.  ahoul  building  strong  holds  in  J.  1.3.  3.3. 

13.  I.  a  great  host  to  invade  the  land  of  J.  12. 

14.  33.  Simon  forlified  the  cities  of  J. 

15.  30.  of  the  places  without  the  borders  of  J. 

40,  catiie  to  invade  J.  ||  41.  on  the  ways  of  J. 
10   10.  hi'  returned  into  the  land  of  J.  in  peace 

2  Mae.  5.  11.  he  thonghl  that  J.  had  revolted 
11.  5.  he  came  to  J.  and  drew  near  to  Rethsurv 

13.  1.  was  coming  with  a  great  power  into  J. 
JUDGE. 

2  Esd.  4.  18.  if  thou  wert7'.  betwixt  these  two     . 

7.  19.  he  said  to  me,  there  is  007'.  above  God 

8.  IS.  the  swiftne.ss  of  lhe7.  that  is  to  come 

14.  32.  forasmuch  as  he  is  a  righteous 7. 
10.  67.  behold,  God  himself  is  the 7'.  fear  him 

.hid.  7.  24.  God  be7'.  between  us  and  you 
IVisd.  9.7.  to  be 7'.  of  thy  sons  and  daughlerg 

1.5.  7.  of  cither  sent, the  potter  himself  is  the  7'. 
Eccl.  7.  6.  seek  not  to  be  ;'.  being  not  able  to  take 

8   14.  go  nol  fo  law  with  a  ;'.  for  they  will  judge 

10.  1.  a  wise;',  will  instruct  his  people 
2.  as  the7'.  ofthe  people  is  himself,  so  are  officers 

35.  12.  fur  the  Lord  is7.  with  him  is  no  respect 
41.  18.  of  an  offence  before  nj.  and  ruler 
Hnr.  6.  14.  as  ihoiigb  he  were  87.  ofthe  country 

1  Miie.  2.  .55.  Jesus  was  made  a 7-  in  Israel 

2  Mac.  12.  6.  callmjon  God  tlierighteou87'.  41. 
JUDGE,  rerb. 

1  F.id.  3.  9.  the  three  princes  of  Persia  shall7'. 
8.23.  they  mny  j.  in  all  Syria  and  Pboiiicc 

2  Ksd.  2.  20.  do  right  to  the  widow,  7.  for  the  fa- 
tberlpss,  give  to  the  poor 

IVisd.  3.  8.  they  shall ;".  Ihe  nations  have  dominion 
0.  12.  then  shall  17'.  ihy  people  righteously 
12.  21.  withcirciimspectiondid^l  thou  ;■.  thy  sons 
22.  thai  when  wo  ;'.  we  should  carefully  think 
Kcrl.  4. 15.  who  gives  car  to  her  shall ;".  the  nations 
8.  14.  they  will  ;'.  for  him  according  to  big  honour 

11.  28.  ;'.  none  blessed  before  his  death 
31.  15.  ;.  ofthy  neiihlioiir  bv  thyself,  bediscreot 
35. 17.  ihe  Most  High  shall  behold  to;,  righteously 
45.  26.  wisdom  to;',  his  pooiilc  in  riglitcousncBS 

Bar.  6.  54.  neither  can  tbey7'.  their  own  cause 
64. are  able  neither  to 7',caii8Ps,nordoeood  tomeo 

1  Mac.  7.  42. ;'.  him  according  to  his  wickedness 

2  Mac.  6.  12.  but  that  lhey7.  those  punishments 


JUD 

JUDGED. 
2  Esd.  8.  40.  hast  iioij.  iliyscll'  wuriliy  to  be  much 
11.  41.  the  earth  hast  thim  not/  witli  truili 
12. 9.  thuu  hast^'.  me  worthy  to  shew  me  lust  limes 
IVisd.  G.  4.  you  liave  not  j.  urighr  nor  kept  hiw 
lU.  that  keep  hohDcsii  holily  shall  bej.  holy 

11.  9.  know  iiow  tlie  ungodly  werej.  in  wiath 

12.  22.  when  we  ourstlves  aroj.  look  tor  mercy 
Keel.  2.").  7.  nine  things  which  I  huvu_;.  to  be  happy 

2(j.  26.  that  honoureth,  tihall  hej.  wise  of  all 
35.  19.  till  he  have,;.  Ihe  tall^e  of  his  jicople 

Bar.  2. 1.  pronounced  against  our  judges  that  J.  Isr. 

2  Afac.  4.  47.  should  have  hnv.nj.  innocent 

9.  15.  J.  not  worthy  so  much  as  to  he  buried 
11.36.  «uch  things  afi  he^'   to  be  referred  to  kings 

JUDGES. 

1  F.sd.  2. 17.  thej.  that  are  in  Ctlosyria  and  Phenice 

8.  23.  and  thou  Esdras  ordain^,  and  justices 

9.  13.  with  them  rulers  und_;.  of  every  place 
iVisd.  1. 1.  love  righteousness,  ye  that  bej.  of  earth 
C.  1.  learn,  ye  that  \n:j.  of  the  ends  of  the  earth 

Eccl.  10.  ii.  great  men  andj.  shall  be  honoured 
38.  33.  they  shall  not  sit  on  the  j.  seat  or  unders 
Bai:".  1.  proimunced  against  ourj.  tliatjudgid  Isr. 
iits.S.two  of  the  ancients  of  the  people  to  bej.l'roni 
ancient/  who  seemed  to  govern  the  people 

41.  as  those  that  were  elders  and  j.  of  the  people 

JUDGEST. 

2  EsJ.  4.  20.  but  whyj.  thou  not  thyself  also? 
Toll.  3.  2.  and  thouj.  truly  and  justly  for  ever 
H'isd.  12.  la',  thuu  ujasteiing  thy  power j'.  with 

JUDGKTII. 
Eccl.  16.  12.  he  J.  nman  according  to  Iiis  works 

JUDGING. 
Kith.  10.  9.  and  aluMvs  j.  ihini'.-i  that  are  evident 

JUDGMENT. 
1  Ksd.  3.  15.  sat  him  down  on  the  royal  seat  ofj. 

4.  40.  nor  in  hurj.  is  any  unrighteousness 
S  Ksd.  4.  20.  he  said,  thou  hast  given  a  right/ 

5.  34.  while  I  labour  to  seek  out  part  of  h'lsj. 
40.  even  so  canst  thou  not  find  out  iny^;. 

42.  he  said  to  me,  I  will  liken  niyj.  to  a  ring 

43.  that  thou  iiiiglitcst  shew  thy  j.  the  sooner 

7.  33.  the  Most  tligh  shall  appear  on  Ihe  seat  of/ 
34.j.only  shall  remain,  trulli  shall  stand  and  faith 

6-  12.  and  thou  reforinedst  it  with  thyj. 
.33.  not  think  on  them  that  sinned  before  J. 
Gl.  and  therefore  is  my  j.  now  at  hand 
11.46.  may  hope  for  the/  of  him  that  made  her 
12.  33.  he  shall  set  them  before  him  alive  in/ 
34.  make  joyful  until  the  coming  of  the  day  of/ 
14.  35.  after  death  shall /come,  wheji  live  again 
/u(/.l6. 17.lhc  Lord  will  lake  vengeance;  in  day  nfj. 
E*tA.10.1  l.two  lots  cameat  the  day  ofj. before  God 
/fV.viA  5.  18.  put  on  true/  instead  of  a  helmet 

6.  5.  a  sharp/  "hall  he  to  ihem  in  high  places 

8.  11.  1  shall  he  fouml  of  quick  conceit  in  j. 

9.  3.  and  exccutcj    with  an  upright  heart 
5.  too  young  for  the  iinilerslanding  of/  and  laws 

12.  12.  or  who  shall  withstand  thy  j. .' 

13.  thou  mighlest  shew  thattliyj.  is  notunright. 

25.  to  them  ihou  didst  send  a/  to  mock  them 

26.  they  shall  feet  aj.  worthy  of  God 
16.  18.  they  were  persecuted  with  ibcj.  of  God 

i^cc/.3.24.an -vil  suspicion  hath  overthrown  ihiirj. 
4.  9.  be  not  fuint-heartcd  when  thuu  sittest  in/ 
11.9.  and  sit  noting,  with  sinners 
16.  2(i.  the  works  of  the  Lord  are  done  in/ 
18.  20.  befoic  j.  e.\ainino  thyself,  and  fiinl  mercy 
19.25.  there  is  one  that  turi.s  aside  tom.ikcj.ap 
pear,  there  is  a  v/Ue  man  that  ju-^l  fielh  in  j. 
30.  4.  so  is  ho  that  execuictli/  with  violence 
21.  5.  and  his,/.  Cometh  speedily 
25.  4.  O  how  comely  n  thing  in  j.  for  gray  hairs! 
32.  3.  8peak,thou  elder,  but  with  sound/ 

16.  they  that  feur  the  Lord  shall  fm<l/ 
35. 17.  not  depart,  till  the  Most  High  execute/ 
3".  22.  remember  my  j.  for  thine  also  shall  he  so 
'J3.  shall  not  sit  in  judge's  seat,  nor  understand 
senliiiC'- ofJ.  they  cannoulei-l.irijustice  andj. 
42.2.  anil  of/  to  jiistify  the  imgodly 
43. 13.  and  s-ndn  swiftly  the  lish'nuigs  of  his/ 
45.  U).  with  a  bre.ist-pintc  o{j.  and  with  Urim 
48.  7.  who  heardosl  in  Honb  the  j.  of  vengeance 

10.  to  pacify  the  wrath  of  the  Lord's  j. 
Dan.3.5.  Ihnu  hnst  cxoi  uied  trncj.  accord,  to  truth 

an!\j.  didst  lliou  bring  these  things  on  us 
8.  every  thing  Ihou  hast  done,  ha^^t  dune  in  true/ 
Sun.  49.  return  again  to  the  plare  of/ 
53.  for  thou  hnst  pronounnil  false  /. 
I  Mac.  2.  24.  to  slicw  his  anjer  according  to/ 
29.  many  that  sought  iifierjumii-e  and/ 
6.  22.  how  long  will  it  bo  ere  thou  pxvr.uto.j.  ? 
iMarT.  35.  Ihou  lm"t  notesrupedj.  of  almighty  G. 
3t).  hut  thou  thro'  tn.'  /  of  God  shall  recoiv<!  just 
!>.  4.  to  Hispalcl   the  ;.  of  God  now  following  him 

18.  for  Ihe  jiislj.  of  God  wnscome  upon  him 
.3.26. 1.y><iu«  wrnt  unto  the  7.i'eni,<>Bi(lai  much 
JUDGMENTS, 
t  Ead.  7.  30.  into  jilcnc,  f  ke  a>  in  Ihe  fonnorj. 


c,  r  He  1 
BIO 


JUS 

Tob.  3.  5.  and  now  thy/  are  many  and  true 
./ud.  9.  6.  and  thy/  are  m  thy  foreknowledge 
It  isd.  12. 10.  but  executing  thy/  on  iheiu  by  little 

17.  1.  gr.eat  are  thy  j.  and  cannot  he  expressed 
Eccl.  17.  12.  and  he  shewed  them  hisj. 

Ifi.  14.  and  that  diligently  seek  after  his  j. 

45.  5.  teach  Jacob  his  covenants,  Israel  his  j. 

17.  he  gave  him  authority  in  the  statutes  ot/ 
Dan.  3.  4.  thy  ways  are  right,  and  all  thy  j.  truth 
Sus.  9.  not  look  to  heaven,  nor  remember  just  j. 

JUDITH. 

Jud.  8.  1.  at  that  time  J.  heard  thereof,  9. 

4.  so  J.  was  a  widow  in  her  house  three  years 

32.  then  said  J.  unto  them,  hear  me,  and  1  will  do 

9.1.  then  J.  fell  upon  her  face  and  jiut  ashes  on  her 

head,  J.  cried  with  a  loud  voice  and  said 

10.  10.  J.  went  out,  she  and  her  maid  with  her 
23.  when  J.  was  come  before  him  and  servants 

11.  5.  J.  said,  receive  the  words  of  thy  lervant 

12.  2.  J.  said,  I  will  not  eat  thereof,  lest  offence 
4.  then  said  J.  to  hiin,  as  thy  soul  livelh 
1-1.  then  said  J.  to  him,  who  am  I  now,  that  I 

16.  now  when  J.  came  in  and  sat  down  ,tjloferiies 

18.  BO  J.  said,  I  will  drink  now,  my  lord 

13.  3.  J.  had  commanded  her  maid  to  stand  within 
4.  J.  standing  by  hia  bed,  said  in  her  heart, O  Lord 
11.  then  saiU  J.  afar  olf  to  watchmen  at  the  gate 

14.  1.  then  said  J.  to  them,  hear  nie  my  brethren 

7.  Achior  fell  at  J.  feet  and  reverenced  her 

8.  J.  declared  unto  him  all  that  she  had  done 
14.  for  he  thought  that  he  had  slept  with  J. 

17.  he  went  into  the  tent  where  J.  lodged 

15.  8.  Joacim  came  to  see  J.  and  to  salute  her 
11.  they  gave  unto  J.  Olofernes  his  lent 

IG.  1.  then  J.  began  to  sing  this  thanksgiving 
2.  J.  said,  begin  to  my  God  with  timbrels 
7.  but  J.  Ihe  daughter  of  Merari  weakened  him 

19.  J.  also  dedicated  all  the  stuff  of  Olofernes 

20.  and  J.  remained  with  them  three  months 

21.  and  J.  went  to  Bethulia,  and  remained  in  her 
25.  none  made  Israel  afraid  in  the  days  of  J. 

JUPITER. 

2.^/ac.6. 2.  and  to  call  it  the  temple  of  J.  Olympias 

and  in  Garizim  of  J.  the  defender  of  strangers 

JURY,  Sec  Jewry. 

JUST. 

1  Ksd.  4.  39.  but  she  doth  the  things  that  are/ 

2  Ksd.S.  33.  thej.  who  havo  many  good  works 

10.  16.  the  determination  of  God  to  bej. 
7'uA.  3.  2.  O  Lord,  thou  nrlj.  and  all  thy  works 

13.  13.  rejoice  and  he  glad  for  the  children  of  ihe 
j.  shall  be  gathered  and  bless  the  Lord  of  the  j. 

14.  9.  and  shew  thyself  merciful  and/ 
F.sth.  16.  15.  the  Jews  live  by  most  j.  laws 
IVisd.  2. 16.  pronounceth  the  end  ofj.  to  be  blessed 

18.  if  the  j.  man  be  son  of  God,  he  will  help  him 

11.  9.  thirsting  in  another  manner  than  the/ 

12.  I'.t.  that  thej.  man  should  be  merciful 
11.  31.  but  it  is  ihej.  vengeance  of  siimers 

Feci.  9.  IG.  \ntj.  men  eat  and  drink  with  thee 
Ifi.  3.  for  one  that  is  j.  is  heller  than  a  thousand 
.35.  7.  the  sacrifice  of  a/  man  is  acceptable 
Bar.Ct.  73.  belter  is  thej.  man  that  hath  no  idols 
■'ills.  9.  they  might  not  rcinomber/ judgments 
Prayer  of  Jilanass.  thou,  O  Lord,  that  art  Ihe  God 
of  the/  hast  not  appointed  repentance  to  Ihej. 
2.flAic  7.36.shalt  receive  j  punishment  for  thy  pride 

9.  18.  the/ judgment  ofGod  was  come  on  him 
JUSTICE. 

Tob.  1.  3.  I  walked  in  the  way  of  truth  and/ 

13.  fi.  O  ye  siimers,  turn  and  doj.  before  him 

14.  7.  all  those  who  love  God  in  truth  and/ 
Ktth.  IG.  4.  they  think  to  escape  Ihej.  ofGod 
Xf  1.1'/.  8.  7.  she  teachelh  prudence,  j.  and  fortilui! 
Eccl.  Ifl.  22.  who  can  declare  the  works  of  his  j. 

.32.  16.  that  fear  the  Lord  shall  kindle  j.  as  alight 
38.  33.  they  cannot  declare/  and  jmlgment 

1  J\fae.  2.  29.  many  that  sought  after  j.  and  judg- 
ment went  down  into  the  wilderness  to  dwell 

7.  12.  asfend)lc  a  Company  of  Scribes  to  require  j. 

8.  ."12.  if  ihcy  complain,  wo  will  do  them  j. 
14.  35.  for  llicj.  and  faith  he  kept  to  his  nation 

2  Mac.  8.  13.  they  that  distrusted  the  j.  ofGod 

10.  12.  choosing  rather  to  do  j.  to  the  Jews 
JUSTICES. 

1  Ksd.  8.  23.  thou  Esdrns,  ordain  judges  audi. 
JUSTIFY. 

0  Esd.  4.  18.  whom  woiildcst  thou  begin  to  j.  t 
Ecrl.l.  5./  not  Ihysilf  before  Ihe  Lord,  boast  not 
10.  20.  who  will  j.  him  Ihnt  sinnelh  ng.  his  soul  ? 
13.22.  things  not  lobe  spoken,  yet  incMi  j.  him 
42.  2.  and  ol  judgment  to  ;.  the  ungodly 
JUSTIFIED. 

2  Esd.  12.  7.  ifl  am  j.  with  lhei>  before  others 
Fslk.  1(1.  12.  so  Gfidj.  his  inheriianrn 
Ercl.  1.  22.  a  furious  man  cannot  be  j. 

18.22.  and  defer  not  until  death  to  boj. 
31.  5.  ho  that  lovilh  gold,  shnll  not  ho  j. 

jusriFiETH. 

Eccl.  19.  25.  there  is  a  wise  man  that/  in  judgment 


KEP 


ApOCRTfH^ 


JUSTLY. 
Tob.  3.  2.  thoujudgest  truly  and  j.  fur  ever 

4.  6.  doings  shall  succeed  to  all  them  tliat  live/ 
IVisd.  14.  30.  for  both  shall  they  be  j.  j)unished 

19.  13.  they  su  tiered  j.  accord,  to  their  wicke<lne«« 
2  Mac.  7.  38.  that  is/  brought  on  all  our  naliou 

9.  6.  and  that  most/  lor  he  had  lorinenterl  othei 

13.  7.  having  no  buiial  in  earth,  and  that  most  i'. 

IVY. 

2  Mac.C.  7.  go  in  procession  to  Bacchus,  carrying  j 

K. 


KADE3. 
./«(/.  1.9.  Chellus,  and  K.  and  the  river  of  Egvpt 

KEEL. 
IVisd.  5. 10.  the  path-way  of  the  k.  in  the  wavei 

KEEP. 

1  Esd.  4. 11.  these  k.  walcli  round  about  him 

2  Esd.  1.  24.  that  ihoy  may  k.  my  statutes 
2.  22.  k.  the  old  and  young  within  thy  walls 

4.  40.  usk  her,  if  her  womb  may  A',  the  birth 
8.  27.  those  that  k.  thy  testimonies  in  alHiction 
10.  15.  therefore  k.  thy  sorrow  to  thyself 

12.  38.  whose  hearts  may  k.  these  secrets 

13.  42.  they  might  here  k.  their  statutes 

14.  30.  received  the  law  of  life,  which  they  k.  not 
15.24.  woe  to  ihenithat  A.  not  my  conimandmentj 

32.  these  shall  be  troubled  and  k.  in  silence 
Tob.  3.  15.  to  whom  I  may  k,  myself  for  a  wife 

5.  21.  the  good  angel  will  /.-.  him  company 
14.  9.  but  k.  thou  the  law  and  commandmenta 

.Jud.  4.  7.  to  k.  the  pa.ssages  of  the  hill-country 
7.  12.  remain  in  camp,  i.  all  the  men  of  thy  army 

IVisd.  6.  10.  for  they  that  k.  holiness  holily 
17.  4.  nor  might  the  corner  t.them  from  fear 

KccM.St).  if  thou  desire  wisdom  A.commandment* 

2.  15.  and  they  that  love  him  will  k.  his  ways 

6.  26.  and  k.  her  ways  with  all  thy  power 

7.  22.  if  they  he  for  thy  profit,  k.  them  with  tbea 

8.  17.  consult  no!  a  fool,  be  cannot  k.  counsel 

9.  13.  k.  far  from  the  man  that  halh  power  to  kill 

1.5.  15.  to  k.  the  c<immandineiits  and  to  perform 
17.  22.  he  will  k.  the  good  deeds  of  man  as  apj)U 

25.  16.  than  to  k.  house  with  a  wicked  woman 

26.  10.  k.  her  in  straitly,  lest  she  abuse  herself 
19.  my  son,  /,-.  the  flower  of  thine  age  sound 

28.  1.  he  will  surely  A-.  his  sins  in  remembrance 

29.  3.  k.  thy  word,  and  deal  faithfully  with  him 
37.  12.  whom  thou  knowest  to  k.  the  commandm. 
39.  2.  he  will  k.  the  sayings  of  the  renowned  men 

41.  14.  my  children  k.  my  discipline  in  peace 

42.  II.  k.  sure  watch  over  a  shamtless  daughter 
Bar.  4.  1.  all  they  that  k.  it  shall  come  to  life 

6.  35.  tho'  a  man  make  a  vow  to  them  and  k.  it  tot 
59.  lo  k.  such  things  safe  as  be  therein 

1  Mac.  4.  61.  thev  set  there  a  garrison  to  k.  it,n  <d 
fortified  Bcthsura,  6.  50.  |  U.  3.  |  12.  34. 

7.  40.  they  ordained  l<i  k  yearly  this  day 

8.  26.  hut  they  shall  k.  their  covenant 

10.  20.  take  our  part,  and  k.  friendship  with  us 
13.  48.  placed  such  men  there,  as  would  A-.  the  law 

2  Mac.  1.  9.  see  ye  k.  the  feast  of  tabernacles 
18.  we  arc  purposed  lo  A-.  the  purification  of  the 

temple,  might  A-.  it  as  Ihe  feast  of  tabernacle! 

3.  22.  to  A.  Ihe  things  conmiitted  of  trust  sale 

6.6.  for  a  man  to  A.  the  sabbath-days,  II. 

11.  19.  if  then  you  will  A.  yourselves  loyal 
24.  had  rather  k.  their  own  manner  of  living 

12.  42.  ihe  people  lo  A.  themselves  from  sin 
KEEPERS.  ' 

1  Esd.  8.  19.  commanded  the  k.  of  the  treasure! 

Estk.VZ.^.^^\■o  eunu''bs  of  the  king  and  A.  of  palace 

KEEPEST. 

1  Mac.  15.  7.  the  fortres,8es  thou  A.  in  thy  hands 
KEEPETH. 

2  F.sd.  8.  9.  that  which  k.  and  is  kept,  shall  both 
Fcrl.  12.  6.  A.  them  against  thoday  of  punishment 

20.  5. 1  here  is  one  that  A.  silence,  and  is  wise 
6.  and  some  A.  silence,  knowing  hi.«  limo 

21.  11.  he  that  A.  the  law  of  the  Lord,  35.  1. 
23.7.  he  thit  A.  it,  shall  never  betaken  in  his  lip« 
2;).  I.  siroiigthenetli  his  hand,  A.  commondment* 

Bar.  6.  70.  as  a  scarecrow  in  a  garden  A.  nothing 

KEF.PING. 
IVisd.  6.  18  love  Js  the  A  of  her  Inwa 
Feci.  32.  2.3.  for  ihi^  is  A.  of  ihe  commandments 
40.  6.  he  is  in  his  sleep,  as  in  a  day  of  A.  wateb 
42.  6.  9ure  A.  is  good   where  an  evil  wife  is 
J  Mac.  3.  40.  concerning  the  A.  of  the  treasury 
5.  25.  when  taking  ihn  Jmvs  A.  holy-day 
KEPT. 

1  Esd.  1.20.  such  paspover  was  not  A.  in  Isrnpl  sinoe 

3.  4.  men  of  the  guard  that  A.  the  king's  body 

4.  56.  lo  give  to  all  ihat  k.  the  city,  pensions' 
7.  14.  they  A.  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread 

2  Fsd.  3.  35.  who  h  ilh  so  A.  Ihy  command rrrnotj 
3fi.  that  Israel  hv  name  halh  A.  thy  precepts 

8.9.  but  that  which  kcepcth  and  is  A.  boprcycrvd 


ArOCRTFHA.] 


KIN 


S  F.sd.  9.  21.  I  have  4.  nie  a  grape  of  the  cluster 
Si.  and  let  my  grape  be  k.  ami  my  plant 
32.  our  fathers  who  received  the  law,  k.  it  not 
3;(.  they  t.  not  the  thing  that  was  sown  in  thum 
'2.  21.  lour  shall  Be  k.  unlil  their  end  begin  to 
approach,  but  two  shall  he  k.  unto  the  end 
30.  they  whom  the  Highest  hath  k.  to  their  end 
32.  the  anointed  which  Highest  hath  A.  for  them 

13.  23.  he  that  shall  endure  hath  /;.  himself 

26.  the  same  whom  God  hath  k.  a.  great  season 
,  42.  which  they  never  k.  in  llioir  own  land 

14.  31.  ye  have  not  k.  ways  Gud  commanded  you 

34.  if  reform  your  hearts,  ye  shall  be  k.  alive 
Tob.  11.  19.  Tobias'  wedding  was  k.  seven  days 
Jud.  6.  12.  k.  them  from  comiiig  up,  by  casting 

5.  2i).  to  Jacob  when  he   k.  the  sheep  of  Laban 
13   16.  wlii>  hath  k.  me  in  my  way  that  I  went 

h'isd.  6.4.  have  not  judged  aright,  nor  k.  the  law 
10.  3.  4.  him  strung  against  his  tender  compassion 

12.  she  k.  him  sale  trom  those  that  lay  in  wait 
14.  16.  an  ungodly  custom  was  k.  as  a  law 

24.  Ihey  k.  neither  lives  nor  marriages  undefilcd 
17.  16.  whosoever  fell  down,  was  straitly  k. 
19.  6.  thy  children  might  be  k.  without  hurt 

f.ccl.  11.  30.  like  as  a  partridge  k.  in  a  cage 
44.  20.  who  k.  the  law  oftlie  Most  High 

Dan.  3.  7.  notobeycd  commandments,  nor  A.  them 

14.  we  he  A-.  under  this  day  in  all  the  world 
Prayer  of  Jlanass.  nor  k.  I  thy  commandments 

1  Mac.  3.  45.  and  aliens  k.  the  strong  hold 
4.  56.  so  they  k.  the  dedication  of  the  altar 

59.  the  days  should  be  k.  in  their  season 

7.  48.  they  k.  that  day,  a  day  of  great  gladness 

8.  12.  tnit  with  their  friends  they  k.  amity 

10.  26.  whereas  you  have  k.  covenants  with  us 

11.  46.  but  they  of  the  city  k.  the  passages 

13.  52.  that  that  day  should  be  k.  every  year 

14.  35.  for  the  faith  which  he  k.  to  his  nation 

2  Mac.  1. 19.  the  priests  hid  it  where  they  k.  it  sure 

2.  12.  so  Solomon  k.  those  eight  days 
J.  I.  and  the  laws  were  k.  very  well 

15.  things  given  to  be  k.  that  they  should  be  pre- 
se;ved  lor  such  as  committed  them  to  be  k. 

19.  virgins  that  were  k.  in  ran  to  the  gates 

6.  7.  a[id  when  the  feast  of  Bacchus  was  k. 

8.  33.  at  such  time  as  they  k.  the  feast  for  victory 
10.  6.  and  they  k.  eight  days  with  gladness 

15.  the  Idumeana  k.  the  Jews  occupied 
17.  they  k.  oft' all  that  fought  on  the  wall 

27.  drew  near  to  enemies,  they  k.  by  themselves 

15.  3.  who  commanded  the  sabbath-day  to  be  k 
4.  who  commanded  the  seventh  day  to  be  k. 

KID. 
Tob.  2.  12.  they  gave  her  also  besides  a  k. 

13.  I  said  unto  her,  from  whence  is  this  k.  ? 

KIDS. 
Eccl.  47. 3.  David  played  with  lions  as  with  k. 

KILL. 
i  F.sd.  4.  7.  if  he  commanded  to  k.  they  k. 
2  F.sd.  1.18.  why  broughtinio  this  wildern.  to4.  us? 
Jud.  5.  22.  the  people  spake  that  he  should  k.  him 

7.  13.  so  shall  thirst  k.  them,  and  they  give  up 

16.  5.  he  would  k.  my  young  men  with  the  sword 
Keel.  9.  13.  from  the  man  that  hath  power  to  k 

1  Mae.  12. 40.  take  Jonathan,  that  he  might  k.  him 
16.  19.  he  sent  others  to  Gazara  to  k.  John 

KILLED. 
Tob.  1.  18.  Sennacherib  in  his  wrath  k.  many 
21.  two  of  his  sons  k.  him,  and  they  fled 

3.  8.  whom  Asmodeus  the  evil  spirit  had  k. 
7.  8.  and  after  they  had  k.  a  ram  of  the  flock 

Jad.  2.  25.  Olofernes  he  k.  all  that  resisted  him 
iVisd.  12.6.  parents  that  A-.  wiih  their  own  hands 
16.9.  for  them  the  bilings  of  grasshoppers  k. 
Keel.  30.  23.  for  sorrow  hath  k.  many,  no  profit 

1  Mae.  2.  25.  also  the  king's  commissioners  he  k. 
5.34.  there  were  k.  of  them  that  day  about  8000 

9.  18.  Judas  also  was  k.  and  the  remnant  fled 

2  Mae.  4.  42.  him  they  k.  beside  the  treasury 

10.  17.  they  k.  no  fewer  than  twenty  thousand 
30.  so  that  being  full  of  trouble,  they  were  k. 

35.  with  fierce  courage  k.  all  they  met  withal 
37.  and  k.  Timotheus  that  was  hid  in  a  pit 

14.2.  Demetrius  hail  k.  Antiochus  and  Lysias 

KILLETH. 
TVi.sd.  16.  14.  a  man  indeed  k.  through  his  malice 
£cci.  34.  20.  asone  that  A-.  the  son  before  his  father 

KILLING. 
!i  Mac.  5.  13.  thus  there  was  k.  of  young  and  old 

12.  23.  Judaa  also  k.  those  wicked  wretches 

KIND. 
TVisd.  7.23.  k.  to  man,  sti'dl';iKt,  sure,  free  from  care 
Feci.  6.  5.  fair  tongue  will  increase  k.  greetings 

KINDNESS. 
F.rcl.  30  6.  one  th^t  shall  requite  k.  to  friends 
38.  23  if  there  be  k.  and  comfort  in  her  tongue 
37.  II.  nor  with  an  unmerciful  man  touching  k. 
Dan.  3.  19.  but  deal  with  us  after  thy  loving  k. 

KIND. 

H^sd.  14.  26.  changing  of  A.  disorder  in  roarriases 

'811 


KIN 

JFisd.  18.12.  innumerable  dead  with  one  k.  ofdeath 
19.  6.  the  creature  in  his  proper  k.  was  fashioned 

18.  elements  were  changed  by  a  k.  of  harrijoiiy 
21.  nor  melted  liie  icy  k.  of  heaveidy  meat 

F.cel.  13.  16.  all  flesh  consorteth  according  to  k. 
2  Mac.  11.  31.  Jews  shall  use  theirown  A'.of meats 

KINDS. 
Eccl.  36.  19.  the  palate  tasteth  divers  k.  of  venison 
43.  25.  therein  be  variety  of  all  k.  of  beasts 

KINDLE. 
Feci.  8. 10.  k.  not  the  coals  of  a  sinner  lost  be  burnt 
28.  8.  for  a  furious  irian  will  k.  strife 
32.  16.  and  they  shall  k.  justice  us  a  light 

KINDLED. 
2  Esd.  15. 23.  consumed  sinners  like  straw  that  is  k. 
16.  15.  the  fire  is  k.  and  shall  not  be  put  out 
68.  the  wrath  of  a  great  multitude  is  k. 
Jud.  7.  5.  when  they  had  A-.  fires  on  their  towers 
IVisd.  17.  6.  a  fire  k.  of  itself,  very  dreadful 
Feci.  9.  8.  for  herewith  love  is  k.  as  a  fire 
11.  32.  of  a  spark  of  fire  a  heap  of  coals  is  k. 
2  Mac.  1.  32.  this  done,  there  was  k.  a  flame 
4.  38.  Antiochus  being  k.  with  anger 
See  Fire,  and  Flame. 
KINDLETH. 
Eccl.  28. 11.  a  hasty  contention  k.  a  fire 

KINDLING. 
2  Mac.  10.  36.  k.  fires,  burnt  the  blasphemers  alive 

KINDLY. 

2Jl/ae.9.21.would  have  remembered  A-.your  honour 
13.23. honoured  the  temple, and  dealt  k.  with  place 

KINDRED. 
1  Fsd.5.5.o\.\t  of  the  A.  of  Pharesof  tribe  of  Juda 
Tob.  1.  9.  I  married  Anna  of  mine  own  k. 

10.  my  k.  did  eat  of  the  bread  of  the  Genliles 

4.  12.  that  they  all  married  wives  of  their  own  A. 

5.  II.  I  would  know,  brother,  thy  k.  and  name 

6.  11.  seeing  thou  only  art  of  her  k. 

15.  the  precepts  which  thy  father  gave  thee,  that 
thou  shouldst  marry  a  wife  of  thine  own  k. 
Jud.  8.  2.  Manasses  was  of  her  tribe  and  k. 
16.  17.  woe  to  the  nations  that  rise  against  my  A. 
24.  gave  goods  to  the  nearest  of  A.  to  Manasses, 
and  to  them  that  wore  nearest  of  her  A 
Feel.  16. 4.  the  A.  of  the  wicked  shall  become  desol 
22.  10.  children  do  stain  the  nobility  of  their  A. 
Sus.  30.  she  came  with  her  children  and  all  her  !c. 
63.  with  Joacim  her  husband  and  all  the  A. 
KING. 
1  Fsd.  1.  7.  these  were  given  of  the  A.  allowance 
26.  what  have  I  to  do  with  thee,  O  A.  of  Jiidea' 
34.  the  people  made  him  A.  instead  ofjosias 
39.  Joacim,  when  he  was  made  A.  43. 

2.  24.  now  we  do  declare  to  thee,  O  lord  the  A. 

3.  8.  and  laid  it  under  A.  Darius  his  pillow 

9.  when  the  A.  is  risen,  some  will  give  him 

11.  the  second  wrote,  the  A.  is  the  strongest 

13.  now  when  the  A.  was  risen  up,  they  took 

19.  it  maketh  the  mind  of  A.  and  fatherless  all  one 
21.  a  man  remembereth  neither  A.  nor  governor 

4.  1.  that  had  S(>oken  of  the  strength  of  the  A. 
3.  the  A.  is  more  mighty,  for  he  is  lord  of  all 

12.  Oye  men,  how  should  not  the  A.  be  mightiest! 

14.  Oye  men,  it  is  not  the  great  A.  that  excelleth 

15.  women  have  born  the  A.  and  all  the  people 
30.taking  the  crown  from  the  A.  head  and  setting 
31.  for  all  this  the  A.  gaped  and  gazed  upon  her 
37.  wine  is  wicked,  the  A.  is  wicked,  women 

wicked,  all  the  children  of  men  are  wicked 
6. 14.  this  house  was  builded  by  a  A.  of  Israel 

8.  4.  the  A.  did  him  honour  for  he  found  grace 
21.  that  wrath  come  not  on  the  kingdom  of  the  A. 

51.  for  I  was  ashamed  to  ask  the  k.  footmen 

52.  we  had  said  to  the  A.  that  the  power  of  God 
Tob.  1.  19.  Ninevites  complained  of  me  to  the  A. 

12.7.  good  to  keep  close  the  secret  of  a  A.  11. 
13.  6.  and  extol  the  everlasting  K.  10. 

7.  my  soul  shall  praise  the  K.  of  heaven 

15.  let  my  soul  bless  God  the  great  K. 

Jud.  2.  5.  thus  saith  the  great  A.  lord  of  the  earth 
3.  2.  the  servants  of  Nabuchodonosorlhegroat  A. 

5.  11.  the  A.  of  Egypt  rose  up  against  them 

9.  12.  K.  of  every  creature,  hear  thou  my  prayer 

11.  1.  Nabuchodonosor  the  A.  of  all  the  earth 
Eslli.  lO.O.lhis  river  is  Esther,  whom  the  A.married 

12.  1.  Gahatha  andTharra,  twoeunuchs  of  the  A. 
2.  they  were  about  to  lay  hands  on  Artaxerxes 

the  A.  and  so  he  certified  the  A.  of  them,  3,  4, 5. 
fi.  Ainan  who  was  in  great  honour  with  the  A. 

13.  9.  saying,  O  Lord,  Lord,  the  K.  Almighty 

14.  3.  saying,  O  my  Lord,  thou  only  art  our  K. 

10.  and  to  magnify  a  fleshly  A.  for  over 

12.  give  me  boldness,  O  K.  of  nations.  Lord  ofall 
15.6.  she  stood  before  the  A.  who  sat  on  his  throne 

8,  then  God  changed  the  spirit  of  the  A. 

16.  she  fell  down,  then  the  k.  was  troubled 

16.  11.  was  honoured  as  the  next  person  to  the  k. 
fVisd.  6.  24.  a  wise  k.  is  the  upholding  of  people 

7.  5.  there  is  no  A.  had  any  other  beginning 

9.  7.  thou  host  chosen  me  to  be  a  A.  of  thy  people 


KIN 

TVisil.  11. 10.  other  as  a  severe  A.  tnou  didst  punith 

12.  14.  neither  shall  A.  nor  tyrant  be  able 

14.  17.  they  made  an  expri!ss  image  of  a  k. 
18.11.  like  as  the  k.  so  aniiered  Iho  common  person 

Eccl.  7.  4.  nor  seek  of  the  A.  the  scat  of  honour 

5.  boast  not  of  thy  wisdom  before  the  A. 

10.  3.  an  unwise  A.  destroyetli  his  people 

10.  he  that  is  lo-day  a  A.  to-moirow  shall  die 
18.  .3.  all  obey  his  will  for  he  is  the  K.  of  all 
38.  2.  and  he  shall  receive  honour  of  the  A. 

45.  25.  the  inheritance  of  the  A.  be  to  his  posterity 
511. 15.  asvveet  savour  to  the  most  high  K.  of  uil 
51.  6.  by  an  accusation  to  the  A.  from  a  tongue 
Har.  2.  21.  to  serve  the  A.  of  Babylon,  i!2.  24. 

6.  53.  neither  can  they  sot  up  a  A.  in  the  land 
56.  they  cannct  withstand  any  A.  or  enemies 
59.  belter  to  be  a  A.  that  sheweth  his  power 

Dan.  3.  9.  thou  didst  deliver  us  to  an  unjust  k. 
Bel  2.  and  Daniel  cotiversed  with  the  A. 

7.  then  Daniel  said,  O  A.  be  not  deceived 

8.  so  the  A.  was  wroth,  and  called  for  his  priests, 
king  is  mentioned  in  verses  10,  11,  14,  16,  17, 
18,  19,  20,22,  24,25,26,28,  29,  30,  40. 

1  Mac.  8.  5.  had  discomfited  Perseus  A.  ofCitims 

15.  32.  Athenobius  the  A.  friend  to  Jerusalem 

2  Mae.  1.  11.  having  been  in  battle  against  a  A. 
24.  who  art  merciful,  the  only  and  gracious  Ki 
35.  and  the  A.  took  many  gifts,  and  bestowed 

3.  37.  and  when  the  A.  asked  Heliodorus 

6.1.  the  A.  sent  an  old  man  of  Athens  to  compel 

7.  3.  the  A.  being  in  a  rage  commanded,  39. 

9.  but  the  K.  of  the  world  shall  raise  us  up 

8.  10.  which  the  A.  was  to  pay  to  the  Romans 

11.  15.  concerning  the  Jews,  the  A.  granted  it 

18.  what  things  were  meet  to  be  reported  to  the  k. 

13.  4.  but  the  K.  of  kings  moved  Antiochus'  mind 

14.  4.  came  to  A.  Demetrius  in  tlie  151st  year 
9.wherefore  OA. seeing  thou  knowest  these  things 

26.  he  had  ordainrd  Judas  to  be  the  A.  successor 

27.  then  the  A.  being  in  a  rage,  wrote  to  Nicanor 
29.  because  there  was  no  dealing  against  the  h. 

15.  5.  I  command  to  do  the  A.  business 

KINGS. 

1  Fsd.  2.27.  mighty  A.  and  fierce  were  in  Jerusalem 

29.  proceed  no  further  to  the  annoyance  of  A. 

2  F.sd.  12.  20.  in  him  there  shall  arise  eight  A. 
15.  20.  I  wdl  call  together  all  the  A.  of  the  earth 

33.  shall  be  fear,  dread  and  strifii  among  their  A\ 
Fsth.  13.  4.  that  despised  the  commandments  of  i. 
H'isd.  6.  1.  hear  therefore,  O  ye  A.  and  understand 
21.  if  your  delight  be  then  in  thrones,  O  ye  A. 
10. 16.  withstood  dreadful  A.  in  wonders  and  signs 
]4.16.wpreworshippedhy  the  commandments  of4. 
Kiel.  8.  2.  gold  hath  perverted  the  hearts  of  A. 

11.  5.  many  A.  had  sat  down  upon  the  ground 
45.  3.  he  made  him  glorious  in  the  sight  of  A. 

47.  11.  he  gave  him  a  covenant  ofA.  and  a  throne 

48.  6.  who  broughtesi  A.  to  destruction  and  men 
8.who  anointedst  A.to  take  revenge, and  prophets 

49  4.  even  the  A.  of  Jnda  failed 
Bar.  1.  16.  confusion  of  face  belongs  to  our  A. 

2.  19.  the  righteousness  of  our  fathers  and  k. 
24.  that  the  bones  of  our  A.  shall  be  taken 

0.  51.  it  shall  appear  to  all  nations  and  A. 
Dan.  3.  23.  the  A.  servants  that  put  ihem  in 

1  Mac.  1.  2.  Alexander  slew  the  A.  of  the  earth 

3.  7.  he  grieved  many  A.  and  rr:aite  Jacob  glad 

30.  he  had  abounded  above  tlio  A.  before  him 

10.  60.  to  Ptolemais,  where  he  met  the  two  k. 
13.  36.  to  Simon  the  high-priest  ami  friend  of*. 
14. 13.  the  A.  themselves  were  overthrown 

15.  5.  which  the  A.  before  me  granted  thee 

2  Mae.  2.  13.  gathered  the  acts  of  the  A.  and  (  o- 

phets,  and  the  epistles  of  A.  concerning  holy  gifts 
3.  2.  even  A.  themselves  did  honour  the  place 

6.  it  was  possible  to  brin?  all  into  the  k.  hand 
8.  but  indeed  to  fulfil  the  A.  puri)03e 

5.  16.  things  that  were  dedicated  by  other  A. 
13.  4.  but  the  King  of  A.  moved  Antiochus'  mind 
13.  before  the  A.  host  should  enter  into  Judea 

15.  he  went  into  the  A.  lent  by  nighl  and  slew  him 
26.  thua  it  went  touchinj  the  A.  coming 

KINGDOM. 

1  Fsd.  4.  40.  truth  is  the  strength  iind  A.  ofall  ages 
43.  in  the  day  when  thou  camest  to  Iho  A. 

8.  21.  ihat  wrath  come  not  on  the  A.  of  the  kings 

2  Fsd.  2.  37.  that  called  you  to  the  heavenly  k 

12.  30.  this  is  the  small  A.  and  full  of  trouble 
Tob.  13.1.  blessed  be  God,  imd  blessed  be  his  A. 
Jud.  1.  12.  Nabuchod.  sware  by  his  throne  and  k. 

2.  12.  as  I  live,  and  by  the  power  of  my  k 

11.  8.  thou  only  art  excellent  in  all  the  k. 
Fslli.  13.  2.  and  mak  ng  my  A.  peacetiblo 

3.  Aman  had  the  honourof  second  place  in  tl)et. 
5.  that  our  A.  may  not  he  firmly  eslabliehcd 
16. 8.  we  must  take  care  that  our  A.  may  be  quiet 

12.  he  went  about  to  deprive  us  of  our  A.  ar:d  life 

13.  also  blameless  Esther,  partaker  of  our  k. 

14.  to  have  translated  the  A.  of  the  Persians 

16.  who  hath  ordered  the  A.  both  unto  lu 


KNO 

Visd.  1.  14.  nor  the  k.  of  death  upon  the  enrth 

5.  IG.  thcrtforelliey  shall  receive  a  glorious  A. 

6.  4.  because  being  iiiiiusters  of  his  k. 

20.  the  iletiire  of  wisdom  briiigelh  to  a  k. 
10.  10.  she  shewed  him  the  k.  of  Gud 

14.  till  she  brought  him  the  sceptre  of  the  k. 
Keel.  10.  8.  the  k.  is  translated  to  another  people 

4(i.  13.  Samuel  the  prophet  estabhshed  a  k. 

47.  21.  so  the  k.  was  divided ;  a  rebellious  k. 
Bar.  5.  0.  exalted  with  glory,  us  children  of  the  k. 

1  JMac.  1.  C.  and  parted  his  k.  among  them 

10.  in  the  137th  year  of  the  k.  of  the  Greeks 
51.  in  the  same  manner  wrote  he  to  his  whole  A. 

2. 10.  what  nation  hath  not  hud  a  part  in  her  k.  1 
57.  David  possessed  the  throne  of  everlasting  A. 

3.  14.  I  will  get  me  a  name  and  honour  in  the  k. 

6.  15.  his  son,  and  nourish  him  up  for  the  k. 

10. 33.  were  carried  captives  itito  any  partof  my  k. 
11. l.kiogof  Egypt  went  about  to  getAlexander'sA. 
9.  and  thou  shalt  reign  in  thy  father's  k. 

11.  did  slander,  because  he  was  desirous  of  his  A. 
12.  39.  Tiyphon  went  about  to  get  the  A.  of  Asia 
15.  3.  pestilent  men  have  usurped  A.  of  our  fathers 

2  Mac.  2.  17.  gave  them  the  A.  and  the  priesthood 

4.  7.  Antiochus  called  Rpipbanes,  took  ths  A. 

KINGUOMr^. 
\'Esi.  1.  24.  did  wickedly  above  all  people  and  A. 
2  F.sd.  12.  23.  the  MosJ  llighshall  raise  up  three  k. 
F.stk.  13.  4.  BO  as  the  uniting  of  our  A.  cannot  go 
Reel.  44.  3.  such  as  dl(i  hear  rule  in  their  A. 

KINSFOLKS. 
^Mae.  8. 1.  they  wont  and  called  their  A.  together 

KINSMAN. 
Tol).  3.  15.  neither  liaih  he  any  near  A.  nor  son 

7.  4.  he  said  to  them,  do  you  know  Tobit  our  ft.? 
Eeel.  41.  21.  to  turn  away  thy  face  from  thy  A. 

KINSMCN. 
2  Mac.  12. 39.  they  came  to  bury  ihom  with  their  A. 

KISS. 

Kslh.  13. 13.  been  content  to  A.  the  solos  of  his  feet 

iCccZ.29.5.  till  he  hath  received,  will  A. a  man's  hand 

KISSED. 

1  Rsd.  4.  47.  Darius  the  king  stood  up  and  A.  him 
'Fob.  7.  6.  Raguul  leaped  up  and  A.  him,  and  wept 

10. 12.  may  heargood  report  ofthee,  and  he  A.  her 

KNEE. 

Prayer  of  Manass.  now  1  bow  the  k.  of  rny  heart 

KNEW. 

2  F.sd.  7.  23.  that  he  is  not  ajid  A.  not  his  ways 
10.  35.  for  I  have  seen  that  I  A.  not,  and  hear 

'Fob.  2.  10.  I  A.  not  that  there  were  sparrows 

5.  5.  Raphael  that  was  an  angel,  but  he  A.  not 
Jud.  10.  22.  none  A.  her  all  the  days  of  her  life 
If'isd.  2. 22.  the  mysteries  of  God,  they  A.  them  not 

9.  9.  and  A.  what  was  acce|itable  in  thy  sight 

10.  8.  they  A.  not  the  things  which  were  good 

11.  9.  they  A.  how  the  ungodly  were  judged 
15.  11.  forasmuch  as  he  A.  not  his  Maker 
19.  1.  for  he  A.  before  what  they  would  do 

14.  those  whom  they  A.  not  when  they  came 
Feci.  23.  20.  he  A.  all  things  ere  ever  they  were 
24.  28.  the  first  man  A.  her  not  perfectly 
Bar.  2.  30.  for  1  A.  that  they  would  not  hear  me 
4. 13.  they  A.  not  his  statuies  nor  walked  in  comm. 

KNOCKED. 
Jud.  14.  14.  Bagoas  A.  at  ihe  door  of  the  tent 

KNOTS. 

If'isd.  13. 13.  a  crooked  picci'  of  wood,  and  full  of  A. 

KNOW. 

1  K.«f.4.22.  you  must  A.  that  women  have  dominion 
5.  (iO.  they  came  to  A.  what  the  noise  should  mean 

8.  23.  all  those  that  A.  the  law  of  thy  God 

2  Esd.  4.  4ti.  shew  me  then,  what  is  past  I  A.  hut 

what  is  for  to  come,  I  A.  not 
!52. 1  am  not  sent  to  shew  thee,  for  I  do  not  A.  it 

9.  12.  the  same  must  A.  it  after  death  by  pain 

12.  Sfi.  thou  only  hast  been  meet  to  A.  this  secret 

13.  52.  nor  A.  the  thing  in  the  deep  of  the  sea 
Tob.  3.8.  dnsi  ihou  not  A.  that  thou  hast  strangled 

11.  7. 1  A.  Tiihiiis,  ihy  father,  will  open  his  eyes 
Jud.  8.  20.  but  we  A.  none  other  God,  therefore 
9.  7.  they  A.  not  that  thou  art  the  Tiord 

14.  5.  that  he  may  A.  him  that  despised  Fsraol 
F.flh.  11.  12.  by  all  means  was  dosirons  to  A.  it 
n'iid.  2. 19.  examine,  that  we  may  A.  his  meekness 

7.  17.  namely  to  A.  how  the  world  was  made 

21.  things  either  secret  or  manifest,  them  I  A. 

8.  21 .  a  point  of  wisdom  to  A.  whose  gift  she  was 

9.  10.  that  I  may  A.  what  is  pleasing  to  thee 

13.  what  man  is  ho  that  cnn  A.  the  counsel  ofG.? 

10.  12.  might  A.  thafgoodncss  is  sirongor  than  all 
12.17.  and  amongthem  that  A.  it,  tnakest  maniHrst 

27.  the  true  God,  whom  befr)rc  they  denied  to  A. 
13.  1.  not  out  of  gooil  things  seen  A.  him  that  is 
3.  let  him  A.  how  much  heller  the  I.oid  of  them  is 

15.  3.  to  A.  thee  is  perfect  righteousness,  yen  to 

A.  Ihy  power  in  the  root  of  immorlalily 
Ifi.  10.  the  unjodly  that  denied  to  A.  thee 

22.  they  miirht  A.  that  fire  buriiini;  did  destroy 
W.  might  r  that  it  is  not  the  growing  of  frultii 

81^ 


KNO 

ffi.id.  18.  19.  and  not  A.  why  they  were  afflicted 
/','ccM2.I1.thou  shaltA. his  rust  hath  not  been  wiped 
ir>.15.  hardened  Pharaoh  that  he  should  not  A.  him 
23.  27.  A.  there  is  nothing  better  than  fear  of  Lord 
25.  4.  and  for  ancient  men  to  ft.  counsel 
27.  27.  he  shall  not  A.  whence  it  cometh 
3(i.  5.  let  them  A.  thee  as  we  have  known  thee 

17.  that  all  may  A.  that  thou  art  the  Lord 

37.8.  and  A.  before  what  need  he  haih 

46.  6.  that  nations  might  A.  all  their  strength 
Bar.  2. 15  that  all  the  earth  may  A.  thou  art  Lord 

31.  shall  A.  that  I  am  the  Lord  their  God 

3.  14.  that  thou  maycstft.  where  is  length  of  days 

6.  29.  ye  may  k.  that  they  are  no  gods,  52,  72. 
Dan.  3.  22.  let  them  ft.  that  thou  art  Lord,  only  God 
Bel  35.  neither  do  I  A.  where  the  den  is 

1  Mac.  2.  65.  I  A.  that  Simon  is  a  man  of  counsel 

4.  11.  that  all  the  heathen  may  A.  there  is  One 
,33.  let  all  those  that  A.  thy  name  praise  thee 

2  Mac.  1.  27.  let  heathen  A.  that  thou  art  our  God 

11.  37.  that  we  may  A.  what  is  your  mind 

KNOWEST. 
2  F.sd.  5. 17.  ft.  thou  not  Israel  is  committed  to  thee? 

12.  38.  whose  hearts  thou  ft.  may  comprehend 
T'oA.3.14.thou  A.Lord,!  am  pure  from  sin  with  man 

11.  2.  thou  A.  brother,  how  didst  leave  thy  father 

Estk.  13.  12.  thou  A.  all  things,  and  thou  A.  Lord, 

that  it  was  not  in  contempt  or  pride,  14,  15. 

14.  16.  thou  A.  my  necessity,  for  I  abhor  the  sign 
Feci.  8.  18.  thou  A.  not  what  he  will  bring  forth 

9.  11.  for  thou  A.  not  what  shall  be  his  end 

37.  12.  whom  thou  ft.  to  keep  the  commandments 
Sus.42.  Susanna  cried  and  said,  O  everlasting  God, 
thou  A.  the  secrets,  and  A.  all  things  before 
43.  thou  A.  thatlhey  have  borne  false  witness 

1  Mac.  3.  52.  what  things  they  imagine  thou  A. 

2  Mac.  14.  9.  O  king,  seeing  thou  ft.  all  these  things 

KNOWETH. 
2  F.sd.  3.  32.  or  any  other  people  that  ft.  thee 

15.  26.  the  Lord  ft.  all  them  that  sin,  16.  54. 

16.  56.  the  stars,  he  ft.  the  number  of  them 

63.  he  A.  your  inventions,  and  what  you  think 
fVisd.  6.  8.  she  ft.  the  things  of  old,  she  ft.  the  suh- 
tilties  of  speeches  and  can  expound  dark 
9.9.  wisdom,  which  A.  thy  works,  and  was  present 

II.  she  A.  and  understandeth  all  things 
15.  13.  he  ft.  himself  to  offend  above  all  others 
Frcl.  11. 19.  he  A.. not  what  timeshallcomoonhim 
15.  HI.  his  eyes  on  them,  he  A.  every  work  of  man 
18.  28.  every  man  of  understanding  ft.  wisdom 

20.  17.  he  A.  not  aright  what  it  is  to  have 

21.  7.  a  man  ofunderstanding  A.  when  he  slips 
23.  19.  A.  not  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  brighter 
27.  22.  he  that  A.  him  will  depart  from  him 
32.  8.  be  as  one  that  A.  yet  holdeth  his  tongue 
34.  9.  a  man  that  hath  travelled,  A.  many  things 

10.  ho  that  hath  no  experience  ft.  little 

42. 9.  father  waketh  for  daughter,  when  no  man  ft. 

18.  for  the  Lonl  A.  all  that  may  be  know  n 
Bar.  3.  31.  no  man  ft.  her  way,  nor  ihinkelhof  path 

32.  but  he  that  A.  all  things,  A.  her,  and  found  her 

KNOWING. 
2  Fsd.  8.  .58.  yea,  and  that  A.  they  must  die 
.fud.  11.  Hi.  I  thy  handmaid  A.  all  tbi.s,  am  fled 
M'isd.S.O.k.  that  she  would  be  a  counsellor  of  good 

13.  16.  A»lhat  it  was  unable  to  help  itself 

15.  2.  for  if  we  sin,  we  are  thine,  A.  Ihy  power, 
hilt  we  will  not  sin,  A.  we  are  counted  thine 

18.  6.  A.  to  what  oaths  they  had  given  credence 
F.ccl.  20.  6.  some  keepeth  silence,  A.  his  time 
Bar.  G.  65.  A.  that  they  are  no  gods,  fear  them  not 

1  Mac.  5. 34.  the  host  A.  thai  it  was  Maccabeus,  fled 

2  Mae.  9.  24.  A.  to  whom  the  state  was  left 
15.  21.  A.  that  victory  cometh  not  by  arms 

KNOWLEDGE. 

1  F.id.  6.  12.  to  the  intent  we  might  give  A.  to  thee 

2  Fsd.  14.  47.  for  in  them  is  the  stream  of  A. 
■  hid.  II.  8.  that  thou  only  art  mighty  in  A. 
W7s(i.1.7.containethall  things,  hath  A.  of  the  voice 

2.  13.  he  professoth  to  have  the  A.  of  God 

7.  16.  in  his  hand  is  the  ft.  of  workmanship 
17.  for  he  hnlh  given  mo  certain  A.  ofthings 

8.  4.  she  in  privy  to  the  mysteries  of  the  A.  of  God 

10.  10.  she  gave  him  ft.  of  holy  things 

14.  22.  not  enough  that  they  erred  in  A.  of  God 
f:fc/.1.7.to  whom  hath  A.  of  wisdom  been  manifi'Si 

25.  the  pnrahles  of  A.  are  in  trea«iires  of  wisdom 

3.  25.  profess  not  the  ft.  that  ihou  hast  not 
II).  25.  and  ho  that  hath  A.  will  not  grudge 

11.  15.  wisdom  and  A.  are  of  the  Lord 

15. 1.  hcthat  hath  A.  of  the  law,  sliall  obtain  her 
Ifi.  24.  my  son,  hearken  to  me,  and  learn  ft. 
25.  and  I  will  declare  his  A.  exactly 

17.  7.  he  filled  them  with  the  A.  ofunderstanding 

11.  besides  this  ho  gave  thimi  A.  and  the  law 

19.  10.  the  A.  of  the  commandments  of  the  Lord 
20.  and  the  A.  of  hia  omiiipotenry 

22.  and  the  A.  of  wickedness  is  not  wisdom 
21.  13.  theft,  of  a  wise  man  shall  abound 
14.  ho  will  hold  no  k.  as  long  a>  ho  liveth 


LAB 


(ArOCKiTPBA 


Feci.  21. 18. ft.  of  the  unwise,iBa8  talk  wi'lioul«en»« 
22.  19.  pricketh  the  heart,  makes  it  show  lier  ft 
24.  18.  1  am  the  mother  of  fair  love,  fear  and  k. 

27.  he  makes  the  doctrine  of  ft.  appear  as  light 
33.  8.  by  ft.  of  the  Lord  they  were  distinguished 

11.  in  much  ft.  the  Lord  hath  divided  them 

39.  7.  he  shall  direct  his  counsel  and  ft. 

40.  5.  in  time  of  rest  hisnight-sleepchangeshisi 

44.  4.  leaders  by  their  A.  meet  for  llie  people 

45.  5.  he  gave  him  the  law  of  life  and  ft. 

50.  27.  the  instruction  of  understanding  and  ft. 
Bar.  3.  20.  but  the  way  of  A.  have  they  not  knowv 
27.  neither  gave  ho  the  way  of  ft.  to  them 
3G.  he  h.ilh  found  out  all  the  way  of  A. 
6.  42.  they  cannot  undersiand,  they  have  no  ft. 
Stis.  48.  wiihout  examination  or  A.  of  truth 
2  Mac.  6.  30.  to  the  Lord  that  hath  the  holy  ft. 
9.  11.  come  to  k.  of  himself  by  scourge  of  God 
KNOWN. 

1  Fsd.  6.  8.  let  all  things  be  A.  to  our  lord  the  king 

2  Fsd.  5. 7.  make  a  noise,  which  many  have  not  ft 
16.  73.  then  shall  they  be  A.  who  are  my  chosen 

./ad.  8.  29.  thy  people  have  A.  thy  understanding 
Fsth.  14.  12.  make  thyself  A.  in  our  affliction 
IVisd.  2.  1.  nor  A.  to  have  returned  from  the  grave 

3.  13.  which  hath  not  A.  the  sinful  bed 

4.  1.  because  it  is  A.  with  God  and  wiih  men 
6.  13.  in  making  herself  first  A.  to  them 

9.  17.  thy  counsel  who  hath  A.  except  thou  give 
16.  28  that  it  might  he  A.  wen)ust  prevent  the  BUli 
Feel.  1.  6.  or  who  hath  A.  her  wise  counsels? 
4.  24.  for  by  speech  wisdom  shall  be  A. 
6.  27.  search,  and  she  shall  be  made  A.  to  thee 

11.  28.  for  a  man  shall  bo  A.  in  his  children 

12.  8.  a  friend  cannot  be  A.  in  prosperity 

16.  15.  that  his  works  might  be  k.  to  the  world 
19.  27.  where  he  is  not  A.  he  will  do  a  mischief 
29.  a  man  may  be  ft.  by  his  look 
21.  7.  an  eloquent  man  is  A.  far  and  near 
26.  9.  wlioreiloni  of  a  woman  be  A.  in  her  looks 
3G.  5.  let  them  know  thee,  .as  we  have  A.  thee 
38.  5.  that  the  virtue  thereof  might  he  A. 
42.  18.  the  Lord  knoweth  all  that  may  be  A. 

46.  15.  and  by  his  word  he  was  ft.  to  be  faithful 
Bar.  4.4.  things  pleasing  to  God  are  made  A.  to  us 

6.  16.  whereby  they  are  A.  not  to  be  gods 
SO.  it  shall  be  ft.  hereafter  that  they  ate  faiae 

L. 


LAB  AN. 

Jud.  8. 26.  kept  the  sheep  of  T,.  his  mother's  brother 
LABOtTR. 

1  Fsd.  4.  22.  do  ye  not  /.  and  bring  all  to  the  woman 

2  F.sd.  3.  .33.  and  yet  their  I.  hath  no  fruit 

5.  12.  they  shall  I.  but  their  ways  shall  not  prosper 
34.  while  I  /.  to  comprehend  the  way  of  God 

7.  14.  if  they  that  live  /.  not  to  enter  these  things 

8.  14.  which  with  so  great  I.  was  fashioned 

9.  22.  for  with  great  I.  have  I  made  it  |ierfect 

10.  14.  like  as  thou  hast  brought  forth  with  7. 
24.thenighe8t  shiill  give  rest  and  ease  from  thy  L 
47.  told  thee  that  she  nourished  him  with  I.      ' 

13.38.  and  he  shall  destroy  them  without  I. 
tVisd.0. 10.  that  being  present,  she  may/,  with  me 
16.  with  I.  do  we  find  llie  things  before  us 

15.  4.  an  imagospotleii,  the  painter's  fruitless  /. 
7.  the  potter  fashioneth  every  vessel  with  much  {, 
9.  his  care  is,  not  that  he  shall  have  much  /. 

16.  20.  didst  send  bread  prepared  without  their /. 
17.20.  and  none  were  h>ndcredin  their  I. 

Frrl.  11.  21.  trust  in  the  Lord,  and  abide  in  thy  L 
13.  26.  it  is  a  wearisome  /.  of  the  mind 
16.  27.  they  neither/,  nor  are  weary,  nor  cease 
19.  11.  as  a  woman  in  /.  of  n  child 
.30.  13.  chastise  thy  son,  and  hold  him  to  /. 
31.  3.  the  rich  hnlh  great  /.  in  gathering  riches 
34.2.3.  what  profit  have  they  then  but  l? 
40.  18.  to  /.  and  be  content  with  ihal  n  man  hath 
51.27.  heboid,  how  that  I  have  had  hut  little  /. 

2.,Vac.2.  26.  taken  on  iw  this  painful /.  of  abridging 
LAnOFliKI). 

Fret.  24.  34.  Ihal  I  have  not  /.  for  myself  only 
33.  17.  consider  that  I  /.  not  for  myself  only 

2  Mac.  4.  7.  Onias  /.  iind.T-hnnd  to  be  high-priest 
LAUOrKER. 

JVisd.  17.  17.  whether  he  were  n  /.  in  the  field 
LABOI'RE.'ST. 

2  FM.  5.  37.  deolare  the  thing  ilinl  thou  /.  to  know 
LABOrRETIf. 

Feel.  10.  27.  better  '•»  he  that  /.  and  abnnnilctlj 

11.  II.  there  is  one  thiit  /.  and  lakelh  pains 

31.  4.  the  poor  /.  in  liiKpoor  estiile,  and  is  needy 
,38.  27.  every  work-master  ihal  /.  night  ond  day 

LABOI'RING. 
1  F.od.  5.  .•)■".  /.  to  advance  the  works  in  the  houia 
Jud.  5.  11.  broiiglit  Ih  m  low  with  /.  in  brick 
F.rel.  19.  I.  a  /.  man  that  is  given  to  drimkenneis 
2.Vnc.  2.28  /  lo  follow  the  rules  of  abridgment 


Apocbypha.] 


LAS 


S  Mac.  2. 31.  to  use  brevity  and  avoid  /.  of  work 

LABORIOUS. 
Eccl.7. 15.  halo  not  I.  work,  neither  husbandry 

LAIiOUKS. 
JVisd.'S.  n.  their  I.  unlVuitlul,  works  unprofitable 

15.  lor  glorious  is  llii^  liuit  of  good  /. 
5.  1.  alilicted  hiiu,  iiml  miuio  no  account  of  liis  /. 

10.  111.  bIiu  inulli|ill<'(l  tliu  fruit  of  his  I. 
17.  rendered  to  ilie  riglileous  u  reward  of  their  /. 

15.  8.  employing  liis  I.  lewdly,  he  makes  a  god 
Reel.  14. 15.  leave  thy  I.  to  be  divided  by  lot 
28. 15  and  hath  deprived  them  of  their  /. 
38.25  lie  that  is  occupied  in  their  I. 

LACE. 

Eccl.6.  30.  ornament,  and  her  bands  are  purple  I. 

LACliUEMONIANS. 

1  Mac.  12.  2.  sent  letters  to  the  L.  and  other  places 
5.  sent  letters  which  Jonathan  wrote  to  the  L.  6. 

20.  .'Vreus  king  of  the  L.  to  Onias  high-priest 

21.  found  that  the  L  and  Jews  are  brethren 
14.20.  the  copy  of  the  letters  that  the  L.  sent 

23.  the  people  of  the  L.  might  have  a  niemoria 
15.23.  he  wrote  loSampsancs  and  the  L. 

2  Mac.  5. 9.  he  retiring  to  the  L.  to  find  succour 

LACKING. 
SJtfae.  8.  25.  but  I.  time  they  returned 

LADDERS. 
l^Vac.  5. 30.  was  an  innumerable  people  bearing  /. 

LADEN. 

Eecl.  3.  27.  obstinate  heart  shall  be  I.  with  sorrows 

LAID. 

1  Esd.  3.  8.  and  I.  it  under  king  Darius  his  pillow 
Esth.  14.  2.  she  /  away  her  glorious  apparel 

15.1.  slie  I.  away  her  mourning  garments 

11.  held  up  his  sceptre,  and  I.  it  upon  her  neck 
Wisd.  4.  1.x  nor  I  they  up  this  in  their  minds 

2  Mae.  3.  10.  money  I.  up  for  the  relief  of  widows 

LAKE. 
2  JWac.  12.  16.  a  I.  was  seen  running  with  blood 

LAMB,  S. 

Wisd.  19.9.  they  went  at  large  and  leaped  like  I. 

Eecl.  13.17.  what  fellowship  hatli  wolf  with  the^.? 

4t).  16.  when  he  ottered  the  sucking  I. 

LAME. 

2  Esd.  2.21.  laugh  not  a  I.  man  to  scorn,  defend 

LAMENT,  ED. 
Jud.  16.  24.  the  house  of  Israel  I.  her  seven  days 
Eecl.  38.  10.  begin  to  I.  as  if  tlmu  hadst  suffered 

LAMENTATION. 
Tab.  2.  6.  your  mirth  shall  be  turned  into  I. 
H'isd.  19.3.  making  I.  at  the  graves  of  the  dead 
Eecl.  38.  17.  weep,  and  use  I.  as  he  is  worthy 

1  Mac.  1.  27.  every  bridegroom  took  up  I. 
2.  70.  and  ail  Israel  made  great  I.  for  him 
4.  39.  they  rent  their  clothes  and  made  great  I. 
9.  20.  all  Israel  made  great  I.  12.  52.  1 13.  26. 

41.  and  the  noise  of  their  melody  into  I. 

2  Mac.  U.  0.  people  with  I.  and  tears  besought  Lord 

LAMP,  S. 
Eecl.  48.  I.  Elias,  his  word  burnt  like  a  I. 

1  Mac.  4.  50.  the  I.  that  were  on  the  candlestick 
6.  39.  the  mountains  sliined  like  I.  of  fire 

LANCES. 
2jVac.5.2.  armed  with  I.  like  a  band  of  soldiers 

LAND. 
JVisd.  10.  7.  waste  I.  that  smoketh  is  a  testimony 
12.3.  to  destroy  those  old  inhabitants  of  thy  holy  I. 
16.  19.  might  destroy  the  fruits  of  an  unjust  /. 

18.  15.  into  the  midsi  of  a  i.  of  destruction 

19.  7.  where  water  stood  before,  dry  I.  appeared 
10.  while  they  sojourned  in  the  strange  I. 

Eecl.  20.  28.  he  that  tilleth  his  I.  shall  increase 
39.  22.  his  blessing  covered  the  dry  I.  as  a  river 

46.  8.  even  unto  the  I.  that  floweth  with  milk 

47.  24.  that  tlu-y  were  driven  out  of  the  I. 

48.  15.  till  they  were  carried  out  of  their  I. 

2  Mac.  5.  21.  weeninn  to  make  the  I.  navigable 

LANGUAGE. 
Eecl.  6.  5.  sweet  I.  will  multiply  friends 
}1ar.  4.  15.  a  shameless  nation  of  a  strange  I. 
2  j>/uc.  7.  8.  but  he  answered  in  his  own  /.  and  said 
21.  s'lie  e.\h«4rled  every  one  of  them  in  her  own  Z. 
27.  she  spake  in  her  country  I.  on  this  manner 
12.  37.  he  began  in  his  own  I.  and  sung  psalms 
15.  29.  praising  the  .Almighty  in  their  own  /. 
LANGUISH. 
2  £sd.8.31.we  and  our  fathers  do  I.  of  such  diseases 

LARGE. 
2  K.id.  1.  13.  I  gave  you  a  I.  and  safe  passage 
fVUd.  19.  9.  for  they  went  at  I.  like  horses 
F.ecl.  47.  12.  and  for  his  sake  he  dwelt  al  I. 
Bar.  3.  24.  how  /  is  the  place  of  his  possession 
iMac.  2.  30.  to  go  over  things  at  I.  and  be  curious 

LARGELY. 
1  Mac.  16. 16.  when  Simon  and  sons  had  drunk  I. 

LAST. 
fVisd.^.  17  their  /.  age  shall  be  without  honour 
Fxel.  I.  13.  it  shall  go  well  with  him  at  the  /. 

2.  3.  that  thou  mayesi  be  increased  at  thy  I.  end 

3.  26.  a  stubborn  heart  will  fare  evil  at  the  I. 

813 


LAW 

Eecl.  6.  28.  for  at  the  I.  thou  shalt  find  her  rest 
12.  12.  and  thou  at  the  I.  remember  my  words 
14.  7.  at  the  /.  he  will  declare  his  wickedness 
24.  28.  no  more  shall  the  I.  find  her  out 
27.  23.  but  at  the  I.  he  will  writhe  his  mouth 
31.  22.  at  the  I.  thou  shult  find  as  I  told  thee 
.32.  11.  rise  up  betimes,  he  not  I.  but  get  home 
.33. 16.  I  awaked  up  I.  of  all  as  one  that  gathers 
38.20.  drive  it  away,  and  remember  the  i.  end 

41.  2.  unto  him  that  is  now  in  the  I.  age 
48.  24.  he  saw  what  should  come  to  pass  at  I. 

LAUGH. 
2  Esd.  2.  21. 1,  not  a  lame  man  to  scorn,  defend 
Jud.  12. 12.  if  we  drawher  not,  she  will  I.  us  to  scorn 
£.s<A.  14.  II.  and  let  them  not  i.  at  our  fall 
IVisd.  4.  18.  but  God  shall  I.  them  to  scorn 
Eccl.7.11.1.  no  man  toscorn  in  bitterness  of  his  soul 

13.  7.  and  at  the  last  he  will  I.  thee  to  scorn 
30.  10.  I.  not  with  him,  lest  thou  have  sorrow 

LAUGHED. 
1  Esd.  4.  31.  if  she  I.  upon  him,  he  /.  also 
IVisd.  17.  8.  were  sick  or  fear  worthy  to  be  I.  at 
Eecl.  6.  4.  made  him  be  I.  to  scorn  of  his  enemies 

20.  17.  of  how  many  shall  he  be  /.  to  scorn  ; 
Bel  19.  then  I.  Daniel,  and  held  the  king 

1  Mac.  7.  34.  he  mocked  them  and  I.  at  them 

10.  70.  and  I  am  /.  to  scorn  for  thy  sake 
LAUGHING. 

Eecl.  18.  31.  she  will  make  thee  a  /.-stock,  42. 11. 

2  Mac.  7.27.  she  I.  the  cruel  tyrant  to  scorn 
LAUGHTER. 

Eecl.  19.  30.  a  man's  excessive  /.  shows  what  he  is 

21.  20.  a  fool  lifleth  up  his  voice  with  I. 
LAW. 

1  Esd.  8.  3.  being  very  ready  in  the  I.  of  Moses 

7.  he  omitted  nothing  of  the  I.  of  the  Lord 

8.  to  Esdras  reader  of  the  I.  of  the  Lord,  9. 

19.  and  the  reader  of  the  Z.  of  the  most  high  God 
9.  42.  Esdras  the  priest  and  reader  of  the  I. 

46.  and  when  he  opened  the  I.  they  stood  up 
Tub.  6.  12.  not  to  another,  according  toZ.  of  Moses 
7.  13.  saying,  take  her  after  the  /.  of  Moses 

14.  9.  but  keep  thou  the  /.  and  commandments 
IVisd.'i.  11.  let  our  strength  be  the  I.  of  justice 
Eecl.  2.  16.  that  love  him  shall  be  filled  with  the  I. 

9.  15.  communication  in  the  /.  of  the  Most  High 
10. 19.  they  that  regard  not  I.  are  dishonourable 

11.  15.  understanding  of  the  I.  is  of  the  Lord 

15.  1.  he  that  hath  knowledge  ofthe  I. 

17.  II.  he  gave  the  I.  of  life  for  a  heritage 
19. 17.  give  place  to  the  I.  ofthe  .Most  High 

20.  in  wisdom  is  the  performance  ofthe  I. 
23. 23.  she  hath  diso'beyed  the  /.  of  the  Most  High 
24.  23.  even  the  I.  which  Moses  commanded 
32.  15.  he  that  seekcth  the  I.  shall  be  filled 
33.2.  a  wi.se  man  hateth  not  the/. 
34.  8.  the  I.  sh.all  be  found  perfect  without  lies 

39. 1.  giveth  his  mind  to  the  I.  ofthe  Most  High 
8.  he  shall  glory  in  the  I.  ofthe  covenant 

41.  8.  woe  be  to  you  who  have  forsaken  the  I. 

42.2.  be  not  ashamed  ofthe  i.  ofthe  Most  High 
45.  5.  even  the  /.of  life  and  knowledge 
46. 14.  by /.ofthe  Lord  he  judged  the  congregation 

Bar.  2.  2.  that  were  written  in  the  /.  of  Moses  ^ 
Sas.  6.  all  that  had  any  suits  in  the  I.  came  to  them 
1  Mac.  1.  49.  to  the  end  they  might  forget  the  /. 
52.  to  wit,  every  one  that  forsook  the  /. 

56.  they  rent  in  pieces  the  books  ofthe  /. 

57.  or  if  any  consented  to  the  /.  put  him  to  death 

2.  26.  thus  dealt  he  zealously  for  the  I.  of  God 
27.  whosoever  is  zealyus  of  the  /.  follow  me 

42.  all  such  as  were  voluntarily  d(?voted  to  the  /. 
50.  be  zealous  for  the  /.  and  give  your  lives 

3.  48.  they  laid  open  the  book  ofthe  /. 

4.  42.  priest.'i,  such  as  had  pleasure  in  the  /. 
14. 14.  the  /.  he  searched  out,  and  every  contemner 

ofthe  /.and  wicked  person  he  took  away 
2  Mac.  1.  4.  and  open  your  hearts  in  his  I. 
2.  3.  the  /.  should  not  depart  from  their  hearts 

18.  as  he  promised  in  /.  will  shortly  have  mercy 
4.  11.  ho  brought  up  new  customs  against  the  /. 
6. 23.  or  rather  the  holy  /.  made  and  given  by  God 
7. 1.  compelled  against  the/,  to  taste  swine's  flesh 

30.  the  commandment  of  the  /.  that  was  given 

12.  40.  which  is  forbidden  the  Jews  by  the  /. 

13.  10.  being  at  the  point  to  be  put  fronj  their  /. 
15.9.  and  so  comforting  them  outof  the  /. 

LAWS. 
.Jad.W.  12.  God  hath  forbidden  them  to  eat  by  his  Z. 
Esth.  16. 15.  that  the  Jews  live  by  most  just  /. 

19.  the  Jews  may  freely  live  after  tlieir*bwn  I. 
Wisd.  6.  18.  love  is  the  keeping  of  her  /. 
Ercl.  4.  17.  trust  his  soul,  and  try  him  by  her  /. 

45.  17.  that  he  should  inform  Israel  in  his  /. 
1  Mac.  1. 42.  that  every  one  should  leave  his  I. 

2.  40.  if  we  fight  not  for  our  lives  and  /.  3.  21. 

6.59.  and  covenant  with  them  that  they  shall  live 
after  their  I.  because  we  abolished  thoir  /. 

13.  3.  have  done  for  the  /.  and  the  sanctuar* 
3  Mac.  3.  1.  and  ths  I.  were  kept  very  well 


LEA 

2  Mac.  4.  2.  that  was  so  zealous  of  the  /. 

5.  8.  being  hated  as  a  forsaker  of  the  /. 

6.  1.  and  not  to  live  after  the  /.  of  God 
28.  to  die  for  the  honourable  and  holy  I. 

7.  9.  shall  raise  us  up,  who  have  died  liar  hit  {. 
11.  and  for  his  /,  I  desiiise  them 
23.  as  you  regard  not  yourselves  for  his  /.  sake 
37.  offer  up  my  body  and  life  for  /.  of  our  fathers 

8.  21.  he  had  made  them  ready  to  die  for  the  /. 
36.  because  they  followed  the  I.  he  gave  them 

11.  24.  should  suffer  them  to  live  after  their  own  i 
31.  the  Jews  shall  use  their  own  kind  oil. 
LAWFUL. 

1  Esd.  1. 16.  it  was  not  /.  for  any  to  go  from  service 
Tub.  2.  13.  it  is  not  /.  to  eat  any  thing  stolen 

•Jud.  II.  13.  which  things  it  is  not  /.  to  touch 

2  Mac.  6.  4.  brought  in  things  that  were  not  /. 
20.  such  things  as  are  not  /.  to  be  tasted 
2J.  to  bring  fiesh,  such  us  was  /.  for  him  to  use 

LAWLESS. 
Oaw.  3.9.  deliver  us  into  the  hands  of  i.  enemies 

LAY. 
Tab.  12.  8.  better  to  give  alms,  than  /.  up  gold 
Esth.  12.2.  they  were  to  I.  hands  on  Artaxerxes 
IVi.td.  5.  7.  through  deserts  w  here  there  I.  no  way 
23.  thus  iniquity  shall  I.  waste  the  whole  earth 

11.  2.  they  pitched  tents  where  there  I.  no  way  . 
Eecl.  5.  12.  if  not  /.  thy  hand  upon  thy  mouth 

7.6.  l.n  stumbling-block  in  the  way  of  uprightness 

13.  12.  but  cruelly  he  wvJI  /.  up  thy  words 

29.  11.  /.  up  treasure  according  to  cominandmenti 

LEAD. 
Wisd.  9.  11.  she  shall  /.  me  soberly  in  my  doingg 
Eecl.  17.  26.  he  will  /.  Ihee  out  of  darkness 
40.  28.  /.not  a  beggar's  life,  better  die  than  beg 

LEAD. 
Ercl.  22.  14.  what  is  heavier  than  /.? 
3H.  :)0.  he  applieth  himself  to  /.  it  over 
47.  18.  thou  didst  multiplv  silver  as  /. 

LEAN. 
Eecl.  41.  19.  and  to  /.  with  thy  elbow  on  meat 

LEAPED. 
Toh.  6.  2.  a  fish  /.outof  river,  would  have  devoured 
7.  6.  then  Raguel  /.  up,  and  kissed  him,  and  wept 
Jud.  14.  17.  he  /.  out  to  the  people  and  cried 
Esth.  1.5.  8.  who  in  a  fear  /.  from  his  throne 
/f'(.?f/.18.15.thy  almighty  word  /.down  from  heaven 
19.  9.  they  /.  like  lambs,  praising  thee,  O  Lord 
LEAGUE.  ' 

1  Mac.  11.  9.  come,  let  us  make  a  /.  betwiit  us 

12.  3.  renew  the  /.  as  in  the  former  time 

8.  wherein  declaration  was  made  ofthe  /. 
16.  renew  the  amity  we  had,  and  the  former  /. 

14. 18.  to  renew  the  friendship  and  /.  they  had 

24.  sent  to  Rome  to  confirm  the  /.  with  them 

15. 17.  came  to  renew  the  old  friendship  and  I. 

See  Amity. 

LEARN. 

Wisd.  6. 1.  /.  ye  that  be  judges  of  ends  ofthe  earth 

9.  that  ye  may  /.  wisdom,  and  not  fall  away 
Reel.  8  8.  for  of  them  thou  slialt  /.  instruction 

9.  and  of  them  thou  shalt  /.  understanding 

16.  24.  my  son,  hearken  to  me,  and  /.  knowledge 
1  J\fac.  10.72.  ask  and  /.  who  I  am,  and  the  rest 
'2  Mae.  7. 2.  what  wouldest  thou  ask  or  /.  of  us 

LEARNED. 

Esth.  12.  2.  /.  that  they  were  about  to  lay  hands 
Wisd.  6.  ro.  they  that  have  /.  such  things,  shall  find 
7. 13. 1  /.diligently  and  communicate  her  liberally 

Ere/.S.i).  for  they  also  /.  of  their  fathers 
38.24.  the  wisdom  ofa  /.man  comes  by  opportunity 
39.  8.  he  shall  show  forth  that  which  he  hath  /. 
42.  8.  thus  shalt  tlinu  be  truly  /.  and  approved 
LEARNING. 

Wisd.  7.  14.  for  the  gifts  that  come  from  /. 

Eecl.  4.  24.  /.  known  by  the  word  of  the  tongue 

21.21.  /.  is  to  a  wise  man  as  an  ornament  of  gold 
33.  17.  I  laboured  fiir  all  them  that  seek  /. 
44.  4.  by  their  knowledge  of /.meet  for  the  people 
51. 16.  I  received  her,  and  gat  much  /. 

23.  draw  near  and  dwell  in  the  house  of/. 
28.  get  /.  with  a  great  sum  of  money,  get  gold 
LEAVE. 
I  Esd  8. 85.  may /.the  inheritance  to  your  children 
Tob.  II.  2.  knowest  howtliou  didst  /.  thy  father 
12.  13.  /.  thy.  dinner  to  go  ami  cover  the  dead 
H'isd.  2.9.  let  us  /.  tokens  of  our  joy  fulness 
Eecl.  fi.  3.  thou  shalt  /.  thyself  as  a  dry  tree 
11.  19.  he  must  /.  those  things  to  others 
14. 15.  shalt  thou  not  /.  thy  travels  to  anothcrl 

23.  1.  O  Lord,  /.  me  not  to  their  counsels 

17.  a  whoremonger  will  not  /.  offtill  he  die 
26.  she  shall  /.  her  majpoiy  to  be  cursed 

24.  .33.  I  will  /.  it  to  alfages  fur  ever 
29. 17.  will  /.  him  in  danger  that  delivered  him 
31.  17.  /.  off  first  for  manners'  sake 
33.  22.  /.  not  a  stain  in  thine  honour 
38.  10.  /.off sin,  and  order  thy  hands  aright 
39. 11.  he  shall  /.  n  greater  name  than  a  thousand 

17. 22.  but  the  Lord  will  never  /.  off  his  mercy 


LIE 

E<e/.51.10  he  would  not/,  me  in  duyi  of  my  trouble  I 

LEAVi:. 
1  Mac.  11.  .W.  lie  giive  liiiii  I.  to  drink  in  gold 
15.  ti.  1  givu  tli'je  L.  to  coin  money  for  thy  country 
LKAVES. 
Eccl.  6.3.  tliou  hbalt  eat  up  Ihy  I.  and  lose  fruit 
11.  Id.  as  for  the  green  /.  on  a  thick  tree,  some  full 

L.EI). 
Tab.  ].  2.  who  was  I.  captive  out  of  Ttiisbo 
tVisd.  ItJ.  lei.  anil  /.  them  through  much  water 
19.  11.  being  I.  willi  their  appetite,  they  aaked 

LEFT. 
Tob.  1.  8.  I  WQ9  I  an  orphan  by  my  father 

iiO.  nor  any  thing  /.  me  besides  my  wife  Anna 
Wisd.  10.  14.  I.  hiin  not  in  bonds,  till  bhe  brought 
14.  0.  and  /.  to  all  ages  a  seed  of  generation 
Eccl.  15.  14.  he  /.  him  in  the  hand  of  his  counsel 
17.  21.  neither  /.  nor  forsook  them,  but  spared 
'ii.  d.  the  sinner  shall  be  /.  in  his  foolishness 
:MJ.  8.  and  a  child  I.  to  himself  will  be  wilful 
44.8.  of  them  that  have  /.  a  name  behind  them 

LENGTH. 
H'isd.  4.  8.  age  is  noi  what  standeth  in  I.  of  time 

LENGTHENED. 
Eccl.  48.  23.  and  he  I.  the  king's  life 

LENT. 
Hlid.  15.  9.  his  life  I.  him  shall  be  demanded 
Eccl.  i'J.  4.  many,  when  a  thing  was  I.  them 

LEOPARD. 
/Ted.  23.  23.  it  shall  devour  them  as  a  ;. 

LESS. 
ft'iad  15.  10.  his  life  is  of/,  value  than  clay 

LESSON. 
Eccl.  9. 1.  teach  licr  not  an  evil  /.  again»t  thyself 

LET. 
Eccl.  27.  19.  BO  hast  thou  /.thy  neighbour  go 

LETTED. 
/I'mJ.  7.  22.  wisdom  quick,  which  cannot  be  I. 

LETTETH. 
Eccl.  27.  19.  as  one  that  /.  a  bird  go  out  of  hand 

LETTER. 

EsUi.lfi.  19.  shall  publi«h  copy  of  this  /.  in  all  places 

LETTERS. 

1  Mac.  12.2.  he  sent  /.  to  the  Lacedemonian^i,  5. 
Scr  aUo  7,  8,  17,  19.  |  14.  20.  |  15.  1,  15.   2  Mac. 

11.  lb. 
iMac.'J.  18.  he  wrote  the  /.  underwritten 

LEVITE. 
Eslh.  11.  1.  who  said  he  was  a  priest  and  /. 

LEWD. 
E.n/t.  16.  4.  but  lifl'd  up  with  words  of/,  persons 
ti.  with  fHls>:iiood  uiid  di  celt  of  their  /.  disposition 
Eccl.  30.  13.  Ie«t  bis  /.  behaviour  be  an  oll'ence 

LEWDLY. 
fVisd.  15.  8.  employing  bis  labours  I.  he  maketh 

LEWDNESS. 
Tub.  4.  13.  in  /.  is  decay  and  great  want 

LIAR. 

/;ec/. 20.26.  the  disposition  of  a/,  is  dishonourable 

2.J.  i.  a  poor  man  proud,  n  rich  man  that  is  a  /. 

LIARS. 

2  F.sd.  11.  42.  hrml  hurt  the  peaceable,  hast  loved  /. 
IViad.  10. 14.  she  6liew>  d  theia  to  be  /.  and  gave 
Eccl.  15.8.  men  that  are  /.  cannot  rememb«:r  her 

LIBANUS. 

1  Fid.  4.  48.  he  wrote  letters  also  to  them  in  L. 

2  /■,>(/.  15.  20.  from  the  south,  from  the  east,  and  L. 
»:c/.  24. 13.  I  was  exalted  like  a  cedar  in  L.  .50. 12. 

LIBERAL. 
Eccl.  31.23.  whoso  is  /.  of  his  meat,  men  speak  well 

LIBERALLy. 
IVisd.  7. 13.  and  I  do  communicate  her  /. 
1  Mac.  3.  30.  nor  have  Bui;h  gifts  to  give  so  I. 

LIBERALITY. 
1  £.'«(/.  4. 4G.  princely  /.  proceeding  from  thyself 
LIBERTY. 

1  F,(rf.4.53.  that  they  should  have  freo  /. 

<)2.  beciiuse  he  halh  given  them  freedom  and  /. 

2  Eld.  H.  50.  wh'-n  they  had  taken  /.  they  desiiised 
Eccl.  7.  21.  a  good  servant,  defraud  him  not  of  /. 

25.  25.  nor  a  wicked  woman  /.  to  gad  abroad 
"ti.  10.  Iiwtshe  abuse  herself  through  over-much  /. 
30. 11.  give  liiiii  no  /.  in  his  youth,  and  Wink  not 

1  Mac.  13. 10.  when  be  is  at  /.  he  may  not  revolt 
)4.2>i.  chased  away  enemies, and  confirmed  their/. 

2  Mac.  9. 14.  the  holv  city,  he  would  set  at  /. 

LIBRARY. 
2  Mac.  2.  13.  how  he  founded  a  /.  g.ithcrcd  acts 

LICENCi:. 
Jud.  11. 14  to  bring  them  a  /.  from  the  icnato 
Ercl.  15.20.  nor  halh  ho  given  any  man  /.  to  sin 

1  Mac.  1.  13.  gave  them  /.  to  do  after  the  heathen 

2  Mac.  4. 9.  it'  he  might  hsKe  /.  to  set  up  a  iilace 

iaW 

fVisd.  2.  12.  let  us  /.  in  wail  for  the  righteous 
Eccl.  5. 14.  and  /.  not  in  wait  with  thy  tongue 
0.21.  she  will  /.  upon  him  as  a  mighty  stone 
8.  1 1.  lest  he  /.  in  wait  to  entrap  thee  in  thy  words 
14.22.  go  after  her,  and  /.  in  wait  in  her  ways 
27. 38.  but  vengeance  shall  I.  ia  wait  for  them 
614 


UP 

LIETH. 
Eccl.  11.  31.  for  he  /.  in  wait,  and  tuinetb  good 
27. 10.  as  the  lion  /.  in  wait  for  the  prey 
28.26.  lest  thou  full  before  him  that  /.in  wait 

LIKE. 
1  End.  4. 21 .  he  sticks  not  to  spend  his  /.  with  his 
'iEad.  2.  12.  they  shall  have  the  tree  of/. 
3.5.  thou  didsi  breathe  into  him  the  breath  of/. 
7,  59.  this  is  the  /.  whereof  Moses  sjiake  to  the 
people,  choose  the  /.  that  thou  inayest  live 
14.  .'to.  receive  the  law  of/,  which  they  kept  not 
lij.  til.  he  gave  them  breath,  /.  and  underslandliig 
7'u/i.d.l7.  hiiisb  their  /.  in  health, with  joy  and  mercy 
12.  9.  that  exercise  alius,  shall  be  tilled  with  /. 
10.  they  that  sin,  arc  enemies  to  their  own  /. 
Jud.  10.  13.  without  losing  the  /.  of  any  man 
15.  thou  hast  saved  thy  /.  in  that  thou  hast  basted 

12.  18.  because  my  /.  Is  magnified  in  me  this  day 
13.20.  because  thou  bust  nut  spared  thy  /. 

Enth.  13.  2.  to  settle  my  subjects  in  a  quiet  /. 
10.  12.  went  to  deprive  us  ot  our  kingdom  and  /. 
13.  as  well  of  Mardocheus,  who  saved  our  /. 

IVistd.  1.  12.  seek  not  deJith  in  the  error  of  your  /. 
4.  9.  and  an  unspotted  /.  is  old  age 
5. 4.  we  fools  accounted  his  /.  irKidncss 

7.  0.  for  all  men  have  one  entrance  to  /. 

8.  5.  if  riches  be  to  be  desired  in  this  /. 

7.  men  can  have  nothing  more  profitable  in  /. 

13.  11.  a  vessel  fit  for  the  service  of  man's  /. 

17.  not  ashamed  to  speak  to  that  which  hath  no  /. 

18.  for  /.  be  |>rayetli  to  that  which  is  dead 

14.  12.  the  invention  of  them  the  corruption  of  /. 
29.  their  trust  is  in  idols  which  have  no  /. 

15.8.  when  his  /.  ubich  was  lent  him  shall  be 

10.  and  bis  /.  is  of  les'<  value  than  clay 

12.  but  they  counted  our  /.  a  pastime 

10.  9.  nor  was  there  found  any  remedy  for  /. 

13.  for  thou  ha^t  power  of/,  and  death 
Eccl.  1.  12.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  givelh  long  /. 

20.  and  the  branches  thereof  are  long  /. 

3.  6.  that  honoureib  his  father  shall  have  a  long  / 

4.  12.  he  that  loveth  her,  lovetb  /. 

5.  1.  and  say  not,  I  have  enough  fur  my  /. 

11.  be  swil't  to  hear,  and  let  thy  /.  be  sincere 
0.  10.  a  faithful  friend  is  the  medicine  of/. 

9. 1.3.  lest  he  take  away  thy  /.  presently 

10.29.  him  that  dishoiiourelh  his  own  /. 

11. 14.  /.  and  death,  jioverty  and  richescomeof  L. 

13. 14.  love  the  Lord  all  thy  /.  and  call  on  him 

15. 17.  before  man  is  /.  and  death 

10.  3.  trust  not  thou  in  their  /.  nor  respect 

17.  11.  he  gave  them  the  law  of/,  for  a  heritage 

18.  33.  thou  sbalt  lie  in  wait  Sir  thy  own  /. 

19.  5.  he  that  resistelh  pleatures,  crowiietb  his  /. 
I'J.  the  knowledgeofcomniaiuis  is  doctrine  of/. 

20.  32.  he  that  leadeth  bis  /.  without  a  guide 

21.  13.  his  couifsel  is  like  a  pure  fountain  of/. 
22. 11.  the  /.of  the  fool  is  worse  than  death 

12.  for  an  ungodly  man  all  the  days  of  his  /. 
23.  1.  Father  and  Governor  of  all  my  whole  /. 

4.  O  Falh.and  G.of  my  /.  give  me  not  a  ytoai  look 
25. 2.  and  1  am  greatly  olfeiided  at  their  /. 
20.  2.  he  shall  fulfil  the  years  of  his  /.  in  peace 
29.  1.5.  for  he  hath  given  bis  /.  for  thee 

22.  better  is  the  /.  of  a  poor  man  in  a  cottage 
24.  it  is  a  miserable  /■  to  go  from  house  to  house 

31.27.  wine  is  as  good  as/,  toatnan  if  drunk  mo- 
derately, what  /.is  to  a  man  that  is  without  wine 
33. 14.  good  is  set  against  evil,  /.  against  death 

23.  at  the  lime  wheirthou  sbalt  finish  thy  /. 
34. 21.  the  bread  of  the  needy  is  their  /. 

37.  18.  four  things,  good  !ind  evil,/,  and  death 
27.  my  son,  prove  iby  soul  in  thy  /.  and  see 
31.  he  that  taketh  heed,  prolongeth  his  /. 

38.  14.  for  ease  and  remedy  to  jirolong  /. 

39.  20.  the  principal  things  for  the  use  of  man's  / 

40.  29.  the  /.  of  him  that  depcndeth  on  niiothei 

man's  table,  is  not  to  be  counted  for  a  / 

41. 13.  a  good  /.  bath  but  few  days,  but  good  iianit 
4.5.  5.  he  gave  him  the  law  of/,  and  knowledge 

48. 14.  he  did  wonders  in  his  /.  and  at  his  death 
23.  sun  went  back,  he  lengthened  the  king's  /. 

50.  1.  who  in  his  /.  repaired  the  house  again 

51.  3.  out  of  the  hands  of  such  as  sought  my  /. 
0.  my  /.  was  near  to  the  hell  beneath 

Bar.  1. 11.  pray  for  the /.  of  Naburhodonosor  king 

of  Babylon,  and  for  the  /.  of  lialtbasar  his  son 

4.  I.  nil  they  that  keep  it  shall  come  to  /. 

1  Mac.  3.  12.  therewith  he  fought  all  his  /.  long 
10.01.  men  of  a  wicked  /.  nssembied  against  him 
13.  .5.  tlSjl  I  should  spare  my  own  /.  in  trouble 

2  Mac.  3/2!).  ho  lay  speechless,  without  ho|>e  of/. 
31.  call  upon  the  Most  nigh,  to  grant  him  bis  /. 
33.  for  his  sake  the  Lordliath  granted  thee  /. 
3.1.  made  vows  unto  him  that  bad  saved  his  /. 
38.  him  well  scourged,  if  he  escape  with  lil»  /. 

6.  20.  are  not  lawful  for  love  of/,  to  bo  tasted 
27.  manfully  changing  this  /.  I  will  shew  myself 

7.9.  the  king  shall  raise  us  up  unto  everlnsting  / 
14.  thou  ihall  have  no  resurrection  to  /. 


LIO 


[ApocRTPa* 


2  Mae.  7.23.  will  also  give  you  ireath  and  /.  agaia 
25.shcw<iiild  counsel  the  young  man  losave  Ills' 

30.  dead  under  God's  covenant  ot  everlasting  /. 

37.  1  offer  up  my  body  and  /  for  the  laws 
12.  24.  he  besought  to  let  him  go  w  itb  his  /. 
14. 25.  was  quiet,  and  took  part  of  this  /. 

38.  he  did  boldly  jeopard  his  body  and  /. 
46.  and  culling  on  the  Lord  of/,  and  spirit 

LIFT. 
Eccl.'Xi.  1.  /.  not  thyself  up,  but  be  as  the  rest 
:i8.  3.  the  skill  of  the  physicians  shall  /.  up  bis  lieoi 
40.20.  ricbe*  and  strength  /.  up  the  heart 
40.2.  witen  he  did  /.  up  his  hand  against  citi«a 

LIFTED. 
Eccl.  11.  13.  and  /.  up  Ins  head  from  misery 
47.  4    when  he  /.  up  bis  hand  with  the  stone 
50.  20.  he  /.  up  his  bands  over  the  cungregalioo 
51.9.  then  /.  up  my  supplication  from  earth 

LIGHT. 
1  F.sd.  8.'79.  to  discover  to  us  a  /.  in  the  houie 
Tub.  10.  5.  I  have  let  thee  go, the  /.of  mine  eyet 
H  ind.  5.  0.  the  /.  of  righteousnesf  rKit  shined  to  in 
7.  10.  I  chose  to  have  her,  instead  of  /.  for  the  L 
that  Cometh  from  her  never  gooth  out 

20.  she  is  the  brightness  of  the  everlaBting  /. 

29.  being  compared  with  /.  she  is  found  before  it 
10.  17.  and  a  /.  of  stars  in  the  night  season 
18. 1.  but  thy  saints  had  a  very  great  /. 

4.  they  were  worlby  to  be  deprived  of/,  by  whom 
uncorrupt  /.  of  the  law  was  to  be  given 
F.ccl.  16.  10.  be  hath  separated  bis  /.  from  darkneia 
17. 2t).  he  will  lead  thee  out  of  darkness  into  /. 

31.  what  blighter  than  sun,  yet  /.  thereof  failetb 
22. 11.  weep  for  the  dead,  fur  be  hath  lost  the  2. 
26.  17.  as  the  clear  /.  is  on  the  holy  candlestick 

32.  16.  they  that  fear  L.  shall  kindle  justice  as  at. 
Xt.  7.  when  all  tlie  /.  of  every  day  Is  of  the  sun 
42.  16.  the  sun  that  givcth  /.  Icx)keth  on  all 
43  7.  a  /.  that  decreaseth  in  her  perfection 

9.  ornament  giving/,  in  the  highest  places  of  L(L 
50.7.  as  the  rainbow  giving  /.  in  the  clouda 

29.  for  the  /.of  the  Lord  leadeth  him 
liar.  3.  14.  where  is  the  /.  of  the  eyes,  and  peace 
20.  young  men  have  seen  /.  and  dwelt  ou  earlb 

33.  lie  that  sendeth  forth  /.  and  it  goetli 

34.  they  shewed  /.  to  him  that  made  them 
5.  9.  God  shall  lead  Israel  in  the  /.  of  his  glorr 
0. 19.  they  /  them  candles  more  ihun  for  themselvea 

07.  nor  shine  as  the  sun,  nur  give  /.  as  the  moon 

Dan.  3.  48.  O  ye  /.  and  darkness,  bless  ye  the  Lord 

LIGHT. 

1  F,8d.  8.  86.  tliou,  O  Lord,  didst  make  our  sins  L 
/•."re/.  7.  26.  give  not  thyself  over  to  a  /.  woman 

19.  4.  he  that  is  hasty  to  give  credit  is  /.-minded 

2  Mac.  4.  17.  for  it  is  not  a  /.  thing  to  do  wickedly 
LIGHTEN. 

fVisd.  17. 5.  the  Btar^;  endure  to  /.  that  horrible  night 

LIGHTNED. 
2  F.sil.  6.  2.  he  said  to  me  before  it  thundered  and  I. 

13.  53.' whereby  thou  only  art  here  /. 
LIGHTNINGS. 

Feci.  43. 13.  he  sendeth  the  /.  of  his  judgment 
Dan.  3. 51.  O  ye  /.  and  clouds,  bless  ye  the  Lord 

LIGHTS. 
IVisd.  13.  2.  deemed  the  /.  of  heaven  to  be  the  goda 

LIKE. 
Tub.  7.  2.  how  /.  is  this  young  man  to  Tobit 
8.  6.  let  us  make  to  hiin  an  aid  /.  to  himself 

14.  .5.  shall  build  a  temple,  but  not  /.  to  the  6rit 
H'isd.  5.  14.  for  the  hope  of  the  ungodly  is  /.  du<l 

1.3.  14.  or  made  it  /.  some  wild  beast  laying  it 

15.  10.  but  no  man  can  make  a  god  /.  to  himself 

10.  1.  by  the  /.  were  they  punished  worthily 
F.r.cl.  13.  1.  with  a  proud  man  shall  be  /.  to  him 

15.  every  beast  loveth  his  /.  and  every  mao 

21.  9.  the  wicked  is  /.  tow  wrapped  together 

27.9.  the  birds  will  resort  to  their  /.  so  will  truth 

30.  4.  he  bath  left  one  behind  him  /.  himself 

33.  5.  the  henit  of  the  foolish  is  /.  a  cart-wheel, 
and  his  thoughts  are  /.  a  rolling  nxle-tre« 

.34.  2.  '\f  I.  him  that  rulcbcth  at  a  sh^nlow 

30.  23.  then  is  not  her  husband  /.  other  me/l 

44.  19.  in  glory  was  there  none  /.  to  him 

49. 14.  but  on  earth  wa.i  no  man  created  /.  Eoocb 

LIKENED. 
K«/.  25.  II.  holdeth  it,  whereto  shall  ho  be  1.1 

LIKENESS. 
Eccl.  34.  3.  even  as  the  /.  of  a  face  to  a  face 

LIKIN(;. 
H'isd.  16.  21.  tempered  itself  to  every  man's  /. 

LION. 
2  F.sd.  11.  37.  lo,  as  it  were  a  roaring  /.  rhnscd 
12.  1.  while  the  /.  spake  these  words  to  the  cagl* 
31.  and  the  /.  whom  thou  sawest  rising  up 
10.  0.  may  any  man  drive  away  a  biin>;ry  /.? 
FMh.  14.  13.  give  eluquent  Bp<«ch  bcfmo  the  I. 
F.ccl.  4.  30.  be  not  as  a  /.  in  thine  bonso 
21.  2.  the  teeth  thereof  are  as  the  t'-'tli  of  a  /. 

25.10.  I  had  rnthcr dwell  with  a  /.and  a  dragon 
than  to  keep  bouse  with  a  wicked  womaa 


Afocktth^] 


LIV 


E^cl.  27.  10.  as  the  I.  licth  in  wall  for  the  prey 

26.  bul  vengeance  as  a  I.  shall  lie  in  wait  for  iFicm 
2d.  23.  it  sliull  lie  sent  upon  them  as  a  I. 
1  JUac.  3.4.  Judas  Maccabeus  in  his  acts  was  like  a 
I.  and  like  ii  I.  whelp  roaring  for  prey 
LIONS. 
tVisd.  11.  17.  a  niullituile  of  hears  or  fierce  /. 
Keel.  13. 19.  as  iho  wild  ass  is  I.  prey  in  wilderness 
47.3.he  played  with  i.as  with  kid8,and  with  bears 
Bel  31.  who  cast  him  into  the  I.  den  where  he  was 

32.  and  in  the  den  there  were  seven  I. 
34.  carry  it  to  Daniel  who  is  in  the  I.  den 

1  Mac.  2.  (iO.  I>aniel  was  delivered  from  moulh  oil. 

2  Mac.  11. 11.  giving  a  charge  on  enemies  like  I. 

LIPS. 
Jud.  9. 10.  smite  by  the  deceit  of  my  I.  the  servant 
Eccl.  1.  24. 1,  of  many  shall  declare  his  wisdom 

12.  10.  an  enemy  speaketh  sweetly  with  his  I. 
21. 16.  grace  shall  be  found  in  the  /.  of  the  wise 

25.  the  I.  of  talkers  will  be  telling  such  things 

22.  27.  who  shall  set  a  seal  of  wisdom  on  my  /. 

23.  7.  that  keeps  it,  shall  not  be  taken  in  hie  I. 
39. 15.  shew  forth  his  praise  with  songs  of  your  I. 

50.  20.  give  the  biessing  of  the  Lord  with  his  I. 

51.  2.  hast  preserved  from  the  I.  that  forge  lies 

LITTLE. 
7VJ.4.8.ifabundance  give  accordingly, if  thou  have 
but  I.  be  not  afraid  to  give  according  to  that  I. 
Jud.  It).  16.  all  sacrifice  is  too  /.  for  a  savour 
fVisd.  3.  5.  and  having  been  a  I.  chastised 

7.  9.  all  gold  in  respect  of  her  is  as  a  I.  sand 
12.2.  therefore  cliastenest  thou  them  by  I.  and  I. 

8.  didst  send  wasps  to  destroy  them  by  /.  and  /. 
10.  executing  judgments  on  them  by  I.  and  /. 
14. 20.  who  a  I.  hetbre  was  but  honoured  as  a  man 
15.  8.  he  which  a  I.  before  was  made  of  earth 
10.27.  being  warmed  with  a  I.  sun-beam,  melted 
Heel.  11.  3.  the  bee  is  I.  among  such  as  fly 
19. 1.  contemns  small  things  shall  fall  by  I.  and  I. 

20.  12.  ihero  is  ihat  buyeth  much  for  a  I. 
!5.  he  givelh  I,  and  upbraideth  much 

21.  20.  but  a  wise  man  doth  scarce  smile  a  /. 
22. 11. make?,  weejiing  for  the  dead,  he  is  at  rest 
25.19. all  wickedness  is/,  to  wickedness  of  woman 
29.  23.  be  it  I.  or  much,  hold  thee  contented 

31.  19.  a  I.  is  sutiicient  for  a  man  well  nurtured 
34.  10.  he  that  hath  no  experience,  knoweth  I. 
38.  24.  he  that  hath  I.  business,  shall  become  wise 

40.  6.  a  I.  or  nothing  is  his  rest,  he  is  in  his  sleep 
42.  4.  be  n<it  ashamed  of  getting  much  or  I. 

51.  27.  how  Ihat  I  have  had  but  /.  labour 
/>an.3.  53. 0  ye  mountains  and  I.  hills,  bless  Lord 

1  Mae.  7. 50.  the  land  of  .Iud°  was  in  rest  a  I.  while 

2  Mac.  6.  25.  through  my  desire  to  live  a  I.  time 
7. 33.  though  the  Lord  be  angry  with  us  a  I.  while 

LIVE. 
2  Esd.  2.  14.  for  1 1,  saith  the  Lord 
Tab.  4.  6.  succeed  to  thee  and  all  them  that  Z.  justly 
5.  3.  which  may  go  with  thee  while  I  yet  I. 
Jud.  7.  27.  be  his  servants,  that  our  souls  may  /. 
Esth.  16.  15.  that  the  Jews  I.  by  most  just  laws 

19.  publish  this,  that  the  .Tews  may  freely  I. 
Wisd.'i.ll.  for  though  they  I.  long,  yet  not  regarded 

5.  15.  but  the  righteous  I.  for  evermore 

8.  9.  I  purposed  to  take  her  to  me  to  I.  with  me 
16.  to  I.  with  her  hath  no  sorrow,  but  joy 

14.  28.  they  prophesy  lies,  or  I.  unjustly 
Eccl.  13.  5.  if  have  any  thing,  he  will  I.  with  thee 
19.6.  that  can  rule  his  tongue,  shall  I.  without  si  rife 
34. 13.  the  spiritof  those  that  fear  the  Lord  shall  I. 
39. 9.  his  memorial  shall  not  depart  away,  and  his 
name  shall  I.  from  generation  to  generation 
42.  23.  all  these  things  I.  and  remain  for  ever 
48.  11.  that  slept  in  love,  for  we  shall  surely  I. 

1  Mac.'i.  13.  to  what  end  shall  we  I.  any  longer? 

33.  do  the  command  of  the  king,  and  you  shall  i!. 

6.  .59.  covenant  that  they  shall  I.  alter  their  laws 
S  Mac.  6.  1.  and  not  to  I.  after  the  laws  of  God 

19.  than  to  I.  stained  with  such  an  abomination 
25.  through  my  desire  to  I.  a  little  time 
]1.  23.  they  that  are  in  our  realm  /.  quietly 

24.  shouM  sutTi-r  them  to  I.  after  their  own  laws 

25.  that  they  may  I.  according  to  the  customs 

LIVED. 
Wisd.  15. 17.  whereas  he  I.  once,  but  they  never 
Eccl.  30.  5.  while  he  I.  he  saw  and  rejoiced  in  him 
41. 4.  whether  thou  have  I.  ten  or  a  hundred  years 
48. 12.  whilst  he  Mie  was  not  moved  with  presence 

2  Mac.  ft.  27.  Maccabeus  I.  in  the  mountains 

9.  9.  while  he  I.  in  sorrow  his  flesh  fell  away 

LIVETII. 
Toh.  13.  1.  blessed  he  God  that/,  for  ever 
Jud.  12.  4.  Juiliih  said,  as  thy  soul  I.  my  Ijord 

13.  Ifi.  as  the  Lord  /.  who  hath  kept  me  in  my  way 
Eccl.  3.  12.  and  grieve  him  not  as  lone  as  he  /. 

18.  1.  he  that  I.  for  ever  Treated  all  things 

22.  4.  bntshe  that  I.  dishonestly  is  father's  heavin. 
25.  7.  he  lh;it  I.  to  see  the  fall  of  his  enemy 

41.  1.  O  death,  how  hitter  to  n  m.in  that/,  at  rest! 
♦4.  14.  bul  their  name  I.  for  evermore 

815 


LOR 

LIVING,  LIVING. 

Tab.  13.  4.  and  extol  him  before  all  the  /. 

IVisd.  1. 13.  not  pleasure  in  the  destruction  of  the  I. 
4.  10.  so  I.  among  sinners,  he  was  translated 
1().  shall  condemn  the  ungodly  which  arc  I. 
7.  20.  to  know  the  natures  of/,  creatures 
15.  11.  he  knew  not  him  that  breathed  in  a  I.  spirit 
18.  12.  nor  were  the  /.  sutiicient  to  bury  them 

23.  he  stayed  wrath,  and  parted  the  way  to  the  I. 
Eccl.  4. 1.  my  son,  defraud  not  the  poor  (if  his  /. 

17. 28. the /.and  sound  in  heart  shall  praise  Lord 

45.  16.  he  chose  him  out  of  all  men  I. 

49.  16.  so  was  Adam  above  every  /.  thing 
Bel  5.  I  may  not  worship  idols,  hut  the  I.  God 
0.  Ihinkest  thou  not  that  Bel  is  a  I.  god  ? 

24.  thou  canst  not  say  that  he  is  no  I.  god 

2  Mae.  7.  33.  though  the  I.  Lord  be  angry  with  .us 

11.  24.  had  rather  keep  their  own  manner  of/. 

15.  4.  there  is  in  heaven  a  /.  Lord,  and  mighty 

LOAVES. 

1  Mac.  4.  51.  they  set  the  /.  upon  the  table 

2  Mac.  1.  8.  we  lighted  lamps,  and  set  forth  the  /. 

LODGE. 
Tob.  6. 10.  brother,  to-day  we  shall  /.  with  Raguel 
Eccl.  14.  24.  ho  Ihat  doth  /.  near  her  house 

25.  shall  /.  in  a  lodging  where  good  things  are 

26.  and  he  shall  /.  under  her  branches 

LODGED. 
Tob.  6.  1.  they  came  to  river  Tigris,  and  /.  there 

9.  5.  Raphael  went  out  and  /.  with  Gabael 
Eccl.  29.  27.  my  brother  conieth  to  be  /. 

1  Mac.  11.  6.  they  saluted  one  another  and  /. 

LOINS. 
.Tud.  4.  10.  put  sackcloth  on  their  /.  8.  5. 

14.  their  /.  girt  with  sackcloth,  2  Jfnc.  10.  25. 
Eccl.  35.  18.  he  hath  smitten  in  sunder  the  /. 
47.  19.  thou  didst  bow  thy  /.  unto  women 

LONG. 
Toh.  9.  4.  if  I  tarry  /.  he  will  be  very  sorry 

10.  4.  my  son  is  dead,  seeing  he  stayeth  /. 
IVisd.  3.  17.  though  they  live  /.  yet  not  regarded 

4.  13.  perfect  in  a  short  time,  fulfilled  a  /.  time 

17.  2.  fettered  with  the  bonds  of  a  /.  night 

18.  20.  hut  the  wrath  endured  not  /. 

24.  in  the  /.  garment  was  the  whole  world 
Eccl.  1.  12.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  giveth  a  /.  life 
20.  and  the  branches  thereof  are  /.  life 

3.  6.  that  honoureth  his  father  shall  have  a  /.  life 

4.  1.  make  not  the  needy  eyes  to  wait  /. 

7.  16.  remember  that  wraih  will  not  tarry  /. 
10.  10.  the  physician  cutteth  off  a  /.  disease 
14.  12.  remember  death  will  not  be/,  in  coming 
23.  28.  and  to  he  received  of  him  is  /.  life 

46.  4.  and  was  not  one  day  a^  /.  as  two? 

LONG-SUFFERING. 
Wisd.  15. 1.  /.  and  in  mercy  ordering  a1I  things 
Eccl.  2.  1 1.  the  Lord  is  full  of  compassion  and  /. 

5.  4.  the  Lord  is  /.  ho  will  in  no  wise  let  thee  go 

LOOK,  S. 
Eccl.  19.  29.  a  man  may  bo  known  by  his  /. 

23.  4.  O  Lord,  give  me  not  a  proud  /. 

26.  9.  whoredom  may  he  known  in  her  haughty  /. 

LOOK. 
Wisd.  12. 22.  when  judged,  we  should  /.  for  mercy 
Eccl.  9.  8.  and  /.  not  upon  another's  beauty 

.33.  15.  so  /.  on  all  the  works  of  the  Most  High 

34. 15.  to  whom  doth  he  /.?  who  is  his  strength  ? 

38.28.  his  eyes /.still  upon  the  pattern  of  the  thine 

41.  20.  be  ashamed  to  /.  upon  a  harlot 
43. 11.  /.  on  the  rainbow,  pi  aise  him  that  made  i.t 

LOOKED. 
Eccl.  16.  29.  the  Lord  /.  upon  the  earth 
23.  20.  after  they  were  perfected,  /.  upon  them  all 
51.  7.  I  /.  for  the  succour  of  men,  there  was  none 

LOOKETII. 
Feel.  16. 19.  shaken,  when  the  Lord  /.  upon  them 
20.  14.  he  /.  to  receive  many  things  for  one 

42.  16.  the  Bim  that  gives  light,  /.  on  nil  things 

2  Mac.  7.  6.  the  Lord  God  /.  upon  us,  and  in  truth 

LOOKING. 
Tob.  11.  5.  Anna  sat  /.  toward  the  way  for  her  son 
Eccl.  12.  ll.shalt  be  to  him,  as  if  wiped  a  /.-glass 
2  Mac.  7.  4.  his  brethren  and  his  mother  /.  on 

LOOSED. 
.Jud.  fi.  14.  the  Tsrnelites  came  to  him  and  /.  him 
Feci.  22.  16.  timber  cannot  ho  /.  with  shaking 

LOOSENED. 
.Tad.  9.  2.  who  /.  the  girrlle  of  a  xaid  to  defile  her 

LORD. 
Toh.  2.  2.  a  poor  man,  who  is  mindful  of  the  L. 

3.  12.  now,  O  L.  I  set  mine  eyes  toward  thee 

4.  19.  Mess  the  Ij.  thy  God  nlway,  and  desire 

5.  19.  that  which  the  Ti.  halh  given  lis  to  live 
7.  18.  the  I<.  of  heaven  and  earth  eive  thee  joy 
10.  12.  the  L.  of  heaven  restore  thee,  my  brother 
13.  10.  give  praise  to  the  L.  for  he  is  good 

Wisd.  1.  1.  think  of  the  L.  with  a  good  heart 

3.  8.  and  their  Ij.  shall  reign  for  ever  t 

4.  14.  for  his  soul  plensed  the  li.  therefore 

5. 7.  as  for  the  way  of  the  L.  w«  have  not  known  it 


LOV 

Wisd.  S.  15.  their  reward  also  is  with  the  L. 

6.  7.  he  which  is  L.  over  all,  sh.ill  tear  no  man 

8.  3.  the  L.  of  all  things,  himseirioved  her 
21.  I  prayed  to  the  L.  and  besought  him 

9.  1.  O  God  of  my  fathers,  and  L.  of  mercy 

13.  who  can  ihi'nk  what  the  will  of  the  L.  ig? 
10. 20.  the  righteous  praised  thy  holy  name,  O  L. 

11.  13.  they  had  Mime  feeling  of  the  L. 

26.  they  are  thine,  O  L.  thou  lover  ofsouls 

12.  2.  that  they  may  believe  on  thee,  O  L. 

16.  and  because  thou  art  the  L.  of  all 
Eccl.  1.  1.  all  wisdom  comclli  from  the  L. 

2.  1.  if  thou  come  to  serve  the  L.  prepare 

11.  the  L.  is  full  of  compassion  and  mercy 
3.20.  the  power  of  the  L.  is  great,  he  is  honoured 

4.  28.  and  the  I<.  shall  fight  for  tliee 

5.  7.  make  no  tarrying  to  turn  to  the  L.  for  sud- 

denly shall  the  wrath  of  the  L.  come  forth 
11.  4.  for  the  works  of  the  L.  are  wonderful 

12.  the  eye  of  the  L.  looked  on  him  for  good 

14.  poverty  and  riches  come  of  the  L. 

15.  wisdoiTi,  understanding  the  law  arc  of  the  L. 

17.  the  gift  of  the  L.  remaineth  wilh  the  godly 
26.  for  it  is  an  easy  thing  unto  the  L. 

13.  14.  love  the  L.  all  thy  Hie,  and  call  on  him 

14.  2.  who  is  not  fallen  from  his  hope  in  the  L. 
11.  do  good,  and  give  the  L.  his  due  oflering 

15.  9.  for  it  was  not  sent  him  of  the  L. 

11.  say  not,  it  is  through  the  L.  that  I  fell  away 

16.  17.  say  not,  I  will  hide  myself  from  the  L. 
17. 1.  the  L.  created  man  of  the  earth,  and  turned 

5.  the  use  of  the  five  operations  of  the  L. 

20.  but  all  their  sins  are  before  the  L. 

21.  but  the  L.  being  gracious,  S|'ared  them 

18.  2.  the  L.  only  is  righteous,  and  there  is  none 

13.  but  the  mercy  of  the  L.  is  on  all  flesh 

23.  and  be  not  as  ono  that  tenipteth  the  L. 
26.  all  things  are  soon  done  before  the  L. 

23.  1.  O  L.  Father  and  God  of  my  life,  4. 

28.  it  is  great  glory  to  follow  the  L. 

24.  24.  faint  not  to  be  strong  in  the  L. 

25.  II.  the  love  of  the  L.  passeth  all  things 

26.  4.  if  he  have  a  good  heait  to.vard  the  L. 

14.  a  silent  and  loving  woman  is  a  gift  of  the  L. 

28.  23.  such  as  forsake  the  L.  shall  fall  into  it 

42.  18.  the  L.  knoweth  all  that  may  be  known 

43.  5.  great  is  the  L.  Ihat  made  it 

29.  the  L.  is  terrible  and  very  great 

30.  when  you  glorify  the  L.  exalt  him  as  m«ich 
33.  for  Ihc  L.  hath  m;ide  all  things 

44.  16.  Enoch  pleased  the  L.  and  was  translfted 

45.  19.  this  the  L.  saw,  and  it  displeased  him 

22.  for  the  L.  himself  is  his  porlion  and  inherit 

46.  10.  see  thai  it  is  good  to  follow  ihe  L. 
13.  the  prophet  of  the  L.  beloved  of  his  L. 

Dan.  3. 1.  they  walked  in  the  fire,  blessing  the  L. 

LOSE. 
Ecch  9.  6.  that  thou  /.  not  lliine  inheritance 

29.  10.  /.  thy  money  for  thy  brother  and  friend 

LOSETH. 
Eccl.  27. 16.  whoso  discoverelh  secrets,  /.  his  credit 

LOSING. 
Ecc/.10.21. but  roughness  and  pride  is  the  /.  thereof 

LO?S. 
Eccl.  22.  3.  a  foolish  dauehler  is  born  to  his  /. 

LOST. 
Toft. 14.2.Tobit  was  .58yenrK  old  when  he /.his sight 
Eccl.  2.  14.  woe  unio  you  ihat  have  /.  patience 
8.  12.  Itir  if  thou  lendest  him,  count  it  but  /. 
22.  1!.  -veep  for  the  dead,  for  he  Ivith  /.  Ihe  ligh 

27.  IS.  so  hast  ihou  /.  \\w  love  of  thy  neighbour 
20.  10.  let  it  not  rust  under  a  stone  lo  he  /. 

41.  2.  to  him  that  despaireih  anA  halh  /.  patienc« 

LOT. 
F.ccl.W.S.  nor  spared  the  place  where  L.  sojourned 

LOT. 
fVisd.  2.  9.  this  is  our  portion,  and  our  /.  is  this 
Feci.  14.  15.  and  thy  labours  lo  bo  divided  by  /. 
37.  fi.  beware,  lesl  he  east  the  /.  upon  thee 
I  Mac.  3.  36.  he  should  divide  their  land  by  U 

LOT.'^. 

F.sth.  10.  10.  therefore  hiith  he  made  two  /. 

11.  these  two  /.  came  al  Ihe  hour  and  timo 

LOVE. 

1  Esd.  3.  22.  forget  their  /.  to  friends  and  brethren 

4.  18.  do  they  not  /.  a  woman  who  is  comely  t 

24.  when  he  halh  robhrd,  he  brings  it  to  his  /. 
TVi*.  4.  13.  therefore,  my  son,  /.  thy  brethren 

13.  14.  O  blessed  are  ih'ey  thai  /.  Iheo 
WiS'/.  1.1. /.righteousness, ye  thai  he  judges  of  fartb 

3.  9.  such  as  bo  faithful  in  /.  shall  abide  wilh  him 

6.  12.  she  is  easily  seen  of  them  ihat  /.  her 

17.  and  the  care  of  discipline  is  /. 

18.  nnd  /.  is  Ihe  kec|iing  of  her  laws 

8.7.  if  man  /.  righleonsne.^--,  her  labours  are  virlnm 
Eccl.  1. 18.  it  enlargelh  their  rejoicing  ihat  /.  him 
2.  15.  and  ihev  that  /.  him  will  keep  his  ways 

16.  they  Ihal  /.  him,  shall  be  filled  wilh  the  Inw 

4.  7.  iret  thyself  the  /.  of  the  congrecation 

10.  he  sliail  /.  thee  more  than  thy  aiother  doth 


r 


LYS 

Ktcl.  4.  14.  and  them  thatZ.  her,  the  Lord  doth  I. 
6.  33.  if  thou  I.  to  hear,  shall  receive  uuduriiiund 
7.21.  let  thy  soul /.a  good  servant,  dclraud  him  not 
30.  I.  him  that  made  thee  with  all  thy  strength 

10.  19.  they  that  I.  him  are  an  honouruble  plant 

13.  14.  /.  the  Lord  all  thy  life,  and  call  on  him 
15.  13.  they  that  fear  God  I.  not  abomination 
17.  18.  and  giving  him  the  light  of  his  I. 

19.  18.  and  wisdom  oblaineth  his  /. 
24. 18.  I  am  the  mother  of  fair  /.  und  fear 
25. 1.  the  unity  of  brethren,  the  /.  of  neighbours 
II.  but  (he  ^  of  the  Lord  passelh  all  things 
12  the  fcur  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  his  I. 
■.27.  17.  /.  thy  friend,  and  be  faitlilul  to  him 
18.  so  hast  thou  lost  the  I.  of  thy  neighbour 
30.23. 1,  thine  own  soul,  and  comfort  thy  heart 
34. 16.  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  on  them  that  /.  him 
40.  20.  hut  the  I.  of  wisdom  is  above  them  both 
48.11.  blessed  are  they  that  saw  thee  and  slei)t  in  I. 
Sus.  10.  they  both  were  wounded  with  her  /. 

20.  the  doors  are  shut  and  we  are  in  I.  with  thee 
Bel  38.  nor  hast  tlmu  forsaken  them  that  /.  thee 
iMac.  6.  20.  not  lawful  for  ;.  of  life  to  bo  tasted 

14.  2t>.  perceiving  the  I.  that  was  betwi.vt  them 

LOVED. 
fFisd.  7.  10.  I  I.  her  above  health  and  beauty 
8.  2.  I  I.  her  and  sought  her  out  from  my  youth 

3.  yea,  the  Lord  of  all  things  himself/,  her 
£ecZ.  47. 8.  he  sung  songs,  and  i.him  that  made  him 

LOVEST. 
ff^isd.  11.  24.  for  thou  /.  all  the  things  that  are 
16.  26.  thy  children,  O  Lord,  whom  thou  /. 
LOVETH. 
1  Esd.  4.  25.  a  man  I.  his  wife  better  than  father 
Tab.  6.  14.  lest  I  die,  for  a  wicked  spirit  I.  her 
If'isd.  7.  28.  God  I.  none  but  him  that  dwelleth 
Eccl.  4. 12.  he  that  I.  her  I.  life,  that  seek  her  early 
13.15.call  on  the  Lord  for  his  8alvation,every  beast 
/.  his  like,  and  every  man  /.  his  neighbour 
31.  5.  he  that  I.  gold  shall  not  be  justified 
36.  22.  a  man  /.  nothing  belter  than  beauty 
Bar.  6.  9.  an  it  were  for  a  virgin  that  /.  to  go  gay 

LOVER. 
Jfr5d.8.2. 1  sought  her,  and  I  was  a  I.  of  her  beauty 

4.  for  she  is  a  /.  of  God's  works 

LOVERS. 
IVisd.  15. 6.  that  worship  them  are  I.  of  evil  things 

LOVING. 
Esth.  15.  8.  he  comf  irted  her  with  I.  words 
tVisd.  1.6.  for  wisdom  is  a  /.spirit,  will  not  acquit 
.Ecc/.17.29.how  great  is  llie  /.kindness  of  the  Lordl 
86.  14.  a  /.  woman  is  a  gift  of  the  Lord 
Dan.  3.  19.  deal  with  us  after  thy  /.  kindness 

LOVINGLY. 
1  Mac.  8. 1.  such  as  would  /.  accept  all  that  joined 
3  Mac.  12.30.  the  Scythopolitans dealt  /.  with  them 

LOW. 

iRsd.^.W.  let  me  alone,  fori  am  brought  very  /. 

12.4J^.sHek  mercy  for  llie/.estateof  your  sanctuary 

Jud.  6.  19.  and  pity  the  /.  estate  of  our  nalion 

7.  32.  and  they  were  very  /.  brought  in  the  city 

Eccl.%  4.  be  paliijnt  when  art  changed  to  a  /.estate 

11.1.  wisdom  lificth  up  the  head  of  him  of/,  degree 

12.  the  Lord  set  him  up  from  his  /.  estate 

80.  11.  there  is  that  lifketh  his  head  from  a/,  estate 

33   12.  but  some  he  hath  cursed  and  brought  /. 

1  Mac.^.  51.  priests  are  in  heaviness  and  brought  /. 

14.  14.  He  strengthened  all  .us  people  brought  /. 

LOWLY. 

Eccl.  3.  20.  the  [,ord  is  honoured  of  the  /. 

10.  15.  and  hath  plmited  the  /.  in  their  plaro 

12.  5.  do  well  unto  him  that  is  /.  but  give  not  to 

LOYAL. 

iMac.  11. 19.  if  you  will  kei.p  yourselves/,  to  state 

LTicru.s. 

IMac.  15. 10.  L.  consul  of  the  Romans,  to  Ptolomee 

Ltm. 

Jud.  2.  2,1.  he  destroyed  Phiid  and  L.  and  spoiled 

LUMPS. 
Jud.  10.  a.  she  filled  a  bn?  with  corn  and  /.  of  figs 

LUST. 
To4.8.7. 1  take  not  this  my  sister  for  /.  but  ujirightly 
fVisd.  1.').  5.  th<:  sight  entireih  foola  to  /.  after  it 
Sus.  8.  that  thiir  /.  was  inflamed  toward  her 

11.  for  they  worn  ashamed  to  declare  their  /. 

14.  turning  buck,  ilirv  acknowledged  their  /. 

LY.\R,  .<>>,  LtAR. 

I.YINt;. 

F.cct  51.  5.  from  on  nnrli'im  tongue,  from  /.  words 

LY.>5IAS. 
1  Jific.  3.  32.  ho  left  L.  to  oversee  aflairs  of  the  king 

38.  then  L.  chose  Piolcinee  son  of  Dorymcncs 
7.  2.  his  forces  had  Inlc-n  Aniiochus  anil  L. 
8  Mac.  10. 11.  he  set  one  L.  over  affiiirsoftho  realm 
11. 1.  L.  the  king's  protector  and  cousin, took  sore 

12.  and  \,.  himself  Hed  away  shnmefiilly 

15.  Maccabeus  wroio  unto  L.  concnrnini  Jews 

16.  letters  to  the  Jews  from  L.  to  this  effeet 
22.  Antioclms  to  his  hrothnr  L.  greeting 
35.  what  L.  the  king's  cuuiiu  hath  granted 

8ie 


MAI 

2  ..^fac. 12.1. these beingmade,  L.went  unto  the  king 
27.  Ephron  a  strong  city  wherein  /.  abode 
13.  2.  L.  his  protector  and  ruler  of  his  affairs 
14.2.  had  killed  Aniiochus  and  L.  his  protector 

LYSIMACIIUS. 

F.sth.  11.  1.  L.  the  son  of  Ptolemcus  interpreted  it 

2./>/u<:.4.29.  Menelaiis  left  his  brother  L.  in  his  stead 

39. many  gathered  themselves  together  against  L. 

40.  L.  armed  about  3000  men,  and  began  first 

41.  they  seeing  the  attempt  of  L.  caught  stones 


MAN 


[ApocrVph*. 


M. 


MACCABEUS. 

1  Mac.  2.  4.  Judas  who  was  called  M. 

3.  1.  his  son  Judas  called  M.  ruse  in  his  stead 

5.  24.  Judas  M.  and  Jonathan  went  over  Jordan 
34.  the  host,  knowing  it  was  M.  fled  from  him 

2  Mac.  5.  27.  Judas  M.  with  nine  others  withdrew 
8.  16.  M.  called  his  men  together  about  6000 

10. 19.  M.  left  Simon,  and  Joseph,  and  Zaccheus 
.30.  they  took  M.  betwixt  them  and  covered  him 

11.  7.  then  M.  himself  first  of  all  took  weapons 

12.  19.  Uositheus  and  Sosipater  of  M.  captains 

26.  then  M.  inarched  forth  to  Camion 

13.  24.  accepted  well  of  M.  made  him  governor 

14.  6.  the  Assideans,  whose  captain  is  Judas  M. 

27.  that  he  should  send  M.  prisoner  to  Aniioch 

30.  M.  saw  that  Nicanor  began  to  be  churlish 
15.7.  M.  had  confidence  that  Lord  would  help  him 

21.  M.  seeing  the  coming  of  ihe  multitude 
MACEDONIAN. 
Esth.  16.  10.  Aman  a  M.  the  son  of  Amadatha 

1  Mac.  1. 1.  Alexander  son  of  Philip  the  M.  6.  2. 

MACEDONLAxNS. 
Esth.  16. 14.  the  kingdom  of  Ihe  Persians  to  the  M. 

2  Mac.  S.  20.  the  battle  in  Babylon,  with  four 

thousand  M.  and  that  the  M.  being  perplexed 
MAD. 
JVisd.  14.  23.  for  either  they  arc  m.  when  merry 

MAD-MEN. 
2  Esd.  16.  71.  shall  be  like  m.-men,  sparing  none 

MADNESS. 
IVisd.  5.  4.  we  ftjols  accounted  his  life  m. 
Eccl. 'Hi.  13.  thoushaltnevarbe  disquieted  with»n. 
2  Mac.  15.  33.  and  hang  up  the  reward  of  his  m. 

MADE. 
Wisd.  1. 13.  for  G.m.  not  death,  nor  hath  pleasure 

6.  7.  for  he  hath  m.  the  small  and  the  great 

11.  24.  thou  abhorrest  nothing  which  thou  hast  m. 
for  never  wouldest  thou  have  m.  any  thing  if  thou 

13.  15.  set  it  in  a  wall,  and  m.  it  fust  with  iron 

14.  3.  thou  hast  m.  a  way  in  the  sea,  a  safe  path 
8.  is  cursed,  as  well  as  he  that  m.  it 

10.  for  that  which  is  m.  shall  be  punished 
17.  they  m.  an  e.xpress  image  of  a  king 

15.  8.  who  a  little  before  was  m.  of  earth  himself 
Eccl.  24.8.  he  that  m.me  caused  my  tabernacle  rest 

32.  13.  for  these  things  bless  him  that  m.  thee 
39.  21.  he  hath  m.  all  things  for  their  uses 
43.  6.  he  m.  the  moon  also  to  serve  in  her  season 
33.  for  the  Lord  hath  m.  all  things 
MAGIC. 
Wisd.  17.7.  as  for  the  illusions  of  art  m.  put  down 

MAGNIFICENCE. 
1  Esd.  1.  5.  according  to  the  m.  of  Solomon 

MAGNIFY. 
Toh.  12.  6.  bless  God,  praise  him  and  m.  him 
Ksth.  14.  10.  heathen  to  m.  a  fleshly  king  for  ever 
IVisd.  19.  22.  O  Lord,  thou  didst  m.  thy  people 
Eccl.  39.  15.  m.  his  name,  shew  forth  his  praise 
4.3.  28.  how  shall  we  be  able  to  m.  him  1 

31.  who  h.ith  seen  him?  who  can  m.  him  as  he  is? 
49.  11.  how  shall  we  m.  Zorobabel? 

MAGNIFIED. 
Jnd.  12.  18.  because  my  life  is  m.  in  me  this  day 
IVisd.  10.  20.  they  m.  with  one  accord  thy  hand 

MAGNIFIETII. 
fFis/i.8.3.  conversant  with  God,  she  m.  her  nobility 

MAID. 
Toi.  6.12.  them,  is  fair  ami  wise,  therefore  hear  me 

13.  that  this  m.  hath  b'-en  given  to  si'ven  men 
8.  13.  HO  the  m.  opened  the  door  and  went  in 
Jud.  9.  2.  who  loosened  the  girdle  of  a  m. 
10.  2.  she  called  her  m.  and  went  into  the  house 
5.  then  she  gave  her  m.  a  bottle  of  wiiio 
10.  Juilith  wont  out,  she  and  h"r  m.  with  her 

12.  19.  then  «ho  took  what  her  m.  had  pre|)nred 

13.  0.  she  gave  Oloferncs  his  head  to  her  m. 
15.13.  they  put  a  garland  ofolivcon  her  and  her  m. 
I'i.  23.  being  105  yonrs,  and  m.ikc  her  m.  free 

K.1/A.  15.  7.  bowed  herself  on  the  heail  of  llio  m. 
Eccl.  41.  22.  or  to  bo  over  busy  with  his  m. 

MAIDS. 

Tob.  3.  7.  Sara  was  reproached  by  her  father's  m. 

8.  12.  ho  said,  send  one  of  the  m.  ami  let  her  see 

Su.t.  15  she  went  in  as  before  with  two  m.  cmly 

19.  now  when  Ihe  m.  wore  gone  forth  Ihe  ciders 

30  ihut  iha  garden  dourt,  and  sunt  tlis  m.  away 


MAJESTY. 
1  Esd.  4. 40.  she  is  the  strengih  and  m.  of  all  ages 
Tab.  3.16.  prayers  heard  before  the  m.  of  great  God 

13.  C.  and  I  do  declare  his  might  and  >n. 
Esth.  15.6.  and  was  clothed  with  all  his  robes  of  m 

7.  lifting  up  his  Countenance  that  shone  with  m. 

13.  my  heart  was  troubled  for  fear  of  thy  m. 
Wisd.  18.  24.  thy  m.  on  the  diadem  of  his  head 
Eccl.  2.  18.  for  as  is  his  m.  so  is  his  mercy 

MAINTAIN. 
1  Fjd.  4.  52.  to  m.  burnt-offerings  on  the  altar 
Eccl.  25.  22.  a  woman  if  she  m.  her  husband  is  full 
38.  34.  but  they  will  m.  the  state  of  the  world 

MAINTENANCE. 
1  Mac.  14.  29.  for  the  m.  of  their  sanctuary 

MAKE. 
1  Esd.  2. 26.  I  commanded  to  m.  diligent  search 
8.  86.  thou,  O  Lord,  didst  m.  our  sins  light 
IVisd.  15.  .5.  they  that  m.  them  are  lovers  of  evil 

9.  counteth  it  his  glory  to  m.  counterfeit  thioga 

MAKETH. 

IVisd.  15.  8.  he  m.  a  vain  god  of  the  same  clay 

Eccl.  43.  13.  he  m.  the  snow  to  fall  apace 

15.  by  his  great  power  he  m.  the  clouds  firm 

17.  the  noise  of  thunder  m.  the  earth  to  tremble 

MALES. 

1  Mac.  5. 28.  he  slew  all  the  m.  with  the  sword,  51 

MALICE. 
IVisd.  12. 10.  and  that  their  m.  was  bred  in  them 

20.  whereby  they  might  he  delivered  from  iheirnb 

10.  14.  a  man  indeed  killcth  through  his  m. 
Eccl.  27.  30.  m.  and  wrath,  these  arc  abominationa 

28.  7.  and  bear  no  m.  to  thy  neighbour 

1  Mac.  9.  51.  that  they  might  work  m.  on  Israel 
13. 6. heathen  are  gathered  todestroy  usof  veryja. 

2  Mac.  4.  50.  still  in  authority,  increasing  in  m, 

MALICIOUS. 
Esth.  13.  4.  there  was  scattered  a  certain  m.  peopio 

7.  they  who  of  old  and  now  also  are  m. 
IVisd.  1.4.  into  a  m.  soul  wisdom  shall  not  enter 
2  Mac.  5.  23.  a  ni.  mind  against  his  countrymen 

MALICIOUSLY. 
Su5. 43.  these  men  have  m.  invented  against  me 

62.  as  they  tti.  intended  to  do  to  their  neighbour 
iMac.  14.  11.  others  being  m.  set  against  Judas 

MALIGNED. 
Ecc/.  45.  18.  strangers  m.  him  in  the  wilderness 

MAN. 

Esth.  13.  9.  there  is  no  m.  that  can  gainsay  thee 

11.  there  is  no  m.  that  can  resist  thee  the  Lord 

14.  not  prefer  the  glory  of  m.  above  glory  of  God 
IVisd.  2. 1.  nor  was  any  m.  known  to  have  returned 

5.  it  is  fast  sealed,  so  that  no  m.  Cometh  again 
7.2.  being  compacted  in  blood,  of  the  seed  ofm. 

23.  kind  to  m.  stedfast,  sure,  free  from  care 
9.13.  what  m.  is  he  that  can  know  counsel  of  GodT 

11.  Ifi.  might  know  that  wherewithal  a  m.sinneth 

15.  16.  m.  made  them,  but  no  m.  can  make  a  god 

16.  20.  breail,  able  to  content  every  m.  delight 

21.  tempered  itself  to  every  m.  liking 

26.  the  growing  of  fruits  that  nourisheth  m. 

Ecc/.  8.  4.  jest  not  with  a  rude  m.lest  bo  disgraced 

MANFULLY. 

1  Mac.  9.  10.  let  us  die  m.  for  our  brethren 

2  Mac. '2.  21.  to  those  that  behaved  themselves  «. 

6.  27.  m.  changing  this  life,  I  will  shew  myself 

7.  5.  they  exhorted  one  another  to  die  m. 

10.  Ihe  third  holding  forth  his  hand<  m. 

8.  10.  Macraheiis  exhorted  them  to  fight  m. 

14.  42.  choosing  rather  to  die  n.  than  to  coille 

MANGLED. 
2  Jl/oe.  7.  15.  thevhrou?hi  Ihe  fifth  also  and  m.  him 

■  MANIFEST. 
IVisd.  12.  17.  thou  niakest  their  boldness  m. 
Keel.  6.  22.  and  she  is  not  tn.  to  many 
16.  16.  his  mercv  is  m.  \n  every  creature 

MANIFESTATION. 
Wisd.  1.  9.  for  the  m.  of  his  wicked  deeds 

MANIFOLD. 
ff7.«(i.7  22.aSpirit,oneonlv,m.  subtile,  lively,  cleat 
F.ccl.  51.  3.  from  the  tti.  nflliclions  which  t  had 

MANLY. 
2  Mac.  7.21.  with  a  in.  slomnch  he  said  to  them 

MANLINESS. 
2  Mac.  8.  7.  that  the  hriiil  of  his  m.  was  spread 
14.  18.  Nicanor  hearing  of  the  m.  of  them 
MANNA. 
2  F.sd.  1.  19.  and  I  gave  you  m.  to  pal 
Bar.  1.  10.  prepare  ye  m.  and  offer  on  the  altar 

Manner. 

Toh.  7.  12.  then  lake  her  according  to  the  m. 
Fath.  13.  ."i.  in  the  sirnngo  m   of  their  laws 
IVifd.  II  9.  thirsting  in  another  m.  than  the  just 
18. 11.  master  servant  were  punisheil  nfter  onem. 
Ecel.yi.  18.  four  m.  of  things  appear;  good,  evil 

1  Mac.  10.  .58.  with  great  elorv,  as  ihe  m.  of  kings  i( 

MANNER.S. 
Pf  e/.3l. 17.  leave  off'finil  for  m.  sake, not  unsallable 

2  .Hie  4. 13.  such  was  the  increase  of  heathenish  m. 
S.  22.  for  m.  more  barbarous  than  he  that  act  him 


AfOCRYPHA.] 


MAS 


SJfof.  C.  9.  wouldnot  conform  lom.  of  the  Gentiles 

MANSLAUGHTER. 
S  Esd.  1.  26.  your  feet  aie  swilt  to  commit  m. 
IVisd.  14.  '.25.  there  reigned  in  ail  men,  blood,  m. 

MANY. 
EccZ.M.  7.  for  dreams  have  deceived  m.  they  failed 
42.  0.  and  shut  up  where  m.  hands  uro 

MARCHED. 
Jud.  1.  13.  he  m.  in  baltle-nrray  against  Arphaxad 
1  Mac.  ti.  'i'.i.  the  king  in.  fiercely  with  Ida  host 

40.  they  »n.  on  safely  and  in  order 

'i  Mac.  11.  10.  they  m.  forward  in  their  armour 
\i.  2tj.  then  Maccabeus  m.  forth  to  Camion 
13. 19.  m.  to  Bethsura  a  strong  liold  of  the  Jews 
MARCHING. 
1  Mac.  6.  41.  that  heard  the  m.  of  the  company 

MARDOCHEUS. 

I  Esd.  3.  8.  came  with  Encnius,  M.  Beelsarus 

Emh.  10.  4.  M.  said,  God  haih  done  these  things 

U.  2.  M.  of  the  tribe  of  Bunjacnin  had  a  dream 

MARISH. 

1  Mae.  9.  42.  they  turned  again  to  the  m.  of  Jordan 

45.  the  water  on  this  and  that  side  the  m. 

MARKET. 

fVisd.  15.12.  they  counted  our  time  here  m.  for  gain 

MARKET-PLACE  ani\  places. 
1  Esd.  2.  18.  the  Jews  do  build  thu  m.-places 
Tob.  2.  3.  one  of  our  nation  is  cast  in  the  m.-place 

MARK. 
Wisd.  5. 12.  like  as  when  an  arrow  is  shot  at  a  m. 

21.  the  thunderbolts  shall  Hy  to  the  m. 
Eccl.  23.  10.  shall  not  be  wiihout  a  blue  m. 

MARKS. 
Eccl.  28.  17.  the  whip  maketh  m.  in  the  flesh 

MARRIAGE. 
1  Mac.  9.37.  the  children  of  Jambri  made  a  great  m, 

41.  thus  was  their  m.  turned  into  mournmg 
10.  58.  and  celebrated  her  m.  at  Ptolemais 

MARRIAGES. 

'  fVisd.  14.  24.  they  kept  not  livrs  nor  m.  undefiled 

26.  changing  <if  kind,  disorder  in  m.  adultery 

MARRIAGE-CHAMBER. 

Tob.  6.  16.  when  thou  shall  come  into  the  m. 

1  Mac.  1.  27.  she  that  sat  in  i/i.  was  in  heaviness 

MARRY. 
Eccl.T.'ii.  m.  thy  daughter,  so  shalt  have  performed 

1  Mac.  10.  5fi.  I  will  m.  my  daughter  to  thee 

2  JMac.  1.  14.  Antiochus  as  though  he  would  m.  her 

MARRIED. 

1  Esd.  5.  38.  who  m.  Augia  one  of  the  daughters 
8.70.  they  and  sons  have  m.  with  their  daughters 

92.  O  Esdras,  we  have  m.  strange  women 
Tob.  1.  9.  I  m.  Anna  of  mine  own  kindred 

3.  8.  she  had  been  m.  to  seven  husbands 

4.  12.  they  all  m.  wives  of  their  own  kindred 
F^th.  10.  0.  whom  the  king  m.  and  made  queen 
Eccl.  15.  2.  receive  him  aa  a  wife  m.  of  a  virgin 

26.  22.  a  m.  woman  is  a  tower  against  death 

42.  9.  and  being  m.  lest  she  should  be  haled 

10.  and  when  she  is  m.  lest  she  should  he  barren 
IMac.  14.  25.  so  he  m.  was  quiet,  and  took  pari 

MARVEL. 
F^cl.  11.21.  m.  not  at  the  work  of  sinners,  but  trust 
16.  11.  it  is  m.  if  he  escape  unpunished 
26.  11.  m.  not  if  she  trespass  against  thee 

43.  24.  and  when  we  hear  it,  we  m.  thereat 

MARVELLED. 
Eccl.  11.  13.  so  that  many  that  saw  it,  m.  at  him 

47.  17.  the  countries  m.  at  thee  for  thy  songs 

2  Mac.  1.  22.  a  fire  kindled,  so  that  every  man  m. 
7.  12.  the  king  m.  at  the  young  man's  courage 

MARVELLETH. 
Eccl.  40.  7.  when  all  is  safe,  he  awaketh  and  m. 
43.  18.  eye  r;i.  at  the  beauty  of  the  whiteness 

MARVELLOUS. 
}Visd.  10.  17.  guided  the  righteous  in  a  m.  way 
19.  8.  seeing  thy  vi.  strange  wonders 
Eccl.  17.  9.  he  gave  them  to  glory  in  his  m.  acts 
38.  6.  he  might  be  honoured  in  his  m.  works 
42. 17.  not  given  power  to  declare  all  his  m.  works 
43.  2.  declaring  at  his  rising  a  m.  instrument 
29.  the  Lord  is  great  and  m.  in  his  power 

48.  14.  and  at  his  death  were  his  works  m. 
Mac.  7.  18.  Iherelore  m.  things  are  done  to  as 
20.  buf  the  mother  was  m.  above  all 

MASS,  See  Iron. 
MASSACRE. 

1  Mac.  1.  24.  having  made  a  great  m.  and  spoken 

MASTER. 
fTwd.  18.  ll.m.  and  servant  punished  ono  manner 
£«eM9.  21.  if  a  servantsay  to  his  m.  I  will  not  do 
32.  I.  if  thou  be  made  the  m.  of  the  feast 

2  Mac.  1.  10.  to  Arisiobulus,  king  Ptolemeus  m. 
2.  29.  83  the  m.  budder  of  a  new  house  must 

care  for  the  whole  building 
14. 12.  Nicanor,  whr)  had  been  m.  of  the  elephants 

MASTERS. 
Eccl.  3. 7.  do  aervic?  unto  his  parents,  a«  to  hia  m. 

MA3TICK. 
Siu.  54.  who  answered,  ondcr  a  m.  tree 
817 


MED 

MATTATHIAS. 
1  Mac.  2.  14.  M.  and  his  sons  rent  their  clothes 

16.  M.  also  and  his  sons  came  together 

17.  the  king's  oflicers  said  to  M.  on  this  wise 
19.  M.  answered  and  spake  with  a  loud  voice 
21.  which  thing  when  M.  saw,  he  was  inflamed 
27.  M.  cried  throughout  thu  cily,  saying 
39.  when  M.  and  Ins  friends  understood  hereof 
45.  M.  and  bis  friinds  went  round  about 
49.  when  the  lime  drew  near  that  M.  should  die 

II.  70.  none  left,  except  M.  the  son  of  Ab^alom 

14.  29.  Simon  son  of  M.  with  his  brethren 

If).  14.  Simon  came  with  his  sons  M.  and  Judas 
"Mac.  14.  lU.  wherefore  he  sent  M.  to  make  peace 

MATTER. 
IVisd.  11.17.  that  made  the  world  of  m.  without  form 

15.  13.  that  of  earthly  m.  makes  brickie  vessels 
Eccl.  5.  15.  be  not  ignorant  in  a  great  m.  or  small 

7.25.  so  shalt  thou  have  performed  a  weighty  m 
11.  9.  strive  not  in  a  m.  that  concerns  thee  not 
22.8.when  he  hath  told, he  will  say, what  is  the  m.7 

27.  1.  many  have  sinned  for  a  small  vi. 

28.  10.  as  the  m.  of  the  fire  is,  so  it  burnelh 
37.  11.  hearken  not  to  these  in  any  m.  of  counsel 

MATTERS. 
Eccl.  3.  23.  be  not  curious  in  unnecessary  m. 
II.  10.  my  son,  meddle  not  with  many  in. 
37.  11.  neither  with  a  coward  in  m.  of  war 
2  Mac.  4.  23.  to  put  him  in  mind  of  necessary  m. 
31.  then  came  the  king  in  haste  to  apjiease  m. 

8.  9.  who  in  m.  of  war  had  great  exjierience 

MEANLY. 
2  Mac.  15.  38.  but  if  I  have  done  slenderly  and  m 

MEANS. 
Eccl.  46.  4.  did  not  the  sun  go  back  by  his  m.'! 

MEASURABLY. 
Eccl.  31.  28.  wine  m.  drunk  bringeth  gladness 

MEASURE. 
Wisd.  11.  20.  thou  hast  ordered  all  things  in  m. 

MEASURED. 
IVisd.  4.  8.  nor  that  is  m.  by  number  of  years 

MEAT. 
Tob.  2.  2.  when  I  saw  abundance  of  m.  I  said 

4.  then  before  I  had  tasted  »f  any  m.  I  start  up 
7.  8.  they  set  store  of  m.  on  the  table 
10.  7.  and  she  did  eat  no  m.  on  the  day-time 
Jvd.  12.  9.  until  she  did  eat  her  m.  at  evening 

13.  10.  and  she  put  it  in  her  bag,of  m. 

IVisd.  13. 12.  the  refuse  of  his  work  to  dress  his  m 

16.  2.  preparedst  for  them  m.  of  a  strange  taste 
19.  21.  nor  melted  the  icy  kind  of  heaveidy  m. 

Eccl.  30.  18.  are  as  messes  of  m.  set  on  a  grave 

25.  a  good  heart  will  have  a  cate  of  his  m. 
31.  23.  whoso  is  liberal  of  his  m.  men  speak  well 
24.  but  against  him  that  is  a  niggard  of  hia  m. 
3R.  18.  yet  is  one  m.  better  than  another 
40.  29.  he  pollutelh  himself  with  other  men's  m. 
41. 1.  to  him  that  is  yet  able  to  receive  m. 

19.  be  ashamed  to  lean  thy  elbow  on  the  m. 
Bel  11.  set  on  the  m.  and  make  ready  the  wine 

MEATS. 
IVisd.  19.  11.  when  they  asked  delicate  m. 
Eccl.  13.  7.  and  he  will  ahame  thee  by  his  m. 
36.  18.  the  belly  devoureth  all  m.  yet  is  one  meat 
37.29.  he  not  unsalialile,  nor  too  greedy  upon  m 

30.  for  e.\cess  of  m.  bringeth  sickness 
Bel  14.  when  gone  out,  the  king  set  m.  before  Be 

1  Mac.  1.  63.  they  might  not  he  defiled  with  m. 

2  Mac.  11.31.  Jews  shall  use  their  own  kind  of  m 

MEDDLE. 

1  Esd.  R.  27.  be  cp.relul  not  to  m.  with  the  place 

2  Ksd.  16.  67.  to  m.  no  more  with  Ihem  for  ever 
Eccl.  11.  10.  my  son,  m.  not  with  many  matters,  foi 

if  thou  m.  much,  thou  shall  not  he  innocent 

1  Mac.  10.35.  no  man  have  authority  to  m.w  ith  them 

MEDES. 

2  Esd.  1.  3.  who  was  captive  in  the  land  of  the  M 
fud.  1.  1.  which  reigned  over  the  M.  in  Ecbatane 

16.  10.  the  M.  were  daunted  at  her  hardinesri 
1  Mac.  1.  1.  Darius  king  of  the  Persians  and  M 

MEDIA. 

1  Esd.'.i.l.  a  feast  to  all  the  princes  of  M. and  Persia 

7*176.  1.  14.  I  went  into  M.  and  left  in  trust  with 

Gabael  at  Rages,  a  city  of  M.  ten  talents 

of  silver 

15.  was  troubled  that  I  could  not  go  into  M. 

4.  1.  had  Committed  to  Gabael  in  Rages  of  M.  20. 

9.  2.  take  two  camels,  and  go  lo  Rages  of  M. 
11. 1,5.  told  great  things  had  happened  lohimin  M. 

14.  4.  go  into  M.  my  son,  for  I  surely  believe  th.nt 

for  a  lime  peace  shall  rather  be  in  M. 
14.  he  died  at  Echat:ine  in  M.  being  127  yo»rs 
MEDICINE. 
Eccl.  6.  16.  a  faithful  friend  is  the  m.  of  life 

MEDICINES. 
Eccl.  38. 4.  the  L.  hath  created  m.  out  of  the  earth 

MEDITATE. 
Eccl.  14.  20.  blessed  is  the  man  that  doth  m.  good 

MEDITATION. 

Eccl.  39.  1.  he  that  is  occupied  in  the  m.  thereof 

SN 


MEN 

MEDITATIONS. 
2  Esd.  10.  5.  then  left  I  the  m.  wherein  I  waa 

MEEK. 
Feci.  '.i.  19.  but  m  ateries  are  revealed  unto  the  nt. 
10. 14.  the  Lord  hath  set  up  the  m.  in  heir  stead 

MEEKNESS. 
IVisd.  2.  19.  examine  that  wo  may  know  hi^m. 
Eccl.  1.  27.  and  faith  and  m.  arc  his  delight 

3.  17.  my  son,  go  on  with  thy  businiws  in  m. 

4.  8.  give  him  n  friendly  answer  with  m. 

10.  28.  my  son,  glorify  thy  soul  in  m.  and  give  it 
36.  23.  if  there  be  kimlness  and  m.  in  her  tongue 

MEET. 
Tob.  11.  16.  Tobit  went  out  to  m.  hia  daughter 
Eccl.  9.  3.  VI.  not  with  a  harlot  lest  thou  full 
15.  2.  as  a  motlmr  shall  she  m.  him,  and  receiv-fl 
40.  23.  a  Tiiend  iiml  companion  never  in.  aniisB 

1  Mac.  3.  11.  Judaa  went  forth  t<i  in.  him,  16. 
17.  when  they  saw  the  host  coming  to  m.  them 

5.  39.  u|)on  this  Judas  went  to  m.  them 

10.  56.  m.  me  therefore  at  Ptolemnis,  that  we 
.M).  that  Jonathan  should  come  and  m.  hira 

11.  64.  he  wi'nt  lo  vi.  Ihcin  and  left  Simcm 

12.  41.  then  Jonaihun  went  out  to  m.  him 

2  Mac.  14.  21.  appointed  n  day  to  m.  in  together 

MEET. 

1  f;sr/.2.20.wolhinkit  m.not  toneglectsnch  matter 
5.  51.  they  offered  sacrifices  daily  aa  was  m. 

2  Esd.  4.  44.  and  if  I  be  m.  therefore,  shew  me 

12.  36.  thou  only  hast  been  m.  to  know  this 
7*04.1.8.  the  third  I  gave  to  them  lowborn  it  wnsm. 

7. 10.  it  is  m.lhat  ilioushouldsl  marry  my  daughter 
fVisd.  4.  5.  not  ripe  lo  eat,  yea,  m.  for  nothing 

7.  15.  to  conceive  as  is  m.  for  things  given  me 

13.  11.  he  hath  sawn  a  tree  m.  for  the  purpose 
Eccl.  10.  23.  it  is  not  m.  to  despise  the  poor  man 

1  Mac.  8.  30.  shall  think  m.  to  add  or  diminish 
10.  10.  thou  art  a  man  vi.  to  be  our  friend 

13.  40.  look  who  are  m.  among  you  to  be  in  court 

2  j1/rtc.8.33.  he  received  a  reward  m. for  wickedneai 

9.  12.  he  said,  it  is  m.  lo  be  subject  to  God 

MELODY. 
Eccl.  32.  6.  so  is  the  m.  of  music  with  wine 
40.  21.  the  pipe  and  paallery  make  sweet  m. 
47.  9.  that  the  singers  might  make  sweet  m. 
50. 18.  with  variety  ofsonnds  was  made  sweet  m, 

MELODIOUS. 
IVisd.  17. 18.  Oram,  noise  of  birda  among  branches 

MELT. 

./«»i.  lfi.15.  the  rocks  shall  jn.aa  wax  at  thy  presence 

T/srf.lfi.20.thehopeoftheunfailhfnl  shall m. away 

19.  21.  kind  of  meat  ihnt  was  of  nature  apt  to  m, 

MELTED. 

IVisd.  16.  22.  snow  endured  the  fire  and  m.  not 

19.  21.  neither  m.  they  the  icy  kind  of  meat 

MEMBER. 

2.Wi2c.7.7.punished  l  h  rough  out  every  m.of  thy  body 

MEMORIAL. 
Ps^A. 16.23.  ciinspire  against  us,  a  m.ofdestruction  ■ 
Wisd.  4.  I.  for  the  m.  thereof  is  immoital 
19.  shall  be  in  sorrow,  and  their  m.  shall  perish 

8.  13.  shall  leave  behind  me  an  everlasting  m. 

10.  8.  left  behind  them  a  m.  of  their  foolishnesa 
Eccl.  10.  17.  he  hath  made  their  m.  to  cease 

24. 20. my  m.is  sweeter  than  honey, and  inheritance 
35.  7.  the  m.  thereof  sha'l  never  be  forgotten 
33.  II.  give  a  sweet  savour  and  a  m.  of  fine  flouf 
39.  9.  hia  »ji.  shall  not  depart  away 

44.  9.  some  there  be  which  have  no  m. 

45.  1.  even  Mosi's  4)eloved,  whose  m.  is  blessed 
9.  fiir  a  m.  to  the  children  of  big  people 

11.  with  a  writing  engraved  for  a  m. 

16.  a  m.  to  make  reconciliation  for  hia  people 
49. 10.  of  the  twelve  prophets,  let  the  m.  he  blessed 

liar.  4.  5.  be  ofgood  cheer,  my  penple,  m.  of  Israei 

1  Mac.  3.  7.  and  his  m.  is  ble.ssed  for  ever 

35.  and  to  take  awav  their  w.  from  that  place 
8.  22.  that  they  might  have  by  them  am.  of  pc:ico 
12.  53.  lake  away  their  m.  from  amonssl  men 

2  Mac.  6.  31.  leavin?  his  death  for  a  m.  of  virtue 

MEMORY. 
F.rcl.  23.  26.  she  shall  leave  her  m.  to  bo  cursed 
46.1 1. concerning  the  judges,  let  their  m.  be  blessed 

1  Mic.  13.  29.  he  made  armour  for  a  perpetual  m. 

2  Mac.  1.  25.  that  are  desirous  to  commit  lo  m. 
7.  20.  the  mother  was  worthy  of  honouiable  m. 

MEN. 
Wisd.  3.  4.  though  they  be  punished  in  sfiht  of  nt. 
4.  2.  when  it  is  present  m.  take  example  al  it 
8.11    I  shall  be  admired  in  sisht  of  creat  TH. 
II   23.  for  thou  winkeat  at  the  sins  of  m. 

12.  17.  when  m.  will  not  believe  that  i\m\\  art 

13.  I.  vain  are  all  m.  by  nature,  isnorani  of  Ooi! 

14.  11.  and  stumbling  blocks  lo  the  sonit  of  m. 

14.  by  the  vain  glory  of'n.  they  entered  the  worjd 

17.  whom  m.  could  no'  honour  in  presence 
25.  there  reigned  in  all  m.  wiihout  e.vcption 

Feci.  1.  16.  and  filleth  m.  with  her  fruits 
2.  5.  acceptable  m.  in  the  furnace  of  adversity 

18.  in'ohandd  of  Lord  and  not  into  han.la  of  « 


MER 

JEee/.  S1.3.  as  teeth  of  a  lion,  slaying  souls  of  m. 
33.  10.  anil  all  ;«.  are  from  tlie  ground 

37.  '■2S.  all  llnngd  are  not  prulilublti  fur  all  m. 

38.  b.  lie  Imtli  given  m.  skill,  thai  he  might  be 
44.3.  let  ua  praise  m.  renowned  for  their  power 
4o.  16.  he  chose  him  out  of  all  m.  living 

49.  111.  Sum  and  Seth  in  gre,"!  honour  among  m. 
Prayer  of  .Manass.  wliom  all  m.  fear  and  tremble 

MENELAUS. 
2  Mac.  4.  23.  Jason  sent  M.  Simon's  brother 
27.  BO  M.  got  the  principaliiy 
29.  M.  left  his  brother  Lysimachus  in  his  stea<l 
3'J.  M.  supposing  he  had  gotten  convenient  time 
34.  M.  taking  Andronicus  apart,  prayed  him 
43.  there  was  an  accusation  laid  against  M. 
45.  but  M.  being  now  convicted,  promised 
47.  he  discharged  M.  from  the  accusations 
SO.  M.  remained  still  in  authority,  increasing 

5.  S.  the  city  taken,  M.  tied  into  the  castle 

15.  M.  that  traitor  to  the  laws  being  his  guide 
23.  besides  .M.  who  bare  a  heavy  hand  over 

11.29.  iM.  declared  to  us,  that  your  desire  was 
32. 1  have  sent  also  M.  that  he  may  comfort  you 
13.  3.  RI.  also  joined  himself  with  them 
ME.NSTRUOUS. 
S  Esd.5.6.ani\  m.  women  shall  bring  forth  monsters 
Esth.  14.  IG.  that  I  abhor  it  as  a  m.  rag 
Bar.  6.  29.  ni.  women  eat  their  sacrifices 

MERCHANT. 
F.ccl.  26.  29.  a  m.  shall  hardly  keep  from  wrong 
37.  11.  nor  consult  with  a  m.  concerning  exchange 

MERCHANTS. 
Ecd.  42.  5.  and  of  m.  indifferent  selling 
Bar.  3.  2;).  the  vi.  of  Meran  and  Theman 

1  Mac.'i.il.  the  m.  of  the  country  heating  the  fame 

2  Mac.  8.  34.  Nicanur  brought  m.  to  buy  the  Jews 

MERCY. 
1  Esd.  5.  61.  because  his  m.  and  glory  is  for  ever 

8.  T8.  m.  hath  been  shewed  to  us  from  thee 
S  Esd.  1.  25.  I  shallhave  no  m.  upon  you 

2.  4.  go,  O  my  children,  and  ask  m.  of  the  Lord 

31.  I  shall  shew  m.  to  them,  for  I  am  merciful 

32.  until  I  come  and  shew  m.  unto  them 
4.  24.  and  we  ate  not  worthy  to  obtain  m. 

7.  66.  I  know  that  he  is  of  gieal  m. 

8.  11.  nourished,  till  thou  disposest  it  to  thy  m. 
32.  if  thou  hast  a  desire  to  have  m.  on  us 

45.  and  have  m.  upon  thine  own  inheritance 
Tob.  3.  2.  and  all  thy  ways  are  m.  and  truth 
8. 17.  bccaii.sc  thou  hast  had  m.  grant  them  m.  O 
Lord  finish  their  life  in  healtli  with  joy  and  m. 

13.  2.  for  he  doth  scourge  and  hath  m. 

5.  he  will  scourge,  and  will  have  m.  again,  9. 

14.  7.  shall  rejciice,  shewing  m.  to  our  brethren 
Jud.  13.  14.  he  hath  not  taken  away  his  m. 
Wisd.  3.  9.  for  grace  and  m.  is  to  his  saints 

4.  15.  that  his  grace  and  m.  is  with  his  saints 

6.  6.  for  m.  will  soon  pardon  the  meanest 

9.  1.  God  of  my  fathers  and  Lord  of  to.  who  hast 
11.  9.  when  tried,  albeit  but  in  m.  chastised 

23.  thou  hast  m.  upon  all  thou  canst  do  all  things 
12. 22.  when  we  arc  judged,  we  should  look  for  m. 

15.  1.  gracious,  and  in  m.  ordering  all  things 

16. 10.  thy  m.  was  ever  by  them  and  healed  them 
19.  1.  wrath  came  on  them  without  m.  to  the  end 
Ecd.  2.  7.  wait  fur  his  m.  and  go  not  aside 

9.  hope  fur  good,  and  for  everlasting  joy  and  m. 

11.  for  the  Lord  is  full  of  compassion  and  m. 
18.  for  as  his  majesty  is,  so  is  his  m. 

,5. 6.  say  not,  his  m.  is  great,  he  will  be  pacified 

16.  11.  m.  and  wrath  are  with  him,  he  is  mighty 

12.  as  his  m.  is  great,  so  is  his  correction  also 
14.  make  way  for  every  work  of  m. 

16.  his  in.  is  manifest  to  every  creature 
18.  11.  God  pourelh  forth  his  m.  upon  them 

13.  the  m.  of  man  is  toward  his  neighbour,  but 

the  m.  of  the  Lord  is  upon  all  flesh 

14.  he  hath  m.  on  them  that  receive  discipline 
23.  3.  whose  hope  is  far  from  thy  m. 

2^.  4. -he  sheweth  no  m.  to  a  man  like  himself 
29.  8.  with  a  pour  man,  delay  not  to  shew  hirn  m. 

35.  J9.  and  made  them  to  rejoice  in  his  m. 
20.  m.  is  seii.soiiahlu  in  time  of  affliction. 

36.  1.  have  m.  upon  us,  O  Lord,  and  l)eh\d  us 
12.  O  Lord,  have  m.  on  the  people  that  is  Called 

46.  7.  in  the  lime  of  Muses  he  did  a  work  of  m. 

47.  22.  but  flic  Lord  will  never  leave  ofThis  m. 

50.  24.  that  he  would  confirm  his  m.  with  us 

51.  8.  then  thought  I  upon  thy  m.  O  Lord 
29.  let  your  soul  ritjoice  in  Ins  m. 

Bar.  6.  rV*.  Iliny  can  shew  no  m.  lu  the  widow 
Dan.  3.  Vi.  cause  not  thy  m.  to  depart  from  us 
67.  his  m.  enilnreth  for  ever,  68.  1  Mac.  4.  24. 

1  Mac.  3.  44.  tip  y  might  ask  m.  and  compassion 
4.  10.  if  prradvriiture  the  Lord  will  h.ive  ni.on  us 

2  Mac.  2.  7.  till  God  receive  them  unto  m. 
18.  he  will  shortly  have  m.  upon  us 

6.  16.  he  never  withdrawclh  hii  m.  from  ui 

7.  29.  that  I  mny  receive  thee  again  in  m. 

&  S.  th«  wratli*V)rtIie  Lord  was  turned  into  m. 
RIO 


MID 

3  Mac.  8. 27.  which  was  beginning  of  m.  unto  them 

9.  13.  who  now  no  mure  would  have  m.  on  him 

10.  4.  that  ho  would  chasten  them  with  ;;(. 

MERCIES. 
Eccl.  18.  5.  and  who  shall  also  tell  out  his  m.  ? 
51.  3.  to  the  multitude  of  thy  in.  Dan.  3.  19. 
I'rayer  of  Manors,  thou  of  thine  infinite  m.  hast 

MERCIFUL. 
1  Esd.  2.  31.  I  am  m.  saith  the  Lord  almighty 

7.  62.  1  know  that  the  Most  High  is  called  m. 

8.  31.  because  of  us  thou  shalt  be  called  m.  32. 
Tub.  6.  17.  rise  up,  and  pray  to  God  who  is  m. 

7.  12.  the  m.  God  give  you  good  success  in  all 
14. 9.  sliewthyselfm.  that  it  may  go  well  with  thee 
.fad.  16.  15.  thou  art  m.  to  them  that  fear  thee 
K.itk.  13.  17.  be  m.  to  thine  inheritance 
IVisd.  12.  19.  that  the  just  man  should  be  m. 
F.ccl.^.  1.  he  that  isjn.  will  lend  to  his  neighbour 
36. 13.  O  be  m.  to  Jerusalem  the  holy  city 

44.  10.  these  were  m.  men,  whose  righteousness 

45.  1.  he  brought  out  of  him  a  m.  man,  even  Moses 
48.  20.  they  called  on  the  Lord  who  is  m. 

50. 19.  besought  L.  by  prayer  before  him  that  is  m. 
Bar.  3.  2.  O  Lord,  have  mercy,  for  thou  art  m. 
Prayer  of  Manass.  but  thy  in.  jiromise  is  unmea- 
surahle  and  unsearchalHe,  for  thou  art  very  m. 

1  v1/ac.2.57.  David  for  being  m.  possessed  the  throne 

2  Mac.  1.  24.  who  art  strong,  and  righteous  and  m. 

7.  37.  that  he  would  speedily  be  in.  to  our  nation 

8.  29.  besought  the  m.  L.  to  be  reconciled,  l3. 12. 
10.26.  tliey  besought  him  to  be  m.  to  them 
11.9.  they  praised  the  m.  God,  and  took  heart 

10.  having  a  helper,  for  the  Ld.  was  m.  to  them 
MERCIFULLY. 
Tub.  8.  7.  771.  ordain  that  we  may  become  aged 

MERCIFULNESS. 
Eccl.  40.  17.  and  in.  endureth  for  ever 

MERCILESS. 

IVisd.  12.5.  and  also  those  m.  murderers  ofchildren 

MERRY. 

1  Esd.  7. 14.  they  kept  feast  making  m.  before  Lord 

9.  54.  they  went  to  eat,  and  drink,  and  make  m 

2  Esd.  2.  27.  thou  shalt  be  m.  and  have  abundance 
7i/A.7.U.  Raguel  said,  eat,  and  drink,  and  make  in. 
Jud.  12.  13.  drink  wine,  and  be  m.  with  us,  17 
fVisd.  14.  28.  for  either  they  are  mad  when  m 
Eccl.  1.  12.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  niaketh  a  m.  heart 

13.  25.  a  7K.  heart  makes  a  cheerful  countenance 
32.  2.  that  thou  mayest  be  m.  with  them 

MESOPOTAMIA. 
.Tud.  2. 24.  he  went  through  m.  and  destroyed  cities 

MESSAGE. 
1  Mac.  10.  51.  Alexander  sent  a  m.  to  this  effect 
15.  32.  Antenobius  told  him  the  king's  m. 

MESSENGER. 

1  Esd.  1.  50.  God  sent  by  his  m.  to  call  them  back 

MESSENGERS. 

1  Mac.  1.  44.  the  king  had  sent  letters  by  m. 

5.  14.  behold,  there  came  other  m.  from  Galilee 
7. 10.  came  to  Judea,  where  they  sent  m.  to  Judas 
13.  14.  Tryphon  sent  m.  unto  Simon,  saying 
21.  they  in  the  tower  sent  m.  to  Tryphon 

2  Mac.  4. 19.  Jason  sent  special  m.  from  Jerusalem 

MESSES. 
Eccl.  30.  18.  are  as  m.  of  meat  set  on  a  grave 

MET. 
1  Esd.  0.  4.  whosoever  m.  not  there  in  two  or  three 
7'o6.7.1.they  came  to  the  house,  and  Sarah  7ii.them 
.Jud.  TO.  11.  the  first  watch  of  .\ssyrians  m.  her 

1  .Voc.  4. 29.  Judas 771.  them  with  ten  thousand  men 

10.  60.  to  Ptolemais,  where  he  771.  the  two  kings 
74.  where  Simon  his  brother  m.  him  to  help  him 

11.  2.  they  opened  unto  him,  and  771.  hiin 

6.  then  .lonathan  771.  the  king  with  great  pomp 

2  j'l/(ic.5. 12.cominanded  not  to  spa  re  such  as  they  771. 
8.  14.  being  sold  before  they  in.  together 

10.  35.  they  killed  all  that  they  771.  withal 

MID-DAY. 

1  Esd.  9.  41.  he  read  from  morning  to  m. 

MIDNIGHT. 
Jud.  12.  5.  and  she  slept  till  771.  and  she  arose 
MID  LAND. 

2  Mac.  8.  35.  ho  came  thrniigli  the  771.  to  Antioch 

MIDST. 
.Tud.  6. 11.  thev  went  from  the  771.  of  iho  plain 

11.  19.  I  will'lend  thee  through  the  771.  of  Judea, 

and  I  will  set  thy  throne  in  the  771. 
thereof 
IVisd.  7.  18.  the  ending,  and  771.  of  the  times 
F.ccl. 'i).  13.  remember  thou  goest  in  the  771.  of  snares 
11.  8..  nor  interrupt  men  in  the  771.  of  their  talk 
42.  12.  and  sit  not  in  the  771.  of  women 
Dan.^.  I.  and  they  walked  in  the  771.  of  the  fire 
2.  opening  his  mouth  in  the  m.  of  the  P.r'^.  said 
27.  and  made  the  771.  of  the  fiiriiace  moist 
66  he  hath  delivered  lis  out  of  the  7;i.  of  furimcf 
Su.'.  34.  two  elders  stood  in  the  771.  of  the  people 

4''.  so  ho  standing  in  the  t7i.  of  them,  said 

2  .^fac.  14.  44.  he  fidl  in  the  771.  of  the  void  place 

45.  yel  hg  ran  through  lliv  in.  of  the  throng 


MIN 


[ApocRxrnA. 


MIGHT. 
Tob.  13.  6.  praise  the  Lord  of  771.  declare  his  m. 
Jud.  9.  11.  nor  standeth  tliy  771.  in  strong  men 

14.  thou  art  the  God  of  all  power  and  tti. 
13.8.  she  smote  twice  on  his  neck  with  all  her  Ml 
MIGHTY. 

1  Esd.  4.  41.  great  is  truth,  and  771.  above  all  thingi 
8.  47.  by  the  771.  hand  of  our  Lord,  61. 

2  Esd.  6. 32.  the  M.  hath  seen  thy  righteous  dealing 

10.  24.  that  the  M.  may  be  merciful  unto  thee 
E.<lh.  14.  19.  O  thou  771.  God  above  all,  hear  us 

16. 16.  they  be  children  of  the  most  771.  living  God 

H'isd.a.  23.  a  771.  wind  shall  stand  up  against  them; 

ill  dealing  shall  overthrow  the  thrones  of  the  m. 

6.  6.  but  771.  men  shall  be  mightily  tormented 
Eccl.  4.  27.  neither  accept  the  person  of  the  jti. 

7. 6.  lest  at  any  time  thou  fear  the  person  of  the  771. 

11.  6.  many  m.  men  have  been  greatly  disgraced 

12.  6.  against  the  771.  day  of  their  punishment 
15.  18.  he  is  m.  in  power,  and  beholdeth  all  things 
29.  13  it  shall  light  for  thee  butter  than  a  m.  shield 

18.  suretiship  hath  driven  771.  men  from  houses 
34.  16.  he  is  their  m.  protection  and  strong  stay 
40.  6.  and  he  followed  the  771.  One 

16.  he  called  upon  the  771.  Lord,  when  bis  enemies 
47  5.  he  gave  strength  to  slay  that  »7i.  wariior 

MIGHTIER. 
fVisd.  13.  4.  how  much  771.  is  he  that  made  him 
Eccl.  8. 12.  lend  not  to  him  that  is  771.  than  thyself 

13.  2.  have  no  fellowship  with  one  that  is  771. 

MIGHTIEST. 

1  ££(2. 4.12. 0  men,  how  should  not  the  kingbe77t.7 

MIGHTILY. 
IVisd.  6.  6.  but  mighty  men  shall  be  771  tormented 

MILDNESS. 
Esth.  13.  2.  carrying  myself  with  equity  and  771. 
15.  8.  God  changed  the  spirit  of  the  king  into  m. 
MILK. 

2  Esd.  8.  10.  out  of  the  breasts  771.  to  be  given 

See  Honey. 
MIND. 

1  Esd.  2. 8.  all  they  whose  771.  the  Lord  bad  moved 

3.  17.  declare  your  771.  concerning  the  writings 
lO.itmaketh  the  771.  of  the  king  and  child  all  one 

8.  11.  as  many  therefore  as  have  a  771.  thereunto 

2  Esd.  4.  23.  for  it  was  not  my  771.  to  be  curious 
5.  14.  my  777.  was  troubled,  so  that  it  fainted 

33.  thou  art  sore  troubled  in  771.  for  Israel 

9.  40.  I  sahl,  why  art  thou  so  vexed  in  thy  »7i. 
41.  let  me  alone,  for  I  am  grieved  in  my  771. 

12.  3.  out  of  the  trouble  and  trance  of  my  771. 

5.  lo,  yet  am  I  weary  in  my  771.  and  very  weak 
J'ob.  4.  19.  neither  let  them  be  put  out  of  thy  m. 

13.  6.  if  you  turn  to  him  with  your  whole  771. 
.Tud.  12.  16.  his  777.  was  moved,  and  he  desired  her 
Esth.  11.  12.  Mardocheus  bare  this  dream  in  771. 
/fisrf.3. 14.  an  inheritance  more  acceptable  to  his 771. 

4.12. concupiscence  doth  undermine  the  siiiiple77i. 

9.15.  the  earthly  tabernacle  weigheth  down  the  771 
Eccl.  5.  2.  follow  not  thine  own  771.  and  strength 

6.32.  if  thou  wilt  apply  thy  771.  thou  shalt  be  prudent 
37.  let  thy  771.  be  upon  the  ordinancus  of  the  Lord 

7.  26.  hast  thou  a  wife  after  thy  771.  forsake  her  not 
13.  26.  is  a  wearisome  l.ibour  of  the  771. 

23.  4.  turn  away  from  thy  servants  a  haughty  m, 

6.  give  not  over  thy  servant  to  an  impudent  tii. 

26.  14.  so  much  worth,  as  a  m.  well  instructed 
15.  and  her  continent  771.  cannot  be  valued 

27.  16.  and  shall  never  find  friend  to  his  771. 

29.  17.  he  that  is  of  an  unthankful  771. 

30.  «!.  give  not  over  thy  in.  to  heaviness 

31.  28.  wine  bringeth  cheerfulness  of  the  tti. 
29.  \^'ine  to  excess  makeih  bitterness  of  the  771. 

37.  6.  forget  not  thy  friend  in  thy  771. 

12.  a  godly  man,  whose  771.  is  according  to  thy  m. 

14.  a  man's  771.  is  sometime  wont  to  tell  him  more 

than  seven  watchmen  that  sit  in  a  lower 

38.  26.  he  giveih  his  771.  to  make  furrows 
28.  he  settcih  his  771.  to  finish  his  work 

39.  I.  he  that  giveih  his  771.  to  the  law  of  God 
Par.  4. 28.  as  it  was  your  m.  to  go  astray  from  Gci 
.'>i(,t.9.  they  (icrverted  theirown  771.  and  lurned  away 

1  Jfnc.  10.  74.  Jonathan  was  moved  in  his  77t. 

2  Mac.  1.  3.  to  do  his  will  with  a  willing  m. 

3. 16.  declared  the  inward  arony  of  his  771. 

4.  46  Ptolemee  brouKht  him  to  be  of  another  m. 

5.  11.  removing  out  of  Egypt  in  a  furious  771. 
17.  and  so  haiighiy  wits  Aiitiochns  in  771. 
21.  such  was  the  haughtiness  of  his  771. 

6.  29.  the  speeches  proceeded  from  a  desperate  M 
9.  27.  that  he  undersianding  my  771.  will  yield 
11.  7.  so  they  went  forth  wilh  a  williog  771. 

25.  our  771.  is  that  this  nation  Khali  be  in  rest 
37.  send  tliiit  wo  may  know  what  is  yuur  771. 

13.  4   the  Kin?  of  kings  moved  .\ntioehus'  771. 
9.  king  came  with  a  barbarous  and  haughty  M 

14.  20.  it  appeared  that  they  were  all  of  one  M 

15.  30.  Judas  tho  chi.'f  dife'nder  in  body  and  m 

MINDED. 
EtLk.  14.  13.  of  all  that  are  like  si.  to  him 


ATOCRTPHA.] 


MIS 


Ecd.  19. 4.  that  is  hasty  to  give  credit,  Is  light-m. 

iJUac.  12.8.  heard  lliai  the  Jamuites  were  j;i.  to  do 

MINDS. 

1  Ksd.  2.  9.  whose  m.  were  stirred  up  thereto 
H'isd.  4.  15.  nor  laid  they  up  tliis  in  llieir  m. 

2  Mac.  2.  2.  that  they  should  not  err  in  their  ?«. 
15.  10.  wlien  he  stirred  up  their  m.  he  gave  them 

MINDFUL. 
a  Esd.  16.  20.  nor  be  always  ;«.  of  the  scourges 
7'oA.  2.  2.  bring  what  poor  man  is  tn.  of  the  L»rd 
4.  5.  my  son,  be  »n.  of  the  Lord  all  thy  days 
Wisd.  U'-  11.  they  luiaUt  he  m.  of  thy  goodness 
19.  10.  for  they  were  yet  m.  of  the  things  done 
Eccl.  3.  31.  is  m.  of  that  which  may  come  after 
it  Mac   12.  43.  that  he  was  m.  of  tiie  resurrection 

MINGLE. 
1  E^d.  8.  87.  to  m.  ourselves  with  the  uncleanness 

MINGLED. 
S  Mac.  14.  38.  when  they  in.  not  themselves 
15.  39.  as  wine  m.  witli  wattr  is  pleasant 
MINGLING. 
S  Mac.  14. 3.  in  the  limes  of  their  m.  with  Gentiles 

MINISTER. 
1  Esd.  1.  4.  and  m.  unto  his  peoi)Ie  Israel 
5.  who  m.  in  the  presence  of  your  brethren 

4.  54.  the  priests'  vestments  wherein  they  m. 
Eccl.  4.  14.  serve  her,  shall  7n.  to  the  holy  One 

45    15.  that  they  should  m.  to  him,  and  bless 
1  Mac.  10.  42.  appertain  to  the  priests  that  m. 
MINISTERS. 
^        1  Ksd.  1.  3.  the  Leytes,  the  holy  m.  of  Israel 

5.  35.  all  the  m.  ot  the  temple,  8.  5,  22. 
Wisd.  6.  4.  because  being  m.  of  his  kingdom 

MINISTERED. 
Tob.  1.  7.  the  sons  of  Aaron  who  m.  at  Jerusalem 
Jud.  4. 14.  they  that  m.  to  the  Lord  had  sackcloth 

MINISTRY. 
Wisd.  18.  21.  bringing  the  shield  of  his  proper  m. 
Eccl.  48.  20.  delivered  them  by  the  m.  of  Esay 

MIRACULOUSLY. 
iMac.  3.  30.  that  had  m.  honoured  his  own  place 

MIRROR. 
Wisd.  7.  26.  the  unspotted  m.  of  the  power  of  God 

MIRTH. 
1  Esd.  3.  20.  it  turneth  every  thought  into  m. 
Tob.  2.  6.  all  your  m.  be  turned  into  lacnentation 
Wisd.  8.  16.  hath  no  sorrow,  but  m.  and  joy 
Eccl.  31.  31.  despise  not  thy  neighbour  in  his  m. 
Bar.  2.  23.  the  voice  of  m.  and  the  voice  of  joy 
1  Mac.  4. 59.  the  dedication  of  altar  be  kept  with  m. 

MISCHIEF. 
iKsd.  15.  56.  so  shall  God  deliver  thee  into  m. 
Esth.  13.5.  this  people  working  all  them,  they  can 
Eccl.  19.  27.  will  do  thee  a  m.  before  thou  be  aware 
27.  27.  he  that  worketh  m.  it  shall  fall  on  hira 

1  Mnc.  1.  15.  joined  to  heathen  and  sold  to  do  m. 
7.  23.  now  when  Judas  saw  all  the  m. 

9.  61.  they  took  men  that  were  authors  of  that  m. 

2  Mac.  A.  47.  who  was  the  cause  of  all  the7n.  13.  4. 

6.  3.  the  coming  in  of  this  m.  was  sore 

7.  31   thou  that  hast  been  the  author  of  all  m. 

MISCHIEVOUS. 
Esth.  14.  19.  deliver  us  out  of  the  hands  of  the  m. 
Wisd.  15.  4.  nor  did  the  m.  invention  of  men 
Eccl.  11.  33.  take  heed  of  a  m.  man  lest  he  bring 
Sus.28.  the  two  elders  came  full  of  to.  imagination 

MISCONCEIVE. 
S  Mac.  3.  30.  suspecting  lest  ihe  king  should  m. 

MISERABLE. 
Tob.  13. 10.  love  in  thee  for  ever  those  that  are  m. 
Wisd.  3.  11.  whoso  despiseth  nur'ure,  he  is  m. 
9.  14.  for  the  thoughts  of  mortal  men  are  m. 

13.  10.  but  VI.  are  they,  and  in  dead  things  hope 
15.  14.  and  are  more  m.  than  very  babes 

JEccZ.29.24.it  is  a  to.  life  to  go  from  house  to  house 
Bar.  4.  31.  m.  are  they  that  afflicted  iliee 

^.  TO.  are  the  cities  which  thy  children  served 
2  J>/ac.9.28.  sodied  he  a  m.  death  in  strange  country 

MISERY. 
2  Esrf.7. 33.  m.  shall  pass  away,  and  long-sufTering 
•9.  45.  God  heard  me,  looked  upon  my  to. 
Wisd.  3.  2.  and  iheir  departure  is  taken  for  m. 
Eccl.  11.  13.  and  lifted  up  his  head  from  m. 

1  JV7UC.2. 7.  woe  is  me,  to  see  this  to.  of  my  people 
6.  II.  how  great  a  flood  ofm.it  is  wherein  now  I  am 

2  Mar.,  fi.9.  then  might  a  man  have  seen  present  m. 

14.  8.  for  all  our  nation  is  no  small  m. 

MISERIES. 

3  Esd.  8.  .tO.  many  great  m.  shall  be  done  to  them 
Bar.  2.  25.  and  they  died  in  great  m.hy  famine 

1  Mac.  3.  42.  Judas  saw  tliat  m.  were  multiplied 

MISINFORMED. 

2Jtfae.3.  11.  and  not  as  that  wicked  Simon  had  m. 

MISS. 

2  Ksd.  IR.  13.  arrows  are  sharp  and  shall  not  m. 
Eccl.  8.  9.  m.  not  the  discourse  of  the  elders 

MISSING. 
2  JIfac.  14.  43.  but  m.  lur  «'r(ike  through  haste 

MIST. 

Wisd.  2.4.  and  our  life  shall  be  dispersed  as  a  m. 

819 


MON 

Eccl.  43.22.  a  present  remedy  of  all  is  a  m.  sooiing 

MITHRIDATES. 

1  Esd.  2. 11.  he  delivered  them  to  M.  his  treasurer 

16.  in  time  of  Belenus,  and  M.  and  Tabellius 

MITIGATED. 

Wisd.  16.  18.  for  some  time  the  flame  was  m. 

MITEE. 

Eccl.  45.  12.  he  set  a  crown  of  gold  upon  the  m. 

MIXED. 

1  Esd.  8. 70.  holy  seed  is  7/t.  with  the  strange  people 

2  Esd.  13.  11.  and  they  were  all  ra.  together 

MOAB. 
Jud.  1. 12.  slay  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  ofM. 
5.  2.  and  called  all  the  princes  of  M. 

22.  all  that  dwelt  by  the  sea-side  and  in  M. 

MOABITES. 
1  Esd.  8.  69.  the  M.  Egyptians,  and  Edomites 
Jud.  6.  1.  Olofernes  said  to  Achior  and  all  the  M. 

MOAN. 
Eccl.  38.  17.  weep  bitterly,  and  make  great  m. 

MOCK. 
/f'>S(i.l2. 25.  thou  didit  send  a  judgment  torn,  them 

MOCKED. 
Tob.  2.  8.  but  my  neighbours  to.  me  and  said 

1  J)/ac.  7. 34.  bvil  he  m.  them  and  laughed  at  them 

2  JV/ac.7. 39.  king  took  ii  grievously  that  he  was  to. 

MOCKERY. 
Eccl.  27. 28.  m.  and  reproach  are  from  the  proud 
2  Jl/ac.  8.  17.  injury,  whereof  they  made  a  m. 

MOCKING. 
Eccl.  33.  6.  a  stallion  horse  is  as  a  m.  friend 
2  JMat.7.7.  brought  second  to  make  him  am.-stock 

MODERATE. 
Eccl.  31.  20.  sound  sleep  cometh  of  m.  eating 

MODERATELY. 
Eccl.  31.  27.  wine  is  good,  if  it  be  drunk  to. 

MODEST. 
2  Mac.  4. 37.  the  m.  behaviour  of  him  that  was  dead 

MODIN. 
I  Mac.  2. 1. then  arose  Mattathias  and  dwelt  in  M. 

15.  came  into  city  of  M.  to  make  them  a  sacrifice 

23.  to  sacrifice  on  the  altar  which  was  at  M. 
70.  in  sepulchre  of  his  fathers  at  M.  9.  19. 

13.25.  buried  them  in  M.  the  city  of  his  fathers 
30.  this  is  the  sepulchre  which  he  made  at  M. 
16.  4.  who  went  out  and  rested  that  night  at  M. 
2 Mac.  13.  14.  so  Judas  camped  by  M. 

MOIST. 
Dan.  3.  27.  as  it  bad  been  a  to.  whistling  wind 

MOLEST. 
Esth.  12.  6.  Aman  sought  to  m.  Mardocheus 

1  Mac.  10.  35.  or  to  m.  any  of  them  in  any  matter 

MOLLIFYING. 

Wisd.  16.  12.  nor  to.  plaister  that  restored  them 

MOMENT. 

2  Esd.  16.  38.  which  pains  slack  not  a  to. 

Wisd.  18. 12.  in  one  m.  noblest  offspring  destroyed 
2 ./V/ac.  6. 25.  through  my  desire  to  live  a  m.  longer 
I  9.  11.  his  pain  increasing  every  to. 
MONTH. 

1  Esd.  5. 6.  in  the  m.  Nisan,  the  first  m.  Esth.  11. 2. 
47.  when  the  seventh  m.  was  at  hand 

53.  began  from  the  first  day  of  the  seventh  771. 

7.  5.  the  three  and  twentieth  day  of  the  m.  Adar 
10.  passover,  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  first  to. 

9.  5.  the  twentieth  day  of  the  ninth  m. 

16.  in  the  first  day  of  the  tenth  m.  they  sal 

2  £sd.l6.38.  a  woman  in  the  ninth  m.  bringeth  forth 
Esth.  10. 13.  and  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  same  vi. 

13.  6.  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  twelfth  m.  Adar 
16.  20.  the  thirteenth  day  of  the  twelfth  to. 

Eccl.  43.  8.  the  to.  is  called  after  her  name 
1  Mac.  1.  54.  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  vt.  Casleu 
4.  52.  on  the  five  and  twentieth  day  of  the  ninth  to. 
59.  from  the  five  and  twentieth  day  of  the  m. 

14.  27.  the  eighteenth  day  of  the  to.  Elul 
16.  14.  in  the  eleventh  to.  called  Sabat 

.2  Mac.  1. 9.  see  that  ye  keep  the  feast  in  m.  Casleu 
18.  upon  the  five  and  twentieth  day  of  the  m. 
11.21.  the  twenty-fourth  day  of  m.  Dioscorinthius 
33.  in  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  m.  Xanthicus,  38. 

15.  36.  the  thirteenth  day  of  the  twelfth  m. 

MONTHS. 

1  E5(i.l.44.Joacim  reigned  but  three  m.and  ten  days 

2  Esd.  4.  40.  when  she  hath  fulfilled  her  nine  to. 

8.  8.  and  nine  m.  doth  tliy  workmanship  endure 
Wisd.  7.  2.  to  be  flesh  in  the  time  often  vt. 

2  Jl/ac.  7. 27.  have  pity  on  me  that  bare  thee  nine  to. 

MONEY. 
1  Ksd.5. 54.  they  gave  the  masons  and  carpenters  m. 
8.  24.  by  penalty  of  »n.  or  by  imprisonment 
Tob.  4.  1.  in  that  day  Tobit  remembered  the  m. 

2.  I  may  signify  to  him  of  the  to.  befi)rc  I  die 
5. 2.  how  can  I  receive  m.  seeing  I  know  iiim  not 

3.  seek  thee  a  man,  and  go  and  receive  the  m. 
18.  be  not  greedy  to  add  m.  to  m. 

i.  2.  go  to  Gabnet  and  bring  me  the  m. 
10.  2.  and  there  is  no  man  to  give  him  the  m. 
10.  Raguel  gave  him  servants,  cattle,  and  m. 
12. 3.  ho  bath  brought  me  the  is.  and  healed  thee 


MOT 

.fud.  4.  10.  s(^rvants  bought  with  si.  put  sackcloth 
Eccl.  9.  9.  spend  not  thy  m.  with  her  at  the  wine 

14.  3.  what  should  an  envious  man  do  with  771.? 
21.8.  that  builds  his  house  with  other  men's  m. 
29.5.  for  his  neighbour's  7rt. he  will  siieuksubmisaly 

10.  lose  thy  m.  for  thy  brother  and  thy  frisnd 
51.  25.  buy  her  for  yourselves  without  to. 
28.  get  learning  with  a  great  sum  of  m. 
Bar.  1.  6.  they  made  also  a  collection  of  m. 
10.  we  have  sent  you  vt.  to  buy  you  oU'erings 

6.  35.  they  can  neiiher  give  riches  nor  to. 

1  jVac.  3.  31.  to  go  into  Persia  to  gather  much  m. 
8.  26.  nor  aid  them  with  victuals  or  vi.  28. 

13. 15.  it  is  form,  he  is  owiii"  to  the  king's  Ireasurn 
17.  yet  sent  he  the  in.  andTlie  children,  18. 

15.  6.  I  give  thee  leave  also  to  coin  m. 

2  Mac.  1. 14.  to  receive  to.  in  name  of  a  dowry 

3.  6.  Ihe  treasury  was  full  of  infinite  sums  of  »n. 
7.Apolloniuscame  and  had  shewed  him  of  the  tti. 

and  sent  him  to  bring  him  the  foresaid  ttu 

9.  that  intelligence  was  given  him  of  Ihe  m. 

10.  there  was  to.  laid  up  for  Ihe  relief  of  widowi 

4.  1.  having  been  a  bewrayer  of  the  vt. 

20.  this  7«.  was  appointed  to  Hercules'  sacrifice 
23.  sent  Menelaus  to  bear  Ihe  m.  unto  the  king 
27.  but  as  for  the  m.  that  he  had  promised 
4.'5.  to  give  him  in.  if  he  would  pacify  the  king 

8.  10.  to  make  so  much  vt.  of  the  captive  Jews 
25.  took  Iheir  to.  that  came  to  buy  them 

10.  21.  they  had  sold  Iheir  breihren  for  vt. 

MONUMENT. 
Wisd.  10.  7.  a  standmg  pillar  of  salt  is  a  m. 

1  Mac.  13.  27.  Simeon  built  a  vt.  on  the  sepulchre 

2  Mac.  15.  6.  determined  to  set  up  a  public  to. 

MOON. 
2  Esd.  5.  4.  the  m.  shall  shine  thrice  in  the  day 
6. 45.  thou  comraandedst  the  m.  to  give  her  light 
Eccl.  27.  11.  but  a  fool  changeth  as  the  m. 
39.  12.  for  I  am  filled  as  the  m.  at  Ihe  full 
43.  6.  he  made  Ihe  to.  also  to  serve  in  her  season 

7.  from  the  vi.  is  the  sign  of  feasts 
50.  6.  he  was  as  ibe  m.  at  the  full 
Bar.  6.  60.  for  sun,  7/1.  and  stars  are  obedient 

67.  nor  shine  as  Ihe  sun,  nor  give  light  as  the  7a. 
Dan.  3.  40.  O  ye  sun  and  711.  bless  ye  the  Lord 
iVlORDOCHEUS,  Scf  Mardocheus. 
MORNING. 
I  Esd.  1.  11.  and  thus  did  they  in  the  to. 

5.  50.  they  ofTered  to  the  Lord  vt.  and  e\ening 

9.  41.  he  read  in  the  court  from  vt.  until  mid-day 
Tab.  9  6.  early  in  the  m.  they  both  went  forth 
Jud.  12.  5.  when  it  was  toward  the  7«.-wntch 

H.ll.assoonas  the7n.arose,they  hanged  the  head 
ffiid.l  1.22. yea,  as  adropof  the  7h.  dew  that  falleth 
Eccl.  18.  26.  from  m.  till  evening  time  is  changed 

24. 32.  I  will  yet  make  doctrine  to  shine  as  the  m. 

47.  10.  that  the  temple  might  sound  from  7/1. 

.50.  6.  he  was  as  the77i.-star  in  the  midst  of  a  cloud 
Bel  16.  in  the  m.  betime  the  king  arose 
1  Mac.  4.  52.  they  rose  up  betimes  in  the  m. 

5.  30.  betimes  in  the  m.  they  looked  up 

9.  13.  the  battle  continued  from  m.  till  night 

10. 80.  cast  darta  at  the  people  from  m.  till  evening 

11.  67.  betimes  in  the  m.  they  gal  to  the  plain 

MOSES. 

1  Esd.l.d.  commandment  which  was  given  toM. 

11.  to  offer  as  it  is  written  in  the  book  of  M. 
5.  49.  as  it  is  commanded  in  the  book  of  M. 

7.  6.  did  Ihe  things  written  in  Ihe  book  of  M. 

9.  stood  arrayed,  according  to  Ihe  book  of  M. 
8. 3.  as  a  scribe,  being  very  ready  in  Ihe  law  of  M. 

9.  39.  that  he  would  bring  the  law  of  M. 

2  Esd.  1.  13.  I  gave  you  M.  for  a  leader 

7.  36.  M.  prayed  for  the  fathers  that  sinned 
.59.  for  this  is  the  life  whereof  M.  spake 

14.  3.  I  did  manifestly  reveal  myself  to  M. 
Eccl.  45. 1.  even  M.  beloved  of  God  and  men 

15.  M.  consecrated  and  anointed  him  with  oil 
46.  1.  Jesus  was  successor  of  M.  in  prophecies 

7.  in  the  time  of  M.  he  did  a  work  of  mercy 
Bar.  1.  20.  curse  which  the  Lord  appointed  by  M. 

2.  28.  as  thou  spakest  by  thy  servant  M. 
S««.  3.  tauelit  according  to  the  law  of  M.  62. 
2  Mac.  1.  29.  plant  thy  people  as  M.  hath  spoken 

2.  4.  where  M.  climbed  up  and  saw  the  heritage 

8.  the  cloud  also  as  it  was  shewed  under  M. 

10.  as  when  M.  prayed  to  the  Lord,  fire  came 

11.  M.  said,  because  Ihe  sin-ofTeiing  was  not 
7.  6.  as  M.  in  his  song  declared,  saying 

30.  law  that  was  given  unto  our  fathers  by  M. 
MOTHER. 
2  Esd.  1.  28.  I  pravcd  you  ns  a  vt.  her  daughter! 

10.  7.  how  that  Sion  our  m.  is  full  of  henvincsi 
13.  .55.  Ihou  hast  called  understanding  Iby  771. 

ToJ.1.8.  as  Deborah  my  father's  m. commanded  me 
4.  3.  nnd  despise  not  thy  m.  hut  honour  her 
13.  for  lewdness  is  Ihe  m.  of  famine 

15.  17.  but  Anna  his  vt.  wept,  nnd  said  to  Tobii 

10.  12.  honour  thy  father  and  thy  iK.-in-law 

11.  17.  and  blessed  be  thy  father  and  thy  m 


MOU 

Tob.  i4. 10.  bury  me  decently  and  Ihy  m.  with'  me 
ri.  ulicn  Anna  Ins  m.  was  dead,  he  bunud  her 
Ilj.  Iiti  burled  Ins  lather  iind  ni.liuni'urnbly 

H'iid.  7.  '2.  in  my  m.  womb  I  wiis  lasliioiu'd 
Vi.  I  linew  nut  that  she  was  the  m.ol  thoni 

Eccl.  3.  2.  tiie  authority  of  the  m.  over  the  sons 
4.hetliut  honoureth  htsm.liiiisone  that  luyeth  up 
G.  the  obedient  shall  be  a  conil'ort  to  his  iii. 
9.  curse  of  the  m.  ruolelh  out  louiululions 

11.  a  m.  in  dishonour  is  a  reproach  to  children 
16.  he  that  aiijjerelh  his  rn.is  cur.-ed  of  God 

4.  10.  be  instead  of  a  husband  to  tlieir  m. 

I.  27.  uiid  forget  not  the  sorrows  of  thy  m. 

15. i!.  as  a  m.sballihe  meet  him  and  receive  liim 
24.  18.  I  am  the  m.  of  fair  love  and  lijar 
40.  1.  from  the  day  they  go  out  of  their  m.  womb, 
till  llie  day  they  riturii  to  the  m.  of  all  things 
49.  7.  was  a  prophet  sanclihrd  in  his  7;i.  womb 

1  Mac.  13.  iS.  for  his  m.  and  his  four  brethren 

2  Mac.  7. 1.  seven  brethren  with  their  m.  taken 

4.  the  rest  of  liis  brethren  and  m.  looking  on 

5.  they  exhorted  one  another  with  the  m.  to  die 

20.  but  the  III.  was  marvellous  above  all 
2.3.  the  king  called  his  m.  and  exhorted  her 

41.  last  of  all  alter  the  sons  the  m.  died 

MOTH,  S. 
F.ccl.10.3.  m.  and  worms  shall  have  liim  to  heritage 
4'2.  13.  for  from  g.irrnents  Cometh  a  m. 
Bar.  6. 1».  gods  cannot  save  themselves  from  ni. 

MOTION. 
2  F.sd.  6.  14.  it  shall  be  as  it  were  a  great  m. 
li'iid.'.a.  wisjom  IS  more  moving  than  any  m. 

MOVE. 
2  F.sd.  4.  37.  he  doth  not  m.  nor  stir  them 
Har.a.'i'.  ncilhir  can  they  m.  of  themselves 
Van.  3.  57.  whales  and  all  that  m.  in  the  waters 
MOVED. 

1  Esd.  2.  8.  all  thoy  whose  mind  the  Lord  had  m. 

8.  7tJ.  all  that  were  m.  at  the  word  of  the  Lord 

2  Esd.  3.  3.  my  spirit  was  sore  ni.  and  I  spake 

6. 14.  the  place  where  thou  standest  shall  not  be  »;i. 
7. 1.5.  why  art  tlioa  m.  whereas  thou  art  mortal 
13.  2.  that  the  wind  m.  all  the  waves  thereof 
Jud.  'J.  4.  children,  which  were  m.  with  Ihy  Zfiil 

12.  10.  bis  heart  was  ravished,  his  mind  was  m. 
16. 15.  for  the  mountains  shall  be  m.  from  foundat. 

F.ccl.  16.  18.  sliai:  be  m.  when  he  shall  visit 
48.12. he  was  not  m.witli  the  presence  of  anyprince 
Bar.  4.  fi.  hot  because  you  m.  Go^  .u  wralh 

1  Mac.  10.  74.  Jonathan  was  7ft.  in  his  mind 

2  Mac.  4.  37.  Antioehus  was  sorry,  and  in.  to  pity 
4'j.  they  of  Tyriis  m.  with  hatreil  of  tnat  deed 

13.4.  the  King  of  kiii;s  m.  Antiochus'  mind 
MOVEDST. 
2  Esd.  3. 18.  thoum.  the  whole  world,  and  madost 

MOVING. 
IVisd.  2.  2.  as  a  little  sjiark  in  m.  of  our  heart 
7.  24.  for  wisdom  is  more  m.  than  any  motion 
MOUNT. 
2  F.sd.  2.  33.  a  charge  of  the  Lord  on  7n.  Ilorcb 

42.  I  Esdras  saw  on  m.  Sinn  a  great  people 

13.  35.  he  shall  sinnd  tipiin  the  top  of /«.  Sion 
tyisd.  9.  8.  to  build  a  temple  on  thy  holy  m. 

1  Mac.  4.  37.  all  the  host  went  up  into  m.  Bion 
CO.  they  builded  tlie  m.  Sion  with  high  walls 

5.  .')4.  so  they  went  up  to  vi.  Sion  with  joy 

6.  48.  the  king  pitched  his  tents  against  in.  Sion 
62.  then  the  king  entered  into  m.  Sion 

9.  15.  who  pursued  them  to  the  m.  Azotus 

II.  37.  set  on  the  holym.  in  a  conspicuous  place 
12.36.  ittising  a  in.  between  the  tower  and  the  city 

MOUNTAIN. 

2  Esd.  13.  fi.  he  had  graved  himself  a  great  m. 

12.  I  saw  the  same  man  comedown  from  the ni. 
Jud.  2.  21.  pitched  from  Beclileth  neiir  the  m. 

10. 10.  looked,  until  she  was  gimc  down  the  m. 

13.  10.  th<-y  went  up  the  m.  of  Bethulia 
Feci.  .'50.20.  that  sit  upon  the  m.  of  Samaria 
Bar.  6.  3!l.  like  stones  that  be  hewn  out  of  the  m. 

1  Mac.  16.20.  he  sent  to  take  the  m.  of  the  temple 

2  Mac.  2.  4.  as  he  went  forth  into  the  m. 

MOUNTAINS. 

1  F.sd.  4.  4.  they  go  and  break  down  m.  and  towers 

2  Eid.^.'i'.i.  whoso  indignation  makes  the  m.  melt 

15.  42.  Ihey  shall  break  down  the  m.  and  hills 

16.  60.  hath  made  pools  on  the  lops  of  the  rn. 
Ti,b   1.  21.  they  fled  into  the  m.  of.^rarath 
Jud  1. 15.  he  took  also  Arphaxad  in  the  iii. 
f><;«.24.  13.  ns  a  cypress  upon  the  m.of  Ilermon 

43.  4.  the  Riin  burncth  thi^  m.  three  times  morn 
16.nlhissightihn  m.aro slmki'ii, the  wind  blowefti 

21.  ildcvoureth  the  m.nnd  liuimah  the  wilderness 

MOURN 
2  Fjd.  P.  16.  Ihy  inheritance,  for  whoso  cnimo  I  m. 

10.  4.  bill  coiilinniilly  to  m.  and  to  fast  until  I  die 
8. now  seeing  wo  all  m.art  thou  grieved  for  one  son 
9.  loll  iIm'i'  that  it  is  sho  which  ought  lo  m. 

15. 12.  r.i.'vpl  sli:ill  in.  and  fonnilalion  bo  smitten 

13.  iIk'v  that  till  Ihti  ground  shall  m. 

16.  33.  iKa  women  shall  m.  having  no  husbandi 
820 


MUL 

2  Esd.  IG.  39.  world  shall  m.and  sorrows  shall  come 
J  Mac.  5.  iO.  he  had  none  lo  in.  fur  iiim 
MOURNED. 

1  Esd.  1.  32.  in  al'  Jewry  ibey  m.  for  Josias 

8.  72.  a.ssembled,  whilst  I  in.  for  the  inujuity 

2  /•-'»■(/.  9.  38.  she  m.  ard  wept  with  a  loud  voice 
10.  49.  because  she  ni^'or  her  son  tliim  beganiiesi 

F.ccl.  48.  24.  he  comforted  them  that  in.  in  Sion 
1  Mdc.  1.  26.  so  that  the  pi)*ice8  and  elders  in. 
2.  14.  Maitathias  and  his  sons  in.  very  sore 

9.  20.  arid  all  Israel  in.  many  drys,  saying 

MOURNING. 

1  Esd.  9. 2.  in.  for  the  great  inii|uitics  of  multitude 

2  Ksi^. 5. 20.  so  I  fasted  seven  (lays,  m.  iu'id  weeping' 

10.  6.  scest  thou  not  our  in.  anil  what  huppeu'th 
II.  who  then  should  make  more  in.  than  she  : 
41.  thou  sawest  a  woniiin  m.  nnd  begiinnesl 

Tub.  2.  6.  your  feasts  shall  be  turned  into  m. 
E.sth.  14.2.  put  on  garments  of  anguish  and  m. 

15.  1.  third  day  she  laid  away  her  m.  garments 
IVisd.  14. 15.  for  a  father  afflicted  with  untimely  m. 

19.  3.  for  whilst  they  were  yet  in.  at  the  graves 

MOURNINGS. 
2  Esd.  1. 19.  Ihad  pity  on  your  in.  and  gave  manna 

16.  18.  the  beginnings  of  sorrows  and  great  in. 

MOUTH. 

1  Esd.  1.  2^.  words  spoken  by  the  m.  of  the  Lord 
47.  words  spoken  to  him  from  the  in.  of  the  Lord 
57.  word  of  the.Lord  spoken  by  the  m.  of  Jeremy 

2.  1.  that  he  had  promised  by  the  in.  of  Jeremy 
4.  19.  with  open  in.  (i.\  their  eyes  fast  on  her 
31.  the  king  gazed  upon  her  wiitf  open  m. 

2  F.sd.  14.  38.  o|ien  thy  in. and  drink  that  I  gave  thee 
41.  and  my  m.  was  opened,  and  shut  no  more 

Tub.  13.  6.  tlierefore  confess  him  with  your  in. 
.tud.  11.  19.  a  dog  shall  not  open  his  m.  at  thee 
(Visd.  1.  11.  tlie  m.  that  belieth  slayetb  the  soul 

8.  12.  they  shall  lay  their  hands  on  their  in. 

10.  21.  wisdom  openeth  the  in.  of  the  dumb 
F.ccl.  5.  12.  if  not,  lay  thy  hand  uiion  thy  in. 

14.  1.  blessed  man  that  hath  not  slipt  with  his  m. 

15.  9.  praise  is  not  seemly  in  the  i«.  of  a  sinner 

20.  19.  will  always  be  in  the  ni.  of  the  unwise 
20.  rejected  when  it  comes  out  of  a  fool's  vi. 

21.5.  a  prayerout  of  a  [loor  man's  in.  reuoheth  to 
17.  they  inquire  at  them,  of  ihe  wise  man 

22. 22.  if  thou  hast  opened  thy  m.  against  Ihy  friend 
23.7.  hear,  O  ye  children,  the  disc  iplineof  the  in. 

9.  accustom  not  thy  m.  lo  swearing 

13.  use  not  thy  m.  to  intemperate  swearing 

24.  2.  in  the  congregation  shall  she  open  her  m. 
3.  I  came  out  of  the  in.  of  the  Most  High 

26. 12.  she  will  open  her  m.  as  a  thirsty  traveller 

27.23.  at  last  he  will  writhe  his  in.  and  slander 
28.  12.  and  both  these  come  out  of  thy  in. 

29. 24.  art  a  stranger,  thou  darest  not  ojien  thy  m. 
30.  18.  delicates  poured  up.in  a  vi.  shut  up 

34.  8.  wisdom  is  perfection  to  a  faithful  in. 
37.  22.  the  fruits  are  commendable  in  his  m. 

39.  5.  and  he  will  open  his  in.  in  prayer 

40.  30.  begging  is  sweet  in  the  m.  of  the  shameless 
7)an.  3.  2.  opening  his  in.  in  the  midst  of  the  (ire 

28.  tifen  the  three,  ns  out  of  one  m.  praised  God 
.Siis.  61.  Daniel  had  convicted  them  by  their  ownm. 
Bel  27.  this  he  put  in  the  dragon's  in. 

1  Mac.1.  00.  Daniel  was  delivered  from  the  in.  of 
0.55.  for  his  m.  was  slopped,  he  could  not  speak 

2  J/uc.6.18.  Eleazar  wasconstrained  to  open  his  m. 

MOUTHS. 
.Tud.  15.  13.  Israel  followed  with  songs  in  their  m. 
F.sth.  13. 17.  destroy  not  the  in.  of  them  that  praise 

14.  10.  open  Ihe  in.  of  the  heathen  lo  sol  forth 
F.ccl.  49.  1.  it  is  sweet  as  honey  in  all  m. 
Dan.  3.  10.  and  now  we  cannot  open  our  m. 

MU(;iI. 
ToA. 12  R.aliltle  with  righteonsricsR  ishettertlmn  in. 
IVisd.  B.  12.  if  I  talk  m.  they  shall  lay  their  hands 

10.  18.  and  led  them  through  in.  water 
F.crl.  37.  11.  with  nn  idle  servant  of  in.  business 

43.  27.  we  may  speak  m.  and  yet  come  short 
30.  when  yeglorifyGod  i^xalt  him  iism.asyoucaii 

51.  16.  I  received  her,  nnd  gat  vi.  learning 
27.  how  llial  I  have  gotten  unto  mo  m.  rest 
2'<.  gel  learning,  and  get  in.  gold  by  her 
IMac.  15.  14.  who  pravclh  m.  fur  Ihe  people 

MULItEKRIES. 
M/uc.fi  34.  they  she  wed  the  blood  ofgrapcs  and  m. 

MULE. 
./«(/.  15.  11.  she  took  it  and  laid  it  on  her  m. 
MULES. 

1  Esd.  5.  43.  two  hundred  forty  and  five  m. 

MULTII'LV. 

2  F.sd.  3.  12.  when  Uvy  on  earth  began  lo  m. 
7.  67.  for  if  he  shall  not  in.  Iris  mercies 

Feel.  ft.  5.  sweet  language  will  m.  friends 

16.  2.  though  they  ni.  n-joice  not  in  them 
23.  16.  two  Boris  of  men  m.  sin,  a  hot  mind 

44.  21.  ho  would  m.  hini  as  the  diiM  of  ihe  earth 
47.  IH.  and  thou  didst  m.  silver  ns  had 

Dan.2.  13.  that  lliou  would>t  in.  their  sued  as  stars 


NAB  [Apocrypba. 

MULTIPLIED. 

1  Esd.  8. 75.  for  our  sins  are  in.  above  our  heada 

2  F.sd.  5.  10.  incontinency  shall  be  m.  on  earlh 
It  isd.  10.  10.  she  ni.  the  fruits  of  his  labours 
F.ccl.  18.  12.  therefore  he  i«.  his  compassion 

■18.  16.  some  pleasing  to  God,  and  some  in.  sius 
Prayer  ufManass.my  transgressions  are  Tn.aiiil  n 
I  Mac.  1.  9.  and  evils  were  in.  in  the  earth 
3.  42.  when  Judas  saw  that  miseries  were  m. 
14.  15.  he  in.  the  vessels  of  the  temple 

MULTll'LlETH. 
Eccl.  21. 12.  as  wisdom  which  vi.  bitterness 

MULTIPLYING. 

IVisd.  i.  3.  the  in.  brood  of  the  ungodly  not  Ihiiv* 

MULTITUDE. 

1  F.sd.  4. 14.  it  is  not  the  great  king  nor  in.  of  mCB 

5.  65.  yet  the  m.  sounded  niarvclluusly 
9.  6.  all  the  in.  sat  trembling  in  the  court 

2  Esd.  3.  16.  and  so  Jacob  became  a  great  m. 

6.  3.  before  the  innumerable  ni.  of  angels 
IVisd.  6.  2.  you  that  glory  in  the  th.  of  nations 

24.  the  m.  of  the  wise  is  the  welfare  of  the  worW 
F.crl.  5.  6.  he  will  be  pacified  for  the  m.  of  my  sina 
6. 34.  stand  in  the  m.of  the  elders,  and  cleave 

7.  7.  offend  nut  against  the  in.  of  a  city 

9.  God  will  look  upon  the  m.  of  my  oblations 
14.  1.  that  is  not  pricked  with  the  in.  of  sins 
16.  1.  desire  not  a  m.  of  unprofitable  children 

3.  trust  not  in  their  life,  nur  lesjiect  their  m. 
26.  T).  the  gathering  tiigclher  of  an  unruly  m. 

34. 19.  nor  is  he  pacified  for  sin  by  m.  of  sactilices 
35. 18.  till  he  have  taken  away  the  in.  of  the  proud 
42. 11.  le«t  she  make  thee  ashamed  before  Ihe  n. 
51.  3.  according  to  the  in.  of  thy  mercies 

Prayer  of  Manass.  for  Ihe  m.  of  mine  iniquity 
MUNITION. 

1  Mac.  14.  10.  he  set  in  them  all  manner  of  ni. 

MURDER,  S. 

2  Mac.  4.  3.  by  Simon's  faction  in.  were  committed 
35.  were  much  grieved  for  the  unjust  m.of  the  maa 

MURDERED. 
IVisd.  10.3.  the  fury  wherewith  he  m.  his  brothoi 

1  Mac.  2.  41.  as  our  brethren  that  were  m. 

MURDERER. 

2  Mac.  4.  38.  there  slew  he  the  cursed  m. 
9.  28.  thus  the  m.  and  blasphemer  died 

MURDERERS. 
IVisd.  12.  5.  also  those  merciless  m.  of  children 
2  Jl/ac.l2.6.he  came  against  those  m.of  his  bietbreit 

BlURMUR. 
2  Fsd.  1. 16.  but  even  to  this  day  do  ye  yet  m. 
Eccl.  31.  a.  against  a  niggard  the  whole  city  •>. 

MURMURED. 
2  Esd.  1. 15.  nevertheless  you  in.  there 
■  hid.  5  22.  the  people  standing  alioiit  Ihe  tent  m. 

1  Mac.  11.  39.  all  tlio  host  m.  against  Demetrius 

MURMURING. 
IVisd.  1.  11.  hewiirc  of  jn.  wl-'.n  is  unprofitable 
Eccl.  46.7.  and  they  appei'/  .i  Ihe  wicked  m. 

MURMURINGS 
IVisd.  1. 10.  and  Ihe  noise  of  m.  is  not  hid 
MUSED. 

2  Fsd.  10. 25. 1  was  afraid,  and  m.  what  it  might  be 

MUSETH. 
IVisd.d.  15.  the  mind  that  in.  upon  many  things 

MUSIC. 
Ecel.  22.  6.  a  tale  out  of  season  is  as  m.  in  mourning 
32.  3.  with  sound  judgment,  and  hinder  not  m. 

5.  concert  of  m.  in  a  hampiet  of  wine 

6.  so  is  the  melody  of  in.  with  pleasant  wine 

40.20.  wine  and  in.  rejoice  the  heart 
49.  1.  it  is  ns  w.  at  a  banquet  of  wine 

1  Mac.  9.  39.  lo  meet  them  with  instruments  of  m 

MUSICAL. 
1  f;.«(/.  5. 2.  brought  them  back  with  m.inslrumenU 

59.  priests  in  vestments  with  in.  inslruinents 
Eccl.  4 !.  5.  such  as  found  out  in.  tunes,  and  recited 

MUSICIAN. 
Eccl.  32.  4.  pour  nut  out  words  w  here  Ibcro  is  a  nt 

MUSTERED. 
./ud.  2. 15.  he  m.  the  ihosen  men  for  the  battle 

MUTED. 
Tob.'i,  10.  the  sparrows  m.  dung  into  mine  eyes 

MYRRH. 
Eccl.ii.  15.  a  plonsani  odour  like  the  best  m. 

MYSTERIES. 
;r/>(/.2.22.  as  for  the  m.  of  God  they  knewlhcm  no. 
6.  22.  and  I  will  not  hide  m  from  you 
8. 4.  she  is  privy  lo  Ihe  in.  oflhi^  knowledge  ofOod 
Eccl.  3.  19.  but  in.  are  revealed  unto  the  meek 


N. 


nauathitrs. 

1  .yfiie.  5.25.  whirr  thev  met  with  Ihe  N. 

NAUITHODONOSOR. 
I  F.sd.  1.41.  N.  also  look  of  llii-  holy  vessels 
Toh.  14.  15.  ofXineve  which  was  taken  by  N 
Jud.  1. 1.  in  tha  twelfth  year  of  the  ruign  of  N 


ArocRv?ni  ] 


NAT 


Jud.  2.  19.  to  go  before  king  N.  in  the  voyage 

3.  8.  that  all  nations  should  worBliiji  N.  only 
6.  4.  saith  king  N.  lord  of  all  the  earth 

11. 1. 1  never  hurl  any  that  was  willing  to  serve  N. 
4.  entreat  thee  well,  as  they  do  the  servants  of  N. 
7.  as  N.  king  of  all  the  earth  liveth 

12.  13.  which  serve  in  the  house  of  N. 

Kstk.  11.  4.  one  ofthe  captives  which  N.  carried 
Bar.  1.  9.  N.  king  of  Babylon,  G.  2. 

11.  |iray  for  the  life  ofN.  king  of  Babyloa 

12.  wo  shall  live  under  the  shadow  of  N. 

NAHUM. 
2  E.id.  1.  40.  I  give  for  leaders,  N.  and  Abacuc 

NAIL. 
Eccl.  27.  2.  as  a  n.  sticks  between  the  joinings 

NAKED. 
Tob.  1.  17.  and  I  gave  my  clothes  to  the  n. 

4.  16.  give  of  thy  garments  to  them  that  are  n. 
2  Mac.  11.  12.  many  being  wounded,  escaped  n. 

NAME. 

1  Esd.  1.48.  made  him  swear  by  the  n.  of  the  Lord 

4.  63.  the  tejnple  which  is  called  by  his  n. 

6.  33.  the  Lord,  whose  n.  is  there  called  upon 
8.  78.  be  left  us  a  n.  m  the  place  of  thy  sanctuary 
88.  till  thou  hadst  lell  us  neither  root,  seed,  nor  n. 

2  Esd.  4.  1.  the  angel,  whose  n.  Uriel  gave  me 
Tub.  3.  15.  and  that  1  never  polluted  my  n.  nor  the 

n.  oCmy  father  in  the  land  of  my  captivity 

5.  11.  I  would  know,  brother,  thy  kindred  and  n. 
11.  14.  he  said,  blesspd  is  thy  n.  lor  ever 

13. 11. shall  come  from  far  to  the  7i.  ofthe  LordGod 
Jud.  9.  7.  breakest  the  battle,  the  Lord  is  thy  n. 
F.sth.  10.  8.  assembled  to  destroy  the  n.  ofthe  Jews 
H'isd.  2.  4.  and  our  n.  shall  be  forgotten  In  time 

14.  21.  ascribe  to  stocks  the  incommunicable  n. 
19.  18.  in  a  psaltery,  notes  change  n.  ofthe  tune 

Ecr.l.  6.  1.  thereby  thou  shall  inherit  an  ill  n. 
22.  for  wisdom  is  according  to  her  n. 

15.  6.  shall  cause  him  to  inherit  an  everlasting  n. 
17.  10.  and  the  elect  shall  praise  his  holy  n. 

22.  14.  what  is  the  n.  thereof  but  a  fooH 
37.  1.  a  friend  which  is  only  a  friend  in  n. 

26.  and  his  71.  shall  be  perpetual 
39. 9.  his  n.  shall  live  from  generation  to  general. 
11.  he  shall  leave  a  greater  n.  than  a  thousand 
15.  magnify  his  n.  and  shew  forth  his  praise 

40.  19.  building  of  a  city  cunlinueth  a  man's  n. 

41.  11.  an  ill  ?(.  of  sinners  shall  be  blotted  out 
12..  have  regard  to  thy  n.  for  that  shall  continue 

13.  but  a  good  n.  endureth  lor  ever 

43.  8.  the  month  is  called  aller  her  n. 

44.  8.  there  be  that  have  left  a  n.  behind  them 

14.  bodies  buried,  but  their  n.  liveth  for  ever 

45.  15.  they  should  bless  the  peo[ile  in  hisn. 
47.  16.  thy  n.  went  far  unto  the  islands 

50.  20.  to  give  blessing,  and  to  rejoice  in  his  n. 
Bar.  2.  11.  and  thou  hast  gotten  thyself  a  n. 
32.  they  shall  praise  me,  and  think  on  my  n. 

3.  5.  but  think  upon  thy  |)i>wer  and  thy  n. 

4.  30.  he  thai  gave  thee  that  n.  will  comfort  thee 

1  Jl/uc.3. 14.  he  said,  1  will  get  mean,  and  honour 

4.  .33.  let  all  those  that  know  (by  n.  praise  thee 

5.  57.  let  us  also  get  us  a  n.  and  go  fighl  ag.  heathen 
63.  renowned,  wheresoever  their  n.  was  heard  of 

fi.  44.  that  he  might  gel  hini  a  perpetual  n. 

14.  10.  ihot  his  honourable  71.  was  renowned 

2  J\Iac-  12.  13.  strong  city,  the  n.  of  it  was  Caspis 

NAMED. 
2  Esd.  5.  26.  of  fowls  thou  hast  n.  thee  one  dove 
Tob.  3.  8.  neither  wast  thou  n.  after  any  of  them 
Wisd.  14.  27.  for  worshipping  of  idols  not  to  hen. 
Keel.  24.  18.  all  my  children,  which  are  ?i.  of  him 
36.  12.  people,  whom  thou  hast  n.  thy  first  born 
NAMES. 

1  Esd.  6.  12.  and  we  required  the  n.  in  writing 
8.  49.  the  catalogue  of  whose  71.  were  shewed 

NAMETir. 
Eccl.  23. 10.  who  swareih  and  7t.  God  continually 

NAMING. 

Eccl.  23.9.  nor  use  thyself  to  the  Ji.  of  the  holy  One 

NANEA. 

2  Mac.  1. 13.  when  the  leader  came,  they  were  slain 

in  the  temple  of  N.  by  the  deceit  of  N.  priests 
NARRATIONS. 

2  Mac.  2.  24.  desire  to  look  into  then,  of  the  story 

NARROW. 

3  Ksd.T.A.  but  put  the  case,  the  entrance  were  n.  7. 

13.  43.  they  entered  hv  the  71.  passages  of  the  river 

NATHAN. 
Eccl.  47.  1.  after  him  rose  up  N.  to  prophesy 

NATION. 
1  Esd.  0.  33.  the  Lord  destroy  every  king  and  n. 
Tob.  1.  17.  if  I  saw  anyof  my  71.  dead,  I  buried  him 
2.  3.  one  of  our  n.  is  strangled  and  cast  out 
4. 19.  forevery  n.hatli  not  conneel, but  Lord  givotli 
Jud.  5.  10.  that  one  could  not  number  their  n. 
21.  but  if  there  bo  no  iniquity  in  their  n. 

6.  5.  vengeance  of  this  n.  that  came  out  of  Egypt 
19.  O  Lord  God  pity  the  low  estate  of  our  n. 

15.  9.  thou  art  the  great  rejoicing  of  our  n. 

631 


NEC 

EHk.  10.  9.  my  it.  is  this  Israel,  which  cried  to  God 
IVisd.  10.  15.  from  the  n.  that  opiirossed  them 
17.  2.  unrighteous  thought  to  oppress  the  holy  n. 
Eccl.  16.  6.  in  a  rebellious  n.  wrath  is  entire 

28.  14.  hath  driven  them  from  n.  10  n. 

49.  5.  he  gave  their  glory  to  a  strange  71. 

50.  25.  and  the  third  is  no  n. 

Bar.  4. 15. a  shameless  n.  and  of  a  strange  language 
Dan.  3.  14.  for  we  are  become  less  than  any  n. 

1  Jfac.  1.  34.  they  put  therein  a  sinful  n. 

2.  10.  what  7t.  hath  not  had  a  pari  in  her  kingdom? 
11.  42.  I  will  greatly  honour  thee  and  thy  n. 

13.  6.  I  will  avenge  my  7(.  and  the  sanctuary 

14.  4.  he  sought  the  good  of  his  n.  in  such  wise 

6.  and  he  enlarged  the  bounds  of  his  71. 

29.  put  themselves  in  jeopardy,  and  resisting 
tho  enemies  of  their  n.  did  their  71.  great 
honour 

16.  3.  now  I  am  old,  go  out  and  fight  for  our  71. 

2  Mac.  4.  2.  that  had  tendered  his  own  n. 

10.  brought  his  own  n.  to  the  Greekish  fashion 
6.12.  not  for  destruct.hut  for  achasteningof  our  71. 

31.  not  only  to  young  men,  but  to  all  his  n. 

7.  16.  think  not  that  our  71.  is  forsaken  of  God 

37.  he  would  speedily  be  merciful  to  our  n. 

38.  the  wrath  justly  brought  on  all  our  77. 

10.  8.  should  be  kept  ofthe  whole  n.  ofthe  Jews 

11.  25.  our  mind  is,  that  this  n.  shall  be  in  rest 
14.  9.  be  careful  for  the  country  and  our  ?i. 

34.  him  that  was  ever  a  defender  of  their  n. 
NATIONS. 

1  Esd.  1.  49.  passed  all  the  pollutions  of  all  7j. 

2  Esd.  3.  7.  of  whom  came  n.  tribes,  people 
Tob.  3.  4.  for  a  proverb  of  reproach  to  all  71. 

13.  5.  and  he  will  gather  us  out  of  all  n. 

11.  many  n.  shall  come  from  far  to  the  Lord 

14.  6.  and  all  77.  shall  turn  and  fear  the  Lord 

7.  so  shall  all  n.  praise  the  Lord,  and  his  |ieopIe 
■fud.  16. 17.  woe  to  the  7i. that  rise  upag.  my  kindred 
Estk.  13.  4.  that  had  laws  contrary  to  all  77. 

14.  12.  O  king  ofthe  n.  and  Lord  of  all  power 
ff'isd.Z.S.they  shall  judge  the  7t.and  have  dominion 
6.2.  you  that  glory  in  the  multitude  oC  n. 

8.  14.  and  the  n.  shall  be  subject  to  me 
10.  5.  the  77.  in  their  wicked  conspiracy 

12.  12.  shall  accuse  thee  for  the  n.  that  perish 
Eccl.  4.  15.  whoso  gives  ear  to  her,  shall  judge  77. 

10. 15.  Lord  hath  plucked  up  the  roots  of  proud  71. 

17.  17.  in  the  division  of  the  n.  he  set  a  ruler 

29.  18.  so  that  they  wandered  among  strange  71. 
36.  2.  send  thy  fear  upon  all  71.  that  seek  not  thee 
39.  10.  7J.  shall  shew  forth  his  wisdom 

44.  21.  that  he  would  bless  the  n.  in  his  seed 

46.  6.  he  made  the  battle  to  fall  upon  the  71. 

50.  25.  there  be  two  manner  of  7!.  which  I  abhor 
Bar.  4.  6.  ye  were  sold  to  n.  not  for  destruction 

6.  4.  see  gods  of  gold,  which  cause  n.  to  fear 
Bar.  6.51.  it  shall  manifestly  ajipear  to  77.  and  kings 

1  Mac.  1.  3.  Ale.xander  took  spoils  of  many  n. 
4.  he  ruled  over  countries,  and  71.  and  kings 

NATIVITY. 
IVisd.  6.  22.  seek  out  from  the  beginning  of  her  77. 
Eccl.  23.  14.  and  so  thou  curse  the  day  of  thy  n. 

NATURE. 
JVisd.  13.  1.  surely  vain  are  all  men  by  n. 
19.  20.  the  water  forgat  his  own  quenching  71. 
21.  the 'icy  meat,  that  was  of  7t.  apt  to  melt 
NATURES. 
Wisd.  7. 20.  to  know  the  n.  of  living  creatures 

NAVE. 
Eccl.  46.  1.  Jesus  son  of  N.  was  valiant  in  wars 

NAUGHTY. 
Wisd.  12.  10.  that  they  were  a  71.  generation 

NAUGHTINESS. 
Wisd.  4.  12.  the  bewitching  of  71.  dolh  obscure 
NAVIGABLE. 

2  Mac.  5.  21.  in  his  pride  to  make  the  land  n. 

NAVY. 

1  Mac.  1.  ]7.he  entered  into  Egypt  with  a  great  7t. 

2  Mac.  12.  9.  he  set  fire  on  the  haven  and  the  74. 
14.  1.  Demetrius  with  a  great  power  and  71. 

NAZARITES. 
1  Mac.  3.  49.  and  the  N.  they  stirred  up 

NEBAT. 
Eccl.  47.  23.  there  was  also  Jeroboam  the  son  of  N. 

NECESSARY. 
Tob.  5. 14.  wilt  thou  a  drachm  a  day,  and  things  v. 
Eccl.  20.  32.  n.  patience  in  seeking  the  Lord 
29.  3.  shall  find  the  thing  that  is  71.  for  thee 

1  Mac.  10. 39.  for  the  77.  cvpences  of  the  sanctuary 

2  Mac.  1.  18.  we  thought  it  n.  to  advertise  you 
4.  23.  to  put  him  in  mind  of  certain  77.  matters 

9.  21.  I  thought  it  n.  to  core  for  safety  of  all 
13.20.  Judas  conveyed  such  things  as  were  7i. 

NECESSITY. 
2  Esd.  4.  42.  to  escape  the  71.  ofthe  travel 
Tub.  4.  9.  a  good  treasure  against  the  day  of  7t. 
E.'ith.  14.  Ifi.  thou  knowest  my  n.  for  I  abhor 
IVisd.  17. 17.  endured  n.  that  could  not  be  avoided 
Eccl.  20.  14.  nor.  yet  of  the  oiiviou?,  for  his  n. 


NEI 

NECESSITIES. 
2  Esd.  13.  19.  come  Into  gieat  perils,  and  mctr  11 

NECK. 
1  Esd.  1.  48.  he  rebelled,  and  hardened  hii  n. 

3.  6.  and  head-lire,  and  chain  about  his  n. 
Tob.  11.9.  Anna  fell  on  the  n.  of  her  son,  13. 

Jud.  13.  8.  and  she  smote  twice  upon  his  n. 

16.  9.  and  the  fauchion  passed  through  his  n. 
EsOi.  15. 11.  his  sceptre,  and  laid  it  upon  her  n. 
Eccl.  6.  24.  and  put  thy  71.  into  her  chain 

7.  23.  and  bow  down  their  71.  from  their  youth 

30.  12.  bow  down  his  77.  while  he  is  young 

33.  26.  a  yoke  and  collar  do  bow  the  n. 
51.  21).  put  your  77.  under  the  yoke  , 

liar.  2.  33.  they  shall  return  from  their  stiff  71. 

4.  25.  but  shortly  thou  shall  tread  upon  his  n. 

NECKS. 
1  Mac.  1.  61.  they  hanged  infants  about  their  a. 

NEED. 
Wisd.  11.  5.  they  in  their  n.  were  benefited 
13.  16.  for  it  is  an  image,  and  hath  71.  of  help 
Iff.  25.  according  to  the  desire  of  them  that  had*. 
Eccl.  4.  3.  defer  not  to  give  him  that  is  in  ?». 

8.  9.  learii  to  give  answer  as  n.  requireth 

11.  12.  another  that  is  slow  and  hath  n.  of  help 
13.  6.  if  he  have  77.  of  thee,  he  will  deceive  thee 
18.  25.  when  rich,  think  on  poverty  and  n. 

23.  18.  no  body  seeih  me,  what  71.  I  to  fearl 
29.  2.  lend  to  thy  neighbour  in  time  of  his  n. 
27.  my  brother  cometh,  I  have  71.  of  my  house 
32.  7.  speak,  young  man,  if  there  be  71.  of  thee 
33.31.  thou  hast  71.  of  him,  as  of  thine  own  soul 

37.  8.  and  know  before  what  77.  he  hath 

38.  12.  let  him  nolgofrom  thee,  thou  hast?!,  of  him 

39.  21.  a  man  71.  not  to  say,  what  is  lids'? 
31.  they  shall  be  ready  on  earth  when  n.  is 

42.  21.  and  he  hath  no  77.  of  any  counsellor 

1  Mac.3. 28.  be  ready  whenever  he  should  n.  thera 

12.  9.  albeit  we  n.  none  of  these  things 

2  J\fac.  2.  15.  if  ye  have  71.  thereof,  send  to  fetch 
14.35.  thou,  O  Lord  of  all,  who  hast  77.  of  nothing 

NEEDETH. 
Ecc^40.  26.  the  fear  ofthe  Liiid  7j.  not  to  seek  help 

NEEDFUL. 
Eccl.  39.  33.  he  will  give  every  re.  thing  in  seasoD 

NE"EDY. 
Eccl.  4.  1.  make  not  the  7t.  eyes  to  wail  long 
5.  turn  not  away  thine  eye  from  the  71. 

31.  4.  and  when  he  leaveth  off,  he  is  still  n. 

34.  21.  the  bread  ofthe  77.  is  their  ife 
41.2.  acceptable  is  thy  sentence  to  the  R. 

NEGLECT. 
Eccl.  7.  10.  and  71.  not  to  give  alms 
38.  16.  cover  his  body,  and  71.  not  his  burial 

NEGLECTED,  ING. 
Wisd.  3.  10.  ungodly  which  have  77.  the  righteoaa 
2  Mac.  4. 14.  desjiising  the  temple,  and  71.  sacrifice! 

NEGLIGENT. 
Eccl.  33.  9.  my  son,  ir  thy  sickness  be  notn. 
Bar.  1. 19.  we  have  been  ?7.  in  not  hearing  bini 
NEHEMIAS'</f  NEEMIAS. 

1  Esd.  5.  8.  with  Jesus,  «.  and  Zacharias 
40.  for  unto  them  said  N.  and  Atharias 

Eccl.  49.  13.  among  the  elect  was  N.  who  raised  up 

2  Mac.  1.  18.  given  when  N.  ottered  sacrifice 

20.  N.  being  sent  from  the  king  of  Persia 

21.  N.  commanded  the  priests  to  sprinkle  wood 
23.  the  rest  answering  thereunto  as  N.  did 

31.  N.  commanded  water  to  be  poured  onslonei 
33.  that  N.  had  purified  the  sacrifices  therewith 
36.  N.  called  Ibis  thing  Nophihar,  a  cleansing 
2.  13.  in  the  writinss  and  commentaries  of  N. 

NEIGHBOUR. 
2  Esd.  15.  19.  a  man  shall  have  no  pity  on  hii  n. 
.hid.  7.  4.  they  said  every  one  to  his  71.  10. 19. 
15.  2.  no  man  thai  durst  abide  in  sight  of  hi«  n. 
Kcc/.5.12.if  thou  hast  under8tanding,an8wcr  thy  i» 
0.  17.  for  as  he  is,  so  shall  his  re.  be  also 

9.  14.  as  near  as  thou  canst,  guess  at  thy  71. 

10.  6.  bear  not  hatred  to  thy  v.  for  every  wrong 

13.  15.  and  every  man  loveth  his  71. 

17.  14.  he  gave  commandment  concerning  his  n. 

18.  13.  the  mercy  of  rajyn  is  toward  his  71. 

19.  17.  admonish  thy  71.  before  thou  threaten  him 

22.  23.  be  faithful  to  thy  re.  in  his  poverty 
27.  18.  so  hast  thou  lost  the  love  of  thy  n. 

19.S0  hast  thou  let  thv  77.go,  and  shalt  not  get  him 

23.  2.  forgive  thy  71.  the  hurl  he  hath  done  thee 
7.  remember  commands,  bear  no  malice  to  thy  Ji. 

29.  1.  he  that  is  merciful  will  lend  to  his  n. 
2.  lend  to  thy  71.  in  time  of  his  need,  and  pay  thou 
thy  V.  again  in  due  scaaoa 
14.  an  honest  man  is  surely  for  his  71. 
20.  help  thy  n.  according  to  thy  power 
31.  15.  judge  of  thy  11.  by  thyself,  bo  discreet 
31.  rebuke  not  thy  n.  at  wine,  despise  him  not 
Sim.  62.  as  they  intended  to  do  to  their  77. 
2  Mac.  6.  8.  there  went  a  decree  to  the  71.  citiai 

NEIGHBOURS. 
1  Esd.  2. 6.  those,  I  say,  that  are  his  n.  let  them  help 


NIG 

8  K.'rf.O.  -IS.  I  wi\8  glad  of  him,  so  were  all  my  h. 

10.  2.  ami  all  my  n.  rose  up  to  comfort  me 
Tab.  2.  8.  bill  my  n.  mocked  me,  and  said 
Eccl.  15.  5.  she  shiill  exalt  him  above  his  n. 

21.  2r.a  foolish  man's  foot  is  soon  in  his  n.  house 
25.  1.  the  unity  of  brethren,  the  love  ofn. 

18.  her  husband  shall  sit  among  his  71. 
29.  5.  for  his  n.  money  he  will  speak  submissly 

34.  22.  he  thai  lakiUh  away  his  n.  living 

Bar.  4.  24.  as  n.  of  Sion  have  seen  your  captivity 
iJUac.  9.  25.  tlie  princes  that  are  borderers  and  71. 

NEPIITHALI. 
Tob.  I.  1.  of  the  seed  of  Asael,  of  the  tribe  of  N. 
2.  which  is  called  properly  N.  in  Galilee 

4.  »n  the  tribe  of  N.  full  from  Jerusalem 

5.  the  house  of  my  father  N.  sacrificed  to  Baal 
".  3.  to  whom  thev  said,  we  are  of  the  sons  of  N. 

■  NKVER. 
IFisd.  2.  2.  we  shall  be  as  though  we  had  n.  been 

3.  15.  the  root  ofwisdoin  shall  71.  fall  away 

6.  12.  wisdom  is  glorious,  and  71.  fadeth  away 

7.  10.  light  that  comuth  from  her  7i.  gueth  out 
14.  she  is  a  treasure  to  men  that  71.  faileth 

15.  17.  whereas  he  lived  once,  but  they  n. 
Eccl.'.'.id.  remember^he  end.thou  shall  n.  do  amiss 

12.  10.  n.  trust  thine  enemy,  for  as  iron  rustelh 
22.6.  stripes  and  correction  ofwisdoin  are  n.oal  of 

23.  7.  keepeth  it,  shall  7t.  be  taken  in  his  lips 
11.  the  plague  shall  n.  depart  from  his  house 

40.  23.  a  friend  and  companmn  n.  meet  amiss 
44. 9.  who  are  perished  as  though  they  had  7».  been 
NEW. 

1  Esd.  5.  52.  of  the  n.  moons  and  of  all  holy  feasts 

6.  9.  building  a  house  to  the  Lord,  great  and  n. 
25.  one  row  ofn.  wood  of  that  country 

2  F.sd.  1.  31.  for  your  n.  moons  have  I  forsaken 
Jud.  8.  fi.  saveilieevcs  of  the  7i.  moons,  and  then. 

moons,  and  the  feasts  and  solemn  days  of  Israel 

16.  2.  tune  to  him  a  n.  psalm,  exalt  him 

13.  I  will  sing  unto  the  Lord  a  v.  song 
JVisd.  7.  27.  remaining,  she  makcth  all  things  n. 
Eccl.  9.  10.  forsake  not  an  old  friend,  for  the  n.  is 

not  compMrahle  to  him,  a  71.  friend  is  as  n.  wine 

24.  25.  as  Tygris  in  the  time  of  the  jr.  fruit 

%.  6.  shew  71.  signs  and  make  strange  wonders 

J  Mac.  4.  47.  they  built  a  n.  altar  as  the  forn?er 

49.  they  made  also  n.  holy  vessels  and  brought 

r>3.  offered  on  the  n.  altar,  of  burnt-offering 

ZJHac.2.  29.  as  the  master-builder  of  a  n.  house 

4.  11.  he  brought  up  71.  customs  against  the  law 

NEWLY. 
Jud.4.  3.  were  71.  returned  from  the  captivity 
H'isd.  11.  18.  O  beasts  full  of  rage,  71.  created 
2  Mac.  10.  28.  the  sim  being  n.  risen,  they  joined 

NEWS. 

iMac.Q.  3.  n.  was  brought  what  had  happened 

NEXT. 

1  F.sd.  3.7.  he  shall  sit  n.  to  Darius  for  his  wisdom 
Tob.  1.  22.  Sarchedonus  appointed  him  n.  to  him 
Jiid.  2.  4.  called  Olofernes,  who  wasn.  to  him 
Esth.  13. 6.  who  is  over  the  affairs,  and  is  v.  to  us 

16.  11.  honoured  as  the*,  person  unto  the  king 

2  Mac.  4.  41.  takinc  handfiils  of  dust  that  was  n. 

NICANOR. 
1  Mac.  3.  38.  chose  N.  and  Gorgius,  mighty  men 

7.  26.  then  the  king  .sent  N.  one  of  his  princes 

27.  soN.  came  to  Jerusalem  with  a  great  force 
44.  whenN.  host  saw  (hat  he  was  slain,  they  fled 
Mac.S.  9.  then  choosing  N.  son  of  I'atroclus 

14.  being  sold  by  the  wicked  N.  before  they  met 
:14.  as  for  that  most  ungracious  N.  who  brought 

12.  2.  N.  governor  of  Cyprus  would  not  suffer  them 
14.12.  calling  N.  who  had  been  muster  ofelephants 
14.  then  the  heathen  came  to  N.  by  flocks 
30.  when  Maccabeus  saw  that  N.  began  to  he 
chuilish  to  hiin,  he  withdrew  himself  from  N. 
15.  0.  so  N.  determined  to  set  up  a  monument 

28.  they  knew  that  N.  lay  dead  in  his  harness 
30.  Judaa  commanded  to  strike  off  N.  head 

32.  he  shewed  them  vile  N.  head  and  the  hand 

33.  he  hail  cui  out  the  tongue  of  ungoilly  N. 
35.  he  hansed  also  N.  head  on  the  tower 
37.  thus  went  it  with  N.  and  from  that  time 

NIGGARD. 
Ecrl.  14.  3.  riches  arc  not  comely  for  a  n. 
'  10.  B  wicked  eye  ift  a  71.  at  his  table 

31.24.  against  a  n.  the  eitv  shall  murmur 

MGGARDNESS. 
Eccl.  31.  24.  testimonie'!  ofiris  n.  not  to  be  doubted 

NIGH. 
Eccl.  12.  13.  or  any  such  as  come  n.  wild  beasts 
14.  25.  hn  shall  pitch  his  lent  n.  10  her 

35.  17.  till  it  come  n.  he  will  not  ho  comforted 

NIGHT. 
Esd.  1.  14.  the  priests  ofTi^rcd  fal  unlil  n. 
%  Tub.  f.  9.  BO  they  slept  both  that  n. 

Jud.6. 21.  called  on  ihcGod  of  Israid  all  that  n. 

7.  5.  they  ren)ained  and  watched  all  that  n. 

8.  33.  you  sliad  stand  this  n.  in  the  galo 

11.  3.  t'nou  shalt  live  thin  n.  and  jieroanor 

829 


NON 

Jud.  11.  5.  I  will  declare  no  lie  to  my  lord  this  n. 

17.  is  religious  and  servethG.  of  heaven  day  and 

71.  thy  servant  will  go  out  by  n.  to  the  valley 

13.  14.  destroyed  our  enemies  by  my  hands  this  71. 
H'isd.  7.  30.  for  after  this  coiueth  71. 

10.  17.  and  a  light  of  stars  in  the  n.  season 

17.  2.  and  fettered  with  the  bonds  of  a  lung  n. 
5.  nor  stars  endure  to  lighten  that  horrible  n. 
14.  but  they  sleeping  the  same  sleep  that  n. 

21.  over  them  only  was  spread  a  heavy  n. 

18.  C.  of  that  71.  were  our  fathers  certified 

14.  that  n.  was  in  the  midst  of  her  swift  course 
Reel.  36.-2().  lodges  wherever  the  n.  lakelh  him 

38.  27.  every  carpenter  that  laboureth  n.  and  day 
40.  5.  hisn.  sleep  doth  change  his  knowledge 

Itar.  2.  25.  they  are  cast  out  to  the  fiost  of  the  n. 

Bel  15.  in  the  n.  came  the  priests  with  wives 

1  Mad.  5.  in  the  mean  season  came  Gotgias  by  n. 
5.  29.  from  whence  he  removed  by  n.  and  went 
9.  13.  the  battle  continued  firom  morning  tilln. 

58.  Bacchides,  who  shall  take  them  all  in  one  71. 
Ifi.  4.  who  went  out  and  rested  that  n.  at  Modin 

2  Mac.  8.  7.  specially  took  he  advantage  of  the  71. 
12.  6.  he  came  and  burnt  the  haven  by  71. 

13. 10.  commandfcd  to  call  on  the  Lord  n.  and  day 

15.  he  went  into  the  king's  tent  by  n.  and  slew 

NIGHTS. 
Tob.  10.  7.  she  ceased  not  whole  n.  to  bewail 
Dan.  3.  47.  O  ye  n.  and  days,  bless  ye  the  Lord 

NINE. 
2  Ksd.  4.  40.  she  liath  fulfilled  her  71.  months 
8.  8.  n.  months  doth  thy  workmanship  endure 
&c?.25.  7.  therehen.  things  I  have  judged  happy 
2  Mac.  5.  27.  but  Judas  with  n.  others  withdrew 
7.  27.  that  bare  thee  n.  months  in  my  wondi 
12.  10.  when  gone  from  thence  n.  furlongs 

NINEVE. 
Tob.  1.  3.  my  brethren,  who  came  with  me  to  N. 
10.  when  we  were  carried  away  captives  to  N. 
17.  or  if  I  saw  any  cast  about  the  walls  of  N. 

22.  Achiacharus  entreating,  I  returned  to  N. 

7.  3.  of  Nephthali  which  are  cajitives  in  N. 
11.1.  went  on  his  way  till  they  drew  near  to  N. 

14.  4.  which  Jonas  the  prophet  spake  of  N. 

8.  now,  my  son,  depart  not  out  of  N.  because 
10.  bury  me  decently,  but  tarry  no  longer  at  N. 

15.  but  he  heard  of  the  destruction  of  N. 
.Jud.  1.  1.  who  reigned  in  N.  the  great  city 

16.  so  he  returned  afterward  to  N. 

NOAH. 
iF-sd.  3.  11.  thou  leftest  N.  with  his  household 
Eccl.  44.  17.  N.  was  found  perfect  and  righteous 

NOBILITY. 
JVisd.  8. 3.  she  magnified  hern,  the  Lord  loved  her 
Eccl.  22.  10.  children  do  stain  the  n.  of  her  kindred 

NOBLE. 
Eccl.  10.  22.  whether  he  be  rich,  71.  or  poor 
18.  4.  and  who  shall  find  out  his  n.  acts? 

1  Jl/ac.3.  32.  so  he  left  Lysias  a  n.  man  to  oversee 

8.  2.  their  wars  and  71.  acts  which  they  had  done 

2  Mac.  6.  31.  death  for  an  example  ofn.  courage 
12.  42.  besides,  n.  Jud;is  exhorted  the  peojile 
14.  42.  otherwise  than  beseemed  his  n.  birth 

NOBLES. 
1  Esd.  1.  38.  and  he  bound  Joacim  and  the  n. 
8.  26.  hath  honoured  me  in  the  sight  of  king  and  71. 
.Jud.  2.  2.  so  he  called  unto  him  all  his  v. 
Bar.  1.  4.  in  the  hearing  of  the  n.  and  elders 

NOBLEST. 
JVisd.  18.  12.  the  n.  ofl^spring  was  destroyed 

NOE. 
Tob.  4.  12.  we  are  the  children  of  N.  Abraham 
NOISE. 

1  F^d.  5. 06.  came  to  know  what  the  v.  should  mean 

2  F.sd.  5.  7.  the  sea  shall  make  a  7^n  the  night 
.Jud.  14. 9.  the  people  made  ajoyfuni.  in  their  city 

19.  there  was  a  great  n.  throui.'hout  their  ciimp 
F.sl!A.  11.  .5.  behold,  a  n.  of  tumult  with  thunder 
)Visd.  1.  10.  the  n.  of  murniurings  is  not  hid 
.').  11.  parted  with  the  violent  n.  and  motion 

17.  18.  or  a  melodious  n.  ofbirds  among  branches 

18.  10.  a  lamentable  n.  was  carried  abroad 
Feci.  38.  28.  tin-  n.  of  the  hammer  is  over  in  his  ears 

40.  13.  the  goods  of  tho  unjust  shall  vanish  with  n. 
43.  17.  the  71.  of  thunder  makes  the  earth  tremble 
45.9.  there  might  bo  a  sound  and  a  71.  made,  that 

might  be  heard  in  the  temple  for  a 

memorial 
'16. 17.  with  a  great  71.  made  his  voice  to  he  heard 
."iO.lO.lhesons  of  .\aron  made  a  great  n.lo  be  heard 

1  Mac.  9. 13.  the  earth  shook  at  the  71.  of  ihe  armies 

41.  tho  n.  of  their  melody  into  lamentation 
NOISED. 
.Jud.  10.  18.  her  coming  was  ti.  among  tho  tents 

NOISES. 

;f'i.-7i.  17.4.but  n.as  orwaters  fallingdown,80unded 

NOISOME. 

2  Mac.  9.  9.  his  smell  was  n.  to  all  his  army 

NONE. 
Jud.  6.  4.  n.  of  my  words  shall  ho  in  vain,  9. 


NOU 


[Apocetpha 


J-ud.  9.  14.  there  Is  n.  other  that  protccleth  Israel 

16.  14.  there  is  71.  that  can  resist  thy  voice 
Eccl.  11.  28.  judge  n.  blessed  before  his  death 

36.  10.  that  say,  that  there  is  n.  other  but  mo 
39.  17.  n.  may  say,  what  is  this?  why  is  that* 
18.  and  71.  can  hinder  when  he  will  save 

44.  19.  in  glory  was  there  n.  like  unto  him 

45.  13.  before  him  there  was  n.  such 

51.  7. 1  looked  for  succour,  but  there  was  n. 
Bar.2.  23.  71.  of  these  have  known  way  of  wisdom 

25.  great,  and  hath  n.  end,  high,  unmeasurabia 

6.  73.  hetier  is  the  just  man  that  hath  n.  idols 
Bel  41.  and  there  is  n.  other  besides  the« 

1  Mac  3.  45.  n.  of  her  children  went  in  or  out 

7.  17.  bloodshed,  and  there  was  n.  to  bury  them 

8.  14.  yet  for  all  this  n.  of  them  wore  a  crown 
14.12.  Kit  under  his  vine,  there  was  n.  to  fray  them 

2  Mac.  5.  10.  he  had  n.  to  mourn  for  him 
NORTH. 

2  Esd.  15.  34.  clouds  from  Ihe  n.  to  the  south 
Jud.  16.  4.  out  of  the  mountains  from  the  JI. 

NORTHERN. 
Eccl.  43.  17.  so  doth  the  71.  slorm  and  whirlwind 

NOSES. 
IViad.  15.  15.  which  have  not  71.  to  draw  breath 

NOSTRILS. 
IVisd.  2.  2.  for  the  breath  in  our  n.  is  as  smoke 

NOTABLE. 
2  Mac.  3.  20.  two  other  young  men  ir.  in  strength 

6.  28.  leave  an.  example  to  such  as  be  young 
14.33.  and  I  will  ereei  a  n^ temple  to  Bacchus 

NOTABLY'. 
2  Mac.  14.31.  he  wasn.  prevented  by  Judas'  policy 

NOTES. 
IVisJ.  19.  18.  as  n.  change  Ihe  name  of  the  tuna 

NOMADES. 
2  Mac.  12.  11.  theN.  of  Arabia  being  overcome 
NOTHING. 

1  Esd.  8.  7.  lie  omiited  n.  of  the  law  of  the  Lord 

9.  51.  and  sent  part  lo  llieni  that  have  n. 

54.  they  went  lo  give  part  10  them  ihat  had  71. 

2  Esd.  5.  12.  then  shall  men  hope,  but  71.  obtain 
Tob.  4.  17.  but  give  71.  to  the  wicked 

10.  5.  now  I  care  for  v.  my  son,  since  I  let  thee  go 

12.  11.  surely  I  will  keep  close  n.  from  you 
F.sth.  10.  5.  a  dream,  and  71.  thereof  hath  failed 

14.  II.  give  not  thy  sceptre  to  them  that  be  71. 
H'isd.  2.  11.  what  is  feeble  is  found  to  be  n.  worth 
4.  5.  Ihe  fruit  not  ripe  to  eat,  yea,  meet  for  71. 

7.  8.  I  esteemed  riches  «.  in  comparison  of  her 

8. 7.  men  can  have  71.  more  profitable  in  their  lives 

9.  6.  without  wisdom  lie  shall  be  n.  regarded 

11.  24.  thou  abhorresi  n.  which  thou  hast  made 
]3.10.resemblancesof  bcasls,or  a  stone  good  forji. 

17.  12.  fear  is  n.  but  a  betraying  of  succours 
Eccl.  6.  15.  71.  doth  countervail  a  faithful  friend 

8.  16.  for  blood  is  as  71.  in  his  sight 

10.  6.  do  71.  at  all  by  injurious  practices 

13.  4.  but  if  thou  have  71.  he  will  forsake  thee 
18.6.  works  of  L.  there  may  be  n.  taken  from  them 

22.  let  n.  hinder  thee  lo  pay  ihy  vow  in  time 
20.  23.  and  makelh  him  his  enemy  for  n. 
23.  27. 71.  betler  than  the  fear  of  I'lie  Lord,  and  n. 
is  sweeter  than  to  take  heed  to  com- 
mandments 
26. 14.n.  so  much  worth  as  amiwd  well  instructed 

32.  19.  do  71.  without  advice,  then  repent  not 

33.  20.  and  without  discretion  do  n. 

39.  li).  and  n.  can  be  hid  from  his  eyes 
20.  and  there  is  n.  wonderful  before  him 

40.  6.  a  liltle  orn.  is  his  rest,  and  he  is  in  sleep 
7.  awaketh,  and  inarvellelh  that  the  fear  wasTt. 

41.  1.  unto  the  mnn  that  hath  n.  lo  vex  him 

42.  21.  to  him  may  n.  be  added,  nor  diiniuished 
24.  and  he  hiilh  made  71.  imperfect 

Bor.  6.  17.  a  vessel  is  n.  worth  when  it  is  broken 

26.  they  declare  to  men  that  they  hen.  worth 
28.  hut  to  the  poor  they  give  n.  of  it 

70.  for  as  a  scarecrow  in  a  garden  keepeth  n. 

1  Mac.  2.  (i3.  and  his  thought  is  come  to  n. 

2  Mac.  4.  2.5.  bringing  n.  worthy  tho  priesthood 

7.  12.  so  Ihat  he  71.  regarded  the  pains 

9.7.  howbeit,  he  n.  censed  from  his  brnggin 

12.  4.  to  live  in  peace,  and  susiwcling  it. 

14.  35.  O  Lord  of  all  ihinss.  who  hast  need  ofn. 

NOUGHT. 

1  Fsd.  1.  56.  till  they  had  brought  them  all  lo  n. 
2>:.«rf.  2. 33.  when  I  came  lo  them,  tJieysetmn  am 

8.  .5!l.  it  was  now  his  will  men  should  cimie  lo  71 
Jud.  4. 1.  spoiled  temple",  and  brought  them  to  71. 

13.  17.  broiijht  to  71.  the  enomicn  of  thy  |ieople 
Fsth    13.  15.  their  eves  are  on  lis  to  bring  us  lo  n. 
H'isd.  1.  II.  no  won!  so  secret  Ihni  shall  go  for  n. 

16.  Ihev  consumed  lo  n.  and  made  a  covenant 
F.irl.  -10.' 14.  so  shall  Irnn'gressors  come  to  ti. 
47.7.hc  brought  to  n.ihe  Philistines  his  adversaries 
NOURISH 

2  F.sd.  2  2."!.  n.  thy  childicn,  O  thou  good  nursa 
Tub.  2.  10.  moreover  Achincharus  did  n.  me 
F.ccl.  28.  5.  if  he  that  it  but  flesh  n.  hatred 


Apocrypha.]  OBE 

Bar.  4.  II.  with  joy  did  I  v.  tlicin,  but  sent  them 
1  Miic.  6.  l.j.  Iiu  >liould  n.  Iiiiii  up  fur  the  kiiiguom 
S  Mac.  JO.  lo.  llitiy  Weill  about  to  n.  wur 

NOUKISHED. 
1  Esd.  4.  16.  they  n.  them  that  pluiited  vineyards 
S  £.';«t/.  8.  II.  that  tlie  thing  tiishiuned  inuy  be  n. 

9.  40.  anil  1  w.  him  with  a  great  travail 
Jud.5.  10.  wiiihj  they  were  /i.jiiid  became  a  multi. 
IVisd.  l(i.  '£i.  that  llie  righteous  might  he  n. 

2^/u<;.7. 'J7.  jjavetlieesuik  tliree  years,  and  H.thee 

10.  14.  lie  H.  war  conlinii;illv  with  the  Jews 

^o^JUlsn^:TH. 

Wisd.  IG.  25.  was  obedient  to  thy  grace  that  n.. 
3(5.  it  is  nut  tlie  growing  ut  fruits  tliat  n.  man 
Eccl.  IT.  Id.  Iiis  first-burii  he  n.  with  disciphiie 
NUMBER. 

1  Esd.  2.  9.  with  many  free  gifts  of  a  great  n. 

Vi.  this  was  the  n.  of  them,  1000  gulden  cups 
8.  03.  all  Hus  delivered  them  by  n.  and  weight 
8  ICad.  2. 3d  bcliold  the  n.  of  tluise  that  be  sealed 

3.  7.  came  tribes,  people,  and  kindreils  out  of  n. 
29.  when  I  had  seen  impieties  without  n. 

4.  37.  by  n.  hath  he  numbered  the  times 
10.50.  and  he  knowelh  the  «.  of  them 

Jud.  2.  20.  for  tiie  inullilude  was  without  n. 
5. 10.  so  that  one  could  not  ».  their  nation 
Wi4(/.  4.  8.  nor  that  is  measured  by  n.  of  years 
11.2(t.  all  things  in  measure,  and  re.  and  weight 

Eccl.  1.  2.  who  can  n.  the  sand  of  the  sea  % 
7. 10.  H.not  thyself  among  the  multitude  of  sinners 
16. 17.  among  such  an  ijifinite  n.  of  creatures 
18.  5.  who  shall  71.  the  strength  of  his  majesty  ? 
9.  the  n.  of  a  man's  days  at  most  are  100  years 
38.29.  who  makelh  all  his  work  by  n. 
42.  7.  deliver  all  things  in  rt.  and  weight 
45. 11.  after  the  n.  of  the  tribes  of  Israel 
48.  2.  and  by  his  zeal  he  diminished  their  n. 

Bar.  2. 29.  multitude  shall  be  turned  into  a  small  n. 

frayer  of  Mainis.<s.  seemed  above  tt.of  sands  of  sea 
NUMBERED. 

Wisd.  5. 5.  how  is  he  n.  among  thechildren  of  God  I 

Eccl.  1.  9.  he  created  her,  and  saw  her,  and  n.  her 
37.  25.  the  days  of  the  life  of  man  may  be  n. 

NUMENIUS. 

Mac.  12.  IC.  we  chose  N.  the  son  of  Antiochus 

NURSE. 

2  Esd.  1. 28.  prayed  you,  as  a  n.  her  young  babes 
i2.  25.  O  thou  good  n.  slablish  their  feet 

NURSED. 
Wisd.  7.4.  I  was  n.  in  swaddling  clothes 
Bar.  4.8.  ye  have  grieved  Jerusalem  that  n.  you 

NURTURE. 
IVisd.'A.  11.  whoso  despiseth  n.  is  miserable 
£cc^22,10.  haughty  thmugh  disdain  and  want  of  n. 

NURTURED 
Eccl.  21.  23.  he  that  is  well  n.  will  stand  without 
22.  .1.  an  evil  n.  son  is  the  dishonour  of  his  father 
31.  19.  a  little  is  sufticient  for  a  man  well  n. 
40.24.  a  wise  ninn  well  n.  will  beware  thereof 

NURTUREDST. 
2  Esd.  8. 12.  thou  V.  it  in  tliv  law,  and  leformedst  it 

NUKTURETU. 
Eccl.  18.  13.  he  teproveih,  and  71.  and  teacheth 


OFF 


o. 


O.ATIl. 

1  Ksrf.  8. 93.  let  us  make  an  o.  to  the  Lord 

90.  EsdriiB  look  an  o.  of  the  chief  of  the  priests 

ToA.  8.  20.  Ra^'uel  had  said  to  hini  by  an  0. 

^urf.  8.  II.  touching  this  o.  which  ye  made 
30.  coinpcll'ed  lis  to  bring  an  0.  on  ourselves 

Eccl.  44.  21.  Iherefore  he  assured  him  by  an  o. 

Bar.  2.  34.  the  land  which  I  promised  with  an  o. 

1  Mac.  6.  01.  the  princes  made  an  o.  to  Ihein 
fi2.  but  he  brake  hi?  0   that  he  had  made 

7. 18.  for  they  have  broken  the  covenant  and  0. 

2  Mac.  14.  33.  and  be  made  an  o.  in  this  manner 

OATHS. 
Wisd.  18.  6.  to  what  o.  Ihi'y  had  given  credence 

22.  allndgingo.  and  covenants  made  with  fathers 
2  Mac.  4.  34.  who  gave  iiim  bis  right  band  with  o. 

7.  24.  but  also  he  a.=surcd  him  with  0. 
15.  10.  shewing  them  thi'  breach  of  0. 

OBEDIENT. 
2  Esd.  1.  8.  for  they  have  not  been  0.  to  my  law 
Wisd.  16. 25.  it  was  0.  to  thy  grace  that  nourisheth 
Eccl.  3.  6.  he  that  is  0.  unto  the  Lord  shall  be 

33.28.  if  he  be  not  0.  put  on  more  heavy  fetters 

42.  2;t.  for  all  uses,  and  they  are  all  0. 
Bar.  2.  5.  we  have  not  been  0. 10  his  voice 

6.  60.  being  sent  to  do  their  offices,  arc  0. 

OBEY. 
J  K.tfl.  4.  10.  all  bis  people  and  armies  0.  him 

5.09.  for  we  likewise  as  yon  do,  o.  your  Lord 

8.  94.  as  many  as  do  n.  the  law  of  the  Lord 
S  Esd.  1.  24.  thou  Judah  wonldst  not  0.  me 
Jud.  2.  3.  all  that  did  not  n.  the  romtnandmcnt 


OBEYED. 

1  Esd.  4. 12.  be  mightiest,  when  in  such  sort  he  is  0. 

OBEYETH. 
Eccl.  24.22.  that  0.  me  shall  never  be  confounded 
Bar.  3.  33.  calleth  it,  and  it  o.  him  with  fear 

OBJECTETH. 
Wisd.  3.  12.  0.  to  our  infamy  the  transgressings 

OBLATION. 
Dan.  3.  15.  nor  is  there  at  this  time  0.  or  incense 

OBLATIONS. 
I  Esd.  5.  52.  and  after  that  the  continual  0. 
Eccl.  7.9.  God  will  look  on  the  multitude  of  my  0. 
50.  13.  and  the  o.  of  the  Lord  in  their  bands 
1  Mac,  15.  5.  bow  I  confirm  to  thee  all  the  0. 

OBSCURE. 
Wisd.  4. 12.  doth  0.  things  that  are  honest 

OBSCURITY. 
Esth.  11.  8.  and  lo,  a  day  of  darkness  and  0. 

OBSERVE. 
2£sd.7. 21.  they  should  0.  to  avoid  punishment 
Eccl.i.  20.  0.  the  opportunity  and  beware  of  evil 
13. 13.  0.  and  take  heed,  for  thou  walkest  in  peril 

18.  27.  a  wise  man  will  fear,  but  a  fool  will  note. 
27.  12.  if  among  the  indiscreet,  0.  the  time 

1  Mac.  2.  67.  take  all  those  that  u.  the  law 

2  Mac.  0.  8.  that  they  should  0.  the  same  fashions 
OBSERVED. 

'iEsd.  9.  32.  our  fathers  0.  not  thy  ordinances 
Eccl.  19.  9.  he  heard  and  0.  thee  and  will  hate 

OBTAIN. 
2  Esd.  4.24.  and  we  are  not  worthy  to  0.  mercy 
5.  12.  then  shall  men  hope,  but  nothing  0. 

14.  34.  and  after  death,  ye  shall  o.  mercy 
Wisd.  8.  13.  by  means  of  her  0.  immortality 

21.  perceived  that  I  could  not  0.  her 
Eccl.  11.10.  thou  shalt  not  0.  nor  escape  by  fleeing 
15. 1.  that  hath  knowledge  of  the  law  shall  o.  her 
1  Mac.  2.  64.  for  by  it  shall  you  0.  glory 

OBTAINED. 
1  Esd.  6.  5.  the  elders  of  the  Jews  o.  favour 
Est/i.  16.  11.  Aman  had  so  far  forth  o.  favour 
Eccl.  40.  9.  and  his  seed  o.  it  for  a  heritage 

1  Jl/ac.2.54.o.the  covenant  of  everlasting  priesthood 
15.9.  when  we  have  o.our  kingdom  we  will  honour 

2  Mac.  5.  7.  howbeil  he  o.  not  the  principality 

15.  5.  he  o.  not  to  have  his  wicked  will  done 
OBTAIN  ETH. 

Eccl.  19.  18.  and  wisdom  0.  the  love  of  God 

OBTAINING. 
EccZ.10.21.  fear  of  Lord  gooth  before  0.  of  authority 

OCCASION. 

Wisd.  14. 21.  this  was  an  0.  to  deceive  the  world 

Eccl.  4.5.  and  give  him  none  0.  to  curse  thee 

23.  refrain  not  when  there  is  0.  to  do  good 

OCCUPIED. 

Eccl.  12.  3.  no  good  to  him  that  is  always  0.  in  evil 

38.  25.  and  that  is  o.  in  their  labours 

39.  1,  he  that  is  w.  in  the  meditation  of  the  law  of 
the  Most  High,  will  be  0.  in  prophecies 

2  Jl/ac.  8.  27.  they  0.  themselves  about  the  sabbath 
10.  15.  the  Iduineans  kept  the  Jews  0. 
OCCUPIETH. 
2  Esd.  16. 42.  lie  that  0.  merchandise  had  no  profit 

ODIOUS. 
Wisd.  12.4.  thou  hatcdst  it  fordoing  mosto.  works 

ODOLLAM. 
2  Mac.  12.  38.  so  Judas  came  into  the  citv  O. 

ODOUR. 
Eccl.  24.  15.  I  yielded  a  pleasant  0.  like  myrrh 

ODOURS. 
"Esd.  6.  44.  there  were  0.  of  wondeiful  smell 

OFFENCE. 
.Tud.  12.  2.  I  will  noi  eat  thereof,  lest  there  be  0. 
Wisd.  14.  31.  that  punisheth  the  0.  of  the  ungodly 
Eccl.  18.  27.  a  wise  man  will  beware  of  0. 

19.  8.  if  lliou  canst  without  0.  reveal  them  not 
23.  11.  acknowledge  not,  he  maketb  a  double  o. 
.10.  13.  lest  his  lewd  behaviour  be  an  o.  lo  thee 
41.  18.  of  an  0.  before  a  judge  and  rulir 

1  Mac.  5.  4.  who  had  been  an  o.  unto  the  people 

OFFENCES. 
Prayer  of  Manass.  and  I  have  multiplied  0. 

OFFEND. 
Wisd.  12.  2.  therefore  cbaslenesi  thou  ihcm  that  o. 
15.  13.  knowelh  himself  to  o.  above  all  others 
Eccl.  7.  7.  0.  not  againat  the  multitude  of  a  cily 
17.25.  make  thy  prayer  before  his  face,  undo,  lees 
19.  4.  that  sinncth  shall  0.  against  his  own  soul 
23.  11.  if  he  shall  o.  his  sin  shall  be  upon  him 
31.  10.  who  might  0.  and  hath  not  offended 
17.  leave  off,  and  be  not  unsatiable  lest  thou  0. 
30.  drunkenness  increaselh  rage  of  a  fool  till  heo. 
OFFENDED. 
2Es(/.12.41.  whathaveweo.thatlhou  forsakestus? 
Wisd.  10.  8.  that  in  the  things  wherein  they  0. 
12.  2.  pulling  in  remembrance  wherein  they  o. 
Eccl.  19.  16.  who  bath  not  0.  with  his  tongue  1 
2.  and  I  am  greally  o.  at  their  life 
31.  10.  who  might  offnd  and  hath  not  0.? 


OLO 

OFFEND  ETIL 

Bar.  5.  14.  that  cannot  put  to  death  one  that  0.  him 

OFFENJDING. 
Wisd.  2.  12.  he  upbraideth  us  with  our  0.  the  law 

OFFER. 
1  Esd.  1. 6.  0.  the  passover  in  ordcr,and  make  ready 
9.  20.  and  to  o.  rams  to  make  reconciletnciit 


£ceM8. 3.  gov.  the  world,  nnil  all  things  0.  his  will 

iMac.l.M.  I  will  nut  0.  the  king's  commandmeoti  32.  15.  but  the  hypocrite  will  be  0.  thereat 
823 


Eccl.  7.  9.  when  I  u.  to  God,  he  will  accept  it 
Bar.  1. 10.  prepare  ye  manna,  and  0.  on  the  ultar 
2  Jlfdc.  4.  40.  ho  began  first  to  0.  violence 
7.  .37.  but  1  (I.  up  my  body  and  life  for  the  laws 

12.  43.  he  sent  it  to  Jerusalem  to  0,  a  sin-otfcrinr 
OFFERED. 

Tvb.  5.  13.  we  0.  the  first-born  and  tenths  of  fruita 
Eccl.  46.  16.  when  he  0.  the  suck  nig  lamb 
2  Mac.  1.  18.  given  us  when  Neemias  0.  sacrifice 
3.  32.  0.  a  sacrifice  for  the  health  of  Ihe  mao 
10.  3.  they  0.  a  sacrifice  after  two  years 

OFFERETH. 
Wisd.  17.  12.  fear  betraying  the  succours  reason  0. 
Eccl.  35. 1.  he  that  takctli  heed  0.  a  peaceolfering 
2.  he  that  requitelb  a  good  turn  0.  fine  flour 
OFFERING. 
2  Esd.  10.  45.  wherein  there  was  no  0.  made  in  her 
Eccl.  14.  11.  my  son,  give  the  Lord  his  due  0. 
30.  19.  what  good  doeth  Ihe  0.  to  an  idol! 
34.18.  a  thing  wrongfully  gotten,  bis  o.is  ridiculous 
2(/.  whoso  brings  an  u.  of  the  goods  of  the  poor 
35.  6.  n.  of  the  righteous  makelh  the  altar  fat 
50. 14.  that  he  might  adorn  the  o.  of  Most  High 
2  jl/ac.  4.  24.  0.  more  than  Jason  by  300  talents 
14.  31.  the  priests  that  were  v.  usual  sacrifices 

OFFERINGS. 
1  Esd.6.3]  .that  o.may  be  made  to  the  most  high  God 
2f;srf. 10. 46. Solomon  builded  the  cily, and  offered  0. 
Jud.  10.  18.  they  offered  their  burnt-o.  and  gifts 
Eccl.34. 19.  is  not  pleased  with  the  0.  of  the  wicktd 
35.  1.  he  that  keepelh  (he  law,  brings  0.  enough 

OFFICE. 

1  Esd.  5. 38.  priests  that  usurped  0.  of  the  priesthood 

Eccl.  32.  2.  when  done  all  thy  o.  take  thy  place 

45.  15.  should  cvecute  the  n.  of  the  priesthood 

OFFICES. 
Bar.  0.  CO.  being  sent  fo  do  their  0.  are  obedieat 

OFFICERS. 
Eccl.  10.  2.  as  the  judge  is  himself,  so  are  his  0. 
IMac.  10.  33. 1  will  that  all  my  a.  remit  tributes 
41.  all  the  overplus  which  the  0.  paid  not  in 

13.  37.  to  w  rite  to  our  o.  to  confirm  immunities 
OIL. 

1  Esd.  6.  30.  and  also  corn,  salt,  wine,  and  0. 
.Tud.  10.  5.  then  she  gave  her  maid  a  cruse  of  0. 

11.13.  resolved  lospend  the  tenths  of  wine  and  o 
Eccl.  39.  26.  the  blood  of  the  grape,  0.  and  clothing 

45.  15.  I\Ioses  anointed  him  with  iioly  o. 
Sus.  17.  she  said,  bring  me  0.  and  washing-ballg 
OINTMENT,  S. 

2  Esd.  2. 12.  they  shall  have  the  tree  of  life  for  an  o 
.Tud.  10.3.  she  anointed  herself  with  precious  o. 
Wisd.2.7.\etus  fill  oursel  ves  with  cosily  wine  and  o. 

OLD. 
Tob.  3. 10.  I  shall  bring  bis  0.  age  with  sorrow  to  gr. 

14.  13.  where  he  became  0.  with  honour 
.7vd.  10.23.  she  waxed  0.  in  her  husband's  house 
Esth.  13.  7.  who  of  o.  and  now  are  malicious 
Wisd.i.}6.  the  years  and  0.  age  of  the  unrighteoui 
8.  8.  she  knoweth  things  of  o.  and  conjecturcth 
12.  3.  those  o.  inhabilanis  of  thy  holy  land 

14.  R.  for  in  o.  lime  when  proud  giants  perished 
Eccl.  2.  10.  look  at  the  generations  of  0.  and  see 

6.  18.  so  shalt  thou  find  wisdom  till  thine  0.  age 
8.  6.  dishonour  not  a  man  in  bis  0.  age,  for  even 
some  of  us  wa.\  0.  rejoice  not  over  thy  enemy 
9. 10.  forsake  not  an  0.  friend,  for  new  is  not  conj- 
parnble,  when  wine  is  0.  shalt  drink  with  pleas. 
11. 16.  evil  shall  wa.\  0.  with  them  Ihatglory  in  it 
20. lie  sled  fast  in  covenant,  and  wax  o. in  thy  work 
H.  17.  all  flesh  wa.xelh  0.  as  a  garment 
16.  7.  he  was  not  pacified  toward  the  0.  giants 
25.  2.  I  hate  an  o.  adulterer  that  dolcth 
51.  8.  then  thought  I  upon  thy  acis  of  o. 
Rrtr.3.10.t  hall  hou  art  waxen  o.in  a  strange  country 
S'lis.  52.  O  thou  that  art  waxen  0.  in  wickedness 

1  Mac.  3.  29.  the  laws  which  had  been  of  0.  time 

15.  3.  that  I  ni.ny  restore  it  lo  the  n.  estate 
17.  to  renew  the  0.  friendship  and  league 

16.3. bul  now  lam  u. and  ye  are  of  asnflicipnt  age 

2  .Mac.  5.  13.  there  was  killing  of  young  and  o. 
6.  21.  for  0.  acquaintance  they  hail  with  Ihe  maa 

22.  for  ihe  0.  friendship  with  them,  find  favour 
OLIVE. 
Jud.  15.  13.  they  put  a  jarlRod  of  o.  upon  Iier 

OLIVE-TREE 
Eccl.  50.  10.  as  a  fnk  o.-lrrf  budding  forth  frnit 

OLIVES. 
2  F^d.  16. 29.  as  in  an  orchard  of  0.  on  every  tree  ara 
left  three  or  four  o.  when  vineyard  gathered 
OLOFERNES. 

I  Jud.  2.  4.  O.  the  chicfcapmin  of  his  army 
14.  then  O.  went  from  the  presence  of  hii  lord 


OPP 

/u<i.l0.13. 1  am  coining  before  O.  the  chiorctvptain 
17.  ami  lliey  brought  lier  to  lliu  tent  ol  O. 
21.  O.  lesled  upon  his  bed  under  a  canopy 

11.  1.  itiui)  said  O.  uiilrflier,  'Ja.  |  12.3, 17. 

12.  10.  O.  inadu  u  fuasl  to  liis  own  servants  only 
16.  O.  Iiis  h>:an  uns  ravished  with  her 

2U.  O.  took  great  delight  in  her,  and  drank 

13.  2.  O.  lying  alung  on  his  bed  in  the  tent 

6.  the  pillar  of  the  bed  which  was  at  O.  head 

9.  she  went  furth  and  gave  O.his  hi.aii  to  her  maid 

15.  she  said  unto  thein,  behold  the  head  ofO. 

14.3.  then  they  shall  run  to  the  lent  of  O.  13. 

18/  O.  lieth  upon  the  g^ou^d  wiihu'ut  a  head 

ONE. 

Tub.  4.  4.  when  dead,  bury  her  by  me  in  o.  grave 

6.  10.  he  also  hath  v.  only  daughter,  named  Sara 
FMh.  15.  .3.  upon  the  o.  she  leaned,  as  carrying 
H'ii'd.7.  22.  a  spirit,  holy,  o.  only,  manifold 

11.  20.  they  have  fallen  down  with  a.  blast 
Keel.  1.  8.  there  is  O.  wise  an<l  greatly  to  be  feared 
•'.  6.  have  but  o-  counsellor  of  a  thousand 
■■  A  bind  not  o.  sin  upon  another,  for  in  o.  Ihou 
shall  not  be  unpunisheil 
ib.  3.  0.  that  is  just  is  better  than  a  thousand 
46.  4.  and  was  not  o.  day  as  long  as  two  1 
/Jan.3.28.  the  three, as  out  of  o.  mouth,  praised  God 
A"u»-.  52.  he  called  o.  of  them,  and  said  unto  him 
Z  Mac.  3.  32.  he  left  o.  of  the  blood  royal  to  oveisee 
4.  1 1,  may  know  tliat  there  is  O.  thai  delivereth 
8. 10.  they  committed  their  goveriim<-nt  to  o.  man 
every  year,  and  all  were  obedient 
to  that  0. 

9.  58.  who  shall  take  them  all  in  o.  night 

2  Mac.  1.  5.  hear  players,  and  be  at  o.  with  you 

7.  2.  but  0.  of  them  that  spake  first,  said  thus 

20.  saw  her  seven  sons  slain  in  thesi)aceofo.  day 

21.  yea,  she  exhorted  every  o.  of  them 

ONIAS. 
2. Vac.  3. 1.1a  W8  kept  because  of  the  godliness  of  O. 
5.  and  when  he  could  not  overcome  O. 

4.  1.  Simon  slandered  O.  as  if  he  terrified  Heliod. 
4.  O.  seeing  the  danger  of  this  contention 

34.  lie  prayed  him  to  get  O.  into  his  hands 
3ti.  because  O.  was  slain  without  cause 
15.  14.  then  O.  answered,  saying,  this  is  a  lover 

ONYX. 
Eccl.  24.  15.  I  vielded  a  pleasant  odour  like  o. 

OPEN. 
1  F..id.4.3\.  the  king  gaped  on  her  with  o.  mouth 
Toll.  2.  in.  my  eyes  being  o.  the  sparrows  muted 
6.  4.  o.  the  fish,  and  take  the  heart  and  the  liver 
II.  7.  I  know  that  thy  father  will  o.  his  eyes 
Jud.  4.  6.  toward  the  ».  country  near  Dothaim 

10.  9.  they  commanded  the  young  men  to  o.  unto 

her,  as  she  had  spoken 

1 1.  10.  a  dog  shall  not  so  inucli  as  o.  his  moulh 
13.  11.  0.  0.  now  the  gate,  our  God  is  with  us 

FJth.  14.  10.  0.  the  mouths  of  the  heathen 

F.ccl.  a.  ID.  and  o.  ilot  thine  heart  to  every  man 
15.5.  in  the  midst  of  congreg.  shall  she  o.  his  mouth 
20.24.  a  stranger,  thou  dan  st  not  o.  thy  mouth 
39.  5.  and  he  will  n.  hie  mouth  in  prayer 

Bar.  2.  C.  but  to  us  and  our  fathers  o.  shame 
17.  o.  ihine  eyes  and  behold;  for  the  dead 

Dan.  3.  10.  and  now  we  cannot  o.  our  mouths 

1  Mac.  3.  48.  and  they  laid  o.  the  book  of  the  law 

5.  48.  howbcit  iliey  could  not  o.  unto  him 

2  Mac.  1.  4.  God  o.  your  hearts  in  his  law 

6.  18.  Elea/.ar  was  ronslraiiicd  to  o.  his  mouth 

OPENKD. 
1  Fsd.  9.  4fi.  when  he  o.  the  law  they  stood  all  up 
I  f><<.().20.  books  shall  be  o.  before  the  firmament 
t'.  52.  for  unto  you  is  paradise  o.tr''e  of  life  planted 
9.  2P.  I  n.  my  mouth,  and  be{.'an  to  talk  before  God 
7'ufi.  8.  i:t.  so  the  maid  o.  the  door  and  went  in 
Jud.  10.  9.  the  gates  of  iho  city  to  be  o.  lo  me 
Feci.  43.  14.  thriMigli  this  the  treasures  are  o. 
!t\.  2.1   I  0.  my  mouth  and  said,  buy  her  for  yours. 
.S'ii.«.  25.  then  ran  the  one  and  o.  the  carden  Hoor 
S  Mac.  12.  41.  who  hiid  n.  Iho  things  that  were  hid 

OPF.NETH. 
F.i-cl.  20.  15.  he  n.  his  mouth  like  n  crier 
40   14.  while  he  o.  his  hand,  ho  shall  rejoice 

OPF.NLV. 
Fxcl.  51.  13.  I  desired  uisiloin  n.  in  my  prayer 

OPr-'RATION. 
IViad.  7.  17.  to  know  the  n.  of  the  elements 

OPF'.R.ATIO.N'r^. 
Fxcl.  17.  5.  thev  received  thi'  me  of  the  five  o. 
OPHIR,  Srr  r.oLn. 
OPINION. 
Feci.  3.  21.  are  deceived  by  their  own  vain  o. 

OPPORTUNITY 
F.ret.  4.  20.  obs'  rvc  the  o.  nnil  bi-wnre  of  evil 
12.  16.  if  he  find  o.  he  will  not  bo  sMihfud 
W.  28.  yel  when  h"  findoth  o.  lie  will  do  evil 
JO.  7.  a  "wise  man  will  hold  his  tongue  lill  ho  see  o. 
18. 2-1.  the  wlwlom  of  a  learned  man  conieth  by  o. 
J  .Mae.  11.42.  I  will  honour  thy  nation,  if  o.  nerve 
LV  34.  wc  hiiving  o.  hold  the  inhoritnnco 
824 


OSE 

OPPRESS. 
IViad.  2.  10.  let  us  o.  the  poor  righteous  man 
17.  2.  unrighteous  thought  to  o.  the  holy  nation 
Feci.  3t5.  9.  let  them  perish  that  o.  the  people 
\AIac.ii.  18.  they  saw  iliat  the  Grecians  did  o.  Israel 
2  Mac.  I.  28.  punish  them  that  o.  and  do  us  wrong 

OPPRKSriED. 
.Iud.9. 1 1,  and  helper  of  the  0.  and  upholder  of  weak 
I().  8.  fur  the  exaltation  of  those  that  were  o. 
tVisd.  10.  II.  the  covetousuess  of  such  as  o.  him 
Feci.  35.  13.  ho  will  hear  the  prayer  of  the  o. 

OPPRESSOR. 
Feci.  4.  9.  him  that  suffereth  wrong  from  the  0. 

OPPROBRIOUS. 
£cc/.23.15.  the  man  that  is  accustomed  too.  words 

ORACLE. 
F.ccl.  'Xi.  3.  the  law  is  faithful  to  hira  as  an  o. 

ORACLES. 
Feci.  36.  14.  fill  Sion  with  thine  unspeakable  o. 

ORCHARD. 

2  F.sd.  16.  29.  as  in  an  o.  of  olives,  on  every  tree 

ORDAIN. 

1  Fsd.  8.  23.  0.  judges  and  justices  in  all  Syria 

2  F.sd.  6.  49.  thou  didst  o.  two  living  creatures 
Tob.  8.  7.  mercifully  o.  that  we  may  become  aged 
1  Mac.  10.  20.  this  day  we  o.  theo  to  be  high-priest 

ORDAINED. 

1  F.sd.  6.  34.  I  Darius  the  king  have  o.  it  be  done 
8.  49.  the  servants  of  the  temple  whom  David  o 

2  F.sd.  7.  17.  O  Lord,  thou  hast  o.  in  thy  law 

8. 14.  it  is  an  easy  thing  to  be  o.  by  commandment 
Toh.  I.  G.  as  it  was  o.  to  all  the  jieople  of  Israel 
Esth.  13.  6.  by  Aman  who  is  o.  over  the  affairs 

14.  9.  Ihcy  will  abolish  the  thing  thou  hast  o. 

ff7.sd.9.2.fl.man  thro'  thy  wisdom  to  have  dominion 
Keel.  7. 15.  husbandry  w  hich  the  Most  High  hath  o. 

48.  10.  who  wast  o.  for  reproofs  in  their  times 
1  Mac  3.  55.  Judas  o.  captains  over  the  people 

4.  59.  0.  that  the  days  of  the  dedication  be  kept 

7.  49.  moreover,  thev  o.  to  keep  yearly  this  day 

ORDER. 

1  F.sd.  1. 6.  offer  the  passover  in  o.  and  make  ready 
10.  the  priests  and  Levites  stood  in  comely  o. 
15.  the  sons  of  Asaph  were  in  their  o. 

8.  10.  I  have  given  o.  that  such  of  the  nation 

2  F.sd.  6.  4.5.  and  the  stars  should  be  in  o. 
1.3.  20.  he  shall  o.  them  that  are  left  behind 
14.  13.  now  therefore  set  thine  house  in  o. 

H'i.':d.  7.  29.  she  is  above  all  the  o.  of  stars 

8.  14.  I  shall  set  the  people  in  o.  and  nations 

9  3.  o.tlie  world  according  to  equity  and  righteous 
Eccl.  2.  6.  0.  thy  way  aright,  and  trust  in  him 
38. 10.  0.  thy  hands  aright,  and  cleanse  thy  heart 
43.  10.  they  will  stand  in  their  o.  and  never  faint 
47.  10.  and  he  set  in  o.  the  solemn  times 

3  Mnc.  6.  40.  they  marched  on  safely  and  in  o. 

9.  55.  nor  could  give  o.  concerning  his  house 
2  Mae.  3.  14.  he  entered  in  to  o.  this  matter 

4.  27.  as  for  the  money  he  took  no  good  o.  fo»  it 
7.  8.  he  received  also  the  next  torment  in  o. 

ORDERED. 
»f?>rf.  11.20.  but  thou  hasto.  nil  things  in  measure 
Eccl.  10.  1.  govcrnmet.t  of  a  prudent  man  is  well  o 

ORDER  EST. 
Wisd.  12.  15.  thou  o.  all  things  righteously 

ORDERING. 
Wisd.  15.  1.  gracious,  and  in  mercy  o.  all  things 
Erel.  26.  16.  a  good  wife  in  the  o.  of  her  house 
32.2.  receive  thy  crown  tor  thy  well  o.  of  the  feast 
1  Mac.  16. 14.  taking  rare  for  the  good  n.  of  them 

ORDINANCES. 
Feci.  6.  37.  let  thy  mind  he  upon  the  o.  of  the  Lord 
Bar.  2. 12.  we  have  dealt  unrighteously  in  all  Ihyo. 
I  Mnr.  ^.  ri.  gave  them  licence  to  do  after  the  o. 
2.  21.  God  forbul  that  we  should  forsake  the  o. 
ORDINARY. 

1  ;r.?rf.M6. not  lawful  for  anyto  go  from  hiso.service 
Eccl.  33.  9.  some  oftl.em  hath  he  made  o.  days 

OR  KB. 

2  F.sd.  2.  33.  a  charge  of  the  T^ord  on  mount  O. 

ORNAMENT. 
F.c.e.l.  6.  30.  for  there  is  a  golden  o.  upon  her 
21.  21.  learning  is  lo  a  wise  man  as  nil  o.  of  gold 
4'\.  9.  an  o.  giving  light  in  the  highest  places 
4.).  12.  an  o.  of  hnnour,  a  cosily  work 
Prayer  of  Mnnass.  inaib'  earth  with  all  o.  thereof 

ORNAMENTS. 
.htd.  10.  4.  and  she  put  nboiit  her  all  her  o. 
F.crl.  45.  7.  ho  beautified  him  with  comely  n. 

1  Mac.  1.  22.  the  golden  o.  before  the  lemplo 

2.  11.  nil  her  o.  are  taken  awny,  U  a  bond  slave 
'iMac  "  2.  images  of  silver  ami  gold  with  l)ieir  o. 

5.  3.  there  was  bim'ii  glitiering  of  golden  o. 

ORPHAN. 

2  F.sd.  2.  20  defend  the  o.  clothe  the  naked 
Tob.  I.  8.  because  I  wnj  lefi  an  o.  by  my  father 

ORPHANS. 
2  J1faf.8.28.  hud  given  BiMiilslolhe  maimed  and  o. 

OSEA. 
lEsd.  13.  40.  carried   n  the  time  of  O.  the  kinj 


OX 


[ApocKrra« 


OSEAS. 
iEsd.  1.  39.  I  will  give  for  leaders,  O.  Amoz 

OVEN. 
2  F.sd.  4.  48.  behold,  a  hot  burning  o.  passed  by 
/>an.  3. 23.  the  king's  servants  ceased  not  to  makf 
the  o.  hot  with  rosin 
26.  the  angel  of  the  Lord  came  down  into  theo 
and  smote  the  dame  of  the  hre  out  of  the  o. 
OVERCAME. 
2  Esd.  11.  40.  the  fourth  came  and  o.  all  beasts 
IVisd.  16.  10.  not  the  teeth  of  venomous  dragons  Q 
18  22.  so  he  o.  the  destroyer,  not  wiih  strength 
2^/ac.2.  21.  being  few  ihey  o.  the  whole  country 
OVERCOME. 

1  Fsd.  3.  5.  let  every  one  speak,  he  that  shall  o. 

2  F.sd.  3.  21.  the  first  Adam  was  «.  and  so  bo  all 
C.  28.  corruption  shall  beo.  and  truth  be  declared 
7.58.  if  he  be  o.  he  shall  sutl'er  as  thou  hast  said 
13.  34.  willing  to  come  and  o.  him  by  fighting 

.Ivd.  5.  20.  let  us  go  up,  and  we  shall  o.  them 
iVisa.  2.  4.  and  v.  with  the  beat  thereof 
F.ccl.  48.  13.  no  word  could  n.  him 

1  Mac.  2.  GI.  none  that  trust  in  him  shall  be  o 

2  Mac.  II.  13.  that  the  Hebrews  could  not  !.-o  o- 
12.  11.  so  the  Nomades  of  Arabia  being  o. 

OVERFLOW. 
.Jud.  2.  8.  be  filled  with  their  dead  till  il  a. 

OVERLAID. 
Bar.  6.  39.  their  gods  of  wood,  which  are  o.  50. 

OVERMASTER. 
F.ccl.  12.  5.  give  it  not,  lest  he  o.  thee  thereby 

OVERMUCH. 
Kec?.26.  10  Test  she  abuse  herselflhrougho.  liberty 

OVERPASS. 
Eccl.  14.  14.  let  not  part  of  a  gotid  desire  o.  theo 

OVERPLUS. 
1  Mac.  10.  41.  all  the  o.  which  otricers  paid  not 

OVERSEE. 
1  Esd.  7.  2.  did  very  carefully  o.  the  holy  worki 
1  Mac.  3.  32.  he  left  Ly.'ias  to  o.  the  affairs 

OVERSEEING. 
.Tud.  8.  3.  as  he  stood  u.  them  that  bound  sheave* 
H'isd.  7.  23.  having  all  power,  o.  all  things 

OVERSEER. 
Tob.  1.  22.  AchiachariiH  was  «.  of  the  accounts 

OVERSEERS. 
I  Mac.  1.  51.  he  appointed  o.  over  the  people 
10.  37.  1  will  that  their  ».  \>f  of  themselvee 
OVERSHADOW. 

Bar.  5.8.  every  sw t-sm.-lling  tree  shall  o.  Israel 

OVERSIGHT. 
1  Mac.  13.  39.  as  for  anv  n.  or  fault  committeil 

OVERTAKEN. 
.Jud.  11.  II.  and  their  sin  hath  n.  them 

OVERTHREW. 
F.ccl.  10.  16.  the  Loirl  n.  countries  of  the  heathen 

OVERTHROW. 
Wisd.  5.  23.  ill  dealings  shall  a.  the  thrones 
F.ccl.  8.  16.  where  there  is  no  help  he  will  o.  Inee 
i:t.  2.3.  if  he  stumble,  they  will  help  lo  o.  him 
29.  16.  a  sinner  w  ill  o.  the  good  csiate  of  hissureljr 
1  Mac.  3.  22.  the  iiord  himself  will  o.  them 
5.3.  Judas  gave  them  a  great  n.aiid  abated  courage 

OVERTHROWING. 
Eccl.  13.  13.  for  Ihnn  walk.-si  in  peril  of  thy  o. 

OVERTHROWN. 
To*. 14. 4.Jonahspnkei.fN:iie»c, that  itshould  be*. 
Jvd.  7.  14.  they  shall  be  o.  in  the  streets 
16.  11.  these  lifted  up  iheir  voices,  hut  Ihey  were*. 
Keel.  3.  24.  evil  suspM-ion  has  o.  their  jiidirment 
12.  12.  lest  w  hen  he  hath  o.  thee,  he  stand  up 

27.  3.  his  house  shall  soon  he  o. 

28.  14.  hath  o.  lln'  hniis.-s  of  great  men 

OVERTOOK. 
1  M^c.  12.  30.  pursued  after  them,  but  o.  them  not 

OVERWEIGH. 
F.ccl.  8.  2.  be  not  at  vannnre  with  rich,  legt  he  «. 

OVERWISE. 
Feci.  10.  26.  be  not  o.  in  lioinL'  thy  business 

Ol'GHTEST. 
F.ccl.  15.  1).  thou  o.  not  lo  do  the  things  he  hntetb 

onus. 

1  Ma€.  12.  23.  we  do  write  back  again  to  you,  thai 

your  cattle  and  i;ooi's  an-  o.  and  o.  are  yours 
OITT-tiOINCS. 

2  F.sd.  4.  7.  or  whi -h  nre  the  n.  of  paradise 

OUT-ROADS. 
1  Mac.  15.  41.  might  innt..'  n.  on  llio  ways  of  Juden 

OUTWARD. 
F.ccl.  11.2.  nor  nblior  n  man  for  liiii  o.  sppcaranca 

OWE. 
1  Mae.  13.  39.  the  crown-'nx  also  which  ye  t.  Ds 

OWING. 

1  Mnc.  13.  15.  it  is  f..r  money  ho  U  o.  lo  the  king 

15.8.  if  any  thing  be  or  «hnll  bo  o.  to  the  king 

OWNERS. 
7'»A.  2.  12.  when  she  had  sent  them  homo  to  the  • 
13.  is  it  not  stolen  ?  render  il  to  the  o. 
•OX. 
Jud.  8.  1.  the  daughter  of  Merari,  the  son  ofO. 


AroeRY?BA.] 


PAR 
P. 


PACIFY. 

Eccl.  48. 10.  to  p.  the  wrath  of  the  Lord's  judgmMit 
S  Mac.  4.  45.  if  he  would  ;;.  the  king  toward  him 

PACIFIED. 
Eccl.  5.  6.  he  will  hop.  for  multitude  of  rrry  sins 
16.  7.  he  was  noty;.  toward  the  old  giants 
34.  19.  neither  is  hep.  for  ein  hy  siicrifices 
ZMac.  13.26.  Lysias/».  made  them  well  affected 

PAII-f. 
2  Est!.  8.  59.  thirst  and  ;;.  are  prepared  for  them 
U.  12.  the  same  must  know  it  alter  death  hy  p. 
1*2.  26.  one  shall  die  on  his  bed,  and  yet  with  p. 
Wisd.  10.  9.  but  wi.sdom  delivered  from  p.  those 
F.ccl.  31.  20.  but  the  p.  of  watching  and  choler 
48.  19.  they  were  in  p.  as  women  in  travail 
ZMac.  7.  3l).  who  have  snffered  a  short  p. 
9.  5.  a  p.  of  the  bowels  that  was  remediless 
9.  whilst  he  lived  in  p.  his  flesh  fell  away* 
11.  his  p.  increasing  every  moment 
PAINED. 
2  Mac.  9.7.  the  members  of  his  body  were  much  p. 

PAINS. 
Eecl.  11.  11.  one  that  laboureth  and  takcthp. 
38.  7.  with  such  he  taketh  away  their  p. 

1  Mac.  10.  15.  of  the  p.  that  they  had  endured 
i2  Mac.  2.  27.  we  will  undertake  this  great  p. 

6.  30.  I  endure  sore  p.  in  body  by  being  beaten 

7.  12.  for  that  he  nothing  regarded  the  p. 

9.  '8.  but  for  all  this  his  p.  would  not  cease 
PAINFUL. 

2  Esd.  7.  12.  they  are  full  of  perils  and  very  p. 

2  ^fac.  2. 26.  that  have  taken  upon  us  this  p.  labour 
rAINT. 

1  Mac.  3.  48.  to  p.  the  likeness  of  their  images 

2  Mac.  2.  29.  underlakcth  lo  set  it  out  and  p.  it 

PAINTERS. 
fVisd.  15.  4.  image  spotted,  the  p.  fruitless  labour 

PALACE. 
F.slh..  12.  1.  two  eunuchs,  and  keepers  of  the  p. 
Bar.  6.  5'J.  better  be  a  pillar  of  wood  in  a  p. 

PALATE. 
£cci.  36.19.  as  thep.  taeteth  divers  kinds  of  venison 

PALES. 
Eccl.  22.  18.  p.  will  never  stand  against  the  wind 

PALSY. 
1  Mac.  9.  55.  Alcinuis  was  taken  with  a  p. 
PAMPHYLIA. 

1  Mac.  15.  23.  the  same  things  wrote  ho  to  P. 

PANGS. 

Keel.  31. 20.  p.  of  the  belly  with  an  unsatiable  man 

PAN. 

2  Mac.  7.  5.  to  be  brought  and  fried  in  the  p. 

PANS. 

1  Esd.  1. 12.  sod  in  pots  and  p.  with  a  good  savour 

2  Mad.  3.  the  king  commandedp.  to  be  made  hot 

PAPER. 
S  F.sd.  15.  2.  and  cause  them  to  be  written  in  p. 
Tob.  7.  14.  took  p.  and  did  write  an  instrument 

PARABLES. 
Eccl.  1.  25.  thep.  of  knowledge  are  in  wisdom 
6.  35.  let  not  p.  of  understanding  escape  thee 
13.  2fi.  finding  out  of  p.  is  a  wearisome  labour 
18.  29.  and  they  poured  forth  exquisite  p. 

38.  33.  shall  not  be  found  where  p.  are  spoken 

39.  2.  and  where  subtil  p.  are,  he  will  be  there 
3.  and  he  will  be  conversant  in  dark  p. 

47.  15.  and  thou  fillest  it  with  dark  p. 
17.  marvelled  at  thee  for  Ihy  songs  and  p. 
PARCHED. 
Jud.  10.  5.  she  filled  a  bag  with  p.  corn  and  figs 

PARCHETH. 
Eccl.  43. 3.  at  noon  it  p.  the  country,  who  can  abide 

PARDON. 
Wisd.  6.  6.  for  mercy  will  soon  p.  the  meanest 
12.  11.  nor  didst  for  fear  of  any  give  them  p. 
18.  2.  they  thanked  ihem  and  besought  them  p. 
Prol.  of  .Jes.  to  p.  us  wherein  we  come  short 
Eccl.%).'2d.  that  pleaseth,  shall  gel  p.  for  iniqi»ity 
21.  1.  do  so  no  more,  ask  p.  for  thy  former  sins 
28.  3.  and  doth  he  seek  p.  from  the  Lord  1 
5.  who  will  entreat  for  p.  for  his  sins  7 
PARDONED. 
Wisd.  13.  8.  howbeit,  neither  are  they  to  be  p. 

PARDONETII. 
%E^d.1.  68.  hep.  for  if  he  did  not  so  of  goodness 

PARENTS. 
Wisd.  4. 6.  witnesses  of  wickedness  against  theirp. 
12.  6.  thep.  that  killed  with  iheir  own  hand.') 
Eccl.  3.  7.  he  will  do  service  to  his  p.  as  to  masters 
^.  9.  they  shall  cover  the  baseness  of  theirp. 
Sus.  3.  her  p.  also  were  righieous  and  taught  her 
1  Mac.  10.  9.  he  delivered  them  to  theirp. 
iMac.  12.24.  because  he  had  manyof  tho  Jowg'p. 

PART. 

Jttd.  7.  1.  and  all  his  people  come  to  take  his  p. 

Wisd.  1.  16.  they  are  worlhy  to  take  p.  with  it 

2.  9.  none  go  without  his  p.  of  voluptuuuaoesi 

835 


PAT 

Eccl.  44. 23.  among  the  twelve  tribes  did  hep  them 
Bar.  6.  28.  their  wives  lay  iipp.  thereof  in  salt 

1  Mac.  2.  10.  what  nation  hatii  not  had  a  p.  in  her  ? 

10.  20.  we  require  thee  to  lake  our  p. 

2  ^/ac.  8.  28.  had  given  p.  of  spoils  lo  the  maimed 

PARTAKERS 

Eith.  16. 5.  caused  many  to  hep.  of  innocent  blood 

IVisd.  16.  3.  might  be  inadep.  of  a  Ktrange  taste 

18.  9.  should  hep.  of  the  same  good  and  evil 

"i  Mac.  4.  14.  to  hep.  of  the  unlawful  allowance 

5.  27.  /est  they  should  be  p.  (>f  the  pollution 

PARTED,  ETH. 
Wisd.  5.  12.  or  like  as  when  an  arrow  p.  tho  air 

1  Mac.  1.  6.  and  p.  his  kingdom  among  thcin 

PARTS. 

Eccl.  16.  26.  he  disposed  thep.  thereof 

'2  Mac.  7.  4.  to  cut  olTthe  utniostp.  of  his  body 

9.  5.  sore  torments  of  the  inner  p.  came  on  him 

PARTICULARS. 

2  Mac .2.20.  to  gi<  over  things,  and  to  be  curious  inp 

11.  20.  but  ot  the  p.  I  have  given  order 

PARTLY. 
Wisd.  17. 15.  wore  p.  vexed  with  monstrous  appa- 
ritions, and  p.  fainted,  their  heart  failing  them 
PARTNERS. 
Eccl.  42.  3.  of  reckoning  with  p.  and  travellers 

PARTRIDGE. 
Eccl.  II.  30.  as  a  p.  taken  and  kept  in  a  cage 

PASS.  ^ 

Wisd.  1.  8.  neither  shall  vengeance  p.  by  him 

2.  4.  our  life  shall  p.  as  the  trace  of  a  cloud 
7.  and  let  no  flower  of  the  spring  p.  by  us 

6.  22.  and  I  will  not  p.  over  the  truth 

Eccl.  23.  2.  spare  me  not,  and  it  p.  not  hy  my  sins 
42.  9  lest  she  p.  away  the  flower  of  her  age 

1  Mac.  5.  40.  if  Judas  p.  over  first  unto  us 

2  Mac.  15.  36.  in  no  c.ise  to  let  that  day  p. 
PASSABLE. 

2  Mac.  5.  21.  to  make  the  sea  p.  by  fool 

PASSED. 
.Jud.  16.  9.  and  the  fauchion  p.  through  his  neck 
Estk.  15.  6.  then  having  p.  through  all  the  doors 
Wisd.  5.  9.  those  things  are  p.  away  as  a  shadow 
Eccl.  28. 19.  hath  not  p.  through  the  venom  thereof 
1  Mac.  3.37.  and  having  p.  the  river  Euphrates 

PASSETIl. 
Wisd.  2.  5.  our  time  is  a  very  shadow  that  p.  away 
5. 10.  as  a  ship  that  p.  over  the  waves  of  water 
14.  p.  away  as  the  remembrance  of  a  guest 

7.  24.  wisdom  p.  and  goeth  through  all  things 
Ezcl.  25.  11.  the  love  of  the  Lord  p.  all  things 

PASSING. 

Wisd.  14.  5.  and  p.  the  rough  sea  in  a  weak  vessel 

PASSOVER. 

1  Esd.  1.  1.  Josias  held  the  feast  of  the  7*.  in  Jeru 

salem,  and  offered  the  p.  the  founeenlh  day 

12.  they  roasted  the  p.  with  fire,  as  appertaineth 

20.  such  a  p.  was  not  kept  in  Israel  since  Samuel 

PAST. 

2  Esd.  4.  5.  or  call  me  again  the  day  that  isp 

45.  shew  me  then  whether  there  be  more  to  come 

than  is  p.  or  more  p.  than  is  to  come 

46.  what  isp.  I  know, what  is  to  cornel  know  not 
9.  1.  when  thou  seest  part  of  the  signs  p. 

Wisd.  11.  12.  for  the  remembrance  of  things  p. 
Eccl.  42.  19.  he  declareth  the  things  that  are  p. 

PASTIME. 
Wisd.  15.  12.  but  they  counted  our  life  a  p. 
Eccl.  32.  12.  take  thy  p.  and  do  what  ihou  wilt 
Bar. 2. 17.  had  theirp.  with  the  fowls  of  the  air 

PATH. 

2  Esd.  14.  22.  that  men  may  find  thy  p.  and  live 
Bar.  3.  31.  no  man  knoweth  or  thinketh  of  her  p. 

PATHS. 
Tob.  4. 19.  that  all  thy  p.  and  counsels  may  prosper 
Bar.  3.  21.  nor  understood  they  thep.  thereof 

PATHWAY. 
Wisd.  5.  10.  nor  thep.  of  the  keel  in  the  waves 

PATIENCE. 
Wisd.i.  19.  examine  him  with  torture  and  despite- 
fulness,  lo  know  his  meekness,  and  prove  his  p. 
Eccl.  2.  14.  woe  unto  you  that  have  lost  p. 

3.  13.  have  p.  with  him,  and  des|)ise  him  not 
5.  11.  be  swift  to  hear,  with  p.  give  answer 

16.  13.  thep.  of  the  godly  shall  not  be  frustrate 

17.  24.  he  comforted  those  that  fail  inp. 

20.  .32.  necessary  p.  in  seeking  the  Lord  is  better 
29.  8.  have  thou  p.  with  a  man  in  poor  estate 
41.  2.  to  him  that  dcspaireth  and  hath  lost  p. 
PATIENT. 
2  Esd.  7.  64.  that  he  is  p.  and  long  suffereth  thos« 
F.ccl.  1.  23.  a  p.  man  will  bear  for  a  time 
2.  4.  be  p.  when  thou  art  changed  to  low  estate 

18.  11.  therefore  is  God  p.  with  them 

35.  18.  nor  will  the  mighty  he  p.  toward  them 

PATIENTLY. 
Bar.4. 25.  suffer  p.  the  wvath  that  is  come  from  God 
2  Mac.  6. 14.  whom  the  Lord  p.forbearethto  punish 

PATTERN. 
Eccl.  38. 28.  hie  eyeg  look  still  upon  p.  of  tli*  thing 


PEO 

PAVEMENT. 

Ece/.20. 18.  to  slip  on  ap.  is  betife,  than  .oslipwitk 
Bel  19.  behold  now  thep.  and  maik  well 

PAY. 
Eccl.  18.  22.  let  nothing  hinder  thee  top  thy  »o\v 
29.  2.  p.  ihiiu  thy  neighhuur  again  in  season 
6.  and  for  honour  he  will  p.  him  disgrace 

1  Mac.  3.  28.  he  gave  his  soldiers  p.  for  a  year 
10,  36.  of  the  Jews,  lo  whom  p.  shall  be  given 

2  Mac.S:  10.  which  the  king  »  as  lop. to  the  Homans 

PAID. 
Tob.  2.  12.  they  p.  her  wages,  and  gave  her  a  kid 
1  Mac.lO.il,  all  the  overplus  which  ollicersp.  not  iu 

PAYETU. 
Eccl.  29.  6.  hep.  him  with  cursings  and  raiiinus 

PAYMENTS. 
Bar.  3.  8.  in  our  captivity,  to  he  subject  to  p. 
1  Mac.  1 1. 34.  instead  ofp.  whicli  the  king  received 

PEACE. 
Tob.  13.  14.  for  they  shall  njoice  in  thy  p. 
./ud.  3.  1.  they  sent  ambassadors  to  treat  ofp. 
7.  24.  in  that  you  have  not  required  p.  of  Assur 
H'isd.  3.  3.  utier  destruction  ;  but  they  are  in  p. 
14.  22.  those  so  great  plagu/L'S  called  they  p. 
Eccl.  1.  18.  making  p.  and  perfect  health  flourish 

13.  18.  what  p.  heiween  the  rich  and  the  poor 
26.  2.  he  shall  fulfil  the  yea^s  of  his  life  inp. 
2S.  9.  maketh  debate  among  Ilium  that  be  at  p. 

13.  such  have  destroyed  many  that  were  at  p. 
38.  8.  from  him  is  p.  over  iill  the  earth 

41.  14.  my  children  keep  discipline  in  p. 
44. 14.  their  bodies  are  buried  in  p.  but  name  livoa 
47.  16.  and  for  thy  p.  thou  wast  beloved 
50.  23.  that  p.  may  he  in  our  days  in  Israel 
Bar.  3. 13.  thou  shonldst  have  dwelt  in  p.  for  ever 

14.  where  is  the  light  of  the  eyes  and  p. 

4.  20.  1  have  put  off  the  clothing  ofp. 

5.4.  for  Ihy  name  be  called  Ihe  p.  of  righteouancM 

1  Mac.  5.  54.  until  they  had  relumed  in  p. 

6.  49.  but  with  them  in  Belhsura  he  made  p. 

7.  13.  the  Assideans  were  the  first  that  souglU  p. 

8.  20.  to  mnke  a  confederacy  and  p.  with  yo« 
22.  might  have  a  memorial  ofp.  and  confederacy 

9.  70.  to  the  end  he  should  make  p.  wiih  him 

10.  47.  he  was  the  first  that  entreated  of  true  p. 
66.  Jonathan  returned  to  Jerusalem  with  p. 

11.  50.  grant  us  p.  and  let  the  Jews  cease 

51.  they  cast  away  their  weapons  and  madep 
13.37.  we  are  ready  lo  make  astedfastp.  with  yta 
40.  and  let  there  be  p.  betwixt  us 

14.  8.  then  did  they  till  Iheir  ground  in  p. 

11.  he  made  p.  in  the  land,  and  Israel  rejoiced 
16.  10.  he  returned  into  the  land  of  Judea  in  p. 

2  Mac.  3.  1.  ihe  city  was  inhabited  with  all  p. 

5.  25.  coming  lo  Jerusalem,  and  |iretcndingp. 
10.  12.  endeavoured  to  continue  p.  with  them 

12.  2.  would  not  suffer  them  to  live  inp. 

4.  accepted  it,  as  being  desirous  to  live  inp. 

11.  being  overcome,  besought  Judas  for  p. 

14.  6.  Assideans  will  not  kn  Ihe  realm  be  in  p. 

PEACEABLE. 

2  Esd.  11.  42.  thou  hast  hurl  the  p.  and  loved  liarg 

F.sth.  16. 8.  that  our  kingdom  may  be  qwict  and  p. 

Eccl.  47.  13.  Solomon  reigned  in  a  p.  lime 

1  Mac.  1.  30.  and  spake  p.  words  to  them 

5.  25.  N.abaihites  came  unto  Ihem  in  p.  manner 

2  Mac.  14.  22.  so  thev  made  a  p.  conference 

PEACEABLY. 
.fud.  7.  15.  bi'cause  they  met  nol  thy  person /».' 
Eccl.  44.  6.  living  p.  in  Iheir  habitations 
Bar.  6.  3.  I  will  bring  you  away  p.  from  thence 
1  Mad.  15.  so  ho  spake  unto  them  p.  and  swnro 
29.  come  to  Judos,  they  saluted  one  another  p. 
12.  4.  they  should  bring  them  into  the  land  p. 

PEACE-OFFERING. 
Feci. 35. 1.  that  taketh  lieid  (iflerelh  a  p.-nfferi-ng 
47. 2.  as  is  the  fat  taken  from  the  p.-oJTerinsr 

PEEP. 
Eccl.  21. 23.  a  fool  wilt  p.  in  at  the  door  into  hoaie 

PENALTY. 

1  Esd.  8.  24.  by  p.  of  money,  or  by  imprisonment 

PENSIONS. 

1  Ksd.A.  56.  to  give  to  all  that  kept  the  city  p. 

PENTECOST. 
Toh.^.  ].  in  the  feast  ofp.  which  is  the  holy  feut 

2  Mac.  12.  32.  after  ihe  feast  called  p.  they  went 

PENURY. 
Wisd.  16.  3.  these  sufferings  p.  in  a  short  space 
4.  it  was  necessary  that  on  them  should  come  •. 

People. 

.Tud.  5.3.  he  said  to  them,  tell  me  now  who  this p.i« 

6.  18.  then  thep.  fell  down  and  worshipped  God 
14.  17.  he  leaped  out  to  tho  p.  and  cried 

Esth.  10. 12.  so  God  remembered  hisp.and  justified 
Wisd.  6.  2.  give  ear,  you  that  rule  the  p. 
21.  O  ye  kings  of  thep.  honour  wisdom 
24.  a  wise  king  is  the  upholding  of  the  v 
9.  7.  thou  Imet  chosen  me  lo  be  a  king  01  thy  ^ 

12.  and  then  shall  I  judge  thy  p.  righteously 
IG.  3.  dealing  gracious*"  wit'i  thine  owo^ 


PER 

irifd.  16.20.  fceilcst  (hinc  own  p.  with  angels'  food 

18.  7.  ao  ol'lhy  p.  wasaccepleil  both  the  snlvatioii 
I'J.  5.  that  thy//,  iiuglil  pass  a  wonderful  way 

Keel.  9.  17.  the  wise  ruler  o(  p.  tor  his  speech 
10.  2.  as  the  judge  ol'  the  p.  is  himself,  so  are 

8.  the  kingdom  is  translated  from  onep.to  another 
lb.  ]1.  if  there  be  one  slitf-necked  among  the  p. 
17.  17.  he  set  a  ruler  over  every  p. 
24.  1.  wis(J»<m  shall  glory  in  the  midst  of  her  p. 

6.  in  every /».  and  nation  I  got  a  possession 

12.  and  I  took  root  in  an  hiiiiouruble  ;;. 
31.9.  wonderful  things  lialh  he  done  among  hia  p. 
33.  18.  hear  me,  O  ye  great  men  of  the  p. 
3.5.  ly.  till  he  have  judged  the  cause  of  his  p. 

36.  9.  and  let  them  jierish  that  opjiress  the  p. 

14.  fill  Sion  with  oracles,  thy  p.  with  glory 

37.  23.  a  wise  man  instructeth  his  p. 

41.  18.  of  iniquity  before  a  congregation  and  p. 

42.  11.  lest  he  make  thee  a  reproach  among  tliep. 
44.  4.  leaders  of  the  p.  by  their  counsels 

15.  the  p.  will  tell  of  their  wisdom 

45.3.  he  gave  him  a  commandment  for  his  p. 

15.  that  they  should  bless  the  p.  in  his  name 

16.  to  make  reconciliation  for  his  p. 

22.  neither  had  lie  any  portion  among  the  p. 
46.  7.  in  that  they  withheld  the  p.  from  sin 

8.  of  six  hundred  thousand  p.  they  two  preserved 

13.  Samuel  anointed  princes  over  his  p. 
20.  to  blot  out  the  wickedness  of  the  p. 

47. 4.  did  he  not  lake  away  reproach  from  the  p.? 

5.  and  to  set  up  the  horn  of  his  p. 

6.  80  the  p.  honoured  him  with  ten  thousands 

23.  even  the  foolishness  of  the  p.  and  one  who 

turned  away  the  p.  through  his  counsel 
49.2.  he  behaved  in  the  conversion  of  the  p. 

15.  not  a  man  like  unto  Joseph,  a  slay  of  the  p. 
50.  5.  how  was  he  honoured  in  the  midst  of  thep.? 

17.  then  all  ihe  p.  together  hasted,  and  fell 

19.  anil  the  p.  besought  the  Lord  by  prayer 
Bar.  2.  30.  because  it  is  a  stifl-m'rked  p. 

35.  and  they  shall  be  my  p.  and  I  will  no  more 
drive  my  p.  of  Israel  out  of  the  land  given 
them 
4.5.  beofgoodchopr,  myp.  the  memorial  of  Israel 
Sus.  7.  now  when  the  p.  departed  away  at  noon 
47.  then  all  thep.  turned  them  toward  him 
50.  wherefore  all  thep   turned  again  in  haste 
1  Mac-  1.  41.  wrote,  that  all  should  be  one  p. 
3.43.  let  UB  restore  the  decayed  estate  of  ourp.ond 
let  us  fight  for  our  p.  and  sanctuary 

8.  15.  in  council  consulting  alway  for  thep. 
11.21.  ungodly  persons  who  hated  their  own  p. 

33.  determined  to  do  good  to  the  p.  of  Ihe  Jews 
A'l.  I  will  not  only  do  this  for  thee  an<l  thy  p. 
14.23.  it  pleased  the  p.  to  entertain  the  men 
15.40.  CendebeUB  began  to  provoke  thep. 
S  Mac.  4.  48.  that  followed  for  the  city  and  the  p. 

5.  19.  God  did  not  choose  the  p.  for  the  place's 

sake,  but  the  place  for  thep.  sake 

6.  3.  Ihis  mischief  was  grievous  to  the  p. 

16.  tho'  ho  punish,  yet  doth  he  not  forsake  his  p. 
10.21.  he  called  the  governors  of  the  p. 

12. 13.  and  inhabited  by  p.  of  divers  countries 
42.  exhorted  thep.  to  keep  themselves  from  sin 

13.  25.  the  p.  there  were  grieved  for  the  covenants 

15. 14.  who  prayeth  much  for  the  p.  ond  city 
!i4.  that  come  against  thy  holy  p.  to  blaspheme 

PERADVKNTURK. 
IVisd.  13.  6.  for  they  p  err,  seeking  God 

1  Mac.  4.  10.  if  p.  the  Lord  will  have  mercy  on  us 

9.  8.  if  p.  we  may  be  ablo  to  fight  with  them 

PKRCEIVE. 
Wisd.  16.  18.  but  themselves  might  see  and  p. 
/<or.6.49.  howcann<it  men  p.  timt  they  be  no  gods? 

I'ERCKIVI'.l). 
Wind.  m.  18.  which  may  well  be  p.  hy  the  sight 
Keel.  18. 12.  he  saw  and  p.  their  end  lo  bo  evil 

2  Mac.'i.l.  which  when  Ji-remvp.  he  blamed  them 

PERDITION. 
EceL  16.  0.  ho  pitiet"  not  the  people  of  p. 

PERFECT. 
Wisd.  4. 13.  he  being  made  p.  in  a  short  time 

15.  3.  f<ir  to  know  thee  Ik  p.  righteouNnesa 
Feci.  1.  18.  mnkmg  peace  and  p.  health  flourish 

31.  10.  who  hajh  been  tried,  and  found  p. 

34.  8.  tho  law  shall  bo  found  p.  without  lies 

44.  17.  Noah  was  found  p.  in  the  time  of  wrnth 

45.8.  he  put  on  him  p.L'lo'V,  and  slrenglhencd 

PERFECTED. 
tFisd.  4.  16.  and  youth  that  ia  soon  p. 
Keel.  7.  32.  that  ihy  blessings  may  he  p. 

23  20.  BO  after  thnv  were  p.  he  looked  on  thom 

PERFECTION. 
Kftk  15. 5.  she  wan  ruddy  through  the  p.  of  beauty 
IViad.  3.  16.  they  shall  not  come  to  their  p. 

6.  15.  to  think  therefore  on  her  ia  p.  of  wisdom 
Kecl.il.  Il.thcp.ofthcfearofthe  Lord  is  wisdom 

34.8.  and  wisdo:n  ia  p.  to  a  faithful  mouth 

4:1.  7.  n  light  that  decroanelh  in  her  p. 

SO  II  when  h«  waaclched  with  tho  pi  of  glory 


PIT 


PER 

PERFECTLY. 

yud.  11.6.  God  will  bring  the  thing  p.  to  pass 
A'cc/.  24.  28.  the  first  man  knew  her  not  p. 
38.  28.  and  he  watcheth  to  polish  Up. 

PERFORMANCE. 
Eccl.  19.  20.  in  all  wisdom  is  thep.  of  the  law 
•iMac.  11. 17.  made  request  for  p. of  the  contents 
PERFORMED. 

1  Esd.  8.  21.  let  all  things  be  p.  after  the  law 

2  Esd.  7.  24.  and  they  have  not  p.  his  works 
14.  25.  till  things  be  p.  which  thou  shall  write 

Eccl.  7.  25.  so  shall  thou  have  p.  a  weighty  matter 
PERFUME. 

Tob.  6. 16.  thou  shall  take  the  ashes  of  p. 
Eccl.  49.  1.  is  like  the  composition  of  thep. 
Bar.  6. 43.  women  siilin.j  in  ways,  burn  bran  for  p. 

PEKIL. 
Eccl.  13.  13.  walkest  in  p.  of  thy  overthrowing 
1  Mac.  11.  23.  Jonathan  put  himself  in  p. 

PERISH. 
Jud.  6.  8.  thou  shall  not  p.  till  thou  be  destroyed 

7. 1 1.  shall  not  so  much  as  one  of  thy  people  p. 
Est/i  11.  9.  the  righteous  nation  were  ready  to  p. 
Wisd.  4.  19.  and  iheir  memorial  sholl  p. 

12.  12.  will  accuse  thee  for  the  nations  that  p. 

18. 19.  did  foreshew  this,  lest  they  should  p. 
Eccl.  3.  26.  that  lovelh  danger,  sliall  p.  therein 

5.7.  thou  shall  p.  in  the  day  of  vengeance 

8. 15.  thou  shall  p.  with  him  through  his  folly 

36.  9.  let  them  p.  that  oppress  the  people 
41.  6.  the  inheritance  of  sinners'  children  shall  p 
41. 18.  all  flesh  should  p.  no  more  by  the  flood 
47.  22.  neither  shall  any  of  hia  works  p. 

Bar.  3.  3.  for  thou  endurest,  and  we  p.  utterly 
1  Mac.  3.  9.  he  received  such  as  were  ready  to  p. 

6. 13.  behold,  Ip.  thro'  great  grief  in  a  strange  land 

PERISHED. 
1  Esd.  4. 27.  many  also  havep.and  erred  for  women 
Toll.  14.  10.  A  man  fell  into  the  snare  and  p. 
f.'i^A.  If).  21.  the  chosen  people  should  have  p 
IVisd.  10.  3.  he  p.  in  fury  wherewith  he  murdered 
6.  when  ungodly  p.  she  delivered  the  righteous 

14.  6.  in  the  old  lime,  whin  the  proud  giants  p. 

16.  5.  they  p.  with  the  slings  of  crooked  serpents 
Eccl.  37.  31.  by  surfeiting  have  many  p. 

44.  9.  who  are  p.  as  though  they  had  never  been 
Bar.  3.  28.  they  p.  through  iheir  own  foolishness 

1  Mac.  13.  49.  a  number  of  them  p.  through  famine 
'iMac.  5.  9.  llius  ho  p.  in  a  strange  land 

8. 19.  a  hundred  fourscore  and  five  thousand  p. 
PERISHETH. 

2  Esd.  9.  37.  nolwillistanding,  the  law  p.  not 
Eccl.  17.28.  thanksgiving  p.  from  the  dead 

PERJURY. 
Wisd.  14.  25.  so  that  there  reisned  tumults,  p. 

PERMANENT. 
2  Esd.  3.  22.  thus  infirmity  was  made  p. 

PERPETUAL. 
2  F.sd.  9. 19.  manners  are  corrupted  by  n  p.  seed 
.Jud.  13. 20.  God  turn  these  to  thee  for  a  p.  praise 
Esth.  14.  5.  thou  (ookest  Lsrael  for  a  p.  inheritance 
IVisd.  10. 14.  them  to  be  liars,  and  gave  him  p.  glory 
11.  6.  instead  of  a  fountain  of  a  p.  running  river 
Eccl.  11.  33.  lest  he  bring  upon  thee  a  p.  blot 

37.  26.  a  wise  man's  name  shall  hep. 
41.  6.  their  posterity  shall  have  a  p.  reproach 

1  Mac.  6.  44.  that  he  might  gel  him  a  p.  name 

13.  29.  made  all  their  armour  for  a  p.  memory 
PERPETUALLY. 

Eccl.  45. 13.  but  his  children's  children  p. 
PERPLEXED.        « 

1  Mae.  3.  31.  being  greatly  p.  in  his  mind 
PERSECUTE. 

2  Kirf.  15. 31.  conspirine  in  great  power  to ;>.  them 
PERSECUTED. 

.Tud.  16.3.  out  of  the  hands  of  Ihem  that  p.  me 
ll'isil.  1 1 .  20.  fall.n  down,  being  p.  of  vengeance 
16.  16.  the  ungodly,  with  showers  were  they  p. 
Eccl.M.  19.  so  is  he  tha'  is  n.  of  the  Lord 
Bar.  4.  25.  for  thine  eneinv  halh  p.  line 
PERSE(;UTIl)N. 

1  Mac.  2.  43.  thev  llml  fled  for  p.  joined  them 
PERSKl'OLIH. 

2  Mac.  9.  2.  he  had  entered  the  city  called  P. 
PERSIA. 

1  E.^d.  3.  0.  the  three  princes  of  P.  shall  judgo 
8.  80.  made  ns  gra'-ious  before  the  kings  of  P. 
1  Mac.  3.  31.  be  d.'lerniinod  to  go  iiilo  P. 
6.  1.  heard  that  Elymaia,  in  the  country  of  P. 
5.  there  came  one  who  brought  tidings  inio  P. 
56.  Philip  was  returned  out  of  P.  and  Media 

14.  2.  but  when  Arsaces  tho  king  of  P.  heard 
ZMac.  1.  13.  for  when  tho  lender  wns  come  into  P. 

19.  for  when  our  fathers  were  led  into  P. 

33.  this  matter  wns  told  to  the  king  of  P. 
PERSIANS. 
1  Fsd.  1.  57.  becnmo  strvanta,  till  the  P.  reigned 
.hid.  16.  10.  tho  P.  quaked  at  her  holdncua 

Etlh.  16.23.  KHfi'ty  to  lis,  and  the  well-nfl'ected  P.'   27.  26.  whoao  digselh  n  p.  almll  Inll  therein 
1  Mac.  I   1    had  snrtlcn  Darius  king  of  the  P.       11  Mac.  7.  19.  he  cast  them  into  tho  groat  p 


[ArocKYPBA 


PERSON. 
Jud.  7.  15.  because  they  met  not  thy  p.  peaceably 

12.  12.  for  lo,  it  will  he  a  shame  for  our  p. 
Esth.  16.  11.  honoured  as  the  next  p.  to  the  king 
IVifd.  6.  7.  is  Lord  over  all,  shall  fear  no  man's  f 
Eccl.  4.  22.  acce|il  no  p.  against  thy  soul 
27.  neither  accept  thep.  of  the  mighty 

7.  6.  Test  thou  fear  the  p.  of  the  mighty 

10.  5.  on  p.  of  the  scribe  shall  he  lay  hjg  honour 
35.  13.  will  not  accept  any  p.  against  a  poor  maa 
42.  1.  and  accept  nop.  to  sin  thereby 

1  Mac.  14.  14.  and  every  wicked  p.  he  took  away 
PERSONS. 

Fjtk.  16.  4.  with  ihe  glorious  words  of  lewd  p. 

Eccl.  20. 22.  by  accejiting  of  p.  overthrows  himself 

35.  12.  and  with  him  is  no  respect  of  v. 

PERSUADE. 

iMac.  11.  14.  promised  that  he  would  ».  the  kins 

PERSUADED. 

2  Esd.  7. 61.  joy  over  Ihem  that  are  p.  to  salvation 
•2  Mac.  10.20.  they  with  Simon  were  p.  for  money 

11.  14.  and  p.  them  to  agree  to  all  conditions 
13. 26.  Lysias  p.  pacified,  and  made  well-atfected 

PERSUASIONS. 
lE*(/.5.73.  by  pojiularp.  they  hindered  the  building 

PERTALN. 
Ecel.  21.  25.  telling  such  things  as  p.  not  to  them 
2  Mac.  3.  6.  which  did  not  p.  t«  the  sacrifices 

PERTAINING. 
"Mac.  14.  8.  tare  I  have  of  things  p.  to  tne  kinr 

PERVERTED. 
Sus.  9.  they  p.  their  own  mind,  and  turned  away 

PESTILENCE. 
2  Esd.  15.  49.  I  will  send  famine,  sword,  and  p. 

PESTILENT. 
Esth.  16.7.  done  through  thep.  behaviour  of  th^m 

1  jtfac.  10. 61.  certain  p.  fellows  of  Israel  assembled 
PETITION. 

2  E.id.  8.  24.  give  ear  lo  thep.  of  thy  creature 

1  Mac.  7. 37.  house  of  prayer  and  p.  for  thy  people 
PHENICE. 

2  Mac.  4.  22.  afterward  he  went  w  ilh  his  host  to  P 
PHILIP. 

1  J>fae.6.  2.  shields  which  .■\lexander  son  of  P.  left 

14.  then  called  ho  for  P.  one  of  his  friends 
63.  where  he  founil  P.  to  be  mnaier  of  the  city 

8.  5.  how  they  had  discomfited  in  battle  P. 

2  Mac.  5.  22.  he  left  governor,  at  Jerusalem,  P. 
6.  11.  being  discovered  to  P.  were  all  burned 

PHILOMETOR. 
iMac.  4.  21.  the  coronation  of  Ptolemeus  P. 
10. 13.  left  Cyprus,  that  P.  had  cominilted  to  bim 
PHINEES,  PHINEA9. 
2  Esd.  1.  2.  the  son  of  P.  the  son  of  Elenzar 

1  Mac.  2.  26.  as  P.  did  to  Zamhri  the  son  of  Salom 
54.  P.  our  father,  in  h<'ing  z>'alous,  obtained 

PHRYGIAN. 
2^/ae.5.22.alJerusnlem,Philip.  for  his  country  a  P. 

PHYSICIAN. 
Eccl.  10.  10.  thep.  cuttelh  oft'a  long  disease 
38.  1.  honour  a  p.  with  the  honour  due  to  him 
3.  the  skill  of  Ihe  p.  shall  lift  up  his  head 

12.  then  give  place  to  ihep.  the  Lord  created  him 

15.  let  him  full  into  the  hand  of  tiiep. 
PHYSICIANS. 

Tob.  2. 10. 1  went  lo  the  p.  but  they  helped  me  not 

PHYSIC. 
Ecel.  18.  19.  and  u>'e  p.  or  ever  thou  be  sick 

PIECES. 

2  F.sd.l.2i  ye  have  sis  in,  and  torn  their  bodies  in  p. 
2.  14.  for  I  have  broken  the  evil  in  p.  and  created 

2  Mae.  15. 33.  they  should  give  it  by  p.  to  the  fowls 

PIERCE. 
2 Mae.  11.9.  were  remlv  lo  p.  thro'  walls  of  iion 

PIERCED. 
.Tud.  16.  12.  tho  sons  of  damsels  have  p.  thom  thro' 

PIERCETH. 
Ecxl.  35.  17.  the  prayer  of  the  humblep.  the  cloudi 

PIKES. 
2J\lac  5. 3.  shaking  of  shields  nnd  a  inullitudcofB 

PILGRIMAGE. 
2  Esd.  8  39.  I  will  remember  iheirp.  and  salvatioB 

PIL(;RIMS. 
iJ-lsd.  16.  40.  he  even  as  p.  upon  the  earth 

PILLED. 
Tob.  II.  1  J.  the  whiteneas  p.  nwny  from  his  ev8» 

PILLOW. 
1  Esd.  3.  8.  and  laiil  it  under  king  Dariua  hia  p, 

PINCHING. 
Eccl.  11. 18.  wnxelh  rich  hy  his  warincsa  nnd  p. 

PIN. 
Eccl.  14.  24.  shall  also  fasten  a  p.  in  her  walls 

PIPE. 
Ecel.  40.21.  thep.  nnd  panllery  make  sweet  moloJy 

PIT. 
Wisd.  10.  13.  she  went  down  with  him  into  Ihe^ 
Eccl.  12.  16.  imacinoih  how  to  ihriiw  tliec  into  a  p 
21.  in.  but  at  the  end  thereof  is  ihe  p.  of  hell 


APOCaTPBA.] 


PLA 


S  Mac.  1.  19.  and  hid  it  in  a  hollow  place  of  a  ;;. 
PITCH. 

Eccl.  13.  1.  he  thai  toucheth  p.  shall  be  defiled 
Dan.  3.  23.  to  make  oven  hot  with  rosin,  p. 
Bel  27.  then  Danie)  took  p.  fat,  and  hair 

PITCH. 
Eccl.  14.  25.  he  shall  y.  his  tent  nigh  unto  her 

1  Mac.  5.  4'J.  every  man  p.  his  tent  where  he  was 

2  Jilac.  13.  17.  they  determined  not  lop.  camp 

PITCHED. 
Wisd.  11.  2.  they  p.  tents  where  there  lay  no  way 
Ijtfac.  3.  41).  so  iliey  cume  and^.  by  Emmaus 

PITV. 
8  Esd.  1.  19.  then  had  I  p.  on  your  mournings 
15. 19.  a  man  shall  have  no  a.  on  his  neighbour 
TuA.S.lS.  p.tiiken  ofme  that  hear  no  more  reproach 

6.  17.  who  will  have  p.  on  you  and  save  you? 
8.  4.  let  U.S  pray  that  God  \%'ould  have  p.  on  us 
11.15.  for  thou  hast  scourged  and  taken  p.  on  me 

Jud.  C.  I'J.  and  p.  the  low  estate  of  our  nation 
Eccl.  12.  13.  who  will  p.  a  charmer  that  is  bitten 

14.  so  one  that  goeth  to  a  sinner  who  will  p. 
Bar.  3.  2.  have  p.  on  us,  becadso  we  have  sinned 
a  Mac.  4.  37.  Antiochus  was  moved  to  p.  and  wept 

7.  27.  have  p.  on  nie  that  bare  thee  nme  montlis 

PITIED. 
Eecl.  16.  9.  hep.  not  the  people  of  perdition 
Bar.  4.  15.  nor  reverenced  old  man,  nor  p.  child 
S  Mac.  3.  21.  then  it  would  have  p.  a  man  to,  see 

PITIFUL. 
Eccl.  2.  11.  Lord  is  long-suffering  and  very  p. 

PLACE. 
Esth.  13.  3.  h*l  the  second  p.  in  the  kingdom 
fVisd.  12.  20.  giving  them  time  and  p.  whereby 
0        19.  22.  but  diilst  assist  them  in  every  time  and  p. 
Eccl.  8.  16.  go  not  with  him  into  a  solitary  p. 
10.  15.  the  Lord  planted  the  lowly  in  their  p. 
12.  12.  set  him  not  by,  lest  he  stand  up  in  thy  p. 
16.  8.  nor  spared  he  the  p.  where  Lot  sojourned 
,     19.  17.  give  p.  to  the  law  of  the  Most  High 

29.27.  give  p.  thou  stranger,  to  an  honourable  man 

32.  2.  take  thy  p.  thiit  thou  mayest  be  merry 
41.19.oflheft  in  regard  ofp.  where  thou  sojournest 

48.  5.  didst  raise  his  soul  from  the  p.  of  the  dead 
Bar.  3.  15.  who  hath  found  out  her  p.? 

24.  and  how  large  is  the  p.  of  his  possession 
Svs.  49.  return  again  to  the  p.  of  judgment 

1  Mac.  10.  14.  for  it  was  iheir  p.  of  refuge 
14.  36.  they  did  much  hurt  in  the  holy  p. 

16.  16.  carae  on  Simon  into  the  banqueting  p. 

2  Jlfac.  1. 19.  so  that  the  p.  was  unknown  to  all  men 

PLACED. 
8  Jlfjc-  15.  20.  the  beasts  were  conveniently  p. 

PLACES. 
Tab.  5.  5.  and  knowest  thou  those  p.  welH 
Eccl.  9.  7.  nor  wander  in  the  solitary  p.  thereof 

24.  4.  I  dwell  in  high  p.  my  throne  is  in  a  pillar 

33.  12.  some  of  them  he  turned  out  of  their  p. 
46.  9.  so  that  he  entered  on  the  high  p.  of  the  land 

PLAGUE. 
2  Esd.  LI.  12.  Egypt  shall  be  smitten  with  the  p. 
16.  19.  beh<ild  fimine  and  p.  Iribulat.  and  anguish 
F.ccl.  2:t.  II.  p.  shall  never  depart  from  his  house 

25.  13.  Jive  me  any  p.  but  the  p.  of  the  heart 
£ar.  6.  48.  when  there  cometh  any  war  or  p. 

49.  neither  ,^ve  themselves  from  war  nor  p. 
IJtfac. 3. 29. because  of  the  p.  he  had  brought  on  land 
2^ac.  9.  5.  with  an  incurable  and  invisible  p. 

PLAGUED. 
1  Mac.  0.  55.  even  at  that  time  was  Alcimus  p. 
iMac.  9. 11.  beinj  p.  he  began  to  leave  off  his  pride 

'  PLAGUES. 

Wisd.  14.  22.  those  so  great  p.  called  they  peace 

Bar.  2.  2.  to  bring  upon  us  great  p.  such  as  never 

7.  all  p.  are  come  upon  us  the  Lord  pronounced 

3.  4.  for  the  which  cause  these  p.  cleave  to  us 

2.Wac.7.37.  by  torcnents  and  p.  thou  mayest  confess 

PLAIN. 
Wisd.  7.  20.  undefilcd,  /).  not  subject  to  hurt 
Krc/.21.10.the  way  of  sinners  ismadep.with  stones 
32.  21.  be  not  confident  in  a  p.  way 

1  Mac.  5.  52.  into  the  great  p.  before  Brlh.<nn 
16.  11.  in  the  p.  of  .Terirho  was  Ptolemeus 

PLAISTER. 
IVisd.  16. 12.  nor  moilifvinc  p.  that  restored  health 

PL.M.STERTNG. 
Eccl.  22.  17.  as  a  fair  p.  on  the  wall  of  a  gallery 

PLANT. 
Ercl.  10.  19.  that  love  him,  an  honourable  p. 

49.  7.  and  that  he  might  build  up  also  and  p. 

2  Mac.  1.  29.  p.  thv  pt-opla  in  thy  holy  place 

PLANTED. 
Eccl.  10. 15.  Lord  p.  the  lowly  in  their  place 

PLANTS. 
Wisd.  7.  20.  to  know  the  diversities  of  p. 
10.  7.  p.  bearing  fruit,  that  never  come  to  ripeness 
PLATE. 
Jud.  12.  1.  to  bring  her  in  where  his  p.  was  set 
1.5.  11.  thev  gave  to  .Tudiih  all  his  p.  and  beda 
I  .Vae.  15. 32  th/>  cupboard  o''  gold  and  silver  ». 
827      "  ' 


POL 

PLATES 
Eccl.  50.  3  cistern  was  covered  with  p.  of  brass 

PLAY. 
Eccl.  30.  9.  p.  with  him,  he  will  bring  to  heaviness 

PLAYED. 
Eccl.  23.  23.  she  hath  p.  the  whore  in  adultery 

47.  3.  he  p.  with  lions  as  with  kids,  and  with  bears 

PLEADED. 
2  Jtfac.  4.  44.  three  men  p.  the  cause  before  him 

PLEASANT. 
Eccl.  32.  6.  BO  is  melody  of  music  with  p.  wine 
40.  21.  but  a  p.  tongue  is  above  them  both 
iMac.  15.  39.  as  wine  mingled  with  water  is  p. 

PLEASE. 
Toi.  3.  15.  if  it  p.  not  thee  that  I  should  die 
4.  3.  do  that  which  shall  p.  her,  grieve  her  not 
Wisd.  14.  19.  be  willing  to  p.  one  in  authority 
£cc/.18.  31.  if  givest  thysoul  ihe  desires  thalp.her 

19.  19.  and  they  that  do  things  that  p.  him 

20.  27.  hath  understanding,  will  p.  great  men 

PLEASED. 
Tob.  5.  16.  so  they  were  well  p.  then  said  he 
o/u(i.7.I6.  these  v.ordsp.Olofernes  and  his  servants 
15.  10.  done  much  good,  and  God  is  p.  therewith 
JVisd.  4.  10.  hop.  God  and  was  beloved  of  him 

14.  for  his  fioul  p.  the  Lord,  therefore  he  hasted 
Eccl.  34. 19.  the  Most  High  is  not  p.  with  offerings 
44.  16.  Enoch  p.  the  Lord,  and  was  translated 

48.  22.  Ezekias  did  the  thing  that  p.  the  Lord 

1  Mac.  1.  12.  so  this  device  p.  them  well 
8.  21.  so  that  matter  p.  the  Romans  well 

10.  47.  but  with  Alexander  they  were  well  p. 
14.  4.  his  authority  and  honour  p.  them  well 

47.  then  Simon  was  well  p.  to  be  hijh-priest 

2  Jtfiic.  1.  20.  when  it  p.  God,  Neemias  being  sent 

11.  35.  hath  granted,  therewith  we  are  well  p. 
14. 35.  wastp.  that  the  temple  should  be  among  us 

PLEASETH. 
.Jud.  3.  3.  our  flocks  and  herds,  use  them  as  p.  thee 
Eccl.  19.  21.  master,  I  will  not  do  as  it  p.  thee 
20.  28.  he  that  p.  great  men  shall  get  pardon 
39.  18.  at  his  command  is  done  whatever  p.  him 

PLEASING. 
Tob.  A.  21.  do  that  which  is  p.  in  his  sight 
Wisd.  9.  10.  that  I  may  know  what  is  p.  to  thee 

17.  18.  a  p.  fall  of  water  running  violently 
Eccl.  48.  16.  some  did  that  which  was  p.  to  God 

PLEASURE. 
Wisd.  1.  13.  nor  hath  hep.  in  the  destruction 

7.  2.  and  the  p.  that  came  with  sleep 

8.  18.  great  p.  it  is  to  have  her  friendship 
Eccl.  9.  10.  when  old  thou  shall  drink  it  with  p. 

12.  in  Ihe  thing  that  the  ungodly  have  p.  in 
11.  27.  affliction  maketh  a  man  forget  p. 

14.  5.  he  shall  not  take  p.  in  his  goods 

18.  32.  take  not  p.  in  much  good  cheer 
19.5.whosotakethp.in  wickedness,be  condemned 
25.  21.  and  desire  her  not  for  p. 

33. 13.  as  the  clay  is  in  the  potter's  hand  to  fashion 
it  at  p.  so  man  is  in  hand  of  him  that  made  him 
37.  28.  nor  hath  every  soul  p.  in  every  thing 
41. 4. why  art  thou  against  ihep.  of  the  Most  High? 

1  Mac.  4.  42.  priests,  such  as  had  p.  in  the  law 

2  Mac.  12.  11.  promising  to  p.  him  otherwise 

PLEASURES. 
Eccl.  19.  5.  he  that  resislelh  p.  crownsth  life 
1  Jl/ac.  8.30.  think  meet,  they  may  do  it  at  their  p. 

PLENTY. 

Jud.'i.  18.  p.  of  victual  for  every  man  of  the  army 

PLOTS. 

1  Esd.  5.  73.  by  secret  p.  and  popular  persuasions 

PLOUGH. 
Ecci.38.25.how  canhegetwisdom  that  holdethp.? 

PLOWETH. 
Eccl.  6. 19.  come  to  her,  as  one  thrt  p.  and  soweth 

POINT. 
Eccl.  31.  1.5.  judge,  and  be  discreet  in  every  p. 

2  Mac.'i.  30.  to  stand  on  everyp.  and  go  over  things 

13.  10.  being  at  the  p.  to  be  put  from  their  law 

POINTS,  POINTS. 
2  Jlfac.  12. 22  woimded  with  p.of  their  own  swords 

15.  12.  and  exercised  in  all  p.  of  virtue 

POISONED. 
2  Mac.  10. 13.  that  he  p.  himself,  and  died 
POLICY. 

1  Mac.  8.  4.  that  by  their  p.  they  had  conquered 

2  Mac.  13.  18.  went  about  to  take  the  holds  by  p. 

14.  29.  watched  to  accomplish  this  thing  hyp. 
31.  he  was  notably  prevented  by  Judas' p. 

POLICIES. 
Jud.  11.  8.  we  have  heard  of  thy  wisdom  and  p. 

POLISH. 
Eccl.  33.  28.  and  watcheth  to  p.  it  perfectly 

POLISHED. 
Bar.  6.  8.  his  tongue  is  p.  hv  the  workman 

POLLUTE. 

1  Mac.  1.  46.  p.  the  sanctuary  and  holy  people 

2  Mac.  6.  2.  top.  also  the  temple  in  Jerusalem 

POLLUTED. 
1  Eld.  8.  83.  is  &  land  p.  with  the  pollutions 


POS 

2  Esd.  15.  8.  wickedness  hath  p.  the  whole  earth 
7'(/i.  2.  9.  being  p.  and  my  face  was  uncovered 

3.  15.  that  I  never  p.  my  name  nor  name  of  my 
.Jud.  9.  2.  and  p.  her  virginity  to  her  reproach 

1  Mac.  14.  liti.  ihey  p.  all  about  the  sanctuary 

2  Mac.  5. 16.  taking  the  holy  vessels  with  p.  Jiunds 

POLLUTETH. 
EccU  40.  29.  hep.  himself  witn  other  men's  meal 

POLLUTION,  S. 
.Tud.  9.  4.  which  abhorred  the  p.  of  their  blood 

1  Mac.  13.  50.  he  cleansed  the  tower  from  p. 

2  ./UttC.5.  27.  leal  theysliould  be  parlakersof  iho  n 

POMEGRANATES. 
Eccl.  45.  9.  he  compassed  him  with  p.  and  bells 

POMP. 
\Mac.  10.  80.  men  of  city  met  him  with  great  d 

PONDER. 
2  Esd.  4.  31.  p.  now  by  thyself,  how  great  fruit 
Eccl.  21. 17.  they  shall  p.  his  words  in  their  heurU 

PONDERED. 
Wisd.  8.  17.  when  I  p.  them  in  my  heart 

POOLS. 
2  Esd.  16.  00.  p.  on  the  tops  of  the  mountains 
POOR. 

1  Esd.  3.  19.  the  mind  of  the  p.  man  and  of  the  rich 

2  fJ.s(i. 15.51. thou  shall  be  we;ikened  as  ap.  woman 
Tub.  2.  2.  bring  what  p.  man  soever  thou  findest 

4.  7.  neither  turn  thy  face  from  any  p. 

21.  fear  not,  my  son,  that  we  are  made  p. 
Wisd.  2.  10.  let  us  oppress  the  p.  righteous  man 
Eccl.  1.28.  distrust  not  the  Lord  when  thou  art  p. 
4.  1.  my^on,  defrauil  not  the  p.  of  his  living 

4.  neither  turn  away  thy  face  from  a  p.  man 

8.  not  grieve  to  bow  down  thine  ear  to  the  p. 
7.  32.  and  stretch  thine  hand  unlo  the  p. 

10.  22.  whelher  he  be  rich,  noble,  or  p. 
23.  it  is  not  meet  to  despise  the  p.  man 
30.  the  p.  man  is  honoured  for  his  skill 

11.21.  easy  on  thesudilen  to  make  a  p.  man  rich 

13.  3.  the  p.  is  wronged,  and  must  entreat  also 

18.  what  peace  between  the  rich  am!  the  p.? 

19.  rich  eat  up  the  p.  ||  20.  rich  abhor  the  p. 

21.  but  a  p.  man  is  thrust  away  by  his  friendg 

22.  the  p.  man  slept,  and  yet  they  rebuked  him 

23.  if  p.  man  speak,  they  say,  what  fellow  is  thiBt 
21.  5.  a  prayer  out  of  a  p.  man's  mouth  reachcth 
25.  2.  my  soul  hates  a  p.  man  that  is  proud 

20.  4.  a  man  be  rich  or  p.  if  he  have  a  good  heart 

29.  8.  have  thou  patience  with  a  man  in  p.  estate 

9.  help  the  p.  for  the  commandment's  sake 
22.  better  is  the  life  of  a  p.  man  in  a  cottage 

30.  14.  better  is  the  p.  being  sound  and  strong 

31.  4.  the  p.  labourcth  in  hisp.  estate,  and  is  needy 
34.  20.  brings  an  offering  of  the  goods  of  the  p. 
35. 13.  will  not  accept  any  person  against  ap.man 
38.  19.  the  life  of  the  p.  is  the  curse  of  the  heait 

Bar.  6.  28.  but  to  the  p.  they  give  nothing  of  it 
'2 Mac.  4.  47.  and  those  p.  men  he  condemned 

POPULAR. 

1  Esd.  5.73.  bv  their  secret  plots  and  p.  persuasionf 

PORCH, 

1  Esd.  9.  41.  Ihe  broad  court  before  the  holy  p. 

2  Mac.  1.  8.  burnt  the  p.  and  shed  innocent  blood 

,  PORTERS. 

1  Esd.  1. 16.  moreover  the  p.  were  at  every  gate 

PORTION. 
Estk.  13.  16.  despise  not  the  p.  thou  deliveredit 
Wisd.  2.  9.  for  this  is  our  p.  and  our  lot  is  this 
Eccl.  7.  31.  give  him  hisp.  as  it  is  commanded 

11.  18.  and  this  is  the  p.  of  his  reward 

14.  9.  the  covetous  is  not  satisfied  with  his  p.' 
17.  17.  but  Israel  is  the  Lord's  p. 

24.  12.  in  the  p.  of  the  Lord's  inheritance 

25.  19.  let  thep,  of  a  sinner  fall  upon  her 

26.  3.  a  good  wife  is  a  good  p.  which  shall  be  given 

in  the  p.  of  them  that  fear  the  Lord 
23. a  wicked  woman  given  as  a  p.  to  wicked  man 
41.  9.  and  if  yon  die,  a  curse  shall  be  your  p. 
21.  be  ash  imed  to  take  away  a  p.  or  a  gift 
45.  22.  nor  had  he  any  p.  among  the  people,  for 
the  Lord  himself  is  hisp.  and  inheritiinc* 

2  .Mar..  1.  26.  preserve  thy  own  p.  and  sanctify  it 
14.  15.  and  who  alwavs  helpeth  hisp. 

PORTIONS. 
f?r(:;.  44.23.  gave  him  a  heritage,  and  divided  h'lap 

50.  12.  when  he  took  p.  out  of  the  priests'  hand* 

POSSESS. 
.fud.  8.  22,  n  reproach  to  all  them  that  p.  ua 
Eccl.  11.  24.  I  have  enough,  and  p.  many  thing* 

POSSESSED. 
Eccl.  36.  15.  tho"  hast  p.  frnin  the  beginning 

POSSESSION. 
.Tud.  16.  21.  Judith  remained  in  her  own  p. 
Wisd.  8.  5.  if  riches  be  a  p.  to  bo  desired  in  lifa 
Eccl.  4.  16.  his  generation  shall  hold  her  in  p. 
24.  6.  in  every  people  and  nation  I  got  a  p. 
28.  24.  look  that  thou  hedge  thy  p.  with  thoma 

51.  21.  therefore  have  I  gotten  a  gooilp. 

P0S?KSS,IONS. 
Ecel.  41.  1.  to  a  man  that  liveth  at  rest  io  hif  f 


POU 

POSSIBLE. 
H'iid.  Ifi.  15-  il  is  not  p.  to  escape  Ihine  hnnd 
S  .Mac.3.6.  il  was  p. to  bring  all  into  tlie  king's  hand 

14.  10.  il  16  not  p.  that  llie  slate  should  be  quiet 

POST. 
WUd.  5.  9.  passed  away  as  a  p.  that  haslcd  by 

POSTKRITV. 
lEsd.4..53.  have  fr<ie  liberty,  as  well  they  ns  their  p. 
Eccl.  45.  24.  he  and  p.  should  have  ".he  dignity 
25.  the  inheritance  should  be  lo  liis  p-  alune 
47.  2-2.  nor  will  he  abolish  the  p.  of  his  elect 
Bar.  2. 15.  Israel  and  his  p.  is  called  by  thy  name 
iMac    1   20.  did  send  ol' the  p.  of  those  priests 

POTEi\T.\TES. 
Eccl.  10.  24.  judges  and  p.  shall  be  honoured 

POTS. 
\Esd.  1  12.  the  sacrifices,  thev  sod  them  in  brass  p. 

POTTAGE. 
Bel  33.  a  prophet  llahhacuc,  who  had  made  p. 

POT'J'ER. 
jrij(/.15.7.thc;).  tern|>ering3oft  earth  ;  but  what  is 
the  use  of  either  sort,  the;),  himself  is  the  judge 
Eccl.  27.  5.  the  furnace  proveth  the  p.  vessel 
33.  13.  as  the  clay  is  in  the  p.  hand  to  fashion  it 
38.  29.  60  doth  the  p.  silling  iit  his  work 

POVERIY. 
£ccM0.31. honoured  in  p. how  much  more  in  riches 
diiihonuurable  in  riches,  how  much  more  iu  p. 

11.  12.  is  slow,  wanting  ability,  and  full  of  p. 
14.  life,  death,  p.  and  riches  come  of  the  Lord 

13.  2-1.  p.  is  evil  in  the  mouth  of  the  ungodly 
18.  25.  whin  thou  art  rich,  think  on  p.  and  need 
22.  23.  be  faithful  to  thy  neighbour  in  Me  p. 
26.  2t?.  a  man  of  war  thut  sutleieth  p. 
29.  9.  turn  him  not  away  because  of  his  p. 
POWER. 
iEsd.  1.  10.  all  his  p.  have  I  smitten  down 
Jud.  2.  12.  as  I  live,  and  by  the  p.  of  my  kingdom 
9.  11.  for  thy  p.  slandelh  not  in  multitude 

14.  that  thou  art  the  God  of  all  p.  and  might 
11.7.  and  his  p  liveth  who  hath  sent  thee,  and  the 
fowls  of  the  air  shall  live  by  thy  p. 
13.  4.  O  Lord  God  of  all  p.  look  at  this  present 
II.  God  is  with  us,  to  shew  his  p.  in  Jerusalem 
19.  which  remember  the  p.  of  God  for  ever 
Wisd.  1.3.  his  p.  when  il  is  tried  reproveth  unwise 

6.  3.  p.  is  given  vou  of  the  Lord,  and  sovereignty 

7.  23.  sledfast,  free  from  care,  having  all  p. 

25.  ff)r  she  is  the  breath  of  the  p.  of  God 

26.  the  unspotted  mirror  of  ihe  p.  of  God 

9.  11.  and  she  shall  preserve  me  in  her  p. 

10.  2.  and  gave  him  p.  to  rule  all  things 

II. 20.  being  scattered  through  the  breath  ofthyp. 
21.  who  may  wilhsitind  the  p.  of  thine  arm? 

12.  1.5.  thinking  it  not  agreeable  with  thy  p. 

16.  Uiy  p.  is  the  bi-glnning  of  righteousness 

17.  men  will  not  believe  thou  art  of  a  full  p. 
IS.but  thou  mastering  thy  p.  judgest  with  equity; 

for  thou  niayeat  use  p.  when  thou  wilt 
14.31.  Itisnot  thep.  ofthem  by  whom  they  swear 

15.  2.  if  we  sin  we  are  thine,  knowing  Ihyp. 
3.  to  know  ihy  p.  is  the  root  of  immortality 

16  13.  for  thou  hast  p.  of  life  and  death 

19.  it  hiirnelh  in  water  above  thep.  of  fire 
Eccl.  3.  20.  for  the  p.  of  the  Lord  is  great 
6.  26.  and  keep  licr  ways  with  all  thy  p. 

8.  13.  be  not  surety  above  thyp.  for  if  thou  be 

9.  13.  keep  far  from  the  man  that  lialh  p.  lo  kill 

10.  4.  the  p.of  thecarih  is  in  the  hand  of  the  Lord 

13.  2.  burden  not  thyself  above  thyp.  while  livesl 
1.5.  18.  he  is  mighty  in  p.  and  beholdelh  all  ihingR 
18.  4.  to  whom  he  hath  given  p.  to  declare  works 
45.  6.  and  with  hniLsloiies  of  mighty  p. 

49.  5.  tlicreforc  he  gave  their  p.  lo  others 
Bar.  1.  6.  collection,  according  to  every  man's  p 
3.  5.  think  on  thy  p.  and  thy  name  at  this  tiino 

8.  59.  belter  to  he  a  king  that  sheweth  his  p. 
03.  lhc*e  like  to  them  neither  in  shew  nor  p. 

Prayer  of  Manass.  (em  and  tremble  before  Ihyp. 

iMoA.  3.  24.  the  Lordof  spiriu,  and  the  prince  of 

all  p.  all  were  nst<mishod  at  the  p.  of  God 

98.  manifently  iliey  acknowledged  thep.  of  God 

9.  8.  shewing  forth  to  all  the  manifest  p.  of  God 
11.4.  not  at  nil  considering  thep.  of  God 
12.28.  who  wiih  hin  p.  hrpiiksntrength  of  enemies 

POWERS. 

7)an,3.30. 0  all  yo  p.  of  the  Lord,  bless  yp  the  Lord 
Prayer  of  Manasn.  nil  llw  p.  of  heaven  praise  thee 

POWERIMir,. 
Eccl.  10.  15.  that  his  p.  works  might  he  known 

POUR. 
Tab.  4.  17.  p.  out  thy  bread  on  burial  of  the  Just 
Eccl.  10. 13.  heUmt  liaih  il,  shall  p.  out  aboniinat. 

10.  II.  he  is  mighty  lo  p.  out  dinph-aiinre 
24.  33.  I  will  yet  p.  out  doctrine  an  pro|)hi'By 
36.  7.  raise  up  indignation,  and  p.  out  wrnlh 

39  O.lin  shall  p.  out  wise  sentcncea  and  give  thanks 
23  they  p.  out  their  forrr,  and  nppoaso  wralh 
POURED. 
tt€l~  16.  30.  Ihcy  p.  fuitli  e.xiiuiaito  parablaa 


PR4 

Eccl-  ."iO.lS.  hep.  of  the  blood  of  the  grape,  hep. out 
at  the  foot  of  the  altur  a  sweel-siiielling  savour 

27.  who  out  of  his  heart  p.  forth  wisdom 

2  Mac.  1.  31.  water  to  be  p.  on  the  great  stones 

POURETH. 
F.ccl.  18.  11.  God  p.  forth  mercy  on  them 
3.5. 14.  the  widow,  when  she  p.  out  her  complaint 

43.  19.  the  hoar-frost  as  salt  hep.  on  the  earth 

PRACTICE,  S. 
Eccl.  10.  6.  do  nothing  at  all  by  injurious  p. 
~  9.  truth  will  return  lo  lliem  that  p.  in  her 
PRACTISED. 
2  Mac.  14.  22.  lest  treachery  be  suddenly  p. 

PRACTISING. 
1  Esd.  2.  26.  that  city  was  p.  against  kings 

PRAISE. 
2K«d.  13.  57.  giving  p.  greatly  to  the  Most  High 
Tob.  3.  11.  let  all  tiiy  works  p.  thee  for  ever 
8.  15.  thou  art  worthy  to  be  praised  with  all  pure 
and  holy  p.  therefore  let  thy  saints  p.  thee 

12.  6.  bless  God,  )>.  him,  p.  him,  it  is  good  top-  and 

exalt  God,  therefore  be  not  slack  to  p.  him 

13.  6.  p.  the  Lord  of  might,  and  extol  the  King 
7.  my  soul  shall  p.  the  king  of  heaven  and  rejoice 

14.7.  so  shall  all  nations  p.  Lord  and  confess  God 
Jud.  13. 14.  then  said  she,  p.  p.  God,  p.  God  I  say 
20.  God  turn  these  to  thee  for  a  perpetual  p. 
16.  1.  the  people  sang  after  her  this  song  of  p. 
Eslh.Vi.VS .  we  may  live,  O  Lord,  andp.  thy  name, 
destroy  not  the  mouths  of  thein  that  p.  thee 
fVisd.  15.  19.  nor  are  they  lo  be  desired,  but  they 
went  without  the  p.  of  God  and  his  blessing 
Eccl.  II.  31.  in  things  worthy  p.  will  lay  blame 
15.  9.  p.  is  not  seemly  in  the  mouih  of  a  sinner 
10.  for  p.  shall  be  uttered  in  wisdom 
I".  27.  who  shall  p.  the  Most  High  in  the  grave? 

28.  the  sound  in  heart  shall  p.  the  Lord 

18.  2».  and  will  give  p.  to  him  that  found  her 
24.  I.  wisdom  shall  p.  herself,  and  shall  glory 
27.  7.  p.  no  man  before  thou  hearesi  him  speak 
35.  2.  ho  that  giveth  alms,  sacrificelh  p. 
39.  10.  the  congregation  shall  declare  his  p. 

14.  sing  a  song  of  p.  and  bless  the  Lord 

15.  shew  forth  his  p.  with  the  songs  of  your  lips 
35.  p.  ye  the  Lord  with  the  whole  heart 

43. 11. look  on  the  rainbow,  andp.  him  that  made  it 

44.  1.  let  us  now  p.  famous  men,  and  our  fathers 
51.  1.  I  will  thank  thee,  I  do  give  p.  to  thy  name 

29.  rejoice  in  his  mercy,  be  not  ashamed  of  his  p. 
Bar.'J.  6.  thou  art  our  God,  thee,  O  Lord,  will  wep. 

7.  that  we  should  p.  thee  in  our  captivity 
Dan.  3.  35.  p.  and  e.>ialt  him  above  all  for  ever 

Jind  so  to  the  end  of  the  chapter. 
Prayer  of  Manass.  I  will  p.  thee  for  over  all  days 
of  my  life,  all  the  powers  of  heaven  do  p.  thee 
I  Mac.  4.  33.  let  all  p.  thee  with  thanksgiving 
PRAISED. 

1  Esd.  4.  62.  they  p.  the  God  of  their  fathers 

2  Esd.  2.  42.  they  all  p.  the  Lord  with  songs 
Tob.  8.  15.  then  Raguel  p.  God,  and  said,  O  God, 

thou  art  worthy  to  he  p.  with  all  holy  praise 
.Tiid.  6.  20.  comforted  Acbior,  and  p.  him  greatly 
/K(.9(f.  10.  20.  the  righteous  p.  thy  holy  name 
Ecr/.47.6,peoplep.  iiim  iu  the  blessings  of  the  Lord 
/>an.3.29.blessed  art  thou,  O  Ld.  God,  to  be  p.  and 
exalted  abcTO  all  tor  ever,  30, 31,  .32,  33,  34. 
.^ii.'.  63.  they  p.  God  for  their  daughter  Susanna 
1  Mac.  4.  24.  went  home,  and  p.  the  Ld.  in  heaven 
'iMac.  U.  9.  then  tl'.ey  p.  the  merciful  God 

PRAISES. 
F.stli.  14.  10.  heathen  to  set  forth  the  p.  of  iho  idols 

PRAISING. 
Tob.  11.1.  after  this,  Tobias  went  his  way  p.  God 

16.  Tobit  wont  out,  rejoicing  and  p.  God 

1 1.  1.  so  Tobit  made  an  end  of  p.  God 
/ri.tfi.IO.  9.  p.  thee,  O  L.  who  hadst  delivered  them 
Eccl.  39.  1.5.  and  in  p.  him  you  shall  say  thus 
Dan.  3.  I.  and  Ihoy  walked  in  the  fire,  p.  (Jod 

I  jVac.4.  .55.  worshipping  and  p.  the  God  of  heaven 
•2  Mac.  12.  41.  p.  the  Lord,  the  righteous  judgo 
15.  29.  p.  tho  Almightv  in  their  own  language 

PftAV. 
Tub.  6.  17.  rise  up  and  p.  to  God,  who  is  mereiful 

8.  4.  let  us  p.  that  God  would  have  mercy  on  us 

12.  12.  when  thou  didst  p.  and  bury  the  dead 
./u//.  H.  31.  therefore  now  p.  thou  fur  ns,  because 

9.  12.  In.  thee,  I  p.  then,  O  God  of  my  father 
II.  17.  I  will  p.  to  God,  and  ho  will  tell  mo 

IVisd.  16.  28.  and  at  the  day-spring  p.  lo  iheo 
Err/.  :n.  15.  above  all  this,  p.  lo  the  .Must  High 
39.  5.  and  he  will  p.  before  the  Most  High 

PRAYED. 

Toh.  3.  1.  I  did  weep,  and  in  sorrow  p.  pnyini; 

II.  linn  she  p.  toward  the  window  and  said 

Fsth.  14.  3.  »ho  p.  unto  the  Lord  (Jod  of  Israel 

/r/.s-rf.  7.  7.  I  p.  and  understanding  wa»  given  mo 

1  Mac.  II.  71.  ho  cast  earth  on  his  henil  and  p. 

2  .^far.  1.  P.  then  we  p.  lo  the  Tiord  and  were  hoard 
2.  10.  ns  when  Moses  p.  lo  tho  Lord,  ilie  fire  en 

4uwii  from  heaven, evro  top.  Solomon  aUo 


PRE 


[Art  •■.tiinx 


a  Mac.  5.  4.  every  one  p.  that  that  opparili'>n  mi^ht 

15.  12.  Oniasp.  lor  the  whole  body  of  the  Jews 

PRAYER. 
Tob.  12.  8.  p.  is  good  with  failing  and  alms 

13.  1.  ihenTohil  wrote  a  p.  of  rejoicing,  and  said 
Jud. 'J.  12.  King  of  every  creature,  heariiiou  my  p 

13.  10.  they  went  according  to  their  custom  top 
Esth.  13.  8.  Mardocheus  made  his  p.  to  the  Loid 
It'isd.  13.  17.  then  inaketh  hep.  lor  his  goods 
Eccl.  4.  (i.  his  p.  be  heard  of  him  that  made  him 

7. 10. he  not  laiiit-heuried  when  lliou  inukist  thyp 

17.  2o.  return,  and  make  thy  p.  before  his  face 
21.  5.  a  p.  out  of  a  jioor  man's  mouth  reacheth 

lo  the  cars  of  God,  and  his  judgment  comelb 

34.  26.  and  doth  the  same,  who  will  hear  hi^p 

35.  13.  he  will  hear  the  p.  of  the  oppressed 

16.  his  p.  shall  reach  unto  the  clouds 

17.  the  p.  of  the  humble  pierceth  the  clouds 

36.  17.  O  Lord,  hear  the  p.  of  thy  servants 
39.  5.  and  he  will  open  his  mouth  in  p. 

6.  he  shall  give  thanks  to  the  Lord  in  his  p. 
50.  19.  the  people  besought  the  Lord  by  p. 
51.11. 1  cajled  on  the  Lord,  and  so  myp.  was  heard 

13.  when  young,  I  desired  wisdom  openly  in  p. 
I. War. 5.33.  who  sounded  trumpets  and  cried  with  p. 

7.37.  be  a  house  of  p.  and  petition  for  thy  people 

2  Mac.  1.  23.  the  priests  made  a  p.  whilst  sacrifice 

24.  p.  was  after  this  manner,  O  Lord,  Lord  God 

10.  27.  after  thep.  they  took  their  weapons 

12.  42.  betook  themselves  to;),  and  besought  bim 
15.  22.  in  his  p.  he  said  after  this  manner 
26.  encountered  enemies  with  invocation  and  p. 
PR.\YERS. 
Tob.  3.  16.  so  the  p.  of  them  both  were  heard 

12.  1.5.  which  present  thep.  of  the  saints 
Jud.i.i'.i.  so  God  heard  theirp.  and  lookedon  their 

13.  3.  for  >;he  said  she  would  go  forth  lo  her  p. 
Bar.  2.  14.  hear  our  p.  O  Lord,  and  our  petitioiJi 

1  Mac.  12.  II.  in  our  p.  to  think  on  our  brethren 

2  Mac.1.5.  God  hear  ynurp.  and  be  alone  with  you 

PRAYEST. 
F.ccl.  7.  14.  make  not  much  babbling  when  thoup. 

18.  23.  before  thou  p.  prepare  thyself 

28.  2.  so  thy  sin  shall  be  fiirgiveu  when  thou  p. 

PR  A  YET  H. 
Eccl.  34.  24.  when  one  p.  and  another  curseth 

PREACH. 
2  Esd.  2. 1 32.  till  I  come  and  p.  mercy  unto  tliect 

PRECEPTS. 
2  E.s'd.  16.  76.  the  guide  ofthem  who  keep  my  p. 
Tub.  6.  15.  dost  not  thou  remember  the  p.? 

PRECIOUS. 
Toh.  13. 16.  for  Jerusalem  he  built  up  wilhp.stonet 
Jud.  10.  3.  she  anointed  herself  with  p.  ointment 
F.sih..\i.'l.  instead  ofp.ointmenis  covered  her  head 
15.  6.  robes  all  glillering  w  ith  gold  and  p.  stone* 
IVisd.  7.  9.  nor  compared  I  to  her  any  p.  stones 
Eccl.  9. 5.  fall  not  hv  tliosi'  things  that  aie  p.  in  her 

PREDKCEr^SORS. 
EsfA.14.  5.  thouiooke.si  mii  fallier*  fi.om  all  theirp 

PRE-E.ML\Ei\CE. 
Err/.  33.  02.  in  thy  woiks  keep  lo  thyself  the  p. 
1  Mac.  11.  27.  anil  gave  him  p.  among  his  frienda 

PREEERRED. 
fVisd.  7.  8.  I  p.  her  before  sceptres  and  thrones 
PREPARE.        ^ 

1  F.sd.  1.  4.  p.  you  after  your  fainiliesnnd  kindredi 

2  E.-.r/.  14.  24.  look  ihou  p.  thee  many  box  trees 
Tub.  5.  16.  he  said,  p.  thyself  for  the  journey 

11.  3.  let  us  basle  before,  and  p.  the  house 
Jitd.  2.  7.  that  they  p.  for  ine  earth  and  water 

12.  1.  that  they  should  p.  for  her  of  his  meats 
Err/.  2.  1.  my  son,  p.  thy  soul  for  templalion 

17.  they  that  fear  the  Lord  will  p.  their  hearts 

15.  23.  before  thou  praycstp.  thyself 

33.  4.  p.  what  to  say,  so  shall  ihou  be  heaid 

PREPARED. 
I  F.sd.  1.  13.  they  p.  for  themselves  and  priests 

14.  the  Levites  p.  for  themselves  anil  priests 
Tob.  2.  1.  there  was  a  good  dinner  p.  for  me 

5.  16.  when  his  son  had  p.  all  things  for  journey 
Jud.  9.  6.  we  are  here,  for  all  thy  w  ays  are  p. 

12.  19.  she  ale  and  drank  what  her  maid  had  p 
F..'th.  11.7.  at  their  cry  all  nations  were  p.  lo  batUa 
)ri.fr/.9. 8.  which  thou  hast  p.  from  the  beginning 

16.  20.  didsl  send  brood  p.  wiihoiil  their  labour 
F.ccl.  49.  12.  which  w  as  p.  for  everlasting  glory 

PREPAREDST. 
>ri>(/.16.2.  thou  p.  for  I  hem  meat  ofa  strange  tasta 

PREPARETH. 
Eccl.  26.  23.  Lord  p.  such  a  one  for  the  sword 

PREPARING. 
Wisd.  14. 1.  again,  one  p.  to  sail,  calloth  on  wood 

PRESCKinED. 
1  Esd.  1.5.  according  as  Pnvid  Ihe  kin  j  of  Israelp 

PRESENCE. 
n'isd.  14.  17.  whom  men  coulil  not  honour  in  p. 
Erf/.8.11. rise  not  in  anc.TRtr.  of  iijiirioui  persons 

PRESENT. 
Wisd.  2. 0.  let  us  ei\]ay  the  good  things  that  arep 


Apocrypb*  ] 


PKI 


PRO 


PRO 


fFisd.  4.  2.  when  it  Is  p.  men  take  example  at  it 
y.  9.  Wisdom  was  p.  wlieii  ihou  iimdest  tlia  wurld 

10.  that  beinjfp.  she  may  labour  with  mo 
H.  11.  whether  absent  or  p.  ihey  were  vexed 
14.  17.  might  Hatter  him  absent  as  if  he  were  p. 
Eccl.  1.  21.  where  it  is;;,  it  turneih  away  wrath 
27.  23.  when  thou  an  p.  he  will  speak  sweetly 
31.  6.  go/J  ruin  of  many,  their  destruction  was  ». 

PRESENT. 
Tob.  12.  15.  which  p.  the  prayers  of  the  sainU 

PRESENTS. 
Eccl.  20.  29.  p.  and  gifts  blind  the  eyes  of  the  wise 

PRESERVATION. 
Eccl.  34.  16.  he  is  a.  p.  from  stumbling  and  help 

PRESERVE. 
Tob.  6.  17.  thou  shalt  p.  her,  and  she  shall  go 
fCisd,  9.  11.  and  she  shall  p.  me  in  her  power 

PRESERVED,  ETH. 
IVisd.  10.  1.  she  p.  the  first  formed  faiherof  world 

4.  wisdom  again  p.  it,  and  directed  the  course 

5.  and  she  p.  him  blameless  unto  God 
11.  25.  or  have  been  p.  if  not  called  by  thea 
16.  26.  but  that  it  is  thy  word  which  p.  them 

£cc2. 20.  2.  he  thatconfesscthshallbep.  from  hurt 

PRESS. 
Eccl.  13.  10.  p.  not  on  him,  lest  ihou  be  put  back 
31.  31.  p.  not  on  him  with  urging  him  to  drink 

PRESSED. 
Wi'sd.  17. 11.  wickedness  being  p.  with  conscience 
Eccl.  46.  5.  when  the  enemies  p.  upon  him 
Bel  30.  when  the  king  saw  that  they  p.  him  sore 
2  Mac.  14.  9.  our  nation,  which  is  p.  on  every  side 

PRESUMED. 
2  Mac.  3.24.  all  that  p.  to  come  in  were  astonished 
5.  15.  but  p.  to  go  into  the  moat  holy  temple 

PRESUMPTION. 
Eath,  13.  2.  not  lifted  up  with  p.  of  my  authority 
i  Mac.  5.  18.  this  man  had  been  put  back  from  p. 

PRETEND. 
EccM2.17.thougli  hep.  to  help  thee,  yet  undermine 

PREVAIL. 
Eccl.20.6.  if  hep.  he  shall  hnrdly  receive  the  half 

PREVENT. 
Wisd.  16.  28.  we  must  p.  the  sun  to  give  thanks 

PREVENT ETH. 
Wisd.  6. 13.  she  p.  them  that  desire  her 

PREY. 
1  Esd.  8.  77.  for  our  sfrns,  we  were  given  up  for  a  p. 
Jad.  5.  24.  they  shall  be  a.  p.  to  bo  devoured  of  all 
9.  4.  thou  hast  given  their  wives  for  a  p. 
16.  5.  that  he  would  make  my  infants  as  a  p. 
Eccl.  27.  10.  as  the  lion  lieth  in  wait  for  the  p. 
IMac.  7.  47.  they  look  fhe  spoils  and  the  p. 

PRICE. 
i^ccZ.33.30.because  thou  hast  bought  him  with  a  p 
Bar.  6. 25.  the  things  are  bo'ight  for  a  most  high  p 

PRICKED. 
W(jd.l6. n. they  werep. that  they  i-hoiild  remember 
£ccM2.12.  lest  thou  remembermy  wonlsand  bep. 

14.  1.  who  is  not  p.  w'iih  the  multitude  of  sins 

PRICKETH. 
Eccl.  22.  19.  he  that  p.  the  eye,  will  make  tears 

PRIDE. 
Tob.  4. 13.  for  in  p.  is  destruction  and  much  trouble 
Jud.  9.  9.  behold  their  p.  and  send  thy  wrath 
Esth.  13.  12.  it  was  nut  in  p.  that  I  did  not  bow 

14.  not  worship  any  hut  thee,  nor  will  I  do  it  inp. 
TVisd.  5.  8.  what  hath  p.  profited  us?  or  riches 
Eccl.  10.  7.  p.  is  hateful  before  God  and  man 
13.  p.  is  the  beginning  of  sin,  he  that  hath  it 
18.  p.  was  not  made  for  man,  nor  furious  anger 
21.  roughness  and  p.  is  the  losing  thereof 

15.  8.  she  is  far  from  pi  liars  cannot  remember 

16.  8.  hut  he  ahl)orred  them  for  their  p. 
26.  26.  she  that  dishonnurelh  him  in  her  p. 
43.  1.  the  p.  (if  the  heisht,  the  clear  firmammt 

Bar.  4.  34.  her  p.  shall  be  turned  into  mourning 

1  ^(tc. 2. 49. now  hath  p  and  rebuke  gotten  strength 

3.  20.  thev  come  against  us  in  p.  and  iniquity 

2  Mac.  1.28.  punish  I  hem  that  with  p.  do  us  wrong 
5.21.  weening  in  his  p.  to  make  the  land  navigable 
7.36.  shalt  receive  just  punishment  for  thy  p. 
9.  7.  but  still  was  fi  led  with  p.  breathing  out 

11.  he  began  to  leave  otThis  great  p. 
15.  6.  Nicanor  in  exceedin-r  p.  determined 

PRIEST. 
Eccl.  7.  31.  fear  the  Lord,  and  honour  the  p. 
50.  1.  Simon  high  p.  son  of  Onias,  who  repaired 
I  Mac.  2.  1.  Mattalhias  a  p.  of  the  sons  of  joarib 

7.  14   one  that  is  a  p.  of  the  seed  of  Aaron 
15.  1.  to  Simon  the  p.  and  prince  of  the  Jews 

.^r«  Ilion. 

PRIESTS. 

I  Ffd   I.  2.  having  set  the  p.  according  to  courses 

4.  53.  the  p.  that  went  away  should  have  liberty 
.54.  the  p.  vestments  wherein  they  minister 

!>.  .59.  Ihep   stood  arrayed  in  their  vestments 

8.  77.  we  with  our  p.  were  given  up  to  the  sword 
.Tiid.  n.  13.  which  they  had  resi'rved  for  the  p. 
/rti'(2.13.6.  with  theirp.  out  of  their  idoiatroui  crew 


Eccl.  7.  29.  fear  the  Lord,  and  reverence  his  p.      I  PROCEEDED. 

50.  12.  ho  took  the  portions  out  of  the  p.  hands      2  Esd.  10.  19.  so  1  p.  to  speak  further  unto  her 
Bar.  1.  7.  to  the  p.  and  all  the  people  at  Jerusalem     2  Mac.  6.  29.  thespeechesp.  from  a  desperate  mind 

16.  contusion  of  faces  helongeth  to  our  p.  ]  PROCESS. 

6.  10.  the  p.  convey  from  their  gods,  gold,  silver    2Esd.  11.20.  in  p.  of  time  the  feathers  stood  up 

18.  even  so  the  p.  make  last  tlieir  temples  I  PROCESSION. 

28.  things  sacriliced,  their  p.  sell  and  abuse         ,iMac.  0.  7.  were  compelled  logo  inp.toBacchm 

31.  the  p.  sit  111  their  temples,  their  clothes  rent  PROCLAMATION. 

33.  the  p.  also  take  off  their  garments  j  1  Esd.  2.  2.  he  made  p.  through  all  his  kingdon. 

48.  the  p.  consult  with  themselves  where  may  be '  1  Mac.  5.  49.  Judas  comnuuuled  a  p.  to  be  mud« 


55.  when  fire  falleth  their  p.  will  llee  away 
Z)an.3.G2.  Oye  p.of  the  Lord,  bless  ye  the  Lord 
Bel  8.  the  king  was  wroth,  and  called  for  his  p. 
10.  now  the  p.  of  Bel  were  threescore  and  ten 
15.  in  the  night  came  the  p.  with  their  wives 
28.  the  king  hath  put  the  p.  to  death 
1  Mac.  3.  49.  they  brought  also  the  p.  garments 
51.  thy  p.  are  in  heaviness  and  brought  low 
4.  38.  they  saw  the  p.  chambers  pulled  down 
42.  so  he  chose  p.  of  blameless  conversation 
5.67.cerlainp.  desirous  to  shew  their  valour,  slain 
7.  36.  the  p.  entered  in,  and  stood  before  the  altar 
10.42.becau6e  they  appertain  to  tliep. that  minister 
52  J)/ac.l.l0.who  wasof  the  stock  of  the  anointed  p. 
13.  they  were  slain  by  the  deceit  of  Nanea'sp. 

19.  the  p.  that  were  then  devout,  took  the  fire 

20.  Neemias  did  send  of  the  posterity  of  those  p. 

23.  the  p.  made  a  prayer  while  sacrifice 
30.  the  p.  sung  psalms  of  thanksgiving 

3.  15.  thep.  prostrating  themselves  before  the  altar 

4.  14.  thep.  had  no  courage  to  serve  any  more 

14.  34.  then  the  p.  lift  up  their  hands  to  heaven 

15.  31.  when  he  had  set  the  p.  before  the  altar 
PRIESTHOOD. 

Eccl.  45.  7.  he  gave  him  the  p.  among  the  people 
15.  they  should  execute  the  office  of  thep. 

24.  should  have  the  dignity  of  thep.  for  ever 

1  Mac.  2.  54.  the  covenant  of  an  everlasting  p. 
7.  21.  but  Alcimus  contended  for  the  high  p. 
11.  27.  the  king  confirmed  him  in  the  high  p. 

16.  24.  are  written  in  the  chronicles  of  his  p. 

2  Jl/ac.2.17.lhat  gave  them  thep.  and  the  sanctuary 

4.  24.  he  got  the  p.  to  himself,  offering  more 
11.  3.  to  set  the  high  p.  to  sale  every  year 

14.  7.  of  my  ancestor's  honour,  I  mean  the  high  p. 
PRIETH. 

Eccl.  14. 23.  he  that  p.  in  at  her  windows  shall  also 

PRINCE. 
.Tud.  9.  10.  the  servant  with  the  p.  and  thep.  with 
Eccl.  41.  17.  be  ashamed  of  a  lie  before  a  p. 

48. 12.  he  was  not  moved  with  presence  of  any  p. 
Dan.  3.  15.  nor  is  there  at  this  time  p.  or  prophet 
1  Mac.  3.  13.  when  Seron  a  p.  of  the  army  heard 

9.  30.  we  have  chosen  thee  this  day  to  be  our  p 

15.  1.  unto  Simon  the  priest  and  p.  of  the  Jews 
2.  to  Simon  high  priest  and  p.  of  his  nation 

2jl/ac.3.24.the  P.  of  all  power  caused  an  apparition 

PRINCES. 
Eccl.lO.  14.  hath  cast  down  the  thrones  of  proud  p. 

39.  4.  he  shall  appear  before  p.  he  will  travail 

46.  18.  he  destroyed  all  thep.  of  the  Philistines 
Bar.  2.  1.  against  our  p.  and  the  men  of  Israel 

3.  16.  where  are  thep.  of  the  heathen  become 
1  Mac.  6.  60.  the  king  and  thep.  were  content 

7.26. the  king sentNicanoroneof  his  honourablep. 

9.  37.  daughter  of  one  of  the  great  p.  of  Chanaan 
PRINCELY. 

1  Esd.  4.  46.  this  is  the  p.  4iberality  from  thee 
PRINCIPALITY. 

2  Mac.  4.  27.  so  Menelaus  got  the  p. 

5.  7.  howbeit,  for  all  this  he  obtained  not  thep. 
PRISON. 

Eccl.  13.  12.  he  will  not  spare  to  put  thee  in  p. 
2  Mac.  13.  21,  when  had  soften  him,  put  him  in  p. 

PRISONER. 
Tud.  16.  9.  her  beauty  took  his  mind  p. 
2  Mac.  14.  27.  that  he  should  send  Maccabeus  p. 
33.  if  you  will  not  deliver  me  Judas  as  a  p. 
PRISONERS. 
2  K.?(i.l3. 40.  ten  tribes  which  were  carried  away  p- 
IVifsd.  17.2.  p.  of  darkness,  and  fettered  with  night 

1  Mac.  9.  70.  that  he  should  deliver  them  thep. 
72.  when  he  had  restored  unto  him  thep. 

15.  40.  Cendebeus  bpjran  to  take  the  people  p. 

PRIVATE. 
Esth.M.  16.  I  wear  it  not  when  I  am  p.  by  myself 

2  JWiic.  4.  5.  the  good  of  all,  both  public  and  p. 
PRIVY. 

Wisd.  8.  4.  she  is  p.  to  the  mysteries  of  knowledge 
■"^K.?.  18.  they  went  out  themselves  at  p.  doors 
ISrl  13.  under  table  they  had  made  a  p.  entrance 
21.  who  shewed  him  p.  doors  where. they  came 
2  .Vac.  1.  16.  and  opening  a  p.  door  of  the  roof 
8.  7.  took  advantage  of  niffht  for  such  p.  attempts 
PRIVILY. 

1  .^Tac■  9.  60.  he  sent  letters  p.  to  his  adherents 

2  Mac.  1.  19.  the  priests  took  the  fire  of  the  altar  p. 
8.  1.  they  went  p.  into  the  towns  and  called 

PROCEED. 
1  Esd.  1.  29.  those  wicked  workers  p.  no  further 


PROCLAIMING 
2  Mac.  8.  11.  p.  a  sale  of  the  captive  Jews 

PROCURE. 
1  Mac.  7.  15.  we  will  p.  the  harm  neither  of  yott 
13.  17.  he  should  p.  to  himself  great  haired 
PROCURED. 
Esth,  16. 13.  who  continually  p.  our  good 

PROFANATION. 

1  .Vac.  1.48.  with  all  manner  of  uiicleanness  and* 

PROFANE. 

1  Mac.  1.  45.  that  they  should  p.  the  sabbaths 
63.  that  they  might  not  p.  the  holy  covenant 

2.  34.  neither  will  we  p.  the  sabbath-day 

2  JIac.  5.  16.  with  p.  hands  pulling  down  things 

6.  5.  the  altar  also  was  filled  with  p.  things 
PROFANED. 

2  Esd.  10.  22.  the  name  called  on  us  is  almost  p. 

1  Mac.  1.  43.  many  of  the  Israelites  p.  the  sabbath 

3.  51.  thy  sanctuary  is  trodden  down  and  p. 
4.:<8.when  they  saw  altar  p.  they  rent  their  clothes 

54.  and  what  day  the  heathen  had  p.  it 
2 Mac.  8.  2.  pity  the  temple  p.  of  wicked  men 
10.5.  the  same  day  that  the  slrangersp.lhe  temple 
PROFANELY. 

2  Esd.  15.  8.  their  wickedness  they  p.  commit 
PROFANENESS. 

2  Mac.  4.  13.  through  the  exceeding  p.  of  Jason 

PROFESS. 
Eccl.  3.  25.  p.  not  the  knowledge  thou  hast  not 

PROFIT. 
2  E.fd.l.il.  for  whatp.for  men  to  live  in  heaviness! 

49.  what  p.  is  it  to  us  if  there  be  promised  us 
Kcc^5.8.they  shall  not  p. thee  in  the  day  of  calamity 
11.  23.  say  .not,  what  p.  is  there  of  my  service? 
13.  4.  if  thou  be  for  his  p.  he  will  use  theo 
20.  10.  there  is  a  gift  that  shall  not  p.  thee 
30.  wisdom  that   is    hid,  and  treasure  that  It 
hoarded  up,  what  p.  is  in  them  both? 
29.  11.  it  shall  bring  thee  more  p.  limn  gold 
30.23.sorrow  hath  killed,  and  there  is  nop.  tliereio 
34.  23.  what  p.  have  they  then  but  labour? 
26.  or  what  doth  his  humlilirig  p.  him? 
2  Jl/ac.  2. 25.  been  careful  that  all  might  have  p. 

PROFITABLE. 
Tob.  3.  6.  it  is  p.  for  me  to  die  rather  than  live 

4.  18.  and  despise  not  any  counsel  that  is  p. 
ff'isd.8.7.  can  have  nothing  more  p.  in  their  life 
Eccl.  10.  4.  he  will  set  over  it  one  that  is  p. 

37.  28.  for  all  things  are  not  p.  for  all  men 
2  Mac.  12. 12.  that  they  would  be  p.  in  many  things 

PROFITED. 
IVisd.  5.  8.  what  hath  pride  p.  us,  or  riches? 
Fed.  .33. 16.  by  the  blessing  of  Lord  I  p.  and  filled 
51.  17.  I  p.  therein,  therelore  will  I  ascribe  glory 

PROFOUNDER. 
Eccl.  24.29.  her  counsels  p.  than  the  great  deep 

PROGENITORS. 
Estk.  16.  16.  who  ordered  the  kingdom  to  ourp 

PROLOGUE. 
2  Mac.  2.  32.  it  is  a  fooli.sh  thins  to  make  a  long  p. 

PROLONG. 
Eccl.  29.  5.  he  will  p.  the  time  and  return  words 

38.  14.  they  give  for  ease  and  remedy  lop.  life 
PROLONGETH. 

Keel.  30.  22.  the  joyfulness  of  a  man  p.  his  day 
.37.  31.  but  he  that  taketh  heed,  p.  his  life 

PROMISED. 
Bar.  2.  34.  which  I  p.  with  an  oath  to  their  fathers 

1  Mac.  11.28.  hep.  him  three  hundred  talents 

2  Mac.  2. 18.  hep.  in  the  law,  will  have  mercy  on  us 
4.  9.  besides  this  he  p.  to  assisn  150  more 
7.  26.  she  p.  him  that  she  would  counsel  her  son 

PROMISES. 
2  Esd.  5.  20.  and  Ihey  which  did  sainsay  thy  p. 
ffi'srf.  12.21.ha8t  sworn  and  made  roven.  of  good  p 
1 .1/ac. 10.15.had  heard  what  p.  Demetrius  hail  sent 

PROMISETH. 
Eccl.  20.  23.  that  for  bnshfulness  p.  to  his  friend 

PROMISING. 
2  F.sd.  3.  15.  p.  that  thou  wouMst  never  forsake 
2Mac.  4.  8.  p.  to  the  kins  bv  intercession  talents 

PRO.MOtE. 
Kcci.  20.27.  a  wise  man  shall  p.  himself  to  honour 

PROMOTED. 
1  Mac.  11.  26.  kins  p.  him  in  sishl  of  all  hisfriendt 

PRONOUNCED. 
Tud.f^.tl.  this  oath  which  yep.  between  G.  and  yoa 
Bar.  2.1.  L.  made  good  his  word  which  hep.  «g  ui 

7.  pinsurs  which  the  Lord  hath  p.  against  Ua 
Sus.  53.  for  thou  hast  p.  false  judgment 


PRO 

PRONOUNCETH. 
Ifud.  i  I&  iiep.  the  end  of  ilie  juut  to  be  bleBBed 

PRUPKK. 
W\$d.  18.  21.  bringing  lliuHliieldof  liisp.  ministry 
li).  tj.  lor  the  wlmlu  crfiiluro  in  liis  i)roper  kind 

I'KOl'ERLY. 
Tob.  1.  2.  Thisbe,  which  in  called  ;>.  Nephthali 

fUUPIIECY. 
t  £«<f.  15.  1.  behold,  speuk  thou  the  words  of  p. 
Tob.'Z.  6.  remembering  that />.  ot'Ainoa,  as  he  said 
Ecct.  49.  6.  according  to  the  p.  ul' Jcreiiiias 

I'KOl'HKCIKri. 
Eccl.  39.  1.  he  will  bu  occu|iied  in  p. 
44.  3.  giving  couimcl  and  declaring  p. 
PUUFIIKSV. 
S  Esd.  8.  5.  agreed  to  give  ear,  and  art  willing  to;). 
IVUd.  14.  'id.  either  mad  when  merry,  or  p.  lies 
Eccl.  47.  1.  and  after  him  rose  up  Nathan  to  p. 

PKOl'llKSIEU. 
1  £sd.  6.  1.  Ag^'l•lls  undZachariasp.  to  the  Jews 
Jud.  6.  2.  that  inou  hast  p.  among  us  to-day 
Eecl.iG.  'iO.  and  alter  his  death  hap.  and  shewed 

HUUPUKT. 
1  Esd.  I.  20.  sinre  the  time  of  the  p.  Samuel 

28.  not  regarding  the  words  of  the  p.  Jeremy 
3  Esd.  1.  1.  the  second  book  of  the  p.  Esdras 
Tob.  14.  4.  which  Jonas  the  p.  spake  of  Nineve 
fftsd.ll.  l.slie  prospered  ill  the  hand  of  the  holy  p. 
Eccl-  46.  13.  Samuel  the  p.  of  the  Lord,  beloved 
15.  by  his  faithfulness  he  was  found  a  true  p. 
48.  1.  then  stood  up  Hlias  the  p.  as  fire 
49.7.Jereniias,who  nevertheless  was  ap. sanctified 
Bel.  33.  there  was  in  Jewry  a  p.  called  Habbacuc 
1  Mad.  Mi.  till  there  should  come  a  p.  to  shew 
'J.  27.  since  tlic  lime  that  a  p.  was  not  seen 

14.  41.  until  thi  re  should  arise  a  faithful  p. 

S  Mac.  2.  I.  that  Jeremy  the  p.  commanded  them 
2.  how  that  the  p.  having  given  them  the  law 
4.  the  p.  being  warned  of  God,  commanded 

15.  14.  this  is  Jeremiiis  the  p.  of  God 

PKOPHKTS. 
1  Esd.  1.  51.  they  made  a  sporl  of  his  p. 
6.  1.  the  p.  prophesied  unto  the  Jews 
Tob.  4.  \-i.  for  we  are  the  children  of  the  p. 
14.  5.  as  the  p.  have  spoken  thereof 
tVisd.'.'i'.she  makelh  them  friends  of  God  and  p. 
Eccl.  3(5.  15.  raise  uji  p.  that  have  been  in  thy  name 
It),  and  let  liiv  /'.  be  found  faithful 
PKOPITI.XTION. 
H'isd.  18.  21.  even  prayer  and  p.ofincenso 
Eccl.  5.  5.  concerning  p.  ho  not  without  fear 
35.  3.  and  to  fiir>  iki'  unrighti^oii.sncss  is  a  p. 

PK(>I'()KTIU.\ABLY. 
M'isd.  13.  5.  p.  the  iinkir  of  them  is  seen 

PKOSI'KR. 
2 Fsd.  5. 12.  shall  labour,  but  their  ways  shall  not  p. 
Tob.  4.  19.  that  all  Ihy  paths  and  counsels  may  p. 
5.  10.  his  father  said,  God  p.  vour  journey 
Krct.  15.  10.  and  the  Lord  will  p.  it 
38.  14.  that  he  would  p.  that  which  they  give 

PROSPERED. 
fVisd.  11.  1.  she  p.  their  works  in  hand  of  prophet 
1  Mac.  -2.  47.  and  the  work  p.  in  their  hand 
3.  6.  because  salvation  p.  in  his  hand 
14.  36.  for  ill  his  time  things  p.  in  his  hands 
16  2.  things  have  p.  so  well  in  nur  hands 
S  jWoc.  8.  8.  that  things  p.  with  him  still  mora 

PROSPERITY. 
Ecel.  6.  11.  but  in  thy  p.  ho  will  be  as  thyself 
10.5.  in  the  hand  of  God  is  the  p.  of  man 
ll.I4.p.and  ndver9ily,life  and  death  come  of  Lord 
17.  and  hia  favour  bringeth  p.  for  ever 
25.  in  day  of  p.  is  n  forgctfulness  ofallliclion 

12.  8.  a  friend  cannot  be  known  in  p. 

9.  in  the  p.  of  a  man  enemies  will  be  grieved 

13.  26.  ia  a  token  of  a  heart  that  is  in  p. 
Si.  23.  that  Ihon  mayert  rejoice  in  his  p. 
37.  4.  wliirh  rejiiicelh  in  the  p.  of  a  friend 
41.  1.  to  the  im'iii  Ihnt  hath  p.  in  all  things 

1  Mae.  12.  22.  do  well  to  write  to  us  of  your  p. 
SMae.  9.  19.  wiHhcth  miirh  jov,  health,  and  p. 

PROSPEROUS. 
I  Esd.  8.  .V).  to  desire  of  him  a  p.  journey  for  us 
Tob.  5.  21.  and  his  journey  shall  be  p. 
10.  11.  the  God  of  heaven  give  you  a  p.  journey 
Eecl.  43.  26.  the  end  of  l hem  hnt'h  p.  success 
PKOSPEHOI'SLY. 

1  Fid.  6.  10.  the  work  giieih  on  p.  in  their  hands 
Tub.  4.  6.  thy  doingi  shall  p.  micceed  to  thoo 

PROSTRATING. 
tMac.3. 15.  but  prie»t«  B.  themselves  before  altar 

PROTECT. 
Ifisd.  5.  16.  and  wiih  his  arm  shall  he  p.  them 

PROTECT  ETII. 
Jud.  9.  14.  no  olher  that  p.  the  people  of  Iiiraol 

PROTECTING. 
].4fac.3.3.hc  made  b^ililes/i.the  host  with  thcaword 

PRoTiurrioN. 

Eecl.  34.  16.  he  is  their  mighty  p.  and  sirong  Hay 

2  Mac.  13.  17.  the  p.  of  iho  Lord  did  help  litm 

830 


PSA 

PROTECTOR. 
Jud.  9.  ]1.  for  thou  art  a  p.  of  the  forlorn 
2  Mac.  11.1.  Lysias  the  king's  p.  and  cousin 
13  2.  Lysius  his  p.  and  ruler  of  his  alluirs 
PROTESTATIONS. 
Eccl.  46.  19.  he  made  p.  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 

PRO  UU. 
2  Esd.  11. 44.  Highest  huth  looked  on  the  p.  times 
f.'d'M.  13.  12.  that  1  did  not  bow  down  lop.  Aman 
h'lsd.  14.  6.  in  old  time  when  the  p.  giaut£  |ierished 
Eccl.  3.  28.  in  the  punishment  ol  the  p.  no  remedy 

10.  9.  why  is  earth  and  ashes  p.  ? 

14.  the  Lord  cast  down  the  ihronesofp.  princes 
15. the  Ld.hath  plucked  up  roolsofthep.nulioiis 

1 1.  30.  us  a  partridge,  so  is  the  heart  of  the  p. 
13.  1.  he  that  hath  fellowship  with  a  p.  man 

2U.  as  the  p.  hate  humility,  so  doth  the  rich 
21.  4.  the  houseofp.  men  shall  be  made  desolate 
23.  4.  O  God  of  my  life,  give  me  not  a  p.  look 

8.  the  evil-apeaker  and  p.  shall  fall  thereby 
25.  2.  my  soul  hateth  u  |>oor  man  that  is  p. 
27.  15.  llie  strife  of  the  p.  is  blood-shedding 

28.  mockery  and  reproach  are  from  the  p. 
31.26.  So  wine  the  hearts  of  the  p.  by  drunkenness 
32. 12.  do  what  thou  will,  but  sin  not  by  p.  speech 

18.  but  a  p.  man  is  not  daunted  with  fear 
35.18.he  have  taken  away  the  multitude  of  the  p. 
51 .  10.  he  would  not  leave  me  in  the  time  of  the  p. 

1  Mac.  2.  47.  they  pursued  also  alter  ihe  p.  men 

2  Alac.  9.  8.  sop.  was  he  beyond  the  condition 
15.32.  the  hand  that  with  p.briigs  he  hud  stretched 

PROUDLY. 
.fud.  6.  17.  spoken  p.  against  the  house  of  Israel 
Eccl.  48.  18.  his  hand  against  Siou  and  boasted  p. 

1  Mac.  1.  21.  he  entered  p.  into  the  sanctuary 
24.  having  made  great  massacre  and  spoken  p. 

7.  34.  but  he  mocked  them  and  spake  p. 
47.  his  hand  which  he  stretched  out  sop. 

2  Mac.  9.  4.  for  he  had  spoken  p.  in  this  sort 
12.  that  a  man  should  not  p.  think  of  himself 

PROVE. 
fVisd.  2.  17.  let  us  p.  what  shall  happen  in  the  end 

19.  vie  may  know  his  meekness,  and  p.  patience 
Kcc/.  6. 7.  if  thou  wouldest  get  a  friend,  p.  him  first 

37.  27.  my  son,  p.  thy  soul  in  thy  life 

PROVED. 
fVisd.  3.  5.  for  God  p.  and  found  them  worthy 
Eccl.  44.  20.  when  he  was  p.  he  was  found  faithful 

PROVETH. 
Eccl.  27.  5.  the  furnace  p.  the  potter's  vessel 
31.  26.  the  furnace  p.  the  edge  by  dipping 

PROVERB. 
Tob.  3.  4.  and  for  a  p.  of  reproach  to  all  nations 

PROVERBS. 
Eccl.  8.8.  but  acquaint  thyself  with  their  p. 
47.  17.  the  countries  marvelled  at  lliee  for  Ihy  p. 
PROVIDE. 

1  Mac.  10.  C.  to  p.  weapons  that  he  might  aid  him 

PROVIDED. 
fVisd.  13.  16.  hep.  for  it,  that  it  might  not  fall 
\Mac.  10.21.  gathered  forces,  and  p.  much  armour 
14. 10.  he  p.  victuals  for  the  cilies,  and  set  in  them 

2  Mac.  4.  21.  Antiochus  p.  for  his  own  safety 

PROVIDENCE. 
Wisd.  14.  3.  but  thy  p.  O  Father,  governeth  it 
17.  2.  they  lay  exiled  from  the  eternal  p. 
PROVISION. 
.Jud.  2.  17.  and  goats  without  number  for  their  p. 
4.  5.  they  laid  up  victuals  for  the  p.  of  war 

12.  3.  if  p.  fail,  how  should  we  give  thee  the  like? 
2  Mac.  6.  21.  to  bring  tbsh  of  his  own  p. 

12.  27.  wherein  was  great  p.  of  engines  and  darts 
PROVOKE. 
Jud.  a.  14.  p.  not  the  Lord  our  God  to  anger 
11.  II.  wherefore  they  will  p.  their  God  lo  anger 
F.ccl.  4.  2.  neither  p.  a  mon  in  his  distress 
1  Mac.  6.  34.  they  might  p   elephants  to  fight 
15.  40.  Cetidebeus  began  to  p.  the  people 
PROVOKED. 

1  F.sd.  0.  IS.but  whenourfalhersp.God  to  wralli 

2  Fud.  I.  7.  they  have  p.  mo  to  wraih,  and  despised 
liar. 4.  7.  for  yep.  him  that  made  you 

PRUDENCE. 
fVisd.S.  fi.  ifp.  work,  who  more  cunning  than  she? 
7.  teachelh  temperance,  p.  justice,  and  fortitude 
18.  in  the  exercise  of  conference  with  her  p. 
Feci.  1.  4.  the  understanding  of  p.  from  everlasting 
10.3.  through  Ihe  p.  of  Ihem  Ihiil  are  in  authority 
19.  22.  nor  ut  any  tinio  is  the  counsel  of  sinncis  p. 
25.  0.  well  is  him  that  hath  found  p. 
34.  10.  but  ho  that  hnili  iruvelled,  is  full  of  p. 

PRUDENT. 
Feel.  3.  29.  the  heart  of  the  p.  will  underslnnd 
6.  32.  if  thou  apply  Ihy  mind,  thou  shalt  be  p. 
10.  1.  the  government  of  a  p.  man  is  well  ordered 
PSALM. 
.fud.  J6.  2.  tune  unto  him  a  now  p.  exalt  him 

PSALMS. 
2  Mac.  1.  30.  the  priests  sung  p.  of  lhnnki>giving 
lU.  7.  they  siing  p.  tu  hini  thut  had  given  bucccu 


PUN 


[Afocrtpba 


iMac.  10.  3d.  thii  done,  they  praised  the  L.  with  s 
12.  37.  he  sung  p.  with  a  loud  voice 
PSALTERY. 
2  Fsd.  10.22.  our  p.  is  laid  on  the  ground,  our  song 
IVisd.  19.  18.  like  as  in  a  p.  notes  change  the  liuia 
Eccl.  4U.  21.  llie  pi|>e  and  p.  make  sweet  melody 

PTOLEMAIS. 
1  Mac. 5. 15.  they  of  P.  andotTyrusarcaa«embled 
55.  Simon  his  brother  in  Galilee  before  P. 
10.  1.  Alexander  went  up  and  look  P. 
58.  Alexander  celebrated  her  niiirriage  at  P. 
60.  who  thereupon  went  honourably  lo  P. 
12.  48.  lliey  of  P.  shut  the  gutea  and  took  him 
PTOLEMEE. 

1  Mac.  1.  18.  but  P.  was  afraid  of  him  and  fled 

3.  3d.  then  Lysiaa  chose  P.  son  of  Durymeoeg 

10.  51.  sent  anibassudors  to  P.  king  of  Egypt 

11.  3.  now  as  P.  entered  into  the  cilies 

15.  king  P.  brought  forth  his  host  and  met  liinn 

16.  Alexander  tied,  but  king  P.  was  exulted 
18.  king  P.  also  dying  the  third  day  atler 

l.'>.  10.  Lucius  consul,  unto  king  P.  greeting 
16.  16.  P.  and  his  men  rose  up  and  took  weapons 
18.  then  P.  wrote  these  thiiiga,  and  sent  tu  king 
21.  and,  quoth  he,  P.  hath  sent  lo  slay  thee  also 

2  Mac.  4.  45.  promised  P.  the  son  of  Doiymencs 
46.  P.  taking  the  king  aside  into  a  gallery 

6. 8. there  went  out  a  decree  bv  the  suggestion  of  P. 

PTOLEMEUS. 
Est/t.  11.  1.  P.  his  son  brought  this  epistle 

1  Mac.  16.  11.  P.  the  son  of  Abobus  made  captain 

2  Mac.  1.  10.  to  Aristobulus  king  P.  master 

4.  21.  the  coronaiion  of  king  P.  Philometor 

8.  8.  he  wrote  unto  P.  the  gove.rnor  of  Celosyria 

10.  12.  P.  ihal  was  called  Macion  endeavoured 

PUBLIC. 
Kcc/.38.33.tliey  shall  not  be  sought  forinp.counsel 
\Mac.  14. 23.tu  put  copy  ofamhassngo  inp. records 
2  Mac.  4.  5.  seeking  the  good  of  all  p.  and  private 

15.  6.  to  set  up  up.  monument  of  his  victory 

PUBLISH, 
2  F.sd.  14.  26.  some  thing*  sl*1t  thou  p. 
F.sth.  16.  lU.  ye  shall  p.  the  copy  of  this  letter 
PUBLISHED. 

1  Esd.  9.  53.  the  Levltes  p.  ull  things  tothe  pcopla 

PUFFED. 

2  Mac.  7.  34.  be  not  p.  up  with  uncertain  hopes 

11.  4.  but  p.  up  with  his  ten  thousand  footmen 

PULL. 
2  F.'d.  1.  8.  p.  thou  off  then  the  hair  of  Ihy  head 
H'isd.  1.  12.  and  p.  not  on  yourselves  destruction 
1  Mac.  4.  45.  they  thought  it  best  top.  it  down 

6.  62.  he  gavecommundnient  lop.  down  the  wall 

9. 55. us  he  began  to  p.down,.'\lciinus  w  as  plagued 

PULLED. 
1  Fsd.  6.  16.  who  p.  down  the  house  and  burned  it 

8.  71.  I  p.  off  Ihe  hair  from  off  my  head 
.lad.  10.  3.  p.  off  the  sackcloth  which  he  bad  on 
Feci.  28.  14.  strong  cilies  hath  it  p.  down 

40.  16.  the  weed  sliuil  be  p.  up  before  all  grass 

1  Mac.  1.  22.  the  ornaments,  all  which  he  p.  off 
31.  hup.  down  the  houses  and  walls  thereof 

2.25.  commissioner  be  killed,  the  altarhop.dowa 

45.  then  Multulhiasp.  down  the  allars 
4.  .18.  they  saw  the  priesis'  chambers  p.  down 
5.65.  Iiep.down  the  fortress  of  it. and  burnt  towers 
0.  7.  they  p.  down  the  aboTniimlions  he  set  up 

2  Mac.  7.  7.  they  hud  p.  off  the  skin  of  his  head 

10.  2.  the  allurs  and  Ihe  chapels  they  p.  down 

PULLETH. 
Eccl.  34.  23.  one  biiildeih,  and  another  p.  down 

PULLING. 
2  Mac.  5.  16.  with  profane  hands  p.  down  things 

PULPIT. 
1  Esd.^.  42.  Esdras  siood  upon  a  p.  of  wood 

PUNISH. 
Toh.  3.  3.  p.  me  not  for  my  sins  and  ignorances 
Hisd.  II.  10.  the  other  thou  dnist condemn  and  ^. 

12.  20.  if  thou  didsl  p.  the  ciiemie*  of  children 
18.  8.  wherewith  thou  didsl  p.  our  adversaries 

1  Mac.  7.  7.  let  him  p.  Ihem  with  all  ihalaid  Ihom 
^iJilar.  1.  28.  p.  them  I  hut  oppress  us  and  do  wrong 

6.  14.  whom  Iho  Lord  patiently  forbeara  top. 
16.tlio'  hep.  with  ndversiiy,  yet  doth  not  fursak* 
PUNISHED. 

2  Fsd.  9.  13.  how  the  ungodly  shall  be  p.  and  whan 
fud.  1 1.  10.  for  our  nation  shall  nol  be  p. 
li'isd.'.l.  4.  fur  (bough  they  be  p.  in  the  sight  of  man 

10.  but  the  ungodly  shall  he  p.  nccordin(|  to 

11.  5.  by  what  things  their  enemies  wore  p. 

8.  how  thou  hadsl  p.  their  adversaries 
16.  by  the  Huine  also  shall  he  be  p. 

12.  14.  for  any  whom  Ihoii  hadsl  p. 

15.  condemn  him  that  hnlh  not  doaerved  to  bp  p. 

27.  look  for  what  things  they  grudged  when  they 

were  p.  now  being  p.  ill  them  when  Ihny  saw  it 

M.  Id.  shall  bo  p.  UK'ether  with  him  that  inodait 

:m.  b.r  b.nh  causes  shall  ihoy  be  justly  p. 

16.  I.  bv  the  like  were  Ihoy  ;>•  worihily 

9.  fur  they  w  uio  worthy  to  bo  p.  by  such 


Am  htpba.] 


PUT 


Wifd.  18.  11.  the  master  and  the  Bctvant  were  p. 

2*2.  but  with  a  woril  subdued  him  that  p. 
Keel.  2:t.  21.  this  mnn  shall  bo  /).  in  the  utruets 

1  Mac.  14.  45.  or  break  .nese  things  shoulil  be  p. 
a  Mac.  G.  j:i.  not  suflered  long,  but  forthwith;). 

7.  7.  they  a.sked,  wilt  thou  eat  before  Ihou  be  ».? 

rUNISHKTH. 
Jud.  7.  28.  which  p.  us  according  to  our  sins 
Wisi.  1.  8.  nor  vengeance  when  it  p.  pars  by  him 

14.  31.  that  p.  alwavs  the  offence  of  the  ungodly 

PUNISHING. 
Eccl.  33.  30.  p.  the  wicked  to  destruction 
PUNISHMENT. 

2  Ksd.  7. 21.  what  they  should  observe  to  avoid  p. 

47.  what  prolit  for  men  after  death  to  look  for  p. 

15.  12.  Egypt  smitten  with  the  plague  and  p. 
Wisd.  16.  2.  instead  of  which  p.  dcaJing  graciously 

24.  against  the  unrighteuuu  for  their  p. 
19.  4.  they  might  fulfil  the  p.  which  was  wanting 
Eccl.  3.  m.  in  p.  of  the  proud  there  is  no  remedy 

8.  5.  remember  that  we  are  all  worthy  of  p. 

12.  6.  kecpeth  against  the  mighty  day  of  their  p. 
'iMac.  4.  3d.  thus  the  Lord  rewarded  him  his  p. 

48.  thus  they  did  soon  suffer  unjust  p. 

6. 26.  tlio'  I  should  be  delivered  from  the  p.  of  men 

7.  36.  thou  shall  receive  just  p.  for  thy  prido 

PUNISHMENTS. 
}Visd.  11.  13.  when  they  heard  by  their  own  p. 
19.  13.  and  p.  canio  upon  the  sinners 
iMa'C.fi.  12.  judge  those  p.  not  to  be  for  destruction 

PURE. 
Tob.  3.  14.  that  I  am  p.  from  all  sin  with  man 

13.  16.  thy  towers  and  battlements  with  p.  gold 
Wisd.  7.  23.  p.  and  most  subtile  spirits 
Eccl.'il.  13.  his  counsel  is  like  a  p.  fountain  of  life 
Bar.  3.  30.  who  will  bring  her  for  p.  gold? 

PURENESS. 
^ri>(/.  7.  24.she  goeth  thro'  all  by  reason  of  her  p. 
Keel.  51.  20.  and  I  found  her  in  p. 

PURGE. 
Tob.  12.  9.  for  alms  shall  p.  away  all  sin 

PURIFICATION. 
12  Mac.  1. 18.  purposed  to  keep  the  p.  of  the  temple 

PURIFIED. 
'iMac.  1.  33.  Neemias  had  p.  sacrifices  llicrewith 

2.  18.  he  delivered  us  and  hath  p.  the  place 

12.  38.  they  p.  themselves  as  the  custom  was 

PURPLE. 
J;cc2. 40.  4.  from  him  that  weareth  p.  and  a  crown 
45.  10.  with  gold,  and  blue  silk  and  p. 
Bar.  6. 12.  though  they  be  covered  with  p.  raiment 
72.  by  the  bright  p.  that  rotteth  U[)0n  them 

1  Mac.  4.23.  where  they  got  gold  and  p.  of  the  sea 

8.  14.  none  was  clothed  in  p.  to  be  magnified 

10.  20.  he  sent  him  a  p.  robe  and  a  crown  of  gold 
62.  the  king  commanded  to  clothe  him  in  p. 

2  Jlfoc.  4.  38.  he  took  away  Andronicus'  p. 

PURPOSE. 
Jud.  8. 14.  can  ye  search  God,  or  comprehend  hisp 

11.  11.  be  not  defeated  and  frustrate  of  his  p. 

13.  3.  spake  to  Bagoas  according  to  the  same  p. 
1  Mac.  15.  3.  my  p.  is  to  challenge  it  again 

S  Mac.  3.  8.  but  indeed  to  fullil  the  king's  p. 

PURPOSED. 
Jud.  9.  8.  they  have  p.  tcr  defile  thy  sanctuary 
13.  who  havep. cruel  things  against  thy  covenant 
11.  12.  thoy  p.  to  consume  all  those  things 
Wisd.  8.  i).  I  p.  to  take  her  to  me  to  live  with  me 
Eccl.  51.  18.  I  p.  to  do  afier  her,  and  I  followed 

1  Mac.  14.  31.  enemiesp.  to  invade  their  country 

2  Mae.  1.  18.  we  are  p.  to  keep  the  purification 

PURPOSES. 
Jud.  11.6  my  lord  shall  not  fail  of  his  p. 
Esth.  12.  2.  he  searched  out  their  p.  and  learned 
16.  9.  both  by  changing  our  p.  and  judging 
PURSUE. 
.Tud.  14.  4.  ye  shall  p.  them,  and  overthrow  them 
S  Ma£.  8.  26.  they  would  no  longer  p.  them 

PURSUED. 
Wisd.  19.  3.  and  they  p.  them  ns  fugitives 
1  Mac.  2  47.  ihi'v  p.  also  after  the  proud  men 

3.  5.  for  he  p.  the  wicked,  and  sought  them  out 

4.  9.  when  Pharaoh  p.  them  with  an  army 

15.  for  ihey  p.  thorn  unto  Gazara  and  Idumea 

5.  22.  he  p.  them  to  the  sate  of  Ptolemais 
60.  and  p.  thi'in  to  the  borders  of  Judea 

9.  15.  whop,  them  unio  the  mount  .Azolus 
15.  11.  beinsp.  by  king  Antiochus,  he  fled 

2^ac.  5.  8.  fleeing  from  city  to  city,  p.  of  all  men 
PURSUING. 

1  Mac.  4.  16.  Judas  returned  again  from  p.  them 

2  Mac.  12.  23.  Jnd:is  was  very  earnest  in  p.  them 

PURVEYOR. 
Tob.  1. 13.  before  Enemasiar,  so  that  I  was  hisp. 

PUT. 
2  .F.'!rf.3.16.  didst  choose  him  to  thee,  and  p. by  Esau 
Wisd.  3.  9.  that  p.  trust  in  him,  shall  understand 
Keel.  13.  6.  smile  on  thee,  and  p.  thee  in  hope 
Sus.  51.  p.  the.so  two  aside  one  from  another 
50  so  he  p.  him  aside  and  commanded  to  bring 
831 


RAQ 

2  Mac.  13. 10.  at  the  point  to  be  p.  from  their  law 

PUTTING. 
Jud.  16.  17.  in  p.  fire  and  worms  in  their  flesh 
2  Mac.  4.  11.  and  p.  down  the  governments 

PYRAMIDS. 
1  .Jfoc.13.28.  hesetupsevenp.  one  against  another 


Q. 


aUAILS. 

'iEsd.  1.  15.  the  q.  were  as  a  token  for  you 
IVisd.  16.  2.  even  q.  to  atir  up  their  appetite 
19.  12.  for  o.  came  up  to  them  from  the  sea 
UUAKE. 

1  JIfac.  4.  32.  let  them  o.  at  their  destruction 

aUAKEU. 
.Tud.  16.  10.  the  Persians  q.  at  her  boldness 
aUAKETH. 

2  Esd.  16. 12.  the  earth  q.  and  foundations  thereof 
aUANTlTY. 

2  Esd.  4.  5u.  the  q.  which  is  past  did  more  exceed 

QUARRELLING. 
Eccl.  31.  29.  excess  maketh  brawling  and  q. 

QUARTERS. 
I  Mac.  3.  36.  should  place  strangers  in  all  their  q. 

5.  9.  the  Israelites  that  were  in  their  q. 

aUELL. 

1  Mac.  4.30.  who  didst  q.  the  violence  of  the  mighty 

aUENCH. 

2  Ksd.  16.  4.  a  fire  is  sent,  and  who  may  q.  it  7 
Eslk.  14.  9.  they  will  q.  ihe  glory  of  thy  house 

aUENCHED. 

fVisd.  11.4.  their  thirst  was  q.  out  of  Ihe  hard  stone 

Eccl.  28.  12.  if  thou  spit  on  it,  it  shall  bo  q. 

23.  and  it  shall  burn  in  them,  and  not  be  q. 

QUENCHETH. 

Wisd.  16. 17.  had  force  in  water  that  q.  all  things 

aUENCHING. 

Wisd.  19.  20.  the  water  forgat  his  own  q.  nature 

QUESTION. 

1  Esd.  6.  30.  every  year,  without  further  q. 

QUESTIONS. 

2  Esd.  8.  55.  therefore  ask  thou  no  more  q. 

QUICK. 
Wisd.  7.  22.  loving  the  thing  that  is  good,  q. 
8. 11. 1  shall  be  found  of  a  5.  conccilin  judgment 
Eccl.  31.  22.  my  son,  in  all  thy  works  be  q. 

QUICKEN. 
2  Esd.  8.  13.  and  thou  shall  q.  it  as  thy  work 

QUICKLY. 
Wisd.  3.  18.  or  if  they  tf5e  q.  they  have  no  hope 

6.  15.  whoso  watchelh,  shall  q.  be  without  care 
\Mac.  2.  40.  they  will  q.  root  us  out  of  the  earth 

C.  27.  wherefore  if  Ihou  dost  not  prevent  them  q. 
iMac.  14.  44.  but  they  q.  giving  back,  he  fell 

QUIET. 
2  Esd.  10.  3.  when  they  bad  all  left  off  to  comfort 
me,  to  the  end  I  might  be  }.  then  I  rose  and  fled 
Esth.  16.  8. we  must  take  care  that  our  kingdom  for 
time  to  come  may  be  q.  and  peaceable  for 
all  men 
Wisd.  18.  14.  while  all  things  were  in  q.  silence 
Eccl.  2.5.  20.  so  is  a  wife  full  of  words  to  a  q.  man 
47. 13.  Solomon  reigned  in  a  peaceable  time,  was 
honoured,  for  God  made  all  y.  round  about  him 

1  Mac.  1.  3.  that  the  earth  was  q.  before  him 

2  Jl/ac.12.2.  Nicanor  would  not  suffer  ihem  to  be  q. 
14.  10.  not  possible  that  the  slate  should  be  q. 

25.  so  he  married,  was  q.  and  took  part  of  life 
QUIETLY. 
Eccl.  28.  16.  never  find  rest,  and  never  dwell  q. 
'iMac.  11.  23.  they  that  are  in  our  realm  live  q. 

QUIETNESS. 
2  Esd.  2. 24.  abide,  take  rest,  for  thy  q.  shall  come 

QUIVER. 
Eccl.  26. 12.  by  every  hedge  she  will  sit  down,  and 
open  her  q.  against  every  arrow 


R. 


RABSACES. 
Eccl.  48.  18.  Sennacherib  came  up  and  sent  R. 

RACE. 
Eccl.  26. 21.  thy  r.  thou  leaves!  shall  be  magnified 

RAGE. 
Wisd.  11.  18.  or  unknown  wild  beasts  full  of  r. 
Eccl.  31.  30.  drunkenness  increascth  the  r. 
36.  9.  let  him  he  csnsumed  by  the  r.  of  the  fire 

1  Mac.  7.  35.  with  that  he  went  out  in  a  great  r. 
15.  36.  but  returned  in  a  r.  to  thfi  king 

2  Mac.  4.  25.  having  the  r.  of  a  savage  beast 
40.  the  common  people  being  filled  with  r. 

7.  3.  then  the  king  being  in  a  r.  commanded 
10.  28.  making  their  r.  leader  of  their  battle 

RAGES. 
Tob.  1. 14.1  left  at  R.  a  city  of  Media,  ten  talents 

5.  5.  he  said  to  him,  canst  thou  go  with  mc  to  R.l 

6.  9.  and  when  they  were  come  near  to  R. 


REA 

RAGUEL. 

7*1/4.  3.  7.  Sara  Ihe  daughter  of  R.  was  re[  roachod 
t).  10.  to  day  we  shall  lodge  wjth  R.  thy  cousin 
7.().  then  R.  leaped  up,  and  kissed  him,  and  wup* 

9.  he  coiiiiiiunicaled  the  mailer  with  R.  and  R. 

said  to  Tobias,  eal,  drink,  and  make  merry 

8.  9.  R.  arose,  and  went  and  made  a  grave 
15.  R.  praised  God,  and  said,  thou  art  worth 

9.  3.  R.  hath  sworn  lliat  1  shall  not  depart 

RAILINGS. 
Eccl.  29.  6.  he  paycth  Kim  wiih  cursings  and  r 

RAIN. 
2  Ksd.  4.  50.  as  the  r.  is  more  than  Ihe  drops 
8.  43.  the  seed  perisheth  if  it  receive  not  Ihy  r.  in 
due  season,  or  if  there  come  loo  much  r. 
.fud.  8.  31.  pray  for  us,  the  Lord  will  send  us  r. 
Wisd.  16.  22.  fire  sparkling  in  the?-,  de.ilroyed  fruits 
Eccl.  I.  2.  who  can  number  ihe  diops  of  r.? 
35.  20.  as  clouds  of  r.  in  ihe  time  of  drought 
40. 13.  goods  shall  vanish  like  a  great  thunder  inn 
49.  9.  of  the  enemies  under  the  figure  of  the  r, 
liar.  6.  53.  nor  can  they  give  r.  unio  men 

RAlNilOW. 
Eccl.  43. 11.  look  on  r.  and  praise  him  that  made  it 
511.  7.  as  r.  giving  light  in  the  bright  clouds 

RAINS. 
Wisd.  16.  16.  with  strange  r.  were  persecuted 

RAINETII. 
".ccl.  1.  19.  wisdom  r.  down  skill  and  knowledeo 

RAINING. 
Eccl.  43.  J8.  the  heart  is  astoniAhcd  at  the  r.  of  it 

RAISE. 
2  Ksd.  2.  16.  those  that  be  dead  will  I  r.  again 
12.23.  the  Most  High  shall  r.  up  three  kingdoms 
Eccl.  31).  7.  r.  up  indignation,  and  pour  out  wrath 
48.  5.  who  didst  r.  uj)  a  dead  man  from  death 
2  Mac.  7.  9.  the  King  of  the  world  shall  r.  us  up 
RAISED. 

1  Esd.  2.  2.  the  Lord  r.  up  the  spirit  of  Cyrus 
23.  Jews  were  rebellious,  and  )■.  always  wars 

8.81.  honoured  the  temple  and  r.  up  desolate  Sion 

2  Esd.  6.  21.  and  they  shall  live  ami  be  r.  up 
7.  31.  the  world  that  awaketli  >.hall  not  be  r. 

Eccl.-i0.l2.  Neemias  who  r  up  for  us  the  walls  that 
were  fallen,  and  r.  up  our  ruins  a^aia 
Si/.t.  45.  Lord  r.  up  the  spirit  of  a  young  youth 
1  Mac.  14.  37.  he  r.  up  the  wails  of  Jerusalem 

RAISETII. 
£cr;.3.1.17.he  r.up  tlie  soul,  and  lighteneth  the  evet 

RAM. 
Tob.  7.  8.  after  Ihey  had  killed  a  r.  of  the  flock 

RAMS. 
1  Esd.  6.  29.  for  bullocks,  and  r.  and  lambs 

7.  7.  Ihey  offered  two  hundred  r.  4IJU  lambs 
"Mac.  12.  15.  without  any  r.  or  engines  of  war 

RAN. 
Tob.  11. 9.Annar.  forth,  and  fell  on  neck  of  her  soa 

10.  Tobit  stumbled,  hut  his  son  r.  to  him 
.fud.  6.  16.  and  all  their  youth  r.  together 
Sus.  19.  the  two  elders  rose  up,  and  r.  to  her 

1  Mac.  2.  24.  he  r.  and  slew  him  upon  the  altar 

11.  72.  put  them  to  flight,  and  so  they  r.  away 

2  .^/uf.  3. 18.  others  r.  flocking  out  of  their  hoiisea 
19.  the  virgins  kept  in  r.  some  to  ihe  gates 

11).  16.  so  they  r.  with  violence  on  Ihe  holds 

]4.43.he  r.  boldly  up  lo  the  wall,casl  himself  do'vn 

45.  yet  he  r.  throuih  the  inid.sl  of  the  throng 

RANGED. 

.Tud.  2.  16.  he  r.  them  as  a  great  army  is  orde\  "d 

'iMac.  12.  20.  Maccabeus  r.  his  army  by  bands 

RANKS. 
1  Mac.  6.  38.  being  harnessed  all  over  amidst  the  r 

RAPHAEL. 
Tob.  3.  17.  and  R.  was  sent  lo  heal  them  both 
5.  4.  he  found  R.  that  was  an  ancel 

8.  2.  as  he  went,  he  remembered  Ihe  woids  of  R 

9.  1.  then  Tobias  called  R.  and  said  lo  him 
5.  so  R.  went  out  and  lodged  with  Gabael 

12.  15.  I  am  R.  one  of  the  seven  holy  angels 

RAPHON. 
1  Mac.  5.  37.  Timolheiis  encamped  against  R. 

RASH. 
Eccl.  9. 18.  he  that  is  r.  in  his  talk  sh  ill  be  hated 

RATIFIED. 

1  Mae.  8. 30. what  they  add  or  take  away  shall  be  r. 

11.  34.  wo  have  r.  to  ihrm  the  borders  of  Judea 

RATTLING. 

1  Mac.  6.  41.  all  thai  heard  ihe  r.  of  the  harness 

RAVISHED. 

2  Esd.  10.  22.  our  virgins  defiled  and  our  wives  r. 
.Tud.  12.  16.  Olofernes  his  heart  was  r.  with  her 

IC.  9.  her  sandals  r.  his  p\c»,  her  beauty  toos 

RAZiS. 

2  JIfac.  14.  37.  R.  one  of  the  elders  of  Jerusalem 

REACH. 
Keel.  31.  18.  r.  not  thy  hand  out  first  of  all 
35.  16.  and  hie  prayer  shall  r.  unto  the  clouds 
'2Mac.1i.  10.  that  he  could  r.  to  the  stars  of  hcavon 

REACHED. 
2  Esd.  14.  39.  and  behold  he  r.  me  a  full  cup 


REB 

REACHETH. 
Wiid.  8.  1.  wisdom  r.  frum  onu  end  to  another 
Eccl.  21.  5.  a  prayer  r.  to  the  ears  of  Gud 
READ. 

1  Esd.i.  3t).  king  Arlaxerxes  bis  letters  being  r. 
3.  13.  they  dt-livtrt'cl  them  to  him,  so  he  r.  them 

15.  and  the  writings  were  r.  hcforo  them 
9^41.  he  r.  in  the  broad  court  before  tjie  porch 

2  Ead.  14.  45.  the  worthy  and  unworthy  may  r.  it 
Bar.  1.  3.  Baruch  did  r.  the  wordo  of  thia  book 

14.  ye  sliall  r.  this  book  which  we  have  sent 
l.Wae.  14.19.  which  writings  were  r. before  congreg. 
2  Mac.  2.  So.  they  tliiit  will  r.  might  have  delight 
6.  12.  now  I  beseech  those  that  r.  this  book 
8.23.  he  appointed  Elcarar  to  r.  the  holy  book 
15.  39.  delighteth  ihccars  of  them  that  r.  the  story 

READER. 
1  Ead.  8.  8.  Esdras  pn.Bt  and  r.  of  the  law,  9,  19. 

READING. 
I  Mac.  5.  14.  while  those  letters  were  yet  r.  behold 

READY. 
Tab.  14.  3.  for  I  am  r.  to  depart  out  of  this  life 
Esth.  11.  9.  nation  troubled,  and  were  r.  to  perish 
fVisd.  7.  22.  which  cannot  be  letted,  r.  to  do  good 
Keel.  29.  26.  and  feed  me  of  that  thou  hast  r. 
39.  31.  they  shall  be  r.  on  earth  when  need  is 
51.  3.  teeth  of  them  that  were  r.  to  devour  me 
1  Mac.  3.  9.  he  received  such  as  were  r.  to  perish 

17.  we  are  r.  to  faint  with  fasting  all  day 
iMac.  3.  31.  who  lay  r.  to  give  up  the  ghost 

6.  30.  when  he  was  r.  to  die  with  stripes. 

7.  2.  we  are  r.  to  die,  rather  than  transgress 
14.  80  when  he  was  r.  to  die,  he  said  thus 

8.  21.  when  he  made  them  r.  to  die  for  the  laws 

READILY. 
!  Mac.  14.  9.  the  clemency  thou  r.  shewest  to  all 

READINESS. 

2.,^fac.l3.12.Juda8  commanded  they  should  be  in  r. 

REALM. 

1  F.3d.\.V\.  he  wrote  for  Jews  that  went  out  of  his  r. 
8.  10.  the  priests  and  Levites  being  within  our  r. 

2  Eid.  13.  31.  one  r.  shall  fight  against  another 
1  Mac.  3.  27.  he  gathered  all  the  forces  of  his  r. 

6.  14.  Philip,  whom  he  made  ruler  overall  his  r. 

10.  34.  days  of  freedom  for  all  Jews  in  my  r. 
52.  forasmuch  as  I  am  come  again  to  my  r. 

15.  28.  Joppe  and  Oazara,  cities  of  my  r. 
iMac.  10.  11.  he  selLysias  over  the  affairs  of  his  r. 

11.  23.  they  that  are  in  our  r.  Ifve  quietly 

14.  6.  Assideans  will  not  let  the  r.  be  in  peace 

2C.  Judas,  a  traitor  to  hi?  r.  to  be  successor 

REALMS. 

1  Mac.  1.  16.  might  have  the  dominion  of  two  r. 

REAP. 

2  F.iid.  IR.  43.  he  thatsowcth,  as  if  he  should  not  r. 
46.  strangers  shall r.  their  fruits,  spoil  their  goods 

Kcel.l.  3.  and  thou  shall  not  r.  them  seven-fold 

REAPED. 
1  Esd.  \.  fi.  when  they  r.  that  which  Ihcy  had  sown 
Jud.  4.  5.  for  their  fic^lds  were  of  late  r. 

REAPERS. 
fi«t33.  he  was  going  into  field  to  bring  it  to  ther. 

REARING. 
1  F.fd.  5.  62.  for  r.  up  the  house  of  the  Lord 

REASO.N. 
fVisd.  11.  15.  they  worshipped  serpents  void  ofr. 
17.  12.  but  a  betraying  of  the  succours  r.  ofTcrcth 
Keel.  37.  16.  let  r.  go  before  every  enterprise 

1  Jl/ac.  12.  11.  we  remember  vou  in  prayer,  asr.  is 

REASONAfiLE. 

2  Mac.  U.  14.  them  to  njrne  to  all  r.  conditions 

REASONETII. 
Ecr.l.  14.20.  bless'jd  is  the  man  that  r.  of  holy  things 

REASONING. 
fVitd.  2.  1.  the  ungodly  snid,  r.  with  themselves 
Eccl.  27.  5l  so  til"  triiil  of  a  man  is  in  his  r. 

REASONINGS. 
FTiii.  7.  20.  the  violence  of  winds,  and  r.  of  men 

REBEL. 
1  K»d.2.  19.  but  they  will  also  r.  against  kings 
Jhjx.  2.  11.  but  ccmrirning  them  thatr.  spare  not 

REIiELLED. 
1  FM.  1.  48.  ho  forswor.'  himseirand  r. 
Jud.  7.  l.V  because  thcvr.and  met  not  thy  person 

•  REnELLION. 

I  Esd.  2.  27.  the  mm  therein  were  given  to  r. 

RERELLIOUS. 

1  F.fd.  2.  18.  Jerusaloin,  that  r.  and  wicked  city 
22.  thou  shall  understand  that  city  was  r. 

2  K»(i.  1.  a.  not  obedient,  but  it  is  a  r.  people 
Feel.  16.  6.  in  a  r.  nation  wrath  is  set  on  fire 

47.  21.  out  of  Ephrnim  ruled  a  r.  kingdom 

REBOUNDING. 
Wisd.  17.  19.  or  a  r.  echo  from  hollow  mountains 

REmrKE. 
8  F.td.  10.  28.  and  mv  prayer  is  turned  into  r. 
^  Ecel.  11.  7.  iinderstiiiid  first,  and  then  r. 
31.  31.  r.  not  Ihv  neighbour  at  the  wine 

48.  7.  who  heardest  the  r.  of  the  Lord  in  Sinai 

1  Mae.  2.49.  now  hath  pride  and  r.  gotten  strength 


RED 

REBUKED. 

Eccl.  13.  22.  poor  man  slipt,  and  yet  they  r.  him  too 

RECEIVE. 
Tob.  5. 2.  how  can  I  r.  the  moneyl  I  know  him  not 
.Jud.  11.5.  Judith  said,  r.  the  words  of  thy  servant 
fVisd,  6.  25.  r.  instruction  through  my  wards 
12.7.  that  the  land  might  r.  a  worthy  colony 
17.21.  which  should  afterwards  r.  tliein 
F.ccl.  4.  31.  let  not  thy  hand  be  stretched  to  r. 
6.  23.  give  Biir,  my  son,  r.  my  advice 
33.  love  to  hear,  thou  shall  r.  understanding 

11.  34.  r.  a  stranger  into  thy  house,  he  will  disturb 

12.  5.  else  thou  shall r.  twice  as  much  evil 

15.  2.  r.  him  as  a  wife  married  of  a  virgin 

18.  14.  hath  mercy  on  them  that  r.  discipline 

19.  19.  shall  r.  fruit  of  the  tree  of  immortality 
29.  6.  if  he  prevail,  he  shall  hardly  r.  the  half 
32.  2.  r.  a  crown  for  thy  well-ordering  the  feast 

35.  12.  not  with  gifts,  for  such  he  will  nut  r. 

36.  21.  a  woman  wiL  r.  every  man 

38.  2.  and  he  shall  r.  honour  of  the  king 
41.  1.  yea,  unto  him  that  is  yet  able  to  r.  meat 
.'>0.3.the  cistern  tor.  water  was  covered  with  brass 
21.  they  might  r.  a  blessing  from  the  Most  High 
51.  26.  ind  let  your  soul  r.  instruction 
2  Mac.  7.  11.  from  him  I  hope  to  r.  them  again 
29.  that  r  may  r.  thee  again  in  mercy 
36.  thou  shall  r.  just  punishment  for  thy  pride 
RECEIVED. 

1  E.id.  6.  6.  until  such  time  as  an  answer  was  r. 
Tob.T.n.  she  wept  and  r.  the  tears  of  her  daughter 

1 1. 16.  they  marvelled  because  he  had  r.  his  sight 
Jud.  3.  7.  the  country  about  r,  them  with  dances 
F.sth.  16.  10.  and  as  a  stranger  r.  of  us 
yVisd.  3.  6.  he  r.  them  as  a  burnt-offering 

16.  14.  neither  the  soul  r.  up,  cometh  again 

19.  16.  whom  they  had  r.  with  feaslings 

Eccl.  17.  5.  they  r.  the  use  of  the  five  operations 
23.  28.  and  to  be  r.  of  him  is  long  life 
29.  5.  till  he  hath  r.  he  will  kiss  a  man's  hand 
51.  16.  I  T.  her,  and  gat  much  learning 

2  Mac.  7.  8.  he  r.  the  next  torment  in  order 

RECEIVEST. 
Eccl.  42. 7.  all  that  thou  gavest  out,  or  r.  in 

RECEIVING. 
IJVfac.lfi.lS.  the  son  of  Abubus  r.  them  deceitfully 
2  J)/ac.l0.15.r.lhosethat  were  banished  from  Jerus. 

RECEPTACLES. 
Eccl.  39.  17.  at  the  words  of  his  mouth  r.  of  waters 

RECITED. 
Eccl.  44.  5.  such  as  r.  verses  in  writing 

RECKONED. 
Err;.29.4.  many  »".  it  found  and  put  them  to  trouble 
1  Mac.  10.  38.  that  they  may  be  r.  to  be  under  one 

RECKONING. 
Tob.G.  15.  make  thou  no  r.  of  the  evil  spirit 
Keel.  42.  3.  ofr.  with  partners  and  travellers 

RECOMPENSE. 
"Esd.  15.  21.  so  will  I  do  and  r.  in  their  bosom 

55.  therefore  shall  thou  receive  r. 
F.ccl.  7.  28.  how  canst  thou  r.  them  the  things 
12.  2.  do  good  to  the  godly,  thou  shall  find  a  r. 
14.  6.  and  there  is  a  r.  of  his  wickedness 

17.  23.  it  will  render  their  r.  on  their  heads 

20.  10.  there  is  a  gift  whoso  r.  is  double 
36.  20.  but  a  man  of  experience  will  r.  him 

/!ar.  6.  34.  evil  or  good,  they  are  not  able  to  r.  it 
1  Mac.  2.  68.  r.  fully  the  heathen,  and  take  hood 
10.  27.  we  will  r.  you  for  all  the  things  ye  do 

RECOMPENSED. 
1  Mac.  16.  17.  in  which  doing  ho  r.  evil  for  good 

RECOMPENSETH. 
Eccl.  35.  11.  for  the  Lord  r.  and  will  give  thee 
RECONCILED. 

1  F..id.  4.  31.  that  she  might  be  r.  to  him  again 

2  Mac.  5.  20.  the  great  Lord  being  r.  it  was  set  up 
8.  29.  they  besought  the  merciful  Lord  to  be  r. 

RECONCILEMENT. 
Eccl.  27.  21.  and  after  reviline,  there  may  be  r. 

RECONCILIATION. 

Errl.  22.  22.  fear  not,  for  there  mny  bo  a  r. 

4.').  16.  ho  chose  him  to  make  r.  for  his  peojile 

23.  Phineos  stood  up  and  made  r.  for  Israel 

2  Mac.  12. 45.  wheronpon  ho  made  a  r.  for  the  dead 

RECORD. 
Esth.  12.  4.  the  kin;  made  a  r.  of  these  things 

RECORDED. 
1  Esd.  1.42.  those  things  that  are  r.  of  him 
RECORDS. 

1  ^fae. 14.23  a  copy  ofthoir  ambassneo  in  public  r. 

2  Mac.  2. 1.  it  is  also  found  in  the  r.  that  Jeremy 

RECOVERED. 
.f)id.  14.  7.  but  when  thfy  had  r.  him,  ho  fell 

1  JVf'ir.  2.  48.  they  r.  the  law  out  of  hand  of  Gentiles 
10.  K.  as  Inm  come  ngain,and  have  r.  our  country 

2  .Afac. 2. 22.  r.ajnin  ihotompio  and  freed  city 

RECOUNTED. 
2  Mac.  8.  19.  he  r.  what  holpi  their  fathers  found 

RED. 
fVisd.  10.  18.  she  brought  thorn  through  the  R.  aoa 


REJ 


[ApOCRTPftJu 


REDRESS. 

Bar.  6.  54.  nor  can  r.  a  wrung,  being  unabi', 

REFERRED. 
2  Mae.  11.36.  touching  inings  tu  be  r.  to  the  L.nff 

REFORM. 
iEsd.  14.  34.  r.  your  hearts,  vc shall  be  kept  alive 

REFORMED. 
fVisd.  9.  18.  for»<jthe  ways  of  them  which  lived  on 
the  eaith  were  r.  and  men  were  taught  the  thingd 
12.  26.  ihey  that  would  not  be  r.  by  correction 
F.ccl.  10.  25.  he  will  not  grudge  when  hu  is  r. 
23.  15.  will  never  be  r.  all  the  days  of  his  life 

REFORMEDST. 
2  Esd.  8.  12.  and  thou  r.  it  with  thy  judgment 

REFRAIN. 

IVisd.  1.  11.  and  r.  your  tongue  from  backbiting 

Ecel.  4.  23.  r.  not  to  sixjak  when  there  is  occasion 

18.  30.  but  r.  thyself  "from  thine  appetites 

REFRESHED. 

2Esd.  11.  46.  that  all  Iheearth  may  ber.  and  rctuta 

REFRESHETH. 
Ecel.  43.  22.  a  dew  coming  after  heat,  r. 

REFUGE. 
J  Mac.  10.  14.  for  it  was  their  place  ofr. 
2  Mac.  10.  28.  having  their  r.  also  to  the  Lord 
REFUSE. 

1  Esd.  2.  19.  they  will  not  only  r  to  give  tribute 
Eccl.  6.  23.  receive  advice,  .tnd  r.  nut  my  counsel 

REFUSED. 
EccZ.29.7.many  have  r.to  lend  for  others  ill  dealing 

REFUSE. 
Toh.  .5.  18.  let  it  be  as  r.  in  respect  of  our  child 
IVisd.  13.  12.  after  spending  the  r.  of  his  work 

13.  taking  the  very  r.  which  served  to  no  use 
Eccl.  27.  4.  sifteth  with  a  sieve,  the  r.  remainetti 

REGARD. 
2Esd.  8.27.  r.not  wicked  inventions  of  the  heathen 

15.  16.  Ihey  shall  nut  r.  their  kings  or  princes 
Tob.  3.  15.  command  some  r.  to  bo  had  of  me 
Eccl.  10. 19.  that  r.  not  the  law  are  dishunourabU 

20.  7.  but  a  babbler  and  a  fool  will  r.  no  time 
41.  12.  r.  thy  name,  for  that  shall  continue 

REGARDED. 
tVisd.  3.  17.  yet  shall  they  be  nothing  r. 

2  Jl/ac.  7.  12.  for  that  he  nothing  r.  the  paioii 

REGARDETH. 
Eccl.  34.  2.  whoso  r.  dreams,  is  like  hiir  that 

REGARDING. 
fVisd.  10.  8.  r.  not  wisdom,  they  gat  this  hurt 

REGIONS. 
1  Esd.  4.  28.  do  not  all  r.  fear  to  touch  himl 

REGISTER. 
1  Mae.  14.  22.  did  r.  the  things  that  they  spake 

REGISTERED. 
1  Mac.  8.  20.  we  might  be  r.  vour  confedcratef 

REHEARSE. 
Eccl.  19.  7.  r.  not  to  another  what  is  told  thee 

REJECT,  ED. 
.Jud.  Il.lO.r.not  his  word,  but  lay  it  up  in  thy  heart 
IVisd.  9.  4.  r.  me  not  from  among  thy  chihlren 
Eccl.  4.  4.  r.  not  the  supplication  of  the  afflicted 
20.  20.  a  wise  sentence  shall  be  r.  when  it  comes 

REIGN. 
Wisd.  3.  8.  and  their  Lord  shall  r.  for  over 
6.  21.  honour  wisdom,  that  vo  may  r.  for  evermorf 

REIGNED. 
fVi.'id.  14. 25.  there  r.  in  all  men  without  exceptioi 
F.ccl.  47.  13.  Solomon  r.  in  a  peaceable  lime 
1  Mac.  1. 1.  he  r.  in  his  stead,  the  first  over  Greoct 
7.  Alexander  r.  twelve  years,  and  then  died 
10.  Aniiochusr.  in  the  n7tli  year  of  the  kingdom 
6.  2.  Alexniidor  who  r.  first  among  the  Grecians 

10.  1.  by  means  whereof  he  r.  there 

11.  19.  by  this  Demetrius  r.  in  the  167th  year 

54   young  Aniiochiis,  who  r.  and  )\as  crowned 

12.  7.  letters  from  Darius,  who  r.  among  you 

REINS. 

1  .V'u;.2. 24.  when  Mattathins  saw,  his  r.  trembled 

REJOICE. 
Toh.  13.  7.  my  soul  shall  r.  in  his  greatness 

14.  love  thoe,  for  they  shall  r.  in  thy  [mace 
14.  7.  those  who  love  the  Lord  in  truth  shall  r. 

.Jud.  4.  12.  tlip  sanciiinry  for  ilio  nations  to  r.  at 
F.ccl.  8.  7.  r.  not  over  lliy  grcnlesl  enemy 

16.  2.  though  they  multiply,  r.  not  in  them 
22.23.  that  thou  ninyest  r.  in  his  prosperity 
26.  4.  rich  or  poor,  he  shall  at  all  times  r. 

30.  2.  shall  r.  of  him  among  his  ncqiiainlance 
3   and  bi'foro  his  friends  ho  shall  r.  of  him 
35.  19.  till  ho  have  made  them  to  r.  in  his  raor«y 
39.  31.  thoy  shall  r.  in  his  commanilment 
40.20.  wine  nnd  music  r.  the  ronrt 
.V).  20.  to  give  tho  lilessmg  nnd  r.  in  his  name 
.II.  29.  lot  your  soul  r.  in  his  merry  ^ 

linr.  4.  12.  lot  no  man  r.  over  mo  a  widow 

2  Mae.  15.  11.  which  did  not  a  little  r.  them 

RFJOK'F.D. 
Tnh.  14.  13.  before  his  dmth  her.  over  Nine»e 
>ri.«(/.  7,12.Ir.  in  thom  all  for  wisdom  goethbefor* 
Eccl.  30. 5.  while  ho  lived,  he  saw  and  r.  in  him 


Apocrtpba.] 


REM 


Bar  3.  34.  the  stars  shined  in  thoir  wutchos  and  r. 

4.  31.  miaernble  ure  they  thm  r.  at  ihy  Tall 
33.  for  as  she  r.  at  thy  ruin  and  was  glad 

1  Mac.  7.  48.  lor  this  the  people  r.  greatly 
14.  11.  made  peaco,  and  Israel  r.  with  yreat  jny 

RKJOICKTH. 
Eccl.  2G.  2.  a  virtuous  woman  r.  her  husband 
37.  4.  which  r.  in  the  pro.«perity  of  a  friend 
REJOICING. 

2  F.sd.  10.  22.  our  r.  is  at  an  end 
Tvb   11.  15.  his  son  went  in  r.  and  told  his  father 
Keel.  1.  ll.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  a  crown  of  r. 

18.  and  it  cnlargeth  their  r.  that  love  him 
Bar.  4.  34. 1  will  take  away  the  r.  of  h«r  multitude 
37.  lo,  thy  sons  come  r.  in  the  glory  of  Uod 

5.  5.  r.  in  the  remembrance  of  (Jod 

RELEASE,  EU. 

Prayer  of  Manass.  cannot  lill  my  head,  nor  have  r. 

1  Mac.  10.  29.  for  your  sakes  I  r.  ail  tlie  Jews 

30.  I  r.  it  from  this  day  forth 

42.  even  those  things  shall  he  r.  they  appertain 

RELIEF. 

1  Mac.  11.35.  we  discharge  them  of  all  for  their  r. 

2  Mac.  3.  10.  for  the  r.  of  widows  and  fatherless 

RELIEVING. 
Eccl.  3.  14.  r.  thy  father  shall  not  be  forgotten 
RELIGION. 

1  Mac.  1.  43.  the  Israelites  consented  to  his  r. 
2.  19.  and  fall  away  from  the  r.  of  their  fathers 

22.  to  go  from  our  r.  either  on  right  hand  or  left 

2  Mac.  6.  24.  were  now  gone  to  a  strange  r. 
8.  1.  took  all  such  as  continued  in  the  Jews'  r. 
14.  38.  jeopard  his  body  for  the  r.  of  the  Jews 

RELIGIOUS. 
Jud.  11.  17.  thy  servant  is  r.  and  serveth  God 

RELY. 

Eccl.  15.4.  he  shall  r.  on  her  and  not  be  confounded 

RELIED. 

1  Mac-  8.  12.  with  such  as  r.  on  them  kept  amity 

REMAIN. 

2  Esd.  13.  49.  he  shall  defend  his  people  that  r. 
Jud.  1 1.  17.  therefore,  my  lord,  I  will  r.  with  thee 
Eccl.  23.  27.  they  that  t.  sliall  know  there  is 

42.  2;i.  all  these  things  live  and  r.  for  ever 
44.  11.  shall  continually  r.  a  good  inheritance 

13.  their  seed  shall  r.  for  ever,  and  their  glory 
45. 15.  to  his  seed  so  long  as  the  heavens  should  r. 
Bar.  2.  21.  so  shall  ye  r.  in  the  land  that  I  gave 

6.  3.  ye  shall  r.  in  Babylon  many  years,  a  long 

REMAINED. 
Eccl.  48. 15.  there  r.  a  small  people  and  a  ruler 

REMAINETH. 
Eccl.  38. 19.  in  alHictinn  also  sorrow  r. 

REMEDY. 
fVisd.  2.  1.  in  the  death  of  a  man  there  is  no  r. 
16.  9.  nor  was  there  found  any  r.  for  their  life 
Eccl.  3'.  28.  in  puni.shment  of  proud  there  is  no  r. 

43.  22.  a  present  r.  of  all  is  a  mist  coming  speedily 

REMEDILESS. 

Esih.l6.5.  hath  enwrapped  lliem  in  r.  calamities 

REMEMBER. 

1  Esd.  3.  23.  they  r.  not  what  they  have  done 
4. 43.  r.  tliy  vow  which  thou  hast  vowed,  to  build 

2  Esd.  2.  31.  r.  thy  children  that  sleep 
8.  39.  and  I  will  r.  also  their  pilgrimage 

Tab.  3.  3.  r.  me,  and  look  on  me,  punish  me  not 
4.  4.  r.  that  she  saw  many  dangers  for  thee 

19.  therefore,  my  son,  r.  my  commandments 
6.15.dost  ihounotr.precepts  thy  father  gave  thee? 
14.  10.  r.  how  Aman  handled  Achiacharus 

Jud.  8.  2fi.  r.  what  things  he  did  to  Abraham 

13.  19.  whirh  r.  the  power  of  God  for  ever 
Eitk.  10.  5.  fur  I  r.  a  dream  which  I  saw 

14.12.  r.  O  Lord,  make  thyself  known  in  affliction 
}Visd.  10.  11.  that  they  should  r.  thy  words 
Eccl.  7.  16.  but  r.  that  wrath  will  not  tarry  long 
28.  r.  that  thou  w.ist  begot  of  them 
36.  r.  the  end  and  thou  shall  never  do  amiss 

8.  5.  r.  that  we  are  all  worthy  of  punishment 
7.  rejoice  not  over  enemy,  but  r.  that  we  die  all 

9.  12.  r.  shall  not  go  unpunished  to  their  grave 
13.  r.  that  thou  gocst  in  the  njid.st  of  snares 

12.  12.  and  thou  at  the  last  r.  my  words 

14.  12.  r.  that  death  will  not  be  long  in  coming 

15.  8.  and  men  that  are  liars  cannot  r.  her 
18.  25.  tlinu  hnst  enough,  r.  the  lime  of  hunger 
23.  14.  r.  thy  father  and  thy  mother 

18.  the  Most  High  will  not  r.  my  sins 
28. 6.  r.  thy  end,  and  let  enmity  cease,  r.  corrup- 
tion and  death,  abide  in  the  commandments 

7.  r.  the  commandments,  and  bear  no  malice 
31.  13.  r.  that  a  wicked  eye  is  an  evil  thing 
36.  8.  make  the  time  short,  r.  the  covenant 
38.  20.  drive  it  away,  and  r.  the  last  end 

.  41.  3.  r.  them  that  have  been  before  thee 
42.  15.  I  will  now  r.  the  works  of  the  Lord 
Bar.  2.  30.  in  captivity  they  shall  r.  themselves 

33.  they  shall  r.  the  way  of  their  fathers 
3.  5.  r.  not  the  iniquities  of  our  forefathers 
4.14.  r.  ye  the  capt-.vitvof  inysons  and  daughters 
'833 


.    REP 

.5u*.  9.  that  tlicy  might  not  r.  just  judgments 

1  Mac.  4.  9.  r.  bow  our  I'aihers  were  delivered 

6.  12.  I  r.  the  cvds  that  I  did  at  Jerusalem 

7.  3d.  r.  their  blasphemies,  and  sutler  them  not 
12.  II.  we  r.  you  m  the  sacrilices  we  olfer 

2  Mac.  8.  4.  r.  the  wicked  slaughter  of  infanta 

15.  8.  but  lo  r.  the  help  which  they  had  received 
REMEMBRANCE. 

2  Esd.  1.  36.  yet  they  shall  call  their  sins  to  r. 
12.47.  for  the  Highest  hath  yon  in  r. 

Tob.  12.  12.  I  did  bring  the  r.  of  your  prayers 

IVisd.  2.  4.  no  man  shall  have  our  works  in  r. 
11.  12.  a  groaning  for  the  r.  of  things  past 
10.  6.  to  put  tliiMi)  in  r.  of  the  conimundnient 

Eccl.  11.25.  in  alHicticm  there  is  no  r.  of  prosperity 
28.  1.  he  will  sutely  keep  his  sins  in  r. 
38.  23.  when  the  dead  is  at  rest,  let  his  r.  rest 
41.  1.  O  death,  how  bitter  is  the  r.  of  Ihoel 

49.  1.  the  r.  of  Josias  is  like  the  composition 

50.  16.  for  a  r.  before  the  Most  High 
Bar.  5.  5.  rejoicing  in  the  r.  of  God 

1  Mac.  2.  51.  call  to  r.  what  acts  our  fathers  did 

2  Mac.  12. 42.  the  sin  might  wholly  be  put  out  of  r. 
REMEMBERED. 

Toh.  1.  12.  because  I  r.  God  with  all  my  heart 

4.  1.  in  thai  day  Tobil  r.  the  money 

8.  2.  as  he  went  he  r.  the  words  of  Raphael 
Esth.  10.  12.  so  God  r.  his  people  and  justified 
Keel.  3.  15.  in  the  day  of  affliction  it  shall  be  r. 
/?ar.3.23.none  of  these  have  r.  the  paths  of  wisdo 

4.27.  shall  be  r.  of  him  that  brought  these  things 
Bel  38.  Daniel  said,  thou  hast  r.  me,  O  God 
1  Mac.  5.  4.  he  r.  the  injury  of  the  children  of  Bean 

REMEMBJERETH. 
1  Esd.  4.  21.  he  r.  neither  father  nor  mother 

REMEMBERING. 
Tob.  2.  C.  r.  that  prophecy  of  Amos,  as  he  said 

REMISS. 
Eccl.  4.  29.  and  in  thy  deeds  be  not  slack  and  r. 

REMOVE. 
Wisrf.  1 . 5.  r.  from  thoughts  without  understandin 
Eccl.  30.  23.  r.  sorrow  far  from  thee,  for  sorrow 

REND. 
fVisd.  4. 19.  he  shall  r.  them,  and  cast  them  down 

RENDER. 
Tob.  2.  13.  is  it  not  stolen  ?  r.  it  to  the  owners 
Eccl.  17.  23.  I  will  r.  recompence  on  their  heads 
33.  13.  to  r.  to  them  as  liketh  him  best 

RENDERED. 
IVisd.  10.  17.  she  r.  to  the  righteous  a  reward 

RENDERING. 
Esth.  16. 18.  r.  to  him  according  to  his  deserta 

RENEW. 
I  Mac.  12.  3.  that  you  should  r.  the  friendship 

16.  to  r.  the  amity  that  we  had  with  them 
RENEWED. 

I  Mac.  4.  57.  the  gates  and  the  chambers  they  r. 

5.  1.  the  nations  heard  that  the  sanctuary  was  r. 
RENEWING. 

1  Mac.  12.  10.  to  send  for  the  r.  of  brotherhood 
RENOUNCE. 

2  Esd.  14.  13.  therefore  now  r,  corruption 
RENOWN. 

Eccl.  3.  19.  many  are  in  high  place  and  of  r. 

"RENOWNED. 
J«d.ll.23.  thou  shall  be  r.  through  the  whole  earth 
Eccl.  39.  2.  be  will  keep  ihe  sayings  of  r.  men 
44.  3.  men  r.  for  their  power  giving  counsel 

1  Mac.  3.  9.  was  r.  to  the  utmost  part  of  the  earth 

5.  03.  Judas  and  his  brethren  were  greatly  r. 

6.  1.  Elymais  was  a  city  greatly  r.  for  riches 
14.  10.  so  that  his  honourable  name  was  r. 

2  Mac.  2.  22.  ihe  temple  r.  all  the  world  over 
RENT. 

1  Esd.  8.  71.  as  I  heard  these  things,  I  r.  my  clothes 

Jud.  14.  16.  therefore  he  cried  and  r.  his  garments 

19.  when  heard  these  words,  they  r.  their  coats 

Bar.  6.  31.  having   their   clothes  r.  and   heads 

and  beards  shaven 

1  Mac.  1.  5R.  had  r.  in  pieces  the  books  of  the  law 

2  Mac.  4.  38.  took  his  purple,  and  r.  off  his  clothes 
REPAIR. 

1  Esd.  2.  18.  r.  tlie  walls  of  it,  and  lay  foundation 

REPAIRED. 
Eccl.  50.  1.  who  in  his  life  r.  the  house  again 
1  Mac.  9.  50.  he  r.  the  strong  cities  in  Judea 
02.  they  r.  the  decays  thereof,  and  made  it  strong 
12.37.  they  r.  that  which  was  called  Caphcnalha 

REPAIRING. 

1  Mac.  10.  44.  for  r.  the  works  of  the  sanctuary 

REPARATION. 

1  Mac.W.  34.  all  things  con  venient  for  the  r.  thereof 
REPAY. 

2  Esd.  15.  20.  to  r.  things  that  they  have  dono 
Tob.  4.  14.  if  thou  serve  God,  he  will  also  r.  thee 
Eccl.  4.  31.  and  shut  when  thou  shouldst  r. 

12.6.  Most  High  will  r.  vengeance  to  the  ungodly 
29.  S.  when  he  should  r.  he  will  prolong  the  time 

REPAYED. 
Eccl.  35.  18.  he  r.  vengeance  to  the  heathen 
JP 


REP 

REPAYETH. 
Eccl.  20.  12.  much  for  little,  and  r.  it  soven-fuld 

REPENT. 
fy'isd.  19.  2.  ihey  would  r.  and  pursue  them 
Eccl.  17. 24.  to  tliem  that  r.  he  granted  them  return 
21.  6.  but  he  that  feareth  the  Lord  will  r. 
32.   19.  do   nothing  without  advice,   and  whe« 
thou  hast  once  done,  r.  rot 
3.3. 19.  give  not  thy  goods  to  another,  lest  it  r.  thca 
Prayer  of  ManassMiim  art  theGod  ofthem  tliatr. 

REPENTANCE. 
2  FM.  9.  11.  when  place  of  r.  was  open  to  them 
IVisd.  12.  10.  thou  gavest  them  jilace  of  r. 
Eccl.  17.  22.  give  r.  to  his  sons  and  daughters 
18.  21.  and  in  the  time  of  sins  shew  r. 
20. 3.  how  good  is  it  when  art  rei)roved  to  shew  r.J 
44.  16.  an  example  of  r.  to  all  gt aerations 
frdyero/JV/anriS^.thouhast promiseilr.and  lorgiv& 
nessjlhou  hast  appointed  r.to  me  that  am  a  sinner 
REPENTED. 
i-cc/.48.15.for  all  this  the  people  r.not  nor  departed 

REPENTEST. 
Prayer  of  Mana.is.  thou  r.  of  the  evils  of  men 

REPENTING. 
IVisd.  5.3.  they  r.aiid  groaning  for  anguish  of  spirit 

REPLENISHED. 
Ecel.  16.4.  by  one  of  understanding  shall  city  ber. 
32.  13.  who  hath  r.  thee  with  his  good  things 

REPLIED. 
Tob.%  14.  but  she  r.  upon  me,  it  was  given  as  a  gift 

REPORT. 
IVisd.  8.  18.  in  talking  with  her  is  a  good  r. 
Eccl.  31.  23.  the  r.  of  his  good  house-keeping 
Sus.  27.  was  never  such  a  r.  made  of  Susanna 

1  Mac.  12.  23.  to  make  r.  to  you  on  this  wise 
15.  36.  and  made  r.  to  him  of  these  speeches 

2  Mac.  14.  37.  Razis,  a  man  of  very  good  r. 
REPORTED. 

1  F^d.  1.  33.  are  r.  in  the  books  of  the  kings 
Jud.  11.  8.  it  is  r.  in  all  the  earth,  that  thou  only 
Eccl.  44.  8.  that  their  praises  might  be  r. 

1  Mac.  5.  14.  other  messengers,  who  r.  on  this  wise 

2  Mac.^.l'i.  the  same  things  were  r.  in  the  writings 
11. 18.  what  things  were  meet  to  be  r.  to  the  kinc 

REPOSE. 
Wisd.  8.  16.  I  am  come,  I  will  r.  myself  with  lief 

REPROOF. 
IVisd.  11.7.  for  a  manifest  r.  of  that  commandment 
E,ccl.  20.  1.  there  is  a  r.  that  is  not  comely 

REPROOFS. 
Eccl.  48. 10.  who  wast  ordained  for  r.  in  their  timet 

REPROACH. 
Tob.  3.  4.  for  a  proverb  of  r.  to  all  nations 
10.  if  I  do  this,  it  shall  be  a  r.  unto  him 

13.  take  me  out  that  I  may  hear  no  more  Ihe  '. 
.Jud.  4.  12.  and  the  sanctuary  to  profanation  and  r 

5.  21.  we  become  a  r.  before  all  the  world 

8.  22.  we  shall  be  a  r.  to  nil  them  that  possess  ua 

9.  2.  who  polluted  her  virginity  lo  her  r 
IVisd.  4.  18.  a  r.  among  the  dead  for  evermore 

5.  3.  this  was  he  whom  we  had  a  proverb  ofr. 
Eccl.  3.  II.  a  mother  in  dishonour  isar.  to  children 

6.  1.  thou  shalt  inherit  an  ill  name,  shame  and  r. 
9.  being  turned  to  enmity  will  discover  thy  r. 

23.  26.  and  her  r.  shall  not  be  blotted  out 
27.  2S.  mockery  and  r.  are  from  the  proud 
29.  23.  that  thou  hear  not  the  r.  of  thy  house 

41.  6.  their  posterity  shall  have  a  perpetual  r. 

42.  II.  list  she  make  thee  a  r.  among  the  peopio 

14.  than  a  woman  which  bringeth  shame  nndr. 
47.  4.  did  he  not  take  away  r.  from  the  people  1 

Bar.  2. 4.  to  ho  as  a  r.  and  desolation  among  all 
3.  8.  thou  hast  scattered  us  for  a  r.  and  a  curse 
6.  72.  they  shall  be  a  r.  in  the  country 

73.  better  is  the  just  man,  he  shall  be  far  from  r. 
Don.  3.  10.  become  a  shame  and  r.  to  thy  servnntt 
1  Mae.  1.  39.  her  snbhaths  were  turned  into  r. 
4-  45.  pull  it  down  lest  it  should  be  a  r.  lo  tl^m 
53.  for  the  r.  of  the  heathen  was  put  away 
REPRO.ACII. 
Eccl.  8.  5.  r.  not  a  man  thnttiirncth  from  sin 

REPROACHED. 
Tob.  3.  7.  Sara  was  »•.  by  her  father's  maids 
Ecel.  41.  7.  the  children  shall  bo  r.  for  his  sake 

REPROACHES. 
To*. 3.6. because  I  have  heard  falser,  have  sorrow 

REPROACHFUL. 
2  Jlfac.7.24.  Antioclni*  suspecting  it  to  be  a  r.  speech 

REPROACHING. 
Feci.  29.  28.  r.  of  the  lender  is  grievous  to  a  man 

REPROVE. 

2  F.sd.  12.  32.  he  shall  r.  and  upbraid  them 

14.  13.  set  thy  house  in  order,  and  r.  thy  people 

IVisd.  2.  14.  he  was  made  to  r.  our  thoughts 

18. 5.  to  r.  them,  thou  lookest  aw  ay  their  children 

Eccl.  20.  2.  it  is  much  better  to  r.  than  be  angry 

29.  gifts  stop  up  his  mouth,  that  he  cannbt  r 

REPROVED. 

JVisd.  17.  7.  thoir  vaunting  was  r.  with  disgreee 

Eccl.  30.  3.  when  thou  art  r.  to  shew  repentance 


RES 

JEfe/.21.6.hc  that  hateth  to  be  r.  is  in  way  of  dinners 
'.ti.  17. 11  ijinlul  miiii  will  not  bu  r.  but  tiiids  excuse 
2  .Mac.  4.  3J.  be  r.  him  and  willirfrmv  biiniivlf 

RKI'KOVETH. 
Jfisd.  1.  3.  his  power  when  tried,  r.  the  unwise 
Eccl.  Id.  13.  he  r.  and  nurturelh,  and  teuclieth 

REPUTATION. 

Sm«.  64.  Daniel  had  in  great  r.  insight  of  the  people 

REUUEST. 

tS  Mac.  9.  26.  I  r.  you  to  rcineinbur  the  benefits 

11.  17.  they  made  r.  for  the  performance 

REUUIRE. 

1  Esd.  4.  40.  O  king,  this  is  that  which  I  r. 
8.  •~i.  that  you  r.  no  la.x,  nor  any  imposition 

2  Ksd.  1.  3-2  whose  blood  I  will  r.  of  your  hands 
Bar.  G.  3.J.  tbougli  he  kerp  it  noi,  ihcy  will  not  r.  it 
1  Mac.  7.  \i.  a  company  of  scribes  to  r.  justice 
2.Uuc.  11.  -1.  they  r.  that  we  should  sutler  them 

REatlRED. 
1  Etd.  6.  12.  we  r.  of  thein  the  names  in  writing 

8  £*-rf.  13.21. 1  wdl  open  the  thing  that  thou  hast  r. 
Jad.  7. 24.  in  that  you  liave  not  r.  peace  of  .'\ssnr 
S  Mac.l.  10.  when  he  was  r.  he  put  out  his  tongue 

REULTIRETU. 
Keel.  8.  9.  learri  to  give  answer  as  need  r. 
2.^/oc.  6. 27.  shew  myself  such  a  one  as  mine  age  r. 

REUUISITE. 
fVisd.  16.  4.  it  was  r.  on  thc;m  should  come  poverty 

REUUITE. 
Eecl.  8.  19.  lest  he  r.  thee  with  a  shrewd  turn 
30.  G.  one  that  shall  r.  kindness  to  his  friemis 

REUUITETH. 
Eccl.  3. 31.  he  thai  r.  good  turns  is  mindful  of  that 
35.  2.  he  that  r.  a  good  turn,  otfereth  fine  Hour 

RESEMHLANCE. 
IVisd.  14.  19.  to  make  the  r.  of  the  best  fashion 
Eccl,  34.  3.  dreams  is  the  r.  of  one  thing  to  another 

RESERVE. 
Ju.d.'i.  10.  if  they  yield,  thou  shall  r  them  for  me 

RESERVED. 
Jud.  11.  13.  to  spend  first-fruits  r  for  liie  priests 
S  Mac.  4.  19.  but  to  be  r.  for  other  charges 
RESIDUE. 

9  Rsd.  11.  4.  was  greater,  yet  rested  it  with  the  r. 
19.  so  wont  it  with  all  the  r.  one  after  another 

Jud.  15.  6.  the  r.  that  dwelt  in  Bcthulia,  spoiled 

1  Mac.  3.  24.  the  r.  fled  into  land  of  Philistines 

2  Jfac.  8. 23.  the  r.  ihcy  divided  among  themselves 

RESIST. 
Jud.  11.  18.  none  of  them  that  shall  r.  thee 
Etth.  13.  11.  there  is  no  man  that  can  r.  thee 

RESISTANCE. 
1  Mac.  11. 38.  saw  that  no  r.  was  made  against  him 

RESISTED. 
Jud.  2.  2.5.  and  he  killed  all  that  r.  him 
1  Mac.  14.  7.  neither  was  there  any  that  r.  him 

RESISTETH. 
Eccl.  19.  5.  but  he  that  r.  pleasures,  crowneth  life 

RESOLVED. 
Jud.  11.  13.  are  r.  to  spend  the  first-fruits  of  corn 
Eccl.  39.  32.  I  was  r.  and  thought  on  these  things 

1  Mac.  1.  62.  many  r.  not  to  eat  any  unclean  thing 
S  Afoc.  15.1.r.  to  set  upon  them  on  the  sabbath  day 

RESOLUTE. 

2  Mac.  6.  20.  are  r.  to  stand  against  such  things 

RESORT. 
Eccl.  27.  9.  the  birds  will  r.  unto  their  like 
39.  5.  will  give  his  heart  to  r.  early  to  the  Lord 

RESORTED. 
E$tk.  14.  1.  incen  Esther  r.  unto  the  Lord 
Sua.  4.  Joacim  was  rich,  ami  to  him  r.  the  Jews 

RESPECT. 
Tob.  5.  18.  let  it  l>o  as  refuse  in  r.  of  our  child 
Wind.  4.  15.  that  he  hath  r.  unto  his  chosen 
7.  9.  all  gold  in  r.  of  her  is  as  a  little  sand 
19.  15.  but  some  r.  shall  he  had  of  those 
Ecr.l.  1().  H.  truHt  not  theirlife,  nor  r.lheir  multitude 
3.'L  )2.  ami  with  him  is  no  r.  of  persons 
4d!^  14.  and  the  l<ord  hnd  r.  unto  Jacob 

RESPECTED. 
IVisd.  2. 20.  for  by  his  own  saying  he  shall  be  r. 

RESPITE. 
I  Jfac. 12.25.  he  gave  I  hem  no  r.to  enter  his  country 

REST. 
1  Fad.  1.  58.  thn  time  of  her  desolation  shall  she  r. 
Wi>d.4.7.prcvcnted  with  death,  yol  shall  he  be  in  r. 
Keel.  6.  28.  nl  the  last  thou  shall  find  her  r. 
11. 19.  lie  snith,  I  have  found  r.  and  now  will  cat 
20. 21.  when  he  takcth  r.  he  shall  not  be  troubled 
22.  II.  iiiaki^  little  weeping  for  ihn  dead,  ho  isal  r. 

13.  dep.irt  frf)ni  him,  ami  thou  slmlt  find  r. 
24.  7.  with  all  iheoe  I  sought  r.  and  in  whoso 
8.  he  that  made  ino  cnu«e<I  my  tnbernnrlo  to  r. 
11.  likewise  in  the  beloved  city  ho  gave  me  r. 
88.  Ifi.  whoso  hcarkenelli  to  it,  shall  never  find  r. 
33.  25.  if  »ei  servant  to  hibour,  thou  niuilt  tinil  r. 
36.  21.  a  help  like  him<elf,  and  a  pill  ir  of  r. 
Jfi.  23.  whi'U  dead  is  iit  r.  let  his  remi-mhrnnco  r. 
40.  5  and  in  the  time  of  r.  upon  his  bed 
8b  •  liul*  ut  Dotliiiig  ii  hii  r.  ind  afloiward 
834 


REV 

£cc2.41.I.to  a  man  that  livoth  atr.io  hisposgeMions 
44.  23.  and  make  it  r.  on  the  head  of  Jacob 
51.  27.  how  I  have  gotten  to  mo  much  r. 

1  Mac.  7.  .50.  the  land  of  Judea  was  in  r.  a  while 
y.  57.  the  land  of  Judea  was  in  r.  two  years 

2.V/ac.  11.  25.  that  this  nation  shall  be  in  r. 
RESTED. 

fud.  10.  21.  Olofernes  r.  on  his  bed  under  a  canopy 

Keel.  47.  23.  thus  r.  Solomon  with  his  fatheis 

1  Mae.  16.  4.  who  r.  that  night  at  Mudin 

RESTETII. 
F.ccl.  5.  6.  his  indignation  r.  upon  sinners 
31.  3.  when  he  r.  he  is  nl'.ud  with  his  delicates 
RESTORE. 

2  Esd.  7.  32.  the  earth  shall  r.  those  asleep  in  her 
Tub.  10. 12.  the  Lord  of  heaven  r.  thee,  my  brother 
F.ccl.  48.  10.  wast  ordained  to  r.  the  tribes  of  Jacob 
liar.  6.  37.  they  cannot  r.  a  blind  man  to  sight 
1  Mac.  3.  43.  let  us  r.  the  decayed  estate  of  people 

15.  3.  that  I  may  r.  it  to  the  old  estate 
2.W<ic.  9.  16.  he  would  r.  all  the  holy  vessels 

11.  25.  we  have  determined  to  r.  their  temple 

12.  25.  that  he  would  r.  them  without  hurt 
14.  46.  calling  on  the  Lord  to  r.  him  those  again 

RESTORED. 

1  Esd.  6. 26.  should  be  r.  to  the  house  at  Jerusalem 

2  F.td.  12.  18.  but  shall  be  r.  to  his  beginning 
Tob.'i.l.  my  wife  Anna  was  r.to  me  with  my  son 

14. 2. his  sight,  which  was  r.to  him  after  eight  years 
IViad.  16.  12.  was  not  herb  that  r.  them  to  health 

RESURRECTION. 
2  Esd.  2. 23. 1  will  give  thee  the  first  place  in  my  r. 
2  Mac.l.H.  as  for  thee,  thoushalt  have  no  r.  to  life 
12.  43.  in  that  he  was  mindful  of  the  r. 

RETAIN. 
Eccl.  41. 16.  it  is  not  good  to  r.  all  shamefacednees 

KETIRING. 
•2  Mac.  5.  9.  he  perished,  r.  to  the  Laccdemonia  js 

RETURN. 

2  Esd.  16.  16.  so  the  plagues  shall  not  r.  again 

Tub.  5.  15.  if  ye  r.  safe,  I  will  add  something 

201  he  shall  r.  in  safely,  thy  eyes  shall  see  him 

14.5.  they  shall  r.  from  all  places  of  their  captivity 

Eecl.  4.  Id.  then  will  she  r.  the  straight  way  to  hitn 

16.  .10.  and  they  shall  r.  into  it  again 
17. 24.  but  to  them  that  repent,  he  granted  them  r. 

25.  ?-.  to  the  Lord,  and  forsake  thy  sins 
27.  9.  so  will  truth  r.  to  them  that  practi.se  in  her 
20.  5.  r.  words  of  grief,  and  complain  of  time 
40.  1.  till  the  day  they  r.  to  the  mother  of  all 

1  Mac.  3.  56.  should  r.  every  man  to  his  own  house 

10.  55.  thou  didst  r.  into  the  land  of  thy  fathers 

2  Mac.  5.  8.  in  the  end  he  had  an  unhappy  r. 

11.  29.  declared,  that  your  desire  was  to  r.  home 

RETURNED. 
Tob.  2.  5.  then  I  r.  and  wai-hed  myself 

9.  the  same  night  also  I  r.  from  the  burial 
Jud.  5.  19.  but  now  are  they  r.  to  their  God 
fVisd.'i.i .any  man  known  to  haver,  from  the  grave 
Har.  4.  28.  so  being  r.  seek  him  ten  times  more 

1  Mac.  2.  63.  because  he  is  r.  into  his  dust 
5.  54.  not  one  slain,  until  they  had  r.  in  peace 

RETURNETH. 

2  Esd.  16.  16.  as  an  arrow  r.  not  backward 
tVisd.  15.  8.  within  a  little  while  r.  to  the  same 

16.  14.  the  spirit  when  it  is  gone  forth,  r.  not 
Eccl.  26.  28.  one  that  r.  from  lighleousness  to  sin 

REVEAL. 
2  Esd.  10. 38.  the  Highest  will  r.  many  secret  things 
14.  3.  I  did  manifestly  r.  myself  to  Moses 
Tub.  12.  11.  honourable  to  r.  the  works  of  God 
£cc/. 19.8.  if  thou  canst  without  offence,  r.  them  not 

REVEALED. 
KccM.6.  to  whom  hath  the  root  of  wisdom  been  r.? 
3.  19.  but  mysteries  are  r.  to  the  meek 

REVEALETH. 
Eecl.  42.  19.  ho  r.  the  steps  of  hidden  things 

REVEALING. 
Eecl.  41.  23.  be  ashamed  of  r.  of  secrets 

REVELLLNG. 
2  Mac.  6.  4.  the  temple  was  filled  with  riot  and  r. 

REVELLINGS. 
Wisd.  14.  23.  while  tliny  made  r.  of  strange  rites 

REVENGE. 
Wisd.5. 17.  his  weapon  for  the  r.  of  his  enemies 
F.tcl.  5.  3.  for  the  Lord  will  surety  r.  thy  prido 
25.  14.  and  any  r.  but  the  r.  of  enemies 
48. 8.  who  anointed  kings  to  take  r.  and  prophets 
REVENGED. 
Jud.  13.  20.  but  tliou  hast  r.  our  ruin 
IVisd.  12.  12.  to  hi-  r.  for  the  unri;^lileou8  man 

BEVENGETII. 
F.ccl.  28. 1.  he  that  r.  shall  find  vengeance  from  L. 

REVENUE. 
2  Mae.  4.  8.  and  of  another  r.  eighty  talents 
U.  16.  woulil  out  of  his  own  r.  defray  the  charges 

REV  KNURS. 
•iMac.  3.  3.  S.deiinis  of  his  own  r.  bare  the  costs 

RKVERRNtM;. 
2  Esd.  IS.  20  call  the  kings  of  the  earth  to  r.  me 


RIC 


.AFOetTTBA. 


Jud.  10.  2:i.  she  fell  down  and  did  r.  to  him 
H  isd.  2.  10.  let  us  not  r.  the  ancient  gray  hair* 
F.ccl.  4. 22.  let  not  the  r.  of  any  man  cause  thee  fall 
7.29.  fear  the  Lord  with  thy  soul,  and  r.  hispriMU 

26.  24.  an  honest  woman  will  r.  her  husband 
REVERENCED. 

Jud.  14.  7.  she  fell  at  Judith's  feet  and  r.  her 
Bar.  4. 15.  who  neither  r.  old  man,  nor  pitied  child 

REVEREND. 
2  Mac.  15.  12.  a  good  man  r.  in  conversation 

REVILING. 
Eccl.  22.  24.  as  smoke  before  fire,  so  r.  before  blood 

27.  21.  and  after  r.  there  mav  be  reconcileineot 
REVILING3. 

Eecl.  27.  15.  their  r.  are  grievous  to  the  ear 

REVIVED. 
1  Mac.  13.7.pcople  heard  these  words,thcir  spirit  r 

REVOKED. 
1  Mac.  11.  36.  and  nothing  hereof  shall  be  r. 

REVOLT. 
1  Mac.  2.  15.  such  as  compelled  the  people  to  r. 
13.  16,  that  when  he  is  at  liberty  he  may  not  r- 

REVOLTED. 
Tnb.  1.  5.  all  the  tribes  which  together  r. 

1  Mac.  7.24.  betook  vengeance  of  them  that  had  r. 

2  Mac.  1.  7.  r.  from  the  holy  land  and  kingdoui 
5.  11.  the  king  thought  that  Judea  had  r. 

REWARD. 
2  Esd.  2.  35.  be  ready  to  the  r.  of  the  kingdom 

3.  33.  and  yet  their  r.  appenreth  not 

4.  35.  when  conielh  the  fruit  of  the  floor  of  our  r.1 

7.  35.  the  work  shall  follow,  the  r.  shall  be  shewed 

8.  Xl.  the  just  shall  out  of  their  own  deeds  receiver 
39.  I  will  remember  the  r.  that  they  shall  have 

.Jud.  7.  15.  thue  shalt  thou  render  them  an  evil  r. 
Wisd.  5.  15.  their  r.  also  is  with  the  Lord 

10.  17.  to  the  righteous  a  r.  of  their  labours 
Eeel.  2.  8.  believe  him,  and  your  r.  shall  not  fail 

11.  18.  and  this  is  the  portion  of  his  r. 
22.  the  blessing  of  the  L.  is  in  the  r.  of.the  godly 
26.  to  r.  a  man  according  to  his  ways 

17.  23.  afterward  he  will  rise  up  and  r.  them 

36.  16.  r.  them  that  wait  for  thee,  let  thy  prophets 
51.  22.  the  Lord  hath  given  me  a  tongue  for  my  r 

30.  in  his  time  he  will  give  you  your  r. 
2  Mac.  5. 7.  received  shame  for  the  r.  of  his  treason 
8.  Xl.  so  he  received  a  r.  for  his  wickedness 

15.  33.  they  should  hand  up  the  r.  of  his  madness 
REWARDED. 

Tub.  14.  10.  remember  how  he  r.  him  again 
F.sth.  12. 5.  to  serve  in  court,  and  for  this  he  r.  him 
Wisd.  3. 5.  a  little  chastised,  they  shall  be  greatly  r. 

1  Mac.  II.  5:t.  nor  r.  him  according  to  the  benefiui 

2  Mac.  4.  38.  thus  the  T^ord  r.  him  as  he  deserved 
REWARDS. 

1  Esd.  4.  39.  there  is  no  accepting  of  persons  or  r. 
1  .Woe.  2.  18.  with  silver  and  gold,  and  many  r. 
10.28.  will  grant  you  immunities,  and  give  your 

16.  19.  he  might  give  them  silver,  gold,  and  r. 
RICH. 

1  Esd.2.  19.  mind  of  the  poor  man  and  r.to  be  one 

21.  and  it  maketh  every  heart  r. 
Eeel.  8.  2.  be  not  at  variance  with  a  r.'man 

10.  22.  whether  he  be  r.  noble,  or  poor 
30.  and  the  r.  man  is  honoured  for  his  riches 

11.  18.  there  is  that  wa.xeth  r.  by  bis  wariness 
21.it  is  ea>!y  on  a  sudden  to  make  a  poor  man  r 

13.  3.  the  r.  man  haihdone  wrong,  yet  thrcateneth 

22.  when  a  r.  man  hath  fallen,  hath  many  helpers 

23.  when  a  r.  man  spoaketh,  every  man  holdeth 

30.  14.  than  a  r.  man  that  is  afflicted  in  body 

31.  3.  the  r.  hath  great  labour  in  gathering 
8.  hlosscd  is  the  r.  that  is  without  blemish 

44.6.r.men  furnished  with  ability, living  peaceably 
45.  8.  he  strengthened  him  wilh  r.  garments 
■Si/.s.  4.  now  Joacim  was  a  great  r.  man 

1  Mac.  6.  2.  that  there  was  in  it  a  very  r.  temple 

2  Mac.  7.  24.  make  him  both  a  r.  and  happy  mao 
RICHER. 

ICisd.  8.  .">.  what  is  r.  than  wisdom  that  workelh 
Eecl.  13.  2.  wilh  one  niiehlior  and  r.  than  thvsolf 

RICHE.S. 
IVisd.  5.  8.  or  what  good  hath  r.  brought  usT 
8.  ,5.  if  r.  be  a  pos.iession  lo  bo  desired  in  Hfe 
18.  in  the  works  of  her  hands  nro  infinite  r. 
Ecil.  10. 8.  because  of  injuries,  and  r.  got  by  deceit 

30.  the  rich  man  is  honoured  lor  his  r. 

31.  honoured  in  poverty,  how  much  more  in  r.  / 
he  that  is  dishonoured  in  r.howmurh  in  poverty. 

11.  14.  poverty  and  r.  come  of  the  Lord 

13.  24.  r.  are  gooil  to  him  thai  hnlli  no  sin 

14.  3.  r.  .ire  not  comply  for  a  niggard 
21.  4.  lo  terrify  and  do  wrong  will  waste  r. 
24.  17.  my  flowers  are  the  fruit  of  honour  and  w. 
2»*.  10.  nrcordinj  to  his  r.  his  nnger  riseth 

30.  16.  thcro  is  no  r.  above  n  sound  body 

31.  1.  watching  for  r.  consiimnth  the  flesh 
3.  111.-  rich  liuth  grent  labour  in  g-ithering  r 

37.  6.  bo  not  unmindful  of  liini  in  thy  r 
40.  26.  r.  and  slrsnglh  lift  up  tho  heart 


*ro:RYPHi.J 


RIG 


liar.  6.  35.  Ihey  can  neither  give  r.  nor  money 
1  Mac.  4.  -23.  to  spoil  tenia,  where  they  got  great  r. 
6.  1.  that  Elyiiiuis  was  a  city  renowned  lor  r. 
8  Mac.  3.  6.  multitude  of  their  r.  waa  innumerable 

RIDKR. 
it  Mac.  3.  515  a  horse  with  a  terrible  r.  upon  him 

RIDERS. 
Jud.  2.  3.  horses  with  their  r.  twelve  thousand 

RIDICULOUS. 
Ecct.  3-4.  18.  he  sacrilketh,  hisotfering  isr. 
RIFLED. 

1  Mac.  1.  01.  they  r.  their  houses,  and  slew  them 

RIGHT. 

2  Esd.  10.  39.  he  hath  seen  that  ihy  way  is  r. 
Tob.3.  17  belonged  to  Tobias  by  r.  of  inheritance 

6.  11.  for  to  thee  doth  the  r.  of  her  appertain 
Jud.  8.  11    your  words  you  have  spoken  are  not  r. 
>fV*(i.9.9.  knew  what  waa  r.  in  thy  conimandnients 

10.  10.  she  guided  him  in  r.  patlis,  shewed  him 
Keel.  49.  9.  and  directed  them  that  went  r. 
Dan.  3.  4.  thy  ways  are  r.  all  thy  judgments  truth 
1  Mac.  9.  15.  whodiscomtited  the  r.  wing 

RIGHT-AIMING.' 
If^ind.  5.  21.  r.  thunderbolts  shall  go  abroad 
RIGHT-HAND. 

1  Esd.  4.  29.  silting  at  the  r.-hand  of  the  king 

2  Esd.  3.  Ij.  which  thy  r.-hand  had  planted 
16.  13.  strong  is  his  r.-hand  that  beiidelh 

fVisd.  5.  Ki.  with  his  r.-hand  shall  he  cover  them 
Eccl.  12.  12.  neither  let  him  sit  at  thy  r.-hand 
21. 19.  doctrine  to  fools,  like  manacles  on  r.-hand 
49.  11.  Zorobabel  was  as  a  signet  on  the  r.-hand 
Bar.  6.  15.  he  hath  also  in  his  r.-hand  a  dagger 
Mac.  4.  34.  gave  him  his  r.-hand  with  oaths 

14.  33.  he  stretched  out  his  r.-hand  to  the  temple 

15.  15.  Jeremias  holding  forth  his  r.-hand 

RIGHTEOUS. 
8  Esd.  3.  11.  Noah,  of  whom  came  all  r.  men 
.7"oA.  2. 14.  where  are  thy  alms,  and  thy  r.  deeds? 

13.  9.  he  will  have  mercy  on  the  sons  of  the  r. 
Esth.  11.  7.  they  might  fight  against  the  r.  people 

9.  the  whole  r.  nation  was  troubled 

14.  7.  worshipped  their  gods,  O  Lord,  thou  art  r. 
H'isd.  2.  12.  let  us  lie  in  wait  for  the  r. 

3.  1.  the  souls  of  the  r.  are  in  the  hand  of  God 

10.  the  ungodly  which  have  neglected  ther. 

4.  7.  bnt  though  the  r.  be  prevented  with  death 

16.  the  r.  thai  is  dead  shall  condemn  the  ungodly 

5.  15.  but  the  r.  live  for  evermore 

10.  4.  wisdom  directed  the  course  of  the  r. 

5.  she  found  out  the  r.  and  preserved  him 

6.  she  delivered  the  r.  man,  who  fled  from  fire 
10.  when  the  r.  fled  from  his  brother's  wrath 
13.  when  ther.  was  sold,  she  forsook  him  not 

17.  rendered  to  the  r.  a  reward  of  their  labours 
20.  therefore  the  r.  spoiled  the  ungodly 

12. 9.  to  bring  the  ungodly  under  the  hand  of  r. 
15.  as  thou  art  r.  thyself,  thou  orderest  all 

16.  17.  for  the  world  tightelh  for  the  r. 
23.  that  the  r.  might  be  nourished 

18.  9.  the  r.  children  of  good  men  did  sacrifice 
20.  the  tasiing  of  death  touchelh  ther.  also 

19.  17.  as  those  were  at  the  doors  of  the  r.  man 
Eccl.  18.  2.  the  Lord  only  is  r.  and  none  other 

27.  29.  that  rejoice  at  the  fall  of  the  r.  be  taken 
35.  6.  the  oflTering  of  the  r.  makes  the  altar  fat 
44.  17.  Noah  was  found  r.  in  the  time  of  wrath 
Bar.  2.  9.  for  the  Lord  is  r.  in  all  his  works 
Dan.  3.64.0  ye  spirits  and  souls  of  ther.  bless  Lord 
Sus.  3.  her  parents  also  were  r.  and  taught  her 
PrayrrofManass.G.ofour  fathers  and  their  r.secd 
i2  Mac.  1.  24.  who  art  strong,  and  r.  and  merciful 

12.  6.  and  calling  upon  God  the  r.  judge 

RIGHTEOUSNESS. 

3  K.5<f.  511.  ier.  that  maketh  a  man  righteous  gone 

7.  44.  r.  is  grown,  and  truth  is  sprung  up 

8.  30.  love  Ihem  that  put  iheir  trust  in  thy  r. 
32.  to  us,  namely,  that  have  no  works  of  r. 

Tab.  12.  8.  a  little  withr.  is  belter  than  much 

13.  8.  and  let  all  praise  him  for  his  r. 

14.  11.  what  almsdoth,  and  how  r.  doth  deliver 
ff'isd.  1. 1,  love  r.  ye  that  be  judges  of  the  earth 

15.  for  r.  is  immortal,  but  ungodly  men  called 
2.  22.  neither  hoped  they  for  the  wages  of  r. 
5.  6.  we  have  erred,  nnd  the  light  of  r.  hath  not 
shined  on  us,  the  sun  ofr.  rose  not  upon  us 

18.  be  shall  put  on  r.  as  a  breast-plate 

8.  7.  if  a  man  love  r.  her  labours  are  virtues 

9.  3.  order  the  world  according  to  equity  and  r. 
12.  16.  for  thy  power  is  the  beginning  ofr. 

14.  7.  for  blHS.<!ed  is  the  word  whereby  r.  cometh 

15.  3.  for  to  know  thee  is  perfect  r. 
Eccl.  26. 28.  one  that  turneth  from  r.  to  sin 

27.  8.  if  thou  followest  r.  thou  ^alt  obtain  her 

44.  10.  whose  r.  hath  not  been  forgotten 

45.  26.  give  wisdom,  to  judge  his  people  in  r. 
Bar.  1.  15.  to  the  Lord  our  God  belongeth  r. 
2.  17.  the  dead  will  give  neither  praise  nor  r. 
5.  4.  thy  name  shall  be  called,  the  Peace  ofr. 

;  JUac-  Z.  52.  and  it  was  imputed  to  him  for  r, 
S3i 


ROM 

1  Mae.  7.  18.  there  is  neither  troth  nor  r.  in  them 

RING. 

2  Esd.  5.  42.  I  will  liken  my  judgment  to  a  r. 

RINGS. 
Jud.  10.  4.  her  chains,  and  her  r.  and  ear-ringa 

RISE. 
Tab.  6.  17.  r.  up  both  of  you  and  i)ray  to  God 

12.  13.  when  thou  didst  not  delay  to  r.  up 
Jud.  16.  17.  woe  to  nations  that?',  ag.  my  kindred 
Eccl.  8.  11.  r.  not  up  in  anger  at  the  presence 

17.  23.  afterward  he  will  r.  up  and  reward  ihem 
32. 11.  r.  up  betimes,  and  be  nol  the  last 
RISEN. 

1  Esd.  3. 9.  when  the  king  is  r.  some  will  give  him 
.Jud.  13.  5.  the  enemies  which  are  r.  against  us 

2  Mac.  12.  44.  they  that  were  slain  should  have  r. 

RISETH. 

Eccl.  31.  20.  he  r.  early,  and  his  wits  are  with  him 

RISING. 

1  Esd.  8.  7.3.  r.  from  the  fast  with  my  clothes  rent 

9.  1.  Esdras  r.  from  the  court  of  the  temple 

2  Esd.  15.  20.  which  are  from  the  r.  of  the  sun 
Eccl.  43. 2.  declaring  at  r.  a  marvellous  in.strument 

1  Mac.  6.  33.  then  the  king  r.  very  early,  marched 

2  Mac.  4.  40.  whereupon  the  common  people  r. 

RIOT. 
2  Mac.  6.  4.  for  the  temple  was  filled  with  r. 

RIOTOUSLY. 
Eccl.  14.  4.  others  that  shall  spend  his  goods  r. 

RIPE. 
IVisd.  4.  5.  the  fruit  unprofitable,  not  r.  to  eat 
Eccl.  26.  17.  so  is  the  beauty  of  the  face  in  r.  age 

RIVER. 
2  Esd.  1.  23.  tree  in  water,  and  made  the  r.  sweet 
5.  25.  of  all  depths  thou  hast  filled  thee  one  r. 
Tob.  6. 1.  they  came  in  the  evening  to  the  r.  Tigris 
Esth.  10.  6.  a  little  fountain  became  a  r. 
IVisd.  11.  6.  fountain  of  a  perpetual  running  r. 
19.  10.  how  the  r.  cast  up  a  muliitude  of  frogs 
Eccl.  4.  26.  and  force  not  the  course  of  the  r. 
24.  30.  I  also  came  out  as  a  brook  from  a  r. 
31.  my  brook  became  a  r.  and  my  r.  became  a  sea 

39.  22.  his  blessing  ccjvered  the  dry  land  as  a  r. 

40.  13.  the  goods  of  unjust  shall  be  dried  upas  a  r. 
16.  growing  on  every  water  and  bank  of  a  r. 

44.  21.  from  the  r.  to  the  utmost  part  of  land 
1  Mac.  11.  7.  gone  to  the  r.  called  Eleutherus 

RIVERS. 

1  Esd.  4.  23.  goeth  to  sail  on  the  sea,  and  uponr. 

2  Esd.  15.  41.  many  W'aters,  that  all  fields  may  be 

full,  and  all  r.  with  abundance  of  great  waters 
Eccl.  50.  8.  as  lilies  by  the  r.  of  waters 
Dan.  3.  56.  O  ye  seas  and  r.  bless  ye  the  Lord 

ROB. 
1  Esd.  4.  23.  he  goeih  his  way  to  r.  and  to  steal 

ROBBED. 
1  Esd.  4.  24.  when  he  hath  stolen,  spoiled,  and  r. 

ROBBERS, 
Bar.  6.  18.  lest  their  gods  be  spoiled  with  r. 
57.  nor  able  to  escape  either  from  thieves  or  r. 
ROBE. 
Eccl.  6.  29.  and  her  chains  shall  be  a  r.  of  glory 

31.  thou  shall  put  her  on  as  a  r.  of  honour 
27.  8.  thou  shall  put  her  on  as  a  glorious  long  r. 

45.  7.  and  he  clothed  him  with  a  r.  of  glory 
8.  with  breeches,  and  a  long  r.  and  the  ephod 

50.  11.  when  he  put  on  the  r.  of  honour 

1  Mac.  6.  15.  he  gave  him  the  crown  and  his  r. 

10.  20.  therewithal  he  sent  him  a  purple  r. 
21.  at  the  feast  Jonathan  put  on  the  holy  r. 

13.  37.  the  scarlet  r.  which  ye  sent  to  us 

ROBOAM. 
Eccl.  47.  23.  of  his  seed,  ho  left  behind  him  R. 

ROCK. 
Wisd.  y.  4.  water  given  them  out  of  the  flinty  r. 
Eccl.  40.  15.  are  as  unclean  roots  on  a  hard  r. 
48.  17.  he  digged  the  hard  r.  with  iron 

2  Mac.  14.  45.  and  standing  upon  a  sleep  r. 

ROCKS. 
2  Esd.  16.  28.  hide  themselves  in  The  clefu  ofr. 
Jud.  10.  15.  r.  shall  melt  as  wax  at  thy  presence 

ROD. 
Eccl.  30.  1.  he  causelh  him  oft  to  feel  the  r. 

ROE. 
Eccl.  27.  20.  he  is  as  a  r.  escaped  out  of  the  snare 

ROLLING. 
Eccl.  33.  5.  his  thoughts  are  like  a  r.  axle-tree 

ROMANS. 
1  Mac.  8.  1.  Judas  had  heard  of  the  fame  of  the  R. 
21.  so  that  matter  pleased  the  R.  well 
23.  good  success  be  to  the  R.  and  to  the  Jews 
29.  according  to  these  articles  did  the  R. 
12.  4.  upon  this  the  R.  gave  them  letters 
16.  sent  them  to  the  R.  to  renew  the  amity 

14.  40.  the  R.  had  called  the  Jews  their  friends 
15. 16.  Lucius  consul  of  the  R.  to  king  Ptidemee 

2Mac.  8.  10.  which  the  king  was  to  pay  to  the  R. 
36.  to  make  good  lo  the  R.  their  tribute 

11.  34.  the  R.  also  sent  unto  them  a  letter;  the 
ambassadors  ofthe  r.  send  greeting  to  the  Jews 


RUI 

ROME. 

1  Mac.  1.  10.  who  had  been  a  hostage  at  R. 

8.  17.  send  them  lo  R.  to  make  a  league  of  amity 

19.  tlioy  wentlo  R.  a  very  great  journey 

12.  3.  so  they  wont  to  R.  and  entered  the  senate 
14.16.  when  il  was  heard  alR.Jonalhan  was  dead 
24.  after  this  Simon  sent  Numenius  to  ll. 

2  Mac.  4.  11.  who  went  nmbassailor  lo  R. 

ROOK. 

1  Esd.  6.  4.  by  whose  appointment  build  ye  this  r.t 

2  Mac.  1.  16.  and  opening  a  privy  door  ofthe  r. 

ROOM. 
Tob.  2.  4.  I  start  up,  and  look  him  up  into  a  r. 
H'isd.  13. 15.  when  he  had  made  a  convenient  r. 

ROOT. 

1  Esd.  8.  78.  that  there  should  he  left  us  a  r. 
87.  and  didst  give  unto  us  such  a  r. 

8H.  till  thou  hadsl  left  us  neilhjr  r.  nor  name 

2  Esd.  3.  22.  with  the  malignity  ofthe  r. 

5.  3.  the  land  that  thou  seest  now  lo  have  r. 
28.  on  the  one  r.  hast  thou  prepared  others 

8.  41.  neither  doth  all  that  is  i)lanled  take  r. 

53.  the  r.  of  evil  is  sealed  up  from  you 
IVisd.  3.  1.5.  the  r.  of  wisdom  shall  never  fall  away 

15.  3.  to  know  thy  power  is  the  r.  of  immortality 
Eccl.  1.  6.  hath  ther.  of  wisdom  been  revealed? 

20.  the  r.  of  wisdom  is  to  fear  the  Lord 

3.  2H.  the  plant  of  wickedness  hath  taken  r. 

23.  25.  her  children  shall  not  take  r. 

24.  12.  I  took  r.  in  an  honourable  people 

47.  22.  wherefore  he  gave  a  remnant  unto  Jacob 
and  out  of  him  he  gave  a  r.  unto 
David 
1  Mac.  1.  10.  there  came  out  of  them  a  wicked  r. 

ROOTS. 
fVisd.  7.  20.  diversities  of  plants,  and  virtue^  ofr. 
Eccl.  10.  15.  Lord  plucked  up  the  r.  ofthe  proud 
40.  15.  but  are  as  unclean  r.  6n  a  hard  rock 

ROOT. 
Eccl.  49.7.  that  he  mighlr.  out, afflict,  and  destroy 

1  Mac.  2.  40.  they  will  now  r.  us  out  ofthe  eartb 
3.  35.  to  desiroy  and  r.  out  Ihestrcngih  of  Israel 

2Jl/ac.  8.9.tor.oui  the  whole  generation  ofthe  Jews 

12.  7.  to  r.  out  all  ihem  of  ihe  city  of  Juppe 

ROOTED. 
Wisd.  4. 4.  by  force  of  winds  ihey  shall  be  r.  out 

ROOTETH. 
Eccl.'S.  9.  the  curse  ofthe  motherr.out  foundation* 

ROOTING. 
IVisd.  4.  3.  nor  take  deep  r.  from  bastard  slips 

ROAR. 
Bar.  6.  32.  they  r.  and  cry  before  their  gods 
ROARING. 

2  Esd.  11.  37.  as  a  r.  lion  chased  out  ofthe  wood 
12.31.  the  lion  thou  sawcst  r.  and  speaking 

IVisd.  17.  19.  or  a  r.  voice  of  most  savage  beastl 

1  Mac.  3.  4.  like  a  lion'.s  whelp  r.  for  his  prey 

ROSE. 
Eccl.  39.  13.  bud  forth  as  a  r.  growing  by  the  brook 

ROSE-BUDS. 
IVisd.Z.  8.  let  us  crown  ourselves  with  r.-buds 

ROSE-PLANT. 
Eccl.  24. 14. 1  was  exalted  as  a  r.-plant  in  Jericho 

ROSE. 

IVisd.  5.  6.  the  sun  of  riehteousness  r.  not  on  us 

ROSES. 

2  Esd.  2. 19.  mountains  whereon  grow  r.  aniUilie* 

ROSIN. 
Dan.  3.  23.  to  make  the  oven  hot  with  r.  and  pitch 

ROASTED. 
Tob.  6.  5.  when  thev  had  r.  the  fish,  thev  eat  it 

ROUGH. 
JVisd.  12.  9.  or  to  destroy  them  with  oner,  word 

ROUGHLY. 
2  Mac.  14.  30.  he  entreated  him  morer.  than  wont 

ROUGHNESS. 
Eccl.  10.  21.  r.  and  pride  is  the  losing  thereof 

ROYAL. 
1  Esd.  3.  15.  sat  down  in  the  r.  seat  of  judgment 
IVisd.  18. 15.  leaped  down  out  of  thy  r.  throne 

1  Mac.  3.  32.  he  left  Lysias  one  ofthe  blood  r. 
37.  the  king  departed  fioin  Antioch  his  r.  city 

6.  43.  one  ofthe  beasts  armed  with  r.  harness 

2  Mac.  4.  11.  the  r.  privileges  granted  to  the  Jews 

RUB. 
Tob.  11.  8.  being  pricked  therewith,  he  shall  r. 

RUBBED. 
Tob.U.  12.  when  his  eves  besan  to  smart,  he  r.them 

RUDDY. 
Eslh.  15. 5.  she  was  r.  through  perfection  ofbeauty 

RUDE. 
Eccl.  8.  4.  jest  not  with  a  r.  man,  lest  be  disgraced' 

rudi:ly. 

2  Mac.  12.  14.  that  thev  hehavej  themselves  r. 

RUDENESS. 
Ecci.21.24.  it  is  ther.  of  a  man  to  hearken  at  door 

RUIN. 
2  F.sd.  3.  1.  after  r.  of  the  city,  I  was  in  Babylon 
./«(/.  5.  20.  consider,  that  this  shall  be  their  r. 

13.  20.  hast  not  spared,  but  hast  revenged  our  r 


SAC 

Ece  ■  4.    9.  ihe  will  give  him  over  to  his  own  r. 
31.  6.  gold  liiith  bueii  ihc  r.  of  luany 

RUINS. 
£ccZ.  49. 13.Ncemias,  who  raised  up  our  r.  again 

RULE. 
1  Esd.  4.  2.  thut  bear . .  over  sea  and  liinil 
15.  all  the  people  lliat  bearr.  by  sea  utid  lund 

9.  4.  as  the  elders  that  bearr.  appiiinled 
IVisd.  6.  2.  give  ear,  you  that  r.  the  |x-ople 
Eccl.  19.  6.  he  that  can  r.  his  ton^'ue,  chull  live 

a.  S'J.  it  shall  not  haver,  over  them  that  Tear  God 
44.  3.  such  as  did  bear  r.  in  their  kingdoms 
1  .Vac.  i.  8.  his  servants  bear  r.  every  one  in  place 
().  27.  neither  shalt  thou  be  able  to  r.  them 

RL'Lirrn. 

1  Fsd.  4.  14.  who  is  it  then  that  r.  them  1 

UL'LER. 
F.ccl.  9. 17.  the  wii-e  r.  of  the  people,  for  his  spnech 

10.  2.  as  the  r.  ofthe  eity  is,  such  are  all  they 
17.  17.  he  set  u  r.  over  every  people,  but  Israel 
41.  18.  ofun  oftence  before  a  judge  and  r. 

1  .Vac. 2. 17.  thou  art  ar.aiid.au  honourable  man 
6.  14.  whom  he  made  r.  over  all  his  realm 
11.57. 1  appoint  thee  ruler  over  four  governments 

2  .Mac.  4.  27.  Sostralusr.  ofthe  castle  required 
13.  2.  Lysias  his  protector,  and  r.  of  his  alFairs 

RULERS. 
F.ccl.  33.  18.  hearken  ye  r.  ofthe  congregation 
41").  18.  he  dt'siroyed  the  r.  ofthe  Tyrians 

1  .Vac.  14.  20.  ther.  ofthe  Lacedemonians 

RULES. 

2  Mdc.2.  28.  to  follow  the  r.  of  an  abridgment 

RULING. 

1  .Vac.  6.  56.  to  take  to  him  the  r.  ofthe  affairs 

RUMOUR. 

2  Mac.  5.  5.  when  theie  was  gone  fortli  a  false  r. 

RU.V. 

1  F.'ni.4.2G.many  have  r.out  of  their  wits  for  women 
fyiiJ.  3.  7.  they  shall  shine  and  r.  to  and  fro 

10.  29.  and  sliiill  r.  away  as  unprofitable  water 

Keel.  33. 31.  if  entreat  him  evil,  and  he  r.  from  thee 

3.1.  15.  do  not  tears  r.  d<iwn  the  widow's  cheeks'? 

2.1/ac.G.  11.  others  that  had  r.  together  into  caves 

RUNNETH. 
Eccl.  43.  5.  at  his  commandment  it  r.  hastily 

RUNNING. 
Wisd.  17.  18.  or  a  fall  of  water  r.  violently 
19.  or  a  7-.  tliat  could  not  he  seen  of  b'';i8ta 

2  Mac.  5.  2.  there  were  seen  horsemen  r.  in  the  air 
3.  encountering  and  r.  one  against  another 
SG.r.lhro' the  city  with  weapons,slcw  multitudes 

$1.  2.  the  muliittide  r.  to  defend  themselves 
12.  16.  a  lake  adjoininrr,  was  seen  r.  with  blood 
RUSH. 
2  r.sd.  15.  60.  they  shall  r.  on  the  idle  city 
.fud.  15.  4.  that  nil  should  r.  on  their  enemies 

1  Mac.  4.  2.  might  r  'n  upon  the  camp  ofthe  Jews 

RUSHED. 
Jud.  15.  3.  the  chiidren  of  Israel  r.  out  upon  them 
Sus.  26.  the  servants  r.  in  at  the  privy  door  to  see 

RUSHING. 
Jud.  15.  2.  but  r.  out  all  together  they  (led 

2  .Vac.  12.  37.  and  r.  unawares  upon  Gorgias 
14.43.  llie  multitude  nl.io  r.  within  the  doors 

RUST. 
Feci.  12. 11.  his  r.  not  being  altogether  wiped  away 
29.  10.  let  it  not  r.  under  a  stone  to  be  lopt 
JSar.(ri2.tlii:se  gods  cannot  save  themselves  from  r. 

RUSTETH. 
Eccl.  12.  10.  fur  as  iron  r.  so  is  his  wickedness 


s. 


s.\nn.\TH. 

IJIIae.  1.  43.  sacrifice  to  idols,  and  profane  the  *. 
2.  38.  they  rose  against  them  in  buttle  on  the  s. 
2  JHac.  5.  25.  did  forUiar  till  holy  day  ofthe  s. 
2il.  that  were  going  to  the  celebrating  ofthe  *. 
8.  26.  for  it  waB  the  day  before  the  «. 
28.  after  s.  when  they  had  given  ofthe  spoils 
12.  38.  they  ki^pt  the  s.  in  the  same  place 
S.VnU.\TH  DAY. 

1  .Vac.  2.  32.  made  war  against  them  on  the  f.-datj 
34.  nor  do  commandment  to  profane  the  s.-day 
41.  whoso  will  make  hmtlc  with  us  on  the  s.day 

2  Mac.  6.  II.  hid  run  to  keep  the  s.-dny  secretly 
15. 1.  resolved  In  set  upon  them  on  the  l.-day 

3.  that  had  commanded  the  t.-dny  to  be  kept 
S.\RB.\TII-I).\YS. 
./u/f.  10. 2.  house  in  which  she  ahodn  'ytwhnn.-days 
2  .Vac.  6.  6.  nor  was  il  lawful  to  keep  $.-daui 

S.VBRATHg. 
1  FM.\.  58.  till  the  land  had  enjoyed  her  *. 
5.  .52.  the  snciificij  ofthe  ».  and  new-moons 
Jxid.  8.  6.  «ave  Ihe  ».  and  eves  ofthe  nrw-mooni 
]  Mac.  1.  .39.  her.H.  were  turned  into  reproach 
45.  and  that  they  should  profane  the  i. 
SACKCLOTH. 
Jud.  i.  10.  aiid  their  (frvniils  put  f.  OD  thai/  lolni 
830 


SAF 

Jud.i.  ll.cast  ashes  on  tbeir  heads,  spread  nut  their 
s.  before  the  Ld.  also  they  pul  ;i. about  the  altar 
14.  the  priests  hud  tbeir  loins  girt  with  s. 

9.  1.  uncovered  the  .«.  w  herewith  she  was  clothed 

10.  3.  she  pulled  otfthe  s.  which  she  had  on 
Keel.  25. 17.  and  daikcneth  her  countenance  like  s. 
/iar.  4.  20.  IJiave  put  on  me  the  *.  of  iny  prayer 

1  Mac.  2.  14.  put  on  j>.  and  mourned  very  sore 

3.  47.  then  they  fasted  that  day  and  put  on  s. 
iMac.  3.  19.  the  women  girt  with  s.  abounded 

10.  25.  and  girded  their  loins  with  s. 
SACRED. 

2  Mac.  G.  11.  for  the  honour  ofthe  most  s.  day 

SACRIFICE. 
Tob.  1.  4.  that  all  the  tribes  should  s.  there 
Jud.  16.  16.  all  s.  is  too  little  for  a  sweet  savour 
IVisd.  18.9.  the  children  of  good  men  did  a. secretly 
Keel.  7.  31.  and  the  «.  of  sanctitication 
31.  7.  a  siuinbling-hlock  to  them  that  s.  to  it 
35.  7.  the  5.  of  a  just  man  is  accepialile 
Dan.  3.  15.  nor  is  there  prince,  or  s.  or  oblation 

1  Mac.  1.  47.  and  s.  swine's  flesh  and  unclean  beasts 
51.  commanding  the  cities  of  JudatOf. 

59.  they  did  £.  upon  the  idol  altar 

4.  53.  and  offered  s.  according  to  the  law 

56.  sacrificed  the  s.  of  deliverance  and  praise 

2  Mac.  1.  18.  was  given  when  Neeniias  offered  s. 
23.  made  a  prayer  whilst  the  a.  was  consuming 

2.  9.  he  being  wise  offered  the  s.  of  dedication 

3.  32.  offered  a  J?,  for  the  health  ofthe  mini 

4.  19.  to  carry  silver  to  the  s.  of  Hercules ;  which 
the  bearers  thought  fit  not  to  bestow  u|)on  the  s. 

2U.  this  money  was  ajipointed  to  Hercules'  »■. 
6.  21.  as  if  he  did  eat  of  lle.-di  from  the  *■. 
10.  3.  they  offered  a  «.  after  two  years 

13.  23.  Philip  offered  s.  honoured  the  temple 

SACRIFICED. 
Tob.  1.5.  house  of  Nephthali^.  to  the  heifer  Baal 
Bar.  6.  28.  for  the  things  that  are  *.  unto  them 
I  Mac.  1.  43.  many  ofthe  Israelites  s.  to  idols 

4.  56.  they  «.the  sacrifice  of  deliverance  and  praise 

SACRIFICES. 
1  Esd.  1.  12.  the  s.  they  sod  them  in  brass  pots 

5.  .53.  had  made  any  vow,  began  to  offer  .^^  to  God 
Wisd.  12.  4.  works  of  witchcrafts  and  wicked  s. 

14.  15.  to  those  under  him,  ceremonies  and  .1. 
23.  whilst  they  slew  their  children  in  s. 

Keel.  35.  12.  and  trust  not  to  unrighteous  i. 

45.  14.  theirs,  shall  be  wholly  con-sunied 

16.  he  chose  him  to  offers,  to  the  Ijord 

Bar.  C.  29.  women  in  childbed  eat  their  »■. 

1  Mac.  12. 11.  we  remember  you  in  the  s.  we  olTer 

2  Mac.  1.  8.  wo  offered  also .?.  and  fine  flour 
33.  Neemias  had  purified  the  s.  thercwiih 

2.  10.  the  fire  came  down  and  consumed  the  s. 
3.3.  Seleucus  hare  nil  the  costs  belonging  to  the  «. 
6.  which  did  not  pertain  to  the  account  of  the  s'. 
4.  14.  ni  glecting  the  s.  hastened  to  be  partakers 

6.  7.  were  brought  by  constraint  to  eat  ofthe  i. 
8.  that  they  should  be  partakers  of  their  s. 

9.  16.  and  defray  the  charges  belonging  to  the  «. 
14.  31.  the  priests  that  were  offering  their  usual  s. 

SACRIFICETH. 
Kccl.M.  IS.  he  that  s.  of  a  thing  wrongfully  got 
35.  2.  and  he  that  giveth  alms, .?.  praise 

SACRILEGES. 

2  Mac.  4.  39.  when  inanv  .?.  had  been  committed 

SAD. 

1  Ksd.  8.  71.  I  sat  me  down  s.  and  very  heavy 

2  Ksd.  10.  8.  now  seeing  we  all  mourn  and  are  s. 
Wisd.  17.  4.  and  ».  visions  appeared  to  them 

SADLY. 
Eccl.  19.  26.  that  hangeth  down  his  head  s. 

SAFE. 
2  Ksd.  1.  13.  I  gave  you  a  large  and  s.  pnssago 
Tub.  5.  15.  if  ye  return  s.  I  will  add  someihiiig 
21.  journey  prosperous,  and  he  shall  return  s. 

10.  6.  hold  thy  pi!ace,  take  no  care,  for  he  is  $. 
2  Mac.^.  22.  to  kerp  things  committed  of  trust  s. 

SAFEGUARD. 

1  Kid.  8. 51.  for  s.  against  our  adversaries 

.Jud.  1 1.  3.  bo  of  good  comfort  thou  art  dime  for  s. 

2  Mac.  13.  3.  not  for  the  *.  ofthe  country 

SAFELY. 
1  Ksd.  4.  47.  they  should  s.  convey  on  their  way 
Tob.  6.  4.  heart,  liver, and eall,  and  piil  them  up*. 

1  Mac.  6.  40  they  marched  on  s.  and  in  order 

2  Mac.  3.  15.  that  they  should  ».  be  preserved 

SAFETY. 
Tob.  5.  20.  lake  no  care,  he  shall  return  in  s. 
8.21.  half  of  his  goods,  and  go  in  s.  to  his  father 
12.  3.  ho  hath  brought  me  again  to  thee  in  *. 
5.  lake  half  of  all  ye  brought,  and  go  awny  in  s. 
Fsth.  16.23.  horeafier  ihore  may  he  s.  to  us 
/f'l'.irf.  4.17  to  what  end  llie  Lord  b.ntb  set  him  in  ». 

1  Mar.  7.  35,  if  ever  I  come  in  $.  I  will  burn  bouse 

10.  8.3.  tho  horsomen  Kcnttered  in  thr  field  fled  to 
Azoius,  and  went  into  their  iilol's  temple  for*. 

11.  37.  ho  forlifii'd  it  for  tho  ».  ofthe  rniintry 

2  .Vac.  4.  21.  Aiitiucbus  provided  fur  his  own  i. 


SAN 


[.Apocrypha. 


0  .Vac.9.21.tnought  to  care  for  the  common  s.  of  al 

SAIL. 

1  Ksd.  4.  23.  a  man  goeth  his  way  to  s.  on  the  sea 
li'isd.  14.  1.  again,  one  preparing  himself  to  *. 
Keel.  43.  24.  they  that*,  on  tho  sea  tell  of  danger 

1  .Vuc.  13.  29.  be  seen  ofall  tliats.  on  the  sea 

SAINTS. 
Tob.  8.  15.  therefore  let  thy  s.  praise  thee 
12.  15.  which  present  Ihe  prayers  ofthe  s. 
H'isd.  3.  9.  for  grace  and  mercy  is  to  his  s. 

4.  15.  that  his  grace  and  mercy  is  with  his  s. 

5.  5.  and  his  lot  is  among  the  a. 
18.  1.  thy  s   had  a  very  great  light 

5.  had  deterniined  to  slay  the  babe."  of  ihc  s. 
9.  the  s.  shall  be  like  partakeisufguod  and  evil 
Keel.  42.  17.  Lord  hath  not  given  jiower  to  the*. 
45.  2.  he  made  him  like  to  the  glorious  *. 

SAKE. 
Keel.  47.  12.  and  for  his  .'.  he  dwelt  at  largo 
Bar.  2.  14.  and  deliver  us  for  thine  own  s. 
/7an.3.12.thymercy  notdepart  for  ihybelovedAbra- 
ham's  s.for  thyservant  Isaac's  s.aiid  forLirael's s. 

2  .Vac.  5.  19.  God  did  not  choose  the  people  liar  th4 

place's  s.  but  the  place  fur  tjie  people's «. 
SAKES. 
Feel.  40.  10.  and  for  their  s.  came  the  flood 
44.  12.  and  their  children  for  their  s. 
SALE. 
2  Mae. 8.  11.  proclaiming  a  s.  ofthe  captiveJew 

11.  3.  set  the  high  priesthood  to  s.  every  year 

SALT. 

1  Elsd.  6.  30.  also  corn,  s.  wine  and  oil  to  be  given 

2  Ksd.  5.  9.  s.  water  shall  be  fuund  in  the  sweet 
Hind.  10.  7.  a  standing  pillar  of  s.  is  a  inonumenl 
Keel.  22.  15.  sand,  and  «.  and  a  mass  of  iron 

09.  26.  s.  flour  of  wheat,  for  the  Use  of  man's  life 
43.  19.  hour-frost  also  as  s.  he  poureth  on  earth 

Bar.  6.  28.  their  wives  lav  up  part  thereof  in  *. 

SALTNESS. 
Feel. 30.  23.  he  hath  turned  the  waters  into  s. 

SALT-PITS. 

1  Mae.  II.  35.  tlies.  and  crown  taxes  wcdischargo 

SALVATION. 

2  Fsd.  G.  25.  shall  escape,  and  see  my  s. 

7.  Gl.  be  joy  over  them  that  are  persuaded  to  .». 
F.'t/i.  13.  13.  for  the  f.  of  Israel,  to  kiss  the  soles 
H'isd.  5.  2.  amazed  al  the  strangeness  of  his  s. 
16.  6.  having  a  sign  of  s.  to  put  them  in  remembr 
18.  7.  was  accepted  both  the  *.  of  the  righteous, 
and  destruction  ofthe  enemies 
Feel.  13.  14.  and  call  upon  him  for  thy  s. 
Bar.  4.  24.  they  shall  see  yours,  from  our  God 
1  Mac.  3.  G.  because  .«.  prospered  in  his  hand 

SALUTE. 
.Tud.  15.  8.  came  to  see  Judith,  and  to  *.  her 
l.Vac.  7.33.  came  priests  and  elders  to  s.  peaceably 

12.  17.  commanded  logo  unto  you,  and  to  f.  you 

SALUTED. 
Tub.  5.  9.  he  came  in,  and  tlioy  s.  one  anolhar  ■ 
1  Mac.  7.  2!'.  they*,  one  anoiher peaceably 

11.  6.  where  they  s.  one  another,  and  lodged 

SAMARIA. 
1  Ksd.  2.  16.  dwelling  in  S.  ami  other  places 
.fnd.  1.  9.  to  all  (hat  were  in  S.  ami  cilies  thereof 
Eccl.  5(1.  2l'i.  that  sit  upon  the  mountains  of  S. 

1  J\[ac.  3.  10.  gathered  a  great  host  out  of  S. 

5.  61).  thence  he  removed,  and  passed  through  S 

10.  30.  out  ofthe  country  of S.  and  Galileo 

2  .Vac.  15.  1.  woie  in  the  strong  places  about  S. 

SAMUEL. 

1  Fsd.  1.20.  since  Ihe  lime  of  tho  prophet  S. 

2  Ksd.  7.  38.  S.  and  David  for  the  destruction 

SANCTIFICATION. 
Ecel.'i.  31.  give  the  priest  the  sacrifice  of  c. 

SANCTIFY. 

2  .^fac.  1.2.5.  didiil  choose  the  fal hers  and  «.  them 

26.  and  preseive  lliine  own  portion  and  t.  it 

SANCTIFIED. 

2. Vac.  2.  8.  that  Ihe  place  iiiight  bo  honourably* 

SANCTITY. 
2  .Var.  3.  12.  to  the  invir.lable  s.  ofthe  temple 
SANCTUAIJV. 

1  F.sd.B.'H.  belefl  us  a  name  in  the  place  of  thy  *. 

2  Ksd.  7.  38.  for  them  that  should  como  to  llie«. 
10.  21.  for  thou  seeht  that  our  s.  is  laid  waste 

12.  48.  seek  mercy  for  the  low  estate  of  your  * 
1.5.  25.  po  your  way,  defile  not  my  s. 

.Jud.  4.  12.  Ihe  s.  to  profanation  and  reproach 

13.  b'fore  the  s.  of  iho  Lord  .Almighty 
F.ccl.  47.  13.  he  might  prepare  his  s.  for  ever 

49.  6.  they  burm-d  the  chosen  city  of  the  s. 

50.  5.  how  was  ho  honoured  in  coming  outof.t.  / 
1  .Vac  1.21.  Aii.'iochnsenlered  proudly  miothc*. 

36.  it  was  a  plase  to  lie  in  wait  against  Ihe  ,f. 

3.  45.  the  I.  also  was  trodden  down  aliens  kept 
.'i8.  that  are  assembled  to  destroy  u<  and  our  «. 

4.  36.  let  us  go  cli'anse  and  dednalo  lhe#. 
41.  to  fight,  until  he  had  cleanseil  the  .«. 

4".  made  up  the  s.  and  things  within  the  lem|ila 

5.  1.  heard  liisl  the  i,  was  icnewed  as  btfure 


ArocKtrnA.] 


SAV 


1  Mac.  10.  39.  I  give  it  as  a  free  gift  to  the  s.  at 

Jerusalem  for  the  necessary  e.xpcnces  of  the  t. 

13.  3.  what  I  have  done  fur  ihe  laws  and  the  s. 

14.  15.  he  beautiiied  the  £.  and  inuUipUed 
48.  should  be  set  up  within  llie  compass  of  the  s. 

2  Mac.  4.  33.  he  withdrew  himself  inlu  a  s. 
34.  he  persuaded  him  lo  come  forth  of  the  s. 

SAND. 
JVisd.  7.  9.  gold  in  respect  to  her  is  as  a  little  s. 
Eccl.  1.  2.  who  can  number  the  «.  of  the  sea! 
18.  10.  a  gravel  stone  m  comparison  of  the  s. 
S'i.  15.  s.  and  sail,  ami  a  mass  of  iron  is  easier 
Jiati.  3.  13.  as  tlie  s.  tlmt  lii'th  on  the  sea-shore 

SANDS. 
Prai/erofManass.s\i\nod  above  numberofs.  ofsca 

S.VNDALS. 
Jud.  10.  4.  and  she  took  s.  upon  her  feet 
16.  9.  her  s.  ravished  his  eyes,  her  beauty  look 

SANDY. 
EccZ.25.20.  a8climbin?up  as.  way  is  to  feet  of  aged 

SAPPHIRES. 
Tob.  13.  16.  Jerusalem  shall  be  built  up  with  s. 

SARA. 
Tbb.  3.  7.  S.  daughter  of  Raguel  was  reproached 

17.  to  give  S.  the  daughter  of  Raguel  to  Tobias 
6. 10.  he  also  hath  one  only  daughter,  named  S. 
11.  17.  when  he  came  near  to  S.  his  daughter 
12. 12.  when  thou  didst  prav,  and  S.  thy  daugliter 

SARCH  F.DON  US. 
Tob.  1.  21.  S.  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead 
22.  and  S.  appointed  him  near  unto  him 
SAT. 
1  Esd.  3.  15.  he  s.  him  down  in  the  royal  seat 

8.  72.  but  Is.  still  full  of  heaviness  till  sacrifice 

9.  45.  he  «.  honourably  in  the  first  place  of  all 
Tob.  2.  1.  in  the  which  I  s.  down  to  eat 

11.  5.  now  Anna  s.  looking  about  for  her  son 
KstK.  15.  6.  who  £.  upon  his  royal  throne 
Eccl.  II.  5.  many  kings  have  «.  on  the  ground 
IMac.  1.27.  she  that  s.  in  the  marriage-chamber 
8.  15.  wherein  320  men  s.  iu  council  daily 
14.  12.  every  man  s.  under  his  vine  and  fig-tree 

2  JUac.  3.  25.  he  that  s.  on  the  horse  had  harness 

SATISFIED. 
I  Esd.  3.  3.  and  being  «.  were  gone  home 
Eccl.  12.  16.  an  enemy  will  not  be  i.  with  blood 

SATISFIETH. 
Esth.  14.  8.  il  s.  not  that  we  are  in  captivity 

SAVAGE. 
TVisd.  17.  19.  or  a  voice  of  most  s.  wild  beasts 
S  Mac.  4.  25.  but  having  the  rage  of  a  s.  boast 

SAVE. 

Toft. 6. 17.  who  will  have  pity  on  you  and  s.  you 

Ksth.  13.  9.  if  thou  hast  appointed  to  s.  Israel 

Bar.  4.  22.  my  hope  is  in  God,  that  ho  will  «.  you 

6.  30.  they  can  5.  no  man  from  death  nor  deliver 

49.  which  can  neither  5.  them  from  war 

Prayer  of  Manass.  wilt  s.  me  that  am  unworthy 

S  Mac.  7.  25.  counsel  the  young  man  to  s.  his  life 

14.  3.  seeing  by  no  means  he  could  s.  himself 

SAVED. 

3  Ksd.  8.  3.  many  he  created,  but  few  shall  be  s. 
41.  sown  in  the  world,  they  shall  not  all  be  s. 

Tub.  14.  10.  yet  Ac-hiacliarus  was*. 
Jud.  10.  15.  thou  hast  s.  thy  life,  in  that  thou  hasted 
Esth.  10.  9.  my  nation  is  Israel,  which  cried  to  God 
and  were  «.  for  the  Lord  haih  s.  his  people 
16.  13.  as  well  of  Mardocheus  who  s.  our  life 
^f'lsd. 14.5. passing  ihro'  sea  in  a  weak  vessel,  are  s. 
16.  7.  he  was  noi  s.  by  the  thing  that  he  saw 
11.  were  quickly  s.  that  they  might  be  mindful 
Sus.  62.  the  innocent  blood  was  i.  the  same  day 
Prayer  of  Manus<i.  to  sinners,  that  they  may  be  s. 
1  Mac.  2.  50.  by  believing  were  s.  out  of  the  flame 
ZMac.  3.  35.  vows  unto  him  that  had  s.  his  life 

SAVEDST. 
Eccl.  51.  12.  for  thou  s.  me  from  destruction 

SAVEST. 
£«/.  51.8.  and*,  thim  out  of  the  hands  of  enemies 

SAVETH. 
Eccl.2. 11.  the  Lord  is  full  of  compassion  and  mer- 
cy, forgivcth  sins,  and  .9.  in  time  of  affliction 
34.  13.  for  their  hope  is  in  him  that  s.  them 
Sus.  60.  praised  God,  who  «.  Uiem  that  trust  in  him 

1  Mac.  4.  11.  One  who  delivereth  and  s.  Israel 

SAVING. 

Keel.  46.  1.  his  name  great  for  g.  the  elect  of  God 

SAVIOUR. 

2  Esd.  2.  36.  I  testify  my  S.  openly 
Jud.  9.  II.  a  S.  of  ihein  that  are  without  hope 
EstK.  l.'t.  2.  the  beholder  and  S.  of  all  things 
IVisd.  16.  7.  but  by  thee  that  art  the  S.  of  all 
Eccl.  24.  24.  besides  him  there  is  no  other  S. 

51.  5.  and  I  will  praise  thee,_0  God  my  S. 
Bar.  4. 22.  i^hall  come  from  Ihe  Everlasting,  our  S. 
1  Mac.  4.  30.  blessed  art  thou,  O  S.  of  Israel 
SAVOUR. 

1  Kfd.  1. 12.  they  sod  ihem  in  pans  with  a  good  s. 

2  Esii.1. 12.  tree  of  life  for  anointment  of  sweet  ». 
Eccl.  35.  0.  the  sweet  * .  is  before  the  Most  High 

837 


SCY 

Eccl.  38. 11.  give  a  sweet  s.  memorial  of  fine  flour 
39.  14.  and  give  ye  a  sweet  5.  as  frankincense 
50. 15.  a  Bwoet-smelling  .•!.  to  the  most  high  King 
SAW. 

Tfli.l.n.if  I  «.ony  of  my  nation  dead,  or  cast  about 
2.2.  when  Is.  abundance  of  meat,  I  said  to  my  son 

4.  4.  remember  that  she  «.  many  dangers  for  thee 
12.  21.  when  they  arose,  they  s.  him  no  more 

Jud.  10.  7.  when  they  s.  Iier  countenance  altered 

14.  6.  he  s.  the  head  of  Olofernes  in  a  man's  hand 

Esth.  15. 13. 1  s.  thee,  my  Lord,  as  an  angfcl  of  G 

fVisd.  16.  7.  was  not  saved  by  the  thing  that  he  a. 

17.  6.  to  be  worse  than  the  sight  they  s.  not 
10.  they  died  for  fear,  denying  that  they  s.  the  air 

Eccl.  1. 9.  ho  created  her,  s.  her,  and  numbered  her 

18.  12.  he  .1.  and  perceived  their  end  to  be  evil 
30.  5.  while  he  lived,  ho  s.  and  rejoiced  in  him 
45.  19.  this  the  Lord  s.  and  it  displeased  him 
48.  11.  blessed  are  they  that  s.  thee,  and  slept 

Bar.  4.  9.  for  when  she  s.  the  wrath  of  God  coming 
10.  I  «.  the  captivity  of  my  sons  and  daughters 
Sus.  8.  the  two  elders  s.  her  going  in  every  day 

33.  her  friends,  and  all  that  s.  her  wept 
Bel  30.  when  the  king  s.  that  they  pressed  him 
35.  Lord,  I  never  a\  Babylon,  nor  do  I  know 
SAWEST. 
Sits.  54.  tell  me,  under  what  tree  s.  thou  theml 

SAWN. 
Wisd.  13.  11.  after  he  hath  *.  down  a  tree  meet 

SCALE. 
Tob.  3. 17.  to  s.  away  the  whiteness  of  Tobit's  eyes 

SCANT. 
Jud.  11. 12.  victuals  fail,  and  all  their  water  is  s. 

SCARLET. 
EccZ.45.11.with  twisted  «.the  work  of  the  workman 

SCATTER. 
Bar.  2.  29.  among  the  nations,  where  I  will  s.  them 

SCATTERED. 
Tob.  13.  3.  for  he  hath  s.  us  among  ihem 
IVisd.  17.  3.  they  were  s.  under  a  dark  vail 

SCATTERETH. 
Eccl.  43.  17.  as  birds  flying  he  s.  the  enow 

SCENTS. 
tfisd.  11.  18.  or  filthy  s.  of  scattered  smoke 

SCEPTRE. 
Estk.  14.  11.  O  Lord,  give  not  thy  s.  unto  them 
15. 11.  held  up  his  golden  s.  and  laid  it  on  her  neck 
IVisd.  10.14.  she  brought  him  the  .'.of  the  kingdom 
Eccl.  35.  18.  and  broken  the  s.  of  the  unrighteous 
Bar.d.  14.  holdeth  as.  as  though  be  were  a  judge 

SCEPTRES. 
Wisd.  6.  21.  if  your  delight  be  in  thrones  and  s. 
7.  8.  I  preferred  her  before  s.  and  thrones 

SCOLD. 
Eccl.  20. 27.  a  s.  shall  be  sought  out  to  drive  away 

SCORN. 
2  Es<f.  8. 56.  thoughts,  of  his  law,  forsook  his  ways 
.fud.  12. 12.  if  draw  her  not,  she  will  laugh  us  tos. 
Wisd.  4.  18.  but  God  shall  laugh  them  to  s. 
Eccl.  6.  4.  shall  make  him  to  be  laughed  to  s. 
7.  11.  laugh  no  man  to  s.  in  the  bitterness  of  soul 
20.  17.  of  how  many  shall  he  be  laughed  to  s. 

SCORNING. 
Eccl.  41.  19.  be  ashamed  of  s.  to  give  and  take 

SCORPION,  S. 
£cc/.  26.7.  hath  hold  of  her,  is  as  though  he  held  as. 
39.30.  teeth  of  wild  beasts  and  s.  punishing  wicked 

SCOURGE. 
Tob.  13.  2.  for  he  doth  s.  and  hath  mercy 

5.  and  ho  will  s.  us  for  our  iniquities 
.Tad.  8.  27.  the  Lord  doth  s.  them  that  come  near 
Eccl.  26.  6.  as  s.  of  the  tongue  which  communi- 

cateth  with  all 
40.  9.  famine,  tribulation  and  the  s.  happen  to  all 

SCOURGED. 
Tob.  11. 15.  thou  hast  s.  and  hast  taken  pity  on  me 
Wisd.  16. 16.  were  s.  by  the  strength  of  thine  arm 
2  Mac.  3. 34.  seeing  thou  hast  been  s.  from  heaven 
5.  18.  this  man  hud  forthwith  been  3. 
SCOURGES. 
2  Esd.  16.  19.  are  sent  as  s.  for  amendment 

20.  they  shall  not  be  alway  mindful  of  the  s. 
Tob.  13.  14.  having  been  sorrowful  for  all  thy  s. 
Eccl.  23.  2.  who  will  set  s.  over  my  thoughts 
2  Mac.  7.  1.  were  tormented  with  s.  and  whips 

SCOURGEST. 
Wisd.  12.22.  thous.  our  enemies  3  thousand  times 

SCRIBE. 
1  Esd.  2.  23.  to  Somellius  the  s.  and  to  the  rest 
Eccl.  10. 5. 00  person  of  the  s.  shall  lay  his  honour 
SCRIBES. 

1  Mac.  5. 42.  he  caused  the  s.  remain  by  Ihe  brook 
7.  12.  a  company  of  s.  lo  require  justice 

2  Mac.  6.  18.  Elcazar  one  of  the  principal  s. 
SCRIPTURE. 

1  Mac.  12.9.  we  have  holv  books  ofs.  to  comfort  us 
SCYTHIANS. 

iMac.4.  47.  before  S.  have  been  judged  innocent 
SCYTHOPOLIS. 

2  Mae.  12.  29.  from  thenco  they  departed  to  S. 


SEC 


SCYTHOPOLITANS. 
2  Mac.  12.  30.  the  S.  dwell  lovingly  with  them 

SEA. 
2  Esd.  1. 13. 1  led  you  through  the  s.  gave  a  passaf  • 
16.  57.  he  measured  the  s.  and  what  it  contains 
.fud.  2.  24.  river  Arhonai,  till  you  come  to  the  ». 
n'isd.  5.22.  the  water  of  the  s.  shall  rago  ag.  tnem 
14.  3.  for  thou  hast  made  a  way  in  the  s. 
4.  yea,  though  a  man  went  to  s.  without  art 
S.passing  the  rough  s.  in  a  weak  vessel,  are  saved 
19. 7.  out  of  Ihe  Red  s.  a  way  without  impediment 
Eccl.  I.  2.  who  can  number  the  sand  of  the  s.? 
18.  10.  as  a  drop  of  water  unto  the  s. 
24.  29.  for  her  thoughts  are  more  than  the  s. 

31.  my  brook  became  a  river,  and  my  river  a  s. 
29.  18.  and  has  shaken  them  as  a  wave  of  the  1. 
40.  11.  that  of  waters  doth  return  into  the  s. 
44.  21.  would  cause  them  to  inherit  from  s.  to  s. 
50.  3.  the  cistern,  being  in  compass  as  the  s. 

Bar.  3.  30.  who  hath  gone  over  s.  and  found  her? 
Dan.  3.  13.  as  sand  that  lieth  on  the  s.  shore 
Prayer  of  Manass.  above  the  sands  of  Ihe  s. 

1  Mac.  4.  23.  got  blue  silk,  and  purple  of  the  ». 

6.  29.  there  came  from  the  isles  of  the  s.  band* 

7.  1.  Demetrius  came  to  a  city  of  the  s.-coasl 

8.  23.  good  success  to  Jews  by  s.  and  land 

32.  we  will  fight  with  thee  by  s.  and  by  land 
11.  1.  like  sand  that  lieth  upon  the  s.  shore 

8.  Ptoleniee  having  Ihe  dominion  of  the  cities  by 
the  s.  unto  .Sileucia  upon  Ihe  s.  coast 

14.  5.  he  made  an  entrance  to  the  isles  of  the  ». 

15.  38.  made  Cendebeiis  captain  of  the  s.  coast 

2  Mac.  5.21.  to  make  the  s.  passable  by  foot 
9.8.  thought  he  might  command  waves  of  the  *. 

SE.\S. 
Dan.  3.  56.  O  ye  s.  and  rivers,  bless  ye  the  Lord 

SEAL. 
Bel  11.  shut  the  door,  and  s.  it  with  thy  signet 
SEALED. 

1  Esd.  3.  8.  every  one  wrote  his  sentence  and  s.  it 

2  Esd.2. 38.  those  that  be  s.  in  the  feast  of  the  Lord 

8.  53.  the  root  of  evil  is  s.  up  from  you 
Tob.  7.  14.  an  instrument  of  covenants,  and  s.  it 

9.  5.  Gabael  brought  forth  bags  which  were  9. 
Wisd.  2.  5.  it  is  fast  s.  that  no  man  cotneth  again 
Bel  14.  they  s.  the  door  with  the  king's  signet 
Prayer  of  Manass.  hnth  shut  up  the  deep,  and  t.  it 

SEALS. 
Eccl.  38.  27.  and  they  that  cut  and  grave  s. 
45. 11. with  precious  stones  sraven  like  s. set  in  gold 
SEARCH. 

1  Esd.  2.  26.  I  commanded  to  make  diligent  s. 
0.  21.  let .?.  be  made  among  the  records  of  Cyrus 

2  Esd.  16.  31.  that  *.  their  houses  with  the  sword 
.Tud.  8.  14.  then  how  can  you  s.  out  God  1 
Esth.  10.  7.  if  ye  s.  what  hath  been  wickedly  done 
Wisd.  6.  3.  try  works  and  s.  out  your  counsels 

13.7.  they  s.  him  diligently  and  bflieve  their  sight 
Eccl.  3.  21.  neither  s.  the  things  that  are  above 

6.  27.  s.  and  seek,  and  she  shall  be  made  known 
SEARCHED. 

Esth.  12.  2.  hcnrd  devices,  and  s.  their  purposes 
If'i.^d.  9. 16.  (he  things  in  heaven,  who  hafli  s.  outi 

1  Mac.  14.  14.  law  he  .c  out,  and  every  contemner 
SEARCHERS. 

Bar  .3.23.author8  of  fahles.and  .«.out  of  understand. 
SEARCHEST. 

2  Esd.  4.  26.  the  moie  thou  .«.  the  more  marvel 
SEASONABLE. 

Eccl.  35.  20.  mercy  is  s.  in  time  of  aflliction 

SEASO.V. 
2  Esd.  8.  41.  the  thing  ihat  is  sown  good  in  big  ». 

14.  4.  whefe  I  held  him  by  me  a  long  s. 
Wisd.  16.  6.  they  were  troubled  for  a  small  ». 
Eccl.  20.  20.  for  he  will  not  speak  it  in  due  s. 

29.  2.  pay  thou  thy  neighbour  again  in  due  s. 

31.  28.  wine  measurably  drunk  and  in  s.  brings 

39.  10.  shall  be  accomplished  in  due  s. 

33.  he  will  give  every  needful  thing  in  due  «. 
43.  6.  ho  made  the  moon  also  to  serve  in  her  ». 

SEASONS. 
Wisd.  7.  18.  turning  of  the  .sun,  and  change  of*. 
8.  8.  she  forcseeth  the  events  of.',  and  times 
Eccl.  33.  6.  and  he  altered  .«.  and  feasts 

SEAT. 
1  Esd.  3.  15.  he  sat  him  down  in  the  royal  s. 
Wisd.  9.  12.  and  be  worthy  lo  sit  in  my  father's  *. 
Eccl.  7.  4.  seek  not  of  tho'king  the  .?.  of  honour 
12.  12.  set  him  not  by,  htst  he  seek  to  take  thy  f 
38.  33.  they  shall  not'  sit  on  the  judge's  s. 
SECOND. 

1  End.  1.  31.  then  gat  he  upon  his  s.  chariot 

2.  30.  ceased  till  the  s.  year  of  the  reign  of  Darius 

3.  11.  t>(r  ».  wrote,  the'king  is  strongest 
5.  56.  in  Ihe  s.  year,  and  s.  month  after  coming 

57.  in  the  first  day  of  the  s.  month,  in  the  s.  year 

after  they  were  come  t<i  Jernselern 

Esth.  13.3.  had  honour  ofs.  place  in  Ihe  kingdom 

2  Mae.  5.  1.  (ireparcd  his  s.  voyage  into  Egypt 

7.  7.  brought  the  s.  lo  make  »  mocking- «tock 


SEE 

SECONDLY. 
Etel.  S3. 33  $.  elie  hai  )i  trespasseil  against  her  bu^b. 

SECRKT. 
1  Etd.  5.  73.  by  s.  plots  and  popular  persuasions 
t  Esd.  10.  3S.  the  Highest  will  reveal  many  s.  things 
Jud.  3.3.  nubles,und  communicated  his«.  counsul 
Wiad.  1.  11.  no  word  so  s.  that  shall  go  fur  nought 

7.  21.  such  things  as  are  either  s.  or  manifest 
14.  23.  or  used  «.  ceremonies,  or  made  revellings 
17.  3.  they  supposed  to  lie  liid  in  their  5.  sins 

Etcl.  3.  22.  to  see  the  Xhings  that  are  in  s. 
48.  25.  he  shewed  *.  things  or  ever  they  caine 

1  Mac.  1.  53.  and  drove  the  Israelites  into  s.  places 
2.  31.  gone  down  into  s.  places  in  the  wilderness 

41.  that  were  murdered  in  the  5.  places 
SECRETLY. 
WUd.  18.  9.  children  of  good  men  did  sacrifice  s. 
Eccl.  20.  2.  better  lo  reprove,  than  to  be  angry  s. 

2  Mac.  6.  11.  to  keep  the  salibath-day  s. 

SECRETS. 
ToA.12.7.it  is  good  to  keep  close  the  s.  of  a  king,  11. 
Eccl.  1.  30.  and  so  God  discover  thy  s. 
4.  18.  she  will  comfort  him,  and  shew  him  her  5. 
I'.i.  11.  and  smiling  on  thee,  will  get  out  thy  s. 
14.  21.  he  shall  have  understanding  in  her  s. 
22.  22.  e.Tcept  for  pride,  or  disclosing  of  s. 
27.  17.  if  thou  bewrayest  his  i.  follow  no  more 
39.  3.  he  will  seek  out  the  s.  of  grave  sentences 
7.  and  in  his  s.  shall  he  meditate 
Sus.  42.  O  everlasting  God,  that  knowest  the  s. 
2  Mac.  13.  21.  disclosed  the  s.  to  the  enemies 

SECURELY. 
Eccl.  4.  15.  that  attendeih  to  her,  shall  dwell  8. 

SECURITY. 
2  Es(f.  7. 53.  paradise,  wherein  is  s.  and  medicine 
Eccl.  5.  7.  in  thy  s.  thuu  slialt  be  destroyed 

SEDKCIAS. 
fiar.l.S.S.  the  son  of  Josias  king  of  Juda  had  made 

SEDITION. 
2  Esd.  15.  16.  for  there  shall  be  5.  amongst  men 

SEDITIOUS. 
XMac.  14. 16.  Assideans  nourish  war,  and  are  s. 

SEE. 
Keel.  15.  7.  and  sinners  shall  not  s.  her 
20.7.  will  hold  his  tongue  till  he  s.  opportunity 
37.  9.  on  other  side,  to  s.  what  shall  befall  thee 
37.  prove  thy  soul,  and  s.  what  is  evil  for  it 
42.  22.  that  a  ruan  may  s.  even  to  a  spark 
Bar.  1. 20.  tloweth  with  milk,  as  it  is  to  s.  this  day 
4.  24.  BO  shall  they  s.  shortly  your  salvation 
25.  but  shortly  iliou  shult  £.  his  destruction 
Sus.  2U.  the  doors  are  shut  that  no  man  can  s.  us 

SEED. 
/  Ead.  8.70.  the  holy  s.is  mixed  with  strange  people 

88.  hadst  lefl  us  neither  root,  s.  nor  name 
i  Esd.  3.  15.  thou  wouldst  never  forsake  his  s. 

8.  6.  and  thou  give  us  s.  to  our  heart  and  culture 
Wisd.2. 16.  the*,  of  unrighteous  bed  be  rooted  out 

7.  2.  being  compacted  in  blood  of  the  s.  of  man 
10.  15.  she  delivered  the  blameless  s.  from  nation 
12.  11.  it  was  a  cursed  s.  from  the  beginning 

14.  6.  left  to  all  ages  a  s.  of  generation 
Eccl.  1. 1.'>.  she  shall  continue  with  their  s. 
10.  19.  regard  not  the  law,  are  a  dishonourable  s. 

44.  11.  with  their  s.  shall  continually  remain 
12.  their  s.  stands  fast,  and  their  children 
21.  that  he  would  bless  the  nations  in  his  «. 

45.  15.  to  his  8.  so  long  as  the  heavens  remain 

21.  sacrifices,  which  he  gave  to  him  and  his  s. 

46.  9.  his  s.  obtained  it  for  a  heritage 

47.  20.  didst  stain  thy  honour,  and  pollute  thy  s. 

22.  not  take  away  the  s.  of  him  that  lovelh  him 

23.  of  his  s.  he  left  behind  him  Roboam 
T)an.  3.  13.  wouldst  multiply  their  s.  as  the  stars 
Sus.  56.  O  thou  s.  of  Chanaan,  and  nut  Juda 
Praytr  of  Manas s,  and  of  their  righteous  s. 

2  Mac.  7.  17.  how  he  will  torment  thee  and  thy  » 
SEEK. 

1  Ksd.  6.  23.  to  s.  among  the  records  at  Rabylon 

8.  85.  she  shall  never  s.  to  have  peace  with  lliem 

2  Rsd.  12.  48.  that  I  might  s.  mercy  for  low  estate 
14.  23.  that  they  s.  thee  not  for  forty  days 

Toh.  5.  3.  ».  thee  a  man  which  may  go  with  thee 

11.  ho  said,  dost  ihiiu  .«.  for  n  tribe  or  family? 
Wind.  1.  1.  and  in  simplicity  of  heart  s.  him 

12.  s.  not  death  in  the  error  of  your  life 

6.  13.  wisdom  is  easily  found  of  such  ns  s.  her 

22.  bul  I  will  a.  her  out  from  the  beginning 

.E<c/.  3. 21. «.  not  the  things  that  arc  loo  hard  for  thoc 

4.  11.  wisdom  layolh  hold  on  them  that  «.  her 

12.  they  that  s.  to  her  early,  shall  bo  filled 

6.  27.  .<).  and  she  shall  bo  made  known  to  thee 

7.  4.  ».  not  of  Ihe  Lord  pro-eminriice 

6.  s.  not  lo  be  judge,  being  not  able  to  take 
12.  12.  sol  him  not  by,  lest  he  ».  lo  lukr  ihy  scat 
24.  34.  r  laboured  for  nil  them  that  >■  wisdom 
28.  3.  and  doth  he  «.  pnrdon  from  the  Lord? 

32.  14.  ihcy  that  j>.  him  early,  shall  find  favour 

33.  17.  but  for  all  thom  that  «.  learning 
31.  tliat  thy  children  should  s.  to  theo 

838 


SEP 

Eccl  33. 25.  if  let  him  go  idle,  he  shall  s.  liberty 
31.  which  way  wilt  thou  go  to  s.  him'! 

36.  2.  upon  all  nations  that  s.  not,  after  ihec 

39. 1.  he  will  s.  out  the  wisdom  of  all  the  ancient 
.3.  he  will  s.  out  secrets  of  grave  sentuiices 
40. 26.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  needeth  not  to  s.  help 
51.  14.  I  will  s.  her  out  even  to  the  end 
liel  38.  Dor  hast  thou  forsaken  them  that  s.  thee 

SEEKETH. 
IVisd.  6. 14.  who«.  her  early,  have  no  great  travel 
Eccl.  27.  1.  he  that «.  for  abundance  will  turn 

32.  15.  he  that  i.  the  law  shall  be  filled 
2  Mac.  2.  27.  and  s.  the  benefit  of  others 

SEEKING. 
Wisd.  6. 16.  she  goeth  about  «.  such  as  are  worthy 

8.  18.  I  went  about  s.  how  to  take  her  to  me 
13.  6.  for  they  peradventure  err,  s.  God 

Eccl.  14.  16.  no  s.  of  dainties  in  the  grave 
20.  32.  necessary  patience  in  s.  the  Lord 
51.  21.  my  heart  was  troubled  in  s.  her 
SEEMED. 

ifisd.  3.  2.  in  sight  of  the  unwise  they  ».  to  die 

2  Mac.  1. 13.  the  army  with  him  that  s.  invincible 
SEEN. 

Wisd.  13.  1.  out  of  the  good  things  that  are  s. 
17.  19.  that  could  not  be  s.  of  skipping  beasts 

Eccl.  16.  5.  many  things  have  I  s.  with  my  eyes 

42.  1.5.  I  will  declare  the  ihing-s  that  I  have  s. 

43.  31.  who  hath  s.  him  that  he  might  tell  us 
Bar.  2.  26.  laid  waste,  as  it  is  to  be  s.  this  day 

6.  61.  the  lightning  breaking  forth  is  easy  lo  be  s. 
Sws.  54.  if  thou  hast  s.  her,  tell  me,  under  what 

1  Mac.  4.  20.  for  the  smoke  that  was  s.  declared 

13.  29.  might  be  s.  of  all  that  sail  on  the  sea 

2  Mac.  3. 36.  works,  which  he  had  «.  with  his  eyes 
6.  9.  then  might  a  man  have  s.  present  misery 

SELEUCIA. 
1  Mac.  11.  8.  unto  S.  upon  the  sea-coast 
SELEUCUS. 

1  Mac.  7.  1.  Demetrius  the  son  of  S.  departed 

2  Mac.  3.  3.  S.  king  of  Asia  bare  all  the  costs 
4.  7.  but  after  the  death  of  S.  Jason  laboured 

5. 18.  whom  S.  the  king  sent  to  view  the  treasury 

SELL. 
Bar.  6.  28.  the  things  sacrificed,  their  priests  s. 

1  Mac.  13.  49.  they  could  neither  buy  nor  s. 

'2  Mac.  5.  24.  to  s.  the  women  and  younger  sort 

SELLING. 
Eccl.  27.  2.  sin  stick  close  between  buying  and  s. 

37.  11.  consult  not  with  a  buyer  ofs. 
42.  5.  and  of  merchants  indifferent  s. 

SENATE. 

2  Mac.  4.  44.  three  men  that  were  sent  from  the  s. 

SENATE-HOUSE. 
1  Mac.  8.  15.  had  made  for  themselves  a  s.-horise 

SEND. 
Tnb.  8.  12.  s.  one  of  the  maids,  and  let  her  see 

10.  8.  I  will  s.  to  thy  father,  and  declare  to  him 
Jud.  6.  3.  he  will  *.  his  power,  and  destroy  them 

9.  9.  and  «.  thy  wrath  upon  their  heads 

11.  22.  God  hath  done  well  to  s.  thee  before 
PVisd.  9.  10.  O  s.  her  out  of  thy  holy  heavens 

11. 17.  wanted  not  means  to  s.  among  them  bears 

12.  8.  did  s.  wasps,  forerunners  of  thy  host 
25.  thou  didst  s.  a  judgment  to  mock  them 

16.  20.  thou  didst  s.  them  from  heaven  bread 
Eccl.  24.  32.  I  will  s.  forth  her  light  afar  ofl' 

33.  27.  s.  hira  to  labour,  that  he  be  not  idle 
36.  2.  and  s.  thy  fear  upon  all  the  nations 

Sus.  21.  thou  didst  s.  away  thy  maids  from  thee 
29.  s.  for  Susanna  the  daughter  of  Chelcias 

1  Mac.  11.  43.  if  thou  .«.  mo  men  to  help  me 
16.  18.  that  he  should  s.  him  a  host  to  aid  him 

2 Mae.  1.  4.  open  your  hearts,  and  a.  you  peace 
6.  2.3.  he  willed  them  to  s.  him  to  the  grave 

11.  34.  ambassadors  of  the  Romans  s.  greeting 

14.  27.  commanded  that  he  should  s.  Maccabeus 

SENNACHERIB. 

2  Mac.  8.  19.  they  were  delivened  when  under  S. 

15.  22.  and  didst  shiv  in  the  host  of  S.  1^5,000 

SENSE. 
2Kj»(i.l0.36.ismy  ji.deceived,ormysntil  inadrenni? 
£cc/.21.18.  knowledge  of  unwise,a8  talk  without  s. 

SENT. 
TnA.2.12.when  she  had  s.  them  homo  to  the  owners 

12.  20.  for  I  go  up  to  him  tlinl  a.  me 
Eccl.  28.  23.  it  Hliall  be  .i.  on  them  as  a  lion 

34.  6.  if  Ihtiy  bo  not .«.  from  the  Most  High 

SENTENCE. 
Kcc/.20.20.a  wise  s. shall  be  rejectedwhen  it  Cometh 
41.  2.  O  death,  iicceptnble  is  Ihy  s.  to  the  needy 
Sus.  55.  the  angel  of  God  hath  rcrcivcd  the  s. 

SENTENCES. 
1  Esd.  3.  16.  Ihoy  shall  doclnre  their  own  .«. 
Eccl.  39.6.  ho  shall  pour  out  wise  s.  and  give  thanks 

SEPARATE. 
TVUd.  1.  3.  for  froward  thoughts  .'.  from  God 
Eccl.  6. 13.  s.  thyself  from  thine  enemies,  take  heed 

SEPARATED. 
1  End.  7.  13.  alt  ihey  thai  had  »'.  tlieauelvo« 


SET 


[ArocKTPB*. 


1  Esd.  8.  54.  then  I  5. 12  of  the  cliief  of  the  prie«to 
Eccl.  16.  16.  he  hath  s.  his  light  from  darkuesa 
SEPULCHRE. 

1  Mac.  9.  19.  buried  him  in  the  s.  of  bis  futhera 
i;i.  30.  this  is  the  s.  which  he  made  at  Modia 

2  Mac.  5.  10.  he  had  do  s.  wiih  his  I'albera 

SERPENT. 
Eccl.  12.  13.  a  charmer  that  is  bitten  with  a  ». 

21.  2.  flee  from  sin  as  from  Ihe  lace  of  a  s. 

25.  15.  there  is  no  head  above  the  head  of  a  $. 

SERPENTS. 
Wisd.  11.  15.  they  worshijiped  s.  void  of  reason 

16.  5.  they  perished  with  the  stings  of  crooked  t 

17.  9.  being  scared  with  hissing  of  ».  they  died 
Eccl.  39.  30.  teeth  of  wild  beasts,  scorpions,  and  s. 

SERVANT. 

1  Esd.  4.  59.  thine  is  the  glory,  and  I  am  thy  s. 
Jud.5.5.no  lie  shall  come  out  of  the  mouth  of  thy  « 

9.  10.  smite  by  the  deceit  of  my  lips  the  s.  with 
the  prince,  and  the  prince  with  the  t 

II.  5.  Judith  said,  receive  the  words  of  thy  s. 
17.  for  lliy  s.  is  religious  and  scrveth  God 

fi'ied.  9.  5.  I  thy  :J.  and  the  son  of  Iby  handmaid 
10.16.she  entered  into  the  soul  of  the  s.  of  the  Lord 

18.  11.  the  master  and  the  s.  were  punished 
21.  declaring  that  he  was  thy  j. 

Eccl.  7.  20.  thy  ».  worketh  truly,  entreat  him 
21.  let  ihy  soul  love  a  good  s.  defraud  him  not 
10. 25.  unto  the  s.that  is  wise,  shall  they  do  service 

19.  21.  if  a  s.  say  to  his  master,  I  will  not  do 
2^}.  6.  give  not  over  me  thy  s.  to  an  impudent  oiind 

10.  for  ns  a  a-,  that  is  continually  beaten 
Xi.  24.  bread,  coirection,  and  work  for  a  s. 

25.  if  thou  set  thy  s.  to  labour,  shall  find  rest 

26.  so  are  tortures  and  tormenis  for  an  evil  s, 

30.  if  thou  have  a  s.  lei  him  be  as  liiyself 

31.  if  thou  have  a  5.  entreat  him  as  a  biother 
37.  11.  consult  not  with  an  idle  s.  of  business 

42.  5.  to  make  the  side  of  an  evil  s.  lo  bleed 

2  Mac.  8.  35.  he  came  like  a  fugitive  s.  to  Anlioch 

SERVANTS. 
lKsrf.6.13.we  arc  the  s.  of  the  L.  who  made  heaven 
Tob.  10. 10.  Raguel  gave  5.  and  cattle  and  money 
Jud.  10.23.  she  did  reverence,  and  his.<>.  took  her  up 
Esth.  15.  16.  and  all  his  5.  comforted  her 
Eccl.  4.  30.  be  not  frantic  among  thy  ,t. 
6.  11.  in  prosperity  he  will  be  bold  over  thy  *. 
23.  4.  but  turn  away  from  thy  s.  a  haughty  mind 
36.  17.  O  Lord,  hear  the  prayer  of  thy  s. 
Bar.  2.  20.  as  thou  hast  spoken  by  thy  «. 
Dan.  3.  10.  we  are  become  a  re)iroach  to  thy  t. 

63.  O  ye  s.  of  ibe  Lord,  bless  ye  the  Lord 
Svs.  27.  the  i.  were  greatly  ashamed 
1  Mac.  1.  6.  wherefoie  he  called  his  s. 

8.  his  s.  bare  rule  every  one  in  his  place 
2Mac.  7.  6.  and  he  shall  be  coinl'orted  in  his  t. 
.33.  yet  shall  he  be  at  one  again  with  his  3. 
34.  lifting  up  iby  hand  against  the  s.  of  God 

8.  39.  to  be  reconciled  wiih  his  s.  fur  ever 

SERVE. 

1  Esd.  1.  4.  now  therefore  s.  the  Lord  your  God 
.fud.  11.  1.  never  hurl  any  that  was  willing  to  s. 
/;.<«A.12. 5.  command  Mardochcus  tos.  inlhecoui 
IVisd.  15.  7.  the  vessels  that .«.  for  clean  uses 
Eccl.  2.  1.  if  thou  come  lo  s.  the  Lord,  prepare 

23.5.  hold  him  up  that  is  desirous  always  to»'.  the« 
39.  4.  he  shall  £.  among  great  men,  and  appear 

43.  6.  he  ninde  the  moon  al>.o  to  .v.  in  her  si'ason 

2  Mac.  1 .  3.  God  give  you  all  a  heart  lo  ,e.  him 

4.  14.  had  no  courage  to  5.  any  moro  at  Ihe  altar 

SERVED. 
/ri*d.I3. 13.  the  refuse  among  those  that  .t.lono  use 
iCcc^25. 8.  thai  hath  nut  s.  a  man  more  unworthy 

SERVETH. 
Wisd.  16.  24.  for  the  creature  ihat  5.  ihee 
Eccl.  35.  16.  he  that  s.  the  Lord  shall  be  accepted 

SERVICE. 
Wisd.\5.7.  poller  fashionclh  every  vessel  for  our  s. 
Eccl.  3.  7.  and  he  will  do  s.  unto  his  pnrenUi 

III.  25.  to  serviinl  shall  they  ihul  are  free  do  .«. 
II.  23.  say  n<il,  what  profit  is  there  of  my  s.? 
50.  14.  and  finishing  ihe  .s.  at  the  altar 

2  Mac.  3.  3.  belongins  to  the  .«.  of  the  suciificrt 

SERVING. 

Wisd.  14.21.  for  men  «.  either  ciilaniily  or  tyranny 

19.6. ,«.  the  peculiar  commMiidinenls  given  lolhcm 

SERVITUDE. 

.7ud.  8.  23.  our  «.  shall  not  bo  directed  lo  favob- 

SET. 

1  E.^d.  1.  3.  to  ,«.  the  ark  in  the  house  Solomon  built 
2.  21.  and  if  the  walls  thereof  bo  s.  up  anew 

2  End.  :i.  IH.  ihou  didst  s.  fust  Ihe  earth 
H'isd.  13.  18.  which  ciiniiut  ;».  n  foot  forward 
Ecrl  2.2.  .<.  thy  heart  arighl,  and  roDslanlly  endur* 

9.  2.  lo  s.  her  foot  npnii  Ihy  subsiniiro 

15.  16.  he  hath  s.  firn  and  water  before  thee 
17.  17.  he  .t.  n  ruler  over  every  people 

22.  27.  who  shall  s.  n  watch  before  my  mouth  ! 
!<1.  10.  eat  those  things  which  are  «.  before  Ihn* 
33.  25.  if  thou  s.  thy  s«rva.i(  (.1  lab  jut.  find  r««l 


ArOCRTRIA.] 


SUA 


Eccl.  33.  28.  s.  Iiira  to  work  as  is  fit  for  him 
34.  6.  if  iiol  sent,  s.  not  thy  iieart  upon  them 
38.  29.  who  is  ahvay  carefully  s.  at  his  work 
1  JUac.  1.  54.  they  s.  up  the  abuiniuation  on  altar 
&  Mac.  5.  iO.  it  was  s.  up  with  all  ulurv 

SKT'XETU. 
Eccl.  10.  9.  Tor  such  a  one  .3.  his  own  soul  to  sale 
38.  28.  he  s.  his  mind  to  tinisli  his  work 

SETTING. 
l£*(i.4.30.  thecrown,  and  «.  it  upon  our  own  head 

SETTLED. 
Estk.  13.  7.  so  cause  uur  atTairs  lo  be  well  5. 
E<:c/.22.I7.a  heart  .s. on  a  thought  of  understanding 

42.  17.  dcclajo  works,  which  the  Lord  tirmly  s. 

SEVEN. 
1  Esd,  4.63.  and  they  feasted  with  gladness  j.days 
8.  11.  and  to  my  s.  friends  the  counsellors 
Tob.  2.  1.  whicii  is  the  holy  feast  of  the  s.  weeks 
3.  8.  thou  hast  haii  already  s.  husbands 

15.  my  s.  husbands  are  already  dead 
6.  13.  that  thjs  maid  hath  been  given  10  s.  men 

11.  19.  Tobias'  wedding  was  kept  s.  days  with  joy 

12.  15.  I  am  Raphael,  one  of  the  .s.  holy  angels 
Jud.  16.  24.  and  Israel  lamented  her  £.  days 
Eccl.  7.  3.  ihou  sluilt  not  reap  them  s.-fold 

20.  12.  buyelh  for  little,  and  repayeih  it  «.-fold 
22. 12.  s.  days  do  men  mourn  for  hmi  (hat  is  dead 
35.  11.  give  with  a  cheerful  eye,  (or  the  Lord  re- 

compenseth  and  willgivethee  jr.  times  as 

much 
37.  14.  wont  to  tell  him  more  than  5.  watchmen 

40.  8.  and  that  is  £.-fuld  more  on  sinners 

Bar.  6.  3.  for  long  season,  namely,  s.  generations 
Bel  32.  and  in  the  den  there  were  *■.  lions 
1  Mac.  13.  28.  moreover,  he  set  up  s.  pyramids 
3  Mac.  7.  1.  s.  brethren  with  their  mother  taken 

SEVENTH. 
1  Esd.  5.  53.  from  the  first  day  of  the  s.  month 
Eccl.  17.  5.  in  the  s.  place  he  imparted  speech 
1  Mac.  6.  53.  for  it  wass.  year,  and  they  in  Judea 
S  Mae.  12.  38.  when  the  s.  day  came,  they  purified 
15.  4.  who  commanded  the  s.  day  to  be  kept 
SEVENTY. 

1  Esd.  1.  58.  until  the  full  term  of  s.  years 

2  End.  14.40.  keep  the  s.  last,  thalmayest  deliver 
Jud.  1.  2.  made  the  height  of  the  wall  s.  cubits 

SEVERAL. 
Ifisd.  1.11.  according  to  the  s.  dignities  of  fathers 

3  Jtfitc.  12.  2.  but  of  the  governors  of^.  places 

SEVERE. 
tfisd.  5.  20.  s.  wrath  shall  he  sharpen  for  a  sword 
ll.lO.bul  the  other  as  a.*.kinz  thou  dldstcondemn 

SHADOW. 
Wisd.  2.  5.  for  our  time  is  a  very  s.  that  passeth 
5.  9.  all  these  things  are  passed  away  as  a  s. 
Eccl.  34.2.  is  like  him  thatcatcheth  at  a  s. 
Bar.l.Vi.  weshall  live  under  thes.ofNabuchodon. 

SHADOWLNG. 
fPisd.  19.  7.  namely,  a  cloud  s.  the  camp 

SHAKE. 
Eccl.  13.  7.  forsake  ihee,  and  s.  his  head  at  thee 

SHAKEN. 
Wisd.  4.  4.  yet  shall  they  be  .'.  with  the  wind 
ivcci.  16  19.  and  foundations  of  the  earth  shall  bes. 
20.  7.  an  evil  wife  is  a  yoke  s.  to  and  fro 
29.  18.  hath  s.  them  as  a  wave  of  the  sea 

43.  16.  at  his  sight  the  mountains  are  s. 

SHAKING. 

Eccl.  22.  16.  timber  cannot  be  loosed  with  s. 

2  Mac.  5.  3.  horsemen  in  array  with  x.  of  shields 
11.  8.  one  in  white  clothing  s.  his  armour 
SHAME. 

2  Esd.  10.  22.  our  children  are  put  to  s.  priests  burnt 

Jud.  12.  12.  for  lo,  it  will  be  a  s.  for  our  person 
1.3.  16.  halh  not  committed  sin  with  me  to  s.  me 
14.18.  woman  brought  s.aa  houseofNabuchodon. 

Eccl.  4.  21.  for  there  is  a  s.  that  bringeth  sin 

5.  13.  s.  is  in  talk,  the  tongue  of  a  man  is  his  fall 
14.  for  a  foul  s.  is  upon  tne  thief 

6.  1.  thou  shall  inherit  an  ill  name,  s.  reproach 

13.  7.  he  will  s.  thee  by  his  meats,  and  laugh 
20.  2fi.  the  .«.  of  a  liar  is  ever  with  him 

26.  8.  and  she  will  not  cover  her  own  s. 

24.  a  dishonest  woman  conlemneth  s. 

42.  14.  a  woman  which  bringeth  s.  and  reproach 
Bar.  2.  6,  to  us  and  to  our  fathers  open  s. 
jOan.  3.  10.  wo  are  become  a  s.  and  reproach 

19.  put  us  not  to  s.  but  deal  with  us  after  thy 
2  Mac.  5.  7.  at  last  received  .«.  for  his  treason 
3.  2.  he  being  put  to  flizht,  returned  with  s. 

SHAMEFACED. 
Eccl.  26.  15.  a  .9.  woman  is  a  double  grace 

25.  but  she  that  is  i!.  will  fear  the  Lord 
32.  10.  and  before  a  s.  man  shall  go  favour 

41.  16.  therefore  be  s.  according  to  thy  word 
24.  so  shall  thou  be  truly  s.  and  find  favour 

SHAMEFACEDNESS. 
Eccl.  41.  16.  for  it  is  not  jood  to  retain  all  J. 

SHAMEFUL. 

Witd.  2. 20.  let  us  condemn  him  with  a  t.  death 

839 


SHI 

SHAMEFULLY. 

1  Mac.l.  34.  he  abused  them  s.  and  spake  proudly 

2  Mac.  11.  12.  and  Lysias  himself  fled  away  s. 

SHAMELESS. 
Eccl.  26.  10.  if  thy  daughter  be  s.  keep  her  in 
25.  a  s.  woman  shall  be  accounted  as  a  dog 
40.  30.  begging  is  sweet  in  the  mouth  of  the  a. 

42.  11.  keep  a  sure  watch  over  a  s.  daughter 
Bar.  4. 15.  a  «.  nation,  and  of  strange  language 

SHAPE. 
Wisd.  18.  1.  hearing  voice,  and  not  seeing  their  a. 

SHARP. 
Wisd.  6.  5.  for  a  s.  judgment  shall  be  to  them 
18.  16.  unfeigned  commandments  as  as.  sword 
Eccl.  43.  19.  It  lieth  on  the  top  of  s.  stakes 

SHARPEN. 
Wisd.  5.  20.  his  wrath  shall  he  a.  for  a  sword 

SHAVEN. 
Bar.  6.  31.  priests,  having  heads  and  beards  s. 

SHED. 
1  Mac.  1.  37.  thus  they  shed  innocent  blood 

SHEDDETH. 
Eccl.  28.  11.  and  a  hasty  fighting  a.  blood 

SHEEP. 

1  Esd.  1.  8.  gave  two  thousand  and  six  hundred  s. 

9.  they  gave  to  the  Levites  five  thousand  i. 

SHEKELS. 

1  Mac.  10.  42.  the  five  thousand  s.  of  silver 

SHELTER. 
Eccl.  14.  26.  shall  set  his  children  under  her  s. 

SHEPHERD. 
Wisd.  17.  17.  a  «.  or  a  labourer  in  the  field 
Eccl.  18.  13.  he  bringeth  again,  as  a  s.  his  flock 
SHEW. 

1  Esd.  5.  37.  nor  could  they  s.  their  families 

2  E^d.  1.  5.  s.  my  people  their  sinful  deeds 

Tob.  14.9.  s.  thyself  merciful  and  just  that  it  may 
Wisd.  5.  13.  and  we  had  no  sign  of  virtue  to  s. 

12.  13.  s.  that  thy  judgment  is  not  unright 

13.  10.  which  are  gold  and  silver,  to  s.  art  in 
Eccl.  4.  18.  comfort  him,  and  s.  him  her  secrets 

7.  24.  s.  not  thy  face  cheerful  toward  him 

16.  25.  I  will  s.  forth  doctrine  in  weight 

18.  21.  and  in  the  time  of  sins  s.  repentance 
22.  19.  maketh  the  heart  to  s.  her  knowledge 

36.  6.  s.  new  signs,  and  make  strange  wonders 
39.  8.  he  shall  s.  forth  what  he  hath  learned 

15.  ..s.  forth  his  praise  with  songs  of  your  lips 

43.  1.  the  beauty  of  heaven  with  his  glorious  s. 

44.  15.  the  congregation  will  s.  forth  their  praise 
Bar.  3.  37.  afterward  did  he  s.  himself  on  earth 

6.  38.  they  can  s.  no  mercy  to  the  widow 
Sm5.  50.  come  sit  down  among  us,  and  s.  it  us 
Prayer  of  Manass.  in  me  thou  wilts,  thy  goodness 
2  Mac.  6.  27.  I  will  s.  myself  such  a  one 

8.  4.  he  would  s.  his  hatred  against  the  wicked 
12.  36.  that  he  would  s.  himself  their  heljier 

SHEWED. 

1  Esd.  8.  78.  now  hath  mercy  been  s.  unto  us 
Wisd.  10.  10.  she  s.  him  the  kingdom  of  God 

18.  18.  one  and  another  *.  the  cause  of  his  death 
Eccl.  3.23.  for  more  things  are  s.  unto  thee 

14.  12.  covenant  of  the  grave  is  not  s.  unto  thee 

45.  3.  and  he  s.  him  part  of  his  glory 

46.  20.  he  prophesied,  and  s.  the  king  his  end 

47.  23.  Jeroboam,  who  s.  Ephraim  the  way  of  sin 

48.  25.  he  s.  what  should  come  to  pass  for  ever 

49.  8.  which  was  s.  him  on  chariot  of  cherubims 
Bar.  3.  34.  they  s.  light  lo  him  that  made  them 
Bel  21.  the  priests,  who  s.  him  the  privy  doors 

2  Mac.  2.  8.  the  cloud,  as  it  was  s.  under  Moses 
3.  7.  when  Apnilonius  had  s.  him  of  the  money 

15.  32.  and  s.  them  vile  Nicanor's  head 

SHEWETH. 

Wisd.  1.  2.  he  a.    himself  to   such    as   do  not 

distrust  him 

6.  16.  s.  herself  favourably  to  them  in  the  ways 

Eccl.  28.  4.  he  s.  no  mercy  to  a  man  like  himself 

37.  20.  there  is  one  that  s.  wisdom  in  words 
Bar.  6.  59.  better  to  be  a  liing  that  a.  his  power 

SHIELD. 

Jud.  9.  7.  they  trust  in  s.  and  spear,  and  bow 
Eccl  29.  13.  than  a  miglity  a.  and  strong  spear 
1  Mac.  15.  18.  and  they  brought  a  s.  of  gold 
20.  it  seemed  good  to  receive  the  s.  of  them 
SHIELDS. 

1  Mac.  6.  2.  in  it  a  rich  temple  wherein  were  s. 

2  JJ/dc. 5.3.  with  shn  king  of  .V. and  drawing  of  swords 
15.  11.  not  80  much  with  defence  of  s.  and  spears 

SHINE. 
Wisd.  X  7.  ihcy  shall  s.  and  run  to  and  fro 
Eccl.'i4.3Q.l  will  yet  make  doctrine  to*. as  morning 

SHINED. 
Wisd.  5.  6.  the  light  of  righteousness  not  s.  to  us 

17.  20.  the  whole  world  s.  with  clear  light 
Bar.  3.  34.  the  stars  a.  in  their  watches 

1  Mac.  6.  39.  the  mountains  s.  like  lamps  offiro 

2  Mac.  1.  32.  the  light  that  s.  from  the  altar 

SHINING. 
Eccl.  43. 8.  a.  in  the  firmament  of  hearen 


SIE 

Eccl.  50.  7.  as  the  sun  a.  upon  temple  of  M  High 

SHIP,  S. 
Wisd.  5.  10.  as  a  a.  that  passeth  over  the  waves 
Eccl.  33.  2.  a  hyjiocrite  is  as  a  s.  in  a  storm 

1  Mac.  8.  26.  that  aid  them  with  money  or». 
15.  3.  gathered  soldiers,  and  prepared  s.  of  war 

SHOE. 
Eccl.  40.  19.  I  have  not  taken  so  much  as  a  « 
SHOOK. 

2  Esd.  10.  26.  so  that  the  earth  s.  at  the  noise 
2  Mac.  12.  12.  whereupon  they  «.  hands 

SHOOTING. 
Wisd.  11.  18.  a.  horrible  sparks  out  of  their  eyei 

SHORN. 
Tob.  1.  6.  having  that  whicli  was  first  a. 

SHORT. 
Wisd.  2.  1.  they  said,  our  life  is  s.  and  tedioug 
4.  13.  he  being  made  perfect  in  a  s.  time 
9. 5.  of  a  s.  time,  and  too  young  for  understanding 

15.  9.  his  care  is  not  that  his  life  is  s. 

16.  3.  these  sufiering  penury  for  a  s.  space 
Eccl.  17.  2.  he  gave  them  few  days,  and  a  «.  timii 

31.  19.  he  fctcheth  not  hi»  wind  s.  on  his  bed 

32.  8.  let  thy  speech  be  «.  comprehending  much 

36.  8.  make  the  time  s.  remember  the  covenant 
43.  27.  we  may  speak  much,  and  yet  come  a. 

2  Mac.  2.  .32.  and  to  be  s.  in  the  story  itself 
7.  36.  our  brethren  who  have  suffered  a  a.  pain 

SHORTEN. 
Eccl.  30.  24.  envy  and  wrath  s.  the  life 

SHORTLY. 
Wisd.  14.  14.  they  shall  come  s.  to  an  end 
Bar.  4.  24.  so  shall  they  see  s.  your  salvation 
25.  buts.  thou  shalt  see  his  destructiou 
SHOULDER. 
Eccl.  6.  25.  bow  down  thv .'.  and  bear  her 
iMac.  12.35.  horsemen  otThraciasmole  ofThis^ 
15.  30.  strike  off  Nicanor's  head  with  his  a. 

SHOULDERS. 
1  Esd.  1.  4.  ye  shall  no  more  bear  the  ark  on  your  t 
Eccl.  7.  31.  trespass-offering,  and  gift  of  the  a. 
Bar.  2.  21.  bow  down  your  s.  to  serve  the  king 
6.  26.  they  are  borne  upon  ;;.  having  no  feel 

SHOUTED. 
Eccl.  50. 16.  thens.  the  sons  of  Aaron  and  sounded 

SHOWER. 
Dan.  3.  42.  O  every  «.  and  dew,  bless  yo  the  Lord 

SHOWERS. 
Wisd.  16.16.  with  strange  s.  were  they  perscr.u'.orf 

SHREWD. 
Eccl.  8.  19.  lest  he  reijuite  thee  with  a  a.  turn 

SHRUBS. 
1  Mac.  4.  38.  they  saw  s.  growing  in  the  coicrlt 

SHRUNK. 
1  Mac.  3.  6.  the  wicked  s.  for  foar  of  him 

SHUT. 
Tob.  8.  4.  after  they  were  both  s.  in  together 
.hid,  13.  ).  and  Bagoas  s.  his  lent  without 
Wisd.  18.  4.  who  had  kept  thy  sons  s.  up 
Ercl.  4.  31.  and  s.  when  thou  shouldst  repay 

29.  12.  s.  up  alms  in  thy  store-houses 

30.  18.  delicates  poured  upon  a  mouth  a.  up 
48.  3.  by  the  word  of  the  Lord  he  a.  up  heaven 

1  Alac.  3.  18.  for  many  to  he  s.  up  in  hands  of  few 
4.  31.  s.  up  this  army  in  the  hand  of  thy  people 
6.  18.  they  a.  up  the  Israelites  round  about 

2  Mac.  1.  15.  s.  temple  as  soon  as  Antiochus  came 
4.  34.  whom  he  x.  up  without  regard  of  justice 

SICHEM. 
Eccl.  50.  26.  that  foolish  peopW  that  dwell  in  S. 

SICK. 
Wisd.  17.  8.  they  that  promised  to  drive  trouble* 
from  a  ^.  soul,  were  s.  Ihemselvei 
of  fear 
Eccl.  7.  35.  be  not  slow  to  visit  the  s. 
li*.  19.  and  use  physic  or  ever  thou  be  a. 
21.  humble  thyself  before  thou  be  s. 

1  Mac.  1.  5.  and  after  these  things  he  fell  s. 

6.  8.  lay  down  on  his  bed,  am^  fell  a.  for  grief 

SICKNESS. 
Eccl.  30.  17.  death  is  belter  than  continual  s. 

31.  22.  he  quick,  so  shall  there  nn  .«.  come  to  the* 

37.  30.  for  excess  of  meats  bringeth  ,*. 

38.  9.  my  son,  in  thy  a.  be  not  nef  ligcnt 

2  Mac.  9.  22.  having  creat  hope  to  escape  this  t. 
SIDE,  S. 

1  Esd.  3.  9.  of  whose  s.  the  king  shall  judge 
Wisd.  2.  24.  ihey  that  do  hold  of  his  s.  do  find  it 

17.  10.  which  could  of  no  s.  be  nvoided 

Ercl.  30.  12.  beat  him  on  the  s.  while  he  is  a  child 
42.  a.  to  make  the  .<!.  of  an  evil  servant  to  bleed 
1  Mac.  6.  38.  thev  set  them  on  this  s.  and  that  *. 
■     SIF.GE. 

1  Mac.  6.  49.  no  victuals  there  to  endure  the  s. 
9.  64.  then  went  he  and  laid  .s.  against  Betlihagi 

2  Mac.  10.  18.  things  convenient  to  sustain  the  * 
33.  they  laid  s.  agninst  the  •iirtres':  four  days 

11.  5.  drew  near  to  Beihsnra,  and  laid  s.  to  it 

SIEVE. 
£c«2.37.4.whcn  one  siftcth  with  a  «  refuse  remaint 


SIN 

SIGH. 

gccl.  25.  18.  when  he  hcarctb  it  shall  s.  bltlerly 

SlGHJiD. 
.Sim.  32.  then  Susanna  s.  and  said,  I  am  straitened 

SlUHETH. 
Eccl.  30.  20.  a  eunuch  cinbruceth  a  virgin,  and  s 

SIGHING. 
Jud.  14.  16.  Bagoas  cried  with  weeping  and  s. 

SIGHT. 
Tob.  4.  U.  that  give  it  in  the  s.  of  the  Most  Ilish 
21.  had  do  that  which  is  pleasing  in  his  s. 

11.  16.  in:irvelied,  because  he  hud  received  his  s. 

12.  6.  hath  done  unto  you  in  5.  of  all  that  live 

14.  2.  fifty-eight  years  old  when  lie  lost  his  a. 
Jud.  5.  12.  Egyptians  ca.«t  them  out  of  their  s. 

15.  2.  none  durst  abide  in  s.  of  his  neighbour 
Wijd.  3. 2.  in  s.  of  the  unwise,  they  seemed  to  die 

4.  for  though  they  be  punished  in  the  s.  of  men 
8.  11.  1  shall  be  admired  in  the  s.  of  great  men 
9.9.  wisdom  knew  what  was  accejnable  in  thy». 

13.  7.  search  him  diligently,  and  believe  their  ». 
15. 5.  the  J.  whereof  eniicelh  fools  to  lust  after  it 

16.  3.  the  ugly  s.  of  the  beasts  sent  among  them 

17.  6.  to  be  worse  than  the  s.  they  saw  not 
Keel.  1.  29.  be  not  a  hypocrite  in  the  s.  of  men 

2.  17.  they  will  humble  their  souls  in  his  s. 

7.  33.  a  gift  hath  grace  in  the  s.  of  every  man 

8.  IG.  lor  blood  is  as  nothing  in  liis  s. 
11.  21.  it  is  an  easy  thing  in  the  s.  of  the  Lord 
38.  3  in  s.  of  great  men  he  shall  be  in  admiration 
43.  16.  at  his  i.  the  mountains  are  shaken 

45.  I.  which  found  favour  in  the  s.  of  all  flesh 
3.  he  made  him  glorious  in  the  5.  of  kings 

46.  6.  because  he  fought  in  the  s.  of  the  Lord 
Sar.  1.22.  to  do  evil  in  the  s.  of  the  Lord  our  God 
Sus.  23.  than  to  sin  in  the  s.  of  the  Lord 

SIGN,  S. 
Esth.  14.  16.  I  abhor  the  s.  of  rny  high  estate 
Wisd.  5.  II.  no  s.  where  she  went  is  to  be  found 

16.  6.  be  .idmoniahed,  having  a  s.  of  salvation 
Reel.  37.  17.  the  countenance  is  a  s.  of  changing 

43.  6.  a  declaration  of  times,  and  a  «.  of  world 

7.  from  the  mnoa  is  the  s.  offcasts,  a  light 
Bar.  2. 11.  out  of  Kgypt  with  s.  and  with  wonders 

6.  67.  neither  can  they  shew  ».  in  the  heavens 

SIGNET. 
Tob.  1.  22.  .\chiacharu«  was  keeper  of  the  s. 
F.rxl.  17.  22.  the  alma  of  a  man  is  as  a  .«.  with  him 

32.  6.  as  I.  of  an  emerald  set  in  a  work  of  gold 

49.  11.  even  he  was  as  a  .?.  on  the  right  hand 
}Xrl  11.  anil  seal  it  with  thine  own  s. 

1  Mae.  6.  15.  gave  him  the  crown,  his  robe,  and  a. 

SILKNCE. 
J?;cci. 20.  5.  there  is  one  that  keepeth  s.  found  wise 

6.  and  some  keep  s.  knowing  his  time 
41.  20.  of  s.  before  them  that  salute  thee 

2  Mae.  14. 17.  through  the  sudden  s.  of  his  enemies 

.SILENT. 

^£c/.  26. 14.  a. 5.  and  lovinj  woman  isn  gift  of  Lord 

SILK. 

1  Jlfac.4.23.  got  much  gold,  and  silver,  and  blues. 

SILVER. 
Jvd.  5.  9.  they  were  increased  with  gold  and  s. 
Wisd.  7.  9.  J.  shall  be  counted  as  clay  before  her 
13.  10.  the  works  of  men's  hands,  gold  and  s. 
Kr.r.l.  26.  18.  pillars  are  upon  the  sockets  of.?. 
28.  24.  look  that  thou  bind  up  thy  s.  and  gold 
40.  25.  gold  and  s.  make  the  foot  stand  sure 
47    18.  and  thou  didst  multiply  s.  ns  lead 
■W  16.  the  sons  of  Aaron  sounded  the  s.  trumpets 
Bar.  3.  17.  they  that  hoarded  up  s.  and  gold 

18.  they  that  wrought  in  .1.  and  were  careful 
6.  4.  ye  shall  see  in  Babylon  gods  of  a.  and  gold 
39.thcircods  which  are  overlaid  with  gold  and  .■!. 

2  Mac.  2.  2.  when  Ihev  see  imnsrs  of  s.  and  gold 

SILVERSMITHS. 
Witd.  1.5.9.  but  strivetii  to  excel  gold-smiths  and  5. 

SIMEON. 

fud.  9.  2.  O  Lord  God  of  my  Father  S.  to  whom 

1  Mae.^.  l.ion  of  3.  n  priest  of  the  sons  of  Joarib 

SIMON. 

1  Mic.  15.24.  the  copy  hereof  ihey  wrote  to  S 
32  when  he  *BVi  the  dory  of  S.  he  was  astonished 
33.  then  anawcred  S.  and  said  to  him 

16.  2.  S.  called  his  ridi'st  sons,  .ludaa  and  .lohn 

13.  Pt<dcmeii«  cimsolled  against  R.  and  his  sons 

14.  3.  wfift  visiting  the  cities  in  the  roun'ry 
16.  when  S.  and  his  sons  had  drunk  larg'dy,  ihey 

rnmc  upon  9. in  banquitingplnce  and  slew  him 

2  .Vae.  3.  4.  one  S.  of  the  tribe  of  Ilcnjaniin 
II.  not  ns  that  wicked  S.  Iiiid  iniiiinl()rmed 

4. 3.  bv  one  of  9.  fnclion  murdiTB  were  committed 
i.  Apollonius  did  rage,  anil  incr'  ii<c  9   ninlice 
0.  the  slate  continue  qnict,  and  9.  leave  bin  folly 
fl.  22.  ho  jomed  9.  and  Jo«cph  nnd  Jonntlnn 
10.  20.  they  that  were  "iih  9   being  led  with 

SIMPLICITY. 

irUd.  1.  1.  and  in  a.  of  heart  sook  him 

SIN. 

Etd.  fi.  76.  we  have  bi"n  in  groat  *.  to  ttiis  day 

94i> 


SIN 

1  Ejif.9.11. seeing  oura.in  these  things  isspread  k< 

2  Ksd.  9.  36.  we  that  received  the  la« ,  perish  by  s. 
15.24.  woe  to  them  that  s.  and  kwp  not  my  coinm. 

26.  Lord  knowutb  all  llieni  that  a.  aguinitt  him 

16.  63.  knoweth  them  that  s.  and  would  hide  s. 
Tob.  3.  14.  that  I  am  pure  from  all  a.  wiih  inau 
4.  5.  let  not  thy  will  be  set  to  s.  or  transgress 

21.  if  thou  fear  God  and  depart  from  all  *. 

12.  9.  for  alms  shall  purge  away  all  a. 
10.  they  that  s.  are  enemies  to  their  own  life 

.fud.  5.  20.  and  they  ».  against  their  God,  11.  10. 
fyisd.lA.  nor  dwell  in  the  body  that  is  subject  to  s. 

10,  13.  fiarsook  not,  but  delivered  him  from  .?. 

15.  2.  if  we  s.  we  are  ihino,  knowing  thy  power, 

but  wo  will  not  s.  knowing  that  we  are  thine 

Keel.  3.  27.  the  wicked  man  shall  heap  s.  upon  a'. 

4.  21.  for  there  is  a  shame  that  bringeth  .». 

5.  5.  be  not  without  fear  to  add  a.  uiilo  s. 
7.  8.  bind  not  one  s.  upon  another 

10.  13.  for  pride  is  the  beginning  of  5. 

13.  24.  riches  are  good  to  him  that  hath  no  3. 

15.  20.  nor  hath  he  given  any  man  licence  to  a. 

20.  3.  for  so  shall  thou  escape  wilt'ul  5. 

21.  2.  flee  from  a.  as  from  the  face  of  a  serpent 
23. 11.  if  he  offend,  his  s.  shall  be  upon  him,  if  he 

acknowleilge  not  his  s.  a  double  offence 
13.  to  swearing,  for  therein  is  the  word  of  s. 
16.  two  sorts  of  men  multiply  a.  and  the  third 

25.  24.  of  the  woman  came  the  beginning  of  a. 

26.  28.  that  relurneth  from  righteousness  to  s. 
20.  a  huckster  shall  not  be  freed  from  s. 

27. 2.  so  s.  sticks  close  between  buying  and  selling 

10.  so  a.  for  them  that  work  iniquity 

13.  and  their  sport  is  the  wantonness  of  s. 
32.  12.  take  pastime,  but  a.  not  by  proud  speech 
34.  ISI.  nor  is  he  pacified  for  s.  by  sacrifices 
38.  10.  leave  ofTs.  and  order  thy  hands  aright 
42.  1.  and  accept  no  person  to  s.  thereby 

46.  7.  and  they  withheld  the  people  from  a. 
47.23.there  was  also  .leroboam, who  caused  Israel 

to  a.  and  shewed  Ephraim  the  way  of  s. 
2  Mae.  6.  15.  lest  being  come  to  the  height  of  s. 
12.  42.  that  the  .'.committed  might  be  put  out  of 
remembrance  Judis  e.\hortcd  to  keep  from  a. 
SINS. 
1  F.ad.S.l^.  our.<r.  are  multiplied  above  our  heads 
86.  for  thou,  O  Lord,  didst  make  our  a.  light 
9.  7.  thereby  to  increase  the  s.  of  Israel 
fViad.  4.  20.  they  cast  up  the  accounts  of  their  s. 

11.  23.  and  thou  winkest  at  the  a.  of  men 

12.  19.  of  hope  that  thou  givest  repentance  for  a. 

17.  3.  they  siijiposed  to  lie  hid  in  their  secret  a. 
Eccl.  1.  21.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  drivelh  away  a. 

2. 1 1.  the  lyord  lorgiveih  5.  and  savelh  in  affliction 
3.  3.  maketh  an  atonement  for  his  s. 

14.  instead  of  a.  it  shall  be  added  to  build  thee 

15.  thy  a.  shall  melt  away  as  ice  in  fair  weatliei 

5.  6.  he  will  be  pacified  for  the  multitude  of  my  .■!. 
12.  14.  one  that  is  defiled  with  him  in  his  .t. 
14.1.  and  is  not  pricked  with  the  multitude  ofs. 

16.  9.  people,  who  were  taken  away  in  their  a. 

17.  20.  but  all  their  a.  are  before  the  Lord 
25.  return  to  the  Lord,  and  forsake  thy  a. 

18.  21.  and  in  the  time  of  a.  shew  repentance 
21.  l.doso  no  more,  ask  pardon  for  thy  former  «. 
2.3.2.  they  spare  me  not,  and  it  pass  not  by  my  a. 

3.  lest  my  s.  abound  to  my  destruction 

12.  and  they  shall  not  wallow  in  their  .«. 

13.  the  Most  High  will  not  remember  my  a. 
28.  2.  forijive,  so  shall  lliy  a.  also  be  forgiven 

4.  and  doth  he  ask  forgiveness  of  his  own  .». 
.5.  who  will  treat  for  jiurdon  of  his  a.? 
8.  ab.«tain  from  sTife,  thou  shall  diminish  thy  » 

34.26.  6o  it  is  wilh  a  man  Ihiit  fnstelh  for  his  a. 

47.  11.  the  Lord  took  away  his  s.  and  exalted 
24.  and  their  a.  were  multiplied  exceedingly 

48.  15.  neither  departed  they  from  their  a. 

16.  was  pleasing  to  God,  and  some  multiplied  .•! 
Dnn.  3.  5.  bring  these  on  us  because  of  our  .«. 
2 Mae.  5. 17.  Lord  was  ang'y  for  a  while  for  the  f 

18.  hull  been  formerly  wrapped  in  many  ■•. 

6.  14.  till  they  Ix-  come  to  the  fulness  of  their  a. 

7.  32.  for  we  suffer  because  of  our  a. 

12.  42.  for  Ihe  s.  of  those  that  were  slain 

13.  8.  as  ho  commuted  many  a.  about  the  alt.ir 

SINFUL.  ., 

Tob.  13.  6.  dechre  hii  majeslv  to  a  a.  nation 
H'iad.  3.  13.  which  hatlflnol  known  the  a.  bed 
Fret.  10.23.  nor  convenient  to  magiiifv  a  ».  man 

11.  32.  nnd  a  a.  man  Inyoth  wnit  for  blood 
I.').  12.  f.ir  he  hath  no  need  of  the  a.  man 
27.  30.  and  the  .«.  man  shnll  have  them  both 
32  17.  a  .».  man  will  not  be  roproveil,  but  (indclh 

1  Mac.  1.  34.  and  they  put  therein  a  a.  nation 
2.  44.  and  they  smnle  a.  men  in  their  anger 
SINNED. 

1  F/!rf.1.21.cr.nccrning  those  that  .'.anddid  wickedly 
4  27.  many  alio  have  erred,  and  a.  for  women 

Tnb.  3.  3.  mv  fathers,  who  have  a.  before  theo 
lud.  5.  17.  whilst  they  $■  not  before  their  God 


SIS 


[Apoc-stfoa 


Ksik.  14.  6.  and  now  we  have  J.  before  thee 
H'lad.  12.  11.  for  those  things  wherein  they  a. 
^'cc/..5.4.Bay  notIhave.s.and  what  harm  happened 
21.1.  my  son,  hast  thou  s.'i  do  so  no  more 
27.  1.  many  have  a.  for  a  small  matter 
Bar.  1.  13.  we  have  s.  against  the  Lord  our  God 
Prayer  of  Manaas.  thou  hastpromiscd  repenlanca 
to  them  that  have  a.  thou  hast  not  ap[K>inted 
repentance  lo  Ihe  juit,  which  have  not  a.  but 
to  me,  for  1  have  s.  above  the  number  of  the 
sands  of  the  sea;  1  have  a.  O  Lord,  1  have  4. 
2.fl/ue.7.  Id.  wosutfer,  having  a.  against  our  God 

SINNER. 
F.cel.  1.  25.  godliness  is  an  abomination  to  a  s. 
2.  12.  woe  to  the  s.  thai  gooth  two  ways 

5.  9.  so  doth  the  s.  that  hath  a  double  tonguo 

6.  1.  even  so  shall  a  a.  that  hath  a  double  tongue 
8. 10.  kindle  not  the  coals  of  a  a.  lest  thou  be  burned 
9.  ll.envy  not  Ihe  glory  ofa  a.  knowesi  not  his  end 

12.  4.  give  lo  the  godly  and  help  not  Ihe  a.  7. 
14.  so  one  that  gocth  to  a  .«.  and  is  defiled 

13.  17.  what  fellowship  halli  the  wolf  with  tho 
lamb  ?  so  the  a.  wilh  the  godly 

15.  9.  praise  is  not  seemly  in  the  mouth  ofa  » 

16.  13.  the  a.  shall  not  escape  wilh  his  spoils 
20. 0.  there  is  a  a.  that  hath  good  success  in  eril 
23.  8.  the  a.  be  left  in  his  foolishness 
25.  19.  lei  the  portion  ofa  a.  fall  upon  her 
29.  16.  a  «.  will  oven  brow  the  estate  of  his  surety 
33. 14.  good  is  set  against  evil,  so  is  the  godly  set 

against  the  s.  and  ihe  a.  against  the  godly 
Prayer  of  Munaas.  repeniunce  lo  me  that  am  a  *, 
1  Mac.  2.  48.  nor  siiflered  they  the  a.  lo  triumph 

SINNERS. 
fViadAAO.so  that  living  among  s.lie  was  translated 
19.  13.  and  punishments  came  upon  the  £. 
Feci.  5.  6.  his  indignation  rested  U]>on  a. 
7.16.number  not  thyself  among  ihe  multitude  of ». 

11.  9.  and  sit  not  in  judgment  with  a. 
16.  had  their  beginning  together  with  a. 
21.  marvel  not  ntihe  worksofi.trustin  tha  Tiord 

12.  6.  for  the  Most  H.gh  haic  tb  a.  and  will  repay 
15.  7.  not  attain  lo  her,  and  a.  shall  not  see  her 

19. 22.  nor  at  any  time  is  the  counsel  of  s.  prudence 
21.  6.  hateth  to  be  reproved,  is  in  the  way  of  rf. 

10.  the  way  of  s.  is  made  plain  with  stones 
39.  25.  so  evil  things  are  creaieil  lor  »■. 

27.  so  to  Ihe  s.  they  are  turned  into  evil 
40  8.  and  that  is  seven  fold  more  upon  a. 
41.  5.  the  chiliirei)  ofa.  are  aboininnble  ciiildren 

6.  the  inl>.  rilaiice  of  a.  children  shall  perish 

11.  but  an  ill  name  of.?,  shall  be  blotted  out 
Prayer  u/Jl/ana.?.?.  thy  ansry  threatening  to  ward  a 

is  importable;  hast  nppninted  repentance  to  a, 
SINNETll. 
JViad.  11.  10.  might  know  wherewithal  a  man  a. 
Feel.  10.  29.  who  will  justily  him  that  i.  ag.  hissuui 

19.  4.  he  that .?.  sliail  offend  against  his  soul 
38.  15.  he  that  s.  before  lii.s  maker,  let  him  fall 

SINNING. 
F.cel.  19.27.  and  in  the  day  of.?,  he  will  beware 

19.23.  if  fi)r  want  of  power  he  be  hindered  fiom  a. 

20.  21.  there  is  that  is  hindered  from  a.  thioujrh 

waal 

SINAL 
E£(;/.48.7.  whohcardesl  rebuke  of '.he.  Lord  j»  3. 

SINCERE. 
Reel.  5.  11.  be  swift  to  hear,  and  let  thy  life  be  *. 

SING. 
Jad.  16.  1   Judith  began  lo  s.  this  thanksgiviog 
I      13   I  wil   a.  to  the  Lord  a  new  song 
I  Feel.  47.  9.  and  daily  .?.  pmises  in  their  son^s 
51.  11.  and  I  will  .?.  praise  with  thanksgiving 

SINGER. 
Kcc/.  9. 4.  use  not  company  o'"a  woman  that  is  a  ». 

SINGERS. 

1  F..id.  1.  15.  the  holy  .?.  also  were  in  their  order 

F.rrl.  47.  9.  he  set  «.  also  before  the  nl'ar 

.50.  18.  tho  .?.  also  snns  prnises  wilh  their  voice! 

SINGING. 

1  F.sd.  .5.02.  a.  tongs  of  thanksgiving  to  the  Lord 
/fV.?J.18.9.  tliefjtl  ersno>v.«.oiit  Ihe  songs  of  praise 

SINGITLAK. 
Wisd.  14.  18.  Ihe  a  dihfence  of  tho  artificer 
PION. 

2  Fad.  3.  2.  for  I  saw  the  desolation  ofS. 
5  2.5.  Ihoii  ha«t  billowed  9.  lo  ihyself 
6.  4.  or  ever  the  chimncvs  in  S.  were  hot 
in.  7.  tha:  9.  oi-r  mother  is  full  of  heuvinew 

.Jud  9. 13.  purposed  cruel  tliin;;.'  ag-iinst  top  of  8. 
hycl.  24. 10.  and  so  was  I  es'nblishcd  in  8. 
48.  18.  Scnnncherili  lift  up  liis  hand  against  9. 
24.  he  comforted  tt-em  llm  mourned  in  S. 
SIRN.\ME. 
1  Mac.  2.  5.  Jonathnn  whose  ,?.  was  Apphus 

SIRNAMFP. 
1  Mne.  1    10.  .Antiochus .?.  Epiphnnes,  who  hod 
6.  43.  Elcazar  also  ,?.  9r<v«r  in,  (lorceiring 

SISTER. 
Tth.  8.  4.  Tobias  said,  s  arise,  and  let  lu  pray 


ArOCKYTBA.] 


SLA 


Tob.  8.  7.  O  Lord,  I  take  not  this  my  t.  for  luit 

SIT. 
t  Esd.  3.  7.  and- he  shall  s.  next  to  Darius 
4.  42.  art  found  wisest,  tliou  shiilt  a.  n«xt  to  me 
Jud.  12.  15.  that  she  might  s.  and  eat  upon  them 
IVisd.  9. 12.  be  worthy  to  s.  in  my  father's  seal 
Bccl.9.0  s.  not  at  all  with  another  man's  wife,  nor 
f .  down  with  her  in  thine  arms 

11.  1.  wisdom  maketh  him  to  s.  among  great  men 
9.  and  *.  not  in  judgment  with  sinners 

12.  12.  neither  let  him  s.  at  thy  right  hand 
S5.  18.  her  husband  shall  $.  among  bis  neighbours 
2C.  12.  by  every  hedge  will  she  s.  down 
31. 12.  if  thou  s.  at  a  bountiful  table,  be  not  greedy 

32.  1.  lake  diligent  care  for  them,  so  s.  down 
38.  33.  they  shall  not  s.  high  in  the  congregation 

they  shall  not  ».  on  the  judges'  seat 
42.  12.  and  s.  not  in  the  midst  of  women 
Su*.  50.  the  elders  said,  come  s.  down  among  us 

S  ITT  EST. 
Ecel.  4.  9.  deliver  from  the  hand  of  the  oppressor, 
be  not  faint-hearted  when  thou 
s.  in  judgment 
23.  14.  remember  when  thou  s.  among  great  men 
81.  18.  when  thou  s.  an)ong  many,  reach  not 

SITTETH. 

fVisd.  9.  4.  give  me  wisdom  that  s.  by  thy  throne 
£ccl.'.i3.6.  neigheth  under  every  one  that  s.  on  him 
40.  3.  from  him  that  s.  on  a  throne  of  glory 
Bar.  6.  71.  like  a  whitethorn,  that  every  birds,  on 

SITTING. 
1  Esd.  4.  29.  Apame  «.  at  the  right  hand  of  the  king 
Wi.sii.  C.  14.  ho  shall  find  her  «.  at  his  doors 
Eccl.  1.  8.  there  is  one  wise,  s.  on  his  throne 

33.  28.  the  smith  also  5.  by  the  anvil 

29.  so  doth  the  potter  s.  at  his  work  and  turning 
Bar.  6.  43.  the  women  also  s.  in  the  ways 
Bel  40.  he  looked  in,  and  behold  Daniel  was  s. 

SIX. 

Tob.  14.  3.  called  his  son,  and  s.  sons  of  his  eon 

Bel  31.  into  the  lions'  den,  where  he  was  s.  days 

SIXTH. 

1  Esd. 7.  5.  ins.  year  ofDarius  king  of  the  Persians 
i  Esd.  6.  53.  on  the  5.  thou  gavest  commandment 
Eccl.  IT.  5.  in  s.  place  he  imparted  understanding 
iMac.  7.  18.  after  him  also  they  brought  the  s. 

SKILL, 
ff'iid.  13. 13. formed  it  by  the  s.of  his  understanding 
14.  2.  and  the  workman  built  it  by  his  s. 

19.  he  forced  all  his  s.  to  make  the  resemblance 

Eccl.  1.19.  wisdom  raineih  down  s.  and  knowledge 

10.  30.  the  poor  man  is  honoured  for  his  s. 

38.  3.  the  s,  of  the  physician  siiall  lift  up  his  head 

6.  he  hath  given  me  s.  that  he  might  be  honoured 

SKILFUL. 

£cci.21.15.if  a  s.man  hear  a  wise  word,  will  comm. 

SKILFULLY. 
fVisd.  13.  11.  he  hath  taken  oft"  all  the  bark  s. 

SKIN. 
3  MaCi  7.  7  and  when  thev  had  pulled  off  the  s. 

SKIPPETH. 
Eccl.  36.  26.  a  thief  that  «.  from  city  to  city 

SKIPPLNG. 
fVisd.ll  .19.asoand  ofstonesjor  running  of  s. beasts 

SLACK. 
3  Esd.  16. 37.  the  plagues  draw  nigh,  and  are  not  s. 

38.  when  the  child  cometh  forth,  they  s.  not 

39.  even  so  shall  not  the  plagues  be  s.  to  come 
Tob.  12.  fi.  therefore  be  not  s.  to  praise  him 
Eccl.  4.  29.  in  thy  deeds  be  not  s.  and  remiss 

.  35.  18.  the  Lord  will  not  hes.  till  he  hath  smitten 
SLACKNESS. 

2  Esd.  5.  42.  like  as  there  is  no  s.  of  the  last 

SLAIN. 
1  Esd.  1.56.  people  that  were  not  s.  with  the  sword 

4.  5.  they  siay,  and  are  s.  and  transgress  not 

S  Esd.  1.  .32.  whom  ye  have  taken  an<l  «>  and  torn 
Tob.  1.  18.  if  the  king  Sennacherib  had  s.  any 

Jud.O.  3.  wherefore  thou  gavest  their  rulers  to  be  s. 
IVisd.  11.  7.  whereby  the  infants  were  s. 

Bel  28.  he  hath  .^.  the  %ttgon,  and  put  priests 

I  Mac.  2.  9.  her  infants  are  «.  in  the  streets 

3.  11.  many  also  fell  down  s.  but  the  rest  fled 

5.  12.  come  and  deliver  ns,  for  many  of  us  ares. 
16.  21.  told  that  his  father  and  brethren  were  s. 

S  M'lc.  1.  13.  they  were  s.  in  the  temple  of  Nanea 

4.  36.  because  Onias  was  g.  without  cause 

7.  2U.  when  she  saw  her  seven  sons  s.  in  one  day 

SLANDER. 
Eccl.  19.  15.  admonish,  for  many  times  it  is  a  s. 

26.  5.  mine  heart  feareth  the  s.  of  a  city 

27.  23.  be  will  writhe  his  mouth  and  s.  thy  sayings 
1  Mac.  11.  11.  thus  ilid  he  .?.  him,  because  he  was 

SLANDEROUS. 
Eccl.  51.  2.  and  from  the  snnre  of  the  s.  tongue 

SLAVES. 

Jud.  5.  11.  brought  them  low,  and  made  them  s. 

14.  13.  for  the  s.  have  been  bold  to  come  down 

^18.  these  s.  have  dealt  treacherously 

I  M»c~  3.  41.  to  buy  the  cbildrca  of  Israel  &r  t. 

Ml 


SMA 

SLAUGHTER. 

2  Mac.  8.  4.  remember  the  wicked  t.  of  infants 
SLAY. 

1  Esd.  4. 5.  they  s.  and  are  slain,  and  transgress  not 
fVisd.  18. 5.  determined  to  «.  the  babes  of  the  saints 
Eccl.  47. 5.  gave  strength  to  s.  that  mighty  warrior 
Sms.  53.  the  righteous  sliiilt  thou  not  s. 
Bel  2t>.  I  shall. I.  this  dragon  without  sword  or  staff 
1  Mac.  5.  2.  began  to  s.  and  destroy  the  people 
9.  32.  but  Bucchides  sought  for  to  s.  him 
11.  10.  daughter  to  him,  for  ho  sought  to  s.  rao 

16.  21.  Plolemee  hath  sent  to  s.  thee  also 

SLAYETH. 
IVisd.  1.  11.  the  mouth  that  belicth  s.  the  soul 
Ecci.  34.22.  that  taketh  neighbour's  living  s.  him 

SLAYING. 
Eccl.  21.  2.  as  the  teeth  of  a  lion,  *.  souls  of  men 

1  Mac.  6.  45.  s.  on  the  right  hand,  and  on  the  left 

2  Mac.  5.  13.  there  was  s.  of  virgins  and  infants 

SLEEP. 

1  Esd.  3.  6.  to  drink  in  gold,  and  to  s.  upon  gold 

2  Ksd.  2.  31.  remember  thy  children  that  s. 
fVisd.  7.  2.  and  the  pleasure  that  came  with  s. 

17.  14.  but  they  sleeping  the  same  s.  that  night 
Eccl.  13.  13.  hearest  these  things,  awake  in  thys. 

22.  7.  as  he  that  waketh  one  from  a  sound  s. 
31.  1.  and  the  care  thereof  drivelh  awny  s. 

2.  watching  care,  as  a  sore  disease  breaketh  s. 

20.  sound  s.  cometh  of  n)oderate  eating 
40.  6.  he  is  in  his  s.  as  in  a  day  of  keeping  watch 

42.  9.  and  the  care  of  her  taketh  away  s. 

46.  19.  before  his  longs,  he  made  protestations 

1  Mac.  6.  10.  the  s-  is  eone  from  mine  eyes 

SLEEPING. 

ft'isd.  17.  14.  they  s.  the  same  sleep  that  night 

SLENDERLY. 

2  Mac.  15.  38.  but  I  have  done  s.  and  meanly 
SLEPT. 

2  Esd.  10.  59.  so  I  s.  that  night  and  another 
Tob.  8.  9.  so  they  s.  both  that  night 
Jud.  12.  5.  and  she  s.  till  midnight  and  arose 
Eccl.  48.  11.  they  that  saw  thee  and  s.  in  lovo 

•   SLEW. 
Eccl.il.  4.  s.  he  not  a  giant  when  he  was  but  young 

1  Mac.  1.  2.  .Alexander  s.  the  kings  of  the  earth 

61.  they  5.  them  that  had  circumcised  them 
2.  24.  be  ran  and  s.  him  upon  the  a'.tar 

38.  they  rose  up  and  s.  them  with  their  wives 
5.  51.  who  then  s.  all  the  males  with  the  sword 
16.  16.  Ptolemee  s.  him  and  his  two  sons 

2  Mac.  4.  38.  there  s.  he  the  cursed  murderer 
5.  6.  Jason  s.  his  own  citizens  without  mercy 

SLIDE. 
Eccl.  23.  26.  beware  thou  s.  not  by  it,  lest  thou  fall 

SLING. 
.hcd.  9.  7.  they  trust  in  spear,  and  bow,  and  s. 
Eccl.  47.  4.  lifted  his  hand  with  the  stone  in  the  s. 

SLINGS. 
1  Mac.  6.  51.  and  pieces  to  cast  darts  and  s. 

SLIP. 
Eccl.  20.  IS.  to  s.  on  a  pavement  is  better  than  to  s. 
with  the  tongue,  so  fall  of  wicked  shall  come 
SLIPPED. 
Eccl.  25.  8.  he  that  hath  not  s.  with  his  tongue 

SLIPPETH. 
Eccl.  19.  16.  there  is  one  that  s.  in  his  speech 
21.  7.  a  man  of  understanding  knows  when  he  s. 

SLIPPED. 
Eccl.  14.  1.  blessed  is  the  man  that  hath  not  s. 
vrith  his  mouth 
1  Mac.  9.  7.  when  Judas  saw  that  his  host  s.  away 

SLOTHFUL. 
.EccZ.  22.2.  a  .<.  man  is  compared  to  filth  of  dunghill 
37.  11.  consult  not  with  the  s.  for  any  work 

SLOW. 
fFisd.  15.  15.  as  for  their  feet,  they  are  s.  to  go 
Eccl.  7.  3i>.  be  not  s.  to  visit  the  sick 
51.24.  wherefore  are  von  ,<:.?  and  what  say  you? 

SLUMBER. 
Eccl.  22.  8.  a  tale  to  a  fool  speakethto  one  in  a  s. 
31.  2.  watching  care  will  rot  let  a  man  s. 

SMALL. 
1  Esd.  1.  .54.  the  vessels  of  the  Lord,  great  and  s. 
TVisd.  6.  7.  for  he  hath  made  the  .?.  and  great 
14. 5.  men  commit  their  lives  to  a  s.  piece  of  wood 
16.  6.  they  were  troubled  for  a  s.  season 
Eccl.  5.  15.  ignorant  in  a. great  matter  or  n  s. 
19.  1.  he  that  contemnetti  s.  things  shall  fall 
27.  1.  many  have  sinned  for  a  s.  matter 

43.  15.  by  his  power  the  hailstones  are  broken  s. 
48.  15.  there  remained  a  s.  people  and  a  ruler 

Dar^  2.  29.  great  multitude  turned  info  a  s.  number 
Dan.  3.23.  hot  with  rosin,  pitch,  low,  and  s.  wood 

1  Mac.  3. 16.  went  to  meet  him  with  a  s.  company 

18.  with  a  great  multitude,  or  a  s.  company 

2  Mac.  1.  15.  he  was  entered  with  a  j.  company 
3.14.  wherefore  there  was  no  s.  agony  through  city 
14.  8.  for  all  our  nation  is  in  no  *.  misery 

SMART. 
T«b.  11. 12.  when  his  eyes  began  to  s.  he  rubbed 


SOL 

SMELL. 
Tob.  8.  3.  which  s.  when  the  evil  spirit  smellad 
Eccl.  30,  lit.  for  neither  can  it  eat  nor  s. 
2  Mac.  9.  9.  the  filthiness  of  his  s.  was  noisome 
12.  when  himself  could  not  abide  his  own  s. 
SMELLED. 
Tob.  8.  3.  when  evil  spirit  had  s.  he  fled  into  Egypt 

SMELLING. 
Eccl.  50.  15.  a  sweet ,«.  savour  to  the  Most  High 

^         SMILE. 
Eccl.  21.  20.  a  wise  man  doth  scarce  s.  a  little 

SMILED. 
Bel  7.  then  Daniel  .•;.  and  said,  be  not  deceived 

SMILING. 

Eccl.  13. 11.  and  s.  on  tlice,  will  get  out  tliy  secrets 

SMITE. 

1  E.^d.  4.  8.  if  he  comnKinded  to  s.  they  s. 

2  Esd.  15.  11.  and  I  will  s.  Egypt  with  plagues 
.Tud.  9.  10.  s.  by  the  deceit  of  my  lips  the  prince 
Eccl.  36.  10.  s.  in  sunder  the. heads  of  the  rulers 

SMITH. 
Eccl.  38.  28.  the  s.  nlso  silling  by  the  anvil 

SMITTEN. 
./«rJ.13.15.Lord  baths  him  by  thehandof  a  womao 
Eccl.  13.  2.  if  the  one  be  s.  against  the  other 
35.  18.  till  he  hath  .«.  in  sunder  the  loins 

1  .Ulac.  1.  1.  had  s.  Darius  king  of  the  Persians 

2  Mac.  12.  22.  being  .s-.  with  fear  and  terror 

S.MOKE. 
Tob.6.1.  we  must  make  as.  thereof  before  the  man 
16.  the  liver  thou  shiilt  make  a  s.  with  it 

8.  2.  the  heart  and  liver  he  made  a  s.  therewith 
H'isd.  2.  2.  the  liroath  in  our  nostrils  is  as  s. 
Eccl,  22.  24.  as  the  vapour  and  s.  of  a  furnace 
Bar.  6.  21.  their  faces  are  black  through  the  s. 

1  Mac.  4.  20.  for  the  s.  that  was  seen  declared 

SMOTE. 
Jud.  5.  12.  he  s.  the  land  of  Egypt  with  plague* 
13.8.  she  s.  twice  ujion  bis  neck  with  all  her  might 
Dan.  3.26.  and  s.  the  flame  of  fire  out  of  the  ovea 

1  Mac.  2.  44.  they  s.  sinful  men  in  their  anger 

2  J/rtc.  3.  25.  s.  at  Ileliodorus  with  his  forefeet 

9.  5.  God  s.  him  with  an  incur-ible  plague 
]2.35.a  horseman  cnminzon  liims.off  his  shoulder 

SMOTEST. 
Jud.  9.  3.  thou  s.  the  servants  with  their  lords 

SNARE. 
TVisd.  14.  11.  and  a  s.  to  the  feet  of  the  unwise 
Eccl.  27.  29.  they  shall  be  taken  in  the  s. 
51.  2.  and  from  the  s.  of  the  slanderous  tongue 
1  Mac.  1.  35.  and  so  they  became  a  sore  s. 
5.  4.  who  had  been  as.  and  an  offence  to  people 

SNARES. 
Tob.  14.  10.  Manasses  escaped  the  s.  of  death 

SNOW. 
Dan. 3.46.  O  ye  dews  and  storms  of  s.  bless  the  Iji, 
50.  O  ye  frost  and  s.  bifss  ye  the  Iiord 

1  Mac.  13.  22.  but  there  fpll  a  very  great  s. 

SOBERLY. 
IVisd.  9.  11  she  shall  lead  me  s.  in  my  doings 

SOCKETS. 
Eccl.  26. 18.  as  goldeti  pillars  are  on  s.  of  silver 

SODOM. 

2Esrf.2.3.remembrr  what  Tdid  toS.  andGomorrak 

SODOMITES. 

2  Esd.  7.  36.  Abraham  prayed  first  for  tho  S. 
IVisd.  19.  14.  for  the  S.  did  not  receive  those 

SODOMITISH. 
2  Esd.  5.  7.  the  S.  sea  shall  cast  out  fish 

SOFT. 
.Jud.  12.  15.  her  maid  laid  s.  skins  on  the  ground 
IVisd.  2.  3.  our  spirit  shall  vanish  as  tho  s.  air 
15.  7.  for  the  potter  temperrns  the  s.  earth 
SOJOURNED. 
.Tud.  5.  7.  they  s.  heretofore  in  Mesopotamia 
fVisd.  19.  10.  while  they  s.  in  the  strange  land 
Eccl.  10.  8.  nor  spared  he  the  place  where  Lot ». 

SOJOURNEST. 
Eccl.  41.  19.  in  regard  of  the  place  where  thou  t. 

SOLD. 
Tob.  1.7.  another  tenth  pan  I  s.  away  and  spent  it 
.fitd.  7.  25.  but  God  hath  s.  us  into  their  hands 
IVisd.  10.13.  whf  n  rigliteous  was  s.  she  forsook  not 
Bnr.4.6.  ye  were  s.to  the  nations  not  fordPstructioQ 

1  Mac  1.  15.  nnd  were  s.  to  do  mischief 

2  Mac.  4.  32.  nnd  some  of  them  he  s.  into  Tyros 
5.  14.  and  no  ft-wer  s.  than  slain 

8.14. others  s.all  they  had  left  and  withal  besought 
the  Lord,  bc'inj  .'.  by  the  wicked  Nicanor 
SOLDIERS. 
1  Esd.  4.  fi.  likewise  for  those  tha'  are  no  t. 

1  Mac.  3.  28.  and  h>'  sravc  his  s.  pay  for  a  year 

5.  50.  so  the  s.  pitched,  and  assaulted  the  city 

6.  29.  there  came  uato  him  bands  of  hired  s. 
11.3.  he  left  in  every  one  a  jnrrison  of  ».  to  kocpit 

SOLEMN. 

2  Esd.  1.  31.  your  s.  fenst-days  have  I  forsaken 
.Jud.  8.  fi.  and  s.  days  of  the  house  of  Israel 
EsiA.lfi.  22.  among  your  s.  feasts  keep  it  a  highway 
Eecl.  47.  10.  and  he  set  in  ordsr  the  $.  times 


SON 

Bar.  1. 14.  read  this  book  upon  the  s.  doyi 

SOLEMSLY. 
iMac.  14.  4.  which  «iie  used  s.  in  the  Iciiiplo 

SOLK.MNITY. 
Eul.  50.  19.  till  the  s.  oflhe  Lord  was  enrfod 
2JUac.  15.  X.  nut  to  lot  that  day  pass  without  ». 

SOLES. 
£«fJi.l3.13.havebeen  content  to  kiss  thcs.of  his  foot 

SOLITAUY. 
E,cl.  8.  16.  go  not  with  liirn  into  H  s.  place 
9  7.  nor  wander  thou  in  the  i.  places  thereof 

SOLOMON. 
2  Esd.  7.  38.  S.  fdr  them  that  come  to  the  sanctuary 
JCccl.  47.  13.  S.  reigned  in  a  peaceable  time 

23.  thus  rested  S.  with  his  fathers 
2  Mac.  2.  8.  when  S.  desired  the  place  might  be 
10.  even  so  prayed  !?.  also,  and  fire  came  down 

12.  so  S.  kept  those  eight  days 

SOLUTION. 
2  Fsd.  10.  43.  of  death  of  her  sun,  this  is  the  j. 

SONG. 
2  F.sd.  10. 02.  our  s.  is  put  to  silence,  joy  at  an  end 
Jud.  16.  1.  all  people  sang  after  her  this  s.  of  praise 

13.  I  will  sing  unto  the  Lord  a  new  s.  O  Lord 
Keel.  39.  14.  sing  a  «.  of  prnise,  bless  the  Lord 

SONGS. 
lF.sd.5.6i).  singings. of  lhanksgivit>g,  praising Ld. 

Gl.  they  sOng  wdh  luud  voices  s.  to  the  Lord 
^cc/.3U.15.Bhew  forth  his  praise  withi'.  of  your  lips 
47.8.with  his  whole  heart  he  .sung  s.  and  loved  him 

9.  they  might  daily  sing  praises  in  their  s. 

17.  the  countries  marvelled  at  thee  for  thy  a. 

SON. 
Tab.  1.  22.  and  he  was  my  brother's .«. 

3.  15.  nor  any  «.  of  his  alive  to  whom  I  may  keep 

4.  3.  he  snid,  my  s.  when  1  am  dead  bury  me 
4.remcriiber,niy  s.  she  saw  many  dangers  for  thee 
5.  my  4.  bemindfulof  Lord  our  God  all  Ihy  days 

12.  beware  of  all  whoredom,  my  s.  lake  a  wife 

14.  be  circumspect,  my  s.  in  all  things  ihou  dost 
19.  therefore,  my  ».  rcmemb.  my  commandment 
21.  fear  not,  my  *.  th.'it  we  are  made  poor 

5.  1 1,  dost  lliou  leek  a  hired  man  to  go  with  thy  s. 

14.  and  things  necessary  as  to  mine  own  s. 

17.  Anna  said,  why  hast  thou  sent  away  our  s.? 

6.  14.  I  am  the  only  s.  of  my  father,  I  fear  lest  I 

die,  for  they  have  no  other  s.  to  bury  them 
1.  7.  thou  art  the  5.  of  an  honest  and  good  man 
10.  4.  my  s.  is  dead,  seeing  he  stayeth  long 
5.  I  care  fornothiirg,  my  s.  the  light  of  mine  eyes 

7.  mv  .?.  is  di'ad,  she  ceased  not  to  bewail  hers. 
11.9.  Aima  fell  on  the  neck  of  her  s.  and  said,  see- 
ing I  have  seen  thee,  my  s.  I  am  content  to  die 

10.  Tobit  stumbled,  but  his  s.  ran  unlo  him 

13.  when  he  saw  his  s.  he  fell  upon  his  neck 

15.  taken  pity,  for  behold,  I  .=!ee  my  s.  Tobias 
14.  3.  he  called  his  s.  and  the  si.T  eons  of  hi<  s, 

and  said  to  him,  my  s.  lake  thy  children 
H'itd.  2.  18.  for  if  the  just  man  bo  the  s.  of  God 
10.  5.  his  tender  compassion  toward  his  s. 
F.ecl.  2.  1.  my  a.  if  thou  ^mc  to  serve  the  Lord 
3.  12.  my  s.  help  thy  father  in  his  age 

6.  23.  give  car,  my  s.  receive  my  advice 

32.  my  s.  if  thou  wilt,  thou  shall  be  taught 

7.  3.  my  s.  sow  not  mi  furrows  of  unrighteousness 

10.  28.  my  s.  glorify  thy  soul  in  meekness 

11.  10.  my  s.  meddle  not  with  many  matter* 

16.  24.  my.i.  hearken  to  me,  and  leurn  knowledge 

18.  15.  my  .».  blemi-kh  not  thy  good  deeds 
21.  1.  my  s.  htisl  Ihou  sinned'!  do  .so  no  more 
26.  19.  my  s.  keep  the  flower  of  thine  age  sound 

30.  2.  he  that  chustiSeth  his  .«.  shall  have  joy 
3.  he  that  tcnchcth  his  ».  grieveth  the  enemy 

7.  hclhatmBkelhtoomuchof  his.?,  shall  bind  up 
13.  chastise  thy  s.  and  hold  him  lo  labour 

31.  22.  my  *.  hear  me,  and  despise  me  not 

'33.  19.  give  not  thy  s.  and  wife  power  over  lliee 
34.  20.  as  one  that'  killeth  the  s.  before  his  father 
40.  28.  my  n.  lend  not  a  bejgav's  life,  better  to  die 
48.  in.  to  turn  the  hcnrt  of  the  father  to  the  s. 

Bar.  2.3.  a  man  should  cat  the  flesh  of  his  own  5. 

1  Jfcfnr.  1.  10.  E(ii|ihnnes,  jr.  of  .Anliochus  the  king 
3.  33.  lie  left  I^ysias  to  bring  up  his  j.  Antiochus 
10.  51.  I  will  he  thy  f-  in  law,  and  give  gifts 
13.  S3,  saw  that  John  his  t.  was  a  valiant  man 
16. 11.  Plolcmens  thesonofAbubus  made  captain 

2.^fac.7.26.  promised  ihatshe  would  counsel  hcr». 

27.  O  my  .«.  haie  plly  lipun  me  that  bare  thco 

28.  I  beseech  thee,  my  f-  look  upon  Ihe  heaven 
10.  10.  who  wBi  the  f.  of  this  wicked  man 

PONS. 
1  Fsd.  5.  35.  the  a.  of  the  »i'rvnnt«  nf  Polomon 

8.  21.  upon  the  kingdom  of  llie  kinj  niid  his  .f. 
70.  their  a.  have  married  with  ihi  ir  diiughlers 
84.  yc  shnll  not  join  your  dauchlers  lo  their  a 

nor  thall  ye  tnki'  iheir  diiuglitors  to  your  ,? 
SFiid.  1.28.  have  I  not  prayed  you  as  a  father  hiss 
7i)i.l.  7.  the  fir-t  tenth  I  gave  lo  Ihn  a.  or.\aron 

21    not  .15  davs  bef(.rfi  two  of  liis  «.  killed  hm> 
Jud.  5.  3.  he  said   tell  n  e  row,  yo  ».  of  Canaan 
842 


SOU 

IVisd.  9. 1.  to  be  a  judge  of  thy  a.  and  daughters 

12.  21.  with  circumspection  didst  thou  judge  thy  s. 
I'i.  10.  thy  s.  not  the  teeth  of  dragons  overcame 
18.  4.  lo  be  imprisoned  who  kept  thy  s.  shut  up 

13.  acknowledged  this  jieople  to  be  the  s.  of  God 
F.ecl.'i.^Z.  confirmed  authority  of  the  mother  overs. 

It).  1.  neither  delighl  in  ungodly  a. 
40.  1.  a  heavy  yoke  is  upon  the  a.  of  Adam 
50.  13.  60  were  all  the  s.  of  Aaron  in  their  glory 
.S'us.48.areye  such  fools, yes.  of  Israel,  to  condemn 

1  Mac.  1.  9.  so  did  their  s.  after  them  many  years 
2.  20.  yet  will  I  and  my  s.  walk  in  the  covenant 

f)4.  wherefore  you,  my  s.  bo  valiant,  and  shew 
70.  and  his  s.  buried  him  in  the  sepulchre 

13.  16.  and  send  two  of  his  a.  for  hostages 

2  Mac.  7.  20.  when  she  saw  her  seven  s.  slain 
41.  last  of  all,  after  the  s.  the  mother  died 

SOOTHSAYINGS. 
Eccl.  34.  5.  divinations  and  s.  and  dreams  are  vain 

SORE. 
JVi.sd.  10. 12.  in  a  a.  conflict  she  gave  him  victory 
F.ccl.  31.  2.  care  as  a  s.  disease  breakclh  sleep 
39.  28.  which  in  their  fury  lay  on  s.  strokes 

1  Mac.  2. 14.  put  on  sackcloth,  and  mourned  very  s. 

2  Mac.  3.  26.  who  gave  him  many  s.  ttripcs 
9.  5.  s.  torments  of  the  inner  parts  came  upon  him 

SORROW. 
1  /?.«i.3.20.  a  man  remeinberelh  neither  s.  nor  debt 
Tab.  3.  1.  [  did  weep,  and  in  my  s.  prayed,  saying 
6.14.  and  biing  my  fivther's  life  to  the  grave  witlis. 
F.ftk.  13.  17.  turn  ours,  into  joy,  that  we  may  live 
Eccl.2>\.  6.  a  grief  of  heart,  and  s.  is  a  woman  that 
30.  12.  be  stubborn,  and  so  bring  s.  to  thy  heait 
23.  remove  s.  far  from  thee,  for  s.  hath  killed 

37.  12.  who  will  a.  with  thee  if  thou  shaltmiscarry 

38.  19.  in  affliction  also  s.  remaineth 

1  Mar.  1.11.  since  departed,  we  have  had  much  s. 

2  Mac.  3.  17.  what  a.  he  had  now  in  his  heart 
9.  9.  while  he  lived  in  s.  his  flesh  fell  away 

SORROWS. 
Feci.  3.  27.  an  obstinate  heart  be  laden  with  s. 
7.  27.  and  forget  not  Ihe  s.  of  thy  mother 
SORROWFUL. 

1  Fsd.  9.  .52.  this  day  is  holy  lo  Lord,  be  not  s.  53. 
Tub.  3.  10.  when  she  heard  these,  she  was  verys 

7.  7.  when  he  heard  Tobit  was  blind  he  was  s. 
13.  14.  who  have  been  a.  for  all  thy  scourges 
Feci.  4.2.  make  not  a  hungry  soul  s.  nor  provoke 
30.  5.  and  when  he  died,  he  was  not  s. 
SORRY. 

2  E.sd.  8. 15.  thy  people,  for  whose  sake  I  am  s. 
'fob.  9.  4.  and  if  I  tarry  long,  he  will  he  very  s. 
Eccl.  13.  5.  he  will  make  thee  bare,  and  not  be  s. 

SOVEREIGNTY. 
IVisd.  6.  3.  and  s.  is  given  from  the  Highest 

SOUGHT. 
1  Fad.  2.  21.  that  it  may  be  s.  out  in  the  books 

5.  39.  was  a.  in  the  register,  and  was  not  found 
Tub.  1.  19.  that  r  was  s.  for  to  bo  put  to  death 
IVi.'^d.S.  2. 1  loved  her  and  s.  her  out  from  my  youth 
Eccl.  26.  27.  a  scold  shall  be  s.  out  to  drive  awdy 

38.  33.  they  shall  not  be  a.  for  in  counsel 

39.  17.  at  a  lime  convenient  they  shall  all  be  s.  out 
47.  25.  they  a.  out  all  wickedness,  till  vengeance 
51.  3.  out  of  the  hand  of  such  as  s.  after  my  life 

1.5.  from  my  youlh  up  s.  I  after  her 
1  .Mac.  7.  13.  Assideans  were  the  first  that  a.  peace 

SOUL. 
lVisd.\.4.\ntn  a  mnliciouss.  wisdom  shall  not  enter 

11.  the  mouth  that  belieth,  slayeth  the  s. 
4.  11.  was  he  taken  away,  lest  deceit  beguile  his .«. 

14.  his  a.  pleased  the  Lord,  therefore  ho  hasted 
9.  15.  the  corruptible  body  presseth  down  the  a. 
10. 16.  she  entered  into  the  s.  of  servant  of  the  Ld. 
15. 11.  his  milker  that  inspired  into  him  an  actives. 
16.  14.  nor  tho  .«.  received  up,  cometh  again 
17.8.  promised  lo  drive  away  IroublcsVrom  sick  s. 
Eccl.  1.  30.  lest  Ihou  bring  dishonour  on  thy  » 
2.  I.  my  son,  prepare  thy  a.  for  lomptation 
4.  2.  make  not  a  hungry  a.  sorrowful 

6.  if  he  curse  thee  in  tho  billorness  ofhis  a. 

17.  until  she  may  trust  his*,  ami  try  him  by  laws 

20.  ho  not  ashamed  when  it  roncerneth  thy  a. 
22.  accept  no  person  against  thy  s. 

6.  2.  that  thy  a.  be  not  torn  in  pici^es  as  a  bull 

7.  1 1 .  laugh  no  man  to  scorn  in  bllterness  of  his  s. 
17.  humble  thy  a.  gronlly,  for  venjcance  is  fire 

21.  let  thy  s.  love  a  good  servant,  defraud  him  md 

9.  2.  give  not  ihy  a.  uiito  a  womiin,  lo  set  her  foot 
6.  give  not  Ihy  a.  lo  harlots,  that  Ihou  losu  not 

10.  28.  my  son,  glorify  thjr  s.  in  meekness 
W.willjiiRiify  him  that  sinnethneninsl  hisowns. 

14.  4.  he  thai  gatlicreth  by  defrauding  his  own  a. 
16.  eivn  and  tnke,  and  sanctify  thy  a. 

16.  17.  for  what  is  my  a.  nmonj  such  a  number'! 

19.  4.  that  sinneth,  shall  offend  ajainst  his  owns. 

20.  22.  there  is  that  deslroyolh  his  own  t. 

21.  27.  rursclh  Salon,  hn  ciirsolh  his  own  a. 
28.  a  wh.iperrr  dofileth  his  s.  and  i.s  haiod 

1   30.  23.  love  thine  own  t.  and  comfort  tliy  heart 


SPE 


trtPOCRVnlA 


Feci.  32.  23.  in  every  good  work  trust  thine  own  a 
'SJ.  HI.  liiou  hasl  need  of  him,  as  of  thine  own  * 
'34.15.  blessed  is  the  s.  of  him  tliat  feareth  the  Lord 
17.  he  raiseth  up  the  s.  and  lighleneth  the  eyea 
37.  27.  prove  thy  a.  and  see  what  is  evil  for  it 
28.  nor  hath  every  a.  pleasure  in  every  thing 
48.  5.  raise  his  a.  from  the  place  of  the  dead 
51. 19.  my  s.  hath  wrestled  with  her,  1  was  exact 
20.  I  directed  my  a.  to  her,  and  1  found  her 
26.  and  let  your  s.  receive  instruction 
2y.  let  your  s.  rejoice  in  his  mercy 
/iar.  2.  18.  but  the  s.  that  is  greatly  vexed 
3.  1.  O  Lord,  the  s.  in  anguish  crieth  lo  thee 
2  Mac.  6.  30.  but  in  s.  am  well  content  lo  suffer 

SOULS. 
/f'isd.3.  1.  thos.  of  righteous  are  in  hand  of  God 

13.  she  shall  have  fruit  in  the  visitation  of  s. 
7.  27.  and  in  all  ages  entering  into  holy  a. 

11.  20.  they  are  thine,  O  Lord,  ihou  lover  of  s. 

12.  6.  the  parents  that  killed  s.  destitute  of  help 
14.  11.  are  stumbling-blocks  to  the  s.  of  men 

20.  defiling  of  s.  changing  of  kind,  disorder 
17.  I.  therefore  unnurtured  a.  have  erred 
Eccl.  2.  17.  will  humble  their  s.  in  his  sight 

21.  2.  as  the  teeth  of  a  lion,  slaying  s.  of  men 
51.  24.  what  say  you,  seeing  your  s.  are  thirsty! 

liar.  2.  17.  whose  s.  are  taken  from  their  bodies 
6.7.  my  angel  with  you,  I  niyselfcaring  for  yours 
Dan.  3.  64.  O  ye  spirits  and  s.  of  the  righteous 
I  Mac.  1.  43.  should  make  their  s.  abominable 

SOUND. 
IViad.  1.  9.  the  s.  of  his  words  come  lo  the  Lord 

17.  19.  or  a  terrible  s.  of  stones  cast  down 
Feel.  45.  9.  that  there  might  be  a  s.  and  noise  mad« 

47.  10.  that  the  temple  might  a.  from  morning 

SOUNDED. 
1  Fsd.  5.  62.  and  all  the  people  a  trumpets 

C5.  yet  the  multitudes,  marvellously,  was  heard 
li'iad.  17.  4.  noises,  as  of  waters,  s.  about  them 

18.  10.  there  t.  an  ill-according  cry  of  enemies 
Eccl.  50.  16.  sons  of  Aaron  s.  the  silver  trumpets 

SOUNDS. 
IVisd.  19. 13.  notes  change  the  tune,  and  yet  arc  *, 
Eccl.  50.  IS.  Willi  creat  variety  of  s.  made  melody 

SOUNDING. 
1  Mac.  7.  45.  s.  an  alarm  after  them  with  trumpets 

SOUND. 
Feci.  17.  28.  tho  s.  in  heart  shall  praise  the  Lord 

22.  7.  as  he  that  waketh  one  from  a  s.  sleep 
26.  10.  my  son,  keep  the  flower  of  thine  age  s. 
30.  14.  being  s.  and  strong  of  constitution 

16.  there  is  no  riches  above  a  s.  body,  and  no  joy 

SOUR. 

2Mac.1i.  30.  such  a.  behaviour  camcnot  of  good 

SOUTH-SIDE. 

1  Mac. 3.  57.  the  camp  pitched  on  s.  of  Eirtmaus 

SOW. 

2  Fad.  9.  31.  for  behold,  I  s.  my  law  in  you 
10.  24.  no  man  left  to  till  the  earth  and  s.  it 

Eecl.  1.  3.  s.  not  on  furrows  of  unrighteousness 
26.  20.  a.  it  with  thino  own  seed,  trusting  iu 
SOWN. 

1  Zosd.4.  C.whenthevreHpiil  that  svhich  they  bads. 

SOWETH. 

2  Fad.  8.  41.  as  ihe  husbandimin  .<?.  much  seed 

16.  43.  he  that  a.  as  if  he  should  not  reap 

SPACE. 
If'hd.  16.  3.  ihesp  sulfering  penury  for  a  short  ». 
•2 Mac.  14.  44.  and  a  .«.  being  made,  he  fell  down 

SPAIN. 
1  JIfac.  8.  3.  whatthcvhad  done  in  the  country  of.''. 

SPAKE. 
1  F.<d.  1.  51.  and  look  when  the  Lord  a.  unto  then* 

3.  4.  young  men  of  the  guard  s.  ono  to  another 
Tub.  14.  8.  things  which  the  prophet  Jonas  a. 
Eccl.  13.  22.  he  s.  wisely,  and  could  have  no  plaee 

Sr.\KEST. 
Jud.  16.  14.  for  Ihou  .«.  and  they  were  mude 

SPARK. 
1  Fxd.  4.  7.  if  he  commanded  to  a.  they  a. 
IViad.  2.  10.  ungodly  said,  let  us  not  a.  the  widow 
Eccl.  13.  12.  and  he  will  not  s.  lo  do  thee  hurt 

23.  2.  that  they  s.  me  no'  for  mine  ignorance 
1  Mac.  13.  5.  that  I  should  s.  mine  own  '.ife 

SPARED. 
1  Fsrf.  1.  50.  because  he  s.  them  and  bis  tabernacle 

53.  who  s.  noilhcr  young  man  nor  maid 
.Htd.  13.  20.  hrcausf  thou  hasl  not  a.  thyself 
Ecrl.  16.  8.  nor ».  he  the  place  where  Lot  srrjourned 

17.  21.  neither  Icfl  nor  forsook  them,  but  s.  them 

SPARRDST. 
Ifisd.  12.  8.  novertheless  those  tliou  a.  as  men 

SPAREST. 
IVisd.  U.  26.  but  thou  a.  all,  for  they  are  IhiM 

SPART.A. 
1  Muc.\4. 16.  when  henr.l  at  Ronv-,  and  asforasB 

SPEAK. 
I  F^'d.  3  5.  let  every  ono  of  ns  a.  n  sentence 
21.  and  il  makeih  to  a  all  \\vt\s*  by  talents 

4.  13.  the  third,  this  was  Zorobabel,  boganio  t 


^PtiCKYPBA.] 


SPI 


STA 


I  F.sd.4.33.  kin?  looked,  hebegan  to  j.  of  the  trullil  Wi»(i.9.17.cxccpt  thou  send  thyHoly  S.from  above 


'r<>b.6  lO.I  \yill».  tor  her  ihalshe  may  be  given  thee 

1^2.  now  hear  me,  and  I  will  s.  to  her  lather 
7.8.  s.  of  those  things  thou  diilst  talk  in  the  way 
Jud.  11.5.  suffer  thy  handmaid  tos.  in  thy  presence 
Esth.  15.  12.  he  embraced  her,  and  said  s.  to  rae 
fVisd.  6.  9.  to  you  therefore,  O  kings,  do  I  s. 

7.  15.  God  hath  granted  me  lo  s.  as  I  would 

8.  12.  when  I  s-  they  shall  give  good  ear  to  me 
10.  21.  made  the  tongues  that  cannot  «.  eloquent 

13.  17  ashamed  to  «.  to  that  which  liath  no  iitV 
/?cci. 4.23. refrain  not  to  s.when  occasion  to  do  good 

25.  in  no  wise  £.  against  the  truth 
13.6.ho  will  i.theo  fair,andsay, what  wantestthou? 

23.hut  ifpoor  mans.they  say ,what  fellow  is  this"! 
18. 19.  learn  before  thou  s.  and  use  )>hysic  or  ever 

19.  14.  and  if  he  have,  that  he  s.  it  not  again 

20.  16.  they  that  eat  my  bread  s.  evil  of  me 
20.  fur  he  will  not .;.  it  in  due  season 

27.  7.  praise  no  man  before  thou  hcarest  him  s. 
32.  3.  s.  thou  that  art  the  elder,  it  becometh  thee 
43.  27.  we  may  a.  much,  and  yet  come  short 
1  Mac.  9.  55.  so  that  he  could  no  more  «.  any  thing 

SPEAKER. 
£ccZ.  23. 8.  the  evil  s.  and  proud  shall  fall  thereby 

SPEAK  ETH. 
IVisd.  1.  8.  that ,?.  unrighteous  things  cannot  be  hid 
Eccl.  12.  16.  an  enemy  «.  sweetly  with  his  lips 
13.22.  rich  mans,  things  not  to  bespoken,  yet  men 
23.  when  rich  man  s.  every  man  holds  his  tongue 
22.8.  thattellelh  tale  toa  fool,  s.  to  one  in  slumber 
25.  9.  he  that  s.  in  ears  of  them  that  will  hear 

SPEAKING. 
KccL  6. 5.  a  fair  g.  tongue  will  increase  greetings 
41.  £).  or  of  $.  again  what  thou  hast  heard 

SPEAR. 

Jud.  11.  2.  I  would  not  have  lifted  up  my  s. 

See  Shield. 

SPECIAL. 

Tob.  10.12. 1  commit  my  daughter  to  thee  of  s.  trust 

Wisd.  3. 14.  to  him  shall  he  given  thes.  gift  of  faith 

SPEECH. 
Jud.  9.13.  make  my  s.  and  deceit  to  be  their  wound 
Ksth.  14.  13.  give  me  eloquent  s.  in  my  mouth 

1(5.  5.  oftentimes  the  fair  i.  of  those  put  in  trust 

F.ccl.  4.  24.  for  by  s.  wisdom  shall  be  known 

9.  17.  and  the  wise  ruler  of  the  p(>ople  for  his  s, 

17.  5.  ».  an  interpreter  of  the  cogitations  thereof 

19.  IG.  there  is  one  that  slippeth  in  his  s. 

32.  8.  let  thy  s.  be  short,  comprehending  much 

12.  lake  thy  pastime,  but  sin  not  by  proud  s. 

"Mac.  15. 39. so. «. finely  framed  duligliteth  the  ears 

SPEECHES. 
fVisd.  8.  8.  she  knoweth  the  subtilties  of  s. 
Eccl.  36.  19.  so  a  heart  of  understanding,  false  s. 

SPEECHLESS. 
Wisd.  4.  19.  he  shall  rend  them,  that  they  be  s. 
2  Mac.  3.  29.  he  lay  s.  without  all  hojie  of  life 
SPEED. 

1  Esd.  6.  10.  those  works  are  done  with  great  s. 
8-  19.  that  they  should  give  it  him  with  «. 

SPEEDILY. 
Jud.  12.  14.  whatever  pleaseth  him,  I  will  do  s. 
Esth.  16.  18.  God  s.  rendering  vengeance  to  him 
ffisd.  2.  6.  let  us  s.  use  the  creatures  as  in  youth 

4. 11.  yea,  s.  was  he  taken  away,  lest  wickedness 

6.  5.  horribly  and  s.  shall  he  come  upon  you 
^ccM6. 4. kindred  ofwickedshalU. become  desolate 

21.  5.  and  his  judgment  cometh  «. 

43. 22.  a  present  remedy  of  all  is  a  mist  coming  s. 

2  Mac.  7. 37.  he  would  ,i.  be  merciful  to  our  nation 

SPEND. 
1  Esd.i. '21.  he  sticks  not  to  s.  hislife  with  his  wife 
7'w6.10.7.whichRnguel  had  sworn  heshould.5.thore 
Jud.  11. 13.  are  resolved  to  s.  the  first-fruits  of  corn 
12. 4.  I  shall  not  s.  those  things  that  I  have  before 
Eccl.  9.  9.  s.  not  thy  money  with  her  at  the  wine 
14.  4.  for  others  that  shall  s.  his  goods  riotously 

SPENDING. 
fVisd.  13.  12.  and  aftf  r  s.  the  refuse  of  his  work 

SPENT. 
I  Esd.  6. 30.  as  priests  in  Jerus.  signify  lo  be  daily  .s. 
1  Mac.  14. 32.  Simon  .■>.  much  of  his  own  substance 

SPIRIT. 
J  Esd.  2.  2.  the  Lord  raised  up  the  s.  of  Cyrus 
TV*.  3.  0.  and  command  my  s.  to  be  taken  from  me 
6.7.  if  a  devil  or  an  evils,  trouble  any  make  smoke 

14.  lest  I  die,  for  a  wicked  s.  loveth  her 

15.  and  make  thou  no  reckoning  of  the  evil  s. 
8.  3.  which  smi>ll  when  the  evil  s.  had  smelled 

Jud.  14.  6  Achior  fel\  down,  and  his  s.  failed 

16.  14.  th«a  didst  send  forth  thy  ».  it  created  them 
Eslh.  15.  8.  then  God  changed  the  s.  of  the  king 
IFisd.  1.  5.  the  holy  s.  of  di.scipline  will  flee  deceit 
<i.  wisdom  is  a  loving  s.  and  will  not  acquit 
7.  for  the  s.  of;  be  Lord  filleth  the  world 
2.  3.  and  our  s.  shall  vanish  as  the  soft  air 
5.  3.  ihey  repenting  and  groaning  for  anguish  of  s. 
7.7.  Ic.illedon  God,  the  s.  of  wisdom  came  tome 
29.  for  in  her  is  an  under:<tinJing  s.  holy 
843 


12.  1.  for  thine  incorruptible  s.  in  all  things 
15.11.  he  knew  not  him  that  breathed  in  a  livings 
16.  he  that  borrowed  his  own  a.  fashioned  them 
Ifi.  14.  the  s.  when  gone  forth,  returneth  not 
Eccl.  34.  13.  the  s.  of  those  that  fear  tha  Lord 

38.  23.  when  his  s.  is  departed  from  him 

39.  6.  shall  be  filled  with  the  *  of  understandin, 
48.  12.  and  Elizcus  was  filled  with  iiis  s. 

24.  he  saw  by  an  excellent  s.  what  should  come 
Bar.  3. 1.  O  Lord,  the  troubled  s.  cricth  unto  thee 
Su.<i.  45.  raised  up  the  holy  s.  of  a  young  youth 
Bel  36.  through  the  vehemency  of  his  3.  set  him 

1  Mac.  13.  7.  the  people  heard,  their  s.  revived 
SPIRITS. 

/f7sd.7.23.  free  from  care,  pure  and  most  subtile  s 

SPIRITUAL. 
Wisd.  14. 12.  idols  were  beginning  of  s.  fornication 

SPIT. 
Eccl.  23.  12.  if  thou  s.  on  it,  it  shall  be  quenrhed 

2  Mac.  6.  19.  he  s.  it  forth,  and  came  lo  torment 
SPITTLE. 

Eccl.  2G.  22.  a  harlot  shall  be  accounted  as  s. 

SPOIL. 
1  Esd.  4.  5.  as  well  the  s.  as  all  the  things  else 
Tob.  3.  4.  thou  hast  delivered  us  for  a  s. 
1  Mac.  3.20.  to  destroy  us  and  our  wives  and  to  s.us 

SPOILED. 
1  Esd.  4.  24.  when  he  hath  stolen,  s.  and  robbed 
IVisd.  10.  20.  the  righteous  s.  the  ungodly 
Eccl.  36.  2.5.  where  no  hedge  is,  the  possession  iss. 
48. 15.  till  they  were  s.and  carried  out  of  their  land 
Bar.  6.  18.  lest  their  gods  be  s.  with  robbers 

1  Mac.  6.  24.  they  slew,  and  s.  our  inheritance 

2  Mac.  9.  16.  holy  temple,  which  before  he  had  s. 
SPOILS. 

1  Mac.  1.  3.  Alexander  took  s.  of  many  nations 

2  Mac.  8.  28.  had  given  part  of  s.  to  the  maimed 
30.  divided  among  themstdves  many  s.  more,  and 

made  the  widows  and  the  aged  also  equal  in  s. 
SPOKEN. - 
1  Esd.  1.  28.  the  words  s.  by  the  mouth  of  the  Lord 

3.  17.  who  had  s.  of  the  strength  of  wine 

4.  13.  then  the  third,  who  had  s.  of  women 
9.  10.  like  as  thou  hast  s.  so  will  we  do 

Eccl.  13.  22.  he  speaketh  things  not  to  be  s. 
33.  17.  weep  a  day  or  two,  lest  thou  be  evil  s.  of 
33.  they  shall  not  he  found  where  parables  ares. 
Bar.  2.  20.  as  thou  hast  s.  by  thy  servants 
Sus.  47.  what  mean  these  words  that  thou  hast  *.? 
Bel  9.  for  he  hath  s.  blasphemy  against  Bel 

1  Mac.  1.  24.  a  great  massacre,  and  s.  very  proudly 

2  Mac.  1.  29.  plant  thy  people,  as  Moses  hath  s. 
3. 34.  when  they  had  s.  these  words,  they  appeared 
6.  17.  let  this  we  have  s.  be  for  a  warning  to  ns 
9.5. as  soon  as  he  had  .9.the«e  words  a  pain  came  on 

SPORT. 

1  Esd.  1.  51.  they  made  a  s.  of  his  prophets 
Eccl.  27.  13.  their  s.  is  in  the  wantonness  of  sin 

SPOT. 
Wisd.  13.  14.  and  covering  every  s.  therein 

SPOTTED. 
Wisd.  15.  4.  nor  any  image  s.  with  divers  colours 

SPOUSE. 

Wisd.  8. 2. 1  loved  her,  I  desired  to  make  her  my  s 

SPOUTS. 

2  Mac.  14.  45.  his  blood  gushed  out  likes,  of  water 
SPREAD 

1  Esd.  9. 11.  seeing  our  sin  in  these  things  is  s.  far 
Jud.  4.  11.  s.  out  their  sackcloth  before  the  Lord 
Wisd.  17.  21.  over  them  was  s.  a  heavy  night 

1  Jlfac.4.51.  they  s.  out  the  vials,  and  finished  works 

3  Mac.  8.  7.  his  manliness  was  s.  every  where 
SPREADING. 

Wisd.  17.  18.  a  noise  of  birds  among  s.  branches 

SPRING. 

fVisd.  2.  7.  and  let  no  flower  of  the  s.  pass  by  us 

SPRLNGS. 

2  Esd.i.l.  how  many  s.  are  in  the  beginning  of  the 
deep,  or  how  many  s.  are  above  the  firmament 

13.  47.  the  Highest  shall  slay  the  s.  of  the  stream 

SPRINKLE. 

2  Jlfac.l.2I.he  commanded  the  priests  tos.llie  wood 

SPRINKLED. 
2  Mac.  10.  25.  they  s.  earth  upon  iheir  heads 

SPY. 
Eccl.  li.  30.  like  as  a  s.  watcheth  be  for  thy  fall 

SPIES. 
1  Mae.  12.  26.  he  sent  «.  also  to  their  tentg 

SQUARE. 
1  Mac.  10.  11.  to  build  the  walls-with  s.  stonct 

STABLISHED. 
Eccl.  22.  16.  BO  the  heart  that  is  s.  by  counsel 

STAFF. 
Tob.  5.  17.  is  ho  not  the  s.  of  our  hand  in  going? 
Bel  2C.  I  will  slay  the  dragon     ithout  sword  or  s. 

STAIN 
Erel.  22.  10.  do  ».  the  nobility  of  their  kindred 
33.  22.  leave  not  a  ».  in  thine  honour 
47.20.  thoa  didst «.  thy  honour  and  pollute  thjscsd 


STE 

2  Ma    6.  25.  and  I  shall  get  a  s.  to  my  old  a^ 

STAINED. 
2  Mac.  6.  19.  to  live  s.  with  such  abominaiion 

STAKES. 
Eccl  43.  19.  it  lieth  on  the  top  of  sharp  «. 

STALI-ION. 
Eccl.  33.  6.  a  s.  horse  is  as  a  mocking  frienrt 

STAMP. 
1  Mac.  15.  6.  also  to  coin  money  with  thine  owQ  f. 

STAND. 
1  Esd.  8.  90.  we  cannot  s.  any  longer  before  thco 
Jud.  fi.  4.  footsteps  shall  not  be  able  lo  s.  before  u> 

8.  12.  that  ».  instead  of  God  amonjst  men 
33.  you  shall  s.  this  night  in  the  gate 

Wisd.5. 23.  a  mighty  wind  shall  s.  up  against  them 
6.  7.  nor  shall  he  s.  in  awe  of  iiny  man's  greatness 
12.  12.  or  who  shall  come  to  «.  ngainst  thee? 
Eccl.  12.  12.  set  him  not  by,  lest  he  s.  in  thy  place 
21.  23.  he  that  is  well  nurlursil  will  s.  without 
22. 18.  pales  on  a  high  place  will  never  s.  ngainst 
the  wind,  so  a  fearful  heart  cannot  s.  against  fear 
37.  1.3.  let  the  counsel  of  thino  own  heart  s. 
40.  25.  gold  and  silver  make  Ihe  foot  s.  sure 
4.3.  10.  they  will  s.  in  their  order,  and  not  faint 
44.  12.  their  seed  s.  fust,  and  their  chililren 
1  ytfar.3..53.  how  shall  we  be  able  to  s. against  them ! 
10.  72.  thy  foot  is  not  able  to  s.  before  our  face? 
2Mac.  2.  30.  to  s.  on  every  point  and  go  over  things 

STANDETH. 

Jud.  9.  11.  for  thy  power  s.  not  in  multitude 

Wisd.  4.  8.  is  not  that  which  s.  in  length  of  lime 

IMac.Q.  44.  its.  not  with  us  to-day,  as  in  time  past 

STANDING. 

1  Esd.  1.  5.  s.  in  the  temple  according  to  dignity 
./ud.  13. 4.  then  Judith  s.  by  his  bed,  said  in  heart 
Wisd.  4.  4.  yet  s.  not  fast,  Ihey  shall  be  shaken 

10.  7.  and  a  s.  pillar  of  salt  is  a  monument 
18.  16.  and  s.  up,  filled  all  things  with  death 
23.  s.  between,  he  stayed  the  wrath  and  parted 
'Sus.  48.60  he  s.  in  the  midst  of  them,  said 
iMac.  14.  4.5.  he  ran  through  and  s.  on  asteeprock 

STAR. 
Eccl.  50.  6.  he  was  as  the  morning  s.  in  a  cloud 

STARS. 
Wisd.  7. 19.  the  circuits  of  years  and  position!  of  #. 
29.  she  is  above  all  the  order  of  s. 

10.  17.  and  a  light  of  s.  in  the  night  season 
13.2.  but  deemed  it  swift  air,  or  the  circle  of  tho*. 
17.  5.  nor  bright  flames  of  s.  endure  to  lighten 

Eccl.  43. 9.  the  be;iuty  of  heaven,  the  glory  of  Ihe  s. 
44.  21.  he  that  would  exalt  his  seed  as  the  s. 
i5ar.3.34.the  s.sliined  in  their  watches  and  rejoiced 

6.  60.  for  the  sun,  moon,  and  ».  are  obedient 
Dan.  3. 13.  multiply  their  seed  as  the  s.  of  heaven 

41.  O  ye  s.  of  heaven  bless  ye  Ihe  Lord 

2  Mac.  9.  10.  thought  he  couM  reach  to  the  s. 
STATE. 

2  .Wac.  4. 6. was  impossible  s.  should  continue  quiet 

9.  24.  they  knowing  to  whom  Ihe  s.  was  left 

11.  19.  if  you  keep  voursilves  loyal  lo  the  *. 
14.  2C.  was  not  woll-aflcctid  toward  the  s. 

STATEL1NE?S. 
Jud.  9. 10.  break  down  th''irs  by  hand  of  a  woman 

STATURE. 
Bar  3.  26.  the  giani«,  that  were  of  so  great  s. 

STATUTE. 
2  Mac.  10.  8.  (hey  ordained  also  by  a  common  t. 

STATUTES 
2  Esrf.1.24. will  give  my  name  that  they  maykeep* 

7.  11.  and  when  Adam  transgressed  my  s. 
13.  42.  that  they  might  there  keep  their  s. 

Eccl.  45.  17.  he  gave  authority  in  s.  of  judgment 

STAY. 
1  Mac.  2.  43.  joined  and  wore  a  s.  unto  them 

STAYED. 
Wi.-id.  IS.  23.  standing  boiween,  he  s.  the  wrath 
Eccl.  15.4.  he  shall  be  s.  ui>on  her,  and  notmovef 

STAYETH. 
Tob.  10.  4.  my  son  is  diiad  seeing  he  s.  long 

STEAD. 
1  F.sd.  1.  34.  people  made  him  king  in  s.  of  Josia* 
Tub.  1.21.  Sarchedonns  bis  son  reigned  in  his  s. 
.Tud.  8.  12.  that  stand  in  s.  of  God  among  men 
Esth.  14.  2.  in  s.  of  precious  ointment^,  ashes 
Wisd.  5.  ]»*.  |)ut  on  true  judgment  in  s.  of  a  helmet 
7.  10.  and  I  choose  to  have  her  in  s.  of  light 
11.  6.  in  s.  of  a  fountain  of  a  perpetual  running 
18.  3.  in  s.  whereof  iliou  gavest  them  a  pillar 
F.ccl.  4.  10.  bo  in  s.  of  a  husband  to  their  mother 
6.  1.  in  s.  of  a  friend  become  not  an  enemy 
17.27.  in  s.  of  them  which  live  and  give  thanka 
Bar.  3. 19.  and  others  are  come  up  in  their  s. 
1  Mac.  3.  1.  then  Marcalx-ns  rose  up  in  his  *. 
11.  34.  in  a.  of  payments  the  king  received 
14. 17.  that  Simon  wns  nmrlo  high-priest  in  hit  a. 
STEAL. 
1  .^d.  4. 23.  a  man  cupih  his  way  to  rob  and  to« 

S'l'EDFAST. 

Fjth.Vi.^.  for  his  consn  ant  good  will  and  s.  fidelity 

Wild.  7.  23.  kind  to  man,  t.  9ur«,  free  from  cars 


STO 

£ecl.  5. 10  be  ».  in  thy  understanding  and  thy  word 
II.  20.  be  s.  in  ihy  covenant,  and  be  conversant 
22.  23.  abide  a.  to  liiin  in  time  of  his  trouble 

1  Mac.  13.  37.  we  are  ready  to  make  a  s.  |ieuce 

STEKP. 

2  Mac.  14.  45.  ho  ran,  and  standing  upon  a  a.  rocli 

STEP. 
Etcl.  19.18.  the  fear  of  Lord  is  first ».  to  be  accepted 

STEPS. 
Ecd.  6.  36.  let  thy  foot  wear  the  t.  of  his  door 
42.  1%  he  revealelh  the  s.  of  hidden  things 

STEVV.ARUS. 
I  Ksd.  8.  67.  the  commandmcnls  to  the  king's  s. 

STICKETH. 

Eccl.  19.  12.  as  an  arrow  that  s.  in  a  man's  thigh 

27.2.  as  a  nail  3.  fast  belwoen  the  joinings  of  stones 

STICKS. 

1  Esd.  4. 21.  he  s.  not  to  spend  his  life  with  his  wife 

STIFF. 
Bar. 2. 30.  not  hear,  beciiuse  it  is  a  5.-necked  people 
33.  and  they  shall  return  from  their  s.  neck 
STIFFLY. 

2  Eld.  2.  47.  stood  so  s.  for  the  name  of  the  Lord 

STINGS. 
IViad.  16.5.  perished  with  the  «. of  crooked  serpents 

STINK. 
ZMac.0. 10.  no  man  could  endure  to  carry  for  hiss. 

STIR. 
2  Mac.  15.  17.  were  able  to  s.  them  up  to  valour 

STIRRED. 
1  Esd.  2.  9.  whose  minds  were  s.  up  thereto 

1  Mac.  3.  49.  and  the  Nazaritea  they  s.  up 

2  Mac.  15.  10.  when  he  had  s.  up  their  minds 

STIRRING. 
2  Mac.  1.  21.  *.  up  her  wnmanigh  thoughts 

STOCK. 
1  Esd.  5.  37.  neither  could  they  shew  their  s. 
Toi.S.W.thenTubitsaid,  thou  art  of  an  honest  and 
good  s.  my  hrolher,  thou  art  of  a  good  s. 

1  Mae.  12.  21.  that  they  are  of  the  s.  of  .'\braliam 

2  .Vac.  1.  10.  was  of  the  s.  of  the  anointed  priests 

STOCKS. 
IVisd.  14.  21.  men  did  ascribe  unto  stones  and  s. 

STOLE. 
2  Mac.  4.  32.  Menelaus  .•?.  certain  vessels  of  gold 

STOLEN. 

1  Esd.  4.  24.  when  he  hath  ."f.  spoiled,  and  robbed 

7'o6.2. 13. 1  said  to  her,  is  it  iiots.'?  rentier  itiothe 

owners,  for  it  is  not  lawful  to  eat  any  things. 

STOMACH. 

t  Mac.  7.  21.  with  a  manly  s.  she  said  unto  them 

STONE. 
Wlad.  11.4.  thirst  was  quenched  out  of  the  hards. 
Eccl.  6.  21.  she  will  lie  upon  him  as  a  mi,'hly  s. 
K.  1.  a  slothful  man  is  compared  to  a  filthy  s.  and 
every  one  vill  hiss  him  out  to  his 
disgrace 
20.  whoso  casteth  a  s.  at  the  birds,  fraycth  them 
29.  10.  and  let  it  not  rust  under  a  s.  to  be  lost 
47.  4.  he  lifted  up  his  hand  with  the  s.  in  the  sling 
1  Mac.  2.  36.  neither  cast  they  a  s.  at  them 
10.  73.  where  is  either  s.  nor  flint,  nor  place 

STONE-BOW. 
Wisd.  5.  22.  hail-slones  shall  be  cast  us  out  of  a  s. 

STONES. 
1  Etd.  6.  9.  building  a  house  of  hewn  and  costly  s. 
Tab.  13. 17.  streets  nhull  be  paved  with  s.  of  Ophir 
Jud.  1.  2.  built  walls  round  about  of  s.  hewn 
6. 12.  from  coming  up  by  casting  of  s.  against  them 
Wisd.  17. 19.  or  a  terrible  sound  of  s.  cast  down 
.KccJ.-21.10.  the  way  ofsinncrs  is  made  plain  withs. 
27.  2.  as  a  nail  sticketh  between  joinings  of  s. 
3-2.  2U.  and  sluinhlo  not  among  the  s. 

1  Mac.  4.  43.  who  bare  out  the  defiled  s. 

5.  47.  they  Btoppcd  up  the  gates  with  s. 

6.  51.  with  instruments  to  cast  fire  and  s. 

10.  11.  to  build  Sion  round  about  with  square  I 

2  Mac.  1.  16.  ihty  throw  a.  like  ihundcrboita 
31.  the  wuHT  to  be  poured  on  the  great  s. 

4.  41.  some  of  tlioni  caught  s.  some  clubs 
10.  3.  striking  s.  thev  look  fire  out  of  thom 
STOOD. 

1  Esd.  5.  59.  the  pric^tH  s.  arrayed  in  vestments 
9.  46.  he  opened  the  law,  they  s.  all  strniglit  up 

Esth.  15.6.  shes.  before  king  who  sal  on  his  throne 
Wisd.  10.  11.  she  s.  by  him,  and  made  him  rich 
11.3.  they  s.  against  their  encinips,  were  avenged 

18.  16.  it  lou''.hed  heaven,  hut  a.  upon  iho  earth 
21.  the  blnnieless  man  ».  forth  to  defend  them 

19.  7.  where  water*,  before,  dry  land  appeared 
F.ccl.  39.  17.  at  liia  commandment  the  waters  s. 

4.>.  2.  so  that  his  enemies  ».  in  fear  of  him 

23.  Pliinces  s.  up  with  good  courage  of  heart 
46. 3.  who  before  him  so  ».  to  it?  the  I  .ord  brought 
48. 1.  then  s.  up  Elias  the  prophet  iis  fire 
50.  1-2.  he  himself  s.  by  the  hoarlli  of  tliu  altar 
Dan.  3.  2.  then  Ar.arios  ».  up  and  prsvfd  thus 
.<>u».34.  two  cldirs*.  up  in  the  midsiofthe  peojile 
1  Mac.  7.  36.  the  priests  entered,  and  s.  heforu  aliar 
8  .V(i«.3. 20.  twn  young  mrn  ».  by  him  ou  either  sidu 
844 


STR 

STOOLS. 

■2  Mac.  14.  21.  when  ».  wore  set  for  either  of  them 

STOOPING. 
Bar.  2. 18.  the  soul  that  is  vexed  and  goeth  s. 

STOP. 
./u(2. 4.7.  it  was  easy  to  s.  them  that  would  come  up 
Esth.  14. 9. 8.  the  mouth  of  them  that  praiiiu  thee 
Eccl.  20.  29.  s.  his  iTiouth  that  he  cannot  reprove 
27. 14.  their  brawls  make  one  s.  his  ears 
2  Mac.  14.  36.  and  s.  every  unrighteous  mouth 

STOPPED. 
.Jud.  16.  4.  the  multitude  whereof  a.  the  torrents 

1  Mac.  2.  36.  nor  s.  the  places  where  they  lay  hid 
9.  55.  Alcimus  was  plagued,  his  mouth  was  s. 

2  Mac.  2. 5.  he  laid  altar  of  incense,  and  s.  the  door 
STORAX. 

Eccl.  24. 15.  a  pleasant  odour  like  sweet  s. 

STORE. 
Tob.  7.  8.  they  set  s.  of  meat  on  the  table 

1  Mac.  6. 6.  s.  of  spoils  which  they  had  gotten 
53.  they  had  eaten  up  the  residue  of  Uiu  a. 

STORE-HOUSES. 
Eccl.  29. 12.  shut  up  alms  in  thy  a.  il  shall  deliver 

STORM,  S. 
fVisd.  5. 14.  like  froth  driven  away  with  the  s. 

23.  a  wind  like  a  s.  shall  blow  them  away 
Dan.'i.Va.  O  ye  dews  and  s.  ofsnow,  bless  ye  the  L. 
STORMED. 

2  Jlfae.  13. 25.  they  s.  because  they  would  make 
STORY. 

'2Mac.  2. 24.  to  look  into  the  narrations  of  the  s. 
30.  belongeth  to  the  first  author  of  the  a. 
32.  here  then  will  we  begin  thes.  foolish  to  make 
a  long  prologue,  and  to  be  short  in  the  s.  itself 
15.  38.  have  done  well,  and  as  is  fitting  the  s. 
39.  delighlelh  the  ears  of  them  that  read  the  s. 
STORIES. 
1  Ead.  1. 33.  in  the  hook  of  the  s.  of  the  kings 
STORY-WRITER. 

1  Esd.i.  17.  thy  servant  Ruihuinus  the  s. 

STRAIGHT. 
.Tud.  13. 20.  walking  a  a.  way  before  our  God 
liar.  6. 27.  nor  can  they  make  themselves  s. 

STRAIT. 
Jud.  4. 7.  because  the  pa3sa?e  was  s.  for  two  men 

STRAITLY. 
(Visd.  17. 16.  whosoever  fell  down  was  s.  kept 
Keel.  26. 10.  keep  her  in  s.  lest  she  abuse  herself 
STRAITNESS. 

2  Mac.  12. 21.  by  reason  of  the  s.  of  all  the  place.s 

STRAITS. 
Jud.  14. 11.  went  forth  to  the  s.  of  the  mountain 

STRAKE. 
Tob.  11. 11.  he  s.  otT  the  gall  on  his  father's  eyes 

STRANGE. 

1  Esd.  8.69.  have  not  put  a  ways,  people  of  the  land 
9.  9.  separate  yourselves  from  the  s.  women 

12.  let  all  that  have  s.  wives  come  at  the  time 
36.  these  had  taken  s.  wives,  and  put  them  away 

2  Esd.  1.  0.  and  they  have  offered  unto  s.  ^ods 
Tob.  4.  12.  and  take  not  a  s.  woman  to  wife 
fVisd.  14.  23.  or  made  rovellings  of  s.  rites 

16. 2.  thou  preparedst  for  them  meat  of  a  s.  taste 
3.  might  be  made  partakers  of  a  s.  taste 
16.  with  s.  showers  were  they  persecuted 
17.  3.  they  were  troubled  with  s.  apparitions 
19.  5.  but  they  might  find  a  s.  death 
8.  seeing  thy  marvellous  s.  wonders  " 
10.  while  they  sojourned  in  the  s.  land 
Eccl.  10.  13.  Lord  brought  on  them  a.  calamities 
29.  18.  so  that  they  wandered  among  s.  nations 
36.  3.  lifl  up  thy  hand  against  the  a.  nations 
39.  4.  ho  will  travel  through  s.  countries 
43.  25.  for  therein  bo  s.  and  wondrous  works 
Bar.  1. 22.  to  serve  a.  gods,  anil  to  do  evil  before  Ld. 

3.  10.  that  thou  art  waxen  old  in  a  a.  country 

4.  15.  a  shameless  nation,  and  of  a  s.  language 

1  Mac.  1.  38.  and  hccamo  «.  to  those  born  in  her 
44.  that  they  should  follow  Iho  s.  laws 

6.  13.  I  perish  through  groat  grief  in  a  a.  land 
15.  27.  brake  covenants  and  became  a.  iinlo  him 

2  Mac.  5.  9.  thus  ho  perished  in  a  s.  land 

6.  24.  that  ho  were  now  gone  to  a  s.  religion 
9.  6.  tormented  men's  bowels  with  a.  torments 
23.  he  died  a  miserable  death  in  a  a.  country 
STRANGER. 
Eath.  16.  10.  Aman  as  a  «.  received  of  us 
Ercl.  8.  16.  do  not  secret  things  before  a  .». 
11.  34.  receive  a  «.  into  thy  house,  ho  will  turn 
2".l.  26.  come,  thou  a.  furnish  a  table  ond  feed  me 
27.  "ivo  place,  ^lou  a.  to  nn  honourable  man 
STRANGERS. 
1  E.?(i.P.83.  a  land  polluted  with  the  pollutions  of  s. 
Wild.  19.  13.  used  a  hateful  behaviour  toward  i. 

15.  because  they  used  s.  not  friendly 
F.rcl.  20.  19.  and  give  not  thy  streiiglh  to  f. 
A5.  18.  ,1.  conspired  together  agniimt  him 
Har.  6.  5.  that  ye  in  no  wise  bo  like  to  a. 
I  -War.  1.  38.  tho  city  wnn  made  a  habitation  of  ». 
2.  7.  tho  sanctuary  dchvered  into  the  hand  of/ 


STR 


[AForRinu 


1  Mac.  3.  36.  he  should  place  a.  in  all  their  qoartcn 
4. 12.  then  the  s.  lift  up  their  eyes  and  saw  theia 

22.  they  fled  every  one  into  the  land  of  ». 
26.  all  the  s.  that  had  escaped  came  and  told 
30.  gavest  hosts  of  a.  into  the  hands  of  JonalhaB 

2  Atac.  10.  5.  the  day  that  s.  profaned  the  templ« 

STRANGENESS. 
/riS(/.5.2.  shall  be  amazed  at  thes.  ofhissalvatiott 

STRANGLED. 
Tob.  2.  3.  he  said,  father,  one  of  our  nation  is  s. 
3.8.  dost  not  know  that  thou  hast  s.  thy  husbandlt 

10.  so  that  she  thought  to  have  a.  herself 
Esth.  12.3.  having  confes.sed  it  they  were  a. 

STRAYING. 
£cc^6. 2.  soul  not  torn  in  pieces,  as  abulls.  alon« 

STREAM,  i 
Wisd.  19. 7.  and  out  of  the  violent  s.  a  greco  SeU 

STREAMED. 
Dan.  3.  24.  so  that  the  flame  s.  forth  above 

STREET. 
2  Mac.  10.  2.  the  altars  hiid  built  in  the  open  s. 

STREETS. 
Eccl.  9.  7.  look  not  round  about  thee  in  the  s. 
23.  21.  this  man  shall  be  punished  in  the  s. 
49.  6.  they  burnt  chosen  city  and  made  s.  dcsolatl 
1  Mac.  1.  55.  and  they  burnt  incense  in  the  a. 
2.  9.  her  infants  are  slain  in  the  a. 
14.  9.  the  ancient  men  sat  all  in^he  s. 
2JI/ac.3. 19.  the  women  abounded  m  the  ». 

STRENGTH. 
1  Esd.  3.  17.  who  had  spoken  of  the  s.  of  wine 
4. 1.  that  had  spoken  of  the  s.  of  the  king 
2.  O  ye  men,  do  not  men  excel  in  a.? 
40.  and  she  is  the  s.  and  majesty  of  all  ages 
Wisd.  2.  11.  let  our  s.bo  the  law  of  justice 
11.21.  thou  canst  shew  thy  great  s.  at  i)ll  times 
12. 17.  men  will  not  believe  thou  shcwcdst  thy  • 
16.  16.  were  scouiged  by  the  s.  of  lliine  arm 
2:t.  but  this  again  did  even  forget  his  own  a. 
24.  increaseth  his  s.  against  the  unrighteous,  and 
abateih  his  s.for  benefit  of  them  that  trust  in  ibea 
18.  2-2.  so  he  overcame,  not  with  s.  of  body 
Eccl.  3. 13.  when  thou  art  in  thy  full  s. 
21.  nor  search  things  that  are  above  thy  .♦. 
5.  2.  follow  not  thino  own  mind,  and  thy  ». 
7.  30.  love  him  that  made  thee  with  all  thy  s. 

16.  7.  who  fell  away  in  s.  of  their  foolishness 

17.  3.  he  endued  them  with  s.  by  themselves 

18.  5.  who  sliiill  number  the  s.  of  his  majesty  1 
26.  19.  my  son,  give  not  thy  s.  to  strangers 
2rf.  10.  and  as     man's  s.  is,  so  is  his  wrath 
31.30.diunkc<.nessdiinini8heth  s.  makelh  woundt 
34. 15.  to  whom  doth  he  look  ?  and  who  is  his  a.f 
38.  18.  the  heaviness  of  ths  heart  breakelh  s. 

30.  he  boweth  down  his  s.  belbre  his  feet 
40. 26.  riches  and  s.  lift  up  the  heart,  but  tlie  fear 
41.2.  death  is  acceptable  to  him  whose  s.  failetb 
43.  30.  when  you  exalt  him,  put  forth  all  your  s. 
46.  6.  that  the  nations  might  know  all  their  s. 
9. the  Lord  gave  s.  olso  to  Caleb,  which  remained 
Bar.  }.  12.  the  Lord  will  give  uss.  and  lighten  oui 
ey('.<i,  and  we  shall  live  under  Nubiiihodonosor 
.3. 14.  learn  where  is  wisdom,  where  is  s. 
/Jan.  3.  21.  and  let  their  s.  be  broken 

1  Mac.  2.  49.  now  hath  pride  and  rebuke  gotten  « 
3. 19.  but  s.  Cometh  from  heaven 

.35.  to  destroy  and  root  out  ;h,^  s.  of  Israel 
4.  3-2.  cause  the  boldness  of  their  s.  to  fall  away 
6.6-2.  but  when  he  saw  the  .«.  of  the  place 

2  Mac.  1-2.  28.  who  breakeih  the  s.  of  his  enemies 

STRENGTHEN. 

1  Esd.  7.  15.  to  s.  their  hands  in  the  works  of  Lord 

Jud.  13.  7. .«.  nie,  O  Lord  God  of  Israel,  this  day 

1  Mac.  9.  50.  these  did  he  a.  with  high  walls 

10. 23. in  makine  amilv  with  .lews  tos.  himself 

STRENGTHENED. 
Eccl.  45. 8.  he  a.  him  with  rich  garments 
1  Mac.  2.  17.  thou  art  s.  with  sons  and  brethren 
14. 14.  he  3.  nil  those  of  his  pfoph-  brought  low 

STRENGTHENING. 
1  Mac.  6. 18.  he  soiisht  the  .«.  of  the  heathen 

STRETCH. 
Keel.  7.  3i.  and  s.  thine  hand  to  tho  poor 
31. 14.  s.  not  thy  Innd  whithersoever  it  looketb 

STRETCHED. 
Ecel.  4.  31.  let  not  thy  hand  be  s.  out  to  receive 
24.  16.  as  the  turpentine  tree  I  a.  out  branches 
46.  2.  ho  a.  out  his  sword  against  the  cities 
48.  20.  they  .».  out  their  hands  toward  him 
."iO.  15.  he  »-.  out  his  hand  to  the  cup,  and  poured 
51.  19.  I  a.  forth  inv  hands  to  the  heaven  above 

STRETCHETH. 
1  Ead.  6.  33.  that  .«.  out  his  hand  lo  hinder  house 

STRETCHING. 
1  Esd.  8.  73.  then  «.  forth  mv  hands  lo  tlie  Lord 

STREWED. 
Bel  14.  lo  bring  ashes,  tho-n  thev  s.  thro'  the  temple 

STRICKEN. 
Ffth.  14.  8.  they  have  a.  hands  with  their  idols 
Wisd.  19.  17.  even  wilb  blindiiosg  woie  these  « 


Apocrvtha.] 


SUB 


8  Mac.  15. 2<.  let  those  be  s.  with  terror  that  come 

STRIFE. 
Eccl.  19.  G.^hatcan  rule  his  tongue,  hve  without  s. 

27.  15.  the  s.  of  the  proud  is  blood -shedding 

2S.  8.  abstain  from  s.  and  thou  shnit  iliniinish  thy 

sins,  for  a  furious  man  will  kindle  s. 

40.  5.  anger  and  s.  do  change  his  knowledge 

9.  death  and  blood,  s.  and  sword  happen  to  all 

STRIKING. 

2  Mae.  10.  3.  s.  stones,  they  took  fire  out  of  them 

STRIPE. 
Jud.  9. 13.  make  my  deceit  to  be  their  wound  and  s 

STRIPES. 
Eeel.  2-2.  6.  s.  and  correction  are  never  out  of  time 
S  Mac.  3.  26.  who  gave  him  many  sore  s. 
6.  3U.  but  when  he  was  ready  to  die  with  s. 

STRIVE. 

Eccl.  4.  28.  s.  for  the  truth  unto  death,  the  Lord 

8.  1.  s.  not  with  a  mighty  man  lest  thou  fall 

3.  s.  not  with  a  man  that  is  full  of  tongue 

11.  9.  s.  not  in  a  matter  that  concernetli  thee  not 

2  Mac.  7.  19.  that  takest  in  hand  to  s.  against  God 

STRIVING. 
Wisd.  4.  2.  got  victory,  .«•  for  undefiled  rewards 

STROKE,  S. 
Wisd.^.W.  light  air  beaten  with  the  s.  of  her  wings 
Eccl.  27.  2.).  a  deceitful  .«.  shall  make  wounds 
28. 17.  the  s.  of  the  whip,  the  s.  of  the  tongue 
39.  28.  spirits  in  their  fury  lay  on  sore  «. 
t  Mac.  14.  43.  but  missing  his  s.  through  haste 

STRONG. 
»  K$d.  3.  18.  O  ye  men,  how  exceeding «.  is  wine  ! 
4.  32.  how  can  it  be  but  women  should  be  s.  1 
34. 0  ye  men, are  not  women  s.Tgreat  is  the  earth 
38.  as  for  truth,  it  endureth  and  is  always  s. 
6. 14.  was  builded  by  a  king  of  Israel  great  and  s. 
8.  85.  that  ye  may  be  s.  and  eat  the  good  things 
Wisd.  14.  16.  an  ungodly  custom  grown  n. 
Eccl.  6.  14.  a  faithful  friend  is  a  s.  defence 

24.  24.  faint  not.to  be  s.  in  the  Lord 

28.  14.  J.  cities  hath  it  pulled  down 

20.  13.  better  than  a  mighty  shield  and  s.  spear 
30.  14.  being  sound  and  s.  of  constitution 

15.  and  a  s.  body  is  above  infinite  wealth 

Bar.  6.  58.  they  that  are  .<t.  do  take  and  go  away 

l^ac.1.2.made  many  war9,and  won  many  «.  holds 

19.  thus  thev  got  the  s.  cities  in  land  of  Egypt 

33.  then  builded  they  the  ciiy  of   David   with  a 

great  and  s.  wall, and  made  it  a  s.  hold  for  them 

3.  45.  sanciuary  trodden,  and  aliens  kept  s.  hold 

8  Mac.  1.  24.  O  Lord  Goii,  who  art  fearful  and  s. 

11.5.  drew  near  to  Bethsura,  which  was  a  s.  town 

12  27.  Enhron,  a  .?.  city,  wherein  Lysias  abode 

STRO.XGER. 
1  F.sd.  4.  35.  great  is  the  truth,  and  s.  than  all 
Wisd.  10.  12.  know  that  godliness  is  .<s.  than  all 
F.ccl.  28.  10.  and  the  s.  they  are  which  contend 
Sus  39.  for  he  was  ^.  than  we  and  leaped  out 
STRONGEST. 

1  K^d.  3.  10.  wine  is  the  s.  ||  11.  the  king  is  s. 
I2.women  ares.||2I.O  ve  men, is  not  wine  the  s.? 

STRONGLY. 

2  Mac.  10.  17.  assaulting  them  s.  they  won  holds 

STRUCK. 

1  Esd.  4.  SO.  she  s.  the  king  with  her  left  hand 

2  Mac.  1.  16.  thev  threw  stones  and  i.  the  captain 

■  STUBBLE. 
Wisd.  3.  7.  they  shall  shine  as  sparks  among  s. 

STUBBORN. 
Eccl.  3.  26.  a  s.  heart  shall  fare  evil  at  last 

30.  12.  lest  he  wax  s.  and  he  disobedient  to  thee 

STUFF. 
Jud.  15.  11.  plate,  bedn,  vessels,  and  all  his  s. 

STUMBLE. 
Eccl.  13.  23.  if  he  s.  they  will  help  to  overthrow 

25.  21.  s.  not  at  the  beauty  of  a  woman 
32.  20.  and  s.  not  among  the  stones 

STUMBLED. 
Tob.  11. 10.  Tobit  went  toward  the  door  and  s. 

STUMBLING. 
Wisd.  14.  11.  and  s.  bhicks  to  the  souls  of  men 
Eccl.  7.  a.  lay  a  s.blabk  in  way  of  thy  uprightness 

31.  7.  it  is  a  s.  block  to  them  that  sacrifice 
34.  16.  he  is  a  preservation  from  s.  and  a  help 
39.  24.  eo  are  they  -i.  blocks  to  the  wicked 

SUBDUED. 
Wisd.  18.  22.  with  a  word  .5.  he  him  that  punished 

SUBJECT. 
Wind.  1.  4.  nor  dwell  in  the  body  timt  is  s.  to  sjn 
8.  14.  and  the  nati"iis  shall  be  s.  unto  me 

SUBJECTION. 
Ecel.iT.  19.  bv  thy  body  thou  wast  brought  into  s. 
48.  12.  neither  cnuM  any  bring  him  into  s. 

SUBJECTS. 
1  Ktd.  3.  1.  Darius  made  a  great  feast  toall  his  a. 
Eeth.  13.  2.  I  purposed  to  settle  my  s.  in  quiet 

SUGMI3^;LY. 
Eccl.  29.  5.  for  ni>iahbr,iir's  money  he  will  speaks. 

•SUBMITTED. 
3«Vac.l3  33.  s.  and  aware  to  all  equal  cooditioni 
845 


SUM 

SUBSTANCE. 
Tob.  4.  7.  give  alms  of  thy  s.  and  when  thou  givcst 
14.  13.  he  inherited  their  s.  and  his  fathers 
Eccl.  9.  2.  to  a  woman,  to  set  her  foot  on  thy  s. 

SUBTILE. 
Wisd.  7.  23.  kind  to  man,  pure  and  most  s.  spirits 
Eccl-  39.  2.  where  s.  parables  are,  ho  will  be  there 

SUBTILLY. 
Jud.  5. 11.  the  king  of  Egypt  dealt  s.  with  them 

SUBTILTY. 
Eccl.  19.  25.  there  is  an  exquisite  3.  and  is  unjust 

SUBTILTIES. 
Wisd.  8.  8.  slie  knoweth  the  s.  of  speeches 

SUBURBS. 

lMac.\l.i.  they  shewed  him  Azotus  and  s.  thereof 

61.  he  burned  the  s.  thereof  with  fire  and  spoiled 

SUCCEED. 

Tob.  4.  6.  thy  doings  shall  prosi)crously  s.  to  thee 

Eccl.  48.  8.  who  anointed  prophets  tos.  after  him 

SUCCESS. 
Tob.  7.  12.  God  give  you  good  s.  in  all  things 
Wisd.  13.  19.  and  for  good  «.  of  his  hands,  asketh 
Keel.  20.  9.  a  sinner  that  hath  good  s.in  evil 
38.  13.  when  in  their  hands  there  is  good  s. 
43.  26.  by  him  the  end  of  them  hath  prosjierous  s. 

1  Mac.  4.  55.  praising  God,  who  had  given  good  s. 

8.  2!i.  good  ,9.  he  to  the  Romans  and  Jews  by  sea 

2  Mac.  10.  23.  having  good  s.  with  his  weapons 
28.  for  a  pledge  of  their  s.  and  victory 

13.  16.  at  last  thev  departed  with  good  s. 

SUCCESSOR. 
Eccl.  46.  1.  Jesus  son  of  Nave  was  the  s.  of  Moses 
'iMac.  9.  23.  when  he  led  an  army  he  appointed  as 

14.  26.  he  had  ordained  Judas  to  be  the  king's  s 

SUCCOUR. 
Eccl.  51.7.  I  looked  for  s.  of  men,  there  was  none 

1  Mac.  1.  53.  wheresoever  they  could  flee  for  s. 
2.  44.  but  the  rest  fled  to  the  heathen  for  s. 

2  Mac.  5.  9.  and  thinking  there  to  find  s. 

SUCCOURS. 
Wisd.  17.  12.  for  fear  is  a  betraying  of  the  s. 
SUCCOURETH. 

1  Mac.  12. 15.  we  have  help  from  heaven  that  s.  us 

SUCK. 

2  Mac.  7.  27.  have  pity  on  me  thatgave  s.  3  years 

SUCKING. 
Eccl.  46.  16.  when  he  offered  the  s.  lamb 

SUDDEN. 
Wisd.  17.  15.  for  a  s.  fear  came  upon  them 
Eccl.  11.  21.  on  the  s.  to  make  a  poor  man  rich 
2  Mac.  14.  17.  through  the  «.  silence  of  his  enemies 

SUDDENLY. 
Wisd.  18.  17.  then  s.  visions  of  horrible  dreams 
Eccl.  5.  7.  s.  shall  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  come 

11.  22.  s.  he  maketh  his  blessing  to  flourish 
22.  27.  upon  my  lips,  that  I  fall  nd  s.  by  them 

1  Mae.  1.  30.  he  fell  .«.  on  the  city,  and  smote  it 
3.23.  had  left  offepeaking,  he  leapt  s.  upon  Iheni 
4. 2.  might  rush  in  on  the  Jews  and  smitethem  s 

2  Mac.  3.  27.  Heliodorus  fell  s.  to  the  ground 

14.  22.  lest  treachery  should  be  s.  practised 

SUFFER. 
Jud.  11.5.S.  thy  handmaid  to  speak  in  thy  presence 
Bar.  4.  25.  s.  patiently  the  wrath  that  is  come 
6.  18   made  sure  as  being  committed  to  s.  death 
Bel  12.  we  wills,  death,  or  else  Daniel  that  speaks 
2  Mac.  4.  48.  they  did  soon  s.  unjust  punishment 

6.  .30.  but  in  soul  am  content  to  s.  these  things 

7.  18.  for  we  s.  these  things  for  ourselves 
32.  for  we  s.  because  of  our  sins 

SUFFERED. 
Wii'd.  18.  1.  they  had  not  s.  the  same  things 

11.  like  Hs  the  king  so  s.  the  common  person 
Eccl.  38.  16.  as  if  thou  hadst  ».  great  harm 
1  Mac.  2.  48.  nor  s.  they  the  sinner  to  triumph 

15.  14.  neither  s.  he  any  to  go  out  or  in 

'2  Mac.  7.  36.  our  brethren  wiio  now  have  s.  pain 

9.  28.  the  murderer,  havings,  most  grievously 

SUFFERETH. 
Tob.  4.  10.  alms  s.  not  to  come  into  darkness 
Eccl.  4.  9.  deliver  him  that  s.  wrong  from.oppressor 
26.  28.  a  man  of  war  that  .«.  poverty 

BUFFERING. 
Wisd.  10.3.  but  these  s.  penury  for  a  short  space 

SUFFICE. 
Tob.  5.  19.  what  the  Lord  hath  given  us  doth  s.  us 

1  Mac.  2.  33.  let  that  vou  have  done  hitherto  s. 

SUFFICIENT. 

Wisd.  18.  12.  nor  were  the  living  s.  to  bury  them 

Eccl  31.  19.  little  is  s.  for  a  man  well  nurtured 

SUGGESTION. 

2  Mac.  6.  8.  went  a  decree  by  the  ».  of  Ptolemee 

■      SUITS. 
Eccl  29.  19.  business  for  gain  shall  fall  into  s. 
Sus.  6.  all  that  had  any  .«.  in  law  came  to  them 

SUM. 
Eccl.  43.  27.  come  short,  wherefore  in  *.  he  is  all 
51.  28.  get  learning  with  a  great  *.  of  money 
2  Jtfae.  3.  II.  the  s.  in  all  was  400  talents  of  silver 

12.  43.  to  the  s.  of  two  thousand  drachmi 


SUS 

SUMS. 
2^ac.3.  6.  treasui7  ^'■"■^ '""  of  infinite  s.  of  money 

SUMMER. 
Eccl.  50.  8.  the  frankincense-tree  in  lime  of*. 
Dan.  3.  45.  O  ye  winter  and  *.  bless  ye  the  Lord 
SUN. 

1  Esd.  4.  34.  O  men,  swifi  is  the  s.  in  his  coursu 

2  Esd.  6.  45.  cummandest  that  the  s.  should  Ehin« 

15.  20.  kings  which  are  from  the  rising  of  the*. 
Tob.  2.  4.  took  him,  till  the  going  down  of  the  t.  ■ 

7.  after  the  going  down  of  liie  s.  I  made  a  grave 
Jud.  14.  2.  the  s.  shall  come  forth  on  the  earth 
Wisd.  2.  4.  as  mist  that  is  driven  away  with  the  f . 
3.  (!.  the  s.  of  righteousness  rose  not  on  us 
7.  29.  for  she  is  more  beautiful  than  the  s. 

16.  28.  we  must  prevent  the  s.  to  give  thee  thankl 
18.  3.  and  a  harmless  s.  to  entertain  them 

Eccl.  17.  19.  their  works  are  as  the  s.  before  him 

31.  what  is  brighter  than  the  s.  ?  yet  the  light 
26.  19.  as  thes.  when  it  ariseth  in  the  heaveo 

33.  7.  all  the  light  of  every  day  is  of  the  ». 

34.  le.  he  is  a  cover  from  the  s.  at  noon 
43.  2.  the  s.  when  it  ajipeareth,  declaring 

4.  but  the  s.  burneth  the  mountains  moie 
46.  4.  did  not  the  s.  go  back  by  his  means  1 
48.  23.  in  his  time  thes.  went  backward 
50. 7.  as  the  s.  shining  on  the  temple  of  Most  High 
Bar.  6.  60.  for  t.  moon  and  stars  are  obedient 
Dan.  3.  40.  O  ye  s.  and  moon,  bless  ye  the  Lord 

SUN-BEAM. 
Wisd.  16i  27.  being  warned  with  a  little  «.  melted 

SUNG. 
Eccl.  47.  8.  with  his  whole  heart  he  s.  songs 

1  Mac.  4.  24.  they  s.  a  song  of  thanksgiving 

2  Mac.  1.  30.  the  priests  s.  psalms  of  thanksgiviDf 
12.  37.  he  s.  psalms  with  a  loud  voice 

SUPERSTITION. 
Wisd.  14.  18.  set  forward  the  ignorant  to  more  s. 

SUPPED. 
Tob.  8.  1.  when  they  had  s.  they  brought  Tobias  in 

SUPPLICATION. 
Eccl.  4.  4.  reject  not  the  s.  of  the  afflicted 

35.  14.  he  will  not  despise  the  s.  of  tho  fatherless 

39.  5.  and  he  will  make  s.  for  his  sins 

51.  9.  then  lifted  I  up  my  s.  fiom  the  earth 
Bar.2.19.we  do  not  make  our  humble  s. before  thee 
for  the  righteousness  of  our  fathers  and  kings 

1  Mac.  11.  49.  they  made  s.  to  the  king  and  cried 

2  Mac.  3.  18.  others  ran  flocking  to  the  general  s 
8  29.  when  they  had  made  a  common  s. 

9. 18.  containing  the  form  of  a  s.  after  this  manner 

14.  15.  they  made  .'.  to  him  that  had  established 

SUPPORT. 

1  Esd.  8.  52.  power  of  Lord  tos.  them  in  allwivs 

SUPPOSE. 
Tub.  6.  17.  Is.  that  shi'  shall  bear  theo  children 

SUPPOSED. 
Wisd.  17.  3.  they  s.  to  lie  hid  in  their  secret  sins 
Bar.  6.  64.  not  to  he  .<.  nor  said  that  they  are  godi 

SUPPOSING. 

2  J/ac.4.32.Menelau6  s.  he  had  got  convenient  time 

SURE. 
Eccl.  10.  19.  they  that  fear  the  Lord  are  a  s.  seed 

40.  25.  gold  and  silver  make  the  foot  stand  s. 
42.  6.  s.  keeping  is  good  where  an  evil  wife  is 

11.  keep  a  s.  watch  over  a  shameless  daughter 
Bar.  6.  18  as  the  doors  are  mades.  on  every  sid« 
2  Mac.  3.  22.  to  keefi  things  safe  and  s.  for  those 

SURELY. 
Wisd.  13.  1.  s.  vain  are  all  men  by  nature 
Eccl.  5.  3.  the  Lord  will  s.  revenge  thy  pride 
28. 1.  he  will  s.  keep  his  sins  in  remembrance 
48.  11.  Olid  slept  in  love,  for  we  shall  s.  live 
SURNAME,  .'ire  SIRNAME. 
SURETY. 
i?ce/.8.13.  nots.  above  thy  power,if  thou  be  s.pay  b 
29.  14.  an  honest  man  is  s.  for  his  neighbour 

15.  forget  not  the  friendship  of  thy  s. 

16.  will  overthrow  the  good  estate  of  hiss. 

SURETISHIP. 
Ecel.  29.  18.  s.  hath  undone  many  of  good  estate 
19.  a  wicked  man  shall  fall  into  s. 
SURFEITINe. 
Eccl.  37.  30.  and  s.  will  turn  into  choler 
31.  by  s.  have  many  perished,  but  he  that  taketh 
SUSA. 
Estk.  11.3.  was  a  Jew,  and  dwelt  in  thecityofS. 
16.  18.  is  hanged  at  the  gates  of  S.  with  his  family 
SUSANNA. 
.S«s.  7.  S.  went  into  her  husband's  garden  to  walk 
22.  then  S.  sighed,  and  said,  I  am  straitened 
24.  with  thntS.  cried  with  a  loud  voice 
27.  there  was  never  such  a  report  made  of  S. 
31.  S.  was  a  vervdelira'e  -voman  and  beauteou* 
SUSPEC-PED. 
Tob.  8.  16.  that  is  not  come  to  me  which  I  $. 
2  Mac.  4.  34.  tho'  he  wern  s.  vet  persuaded  he  him 

SUSPECTETH. 
Erel.  23.  21.  where  he  s.  not,  he  shall  be  JakoB 
37.  10.  consult  aot  with  one  that  s.  thee 


swo 

SUSPECTING. 
iMac.X3i.\he  high-priesls  lest  the  king  ehoulJ 
7.  '24.  and  s.  it  to  be  a  rpproachful  S|ieL'cli 
12.  4.  desirous  to  live  in  peace,  and  s.  nothing 

SUSPICIO.N. 
Ecc/.3. 24.  evils,  tiaih  overthrown  their  judgment 

SUSTAIN. 
2  Mae.  10.  18.  thinpi  convenient  to  s.  the  siege 

SUSTENANCE. 
fFisd.  16.  21.  lor  thy  s.  declared  thy  sweetness 

SW  AU1jLING-CL(  )TH  ES. 
;f'isd.7.  4.  I  was  nursed  in  .s.  and  tli;it  with  cares 

SWALLOWS. 
Bar.  6.  2'2.  upon  Iheir  liodieg  and  heada  sit  s. 

SWAM. 
rrisd.  19.  19.  the  things  that  before  s.  in  water 
1  Mac.  9.  48.  they  *.  nver  to  the  further  bank 
SWAKE. 

1  Ksd.  8.  96.  to  do  these  things,  and  so  they  s. 

2  Mac.  13.  23.  and  s.  to  all  equal  conditions 

14.  32.  s.  they  could  not  tell  where  the  man  was 

SWAY. 

Eccl.  1.22.  the  s.  of  his  lurv  shall  be  his  destruction 

SWEAR. 

1  F.sd.  1.  48.  made  him  s.  by  the  name  of  the  Lord 
'J'ob.  7.  11.  till  we  a"ree  and  s.  one  to  another 
tVisd.  H.2'J.  iho'  s.  lalsely,  yet  look  not  to  be  hurt 

31.  it  is  not  the  power  of  them  by  whom  they  a". 
Ecci.2^.  11.  if  he  s.  in  vain,  shall  not  be  innocent 

SWEAR  ETH. 
Eccl.  23. 10.  he  that  s.  and  nameth  God  continually 
ij7.  14.  the  tali<  of  him  that  s.  much,  makuth 

SWEARING. 
Eccl.  23.  9.  accustom  not  thy  month  to  s. 
II.  a  man  that  u<eih  much  .?.  shall  be  filled 
13.  use  not  lliy  mouih  to  intemperate  s. 
SWEAT. 

2  Mac.  2.  26.  it  was  a  matter  of  «.  and  watching 

SWEET. 

1  Esd.  9.  51.  go  eat  the  fal,  and  drink  the  .s. 

2  End.  1.23.  iree  in  water,  and  made  the  river  s. 
Ecil.  6.  !>.  s.  language  will  multiply  friends 

11.  3.  but  her  IVui'-  is  the  chief  of  s.  things 

23.  17.  all  bread  is  s.  to  a  whoremonger 

24.  13.  I  ?ave  a  s.  smell  like  cinnamon,  I  yielded 
a  pleasant  odour  as  myrrh,  onyx  and  .?.  storax 

35.  C.  s.  savour  thereof  is  before  the  Most  High 
38.  5.  was  not  the  water  made  (?.  with  wood  1 

II.  give  a  s.  savour  and  memorial  of  fine  flour 
40.  IH.  to  labour  and  lo  he  content  is  a  s.  life 

21.  the  pipe  and  psaltery  make  s.  melody 

30.  begging  is  ,<.  in  the  mouth  of  the  shameless 
49.  1.  it  is  s.  as  honey  in  all  mouths 
Bar.  5.  8.  «fvery  s.-smellimr  tree  shall  overshadow 

SWEETER. 
Eccl.  23.  27.  there  is  nothing  .9.  than  to  take  heed 
24.  20.  for  my  memorial  is  s.  than  honey 

SWEETLY. 
iVisd.  8.  1.  and  s.  doth  she  order  all  things 
Eccl.  12.  16.  an  enemy  speaketli  s.  with  his  lips 

27.  23.  when  thou  art  prest-nt,  he  will  speak  i. 

SWEETNESS. 
ffisd.  16.  21.  for  thv  sustenance  declared  thy  s. 

SWIFT. 

lK*d.4.34.  high  is  heaven,  5.  isthceun  in  his  course 

H'isJ.  13.2.  or  the  g.  air,  or  the  circle  of  the  stars 

18.  14.  that  liight  was  in  midst  of  her .?.  course 

Eccl.  5. 11.  be».  to  hear,  and  let  thy  life  be  sincere 

SWIFTLY. 
Eccl.  43.  13.  sendeth  .i.  the  lightnings  of  judgment 

SWIFTNESS. 
2  Esd.  8.  18.  the  s.  of  the  jndgo  which  is  lo  come 

SWINES. 
1  Mac.  1.  47.  sacrifice  «.  flish  and  unclean  tieaslsi 
ZMac.t).  18.  Eleazar  wasconslrained locals. flesh 

SWOtJN. 

fVisd.  17.  19.  these  things  maile  them  ».  for  fear 

SWORD. 

1  Fid.  1.53.  who  slew  their  young  men  with  the  5. 
4.  23.  a  man  t:ikith  his  n.  and  goeth  his  way 
8.T7.  we  were  given  ngi  to  the  «.  and  to  captivity 

Ercl.  21.  3.  nil  iiiir]iiily  is  as  a  two-edged  s. 

22.  21.  though  Ihou  drewest  a  s.  at  thy  friend 
20.  2H.  the  Lord  prepareil  such  a  one  for  the  s. 

28.  |H.  many  have  fallen  hy  the  edgo  of  the  ». 
30.  :J0.  the.i.  punishing  the  wicked  to  destruction 
40.  9.  strife  and  ».  happen  unto  all  flesh 

46.  2.  nnd  stretched  out  his  s.  against  Iho  cities 
Bar.l.'iTt.  Ihey  died  by  famine,  by  /i.  nnd  pestilence 
l.Wne.  2.  0.  voun^ien  are  sliiiii  with  .i.  f)f  enemy 

3.  3.  made  battles,  protecting  the  ho.it  with  his  s. 
12,  Judas  look  Ihoir  spoils  and  Apollonius'  *. 

4.  33.  cast  them  il own  with  thes.  of  thern  that  love 

7.  :J8.  bo  avenged,  nnd  let  them  fall  by  the  /t. 

8.  23.  the  «.  nUo  and  enemy  bo  fur  from  llwm 

9. 73.  thus  lhe«.eeiigpd  from  Israel,  but  Ji.nnth.in 
10.  85.  burnt  and  slain  with  the  .».  HOOO  nun 

2  Mac.  14.  IH.  dnr^t  not  Irv  the  mntter  hy  the  j. 
41.  ho  beinj  ready  to  he  taken,  *ll  on  his  .■>. 

IS.  15.  Jeremias  gave  to  .ludaa  a.  3.  of  gold 
846 


TAK 


TEA 


[ApoCRYPHiL, 


2  Mac.  15.  16.  take  this  holy  s.  a  gifl  from  God     I  jBar.3.29. who  hath  gone  up  into  heaven  and  t.  herl 


SWORDS 
1  Ksd.  3.  22.  and  a  little  after  they  drew  out  s. 

1  Mac.  4.  6.  who  had  neither  armour  nor  a. 

2  Mac.  5.  3.  drawing  uf  s.  and  casting  ol  darts 
12.22.  and  wounded  with  the  points  of  Iheir  own  s. 

SWORE. 
tVisd.  14.  30.  and  also  thi'y  unjustly  s.  in  deceit 
1  Mac.  7.  35.  Nicanor  s.  in  his  wraih, saying 

SWORN. 
fVisd.  12.  21.  unto  whose  fathers  thou  hast  s. 
SYRIA. 

1  .Vac.  3.  13.  Seron,  a  prince  of  the  army  of  S. 
41.  a  power  also  of  S.  and  of  the  I'hilisiiiies 

7.  39.  where  a  host  out  ofS.  iTiet  him 
11.2.  took  his  journey  into  S.  in  peaceable  manner 
CO.  and  all  the  forces  of  S.  gathered  themselves 
SYRIAN. 

2  Mac.  15.  36.  in  the  S.  tongue  is  called  Adar 


TABERNACLE. 

■Tud.  9. 8.  to  pollute  the  U  where  thy  name  restcth 
14.  7.  blessed  art  thou  in  all  the  t.  of  Juda 
Wisd.  9.  8.  a  temple,  a  resemblance  of  the  holy  t. 

15.  the  earthly  t.  vveigheth  down  the  mind 
Eccl.  24.  10.  in  the  holy  t.  I  served  before  him 

15.  as  the  fume  of  frankincense  in  the  t. 
2  Jl/uc.  2.  5.  a  hollow  cave,  wherein  he  laid  the  t. 
TABERNACLES. 

1  Esd.  5.  51.  also  they  held  the  feast  of «. 

2  Esd.  2.  11.  I  will  give  these  the  everlasting  t. 
Jud.  2.  2lj.  burnt  their  t.  and  spoiled  slieep-coles 

TABLE. 
Tab.  7-  8.  they  set  store  of  meat  on  the  t. 
Eccl.  6.  10.  some  friend  is  a  companion  at  the  t. 
31.  12.  if  thou  sit  at  a  bountiful  t.  be  not  greedy 

40.  29  life  that  dependeth  on  another  man's  /. 
Bd  21.  consumed  such  things  as  were  on  the  t. 
1  Mac.  I.  22.  the  t.  of  the  shew-bread  and  vials 

4.  49.  the  altar  of  burnt-oflerings  and  the  t. 
51.  they  set  loaves  on  the  t.  and  spread  vails 

TABLES. 
1  Mac.  14.  18.  they  wrote  to  him  in  t.  of  brass 

TAKE. 
Tob.  4.  12.  my  son,  chiefly  f .  a  wife  of  the  seed  of 
thy  fathers,  and  t.  not  astrange  woman  to  wife 
5.20.  t.no  care,  my  sister,  he  shall  return  in  safety 

6.  3.  then  the  angel  said  to  him,  t.  the  fish 

7.  13.  saying,  t.  her  aller  the  law  of  Moses 
8. 7. 1  t.  not  this  my  sister  for  lust,  but  uprightly 
9.  2.  t.  with  thee  a  serv.int  and  two  camels 
12.  5.  t.  half  of  all  ye  have  brought,  and  go  away 

IVisd.S.lS.  I  went  about  seeking  how  lo  t.herto  nie 
Eccl.S.  13.  for  if  thou  be  surety,  t.  care  to  pay  it 

12.  12.  set  him  not  by,  lest  he  seek  to  t.  thy  seat 
14.  5.  ho  shall  not  t.  pleasure  in  his  goods 

16.  give  and  t.  and  sanctify  thy  soul,  there  is  no 
23.  2.».  her  children  shall  not  t.  root,  aiirl  branches 

41.  19.  be  ashamed  of  scorning  to  give  and  t. 
47.4.  did  he  not  t.  away  reproach  from  the  people? 
48.  8.  who  anointed  kings  to  (.  revenge 

Har.  4.  30.  t.  n  cood  heart,  O  Jerusalem 
licl  37.  O  Daniel,  t.  the  dinner  God  hath  sent 

1  Miic.  3.  35.  nnd  to  t.  away  their  memorial 

5.  19.  t.  ye  the  charge  of  this  people,  and  see 

6.  2R.  besieging  the  tower  at  Jerusalem  to  t.  it 

8.  18.  that  Ihey  would  t.  the  yoke  from  them 

2  Mac.  14.  39.  sent  above  .500  men  of  war  to  t.  him 
1.5.  5. 1  command  to  t.  arms,  nnd  to  do  business 

TAKE  Ai«/. 
F.rrl.  fi.l3.  separate  from  enemies,  t.  heed  of  friends 
W.Xi.t.hcnl  of  a  mischievous  man, lest  bring  a  blot 

13.  13.  t.  good  held,  for  thon  walkest  in  peril 
23.  27.  t.  heed  to  the  commandment  of  Iho  Lord 

TAKEN. 
I  E.id.  2. 28.  heed  lo  bo  t.  that  there  be  no  more  done 

9.  36.  all  these  I.  sir.ingo  wives,  put  them  away 
Toll.  11.  l.'i.  hast  scourged,  nnd  hnsi  t.  pity  on  mc 
IVhd.  3.  2.  nnd  Iheir  departure  is  t.  for  misery 

4.11.spcodily  washet.lesi  wickedness  should  niter 

14.  15.  made  an  image  of  his  chilil  soon  t.  away 

15.  8.  returns  to  the  same  out  of  which  he  was  t. 
Eccl.  9.  4.  lest  ihou  be  /■  with  her  attempts 

11.30.  like  as  n  partridge  t.  nnd  kept  in  a  cage 

16.  9.  people  who  were  t.  away  in  their  sins 
19.  3   nnd  n  bold  man  slinll  be  t.  away 
23.  7.  keepeth  it,  shall  never  be  t.  in  his  lips 

21.  where  he  snspee.telh  not,  he  shall  he  t. 
27.  26.  ho  that  setleth  n  trap,  shall  be  t.  therein 
31.  7.  nnd  every  fool  shall  bo  (.  therewith 
44.  17.  he  was  t.  in  exclmngn  for  the  world 
4(i.  19.  I  hnve  nit  t.  nny  man's  goods,  not  a  shoe 

47.  2.  as  i<  the  fat  t.  away  from  the  peiice-olTuring 

48.  9.  who  was  I.  up  in  a  whirlwind  of  fire 
■VK  14.  Enneh,  he  was  t.  from  the  earth 

flar.  n.  17.  whose  *nuU  are  I.  from  their  bod 
24.  the  bones  shall  be  t.  out  of  their  places 


4.  20.  Ihey  were  I.  as  a  flock  caught  of  enemie* 

1  Mac.  2.  58.  Elias  was  t.  up  into  heaven 

3.  45.  joy  was  (.  from  Jacob,  the  pipe  ceased 
9.5.5.  Alcimus  plagued,  he  was  t.  with  a  palsy 
13.  41.  thus  the  yoke  wus  t.  away  from  Israel 
1.5.  33.  we  have  neither  t.  other  men's  ands 

2  Mac.  9.  21.  being  t.  with  a  grievous  disease 
12.  35.  ho  would  have  t.  that  cursed  nun  ahve 

TAKEST. 
Kcc/.  7.  36.  whatsoever  thou  f.  in  hand,  remember 

TAK  ETH. 
E.ccl.  II.  11.  one  that  hibourelh,  and  t.  pains 
19.3. whoso  t.  pleasure  in  wickedness,  condemned 
20.  H.  he  that  t.  to  himself  authority  therein 
34.  22.  he  that  t.  away  his  neighbour's  living; 
36.21'.  and  lodgeih  wheresoever  the  night  t.  him 
42. 9.  and  the  care  for  her  t.  away  sleep 

TAKETH  heed. 
Eccl.  37.  31.  he  that  t.  hetd  prolongeth  bis  life 
TAKING. 

1  E.id.  4.  .30.  t.  the  crown  from  the  king's  head 
Tab.  4.  13.  despise  not,  in  not  (.  a  wife  of  them 
IVi.td.  13.  13.  and  t.  the  very  refuse  among  tiioiMj 

2  Mar.  5.  25.  when  t.  the  Jews  keeping  holy-day 

12.  35.  (.  hold  of  his  coat,  drew  him  by  force 
TALE.  I 

F.ccl.  19.  15.  admonish,  and  believe  not  every  t. 
22.  6.  a  I.  oiii  of  season,.i8  as  music  in  mourning 

8.  he  that  lellelh  a  t.  to  a  fool,  sptakelh  to  ono 
TALENT. 

1  Esd.  1.3C.  seta  tax  on  the  land  of  one  t.  of  gold 

TALENT.S. 
1  Esd.  .3.  21.  it  makcth  to  speak  all  things  by  t. 

4.  51.  should  be  yearly  given  twnty  t.  to  building 
52.  other  ten  t.  yearly  to  maintain  olfeiings 

TALK. 
fVisd.  8. 12.  if  1 1.  much,  they  shnll  l.iy  their  handa 
Feci.  .5.  13.  honour  and  shame  is  in  i. 
9.  18.  and  he  that  is  rash  in  his  t.  shall  be  hated 
11.8.  nor  interrupt  men  in  the  midst  of  their  t. 

13.  11.  affect  not  to  be  made  equal  to  him  in  t. 
19.  8.  to  friend  or  foe,  t.  not  of  other  men's  lives 
22.  13.  t.  not  much  wilh  a  fool,  and  go  not  to  hira 
27.  14.  the  (.  of  him  that  sweareth  much 
38.  25.  driveth  oxen,  whose  t.  is  of  bullocks 

TALKED. 

1  Mac.  3.  26.  all  nations  t.  of  the  battles  of  Judat 
TALKING. 

)Vi.'<d.  8.  IS.  and  in  (.  with  her,  a  good  report 
F.ccl.  21.  10.  the  t.  of  n  fool  is  like  a  burden 

TAPHNES. 
.Jud.i.  9.  the  river  of  Ei;vpl,  and  T.  and  Ramesse 

TARRY. 
Tub.  2. 2.  bring  what  poor  man,  and  lo,  1 1.  for  thee 

4.  14.  let  not  the  wages  of  any  man  t.  with  thee 

5.  7.  Tobias  said,  t.  for  me  till  I  tell  my  father 

9.  4.  if  I  t.  long,  lie  will  be  very  sorry 

10.  8.  t.  wilh  me,  and  I  will  seiid  to  thy  father 

14.  10.  bnry  me,  but  t.  no  longer  at  Nineve 
Eccl.  7.  16.  remember  that  wrath  will  not  1.  long 

12.  15.  if  Ihou  besin  to  fall  he  will  not  t. 

TARRIETH. 
Tf^isd.  .5. 14.  pa.sseih  as  a  gne^t  that  t.  but  a  day 

TARRYING. 
F.ccl.  5.  7.  make  no  t.  to  turn  lo  the  Lord 

TASTE. 
U'i.fd.  16.  2.  thou  proparest  meat  of  a  strange  t. 

20.  able  lo  content,  and  ngieeing  lo  every  t. 
•2  Mar.  7.  1.  were  entnpelled  to  t.  swine's  flesh 

15.  39.  as  wine  with  water  delighielh  the  I. 
TASTED. 

Tob.'i.A.  before  I  h.id  /.of  any  meal,  I  started  up 
in.<!il.  18.  25.  it  was  enou'jh  they  only  t.  of  wratb 

2  JIac.  6.  20.  not  lawful  for  love  of  life  lo  be  (. 
TASTETH. 

Eccl.  36.  19.  as  the  palate /.(livers  kinds  ofvcniaon 

TASTING. 
M'jsf/.  18.20.lhe/.  ofdenth  touched  the  righteous 

TAUGHT. 

1  F.S'I.  8.  7.  but  t.  all  Israel  the  ordinances 

9.  49.  lo  the  Leviles  that  /.  Ijie  multitude 

2  F.sl.  8.  20.  them  that  hnve  clearly  /.  the  low 
If'i.^d.  9. 18.  men  worn  /.  things  pleasing  to  the 
Feci.  6.  32.  my  son,  if  thou  wilt,  ihou  shall  be  t. 

21.  12.  he  thai  is  not  wise  will  not  be  /.' 
Sus.  3.  /.  their  daughter  according  lo  law  of  Moses 

TAX. 

I  K.sii.  1.  38.  h»i  sot  a  /.  on  the  land  of  100  talenU 

8.  2i.  that  ye  require  no  /.  nor  imposition 

Sen  Crown. 

TEACH. 

1  F.sd.  8.23.  Ihoao  that  know  it  not,  thon  sholt  t. 

2  End.  12.  .38.  nnd  /.  them  lo  the  wise  of  the  poopU 
Eccl-  9. 1.  /.  hur  not  an  evil  lesson  against  thyieir 

45.  5.  that  he  miihl  /.  Jacob  his  covenants 

TEACHETH. 
U'i.fd.  a.  7.  for  she  /.  temperance  nnd  prndenM 
Frrl.  18.  13    he  reprovelb,  nurlurelh,  n;id  t. 

22.  7.  whoso  (.  a  fool,  is  as  ouo  that  gluclh 


Apocrypha.'' 


TEN 


Eccl.  30.  3.  he  that  t.  Iiis  son,  gri«vcth  the  enemy 
'S.i.  97.  eenil  liim  to  labour,  lor  idleness  t.  evil 

37.  19.  there  is  one  that  is  wise  und  t.  inuriy 

TEARS. 
Eccl.  35. 15.  iloih  not  i.  ruji  down  widow's  cheeks'! 

38.  IC.  my  son,  let  I.  tall  down  over  the  dend 
SMac.  11.  (5.  with  laineiilalionu  and  £.  he  sought 

TEDIOUS. 
JVisd.  2. 1.  ungodly  said  our  life  is  short  and  (. 

TEETH. 
tFiid.  16. 10.  not  the  t.  of  veiiomotjs  dragons 
Keel.  21.  2.  the  t.  thereof  are  the  t.  of  a  lion 
30. 10.  lest  thou  gnash  thy  t.  in  the  end 
3'J.  30.  t.  of  wild  beasts  punisliing  the  wicked 
51.  3.  from  t.  of  them  that  were  ready  to  devour 

TELL. 
Tob.  5.  7.  tarry  for  me  till  I  t.  my  father 

14.  but  t.  me,  what  wages  shall  I  give  tlioel 
Jud.ll.l7.  he  will  t.  me  when  they  have  committed 
/ftsrf.  6.22.  as  for  wisdom,  what  is  she,  I  will  (.  you 
Eccl.  18.  5.  who  shall  also  e. out  his  mercies? 
37. 14.13  wont  to  £.him  more  than  seven  watchmen 

43.  24.  that  sail  on  the  sea,  t.  of  the  danger 

44.  15.  the  people  will  t.  of  their  wisdom 

Sus.  54.  t.  me,  under  what  tree  sawest  thou  them? 
t  Mac.  7. 22. 1  cannot  f.  how  ye  came  into  my  womb 

TELLETH. 
Eccl.  22.  8.  he  that  l.  a  tale  to  a  fool,  speaketh 

TELLING. 
Eccl.  21. 25.  the  lips  of  talkers  will  be  t.  such  things 

TEMPERED. 
JVisd.  16.  21.  t.  itself  to  every  man's  liking 

TEMPERING. 
fVisd.  15.  7.  the  potter  t.  soft  earth,  fashioneth 

TEMPEST. 
Ifisd.  5. 14.  dispersed  here  and  there  with  a  t, 
Eccl.  10.  21.  it  is  a  t.  which  no  man  can  see 

TEMPLE. 
1  Esd.  1.  41.  he  set  them  in  his  own  t.  of  Babylon 
49.  the  governors  defiled  the  t.  of  the  Lord 
6. 19.  put  them  in  the  i.  at  Jerusalem,  and  that  the 
t.  of  the  Lord  should  be  built  in  his  place 

8.  18.  vessels  for  the  use  of  the  t.  of  thy  God 
81.  yea,  and  honoured  the  t.  of  our  Lord 

Tob.  14.  5.  the  land,  where  they  shall  build  a  t. 
Jud.A.  11.  every  man  and  woman  fell  betbre  the  t. 
5.  16.  thet.  of  their  God  was  cast  to  the  ground 
JVisd.  3.  14.  rin  inheritance  in  the  t.  of  the  Lord 

9.  8.  thou  hast  commanded  me  to  build  a  t. 
£crf.  45. 9.  a  noise  that  might  be  heard  in  the  t. 

49.  12.  who  set  up  a  holy  t.  to  the  Lord 

50.  1.  Simon  in  his  days  fortitied  the  t. 

4.  he  look  care  of  the  t.  that  it  should  not  fall 

51.  14.  I  prayed  for  her  before  the  t.  and  will  seek 
Bar.  6.  20.  they  are  as  one  of  the  beams  of  the  t. 
Bel  10.  the  king  went  with  Daniel  into  the  t.  of  Bel 
1  Mac.  2.  8.  her  t.  is  become  as  a  man  without  glory 

4.  50.  that  the  lamjis  might  give  light  in  the  t. 

5.  43.  and  fled  to  the  t.  that  was  at  Carnaira 
G.  2.  and  that  there  was  in  it  a  very  rich  t. 
16.  20.  he  sent  to  take  the  mountain  of  the  t. 

Z.Mac.  1.  13.  they  were  slain  in  the  t.  of  Nanca 

2.  22.  they  recovered  again  the  t.  renowned 

3.  12.  to  majesty  and  inviolable  sanctity  of  the  t. 

4.  14.  despising  the  t.  and  neglecting  sacrifices 
32.  Menelaui  stole  vessels  of  gold  out  of  the  t. 

5. 15.  to  go  into  the  most  holy  t.  of  all  the  world 

6.  2.  and  t.i  call  it  the  t.  of  Jupiter  Olympius 
4.  the  t.  was  filled  with  riot  and  revelling 

8.2.  would  pity  the  t.  profaned  of  ungodly  men 

9.  2.  entered  city,  and  went  about  to  rob  the  t. 

10.  1.  Maccabeus  recovered  the  t.  and  the  city 

.TEMPLES. 
Jud.  4.  1.  heard  how  he  bad  xpoiled  all  their  t. 
Bar.  6.  18.  even  so  the  priests  make  fast  their  t. 

TEMPT. 
fVisd.  1.  2.  he  will  be  found  of  them  that  t.  him  not 
Eccl.  J3. 11.  with  communication  will  he  t.  thee 

TEMPTATION. 
Eecl.  2.  1.  if  thou  come,  prepare  thy  soul  for  t. 
33.  1.  but  in  (.  even  again  he  will  deliver  hira 
1  Mac.  2.  52.  Abraham  was  found  faithful  in  t. 

TEMPTED. 
Txtd.  8. 12.  who  are  yon  that  have  (.  God  this  day  ? 

TEMPTETH. 
Eccl.  18.  23.  and  be  not  ns  one  that  t.  the  Lord 

TEN. 
Eecl.  23.  19.  are  t.  thousand  times  brighter 
47. 6.  the  people  honoured  him  with  t.  thousands 
Dan.  3.  17.  like  as  in  t.  thoiinands  of  fat  lambs 

TENDERED. 
i  Mac.  4. 2.  had  t.  his  own  nation,  and  was  zealous 

TENT. 

Jud.  8.  5.  she  made  her  t.  on  the  tnp  of  her  house 

10. 15.  now  therefore  come  to  his  t.  some  conduct 

17.  thev  brought  her  to  the  t.  of  Olofernes 
14.  14.  Bngoas  knocked  at  ihe  door  of  the  t. 
Eccl.  14.  25  he  shall  pitch  his  t.  nigh  to  her 

TENTS. 

Wisd.  11. 2.  they  pitched  (.  where  there  lay  no  way 

847 


THI 

TENTH. 

Eccl.  25.  7.  the  I.  I  will  utter  with  my  tongue 

TENTHS. 
Tub.  5.  13.  the  tirst-born,  and  the  t.  of  tho  fruits 

1  Mac.  10.  31.  free  both  (rom  Ihe  t.  and  tributes 

TERRIBLE. 
fVisd.  5.  2.  tlicy  shall  he  troubled  with  t.  fear 
II.  19.  but  also  the  t.  sight  utterly  destroy  them 

17.  9.  for  though  no  t.  thing  did  fear  them 

19.  or  a  t.  sound  of  stones  cast  down,  or  a  running 
Eccl.  43.  29.  the  Lord  is  t.  and  very  great 
Prayer  of  Munass.  by  thy  t.  and  glorious  name 

2  Mac.  3.  25.  a  horse  with  a  t.  rider  upon  him 

TERRIFY. 
Eccl.H.4.  to  t.  and  do  wrong  will  waste  riches 

TERRIFIED. 
fVisd.  17.  6.  for  being  much  t.  they  thought  things 
IMac.  4. 1.  as  if  he  had  t.  Heliodorus,  been  worker 

TERROR. 

2  JIfac.  8.  16.  not  to  bo  stricken  with  t.  of  enemy 

12.22.  enemies  being  smitten  with  fear  and  t. 

TERRORS. 
JVisd.  17.  8.  they  that  promised  to  drive  away  t. 

18.  17.  and  (.  came  noon  them  uiilouked  for 

TESTAMENT. 

1  Mac.  1.  57.  was  found  with  any  the  book  of  the  t. 

TESTIFY. 

1  Mac.  2.  37.  heaven  and  earth  shall  t.  for  us 

TESTIFIED. 

2  Mac.  3.36.  then  t.  he  to  all  men  tho  works  of  God 

TESTIMONY. 
IVisd.  10.  7.  the  waste  land  that  smoketh  is  a  t. 

TESTIMONIES. 
Eccl. '.il.2i.  the  t.of  hisniggardness  not  be  doubted 
45.  17.  that  he  should  teach  Jacob  the  t. 

THANK. 
Eccl.  20.  16.  I  have  no  t.  for  all  my  good  deeds 

THANKS. 
1  Esd.  4. 60.  blessed  art  thou  w  ho  hast  given  me  wis- 
dom, for  to  thee  I  give  t.O  Lord  of  our  fathers 
Tob.  12. 20.  give  God  1. 1  go  up  to  him  that  sent  me 
IVisd.  16.28.  we  must  prevent  the  sun  to  give  t. 
Eccl.  17.27.  instead  of  them  who  live  and  give  t. 
29.  25.  thou  shalt  entertain  and  have  no  t. 
39.  6.  ho  shall  give  t.  to  the  Lord  in  his  prayer 
Dan.  3. 67.  O  give  t.  to  Lord,  because  he  is  gracious 
68.  all  ye  that  worship  the  Lord,  give  him  t. 

1  Mac.  14.  25.  what  t.  shall  we  give  to  Simon? 

2  Mac.  3.  33.  give  Onias  the  high-priest  great  (. 

8.  27.  yielding  exceeding  praise  and  t.  to  the  Lord 

9.  20.  if  ye  fare  well,  I  give  very  great  t.  to  God 

THANKED. 
Eccl.  12.  1.  so  shalt  thou  be  t.  for  thy  benefits 

THANKFULNESS. 

Eslh.  16.4.  and  take  not  only  t.  away  from  men 

Eccl.  37.11.  nor  consult  with  an  envious  man  of  t. 

THANKSGIVING. 

1  E»rf.5.fi0.  singing  songs  oft.  and  praising  the  Lord 
Eccl.  17. 28.  (.  perisheth  from  the  dead,  asonc  is  not 

51. 11.  praise  conlin.  and  I  will  sing  praise  with  I. 

2  Mac.  10.38.  praised  the  Lord  witli  psalms  and  t. 

THARSUS. 
2  Jl/ac.4.30.theyofT.andMnllos  made  insurrection 

THEFT. 
fVisd.  14.  25.  manslaughter,  t.  and  dissimulation 

THEMAN. 
Bar.  3.  22.  neither  hath  it  been  seen  in  T. 

THICK. 
Fed.  14.  18.  ns  of  the  green  leaves  a  t.  tree 
2  Mac.  1.  20.  they  found  no  (ire,  but  t.  wator 

THICKEST. 
2Jtfa(;.  14.43.  cast  himself  down  among  t.  of  them 

THIEF. 
Keel.  5.  14.  for  a  foul  shame  is  upon  the  t. 
20.  25.  a  t.  is  better  than  a  man  that  is  a  liar 
36.  26.  who  will  trust  a  t.  well  appointed  ? 

THIEVES. 
Bar.G.  15.  cannot  deliver  himself  from  war  and  t. 

THIGH. 
Jud.  9.  2.  who  discovered  the  t.  to  her  shame 
Eccl.  19. 12.  as  an  arrow  that  sticketli  in  a  man's  t. 

THIN. 
IVisd.  5.  14.  like  a  (.  froth  that  is  driven  away 

THINK. 
fVisd.  1.  1.  t.  of  the  Lord  with  a  good  heart 
6.  15.  to  t.  upon  her  is  perfection  of  wisdom 
9.13.  or  who  can  t.  what  the  will  of  the  Lord  is? 
Eccl.  3.  22.  t.  thereupon  wiih  reverence 
18.  24.  I.  on  the  wrath  that  shall  be  at  the  end 
25.  whnn  thou  art  rich,  t.  on  poverty  and  need 
Bar.  2.  32.  and  they  shall  t.  upon  my  nanrie 
3.  5.  but  t.  on  thv  power  and  name  at  this  time 
6.  40.  how  should  a  man  then  t.  they  are  gods? 
2  Mac.  2.  29.  even  so  I  t.  it  is  with  us 

6.  24.  whereby  many  young  persons  might  I. 

7.  16.  yet  t.  not  our  nation  is  forsaken  of  God 
19.  t.  not  that  thou  shalt  escape  unpunished 

9.  12.  a  man  should  not  proudly  t.  of  himself 

THIRD. 
1  Esd.  3.  12.  the  (.  wrote,  women  are  strongest 


TIG 

1  Esa.  4. 13.  then  tlie  t.  who  hal  spoken  of  women 
Feel.  23.  16.  and  the  t.  will  bring  wrath 
26.  2-S.  and  the  t.  maketh  me  angry 

50.  25.  two  I  abhor,  and  the  i.  is  no  nation 

1  Afac.  14.  27.  Ilif  (.  year  of  Simon  the  high-pric»t 

2  Jl/ec.7. 10.  after  was  the  t.  made  amockliig-slock 

THIRDLY. 
£cc/.  23.  23.  £.  she  hath  played  whore  in  adultery 

THIRST. 
Jud.  7.  13.  so  shall  t.  kill  them,  and  they  shall  give 

22.  their  women  and  young  men  fainted  for  (. 
IVisd.  11.4.  their  t.  was  quenched  out  of  the  stone 
8.  declaring  by  that  t.  how  thou  hadst  imnishud 
THIRSTY. 
IVisd.  11. 4.  when  they  were  t.  they  called  on  thee 
Eccl.  26.  12.  open  her  mouth  as  a  t.  traveller 
51. 24.  what  say  ye,  seeing  your  souls  are  very  t.i 

THIRSTING. 
IVisd.  11.9.  (.  in  another  manner  than  the  just 

THOUGHT. 
IVisd.  1.  16.  they  t.  to  have  had  it  their  friend 

6.  16.  and  she  mecteth  them  in  every  I. 

Feci.  11.  5.  one  that  was  never  t.  on  hath  worn 
22.  17.  a  heart  settled  upon  a  t.  of  understanding 
42.20.  no  i.  escapeth  him,  nor  any  word  hidden 

51.  8.  then  t.  I  upon  thy  mor&y,  O  Lord 

Bar.  6.  56.  how  can  it  be  then  t.  that  they  are  gods? 

THOUGHTS. 
IVisd.  1.  3.  for  froward  (.  separate  from  God 
5.  remove  from  t.  without  uiidurslanding 
2.  14.  he  was  made  to  reprove  our  (. 
9.  14.  for  the  t.  of  mortal  men  are  miserable 
Feci.  23.  2.  who  will  set  scourges  over  my  £.? 
33.  5.  and  his  t.  are  like  a  rolling  axle-tree 

THOUSAND. 
IVisd.  12. 22.  scourgest  our  enemies  a  t.  times  more 
Eccl.  G.  6.  but  have  one  counsellor  of  a  £. 
16.  3.  for  one  that  is  just  is  better  than  a  t. 
18.  10.  so  are  a  t.  years  to  the  days  of  eternity 

39.  11.  he  shall  leave  a  greater  name  than  a  t. 
41.  4.  ten,  or  a  hundred,  or  a  t.  years 

12.  continue  above  a  t.  great  treasures  of  gold 
1  Mac.  2.  38.  slew  to  the  nuuibur  of  a  t.  people 

TIIRACIA. 
"Mac.  12.35.  a  horseman  of  T.  coming  upon  hini 

THREATENED. 
Jud.  8. 16.  for  God  is  not  as  man,  that  ho  may  be  t. 

THREATENETH. 
Eccl.  13.3.  rich  man  hath  done  wrong,  and  yet  he  t 

THREATENING. 
Prayer  of  Munass.  thine  ansry  t.  toward  sinnen 

three: 

1  Esd.  3.  4.  t.  young  men  that  were  of  the  guard 
Eccl.  25.  1.  in  t.  things  I  was  beautified 

2.  t.  sorts  of  men  my  soul  hateth 
26.  5.  there  be  i.  things  that  my  heart  feareth 
48.  3.  and  also  t.  times  brought  down  fire 
Dan.  3.  28.  then  the  t.  as  out  of  one  mouth  praised 

THRICE. 
Eccl.  13.  7.  he  have  drawn  thee  dry  twice  or  t. 

THRIVE. 
IVisd.  4.  3.  the  brood  of  the  ungodlv  shall  not  t. 

THRONE. 
Eslk.  15.  6.  the  king,  who  sat  on  his  royal  t. 
IVisd.  9.  10.  O  send  her  from  the  t.  of  Ihy  glory 
18.  15.  out  of  thy  royal  t.  as  a  fierce  man  of  war 
Feci.  1.  8.  is  one  wise,  the  Lord  silting  upon  his  t 

40.  3.  from  him  that  siltelh  on  a  I.  of  glory 

47.  11.  the  Lord  gave  him  a  t.  ofglory  in  Israel 

1  Jl/«c.  2. 57.  possessed  t.  of  au  everlasting  kingdom 

7.  4.  Demetrius  wes  set  on  the  t.  of  his  kingdom 

THRONES. 
IVisd  ."i.SS.  ill-dealing  slialloverthrowt.  of  mighty 

6.  21.  if  your  delight  be  then  in  I.  and  sceptres 

7.  8.  I  preferred  her  before  sceptres  and  t. 

Eccl.  10. 14.  hath  cast  down  the  £.  of  pruud  princee 
THRONG. 

2  Mac.  14. 45.  yet  he  ran  through  the  midst  of  the  (. 
46.  plucked  out  his  bowel«,andcast  them  on  thet. 

THROWN. 
IVisd.  11.  14.  when  he  was  long  before  (.  out 
18.  18.  one  t.  here,  another  there,  half  dead 

THRUST. 
Eccl.  13.21.  a  poor  man  is  t.  nwav  by  his  friends 

.     THUMMIN. 
Eccl.  45. 10.  a  breast-plate,  and  with  Urim  andT. 

THUNDER. 
Eslh.  n.  5.  behold  a  noise  of  timiult  with  t. 
Feci.  32.  10.  before  the  t.  gocth  lightning 
40.  i:?.  shall  vanish  with  a  noise  like  great  Mn  rain 
43.  17.  the  noise  of «.  makes  (he  earth  tremble 

THUNDER-DOLTS. 
IVUd.  5.  21.  the  right-aiming  t.  shall  go  abroad 
2  Mac.  1.  16.  thev  threw  stones  like  t.  and  struck 

THUNDERED. 
Eccl.  46.  17.  and  the  Lord  (.  from  heaven 

TIDINGS. 
2  Mac.  9.  24.  or  if  anv  grievous  t.  wore  brought 

•       TIGRIS. 
Tob.  6. 1.  they  came  in  the  tvenins  to  I'lW  rirerl 


TOB 

JkiA.  8.  there  came  to  him  all  that  dwelt  by  T. 
Keel-  24.  25.  as  T.  in  the  times  of  the  new  fiuita 

TILLETH. 
Eccl.  30.  28.  he  that  t.  his  land  shall  increase 

TIMBER. 
fVisd.  13.  11.  now  a  carpenter  that  fellelh  t. 
Etcl.'H.  16.  ast.giitjmd  bound  together  in  building 

TIMBRELS. 

Jujd.  3.  7.  they  received  them  with  dances  and  t. 

TIME. 

1  Etd.  1.  19.  Israel  held  the  paseover  at  that  t. 
5.  73.  hindered,  all  the  t.  that  king  Cyrus  lived 

Tab.  14.  4.  the  house  shall  be  desolate  for  a  t. 
EsCh.  16.  20.  in  the  t.  of  affliction  set  on  them 
■    fVisd.i.i.  our  name  ehull  be  forgotten  in  I. 
5.  our  t.  is  fi  very  shadow  that  pnsseth  away 
4.  4.  though  they  flourish  in  branches  for  a  t. 
8.  age  is  nut  that  which  staiidelh  in  length  oft. 
13.  made  perfect  in  a  short  t.  fulfilled  a  long  t. 
0.5.  I  thy  servant  am  of  a  short  t.  and  too  young 
15. 12.  counted  our  t.  here  a  market  for  gain 
19.  22.  didift  assist  them  in  every  t.  and  place 
Eccl.  1.  24.  he  will  hide  his  words  for  a  t. 
2.  2.  and  make  not  haste  in  t.  of  trouble 

11.  for  the  Lord  savelh  in  t.  of  affliction 
16.26.  from  the  t.  he  made  them,  he  disposed 
18.21.  and  in  the  t.  of  sins  shew  repentance 

22.  let  nothing  hinder  to  pay  thy  vow  in  due  t. 
24.  t.  of  vengeance  when  he  shall  turn  his  face 
25.when  thou  hastenough,  remember  t.of  hunger 
19.  9.  and  when  I.  comcth  he  will  hato  thee 

22.  nor  at  any  t.  the  counsel  of  sinners  prudence 

20.6.  and  some  koepnth  silence  knowing  his  {. 
7.  but  a  babbler  ana  fool  will  regard  no  t. 

22. 16.  so  the  heart  established  shall  fear  at  no  t. 

23.  abide  stedfast  to  him  in  the  £.  of  trouble 
24.26.  and  as  Jordan  in  the  «.of  the  harvest 

87.  to  appear  as  Geon  in  the  i.  of  vintage 

27. 12.  if  among  the  undiScreet,  observe  the  t. 
29.2.  lend  thy  neighbour  in  the  t.  of  his  need 

5.  when  he  should  repay, he  will  prolong  the  t. and 
return  words  of  grief,  and  complain  of  the  t. 
30. 24.  carefulness  bringclh  age  before  the  t. 
32.4.  and  shew  not  forth  wisdom  out  off. 

33. 23.  at  the  f.  when  thou  shalt  end  thy  days 

35. 20.  mercy  is  seasonable  in  t.  of  affliction 

36. 8.  make  the  t.  short,  remember  the  covenant 
37. 4.  but  in  t.  of  trouble  will  be  against  him 

38. 13.  there  is  a  t.  when  in  their  hands  there  is 
39.28.  int.  of  destruction  they  pour  out  force 

31.  when  their  t.  iscome  they  shall  not  transgress 
34.  for  in  t.  they  shall  all  be  well  approved 

40. 24.  brethren  are  against  the  t.  of  trouble 

44.  J7.  Noah  was  found  perfect  in  the  t.  of  wrath 

46. 7.  in  the  £.  of  Moses  he  did  a  work  of  mercy 

48.23.  in  his  t.  the  sun  went  backward 

49.  3.  in  t.  of  uneodly  he  established  the  worship 

50. 24.  and  that  he  would  deliver  us  at  his  t. 
51. 10.  in  f.  of  the  proud,  when  there  was  no  help 

12.  and  thou  delivcrcdst  me  from  the  evil  f. 
30.  in  his  t.  he  will  give  you  your  reward 

Bur.  3.5.  but  think  on  thy  name  now  at  this  t. 
J)an.3. 15.  nor  is  there  at  this  t.  prince  or  prophet 
Sus.  15.  it  fill  out  as  they  watched  a  fit  t. 

2  Mac.  1. 22.  when  the  t.  came  that  the  sun  shone 

TIMES. 
^PTisd.T.IS.  beginning,  ending,  and  midst  of  the  t. 
8. 8.  she  foreseeth  the  events  of  setisons  and  t. 

11.21.  thou  canst  hhew  Ihy  great  strength  at  all  t. 
Eccl.  19.  15.  admonish,  fiir  many  t.  it  is  a  slander 

26. 4.  have  a  good  heart,  he  shall  at  all  t.  rejoice 

43. 6.  he  made  the  moon  for  a  declaration  oft. 

44.7.  all  these  wero  the  glory  of  their  t. 

47. 10.  he  set  in  order  the  solemn  t.  till  the  end 
48. 10.  who  wast  orilained  for  reproofs  in  their  t. 
Bar.  4. 28.  being  returned  seek  him  ten  I.  more 

TiMoRors. 

Ifud.  17. 11.  wickedncB.)  cnnrfemned  is  very  t. 
TIMOTHEU3. 

1  Mac.  5  1'.  T.  being  captain  of  their  host 

2  Mac.  P.  .10.  of  Ihnnr  that  were  with  T.  they  slew 
0.3.  what  had  happened  unto  Nicanor  and  T. 
10.24.  T.  whom  the  .Tews  hid  overcome  before 

IK.  as  fix  T.  himself,  he  fled  into  a  strong  hold 
■J7.  and  killed  T.  that  »as  hid  in  a  certain  pit 
12.  18.  as  fiirT.  they  finmd  him  not  in  the  places 

19.  slew  those  that  T.  had  left  in  I  he  fortress 

20.  wentasainslT.  wiio  had  about  him  120,000 
2L  when  T.  hail  knowled;f  of  Judas  coming 
34.T.  himself  fell  into  the  hands  of  Dositheus 

TIN 
Xeei.47.  18  didst  gither  gold  as  t.  and  multiply 

TluR. 
Jkd.  10.  3.  braided  ner  hair,  and  put  a  t.  uprm  it 
M.S.  bound  her  hair  in  a  e.  and  took  liner 

TITHE3. 
Eccl.  Vt.  9.  and  dedicate  thy  t.  with  glndn  «i 
1  Mae.  11. 35.  of  the  l.  and  cust(wis  pertaining 

TOBIAS. 

Tot.  1  0.  I  married  Anna,  and  of  her  I  begat  T. 

8iS 


TOO 

ToJ.S.n.gave  Sara.daughter  of  Raguel,  for  wife  to 
T.  the  son  of  Tobit,  she  belonged  to  T.  by  right 
4.2.  wherefore  do  I  not  call  for  my  son  T.7 
7.  11.  but  T.  said,  I  will  eat  nothing  here,  till 
13.  and  he  gave  her  to  be  wife  to  T.  saying 
8. 1.  they  supped,  and  brought  T.  in  unto  her 

4.  T.  ruse  out  of  the  bed,  and  said,  sister,  arise 

5.  then  began  T.  to  say,  blessed  art  Ibou,  O  God 
9.  6.  came  to  the  wedding,  and  T.  blessed  his  wife 
II.  1.  after  this,  T.  went  his  way,  praising  God 

7.  I  know,T.  thy  father  will  open  his  eyes 
19.  T  wedding  was  kept  seven  days  with  joy 
1-2.  1.  then  Tobit  called  his  son  T.  and  said 

14.  12.  but T.  departed  with  his  wife  and  diildren 
2  Mac.  3. 11.  some  belonged  to  Hircanus  son  of  T. 

TOBIE. 
1  Mac.  5. 13.  our  brethren  that  were  in  places  of  T. 

TOBIEL. 
Tab.  1. 1,  the  book  of  the  words  of  Tobit  son  of  T. 

TOBIT. 
Tab.  I.  3.  I  T.  have  walked  in  the  way  of  truth 
3. 17.  the  whiteness  of  T.  eyes,  then  canieT.  home 
4. 1.  in  that  day  T.  remembered  the  money 

7.  2.  how  like  is  this  young  man  to  T.  niy  cousin  ! 
4.  he  said  to  them,  do  you  know  T.  our  kinsman? 
7.  but  when  he  heard  that  T.  was  blind,  he  wejit 

10. 1.  now  T.  his  father  counted  every  day 
11. 10.  T.  went  toward  the  door  and  stumbled 

16.  T.went  out  to  meet  his  daughter-in-law 

17.  but  T.  gave  thanks  before  them,  because 
12. 1.  T.  called  his  son  Tobias,  and  said  to  him 
13.  1.  then  T.  wrote  a  prayer  of  rejoicing 

14. 1.  BO  T.  made  an  end  of  praising  God 

13.  inherited  their  substance,  and  his  father  T. 

TOIL. 

lEsd.  4. 22.  do  ye  not  t.  and  bring  all  to  the  woman? 

TOKEN,  S. 

1  F.3d.2.5.  give  great  things  in  t.  of  victory 

2  Fsd.  1. 15.  the  quails  were  as  a  (  for  victory 
/fi'sd.  2.  n.  let  us  leave  t.  of  our  joyfulness 

5. 11.  there  is  no  t.  of  her  way  to  be  found 
Eccl.  13.  26.  is  a  t.  of  a  heart  in  prosperity 
2  Mac.  6. 13.  for  it  is  a  t.  of  his  great  goodness 

TOLD. 
Tob.  8. 14.  maid  came  and  t.  them  that  he  was  alive 
./ud.  10.18.  came  about  her,  till  they  t.  him  of  her 
F.ccl.  19.7.  rehearse  not  that  which  is  t.thee 

31.  22.  at  the  last  thou  shalt  find  as  I  t.  thee 

TOMB. 
Ecct.  21.8.  gather  stones  for  the  t.  of  his  burial 

TONGUE. 
fVisd.  1.  6.  for  God  is  a  hearer  of  his  t. 
II.  and  refrain  your  t.  from  backbiting 

8.  12.  when  I  hold  my  t.  they  shall  bide  my  leisure 
Eccl.  4.  24.  and  learning  by  the  word  of  the  t. 

29.  be  not  hasty  in  thy  t.  and  in  thy  deeds  slack 
5.  9.  so  doth  the  sinner  that  hath  a  double  t. 

13.  and  the  t.  of  man  is  his  fall 

14.  notawhieperer,  andlie  not  in  wait  with  thy  t. 

8.  3.  strive  not  with  a  man  that  is  full  oft. 

9.  18.  a  man  of  an  ill  t.  is  dangerous  in  his  city 
17. 6.  counsel  and  a  t.  eyes  and  ears  gave  he  lliem 
19. 6.  he  that  can  rule  his  t.  shall  live  without  strife 

16.  who  is  he  that  hath  not  offended  with  his  t.? 
20.  1.  some  man  holdeth  his  t.  and  he  is  wise 

7.  Wiseman  will  hold  his  t.  till  he  see  opportunity 

18.  is  better  than  to  slip  with  the  f. 

22.  97.  who  shall  set  a  watch  and  a  seal  of  wis- 
dom upon  my  lips,  that  my  t.  destroy  me  not? 

25.  7.  and  the  tenth  I  will  utter  with  my  t. 

8.  well  is  him  thai  hath  not  slipped  with  his  t. 

26.  6.  a  scourge  of  the  t.  which  communicates 
28.  14.  a  backbiting  t.  hath  disquieted  many 

17.  the  stroke  of  the  t.  breaketh  the  boties 

18.  but  not  so  many  as  have  fallen  by  the  t. 

32.  8.  one  that  knowoth  and  yet  holdeth  his  t. 
36.23.  if  there  be  meekness  andComfi)rt  in  her  t. 
37.  18.  but  the  t.  rulelh  over  them  continually 

51.2.  preserved  from  thesnaresof  theslanderous  I. 
a.  from  an  unclean  t.  and  from  lying  words 

6.  bv  an  accusation  from  an  unrighteous  t. 
Bar.  6.S.  as  for  their  t.  it  is  polished  by  workmen 
2  Mac.  7.  4.  to  cut  out  f.  of  him  that  spake  first 

10.  when  hn  was  required  he  put  out  his  t. 

15.  33.  when  he  had  rut  out  the  t.  of  Nicanor 

TONGUED. 
Eccl.  28.  13.  curae  the  whisiierer  and  doublo-t. 

TONGUES. 
jy»d.l0.21.  made  the  t  that  cannot  spoak,cloquent 

TOOK. 
1  End.}.  41.Nabuchodono8ort.  of  the  holy  vessels 
8.96.  Esdrna  arose,  and  t.  an  oath  of  the  priests 
Tob.  2.  4.  I  start  up,  and  t.  him  up  into  a  room 
7.  n.  t.  her  by  the  hand  and  gave  her  to  Tobias 

14.  ho  t.  paper  and  did  write  an  instrument 
8. 2.  hn  t.  the  ashes  of  perfumes,  and  made  smoke 
12. 6.  he  f.  them  both  apart,  and  said  unio  th''m 
R»tA.15.2.  had  called  on  God,  she  f .  two  ma'ds  with 
IVifd.  13.  3.  being  delighted,  took  thorn  to  be  gods 
I  Kecl.i''.  11.  the  Lord  I.  away  bia  tins,  and  eiallcd 


TRA  (Apochipha. 

TOOKEST. 
EstA.  14. 5.  thou  t.  Israel  from  among  all  people 

TOP. 
Jud-  9. 13.  who  purposed  evil  against  the  1.  of  Sion 

TOPS. 
Jud.  4.  5.  of  all  the  t.  of  the  high  mountaini 

TORCH-LIGHT. 
2  .Vac.4. 22.  he  wasbruught  in  with  t.  andshoutinsf 

TORMENT. 
fVisd.  3.  1.  and  there  shall  no  f.  touch  them 
17.  13.  more  than  the  cause  which  brings  the  (. 

1  Mac.  9.  56.  Alcimus  died  at  t^at  time  with  t. 

2  Mac.  6.  19.  he  came  of  his  own  accord  to  the  t. 
28.  had  said  this,  immediately  he  went  to  ibe  k 

7.  8.  he  also  received  the  next  t.  in  order 
17.  behold,  how  will  he  t.  thee  and  thy  seed 
TORMENTED. 
2  Esd.  13.38.  wherewith  they  shall  begin  to  be  t. 
H'isd.  6.  6.  but  mighty  men  shall  be  mightily  t, 
11.  9.  the  ungodly  were  judged  in  wrath  and  t. 
12.23.  hast  t.  them  with  their  own  abomiiiatiooa 
16.  1.  by  the  multitude  of  beasts  were  they  t. 
4.  should  be  shewed  how  their  enemies  were  L 
2  Mac.  7.  1.  and  were  t.  with  scourges  and  wbipf 
13.  they  t.  and  mangled  the  fourth  in  like  manner 
9.  6.  he  had  t.  other  men's  bowels  with  tormenta 

TORMENTOR. 
2  Mac.  7.  29.  fear  not  this  t.  but  take  thy  death 

TORMENTS. 
2  Esd.9.  9.  have  cast  them  away, shall  dwell  in  t. 
Wisd.  1!1.  4.  the  punishment  wanting  to  their  t. 
Eccl.  33.  26.  so  are  tortures   and  t.  fur  an  evil 

servant 
2  3/a<:.7.37.  thai  thou  by  t.  mayest  confess  he  is  God 
9.  5  Fore  t.  of  the  inner  parts  came  upon  him 
6.  he  had  tormented  others  with  many  t. 
TORN. 
Eccl.  6.  2.  that  thy  soul  be  not  t.  in  pieces 

TORTURE. 
Wisd.%  19.  examine  him  with  despitefulne*^  and  t 

TORTURES. 
'iMac.  7.  42.  idolatrous  feasts  and  extreme  f. 

TOUCH. 
Tob.  12.  7.  do  good,  and  no  evil  shall  t.  you 
./ud.  11. 13.  it  is  not  lawful  for  any  so  much  as  to  t 
IVisd.  3.  1.  and  there  shall  no  torment  t.  them 
Ecct.34.25.  if  he  t.  it  again,  what  availeth  washing? 

TOUCHED. 
Wisd.  18.  16.  and  it  t.  heaven,  but  stood  on  earth 

20.  the  tasting  of  death  t.  the  righteous  also 
Dan.  3.  27.  so  that  the  fire  t.  them  not  at  all 

TOUCHETH. 
Eccl.  13. 1.  he  that  t.  pitch  shall  be  defiled  therewith 

TOWER. 
Eccl.  26.  22.  a  married  woman  is  a  t.  against  death 
37.  14.  watchmen  that  sit  above  in  a  high  t. 

1  Mac.  6.  24.  they  of  our  nation  besiege  the  t. 
9.  53.  and  he  put  them  in  the  t.  at  Jerusalem 
13.  50.  he  cleansed  the  t.  from  pollutions 

52.  the  hill  of  the  temple  that  was  by  the  t. 

2  Mac.  4. 12.  he  built  a  place  of  exercise  under  the  U 
13.  5.  a  t.  of  fifty  cubits  high  full  of  ashes 

15.  35.  he  hanged  also  Niciinor's  head  on  the  t. 

TOWERS. 

1  Esd.  1.  .55.  Jerusalem,  they  set  fire  on  her  (. 

4.  4.  they  break  down  mountains,  walls,  and  t. 
Tob.  13.  i6.  thy  walls,  t.  and  bailKinents  with  gold 
.fud.  1.  3.  set  the  t.  thereof  on  the  galis  of  it 
UV(ie.l.33.  they  buildi-d  city  of  Dav.  with  mighty  t. 

5.  0.5.  and  burned  the  t.  thereof  round  about 

16.  10.  so  they  fled  even  to  the  t.  in  the  fields 

TOWN. 

2  Mac.  n.  5.  to  Rothsura,  which  was  a  strong  t. 
12.21.  for  the  t.  was  hanl  to  besiege,  and  uneasr 

TOWNS. 

1  Mac.  5.  65.  he  smote  Hebron  and  the  t.  thereof 
i  Mac.  8.  1.  they  with  him  went  privily  into  t. 

6.  he  came  unawares  and  burnt  up  t.  and  citiei 
TRACK. 
fVisd.  2.  4.  shall  pass  away  as  the  t.  of  a  clood 
.5.  10.  the  t.  thereof  cannot  hn  fiiund,  nor  palll 

TRACETH. 

EccM4.22.  go  after  her  as  i<ne  that  t.  and  lie  in  wait 

TRAINI.N'G. 

2  Mac.  4.  9.  for  the  t.  up  of  vouth  in  the  fashion* 

TRAINS. 
Eccl.  II.  29.  for  the  deceitfiil  man  hath  many  t. 

TRANCE. 
2E,«d.  12.  3.  I  awaked  out  of  irnnhle  and  t.  of  mind 

TRANsnRr.s.sr,n. 

1  F.'d.  1 .  48.  ho  t  the  laws  of  the  Loril  God  of  Israel 
8.  82.  for  we  have  t.  ihv  rnmmandmcnU 

TRANSGRES?ETH. 
Eccl.  19.  24.  that  t.  the  law  of  the  Most  High 

TRANSGRESSING,  S. 
fVi.id.  2.  12.  he  ot.jucteth  the  f.  of  our  education 
Frcl.Vt.  19.  a  wieked  man  t.  the  eninmandmenU 
TRANSGRESSIONS,  see  Prat/rr  of  Mancu. 

TRANSGRESSORS. 
Eccl.  40.  14.  so  shall  t.  come  to  nought 


POCBTPHA.] 


TRI 


TRANSLATED. 
Esth.  16.  14.  to  have  t.  the  kingJom  oftlio  Pursians 
'Visd.  4.  10.  BO  that  living  among  sinners,  lie  wag  t. 
Eccl.]O.S.  kingdom  is  t.  from  oiui  people  to  annlher 
2  Mac.  11.  23.  since  our  father  is  I.  unto  the  gods 

TRAVAILETH. 
Eccl.  19.  II.  a  fool  t.  with  a  word,  as  a  woman 

TRAVEL. 
/ri5(/.6.14.  Bcekctli  her  early,  shall  have  nogreat  t. 
Reel.  8.  15.  t.  not  by  the  way  with  a  bold  fellow 
34. 5.  the  heart  fancieth  as  a  woman's  heart  in  t. 
40.  1.  groat  t.  is  created  for  every  man 
1  Mac.  9.  68.  for  his  counsel  and  I.  was  in  vain 

TRAVELS. 
fVisd.  10.10.  made  him  rich  In  his  (.  and  multiplied 

TRAVELLED. 
Eccl.  34.  9.  a  man  that  liath  (.  knowetli  things 

TRAVELLER. 
£cc{.  26. 12.  she  will  open  her  mouth  as  a  thirsty  t. 

TRAVELLEKS. 

Ecd.  42.  3.  of  reckonin:,'  with  thy  partners  and  t. 

TREACHERY. 

1  Mac.  Ifi.  17.  in  doing  he  committed  great  t. 

2  Mac.  3. 32.  some  t.  had  been  done  to  Heliodorus 

TREACHEROUS. 
.EccJ.  22. 22.  disclo.sifig  of  secrets,  or  a  t.  wound 

TREAD. 
Jud.  6.  4.  with  them  we  will  t.  them  under  foot 
Bar.  4.  2.'>.  «ee  his  destruction,  and  t.  on  his  neck 
1  Mac.  4.  00.  t.  it  down  as  they  had  done  before 

TREASURE. 
Tob.  4.  0.  thou  layest  up  a  good  ;.  for  thyself 
JVhd.  7.  14.  for  she  is  a  t.  that  never  faileth 
Eccl.  3.  4.  he  is  as  one  that  layeth  up  t. 
6.  14.  th.it  hath  found  such  a  one  hath  found  a  I. 
20.  30. «.  Uiat  is  hoarded  up,  what  profit  is  in  it? 

29. 11.  lay  up  thy  t.  according  to  thy  coinmandm. 

40.  IS.  he  thai  findeth  a  t.  is  above  them  both 

41.  14.  a  t.  that  is  not  seen,  what  profit  is  in  it  1 
1  Mac.  3. 28.  he  opened  his  t.  and  gave  soldiers  pay 

13.  15.  for  money  he  is  owinj  to  the  king's  t. 
TREASURER. 

1  Esi.  2.  11.  he  delivered  to  Milhridatea  his  t. 
4.  49.  no  t.  should  forcibly  enter  their  doors 

2  Mac.  3.  7.  the  king  chose  out  Heliodorus  his  t. 

TREASURES. 
1  Esd.  i.iT.  Daiiu'j  wrote  letteis  for  him  to  all  the  t. 

TREASURES. 
1  End.  1.54.  they  look  holy  ve.ssels  and  the  kin?'s<. 
8. 19. 1  commanded  the  keepers  of  the  I.  in  Syria 
F.ccl.  1.25.  the  parables  are  in  the  t.  of  wisdom 

41. 12.  thy  name  above  a  thousand  great  t.  of  gold 
43.14.through  this  the  i.  are  opened,  the  clouds  fly 

Bar.  3.  15.  or  who  hath  come  into  her  t.  ? 

1  Mae.  1.  23.  he  took  the  hidden  t.  which  he  found 

3.  29.  when  he  saw  the  money  of  his  t.  failed 

TREASURY. 
1  Esd.  5.  45.  give  into  the  holy  t.  of  the  works 
8.  18.  thou  shall  give  it  out  ot  the  king's  t. 

1  Mac.  14.  451.  the  copies  should  be  laid  up  in  the  t. 
2^ac.3.6.  and  told  that  the  t.  in  Jerusalem  was  full 

13.  that  it  must  be  brought  into  the  king's  t. 
24.  as  he  was  there  with  his  guard  about  the  t. 
40.  the  keeping  of  Ihe'f.  fell  out  on  this  sort 

4.  42.  the  robber,  him  they  killed  beside  the  t. 
5. 18.  whom  Seleuciis  the  king  sent  to  view  the  t. 

TREAT. 

Jud.S.l.they  sent  ambassadors  to  him  to  t.  of  peace 

TREATED. 

2  Mae.  13.22.  the  king  t.  with  them  in  Bcthsura 

TREE. 
I  Efd.  6.  32.  out  of  his  own  house  a  t.  be  taken 
fVisd.  13.  II.  after  he  hath  sawn  do-.vn  a  t.  meet 
Ecrl.  14.  18.  as  of  the  green  leaves  on  a  thick  I. 
27.  6.  the  fruit  declareth  if  the  t.  have  been  dressed 
Bar.  5. 8.  every  sweet-smelling  t.  shall  overshadow 
Su«.  .54.  tell  me  under  what  t.  sawest  thou  thcml 

TREES. 
1  .Mae.  10.  30.  half  of  the  fruit  of  the  t.  I  release 
14.  8.  and  the  t.  of  the  field  gave  their  fruit 
TREMBLE. 
I  Esd.  4.  36.  all  works  shake  and  (.  at  it 
Eccl.  43.  17.  thunder  maketh  the  earth  to  t. 
Prayer  of  Manasa.  all  men  t.  before  thy  power 

TREMBLED. 
Keel.  48.  10.  then  t.  their  hearts  and  hands 
I  Mac.  2.  24.  inflamed  with  zeal,  and  his  reins  t. 
12.  23.  they  feared  and  t.  in  their  hearts 
TREMBLING. 
Jud.  15.  2.  and  fear  and  (.  fell  upon  them 

TRESPASS. 
KecU  26.  11.  marvel  not  if  she  t.  against  thee 

TRESPASSED. 
Eccl.  23. 23.  she  hath  t.  against  her  own  husband 

TRIAL. 
Wisd.  3. 18.  nor  have  they  comfort  in  the  day  of  t. 
4.  6.  are  witnesses  against  parents  in  their  (. 
6.  8.  but  a  sore  t.  shall  come  on  the  mighty 
M'.ecl.  6.21.  will  lie  on  him  as  a  mighty  stone  off. 
1<>.  33.  and  the  t.  of  all  things  ii  in  tiie  ead 
849 


TRU 

Eccl.  27.  5.  so  the  (.  of  a  man  is  in  his  reasoning 

7.  before  hearest  him  speak,  lor  this  is  (.  of  men 

TRIBE. 

Tob.  4.  12.  a  woman  who  is  not  of  thy  father's  t. 

5.8.  call  him,  that  I  may  know  of  what  t.  lie  is 

10.  shew  me  of  what  t.  and  family  thou  art 

11.  he  said,  dost  thou  seek  for  a  t.  or  fdiuily'? 
13.  I  inquired  to  know  thy  t.  and  thy  family 

./ud.  8.  2.  was  her  hu.sbanJ  of  her  t.  and  kindred 
Enth.  14.  a.  I  have  htvird  in  the  t.  ofiny  family 

TRIBES. 
7'o6.L4.  which  was  chosen  out  ofall  thcf.  of  Israel 
that  all  the  t.  should  sacrifice  there 
Eccl.  36.  11.  gather  all  the  t.  of  Jacob  together 
44.  23.  ainong  the  twelve  t.  did  he  part  tliera 
TRIBULATION. 
Estk.  11.  8.  a  day  of  darkness  and  t.  and  anguish 
Eccl.  40.  9.  calamities,  famine,  t.  and  srourge 
1  Mac.  6.  11.  I  thought,  into  what  (.  am  I  come 

TRIBUNES, 
./urf.l  4. 12.their  leaders  came  to  their  captains  and  t. 
1  Mae.  16.  19.  to  the  t.  he  sent  letters  to  come 

TRIBUTARIES. 
1  Mae.  1.  4.  kings  who  bpcame  t.  unto  him 

TRIBUTE. 
1  Esd.  2.  19.  they  will  not  only  refuse  to  give  t. 
4. 6.  and  compel  one  another  to  pay  t.  to  the  king 
50.  that  the  country  should  be  free  without  t. 

1  Mac.B.l.  such  as  reigned  after  him  pay  great  t 
11.  28.  that  he  would  make  Judea  frue  from  t. 
13.  39.  if  any  other  t.  were  paid  in  Jerusalem 

2  Jl/ac.  8.  10.  the  t.  of  two  thousand  talents 
36.  to  make  good  to  the  Romans  their  t. 

TRIBUTES. 

1  Mac.  3.  29.  that  t.  in  the  country  were  small 
31.  there  to  take  the  (.  of  the  countries 

10.  29.  and  now  I  release  all  the  Jews  from  t. 
31.  let  Jerusalem  be  free  from  tenths  and  t. 

15.  30.  deliver  the  t.  of  the  places  ye  have  gotten 
31.  give  for  t.  of  the  cities  other  500  talents 
TRIPOLIS. 

2  JIfoc.  14. 1.  having  entered  by  the  haven  of  T. 
TRIUMPH. 

Eccl.  24.  2.  she  shall  (.  before  his  power 

1  Mac.  2.  48.  nor  suffered  thev  the  sinner  to  t. 

TRIU.MPHETH. 

Wisd.  4.  2.  it  weareth  a  crown,  and  t.  for  ever 

TRODDEN. 

1  Mac.  3.  45.  the  sanctuary  also  was  t.  down 

2  Mac.  8.  2.  the  people  that  was  t.  down  of  all 
TROOPS. 

2  Mae.  5.  3.  there  were  seen  t.  of  horsemen  in  array 

TROUBLE. 
Tob.  4.  13.  in  pride  is  destruction  and  much  t. 

6.  7.  if  a  devil  or  an  evil  spirit  t.  any 
Esth.  13.  7.  to  be  well  settled,  and  without  t. 
F.ccl.  2.  2.  and  make  not  haste  in  time  of  (. 

4.  3.  add  not  more  t.  to  a  heart  that  is  ve.xed 

6.  8.  for  some  man  will  not  abide  in  the  day  oft. 
22.  13.  beware  of  him,  lest  thou  have  t. 

23.  abide  stedfast  to  him  in  the  time  of  his  t. 

29.  4.  many  put  them  to  t.  thot  helped  them 
37.  4.  but  in  the  time  of  t.  will  be  against  him 
40.  .5.  t.  and  unquielness,  fear  of  death,  anger 
51.  10.  he  would  not  leave  me  in  thedays  of  my  t. 

2  Mac.  1.  25.  thou  that  deliveredst  Israel  frnm  t. 
3.  30.  which  a  little  before  was  full  of  fear  and  t. 

TROUBLED. 
Tob.  12. 16.  they  were  both  t.  and  fell  on  their  faces 
Esth.  1.5.  16.  she  fell  down,  then  the  king  was  t. 
fVisd.  5.  2.  they  shill  be  t.  with  terrible  fear 

11.  6.  a  running  river,  t.  with  foul  blood 
17.3.  astonished,  being  t.  with  strange  apparitions 

Ercl.W.^\.  when  he  takes  rest,  he  shall  not  be  t. 

30.  7.  and  his  bowels  will  be  t.  with  every  cry 
40.  6.  t.  in  the  vision  of  his  heart,  as  if  escaped 
51.  21.  my  heart  was  t.  in  seeking  her 

Bar.  3.  1.  the  t.  spirit  crieth  unto  thee 
Dan.  3.  27.  the  fire  neither  hurt  nor  t.  them 
1  Mac.  3.  6.  all  the  workers  of  iniquity  were  t. 

7.  22.  to  him  resorted  all  such  ns  t.  the  people 
9.  7.  Judas  was  sore  t.  in  mind  and  distressed 
11.53.  nor  rewarded  him,  but  t.  him  veiy  sore 

TRUE. 

1  Esd.  8.  89.  O  Lor.I  of  Israel,  thou  art  t. 

.Txid.  11. 10.  but  lay  it  up  in  thy  heart,  for  it  is  t. 

fVisd.  1.  6.  for  God  is  a  t.  beholder  of  his  heart 
2. 17.  let  Hs  see  if  his  words  be  t.  and  let  us  prove 
6.  17.  the  very  '■  beginning  of  her  is  the  desire 

12.  27.  thev  acknowledged  him  to  bo  the  (.  God 
Eccl.  4fi.  15.  Samuel  was  found  a  (.  prophet 
Dan.  3.  8.  ihou  hast  done  in  t.  judgment 

TRULY. 

Tob.  3.  2.  and  thou  judgest  t.  and  justly  for  ever 

14.  6.  nations  shall  turn  and  fear  the  Lord  God  (. 

Er.cl.  41.  24.  so  shnlt  thou  be  (.shamefaced 

42.  8.  thus  shalt  thou  be  t.  learned  and  approved 

TRUMPETS. 
1  Esd.  5.  62.  and  all  the  people  sounded  t. 
64.  nianv  with  (.  and  j«v  shouted  with  loud  voice 
5  & 


TUR 

l£s(f. 5.05. the  t.  might  not  be  heard  for  the  w  leping 

OC.  to  know  what  that  noise  of  (.  sliou'id  mean 

Eccl.  50.  10.  the  sons  of  Aaron  sounded  the  silver  f. 

TRUST 
Tf)*. 10.12.1  commit  my  daught.  to  thee  ofspecial  C 
Jud.  2.  5.  take  men  llmt  t.  in  Iheir  own  strength 

7.  10.  the  children  of  Israel  do  not  (.  in  spears 

8.  20.  tliercjfore  we  t.  that  he  will  not  despise  us 
IVisd.  3. 9.  they  that  put  their  t.  in  him  uiiderslund 

14.  29.  for  insomuch  as  llieir  t.  is  in  idols 
Eccl.  2.  6.  order  thy  way  aright  and  t.  in  him 

10.  did  ever  any  t.  in  Lord  and  was  confounded? 
4. 17.  until  she  may  {.  his  soul,  and  try  him  by  laws 
11.  21.  t.  in  the  Lord  and  abide  in  thy  labour 
12. 10.  never  t.  thine  enemy,  for  as  iron  rustelh 
16.  3.  t.  not  thou  in  their  life,  neither  respect 
.12.  23.  in  every  good  work  t.  thine  own  soul 
34.  7.  they  have  failed  that  put  their  t.  in  them 
3.1.  12.  and  t.  not  to  unrighteous  sacrifices 

36.  26.  who  will  t.  a  thief  well  appointed 

38.  31.  those  t.  to  their  hands,  every  one  is  wise 
Bur.3.17. hoarded  upsilver  and  gold,"  herein  men  (. 
Dan.  3.  17.  not  confounded  that  put  their  t.  in  thea 
Sus.  fiO.  God  who  savelh  them  that  t.  in  him 

1  Mac.  2.  61.  none  that  {.  in  him  shall  be  overcome 
2JI/ac.  3. 22.  to  keep  the  things  committed  oft. 

7.  24.  that  he  also  would  t.  Iiim  with  alFairg 
40.  so  this  man  put  his  whole  t.  in  the  Lord 

8.  18.  for  thev,  say  he,  t.  in  their  weapons 
■      TRUSTING. 

Eccl.  26.  20.  t.  in  the  goodness  of  thy  stock 

2  Mac.  10.  34.  t.  to  the  strenjlh  of  the  place 
TRUSTY. 

Tub.  5. 8.  whether  he  he  a  t.  man  to  go  with  thoe 
TRUTH. 

1  E.td.  4. 13.  who  had  spoken  of  women  and  the  L 
33.  the  king  looked,  so  he  began  tospeak  of  the  C 
3.5.  great  is  the  t.  and  stronger  than  all  things 
38.  as  for  the  t.  it  endiireth  and  is  strong 
40.  blessed  be  the  God  oft. 

Tab.  14. 7.  air  those  that  love  the  Lord  God  in  t. 
.hid.  10.  13. 1  am  comifig  to  declare  the  words  of  4. 
fVisd.'i.S).  they  that  trust  in  him  shall  understand  t 

.5.  6.  therefore  have  we  erred  from  the  way  oft. 

6.  22.  and  1  will  not  pass  over  the  /. 
Eccl.  1. 30.  because  thou  earnest  not  in  (.  to  fear  L. 

4.25.in  nowise  speak  against  the  t.  but  be  abashed 
28.  strive  for  the  (.  unto  death.  Lord  fight  for  thee 

11.  7.  blame  not  before  Ihou  hast  e.xtimined  the  1. 

27.  9.  so  will  t.  return  to  them  that  practise  in  her 

34. 4.  from  that  which  is  false,  what  t.  can  come? 

37.  15.  pray  that  he  will  direct  thy  way  in  t. 
41. 19.  in  regard  of  the  t.  of  God  and  his  covenant 

Dav.  3.4.  thy  ways  right,  all  thy  judgments  are  t. 
Sus.  48.  that  without  examination  of  the  t. 

TRY. 
.Tnd.  8.  13.  and  now  t.  the  Lord  Almighty 
fVisd.  II.  10.  thc'^e  thou  didst  ailmonish  and  /. 

2  Mac.  14. 18.  durst  nni  t.  the  matter  by  the  sword 
TRIED. 

'ud.  8.26.  how  he  t.  Isaac,  and  what  happened 

27.  he  halh  not  t.  us  in  the  fire,  as  he  did  them 
Wisd.  1.  3.  and  his  power  when  it  is  I.  reproveth 
3.  0.  ns  g(dd  in  the  furnace  hath  he  t.  them 
II.  9.  for  when  they  were  (.  albeit  but  in  mercy 
Feci.  2.  5.  gold  is  t.  in  the  fire,  men  in  the  furoaco 
31.  10.  who  hatji  been  t.  and  found  perfect 
2  Mac.  1.34.  made  it  holy,  after  he  had  t.  the  matter 

TRIETH. 

Jud.  8.  25.  who  t.  ns  even  as  he  did  our  fathers 

TRYPHON. 

1  Mae.  11.  39.  there  was  one  T.  that  had  been 
.56.  T.  look  the  elephants  and  won  Antioch 

12.39.  T.  went  about  to  git  the  kingdom  of  Asia 
49.  then  sent  T.  a  host  of  footmen  into  Galilee 

13.  1.  when  Simon  heard  that  T.  had  gathered 
14.  now  when  T.  knew  that  Simon  was  risen 
19.  howbeit  T.  dissembled,  nor  would  let  him  go 
34.  because  nil  that  T.  did  was  to  spoil 

15.  10.  came  to  him,  s"  that  few  were  left  with  T. 
25.  he  shut  up  T.  that  he  could  not  go  out 
37.  in  Ihe  mean  lime  fledT.  by  ship  to  Onhosias 

39.  as  for  the  kin?  hiniself,  he  pursued  T. 
TUMBLED. 

Jud.  13.  9.  and  she  t.  his  body  down  from  the  bed 

TUMULT. 
Eslh.  11.  5.  behold,  the  noise  of  a  t.  with  thunder 

2  Mae.  13.  16.  at  Inst  thev  filhd  the  camp  with  t. 
TUMULTS. 

/risd.14.25.  corruption,  unrailhfuIness,?.perjurT 

TURN. 
Esth.^'^.  17.  i.onr  sorrow  into  jny,  that  we  may  live 

14.  11.  but  t.  their  device  upon  themselves 
fVisd.  2.  12.  because  he  is  not  for  our  I. 
F.ccl.  4.  4.  not  t.  away  thy  face  from  a  poor  noa 

5.  t.  not  away  thine  eye  from  Ihe  needy 
.5.  7.  make  no  tarrying  to  t.  to  the  Lord 
7.  2.  and  iniquity  shall  (.  away  from  Ihee 
9.  8.  t.  away  thine  eye  frnm  a  bcantiful  woman 
11.  34.  the  stranger  will  /  thee  out  of  thinp  ow« 


UGL 

Sect  17. 9C.  (.  to  the  Moat  High,  and  t.  away  from 

iniquity,  fur  lie  will  luad  tlive  oul 
of  durkiie£« 

18. 24.  tlie  time  when  he  shall  t.  away  hia  face 
23.  4.  (.  awuy  from  thy  geivaiiig  a  haughty  mind 

S.C.  away  Irucn  nie  vain  hopes  and  concupiscence 
27.  l.thatseekcth  ahundance  wilU.  Iiiseyes  away 
35.  2.  he  that  requitelh  a  good  t.  utlV-roth  flour 

40.  11.  tilings  of  earih  shall  (.  to  the  earth  again 

41.  31.  to  t.  away  thy  face  from  thy  kinsman 
48.  10.  to  (.  the  heart  of  the  fatlier  to  tlie  son 

Bar.  2.  S.  might  I.  every  one  iVom  imaginations 

13.  let  thy  wrath  t.  from  us,  for  we  are  but  a  few 
4.  2.  (  thee,  O  Jacob,  and  take  hold  of  it 
S  Mac.  5.  4.  tliat  apparition  might  t.  to  good 
7. 24.  if  he  would  (.  fr<im  the  laws  of  his  fathers 

TURNLD. 
I  Esd.  7. 15.  the  Lord  had  (.  the  counsel  ofthe  king 
R  87.  we  have  (.  again  to  transgress  thy  law 
tfisii.  19.  19.  earthly  things  were  t.  into  watery 
Kccl.6.  9.  there  is  a  friend,  who  being  (.  to  enmity 
28.  find  her  rest,  and  that  shall  be  t.  to  thy  joy 

10.  12.  his  heart  is  t.  away  from  his  Maker 

37. 2.  when  companion  and  friend  is  t.  to  an  enemy 
39.  27.  so  to  the  sinners  they  arc  t.  into  evil 
45. 23.  ha  stood  up  when  the  people  were  t.  back 
47.23.  wlio  t.  away  the  people  through  his  counsel 
Bar.  1.  13.  and  his  wrath  is  not  (.  from  us 
2.  211.  this  multitude  be  t.  into  a  small  number 
4.  34.  and  her  |)ride  shall  be  t.  into  tnouniing 
Sus.  9.  t.  away  their  eyes,  that  ihuy  niislit  not 

47.  tli«n  all  the  people  t.  them  toward  him 
1  Mac.  5.  28.  Judas  and  his  host  t.  suddenly  by 
35.  this  done,  Judas  t.  aside  to  Ma.spha 
68.Judas«.lo  Azolusin  theland  ofthe  Philistines 

9.  41.  thus  was  the  marriage  t.  into  [noiirning 

11.  55.  Demetrius,  who  t.  his  hack  ami  fled 

12.  31.  wherefore  Jonathan  t.  to  the  Arabians 
33.  from  whence  he  t.  aside  to  Joppe,  and  won  it 

2^ac.8.  5.  the  wrath  ofthe  I/ord  was «. into  mercy 

10.  25.  they  t.  themselves  to  pray  to  God 

TURNING. 
H^Ud.  7.  18.  the  alterations  ofthe  ^  ofthe  sun 
Sled.  38.  21.  forget  not,  for  there  is  no  t.  again 
1  Mac.  3.  8.  and  t.  away  wrath  from  Israel 

TURNS. 
Eccl.  3.  31.  he  that  requitcth  good  t.  is  mindful 

TURPENTINE. 
£cc2.24.16.a9  the  t.  tree  I  stretched  out  my  branches 

TWELVE. 
1  F.sd.  5.  41.  from  them  of  t.  years  old  and  upward 

7.  8.  and  ^  goats  fur  the  sin  of  all  Israel 

8.  54.  then  I  sofiarated  t.  of  the  chief  of  the  priests 
F.ccl.  49.  10.  of  t.  prophels,  let  memorial  be  blessed 
1  Mac.  1.7.  Alexander  reigned  t.  years,  and  died 

TWICE. 
Jud.  13.  8.  she  smote  t.  upon  his  nock  with  might 
Eecl.  12.  5.  thou  shalt  receive  {.  as  much  evil 

13.  7.  till  he  have  drawn  thee  dry  t.  or  thrice 

32.  7.  and  yel*scarcely  when  thou  art  t.  iisked 
45. 14.their  sacrifice  shall  be  ronsuracd  every  day  (. 

TWISTED. 

Eccl.  45.  11.  with  I.  sfarlet  work  ofthe  cunning 

TWO. 

1  Esd.  5.73.  were  hindered  for  the  space  of  t.  yenrs 
Eccl.  2.  12.  woe  to  the  sinner  that  joeth  t.  ways 

26.28.  there  be  I.  tilings  that  grieve  my  heart 

33.  15.  there  be  I.  and  t.  one  against  another 

50.25.  there  be  ^  manner  of  nations  I  abhur 
Sim.  5.  (.of  the  ancients  ofthe  people  to  be  judges 

8.  the  t.  elders  saw  her  going  in  every  day 
.  Mac.  1.  16.  might  have  the  dominion  of  t.  realms 

9.  57.  the  land  of  Judca  was  in  rest  (.  years 

11.  13.  Ptolemee  set  t.  crowns  on  his  head 
13.  10.  seriil  t.  of  his  sons  for  hostages 

iMac.6.  10.  t.  women  brought,  who  circumcised 

TYRANNY. 
Wisd.  14. 2! .  for  men  serving  either  calamity  or  t. 
16.  4.  on  them  cxircising  t.  hhould  come  penury 

TYRANT. 
Wisd.  12.  14.  nor  shall  I.  be  ablo  to  set  his  face 

2  Mac.  4.  25.  but  having  the  fury  of  a  cruel  (. 

TYRANTS. 
Witd.B.  l.'i.  horrible  t.  shall  bo  afraid  when  hear 

TYRE. 
1  Esd.  5.  55.  unto  them  of  T.  they  gave  cars 

TYRIAN3. 
Etcl.  46.  18.  ho  dcstroved  the  ruhrs  ofthe  T. 

TYRUS. 

1  Mac.  11.  .59.  the  place  calleil  the  ladder  of  T. 

C  Mac.  4. 18    MOW  wlim  the  eBinn  wn«  kept  at  T. 

32.  and  somr  ho  sold  Into  T.  and  citii'H  iilmut 

44.  when  the  king  came  to  T.  three  mon  pinadod 

49.  thoy  of  T.  moved  with  hatred  of  that  deed 


u. 


i:glv. 

}fui.  IG.  3.  for  (ht  H  •ight  of  lh«  beosU  lent 
•SO 


UND 

UNABLE. 

fVisd.  12.  9.  not  that  thou  wast  u.  to  bring  ungodly 
13.  It),  knowing  that  it  was  u.  to  help  itself 
19.  of  him  that  is  most  u.  to  do  aoy  thins 
UNADVISEDLY. 

1  Mac.  5.  67.  for  that  ther  went  out  to  fight  ti. 

UNAWARES. 

2  Mac.  8.  6.  he  came  at  u.  burnt  up  towns  and  cities 

12.  37.  and  rushing  u.  upon  Gorgias'  men 

UNBELIEVING. 
IVisd.  10. 7.  pillar  of  salt  is  monument  of  ao  u.  aoul 

UNBURIED. 
2^fac.S.I0.  he  that  had  cast  out  many  u.  had  none 

UNCERTAIN. 
TVisd.  9.  14.  and  our  devices  are  but  u. 
2  Mac.  1.  34.  nor  be  pulTed  up  with  u.  hopes 

UNCHANGEABLE. 
2  Esd.  6.  44.  there  were  flowers  of  u.  colour 

UNCIRCUMCISED. 
Esth.  14. 15.  knowestthat  I  abhor  the  bed  of  then. 
1  Mac.  1.  15.  and  they  made  themselves  u. 
4H.  they  should  also  leave  their  children  u. 

2.  46.  what  children  soever  they  found  u. 

UNCLEAN. 
Eccl.  34.  4.  of  an  u.  thing  what  can  be  cleansed  1 
40.  15.  but  are  as  u.  roots  upon  a  hard  rock 
51.  5.  delivered  from  an  u.  tongue  and  lying  words 
1  Mac.  1.  47.  sacrifice  swine's  flesh  and  u.  beasts 
62.  many  confirmed  not  to  eat  any  u.  thing 
4.  43.  bear  out  the  defiled  stones  into  an  u.  place 

UNCLE  ANN  F.SS. 
I  Esd.  I.  42.  things  recorded  of  his  u.  and  impiety 
8.  83.  and  they  have  filled  it  with  their  u. 

87.  to  mingle  ourselves  with  the  u.  of  the  nations 
/r;.s'i.l4.2l).defiling  of  souls,  adultery,  shameless  u. 

1  Mac.  1.  48.  their  souls  abominable  with  all  u. 

13.  48.  yea,  he  put  all  v.  out  of  it,  and  placed  men 

UNCOMFORTABLE. 
Eccl.  18.  15.  nor  use  u.  words  when  thou  givest 

UNCOVERED. 
.Jud.  9. 1.  u.  the  sackcloth  wherewith  was  clothed 

UNDEFILED. 
IVisd.  3.  13.  blessed  is  the  barren  that  is  u. 
4.  2.  having  gotten  victory,  striving  for  u.  rewards 

7.  22.  holy,  mibtile,  lively,  clear,  u.  plain 

8.  20.  rather  being  good,  I  came  into  a  body  u, 

14.  24.  they  keep  neither  lives  nor  marriages  u. 

2  Mac.  7.  40.  this  man  diedu.  and  put  his  trust  in  L. 

14.  36.  O  holy  Lord,  keep  this  house  ever  u. 

15.  34.  he  that  hath  kept  his  own  place  u. 

UNDERMINE. 
IVisd.  4.  12.  wandering  doth  u.  the  simple  mind 
Eccl.  12.  17.  pretend  to  help,  vet  shall  he  u.  thee 

UNDERMINED. 
iMae.  4.  26.  then  Jason,  who  had  u.  his  own  bro- 
ther, being  u.  by  another,  was  compelled  to  flee 
UNDERSTAND. 
If'isd.  3.  9.  they  that  trust  in  him  shall  u.  truth 
4.  17.  they  shall  not  u.  what  God  hath  decreed 

6.  1.  hear  therefore,  O  ye  kings  and  u. 

13.  4.  let  them  u.  how  much  mightier  he  is 
Eccl.  3.  23.  more  things  arc  shewed  than  men  u. 
29.  the  heart  of  the  prudent  will  u.  a  parable 

11.  7.  blame  not,  u.  first,  and  then  rebuke 
17.  6.  and  a  heart  gave  he  them  to  u. 

34.  11.  and  I  u.  more  than  I  can  express 
Bar.  3.  9.  hear,  Israel,  give  ear  to  u.  wisdom 
6. 41.  they  entreat  Bel  ns  though  ho  were  able  to  u. 

UNDERSTANDirrH. 
IVisd.  9.  11.  fi)r  she  knowelh  and  u.  all  things 

UNDERSTANDING. 
IVisd.  1.  5.  from  thoushls  that  nro  without  7/. 

4.  II.  \eA  that  wickedness  should  alter  his  u. 

7.  7.  wherefore  I  prayed,  and  «.  was  given  me 

22.  wisdom  taught  me,  for  in  her  is  an  u.  spirit 

23.  overseeing  all  things,  and  going  through  all  ti. 

9.  5.  for  I  am  too^oung  fiir  the  u.  of  judgment 

12.  24.  being  deceived  as  children  of  no  u. 

13.  13.  and  formed  it  by  the  skill  of  bis  u. 

Ecrl.  1.4.  and  the  «.  of  prudence  from  everlasting 
10.  wisdom  raineth  down  the  knowledge  of  «. 

3.  13.  nnd  if  his  ti.  fail,  have  patience  with  him 

5.  lO.bi'Bteilfastin  tbyu.and  htihy  word  beaanie 
12.  if  thou  hast  «.  answer  thv  neighbour 

6.  20.  he  that  is  without  u.  will  not  remain 
33.  if  thou  love  to  hear,  thou  shall  receive  u. 
'^T^.  and  let  not  the  parables  sf  «.  escape  theo 
36.  if  thou  !>t"est  a  man  of  u.  ect  belimos  to  him 

7.  2.'>.  marry  daughter,  but  give  her  to  a  man  of  u. 

8.  9.  the  ciders,  tif  them  thou  slialt  h'arn  u. 

10.  23.  to  dexpiso  the  poor  man  that  hath  u. 

1 1.  Vi.  knowlrdgc  and  u.  ofthe  l;iw  are  of  Lord 

14.  20.  that  rrasoneth  of  hidy  thines  by  hia  «. 
21.  shall  also  have  «.  In  hnr  srcrets 

1.1.  3.  with  the  bread  of  u.  shall  sh.'  fo'-d  him 

16.  4.  by  one  that  hnth  u.  bIibII  citv  he  replenished 
23.  he  that  wantnth  u.  will  think  nn  vain  things 

17  S.  in  thf  sixth  place  ho  impartril  them  u. 
7.  ho  fill.'d  thi-m  with  the  fnowli-dgo  of  u. 
9.  that  tliey  might  declare  hia  worki  with  u. 


UNG 


[Afocrtpb 


Eccl.  18.  28.  every  man  ofu.  knoweth  wisdom 
29.  they  that  were  of  u.  m  sayings  became  wis* 
ly.  2.  wine  will  make  men  ofu.  to  fall  away 

24.  he  that  hath  small  u.  and  fcareth  God 

29.  one  that  hath  u.  knoweth  by  hia  countenance 
01. 1 1,  that  keepelh  thelaw,  getteth  the  u.  thereof 

25.  the  words  of  auch  as  h^ve  u.  are  weighed 
22.  11.  and  weep  for  the  fool,  for  he  wanleth  u. 

13.  go  not  to  him  that  hath  no  u.  beware  of  him 

15.  sand  is  easier  to  bear,  than  a  man  without  u. 
17.  a  heart  settled  on  a  thought  of  u.  is  as  a  fair 

24. 26.  he  maketh  the  u.  to  abound  like  Euphrates 
2.1.  5.  Oh !  how  comely  is  u.  to  men  of  honour 

8.  well  is  him  that  dwelletli  with  a  wife  ofu 

26.  28.  and  men  of  u.  that  are  nut  set  by 

27.  12.  but  be  continually  among  men  ofu. 

33.  3.  a  man  ofu.  trusteth  ia  the  law,  and  the  law 

34.  1.  the  hopes  of  a  man  void  ofu.  are  vain 

36.  19.  so  doth  a  heart  of  u.  false  speeches 

37.  22.  and  the  fruits  ofu.  are  commendable 
39.  6.  he  shall  be  filled  with  the  spirit  of  u. 

9.  many  shall  commend  his  u.  his  name  shall  live 
44.  3.  men  renowned,  giving  counsel  hy  theii  u. 
47.  14.  and  as  a  flood  thou  wast  filled  with  u 

2^{.lie  left  behind  him  Ruboam,  one  that  had  no  u. 
50.  27.  written  in  this  book  the  instruction  ofu. 
liar.  3.  14.  learn  where  is  strength,  where  is  u. 

32.  and  he  hath  found  her  out  with  his  u. 
'iMiic.  9.  27.  he  u.  my  mind,  will  graciously  yield 

11.  13.  who,  as  be  was  a  man  of  u.  sent  to  ihem 

UNDERSTOOD. 

1  Esd.  9.  55.  because  they  u.  the  words  thereia 
IVisd.  4.  15.  this  the  people  saw,  and  m.  it  not 
Keel.  1.  7.  who  hath  u.  her  great  experience? 
Bar.  3.  21.  they  have  not  u.  the  paths  thereof 

UNDERTAKE. 

2  Mac.  2.  27.  we  will  u.  gladly  this  great  pains 

UNDERTAKETH. 
Eccl.  29.  19.  he  that  «.  other  men's  busineM 
2  Mac.  2.  29.  he  that  u.  to  set  it  out  and  paint  it 
UNDERTOOK. 

1  Esd.  1.  28.  did  not  turn,  but  u.  to  fight  with  him 

2  Mac.^.  10.  sii  Nicanur  u.  to  make  money  of  Jews 

UNDERWRITTEN. 
2  Mac.  9.  18.  he  wrote  to  the  Jews  the  letters  u. 

UN  DISCREET. 
Eccl.  27. 12.  if  thou  be  among  the  u.  observe  time 

UNDRESSED. 
2  Esd.  16.  78.  it  is  left  u.  and  cast  into  the  fire 

UNFAITHFUL. 
2  Esd.  15.  4.  u.  shall  die  in  their  unfaithfulness 
IVisd.  16.  29.  the  hope  ofthe  u      lOll  melt  away 

UNFAITHFULNESS. 
2  Esd.  1.5.  4.  the  unfaithful  shall  die  in  their  u. 

UNFEIGNED. 
IVisd.  18.  16.  brought  thine  u.  commandment 
2  Mac.  14.8.  for  the  u.  care  I  have  of  things 

UNFRUITFUL. 
IVisd.  3.  II.  their  hihuurs  u.  works  unprofitable 

UNGODLY. 
IVisd.  1.  9.  shall  be  made  into  the  counsels  ofthe  u. 

16.  but  u.  men  with  the  works  called  it  to  Ihem 
3. 10.  the  H.  shall  be  punished  accord,  tii  their  imag. 

4.  3.  multiplying  hrood  ofthe  u.  shall  not  ihrive 
16.  righteous  shall  condemn  then,  who  are  living 

5.  14.  the  hope  ofthe  u.  is  like  dust  blown  nway 
II).  fi.  when  u.  perished,  she  delivered  righteous 
11.9.  they  knew  how  the  u.  were  judged  in  wrath 

12.  9.  unable  to  bring  it.  under  the  righteous 
14.  9.  the  u.  nnd  his  ungodliness  are  both  alike 

16.  an  «  cost om^rown  strong  was  kept  as  a  law 
31   that  punisheiTi  the  offence  ofthe  u. 
16.  10.  for  the  u.  that  denied  to  know  thee 
1(1.  1.  as  for  the  «.  wr.ith  came  upon  them 
F.ccl.  7.  17.  for  the  vengeance  ofthe  «.  is  fire 
9.  12.  delight  not  in  what  u.  have  pleasure  in 

12.  .1.  do  well  to  lowly,  but  give  not  to  the  u. 
6.  Most  High  will  repay  venjeance  to  the  u. 

13.  24.  poverty  Is  evil  in  the  mouth  ofthe  «. 

16.  1.  not  a  multit.  of  child,  nor  delight  in  u.  sons 
3.  die  without,  than  to  have  them  that  are  u. 
6.  in  congregation  ofu.  shall  a  fire  be  kindled 

21.  27.  when  the  u.  curseth  Satan,  he  ciirseth 

22.  12.  but  for  nn  u.  man  all  the  d.iys  of  his  life 
26.26.  dishonoureth  him,  shall  he  counted  u.  of  all 
4 1. 5.  they  I  hat  are  conversant  in  dwelling  of  the  u 

8.  woo  to  you  M.  men  who  have  fiirsaken  llie  law 

10.  so  the  1/.  shall  go  from  a  ourse  to  destruction 
42.  2.  nnd  of  judgment  to  justify  the  u. 

49.  3.  In  time  ofu.  herslahlished  the  worship  of  G. 
//«r.2.12.0  Lord,  we  havosinned,  wo  have  done  jfc 

1  Mac.  3.  8.  deitroyinc  the  u.  out  of  them  • 
15.  there  went  a  mighty  host  ofu   to  help  him 

6.  21.  to  whom  sotm-  ti.  im^n  of  Israil  j>inod 

7.  .").  thoro  cnino  to  him  all  the  u.  men  of  Israel 
9.  .18.  then  nil  the  ».  men  held  a  ooiincil 

73.  ho  destroyed  the  m.  men  out  of  Israel 
11.21.  certain  «   persona  who  hated  ihoir  peoph 

2  Mne.  1.  17.  who  hath  delivend  up  thou. 

4.  13.  lli«  profkncnes*  of  Jason,  that  u.  wrstck 


APOCKTPnA.] 


UNS 


2.Vac.8.2.would  pity  the  temple  profaned  ofu.  men 
UNGODLhNESt^. 

1  Esd.  1.  52.  being  wroth  wilh  his  people  for  u. 
fVisd.  14.  U.  ungodly  and  his  u.  are  alike  hateful 

UNGRACIOUS. 

3^/nc.4.19.this  u.  Jason  sent  meaatMigers  from  Jeru. 

8. 34.  as  that  most  u.  Nicnnor,  bronght  merchants 

IS.  3.  then  this  most  u.  wretch  demanded 

UNHAPPY. 

2  Mac.  5.  6.  that  it  would  be  a  most  u.  day  for  him 
ii.  in  the  end  therefore  he  had  an  u.  return 

UNITY. 

Eccl.  25.  1.  u  of  brethren,  the  love  of  neighbours 

UNJUST. 

1  f^.  4.  39.  she  refraineth  from  all  u.  things 
fVind.  16.  19.  might  destroy  fruits  of  an  u.  land 
Eccl.  7.  2.  depart  from  u.  and  iniquity  shall  turn 

19.  25.  there  is  sublilty,  and  the  fame  is  u. 

40.  13.  the  goods  of  the  u.  shall  be  dried  up 

41.  18.  ofu.  dealing  before  thy  partner  and  friend 
Dan.  3.  9.  thou  didst  debver  us  to  an  u.  king 

2  Jifac.  4.  48.  they  did  s>«i>n  siitfer  u.  punishment 

UNJUSTLY. 
Wisd.  14.  28.  or  they  prophesy  lies,  or  live  u. 

30.  they  «.  swore  in  deceit,  despising  holiness 
Eccl.  5.  8.  set  not  thy  heart  on  goods  u.  gotten 
2  Mac.  8.  17.  the  injury  that  they  had  u.  done 

UNKNOWN. 
Wisd.  11.  18.  or  u.  wild  beasts  full  of  rage 

18.  3.  botli  to  be  a  guide  to  the  u.  journey 
2  Mac.  1.  19.  so  that  the  place  was  u.  to  all  men 

UNLAWFUL. 
Wisd.  4.  6.  fv>r  children  begotten  ofu.  beds 

UNLEARNED. 
Eccl.  6.  20.  she  is  very  unpleasant  to  the  u. 
51. 23.  draw  near  to  me,  you  u.  and  dwell  in  house 

UNLOOKED. 
Wisd.  18. 17.  and  terrors  came  upon  them  u.  for 

UNMEASURABLE. 
Bar.  3.  2.i.  great,  and  hath  no  end,  high  and  «. 
Prayer  of  Manors,  thy  merciful  jiromise  is  u. 

UNMERCIFUL. 
JEeeZ.  37. 11.  nor  with  an  u.  man  touching  kindness 

UNMINDFUL. 
Eccl.  37.  6.  be  not  u.  of  him  in  thy  riches 

UNNECESSARY. 
Eeel.  3.  23.  be  not  curiom  in  u.  matters 

UNPASSABLE. 
Esth.  16.  24.  shall  be  made  not  only  u.  for  men 

UNFERFECT. 
Wisd.  4.  5.  the  u.  branches  shall  be  broken  off 
Eccl.  42.  24.  and  he  hath  made  nothing  u. 

UNPLEASANT. 
Eccl.  6.  20.  she  is  very  ?«.  to  the  unlearned 

UNPROFITABLE. 
Wisd.  1.  11.  beware  of  murmuring  which  is  j/. 
4.  5.  fruit  u.  not  ripe  to  eat,  meet  for  nothing 
16.  29.  for  the  hope  of  the  unfaithful  shall  melt 
away  as  hoar  frost  and  run  away  as  «.  water 
Eccl.  16.  1.  desire  not  a  multitude  of  u.  children 
37.  19.  one  is  wise,  and  vet  is  «.  to  himself 

UNPUNfSHED. 
Eccl.  7.  8.  for  in  one  sin  thou  shalt  not  be  u. 

UNREASONABLE. 
Wisd.  11.  15.  didst  semi  a  multitude  ofu.  beasts 

UNRIG  HT. 
Wisd.  12.  13.  shew  that  iliy  judgment  is  not  u. 

UNRIGHTEOUS. 
I  Esd.  4.  36.  and  with  it  is  no  u.  thing 
Esth.W.  15.  knowc-iilihatlhalelheglory  of  theu. 
Wisd.\.  8.  that  speaketh  u.  tilings  cannot  be  hid 
3.  16.  the  seed  of  an  «.  bed  shall  be  rooted  out 

19.  horrible  is  the  end  of  the  u.  generation 
10.  3.  but  when  the  u.  went  from  her  in  his  anger 
12.  12.  to  be  revenged  for  the  u.  men 

Er.cl.  17.20.  none  of  theiru-rleedsarc  hid  from  him 
35. 12.  and  trust  not  to  u.  sacrifices,  the  L.  is  judge 

18.  till  he  hath  broken  the  sceptre  of  the  u. 
51.  6.  by  an  accusation  to  king  from  an  u.  tongue 
S  Jl/ae.  14.  36.  O  holv  Lord,  stop  every  u.  mouth 

UNRIGHTEOUSLY. 
Wisd.  12.  2;l.  whereas  men  have  lived  «. 
Bar.3.  12.  we  have  dealt  «.  in  thy  ordinances 

UNRIGHTEOITSNESS. 
1  Esd.  4.  37.  in  their  «.  also  they  shall  perish 
Tob.  4.  5.  my  son,  follow  not  the  ways  ofu. 
J2.  8.  a  little  is  better  than  much  with  u. 
Wisd.  1.  5.  and  will  not  abide  when  u.  Cometh  in 
Eccl.  7.  3.  my  son,  kow  not  upon  the  furrows  of  u. 
17.  14.  he  said  to  them,  beware  of  all  «. 
35.  3.  and  to  forsake  u.  is  a  propitiation 
r.NRULY. 
^cc/.26.5.the  gathering  together  of  an  u.  multitude 

I  XSATIABLE. 
Eccl.  31.  17.  and  be  not  u.  lest  thou  offend 
20.  but  pangs  of  the  belly  are  wilh  an  «.  man 
37.  29.  be  not  u.  in  anvdainlv  thing,  nor  greedy 
U.NSEARCMABLE. 
2  Esd.  9. 19.  are  corrupted  by  a  law  which  ia  u. 
Bar.  3. 18.  to  careful,  and  whose  wurki  ere  u. 
831 


UTM 

Prayer  of  Manass.  thy  merciful  promiie  ii  u. 

UNSEASONABLE. 
£ccZ.20.19.anu.  tale  will  be  in  the  mouth  of  unwise 

UNSPEAKABLE. 
Eccl.  36.  14.  fill  Siuu  with  thinu  u.  oracles 
2  Mac.  12.  16.  took  city,  and  made  u.  slaughters 

UNSPOTTED. 
Wisd.  4.  9.  and  an  u.  life  is  old  agd 
7.  26.  u.  mirror  of  (he  power  of  God  and  image 

UNTAUGHT. 
Ecel.  20.  24.  continually  in  the  mouth  of  the  u. 

UNTEMPERATE. 
Eccl.  23.  13.  use  not  thy  mouth  to  u.  sweatinz 

UNTHANKFUL. 
2  Esd.  8.  60.  were  u.  to  him  who  prepared  life 
Eccl.  29. 17.  he  that  is  of  an  u.  mind  will  leave  him 

UNTIMELY. 
2  Esd.  6.  21.  women  shall  bring  forth  u.  children 
WisU.li.  15.  for  a  father  afflicted  with  u.  mourning 

UNWISE. 
2  Esd.  5. 39.  as  for  me,  I  am  u.  how  may  I  gpcak? 
Wisd.  1.  3.  his  power  when  tried  rcproveth  the  u. 
5.  2U.  the  world  shall  fight  with  him  against  the  u. 
14.11. the  idols  of  Gentiles  are  become  ustuiiibliug 
block  to  souls  of  men  and  a  snare  to  feet  of  u. 
Eccl.  10.  3.  an  u.  king  destroyeth  his  people 
20. 19.  an  unseasonable  tale  will  be  in  mouth  of «. 

21.  18.  knowledge  ofu.  is  as  talk  without  sense 
42. 8.  be  nut  aihan)ed  to  inform  the  u.  and  foolish 

UNWORTHY. 
2  Esd.  14.  45.  that  the  worthy  and  u.  may  read  it 
Eccl,  25.  8.  not  served  a  man  moreu.  than  himself 

UNWORTHIL.Y. 
Esth.  16.  7.  behaviour  of  them  that  are  u.  placed 

UPBRAID. 
Eccl.  18.  18.  a  fool  will  u.  churlishly,  and  a^ifl  . 
41.  22.  and  after  thou  hast  given,  u.  not 

UPBRAIDETH. 
Wisd.  2.  12.  he  «.  us  wilh  our  offending  the  law 
Eccl.  20.  1.5.  he  giveth  little,  and  u.  much 

22.  20.  he  that  u.  his  friend  breaketh  friendship 
UPBRAIDING. 

Eccl.'ii.^.  there  may  be  a  reconciliation,  except  u. 

29.28.the  u.of  house-room,  and  reproaching  lender 

41.  22.  be  ashamed  ofu.  speeches  before  friends 

UPHOLDER. 

Jud.  9. 11.  a  helper  of  oppressed,  an  u.  of  the  weak 

UPHOLDING, 
./ud.  11.  7.  for  the  u.  of  every  thing  living 

UPRIGHT. 
Wisd.  9.  3.  execute  judgment  with  an  u.  heart 
£ccZ.27.14.  thatsweareth,  maketh  the  hair  stand  u. 
Bar.  6.  27.  nor  if  one  set  them  u.  they  can  move 

UPRIGHTLY. 
Tob.  4.  5.  do  u.  all  thy  life  long,  and  follow  not 
8.  7.  I  take  not  this  my  sister  for  lust,  but  u. 
Eccl,  49.  2.  he  behaved  himself  u.  in  conversion 

UPRIGHTNESS. 
Eccl,  7.  6.  a  Btumbling-block  in  the  way  of  thy  u. 

UPWARD. 
l£«(i.5.41.so  of  Israel  from  twelve  years  old  and  «. 

URIM. 

Eccl.  45.10.  a  breast-plate  wilh  U.  andThummim 

USE. 

1  Esd.  8. 17.  are  given  for  the  u.  of  the  temple 
Tob.  6.  6.  to  what  u.  is  ihe  heart  and  the  liver? 
.Tud.  12.  15.  had  received  of  Bagoas  for  her  daily  u. 
Wisd.  12.  18.  thou  mayest  u.  power  when  ihou  wilt 

25.  as  to  children  without  the  u.  of  reason 
13.  13.  among  those  which  served  to  no  u. 
15.  7.  but  what  is  the  u.  of  either  sort 
Eccl.  7.  1.3.  u.  not  to  make  any  manner  of  lie 

14.  u.  not  many  words  in  a  multitude  of  elilers 
23.  9.  nor  u.  thyself  to  the  naming  of  the  Holy  One 

13.  u.  not  thy  mouth  to  unlemperate  swearing 
32.9. when  ancient  men  in  place,  u. not  many  words 
39.  26.  Ihe  things  for  the  whole  u.  of  man's  life 

2  Mac.  6.  21.  flesh  of  his  own  provision,  such  as 
was  unlawful  for  him  to  u 

11.  31.  the  Jews  shall  u.  their  own  kind  of  meats 

12.  39.  as  u.  had  been,  Judas  came  to  take  bodies 
USED. 

Wisd.  14.  23.  whilst  tney  u.  secret  ceremonies 
19.  13.  as  they  u.  a  more  hard  behaviour 

15.  because  they  u.  strangers  not  friendly 
USES. 

Wisd,  15.  7.  the  vessels  that  serve  for  clean  u. 
Eccl.  38.  1.  for  theu.  which  you  niaw  haveof  him 
39.  21.  for  he  halh  made  all  things  for  their  u. 

USETH 

KcfI20.8.  he  that  u.  many  words  shall  be  abhorred 

23.11. aman  thatu.  much  swearing  filled  with  iniq. 

USUAL. 

2  ^fae. 14. 31.priests  wore  offering  their  u.  sacrifices 

USURPED. 
1  Esd.  a.  38.  of  the  priests  that  u.  the  oflice 
1  Mac.  15.  3.  pestilent  rfien  have  u.  the  kingdom 
UTMOST. 

1  3/a«.3. 9.  wag  renowned  to  theu.  part  of  ihe  earth 

2  Mac.  7.  4.  to  out  off  the  u.  parts  of  his  body 


VEN 

UTTER. 
EecL  25.  7.  the  tenth  I  will  u.  with  my  long\M 

UTTERANCE. 
Eccl.  27.  6.  so  is  the  u.  of  a  conceit  in  the  hestl 

UTTERED. 
Wisd.  7.  3.  the  first  voice  which  I  u.  was  crying 
Eccl,  15. 10.  for  praise  shall  be  u.  in  wisdom 
2  Mac.  10.  34.  blasphemed  and  u.  wicked  words 

V. 

VAIL. 

Wisd.  17.  3.  under  a  dark  v.  of  forgetfulness 
1  Mac.  1,  22.  censers  of  gold,  the  v.  and  crowns 

VAIN. 
Jud.  6.  9.  and  none  of  my  words  shall  be  in  v. 
Wild.  3.  11.  he  is  miserable,  their  hope  is  v. 
13.1. surely  r.are  all  men  by  nature,  ignorant  of  G. 

14.  14.  by  V.  glory  of  men  they  eiileied  the  world 

15.  8.  he  maketh  a  v.  god  of  ihe  same  clay 
Eccl.'.i.ii.m^ny  are  dcceiv.  by  their  own  v.  opinion 

23.  11.  if  he  swear  in  v.  he  shall  not  be  innocent 

34.1. the  hopes  of  a  man  void  of  understand,  are  p. 

5.  divinations,  enothsayings,  and  dreams  are  v. 

VALIANT. 

I  MncM.  64.  wherefore,  ye  my  srms,  he  v.  and  shew 

3.  58.  Judas  said,  arm  yourselves,  and  be  v,  men 

4.  3.  he  himself  removed  and  the  t;.  men  with 

5.  56.  heard  of  the  v.  acts  which  they  had  done 

9.  21.  how  is  the  v,  man  fallen  that  delivered 

13.  53.  Simon  saw  that  John  his  son  was  a  d.  man 

14.  32.  Simon  armed  the  v.  men  of  his  nation 
'2  Mac.  13. 15.  wilh  the  most  v.  voungmenhe  weot 

VALIANTLY. 
1  Mac.  2.  46.  those  they  circumcised  v. 
4.  35.  how  they  were  ready  either  to  live  or  die  r. 

6.  31.  they  burned  them  with  fire,  and  fought  v. 
VALIANTNESS. 

£ccZ.31.2j.  shew  not  ihy  v.  in  wine,  halh  destroyeij 

VALLEY. 
./urf.4.4.  Iheysent  toEsora,and  to  the  v.  of  Salem 

7.  3.  they  camped  in  the  v.  near  to  Bethulia 

10.  10.  they  looked  uniil  Judith  had  passed  the  v, 
y  VALOUR. 

ljlfac.5. 67.  certain  priests  desirous  I  o  shew  theirs 

8.  2.  that  Ihe  Romans  were,  men  of  great  v. 
IMac.  15.  17.  good  and  able  to  stir  them  up  ton. 

VALUE. 
Wisd,  15.  10.  and  his  life  of  less  •».  than  clay 

VALUED. 
Ecel.  26.  15.  her  continent  mind  cannot  be  v, 

VANISH. 
Wisd,  2.  3.  and  our  spirit  shall  v.  as  soft  air 
£ccZ.  40. 13.and  shall  r.  wiili  noise  as  great  thuDder 

VANISHED. 
Bar.  3. 19.  they  are  v.  and  gone  down  to  the  grave 

VAPOUR. 
Wisd.  11.  18.  beasts  breathing  out  either  a  fieryr. 
Eccl.  22.  24.  as  ihe  v.  and  smoke  of  a  furnace 
38.  28.  the  v.  of  ihc  fire  waslelh  his  flpsh 
"Mac.  7.  5.  as  the  r.  of  the  iian  wasdisjierscd 

VAPOURS. 
£cc2.43.4.  brealhin;  out  fierv  v.  and  sending  beams 

VARIANCE. 
Eccl.  8.  2.  be  not  at  v.  with  a  rich  man 

VARIETY. 
Eccl.  38.  27.  and  are  diligent  to  make  great  v. 
50. 18.  wilh  great  D.  of  sounds  was  there  melody 

VAULT. 
2  Esd.  16.  59.  hespreadelh  oiilthe  heavens  like  a  v. 

VAUNT. 
IJIfiTc. 10.70. why  dost  thoiip.  ihv  power  against  us? 

VAUNTI.N'G. 
WitJ.5.B.  what  good  hath  riches  which  v.  brought? 
17.  7.  and  their  v.  in  wisdAjn  was  reproved 
VEMEiNlENCY. 
iMac.  14. 38.  jeopard  hie  body  and  life  wilh  all  v 

VEHEMENTLY. 
Eccl.  17.  20.  and  hate  thou  abomination  v. 

VENGEANCE, 
./nrf.fi.  5.  till  I  fake«.  this  nation  come  out  of  Egypt 
8.  27.  neither  halh  he  taken  v.  on  us 
9.2.  thou  gavestasword  to  take?),  of  ihe  strangers 
16.  17.  Lord  will  lake  v.  of  them  in  judgmrot 
Eslh.  16.  18.  God  speedily  rendering  v.  to  him 
Wisd/l.B.nor  B.when  it  punishelh  shall  pass  by  him 

1 1.  15.  unreasonable  beasts  upon  them  for  v, 
Eccl.  5.  7.  thou  shalt  perish  in  Ihe  day  of  r. 
7.  17.  for  thee,  of  the  ungodly  is  fire  and  worms 

12.  6.  and  will  rpjiay  ".  unto  the  ungodly 
18.  24.  and  the  time  of  v.  when  he  shall  turn  away 
27.  28.  V.  as  a  lion  shall  lie  in  wail  for  them 
28. 1.  he  that  revengelh  shall  find  v.  from  Ihe  Lord 
3.5.  18.  till  he  hath  repayed  ?'.  to  the  heathen 
.39.  28.  there  he  spirits  that  are  created  for  v. 
47.  25.  they  sought  wickedness  till  );.  came  on 

1  Mac.  7.  9.  that  he  should  lake  r.  of  Israel 

24.  and  look  v.  of  them  that  had  revolted  from 
12  Mac.  6.  15.  afterwards  ho  should  take  a.  of 


VIO 

VENOM. 
Eccl.  28.  19,  hath  not  (lupsed  tliro'  the  t.  thereof 

VEiNOMOCS. 
H'iid.lO.  10.  the  very  toeih  of  r.  dragons  overcame 

VEK.MIMOiN. 
if'isd.  13.  14.  laying;  it  over  with  v.  and  paint 

VERSES. 
Eccl.  44.  5.  such  as  recited  o.  in  writing 

VESSEL. 
fFisd.  13. 11.  hath  made  a  v.  thereof  fit  for  service 
14.  1.  more  rotten  than  the  v.  that  carrielh  him 
5.  passing  the  rough  sea  in  a  weak  v.  are  saved 
0.  hope  of  the  woHd,  escaped  in  a  weak  v. 
Keel.  '21.  14.  inner  parts  of  a  tool  hke  a  broken  o. 
5U.  9.  as  a  r.  of  beaten  gold  with  precious  stones 
Bar.  t).  17.  for  hke  as  a  v.  tliat  a  man  usetli 
5ll.  or  else  a  profitnhli'  v.  in  a  house 
VESSELS. 
1  Esd.  1.  45.  brought  with  the  holyr.  of  the  Lord 

4.  44.  to  send  away  all  the  v.  tliat  were  taken 
ff'isd.  13.  7.  both  the  v.  that  serve  for  clean  uses 

13.  maketh  brittle  v.  and  graven  images 
Eccl.  27.  5.  the  furnace  proveth  the  potter's  v. 
Bar.  1.  8.  when  he  received  r.  of  the  house  of  Lord 
1  Mac.  1.  21.  and  took  away  all  the  v.  thereof 

23.  he  took  silver  and  gold  and  precious  B. 
2.  9.  her  glorious  v.  are  carried  into  captivity 
6.  12.  I  took  all  the  r.  of  gold  and  silver 
11. 58.  upon  this  he  sent  him  gK>lden  v.  to  be  served 

14.  15.  he  multiplied  the  v.  of  the  temple 
K  Mac.  4.  32.  Meiiclaus  stole  certain  v.  of  gold 

48.  they  that  followed  the  matter  for  holy  v. 

5.  1(>.  taking  the  holy  r.  with  polluted  hands 

9.  16.  restoie  all  the  holv  v.  with  many  more 

VESTMENTS. 

1  Esd.  4. 54.  and  priests'  v.  wherein  they  minister 

5.  .59.  the  priests  stood  arrayed  in  their  v. 
ZMac.  3.  15.  prostrating  themselves  in  their  v. 

VEX. 

2  Mac.  5.  22.  he  lef^  governors  to  v.  the  nation 

VEX  En. 

Tob.  6.  7.  and  the  party  .shall  be  no  more  v. 
IVisd.  11.  II.  ali.iJent  or  present,  they  were  v.  alike 
17.  15.  Ihcy  were  v.  with  monslrous  apparitions 
Eccl.  4.  3.  add  rot  more  trouble  to  a  heart  that  iiiv 
41.  2.  death  unto  him  that  is  c.  with  all  things 
Bar.  2.  18.  hut  the  soul  that  is  greatly  v. 
1  Mac.  3.  5.  and  burn  U|i  those  that  v.  his  people 

VIALS. 
1  Eid.i.  13.  o.ofgold  thirty,  and  of  silver  2400 

VICE. 
IVisd."!.  30.  hut  v.  phnll  not  prevail  against  wisdom 

VICTORY. 
^F.sd.^.  5.  give  great  gifts  and  things  in  token  of « 
9.  to  him  shall  the  v.  he  given,  as  was  appointed 

12.  above  all  thing..!  truth  beareth  away  the  v. 
4.  5.  if  Ihcy  get  the  c.  they  bring  all  to  the  king 

59.  and  said,  from  thee  cotnelh  v.  and  wisdom 
M'isd.  4.  2.  having  got  the  v.  striving  for  rewards 

10.  12.  in  a  sore  conflict  she  gave  him  the  v. 

1  Mae.  3.  19.  for  v.  siandeih  not  in  the  multitude 

2  Afitc.  8.  33.  at  such  times  as  they  kept  feast  for  » 

10.  38.  had  done  so  great  things  and  given  them  v 

12.  11.  Judas'  side  by  the  help  of  God  got  ihe  v. 

13.  15.  given  watch-word  to  them,  v.  is  of  Go# 

15.  6.  to  set  up  a  public  monument  of  his  c. 
8.  now  to  expect  v.  and  aid,  from  the  Almighty 
21.  knowing  that  v.  romelh  not  by  arms 

VICTUALS. 
Jud.  4.  5.  and  laid  op  j».  for  the  provision  of  war 

11.  12.  for  thi'ir  v.  fail  them  and  water  is  scant 

1  Mac.  1.35.  they  stored  it  also  with  armour  and  v. 

6.  49.  because  they  had  no  »■  to  endure  the  siege 
57.  we  decay  daily,  and  our  v.  are  but  small 

8.  26.  that  make  war  on  them  or  aid  them  with  v. 
2fi.  neither  shall  v.  bo  given  to  them  are  against 

9.  52.  and  put  forces  m  them  and  provision  of  v. 
J3.  iJJ.  should  hasten  his cominSi  nndsend  themt). 

33. Simon  built  up  the  strong  holds  and  laid  up  ». 

14. 10. he  provided  v.  for  the  cities  and  set  munition 

VIEW. 

2  Mae.  5. 18.  king  Splnirna  sent  to  v.  the  treasury 

VIEWED. 
Jud.  7.  7.  and  p.  the  pniun?i'9  up  to  the  city 

VILE. 
fVind.  4.  18.  they  shall  herenficr  be  a  v.  carcase 
11.  15.  ihey  worshipped  ser|Knls  and  v.  boasts 

13.  14.  or  mnde  it  like  some  v.  beast 
2  Mac.  15.  32.  and  shewed  ihein  v.  Nicanor'i  head 

VINE. 
2  Efd.  5. 23.  O  Ij.  thnu  ha«t  chosen  thee  one  only  r. 

VINEVARn. 
2  End.  16.  30.  or  a»  when  a  v.  ii  gathnroil 
43.  io  also  he  that  pinrtloth  the  v. 
VINEYARDS. 
XEad.  4. 16.  they  nourished  them  up  that  planted  v 

VINTAGE. 
Keel.  24.  27.  and  in  Genn  io  the  time  ofc. 


VOW 

Eccl.  20.  4.  he  that  exocuteth  judgment  with  t>. 

1  .l/ue.4.30.  who  didst  quell  the  o.ol  the  mighty  man 

6.  47.  Jews  seeing  t7.  of  his  forces  turned  away 

7.  29.  were  prepared  to  take  away  Judas  by  v. 

2  Mac.  4.  40.  Lysimachus  began  first  to  ofl'er  v. 
VIOLENT. 

ff'isd.  13.  2.  or  the  v.  water  or  ihe  lights  of  heaven 
19.  7.  and  O'lt  of  the  v.  stream  a  green  field 

VIOLENTLY. 
IVisd.  17.  18.  a  pleasant  full  of  water  running  v. 
£cc/.4C.6.he  made  the  battle  to  fall  t;.on  tlie  nations 
'iMac.  9.  7.  carried  o.  so  that  having  a  soie  fall 

14.  41.  and  v.  broken  into  the  outer  door 
VIRGIN. 

£fcZ.  20.  4.  as  is  lust  of  a  eunuch  to  deflower  a  v. 

30.  20.  groaneth  as  a  eunuch  that  cmbracclli  a  v. 
VIRGINS. 
2  Esd.Xfi.  33.  V.  shall  mourn  having  no  bridegrooms 
fud.  16.  5.  make  my  infants  a  prey,  my  v.  a  spoil 
ljl/ae.1.26.  the  v.  and  young  men  were  made  fucble 
'iMac.  3.  19.  and  the  v.  that  were  kept  in,  ran 

5.  13.  thus  there  was  slayins  oft),  and  infanta 

VIRTUE. 
Wisd.  4.  1.  belter  to  have  r.  for  the  memorial 

13.  4.  they  were  astonished  at  their  power  and  v. 

19.  20.  the  fire  had  [wwer,  forgetting  his  own  v. 
Eccl.  38.  5.  that  the  r.  thereof  might  be  known 
'iMac.  6.  31.  leaving  hisdealli  for  a  memorial  of  o. 

15.  12.  exercised  from  a  child  in  all  points  oft). 
VIRTUES. 

Wisd.  7.  20.  the  diversities  of  plants  and  o.  of  roots 

VIRTUOUS. 
2  Esd.  16.  49.  like  as  a  whore  envielh  a  r.  woman 
£ccZ- 20.  1.  blessed  is  the  man  that  hath  a  v.  wife 

2.  a  V.  woman  rejoiceth  her  husband 
28.15.a  backbiting  tongue  hath  cast  oiitc.  woman 
2  Mac.  15. 12.  Onias  a  u.  and  good  man,  reverend 

VISION. 
2  Esd.  10.  37.  thou  wilt  shew  thy  servant  of  this  v. 
Eccl  34.  3.  the  v.  of  dreams  is  the  rescnrblancc 
40.  6.  troubled  in  the  v.  of  his  heart 
46.  1.5.  he  was  known  to  be  faithful  in  v. 
49.  8.  it  was  Ezekiel  who  saw  the  glorious  v. 
•2  Mac.  15.  12.  and  this  was  his  v.  that  Onias 

VISIONS. 
IVisd.  17.  4.  and  sad  v.  appeared  unto  them 

VISIT. 
2  Esd.  6.  18.  to  V.  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth 
9.  2.  Ihe  Highest  will  begin  to  v.  the  world 
.Jud.  8.  33.  the  Lord  will  v.  Israel  by  my  hand 

13.  20.  to  V.  Ihee  in  good,  because  hast  not  spared 
Fell.  2.  14.  what  will  ye  do  when  Ld.  shall  v.  you? 
7.35.  be  not  slow  toe  the  sick,  make  thee  beloved 

16.  18.  all  therein  shall  be  moved  when  he  shall  v. 
VISITATION. 

Wisd.  3.  7.  intho  time  of  their  rt.  they  shall  shine 

13.  she  shall  have  fruit  in  the  v.  of  souls 
14.1  l.on  the  idols  of  the  Gentiles  shall  there  be  a  t). 

Eccl.  18.  21).  in  day  of ».  thou  shall  find  mercy 
34.  6.  if  not  sent  from  the  Most  High  in  the  v. 

VISITED. 

1  Esd.  6.  5.  because  the  Lord  had  v.  the  captivity 

VISITING. 

1  Mac.  16.  14.  V.  the  cities  that  were  in  Ihe  country 
2.Voc.3.8.Heliodorus  imder  a  colour  of  r.  the  cities 

VOICE. 
IVisd.  1.  7.  containeth  all,  hath  knowledge  of  the  «. 
7.  3.  the  first  b.  which  I  uttered,  was  crying 

17.  19.  or  a  roaring  v.  of  most  savage  beasts 

18.  1.  whoso  V.  they  hearing,  and  not  seeing 
Eccl.  21.  20.  a  fool  fifieth  up  his  v.  with  laughter 

34.  24.  whose  v.  will  the  Lord  hear  t 
45.  5.  he  made  him  to  hear  his  v.  and  brought  him 
46. 17.  with  a  great  noise  made  his  u.tohe  heard 
Uar.  1.  18.  have  not  hearkened  to  the  r.  of  thoLd. 
19.  we  have  been  negligent  in  not  hearing  his  v. 
2.  5.  we  have  not  been  obedient  unto  his  v. 
22.  but  if  ye  will  not  hear  Ihe  v.  of  the  Lord 
S!3.  I  willcauso  locensetho  p.  of  mirth,  the  n.  of 
joy,  Ihe  V.  of  the  hridegroo.n,  and  «.  of  the  bride 
S!us.  44.  and  the  Lord  heard  her  b. 

2  Mac.  12.  37.  and  sung  psalms  with  a  loud  v. 
VOICES. 

I  F.sd.  5.  61.  and  they  sung  with  loud  v.  songs 
Eccl.  50. 18.  Iho  singers  sung  praises  with  their  e. 

VOID. 
IVisd. }\.  IS.lhey  worshipped  serpents  7>.  of  reason 
Ecrl.M.  1.  the  hopes  of  a  man  B.  of  understanding 
1  Mae.  3.  4.5.  now  Jerusalem  lay  r.  as  a  wilderness 
9.<Vaf. 13.25. booauic  they  would  make  covenants  b. 

14.  28.  that  he  should  make  v.  the  articles 
44.  he  fell  down  into  the  miilst  of  the  r.  place 

VOLUNTARILY. 
I  Mae.  2.  42.  such  as  were  v.  devoted  to  the  law 

VOLUPTUOUSNESS. 
Wisd.  2.  9.  none  of  us  eo  without  his  part  of  our  v. 

VOMIT. 

F^el.  31.  21.  go  forth,  p.  and  thou  shall  have  rest 

VOW. 


WAL 


[ArOCKTFKA  • 


1  Esd.  4.  43.  remember  thy  v.  which  thou  vowe« 
46.  I  desire  that  thou  make  good  the  v. 
5.  53.  all  the)  that  had  made  any  p.  to  God 
8.  58.  the  gold  and  the  silver  is  a  v.  to  the  Lord 
VOWED. 

1  Esd.  4.  43.  remember  thy  vow  which  thou  hast*. 
44.Cyrusset  apartjWhen  heB.todisiroy  Babylon 

45.  thuu  hast  also  v.  to  build  up  the  temple 

46.  the  vow  ihou  hast  v.  to  the  king  of  heaven 
8.  13.  the  gifts  which  I  and  my  friends  have  r. 

50.  there  I  p.  a  fast  to  the  young  men  before  Lord 

2  jV/ac.9. 13.  this  wicked  person  p.  also  to  the  Lord 
VOWS. 

Jud.  4.  14.  with  the  p.  and  free  gifts  of  the  people 
2  Mac.  3.  35.  llehudorus  made  great  p.  unto  him 

VOYAGE. 
.fud.  2. 19.  and  his  power  logo  before  the  king  in  o. 
2  Mac.  5  1.  prepared  his  second  p.  into  Egypt 


w. 


VIOLENCE 
Witd.T.K.  the  p.  of  winds  and  reaioningtof  monil£«il.S.7.whlch  bBvebMnielforthby  p.  for  temple 
853 


WAGES. 
lEsd.i.  56.  he  commanded  to  give  pnnsionsand  v. 
Tob.i.  12.  they  paid  her  w.  and  gave  her  alsualui. 
14.  it  was  given  for  a  gift  more  than  the  w. 

4.  14.  let  not  the  w.  of  any  man  tarry  with  thee 

5.  3.  seek  thee  a  man  and  I  will  give  him  is. 

14.  but  tell  me  what  to.  shall  I  give  theel 

15.  moreover  I  will  add  something  to  thy  u. 
12   1.  my  son,  see  that  the  man  have  his  «o. 

1  Mac.  14.32.  armed  the  valiant  men  and  gaveie. 

WAIT. 
,Tud.  8.  17.  let  us  w.  for  salvation  of  him 
13.  3.  to  stand  and  to  i^.  for  her  Cuming  forth 
Wisd.  2.  12.  let  us  lie  in  ir.  for  the  righteous 
10.  12.  and  keep  him  safe  from  those  that  lie  in  to. 
Eccl.  8.  11.  lest  he  lie  in  w.  to  entrap  thee 
27.  28.  vengeance  as  alien  shall  lie  in  u>.  for  them 
36.  16.  reward  lliem  thai  w.  for  thee 
51.  8.  how  thou  deliverest  such  as  w.  for  thee 
1  Mac.  1.  36.  for  it  was  a  place  to  lie  in  to. 
2Jl/rtc.  7.  .30.said,  whom  lo.ye  for?  I  wiH  notobey 
9.  2.>.  to.  for  opporliiniiics  and  expect  the  event 

WAITED. 

./KrZ.6.10.commanded  hi:J8^,rvantsthnt  lo.in  his  tent 

12.  16.  for  he  «o.  a  time  to  deceive  Judith 

WAITERS. 

Jud.l^.l.  dismissed  the  w.  from  presence  of  his  lord 

WAITING. 
.Tud.  8.  33.  I  will  go  forth  with  my  to.  woman 

VVAKETH. 
Feci.  22.  7.  as  he  that  ic.  one  from  a  sound  sleep 
42.9.  the  father  ir.  for  the  daughter,  no  man  know* 

WALK. 
Fed.  5.  2.  to  10.  in  the  ways  of  thy  heart 
Bar.  4.  2.  w.  in  the  presence  of  Ihe  light  thereof 
Si/.s.7.Snsann.went  into  her  busband'sgarden  to  lo. 
1  Mac.  2.  20.  10.  in  the  covenant  of  our  fathers 

WALKED. 
Tub.  1.  3.  I  Tobit  have  to.  all  the  days  of  my  life 
Wind.  6.  4.  nor  w.  after  the  counsel  of  God 
19.21.  flames  wasted  not,  though  they  to.  therein 
Uar.  3.  13.  if  thou  hndst  to.  in  the  way  of  God     " 
Dan.^.  1.  and  they  to.  in  the  midst  of  the-  fire 
.*«».  36.  the  elders  snid,  as  we  lo.  in  the  garden 

WALK  EST. 
Eccl.  9.13.  th.it  thou  lo.on  battlements  of  the  city 

WALKING. 
Sus.  8.  the  elders  saw  h.r  going  in  every  day  and  te 

WALL. 
Tub.  2.  9.  and  slept  *y  Ihe  lo.  of  my  court-yard 
10.  I  knew  not  Ihere  were  sparrows  in  Ihe  te. 
H'iW.13. 15.set  it  in  a  rr.  and  made  it  fast  with  iron 
Kf  f /.  .'50.  2.  the  fortress  of  Ihe  to.  about  the  lempla 
1  Mar.  6,  62.  lo  pull  down  the  to.  round  about 

9.  54.  the  tr.  of  the  inner  court  be  pulled  down 

12.  37.  as  part  of  the  w.  toward  Ihe  brook  fallen 
'iMar.  6.  10.  they  cast  Ihem  down  from  the  to. 

10.  17.  they  kept  off  all  that  roiight  on  the  to. 
3.5.  twenty  young  men  nssaulleil  the  to.  manly 

14.43.  he  ran  boldly  iin  to  the  to.  cast  himself  down 

WAL!,a. 
1  Fsd.  2.  24.  and  the  lo.  thereof  set  up  anew 

4.  4.  ihey  break  down  mountains,  lo.  and  towen 
6  9.  the  timber  niriady  laid  upon  the  lo. 

ToA.  1.17. or  cast  aliont  to.  of  Nineveh,  1  liiiriBd  him 

13.  Ifi.  to.  and  towers  and  bntllemenls  with  gold 
Errt.  49.  13.  Neemins  raised  up  for  us  the  «>. 

1  Mac.  1.31.  he  polled  down  houses  and  to.  thereof 
6.  7.  compassed  about  the sancluary  with  high  i«. 
10.  11.  the  workmen  to  build  the  to.  and  Snin 

45.  for  buildin,-;  Ihe  to.  of  Jonisalem  and  Jndea 
13.  45.  people  climbed  on  Ihe  to.  wilhlheir  wire* 

2  .Wic.  3.19.  rBn,«omnlo  the  gales,  and  ^iMnetois, 

5.  5.  they  that  were  on  the  to.  lioing  put  I'nck 
11.9.  were  ready  lo  pierce  throiich  w  .  of  iron 
12.  13.  a  bridge  lo  a  stronj  city  fenced  with  le 

WALLOW. 
Eccl.  83. 12.  and  ihov  shall  not  lo,  in  their  sins 


ApocRrrHA.]         WAT 

WAND. 

Eecl.  33.  24.  fodder,  a.  to.  mid  burdejis  for  the  ask 

WANDER. 
Eccl.  36.  i25.  he  that  hiith  no  wife  will  w.  mourning 

WANDERED. 
Keel.  29.  18.  BO  that  Ihty  w.  among  strange  nations 
iMac.  10.  6.  when  as  they  w.  in  the  mountains 

WANDERING. 
W7s<i.4.12.the  w.  of  concupisconcodoth  undermine 

WAN. 
I  Mac.  1  2.  lie  vi.  many  strong  holds  and  slew  kings 

WANT. 
Eccl.  3.  25,  without  eyes  thou  shalt  w.  light 
19.28.if  for  io.of  power  lie  be  hindered  froinsinning 
20.2l.thcre  is  that  is  hindered  from  sinning  tliro'  w. 
40.  26,  there  is  no  w.  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord 
1  Mac.  13.  49.  in  great  distress  for  id.  of  victuals 

WANTED. 
Wisd.  11.  17.  w.  not  means  to  send  among  them 

WANTETH. 
F.cel.  10.  27.  than  he  that  boaeteth  and  w.  bread 
16,  23.  he  that  u>.  undersianding  will  think 

WANTING. 
Wisd.  19.  4.  the  punishment  to.  to  their  torments 
Eccl.  11. 12.  another  lo.  ability  and  full  of  poverty 
19.  23,  and  there  is  a  fool  v>.  in  wisdom 

WANTONNESS. 
Ecd.  27.  13.  the  sport  of  fools  is  in  the  w.  of  sin 

WAR. 
IVisd.  8. 15.  I  shall  be  found  good  and  valiant  in  w. 
18. 15.  as  a  fierce  man  of  w.  nto  the  midslof  land 
Eccl.  26.  28.  a  mnn  of  w.  that  suft'orclh  poverty 
37.  1 1.  nor  consult  with  a  coward  in  matters  of  w. 
Bar.  3.  26.  of  so  great  stature,  and  so  expert  in  w. 
6.  15.  cannot  deliver  himself  from  w.  and  thieves 
\Mac.  2. 32.  made  w.  against  them  on  sabbath  day 

3.  13.  the  faithful  to  go  out  with  him  lo  w. 

8.  27.  \(  w.  come  first  on  the  nation  of  the  Jews 
2.'Wac.8.9.who  in  matters  ofjr.  had  great  experience 

10.  15.  the  Idumeans  went  about  to  nourish  w. 

WARS. 

J  Esd.  2.  23.  the  Jews  raised  always  w.  therein 

4.  6.  for  those  that  have  not  to  do  with  w. 
Eccl.  46.  1.  Jesus  son  of  Nave  was  valiant  in  w 
I.'lfac.l.2.mademanyKi.and  won  many  strong  holds 

12.  1.3.  we  have  had  great  troubles  and  w. 
16.  23.  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  John  and  his  w. 
iMac.  2.20.  the  w.  against  Antiochus  Epiphanes 

10.  10.  gathering  briefly  the  calamities  of  the  w. 

WARD. 
1  Mac.  14.  3.  Arsaces  by  whom  he  was  put  into  to, 

WARINESS. 
Eccl.  11.  18.  there  is  that  waxeth  rich  by  his  w. 

WARLIKE.  ( 

l,fl/ac.5.56.valiant  acts  and  w.  deeds  they  had  done 

WARNING. 
1  Mac.  6.  3.  they  of  the  city  having  had  w.  thereof 
iMac.  6.  17.  but  let  this  be  for  a  w.  to  us 

WARRIOR. 
Jiid.  15.  3.  every  one  that  was  a  w.  rushed  out 
Eccl.  47.  5.  he  gave  streneth  to  slay  that  mighty  w. 

WASH. 

Sits,  15.  she  was  desirous  to  tc.  herself  in  the  garden 

17.  shut  the  garden-doors  that  I  may  w.  me 

WASHED. 
Jud.  10,  3,  and  w.  her  body  all  over  with  water 

WASHETH. 
Eccl.  34.  25.  that  w.  after  touching  of  a  dead  body 

WASHING. 
JCccZ.34.25.if  he  to\ich  again,  whatavaileth  his?c.? 
SiLS.  17.  said  to  her  maids,  bring  me  oil  and  w.  balls 

WASP.S, 
Wisd.  12.  8.  didst  send  w.  forerunners  of  thy  host 

WASTE. 
Jud.B.1\.  if  we  be  taken  so,  all  Judea  shall  lie  w. 
Wisd.!\.'£i.  this  iniquity  shall  lay  w.  the  whole  earth 
Eccl.  21.  4.  to  terrify  and  do  wrong  will  w.  riches 
Bar.  2.  26.  the  house  hast  thou  laid  w. 

1  Mac.\.'i9.  her  sanctuary  laid  !c.  likea  wilderness 
2,  12.  even  our  beauty  and  nur  glory  is  laid  jo. 

WASTED. 

fr(se/.19,2l.on  other  side  the  flames  w.  not  the  flesh 

WATCH. 

2  Ksd.  2. 13.  the  kingdom  is  already  prepared,  to. 

11.  8.  to.  not  all  at  once,  w.  by  course 
Jvd.  7.  13.  lo  w.  that  none  go  out  of  the  city 

10.  11.  the  first  to.  of  the  Assyrians  m'et  her 
Erel.  22.  27.  who  shall  set  a  to.  before  my  mnulhl 

26.  11.  to.  over  an  impudent  eye,  and  marvel  not 

40.  6.  ho  is  in  sleep,  as  in  a  day  of  keeping  to. 

42.  11.  keep  a  sure  lu.  over  a  shameless  daughter 
1  Mac.  12.  27.  Jonathan  commanded  his  men  to  to. 

WATCHED. 
Jud.  7.  .5.  they  remained  and  w.  all  that  night 
S«».12.lhpy  to.  diligently  from  day  to  day  to  see  her 

15.  and  it  fell  out  as  they  to.  a  fit  time 

16.  the  two  elders  hid  themselves  and  to.  her 
2.Wac.l4.29  he  tc.his  time  to  nccomplish  by  policy 

WATCHES. 

Eccl.  43. 10.  they  will  stand,  never  faint  in  their  w. 

6&3 


WEA 

Par.  3. 34.  the  stars  shined  in  their  to.  and  rejoic«d 

WATCHETH. 
Wisd.  6.  15.  whoso  lo.  fur  her  shall  be  without  care 
Keel.  11.  30.  and  like  as  a  spy  to.  he  fur  thy  fail 
38.  28.  ho  to.  to  polish  his  work  perfectly 

WATCHING. 
Eccl.  31.  2.  to.  care  will  not  let  a  man  slumber 
'20.  but  the  pain  of  to.  and  choler,  and  pangs 
2  Mac.  2.  26.  not  easy,  but  a  matter  of  sweat  and  to. 

WATCH-MEN, 
£cc2.37.14.man's  mind  tell  him  more  than  seven  to. 

WATER, 
Wisd.  5. 10.  as  a  ship  passeth  over  the  waves  of  to 

22.  the  to.  of  the  sea  shall  rage  against  them 

10.  18.  she  led  them  through  much  lo. 

11.4.  w.  was  given  them  out  of  the  flinty  rock 
1.3.  2.  or  Ibo  violent  ic.  or  the  lights  of  heaven 

16.  17.  the  fire  had  more  force  in  the  to. 

19.  it  burneth  even  in  the  midst  of  to. 

29.  and  shall  run  away  as  unprofitable  to. 

17.  18.  w.  I  19.  7,  19,  20.  w. 

Eccl.  3.  30.  10.  will  quench  a  flaming  fire 
24.  31,  I  will  w,  my  best  garden,  and  will  to. 
25. 25. give  the  lo.  no  passage,  nor  a  wickejj  woman 
26.  12.  to.  I  29.  21.  w.  |  38.  5.  w.  |  40.  16.  to.  |  43. 
20.  to.  I  48.  17.  to. 

1  Mae.  9.  33.  pitched  by  the  w.  of  the  pool  Asphar 
45.  the  10.  of  Jordan  on  this  side  and  that  side 

11.  60.  passed  through  the  cities  beyond  the  w. 
16.  5.  there  was  a  to.  brook  between  them 

'iMac.  1.  19.  in  a  hollow  place  of  a  pit  without  to. 

20.  told  us  tliey  found  no  fire  but  thick  lo. 

14.  43.  tho'  his  blood  gushed  out  like  spoutsof  to. 

15.  39.  as  it  is  hurtful  to  drink  wine  or  to.  alone,  a.i 
wine  mingled  with  to.  is  pleasant  and  delights 

WATERS, 
a  Esd.  1.  20.  and  to.  flowed  out  to  your  fill 
6.  41.  and  to  make  a  division  betwixt  the  jo. 
13.  40.  he  carried  them  over  the  w. 
16.58.  in  midst  of  to.  hanged  the  earth  upon  the  to. 
.hid.  7.17.  they  took  the  w.  and  fountainof  the  to. 
Wisd.  17.  4.  but  noises  as  of  to.  falling  down 
Eccl.  39. 17.  at  his  command  the  w.  stood  as  a  heap, 
at  the  words  of  his  mouth  the  receptacles  of  to 

23.  as  he  that  turned  the  w.  into  saltness 

40.  11.  what  is  of  the  to.  do  return  into  the  sea 
48.  17.  he  digged  the  rock  and  made  wells  for  to. 
50.  8.  as  lilies  by  the  rivet's  of  to.  and  as  branches 
Dan.  3.  38.  O  all  ye  to.  above  the  heavens 
"WATERY, 

2  Ksd.  4.  49.  there  passed  by  before  me  a  to.  cloud 
Wisd.  19. 19.  for  earthly  things  were  turned  into  to. 

WAY. 
2E.sd.3.7.thou  gavest  commandment  to  love  thy  to. 

13.  45.  through  country  there  was  a  great  to.  to  go 
ToA. 1.3.1  have  walked  in  the  tc.of  truth  and  justice 
Wisd.  5.  6.  we  erred  from  the  w.  of  truth 

7.  we  wearied  ourselves  in  the  w.  of  wickedness 

14.  3.  for  thou  hast  made  a  id.  in  the  sea 

15.  12.  say  they,  we  must  be  getting  every  to, 

18.  23.  and  parted  the  id.  lo  the  living 

Eccl.  2.  6.  order  thy  w.  aright  and  trust  in  him 

4.  18.  then  will  she  return  the  straight  to. 

5.  9.  to.  I  8.  15.  to.  I  16.  14.  to.  |  21.  6,  10,  16.  v>. 

I  32.  20,  21.  to.  I  37.  9,  15.  to.  I  51.  15.  w 
WAYS. 
1  Ksd.  8,  52.  to  support  them  in  all  their  w. 
Tob.  4.  5.  follow  not  the  to.  of  unrighteousness 
Wisd.  2  16.  he  abstaineth  from  our  to.  as  filthiness 

6.  16.  she  sheweth  herself  to  them  in  the  to. 

9. 18,  for  so  the  to.  of  them  that  lived  on  the  earth 
Eccl.  1.  5.  her  w.  are  everlasting  commandments 
2.  12,  15.  10.  I  4.  17.  w.  I  5.  2.  to.  |  6.  26.  to.  I  14. 

2L,  w.  I  16.  20.  w.  I  17.  13.  w.  \  33. 

11.  to.  I  39.  24.  w.    48.  22.  to. 

1  Mac.  5.  4.  they  lav  in  wait  for  thera  in  the  id. 

Waves. 

2  Esd.  13.  2.  that  it  moved  all  the  v).  thereof 
Wisd.  5.10.  as  a  ship  that  passeth  over  the  w.  trace 

not  found,  the  path  way  of  the  keel  in  the  to. 
14.  3.  thou  hast  made  a  safe  path  in  the  w. 
Eccl.  24.  6.  in  the  to.  of  the  sea,  and  in  all  the  earth 
2  Mac.  9.  8.  though  he  might  command  the  to. 
WEAK. 

1  Ksrf.l..30.  carry  me  out  of  battle,  for  I  am  very  to. 

2  Esd.  2.  21.  heal  the  broken  and  the  w. 

7.  42.  therefore  have  they  prayed  for  the  to. 
Witd.  13.  18.  for  health  he  called  on  what  is  w. 

14.5.  passing  the  roughsea  in  a  w.  vessel  are  saved 
a.  the  hope  of  the  world  escaped  in  a  w.  vessel 

Eccl.  25.23.  maketh  to.  hands  and  feeble  knees 
Bar.  0.  36.  nor  deliver  the  to.  from  the  mighty 
2  Mac.  9.  21.  as  for  me  I  was  to.  or  else  I  could 

WEAKENED. 
fud.  16.  7.  but  Judith  to.  him  with  her  beauty 

WEAKNESS. 
2  Esd.  8.  53,  to.  and  the  moth  is  hid  from  you 

WEALTH. 
Toh.  4.  21.  thou  hast  much  v>.  if  thou  fear  God 
Eccl.  30,  15.  and  a  strong  body  above  infinite  w! 


WHA 

WEAPON. 

Wisd.  5. 17.  make  tho  creature  liis  tB.  for  reveiiM 

WEAPONS, 

1  Mac.5.4^.the  brethren  cast  away  their  tD.  and  fled 

10.  6.  and  to  provide  id.  that  he  might  aid  bira 

2  jWac.3.2S.being  unable  to  help  himself  with  his  w 
10.23.havinggood  success  with  hia  to.  in  all  things 

27.  they  took  their  to.  and  went  on  further 

11.  7.  Maccabeus  himself  first  of  all  look  w. 

WEAR. 
Esth.  14.  6.  that  I  to.  it  not  when  T  am  private 
Eccl.  6.  36.  let  thy  foot  w.  the  slops  of  his  door 

1  Mac.  11.  58.  gave  him  leave  to  to.  a  golden  buckle 

14.  43.  be  clothed  in  purple,  and  w.  gold 

2  Mac.  4. 12.  chief  voung  men,  made  them  to.  a  hat 

WEARETH. 
Eccl.  40. 4.  from  him  that  w.  purple,  and  a  crown 

WEARIED, 
Wisd.  5.  7,  wo  to.  ourselves  in  way  of  wickedness 

WEARISOME. 
£rel.  13.26.  finding  out  is  a  id.  labour  of  the  mind 

WEARY. 

Jud.  13,  1.  they  went  to  their  beds,  they  were  all  to 

Eccl.  16.  27.  they  neither  labour  nor  are  to. 

43.  30.  put  forth  all  your  strength,  and  bo  not  lo. 

2  J/ac.  12.36.  with  Gorgias,  fiught  long  and  were  to. 

WEATHER. 
Eccl.  3. 15.  thy  sins  melt,  as  ice  in  the  fair  warm  to. 

WEDDING. 
2  K.5d.l0.1.  was  entered  into  his  to. chamber,  he  died 
Tob.  8. 19.  and  he  kept  the  ic.  feast  fourteen  days 

WEED. 
Eccl.  40.  16.  the  w.  g.-owing  upon  every  water 

WiiEKS. 
2  Mac.  12.  31.  the  fenst  of  the  to.  approaching 

WEENING. 
2  Mac.5.^\.  ID.  in  his  pride  to  make  land  navigable 

WEEP. 
2  Ksd.  2.  27.  others  shall  to.  and  be  sorrowful 
Tob.  3.  1.  then  I  being  grieved,  did  u>.  and  prayed 
.!iid.  16.  17.  they  shall  feel  them  and  lo.  for  ever 
Eccl.  7.  34.  fail  pot  to  be  wiih  them  that  to. 

12.  16.  he  will  w.  but  if  he  find  opportunity 

22.  1 1.  w.  for  the  fool,  for  he  wants  understanding 
38.  17.  w.  bitterly,  and  make  great  moan 
WEEPING. 

1  Esd.  5.  03.  came  with  w.  and  great  crying 

65.  trumpets  might  not  be  heard  for  to.  of  people 
8.  91.  there  was  great  w.  among  the  multitude 
Tob.  5.  22.  then  she  made  an  end  of  to. 
EccZ.  22. 11.  make  little  to.  for  the  dead,  he  is  at  rest 
Bar.4.11.butsent  them  away  with  to. and  mourning 
.Si/s.  35.  and  she  to.  looked  up  toward  heaven 

2  Mac.  13. 12.  besoucht  the  Ld.  with  to.  and  fasting 

WEIGH. 

2  Ksd.  4.  5.  then  said,  w.  metlie  weight  of  the  fire 

16.  76.  let  not  your  sins  w.  you  down 

£cci.28.25.  to.  thy  wordsin  a  balance,  make  a  door 

WEIGHED. 

1  Ksd.  8.  55.  I  to.  them  the  gold  and  the  silver 
.36.  and  when  I  had  w.  it,  delivered  to  them  silver 

2  Esd.  4.  36.  he  hath  to.  the  world  in  the  balance 
Eccl.  21.  25.  but  the  words  are  lo.  in  the  balance 

WEIGHKTH. 

Wisd.  9.  15.  earthlv  tabernacle  w.  down  the  mind 

WEIGHT. 

1  Kf!d.  8.  64.  all  the  w.  of  them  was  written  up 

2  Ksd.A.S.  then  he  said,  weigh  me  the  w.  of  the  firo 
Errl.  16.  25.  I  will  shew  forth  doetrine  in  to. 

42.  7.  deliver  all  things  in  number  and  to, 

WEIGHTY. 
Eccl.'7."5.  and  so  shall  have  performed  ato.  matter 

WELL. 
Kcrl.  28.  19.  TO.  is  he  that  is  defended  from  it 

1  Mac.  8.  15.  lo  the  end  they  might  be  to.  ordered 

2  Jfac.  11.  35.  therewith  we  also  arc  7C.  pleased 
12.  43.  doing  therein  very  to.  and  honestly 

15.  38.  if  I  have  dnne  w.  and  as  is  fitting  the  story 

WELFARE. 
07.9^.6.24. multitude  of  the  wise  is  w-  of  the  world 
2JI/ac.  14.14.  calamitiesof  the  Jews  to  be  their  to. 

WELLS. 
2  Esd.  2.  32.  for  my  to  run  over,  and  my  grace 
Eccl.  48. 17.  he  digged  the  hard  rock,  and  made  w. 

WENT, 
Wind.  a.  11.  no  sign  where  she  w.  is  to  be  found 
Eccl.  49.  9.  for  he  directed  them  that  to.  right 

WEPT. 
To*.7. 6.  Raguel  leaped  up,  and  kissed  him,  and  w 

7,  Tobit  was  Mind,  he  was  sorrowful  and  to. 

8.  Edna  his  wife  and  Sara  his  daughter  to. 
11.  9.  I  am  content  to  die,  and  they  to.  both 

14.  and  he  w.  and  said,  blessed  art  thou,  O  God 
Svs.  33.  her  friends  and  nil  that  saw  her  to. 
2Jlf<ic.4.37.  Iheref 're  Aniiochus  wa»hor,rlily8orrji 
and  moved  to  nitv,  and  tn.forhim  that  waideili^ 
WESTWARD. 
.7ud.  2.  19.  to  cover  nil  the  face  of  the  earth  le. 

WHALES. 
Eccl.  43.  85.  all  kinds  of  boasts  and  to.  croatad 


WID 

jDon.  3.57.  Ore  w.  and  all  that  move  in  th«  waters 

WHC.\T. 
Jud.  3.  3.  all  our  fields  of  ic.  lie  before  lliy  face 
£cc<.  39.  36.  iron  and  salt,  flour  of  le.  hont.'y,roiIk 

WilLLP. 
1  Mac.  3. 4.  was  like  a  lii>n'd  w.  roaring  for  liis  prey 

VVHIl". 
Ecel.  28.  17.  the  stroke  of  the  w.  maketh  marks 

VVIlIRLWliND. 
F.ccl.  43. 17.  so  duih  ibc  norilieru  utoriii  and  the  te. 
40.9.  who  was  taken  up  in  a  ic.  of  tire  and  chariot 

WHISPKR. 
Eccl.  12. 18.  he  will  ninp  IiIk  hands  and  u>.  much 

wuisrKiii;u. 

F.ccl.  5. 14.  be  not  callid  a  ir.  and  lie  not  in  wait 
21.  2d.  a  w.  dufileth  his  own  soul,  and  is  huted 
38.  13.  curse  the  w.  and  double-tongued 

WHISTLING. 
Wisd.  17.  18.  whether  it  were  u  w.  wind  or  noise 
Dan.  3.  27.  as  it  had  been  a  moist  la.  wind 

WHITE. 
Bar.  6.  71.  are  like  a  w.  thorn  in  an  orchard 
^JUac.  1 1 .8.  aiipea red  before  them  one  in  w.  clothing 

WHITENESS. 
Tob.  2.  10.  a  w.  came  in  mine  t7Cfl  and  I  went 
3.  17.  to  scale  away  the  u>.  of  Tobit's  eyes 
6.  8.  to  nnoint  a  man  that  hath  v>.  It  his  eyei 
11.8.  he  shall  rub,  and  the  ic.  shall  fall  away 

13.  and  the  w.  pilled  away  from  his  eyes 
Eccl.  43. 18.  the  eye  marvelleth  at  beauty  of  the  w. 

WHOLE. 
Tob.  12. 3.  he  made  w.  my  wife,  brought  me  money 
£cc/.38.'J.pray  totheliOrd  and  he  will  make  thee  ic. 

WHORE. 
Eccl.  23.  23.  she  hath  phiyed  the  w.  in  adultery 

WIIOREDOAI. 
Eccl.  26.  9.  the  w.  of  a  woman  may  be  known 
41.  17.  be  ashnmed  of  la.  before  father  or  mother 

WHOREMONGER. 
£cc?.23.  n.all  bread  is  sweet  to  a  15.  will  not  leave  off 

WHORING. 
Eccl.  46.  11.  judges,  whose  heart  went  not  a  w. 

WICKED. 
1  Esd  8.86.  is  done  to  us  for  our  in.  works  and  sins 
Tob.  4.  17.  but  give  nothing  to  the  w. 
6.  14.  I  am  afraid,  for  a  ic.  spirit  lovelh  her 
E»th.  16. 1.5.  whom  this  k.  wretch  hath  delivered 
irwrf.  3. 12.  their  wives  are  foolish,  and  children  w. 
,     Eccl.  10.  9.  a  more  w.  thing  than  a  covetous  man 
^.     14.  8.  envious  man  hath  a  v>.  eye,  he  turns  away 
Wj       10.  a  IC.  eye  envielli  his  bread,  he  is  a  niggard 
16.  4.  the  kindred  of  uj.  shall  speedily  be  desolate 

19.  26.  there  is  a  in.  man,  that  hangelh  his  head 

20.  18.  so  the  fall  of  the  ic.  shall  come  speedily 

21.  9.  w.  I  25.  16,  2.5.  ?/>.  1  31.  13.  w.  |  :W.  21,  30.  w. 

I  40.  10.  w.  1  46.  7.  w.  murmuring 
Bar.  1.  22.  the  imagination  of  his  own  w.  heart 

2.  33.  return  from  their  stiff-neck  and  tc.  deeds 

1  Mad.  10.  there  came  out  of  lliem  a  w.  root 
11.  went  out  of  Israel  jr.  men  who  persuaded 
34.  they  put  w.  men,  who  fortified  themselves 

3.  6.  a.  shrunk  for  fear  of  him  and  were  troubled 
9.33.  u>.  began  to  put  forth  their  heads  in  Israel 
14. 14.  every  contemner  of  the  law  and  ic.  person 

2  J>/ac.  3.  II.  not  as  that  ir.  Simon  had  misinformed 
4.49.they  of Tvriis  moved  ivitli  hatr.of  that  (t.deed 
6.  13,  21.  le.  I  7.  34.  w.  |  8.  4,  32.  w.  I  !k  9,  13.  ,o.  \ 

10.  10,34.  w.  I  12.  23.  to.  |  13.  7.  w.  \  14. 
27,  42.  M.  1 13.. 5.  his  w.  will  done 
WICKEDLY. 
Eat  h-Mi."!. ye  search  what  hath  been  ?c.  done  of  late 
Eccl.  i.5.  20.  he  hath  commanded  no  man  to  do  w. 
2  Mae.  4. 17.  for  it  is  not  a  light  thing  to  do  w. 

WICKEDNESS. 
Fft>d.2. 21.  for  their  own  v.  halh  blinded  them 

4.  6, 11.  IT.  I  :>.  7, 13.  w.  I  10.  7.  IC.  I  1 1.  15.  w.  \  17. 

11.7C.  1 19. 13.  suffered  according  to  their  ic. 
Keei.3.28.  for  the  plant  of  ic.  hath  taken  root  in  him 

12.  10.  for  like  an  iron  rusteth,  so  is  his  ic. 

14.  7.  and  at  the  Inst  he  will  declare  his  tc. 

19. 23.  there  is  a  tc.  and  the  same  an  abomination 

25.  13.  and  any  w.  hut  the  ic.  of  n  woman 
19.  all  tc.  is  but  little  to  the  tc.  of  a  woman 

46.  20.  to  blot  out  the  tc.  of  the  people 
Bar.  2.  26.  for  the  lo.  of  the  house  of  Israel 
Sut.  52.  art  waxen  old  in  tc.  ||  m.  not  abide  your  tc. 

1  Mac.  13.  46.  deal  not  with  us  according  to  our  tc. 

2  Mac.  3.  1.  because  of  Onias  his  hatred  of  tc. 

8.  33.  he  received  a  rewnnl  meet  fur  his  ic. 

WIDOW. 
Jnd.  8.  4.  so  Judith  was  u  tc.  in  her  hmiso 

9.  9.  give  it  into  mine  hand,  who  am  a  tc. 
Wi>rf.2. 10.  let  us  not  spare  the  to.  nor  reverence 
Fcef.  35.  14.  nor  tc.  when  she  poureth  out  romplaint 
liar.  6.  38.  they  can  shew  no  mercy  lo  the  ic. 

WIDOWS. 

Jud.  8.  .V  she  put  on  sackcloth,  wore  her  tc.  appnrol 

.FccZ.SS.I.'l.do  not  the  tears  run  down  the  IC  cheekn? 

J  Mac.  3. 10.  was  money  Iniil  up  for  therelicf  of  ic. 

8. 28.  given  part  of  siioils  to  the  maimed  and  the  tc. 

854 


WIN 

WIDOWERS. 
2  Eid.  16.  44.  and  they  that  marry  not  as  the  ic. 

WIDOWHOOD. 
2  Esd.  15.  49.  I  will  send  plagues,  tc.  poverty 
Jud.  lU.  3.  she  put  off  the  garments  of  her  tc. 

wiFi;. 

1  Esd.4.  20.  learetb  his  father,  and  cicaveth  to  tc. 

25.  wherefore  a  man  loveth  his  tc.  better  than 
Tvb   1.  20.  any  thing  left  mo  besides  my  tc.  Anna 

2.  11.  my  IC.  Anna  did  take  women's  work 

3.  15, 17.  tc.  1  4.  12.  tc.  I  6.  15.  ic.  |  7.  13.  tc.  |  8.  6, 

31.  tc.  I  9.  6.  IC.  I  10.  10.  tc.  I  11.  3.  IC. 
fyisd.  13. 17.  prays  for  his  goods,  ic.  and  children 
Eccl.  9.  1.  be  not  jealous  over  the  ic.  of  thy  bosom 
15.  2.  receive  him  as  a  tc.  married  of  a  virgin 

23. 22.  thus  shall  it  go  also  with  the  tc.  that  Icaveth 
25.  8.  that  dwelleth  with  a  uj.  of  understanding 

20.  so  is  a,  w.  full  of  words  to  a  quiet  man 
26. 1.  ble.ssed  is  the  man  that  hath  n  virtuous  ic. 
7.  an  evil  tc.  is  a  yoke  shaken  to  and  fro 
13.  the  grace  of  a  tc.  delights  her  husband 
16.  is  beauty  of  a  good  w.  in  ordering  her  bouse 
33.  19.  give  not  thy  ic.  power  over  thee 
36.  24.  ho  that  gets  a  w.  beginneth  a  possession 

40.23.  but  above  both  is  a  w.  with  her  husband 

41.  21.  be  ashamed  to  gaze  on  another  man's  ic. 

42.  6.  sure  keeping  is  good  where  an  evil  ic.  is 

2  Mac.  14.  25.  he  prayed  him  also  lo  take  a  u>. 

WILD. 
Esth.  16.  24.  but  also  most  hateful  to  tc.  beasts 
fVisd.  7.  20.  and  the  furies  of  ic.  beasts 
Eccl.  12. 13.  or  any  such  as  come  nigh  tc.  beasts 
13.  19.  the  tc.  ass  isthe  lion's  prey  in  the  wilderness 
39. 30.  teeth  of  w.  beasts  and  scorpions  and  sword 

WILL. 
1  Ksd.  9.  9.  do  his  ic.  and  separate  yourselves 
IVisd.  9. 13.  who  can  think  what  the  ic.  of  the  L.  is? 
Krcl.  8. 15.  for  he  will  do  according  to  his  own  tc. 

38.  32.  they  shall  not  dwell  where  they  w. 

39.  18.  none  can  hinder  when  he  w.  save 

43.  16.  at  his  w.  the  south  wind  blowclb 

1  Mac.  2.  K.  ic.  I  3. 60.  IC.  I  2  J»/ac.  1 1 .  23,  30.  tc.  | 

14.  33.  IC.  I  15.  5.  not  to  have  his  w.  done 
WILFUL. 
Eccl.  30.  8.  a  child  left  to  himself  will  be  ic. 
WILLED. 

2  Jlfac.G.  23.  tc.  them  straight  ways  to  send  to  grave 

WILLING. 
Wisd.  14. 19.  for  he  tc.  to  please  one  in  authority 
F.ccl.  6.  35.  be  w.  to  hear  every  godly  discour.se 
2  Mac.  11.  7.  they  went  together  with  a  w.  mind 

WILLINGLY. 
2JI/ac.  14. 24.  would  not  ic.  have  Judas  out  ofsight 

WILT. 
TVisd.  12. 18.  thou  mayest  use  power  when  thou  tc. 
2  J>/ac.7.16.thou  hastpower,thou  dostwhatthouic. 

WIND. 
Wisd.  4.  4.  they  shall  bo  shaken  with  the  w. 
5.  14.  is  like  dust  blown  away  with  the  w. 
2.3.  a  mighty  to.  shall  stand  up  ngain.st  them 
13.  2.  but  deemed  either  fire,  or  w.  or  swifb  air 
17.  18.  whether  it  were  a  whistling  ic.  or  noise 
Eccl.  .5.  9.  winnow  not  with  every  ic.  and  go  not 
22.  18.  pales  will  never  stand  against  the  ic. 
31.  19.  he  fetched  not  his  tc.  short  upon  his  bed 
Dan.  3.  27.  as  it  had  been  a  moist  whistling  tc. 

WINDS. 
Dan.  3.43. 0  all  ye  ic.  bless  ye  the  Lord,  praise  him 

WINDOW. 
Tub.  3. 11.  then  she  praved  toward  the  tc.  and  said 

WINDOWS. 
Eccl.  14. 23.  he  that  prieih  in  at  her  w.  shall  hearken 

WINE. 
Tud.  12. 20.  and  drank  more  tc.  than  he  had  drunk 
F.tlh.  14. 17.  nor  drunk  the  w.  of  the  drink-otTerings 
Wisd.  2.7.  let  us  fill  ourselves  with  costly  ic. 
F.ccl.  9.  9.  spend  not  ihy  money  with  her  at  tc. 
10.  forsake  not  a  friend,  a  new  friend  is  as  new  tc. 
19.  2.  tc.  and  women  will  make  inen  to  fall 

31.  25.  shew  not  thy  valiantness  in  tc.  for  tc.  hnlh 

26.  so   doth    tc.  the    hearts  of  the    proud    by 

drunkenness 

27.  tc.ia  as  good  as  life  to  a  mnn  if  It  hi^  moderalelv 

28.  tc.  meaourahly  drunk  and  in  si^ason  hringelli 

29.  but  IC.  drunken  with  excess  makes  hlllerncss 

32.  5.  a  concert  of  music  in  a  banquet  of  tc. 

6.  so  is  the  melody  of  music  with  ploasant  a. 

40.  20.  It.  and  music  rejoice  the  heart 
49.  1.  and  as  music  at  a  banquet  of  tc. 

WING. 

1  Jl/oc.9. 12.asforBncrliiilesho  wasin  the  right  ic. 
WINGS. 

2  F.sd.  1.  30.  gathereth  her  chickens  imder  hcrie. 
11.  I.  an  eagle  which  had  twelve  feathered  tc. 

ff'i.irf.S.ll.airbcing  beaten  with  the  stroke  ofhcric. 
IMac.  15.  20.  and  the  horsemen  set  in  ic. 

wy«.'K. 

F.ccl.  30. 1 1.  give  no  lihertv  and  ic.  not  at  his  folliea 

WINNING. 
1  ^fac.8.  3.  for  the  tc.  the  mines  of  silver  and  gold 


WIS 


(ArOCHTPHA. 


WINNOW. 

Eccl.  5. 9.  IC.  not  with  every  wind  and  go  not  into 

WINTER. 
Wisd.  16.  29.  shall  melt  away  as  the  ic.  hoar-frost 
Dan.  3. 45. 0  ye  ic.  and  summer,  bless  ye  the  Lord 

WIPED. 

Eccl.  12. 11.  thou  shall  be  to  him  as  if  Ihou  badst  ic. 

u  looking-glass,  his  rust  not  allogether  tc.  awu y 

WISDOM. 

1  /i*J.  4.  59.  from  thee  Cometh  tc.  and  thine  is  glory 

60.  blessed  art  thou  who  hast  given  me  tc. 
Esth.  13.  3.  Aman  that  excelled  in  tc.  among  us 
Wisd.  1.  0.  for  tc.  is  loving  spirit  and  will  not  acquit 
3. 11.  whoso  despiseth  tc.  and  nurture  is  miserable 

15.  and  the  root  of  tc.  shall  never  fall  away 
4.  9.  but  tc.  is  the  gray  hair  unto  men 
6.  9.  that  ye  may  learn  to.  and  not  fall  away 
12.  tc.  is  glorious  and  never  fadelh  away 

15.  to  think  therefore  on  her  is  perfection  of  ic. 
20,  21,  22,  23.  tc.  1 7. 7,  12,  15,  16,  22,  24,  28, 30 

tc.  I  8.  5,  17,  21.  70. 1  9.  4,  6,  17,  18.  tc.  1  10 
4,  8,  9,  21.  w.  1  14.  5.  tc.  1 17.  7.  ic. 
Eccl.  1.  I.  all  IC.  Cometh  from  the  Lord,  is  with  bim 

4.  Id.  hath  been  created  before  all  things 

5.  the  word  of  God  most  High  is  the  fountain  ofto 

6.  to  whom  hath  the  root  of  ic.  been  revealed 

14.  to  fear  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  ic. 

16.  to  fear  the  Lord  is  fulness  of  to.  and  fills  men 

19.  IC.  raineth  down  skill  and  knowledge 
24.  and  the  lips  of  many  shall  declare  iiis  tc. 
25.parablesofknowledgearein  the  treasures ofic. 
26.  if  thou  desire  tc.  keep  the  commandments 

4.  11.  tc.  cxalteth  her  children,  and  layeib  hold 

23.  and  hide  not  thy  w.  in  her  beauty 

24.  for  by  speech  w.  shall  be  known  and  learning 

6.  18.  so  shult  Ihou  find  w.  till  thine  old  ago 

22.  for  tc.  is  according  to  her  name,  not  manifest 
37.  he  shall  give  thee  to.  at  lliy  own  deeiro 

7.  5.  boast  not  of  thy  w.  before  the  king 

14.  20.  that  doth  meditate  good  things  in  ic. 
15. 10.  praise  shall  be  uttered  in  w.  and  L.  proR|)er 
18.  for  the  w.  of  the  Lord  is  great,  he  is  mighty 

18.  28.  every  man  of  understanding  knows  to. 

19.  18.  and  ic.  ohtaineth  his  love 

20.  thefearof  the  Lord  is  all  ic.  and  in  all  ic.  is  tba 
performance  of  the  law  and  knowledge  of  him 

22.  the  knowledge  of  wickedness  is  not  tc. 

23.  and  there  is  a  fool  wanting  in  ic. 

24.  is  better  than  one  that  hath  much  w. 

20  30.  w.  that  is  bid  and  treasure  that  is  hoarded 
31.  that  hides  folly,  than  a  man  that  hideth  his  i«. 

2|.  12.  there  is  a  to.  which  multlplieth  bitleiness 
18.  as  is  a  house  destroyed,  so  is  tc.  to  a  fool 

20. 0.  stripes  and  correction  of  tc.  never  out  of  timo 

2 1. 1.  w.  shall  praise  herself  and  shall  glory  in  midfit 

25.  he  filleth  all  things  with  his  tc.  as  Phisoa 
.'{4.  but  laboured  for  all  them  that  seek  w. 

25.  .5.  O  how  comely  is  the  to.  of  old  men  I 

in.  O  how  great  is  he  that  findoth  tc' 
27.  11.  the  discourse  of  a  godly  man  is  with  ». 

32.  4.  and  shew  not  forth  w.  out  of  time 

31. 8,  9.  to.  I  37.  20,  21.  w.  \  .38,  24,  2.").  to.  |  39.  1, 
10.  70.  I  40.  20.  tc.  I  41.  14.  w.  I  43.  33.  to. 
I  44.  15.  IC.  I  50.  27,  29.  ic.  |  51. 13, 17.  tc. 
Bar.  3.  9.  hear,  Israel,  give  car  to  understand  a. 
14   h'lirn  where  is  tc.  where  is  strength 
23.  the  Agnrenes  that  seek  tc.  on  earth  none  of 
these  have  known  the  way  of  ic.  or  her  paths 
WISE. 
Wisd.  4.  17.  for  they  shall  see  the  end  of  the  ic. 
6.24.  the  multitude  of  the  tc.  is  the  welfare  of  the 
world,  and  a  xr.  king  the  upholdiiigoflbe  people 
Ecrl.  1.  6.  who  halh  known  her  ic.  counsels? 

8.  there  is  one  ir.  and  greatly  to  he  feared 
3.  29.  an  attentive  car  is  the  desire  ofa  tc.  man 
6.  34.  and  cleave  unto  him  that  is  tc. 
7.19.forego  not  a  ic.good  woman.grace  above  gidd 
8.8.  despise  not  I  ho  discourse  of  the  ir.bul  acquaint 
O.I4.gnessnt  thynelghhoiirand  consult  withthe  tc. 

15.  let  thy  tiilk  he  » ilh  the  tc.and  communication 
in.  1.  n  IC.  judge  will  instruct  his  people 

18.  27.  a  7c.  man  will  finr  in  every  thing 
29.  became  also  tc.  Ihemsi'lves,  and  poured  forth 

21.  12.  he  that  is  not  ir.  will  not  be  lau<;ht 
15.  if  a  skilful  man  hear  a  tc.  word,  will  commend 
Iti.  hut  g(nce  shall  he  found  in  the  lips  of  the  lo 

26.  hut  the  mouth  of  the  tc.  is  in  their  heart 
^6.26.  her  husbiuid,  she  shall  be  judged  tc.  ufall 

33.  0.  a  IC.  man  hali'lh  not  the  law 

37.  19,  22.  to.  1  38.  4,  21,  31.  ic.  I  47.  12,  14.  to 

WISELY. 
Eccl.  13.22.  he  spate  ic.  and  could  have  no  plac« 

WISE  man. 
Fr(-/.2I,17. thef  inquire  at  thomoulhnfihe  tc.  itiiiii 

20.  but  a  tc.  man  d.iih  scarce  smile  n  little 

21.  H  IC.  man  will  he  grieved  with  the  ilisgiace 
37.  2:1.  a  ic.  7;i«m  instruclelh  his  people 

21.  n  7r.  man  shall  he  filled  with  blessing 
26.  M  it.  man  shall  inherit  glory  among  his  people 
40. 29.  a  IT.  man  wcll-nutlutud  will  beware tliorcoi 


I' 


r«cRYrHA.]         WON 

WISEST. 

1  Ead.  3.  9.  pliall  jinlgo  tliiit  liis  sentence  i*  tlic  to. 
4.  42.  will  una  it  ll»;e  bccuiisu  thou  art  found  to. 

vvisnKTn. 

2  Mac.  9. 19.  to.  much  joy,  lioaltli  and  prosperity 

WrrCIICKAKTS. 
If  («<^.  13.4.lhou  hatcd^<t  for  duin^  odious  worksofio. 

WITH  DRAW. 
Eccl.  i3.9.  if  be  invited  of  a  mighty  man,  w.  thyself 

WITHDRKW. 
Tob.  1. 19.  to  be  put  to  death,  I  m.  myself  for  fear 

WITHEKEI). 
H'isd.  2.  8.  crown  with  roue  buds  before  they  be  lo. 

WITHHELD. 
Eccl.  46. 7.  and  »o.  the  people  from  sin  and  appeased 

WITHSTAND. 
Wisd.  11.  21.  who  may  w.  the  power  of  thy  arm7 
12. 12.  who  shall  say,  what  hast  thou  done?  or  who 
shall  tr.  thy  judgment,  or  shall  accuse  thee? 
Bar.  6.  56.  they  cannot  w.  any  king  or  enemies 
1  J\tac,'5.  40.  we  shall  not  he  able  to  a.  him 

WITHSTOOD. 
tVisd.  10. 16.  ir-dreadlul  kings  in  wonders  and  signs 
F.ccl.  46.  7.  in  that  ihey  w.  the  congregation 
8  Mac.  8.  5.  he  could  not  be  w.  by  the  heathen 

WITNESS. 

.r«</.7.38.we  take  tow. against  you  heaven  and  earth 

/f'i«rf.  1.6.  for  God  is  to.  of  his  reins,  and  a  beholder 

HusMX.  if  thou  wilt  not,we  will  bear  to. against  thee 

4:{.  knowe.st  they  have  borne  false  to.  against  me 

49.  for  they  iiave  borne  false  to.  against  her 

61.  for  Daniel  Itad  convicted  them  of  false  to. 

1  Mac.  2.  56.  Caleb  for  bearing  to.  before  congregat. 

WITS. 
£ccr  31.20.  horiseth  earlv,  and  his  w.  are  with  him 

WITTY. 
Jiid.  11. 23.  thou  art  beautiful  and  to.  in  thy  words 
H'isd.S.  19.  forlwasa  to. child,  and  had  good  spirit 

WIVES. 
lKsd.5. 1.  to  go  up  with  their  to.  sons  and  daughters 
9.  12.  let  them  that  have  strange  w.  come  at  time 
17.  cause  that  held  strange  to.  was  br<)U;.'ht  to  end 
Tob.  4.  12.  Ihey  all  married  w.  of  their  kindred 
Jud.  4.  12.  he  would  not  give  their  m.  for  a  sjioil 
7.  27.  nor  our  w.  nor  our  children  to  die 
Est/i.  13.6.  shall  wiih  w.  and  chddren  be  dcstioyed 
fVisd.  3. 12.  their  to.  are  foolish  and  children  wicked 

WOE. 
Eccl.  2. 12.  to.  be  to  fearful  hearts,  and  faint  hands 

41.  8.  to.  be  to  you  ungodly  who  have  forsaken  law 
1  Mac.  2.  7.  to.  is  me,  wherefore  was  I  born  to  see 

WOLF. 

Eecl.13. 17.  what  fellowship  hath  the  to.  with  lamb? 

WO.MAN. 

1  Esd.4. 18.  do  'hey  not  love  a  to.  who  is  comely? 
9.  40.  to  the  whole  multitude  from  man  lo  to. 

Tob.  4.  12.  take  not  a  strange  jc.  to  wife  who  is  not 
£cci.7.19.forcg'i  not  wisegood  to.  grace  above  gold 

26.  but  give  not  thyself  over  lo  a  light  w. 

9.  2.  give  not  thy  soul  to  a  to.  to  set  her  foot  on 
4.  use  not  the  company  of  a  w.  that  is  a  singer 
8.  turn  thy  eye  from  beautiful  w.  for  many  have 

lieeii  ileceived  by  the  beauty  of  a  to. 

10.  18.  nor  anger  for  tliem  that  nre  born  of  a  w. 
19.  II.  a  fool  travails  as  to.  in  hibour  of  a  child 

25.  13.  any  wickedness  but  the  wickedness  of  a  w. 

26.  2,  6,  8,  9,  14,  15,  22,  23,  2f,  25,  26, 27.  lo.  1 36. 

21,  22.  IB.  I  42.  14.  a  to.  vybo  brings  shame 
Sue.  46.  I  am  clear  from  the  blood  of  this  ic. 

WOMANISH. 
2^ac.  7.  21.  stirring  un  her  w.  thoughts,  she  said 

WOMR. 
ToA.4  4.  she  saw  dnngerswhen  thou  wast  in  her  to. 
Eccl. 1. 14.it  was  created  with  the  faithful  in  the  to. 
40.  1.  from  the  day  they  go  out  of  their  mother's  to. 
49.  7.  wns  a  prophet,  sanctified  in  his  mother's  eo. 
.50.  22.  who  exalleth  our  days  from  the  to. 
S  ^lfae.7.22. 1  cannot  tell  how  you  came  into  my  to. 

27.  that  bare  thee  nine  months  in  my  to. 

WOMEN. 
Tob.%  11.  my  wife  Anna  did  lake  to.  works  to  do 
Eccl.  19.2.  wine  and  to   will  make  men  fall  away 
28. 15.  backbiting  tongue  halb  cast  out  virtuous  to. 

42.  12.  anil  sit  not  in  the  midst  of  to. 
13.  and  from  to.  cometh  wickedness 

47.  19.  thou  didst  bow  down  thy  loins  to  to. 

WONDERFUL. 
ToJ.12.22.  confessed  the  great  and  to. works  ofGod 
Jud.  11.  8.  reported  thou  art  to.  in  feats  of  war 
16.  13.  Lord  is  w.  in  strength  and  invincible 
Est/i.)rt.  H.  for  to.  art  thou.  Lord,  and  full  ofgrnce 
fVhd.  19.  5.  that  thy  people  might  pass  a  to.  way 
F^cl.  11.  4.  for  the  works  of  the  Lord  are  i*. 
31.  9.  to.  things  hath  he  done  among  his  pooplo 
J6  8.  and  let  them  declare  thy  to.  works 
39.  20.  and  there  is  nothing  to.  before  him 

2  Mac.  15.  13.  was  of  n  id.  and  excellent  majesty 

WONDERFULLY. 
.Tud.  14.  19.  and  their  minds  were  to.  troubled 
Eccl.  43. 8.  the  moon  increasing  w.  in  her  changing 
t<S5 


WOR 

WONDERS. 

fVisd.  8.  9.  she  foreseelh  signs  and  to.  and  events 
10. 16.  she  withstood  dreadful  kings  in  to. and  signs 
19.  8.  seeing  thy  marvellous  Rlrange  to. 
Eccl.  45. 3.  by  his  words  he  caused  the  to.  to  erase 

19.  he  did  lo.  upon  them  to  consume  tnein 
48.  14.  W  id  to.  in  his  life  and  at  hfk  deoth 
2  Mac.  fS.  21.  called  on  the  Lord  that  wurketh  to. 

WONDERED. 
.fud.  10.  19.  they  to.  at  her  beauty  and  admired 

WONDROUS. 
Eccl.  18.  6.  as  for  the  w.  works  of  the  Lord,  there 
may  nothing  be  taken  from  thorn,  nor  put  to  them 
30.  0.  that  they  may  set  forth  thy  to.  deeds 
43.  2.5.  for  therein  be  strange  and  to.  works 
48.4. 0  F/lias,  thou  wast  liunuured  in  thy  to.  works 
50.  22.  bless  ye  God,  who  only  doeth  to.  things 

WONT. 
Eccl.  37.  14.  a  man's  mind  is  to.  to  tell  him  more 

WOOD. 
1  F.sd.  6.  25.  one  row  of  new  to.  of  that  country 
IVisd.  10.  4.  in  a  piece  of  to.  of  small  value 

13.  13.  being  a  crooked  piece  of  to.  full  of  knots 

14.  1.  calleth  upon  a  piece  of  to.  more  rotten 

5.  men  commit  their  lives  to  a  small  piece  of  to. 
7.  blessed  is  the  to.whereby  righteousness  cometh 
Eccl.  8.  3.  and  heap  not  w.  upon  his  fire 
liar.  6.  3(<.  set  meat  before  the  gods  of  gold  and  w. 
39.  their  gods  of  to.  which  arc  overlaid  with  gold 
50.  for  seeing  they  be  but  of  to.  and  overlaid 
1  Mac.  6.  37.  there  were  strong  towers  of  to. 
9.  45.  and  that  side,  the  marish  likewise  and  to. 
2, Vac.l.  21.  command,  the  priests  to  sprinkle  the  to. 

WORD. 
.Tiid.  5.  5.  let  my  lord  now  hear  a  w.  from  mouth 
IVisd.  1.  11.  no  w.  so  secret  shall  go  for  nought 
16.  26.  thy  to.  preserveth  them  that  trust  in  ihee 
18.  15.  thy  almighty  w.  leaped  down  from  heaven 
Eccl.  1.5.  the  to.  of  God  is  the  fountain  of  wisdom 
2.15.  they  that  fear  the  Lord  will  not  disobey  his  to. 
5.  10.  be  Btedfast,  and  let  thy  to.  be  the  same 
16.  28.  and  they  shall  never  disobey  his  w. 

18.  10.  so  is  a  ID.  better  than  a  gift,  17. 

19.  10,  n,  12.  to.  I  21.  15.  w.  I  23.  12,  13.  to.  |  29. 

3.  to.  I  39.  31.  to.  1  41.  IG.  to.  ( 43.  26.  to.  | 
48.  1,  13.  no  to.  could  overcome  him 
Bnr.  2. 1.  therefore  the  Lord  hath  made  good  his  to. 

5.  5.  gathered  from  west  to  east  by  w.  of  Holy  One 

1  Mac.  2.  .55.  Jesus  for  fulfilling  the  to.  made  a  judge 
•2  Mac.  10. 13.  accused  and  called  traitor  at  every  w. 

WORDS. 
Eslk.  15.  8.  the  king  comforted  her  with  loving  to. 
16. 4.  lifted  up  with  the  glorious  to.  of  lewd  perscms 
Wisd.  1.  6.  will  not  acquit  a  blasphemer  of  his  w 

9.  the  sound  of  his  w.  shall  come  to  the  Lord 
2.  17.  let  us  see  if  his  w.  be  true,  and  let  us  prove 

6.  25.  receive  therefore  instruction  through  my  w. 
Eccl.  1.  24.  he  will  hide  his  to.  for  a  time 

13.  II.  not  equal  in  talk,  believe  not  bis  many  to. 

12.  but  cruelly  he  will  lay  up  thy  to. 

20.  8.  he  that  useth  many  to.  shall  be  abhorred 

13.  a  wise  man  by  his  w.  makes  himself  beloved 

21.  17.  they  shall  ponder  his  to.  in  their  heart 
2.5.  the  w.  of  such  as  have  understaiwling 

23.  15.  the  man  accustomed  to  opprobiious  lo. 
25.  20.  so  a  wife  full  of  to.  to  a  quiet  man 
32.  4,  9.  IP.  I  37.  20.  to.  |  30.  17.  to.  I  42.  15.  to.  | 
45.  3.  to.  I  51.  5.  to.  delivered  from  lying  lo. 

2  Mac.  7.  30.  while  she  was  yet  speaking  these  to. 

WORK. 

1  Esd.  9.  11.  this  is  not  a  to.  of  a  day  or  two 

fftVi/.  8. 6.  and  if  prudence  to.  who  of  all  that  are 

13. 10.  good  for  nothing,theto.  o!  an  ancient  hand 

12.afler  spending  the  refuse  of  his  lo.to  dress  meal 

14.  20.  multitude  alliircid  by  the  grace  of  his  w. 
Eccl.  7.  15.  hate  not  laborious  w.  nor  husbandry 

9.  17.  forlhe  artificer,  the  V!.  shall  be  commended 
11.20.  be  conversant  therein  and  wax  old  in  thy  to. 
14.  19.  every  to.  rotteth  and  consurneth  away 
1.5.  19.  and  he  knoweth  every  to.  of  man 
16.  14.  make  way  for  every  to.  of  mercy 
27.  10.  so  sin  for  them  ihat  to.  iniquity 

32.  2.3.  in  every  good  to.  trust  thine  own  soul 

33.  24.  bread,  correction,  and  w.  for  a  fervant 
28.  set  him  to  w.  as  is  fit  for  him,  put  fetters 

37.  11.  nor  with  a  hireling  of  finishing  lo. 

38.  27,  28,  29,  31,  34.  to.  |  42.  16.  k.  J  43.  2.  a.  | 

45.  10,  11,  12.  (o.  I  51.30.  10. 
Bar.  fi.  51.  that  there  is  no  u>.  of  God  in  them 
I  Mac.  2.  47.  and  the  w.  prospered  in  their  hand 

WORKS. 
1  F.sd.  6.  10.  Ihesc  to.  arc  done  with  great  spceil 
8.86.  isdonetonsfor  our  wicked  to.  and  great  sins 
Tob.  3.  2.  O  Lord,  thou  art  just  in  all  thy  to. 

11.  let  all  thy  to.  praise  thee  for  ever 
12.  6.  himourabiy  to  shew  forth  the  to.  of  God 
JVi.td.  1.  12.  destruction,  with  the  to.  of  your  hands 

2.  4.  no  man  shall  have  our  to.  in  remeiidirance 

3.  11.  their  hope  vain,  and  their  in.  unprofitable 
6. 3.  (hall  try  your  to.  aod  search  out  your  counsels 


WOR 

lf(>(2.8.18.and  in  to.  of  her  hands  arc  infinite  richet 
9.  U,  12.  to.  I  1 1.  1.  to.  I  12.  4,  I'.l.  to.  I  13.  1,7, 10. 
to.  I  14.  5.  the  to.  of  wisdom  chould  be  idle 
Keel.  5.  3.  say  not,  who  shalicoiiirul  me  for  my  w.f 
11.  4  10.  Wonderful,  his  to.  among  men  are  hidden 
21.  marvel  not  at  the  lo.of  sinners,  but  trust  In  Ld 
Iti.  1.5.  that  his  powerful  to.  might  bo  known 

21.  fur  the  moat  part  of  his  to.  are  hid 

22.  who  can  declare  the  to.  of  his  justice? 

27.  he  garnished  his  to.  for  ever,  they  neither  la- 
bour, nor  aie  weary,  nor  cease  troin  their  ir. 
17. 9.  that  they  might  declare  his  to.  with  uiidersl. 
19.  all  their  to.  are  as  the  sun  before  him 
31.  22.  in  all  thy  to.  be  quick,  so  no  sickness  come 
33.22.  ill  all  thy  to.keep  to  thyself  the  pre-em'.nence 
35.  19.  to  to.  of  men  according  to  tlieir  devices 
:I8.  6.  he  might  be  honoured  in  his  marvellous  to. 
8.  of  his  w.  there  is  no  end,  from  him  is  peace 
39.  lb,  19.  to.  I  42. 15, 21, 22.  to.  |  43.  4, 28,  32.  lo. 
I  47.  8.  in  bis  lo.  he  praised  the  Holy  One 
Bar.3. 18.  whose  to.  areunsearchablejare  vanished 

6.  51.  they  are  no  gods,  but  the  to.  ut  men's  hands 
/Jan.  3.  35.  O  all  ye  w.  of  the  Ld.  bless  ye  the  Lord 

1  Mac.  4.  51.  finished  all  the  w.  they  begun  to  make 

9.  54.  he  pulled  down  the  w.  of  the  |>roph.c;«  . 

10.  44.  for  the  repairing  the  to.  of  the  sanctuary 
14.  42.  llii'lr  captain,  to  set  them  over  their  to. 

2  jtfae.  3.  36.  lie  testified  Ihe  w.  of  the  great  God 

WORKER. 
F.sth.  16. 18.  for  he  that  was  the  to.  of  these  things 
Eccl.  14.  19.  and  the  to.  thereof  shall  go  withal 
2  Mac.  4. 1.  as  if  he  had  been  the  to.  of  these  evils 

WORKERS. 
JVuid.  15. 9.  cndeavoureih  to  do  like  the  le.  in  brass 

1  Mac.  3. 6.  all  the  to.  of  iniipiity  were  troubled 

WORKE'ril. 
IFis(f.8.5.wliat  is  richer  than  wisdom  that  to. things? 
F.ccl.  7.  20.  whereas  thy  servant  to.  truly 
27.  22.  he  that  wiuketh  his  eyes,  to.  evil 
27.  he  that  w.  mischief,  it  sliall  fall  on  him 

2  Mac.  15.  21.  called  on  the  Lord  that  w.  wonder* 

WORKING. 
Esth.  13.  S.  this  people  lo.all  the  mischief  they  can 

WORKMAN. 
Wisd.  8.  6.  who  is  a  more  cunning  to.  than  shel 
14-  2.  and  the  w.  built  it  by  his  skill 
F.ccl.  45.  U.  the  work  of  the  cunning  to.  stones 
fiar.6.8.  as  for  their  tongue,  it  is  poli^hed  by  the  lO. 
45.  can  be  nothing  el^e  than  w.  will  hdve  Ihcm  be 
WORKMANSHIP. 
IVisd.'.  16.  all  wisdom  also  and  knowledge  of  10. 

WORK-AIASTER. 
F.ccl.  38.  27.  every  w.  that  laboureth  night  and  day 

WORLD. 

2  Esd.  2.  34.  he  is  nigh  that  shall  come  in  end  of  to. 

3.  9.  broughlest  flood  on  those  that  dwelt  in  the  lo. 

4.24.  we  pass  away  out  of  the  w.  as  grasshoppers 

27.  lor  this  to.  is  full  of  unrighteousness 
5.  24.  of  all  hinds  of  the  w.  hast  chosen  one  pit 
14.  11.  for  the  w.  is  divided  into  twelve  parts 
IVisd.\.M.  thegenerationsof  ihe  to.  were  healthfu 
2.24.  through  envyof devil  camedeaih  into  th^to. 
6.24.  the  miillitudeof  wise  is  the  welfare  of  the  to. 

7.  17.  namely,  to  know  how  the  w.  was  made 

10.  1.  preBcrv(;d  the  first-formed  father  of  the  to. 

8.  he  left  behind  them  to  tlio  to.  a  memorial 

11.  22.  the  w.  before  thee  is  as  a  little  grain 

13.  2.  to  be  the  gods  which  govern  the  to. 

9.  to  know  so  much  that  they  could  aim  at  the  to. 

14.  14.  for  by  vain-glory  they  entered  into  the  w. 

21.  this  was  an  occasion  lo  deceive  the  to. 

18.  24.  fiir  in  the  long  garment  was  the  whole  to. 
F.crl.  18.  3.  who  goveriieth  the  to.  willi  the  pain; 

24.9.  he  created  me  from  beginning  before  the  to. 

38.34.  but  they  wilt  maintain  the  state  of  the  lo. 

42.  18.  and  iie  helioldeth  the  si^ns  of  the  IB 
/?ar.6.62.wheiiGod  commands  clouds  t.i  go  over  to. 
Dnn.  3.  9.  and  lo  Ihe  must  wicked  in  ail  the  7b. 
14.  be  kept  uiiditr  this  day  in  all  xb.  liir  our  sins 

22.  thou  art  Lord,  glorious  over  the  whole  xb. 

2  Mac.  2.  22.  the  temple  renowned  all  the  to.  over 

3.  12.  the  temple  honoured  over  all  th<!  to. 

7. 23.  doubtless  the  Creator  of  the  to.  who  fiirmed 

9. 17.  and  go  through  all  lire  to.  that  was  inhabited 

WORMS. 

KofM0.11.slialIinheritcr<  epingthings,bensts&.  to. 

19.  3.  moths  and  to.  shall  have  him  to  licrilage 
1  Mac.  2.  62.  for  his  glory  shall  he  dung  nnd  vs. 
2.Wac.9.9.to.ro8eoutof  thi.  body  of  til  is  wicked  msn 

WORN. 
F.ccl.W.^.  one  never  thonjht  of,  hath  w.  the  crown 

WORSE. 
If-'isd.  15. 18.  being  com[iared,  some  to.  thtr  otheri 
F.ccl.  19.  7.  thou  shall  fire  never  the  to. 
22   II.  the  life  of  the  fo(d  is  it.  than  death 
.39.  34.  a  man  cannot  say,  this  is  to.  than  that 
2.1fir.  7..39.  the  king  handled  lii-n  to.  than  Ihe  rest 
13.  9.  to  do  far  to.  to  .Tews  than  had  bsen  don«» 

WORSHIP. 
Tub.  5. 13.  as  wc  went  together  to  Jerusalem  to  to 


WRE 

'yi3.8.that  all  nation?  should  m.  NabuchoJonosor 
3. 18.  nor  people  which  to.  gods  made  with  hands 
Esth.  13.  14.  nor  will  I  w.  any  but  ihoe,  O  God 
Wind.  15.  tJ.  Ihey  lliul  w.  llicni,  are  lovera  ol'evil 
Eccl.  4U.  3.  he  c-stiiblisltLil  the  to.  of  God 

50.17.  the)ieople  tell  on  their  luces  to  to.  their  Lord 
21   they  bowed  down  to  io.  the  second  time 

Bar.  G.  (i.  but  say  ye,  O  Lord,  we  must  v>.  thee 
3SJ.  if  they  thai  w.  Ihem  shall  be  confounded 

Dan.  3. 1(1.  become  u  reproach  lo  thcin  that  w.  Ihce 
68.  O  all  ye  that  w.  the  Lord,  praise  liim 

Bel  4.  the  king  said,  why  dost  thou  not  to.  Bel  1 

5.  Daniel  said,  because  1  ni.iy  not  w.  idols  nxide 

SJ5.  Daniel  said,  I  will  w.  tlie  Lord  my  Ood 

27.  Daniel  said,  lo,  those  are  the  gods  you  w. 

VVt)K^llll'i'LU. 

^ud.5.8.and  le.  the  God  ofhcaveii  whom  they  knew 

IVisd.  11.  15.  Ihey  w.  sirpenls  void  of  reason 

14.  16.  ima"e»  were  u).  by  the  command  of  kinffs 

15. 18.  they  lO.  those  beasts  that  are  most  hateful 
Bel  4.  the  kini;  v-  it,  but  Daniel  v>.  his  own  God 

"VVOKSIIIITETH. 
IVisd.  15.  17.  he  is  better  than  the  things  he  w. 

WOKSHiri'ING. 
Witd.  14.  27.  for  the  w.  of  idols  not  to  be  named 

WORTH. 
fVisd.  2.  11.  feeble  is  found  to  be  nothing  ib. 
.E(;c/.26.14.nothin5Somucli  w.as  a  mind  instructed 
Bar.  6. 17.  a  vessel  is  nolhini;  tc.  wlien  it  is  broken 
26.  they  declare  to  men  that  they  be  nothing  w. 
WORTH  V. 
W^itd.  1.  16.  they  are  w.  to  lake  part  with  it 
3. 5.  God  proved  thL'ni,  found  lliein  w.  for  himself 

6.  16.  she  g'>elh,  seeking  such  as  are  w.  of  her 

9.  12.  to.  1  Vi.  7.  w.  I  15.  6.  ic.  |  16.  9.  w.  \  17.  8.  w. 

I  18.  4.  were  uj.  lo  be  deprived  of  light 
EceL  8.  5.  remeinber  we  are  all  w.  of  punishment 
11.  31.  in  things  w.  praise,  will  lay  blame  on  thee 
38.17. weep  bitterly  and  use  lamentation  as  he  is  w. 

1  Mac.  16. 23.  his  wars  and  w.  deeds  which  he  did 
iJUac.4.  25.  bringing  nothing  70.  the  high  priesth. 

7.  20.  the  mother  was  io.  of  honourable  memory 

15.  11.  he  told  them  a  dream,  w.  to  be  believed 
21.  he  giveth  victory  to  such  as  are  w. 

WOKTllILV. 
Eccl.  16. 20.  no  heart  can  think  on  these  things  to. 

WOVKN. 
Jud.  10.21.  Olofernes'  bed  w.  with  purple  and  gold 

WOULD. 
Wisd.  7. 15.  God  hath  granted  me  to  speak  as  I  zo. 

WOULDKST. 
iMac.  7.  2.  what  10.  thou  ask  or  learn  of  us? 

WOUM). 
fU:cl.  22. 22.  except  for  piide,  or  a  treacherous  w. 
27.  21.  as  for  a  w.  it  may  be  bound  up 

2  Jtfoc.  15. 16.  with  which  thou  slialt  10.  adversaries 

WOUNDKD. 
Jud.  Ifi.  12.  and  to.  them  as  fugitives'  children 
£cc/.  25. 23.  a  wicked  woman  inaketh  a  jo.  heart 
SJIfac.  3.  16.  it  would  have  to.  his  heart 
12.22.  and  ic.  with  iho  points  of  their  own  swords 
WOUNDS. 
Eccl.  27.  25.  a  deceitful  stroke  shall  make  w. 
30. 7.  makethtoo  much  of  his  son  shall  bind  his  10. 
31.30.  it  diminishctli  strength,  and  makoth  w. 

WUAIM'KD. 
Feci.  21.  9.  the  wicked  is  like  two  10.  together 
S^/ac.  5.  18.  had  thev  not  been  to.  in  many  sins   , 

WRATH. 
Tob.  1.  18.  Sennacherib  in  his  ir.  killt^d  many 
Jud.  2.  7.  I  will  go  forth  in  iny  to.  against  them 
Wind.  5.22.  and  hailrttones  full  of  to.  shall  be  cast 

10.  10.  the  rightenns  (led  fniin  his  brother's  w. 

11.  9.  to.  j  18.  21,  2:1,  2.';.  10. 1  10.  1.  to.  on  them 
Eccl.'.  II).  rememlier  I  hut  to.  will  not  tarry  long 

10.  II.  for  mercy  and  to.  are  wilh  him 
IB.  3-1.  think  on  the  to.  that  shall  be  ai  the  end 
25.  15.  there  is  no  w.  above  the  w.  of  an  enemy 
27.  30.  malice  and  to.  even  these  are  abominations 
2K.  10.  and  a«  a  man's  strength  is,  so  is  lii.''  to. 
30.24.  envy  nnd  to. shorten  the  life,  and  carefulness 
3<).  23.  so  shall  the  heathen  inherit  his  to. 

2S.  appease  the  10.  of  him  that  made  them 
40.  5.  IP.  and  envy,  trouble  nnd  uni|uititness 
44.  17.  Noah  was  found  righteous  in  tiitie  of  to. 
4.'>.  18.  the  congregation  of  ('ore  with  fury  and  to. 
47.  20.  thou  broiighlcst  to.  on  thy  children 
Bar.  I.  13.  nnd  hia  to   i*  not  tnmc^d  frnin  us 
2.  13.  let  thy  to.  turn  from  u.j,  v/r  are  but  few 
20.  for  thou  hast  sent  out  thy  to.  upon  ut 
4.9.  when  she  saw  the  ic.ofGod  coining  upon  you 
1  Mac.  3.  8.  and  turning  away  to.  from  (siacl 
i  Mac.B.a.  the  lo.oflhe  Lord  was  turned  lo  mercy 

WRATHFUL. 
EccHy  19.  in  his  10.  indignation  were  con.iumod 

WRRSTLKD. 

.Eccl.  51.19.  my  soul  ha'li  >n.  with  her,  1  was  exact 

WRF/rCfl. 

3  Jflac.  4. 13.  nrofuncnras  of  Jason  that  ungodly  ic 

656 


YES 

2  Mac.  13. 3  then  the  most  ungracious  to.demanded 

WRETCHES. 
2  Jl/ac. 12.23.  was  earnest  in  killing  those  wicked  to. 

WRITE. 

Tob.l.li.  and  did  to.  in  an  instrument  of  covenants 
£ar.  2.28. .tliou  didst  command  him  to  to.  thy  law 

WRITHE. 

Eccl.  27.  23.  but  at  the  last  ho  will  to.  his  mouth 

WRITING. 

1  Esd.  2. 2.  through  all  his  kingdom,  and  also  by  to 
6.  12.  we  might  give  knowledge  to  thee  by  to.  we 

required  the  names  in  10.  of  the  princijial  men 
Rsth.  13.6.  that  are  signified  into,  to  you  by  Amai 
Eccl.  42.  7.  and  put  all  in  v).  that  thou  givest  out 
45.  11.  willi  a  w.  engraved  for  a  memorial 

2  jl/ac.  2.  4.  it  was  also  contained  in  the  same  w, 

WRITINGS. 

1  Fsd.  3. 13.  took  their  to.  and  delivered  them  to  him 
15.  and  the  w-  were  read  before  them 

2  jVac.3.13.  the  same  things  were  reported  in  the  to. 

WRITTEN. 
1  Esd.  1.33.  these  things  are  to.  in  the  book  of  stories 

2.  2i.  thou  shall  find  in  the  chronicles  what  is  w. 
8. 64.  the  weight  of  lliem  was  w.  that  same  hour 

Eccl.  .50.  27.  Jesus  the  son  of  Siracli  w.  in  this  book 
1  Mac.  9.  22.  his  acts  and  greatness,  lliey  are  not  to. 

14.  23.  we  have  w.  a  copy  tliereof  to  Simon 

15.  15.  letters  wherein  were  u>.  these  things 

WRONG. 
Eccl.  4.  19.  but  if  he  go  w.  she  will  forsake  liim 
10.6.  bear  not  hatred  to  thy  neighbour  for  every  to. 
13.  3.  the  rich  man  hath  done  w.  yet  threalenelh 
21.  4.  to  terrify  and  do  to.  will  waste  riches 

1  Mac.  7.  14.  for,  said  they,  he  will  do  us  no  to. 

2  Mac.  1. 28.  punish  them  that  wilh  pride  do  us  to. 

3.  12.  was  impossible  such  w.  should  be  done  Ihem 
10.  12.  for  the  to.  that  had  been  done  to  them 

WRONGFULLY. 

1  Mac.  2.  37.  testily  thai  you  put  us  to  death  w. 

15.  33.  which  our  enemies  had  to.  in  possession 

2j>/ac.  8. 16.  the  heathen  whocame  to.againstthem 

WROTE. 

1  Esd.  4. 47.  and  to.  letters  for  him  to  the  treasurers 

49.  he  to.  for  all  the  Jews  that  went  to  Jewry 

6.  17.  Cyrus  the  king  w.  to  build  up  this  house 

Tub.  13.  1.  then  Tobil  w.  a  prayer  of  rejoicing 

./ltd.  4.6.  Joacim  to.  lo  them  that  dwell  in  Bethulia 

1  Mac.  10.6.5.  and  10.  him  among  his  chief  friends 

13.  H5.  to  him  king  Demetrius  to.  after  this  manner 

14. 18.  they  w.  to  him  in  tiible.f  of  brass  lo  renew 

WROTH. 

Bel  8.  so  the  king  was  w.  and  called  for  his  priests 

WROUGHT. 
7'o6.4.14.the  wages  of  any  man  that  hath  to. for  thee 
Jud.  ^.5.  for  thou  hast  to.  not  only  those  things 
Eslh.  10.  9.  God  bath  to.  signs  and  groat  wonders 
IVisd.  3.  14.  who  with  his  hands  to.  no  iniquity 
13.  11.  a  carpenter  that  hath  10.  it  handsomely 
Eccl.  44. 2.  the  Lord  hath  to.  great  glory  by  thoni 
Bar.  3.  18.  for  they  to.  in  silver  and  were  careful 
1  Mac.  9.  23.  there  rose  up  all  such  as  to.  iniquity 


Y. 


YEAR. 

1  E«d.5.57.in  second  y.  after  they  come  to  Jewry 
Eccl. 33.7.  light  of  eveiy  day  of  the  y.  is  of  the  sun 
37.  11.  nor  with  a  hireling  for  a  y.  of  finishing 
.50. 8.  as  the  flower  of  roses  in  the  spring  of  the  y. 
Su.-i.  5.  the  same  y.  were  appointed  two  ancients 

1  Mac.  3.  28.  and  gave  his  soldiers  pay  for  a  y. 
37.  the  king  departed  from  Anlioch  the  147th  y. 

6.49.  no  victuals,  it  being  a  y.  of  rest  to  the  land 

8.  10.  their  government  to  one  man  every  y. 

9.  54.  in  the  153d  y.  in  the  second  month 

10.  40.  I  give  every  y.  15,000  shekels  of  silver 
42.  silver  they  took  out  of  the  accounis  y.  by  y. 

11.  J9.  Demetrius  reigin^d  in  the  167lh  y. 

13.  42.  in  the  first  y.  of  Simon  the  highprieat 
51.  entered  into  it  in  171st  ij.  with  thanksgiving 
.')2.  that  that  day  be  kept  every  y.  with  gladness 

14.27.  being  Iho  third  y.  of  Simon  ihe  high-priest 

2  ./lfac.10.8.  ihalovorv  >/.  those  days  shuuld  bekeiit 

Years. 

1  Esd.Q.  14.  ihis  house,  it  was  liiiildedmany  y.  ago 

H'isd.  4.  8.  nor  that  is  measured  by  niiniber  of  y. 

16.  Iho  many  y.  and  old  age  of  the  unrighleous 

Eccl.  26. 2.  ho  shall  fulfil  the  y.  of  his  life  in  peace 

1  Mac.  1.  7.  Alexander  reigned  twelve  y.  and  died 
9.  eo  dill  their  sons  after  them  many  y. 

2  Mac.  1.  20.  after  many  y.  when  it  pleased  God 
4.  40.  a  man  far  gone  in  y.  and  no  L'sa  111  folly 
6.  2.3.  HS  bociimo  the  excellency  of  his  ancient  y. 
7.27.  gave  thoo  auck  three  r^  and  iiourisLod  thee 

YEARLY. 
1  Mac.  7.  49.  they  ordained  to  keep  y.  this  day 
11.  34.  tho  payments  tlin  king  received  of  Ihom  y. 

YESTERDAY. 
Eccl.  33.  22.  y.  for  ma,  and  to-day  for  tlioo 

FIJfJS- 


ZOR  [Apocrtph* 

YIELD. 

./ltd.  2.  10.  ifthey  will  y.  themselvea  to  tho« 
1  Mac   10.  32.  I  I/,  up  my  authority  over  it 
iMac.  S.H.  Wfote  toy.  more  aid  to  the  king's  affain 
9.27. will  favourablyi.  graciously  y.to your  desirei 

YOKE. 
J?cc/.  28. 20.  for  they,  thereof  is  y.  of  iron  and  bands 
33.  26.  a  y.  and  a  uollar  do  bow  the  neck 
51.  26.  put  your  neck  under  the  y.  let  your  soul 
I  Mac.  8. 18.  that  Ihey  would  take  the  y.  from  Uiem 

13.  41.  the  y.  of  the  heathen  was  taken  away 

YOUNG. 

1  Esd.  1.  53.  who  slew  their  y.  men  wilh  the  sword 

3.  4.  the  three  y.  men  thai  were  of  the  guard 

4.  .'>8.  now  when  this  y.  man  was  gone  forth 

8.  50.  I  vowed  a  laslto  the  y.  men  before  our  Lord 

2  £.«/.!.  28.  have  prayed  you  as  a  nurse  her y.  babes 
7'u4.1.4.  when  I  was  in  my  own  country  being  but  y. 
6.  2.  when  the  y.  man  went  down  to  wash  himself 

3.  the  y.  man  laid  hold  of  the  fish  and  drew  it 

5.  the  y.  man  did  as  the  angel  commanded  him 

./ud.  2.27.  smote  all  their  y.  men  with  edge  of  sword 

/('(sd.O.a.  and  loo  y.  for  understanding  ol  judgment 

Eccl.  30. 12.  bow  down  his  neck  while  he  is  y. 

32.  7.  speak,  y.  man,  if  there  be  need  of  thee 

42. 9.  the  care  for  her  taUelh  away  sleep,  wheuy. 

47.  4.  slew  he  not  a  giant  when  he  was  yet  but  y.7 

30.  12.  he  himself  stood  ns  a  y.  cedar  in  Lihuuus 

51.  13.  when  I  was  y.  or  ever  I  wenl  abroad 

Bar.3. 20.  y.  men  have  seen  light  and  dwelt  on  earth 

Sua.  21.  will  witness  that  a  y.  man  was  wilh  thee 

37.  a  y.  man  who  there  was  bid,  came  unto  he 

40.  we  asked  who  the  y.  man  was,  w  ould  not  lei. 

45.  the  Lord  raised  up  the  holy  sjiiritofa  y.  youth 

1  Jl/uc.  2. 9.  her  y.  men  with  the  sword  of  ihe  enemy 
6.  17.  whom  he  had  brought  up  being  y.  to  reign 
11.39.  brought  up  Antiocluis  y.soii  of  Alexander 

40.  to  deliver  him  this  y.  Antiochus  lo  reign 
54.  with  him  the  y.  child  Antiochus  who  reigned 
57.  at  that  timey.  Antiochus  wrote  to  Jonathan 
13. 31.Tryplion  dealtdeceitfully  withy. Antiochus 

14.  9.  y.  men  put  on  glorious  and  warlike  apparel 

2  j>/ur.  3.33.  Ihe  same  y.nien,  in  the  same  cliithing 
4. 12.  brought  the  chief  y. men  under  hissubjectioa 

5.  13.  thus  there  was  killing  of  y.  and  old 

6.  24.  many  y.  persons  might  think  that  Elcazar 
28.  leave  a  notable  example  to  such  as  be  y. 
31   not  only  to  y.  men  but  lo  all  his  nation 

7.  12.  Ihe  king  marvelled  at  the  y.  man's  courage 
2.i.  when  the  y.  man  would  in  no  cise  hearken 
30.  Ihe  y.  man  said,  whom  wail  ye  for? 

12.27.  strong  y.  men  kept  the  walls  and  defended 

13.  15.  with  the  most  valiant  and  choice  y.  mca 

YOUNGER. 

2  Mac.  5.  24.  to  sell  the  women  and  the  y.  sort 
YOUNGEST. 

2  Jl/ac.  7.24.  whilst  1  he  t^  was  yet  alive  did  e.\hort 
YOUTH. 

.fud.  6.  16.  all  llifiir  y.  run  logether  and  women 

Eccl.d.iS.  my  son,  gather  instruction  from  ihyy.  np 
30.  II.  give  him  no  liberty  in  his  y.  and  wink  not 
51.  15.  from  my  yt  up  sought  I  after  her 

$1/8.45.  the  Lord  roised  theholyspiritofa  yoiingy. 

IJlf/te. 1.0.  hud  been  brought  up  with  him  from  his  y. 
2.r)6.Juila8  hath  been  mighty  and  strong  from  his  y. 
16. 2.  from  our  y.  fought  against  tlieeneiniesof  liir. 


z. 


ZABDEUS. 
1  ii;«(f.9.21.sonsnfEmmer,  Ananias,  Z.  and Eanet 

ZACHARIAS. 
1  E.id.  1.  ft.  Hclkias,  Z.  and  Syelus  the  governors 
IS.  the  holy  singers,  .Asaph,  Z.  and  Jediithiin 
5.  8.  Nehemias,  and  '/..  Reesaias,  Enemas 

7.  3.  when  Aggros  and  Z.  Ihe  prophets,  prophesied 

8.  37.  Z.  the  >on  of  Uebai,  wilh  him  28  men 

1  Mac.  5.  18.  so  he  left  Joseph  the  son  of  Z.  56. 

ZAMRRI. 
IJI/ac.2.26.  likcnsI'liiiieliasdidtoZ.sonnfSalom 

ZEnECIIIAS. 
I  j^(/.1.46.  and  made  Z.  kingof  Judcn  and  Jerusnl 

ZEAL. 
Eccl. 49.1.  by  his  :.  ho  diminislicd  llicir  number 
LVao.2. 24.  was  inflamed  wuh  :.und  reins  trembled 

ZEALOUS. 

1  Mac.  2.  27.  whosoever  is  j.  of  the  law  of  God 

54.  Phinohas  our  father,  being  r   and  fervent 

58.  Elius  for  beng  :.  nnd  h  rvent  for  Iho  law 

ZEALOUSLY. 

1  Mac.i.^.  thus  denll  ho  i.  for  the  law  of  God 

ZOROnAKEL. 
lf:.s-ii.5.8.  who  came  wilh  /.  wiih  Jesus,  Nehemia 
56.  began  Z.  tho  son  of  Salathiil  and  Jesus 
70.  then  Z.  and  Jesu9,and  the  chief  of  the  familie* 
6.2.  then  stood  up  Z. the  son  of  Salnlhiol  nnd  Josu 
18.  delivered  to  Z.  and  S.mabiissnriis  tho  ruler 
27.bnlsufTer  Z.sorviintof  ihc  Lord  andgoverno 
^.toZ.thcguvorDor,fur  tullock3,ranis  andklamtk 


i'^4l7YB 


J  0-30 


-^3  32U 


251 


ri 


Py^ceton   Theological   Seminary   Lib 


1    10 


2   01279   9328 


